===== Internet Archive OCR: bijakofkabirtran00kabiuoft_djvu.txt =====

ABIR- 


SHASTRI  INDO-CANADIAN  INSTITL 
156  Golf  Links, 
New  Delhi-3,  India 


*i 


L 


h 


SHASTRI  INDO-CANADIAN  INSTITUT 

156  Golf  Links. 

New  Delhi-3.  India 


ii 

<  o 

<  « 
^  o 

:^  c 


z   «« 

-I 

!! 

if 

n 


THE 


BIJAK  OF  KABIR 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH 


by 

THE  REV.  AHMAD  SHAH 

ACCORDING  TO  HIS  EDITED  HINDI  TEXT  PUBLISHED  IN  1911. 


Published  by  the  Author  at  Hamirpur,  UP. 

1917      • 
^11  rights  reserved 


PK 


THE  PRICE  OF  THIS  BOOK  IS  R».  4 
POST  FREE  Rs.  4-4 


^^^f%. 


c- 


/h 


^^\  OF  TO^Q^ 


Printed  bj'  Apurra  Krishna  Bose»  at  tlie  Indian  Press,  Allahabad. 


PREFACE. 

The  Bijak  of  Kabir  is  written  mostly  in  the  Hindi  of  the 
Mirzapuri  dialect,  though  some  of  the  hymns  show  traces 
also  of  the  Gorakhpuri  dialect,  which  is  due,  perhaps,  to  the 
fact  tliat  Kabir  spent  his  last  days  in  Maghdr  in  the  Gorakh- 
pur  district. 

I  have  seen  several  manuscripts  of  the  Bijak,  all  written 
in  the  Kaithi  character  with  the  words  not  separated. 
Amon"  these  manuscripts,  some  were  quite  complete, 
agreeing  with  the  arrangement  of  the  Raja  of  Rewah^s  edi- 
tion, but  without  any  commentary  ;  some  had  only  a  portion 
of  the  Bijak. 

The  oldest  printed  edition  of  the  Bijak  is  dated  1868,  and 
was  printed  at  Benares,  but  it  contains  only  the  following 
portions  of  the  book  : — 

Ad  Mangal,  84  Ramainis,  12Kahras,  12  Basants,Ohauntisi, 
2  Belis,  2  Ohancharis,  3  Hindolas,  Birhuli,  383  Sakhis.  To  these 
hymns  a  commentary  is  added  which  is  said  to  have  been 
dictated  by  Kabir  Sahib  to  the  Raja  of  Bhagel  Bansha.  In 
the  frontispiece  the  Raja  and  Kabir  are  seated  face  to  face : 
Kabir  is  explaining  the  Bijak  and  the  Raja  is  listening 
attentively.  The  commentary  in  this  edition  is  on  the  basis 
of  what  is  called  sngun  upasna,  the  belief  in  the  incarnate 
Guru. 

The  second  printed  edition  of  the  Bijak,  which  was  printed 
in  Calcutta  in  1890,  was  edited  by  Rev.  Prem  Ohand,  of  the 
Baptist  Mission  of  Monghyr.  This  is  a  neat  little  pocket 
edition  ;  the  words  are  separated,  but  in  some  places  wrongly. 
The  onler  of  the  hymns  in  this  edition  is  peculiar  and  does 
not  agree  with  any  of  the  editions  published  by  Kabir 
Pan  til  is  themselvcR,  It  has  55  more  sahhifi  than  other 
editions ;  but  their  arrangement  is  so  confused  that  it  is 
diflQcult  to  compare  it  with  others.  There  are  some  valuable 
foot-notes.    Its  contents  are  as  follows  :— 

84  Ramainis,  113  Shabdas,  Ohauntisi,  Bipramatisi,  2  Ohan- 
charis, Birhuli,  2  Belis,  3  Hindolas,  12  Kahras,  12  Basants,  364 
Sakhis,  60  supplementary  Sakhis. 


II  PREFACE. 

The  third  edition  of  the  Bijak  is  that  printed  by  the 
Newal  Kishore  Press,  at  Lucknow,  in  1898.  It  is  a  complete 
Bijak  with  commentary  by  Raja  Visliu  Nath  Singh  of 
Rewah. 

The  fourth  printed  edition  was  issued  at  Allahabad  in 
1905.  It  is  called  the  Bijak,  with  commentary  of  Puran 
Dass  of  Burhaupur.  In  this  the  words  are  separated,  but  in 
places  the  separation  is  marked  by  mistakes  and  in  many 
places  the  editor  has  tried  to  polish  and  shape  the  words 
into  their  modern  forms,  which  from  a  literary  standpoint  is 
very  unwise.  The  commentary  is  what  is  called  nirguu 
upasna.  It  has  115  Shahclcis,  while'other  editions  have  only 
113.  But  these  two  extra  shahdas  do  not  convey  any  fresh 
idea,  but  only  what  is  embodied  in  the  Ad  MangaL  It  has  a 
few  saldiis  which  are  not  found  in  the  edition  of  the  Raja,  but 
there  are  some  missing  in  tliis  which  are  found  in  the  Raja's. 
It  contains  as  follows : 

Pritham  Anusar,  84  Ramainis,  115  Siiabdas,  Chauntisi, 
Bipramatisi,  12  Kahras,  12  Basants,  2  Ohancharis,  2  Belis, 
Birhuli,  3  Hindolas,  353  Sakhis. 

The  last  printed  edition  is  tliat  from  Bombay  printed  in 
Samhat  1961  (1906  A.  D.).  This  is  the  Raja  of  Rewah's  edition, 
similar  to  that  of  the  Newal  Kishore  Press,  Lucknow,  but  it 
has  a  life  of  Kabir  in  verse  and  at  the  end  Sayar  Pad  Bijolc 
and  a  genealogy  and  history  of  the  Bhagel  Bansha,  and  Mul 
RamainL  It  has  some  fresh  sahhis  and  contains  an  imaginary 
picture  of  Kabir  and  also  a  likeness  of  the  Raja  of  Bhagel 
Bansha.  In  this  edition  many  mistakes  have  crept  in  and  in 
some  places  the  text  is  spoiled,  but  it  has  preserved  the 
original  beauty  of  the  language. 

After  going  through  all  these  printed  editions  as  well  as 
some  of  the  available  manuscripts,  particularly  one  which  I 
saw  in  Chunar  with  Pundit  Bhan  Partap  Tiwari,  I  tried  my 
best  to  present  the  public  with  a  text  as  accurate  as  pos- 
sible in  my  Hindi  Text  published  in  1911.  It  is  a  pity  that 
no  ancient  MSS.  can  be  consulted.  I  have  separated  the 
words  in  their  proper  form  and  have  added  foot-notes  to  show 
where  a  foreign  word  is  used.  I  left  the  form  of  the  foreign 
word  as  it  is  in  the  text,  but  have  given  a  correct  form  of  it 
in  the  foot-note  ;  for  instance,  in  the  text  you  will  find  i9??i, 


PREFACE.  ill 

while  in  the  foot-note  with  reference  to  this  word  you  will 
(Ind  Axu— .  In  my  text  I  followed  the  Raja*s  order,  adding  at 
the  end  all  those  sakhis  which  are  peculiar  to  the  various 
editions,  thus  bringing  the  total  number  of  sakhis  up  to  442. 

The  Raja's  Ad  Maiigal  and  Sayar  Pad  Bijak  are  also  added 
to  my  text,  though  they  are  clearly  later  additions  to  the 
Bijak ;  but  they  are  a  kind  of  key  to  its  theology; 

While  in  1910  my  Hindi  Text  was  passing  through  the 
Press,  I  was  engaged  in  putting  the  same  into  English, 
and  tlie  Reverend  B.  H.  P.  Fisher  very  kindly  helped 
in  revising  and  correcting  the  same  and  a  few  pages 
also  passed  through  the  Press.  But  for  various  reasons  the 
printing  of  the  translation  had  to  be  abandoned. 

For  about  five  years  the  translation  remained  in  suspense 
During  this  period  fresh  light  was  thrown  upon  the  text 
of  the  Bijak,  and  it  was  strongly  felt  necessary  that  a  fresh 
translation  should  be  made.  Early  in  191C  I  started  the 
translation  and  finished  it  by  the  end  of  February  1916.  This 
time  I  asked  the  Reverend  E.  W.  Ormerod,  of  the  Oawnpore 
Brotherhood,  to  revise  and  correct  my  translation.  To  this 
request  of  mine  he  readily  responded  and  spent  many 
weary  hours  daily  with  me  in  correcting  the  translation. 
I  am  indebted  to  him  for  having  made  the  translation 
intelligible  for  English  readers  to  which  I  can  make  no 
pretension.  But  in  no  way  should  he  be  held  responsible 
if  the  rendering  into  English  does  not  agree  with  the 
original.  I  trust  he  will  permit  me  to  avail  myself  of  this 
opportunity  of  tendering  my  warmest  acknowledgement  of 
iiis  invaluable  labours. 

I  also  have  to  thank  Mahashai  Shew  Barat  ^11  of 
Mirzapore  for  rendering  valuable  help. 

I  am  once  more  indebted  to  the  Reverend  Canon  B.  H.  P. 
Fisher,  the  Head  of  the  Cawnpore  Brotherhood,  for  kindly 
seeing  these  pages  through  the  Press. 

Thanks  are  also  due  to  the  IJ.  P.  Government,  who  have 
contributed  towards  the  cost  of  the  production  of  this  trans- 
lation. 

Just  a  word  about  the  existing  conimentarios  of  the 
Bijak.  If  any  one  wishes  to  study  the  text  in  original,  it  is 
much  better  to  secure  a  copy   without  any  commentary.    I 


iV  PREFACE. 

myself,  during  many  years  of  study,  have  found  it  quite 
liopeless  to  get  any  real  help  from  the  commentaries.  They 
do  not  attempt  to  explain  the  text  of  the  Bijak  so  much  as 
the  theology  of  the  modern  Panth. 

S.  P.  G.  Mission, 

Hamirpur,  U.  p.,  AHMAD  SHAH. 

May  1917. 


0' 


CONTENTS 


Page 

Lifo  of  Kabir 

I 

The  Bijak 

... 

20 

The  Teaching  of  Bijak 

.15 

Short  Account  of  Myth 

41 

Commandments  o( 

Kabir  Panth 

44 

Ad  Mangal 

... 

47 

Ramainis 

... 

51 

Shabdas 

... 

OS 

Chauntisi 

151 

Ripramatifii 

... 

157 

Rahras    ... 

150 

Hasan ts   ... 

168 

Chancharift 

174 

BcllR 

178 

Hirhnii     ... 

. 

181 

Flindolas  ... 

... 

182 

Sakhis      ... 

... 

184 

Sayar  Bijak  Pad 

... 

228 

Proper  Names  mentioned  in  the  Bijak      .. 

280 

ILLUSTRATIONS 


Kabir,  in  Qnrn  Arjnn  Dev's  Onrdwara 
Kabir,  in  Kabir  Cbaara,  Benares     ... 
Niranjan 


Frontispiece 
to  face  p.  19 
to  face  p.  48 


LIFE  OF  KABIR  JN  LEGEND 

There  is  a  peculiar  degree  of  uncertainty  as  to  all  the  data 
for  the  personal  history  of  Kabir.  Legends  abound,  but  reliable 
historical  evidence  is  almost  entirely  wanting:  and  the 
conflicting  voices  of  tradition  leave  us  io  doubt  on  such 
primary  points  as  the  place  and  dat^  of  his  birth,  the  religion 
or  caste  into  which  he  was  born,  whetiier  he  married,  and 
where  he  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  life.  It  is  hardly  an 
exaggeration  to  say  tliat  two  facts  only  can  be  asserted 
with  absolute  confidence:  he  lived  for  some  time  at  Kashi 
(Benares),  and  he  died  at  Maghar. 

Most  baffling  of  all  is  the  obscurity  which  surrounds  the 
question  of  his  parentage.  That  Kabir  was  in  any  case 
brought  up  in  tiie  family  of  a  Mohammedan  weaver  (Julaha) 
is  admitted  by  all  lines  of  tradition.  The  point  at  issue  between 
bis  Hindu  and  Moslem  followers  is  wiieiher  or  not  this  indi- 
cates his  actual  parentage.  Kabir  himself  does  not  help 
towards  a  decision.  For  him  no  one  is  born  Hindu  or  Moslem 
{Ram.  I),  or  again:— 

1.  Now  I  have  come  from  the  unconditioned. 

Maya  has  led  the  world  astray  :  she  did  not  find  my 
secret. 

2.  I  did  not  take  l>irth,  nor  did  I  dwell  in  tlie  womb.  As 
a  child  I  appeared.  In  the  city  of  Kashi  I  made  my  abode 
in  the  forest,  there  a  w*eaver  found  me. 

3.  I  am  not  contained  in  heaven  or  eartl),  tut  I  :im 
manifest  as  boundless  wisdom.  The  form  of  spirit  inamrrst 
in  the  world,  that  is  my  name. 

4.  I  have  no  bones,  no  blood,  no  skin  :  I  am  inanif.stor  of 
the  word.  I  am  beyond  all  body,  tho  Innnilc  luid  Perfect 
One  :   this  says  tho  immortal  Kabir. 


2  LIFE  OP  KABIR  IN  LEGEND 

The  most  commonly  accepted  tradition  of  his  birth  is  that 
given  in  the  Kabir  Kasauti.  This  is  quite  a  recent  compila- 
tion, written  from  the  point  of  view  which  identifies  Kabir 
with  the  deity. 

"The  appearance  of  the  Chief  of  Sages,  the  compassionate, 
Kabir,  the  Lord  Kabir,  in  Kashi,  and  his  coming  from  the 
Lahar  tdnk  to  the  house  of  Ali,  called  Niru,  the  weaver. 

From  the  vault  of  heaven  he  descended,  the  Sat  Guru, 
Purusha,  Kabir  :  lying  in  the  midst  of  the  waters,  the  Pir  of 
ail  Pirs. 

When  countless  lotus  buds  bloomed,  there  the  compassion- 
ate  Creator  was  found. 

Midst  all  the  buds  the  bees  wearied  themselves  with 
humming  :  peacock,  duck,  cliakor,  gathered  about  the  tank. 

In  the  year  1455,  on  the  first  day  of  the  full  moon  :  in 
the  light  half  of  Jeth,  in  the  full  moon  of  the  rains,  he 
appeared. 

Mid  peals  of  thunder,  flashing  lightning,  torrents  of  rain  : 
in  Lahar  tank  the  lotus  blossomed  :  there  Kabir  was  manifest- 
ed. 

Niru  was  bringing  home  his  newly-wedded  wife :  thirsty 
she  went  to  drink  of  the  water,  saw  the  babe,  and  was 
amazed. 

How  came  this  babe  here?  Who  has  exposed  it?  Some 
widow  or  maiden.  Said  Niru,  Listen,  Nima  ;  children  I  have 
had,  but  they  died ;  my  house  is  empty,  beloved.  Haridas 
found  a  diamond,  wiiich  became  a  splendid  diadem  for  his  head. 
Said  Nima,  Listen,  my  master;  my  mind  is  full  of  sore 
misgivings  :  the  honour  of  our  house  is  lost,  i!  this  be  noised 
abroad  in  all  Kashi. 

But  he  is  very  fair  to  look  on,  great  his  beauty,  his  eyes 
are  like  the  lotus:  was  ever  seen  in  all  the  world  the  mother 
who  should  bear  so  fair  a  son  ? 

With  joy  in  their  hearts,  they  took  the  child,  and  man 
and  wife  came  home  :  all  the  women  of  their  kin  began  to 
sing  with  great  delight  of  heart. 

When  they  saw  the  child  in  the  house,  many  were  the 
questions :  How  did  you  get  this  child  ?  began  all  the  women 
to  ask. 


LIFE  OF  KABIR  IN  LEGEND  3 

Without  conception,  we  obtained  this  child  and  brought 
bim  home:  he  is  dear  to  Haridas.  So  all  were  over- 
joyed. 

Another  version  of  the  legend  makes  him  the  son  of  a 
Brahman  widow  born  miraculously  from  the  palm  of  her 
hand,  as  the  result  of  the  prayer  of  the  ascetic  Ramanand, 
who  was  ignorant  of  her  widowhood.  To  avoid  disgrace, 
she  exposed  him  in  the  tank.  Witli  this  story  is  connect- 
ed the  fanciful  derivation  of  the  name  from  the  Hindi  words 
kar  (hand)  bir  (hero). 

The  name  Kabir  is,  however,  palpably  of  Mohammedan 
origin  :  and  the  tradition  in  Uie  Kabir  Kasauti  adds  the 
following  details.  According  to  Muslim  custom  a  Qazi  was 
summoned  to  give  a  name  to  the  child.  On  his  opening  the 
Quran  four  names  were  found,  Kabir,  Akbar,  Kubra,  Kibriya. 
But  Kabir  is  a  title  of  God  and  the  others  are  allied  words. 
More  Qazis  came  and  fresh  attempts  were  made  to  And 
a  suitable  name,  resulting  in  Zinda,  Khinjar  (Kliizar), 
Pir,  and  Haqqa.  Here  again  the  first  and  last  are  names 
of  God  the  others  too  exalted  for  the  child  of  a  Julaha. 
The  Qazi  insisted  that  the  child  must  be  killed  forthwith: 
and  Niru  was  about  to  obey  the  order,  when  the  infant 
miraculously  spoke : — 

1.  Now  have  I  come  from  the  unconditioned.  I  was 
bodiless:  I  took  body  and  I  came  :  in  this  body  I  am  called 
Kabir. 

2.  The  Swan  which  has  been  'separated  from  birth  to 
birth,  I  came  to  raise  him  up.  I  was  called  the  Unseen 
Purush,  Maker,  Immortal  and  Looser  of  Bonds. 

3.  With  all  my  body  I  belong  to  the  Sat-Iok.  I  dwell 
in  every  heart.  Kabir  says.  Hear,  O  brothe^  sadhus :  I  have 
manifested  the  true  name. 

With  regard  to  this  legend  it  may  be  noted  that  of  the 
eight  names  given  only  four,  Kabir,  Kibriya,  Akbar  and 
Haqqa,  are  to  be  found  in  the  Quran,  five  if  Khinjar  be  consi- 
dered a  corruption  of  Khizar,  a  saint  associated  in  the  Quran 
with  Moses, 

On  the  Mohammedan  side  we  have  the  assertion  of  the 
Dabistan   that  Kabir  was  a  Mohammedan  weaver,  and  this 


4  LIFK   OF   KAIUK    IN    LKGKND 

is  confirmed  by   Abul  Fazal.     Both,  however,  describe  liim 
as  a  Muwaliid,  i.e.,  a  theist,  but  not  necessarily  a  Moslem. 

It  becomes  then  a  matter  of  balancing  probabilities  or 
improbabilities  on  either  side.  However  confidently  Kabir 
may  assert  that  none  is  born  Hindu  or  Muslim,  yet  in  common 
parlance  he  must  have  been  of  either  Hindu  or  Muslim 
descent.  Where  tradition  on  both  sides  is  thus  unanimous^ 
we  may  safely  assume  that  he  was  brought  up  in  the  family 
of  a  Julaha.  But  apart  from  this  we  can  find  in  him  na 
trace  of  Moslem  influence,  unless  it  were  contact  with 
Sufi-ism.  The  study  of  the  Bijak  certainly  leaves  a  fixed 
impression  that  the  basis  of  his  mental  equipment  was  Hindu. 
His  apparent  acquaintance  with  Mohammedan  belief,  customs 
and  phraseology  might  easily  be  purely  external  and  acquired. 
But  with  his  Hinduism  the  case  is  entirely  different.  His 
mind  is  steeped  in  Hindu  thought  and  mythology,  and  his 
mother  tongue  is  Hindi. 

The  real  difficulty  lies  here.  How  did  one,  who  to  all 
appearance  belonged  to  a  low  class  Moliammedan  family, 
acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  Hindu  scriptures  and  philosophy, 
only  to  be  gained  from  a  close  association  with  Brahman 
pandits  ?  The  evidence  available  suggests  a  solution  on  some 
such  lines  as  these  : — 

One  of  the  legends  represents  Kabir  as  the  son  of  a 
Brahman  virgin  widow,  born  miraculously  as  a  result  of  words 
spoken  by  Ramanand.  ,  Another  speaks  of  his  being  first 
seen  in  the  lotus-covered  tank  by  Swami  Ashtanand,  a 
disciple  of  Ramanand,  to  wliom  he  described  what  he  had 
seen.  Ramanand  answered  :  "The  boundless  ligiit  which  thou 
hast  seen,  in  a  few  days'  space  its  fame  will  spread.'' 

Was  Kabir  the  son  of  Ashtanand  by  a  mother  whom  Hindu 
custom  forbade  his  acknowledging  as  his  wife  ?  If  this  be  so, 
the  place  of  Niru  or  Nur  Ali  and  his  wife  Nima  in  the  story 
becomes  clear.  Nurbaf  is  a  recognised  name  for  a  Moham- 
medan weaver  in  the  Punjab.  Neiman  is  a  common  name 
among  Mohammedan  women  of  the  lower  class.  These 
would  be  his  adopted  not  his  real  parents.  Living,  as  there 
seems  no  doubt  he  did,  as  the  son  of  a  Julaha  in  the  weavers' 
quarter  of  Benares,  then  as  now  a  museum  of  religious  sects. 


UFB  OF   KABIR  IN  LBGBND  5 

Kabir  would  often  see  and  mix  with  the  wandering  Moslem 
fakirs  and  imbibe  the  doctrines  of  the  Sufis;  wiiile  lie  was  at 
the  same  time  by  the  influence  of  his  real  father  brought 
secretly  but  surely  under  the  Hindu  influences  which  from 
early  childhood  governed  his  thought  and  life.  One  would 
like  to  imagine  that  Ashtanand  by  this  means  trained  his 
son  as  a  reformer  of  the  abuses  in  his  own  faith  which  he 
himself  realised  but  found  himself  powerless  to  amend.  But 
perhaps  this  is  goin^too  far. 

According  to  the  tradition  of  his  followers  Kabir  was 
born  in  the  year  A.  D.  1398  (Sarabat  1455)  and  died  at  the 
age  of  120.  This  latter  tradition  suggests  at  least  that  he 
lived  to  a  great  age  :  more  than  this  is  not  required  to  make 
it  possible  for  him  to  have  been  the  disciple  of  Ramanand 
and  the  Guru  of  Nanak.  The  latter  was  born  in  1469  and 
the  former  is  known  to  have  lived  well  into  the  15th 
century. 

The  Kabir  Kasauti  goes  on  to  describe  how  even  in  his 
childhood  he  offended  Hindus  and  Mohammedans  alike,  refus- 
ing to  be  bound  by  the  limitations  of  either  religion.  When 
playing  with  other  children  he  would  cry  "Ram,  Ram  "or 
**  Hari,  Hari.'*  To  the  Mohammedan  who  rebuked  him  with  the 
warning,  "  Thou  wilt  be  a  great  Kafir  (infidel),"  he  answered — 
**He  who  uses  wicked  violence  or  robs  the  world  by  deceit, 
who  drinks  or  eats  intoxicants,  or  seizes  the  goods  of  others, 
he  is  the  Kafir  ;  the  bandit  is  the  true  Kafir."  Again  he  had 
put  the  tilak  on  his  forehead  and  the  jaueo  (sacred  thread) 
about  his  neck.  The  Brahmans  expostulated— "This  is  not 
thy  religion  :  thou  hast  made  thyself  a  Vaishnavite  and 
callest  on  Vishnu,  Narayan,  Gobind  and  Mukand  ;  this  ia 
our  religion."  He  answered  one  of  their  leaders : 

On  my  tongue  Vishnu,  in  ray  eyes  Narayan,  and  in  my 
heart  Gobind  dwells. 

When  at  the  door  of  Yama  they  question  thee,  what  wilt 
thou  say,  O  mad  Mukand. 

In  my  house  is  thread  ;  I  weave  continually. 

The  janeo  is  only  about  thy  neck,  thou  readest  ever  the 
Oita  and  Gayatri ;  but  Gobind  is  In  my  heart. 

I  the  cow,  thou  the  cowherd,  the  master. 


O  LIFE  OF  KABIR  IN   LK'>BND 

Warned  from  birth  to  birth,  thou  hast  failed  to  bring  me  to 
the  further  shore. 

What  manner  of  lord  art  thou  to  me  ? 

Thou  the  Brahmau,  I  the  weaver  of  Kashi :  learn  my 
wisdom. 

Ever  thou  seekest  after  kings  and  the  wealthy  :  my  medi- 
tation is  with  Hari.— (Zabtr  Kasautu) 

9 

When  the  time  came,  all  Nur  All's  neighbours  agreed  that 
he  must  be  circumcised  according  to  Mohammedan  custom. 
Kabir  resisted. 

You  act  with  force  and  violence.  Never  will  I  endure  iU 
brother. 

If  'tis  God  makes  thee  Turk,  why  came  not  this  cutting  of 
itself  ? 

If  by  circumcision  one  becomes  Turk,  what  then  will  be 
said  of  your  women  ? 

Half  the  body,  so  the  wife  is  styled.  Then  you  still  remain 
Hindu. 

By  putting  on  the  sacred  thread  one  becomes  Brahman. 
What  hast  thou  given  women  to  wear  ? 

She  from  her  birth  is  Sudra  ;  when  she  sets  food  before 
thee  why  dost  thou  eat,  O  Pande  ? 

Hindu  and  Moslem  are  on  one  road.  This  the  Satguru 
has  told  me. 

.Kabir  says,  Hear  O  Saints  !  cry  Ram,  cry  Khuda,"  it  is 
one.— {Kahir  KX 

This  is  taken  from  the  fuller  version  of  the  Bijak, 
Shabda,Si:~ 

O  Qazi,  what  book  do  you  discourse  on  ? 

You  are  jangling  and  wrangling  always :  nothing  of 
wisdom  do  you  know. 

Vain  glorious  of  authority  you  make  me  to  be  circumcised. 
Never  will  I  endure  it,  brother. 

If  'tis  God  that  makes  thee  circumcised,  why  came  not 
this  cutting  of  itself  ? 

If  by  circumcision  one  becomes  Turk,  what  then  will  be^ 
said  of  yniir  women  ? 


LIFB  OF  KABIR  IN  LROBND  «; 

Half  the  body,  so  tlie  wife  is  styled.  Then  you  still  remain 
Hindu. 

By  putting  on  the  sacred  thread  one  becomes  Brahman. 
What  hast  thou  given  women  to  wear  ? 

She  from  birth  is  Sudra  :   why  dost  tliou  eat,  O  Pande  ? 

Hindu  and  Turk,  whence  have  they  (i.  e.  those  names) 
come?   who  started  this  path  ? 

Search  in  your  heart,  search  well  in  your  heart.  Where  is 
paradise  ?  who  won  it? 

Leave  these  distractions  (the  delusion  of  the  extended 
universe) ;  meditate  on  Ram,  O  foolish  mind.  You  do  wicked 
violence. 

O  Kabir,  he  who  grasped  not  Rama's  protection,  at  the 
last  grieved  sore. 

Thereupon  the  Brahmans  returned  to  the  attack— and 
their  challenge  led  directly  to  the  best  known  incident  of 
Kabir's  life.  This  Moslem  Julaha  repeats  the  name  of  Ram 
and  Hari,  but  none  according  to  Hindu  belief  can  enter 
heaven  unless  he  puts  himself  under  the  guidance  of  a  guru, 
Kabir,  they  say,  is  fiirf;jir  and  all  his  devotion  therefore  con- 
temptible. Let  him  become  the  disciple  of  Ramanand — an 
obvious  impossibility,  for  Ramanand  will  have  nothing  to  do 
with  such  a  postulant.  Ramanand  was  disciple  of  Ramanuja, 
the  father  of  all  modern  Vaishnavite  sects,  who  lived  and 
taught  in  Southern  India.  Dissenting  from  his  master's  rigid 
adherence  to  caste  rules,  Ramanand  migrated  to  the  plain  of 
the  Ganges,  and  the  ninety  million  worsliippers  of  the  Rama 
incarnation  at  the  present  day  may  all  more  or  less  be  account- 
ed his  spiritual  descendants.  Kabir,  realising  the  obstacle 
that  his  re|)Uted  birth  in  a  Julaha  household  must  present  to 
his  acceptance,  had  resort  to  diplomacy  to  gain  entry  into  the 
brotherhood.  Knowing  Ramanand's  habit  of  going  down  to 
the  Ganges  to  bathe  before  dawn,  Kabir  went  and  lay  full 
length  upon  the  steps  of  the  Dasasumeda  Ghat.  In  the  dark- 
ness Ramanand  stP|)ped  heavily  with  his  wooden  sandals  upon 
the  boy,  who  cried  out  in  pain  clasping  the  feet  of  the  master. 
As  Kabir  had  anticipated,  the  first  words  of  Ramanand  thus 
surprised  in  the  darkness  were  the  words  that  formed  the 
mantra  of  his  sect,  "  Ram,  Ram  "     Armnl    with  those   Knbir 


8  LIFE  OP  KABIR  IN  LEGEND 

proclaimed  himself  the  accepted  chela  of  the  great  guru.  The 
Dews  of  this  acceptance  of  the  Moliammedan  weaver  spread 
through  the  city.  Ramanand  when  questioned  denied  all 
knowledge  of  it,  but  ordered  tlie  pretender  to  be  brought  to 
him.  Kabir  was  brought,  and  hearing  from  Iiis  lips  the  words  of 
the  initiation  Ramanand  forthwitli  acknowledged  the  claim 
and  accepted  him  as  a  ciiela.  Thenceforward  Kabir  remained 
among  the  number  of  Ramanand's  most  famous  disciples,  and 
it  was  said  to  be  the  influence  of  Kabir  upon  his  master  that 
induced  Ramanand  to  include  among  his  disciples  members  of 
all  castes,  Rui  Das  the  Ohamar,  Sadna  a  butcher,  Dhanna  the 
Jat  and  many  others,  including  Ganga  the  prostitute.  Various 
occasions  are  recorded  on  which  the  disciple  himself  gave 
instruction  to  the  master.  For  instance,  once  in  the  month 
of  Kuar  Ramanand,  wishing  to  perform  a  Sraddha  ceremony 
for  his  guru,  Raghawanand,  sent  his  chelas  to  procure  tiie 
necessary  milk.  The  rest  went  to  the  milksellers,  but  Kabir 
to  the  place  where  the  bones  of  dead  cows  lay,  and  there 
demanded  milk.  His  fellow  chelas  reported  this  extraordinary 
conduct  to  the  master,  to  whose  questions  Kabir  replied  :  "  I 
thought  the  milk  of  dead  cows  most  suited  to  the  dead  guru.'* 
But  another,  Mohammedan  tradition  makes  him  the  dis- 
ciple of  one  Siiaikh  Taqi,  whom  he  met  when  about  thirty 
years  old,  and  adopted  as  his  Pir.  On  his  return  from  a 
journey  to  far  off  Balakii  and  Bokhara  (a  journey  apparently 
undertaken  in  imagination  only,  for  there  seems  no  evidence 
that  Kabir  ever  went  there),  Kabir  visited  his  master  at 
Jhusi,  and  in  response  to  a  request  for  food  was  provided  with 
vegetables,  cooked  rice  and  spiced  milk.  Kabir  felt  aggrieved 
at  this  somewhat  meagre  fare  and  exclaimed  :~ 

Sag,  bhat,  jirawni  matha  ; 

Hamare  Pirke  yehi  hata. 

Greens,  rice,  and  this  spiced  whey; 

In  my  Pir's  house  no  more  than  they. 
To  which  the  Siiaikh  retaliated-— 

Yih  chhor  aur  kya  kha  hai,  mati  ? 

Tohi  upar  pare  chhe  mas  ki  tati. 

**01od,  what  more  would  your  stomach  get  ? 

Before  you  six  months'  plague  I  set." 


UFB  OF   KABIR  IN    LKGKNI)  V 

Tile  two  watercourses,  in  which  Kabir  spent  six  months 
of  misery  from  constant  attacks  of  dysentery,  still  bear  the 
name  of  Kabir  Nala  and  Lotan  Nala. 

Tins  Shaikh  Taqi  figures  also  in  the  Hindu  stories,  where 
however  he  appears  as  the  rival  and  traducer  of  Kabir.  It 
would  appear  that  he  was  the  son  of  Shabau-ul-Millat  and 
belonged  to  the  Soharwardia  order  of  Sufl  ;  he  died  at  Jhusi 
near  Prayag  in  1428. 

In  spite  of  his  growing  fame  Kabir  continued  to  follow  the 
profession  of  his  foster  father  and  to  live  among  the  weavers 
and  butchers  of  Benares.  To  a  sadhu  who  urged  him  to  give 
up  his  mean  employment,  he  replied  in  the  following  hymn, 
found  as  Shobda  64  of  the  Bijak,  while  many  of  his  hymns  are 
based  upon  the  weaver's  work. 

Weave,  weave  the  name  of  Hari,  on  which  gods,  men  and 
munis  are  meditating. 

He  stretched  the  warp  and  took  the  shuttle.  The  four 
Vedas  are  the  wheel. 

One  beam  is  Ram  Narayan,  fulfilling  the  purposed  work. 
He  made  the  ocean   of   the   world  a  trough  :  therein  he 
kneads  the  starch. 

The  body  of  sttirch  is  stiffened  :  few  knew  it  as  starch. 
Moon  and  sun— the  two  are  the  treadle:  in  mid  ocean 
(light)  the  warp  is  made. 

As  the  Lord  of  the  three  worlds  brushed  on  the  starch, 
Shyam  joined  the  broken  ends. 

He  set  the  pegs ;  and  when  be  took  the  reed,  then  Rama 
was  bound. 

As  the  reed  beat  up  the  warp,  the  three  loks  were  bound 
—none  he  left  free. 

The  three  loks  were  made  one  loom  :  the  warp  worked  up 
and  down. 

The  eternal  purush  bade  me  to  sit  beside  him:  Kabir 
entered  into  light.  — (f^/jV/Zc,   Shnhdn  64) 

He  sold  the  cloth  he  wove  himself  in  the  market.  On  one 
occasion  no  one  would  pay  the  price  of  five  takas  (2}  annaa) 
that  he  asked.  A  passing  broker  offered  his  services  and  by 
demanding  six  annas  sold  it  for  5] ;    he  paid  Kabir  his  original 


10  LIFE  OF  KABIR  IN  LEGEND 

price  retaining  the  balance,  and  Kabir   pointed   the  moral 
thus  :— 

"  I  speak  the  truth  and  no  one  heeds ;  but  lies  the  world 
believes. 

Witness  this  cloth,  worth  takas  five ;  eleven  he  receives." 

Another  cold  day  Kabir,  sitting  in  the  market  to  sell  his 
goods,  saw  a  shivering  sadhu  who  asked  his  help.  At  once 
he  gave  him  half  of  his  cloth,  which  the  sadhu  pronounced 
insufficient.  Kabir  handed  him  the  remainder  and  returned 
home,  where  his  mother  demanded  the  price  of  the  cloth. 
Kabir  replied  "Isold  it  for  a  high  price;  and  I  could  not 
bring  the  price  home  myself,  for  it  was  too  heavy  to  carry.'*^ 
To  avoid  the  indignation  of  his  parents  Kabir  retired  to  the 
jungle :  and  in  his  absence  an  unknown  merchant  brought 
large  supplies  of  food  and  left  them  at  his  house.  On  his 
return  Kabir,  after  thanking  his  Lord  who  had  thus  supplied 
his  parents'  needs,  proceeded  to  distribute  all  that  remained 
in  alms.  Some  envious  neighbours  asked  him  why,  and  he 
answered  :— 

By  giving  wealth  does  not  decrease,  as  water  in  the  run- 
ning stream  decreases  not.  Open  your  eyes  and  see.  This  is 
the  word  of  Kabir.  What  you  have  in  store,*give.  There  is  no 
seller  hereafter :  take  now  what  is  yours  to  take.  Thou 
hast  obtained  this  body  ;  its  quality  is  to  giye  and  give  and 
give.  Kabir  says.  Give,  as  long  as  you  keep  this  body.  When 
this  decays,  none  will  bid  thee  give.  Be  sure,  'tis  good  to 
give ;  this  body  is  given  thee  for  good  deeds.  If  the  boat  be 
filled  with  water  or  the  house  with  wealth,  'tis  wise  with 
both  hands  to  empty  it. 

Once  again  his  surroundings  in  the  weavers'  mohalla 
proved  too  strong  for  Kabir's  peace  of  mind.  His  father 
joined  his  neighbours  in  contributing  for  the  purchase  of  a 
cow,  to  be  sacrificed  according  to  custom  on  the  Id-day.  This 
reached  the  ears  of  Kabir,  who  hurried  to  the  spot,  but  before 
he  could  prevent  the  sacrifice,  the  deed  was  done.  Again 
he  left  his  home  and  parents  and  took  refuge  in  the  jungle^, 
whence  he  was  prevailed  upon  to  return  only  after  long 
persuasion.    The    Brahmans  tried   to   induce  him  to  renew 


LIFB  OF   KABIK  IN   LEGEND  11' 

bis  protest  against  the    slaughter  of^the  sacred  cow,  but 
gained  little  by  his  reply  :— 

1.  O  Sants !  I  have  seen  the  way  of  both. 

Hindus  and  Turks  heed  no  warning;  to  ail  the  taste  of 
their  desires  is  sweet. 

2.  Hindus  keep  fast  on  Ekadasi,  they  eat  only  Singhara 
and  milk. 

They  abstain  from  grain  but  do  not  check  the  mind*8 
desire ;  next  day  they  eat  the  flesh  of  beasts. 

3.  Turks  keep  fast  and  hours  of  prayer :  they  cry  alood 
on  the  name  of  God. 

How  will  they  enter  into  Paradise?  When  evening  comes 
they  slaughter  fowls. 

4.  The  Hindu  his  pity,  the  Turk  his  mercy,  each  has 
vanished  from  his  heart. 

One  kills  by  halal,  one  kills  by  jhatka  ;  but  fire  is  kindled 
in  both  their  houses. 

5.  The  way  of  Hindu  and  of  Turk  is  one  :  this  the  Sat- 
guru  has  shown  me. 

Kabir  says,  Hear,  O  Sants :  cry  Rama,  cry  Khuda,  it  is 
one.— (/3ijV//c,  Shahda  10.) 

Ramanand's  disciples  also,  who  objected  to  the  coupling 
of  Brahmans  with  Moslems  in  this  fashion,  fared  even  worse 
at  his  hands: — 

1-    O  Sants,  the  Pandes  are  skilful  butchers. 

They  kill  a  goat,  and  rusii  upon  a  buffalo;  they  have  no 
compassion  in  their  hearts. 

2.  Bathed,  and  with  the  tilak  set  on  their  foreheads,  they 
sit;  and  with  varied  rites  make  men  pay  worship  to  the  goddess. 

They  kill  a  soul,  destroy  it  in  an  instant:  they  make  a 
river  of  blood  to  flow. 

3.  They  style  themselves  most  pious  and  of  high  lineage, 
and  in  the  assembly  demand  reverence. 

Of  them  all  seek  to  bo  initiated:  it  moves  mo  to  trroat 
laughter,  brothers. 

4.  They  lecture  long  about  remission  of  sins:  they  make 
men  do  shameful  deeds. 

Both  alike  I  saw  drowned  in  sin :  Yama  has  dragged 
them  by  their  hands. 


12 


ilFB  OF   KABIR   IN    LEGEND 


5.     They  who  slaughter  cows  are  called  Turks:  are  these 
of  any  less  account  than  they? 

Kabirsays,  Hear,  O  Sants:  the  Brahmans  of  this  Kaliyug 
are  base.— XC/ja/r,  Shabdn  11.) 

The  record  of  Kabir's  own  family-life  raises  again  the 
vexed  question  of  his  birth  and  origin.  Mohammedan 
tradition  implies  that  Kabir  like  other  Sufis  was  a  married 
man,  but  in  the  Hindu  stories  considerable  pains  are  taken  to 
guard  against  this  misconception.  Nowhere  are  we  told  that 
Kabir  was  married  to  Loi,  but  Nima  is  represented  as  protest- 
ing against  her  presence  on  the  ground  that  she  and  Kabir 
did  not  live  together  as  husband  and  wife.  Loi  is  always  the 
cheli  of  Kabir  ;  Kamal  and  Kamali  are  his  spiritual  issue. 

When  thirty  years  of  age  Kabir  in  his  wandering  reached 
the  hut  of  a  sadhu  in  the  jungle  and  restM  there  at  mid-day. 
He  found  no  one  except  a  girl  of  some  twenty  years,  who 
asked  :— Who  are  you  ?  "Kabir."  What  is  your  caste  ? 
*' Kabir."  What  is  your  order  ?  "Kabir."  What  is  your 
name?  "Kabir."  The  girl,  astonished,  exclaimed  "I  have 
here  seen  many  sadiius,  but  never  one  who  answered  in  this 
fashion."  Kabir  replied:  "All  others  have  name  and  caste 
and  order,  but  Kabir  has  none."  Meanwhile  six  other  sadhus 
arrived  and  the  girl  brought  seven  cups  of  milk  and  set  one 
before  each.  The  sadhus  noticed  that  Kabir  did  not  drink 
his  milk,  and  asked  the  reason.  He  replied  that  there  was  yet 
another  sadhu  on  his  way  from  the  further  bank  of  the 
Ganges,  for  whom  he  kept  the  milk.  The  girl  exclaimed  "  My 
Lord,  drink  your  portion  ;  I  have  more  for  the  coming  sadhu." 
Kabir  answered  :  "I  live  on  the  Sliabda."  And  in  answer  to 
her  question  added  "The  Shabda  is  mine,  I  am  of  the  Shabda, 
the  Shabda  is  a  well  of  Brahm.  If  you  desire  the  vision,  test 
the  form  of  the  Shabda."  The  sadhu  arrived  as  Kabir  had  said 
and  to  him  he  gave  his  cup  of  milk.  The  new  arrival  ques- 
tioned the  girl  as  to  her  name  and  parents  and  the  saint  who 
had  formerly  lived  in  the  hut.  To  this  she  replied,  "Hear,  O 
Lord  ;  I  know  not  who  or  whence  I  am  nor  the  manner  of  my 
birth.  In  this  hut  there  lived  a  Bankhandi  Baba,  and  many 
strangers  inquired  from  him  of  me.  His  answer  was  that  one 
day  going  to  bathe  in   the  river  he  saw  in  the  midstream  of 


LIFE  OF   KABIK    IN   LBGKN1>  1^ 

the  Ganges  something  wrapped  in  a  woollen  cloth,  borne  along 
by  the  current.  On  opening  the  bundle  he  found  me,  brought 
me  to  the  hut  and  reared  me  with  milk.  Because  he  found 
me  wrapped  in  the  dark  woollen  cloth  (loi)  he  named  me  Loi, 
and  til!  his  death  he  called  me  by  this  name.  Dying  he  told 
me  that  one  day  a  saint  would  come  and  he  would  be  my 
guide.  In  obedience  to  his  words  I  serve  the  sadhus  and  all 
who  pass  this  way.*'  Tiiereupon  the  girl  turned  to  Kabir  and 
said,  '*0  my  lord,  do  thou  instruct  me."  He  answered, 
**  Serve  the  sadhus,  repeat  Sat  Nam  and  remain  in  the  com- 
pany of  the  guru." 

0  Kabir,  the  sadhu  is  my  atma,  and  I  the  body  of  the  sadhu ; 

1  live  within  the  sadhu,  as  rain  is  in  the  cloud. 

0  Kabir,  the  sadhu  is  my  atma,  and  I  the  life  of  the  sadhu  ; 

1  live  within  the   sadhu,  as  butter  is  in  the  milk. 

O  Kabir,  the  sadhu  is  my  atma.  and  I  the  breath  of  tha 
sadhu; 

[  live  within  the  sadhu,  as  perfume  is  in  the  flowers. 

{Kahir  Kasauti.) 

Thereupon  Loi  distributed  all  she  had  to  the   needy  and 
came  to  live  in  Kabir's   household. 

Somewhat  similar  is  the  account  given  of  the  origin  of 
Kamal,  Kabir*s  reputed  son.  Kabir  and  Shaikh  Taqi  when 
walking  along  the  bank  of  the  Ganges  saw  the  corpse  of  a  three 
months'  old  child  washed  down  by  the  current.  Kabir,  in  re- 
sponse to  a  challenge  of  the  Shaikh  wiio  declared  the  life  to 
be  extinct,  drew  the  corpse  to  land  and  spoke  some  words  into 
the  child's  ear,  who  forthwith  began  to  weep.  Kabir  carried 
the  child  to  Loi  who  reared  it.  The  name  Kamal  (wonder) 
was  given  from  the  exclamation  of  the  Shaikh  when  he  saw 
the  miracle,  which  Kabir  himself  expressly  disclaimed, 
Kabir*s  household  was  further  increased  by  the  addition  of  a 
daughter  called  Kamali.  The  story  as  recorded  in  the  Kabir 
Kasauti  runs  as  follows  :— A  girl  died  in  the  house  of  a  neigh- 
bour (said  by  some  to  be  this  same  Shaikh  Taqi).  At  his  own 
request  the  cliild  was  sent  to  Kabir  who  restored  her  to  life 
and  entrusted  her  also  to  the  care  of  Loi.  The  children 
followed  the  trade  of  the  weaver  ;  and  all  three,  T^ol,  Kamal, 
and  Kamali,  regarded  Kabir  as  their  swami  or  spiritual  guide. 


14  LIFB  OP  KABIR  IN  LEGEND 

When  Kamali,  now  twenty  years  of  age,  was  drawing  water 
from  the  well,  a  Brahman  parched  with  thirst  asked  her  foi* 
water,  which  she  gave  him.  After  quenching  his  thirst  the 
Brahman  asked  who  she  was  and  learned  with  horror  that  she 
was  the  daughter  of  a  weaver.  Kamali  could  do  nothing,  but 
suggested  he  should  take  counsel  of  Kabir  to  whom  the 
Pandit  complained  bitterly  of  his  broken  caste.  Kabir  sang 
the  following  hymn  ; — 

1.  O  Pandit,  think  when  thou  drinkest  water. 

In  the  mud  dwelling  wherein  thou  sittest,  therein  the 
universe  is  contained. 

2.  Where  fifty -six  kots  of  Yadavas  perished,  eighty-eight 
thousand  munis  and  men  ; 

At  every  step  prophets  are  buried,  they  decayed  to  dust 
therein. 

3.  Fish,  tortoise,  crocodile  there  gave  birth  :  the  water  is 
filled  with  blood. 

The  water  of  the  river  flows  i.a  through  its  channels;  men 
and  cattle  were  dissolved  in  it. 

4.  The  bones  are  dissolved,  the  marrow  melted  :  how  else 
comes  the  milk  ? 

That,  O  Pandit,  thou  didst  sit  down  to  drink  :  yet  the 
earthen  pot  thou  accountest  defiled. 

5.  Renounce  the  Vedas  and  the  Book,  O  Pandit :  all  these 
are  fictions  of  the  mind. 

Kabir  says,  Hear,  O  Pande :  these  are  your  pious  deeds 
(dliarm). — {Bijalc^  Shahda  47,) 

All  his  doubts  dispelled,  the  Pandit  fell  at  Kabir's  feet 
begging  him  to  receive  him  as  his  disciple.  Kabir  accepted 
him  and  ultimately  gave  him  Kamali  in  marriage. 

Kabir's  life  was  always  of  the  simplest.  As  his  fame  and 
the  number  of  his  disciples  grew,  one  of  these  urged  the 
necessity  of  some  outward  pomp  and  dignity  as  more 
suitable  to  his  position,  reminding  him  of  his  own  early 
experience  in  the  cloth-market.  Failing  to  convince  this 
enthusiast  by  less  direct  means,  Kabir  took  him  with  him  to 
a  neighbouring  palace  then  occupied  by  Raja  Bir  Singh. 
The  porter  at  the  main  gate  opposed  their  entrance  and  to 
Kabir's  request  that  the   two  pilgrims  should  pass  the  night 


UFB  OF  KABIR  IN  LEGEND  15 

at  this  inn,  rejoined  that  this  was  no  inn  but  the  Raja's 
palace.  Kabir  insisted  that  the  building  was  an  inn  and  the 
noise  of  the  dispute  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Raja. 
From  him  Kabir  continued  to  demand  one  by  one  the  names 
of  the  Rajas  wlio  had  lived  tliere  before  him,  until  the 
reluctant  Raja  admitted  the  truth  of  his  description.  Kabir 
and  his  disciple  lay  down  to  sleep  in  separate  courtyards 
of  the  palace.  At  night  the  servants  roused  the  disciple  and 
asked  him  who  he  was.  He  replied  **  A  sadhu";  whereupon 
they  beat  him  soundly  and  turned  him  out.  They  next  went 
to  Kabir  but  lie  gave  no  answer  at  all.  In  the  morning  guru 
and  chela  met  outside  the  palace,  and  the  chela  detailed 
his  woes.  Kabir  replied  **  You  posed  as  a  sadhu  and  were 
none  ;  therefore  you  were  beaten.  No  sadhu  ever  seeks  to 
sleep  in  a  king's  palace." 

Bir  Singh  built  a  beautiful  palace  at  Jaunpur  and  invited 
many  friends  to  a  great  feast  on  its  completion.  All  were 
loud  in  praises  of  the  work,  when  the  IJaja  noticed  among 
them  a  single  sadhu  who  stood  in  silence,  and  asked  him  his 
opinion  of  the  new  palace.  The  sadhu  replied  that  but  for  two 
defects  it  should  have  had  his  praises  too.  Bir  Singh  insisted 
that  he  sliould  name  them.  After  a  while,  said  the  sadhu, 
this  building  cannot  but  fall :  that  is  the  first ;  and  tiie  second, 
the  master  of  this  house  will  pass  away  before  tlie  palace  falls. 

The  Raja  burst  out  in  anger,  when  suddenly  he  recognis- 
ed Kabir  in  the  unknown  sadhu  and  fell  at  his  master's  feet. 

**  You  built  a  spacious  palace  and  called  many  together 
to  make  it  famous.  You  crowned  it  with  a  dome  of  gold,  but 
in  a  moment's  space  you  will  go  and  leave  it  all,  O  Kabir. 
Though  a  house  be  built  and  decked  with  emerald  and  dia- 
monds worth  millions,  it  cannot  be  seen  but  for  four  short 
days ;  death  will  come  and  destroy  it.  The  houses  where  seven 
Shabdas  sounded  and  rejoicing  was  made  from  door  to  door 
are  empty  and  crows  abide  there.  O  Kabir,  for  ten  days 
only  may  your  drum  be  heard  -thereafter  tiiis  city,  <|uarter 
and  street  you  will  see  no  riiore.  O  Kabir,  after  death 
none  will  remember  your  name;  all  will  run  to  the  inhabi- 
tated  city.  Mad  man  !  thou  hast  forgotten  death.  This  body 
will  be  mingled  with  the  earth,  as  the  salt  in  the  flour." 


16  LIFE   OF   KABIR  IN   LBGBND 

But  Raja  Bir  Singh,  as  a  disciple,  failed  to  satisfy  Kabir, 
and  he  thought  to  test  and  at  the  same  time  to  strengthen  his 
devotion.  Supported  on  the  one  side  by  Rui  Das,  theChamar, 
and  on  the  other  by  Ganga,  the  prostitute,  botli  approved 
Sants  but  a  sore  scandal  to  the  orthodox,  carrying  a  bottle 
of  liquor  in- his  hand,  Kabir  presented  himself  at  the  court  of 
Bir  Singh.  The  Raja,  disgusted  and  affronted,  ignored  him; 
but  when  he  saw  Kabir  deliberately  pour  the  contents  of  the 
liquor  bottle,  which  was  really  (illed  with  water,  upon  his 
foot,  drenching  the  palace  carpet,  loudly  demanded  an  explan- 
ation of  this  behaviour.  Kabir  replied,  **  At  Jagaunath  a 
Brahman  has  burnt  his  foot  while  cooking— I  have  poured 
this  out  to  ease  him."  At  the  request  of  his  favourite,  Bir 
Singh,  Sikandar  Lodi  despatched  a  messenger  mounted  on  a 
swift  camel  who  returned  with  the  news  tliat  it  was  as 
Kabir  had  said.  There  is  at  Jagannath  a  temple  called  after 
Kabir  and  pilgrims  to  the  place  visit  this  shrine  and  receive 
Kabir's  tarauei. 

In  Gujarat,  which  Kabir  visited  in  his  wanderings,  there 
lived  a  Solankhi  Raja,  who  on  Kabir's  arrival  went  with  his 
Rani  to  salute  the  saint  and  beg  the  blessing  of  a  son.  Kabir 
replied  in  the  hymn  :  — 

"The  world  is  so  mad  that  no  one  knows  ought  of  devo- 
tion. One  comes  and  begs  for  a  son  :  My  master,  grant  me 
this  boon.  Another  is  vexed  with  pain  and  asks  relief  from 
this.  Some  come  and  pray  wealth,  proffering  money.  Some 
come  and  ask  a  beauteous  bride.  Not  one  comes  to  buy  the 
truth.  All  the  world  believes  a  lie.  Kabir  says.  Hear,  O 
Saints:  what  can  one  make  of  the  blind  ?'* 

The  royal  pair  continued  to  plead  their  childlessness  and 
begged  for  an  heir,  until  Kabir  gave  them  a  promise  that  a 
lion-faced  child  should  be  born  of  his  essence,  by  whom  the 
Solankhi  race  should  be  continued.  Nine  months  later  the 
queen  bore  such  a  child  and  exposed  it  in  the  jungle,  where 
Kabir  found  it.  Carrying  the  child  he  appeared  before  the 
Raja  and  demanded  an  explanation,  warning  him  that  unless 
he  kept  the  child  his  race  would  become  extinct.  The  father 
implored  the  saint's  forgiveness  and  promised  obedience. 
Kabir  blessed  the  child,  whom  he  named  Dayaghar  Deva,  and 


LIFE  OF  KABIR  IN  LBOEND  17 

promised  that  his  race  should  rule  for  forty-two  generations ; 
but  his  descendants  are  called  Bha^el  Bansi  and  not  Solankhi. 
A  prince  of  this  line  was  established  by  Kabir  at  Bandhoghar 
in  the  fortress  of  Lakshman ;  and  the  Raja  of  Rewa  is  a  des- 
cendant of  this  family. 

Dharam  Das,  the  chief  disciple  and  successor  of  Kabir, 
was  the  son  of  a  wealthy  baniya.  A  man  of  great  devotion 
and  accustomed  to  distribute  a  large  portion  of  his  wealth 
in  alms,  he  was  present  on  the  occasion  of  a  discussion  bet- 
ween the  pandits  and  Kabir.  Kabir^s  simplicity  and  the 
directness  of  his  language,  which  ail  could  understand,  im- 
pressed him  strongly  in  their  contrast  with  the  pandits* 
quotations  from  Vedas,  Puranas  and  theological  but  unintelli- 
gible authorities.  He  begged  Kabir  to  initiate  him  as  his 
chela,  but  was  bidden  to  wait.  Again  at  Mathura,  when  en- 
gaged in  cooking  his  food,  he  noticed  that  the  wood  for  his 
fire  was  full  of  ants,  and  grieved  that  one  meal  must  mean 
the  destruction  of  so  many  lives  ;  a  stranger  approached  and 
he  recognised  Kabir,  who  sang  this  sakhi : — 

Life  cannot  be  sustained  but  at  the  cost  of  life ;  life  preys 
on  life;  how  can  mercy  be  shown  to  all  living?  O  man, 
consider. 

Again  he  begged  to  be  initiated,  but  again  was  told  to 
wait.  A  third  time  Kabir  met  him  in  Bandhogarh  and  again 
solved  another  of  his  difficulties.  Now  he  was  told  to  sell  his 
possessions  and  keeping  only  a  blanket  for  his  covering  to 
follow  Kabir.  His  wife  Aman  protested  at  this  faith  which 
separated  the  husband  from  his  wife  :  she  too  received  and 
obeyed  the  same  command ;  and  many  women  following  her 
example  became  obedient  to  Kabir. 

Another  account  tells  of  the  visit  of  Loi  to  Dharm  Das, 
then  a  rich  and  unconverted  baniya,  and  ascribes  his  conver- 
sion to  the  action  of  Kabir  on  that  occasion. 

Among  the  hymns  of  Dharm  Das  is  the  following  brief  life 
of  his  master:— 

In  Kashi  he  was  manifested,  was  called  a  man,  came  io 
the  house  of  Niru. 

In  this  dread  world  he  made  his  religion  known.  In  Kashi 
he  suffered  the  mocking  of  fools,  by  consorting  with  Qanga^    * 


18  LIFE  OF  EABIR  IN  LBGBND 

The  Pandit  of  Jagannath  he  saved  from  the  fire,  pouring 
water  on  his  foot. 

King  Sikandar  cast  him  bound  into  the  water,  into  the 
flames,  at  the  feet  of  a  maddened  elephant. 

He  appeared  as  a  raging  lion.  He  discoursed  of  Nirgun 
and  sang  the  song  that  banishes  fear. 

He  warned  and  instructed  jivas  (souls).  He  defeated  the 
qazis  and  the  pandits.  None  could  overcome  him.  All  jiva& 
that  sought  his  protection  found  bliss. 

Kabir,  my  master,  giver  of  salvation,  has  sped  the  swans 
on  the  path  of  heaven. 

Another  of  his  hj^mns  tells  of  the  famous  visit  of  Gorakh- 
nath  to  Ramanand,  and  of  his  receiving  instruction  from 
Kabir.    (See  K.  K.,  p.  41.) 

My  Lord  Kabir  spread  the  warp. 

One  peg  he  set  in  earth  and  one  on  heaven. 

The  thread  became  loose  and  was  entangled:  Brahma^ 
Vishnu  and  Mahesh  were  misled. 

After  spreading  the  loom  the  Satgur,  came  home  :  he 
instructed  Gorakh  in  his  room. 

Dharm  Das  says.  Hear,  brother  Sadhus :  by  making  and 
remaking  the  treasure  was  sold. 

At  the  outset  of  this  discussion  between  Kabir  and 
Gorakhnath,  the  latter,  impressed  by  Kabir's  wisdom,  asked 
his  age;  and  Kabir  sang  {Kabir  Kasauti,  p.  42.):— 

Who  asks  of  my  age,  is  mad. 

I  am  always  and  will  remain  for  ever. 

A  million  Vishnus  have  passed,  many  million  Kanhaiyas. 

Countless  million  Shambhus  have  been,  Mohammed  and 
his  caliphs : 

Gods  that  cannot  be  numbered. 

I  am  neither  aged  nor  a  ciiild.    I  rest  not  on  this  world. 

Hear,  O  Gorakh ;  such  is  my  age. 

And  the  two  following  hymns  are  said  to  have  been  chant- 
ed by  Kabir,  as  the  two  disputed  on  the  nature  of  Maya  :— 

Hymn  No.  L 

1.  I  have  known  Maya  as  a  great  deceiver.  She  roams 
bearing  a  three-fold  noose  in  her  hand ;  she  speaks  honeyed 
words. 


LIFE  OF  KABIR  IN  LEGEND  19 

2.  As  iCainaia  she  settled  in  the  bouee  of  Keshava,  in 
the  house  of  Shiva  as  Bhawani. 

In  the  house  of  Panda  she  abode  as  an  idol,  in  the  Tirathas 
she  became  water. 

3.  In  the  house  of  the  yogi  as  yogrini,  in  the  raja's  house 
as  rani. 

In  the  house  of  one  she  settled  as  a  diamond,  in  another's 
as  a  paltry  shell. 

4.  In  the  bhakta's  house  as  bhaktiii,  in  the  Brahman's 
house  as  a  Brahmani. 

Kabir  says,  Hear,  O  Sants :  this  is  a  tale  that  none  can 
tell.--(Bi>fc,  Shabda  59.) 

Hymn  No.  2. 

1.  **  O  robberess !  Why  do  you  wink  with  glad  eyes  ? 
Kabir  will  never  fall  into  your  clutches.  You  cut  the  pumpkin 
and  made  your  drum,  and  slicing  lemon  made  cymbals  (sun 
and  moon). 

2.  Five  Tui*ai  (senses)  sing,  and  Balamkhira  dances. 
Buffalo  is  Padmani  and  mouse  (mind)  lover.  A  frog  beats 
out  the  time,  a  she-ass  sings  the  bridal  song ;  a  camel  sings  a 
song  of  Vishnu. 

3.  With  necklace  of  tulsi  on  neck  bedecked  with  silver, 
she  displays  her  beauties ;  and  with  golden  ornaments 
beguiles. 

4.  She  misleads  three  worlds.  A  fish  climbs  a  mango  tree 
and  plucks  fruit ;  a  tortoise  picks  it  up.  Kabir  says.  Hear,  O 
Gorakh  :  only  few  can  explain  its  meaning." 

With  this  visit  of  Gorakhnath  may  be  compared  the 
story  of  Sarva  Jit,  who  came  to  Benares  to  dispute  with 
Bamanand.  The  aged  Ramanand  deputed  Kabir  to  meet 
him  ;  and  on  the  pandit's  objecting  to  this  weaver  antagonist 
Kabir  replied  with  the  song  Hanuiini  28  :— 

1.  No  one  knew  the  mystery  of  that  weaver  who  camo 
into  this  world  and  spread  the  warp. 

2.  The  earth  and  sky  are  the  two  beams  ;  and  moon  and 
sun  are  two  filled  shuttles. 

3.  Taking  a  thousand  threads,  be  spreads  it  lengthways: 
to-day  he  weaves  still,  but  hard  to  reach  is  the  far  off  end. 


20  LIFE   OF  KABIR   IN   LEGEND 

4.  Kabir  says,  Joioiiig  karm  with  karm,  broken  with 
uubroken  thread,  splendidly  the  weaver  weaves. -(Bijak, 
Romahii  28.) 

Sarva  Jit  was  deeply  impressed  and  sought  to  become 
Kabir's  disciple,  but  was  directed  to  go  to  Ramauand.  An- 
other tradition  explains  the  name  of  his  opponent  thus. 
Sarvanaud  having  defeated  all  the  pandits  of  his  time  in  his 
exposition  of  the  Shastras  had  changed  his  name  to  Sarva  .lit, 
when  his  mother  declared  that  there  was  one  Kabir  in 
Benares  whom  he  had  not  defeated  and  could  not.  With  a 
number  of  carts  laden  with  books  he  started  for  Benares  to 
find  Kabir.  On  his  arrival  Kabir  asked  him  the  reason  of. 
this  challenge  and  he  answered  that  until  he  had  overcome 
Kabir  his  mother  would  not  acknowledge  his  greatness. 
**  If  that  is  all,"  said  Kabir,  "  I  admit  my  defeat.''  The  pandit 
for  the  more  complete  satisfaction  of  his  mother  asked  Kabir 
to  write  this  admission  on  paper  and  Kabir  gave  him  leave 
to  write  whatever  he  wished.  Armed  with  this  document  on 
which  he  had  written  "Sarva  Jit  defeated  Kabir ''he  re- 
turned home  and  showed  the  paper  to  his  mother,  but  the 
words  had  rearranged  themselves  and  now  ran  "  Sarva  Jit 
was  defeated  by  Kabir." 

There  are  numerous  stories  which  illustrate  the  some- 
what unusual  manner  in  which  Kabir's  disciples  were  attract- 
ed to  him.  A  Brahman  named  Bam  Das  met  Kabir  on  the 
bank  of  the  Narbada  and  asked  for  a  vision  of  Vishnu.  On 
being  told  that  every  visible  form  was  Vishnu's,  he  maintain- 
ed that  he  desired  to  see  Vishnu  with  his  natural  eyes. 
Kabir  promised  that  his  request  should  be  granted  and 
to-morrow  at  raid-day  Vishnu  would  appear  to  him  in  his  own 
house.  Ram  Das  cleansed  his  house  and  prepared  a  great  feast 
for  his  expected  guest.  At  mid-day  there  appeared  a  huge 
and  dirty  buffalo  which  ate  the  food  and  fouled  the  house ; 
Ram  Das  drove  it  off  with  blows  and,  having  waited  till 
evening  for  his  guest  without  result,  set  out  to  find  Kabir. 
Kabir  met  him  with  the  words  '*  O  Ram  Das,  Vishnu  visited 
your  house  at  mid-day  in  the  form  of  the  buffalo.  He  ate  the 
iood  you  had  prepared,  but  you  seized  a  stick  and  drove  him 
out." 


LIFK  OF  KABIR   IN   LEGEND  21 

In  Gujarat  on  tlie  bank  of  the  Narbada  there  lived  twa 
Brahman  brothers,  Tatta  and  Jiva,  who  had  vowed  that  he 
alone  siiould  be  their  guru,  the  water  from  whose  feet  should 
cause  a  certain  dried  banyan  stump  to  blossom.  Kabir 
in  his  wanderings  came  to  their  house,  where  the  brothers 
received  him  as  a  sadhu,  washed  his  feet  and  sprinkled 
the  water  upon  the  stump,  which  blossomed.  They 
accepted  him  as  their  guru,  and,  in  spite  of  their  kinsfolk*s 
abhorrence  for  the  Moslem  weaver,  refused  to  renounce 
him.  No  one  of  their  caste  as  a  result  would  ally  themselves 
with  the  family  of  either,  and  by  Kabir's  advice  they  prepared 
to  marry  the  son  of  the  one  brother  with  the  daughter  of  the 
other.  Kabir,  now  at  Benares,  was  appealed  to  by  all  the 
members  of  the  caste  to  prevent  such  a  precedent,  but 
pointed  out  that  they  themselves  had  left  no  alternative; 
whereupon  their  kinsmen  consented  to  reinstate  the  brothers, 
and  many  more  became  disciples  of  Kabir.  The  banyan,  now 
become  a  mighty  tree,  is  still  shown. 

In  a  land  where  custom,  caste  and  tradition  reigned,  his 
consistent  rejection  of  the  orthodox  expressions  of  devotion 
could  not  fail  to  be  marked  in  the  traditional  stories  of  his 
life.  From  his  childhood  he  is  represented  as  scandalizing 
all  the  prejudices  of  Hindu  and  Moslem  alike.  On  the  banks 
of  the  (Janges  he  sees  the  Brahman  engaged  in  devotions  and 
discoursing  on  the  mysterious  power  of  the  Ganges'  water 
that  can  wash  away  all  sin  ;  he  fills  his  wooden  cup  from  the 
river  and  offers  it  to  the  Brahman  teacher  who  shrinks  in 
horror  from  the  pollution  caused  by  the  Moslem  weaver's 
vessel.  Kabir  replies, 'M  thought  the  water  of  the  Ganges 
could  purify  the  weaver's  cup.  Now  I  see,  the  teaching  you 
give  to  others,  you  yourself  do  not  believe":— 

Song. 

What  profit  bathing  if  the  mind  Is  full  of  filth  ?  A  fish 
lives  ever  in  the  water,  yet  never  loses  its  smell.  The  world 
perished  in  visiting  the  tiraths,  fasting  and  bathing  in  cold 
water.  Through  each  knowledge  of  the  True  Name  death 
has  drowned  all  the  ages.  Two  go  to  the  tirath :  the  mind 
is  restless  and  the  heart  covetous.    Not  one  sin  was  blotted 


22  LIFE  OF  KABIR  IN  LEGEND 

out,  but  ten  maunds  burden  more  was  loaded.  MillionB  of 
tiraths  visited,  millions  of  temples  built.  But  so  long  as  a 
Saut  goes  unserved,  all  works  are  fruitless. 

Again,  the  Nirbhai  Gyan  tells  of  a  Muslim  saint  called 
Jalian  Gasht  (the  Pilgrim  of  the  World)  who  came  to  India 
and  hearing  of  Kabir  set  out  to  visit  liiui.  When  Kabir 
heard  of  his  arrival,  he  explained  to  Dharra  Das  that  this 
man  was  a  true  saint  but  still  believed  in  the  distinction 
between  Hindu  and  Muslim.  Now  God  has  sent  Jiim  to 
me  that  I  may  complete  his  wisdom.  Accordingly  Kabir 
ordered  his  disciple  to  bring  a  pig  and  tie  it  near  his  door. 
Jahan  Gasht  arriving  at  Kabir's  house  and  seeing  tlie  pig 
was  departing  in  disgust  when  Kabir  called  to  him  from  the 
upper  room,  O  Jahan  Gasht,  why  do  you  go  without  seeing 
Kabir?  and  compelled  him  to  enter.  After  the  customary 
salutations  the  pilgrim  asked  his  host  why  he  kept  ti)e  unlaw- 
ful thing  at  his  door.  Kabir  replied  "  O  Jahan  Gasht,  I  liave 
kept  the  unlawful  thing  without  my  house,  but  you  within 
your  heart.  Had  it  not  been  in  your  heart,  your  eyes  would 
not  have  seen  it.  Whatever  you  keep  within  your  heart  is 
made  manifest.  There  is  nothing  lawful  or  unlawful.  Tiiere 
are  but  creeds  which  men  have  made.  God  has  created 
nothing  that  we  should  call  unlawful  or  unclean.  I  look 
on  nothing  as  lower  or  as  higher."  Then  at  Jahan  Gasht's 
request  he  sang  this  song  of  instruction  :— 

1.  Brother,  whence  came  two  divine  masters  of  the 
world  ?  who  has  led  you  astray  ? 

Allah,  Rama,  Karim,  Keshava,  Hari,  Hazrat,  are  but 
names  given. 

2.  Jewels  and  jewels  are  made  of  one  gold  bar  ;  but  in  it 
is  one  nature  only. 

In  speech  and  hearing  only,  two  are  made :  one  Namaz 
another  Puja, 

3.  He  is  Mahadeo,  he  Mohammad  :  Brahma  is  called  Adam. 
One  is  called  Hindu,  one  Turk  :  both  live  on  the  one  earth. 

4.  One  reads  the  Vedas,  another  Khutbas  :  one  is  Maulvi, 
one  is  Pande. 

Each  is  called  by  a  separate  name  ;  both  are  pots  of  the 
one  clay. 


1 


LIFB  OF.  KABIR  IN   LEGEND  J8 

5.  Kabir  says,  both  alike  have  gone  astray  :  none  has 
found  Rama. 

One  sacrificed  a  goat,  and  one  a  cow:  in  argument  tliey 
have  lost  their  life.— (B/ja/r,  Shabda  30.) 

And  in  many  other  places  in  the  Bijak  there  are  hymns 
containing  allusions  to  the  frequent  controversies  which 
took  place  between  the  Moslem  doctors  and  Kabir,  as  for 
instance  -Raraaini,  48 :  - 

1.  Through  Manikpur  Kabir  passed :  there  he  heard 
Shaikii  Taqi's  fame. 

2.  At  the  place  that  is  called  Jaunpur  I  heard,  at  Jhusi 
I  heard  tlie  names  of  many  Pirs. 

3.  There  are  written  twenty-one  pirs ;  they  gave  dis- 
courses (Khutba)  in  honour  of  the  prophet. 

4.  Hearing  I  could  not  refrain  myself : ''Seeing  these 
graves  ye  are  gone  astray." 

5.  The  works  of  the  Friend  of  God  and  of  his  Prophet, 
followed  by  you  in  act  alone,  are  become  unlawful. 

6.  Snkhi:  O  Shaikh  Akardi,  Shaikli  Sakardi,  give  heed 
to  my  words. 

See  the  l)eginning  and  the  end  from  age  to  age  with 
open  eyes. 

There  remains  for  consideration  the  appearance  of  Kabir 
before  the  Emperor  Sikandar  Lodi,  referred  to  in  the  verses 
of  Dharm  Das  quoted  above  and  many  other  legends  of 
Kabir.  One  might  hope  to  find  oneself  on  firmer  historical 
ground  here  but  the  trail  of  the  legendary  serpent  is  obvious 
over  all  this  incident  too. 

The  Firishta  describes  Sikandar  Lodi  as  himself  a  poet 
and  keenly  appreciative  of  literary  merit.  He  was  as  remark- 
able for  his  fear  of  God  as  for  his  benevolence  towards  his 
people.  He  encouraged  charity  of  all  kinds  and  maintained 
a  large  number  of  holy  men,  and  was  firmly  attached  to  the 
Mohammedan  religion  which  he  sought  to  purge  of  many 
imported  superstitious  practices.  The  same  work  counts 
it  to  him  for  righteousness  that  he  made  a  jwint  of  destroying 
all  Hindu  temples  and  at  Mathra  made  great  efforts  to 
prevent  the  Hindu  bathing  ceremonies  from  being  carried 
out.    In  1490  a  Brahman  of  Kataen   near  Lucknow  named 


24  LIFE  OP  KABIR  IN   LEGEND 

Boodhan  created  a  considerable  stir  by  maintaiDing  witli 
great  ingenuity  and  publicity  the  thesis  "That  the  religions 
both  of  the  Moslems  and  Hindus  if  acted  on  with  sincerity 
were  equally  accei)table  to  God."  Two  prominent  Lucknow 
doctors,  Qazi  Peela  and  Shaikh  Bude,  held  contrary  views ; 
and  ultimately  the  Governor  Azim  Humayun  thought  fit  ta 
send  all  the  disputants  to  Sambhal,  where  the  king,  who  was 
fond  of  hearing  religious  disputations,  directed  the  learned 
of  his  empire  to  assemble  and  confute  the  Brahman.  The 
doctors  finally  gave  their  opinion  that  unless  the  infidel  who 
had  maintained  the  Hindu  worship  to  be  of  equal  value  in  the 
sight  of  God  with  that  of  the  believer,  should  renounce  his 
error  and  adopt  Islam,  he  ought  to  suffer  death.  The  Hindu 
refused  to  apostatize  and  was  accordingly  executed. 

Before  this  sovereign  Kabir,  the  legends  say,  was  twice 
arraigned.  His  enemies,  Hindu  and  Moslem,  carrying  his 
mother  with  them,  went  in  full  day-light  with  burning 
torches  to  prefer  their  complaints  against  the  weaver  who 
outraged  the  ears  of  the  faithful  Moslems  with  his  cries  of 
Ram,  Ram  in  every  street  and  had  desecrated  the  sacred 
janeo  and  tilak  of  the  Hindu  by  his  unlawful  assumption  of 
these  symbols  of  the  twice  born.  Shaikh  Taqi  also,  jealous 
of  his  fame,  supported  the  complaints.  Kabir  was  brought 
before  the  king,  to  whom  he  refused  obeisance:  "I  have  never 
learnt  to  make  obeisance,  save  to  One  Who  is  above  all." 
The  king  demanded  the  reason  of  his  delay  in  obeying  the 
royal  command.  Kabir  replied  that  he  had  been  absorbed  in 
watching  a  play.  "  I  saw  a  passage  smaller  than  a  needle's 
eye.  Therein  I  saw  thousands  of  camels  and  elephants  pass- 
ing on  their  way."  The  king  declared  this  an  impossibility 
and  Kabir  a  liar ;  he  replied  : 

O  Kabir,   speak  not  untruth. 

None  knows  what  may  be  in  the  fourth  part  of  a 
second. 

O  Kabir,  a  drop  has  entered  into  the  sea :  all  know  it. 

But  the  sea  has  entered  into  a  drop:  few  can  understand. 

The  outward  eyes  are  perished :  the  mind's  eyes  perished. 

O  Kabir,  he  who  has  lost  all  four  (eyes)  ;  what  can  one 
find  in  him  ? 


UFB  OF  KABIR  IN  LEGEND  25 

And  at  the  king's  command  explained— "O  Sikandar, 
bear  ;  heaven,  earth,  the  sun  and  moon  are  far  away  one  from 
the  other.  In  the  vast  interspaces  elephants  and  camels,  men 
and  other  beings  pass  to  and  fro.  All  these  you  see  in  the 
pupil  of  the  eye.  Is  not  the  pupil  of  the  eye  as  the  eye  of  a 
needle  ?  In  one  drop  of  water  the  sea  appears,  in  one  grain 
of  sand  a  million  suns  and  moons  are  shining.  If  one  sees  it 
not,  his  eyes  are  faulty. 

Tiie  king  was  satisfied  and  let  him  go.  But  Kabir's 
enemies  again  approached  Shaikh  Taqi,  who  urged  the  king 
to  deal  with  Kabir  as  an  infidel,  hateful  to  Hindu  and  Moslem 
alike,  and  a  political  danger ;  the  Hindus  further  insisting 
that  Kabir  was  a  person  of  notoriously  loose  character, 
associating  habitually  with  low  caste  reprobates  and  women 
of  bad  character. 

The  king  sent  for  Kabir  again,  who  answered/this  second 
charge  thus :  - 

That  I  know  all  to  he  one,  what  cause  of  grief  is  that  to 
others? 

If  1  am  dishonoured,  I  have  lost  my  own  honour :  others 
Deed  pay  no  heed. 

Mean  I  am  and  with  the  mean  I  would  be  numbered  :  I 
have  no  hire  with  others. 

For  honour  and  dishonour  I  care  not:  he  whose  eyes  are 
opened,  he  will  understand. 

Kabir  says,  honour  is  based  on  this.  Renounce  all  else, 
sing  only  Kam. 

Till  now  I  have  fared  well :  this  one  case  alone  remains. 

When  this  jiva  is  seized  by  Yama,  will  this  honour  stand 
or  vanish  ? 

The  qazis  demanded  with  threats  that  he  should  live  as  a 
true  Muslim.  Kabir  answered  :  I  know  not  what  a  Moslem, 
what  a  Hindu  can  be.  In  all  hearts  is  but  One  Master :  there 
is  not  a  heart  without  Him.  I  sacrifice  myself  to  that  form 
wherein  He  appears.  The  qazis  challenged  his  name  Kabir, 
a  name  of  Qod.  He  answered.  If  you  know  this  to  be  a  name 
of  God,  why  do  you  call  me  so?  And  in  reply  to  the  king's 
demand  for  his  real  name,  he  sang  :— 

My  name  is  Kabir :  all  the  world  knows  this. 


m  LJFB  OF   KABIR   IN   LEGEND 

Id  the  three  worlds  is  my  name ;  and  iiappiness  is  my  abode. 

Water,  air,  the  seasons,  thus  I  created  the  world. 

The  unstruck  wave  thunders  in  the  heaven,  and  Sohang 
keeps  time. 

I  made  manifest  the  seed  of  Brahma.  From  the  bands  of 
Yama  I  gave  release  and  made  the  body  clean. 

Gods,  men  and  munis  do  not  find  the  end.  Kabir's  saints 
alone  can  find  it~(Kahir  Kasauti,  37.) 

By  Vedas  and  the  Book  none  will  reacli  the  shore.  So 
deep  is  the  mysterious  knowledge :  hear,  O  SiUandar :  I  am  a 
pir  of  both  religions. 

This  was  blasphemy;  another  saying  of  Kabir,  "Into  hell 
fall  Turk  and  Hindu ;  Qazi,  Brahman  both  deserve  it,"  did 
not  mend  matters.  And  Kabir  by  the  king's  order  was  bound 
with  chains  and  cast  into  the  Ganges ;  but  the  bonds  could 
not  hold  him  nor  the  water  drown.  "The  world  is  bound 
with  a  twisted  rope"  of  "mine  and  thine."  Kabir  cannot 
be  bound  ;  he  has  the  Name  as  his  support.  He  was  thrown 
into  a  fiery  pit,  but  emerged  unscathed.  Then  the  king  cast  him 
tooundhand  and  foot  at  the  feet  of  an  infuriated  elephant; 
the  elephant  refused  to  go  near  him,  and  the  driver  cried  out 
that  he  saw  before  him  a  raging  lion  and  could  not  make 
his  beast  go  near  it.  The  king  having  mounted  the  elephant 
and  nimself  seen  the  marvel,  hastened  to  prostrate  himself 
at  the  saint's  feet.    Kabir  answered  him  :— 

For  him  who  sows  thorns  for  thee,  do  thou  sow  flowers: 

For  thee  the  harvest  will  be  flowers,  but  for  him  sharp 
pains. 

Tradition  says  that  Kabir  grew  old  in  Kashi  and  assigns 
him  a  life  of  120  years.  To  the  last  his  mind  was  set  on 
combating  the  superstitions  and  the  belief  in  ceremonial 
which  many  of  his  Hindu  followers  were  still  unable  to 
discard.  When  he  felt  death  drawing  near,  he  determined 
to  leave  the  sacred  city  for  Maghar,  which  is  some  six 
marches  distant  from  Benares.  The  popular  belief  main- 
tained that  all  who  died  at  Maghar  must  return  to  earth 
in  the  form  of  asses,  and  his  disciples  cried  out  at  this  deter- 
mination of  their  master,  which  however  they  were  powerless 
to  alter. 


LIFE   OP   KABIR   IN    LEGEND  27 

**Men  say  Kablr  has  gone  far  off.  But  few,  the  steadfast, 
know  the  truth. 

The  three  worlds  know  the  sou  of  Dasrath ;  tlie  secret 
essence  of  Rama's  name  is  not  tliis. 

By  his  own  knowledge  each  interprets;  lie  styles  a  rope 
the  snake  he  sees. 

Though  knowing  virtue's  fruit  the  best,  yet  leaving  Hari 
the  mind  finds  not  salvation. 

Hari  sustains  all,  as  the  water  bears  up  the  fish.  Kabir 
proclaims  another,  better,  way."— (Bi/o/r,  Shabda  100.) 

His  disciples  begged  him  to  relent.  Lord,  thou  art  dying ; 
let  us  take  thee  to  Benares. 

**The  world  will  die,  but  I  shall  not  die.  1  have  got  one 
giver  of  life.  Infidels  will  die,  saints  will  live.  They  will  fill 
and  drink  the  immortal  juice.  If  Hari  die,  then  I  will 
die ;  if  he  does  not  die,  then  now  why  should  I  die  ?  Kabir  says, 
I  fixed  the  mind  in  the  mind  ;  I  became  immortal  and  obtain- 
ed the  ocean  of  happiness.'' 

After  this  Kabir  stretched  himself  upon  the  earth  and 
covered  himself  with  a  sheet.  His  disciples  broke  out  in 
lamentations  and  were  rebuked  for  this  : 

O  people,  you  are  simple  of  understanding. 

1.  As  water  mingles  with  water,  so  Kabir  will  mingle 
with  the  dust. 

2.  If  Maithul  is  your  real  abode,  then  your  death  will  be 
at  Maghar. 

3  One  who  dies  at  Maghar,  will  not  see  death  (be  free 
from  the  bondage  of  death). 

If  he  dies  elsewhere  he  will  bring  shame  on  Kama. 

4.  **One  who  dies  at  Maghar  becomes  an  ass*';  a  fine 
thing,  you  have  lost  your  confidence  in  Rama. 

5.  What  is  Kashi,  what  the  waste  land  of  Maghar,  if 
Rama  dwells  in  ray  heart  ? 

If  Kabir  leaves  his  body  in  Kashi,  what  credit  will  it  be 
to  Rama  ? 

And  there  at  Maghar  he  sang  his  last  song,  as  the  con- 
summation of  his  union  with  the  beloved  drew  near. 

^  Sing,  O  Bride,  the  bridal  song  of  blessing  :  to  my  house 
faas  come  Raja  Ram,  my  husband. 


28  LIFE  OP   EABTR  IN  LEGEND 

My  body,  my  soul,  are  transported  with  delight.  The  five 
tattwas  form  his  bridal  company. 

Rama  Deva  has  come  to  be  my  guest  :  I  am  inebriated 
with  the  joy  of  youth. 

My  body  delights  in  the  lake  of  the  Vedas:  Brahma 
himself  chants  the  Vedas. 

With  Ram  Deva  I  tread  tlie  sacred  circle.  Blessed,  blessed 
is  my  lot. 

The  three  and  thirty  millions  of  the  gods  are  come  ;  eighty- 
six  thousand  men  and  munis, 

Kabir  says,  I  go  hence,  wedded  with  the  Purusha,  the 
One,  the  Immortal." 

The  news  of  his  death  was  rapidly  carried  to  Benares 
and  his  disciples  flocked  to  Maghar,  where  a  dispute  arose 
between  two  rival  parties,  headed  by  Raja  Bir  Singh  and 
Bejli  Khan  Pathan,  as  to  the  disposal  of  his  body.  Just  when 
an  appeal  to  arms  seemed  imminent,  there  appeared  an  aged 
man  who  bade  the  disputants  raise  the  sheet  tliat  shrouded 
Kabir's  body.  They  did  so,  and  found  beneath  it  a  heap  of 
flowers  only.  These  they  divided;  Bejli  Khan  buried  his 
portion  at  Maghar,  while  Bir  Singh  cremated  the  remainder 
at  Kashi  and  buried  the  ashes  at  Kabir  Ohowra. 


THE  BIJAK 

This  collection  of  hymns  in  various  metres  contains  the 
most  authoritative  record  of  Kabir's  teaching.  The  word 
itself  has  three  distinct  meanings — (1)  an  invoice,  (2)  essence 
or  seed,  (3)  a  document  by  which  a  hidden  treasure  can  be 
located.  The  title  given  to  this  collection  seems  to  be 
derived  from  the  third  of  these  uses  of  the  word.  In  early 
<|ay6  near  the  Benares  State  there  lived  a  race  called  Baroh : 
the  district  they  inhabited  is  still  called  Badohi,  a  corruption 
of  the  original  Barohi.  An  aboriginal  race  of  India,  when 
conquered  by  the  Rajputs  and  forced  to  do  menial  work, 
they  buried  tlieir  treasures  out  of  sight,  carefully  marking 
the  places  of  concealment  by  secret  signs  on  a  carefully 
preserved  chart  This  chart  they  called  a  Bijak  or  key. 
When  in  need  of  money,  they  recovered  their  treasure  by 
means  of  this  Bijak,  taking  care  never  to  disclose  its  secret 
signs  to  any  but  their  heirs.  Kabir  himself  spoke  the  dialect 
of  the  Mirzapur  and  Qorakhpur  district,  and  no  doubt  was 
familiar  with  this  use  of  the  word,  to  which  he  directly 
refers  in  the  Sakhi  of  the  37th  Ramaini. 

**The  Bijak  tells  the  secret  of  the  treasure  which  is 
hidden:  the  Shabda  tells  of  Jiva;  there  are  but  few  who 
understand  it." 

The  language  of  the  Bijak  is  that  spoken  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Benares,  Mirzapur  and  Gorakhpur,  and  the  writing 
is  in  the  Kaithi  character.  Both  style  and  language  make  it 
exceedingly  difficult  to  understand.  The  colloquialisms,  idio- 
matic and  elliptical  structure  of  sentences,  and  frequent  play 
on  words,  increase  the  difficulty.  There  is  hardly  a  sentence 
for  which  strict  grammatical  accuracy  could  be  claimed. 
Most  of  the  words  which  were  in  common  use  in  the  time  of 
Kabir  have  by  now  become  obsolete,  while  even  at  the  time 
when  Kabir  lived,  his  sayings  were  by   no  means  always 


30  THE  BIJAK 

understood.  Kabir  himself  seems  to  be  answering  a  charge 
of  obscurity  in  the  194th  Sakhi.  "  My  speech  is  of  the  East, 
no  one  can  understand.  He  only  can  understand  me  who  is  of 
the  Bast.''  Moreover  this  Purbia-boli  was  the  dialect  of  the 
villager  :  and  the  Brahmans  and  literate  generally  resented 
being  addressed  in  this  fashion. 

In  the  Bijak  are  found  some  235  words  of  Persian,  Arabic 
or  Turkish  origin,  generally  in  a  more  or  less  distort«^d  form. 
These  words  occur  again  and  again.  They  had  found  their 
way  into  the  language  of  the  country  as  a  result  of  the 
constant  intercourse  between  the  Hindu  and  the  conquering 
Moslems,  who  first  entered  the  country  in  the  early  part  of 
the  8th  century.  All  these  conquering  hordes  that  poured 
in  from  beyond  the  Indus  or  from  the  north  of  the  Himalayas 
spoke  some  form  of  Persian  ;  hence  the  use  of  Persian  words 
and  phrases  made  its  way  into  the  ordinary  dialect  of  the 
country.  From  the  Prithvi  Raj  Rasa,  composed  by  Ohand 
Baroot  sliortly  after  the  defeat  of  Prithvi  Raj  by  Shahab-ud- 
Din  Gori  in  1193  A.D.,  we  find  that  Persian  and  Arabic  words 
were  in  common  use.  Such  words  as  Mahal,  Parwardigar, 
Paigam,  Karim,  Sultan,  Badshah,  Diwan,  Khalq,  Alam,  Hazrat, 
Mulk,  Parman,  found  in  this  Rasa,  as  early  as  the  beginning 
of  the  13th  century  are  also  words  commonly  used  in  the 
Bijak.  But  the  language  of  the  Prithvi  Raj  Rasa  can  by  no 
means  be  regarded  as  typical  of  the  everyday  speech  of  the 
13th  century ;  it  consists  mainly  of  Sanskrit  words  and 
phrases  and  cannot  be  understood  without  a  good  working 
knowledge  of  Sanskrit. 

It  is  probable  that  in  the   Bijak  we  have  the  only  exact 
specimen  of  the  language  commonly  spoken  in   the  middle  of 
the  fourteenth  century :   and  earlier   than   this   there    are 
no  records  of   the  spoken  language,  the   Prithvi  Raj    Rasa 
already  referred  to  being  in  the  main  literary  Sanskrit.    Kabir 
is  said  to  have  lived  120  years,  and  this  if  true  would  make 
him  the  contemporary  of  the  following  Moslem  rulers!:— 

Muhammad  Tuglaq      ...  ...  ...        1394-1414.  A.  D. 

Syed  Khizar  Khan        ...  ...  ...        1414-1421.       „ 

Mubarak  Shah  ...  ...  ...         1421-1435.       „ 


THE  BIJAK  n 

Mohammed  8hah  ..  ..  ...  1435-1445    A.  D. 

Ala-ud-Din  ...  ..  1445-1450. 

SikandarLodI  ...  ...  ...  1488-1517. 

Ibrahim  Lodi  ...  ...  ...  1517-162C. 

There  'is  an  oral  tradition  tliat  the  contents  of  the  Bijak 
were  originally  dictated  by  Kabir  to  one  Bhaggo  Ji ;  who  is 
identical  with  Bhagwan  Das.  When  the  Bijak  was  com- 
pleted Bhaggo  Ji  took  it  to  Dhanaoti,  where  it  long  remained 
in  tlie  keeping  of  Dhanaoti  Maliants,  and  was  published  in 
manuscript  form  by  the  wandering  disciples  of  Kabir.  The 
royal  family  of  Rewa  claim  that  it  was  given  to  them 
by  Kabir  himself :  and  the  manuscript  of  the  Bijak  in 
the  possession  of  the  royal  house  of  Rewa  is  said  to  be 
that  which  was  written  out  by  Dharm  Das  in  Sambat  1521 
Bikrami. 

The  hymns  of  the  Bijak  comprise  Ramainis,  Shabdas, 
Kaliarwas,  Hindolas,  Sakhis.  In  the  absence  of  any  earlier 
work  composed  in  these  metres  the  claim  of  Kabir  to  be 
regarded  as  the  inventor  of  the  metres  and  musical  modes 
thus  used  cannot  easily  be  disputed. 

But  apart  from  purely  literary  or  philosopiiical  considera- 
tions the  real  importance  of  Kabir  rests  on  the  enormous  in- 
fluence he  exercised  upon  subsequent  religious  thinking.  He 
himself  realised  that  in  order  to  reach  the  mass  of  the  popula- 
tion it  was  essential  that  he  should  deliver  his  message  in  the 
best  known  of  the  popular  dialects— Hindi,  Sanskrit,  the  lang- 
uage ef  the  learned  would  have  secured  for  him  at  best  the 
attention  of  a  few  educated  pandits,  and  these  would  have 
despised  him  as  the  son  of  a  Moslem  weaver.  "Sanskrit/' 
he  himself  says,  "  is  like  the  water  of  a  well,  while  the  Bhasha 
is  like  the  flowing  water  of  a  river.'*.  Perhaps  this  abandon- 
ment of  the  language  of  the  learned  in  favour  of  the  diHlect 
of  the  common  people  has  proved  the  most  powerful  and 
lasting  of  all  the  many  religious  reforms  he  set  himself  to 
bring  about.  His  teaching  and  that  of  his  disciples  has 
resulted  in  the  existence  of  additional  Panths  and  sects  in 
many  districts,  more  or  less  mutually  exclusive.  But  the 
Bijak  was  the  precarsor  of  the  countless  hymns  still  sung 
by   wandering  sadhuB  in   every  village  of  Northern  India. 


32  THB  BIJAK 

Two-thirds  of   the   Grantli    is    Kabir's,    and   his  work  leads 
directly  to  the  hymns  of  Tulsi  Das  and  the  Hindi  Ramayan. 

It  seems  strange  tliat  the  great  teacher  Ramanand,  the 
father  of  the  modern  Vaishnavite  sects,  has  left  no  work 
in  Bhasha:  all  his  writings  are  in  Sanskrit ;  one  solitary 
Hindi  hymn  of  his  is  preserved  in  the  Granth.  The  story  of 
Kabir's  initiation  has  been  told  elsewhere,  but  there  is  every 
reason  to  suppose  that  Ramanand  was  largely  influenced  by 
Kabir.  Strictly  orthodox  in  his  observance  of  caste  rules,  he 
is  said  never  to  have  spoken  to  a  non-Brahman  except 
through  rfn  intervening  screen.  But  after  his  acceptance  of 
Kabir  we  find  a  Rajput,  a  Ohanmr,  a  butcher,  a  prostitute, 
admitted  to  the  status  of  disciple.  The  Ramanand  Gash t  gives 
many  instances,  not  all  necessarily  historical,  of  the  strong 
influence  exercised  by  Kabir  over  his  master  Ramanand. 

Kabir  had  twelve  distinguished  disciples,  almost  all 
of  low  caste  origin,  and  each  of  the  twelve  instituted  an 
independent  order.  An  examination  of  tlieir  scriptures  and 
their  hymns  reveals  little  of  real  originality :  all  alike  show 
a  close  following  of  Kabir,  and  the  thoughts  expressed  are 
those  that  have  been  more  forcibly  emphasised  by  Kabir. 
Thus  Jivan  Das,  himself  a  disciple  of  Kabir,  founded  an  order 
named  the  Sat  Nami.  Gyani,  also  a  disciple,  orginated  several 
mendicant  orders.  All  these  sing  Shabdas,  Sakhis,  and  other 
hymns  of  Kabir;  in  the  case  of  the  latter  the  name  of  Gyani 
being  substituted  for  that  of  Kabir.  Another  disciple,  Saiiib 
Das,  was  the  founder  of  the  Mul  Panthis.  They  do  not  ack- 
nowledge Kabir  as  their  religious  guide,  but  their  scriptures 
contain  nothing  that  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  original 
master.  The  Dadu  Panth  in  Rajputana,  the  Sadhs  of  Parru- 
khabad,  the  Baba  Lali  of  Malwa,  the  Shiv  Narainis  of 
Ghazipur,  the  Maluk  Dasis  of  Kara  Manikpur,  the  followers 
of  the  Darya  Sahibs  of  Behar  and  Rajputana,  Oharan  Das 
and  Paltu  Sahib,  are  all  direct  descendants  of  Kabir  and 
sing  his  hymns,  while  the  Pran  Nathi,  Nirmala,  and  Udasi  are 
but  reflections  of  the  same  religious  teaching.  Again,  the 
Radha  Swami  Panth  of  modern  days  has  recently  compiled 
three  books  to  give  authoritative  expression  to  their  doc- 
trines of  the   Panth.    Again  the  teaching  given    is   Kabir's. 


THE  BIJAK  33 

More  honest  than  many  of  the  sects  already  named,  they 
have  acknowledged  their  debt  and  the  name  of  Kabir  is 
retained  at  the  end  of  each  hymn.  For  the  last  fifteen  years 
a  monthly  periodical  called  The  Sadhu  has  been  published 
at  Lahore,  and  recently  at  Delhi,  for  the  purpose  of  expound- 
ing the  teaching  of  Sadluis  belonging  to  the  different  orders. 
Again  and  again,  whenever  the  doctrines  or  principles  of  an 
order  are  to  be  illustrated,  the  hymns  of  Kabir  are  used  to 
make  the  doctrine  clear.  Acknowledgement  of  a  debt  to  the 
reputed  son  of  a  humble  Moslem  weaver  perhaps  proved 
distasteful,  but  his  inspiration  was  none  the  less  indispens- 
ible  ;   and  his  influence  is  patent. 

To  return  to  the  more  famous  teachers,   Nanak.  Sur  Das, 
and  Tuisi  Das.    A  well-known    tradition    tells  how   Nanak  s 
father  supplied  his  son  with  money  and  sent  him   out  with 
the  object    of    establishing  a    lucrative    business.      In  the 
course  of  his  journey    lie    fell  in    with    tliree  sadhus,  upon 
whom  he  spent  the  sum  intended  to  serve  as  his  capital. 
History  makes  no  niention  of  any  attempt  to  spread  teaching 
by   means    of    wandering   disciples    before   that     of   Kabir. 
Thus  it  is  by  no  means  improbable   that  these  three  sadhus 
were   emissaries  of   Kabir.      There   is  a   further   record  of 
Nanak's    meeting   with   Shaik     Kamal,   the    son    of   Kabir. 
Nanak  is  said  to  have  been  27  years  old   when  he  met  Kabir 
in  Benares,  Kabir  to  have  been  70  years  of  age  when  Nanak 
was  bom.    But  tradition  assigns  to  Kabir  a  life  of  120  years. 
The  story  of  the  dispute  over  Kabir's  remains  and  its  settle- 
ment reappears  in   the  traditional  life  of  Nanak.     In  the 
family  of  Nanak  Kabir  is  still  held   in   great  veneration  and 
the   two  sects  Nirmala  and    Udasi,  professed    followers  of 
Nanak,  regard  Kabir  as  his  Guru.    Nanak   himself  mentions 
Kabir  with  great  reverence  and  says  that  he  alone  beside 
himself  reached  heaven.    In  the  Janam  Sakhi  of  Nanak  we 
read  that,   when  brought  before    Baber,  Nanak    told    the 
Bmperor  that  Kabir  was  a  great  saint  and  one  with  God ; 
and  there  are  numerous  other  allusions  to  the  greatness  of 
Kabir  in  the  same  Jattam  Sakhi,    To  these  may  be  added 
the  following  quotations,  the  first  from  a  hymn  of  Dulam  Das, 
a  follower  of  Nanak  : 
8 


34  THE    HIJAK 

Nanak  nam  Kabir  mata  hai :  so  Guru  praghat  sunai. 

Dhruve  Prahlad  ye  hi  ras  mate  :  Shive  rahe  tari  lai. 

Nanak  is  the  name  of  the  religion  of  Kabir :  the  Guru  has 
told  me  so  openly. 

Dhruva  Prahlad  was  intoxicated  in  that  juice :  and  Siva 
remained  in  samadhi. 

The  second  from  Gobind  Singh  :  "Kabir  Panth  ab  bhayo 
Khalsa.  The  religion  of  Kabir  has  become  Khalsa."  Khalsa 
means  *  pure '  and  is  the  name  of  the  Sikh  religion. 

The  traditions  may  be  regarded  as  untrustworthy  and  the 
quotations  capable  of  other  interpretations  or  at  least  insuf- 
ficient evidence  on  which  to  base  so  large  a  claim.  There 
remains  a  further  consideration.  Nanak  and  his  successor 
were  all  natives  of  thePanjab.  But  the  hymns  of  theGranth 
in  Panjabi  are  comparatively  few  :  nearly  seventy  per  cent. 
are  in  Hindi,  and  many  hymns  contain  words  of  Gujarati, 
Marathi  and  other  southern  dialects.  The  15  Bhagats  of  the 
Granth  have  borrowed  largely  from  Kabir,  and  his  influence 
is  strong  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Adi  Granth. 

Sur  Das  is  said  to  have  declared  his  intention  of  composing 
1,25,000  hymns:  he  had  composed  seventy-five  thousand 
when  death  prevented  the  completion  of  his  vow.  His  seventy- 
five  thousaind  hymns  were  collected  and  edited  by  Abdul 
Rahira  Khan  Khanan,  the  Oommander-in-chief  of  Akbar.  Sur 
Das  was  himself  personally  known  to  Akbar.  Throughout 
these  hymns,  in  which  for  the  most  part  he  celebrates  the 
praises  of  Sri  Krishna,  there  are  considerable  traces  of  Kabir's 
influence.  The  more  famous  Tulsi  Das  in  his  autobiography 
called  Wane  Patr  writes  — 

Sarwasto  Kabir  ne  kaha— Kabir  sang  the  real  thing. 

Shesh  bacha  so  Sur  da  laha— Whatever  little  remained  was  held  by 

Sur  Das. 

Tulsi  Ram  nam  pad  gaha. — Tulsi  sang  the  praises  of  the  name  of  Ram. 

From  this  statement  it  would  appear  that  Tulsi  Das  attri- 
buted the  larger  part  of  the  sacred  hymns  in  Hindi  existing 
in  his  day  to  Kabir,  ascribing  the  remainder  to  Sur  Das.  He 
mentions  no  other  bhagats  in  this  connexion,  and  the 
inference  is  obvious  that  he  knew  of  little  or  no  other  original 
work  of  this  kind  except  that  of  the  two  writers  he  names. 


THE  TEACHING  OF  THE  BIJAK. 

A  close  study  of  the  Bijak  and  the  other  works  attributed 
to  Kabir  forbids  his  dismissal  as  an  abusive  religious  revolu- 
tionary or  even  as  an  unsystematic  and  eclectic  thinker. 
His  teaching  is  neither  Vedanta  nor  Sankhya,  neither  Nyaya 
nor  Mimansa,  but  is  based  on  original  thinking  of  his  own. 
While  it  cannot  be  denied  that  thoughts  resembling  his  are 
to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Hindu  philosophers,  and 
especially  in  the  Moslem  Sufis  of  all  ages,  yet  the  presentation 
of  them  is  peculiarly  his  own.  His  influence  was  consider- 
able and  his  work  valuable  in  its  constructive  as  well 
as  in  its  critical  and  destructive  effects ;  and  may  yet  play  a 
large  part  in  the  development  of  Indian  religious  thinking. 
His  criticisms  of  tl)e  Hindu  pandits  and  the  Moslem  divines 
were  certainly  vigorous  and  incisive  ;  yet  they  seem  to  have 
carried  frequent  conviction;  while  the  religious  sincerity 
and  the  humour  of  his  verse  precluded  bitterness  and  over- 
readiness  to  take  offence.  The  directness  of  his  style  and  his 
use  of  the  vernacular  are  at  once  proof  of  his  originality  and 
the  key  to  his  rapid  success  throughout  Northern  India. 

In  any  attempt  to  estimate  his  rank  as  a  poet  it  is  neces- 
sary to  keep  In  mind  three  considerations.  He  is  the  pioneer 
of  Hindi  literature,  the  father  of  all  Hindi  hymns  ;  for  there 
are  none  before  him  and  the  famous  Granth  is  largely  his.  He 
stands  as  far  from  modern  Hindi  as  Ohaucer  from  the  poetry 
published  in  the  Spectator  of  today.  He  was  concerned 
first  ()!  all  with  the  delivery  of  his  message.  To  the 
modorn  reador,  and  imrticularly  to  the  Rur(>|>ean,*thi8  renders 
him  often  obscure,  not  infrequently  unintelligible.  We  hav6 
lost  the  key  to  muoh  of  what  he  has  written,  and  his 
commentators,  and  even  the  Mahants  that  trace  their  origlD 
to  him,  do  not  always  seem  to  have  retained  it. 

Finally  it  must  be  remembered  that  "These  very  difficul- 
ties constitute  its  peculiar  value  to  the  student  who  wishes 


36  THE  TEACHING   OF  THE  KIJAK 

to  learn  the  language  of  the  people.  It  disciplines  the  mind 
into  recognising  words  which  have  been  distorted  and  twisted, 
and  teaches  one  that  a  sentence  can  be  turned  upside  down 
and  inside  out  and  yet  remain  intelligible"*  , 

^ /6,eligious   toleration  and   the  brotherhood   of   mankind—/ 

""^lese  were  among  the  chief  lessons  he  set  himself  to  inculcate, 

and  at  a  time    when    they  were  by   no   means  the   common- 

;  places  of  platform   oratory.^  The  duty  of  avoiding  unneces- 

^  sary  contention  and  all  persecution/is  enshrined   in   a  maxim 

given  by   him  to  his  disciples  and  still  committed  to   memory 

by  almost  all  of  them  to  tliis  day  :-- 

ffsft    5t^    53^    ^    ^ft^    ^^    ^HT^    'T^  " 

Be  friends  with  all  and  mix  with  all— talk,  as  Rome  does, 

at  Rome : 

'Of  course,  of  course'  agree  with  all— but— keep  your  life 
and  home. 

By  "taking  the  name  of  air'  he  meant  using  indifferently 
the  Hindu  or  Mohammedan  names  for  God,  Khuda,  Allah, 
Rahim,  Rama,  Kartar,  Ishwar :  by  "  of  course,  of  course,"  he 
meant  the  toleration  of  others'  teaching  without  its  approval 
or  acceptance. 

In  the  second  Ramaini   he  insists  that  "  all  men  are  of 
one  blood,  one   woman  has  given  birth   to  all :   what  then 
is  this  knowledge  that  keeps  us  separate  ? "    And  again  "I 
have  wept  for  the  world,  but  no  one  has  wept  with  me.    He 
alone  will  weep  with  me,  who  has  understood  the  word."    At 
bottom  his  religion  is  love :  he  believes  that  God  is  love.  His 
form  love,  and  His  purpose  that  all  should  love  Him.    Kabir 
teaches  that  once  man  begins  to  love  God,  he  will  count  all 
else  but  loss,  see  its  nothingness,  and  will  have  union  with  God/ 
For  Kabir  God  is  still  the  Absolute,  beyond  all  being,  the 
one,  Atit,  Satya   Purush.    Gods,  men,  and  munis  engaged 
in   the  search    for  Him,    but  all   alike    failed  to  find   Him 
(Uam.  III).    Maya  leads  the  whole  world  astray  in  error,  and 
salvation  from   the  ocean  of  existence,  the  endless  cycle  of 
'     birth  and  rebirth,  is  impossible   except  by  the  knowledge  of 
the  One  and  devotion  to  Him  alone.,    But  "  What  is  truth?" 
*  Greaves'  Grammar  of  the  Ramayan. 


/. 


THK  TEACHING  OP  THE  BTJAK  37 

"  How  can  1  describe  the  conditions  of  the  Unconditioned, 
who  has  neither  village  nor  resting-place.  He  who  must 
be  seen  without  qualities,  by  what  name  shall  I  call  Him?" 
Ram.  VII.  And  again,  **  When  I  was,  there  was  none  else ; 
all  were  within  me."  Ram.  XLII.  And  similarly  Ramaini 
VI,  VII,  VIII  and  many  other  passages  expound  the  mystery 
of  the  One,  whom  all  have  failed  to  find  and  all  the  systems 
and  doctrines  and  rituals  serve  only  to  obscure.  Kabir 
himself  frequently  uses  the  name  Rama  for  God,  but  by 
Rama  he  never  means  the  son  of  Dasarath.  *'  The  son  of 
Dasarath  is  known  in  the  three  worlds*  but  the  secret  name 
of  Rama  is  other  than  this.'* 

Knowledge  of  the  One  and  His  bhakti  are  thus  the  essence  ^ 
of  all  religion,  the  sole  way  of  deliverance ;  and  these  can 
only  be  attained  by  the  direction  of  the  true  Guni/or  spiritual 
guide,  of  whom  Kabir  speaks  again  and  again,  for  "He  is 
false  who  renounces  the  son  (i.e.,  the  Sants) :  by  the  mercy 
of  the  Guru  one  learns  Rama's  service."     LXVI. 

Bhahti  is  tlie  true  searching  after  God  the  Paramatma. 
It  begins,  remains  and  ends  in  the  love  of  God.  The  BhaktaAr- 
performs  this  Bhakti,  not  for  the  sake  of  gaining  heaven 
or  for  any  reward,  but  for  the  love  of  God  from  whom  he  has 
been  separated  by  Kal  and  Maya.  Kabir,  Nanak,  Tulsi  Das, 
Sur  Das,  all  preached  this  bhakti :  there  is  in  it  no  thought  of 
reward ;  trust  in  God,  love  of  God,  with  no  thought  of  any- 
one or  anything  besides  :  this  is  all.  / 

Bhakti  is  of  two  kinds  %•  lower  and  w  hi 
is  attained  by  Karmas.  but  these  must  be  performed  without 
motive,  otherwise  they  are  useless.  After  passing  through 
the  stages  of  Karma,  the  higher  stage  of  devotion  ^v  'ffii  is 
reached.  /Thus  Bhakti  generally  begins  with  Karmas,  worship 
and  other  rituals;  but  as  the  devotee  passes  from  (1)  Karma 
Kand  (law)  and  (2)  Upasana  Kand  (Ritual)  through  (3)  Gyan 
Kand  (knowledge  or  understanding  of  rituality)  he  then 
gains  the  vision  of  God  which  is  called  Vigan  Kand.  But 
the  practice  in  all  these  stages  must  be  without  hope  of 
reward.  Similarly  the  Snfls  have  also  four  stages  of  Ibadat; 
(1)  Shariat  (Law),  (2)  Tariqat  (Rituals),  (3)  Haqiqat  (Reality), 
(4)   M'arifat  (Knowledge). 


gher.    The  first 


38  THE   TEACHING   OF  THE   BIJAK 

But  throughout  Kal  Purush  strives  to  mislead  the  Bhaktas. 
He  fascinates  souls  with  honeyed  words  and  darkens  their 
understanding.  He  increases  in  them  the  power  of  desire. 
He  entangles  them  in  the  things  of  the  world,  so  that  they 
cannot  leave  it,  making  them  think  much  of  men  and  little 
of  God.  He  directs  their  minds  to  material  progress,  so  that 
the  spiritual  is  more  and  more  ignored. 

In  the  Bijak  he  deals  with  each  system  of  religion,  criticis- 
ing and  pointing  out  their  errors  to  the  adherents  of  each. 
Beginning  with  the  Vedas  he  takes  one  by  one  the  Hindu  sys- 
tems of  philosophy  and  tiie  Moslem  faith,  insisting  that  all 
these  beliefs  and  their  accompanying  rituals  are  powerless  to 
save  a  man  because  unable  to  bring  him  into  union  with  God. 
-^/At  every  step  he  seeks  to  show  that  the  service  of  God  and 
tlie  service  of  the  world  are  utterly  incompatible.  Religion 
for  Kabir  is  love  and  devotion  to  God  alone.  In  this  world 
we  see  love  and  hatred,  light  and  darkness,  body  and  soul, 
sunshine  and  shadow.  Where  the  Lord  alone  is,  there  are 
love,  light  and  sunshine.  There  is  the  Real  alone.  Those 
who  really  love  God,  live  and  think  on  that  plane,  and  not 
oh  that  of  the  material  world  :  just  as  the  true  lover  will  think 
of  nothing  but  his  beloved,  seeking  always  to  attain  a  full 
knowledge  of  his  beloved  and  cherishing  no  other  aim. 

The  Creation  :— 

Kabir  teaches  in  many  passages  of  the  Bijak  that  God 
is  not  the  Creator  of  the  universe.  This  is  the  creation 
of  Niranjan,  and  Niranjan  was  created  by  God.  Again, 
nothing  in  the  universe  is  true  and  real :  all  is  entirely  illusory 
and  visionary.  Maya  is  the  mother  as  well  as  the  wife  of 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  Mahesha.  Many  allusions  are  made  in  the 
Bijak  to  her  deceits  and  it  is  she  who,  binding  the  soul  to  this 
world,  thereby  becomes  the  author  of  all  sins.  Much  of  the 
teaching  on  creation  is  to  be  found  in  the  earlier  Ramainis. 
Thus  in  the  first  Ramaini — In  the  beginning  one  form  Jiva 
existed.  Brahma  makes  the  world,  Vishnu  provides  for  its 
needs,  and  Mahesha  decorates  it.  As  these  work  in  the 
world,  they  also  work  in  the  body  of  each  being.  Raj,  Sat,  Tam, 
the  three  Gunas,  are  their  instruments,  and  by  these  they 
work  in  the  body,  Brahma  as  chief  of  Rajo-gunr,  Vishnu  of 


THE  TEACHING   OF  THB  BIJAK  39 

Sato-gunr  and  Mahesha  of  Tamo-gunr.  These  three  gave  birth 
to  an  innumerable  progeny,  male  and  female :  the  government 
of  the  uni verge  was  divided  by  the  three  original  powers 
among  themselves,  and  they  are  the  sources  of  all  powers  and 
actions  in  this  material  universe;  but  always  beyond  them 
and  unknown  to  them  is  the  One,  of  whom  the  first  line  of 
each  of  the  earlier  Ramainis  speaks. 

"  Brahma  built  a  house  which  he  roofed  in  fourteen  places. 
Hari,  Hara,  Brahma  are  the  names  of  the  head  men :  who 
founded  for  themselves  three  villages."  This  refers  to  the 
government  of  the  material  universe  and  its  fourteen  divi- 
sions Bho,  Bhu,  Suh,  Tapa,  Jana,  Mah,  Satyam,  Atal,  Vital, 
Talatal,  Rasatal,  Mahatal,  Satal,  Fatal.  In  the  third  Ramaini 
sometiiing  like  an  order  of  creation  is  given  :  first  an  illusory 
world  was  made,  and  next  a  place  for  it  :  then  air,  water, 
trees  and  Maya  extended  in  many  forms  :  then  the  egg  {and)^ 
body  ipind)  and  the  Brahmand :  and  last  of  all  the  gods,  men, 
and  munis.  These  accounts  of  the  creation  can  perhaps  best 
bo  understood  in  the  light  of  the  myth  which  is  given  below 
p.  41),  while  in  the  84th  Ramaini  may  be  found  an  epitome 
of  the  main  thought  of  Kabir. 

Karma  and  transmigration  play  as  large  a  part  in  the  sys- 
tem of  Kabir  as  in  the  rest  of  Hindu  thinking.  For  to  him  as 
to  others  they  are  the  principles  by  which  the  |)hen()menal 
universe  is  directed  and  to  be  explained.  Of  Karma  he  speaks 
most  plainly  in  Shabda  110  :  and  both  underlie  all  his  teach- 
ing with  regard  to  iiumau  existence.  Escape  from  the  realm 
of  Niranjan,  wheu  those  hold  sway  and  all  things  are  the 
prey  of  Kal,  is  possible  only.througli  the  union  with  God 
which  is  the  end  of  Bhakti.  But  to  Kabir  all  the  regulationsQ" 
of  caste,  the  rituals  of  religions,  the  systems  of  philosophy  (the 
six  Darshanas)  are  no  more  than  pretentious  and  misleading 
follies,  which  serve  only  to  confuse  men^s  miods,  foster  in 
them  an  utterly  mischievous  self-importance,  and  blind  them 
to  the  one  road  to  deliverance.  Throughout  the  Bijak,  as  in 
all  the  records  of  his  life,  he  wages  a  truceless  war  with  these ; 
and  is  in  constant  conflict  with  the  orthodox,  whether  Hindu 
or  Moslem. 
An  examination  of  the  Bijak  makes  it  clear  beyond  question 


^^  THE  TfiACHlNO    OF  THE  BIJAK 

that  Kabir  had  a  thorough  and  intimate  knowledge  of  Hindu- 
isra.  He  can  and  dors  meet  Hindus  certainly  on  their  own 
ground.  But  his  attitude  is  such  that  no  Hindu  would  dream 
of  owning  him  as  Hindu.  He  condemns  unsparingly  their 
gods,  their  rituals,  their  sanyasis  and  their  sadhus  and  all 
their  practices  of  piety.  By  the  time  in  which  Kabir  lived 
Moslem  rule  was  well-established  in  Nortiiern  India.  The 
devout  Moslem  held  these  practiceslin  abhorrence,  and  Kabir's 
attacks  upon  them  convinced  the  Hindus  that  he  spoke  as  a 
Moslem.  When  he  passed  the  same  strictures  on  Moslem 
practice  also,  the  pandits  sought  the  aid  of  the  Qazis  against 
the  common  foe  :  hence  the  frequent  allusions  to  unholy 
alliances  of  Hindu  and  Moslem  to  silence  the  blasphemer,  and 
the  records  of  discussions  with  Shaikh  Tdqi  and  others.  The 
Moslems  no  doubt  classed  him  with  the  Sufis,  to  whom  much 
latitude  was  always  allowed.  The  contrast  of  Kabir's  inti- 
mate acquaintance  with  Hindu  thought,  writings  and  ritual 
with  the  purely  superficial  knowledge  of  Moslem  beliefs  re- 
vealed in  the  Bijak  is  too  striking  to  be  ignored.  The  Moslem 
words  and  references  are  no  more  than  might  be  expected  in 
an  ordinary  and  even  illiterate  Julaha.  But  in  order  to 
account  for  his  detailed  and  extensive  knowledge  of  Hindu 
traditions  and  belief,  we  can  only  assume  that  he  must  have 
spent  a  considerable  time  in  the  company  of  Ramanand  or 
other  teachers,  learned  their  lore,  and  from  his  criticism  of 
the  systems  practised  in  his  time  developed  the  belief  which 
he  puts  forth  in  the  Bijak  and  his  disciples  spread. 

In  modern  India  organised  attempts,  such  as  that  of  the 
Brahma  Samaj,  to  correct  the  abuses  in  Hinduism  tend  to  be 
branded  as  disguised  Ohristianity.  It  may  be  noted  that  an 
interesting,  if  unconvincing,  attempt  to  connect  the  Kabir 
Panth  with  the  teaching  of  the  Jesuits  has  been  made  by  Pt. 
Walji  Bhai  of  the  Irish  Presbyterian  Ohurch.  It  seems  pro- 
bable that  a  similar  tendency  caused  Kabir  in  his  own  day  ta 
be  called  a  Moslem  ;  while  the  Moslems  on  the  whole  wel- 
come his  efforts,  as  a  help  in  combating  the  idol  worship^ 
of  India,  and  acknowledged  him  as  a  Pir  for  his  self-denying- 
and  pious  life.  , 


A  SHORT  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  MYTH  WHICH 
UNDERLIES  THE  COSMOLOGY 
OF  THE  BIJAK. 

In  the  beginning  there  was  One  Essential  Being,  Sat 
Purush,  "  the  True  Porson,"  who  exists  alone,  without 
passions. 

Of  his  own  will  he  created  the  universe  out  of  nothing. 
To  rule  the  universe  he  created  six  Brahmas,  his  **  holy  sons," 
Onkar,  Sahaj,  Ichchha,  Sohang,  Achint  and  Achchhar.  To 
each  was  given  a  world  and  souls  to  populate  it. 

Sat  Purush  found  that  the  six  Brahmas  failed  to  preserve 
discipline  in  the  universe.  He  therefore  proceeded  to  create 
a  seventh  son,  whose  origin  was  as  follows  :-- 

AchcHhar  was  sitting  where  all  was  water,  when  Sat 
Purush  brought  deep  sleep  upon  him.  When  Achchhar  awoke, 
he  saw  an  egf^  floating  on  the  waters,  and  began  to  meditate 
upon  it.  Suddenly  with  a  loud  noise  the  egg  burst  in  two 
and  there  came  forth  a  being  of  furious  aspect,  whom  Ach- 
chhar named  Niranjan,  (called  also  Kal  and  Kal  Purush). 
This  being,  though  naturally  of  an  ungoverned  temper,  en- 
gaged in  devotion  (bhakti)  so  meritorious,  that  he  was  able  to 
ask  of  Sat  Purush  the  boon  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  three 
worlds  (loks).  The  boon  was  granted  with  the  condition  that 
he  should  make  a  polite  request  for  the  necessary  materials 
to  the  Tortoise  (Kumarji)  in  whose  keeping  they  were. 
Niranjan  however  was  far  from  conciliatory  and  the  result 
was  a  fight  with  the  Tortoise,  in  the  course  of  which  Niranjan 
cut  off  three  of  the  sixteen  heads  of  the  Tortoise  and  thence 
there  poured  forth  the  necessary  materials,  the  Sun,  Moon« 
Earth,  etc. 

The  Tortoise  thereupon  complained  to  Sat  Purush,  who 
decreed  that  Niranjan  should  never  enter  his  lok  or  see  hi» 
face. 


42  THE  COSMOLOGY  OF  THE  BIJAK 

Niranjan  though  now  possessed  of  the  material  elements, 
could  not  make  man.  He  therefore  swallowed  the  three 
heads  of  Kumarjiand  began  again  to  perform  Samadhi  (trance 
or  meditation),  at  the  end  of  which  he  asked  for  bij-khet  (a 
field  to  sow  in).  Sat  Purush  created  for  him  a  woman; 
but  she  kept  her  eyes  fixed  on  Sat  Purush  rather  than  on 
Niranjan  and  only  with  great  diflBculty  was  persuaded 
to  become  Niranjan's  wife.  There  was  here  a  kind  of 
testing  :  so  long  as  she  concentrated  her  mind  on  Purush, 
Niranjan  had  no  power  over  her;  but  gradually  Niran- 
jan's fascination  overcame  her  and  she  became  entangled 
in  the  world  and  separated  from  God.  The  issue  of  the 
union  was  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Mahesh.  After  their  birth 
Niranjan  became  invisible  :  the  woman  remained.  She  is 
Maya. 

Brahma  then  asked  his  mother  "  Who  is  my  father  ?"  She 
answered  "  You  have  no  father."  Brahma,  unconvinced,  set 
out  in  search  of  him.  Brahma,  however,  was  destined  to  be 
the  creator  of  this  universe  ;  the  woman  accordingly  formed 
a  girl  and  sent  her  after  him  to  persuade  him  to  retj^rn.  He 
told  the  woman  that  he  had  seen  his  father,  and  received 
the  answer,  "  That  is  untrue  ;  therefore  you  shall  beg  from 
door  to  door." 

Vishnu  was  then  asked  whether  he  had  seen  his  father, 
and  answering  "No"  received  as  his  reward  the  sovereignty 
of  the  three  loks. 

Mahesh,  asked  in  his  turn,  returned  no  answer  and  was 
told  he  would  be  an  ascetic. 

The  woman  then  created  three  daughters  to  be  wives  to 
her  sons  :  Niranjan  at  the  same  time  created  the  four  Vedas  : 
but  all  were  drowned  in  the  ocean.  The  three  sons  therefore 
churned  the  ocean  and  recovered  both  women  and  Vedas. 
The  latter  were  absorbed  in  Saraswati,  who  was  assigned  to 
Brahma,  while  the  other  two  women  were  given  to  his 
brothers. 

Brahma  then  created  the  present  world,  and  men  began 
to  worship  the  three  brother-gods.  It  is  said  that,  of  the  four 
kinds  of  created  beings,  Andaj-Kliand  (oviparous)  were  made 
by  the  woman,  Pindaj-Khand  (mammals)  by  Brahma,  Ukmaj- 


THE  COSMOLOGY  OF  THE   BIJAK  43 

Khand  (insects)  by    Vishnu,  and  Stliawar    (vegetable  and 
minerals)  by  Mahesh. 

Gradually  the  woman  realised  that  her  three  sons  were 
shutting  her  out  from  the  attention  of  mankind.  She  there- 
fore created  three  more  daughters,  who  originated  thirty- 
six  kinds  of  music  and  sixty-three  tunes  and  so  fascinated 
the  world  that  all  began  to  believe  in  the  mother  (Devi). 

The  souls  of  men  were  thus  distraught  and  they  cried  to 
the  Sat  Purush,  who  in  answer  sent  Kabir  into  the  world  to 
teach  men  to  look  beyond  Niranjan  and  his  progeny  to  the 
One,  the  Sat  Purush  himself. 

This  messenger  of  the  Sat  Purush  is  known  by  different 
names  in  the  four  ages  ;  thus  in  the  Satyug  he  is  Sat  Sukrit : 
in  the  Tretayug,  Munindarji  :  in  the  Dwaparyug,  Karunamai 
Rishi  ;  and  in  the  Kalyug,  Kabir  Sahib. 

The  Root  of  the  true  Religion  of  Kabir. 


Ishwar  (Ood) 
Achariya  (Manifester) 
Guru  (Guide) 
Shastar  (Scriptures) 
Marg  (Way  or  path) 
Cbal  (Mode  of  life) 
Maktidwar  (Gate  of  salvation) 
Lok  (Abode) 


Satya  Purush. 
Kabir  Sahib. 
Parakh. 
Swansan  Ved. 
Nirvan. 
Satoguni. 
Sar  Shabd. 
Satya  Lok. 


PRINCIPLES  OR  COMMANDMENTS  OF 
THE  KABIR  PANTH. 

1.  To  believe  in  One  Avagat,  Atit,  Brahm,  Satya  Purush. 
His  bhakti  sliould  be  practised. 

2.  Satya  Purush  and  Kabir  Sahib  are  one.  Satya  Purush 
manifests  himself  in  Kabir. 

3.  Faith  ia  the  Guru  and  in  his  teaching. 

4.  True  Sadhus  should  be  served. 

5.  Show  mercy  and  love  towards  all  Jivas. 

6.  To  abstain  from  all  kinds  of  meats. 

7.  To  abstain  from  all  kinds  of  intoxicating  things. 

8.  To  abstain  from  adultery. 

9.  No  visible  object  in  this  world  should  be  worshipped. 

10.  Anything  offered  to  images  should  not  be  eaten.  Every- 
thing you  get  to  eat,  offer  it  first  to  the  true  God,  then  eat  it. 

11.  Do  not  tell  lies. 

12.  Do  not  steal. 

13.  Do  not  gamblco 

14.  Mark  your  body  in  12  places  (Tilak). 

15.  Use  clean  clothes. 

16.  Wear  Tulsi  necklace. 

17.  Repeat  Satya  Nam. 

18.  Practise  bhakti  of  Satya  Purush  and  preach  him, 

19.  Do  not  believe  in  charms,  amulets  and  other  supersti- 
tious things  (Jantr,  Mantr,  and  Tantras). 

20.  The  way  of  salvation  cannot  be  found  in  any  other 
books  but  in  Swansan  Ved. 

21.  Besides  Satya  Kabir  and  his  Hans  no  one   will  be  able 
to  save. 

22.  Without  True  Guru  no  one  will  get  salvation. 

23.  Apart  from  bhakti  of  Satya  Purush  all  other  bhaktis 
will  drown  in  the  world  and  will  not  save  any  one. 

24.  Tirath,  Barat,  etc.,  are  all  bands  of  Yama  and  people 
are  tied  with  them. 

25.  Nine  kinds  of  bhakti  and  four  kinds  of  Muktis  are  bands 
only. 


PRINCIPLES  OR  COMMANDMENTS  OF  TUB  KABIR  PANTH        45 

26.  Those  who  worship  NirgunrorSurgunr  they  are  always 
bound  down. 

27.  Hindu,  Moslem   and  any  other  sect  can   join   Kabir's 
religion. 

28.  Heaven   and   hell   and   other  Loks  have  no  existence 
except  for  the  ignorant. 

29.  Without  the  knowledge  of  Sar  Shabd  no  one  can  attain 
salvation. 

30.  Abuse,  deceit  and  jealousy  are  enemies  of  salvation. 

31.  Humility  is  a  great  virtue. 

32.  The  way  of  salvation  is  very  narrow. 

33.  Whatever  troubles  you   have   to  face  do  not  ask  help 
from  another  god,  but  from  God. 

34.  Whoever  accepts  Sat  Guru  should  serve  him  with  all 
his  heart  and  power. 

35.  Kabir  is  bodiless.     His  body  never  suffers. 

36.  Give  thanks  for  the  gift  of  Sat  Guru. 

37.  The  fear  of  God  is  the  sign  of  salvation. 

38*     Without  true  love  of  God   the   practice  of  bhakti  is 
fruitless. 

39.  Blessed  are  those   who  renounce  the  covetousness  of 
this  body  and  remain  in  devotion. 

40.  Without  thinking  of  others'  good  no  one  can  attain  sal- 
vation. 

41.  To  speak  moderately  is  a  great  virtue. 

42.  To  read  Sat  Guru's  words  is  a  great  virtue. 

43.  Kabir  Sahib  has  established  his  religion  through  a  cer- 
tain family  :  only  that  should  be  honoured. 

44.  Do  not  curse  any  one. 

45.  t>ne  should  know  the  supreme  Spirit. 

46.  Proud  persons  cannot  know  the  supreme  Spirit. 

47.  To  follow  the  Guru's  instructions  is  great  worship. 

48.  So  long  as  one  thinks  much  of  his  body  and   nourishes 
it  he  cannot  know  God 

49.  The  ignorant  and  unwise  and  without  undorstaoding 
will  never  know  how  to  attain  salvation. 

50.  So  long  as  one  is  proud  of   his  body  and  considers  it  a 
real  thing,  he  will   oever  be  able  to  be  called  bod i loss  while 
having  body. 


THE  BIJAK 


AD-MANQAL. 

1.  In  the  beginning  was  the  Almighty  alone  :  there  was 
none  other  : 

How  came  the  second  to  be  ?    O  Guru,  I  ask  tliee  this. 

2.  Then  the  Sat-Gpru  spoke  with  his  lips  and  said.  Listen, 
O  good  and  wise  man  : 

I  will  relate  to  thee  the  secret  of  the   beginning  and  the 
end. 

3.  In   tlie  beginning  the  Almiglity  let  Sruti'    slowly  be 
manifest  within  Himself. 

And  let  it  grow  and  expand  into  seven*. 

4.  Secondly  within  Him   desire  sprang  and  the  seven  fol- 
lowed with  all  their  heart  and  mind  : 

Seven  forms   were  created,  hut  none   recognised  the  Un- 
conditioned. 

5.  Then  in  the  ear  of  the  Almiglity  the  root  of  Sruti    was 
manifested  : 

The  organ  of  sound  came  and  thence  five  Brahmas*  ap- 
peared. 

6.  Bach  of  the  five  laid  an  egf^  and  put  them  one  within 
another : 

Two  desires  are  hidden  there ;  O  good  man,  understand  it 
well. 

7.  Yog  Maya,  for  the  sake  of  principles,  produced  the 
letter  : 

This  was  made  by  the  Infinite,  the  Almighty  ;  and  He  kept 
it  bidden. 

8.  The  breath  So/urn*  sprang,  which  bound  all : 

'  Thought  or  ioteUigeno«. 

'  Ooe  became  nuuij. 

*  FiTe  yital  breaths  :— Udana,  Prana,  Apana,  Qamana.  Vyana. 

'  That  I  am. 


4  AD-MANGAL 

Eight'  essences  were  made  ;    O  wise  sant,  understand  it. 

9.  The  light  of  the  inanimate  egg  he  diffused  everywhere  : 
Sitting  on  the  top  of  the  egg  he  laid  the  foundation  of  the 

lower  half  of  the  sphere. 

10.  From  the   love   of  that   inanimate  sprang  the  mi'ghty 
letters  : 

Four  essences'  were  made,  four  Vedas  were  diffused. 

11.  Then  to  these  letters  were  given  sleep,  attachment 
and  weariness : 

This  was  done  by  the  Almighty,  the  Infinite  ;  none  under- 
stood the  secret. 

12.  When   the  sleep  of  the  letters  was  over  and^the  un- 
consciousness of  the  Sruti  was  decreased  : 

There  was  one  egg  of  dark  colour  floating  in  the  waters. 

13.  Within  the  heart  of  the  letters  there  arose   a  pang  of 
restless  doubt : 

Who  created  this  egg  ?    Whence  is  its  origin  ? 

14.  Upon  the   face  of   this   egg   was  the  impress   of  the 
Word  ; 

From  the  front  of  the  letters  there  broke  forth  the  father 
of  the  ten  doors. 

15.  Thence   was  manifested   the   light  of  Niranjan* ,  and 
all  kinds  of  forms  : 

And   Kal,*  of  boundless  power  and  strength,  became   the 
governor  of  the  three  worlds. 

16.  From  him  sprang  three  deities,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Ma- 
hesha  : 

These  made  the  four  corners  by  tlie  instructing  of  Maya. 

17.  Four  Vedas,  six  Shastras  and  eighteen  Puranas  : 
Bound  down   the  world  in  hope  and  made  all  three  worlds 

to  go  astray. 

18.  In  the  stream  ol  eighty-four  millions'  Jiva  was  given 
abode  : 

'  Five  elements  : — Earth,  air,  fire,  water  and  ether ;  three   qaali- 
ties  '.—Goodness,  foulness,  and  darkness. 

*  Akar,  Okar,  Makar,  and  Bindu. 
■  Unborn. 

*  The  angel  of  death. 

*  This  means  8,400,000  re-birtlKs. 


1  ^Imar  Lok.  Abode  of 

Immortalily. 

2  Ci/oni  Vuruth.  Wi»e 

Beinv.      i.e..       the 
True  Guide.  Kabir. 

3.  /ap.  medilalion. 

4.  SaratwaH.    the    god- 

dcM  ot  learning. 

5.  Jioa       ShakU.      life 

energy. 

6.  Mahadeo. 


7.  Vi.hnu. 

8.  Brahma. 

9.  Ganetha. 

10.  MaJa.  pride. 

11.  AfoAa.  infatuation. 

12.  Kama,  detire. 

13.  M altera,  tnvy. 

14.  Lobha,  covetotttnett. 

1 5.  KroJha.  anger. 

16.  Nagc,  Serpent. 

17.  ACurma.  TortotM. 


AD-MANGAL  49 

Fourteen  Yamas'  were  made  and  faith  was  in  four  Vedas. 

19.  All  in  searcti  of  their  own  happiness  wander  within 
one  egg  : 

In  birth  and  destruction,  weal  and  woe,  they  come  and  go. 

20.  After  this  came  I  for  the  sake  of  the  true  Word  : 
The  origin  of  the  beginning  and   the  end  I  now  proclaim 

to  you. 

21.  The  seven  Srutis  are  the  root  of  all,  and  destruction 
also  is  within  them  : 

All  has  sprung  from  them,  and  all  will  be  absorbed  in  them 
again. 

22.  The  Almighty,  considering  all  this,  Himself  remained 
concealed  : 

I  have  come  to  bring  this  message,  to  wake  the  world  from 
its  sleep. 

23.  Without   the  seven  Srutis  and  beyond   the   sixteen 
Sankhyas  (of  Jivas) : 

There  is  the  seat  of  the  Almighty,  that  causes   the  salva- 
tion of  Swans. 

24.  Prom  house   to  house  I  have  proclaimed   this ;  none 
listens  to  my  word  : 

They   will  be  drowned  in  the  ocean  of  existence  and  the 
stream  of  the  eighty-four  millions. 

25.  The  message  of  the  first  creation  hear,  O  wise  sant: 
Thus  says  Kabir,  the  awakened  Guru,  by  the  orders  of  the 

Almighty. 

^  Fourteen  loks.    See  Ramaini  2. 


RAMAINIS. 

1 

1.  In  the  beginning  one  form  Jiva  existed: 

In  the  beginning  the  light  had  its  manifestation. 

2.  Desire  was  made  in  the  form  of  woman : 
To  her  was  given  the  name  of  Gayatri.' 

3.  To  that  woman  were  born  three  sons : 

Brahma.  Vishnn,  Mahesha  were  the  names  given. 

4.  Then  Brahma  asked  the  mother:" 

Who  is  thy  iiusband  and  whose  wife  art  thou  ? 

5.  I  am  thou,  thou  art  I ;  there  is  no  one  beside: 

Thou  art  my  husband  and  I  thy  wife. 

6.  Salchi :— Father  and  son   liave   the   same   wife* ;  one 

mother'  gave  birth  to  both  : 
Never  have  I  seen  a  son  so  worthy  that  he  sought  out  his 

father.* 

2 
1      In  the  bftginnins:'    was  light,  Shabd/  One  and  Woman  : 

From  her  are  Hari.  Brahma,  Tripurari. 

2.  From  these  three  came  numberless  males  and  females  : 
None  of  them  knew  their  own  beginning  and  their  end. 

3.  Bidhata  (Brahma)  built  a  iiouse  : 
Wiiich  he  roofed  in  fourteen  places^. 

*  A  raost8a*)red  verso  <.f  tho  Riff  Veda  :  overy  Brahman  ;niist  repeat 
it  in  his  morning  and  eveninfi;  devotions.  It  is  also  called  Savitri  and 
she  is  the  wife  of  Hrahma  and  mother  of  the  four  Vedas. 

"  Adi-Maya. 
>  Maya. 

*  The  real  essence-Qod. 

*  Vnmuni  staf^e. 

*  The  Hhabd  means  soand  or  speech :  it  bM  four  stages :— \1)  the 
first  stirriofc  of  breath.  (2)  the  whisper  of  the  breath,  (8.  the  middle 
staf^o.  (4)  articiilite  atteranco. 

'7  HoaTens:— eicth.  space,  heaven,  abode  dt  Rants,  abode  of 
Brahma'A  sons,  abrido  of  VairaglR,  abode  of  Brahma.  7  Hells  :  Atal,  Vital, 
PuUl,  Mahatal,  Itiisatal,  Talatal.  Fatal. 


52  RAMAINIS 

4.  Hari,    Hara    and    Brahma    are    the    names    of    the 
head-men  ; 

Who  founded  for  themselves  three  villages  ^ 

5.  They  also  roade  the  Khand  and  Brahmand*  : 
Six  Darshanas'  and  ninety-six  Pakhandas*. 

6.  No  one  has  been  made  to  read  the  Veda  in  the  womb; 
The  Turk  is  not  born  circumcised. 

7.  All  that  desire  woman  pass  througli  the  womb  : 
Disguised  in  various  garbs  they  play  their  part. 

8.  Then  thou  and  I  were  of  one  blood  : 
One  life  pervades  us  all. 

9.  One  woman  gave  birth  to  tlie  whole  world : 
By  what  knowledge  come  you  to  be  separate  ? 

10.  When  one  comes  out  from  the  door  of  the  womb  he  is 
called  child : 

When  he  enjoys  woman  he  is  called  man. 

11.  No  one  knows  the  conditions  of  the  unconditioned  : 
With  but  one  tongue  how  can  I  explain  it? 

12.  If  one  had  ten  million  tongues  in  his  mouth  ; 
Then,  O  Mahants,  he  might  be  able  to  speak. 

13.  Sakhi :— Kabir  cried  aloud  and  said  :    This  bargaining 
has  an  end : 

For  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  name  of  Rama  the  world  is 
drowned  and  dead. 

3 

1.  In  the  first  beginning  there  was  thought  : 

The  second  that  appeared  was  a  resting-place  therefor. 

2.  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Shiva  and  Shakti*  then  appeared  : 
From   the  first  moment  the  soul   sought  to  find  the 

method  of  devotion^. 

3.  Then  appeared  the  And,  Find,  Brahmand*"  : 

Then  the  earth  appeared  and  was  divided  into  nine  parts. 
'  Heaven,  earth,  Hell. 
»  Brahma's  egg. 
«  Utar  Mimansa,  Purab  Mimansa,  Sankh,  Yog,  Niyaya,  Vashishak. 

•  Jogi  12,  Jangam  18,  Sevra  24,  Sanyasi  10,  Darvesh  14,  Brnhman  18. 

•  Female  Deities. 

•  For  these  deities. 

'  Four  kinds  of  animal  kingdoms  :— Fiom  a  placenta  ;  from  eggs  ; 
from  seeds  ;  from  minerals. 


RAMAINIS  53 

4.    Then  appeared  air,  water  aud  shade*  : 

Maya  appeared,  diffused  in  many  forms. 
5^    Then  appeared  Sidh,*  Sadhak'   aud  Sanyasi*  : 

They  all  engaged  in  the  quest  of  the  Immortal. 

6.  Then  appeared  gods,  men  and  munis  and  all  else  : 
They  all  failed  in  the  search. 

7.  Sakhi :— Gods  and  souls    appeared  ;   the   gods   were 

Lords,  the  rest  their  slaves  : 
Kabir  knows  nothing  more,*  his  hope  is  in  the  name  of 
Rama  alone. 


1.  At  the   first  step   the  Guru   took   thought  : 
They*  praise  the  Maker  as  Creator. 

2.  By  directing  it  to  action  he'  has  led  the  world  astray  : 
Maya  bound  the  world  in  devotion  to  Shakti. 

3.  He  showed  them  wondrous  forms,  taught  many  kinds 

of  speech  : 
So  love  sprang  up,  he  sang  Raraainis*. 

4.  The  worshipi^ers  of  Sugun   and  Nirgun  did  not  under- 

stand its  meaning  : 
Many  did  not  recognise  it. 

5.  Whoso  understands,  liis  bo«iy  is  free  from  impurity  : 
Without  understanding,  men  became  like  moths. 

6.  Sakhi  :  -Understand,  and  sing  with   understanding  : 
O  fool,  you  did  not  understand  the  song : 

**  Beginning  and  end,  creation  and  destruction  ;**  'He 
himdelf  has  clearly  spoken  it. 

'  Trees. 

'  Ad  accomplished  Ksnt. 

'  An  sdept,  an  aooomplisher. 

*  One  who  abandons  or  resigns. 

*  i.4^,  Kabir  oares  nothing  for  gods  and  sonls. 

*  Jivius. 

'  Brahma. 

*  It  means  that  the  Guru  showed  himself  in  many  wondrous  forms,  and 
taught  in  many  kinds  of  speech,  and  love  sprang  in  him  for  Jivas  and  he 
gave  teaching  in  Ramainis. 

'  The  Guru. 


54 


RAMAINIS 


5 

1.  For  how  lonof  shall  I  explain  the  subject  of  the  a^es  : 
Brahma  went  astray  and  did  not  recognise  the  Saviour. 

2.  It  ^ave  pleasure  to  Hari^  Hara'  and  Brahma  : 
They  took  two  letters  and  made  a  system. 

3.  These  two  letters'  they  united  : 

The  Heavenly  Sound  and  Light  appeared  as  proof. 

4.  They  read  the  letters  and  being  enlightened  founded 

the  way  : 
That  gave  delight  to  Sanaka  and  Sanandan. 

5.  Veda  and  the  Book  were  diffused  : 

And  thus  expanded  were  beyond  all  comprehension  of 
the  mind. 

6.  In  all  four  ages  the  Bhaktas*   founded  their  different 

ways  : 
No  one  understood  and  the  bundle  (of  Karma)  was  torn. 

7.  ,  The  earth^  through  delusion  strays  on  all  sides  : 
restless  it  finds  no  remedy. 

8.  If  the  mind  wavers  not*',  it  will  find  heaven  : 
leaving  the  Husband'^  it  will  fall  into  hell. 

9.  The  Swan  that  keeps  its  first  direction*  finds  salvation  : 
the  tryst**  is  close  :  let  one  but  understand. 

10.  The  Bhaktas  decked  themselves  with  Bhakti'"  : 
but  all  are  drowned  in  midstream. 

11.  Sakhi  :— Without  the   teaching  of  the  Guru,   here 

is  mere  confusion  : 

The  Husband  * '    met  me  and  told  me. 

For  the  preacher*^  preaches  it  in  all  ages,  but  no* one 

pays  any  heed. 

^  *'  One  who  removes  "  the  sins  of  men  ;  a  name  of  Vishun. 

»  A  name  of  Shiva. 

^  Light  and  darkness,  heaven   and  hell,  heat  and  cold,  pain  and 
pleasure,  etc. 

•  Devotees. 

»  This  world  and  its  people. 

•  One  who  is  firm  in  God. 

^  J'tunning  after  other  gods. 
■  Towards  God. 

•  Meeting  with  God. 

^^  Bhakti  here  means  Maya.    Relied  upon  their  own  righteousness. 
"  Guru. 


RAMAINIS  55 


1.  How  can  I  explain  His  form  or  outline  : 
there  is  no  second  who  has  seen  Him. 

2.  He  is  neither  Onkar\  nor  Veda'  : 

what  can  I  say  of  the  secret  of  his  family  ? 

3.  He  is  neither  stars,  nor  sun,  nor  moon  : 
He  is  not  born  of  any  father's  seed. 

4.  He  is  neither  waters,   nor  dry   land,   nor  stillness,  nor 

wind  : 
Who  can  name  or  lay  commands  on  Him  ? 

5.  There  is  no  day,  no  night : 

Who  can  say  what  is  His  family  and  caste. 

6.  Sakhi : — In  the  void  consciousness  arose  :  then  a  light 
^       was  manifested. 

I  sacrifice  myself  to  the  Purusha*,  who  is  self -existent. 


V 


1.  When  there  was  no  air,  and  no  water, 
then  who  created  the  universe  ? 

2.  Then  was  no  bud,  no  flower, 
then  no  womb  and  no  generation. 

3.  Then  was  no  learning,  no  Veda, 
then  no  word,  no  taste. 

4.  Then  was  no  body,  no  dweller, 

no  regions  below,  no  earth,  no  sky,  no  heaven. 

5.  Then  was  no  Gum,  no  chela, 

no  fatliomable  no  unfathomable,  no   worship  of  Sugun 
and  Nirgun,  no  two  paths. 

6.  Sahhi :— How  can  I  describe   the  condition  of  the  un- 

conditioned, who    lias   neither  village   nor    resting- 
place  ? 
He  who  must  bo  seen  without  qualities,  by  what  name 
shall  I  call  Him  ? 

»  Tho  mystic  syllable  Om. 

'  Adi  Ved. 

•  The  eternftl  Person. 


56 


RAMAINIS 


8 

1.  Tatvamasi'  is  Mie  preaching  of  tlie  Upanishads' : 

that  is  their  message. 

2.  Great  is  their  reliance  upon  this^ : 

but  how  can  they,  however  mighty,  describe  Him? 

3.  The  Eternal  essence  is  His  own  proof : 

Sanaka's  company  and  Narad  were  delighted  to  know. 

4.  Yajnavalkya  and  Janaka  discoursed  thereon  : 
Battatriya  enjoyed  the  same  sweetness. 

5.  The  same  Vashishta  and  Rama  sang  together  : 

the  same  Krishna  expounded  to  Udho. 

6.  The  same  Janaka  firmly  grasped : 
and  having  body  was  called  bodiless. 

7.  Sakhi  :~Who  gives  up  all  pride  of  family  :  living,  he 

does  not  die. 
He  sees  what  is  not  seen,  and  himself  is  called  unseen. 
9 

1.  Some  bound  themselves  with  eight*   painful  woes  and 

nine  ropes', 
Yama  has  bound  the  son  of  Anjani. 

2.  Yama's  servants  bound  continually  : 
they  bound  the  whole  universe. 

3.  The  three  millions  of  gods  are  tied  : 

by  meditating  (upon  whom)  men  think  their  iron  bands 
are  loosened. 

4.  A  Raja,  if  he  meditate,  will  reach  the  Turiya'  state  : 

if  the  religious  meditate,  he  will  advance  yet  further. 

5.  Some  meditate  on  the  meaningless  woman^ : 

the  common   folk    when  they  meditate  do    but  sweep 
away  flowers*. 

»    Thou  art  he. 

*  The  theological  and  argumentative  parts  of  the  Vedas. 

•  Upon  tliis  message  of  Upanishad. 

*  Ashtangh  Yogi  suffering  pain  in  two  hands,   two  thighs,  breast, 
two  eyes  and  forehead.  '  »  «>♦   wxoaow. 

«,^^  Ji^®  "'''®  u?'"'^^  ""^  worship  --hearing  ;  celebrating  praise  ; 
meditation ;  worshipping  the  feet  of  the  Guru ;  image  worship rsaluting  ; 
attendance  ;  friendship  ;  and  communion.  ^  * 

•  Transcendental  or  death-like  state.     '  Maya.    •  After  flower  fruit 
will  remain. 


RAMAINIS  87 

6.  Safc/ii:— Those  who  choose  bondage  get  the  fruit  thereof : 

it  was  their  god  that  bound  them  : 
Kabir  says,  They  only  will  be  saved,  who  repeat  the 
Name  every  moment. 

lO 

1.  The  religious  were  washed  away  in  the  pipal  forest'  : 

none  warned  tiiem  of  the  coming  flood. 

2.  When  the  flood  came  they  were  confounded : 

Yama  from  birth  to  birth  is  clothed  in  power. 

3.  Olothed  in  power  Yama  Htarts  forth  : 
and  enters  the  three  worlds  alike, 

4.  He  has  bound  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Mahesha  : 
And  Parvati's  son  Ganeslia. 

5.  He  has  bound  air,  fire,  sky,  water  : 

has  bound  the  two  heroes,  sun  and  moon. 
(J.     All  who  recited  true  Mantras'  he  bound  : 

the  woman'  knows  nothing  of  the  immortal  essence. 

7.  Sofchi  :~Though  knowing  not  of  the  immortal  essence, 

yet  all  i>eopIe  passed  for  iiappy  : 
ICabirsays,  He  who  has  no  desires,  he    is   not  subject 
to  life  and  death. 

11 

1.  In  blind  discussions  tlie    world  has  become  mad  : 
in  the  three  worlds  robbery  is  rife. 

2.  Brahma  was  robbed  and  Naga  killed, 
Tripurari*  in  the  company  of  the  gods  was  robbed. 

3.  Vishnu  suffered  rohbery  by  reason  of  his  kingdom  : 
though  he  ruled  the  fourteen  regions  of  the  world. 

4.  When  no  one  knows  its*  beginning  and  its  end  : 

wherefore  do  you  fear  it  ? 

5.  It  is  as  the  light  and  you  as  the  moth  : 
the  soul  has  made  its  abode  with  Yama. 

6.  As  the  insect  of  the  iiim  tree  loves   the  juice  of  the 

fttm  : 
80  the  fool  says  poison  is  Amrit*. 

*  In  the  waves  of  Maya. 

'     Who  followed  tho  right  path  :  oven  thej  wero  trapped  by  Maja. 

*  Maya.  '    Mahadeva,  god  of  gods.  *    Neotar. 


»  RAMAINIS 

7.  What  benefit  can  come  of  poison  ? 

for  a  little  profit  the  treasure  was  lost. 

8.  Though  poison  and   Amrit  are  mixed  together  : 

yet  he  who  has  sense  knows  it  is  poison. 

0.  O  man,  what  has  become  of  knowledge  and  ignorance  ? 
Without  clear  understanding  the  world  is  foolish  and 

without  knowledge. 

10.  Void  of    understanding,   what  can   one  say  of  their 

knowledge  ? 
They  are  set  on  coveting  and   make  their  hope  of  it.    - 

11.  Sakhi :— All  are  dead,  ye  also  will  die  :  the  dead  are 

proclaimed  by  beat  of  drum. 
The  world  is  compared  unto  a  dream:  that  sound  re- 
mains as  the  only  witness. 

12 

1.  The  fortress^  is  of  mud  and  the  lock"  of  stone  : 

that  which  is  the  forest*   is  also  the  watchman'. 

2.  Seeing  the  forest  the  soul  is  afraid  : 

Brahman*  and  Vaishnavite*  are  known  as  one. 

3.  The  farmer"  makes  all  ready  and  does  his  farming  : 

no  seed  is  sown  in  a  growing'  field. 

4.  O  man,  give  up  all  these  vain  imaginings  : 

in  them  (jiiru  and  chela  alike  are  drowned. 

5.  The  third  was  drowned,  Parath^  : 

who  set   fire  to  the  forest. 

6.  The  dogs^  barked  and  died  barking  : 

nothing  resulted  from  the  jackal'. 

7.  Sahhi  :  -The  mouse"  and  the  cat»   are  confederate  : 
how  can  they  live  together  ? 

O  sants,  behold  a  wonder  : 
the  elephant®  devours  the  lion". 


'    Body. 

•     Tliose  who  control  their  mi 

«    Mind. 

and  body. 

*    Sant. 

'    False  teachers. 

*    Wise. 

•    Jiva. 

'    Full  of  illusion. 

•    Maya. 

RAMAINIS  59 

18 

1.  Though  one  has  no  faith  in  the  world  : 

how  is  it  that  the  elements'  of  the  world  have  wound- 
ed him  sorely  ? 

2.  They  will  be  hidden  in  that  which  is  left : 

no  one  put  any  faith  in  this. 

3.  Men  hence  having  lost  their  capital  : 
no  one  can  cut  the  sharp  edge  of  Yama. 

4.  Today's  work  is  work,  tomorrow^s  is  not  work  at  all  : 

kings  have  loaded  up  and  gone  to  the  four  winds. 

5.  Following  an  easy  venture  you  have  lost  your  capital  : 
instead  of  profit  you  found  loss,  O  brother. 

6.  By  reason  of  your  feeble  wit  the  moon  has  set : 

yet,   you   say,   the   Lord   resides   in    the  junction   of 
Trikuti. 

7.  Vishnu  gave  this  counsel : 

get  you  victory  by  the  eight  ceremonials". 

8.  Then  Sanaka  and  his  company  considered  this  element : 

and  rejoiced   like   a  beggar   who   finds  unlooked   for 
treasure. 

9.  Perceiving  this  they  were  comforted  : 

in  their  minds  all  doubt  was  at  an  end. 

10.  The  sight  of  creation  is  revealed  in  a  moment  : 
one  dies,  another  ponders  over  it. 

11.  Tliose  who  are  dead  and   gone,  none  speaks  of  them  : 

false  hope  has  fastened  on  the  world. 

12.  Sakhi :  -To  save  yourself  from  burning,   why  do   you 
not  cry  aloud  for  help  ? 

You  have  eaten  poison  and   poisoned   food   heaped  to- 
gether day  and  niglit. 

'     Drahh  are  nine  :— Earth,  water,  lire.  air.  sky,  fonr  wlnd«»,  death, 
mind  and  nonrs  illoslon,  Brahmn. 

>    T  .  mako  onosclf  oxcoodiiigly  Hmall  ;  tx)  make  onosolf  hirjjo  ; 
to  make  oneself  heavy  ;  to  touch  tho  nan  and  moon  ;   to  mako  predio- 
tions  ;  to  snbdae  ;  to  creato. 


^  HAMAINIS 

14 

1.  He  in  his  pride  is  a  great  sinner  : 

in  the  form  of  Pakhand  be  knowingly  deceived  men. 

2.  In  the  form  of  dwarf  he  deceived  king  Bali  : 

what  ^ood  has  Brahma  done  to  any  one  ? 

3.  Brahma  has  committed  all  manner  of  thefts  : 

Brahma  is  guilty  of  all  offences. 

4.  Brahma  has  composed  Granth'  and  Puranas'  : 

how  do  you  kuQw  me'  as  a  man  ? 

5.  By  ofie  is  found  the  Way  of  Brahma  : 

by  one  Swan  tiie  praise  of  Gopal  is  sung. 

6.  By  one  is  found  a  Way  of  Sambhu  : 

by  one  men  learned  to  honour  evil  spirits. 

7.  By  one  man  learned  the  worship  of  images : 

by  one  to  bow  down  and  offer  Naniaz*. 

8.  No  one  pays  heed  to  the  warning  of  another  : 

O  Kabir,  they  do  not  know  the  husband  to  be  false. 

9.  O  my  faithful,  sing  praise  with  body  and  with  mind  : 

Kabir  is  true  and  speaks  true  words. 

10.  Himself »  is  the  God  and  Himself  the  leaf  that  is  offered. 
He  is  family  and  He  is  caste. 

11.  He  is  all  created  things  :  He  dweller  in  the  world : 

He  himself  is  husband  :  He  is  enjoyer  of  all  happiness. 

12.  Four  ages  have  passed  since  first  I  proclaimed  it : 

now  before  whom  shall  I  cry  aloud  ? 

13.  Sakhi  :-None  believes  him  who  speaks  the  truth  :  all 
cleave  to  tlie  false. 

False  consorts  with  false,  and  the  fool  eats  ashes. 

^    Scriptures. 

Puranas  are  eighteen,  they    ;*re  collections  of    doctrine  and 
mythology. 

*  Maya. 

*  Muslim  prayer, 

*  Brahma. 


RAMAINIS  61 

15 

1.  The  clouds*  have  pjathered  and  the  evening  has  fallen  ; 
The  guide*  has  lost  his  way  in  the  midst  of  the   forest*. 

2.  The  lover*  is  here,  and  the  husband*  there  : 

the  four-fold  blanket*  shrouds  the  forehead. 

3.  Sahhi  :— She'    cannot  bear  even  a   flower's  weight  and 

weeping  complains  to  her  maiden  friends. 

As  the  blanket  gets  wetter,  wetter,  so   the  burden  gets 

heavier,  heavier, 

16 

1.  Walking,  walking,  the  feet  are  aching  : 
constant  failure  brought  vexation  of  spirit. 

2.  The  Gandharbas  and  thei  Munis  found  not  the  end : 

they  failed  and  bade  the  world  seek  out  the  invisible. 

3.  The  bonds  are  thick  ;  yet  the  bondage  is  not  seen  : 

they  died  in  weariness,  yet  understood  nothing  at  all 

4.  Misled,  the  soul  is  sore  afflicted  : 

the  night  appears  as  a  pitch  dark  well. 

5.  It  is  full  of  Maya  and  of  Moh'  : 

it  is  full  of  frogs,  ligiitning  and  wind. 
<J.  It  is  close  and  rains  in  continuous  stream  : 

the  night  is  awesome  and  there  is  no  provision. 
7.  Sakhi :— All  are  gone  astray  ;  the  blind  are  misled  : 

none  heeds  instruction ;  all  are  sunk  in  one  error. 
17 
1.  Were  I  to  meet  another  soul  like  mine : 

it  would  bring  much  joy  and  devotion  to  my  heart. 
%  If  to  any  I  expounded  the  word  of  Rama : 

love  did  not  appear  in  him. 

3.  I  have  seen  all  the  world  in  one  *  condition  : 
he  who  is  without  it**^,  alone  discriminates. 

4.  The  soul  seeks  release    from   the    noose    of    worldly 

desire  : 

yet,  go  where  it  will, these  the  butcher'*  waits  to  strike 
it. 

^  Foolishness.  '  Pour  Vedaa  and  oeremonial  code. 

^  Brshma.  '  Jiva. 

*  Ved,  Puranas,  etc.  *  Desire. 

*  Devotee.  *  Pollowiog  Maya. 

*  God  »»  Maya. 


IJA.MAINIS 

5.  Let  the  butcher  come,  knife  in  hand : 

come  he  will,  yet  I  will  strike  him  on  the  head. 

6.  Many  and  great  men  came  : 

but  all  were  taught  by  one  Pandit  ^ 

7.  Read,  and  having  read  always  keep  the  secret : 
else  assuredly  it  will  be  lost. 

8.  Sa/r/ii :— Repeat  the  name  of  Rama,  renouncing  the 

hope  that  causes  all  grief. 
Else  it  will  grind  you  from  above  ^   and  from  below", 
with  all  the  force  of  fifty  million  mills. 

18 

1.  The  way  of  faith* 'is  wonderful,  past  all  describing : 
Rama  is  astray  the  world  is  astray. 

2.  If  you  will,  then  awake,  O  brother  : 
else  Yama  will  bear  the  soul  away. 

3.  If  one  believes  not  the  Shabda,  and  yet  gives  discourses 
on  wisdom  : 

then  Yama  has  made  an  abode  for  him. 

4.  Doubt,  the  hunter,  has  settled  in  your  body  : 
and  preys  upon  the  flawless  diamond*. 

5.  Sakhi  :— Doubt  has  settled  in  your  body,  there  throws 

its  dice. 
The  soul  itself  is   wounded,  yet  it  utterly  destroys 
other  souls. 

19 

1.  They  have  set  their  hope  on  the  Light  invisible  : 
now  look  at  this  amazing  marvel. 

2.  See,  brother,  this  their  marvellous  performance  : 
where  all  is  void,  there  is  their  resort. 

3.  They  longed  for  the  void  and  have  reached  void  : 
they  have  let  go  the  guiding  hand  and  go  on  guideless. 

4.  Doubt"  the  hunter  ranges  through  all  the  world  : 
Kal  hunts  his  prey  at  evening  and  at  dawn. 

5.  Sahhi :— Repeat  the  name  of  Rama :  Kal  has  seized 

you  by  the  hair. 
Who  knows   when  he  will  slay,  whether  in  your  own 

home  or  abroad. 
1  Brahma.  •  Kabip's  religion. 

'Maya.  *  jiva. 


RA&IAINIS  6t 

20 

1.  Now  recite  the  immortal  Dame  of  Rama  : 
O  soul,  leave  not  Hari  uor  go  elsewhere. 

2.  Go  whither  you  will,  it  is  but  to  be  a  moth'  : 

let  not  yourself  be  burued  :   know   tliat   to  which  you 
cleave  is  poison. 

3.  He  who  repeats  the  name  of  Rama  in  meditation  : 
yielding  to  his  glamour  as  Bhringikit'  resigns  to  his 

will. 

4.  Now  the  burden  of  trouble  weighs  heavily  : 

O  soul,  bestir  thyself,  that  thou  may'st  see  and  consider. 

5.  The  thought  of  the  mind  is  a  wave  of  wickedness  : 
thou  seest  not  its  beginning  nor  its  end. 

6.  Sakhi:  -In  the  ocean  of  desire  Rama's  support  is  a  ship: 
Kabir  says,  Find    Hari's  refuge  :   then  you  will  cross  it 

as  if  it  were  no  bigger  than  the  print  of  a  calf's  hoof. 
21 

1.  There  is  great  trouble,  a  mine  of  troubles  : 
thou  wilt  escape  only  when  thou  knowest  Rama. 

2.  Know  Rama  and  find  the  path  of  union  : 
thee  the  noose  will  not  fall  round  thee. 

3.  Gold  and  maidens,  horses  and  silks  : 
great  store  of  riches  endure  but  a  few  days. 

4.  With  a  little  wealth  one  became  demented  : 
and  took  no  thought  of  Dharam  Rai. 

5.  Seeing  his'  fearful  aspect,  thy  face  is  blackened  with 

terror  : 
thou  hast  swallowed  poison  in  mistake  for  Amrit. 

6.  Stihhi ;— I  create,  I  kill,  I  burn,  and  1  devour. 
Indwelling  in  water  and  in  earth  :  my  name  isNiranjan. 

*  Admirer  of  Maya. 

•  An  insect  that  seize**  anti  fascin.itos  anothor  .md  t  Ikh  .sl()\\  ly  <locs 
its  victim  to  doath.  Having  carried  its  victim  to  its  lust .  it  cliirms  it 
by  itK  hummiiiK  and  there  breaks  one  leg  after  another,  while  the 
sufferer  has  neither  desire  nor  will  to  make  its  escape. 

'  Angel  of  death 


^  RAMAINIS 

22 

1.  Niranjan  is  invisible,  none  can  see  him  : 
in  his  bondage  all  are  bound. 

2.  The  falsehood  wherein  they  are  bound  is  manifest : 
they  think  the  false  to  be  the  true. 

3.  He  has  bound  all  fast  and  made  them  serve  with  ritual. 
Exempt  from  himself  he  lives  aloof. 

4.  He  has  made  six  Ashrams'  of  the  six  Darshanas  : 
from  these  six  juices*,  rejected  as  bad. 

5.  He  tells  of  four  trees'  and  of  six  branches*, 
and  sciences  past  numbering. 

6.  By  the  Puranas  he  gives  yet  more  instruction  : 
in  them  one  sees  nor  end  nor  beginning. 

7.  Spells,  pilgrimages,  fasts  and  worship  of  evil  spirits  : 
almsgiving,  many  other  good  deeds  are  taught. 

«.    SakM  :  —This  is  a  temple  of  love  :  it  must   not  be 
entered  headlong. 

Who  enters  it  headlong,  will  lose  his  life  for  nought. 
23 

1.  Small  joy,  great  grief  is  there  in  the  beginning  and 

the  end  : 

the  mind  is  distraught  like  an  elephant  decoyed. 

2.  Losing  joy,  where  will  one  gain  salvation  ? 
deserting  truth  he  ever  follows  after  lies. 

3.  Fire  and  light  blaze  together  : 

the  moth  is  consumed  in  gratifying  his  eyes. 

^The  six  stages  of  life  .-—existence ;  birth;  growth;  maturity; 
decay ;  death. 

*  Causing  another's  body  to  decay.  Causing  the  death  of  another. 
Causing  another  to  remove  from  his  habitation.  Stopping  another's 
motion.  Casting  an  illusion  over  another.  Reducing  another  to  sub- 
jection. 

*  Pour  Vedas. 

*  The  six  Shastras  :— three  of  which  relate  to  grammars,  one  to  cere- 
monies, one  to  mathematics,  one  to  explanation  of  obscure  words  in  the 
Vedas. 


RAMAINIS  65 

4.  To  eud  your  troubles  begin  to  consider  : 

give  up  the  friendship  of  the  false. 
Because  of  covetousness  this  birth  is  lost  : 
old  age  and  death  are  hard  at  hand. 
<J.    Sakhi  :   -The  world  is  bound  in   error  ;   in  this   wise   is 
this  coming  and  going. 
Having  gained  birth  as  man,  O  man,  why  go  astray  ? 

24 

1.  As  is  the  tale  of  the  moon  and  the  chnhov  : 
so  is  the  wisdom  of  man  perverted. 

2.  The  four  ages  are  likened  to  a  dream  : 

therein  falsehood  was  known  as  truth. 

3.  None  knows  it  is  delusion  : 

In  this  way  all  have  gone  astray. 
1.    Putting  themselves  to  the  front  they  have  lost  their 
all: 
they  did  not  obtain  human  understanding  even  in  dream. 

5.  He  wlio  lias  escaped  from  the  thirty-four  letters:^ 

knows  sin  from  virtue. 
€.    Sakhi :— That  which  you  speak,  must  you  become  ;  why 
do  you  not  abandon  falsehood  ? 

Stand   in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  T  l)}d  you  :  do   not 
lose  your  life  in  error. 

25 

1.  This  is  the  property  of   tlie  thirty-four  letters  : 

that  a  thousand  names  are  seen  in  them. 

2.  Tiirough- wanderings  and  error  man   comes  again    to 

his  house (body)  ; 
whatever   wisdom  he  has,  he  loses  all. 

3.  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Shiva  and  Sliakti  are  searching: 

many  men  are  searching  with  varied  devotions. 

4.  Gandharbas,   Munis,  gods  are  searching  out  good  : 

many  people  are  searching  with  varied  service. 

5.  Sa/iJu*  :  — The  Jati ^   and  Sati*  all  are  searching :   their 

mind  never  admits  defeat. 

Even  great  heroes  failed  to  spell  it  out.     This   Kabir 
proclaims  aloud. 
\.\    holr  snrus.  •  Chaste,  a  nngious  mondicant  of  the  Jain  seot 

'  \ViiLL(  li  scriptnres.      *  Virtuous,  true,  faithful, 
o 


66  RAMAINIS 

26 

1.  The  Maker  ^  has  made  himself  Creator  : 

as  the  potter  makes  earthen  pots  of  various  kinds. 

2.  Bidh  ^  has  arranged  them  in  one  place  : 

and  fashioned  his  handy  work  in   countless  forms. 

3.  He  burned  them  in  the  furnace  of  the  womb  : 
wherein  he  himself  was  their  sustainer. 

4.  After  many  processes  the  vessel  comes  out  : 
then  the  name  Shiva  or  Sliakti  was  given.     ^ 

5.  When  his  own  son  is  a  fool : 

the  wise  father  will  not  bear  him  company. 

6.  These  are  true  words  that  I  speak  myself : 
men  are  demented  with  dreamings. 

7.  Revealed'or  manifest,  there  is  but  one  stamp  : 

whom  can  you  call  Brahman  and   whom  Sudra''  ? 

8.  Let  no  false  pride  mislead  you  : 

that  Hindu  and  Turk  are  of  different  family  is  false. 

9.  Sakhi  :— He  who  drew  this  picture  is  the  true  Artist'. 

Says  Kabir,  they  are  the  wise,   who  look  toward  the 
Artist. 

27 

1.  The  Brahmand  was  given  to  Brahma: 

the  seven  oceans  and  nine  regions  of  the  earth. 

2.  Vishnu  by  speaking  truth  was  established  : 
and  gained  possession  of  the  three  worlds. 

3.  Shankar  then  made  the  form  of  Linga^: 
and  pierced  earth  to  its  infernal  regions. 

4.  Then  Ashtangi*  was  created  in  the  form  of  a  virgin : 

and  fascinated  the  three  worlds. 

5.  Her  second  name  was  Parvati  : 

and  for  her  austerity  she  was  married  to  Shankar. 

6.  There  was  but  one  man,  one  woman, 

from  whom  the  four  kinds  of  creation^  were  formed. 
'    Brahma. 

'    Untouchable  caste. 
'    Literal  string-holder. 

*  Siva's  genital  organ. 

"    Eight  limbs  of  Maya,  i.e.,  Prithwi,  Jal,  Agni,  Vayu,  Akash,  Man, 
Budhi,  Ahankar. 

•  Andaj,  Pindaj,  IJkhmaj  and  Sthawar. 


RAMAINIS  67 

7.  Sharmana,  Barban,  Deva  and  Das*  : 

Rajgiina,"  Taraguua/  earth  aud  sky. 

8.  Sa/c/ii:— From  one  egg  of  Ookar  the  whole  universe 

expanded. 
Says   Kabir,    All  are   wives  of     Rama  :     unmovable 
Purusha  is  the  Husband. 

28 

1.    No  one  knew  the  mystery  of  that  weaver  :* 
who  came  into  the  world  and  spread  the  warp. 

-.    The  earth  and  sky  are  the  two  beams  :^ 
the  sun  and  moon  are  two  filled  shuttles. 

3.  Taking  a  thousand  threads  he  spreads  them  length- 

ways :  to-day  he  weaveth  still,  but  hard  to  reach  is 
the  far  off  end. 

4.  Sakhi  :— Says  Kabir,  Joining  Karma  with  Karma, 

woven  with  unwoven  threads,  splendidly   the   weaver 
weaves. 

29 

1.  The  mind  can  change  the  thunderbolt  into  a  straw  in 

a  moment: 
itself  can  again  change  the  straw  into  a  thunderbolt. 

2.  The  wise  man  knows  this  and  leaves  it : 

but  so  long  as  he  is  bound  with  Karmas,  he  covets. 

3.  Sometimes  it  renounces  Karma,  Dharma,  wisdom  and 

religion : 
and  sometimes  holds  the  false  name  as  true. 

4.  At  first  it  has  manifested  the  three  states  :^ 
through  which    it    has   destroyed    Karma,  Dharma 

and  wisdom. 

5.  At  the  sun-rising^  the  stars*  grow  dim  : 

in  movable  and  immovable,  it  was  absorbed  in  both. 

'  Kshatri,  Vaishya,  Brahtoan,  uatouchable  caste. 

*  ElomoDt  of  foulnets.  '    Three  qnalitios  :— Sat,  Raj.  Tam. 
'  Element  <>t  du knoM.  '    False  Instructions. 

*  Mind.  *    Kara m,  Dharaoi,  wisdom. 

*  Literal— ilitcii. 


68  RAMAINIS 

6.  The  effect  of  poison  cannot  be  done   away   by   eating 

poison : 
he  is  the  true  magician  who  gives  life  to  the  dying. 

7.  Sakhi : — If  for  a  moment's  space  the  vision  fails,  in  that 

moment  it  will  sting. 
If  you  cease  to  believe  in  the  charm   for  poison,  what 
can  tlie  magician  do? 

30 

1.  O  brother,  tliou  art  misled  believing  in  the  six  Darsha- 

nas : 
wrapped  in  the  garb  of  Paklianda. 

2.  They  came  and  destroyed  the  soul  and  life  : 
the  four  Vedas  are  wise  and  clever,  but  dumb. 

3.  The  Jainis  know  not   the   mystery  of  Dharma : 

they  pluck  leaves  and  come  to  God's  temple. 

4.  The  flowers  of  Dawana,'  Marna'  and  Cliampa  :* 
know  they  have  countless  souls  within  them. 

5.  They  pluck  the  tresses  of  Earth : 

with  their  eyes  open  they  are  laying  lives  waste. 

6.  Churning  the  mind  they  struggle  with  the  seed  : 

the  seed  is  harassed  but  will  not  leave  the  door. 

7.  Their  state  is  crushed  : 

in  the  six  Darshanas  the  Jains  are  derided. 

8.  Sakhi  : — The  divine  knowledge  is  outside  this  way : 

though  it  seem  near,  yet  it  is  far  off. 
To  him  who  knows  it    is     near,  for    all  beings  it 
pervades. 

31 

1.  The  Smriti*  made  known  the  three  qualities : 

and  the  paths  of  sin  and  merit  were  laid  down. 

2.  From  reading  the  Smriti  and  Vedas  disputings  arose : 

conceit  is  practised  in  the  garb  of  Pakhanda. 

3.  One  reads  the  Vedas  and  takes  honour  to  liimself : 
for  him  the  knot  of  doubt  is  not  yet  unloosed. 

4.  He  reads  the  Vedas  and  then  he  destroys  lives  : 
and  offers  their  severed  heads  to  the  images. 

•    Names  of  flowers.  '    Traditions  or  oral  law. 


RAMAINIS  69 

5.    Sakhi :-  Says  Kabir.  Through  Pakhanda  they  troubled 
many  lives. 
The  inward  Light  is  not  revealed  : 
no  one  in  this  life  has  seen  himself. 

32 

1.  Veda  and  Purana  are  the  mirror  of  the  blind  : 

what  does  the  spoon  know  of  the  taste  of  delicacies  ? 

2.  As  a  donkey  laden  with  sandalwood  : 

the  fool  does  not  know  the  sweet  fragrance. 

3.  Sakhi : — Says  Kabir,  They  ransack  even  heaven, 

but  do  not  find  that  which  will  take  their  pride  away. 

83 

1.  O  brother,  the  Smriti  is  the  daughter  of  Veda : 
she  came  bringing  a  cord  in  her  hand. 

2.  Each  wove  it  for  himself  and  bound  fast  his  own  neck  : 
false  desires  are  the  trafiBcking  of  Kal. 

3.  Knot  upon  knot,  there  was  no  release  : 
the  world  was  lost  in  things  of  sense. 

4.  In  my  sight  the  whole  world  was  plundered : 

O  Kabir,  the  servant  won  release,  repeating  the  name 
of  Ruma. 

5.  .Sa/c/u* :     With  ever  calling  Rama    Rama,   the   tongue 

itself  has  hardened. 
They  will  not  drink  pure  water:  they   prefer  to  dig  a 
tanU  uiul  drink. 


1.  O    Pandit,    t'>     iciuiiiiL*    ;iii'i    rciiuiii;^  vou  li;ive  bcrome 

acute : 
tell,  explain  to  me  this  salvation  of  yours. 

2.  Where  dwelleth  the  Purusha  and  in  what  village  : 
O  Pandit,  exi)ound  him  to  me  and  his  name. 

3.  Brahma  composed  his  four  Vedas  : 

but  even  he  knew  not  tiio  mystery  of  salvation. 

4.  He  has  spoken  much  of  almsgiving  and  deeds  of  merit : 

but'of  his  own  death  he  had  no  knowledge. 


70  RAMAINIS 

5.  There  is  one  name  infinite  and  fathomless : 

there,  O  Kabir,  the  servant  is  firmly  established. 

6.  Sakhi :— Where  ant  cannot  climb,  nor  mustard  seed 

rest. 
Wliere  coming  and  going  can  get  no  hold,  thither  let 
the  whole  world  go. 

35 

1.  Pandits  have  gone  astray  reading  and  studying  the 

Vedas : 
they  do  not  know  the  secret  of  their  own  selves. 

2.  Their  evening  and  morning  prayers,  their  six  ^  modes  of 

worship : 
and  many  things  like  these  they  consider  virtuous 
deeds. 

3.  They  made  the  Gayatri  to  be  recited  in  all  four  ages  : 
go  and  ask  them  who  has  thus  found  salvation. 

4.  If  touched  by  another  you  wash  your  body  : 
but  tell  me,  who  is  meaner  than  you  ? 

5.  These  are  your  good  deeds,  yet  you  are  consumed  with 

pride : 
from  such  pride  no  one  will  derive  any  benefit. 

6.  He  whose  name  is  the  breaker  of  pride  : 
How  can  He  tolerate  your  pride  ? 

7.  Sakhi : — They  who  give  up  pride  of  race  and  attachment 

and  search  for  the  word  alone, 
Renouncing  the  shoot  and  seed  of  all  desire,  these  men 
become  freed  from  body  and  from  space. 

36 

1.  The  learned,  clever,  and  far-sighted  :• 
who  know  but  one'  wise  are  not  wise. 

2.  They  knew  not  the  secret  of  the  two*  wise : 
creation  and  destruction,  night  and  morning. 

'  study,  teaching,  sacrificing,  causing  sacrifices  to  be  made,  giving 

gifts  and  receiving  gifts. 
'  The  third  eye  of  Siva. 
3  Those  who  believe  only  One. 
*  Brahma  and  Brahmand. 


RAMAINIS  71 

3.  All  alike  adopted  one  trade : 

rites,  piety,  ceremonies  and  Biiagwan.^ 

4.  Hari  is  a  master  that  none  can  leave : 

therefore  like  babes  they  sing  the  marriage  song  of 
Paradise. 

0.  Safc/ii:— Whither  are   they  gone,  the  men  whose  heads 

their  Guru  shaved  ? 
Know  ever  the  name  of  Rama  and  give  up  that  which 
is  counterfeit. 

37 

1.  The  first"  wise  is  not  wise: 
the  second'  wise  none  knows. 

2.  The  third*  wise  is  lost  in  its  wisdom  : 
the  fourth*  wise  takes  it  thither. 

0.  The  fifth**  wise,  no  one  knows: 

in  the  sixth'  w  ise  all  are  lost  and  strayed. 

4.  The  seventii"  wise— O  brother,  if  you  know^  him : 
reveal  him  in  the  world  and  Vedas. 

5.  Sakhi :— The  Bijak  tells  the  secret  of   that  treasure 

which  is  hidden  : 
the  Word  tells  of  Jiva :  few  are  they  who  understand. 

38 

1.  I  have  explained  in  this  way :   none  heeded  my  words: 
all  have  spread  the  loom  in  the  middle  of  the  way. 

2.  Day  and  night  they  are  continually  joining  the  thread : 
in   twisting  the  thread  and  in  spinning  doubt  is  not 

removed. 

3.  Every  heart  is  full  of  doubt : 

one  cannot  leave  the  doubt  and  go  elsewhere. 

4.  There  is  no  fulness,  and  day  by  day  is  wasting  : 
go  where  one  will,  the  body  weakens. 


'  The  Saprcme  Being. 

•  Vishnu. 

*  BraJuna. 

'  Five  senses. 

•  Maya. 

'  Mind. 

*  Jiva. 

•God. 

72 


RAMAINIS 

5.  The  religion  which  is  from  the  beginning  to  the  end : 
that  is  openly  declared  to  all. 

6.  S«/r/i/:- Believe  this  message  true  and  set  it  upon 

your  head. 
O  sa«ts,  here  is  content  and  happiness;  abide  in  it^ 
your  heart  will  be  refreshed. 

39 

1.  He  who  in  the  Kali  Yug'  made  men  recite  the  Kalima:* 
even  he  did  not  trace  out  the  Almighty. 

2.  Marvels,  Karmas  and  ceremonies  are  performed  : 
Veda  and  Koran  became  their  rituals. 

3.  On  account  of  Karmas  one  appeared  in  the  womb : 
on  account  of  Karmas  a  name  was  given. 

4.  Karmas  are  the  cause  of  circumcision  and  of    the 

sacred  thread : 
but  neither  Hindu  nor  Turk  knows  the  secret. 

5.  Sakhi:— By  the  mingling  of  water  and  air  chaos  form- 

ed itself. 
Into  the  void  consciousness  entered  :    who  can  declare 
it? 

40 

1.  Adam,  who  was  first,  did  not  know  : 
whence  came  mother  Eve. 

2.  Then  there  was  not  Turk  nor  Hindu  : 

no  blood  of  the  mother,  no  seed  of  the  father. 

3.  Then  there  were  no  cows,  no  butchers : 
who,  pray,  cried  'In  the  name  of  God  'V 

4.  Then  there  was  no  race,  no  caste  : 
who  made  Hell  and  Paradise  ? 

5.  No  one  had  knowledge  of  the  mind's  doctrines  : 
wisdom  was  lost,  therefore  they  detailed  two  religions. 

6.  Sakhi : — Where  there  is  union  there  are  energies  :  with 

dissolution  energies  vanish. 
To  satisfy  the   taste  of  the  tongue  man   has  devised 
many  inventions. 

'      The  age  of  vice.  '  The  Muslim  creed. 


RAMAINIS  7^ 

41 

1.  In  a  pool  *  of  the  8ea  the  drops  *  are  gathered  : 

in  each  are  the  sun,  moon  and  thirty-three  krores  of 
gods. 

2.  Ail  are  settled  in  the   wliirlpooP  : 

they  longed  for  happiness,  but  trouble  did  not  leave 
them. 

3.  The  secret  of  the  trouble  none  has  found  : 
tlie  world  was  distraught  in  diverse  fashions. 

4.  Man  is  at  once  mad  and  wise  : 

Rama  dwells  in  his  heart  but  he  knows  it  not. 

5.  Safc/n*:— The  same  is  Hari,  the  same  is  Lord,   the  same 

are  slaves  of  Hari. 
Prom  those  who  know  thut  Varna  is  not  nor   Yamini,* 
the  maiden  (Maya)  departed,  frustrated. 

42 

1.  When  I  •  was,  there  was  no  other  : 
all  were  within  me. 

2.  Tell  me,  O  Rama,  when  came  service  of  thee  ; 
answer  and  make  it  plain  to  me,  O  Deva. 

3.  If  I  speak  truth  all  will  beat  me  : 
liar  keeps  company  with  liar. 

4.  A  blind  man  says  *  I  see  all ' : 

he  who  has  eye-sight  beholds  his  face. 

5.  Thus  I  declare  it,  believe  who  will  : 

whatever  is  in  your  mouth  should  be  in  your  heart. 

6.  Ivabir  says,  smiling :  O  brother  all  I  say  is  a  lie  to  thee. 

43 

1.  The  souls  that  kept  firm  trust  in  themselves : 
went  down  to  hell  and  in  hell  abide. 

2.  Their  coming  and  their  going  takes  no  time  : 

Kal,  the  hunter,  shoots  them  morning  and  evening. 

»  Priklrti.  *  Night. 

■  Atoms.  *  Sat  Puriwha. 

•  Maya. 


^^  RAMAINIS 

3.    They  read  and  expound  the  fourteen  '  arts  : 
but  they  gain  no  knowledge  of  their  own  dying. 

i.    Pear  came  upon  the  departing  Jiva  : 
and  lie  gave  a  false  message  to  others. 

5.  He  left  the  company  of  the  Guru  and  is  involved  in 

dispu  tings : 
a-nd  seeks  to  bale  out  himself  the  stream  of  hell. 

6.  Sakhi :— Guru's  enemies  and  the  self-instructed,  men 

or  women, 
must  roam  through  eighty-four  million  births,  so  long 
as  sun  and  moon  exist. 

44 

1.  You  never  kept  the  company  and  fellowship  of  sants : 
thus  with  your  own  hand  you  have  thrown  away  your 

life. 

2.  To-morrow  you  will  not  gain  an  abode  like  this  : 
you  have  not  known  the  companionship  of  sadhus. 

3.  Now  you  will  have  your  abode  in  hell : 

because  every  day  you  remained  in  the  company  of  the 
false. 

4.  Sakhi  :-I  have  seen  the  departure  of  all,  cries  Kabir 

lOudly. 

If  you  would  awake,  awake  :  the  robber  is  attacking  in 
broad  day  light. 

45 

1.  Hirnakush,  Ravan,  and  Kans  are  gone  : 

Krishna  and  all  the  family  of  gods,  men  and  munis  are 
gone. 

2.  Brahma  is  gone,  who  did  not  know  the  mystery : 
all  the  great  ones  are  gone,  who  were  wise. 

3.  None  understood  the  story  of  Rama : 
whether  it  was  pure  milk  or  all  water. 

'  Four  stages  of  life  :--Student  life  ;  married  life  ;  life  in  the  forest  ; 
abandonment  of  the  world.  Three  kinds  of  merit :— Merit  stored  up  ; 
merit  in  action  ;  merit  which  has  yet  to  operate.  Three  kinds  of 
knowledge :— Knower  ;  known  ;  process  of  knowing.  Four  kinds  of 
liberation  :— to  live  in  the  heaven  with  God  ;  to  be  quite  near  to  Him  ; 
to  have  a  similarity  of  form  with  Him  ;  complete  absorption  in  Him. 


RAMAINIS  75 

4.  The  path  remained,  but  their  breath  failed  them  : 
and  their  village  is  ruined  on  all  ten  sides.' 

5.  The  world  became  to  them  as  a  net  to  the  fish  : 
a  boat  of  iron  and  loaded  with  stone. 

6.  They  all  row,  but  know  not  the  secret  : 
yet  they  say,  we  reach  the  shore. 

7.  Sakhi : — As  an  earthworm   in   the  mouth   of  a  fish,  a 

lizard  in  the  mouth  of  a  rat, 
a  musk-rat  in  tlie   mouth   of  a  snake  ;   so  they  lose 
their  life. 

46 

1.  The  serpent-god  will  perish,  Garur  "  waste  in  decay  : 
the  deceitful  and  tlie  truth-teller  both  will  perish. 

2.  All  will  perish,  whether  they  taught   sin   or   deeds    of 

merit : 
whether  they  believe  in  Sagun  '  or  in  Nirgun.* 

3.  Fire,  air  and  water  and  all  the  universe  : 
how  far  shall  I  name  them  ? 

4.  Vishnu's  world  will  perish  in  a  moment : 
I  see  always  the  shadow  of  destruction. 

5.  Sakhi  :— Maya  took   tlie   form   of  a   fish,   and  Yama* 

casts  the  angle  : 
when  Hari,  Har  and  Braiima  could   not   escape,  what 
then  of  gods,  men  and  itinnis  ? 

47 

1.  Jara-Sindhu  and  Shishupal  were  slain  : 

ArjuD  of  the  thousand  arms  was  killed  by  gm\e. 

2.  Ravan,  the  great  deceiver,  has  vanished : 
whose  Ijoitka  stood  with  golden  walls. 

3.  Duryodhan^was  lost  for  his  pride  :  • 
the  secret  of  Pandu  was  not  found. 

'  Ten  doors  of  the  body. 

^  A  creatarc  with  the  head  and  wings  of  a    vulturo  and    body  of  a 
maD,  the  vehicle  of  VishDn. 
*  With  qualitiog. 
'   Without  qu'ilities. 
'  Death. 


76 


RAMAINIS 

4.  Through  Maya's  influence  all  the  kings  are  gone  : 
though  music  was  played  at  their  doors,  great  or  less. 

5.  Six  emperors  passed  away  and  entered  into  earth  : 
still  not  a  single  soul  believed. 

6.  What  more  shall  I  say  ?  In  unconsciousness  all  are  gone : 
*  Conscious '  and  '  Unconscious '  are  the  watchwords  of 

a  quarrel. 

7.  Sakhi  :-This  Maya,  beguiler  of  the  world,  has  pursued 

all  the  world  with  her  beguilements. 
Harishchandra  for  the  sake  of  keeping  faith   was  sold 
from  house  to  house* 

48 

1.  Through  Manikpur^  Kabir  passed  : 
there  he  heard  the  fame  of  Shaik  Taqqi. 

2.  At  the  place  which  is  called  Jaunpur  : 

and  at  Jhusi'  I  heard  the  names  of  many  plrs. 

3.  There  are  written  twenty-one  Pirs  : 

they  all  were  giving  Khutba''  in  honour  of  the  prophet. 

4.  When  I  heard  the  talk  I  could  not  refrain  myself : 
Seeing  these  graves,  ye  are  gone  astray. 

5.  The  works  of  the  Friend  of  God  and  of  His  Prophet : 
followed  by  you  in  practice  only,  are  become  unlawful. 

6.  Sakhi  :0  Shaikh  Akardi  and  Shaikh  Sakardi,  listen  to 

my  words. 
See  the  beginning  and  the   end  from   age  to  age  with 
open  eyes. 

«  49 

1.  O  Darvesh,*  give  me  knowledge  of  that  house  : 
in  what  dress  is  the  King  ? 

2.  To  what  place  does  he  march,  and  at   what  place  does 

he  halt  ? 
To  what  form  dost  thou  make  salutation  ? 

3.  I  ask  thee,  O  Mj^^salman : 

is  he   robed   in  red  or   yellow  or   many-coloured  gar- 
ments  ? 

»  Karamanakpur  in  the  Fatehpup  district.        '  Discourses 

'  Opposite  to  the  Allahabad  Fort.  *  Muslim  mendicant. 


RAMAINIS  77 

4.  O  Qazi,*    what  sort  of  deeds  are  thintf  ? 

In  every  house  thou  orderest  tlie  slaughter  of  buffaloes. 

0.  Who  has  decreed  the  slaughter  of  goats  aud  fowls  ? 
by  whose  order  dost  thou  use  thy  knife  ? 

6.  Thou  knowest  not  pity,  yet  art  thou  called  Pir-  : 
reading  the^  verses  thou  teaciiest  the  world. 

7.  Says  Kabir,  One  was  called  Sayed  *  ; 
himself  misled  he  misleads  the  world. 

5.  Salchi  :— They  fast  all  day  :  at   night   they   slaughter 

the  cow. 
Here   murder,   there  devotion  :   how   can   this   please 
God  V 

50 

1.  i  have  been  speaking  for  four  ages  ; 

no  one  understands  :  they  are  engrossed    with  son  and 
wife. 

2.  As  fire  comes  out   from   the   bamboo   and   burns   the 

bamboo  forest : 
so  by  his  own  errors  man  is  plunged  into  confusion. 

3.  As  the  elephant  is  cauglit  in  the  elephant-trap  : 
and  the  buck  by  the  lure  of  the  doe. 

4.  As  the  wise  cuts  iron  with  iron  : 

so  woman's  secret  is  known  only  to  woman. 

5.  Sakhi  :— Man's  love  is  toward  woman  and  woman's  love 

toward  man. 
But  they  who  love  the  Purusha  alone  are  few  in  all 
the  world. 

51 

1.  Brother,  His  name  is  in(iesrril)al)lo  : 
how  can  one  sing  song  of  praise  for  Him  ? 

2.  If  one  must  speak,  this  is  the  outcome  : 
it  is  a  traveller  embarked  upon  a  boat. 

3.  Can  one  say  aught  of  rest  or  motion  ? 
he  sits  and  yet  he  moves  upon  his  way- 

^  Muslim  jadge. 

*  Maslim  Saint. 

*  One  descended  from  the  Prophet  Mohammed. 


78  RAMAINIS 

4.  If  the  countenance  is  there,  there  is  no  need  of  any 

manner  of  disguise. 
Keep^    the  mind  fixed  and  speak  no  word. 

5.  Sakhi :- When  the  body  is  all,  the  mind  vanishes :  when 

the  mind  is  all,  the  body  vanishes. 
Let  body  and  mind  be  ever  one  ;  then,  O  Kabir,  that  is 
the  Swan. 

52 

1.  That  for  which  Shiva  still  suffered  the  pain  of  separa- 

tion : 
besmeared  his  body  with  ashes,  and  became  Yogi—' 

2.  The  serpent-god  with  his  thousand  mouths  could   not 

comprehend  : 

now  the  Husband  expounds  exactly. 

3.  He  who  will  thus  meditate  upon  me  : 
shall  gain  the  vision  in  six  months'  space. 

4.  Though  I  show  myself  in  this  form  or  in  that  : 
though  I  remain  hidden,  yet  shall  I  manifest  all  my 

being. 

5.  Sakhi :— Kabir  cries  aloud,  All  are  in  one  state. 
None  heeds  my  teaching :  how  shall  they  escape  the 

net  of  error  ? 

63 

1.  As  muni,  Mahadev  found  not  the  end  : 
with  Uma  he  wasted  his  life. 

2.  Like  him  is  there  any  Sidh  or  Sadhak  ? 
How  can  the  mind  ever  be  at  rest  ? 

3.  Long  as  the  mind  is  in  the  body  : 
so  long  none  can  wake  nor  see, 

4.  Then  only  will  you  wake,  when  you  quit  your  life  : 
when  the  end  comes,  the  mind  knows  regret. 

5.  You  have  heard  so  much,  but  are  near  to  death  : 
still  the  mind's  disease  does  not  leave  you,  brother. 

1  Literally  when  the  mind  is  fixed  none  speaks. 

»  One  who  has  liberated  his  soul  from  the  material  world. 


RAMAINIS  79* 

6.    Sahhi :— Of  all  who  came  into  tbe  three  worlds,  not 
one  desires  to  leave. 
One^  that  is  blind  has  devoured   the  world:    all  the 
world  is  sunk  in  despair. 

54 

1.  Dead  is  Brahma,  Shiva  the  lord  of  Kashi  : 
with  them  lies  dead  the  immortal. ' 

2.  In  Mathura  died  Krishna  the  cowherd  : 
one  by  one  died  tlie  ten  avatars.^ 

3.  One  after  one  died  the  founders  of  devotions  : 

those  who  knew  Him  in  qualities  and  without  qualities. 

4.  Sakhi : — Nath  Muchandar  escaped   not,  nor  Gorakh, 

Dattatriya  nor  Viyas. 
Kabir  cries  aloud,  All  were  caught  in   the  noose   of 
death. 

55 

1.  Gone  is  Rama,  gone  too  Lakshman  : 

not  even  Sita,  peerless  wife,  could  bear  him  company. 

2.  Korava  goes  in  a  moment  of  time  : 

gone  too  Bhoj  who  beautified  Dharanagar. 

3.  Gone  is  Pandava  and  queen-like  Kunti : 

gone  Sahadeva  who   founded  wisdom  and  learning. 

4.  Ho  who  reared  Lanka  all  of  gold  : 

took  nothing  with  him  at  the  hour  of  departing. 

5.  Harishchandar,  whose  palace  is  built  in  the  heavens : 
is  seen  no  more. 

6.  Such  fools  are  men  that  they    are  ever    collecting 

more  : 
mortal  themselves  they  weep  for  the  death  of  others. 

7.  Man  does  not  think  that  he  will  die  himself : 

his  desire  is  to  get  ten  half-pence*  more,  and  take  and 
enjoy  them. 

^  Miod. 
'  Vlahnu 

'  Ten  incaniatioiiH  of  Vishnu  :— Fish,  tortoise,  boar,  Hon,  the  dwarf, 
Parasnrama,  Rama,  Krishna,  Buddha,  Kalki. 
'  Dastaka. 


80  RAMAINIS 

8.    Sakhi :— Each  lias  gone,  his   own   deeds  done  :   no  one 
has  followed  with  another. 
Ravan  has  gone,  his  own  deeds  done  ;   and  Dasharath 
Nath,  his  own. 

56 

1.  Day    after    day   they    burn  :    who   has   found  these 

burned  ? 
or  they  are  buried,  but  none  rose  up  again. 

2.  They  do  not  bear  them  forth  upon   the   sliouldcrs  :  'tis 

but  mockery : 
Tell  me,  pray,  in  what  manner  did  tiiey  find  release  ? 

3.  Tliey  do  misdeeds  and  boast  their  deeds  are  virtues : 
they  study  the  Vedas  and  expound  them  to  the  world. 

4.  Sakhi  :— A  husk  is  sown  and  naught  results. 
Says  Kabir,  O  brothers,  wake  and  consider. 

57 

1.  One  thread  of  action  is  in  all  the  world  : 
it  is  declared  before  Ilfty  lakhs  of  men. 

2.  Only  those  should  read  the  arts  and  Vedas  ; 

of  whose  speaking  of  the  word  follows  confirmation. 

3.  The  word  has  reached  the  instructed  in   knowledge  : 
there  too  doubt  was  only  deepened. 

4.  Sakhi ;— You  went  in  search  of  the  Swan  :  behind  is 

the  limitless,  the  unfathomed. 
•   Without  understanding  how  can  you  know  it  ?  False  is 
your  pride. 

58 

1.  O  son,  render  me  my  service  : 

to  thee  will  I  give  the  kingdom  of  the  gods. 

2.  In  an  inaccessible  fortress  I  will  release  thee  : 
come,  listen  to  other  teaching. 

3.  I  will  show  thee  creation  and  destruction  : 
thou  Shalt  reign  and  delight  in  happiness. 

4.  Not  a  single  hair  will  suffer  pain  : 

and  to-morrow  there  shall  be  no  more  birth. 


RAMAINIS  81 

-5.    Sins  will  vanisb,  an  abode  of  bliss  be  won  : 

if  sure  obedience  be  given  to  Kabir. 
^.    Sakhi  :  -They  alone  are  Sam  and  Sadlui,  who  obey  my 
bidding  : 
They  will  see  with  open  eyes  the   beginning  and  the 
end,  creation  and  destruction. 

59 

1.  By   constant  discipline  of   the  breath   the  vessel   was 

broken : 
but  the  mind  knows  not  who  has  robbed  it. 

2.  One  thief  has  robbed  the  world  : 
but  very  few  are  they  who  know  it. 

3.  In  heaven,  the  realms  below,  in  earth  and  waters : 
one  alone,  Rama,  watches  over  all. 

4      Sakhi: — All   are  become   as   stone   and   are  vanished, 
like  an  air-drawn  picture ; 
The  wealtli,  whereon  they  set   their  hearts,  is  become 
their  foe. 

60 

1.  Renounce  honour,  renounce  boasting  : 
then  the  pride  of  your  mind  will  be  broken. 

2.  For  those  who  steal  and  devour : 
that  plant  will  blossom  again. 

3.  If  one  pursues  riches  and  worldly  honour : 
that  plant  brings  him  again  fnto  the  world. 

4.  Sakhi :    -Give  up  lies,  know  them  to  be  lies  ;  this  world 

is  all  illusion. 
For  this  cause  do  I  speak,  that  you  may  find  escape. 

61 

1.  Those  who  give  religious  discourses: 
rise  early  in  the  morning  and  utter  lies. 

2.  Lies  in  the  morning  and  lies  in  the  evening : 
lies  have  settled  in  their  heart. 

3.  They  do  not  know  the  mystery  of  Rama: 

they  have  established  a  religion  of  Vedas  and  Puranas. 

>  Mind. 


82  KAMAINIS 

4.  They  do  not  even  follow  the  sayings  of  the  Vedas : 
The  fire  is  blazing  and  is  not  quenched* 

5.  Sa/c/it:— Singing  the  praise  of  one  without  qualities, 

they  have  lost  tlieraselves. 
The  body  of  earth  is  mingled   with  earth,  and  air  with 
air. 

62 

1.  If  thou  thinkest  the  Maker  distinguished  castes : 
birth  is  according  to  these  penalties  for  deeds. 

2.  Born  a  Sudra  you  die  a  Sudra : 

it  is  only  in  this  world  of   illusion  that  you  assume  the 
sacred  thread. 

3.  If  birth  from  a  Brahman  mother  makes  you  Brahman : 
why  did  you  not  come  by  another  way  ? 

4.  If  birth  from  a  Turk  mother  makes  you  Turk  : 
why  were  you  not  circumcised  in  the  womb  ? 

5.  If  you  milk  black  and  yellow  cows  together : 
will  you  be  able  to  distinguish  their  milk  ? 

6.  Sakhi :— O  men,  give  up  your  pretence  of  great  wisdom. 
Says  Kabir,  Recite  the  name  of  the  Bow-holder.^ 

63 

1.  He  who  held  that  shapes  are  many  but  caste  one : 
did  not  recognise  the  four  castes. 

2.  They  perished  who  did  not  recognise  the  creator :  * 
they  perished  who  gave  their  mind  to  others. 

3.  They  perished  who  prated  of  the  Vedas : 

they  read  the  Vedas^  but  did  not  know  their  secret. 

4.  As  the  clear  sky,  so  no  eye  can  see  Him  : 

when  He  was  manifested,  naught  of  Him  was  under- 
stood. 

5.  Sakhi i—He  makes  all  dance  in  varied  dances:  He 

dances  in  the  likeness  of  a  rope  dancer. 
The  immortal  dwells  in  every  body :  O  Shaikh  Taqqi, 
hear. 

*Raina.        •  The  Lord. 


RAMAINIS  83 

64 

1.  Ill  this  body  1  taught  the  means  whereby  the   ruby   is 

attained : 
in  many  ways  the  mind  was  perverted. 

2.  If  I  explain  this  a  hundred  thnes, 

still  they  will  not  forsake  their  prejudice. 

3.  The  man  who  rests  upon  the  saying  of  the  Sant : 
gains  the  nine^  nuUlhi  and  perfection. 

4.  Devotion  dwells  ever  in  the  heart  of  him  : 

who  tests  all  things  on  the  touchstone  of  Rama. 

5.  He  who  goes  elsewiiere  to  test : 

is  mad  and  makes  his  madness  madder. 

6.  Sakhi :— For  this   cause  the   noose  of  death   has  fallen 

on  thee :  take  thought  then  for  thyself. 
Where   a   sant   is,   thither   the  sant  repairs,  and  the 
mean  keeps  company  with  the  mean. 

65 

1.  Tell  out  your  good  and  your  bad  qualities : 

you  will  meet  misfortune  if  you  do  not  consider  this. 

2.  O  soul,  thou  hast  found  great  trouble : 
without  water  what  peace  has  the  flsh  ? 

3.  Though  the  chatrik*  has  water  all  around  him  : 
if  the  cloud  yields  no  rain  he  goes  unsatisfied. 

4.  So  one   disguised    plays    many   parts    and   stays  hig 

hope  on  the  ocean  of  existence  : 
with  water  all  round  the  chatrik  is  still  athirst. 

5.  The  name  of  Rama  is  the  true  essence : 
all  else  in  this  world  is  false. 

6.  Hari  is  a  flame  and  you  a  moth  : 
Yama  has  made  his  abode  with  the  soul. 

7.  As  if  one  has  found  treasure  in  a  dream : 

it  is  not  in  the  heart:  how  then  can  he  hide  it  safely? 

8.  It  is  not  in  the  heart,  yet  he  cannot  bear  to  renounce 

it: 
this  coveting  is  vain,  but  they  know  it  not. 

>  Seo  Ramaini  9,  note  4. 

'  The  pied  ouokoo:  it  is  said  that  it  HTea  on  rain  drops. 


34  RAMAINIS 

9.    The  saying  of  the  Smriti  they  did  not  believe : 

their  knowledge  is  deceitful,  like  a  goat  gnawing  a  tree.  ' 

10.  The  movement  in  the  world  is  tlie  soul's  foolishness : 
this  is  the  cause  tlmt  none  sees  to  the  end. 

11.  SaHii :— Through   blindness  none   lias   rest:    not   one 

considers : 
not  knowing  the   hhakti  of   Hari,  the    whole  world  is 
drowned  and  dead. 

68 

1.  He  to  me  is  a  beloved  friend  : 

who  leads  into  right  paths  those  who  have  lost  the  road. 

2.  The  wise  remains  ever  on  the  right  path  : 
and  in  his  search  he  goes  not  astray. 

3.  He  is  false,  who  renounces  the  son '  : 

by  the  mercy  of  the  Guru  one  learns  of  Rama. 

4.  In  the  world  men  are  oft  deluded ; 
seeing  riches  and  sons,  they  grow  proud. 

5.  SahJii:— When  the  mind  took  but  one   step  forward, 

forthwith  the  shrine  was  lighted. 
They  are  dead,  were  dead  while  yet  they  lived:  they 
are  safe  who  deserved  salvation. 

67 

1.  Twisting  your  body  is  not  devotion : 
men  put  many  antic  dispositions  on. 

2.  I  take  no  pleasure  in  a  forced  obedience : 
when  in  his  heart  one  knows  me  not. 

3.  With  one  thing  on  their  tongue,  another  in  their  heart: 
these  have  not  known  me  even  in  dreams. 

4.  Sorrow  is  their  lot,  now  in  this  world  : 
if  thou  wouldst  wake,  then  keep  aloof. 

5.  Men  who  speak  ill  of  the  Guru  ; 
will  be  born  as  swine  and  dogs. 
Sakhii-ThroMgh     eighty-four    millions    of    created 

beings  they  will  wander  and  wander,  suffering  pam. 
Says  Kabir,  Those  who  know    Rama,  they  alone  are 
dear  to  me. 

•  Guro. 


6. 


RAMAINIS  85 

68 

1.  Parted  from  Him  they  lived  without  a  protector  : 
plunged  iu  the  dense  forest  they  find  no  path. 

2.  AH  he  knows  he  borrows  from  the  Vedas : 

but  when  he  really  understands  he  counts  it  worthless. 

3.  Those  who  know  the  sport  of  the  Dancer:* 
recognise  the  gods  as  of  like  nature. 

4.  He  tlien  sports  within  all  bodies  : 

there  is  none  other  of  whom  to  take  account. 

5.  Good  or  bad,  whatever  chance  befall  : 
man  must  gaiu  its  fuUilment. 

6.  Sakhi:~Ke    whom    the   arrow   pierces,    knows    the 

pain. 
When  struck  he  seeks  not  escape  :  lie  looks  to  Kabir  as 
the  ocean  of  bliss. 

69 

1.  O  brother,  never  have  I  seen  Yogi  like  this  : 
puffed  up  with  pride  he  walks,  caring  for  nothing. 

2.  He  teaches  the  religion  of  Mahadeva  : 
and  tiierefore  is  called  a  great  Mahant.^ 

3.  In  market  and  street  he  sits  in  the  posture  of  a  Yogi  : 
he  is  an  imperfect  Siddh,  a  lover  of  Maya. 

4.  When  did  Dattatriya  attack  his  enemies  : 
when  did  Shukdeva  lay  a  cannon  ? 

5.  When  did  Narad  fire  a  gun  : 
or  Viyasdeva  wind  a  horn  ? 

6.  They  who  fight  are  of  little  wisdom  : 
shall  I  call  such  ascetics  or  bowmen  ? 

7.  They   have   renounced  the   world,  yet  coveting  rules 

their  mind  : 
they  wear  gold  and  disgrace  their  order. 

8.  They  gather  horses  and  mares  : 

they  acquire  villages  and  go  like  millionaires. 

9.  Sakhi  :— A  beautiful   maldon  is  not  fitting  in  the  com- 

pany of  Sanaka  and  his  kind. 
He  who  carries  a  blackened  vessel  will  one  day  be 
fouled. 

>  Maya.        •  A  great  devotee. 


86  RAMAINIS 

70 

1.  O  brother,  to  whom  shall  I  say  ought  : 
even  while  I  speak,  the  essence  is  dissipated. 

2.  By  continual  speaking  defects  are  multiplied  : 
speak  words  whicli  will  give  thought. 

3.  If  you  meet  a  sant,  speak  two  words  with  him  : 
if  you  meet  the  profane,  then  remain  dumb. 

4.  Sakhi :— To  speak  with  a  Paadit  is  full  of  profit :  speech 

with  a  fool  is  mere  babble. 
Says  Kabir,  Tiie  half-filled  vessel  swings  aimlessly  : 
if  it  be  full,  it  speaks  with  understanding. 


71 


1.  He  who  considers  sorrow  and  delight  to  be  equal : 
his  state  not  even  Indra  knows. 

2.  Some  shave  men's  locks  and  hang  the  black  cord  on 

their  necks  ; 

and  pride  themselves  on  the  practice  of  Yoga.  ^ 

3.  What  credit  is  there  in  causing  your  seat  to  fly  ? 
crow  and  kite  also  circle  in  the  air. 

4.  Paradise  and  hell  are  alike  : 

kingdom  and  throne  the  Sant  counts  but  a  ruin. 

5.  The  fire  of  hell,  the  cool  fragrance  of  sandal  to  him 

are  one  :  , 

to  him  the  madman  is  as  the  wise. 

6.  Pottage  and  clove  to  him  are  one  : 
he  leaves  sugar  and  eats  ashes. 

7.  Sakhi :— By  making  distinction  and  distinction  wisdom, 

strength  and  mind  are  wasted. 
When  the  two  have  become  one,  to  which  shall  I  then 
show  preference  ? 

^  A  method  of  freeing  the  soul  from  the  material  world.  To  attain 
it  certain  postures  of  body  must  be  practised  ;  these  will  develop  the 
habit  of  concentration,  and  ultimately  the  liberation  of  the  soul. 


r 


I 


RAMAINIS  87 

72 

1.  Oue  womau*    has  come  iato  the  world  : 
who  has  neither  mother  nor  father. 

2.  She  has  not  feet,  nor  head,  nor  life,  nor  form  : 
all  the  world  is  wandering  in  her. 

3.  All  the  seven*  days  she  lias  power  : 

on  learned  and  unlearned  ;  a  tale  of  wonder. 
4.    AH  pay  her  worship  : 

both  learned  and  unlearned  ;  a  mighty  wonder. 

73 

1.  I  have  seen  a   woman'  walking: 

the   pitcher*  below,  the  water-carrier  above. 

2.  She  was  passing  on  along  the  highway  : 
the  bed"    was  resting  upon  the  sleeper' . 

3.  Dying  of  cold  yet  she  spares  the  quilt*  : 

she  knows  not  her  husband^  :   the  wife  is  demented. 

4.  Evening  and  morning  she  lights  the  lamp  : 
leaving  her  husband  she  dotes  upon  a  lover.* 

5.  Night  andf»day  she  is  inebriated  with  love  of  him  : 
to  her  own  husband  she  speaks  not  truth. 

6.  She  left  her  husband,  while  he  slept,  and  went : 
now  to  whom  shall  I  make  plain  this  trouble  ? 

7.  Sakhi  ;— One  may  not  uncover  his  own  thigh,  nor  tell 

the  tale  of  his  own  shame, 
Either  it  is  known  to  my  mind  or  my  hhaktns  sing  it. 

74 

1.  Then"  was  neither  subtle,  gross,  nor  earthly  body  : 
for  Him  no  sorrow  and  no  Maya. 

2.  The  lotus  leaf  is  on  the  ripple  : 

they  are  together,  yet  this  cleaves  not  to  that. 
»  Maya. 

^  It  sabdaes  mind,  Jiva,  and  five  snnses. 
'  Thought,  intelligence. 

•  Body. 

•  Mind. 

•  The  Lord. 

*When  the  mind  was  in  its  original  state. 


88  RAMAINIS 

3.  Desire,  like  dew,  was  on  each  egg  : 
yet  no  one  says  the  eggs  are  separate. 

4.  Bodiless,  they  conceived  of  Him  as  embodied, 
reciting  the  name  of  Rama,  spirit  was  born. 

5.  The  scriptures  say  that  all  is  water  : 

in  the  mind  of  various  races  names  arise. 

6.  Where  cattle,  insects,  crocodiles  rot : 
of  this  same  water  all  things  drink. 

7.  If  one  escapes  out  of  this  noose  : 
he  will  not  seek  out  a  path  again. 

8.  Saklii  :— This  world  is  bound   in   error  :   no  one  con- 

siders : 
knowing    not   the    hliakti  of    Hari,    all   the   world  is 
drowned  and  dead. 

75 

1.  Cleave  to  the  side  of  that  master  : 

so  ending  the  two  troubles  you  will  find  your  support. 

2.  He  was  not  born  in  the  family  of  Dasarath  : 
He  did  not  lay  waste  the  King  of  Lanka. 

3.  He  did  not  come  in  the  womb  of  Devaki  : 
Jasoda  did  not  fondle  Him  in  her  lap. 

4.  He  did  not  live  on  the  earth  for  its  destruction  : 
He  did  not  enter  the  world  below  to  deceive  Bali. 

5.  He  did  not  fight  with  king  Ba^i  : 

He  did  not  strike  down  and  slay  JSirnakusIi. 

6.  He  did  not  assume  on  earth   the  form  of  the  boar  : 
nor  by  slaying  the  Kshattris  rid  the  earth  of  Kshat- 

tris. 

7.  He  did  not  hold  the  Govardhan  hill  upon  his  hand  : 
He  did  not  roam  the  forest  in  company  with  cowherds. 

8.  He  is  not  Gandak,  Salig  Ram,'    nor  stone  : 

He  did  not   swim  the   river   in  the  form  offish  or  tor- 
toise. 

9.  He  did  not  quit  the  body  in  Dwaravatl  : 
His  body  was  not  buried  in  Jagannath. 

^  A  spiral  fossil  shell  resembling  the  conch  of  Vishnu,  and  accepted 
as  a  symbol  of  him.  It  is  found  in  the  bed  of  the  Gandak  river,  a  tri- 
butory  of  the  Ganges. 


RAMAINI8  89- 

10.    Salchi  .-Loudly  Kabir  proclaims --Do  not  forget  that 
Path. 
That  of  whfch  you  form  your  fancies,  is  neither  subtle 
nor  material  form. 

76 

1.  Maya  and  Desire  are   troubles  of  the  world  : 
but  no  one  thinks  so  of  this. 

2.  Maya  and  Desire  are  a  troublous  noose  : 

he  who  escapes  therefrom  is  a  true  worshipper. 

3.  He  who,  taking  Rama's  name,  lays  hold  upon  the  raft : 
will  safely  float  to  shore  across  the  world. 

4.  Sakhi  :— The  name  of  Rama  is  exceeding  precious  ;  I 

have  no  concern  with  others. 
From  beginning  to  end,  from   age  to  age,  in  the  name 
of  Rama  alone  I  fight. 

77 

1.  There  is  but  one  KaP  in  all  the  world  : 

there  is  but  one  Name  beloved  of  all. 

2.  One  cannot  name  It  as  male  or  female  : 

It  has  entered  into  all  forms  in  the  world. 

3.  None  can  say  whether  It  lias  form  or  no  form  : 

light  or  heavy,  there  is  no  weighing  It. 

4.  There  is  neither   hunger  nor   thirst,  neither  sunshine 

nor  shade  : 
Free  from  pain  and  pleasure,  yet  It  remains  in  then). 

5.  Sakhi  '.—Boundless,  supreme,  a   form  of  many  colours, 

innumerate-  * 

Loudly  Kabir  proclaims  -Call  Him  wonderful. 

78 

1.  In  his  human  birth  man  has  lost  his  way  in  the  world  : 
many  are  they  that  claim  a  share  in  this  body. 

2.  Father  and  mother  say  '  He  is  our  son* : 

for  their  own  advantage  did  they  nurture  him. 

3.  The  wife  says  *  He  is  my  husband*  : 

like  a  tigress  would  she  devour  him. 

'  Kal  hero  ataiulH  for  Brahma. 


90 


RAMA  IN  IS 


4.    Children  and  kinsmen  watch  expectant : 

like  jackals  with  open  mouth. 
5     Crows  and  vultures  are^ever  thinking  of  his  death  : 

swine  and  dogs  lie  in  wait  in  his  road. 

6.  Tlie  fire  says,  '  I  shall  consume  this  body'  ; 

the  water  says,  'I  shall  carry  it  off  while  it  yet  burns.' 

7.  The  earth  says,  '  It  will  be  mingled  in  me  ' : 

the  air  says,  'T  shall  whirl  it  away  as  dust.' 

8.  The  fool  who  says  this  house  is  my  house, 

he  is  thy  bitterest  enemy  that  confronts  thee. 

9.  How  knowest  thou  this  body  to  be  thine  ? 

In  the  form  of  desires  thou  art  lost  in  ignorance. 
10.    Saklchl:— So   many  are   the  claimants  for  this  body: 
through  all  your  life  you  suffer. 
Madman,    you  do   not     wake,    but    mutter    always 
'  mine,'  '  mine.' 

79 

1.  Increase  (desires),   they  grow :   decrease   them,  they 

dwindle  : 
our  testing  is  approved  ;  that  tested  by  others  proves 
counterfeit. 

2.  What  more  shall  I  speak?  See  how  much  I  have  said  : 
I  would  say  more,  if  it  carried  some  weight. 

3.  I  cannot  refrain  from  speaking  : 

but  dogs  devour  the  soul  still  separate  from  God, 

4.  Age   after  age   they   are  eaten  and  eaten ;  still  none 

awakes : 
loudly  Kabir  proclaims.  Souls  pass  away  unawakened. 
80 

1.  Many  bold  ventures  did  the  soul  make  : 
but  none  met  the  Lord,  not  even  in  dream. 

2.  He  did  not  separate  by  testing  sound  from  counterfeit : 
seeking  for  profit,  he  but  lost  his  capital. 

3.  It  was  not  known  whether  the  rope  was  strong: 

stout  or  flimsy,  all  proved  useless. 

4.  Kabir  says,  Whom  will  you  blame, 

when  you  go  hence  with  hopes  thin  and  broken  ? 
•  False  teachers. 


RAMAINIS  PI 

81 

1.  O  brothers,  hear  the  story  of  the  gods  : 
Brahma  ravished  his  daughter. 

2.  Tliat  whicii  you  have  heard  of  Mandodri  and  Tara  : 
in  tlieir  house  an  elder  brother  was  their  husband. 

3.  Surpit  deceived  Ahalya : 

the  moon  carried  off  the  wife  of  the  Guru  of  the  gods. 

4.  Says  Kabir,  By  reciting  tlie  praises  of  Hari 

PCunti  gave  birth  to  Karan  when  yet  a  virgin. 

82 

1.  Maya  planted  a  tree  of  happiness  in  the  world : 

none  understood  it  was  but  worldly  pleasure. 

2.  The  tree  has  six^  branches,  its  leaves  are  four  ages  : 

it  bears  two  fruits,  sin  and  virtuous  deeds. 

3.  Tliey  have  countless  tastes  past  all  describing: 

they  display  varied  scenes  tliat  are  therein. 

4.  Tiiey  like  a  dancer  have  decked  themselves  for  playing : 
whoever  plays  himself  will  see  the  play. 

5.  The  luckless  Jiva  fascinated  with  desire  : 

(!Ould    not   see   the   mystery:   he  saw  not  Siva,  Shakti 
and  Brinch." 

6.  Sakhi :— Of  all  who  passed  within  the  curtain,  no  one 

understood  the  word. 
Those  wiio  understood  escaped  :  all  others  suffer  loss. 

83 

1.  He  is  Kshatriya  who  fulfils  the  Kshatri^s  dharmo  : 

he  will  obtain  the  merits  of  his  deeds  and  one-fourth 
besides. 

2.  O  Abadho,  to  whom  the»Guru  revealed  wisdom  : 

his  mind  carried  him  thither. 

3.  He  is  the  Kshatriya  who   fights  within    his  own  house 

(body) : 

slays  the  five  (senses),  and  knows  there  is  but  One. 
1.     Who  destroys  a  life  that  he  may  support  a  life  : 

destroys  his  birth  as  man  with  his  eyes  open. 
5.    If  one  can  strike  and  wound  that  mark  (the  Mind) : 

flght  there,  where  stands  the  self-crowned  king. 
'  .Six  DarsUluias.  *  Brahma. 


92  RAMAINIS 

6.    Saklii :-  The  self-crowned   dies,    the    true    soul    will 
not  die. 
Without  the  love  of  Rama— in  the  void,  the  all— they 
have  lost  themselves. 

84 

1.  O  soul,  save  thyself  from  the  pain  : 
which  pervades  the  whole  world. 

2.  All  are  in  the  bondage  of  Maya  and  Desire : 
to  gain  a  little  profit  they  lose  their  capital. 

#     3.    Saying  *  mine  '  and  *  thine,'  all  have  lost  themselves : 
and  slept  even  from  their  mother's  womb. 

4.  The  soul  plays  in  many  forms— in  various  garbs : 
men  like  bees  are  swept  away. 

5.  After  birth  and  death  it  comes  again  into  a  body  : 
they  find  no  shred  of  peace,  even  in  dream. 

6.  They  suffer  all  trouble  misery  and  pain : 

they  found  not  that  which  can  quench  the  burning, 

7.  The  whole  world  burns  in  this  *  mine '  and  '  thine' : 

a  life  accursed,  the  world  a  lie. 

8.  False  desire  has  fastened  upon  all : 

escape  one,  yet  are  there  many  more  to  come. 

9.  Of  all  who  securely  sought  to  guard  their  goods : 
though  wise,  not  one  of  them  v/as  saved. 

10.     Salchi  :-  No  one  awakes  of  himself  ;  and  if  I  speak  they 
are  wrath. 
Says  Kabir,  They  awake  but  in  dream  :   this  is  neither 
being  nor  not-being. 


SHABDAS 

1 

1.  O  Sants,  bhakti  was  established  by  the  True  Guru. 

Of  one*  woman  two"  men  were  born :  solve  it,  learned 
Pandit. 

2.  Cleaving  the  rock'  one  Ganga*  issued  forth,  and  every- 

where was  water,  water  alone. 
In   that   water   two  mountains'   were  covered :  the 
river'   was  swallowed'  up  in  the  flood.^ 

3.  A  fly '    flew  and  settled  on  a  tree^ :  it  uttered  but  one 

word. 
The  fly  has  no  male,  and  conceived  without  seed. 

4.  The  woman*  has  devoured  all  men  ;  from  her  He  (Sat- 

Purush)  alone  was  free. 
Says   Kabir,  He  who   now  understaiuis   is  Guru,  and  I 
his  chela, 

2 

1.  O  Sants,  when  waking,  sleep. 

Such   Kal   will  not  devour,  nor    troubles  iiein  them 
round :  the  body  will  not  waste. 

2.  In  contrary    wise  Ganga^  sucks"  up   the  ocean:'  the 

moon'  swallows  the  sun.* 
A  sick'  man  destroys  the  influence  of  the  nine  planets,' 
the  8un*8  orb'  shines  in  water.*  ° 

3.  Without  feet  they  range  in  all  directions,  and  without 

eyes  survey  the  world. 
In  contrary  wise  the  she-goat*  *  devours  the  lion':  let 

who  can  solve  the  marvel. 

• 

*  Maya.  *  Destruction.         *  Maya  and  Kal. 

'  Brahma  and  Jiva.  *  World.  *"  Tho  ocean  of  the  world. 

*  Mind.  '  Soul.  "  Jiva. 

*  boriptures.  •  Bnpreme  boing. 


^  SHABDAS 

4.  Upside'    down   the  pitcher   does  not  (ill  with  water: 

but  upright  the  vessel  fills. 

For  one  object  men  have    tried  this  way  and  that : 

only  by  the  Guru's  gift  will  they  cross  safely. 

5.  Sitting  in   their    cave'    tbey  see  the   whole    world : 

outside  it  they  understand  nothing. 
In  contrary   wise  the  arrow  strikes  the  archer* :  let 
the  brave  understand. 

6.  They  who    call    themselves  singers^    sing  not:    the 

dumb''  are  ever  singing. 
They  see  the  scene  to  be  jugglers  playing,  and  deepen 
their  love  for  the  secret  of  secrets. 

7.  Discussions  and  controversy,  be  they  what  they  may, 

are  but  an  unmeaning  tale. 
In  contrary  wise  the  earth*  transfixes   the  heaven,* 
This  is  the  word  of  the  Purusha. 

8.  Without  cup^   the  Amrit  is  drunk:  the  river*  keeps 

its  waters  full. 
Says  Kabir,  They  live  from  age  to  age,  who  drink  the 
unmixed  juice  of  Rama. 

3 

Iv    O  Sants,  within  the  house  there  is  great  quarrelling. 
Night  and  day  there  stand  up  to    wrangle  five  sons^ 
and  one  woman.'' 

2.  They  all  demand  food  of  different  kinds :  all  five  are 

selfish. 
None  pays  attention  to  another's  warning :  each  is  set 
on  his  own  satisfaction. 

3.  He  who  removes  the  defects  of  folly  and  brings  these- 

sons  under  control, 
Says  Kabir,    he  is  my   friend,  whoever  settles  this 
wrangle  in  the  house. 

^  Entrapped  in  this  world. 

'  Within  their  heart. 

*  Maya  and  Kal. 

'  Soul. 

'  Body. 

"  Desire  ;  anger ;  covetousness  ;  infatuated  love  ;  pride. 

'  Fooliph  understanding. 


SHABDAS  '"^S- 


1.  O  Sants,  behold,  the  world  is  mad. 

If  I  speak  the  truth,  they  rush  to  beat  me :  the  world 
believes  in  falsehood. 

2.  I   have  seen  observers  of  all  rites,  performers  of  all 

duties :  at  early  dawn  they  bathe. 

Then   they   slay  souls  and  worship  stones  :  knowledge 
in  them  there  is  none. 

3.  I  have  seen  many  Pirs  and  Aulias  :  they  read  the  Book, 

the  Quran. 
They  initiate   disciples  and  give  instruction    in  such 
knowledge  as  they  have. 

4.  They  sit  them  down  full  of  vanity  and  in  their  mind  is 

vain  glory. 

They  worship  brass  and  stone  and  are  lost  in  the  pride 
of  their  pilgrimages. 

5.  They  wear  the  beads  and  the    cap  and   plume  them- 

selves on  tilak  and  markings. 

They  are  given  up  to  the  singing  of  Sakhis  and  Shab- 
das ;  but  have  no  knowledge  of  the  soul. 

6.  The  Hindu  says  **Rama  is  my  beloved:''   the  Turk 

"  Rahman  is  mine." 

They  have  lost  their  lives  ever  quarrelling  one   with 
another :  none  understand  the  secret. 

7.  From   house  to  bouse  they  go  to  mutter  Mantra^  and 

vaunt  themselves  of  this  honour. 

Thus  Guru  and  disciples  all  are  drowned  together:  and 
at  the  end  they  grieve. 

8.  Says  Kabir;  Hear,  O  Sants,  these  are  all  deluded  in 

error. 

However  long  I  speak  they  do  not  heed :  one  sluggard 
follows  after  another. 


:96  SUAUDAS 

5 

1.  O  Sauts,  there  has  come  to  pass  a  mighty  wonder. 
If  I  tell  it,  who  will  believe  ? 

2.  There  is  but  one   raale^  but   one  female.'     Consider 

this  well. 
From  one'   egg  were    all  eighty-four    millions:   the 
world  is  deluded  in  error. 

3.  One  woman*  has  spread  her  net :  fear  came  on  all  th^ 

world. 
By  searching  none  has   found  the  end  :  nor  Brahma, 
nor  Vishnu,  nor  Mahesha. 

4.  Having  a  serpent-noose'  within  her,  she  has  plundered 

and  devoured  all  the  world. 
Without  the  sword  of  wisdom®  fights  the  whole  world  : 
none  could  seize  her. 

5.  She*  is    herself  root,  flower  and  orchard :  she  herself 

plucks  and  eats. 
Says  Kabir,  They  alone  are  saved  whom  the  Guru  has 
awakened. 

6 

1.  O  Sants,  tJiere  came  to  pass  a  mighty    wonder.    The 

son"  took  his  mother*  to  wife. 

2.  The  daughter*    was  infatuated  with  her  father'  ;  and 

yet  remained  virgin. 
Leaving  her  husband®  she    has  wedded  her  father- 
in-law;®  why  have  you  not'understood  ? 

3.  With  her    brother '°  she  has  gone  to  the  house  of  her 

father-in-law®,  and  became    rival   to   her  mother- 
in-law.'' 
Husband's  sister*   and  brother's  wife*"   have  plotted 
•        together  :  why  did  you  abuse  my  name  ? 

4.  She  did  not  come  with  the   father-in-law®  of  her  son: 

yet  easily  became  mistress  of  the  house. 
Says  Kabir,  Hear,  O  Sants  ;  one  born  as  man  became 
a  woman. 


*  Pttrusha. 

'  Elements  of  three  qualities. 

•  Mind. 

"Prakriti. 

•  Guru's  teaching?}. 

10  Pride. 

*  Brahma. 

'  Jiva. 

i«  Adi  Maya. 

*  Maya. 

'  Brahma. 

i»  Scriptures 

SHABDAS  87 

7 

1.  O  Sants.  if  I  speak,  who  will  believe  me?  Wliatever  lie 

is  spoken,  is  taken  as  truth. 

2.  The  flawless,  priceless  gem^  is  gleaming:  but  there  is 

neither  purchaser  nor  owner. 
It  glitters  and  gleams  in  brilliance  on  every  side  :  and 
its  splendour  pervades  the  world. 

3.  Such  was  the  goodness  of  the  Guru  that  He  alone 

made  visible  the  unqualified  and  invisible. 
In  sauwdhi  enlightenment*   awakes  and  the  vision  of 
the  Divine  is  given. 

4.  Look  where  I  will,  there,  there  is  He :   the  diamond  of 

the  mind  is  flawed. 
This  teaching  of  the  Eternal  Essence  I  gained  through 
the  Guru;  this  is  the  lesson  of  Kabir. 

8 

1.  O  Sants,  that  which  comes  and  goes,  is  Maya. 

The   Protector,  on   him   Kal  has  no  hold:   He  has  not 
gone,  nor  has  He  come. 

2.  What  motive  had  He  to  become  Fish  or  Tortoise?  He 

did  not  slay  Sankha  Sur. 
He  is  merciful  and  knows  no  enmity:  tell  me,  whom 
has  he  slain  ? 

3.  The  Creator  is  not  styled  tlie   Boar :   nor  did  He  bear 

the  earth  as  a  burden. 
These  are  not  the  works  of  the  Lord :  the  world  speaks 
falsehood. 

4.  One  who  came  forth  cleaving   the  pillar,  all  believe  on 

him. 
But  he  who  tore  the  belly  of  Hirnakush  with  his  nails, 
he  is  not  the  Creator. 

5.  In  the  form  of  a  dwarf  he  did  not  tempt  Bali :  that 

wiiich  tempts  is  Maya. 
For  lack  of  understanding  the   whole  world  is  bewil- 
dered :  Maya  has  deluded  the  world. 

*  The  essence  of  Qod  not  contracted  or  disfigured  by  the  materl*! 
world. 

*  UnmunU  the  state  of  absolute  anion  with  God  in  which  perso- 
nality disappears. 

7 


8  SHABDAS 

6.  Parasu  Ram  did  not  kill  the  Kshattri :  Maya  worked 

this  deceit. 
Those   who  found  not  the  devotion  and  the  secret  of 
the  Sat-Guru,  gave  their  lives  for  naught. 

7.  The  Maker  of  all  did  not  wed  Sita  :    nor  build  a  bridge 

of  stone  across  the  sea. 
This  Raghuuath  they  serve  :   but  he  who  serves  him  is- 
but  blind. 

8.  With  Gopis  and  Gwalas  He  did  not  come  to  Gokul : 

the  Creator  did  not  slay  Kansa. 
The  Lord  is  merciful  to  all.    No  victory,  no  defeat  is- 
His. 

9.  The  Creator  is  not  Budha :  He  did  not  slay  the  demons. 
Having  no  knowledge  of  the  Creator,  all  are  astray. 

Maya  has  destroyed  the  world. 

10.  The  Creator  did  not  become  Kalanki :    He  did  not 

wound  the  Kalingha. 
These  are  all  deceits  of   Maya :   the  pious,  the  devo- 
tees, all  are  astray. 

11.  The   ten  incarnate  deities  are  Maya :   but  are   wor- 

shipped as  Creator. 
Says  Kabir,  Hear,  O  Sants ;   that  which  is  born   and 
dies  is  but  second. 

9 

1.  O  Sants,  when  I  speak,  the  world  beats  me. 

If  I  hold  my  peace,  what  then  ?    No  one  considers  the 
word. 

2.  The  son^  took  birth  first :  the  father'  was  born  after- 

wards. 
Father  andlson  have  the  same  mother' :  who  can  solve 
this  wonder. 

3.  The  rat*   is  installed  as  king  with  royal  tilak :  the 

snake"  is  his  minister  at  his  right  hand. 
The  wretched  dog^  is  seneschal,  the  cat^  is  servant  in 
the  palace. 

»  Jiva.  '  Pride, 

^  Brahma.  *  Consciousness. 

5  Maya.  '  Wisdom. 

*  Mind. 


SUABDAS  99 

4.    The  black  crow   blackened'    paper  before  him:   the 
bullock*  was  made  Ooiirt  clerk. 
Says   Kabir,  Listen   O  Sants;  the  buffalo*   is   set  to 
admiuister  justice. 

lO 

1.  O  Sants,  I  have  seen  the  way  of  both. 

Hindus  and  Turks  heed  no  warning:  to  all  the  taste  of 
their  desires  is  sweet. 

2.  Hindus  keep  fast  on  Ekadasi*  and  taste  only  singharas* 

and  milk. 
They  abstain   from  grain,  but  do  not  check  the  mind's 
desire :  next  day  tliey  eat  the  flesli  of  beasts. 

3.  Turks  keep  fast  and  hours  of   prayer  :   they  cry  aloud 

on  the  name  of  God. 
How   will  they   find  Paradise  ?  When   evening  comes 
they  slaughter  fowls. 

4.  Hindu  and  Turk,  each  has  renounced  his  mercy  in  his 

heart 
One  kills  by  halal^^  one   kills  by  jhatka'' :  but  fire  is 
kindled  in  both  their  houses. 

5.  t'or   Hindu  and   for  Turk   there  is  one   path,  so   the 

Sat-Guru  has  taught. 
Says  Kabir,  Listen  O  Sants:  cry  'Bama'  cry  *Khuda*: 
it  is  one. 

11 

1.    O  Saats,  the  Pandas  are  skilful  butchers. 

They  slay  a  goat  and  rush  upon  a  buffalo :  they  have 
no  pity  in  their  hearts. 

^  Vcdas  and  other  scriptures. 

*  Those  who  instmct  in  ceremonial  laws. 

*  Garu  who  initiates. 

*  The  llth  (lay  of  each  half  of  the  month  is  observed  by  the  Hindus 
;{enerally,  and  especially  by  Vaish&avas,  as  a  solemn  fast 

*  The  water  chestnut. 

*  Muslims,  when  they  slaughter  an  animal  for  meat  or  MMirllloe, 
before  killing  the  yictim  repeat  a  special  formula  that  is  called  'Halal.* 

*  The  Hindu   way  is   to  slaughter  by  a  sudden   jerk,  and  only  such 
meat  is  lawful  for  sacrifice.    This  method  of  killing  is  called  *  Jhatka.* 


too  8HABDAS 

2.  Having  bathed  and  set  the   tilah^   on  their  forehead 

they  sit,  and  with  varied  ceremonies  make  men  pay 
worship  to  the  goddess. 
They  kill  a  soul  and  destroy  it  in  a  moment:  and  make 
a  river  of  blood  to  flow. 

3.  Most  pious  and  of  noble  lineage  are  they  styled,  and 

demand  high  honour  in  assemblies. 
All  ask  to  be  initiated   by   them.     It  moves  me  to 
laughter,  brothers. 

4.  They  deliver  lectures  on  remission  of  sins ;  but  make 

men  do  shameful  deeds. 
Both   alike  I   saw  drowned :  Yama  has  dragged  them 
down  by  their  hands. 

5.  Those  who  slaughter  cows  are  called  Turk  :   are  these 

not  of  less  account  than  they  ? 
Says  Kabir,  Hear,  O  Sants:  the  Brahmans  of  this   Kali 
Yug  are  base. 

12 

1.  O  Sants,  men  are  intoxicated   with   varied   religions. 
They  drink  the  cup  of  Love's  immortal  juice,  and  are 

intoxicated  in  the  company  of  the  holy. 

2.  They  control  their  lower  and  upper  breath  as  in  a 

still :  and  the  fire  of  Brahma  is  kindled. 
In  the  centre  it  is  closed :  the  dirt  of  Karma  is  skim- 
med :  the  juice  is  distilled, 

3.  Gorakh,  Datta,  Vasishta,  Vyasa  the  poet,  Narad,  Shuk- 

muni,  collect  it. 
Sharabhu  and  Sauak  with  his  company  are   seated  in 
the  assembly :  there  the  brimming  cup  passes. 

4.  Ambarisha,  Yagya,  Janaka,  Jarha,  and  the  serpent-god 

with  his  thousand  mouths,  drink  of  it. 
How  shall  I  recount  them  from  beginning  to  end.    In 
season,  out  of  season,  they  are  drunk  with  it. 

5.  Dhruva,    Prahlada,    Vibhishana    are  drunk,  drunken 

therewith  the  wife  of  Siva. 
Brahma,  the  unconditioned,  was  drunken  in  Brindaban: 
still  its  influence  is  on  him. 

^  A  sectarial  mark  made  with  coloured  eye-earth,  sandalwood  and 
unguents  upon  the  forehead  between  the  eye-brows. 


6HABDAS  lot 

6.    Gods,  raeu,  Munis,   Yatis,  Walls ;  whoever  drank,  he 
knew. 
Says  Kabir :  *  Tis  like  a  dumb  man's  sugar :  how  can  be 
explain  its  taste  ? 

13 

1.  O  Rama,  thy  Maya  makes  great  confusion. 

No  one   understands  her   nature  and  her  secret :  she 
makes  gods,  men  and  munis  to  dance. 

2.  O  cotton   tree,  of   what  advantaj?e  are  thy  spreading 

branches  ?    What  of  thy  beautiful  flowers  ? 
Many  parrots  have  settled  on  thy  branches :  but  when 
they  tasted  the  cotton  they  flew. 

3.  O  palm-tree,  of  what  use  is  thy  stately  height  ?    None 

gets  fruit  of  thee. 
When  the  summer  season  comes,  thy  shade  is  of  no  use 
at  all. 
4     Their  own  cleverness  they  teach  to  others,  the  wisdom 
of  gold  and  women. 
Says  Kabir,  Hear,  O  Sants ;   at  the  feet  of   Rama  da 
service. 

14 

1.  Por  him  who  knows   not  Rama,  the   knot  of  doubt  is 

not  untied :  hence  again  and  again  Yama  seizes  and 
plunders. 

2.  Being  born   mean,  you  call  yourselves  high   born,  ye 

Yogis  and  Sannyasis. 
Wise,  learned,  heroes,  poets,  benefactors :  but  none  has 
dispelled  this  system. 

3.  .\ll  read  Smriti   and   Vedas  and   Purana :    none  have 

vision  of  the  Inward  Light. 
How  can  iron  become  gold,  unless  it  bo   touched  with 
the  pnras^  ? 

4.  Those  who  did  not  reach  the  shore   when   living,  how 

can  they  cross  when  dead,  who  did  not  cross  wheo 
living? 
On  whatsoever  one   flxp-^  hi^   faith    when  living,  there 
he  rests  when  dead. 

'  Philosopher's  stone,  trhich,  nccoiting  to  Hindu  logends,  imraodi- 
ately  converts  into  gold  any  metal  it  touches. 


102  SHARDAS 

5.    Whatever  one  did,  whether  wisdom  or  unwisdom,  that 
he  considers  right. 
Says  Kabir,  What  use  is  it  to  speak  to  him  who  goes 
astray  with  open  eyes. 

15 

1.  Knowing  not  Rama,  tliey  went  to  weave  :  the  weaver^ 

left  the  house  and  went  away. 

2.  Of  nine*  yards,  of  ten'    yards,  aye  nineteen  yards,  he 

spread  the  warp*. 
Seven*  threads,  nine®  spaces,  and  a  width^  of  seventy- 
two  besides. 

3.  The  cloth's    length    cannot  be    measured    in   yards. 

Two-and-a-half  seer  are  sold  for  a  paisa. 
It  is  neither  above  nor  below  one  rati  in  weight :   the 
housewife*  holds  it  fast. 

4.  Ever  restless,  she^  wrangles  with  her  husband*   and 

demands  for  herself  threefold  *°. 
Should  the  warp  get  wet,  it  is  of  no  use:  the  weaver 
leaves  it  in  anger. 

5.  Says  Kabir,  Hear,  O  Sants ;   renounce  the  spreading 

mirage  of  him  who  made  this  visible  world. 
Repeat  the  name  of  Rama,  thou  madman ;  the  ocean  of 
existence  is  hard  to  cross. 

16 

1.  He  *  •  who  knows  not  Rama,  plays  on  a  drum  with  holes : 

without  hands  and  feet  the  dance  goes  on. 

2.  Without  hands  is  the   music   made,  without  ears  is  it 

heard,  without  ears  are  the  hearers. 
The  city  is  without  inhabitant :  the  assembly   without 
occasion.    O  men  and  munis,  understand. 

^  Jiva. 

^  Buddhi,  Ahankar,  Man,  Shabd,  Suprosh,  Rup,  Ras,  Gandh,  Atma. 

3  Five  Karatn  Indris  and  five  Gyan  Tndrls. 

*  Body. 

'  Akash,  Wayo,  Tcj,  Jal,  Prlthwi,  Ahankar  and  Buddhi. 

•  Nine  doors. 
'  72  Arteries. 
"  Maya. 

'  Three  rights— one  as  a  wife,  one  as  a  mother,  one  as  a  dower. 
*°  The  whole  of  this  Shabda  refers  to  Nirgun  Brahma. 


8HABDAS  103 

Enjoyment  without  senses,  taste  without  tongue, 
immortality  without  body. 

There  the  thief  penetrates  the  liouse  while  men  wake : 
though  the  husband  is  in  it,  the  house  is  empty. 

Shoots  without  seed,  tree  without  trunk,  fruits  ripe 
without  blossom. 

The  barren  womb  gives  birtli  to  a  child  :  without  feet 
the  tree  is  climbed. 

Ink  without  inkpot,  pen  without  paper,  learning  with- 
out letters  : 

Without  Samadhi  enlightenment,  without  wisdom 
wise.    Says  Kabir,  So  is  the  Sant. 


17 

1.  One  sings  of  Rama  and  teaches  others :  but  knowing 

not  Hari  his  mind  is  restless. 

2.  By   whose  mouth  the   Veda  and  Gayatri  are  recited, 

on  his  words  the  world  would  fain  pass  over. 

He,  at  whose  feet   the  world  falls  every  morning,  that 
Brahman  himself  takes  life. 

3.  High-born  himself,  he  eats  in  the  houses  of  the  low,  and 

by  doing  loathsome  works  he  fills  his  belly. 

On  tlie  eclipse  and  tlie   Amawas'  he  acts  the  beggar; 
with  a  lamp  in  his  hand  he  falls  into  the  well. 

4.  He  knows  not  how  to  fast  on  Bkadasi,  and  in  his  heart 

he  cherishes  the  love  of  evil  spirits. 

Refusing  camphor  he  knots  poison  i?^  IW^  i.^it^  losing  all 
wisdom  he  wanders  as  a  fool. 

5.  He   troubles  the    honest  and  cherishes    thieves:   he 

speaks  ill  of  saintly  men. 

Says  Kabir,  These  lives,  the  slaves  of  appetite,  fall  into 
hell. 


The  last  day  of  the  dark  fortnight 


IW  SHABDAS 

18 

1.  The    qualities    of    Rama    are    matchless,    matchless, 
matchless.    How   can    the   foolish  understand?    Let 

the  man  of  understanding  ponder  it. 

2.  Many  like  Rama  Chandra  practised  penances,  who  did 

good  to  this  world. 
Many  like  Krishna  bore  flutes ;  they  too  did  not  find 
the  end. 

3.  Many   wore   the  forms  of  Fish,  Tortoise  and  Boar,  or 

took  the  name  of  Dwarf. 
Many  were  as  Buddha  the  Spotless ;   they  too  did  not 
find  the  end. 

4.  Many  Sidh,  Sadhak   and  Sanuyasis,   who   made  their 

home  in  the  forest ; 
Many  munis  and  men   like  Gorakh :  they  too  did  not 
find  the  end. 

5.  Of  Him,  whose   nature   was   not  known   to  Brahma, 

whom  Shiva  and  Sanak's  company  failed  to  find- 
How  canst  thou,  O  man,  know  the   qualities  of  Him  ? 
Kabir  cries  aloud. 

19 

1.  O  man,  now  at  this   time   recite  the   name  of  Rama  : 

and  understand  the  story  past  all  telling. 
Those,  whose  mind   is   toward   Hari,    wake  night  and 
morning. 

2.  The  witch*  has  settled  on  the  braucli,  the  dog*  is  tied, 

the  lion'  watches  in  the  forest." 
Five"  families  are  at  w^ar  together  :   much  discordant 
music^  sounds. 

3.  Like  deer  and  stags   doubt  is  driven   in  the  forest* : 

the  hunter^  fixes  his  arrow. 
The  jungle*   takes  fire  and  the  whole  forest  is    con- 
sumed :  the  fish^  is  hunting  there  for  prey. 

4.  Kabir  says.  Hear,  O  Sants ;  who  expounds  this  song. 
Who  sings  this  song  with   understanding,  saves  him- 
self and  saves  others. 

I  Maya.        '  Worldly  pleasures.  ^  Kal.  *  The  world. 

•  Desire.,  anger,  covetousness,  infatuated  love,  pride. 

•  Vedas,  Smriti,  Puranas.  '  jiva. 


SUABDAS  105 

20 

1.  Will  any  lover  of  Raraa  drink  his  wine  ?  If  one  drinks 

he  will  live  in  bliss  : 

2.  The  fruit  is  Anirit,   without  core  or  rind:  the  parrot 

drinks  its  juice. 
It  does  not  ooze  nor  strain  nor  make  the  body    wet  : 
the  bee,  its  servant,  haunts  it : 

3.  The  Vedas  are  a   tree   rich  in   sap  :     it    bears  four 

fruits*  :  three  are  thereon. 
One' is  far  off  and  is  desired  by   all:   by   striving  and 
striving  some  obtain  it. 

4.  Spring  has  passed,  the  season   of  summer   has   come  : 

the  tree  '  will  not  blossom  again  : 
Kabir  says,  The  Lord  is  the  ocean  of   bliss  :  who  gains 
Rama,  he  Qnds  happiness. 

21 

1.  Thou  didst  not  cleave  to  Rama  :  wliat  sin  has  fastened 

on  thee  ?    In  death  what  wilttljou  do,  O  unfortun- 
ate? 

2.  Some  go  on  pilgrimage,  some  shave  their  heads :  others 

make  discourses  on  Pakhandas,  illusion  and  mantrafi. 

3.  Reading  the  sciences  and  Vedas  they  are  swollen  with- 

pride  :  at  the  end  they  All  their  mouth  with  ashes. 

4.  In  grief  and  happiness  he  nourishes  his  family;  but  at 

the  time  of  death  he  must  l)oar  his  pain  alone. 

5.  Kabir  says,  This  iron  age  is  base  :   that  whioii  is  in  the 

vessel  will  come  out  of  the  spout. 

22 

1.  O  Abadhu*,  give  up  the  expanse  wherein  mind  ranges. 
Hold  fast  the  state  that  gives  security,  exalted  above 

Par- Brahma. 

2.  There   was   no    Mahadeva,    no  Mohammad,    neither 

Krishna  nor  Karim  : 
There  was  neither  Adam  nor  Bnilima,  neither  sunshine 
nor  shadow. 

^  Dh*ram,  Arth,  Kam,  Moksh.        *  Moksh.        '  Vedas. 
•  Without  wisdom. 


t06  SHABDAS 

3.  There  were  no  eighty  thousand  prophets,   nor  eighty- 

eight  thousand  munis ;  neither  moon,    nor  sun  nor 

stars.  Neither  was  there  Pish  nor  Tortoise. 

4.  There  was  no  Veda,  Book,  nor  Smriti  :   neither  sin  nor 

virtues. 
There  was  neither  call  to  prayer  nor  Muslim  creed  : 
neither  Rama  nor  Khuda. 

5.  There  was  in  the  mind   neither  beginning,  end,    nor 

midway  :    neither  fire,   wind,  nor  water. 

There  were  no  eighty-four  millions  of  living  creatures : 
nor  Sakhis,  Shabdas,  nor  Banis. 

6.  Kabir  says,  Listen,  O  Abadhu  ;  think  beyond  all  these. 

Wlience  was    manifested   Purana  Brahm  ?    and    who 
created  Karma? 

23 

1.  O  Abadhu',  the  doings  of  the  Almighty  are  matchless. 

He  exalts  the  pauper  to  be  king  :  and  he  makes  of  the 
sovereign  a  beggar. 

2.  The  clove  tree  may  bear  no  fruit  and  the  sandal   tree 

no  blossoms. 
The  fish  may  range    like    a  hunter   in  the  forest  and 
the  lion  float  in  the  ocean. 
S,    Tlie  castor  tree  may   become  the  sandal  and  spread 
its  fragrance  on  every  side. 
A  blind  man  may  see  as  a  play  the  doings  of  the  three 
worlds  of  the  Brahmand. 

4.  A  cripple  may  leap  over  Meru  and  Sumeru  mountains, 
and  one  who  has  attained  release  be  sent  to  roam  in 
the  three  worlds. 

.The  dumb   may   expound    wisdom  and  knowledge,  and 
reveal  speech  ineffable. 
r).    The  sky   may  be  bound  and  banished   to   the   realm 
below,  and  Sheshnag  rule  in  heaven. 
Kabir  says,  Rama  is  king ;  whatever  he  does  is  fitting. 

1  Without  wisdom. 


SHABDAS  107 

24 

1.  O  Abadhu,  that  Yogi  is  my   Guru,   wiio   will  expound 

this  song. 

2.  There  stands  a    tree*,  but  without  roots  :    fruit  it 

bears,  but  without  blossom. 
It  has  neither  branches  nor  leaves,  it   raises   its  head 
to  the  eight  heavens. 

3.  Leaves    without  root,  hands   without  body  :  witnout 

tongue  it  sings  praise. 
The  singer  has  no  form   nor  outline  :  the  true  Guru,  he 
will  make  it  plain. 
4!    To  search  out  the   path   of  fish   or  kite ;    Kabir  says, 
these  both  are  hard 
I  am   a  sacrifice   to   that    blest  Being  who  is    intinite 
and  boundless. 

25 

1.  O  Abadhu,  that  Lord  *  is  drunken   with   the  elements 

of  the  world.    The    instruments  *   are  dancing,  and 
the  wedding  guests*  make  the  music. 

2.  Tiie  bridegroom  *  is  set  upon  the  head  of   the  crown.* 

It  is  beyond  all  describing. 
The   bridegroom's  father  *  is  fed   by  the  charans  *  at 

the  bridal  awning.  ' 
The  son*  marries  his  own  mother.  * 

3.  The  bride  *  is  daubed   with  plaster  ami    the   bride's  ' 

seat  set  upon  her  :   and  the  song  of  good   omen  ''^ 
sung  till  morning. 
The  rice  ' '  ate  up  the  wedding  guests  :  how  happy  are 
omens  of  good  fortune. 

4.  When  their  hands  were  joined,  the  world  was  fashioned 

and  Surtl  entered  Shnk  Muni. 
Kabir  says.  Hear.  O  S;ii.f«   ind,  O   wise  Pandit,  under- 
stand. 

»  Mind.  '  The  soat  of  the  heart. 

'  Yedas  and  other  scripturon.  *  Maya. 

'  Badhi,  Chit  Ahankar.  'Body. 

*  Ceremonial  laws.  '^  To  be  absorhcd  in  Maya. 

*  Brahma.  *^  Deslrea. 

*  Priests. 


108  SHABDAS 

26 

1.  Hardly  a  friend  have  I  at  all :  what  more  shall   I  say^ 

O  brother ; 
He  alone  is  so  who  perfects  his  devotion,  and  as  Rama 
has  set  him,  there  remains. 

2.  Sitting  on  the  air,  studying  Yoga,  Vedas,  rites  and 

astrology ,  they  are  demented  : 
Six  Darshanas,  ninety-six  Pakhandas  ;  none  understood 
this  trickery. 

3.  They  wandered  about  through  all  the   world,  but   the 

mind  did  not  find  rest  : 
They  would  fain  lift   the   world,  but   the   mind  never 
found  rest  in  mind. 

4.  Kabir  says,  The  hope  of  tlie  Yogi  and   the  Jangam    is 

withered  : 
If  they  repeat,  like  the  chatrik,  the  name  of  Rama, 
their  abode  in  hhakti  is  sure. 

27 

1.  O  brother,^    it  is  a  wondrous  form,  a  marvellous  story. 

If  it  be  told,  who  will  believe  ? 
Wherever,  wherever  one  looks,  there  there  is  He  tlie 
same.    He  is  found  in  every   vessel. 

2.  Happiness  without  wealth,   misery    without   poverty, 

peaceful  rest  without  sleep  : 
Light   without   flame,  lover  without  form,  streaming 
tears  without  eyes. 

3.  Knowledge  without  error,   perception   without  mind,. 

of  many  forms  though  formless  : 
Thought  without  abstraction,  pleasure  without  sport- 
ing, such  is  the  picture  unique. 

4.  Kabir  says,  This   world   is   without  jewel*  :    see  and 

consider  carefully. 
Renounce  all  gain,  coveting,  and  kinsmen  :   worship 
the  Bearer  of  the  bow. 

This  Shabda  means  that  the  God  is  outside  of  this  illusory  worlds 
*  God. 


SHABDAS  .  100 

28 

1.  O  brother,  Brahma  has  given  a  cow  : '    the  burden  of  it 

lias  become  unbearable. 
She   drinks  the  water  that   nine   women'   draw:   still 
her  thirst  is  not  quenched. 

2.  She   was  kept  in   seventy-two  chambers,  and  within  a 

strong  locked  door. 
To  a  driven   peg  she  was   bound  fast  with  a  rope:  but 
she  broke  it  and  escaped. 

5.    O  brother,  four  trees*,  their  six  branches*  and  eighteen 
leaves,' 
All    tiiese   the  cow   has  eaten   up,  and  still  she  is  not 
satisfied. 

4.  These  seven*    (chakkar)  are  its  seven  awaran^"^    nine* 

and  fourteen*   (loks).    All  these  the  cow  has  swal- 
lowed and  still  she  i«  not  satisfied. 

5.  Tied  to  the   peg  the  cow  Is  drunken  :   she  has  horns  of 

no  colour. 
She  Ihas  neither  caste  nor  no  caste,  and  devours  alike 
things  lawful  and  unlawful. 

<J.    O  brother,  Brahma,  and  Vishnu  came  to  search  it  out, 
Siva  and  Sanak's  company. 
Siddhas  innumerable  joined  in  the  search :  none  ever 
found  the  cow. 

7.    Kabir  says,  Hear,  O  Sants  ;  whoever  solves  this  song, 
Whoever  sings  this  with   understanding,  he  is  leader 
and  will  cross  to  safety. 

29 

1.    O  brother,  if  the  eyes  of  a  lover  open, 

Tlien  to  Par-Brahm,  the   unconditioned,  the  immortal, 
tiie  mind  will  always  cling. 

^  Speech.  *  Qnda,  Lidrl,  Nabbi,  Akash,  Abankar, 

*  Nine  forms  of  worship.  Hudhi. 

*  Vedas.  '  Ornaments. 

*  Darshanaa.  *  Nino  divisions  of  the  earth. 

*  Pnranas.  '  Fourteen  loks. 


no  SHABDA8 

2.  They   who  crave  for  liquor  and  thirst  tor  intoxication^ 

nowhere  lind  content. 
The  drunken  with  lust  and  auger  Maya  fills  brimful 
and  gives  them  to  drink. 

3.  Brahma,  as  a  distiller,  has  built  his  still :    with  their 

senses  they  taste  his  liquor. 
At  the  height   of    the  debauch   they  cry   "wisdom,, 
wisdom  ":  if  one  is  shrewd  he  will  understand  it. 

4.  In   this  Kali   Yug  the  body  is  full  of  woe,  care,  wick- 

edness and  diverse  pains. 
Where  there   is  steadfastness,  peace  and  all  purity^ 
rise,  Kabir,  and  meet  it  there. 

30 

1»     Brother,   whence   came  two  diverse  masters  of  the 
world  ?    Who  has  led  you  astray  ? 
Allah,  Rama,  Karim,  Keshava,  Hari,  Hazrat  are  but 
names  that  are  given. 

2.  Jewels  and  jewels  are  made  of  one   ^:old  bar  :  but  in  it 

is  one  nature  only  : 
Only  in  speech  and  hearing  two  are  made— one  Namaz, 
another  Puja. 

3.  He  is  Mahadeva,  He  Mohammad,  and  Brahma  is  calieu  ^ 

Adam. 
One  is  called  Hindu,  one  Turk :  both  live  on  the  same 
earth. 

4.  One  reads  the  Vedas,  another  Khutbas,*  one  is  Maulvi^ 

one  is  Pande. 
Bach  is  called  by  a  separate  name  ;  both  are  pots  of 
the  one  clay, 

5.  Kabir  says,  both  alike  have  gone  astray  :  none  has 

found  Rama. 
One  sacrificed  a  goat  and  one  a  cow  :  in  arguings  both 
have  lost  their  lives. 

'  Sermons  delivered  in  the  mosques  at  midday  prayer. 


SHABDAS  111 

31 

1.  The  swan '  was  killed  with  the  knife  of  doubt :  the  cow* 

sucks  and  the  calf*  is  milked. 

2.  The   game*    hunts   piey^    from   house,   to  house  :  the 

hunter's*  flesh  is  torn. 
In  the  cool   water*  the  hot  sand   is  parched  :  the  dust 
uplifts  its  waves. 

3.  The  earth   rains*,  tiie   clouds*  are   watered,  the  river 

banks  flow  onwards. 
The  swan*   dries  up,  the  tank*  takes  flight,  the  feet* 
entangle  the  mud.* 

4.  As  long  as  hands  swing  and  feet   walk,  so  long  hope  is 

vain. 
Kabir  says,  His  movements  are  not  seen ;  why  then 
accept  his  word  ? 

32 

1.  O  Swan,  arouse  tliee  early,  for  they  have  devised  many 

wiles. 

2.  In  the  form  of  Pakhauda    they  have  set  the  three  qua- 

lities: in  this  Pakhanda'  the  world  is  misled. 
The  husband   in   the   house  is  both  butcher  and  king  : 
what  can  the  subjects  make  of  it  V 

3.  Styled  Bhaktas   they  know   not  Bhakti  :   leaving   tlie 

Amrit  they  swallowed  down  poison. 
In  ages  past  the  elders  also  were  misled   :   they  too 
did  not  heed  my  sayings. 

4.  Hold  fast  my  saying,   and   night   and   day  be  on  your 

guard. 
The  Guru  of  this  Kali  Yug  is   full   of  wiles;   by    the 
robbery  he  practises  he  slew  the  whole  world. 

5.  Vedas  and  the  Book  are  two  spread  nooses :  realise  that 
thou  art  snared  therein. 

Kabir  says,  Those  swans  were  not  misled,  whom  I  met 
and  proved  their  Saviour. 

*  Jira.  *  Vedas  and  Shastras. 

*  Maya.  *  Wisdom. 

»  Mind.  *  The  world. 

'  Brahma. 


^2  SHABDAS 

33 

1.  DearSwau,  whither  dost  thou  leave  the  tank*  to  go  ? 
Tl)e  tank,   wherein  thou   wast  picking  pearls,  there 

thou  didst  play  manifold  delights. 

2.  The  tank   is  dried  up,  the   lotus   stems  no  more  yield 

moisture,  the  lotus  flowers  are  withered. 
Kabir  asks.  After  this  present  separation  when  wilt 
thou  come  hither  again  ? 

34 

1.  The  men  of  Hari  in  the  form   of  Swans   range   far  and 

wide  :  they  gather  up  the  holy  name  and  chant  it. 

2.  They  bear  in  their  beaks   the  wreath  of  salvation  and 

charm  others  with  it  :  they  keep  silence  or  else  they 
sing  the  praises  of  Hari. 

3.  They  live  by   the  bank  of   Mansarowar ;  they  set  their 

heart  on     the    feet  of     Rama :    elsewhere     they 
grieve. 

4.  The  crow's  ill- wisdom  comes  not  near  them  :  the  Swans 

behold  the  vision  every  day. 

5.  They   who  separate   the   milk  from  the  water,  there, 

says  Kabir,  are  my  devotees. 

35 

1.  Hari  is  my  beloved,  T  am  the  spouse  of  Rama.    Rama  is 

the  elder  and  I  the  younger. 

2.  Hari  is  the  spinning    wheel  and  I   Ratan   Peorlya^ 

Taking  the  name  of  Hari  I  spin  continually. 

3.  Six  months  I  spin  the  thread,  and  in  a  year  I  make  the 

skein.     Folks  say  that  I,  a  poor  thing,  spin  well. 

4.  Kabir  says.  The   thread  has  been  well  spun  :  but  the 

spinning  wheel  cannot  prove  the  giver  of  salvation. 

1  Body. 
#  ^  A  kind  of  cloth. 


SHABOAS  113 

36 

1.  Ifriii  .:^.t  i.Mf.M-i  Imsrobbet!  tlie  world  :  yet  parted  from 

Hari  liow  can  you  live,  O  brother  ? 

2.  Wlio  is  the  husband    of   whom  ?  Who   is  the   wife  of 

whom  f  Yama's  spreading  of  the  net  is  a   tale  that 
ii<me  can  tell. 

3.  Who  is  the  son  of  whom  ?  Who  is  the  father  of  >  whom  ? 
Who  is  it  dies  ?  Who  suffers  pain  ?  • 

4.  Robbery  and  robbery  has  plundered  the  treasure  of  all : 
none  recognised  in  Rama  the  robber. 

5.  ICabir  says.  My.  mind  has  yielded  to  this  robber  :   when 
T  I  iM'fxj-tnsfd  th»-  rt^)>ber  the  robbery  ceased.  : 

37 

1.  Hari  as  a  robber  roams  the  whole  wor]<l    to  rob:  v/hen 
he  goes  forth  he  speaks  no  wortl. 

2.  Our  friendship  is  from  earliest  childhood  :  deserting  me 

where  else  will  you  resort  ? 
\     Thou  art  the  husband,  we  thy  wife  :  thy  weight  is  upon 

us  heavier  tlian  a  rock. 
4.     The  lx)dy  is  of  earth,  tlit    .    .  ,.*  wi  aii-  ;  ICahir  is   in  dread 

of  the  robbing  of  Hari. 

38 

1.  Without  Hari  is  delusion,  without  the  Guru  vileness  : 
Wherever  ye   went,  ye  lost   that  talisman  of  yours  : 

from  the  one  ^\mre  came  many  snares. 

2.  The  Yogi  says  Yoga  is   best,   of  all  ;  O    brother,   it    lias 

no  rival  : 

Yogis  witii    plaited    hair  or  shaven    head,  with  sealed 
lips  or  matted  locks,  where  did  these  lind  wisdom  ? 

3.  The  wise,  the  men  of  science,  heroes,  poets,  the  gene- 

rous ;  all  claim  that  they  are  great  : 
Whence  they  sprang,   f»<itiw..- h...^  ,,    ,l;   aitiua 

they  had,  vanished. 

4.  Ijcave   worthless  things  on  this  side  or  on  that,  sing 
ceaseless  praise  of  Hari  : 

Kabirsays,  The  dumb  has  eaten  sugsir  :  but  questioned 
how  can  he  explain  it  ? 


114  SHABDAS 

89 

1.  Such  is  Hari,  with  whom  the  world  would  strive.  How 
can  a  snake*  seize  Garura  (  =  Garuda). 

2.  'Twixt  mouse  and  cat  what  friendsliip  can  there  be  ? 
Can  a  jackal  wage  war  upon  a  lion  ? 

3.  A  great  marvel  I  have  seen  in  the   world  :  a  dog* 
driving  before  him  the  elephant*  and  his  rider. 

4.  Kabir  says,  Listen  O  brother  Sants  :  this  secret  is  clear 
to  few. 

40 

1.  O  Pandit,  all  your  talking  is  a  lie. 

If  by  repeating  Rama's  name  the  w^orld  is  saved,  then 
by  repeating  "sugar"  the  mouth  is  sweetened. 

2.  If  by  saying  "  fire"  one's  feet  are  burned,  by  saying 

"  water"  thirst  is  quenched. 
If  by  saying  "food"  hunger  is  satisfied,  then   can   the 
world  find  safety  so. 

3.  Living  with  men  a  parrot  cries  "  Hari,"  yet   it  knows 

nought  of  Hari's  splendour. 
If  ever  it  flies  again  to  the  forest,  it  will  remember 
Hari  no  more. 

4.  Without  touch,  without  sight,  without  feeling,  merely 

taking  the  name,  what  is  that? 
If  wealth  came  by  but  saying  "wealth,"  then  none 
would  remain  in  poverty. 

5.  Their  real  love  is  for  the  pleasure  of  Maya ;  they  do 

but  jest  with  the  Bhaktas  of   Hari. 
Kabir  says.  Unless  one  sings  the  One  Rama,  he  will  go 
bound  to  the  city  of  Yama. 
41 

1.  O  Pandit,  see,  consider  in  your  mind. 

Tell  me,  wl)ence  did  defilement  spring?    How  came 
you  to  discern  defilement? 

2.  Of  the  father's  seed  and  the  blood  united  within  the 

vessel  the  vessel  is  f.?.shioned. 
From   the  eight-leafed  lotus*   all  are  born  on  earth. 
Whence  did  defilement  come  ? 
» It  may  also  mean  *  dove '.  ^  Maya.  »  Jiva.         *  Womb. 


SHABDAS  115 

3.    The  eiglity-four  millions  are  many  mansions:   they  all 

decayed  and  turned  to  dust. 
All  were  set  in  a  single  line  :  which  did  you  purify  by 

your  sprinklin*?? 
Defilement  you   eat,  defilement  you  drink,  defilement 

created  the  world  : 
Kabir  says,  Tliey  are  free  from   defilement,  who  keep 

no  company  with  Maya. 

42 

1.  O  Pandit,  think  and  clearly  tell  me  the  way   of  escape 

from  this  ffoin«r  and  coming. 
O  brother,  in  wliich  re*?ion  dwell    the   fruits  of  Arth, 
Dharm,  Kam  and  Moksh. 

2.  In  north,  in  south,  in  east,  in   west,  in   heaven,  or  in 

the  realms  below. 
Without  Gopal  there  is  no   refuge ;   why  do  you  thus 
haste  to  hell  ? 

3.  For  those  who  know   Him  not,  are  heaven  and  hell: 

they  who  know  Hari  have  no  part  in  them. 
The  fear  with  which  the  world  is  afraid,  that   has  no 
fear  for  me. 

4.  I  take  no  thought  for  sin  or  virtue  :  neither  to  Heaven 

nor  hell  go  I. 
Kabir  says,   Hear,  O  brother  Sants :   where    his  own 
place  is,  there  each  goes. 

43 

1.  Pandit,  your  thoughts  are  all  untrue  :  there  is  here 

no  universe  and  no  creator. 

2.  Nor  subtle,  nor  gross,  nor  air,  nor  Are  :  nor  Sun,  nor 

Moon,  nor  earth,  nor  water  ; 
Nor  the  Form  of   Light  nor  Kal    are   there  :   there  is 
neither  word  nor  body 

3.  There  i«^  neither  action  nor  virtue,  no  mantras  and  no 

worsiiip  at  all. 
Rites  and   ceremonies  have  no  worth  at  all.    He  is 
One,  there  is  no  second. 


115  SHABDAS 

4.  NHther  Gorakh  nor  Rama  is  there,  nor  any  disceruiog 

of  secrets. 
Nor  Hari,  Har,  nor  Brahma :  neither  Siva  nor  Shakti  : 
nor  pilgrimage  nor  ceremonial. 

5.  He  who  has  not  father,  mother  nor  Guru,  is  he  alone 

or  is  there  another  ? 
Kabir  says,  He  who   now  understands,  lie   is  Guru,  1 
his  chela. 

44 

1.  Consider,  O  Pandit,  and  ponder  on  this  :    is  Miis  '   male 

or  female  ? 

2.  In  the  house  of  a  Brahman   she  Becomes  a   Brahmini, 

in  the  house  of  a  Yogi  as  a  chelV  : 
Reciting  the  Kalima  she  became   a  Turk  woman  :   in 
the  Kali  Yug  she  remains  alone. 

3.  Slie  has  no  husband,  she   celebrates  no  bridal,  yet  she 

is  the  mother  of  sons  : 
She  let  no  dark-haired    man    escape  her  :   still  she  is 
always  virgin. 

4.  She  lives  in  the  house  of    parents,  nor  ever  goes  to 

her  father-in-law's    house:  she  never  sleeps   with 
her  husband. 
Kabir  says.  They  live  from  age  to  age,  who  renounce 
all  caste  and  pride  of  race. 

«  45 

1.  Who  of  men  did  not  die?  O  Pandit,  speak  and   make 

this  plain  to  me. 

2.  Dead  is  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Mahesha  :   dead  is  Ganesha, 

the  son  of  Parvati. 

3.  Dead  is  the  Moon,  the  Sun,  the  serpent-god  :  Hanuman 

is  dead,  who  built  the  bridge. 

4.  Dead  is  Krishna,  dead  is  the  maker.    One  only  did  not 

die,  the  Creator. 

5.  Kabir  says.  He  alone  dies  not,  who  is  not  held   in   com- 

ing and  going. 

•  Maya. 

*  A  female  devotee. 


SHABDAS  117 

46 

1.  O  Pandit,  this  is  a  wondrous  marvel. 

One  died  and  you  fasted  from   food  :  yet  another  you 
kill  and  prepare  it  for  food. 

2.  Bathed  and  adorned  with  the  tilak  you  sit  :  with  jVineo 

on  shoulder,  you  practise  nine  virtues. 
With  a  boue  in  your  vessel,  a  bone   in   your  dish,  and 
your  raouth  :  so  you   perfect  your  six  duties. 

3.  Where  you  preach  the  law,  there  you  take  life  :  a  deed 

utterly  lawless,  my  brother. 
If  a  man  like  you  is  called   Brahman,  pray  whom  shall 
one  call  a  butcher  ? 

4.  Kabir  says,  fji^iteiu  O  Sants  :    the    world    is   astray    ia 

delusion 
The   Infinite,    Boundless,  the   Perfect  :    that   state   is 
f<uiM(l  l»v  few. 


47 


1.  O  Pandit,  think,  when  thou  drinkest  water. 

In  the  mud-dwellin;^,  wherein  thou  sittest,  the  universe 
is  contained. 

2.  Where  fifty -six  knts  of   Yadavas  perished,  eighty-eight 

thousand  men  and  Munis  : 
At  every  step  prophets  are  buried,   they   decayed    to 
dust  therein. 

3.  Fish,   tortoise,  and    cKx^xIile    there    pave    birth  :    the 

water  is  filled  with  blood. 
The  water  of  the  river  flows  in  throuj^h   its  channels: 
men  and  cattle  dissolved  in   it. 

4.  The  bones  are  dissolved,    and    thp   marrow   melted: 

how  else  comes  the    milk  ? 
Thou,  O  Pandit,  thou   di<lst  sit  down  to  drink  :   yet 
the  earthen  pot  thou  accountest  defiled. 

5.  Renounce  the  Vedas  and   the    Hook    O    Psuulit  :   all 

these  are  Actions  of  tite  min<! 
Kabir  says.  Hear,  O  Pande :  these  are  thy  pious  deeds. 


118  SHABDAS 

48 

1.  O  Pandit,  see  and  ponder  in  your  heart,   who  is  male 

and  wlio  is  female. 

2.  He  who  silently  pervades,  speaks  in  every  body  :  his 

ways  are  wonderful  : 
How  can  one  call  upon  thd  name  of  Him  who  has  no 
name,  no  colour,  no  form  ? 

3.  Why  dost  thou  speak  of  **  thee"  and  "  me,"  O  madman  ? 

what  is  thine  and  what  is  mine  ? 
Rama,  Khuda,  Shakti,  Siva  are  one  :  tell  me,  pray,  how 
will  you  distinguish  them  ? 
4.    Vedas,   Purana,  Koran,    the  Book :  in   various   ways 
they  speak  of  Him. 
Hindu,  Turk,  Jain  and  Yogi  :   none   had  knowledge   of 
tlie  secret. 
5.    That  which  is  proved  in  the  six  Darshanas,   that  they 
have  named  according  to  their  mind. 
Kabir  says.  Am   I   alone  a  madman    and  this   whole 
world  wise  ? 

49 

1.  Ponder,  O  Pandit,  the  word  of  release  :   when  evening 

falls  where  abides  the  sun  ? 

2.  There   is  neither    high   nor  low,  mountain,  hill,   nor 

wall :  without  a  singer  the  song  rises  there. 
8.    Wliere  there  is  no  dew,  no  tin'rst,  no   dwelling,  there  a 
thousand  cows  are  milked. 

4.  Tliere  there  is  ever  Amawas  and  Shankrant,  there  the 

nine  planets  ever  sit  in  order. 

5.  I  ask  thee,  O  learned  man,  when  has   thy   heart  been 

eclipsed  ? 

6.  K^bir  says,  If  not  even  this  thou  knowest,  what  Guru's 

word  was  whispered  in  thine  ear? 

60 

1.  Consider,  O  Pandit,  it  appears  as  a   tree;  half  is  in- 

dwelt by  male  and  half  by  female. 

2.  The    whole    universe  is    one    tree :   its    top    reaches 

heaven,  its  roots  to  the  deep  below. 


SHABDAS  110 

3.  It  lias  twelve'  buds,    and  four  and  twenty*   leaves: 

thick  roots  are  set  about  its  trunk. 

4.  It    neither  blossoms  nor  bears    fruit:  sound*  issues 

from  it:  day  and  nij^Iit  foul*  water  oozes  out. 

5.  Kabir  says.  When  notliing  was,   tiien   Hari   nourished 

the  tree. 

51 

1.  Consider,  O  Pandit,  and  bestir  thy  mind :  sometimes 

it'  flows  in  flood,  sometimes  it  is  dried  up. 

2.  Sometimes,  it   rises,  sometimes  it  sinks,  sometimes  it 

jfoes  to  the  deptii.    None  finds  the  gem  nor  reaches 
to  the  bottom. 

3.  Tliere  is   no  river,  yet  water  flows  clearly  :  the  fish* 

dies  not :  the  fisher'  stands  by  tlie  brink. 

4.  Kabir  says.  Thus  is  the  mind  deceived  :  sit  still  and  so 

travel  on  your  way. 

52 

1.  O  Knower  of  Brahm,  swing  on. 

Heavily,  heavily  tiie  rain   was  outpoured,  but  never  a 
drop  of  \\ater  fell 

2.  To  the  foot  of  an  ant*  an  elephant'   was  tied :    the 

goat'"  devoured  the  wolf\ 
From  the  midst  of  the  sea'*  came  a  waterfowl*,  de- 
manding a  spacious  house. 

3.  The  frog*  and   the  snake*   dwell  together,    and  the 

cat' '  is  wedded  to  the  dog*. 
Ever  the  lion'  joins  battle  with  the  jackal* :  here  is  a 
wonder  that  canLot  be  told. 

4.  Doubt  as  a  deer  besets  the  forest  of  the  body  :  the 

arrow*  aims  the  archer*. 
The  ocean**  is  burning  and  consumes  the  forest'*  :  the 
flsb*  is  aoglmg  for  its  prey'*. 

»  Twelve  bnds=Kal.  •  Jiva. 

*  Twenty- four  lcavcs=Maya.  »  Kal 

*  Rrripturr«  *"  Thrt  world. 

*  Creation  i8sa(!H  forth.  "  Mnya. 

'  Mind.  ••  The  oocan  of  this  'world. 

*  JIva.  >•  Body. 

*  Maya.  *'  Desires. 


190 

5. 


SJIAIJDAS 


Kabir  sajs.  Tins   knowledge  is  stupendous  :  who  Can 

tinderstiwid  tliis  knowledge  ? 
The  Jiva  that  can  fly  without  wings  in   the  sky,  that 

.iiva  will  never  know  death. 

58 

1.  Who  knows  that  tree,'  his  body  will  be  free  from  age 
and  death.  ^ 

2.  There-  is  the  one  tree  in  all  the  world  ;  tlie  tree  is  one, 
three    branches  spring  from  it. 

3.  The  midmost  branch  bears  four^  fruits:  who  can 
count  Its  twigs  and  leaves? 

4.  A  single  creeper^  wrapped  its  coils  round  the  three 
regions  of  the  world  :  from  its  bonds  the  wise  even 
cannot  free  themselves. 

5.  Kabir  says,  This  I  have  proclaimed.  Let  him  who  is 
learned  ponder  it. 

64 

1.  She*  with  iier  husband«  came  to  his  father's'  house 
She  slept  alone  and  had  no  pleasure  :  her  youth  passed 

like  a  dream. 

2.  Pour«  together  fixed  the  wedding  day  :  five^   together 
set  up  tiie  marriage  awning.'" 

Her  companions  > »  and  playmates  sang  the  songs  They 
coloured  her  forehead  with  turmeric  of  pain  and 
pleasure. 

Tlie  mind  in  various  forms  trod  the  circle  :  tlie  marriage 
knot  was  tied  and  she  became  a  wedded  wife. 

Pouring  the  offering  of  water,  the  gentle  bride*'^  svent 
on:  and  in  the  very  bridal  seat  became  a  widow  at 
her  husband's*"  side. 

'The  World.  ^  The  word. 

«  Three  elements  of  Truth,  «  Man  B„dh.  Chit,  Ahaftkar 

foulness,  and  darkness.  »  Prithwi.  Jnl,  Tej,  Wayn,  Akash. 

•  Arth,  Dharm,Kam,  Moksh.  >»  Body. 

\  \.^^*-  "  Organs  of  sense. 

.  R.,,  „    .  ^^"  s^'®  renounced  and  clove    to 

Kal  Brahm. 


3. 


.S1IAIM)A.S  121 

4.    The   marriage   over,  tlu;   bride  departed    without   the 

bridegroom.    While  on  the   way    the    father-in-law* 

explained. 

Kabir  says.  When  T  go  to  tiie  house  of   my  husband,  I 

slinll  rrrms  Ktffo\v  and  by  my  love's  «i<l»'  nmVf^  music. 

55 

1.  O  brother,  see  the  stnbbormjoss  of  men.     It   is  a  story 

past  all  words. 

2.  They   yoke   the   lion'    and    the   tiger'    to  one  plough 

and  are  sowing  paddy*  in  fallow'  land. 
Bears*  of  the  forest  do   the   weeding  and    the   goat^ 
has  turned  farmer. 

3.  The  crow'  attends    to  thr   wasiimg  t)f   clothes.     The 

herons^  gnash  their  teeth'*. 
The  lly  attends  to  the  shaving  of  heads,  and   says,  "  I 
will  attend  the  wedding  party.*' 

4.  The  goat'  '  is  wedding  the  tiger,"  and  the  cow'*  sings 

the  marriage  hymn. 
The  Rojh'*  of  the  forest  are  given  as  dowry  :  the  big 
lizard"  shoulders  the  palki, 

5.  Kabir  says.  Hear,  O  Sants  :  he  who  will  expound   this 

song, 
He    is    the     PiMidii    ;»riil    ti..        .    ,       iw    will  rank   as 
Bhakta. 

56 

1.  Men  put  no  faith  in  me. 

They  have  started  false  trading    widi    ;i    iaise   dealer: 
they  all    have  lost  their  venture. 

2.  Taking  the  six   Darshanas   they   established  a    faith  : 

and  the  three  gmls  are  their  mighty  lords. 
If  the  king  of  a  city  prov(?  tyrant,  the  subjects   will  be 
brought  to  ruin. 

Kno\vlo<li:»'.  »  Mind. 

MitwI.  •»  Afcr«»iition. 

[5u  ;t  '>  JIva. 

ivrf. -.,.>...  »'  Kal. 

I       lire  heart.  "  Ve<Ia8. 

i  !    I".  *'  Roligiontt  coromonies. 

Chit.  ••  |»rido. 

Boflv. 


122  SHABDAS 

3.  From    hence    thither,   from    thence    hither    they    go 

mounted  on  the  bull  of  Yama; 
As  a  ju;]^;^ler  ties  a  leash  to  a  monkey,  and  makes  him 
do  just  what  he  pleases. 

4.  This*  is  the    tree    of  creation    and    destruction :  all 

worldly   pleasures  are  the  plagues  : 

As  a  do^^  wiiich  fawns  on  one  who  beats  him,  so  the 
world  behaves. 

5.  Kabir  says,  This  is  wondrous  wisdom  :  give  good  heed 

to  my  words. 

Today  will  I  save  him  from  Kal,   if  he  will  but  bestir 
his  mind. 

57. 

1.  They  neither    meditate    on    Hari    nor    change    their 

nature. 

Instructed   in   the  word,  they   make  no  amendment : 
they  become  blind,  the  mind's  sight  too  was  lost. 

2.  They   are  like  a  stone  in   water  which  by  striking 

brings  forth  fire. 

Though  thousands  of  vessels  of  water  be   poured    out, 
yet  it  remains  dry. 

3.  The  wliitening  body  grows    whiter  and  whiter,  and 

ever  the  sleep  increases. 

The  numbing  chill  that  destroys  the  sick,  is  the  result 
of  Siddh  and  Sadhuship. 

4.  Crying  "  The  Infinite,  the  Infinite,"  the   whole  world 

perished  :  in  this  Infinite  the  universe  is  absorbed. 
Their  departing  is  near  :  they  post  to  the  city  of  Yama : 
still  they  repeat  this  same  one  word. 

5.  In  the  meeting  with   the  Sat-Guru  is  great  comfort 

won,  if  the  words  of  the  Sat-Guru  be  followed. 

Kabir  says.  They  are  ever  blest,  who  meditate  upon 
this  song. 

'  This  world. 


SHABDAS  123 

58 

1.  The  plunderer'  of  men  lias  kindled  a  fire  of  evil :  none 

without  fuel  is  found  to  quench  it. 
I  know  well,  it  sprinors  frora  thee,'   and  in  it  the  whole 
world  burns. 

2.  In   the   water*    there  is  a    seed   of  fire :   none  finds 

the  water  that  will  quench  it. 
The  one*  does  not  burn ;  the  nine*  women  burn.  No  one 
knows  the  means  to  stay  it. 

3.  The  city^  burns,  and   the  watchman' sleeps  at  ease: 

he  says  **  In  my  house  all  is  well." 
The   house*  is   burned,   the   property   escapes :  I?ama, 
grievous  are  thy  doinors. 

4.  By  a  euniich's*    embrace,   the   lon^in^  of   the   heart* 

cannot  be  satisfied.     Deeminjr  tiie  life  lost  and  vain, 
this  body  became  listless. 

5.  He  who  of  set   purpose  uses  guile ;  there  is  none  so 

base  as  he. 
Kabir  says,  All  are  wives  of   Rama:  there  is  no  other 
beside  me. 

59 

1.  r  have  known  Maya  as  a  great  "bandit. 

She  roams  with  a  threefold   cord  in  her  hand  and  she 
sp^ak^i  honeyed  words. 

2.  As  Kamala  she   settled    in  the  house   of  T\(\sliava  :  in 

the  house  of  Shiva  as  Bhawani. 
In   the  house   of   Panda  she   abode  as  an   idol :  in   the 
tirathas  she  became  water. 

3.  In  the   house  of  a  Yogi  as  Yogin! ;  in  the  raja's  house 

as  rani.    In  the  house  ofi one  as  a  diamond,  in   an- 
other's as  a  paltry  shell. 

4.  In  the  hhaHa^s  house   as  hhnktani,  in   the  13rahman*s 

house  as  Brahmani. 
Kabir  Fays,  Hear  O  San ts,   this  is  a  lak-   that   none  can 
tell. 

•  Mya.  •  Body. 
»  Jiva.  »  Jiva. 

•  HoliiclnnH  ordf>ra.  "  Maya. 

•  f^^nt.  *  Soiil. 

•  Pivo  olemontH  and  Man.  Biidhi. 

Chit,  Ahankar. 


124  SHABDAS 

60 

1.  Maya  aud  Moii  have  bewitched   all :  thereby  the  jewel 

of  wisdom  has  been  stolen. 

2.  The  life  is  as  a  dream :   the  life  passes  like  a  dream. 
The  instruction  that  the  Guru  gave,  this  you  neglected 

and  lost  tlie  great  treasure. 

3.  By  the  sight  of  the   light   the   moth   is  charmed;  the 

creature  does  not  discern  the  flame. 
Jn  the  noose  of   Kal  men  wake  not  from   folly  :  they 
dote  on  gold  and  women 

4.  Slieikh  and  Syed  read   tlieir   Book:  the   Pandit  pores 

over  his  shastras. 
Refusing  the  Sat  Guru's  instruction,  they   take  the 
life  of  creatures  wittingly. 

5.  Who  so  considers  and  abandons  evil,  he  is  ids  own  and 

other's  ark.     Kabir  says.    Mankind,    ciiant   Bhag- 
want's  name  :  there  is  none  other. 
61 

1.  Dead,   wliat   will   you  do  witli   your   body  ?    The   soul 

departs,  at  once  it  is  cast  forth. 

2.  When   the  corpse  is  thus  forsaken,  it  meets  varied 

usage  :  some  burn,  some  bury  it  in  earth. 

3.  The  Hindus   take   it  out   to    burning,   the  Turks    for 

burying ;  thus  it  leaves  the  house  of  either. 

4.  Yama   has  spread  a  snare   with  the   noose  of  Action  : 

as  the  fisher  catches  fish  and  slays  them. 

5.  Without  Rama,  O  men,   it   will  be   witii   you  as   the 

beetle  in  the  cowdung  on  the  road. 

6.  Ivabir  says,  Hereafter  you  will  curse  your  folly,  when 

from  this  liouse  you  must  fare  forth. 
62 
1.    O  Mother,  I*  am  a  shining  light  in  both"  families. 
1  have   devoured    twelve'    iiiisbands   in   my   father's* 
house,  and   sixteen **  in    the    house   of   my    father- 
in-law*. 
'  CoMscioiwMcss.  '  Lok  and  Parlok. 

^  Ahankar,  Hndlii,  (ivo  Tatrnaiitras,  five  Mnhabhnt. 

*  lUusory  world. 

*  Five  Gyan    Indris  ;   five  organ.s  of  sense  ;   four  Antakarn  ;   twa 

Pradhan.  ,  •  Braluna. 


I  SHARDAS  125 

I  have  tied  my  liusbaud's  mother'  and  his  sister"  to 
tiie  side  of  my  bed.  My  husband*;^  brother'  is  a 
cause  of  abuse  to  me. 

I  i)iirn  the  hair  of  that  woraau's-iiead,  who  began  tliese 
quarrels  within  me. 

r    kept   five*    within  my    womb  and    can    keep   two,* 

four*'  m(»re. 
I   made   of   my    neighbour'    my  meal    and    also  of   ray 
mother-wisdom. 

See,  T  have  spread  my  bed  with  ease,  and  sleep  thereon 
with  limbs  outstretched. 

I  neither  come  nor  go,  nor  die  nor  llvp.  My  lord* 
has  taken  away  ray  reproach. 

If  I    liold   fast  the  One®   name  as  mine,  T  sliall   escape 

from  the  world. 
B.y  the   One   namo  T   liohi    fast  :    tliis^   Kabir  proclaims 

aloud. 

63 

To  wliom  shall  I  S|K^ak  ?  Who  will  hear  and  who  obey  ? 
By  contact  with  the  flower^**  the  bee*  *  dies. 

The  flower  blossomed  in  the  vaidt  of  heaven.  The 
branchs  are  downward  and  the  root  is  upward. 

f  needs  no  ploughing,  sowing,  watering  nor  weeding. 
Without  branches  or  leaves  one  flower  withers, 
the  bee  is  distressed. 

It  bears  fair  blossoms  and  the  gardener- woman-binds 
these  in  a  fair  garland.  When  the  flower  withers, 
the  bee  is  distressed. 

Kabir  says.  Hear,  O  brother  San t.s:  thr  N'miikmI  folic 
are  captivated  by  this  flower. 

'  ^fayu.  *  RiiloH  i>f  aAceticigtn* 

'       it  of  Maya.  •  Parum  Tat. 

\       IS.  •  Sat  Punish. 

*  Kam,  KroUti,  Lobh«  Moli,  Aliankar.  *"  MaynV  world. 

*  Nirgui:  and  Sugun.  >■  Jiva. 

*  Ja^^rat.  Siipun.  .Shimiipiiti,  Turya. 


126  SHABDAS  / 

64 

1.  Weaver',   weave  the  name  of   Hari,  on   whicli   gods, 

men  and  Munis  are  wrapt  in  meditation. 

2.  He  stretched   the  warp  and   took   the  shuttle.*    The 

four  Vedas  are  the  wiieel. 
One  beam  is  Ram  Narayan,    fulfilling  the    purposed 
work. 

3.  He  made  the  ocean  of   the   world   a  trough :  therein 

he  kneads  the  starch.* 
The  body  of  that  starch  is  stiffened.    Pew  know   that 
it  is  starch. 

4.  Moon*   and  Sun/    they    are   two   treadles :    in  mid- 

ocean'  the  warp  is  made. 
As  the  lord  of  the  three  worlds  brushed*  on  the  starch, 
Sliyam  joined*  the  broken  ends. 

5.  He  set   the  pegs,*   and  when  he  took   the  reed,  then 

Rama  was  bound. 
As  the   reed  beat  up  the  warp,   the   three  loks  were 
bound  :  none  he  left  free. 

6.  The  three  loks  were  made  one  loom  :  the  warp  worked 

up  and  down  : 
The  Eternal   Purusha  bade   me*°  to  sit   beside  Him. 
Kabir  entered^  ^  into  Light. 
66 

1.  The  Yogi'*  has  gone  again  within  the  city^'andhas 

entered  there,  where  are  five**  women. 

2.  He  has  gone  to  the  strange^  ^  country,  of  which  none 

can  tell.    The  Yogi  comes   not  back  to  his  cave'* 

again. 

I  Jiva.  '°  Kabir. 

»  Mind.  '*  Preferred  to  be  absorbed  in  Him 

»  Elements.  than  to  sit  near  by. 

•  l>ran.  .         *'  Jiva. 

•  Prikriti.  "  liodj-. 

•  Space.  **  Five  Prans  :  — Pran,  Apan,  Dyan, 
'Practice  of  Yoga.  Samnn,  Wayan. 

•  He  lielpcd  in  Yo:?a.  **  Human  Body. 

•  Established  religious  orders. 


SUABDAS  127 

3.  His   body  is  burnt,  bis   flag  is   torn,  and  staff  broken ; 

his  skull  is  shattered. 

4.  Kablr  says.  This  Kali   Yug  is   base:    what   is  in   the 

vessel  comes  out  at  the  spout. 

66 

1.    No  one  should  settle  in  the  Yogis"  city:  who  settles 
there  becomes  a  Yogi. 

2.  This  Yogi  has  an  inverted  wisdom :  his  body  is  black 

and  he  knows  it  not. 

3.  His  body  'is   visible  but   remains  unseen  :  therein  is  a 

root  of  constant  lives. 

4.  If  one  knows  the  fashion  of  that"  Yogi,  he  will  live  and 

move  in  Rama  and  view  the  three  worlds. 

5.  He  will  pluck  the  fruit  of  the  immortal  vine  and  drink 

its  juice.     Kabir  says.  He  will  live  from  age  to  age. 

67 

1.  If  thy  Bhagwan  is  in  the  form  of  seed,  then,  O  Pandit, 

why  do  you  still  question  ? 

2.  Where   is  mind  ?  Wiiere  is   wisdom  ?  Where  Onkar  ? 

Where  Sat,  Raj,  Tam,  the  qualities  of  the  three 
kinds  ? 

3.  It*  bears  fruit  and  flowers  of  various  kinds,  deadly  and 

immortal.     The  Vedas  describe  many  ways  of  sal- 
vation. 

4.  Kabir  says.  What  do  I  know  ?  Who  is  released  and  who 

is  snared  ? 

68 

L    I  will  spin  a  thousand  threads^,  if  my  spinning  wheel' 
be  not  burnt. 

But  though  the  wheel  be  burnt,  yet  the  carpenter* 
does  not  die. 

*  VJho  roly  npon  oeremonials.  *  Doinfi^s  of  mind. 
"TnioYogi.  •K.iIChakkar. 

*  Bhagwan.  *  Kal. 


128  SHAHDAS 

2.  OH'ather',   make  for  me   my    marriage,  seeking  out  a 

worthy*  husband. 
Till  thou  find   a  worthy  husband,  till  then    wed  me  to 
th>self. 

3.  Wiien   lli*8t  I  set  foot  in  tiie  city',  pain   and  siokaess 

oame  upon  me. 
Then  my  eyes  behehl  a  wonder  :  tiie   father*  weds  Iiis 
(hiugiiter'. 

4.  To  the   liouse  of    the  bride«i^room\s   father^    came  the 

fatlier'     of    tlie    bride,    and    the    brother    to    the 
daughter-in-law. 
Setting   the  legs*  in  the  sockets,  they  made  the  spin- 
ning-wheel firm. 

5.  All  the  company  of  gods  will  die  :  but  one,  the  carpen- 

ter", does  not  die. 
For  the  sake  of  the  mind's  pleasure  the  spinning-wjieel 
was  made  more  firm. 

6.  Ivabir  says.  Listen  O  San  ts:  he  who  learns  tiie  secret 

of  this  spinning-wheel, 
lie  who  sees    the   spinning-wheel,   will  be   free   from 
coming  and  going. 

69 

1.  O  Musician '  ^,  thy  music  rings  out  superbly.   Its  melody 

Alls  the  eight**  heavens. 

2.  Thou   makest   melody,   'tis    thou   art  playing.       Thou 

roamestwith  it  in  thy  hand.    . 
In  the  one  Shabda  are  six  and   thirty   melodies  :   it 
makes  the  inusic  that  is  infinite. 

3.  The   mouth  is   the   neck,  the   ears  the  shell  :  the  Sat- 

Guru  has  set  the  frets. 
The   tongue   is   the  string,  the   nose   the  bridge,  and 
Maya  is  applied  as  rozin. 

4.  In  the  arch  of  heaven*  *  bright  radiance  gleamed,  when 

the  strain  was  changed. 
Kabir  says.  They  are  the  wise  judges,  who  gave  their 
mind  to  the  Musician. 

'  Guru.  '  God.        '  At  the  time  initiation  by  the  Guru. 

'  Brahma.  *  Maya        •  Mind.         '  M  ind's  object  of  worship. 

•  Ceremonial  laws.      '  Kal  >"\lind.        "  Within  the  heart 


SHABDAS  129 

70 

1.  As  the  flesli  of  man,  so  is  the  flesh  of  beast  :  the  blood 

of  each  is  of  one  colour. 
The  beast's  flesh  is  the  food  of  all :  man's  flesh  none 
but  jackals  eat. 

2.  Brahma  the   potter  has   filled  the   pot*  :  it  appears,  it 

vanishes  :  whither  now  goes  it  ? 
You  eat  flesh  and   flsh,  as  though  they  had  been  sown 
in  your  own  field. 

3.  O  Mind,  you  make   your  gods  and  goddesses,  and  kill 

the  being  to  make  offerings  to  them. 
But  if  your  gods  are  true,  why  do  they  not  take  them 
when  grazing  in  the  fields  ? 

4.  Kabir  says.   Hear  O  Sants  :  recite  the  name  of  Rama 

ever. 
For  what  you  do  to  gratify  your  palate,  a  heavy   pe- 
nalty must  be  paid. 

71 

1.  O  Chatrik,*   why  do   you  cry   for  that  which  is  far  off, 

when  the  world  is  filled  with  that  water. 

2.  The  water  which  holds  the  secret  of  the  paternal  seed, 

the  Vedas  have  created  with  six  Karmas. 

3.  The  water,  in   which  Jiva  and  Shiva  dwell,  that  water 

is  revealed  as  Amrit  on  the  earth. 

4.  The  water,  wlience  all  bodies  spring,  in  that  water 

Kabir  makes  no  difference. 

72 

1.  Wliy  are  your  goings  crooked,  crooked,  crooked  ? 

All  ten  doors  are  sunk  in  hell,  and  you  are  but  a 
stream  of  filth. 

2.  Your  eyes  are    blinded,  your  mind  cannot  see  :  you 

have  known  no  wisdom  at  all. 
The  thirst  of  passion  and  anger  has  destroyed  you  : 
without  water  you  are  drowned  and  dead. 
»  This  world.  «  Jlva. 


130 


8HABDAS 

3.  Burnetl,  the  body  becomes   dust  and   ashes  ;  buried, 

the  worms  consume  it. 
It  will  be   food  for  swine,  for  dogs  and  crows :   this  is 
tlie  body's  high  estate. 

4.  You  do  not  awake  nor  see,  O   foolish  and  demented  : 

Kal  is  close  upon  you. 
You  may  take  countless  precautions,  yet  the  last  state 
of  it  is  dust. 

5.  Sitting  within  a  house  of  sand,  the  fool  does  not  awake. 

Kabir  says.  Through   never    praising  Rama's   name 
many  wise  men  are  drowned  and  dead. 


73 

1.  Wiiy  do  you  walk   puffed  up  with   pride,   witli   pride, 

witli  pride  ? 
When  you  lay  face   downward  for  ten  months,  why  do 
you  forget  those  days  ? 

2.  As  a  bee  which  forsakes  not  the  honey's  sweetness,  so 

you  gather  your  wealth  with  sorrow  and  care. 
When  you  are  dead,  all  will   cry  "  Hence  with  him, 
hence."     For    who    harbours  a   ghost  within   his 
house  ? 

3.  The  body,  burnt,  will  turn  to  ashes]:  buried,  the  earth 

swallows  it  up ; 
'     Like  water  poured   in  an  unbaked  jar.    This  is  tlie 
body's  high  estate. 

4.  The   wife  accompanies   her  husband  up  to  the  thresh- 

hold,and  beyond  it  tlie  relations  and  friends. 
To   the  burning  place   you  keep  your  bier  :  then,  O 
Swan,  you  go  alone. 

5.  Estranged  from  Rama  and   drunken  with   desire,  you 

will  fall  helpless  into  the  well  of  Kal. 
Kabir  says.  Men   have  got  themselves  entangled,  as  a 
parrot  is  deceived  by  the  springe. 


SHABDAS  131 

74 

1.    Tlif  Yogi '  is  set  so  stubbornly  on  action,  though  he  has 

neither  heaven  nor  sky  nor  earth. 
2     H<j  has  nor  hands  nor  feet,  nor  form  nor  outline. 

Without  market  he  plies  liis  trade,  and  acts  as  weigh- 

man  and  accountant. 

3.  He  has  no  deed,  no  virtue,  no  devotion  and  no  rites  of 

religion. 
He  carries  no  horn,  no   bowl  :  why   should  he   beg  for 
salvation  ? 

4.  Thou  knowest  me,  and  I*  know  thee'  :  I  am  absorbed 

in  thee. 
When  there  is  no  creation,  no  destruction,  whom  will 
you  take  to  meditate  upon  ? 

5.  Tiie  Yogi  has  set  up  one'   to  worship,  but  Rama  per- 

vades all. 
This  has  no  root  of  healing  :  but  Rama  is  the  root  of 
all  living. 
6.    Regard  this  but  as  a  juggler's  trick,  the  sport   of   the 
buffoon. 
Kabir    says.   Listen,   O  Sants  :  who   understands,  he 
rules  as  king. 

76 

1.  This  error  is  a  cause  of  grievous  ruin. 

What  is  the  Veda  ?  What  is  the  Book  ?  What  religion 
or  hell  ?   Who  male,  who  female  ? 

2.  A    vessel  of  earth  moulded  and  fashioned— the  father's 

seed  entered  therein. 
When  the  vessel  is  perished,  how  will  you  name  it  ? 
O  fools,  by  your  searching  you  are  all  astray, 

3.  Skin  and  bone,  dung  and  urine,  are  all  one. 

From  the  one  seed  the  universe  was  created ;  then  who 
is  Brahman,  who  is  Sudra  ? 
1.     liajo-gunr  is  Brahma,  Tamo-gun r  Shankar,  and  Sato- 
gunris  Hari. 
Kabir  says.  Abide   in    Hama:   there  is  neither  Hindu 
nor  Turk. 

'Mind.  'Jiva.  Mmn^lmrv  one* 


Its  SHABDA8 

76 

1.  You  yourself  are  self -deceived. 

Like  a  dog  in  a  house  of  Iboking-glasses,   tliat  died 
barking  at  illusion. 

2.  Like  a  lion  who,  looking  in  the  water  of  a   well,  sees 

his  reflection  and  straight  jumps  in. 

Like  an  elephant  on  a  shining  marble  floor,  drives  with 
his  tusk  at  that. 

3.  Like  a  monkey,  whose  greed  will  not  let  him  loose  his 

hand  :  he  is  caught  and  led  from  house  to  house. 

Kabir  says,  O  thou  parrot  in  the  springe,  who  caught 
thee  ? 

77 

1.  One  builds  great  hopes  of  himself :  but  none  has  foun  d 

the  secret  of  Hari. 

2.  Where  can  the  senses  find  rest  V  Where  has  he  gone, 

whom  men  call  Rama  ? 

3.  Where  are  they   gone  that   were   wise  ?  After  death 

they  were  absorbed  in  the  song. 

4.  Ramanand  drank  deep  of  the  juice  of  Rama.    Says 

Kabir,  I  am  weary  with  repeating  this. 

78 

1.  Now  I  have  understood  the  tricks  of  Hari's  play. 

With  beat  of  drum  he  displays  his  feats,  and  again 
gathers  them  up. 

2.  In  the  play  of  Hari  gods,  men,  Munis  are  deceived  : 

Maya  has  set  up  her  show. 

She  locked  them   up    in   the   house  and  bewitched 
them  :  no  wisdom  entered  their  hearts. 

3.  The  play  is  false,  but  the  player  is  true  :  such  is  the 

faith  of  sants. 

Kabir  says.  According  to  his  understanding  is  the  state 
of  each. 


SHABDAS  133 

79 

1.  Tell  me,  O  immortal,  with  whom  thou  art  engaged. 

Whose  mind  is  awake,  he  is  fortunate. 

2.  Within  the  Immortal  a  star  appears.    There  is  one  who 

wakes*  and  one  who  awakens.' 

3.  That  which  you  seek  is   not  to  be  found  there.    It  is 

within  the  immortal  word. 

4.  Kabir  says.  He  alone  will  understand  that  word,  whose 

mouth  and  heart  are  one. 

80 

1.  O  man,  work  out  your  own  release, 

While  you  live,  consider  and  find  for  yourself  a  refuge: 
after  death  where  is  your  house  ? 

2.  O  Soul,  if  you  do  not  take  this  chance  to  awake,  at  the 

last  none  will  be  yours. 

3.  Kabir  says.  Listen,  O  Sants :  the  assaults  of  death  are 

cruel.  , 

81 

1     Being  united  as  the  letters  Ra  and  Ma;  all  the  Sants 

have  woven  a  covering'  of  many  colours. 
^.     Valmiki  sowed  the  field,  and  Sukdeva  picked  it. 

Actions  were  the  cotton  seeds.    Jaideva  spins  the 
thread. 
3.    The  loom  is  spread  in  the  three  worlds  by   Brahma, 
Vishnu,  Mahesha. 
Reciting  the  name  the  Munis  failed,  Surpati  and  all 
the  kings. 
i      Whoever  sung  its  praises  with  his  own   tongue,  as  in  a 
city  without  inhabitant,* 
As  a  guest'  in  an  empty*  house,  so  they  set  their  love 

on  Him. 
The  four  Vedas  are  the  outspread  loom  :  the  Formless 

holds  the  comb. 
Kabir  weaves  the  covering,  to  be  worn  by  the  ser- 
vants of  Hari. 

•  Chela.  'Guru. 

*  Bbakti  niarg.  *  XorhintMioHs.  '  Brahro. 


134  SHA.BDAS 

82 

1.  O  People,  understand  this  :  in  the  mouth  of  a  fair  mai- 

den^ sounds  a  drum. 

2.  They  that  believe  in  Sagun  pierce  the  six*   circles,  and 

wash  mill'  and  not  bullock.* 
Thej^  seize  on  Brahma*  and  cast  into  their  fire*   sacri- 
fice ;  like  a  fish^  they  climb  and  reach  the  heavens. 

3.  They  have  Amawas  and   eclipse  always,"    and   Rahu* 

devours  the  second  day.^  ° 
The  cow®  eats  that  which  issues  from  the  Vedas,  and 
pours  forth  like  rain^'  :  thereby  the  body  is  wasted. 

4.  Within   the  Trikuti   circle     the  drum   sounds,^"    the 

subtle  body  is  drenched. 

From  the  lotus-like  Trikuti  comes  water  that  fills  the 
subtle  body.    How  solve  this  wonder  V 

5.  Kabir  says.  Listen,  O  Sants  :  this  perfection  is  dear  to 

the  Yogi. 
He  is  always   happy   with  his  principles.    Earth*  m 
ever  virgin. 

83 

1.  O  fool  and  ignorant,  you  are  astray,  because  you  know 

not  Rama  each  moment. 

2.  You  attack  and  strike   down   the   cow  and   cut  her 

throat  to  take  her  life. 
The  life  of  the  living   you  strike  dead,  and  say  your 
slaughter  makes  it  dedicated. 

3.  This  flesh,  which  you  call  holy,  hear  how  it  was  formed, 

O  brother. 

Flesh  is  composed  of  blood  and  seed  :  that  flesh  you 
eat  is  then  unholy. 

'  Maya.  ^  Surti, 

'  Six  modes  of  worship  •  Whenever  they  are  in  Samadhi. 

or  actions. 

'  Body.  •  Kal. 

*  Soul.  1°  Partly  culightened 

*  Seed.  '1  Rules  of  austerity. 

*  Trikuti.  »'  Om,  om. 


SHABDAS  135 

4.  O  fool,  you  do  not  admit   this  folly  as  your  own,  but 

say  your  ancestors  did  so. 
Its  blood  is  on  your  head  and  upon  those  who  gave  to 
you  such  teaching. 

5.  The  black   hairs  of  youth  are  gone  and  the  snows  of 

age  have  fallen :  still  your  heart  has  not  grown  white. 
Of  what  value  are  your  fastings,  your  prayers,  your 
calls  to  prayer,  your  dying  in  a  tiny  cell  ? 

6.  Their  Vedas  and   Puranas  the   Pandits  read  and  the 

Maulana  studies  his  Koran. 

Kabir  says.  Those  all  went  to  hell  who  knew  not  Rama 
each  moment. 

84 

1.  Qazi,  wiiat  is  this  Book  that  you  discourse  on  ? 

You  are  jangling  and   wrangling  always  :   nothing  of 
wisdom  do  you  know. 

2.  Vain-glorious  of  authority  you  make  me  to  be  circum- 

cised :  never  will  I  endure  it,  brother. 
If  it  is  God  that  makes  thee  to  be  circumcised,  why 
came  not  this  cutting  of  itself  V 

3.  If  by  circumcision  one  becomes  Turk,  what  then  will 

be  said  of  your  women  ? 
Half  the  body,  so  the  wife  is  styled  :   then  you  still 
remain  Hindu. 

4.  By  putting  on  the  sacred  thread  one  becomes  a  Brah- 

man.   What  has  thou  given  to  women  to  wear  ? 
She  from  birth  is  but  a  Sudra,   why  dost  thou  eat  the 
f()(Hl  she  brings,  O  Pande. 

5.  Hindu  untl   Turk,   whence   have  they  comeV       Who 

started  this  path  ? 
Search  well  in  your  heart,  your  own  heart :   where  is 
Paradise  ?   Who  won  it  ? 

6.  Leave  these  distractions,  meditate  on  Rama,  O  foolish 

mind  :  you  deal  with  violence. 
O  Kabir,  who  gnisped  not  Ramans  protection,  at  the 
last  grieved  sore. 


136  SHABDAS 

85 

1.  It  is  the  deluded  who  say,  "  This  house  is  mine." 

The  house,  in  which  you  move  puffed  up  with  pride,  it 
is  not  yours. 

2.  Elephants,  horses,  bullocks,  carriages,  you  gathered  a 

great  store : 
You  are  driven  from  the  village  and  make  your  abode 
in  the  forest. 

3.  Thence  you  send  no  money,   safely  tied,  nor  do  you 

return  again. 
The   wife   is   without,  the  rival  in  the  palace  :  the 
husband's  place  nor  here  nor  there. 

4.  Nine  maunds  of  tangled  thread^  is  never  straightened  : 

from  birth  to  birth  the  tangle  grows. 
Kabir  says,  Hear,  O  Sants,  and  interpret  this  song. 

86 

1.  O  Kabir,  your  house  is  on  the  cliff's  edge :  all  the  world's 

astray. 
No  one  follows  the  Guru's  sayings :  all  are  mad  year 
in,  year  out. 

2.  Tn  the  whole  Brahmand  Kabir  is  the  only  Swan  :  the 

rest  are  crows  with  open  beaks. 
All  are  following  their  mind-made   religions,  wearing 
bodies  made  on  earth. 

3.  Kabir  has  one  word  for  all :  you  have  built  your  house 

in  water. 
Robbery  is  constant  in  the  body  :  they  have  not  found 
the  body's  secret. 

4.  O  Kabir,  she"    who  wears  woman's  form  is  everywhere 

and  licks  up  all  as  a  deer  the  grass. 
The  wisest  of  men  and  the  Munis  grew  weary :  not  one 
could  ever  catch  her. 

5.  Brahma,  Varuna,  Kuvera,  Puriadra,   Pipa,  Prahlada, 

all  tasted  of  it. 
Him'  whose  nails  rent  the  belly  of  Hirnakush,  death 
did  not  spare. 

'  Karmas.  ^  Maya.  '  Narsingh. 


SHABDAS  137 

6.  Gorakh  and  Datta,  monks  like  these,  and  the  saints 

Namdeva  and  Jaideva  ; 
No  one  has  any  news  of  them  :   no  one  knows   where 
they  abide. 

7.  Draughts  are  played  within   the  heart  and  the  dice  of 

birtlis  are  cast. 
None  knows  what  will  be   from  moment  to  moment  : 
none  can  discern  this. 

8.  In  every  quarter  of  tbe   earth  are  cities  with  inhabit- 

ants, Rum,  Sham,  Dehli*  in  the  midst. 
Above  it,  see  a  mighty   wonder  !  Yama  brandishes  his 
dart. 

9.  All  the  incarnations  are  his,*  to   whom  belongs  earth 

and  heaven  :  numberless  they  stand  before  him  with 
joined  hands. 
O  wonderful,'  fathomless,  unsounded  all  these  splen- 
dours are  thine. 

10.  Kabir  the   hero  proclaims   this  everywhere  :  Even 

now  be  wise. 
Kabir  says,  The  Guru  is  as  polish  ou  the  mirror.    Pro- 
claim it  with  every  breath. 
87 

1.  O  Kabir,  your  house   is  on   the  cliff's  ed^e :   the  mind 

hunts  its  prey.  * 

Worldly  pleasure  is  the  deer :  and  the  mind  aims  arrows 
at  its  will. 

2.  The    king*    awakes  with   the  necklace  of  holiness : 

he  binds  the  source  at  will. 
He  wields   the  bow  of  meditation  in  the  forest  of 
wisdom,  practises  the  arrow  of  Yoga. 
3     He  pierced  the  six  circles,  and  pierced  the  lotus :  then 
the  light  was  manifested. 
Passion,  anger,  avarice,  delusion  he  drove  headlong 
like  game. 
4.    At  the   door  of   mid-iieiivcii  hv  halted,  where  tiiere  is 
neither  night  nor  day. 
Das  Kabir  entered  there  :  his  friends  and  companions 
were  parted  from  him. 
*  Rnm  is  one  side  and  Sham   on   the  other  :  Dehll  is  supposed  in  tbe 
•centre,  that  is,  the  place  of  Kal.        '  Kal.  •  Maya.         *  8o«l. 


138  SHABDAS 

88 

1.  O  brother,  it^   is  not  game,  it  is  not  game :  yet  all  eat 

its  meat. 

2.  It  is  the  one  quarry  in  the  whole  world.    The  account 

of  it  none  can  describe. 
If  one  opens  its  belly  to  see,  there  is  neither  liver  nor 
organs. 

3.  Such  is  its  meat  that  it  is  ever  and  always  offered  for 

sale. 
The  bones  and  legs  are  thrown   on   the  dung-hill :  it 
never  knew  any  fire  or  smoke. 

4.  It  has  no  head  and  no  horn  ;  and  how  should  it   have  a 

tail? 
All  Pandits  are  confused  in   its   pursuit.     Kabir  ha& 
sung  this  Banowri.'' 

89 

1.  O  Fortunate,   wherefore  did  you  grow   covetous  and 

lose  the  gem  of  this  birth? 
Why  in  the  soil  of  your  first  birth  did  you  sow  the  seed? 

2.  The  body  was  fashioned  from  water  and  was  kept  in 

the  tank  of  fire. 
After  ten  months  you  were  brought  from  your  mother'^ 
womb,  and  again  were  beset  by  Maya. 

3.  From  an  infant  you   liave  become  aged :  that  which 

was  to  be  will  be. 
When  Yama  comes,  lie  will  bind  and  bear  you  off :  and 
you  will  weep  with  streaming  eyes. 

4.  .  You  who  cherished  hope  of  life— Kal  has  choked  your 

breath. 
This  world  is  a  gambling  house,  O  Kabir ;  be  careful  as 
you  tiirow  the  dice. 

90 

1.  O  Sants  and  Mahants,  worship   iiim  alone   who  has 

escaped  from  the  noose  of  Kal. 

2.  Dattatriya  did  not  know  the  secret:  he   was  vainly 

entangled  in  his  appetites. 

^  Maya.        *  A  aiiisical  mode  especially  comi»osed  by  weavers. 


SHABUAS  131^ 

By  churniug  water  he  strove  to  make  butter :  such 
was  the  Samadhi  lie  practised. 

3.  Gorakh  could  not  retain  the  breath,  for  all  his  vaunted 

devices  of  devotion. 
By  multiplying  their  mystic  rites  and  ceremonies  they 
did  not  know  Par-Brahma. 

4.  Vasishtha  filled  with  all  knowledge  and  all  mysteries : 

from  whom  sprang  even  Rama  as  disciple. 
Rama,  who  was  named  Creator,  even  him  Kal  did  not 
spare. 

5.  The  Hindus  say,  "  We  ourselves  will  burn  up  our  sins  " : 

the  Turks  say  "  We  trust  our  Pir." 
Both  are  wrangling  for  their  faiths  :   the  swan  Kabir 
stands  gazing  at  it. 

91       • 

1.  All  whom    1   saw,  I  saw  distressed :  of  all   who  wear 

body  I  saw  none  happy. 
Men  speak  of  rising  and  of  setting.  Think  also  on  these 
things. 

2.  All   are    troubled,  each    as    lie  goes  his  several  road, 

be  he  householder,  be  he  recluse. 
Shukacharya  for  this  trouble's  sake  renounced  Maya  in 
his  mother's  womb. 

3.  The  Yogi  is  troubled,  the  Jaugani  is  troubled ;  for  those 

who  do  penances  their  trouble  is  doubled. 
Hopes  and  thirsty  longings  beset  all  hearts :  no  house  is 
void  of  them. 

4.  I   speak   the   truth,  the  whole  world  is  vexed:  a  lie  I 

cannot  speak. 
Kabir  says.  He  tu»'  u.i>  immiIiUmI,  wh*-  -r(  all  this   on 
foot. 

82 

1.  O  brothers,  know  the  mind  :  when  it  leaves  the  body, 

wherein  does  the  mind  enter? 

2.  Sanak,  Sanandan,  Jaideva,  X  ""M    \!Ml»:ni^ha,  Trahlada, 

Sudama ; 

3.  Though  |)erfect   Bhaktas,   they   knew   not  the  mind : 

lovers  of  Bhakti,  yet  had  they  not  mind's  secret. 


140  SHAH DAS 

4.  Bharthari,  Gorakh,  Gopichand ;  in   constant  converse 

with  that  mind  the.Y  found  much  bliss. 

5.  The  mind,  whose  mysteries  none  knew,  with  that  mind 

Sukdeva  was  enraptured. 

6.  Shiva,  Sanak's  company,  Narad,  and  Shesha  in  their 

body  saw  not  that  mind. 

7.  The  one  I^ranjan  is  in  all  bodies :  in  him,  O  Kabir,  all 

wander  and  wander. 

93 

1.  O  Sage,  suci^  is  your  world,  and  such  are  the  dealings 

of  tliis  iron  age. 
Who  would  daily  suffer  these  illusions  ?    This  is  not  my 
way. 

2.  The  nature  of  Smriti  is  known  to  all :  but  none  under- 

stands his  own  heart's  Tatwa.  ^ 
They  set  before  the  lifeless  the  living  as  offerings: 
and  their  eyes  see  nothing. 

3.  Why  do  you  leave  the  Amrit  and  drink  the  poison  :  and 

bind  the  counterfeit  in  your  girdle  ? 
They  give  to  thieves  the  seats  of  honour  and  from 
the  honest  hide  their  face. 

4.  Kabir  says,  Liars  keep  company  with  liars ;  and  robbers 

deal  with  robbers. 
The  three  worlds  are  full  of  such :  tliere  is  none  to  trust. 

94 

1.  Tell  me,  what  is  this  word  Niranjan  ? 

No  hands,  no  feet,  no  mouth,  no  tongue.    O  Soul,  how 
do  you  meditate  on  him  ? 

2.  If  you  say,     "  He  is  light.  He  is  light  "  :  tell  me  the 

evidence  of  that  light. 
If  light  is  kindled  from  light,   where    then  is   that 
light's  dwelling? 

3.  Brahma   who  himself  spoke   the   four  Vedas,  himself 

did  not  Iqiow  this  mystery. 
Kabir  says.  Listen  O  Sants :  let  the  wise  Pandit  learn 
this  knowledge. 

'  Essence  or  secret. 


SHABDAS  141 

95 

1.  Who   will  act  as  Kotwal  in  such  a  city  ?  ^     The   flesh  • 

is  spread  abroad  and  the  vulture'  set  on  guard 

2.  The   mouse*    is  a  boat  and  the  cat*  is  boatman.    The 

frog*  sleeps  and  the  snake''  sits  on  guard. 

3.  The  bullock'   calves'-*  and  the  cow ^"  remains  barren  : 

the  bull-calf*  ^  is  milked  three  times  an  evening. 

4.  Each  day  the  lion  *"  stands  to  fight  with  the  jackal  ^\ 

They  are  few  who  interpret  the  words  of  Kabir. 
96 

1.  With  what  many  lamentations  will  you  weep !    Many 

are  gone,  nor  are  prevailed  on  to  return. 

2.  You  paid  no  heed  to  my  teaching ;  you  did  not  recognise 

the  other  as  the  teaching  of  your  pride. 

3.  Now  you   weep  :   and  to  what  profit  ?    Wherefore  did 

you  cause  me  tears  ? 

4.  Kabir  says,  Listen,  O  men :  do  not  fall  into  the  clutch 

of  Kal. 

97 

1.  Allah  and  Rama  are  names  of  thee,  O  Jiva  ?  to  whom  - 

soever  thou  art  merciful,  thou  art  his  lord. 

2.  Why  bow  the  shaven  head  down  to  the  earth :  why 

bathe  the  body  with  water  ? 
The  shedder  of  blood  is  yet  called   innocent,  and  his 
misdeeds  are  hidden. 

3.  What  is  the  use  of  ablutions,  and  cleansings  of  the 

teeth  ?  and  of  what  use  prostrations  in  the  mosque  ? 
With   deceit   in   his  heart    one   offers  prayers:   what 
profits  his  journey  to  Mecca  ? 

4.  Hindus  keep  the  Bkadasi  fast  on  twenty-four  *  *  days : 

the  Musalman  keeps  thirty  : 
Tell  me,   who  passed   the  eleven    months  over,  and 

entered  only  into  one? 
»  Body.  •  Brahma. 

^  Desires.  '  Ve<las  and  other  scriptures. 

»  Orpan  of  seiiHOH.  '"  Gayatri  or  ceremonial  law. 

*  Human  birth.  '^  Scriptares  simply  instruct  on  three 

*  Maya.  qualities — Raj,  Sat  and  Tarn. 

*  Jiva.  **  Sound  wisdom. 

*  Kal*  **  Foul  understanding. 

"  Twice  a  month. 


142  SHABDAS 

5.  Hari's  dwelling  is   tlie  east :   Allah's  abode  is  in   the 

west. 
Seek  Him  in   your  heart;   there  see  Him:   there  is 
Karim  and  Rama. 

6.  If  God  lives  in  the   mosque,  to    whom  belongs  tlie 

remaining  country  side? 
Rama  resides  in  the   pilgrim-places  and  the  images : 
in  neither  they  have  found  Him  out. 

7.  Who  said  tliat  Vedas  and   the  Book  are  false  ?    They 

are  false  who  do  not  ponder. 
Within  all  bodies  One  alone  is  seen  :    'tis  fear  of  a 
second  that  destroys. 

8.  Whatever,  male  or  female,  is  created,  they  are  all  Thy 

form. 
O  Kabir,  the  son  of  Allah  and  of  Rama,  he  is  my  Guru 
and  my  Pir. 

98 

1.  Let  but   Hari's  name  be    mine,  and  I  renounce  all 

others  :  they  are  useless, 

2.  Where  then  was  Adam  ?    Where  then  Eve  ?    Where 

then  were  Pirs  and  Prophet  ? 

3.  Where    then    was   earth?     Where     then   was  sky? 

Where  were  Vedas  and  where  Koran  ? 

4.  He  who  erected  mosques  in  the  world Fasting 

is  false  and  Festival  is  false. 

5.  The  name  of  Allah  the   One  is  true.    To  him  should 

man  bow  down  in  salutation. 

6.  Tell  me,  whence  is  Paradise?    And  at   whose  bidding 

do  you  use  your  knife  ? 

7.  The  Creator  made  action  His  playing :  the  two  paths,  * 

Hindu  and  Turk,  were  started. 

8.  Where  then  was  day  ?    Where  then  was  night  ?    Where 

then  was  tiie  creation  of  actions  ? 

9.  He  has  neitlier  caste,  nor  lineage.    Kabir  says.  He 

has  neither  day  nor  night. 

^  Religions. 


SHABDAS  143 

99 

1.  O   friend,  '  wbere  go  you,  all  alone  ?    Why  do  you  not 

rouse  you  and  take  thought  for  your  house  ? 

2.  With  rice-milk  and  sugar  and   butter   you  cherished 

your    body.    Now   that  body   has  been   cast    out- 
side. 

3.  On  your  head  you  were  wont  to  tie  the  turban  deftly : 

the  gems  of  that  head  the  crows  will  tear. 

4.  The  bones  burn   like   dry   wood  and   the  hair  like  a 

bundle  of  grass. 

5.  Coming  and  going  you  have   no  companion  :  what  has 

come  to  your  troop  of  stabled  elephants? 

6.  You   were  still   unsatisfied   with   the  juice  of   Maya, 

when  Yama  stalked  you  like  a  cat. 

7.  Kabir  says,    Man   has    not  yet    awakened,    though 

Yama's  club  strikes  the  crown  of  his  head. 

100 

1.  O  people,  see   the  kinship  of  H&ri.    The  mother*  has 

caught  the  son*  and  gone  off  witii  the  daughter.* 

2.  The   mother-i?i-law  *  and   the   husband's  sister'^   bear 

rule  in   the    house.    A  daughter"    is   born     in   the 
house  of  the  jugglers.* 

3.  I*  am  brother-in-law :  Rama  brother  of  my  wife :  I  am 

the  father  and  Hari  the  son. 

4.  Kabir  says— This   is  the  power  of  Hari :  \ut  who  onco 

dwelt  in  Rama  is  now  ***  a  bitch's  son. 

lOl 

1.    Gazing    on   it    I   was  filled   with    amazement.    Few 
can  understand  this  song. 

'  Soul.  •  Attention. 

'.Maya.  '   I)o.siroH  *  Mind. 

*  Jiva.  '  ThiH  means,   when   1  have    union   with 

*  Hudhi.  flod  then  all  relationship  vanNhen. 

*  Will.  •"  In  ropoatod  births. 


144  SHABDAS 

2.  The  earth  is  sky  and  sky  is  earth,  an  elephant  *  enters 

the  mouth  of  an  ant.* 

3.  Tliere  is  no   wind,  the   mountain  is  flying.    All  living 

things  and  trees  are  drowned 

4.  The  dry.  tank  rises  on  heaving   waves :  there   without 

water  the  goose  is  sporting. 

5.  The  Pandit  sits  and  reads    the  Purana  and  discourses 

of  that  he  has  never  seen. 

6.  Kabir  says,  He  who  understands   this  song  %  he  is  the 

Sant,  worthy  of  all  trust. 

102 

1.  O  sons  of  a  slave  girl*,  must  I  abuse  you  ?    You  should 

consider  the  true  path  and  think  tliereof. 

2.  Those  of  our  kin  are  not  our  own  :  we  meet  them  no 

more,  not  even  in  dream. 

3.  Brahmans,  Kshatriyas,  and  Baniyas :  of  these  none 

gave  heed  to  my  saying. 

4.  As  many  as  are  Yogis  and  Jangam,  they  are,  one  and 

all,  beside  themselves. 

5.  Says  Kabir,  the  only  Yogi :  They  all  became  delusion's 

slaves. 

103 

1.  O  people,  you  are  simple  of  understanding. 

As  water  mingles   with  water,  so  will  Kabir  mingle 
withHhe  dust. 

2.  If  Mai  thai  is  your  true  abode,  then  may  your  death 

well  be  at  Maghar. 

3.  Dying  at  Maghar    one    will  not  see  death.    Dying 

elsewhere  he  brings  shame  on  Rama. 

4.  "One  who  dies  at  Maghar,  becomes  an  ass."*    Truly 

you  have  lost  your  trust  in  Rama. 

5.  What  is  Kashi,  what  the  waste  land  of  Maghar,  if  only 

Rama  dwells  in  my  heart  ? 

6.  If  Kabir  leaves  his  shell  in  Kashi,  what  honour  will 

that  bring  to  Rama  ? 
1  Kal.  '  Jiva. 

'  This  song  hints  about  the  spiritual  union  with  God. 

*  Maya's  sons.  Kabrr's  disciple  were  so  before  they  followed  Kabir. 

*  Hindus  believed  so. 


SHABDAS  145 

104 

J.    How  shall  I  cross  the  sea,  O  Master,  how  shall  I  cross 
'<  the  sea  ?    I  am  full  of  many  sins. 

2.  How  shall  I  serve  and  worship  thee,  how  meditate  on 

thee?    Only  without  am  I  white,  just  like  a  heron. 

3.  My  nature  is  a  snake's  and  1  am  a  great  sinner.    The 

conscience  is  foul,  and  like  a  cat. 

4.  I  see  it  to  be  contrary  and  crazed,  wrapt  in  the  cloak 

of  the  six  Darshanas. 

h.    Kabir  says.  Listen,  O   men   tliat  are   mine :   all  are 
caught  in  the  noose  of  a  scheming  witch. 


106 

1.  The  demon  of  doubt  has  devoured  the  world :    whoever 

worshipped  it  has  perished. 

2.  It  comes  not  from  egg  nor  from  womb :  it  has  nor  soul 

nor  body.    Numberless  lives   have  been  sacrificed 
to  it. 

3.  Goats,  fowls  and  piglings  are  offered  :  in  the  next  birth 

their  turn  will  come. 

4.  Kabir  says.  Listen,  all  men  ;  who  worships  the  demon 

becomes  demon  himself. 


106 

1.  The    bees'    have  flown,   tlie    cranes'    have    settled: 

night'  is  gone,  day*  also  will  pass. 

2.  The  maiden  Jiva  shivers  and  shudders  with  fear:  she 

knows  not  how  her  lover*  will  receive  her. 

3.  An  unbaked  pot  retains  not  water.    When  the  swan 

departed  the  body  withered. 

4.  My  arms  are  aching  with  scaring*  the  crows.    Kabir 

says,  Now  this  tale  is  ended. 

»  Yonth.    »  Old  age.     »  God.    *  Ceremonial  lawg. 
]0 


146  SHABDAS 

107 

1.  Without   the  Husband*   you  have  become  an  oilman's* 

bullock. 
You  do  not  sit  in  the  company    of  the  Sants,  your 
whole  life  has  passed  beneath  the  yoke. 

2.  You  will  be  swept  away  in  deatli,  and  for  your  selfish- 

ness will  disappear  and  fall  beneath  Yama's  club. 

For  love  of  riches,  wife,  sou,  and  affairs  of  your  estate, 
you  have  laden  yourself  with  all  these  burdens. 

3.  Leaving  the  husband  you  are  infatuated   with   worldly 

pleasures,  and  have  sown  the  seed  of  sin. 

In  vain  hope  of  salvation  for   their  lives,  men   eat  the 
leavings*  of  evil*  spirits. 

4.  In  the  eighty-four  millions  of  created  beings  the  world 

is  washed  away. 
Kabir  says.  Listen,  O  Sants :   they   are  holding  fast 
to  the  tail  of  a  dog." 

108 

1.  Again  am  I  become  as  a   fish  in   the  water. *^     In  my 

former  birth  I  vaunted  my  penances. 

2.  I  prided  myself  that  my  mind  renounced  all,  that  I  left 

my  family  and  lived  to  repeat  Rama's  name. 

3.  I  left  Kashi  and  my  knowledge  was  artless.    Tell  me» 

Lord  of  my  soul,  what  shall  be  my  state  ? 

4.  Am  1  a  bad  servant,  or  art  thou  unmindful  ?    Of  the 

two,  O  Bhagwana,  which  is  the  guilty? 

5.  Now  I  draw  near  for  thy  protection.    Nowhere  else 

could  I  see  the  feet  of  Hari. 

6.  Now  I  draw  near  to  thy  presence.    Thou   hast  made 

Das  Kabir  to  be  sore  distressed. 

'  God  or  True  Guru.  *  Images  of  gods. 

•  Maya  or  False  Guru.  '  Faith  in  dead  gods. 

•  Parshad  or  offerings.  *  Water  of  love. 


SHABDA8  147 

109 

1.  Men   say   Kabir  has  ^one   far  away.     But   few,   the 

steadfast,  know  the  truth. 

2.  The   three   worlds  know  the  son  of  Dasaratha.    The 

secret  of  Rama's  name  is  other  than  this. 

3.  By  his  own  knowledge  eacli   interprets  :   he   calls  it  a 

rope,  t.lie  snake  which  he  sees. 

4.  Though  knowing  virtue's   fruit*   the  best,  yet  leaving 

Hari  the  mind  finds*  not  salvation. 

5.  Hari  sustains  all,  as   the   water  bears  up   the    fish. 

Kabir  proclaims  another  better*  way. 

IIO 

1-     None  can  erase  his  Karma- 
How  can  any  erase  Karma's   writing  even  to   the  end 
of  a  million  ages? 

2.  Sita  wedded  Raghunath,  yet  at  one   moment   this  held 

not  true. 

Though   the  Guru  Vasishtha  divined  the  hour,  chant- 
ing the  charm  of  the  Sun. 

3.  He   whom   men   call   the  maker  of  the  three  worlds, 

smote  Bali  with  violence. 

Once  on  a  time  it  came   to  pass,  that  be  in  his  turn 
had  his  day. 

4.  The  body    of  Narada  Muni   was  disguised :  he  took 

the  form  of  a  monkey. 

Though  he   tore  the  arms  of  Sishupal,  yet  himself  he 
wore  tlie  armless  form  (Buddha.) 

5.  None  should   talk  of  Parvati  as  barren,  nor  make  of 

Shiva  a  beggar. 

Kabir  says.  All   these  are  tales  of  the  Maker  :  the 
doings  of  Karma  are  different. 

^  Oood  deods  produce  good  fruits. 

^  But  mind  believes  salvation  is  in   meditating  upon  the   feet  of 

Hari  alone. 
*  True  path  of  salvation. 


10  SHARDAS 

111 

1.  Is   th^r.e  a  wise  Guru  and  Pandit,  who  will  understand 

the  Veda  reversed?^ 
In  the   water*  fire  is  burning:  in  the  blind'  eyes  there 
is  sight. 

2.  The  cow«   has  eaten  up  the  lion,*  the  deer'  has  eaten 

up  the  leopard* 
The    crow'    has  snared  the  fowler,'    the  quail'    has 
triumphed  over  the  hawk.' 

3.  The   mouse'    has  eaten   up  the   cat,'   the  jackal'  has 

eaten  up  the  dog.' 
He  who  knows  the  primal   teaching,  will  attain  this 
garb. 

4.  One  single  frog*  has  eaten  up  five'  serpents. 
Kabir  proclaims  aloud :  the  two*  are  one  together. 

112 

1.  Disputing  arose  within  the  mind :  he   who  can  direct 

it  finds  release. 

2.  Is   Brahma  the  greater  or  That  from  which  he  came  ? 

Are  the  Vedas  the  greater,  or  He  who  made  them  ? 

3.  Is   the   mind   the  greater,  or  He   in   whom  the  mind 

believed  ?    Is  Rama  the  greater  or  he  who  knoweth 
Rama? 

4.  O  Kabir,  in  doubt  and  error  perplexed  they  wander. 

Is  the  place  of  pilgrimage  the  greater,  or  he  who  is 
its  servant  ? 

118 

1.  You  believe  those  who  are  false  :  listen,  O  Sants  and 

wise.    The  robber's  den  is  within  the  heart :  go  not 
astray  through  folly. 

2.  There  is  a  roof  of  falsehood,  it  spreads  over  earth  and 

sky. 
In  all  ten  regions  its  noose  is  set :  it  has  beset  the  soul. 

»Deva.  *  Mind. 

1  Kal.  *  Kam,  Krodh,  Lobh,  Moh,  Ahankar. 

«jiva.  •JivaandKal. 


SHABDAS 


f* 


3.  Devotion,  sacrifice  and  rosary,  piety,  pilgrimage,  fast- 

ings and  alms, 
Xine  Bhaktis,  Vedas,  the  Book,  all  these  are  cloaks  of 
falsehood. 

4.  One    goes    about   with  Shabdas,  another    boasts    his 

doings. 
Ever  they  claim  respect  and  renown,  both  sects,  Hindus 

and  Turks. 
5     In   prating  about  the  heavens,  their  hour  of  death    has 

drawn  near. 
Cherishing  great  conceit  of  heart,   they  are    drowned 

wliere  is  no  water. 
6.     Kabir  says.  To  whom  shall  I  speak  ?     All  the    world   is 

blind. 
They   keep  away   from  one  who  speaks  truth,  and  are 

the  bond-slaves  of  liars. 

114 

1.  By  the  Essential  Word  alone  will  you  find  safety.     Be- 

lieve and  trust  therein. 

2.  The  One,  tiie  Primal  Purusha,  is  a  tree,  and   Niranjao 

is  its  branch : 
The  three  gods  are   its  twigs  :   and   the   universe   its 
leaves. 

3.  Brahma  established  the  Veda :  Shiva  spread  Yoga  wide. 
Vishnu  is  the  author  of  Maya :  he  started  all  its  traffic- 
kings. 

4.  In   the  three   worlds  and   in  the  ten  directions  Yama 

obstructs  the  doors. 
All   .Tivas  are  become   as   parrots,  carrying  poisonous 
food. 

5.  The  ruler   wears  light  as  his  form,  who  has  spread  his 

dominion  wide. 
Oasting  the  angle   of  action,  he  has  caught  the  whole 
world. 

6.  I   can   annul   his  dominion  and   speed  the  soul  across 

this  ocean. 
Kabir  says,  I  can  make  you  fearless :   therefore  test 
this  minting. 


160  SHABDAS 

115 

1.  O  Sants,  such  is  the  error  in  this  world,  wherein  souls 

are  lost  in  vanity. 

2.  First    erred   the  undivided    Brahma,    imagining    the 

existence  of  his  shadow. 
Believing  in   that  shadow   he  caused  desire,  and  from 
desire  came  pride. 

3.  Through  pride   he  posed   as  Maker,  and   established 

various  scriptures : 
In  that  same  error  the  whole  world  errs  :  that  error's 
secret  none  has  found. 

4.  The  eiglity-four   millions  are   from  that  error :   that 

error  has  misled  the  world. 
He   too  has  erred,  who  was  from  the  beginning :  now 
that  error  eats  up  all. 

5.  The  error  will  cease  when  the  Guru  is  found  :  to  reveal 

the  test,  that  is  true. 
Kabir  says,  That  which  remedies  this  error,  that  is  the 
test  of  all,  O  brother. 


CHAUNTISI 

Onkar*  is  from   eternity :   those,  who   know   it  so,  they 
write,  erase,  and  then  again,  revere  it. 

This  Onkar  all   repeat:   but  they  that  this  discern   are 
few  indeed. 

1.  Ka:- 

One  may  find  the  flame  ^  within  the  lotus."  When  the 
mystic  moon'  appears,  its  light  cannot  be  quenched. 

There  if  one  gains  the  golden  colour*,  he  comprehends 
the  incomprehensible,  and  makes  his  mind's  abode 
in  heaven. 

2.  Kha:- 

If  you  would  know,  amend  your  defects  :  else  leaving 
the  Husband*  you  wander  in  the  ten  regions. 

The  Husband  alone  is  release  and  lasting  forgiveness. 
He  who  would  be  immortal,  let  him  grasp  the  song 
eternal. 

3.  Ga:- 

Obey  the  words  of  the  Guru  :  let  not  the  ear  receive 
another  word. 

Then  the  bird*  will  range  no  whither,  but  comprehend- 
ing the  Incomprehensible  rests  in  heaven. 

4.  Gha:— 

As  one  body  wastes,  auuther  appears I'^body  within 
body  is  stored. 

As  body  is  dissolved,  so  body  comes  again:  and  body 
again  is  laid  up  within  body. 

*  It  may  be  alao  rendered  *  Onkar  ia  beginning '. 

•  Vision.        '  Heart.        >  The  eternal  light.        "  Reality. 

*  Mind  oraoal. 


152  CHAUNTISI 

5.  Na:— 

All  the  days  and  nights  are   spent  in    gazing;  with 

gazing  the  eyes  grow  red. 
If  for  one  moment  one  gains  the  vision,  in  that  same 

moment  he  may  close  his  eyes. 

6.  Oha:- 

A  mighty  picture^  has  been  displayed:  neglect  the 
picture,  view  the  painter.' 

For  Him,  who  made  the  varied  picture,  ignore  the  pic- 
ture :  wake  to  Him,  O  conscious  soul. 

7.  Chha:— 

All  is  the  King's  :  inebriate  your  soul  with  Him  :  blot 

out  all  other  hopes. 
Once  and  again  I  have  given  the  warning.    Leaving 

the  Husband,  why  have  you  let  yourself  be  bound  ? 

8.  Jar- 

Burn  up  this  body  while  still  living,  burn  your  youths 

and  follow  the  rule. 
What  knowledge  you  iiave,  it  must  all  be  burned ;  then 

within  the  body  the  light  will  shine, 

9.  Jha: 

Entangled   or  free  where  will  you  go  V    In  wandering 

search  your  life  will  be  spent. 
After  searching  through  a  million  Sumerus,  the  fort* 

you  built  will  be  your  fort  still. 

10.  Na:- 

Gazing  upon   the  city  of  love,  yourself  resolve  your 

doubts. 
Seek  not  to  see,  nor  seek   to  escape  ;  where  nothing 

is,  offer  there  your  body  and  soul. 

11.  'ra:-- 

Within  the  mind  is  a  crooked  way  :  open  the  door  and 

enter  the  palace. 
Tottering  or  firm,  abide  therein  :  be  established  there, 

then  nowhere  will  you  journey.* 

^  Universe.      *  Your  next  birbk  will  be  according  your  deeds. 
'  Creator  *  No  more  birth  and  death. 


CHATNTISI  Vm 

12.  Tha:- 

The  goal'  is  far  off,  the  robber*  near:  the  ever  merci- 
less has  paralysed  the  mind 

This  robber,  who  has  robbed  all  the  wise,  know,  him  as 
robber,  but  learn  well  your  goal. 

13.  Pa:- 

Prom  fear'  springs  fear  :  and  fear  is  stored  in. fear. 
Who  fears  fear,  will   return  to  fear;  and  fear  again  ia 
laid  up  in  fear. 

14.  Dha: 

All  those  who  search,  where   go  they  ?  The  drummer 

is  enamoured  of  his  drum. 
Where  nothing  is,  thence  all  take  birth  :  where  nothing 

is,  of  that  take  knowledge*. 

15.  Nana:— 

The  village  with  inhabitants  is  far  away.  O  Nana,  be 
thy  name  effaced. 

All  living  died  and  in  a  dense  throng  passed.  Count- 
less .Tatis  died  in  the  forests. 

16.  Ta: 

The  Three'  will  not  vanish  :  from  tliein  keef»  the  body 

hidden  in  the  three  worlds. 
Who  keeps  his  body  hidden    in  tlie  three    worlds,  finds 

the  True  Element^  gains  That  Element. 

17.  Tha: 

Its^  depths  cannot  be  fathomed.  By  this  peace  that 
peace  comes. 

Step  by  step  gain  peace.  O  brother  :  wirhout  the  pil- 
lars the  temple  falls. 

18.  Da:- 

See,  all  is  doomed  to  perish  :  as  you  .see,  so  consider. 
He  that  controls"    the   ten  doors,  then  will   gain  the 
vision  of  the  Merciful. 

'Salvation.  »  Kal  BrahoKi. 

^  Do  not  think  that  God  is  terror  but  believe  thao  Ho  in  all  love,  all 

merciful  *  Koceive  knowledge  from  that  place. 

'  Three  qualitiea.  *  The  oternal  truth  '  Bhakti  Marg. 

'  Do  not  stay  in  a  wavering  position  hut  concentrate  your  mind  on 

the  One  alone. 


15#  CHAUNTISI 

19.    Dha:— 

In  the  middle^  vault  is  darkness  :  as  you  see,  so  cod- 

sider. 
He  that  neglects  the  midway  to  fix  his  mind  upon  the 

summit,  will  renounce  self  and  make  love  increase. 

20.  Na:- 

Enter  the  fourth*  :   else  you  become  the  ass  of  Rama 

and  so  feed  on  grass. 
Leaving  the   King  you   made  your  abode  in  hell :  O 

foolish,  even  now  awake  ;  morning  has  come. 

21.  Pa:- 

All  commit  sin ;  where  there  is  sin  virtue  is  not. 
Pa  says.  Listen,  O  brother :   by  serving  me  you  get 
nothing  at  all. 

22.  Pha:- 

The  fruit  is  far  off :  taste  if  you  will.    The  Sat-Guru 

will  not  pluck  and  give  you. 
Pha  says.  Listen,  O  brother  :   none  has   knowledge  of 

heaven  and  the  realm  below. 

23.  Ba  :- 

All  are  wrangling,  one  and  all :  by  wrangling  nothing 

is  achieved. 
If  one  speak,  let  him  speak  with  meaning  :  the  secret 

of  action's  fruit  you  know  not,  brother. 

24.  Bha:- 

Illusion  overflows  the  world  :  by  reason  of  illusion  the 

near  is  become  far  off. 
Bha  says.  Listen,  O  brother  :  all  come  in  illusion  and 

in  illusion  they  go. 

25.  Ma:- 

By  serving  Ma,'  one  finds  not  the  secret  :  in   serving 

me  they  lost  their  all. 
The  mind  has  grasped  the  root  of  Ma:  he*  that  is  in 

the  secret  knows  it, 

'  In  the  state  of  Samadhi  one  suspends  all  bis  actions. 

•  Arth,  Kara,  Dharam,  Moksh  (Salvation).    Tlie  first   three  are  no 
gotxl  if  one  do  not  attain  the  fourth. 

'  Maya.  *  Guru. 


CHAUNTISI  155 

26.  Ya:~ 

Ya*  overflows  the  world:  yet  Ya  is  to  be  from  the 
world  apart. 

Ya  says,  Listen,  O  brother :  by  serving  me  comes  vic- 
tory, victory. 

27.  Ra:— 

One  gets  entangled  in  this  dispute:  that  by  Rama*s 
name  grief  and  pain  will  vanish. 

Ra  says.  Listen.  O  brother :  ask  of  the  Sat-Guru  ;  then 
come  and  serve. 

28.  La:- 

In  child isii  lisping  instruction  comes  :  by  this  same 
lisping  you  will  learn  truth. 

You  yourself  lisp  and  yet  blame  others  :  both  work  in 
the  one  field. 

29.  War- 

All  cry  "  He,  He.''  By  crying  **  He"  will  nothing  be 
achieved. 

Wa  says.  Listen,  O  brother  ;  none  has  knowledge  of 
heaven  and  the  realm  below. 

30.  Sha:— 

None  see  the  tank  :  the  tank  and  its  refreshing  cool 
are  one. 

Sha  says.  Listen,  O  brother :  the  world  is  passing  away 
into  the  void. 

31.  Kha:- 

All  say  "True,"  True  :  by  sayint'  "'True  "  will  nothing 
be  achieved. 

Kba  says,  Listen,  O  brother :  repeat  Kama's  name  and 
so  escape. 

32.  8a:- 

A  bow*  was  made  with  violence  :  pierced  with  its 
arrow  all  people  are  afflicted. 

»  Yoga. 

>  EaI  has  made  a  bow. 


156  CHAUNTISl 

In  the  house  of  Sa  the  Void  takes  qualities  :   so   much 
is  not  known  to  any. 

33.  Ha:— 

He  is  -none  knows  His  being  :    when  things  are,  then 
the  mind  believes  in  them. 

He  is  in  truth    let  all  receive  it :  when  "He  "  is,  that 
"  Tliat  "  is  no  more, 

34.  Ohha:  - 

In  a  moment  it  will  be  blotted  out  :  when  darkness 
falls,  who  will  make  you  see  ? 

When  darkness  fell,  none  found  the  end.    Therefore 
Kabir  proclaimed  it  beforehand. 


BIPRAMATISI 

1.  Gather,  all,  and  hear  about  the  religion  of   Brahmans : 

without    the   knowledge  of  Hari   they   sink  like  an 
overloaded  boat. 

2.  By  being  a  Brahman,  one  knows   not   Brahm :  he  but 

brings  to  his  home  the  gifts  of  sacriflce. 

3.  He  has  no  knowledge   of  Him  who  is  Creator :  he  sits 

and  prates  of  Karma  and  Dharma. 

4.  On  the  eclipse  and  at  Amawas  he  worships  tiie  water: 

like  the  Chatrik  they  profess  one  love  but  their  real 
aim  is  other. 

5.  The  services  for  the  departed  one   are  on  his  lips,  but 

at  the  time  of  the  fire  offering  his  thoughts  are   on 
offerings  for  himself. 

6.  In  the   world   He   is  called  of  high  lineage,  but  again 

and  again  he  inakes  men  do  foul  deeds. 

7.  With   his  son   and  his   wife  he  eats  the   leavings   of 

others,  and  he  calls  them   defiled  who  are  Bhagats 
of  Hari. 

8.  His  works  are  unclean :  he  eats  other's  leavings :  his 

understanding  is  denied  and  to  Yama-lok  he  goes. 

9.  Having  washed  and  bathed  he  goes  proudly  :  when  he 

sees  a  saint  of  Vishnu  his  mind  is  vexed. 

10.  He  is  set  on  gain  and  allows  no  partner.    To  him  the 

Name  is  as  a  fiery  oven. 

11.  He   forsook   not  the  reliance  on  Rama  and  Krishna: 

by   reading  and  study   he  is  become  the  slave  of 
works. 

12.  He    performs   works  and    runs    after  works :   if  any 

consults  him,  he  seeks  to  establish  him  in  works. 

13.  Those  who  believe  not  in  these  works,  he  reviles;  to 

those  who  believe  in  works,  he  gives  his  heart. 

14.  "Tis  thus  he  maintains  the  Bhakti  of  Bhagwant:  be  is 

of  the  hierarchy  of  Hirnakush. 


158  BIPRAMATISI 

15.  See  the  way  these  foolish  miads  are  revealed.     Without 

inward  sight  they  become  the  slaves  of  works. 

16.  By  all  his  worsliip  not  one  sin  is  removed  :  by  singing 

his  praises  one  is  drowned  in  the  world. 

17.  He  has  in  his  hands   the  dice  of  sin   and  virtue.    So  he 

has  wrought  tlie  destruction  of  tiie  world. 

18.  His  system  abandons  not  either  system :  he  sets  fire,  to 

this  house  and  builds  up  that. 

19.  He  settles  him  at   home  like  an  honest  trader :  in  his 

secret  iieart  he  robs  like  a  rat. 

20.  Such  is  the   worship  the  Brahman  pays  the  gods.    To 

take  tlie  name  he  assumes  five  postures. 

21.  They  were  drowned  and  could   not  save  themselves ; 

by  speaking  of  high  and  low  he  perished. 

22.  To  call  one  high,  one  low  is  the  talk  of  fools ;  there  is 

but  one  air,  one  water. 

23.  There  is   but  one   Earth  and  one  Potter ;  One  is  the 

Creator  of  all. 

24.  One  potter's  wheel  made  many  forms :  and  He  is  with- 

in the  seed.  '■ 

25.  One  Light  pervades  all :  for  mere  naming*s  sake  men 

call  it  pearl. 

26.  His  acts  are  devilish   but  he  is  called  a  god:  he  dis- 

putes at  length  but  cannot  win  across  this  sea. 

27.  When  the  swan  leaves  and   parts  from  the  body,  tell 

me,  pray,  of  what  caste  is  it  ? 

28.  Is    it    black,    white,  red    or  yellow  ?      Coloured    or 

colourless  ?    Hot  or  cold  ? 

29.  Hindu  or  Turk,  aged  or  youthful,  female  or  male  ?    All 

this  think  out. 

30.  To  whom  shall  I  speak  ?    Not  one  pays  heed.    But  so 

Kabir  Das  has  seen'  it." 

Sakhi : — They  are  swept  away  down  in  the  current :  grasp 
their  hands  and  draw  them  to  the  shore. 
Those   who    will  not  heed  the  warnings,  thrust 
them  in,  further  in  than  before. 

*  Literal  recognized  or  understood  itw  reality.  ;*  8oul. 


KAHARA 
I 

1.  Practise  the  simple  meditation,  the  simple  meditation, 

yourself  absorbed  in  the  Guru's  words. 

2.  While   in   the   world,  keep  fixed  your  roving  mind,  and 

your  gaze  unwavering. 
As  you  ever  see  trouble  now,  so  will  happiness  ever  be 
yours  hereafter. 

3.  Though    misgivings  do  not  now  readily  assail   you,  yet 

in  your  heart  unravel  sucli  tangles  as  there  be. 
When  you  draw   tight   tlie   line  of  salvation,  then  the 
great  fish  will  be  caught'. 

4.  Bid    your    mind   subdue    the    mind   and   re/rain    from 

speaking  good  words  or  ill. 
Let   not   the   mind   quit  the  love  of  devotion,  nor  ever 
relax  its  knot. 

5.  Neglect  delight",  but  do  not  neglect  salvation  :   by  the 

practice  of  Yoga  make  perfect  your  body. 
If  you  would  be  inebriate  with  this  love,  then  with  this 
wisdom  bind  your  thought. 

6.  Else  is  the  master'  very  stern  :  he  will  deal  with  craft 

and  guile. 
You   will   be  bound  and  slain  :  your  all  taken :  all  your 
exultation  vanish. 

7.  When  ill  fortune  comes  upon  you,  whips  will  be  broken 

on  your  back. 
The  members  of  your  house  will  stand  and  see  it,  but 
no  one*s  intercession  brings  you  release. 

8.  You  that  have  no  Quru,^  fall  suppliant  at  his  feet,  but 

he  will  heed  no  prayer : 
You  were   without   knowledge,  never  sought  to  know  : 
how  should  he  know  you  now  ? 

*  Undenitandlog  attalued.  ^  Kal. 

^  DcHires.  *  Hurini^  no  objeot  of  worship. 


160  KAHARA 

9.    He   has  summoned  you,  but  he  speaks  not :  the  boat- 
man bears  himself  with  pride  : 
He  that  lias  no  provision   in   liis   purse  must  wander 
helpless  to  and  fro. 

10.  Those  who  have  continually  performed  the  ordinances, 

they   care  not  if  the  wife  goes  with  them  no  further 
than  the  threshold. 
One^  without  hands  or  feet  will  seize  upon  your  body. 

11.  You  have  oars,'*   O  foolish,  row  on :  why  grope  along 

the  bank? 
Remain  in  the  shallows,'  launch  not  into  the  deep,  lest 
you  lose  what  now  you  hold. 

12.  The    burning  sun   below,  the    burning    sand    above; 

nowhere  will  you  find  shade: 
Knowing  this  bestir  yourself :   why  do  you  not  make 
for  yourself  some  shade  ? 

13.  Whatever  sport  you  made,  now  let  that  be  :   how  can 

this  be  made  hereafter  ? 
Your  husband's*  mother  and  his  sister'    will  deride 
you  :  you  will  hide  your  face  in  shame. 

14.  The  sugar ^   is   melted,   tlie  bag'   sags  flabbily  :  you 

never  obeyed  the  advice  I  gave  : 
You  never  trained  Tazi "  and  Turki  *  horses,  you  always 
rode  a  horse  of  wood. 

15.  The  clapping  and  cymbals  make  pleasant  music  :  all 

dance  to  the  Kahara  measure  : 
In  whatever  colour  the  groom'  comes  to  the  wedding, 
therein  must  the  bride®  too  deck  herself. 

16.  Your  boat* "  was  good :  you  had  no  skill  to  row  it :  how 

will  you  reach  the  shore  ? 
Kabir  says,  He  who  is  drunken  with  the  wine  of  Rama, 
he  is  Kabir's  disciple. 


\  ^al.  *  Bbakti. 

>  Do  not  attempt  to  receive  more  than  yon  actually  can  hold. 

*  Mul  Prikriti.  '  \vidiya.  *  Age.  '  Body. 

•  Kinds  of  horses.  'Body.  »°  Hnman  birth. 


KAUARA  101 

II 

1.  Hear   wisdom,  O  Ruby  *  ;  hear  wisdom,  O  Ruby :  as 

best  you  may  decide  the  dispute. 

2.  Kneading,  the  potter   '  makes  the  pots:  but  no  one  is 

saved  in  the  skinner's  '   house. 
Ever  the  weaver  '  rises  and  fills  the  shuttle :  the  cloth 
printer  *  dances  about  the  court : 

3.  Ever  the  barber  *    climbs  into  the   boat,  *   and  burns 

botli  boat  and  oars. 
If  you  have  no  knowledge  of  the  master  *,  how  can 
you  hope  to  decide  the  dispute  ? 

4.  Within  one  village  *  dwell  five  maidens' :  there  too  are 

an  elder  brother  '  and  his  wife  *  : 
They  strive  together,  each  for  her  own  hand,  and  care 
not  at  all  to  love  their  husband.  ■ 

5.  With  the  buffaloes  ®  the  starling  ^^  is  always  found  : 

eyes  it  has,  but  does  not  see. 
It  never   kept   company   with  the  cows  ^\   how  can 
you  hope  it  will  know  the  truth  ? 

6.  You  did  not  ask  the   wayfarer  of  the   way,  so  foolish 

you  are  and  ignorant. 
You  leave  the  landing  and  crawl  where,  there  is  no 
landing,  how  can  you  reach  the  furtlier  shore  ? 

7.  One  day  through  greed  you  seek  a  Guru  of  your  caste  ; 

the  next  your  thoughts  turn  to  the  Brahman  : 
Set  not  yourself  between  the  two  millstones  to  be 
ground  to  powder  :  so  you  will  find  a  nearer  resting- 
place. 

8.  The  Sat-Guru  has  given  an  arrow  of  love:  bis  bow  and 

his  arrow  are  strong  : 
DasKabir  made  this  Kahara  :  within  the  Mahara*8  '* 
measure  he  abides. 

»  Soul.  '  Brahma. 

'KjilBrahm.  'Maya. 

•  Kal.  •  IndriH. 

*  Uaman  body.  '•  Mind, 


*Alloternal.  "Sadhns. 

'  Oyan  Indris.  »  Qod. 


11 


162  KAUARA 

III 

1.  O  brother,  serve  the  name  of  Rama  :  He  is  near,  your 

hopes  are  far  away. 
Why  do   you  i>ay    worship  to  other  gods,  O  madman  ? 
All  your  hopes  of  them  are  false. 

2.  What  use  is  being  white  outside,  O  madman,  while  you 

are  still  black  within  ? 
What  matters  it   that  your  body  has  grown  old,  while 
still  the  mind  within  is  young  ? 
3     The  teeth  in  your  mouth  have  gone,  O  madman  ;  still 
you  have  iron  teeth  within. 
Ever  you  chew   the  grain  of   worldly   pleasure,  lust, 
anger,  pride  and  coveting. 
4.    All  your  body's  strength  has  left  you,  yet  the  solace  of 
your  heart  is  doubled  : 
Kabir  says.  Hear,  O  Sants :  all  wisdom  is  not  worth  a 
shred. 

IV 

1.  My*  covering  is  the  name  of  Rama,  and  in  this  Rama  I 

deal. 

2.  I  have  made  Rama's  name  my   merchandise,  and  with 

Hari  keep  my  shop. 
I  have  displayed  a  thousand  names :  it  yields  a  quarter 
profit  day  by  day. 

3.  To  wliomsoever  I  give  a  new  five  seer's   weight,  he 

receives  but  two  seers  and  a  half'\ 

Even  if  the  five  seers  be  corrected,  yet  the  difference' 
still  remains. 
•  4.    The  scales  are  unequal*  ;  the  seer  •  is  but  three  quar- 
ters :  deceived  *  ones  beat  the  drum. 

Kabir  says.  Hear,  O  Sants  ;  they  gather  their  bargains 
and  depart  deceived. 

'  Such  la  said  by  Yogis  and  performers  of  penances. 
^  Only  half  my  instructions  are  followed. 

*  A  defective  soul  is  unable  to  receive  instruction. 

■*  In  repeated  births  the  soul  becomes  more  and  more  defective, 
»  Bhakti. 

•  Those  who  rely  upon  their  imperfect  Bhakti. 


KAHAKA 


168 


1.  Repeat  the  name  of  Rama,  the  name  of  Rama  :  awake 

and  look  within  your  mind. 
They  gathered  and  stored  millions  upon  millions  :  yet 
they  went  hence  with  empty  hands. 

2.  Your   grandfather,  your  father  and  his  father's  father, 

they  who  buried  this  treasure  in  the  earth — 

Are  you  too  blind  as  they  were,  your  inward  eyesight 
gone  ?  why  did  they  leave  all  this  behind  ? 

3.  This  world  is  but  a  trafficking  in  phantoms  :  at  the  end 

there  is  nothing  at  all . 

Its  birth,  its  destruction  is  a  thing  of  a  moment :  it  is 
as  the  shadow  of  a  cloud. 

4.  Relations,  kinsmen,    race    and   family,   where   is   the 

ground  of  boasting  in  them  ? 

Kabir  says,  Without  meditation  upon  Rama  all  wisdom 
is  sunk  in  the  deep. 

VI 

1.  Without  the  name  of  Rama,  without  the  name  of  Rama, 

the  life  is  lost  for  uotliing. 

2.  As  the  parrot  is  fooled  that  haunts  the  scmar  tree  : 

the  cotton  flew  and  he  has  lost  his  labour. 

As  the  drunkard  who  pays  out  money  from   his  gir- 
dle, and  for  it  loses  the  poor  wits  he  had. 

3.  As  the  stomach  is  not  satisfied  by  pleasant  taste  alone, 

nor  thirst  quenched  by  dew. 

How  can  the  penniless  be  helpful  to  his  fellow  ?  He  is 
vexed  at  heart  with  troubles  of  his  own. 

4.  With   the  gem  in  your  hand,  you  knew  not  its  secret : 

so  the  tester  snatched  it  from  you. 

Kabir  says.  When  this  chance'  has  passed,  you  will  not 
find  the  gem  again. 

'  Hyuiuid  birth. 


164  KAHARA 

VII 

1.  Bestir  yourself,    remember  Rama  ;  hear  this  that  I 

proclaim  aloud. 

2.  With  shaven  head  you  sit  swollen   with  pride,  rings  in 

your  ears,  within  the  cave. 
Without,  you  have  besmeared   yourself   with  ashes  : 
but  within,  within  you  rob  the  house. 

3.  In  your  village   dwells    a   proud   mendicant  ",  filled 

with  self,  with  pride  and  lust. 

Enticement  will  bear  you  away  to  her  lair  :  all  your 
renown  wilj  be  no  more. 

4.  Who  knows  the  dweller  at  the  heart  of  all,  will  rest 

unmoved. 

Fearless  there  in  the  Guru's  city  sleeps  Das  Kabir  in 
peace. 

VIII. 

1.  The  bliss  (of  Hari)  and  the  peace  (of  Allah)  :  tell  me» 

to  whom  was  either  given  ? 

In  coming  and  in  going  twice  were  they  plundered : 
all  that  they  had  was  snatched  away. 

2.  Gods,  men.  Munis,  Jatis  :  Pirs,  Auliya  and  Mirs  :  all 

were  born  into  the  world. 

How  far  shall  I  count   them  ?  They  are  endless  mill- 
ions :  all  have  tasted  death. 

3.  Water,  air,  and  sky  will  vanish  :   the  moon  and  mighty 

heroes : 

This  will  vanish,  that  will  vanish  :  perfection  falls  to 
the  lot  of  none. 

4.  Saying  "  All's  well "  the  world  is  perishing :  this  "  wel- 

fare "  is  a  noose  of  Kal. 
Kabir  says.  All  the  world  will  perish,  but  the  Immortal 
Rama  abides. 

1  Body.  2  Mind. 


KAUAKA  165 

IX 

1.  O  Fool,  this  is  the  fashion  of  the  body  :  death  comes, 

and  none  consents  to  touch  it. 
Your  very   armlet  they    will  break   and  take,  though 
your  wealth  be  counted  in  millions. 

2.  When  your  breath  comes  short,   their  fears  begin  : 

this  family  that  is  your  boast. 
Whoever  comes  near,  will  hurry  you  out  nor  suffer  your 
stay  a  moment  longer. 

3.  You  were  nice  in  anointing  your  body   with  sandal : 

you  wore  on  your  neck  an  ivory  circlet. 
But  dead,  that  same   body   the   vulture's  beak  rifles 
and  its  llesh  is  rent  by  the  jackals. 

4.  Kabir  says.  Listen,  O  Sants  :   they  are  void  of  wisdom, 

of  true  understanding. 

This  day  or  that,  so  all  will  be,  be  he  a  king  or  be  he 
a  beggar. 

X 

1.  fn  all  I  am— and  am  not.  Me  they  pronounce  now  this, 

now  that. 

My  covering  is  a  single  sheet'  :  so  men  speak  of  me 
as  Unity. 

2.  One  unbounded,  without  limit,  as  the  ray  of  the  Moon 

in  a  pitcher  of  water. 

I  am  of  one   likeness ;   none   understand  ;  else   age, 
death,  doubt  would  flee  away. 

3.  I  am  neither  babe,  nor  aged  :  with  mo  is  no  disciple. 

I  live   in   the   form   of    the  three   qualities   :   I  deal 
with  all :  my  name  is  Rama  the  King. 

4.  Where  are  night  and  day,  I  am  not :  male  and  female 

are  alike  in  me. 

I  am  neither  sent  nor   summoned:  I  am  in  the  world 
untrammelled. 

Prikriti. 


IW  KAHARA 

5.  The  weaver  *    knows  not   loom  •  nor   warp,  *    yet  he 

weaves  his  web  in  ten  *  places. 

As  each  has  seen  the  Guru's  splendour,  so  he  speaks : 
but  few  have  grasped  its  truth. 

6.  The  diamond  of   the  mind  received  a  hundred  facets : 

even  the  cost  of  the  cutting  was  not  made. 

Of  Hari,  for  whom  gods,  men,  and  Munis  searched,  the 
friends  of  Kabir  have  found  some  trace. 

XI. 

1.  O  sister'  of  my  husband,  you  long  for  union  :  when 

you  slept  the  whole  world  vanished. 

When  you  came,  and  you  slept  together,  you  and  my 
husband  vanished  away. 

2.  My  father's^   wives  are  two",  myself  and  my  husband's 

brother's  wife  :  both  vanished. 

When  I  reached  my  husband's  land,  then  the  world's 
nature  was  made  clear  to  me. 

3.  My  mother®  died  and  my  father  :  the  tank^  °  that  was 

made  vanished  with  them. 

Idled  and  so  all  died  to  me  :    my  folk^\  my  family, 
vanished  together. 

4.  While  the  breath  is  within  the  body,  so  long  is  peace 

far  distant. 

Kabir  says.  When  the  breathing  ceases,  the  house  ^  * 
in  the  end  is  burnt  up  with  fire. 

XII 

1.    This  Maya  is  mad  for  Raghunath,  and  she  goes  forth  to 
hunt  her  prey. 
The  wise  and  polished  she  chose  out  and  slew :  not 
one  has  she  spared  of  all. 


» Jiva. 

'Eternal  Purusha, 

'  Maya. 

Bhaktani  and  Bhaktl . 

•Maya's  actions. 

'  Adi  Maya. 

*  Ten  doors. 

'"  Ceremonial  law. 

»  Maya. 

^i  all  those  who  established  rituals,  etc. 

•  Brahra. 

"  Body. 

KAHARA  167 

2.  The   recluse   (silent),  the  brave,  the  ascetic  she  slew, 

the  Yogi  deep  in  his  meditation. 
She  slew  the  Jangara   in   his  jungle,   though  he  had 
abjured  the  favours  of  Maya. 

3.  The  Pande  she  slew  while  reading  his  Vedas,  the  Swami 

performing  his  worship. 
The  Pandit  she  slew  when  expounding   his  texts.    On 
the  self-controlled  she  cast  her  bridle. 

4.  Shringi  the  Rishi  she  slew  in  the  forest  and  clove  the 

head  of  Brahma. 
M uchandar  Nath  turned  away  and  shunned  her  :  even 
in  Singhal  he  was  overwhelmed. 

5.  In  the  house  of  Sakat  she  ruled  the  household  :  but  is  a 

slave  to  the  devoted  of  Hari. 
Kabir  says,   Listen,  O  Sants:   when  she  approaches, 
drive  her  away. 


BASANT 


1.  Where  spring  holds  sway  the  twelve  months  through, 

few  have  conceived  the  perfection  there. 

2.  Where  fire  as  rain  pours  down  in  ceaseless  streams, 

where  the  forest  grows  green  in  all  its  eighteen 
glades.  * 

3.  Where  unrestrained   the  waters   well  up  within,  and 

the  cleansing  air  bears  away  all  foulness. 

4.  No  trees  are  there,  yet  heaven  is  bright  with  blossom  ; 

Siva  and  Brahma  would  drink  its  perfume. 

5.  Sanak  Sananda,  all  the  devotees,  like  bees,  would  find 

it;   the  eighty-four  million  Jivas  fain  would  enter 
there. 

6.  If  the  Sat-Guru  unveil  for  you  the  truth  thereof,  never 

forsake  your  meditation  at  his  feet. 

7.  Whoso  hungers  for  the   fruit  of  that  eternal  world, 

Kabir  says,  let  him  understand,  so  shall  he  taste 
of  it. 

II 

1.  They  who  learn  the  love  of  Sri  Basant  but   with  their 

lips  and  straightway  lose  it,  again  and  again  Yama 
meets  them  at  the  journey's  end. 

2.  Those  who  have  beaten  out  the  music  of  Meru-daiid, 

have  burnt  up  all  their  desires  in  the  eight-leaved 
lotus. 

3.  The  fire  of  Brahma  was  manifested :  in   them  upward 

and  downward  passes  tlie  breath. 

4.  Nine'  channels  are  the  abode  of  uncleanness:  five* 

maidens  go  in  company  to  see. 

» 6  Dyal  Des,  6  Kal  Des,  6  Maya  Des. 
"  Nine  doors  of  body. 
'  Five  senses. 


BASANT  ItW 

5.  The   music  of   the   iatioite  fills  all     the   ait* :  two  and 

seventy  *  men  cast  dust  upon  their  bodies. 

6.  The   sight  of  Maya  has  bewitched  you,  as  a  flower  of 

the  forest  that  blooms  but  for  a  day. 

7.  Kabir  says.  Behold   the  servants  of  Hari,  that  ask  as 

their  Holi  gift  *  a  house  in  heaven. 
Ill 

1.  To  greet  thee,  O  Mehtar^  have  I  come.    Now  grant 

me  to  wear  the  garment  of  spring  time. 

2.  The  loom'  is  long,  the  pin  *  is  thin,  the  thread  *  is  old 

and  tied  upon  three*  pegs. 

3.  Three  hundred  and  sixty"  threads  are  stretched:  they 

are  tied  with  two  and  seventy  knots^. 

4.  Through  the  pipes'   comes  a  ceaseless  murmur:  the 

weaver's  wife*    sits  crouching  there. 

5.  Above  it  dances  and  plays  the  dancer**  :  upon  the  loom 

her  feet' '  are  moving. 
(J.    Five,   twenty-flve,'"     and    ten  doors  are   there:  five 

maidens*'   face  each  other  there. 
7.    They  have  decked  themselves   with   veils**   of  many 

colours.    At  Hari*8  feet  Kabir  sings  his  song. 

IV 

1.  The  old  witch*'  laughs  to  herself  as  she  says.     'I  am 

ever  young:  what  woman  so  fair  as  I?" 

2.  My  teeth  are  gone  with   chewing  betel :  my   hair  is 

fallen  with  bathing  in  Ganga. 

3.  My  eyesight  is  gone  from  painting  with  antimony :  my 

youth  is  gone  with  snaring  lovers. 

4.  Those  who  are  wise,  1  make  my   prey:   lur   those   who 

are  foolish  1  deck  me  with  charms. 

6.  Kabir  says,  The  old  witch  sings  for  joy:  son '®  and  hus- 

band *  ^  she  has  eaten  and  there  she  sits. 

*  Followers  of  various  rellgioim  •  Maya. 
'  Pha(?o\va.  '"  Jiva. 

*  Body.  >'  Maya  and  Brahma. 

*  Jiva.  ' «  5  Elements  and  25  Prlkirtis. 

*  Three  qualities.  »•  Five  senses. 

*  Bones.  ^*  Garbs  or  bodies. 

*  Ligaments.  '  *  M  ay  a. 
'Arteries.                                             "  JIva. 

"  Brahma. 


170  BASAI^T 


1.  O  Pandit,  read  the  riddle  of  her^  wlio  was  unmarried, 

remaining  virgin. 

2.  The  assembled  gods  gave   her  to  Hari :  through  the 

four  ages  was  she  with  Hari. 

3.  First  she    came  in  the  guise  of  Padmani :  she  is  a 

serpent- wife  that  preys  upon  the  world. 

4.  She  is  grown  woman,  and  iier  husband  a  boy:  the 

darker  the  night,  the  brighter  her  lustre. 

5.  Kabir  says.  She  is  the  whole  world's  darling :  of  their 

own  strength  none  can  sJay  her. 


VI 


1.  Mother,  my  husband'    is   tractable  indeed:  he  toila 

at  his  work*  till  daylight  comes. 

2.  At- dawn  he  rises  and    sweeps   the  courtyard*:  he 

takes  a  great  basket'  and  removes  the  cow-dung.*" 

3.  Stale'   rice  my   husband  accepts  and  eats :  he  takes 

a  big  pitcher*  and  goes  for  water. 

4.  I  have  tied  my  husband  to  my  apron  strings' ;  I  can 

take  and  sell  him  from  market  to  market. 

5.  Kabir  says :   These  are    tiie   doings    of    Hari :    thia 

woman's  ^  husband  ■  knows  not  shame. 


1  Maya.  *  Destroys  the  world. 

"  Brahma.  *  Through  Kal. 

3  Actions.  •  Sweeps  the  world. 

*  Karraas  of  his  past  birth. 

"  Busy  in  ablutions  and  pilgrimages. 

"  I  subdued  him.     (Literally  "to  the  side  of  my  bed.") 


BASANT  171 


VII 


1.  O  friend,   within    mv   very    house   tlie  quarrel  grows 

violent :  this  restJess  woman  ^  rises  and  attacks  me. 

2.  She  is  one,  she  is  tall,  and  has  five*  hands.    These 

five  have  twenty-five'  to  iielp  them. 

3.  These  twenty-five   point  different   ways :   and  others 

point  out  others  still. 

4.  While  still   midway  they  expect  the  goal :  and  among 

them  the  Jiva  is  shaken  to  pieces. 

5.  Each  grudges  if  it  be  not  satisfied.    Tell  me,  whence 

can  come  peace  and  rest  ? 

6.  No  one  considers  or  cares  for  this.     Every   one  thinks 

but  of  viewing  folly. 

7.  From   king  to  beggar  all   are   grinning  and  laughing. 

So  none  can  grasp  the  form  that  is  One. 

8.  They  search  not  within,  but  declare  it  far  off.     Every- 

where these  herons  glut  themselves. 

9.  There  are  millions  of    hunters,  but  one  Jiva  only : 

therefore  it  cries  "O  Love,  my  Love." 

10.  What's    to  come,  this  present  hour  decided.    Says 

Kabir,  His  die  is  cast  once  for  all. 


VIII 

1.  A   branch   in  her*   iiand    to   slielter   her,   the  woman 

sports  there :  he  that  is  learned  let  him  unravel  this. 

2.  She  wears  no  garment,  goes  unveiled :  above  riches 

is  this  unreal  one  beloved. 

3.  She  rings  out   uncertain  music  :    now   she  destroys 

and  now  she  saves. 

4.  Says  Kabir,  the  servant   of  servants.  To  one  she  gives 

bliss  and  to  another  grief. 

'  iMaya  •  25  Prikritis. 

•  Akash.  Wayo.  Tej,  Water  and  Prithwi. 


172  BASANT 

IX 

1.  So  is  this   priceless  body  swept    away.    Recite  the 

name  of  Rama  if  you  would  gain  the  shore. 

2.  Beuu,   Bali,   Kans  are  gone:  Duryodhan  is  gone:  his 

race  is  perished. 

3.  Prithu  is  gone,  who  ruled  the  earth :  Bikram  is  gone : 

not  one  remained. 

4.  The  six  great  potentates  are  gone,  their  retinue  swept 

hence.    Delay  no  more,  O  man,  to  see  and  under- 
stand. 
.    Hanuman,  Kashayapa,  Janak,    Bali :  these  all  were 
choked  in  the  stream  of  Yama. 

6.  Gopi  Ohand  performed  his  Yoga  fully:   Ravan  was 

killed  in  the  act  of  desire. 

7.  All,  who  took  birth  I  saw  passing  away.  Kabir  says. 

Sing  the  name  of  Rama. 


1.  All  are  drunk,  none  awoke :  the  thief  is  upon  them, 

and  plunders  their  house. 

2.  The    Yogi  is    drunk    in  his   meditation,   the  Pandit 

drunken  with  reading  Puranas. 

3.  The  ascetic    is  drunk  in   his  austerity,  the  Sanyasi 

drunken  with  thought  of  "  I." 

4.  The  Maulvi  is  drunk  in  reading   the   Koran,  the  Qazi 

drunken  with  doing  his  justice. 

5.  The  worldly  are  drunk  in  the  stream  of  Maya,  the 

kings  drunken  with  pride. 

6.  Drunken  are  Sukhdeo,  Udho  and  i^  kraura,  Hanuman 

drunken  with  joy  in  his  tail. 

7.  Siva   is  drunken    in   obeisance  of  Hari,  in   the  Kali 

Yuga  drunken  are  Jaideo  and  Nama. 

8.  The  Smriti  and  Vedas  have  declared  the  truth,  as  the 

secret  of  his  house  was  the  death  of  Ravan. 

9.  This  roaming  mind  pursues  ever  low  aims :  Kabir  says, 

Sing  the  name  of  Rama. 


BASANT  173 


XI 


1.  O  Siva,  is  it  thus  .you  make  Kaslii  vour  owu  V    Tiie  time 

is  come  to  tliiok  thereof,  O  Siva. 

2.  All  offer  uuguents,  sandal,  perfume,   betel   leaves  :   in 

every  house  Smriti  and  Puranas  are  chanted. 

3.  In  temples  of  every  kind  the  food  is  offered  :  the  people 

of  the  city  cry  aloud  to  you. 

4.  In  all  ways  your  people  are  fearless  before  you :  there- 

fore my  mind  too  is  bold  to  approach  you. 

5.  Our  children*  have  this  knowledge  only  :  to  you  it  be- 

longs to  make  them  go  astray. 

6.  Wherever  a  man  has  set  his  heart,  when  the  Jiva  dies, 

say,  will  it  not  enter  there  ? 

7.  Should  he  suffer  loss  therein,  not  his  is   the  fault,  the 

blame  is  his  Lord's. 

8.  Hari  was  gracious  and  disclosed  the  secret,  **  Where  I 

am,  why  thought  of  second  ?  " 

9.  Pour  days  possess  your  soul  in   patience  :   that  which 

he  sees,  this  speaks  Kabir. 

XII 

1.  No  one  observes  my  saying  :  men  drown  themselves  in 

a  stream  of  water. 

2.  The  blind  follow  the  blind,  as  one  seeks  the  company 

of  a  harlot.' 

3.  So  undiscerning  are  they :  the  husband  stands  near  and 

they  do  not  know  him. 

4.  Bacli*  claims  honour  for  his  own :  and  lying  device* 

are  taken  for  truth. 

5.  Nothing  does  a  liar  ever  achieve  :  so  I  warn  you ;  hear, 

ye  shameless. 

6.  Give  up  Pakhandas  and  heed  my  words:  else  you   will 

fall  into  Yama's  hands. 

7.  Kabir  says.  Men  never  truly  searched :  they  wandered 

and  died  like  a  Rojh*  in  the  forest. 

'  Bhaktat.  '  Bach  god. 

^  Who  has  no  husband.  *  A  white-footed  deer  generally  known  as  Nilgai. 


CHANCHARl  ! 

1.  Maya  sporting  plays  the  temptress,  the  whole  world 

she  has  taken  captive. 
Lithe  as  a  leopard,  with  the  gait  of  a  young  elephant, 
she  has  decked  herself  with  delusion. 

2.  Her  veil  is  dyed  in  varied  colours,  she  is  adorned  as 

a  beautiful  maiden. 
Her  wondrous  beauty  of  form  and   the   excellence   of 

her  grace  are  beyond  all  telling. 

3.  A  body  as  the  moon,  the  eyes  of  a  deer  has  she  : 

unveiled  the  gem  upon  her  brow. 
All  the  Yatis  and  Satis  were  enamoured  of  her :  she 
walks  as  a  young  elephant. 

4.  She  blackened  the  face  of  Narada  and  hid  herself  from 

his  eyes. 
Triumphing  in  her  triumph  slie  turned  away  backward 

with  a  mocking  smile. 

5.  She  ran  in  pursuit  of  Siva  and  Brahma  and  made  both 

her  captives : 
She  took  from  them  the  Holi  gift^    and  straightway 

eluded  them. 
^.    The  song  celestial  flUed  the  air  and  entranced  the  ear 
of  all  who  heard. 
This  player  makes  her  play,  to  fit  the  throw  of  every 
player. 
7.    She  has  cast  ignorance  before  them  :  the  feet  that  walk 
can  walk  no  more. 
So  the  player  sets  her  play  :  the  chance  of  this  birth 
comes  never  again. 
S.    Gods,  men,  munis,  deities,  Gorakh,  Datta,  and  Vyasa : 
Sanak,  Sanandan,  lost  at  this  gaming  :  what  hope  then 
have  others? 

^  Phagowa. 


CHANCHARI   I  175 

9.    Filled  full  of  empty  love  she  rests  her  syringe  on  her 
breast : 

She  made  all  captive  to  her  will,  and  then  withdrew 
with  backward  glances. 

10.  She  has  formed  a  lake  of  wisdom  and  in  her  hand  holds 

the  three  qualities : 

She  drew  after  her  Siva  and  Brahma  and  lures  away 
all  others  with  her. 

11.  On  one  side  stand  gods,  men  and  munis,  on   the  other 

she  alone : 

Her  glance  fell  on  them,  she  spared  none,  she  set  one 
seal  00  all. 

12.  All  that  were  she  trapped  and  in  her  veil   enmeshed 

th^m. 
Black  was  the  line  she  drew  on  all :  none  went  without 
her  mark. 

13.  Indra  and  Krishna  were  standing  at   her  door,   their 

eyes  hungry  with  longing  : 

Kabir  says.  They  alone  were   saved,   in    whom   desire 
found  no  entrance. 


CHANCHARI  II 

1.  Burn  up  all  this  world's  desire  :    O  mind  distraught. 
Therein  is  sorrow,  grievous  trouble  :    Know  this,  O 

mind  distraught. 

2.  Without  foundation  is  the  temple  :     O  mind  distraught. 
Of  brick  wherein  no  earth  is  kneaded  :     Know  this,  O 

mind  distraught. 

3.  Tis  but  the  model  of  an  elephant :  O  mind  distraught : 
The  Creator  has  but  drawn  a  picture :    Know  this,  O 

mind  distraught. 

4.  What  sense  is  pride  of  wealth  or  body :    O  mind  dis- 

traught ? 
These  are  a  prize  for  earth  and  earthworms :    Know 
this,  O  mind  distraught. 

5.  Blinded  by  lust  the  elephant  is    taken :    O  mind  dis- 

traught. 
And  to   the  ankus^   bows    his  head:    Know   this,  O 
mind  distraught. 

6.  The  monkey  fills  his   fist  with  dainties :    O  mind  dis- 

traught . 
He  stretches  out  his  arm  and  grasps  them :    Know 
this,  O  mind  distraught. 

7.  Despair  of  escape  takes  hold  of  him  :  O  mind  distraught. 
From  house  to  house  lie  gets  but  blows  :    Know  this, 

O  mind  distraught. 

8.  Nothing  he  knows  of  worse   or  better ;  O  mind  dis- 

traught. 
From   house  to  house  he  has  to  dance :   Know  this,  O 
mind  distraught. 

9.  As  a  parrot,  the  springe  catches ;  O  mind  distraught. 

Even  so  see  thou  delusion :  Know  this,  O  mind  dis- 
traught. 

^  The  iron  hook  with  which  elephants  are  driven. 


OHANCHARI   II  177. 

10.  What  use  can  it  make  of  learning :  O  mind  distrauglit  ? 
At  the  last  the  cat  devours  it;    Know  tliis,  O  mind 

distraught. 

11.  The  guest  that  comes  to  liouse  deserted,  O  mind  dis- 

traught 

As  he  comes,  so  he  departeth  :     Know   this,  O  mind 
distraught. 
12     Countless  the  sacred  streams  to  bathe  in,  O  mind  dis- 
traught. 

Many  the  deities  to  worsiiip  :     Know  this,  O  mind  dis- 
traught. 

13.  Men  are  drowned,  where  is   no  water :    O  mind  dis- 

traught. • 

Set  thyself  in  Rama's  vessel  :    Know  this,  O  mind  dis- 
traught. 

14.  Says  Kabir,  the  world's  deluded  :  O  mind  distraught. 
Hari's  service  th<\v  deserted  :  Know  this,  O  mind  dis- 
traught. 


I-: 


BELI  I 

1.  Within  you,  Swau,^  is  Mansarowar,  O  Rama  that  lives 

in  all. 
While  one  watches,  comes  the  robber,'  O  Rama  that 

lives  in  all. 

2.  If  one   watciies,  he  escapes  him,  O  Rama  that  lives  in 

*  all. 

Those  who  sleep,  they  are  beguiled,  O  Rama  that  lives 

in  all. 

3.  To-day  the  goal'  is  close  beside  you,  O  Rama  that  lives 

in  all. 
To-morrow  'twill  be  far,  far  distant,  O  Rama  that  lives 

in  all. 

4.  Your  home  is  in  a  stranger's'   country,  O  Rama   that 

lives  in  all. 
You  waste  your  eyes  in   fruitless  searching,  O  Rama 

that  lives  in  all. 

5.  As  one  churns  curds,  so  you  churned  terror,'^  O  Rama 

that  lives  in  all. 
You  made  your  whole  abode«  the  churn,  O  Rama  that 
lives  in  all. 

6.  The  Swan  is  insensible  as  marble,  O  Rama  that  lives  in 

all. 
The  pure  word  cannot  pierce  and  enter,  O  Rama  that 

lives  in  all. 

7.  O  Swan,  you  were  a  precious  jewel,  O  Rama  that  lives 

in  all. 
1  warned,  you  did  not  heed  my  warning,  O  Rama  that 

lives  in  all. 

1  jiva.  ^  Niran jail's. 

1  j^al.  '  Desires. 

3  Salvation.  "  All  five  senses. 


BBLI I  17d 

8.  As  you  did,  so  you  received,  O  Rama  that  lives  in  all. 

Blame  not  me  for  your  own  error,  O  Rama  that  lives 
in  all. 

9.  You  left  the  all,  and  chose   the  finite,  O  Rama  that 

lives  in  all. 
Made   for  yourself   tiiis  easy    tradiiij,',   O  Rama  that 
lives  in  all. 

10.  Had  you  but  made  Rama's  name  your  traffic,  O  Rama 

that  lives  in  all. 
Your   bales  had  been  of   priceless    treasure,  O   Rama 
tiiat  lives  in  all. 

11.  Laden  with  goods  iive^  merchants  travelled,  O  Rama    \ 

that  lives  in  all. 
Nine^    porters  bear  with  them  ten'  burdens,  O  Rama 
that  lives  in  all. 

12.  While  in  the  way  the  merchants  «iuarielled,  O   Kama 

that  lives  in  all. 
And  so  they   have  destroyed  the  body,  O  Rama  that 
lives  in  all. 
liJ.     hi  bitter  grief  the  Swan  dcpartin.ijr,  O  Ixania  Miat  lives 
in  all. 
A   long   farewell   took  of   his   fellow,*  ()    Kama   that 
lives  in  all. 
M.     Within  the  lake'  the  lire  is  kindled,  O  Rama  that  lives 
in  all. 
The  lake  is  burned,  and  turned  to  ashes,  O  Kama  that 
lives  in  all. 
15.    Says  Kabir,0  Sants,  now  hearken,  O  Rama  that  lives 
in  all. 
Discern   ye  now  'twixt  good  and  evil,  O   Rama  that 
lives  in  all. 

'  Five  bhutuk  .s/jnnr. 

^  Fivo  i'rauK  and  four  Antahkarans. 

"•  Indrib. 

'  Claimauts  of  his  body 

'Body. 


BELI   11 

1.    You   were  led   astray  by  Smriti,   O  Rama  tliat  lives 
in  all. 

You   believed   to  your   deluding,   O   Rama   that  lives 
iu  all. 

2     These  are  like  the   fisher's  angle,  O  Rama  that  lives 
in  all. 

One  believes  and   is   entangled,    O  Rama   that  lives 
in  all. 

3.    Such  are  Vedas,  and  such  is  Bhagwat,'  O  Rama  that 
lives  in  all. 

So   my   Guru  has   assured   me,   O   Rama   that    lives 
in  all. 

1.    You  have  raised  your  fort  of   cowdung,  O  Rama   that 
lives  in  all. 

You  will  soon  forsake   the  battle,  O  Rama  that  lives 
in  all. 

'k     Him  by  wisdom's  strength  none  reaches,  O  Rama  that 
lives  in  all. 

By   what  searching  can  one  find  Him  ?  O  Rama  that 
lives  iu  all. 

6.  Hear,  possess  your  soul   in   patience,  O  Rama   that 

lives  in  all. 

Though  at  first  the   mind  is  shamed,  O  Rama   that 
lives  in  all. 

7.  Think  not  then   to  search  hereafter,  O  Rama  that 

lives  in  all. 

All   is   found  in   this  form  only,   O   Rama   that  lives 
in  all. 

8.  Says  Kabir,  O    Sants,  now  hearken,  O    Rama  that 

lives  in  all. 

Near  you  let  no  snare  be  woven,  O  Rama  that  lives 
in  all. 

'  Shastras. 


BIRHULI 

1.  Neither  end  nor  yet  beginning,  O  Soul  forsaken.^ 

Neither  root,  nor  tree,  nor  branches,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

2.  There  is  neither  night  nor  daylight,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

There  is  neither  air  nor  water,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

3.  The  companies  of  Bralima  and  Sanaka,  O  Soul  forsaken 

Have  spoken  endlessly  of  Yoga,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

4.  In  Asarh*  montli  came  the  winter,  O  Soul  forsaken. 
Thus  the  seven'*  seeds  were  planted,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

5.  Tlie    field*    was   ever    harrowed,     weeded,    O    Soul 

forsaken. 
Ever    sprang    new    leaves,"    new   branches,  O  Soul 
forsaken. 

6.  Still  'tis®  empty,  still  'tis  empty,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

All  the  three  worlds  still  are  empty,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

7.  Only  one  fair  flower^  blossomed,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

And  this  universe  the  flower  is,  O  Soul  forsaken 

8.  That  flower  is  the  Bhakta's  worship,  O  Soul  forsaken. 
So  they  find  the  King"  in  worship,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

9.  By  the  Sants  the  flower  is  gathered,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

10.  It  heeds  no  antidote"  for  poisons,  O  Soul  forsaken. 
The  charmer  owns  its  power   resistless,  O  Soul  for- 
saken. 

11.  A  fleld  of  poison*"  you  have  planted,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

Why  do  you  refuse  the  harvest?  O  Soul  forsaken. 
!2.     Birth  after  l>lrtl>   nm'  fruit''  von  iralhrred,  O  Soul  for- 
saken. 
From  this  braucli  of  oleander,"     O  Soul  forsaken, 

13.    Says  Kabir,  the  truth  he  findeth,  O  Soul  forsaken. 
When  of  this  my  fruit  Ik;  tasteth,  O  Soul  forsaken. 

>  Or  **8oul  sick  with  longing."  '  Desires. 

»  A»  soon  as  one  was  born.  •  Object  of  worship. 

*  Srutis.  •  Goremonials. 

*  Body  and  mind.  '"  Actions. 

*  Now  mtxlcH  of  wofHliip.  '*  Ho  born  again. 

*  This  world.  »»  Maya. 


HINDOLA 

I 

1.  The  whole  world  swings  in  the  swing  of  delusion. 

2.  Where  sin  and  virtue  form  the  two  supports  and  Maya 

lias  set  it  on  Meru  mountain. 
Tliere,  seated  in  the  seat  of  actions,  is  tiiere  one  who 
does  not  swing  ? 

3.  Desire  it  is  that  sets  it   swinging,  the   twisting  ropes 

are  worldly  pleasures,  longing  its  peg,  behold  it. 
Good  deeds  and  bad  are  made  the  ropes,  gripped  by 

the  two  hands. 
\.    All  Gandharvas,  Munis,  swing  therein:   there  swing 

Surpati  and  Indra. 
Narada,  Sharda,  swing  therein  :  there  swing  Vyasaand 

Phan  indra. 

5.  There  swing   Biranchi,  Mahesha  and  Munis:    there 

swing  the  sun,  the  moon. 
He  who  is  Formless,  Himself  took  form   and  there  he 
swung  as  Goviud. 

6.  The  six,'  the  four,"  fourteen,'  the  seven,*  the  one  and 

twenty, •*  the  three  worlds  there  are  set : 
Search  out  and  see  the  four  creations,  never  a  one  is 
stable. 

7.  Search  these  and  find  Khandas  and  Brahmanda  :   nor 

did  the  six  Darshauas  find  release. 
Take  counsel  with  the  Sant  and  Sadhu :  when  freedom's 
won,  where  goes  the  Jiva  ? 

8.  Where  is  no  moon,  no  sun,  no  night,  no  twilight,  where 

are  no  five  elements. 
'  Where  famine,  death,  destruction  are  not,  there  but 
few  sants  attain. 

9.  Exiled  thence,  for  many  ages'  passing,  so  you  wandered 

on  the  earth. 
Seek  with  the  Sadhus  and  share  their  vision,  so  you 
will  turn  again  and  enter. 

>  Dai'shaiias.  ^  Vedas.  *  Fourteen  sciences.         "  ^i^^f  ... 

"  Elements  :— 5  tanmatras,  5  bhubs,  5  prans,  4  antahkaraus,  1 1  raknti, 
1  Pradhan, 


HINDOLA  183 

10.    The  swinging  holds   no  fears   for  him,   who  is  a  Sant 
and  wise. 
Says  Kabir,   who   finds   the  true  Siikrit,  coraes  never 
again  to  swing. 

II 

1.  Making  of   many   forms   his   picture,   Hari    has    set 

his  dance  awhirl. 
To  quencli  his  longing  for  that  swinging,  wiio  lias  ever 
found  the  wisdom  ? 

2.  Swinging,  swinging  through  the  ages,* yet  the  mind 

leaves  not  its  craving. 
Night  and  day  tiie  swing  swings  ever,  tlirougli  tlie  four 
ages,  each  year's  rains. 

3.  Now  it  swings   high   and   now   swings  low,  and  now 

unwitting  bears  to  heaven. 
Delusion's  swing  so  well  deludes  :  and   can   stay  his 
swinging. 

4.  Of  this  sw4ng  I  live  in  terror  :  liold  me  fast,  O  Yadava 

king  : 
Ivabir  cries.  Grant  ray   prayer,  Gopal,  that  T  may  find 
thy  refuge,  Harl. 

Ill 

1.  Coveting  and  desire  its  side-posts,  thus  the   mind  has 

set  a  swing. 
The  Jivas  of  all  the  world  are  swinging  :  nowhere  is  a 
fnin  abode. 

2.  Wise  men   swing   there   in  their   wisdom  :  the  kings 

and  peoples  swing. 
Sun  and  Moon   swing  there   together  :  no  one    found 
the  secret  out. 

3.  Kighty-four*    millions    .livas   swinging  :   Ravi's  son' 

pursued  and  took  thom. 
Countless  ages,  aeons  passed  :  alas  !  not  yet  has  one 
paid  heed. 
I.     Kart  h  and  sky  swing  there  together :  there  the  air  and 
waters  swing. 
Hari  has  taken   form,  is  swinging  :   the  Swan  Kabir 
beholds  it  all. 

'  Tho  mesRongep  of  doath. 


SAKHIS 

1.  When  tliou'  wast  free  from  biitli,  tlien  there  was  none. 

On  thy  sixth"  clay  I  awoke.  Wliither  dost  thou  stray  ? 

2.  The  word  is  mine  and  thou  art  of  the  word.     Hearing 

do  not  pass  it  by. 
If  thou  wouldst  know  the  real  essence,  then  test  the 
word. 

3.  My  word  is  from   eternity.    The   word   lias  entered 

into  the  Jiva. 
It  is  a  basket  for  flowers  :  but  the  horse*  has  eaten  np 
the  ghU*  ' 

4.  Witliout  the  word  consciousness  is  blind.    Tell  me, 

whither  shouldst  one  go  ? 
If  one  find  not  the  door  of  the  word,   then  he  strays 
aimlessly  this  way  and  that. 

5.  TJiere  are  words  many  and  various  :  churn  and  extract 

the  real  word. 
Kabir  says.  He  who  has  not  the  real  word,  an  accursed 
life  he  lives. 

6.  Beaten  by  the  word  some  have  fallen,  and  some  have 

resigned  dominion  :  ' 
They   who  have  discerned   the  word,  their  work  was 
perfected. 

7.  My  word  is  from   eternity  ;  meditate  tliereon  moment 

by  moment. 
It  will  bear  fruit  within,  all  the  outward  is  vanity.* 

'  Jiva.  -  Man  Tndri.  ^  Body.  "  Aftayan.  '  Harlsh  Chandra. 
^SS^  5W5[T  ^f^  ^T  Tor  Tof  %!.%  ^\'%  ^?r!  '^fS^  Wf  oft  ^3:^?  ^  fr^  ^? 
It  is  impossible  not  to  recall  the  long  history  and  f^reat  significance 
of  the  similar  conception  in  western  thought  from  Heraclitus  through 
the  Stoics  to  Philo  of (  Alexandria  and  thence  into  Christian  thought, 
the  author  of  the  fourth  Gospel.  Heraclitus'  lost  book  opens  with 
the  words—"  Having  hearkened  not  unto  me  but  to  the  Logos,  it  is  wise 
to  confess  that  all  things  are  one." 

Or,  compare  with  other  passages  from  Heraclitus  Sakhi  4. 

"  In  the  Vedic  hymns,  the  Brahmanas  and  Upanishads  there  are 
references  to  Vak,  personified  as  a  goddess  in  Hymn  10  of  the  Rig  Veda: 
but  whether  anything  like  a  continuous  development  of  a  Logos  con- 
ception can  be  traced  down  is  far  from  certain.  Certainly  the  two 
conceptions  are  not  identical,  any  more  than  Vak  and  Shabda  are 
identical.  Nor  does  it  seem  probable  that  Kabirs'  teaching  was 
influenced  or  inspired  by  Christian  teaching,  whatever  may  have  been 
the  fact  with  regard  to  the  later  literature  of  the  Panth. 


SAKHIS  185 

8.    Those   who  did  not  make  provision  reached  a  town 
and  city. 
Where,  when  darkness  falls  and  day  is  over,  tney  can- 
not make  provision. 
^.    Furnish  you  with  provision  here :  the  way  before  you 
is  difficult. 
All  were  going  to  buy  in  heaven,  but  there  is  neither 
trader  nor  market. 

10.  If  you   know  your  Jiva  as  your  own,  then  seek  that 

Jiva's  good. 
Such  a  guest  as  Jiva  will  not  be  found  a  second  time. 

11.  If  you  know  him  as  your  very  master,  then  know  that 

Jiva  well. 
If  you  regard  your  own  honour,  do  not  ask  others  to 
give  you  to  drink. 

12.  Why  go  about  offering  water?    In  every   house  is  a 

flowing  sea. 
If  one  be  really  thirsty,  he  will  drink  perforce. 

13.  O  Swan,'  pearls*  are  for  sale,  heaped  on  a  golden  dish. 
What  will  he  do  with   that,  Jhe  secret  of  which  he 

knows  not? 

14.  O  Swan,  thou  art  all  of  the  colour  of  gold,'  how   can  I 

describe  tliee  ? 
When  thou  comest  in  prosperity  to  the  t&nk,*   then  I 
will  sing  loving  praise  of  thee. 

15.  O  Swan,  thou  wast  strong,  but  now  thy  steps  are  slow. 
Stained  with  various  colours,*  thou  didst  take  another 

love. 

16.  The  Swan  departs  from  the  lake,  the  body  is  left  empty. 

Kabir  proclaims  aloud.     Ever  the    same   door,    the 
same  dwelling. 

17.  The  Swan  and  tho  lieron  to  tiic  eye   are  of  one  colour, 

they  feed  in  tiic  same  tank. 
But  in  knowing  the  milk  from  water  the  heron  is 
revealed  at  once. 

'  Jiva. 
'Trnotoachinj;8. 

*  Pure  and  unstained. 

*  Body. 

*  By  following  other  masters. 


186  SAKUIS 

18.  Wherefore  is  the  doe*  so  starved?    She  feeds  by  the^ 

pool  crowned  with  green  pasture. 
There  are  a  million  hunters,  but  one  doe.    How   shall 
she  escape  their  shafts  ? 

19.  The  three  worlds  are  a  cage :  virtue  and  vice  a  net. 

All  souls  became  a  prey,  there  is  one  hunter,  Kal. 

20.  Life  is  lost  in  covetousness :  vice  has  devoured  virtue. 

On  him  who  speaks  but  half  of  half,  on  him  I  look  with 
wrath. 

21.  The  half  of  a  Sakhi  completes  the  work,  if  it  be  under- 

stood. 
What  use  is  the  pandit  and  the  books  he  reads,  though 
night  be  joined  to  day  ? 

22.  A  figure  of  five  elements  was  fashioned :   it  forthwith 

cried"!,  I.'* 
Tell  me.  Pandit,  which  is  greater,  the  word  or  the  Jiva  ? 

23.  To  this  figure   of  five  elements  the  name  of  man  is 

given. 
If  one  piece  of  the  machine  is  gone,  the  whole  is  ren- 
dered useless.  , 

24.  Colours  spring  from  colours ;  yet  all  colours  are  but  one. 

Of  what  colour  is  the  soul  ?    Seek  to  discern  that. 

25.  The  soul  (enlightened)  is  as  molten  (gold) :  the  word  is 

th^re  as  (purifying)  borax. 
The  drop  of  yellow  rain  brings  mildew  :  Kabir  says. 
But  few  see  this. 

26.  By  taking  five   elements   the  body   was  made.    The 

body  received  them,  what  was  done  ? 
In  the  bondage  of  deeds  it  is  known  as  Jiva :  the  Jiva 
is  given  over  to  the  doing  of  deeds. 

27.  Within  these  five  elements  is  the  abode  of  that  which 

is  hidden. 
There  are  but  few  who  find  the  secret.    The  Guru's 
word  is  the  proof.  * 

28.  Who  sits  with  sensation  stilled,'  in  sidelong  posture, 

the  windows  of  his  body  filled  with  light ; 
In  his  heart  I  reside,  girt  with  my  armies  before  him. 

^  Jiva. 

'  It  caa  be  found  through  the  Guru's  instructions. 

'  In  the  state  o(  Saraadhi. 


SAKHIS  187 

29.  Within  the  heart  is  a  mirror,  yet  the  face  cannot  be 

seen. 
Then  only  will  the  face  be  seen,  when  doubt   has 
vanished  from  the  heart. 

30.  A  village  on  a  high  hill,  and  the  arm  of  a  mighty  man  : 
Serve  such  amaster\  on  whose  very  shadow  you  may 

be  upborne. 

31.  By  the  path  the  Pandits  went,  by  that  the  foolish  too 

have  gone. 
Rama's  cliff  is  very  high  :  thereon  Kabir  has  climbed. 

32.  They  say  to  me,  "  O  Kabir,  come  down :  you  have  with 

you  neither  provision  nor  guide. 
If  your  provision  fail,  your  feet  be  weary,  the  Jiva  will 
be  in  the  power  of  another." 

33.  The  house  of  Kabir  is  on  the  mountain  peak,  where  the 

path  is  winding. 
There  the  foothold  even  of  the  ant  is  not  sure,   there^ 
men  load  their  oxen  no  more. 

34.  He  who  has  never  seen  that  country  and  yet    speaks 

of  it  is  a  fool. 
He  himself  eats  salt,   and   yet   goes  offering   camphor 
for  sale. 

35.  All  say,  **  Tiie  word,  the  word  ":  but  that  word  is  with- 

out form. 
The  tongue  cannot  utter  it :  it  is  grasped  by  perceiving 
and  testing. 

36.  The  master  dwells  on  the  mountain  top  and   liis  liome 

above  the  horses  of  the  sky  (lightning). 
There  without  flowers  the  bee  sucks  honey  :  tell   me 
tlie  name  of  that  tree. 

37.  Sandal,    restrain  thy   fragrance:   on   thy  account  the 

wood  is  cut. 
Do  not  slay  the  hving  Jiva  :  after  deatii  all  will  |)rove 
useless. 

38.  The  sandal  is   wrapped  with  snakes:  what  can   the 

sandal  do  ? 
Every  hair  is  steeped  in  poison  :  where  can  the  nwrit 
enter  in  ? 

*  Follow  God  alone. 


188  SAKHIS 

39.  Placed  on  the  slab  of  Samsan*   all  forms'    (stones) 

are  of  one  colour : 
Kabir  says,  Such  is  the  state  of  the  prey,*   dogs*  see 
and  bark. 

40.  What  it  has  seized,  it  does  not  let  go,  though  tongue 

and  beak  be  scorched. 
What  sweetness  is  there  in  the  live  coal,  yet  the 
Ohakor'  swallows  it. 

41.  The  Ohdkor  trusting    upon  the  Moon  swallows  the 

burning  coal. 
Kabir  says,  It  burns  not :  so  great  a  thing  is  love. 

42.  They  sway   to  and  fro  in  the  struggling  twilight :  no 

single  one  escaped. 
Even  Gorakh  was  caught  in  the   city  of  death:  who 
then  can  be  called  pious  ? 

43.  Gorakh  was  in  love  with  his  devotions  :  he  would  not 

allow  his  dead  body  to  be  burned. 
Yet  his  flesh  decayed  and  mingled   with  the  dust, 
though  his  body  gleamed  with  much  rubbing. 

44.  Running  from   the   forest   the   hare   fell  among    the 

ravines,  following  its  nature. 
To  whom  will  tlie  hare  tell  his  troubles  ?    Who  will 
understand  tlie  hare  ? 

45.  For  many  days  he  wandered  and   performed  ^amadhi. 
The  hare  has  fallen  into  a  pit :  now  far    away  he 

bewails  his  lot. 
40.    O  Kabir,  doubt  did  not  vanish,  though  many  garbs 
were  worn. 
Without  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  there  is  a  divid- 
ing barrier  within. 
47.    Without    fine  the  world  imposed  fine,  and  sixteen' 
fines  are  levied. 
The  Divider  is  covetous :  sugar  is  sweeter  than  '  gur.'' 

'  A  kind  of  stone = Maya. 
'  Stones. 
^  Jiva 

*  False  Gurus. 

*  A  Greek   partridge.    It  is  said  that  it  lives  upon  moon- 

beams, and  eats  live-coals  at  the  full  moon. 
'  5  Karam  Indris,  5  Gayan  Indris,  4  Antah  Karan  : — Man,  Chit, 

Budh,  Ahankar,  2  Maya  '  I '  and  *  my.' 
'  Molasses. 


SAKHIS  18(>' 

48.  In  the    sceDted  sandal    forest  of    Malaya-gar  other 

trees  are  hidden  : 
Though  tliey  take   the  name  of  sandal,  yet  are  they 
not  true  Malaya-gar  wood. 

49.  In   the  scent    of  the  sandal  forest    of    Malaya-gar 

the  Dhak'  and  the  Palas  were  steeped. 
But  the  bamboo-tree   was  never  scented,  though  age 
after  age  it  stood  so  close. 

50.  Walking  and  walking   the  feet   grew  weary,   the   city 

is  yet  nine  kos. 
If  a  halt  be  made  midway,  tell  me,  who  is  at  fault  ? 

51.  Dusk  fell,  the  day  was  over,  evening  came  at  last : 
Engaged   with    many   lovers,    the    harlot  remained 

barren. 

52.  The  mind  cries,  *'  Whither  shall  I  go  ?  "  And  conscious 

thought,  **  Whither  shall  I  go  ?  " 
After  six  months  of  travel,  still   the   village  is  a  mile 
distant, 

53.  They  renounced  their  households  and  became  udasi^  : 

they  entered  the  forest  to  do  penance. 
The  worn  out  body  died  :  and  she'    who  sells  the 
betels,  picked  and  ate  it. 

54.  For   those   who   understand   the   name  of  Rama,   for 

them  the  cage  wears  thin  : 
Sleep  comes  not  upon   their  eyes,  nor  does  the  flesh 
thicken  upon  their  bodies. 

55.  Those   who  are   steeped  in   the  juice  of  Rama,  their 

tree  will  never  wither. 
No  longer  are  they  aware  of   aught :   such  men  know 
nor  pain  nor  pleasure. 

56.  If  the  mango  and  the  maulsi  tree  be  cut  they  bear  no 

fruit :  the  slit  ear  will  not  heal. 
O  Gorakh,   whose  renown   remains,  if  he  understands 
not  the  song  ? 

57.  The  Jiva  is  like  the  paras,  the  world  is  like  the  iron  : 
The  ixiras  begets  the  pains :  the   tester  is  the  mint 

(of  truth). 

'  Butea  frondoBa. 
'  A  hermit. 
•  Maya. 


190  SAKHIS 

58.  O  Kabir,  deck   thyself   in  the  garments  of  love,  and 

dance. 
To  him  is  given  honour,  whose   body   and  soul  speak 
truth. 

59.  Into  the  chamber  of  mirrors  entered  a  dog  headlong : 
There  at  the  sight  of  his  own  image  he  barked  and 

barked  till  he  died. 
^0.    When  one  sees  his  reflection  in  the  mirror,  he  is  In 
both  the  same : 
From  this  element  comes  that :  and  that  is  the  same 
again. 
'Qi.    All  forests  and  all  oceans  are  of  me :  I  make  lover 
and  beloved  one. 
Now  are  they  on  the  road  of  Kabir  :  let  the  travellers 
go  thereon. 

62.  My  song  is  new  :  none  understands  the  strain. 

Whoever  has   perceived  this  word,  he  is  a  king  of 
kings. 

63.  I^bir  proclaims   it  loudly,   sitting  upon  a  branch  of 

the  sandal-tree : 
They  walk  not  on   the  road  appointed :  what  loss  is 
that  of  mine? 
^4.    Of  the  truthful  he  is  best  of  all,  who  in   his  heart 
is  true. 
Without  truth  there  is  no  comfort,  though  one  give 
a  million  discourses. 
^5.    Deal  in  true  merchandise,  know  this  in  your  heart. 

By  truth  you  will  gain  the  diamond,  by  falsehood  you 
will  lose  your  all. 
^6.    They  pay  no  heed  to  sound  words,  and  they  take  no 
thought  themselves. 
Kabir  proclaims  aloud.  The  world  has  passed  as  a  dream. 
67.    The  fire  is  lit  in  the  ocean,  no  smoke  appears. 

He  only  knows  it,  who  is  burnt  up  therein,  and  he  who 
kindled  it. 
^8.    The  Are  is  lit  by  him  who  sets  the  fire :  when  he  lights, 
it  burns. 
I  sacrifice  myself  to  him  who  sets  the  fire  :  the  thatch 
escapes,  but  the  house  is  consumed. 


SAKHIS  191 

69.  A  drop  which  has  fallen  into  the  ocean,  all  know  it  well. 
That  the  ocean  is  within  the  drop,  this  is  understood 

by  few. 

70.  It  is  planted  on  poisoned  ground,  be  it  watered  with 

amrlt  a  hundred  times. 
O  Kabir,  people  do  not  renounce  the  thought,  whatever 
it  be,  within  the  mind. 

71.  The  half-burned  log,*  it  cries  aloud  : 

Now  that  I  go  to  the  blacksmith's  house,  he  will  burn 
me  a  second  time. 

72.  The  wood*   which  is  wet  from  separation'   splutters 

and  pours  out  smoke. 
It  will  be  free  from  pain  only  when  the  whole  is  burned. 

73.  Him,  who  is  pierced  by  the  arrow  of  separation,  no  drug 

will  heal. 
A  lingering,  lingering  death  he  lives,  takes  birth  again, 
to  cry,  "  Ah  me.  Ah  me." 

74.  Kabir's  word  is  true  :  in  your  heart  see  and  ponder  it. 
They  do  not  consider  and  understand,  though  I  continue 

to  proclaim  it  for  four  ages. 

75.  If  you  are  a  true  merchant,  open  a  true  market. 
Sweep  well  within  and  throw  the  rubbish  far  away. 

76.  The  chamber  is  of  wood  :   fire  is  set  all  about  it. 

The  learned  Pandit  was  burnt  to  ashes :  by  good  luck 
the  ignorant  were  saved. 

77.  As  falls  Sawan's  rain  in  heavy  drops  from  heaven  : 
The  whole  world  ))ecame   Vaishnava :  but  the  Guru 

never  gave  them  teaching. 

78.  Close  to  the  bank  he  sank  and  was  drowned  :   I  am 

distressed  for  this. 
lo  the  full  current  of  the  stream  of  avarice,  how  is  it 
you  can  sleep  ? 

79.  He  recites  the  salchi,  but  does  not  grasp  it :  he  does' 

not  walk  along  the  path. 
The  stream  of  the  river  of  avarice  flows  deep:  where 
can  one  firmly  plant  his  feet  ? 

*  .liva. 

^  From  God. 


192  SAKHIS 

80.  Many  I  met  of  many   words,  but  none    I  met  who 

grasp  them. 
Let  him  who  speaks  so  bd  swept  away,  if  he  holds  not 
fast  himself. 

81.  If  one  by  one  it  be  established,  then  it  will  be  established. 
He  who  speaks  with  double   tongue,  shall  be  beaten 

with  redoubled  blows. 

82.  Restrain  your  tongue,  refrain  from  much  speaking. 
Hold  fast  by  the  tester,  who  has  knowledge  of  the  word 

that  falls  from  the  Guru's  lips. 

83.  He  who  does  not  bridle  his  tongue  and  has  no  truth  in 

his  heart. 
Do  not  keep  company  with  him  :  he  will  rob  you  even 
of  a  marble  of  glass. 

84.  The  soul  has  perished  by  reason  of  the  tongue :  every 

moment  they  speak  unworthy  words. 
By  reason  of  the  mind  they  go  astray  in  error  and  Kal 
swings  them  hither  and  thither. 

85.  The  spearhead  is  fixed  in  the  body  :  the  arrow  broken 

sticks  fast. 
Without  the  loadstone  it  cannot  be  drawn  out :  a  million, 
other  stones  proved  useless. 

86.  In  front   the  stairway  is  narrow :  behind  it  is  broken 

in  pieces. 
The  maiden  behind  the  curtain  pushes  others  on,  her- 
self far  from  the  danger. 

87.  While  in   the   world    consider,    whether    householder 

or  Yogi. 
The  time  is  passing  away :  beware  of  strange  folk. 

88.  Doubt  has  destroyed  all  the  world  :  none  destroys  doubt. 
He  will  destroy  doubt,  who  has  considered  the  word. 

89.  Speech  is  of  many  varied  kinds :  thine  eyes  perceive 

nothing. 
Kabir  proclaims  aloud,  Understand  the  speech  of  each 
abode. 

90.  By  holding  the  root  work  is  perfected :  do  not  go  stray 

in  error. 
The  mind  is  wandering  in  the  ocean :  be  not  swept  away 
therein. 


SAKHIS  19^ 

91.  As  the  bee  roams  about  the  garden  for  tlie  scent  of 

many  flowers: 
So  the  Jiva  roams  in  worldly  desires  and  at  the  end 
goes  disconsolate. 

92.  The  whirlpool  is  as  the  heron's  snare :  many  senseless 

Jivas  have  been  swallowed  up  therein. 
Kabir    says.  Only   those  escape,  in    whose   heart  is 
discernment. 

93.  The  flighty  in  mind  became  a  locust  in  the  three  worlds : 
The   men  of  Hari  for  lack  of   the   knowledge  of  Hari 

fell  into  the  hands  of  Kal. 

94.  The  waves  are  of  varied  colour :   the   mind   is  a   bee 

that  cannot  see : 
Kabir  proclaims  aloud.  Understand  it  by  the  instru- 
ment of  wisdom. 

95.  As  a  juggler's  monkey,  so  is  the  Jiva  with  the  mind  : 
He  makes  him  dance  to  various  measures,  but  keeps 

him  close  to  hand. 
9G.    This  mind  is  unstable,  this  mind  is  a  thief,  this  mind  is 
a  pious  robber. 
The  mind  destroys  gods,  men  and  munis :   the  mind 
has  ten  thousand  doors. 

97.  The  snake  of  separation  has  bitten  the  body  :  it   heeds 

no  charm  at  all. 

Separated  from  Rama,  man  cannot  live,  or,  If  he  lives, 
he  lives  a  madman. 

98.  Parted  from  Rama,  the  body  is  restless :  let  no  one  do 

them  hurt : 
At  the  merest  touch  they   will  die,  like  the  sensitive 
creeper  are  they. 

99.  The  snake  of  separation  has  fastened  on  the  heart  and 

wounded  it. 
The  Sadhu  will  not  shrink  away— just  as  it  pleases  let 
it  bite. 
100.    The   heart's  tiirobbiug   pain  is  lodged  deep— a  splinter 
from  the  tree  of  speech. 

Extraction  will  not  draw  it  forth  :  there  it  remains 
to  make  fresh  wounds. 
18 


IM  SAKHIS 

101.  The  black  snake  witliin  tlie  body  lias    utterly  devoured 

all  the  world : 
But  few   will  escape,  who  meditate  on  the  name  of 
Rama  with  understanding. 

102.  Kal  stands  above  thy  head :  awake,    friend  of  thy 

foreign  foe. 
How  can  he  sleep  at  peace,  whose  house   is  on  a 
lonely  way  ? 

103.  The  body  is  wood  and  Kal  a  weevil :  he  devours  in 

various  ways : 
Kal  has  settled  within  the  body :  no  one  reads   the 
secret. 

104.  The  mind  is  a  cell  of  Maya :  the  body  a  castle  of 

doubt. 
Snake's  poison  heeds  no  charm :  Kal  is  the  onset  of  a 
snake.  « 

105.  Mind  and  Maya  are  one  :  Maya  pervades  the  mind : 
The  three   worlds  are  plunged   in  doubt :  how   can  I 

speak  of  them  apart  ? 

106.  The  hedge  is  given  as  protection  to  the  field  :  but  the 

hedge  devours  the  field. 
The  three  worlds  are  plunged  in  doubt ;  whom  can  I 
make  to  understand. 

107.  The   mind  is  a  sea,  and  desire  is  the  wave  :   many  are 

swept  away  and  drowned. 

Kabir  says,  They  only  will  escape,  in   whose  heart  is 
discernment. 

108.  By  wisdom  a  sea  was  made,  strong  wind,  and  a  sharp 

eyed  thief : 
The  whole  world  was  destroyed :  none  could  reach 
the  goal. 

109.  None  died  as  man,  whoever  died,  died  as  a  beast  of  the 

field : 
Not  once  Jiva  reached  the  goal,  but  became  elephant 
or  horse. 

110.  Than   man  there  is  no  greater  sinner,  who  obeys   not 

the  Guru's  instruction. 
Again  and  again  he  cries  like  a  jungle  kukuhi  and  is 
conceived  in  the  womb  of  four  mines. 


SAKHIS  ld5 

111.  What  can  helpless  man  do  V    At  his  biddiDg  the  door 

will  not  be  opened. 
If  a  dog  be   made  to  sit  at  the   chauka,  '  he   will   but 
lick  the  aipan  *  according  to  his  wont. 

112.  What  can  helpless  man  do,  whose  body  is  senseless  ? 
When  within  the  Jiva  there  lives  no  power  to  see,  what 

use  in  calling  to  him,  O  Kabir  ? 

113.  If  you  received  birth  as  man  but  lose  the  chance  that 

now  is  yours. 
You  will  fall  into  the  mill  of  this  world,  and  there 
suffer  grievous  blows. 

114.  Seek  to  obtain   the  gem   of   wisdom.    What  is  all  this 

decking  of  dust  ? 
Kabir  came  and   went  again :  this  world  is  without 
savour. 

115.  Birth  as  man  is  priceless  ;  it  cannot  be  a  second   time. 
A  ripe  fruit  which  has  fallen  cannot  again   grow   on 

the  branch. 
UG.    You  go,  having  twisted  my  arm  and  awakened  me  from 
sleep. 
Kabir  proclaims  loudly.  By  this  road  must  you  go. 

117.  I  have  given  Sakhis  in  bundles,  but  in  all  four  ages 

only  twojetters. 
O  Kabir,  the  taste  of  the  words  is  sweet ;  but  no  one 
really  weighs  it. 

118.  A  raft  is  made  of  suakes  '  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean  of 

this  world. 
To  leave  it  is  to  drown,  to  grasp  it  to  be  bitten  in  the 

arm. 
119    In  my  hand  a  cup  filled  with   /c/toiua,  I  kept  watch 

all  day  long. 
O  Kabir,  when  I  care  no  longer,  not  even  sour   milk 

will  be  offered. 
120.    If   I  speak  of  One,  it  is  not  so  :  if  I  say  two,    then 

this  Is  an  offence. 
As  He  is,  so  He  remains  :  this  Kabir  proclaims  aloud. 

*  Bridal  seat. 

'The  seat  is  plastered  with  rice-water. 

'  Knowledge. 


IM  SAKHIS 

121.  I  have  a  packet  of  amrit :  I  opened  it  in  many  ways : 
Sbould  I  meet  with  one  like  myself,  I  will  dissolve  it 

and  give  him  to  drink. 

122.  The  bundle  of  amrit  I  lifted  from  my  head. 

To  whomsoever  I  declared  that  I  am  One,  he  but 
abused  me. 

123.  Of  Him,  for  whom  munis  practised  penance,  whose 

praises  the  Vedas  are  wearied  with  singing  : 
Of  Him  I  give  instruction,  but  none  believes. 

124.  From  One  came  countless—and  the  countless  became 

One. 
When  comes  knowledge  of  the  One,  in  the  One  all  are 
absorbed. 

125.  There  is  one    word  of  the  Guru-deva :    therein  are 

countless  thoughts. 
Pandits,  munis,  men  were  wearied :  the  Vedas  caa 
find  no  limit  there. 

126.  Turning  their  backs  upon  the  Master,  four  armies  sing. 

Jiva  is  fallen  among  thieves  ;    though  he  has  no  part 
nor  lot  in  this. 

127.  The  hunter  sees  the  game— and  flees  from  it. 

A  wonder  have  I  seen  :  a  dead^  man  is  devouring 
Death.  "" 

128.  In  the  three  worlds  there  is  robbery,  that  makes  away 

with  all. 
The  thief  is  without  a  head :  none  could  recognise  him. 

129.  Watching   the  grinding    of  the  mill,  tears  came  to 

my  eyes  : 
None  who  came  between  its  two  stones,  escaped  un- 
scathed. 

130.  The  mill  of  Rama  is  working,   which  has  ground  the 

world  to  dust. 
Kabir  says.  They  alone   were  saved,  who  had  taken 
out  the  pin. 

131.  Four  thieves  went  out  athieving  :    they   took  ofif  the 

shoes  from  their  feet. 

The  four  set  their  ladder  at  the  door.  *     O  Pandit, 

ponder  this. 

^  JlTa  •  Kal 

'  Mana,  Bndha,  Chita,  Ahankar.  *  At  each  door  of  the  body. 


SAKHIS  191 

132.  Praise  to  that  milk,  whence  comes  the  ghi. 

Half  a  Sakhi  of  Kabir  is  the  life  of  four  Vedas. 

133.  Praise  to  that  mind,  which  attests  the  tester. 
The  Lord  has  given  sugar  :  the   fool  thinks  it  salt. 

134.  The  plant  of  poison  has  taken  root  and  a  snake  coiled 

round  it. 
On  account  of  this  the  Jiva  is  in  dread  and  watches 
night  and  day. 

135.  In  the  house  where  the  snake  harbours,  there  can  no 

s(ulhuhe: 
All  the  furniture  is  removed  from  it  and  it  is  filled 
full  of  poison. 

136.  Seed  of  a  grain-weight  was  sown,  its  produce   was  a 

maund  : 
The  tent  of  Kal  is  pitched  morning  and  evening    on 
the  road. 

137.  Though  one  maund  be  sown,  the  crop  will  not  be  even 

a  grain-weight. 
No  one  heeds  my  saying,  therefore  at  the  last  tliey  go 
astray. 

138.  Renounce  self  and  recite  the  name  of  Hari :  efface 

defects  from  head  to  toe. 
Have  no  fear  of  any  creature :  this  is    the  essence  of 
the  sadhu'H  faith. 

139.  By  reason  of  prejudice  and  bigotry  the   whole  world  is 

misled. 
He  who  is  free  from  prejudice  and  recites   the  name 
of  Hari,  he  is  the  finnt  and  the  wise. 

140.  The  great  are  lost  in  greatness,  in  their  every  hair  is 

pride. 
Without  knowledge  of  the  Sat-Onru  all   four  castes 
are  chautar, 

141.  What  use  in  renouncing  Maya,  when  you   will  not  re- 

nounce conceit  ? 
In  that  conceit  were  ail  munis  burned :  that  conceit 
devours  all. 

142.  In  the   flame  of  Maya  the  whole  world  burns  :  they 

dote  on  gold  and  women. 
Kabir  says.  How  can  you  be  saved  when  the  fire  is 
wrapped  in  cotton  ? 


IW  SAKHIS 

143.  Maya  in  the  world  is  as  a  snake :   armed  with  poisons 

she  lies  in  the  road. 
The  whole  world  she  has  caught  in  her  noose  :  Kabir 
alone  cut  his  way  out. 

144.  There  is  a  charm  for  the  snake  and   the  scorpion,  and 

for  poisons  there  are  antidotes. 
If  one  fall  into  the  clutches  of  a  treacherous  woman, 
she  will  tear  out  his   heart  and  devour  it. 

145.  Tamogunr  has  three  qualities  :  there  the  bee  revels  in 

the  scent. 

One  branch  bears  three  fruits,  brinjal,*  sugarcane," 
and  cotton.' 

146.  Tlie  mind  like  an  elephant  tramples  the  zealous  Jiva 

to  death ;  desire  has  grown  shrewd. 
It  heeds  no  music  and  no  charm  :  it  flies  and  fastens  on 
its  prey. 

147.  The  mind  is  an  elephant,  which  never  obeys  :   it  goes 

at  its  own  will. 
What  can  the  helpless  mahnvat*  do,  witli  no  aniens  in 
his  hand. 

148.  This  Maya  is  a  sweeper- woman  and  a  sweeper's  wife. 
She  caught  in  her  toils  both  father  and  son :   yet  she 

remains  not  with  either. 

149.  Beholding  gold  and  women  be  not  led  astray  by  their 

brilliance. 
Separation  and  union  are  twins,  like  a  snake  that  casts 
its  slough. 

150.  All  fell  into  the  clutches  of  Maya,   Brahma,   Vishnu^ 

Mahesha : 
Narad,  Sharad,  Sanak,  Sanandan,  and  Ganesha,  the  son 
of  Gauri. 

151.  One  Pipal'  tree  is  valued  highly;  no  one  knows  its  secret. 
They  plash  the  boughs,  but  none  gets  fruit :  leaving  the 

Husband  they  seek  this  Pipal. 

152.  From  being  honest  one^   became  a  thief :  among  the 

thieves  quarrels  arose. 
O  Jiva,  you   will  know  it  well,  when   the  blows  fall 
upon  you. 

^  Salty     » Sweetness.         •  Tasteless. 
*  An  elephant  driver.        *  Brahma.        •  Jiva. 


SAKHI3  199 

153.  How  can  his  work  find  completion,  to  wliom  the  Guru 

has  not  shown  the  path  ? 
His  raft  will  sink  again  and  again  at  the  ghaV  that  is 
no  ghat. 

154.  It  was  not  known— it  was  not  understood  :  we  did  not 

walk  with  understanding. 
When  the  blind  is  companion  of  the  blind,  who  will 
show  the  path  ? 

155.  When  his  Guru  is  blind,  what  can  the  disciple  do  ? 

The  blind  urges  on  the  blind,  both  fall  into  the  well. 

156.  The  chamber  is  the  chamber  of  a  man  :  do  not  there- 

fore rush  to  enter  in. 
In  one  field  there  feed  a  lion,  a  donkey  and  a  cow. 

157.  Four  months  the  rain'  fell  heavily  :   the  water  of  the 

tank  is  unrivalled. 
But  clothed  in  mail  of   proof   not  one  arrow   pierced 
them. 

158.  The  Jiva  fears  to  meet  the  Guru :  and  the  body  is 

subject  to  decay. 
Polly  like  a    butcher    lives  within    the    mind :    and 
gamblers'  stakes  are  set  there. 

159.  The  body  is  doubt,  the  mind  a  dog:   Kal    hunts   there 

ever. 
Dwelling  in  one  house   with  these,  O  friend,  why  do 
you  ask  of  its  welfare  ? 

180.     He  who  distinguishes  not  the  lionest  from  the  thief,  is 
))lind  and  witless. 
For  lack  of  the  test  is  he  destroyed.    Consider  and 
keep  yourself  aloof. 

161.  Make  your  Guru  your  armourer  :  he  will  scour  clean 

your  mind. 
With  the  chain  of  his  word  he  will  burnish,  and  your 
mind  will  become  like  a  mirror. 

162.  In   instructing  a  fool  your  own  store  of  wisdom  is 

wasted : 
Oharcoal  cannot  grow  white,  however  much  soap  be 
used. 

'  Landing  place. 

*  Gura's  instrtictiona. 


200  SAKHIS 

163.  An   idiot,  a  sloven,  an  evil  doer,  is  cased  from  head  to 

foot. 
What  can  the  archer  do   wheu  no  arrow   can  pierce 
him  ? 

164.  A  parrot  has  settled  on  the  fruit  of  the  semar'^  tree. 
He  draws  back  his  beak  and  beats  his  head :  he  has  no 

one  to  thank  but  himself. 

165.  O  parrot,  quickly  leave  the  semar  tree  :  or  your  wings 

will  become  yet  more  enfeebled. 

Only  those  will  haunt  the   semar  tree,   who  have  no 
eyes  in  their  heart. 

166.  The  parrot  settled  on   the  fiemar  tree  in  hope  of  the 

two  buds. 

When  the  buds  cracked  and  split,  the  parrot  flew  off 
disgusted. 

167.  Upon  whom  do  people  trust  ?    Why  do  they  sit  aloof  ? 
Yaraa  lurks  to  murder  Jivas,  as  a  butcher  slaughters 

sheep. 

168.  He  who  by  knowledge  and  understanding  stays  unmov- 

ed, and  renouncing  power  becomes  powerless : 

Kabir  says,  No  one  can  touch   the   garment's  hem  of 
such  a  sant. 

169.  That  diamond  is  worthy  of  all  praise  that  can   endure 

tlie  hammer's  blow. 

Tlie  deceitful  and  the  hypocrite  on  testing  was  proved 
spurious. 

170.  Hari  is  a  diamond,  men  are  jewellers :  all  spread  their 

wares. 

When  men  And  the  tester,  then  the  claim  of  others  is 
rejected. 

171.  Do   not  display  a  diamond  in  the  market  where  men 

sell  greens. 

Tie  up  your  bundle  quietly  and  go  upon  your  way. 

172.  A  diamond  fell  in  the  market,  and   there  lay   covered 

with  dust. 

Many  fools  passed  it  by :  the  tester  picked  it  up. 
*  Cotton  tree. 


SAKHIS 


201 


173.    Diamouds  are  not  found  in  bags,  nor  sandal  trees  in 
rows. 
Ldons  do  not  live  in   herds  :  nor  sailhns  walk  in  com- 
panies. 
174.     Kacli  according  to  his  wisdom,  so  have  all  believed. 

Hari's  knowledge  is  hard  to  come  by  :  none  perceived 
it  fully. 

175.  The  bones  burn  like  fuel,  the  tree  burns  like  grass. 
Kabir  is  burning  in  the  sweetness  of  Rama,  as  cotton 

burns  in  the  store-house. 

176.  The  ghat  was  missed  through   ignorance  of  the  road  : 

through  the  orders  came  wandering  in  the  mines  of 
creation 
That  which  spread  the  lime  in  this  world  was  never 
clearly  known. 

177.  What  profits   talking   to  a  fool   or  how   control  the 

brutish  ? 
What  profits  shooting  at  a  stone  ?  The  best  of  arrows 
is  but  spoiled. 

178.  As  a  marble  falls  upon  a  dome  and  straig'htway  tumbles 

to  the  ground  : 
So  is  the  heart  of  a  fool :  liow  can  the  word  rest  there  ? 

179.  The  outward  two  are  gone,  and  the  mind's  also  are 

lost. 
He  whose  four  eyes  are  gone,  how  can  he  be  controlled  ? 

180.  Many  days  passed  so,  without  love  of  devotion. 
Waste  land  sown  will  bear  no  crop,  however  heavily  it 

rain. 

181.  1  weep  for  this  world,  but  none  weeps  for  me. 

That  man  alone  will  weep  for  n^,  who  has  discernment 
of  the  word. 

182.  All  say  'Lord,  Lord,*  but  I  am  concerned  therefor. 

Of  the  Ijord  they  have  no  knowledge  :  where  will  they 
rest  at  last  ? 

183.  Life  cannot  be  sustained  witiiout  life  :  life  is  the  food 

of  life. 
How  can  you  sustain  your  life  and  yet  be  merciful  to 
life?  O  Pandit,  think  this  out. 


202  SAKHIS 

184.  1  describe  all,  none  know  me. 

Tlien  I  was  good  :  now  am  I  good  :  from  age  to  age  I 
cannot  change. 

185.  If  I  speak  openly,  then   they  will  beat  me  :  none  sees 

within  the  veil. 
The  dog  '  is  hidden  beneath  the  straw  :  why  make 
enemies  by  speaking  ? 

186.  I  have  travelled   through  many  countries  :  my  mind 

is  stored  with  their  plentJ^ 
Of  that  for  which  I  have  been  searching,  everywhere 
there  is  famine. 

187.  This  Kali  Yug  is  base,  the   world  is  blind,  none  heeds 

the  word. 
To  whomsoever  I  speak  of  his  own  good,  he  is  roused 
to  hate  me. 

188.  1  touch  not  ink  nor  paper,  nor  take  pen  in  my  hand. 
Of  the  greatness  of  the  four  ages  Kabir  has  given 

instruction  with  his  lips. 

189.  Wisdom   before,  '    wisdom   behind,  *    wisdom    on   the 

right^'hand  and  the  left\ 
To  increase    wisdom  upon    wisdom,    that  is  all   my 
wisdom. 

190.  He   who   walks   within   bounds  is  man ;  who  lives  in 

the  boundless  is  the  sant. 
He  who  knows  not  the  bounds,  nor  the  unbounded, 
his  understanding  is  naught. 

191.  Those  who  understand  are  established  in  one  state, 

those  who  seek  in  every  place : 
They,   says  Kabir,  are  betwixt  and  between :  they 
waver  from  this  side  to  that. 

192.  What  can   the  helpless  road  do,   when   the   traveller 

does  not  walk  with  understanding? 
Leaving  their  own  road,  they  wander  from  waste  to 
waste. 

193.  You  are  dead  and  you  will  die  again,  without  even  a 

blunted  arrow. 
The  axe  is  laid  to  the  tree  :  today  or  tomorrow  you  die.. 

»  Kal.        ^  Jagrat.        •  Supan. 
*  Rhushputi.  *   Turiya. 


SAKHIS  205- 

191.    My  speech  is  of  the  East :  no  one  can  understand  me. 
Only  he  can  understand  me,  who  is  from  the  furthest 
East. 

195.  He  whose  steps  once  crushed  the  earth  and  raised 

the  dust  in  clouds. 
Himself  a  prey  is  drying  in  the  sun:  O  Pandit,  consider 
this. 

196.  Those  who   measured'    tlie  earth   in   their  stride,  and 

crossed*  the  river  at  a  leap. 
Who  weighed'    the   mountain  in   their  hands:   these 
has  Kal  devoured. 

197.  Nine*    maunds  of   milk   were  collected :   it   vanished 

drop  by  drop. 
The  milk  was  spilt  and  soured :  and   the  butter  was 
spoiled. 

198.  How  often  I  fall  at  their  feet  to  win  them  :  how  often- 

I  weep  to  win  them. 
The  Hindus  go  on  worshipping   their  gods,  and   the 
Turk  owns  none  of  these  at  all. 

199.  O  man,  thy  state  is  great:  yet  of  thy  flesh  no  use  is^ 

made. 
Of  thy  bones  can   no  ornaments   be  formed  ;  nor  soun- 
ding instrument  of  thy  skin. 

200.  Who  knows  me,  I  know  him. 

Heed  not  the  saying  of  the  world  or  Vedas. 

201.  While  the  drum  lasts  it  sounds,  and  so  long  the  traf- 
ficking of  wealth  proceeds. 

When    the  drum   is  broken,   wealth   is  gone  :  no  one 
looks  in  at  your  door. 

202.  The  Earth  is  the  mother  of  all  things  :   the  Earth   is 
the  nurse  of  all. 

The   Earth   cares   not   to   know    hor  value  :  sois  the 
merciful  Guru. 

203.  Had   the  Earth  not  cared  to  know  its  value,  it  would 

never  have  wavered. 
Grain  by  grain  it  would  have  grown  heavier  and  beei^ 
established  at  its  root. 

»  Dwftrf.  "  Han  am  an. 

*  Erishn.n.  *  Nine  kinds  of  woraliip. 


-^  SAKHIS 

204     When  merit  was  not,  when  earth  was  not,  nor  water; 
When  creation  and  destruction   were  not :   of  that 
age  has  Kabir  spoken. 
205.    When  there  is  speech,  there  the  letter  came  to  be  : 
where  tliere  is  silence,  there  the  mind  is  firm. 
Then  speech  and  silence  are  one :  but  those  who 
understand  are  few. 
6.    The  stars  shine  till  the  sun  rises. 

The  Jiva  is  subject  to  Karma,  till  it  be  filled  with 
knowledge. 

207.  Not  knowing  the  name  of  the  village,  men  go  on  the 
wrong  road. 

Tomorrow  a  thorn  will  pieree  them :   why  not  give 
heed  beforehand? 

208.  Keep  company  with  tlie  sadhus  who  can  free  others 

from  troubles. 
The  companionship  of  the  mean   is  worthless  :  it 
is  misery  day  and  night. 

209.  Good  company  brings  forth  happiness  :  from  ill  asso- 

ciates spring  troubles. 
Kabir  says.  Let  us  go  where  there  is  companionship 
after  our  own  heart. 
210.    As  your  longing  is  at  its  beginning,  so  should  it  be 
to  its  end. 

By  adding  shell   to  shell,  a  hundred  millions  are 
heaped  up. 
2fl.    Today,  tomorrow,  or  any  day  (comes  death) :  the  body 
is  not  lasting. 
How  many  days,  O  man,  can  you  keep  water  in  an 
unbaked  vessel  ? 
212.    Trust  your  own  hands,  your  arms,  your  strength  : 
give  up  reliance  upon  others. 

When  through  his  courtyard  flows  a  river,  how  can 
he  die  of  thirst  ? 

213.  One  helpless  Jiva,  bound  with  many  bonds  : 

How  can  his  own  strength  set  him  free,  if  his  master 
give  not  release? 

214.  Do  not  kill  poor  Jivas  ;  there  is  one  life  in  all. 
Murder  will  never  be   forgiven,  though  one  hear  a 

million  Puranas. 


SAKHIS  20&> 

215.  Never  kill  a  Jiva  :  tomorrow  he  will  take  your  life. 
By  pilgrimages  you  will  not  be  saved,  though  a  mil- 
lion diamonds  be  given  in  alms. 

216.  Three   went  on  pilgrimage,   with   restless  thought 

and  thieving  mind. 
Not  one  single  sin  was  done  away  :  but  ten  maunds 
more  piled  on  them. 

217.  On    their  pilgrimage   they   were  swept  away  and 

drowned  :  shivering  they  bathed  in  the  waters  : 
Kabir  proclaims  aloud  :  They  became    rakshas  and 
bewailed  their  lot. 

218.  Pilgrimage  has  become  a  noxious  creeper  and  spreads 

from  age  to  age. 
The  followers  of  Kabir  have  rooted  it  up :   for  w!io 
would  eat  poison  ? 

219.  O  creeper  of  strange  qualities  !  thy  quality  cannot 

be  described. 
Wherever  cut,  tliou  growest  green  ;   watered   thou 
witherest  away. 

220.  The  creeper  is  unsightly  and  its  fruit  is  bad  :  the^ 

scent  of  its  flowers  is  noisome. 
The  root  destroys  the  gourd  :  and  all  thy  leaves 
are  bitter. 

221.  Cleaner  than   water,  subtler  than  vapour,  swifter 

than  air : 
Such  Kabir  has  made  his  friend. 

222.  Hearken,  O  sftnts,  to  the  words  of  the  Sat-Ouru  : 

take  no  burden  on  your  heart. 
Stand  up  in  his  presence,  I  bid  you,  and  set  your 
battle  in  array. 

223.  Sow  the  bitter  creeper,  and  you   will  pluck  bitter 

fruit. 
Then  only  you  will  gain  the  name  of  aidh^  when 
the  creeper  is  utterly  cast  out. 

224.  If  one  becomes  Sidh,  still  what  comes  of  it  ?    His 

fame  has  spread  on  all  sides. 

Within  him  is  the  seed-  and  desire  will  spring  up 
again. 


206  SAKHIS 

225.  Behind   the  curtain  libations    of    water  are    poured 

out :  O  sontSy  consider  it. 
Prom  the  fear  of  shame   he  lets  himself   be  crushed 
and  killed  :  Kal  carries  off  the  prey, 

226.  If  I  say,  "  He  is,'*  then  none  believes  :  without  being 

one  is  established  (sidh). 
Kabir  says,  Listen   O  sants  :    diamond  only  can  cut 
diamond. 

227.  Gold,  the  good,  the  sadhus,  can  part   and  be  united    a 

hundred  times. 
The  bad  are    alike  a  potter's  pots,  shattered  at    a 
single  blow. 

228.  In  a  chamber  of  soot  the  whole  world  is  being  stifled. 
Praise  to  the  man  who  enters  it  and  emerges  again. 

229.  The  chamber  is  of  soot  and  the  fort  too  of  soot. 

He  is  not  blackened  there,  who  abides  covered  with  a 
covering. 

230.  Wealth  of  ten  thousand   millions,  dominion  from  sun- 

rising  to  setting ; 
Are  not  to  be  weighed  against  the  excellence  of  devo- 
tion.   Of  what  use  is  all  this  ? 

231.  The  flsh^  have  all  vanished,  to  be  sold  in  the   court   of 

the  Fisher*. 
Were  thine  eyes   inflamed?    Why  else    did  the  net 
enfold  you? 

232.  I  made  my  house  in  the  waters  and  my  bed  in  the  deep 

below. 
When  the  dice  of  karma  were  cast,  the  net  wrapped 
me  round  as  a  garment. 

233.  Becoming  fish  there  is  no  escape :  the  Fisher  is  your 

death. 
In  whatever  tank'  you  swim,  there  too  he  will  set  his 
net. 

234.  Without  rope  the-  necks  of  all  are  bound  :  its  bonds  are 

countless. 
The  glass  is  given  into  their  hands,  but  without   eyes 
what  can  they  see  ? 

^  Jiva. 
»  Body. 


SAKUIS  207 

235.  By  teaching  tbey  are  not  tauglit ;  tliey  sell  themselves 

into  another's  hand. 
I   seek   to  draw   thee  to  myself,  but    thou   strivest 
toward  the  city  of  Yama. 

236.  As  constant  polishing  cleanses  iron  of  rust: 

So  by  constant  counsel  Maya  and  Moh  are  broken. 

237.  A  boat  of  iron,  a  heavy  cargo  of  stone, 

A  bundle  of  poison  on  his  head,  and  yet  he  fain  would 
cross. 

238.  The  Pandavas  holding  fast  by  Krishna,  yet  wasted  on 

Himalaya  mountain. 
If  iron  be  touched  with  the  paras,  how  can  rust  eat  it 
away? 

239.  He  rises  in  the  east  and  sets  in  the  west  and  feeds  on 

the  flowering  air. 
He  in  his  turn  is  devoured   by  Rahu ;  why  has  man 
forgotten  ? 

240.  The   mind   resides   before  the   eyes:  in  a  twinkling  it 

ranges  wide. 
The  three  worlds  are  tlie  mind's  realm  :  the   mind  is 
worshipped  in  every  place. 

241.  Tlie  mind  is  greedy  for  its  own  sweetness:  the  wave  of 

worldly  pleasure  is  ever  tossing. 
The  body   moves  at   the    mind's  motion :  thus  all  is 
lost. 
212.    The  fashion  of  the  world  is  as  a  flock  of  sheep. 
If  one  falls  into  a  pit,  all  go  the  same  road. 

243.  That  path  is  very  difficult :  none  should  go  thereby. 

Those  who  went,  never  returned  :  who  will  bring  news 
of  their  welfare? 

244.  In  the  company  of  the   wicked  there  is  death  :  as  the 

plantain  tree  near  the  plum. 
This  waves  and  that  is  torn  to  shreds :  avoid  the  com- 
pany of  Bidhana  (Brahma). 

245.  The  plantain  took  no  thought  when  the  plum  tree  was 

planted  near  it. 
Now   what  profits  taking  thought,  when  thorns  hem 
it  round  ? 


206  SAKHIS 

246.  None  know  life  and  death :  all  depart  in  blindness. 

At  the  door  of  the  unjust  none   finds  justice,  but  fron* 
birth  to  birth  bewails  his  lot. 

247.  He  who  found  not  the  Sat-gnni,  rushes  restlessly  in  alt 

directions. 
The  madinan*s  eyes  are  sightless :  his  house  is  burning,, 
but  he  quenches  ashes. 

248.  The  treasure  is  here,   they  seek  it  there.    How  shall 

they  then  obtain  it  ? 
He  is  wise  and  worthy  of  honour,  who  keeps  the  tester 
close  beside  him. 

249.  Listen  to  all,  but  make  your  own  decision. 

As  the  red  powder  box  is  at  once  box  and  lid. 

250.  O  musician,  make  your  music :  let   the  bitch  of  this^ 

Kali  Yug  lie. 
What  to  you  are  other's  doings  ?    Set  your  own  house 
in  order. 

251.  They  sing  and  recite  to  others,  but  do  not  know  them- 

selves :  it  is  a  song  sung  without  understanding. 
Kabir  says,  Without  the  touch  of  the  Paras,  the  iron  is 
but  stone  within. 

252.  That  which  in  the  beginning  I  made  one,  now  has  been 

split  in  pieces. 
Tested  by   the   touchstone    it  could  not  stand,   but 

proved  mere  brass. 
253     O  Kabir,  all  spoiled    Bhakti,  by    laving  stones  and 

pebbles. 
Within  they  stored  up  poison,  and  poured  away  the 

amrit, 

254.  She*  was  wife  to  one,  but  became  the  wife  of  many: 

the  wanton  had  many  mates. 
Kabir  asks.  With  which  will  she  burn,  for  she  was  wife 
of  many  husbands  ? 

255.  The  body  is  a  ship  and  mind  a  crow  :  millions  of  leagues 

it  flies. 
Sometimes  it  sinks  in  the  fathomless  river  of  doubt». 
sometimes  it  enters  heaven. 

*  Jiva. 


SAKHIS  209 

256.  For   the  jewel  of   wisdom  is  a  chamber   made:   and 

tliereon  is  a  lock  of  silence : 
111  presence  of  the   tester  open  it— witii   the  key  of 
gracious  words. 

257.  Midway  between  heaven  and   the  realm  below  hang 

two  fiourds :  '  one  is  pierced.' 
In  the  fear  of  six  Darshanas  are  caught  the  eighty-four 
million  of  siddhas. 

258.  Cast  away  all  evil  thinking:  make  your  life  fair. 

Give  up  the  ways  and  nature  of  the  crow  and  live  the 
life  of  the  swan. 
25*.*.     Even  as  he  speaks,  so  should  one  act,   and  renounce 
passions  and  hatred. 
He  will  not  vary  less  or  more  by  one  grain's  weight: 
thus  should  he  rule  himself. 
2G0.    O  Rama,    I  am  standing  at  thy  door :  O  Kabir,  come 
and  meet  with  me. 
Thou  art  merged  in  all— but  I  would  not  utterly  be 
merged  in  thee. 
201.    Delusion  fills  the  three  worlds,  and  every  place  delusion 
makes  its  dwelling. 
Kabir  proclaims  aloud.  Thou  livest  in  the  village  of 
delusion. 
262.    The  diamond  they  dropped  in  the  sand :  and  they  pick 
up  pebbles  and  eat  them. 
Kabir  proclaims  aloud.  Thou  shalt  again  set  out  iu 
sorrow. 
2C;{     As  the  leaves  in  the  forest,  or  the  grains  of  sand  in 
Ganges, 
Are  the  words  that  fell  from  the  lips  of  Kabir:  think. 
Pandit,  what  thou  shalt  answer. 

264.  I  thought  you  to  be  of  the  race  of  the  swan,,  therefore 

I  kept  by  your  side. 
Had  I  known  you  were  kin  to  the  crane,  I  had  never 
let  you  touch  my  body. 

265.  The  wise  hold  fast  by  wisdom,  the  unwise  scorn  wisdom. 
If  one  give  nutmeg  to  a  bullock,  how  can  he  know  or 

eat  it  ? 

14  '  Jiva  and  Ishwar.  '  Jira. 


210  SAKHIS 

266.  Leaving  the  herdsman,  leaving  the  husband,  the  cow* 

toothless  (and  old) 
Without  liope  of  salvation  lows  in  the  lanes  of  Brinda- 

ban. 

267.  Those  who  speak  sweet  words  with  their  mouth  but 

have  another  thought  in  their  hearts  : 
With  such,  says  Kabir,does  Rama  deal  no  less  cleverly. 

268.  Hence  all  go  their  way,  heavily,  heavily  laden. 
Thence  none  come  to  us,  whom  I  may  run  and  question. 

269.  The  devotion  of  Rama  is  dear,  as  fire  is  dear. 
Tliough  the  whole  city  be  burned^  yet  again  and  again 

men  beg  for  it. 

270.  The  wife  is  called  her  husband's,  but  yet  she  sleeps 

with  another. 
Folly  abides  in  her  heart :  what  joy  can  her  husband 
have? 

271.  The  good  became  bad,  by  listening  to  some  other's 

word. 
The  bell-metal  became  copper,  not  to  be  priced  as  gold. 

272.  Parted  from  God  they  offered  arti.*     O  Rama,  grant 

them  the  vision. 
At  death  Thou  wilt  grant  the  vision  :  but  what  profits 

this  ? 

273.  In  a  moment  comes  the  destruction :  the  people  live 

like  slovens. 
Take  careful  thought  for  the  future  :  then  cry  over 
what  is  past. 

274.  One  has  entered  into  all,  and  all  entered  into  the  one. 
Kabir  has  entered  into  the  knowledge,  wherein  there 

can  be  no  second. 

275.  If  the  One  is  served,  then  all  are  served  :  if  all  are 

served,  the  One  departs. 
If  the  root  be  watered,  there  wil  be  blossoms  and  fruit 
in  abundance. 

276.  The  forest,  wherein  no  lion  can  range,  no  bird  can  fly  : 
That  forest  Kabir's  disciples  have  explored  by  means  of 

silent  samadhU 

*  Jiva.  . 

»  A  lamp  made  of  flour  filled  with  ghi,  and,  having  several  wicks 

lighted,  is  whirled  round  over  an  idol. 


SAKHIS 


^f 


277.  If  I  speak  truth,  he  is  not  He  :  but  the  lie  is  dear  to  all. 
They  pour  water  over  my  head,  but  it  waters  the 

gardens  of  others. 

278.  Speech  is  priceless,  if  one  speak  with  knowledge. 
Weigh  in  the  balance  of  the  heart,  then  let  it  pass 

your  lips. 
280*.  He  (Brahma)  has  become  as  others  :  wliy  art  thou  void 
of  understanding? 
The  wise  and  the  unwise  do  not  thou  regard  as  one. 

281.  Those  who  are  drunk  with  Rama*s  wine  are  happy  in 

their  heart. 
As  a  fair  maid's  reflection  in  the  mirror  no  one's  arms 
can  clasp. 

282.  If  you    would   be  a  sadhii,  frequent  the  company  of  a 

sadhu  that  is  perfect. 
If  you   press  unripe  mustard  seed,  you  get  no  oil  nor 
cake. 

283.  Though  a  lion's  skin  be  wrapped  about  the  ram, 

His  speech  betrayeth  and  the  voice  unmasks  him. 

284.  Ages  were  spent  in  search  for  that  whose  root  is  in 

the  heart. 
From  their  great  pride  and   boast  fulness,   from   these 
their  error  sprang. 

285.  Ten     doors  1ms  the  cage   wherein   the   bird's  life  is 

contained. 
The   marvel  is   that   it  remains:   if   it  departs   why 
wonder  ? 

286.  With  Rama's  name  on  their  lips  they  set  their  battles 

in  array,  and  walk  in  the  ways  of  others. 
They   wear  the  skin  of  a  man  but   roam  like   hullorks 
here  and  there 

287.  The  ploughing  is  good,  the  seed  is  good,  and  it  is  sown 

by  handfuls. 
Why  then  does  the  blade  dry  up?    It  is  the  nature  of 
the  soil. 

288.  He  who  steps   from  the  Guru's  ladder,  no  longer  has 

the  Guru's  word. 
Hira  will  Kal  drag  away  and  none  can  keep  him  safe. 
•  Sakhi  279  in  the  Hindi  text  is  the  samr  as  212. 


212  SAKHIS 

290*.  Within  the  heart  is  biii'Diiig  sand  and  sunlight : 
And  all  liva under  the  shade  of  sorrow. 

291.  When  the  fire  is   kindled  in  the  ocean,  all  is  consumed 

to  the  very  ooze. 
From  east  to  west  the  Pandits   died,  pondering,  pond- 
ering ceaselessly. 

292.  Whoe'er  I  met  was  guru :  none  I  met  who  was  cheln. 
Six  lakhs  and  six  and  ninety   thousand  texts  for  but 

one  Jiva. 

293.  Where  one  would  buy,   there  am  I  not ;  there  ami, 

where  is  no  buyer. 
For  lack  of  thought  they  roam  in  error,  grasping  at 
the  shadow  of  the  word. 

294.  My  word  is  from  Eternity :  this  alone  has  power. 

But  these  who  start  and  shrink  are  altogether  power- 
less. 

295.  Throughout  the  world  are  gems  and  stones  and  all  can 

distinguish  them. 
The  tester  is  more  precious  than  the  gem ;  for  in  the 
world  these  are  but  few. 

296.  Do  not  call  him  tester  who  knows  the  common  stones. 
He  who  knows  the  gem  in  the  hearts  of  men,  he  is  the 

tester  of  jewels. 

297.  All  the  world  is  perishing,  each  in  his  own  fire. 
Never  did  I   meet  a  Jiva,  to  whose    companionship 

I  could  cUng. 

298.  The  man  is  sunk  deep  in  sleep  :  if  he  but  open  his  eyes, 

and  see. 
The  Jiva  is  fallen  among  thieves,  though  he  has  no 
part  nor  lot  in  this. 

299.  This  is  the  realm  of  the  Destroyer :  he  waylays  the 

labourer  and  takes  for  himself  his  goods. 
The  essence  of  the  word  is  as  a  mint,  that  tests  the 
secrets  of  the  heart. 

300.  They  claim  to  see,  yet  all  have  perished :  the  unseen 

none  discerned. 
If  one  that  is  penniless  comes  to  buy,  in  him  I  shall 
find  delight. 
*  Salchi  289  in  the  Hindi  text  is  the  same  as  200. 


SAKHIS  213 

301.     Within  tbe  eyes  is  power  to  see ;  but  few  are  they  who 
understaDcl. 
The  bodily  eyes  men  still  retain  :  thus  they  are  full  of 
empty  words. 
303*.  Pay  worship  with  understanding :  all  can  assume  a  dress. 
Let  that  worship  be  swept  away,  wherein  is  no  under- 
standing of  the  word. 

304.  Gods,  men,  munis,  deities,  seven  seas,  nine  regions  of 

the  earth : 
Kabir  says.  All  have  had  the  pleasure,  now  comes  the 
penalty  of  taking  body. 

305.  While  the  heart   rests  not  on  itself,  so  long  there  is 

no  peace. 
In  the  four  ages  have  I  proclaimed  it:  but  doubt  still 
nils  their  hearts. 

306.  I  listened  when  the  instrument  was  sounding.    All  its 

strings  are  broken. 
What  can  the  poor  instrument  do,  when  the  maker  of 
music  has  gone  ? 

307.  If  thou  carest  for  me,  then  give  up  all  thy  hopes. 
Grow  ever  in  my  likeness,  so  all  is  in  thy  hand. 

308.  If  one  become  a  sadhu^  what  comes  of  that,  if  he  speak 

not  with  understanding? 
He  kills  another's  soul :  for  his  tongue  wields  a  sword. 

309.  Within  the  swan  there  lies  a  lake  of  deceit. 

The    Jiva    found   no   resting-plao<%   his  eyes    denied 
the  vision. 

310.  Sweet  words  are  balm,  and  harsh  words  are  an  arrow. 
It  penetrates  the  doorway    of  the  ear  and  transfixes 

thr  whole  body. 

311.  Behold  the  courage  of  the  diver:  he  plunges  into  the 

lowest  deeps. 
The  Jiva  heeds  no  obstacle  and  comes  forth  with  the 
ruby  in  his  hand, 

312.  The  world  went  hence  deceived :  it  found  ^lor  Yoga  nor 

pleasure. 
Kabir  has  threshed  out  all  the  sesamum  seed^ ;  the  rest 
thresh  only  stalks. 

*  Sakhi  802  in  tho  Hindi  text  is  the  same  M  3dl.- * 


214  SAKHIS 

313.  O  diver,  drink  the  amrit :  why  plunge  to  your  death  in 

the  deeps  below  ? 
By  the  mercy  of  the  Quru  and  the  companionship  of 
sadhus,  in  this  hour  you  can  emerge. 

314.  Many  lives  were  wasted,  many  fell  and  came  to  nought. 
For  the  sake  of  one  bund,  O  man,  why  do  you  weep  ? 

315.  When    the    fire  is  kindled  in  the    ocean,    the    ashes 

crumble  piece  by  piece. 
O  Kabir,  the  hypocrites   bewail   the  burning  of  my 
priceless  gem. 

316.  In  the  six  Darshanas    One  is  pondered :   he  is  named 

the  Maker  : 
Says  Kabir,  All  the  world  is  wise  and  I  the  only  simple- 
ton among  them. 

317.  The  truthful  no  curse  can  touch  :  the  truthful  Kal  does 

not  devour. 
Who  walks  in  the  way  of  perfect  truth,  no  calamity 
befalls  him. 

318.  Take  service  with  a  perfect  master,  one  who  is  perfect 

in  all  his  ways. 
If  you  cling  to  the  love  of  the  mean,  you  will  return 
with  all  your  treasure  lost. 

319.  O  physician,  return  to  thy  house  :  no  one  asks  anything 

of  thee. 
He,  who  has  laid  this  burden  on  us,  himself  will  teach 
us  to  bear  it. 

320.  In   instructing  others,    my   own  mouth  is  filled  with 

sand. 
While  guarding  another's  floor,  my  own  field  has  been 
eaten. 

321.  I  am  looking  toward   thee,   thou  lookest  somewhere 

else. 
A  curse  on  such  a  mind  as  this  :    one  mind  that  haa 
two  aims. 

322.  Aiming  and  directing  others*  aim  they  took  their  aim  : 

no  arrows  hit  the  mark. 
The  arrows  all  went  wide  :  they  fiung  down  the  hovr 
and  left  it. 


SAKHIS  215 

323     Action  must  agree  with  word  :  only  if  it  is  a  magnet, 
call  it  so. 
Kabir  says.  Without   the  true   magnet  how  can  one 
win  the  battle  ? 

324.  Say  your  say  and  hear  my  words  :  hear  and  grow  one 

with  me. 
Before   my  eyes  the  world  has  passed ;  but  such  an 
one  I  never  found. 

325.  I  have  travelled  from  country  to  country,  through  the 

streets  of  village  after  village. 
I   iiave  not  found  one  Jiva,   who  cared   to  sift  and 
winnow. 

326.  The  magnet  and  iron  are  lovers  :   it  draws  and  uplifts 

the  iron. 
Such  is  the  word  of  Kabir,  that  draws  and  saves  from 
Kal. 

327.  You  were  deceived.    So  be  it.     But  now  awake  again. 
Tlie  weapon  of  the  word,  this  is  the  file  of  doubt. 

328.  If  the  songs,  Kabir  has  set  and  sung,  one  daily  sings 

with  understanding. 
Once  passed  in  death  he  will  not  return,  nor  here  be 
seen  again. 

329.  Wliat  can  the  helpless  Guru  do  ?    The  fault  is  in  the 

pupil. 
Tlie  arrow  of  the  word  pierces  him  not  :  as  well  blow 
into  a  hollow  bamboo. 

330.  Look  on  him'  as  thy  grandsire,  thy  brother,  and   thy 

father    and  cleavt^  in  reverence  to  his  feet. 
lie  who  in  this  time  fails  to  see,  for  ever  and  always 
*     he  is  blind. 

331.  To  be  little  is  best  of  all :   from  being  little  all  things 

grow. 
As  to  the  two  days'  moon  all  bow  the  head. 

332.  Death  after  death  the   whole  world  died  :    yet  none 

knows  bow  to  die. 
None  ever  died  in  such  wise  as  never  to  die  again. 

'    Guru. 


333.     Death  after  death  the  whole  world  died  :  but  none 
took  future  thought. 

Each  held  by   his  own  wisdom  :  but  the  whole  world 
died  a  slave. 

33-1.    The  wares  are  set  out,  no  buyer  comes:  the  price  of 
the  wares  is  hire. 
The  man  wlio  has  no  money  walks  restless  to  and  fro. 

335.  They  renounced  their  households  to    become  Yoei 

Household  the  Yogi  has  none  ' 

Without  understanding  they  wander  astray,  grasping 

but  the  shadow  of  the  word.  "      f    s 

336.  The  lion-  roams  solitary  in  the  forest  :   in  a  second  of 

tune  he  makes  its  circuit. 
His  own,  .or  the   forest  of  'another,  each   is  alike  to 

^^^'    "'waTch"'^''"'  """""  '"*  ""''^  '■  '"^"'  "^  "'■'«  *"  J^««P 
'Sllet  imZs^  -'^^^  ^'^'-  --  — ' 

All  actions  of  the  heart  within  come  forth  by  the  way 
of  tlie  moutii.  "^ 

339.    I  never  knew   a  bosom  friend  :  all  I  met  were  selfish. 

m::,d"r;    ''"  *^'  '^  *°^"  "°^^'  -« -  *-•>- 

^'°-    l?vl  ""r'r'"""'-"'^"'-"'°»"'«^o"oneinhisownfire. 
myself.'         ""'*  *''  '"^'■'  '"  ^^"•""   '  "''^ht  join 

341.  Moulded  and  fashioned  was  man  :    but  without  wis- 

dom  he  is  shapeless. 

What  can  one  do  with  the  rose,  which  has  no  frag- 
ranee  ?  ^ 

342.  What  profits  birth  in  mighty  house,   when  the  under- 

standing is  feeble  ? 

Like  a  flower   in  a  desert   place,  whose  colours  will 
wither  for  naught. 


SAKHIS 


217 


343.  There  is  no  penance  higher  than  truth,  no  sin  that  can 

rival  lying. 
In  him,  within  whose  heart  is  truth,  does   He  himself 
abide. 

344.  Not  made  of  the   Creator  nor  of  Brahma  :   unseen  of 

sun  or  moon  : 
Not  found  in  the   three  worlds  :  yet  known  to  all  the 
universe. 

345.  The  trunk   is  straight,  the  fruit   is  hard  to  reach,  the 

tree*  is  rooted  firm. 
Many  birds  died  \n  striving  after  it  :  the  fruit  is  sweet 

but  far  away. 
346     One  sits"  -a  banya  :    one  stands' — a  cowherd  : 

One  never  sleeps*     a  watchman  :   Kal  has  devoured 

them  all. 

347.    In  front,  the    tire   burns  liercely  ;  behind,   it  all  grows 
green  again. 
All  praise  then  to  the  tree",    tliat  bears  although  its 
root  be  severed. 

MS.    Youth,  age,  and   childhood   passed :   now  the  fourth* 
stage  is  come. 
Kven   as  a  cat    watches   a   mouso,   so   Yama  lies  in 
wait. 

349.  Destroyed  by  others,  not  self-destroyed,  yet  none  the 

\  less  destroy<Ml  ; 

Whom  shall    I  strike  aii<l  woinul  ?    All  tliat  T  see  is  my 
own  life. 

350.  I  went  to  all  the  trees',  1  tested  all  their  fruits. 
Again  and  again  Kabir  goes   begging  the  vision  as  his 

alms. 

351.  When  there  is  none  to  hear   within  the  house,  teacher 

and  teaching  are  vain. 
When  hearer  and    teaciier   ai<:  m  one  iiouse,  tlien  the 
teaching  proves  its  savour. 

'     The  tree  of  Prikirti.  *  Old  age. 

'.  *.  *  Different  types  of  asceticfi. '  Retigiorifi.. 
*  Attachment  to  thin  world. 


218  SAKHIS 

352.  The  touch  of  the  paras  turns  it  to  gold  :  it  will  never 

be  iron  again. 
The  palas  tree  pervaded  by  the  sandal's  scent,  is  now 
called  dhak  by  none. 

353.  Searching,  and  searching,  and  searching,  but  showed 

Him  now  this,   now  that. 
When   searcliing  and   searching  found   nothing,  then 
Hari  was  known  unique. 

354.  Tlie  Unique  lias  made  the  world,  but  the  Lord's  light 

is  other  than  He. 
In  the  last  hour  of  all,  tell  me,  whose  is  the  vision  you 
see? 

355.  Tiie  Lord's  light   in    the  heart   is   one,  by   that  light 

then  behold  Him. 
Why  do  you  call  him   Unique,   by   whose   w^ork   the 
world  was  made  ? 

356.  Brahma  asked  tlie   woman,    with  clasped  hands  and 

bowed  head  : 
Of   what  origin'    is  tliat  Purusha,  O  mother?  speak 
and  make  me  to  know. 

357.  He  has  no  form  nor  shai>s  :  nor  in   the  interspaces  did 

he  take  body. 
In  the  midst   of   the   palace   of  heaven  know  him  as 
without  substance. 

358.  Tiiey  set  themselves  to  meditate  upon  this  Purusha,  as 

within  adamantine'  doors. 
They  saw  but   their  own  reflection :  and   the   three* 
were  entranced  therewith. 

359.  This  mind  found  refreshment,  when  the   knowledge  of 

Brahma  gushed  forth. 
The  fire,  in  which  the  world  is  burning,  became   like  a 
cooling  stream. 

360.  That  to  which  from  all  eternity  the  soul  was  kin,  was 

forgotten  in  all  abodes. 
Now  caught  in  the  eighty-four  million  (births)  the  scut 
cries'^  This  "and  *'That." 

'  Caste  or  colour. 

•  The  state  of  Samadhi. 

*  Brahma.  Vishnu  and  Mahesha. 


SAKHIS  21^ 

361.    I   describe  the  unseen  V     I    describe  the  seen,'  I  des- 
cribe the  unborn'  to  thee. 
O  Kabir,  I  describe  ail,  but  none  describes  me. 
382.    In  the  three  worlds  I  have  seen  it :  wh}-  do  you  call  it 
unseen  ? 
Knowing  not   the   essence   of   the   world,  you  wear  a 
disguise  to  your  own  deception. 
363.    Learn,  whence  came  the   word,  and  where   the   word 
abides. 
Kabir  says,  I  am  the  lover  of  the  word,  which  gave  the 
vision  of  the  invisible. 
361.     Learn   to   know  your  own   true  maker:    believe  my 
words. 
Within  the  five   elements,  of  whose  power   was  this 
wide  display  ? 

365.  Of   the   whole   universe  am  I   tiie   maker  :  above  me 

there  is  no  second. 
Kabir  says.  No  one  knows  me  :  all  are  absorbed  in  that*. 

366.  Tlie  sons*  pay  no  iieed  to  their  father's*   words  :  they 

worship  one   without  substance. 
Kabir  says.  Even  now  awake,  and  renounce   the  \ov& 
that  is  false. 

367.  All  set  their  hope  on  the  city  of  nothingness,  wherein 

there  is  no  Creator. 
Kabir  says.  Know  your  own  Jiva  :  thus  all  delusion  will 
vanish. 

368.  All  say,  "devotion,  devotion " :    but    their    devotion 

proved  vain. 
From  the  place,  whcroi?i   tUvy  put  their  trust,  came 
wrath. 

369.  Consider,  O  learned  brother :    not  one  has  brought   us 

tidings. 
From  the  journey,  they  went,   they  return   not  again 
to  give  an  account  of  that  country. 

370.  In  delusion  the  whole  world  passed  away  :  all  |>erished 

in  delusion. 
No  one  firmly  plants  his  steps  :  this  woe  is  past  all  telling* 

^  Maya.  *  Brahma.  Vishnu  and  Mahesha. 

*  Eternal  Purusha.  *  Niranjan. 

•  Chelas.  •  Guru. 


230  SAKHJS 

371.  Prom  Maya  has  sprung  mind:   from    mind  the  ten 

avatars. 
Brahma,  Vishnu   passed  away   deluded :   tlie  world  is 
plunged  in  error. 

372.  Galling  on  Rama,  all  passed  through   the  world,  but 

not  one  reached  Rama. 
Kabir    says.    For    those    who  know   Rama,  all  their 
works  are  perfected. 

373.  Tins  world  has  become  mad,  entangled  in   the   love   of 

the  unseen. 
Deserting   the   Visible,   it  serves  a  Purusha  without 
substance. 

374.  TI)e    king^    became    subject :  the  subject'   took   the 

kingdom. 
The  subject  would  govern  all,  hence  all  is  confusion. 

375.  He,  whose  praise  all  learn  to  chant,  has  neither  hands 

nor  feet. 
Kabir  says,  Wisely  the  mother  gave  this  son  the  name 
Niranjan  (without  birth). 

376.  O  tliou  tliat  knowest  Brahma,  be  not  led   astray   with 

Vedas  and  the  world. 
Kabir  says.  Here  is  my  wisddm  :  take  this  lamp  in  thy 
hand. 

377.  The  worshipper  saw  not  the  Deva :  nor  did   the  Deva 

see  his  worshipper. 
Kabir  says,  I   saw   both  d.ying :   the  Guru   gave  this 
teaching. 

378.  Thou  knowest  thine  own  state,  Deva :  in  us  is  no  power 

to  know. 
Kabir  says.  All  share  this  error :  all  are  plunged  in  doubt. 

379.  From  gazing  on  nothingness  doubt  arose,  and  searching 

on  all  four  sides. 
Searching  and  searching  they  died,  but  the  form  with- 
out form  none  found. 

380.  He  who  has  planted  his  understanding  firm,  that  Yogi 

becomes  immortal. 
Xow  he  understands,  and  renounces  error :  beside  him 
there  is  none  else^ 

1  Soul.  '  Kal. 


SAKHIS  221 

381.  By  doing  what  tliey  see  others  do,  tlie  whole  world  was 

misled  :  none  found  f  lie  Sat-Gnvn. 
ICabir  says.  They  perplexed  with  doubt  have  lost  their 
Jiva. 

382.  You  set  your  hope  thereon  :  the  hope  thereof  is  false. 
Infatuate  you   left    your  household    for    the    forest  r 

from  age  to  age  you  roam  unsatisfied  ^ 

383.  When    the   foundation   shakes,    the    whole     house    is^ 

shaken  :     now  none  can  check  its  fall. 
Kabir  says.  If  one  understands,  him  will  Kal  not  devour. 

384.  Rama*  dwelt  in  the  depths  of  the  forest :  yet  the  hope 

of  the  Guru  was  unfulfilled. 
Kabir  says,  All  this  is  Pnhhamla,  and  liars   always   go 
disappointed. 

385.  Fear  arose,  the  heart  is  fearful,  this  fear  destroys  their 

peace. 
None  has  seen  Rama,  though   they  cry  '*  Rama  "  day 
and  night. 

386.  'Twas  I  made  the  ocean  of  bliss,  and  sorrows  and  grief 

I  trampled  under  foot. 
None   kept   fast   his   grip:  beggar  and  king,  all  passed 
away. 

387.  Had  there  been  no  trouble   in   tiie   world,  there  had 

been  no  grief  of  separation. 
In  their  happiness  they  heaped  sorrow  on  themselves  : 
this  saying  all  men  say. 

388.  All  are  engrossed   with   scriptures :  this  fashion  none 

renounces. 
All  are  caught  in  the  net  of  error  and  have  cast  away 
the  Jiva. 

389.  He'  is   without  form,   without  shape  ;  but  makes  the 

whole  world  to  dance. 
Him,  who  destfoys  the  five,*  all  should  fear  him. 

390.  Deluded,  deluded  the  whole  world  passed,  through  fol- 

lowing their  guide. 
Kabir  says,  When   the  tree  is  rotten,  what  can  you 
gather  then  ? 

'  Yogis  who  reside  in  the  forest.  *  Mind. 

*  So  say  those  who  practise  penances  in  tho  forest.  *  Fivo  Gyau  Indris. 


222  SAKHIS 

391.  The  sakhi  is  tlie  eye  of   wisdom  :   behold  and   ponder 

it  in  your  heart. 
Without  the  sakhi  the  quarrel  of  tlie  world  will   never 
cease. 

392.  It  all  depends  on  five  elements :  consider  this. 

Says  Kabir,  By  understanding  the  secret  of  the  ele- 
ments the  Jiva  will  be  saved. 

393.  If  one  becomes  true,  what  comes  of  that,  if  he  knows 

not  Him  that  is  true  ? 
If  one  be   true  and   meet  Him  that  is  true,  he  will  be 
merged  in  that  true  one. 

394.  The  road  by  which  went  Sanak  and  his  companion, 

Brahma,  Vishnu,  Mahesha : 

All  followed  that  same  path  :  to  whom  then  shall  I 
give  instruction  ? 

395.  By  reason   of  deeds   done  for  his  kin,  the  swan   went 

far  astray. 

Then  to   what  family  will  the   blame  belong   when 
he  lives  as  a  beast  of  the  field  ? 

396.  He   whose   lieart   never  knew   the  Guru,  whose   body 

the  word  never  pierced  : 

Kabir   proclaims  aloud,  This  is   for  a  swan  to   be 
companion  of  a  heron. 

397.  Hatred   and   hater    are    one  :    make   no   union   with 

them. 

Oaught  in  the  toils  you  will  die  :   whence  can  sal- 
vation come  ? 

398.  If     the    Guru   be   perfect,   the    disciple    brave,  then 

gather  your  reins  and  plunge  into  the  battle. 

If  you  would  really   know   the  Lord,  then  sit  for  a 

while  in  thought. 
,399.     If  one   that    is  bound  be  with   one  that   is  bound,  by 
what  means  can  come  release  ? 
Do  service  to  one   who  is  free  from  bonds,  and  he 

will  release  in  a  moment. 
400.    Do  not  follow,  brother,  the  current  of  the   mind  :    give 
up  this  your  wisdom. 
Thus  many  neighbours  were  swept  to  death  :  in  our 

own  hearts  we  know  it. 


SAKHIS  223 

•101.    I  have  but  one  arrow  :    the  mind  has  thirty-six  : 

If  ray  single  arrow  strikes,  all  the  rest  are  nothing. 
402.    He   has    withdrawn   His   presence,  yet  is  He   within 
the  iieart :  this  the  mind  knows  well. 
He  who  knowingly   does    evil,    where    will    he    find 
happiness  ? 
103.     Ponder  it  and   be    entranced,   understand   it  and  be 
free  from  limitation. 
Behold  the  marvels  of  Him,  whom   no  bonds  can  re- 
strain. 

404.  He,  for  whom   they   wander  searching,  ever  stands 

before  them. 
To  the  instructed  He  is   near,   frnm    the   uninstructed 
He  is  far  away. 

405.  It  is  but  one  thing,  and  they  make  it  many. 

A    heavy   curtain   hangs  between,  therefore  naught 
is  seen. 

406.  Who   thrones   the  Guru   in  his  heart  and  walks  in  his 

commands  : 
Kabir  says.   For  such   a  Sant   the  tliree  worlds  hold 

no  fears. 
107.    If  all   one*H   household   be  1)1  ind,  and  a  well  is  before 

the  door. 
Whoever  seeks  to  venture  out,   will   surely  fall   into 

the  well. 

408.  Search   on    the   road    revealed   the   uem,   a   dininond 

trampled  by  a  thousand  ages. 
How  canst  thou,  Kabir,  renounce  this  road  on   which 
the  gem  is  found  ? 

409.  Men  only  know  the  diamond  borne   in  the  merchant's 

pack. 
This  is  the  diamond  of  salvation  :  a  fool  loses  it  and  dies. 

410.  Doquic! :''  '^i-  .t  t'tou  hast  to  do  :  the  ilame  has  come 

Cl08( 

When  the  tire  has  caught  the  door,  nothing  can  be 
carried  out. 

411.  Weigh   your  words  before  you   speak  :    a   word    has 

neither  hands  nor  feet. 
Yet  one  word  acts  as  balm,  another  as  a  bruise. 


224  SAKHIS 

412.  All  are  dwellers   in  that  couutry  :   dacoits  have  set 

upou  them. 
Trusting  the  autumn  moonlight   they   failed   to   keep 
tlieir  road. 

413.  If  you  care  for  your  welfare,  then   awake:   the   boat* 

lias  touched  the  shore". 
Again    and    again    you    will    reproach    yourself  :    a 
chance  like  this  comes  not  again. 

414.  Now   parted,   where  will  you  go  and  where  find  rest 

for  your  feet  ? 
CJoufront  the  foe,  fight   face   to  face,  make   no  un- 
lucky throw. 

415.  The  Guru's   image  is  as  the    moon,   the   disciple   the 

chakor. 
Moment  by  moment  let  them  fix  their  gaze  upon   the 
Guru's  image. 

416.  The  Guru  entered  into   the  disciple  :   unbroken  love 

prevails. 
No  separation  can  sunder  them  :  they  are  two  bodies 

but  one  soul. 

417.  Guru  diflfers    from   guru,   and    the   natures  of  gurus 

are  diverse. 
Worship  ever  that  Guru,   who  can  reveal   the  secret 

of  the  word. 

418.  Men  follow  five  or  seven  Gurus  :    he  who  can  reveal 

the  word,  is  the  Guru  indeed. 

419.  Hari  lost.  Guru  shelters  :  the  Guru   lost,  there  is  na 

refuge. 
O  sinful  man,  call  on  the  Guru,  not  upon  another. 

420.  The  Guru  is  potter,  the  disciple   is   clay  :  moulding 

and  moulding  he  amends  the  flaws. 
Within  he  supports   him   with  love  :  without  he  deals 
blow  on  blow. 

421.  t  made  a  cave  of  wisdom,  but  found  no  sadhak  for   it. 
YogiandJangam' were  swept  away   in  death  :    with- 
out intention  there  is  no  devotion. 

1  Age. 

» Wearing  its  end. 

•  A  Hindu  mendicant. 


SAKHIS  225 

422.    The  Guru  must  be  one  who  takes  nothing  from  the 
disciple. 
The  disciple   must  be  one  who  gives  all  he  has  to  the 
Guru. 
•123.    This  is  that  which  can  be  seen,   not   that  which  can 
be  uttered. 
This  is  that  which  can  be  felt,  not  that  which  can  be 
given. 

424.  He   in   whose  heart   is    no  deceit,  deceiving  cannot 

touch  him. 
He  in  whose  heart  deceit  is  harboured,   him  deceit 
deceives. 

425.  The  Lord  is  lord  of  all :  but  the  Lord's  own  are  few. 

Why  search  among  ten   thousand  ?    Among  ten  mil- 
lions there  is  scarcely  one. 

426.  Serve  the  perfect  Master  and  so  you  will  be  perfect. 

When  the   perfected  finds  the   Perfect,  the   Perfect 
will  reveal  perfection. 

427.  When  patience  and   goodness   of  heart   flourish,  the 

invisible  is  revealed. 
Without  this   goodness  none   finds   the   goal,  though 
he  give  a  million  discourses. 

428.  The  ruby  of  goodness  is  greater  than  all :   it  is  the 

mine  of  rubies  : 
All  the   wealth  of  the   three  worlds  resides  in    this 
goodness  of  heart. 

429.  Wealth    of    kine,    of  elephants,  of  revenue,  all  the 

mines  of  wealth  and  gems  : 
When   the   wealth   of  contentment  is   won,  all  other 
wealth  is  as  dust. 

430.  When  there  is  "  I,"  there  is  "  my " :    where    sorrow, 

there  is  sin. 
Where  there  is  mercy,  there  is  strength  :  where  for- 
giveness, there  is  He.  . 

431.  It*  is  infinite,  yet  in  all  things  finite:   the  nver  Uoods 

each  several  thought. 
The  fisher*  casts  his  net,  for  what?    There  is  neither 
fish'  nor  water.* 

*  Guru.  «  Kal. 

*Jiv».  *Maya. 

15 


226  SAKHIS 

432.  To  give  me  joy,  destroy  my  pain  and  tct^e  away  all 

troubles. 
Kabir  says,  When  shall  I  meet  the  sant,  who  is  a  lover 
of  the  Eternal. 

433.  The  giver  of  happiness  lives  in  all,  and  he  gives  pain  to 

none. 
To  rest  established  in  his  faith,  that  is  the  proof  of  the 
sadhu. 

434.  Let  not  the  sant  forsake  saintliness,  though  he  meet 

with  a  million  unsaintly. 
Snakes  coil  about  the  sandal  tree,  yet  it  loses  not  its 
coolness. 

435.  In  the  house  of  the  grandfather^  resides  the  Immortal* : 

the  son^  carries  a  burden  upon  his  head. 
In  three  worlds  grandchildren*  are  robbed ;  O  Pandit, 
consider  this: 

436.  In  the  world  the  sadhu  is  priceless :  many  who  are  not 

wear  the  garb. 
You  may  know  heron  from  swan  by  the  test  of  water 
mixed  with  milk. 

437.  All  sadhus  are  honoured  in  their  own  abodes. 

He  who  discusses  the  word  as  tester,  he  is  a  crown  for 
the  head. 

438.  Mind  dyed  in  many  colours  is  a  busy  dyer :  it  dyes  with 

colours  good  and  bad. 
Kabir  says.  Only  then  will  you  escape,  when  you  make 
your  abode  with  the  word. 

439.  The  mind  was  immortal :  killing  could  not  kill  it. 

By  constant  rubbing  on  the  brilliant  of  wisdom  it  can 
be  worn  and  worn  away.  , 

440.  Mind  mounts  upon  all:   the  trees  of  the  mind  are 

countless. 
But  they  w^ho  are  mounted  upon  mind  are  few  indeed. 

441.  Mind  soars  aloft  as  a  bird  and  searches  here  and  there 

in  heaven. 
Baikunth^  does  not  contain  Him  :  the  Lord  is  with  His 
worshipper. 

1  The  eternal  Purusha.  ^  Brahm.  »  Guru. 

*  Brahma,  Vishnii,  Mahesha.         '  Vishnu  lok. 


SAKHIS  227 

442.    The  maiden  *  climbed  the  hill  and  decked  her  with  many 
allurements'. 
Her  lover  utters  never  a  word  :  her  adornments  bum 
her  like  Are. 
413.    The  maiden  is  endowed  with   all  graces :  in  her  ears 
jewels  gleam. 
When   a  dart  from    lier  lover's  eyes  strikes  her,  her 
whole  body  is  transfixed. 

444.  Ten  thousand  hunters,  but  one  deer :  many  bandits  and 

one  wayfarer. 
What  can  one   helpless  man  do,  where  countless  ruf- 
fians dwell  ? 

445.  Even  ill  company  leaves  no  stain  on   him,  whose  hand 

clasps  the  ruby  of  wisdom. 
Just  as  a  juggler's  boy  plays  fearlessly  witli  a  snake. 

'  .liva. 
*  Various  kinds  of  worship. 


SAYAR   BIJAK   PAD 

1.  O  Sants,  the  teaching  of  the  Bijak  is  with  authority. 

Many  grew  weary  searching  and  searching :  few  were 
they  who  found. 

2.  The  four  ages  and  the  four-armed  Veda  chant  bound- 

less scriptures. 
Vishnu,  Birancha,Rudra,  rishis  sang  :  none  have  found 
the  end. 

3.  Some  declare  Him  Nirgunr,  some  Sugunr  :  some  speak 

of  Him  as  Light. 
To  the  Lord  each  assigns  a  name,  but  none  reveals  His 

form. 

4.  Some  pronounce  Him  subtle  or  gross,  and  some  the 

Letter  that  has  always  truth. 
The  Sat-Guru  says,  Few  recognise  Him,  and  many 
liars  go  about. 

5.  The  devotion  that  is  coveting  is  altogether  vain  :  the 

Lord  is  infinitely  wise. 
Beyond  attainment, beyond  vision  is  the  Lord's  abode: 
yet  all  say,  '  That  is  our  goal.' 

6.  The  way  is  not  seen ;  the  wayfarer  finds  them  not, 

though  he  search  for  abode  and  resting-place. 
Some  laid  it  down, '  He  is  Not-Being.'    One  says,  The 
Light  is  proof  of  Him. 

7.  Some  say,  He  has  neither  form  nor  outline.    On  whom 

then  do  they  fix  their  meditation? 
In  every  several  hair  the  Creator  is  revealed :  why 
then  go  astray  in  error  ? 

8.  Upholding  or  denying,  all  alike  flagged  and  failed.    Tlie 

Creator  none  could  comprehend. 
Of  what  form  is  the  True  Lord?    This  has  been  set 

forth  by  none. 
0.    By  many  proofs  they  establish  their  belief:  the   irue 

One  is  ignored. 
Millions  of  births  and  ages  passed  in  whims  and  fancies  : 
they  find  the  vision  nowhere. 


SAYAR  BIJAK   PAD  229 

10.  The  All-Merciful,  the  All-Great,  He  is  seen  by  few 

indeed. 
Straightway  their  state  is  changed  to  bliss  :  they  are 
entranced  there  forever. 

11.  Requiring  more  and  ever  more  the  wise  of  many  sects 

would  strengthen  their  devotion : 
The  teaching  of  the  Bijak  is  known  to  few  :  the  proud 
go  wandering  in  error. 

12.  Kabir  said.  Within  the  Creator  is  all,  and   the  Creator 

permeates  all. 
Without  the  secret  all  are  sunk  in  error :  only  the  sant, 
the  wise,  can  comprehend. 


PROPER  NAMES  MENTIONED  IN 
THE  BIJAK* 

Alialya:— Wife  of  the  Rislii  Gautama.  She  was  the 
first  woman  made  by  Brahma,  and  he  gave  her 
to  Gautama.  She  was  seduced  by  Indra.  One 
version  represents  her  as  knowing  the  god  and  being 
nattered  by  his  condescension  ;  but  another  version 
states  that  the  god  assumed  the  form  of  her 
husband,  and  so  deceived  her.  Being  cursed  by 
Gautama  she  became  a  stone.  Rama  afterwards 
delivered  her. 

Akrura :— A  Yadava  and  uncle  of  Krishna.  He  was 
son  of  Swa-phalka  and  Gandini.  He  was  sent  by 
Kansa  to  fetch  Krishna  from  Gokula  tliat  he  might 
be  slain.  Akrura  went  against  his  will,  and  Krishna 
observing  this  revealed  to  him  his  nature. 

Ambarisha:— A  king  of  Ayodhya,  twenty-eighth  in 
descent  from  Ikshwaku.  It  is  said  that  he  observed 
strictly  the  Ekadasi  fast  and  broke  it  according 
to  rule  before  the  end  of  the  day.  Once  Durvasa 
came  to  his  house  as  a  guest.  As  usual  the  guest 
went  to  have  a  bath  before  dinner.  He  took  so  long 
a  time  bathing  that  Ambarisha  drank  a  little 
water  to  keep  his  rule.  Durvasa  sought  to  kill 
him ;  but  Ambarisha  asked  protection  from  Vishnu 
and  was  protected. 

Anjana :— Mother  of  Hanumat  by  Vayu,  god  of  the 
wind. 

Arjuna :— The  third  Pandu  prince.  He  was  tauglit 
tlie  use  of  arms  by  Drona  and  was  his  favourite 
pupil.  By  his  skill  in  arms  he  won  Draupadi  at 
her  Swayamvara.  For  an  involantary  transgression 
he  imposed  upon  himself  twelve  years'  exile  from 
his  family,  and  during  that  time  he  visited  Parasu- 
Rama,  who  gave  instruction  in  the  use  of  arms. 

*  These  notes  are  partly  taken  from  Dowson's  Classical  Dictionary  of 
Bindu  Mijthology. 


it 


PROPER   NAMES   MKNTIOXED  IN   THK    UIJAK  231 

Avagat :— Unconditioned,  which  cannot  be  compre- 
hended (God). 

Bali,  Balin  :— The  monkey  king  of  Kishkindhya,  who 
was  slain  by  Rama  and  whose  kingdom  was  given 
to  his  brother  Su-griva,  the  friend  and  ally  of  Rama. 
He  was  supposed  to  be  the  son  of  Indra,  and  to 
have  been  born  from  the  hair  (bala)  of  his  mother, 
whence  his  name.  His  wife's  name  was  Tara,  and 
his  sons'  Angada  and  Tara 

Bhoja :— A  name  borne  by  many  kings.  Most  con- 
spicuous among  them  was  Bhoj  or  Bhoja-deva, 
king  of  Dhar,  who  is  said  to  have  been  a  great 
patron  of  literature,  and  probably  died  before 
A.  D.  1082. 

Brahma  (masculine) :— The  first  member  of  the  Hindu 
triad ;  the  supreme  spirit  manifested  as  the  active 
creator  of  the  universe. 

Dasa-ratha:— A  jnince  of  the  Solar  race,  son  of  Aja, 
8  descendant  of  Ikshwaku,  and  king  of  Ayodhya. 
He  had  three  wives,  but  being  childless,  he  per- 
formed the  sacrifice  of  a  horse,  and,  according  to 
the  Ramayana,  the  chief  queen,  Kausalya,  remained 
in  close  contact  with  the  slaughtered  horse  for  a 
night,  and  the  other  two  queens  beside  her.  Four 
sons  were  then  born  to  him  from  his  three  wives. 
Kausalya  bore  Rama,  Kaikeyi  gave  birth  to  Bharat, 
and  Su-mitra  bore  Lakshmana  and  Satru-ghna. 
Kama  partook  of  half  the  nature  of  Vishnu,  Bharat 
of  a  quarter,  and  the  other  two  shared  the  remain- 
ing fourth. 

Dattatriya:  Sod  of  At ri  and  Anasuya.  A  Brahman 
saiDt  in  whom  a  portion  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and 
Siva,  or  more  particularly  Vishnu,  was  incarnate. 

Devaki;  -Wife  of   Vasu-deva,  mother  of  Krishna, 

Dhruva :~  The  polar  star.  According  to  the  Vishnu 
Parana,  the  sons  of  Manu  8wayam-bhuva  were 
Priya-vrata  and  Uttanapada. 

Dig-ambara:-*  Clothed  with  space.'  A  naked  mendi- 
cant.   A  title  of  Siva. 


232  PROPER  NAMES   MENTIONED   IN   THE   lilJAK 


^ 


Dur-yodhanai-^Hard  to  conquer/  The  eldest  son 
of  King  Dhrita-rashtra  and  leader  of  the  Kaiirava 
princes  in  the  great  war  of  the  Mahabharata. 

Dwarka,  Dwaravati :-'  The  city  of  gates.'  Krishna's 
capital,  in  Gujrat,  whicli  is  said  to  have  been 
submerged  by  the  ocean  seven  days  after  his  death. 

Firendr  : -Serpent-king. 

Gandharva:-' The  heavenly  GandharvV  of  the  Veda 
was  a  deity  who  knew  and  revealed  the  secrets  of 
iieaven  and  divine  truths  in  general. 
Gaiiesa:-(Gana-Isa),  Gana-pati  :-Lord  of  the  Ganas 
or  troops  of  inferior  deities,  especially  those 
attendant  upon  Siva. 

Go-kula:— A  pastoral  district  on  the  Yamuna,  about 
Mathura,  where  Krishna  passed  his  boyhood  with 
the  cowherds. 

Gopala:-Go-vinda:  -'Oow-keeper.'  A  name  of  the 
youthful  Krishna,  who  lived  among  the  cowherds  in 
Vrindavana. 

Gopis :— The  cowherd  damsels  and  wives  with  whom 
Krishna  sported  in  his  youth. 

Gorakh  :— The  founder  of  Gorakha  Pauth,  lived  in  four- 
teenth  century  A.  D. 

Go-vardhana :— A  mountain  in  Vrindavana,  which 
Krishna  induced  the  cowherds  and  cowlierdesses  to 
worship  instead  of  Indra.  This  enraged  the  God, 
who  sent  a  deluge  of  rain  to  wash  away  the 
mountain  and  all  the  people  of  the  country,  but 
Krishna  held  up  the  mountain  on  his  little  finger 
for  seven  days  to  shelter  the  people  of  Vrindavana. 

Hanuman,  Hanumat,  Hauumat :— A  celebrated  monkey 
chief.  He  was  son  of  Pavana,  *  the  wind,'  by  Anjuna, 
wife  of  a  monkey,  named  Kesari.  He  was  able  to  fly, 
and  is  a  conspicuous  figure  in  the  Ramayana. 

Haris-Ohandar;-Twenty.eighthkingof  the  Solar  race, 
and  son  of  Trisanku.  He  was  celebrated  for  his 
piety  and  justice. 

Hiranyakusha:  'Golden  eye.'  A  Daitya  wlio  drag- 
ged the  earth  to  the  depth  of  the  ocean. 


PROPER   NAMES    MENTIONED   IN   THE   RIJAK  233 

Indra:— The    God   of   the  firraament,  the    personified 

atmosphere. 
Janaka:— Kingof  Mithila,  of  the  Solar  race.    When 
Nirai,    his   predecessor,    died     without    leaving    a 
successor,  the  sages  subjected  the  body  of  Nimi  to 
attrition,  and  produced  from  it  a  prince  "  who  was 
called  Janaka,    from  being    born   without    a  pro- 
genitor." 
Jaunpur :— A  city  in  U.  P. 
Jaya-Deva:   -A  poet,  author  of  Gita. 
.Ihusi  :--A  village  near  Allahabad  fort,  where  the  tombs 

of  Shaikh  Taqi  and  of  other  Muslim  saints  are. 
Kansa:— A  tyraiyiical  kingof  Mathura,  son   of  Ugra- 

sena  and  cousin  of  Devaki,  the  mother  of  Krishna. 
Kanya-Kumari :— 'The    virgin    damsel.'    A   name    of 

Durga. 
Karna:-Sonof    Pritha  or  Kunti,   by  Surya,   the  sun, 

before  her  marriage  to  Pandu. 
Kasi :  —Benares. 
Kesava:--*  Having   mucli  or  fine  hair.'    A  name    of 

Vishnu  or  Krishna. 
Kunti :— Daughter  of  the  Yadava  prince  Sura,  King 
of  the  Surasmas,  whose  capital  was  Mathura  on  the 
Yamuna.    She   was  sister  of  Vasudeva,  and   was 
given  by  ber  father  to  his  childless  cousin,  Kunti- 
bhoja,   by   whom   she    was    brought    up.    In     her 
maidenhood   she   showed   such  respectful  devotion 
to  the  sage  Dur-vasa,  that  he  gave  her  a  charm 
by   means  of   which  she  might  have  a  child  by  any 
god  she   pleased   to   invoke.    She  called   upon   the 
sun,  and  by  him  had  a  son,  named  Kama,  but  with- 
out any  detriment  to  her  virginity  ;  still,  to  keep 
the  affair  secret,  the  child  was  exposed  on  the  banks 
of  the  Yamuna. 
Kuru  :— A  priDce  of  the  Lunar  race,  son  of  Samvarana 
by  Tapati,  a  daughter  of  the  sun.    He  ruled    in   the 
'north-west  of  India  over  the  country  about  Delhi. 
Kuverai—ln  the  Vedas,  a  chief  of  the   evil  beings  or 
spirits  living   in    the  shades  :  and  called  by  his  pat- 
ronymic Vaisravana. 


234  PROPER   NAMES   MENTIONED   IN   THE   IJIJAK 

Lakshmana  :— Son  of  the  King  Dasa-ratha  by  his  wife 
Sumitra.    He  was  the  twin  brother  of  Satru-ghna, 
and  the  half-brother  and  special  friend  of  Rama- 
Chandra. 
Lanka:— The    island  of    Ceylon    or  its    capital  city. 

Tlie  city  is  described  in  the  Ramayana  as  of  vast 

extent  and  of  great  magnificence,  with  seven  broad 

moats  and   seven  stupendous   walls  of  stone  and 

metal. 
Maghar:— A   village    in    Gorakhpur    district    where 

Kabir's  tomb  is  still  visited.  ' 

Manakpur  :— A  village  on  the  Ganges. 
Mandodri  :-~Ra van's  favourite  ,;^^ife  and   the  mother 

of  Indra-jit. 
Mithila,   (methal)  :-  -A  city,   the  capital  of  Videha  or 

North  Bihar,  which  corresponds  to  the  modern  Tirhut 

and  Purniya,  between  the  Gandaki  and  Kosi  rivers. 
Muchandar-nath  :~Guru  of  Gorakh-Nath. 
Muni :— "  A  holy  sage,"  a  pious  and  learned  person, 

endowed  with  more  or  less  of  a  divine  nature,  or 

having  attained   to  it  by  rigid    abstraction    and 

mortification. 
Naga  :— A  mythical  semi-divine  being,  having  a  human 

face  with  the  tail  of  a    serpent,  and   the  expanded 

neck  of  the  cobra. 
Nam  : — Nama  Deva. 

Narada :—  A  Rishi  to  whom  some  hymns  of  the  Rig- 

veda  are  ascribed. 
Naresh  :— Lord  of  men. 
Pandu  :--  The  pale.'    Brother  of  Dhrita-rashtra,  King 

of  Hastinapur,  and  father  of  the  Pandavas  or  Pandu 

princes. 
Parasu-Ram :    '  Rama    with    the    axes.'    He    was    a 

Brahman,  the  fifth  son  of  Jamad-agni  and  Renuka. 
Partha  :— A  son  of  Pritha  or  Kunti. 
Parvati :— '  The  mountaineer.'     A  name  of  the  wife 

of  Siva. 
Prahlada  :  -A  Daitya,  son  of  Hirna-kasipu  and  father 

of  Bali. 


PROPER  NAMES   MENTIONED   IN   TUE   BIJAK  235^ 

Pritlii,  Prithu :— Was  the  son  of  Vena,  son  of  Anga.  He 
was  called  first  King,  and  from  him  the  eartli  re- 
ceived her  name  Prithivi. 

Rama  : -Eldest  son  of  Dasa-ratha,  a  King  of  the  Solar 
race,  reigning  at  Ayodhya. 

Ravana  :— The  demon  King  of  Lanka  or  Ceylon,  from 
which  he  expelled  his  half-brother  Kuvera.  He 
was  son  of  Visravas  by  his  wife  Nikasha,  daughter 
of  the  Raksliasa  Su-mali. 

Ravi  -.—The  sun. 

Saha-deva  :— The  youngest  of  the  live  Pandu  princes, 
twin  son  of  Madri  the  second  wife  of  Pandu,  and 
mythologically  son  of  the  Aswins,  or  more  specific- 
ally of  the  Aswiu  Dasra. 

Sakata  :  -A  worshipper  of  the  Sakti. 

Sakti :— The  wife  or  the  female  energy  of  a  deity,  but 
especially  of  Siva. 

Sanaka,  Sanandan,  Sanatana,  Sanat-Kumara :— The 
four  Kumaras  or  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma. 

Sankadik  :— Sanak,  etc. 

Sankara  :*  Auspicious. '  A  name  of  Siva  in  his 
creative  character. 

Sesha,  Sesha-Naga :  — King  of  the  serpent  race  or 
Nagas,  and  of  the  infernal  regions  called  Patala. 

Shambhu  :  -A  name  of  Shiva. 

Sharad  :— Saraswati,  the  goddess  of  learning. 

Sliukh-deva-Muiii  :    The  son  of  Viyas. 

Sudama  :      A  frien<l  of  Krishna. 

Sisu-pala:  Son  of  Dama-gosha,  King  of  Ohedi,  by 
Sruta-deva,  sister  of  Vasu-deva  ;  he  was  therefore 
cousin  of  Krishna  Krishna  had  carried  off  Rukmini, 
his  intended  wife. 

Sukh-deva  :    Son  of  Viyas. 

Surpanakha:*  Having  nails  like  winnowing-fans.* 
Sister  of  Ravana. 

Uraa :    *  Light.'    A  name  of  the  consort  of  Siva. 
Vamana  :— The  dwarf  incarnation  of  Vishnu. 
Vashishtlia  :-  *  Most   wealthy.*    A   celebrated    Vedic 
sage  to  whom  many  hymns  are  ascribed. 


236  PROPER  NAMES   MENTIONED  IN   THE   BIJAK 

Vena :— Son  of  Anga,  and  a    descendant    of    Manu 

Swayambhuva. 
Vidhatri  :- '  Creator.'    A  name   of    Brahma,  Vishnu, 

and  Viswa-karma. 
Vikramaditya:— A  celebrated  Hindu  king  who  reigned 

at  Ujjayini.    He  is  said  to  have  been  the  son  of  a 

king  named  Gardabhila. 
Vrinda-vana  :— A  wood  in   the  district  of    Mathura 

where  Krishna  passed  his  youtli,  under  the  name 

of  Gopala,  among  the  cowherds. 
Yadu-Banshi :— A  famous  race  of  Chhattris. 
Yasoda  :— Wif^  of    the  cowherd  Nanda,  and    foster- 
mother  of  Krishna. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


PK     Kabir 

2095      The  Bijak  of  Kabir 

K33A22 


