===== Internet Archive OCR: The Scared book of Hindus Edited  Major B D Basu Volume XXIV Part 2  Brahma Vaivarta Puranam Translared By Rajendra Nath Sen 1921 Allhabad - The Panini Office_djvu.txt =====

| Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


} om 
` JULY 1921. Joe 


E THÉ 


` SACRED BOOKS 


pev. 


| HINDUS - 


TRANSLATED BY 
| VARIOUS SANSKRIT SCHOLARS. 


| ` EDITED BY 
| Major B. D. Basu, I. M. S. (Retired.) 


VOLUME XXIV. - 
|  BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANAM. 


PART III, 
— 


n TRANSLATED BY. pues 
RAJENDRA NATH SEN, M.A., 


25 
EC 


PUBLISHED BY | 
Sudhindra Nath Vasu, at 


3 | Cover Printed by Apurya | 
: 5 ion : INLAND=Rs, 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KH AN DA. 177 


20-31. The boys were filled with joy and said with a sweet smile, ‘O 
mothers, we are very hungry ; so Krişna and Balirdma have sent us to you. 
They are ata great distance from this place, putting up at Madhuvana at the 
root of the holy бс tree Give us food, please. We are hungry. They, too, 
are exhausted and have begged food of you. Let us know soon if you will 
give us food or not." ‘The Brahmin women, who were devoted to Krişna, 
thereupon, with streaming eyes and with a thrill of raptures in their bodies 
prepared to go to Lord Krisna with boiled winter rice, milk boiled with rice 
and sugar, biked cakes. delicious curd, condensed milk, ghee and honey deposi- 
ted in cups of silver and bell-metal These blessed and virtuous ladies suxtous 
to see Krigna proceeded with many objects in view. They crrived there and 
saw that Krisna attended by Dalaráma and the children was looking like the 
moon surrounded by estars Не was clad in yellow silken dress, he was lovely, 
smiling, youthful, dark b!ue in complexion and of a tranquil disposition. His 
A face resemble] the full moon. He was decked with auklets, bracelets and 
armlets His neck was adorned with a wreath of crystals which descended up to 
4 the knee. llis breast was decked with garlands of jasmine 

32-46. His body was besmeared with sandal, aloe, saffron and musk. 

His nose and cheeks were very beautiful. His teeth resembled the grains 

of ripe pomegranate. lle had a plumage of peacock, attached to his diadem. 

His ears were decked with Kadam. — Even by meditation, the yogis are unable 

to get a glimpse of this deity who always favours his votaries. He is constantly 

adored by Brahma, S’iva, ОБагта, Ananta, Indra and the Munis. The wives 
ot the Brahmins reverentially bowed to him and worshipped him in the light of 
their limited intellect. They suid, ‘You аге, О Lord, the Supreme Being, 
the support of all. Sometimes you are void of attributes and form: at other 
times. you are vested with attributes and a shape. You are the witness of 
every act, You are diss ciated from all objects. You are Nature as well as 
the Purusa (the Supreme Being; and you are the final cause. Brahma, the 
creator, Visnu, the preserver, aud Siva, the destroyer are all you digits. You 
аге, O lord, the same JMahá-Visnu who wields a world on each of the pores 
| of hisskin. You are his father. You are the emblem of valour, energy and 
| wisdom. You are all wisdom. The Vedas hold that vou are indescribabie. 

Who is capable of adoring you? You represent the thread (system) of 

creation and the five subtle elements. You are the root of all energy and the 
| symbol of all power. You are the lord of all force and you harbour every kind 
of might. You are unthinkable and eltulgent. You are all happiness and 
eternal. l'ora wonder, you uave a body and yet you have по body. You have 
: not got any of the s-nses; and yet you know everything that could be 

perceived by the senses. When Saraswati, Mahesa, Ananta, Dharma, Brahma, 

Parvati, Kamala, Radha, Savitri, and the four Vedas are unable to adore you 

or determine your essence, then how is it possible for men and incompetent 

persons like ourselves to do so ? О friend of the poor, be propitiated with us 
| and show us compassion.” 
47-57. So saying, they threw themselves prostrate at his feet : and the 
! Шога held out to them assurances of safety. Whoever at the time of worship 
4 reads the above hymn will be saved, no doubt іп (һе same manner as the 
E 23 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


: A 
178 = THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


above girls. Hari seeing them thus prostrate said to them thus, ‘‘Accept some 
boon and all will be well with you.” They replied cheerfully and reverentially, 
“ O Lord, we do not want any other boon than this, that we want to serve your 
lotus feet. Kindly give us, therefore, devotedness and allegiance to your feet. 
Be merciful, O Lord. We shall not return home but remain here and con- 
stantly behold your face.” The merciful Krigna agreed and partook with the 
boys of the delicacies offered to them by the ladies, which were as sweet as 
nectar. ‘Then the ladies saw that a golden car was descending from the 
heavens. It was furnished with apparels, diamond looking-glasses, pillars aud 
jars. It was decked with garlands of Parijata, banners pure and bright like 
flame, cloths and white chowries. It was very lovely, speedy like tho mind, 
and lighted up with a hundred. moons, 


58-71. It contained attendants of Krisna clad in yellow dress and 
adorned with diamonds and wreaths of wild flowers. ‘hey were all young, 
dark-blue, vested with two hands holding a flute and looked like cow-herds. 
Their curved crest was adorned with the plumage of peacocks and nose-gay of 
flowers. They hastily came down from the car, bowed to Lord Krisna and 
asked-the Brahmin women to enter intothe car, The ladies then bent their 
heads to Krisna, went to the Goloka, quitted their mortal frames and were 
turned into cowherdesses. ‘Through his illusions or supernatural charms, Нагі, 
then constructed shadows of the Brahmin women and sent them back to the houses 
of the Brahmins. ‘The suspicious Brihmins, on the other hand, came out in 
quest of them and discovered them in the way. They were very pleased to see 
them and gently said thus :—'* Ah! you are truly blessed, for you have 
seen Lord Krisna. Our existence and study of tho Vedas are wholly 
ineffectual or fruitless. The Vedas, the Puranas aod the savants hold that all 
objects, constitute the essence and glory of God. He alone gives reward to 
people for their devotion, meditation, vow, charity, pilgrimage, fasting, the 
study of the Vedas or'the worship of the idols. Ву the side of the Kalpa tree, 
all other trees are useless. Similarly, whoeyer adores Lord Krisna may 
dispense with all other adorations as useless. A person who can cross an 
ocean need not display his valour by crossing a mere well. So saying, the 
Brahmins took their wives to their respective houses and spent their days with 
them with pleasure. 

72-82, Тһе Br&hmins could not cherish any sort of suspicion in their 
mind regarding their identity, seeing that their wives were more thun ever 
expert in every act and disposed to amorous pastimes. Thereafter the Supreme 
Lord Hari, Baladeva and the children soon went home. I told you what I 
heard in days of yore touching the glory of Lord Hari from Dharma. Now 
what do you want to hear ?" Narada said, “O best of sainte, what act of 
piety enabled the Br&hmin women to attain salvation which is inaccessible even 
to the munis and the saints ? Who were these ladies in their previous 
bisths and what faults did they commit on account of which they were born 
in this world (earth ? Will you kindly remove my doubts on these points?" 
Narayana said, ‘O Narada, they were at first the beautiful, virtuous, good- 
natured, pious wives of the seven Rigis to whom they were extremely devoted. 
They were in the prime of their youth, with rising breasts and thick loins. They 
were gorgeously clad and decked with ornameats from head to foot. ‘heir 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JAN MA-KHANDA. 179 


gold : and their faces which looked like 
Their crooked glances could turn even 
e was much excited with lust at the 
d desired their society in his heart. 


complexion had the colour of heated 
lotus were graced with gentle smiles. 
the heart of saints, Of yore, the god of fir 
eight of their faces, rumps 'and breasts an 
Once upon a time he passionately touched them with his flame in the kitchen 
and was beside himself with lust. The virtuous nymphs, solely devoted to their 
husbands, could not realise this fact; but the Fire-god who touched them, 
again aud again, was bewildered with lust. 

ow what was passing in his heart 


83-95. Then lord Angirá came to kn 
i. e., consume everything." 


and cursed him saying, “You will be omnivorous, 
When the Fire-god came to his senses, he was much abashed and adored 
Angirà. Не was so much afraid of the yaloar of a Brahmin that he shivered 
from head to foot. Angirá in anger also cursed the nymphs who were touched 
by the Fire-god saying: ‘You have been polluted by sin: therefore you will 
also be born {aa women in India where you will be wedded to Br&hmins 
descending from the same stock as ourselves." Thereupon the women began 
to weep and subdued by love, with folded palms, they entreated the great sage 
Angirà thus: ‘O best of saints, we are sinless and chaste. You ought not 
to abandon us ; unconsciously we have been touched by another person. You 
should not punish your servants devoted to you. When .shall we again be 
ab'e to behold your lotus-feet ? О saint, separation from the husband is more 
painful to a woman than the cut by a sword or the bolt from the blue or other 
kinds of injury inflicted upon her. How can we go to earth, if we quit 
a pious, virtuous and excellent husband like yourself. If we have to go 
there at all, when shall we return? Consistently with justice we cannot be 
charged with a sin when we have been unconsciously touched by others. 
Ahalyá, though raped by Indra, got back her husband and was considered 
chaste in spite of her sexual intercourse with Indra. But how isit that mere 
touch entailed upon us the penalty of divorce ? О pious saint, you ara versed 
in the Vedas and their auxiliary branches. You are the best of those that are 
so versed. You should consider this point. When women are frightened, 
tley seek the protection of their respective husbands But if the hasbands 
themselves terrify them, whose protection will they seek ? 


96-107. © pious soul, hold out assurance of safety to us Who can 
punish his wife, pupils or sons ? Ве а person strong or weak, he is the owner 
of his property. No one can prevent a person from selling his own property." 
The merciful sage, when he heard their words, looked at them, was subdued by 
love and wept bitterly. Then all the saints were afflicted with grief caused 
by the reflection of the separation of the women from their husbands and dumb- 
foundered like statues. The learned Angirá after having wept bitterly fora 
long time consulted his brothers and saidto the damsels. “The S'rutis hold that 
people are liable to enjoyments or sufferings so long as their karma іе pre- 
dominant You can no longer enjoy our society as the terms of your 
enjoyment are over. А person must reap the consequences of his acts in 
India Не сап by no means do away with the reward or the penalty of his 
acts in ten millions of years. Whoever enjoys the society of a woman courted 
by another man dwells in the hell called the thread of time so Jong as the sun 
and the moon exist. А vile woman is not fit for an act sacred to the manes 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE i 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
& 
180 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


ог the gods. Тһе husband loses his grace and valour by embracing her. 
Brahma himself hath said that oblations of ghee to ihe fire or offeriugs of 
water made by such a man do not satisfy the gods or tre manes. 


108-118. ‘This is why learned men carefully preserve their wives.; other- 
wise they are consigned to hell. Тһе Pendits preserve the integrity of their 
wives with care, as women are at the bottom of all evil and can, by no means, 
be trusted. А wife and a cooking utensil should always be carefully preserved; 
for they are consecrated by the touch of the owner and desecrated by the 
touch of others. A woman who defrauds her husband aud courts another 
lover is consigned to the hell calle! the Kumbhipáká as long аз the sun and 
the moon exist. The myrmidons of Yama chastise her if afflicted with 
tortures, ‘she tries to runaway from that place. She is always bitten there by 
worms as big as snakes. The bite causes her to screamin pain but does uot 
affect ber life. For tbe sake of pleasure which only lasts for a few minutes, 
the wretch forfeits fair fame in this world and is consigned to hell hereafter. 
Yherefore the virtuous try their best to shield their wives from the gaze of 
others. Ina word, that woman is truly blessed who is not touched even by the 
rays of the sun. A vile woman who is independent of the conirol o! her husband 
resembles a sow in all her features 


119-181. А woman, who to preserve the integrity of the family of her 
husband, is obedient to him goes to the Vaikuntha along with him. You 
should therefore go to earth and assume there human forms. Atterw rds 
the bare sight of Hari will enable you to goto the Goloka. Нагі, by the 
superanatural powers of Yoga or abstract meditation, will construct your 
shadows which for some time will dwell in the houses of the Brahmins and 
then come back to us. Thus, in course of time through your digits you will 
become our wives again. Thus my curse has proved more than а boon to you.” 
The sorrowful Angirà paused. Cursed by him, they descended to the earth 
and were wedd d to the Brahmins. Afterwards, when they reverentially 
offered food to Hari, they were emancipated and went to the divine land. ‘Thus 
the curse was more than a source of prosperity to them. Fora wonder, the 
anger ОЁ sages is immediately productive of good. Therefore adversity caused 
by the great is better than prosperity brought about by the wicked. ‘The 
Bráhmin women forsaken by their respective husbands obtained emancipation, 
from which it is clear that no one attains greatness without calamity, Thus 
I narrated to you the excellent deeds of Hari andalso the wonderful account 
of the redemption of the virtuous girls О saint, the history of Lord Krisna 
is original at every step. Itis so lovely. Опе who listens to it is never 
satiated. Ina word, good things never cause sufficient satisfaction. I related 
to you exactly what I heard from my spiritual guide. Now tell me what you 
wantto bear." Narada said, "O ocean of mercy, what shall I tell you? 
Describe to me ever thing that vou heard from your guru”  Náráyana then 
Continued te recite the glory of Hari. 


(0) Jat ALTO IP 10 fe XT 9X S 
1-9. Narayana said, “Once upon a time Hari without Baladeva but with 
his associate children went to the coast of Yaimuná x here the serpent Kaliya 
used to dwell, "herein a forest situated on its coast he ate ripe fruits and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KH AN DA. 181 


then refreshed himself with the limpid water of the stream. After having 
grazed the cows, with the children, he kept them in a suitable place and then 
sported with the boys When the boys were iufatuated with the excitement 
of the sports, the cow chewed green leaves and, after baving drunk poisoned _ 
water, they grew restless with pain and expired immediately. The cow-herds, 
friguteaed and perplexed. reported the matter to Lord Krişna who with full 
knowledge of the whole affair restored to life the cows who began to look him 
in the face. Then the Supreme Lerd Krisna who was vested with a human 
form ascended а kadam tree situated on the coast of the Y smuná and thence 
dropped into the house of the snake. Тһе water thereupon rose a hundred 
cubits high, which caused joy and sorrow to the boys at one and the 


same time. 


10-20. When Kaliya perceived the approach of a man, he was highly 
incensed and at once swallowed Hari just as a man unconsciously catches hold 
of a red-hot iron, whereby the throat and stomach of the snake were burnt. 
‘Thereupon the snake, oppressed by the glaring radiance of Brahma, vomited 
him av once crying, “аіаз {1 perish!’ ‘Tie snake then chewed the body of 
Hari which was as bard as thunder or adamant with the result tbat all his teeth 
were broken ; and there was a copious flow of blood from his mouth. Krişna 
then sat down on the head of that toothless monster who, crushed by the 
weight of the Lord that sustains the universe was about to die. He vomited 
biood, swooned aud dropped on the ground. Seeing him senseless, all the 
snakes wept bitterly out of love. Some ran away through fear : and others 
entered into a hole. Then the chaste Suvali, the spouse ; of the snake, when 
she saw that her husband who was E to cohabit with her was reduced to 
this plight, wept before Hari with other female snakes. With a heart 
perplexed with fear and with folded palms, «he caught bold of the lotus feet 
of Hari and said, “O Lord of the universe, source of all dignity, give me 
back my husband. ‘here is no oue so dear to the wife as the husband. (0) 
ocean of endless love, you are the lord and friend of the gods. I entrat you: 
not to kill my husband. О lover of Kádbá, you ure the friend of the whole 
world and the ruler even of Brahma. Give me back my husband. Wher 
Siva, Brahma, Ananta, Kártika, Saraswati and the Vedas are rendered speech- 
less in their fruitless attempt to adore you, who else can do it? What to talk 
of a worthless, toolish and evil-minded wretch like myself? It is impossible 
for a mean reptile like ше to ovtain a glimpse of your face. How can I have 
the presuu.ptuous audacity to think of adoring the Supreme Being who із 
constantly eulogised by Brahmá, Hari, Hara, Ananta, other gods, Manu, men 
and the sages ?, 


21-31. How can I, immersed in sin and ignorant of the Vedas and the 
holy scriptures, possibly adore you, when Parvati and Kamala are afraid of 
the task, when even Sávitri, the mcther of the Vedas, is incapable of it ? I 
adore the lotu:-feet of that Supreme Being who, decked with gems and lying 
on a golden bedstead, resides in the heart of КАЧА; whose body is Lbesmeared 
with sandal paste and who has a smiling countenance; who is full of happiness 
and felicity: whose crest is adorned “uh § jasmine wreaths, whose mind is 
delighted with the fragrance of the Pårijàta, whose body is agitated with a 
thrill of raptures at the sound of cuckoos and the sound of bees ; who always 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


А 
182 THE ВЁАНМА.Ү AIVARTA PURANA. 


chews the betel offered tə him by his beloved spouse; who із worshipped by 
Brahma, S'ivi Ananta ete Wife of a snake, how can [ adore the indes- 
eriable Hari who is served by Laksmi, Saraswati, Durgà, Ganga, Savitri, the 
adepts, Manus and saints, who baffles the oratorical powers of the Vedas and 
savants? О god, you are without a cause and yet you are the final cause. 
You ara the Lord of all, supremely good, and manifest yourself of your own 
accord. You are excellent and the lord of the excellent. [ bow to you. О 
Krisna, you are the lord of the gods, the demons, Brahma, Ananta the saints, 
the Manus and the adepts. You are the lord of all attributes, Therefore, 
О master of all animate and inanimate objects, deign to preserve me О soul 
of the universe, youare the lord of virtue and the virtuous, the good and the 
evil, and the Vedas. Even the Vedas are unable to determine your essence. 
You are the ruler of the body and the soul. You are the friend of all. There- 
fore, O Lord, I beseech you to preserve me." 


32-84. The goddess of the snakes, having thusadored Lord Krisna with a 
reverential inclination of her head, held his lotus feet. Whoever reads this 
hymn every day in the morning, noon and evening is relieved from all kinds 
of sins and goes tothe land of Hari. In this world, he acquires faith or 
religious belief in Hari; and, after his death, he secures his allegiance or bondage, 
becomes one of his attendants and obtains the four kinds of rede.nption, 
SAlokya, etc. 


35-44. Narada said, ‘O blessed soul, kindly narrate to me what was 
stated by Нагі in reply to the words of the spouse of the serpent." Sita said, 
* Saint Nár&yana, the son of Dharma, when he heard the words of Nárada 
commenced the narration of that wonderful and excellent anecdote. Lord 
Krisna was much impressed with the hymn of the wife of the serpent lying 
prostrate at his feet with folded hands and bewildered with fear and said, ‘O 
queen of snakes, be of good cheer and solicit a boon from me. O mother, 
by my boon your husband will be free from death and decrepitude. Child, quit 
this lake from this day forth and go home with your family and husband. 
From to-day forth you are my daughter; and your husband is like my son-in- 
law I һауе imprinted foot-marks on the head of your husband who, on that 
account, will be adored by Garuda. Go hence to Ramanaka-dwipa and ask of 
me any boon you desire.” Thereupon the wife of the snake wept with joy and 
respectfully thus said, “Sire, let my faith be firmly established in your lotus- 
feet. ‘his is the boou I require from you. 


45-57. Мау my mind ever wander in the lotus of your feet like а bee ! 
May I be blessed in the love of my husband; and may he be the best of sages!” 
So saying. she looked him in the face which resembles the full moon. Her 
mind was filled with raptures : her eyes, with tears. She again said respectfully, 
“Lord, І shall not go to the Ramanak Islands. I have nothing to do with the 
world. Let my husband take part in worldly affairs, Lord, make me your 
slave. I do not desire other kinds of redemption (Sálokya etc.,) which are 
sixteen times inferior to the bondage of your lotus-feet. I crave only the 
above boon, viz., your bondage ; whoever wants any other boon, though born 
in the sacred land of India, is for ever rendered destitute.” ‘The Lord smiled 
apd complied with her request. At once, an excellent lovely car ot gam 


URS) 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


سا ———— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 183 


descended from the sky, furnished with paraphernalia and wreaths c£ flowers, 
filled with the attendants of Lord Krisna, speet y like the wind ard mind and 
moving on a hundred wheels. The blue-coloured attendants of ihe Lord 
descended, bowed to Krisna. picked up Suvala and proceeded to the Goloka. 
Then Hari, by his powers of illusion, constructed a shadow of Subalé and gave 
it to Kaliya who, bewildered by the magic of the Lord, did not suspect any- 
thing wrong. 

58-70. Then the merciful Lord descended from the head of Kaliya and 
touched it with his fingers. He at once recovered and beheld before him 
Hari and the weeping, chaste Suvalà with folded palms Seeing that the snake 
was dumb, he spoke to him thus (as God is equally kind to the fit and unfit): 
“Kaliya, my child, solicit from me any boon that you may desire. You are 
dearer to me than my life. Be of goor cheer. Whoever springing out cf my 
digits is devoted to me secures my favours. I simply control him a little bit: 
and then l am propitiated. Now I tell you that whoever will kill any of your 
desendants will commit the sin of Bráhmin-slaughter. Ара whoever will 
strike a rod on the foot-marks of your bead i!l commit a sin twice as culpable 
ав the Brabmin-slaughter. Laksmi will leave his house. Ніз race, longevity 
and fame will be attenuated. Не will live for a century in the hell called the 
thread of time where he will be bitten by worms as huge as snakes. Then he 
will be born again, but die subsequently of snake-bite. His descendants will 
live in constant fear of snakes. Whoever will worship your descendants or the 
foot-marks on their heads will be relieved from all sins. Just go, therefore, 
to the island of Ramanaka. You need not be afraid of the divine eagle who 
will worship you, as soon as he will see your foot-marks." 


71-81. О son, you and your descendants will be rendered free from his 
fear. You will excel your relations. I can give you any other boon 
desired by you. Remove all fear from your mind now." Then Káliya with 
shivering frame and folded palms thus replied, “О Lord, I do not want any other 
boon than this, that in every birth I may devoutly remember your lotus feet. 
Whether I acquire the birth of a bird or a Brahmin, my life will be blessed if 
Iremember you. Without faith in you, even life in heaven is fruitless. The 
place where a man remembers you is the best of all places in the world. 
Whether a person's life be long or short, it is fruitful ifit is spent in your 
service, Whoever ministers to your lotus feet is exempt from death, 
decrepitude, disease, fear, etc. A person devcted to you does not want even 
the unattainable position of Indra, Brahma or an immortal being. He despises 
the four kinds of redemption, (Sálokya etc’) libe a torn piece of cloth. 
From that day forth, O Lord, when I obtained your mystic formula from 
Ananta, I have been rendered black in appearance by contemplation of your 
features and by your grace. 


82-90. Garuda’s faith in ycu was strong ; and mine weak ; hence he was 
able to expel me. © best of those who grant boons. now you have given me 
firm faith ‘so that we have equal degrees of faith. Therefore Garuda will no 
longer be able to devour me. As soon as he will see your foot-msiks on my 
head, he will quit me, whether І һауе merits or not. О god, the princes of 
snakes will now be submissive tome. I cn no longer be killed by Garuda. 
I am afraid of none now except Ananta. Ah! whata good luck I have ! The 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
184 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


Jord who is not observed even in dreams by the contemplative Indra, gods, 
saints, Manus and men is perceptible to my senses Lord, you take a form to 
please ycur worshippers ; otherwise, you have no form. When you take a 
form, you are vested with attributes: otherwise you are void of a form and 
attributes You are self-determining, eternal, the prop and the lord of the 
universe and the final cause. You are the witness of every act and the soul 
of the universe. You cin take any form How can an ordinary snake like me 
adore уоп when Brahma. S'iva, Ananta, Dharma and Indra are unable to do 
so? О friend of the poor, O ocean of mercy, pardon a wretch like mysolf 
who, through his folly and the crookedness of his heart, chewed and 
swallowed you. 


91-08. Like the sky, О Lord, you are unassaila le by weapons, invisible 
and insurmountable, Youare most effulgent and thus dazz'e the sight.” So 
saying, the snake fell at his lotus-feet, Hari was pleased and granted him 
all the boons solicited by him. Whoever in the morning reads the above hymn 
is relieved from the fear of snakes, from generation to generation. He can lie 
down even on a bed of snakes. A man bitten by snakes or dying of poison 
recovers if he listens to the hymn on his death-bed. Whoever writes this hymn 
on a birchen leaf and holds it on his right arm or wields it round bis neck is 
exempted from the fear of snakes. A house where this hymn is preserved 
accomodates snakes ; and the resident of the said house enjoys immunity from 
the fear of poison, ‘fear and thunder. Whoever reads or wields this hymn 
ever cherishes the memory of Hari with a devout heart in this world ; and in 
the end he consecrates his geneology and secures the bonilage of Нагі. 


99-102. Lord Кгіѕпа also gently asked the snake to go with his family 
to the island of Ramanaka which was beautiful like the city of Indra, as it was 
situated on the coast of theYamun& Commanded by Hari thus, the snake wept 
bitterly and said, “When shall I behold your lotus-feet again?" Then the snake 
bowed to God a hundred times and went to ihe said Island with his family 
through a passage across the water, with a heart afflicted by separation from 
Hari. . 


103-115. Тһе water of the Yamuna is sweet like nectar and every опе 
was pleased. When Káliya went there, he saw a habitation (beautiful like 
Indra’s city), which Vi$wakarmá had already c nstructed at the command of 
the merciful Lord. There the snake passed his days happily with his family 
and children. Thus I have narrated to you the wonderful account of Hari. 
What more do you want to hear ?? Narada said, “Lord, why had Kaliya to 
quit his home and ро to the coast of the Yamuna.?”  Náráyana said, “ОЁ 
yore, I heard the following account on the Malaya range from Dharma on the 
occasion of the solar festiva]. Listen. Once upon a time the sage Pulaha seated 
in the council of saints held on the coast of the Suprabha river put this question 
to Dbarma incidentally in connexion with the life and deeds of Krisna. 
The merciful Dharma gave the answer which I am going to tell you. ‘I'he 
snakes every year on the lunar day of the Full Moon in the month of Kártika 
worship Garuda through fear at the command of Ananta. They bathe in the 
great shrine frequented by pilgrims called the  Puskara and reverentially 
worship him with flowers, frankincense, light, sacrificial offerings and other 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 185 


ingredients. Once upon a time, Kaliya in the pride of his heart refused to 
worship Garuda, snatched away sacrificial ingredientsfrom other and attempted 
to devour them. The other snakes remonstrated in vain when Garuda suddenly 


appeared. 

116-128. The snakes when they saw him fought with him at the rick 
of their lives till day-break to save the life of Káliya. But crushed by the 
might of the bird they ran away and sought the protection of Ananta. When 
Kaliya saw that the snakes ran away, he remembered Hari and alone fought 
fearfully with the divire eagle. Ultimately he was vanquished by the bird and 
ran away in fear to the lake of the Yamun&: inasmuch as the bird, cursed by 
saint Saubhari was unable to pursue him there, His followers also subsequently 
joined him. Narada asked, “О saint, why was Garuda cursed by Saubhari ? 
And why was he, though a vehicle of the lord, unable go to there?" Narayana 
said, *'Saubhari was engaged there on the coast of the Yamuná in the contem- 
plation of God for a celestial hundred thousand years and thereby attained 
perfection. By his side, within the water cf the Yamuna, a fish with its retinue 
was roaming fearlessly. It raised its tail several times and circumambulated 
round the saint. Garuda, seeing the huge fish, seized it with his bill. As 
soon ав the saint cast an angry glance at him the fish dropped on the water and 
approached the Muni for protection. The bird attempting to catch it again, 
the sage was incensed and ssid thus, ‘O prince of birds, begone ! thou hast no 
power to slaughter an animal in my presence. Я 

129-140. Thou art proud of the fact that thou art the conveyance of 
Hari. Dost thou not know that Hari can orcate thousands of vehicles like 
thyself ? І can also reduce thee to ashes by the mere twinkle of my eye. 
Sirca, thou art the conveyance of Hari. And am I not also his slave? T say. 
if thou come again to this lake, thou shall be reduced to ashes by my 
curse.” Hearing tbis, the bird trembled, bowed io the Muni and went away. 
From that day forth, the mere mention of the lake causes a tremor in the 
heart of Garuda. I narrated to you what I heard from Dharma. Now, listen to 
the main story. When the boys saw that Hari did not emerge fiom the water 
for a long time, they were overwhelmed with grief and continually beat their 
breasts. Some of them fainted : others dropped on the ground. Some attempted 
to enter into the lake ; others prevented them from their design. Soma wanted 
to commit suicide but they were frustrated in their endeavours by others. Some 
lamented loudly ; others cried out. “Krişna ! Krisna ! " while others went to 
teport the matter to Nanda. 

141-150. Some of the boys clasped one another and, harassed by fear 
and mental agony, exclaimed, ‘‘Where is our Hari? What shall we do 2” 
Others cried, *O son of Nanda, dearer than our lives; O friend, appear before 
our eyes ; for, behold, we perish.” Some of the boys were bewildered with 
grief and, weeping loudly, went to Nanda and communicated the whole affair 
to Yasod& and Balarama. All the cowherds, male and female with hearts, 
agitated with grief and eyes red withtears ran with all their might. They 
were surrounded by the weeping boys and fainted on the coast of the Yamuna. 
Some beat their breasts ; others were dissuaded from their attempts to enter 
into the lake. Some constantly wept ; others lost their senses. Radha was 
prevented with great difficulty from entering into the Jake; shelay down 


24 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


186 THE BRAHMA-VAIV ARTA PURANA. 


in grief оп the coast like a corpse, and Nanda, the lord of the cowherds, wept 
апа fainted, again and again. Then the wise Balaráma tried to console the men, 
women and children. 


151-162. He said, “O milk-men and milk-women, O children, О wise 
Nanda, remember the words of Garga. How can calamity possibly befall a 
person who, in the shape of Ananta, wields the whole universe on his head, 
who in the shape of S’ankara destroys the world and who personally governs 
it ? How candanger overtake a Being who controls Маһа.Уівпи, the sustainer 
of a world on each of the pores of his skin ? Who can subdue Lord Krişna 
who subdues the conqueror of death, who is the death of death and whois the 
dispenser of the all-dispenser Brahm& ? Who can subdue him who is subtler 
than the atom, who is denser than the densest, who is invisible, though present 
everywhere and who residesin the heart of the devotees ? As the sides or 
quarters cannot be concentred in one place, as the sky cannot be touched, so 
the Lord of Râdhâ cannot be controlled by any one, а fact distinctly speci- 
fied in the Vedas. Metaphysicians hold that the soul is invisible. It can- 
not be the target of a weapon. It cannot be consumed or destroyed by any 
thing. For the sake of the devout people engaged in his contemplation, Krigna 
wields a form ; otherwise the Supreme Being who is all glory and light has 
neither beginning, middle nor end. Fora wonder, when the world was inun- 
dated, Brahma came out of the navel of Hari. How cana lake then subject 
him to danger. It is easier for a gnat to swallow the universe than for a 
serpent to swallow Krigna " Thus I narrated to you the edifying, esoteric 
accounts of Hari, mysterious even to the Yogis. Nanda and others wore 
consoled at his words, particularly when they remembered the words of 
Garga. 

168-172. Only Yasod& and Ráüdhá were disconsolate. When they felt 
the pangs of separation from Krisna, words of consolation fell flat upon their 
ears, At this time, Krisna got up from the water, an incident which 
reassured men, women and children. ‘he smile on his face gave it the aspect 
of the full moon. His clothes, the paint of collyrium in tho border of his 
eyes and the sandal pasto annointing his body were intact. Tho infallible 
Being was, as usual, clad in his apparel and decorated with the plumage of a 
peacock attached tohis crest. He was engaged as usual in playing upon his flute. 
Yasgoda at once ran, clasped him to her breast and kissed him with a smile. 
Nanda, Balaráma and Rohini took him in their lapsby turns and gazed at his 
face with open eyes. The boys embraced him out of love: and the cowherdesses 
feasted their eyes with the charms of his person asa red-legged bartavelle 
gazes at the rays of the moon. At this time, a wild fire broke out and 
encircled the whole Gokula with all its residents, It was huge like a mountain; 


and every one was frightened and adored Lord Hari in this imminent 
danger. 


173-186. People said, ^O Lord, destroyer of Madhu, preserve us at tbis 
crisis, just as you preserved us before. You are our tutelary deity and family- 
god. The fire, Varuna, the Sun, the Moon-Yama, Kuvera, the wind, I:ápa, 
Brahmá, Siva, Ananta, Dharma and other gods, the Saints, Manus, men, demons, 
Yaksas, Raksas, Kinnars and al) objects, animate and inanimate, constitute 
your essence. O Lord of ihe universe hold out assurance of safety to us and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


RR 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 187 


check the fire. You are the creator, the destroyer and the preserver of the 
world. The world appears and disappears according to your pleasure. We 
seek your protection. Do shield us from danger.” Having said so,. they 
assumed a posture of meditation. Then Krisna at once extinguished the fire 
wiih the nectar of his glances: and Gokul was saved from the peril affecting 
the lives of its residents. Whoever readsthe above hymn is unquestionably 
relieved from all danger; the army of his enemy perishes; he conquers every- 
where and attainsa feeling of devoutnese for Hari in this world and secures 
his service in the next. Нагі after having relieved all from the perils of the 
wild fre went with them to his house which vied withthe mansion of Kuyera. 
Then Nanda distributed copious wealth to the Brahmins, feasted his friends 
and relations and caused the celebration of auspicious rites, the recitation of 
the name of Hari and the chanting of the Vedas to be performed by the priests. 
The residents of Vrindávana, devoted to the lotus feet of Hari, performed joyful 

festivals on the occasion. Thus I recited to you the account of the auspicious — 
deeds of Hari. It destroys the sins of the age of Kali, as fire consumes 


the fuel. 


CHAPTER XX. 


1-8. Once upon a time, Lord Krisna wiih the boys and Balaráma 
annointad with perfume went to the forest of Vrindávana to play. The 
Lord played with them cheerfully. In the meantime, the cows went astray: 
and Brahma, in order to ascertain the might of Lord Krisna, stole the cows 
with their calves and the children. Then the omniscient and omnipotent 
Lord Krisna, the prince of the Yogis, realised the intention of Brahma and 
by the powers of his abstract meditation created all that was stolen. Then 
Lord Krisna bent upon fun and amusement returned home with the boys and 
Balarüma after grazing the cows. When Lord Krişna thus came to Vrindávana 
and returned with the cows, the children and Balarüma continually for a 
year, Brahm’ knew his might and came to him abashed at the rootof the 
holy fig-tree where he observed that Lord Krisna in the midst of the boys 
was shining like the full moon surrounded by stars. 


916. Lord Krişna, seated ona throne of gem and effulgent with the 
lustre of Brahma, was smiling gently. He was clad in yellow dress. He was 
decked with armlets, bracelets, anklets and ear-rings constructed with gems. 
His graceful face seemed to harbour the charms of ten millions of Cupids. His 
body was annointed with sandal, musk, aloe and saffron. His breast was 
adorned with a garland of Párijáia; and his crest, with a plumage of peacock 
and jasmine wreaths. Nay, the ornaments themselves were decorated with the 
Lord Кгівпа in the prime of his youth was dark-blue 
"His face had the lustre of the full-moon of 
mbas; his nose was like the bill of the 
prince of birds. His eyes thieved the charms of the blooming lotuses cf 
autumn. Ніз breast w s rendered bright with the lustre of the Kaustubha 
which it wore. The aspect of the Supreme Being, the Lord of Radha, was 


quite serene, 


beauty of his person. 
in appearance like a new cloud. 
autumn. His lips were like ripe bi 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE  , 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


188 TUE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


17-26. Brahmá was astonished at this sight and bowed to the Lord, 
againsnd again. The face of the Lord was the exact counterpart of the image 
he beheld in his heart He saw the same image behind him and on all his sides 
as on his front. When Vrindávana, in the eyes of Brahmá, was thus full of 
Lord Krigna, he bowed to him, again and again. Brahmá saw that the cows. 
the calves. the cowherd boys, the trees, the shrubs and the creeping plants 
had all the appearance of Krisna. He then meditated and beheld that the 
universe was full of the image of the Lord. By the illusion of Hari, the trees, 
mountains, the land, the seas, the devas (gods), Gandarvas, munis and men had 
all vanished and assumed the form of Hari. It was impossible to determine 
who was the Lord Krisna, what constituted his illusion ог his superhuman 
power or his majesty. Brahma was struck dumb to find that all was Kriena. 
He was at a loss to make out whom to adore and prepared {о mutter the name. 
of Hari at that place. Не adopted the posture of meditation, folded his 
palms and shed tears like one forlorn. ‘There was a thrill of raptures in 
his body. 


21-39. Then by the powers of his abstract meditation, he blocked up the 
six tubular organs viz., Idà, Susumn&, Medhya, Pingalá, Nalint and Budhâ, and 
the six circles of his body, viz., Visuddha, Anáhata Maladhar, Swadhisthana, 
Manipara and Agnákhya. He caused the wind or tho vital air to surmount the 
circles, introduced it into the aperture at the top of his head and then cooped 
it up there. He then brought the tubular organ of the body called Medhyáà into 
the lotus of his heart, turned the said wind round and conjoined it to the above 
organ, Afterwards he recited the perfect mystic formula consisting of eleven 
letters which Hari had given him. In a short time, he observed in his heart. an 
effalgent light. Within the light, he beheld the lovely form of Hari. He 
was in yellow garment and vested with two hands holding a flate. He seemed 
ever inclined to favour his votaries His ears were decorated with ornamenta 
having the cut of a fish. He bad a smiling and cheerful countenance, His 
body was fair and dark-blue like a new cloud. His essence pervades all 
animale: and yet he is dissociated from them. Ho is the witness of all actions. 
He takes delight in himself, i.e , ho із self-contented. Нз is the reflection of 
the universe. He is the receptacle of all objects and the final cause. He is 
excellent, most adorable and omnipotent. He is the spiritual guide of every- 
body and the root of all good. He is the embodiment of all “mystic formula 
and the source of all prosperity. Brahma saw the same beautiful image outside 
as inside bis heart, He then reverentially adored Lord Krisna withithe same 
hymn that Hari had given him at the time of the great deluge which reduced 
the universe to one mass of water. I bow to that Hari in the guise of a boy 
who isthe image of the universe and lord of all, who is the final cause and 
who is indescribable, : 


40 51. Iadore that Lord who is compassionate to the devout, who is the 
germ of all energy, who wields a powerful form and is yet dissociated from 
all objects, who is self-determining, who represents а merciful pilot to 
steer the boat of enorgy across the sea of the world in all its dreadful aspect. 
He is the spirit that pervades everything and yet is dissociated from 
everything. Не is vested with attributes and is yet void of attributes, I 
bow tohim. Не is the presiding deity of the passions and the abode of the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. | 189 


passions, I bow to that colossal Being. He is the Vedas, the father of 
the Vedas, and the emblem of the auxiliary branches of the Vedas. I bow 
to Him, the source of all mantras. He is the essence of all objects, wonderful 
and indeterminable, free and yet dependent, invisible even through the help of 
asceticism or Yoga, though ubiquitous His existence is incontrovertible. 
. 1 bew to the spiritual guide of the Yogis. I bow to the Lord of Hüdhá who 
occupies the central position in the sphere of the Rûsa and is attended by the 
cow-herds, male and female. 1 bow to that god who is served by S'iva who 
lives by the side of the virtuous and shuns the wicked, who is the lord of the 
ascetics and the very picture of devotion. He is the seed and the king of 
all mystic formulae. Не yields fruits of devotion to the devout and is the 
living embodiment of success attained through the mantras. І bow to the 
Supreme Being. He is the image of joy and sorrow, the source of happiness 
and misery, the author of virtue. the root of all good and evil. I bow to Him, 


52-60. Brahmá, having worshipped him thus, restored to him the cows, 
calves and the children, bowed to him low, then fell flat on the ground and 
wept bitterly. When he opened his eyes, he beheld, before him, only the 
lovely lord Krisna seated at the root of the holy fig tree. Rendering him 
obeisance again and again, Brahm& went back to the Brahmáloka. Whoever 
reads this hymn of Brahmá enjoya happiness in this world and, after his death, 
goes to the Goloka where he attains the form of Lord Krisna, lives by his 
side and renders him perpetual homage. Кгіѕпа also went home with the 
cows and children who, though they came back after the lapse of a year, were 
lewildered by the illusion of the Lord and thought that only a day and a 
night had passed in this long interval. The milk-men and the milk-maids 
also could not controvert the point in any way. It is impossible to make. out 
if objects created by a meditative ascetic (Yogi) are new or old. Thus, О 
saint, I have related to you the account of Нагі pleasing at all times and 
calculated to give redemption, happiness and sanctity. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


1-19. Once upon a time, Nanda with a view to perform a religious 
sacrifice in honour of Indra ordered the beat of drumand directed the cowherds, 
young and old, and all the Bráhn ins, Ksatriyas, Vaigvas and the Südras of the 
town to worship Indra reverentially with curd, condensed milk, whey, ghee, 
molasses and honey. Having made this proclamation, he set up in his wide 
domain the standard of Indra. He covered it with silk and garlands and 
aunointed it with sandal, aloe, musk and saffron, After bathing, he put ona 
pair of washed clothes, washed his feet, performed his diurnal rites and sat 
down on a golden stool. Maay sacrificial cups were provided for the occasion. 
The priests and the cowherd boys and girls sat down there, The residents 
of the town arrived there with heaps of presents. The Munis versed in the 
Vedas and effulgent with the lustre of Brahma, namely, the tranquil- minded 
Carga, Gálava, S’dkala, S’ikatayana, Gautama, Karatha, Karna, Vátsya, 
Kátyüyana, Saubhari, B&mdeva, Yagna-valkya, Panini, Rigya-S’ringa, Gaur. 


. CC-0.In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


E 


бы. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


190 : THE BRAAM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


mukha, Bharadw&ja, Bamana, Krisna-Dwaipdyana, S'riugi, S'amanta, Jaimini, 
Kata, Paráara, Maitreya and Vaiéampáyana arrived there with their pupils ; 
and many a Brahmin, beggar, bard, Ksatriya, Vaisya and Sidra came 
there. я 

14-27, ‘Thereupon Nanda got up with his attendants, offered allegiance 
to the saints, Bráhmins and kings and sat down with their permission. He 
then asked expert Brahmins to cook food in the place where the standard was 
get up. He also caused lamps to be lighted in that place which was perfumed 
with frankincense. Не also provided for the occasion flowers, garlands, sacrifi- 
cial offerings, balls of sesamum, two thousand baskets full of cakes prepared 
with ground rice (Swastikas), a thousand jars full of candied sugar, also jars 
containing balls of the flour of barley and wheat boiled with ghee, countless ripe 
plantains or other local fruits of the season, a hundred thousand jars of conden- 
sed milk, curd, honey, ghee, butter, whey, molasses and Visnu oil, other 
objects fit for enjoyment, bullocks and musical instruments. There was а 
flourish of yocal music; and many silver and golden cups, gorgeous apparel, 
lovely ornaments and golden stools were provided for the occasion. 


28-39. Near the staff or the club (the standard of Indra) a thousand 
goats, a hundred buffalos, a hundred thousand sheep, sixteen men and a hundred 
rhinoceroses-were provided for sacrifice. After the purification of the victims, 
the sentinels mounted guard over that place. 16 was impossible for any one 
to tell the number of the children, young men and women, assembled there 

—or the plants and trees fixed at that place. Every one was enchanted at the 
time with the music, the dance and the song. At the festival Rambhâ, 
Urvasi, Menakà, Ghritáchi, Mohini, Rati, Prabhávati, Vipra Chitti, Bhánu- 
mati, Tilottamà, Renuka, and other celestial prostitutes were present. Men 
were captivated with their dances, their personal charms and their coquettish 
movements, At that time the powerful Baladeva and Hari himself came 
there with the cowherd boys. Every one was rejoiced to see them from a 
distance and stood up in reverential awe. Lord Krisna who was playing upon 
the conches and the enchanting flute while returning from the play-ground 
was adorned with gems and the diamond called Kaustubha. His dark-blue 
appearance was besmeared with the paste of sandal and aloe. Не was looking 
at his own face (which resembled the blooming lotus of autumn) reflected in 
the mirror of gem. There was a mark of sandal on his forehead coupled 
with a mark of musk on account of which his face looked as beautiful as the 
moon in the sky orbamented with stars. 


40-53.. As the sphere of the sky is decorated with a line of herons, 
so were his blue throat and chest lighted up with wreaths of jasmive. Asa 
new cloud is illumined with flashes of lightning, his dark-blue complexion was 
brought into prominent relief by his lovoly, yellow dress. Decorated with 
jasmine and nose-gay of flowers attached to his crest, he was looking like the 
eky adorned with stars and the rain-bow. As the rays of the sun shed lustre 
round the blooming lctus of autumn, the ear-rings of gem similarly added 
grace to bis features. The four castes, Brahmins, etc., the saints and the cow- 
herds bowed low to the Lord and then sat down on thrones of gem, Lord 
Krisna took his seat io their midst on a golden stool and looked like the full 
moon of autumn surrounded by a constellation of planets in the heavens, he 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 191 


Brahmins then adored the self-determining, effulgent, eternal Lord of the 
universe who transcends the qualities of Nature and took their respective seats. 
Then Hari (who is thoroughly conversant with ethies) in addressing his father, 
thus gave expression to principles of morality, mysterious even to 
savants :—“O Lord of cow-herds, what are you doing here ? In whose 
worship are you engaged ? What is worship and what is its object and how 
can that object be accomplished ? Supposing that the god who is worshipped 
on this occasion is displeased with the worshipper for any violation of religious 
rites, what will be the penalty ? Or supposing he is pleased, what will be the 
reward in this world aa well asin the next ? What sort of worship yields 
fruits in this world and not in the next? And what sort of worship yields 
fauitin the next world and not in this world ? What sort of worship ів 
beneficial or injurious to the worshipper in both the worlds? A worship not 
enjoined by the Vedas is the cause which is at the root of all evil. Has this 
worship been prevalent in your family, from generation to generation ? Or 
has it been just introdnced ? Have you seen that god whom you are going 
to worship ? Does that god personally descend to eat the sacrificial offerings ? 
If not, the worship of the gods who eat in person is preferable. 


54-60. Sire, the Brahmins are gods on earth; therefore the Vedas 
hold that the worship.of the Brahmins is most desirable, Krisna in the guise 
of a Brühmin eats personally ; and all the gods are pleased when the Brahmins 
are pleased. What is the good of worshipping any gods other than the 
Br&hmins ? If ihe offerings dedicated to a god are presented toa Brahmin, 
they become effectual; for thereby the gods are pleased and grant boons ; other- 
wise they are ineffectual. If a person presents articles of food to a deity 
and eats them himself, he is guilty of misappropriation of the property of the 
gods and goes to hell. No опе should eat the offerings dedicated to deity 
other than Hari. The offerings dedicated to Hari only can be eaten. 


61-71. Food and drink not dedicated to Visnu are impure like ordure and 
urine ; but they are strictly forbidden toa Brdhmin. Look Here. If a person 
gives food to a Brahmin without dedicating it to the gods, even then the 
latter are pleased to eat the same through the mouth of the former and give 
to the donor the privilege of residence in heaven. Therefore adore the 
Brahmins by all means and thereby secure reward in this world as well as 
in the next. The propitiation of the Brahmins, the gift to them of sacerdotal 
fees, the recitation of Hari’s name, devotion, wership, sacrifice, charity and 
celebration of festivals constitute the crowning glory of all acts. The gods 
reside in the body of the Br&hmins; the holy shrines dwell in the dust 
of their feet; and the sacred streams reside in the water with which their 
feet are washed anda bare touch of which 1з as effectual as ablution in the 
aforesaid holy streams. The drink of this water destroys the germs of 
all diseases and consumes the sius accumulated in seven births. Whoever, ’ 
after having committed five kinds of sins, bows toa Bráhmin is immediately 
purified as though he bathed in s]] sacred streams ‘he Vedas hold that the 
mere touch or sight of a Brahmin relieves a man from all kinds of sins. A 
Brahmin, wise or foolish, is the image of Visnu. Vaisnava Brahmins 
are dearer to Hari than his life and consecrate the earth with the dust of 
their feet, a fact described in the Vedas. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
^C v: 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


192 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURAN A. 


12-82. Тһе foot-mark of Braumins is also regarded as a shrine, Their 
louch also destroys the sins committed in holy places. Conversation with them, 
embracing them, the consumption of ihe remnants of the food eaten by them, 
the sight of their faces or the touch of their bodies is calculated to give an 
effectual release from all kinds of sins. Nay, the sight of a Brahmin devoted 
to Hari isas effectual and sanctifying as a pilgrimage to all shrines and ablution 
in all holy rivers. Тһе refuse of the food left by a Brahmin who dedicates 
offerings to Hari at first and afterwards consumes them himself is calculated 
to secure allegiance to the Lord. If a person eats food or drinks a liquid 
without dedicating it to Hari, itis as unholy as.ordure or urine. If an object 
comes into the possession of a devout person, it is regarded as the property of 
Visnu; therefore the consumption of this article without dedicating it to Hari 
amounts to misappropriation of divine property. If2S/idra devoted to Hari is 
anxious to eat any sacrifieial offerings, he should first offer undressed rice to the 
Lord cook it and then eat it. The Brdhmins, Kseatriyas and the Vaisyas are 
entitled to the worship of the Holy stone ; only the S'üdras are not entitled to 
it. О lord, of the cowherds, if you do not offer articles of consumption to the 
Brahmins, they will be rendered as worthless as ashes, 1n the interests of 
virtue, food may be given indiscriminately to every one ; but gift to particular 
persons is more efficacious. Gift to a man in preference to a beast is eight 
times more efficacious; gift toa virtuous S'üdra is efficacious twice as much 
as the last. 

83-94. Gift to a Vaisya is efficacious eight times as much ; gift to a 
Ksatriya is efficacious twice as much as the last; gift to a Brahmin is efficacious 
a hundred times as much as the last: gift to a learned Brahmin in perference 
to an ignorant Br&hmin is efficacious a hvndred times as much аз the last: gift 
to a pious Brühmin who consecrates itio Hari isa hundred times as much 
efficacious as the last, The feasting of a Bráhmin is as much efficacious ав the 
gift of anariicle to a Bráhmin. Нагі is pleased, if his votary is pleased; aud 
all the gods are pleased, if Hari is pleased. For the branches of a tree are 
moistened, if its root is moistened. If you dedicate all these articles to a 
single god, the rest of the gods will be displeased. ОЁ what avail will be 
unto you the satisfaction ofa solitary god, if the rest of the gods are dis- 
satisfied ? O sire, rather dedicate all these а: ticles to the Govardhan Mountain 
who perpetuates the race of the cow and hence he is so called. There is no one 
so virtuous as this Mountain who provides the cow every day with fresh grass, 
The service of the cow confers the same benefit as ablution in holy streams, 
the feasting of the Brahmins, acts of great charity, worship of Hari, perfor- 
mance of all vows, acts of abstinence and religious а usterities, cireumambulation 
rousd the world and veracity. Sire, tke gods reside in the bodies of the 
cows; the shrines reside in their feet: and Laksmi resides in their private 
parts, Whoever marks his forehead with the dust of the soil impressed with 

‘the foot-marks of the cows is purified in the same manner as if he bathed 
in all sacred streams and obiains immunity from danger at every step. 

95-101. The place where the cows dwell is regarded as a shrine ; and a 
man dying there is at once redeemed. A wretch who hurts a Brahmin ога 
cow practically commits the sin of Brabmin-slaughter. Whoever slaughters 
а Brabmin or a cow (the outcome of the digits of Hari) dwells in the hell 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 193 


called the Thread of Time so long as the sun and the moon exist." Then Nanda 
became very glad and replied thus with a smile, ‘‘Child, the worship of Indra 
is hereditary in our family and produces rain. ‘The rains are productive of the 
crops which sustain the people. The residents of the Vraja have been perform- 
ing this annual ceremony from generation to generation for their welfare." 
At these words, Krisna laughed loudly with his brother Baladeva and thus 


Spoke again to bis father: 


102-117. ‘Sire, for a wonder, I hear curious things from you. It has 
never been held by any one that Indra is the cause of rain. Only you say во. 
Pray, do not utter such words any more which are contrary to the principles o£ 
ethics. Now listen to the words of saints as sanctioned by the Sám-Veda. 
Please refer this point to the savants assembled in this council and then deter- 
mine if Indra is the cause of rains or not. The sun is the source of water 
which produces the stalks: and the stalk is the source of crops and fruits, 
The crops are the source of food which sustaius life. In time, the sun swallows 
the water; and in time he vomits it. Providence has assigned to the sun, 
the clouds charged with water, the elephant, the sea, the wind, the Jord of the 
crops, the lord of the year, the minister, the measure of rainfall, the harveat 
and the grass, their respective functions. They have been existing and conform- 
ing to rules in every age, Kalpa aud year. The elephant raises thé water with 
his proboscis from the sea and transfers it to the clouds. The clouds, 
agitated by the wind, pour the water over different parts of the globe. All this 
takes place by the will of God; ucthing can happen against his will. By’ the 
will of God, Brahma has created the world teeming with animate and inanimate 
objects. First, he created food and then the animals. Character is the result 
of habit ; and Karma or act is the result of character. Through Karma, people 
are liable to pleasure or pain. Pain, life, death, disease, sorrow, fear, danger, 
knowledge, poetical genius, fame, infamy, virtue, residence in heaven or hell, 
sin, redemption, faith, allegiance to Hariare all due to Karma, But God is 
the author of that habit, character and Karma, Не is the dispenser of all 
fruits: and every thing is subject to his will. 

118-128. О sire, seek the protection of that Supreme Being who has 
created Mahá-Visnu, the ontology or the hidden principles of creation, nature, 
the world, the tortoise, Ananta, the earth and every-thing from Brahm& down 
to a bush ; at whose command, the wind holds the tortoise, the tortoise holds 
Ananta, Ananta holds the earth and the earth holds the animate and inanimate 
objects ; at whose command, the wind which is the life of the world constantly 
blows, the sun gives light and heat, the fire burns, death frequents animals, 
the trees put forth blossoms and fruits, and the oceans fixed in their respective 
positions acquire a profound depth; by the mere twinkle of whose eyes hundreds 
of worlds appear and disappear; who is the death of death and dispenser of: 
timeand fate. Не shall preserve you. For a wonder, the time occupied by: 
- the fall of a succession of twenty-eight Indras constitutes one day and one night 
ot Brahm&. Тһе longevity of Brahma consists of one hundred and eight years 
consisting of such days and nights. А mere wink of the Supreme Being void 
of all attributes is the space of time within which the downfall even of Brahma is 


. 25 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


А 
194 THE BRAHM A-V AIV АРТА PURANA. 


occasioned. In the;presence of the Supreme Lord the worship of Indra is a hideous 
mockery.” The Lord paused and the Munis present in the council praised him. 
Then Nanda was much pleased and shed tears of joy, The fact is, if any one 
is defeated by his son, he is rejoiced. 


129-141, Then Nanda, at the command of Lord Krigna, pronouuced 
Swasti or benediction and by turns respectfully worshipped Govardhana, tho 
Munis, the savants, the Brahmins, the cows and the fire. When the worship 
was over, there was a loud flourish of music on the occasion of the festival. 
There were sounds of “Jaya” (victory), shouts of Hari, and the music caused 
by the conches. The Munis recited the Vedas and the hymns of Durga 
or Chandi. Dindi, the favourite minister of Kamsa, and the best of bards loudly 
read out the eight auspicious hymns. Then Кгіѕпа wielded a celestial form, 
ascended the mountain Govardhana and said, “I have eaten your sacrificial 
offerings. Please accepts from me a boon.” The whole assembly then said 
to Nanda: “Sire the mountain is before you, all will be well. Just solicit from 
him а boon,” Nanda begged cf him allegiance and homage to Hari where-: 
upon Krigna in the guise of Govardhan gave him the boon required, presented 
to him all the articles of food and disappeared. Ihon Nanda feasted the 
Brühmins and the saints, distributed wealth to them, bowed low and went home, 
preceded by Krisna and Rama and accompanied by his retinue. The bard 
Dindi was offered cloth, horse, pearls, diamonds and food. Tho Munis, 
Brühmins, Kinnars, Gandarvas, Heavenly whores, etc., all bowed to Rûma and 
Кгівпа and departed. Тһе Kings and cow-herds followed suit. 


142-153. Indra, however, who was very much slandered and abused on 
the occasion of the ceremony was much incensed. He mounted a car and 
with his clouds and winds hastily arrived at the spot. The gods, actuated by 
a military spirit and provided with arms, followed him. The terrible noise of 
the wind and the clouds and the uproar caused by the army agitated the town: 
and Nanda was much frightened. The politician Nanda was overwhelmed 
with grief and thus addressed his wife and followers in private, “О Yasoda, 
O Rohini, run away at once with Rûma and Кгівпа. Let the frightened women 
and children also fly. Let the powerful cowherds alone remain with me. In 
case our lives also are imperilled, we will quit the town" So saying. he 
remembered Hari and with folded palms and with a reverential inclination 
of his shoulders, according to the hymn as stated in the Kanwa-éAkha, ho thus 
adored the husband of S'achi. О king of the gods, you are Indra, Surapati, 
S'akra, the son of Aditi, the elder brother of the Wind, the god of a hundred 
eyes, Bhagánga, the son of Kasyapa, Vidoja, Sundsar, Marutwán, Pak-S'/ásana. 
You are the father of all. You are famous by the names of Srimán, S/asi, I’ ga, 
and the destroyer of the demons. People call you the thunderer, the friend 


of Cupid, the destroyer of the vow of Gautama, the slayer of Vritra, Vaeava 
and the beggar of the bones of; Dadhichi. 


154-163. О god, you are also styled Jisnu, the brother of Bamana 
Puruhüta, Purandara, Divaspati, S’ata-mukha, Sütrám&, Gotra-bhid and Bibhu. 
You are likewise celebrated by the names of Lekharsabha, Baláràti, Jambha- 
bhedl, Swaráe, Samkrandan, Duschyavan, Turását, Megha-váhana, Akhandal, 
Harihaya, Namuchi-Pran-Násana, Vriddha-S’raba. Vrisa and Daitya-Darpa- 
Nigudana. These forty-six names of Indra destroy all kinds of sins, Whoever reads 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


naa 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JAN M A-KH ANDA. 195 


this ode of names, as stated by Kauthuma is saved by the thunderer even at the 
time of his greatest. danger. He secures immunity from perils caused by 
deluge, shower of hailstones and hideous thunder-bolt; as Indra himself is the 
preserver of people from such dangers. The house where this hymn is 
preserved is free from the attacks of thunder-bolt and hailstone. Lord Krisna 
was very angry at the hymn, and burning with the radiance of Brahma, 
addressed Nanda thus: Sire, why are you so timid ? Why should you fear, 
when I am by your side? In a moment, I can reduce every thing to ashes. 
You had better place the frightened cows, calves, the children azd women 
inside the cave of Govardhan and cheer up at once." Nanda complied ; and 
Hari at once lifted up with his left hand the mountain, as ifit were as light as 


a club. 

164-174. The place was lighted up with the lustre of gems, itis true; 
but besmeared with dast, it became again dark, The sky was fearfully over- 
cast ; there was a heavy downpour ; there was a shower of thunder and hails ; 
there was a fall of dreadful meteors. But the bare contact with the mountains 
turned them aside. The efforts of Indra become quite ineffectual, as if he 
were quite powerless. Then the incensed god Indra held in his hand the 
thunder constructed with the bones of Dadhichi. But lord Krisna stupefied 
the winds, the clouds and the thunder ; and every one was reduced to the 
condition of pictures suspended on the wall. Indra, subdued by Hari, got into 
a coma and saw that the whole world was full of Lord Krigna. Не beheld 
that Hari, in yellow dress, with two hands holding a flute, and decked with 
diamonds was seated on a throne of gem. Lord Hari seemed inclined to 
favour his votaries: and there was a sweet smile playing on his lips. His body 
was besmeared with sandal paste. Indra when ha saw that the whole world 
containing animate and inanimate objects was fullof tne wonderful form of 
Lord Hari fainted at the sight. He then recited the mystic formula given 
to him by his Guru. An efulgent light focussed in the lotus ofa thousand 
petals was perceptible to his sight. 


175-185., Within that light, he beheld a lovely, celestial form, dark- 
blue in complexion like a new cloud. Earrings of the cut ofa fish decorated 
the features of that Being. His body was adorned with a diamond diadem: his 
neck and breast, with the Kaustubha; his hands, with armlets and bracelets; and 
his feet, with anklet. Indra saw the same form inside his heart as outside his 
heart. Не adored Lord Hari thus : ** Lord, you are indestructible, supreme, 
eternal, invisible, effulgent, vo'd of form and attributes. No one can trace 
your limit. To help the contemplation of the devotees and their adorations, 
you take various forms. Your complexion changes with age. In the Satya-age, 
you were white in colour, effulgent, and the very embodiment of truth. In the 
Tretà, you were effulgent with the lustre of Brahma and resembled the saffron 
in the hue of your complexion. In the Dwápara, you were yellow and olad in 
yellow dress. In the Kali (present age) you are blackjand hence you are called 
Krisna. Your figure is lovely and dark-blue like a new cloud. You are the 
only son of Nanda and the life of Yasodá, You are the Lord of all: and so 
I adore you, You enchant the heart of the milk-maids and are dearer to Radha 
than her life. For amusement you play upon the lovely flute, Your grace 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


À 
196 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


isincomparable. You are decked with gems. You have the grace of ten 
millions of Cupids. You are tranquil in disposition and the Lord of all. At 
oue time, you play with Radha at Vrindá-vana; at other times, уоп dwell in 
her heart in the solitudes of a lovely place. 


186-197. Sometimes you indulge in aqueous sports with Radha; at other 
times, you tie her chignonjor colour her feet with lac-dye or chew betels offered 
by Radha. Sometimes she looksat you with crooked glances; at other times 
you look at her or adorn her neck with garlands twined by yourself. At times 
you go with her to the sphere of the Rûsa and put on the garland offered by 
her. At other times you restore the same garland to her and flirt with her 
to the exclusion of other damsels ; or eat the food offered by the wives of the 
Br&hmins. Sometimes you eat palmyra fruits offered to you by the boys or 
steal the clothes of the naked milk-women. At other times, you sing merrily 
with children. At onetime, уоп tread the head of Kaliya; at other times 
you halloo to the cows with the children or play upon the melodious flute.” 
Indra in great awe adored Hari with the hymn which his spiritual guide gave 
him in his fight with Vritra, the demon. At first, Krisna had given to Brahma 
this hymn, the mystic formula consisting of eleven letters and the auspicious 
amulet. At the shrine of Pugkara, Brahm’ gave the hymn to Sanat-Kuméra 
who gave it to Vrihaspati. The last-named gave it to Indra. Whoever reveren- 
tially reads this hymn every day acquires firm faith in Hariin this world and 
ultimately secures his allegiance. 


198-203. He is exempted from birth, death, decrepitude, disease and 
sorrow. Even in dream he does not see the myrmidons of Yama or his house. 
Lord Krisna, the asylum of grace, was pleased to hear the words of Indra, 
fixed the mountain in its proper place and gladly conferred boons on Indra. 
Indra then bowed to Hari and went home with his attendants, Those who 
were inside the mountain-cave came out and returned home. Every one then 
remembered Lord Hari. S'ri-Krigna went home with his attendants. Then 
Nanda enraptured with religious zeal adored with tears in his eyes the Supreme 
Lord in the guise of his son thus: “О Krigna, уоп аге the Supreme Being. I 
adore you. You are a benefactor of the cows and Brahmins. You wander over 
the surface of the globe as Govinda for the good of mankind. I bow to you, 
again and again. 


204-220. You are the cow, the Brahmins and the Supreme Being. You 
are the prop of endless worlds, you incarnate yourself as a fish: you are the wit- 
ness of all acts and you are dissociated from all objects, void of attributes and 
form. You are very subtle and сап only be attained by the powers of Yoga. 
Even Brahma, Visnu and S/iva adore you. Tbe hue of your complexion varies 
vith every age ; i.e., by turns it becomes white, red, yellow and black. 
Every virtue exists in уоп. You are an ascestic and an adept ; and you are 
the lord of asceticism and perfection. You represent the principle of asceticism 
and are the lord of the ascetics. I bow to you. How can an idiot like me 
adore you, when Ananta, Dharma, Brahma, Ganega. Kártika, Sanaka, even. 
Kapila (the supreme lord of the ascetics) and saints Nara and Narayana 
are unable to do во, and when the Vedas, Saraswati, Laksmt and Râdhå fail in 
their attempts to adore you? О ocean of mercy, preserve me in this ocean 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


—— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 197 


6 of life. I have obtained you as my son in this life by virtue «f my meditations 


in my previous life. Now give me the spirit of devoutness and homage for your 
lotus feet. The position of Brahmé or Indra or the four kinds of redemption 
are not equal even to a sixteenth part of ihe dignity conferred upon a person 
who serves your lotus feet. A wise man by no means desires the position of 
Indra, immortality, heaven, perfection, kingdom or longevity. The society 
of your worsbippers is infinitely superior to auy of the conditions last-named. 
Your votary is just like yourself. Моле сап hold a candle to him. Ifa person 
associates with your votaries for ever so shorta time, he is easily able to cross 
the sea of life Тһе tree of faith puts forth blossoms in the heart of a person 
by reason of his association with your votaries. Jt grows also, when it is 
moistened by the rain poured by the clouds represented by your votaries. 
221-2831. Bad company, however, dries it up ; but the recollection сЁ 
your virtues rejuvenates it. 1f once your faith germinates in the field of 
mind, it can never be destroyed and developes day by day. In course of time, it 
grows into a big tree and yields fruits in the shape of homage to Hari. A 
person who once secures this precious homage becomes dispassionate and can 
easily conquer fear, etc.” Nanda paused and Hari gave him the boon required.. 
In days of yore when saint Drona prayed with his wife in a holy place, 
Brah:u& gave him this precious hymn, the mystic formula of Hari consisting 


of six letters and the auspicious amulet: When Drona was again born as ' 


Nanda, he went to pray at the holy place called Puskara, where Saubhari was 
pleased to give him the above hymn, amulet and the Mantra, Ina word, no- 
body ..can ever give up the hymn, the mantra, the knowledge, the spiritual. guide 
the tutelary deity that once acquires a hold over him and rules the destiny of 
his family from generation to generation. Thus 1 narrated to you the hymn 
and the narrative of Lord Krisna calculated to give redemption, 


CHAPTER XXII. 


1-22. Once upon a time Lord Krisna went with Balaráma and the 
children to the forest of ра]. уга trees containing ripe fruits. It was guarded 
by a demon named Dhanuka with the figure of an ass who was as powerful 
as millions of lions and who could crush the pride of the gods. He was huge 
like a mountain. His eyes were as deep as wells. His teeth were like the 
beams of a plough. His mouth was like the hollow of a mountain. His 
rolling tongue was a hundred cubits in length. His abdomen was like a palace. 
His yell was very hideous. The boys were rejoiced to see this forest and smiled, 
Very much amused at the sight they said, *O Krigna, ocean of mercy, О power- 
ful Baladeva, listen to our prayer. We can break the palm-trees and pluck 
the fruits... But they are guarded hy a powerful demon named Dhanuka who 
has the figure of an ass. He is invincible and even defies the gods. He is the 
prime minister of Kamsa, irresistible, and harmful even to the gods. О lord of 
the universe gifted with eloquence tell us what to do in the circumstances.” 
The Lord gently thus replied, “Boys when I am your companion, you need not 
fear anything. Go and fearlessly shake the trees and eat the fruits.” The strong 
and healthy boys thereupon ascended to the top of the tree and dropped on 
the ground ripe and delicious fruits. Some of them broke the trees, others 
shook them; others raised an uproar and danced. They then descended : and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
198 THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PURAN A. 


while on their way back with the fruits, the most powerful, huge, donkey— 
faced demon turned up with a howl. The boys were very much frightened, 
wept through terror and let go all ihe fruits. They then exclaimed thus, “O Lord 
Krisna, come to the rescue We perish at the hands of the demon. О Kiisna, 
Hari, Dámodara, Náráàyana, Sankarsana, you are the friend of the poor and the 
lord of the cowherds. Preserve us in the ocean of life. О  Mádhava, in 
prosperity or inadversity, no one can save us except you. May victory crown 
you, again and again. Save us this time: for we have been perplexed with fear. 
Kill this prince of demons who threatens to destroy us and thereby add to the 
might and glory ot the gods. 


23-32. At that time, the compassionate Lord came there with a quick 
pace, gently smiled and gave an assurance of safety to the boys who thereupon 
danced with joy. To be sure, the recollection of Hari is the bost guarantee of 
safety and the source of all good. When Krisna saw that the demon in anger 
was about to swallow the boys, he said to the mighty Baladeya thus: “O noble 
Baladeva, this mighty demon was the son of Bali, named Sâhasika. ^ Cursed by 
Durvásá, he has assumed the form of an ass, ‘his wretch is destined to die 
atmy hands. You had better take charge of the boys and remove them else- 
where.” Balarféima complied and removed them. ‘he powerful demon then 
angrily swallowed Hari like a flame of fire. But consumed by his offulgent 

lustre, he vomited him again and was at once spell-bound by the lovely, bright 
and tranquil form of the Lord. 


33-42. Tho sight of the Lord recalled to his memory the conditions of 
bis former life and he at once realised the Divinity of Lord Krisna. Regarding 
the effulgent Lord Krisna as the Supreme Being void of all qualities, he worship- 
ped him according to the S’Astras and alludiug to the incarnation of the Lord 
he spoke thus, “О Lord, having incarnated yourself as a dwarf, you’ went to 
beg alms of my father on the occasion of a sacrifice, deprived him of his king- 
dom and grace and gave him refuge underneath the earth. О merciful lord, 
you are the master of all: and you show compassion to (ho devout. Remember, 


therefore, Bali's faith in you and be pleased to destroy a wretch like me reduced | 


to the condition of an ass by the curse of Durvásá who was pleased to tell me 
at the time that І should die at your hands. О lord of the universe, with your 
pointed wheel having sixteen edges, kill me and thereby give me redemption. 
O Lord, through your digits, you once took the form of a boar and rescued 
the earth by killing the demon called Hiranyáksa and thus preserved the gods. 
Out of compassion to Prahlada and for the preservation of the gods, you took 
the form of Nri-Simha through all your digits and killed Hiranyak-S’ipu. O 
ocean of meroy, with a view to impart knowledge to kiags and to preserve 
the gods and Bráhmins, you once took the form ofa fish and rescued the 
Vedas. For the sake of creation you once took the form of a tortoise and 
supported Ananta. Through your own digits again, you took the form of 
Anantaand with hundred heads supported the earth. - 


43-56. In the form of Rama, the son of Dasaratha, you tied the ocean 
with a bridge for the recovery of Sita and killed Ravana. You are still 
preserving the people in the form of the saints, Nara and Narayana, Now you 
haye manifested yourself through all your digits as the Supreme Being, Lord 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 199 


Krisna Himself, the root of allincarnations. You are oternal, the very life of 
Ya$odá, the source of matchless joy to Nanda, the presiding deity of the 
lives of Lord Krigna aud dearer to Râdhå than her life. You are tranquil, 
unborn and graceful. You alleviate the sufferings of Devaki and relieve the 
earth of her burden as the ‘воп of Vasudeva. You are the ocean of mercy, 
You were pleased to give redemption to Pütan& as toa mother. You are the 
emancipator of Vaka, Кевї. Pralamva and myself. You are self-determining, - 
void of attributes and exempt devout people from fear. Deign to redeem me, 
О Lord. Release me from the ocean of life by ending the wretched existence 
ofa donkey to which I have been docmed. I ama fool and the son of your 
votary. It becomes you, therefore, to give me emancipation. How can I adore 
you (the Supreme Being), void of all attributes, when the Vedas, Brahma, the 
gods and the saints are unable t» do so? For at first I was a demon and 
now I am an ass. О Lord, devise a scheme so that I may not be born again ? 
Indeed, how can a man be born again when once he sees your lotus feet? O 
destroyer of Madhu. you cannot hold me up to ridicule for adoring you. on the 
ground that Brahmá adores you. For the omniscient Lord is equally kind to 
the fit and the unfit.” When the demon worshipped him thus, Lord Krigna 
was pleased with him: and his face assumed a cheerful aspect. Whoever every 
day reads the above hymn in thé morning, noon and evening easily attains the 
vicinity of God, the state of beatitude in which the soul resides іп the same 
world as the Deity and the fourth state of emancipation called S Arsti, i, e., 
equality with the Supreme Being in power and attributes. He attains a state 
of devotedness to Hari in this world and in the end, he secures the bondage of 
Нан and gains knowledge, a good wife, poetical genius, sons, grandsons and 
ame. 


57-66. The merciful Lord Hari then said in his mind, “How is it possible 
for me to kill а votary of mine ?" Не then settled in his mind a plan for his 
destruction. Тһе demon, he thought, should be made to use foul language. 
When therefore, by the illusion of the Lord, he forgot himself, evil Saraswati 
(language) presided over his tongue. The dying, hostile, stupefied demon, bighly 
Incensed, addressed Hari thus with quivering lips. «О stupid human child, thy 
end is near. Hast thou come to this forest, with expectations to go back 
alive and see thy relations ? Thou shalt be disappointed. Neither Kamsa nor 
Jar&-Sindhu пог Narakásura is equal to me in any respect. There is none so 
brave in the world as myself The gods tremble through the fear of my might. 
Siva, Brahma, Visnu, death or time cannot kill me. Thou hast destroyed this 
wood and plucked the fruits in the audacity of thy heart. Youngster, thou 
hast a lovely appearance; why hast thou come here bent on self-destruction?” 


67-77. So saying the demon raised him on his head, whirled him round 
and threw him ata distance. He cast him on the ground and butted him with 
his horns which were broken by the mere touch of Hari’s body. He then 
swallowed him with a view to chew his body ; but his teeth were broken and his 
mouth was consumed in the attempt where-upon he vomited him at once. The 
powerful demon then trembling with anger began to dig the earth with his 
hoofs, rolled his tail, screamed loudly and rushed towards the boys who ran 
away In terror, He then moved Baladeva with his head. The latter beat him 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


Е А 
200 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


with his fists. The demon lost his senses; but, recovering in a minute, he 
went to Hari. Hari also struck him with his adamantine fists. The demon 
fainted: but gaining his consciousness ho got up with n painful heart and made 
water through fear. The mighty demon  regained his strength, raised Hari 
on his head, whirled him round and round and threw him on the ground. 
Then Hari uprooted a palmyra tree and beat the demon with it. Tho demon 
felt as if he were stuck with a hair. 


18-87.. Then the Lord uprooted the Govardhan mountain and hurled 
it upon the demon with the result that tbe latter fainted and vomited blood. 
He, however, got up ina trice and pushed aside the mountain. He leaped up 
with great violence, encircled Hari and rubbed the earth with his hoof. With 
ihe speed of mind, he uplifted Hari а hundred thousand Yojaus high; and there 
was a battle in the sky which lasted for one Prahar. He then threw „him on 
the ground where tho battle lasted for twenty-eight minutes Hari smiled and 
praised the prince vf demors. He said, *O prince of demons, your life is 
truly blessed. You are the son of my votary Bali: all will be well with you. 
You shall get redemption in the shape of final emancipation which can easily 

. be attained by my sight, the root of all good You shall attain, my child, the 
highest and most lovely position." Lord Krisna, thereupon, remembered 
his wheel which arrived there with. all the effulgence and glory of millions of 
suns, The Lord held it in his hand. 


83-96. With the wheel, he easily cut off the head of the demou. As 
soon as the head dropped on the ground, a heap of light brilliant like a hundred 
suns emanated from it. The demon saw the land of Hari and the lotus foot of 
Lord Krisna aud attained beatitude. Тһе gods and the saints showered 
Párijàtfrom the sky ; the heavenly whores sang and the Gandarvas danced. 
The Munis and the gods with a heart filled with raptures adored Lord Hari 
and went home. ‘The children, too, when they witnessed the death of the 
demon, flocked to Krigna. The mighty Baladeva adored the Lord; and the boys 
worshipped him and danced in joy. The boys gladly gave the best cf tho fruits 
to Krisna and Balarám and ate the remnants themselves. Hari, after eating 
and drinking, went home with the children. 


CHAPTER. XXIII 


1-14, Narada said, “О merciful lord, why was the son of Buli turned into 
anass? О lord, what sort of sanctity enabled him to get the redemption of 
identity with Hari in every respect? And why at first was he cursed by 
Durvásà ? You remove all doubts. Kindly tell me everything connected 
with the above points їп detail. For a wonder, every thing coming from the 
mouth of a poet seems original every moment.”  Náráyana said, “Son, I am 
going to recite to you the old history which I- first heard from Dbar.a ол the 
Gandha —Mádan mountain. It relates to the Padma age. It is very wonder- 
ful and lovely and teems with accounts of Hari. It delights the ears like nec- 
tor. At the the Kapla with which this incident is connected, you were a Gandarva' 
named Upayarhana with a melodious voice the husband of fifty youthful damsels‘ 


a ` 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


|а 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. . 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 201 
with whom you used to flirt. [Excited with lust, they always beheld your 
lovely features. You were as dear to them as their lives ; so they never parted 
company with you. Indeed, they could not live without you. At times they 
sported with you in a solitary place, in a lovely grove, on the coast of a river, 
in a charming forest orin a crematorium. Thereafter, by the irony of fate, 

ou were born as the son of a female slave. Hut as you ate the remnants 
of the food consumed by a Brahmin, you became practically immortal, a great 
Vaignava all-seeing through the eye of wisdom, the favourite discipleof Siya 
aad the son of Brahma. Now to the main point. 

15-24. Ones upon a time, Sahasika, the son of Bali, conquered the 
gods by his might and came to the Gandha-Mádan mountain. He was 
seated there on a throne of gem, besmeared with sandal-paste, decked with 
gems and surrounded by a vast army when Tilottamá, the best of heavenly 
whores, was passing by that way gorgeously dressed. She was covered with 
ornaments from head to foot; acd the colour of her body was lovely like the 
Ohampak. She was in the prime of her beauty and. much excited with lust. 
She had the gentle gait of an elephant and a smiling face. At that time, 
the wind removed the cloth from her face, thigh acd breast which attracted 
the gaze of the demon and took away bis senses. Tilottamá likewise fell in 
love with him when she saw the smiling, youthful son of Bali whose face 
resembled the full moon and whose chest was decked with jasmine wreaths. 
She cast arch glances at him. She was proceeding in the direction of the 
lunar region, but lingered there on some plea to enjoy the company of the son 
of Bali. At times she looked at him with crooked glances; at other times, she 
veiled her face and smiled. 

25-36. She was infatuated with raptures and perspired profusely. Her fe- 
male organ was moistened and began to itch. Enamoured of the son of Bali, she 
forgot the moon. For a wonder, mysterious are the ways of unchaste women. 
Whoever trusts them ie hoaxed by fortune and loses his progeny, wealth and 
fame. ІЁ an unchaste woman gets a new gallant, she never wants the old one, 
Ina word she wants only to gain her object. Nothing to her is dear or 
repulsive. She is not inclined to do any act relating to the gods or the manes. 
She is uot attached to her sons, relations or husband. Sensual desire is her ruling 
passion. A gallant, expert in sexual intercourse is dearer to her than her life, 
She regards him with glances of nectar. But she regards a man who is not 
versed in the arts of sexual intercourse with eyes of poison, though he may 
present gems to her. An uuchaste woman has no place beneath the face of 
the sun, Every one is released from his sins after his sufferings ; but an 
unchaste woman is never released so long as the sun and the moon exist. An 
unchaste woman is not moved with compassion by murdering her husband even 
to that extent as any other woman is moved by killing an ordinary insect. 
All the sins of the world dwell in an unchaste woman: there is no sinner greater 
than she. The food cooked by her is mixed up with her sins, Therefore such 
food and water touched by her can not be used connexion with ia any holy act 
relating to the gods and the manes. 

37-49. Such food and water resemble ordure and urine ;and whoever 
offers them to the manes goes to hell. He lives in the hell called the thread 
of time for a century where he is bitten by worms, day and night. Whoever 


26 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


A 
202 THE BRAHMA-VAIV ARTA PURAN A. 


eats food touched by an unchaste woman even by chance forfeits the religious 
sanctities which he accumulated in seven births and loses his longevity, grace 
and fame in this world as wellas in the next. Therefore one should preserve 
the purity of one's wife and cooking utensils. The sight of an unchaste 
woman destroys sins and is ominous to a person who is about to leave his house, 
Her touch is also very sinful ; but ablution in holy streams may cause purifica- 
tion. The life of an unchaste woman in India is quite useless ; for her ablution, 
gift, vow, muttering the name of God, the worship of God, eto, are ineffectual, 
I have thus described to you iucidentally the mysterious ways of an unchaste wo. 
man ; now listen to the main narrative. The son of Bali, when he recovered from 
his swoon, was excited with lust and approached her. She was pleased at 
heart, covered her face with cloth and cast oblique glances at him. The son of 
Bali said, “Madam, who are you and where are you going ? Who is so lovely 
and virtuous as to be able to enjoy your society ? Wherever you might be 
going, kindly acknowledge meas your servant. Please buy me with the price 
of your society. You must also have been excited with lust ; so let us indulge 


in sexual intercourse. Providence, my dear, has ordained our union which no 
body can prevent. 


50-66. Fair one, use to me honeyed expressions with a smile and 
embrace me with your arms. Please show me your auspicious rising breast 
and penetrate me with the keen weapon of your glances. Тһе snake of lust 
has bitten me ; cure me of the bite by touching me with your feet. Iam much 
afflicted ; please refresh me with the nectar of your lips. Fair one, show me 
your teeth which are just like the grains of ripe pomegranate. I am anxious 
to see your deep navel and the three folds about it. Kindly remove the 
cloth tied into a knot in the front round the waist, as 1 am very curious to 
see your fair loin which entices tho heart of sages, Kindly show me your 
eyes which vie with the autumnal moon of lotus and your face which resembles 
the full moon. ‘Thereupon the excited maiden addressed him in reply unabashed - 
thus “ Lord, a husband like you is desired by ladies. You are the son of Bali, 
pious, graceful, virtuous, youtbful, tranquil and versed in sexual. intercourse. 
A good-natured, well-dressed gallant like you is liked by women. А woman 
wants to marry а well-dressed, lovely, self-possessed, healthy, clever, qualified, 
humourous, kind-hearted, strong, pious and devoted man. You have all these 
qualifications, my dear. А woman, therefore, who does not desire you is 
certainly foolish and forfeits ап advantage. When I return from the house of the 
moon god I will gratify your wishes. ‘To pander to the wishes of the moon- 
god, lam going in this dress. ‘Therefore, І am his wife to-day in conformity 
to the rules which bind us and which lay upon us an imperative duty. A 
woman who has not been embraced by the moon-god is regarded as silly. She 
has been deprived of the pleasures of a handsome gallant and therefore resides 
still, so to say, in the womb of her mother. In a word,a woman who has not 
been clasped by the heavenly physician, Cupid, the moon-god, Indra and Nál- 
kuvara is deprived of the pleasures of sexual intercourse. But the embraces 


and dalliances of the moon-god are sweeter than honey. ‘To-day, it is my turn 
to associate with him, 


67-77. Thereupon the son of Bali laughed and in the raptures of his 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA:KHANDA. 203 


Lm ——————— € 


heart and excited with lust said to her in private, “ О Tilotíam&, Brahma was 
much amused while he created you. О most jovial damsel, you are the best 
and mostwitty of nymphs. Providence vested you with all attributes for the 
destruction of Sanda and Upasunda. O omniscient damsel, you are expert in 
matters relating to sexual intercourse. Nothing is concealed from you. 
Reveal, therefore, your mental condition to me. I am curious to know 1t. 
Fairfaced nymph, whom do persons belonging to the fair sex like most and what 
is the character of such persons? 1 want to know these points, though they 
may be unspeakable and mysterious. Fair one, you are just like life to vir- 
tuous kings, Gandarvas and the gods, but among them’ whom do you like most, I 
pray?” Tilottam4 thereupon smiled, cast an arch glance at S&hasika and concealed 
her face with cloth. Then she faithfully deleniated to him the solicited point 
relating to her mental condition, incomprehensible even to savants, indescrib- 
able and mysterious. She said, * О king of demons, I tell you the mental 
condition of unchaste women. My dear, savants know the limit of the Vedas 
and the Vedántas ; but they can not ascertain the limit of the quarters, the 
sky and the women. An old man, if he offers even gems, is repulsive to a 
woman, but a youth, if he takes away everything from her, is dearer to her 
than her life, 

78-91. Ап unchaste woman looks at her young gallant with eyes wide 
open ; and her female organ at his sight is irritated and moistened. Her mind 
is agitated ; her whole body shivers through passion, her body is reduced toa 
state of inertia and consumed with the flame of passion. If she secures «n inter- 
view with him in private, she glances at his face again and again, But if the 
youth owing to his mastery over his passions is not enticed by her charme, she 
expresses to him clearly her heart by displaying to him her body. If her gallant 
is unmanageable, she is tormented throughout her life, Rut if she gets another 
lover equivalent to the first lover or more qualified than he, then only she 
forgets him. There is none in the world whom she loves or hates. Only 
а person versed in matiers of cohabitation is dearer to her than her life. If 
she gets an accomplished new gallant, she ‘s capable of abandoning her former 
gallant, husband, son, brothers, parents, etc. She can not be controlled by 
gifts, acts of piety, truthfulness or adorations ; she is pleased only with sexual 
intercourse. She always remembers, day and night, asleep or awake or even 
while eating, the face of a handsome gallant. She is so hard-hearted that 
she is satisfied only with the adulations of a person who isan adept in matters 
of sexual intercourse. She only seeks a new gallant at every step. O king, 
I have thus described to you the character of an unchaste woman who is a 
blot on her family, Now listen to the mysterious tendencies of my heart. 
І am not particularly attached to any youth, expert in sexual matters, among 
the Gandarvas or the snakes ; but [ am, to a great extent, attached to the 
moon-god, But Каша, the love-god, completely rules my heart. There is none 
во dear to me ; пог in future is any one likely to beso dear to me as Kama, 
The very recollection of his name softens my heart. 

92-114. O king, I thus revealed to you my character as wellas the character 
of unchaste women, Now permit ше to go to the moon-god. On my return, 
I promise, O king, to come to you for your satisfaction," Upon this, the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


204 THE BRAHM А-У AIV ARTA PURÁN A. 


prince laughed loudly: and the excited mymph, too, looked at him again and again 
and smiled. Then cn some plea she showed to him her hard, circular, thick, 
elevated breast which had the hue of the Champaka, her tough and lovely loins 
which put to shame the columns of plantain, ber smiling face (overshadowed 
with arch glances) and blushing cheek. She was much excited with passion 
owing to the solitude of the place ; there was a thrill of raptures in her body 
and she observed his face and dress, again and again, She repeatedly concealed 
her face with the hem of her delicate cloth, When the wise and passionate son 
of Bali perceived the excited condition of her mind, he wanted to know what 
was passing in her heart and out of curiosity questioned her thus, * О nymph 
of lotus eyes, tell me the truth. What will you do now ? 1 ат unable to 
linger here for a long time ; for Ihave to go elsewhere on business. My dear, 
the virtuous and partioularly the wise ought not to commit rape. Such an 
act is contrary to the usage orrites of my family. Auspicious nymph, come 
aldng and gratify me, for I am an expert gallant, Or perhaps, no one can 
control a woman who has got several gallants.” She was quite crest-fallen 
to hear the cruel words of the demon, and a victim to lust, dismissed all feelings 
of self-respect, rebuked herself at heart and thus addressed him, “O my love, 
why do you say so ? And why are you angry ? You are dearer fo me than 
my life. Do аз you please. If 1 disappoint you and go to the moon-god, I 
shall be handicapped in my movements by your curse. Lord, enjoy my society 
to your;fill. Hari will do you good. Anyone who maintains the prestige of 
a woman is benefited by Hari at every stop; and a wrotch who slights her 
is injured by the chaste Parvati at every step, The wise king versed in 
sexual science at once realised the feolings of Tilottama and smiled. Thereupon 
heheld her by the arms, embraced her and kissed her lotus-lips, He then 
went with her to the solitary caves of tho Gandha-Mádan hills, fixod there a 
lamp of gem, put frankincense into the fire, constructed a bed suited to the 
act of sexual intercourse and. slept thereon with that voluptuous nymph. 
When he cohabited with her in various ways, Tilottam& thought that he was 
more expert than Káma. The jovial nymph was much pleased with the 
sexual intercourse performed in an inverse order ; and the sexual intercourse 
being in its prime, she fainted in the excess of her emotions and could not 
distinguish night from day. She then embraced him, the lord of her life and 
„said to him passionately, “Му love, when shall I see your face again? When 
will that auspicious day again arrive? 


115-134. О prince of demons, extraordinary are your charms and 
virtues ! Certainly, there is no one во expert in sexual intercourse as yourself. 
Men have the tendency of bees. You will forget me in time; but a woman 
never forgets the embraces of a good lover. The merits of a person alone 
enable him or her to- secure good company. Separation in such cases is very 
painful, nay, worse than death. Delightful and virtuous company is moré 
precious then nectar or dwelling in heaven. But bad company is more fearful 
than poison. © king, resta while and then embrace me. My heartand life 
will go along with you.” So saying she embraced him and in the excess of 
raptures fainted. As clarified butter is fed by fire, the demon was more excited 
by her embrace and conversations. Не cohabited with her again in eight ways 
and duly kissed her in nine places jn different parts of hor body. With teeth, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KH AN DÀ. 205 


nails and bands he sported with her. The acute noise caused by the movement 
of the anklets and bracelets disturbed the meditation of the saint Durvás&. 
He was covered with white ants: this is why no body was able to preceive 
him so long. Не had adopted the posture of meditation in the hollow of the 
Gandha-Müdan mountain and was contemplating the lotus feet of Lord Krigna. 
The lustful Sábasika and Tilottamá having lost their senses had no idea of 
anything. So they could not see ihe Muni, though he was sitting so close 
by. Effulgent with the lustre of Brahma, the great saint suddenly opened his 
eyes and saw both of them. Then the radiant lord, an offspring of the digits 
of S'iva, seeing them in a state of passion and in one another's clasp and unable 
to distinguish day from night was highly incensed. He was agitated in his 
mind owing to his separation from Hari whom he had attained by meditation, 
His eyes flushed red and when their intercourse was over, he said to the demon 
« О thou shameless wretch, impudent like an ass, get up. Thou art the 
wicked son of the devout king Bali, A god, a man, a demon, a Gandarva or 
a Ráksasa always feels ashamed in the presence of his kith and kin when 
committing a lustful ect. Only a beast wants this sentiment. O£ the 
beasts again, the ass is the most shameless. -Turn thou, therefore, into an ass, 
Get up, thou too, shameless harlot Tilottama. When thou art so much esamour- 
ed of a demon, turn into a demoness, thou likewise.” 


135-150. Burning with wrath, the Muni cursed them in this way, 
whereupon Sáhasika and Tilottama were abashed and frightened fell at his lotus, 
feet and adored him. Sáhasika said, “O saint full of kindness, you~ are Brahmas 
Visnu and S'iva in person. You аге the fire and the sun who create, preserve 
and destroy. О lord, excuse my fault and show me compassion for I am 
worthless, The lord who always pardons the faults of a foolish fellow is truly 
virtuous.” So saying the demon held grass with his teeth, fell at his lotus feet 
and wept loudly.” ‘hen Tilottama said: “ О lord, O ocean of mercy, O friend 
of the poor, show kindness to me. Brahma has created all. Of all his creatures 
a woman is the greatest fool. Among women again, a prostitute is very much 
infatuated with passion and is always lustful. Lord, you Know that a 
lustful person has neither shame, fear nor sense." So saying, she sought his 
protection. tis a known fact that no one gains wisdom in the world without 
adversity. Seeing that both of them were so much perplexed the Muni’s heart 
melted with compassion. Не then gave them assurance of safety and: said, 
ʻO prince of demons, creatures are cursed ог fayoured according to the 
ordinances of providence or fate, Good or bad reputation is surely the result 
of one’s previous acts, О son, you are devoted to Visnu, the son of Bali and 
come out of a good family. ‘his 1 know for certain. You are more pious 
than Janaka. The inclination of the progenitor, no doubt, is inherited by the 
progeny. For example, the foot-marks of Lord Krisna are to be found on the 
head of the descendants of Kaliya. Son, you will attain final emancipation 
after haying attained the condition of an ass. The fruits of the devotion to 
Krigna remain in fact till eternity. Now go soon to the forest of palm at 
Vrindávana near the Vraja. Subsequently you will be killed by the wheel of 
Hariand thus you will be redeemed. О Tilottamá&, you will be born in India 
as the daughter of king Bana and after being embraced by the grandson 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


у А 
206 THE BRAHAM A-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


of Lord Krisna, you will come back here,” О Магада, I thus narrated to you 
the asshood of the prince of demons. Tilottama уаз afterwards born as the , 
daughter of Bana named Ова and married to Aniruddha. ^ 


CHAPTERXXI V. 


1-15. Nêrûyana said, * Now hear the wonderful and mysterious account 
òf the circumstances which led Durvás& to marry in spite of the fact that he 
had subdued his passions, Even dispassionate people are contaminated by 
bad society. So this great Muni was excited with lust at the sight of the 
amours of the demon and the nymph. ln this condition, he gave up his 
meditations and surrendered himself to the thoghts of а woman. А+ 
this time, the saint Aurva was passing by that way with his daughter 
desirous to get a good bridegroom. This saint, free from passions, was 
descended, of yore, from the thighs of the ascetic Brahm& and is heuce 
called Aurva. The girl was descended from the elbow of Aurva and celebrated 
by the name of Kandali. She was solicitous to wed Durvásà and no body. 
else. Then the Muni who was bright. like the flashes of lightning cheerfuliy- 
appeared before Durvásá with bis daughter. As soon at Durvásà saw him, 
he respectfully and speedily got up and joyfully saluted him. Aurva like- 
wise saluted and embraced him and gladly informed him of his daughter’s 
intentions, He said: “My lovely and mature daughter is named Kandali. 
Being apprised by a messenger of your charms and virtues, she is enamoured of | 
you, She is unborn and vested with beauty and virtues of all kinds. Nay, she 
can entice the three worlds. Her only fault is this, she is quarrelsome. 
When she becomes angry, she uses hard words. A woman accomplished in 
every other way can not be abandoned on the ground that she has only one 
fault.” Durvásà was both pleased and sorry to hear these words and saw the 
beautiful and virtuous damsel standing before him. She had а smiling and cheer- 
ful countenance resembling the full moon of autumn, her eyes wore like a ' 
pair of autumnal lotuses. Her loins and breast were widely extended. Clad in an 
apparel pure } ke fire and decked wi'h ornaments of gem, ihe maiden in the 
prime of her beauty was looking at Durvásá archly. 


16-31  Durv&s& was excited with lust and enticed by her sight. Then 
with an aggrieved heart he said to the Muni thus: “O saint, in the three 
worlds, the beanty of a woman always blocks up tbe way to salvation, 
obstructs meditations and causes illusions. In the prison of the world, the 
woman represents an unwieldy chain which even the great-miuded S'iva and 
other gods can not cut asunder with the sword of their wisdom. О great soul, | 
this chain frequents man more than his shadow and isa more constant associate 
than the snfferings occasioned by the Karma, than the passions or the body which : 
harbours the passions or knowledge or disposition. For the shadow frequents 
‘a man so long as his body exists; the sufferings ог enjoyments frequent him | 
во long as they are not ended; the passions last, so long as a man із alive ; 
knowledge lasts, so long аз it is cultured ; and disposition lasts, so long аз 
there is consciousness. But a good wife is the companion of the husband at 
every birth. A married man can not dispense with the necessities of rebirth 
and the result of his good and evil acts. ‘Therefore, О great saint, the seryice 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDÁ. 207 


oe 


of the feet of Hari is the best of all acts. I do not know on account of what 
fault committed by me in my previous birth, I was disturbed in my thoughts 
of Lord Hari. As soon as my heart was agitated with lust at the sight of 
the carnal intercourse of a demon with a whore, I at once realised the fruits 
of my Karma at the instance of Brahm&. Very well, О saint, І shall put up 
with a hundred hard words of your daughter. If afterwards she uses them 
again, I shall duly chastise her. For toleration of a woman's hard language 
is most contemptible. A` henpecked husband is despised by the virtuous. 
Now [shall carry out your command and marry your daughter. For a man 
who forsakesa woman that has voluntarily arrived at his place is consigned 
to the hell called the Thread of Time. Evenif a person who has subdued his 
passions abandons through fear of losing his piety a lustful whore that hag 
arrived of her own accord at a solitary place is involved in sin and goes to 
hell.” Thereupon the saint Aurva gave him his daughter in marriage according 
to the rules preseribed by the Vedas. Durvûsû said, “Amen ! (Swasti)” and 
accepted her. Later on, Aurva gave him the dowry and afflicted with the 
thought of separation from his daughter wept loudly through affection and 
fainted. For а wonder, how a thought like this should prey upon the mind of a 
wise man! 
32-47. Aurva recovered in a moment and consoled his weeping daughter 
afflicted with grief by the thought of separation from her father. Не said, 
“Daughter, listen. íam going to tell you maxims of ethics, beneficial, rare 
an genuine, prescribed by the Vedas and delightful in the end. Child, to a 
chaste woman, the husband is most friendly either in this world or in the next. 
There is none to her as dear and respectable as he. The worship of a god, vow, 
charity, meditation, fasting, mutterance of the name of the deity, ablution in 
holy streams, initation in all the rites, circumambulation round the world, 
service ofa Brahmin or a guest: none of these, І say, is equalin -point of 
religious efficacy, even to the sixteenth degree, to the devotion of a wife to 
her husband. A woman devoted to her husband need not perform other acts: 
and evena woman not so devoted need not perform the acts specified above, 
For, the acts performed by the latter will become fruitless. The 
Vedas hold that there is not so sacred in the interests of a woman as ministering 
to her husband. Child, whether asleep or awake, you should regard your 
husband as one greater than Hari and serve his lotus feet. Do not use to him 
hard language, О my daughter, in joke, anger, error or contempt and either in 
his presence or absence. A woman, in India, who is consciously unchaste 
or scurrilous has no penance assigned to her even by the Vedas. She has to 
live in hell till the fall of a hundred Brahmás. A woman pious in every other 
respect bnt using hard word to her husband forfeits the virtues accumulated 
by her in seven births.” So saying, the great Muni left ; and Durvásá who 
delights in the thought of self (or who is self-contented) passed his days bap- 
pily with his wife in his hermitage. For a wonder, as soon as he was excited 
with lust, he secured the society of a woman which proves that the design of a 
virtuous man is immediately accomplished. Then ihe great saint prepared a bed 
adapted to sexual intercourse and at an auspicious moment took his wife and 
slept with her in solitude. Though this saint did not taste the sweets of a 
Woman throughout his life, yet he was versed in sexual science and was theoros 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


208. THÉ BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


tically wise in matters relating to cohabitation. He therefore copulated wiih 
her in various ways. Then Kandali, having tasted the pleasures which were 
new to her, lost her senses. None of the nuptial pair had any idea of day 
or night. As a sorrowful man, when he first tastes bappiness, is never 
easily satisfied, so the Muni with a passionate disposition and joyful heart 
was engaged in sexual intercourse every day. 


48-69. This intercourse, both the parties being equally matched in 
cleverness, went on regularly- The saint gave up his meditations and gradually 
got attached to his household affairs. Later on, Kandali constantly 
quarrelled with her husband who, with ethical maxims, iried to edify her. 
But she slighted them and was more quarulous than ever. Even the knowledge 
imparted to her by her father did not impress her with the necessity of 
adopting the course of a peaceful life. The nature of a person is in-surmonnt- 
able and can not give way even to ethical doctrines. So she used to fall out 
without any rhyme or reason every day with her husband and employed hard 
words to him. Durvás& before whose might the whole world trembles shivered 
with anger and only counted the number of the hard words used by her. Though 
the merciful Durvásá always exhorted her to be peaceful, yet she never became 
quiet. At last, she completed the hundred hard words. The Muni was graciously 
pleased to excuse her, even though she exceeded the limit. But hard words used 
by her cut him to the quick every day. At last when the Karma of that shrew 
was complete and the measure of her iniquity was full, the self indulgent, 
merciful Durvásà, unable any longer to restrain his temper, cursed her saying: 
«Ве reduced to ashes.” The woman was at опсо consumed to dust at a 
mere hint from the saint. Hor sentient soul, tho reflection of her spirit flew 
unto the sky and modestly thus spoke to Durvasa, “ О lord, you, are all. 
seeing. You perceive everything through the eye of wisdom, How 
сап І explain anything to you? Sweet or hard words, anger, contentment, 


avarice, attachment, lust, hunger, thirst, density, thinness, destruction, sight, ` 


and blindness are the properties of the body, not of the soul. This body is 
subject to three attributes viz the principles of virtue, activity and ignoranca 
which vary in many ways. Listen. In some constitutions, the element of virtue 
is predominant:, in others, the principle of activity ; in others, ignorance. Мо- 
body is vested with these attributes in equal proportions. The principle of | 
virtue begets compassion and the desire of redemption : the principle of activity 
begets a desire to work ; ignorance begets a desire to kill and also the feelings | 
of pride and anger. Anger leads to the use of foul language which begets | 


enmity. This enmity is the source of hatred. Otherwise, there is no enemy | 


in the world and none who is dear or hateful. One has no friend in the world. | 
‘The passions alone are said to be the cause at the root of friendship or enmity. | 
Look, a husband is dearer to a woman than her life ; and a wife is dearer | 
‚ to her husband than his life. But hard words cause a rupture between them | 
ina moment. О lord, by my misfortune, the worst has taken place. Now be 
pleased to excuse my faults and assign my duties to me. What shall I do! | 
Where shall I go now? Where shall I be born again 1 In the three | 
worlds, I shall accept none as my husband except yourself." | 


70.82 When the saint heard these words, he was over-whelmed with | 
grief and fainted. For a wonder, he was self-contented and was very | 
wise ; and yet he lost his wits. Therefore to а shrewd person, separation | 


| 

[ 

| 

| 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE | 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. : 209 


نے 


from his wife із more painful than any other calamity. Recovering in a 
moment, he adopted the posture of meditation and suspended his breath with 
a view to commit suicide. At this time, a Brahmin boy arrived there. He 
held а mace and a parasol in his hands, He was clad in yellow dress and had 
a bright mark of sandal on the forehead. His complexion was darkblue. 
He was effulgent with the lustre of Brahma. His features were lighted up 
witha gentle smile, Serene and wise, he was the spiritual guide of students 
versed in the Vedas. But helooked very tender in age. Durvásd, as soon 
as he saw him, reverentially bowed, provided him with a seat and 
respectfully worshipped him. The boy blessed him ; and hie sight and blessings 
removed all the sorrows of the saint. "Phe clever boy, expert in ethics, ufter 
waiting for a while enunciated to Durvásá principles of morality sweet like nectar 
and said, ‘O Brahman, by the grace of the mystic formula received from my 
Gurn, І am omniscient. Everything is known to me. I see you are subdued 
by grief. So, how сап f question you with regard to the principles of ontlogy? 
О saint, meditation is the duty of a Brahmin, The three worlds can be 
controlled by the powers of asceticism. Laying aside your duty, what line 
of action have you adopted now ? [n the three worlds, who has got a wife or 
husband ? Fools are deluded by the idea of a wife or husband through the 
illusions of Hari. Your wife isthe emblem of fiction ; therefore she disappeared 
so soon. But her disappearance is also imaginary, not real. О saint, Bkánams&, 
the sister of Hari, isa digit of Parvati. She islongevous and good-natured. 
She is the daughter of Vasudeva, 

83-91, This fair girl will be your wife at every age. Set your mind upon 
devotion ; for how long can a person taste the neotar of the company of his 
wife? Now this Kandali will be born as the Kandalî race on earth. 
After reaping the consequences of all her acts, she will be purified. Birth only 
on а single occasion can not be productive of any good. In the next Kalpa, 
she will be your wife, It has been held by the Vedas that it is advisable to 
subdue those that are very haughty in temper."  Krisna in theshape of a 
Bráhmin having imparted this wisdom to the saint soon vanished. The 
Muni regarding every thing as ‘imaginary fixed his mind upon abstract 
meditation or Yoga. On the other hand, Kandali was reproduced on earth as 
the Карда]? race. О Muni,|that,demon then went to the forest of Palm and 
took the figure of a donkey, ‘ilottama also iu due course was born as the 
daughter of Bana. The king of demons, killed by the wheel of Visnu, 
attained the lotus feet of Hari, rarely to be secured even by the saints and 
yet desired by all. On the other hand, Tilottamá also as the daughter of 
Вапа in due course secured the embrace of the grandson of Lord Krisna: and 
her wishes being gratitied, she resumed her former appearance and went back 
home. Thus I have recited to you the account of Lord Krişna which is 


excellent and charming at every step. Now what do you want to hear ? 


CHAPTER XXV. 

1-20, Narada ssid, “О saiut, what a wonderful, auspicious account of 
Нагі did I hear! It appears all the more agreeable, as it comes from your 
mouth, O best of ascetics, when the daughter of Aurva died as a result of 

` Durvásá's powerful curse, did the saint Aurva arrive there or not ? Narayana 


21 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


210 THE BRAHMA-VAIV ARTA PURANA. 


ت 
ЕЕ‏ 


said, “O saint, he was praying at that time on the coast of the river Saraswati 
when suddenly his washed turban, agitated by the wind, dropped on the ground. 
Thereupon he left his meditation and by the powers of his Yoga he realised 
the danger of his daughter and at once rushed to the hermitage D: his son- 
in-law. His tears repeatedly moistened the earth, With an afflicted heart 
he came to Durvásà and screamed aloud saying, “О my ohild, Kandali ! 
Saint Durvásá recognised the voice of his father-in-law and, agitated 
with fear, he came out and fell prostrate at his lotus feet. He lamented 
very much through grief and stated to him everything from the very outset, 
The very wise Aurva was overwhelmed with grief to learn all this, fainted ond 
fell down on the ground like a corpse. Durvásà thinking that he was dead, 
apprehended danger and with great effort restored him to consciousness. 
Aurva soon recovered and addressed the terrified, frightened, prostrate 
Durvás& who lay before him. At that time, through heavy grief, his eyes 
were filled with tears aud looked like a pair of red lotuses. lle was shivering 
with anger and his lips quivered. Aurva said, “О saint, you are ihe grandson 
of Brahmá, the lord of the world and the descendant of Atri. Why then did 
you inflict so heavy a punishment upon my daughter for so light a fault ? 
You have sprung from the digits of S’iva ; you are the spiritual guide of the 
world: and you аге his pupil. Personally, you are virtuous, omniscient and 
expert in the Vedas and their auxiliary branches. The very chaste Anusüy& 
who is an outcome of the digits of Kamal&é is your mother. І do not know 
what fault committed by you bas perverted your intellect. For a wonder, 
a person whose parents are virtuous should be so hard-hearted. The dignity 
of the Vedas issurely incomprehensible. I made over to you with alacrity 
my daughter who was vested with all attributes and had only one foible, 
Abandonment of a shrew is the only penalty prescribed by the Vedss Най 
you forsaken her, she would have been carefully reared by her father. You 
have reduced her to dust for a trifling fault on her part. On this account, 
you will sustain a severe defent. Know it for certain that the merciful god 
(Hari) is the creator, preserver and ohastiser of all creatures, small or 
great. 


2]-31. The great Muni having said so, wept again erying: *O my child! 

О my child and went home in anger. On his departure, Durvásá wert 
very much again and again. The sorrow which he had obliterated from his 
miod by his intellectual powers was doubled. In a word, one's sorrow, though 
repelled by wisdom, is increased by the sight of on»s relations, just as fire 
though covered with ashes is rekindled if it receives dry fuel. Then Durvás& 
remembering his beloved spouse again and again mourned her loss ; but thinking 
that every thing was an illusion set his mind upon devotion. ‘hus I related 
to you the cause of the curse pronounced by the Muni, Afterwards Durvásá 
sustained a great defeat. Narada said, “ Lord Durvásáisa digit of S'ankara 
equal to him in valour. Who was so great and radiantas to inflict upon him 
a defeat, Náráyana said, “О saint, there was a king of the solar race named 
Ambarisa whose heart was always set upon the lotus feet of Lord Hari. He 
was not attached even for a moment to his kingdom, wife, son, subjects or 
even the royal council that he had acquired by the acts of |his previous birth. 
. This great, dispassionate, tranquil-minded, pious and devout king, day and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


تاشت فاا شی وت MEN epus‏ 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


` KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 211 


night, cheerfully adored Hari, whether asleep or awake. His heart was entirely 
merged iu the vow of Ek&dasi and the worship of Krisna. He made over 
the fruits of all acts to Krisna. The wheel of Lord Krisna called Sudarsana 
which was keen and equal to him in valour, effulgent like ten millions o£ 
gems and fit for the adoration of Brahmá and other gods and the demons 
was kept by the side of the king by Hari for his preservation, 

39-39. Once upon a time, the king after having performed the vow 
of Ekádasi and bathed on the twelvth day of the lunar month duly worshipped 
Hari ina way fit for the occasion. He then feasted the Bráhmins and sat 
down to take his food when an agitated ascetic with parched throat, hungry- 
looking, with a mace and parasol in his hand, in white dress, with a bright 
sandal-mark on his forehead turned up there. He was lord Durvás& himself. 
He appeared before the king. The king got up from his seat, bowed to him 
low and cheerfully provided him with water (to wash his feet) and a golden 
throne, ‘The saint blessed him and sat down on the throne. The frightened 
king asked him, "Lord, what is your command ?” Durvásá, the best of 
saints, thus replied, *O best of kings, І am hungry and so I have come to 
your house. Please give me food. But tarry a bit, О king. I am going to 
utter the mantra (mystic formula) of Aghamargana (forbearance from a crime 
or toleration of a crime) which I have not yet finished. I shall be back ina 
minute." When the saint went away, a current of thought agitated the mind 
of the king. When he saw that the twelvth day of the lunar month was 
about to expire, he was much afraid. At this time, Vasistha, the spiritual 
guide, arrived there to whom the king bowed and narrated the whole affair. 
He said, ‘Lord, the twelvth day of the lunar month isabout to expire and 
yet the saint has not come back, I have been subjected tosa great peril. О 
best of saints, after due deliberation оп matters relating to the good or the 
evil, tell me the proper remedy soon. 

40-53. The great Muni thereupon told him soon the words of the 
Vedas beneficial at the outset and delightful in the end. He said, “If the 
iwelvth day of the lunar month is passed and the observer of the vow breaks 
his fast on the thirteenth day, then both he and the object of his vow are lost. 
Brahma has stated in the. Vedas that the above person is implicated in the 
sin of Bráhmin-murder and all his food becomes impure like wine. А fool 
who, without feasting his guests, eats food inan agiiated manner through 
pressure of severe hunger is consigned to the hell called Kumbhipáka, Then 
he is born as а Chandal and in every birth he is subjected to poverty and 
disease. In a grave emergency like this, [сап not tell you a matter more 
delicate than the penalty incurred by the sin, Just see that both the sides 
are preserved. That remedy Iam going to suggest to you after due delibera- 
tion. О king, drink the nectar of the feet sacred to the worship of Lord 
Krisna and thereby preserve the fruits of abstinence ; drinking of water is 
tantamount to fasting whereby there will be no breach of hospitality on your 

` part Agreeably to the words of Vasistha, (the son of Brahm’) the king 
remembered the lotus feet of Lord Krigna and drank a small q tantity of the 
nectar of the feet (i. e. water with which the feet had been washed). At that 
time, saint Durvasi came and by his omniscience happened to know every- 
thing. He burnt with anger and inthe presence of the king he cut off the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


312 THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PURANA. 


clusters of his knotted hair. At once, a hideous being with a sword in 
hand and bright like а fire-brand arose out of tho hair and prepared to kill 
the king. Then the wheel of Lord Hari effulgent like ten millions of suns, 
as it witnessed the affair, killed the imaginary being alluded to above and 
proceeded to kill the saint who ran away through fear. But the Sudarfana 
wheel which was bright like a flame of fire pursued him. Durvds&i whose mind 
was full of remorse and fear wandered throughout the universe and sought the 
protection of Brahma, the lord of the world. He loudly exclaimed saying, 
‘Save me ! save me!’ and arrived at the council of Brahma who got up and 
asked his welfare. 


54-74. Тһе saint related to him the whole affair from start to Anish. 
Thereupon Brahmá with a heart agitated with fear upheaved a deep sigh and 
said to the saint, “My son, by the inspiration of whose might, did you go there 
to curse a servant of Hari? In whose power does it lie in these three worlds 
to kill а person who is preserved by God himself? Нагі who is kind to his 
votaries, be they great or small, always keeps his wheel by their side for their 
protection. A fool, O twice-born, who injures ihe Vaisnavas (dear to Visnu 
as his life) is destroyed by Hari, even the Lord of the destroyer, Child, soon 
go to some other place. You havelittle chance of safety if you remain in 
this place. Unless you go away, the wheel will kill me along with you, 
Who can prevent the Sudargana that is effulgent like Visnu and can consume 
the whole universe, not to talk of Brahma ? " Upon this, saint Durvdsa fled 
and being panic-stricken sought shelter with S'iva at the Kaildsa. With a 
frightened heart, he said to S'iva thus, *O mine of mercy, preserve me. 
The omniscient S'iva, the destroyer, the lord of the poor without enquiring 
into his welfare said, “О best of the twice—born, compose yourself and listen 
to me. You аге the grandson of Brahmá and the son of Atri. Knowing the 
Vedas and being omniscient, you have behaved like a fool and, as such, you 
do not know what law has beea prescribed for everything by the Lord of all, 
in the Vedas, the Puranas and history. By а mere wink or twinkle of his 
eyes, J, Brahma, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the immortals, the 
Munis, the saints, Dharma and Indra appear and disappear. By virtue of 
whose might were you prepared to kill a votary of Hari dearer to him than 
his life? I, Brahma, Kamala, Durga, Vani and Radbé are not dearer to Hari 
than his votaries. Lord Hari, the soul that pervades the heart of 
every one, carefully preserves his votaries, great and small, by means of his 
irresistible wheel called Sudargana, After even deputing this wheel which is 
irresistible like himself in valour for tho protection of his votaries he is not 
confident and so he goes there himself to protect them, Radha, his spouse, is 
dearer to him than his life, ‘hore is none so dear to him as she. And yet 
if she injures any of his votaries, she isabandoned by him. Of all the castes 
the Brahmins are dearer to Hari even than his body. But his votaries are 
dearer still. Whoin these three worldsis dear or hateful to God ? A virtuous 
man who always adores and contemplates him is dear to him. О Brahmin 
at the time of the great destruction when the universe will bo deluged with 
water, the worshippers of Krisna will not die. = 


75-90. 0 twice-born saint, adore Hari and contemplate hia lotus feet. 
{he bare recollection of Hari will remove all your calamities, Go soon (0 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


on ee 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANM A-KHANDA. 213 


„————————-—— 


the Vaikuntha which alone can give you shelter. If you seek the protection 
of Hari, the ocean of mercy, he will hold out to you assurance of safety", 
Atthis time the Kailása was lighted up with the radiance of the wheel, just 
as the earth is lighted up by the rays of the sun. All the residents of the 
Kailasà, oppressed by its formidable heat, sought the protection of S'iva 
crying out, “Save us! Save us "' ankara, the ocean of mercy (when 
he saw the irresistible wheel) along with Parvati cheerfully blessed the 
Brahmin. S'/iva said “If my valour and merits of my devotions which I 
have accumulated for a long time be real, then this guilty, affrighted 
Brühmin will be saved from danger." ^ Párvati said, “Inasmuch as, by 
the virtue of the sanctity of myself and my husband, this Brahmin has sought 
my protection, I bless the terrified Brahmin. May he be saved from calamity.” 
The Muni then bowed to the merciful S'iva and went to the Vaikuntha for 
rescue with the speed of mind. When he saw that the Sudaréan was following 
him, he entered into Hari's domain. He saw that Hari was seated ona throne 
of gem. Тһе conches, wheel, mace and lotus were looking lovely in Hari's 
hands. He was clad in yellow apparel. He was dark-blue in complexion 
and very lovely. He had four arms and a tranquil appearance. He was decked 
with ornaments and wreaths of gems. He had a smilling and cheerful face. 
He seemed inclined to favour his votaries. His head was decorated with a 
bright diadem constructed with wonderful gems. His excellent attendants 
were fanning him with excellent chowries in their hands; the goddess 
Kamal& was ministering to his feet ; Saraswat?, seated before him, was 
adoring him. Sunanda, Nanda, Kumuda, Prachanda and other worshippers 
were seated round him. Some of his votaries were reciting his praises to the 

accompaniment of musical instruments. He was looking at them. When the 

saint saw the Lord thus, he threw himself prostrate on the gro:nd and adored 

him according to the hymn as specified in the Sãm- Veda. Durv&s& said, 

‘O Lord of Kamala, О ocean of mercy, you are the lord of the poor. Wherefore 

preserve me. . 

91-103. О Lord, you are the author of the Vedas and the Ved&ngas, 
the ruler of Providence, the death of death and the time of time, Therefore 
preserve me from the ocean of peril. O Lord and cause of all, you are the 
destroyer of the destroyer and the germ of the tree of Mahà.Visnu. There- 
fore save me from the sen of danger. О Náráyama, you save the refugees, the 
afflicted and the timid. Frightened, I seek your protection. Save me. How can 
the Pandits adore the supreme being who is the origin of the Vedas, whom the 
Vedas can not adore, whom even Saraswati, Ananta with his hundred faces, 
Brahma with his four faces, S’iva with his five faces, S'ruti, the author of the 
S‘ruti etc., are paralysed in their attempts to adore, who baffles even the descrip- 
tive powers of those well versed in the Vedas: О source of all diginity, how 
can I, an ordinary pupil of yours, adore you! Indra s longevity is covered by the 
span of life allotted to fourteen Manus in succession. Brahmá's one day and 
night are equivalent to the span of life allotted to 28 Indras. Brahma’s life con- 
sists of 108 years according to the above calculation. Brahmá falls by a mere 
wink or twinkle of the eye of the Supreme Lord. How is it possible for me, 
thou, to adore that indescribable being 7° So saying, Durvás& fell prostrate at 
his lotus feet and moistened them with his tears. Whoever devoutly reads this 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


А 
214 THE BRAHM A-V AIV ARTA PURANA. 


holy hymn of Hari called Jaymangala composed by Durvási in adversity 
is rescued by Hari personally who graciously approaches him for the purpose. 
And whoever listens to it in a court of justice, crematorium, prison, peril, in 
the midst of enemies or robbers, in a place beset with wild beasts, in a sinking 
ship, in the midst of an ocean, or when he is besieged by a royal army is 
relieved from all this danger, to be sure. 


104-121. Then the compassionate lord Hari smiled and addressed him with 
words delightful like the rain of nectar thus: “O saint, get up 5 every thing will 
be well with you, by my boon. But pleaso listen to the following maxima which 
are delightful, truthful and ethical. The S’Astras incarnate dwell with the 


virtuous by whom other people are edified. But a learned man who con- ў 


sciously violates the maxims of the Vedas is worse than a corpse. О twice- 


born saint, every one has heard in detail the account given in the Puránas, < 
the Vedas and the history about the glory of the Vaigsnavas. They hold that < 


lam the life of the Vaisnavas and that the Vaisnavas also constitute my 
life. Whoever spites the Vaisnavas cherishes a spite against me likewise. 
My worshippers, giving up all thoughts about their sons, grandsons and even 
their royal splendour, constantly cherish me in their memory. Who, then, can 
be dearer to mə than they ? Even my own life or Lakgmi, S’iva, Saraswati, 
Brahma, Durga, Ganes’a, the Hráhmins, the Vedas, S&vitri, the mother of 
the Vedas, the cow-herds, the cow-herdesses or КА4һіс are not dearer 
to me than my yotaries. They are surely dearer to me than my 
life. Thus, О saint, I enunciated to you essential and truthful doctrines, 
This is nota vain adulation of my votaries, They are, I repeat, surely 
dearer to me than my life. A fool who cherishes a spite against me 
does not know his own god. He is therefore defrauded and lives for 
ever in hell. Whoever envies my votaries dearer to me than my life is prompt- 
ly chastised by me and goes to hell in the next world. O twiceorn saint, 
I am the master of all, the preserver of the world and the Supreme Boing. 
And yet I ат. not independent. I am subject to my  votaries, Whether 
I dwell in the Goloka as a figure with two hands or whether in the Vaikuntha 
asa figure with four hands, my form only dwells in those places ; but my 
soul always dwells with my votaries. I eat only those things which my 
vyotaries present to me; but І can not taste even the nectar presented by 
others. О saint, king Amyaris: is dispassionate, innocent, merciful and 
beneficient to all people. Why were you prepared to kill him? I kill those 
stupid people who spite the virtuous saints ever inclined to show mercy to 
all creatures. І can not preserve even Indraif he is inclined to injure my 
volaries, Go soon therefore to the king Amyariga. fe alone can sayo you 
and none others. 


122-135, Thereupon Duryds& was bewildered with fear, remembered 
the lotus feet of Krisna and was much afflicted at heart. O best of Munis, 
at that time, Brahma, S’iva with Parvati, Dharma, Indra and other gods 
arrived there. hoy all bowed to the Supreme Lord Hari with a reverential 
inclination of their heads and with a thrill of raptures adored him by turns, 
Brahma said, “О Lord, you are the supreme spirit dissociated from every thing 
and assume а form only to favour your worshippers, Therefore preserve this 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 215 


great Bráhmin who has offended your votary." S'iva said, ‘O friend of the 
poor, О lord of the universe, this Brahmin is not excluded from the universe, 
Kindly preserve this guilty, poor, sinful, fugitive Brahmin.’  Párvati said, 
“О Lord, king Amvarisa is your votary. But are not the gods and the 
Brühmins dear to you? You are the god of all. Preserve this guilty 
Brahmin.” Dharma said, ‘*You are the father, preserver and the chastiser of 
all How isit that the father for the preservation of one sonis going to 
destroy another son?” Indra said, “О Lord, your mercy and impartiality are 
manifest to every creature. ‘his offender has reaped as he had sown. Now 
preserve the Brahmin.’ Rudra said, “Lord, it is proper to chastise those 
who deviate from the path of virtue,it is true. But you sbould preserve 
this guilty fool.” Тһе regents of the quarters said, “Lord, the Vedas hold 
that the guilty should not be killed. Preserve this Brahmin who has 
unconsciously committed an offence." The planets said, “ A wretch who shites 
a Vaisnava incurs the displeasure of the gods and is constantly troubled by 
us. But you subsequently come to the rescue. Fo deign fo preserve him." 
The saints said, “This Brahmin having been subdued, we are, as it were, dead, 
even in our life-time. For among caste-fellows the chastisement of one person is 
sbameful to others." Atri said, “О Lord, you gave tbis son to me and he is 
^. engaged in your service and hence, conscious of his valour and in the pride 
of his heart he is afraid of none."  Laksmi said, “Lord, excuse the fault of 
this fugitive this time and preserve him. The gods and the Brahmins are all 


adoring you, You should not kill him." 


136-157. Saraswati said, “Lord, you are the father of the gods and the 
source of the Vedas. What explanation, therefore, can І offer to you? You 
are the God of the universe ; and you should preserve every one in the world.” 
The attendants of Visnu said, “Lord, the very recollection of your name isa 
source of good to your votacies in every matter and dispels all calamity. 
Therefore preserve this fugitive Brahmin.’ The dancers said, “О remover 
of poverty, we are always beggars at your door At present we beg of you 
to preserve the life of this twice-born saint". Lord Hari who preserves the 
fugitives smiled at their words and addressed them with delightful words thus, 
“ О gods, listen, all of you, to my words full of ethics and calculated to cause 
happiness. According to your prayer, I will surely preserve this Bráhmin, 
But this twice-born saint should go back from the Vaikuntha to {һе king 
Amvarisa and take bis meal there for the satisfaction of the king. For this 
saint accepted the hospitality offered by the king and was about to curse him 
for no fault on his part. ‘Then the Sudarsan protected him and was about to 
kill this saint also. He was frightened and for full one year wandered in 
different parts of the world. Since that time the king has been fasting with 
an afflicted heart. As a mother does not eat food herself when she sees her 
hungry babe anxious to suck its mother’s breast, so I have been fasting since 
that time owing to the abstinence of my votary from food. By my blessing, 
the excellent Muni will be rendered free from every danger, and 1 guarantee 
that inthe way my wheel will not kill him. From this day forth, relieved 
from all anxiety, I shall also be able to enjoy happiness. 1 eat thin gs presented 
7 by my votaries and relish them just like nectar; otherwise 1 can not eat 
things offered even by Laksmi. Lakgmi too, can not offer anything to me 


N 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


216 THE BRAHMA-VAIV ARTA PURANA. 


without offering it first to my votaries. O child, O best of saints, you are 
very wise. First go therefore to the house of the king. Let the gods, 
goddesses and sages also go home.” So saying Hari went to his seraglio and 
the gods bowed to the Lord of the universe and returned to their homes. 
Then saint Durvásà who was speedy like the wind quitted Hari’s house; 
and Sudarsana, valorous like ten millions of suns, followed suit. The king 
who fasted for a year was sitting on his throne with parched throat. At this 
time he saw the excellent saint standing before him. He got up reverentially 
from his seat, bowed to him respectfully and entertained him with sweet- 
meat etc, He then took his own food. ‘The excellent saint was much gratified 
with the hearty meal and blessed the king. On his way back to his home he 
recited the eulogies of the king and cogitated thus in his heart with surprise, 
“Oh ! inestimable is the glory of the Vaisnavae!”’ 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


1-22. Narada said, *O saint, I heard from you the fault incurred by 
the transgression of the Dwádasi, the disgrace of the great saint and the 
way in which he was rescued by Hari. Now I want to hear from you the 
ordinances of the Ekádasi vow which every one desires to perform. Let me 
know them please, in detail. I know the S’rutis to a certain extent but owing 
to a divergence of views on the subject, І could not decide anything. You are 
the source of the S’rutis; and so L want to know the virtues of Ekadasi from 
your own mouth," Narayana said, ʻO saint, Ekádas'i of all the vows ‘is the 
most unattainable, pleasing to Lord Krisna and is the symbol of asceticism to 
the ascetics. As Krisna is among the gods, Nature among the goddesses, 
Brahmins among people who adopt different stages of life, S'iva among the 
Vaisnavas, Ganesa among those who are worshipped, Saraswat? among savants, 
the gold among metals, Vaisnava among people, knowledge among riches 
the wife among associates, the life among things endeared, disposition among 
favorites, the mind among confidential and restless objects and among passions, 
the mother among elders. the husband among brides, providence among the 
strong, time among destroyers, a good-natured person among friends, the 
disease among enemies, infamy among secrets and among things that destroy 
reputation, the snake among injurious animals, tho prostitute among the 
wicked, Diva among the valorous, tba earth among the enduring, the Rectan 
among victuals, the fire among things that burn, Laksmi among the generous, 
Sati, the daughter of Dakga, among the chaste, Brahma among the lords of 
creation, the sea among rivers, the 54 ma among the Vedas, the Gaetri among 
metres, the holy fig among trees, the holy basil among flowers, the Agra-háyana 
among months, the Spring among seasons, the sun among the Adityas, i»'iva 
among the Rudras, Visma among the Vasus, India among continents, you 
among godly saints, Bhrigu among the Brahmin sages, Rama among kings, 
Kapila among adepts, Sanat-Kumára among philosophers and ascetios, the 
Airávata among elephants, the elephant among beasts, the Himalaya 
among mountains, the  KXaustubha among gems, the sacred Saraswati 
among rivers, Chitra-rath among the Gandarvas, Kuvera among the Yaksas, 
Sumált among tho Raksases, S'atarupá among women, Manu, the son ОЁ 
Brahma the self-exislent, among Manus, Rambh& among the fair, the principle 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHAN DA. 217 


of delusion (Mûyê) among dissemblers, so is the Ekadas’i among vows. This 
is an usual or ordinary vow (as opposed to casual) and hence incumbent 
upon the four castes. It is particularly imperative on the Brahmins and 


the Vaisnavas. 

23-36 On the day of Ekádas'i the vow sacred to the Lord) all the sins 
including Brahmin-slaughter are mixed up with food. Whoever eats on 
that day commits the above sins. He is regarded as the greatest sinner in 
this worl] and in the end has to live in the hell called the Kumbhi—paka 
foreleven yugas. Then he acquires his birth as a Chandal and seven times 
he is born as a person afflicted with psoriasis or leucoderma after which he 
is purified, as Brahm’ hath said. I have just related to you the sins 
Incurred by eating on the day of Ekádas'i. 1 already mentioned to you 
the sins which could be committed by the transgression of Dwis‘t. Now 
I am going to describe to you the evils of fasting on the occasion of 
the Ekûdas'î connected with the Das'ami, Dharma extracted this 
matter from the essence of the Vedas and then related it to me. A 
fool who voluntarily violates even a digit of Das'ami that is to say 


it of fasts on the day of Ekáds'i connected with Das'amt 


even a dig: 
displeases Laksmi who leaves his house wtth a curse. Не forfeits 


renown and progeny and in the end resides in the “ Blind well " (a kind of 
hell) for a hundred Manwantaras. On the lunar day where 6һеге is a con- 
junction of Das'ami, Ekádas'i and Dwádas'i, the person who observes 
the vow should eat and he should fas& the next day. Here if he 
observes the vow on the twelvth day of the lunar month and breaks 
his fast on the thirteenth day, he does not commit any sin for his 
transgressions on the twelvth day. If the Ekádas'i is in full swing on the 
previous day and subsists only for a while in the morning on the next day 
also, then in consideration of the fact that the Ekádas'i has increased 
in length, fasting is proper on the next day specified above. In cases 
where on the previous day six Dandas of Ekádas'i subsist but on 
the next day in the morning there is a conjunction of the three lunar days, 
. the householder should fast ол the previous day alluded to above. But 
the case is different with the Yatis, ete. These should fast and observe the 
ordinary rites, including the act of waking in the night on the next day. 


37-51—A householder should fast on the previous day as stated above 
and break his fast са the next-day when the Ekádas'i із over. O Narada, 
it is equally incumbent upon a Vaisnava, Yati, widow, Brahmachari and 
beggar to ebserve Ekádas'i. But, barring the Vaisnavs, if is imperative 
upon all house-holders to fast on the day, of Ekádas'i connected with 
the bright half of the lunar month. Between Sayan Ekádas'i the eleventh 
day of the fair half of Asárh when Visnu lies down to enjoy his four 
months’ repose in the year) and Utthin Ekâdas'i (—eleventh day of 
the fair half of Kartik when Visnu awakes) a householdor must fast 
on the day of Ekádas'i which relates to the darkhalf of the month, Баб 
not on any other Krişna Ekádas'i. О Brahmin, I related to you the matter 
as determined by the Vedas. Now hear the rules ofthe vow. A person 
should take only boiled rice and g4ee on tho day previous to the Ekádas'i 
and*must not taste even water throughout the day. Then in the night he 
should sleep on а bed of holy grass. The next day he should get up at 
dawn, perform the morning rites the, ordinary rites and then bathe. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
218 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


vow and make the avowal*-of the purpose 
Beo QUA ee E E емо of Lord Krisna. Afterwards he 
үт M ш; ffor water to the manes and perform his morning worship and 
sno ae He should provide himself with sacrificial articles during the 
рза tiie соп ingredients are particularly prescribed for the purpose. 
dar. с ios] as a seat, cloth, water for washing the feet, the same water 
with offer of grass and barley, flower, ointment, frankincense, light, saeri- 
ficial offerings, sacred thread, ornament, perfume, water ene betel 
leaves, oblation cf mill and honey, water to rinse the mouth: t ies ingre- 
dients should be procured in the day and the vow should be per ormed in 
the night. Later on, he should put on a pair of washed clothes, sit down 
on ће matting in a pure condition, rinse his mouth, remem bor Нат? 
and say, Amen! Then atan auspicious moment by means of the Dhyán 
prescribed in the Vedas and pronounced by the Munis, he should consec- 
rate an auspicious jar and offer to it fruits, branches and sandal. By 
separate Dhyáns and invocations, six deities should be worshipped, viz. 
Ganes'a, the sun, the fire, Visnu, S'iva and S'ivà. Не should then bow to 
Hari, remember Hari and then perform the vow. Ifa person performs 
the act without worshipping the above six deities, all his ordinary and 
casual rites become ineffectual. 


59-68. О saint, I related to you matters whieh are part and parcel of 
tho vow. Now listen to matters desirable in connexion with the vow as 
stated by Kânwa Sakha, Ву the Dhyan as prescribed by the Sima Veda, 
for the meditation of the Supreme Being, т.е. Lord Krisna, the worshipper 
should offer flower to the head and again engage himself in the Dhyan, 
The abstruse Dhyán which is desired by all, I am now going to relate to 
you. Listen. This Dhyûn is as dear to the votaries as their life, It 
should not be revealed to any one except the devout. The Dhyàn is as 
follows: I adore God, the final cause, whose complexion is lovely and 
dark-blue like a new cloud, whose excellent features rebuke the grace of the 
full moon of autumn, whose eyes are fair likea pair of autumnal lotuses 
blooming through the rays of the sun, who is decked with the grace of his 
body and ornaments of gem, who is always beheld by the cowherdesses with 
extremely crooked and cheerful glances, whose image seems to be made up 
of the lives of the above damsels, who curious to indulge in the Ras 
in the sphere of the Rasa, who drinks the beauties of the face of Radha as 
the red-legged varta—velledrinks the honey of the antumnal moon; whose 
chest is lighted up with the Kaustubha and decorated with wreaths of 
Párijáta; whose head is crowned with a diadem of gem, whose hand holds a 
melodious flute; who can with difficulty be adorod by gods, demons, 
Brahm& aud others; who is adored by all and cannot be controlled by 
Dhyana. After this Dhyàn, the worshippers should reverentially invoke 
the Supreme Lord and worship him with the offer of sixteen ingredients. 
The worship is as follows: **O Supreme God! This ornament of gem 
(constructed of gold) and a picturesque matting, 1 offer to you. Please 


a dwell 


accept them. O Lord of Radha, I offer to you precious clothes chastened 


by fire and woven by Viswa-karma. Please accept them. O ocean of 
merey, I offer you perfumed, соо] water kept in а golden vase fit for 
washing the feet. Please accept it. О friend of the devout, I offer to you 
water of conches, flower, bent grass, and sacred Argha (oblations of water 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KIIANDA. 219 


with offer of grass, paddy, etc.) mixed with sandal paste. Please 
accept them. . cause of the world, I offer to you white flowers 
perfumed with sandal-paste and aloe which are always delightful 
to you Please accept them. О Lord Krisna, I offer to you Sands] 
aloe, musk, saffron and ointment ef red powder, please accept them; 

69.86. О Lord, I preseut to you frank-incense full of several 
ingredients, fragrant, delighful and prepared out of the juiee of cer- 
tain trees. Please accept it. О Lord, I present to you this lamp 
of gem which is lovely day aud night, bright and calculated to dispel 
dismal darkness. О supreme spirit, I present to you delieious, sweet, 
tasteful artieles of various sorts. Please accept them. О god of the 
chief gods, I present to you а sacred thread, the production 
of fine artistic work, prepaared of golden fibres and tied into Sávitrí 
knots. Please accept it. O son of Nanda, I give you orauments 
for the whole body effulgent with the lustre of valuable gems. 
Accept them. О friend of the poor, I present to you this perfume, 
beneficial and valued on the occasion of every auspicious ceremony. 
Please accept it. O Lord, I offer to you Vsnu oil, lovely and 
desired by all and seasoned with emblie myrobalan and leaves of 
bael. Kindly accept it. О Lord, I reverentially offer to you betel- 
leaves seasoned with camphor and desired by all. Please accept 
them. O husband of the cowherdess, I offer sweet and delicious 
honey deposited in a polished cup gem which is delightful to all. 
Please accept it. О destroyer of Madhü, I offer you perfumed, 
sacred water of the Ganges for rinsing the mouth. Please accept it. 
A devout person after having cheerfully offered these sixteen in- 
gredients should reverentially offer to hima wreath of gem. O Lord, 
l present to you the best of ornaments viz., an excellent garland 
of flowers of different kinds interwoven with fine thread. With the 
mystic syllable whispered into the ear by the spiritual guide or the 
first syllable of a mystic formula, the worshipper should present a handful 
of flowers and afterwards with folded palms he should reverentially 
worship the Lord thus: “О  Krisna, lord of Radha, you аге the 
ocean of mercy. Release us therefore from this dreadful sea of life. 
О Lord, by assuming a hundred births, I have been very much 
agitated in mind. I have been enchained by my Karma. Kindly 
release me from the fetters. Lord, І have sought your shelter and 
am bowing before your lotus feet. By casting at me glances of 
mercy, preserve me from the fear of Yama and give me shelter 
beneath your lotus feet which constitute a cage for fugitive. Lord, 
І am without faith, religious rites, methods prescribed by the Vedas 
and the essense of the Mantras. Yet, kindly grant my prayer. | о 
Hari,- if through the worshipper’s ignorance of the rites prescribed 
by the Vedas, an act is defective, it becomes complete or perfect 
as soon as your name is pronounced.” 4 

87-94. ‘The worshipper should then bow, give -sacerdotal fees to 
the Brahmins and keep up tho might by the celeberation of the 
grand festival. If he even sleeps after haying fasted and performed 
the vow, he will still attain half of the fruits which could posl 
tained by the vow and the fasting. If he sleeps after having 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


230 THE BRAUMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


broken his fast on the twelfth day of the lunar month and thore- 
after even drink water again, still he will attain balf of the fruits of the 
vow. О great Brahmin, the worshipper should then recollect the lotus feet 
of Lord Krişna and with the following mantra he should tako boiled rice 
and ghee only once during the day. “O Auna (food), you are the life of 
beings. Brahm’ created you at first and you are the image of Visnu 
himself. So give me the fruit of fastings in connexion with this Yow. 
Whoever in India reverentially performs this excellent vow of Ekádas'i, is 
able to redeem seven of his ascendants, seven of his descendants, his soul, 
his parents, father-in-law, mother-in-law, daughter, son-in law and even 
his servants. Thus, О Brûhmin I related to you Krigna's vow and his 
deeds calculated to give redemption and happiness. Now І аш going to 
narrate to you other points. Listen. 


CHAPTERXXVII. 

1-17. Nûrûyana said, “O Narada, I am going to describe you the 
character of Krişna, the stealth of the cowherdesses and the boons con- 
ferred upon them according to their desire. ‘The cowherdesses, excited 
with lust, initiated the vow in the first month of Hemanta, and subse- 
quently, having mastered their passions and pure in habit, they subsisted 
for one month full проп gee and boilod rice. They then bathed and on 
the coast of the Yamuna they constructed the image of Parvati with sand. 
They duly invoked the goddess and regularly worshipped the image with 
lovely sandal, alos, musk, saffron, flowers of different kinds, garlands of 
various sorts, frankincense, light, sacrificial offerings, cloth, a variety of 

- fruits, gems, pearls, corals and music. “О mother of the world, you 
create, preserve and destroy the universe. O virtuous goddess, marry me 
to the son of Nanda”, First of all, the cowherdesses prayed the goddess 
wibh the above Mantra. Afterwards they made an avowal of the purpose 
for which the vow is performed and worshipped the goddess with the first 
syllable of the mantra stated in the Sima Veda, always lively and original 
which is follows: ‘Om Hrim Durgài Namah.” ‘bis mantra yiolds all 
the fruits that are desired. Afterwards the cowherdesses delightfully 
offered with this Mantra, garlands of flowers, sacrificial offerings, frankin- 
cense, light, clothes, ote., and bowed to the goddess: and having uttered 
this Mantra reverentially a thousand times and recited several eulogies, fell 
prostrate on the ground and worshipped her. O goddess, you are the aus- 
pxeious source of all good. ‘Therefore, О spouse of Siva, we adore you. 
G ive us the thing we desire. After reciting this mantra, they bowed to 

the Drá.mins tendered them sacerdoal fees and sacrificial offerinys and 
wenthome. O saint, now listento the excellant hymn (which is capable of 
yielding all fruits) where-with the milk-maids eulogised Parvati? During 
the great flood, the sun and tho moon having been concealed ficm sight, 
the whole world with its animate and inanimate objects was covered with 
dark water and at that time Hari who lay in water made over this hymn 
to Brahma and slept. Brahma, the creator of the world, greatly oppressed 
by the demons Madhü and Kaitava, worshipped the goddess Primordial 

Nature thus. “O goddess, (Abhay&) that guarantee immunity from 

danger, you are celeberated by the names of Durga, Siva, Maya, Nara. 
yanî, Sanatani, Jay and Sarva-Mangali. I bow to you. 


| 


? CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE | 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KIIAN DA, 921 


18-35. О Durgà, the Da of your name means destroyer of the 
demons; U means destroyer of calamity or impediments; Ka means the 
destroyer of disease; and Ga means destroyer of sins; A means destroyer of 
fear and foes. Durga, therefore, is she the pronunciation, hearing or recol- 
lection of Hari. Hari himself hath said so. Durga means calamity;and A 
means destrover. She who destroys calamity is therefore Durza. Durga 
means the king of demons; and A means destruction. She is styled Durgå 
by savants, as she destroyed the above king of demons a means good; 
I means supreme and шапу; and VÀ ineans donor. You are called S'ivà 
as you confer many benefits or because you are the visible representation 
ofall good. Siva means redemption; and A means mother. You are so 
called because you personally give redemption. Abhay means destruction 
of fear; and A means donor. Abhayá is she who gives assurance of safety. 
Ма means royal grace and Үй means attainment. She is Maya as she 
gives royal grace. Ма means delusion and Yå means attainment. She is 
Maya as she entangles people in the meshes of delusion. You are the 
product of half of the body of Hari and equal to him in valour. You al- 
ways dwell in his body. Hence you are called Náráyani. Sanátan means 
void of attributes and eternal. She is called Sanátani on this account. 
Ja means welfare and Үй means donor. She who is the source of constant 
welfare is Jaya. Sarva-mangal means prosperity and A means donor. 
She who gives absolute prosperity is Sarva-maugalà. These excellent 
names of Durgá, Náráyana communicated to Brahma who was residing in 
tlie lotus of his navel and after this He slept. 

35-50. When the ‘ndomitable deu.ons Madhu and Kaitava were about 
to slay Brahma, the latter adored the goddess of sleep. Durgå appeared 
to him personally, gave him the excellent amulet of Lord Krisna called 
the All-preserver and disappeared. By virtue of the hymn, Brahma 
obtained the excellent amulet; and by virtue of the amulet he received 
assurances of safety. In the fight with the demon called Tripura, when 
Siva fell down with his chariot, Brahmá gave him that hymn and excellent 
amulet. When S'iva read that amulet and eulogised the goddess of sleep, 
then by the grace of this goddess, Hari arrived there in the shape of a bull 
with Durga, the emblem of energy to give victory to Siva. Then he 
raised Siva along with his, chariot to the sky and cheered him up. Jaya 
gave him success. Then Siva remembered Hari and the goddess of sleep, 
held in his hand the Brahma weapon and killed Tripura through the power 
of the ode and the amulet. The milk-maids also, by virtue of this eulogy, 
obtained Нагі as their husband. Whoever in the morning, noon and 
evening reads the above hymn called Sarva-mangal-prada which yields all 
dosires and destroys all calamities, be he a Stiva, a Vaisnva, ora Sakta 
will be relieved from calamities and saved.in the court cf justice, in the 
crematorium, or in the midst of a wild-fire or when he is beset with the 

life or fear of beasts, or when he is on a boat sinking in the sea, 
or when he is engaged ina war with the enemy, or when he is in 
prison or when he is menaced by lightning, curse of a guru or à Brahmin 
ora rupture with his friends. If a man loses his position, wealth, or 
caste or if a mau be overwhelmed with grief or has a rupture with the 
husband or a son, or if one is poisoned by a snake or injured by the 
wicked, the recollection of. this hymn removes the cause of fear 


danger to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE_ 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


222 THE BRANMA-VAIV АЮГА PURANA. 


an] brings security anl all kinds of prosp rity th +t could possibly be desired. 
He who remembers this hyma acquires tirm faith in Hari in this world 
and in the end secures the bondage vf Hari through the grace of Parvati. 

51-62. ‘The ladies of the Vraja with the above hymn eulo;ised _the 
goddess Parvati every day continually for one month anl reverentially 
Bowed to her. When the month was over, the co vherdessoss kept a 
variety of blue, yellow and white objects and many precious, lovely clothes 
on the coast ef the Yamuna and went to bathe. ‘The whole coast, being 
covered with the above articles, looked very “gay and was perfamed with 
the wind redolent of sandal, aloo aud mask. ‘he coast of the Yamund 
was decked with sacrificial offerings of various sorts, fruits, frankincense, 
lamp, vermilion, and satfron Chou the cowherdesses cheerfully dedicated 
their heart to Hari, put off their clothes and, all naked. engaged them- 
selves in aquatics. —Krigja saw aud removed those clothes and articles 
of food and ate up, conjointly with the children, the food. Then the 
greedy cow-herd boys took , the clothes in a heap on their shoulders and 
went to ^ great distance. Sridáma, Sudám., Vasudáma, Suvala. Sup- 
Ars wa, Sabhánga, Sundara, Chandrabhin, Birbhàn, Suryya-bhàn, Vasu- 
bhàn, Ratnabhin. ‘These twelve cowherd boys, with Krisna and Bala- 
rima constitute fourteen principal milk-men. But millions of other cow- 
herds were also the friends of Hari. "They took all the clothes to a distant 
place and keeping there the heaps of clothes awaited the arrival of Lord 
Hari. 

63-72 Hari himself took some clothes, piled them up ascended the 
Kadam tree and thus addressed the milk-maids, “O milk-maids, you are 
all engaged in & vow : carefully listen to my words and then take part 
in the play. In the month which is well suited to the vow, alter having 
made an avowal of the purpose in connexion with an auspicious rite, why 
have you descended naked into the water and thereby why do you make 
your vow defective? Now who has stolen your cloth, flower wreath and 
sacrificial offerings ? Varuna is displeased with a woman who, initiated 
in a vow, bathes naked in the river ; and the followers of Varuna appro- 
priate all her things. Now how will you go home naked? Unless you 
go, how will your vow be performed ? Could not the doity whom you 
adore on the occasion of the vow preserve your things. When the go.liess 
whom you contemplate and who is pleased with sacrificial offerings could 
nof preserve your things, then how will she be able to give you the fruits 
desired ? A deity who ean yield fruits is capable of anything” When 
the ladies of the Vraja heard his words, they found that their clothes and 
articles were missing. They were consequently agitated with grief and iu 
that naked condition wept loudly, saying, “Where are our clothes and 
sacrificial offerings ? " 

" 18-82. "hey then reverentially and modestly addressed Lord Krisua 

us: “О Lurd, you comprehend yourself fully, for you are the primeval 
God. : O best of those who know the Vedas, these articles fit for the 
worship of the deity we brought for that purpose. They have not been 
presented to the deity. You should not therefore take them. О Govindn 
restore to us our washed clothes, (so that we may put tnem o 
and per- form the vow) along with other articles. As they were 
so saying, Sridàma showed to them the heaps of clothes and ran 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 223 


away again. "hen the supreme goddess Nature (Râdhâ) vas hig’ y 
incensed to the cowherd Leys with the clotles ın their possession 
and with her body saturated with water said thus: © О Sus'ilâ, S'asj- 
kala, Chandramukhi, Madhavi, Kadamba-Mala, Кап, Yamuna, Sarva- 
Mangala, Padma-Mukhi, Savitri, Párijátá, Jáhnavi. Sudhá-Mukhi 
S'ubhà, Padma, Gauri, Swayamprabhà, Kàlikà, Durgá, Saraswati, Bhàá- 
rati, Arpaná, Rati, Ganga, Ambika, Krisna-Priya, Chmapá, Chandan- 
Nandini and other female associates of mine, get up from the water, bind 
Krisna, the lord of my life, aud bring him here. 

83-94. According to Бег ccmmand they got up in anger from the 
water, concealed their fema!e organs with their bands,.and thousands of 
other milk-maids rushed with eyes flushed with anger. ‘Iley likewise 
rushed after Sridama who was running away with the clothes. Sridama went 
very soon to the place where the boy had gathered with clothes in their 
hands. - The milk-maids also quickly went io that place without minding 
any opposition. The boys were frightened and ran to the spot where Lord 
Krisna was, with clothes in his hands. Through fear, they handed over 
the clothes to Krisna who suspended them cn the branches of the tree. Тһе 
Kadamba tree, covered with clothes, looked very lovely. He then ridiculed 
the inilk-maids saying: “O milk—maids, why do you behave thus with 
me, when you are naked? Now, hold your hands and beg of me the 
clothes. Ask yonr mistress Rádhá to beg them of me with folded hands; 
otherwise I shall never return them to you. What сап your Radha do 
unto ше? And what can the goddess whom you adore do unto ше? Go 
and communicate this message to Radha,” 

95-105. The milk-maids cast arch glance at him and then went to 
Radha to whom they delivered the message. Radha when she heard this 
was excited with lust and laughed. There was a thrill of raptures in her 
body. оиб of shame she could not go to Krisna, but she adopted the pos- 
ture of meditation in the water and contemplated the lotus feet of Hari 
which are adored by Brahma, S va, Ananta and Dharma, She recollected 
the feet again and again and owing to the excess of her feelings she ado- 
rel thus the lord of her lif. “O lord of my life, you are the master of the 

Goloka, my god and the god of the milk—maids also О friend of the 
poor, you are the master of the poor ard the lord of «ll. I bow to you. О 
Lord of the cow-herds, you contribute to the delight of Yasodà: you are all 
happiness and supreme happiness. I bow to you О Krisna, lord of my 
life, you have spoiled the sacrifice of Indra. You have crushed the prid, 
of Brahmá and subdued Kaliya. I bow to you. О Lord you are the god 
` of aBrahmáà, Ananta, S'iva and the Bráhmins. You are supreme, the 
img e of Brahma, omniscient and the germ of Brahma. I bow to you. 
You are the germ of all objects, animate and inanimate; you are above all 
attributes, the very essence of attributes, the germ, receptacle and lord of 
all attributes. I bow to you. O lord of my life, you are the master of all 
kinds of perfection (Anim4etc.,). You аге an adept, the very symbol of 
perfection, the image and the germ of asceticism and yourself an ascetic. 
I bow to you. , i 
106-10. You are a deseribable as well as an indescribable object. You are 
the germ of that object and the germ of all objects. I bow to you. I bow 
to that God by constantly worshipping whom I have become Saraswati, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


e 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
224 THE BRAHALA-VAIFARTA PURANA 


î, Durgà, Gangá, and mother of the Vedas, and have thus become 
DE De 1 bow to that lord the touch of whose servants, and 
id B lation of whose name day and night consecrate the place fre- 
we i n Г ilgrims.” The chaste Ridh& having adored him thus keps 
ок EM euet. dedicated her life and soul to Krisna and looked 
чү like a post or pillar. Whoever reads the above hymn composed 
te Radha in the morning, Roon and evening atbains the faith and homage 
of Hari and obtains the status of Radha. Whoever reads the hymn rever- 
entially in emergency attains all sorts of prosperity and recovers articles 
lost for ever, stolen or spoilod. Whoever being afflicted with сате reads 
this hymn attains supreme happiness, posterity and cheerfulness of mind, 
A. woman, separated from her husband, son or friend, and beset with peril 
attains her object ifshe reverentially reads it for a month, If a virgin 
listens to it fora year, she gets a husband accomplished like Lord 
Krişna. М T 

115-194. Radha, settled in the water and praying and eulogising 
the lotus feet of Hari, opened her eyes and found that the whole world 
was full of Krisna and that the coast of the j Yamuna was covered with 
clothes and articles. She then asked herself if all this was a mere dream 
or hallucination on her part. The cowherdesses discovered along with 
the clothes the articles in the very position which they had ,Qecypied 
before. The container of the artictes was the same. ‘The milk-maids 
emerged from the water, performed the vew in question and went homo 
with the permission ef Radha,” Narada said, “Lord, what is the namo 
of the vow performed by the milk-m ids? What frait does it yield-? 
What are the ingredients of the vow? How is the fee given to the 
priest? What are the sweet mystries connected with the termination 
of the vow ? О blessed soul, kindly give m: in detail all these accounts 
of Hari", Süta said, “The great Muni Narayana, the chief of the 
spiritual guides of the poets, smiled at the words of Narada and said 
“О son, listen, I um going to narrate to you fully the ordinances of the, 
vow. This vow is саай Gaurivrata. 16 is performed in the month oj 
Agrahayana. The girls should put on washed clothes after bathing* 
invoke Ganes'a the sun, the fire, Náráyana Siva and Siva, worship them 
with five ingredients and then commence the vow. 

125-188. Below the jar they should construct a 
purify it with sandal, aloe. musk, and saffron, build 
of the ten-handed Durga, impress the forehead with 
and below that with marks of sandal, contemplate and 
and with folded bands having read the following Mantra commence. her 
worship thus; “О Gauri, you gracefully constitute half the body of Siva, 
O anspicious nymph, as you are his spouse similarly make us spouses of 
lovely, precious husbands. A fter having read the above Mantra, they 
should meditate in their mind the figure of Durgá, the mother of the 
universe. This Dhyán is stated in the Sàma Veda: it is mysterious and 
calewlated to yield all fruits. I am going to reveal to you the treasure 
which is unattainable even by sages. By this Dhyána, tho adepts con- 
template Durgá. She is the spouse and darling of Siva, devoted to him 
and dwells in his heart. She has a smiling face and cheerful, lovely 
eyes: her fameʻis great ; she is in the prime of her youth and decked 
with bracelets, armlets and anklets ef gem : her cheek is docorated with 


guadrangular sphere, 
with sand the image 
marks of vermilion 
invoke tho goddess 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


225 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 


earrings of gem ; her neck is decked with jasmine wreath ; her head is 
beautified with chignon attracting the bees ; her forehead is marked with . 
vermilion and musk; her head is crowned with diadem ; she is clad in dress 
chastened by fire ; het neck is decked witha wreath of shining gems and, 
in its proximity, with a garland of Párijáta which descends up to the 
knee; her lovely loins are hard, thick and bending a little through the pre- 
prime. She is effulgent like ten millions of suns 
Brahma and other gods, her lips are like ripe 


bimbas : her hue is like tho fair champak; her teeth put to shame the 
pearls; and the sphere of her face is enchanting like the moon of autumn. 


І adore the goddess who fulfils the objects of the devout. 
139-167. After this Dhyàn, they should offer flowers to the head. 
Then with other flowers in their hands they should reverentially 
contemplate her again. In this vow, they should every day with 
the above mystic formula cheerfully offer to the goddess sixteen ingre- 
dients ; and efterwards they should eulogise her with the Mantra, bow to 
her and roverentially listen to her naratives. Narada said, “Lord, I 
heard all about the rules of the vow, the extraordinary hymn and the 
fruits of the vow. Now, I want to hear about the vow of Gauri. Lord, 
who performed this vow at first and who introduced if into the earth? О 
remover of doubt, kindly narrate to me the above points in detail. 


Narayana said, “In days of yore Kus'adhwaja hada chaste daughter 
at the holy place 


named Vedavati. At first she performed this vow 

called Puskara. On the day the vow was over, Durga, the mother of the 
world, effulgent like ten’ millions of suns, ascended a golden chariot. 
avd with a hundred thousand female ascetics appeared in person before 
Vedavati and with a smiling and cheerful appearance said, ‘I bless you, 


Vedavatí. Solicit any boon that you desire, I haye been pleased with your 
you the boon desired." Vedavati 


vow and have come hare to grant ) 0 j 
opened her eyes.and saw her. She bowed to her aad with folded 
palms said, thus * О goddess. give me the boon that Náráyana may be 
my husband ; and &һе second boon which I ask is this, may my faith in 
your lotus feet be firmly established. I do поб want any other boon. The 
spouse of Siva, the mother of the world, when she heard this, descended 
from her car soon and said, О mother of the world, you are the in- 
carnation of Laksmi, I know. You have descended to the world simply 
to consecrate India. Goddess, by the touch of the dust of your feet the earth 
and all the holy places are at once consecrated. O devotee, your vow and 
your devotion are meant to impart instruction to the people, for at very 


birth, you are the favourite spouse of Narayana. Visnu, to relic gortho cee 
of her burden and to punish robbers dhyd in the 1те 


will descend to Ayo s 2 
iti is digi f һ rvan 
age with all his digits. Afterwards wo of his servants 


he will relieve t ; comem 
fallen through the curse of a Brahman. You had better go to Mitbilê in 
ME OUR p Мише ver е 
will obtain you (the offspring of no womb) will be e | ues 
you up. You will be known by tho name of Sità. pir. xo 
will vo to Mithilà and marry you. In this way in every < d NS 
will be the beloved spouse of Nirdyana.” So saying Pi га 
Vedavati and went home Afterwards the chaste  Vedavati took 
Through the powers; of her 


form of a child and went to Mithila. 


dominance of youth in its 
and constantly adored by 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


926 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


ZI asleep within the furrow of the plough. Janaka saw that 
AI SUE ARMAS the earth with her eyes shut ang anes Her 
colour was like heated gold, Бег body was very radiant. К ‹ шн ia a once 
took and embraced her and proceeded in the Qr o ea ros T n 
the way ther was a voice from the sky to the following e dec ^. A ше 
Janaka, carry to house the unborn girl who 18 the inoa E P «smi. 
Магауапа will be your son-in-law." Hearing this, Janaka too 3 us home 
with all the greater alacrity. Then he made over the girl to ne Se e hag 
sho might nurse her. In course of time the girl became young and y virtue 
of this vow obatined Rama the king of the world the son of Das'aratha 
as her husband. The milk-maids by virtue of the vow obtained Krigna as 
their husband. О Brahmin, I just told you about the vow of Gauri. A 
virgin who performs this vow in India certainly obtains a husband like 
E Narayana said, “О Nirada, the milk-maids performed this 
vow fora month and every day eulogised the goddess according to the 
above hymn. On the last day they cheerfully completed the vow ond adored 
the goddess acording to the hymn as stated in the Kanwa-Sikha, Iam 
going to tell you the hymn by virtue of which the truthful Sita obtained 
the lotus eyed Rûma as her husband. Janaki said “O goddess symbol of 
strength, you are the support of all objects the shelter of all virtue, and the 
constant associate of Siva. Give mo a suitable person for my husband. 1 
bow to you. О goddess, you are tho symbol of ereation, preservation and des- 
truction. You create, preserve and destroy. You are th 
preservation and destruction. 1 bow to you, You are devoted to your 
husband and chaste. You know well the dignity of the husband. I bow to 
you. Give me a suitable person for my husband. O source of virtue you are 
the ,benefactress of the world, the germ of all good. I bow to you. O spouse 
of Sankara, you do good to everybody, You are the germ of ev 
and destroy all calamities: you are the goddess, universal. I bow to you 
mother of the universe. O Nárüyani, hunger, thirst, kindness, desire, 
reverence, sleep, indolence, memory, forgiveness ; all these are the outcome 
of your digits. I bow to you, O emblem of great delusion, you are visible 
and invisible; you are the root of things, visible and invisible. You are 
the source of all fruits ; you are also indescribable. I bow to you. You are 
blessed in Sankara, your husband, i. e. you haye secured his affection; and 
you are the source of all prosperity. I bow to you. Give me prosperity 
and Narayana as my husband. A woman who on the day that the vow is 
complete adores Śiv 


a with the above hymn and reverentially bows to her 
surely attains the supremo Hari as hor 


husband in this world, enjoys 
happiness as desired by her and in the end, mounted on a celestial саг, 
goes to Lord Krisna. : 


188-197. On the day the vow was complete, Radha with the milk- 
maids eulogised the goddess, bowed to her and completed the vow. After- 
wards she gave gold anda thousand Cows as sacredotel fees to tho 
Brahmins, courteously feasted a thousind Brahmins, distributed wealth 
to the beggars and prepared to go home. At her command. there was a 
flourish of music. At this time, at that place, Durgà with ten hands 
decked with ornaments, with a smiling and cheerful appearance, offulgenb 
with the light of Brahman mounted ona lion, the deity who destroys 


e germ of creation, 


ery-thing 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 227 


calamity descended from the sky. The goddess clad in apparel of 
gem descended from the golden car and hastily embraced Radha. The 
milk-maids cheerfully bowed to her. Durga blessed them saying, 
“May your object be fulfilled.” She greeted them affectionately and with 
a smiling face said to Radha, “О Radha, you are dearer to the Lord of all, 
than his life, You have taken a human form through mere illusion. Your 
vow is meant to impart instruction to the people. Fair one, do you remembe 


the Being conversant with the S'ástras, the Lord of the Goloka ? Do you- 


remember the graceful mountain, the river Virajá and the sphere of the 

. Rûsa situated at the Vrindévana, lovely and enticing, constructed by the 
voluptuous Lord Krisna conversant with sexual science? O chaste nymph, 
you have emanated from half the body of Lord Krisna and are equal to. 
Krisna in valour. The goddesses have sprung from the digits of your 
digits. It is impossible that you should be a woman. Goddess,at the 
command of Krisna, you have taken a human form and descended to the 
earth. You are of a tranquil disposition. How can we call you a woman ? A 
chaste one you are unborn and you destroy birth, death and decrepitude. 
Through the sanetities of Kalavati, you have been born as her daughter. 
How can we call you a woman ? 

198-209. O chaste one, you are the life of Hari. The Vedas are 
unable to draw a distinction between you both (Rádhà and Krisna) How 
can we to call you a woman ? O chaste one, indays of yore Brahma adored 
you for sixty tbousand years and yet he was unable’ to see your lotus feet. 
How can we call you a woman? How сап we call you a woman when King 
Suyagna of Manu's race went to Goloka through you whan Bhriguráma 
through your mystic formula and amulet rid the earth of the Ksatriyas 
twenty-one times, when Paras'uràma through the mantra which he got 
from S'iva at the Puskara killed Karta Viryya : when I was daunted by 
fear at the mere mention of your name though I heard with indignation 
that tho said -Paras’urdma very haughtily broke the tooth of my son; when 
for your satistaction Hari preserved him, as I was about to reduce 
him to ashes ? O mother of the world, in every age and at every birth 
Lord Hari has been singled out to be your husband. And yet you observe 
the vow to educate the people. Chaste опе, after the lapse of three months, 

in the lovely month of spring in the night in solitude in the sphere of the 
Rasa and at Vrindávana, united with the cowherdesses, you merrily sport 
with Hari О Radha, in every age you sport in this way. Brahma has 
written this and. no one can efface this writing. O spouse of Hari, as I have 
boen blessed in Siva, so may you be blessed in Lord Krişna. р , 
910-917. You always exist in Ктїзпа as whiteness existsin milk, heat in 
fire, smell in earth and coolness in water. Neither a goddess, nora woman, 
nor a demoness nor a female Gandharva can be so lucky as you. Goddess, by 
my blessing, Lord Krisna himself, the Supreme Being void of all ae 
and adored by Brahma and other gods, will be subject to your will. I say, 


atthe Being who cannot be attained by contemplation, 
EET E lo who is served by Brahma, 


who can with difficulty be adored by the yogis, 
Ananta and other gods, will be subservient to you. O Radha, d 
will be most lucky among women. In the end, you will go bae 


i igna. i гуа di : Then Rádhà 
the Goloka with Krişna.” So saying, Parvati disappeared. TI 
prepared to go home with the milkmaids. At this time Krisna came 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE- 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


228 THE BRAIIMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


to Radha. She saw that Krisna, in the prime of his youth, lovely and 
dark-blue in complexion, in yellow dress and decked with ornaments of 
gem, was standing before her. 

218.994. Не had a smiling and cheerful appearance, he was inclined 
to favour his votaries ; his body was besmeared with sandal paste : his 
eyes resembled a pair of lotuses blooming in autumn, his face had the 
grace of the full moon of autumn ; his forehead was crowned with a diadem 
of gem, his teeth were like the grains of p omegranate ; his hands held the 
merry lotus meant for joy and the flute; his image harboured the 
sportive grace of ten millions of Cupids ; he is void of attributes; Brahma, 
Ananta and Siva constantly adore him; һе is the form of Brahma, as 
determined by the Vedas : he is pious, indescribable, imperishable, patient, 
effulgent , eternal : he is the container and source of all good." Radha 
when she bebeld his indescribable charm got up suddenly and worshipped 
Krisna. At this sight she was oppressed with the darts of Cupid 
and almost fainted. She repeatedly cast at him arch glances and blu- 
shed with shame. 


295.931. Then Hari stood up before the milk-maids and cheerfully 
Said to Radb& thus: “О Rádhà dearer to me than my life, solicit any 
boon that you desire. О milk-maids, you, too, crave any boon that 
you ‘hke. Upon this, Radha and the milk-maids prayed for a boon 
from the Lord of all who was as efficacious as'a Kalpa tree. Radha 
gaid, “Lord, let the bee of my mind éonstantly hover round your Ictus 
foot and drink the nectar of faith which is as sweet as the honey of the 
lotus, May you be the lord of my life in every birth and may I get in 
you faith which can with difficulty be attained. Lord, I wish that 
my mind may ever remain immersed in the recollection of your virtues, 
whether I am asleep or awake." The milk-inaids said, “O friend of our 
lives, may you in every birth be our husband and may you sce usin the 
same light as you do Radha.” 


239.952, Thereupon Krigna, the delight of Yasod4, cheerfully said 
Amen! Then the Lord of the universe cheerfully gave a jasmine wreath, 
the lotus of a thousand leaves (used as a toy) to Radha : and the remain- 
ing garlands and flowers to the cow-herdesses and said, “О milk-maids, 
after the lapse of three months at Vrindàvana in the sphere of the Rûsa 
you will sport with me. As Iam, so you are. The Srutis hold there 
is no distinction between you and me. I constitute your life and you 
constitute my life. O my beloved girls, your vow is “meant to educate 
the people. You haye no self-interest in the vow. You havo descended 
to the earth along with me from the Goloka. You wil! go back with me 
to the Goloka. Now gohome at once. As in every birth, I am dearer 
to you than your life ; so you, too, no doubt, are dearer to me than my 
life." Зо saying Krisua loiterel on the coast of the Yamuna, and so did 
the milk-maids. They also observed him,again and again. Afterwards 
the milk maids, with a smiling and cheerful countenance, with their 
crooked glances feasted upon the honey of the lunar face of Mari as the 
red-legzed bartavelle drinks the rays of the moon. They shouted “Victory.” 
again and again, and went home. Hari, too, with the children cheerfully 
returned home. Thus, О Nirada, I related to you the anspicious deeds of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANM A- K IAN DA. 229 


== 


Hari and gave you the account of the stealth of clothes belonging to the 
eowherdesses which is delightful to all people. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 


1-11, Nûrada said, “О safnt, after three months had elapsed, Hari 
indulged for the first time in sexual intercourse with the milk-maids. O most 
gracious saint, what is the nature of the Vrindávana or the sphere of the 
Rûsa? Iam always very curious to hear new anecdotes of Hari as well 
as the excellent opera of the Rûsa. The account of the deeds of -Hari 
on the surface of the globe is delightful to the ears. Therelore kindly 
recite to me the deeds of Hari which bless the reciter and tbe audience.” 
Süta said, Narayana smiled at the words of the ascetic Narada and 
cheerfully commenced to speak thus: “In days of yore, once upon a 
time, in the season of spring on the 13th day of the bright half of the 
month, Hari went to the Vrindüávana and saw that this wood was per- 
fumed with the wind redolent of the various species of jasmine, viz. 
Kunda, Málati, etc., and the creeping plant of spring called Madhavi and 
acquired a lovely grace through the hum of bees. In this forest, the male 
euckoos seated on the green foliage of trees were making melodious notes. 
This place covered with new siikencloth suited to the sports of the Rasa 
was looking very charming. It was perfumed with sandal, aloe, musk 
aud saffron and filled with betel-leaves seasoned with camphor and various 
other delicacies. A certain- part. of the forest was adorned with beddings 
of frankincense. Мапу garlands of flowers added grace to the scene. 

12-23. Within that forest, the sphere af the Rûsa, circular, chastened 
with sandal, aloe, musk and saffron was displaying its superb charms. It 
contained many a pond meant for amusement and many a garden teeming 
with flowers. Ganders, ducks and waterfowls were sw'mming on the 
waters: The ponds were full of water transparent like crystal and calcu- 
lated to relieve the fatigue caused by sexual intercourse and contained lovely 
stairea „ев fit for amusement. The sphere of the Rûsa was covered with. 
eurd, white paddy, fried rice, ete, and graced with beautiful plaintain trees 
associated with foliage of mangoes interwoven with thread. Jt was deco- 
rated with auspicious jars full of cocoanut and covered with jasmine 
wreaths. The destroyer of Madhu laughed at the sight of the sphere. 
For the sake of fun he played upon his lovely flute to excite the lust of the 
milk-maids. Radha with a heart full of passion, swooned at the melody 
Her mind and soul dissolved with the tune. She stood there motionless 
like a tree. Whenske recovered, she heard the sound of the flute again. 
She was thereupon very much excited, now got up and then- sat down. 
Shethen laid aside her necessary duties, rushed from her house and, 
looking on all sides, marched onward in the direction from which the 

sound of the flute was proceeding. But the lotus-feet of Lord Krisna were 
always awake in her mind ; and the lustre of her body and the radiance 
of her ornaments constructed with gems the finest production of the ocean, 
lighted the four quarters of the globe. Then thirty-three attendants of 
Wtadha ineluding Sus'ilá and others were attracted by the melody of the 
flute and subdued by passion. Accordingly, they sacrieficed the modesty 
characteristic of household women and fearlessly rushed from their houses. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE ә 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


230 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURAN A. 


24-34, "The associates of Ridh& were the best of the milk-maids. Now 
Iam going to tell you the number of those wlio followed the associates. 
О lordly saint, the mill-maids who followed the thirty-three associates of 
Radh& were equal to one another in every respect, in dress, age 
and beauty. . Sus'ilà was followed by sixteen thousand atteudants ; Sas i- 
kalå by fourteen thousand ; Chandra-mukhi by thirteen thousand; Madhavi 
by eleven thousand; Kadamba-mala by thirteen thousand ; Капы by ten 
thousand ; Yamuna by fourteen thousand ; Jáhnavi by fourteen thousand ; 
Subhá by fourteen thousand ; Padma by thirteen thousand; Darga by 
fourteen thousand ; Mangalà by sixteen thousand; Káliká by fourteen 
thousand ; Kamala by thirteen thousand ; Saraswati by thirteen thousand ; 
Bharati by ten thousand ; Aparna by ten thousand; Rati by ten thous- 
and. 

35-46. Ganga was followed by fourteen thousand female attendants M 
Krisna-Priyà, by sixteen thou-and ; Sati by thirteen thousand; Nandini 
by ten thousand ; Sundari by thirteen thousand ; Krigna-Prana by sixteen 
thousand ; Madhumati by fourteen thousand ; Champa by fourteen thous- 
and attendants. Gradually they all assembled, at one place. Some of the 
milk-maids went there with garlands in their hands ; Others with sandal ; 
others with white chowrie, others with musk ; others with saffron ; others 
with small boxes of betels ; others with gold and others with cloths, otc. 
Others went gladly to Chandrávali. The milk maids assembled at one 
place and after having cheerfully prepared the toilet of Ràdhà went to 
Vrindavana. In the way, they shouted, ©“ victory to Hari” and in а 
moment they came to the lovely Vrindávana and saw the enchanting sphere 
of the Rûsa. Тһе scenery of the sphere was more delightful than Heavon 
and was radiant with the pure light of the full moon. This place was very 
solitary and teeming with blooming flowers. A gentle breeze was blowing 
and scattering the fragrance of the flowers on all sides, ; 

47-65. The milk-maids heard in that delightful place the melodious 
note of the male euckoos ealcalated toexcite tho passion of woman and 

©. entice the heart of saints. There the male and female bees infatuated with 
the taste of the honey of flowers wore making a humming noise. Radhika 
with all the girls remembering the lotus feet of Lord Krişna entered into 
the sphere of the Rasa. Lord Krisna saw with pleasure that Radha was 
approaching him with female attendants in her train. She was decked 
with ornaments of gem and clad in lovely dress. Her eyes were arch. 
She had the gait of an elephant. Sho was capable of attracting evan the 
heart of ladies She was decorated with new garments. She was in the 
primo of her youth ; and her grace was most enchanting. Нег loins and 
buttocks were thiek and unwieldy. She resembled the fair Champak in 
colour. Hor face was like the full moon of autumn. ‘She sustained a 


ehignon decorated with jasmine wreath. Then Radha also saw that Krisna 
was also looking slantingly at her, as though she were dearer to him than 
his life. Не was in the prime of his youth and decked with ornaments 
of gem, He harboured the sportiv. 


г ө charms of millions of Cupids. Не 
was dark-blue in appearance and 


1 extremely handsome. Radha with 
erooked glances looked, again and again, at Krişna who was most wonder- 
ful, who had an incomparable grace and was ciad in pieturesque dress. 
She hid her face with hem of her garment 


in shame, She was immediately 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
t 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 231. 


oppressed with the darts of Cupid and, with a thrill of raptures animating 
her whole body. she lost her senses and almost fainted. Similarly, the 
playful Hari, being oppressed with the darts of Cupid represented by her 
glances, stood up before her senseless like a stone. The flute and the 
bright lotus used as a toy dropped from his hands. The yellow dress and 
the plumage of the peacock likewise slipped from his body. Hari in 
a moment recovered, went to Radha and affectionately embraced and 
kissed her. The touch of lord Krişna restored her to consciousness She 
deeply embraced the lord of her life, who was dearer to her than her life 
and kissed his lotus face again and again. Radha and Krsna enticed 
the heart of each ; and Hari who was the best of all humourous beings 
went with Radha, the jovial damsel to the pleasure-house which was 
full of betel-leaves, seasoned with camphor and other things fit for 
enjoyment, which was graced with diamond lamps and looking glasses, 
which was decked with bedsteads. besmeared with sandal and constructed 
with the flowers of Champak. There they remained together, 

66-81. Then the destroyer of Madhu ate with pleasure the fragrant 
betel leaves offered to him by Radha. Radha, the mistress of the Rasa, also 
merrily chewed the botel given to her by Krisna When Hari gave 
Radha the betel-leaf chewed by him, the passionate Radha smiled and 
cheerfully and reverentially ate it up. Then Krisna demanded the betel- 
leaf chewed by Radha : she did not give it to him, but in fear threw herself 
prostrate at his feet. At this time Hari who was excited with passion slept 
on the bed with Radha with a view to enjoy sexual intercourse with hor. 
Then the most witty Hari committed with her eight kinds of sexual inter- 
course (adverse, ete.,) systematically assailed her with teeth, nail and hands 
and kissed her in eight mysterious Ways consistent with the doctrines of 
sexual science and delightful to the ladies. At the time of sexual inter- 
course the passionate Hari with the different members of his body embraced 
delightfully the different members of the bodies of the lustful damsels. Both 
Radha and Krigna were expert in matters relating to sexual Intercourse ; 
so the war of love knew no-intermission. Thus the lord of Radha assumed 
identical forms at one and the same time and entering into every chamber 
committed sexual intercourse with each, and every woman in the lovely 
sphere of the Rasa, Hari in the shape of a cowherd flirted with the milk 
maids inside the chambers and engaged with them in other Kinds of sports 
outside the chambers. In his intercourse with nine lakhs of milk-maids, 
he assumed nine lakhs of forms of cowherds. All combined constituted 
eighteen lakhs of cowherds and cowherdesses in the sphere of the Rasa, 
The hair of every one was dishevelled, the ornament of every one was torn ; 
and the dress of every one was shattered. That place solely resounded with 
the noise caused by armlets, bracelets „апі anklets. Every опе was 

infatuated with passion and fainted. After indulging in the sports on land, 
allofthem indulged in aquatie sports. With these gambols, they Mere 
exhausted. They then soon got up from the waters, put on their clothes, 
observed their lotus faces in the looking glass of gem and after haying 
applied to their bodies sandal, aloe, musk, perfume and put on fragrant 
wreaths they were restored to their normal condition. 

82-99, Afterwards the eighteen hundred thousand cowherds and с 
herdesses joyfully ate betel leaves perfumed with camphor and observe 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


x 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


232 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


their faces in pure looking-glasses. Some of the cow herdesses, being ex- 
cited with passion, out of fun forcibly took away the flute from the hands of 
Lord Krisna. Then they pulled his yellow dress. Some passionate girl 
dennded him of his clothes, took away his yellow garment and then in jest 


returned it to him. Some cow-herdess said to him, “ Listen to matters. 


relating to redemption.” So saying she held Krisna, the lord of „her lifo, 
embraced him again and again and kissed him on the cheek and bimba-like 
lips. Some cowherdess intentionally showed to him. her smiling lunar 
face full of glances, rising breast and delicate waist. Some of the milk- 
maids held their lord with.their hands, placed him in their laps and, cons- 
tructed for his head a crest associated with jasmine wreath. Some pulled 
his crest and attached to it the plumage of peacock. Others adorned the 
crest with wreaths of flowers, others fanned and tended the lord of their 
lives with white chowries. Other passionate girls besmeared his body 
with fragrant sandal. Some milk-maid snatched from some other milk-maid 
the flute and passionately gave it to her husband to add to their mutual 
love. Some cowherdess draggel another cowherdess, denuded her of 
clothes and seated her in the lap of Lord Krişna besmeared with sandal. 
Some danced and sang with Krisna in the centre ; others forcibly caused 
him to dance.: Krişna also out of fun, dragged the clothes of some milk- 
maid, made her naked and then returned the clothes to her. , Then he 
dragged Radha to her breast and prepared for her a charming chignon. He 
fixed on her head the mark of vormilion combined with the mark of musk 
and painted her cheek with lines of cosmetics. ` Then Lord Krigna care- 

fully decked her with lovely clothes chastened by fire, took hold of her lotus 
feet and adorned them with anklets. Не then polished her nails and dyed 
them with lac. ‘Then he adorned her with various kinds of ornamonts, 

annointed her body with perfume, her nock with garlands and kissed her 

lotus face, again and again. ‘Then the lord applied the collyrium paint to 

her eyes, suspended the precious pearl produced in the elephant/s head on 

the front of her nose and assailed her loins and rising breast with nails and 

her lips (red like bimbas) with his teeth. 


100-116. Then he played with Rûdhû on the coast of the pond in 


solitude and came back to the sphere of the Rasa. Thero he played with 
her to his entire satisfaction. There was moonshine outside the sphere. 
‘The bees were humming swoetly and the cuckoos singin in the sphero of 
the Каза bosmeared with flowors and sandal anl rendered fragrant by the 
carrying the sweet scent of the flowers and the sandal. Hari, the great 
spiritual vuide uf ascetics and ths thief of the hearts of the mill-maids 
wielded, soveral forms ugain and committed sexual intererouso with the girls. 
О Narada, at. that time, the anklets, bracelets and armlets resounded 
merrily. On account of this intercourse just initiated, there was a thrill 
of raptures agitating the figures of the milk-maids. Their hands and legs 
were веб in motion. They became almost senseless. When they 
recovered, Krisna ani the girls assailed ono another with teeth and nails. 
‘Heo assailed their breast, with his nails and impressed their hard loins also 
with Er UM nail. In that war of love, the cloth tied round their 
waist, their chignon and small bells slipped, арс ir lovely garment 
and toilet was ruffed: Шу Ө рай. Funding yide EUR p. 


тырп 


ече cms 


uem 


ды >. 


Ò R Й a 6 4 Digitized enm бе Salayu qus тү 


This book was taken from 
i the date last stamped. А fine of one 


or 
anna will be charged for each day the 
book is kept overdue 12 PZ. 
book is кер) py уай - La 9 
i к 
dL 
AM y 4 
= Ма, 289) =. 
Boenoez P pelis 


раен 


( CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


| un Б. 
891.962 EA 
3 
p. 7 
i 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE Dec 


“fs Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 

s E 
$ & 

چ 

„^^ 
a x 
S 1 
uw 


-. CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE- 


