===== Internet Archive OCR: 4679_djvu.txt =====


r _ 


Brahma and Prakriti Kkandas. 


■>-N ; 

Translated into English 


- 

Nath Sen, M. A., LL. B„ 
High Court, N. W. P, 


PUBLISHED BY 

OFF5CB, BHUVANESHWARI ASHRAM 
Bahadurgon], Allahabad. 

1920. 




£ 



brahma and Prakriti Kkandas. 


Translated into English X 

BY 

Rajendra Nath Sen, At, A., LL. B. ( 
Vakil High Court, N. W, P, 

Jjfr■ t '/rrv 



PUBLISHED BY 

T«E PAN1N1 OFFICE, BHUVANESHWARI ASHRAM 
Bahadurganj, Allahabad. 

1920 . 




PREFACE. 

* 

I. have just completed the translation of: the Brahma Vaivarta Purina 
from Sanskrit into English. 1 respectfully beg to present the same to the - bar 
of public opinion ; and i shall deem my labours amply rewarded if these humble 
pages will meet with the approbation of my readers. 

■ This Pur&na is so called .because, it deals with Brahma (the Supreme 
Being) and determines His Divine attributes- Therefore Krisna, theembodimerit 
of the Supreme Being, the form in which hi chooses to manifest himself to his 
believers in the Goloka, (literally, the Cow-world) as well as the worlds below u 
naturally the hereof the mythology and ligures most prominently in the present 
volume. The sketch of the Goloka, the blessed region, which transcends the 
bounds of time and space as set by BrakmA to his own universe aud is supposed 
to bo suspended on the Vacuum merely by the will of Lord Krisna, its 
distinguished occupant, is likewise a master-piece. The work, in a word, makes 
a bold attempt. at the solution of the problem of creation and is a glowing tribute 
to the sterling merits and almost super-human talents of the great author. As 
regards the sallies of imagination and conception of lofty aud sublime ideao, this 
Pur Ana may aptly be said to bold its own against Miltonh; Paradise Lost or any 
other great epic that stands on a similar footing./ 

The work also deals in a considerable manner with various other topics 
such as"the genesis of Nature, the origin of the goddesses, (viz.* K&dhA, Lakgmt, 
Saraswati, DurgA, etc., representing the different faculties of Nature. It gives 
a brief account of the important Ilindu festivals and prescribes the mode of 
worship appropriate to each god or goddess. It also dwells incidentally upon 
the origin of the castes aud lays down most authoritatively code of morality 
or social rules* for their guidance. It expounds the theory of the Ivanna, draws 
a line of distinction between virtue *and vice and gives a vivid description of 
the different kiuds of hell-pita to which people are consigned, after their decease, 
according to the nature of their sins. We are also agreeably surprised to had 
in the book a disquisition on medicine which we gather from the interesting 
dialogue between Lord Hari disguised as a Brahmin hoy and yjfti&vati 
mourning" the death of her husband. But the legends in which the work 
abounds constitute its sine qua non , 

‘ Talking of the Purftnas, in general, mythology is the gift of these 
sacred volumes, ft helps to build up the Pur Arias and vests them with a 
charm whioh seldom fades and an interest, wiiich never flags, as the reader 
passes on from page to page. He is transported, as it were, by tulisroau, 
from one enchanted castie to another with a celerity that is astounding, tie 
is impelled from scene to scone by an ever-increasing curiosity which, feeds his 
patience and sustains his energy ; and, literally spell-bound, ho only pauses 
for breath till he comes to the end of the chapter. 

From the data furnished above, it is abundantly clear that the l uranaa 
essentially form a branch of the science of cosmogony, They deal, for the 
most part, with metaphysics, but in a manner which is peculiarly tuexr own. 











g 0 ck> in the first place, to combine the systems of ethics, philosophy 
?eoondly, they attempt to introduce the theories which they sdvc 
''^Kpby direct methods as adopted by the Daiaanas bat by way of episode und 
thro ^gh legends and tales which in charm and pathos and in the play of fancy 
beat hollow Spencer’s .Fairy Queen, r the Arabian Nights, Tales of Shakespeare’s 
aHMsummer Night’s Dreams. The crowning glory of the Puranas, however, 
consists in the metre which marks each and every line of the invaluable 
compositions. The whole body of the Pur&nas contains four hundred thousand 
verses; and the production of so many huge volumes of poetry, reciting fables 
and fictions, on the one hand and describing dry, jejune and abstruse subjects, 
on the other hand, is a task well worth the pen of an augel and a gigantic 
feat which falls nothing short of a miracle. 

But why are the Pur&nas so called, the term Puranam literally means 
old or ancient Hence it also moans a legeud*, a tale of the past or ancient 
or legendary history. But in the sense in which the term is now ordinarily 
used, it is the designation of the extensive class of the sacred and poetic 
compositions in Sanskrit and, in fact, comprehends the whole body of the Hindu 
mythology* 

The Pur&nas, generally treat of five topics called the Laksmanas; and t 
respectfully invite the attention of my readers to the concluding portion of 
the Brahm&- Vaivart a PurAna wherein this subject has been amply discussed. 

VAs to the age of the Puranas, there is a good deal of controversy; and 
the cloud of mystery which hangs round this contested point does not aeoih 
to have been thoroughly cleared up as yet. Antiquarian researches throw 
but little light on the problem ; and external evidence so far as it is available 
:3 not sufficiently convincing both as regards the age and authorship of the 
volumes. The internal evidence is, of course, furnished by the Puranas them¬ 
selves. We can quote extracts from the Pur&nas to show that they are the 
productions of Vy&sa. In the concluding portion of the first chapter of the 
BrahmH Khanda, for instance, it is distinctly stated that the Brahma Vaivarta 
Parana contains eighteen thousand vterses composed by Yyasa. Besides, there 
is a preponderance of weight in favour of the opinion attributing the authorship 
of the eighteen volumes of the Pur Unas to Vy&sa ; and to this view which 
receives substantial corroboration from the internal evidence as specified 
above, 1 am prepared to subscribe with all my heart in consideration of the 
towering fwraonality of the revered saint and the versatility of his genius 
which ia admitted on all hands and tells its own tale. It is, thereforo^clear that 
he Pur&nas must have been written about the same time as the JMah&bh&rata 
and the Brahma-Sfttras. 

As regards the merits of my translation, I, by no means, lay pretensions 
to immunity from fault?. Errors, I confess, might naturally have crept into 
my composition ; but I trust that the indulgent public will regard them in a 
spirit of toleration rather than criticism. 

I avail myself of this opportunity to express my acknowledgments to the 
manager, JP&nini Office, butfor whose courtesy and enterprise these pages would 
never have seen, the light of day. This philanthropic office, for the facility 
which it has been ail along rendering to place the sacred books of the Hindus 
within the reach of the English knowing public is justly entitled to the ever¬ 
lasting gratitude not only on the part of the educated ludians bub the entire 
civilised world * 

BAJENDRA NATH SEN. 





* mist# 



J 


% 


pensation with Katma by the service of Hari and 
amo wherein the .soul is settled 


he description of the 
XXXIII. 


CHAPTER 

The characteristic features of the hall-pits ... ... 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Description of the sublimity or grandeur of Lord Krisna ; revival of Satya- 
v ( 4n« ; etymology of the term SAvitrf .. ... ' 

CHAP T E R XXXV. 

A description of the nature or lik mees of Lakeraj ; also an account of her 
primordial worship 

CHAPTE R XXXVI. 

An account of India as cursed by Durv&sA ; attainment of a boon aud wisdom 
from Durv&sA by Indra deprived of grace 

CHAPTE R XXXVII. 

The consolation afforded by Vrihaepati to Indra who arrives a this th eshold ... 

0 H A FTER XXXVIII. 

India’s depart ore for the BrahmA-loka with the gods and the spiritual preceptor 
of fhe gods ; his subsequent departure for the Vaikuntha with BrahmA and other 
gods : the determination of the destruction of Mksmi by NftrAyana ; tlio recovery 
of Laksmi by the gods by churning the ocean according to Visnu’s counsel 

CHAP T E R XXXIX. 

Connected with the subject dealing with the question put by Indra as to the 
form of worship appropriate to Lakamh a description of the mantra (mystic formula), 
Dhy&n, method of worship, eulogies etc, sacred to Mahft-Laksmi ... ... 

C H A PT J£ R XL. 


Anecdote of HwAhA 


Anecdote of 0w ad lift 


CHAP T B H XLI. 


CHAPTE R XL1I. 


Yagna 


Anecdote of DakeinA ;aud a recitation of the ode to DaksinA as composed by 


CHAPTE ft XLIII. 


Anecdote of Snsthl ; and a description of the worship and the eulogies sacred 
to this goddess as composed by king Priya-vrata ... 

*CH A PT ER XLIV % 

Anecdote of MuigabChandf ; and u description of. the forms of worship, 
meditation, mystic formula and eulogies sacred to this goddess 

CHAPTER XL V. 

Anecdote of ManasA and the etymology of the twelve names of MauasA 

CHAPTER XL VI. 

The mUnPage of MauasA with Jagat-KAru ; the birth of A«tika : the preser¬ 
vation of the race of snakes by A.stika on the occasion of the ceremony of the 
sacrifice of snakes performed by Jan me jay a ; the recital of the ode to ManasA as 
composed by Indra ... ... ... ... . ... 

C H A P £ E R XLVII. 

The anecdote of $urabhi and eulogies sacked to her ... „ t 



175 

m 

183 

184 
191 

193 

195 

IDS 

200 

202 

206 

208 

210 

211 

215 



C vi 3 

CHAFTIR 


XLVTI1 


.~ite declaration by S’ivix to PA,rvtitl of tho etymology of the term B&dbJ a,K ' 
atftaequent uarratip» by him of the anecdote oi B&ctilE 


§L 


217 


CHAP T E R XLIX. 


The amorous diversions of VirajA with lord Krisna ; the disappearance of 
j.ijrd Krisna through fear of RAdhfi ; the transformation of Vivaja into a river ; 
the quarrel of R$dh& and S’rid&ma' and the curses pronounced by the one against 
the-other ... 


219 


222 


CHAPTER L. 

Curse pronounced by a Brahmin against king Suyagpa 

CHAPTER LI and CHAPTER LIL 

Counsel administered to the king by the a ttendant Ri$ie (saints) undei the 
pretext of propitiating the guest — — 46 ftmt 

C H A FT E R LIII. 

rtapft 

R 


Advice given to the king by tho guest Butn 

C H A P T E 


LIV. 


Incidental reference to the me 8 H. 1 r 0 .nent of time ... the treatise, mainly 
dealimr with the likened of Lord Krisna i oologies on tne water with which the 
foot of a Brahmin are washed ; interview of Bftdha and Kns,,a secured by king 
Snyngnn by dint of hfi devotiorm pTB R Jj y 


The form of worship appropriate) to BiUlhil ; and odi to RiidhA as composed by 
Lord kiisiio ... CH ; ApTE - 5 j.vi.. 

The amulet of EadhJ ... ••• ••• 

C H A P TE » LVIl. 

The etvmoloev of the sixleen names of Dnrgi shown in the anecdote of Dnrgft 

JJieety. g) 0 H A P T E R L'VIII. 

The rape of Tftrft as referred to in the narrative of the descendants of Saratha 
incidentally cooneoted with the description of the grandeur or glory of the goddesses 
nmUhe removal by Sakrachhyya of the si;, which beset the Moon-god ... 

CHAP T E It LIX. 

The sojourn or cueamprueut of the gods assembled for war at the coas. of 
Narmada at the command of Lord Krisnii ? and the departure for Vrihaspati for 

** m * *” . CHAPTER LX. 

The discourse between S’iva and Vrihaspati : their advance towards the coast 
. of tho Narmada ; Brahm&’s arrival at Sakr&ohA.i'yya's place in the capacity of an 

envoy of V isn't ... o EA P T E it LX I." 

The restoration of Tara to BrahmA, by Sakra ; the birth of Budha ; the 

recovery of TM by Vrihaspa 4 ; ; the reapedJivegeneologica of Saratha and the Vaiftya 

Discourse between Suratha and Modhasa 

CHAPTER LXIII. 


Interview of 'Sara&dbi, the Vai§ya with the goddess Nature and his redemption 

O H A P T E R LX IV. 


The method of the worship c£ Nature as preset 1 R ed by Suratha 

OH A P T E R LXV. 

The fruits reaped bv the worship of the goddess Nature; the calculation 

f4UaM CHAPTER LXVT 

Narration of hymn and amalefc of Durga by N^rayana „ ... 


S 


22s 


230 


&36 


240 

243 


244 


24 A 


251 


255 

258 

260 

2«1 


265 

267 




TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


BRAHMA KHANDA 


CHAPTER I. 

Page, 

Invocation of the Deity and Introduction ... ... ,,, \ 

CHAPTE H II. 

Determination of the Mature of tbo Supreme Being ... ... 4 

CHAPTER III. 

Determination of creation, the manifestation of N&r&yana and other goth 
from tho body of Lord Krisna ; ode to Lord Kriinaas recited by these godts ... 5 

CHAP T E R IV. 

The manifestation of S&vitri etc ; the origin of the universe of Brahmft ; tho 
account of the birth of the great Vir&taor Mah&-Visnu ... ... ... 10 

C H AFTER V. 

The calculation of time ; the birth of R&dhft in the sphere of the B&sa (circa* 
ifli dance of the oowherdesses with Krisna in tho centre) ; tho gift of conveyances 
or vehicles to S'iva etc., description of the genesis of Gupyaka etc ... ... U 

CHAPTE R VI. 

The gift of a«boon by Lord Krisna to S anfeara ; the etymology pf the name 
of S'iva : tho injunction of Lord Krisna to BrahmA with a view to creation ... 1:1 

CHAPTER VII. 

The creation of the earth etc,, by Brahma ... ... IB 

CHAPTER VIII. 

The origin of the Vedas and other sacred books ; the birth of Manu (the son 
of tho self-existent Brahma) ; the birth of the eons begotten of the ruind ; the 
birth of Pulastya and other saints ; liability of BrahmA and N&rada to curses which 
they pronounce against ono another ... ... ... 

CHAPTER IX. 

Tho creation of Kagyapa and others ; the birth of Mangala out of the womb 

of the Earth ; on account of tho race of KaSyapa ; the our&e prononuced against the 

Moon-god by Dak&a, the lord of creation ; the gift of a boon by Visnu to the Moon 

seeking tho protection of S'iva ; the departure of the Moon with Dakar,, the Lord of 
creation ••• ••• ... ... ... ... 23 

CHAPTE JR X. 

In connection with the subject dealing with tho theory of caetes a narration 
of the (jrcumstnnoes showing tho liability of GhritAohJ and Viswa-KarmA to curses 
which they pronounce against o^e another ; determination of th.ir mutual 
relations ... ... ... ... 29 

CHAPTER XI. 

In connection with the subject dealing with, the removal of* the curse which 
was pronounced against Viswa-Karmfi, eulogies on Visnu, the Vaisnavas and the 
Br&hmins ... ... ... ... m 36 





C ii 3 

CHAPTEfl XII. 

r 'he birth of Nftrada in the shape of Upa varhana, tho Gandarva 

CHAPTER XIII, 

The death of Upavarhana, - prey to Brahm&'e curse ; lamentations of 
Mftlftvatx ... 

CHAPTER XIV. 

The advent of Visnu to Mftl&vatl's place in the shape of a Br&hmin boy; 
dialogue between the Br&hmin and M&l&vati ; recital of the fruits of karma 

OH API E R XV. 

Dialogue between Mftl&vati and mia-Puruaa (Time personified, an attendant 
of Ytuna or Plato) » * * " »•» *«» I*. 

CHAPIE R XVI. 

A treatise on medical science 

CHAP HE R XVII. 

Ode to Yismi as connected with the snbjfict dealing with the discourse 
between the Brahmins aud the gods' ... 

CHAPTER XV III. 

Ode to tho Supreme Being, as composed by Mgi&v&tl and the resuscitation 
of Upavarhana ... ... ... ,,, 

CHAP T E R XIX, 

The amulet sacred to the Supreme Being oalled the BmhtA&nidft-Pavana (or 
thacnuctifier of the whole universe of Brahmft) ; the recitation of the ode to S’iva 
as compiled by Btinft, the demon ... ... ... 

CHAP T E R XX. 

The birth of XJm varhana, the Gandarva out of the womb of a Sfidra woman 

CHAPTER XXI. 

The etymology of the name of N&rada a id the removal of the cm’seHo which 
ha was subject ... ... 

0 H A P T E R XXIL 

The determination of the otymology of the names of Nftmda aud other sons of 
Brahma ... •** *»• ... * ’ *«t» *'■» ^ 

CHATTE R XXIII, 

Discourse between BrahmA and Natuda ... 4i . ... «... 

Q H A P T E R XXIV. 

The injunction of Brahma to N&rada to go to the S’iva-loka with a view to 
take Manfc/a from S'iva 

CHAPTER XXV. 

The meeting of S iva and NIrada 

C H A PIER XXVI. 

The gift of Krispa’s mantra to NArada by Siva and a treatise or the daily 
worship (or diurnal,rites) 

C H A P T E Pv XXVII* 

Determination of the articles of food which are permitted or prohibited 

ohXpteh XXVIII. 

Determination pf the natur e of the Su preifie Being (Brahma) ; the attainment 

’ ’' t . ; v 



Page. 

40 


42 

47 

49 

51 

54 

57 

59 

62 

64 

66 

67 

69 

71 

n 

75 




the genesis of the 


III. 


IV. 

doecriptiou of her Dhyftnn 

V. 


r i 


.0l a boon from 8’tva by Nftrada ; the departure of N&rada for the hermitage of the 
saint NArAyana, at the command of S’iva ... ... 

0 H A P T E R XXIX, 
luterrogatoriea by NArada to NWyanft ... 

CHAPTER XXX. 

' 

A disquisition on the likeness or essence of the Lord (Krisna) ... 

PPAKRITI-KHANDA. 

CHAP T E R I. 

A short account of the essence of Nature 

CHAPETR II. 

Etyraotogy:.«>f the word S’akti (energy) and oLher words 
gods a»d gotlclesses ... 

CHAPTER 

Calculation of the worlds 

CH A PTER 

Tne form of worship sacred to Saraewati ; a 
(mental representation of her form and qualities) 

CHAP TE R 

Ode to Saraewatt, as composed by YAgna 

CHAPTER Vi. 

The mutual quarrel of Saraswatj, Laksmi and GangA ; eurwes proncnncad by 
them against one another ; and the transformation of their bodies to rivers 

Chapter vit . 

The determination of the virtues of K&U (time personified), Kali and god ... 

CHAPTER VIII. 

The geneBia of the Earth ; the form of worship sacred to her: the Dhy&n 
sacred to the earth ; a recital of her odes etc, ,,, 

CHAPTER IX. 

A narrative or anecdote of the Earth : the fruits secured by gift of land 

’CHAPTER X. ' 

Ancdote of GangA ; the introduction (bringing) of GangA into the earth by 
Bhagirnfcha ; the eulogies and forms* of worship sacred to GangA 

0 HAPIEE xr. 

Rebuke administered to Lord Krisna by R&dhA : a subjeet incidentally 
mentioned in the treatise dealing with the* etymology of the term Visnivpadi 
applicable to GangA ; the refuse taken by GangA in the feet of Krisna through fear 
of RAdt>A about to drink the Ganges water ; the emanation of GangA from the feet 
of Lord Krisna at the prayer of BrahraA and others 

CHAPTER XII. 

The marriage of NArAyana with GangA ... 

CHAPTE R XIII. 

The anecdote of Tulst (holy basil) and a sketch of her pedigree ... 

CH A PI E R XIV. 

The anecdote of Veda«Vati and a brief description of RtmAvana 

CH A PIER XV. 



77 


30 


bi 


83 


89 


92 


95 


98 


99 


104 


108 


Ill 


112 


119 


123 


124 


129 


/ o; 



f ‘y 1 


A* / m ' 

l.P'&Jrfje birth of Tulst ; hot devotions in the hermitage of Badarikit (jujube) ; 
he i itainmeat of a boon by her from Bralimft 

CHAPTER XVI. 

The arrival of S’ankha-Cbfldu at the hermitage of Tulsi ; their marriage ; the 
departure of the gods for the, Vaikuntha r the represeation by the gods to Vtsuu of 
KJm or oppressions caused byS’aukba-Cbftda ; the gift of a spear by V.snu to 
Siva for tho destruction of the demon 

CHAPTER XVII. 

The deeoatch of an ambassador to S’ankha-Ohftda by S’iva challenging him to 
figlu ; a description of the dalliance or amorons paatimea of S aukka-Obfidtt wlth Tl,sS 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

The military expedition of S’ankhft-Cb&da and his diaooursc with S’iva 

CHAPTER XIX. 

The battle between both the armies mounted on chariots ; the defeat of 
(ffirtika ; the fight between Kirtika and S’ankha-Ohfifla ... 

CHAPTER XX. 

The purloin of S’aukha-Chftda’s amulet by Vianu in the guise of an old 
.Brahmin ; the destruction of S’ankha-ChMa by 8’iva ; the production of conches out 
of tho skeleton of Sankha-Chfula 

CHAPTER XXI 

'irr b Aii:„ kb :rt* h ; 

5i.iL.i- f «"» *<—»' *nu» nw, 

atone) and a recitation of the virtues of the said stone 

CHAPTER XXII 

The eight names of Tfilst ; and the form of worship appropriat e to her 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Conuae’ given by ParASnra to Aftwspafi ; tho Dhy&o and form of worship 
appropriate to^vitrf; a description of tho ode to Bftv.trt as composed by Brahma... 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

The marriage of S&vitrt and Btya-V&oa ; the departure of Satya-vftoa for the 
next, world” « delineation by Yama to Sftvitn of the theory of Karma or, the 

univeisctl law of causality _ 

CHAPTER XXV. 

A discourse between Savitct aud Yama ... 

CHAPTERS XXVI and XXVII. 

The attainment of a boon by 8&vitr! from Yama ; the auspicious subject of 
Karma VipVka (the future reward or punishment being the consequence of one . own 
v ._ 1.^1 iv«r Varna nml attended to by S/lvitii •• -107 



m 


m 

137 

HO 

143 

145 

147 

150 

151 

154 * 
355 


acts ) aaLcited hy Yama and attended to by Sitvitr* 

J CHAPTER XXV III. 

Ode to Yama as sompoaod by Sftvitrt ... 

C H A P T E R XXIX. 

The number of the hell-pits ... **’ VVV1 

CHAPTERS XXX and XXXI. 

Description of the distinct hells asaigned to distinct einnere according to the_ ^ 
nature of their sins ... - - • *** 

CHAPTER aXXII. 


aud 159 
164 
164 


WIN isr fiy 





i i ■ j/ 

9 


The Brahnia-Vaivarta Parana. 


B R A H M A-K H A N D A. 


CHAPTER I. 


1-5. I bow to til 0 Supreme Lord who is Eor ever worshipped by Ganesa, Siva, 
Brahma, Indra, Ananta, the goddesses of Fortune and Knowledge called Lakfmt 
and Saraswati respectively and other deities and also by Manu and the beat of 
saints.. I adore the Eternal Hari whose body is manifest in the grossest form, 
surpassing the grossest of all material objects, who sustains endless universes 
on the pores of llis skin and who at the time of creation was united with HI Ay A, 
the principle of unreality, and, by dint of Elds might, created the whole world 
which teems with animate and inanimate objects. I contemplate the Supreme 
Being who is all volition, free from desire who transcends the limits of the 
three properties of nature and who, out of compassion for his devotees, assumes 
the form of Syam-Sundura, literally dark-coloured and beautiful, a form which 
is indescribable. I adore the imperishable Eternal Brahma, Sri Kri§ua, from 
whom have sprung nature and along with hor BrahmA, VTsnn, Mahesa and 
other deities. Vy&sa, the holy saint, on the hypothesis that the goddess of 
knowledge is the heavenly cow who yields all desires and that the Vedas 
are her calves, milked the BrahmA-Vaivarta PnrAna out of the said cow which 
13 extremely sweet and just like neotar; therefore, 0 foolish mortals, if you wish 
to relieve yourself from the troubles of (he world, you had better incessantly 
drink the said milk and after having adored the god VAsudeva and, afterwards, 
NArAyana, Nara, Narottama, Sarswati and VyAsa, you ought to recite the 18 
Pu rAnas apd other works. 

6-13. In days of yore, in the shrine of NaimisAranya situated in India, once 

upon a time, Saunaka and other saints were seated on asanas, that is seats made 
of holy grass, after having performed the daily customary rites and casual core- 
monies, when Sauti, the best of saints, arrived there and bowed to them with 
humility. The &i§is> also, as soon as they saw him greeted him. Thereupon 
the great saint, Saunaka, conversant with the PurAnas and of a tranquil dis¬ 
position, with pleasure and religious fervour, duly worshipped Sauti, an adept 
in the PurAna3 and the very personification of tranquillity; and after the latter 

was relieved of the fatigues of his journey, abked him of his welfare. Sannaka, 
in the presence of all the saints, with great humility, queried Sauti, anent the 
Par Anas, a subject which is pleasing to the ears ami full of narratives with* re¬ 
gard io Krisna, which is clearly an embodiment and depositary of good, from 
which everything gOQil in the world can bo obtained, which is the originator 
of all good and destroyer of all evil, which breeds devotion in H>ri, brings 


1 






happiness and redemption and, to crown all, imparts knowledge of the true or 
essential nature of things and the study of which is calculated to promote the 
number of sons, grand-sons and wives. At that time, Sauti, surrounded by the 
saints, began to look like the moon adored by the stars of heaven. 

14-23. Suanaka said, “0 Muni, where do you propose to go to and whence 
are you coming? Are you well ? What an auspicious day it is for Us, in that we 
have an occasion to see a saint like you, for it appears that you have come to 
ns in view of the fact that we, though desirous of redemption, are immersed in 
the sea of the world absolutely devoid of the knowledge of the essence of crea¬ 
tion and afraid of the prowess of Kaliyuga ! You have entirely solved the mys¬ 
teries of the Puranas and are hence aptly styled Paurftnic, that is, one versed in 
the Pur&nas. Your kindness is unbounded. 0 you, of good fortune, at this 
iisne kindly recite to us some Parana which will give us such knowledge as is 
likely to engender in our mind devotion to Sri Krigna, a devotion which is 
oven greater than redemption and strikes an axe at the root of all karma, 
Predestiharianism, which renders a man liable for his acts. By dint of the 
faith in Krisna, the chain of delusion which ties men down to worldly affairs 
is cut asunder. The faith in Krisna is just like the rain o£ nectar to those 
who are constantly consumed by the conflagration of this temporal world; add 
without faith in Krisna, mortals are incapable of enjoying bliss or happi¬ 
ness in any way. Son, please call memory to your aid and narrate to us that 
Parana which deals specifically with certain subjects below—•namely, the 
Pur&na which describes the Eternal BrahnuA, as the seed or root cause of all 
things and which deals with the work of His creation; the Pur&na which deals 
with the question whether the Supreme Being is corporeal or formless, as to 
how He is adored and contemplated and how the Vaisnavas, anchorites and 
saints worship Him and as io whose opinion prevails in the Vedas; the Purina 
which deals with the form.of nature, the indications of property and determi¬ 
nation of the sublime. 

24-42. Describe to tjs the Pur&na which relater in detail the different kinds 
of worlds, namely, the Goloka, the tfiva-loka, the Vaikuntha, the Purana which 
deals with the parts as distinct from the whole, with nature and her different 
modifications and with the soul as apart from the matter; the Pur&na which 
deals with the gods and goddesses of mystio origin, with the creation of the sea, 
the mountain and the river; the Pur&na which treats of things which are parts 
of nature, of digits or digits of digits, their essence, the way in which they are 
worshipped or celebrated by hymns; the Purana which deals with the wonder¬ 
ful and immortal narrative of Radhik& and fully describes the incidents re¬ 
lating to Durga, Saraswati, LaksmS and S&yitrl; the Par&na whiob deals with 
the law of Karma, the extermination of Kanria, with hell and redemption from 
sin; the Parana which assigns to mortals different kinds of births by virtue 
of their merits and demerits; the diseases to which they are subject and the acts 
by which they relieved; the Purina which treats,of Manai&, Tulsi, Kali, 
and Gang&; the Purana which deals with the Sacred Stone typical of Vi$nu, 
with chartty, morality, and sin, .with the character of Oranoya, hia birth and 
deeds, his secret amubt, his hymn and incantations^ a wonderful subject about 



brabma - kbanda . 


we never heard anything before; the FurSlna which treats of the inoar- 
nation of the Supreme Being Sri Krisna in the sacred land of India. 0 Saint, 
fetidly narrate to ns some wonderful Pur&na which is full of narratives, the au¬ 
dience of which immediately produces the feeling cf asceticism; the Purina which 
lets us know of the house of the individual wherein Krisna was born and of 
the woman who by giving birth to Him was honoured and truly blessed; the 
Purflna which unfolds to us the following points: where Sri Krisna went to 
and with what object in view after his incarnation; what works He accomplished 
and why and at whose instance He relieved the earth of her burden and maintained 
the dignity of the world and why He went back to the Goloka, that is, the Cow- 
world. This is a subject which is calculated to purify the mind, which is in¬ 
comprehensible even to the Munis and with regard to which questions have 
been put or not put according to the scope of cue’s intelligence. For a good 
master is truly he who inculcates his pupils on any subject irrespective of the 
fact that they are inquisitive or not; who regards the fit or the unfit among his 
pupils with strict impartiality. 

43*52. Saati said, “The sight of the lotus of your feel has conferred upon 
me all benefit. I am coming from Sidheiwar and X shall go to the hermitage of 
N&rayana. I have come here to Naimis&rauya, a sacred place in India, in order 
to bow to the Brlihmanas after having blessed myself with their sight. &'nf 
one who owing to ignorance does not bow to a Br&hmana, a god, or his spiri¬ 
tual master is never disentangled from the snares of time so long as the sun 
and the moon are in existence. Hari, the Lord of the universe, is 
roaming throughout India in the shape of a Br&hmana ; therefore only virtuous 
men on account of fcheir merits bow to Hari in the guise of a Br&hmana. 0 Lord, 
X am conversant with all things with regard to which you have questioned me. 
They are all mentioned in detail in that excellent Pur&na which is the substance 
of all the Purftnas. 

This Purftna dispels the delusion of the other Puranas, that is, the secondary 
treatises on the Pur&nas or minor Puranas and the Vedas and produces faith 
in Hari. This is calculated to promote the knowledge of the reality or essence 
of things. This Pur ana yields, to the desirous, the object of their desire, gives 
redemption to those who aspire for it and engenders pious faith iu the mind of the 
Vaisnavas. In fact, it is juftt like the Kalpa tree, a celebrated tree supposed to 
fulfil all desires. The first canto of this Parana describes the Supreme Being, 
the cause of the universe, in whose meditatiou the ascetics, the virtuom? men 
and Vai§navas are always absorbed. Between these people practically there 
is no difference. They receive appellations according to the development of 
their intellect Association with good men styles people virtuous, later 
on, association with the ascetics makes them yogis; and in course of time, 
they are «tyled Vaisrmvas, a rank higher than the last two, when they unite 
with the Vai§navas. 

53*60. This canto treats of all the gods and goddesses and their origin. 
Tho canto which deals with nature gives in detail an auspicious account of all the 
goddesses. In the Brahma-part the processes of the development of Kanna; the 
determination of the Salagram, (the Holy stone) the amulet, the hymn, the 
incantation and worsiiip appertaining to the goddesses have been specified. 
This canto also deals with the features of goddess. Nature, *the characterisei^g 





wwisr#. 


THE BRAHAIA-VAlVARTA PDRAJHA . 


'of the digits and the fame and might of the goddesses. This canto also tolls 
us about the ultimate destination of the virtuous and vicious to places of 
happiness and misery ; delineates hell and the diseases and points out methods 
of redemption. Later on in the Ganesa Khanda or part, tile birth of Ganesa, 
his nature unattainable by the Vedas, the mystic amulet, hymn and incantation 
are put down. Then follows the part which relates to the birth of Sri Krisna 
and’deeds which He performed in the sacred land of India, namely, the unload¬ 
ing of the earth of her burden, His auspicious games and amusements and the 
maintenance of the prestige of the virtuous. 

61-69. 0 best of saints, I have just told you about the excellent Pur&na divi¬ 
ded into 4 cantos which is a clue to all religions. It is the host of all the I ur&nas 
as it is connected with the Vedas and inasmuch as the Brahma is fully described 
in it,- it is oalled the Brahma-Vaivarta Purina. This sfttra (literally string, hence, 
system) of the Pur&nas, in the beginning 8ri Krisna, the Supreme being, in 
the Cow-world which in exempt from all evil and disease, first gave to Brahma 
who in his tarn handed it over in the grand place of pilgrimage called the 
Puakara to Dharraa, (Virtue incarnate). Thereupon Dharcna gladly gave 
it to his son N&r&yana, and the latter saint gave it to N&rada, N&rada on the 
brink of the Ganges gave it to Vy&sa who made a brief sketch of the 
grand interesting narrative and, in the sacred Siddhaksetra, handed it over to mo. 
O lord, I have described to you its history in brief, now hear it in detail. A 
man may get the same reward by reading one chapter of this work that he is 
likely to get by reading 18 thousand slokaa of this Piy&na composed by V yasa. 


CHAPTER II. 

1. Saunaka said, 0 Saufci, I heard from you matters solicited by us the ex¬ 
cellence of which cannot bo described in words. Kindly narrate to us the whole 
Brahma-Khan da in detail. 

2-5. Sauti said, I bow to that Spiritual Leader Hari of immeasurable strength 
and, aftor having adored Hari, the gods and the Brahtnanas, I commence the 
narration of tho subject dealing with the eternal religion. The excellent Brahma- 
Khanda which I heard,from Vy&sa is calculated to remove the gloom of igno¬ 
rance and like a lantern, leads us to tho path of knowledge. 0 best of saints, 
in Che beginning, at tho time of 4 pralaya ’ that is universal destruction, only 
a mass of indestructible light, the cause of endless effulgent worlds bright like 
millions of suns, was in existence. 

6-16. Within the radiant light of that absolutely self-defcerminingrHari, lay 
dissolved tlie three all-fascinating worlds. 0 best of saints, above these throe worlds 
lies the Oow-wor!d, imperishable like tho Deity, rouud like a circle and extended 
over an area of 24 crores of miles. That extensive world, constituting a land 
of gem is an embodiment of light. Even in dream the Yogis are incapable of 
enjoying its vision. The land is only capable of being seen* or attained by the 
Vaisnavas. That.Cow-world, devoid of mental or bodily pain, disease or decre¬ 
pitude or death, sprro v and fear, is 6xed in the sky solely by tho meditative 
power of the Supreme Being# In that Oow-world, countless temples made o£ 
excellent ge ns are displaying their splendour. In the s$U world, at the time 







&RAF1MA-RHAN1)A. 


of the great destruction, only Lord Krisna and, at the time of creation, cow¬ 
herds and Oow-herdesses reside* Sooth of it 122 orores of miles downwards, 
the Vaiktmtha, on the right, and the Sivaloka on the left side (both of them 
as charming as the cow-world) are situated. The Vaikuntfea is extended over 
an area of eight crores of miles and is round like a circle. It is non-existent at 
the time of the great destruction and, at the time of creation, it is connected 
with the figures of Laksmi and Nftr&yana. In the Vaikuntha, durmg the 
sojourn of Laksmi and N&r£iyana, the retinue of Narftyana who has foiir hands 
and who is exempt from death, decrepitude etc , also reside* On the left side 
the Sivaloka occupies an area of eight crores of miles. It is non-existent at the 
time of the gieafc destruction and at the time of creation it is connected with 

the ngures of Siva and his retinue. In the interior of the Cow-world, there 
shines a beautiful light which is the very embodiment and source of supreme 
happiness. The ascetics, by virtue of their asceticism, contemplate the said 
light with the eye of wisdom. Behind this enrapturing invisible excellent 
light, beams forth the resplendent delightful image of the Eternal Being. 
Bis colour is like the aspect of a new cloud ; His^eyes, like red lotuses. His 
face is replete with the glory of the full moon of spring. 

17-27. In a word, His delightful grace is the receptacle of ihe waves of 
beauty appertaining to a hundred thousand Cupids, He is vested with two hands 
and a flute, puts on a yellow garb and has a smiling appeareanee. Aind to hia 
adherents, He is decorated with excellent gems. His whole body is anuointed 
with sandal, musk and saffron paint. His breast is mrnked with a cur] of hair 
and adorned with that celebrated gem called Kaustubha. He holds, on his her.d 
a crown and diadem made of excellent gems. That Eternal Bemg is seated on a 
royal throne. He is full of self-determination and the cause of alj. He is sup¬ 
remely good and the receptacle of everything. Dressed as a cow-herd, He looks 
tender in age. ■ The glory of that perfect Being always prone to favour His ad¬ 
herents, is equivalent to the beauty c£ 10 millions of full moons. He is ex¬ 
empt from desire and incorruptible by nature. All gqod c«n bo attained 
through Him. He is holy and the source and embodiment of good. Ho oc¬ 
cupies the central figure in tbe dance of the cow-herds and cow-tjerdesses and 
lie is the Lord presiding ever the dance. His face, as such, is tranquil, and 
He is the cause of supreme happiness and brings about the accomplishment of 
one's desires. This Being is true, incorruptible, inexhaustible or imperishable 
and is an embodiment of the accomplishment of all objects. He transcends 
the three properties of nature, and has an eternal image. He is the primary 
cause of the universe and indescribable, He transcends nature, in fact, and is in¬ 
voked iby many. The Vaisnavas, gifted with the virtue of tranquillitly, wor¬ 
ship that Hari, independent and matchless, the very image of pence. The 
Deity who hhs got no second, the wiolder of the form as described above, be¬ 
fore creation beheld the whole universe with all its sides and space'all around, 
and found it absolutely vo : d. 

0 B A P TER III. 

1-9. 0 best of the Br&hmanas, thereupon the Deity who is self-determining 

and requires no support, when He beheld that the whole universe was.absolute¬ 
ly denuded of life, wind, trees, mountains, grain and crops, ebsbfoudeJ in dark- 
ness, and fearfully void,.bforfghfc contemplation to His aid and began to create 




TBS BRAH Af.A-V AlV ART A PURAiVA. 






ISL. 


$SL 

- 4be world o£ His own free will and volition. At; once, from Bis right aide, 
the three qualities of nature, incarnate, the cause of all creation, emanated, 
first in order. Afterwards, the spirit of the sublime, the principle evolved from 
nature being the fundamental intellect and first step towards creation emana¬ 
ted from the virtues. Egotism emanated from the spirit of the sublime; and 
from egotism came out the five subtle and primary elements, namely—form, 
taste, smell, touch and sound. Subsequently, from the right side leaped out a 
being, the lord N&r&yana, dark iu colour, youthful, clad in yellow garb, vest¬ 
ed with four arms and decorated with a wreath of forest flowers. A gentle smile 
was playing on his lips and his four hands were respectively decorated with 
conches, wheel, club and lotus. He was ornamented with gems and the Kau- 
siubha. He had a bow connected with horns. The charming grace of his 
face vied with the vernal moon; his breast was adorned with a tuft of* hair. 

The lord of Lak§mt vied with Cupid in grace. Then he worshipped Sri Kri?na 
and adored Him thus: 

10-17. 0 Lord, Thou art the subject, the object and the author of good. 

Thou art the cause of everything, the embodiment of effect, and the cause of all 
cause and also the effect. Thou art the devotee of devotees, the embodi¬ 
ment of. devotion and thou-also yieldest fruits of devotion, I bow to thee 
who art sombre in appearance like the deep dark cloud, just visible in the sky. 
delightful and replete with thine own essence. Though exempt from desire, 
thou art the embodiment of desire. Thou feelesfc desire and at the same time 
art the author of all desires. Thou art identical with all objects and at the 
same time the author of all objects. There is none superior to fhoe; thou art 
the cause of everything. Thou art the Vedas and the very embodiment of 
the fruits (reward) as described in the Vedas. Thou art the fountaiu-head of 
the Vedas, and through thee, all people attain the fruits as described in the 
Vedas. Thou art the knower and the dispenser of the Vedas; and oi: all who 
know the Veda3, thou art the best.” After having said so with profound de¬ 
votion, at* the command of the Supreme Being, he took his seat in front of 
Him on a beautiful throne of gem. Whoever devoutly in the morning, noon 
and evening reads the above hymn as composed by N&r&yana is absolved 
from all kinds of sins. Anyone who is anxious to got a son or a wife or re¬ 
gain a lost Kingdom or fortune succeeds in his design by reading this hymn. 
Any person who loses his liberty is thereby certainly released. A diseased 
person who listens attentively to the above hymn for a year is cured of all 
malady. 

18-23. Later on, from the left side of the Supreme Being, sprang the five 
headed Mabesa, stark naked, fair iu complexion like pare crystal. He had the 
resplendent glory of gold purified by fire; his head was decked with a twisted look 
of hair. A genjtle smile was playing ou his cheerful countenance beaming like 
lotas; each one of his faces was possessed of three eyes, big forehead was crown¬ 
ed with the moon. The master of the masters of Yogis, the author of all 
prosperity, one who has achieved alibis objects, lie was hofding iu his lotus¬ 
like hands the trident, the spear and the rosary of beads. He is the embodi¬ 
ment of death ami full of wisdom. This deity is Siva, the conqnerer of death, 
who is foil of happiness born of wisdom and the dispenser of profound wisdom* 




j 3RAFIMA-KHANDA. 


His charming appearance puts to shame even the full moon. He is pleasing to 
the sight, he is the best of the Vatsnavas and resplendent with the energy erf the 
Supreme Being. With tears in his eyes and with his body agitated with rapture 
for the love of Krisna, with folded palms and iu a faltering tone he placed himself 
before Lord Krisna and worshipped him thus t— 

24-29. (i l adore thee, 0 Lord, who art the best of those who grant victory, 
who art the cause of victory and, thyself invincible, the impersonation of victory 
itself. Thou art the Lord, the cause, the support of the universe and at 
the same lime the embodiment* of the entire universe. Thou art the preserver 
and the destroyer of the universe. Thou bostoweat fruit (result); thou art the 
essence of tho fruit, the receptacle of the fruit, and thyself, the embodiment of 
the fruit. Thou takest birth in the world in various shapes. Thou art the 
best of those who wield power, the giver of power, nay, power incorporate” 
Mah&deva, after having worshipped and accosted Lord Krisna in this way. at 
His command, took his seat on a throne of gem. Anyone who, attentively and 

with concentrated mind, reads the versos composed by S ! va gainu all bis ob¬ 
jects and attains victory at every step. His friends, fortune and prosperity 
always multiply and his sins, calamities and all his enemies perish. 

30-40. Sauti said, “Thereafter a very old anohorite with the waierpot of asce¬ 
tics in his hand sprang from his abdomen. He is the lord of artists, has got four 
faces and is the father and preceptor of all. His dress and tuft of hair are all 
white. This god is the beatowor of all prosperity, the yielder of tho fruits of 
devotion the creator, the dispenser, the author and remover of all karma. 
This Brahma is the abode of mercy, the dispenser of the four Vedas in which he 
is well versed. His appearance is tranquil, his nature, graceful. He is the 
husband of S&vitrl, (the mother of the Vedas) as well as or Saraswali the god¬ 
dess of knowledge. Brahma, with all his body agitated with joy and with 
folded palms and, with a submissive attitude, sat before Krisna and worshipped 
him thus:—“ I adore thee, 0 Lord, who transoendest the three properties of 
nature, who art unspeakable and known by the names of Goviuda and Krisna 
and assuinest the form of a cow-herd. Thou art dark in aspect like a now 
cloud and beautiful Hke 10 millions of Cupids. Thy appearance is tranquil and 
enchanting. Thou art the Lord of R&sa (a kind of cow-herd danoe). Intent 
upon this game, thou revellest in the circle of the R&sa in the Vrind&vnna. 
BrahmA, after haying adored Krisna in this w^y, and bowed to Him accosted 
iu a suitable language Nar&yana, and Mahcsa and occupied an excellent throne 
of gems. Whoever, after having got up frera his bed, reads the hymn com¬ 
posed by Brahma succeeds in getting rid of all his sins ; his bad dreams are 
converted into good dreams and he acquires faith in Krisna, a faith which is 
calculated to increase tho number of his sons and grandsons. By virtue of this 
faith, his infamy is removed and ho gains a good name in the world. 

41-47. Sauti said, “After that, from the breast of Sri Krisna, sprang a smil¬ 
ing white being with clusters of knotted hair on his head. Ibis being is omnisci¬ 
ent, merciful and exempt from the sentiments cf jealousy and anger ; he is the 
eye-vritness of every incident, strictly impartial and is the cause of all and every¬ 
thing He has full knowledge of virtue, is virtuous,imparts virtue tJ others 
and the incarnation of virtue. This most propitious god, the product digits, 











mtsTfy 



THE BRAHMA-VAIV ART A PVRANA. 


<SL 


i» m fact virtue incarnate to those who are disposed to do virtuous deeds. This 
being throw himself prostrate on the ground before the Supreme Being, the 
Lord of all and the dispenser of all desires and worshipped him thus 5-—• 

"I adore Thee, 0 L6rd, dark as a novel cloud, who art all happiness, 
matchless, imperishable, permanent, who art known by the names of krisna, 
Visnu, Vamideva and Govinda, who art the preserver of cows ; who after going 
to the cow-pen put test on the tuft of hair on the tail of calves ; the best o£ 
Bemg3 who dwoliest among the cows, the cow-herds and cow-herdesses; who 
residest in th« circle of the Elisa. 

48-52. Dharma, having so worshipped Sri Krisna got up, accosted 
Brahmfl, Visnn and Mahesa and then sat down on an excellent throne of gem. 
Whoever, at the break of day, after having got up from his bed, reads those 

24 names of iSr? Kri$na as utterel by Dharina attains happiness and success 
by all means. At his death the name of Hari comes home to him and, when 
he dies, he goes to the Oow^world and becomes the bondsman of Hari. He is 
over harboured by virtue ; is never’ inclined to commit any sin and brings under 
his entire control (that is fully achieves) the 4 ends of human life taken 
collectively, namely, virtue, wealth, enjoyment and redemption. All his cala¬ 
mities run away like snakes scared away at the sight of the divine eagle.” 

53-62. Sauti said, “Afterwards, from the left side of Dharma, sprang a 
nymph just like the goddess of fortune herself incarnate. Later on, from the 
mouth of the Supreme Being sprang a goddess very fair in complexion, holding* 
*n her hand a lute and a book. Her beauty vied with ten millions of moons and 
her eyes were like spring lotuses. She was ornamented with gems, her raiment 
was resplendent like fire. This goddess is the fairest of the fair and has a play of 
gentle and arched smile on her lips; Hbo row of hor teeth is very beautiful, her 
body is pleasingly cooHn summer and delightfully warm in winter. She is the 

supreme mother olS Sru-ti and other S&stras and the learned folks. Her 
appearance is tranquil; she is the quality of goodness and purity incarnate. She 
is the tutelary deity of the poofcs, the presiding goddess of speech, and known 
oy the name of Saras watt. She first of all sat down before Sri Ivrisna, 
played upon hor lute and cheerfully began to recite the names, virtues and deeds 

of Sri’ Krisna. The goddess with folded plains began to worship him by the 
recitation of the glorious deeds which he had performed in every birth and in 
every age. She said, “0 Loid, £v occupying the central position in the circle 
of dance, a sport to which thou art impelled by curiosity, thou placest thyself on 
o. throne made of gems with which Thou also adornest Thy person. Thou art 
the Lord and author of the Rasa and also the Lord of the Lair sex who 
indulge in' the Rasa. Thou divertest thy mind with the sport of the R&sa whose 
presiding deity Thou art. I adore thee. Thou art exhausted by taking part 
again and again in the above dance and thou art the tranquil-faced husband of 
those cowberdesses who love the li&sa,” 

63-64. This chaste goddess, after having thus worshipped and adorned the 
Supreme Being, with a cheerful countenance and a mind animate! with passion took 
her seat on an excellent throne of gem. Whoever after having got up from hi* 
bed reads the above hymn as recited by the goddesses of knowledge is blessed with 
wisdom, wealth, learning and sons and always passes his days in happiness. 





€5-73. Afterwards from the mind of Lord Kri§na sprang another goddess, fair 
in colour and ornamented with gems. She had a smiling face and was in tho 
prime of her youth* She was clad in a yellow garment. Through her alone, 
all wealth can be acquired. She is the presiding deity of wealth. She is styled 
in heaven the celestial goddess of fortune. This great goddess, stooping low 
with devotion, faced the Supreme Being and addressed him thus, u 1 adore 
Thee, 0 Lord, who art the embodiment, the master and the receptacle of truth. 
I adore Thee who knowest truth and art Eternal.” This great goddess, casting 
a halo of light all around with the supreme charms of her person which vied 
with heated gold, adored and venerated the Supreme Lord in the way mentioned 
above and cheerfully sat down on tho throne. Thereupon, from the intellect of 
the Supreme Lord, sprang another goddess, the presiding deity of all creation. 
Sho is Nature incarnate, the root cause of all universe. Her colour is liko 
gold heated on a faruace of fire an! her splendour emulated millions of suns. 
A gentle smile always plays on her lotus-like face and she has eyes that vie 
with the spring lotuses. She is dressed in red and ornamented with goms. 
Sho is the presiding deity of sleep, thirst, hunger, kindness, piety, forgiveness 
and other forces of nature. This dreadful hundred*handed goddess is known by 
the name of I)urg& who is the destroyer of all calamities. 

This chaste gjr>dda3s with her innumerable hands held trident, spear, 
bow of horns, sword, numberless arrows, conches, wheel, club, lotus, water- 
pot, thunder, string of beads, hook, lance noose, missile, staff and various 
weapons known as JN&r&yana-asfcra, 13 rah mil-as tra, Rndra-astra, P&Supata-astra, 
Parjanya, V&runa, Agneya'and G&ndharva-astras. Sho faced the Supreme Being 
and cheerfully addressed him thus, “ 0 Lord, I am tho embodiment of all force 
and form, the great goddess Nature*incarnate, ft is true, every one acquires 
strength through me and yet I am not independent, for I have been created by 
Jhee. Therefore Thou art the Lord, tho refuge, the preserver, creator, the 
destroyer and the revivor of tho universe. Therefore f, with happiness, adore 
thee who art all happiness. In the mere twinkling of thine eye, Brabmd. falls ; 
by a more twisting of thine eye-brow, orores of Visnus may bo created. Who 
can delineate thine incomparable prowess ? 

74-80. With the greatest ease Thou canst create all the animate and 
inanimate beings Brahma and other gods and many a goddess like myself. 
Thou art perfect, hence, venerable and so I ad ore Thee, 0 Lord ; the sublime 
Being Vir&ta who sustains the whole world is merely one of thy digits. I 
adore thee accordingly, 0 Supreme Being ; T bow to thee who art beyond tho 
power of tho adoration of Brahma, Visnu, Mahesa, the Vedas, rayselE and tho 
goddess of kuowiedge and who art beyond the scope of. knowledge. Again and 
again, I adore Thee vyho art free from all desire and inclination, whom all the 
Vedas and people, adept in the Vedas arc iacapable of worshipping * In a word, 
noue oaa worship the invisible.” DhrgA having worshipped Hinrin this manner 
and taken her seat on an excellent throne of gem, the chief among the gods 
also adored Him also by turns. Whoever at the time of worship roads tho 
above hymn of Durgjr is crowned with success and happiness iu every walk of 
life. Durga never quits him nor goes to any other place. That man acquires 
a groat reputation in this muudane world and on the extinction of his body ho 
goes f o tho Cow-world (Godska). *9 

2 s ' 



M WlST/fy 





THE BRAHMA-VAIVAB.TA PU11ANA. 


<8L 


CHAPTER IV, 


I- 10. Sauti said, “ 0 Brahmana, after that, from the tip of the tongue of 

Sri Krj$na, sprang a maiden quite enchanting, decked! with all sorts of orna- 
manta, with a rosary of beads in her hands, dad in white dress, and bright in 
appearance like white alabaster or crystal. She is famous by the name of Savilri 
in the three worlds. This chaste goddess Savitrt sat face to face with the 
Eternal Brahmft with folded palms and humbly began to worship Him thus : 
<\0 Lord, thou art incorruptible, stainless, without collyrium, and though full 
of effulgent lustre thou hast assumed a dark-blue appearance out of compassion 
for thy devotees.” The goddess Savitrt, the mother of the Vedas, having worship¬ 
ped Him thus again bowed to Him and with a gentle smile sat on a pleasing 
throne of gem. Thereupon, from the mind of the Eternal Ope, sprang a 
deity, fair in appearance like heated gold. Ho churns the mind of licentious 
men with his 5 arrows, hence wise men distinguish him by the name of Man- 
matba, that is, churner of the mind. From the left side of Cupid, (K&ma) 
came out an incomparable beauty, a maiden whose appearance fascinates the 
world. The very sight of this nymph excites lust in the mind of all people ; 
hence sagos call her Rati (goddess of love). Cupid armed with bow and five 
arrows along with his spouse duly worshipped the Eternal Being and sat down 
before Him on a charming throne of gems. 

II- 20. This K&ma who wields the following arrows, namely, killing, stupi- 
fying, soporific, emaciating and"naaddening, experimentally discharged the arrows 
on all and, at the desire of the Supreme Being, every one was excited with lust. 
To crown all, the great anchorite, Brahma looked with wistful eyes at Rati 
and immediately his semen was discharged. Thereupon brahma was much 
ashamed and loitered there with his garment biding the semen, but the semen 
burnt his cloth and was converted into fire (one of the principal gods) encom¬ 
passed by burning flames. When the Eternal Being saw the fire dreadfully 
increasing, He emitted from His mouth drops of saliva and with the breath of 
his nostril created water. 0 great saint, the water, as soon as it was created, 
inundated the whole world. A little portion of that water extinguished fcb e 
dreadful fire. For the above reason up to this date fire can be easily put out 
by water. Afterwards, from that water, a Being, the presiding deity of water, 
sprang into existence. Known by the name of V&rtina, be became the king 
of the sea-animals. Anon, from the left side,, of fire sprang a damsel named 
§wab& Vho is called by sages the spouse of Fire. From the left side of 
V&runa, there sprang a nymph called V&runi, the affectionate spouse of 
V&runa. 

21*29. From the breath of the Eternal Being, sprang into existence the Wind 
that began to blow as the life of animals. The breath of all animals is but 
an offsprings a portion of the Wind. From the left side of Wind, his wife 
known as Vayavi came into existence. 0 Brabmana, it is a matter of wonder 
thiri through the might of the unerring dart of Cupid, the Supreme Being also 
had to discharge bis semen, but through fear of revelation to the gods, lie himself 
threw it into the w&ter» In a thousand years from that day the semen was con- 
verted i^o an egg and from that egg came out a huge and mighty being called the 





BRAHMA-KHAN DA. 


!l 



'4ta. 1 his VirAta alone i9 the support of the whole creation and .sustains 
a universe on each of the numberless pores of his skiu. He is • the grossest of 
the gross; there is none in the world so great and sublime as he. The recop- 
tacso of all, Virata is celebrated by the nance of MahA-Visnu and is only the 
16th part of iSrl Krlsna. As leaves of lotu3, (as'soon as they spring from 
ordinary ponds,) float on the surface of the water, so it is strange to say that 
two demons came out from the secretion of tbo ears of Mahflvisnn and, spring¬ 
ing out of the water, attempted to 3lay Brahma, the lord of creation. As 
soon as NArAyaiia observed this, ho laid them prostrate under his thigh and 
slew them. From their fat or marrow, the whole earth has been crested and 
this earth is the continuous abode of VasnndharA (the goddess who presides 
over earth) and harbours the world teeming with animate and inanimate objoots.” 

CHAPTER V. 

1-11. The great Risi, Saunak, said, “My thirst for knowledge is increasing 
more and raoro as I hear your words sweot like honey, so please tell me if the cow¬ 
herds and the cow-herdesses you alluded to aro eternal, that is, if they aro real or 
imaginary. Please dispel my doubt by dwelling on this point in detail.” On hearing 
this, Sauti, the best of saints, replied, “ 0 Brahrnana, listen to my statement in 
answer to your querry. The beings whose origin I celebrated to you, though they 
are imaginary at the time of creation, dwell in a latent condition at the lime of 
ever,- annihilation or destruction of the universe. Even NftrAyana, Mahosa, and 

* a ^ ure the great god dess (the root and plastic canse of creation) (though only 
imaginary beings in the sense that nothing is real except the Brahma,) exist 
potentially on the occasion of each Pralaya or destruction. It foHows therefore 
that nothing is real, all is imaginary. 0 Brahrnana, first, I told you about 
Brahma Kalpa, now I am going to describe to yon tlie VarAha and Padrna 
■ivaipas. Kalpa is of three kinds : Brahma, VArAha and Padrna. 0 faint I an age 
or ynga is likewise divided into 4 parts, viz. Satya, Treta, Dwftpara and Kaliyuga. 
tl is said that the age (yuga) of the gods is equivalent to 360 human yUgas 
as mentioned above. The extinction of each Mann takes place in 71 divine 
(yugns). The period, covered by the consecutive, extinction of 14 Manus, is 
equivalent to one day of BrabfnA, the lord of creation, and 360 such days cons¬ 
titute one year of Brahma; and it has been ascertained that the span of his 
ite extends over a period of 108 suoh years. The sages who know tho future 
have ascertained that the total period of longevity alio tod to Brahma is equiva¬ 
lent to one wink of the Supreme Being that is, the moment which expires by 
the m^re twinkle of his eyes. This includes Sambarta and various other kinds 
of Kalpas. I be great saint MArkandeyA will live for a period of 7 snob small 
kalpas. Sr oh a small kalpa is equivalent to one day of Brahma tho lord of 
creation - . It therefore i:o]Iow.s that the span of life allotted to MArkandeyA is 
equivalent to only seven days of BrahmS. 

12-17. I narrated to you beforo tho tnreo kalpas, viz. Brahma, VarAba and 

* adina ; now listen, I am going to tell you bow tho world was created at each 
kalpa. At the BrAhma kalpa BrahraA, at the command of Sri Krisna, first created 
the earth with the marrow of Madhukaitava and, then, other objects. In the 







wnisr^ 


THU BRAttMA-V A1V ART A PURINA. 

second kalpa, that is, Yarflha, Visnu in the form of a boar raised from the in¬ 
fernal region the earth on the verge of destruction. In the third kalpa, that 
is, Padma, Brahmfi settled on the abdomen of Tignu and created all the three 
worlds including the Brahmlaoka i.g., every thing with the exception of the three 
Eternal worlds. O devotee, whose sole treasure is your meditation, in answer to 
your query regarding the solution of the problem of creation, I related to you 
something about its mystery and the number of ages. Now please toll me what 

you wish to hear. That 1 shall relate to you.” Saunaka, the great devotee 
hearing this, said, “0 lord, oblige us by describing to us exactly all the deeds 

which fcki Krisna, the lord of. the GW-world, performed after creation. 

18-25. Sauti answered: “Thereafter the Lord of the Oow-world in company 
with the gods who were oreated by Him wont to the orb or sphere of the JR&sa 
(a (lance of cow-herds and cow-herdesses) most onobanting to the view. This orb 
is situated in the centre of the lovely kalpa trees. It is circular, refreshing, 
extensive and level It is refined with sandal paste, paste of aloe, musk, saffron 
and other kinds of fragrance. In one place there is curd, in some other 
places there is parched grain ; hero, white paddy meets the eyo and there, you 
find plenty of new bent grass. This orb of the R&sa is characterised by knots 
of silk and thread, embellished with green twigs of sandal suspended from the 
top and surrounded on four sides by plants and trees. This orb has acquired 
a great splendour through crores of mansions made of excellent gem. In these 
mansions, lamps of gem always dispel darkness through their own rays. The 
smell of fragrant flowers and frank incense diffused, bore and there, 
gratifies the olfactory nerves. Lovely bed-stsads filled with all things that s 
could bo enjoyed by the senses arc spread for over and have acquired n super¬ 
natural charm. O best of saints, the Supremo Being went to sojourn there. 
The gods were astounded at the sight of the splendour of the sphere (Kasaman 

j dala), Thereupon from the loft side of Sri Krisna, there sprang a beautiful- 
nymph who, with quick foots tops, fetched flowers and presented oblation to the 
lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, 

26-35. Iu view of the faot that the .said nymph, as soon as she became mani¬ 
fest in the orb ran towards Sri Krisna, the sages conversant with tjie Par anas 
have-celebrated her by the name of ii&dha. bhe is the presiding (,eity of the 
wife of 6ri Krisna and os she came out of His life, she is to Him dearer than His 
life. From the very time of her manifestation, she was lb yenr3 of ago ; she 
was in the full bloom of her youth, dressed in very shining apparel, possessed 
of a gentle smile, pleasing to the eye, of soft complexion, the fairest of the 
fair. Her slender body, through the weight of her buttocks, was bending a bit. 
Her buttocks and breast were heavy and swelling. Her lips surpassed m 
redness the Eaudlmjiva flowers. Pho was decorated with a set of teeth that 
beat hollow even the row of pearls. The lotus-face of that graceful nymph and 
her eyes respectively thieved the beauty of the fall moon. Her nose was 
beautiful like Hnruda’s. Her cheeks surpassed in beauty the golden snail and 
' the lotus of spring. 'Sri Rkdlia whose ears were bedecked with gems, whose 
forehead was marked with vermilion and whose, cheeks were annointed with 
sandal, aloe-naste, musk and saffron was looking extremely handsome, ihe 










BRAHMA-KHAN PA. 


SL 


pure Rftdhft wag decked with a wreath of jasmine on her breast. She had 
an excellent look of hair and a load of graceful chignon on her head and her 
legs were robbing the land lotus of its bounty. 

36-45. By her movements, she put to shame the swan and wagtail. By 
the constant use of excellent and delightful wreaths inlaid with gems, necklace 
of pearl, bracelet on tho upper arms and wrist, golden chain and various 
other wonderful ornaments and pearls, IUdhft’s beauty was brought into 
prominent relief. 0 Saint, whoso solo wealth is thy meditation, R&dbft, after 
having manifested herself thus accosted Lord Kri?na and feasting her eyes with 
tho sight of the Ictus face of the Lord, sat with a smiling appearance on a 
throno of gem. For a wonder, at that time, from the pores of the skiu of 
RkdhA a number of cow-herdesses equal to Rad lift in beauty and toilet came 
into existence. The sages who can calculate figures estimated that the above 
cow-herdesses were lac-orores in number. 0 saint, simultaneously from tho 
pojes of the skin of Sri Krisna sprang cow-herds equivalent to Him in apparel 
and matchless beauty. The hbove sages calculated the number of these cow¬ 
herds whose beauty the S'&stras cannot describe in words to be 33 crores. At 

that time, again, from the pores of the skin of Sri Krisna cows of various hue 
and of permanent youth, countless bulls, agreeable kino, various kinds of 
auspicious miioh-eows with calves and other innumerable dark-coloured cows 
that fulfil desires sprang into being. 

46-55. Out of these bulls, Lord Krisna gave cne graceful bull equivalent 
in strength to a crore of lions to Biva in order that he might serve him as big 
conveyance. Later on, frem the pores of tho nails of Sri Krisna came out a 
number of swans with their spouses and young ones. Out of these a very 
powerful swan ho gave to JBrahmft for his conveyance. Later on, from the 

tympanum of the left ear of Sri Krisna, sprang out a number of graceful 
horses, one of whom, in the prosenco of the gods, ho presented to Dharma as his 
conveyance. Again from the tympanum of his right ear, came out Tery powerful 
lions and in the presence of the gods, one of them with very groat esteem he 
presented to the goddess Nature. At the same time He bostowed on her the 
boon desired by Ter as” well as an excellent invaluable garland of flowers. 

Later on, tho best of ascetics Sr! Krisna, by dint of his abstract meditation 
created 5 graceful chariots of pure gem and swift like the wind. Each 
of those chariots is decorated with wheels and hundred thousand sporting-horsos. 
In motion they vie with the wind. These chariots are full of things enjoyable, 
contain numberless bods and are driven by a large number of horses. Each 
play-house is beaming with lamps of gem and decorated with various coloured 
jars made of pearls. In some places, there are looking glasses made of gems 
and precious ornaments. In other places, there are whilfe fly-brushes, or 
ohowriest These very much added to the beauty of the chariots. 

4 

5G-66. Listen further, all these chariots were decorated with flags, f'ros- 
plendent like fire,) flower- wreaths of various hues and superb garlands of pearl, 
gem and diamond and myriad of beautiful artificial red lotuses of emerald and 
pearl. 0 best of the twice born, out of these chariots, T£risna gave one to 












THE BRAHMA V AIV ART A PUR AHA. 


Srftyana, one to his own beloved spouse Rfldhft and three he reserved for his 
own use. 1 hereafter, front the private parts of Krisna, a mighty being of tawny 
colour with his companions carne out and inasmuch as they emanated from 
his private parts they are known by the name of Guhyas, but the best and the 
mightiest of them is called Kuvora. He is the lord of all treasure and the king 
of the Guhyas. Anon, from his private parts came out dreadful ghosts, devils, 
goblins, demons, evil spirits and false conceptions like pumpkin-gourds, Brahma 
R&khsases, that is, evil spirits of the Br&hrnanas and Vetalas (dead bodies 
occupied, by evil spirits). From the mouth of Sri Ivrisna sprang a retinue of 
beings with countless wheels, clubs, conches and lotuses in their hands, decorated 
with the wreaths of jungle-flowers and other ornaments, with yellow garments 
on, of dark colour, having 4 hands each, with crowns on their heads and ear¬ 
rings, Sri Krisna dedicated the last named^ beings to Nautyana, the Guhyas 
to Kuvera and the demons and evil spirits to Siva. 

67-76* What a wonderful glory has the Supreme Being ! From His lotus 

feet He created some Vaisnavas devoted to Sri Krisna himself. They are each 
vested with two hands, of dark and green complexion, holdiug rosary beads in 

their hands, and constantly devoted to the thought of Sri Krisna with a cheerful 

aspect. Adherents of Sri Krisna, they always hold in their hands oblations of 
water for washing His feet. Their hair is on end with raptures engendered by 

the love of Sri Krisna ; tears of joy constantly flow from their eyes; and the 
words they mutter are indistinct (they are so much overwhelmed with feelings). 
Thereupon, from the right eye of Sri Krisna, horrible Bhairavas came out. 
They held in their h inds tridents, ax.es and other instrument?. They had three 
ey03 each, Everyone had on his head the figure of. the half-moon. All were 
stark naked. They had huge bodies. They were bright in dppearance like 
burning flame. All were equal iu^strfcngth to Siva ami weilded gigantic power. 
These eight Bhairavas were respectively called Ruru, Sainh&r, Kala, Asita, 
Krodha, Bhisana, Mah&-Bhnirava, and Khattanga. Later on, from the left 

eye of 'Sri Krisna, carae out aft eternal Being. Thai: Being was armed with 
a trident and an axe, huge in size and stark naked. He was clad in tiger-skin.' 
His face had three eyeB and his head was marked with half-moon. This extremely 
auspicious god is the presiding deity of the Digp&las and is known by the 

name of lsana. Afterwards, hundreds of thousands of female anchorites and 
devotees known by the name of Dakinis and Yoginis, witches and deities called 
KshetrapiUas came out from his nose and belly and all at once from the back 

of &rl Kr^na, the Supreme Being, three crores of gods supremely good in 
every respect, with heavenly aspect, leaped into existence.” 


CHAPTER 


V I. 

t 


1-5. The high-minded Sauti said, ‘ Thereafter Sri Krisna, the Lord of the Qfhv- 
worhl, with great esteem handed over Lak$rai and Saraswati, (the goddesses of 
fortune and knowledge,) who were decorated with wreaths of genu to NtVrayilua. 

Sri Krisna very gladly handed over S&vitri to Brahma, M&rti to Dharma, 





BBAHMA-KHAMDA, 



Rati o£ extraordinary beauty to Cupid and Maoorama to Kuvera. He also 
handed over the particular goddess to that god from whom she had sprung. 

Thereafter Sri Krisna called out s'iva the god of all and the preceptor of the me- 
dilative devotees and in affectionate terms asked him to wed Bhagvati whose con¬ 
veyance is the lion. Mahe«a, on hearing the words of Sri Krisna smiled gently 
and with modesty and timidity thus addressed the indestructible Lord Krisna, 
who is also the lord of life. 

6-16. Sankara said, u O Lord, like ordinary people I am unwilling to accept 

Nature for my bride. She will be a stumbling block across the way o£ my 
devotion to Sri Krisna, She hinders an act which enables a man to 
be the bondsman of Had. She represents a gate which shuts the door upon 
yoga or abstract meditation. She casts a veil upon the knowledge of Tatwa — 
true essence of things—Through Nature that has unquestionably a leaning for 
worldly or temporal affairs, the aspiration of creatures for salvation melts away 
by degrees and their passion for worldly objects increases in the same proportion. 
This Nature throws a veil of obscurity over asceticism. She is the abode or 
rather a basket of mighty delusion, the emblem of a chain which binds this 
temporal world, converting it into a dreadful prison. Again, she destroys sobre 
sense and substitutes for it perverted judgment. She promotes the desire to 
secure the trilling objects of the world, regardless of consequences. Therefore 
0 Lord, grant me the boon I desire ; that is, I don’t waut a spouse. The 
Supreme Lord, who loves his believers accedes to their prayers. 0 Lord of the 
universe, the desire which is predominant in my mind is to consign myself for 
ever to *hy bondage. (*. I want to be thy slave forever.) My prayer, 
therefore, is this, that I may never obtain sufficient satiation by the meditation of 
thy holy name and the adoration of thy feet. May I, under every condition, 
whether awake "or dreaming, walk all around, reciting Thy auspicious name and 
virtues constantly with my 5 mouths. For c-ores of kalpas, may my mind be 
engaged in the contemplation of Thy dark blue aspect. May it never be in¬ 
clined to the enjoyment of material prosperity; may it always lean towards 
meditation, concentration of mind, the service and the worship of the Deity 
and the celebration of His name ; otherwise my mind will be troubled. There¬ 
fore, in no way, I am capablo of accepting Nature ut this time for my bride. 
0 Lord, the bestower of boons, grant mo nine kinds of boons as aa indication of 
my faith in the Deity which are as follows :—• 

17-24, ,1. Thy remembrance, 2. Recitation of Thy holy name. 
3 Narration of Thy virtues, 4. Listening to Thy name and virtue?, 5. Repi- 
tition of Tby auspicious name, 6, The contemplation of Thy graceful aspect, 

Adoration of Thy feet and partaking of Thy offerings, Recitation of 
Tby hymns, 3. Surrender of self in Thy service. In a word,.all these ere 
desired by me, 0 Lord, the sages who are conversant with the 
principle of redemption have described six kinds of redemption .—* 
(1) That by which like the Supreme Being one can enjoy divine perfec 
tion or be vested with his six divine attributes, (2) Residence in the Cow-world, 
(3) Assumption of a form like that of the Deity, (4) Constant residence 
in the proximity of God, (5) Equality to God, (6) Merging oneself in 
God. 










THE BR AH.M A-V AlV ART A PURANA. 


The divine attributes which they have described are of 8 kinds and are as 
follows :— 

(!) The power to wield the simplosfc or subtlest form (2) The power to 
wield a light form and thus ascend the sky* (3) The power to acquire any¬ 
thing and everything. (4) The power to do as one desires. (5) Supreme good¬ 
ness, or excellence, (6) Divinity, (7) The power to bring under control one’s 
passion, (8) l no power to renounce all desire. Likewise they have described 
nine kinds of SidJhis or accomplishments (supernatural powers acquirable by 
practice, a f ruit which could be reaped by moans of ascetic severities), which are 
as follows :— 

(1) Omniscience, (2) Far-sightedness, (3) The power to enter into 
auother s body, (4) The perfection of speech, (5) The power to fulfil others’ 
desires like a Kalpa tree, (6) and (7) The powers to create and destroy, (8) 
acquisition of Immortality, (9) The power to take the front or lead in every 
undertaking. • They have likewise described several kinds of holy acts which 
are as follows 

Mental abstraction, practice of devout austerities, acts of charity of various 
kinds, performance of rites and ceremouios, virtous deeds and acts of fame, 
truthfulness, fasting, adoration of gods and goddesses, the sight of gods, seven¬ 
fold oircumumbulation round the seven islands, ablutions in 7 oceans, tbo sight 
of different kinds of heavens and lastly the attainment of the position of Brahma, 
Viijinu or Mahosa. 0 Master of all, there may be other objects more desirable 
than thoso enumerated above, jmt none among the last-named or first named could 
hold candle to a 16th part of the infinitesimal portion of the faith which Thy 
believers cherish for Thee. The happiness which can be secured by such faiiU 
cannot be obtained elsewhere. Faith in thee thoroforc is alone to be solicited.” 

Sri Krisna us He heard the words of Mah&deva which were replete with faith 
;gently smiled and addressed the lord of the Yogis in the following felicitous 
1 terms \-r 

26 — 35. 0 best of all knowing beings, lord of all, MAMdeva, Thou hadst 
better servo me for 100 crores of kulpas, day and night, again and again. Thou 
art a devoted aaohorite, an adopt, a sage, a Vaisnava and the best of all the gods, 
0 Bhav&, attain immortality by my boon and be supremely great by conquering 
death. Gain omu'seionce, mastery over all the Vedas and perfection of all kinds* 

0 son Siva, thou shalt easily witness the death of innumerable Brahmas ; from 
this day forth thou shalt be equal to me in wisdom, prowess, age, valour, fame 
and energy ; thou art dearer to to me than rny life ; there is no adherent of mine 
who is so faithful to me as thou art. There is no one dearer to me than thy 
self. Thou art the emblem of rny soul. Foolish, sinful people who will blame 
thee through perverse judgment shall ba entangled into the dreadful snares of 

time and suffer' eternal pain as long as the sun and moon are extant. 0 Siva, 
thou shalt accept Nature for thy bride after the lapse of a hundred crores of 
kalpas. 0 Mahesa I have granted all thy prayers. L'hou shouldst now carry 
out my command which ought not to go amiss. Look, when thou and I are one 
(indivisible), thy*words and mine are identic il; so thou shouldst carry them out. 
By wedding Nature, thou * shalt enjoy tin ineffable blis3 of sexual intercourse 
with thy bridge for a thousaud years according to divine calculation ; forth m 
art not a continuous ascetic, but grand and sublime like myself. 






36*46. 0 S'iva, ono who is all volition or desire, that is to say, one who by 

one’s will can achieve anything ono dosiros, must in time have to pass one’s days 
sometimes like a house-holder and at other times like n devotee or anchorite. 
Now, listen, I am going to dwell upon the conjugal troubles which thou hadst 
apprehended. O nly a n unchas to. woiuun. troubloth her husband: a chaste woman 
doth not. Those women who belong to a noble pedigree are subject to the moral 
code of their families or lineage. lienee they aro styled Kulajas or Kulapalik&s, 
that is, they observe the rules or the moral code of their families. A woman of this 
class loves her husband as if he wore her son. Her husband is her sole friend, her 
support, her god and her only refuge. Whether her husband is fallen (out caste) 
or not, wealthy or not, is a matter she entirely ignores- She is constantly engaged 
in his service; but those women who come out from a low pedigree and receive 
from their parents encouragement to do bid deeds are undoubtedly ravished by 
others. It is characteristic of such women to malign their husbands constantly. 
A chaste woman who values her husband more than either of us, that is, S'iva, 
or Krisna, shall enjoy happiness along with her husband in the Cow-world for a 
ororeof kalpas. 0 S'iva, she subsequently merges in auspicious Nature who is the 
essence of S'iva or Visnu. Therefore, 0 Mahesa, at my bidding, thou hadst better 
accept Nature as thy wife to enjoy the ploasuros of the world. Nay, a ty one 
who will, in a sacred land, with the dust of the holy land meant* for 
pilgrims, with a pious mind construct thy male organ associated with the figure 
of the female organ of Prakriti and with reverence worship it a thousand times 
with the five necessary ingredients of worship (as presenting flowers, perfume 
etc*,) shall alone with me enjoy happiness for a or ore of kalpas. dud 
whoever will duly worship a hundred thousand S'iva-lingas i:*nd associate his 
worship r’ith rich presents shall never sustain a fall from the Goloka but attain 
a condition equal to ours in every respect. Moreover, anyone who in the place 
designed for pilgrims construct the male organ of S'iva with mud, ashes, dung 
and sand and worship him eyen only once shill dwell in heaven for 10,00) 
kalpa3 and subsequently he, as a king, shall rule over his subjects and by the 
attainment of knowledge, sons and wealth shall, enjoy ineffable bliss. 

47-54. By virtue of the worship of S'iva-linga, he shall acquire the character 
of a saint and philosopher and shall subsequently attain salvation. What can l 
say morethaii this, that a place where the organ of S'iva is worshipped, though it is 
a place not fit for pilgrimago, shall be turned into a place of pilgrimage, and 
though sinners may die there in numbers yet they shall attain the lani of S'iva (?) 
Whoever at the time of his death will pronounce the name of S'iva, shall be 
released from the sins accummulated by hi n in crores of births and easily get 
‘ Mukti,’ i.e release or salvation. S'iva means good ; and good means redemption ; 
hence redemption is very easy, through S'iva. This is why he is styled S'iva. 0 
S'iva, any parson who is immersed in the ocean of sorrow through loss of wealth 
or relations, by pronouncing the name of S'iva only once, is capable of attaining 
easily everything that is good. ^jjmpHg^de§tCB&14J2XI of tfiua, and iailicate. 
redemption; this is why learned men probably hive styled him S'iva. 
Whoever With every word of his mouth associates the name of S'iva 
unqestionably gets rid*of his sins accumulated by him in a crore of births.” Lord 
8'rl Krisna having said so to Mahdieva, (the holder of the trident) gave him 
the Kalpa-caru mantra (the mystic formula or incantation by whiqh everything can 

3 







Tlltt BRAfjMA-VA1VARTA PUlUNA. 



bo gained) and the occult science which deals with the method o£ conquering 
death and then addressed Durgft whose conveyance is the lion, thus s 


“ 0 daughter, thou hadst better remain with me joy tally in this Cow-world ; 
and subsequently, thou sbalfcr gain S'iva, the substratum and author of all that is 
good. 0 thou of superb countenance, thou shalfc later on spring from the concen¬ 
trated or accumulated energy of tho gods and by the destruction of the demons, 
thou shalt be entitled to the adoration of the whole world. Subsequanily, 0 chaste 
goddes3, thou shalt take birth ia a certain Kalpa in the golden age as the 
daughter of Daksa of tranquil disposition. Afterwards on the occasion of the 
religious sacrifice performed by Daksa, thou shalt be offended by Daksa’s 
calumnies against thy husband ; thou shalt then quit thy body and take thy 
birth in the womb of Menokft, tho wife of tho Himalaya, when thou shalt 
be known by the name of P&rvatl. Then fora thousand years, according to 
tho measure of the gods, thou shalt dally with S'ambhu with whom thou shall be 
united and both of you shall sojourn there in the form of Hara-Gauri. 0 adored 
goddess, in timo thou shalt be worshipped every yea*: in the world on the occasion 
of tho grand ceremony which will take place in spring ; and in every village, every 
town thou shalt bo worshipped in the form of a village goddess with different 
designations. At my command, tho rites of thy worship and the ceremony of 
reciting thy hymn or adopting thy amulet shall be performed according to tho 
code of religion composed by S'iva. Thy ministers shall attain perfection by 
reaping the fruits of tho four main objects of human pursuit, viz: virtue, wealth, 
enjoyment and final beatitude. 0 mother of the universe, whoever will worship 
thee in this sacred land of India shall acquire no end of fame, celebrity, virtue 
and prosperity ” S'ri Krisna having addressed Prakriti in this way gave her 
m excellent mantra consisting of eleveu letters together with the desired mystic 
syllable forming the essential part of tho mantra and then, out of compassion for 
His worshippers, Ho duly formulated a method of worship appropriate to them. 

65-72. Then again he gave to Durg& a mantra of ten letters full of 
mystic charm and desired raystio formulae. The all-powerful, S'ri Krisna, 
also gave her the power to create everything and also bestowed on her the true 
insight into all objects and also supernatural po wer whereby every object could 
be accomplished. 0 saint, S'ri Krisna, the Lord of the world again bestowed on 
the ascetic S'iva the mystic formulae of 13 letters with its corresponding eulogistic 
hymns and amulets, Then he gave the said mantra (together with the know¬ 
ledge of its conjunction) to Dharma, Cupid, the Fire and the Wind. Again he 
gave othor mantras and the process of the attainment of their perfection to 
Kuvera and other gods. Them with a view to creation, he addressed Brahma, 
thus : “This is the law of providence. 0 mest fortunate Brahma, by tny com¬ 
mand, for a thousand divine years, thou shouldst devote thyself to my worship 
and then engage thyself in the task of creation in various ways.” S'ri Krisna 
having said so to Brahm&, gave him a lovely garland and himself went to the 
Vrind&vana with cow-herds and cow-herdesses. 


OH A PTE R V I I. 

1*11. S'auti said, “ 0 thou whose meditation is thy sole treasure, 
Brahmft then, by means of his devotion hiving got all his objects accomplished, 



BRAHMA-KitANVA, 


created the earth at firsts with the marrow of Madhu-Kaitava. Then he created 
eight chief mountains and numberless hills. It is difficult to name them all ; 
but, listen, I am naming only the chief of thorn. They are as follows : Sumeru, 
Kail&sa, Malaya, Himalaya, Udaya, Asia, Subela and Qaudha-ra&dana. These 
are the principal mountains. Afterwards he created seven oceans, many big and 
email rivers, numberless trees, villages and towns. Listen, I name the principal 
seas, 1. Lavana, 2. Iksu, 3. Sur&, 4. Sarpi, 5. Dadhi, 6. Kshira or Milk, 7. 
Tapta Jala. The first ocean is 8 lakhs of miles in circumference, die second 
is twice the first, the third is twice the second and so on. Then the Creator, 
Brahm4, in the circular world which is shaped like a lotus, created seven big 
islands, seven small islands and seven hills fixing for them seven limits. Their 
names as assigned by Brahm& in the biginning are as follows : —1. Jambu, 
2. S'&ka, 3. Knsa, 4. Plakga, 5. Crouncha, 6. Ny&grodha, 7, Pauskara, 
They are celebrated by these names* After that, Brahm& for the dalliance or 
enjoyment of the eight Lokp&las, a class of deities considered as the regents of 
various quarters—created eight graceful cities. Brahm&, the lord of creation, at 
the root of Sumeru, created a town for the residence of Ananta ; and ultimately 
in the upper regions he created seven heavens viz., Bharloka, Bhuvaloka, Swar- 
loka, Mabarloka, Janaloka, Japaloka and Satyaloka. When all these were 
created beautifully, then on tho top of the Mem, he constructed the Brahrualoka 
which is devoid of depreditude efco. Above this, he created the Dhrnvaloka, 
attractive to the mind in every respect. 

12. 0 saint, below that, gradually, he created 7 Pat&ls full of things 

which are more enjoyable than things found in the nether heavens. They are 
celebrated by the names of Atala, Bitala, Suiala, Tal&tala, Mab&tala, P&t&la and 
Rasatala. 0 best of saiat 3 , these seven islands, seven heavens, and seven P&Uias 
together with their inhabitants constitute one Brahm^nda, i, e. universe ; and 
this Brahm&nda is within the jurisdiction of Brahma, O S'aunaka, sach kinds 
of Brahrndadas are countless and all are artificial. On every pore of the skin of 
MahA-Visnu, there is a Brahui&nda of this nature. Through the M&yk or 
delusion of S'ri Krisna, (the Supreme Being,) in every Brabm&pd&, there are 
regents of quarters, Brahm&, Visntt, S'iva, gods, men and all kinds of objects. 
What to telk of gods, Brahm& himself, the lord of creation, Visnu, Mahesa etc. 
are powerless to count the numbers of the Brahm&ndas. The superbly excel¬ 
lent Being, S'rt Krisna, alone is able to count thorn ; but though so able, yet He 
is not inclined to count them. 0 best of Br&hmanas, all these worlds with their 
contents are artificial, transitory aud fleeting like a dr6am. Only the Supreme 
Being, as distinct from space aud the quarters, is eternal ; so are the Vaikuntha 
Uhe S'iva-loka and the Goloka ; these three worlds are eternal and distinct 
jfrom tho universe.” 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1-9. The great-minded Sauti said, Brahui& after having created all 
those worlds was enamoured of his dearest S&vitrl, as lustful males desire lusitul 
females, and impregnated her. For a 100 celestial years, the goddess, fe&vitn 
who gives birth to fair issues, sustained the most painEu! burden of pregnancy in her 









THE BRAtlMA-VAJVARTA FURANA. 


<SL 


worab and ultimately gave birth to the four Vedas, many sciences like logic and 
grammar, 36 female tunes of celestial form, six male tunes with various kinds 
ot musical measures and the ages viz, the Satya, the Trotfi, the Dw^para and 
the quarrelsome Kali. 0 saint, whose wealth is asceticism, thereafter, she gave 
birth to years, months, seasons, lunar days the dan da i. <?., a period of 24 minutes, 
the ksaxia (4 minutes), the day and night, the week days, the evening, the dawn 
and later on ahe gave birth to Doya-senii, Vijay&, Jay a ; six Kritik&s, yoga-kararm 
etc. The chaste Oeva-seuA., the spouse of K&rtika and famous by the name of 
Mah&sasthi is the best of mothers, who is the tatolary deity of children and their 
preserver* Dater on, the goddess S&viiri, devoted to her husband, heart and 
soul, was delivered of the three Kalpas ( Brahma, PAdina and V&r&ha) and 
four kinds of pralayas named Nitya, Naimittika, Dwipar&rdba and Pr&krita, a 
daughter named Death and all kinds of diseases and suckled them to her great 
satisfaction. 

. . tl 10 Thereupon, from the back ct the god BrahmA, Adbarma took his 
>irth ; and from the left side of Adharma, came out his wife. 0 be 3 t of saints, 
tor a wonder, from tue abdomen of Brahmfi, came out Viswakarrrift, the best 
of architects and the all-powerful eight Vasus. Thereupon from the mind of 
Brahma ' T0ro prouuced four boys, (each five years old,) whose bodies began to 
beam forth, as it were, with the radiance of Brahma. The first is Sanaka, 2nd, 
Sananda, 3rd San&tana and the 4th, SanaUKutnaru. They are the wisest 
oc philosophers. Again, from the lotus-mouth of Brahma, came out a youth of 
celestial beauty named Swayambhuva-Manu along with his beautiful wife. His 
personal charms emulated the gold in point of effulgence. His very appearance 
showed that he was favoured to a supernatural extent. He is the primeval 
ciiuSe o. all the Ksatriyus. lhe damsel, his spouse, was extremely beautiful, 
bhe was name S'ata-rupA and seemed t6 be a part of KamalA, the goddess of 
fortune. Manu with his spouse faced Brahma, awaiting his orders. Brahma 
ordered all his sons, filled with raptures an<i devoted to tho worship of Visnu, 
to take part in creation. But they said “ Hxouse us ” and went away with a 
view to devotion. Oa their refusal, Brahma, the Lord of creation, became 
very angry and from his forehead came out eloven Kudras beaming with the 
radiance of Brahma. Among them, the one named Kaiagni-Rudra was the 
destroyer of the universe. In this world, he alone is the asylum of darkness or 
iguoranoe, the lowest of the 3 qualities of nature. Brahmfl is the substratum of 
the active principle of nature and Siva and Visnu are the receptacles of Satwa 
or the quality of goodness. 

22-28. S ri Eri(jna, the Lord of the Universe, is separate from nature 
and transcends the three qualities of nature. Illiterate and senseless people only 
ascribe to b ankara, who is the receptacle of virtue, the attribute of ignorance, 
t best of saints, now listen to the names of the other Rudras as described in the 
Vedas. 1 hey are as follows ;-Mahan, Mahatma, Matiman, Bhisana, Bhayan- 
kara Bitudhwaja, Urdhakesa, Pingaihkbya, lUobi and Suohi/ They are 
celebrated by the above names. Afterwards Palasta came out, from his right 
ear, I ulaha rom his left ear, Angirk from his mouth, Bhrigu from his left 
side and Dak^rom his right side. Kardam-Muoi came oat from the shadow 
ot Biabrna, , ;mcdiasuvha bora his abdomen, Bodhu from his breast and N&rada, 





BkAblMA'K H AN1)A< 



the best of saints, from his throat. From his shoulders, came out WartcM, 
Ap&nt&rtama from his neck, Vaaistha from the tip of his tongue arid Piachetft, 
from his lower lips. Afterwards from the left side of his stomach cam a 
out Harnsi and from the right side, Yafci. Brahma. asked his sons to beget 
offsprings in the interests of creation, The great, devotee NAiada, in reply, 
addressed his father thus: 

29 - 35. 0 groat sire, author of the world, first call my elder 
brothers, Sanata etc., and get them married and then according to your pleasure, 
issue necessary orders to us. 0 Brahma, you are our father and have enjoined 
upon them the task of religious devotion. How does it behove you to order us to 
involve ourselves in worldly affairs constituting the root of all evil ? It is a matter 
of profound sorrow that the mind of a great saint like you has become perverted . 
Just consider ; all your sons have an equal claim upon your affection. But it is 
a matter of great surprise to me that whereas you have conferred, Upon some of 
your sons, the privilege of drinking the nectar of devotion, others you want to 
implicate in mundane affairs which are more dreadful than poison. 0 sire, you 
know that anyone who is immersed in the profound ocean of the world cannot 
be relieved thero-from, even after the lapse of a crore of Kalpas. The Supremo 
Being, alone, is the proserver and the root-cause of everything, and better than 
any other being ; through his grace and favour, every object in the world can 
be attained. This Hari is the main pillar and support of the people who tread 
the path of devotion. He is merciful to his adherents whom He regards as his 
servants, and He always protects them from danger. He is dear to his adhe¬ 
rents, their sole refuge and the only object of their veneration and worship. 
His believers are capable of practising his religious rites and austerities with 
ease. iTiis Hari is always associated with the ways of virtue and is spotless in 
eharaoter. Who is such a fool a3 to leave this Hari and engage his mind in 

temporal matters calculated to effect his destruction ? 

* 

36-40. 0 sire, who is so simple as to leave the honey of devotion to 

God and resort to the drink of the poison of worldly affairs ? 0 sire, just as 

the flame of (ire is pleasing to the eye of an insect, as a piece of flesh attached 
to the fish* book is alluring to the fish, so the enjoyment of the world, is osten¬ 
sibly delightful to a]mm with a temporal turn of mind, though it is destructive 
like dream, insignificant, unreal and productive of death. This feeling is only 
a delusion. ” The great Vai^nava, N&rada, whose body was bright like a flame 
of fire, having said so, stopped, bent low and faced his father. 0 twice born 
saint, Brahm|l on hearing this, was blinded with fury and cursed N&rada. At 
that time his face was flushed with anger ; he shivered from head to foot ) hia 
lips began to quiver and assumed a strange appearance. 

41*49V He said, “ 0 N&rada, by the power of my curse your know¬ 
ledge of ontology shall disappear; and like a sportive fawn, you shall figure 
as a dissolute mortal loved only by women. You shall be the adorable husband, 
dear as their lives, of fifty women in the bloom of their youth and beauty. 
You shall get ceaselessly infatuated with sensual pleasure, after having enticed 
the heart of the above-mentioned ladies. Besides, you shall bs a past-master 
in the science of love. You shall always desire carnal intercourse, and you 
shall ever surpass the preceptor or the chiof of the dissolute pebplo in dnatter# 





TBE brahma-vaivarta pur an a. 


with sexual science. You shall be the progenitor of the Gaudharvas; 
your voice shall be very melodious and your youth shall be perenninal, You 
ahali be expert in song and in the play of lute. You shall be wiso, intelligent, 
honey-mouthed, tranquil in disposition. Your name shall be Upavarhana—a 
fact which nobody can doubt. After having enjoyed the society of these lux¬ 
urious damsels fcr a celestial lakh of years in the solitudes of the forest, you 
shall, through the influence of my curse, again take your birth as the 
son of a slave. 0 son, after that, the society e£ the Vaisnavas and the 
taste of the refuse of their food coupled with the grace of the Almighty will 
restore you to your original condition, «.<?., you will be my son again. Then I 
shall give you uri insight into ancient, celestial ontology. But 0 N&rada, 
cease to exist at this moment, and gettting immersed in the dreadful ocean of 
the world, pass your days for some time in endless torments.” 0 beat of 
Br&hmanas, Brahma having finished, his son N&rada, the foremost of the 
Vaisnavas began to weep arid with folded palms addressed Brahml thus. 

J 50-60, N&rada said; '“ 0 sire, restrain your anger; you are the author 
and destroyer of the world, and the lord of the ascetics. This causeless, out¬ 
burst of passion on your part against your son hardly becomes you. Just con¬ 
sider ; that son alone who violates the principles of virtue or transcends the 
law of morality, is cursed by his father. How coold yon, being a savant, have 
the face to curse a pious and innocent child, devoted to God ? O Brahm&, by 
the irony of fate, the worst has now happened. Now be graciously pleased 
to grant me this boon that whatever life I may tike, my faith in Hari may 
forsake me not and that the name of Hari might always afford mo satisfaction. 
For one who is known as the son of Brahm& h unquestionably inferior to a 
hog, if the wretch, thongh born in the sacred land of India, forgets the name 
of Hari. 0 sire, consider this fact also. Anyone, though bora as a hog,(if he 
remembers the condition of his former life and abandons himself t ,to the services 
of Hari) is no doubt capable of entering withou t the least difficulty into the 
Cow-world by virtue of his good deods. 0 sire, how can I relate with one mouth 
the sublimity of the faith in Hari ? The various places meant for pilgrimage 
constantly solicit, though for a moment only, the touch of the Vaisnavas, with 
a view to wash avray the sins committed by themselves or inflicted upon them 
by sinners. The sacred touch of the Yaisnavas who constantly drink the 
hooey of the ever-desirable lotus-foot of Hari undoubtedly consecrates the earth. 
To crown all, with crores of their ancestors in the upper line, all persons initiated 
in the mystic forniuke of Hurt obtain redemption as soon as their initiation 
is rendered complete. By virtue of this initiation, men are released flora the 
accumulated sins of millions of births and thereby they undergo purification and 
and are thus exculpated from the necessity of reaping the fruits of their actions 
committed in their previous births. Felicity voluntarily embraces a man who 
points out, the path of rectitude to his family, his sons, his pupils, servants and 
relations and redemption meets him at his threshold. Whoever directs the mind 
of his pupils along the wrong path is never released from the Kumbhipak, a kind 
hell, as long as the sun and the moon exist. 

61-68. The term religious preceptor,” as applicable to a father or 
a husband who is unable to impart instructions in matters relating to belief in 
Hari ts a umnoraer ; and to honour any of them with such names i* a hideous 








.BRAHMA-KHAN DA. 


iSL 


idbkery ”, The great-minded Nftrada after having uttered these words fraught 
with moral principles went on to say thus “ 0 four-faced Brahma, when 
you have cursed me, (though I am innocent), you ought likewise to be cursed 
by mo in return. For the pandits injure those who are apt to injure other?, 
0 sire, you are revered by the world, it is true ; but by the might of my im¬ 
precations, your mystic worship perform 'd with hymns, amulets and established 
methods, shall disappear from the faoe of the world. Unquestionably yon shall 
hays to pass your days like an ordinary person who does not deserve to be wor¬ 
shipped. And after’the lapse of three kalpas, you shall bo worshiped in the 
proper way. O Brahmft, the ouly things to which you shall be at present 
entitled are your necessary share in sacrificial offerings and worship in maltera 
relating to vow efo; the rest of your previlegos shall vanish. But the gods etc. 
shall still adore you.” Nftrada having cursed his father thus, Brahmft was 
overwhelmed with grief and waited for a while in the assembly of the gods. O 
Saunaka, Nftrada being cursed in this way by his father, first took his birth as 
a Gandbarva named Upayarhana, then as the sou of a slave, and aftorwards 
having assamed the name of Nftrada again, he was styled as Maharsi (or a 
great saint.) I am now going to reveal to you the method by which Nftrada 
obtained celestial knowledge from his father.” 

CHAPTER IX. 

1-8. 0 best of the learned Brahmins, Brahmft thereupon having 

directed his other son? to pr’ocreate children for the sako of creation, they con¬ 
sented and promptly applied themselves to the task. Thereupon from the mind 
of Marichi, the celebrated Kasyapa took his birth ; and the Moon came out 
from the secretion of the eyes of Atri ju the ocean of the milk ; Gautama 
sprang from the mind of Prachetft and Maitrft-Yaruna from the mouth of 
Pulasta. O best of devotees, thereafter Maim begat on his wife (S'atarftpft) three 
daughters, (who were devoted to their respective husbands) viz. AkfUi, Devahuti 
and Prasuti- Afterwards the said Manu b’gat on his wife two good-looking 
sons, viz. Priyabrata and Uttftnpftda. In time, Uttftnpftda of high soul begat 
a very pious son named Dhruva who beaded t.he list of the Vaisnavas like a 
jewel which bedecks the summit of a mountain After the lapse of a time, 
Manu married his daughter to great saint named Ruohi. He likewise married 
Prasftti to Daksa, and Devahuti to Kardaraa-Muni. Kardama begat Kapiia 
who is famous throughout the world. 0 best of saiuts, the account of the 
extraordinary skill of the lord of the world in creation so pleasing to the ears, 
I am going to describe to you, by and by. Please listen. Afterwards Daksa 
begat sixty daughters on Prasftti. Out of them, he married eight to Pharma, 
eleven to iiudra and the chaste Prakrit! to S'ivu. He married 13 of them to the 
vreat minded Kasyapa aud the remaining twenty-seven to the Moon-god. 

■ 9-12. 0 priest., I am now going to recite to you the names of the wives of 

Dbarma. They are as follows : S'ftnti, Pusti, Dhriti, Tusti, Ksama, S'raddhft, 
Mati andSmriti. They are celebrated by the above names. S'anti, gave birth 
to Santosa ; Pusti to the famous Mahftua ; Dhriti to Dhairyyu ; Tusti to Harsa 
aud Darpa; Ksamft to Sahisnu; S'raddhft to Dhftrmika: Mat,i to Gyftua and 
Smriti to Jfttisniara. Dharma'begat on his first wife, (Marti,) .the’ groat saints 






THE BRAHMA V A J.V ART A PURANA 


named Nara and N&rftyana. 0 S'aunaka,. the issues of Dharma were all 
extremely religious. 

13-22. Now I am going to recite, 0 great saint, the names of the wives of 
Rudra„ They are celebrated by the names o£ (1) KaRt, (2) Kal&vati, 
(3) K&stb&, (4) K&lika, (5) Ka!ahapriy&, (6) KandaU, (7) Bhisantfi, (8) 
(d) Pramoch&, (10) Bhusanti, (11) S'ukl. They produced several chil¬ 
dren and were all the followers of S'iva. The ohasie Prakriti, the wife of S iva, 
could not tolerate the hideous abuses poured over the head of her husband by 
her father Dafeaa and accordingly committed suicide on the sacrilieial grounds. 
Eventually, she was born out of the womb oE Menok&, the wife of Himalaya, 
and got, as usual, S'ankara for her husband. 0 best of religions saints, now 
hear the names of the wives of Kasyapa, Among his wives, the mother of the 
gods was styled Aditi. The mother of the Daityas or demons was called Diti. 
Kadrn produced the snakes ; the world renowned VinatH pro laced the birds; 
Surabhi produced the cows and the buffalos ; SaramA gave birth to the dogs and 
other quadrupeds. Danu, one of his wives gave birth to the Dftoavas. The 
other wives of the magnanimous Kasyapa gave birth to various kinds of animals 
whom it is difficult to specify. 0 Muni, the god named Jndra, the twelve 
Adityas and other most powerful gods including Upendra came out of the womb 
of Aditi. 0 Brahman, India begat Jayanta on his spouse S'achi, Aditya begat 
two sons named S'anischara and Yama and one daughter named Kftiindi on 
Savarna, the daughter of Viswa-Karma,” 

S'auaaka, on hearing this, said, 41 0 lord Sauti, please relate to me bow 
Upendra begat the mighty Mangala on the goddess earth 

23'31, Tho great Sauti answered, V 0 S'aunaka, best of saints, once 
upon a time, the Lord Upendra was sojourning alone in the solitudes of the 
Malaya mountains decorated with tho green leaves and foliage of sandal. The 
whole of his body, ornamented with sandal-paste and gems, had assumed a 
charm which it is impossible to describe and while a gentle smile was playing 
on tho lips of the tranquil-faced and good-uatared Upendra, he seemed to bo the 
only idol (object of admiration) of tho fair sex. The goddess Earth, as she 
beheld the fascinating charms of the Lord, was pierced by the darts of Cupid 
and, growing impatient, suddenly approached bis bed with a smile in the gjirb 
of a beautiful maiden in the full bloom of her youth. Then she decorated her 
neck with a wreath of jasmine flowers rendered sweet,lpodprous with sandal- 
paste, saffron and musk. The Lord Upendra, having realised the condition of 
the goddess Earth who was influned with pission, began to flirt with her in 
several ways. Thereafter, the chaste earth wielded in her womb the irresistible 
energy of the god and lost al) consciousness. She appeared to.be asleep or 
rather dead. Lord Upendra, the best of beings, beholding that the Earth with 
her dishevelled garments, beautiful loins, heaving breast, and big rump had 
lost her senses in the excess of her enjoyment, while smiling all tho while, for a 
time embraced and kissed her ; and subsequently ho went away to his own desti¬ 
nation leaving her alone in that solitary place. 0 Muni, in the-meantime a 
celestial damsel named Ur vast, while strolling here and there, suddenly happened 
to arrive at that place and Ending the Earth in that helpless condition restored 





BRAHMA-KHAN DA. 



her to consciousness by the adoption of several methods. She enquired into the 
cause and the Earth narrated to her everything in detail* 

32-41. Thereupon the Earth who was rendered very feeble by enjoyment, 
though the very embodiment of forbearance and patience, gradually became 
exhausted ; and, finding herself quite unequal to the task of sustaining in her 
womb the semen, threw it into a mine of corah. 0 best of Br&htnanas, this 
semen could, by no means, be ineffectual and on this account, among the corals 
a sou, bright and effulgent, was born like the suu ; and through association 
with the corals his body attained equality with the corals in splendour. He 
was celebrated by the name of Mangala. Mangala begat on Ins wife Medium 
a son named Gh&nteswara. lie was a great dispenser of rewards and bright 
like Visnu. 0 best oE saints, thereupon Diti gave birth to two most powerful 
sons named Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu and one daughter named Simhikft. 
From this SimhikA was born a planet named Saimhikeya Rahu. Another name 
of this Simhikft is Nir-riti; therefore U&hu is also called Nair-rita. The 
above*named Hiranyaksa in his very youth was slain by Visnu in the form of a 
boar. At that time no son was born to him. Prahlada, the great VaijUava was 
the son of Hiranyakasipu. Viroohana was the sou of Prahul&da; and Virochana 
begat Bali celebrated for his magnanimity throughout the world. The king 
Bali begat B&na, the foremost of devotees, who pacified even God S'iva by his 
devotion and made him subservient to his will by dint of his faith. 0 S'aunaka, 
now listen, I am going to narrate to you the genaology of Kadru. Kadru gave 
birth to Ananta, Dhananjaya, Karkotaka, Taksafca, Vasuki, Padma, Airavata, 
MuhA-Padma, S'anku, S'ankhya, Sambarana, Dhritar&stra, Durdharna, Durjaya, 
Durmukha, Bala, Goksa, Gok&muka aud several other excellent snakes. Besides 
those, ail other snakes which come across our view are their lineal descendants. 

42-48. This Kadru also gave birth to a daughter, tho very powerful 
Manas&, the best of female devotees. Her very appearance shows that she is a 
digit of the goddess of fortune. The saint Jurat-Karh who has sprung from 
a digit of N&r&yana married MaaaSa. 0 S'aunaka, who art the very mine of 
devotion, even the mention of the names of these excellent snakes of immeasur¬ 
able strength dispels the fear of snakes. I have related to you the geaeology 
of Kadru. Now I shall tell you about Viuata’s line. First Vinata had two 
sons, Garuda and Arana, both of whom wore equal in strength to Visnu. J.a 
course of time all the birds wore descended from both of them. SuraLhi gave 
birth to tho cattle and Suramft gave birth to the dogs and other quadrupeds. 
The very powerful demons wore born out of the womb of Dunu. Thus 
Kasyapa’s liue I have exhausted. Now let mo trace the line of the Moon. 0 
{S'aunaka, listen attentively. Now I atn'going to narrate to you the names of 
the wives of tiio Moon-god and the wonderful features of their character which 
constitute the essence of the Pur&nas. 

- •1-49-61. They are 27 in number and A their names are as follows t Aswini, 
Bbarani, Krittika, Rohini. Mriga-sirA. Ardnt, . Punarvasu, Pusya, Aslcsa, 
Magha, Pfirva-Phalguni, Uttar-Phalguni, Hasta, Chitrfi, Swati, Visakha/ 
Anuradhd, JesfcM, M&1&, Purvabh&dra-padi, Purva-Aslkla, Uttar-AsadA, Uhan- 
isthA, S'ravanA, S'ata-bhisA, U ttar-bk&dra-padi and Revati. All these damsels 
were extremely devoted to their husbands and very adorable. Out of • these 

1 ■ 25387 







'mtSTQy 


THE BRAHMA-V A,IV ARTA JPURANA. 


damsel, Rohini was known to bo very witty and most beloved o£ her husband. 
By the dfopky of her coquetry, she had so much subdued the heart of her 
husband that leaving her, the Moon could not go to his other wives. The 
sisters of Rohini could no longer tolerate their misfortune, convened together by 
common counsel and informed their father, Daksa, of this fatal calamity which 
was inflicted upon them by the conduct of their co-wife. Daksa, when he 
heard this sad news likely to burst his heart, was extremely incensed and with 
mystic incantations cursed the moon. Thereupon the moon was attacked by 
the disease of consumption. 

He daily got emaciated and when he was reduced to only a half of bus 
former self, he sought the protection of S'iva. The merciful S'ankara, when he 
saw that the Moon was in trouble and a refugee at his place, comforted him and 
displayed his own magnanimity. He cured the Moon of his disease and afforded 
him a shelter on his own head. Thefre the Moon, through the grace of the 
ail-merciful S'iva, resumed his former shape and fearlessly fixed himself on the 
forehead of S'ivav 0 great saint, on that account IS'iva was was called Chandra- 
S'ekhara; and none is so great a protector of the refugees as S'iva. 0 S'aunaka, 
when the daughter^ of Daksa saw the Moon restored to his fqrmer health and 
sojourning in the head of S'iva, they began to weep bitterly and again 1 
sought the protection of their powerful father, Daksa. These damsels afflicted 
by the separation from their husband, as soon aa they came to their father, 
began to beat their breast and addressed Dakear&ja, the friend of the helpless 
* iluis :— 

€> * 

62-70. “ 0 sire, we represented our case to you with a view to secure 

our husband ; but, by an irony of fate, we were not only deprived of his pre¬ 
sence but the privilege of seeing him, also. O father, what can we say more? 
Though we have got eyes, yet everything appears dark to us. We therefore 
conclude that to a chaste female her husband is her eye. In the temporal 
world, ho is her sole refugee, nay, as precious as her life There is no pros¬ 
perity which she values so much,as the society of her fy.Aband. Through her 
husband, she secures the four main objects of human lif b i)viz, virtue, wealth, 
enjoyment and final beautifcude. He is, as it were, a bridge to her across the 
ocean of life. Nay, ha is as dear to her as N&r&yana ; devotion to her husband 
alone is her sole vow and eternal duty. The ladies who do not properly minis¬ 
ter to their respective husbands fail to reap the good fruits of other actions, 
0 sire, you are well aware that of all those virtuous deeds which secure redemp¬ 
tion to mankind, the following, viz . ablution in places meant for pilgrimage, 
payment of legitimate fees to a priest on the occasion of the performance of 
sacrificial rites, various kinds of gifts, or acts of charity, vow, methods of wor¬ 
ship sanctioned by the SMstras, the adoration of all the gods, abstinence from 
food and acts of devotion performed in several ways, are celebrated as the best. 
Out of these, none of them is worth a 16th part of the virtue as represented 
by the devotion of a woman to her husband. In a word, there is no redemption 
for a woman excep• through devotion to her husband. 0, sire, of all her re¬ 
lations, the son is the dearest to a woman and that eon is only a part of her 
husband. It therefore undoubtedly follows that the husband is far more beloved,, 
to a woman than a hundred sons belonging to her. An ill-natured women who 

. 






tmsTfy 



comes out of an ignoble family and whose mind is constantly inclined to her para¬ 
mour, finds fault with her husband ; but a truly chaste woman, irrespective of the 
fact that her husband is degraded or diseased, wicked or poor or void of all virtue 
and, without taking into her consideration the fact that her husband is young or 
old, never foresakes him for a minute but constantly ministers to him,| 

71-77. If an unchaste woman, whether her husband be virtuous or vicious, 
forsakes him through aversion, she can, by no means, be relieved from the 
meshes of time so long as the sun and the moon are extant, and, for ever a 
victim to the bites of insects a3 dreadful as vultures, she has to suffer intoler¬ 
able torments in hell. She has to appease her huoger there by eating the fat 
and the flesh of dead persona and she lias to quench her thirst by the drink of 
urme. 0 sire, oven this does not terminate the sufferings of au unchaste woman 
who regards her husband with aversion. That unfortunate whore, inspite of 
the fact that she suffered the pangs of hell for a long time, has again to take 
her birth as a vulture millions of times and thus to suffer indescribable pain* 
After that she has to take birth as a sow a hundred times and then again as a 
beast of prey a hundred times. Ultimately, though on account of the 
virtuous deeds performed by her in previous births she is born as a woman, 
yet she is either widowed or poor or ever sickly. 0 sire, you are the son of 
Brahmii and you are also capable, like him, of creation. Therefore our trifling 
prayer to you, we are sure, will never be ineffectual. Through our own faults, 
we have been deprived of our husband who is the idol of his wives, most ador¬ 
able and regarded by us as the essence of the whole world. Now it behove 
you to grant our prayer by the restoration of our virtuous husband to as—• 
a task which you can accomplish by dint of your merits ”, Daksa having heard®** 
the piteous words of his daughters went at once to S'ankara. S'iva, as soon as 
he 3aw him, got up and bowed low. Thou Daksar&ja having seen 8'iva, the 
asylum of mercy', lying prostrate on the ground restrained his temper and bles¬ 
sed him. 

78-80. Ho then said, “0 S'iva you had better give me buck my son-in- 
law who is the lord of my life and who is dearer to my daughters than their 
lives. They have been very much afflicted by the fact of their inability to 
enjoy the sight of their husband. Restore to them their husband and do not 
make any further delay. 0 my son-in-law, I assure you that if you don’t 
restore him to me, I shall dreadfully curse you. It is in the power of no body 
to save you 0 best of saints, the merciful 8'ankara, the friend oE the re¬ 

fugees having heard the above words of his father-in-law, Daksa, r<pl.ed thus 
in words sweeter than honey — 

8X-84:. “0 Daksa, though you may curse me or reduce me to ashes, 

yet I shall r.evdr betray the fugitive moon-god.” 0 best of saints, Daksa 
having heard Mahfideva , was about to curse S'iva in anger when S'iva, finding 
that, there was no means of rescue, at ouce remembered Hari, who (si/the solo 
pilot in a perilous sea or the saviour in danger. In the meantime. Krisna as soon 
as he was remembered by S'aukara, took the form of a Br&hmana, arrived at the, 
spot and took his seat between the* two quarrelling parties. They too, as soon as 
they saw Lord Krisna in the shape of a Br&hmana bowed to hi&i reverentially. 
Then that effulgent, glorious, Eternal Being, S'ri Krisna blessed, them both and 






TUB BRAH MA-VAl V ART A PURANA. 


<SL 


began to address S'ankara, who was afraid of imprecations in the following 
way : — 

85-88. u 0 S'iva, among our relations, there is no one so dear to ns 
our soul, it therefore behoves us, 0 lord of gods, to preserve the soul, by all 
means. I therefore request you to save your soul by delivering the Moon to 
Daksa, as desired by him. 0 S'iva, you are the best of ascetics, of a tranquil 
disposition, foremost among the V’ai^navas and strictly impartial to all crea¬ 
tures, A magnanimous being like yourself can never be a prey to malice or 
anger; and this Dak§a who is the son of Brahma is of an exceedingly hot temper, 
dauntless and full of energy. You should not therefore oppose him in any 
way. 0 S'ankara, you know full well tbatvirtous people fear the dauntless, 
but the dauntless people fear none.” 0 S'aunuka, Lord SS'ankara, having heard 
the above wise counsel of the Supreme Lord spoke to him thus with a smiling 
countenance. 

89-9.9. S'ankara said, ‘ 0 you who are all merciful, you have been 
always kind to me. What means then this improper command on your part ? 
If you order me, I can easily sacrifice the fruits of my asueicism which I have 
been reaping for a long time, all my energy, all my prosperity, all perfection nay, 
I can sacrifice my life itself, without demur ; hut I can never betray a fugitive* 
Yoit know full well that virtue curses and forsakes those who through fear 
betray a fugitive and lerwe him in the lurch. 0 Lord of the universe, I tell 
yon therefore that I am prepared to give" up everything, hut I cannot abandon 
virtue. Anyone who is without virtue is past all redemption, and virtue 
protects those who protect virtue. 0 Lord, are you not the Lord of the 
* Vedas ? I therefore ask you to tell me kindly what act is lively to 

preserve virtue. 0 Eternal Being, you are the creator and the preserver 

of the whole universe; and ultimately, at your desire, the whole creation 
unquestionably merges into your Being. Therefore, 0 Omnipotent Lord, any 
,one whose faith in your lotus feet is as immoveable as a mountain cannot possibly 
apprehend danger fiom anybody else. In .short, if I have faith in you, not 
to talk of this trifling Daksa, I do not fear anybody ip the world”. Then 

the Lord Hari, who is conversant with the feelings of all, having heard the 

above words of S'ankara was extremely pleased. He then dragged half of the 
Moon from the summit, i. e . the head of S'ambku and delivered it to Daksa. 0 
. Bast of the Dwijas, from that time, one half of the moon that was relieved from 
all malady began to dwell in the head of B'iva; and the other half, Dakga accep¬ 
ted from Vi?nu and prepared to depart. Then 8'ri Krisna, the Lord of the 
goddess of fortune, was approached again by Da.ksa-r&j who, finding that 
half o£ the Moon that was delivered to him by Vi§nu was a victim of consump¬ 
tion, prayed for bis recovery. The impartial Hari was thereby appeased and 
said, u From this day forth, the moon for half the lunar month will remain per¬ 
fect and for the other half, he will decline. ” Having conferred this boon 
S'ri Krisna went away to his destination. Dak?a took tlie Moon and made him 
over to his daughters. Then the Moon-god having got all his beloved wives 
passed bis time with tho greatest cheerfulness in the shrine of Pu^kara and fr'om 
that time beings afraid of Daksa, he all along treated his wives'with strict 
impartiality. 0 best of saints. I have now related to you every thing (connected 





BtlAHMA-KiiANDA 


^ith the system of creation) which I had gathered from my preceptor in the 
course of my pilgrimage to Puskara while other saints were also present there. 


CHAP'fE R X. 

1-6. Sauti again said 0 best o£ BrAhmanas, I am now going to cele¬ 
brate other matters reh* ting to creation. Pray listen. The geat Ri$i Vrigu 

begat two sons named Chyavana and S'ukra, the foremost among sages; and 
Kriya-devi, the wife of Kratu, gave birth to VAikhilva, tbo best of 
saints. 0 S'aunata, thereafter the great Muni AugirA begat three, sons, 
namely, the groat saint Vrihaspati, Utathya and Snmbara;, and S'aktri, the 
son of Vasistfia begat the great Muni Parftyara. The world renowned Kri§na 
DwaipAyana Hari was descended from this high-sonled ParAsara. The great 
saint VyAsa begat a son named S'uka, who was the foremost among philoso¬ 
phers and whose birth consecreated his family. It is said that he was a digit 
of S iva. Thereafter Pulasta begat the very famous ftisi named, VisravA, 

Kuvera thodord of treasure, was descended from his stopfcf” The great Risi 

S'aunaka, as lie heard this, was astohished very mnch and addressed Sauti thus: 
‘‘0 Sauti, the words of the great-minded saints conversant with the Pur Anas 
are quite incomprehensible. The account of the birth of Kuvera is a matter 
whioh .1 could not comprehend in the least. You just told me that the Lord 
Kuvera was descended from. S'ri Krisna; how is it then that you now tell me a 
different story ? ” 

7-14. Sauti haying heard this said; At first ail tbo regents of the 
quarters were descended from the Supreme Being, it is true; but the same 
Kuvera after being cursed by a BrAhmana again took his birth in the family of 
VisravA. I tell you the cause, please listen:—once upon a time, Utathya the 
son of AugirA, intended to give the priestly fee to his preceptor PrachetA and 
with that object in view he went to Kuvera and respectfully demanded a crore 
of gold coins, 0 best of saints, Kuvera owing to his love of wealth nod 
grieved at heart for the heavy demand made upon his purse rather reluctautly 
offered to pay the amount. The hot-tempered Utathya haying beheld the crest¬ 
fallen appearance of Kuvera at once reduced him to ashes. This is the reason 
why he was born again and this is why he is celebrated by the name of VaiarA- 
vapa. Besides this, the gi eat saint VisravA begat three other sons, viz , Hava¬ 
na, Kumbhakarna and the pious great minded Bibhl§ana. Afterwards 
P ala ha Muni begat Vatsya ; the great saint Ruchi begat SAndilya. and the 
best of saints Bavarni was begotten by Gautama. The great Vrihaspati 
begat Bbaradwaja; and the saint Kasyapa begat the celebrated KAsyapa. 
These Rye Munis were the founders of the five lineages or races of BrAhamanas 
and all of thorn were full of vigour and energy. 0 best of anchorites, 
the other BrAhmanas wero also descended from the mouth of BrahmA, but 
being without lineage or race (gotra) they migrated to different places 
The latter class of BrAhmanas have no connection with the BrAhmanas who ar« 
the founders of the gotras. 

15-21 Those who were descended from the sun, the moon and Matm 
were Ksatriyas. Besides these, other Kjatrivas also took their birth 






THE BRA HMA-V AlV ART A PVRANA. 






from " the arm of BrahraA; but the first named Ksatriyas were superior to the 
last-named. The Vaisyas sprang from the thigh of BiahmS, and, from his feet, 
the S&dras came out. Afterwards, those classes of men who were descended 
from m&ed castes (that is to say in case where the husband belonged to one caste 
and the wife to another) owing to their illegitimacy were styled Varnasankaras. 
0 best of the learned Br&hmans, the cowherds, the barbers, the Bhils, tie con¬ 
fectioners, the masons, the betel-leaf-sellers, the goldsmiths, and tho merchants 
called Vanikas are styled SaVS'udras. Those who were begotten by the Vaisyas 
upon S'&dra women were styled Karanas ; and those who were begotten by the 
Br&hmanas upon the Vaisya women wore Amvasthas. Afterwards, ViswakarmA 
begat *9 sons on a S'&dra woman. They are named as follows Mal&kAra 
Karmak&ra, 8'ankhakAra, Kuvindaka, Kumbhakara, Kamsa-Kara, Sutradhara 
Chitrakftra and Swarnakara. All of them are illegimate and expert in archi¬ 
tecture ; but oat of these, the first six are particularly accomplished in architec¬ 
ture and the last three being cursed by a Brfthmaaa became unholy and were 
deemed incompetent by the SMstras to offer sacrifices. Any qno who engages 
them for the purpose of presiding in matters relating to sacrifice is also an outcasfco; 
in other words, ho is rendered unholyThe great devotee Saunaka was 
astonished to hear all this and questioned Sauti in the following way: tc O Snail, 
who art the foremost among those conversant with tho Pur&nas, what is the 
reason that Viswakamia, the best of architects, id spite of his divinity, was 
enamoured of a S'titdra woman ? What is the reason that his throe sons were 
outcasted- and what occasioned the curse of which they were the victims T Please 
explain all this in detail.” 

24-3 L Sauti answered, 0 best of saints, once upon a time, the celestial 
nymph Ghrit&chi, being extremely excited with passion, put on a lovely dress 
and proceeded in tho direction of Puskara, for pilrimage : in the moan-time, 
Viswakarm^ cheerfully arrived there from the solar region and suddenly 
observed the sportive damsel. As. soon as lie saw her, he was pierced with the 
darts of Cupid. Having lost all control over his will he demanded carnal 
intercourse from that nymph. 0 foremost among Munis, how can I describe 
the superb charm of this damsel whoso youth was everlasting and calculated to 
win the heart even of saints?" The lovely and delicate structure of this nymph was 
softer than the S'irisa flower and as she was decorated with jewels and orna¬ 
ments, there was no limit to her charms. This nymph who appeared to be six¬ 
teen years old, overpowered by the weight of her buttocks, as it were, was direct¬ 
ing her footsteps very gently and in drder to pierce others also with the darts of 
Cupid was casting very frequently amorous glances of love in all directions. 
Tho god of Wind as if desirous to enjoy the sight of her hard buttocks, loins 
and large circular bosom was sportively scattering or removing the lattice of 
her line cloth. And as gentle marks of a smile wore manifest on her face 
which shamed the vernal Moon, her lips which appeared like ripe Bimbas 
appeared doubly delightful. The marks of virmilion anapiutad with musk, 
being prominent on her forehead, the splendour of her beauty knew no bounds. 
Her ueck-being decorated with ear-rings made of gems, it was impossible for a 
spectator to control his passion on the occasion. Viawakurma, well-versed iu 
sexual science, having observed before him GhriWohi possessed of extraordinary 
beauty and a tranquil mien, began to address her with words calculated to excite 
lust and pleasing to the ears. 




BRAIIMA-KHANjDA. 



32-43. Visvvakarma said, “Q beauty, you are dearer to me than my 
life. How it it that you'are going to forsake mo and thus take away my life ? 
0 auspicious nymph, let me soe you to my heart’s content. 0 my darling, in 
order to fiud you out, I have roamed throughout the three worlds; ultimately, 
not having been able to enjoy your sight, I have made up my mind to consign 
myself to the flames. ^Now you are going to Cupid’s region. This is what 
Bambh& told me and, gathering this news form her, I have come to you. 0 
my darling, whose smile is so enchanting, behold, on the coast of this Saraswat}, 
how beautifully the groves of flowers are flourishing. In this place, the refreshing 
winds, gently blowing on all sides, is dissipating the fragrance of flowers in all 
directions. 0 my charmer, which male or female youth will not be agitated at 
the sight of the above scene ? 0 my love, I request you therefore not to waste 

your time unnecessarily ? You had better come at once and, being united with 
mo, spend your time in the enjoyment of sensual pleasures. It is well-known 
that the conjunction of lovers, equal in every respect, is highly desirable. I am 
as graceful and young as yourself. Under the circumstances our union will 
be undoubtedly very pleasing. 0 my charmer, by the excess of your beauty, 
you beat hollow all other ladies of the world. Your limbs are very dolicate and it 
appears to we that you have been excited with passion, and your longevity 
and beauty are both continuous and perennial. My beloved, consider for a 
moment, whether I am not your proper match in every respect. By the boon 
conferred upon me by S'iva who has conquered death, I too have subbued death 
like yourself. By the construction of mansions I have pleased Kuvera who has 
given me immense treasure a'a a token of his* satisfaction. I have also obtained 

a wreath of gem from Yaruna; the god of Wind, being satisfied with mo, has 

likewise given me jewels fit for women; and the god of Fire, by way of remuner¬ 
ation, has given me a pair of matchless apparels, whose splendour vies with the 
1 flame. My goad nymph, Cupid himself has taught me the science of love by 
means of which the heart of damsels can be won; and the moon-god hag been 
graciously pleased to impart to me instructions on architecture and sensual 
science. I thus gained that knowledge which it is impossible for others to 

acquire. 0 darling of my heart, I have all along been desirous to present to 

you the above wreath of gem, clothes and valuable ornaments and fortunately, 
the time has now arrived. 0 artless damsel, afraid lest I should be robbed of 
those precious objects, I have very carefully preserved them in my own house 
and, trying to find you out I have arrived at this spot. Now l desire to hand 
over all those articles to you as soon as our enjoyment is over.” That beauti¬ 
ful nymph, having heard the witty add rhetorical speech of Viswakarra&, smiled 
a little bit and made a reply couched in instructive and delightful language 
which was as follows. 

44-55- Ghritachi said, c< 0 Lord, who hast 
darts of passion, the words wherewith you tempted me 
I frankly admit, but first lend your ears to the rules or regulations which are 
binding upon our conduct as nymphs. 0 god, our practice is this that the dav 
any of us (nymphs) goes to any one, on that praeticular day she is regarded 
as his wife. Though we are loose in character yet we cannot violate the above 
law. If we violate the above law, we shall be regarded as whores. Therefore 
I am by no moans able to pander to your desire. The reason* is- this that oqfc 


been afflicted by the 
are quite legitimate, 





THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PARANA. 


ofdeference to Jie wishes of'the god Sana, I have dressed my self to-day in 

♦fi« X TU *“ n ng t0 . h n h . 009e ' U folloWS that to-day I am 

the who °t Kama, lou shaU also have to admit that I am at present tho 

wife or your proooptor, for yon just" stated that Onpid had lectured you on 
the acionoe of love. How is it possible for me, then, td gratify your desire for 
there u no am more dreadful than the violation of the Chastity of one’s nre- 
oeptors wife r 0 god, it is not unknown to yon that ihore is no preceptor in 
the three worlds so great as he who gives us knowledge or ho who initiates us in 
the mantras (myshe syllables). Either of them is a lac of times greater than 
the father and a hundred times greater than the mother. 0 proficient being, 
it is mentioned m the Vedas that as the mother is greater than the father, so 
is the preceptor s wife a hundred times more adorable than the preceptor. The 
ravishment of the preceptor’s wife is a hundred times more soandalous than the 
violation of ones mother-a fact which is well-established. 0 virtuous one 

the lady addressed as mother by the people is equivalent to a mother.-a fact 

to which the god of virtue himself cm testify. It follows therefore that to 
ravish a woman whom one has once addressed as one’s mother will entail upon 
him the dreadful pona ty of hell and as long as the sun and the moon are ex¬ 
tant he will be entangled in the cobweb of time. To ravish one’s real mother 
is four times more sinful than to ravish one's supposititious mother; and the 
violation of the chastity of the preceptor’s wife is a lac of times more sinful, 
a fact which admits of no doubt. Anyone who voluntarily and consciously 
ravishes cme s preceptors wife can, by no moans be released from the hell 
named kutublupaka for at least a kalpa of years. No S'dstra provides for 
the penance of such an abominable sin. 0 Lord, this dreadful hell name 
Kumbhipaka is circular like a potter’s vessel, keen-edged like a sword, full of 
ordure, unue and tat. or marrow. 

56-65. If any ope falls into it, it is difficult for him to come out. In 
that place insects like dreadful spoars, constantly hover, here and there. There, 

. water is hot like fir<3 and the very touch of it consumes the body. There 
sinners have to appease their thirst with that water and the nightsoil etc. 
men inned above constitute their food. This place is celebrated in tho 
0 aetras as the haunt of the more abominable sinners. So I 3 ay there is no siu 
so heinous as the rape of the preceptor's wife. Yon might have board that the 
licentious wife or tho preceptor also is affected by sin iu the same manner as 
ha , wh ° bls Preceptors wife. 0 Lord, have patience; to-day lam tho 

wile oi Ivama ; therefore I must go to him; on some other ocoasion, I shall 
oome to you m proper dress.” Viswaknrma Jnving heard tho words of Ghri- 
tachx became very angry and cursed her in this way: “O sinful nymph, as a 
result pf thy wicked deeds, take birth us a S'hdra i„ tho temporal world” 
UhrUacbi having heard the curse pronounce 1 by Viswakarma was 
highly moeused in her tarn and she also cursed him in this way: “You cursed 
me unuecessanly, therefore, by the influence of my curse, you shall fall from 
heaven and take birth also as a mortal in tho nether world (i.e. s on earth} 5 * 
Ghritaehi, having said so, wentto the abode of Kamadeva and, after huviuc 
enjoyed his society tola him everything iu detail. 0 S'aunaka, Ghritaehi! 
hy the advice pt kama took her birth at Praydga situate in India, out of the 

womb of the wife of a cow-herd, named Mudaua. The pious Ghritaehi, though 







MINIS 



BRAHMA-KIT AN DA, 


% 


a mortal, was conversant with the condition of her previous life and began to 
spend her time in devotion. As her mind .was constantly thus engaged, she 
was not inclined at first to marry. The splendour ot the body ofthis female 
devotee vied with heated gold; this condition she acquired through the mfiueuea 
of acestioism which she practised on. the lovely coast of the (ranges tor a hundred 
years according to divine calculation. 0 best of saints, the ways of providence arc 
always very mysterious which nobody can comprehend; for, behold, t ns heaven y 
courtezan transformed to a mortal (in spite of the fact that she was an ancho¬ 
rite) subsequently gave birth to nine sons begotten by ViswakarmA, after 
which, she assumed the form of Ghritaoht again and weal back ,.o heaven. 
8'aunaka, hearing the extraordinary circumstance, said, ‘0 bauti, how was it 
possible for her who was a devotee to be united with ViswMfflraitr Aim! 
how long afterwards did she give birth to nine sons and in wha^place • 
yt fi6-75. Saint Sauti, answered, “0 excellent saint, ViswakarmA also, 
cursed by GhyitAolu, with a heart full of sorrow, wont to Brahma-loka and 
there he adored Brahma with various kinds of hymns. Haying repeatedly 
thrown himself prostrate at his foot, he satisfied Brahma and related to him all 
the circumstances. Afterwards by the order of Brahma, ho descended to the 
earth and was born out of the womb of a BrAhmana woman. V iswa karma 
when ho came to the world as a BrAhmana, was regarded as an unparalleled 
architect in view of the very grand, extraordinary and royal mansions which he 
constructed, tie also instructed ordinary people on matters relating to archi¬ 
tecture in various ways. In course of time, ViswakarmA, m the holy land of 
Pray&ga, after having displayed his skill in architecture as regards the construc¬ 
tion of royal palaces, went to the coast of the Ganges tor ablution and there he 
observed a certain lady. 0 best of saints, Viswakarma who remembered all 
the conditions of his previous existence, as soon as he saw the unparalleled 
charming devotee in the full bloom of her youth in spite of the change in her 
appearance,-knew her to be Ghrit&chjL ViswakarmA of a tranquil disposition, 
as soon as he saw her, remembered all the moiden s of Ins previous life and, 
being afflicted by passion, lost, his setfscs. Ho then addressed her .gently thus : 
“ 0 Ghrit&obi, whoso thigh is graoeful like plantain, what is the reason^hnt 
you are sitting here on the coast of the Ganges in the garb of a devoteo ? O 
my charmer, do you remember I am the satm Vis wakarmA desirous to see 
you ? 0 beautv. pander to my desire and in that case I sha 1 immediately 

release you from my curse. In this temporal world, also, Oupid is tormenting 
me very much for your sake. ^ 

76-85 Therefore I solicit your favour and protection. GhritAohi who 
had assumed the form of a mortal in this world, having hoard the words of 
ViswakarmA, now a Brahmana, gave hiua the following reply using tranquil, 
instructive, melodious and excellent terms. The cow-herdess said : • you oi. 

nlacid mien, thou I was the wife of Oupid and have now become a female 
devotee. How it is possible for me then to pander to your desire ? This place, 
in particular, is the sacred land of India and we are standing oa the ho y coast 
of the river Gauges. 0 Vismka<raaA» you know full well, this sacred land o 
India isoutv a field of action that is to say, every one reaps elsewhere the fruits 
of his good"or bad actions committed by him here. Picas people, for _ redemp¬ 
tion alone, take their birth in this sacred land as a result of their .ascetioism , but, 






imtSTfty 



ultimately victims of the delusion of Visnu, they begin to commit sinful deed* 
in a spirit o£ forgetfulness. Anyone, favoured by the goddess Mayft who 
represf 3 nts tbo divine energy, is favoured by feVi Krisna, the preserver of the 
world, through whose grace he obtains faith in Kriaiia and also the desirable 
mantras relating thereto. Anyone, who on account of his pious deeds, takes his 
birth in India, but who subsequently, bewildered by delusion, forgets SM 
Krifna, the ruler of the universe, and whose mind subsequently gets attached to 
temporal matters is really a fool. 0 god, by good luck, the history of my 
previous birth is still green in my memory because l am conversant with the 
conditions of my antecedent life. I am the same celestial prostitute named 
Ghrii&oht, but, being cursed by you, I have been converted into a cow-herdess. 
0 saint, whose mind has thus been pierced by the darts of Cupid, I for the 
sake of redemption, am engaged in devotion on the coast of this sacred river. 
This place is not fit for dalliance. I, therefore, request you to set your mind at 
rest. Just consider : the sins committed by mortals in other places are easily 
destroyed by the sacred dust of the coast of the Ganges ; but the sins perpe¬ 
trated here are many millions of times more disastrous than the sins committed 
in other places. A person who consciously commits a sin on the coast of the 
Ganges, but subsequently desists from his evil acts and practises devotion on 
the holy land of Prayaga, the Ksetra of N&r&yana, is easily relieved of his 
deadly sins. It does not behove a wise being like you to discuss sinful 
matters here for the sake of lust.” Viswakarraft having heard the 
melodious words of that maiden caught hold of her with a cheerful disposition 
and carried her unseen to the Malaya mountains, the asylum of sandal. 

86-88. Then, in a certain valley of the said mount, he constructed a lovely 
flower-bed redolent of the wind that came in contact with the sandal and, there 
in solitude, he began to revel with her. For full twelve years both of them wore 
so much absorbed in sexsual pleasures that they almost lost their Cqnscionsness 
and could not distinguish the night from l^e day, 0 saint, that godly nymph 
thereafter wielded the burden of pregnancy and in due course gave birth in 
the said valley to nine sons successively. 

89-95. 0 S'aunaka, all his sons, MAlakara, Karmakara, S'ankbyak&ra, 

Tantubai, Kumbhak&ra Kamsak&ra S'utradh&ra, Swarnakara and Chitrakara 
were groat architects; and, on acooxmt of their virtuous deeds, they were 
vesteef with wisdom, strength and supernatural cleverness. Afterwards, Ghri- 
t&chi and Viswakarrna, gave proper boons to their sons and leaving them 
behind on earth departed for Heaven. Of the son3 of Viswakarm&, Swarna- 
k&ra became outcasted and unholy on account of the curse pronounced 
against him by a Br&hmin whose gold he had stolen. Sutraclhara also neg¬ 
lected to carry out the orders of a Brahmin to collect fuels for sacrifioial 
purposes and, being cursed by him, was likewise degraded. Chitrak&ra 
transgressed the orders of a Brahmin in respect of a picture the construc¬ 
tion of which was defective and not according to orders and underwent 
the same fate. A certain 13unya, bping contaminated by the company of the 
fallen Swarnakara and polluted by the offence of theft, was likewise cursed 
by a Br&hmH a’nd outcasted. 



BEAHMA-KHANDk. 



96-106. 0 3 aint, how I am going to describe to you tho cause of the 

downfall of other castes. Chitrakftra begat a caste upon a S'ftdra prostitute, 
and the origin of this caste (named Atfc&likftk&ra) being tainted with illegitimacy, 
it was degraded. This caste begat upon a potter woman another caste named 
Kotaka, clever in the matter of construction of houses. The potter begat 
on a Kotaka-woman a caste of a very crooked nature called Taila-kftra. The 
K?atriya begat upon the Rajput-woman a caste named Tibar. All these 
castes are polluted by the sins of their fathers. The Tibara begat upon 
a Tailakftra woman a oaste named Lota or Dasyu whose profession is burglary. 
The Lata begat upon the Tibara woman Malla and five other castes. 
The S’udra begat upon a Brfthmin woman a caste which is the meanest 
of all castes and quite untouchable called the Chandftla. The Tibar begul 
ov a Chandftl-woraan, a caste named Charma-kftra. the Chandftla begat on 
a Oharraa-kara woman a caste called the butcher. The Tibara begat on a 
butcher woman a caste named the Konch. The Kaivarta begat on the Koneha 
woman a caste named Kartftra. The Leta begat on a Chanel ft la-worn an tne 
castes named H&di and Doma. Both of them have despicable natures. The 
Charujftla begat upon the Hadis five kinds of castes, very wicked, who wander 
in tho forests. 

107-113- Now I am going to relate to you, 0 S'aunaka the genesis 
of the caste called S'ankara. On the coast of tho Ganges, the Leta 
begat on tho Tibar a caste named Gangft-Putra. The Veoa-dhftri begat on 
the Gangft-Putra a caste named Yungi. Tho Vaisya begat on a Tibara 
woman a caste named S'undi. The Ksatriya begat on a Karana woman the 
caste named Rftj-put. The Vaisya begot on a S'undi-woman a A caste named 
S'aunciraka. Tho Karana begat on a Raj-put wife a caste* named A garb The 
Ksatriya begat on a Vaisya woman a caste named Kaivarta. Some of these 
Kaivartas were degraded in the Kali-yuga by their associaiion with the 
Tibara and r ,acquired the name of Dhibara. The Dhlbara begat on the Tibara 
woman a caste named Rajaka. Tho Tibara begat on the Rajaka woman a caste 
named Koftli. The barber begat on the Gopa woman a caste named Sarvaswi. 
The Ksatriya begat on a Sarvaswi woman a yery powerful oaste named 
Vyftdha or fowler who kills boasts. 

114-124.. Then Tibara begat on a S'undikft woman seven sons 
successively who, ia Kaii-yuga, by virtue of their association with the 
Hftdis commit burglary. 0 best of anchorites, a Itisi begat on a Brfthmin 

woman a certain son- But as that son took his birth being conceived on the 
first day of the menses of his mother, which was a bad day, he was called Kfrdara 
i. e offspring of a bad womb. , The son is degraded on account of the 
defeot of the menses in his mother. His descendants, springing out of the loiu 
of a Ri$i, perform purification rites like an ordinary Brfthmin on the occasion 
oE the defilement caused by the birth and death of a relation. But they have 
been degraded by their association with the Kotika caste at present and are hence 
extremely contemptible. Likewise, a Ksatriya begat on a S'udra woman a son, 
very powerful and clever in archery conceived on tho first day of thi 
menses; and as he did not desist from burglary, though dissuaded by his father 
he was called Bftg-atita. Likewise, on the same, day, a Ksatriya begat 





THE BRAHM A«V A1V ART A PVRAJTA. 


<§L 


ona S'tidra woman a caste called the Mlecchas, very crooked in disposition, 
dauntless and almost invincible. The members of this caste do not observe 
rites of purification, draw do distinction between virtue and vice and are very 
shameless. Afterwards the Mleechas begat on the Kuvfoda girls a caste named 
Jol&s mnd the Jol&s begat on the said girls a caste named S'af&ka, Those castes 
that sprang into existence with the taint of illegitimacy, are numberless. No 
one can count their number and find out all their names, 0 beat of saints, As- 
wiuikuru&ra, tho heavenly physician, afterwards begat on a Br&hman woman 
the caste called the Vaidyas. These Vaidyas begat on the S'ftdra* woman many 
sons versed in medicine and gifted with domestic virtues. The S'lldra-woman, 
by her association with the last-named gave birth to many children who are 
called snake* oharmera,” 

125-134. S'aunaka was astonished at the words of Saufci and said, 

' Sir, what irony of fate led Aswinlkum&ra, the offspring of the sun, to 
copulate with a Br&hmin woman ? Kindly narrate this incident and gratify 
my curiosity.” Sauti, the best of saints replied, 0 beat of Munis, impossible 
are the ways of Providence. Once upon a time, this tranquil, strong offspring 
of the sun was enamoured of a Br&hmin woman while she was going out on 
pilgrimage. Though he was dissuaded by her again and again, he forcibly 
took her to a grove, ravished and impregnated her. The lady, bewildered with 
alamo and fear, caused her own miscarriage ; and at once a son, beautiful like 
tho heated gold, was born to her in the said grove. Through affection, .she 
took the child in her lap ; and, abashed, she went to her husband and narrated 
to him, in detail, the events brought about by Providence. The Brahmin was 
highly incensed and abandoned his wife along with her son. The lady, over¬ 
come with grief andI hkJ shame, quitted her human frame by virtue of her as. 
cetieism and was turned into a river named Grod&v&ri. On the other hand, 
Aswintkumftra, finding his son motherless, reared him with great care and 
taught him matters relating to medical science, architect and mantras 
(mystic syllables and formulae), Afterwards, a certain descendant of 

Aywinlkum&ra gave up his Vodic faith, reported to astrology and received 

his wages as an astrologer. Hence he was subsequently called the 
astrologer. A descendant of this astrologer, out of avarice, having accepted 
from a. S'ftdra, the first gifts and sacrificial offerings presented to the manes 

(the deceased ancestors) was called Agra D&nl. 0 Wt of anchorites, just 

listen to another extraordinary incident. On the occasion of the sacrificial 
rites performed by a Br&hmixi, an extraordinary Being came out of the sacrificial 
pit and was celebrated by the name of Suta. He was a religious preacher and 
our originator, i,c . the founder of our raoe. 


135-138. The great architect Bralimft himself very kindly taught hirn 
the Pur&nas. Hence the descendants of Sftta are still known as students of 
the Pur&nas. Afterwards, Sfita begat on the Vaisyas a caste named Bh&ts who 
are professional orators and reciters of hymns or eulogies. Q excellent saint, 
I have mentioned to you only a few castes that inhabit the globe. Besides 
those, there are others who came into oxistance with taints of illegitimacy. 
Now I am going to tell you the rolation which Brahma, the creator of the 
world, has fixed among men and women. 




The sister o£ tho father is Pitri-Swas&. r lhe sister of the mother is MAsurl. 
The son is called Tanaya, Putra etc. The daughter is named Duhita, Kany&, 
etc. The soa ’3 wife is called the daughter-in-law. The husband of the daughter 
is called tho son-in-law. The brother of the husband is called Devara. 
The father and the mother of the husband are called father-in-law 

and mother-in-law respectively. The husband is called Pati, K&nata 
etc. The brother of the wife is called the brother-in-law. The sister 
of the wife is called the sister-in-law* The mother of the wife is called 

the mother-in-law. The father of the wife is called the father-in-law. Tho 
brother by the same parents is called Bhr&tft, the sister is called Sodarft, 
O S'aunaka, the husband of the wife's sister is like a brother ; and che father- 
in-law should be respected like tho father, for he is the progenitor of the wife, 
the half of the husband. There are five kinds of fathers who are as follows 
(!) he who maintains us, (2) he who preserves us from danger, (3) the father 
of the wife, (4) tho religious preceptor or guru, (5) the progenitor or ho who 
begets a child. There are fourteen kinds of mothers who are as follows (1) 

the wife and the sister of the person who maintains us, (3) auhfc, i e. paternal 

uncle’s wife, (4) and (5) mother and step-mother, (6) daughter, (7) daughtor-in- 
law, (8) (0) paternal and maternal grand-mothers, (10) mother-in-law, (11) 
sister of the mother, (12) wife of the maternal uncle, (13) sister of the father 
(14) wife of the religious preceptor. 

156-170. The son of a son is called tho grandson whose son again is called 
tho great-grandson. Tho descendants of tho grandson are called the Kulajas. 
The daughter’s son is oallod the Dauhitra. The descendants of tho daughter’s 
son and sister’s son are called the Bfindavas. The sons of the nephews are more 
Gy&ntis. The son of a preoeptor is like a brother. He deserves maintenance 
asrnuch as the daughter of a preceptor and iscelebraled by the name of Bdndaava, 
The father -in-law of a son or daughter is like a brother and is called the Bandhu 
or Baib&hika. The preceptor of the daughter is also like a brother and is a 
Bandhu. Tho preceptor, the brother’s preceptor and the father-in-law are to 
be adored like preceptors. Persons between whom friendship subsists are 
called friends; This friendship is the source of happiness. Ho who causes 
misery is an enemy. Accidentally a friend causes sorrow, and a disinterested 
person sometimes causes happiness. Therefore the authors of tho holy scriptures 
maintain three kinds of relations viz. (1) the relation acquired by knowledge, 
the relation established by Sex, (3) the relation produced by affection. That 
which subsists through affection is called friendship. This is very rare. The 
mother and wife of a friend are like mothers ; there is no difference between 
oue^ own father or brothoi and a friend’s father' or brother. * Besides this, 





THE BRAHMA-VAlVARTA FUrAnA. 


relation fixed by Brahma which is merely nominal. The lover of 
an unchaste woman is called a gallant, a paramour, a frioud ; but this relation is 
merely nominal. The gallant of such a woman is just liko a husband to 
her ; and his concubine is like a wife to him. This fourth relation is current accor¬ 
ding to the local usage of a place; but in other places, it is highly condemned. No 
mention being made of it in the Vedas, it is regarded as detestable. It is said 
to have been ostablisted by Viswrimitra. For a woman, this relation is more 
scandalous. As even great men cannot do away with this custom* it has become 
current in several places ; but an energetic man is not/ affected or polluted by 
observance of this custom and it prevails in every age. / 

CHAPTER XI. 

1-11. Then the'great anchorite S'annaka addressed Saufci reverentially 
and enquired of him thus : “0 Sauti, what did the Br&hmtn afterwards do, 
when ho forsook his spouse ? By what name is the sou of Aswinikum&ra 
known and in what family was ho born ? Kindly oblige me by answering these 
questions”, Sauti answered, “That Br&hrain saint named 8utap&, the ornament 
of the race of Bharadw&ja, subdued by anger, forsook his wife and went to the 
Himalayas for devotion to S'rt Krisna. 8utap& beaming forth with effulgence 
great er than ever by the power of his devotion suddenly perceived in the Heavens 
one day the pure and spotless light of the Supreme Being, S'ri Kri^na. TheBrfi- 
hrain seeing that He transcended nature did not pray for his final emancipation hut 
only begged His bondage (i.e. wanted to serve Him for over) and besought the 
boon, of reverence for Hari^ Later on, thoro was a voice in the sky to this effect, 
“0 BrUhmia, lead a married life for some time and then you will obtain the boon 
required or as desired by you”. He wanted to marry and Brahma himself delivered, 
to him the ideal or intellectual daughter of the manos. He begat upon her a 
son named Kaly&n-Mitra, the best of saints, the very reuiombranco of whom dis¬ 
pels the fear of thunder cherished by people aud secures back to them lost articles 
and friends. Later on, for some reason Sutapft forsook the mother of Kaly&n- 
mitra ; and by association of ideas, he was reminded of the former iniquities of 
Aswinikumkr whom he cursed thus. “0 basest of gods ! From this day forth, by 
vitue of my curse, both of you brothers shall be deprived of a share in the 
sacrificial rites. Yon will be discarded by your worshippers, and, being diseased 
and paralysed, you shall be uuworthy of celebrity in the world. The valorous 
SutapsL having said so, wont home with his son Kaly&nmitra ; and later on, 
the Bun-god came to him with both the Aswinikumar brothers. The Sun, the 
lord of the three worlds, with both his children, began to adore Sutap& thus: 

12 20. ‘ 0 saint, forgive the sins of my sons. Lord N&r&jana himself in every 
age graciously takes the form of a Br&hmin for the preservation of mankind. 
You typify that virtuous lord. Anger does not become you. With one tongue, 
it is impossible to praise a Brahmin. Brahm&, Vi$nu, Mahesa and other gods 
are all gratified by receiving flower, fruits and water presented by a Br&hmiru 
The gods invoked by a Brfihmin are adored in the world, again and again, 
ihere is no god superior to a Brahmin whose shape Hari often takes. Nay, 
Bari is appeased when the Br&hmins are pleased. [jThe gods are pleased when 
Hari is pleased, When the Brahmins are pleased with a person, he cannot 




BBAHMA-KIIANDA. 



apprehend danger from any god. As there ie no river inoro sac-rod than tho 
Ganges, no god superior to Visnu, no Vaisnava greater than S'lva none more 
patient and forbearing than the earth, so there is none greater than a Brahmin. 
As there is ao religion greater than truth, no woman chaster than P&rvati, none 
stronger than fate, none dearer than the son, so there is' nothing more subs¬ 
tantial or real than homage to a Br&hmin. As there is no enemy more 
deadly than disease, none more respectable than the religious preceptor, n<? friend 
equal to the father or the mother, so there is no benefactor like a Brahmin, 
As there is no vow greater than EkAdasi, no wealth so precious as the gem, no 
gem so great as knowledge, so a Br Ah min’s stage is the best of all the stages of 
human life. BribrnA himself has admitted that the efficacy of the Vedas consists 
in acknowledging the spiritual superiority of a Bahrain. It is needless to say 
more. Be propitiated and .show,.QOiapassion to my sons.’y 

21-31, Bharadliwaja, the great saint, having hoard the modest words of the 
Bun, cheerfully bowed low and cured his sons of their diseases through asceticism. 
He then said, “After a while, your sons will again get a share in sacrificial 
offerings.” So saying he went to the coast of the Ganges to pray Hari; and 
the Sun also departed cheerfully from that place. Whoever will read this hymn 
composed by the Sun-god will achieve success every-whero. And whoever at 
break of day will read'thus, “I bow to the Brahmins” will get a fceaefii equal to 
the fruits reaped by a person by bathing in every sacred river or by initiation 
in every religious ceremony. All the sacred rivers of the water meant for 
pilgrimage merge in the ocean ; and the feet of a Br&hmin coutain all one places 
of the earth meant for pilgrimage and consequently there is nothing in the world 
which cannot bo accomplished by a man by his grace. 0 S'aunaka, so long as the 
earth is moistened with the water of a Br&hmtn’s feet, the manes of the deceased 
ancestors drink water cheerfully out of the golden cup shaped like a lotus. 
And whoever driukssuch water reaps the advantages of every pilgrimage and in« 
itiation in eVery religious ceremony. 0 best of Brahmins, whoever drinks the 
water of his feet reverentially for one month is assuredly cured of all 
diseases. 0 great Saint, a Brkhmin, ignorant or learned, if he performs 
regularly the morning, noon and evening rites (i.e., odes to the Sun) and if 
he has faith in Visnu is undoubtedly equal to. Visna himself. A Brahmin 
in a fit of anger or jealousy, with or without cause, cursing others, should not 
bo cursed in return. Nay, a BrAhmin devoted to Hari, is more pious than the 
cows, a hundred times. 

32-40. Whoever drinks the water of his feet or eats the refuse of his 
food reaps bene tits of the KAj-Sftya (royal sacrifice). Tho water of the feet 
of a Br5hmin who fasts on the day of EkAdasi and devoutly worships Hari 
every d u y converts every place into a pilgrimage. A BrAhrain is redeemed in 
his life-time if he consecrates his food to Hari at first and subsequently eats 
it himself. BrahmA has thus ordained for the Br&hmins of high rank:— 
a thing which has not been dedicated to Hari if it is drinkable in the form of 
liquid, is just like urine ; and, if it is eatable in the form of some dry substance, 
it is urohibited like ordure. Look ! BrahmA and all his sons including VasW- 
tha are devoted to Hari, and all the Brahmins arc their descendants. How 
can they turn away from his worship ? If a Brahmin, through the fault of his 










THE BRAH MA~V AIV ART A PVRANA . 


religions preceptor or his parents, neglects his worship, he is really dead though 
ostensibly alive. The father who does not incline tko heart of his sen to the Jovtv 
tiOaof Hari is contemptible; any son who does not assist his father in His worship 
is a wicked son. To call a person a friend who does not encourage His wor- 
ti a mockery. It is folly to call him a king who does hot rale for 

s sake. I ue term “friend” as applied to a person who does not counsel 
ou matters of Hart-worship is n misnomer. A Brahmin who has no faith in 
Hari is worse than a Ohanj&lu who has faith in Hurt. For the latter will get 
salvation; and the former will go to hell. Sacha Ohan-liU is a hundred 
Hines better than such a BrAhmin. A Br&hmin, *void of periodical worship 
(Sandhyft etc.), impure and without faith in Hari is but the apology of a 
Br&bman and resembles a snake void of poison. 

41-46,. A inagnauimoas Br&hmin into whose ears the mystio syllable of 
Visnu's holy name has been ponred is iiberatod or emancipated in hia life-time, 
as held by Brahma. That fortunate Vuisnava merges in the lotus-foot of 
Hari with hundred ascendants in the line of his maternal grand-father and a 
crore of ancestors in his own lino. 0 excellent saint, besides these four caste 
(riz. Brahmin, Ksatriya, Vaisya, S'udra) there is a fifth caste name l Yaisnava. 
As the Vaisnavas adore the lotus-feet of Hari, so Hari. approaches them and con- i 
templates them again and again. May, Sri Xrisna even after deputing His 
great wheel (Sudars in) for the preservation of his worshippers, cannot remain 
free from anxiety, for He approaches them and resides by their side. 


CHAPTER XII. ' 

1-10. Then Saunaka, the best of Riais, having heard all this i>om the 

great-minded Sauti cheerfully asked him again. ‘Through your kindness, I 
heard with cariosity many things connected with the line of Risis incidentally, 
though f did not raise tha question myself. Now I enquire which groat 
Risi, directed by Brahma, took part in oroafciou. Whiok saints had subdued 

their passions ? What did the great N&rada do after his quarrel with his father? 
To what condition were the father and the son reduced as a rosolt of their 
quarrel? Kindly gratify my curiosity by dealing with the above points ” Sauti 

answered. “Except Hamsi, Yati, Aruni, Bodhu, Panoha-Sikha, Aptaai&rtama 
and the five Riais including Sanaka, all the sons of Brahma, in obedience to his 
orders, attached themselves to the enjoyments of life and took part in creation. 
Brahma, being cursed by Narada, lost his right to adoration, (i>., forfeited his 
ciaim to bo worshipped by men). Therefore the Pandits do not worship him 
Ujp to this djiy.. N&rada too, being cursed by his father, took his birth as a 
Gandarva. This incident I am going to relate to you in detail. A certain 
king of the Gandarvas, through prosperous in every respect, was deprived of 
the most pleasant object in all the world as a result of his Kanwt. I mean, he 
had no son and used to p iss his days sorrowfully. But being advised by his 
preceptor, he went away, poor in spirit, to the Puskani, the resort of pilgrims 
where he took the vow of asceticism or deep meditation and began to pray 
S?ambhu, At that time, Vasisiha kindly gave him the hymn, amulet and 
mystio formula of twelve letters relating to S'iva. 






BP, All MA-KHANBA, 


11-20, Che afflicted king took the vow of abstlnenoe and tor a hundred 
recited the Mantra given by Vasisfcha. After the lapse of that period, he saw b i\n 
standing before bitn and brightening the quarters with his effulgence and glory. 
This glorious Being was smiling gently, on account of which he looked propitious. 
Kind to his worshippers and yielding to them the benefit of asceticism, he is the 
emblem and root of devotion/To those who seek his protection, he gives all pros¬ 
perity. Mounted on a bull, stark naked, ho had a body bright like crystal. He has 
three eyes and holds u trident in his hands. The cluster oi his knotted tawny 
hair on the head is superior in beauty to heated gold, ihe blue hue with 
which his throat is tinged gives him a supernatural, charm. He is omniscient 
and surrounded by snakes. Like Time personified, he destroys all: but he himself, 
has conquered death. His appearance shov/s that millions bf mid-nay ^summer 
suns have risen at one and the same time; and he is the Lord of all. This 
tranquil redeemer of mankind gives an insight into the reality of thaigs and 
inspires faith in Hari. The king of the Gandarvas fell down flat before him and 
worshipped him according to the hymn given by Vasi^tha. ihejraeroiful 3 iva said, 
'‘Accept a boon.” Thereupon tho King craved from him a boon of homage 
to Hari and prayed for a son who should be devoted to Hari. I hen the 
Eternal S'iva, the friend and the Lord of the poor., smiled at the words of the 
king said. 


21-32. “0 prince, you ought to have been satisfied with only one boon ; 

thesecond boon is only a repetition of the first. Just see, no one is easily satisfied 
with the good things of the world. In other words, no bound can be sot to ones 
ambition. The sages having discovered this defect in things of sensual enjoy¬ 
ment have abandoned their desire and regard the belief in Hari as ! he only 
supreme and substantial object in the world. Son ! any one who cherishes 
this auspicious faith permanently for Him can easily consecrate the whole 
world. Such a man, no doubt, delightfully goes to tho Cow-world with mil¬ 
lions of ancestors in his own line and a hundred ancestors in the lino of his 
maternal grand-father. Thi 3 worshipper of Hari can easily destroy throe 
kinds of sins, occasioned by the body, the tongue and the mind; and, after hav¬ 
ing fully reaped ihe fruits of his religious acts, attains Han’s bondage, which 
is coveted even by BrahmtL 8o long as a man cannot fix his mind upon 
Hari, ho cannot dispense with the ties of attachment to his family, worldly 
enjoyments and feelings of pains and pleasure. But faith in Hari alone dispels 
the above delusion. The worshipper of Hari who, by his virtues, is able to 
fix Hari, the Eternal and Supreme Brahma in the tablet of his heart cuts 
asunder the ties of the world and drives an axe at the root of this tree of 
karma in the shape and good or bad acts by the sword represented by his de¬ 
votion to Hari. A virtuous man whose sons, as a result of his virtues, are 
Vaisnavas, can easily redeem millions of ancestors in his own line, yon ! There¬ 
fore I request you to accept only one of tho boons craved by you. The devo¬ 
tees consider themselves gratified if they get only one boon. &o they never 
expect to get another. No one is sufficiently satisfied with good things, i.e,> 
the more he gets, the more he desires. High aspiration is by no means desir¬ 
able. 13at sou ! the homage to Hari is a treasure which we have carefully 
preserved and jealously guarded for our own use. VVe are reluctant to part 

6 







THE BRAHMAt-VAlVARTA PVR'ANA . 


§L 


sm ^ ^ 

with it easily. Therefore, soft, crave another boon, but not this particular 
boon. The position of India, Gcd or Brnhmfi., I can undoubtedly give you 
Or, the different kinds o£ divine faculties (viz., Amina, etc ), sublime mental 
abstiaction, the knowledge o£ the realities of things, immortality, any o£ these 
gifts I am prepared to give you, but not the belief in Hari. flearing these 
words, the throat and the lips of the Gandarva-King were parohed up with 
grief; and he thus addressed S'iva, the friend of the poor and souroe of all 
prosperity. 

33-39. The worshippers o£ Krisna do not seek to attain even the position 
of Brahttitf, transcient like a dream, which dissolves in a wink or the twinkle of 
the eye o£ the Supreme Being. 0 Lord, the gifts you alluded to are verv 
insignificant in the estimation of the worshipper of Hari, 0 Lord I 0 God all 


mercifulJ a true Vaisnava does not desire oven the kinds o£ redemption 
named S&lokya, S4rti (equality with God in power and attributes) S&mipay or 
(absorption into God). He does not want even final emancipation or 
Nirvana. In all conditions whether asleep or awake, he wants only this rare 
gift, viz., firm faith in Hari and bondage to Hari. 0 tree, yielding all fruits 
to thy adherents, by thy merits, bestow on mo faith in Hari as well as a Vaisna¬ 
va son, undeserving as I am. He who solicits other gifts from you, when you 
are appeased or propitiated, lives in a paradise of fools. If you disdain to give 
me this gift on the ground that I am the basest of mortals, I shall cut off my 
head and consign it to the flames. 5 ’ The merciful Lord having heard tb* 
piteous words of the modest Gandarva addressed him thus: 

40-45. “0 King, be of good cheer. You have subdued me by your 

faith.' I wish to give you the boon. From this day forth, you will acquire 
faith in Hari. And very soon you will, by my grace, get a Vaisnava son who 
will enjoy a very long life. He wall subdue his passions, be graceful in appear¬ 
ance, very wise and devoted to his religious preceptors.” S'ankara having 
said so, went home, and the king of the Gandarvas also cheerfully returned to 
bis house. The men and the Gandarvas successful in their design, when they 
heard about the boon, were delighted beyond measure. The godly saint Nani- 
da, cursed by Brahra&, vas afterwards begotten by the king of the Gandarvas 
on his wife. When the old wife of the Gandarva king gave birth to this son, 
devoted to Hari and possessed of all merits, on the Gandha-Madan mountains, 
Vasistha, the family preceptor, came to know by means of his devotions that 
this child would be adored throughout the world and naming him, therefore, 
Upavarhana, i.e., very adorable, performed the ceremony of christening (nam¬ 
ing) the child in an auspicious moment. 


CHAPTER XII I. 

1-9. Santi, the great saint, said, “0 asylum of devotion, the old 
king of the Gandarvas reaped, through the grace of S'ankara, the fruit of the 
tree of the de.dre which he had cherished in his heart for a long time i.e he 
was blessed with a son:—aq event which filled him with rapture*; and led him 
to distribute wealth and all sorts of alms to the poor. Afterwards 
when Upavarhana passed the bounds of his childhood, i when he grew up he 
was initiated by Vasistha in the mystic formula relating Jo the worship of 






gRAtlMA-KHANDA. 



Hari and set his mind upon arduous asceticism. Oaoe upon a time, t. e an* 
darra ladies came to bathe there on the coast of the Ganuaka am were 
enchanted by the superb charms of the youthful Upavarhapa. They all J ,e . a 
at b»s sight and, on recovery, these fifty ladies wanted to have him tor neu 
husband. They, accordingly, sacrificed their lives (died) by means ot their de¬ 
votion and were subsequently begotten again by the Qandarva . u ra-ra a. 
In due time, those licentious maidens acknowledged Upavarhapa m their near, 
as their husband and, ultimately with the permission of their father, place 
round his neck ths wreath of a bridegroom, (i.e., married Upavarbana). • n- 
comprehensible are the ways of Piovidence ! That Upavarhana who a uis* 
knew none but Hari forgot all about Him—as he was a victim to the extraordi¬ 
nary charms of these damsels. Thereupon Upavarbana of never fading jou 
lustfully took the damsels to a solitary place and indulged in sensual pleasures 
for three hundred thousand years. Having tasted the pleasures or a kingdom 
for some time in the company of his wives, once upon a time, singing the eulogies 
of Hari, he suddenly came to Brahma at the shrine of the Puskara. At that time 
Brahmft was witnessing the dance of a celestial nymph called Kumbha along 
with other gods. Suddenly he (Upavarbana) became impatient at the sight o 
her thigh (beautiful like plantain) and hard, spherical rising breast exposed by 
the wind. His semen was discharged. He had to abandon the celebration o 
the sweet name of Hari and fainted like an ordinary licentious mortal. A tic 
gods of the assembly burst into a fit of laughter at his condition. But brahma 
cursed him thus *— 

10-19. u O mean-minded Gandarva prince f as a result of this evil act on 
thy pafrt, thou shalt forsake the body of a Gandaiwa and bo born as a S udra. 
Afterwards the association of the Vaisnavas will enable thee to be my son agam. 
0 son t do not be grieved on this account. For a man’s greatness is not mani¬ 
fest unless and until he tastes calamities. Every body by turns tastes pleasure 
or pain.” 0 paint whose sole treasure is asceticism, 13r&hm&, the creator of 
the world, having said so, went back to his domain and Upavarbana af ter having 
displaced wonderful incidents to the spectators gave up his ghost. These I am 
going to narrate to you Listen ! First ho penetrated the six mystic or eso¬ 
teric divisions or circles, (chakras) of the body, viz*, Mul&dhara etc. then ho 
penetrated the sixteen arteries or veins of his body viz. Idl otc. Then by 
the powers of his asceticism he brought his sensient soul along with 
his mind in the form of a swab into the aperture at the crown of his head and 
united it for a moment only with the Supremo Being. O S'aunaka,^ this great 
devotee, the prince of the Gandarvas who was aware of the conditions of his 
previous birth or former life thus gained a personal interview with the Supreme 
Being, adorable by the gods. After a while, the three stringed lute, rare to 
ethers, he put on his left shoulder and he held with his right baud tue wreath of 
crystal. 

20-25. Then he directed his head towards the East and legs towards the 
West and lay down on a seat of holy grass prostrate like a mighty Being who 
had been exhausted. In this condition, he loudly pronounced the word of two 
letters in Sanskrit viz., Krisna, the Supremo good, ttye essence oi the Vedas and 
the germ of redemption and then suddenly shut his eyes for evor. ihe king of the 








THE fiRARMA-VAIVARTA PUB. AN A. 


Gandarvas, as he beheld the sad condition of his son, lost; hig patience, lamented 
his death for a long time and with hb wife remembering S'ri Kri§na, merged 
into the Supreme Being on the strength of his abstract meditations. When 
the wives of Upavarhana beard this, they began to cry bitterly ; and bewildered 
by the spell of Vi§mi, they returned home after great lamentations. The chief 
of his queens, the chaste M&l&vati, clasped the dead body of her husband, began 
to cry most bitterly and addressing he? beloved husband who was no more said 
thus:— 

26-35. “0 my shrewd, witty and potent lord ! 0 my love ! Where have 
you gone to, leaving me hero to mourn yonr loss ? Appear before me, though 
for a time only. 0 Lord of my life ! the place rendered fragrant by the sandal 
wood, the place refreshed by the wind charged with the particles of the water 
of the transparent stream, the flower-grove situatod on the brink of the river 
called Puspa-bh&drA, the place redolent of the sandal-scented breeze refreshing 
the mind and the senses, the flower-conches besmeared with sandal, the places 
resounding with the melody of the cuckoos, the place refreshed by the aqueous 
vapour emanating from the Malatl flowers, the valley of the Gaudha-ra&dan 
situatod on the brink of this river, the place consecrated by the movements of 
N&rayana and Laksmi and still marked by their foot steps, the place where in I 
the solitudes of the above mountain rendered sacred by the visits of Visnu, you 
sported with me all these I say, come back to my recollection and grieve mo 
extremely. Bweet words, like honey, with which you moistened my heart, 
likewise come buck to my memory and perplex my mind. 0 lord of my life l 
the company of the virtuous is more pleasing than Heaven, but separation from 
them is more afflicting than death. The pain caused by bereavemout occasioned 
by tho loss of one’s relations is still more painful. The loss of the son, again, 
causes an indescribable pain ; but tho pain caused by the death of the husband 
is, of all calamities, the* worst and most intolerable to a chaste woman. 

36-51. 0 lord ! the last-named sorrow takes a new shape every-day and 

wounds the susceptibilities of a vrituous woman who was devoted to her husband. 

All other sorrows could be healed if the woman once only enjoys the compauy 
of her husband, but tho sight of no other mortal can relieve the pangs of sepa¬ 
ration from one s husband. 0 Lord of my life ! Brahmil himself Mih said that 
to a chaste woman there is no friend so dear as the husband. Therefore, tell 
mo, lord, how is it possible for me to save myself from this shoreless ocean of 
sorrow ? Bo saying, Malavati began to weep with redoubled sorrow and said, 
u 0 regents of the quarters ! 0 virtue ! 0 Brahma ! 0 king of the mountains ! 

0 NUr&yana t kindly restore my husband to mo.” Bo saying, M&I&vati, weeping 
and weeping, fainted in that dense and almost inaccessible forest. There she 
passed days t and nights alone in a state of unconsciousness with her husband 
clasped in her breast. The gods preserved her unobserved. At break of day, 
her senses came back to her. She wepj bitterly again and addressing Hari, 
the dostroyor of all sorrow, she spoke thus:—'0 Lord of t ie Uuiverse ! I am 
now helpless. The whole uuiverse is void forme. But you arc the preserver 
of alb Why do you not proservo me, then ? 0 Lord ! I am bewildered by your 
spell. I am lamenting the loss of my husband on the ground that ho was my 
master or lord, u#d I, his tfife. But, truly speaking, you are the sole master 








and origin of the whole universes 0 all-meroiful Being ! As a result of 
Karma, it is tree, this son of the Qandarva king was my husband and I, 
his wife. But I do not know how he who used to grow impatient of n:y 
absence for one minute couid forsake a wretch like myself to-day. 0 
Lord ! truly, no one is anybody’s husband or wife or son. Providence alone 
causes such conjunction or separation, a9 a result of Karma. To be sure, 
fools are delighted at union and feel a mortal agony at separation. But 
the Supreme Being is not subject to this feeling like an ordinary mortal. 0 
Lord! the whole world is transient and, truly, the friends, relations and ail 
the enjoyments of life are fleeting. He who realises this truth and renounces 
everything is truly blessed. But ho who is compelled to forsake his con¬ 
nexions with the world against his will is liable to continuous pain. These defects 
or shortcomings of the world have led great men to relinquish the enjoyments 
of life and devote themselves to the lotus-feet of Hari who is all happiness, free 
from evil and destructive of all sorrow. 0 Lord I virtuous men iu the world 
alone acquire wisdom;. how may a woman acquire it ? With folded palms, 
and streaming eyes I pray you to restore my love to me, as to a woman who 
has been bewildered by your spell. I do not want divinity, the position of 
India or redemption, but I pray you, the source of the four-fold objects of human 
pursuit, to oblige me by giving me back my husband. 

52-61. 0 Lord of the universe, though unfortunate, I am lucky in one 

respect. For no woman in the world ever obtained a husband as accomplished 
as mine. Providence bestowed on my husband all qualities except immorta¬ 
lity. He gave him an extraordinary personal graco and a virtuous disposition. 
It. is no exaggeration to say he was even equal to Narayana in beauty, valour, 
wisdom, Serenity of disposition or contentment of mind. He was devoted to 
Hari, like Hari sublime and deep like the ocean, valorous like the sun, pure like 
the fire, good-lookiag like tho moon and enchanting like Cupid. He was intel¬ 
lectual like Vrihaspati and poetical like S'ukra. Ho was well versed in all 
sciences like the goddess of knowledge and his genius shamed Bhrigu. He was 
wealthy like Kuvera and more munificent than Mann. Ho was religious like 
Dharma, more truthful than Satyavrafca, more austere in his devotion than 
Sanat Kumara and more virtuous in his dealings than Brahuiil. He was di¬ 
vine like Indra and ho shamed tho Earth in the quality of forbearance. 0 
all meroiful hejng, friend of the poor ! I do not know how my acoursod heart 
is at rest even on the occasion of the death of my husband. 5 ’ iSo saying, the 
chaste MiU&vati was suddenly tilled with anger and addressing the gods spake 
thus “0 cruel gods ! you establish your dignity by partaking in vain of tho 
sacrificial offerings and clarified butter. I shall deprive you of your right 
to the offerings. 0 omnipresent N&rftyana ! you are tho preserver of the 
worlds. I am not apart from your world. So, I say, restore my beloved 
nusband to life ; or L shall curse you, this moment. 

62-6b. 0 Brabmd, lord of creation ! cursed by your son, you have be¬ 

come unworthy of worship. Vour surviving privileges in the world I shall 
also destroy by my curse. 0 most wise S'ambhu ! by curse, I shall destroy tho 
knowledge you possess of the realities of things. 0 Virtue’ Just seo if I 
can dismanlle you from the position of virtue. By fay cur 9 e, Varna w.ill be 






THE BRAHMA-V AIV AMTA PUR. AN A. 


<SL 


deprived of his jurisdiction. I shall curse Time and Death. Only Decrepitude 
nud Disease I* refrain from cursing, as they were not instrumental in bringing 
about the death of my husband. They have not offended me in any way." 
So saying the chaste M&lavatl bore the corpse of her husband to the coast c£ 
the Kausiki river to curse the gods. Upon this, Brabm& and others gods were 
much frightened and approached Visnu at the coast of the ocean Ksira 
for protection. First they bathed in the ocean and then they began to adore 
Visnu, the deliverer, to obtain relief from this calamity. First Brabm& shiver- 
iug with fear accosted Visnu thus :— 

69-73. “0 friend of tho poor ! the chaste M&l&vatl, the daughter of 

Ohitra-ratha bewildered by the loss of her husband is determined to curse me 
and the gods. You are tho preserver. The savants and the saints, either 
asleep or awake, in prosperity or calamity, always remember you. You always 
shield those who seek your protection. 0 preserver of the poor ! shield us 
from the curse of this woman. Lord ! It is needless to describe to you my 
sorrow. By my son’s curse, I have been deemed unworthy of worship. Now 
M&l&vati is going to deprive me of my jurisdiction or privileges in the world. 
0 merciful lord, my jurisdiction over all in the universe which you have kindly 
given me and which it is difficult for others to attain, I am about to forfeit , 
through the curse of this woman. Your kindness is my sole refuge.” 

74-82. Brahm&, the lord of creation, having paused, S'iva with folded 
bands thus began, “you gave me, merciful lord ! profound wisdom as a reward 
for my devotion to you in the Puskac& For a period covered by the successive 
ages of a hundred Manus. The virtue of that wisdom cannot be sufficiently * 
estimated. All the prosperity, knowledge and valour of ‘ the world combined 
ia not equal to a sixteenth part of that Wisdom which is about to disappear 
for ever, through the curse of that chaste woman. Who can preserve me 
except yourself? The wonderfully fierce glory of a chaste ^ woman is 
incomparable in the world. I have not come across the effulgence and 
valour characteristic of a chaste woman elsewhere in the whole world. 
That valour consumes me. Preserve us, merciful lord ! preserve me.” 
S'iva having paused, Dbarma, the witness of all things in tho world, thus 
began s—“The best of gems that you gave me, Lord, viz., virtue or truth or 
justice is about to perish. This gem which I acquired by devotion will disappear 
through a woman’s curse.” The gods then said : “Lord, you gave us share in 
sacrificial offerings. Our right in the said share will vanish for the same reason.” 
So saying the gods stood up, subdued and frighetned ; and then there was a 
voice from the sky, “0 gods ! you had better go to M&l&vati; and Jautirdan 
will go there himself, later on, in the shape of a learned Brahmin for the main¬ 
tenance of peace and for your preservation. 

83-91. Thereupon tho gods gladly wont to MiUavati on the coast of the Kau¬ 
siki river. The gods beheld Mfilavuti, beautiful as the goddess of fortune. Her 
appafol was pure like tire. She had lighted up the quarters with the 
effulgence of her boauty like the vernal moon. The flood of light which she 
had accumulated round her by serving her husband added lustre i'o her body 
like a fire-brand?. Assuming the posture of meditation, she held to her breast 
her dead lord Her right hand held the melodious three-stringed lute of her 






SR A HMA-KE.N DA. 


<SL 


husband and,out of affection and devotion to her husband, with her fore-finger 
decorated with seal-ring and with the upper part of her thumb, she held a crystal 
garland. Her Colour was like champak (a fragrant, yellow flower). Her tips 
appeared like bimbas . Her neck was adorned with a wreath of gems. She 
seemed to enjoy perennial youth and looked sixteen years old. Her buttocks 
were huge. Her loins and breast were fleshy. She again and again cast wistful 
glances at her dead lord. The pious gods who dreaded the consequences of an 
evil act., were struck at the conduct of the woman and stood motionless for a 
time. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

1-9. The auspicious gods including Bralmia, staying there for a while, 
approached MalA,yati. The chaste M&lftvati, when she saw them, paid due 
homage to all and placing her dead husband before them, again began to weep. 

In the mean time, a very beautiful Brahmin boy turned up before the assembly. 

He held a staff and parasol in his hand. His forehead was marked with sanda! 
paste. Ha had a book in his hand. He had a tranquil and smiling appearance. 

His body was besmeared with sandal-paste and beaming with divine effulgence. 
Having duly accosted the gods who were enchanted by his spell, he sat in the 
midst of the assembly like the moon among the stars. Seated there, he 
began to speak to M&l&vati and the gods. His speeoh showed that be was 
clever. 

7-11. He said, “Why have Brahma and other gods come here ? What 
is the cause of the advent o£ Brahma, the Lord of creation ? What accounts for 
the presenoe of S'iva, the destroyer, Dharma, the witness of all things, tbo Sun, 
tho Moon, the Fire, Time, Death, Yama and ail the gods in this dense forest ? 
Malavati ! What is that dead body in your lap ?” The chaste MalUvati bowed 
low and replied thus : 

12-25. “I cheerfully bow before Janardana in the shape of a Br&hmin, the 
water and fiowehs tendered by whose hands propitiate Hari and other gods. () 
Lord ! 1 am afflicted and want to submit something for your consideration. * 
A merciful being makes no distinction between persons worthy or unworthy of 
his kindness. 0 best of Br&hmins ! I am called Malavati, wife of Upavarbana 
and daughter of Chitra-ratha. With my husband, I roamed at largo in this 
charming place for a celestial hundred thousand years. You are learned and 
you know, according to the S’astras, the deep affection which a ohaste woman 
cherishes for her husband. My husband lost his life t hrough Brahma’s curse. 

For his revival, I wept a good deal before the gods. But 1 find every one is 
selfish in the world; every one is anxious to gain his own object: no one feels 
the sorrows of others. The gods are the authors of prosperity, adversity, 
pleasure, pain, fear, sorrow, joy, life and death. They give fruits of actions ; 
and they can easily uproot tho tree of Karma. There is no friend like a god ; none 
stronger or more generous than he. For this reason, I begged of these gods 
to restore my husband to life, knowing full well that virtue, wealth, 
enjoyment and final beantitude are fruits that can be attained through this tree, 
i. e. God. If the gods give back my husband, as desired by mo, so rough the 




THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA 


bettor ; otherwise I shall make them participators in the sin of watban-slaugh¬ 
ter. I shall inflict a dreadful and irresistible curse upon them, which can b"> 
avoided by no means.” 0 S'aunaka, the afflicted chaste MltUvatt having Bnishd 
her discourse, the Brahmin replied this : * 

26-34. “0 ‘M&l&vatt ! It is true that the gods yield fruits of actions. 
The farmers can only sow seeds in their lields but they can not yield fruits of 
cultivation. In matters of cultivation the gods only can yield fruits, but they 
yield fruits in due time . An agricultrist ploughs his field and sows paddy ; but 
the seed blossoms and fructifies in due time. This is the case with the fruits of 
Karma also. In this field of the world, a house holder bewildered by Vispu’s 
spell sows seeds of Karma which blossom and fructify only in due time. The 
gods, it is true, yield fruits of devotion to the virtuous in this sacred laud of 
fodia, Particularly, whatever is offered by a man to the mouth of a Br&hmin 
(which represents a fertile field) comes back to him. Without devotion no one 
can acquire might, beauty, wealth, son, wife or husband. Whoever, for a 
succession of births worships Nature (primordial) gets, by her grace, a well- 
qualified wife, permanent vyeallh, issue, grandson, land, strength and retiuue. 

35-39. Whoever worships S'iva, the conqueror of death, the emblem, 
source and cause of good gets by his blessing, if he is a male, a good wife and 
if ho is a female, a good husband and also knowledge, wisdom, poetic faculties, 
son prosperity, might and valour. A worshipper of Brahma, likewise, gets 
by his boon issue, wealth, fortune, knowledge, prosperity and happiness. Who¬ 
ever worships the Sun gets, by his grace, knowledge, health, joy, wealth, 

son etc. 

40-51. Fair one, whoever worships (Janesa, the god who is entitled to 
reverence first of all, gets by his grace felicity, prosperity, issue, various kinds 
of relations, wisdom, knowledge, poetic, genius and immunity from all sorts of 
calamities. Whoever worships Vi?nu, the husband of Laksmf, the god of gods, 
by craving a boon, gets everything that ho desires ; and in case ho is free from 
desire, he attains emancipation. By the worship of that tranquil, preserving 
* mighty Beiii* Visun, a man attains religious sanctity, virtue and incomparable 
fame • but if "he foolishly wants a boon, he is bewildered and tricked ..by his spoil. 
The goddess Nature representing the spell of Visnu, if she is propitiated, obliges 
her worshippers by giving them the mystic spell relating to the worship of 
Visnu A virtuous man, worshipping Dharma, acquires virtue and after enjoying 
life in this world, attains the feet of Visnu after his death. In a word, any 
one worshipping a god attains him in the first place aud eventually attains the 
feet of Visnu" along with that god. Whoever worships Krisna (who is apart 
from Nature and transcends the three properties of Nature, who, is adored by 
Briibtnfc Visnu aud Mahesa, who is the supreme God and the seed of all things, 
who is styled by the Yogis as the Brahma imperishable, who is omnipotent and 
eternal who can do a thing as he wills, who beaming with light manifests himself 
sometimes in a visible and sometimes in an invisible form, who is the prop ol 
the universe and the God qf all, who is all happiness, who, though omnipresent, 
;« not mixed up with any thing, who wields a form out of compassion for his 
worshippers, who is a witness of all deeds is emancipated in his life-lime j and 
such a worshipper, in his wisdom, never craves other boons. 








BUAIIMA-KUANDA. 

t • 


52-61. 0 chaste woman ! the four kinds of redemption (Salokya and 

three others), divinity, the position of BrahmS, and even final emancipation are 
trifling in his estimation. All kinds of prosperity he regards as merely lamp 
of earth. The position of Indra or Manu, or immortality he regards as mere 
bubbles of water. Whether asleep or awake he wants only to serve ilan. itamog 
this, this bondage in the interests of Hari, he wants no other boon. The yf or " 
shippers of Hari want Hari’s bondage specified above and are satisfied, if they 
have firm faith in Him. 0 beanty ! whoever attains his vassalage troy gen 
peace and certainly goes to the Cow-world after redeeming crores of ancestors in 
his own line, hundreds of ancestors in the line of his father-in-law, and his 
maternal grandfather, his servants, maid-servants, mother, w ives, sons and 
hundreds of their descendants long as a man does not eerve Krispa, he <3 
liable to birth, the sufferings of the world and the torments inflicted by him oj 
Varna. 0 chasm lady, the frightened Yaraa obliterates the writings from the 
forehead of an individual into whose ears the mystic formula of Visnu is intro¬ 
duced by his religious preceptor. And Braftmtf says : “This man will go direc 
to the Cow-world by over-stepping the bounds of Brahma-loka . *hinking 
this, he prepares for him beforehand the oblatioD of honey, milk etc. 1 .sere is 
no probability of bis re-birth in this world. 

62-66. Heaps of sins committed by this worshipper of Hari in the coarse 
of ten millions of births quit him and run away as a snake flies at the sight of 
a vulture. All his previous acts are cut asunder by the wheel of S3 ri-ilrisna 
oalled Sudarsana. 0 chaste .woman, even .death and decrepitude quit the wor¬ 
shipper of Hari and run away lest the above wheel should cut him to pieoes 
'IV above worshipper, dying, goes to the Cow-world and there, wielding a 
celestial form, resides with S'r! Krisna He lives there as long as Krmna lives, 
in the Cow-world, till eternity. He regards the fleeting longevtty of 

Brahm& as if it were a wink or a moment. 




CHAPTER XV. 

1-7. Thereupon, the Bi4hmin>y said to M&l&vati "O pions woman, 
tell me of what disease your husband died. I am a physician and can treat al! 
sorts of diseases. If a patient is dying or dead, then by my profound wisdom 
I oan restors him to life in seven days. If 1 have a mind to, I can bring to 
you Yuma, Time, Death, Decrepitude and the Diseases in tetters as a fewJor 
fastens and secures his prey. 0 beauty, T. know the cause of diseases and the 

means to avert them. The inauspicious symptoms of diseases I can chock by 
the method prescribed by the S'kstras. I know also ^e method whereby a 
person by abstract meditation quits his life. The ohasto Mal&vati, hearing the 
words of the Brdhmip, smiled a little and then said 

7-20 For a wonder, extraordinary words I heard from the month of this 
Brkhmin hoy. Ho looks to be a mere child ; but his wisdom is astounding to 
the Yoois. 0 Brahmin ! when you promise to revive my husband, then he is 
already alive. For the word of a saint cannot go amiss. I > you most prone aut 
io the Vedas t you will please revive my husband, later on. 1 lease remove my 
doubts in the first place. For if you revive him first, then in the presence of my 







the BRAIJMA- VA1VARTA pvuana. 


I, I shall not be able to put to you anj question. Look ! Among BrahmS, 
the gods and those learned in the Vedas, present on the spot, there is none 
who can control or rule my destiny. You also know everything. If a 
woman is protected by her husband, no ono can prevent him ; and if he 
punishes her, no one can defend her ; The husband is the lord of his 
wife : this is sanctioned by custom and tradition. This right (enjoyed 
by the husband) is not vested in the Vedas, BrahmA or S'iva. The husband is 
her lord, preserver, protector and the best of her preceptors. He is her 
tutelary deity and the sole object of her veneration. A woman who comes out of 
a noble family is obedient to her husband. A woman belonging to a bad family, 
on the other hand, is Independent (of the will of her husband) ; and, tainted 
by nature with an evil disposition adopts prostitution. This vile woman oniv 
serves her gallants and finds fault with her husband. 0 Brahmin, I am the 
l^pavarhana, daughter of Obitra-ratha and daughter-in-law of the king 
of the Ghindarvas I know none except my husband and, therefore, I have 
been reduced to this condition. O^bost of those versed in the Vedas, yon can 
accomplish everything. Bring to me, I pray, for a time, Yama, Time and 
the damsel Death. Thereupon, the expert Br&hmin, at once invoked and 
produced them before the assembly. 

21*30. I.u the first place, the chaste M&lavati eyed the damsel named 
Death. She saw that she was black and hideous in appearance, olad in red 
apparel, and had six hands and a serene aspect. She was chaste and mercif ul ; 
and a gentle smile was playing on her lips. She was accompanied by her sixty- 
four sous and seated on the loft side of her husband, Time or Mah&k&la. Latejf 
on, M&l&vrulsaw the grand Time, hideous in appearance, valorous like the summer 
sut) and a part of Nftrayana. He had six face 3 , sixteen hands, twenty-four eyes 
and b legs. Me was black in appearance and clad in red garment. This great 
god was deformed in appearance; he is the destroyer of the world, master and 
ruler of all and the Lord Supreme. Through to a slight smile playing on his lips, 
he maintained a cheerful appearance. He had a string of rosary beads in his 
hands and seemed constantly to adore Brahma. Later on/ she beheld the 
obdurate diseases, ostensibly very old and yet sucking the breast of their mother. 
Then she saw Yama with thick legs, black in appearance and pious, devoted to 
the worship oi Hari. He i9 the personification of virtue, judge of the good 
and the evil, inflicting chastisement upon the wicked. The chaste Mal&vati, 
when she saw them all, first addressed Yama cheerfully thus : 

31-44. •« 0 Lord, you are pious and versed in the S'ftslr&s. Why did 

yon take away my husband?” Yama replied. “ 0 chaste woman, no one dies 
unless bis time is fall. I can’t take away any one without the will of God. 
f, Death and the diseases take away creatures in the fullness of their time. Also, 
just consider, ray jurisdiction extends over that individual who is snatched away 
by death in due time. Yon can refer the matter to this damsel accordingly.” 
mi&vatt when she heard this, addressed Death thus : u O damsel, you belong to the 
female sex ; you kuow full well about a woman’s pain of separation from ber 
bnsbaud. In my HFe-timo, why did you snatch away my husband ?” Death 
replied : “Providence ordained me for this purpose ; oven years of devotion cannot 
enable mo to abandon this course of action. T£ any chaste woman, through the 
lustre of her energy or power of asceticism reduce me to ashes, I Jiall bo 
relieved of all my calamities ; I do not mind what will befall to my hdsband 









WHIST^ 



BRAHMA-KHAN BA. 



and sod. 0 chaste lady, know it lor certain that 1 or my sons are not to blame 
in any way. We do an act as assigned by Time. Please refer the matter, 
in the presence of this assembly, to the just and magnanimous li.in^ and then 
do the needful.” Thereupon M&l&vatt said, ‘ 0 Lord Time, you are the witness 
of all deeds, and reign supreme in the form of Karma ; you are eternal and a 
part of N&r&yana. You are the highest god; I therefore bow to yon. U 
asylum of mercy, yon are omniscieut. You realise full well the pain ol others. 
Why did you snatch away my husband in ray life-time ? Tuns replied, 
“ 0 ohaste woman, who am I ? and who is death or Yatua and who are the 
diseases ? Wo wander here and there, as directed by God. 

45-47. Krisna who created Nature, Brahma. Visnu, Mahesa, the gods, the 
fourteen saints, 14 Manus, all men and beasts; whose feet are adored by expert 
Yogis, whose sacred name is ever muttered by them 5 under whose government 
S'ankara destroys the world, Dharma witnesses all deeds, Zodfoo and the planets 
move in the sky; by whose command, Indra and other gods have become regents 
0 i the quarters, trees put forth flowers, the earth has become the receptacle ot all 
objects; through whose fear the earth (though herself forgiving;and patient, 
quakes from time to time; before whose might Nature, the origin of all, quakes ; 
by whose spell every ono is stupefied ; who is incomprehensible by the Vedas 
which give an insight into all objects ; who is adored by the 1 uranas, BrahmA 
and Visnu ; to the sixteenth part of whose valour Vtr&ta is equal; who is the 
lord of'lords, the end of time, the death oE death and the only Supreme Being : 
this Krisna, I say, you ought to remember for the removal of all obstructions 
or calamities. This asyluuf of mercy will fulfil your desire and give you back 

' your husband. The same Kri?na that sent us hero will give you all prosperity. 
0 S'aunaka, Time having finished his speech, the Br&hman bov again addressed 
her as follows: 


CHAPTER. XVI. 

l-6.fThe Br&hmaija said, ‘0 excellent Gandarva princess, you put 
questions respectively to Time, Yams, Death and the Diseases. ^ if you entertain 
any farther doul*t on any point, you can refer it to me.’ The chaste Mftlu* 
vaid, in reply, eheerfully put to the Lord of the Universe (who had assumed the 
form of a Br&hmin) a question which occurred toiler mind. She said: ‘0 
Brahmin, you have said that diseases injure the living beiogs by taking away 
tbeir lives. Their causes are specified in the Vedas, Kindly tell me the pro¬ 
cess by which these diseases may be prevented from frequenting the human 
system. '. 0 magnanimous soul, 0 saint, you are merciful and excellent; kindly 
recite to me everything in connection with this sublime subject, whether queried 
by tne or hot. Then Janardanu, in the garb of a Brfthmip, began-to speak ou 
the medical science and interpret its principles. 

7-14. He said : “ I adore the mighty Eternal Being, S'ri-lvrisna who is 
the root cauie of tho Vedas and their auxiliary branches; who is the cause of ajl 
cause; who is thoroughly conversant with the mysteries of creation, who created 
the four Vedas, who is nil good and the cause of all good. At first Brahma, 
the Lord of creation, having perused tjie four VedastyG, llik, \a;uh, oama ami 








THE BRAHMA.-VA1VARTA PUrXnA . 


Afcham) commented on their meanings and created another Veda, viz , Ayur- 
Yeda, Lrahmfi gave it to the ban-god who, oat of this Veda prepared a distinct 
code. This code, the Sun made over to his disciples each of* whom, on the 
strength of this code, prepared a code of his own. if 0 chaste woman, now I 
am going to tell yon the different system,! adopted by them for prevention of. 
maladies. Dhanwantari, Divadasa.„R&siraja, the twin A.swini-Kumaras, Nakula, 
Sahadeva, Yamanr&ja, Chyavana, Janaka, Budha, J&vftla, Jajali, Paila, Karatha, 
A gusty a, these are the sixteen cisciples of Bhfiskara. They are all versed in the 
Vedas and the Ved&ngas (auxiliaries to the Vedas) and at the same time good 
physicians. 

Oood lady, first Dhanwantari prepared a medical code named 
Chikitsa-tatva-V tjayana. Diva-d&sa was the author of Chikits& Daraana. Kilsi- 
r ^ a * a9 of Chikifcsa Kaumudi. The twin Aswini-KumAras wrote 

a work called ChikHsiVS&r-Tantra calculated to correct the errors of the phy¬ 
sicians. Nakula wrote Vnidjak-Sarvasva. Sahdeva wrote ByAdhi-sindhu-ri- 
mardana; xamarAja wrote Jnyan&rnava. Later on, Chyavana wrote Jivad&n; 
and the great saint Janaka wrote a code named Vaidyak Sandeba-Bhanjana. 
Budha, J&v&la and J&jali wrote Chaudra-Sftra, Tantra-Sarak and Ved&nga-S&ra 
respectively. Afterwards, Paila, Karafha and Agastya wrote Nid&na, Sarvu- 
dhara and I)waidha-nirnaya respectively. These fourteen systems constitute- 
the basis of all medical science. They are not only calculated to root out diseases 
but also point out invigorating remedies, Afterwards the Pandits churned the 
ocean of Ayurveda with the mystic formula relating to wisdom and extracted 
batter from it in the shape of these sixteen S'astras. 

24-33. 0 beauty, I have read these S'astras, Ayurveda and Bh&s- 

kara*8amhita and am conversant with the nature of diseases. Good’lady, 
there are. two ways of testing the ability of a physician. The diagnosis 
of the disease and the prescription of the proper remedy—these two aro 
the virtues of u doctor. In a word, he cannot prolong the span of life 
allotted to a patient. He who is conversant with the Ayurveda, who knows 
the methods of treatment, and who is pious and kind is, properly speaking, 
a Vaidya. 0 beauty, fever is the mo$t dreadful and irresistible of all 
diseases ; other diseases take their rise from fever. This Fever (personified) is 
devoted to S'ivr^; ho is a great saint/ He (Fever) is very cruel and deformed 
i m appearance. He has got three legs/three heads, six hands and nine eyes. 
Ashes make his weapon He Is dreadful like Yama who brings life to a close! 
indigestion is the father of fever. Biles, Phlegm and Nervousness, these three 
are the fathers or authors of indigestions. The disorder of those three causes 
pain to the mortals. Fever is of three kinds, that is, fever occasioned by the 
disorder of the nerves, biles and phlegm respectively. Tin re is another kind of 
lever caused by the disorder of all these three. Jaundice, leprosy, dropsy, 
spleen,, colic, dysentery, dyspepsia, consumption, carbuncles, malignant jaundice! 
difficult urination, liver, intermittent or remittent fever, hump on the back, 
elephantiasis, goitre, vertigo, typhoid and cholera; these are the diseases by 
whose modifications 64 kinds of diseases are alleged to be occasioned. 

Alt these diseases are the sons of death. Decrepitude is her 
daughter, Th*s decrepitude and the diseases constantly frequent the world. 










MaBmAKBAN£>A. 


But, Mftl&vati, these diseases never go to him wuo observes the rules of hygie¬ 
nics anti is conversant with the method how to avert them. These • diseases « J 
at bis sight, as a snake flies at the sight of Garuda (the divine eagle). 
sprinkling of water upon the eyes, exercise, application of oil to the sole of the 
feet, annointing the head with oil : these are the methods to keep hack aecro* 
pitnde and the diseases. Walking in the spring season, warmiug the body 
moderately before the fire, occasional sexual intercourse with a yoang girl «mt> 
dispel decrepitude. Ablution in the pond, annointment of the body with 
sandal-paste] warm bath in summer, avoiding exposure to the rams, regularity 
in diet, forbearauce from walk in the son in autumn, bath in autumn . in the 
pond or a dip in tepid water, consumption of grain, rice etc,., (well cooked an- 
hot) these are the means to avert decrepitude. 

43-52. He who uses fresh meat, and new gram, who associates with 
young girls, drinks milk, or takes ghee never acquires decrepitude. Whoever 
whoa hungry, takes excellent rice and chews betel-leaves every day, who, when 
thirsty, drinks copious water, who every day takes curd., ghn f butter and 
molasses is never subject to decrepitude/ He who takes dried meat or stale curd 
(prepared five days previously), who commits sexual intercourse with old women, 
who warms himself in the rays of the sun of the oign V irgo is subject to 
decrepitude. He who takes curd in the night or goes to a prostitute or a 
woman in her menses is subjeot to decrepitude anti its concomitant evils. A 
man who eats food cooked by a prostitute, a childless widow, a woman in hor men •* 
ses, a proouress, a S'ftdra woman, ov a woman absolutely void of menses 
commits the sin of the murder of a Brahmin and is liable to decrepitude as the 
result of the above sin committed by him. Friendship constantly subsists between 
sin and the diseases. Siu engenders disease, decrepitude and all sorts of 
obstacles Nay, sin produces also poverty and violent grief. Indian Sa nts, 
fearful of its consequences, always desist from sin, the enemy of mankind. 

55-63. . Sin flies at the sight of a religious and pious man who worships 
Hari, who treats with roverence his religious preceptor, the gods and his guests; 
as a snake (lies at the 3 ight of the Garuda. Decrepitude or the maladies 
cannot subdue such a man. But those rules hold good, if the times are auspi** 
cious. In bad times, no calamity can be averted. Good lady ! lever which is 
the outcome of the disorder of the nerves, phlegm or biles is the root of all 
diseases. I am uow going to tell you how the diseases enter into the human 
system. The bile is produced in a certain mystic circle, division or depression 
of the body called Manipuraka-chakra; and this is produced when a man does 
not eat when ho is hungry. Drinking water after eating palm or bad (the 
mormelos or quince fruits) also produces bilos. Any one who, by bad luck, 
drinks hot water in autumn or bitter juice in tho month of Bk&dra acquires 
biles. Coriander flour mixed with sugar and wator, gram, curd, whey, milk, 
ghee etc., ripe bael and palm, things prepared out of the sugar-cane, ginger, juice 
of the pulse called Muga, cake of sesamum baked with sugar; these are tonics 
and remove biles. I told you about biles. Now I am going to tell you about 
other things. 

72-73!. Bathing after dinttor, drinking water without third, annoitraoni 
of the body with sesamum oil, or refreshing oil, the uso of the juice of Amalaka 
(emblta myro-hilan), the consumption of stale food, whey, ripe planum* 







THE BRAHMA-VAtVARTA PUR A N A. 


<SL 


fruits, ripe water-melon, oucnrnbnr and radish, bath in the pond in the rainy 
season; all these produce phlegm which is also destructive of physical strength. 
Perspiration caused by tire, use of parched articles, annointment of the body 
with baked oil, walking, use of dry things as food, eating dry and ripe myrobalan, 
raw vikankata and raw plantain, fasting, abstinence from the drink of water, 
the use of powdered leaves of red lotus-flower mixed with ghee, dried sugar, 
long pepper,’ pepper, or dried ginger; all this destroys phlegm and gives 
strength- Princess, now hear the cause of nervousness. Walking after food, 
heat of the fire, operation upon the body with a big lancet, continual sexual 
intercourse, intercourse with an old woman, grief, consumption of very dry 
articles, battle, quarrel, use of abusive expressions or fear : all these produce 
nervousness in the mystical circle of the human system. Now hear the remedy. 
Ripe plantain-fruits, sherbet, cocoa nut-water, fresh whey, delioious cakes, 
sweet curd prepared out of buffalo’s milk, fresh food, sour gruel, cold water, 
baked and pure oil, the whey of the juice of paltn and dates, pure sesamuna oil, 
nse of cocoanut, bath in cold or tepid water, use of emblic myrobalan, annoint- 
ment of the body with refreshing sandal-paste, sleeping in bed constructed 
with leaves of lotus, ventilation by.fan ; all thsse immediately dispel nervousness. 
This nervousness is of three kinds vis., that occasioned by pain, grief and lust 

reap actively* A- 

80-88. Good lady, I just described to you the diseases and the medical 
science composed by Saints dealing with the remedy. Besides, the 
saints have composed chemistry prescribing several sorts of remedy which 
cannot bo fully described even in one year. Now teli me of what disease your 
husband died so that I may hit upon the method to restore him to life.” Sauti 
said. “Mfid&vatl, the daughter of Uhifra-rathu, was delighted to hear this and 
Baid again: ‘0 best of learned Brahmins, my husband, present in the assembly of the 
gods out of shame put an end to his own life by a process of mental abstraction. 
Now I just heard you dealing with a vory interesting subject. Unless a person 
comos to grief, he or she truly is incapable of attaining the good, (i.e. a 
persou in calamity seeks God). 0 most clover being, now revive my husband so 
that both of us may bow to you and return home.” The Brahmin boy, when he 
heard this, immediately went to the godsn. 


CHAPTER X?n. 

1-9. When the gods saw the Brahmin boy, they got up and greeted him. 
They began, then, to talk among themselves. They were deluded by the spell 
of Visnu and forgot the precedent aud subsequent chains of events. They 
'could'not even muke out that the boy was Visnu. Then the Br&htpin, addres- 
siD" tbs gods sweotly, began thus to speak on a subject pleasing to the ears 
of fiving beings: — “0 gods, this girl is the wife of Upavarhan and the daugh¬ 
ter oE Chitra-ratha. Being extremely afflicted with grief, she wants buck the 
life of her husband. 0 gods 1 what are we to do under the circumstances? 
Please say something appropriate to the occasion. This woman was about to 
curse von all; but I prevented her from her design by propitiatory words. 
Yon aho adoreu Hari at tho White Islands. Why has Hari not come as yet ? 
There Was a Voice from the sky that Hari would soon be forthcoming. Why 




BllAUUA-KBAN DA. 



w as that steady or irrevocable voice ial.feiflod ?” Brahmft, the mitbor of I he 
world, first replied thus :— 

10-21. “By ourso, my son NUrada become a Gandarva named (Jpavarhau. 
By me he was cursed again and so he quitted his body by means of yoga- I 
had cursed him saying that he would remain on earth Eor a lakh or Yngas, 
that he would then become a 8'udrr.; and, after all this, he would be my sou 
again. There is still something left to the span of life allotted to him. He 
may live here a thousand years more. Now by the grace of Knsna, I shall 
revive him again and see that he - is not affected by my curse. C best of 
Brahmins, you say that Hari lias not come as yet This is yonr delusion. For 
Huri is emmipresent and He is the soul of all. How, then, can Ue have any 
body ? He is omnipotent and Supreme. He only takes a torm out of compas¬ 
sion for His worshippers. Uo observes and knows all, aud that .eternal Being 
pervades the whole universe. Hi aud 6' mean pervading ; and nu means all. 
Hence Hari is styled Vi?nu. Any one, holy or profane, if under any condition 
he remembers Hari reverentially, is consecrated both externally and internally. 
If any one remembers Visnu, at the outset, in tho middle, and at the termination 
of an aot prescribed by the Vedas, that act, though defective, becomes 
perfect. By Mis command, I create, B'iva destroys and Dhju-ma witnesses 
overy-thing. By His command, Time, being terrified, destroys the people, 
Yuma chastises ' the sinners and Death attacks every body. Nay, Nature, the 
root- cause of this Universe aud the mistress of: the world* a we-stricken, carries 
out His command. 

22-3LJ When Brahma became silent, S'iva thus began, “0 Brahmin, 
to vvferitook or race do you belong ? Have you grasped the essence of the 
Vedas after having studied them? Whose disciple you are? What is your 
name ? Apparently,"you are a boy ; but you are more glorious or splendid than 
the Sun. Why do you defraud’ the gods ? Do you not know God, the Supreme 
Being ? He dwells in the heart of all. The.body of a living being falls when 
it is forsaken by the Supreme Being. As the adherents or tho retinue of a 
monarch follow him wherever he goos, so the sentient soul, mind, knowledge, 
consciouness, life, senses, intelligence, rotentivo faculty, memory,sleep, kindness, 
lassitude, hunger, thirst, development, esteem, contentment, desire, forbearance, 
shame and all other attributes follow tho Supreme Being like Ilis shadow, as 
soou as He quits the body. As soon as God is about to part, S'akti or energy 
takes the van. In a wonh all the attributes described above, though faculties, 
aro obedient to His will. So long as that all-conscious God abides in the body, 
every one is capable of action. As soon as He departs, tho body is turned into 
a loathsome ccrpse. Who can deny Him or His existence ? Brahma himself, 
being powerless to create, adores tho lotus of Ilis feet. After having contem¬ 
plated the Deity for a lakh of yugas, Brahma acquired wisdom and gained the 
power of creation. 

32-41. I am not contented as yet, though I worship Him eternally. 
No one is satisfied in respect of tho good. Ihe .Eternal Being, Krisna, to the 
celebration and adoration of whose name I, though indifferent and callous to 
everything else, have devoted myself as a wanderer throughout the world ; by 
virtue of whose name, death cannot touch mo ; the celebration oh whose name 








cannot bo fathomed by any one. 


42-51 He is a Being whose hands and legs are manifest every where, 
whose eye is capable of perceiving every thing at one and the same time, who 
is the soul of all and ranges in the heart of all, who is invisible to the wicked. 
With reference to this Being, how could you say that He did not come as yet. 
For a wonder, saints are also deluded. But in no case can the virtuous hear 
the calumnies of the great. For the slanderers anl their audience both go to 
the hell called the Kurabht-pakl The wise, if they accidentally hear a zander 
of the above character, are relieved from sin by the recollection of Han and 
acquire thereby religious sanctity. The wretch who slanders Visnu or listens 
to His slander consciously or unconsciously or relishes His slander with a smile, 
sutlers the torments of the hell mentioned above throughout the longevity allot¬ 
ted to BrahmA; and the place which ho treads is desecrated like a cup of wine. 
Nay, any one who dies there goes to hell. Brahmft has specified three * 1Q ds or 
the slander of Visnu, as described above. A foolish wretch who slanders jro.l 
on the ground that He is imperceptible to the senses, that He is not p^sont 
anywhere or that lie is equal to other gods, cannot be relieved from Hell, 
m long as BrahmA is alive. He who slanders his preceptor or his father is 
entangled in the cobweb of time, so long as the San and the Moon exist. ^ ov7 » 
noonecan doubt that Visnu is the spiritual preceptor of all, dispenser of wisdom, 
the supporter of all, the preserver of people from fear and the author of boons. 

52-64, The best of Br&hixrintf having heard the words of the three gods 
smiled a little and gently answered ‘ thus: “ 0 virtuous gods I For a wonder, 

have I slandered Visnu ? Hari did not come and the voice from the sky has 
been falsified. I saidfonly so much. You are gods. Therefore, speak the truth. 
The virtuous are never partial. If any one is partial in an assembly, a hun¬ 
dred ancestors of. his must go to hell. You always take the sense or 
evory statement. You just said, “ Visnu is omnipresent.’ then, to acoept 
a boon from his wherefore did you go to the S'weta-dwipa t ^ The following 
remark is also inappropriate, vis., that the Supreme Being is not different 
from His parts. For if the remark were just, why should the saint? abandon 
the worship o£ the digit? and court the worship of the^ all perfect. Being alone ? 
Strong hope alone sustains the people. For though Krigna is unattainable by 
the wicked and adorable with the greatest difficulty in ten millions of births, 
yet people never cease to worship Him. Like a dwarf who desires to catch at 
the Moon with both his hands, the small as well as the groat desire to attain the 
foot of the Supreme Being. As in this world, Visnu, the resident of the White 
Islands, Brahma, Mahesa,you, i.e., Dharma, the regents of the quarters and other 
gods dwell so jn every world, there are countless Brahmas, Mauesas, god3 and 
property, animate and inanim tte, moveable as well as immoveable. Then num- 








BRAHMA-KHAN DA. 


bers no one can determine. But the Supreme Being who takes a form out of 
compassion for His worshippers,Lord Krisna, is master of all. I he 
Vaikuntha shines above the countless worlds ; and, above that, \ aikuntha, is the 
Goloka expanded over an area of 50 orores of Yojans.. (A Yojan is to 9 

miles nearly). The Eternal Visnu, having four hands reigns in the Yatkgjfca 
surrounded by his courtiers, Nan da Sunandaeto., and die two-handed 8 rl-Knapn 
reigns supreme in the Goloka attended by his retinue, the cowherds and by his 
consort R&dhfl and the cowherdesses. 

65 The soul of all living beings; the perfeot, omnipotent Brahtna 
by way of amorous diversions, constantly sports in the sphere oi the Elsa situated 
iu iho VrindiLvaua. Saintly ascetics constantly adore the circular Light, 
effulgent like millions and millions of puro and blotless suns. Virtuous 
Vaisnavas, on the other hand, contemplate and adore the hgure of the truthj 
Being vested with two hands, enchanting ike millions of Cupids, very lovely, 
youthful, serene in appearance and naturally vested with a sinilo. C go is, yo 
are also Vaisnavas ; you ask me to what lineage I belong and whose disciple I am 
But this problem you cm yourself solve if you have listened alteat, ^ e ‘{j; 0 J 1 ‘ 
I have said above. There is no need of a verbal controversy. Which of the 
parties has befooled itself in the present controversy is a matter which is 
apparent on the face of it. Now try soon to revive the dead Gandarva priiico . 
So saying, Jan&rdana (in the disguise of a boy) paused and began to laugh. 

•OH’APIER XVII I. 

1-8. Sautisaid, “Thereupon Brahinit, Mahesa aud other gods. Bewildered 
by the spell of Visnu, went with the BiAhmatia to Maiavati. Brahma sprinkled 
water out of the wooden pot in his hand on the corpse, whereupon Lpavarhana 
recovered grace of the body and functions of the mind. • 10 w _’ so 
him wisdom, Dharma gave him virtue and the Br&hmni gave him life. The 
siirht of the Eire revived his hunger ; the sight of Cupid roused bis lust; and the 

Wind, the life of the world, inspired breath in him. The Sun-god gave him 

vision; the goddess of knowledge gave him speech; the goddess of - or tune 
gavo him grace. But the Supreme Being not presiding he lay .ike inertia, 
void of motion and consciousness. Them the chaste Maiavati, at the desire of 
Brahma soon bathed in the river, put on a pair of washed clothes and began 
to adore the Supreme Being. 

9-35. She said, “Without God, the whole world appears like a corpse. 
I therefore adore the Supromo Boing, the author of the universe, luat Being 
who, though not associated with anything, witnesses everything ; who, though 
omnipresent, is invisible ; who is the creator of Nature, the receptacle of the 
universe, the mother of Brahma, Visnu and Bfohesft, the Supreme goddess vested 
with three attributes ; by whose command Brahma creates, Visnu preserves ana 
S'iva destroys; who is constantly adored by the gods, Mann, ad^pta and 
virtrous saints; who, transcends the limits of nature ; who, though capabo 
of doing what he wills, is sometimes visible and sometimes invisible; who .s 
excellent and adored by all ; who is the author, the source of all boons ; who 

-rives fruits of devotion; who is the primeval cause incarnate; who is t.e 
emblem of devotion; who is present every where in every form ? who is the 






THE BRAHMA-VA1VARTA PURINA, 



Sl 


"' ^receptacle and ongin of every-thing ; who is manifest in the shape of Karma 
and its fruits ; who gives fruits of Karma and represents its seed ; who also is 
the cause of universal destruction; who kindly assumes a bright appearance in 
view of the fact that worship is impossible without the medium of an imago; 
whoso spherical light vies with the lustre of ten millions of suns and contains 
his very lovely image resembling a new, sombre cloud ; whose eyes are beautiful 
like autumn lotuses ; whose face is graceful like the full tnoon and lighted up 
with a gentle smile ; who vies with ten millions of Cupids in beauty ; whose 
body is decorated with sandal-paste and ornaments ; whose two hands hold the 
flute ; who is clad in yellow dress, youthful in age and serene in appearance ; 
who is the husband of TiddhA ; who can bo destroyed by none; who sowetimes 
in the solitudes of the forest, is surrounded by cowherdesses and at other times 
figures as the central figure in the R&sa, attended by R&dhA ; who at times 
assumes the form of a cow-herd associated with other cowherds in the lovely 
grove of Vrindavana ornamented by the S'ata-S'ringa mountains ; who at one 
time in the form of a boy preserves the celestial cows called K&m-dhenus (the 
milch cows of plenty) and at other times, on the coast of the VirajA river, 
in the wood of P&rij&ta plays upon the flute to entice the heart of the milk¬ 
maids ; who gruces the Vaikuntha which is free from disease in the form of 
Chaturbhuja (four-handed N&r&yana) associated with Lak^mi ; who, in the forni 
of Visnu is served in the White Islands by his consort PadmA ; who, through his 
digits', either takes the form of BrahmA, or S'iva ; who in the form of Vir&ta 
sustains a universe on each of the pores of his skin ; who manifests himsels as 
the grand Virata, a ICth part of the Deity ; who, incarnates himself in various 
ways through his digits and parts ostensibly for the sake of amusement but$really 
for the preservation and maintenance of the world ; who, being the cause of all, 
dwells somewhere in the heart of saints and, in other places, sustains the 
lives of creatures by his essence; who is in<iescnt>able and incomprehensible, 
who is free from desire and emotion and imperceptible ; who, in fact, is the 
cream, the substance of the world; this Supreme Being, I say, void of all attributes, 
cannot possibly be adored by me. Ananta, with hie thousand mouths, BrahmA, 
MahesA, Ganesa, KArtikeya, Nature, the goddess of illusion (deluded by His 
spell), Lak§m}, VAni, the savants versed in the Vedas, the Vedas themselves 
find it impossible to adore Him. How i3 it possible for me, then, to adore that 
Doitv, Supreme and free from all desire’7 LlalAvati, having said so, began to 
weep silently. 

36-34. Afterwards she began to weep aloud and, with a heart agitated with 
fear, bowed to Hari again and again. Thereupon Krisna with S'akti (energy) 
presided over the body of her husband who got up at once, bathed, put on a 
' pair of ’ clothes and, as usual, held the lute in his hand. There was a heat of 
dram when the Br&hmins and the gods were adored. The godsj seeing the 
pair re-united, showered flowers upon them and blessed them. The Gandarva 
prince sang and danced before thorn for a while. The parents of the prince 
were also restored to life by the boon of the gods ; and, re-united with them 
and his spouse, the princo cheerfully went back to his city. The chaste Mala- 
vati feasted the Brahmins, gave them millions and millions of gems and other 
kinds of wealth, caused the recital of the Vedas and eulogies of Hari and the 
celebration olbother auspicious ceremonies and performed many grand festivities. 
On the otlier hand, the gods and Hari (disguised as a Brahmin lad) went back. 





WNIST/fy. 



BRAHMA-KHAN DA. 


Sl 


14-49 0 S'annaka, I have revealed to you the above eulogy 01 hynan 

of Hart Any VaiZva reads this sanctifying hymn at the tune o worship 
acoufres faith in Huri and becomes his vassal or bondsman. A the.st, craving 
a boon attains tko four-fold objects of human pursuit «*., virtue, '■realt. 
tate^l enjoyments and redemption. People desiring knowledge, wealth wife 
son virtue or fame respectively gain their objects through this hymn. » 

Ss back his lost kingdom ; a land-lord recovers hi* lost adheren s or tenants, 
the diseased man gets back his health and the prisoner, his liberty. Atugh 
tened personTs relieved from his fear ; a bankrupt gets back his wealth and 
any person who, in the forest, is attacked by a robber or a wild beast or who s 
assailed by the wild fire or who is sinking in the ocean is relieved trom all 
these dangers by the perusal of the above hymn. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

1 7 Sauti said ; Thereupon M&lAvati, with a cheerful heart having distri- 

—‘ -'K >“» Br r ^ V - 

ha 9 hand and then adored and tended nim m aw, pp p 

oE hi, kiugd.™ ia hi, p.l.o. whioh «„ «,«! to «» ■»»"»'»“ <* «»«**• Ul " 
other wives also came hack and joined him. ^ 

8 10 S'annaka said. ‘ 0 Santi, I want to know in detail about Han s 
. vmn 8 ,._d amulet to which you just referred. Also kmdly tell me about b lva s 
myTho'formula conaiating o£ twelve letters oalclated to relieve .orrow a, well 
as about his amulet.” 

11-20. Sauti said, “Tbo hymn by which MAlavati “ dor9t J Httri u ™ 

omheUraijMoarea. «' “ M j, I have heard Iron, my 

SSi». *&££»£ 

* r 

tLai'i replied, ‘ 0 Brahma, S'aukara a ad pharma, 1 will auuouucg t h. » 






mtST/fr 


TH& BRAHMA-VA tVARTA PURINA . 


teat amulet to you. It is very secret and rare ; and yet I will give it to you. 
It is as dear to me as my life ; and the ref ore you should aot give it to ordinary 
people. The valour which animates my body exists in this amulet also. 

21-25. 0 Brabmft, by wielding this amulet be known in the universe by 

the name of Db&ta (creator or providence.) 0 S'iva, by virtue of this amulet, 
you will destroy the world and be equal to me in every respect. 0 Dharrmi, 
by wileding this, you will be able to confer upon others the benefits or fruits 
of asceticism. The 4 Risi ’ of this amulet is Hari himself; the metre is Gaitr? ; 
the Ged is myself, the lord of the world ; the application or the U 3 e of the 
amulet is this, that it is intended to secure the four-fold objects of human pur¬ 
suit viz., virtue, woalth, enjoyment ani redemption. Whoever will read it 
three lakhs of times will attain perfection. 0 Brahmd, an adept by means of 
this amulet will be equal to me in valour, wisdom, concentration of mind and 
perfection. 

26-38. Pranava may preserve my head; R/iseswara may preserve my fore¬ 
head ; R&dheswara, both my eyes ; Krisna, ray ears, Hari my nose ; Sw&h&, 
iny tongue, Krisnai may preserve all my sides ; S'rl-Krisn&i Swah&, this mantra 
of 8 letters: may preserve my throat : Hrim Krien&i namah, my mouth; Klim 
J5ri?n3ti namah, both my arms ; Namo Gopftuganesai, this mantra of eight 1 
letters may preservo my shoulders. Ora namah Gopiswarfii, this mantra may 
preserve the row of my teeth and lips. Om namah Bhagwati R&sa-raahdatee&i 
JSwaha.: my chest; Aim Krisnfti Sw&h& may always preserve my curs; Om Vlsnave 
8w&h&, may preserve ray skeleton. Govardhan-dharine Sw&hft, this mantra may 
preserve cny whole body ; Om Harai namah > thfe mantra may always preserve ray* 
back. Lord Kri?na may preserve me in the Blast; M&dhava. in the South-East, 
Nandanandana, in the South-West., Govinda, in the West, Radhikeswara in the 
North-West, It&seaa, in the North; and Achyuta in the North-East. That oxcellent 
Nar&yana may preserve me by ajl means. 0 Brahma, I have told you about this 
wonderful amulet. It is as dear as my life. The Aswa-modha or tho B&j-peya 
sacrifice performed a thousand times is not equal even to a part of this amulet. 
A healthy or happy man should wield this amulet after bath and after having 
worshipped his Guru with various implements, such as, cloth, ornaments, sandal 
©to. 0 Brahmin, by virtue of this amulet, a man may be redeemed m his life¬ 
time ; and . one who gains perfection through this amulet attains the position of 
Visnu himself. 

39-43. Sauti said, 4< 0 S'auuaka, just listen to S'iva’s mantra and amulet 
which Vasistha in days of yore gave to the king of the Gandarvas. In days of 
yore, he gave it to the king at the Puskara. The fame, S'amhhu gave it to the 
king B&rta and Durvasa ; and Brahma gave it to Havana. By utterance of the 
fundamental Mantra, you should present offerings and other excellent objects. 
Bana, to obtain the desired amulet, in olden times adyreused S'iva thus ; O 
blessed Lord, kindly reveal to us your amulet c tiled iSams&ra Pa van a’. 

44*45. S'iva replied, *0 son, I am going to give you this most wonderful 
aud mysterious amulet. I gave ?.t first to Durvftsa. this amulet apt to couquer 
the three worlds. Whoever will wield it reverentially will control the three 
worlds. The Rt?i of this amulet is Praj&pati ; its metre is Gaitrl; and I am 

the god ; and us regards its application or use, it is meant to secure virtue, wealth’ 








mtSTfy 


BRAHMA-KHAN DA. 


sensual enjoyment and final beauUtu.de. Whoever will recite it five lakhs of 
times will attain perfection and, in valour, mental abstraction or asceticism 
will be equaf to me in every respect. May S'ainbhu preserve my head ; 
Maheswara, my mouth; Nilkantha, my teeth ; Hara ? my lips ; Cbandra-chuda, 
my throat ; Vrisabhab&hana, both my shoulders; Digauobara, my back. May 
Visweswara preserve me in every way. May Sthanu preserve me, while asleep 
or awake. Child BTina, I revealed to you everything relating to this amulet. 
You should not give it to ordinary men. You ought to conceal it carefully. 
The amulet confers the same benefit as ablution in all sacred rivers, A fool 
who utters it a hundred times without knowing its contents does not reap any 
benefit’’,, 

55-t>6. Sauti said, *0 S'aunaka, you have heard about the amulet given 
by Vasi^tha which is as efficaoi ous as the kalpa*tree. Now hear about the 
hymn. Bftna said U I adore S'iva, the best of gods, the master of the masters of 
devotees and the cause of devotion, the god who is partly biae and partly red. 
I adore the Supreme Being who is all w isdom and happiness and tho cause of 
all wisdom. S'iva is the Lord who yields fruits of asceticism, who gives all 
prosperity ; who is excellent; who is the wealth of devotees ; who is adored 
by adepts ; who is the source of devotion and salvation; who enables its by 
his graco to cross the ocean of hell; who is the ocean of compassion ; whose 
face is always cheerful ; who is easily contented ; tho lustre of whoso body is 
graceful like jasmine, moon, sandal, water-lily and the bright half of the lunar 
month ; who is the emblem of the light of firahmA ; who, out of compassion for 
his worshippers, takes a form ; who, influenced by circumstances and varying 
conditions, wanders every-where in different forms, viz. , the water, the fire, 
the sky, the wind, the moon, the suu, etc; who is capable of easily conferring 
bis own position or status on any body ; who is the life of his worshippers and 
shows them compassion ; who cannot even be adored adequately by the Vedas. 
How can I adore this S'iva, then ? How can I adoro him who is indescribable 
aud incomprehensible ; whose conveyance is a bull ; who is naked and puts on a 
tiger-hide; who holds the raoou on tho top of his head, the trident und the axe?” 
B4iu after reciting this prayer every day used to bow to S'iva. 0 great Muni, 
Vasistba firpt gave this hymn, to the Gandarva. 

67-80. This S'iva’s hymn I narrated lo you. Whoever reverentially 
peruses this hymn will get the fruits of ablation in all holy rivers. If a son- 

less man listens to this for a year, he will surely get a son. A leper, by hearing 

this, is cured of bis leprosy. A victim of the colic pain, (if he eats rice cooked 
with ghee for a year, listens to this ode with wrapped attention and worships 
S$'iva) will bo certainly cured of his malady as Vy&sa hath said. A prisoner, 
who can, by no means, enjoy happiness, by means of inis hymn will, be surely 

restored to liberty. A king who lost his kingdom will regain it amid a 

bankrupt will regain l is wealth by moans of this-hymn. A consumptive patient, 
by the perusal of this hymn, will be cured of his disease. Nothing is impossible 
with a man who listens to this hyum. Particularly, in this sacred land of 
India, by virtue of this hymn, he never parts from his friends and acquires 
imperishable wealth. A wifeless man listening to the hymn £6r a month gets 
an accomplished wife. A man void of intelligence and wisdom,,’ listening to 
it for a month only, acquires knowledge and wisdom merely through the couu- 







THE BRA 11MA-VA1V ART A t'URANA 


ael of his spiritual preceptor. A man who, as a result of his karma (act/, 
poor or afflicted acquires affluence and wealth and having tasted happiness 
and enjoyed celebrity in this world goes to S'iva-loka, on the extinction ot hi3 
body. He who -worships the sun in the morning, noon and evening and likewise 
listens to this hymn will be able hereafter to minister to S^iva and be classed as 
one of his courtiers or myrmidons. 


CHAPTER XX. 

1-11. Sauii said, “ Upavarhana passed the remainder of bis life cheerfully 
with M&i&vati and his wives in the ‘solitary forest, 'ihe old king of 
darvas, with his sons, performed many acts of piety. In his palace viaic . . 
with the mansion of Kuvera, the king passed his life very happily ^ 

ever youthful wifo Susilfi. and ultimately gave up his ghost on *■ ® J ■ , 
of the Ganges. By the grace of S'iva and through the influence ° ^ the piety 
of his son devoted to Visnu, he passed away to the Vaikuntha where he became 
the sluve of Visnu. His wifo also accompanied him. Upavarhana performed tne 
funeral ceremonies of his parents and distributed wealth to the Lr&hmins. u 
S'nunaka, the prince himself, a victim to his curse, died in due time ana w 
subsequently begotten by a Br Akinin on a S'Adra woman. The chaste Ma &™t , 
at tbo Pu§kara, before the sacrificial pit of Bratmifi, craved a boon to g 
her beloved consort and she gave up her ghost, bho was then born out of the worn* 
of the v ife of Sr in jay raj, a descendant of Manu ; iyid while she took . ‘ ’ 

she had full knowledge of the conditions other previous life. ^ ‘ , 

her death, she craved a boon to the effect that Upavarhana might be her lius 
band.” S'aunaka said, “ 0 Sauti, how was Upavarhana begotten by a u.an- 
uoan upon a 8'udra ?” 

12-20. Sauti replied'. At Kanauj, one Drutnifo had a barren, wife named 
Kalavati devotud to her husband. She was barren through the faults o u 
hnaband. By the command oE her husband, sho once upon a hua® o 

K&syapa muni who dwelt in a forest. She saw that the muni, absor oo in n 
devotion of Krisna, was beaming forth with celestial light like the mi , ay 
sun and, being unable logo to him, bade her time till the Uevcaon ot tna 
saint was* over. The saint, when his rites were over, witnessed the never-ending 
beauty of tbo girl with a complexion graceful like the Cl\(impaka . dor eyes 
were like lotuses. The whole of her body was decorated, with ornaments, uar 
face was pretty like the autumnal moon. Her loving breast was 08 y* 
Her buttocks were huge and heavy. She was smiling. Her eyes weie crimson. 
Her yellow garment doubled her charms. She was excited with passion and 
was consequently again and again displaying her breast and l° ,ns * 01 OI ‘ 
head was marked with vermilion. Her feet being decorated with the lac 
dye, thoro was no end to her charms. She appeared like Urvas! in grace. 

21-32. The muni addressed her thus : ‘Who are you in this solitary 
forest? Whose wife are you ? Why have you coine lwre ou a PP 
be a prostitute," Kalavati began to tremble at the words, remembered Hari 
aud thus repliod modestly, “O best of the twice-born amts, I am the daugb 
of a cow-herd, the wife of Druuiila. By the couimau o. tnv a- 




BRAHMA-KHAN DA. 



% 


have come to you ae I desire to have a son. Kindly impregnate me. Yon should 
not slight a woman who has corn© to yon voluntarily. You cannot he hes«t 
with sin by any act performed by you like the all-consuming fire. The muni 
was incensed at the words of the childless woman parted from her husband. His 
lips began to quiver. He addressed her with words full of ethical maxims thus ; 
44 Whoever makes over his wife to another is, according to the Vedas, forsaken 
by grace, i.*., tho goddess of fortune. Therefore you cannot be ehjoyed again 
by Drnmila. And if ho has forsaken you disgusted with your conduct, hewill 
never take you back. A Br&bmin who unknowingly commits sexual intercourse 
with a S'lldra woman forfeits all the lights and privileges of a Brahmin 
and attains the condition of a Chand&l. Such a Br&hmin, (Brahma himself 
hath said) cannot perform the funeral ceremonies of his father or offer sacrifices. 
He cannot touch the Holy Stone (emUen of Visnu) called 8&Jgram, nor 
can he worship the gods. That sinner with ten ancestors in his own line and 
ten ancestors in the line of his maternal grand father goes to the hell called 
tho Kumbhi-p&ka. His oblations to the Manes and his funeral cakes are 
impure like urine and ordure respectively. The Holy Stone, Salgram, 
polluted by his touch, fasts for three days. His tutelary deity does not 
accept water or sacrificial offorings from him. The Brahmins regarding the 
food offered by him as If it were night-soil. 


33*46. 0 whore, that man resides with 21 ancestors of h’8 in the hell 

called Kumbhi-p&ka for the period of longevity allotted to Indra. Anginl has 
said; a base Br&hmin who eats food tasted by a sbdra attains the likeness 
' of a S'fidra ; and a S'ftdra who foolishly goes to a Brahmin woman for immoral 
purposes is entangled in the cob-webs of time during the life-time of 14 Indras 
in succession. That Brahman woman also sustains the same fate and even¬ 
tually takes birth as a S'fidra woman. The Brahmin is also attacked by leprosy 
and hated by his relations. 44 0 S'aunaka, the throat and the lips of the barren 
woman, when she heard his words became parched. At that time, Menaka 
was passing by that way. At the sight of her thigh and breast tho somen of 
the saint was discharged. Thereupon the woman kal&vati drank it cheerfully, 
went to her husbmJ, bowed to him and told him every tiling about, her preg¬ 
nancy. Drumila was delighted to hear this and addressed her with words 
calculated to prove beneficial in the end. He said, (i your son will be a great 
Vaisnava. There is no woman so lucky as you, For those who beget and 
produce Vaisnava children exalt a hundred ancestors of theirs to tne Vaikuntha. 
The parents of a Vaisnava child riding on an excellent chariot, go to* the 
Vaikuntha which is free from re-birth, death or decrepitude Fair one, now 
leave me and go to a Br&hmin’s house and eventually you will find me in the 
Vaikuntha. 


47-69. The lord of the Cowherds having said so to his spouse bathed, 
offered oblations to the gods, worshipped his tutelary deity and distributed 
riclios to tho Br&hmins. He gave them A lakhs of horses, 5 lakh of white 
horses, a lakh of elephants, 100 infautated elephants, 3 lakhs of chariots’; 
12 lakhs of milch-cows, three lakhs of buffaloes and swans, a lakh of 
servants, a thousand villages, hundreds of towns, endless paddy-crops and rice, 
seven crores of gold coins, 1,000 ornaments, a crore of jars ponstructed with 
gems, endless jewels and a large number of women decorated with ornaments. 







UWlST/f 


BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PVR&NA. 


Having done so, be remembered Hari externally and internally (£♦*., by word 
of month and in his heart) and went with haste to the Bidarife&sram a (the Her¬ 
mitage of Jujubes). There he prayed for a mouth and in the presence 
of great saints he gave op his ghost by dint of asceticism. Then he rode on a 
chariot sent by Lord Hari and went to the Vaikunfchi, There he devoted 
himself to the worship of Hari and* was known by the name of HarKD&sa. 
Mow hear o£ Kal&vati. On the death of her husband, she wept loudly and 
prepared to consign herself to the flames, A Br&hmln rescued her, called her 
his mother and took her to his house which was full of gems. 

61-d9. There the chaste la iy gave birth to a son replete with the energy 
of a Br&hmin and effulgent like heated gold. The ladies of the neighbourhood 
caw that he wa? more glorious than the midday sun. He was more beautiful 
than Cupid ; his face was more graceful than the autumnal Moon. His eyes 
were like lotusos. His hands and legs were very graceful His chin was lovely ; 
his bright feet were marked with figures of lotus, wheels etc. His hands had 
an incomparable grace The Judies, seeing that the child was crying and de- 
eirous to suok hia mother, went home with great joy. Thereupon the Brahmin 
with hia wife and sons began to dance merrily* The Br&hmin, too, continued 
to maintain Kal&vatl (with her offspring) like his own daughter. 

OH APT E It XXI. 

1-5. Sauti said, “This wise boy, when ho grew up to the age of five 
years, rercemberod tha incidents of his former birth and also recollected the 
mantraa to which he was used. Ho constantly recited the name and fame o£ 
Kri^na ; and his body was agitated with joy. He wept and danced. The places 
where Kri^na's narratives were recited were Frequented by him. Besmeared 
with dust, he constructed the image of Krisria with mud, presented to him 
offerings after his heart and worshipped him with dust. Summoried by bis 
mother to breakfast, he used to reply I am going to worship Hari. 

6-7. S'aunaka asked : “Please toll me tho names by which he was cele¬ 
brated, the validity of which may be established by etymology.” Sauti answered, 
u As this boy was born after the season of drought and immediately after his 
birth he offered water, he was called N&rada : As ho was conversant with the 
conditions of his former life and imparted wisdom to other boys he was also called 
N&rada* As he was begotten by the saint N&rada, hence he was also called 
N&rada. 

8-12, S'aunaka said, * Sir, I just heard of the etymology of his name. But 
why was the saint called N&rada, at all ? Sauti answered, ‘ the muni Nara, tbo 
eon of Dharma, gave this son to Ivarsyapa who had no son ; hence he was called 
N&rada.” S'aunaka said ‘0 Sauti, I hoard the etymology of the name of NUrada, 
the offspring of a sudra ; but why was N&rada, the son of Brahmd , so calked ?” 

13-22. Sauti answered, u In days of yore, many men came out of the 
throat of Brahmfi. Therefore Brahma’s throat was callod N&rada, And as the 
boy sprang frorq ins throat, he wa 9 called N&rada. There is no use putting 
incidental questions ; listen attentively to the narrative. The boy grew up 
day by day in tlie Br&hmia’s house, and the BrUhrnin treated Kal&vati like his 
daughter. Once upon a time, four Brahmin boys, five years old each, efful- 






BRAHMA-KHAN DA. 


m 


gent in appearance, came to the house of. the Brahmin. The Brahmin bowed 
to them and greeted the boys, effulgent like the midday sun, with oblations of 
honey aud milk. After the boys had eaten fruits etc., the shepherd-boy par¬ 
took of the refuse of their food. One of them was very much pleased with 
him and gave the boy the mystic formula relating to the worship of Krisna. By 
the command of his mother and adoptive father, from that day forth, he became 
the slave of the BrilhminS. On a certain occasion, while the mother of 
the boy was passing by the way, she was bitten by a snake and died. She 
then went to the Vaikunfcha on a celestial car, attended by the retinue of 
Vif no. 


23-31. At day-break, her son went away from the Brahmin’s house with 
the Br&hrain boys. The Br&hmins also imparted to him knowledge with regard 
to the mysteries of creation. Then they left him and went away. The wue 
boy lingered behind on the coast of tho Ganges. The boy, at the root of the 
holy fig-tree, in the midst of a dreadful forest, adopted the posture of devotion 
and recited the incantations of Visnu likely to relieve grief, disease, thirst and 
hunger. S'aunaka said, “ kindly tell me how tho boy obtained the mystic 
incantation of Hari from Sanat-KudaAra.” Satjti answered; 0 best of Dwijes 
(twice-born castes) in days of yore, KrisnA gave the mantra consisting of 22 
letters to Brahma who, in his turn, gave it to Sanat-Kura&ra in view of his piety. 
Sanat-Kumara gave it to N&rada. This mantra is as efficacious as the Kulpa- 
tree. I have told you about the amulet and hymn of this Supreme Being. Nov/ X 
am going to tell you about the meditation (the mental representation of tho 
personal attributes of a deityJ appropriate to him. Listen. 

32-52. The light of Lord Krisna is circular and vies with millions of 
suns. The Yogis, adepts and gods adore this light. But the Vaisnavas adore 
the indescribable, lovely image of Krisna located in the centre of this light, 
lie is bine like a new cloud; his eyes are like lotuses ; his face is as graceful 
as the autumnal full Moon; his lips are like bitnba ; the row of his teeth shames 
the pearls. A gentle smile plays on his lips. He holds a flute in his hands. 
His lovely grace obscures the light of millions of moms and he is enchanting 
like numberless Chip ids. He is clad in yellow dress. Ho has got two hands. 
He has tho matchless graoo of three-fold bonds, viz , at the head, the waist and 
the leg. Ho is ornamented with bracelet, armlet and anklet. His crest is 
adorned with the plumage of a peacock and his breast is decorated with a 
wreath of gems. The jasmine-wreath decorates his body up to his knee. He 
is covered throughout with dandal piHe. The milk-maids or oow-herdessos 
behold him with arch-glances and his breast is covered with a bright diamond 
called the Kaustubhi. The milk-maids decorated with gems and possessed 
of a beauty* that never fades surround Krisna who is implanted in tho heart 
of lt&dhA.” This Supremo, youthful Being, the consort of li&dha, * is cons¬ 
tantly adored by Brak.na. Viijjnu, S'iva, etc. Void of all attributes, trans¬ 
cending nature, bearing testimony to all objects and un-associated with any¬ 
thing, the Jjord of creation is the fit subject of our contemplation and we adore 
him accordingly.” Now J have told you about his meditation (Dbyan), hymn, 
amulet and also the mystic formula which is as efficacious as the Kalpa-tree. 
Now hear about tho boy. 0 S'aunaka, N&rada, without food, absorbed in 
meditation, passed a thousand celestial years in that place. But- by virtue 
9 






THE BRAHMA V AlV ART A PVR AS A. 


J8L 


o£ that perfect mystic formula, (mantra) his body was developed and became 
stronger. Once, through the medium of his devotions, he perceived a celestial 
boy and a celestial kingdom. That celestial boy, decorated with gems, was 
seated on a throne of gem. He was youthful, dark in appearance, dressed like 
a oow-herd, in yellow garments, with two hands holding the flute, smiling, and 
surrounded by cow-herds and cow-herdesses. This Supreme Being was adored 
by Brahm&, Mahesa, Vi^nn and other gods. He beheld Hina for some time; 
but, being unable to see Him longer, was afflicted with grief and began to weep 
at the root of the holy fig-tree. Thereupon, there was a brief, wise, instructive, 
incorporeal voice from the sky to the following effect:—“ lou will not per¬ 
ceive any more the image you saw just now. For it is not meant for the vision 
of bad Yogis. After your death, you will behold Hari again free frem birth, 
death and decrepitude/' 

53. The boy thereupon was consoled and in that holy shrine he recol¬ 
lected Krisna and put an end to his life. There was a beat of drum. Ihore 
was a rain of flowers. N&rada was raleased from his^urse. He died and merged 
in Brahma. Though Narada is eternal, yet, as a result of big previous acts* 
he appeared and disappeared. 0 S'aunaka, the manifestation or disappearance 
of eternal beings depends on their pleasure. A true believer is never subject 
to life, death, decrepitude or disease. 


CHAPTER XXII. 

1-21. Sauti said, ‘Now hear about the etymology of the names of certain 
Munis. Ages ago, at the time of creation, Marichi, N&rada and other saints 
sprang from the throat (narad) of Brahtuft. Hence Narada is so called. The best 
of Munis who sprang from the mind of the creator was called Prachetk. That 
sou who sprang from his right side was called Duksa. Kardama mean? shadow. 

* He was so called because he sprang from the- shadow of Brahfad. Marichi 
means energy and he is so called because he sprang from the energy of 
Bratunst. A son of BrahmJt was styled Kratu, because iu days of yore he 
performed sacrifices. Ira means valiant; and Augira is so called because he 
sprang out of the principal organ, viz., the month of Brahma. |lhrigu moans 
valiant, and is so called as Bhrigu was the most valiant of Brahnci&’s sons. 
Aruni was so called because he shone like Aruna or the Sun. Hamsi is 
so called, as he has the knaok of subduing swans by hi3 asceticism. Vasistha 
is so called, because he was obedient to his father, Yati is so called 
because he is a great devotee. In the vedas Pulasa means devotion as well as 
bloom. Pulasta is so called because he is the embodiment of all devotion. 
Tri means nature aud A moans Visnu ; Atri is so.called because he has faith 
in both (Nuture and Visnu). Pancha-Sikh& is so called as he has five matted 
or clothed hair on his head, the offshoots of the valour of his asceticism. The 
son of Biahmfi, who, while engaged in devotion himself, could enable others 
also to bear the burden of devotion was, in consequence of this faculty, called 
Bodhu. O best of Munis, Ruchi was so called because he had a taste for devo¬ 
tion. The eleven sons who came out of Brahm&, while he was in a rage, are 
called Rndrati on account of their hot disposition and their lamentations. 
S'aunaka said,* “ 1 have a grave delusion or doubt on one point, viz., as to whe- 




BRAHMA-KHAN DA. 


ther S # iva is one of the l.tudras or not. You are conversant with the Purina*. 
Kindly remove iny doubt.” 

22-31. Sauti said, “the preserver Visnu is the emblem of virtue and truth. 
Brshmil represents the principle of activity. The Budraa represent destruc¬ 
tion. K&lAgni-lludra, one of the Kudras, is a part of S'aukara. But the 
beneficent and bountiful S'iva is the embodiment o£ pure virtue. Others are 
the digits of Krisna. Visnu and rf'ankara are perfect embodiments oi Lord 
Krista. They (i. e Visnu and S'iva) are equal to one another iu every respect 
and represent truth and virtue. At the time when I described the origin o 
the Rudras, I referred to this subject also. Why did you forget the fact then i 
For a wonder, every-one is subject to the delation of MAy^ i for even the 
intellect of the munis is also perverted. Sanaka, Sananda, SanAtana and 
Lord Sanat-KumAra, these are the four sons of BrahmA. When Brahma a*kod 
them to create, they refused. BrahmA became angry and the Rudras *P r & n £ 
out cf BrahmA when he was in a rage. Sanaka and Sananda are so called, 
because these two lads are always cheerful. SanAtaua is so called because he 
is supreme like the Lord, equal to Krisna and devoted to Him. Sanata means 
permanent, and KumAra means child, hence BrahmA gave him the etymo¬ 
logical or derivative name of Sauat-KumAra.” I have told you about 
derivation of the names of the sons of BrahmA. Now hear about the narrative 
of NArada in due order. 

CHAP T E R XXIII. 

1-2. Sauti said, “ 0 S'aunaka, BrahmA having deputed his sons to the 
task of creation addressed N&rada (who was conversant with the Vedas and 
the Vedangas, certain classes of works regarded as auxiliary to the Vedas and 
designed to aid in the correct pronunciation and interpretaiion of the text and 
the right employment of mantras in ceremonials) with .words which were 
truthful and beneficial and which constituted the essence of the Vedas.’ 

3-13. He said, '‘Come here, you are the best of all tho members of my 
family and dearer than my life. Before the flame of your wisdom, the 
darkness ofjgnorance disappears. Ju-at consider 1 The father is the bast of all 
preceptors. The dispenser of knowledge and the giver of mantras are both equal 
to one another and greater than the father. My son, I am your father, your fceacuer 
as well as your preserver. I therefore command you to take a wife for mv satisfa¬ 
ction. He who carries out his guru’s command is, truly speaking, a disciple or a 
son. He who does uot do so come* to grief. Ho who carries out his preceptor’s 
orders gets benefit at every stop. Such a man is really a philosopher, a savant 
and a saint. Of the stages of a Brahmin’s life, the siago of a householder 
is the best and the most virtuous. For unless crowned with fruits of asceti¬ 
cism, the source of virtue, a house cannot be tilled with wife and children. As 
a cow, to drink water, goes to the trough, so on a gala-day, the manes, and on a 
lunar-day, the gods approach the ‘householders ; and the householder, after 
bavins performed the casual and tho necessary rites and also the ceremonies 
not obligatory but meant to secure future fruition, enjoys great happiness m 
this world and the bliss jE Heaven in the next world., A virtuous housholder 
who gerforms the duties assigned to him is redeemed daring his lite-tnne aud 











acquires fame, wealth and happiness. And such a man is alive though dead. 
On the contrary, an infamous man, though alive, is dead.” The throat, palate 
and the lips of N&rada became dry as he heard these words with fear. He said. 


14*33. ‘Once upori a time, remember, this verbal controversy injured 
ns a good deal. By your curse, I became at first a Gan larva and then a 
S'ftdra ; you, too, lost your right to receive worship ; i, e. you were no longer 
deemed fit for worship, Sire, I have been released from the curse you will 
be likwise relieved from my curse. but repeated quarrels will produce 
no good. Consider, he truly is a father, preceptor, son or god who 

begets in our mind belief in Hari. He truly is a father who dissuades his son 
from f;he ovil path. A father who dissuades his son from the path of devotion 
to Hari is an evil* door. Marriage is only a source of evil ; for the society 
of the wife destroys devotion, heaven, religious faith and redemption. Foolish 
householders have three sorts of wives to deal with—first a chaste 
wife, secondly a wife who merely courts pleasure, thirdly an unchaste wife. A 
chaste woman for fear of the next world, for the rake of her reputation in this 
world and for gratification of her passion ministers to her husband. A woman 
belonging to the second class ministers to her husband solely for the sake of 
sensual enjoyments. She will never serve her husband, if there is the slight- i 
est impediment to this object which she has in view. She cares to obey 
her lord, so long as she gets raiment, jewels and excellent food. An unchaste 
woman destroys the sanctity of the family of her husband like a fire brand. 

She serves her husband hypocritically and not reverentially. Oppressed by 
lust, she always wants new gallants She is capable of killing her husband. » 
The life of a fool who trusts such a woman is useless. I have just deli¬ 
neated three kinds of women, viz., good, bad and indifferent. But the heart 
of none of them can be fathomed even by savants. Adepts can 
only comprehend it, The heart of women is keen like the edge of a razor. 
Their face is beautiful like the Moon. To gain their object, they use words 
as sweet honey ; but when they are angry the words are turned into poison. 
Belief in their statement results iti universal destruction, For their object is 
unknowable and their action is mysterious. Immodesty and daring charac¬ 
terise their conduct; aud their deeds are tainted with defect and hypocrisy. 

0 Lord of the universe, iho lust of a woman is eight times as great; hunger 
twice as great and cruelty, four times as great as the lust, hunger aud 
cruelty of a man. Her angor and persevorence in every matter are six times 
greater than those of a man. Hew can I be attached to a woman who is subject 
to all these defects ? Hew can a man acquire taste for a woman who is the 
mine of ordure, wine and dirt ? By sexual intercourse the energy of a man 
rs Wasted ; and bis reputation also, if it is committed in the day. Excess 
of love with a woman causes loss of wealth : and excess of attachment to a 
woman causes death. Her society cause loss cf virility. Mutual quarrels 
destroy honour ; and confidence in her causes wholesale destruction. Sire, 
there is no expectation of happiness from a weman. So long as a man is 
healthy, valiant and competent or cajable, a woman is submissive to him. 
And if the same man becomes diseased, old or poor, she does rot even cast at 
him a passing glance ; onjy, through fear cf society, she gives him a little 
food.’ In the light of my own intelligence I depioted the character of the 




WWlfT/ty. 



female sex. You are an adept imd knew every thing. Therefore, lord, protect 
me from this danger.” 


40-46. Then Narada reverentially bowed to his father and with folded 
palms prayed thus ‘ Father, you are a Kalpa-troe. I pray you to grant am 
faith in ilari.’ So saying, ho entreated his father for pormision to observe 
religious austerities. ' Nkrada, was about to go away after having circum¬ 
ambulated round his father from right to left. Thereupon, Brahma, the 
ruler rf the universe, like an ordinary man of the world, began t,o weep very 
loudly, held him by the hand, embraced and kissed him again aod again. 
The adept Brahma then placed him on his knee. Brahma was unable to bear 
the pang of sepaiation which, in fact, is intolerable to every living being. 
Brahma, bewildered by the spell of Visnu., was overwhelmed with gnet in 
view of his separation from his son and began to address him thus : 

CHAPTER XXI V. 

1-5. Brahma said, ‘Child, what have I to do with worldly affairs? 
You bad better go out for devotion. I too am going to the Qoloka to com¬ 
prehend Krisra My sons Sannka, Sauanda, San&tnna, Banat-kmnara, 
Yali. Hamsi, Aruni and Panch-S'ikha have become devotees by reason of their 
indifference to the world. Only Marichi, Angira, Bbrigu, Knchi, Atri, 

Kardama, Prachetft, Kratu, Manu and V&sigtha are obedient to me. -he 
rest of my sons are wilful and disobedient- I have therefore, nothing to 
do with the world. 

6-9. Child, I now tell you what is sanctioned by the Vedas and tradition, 
what is uuspioious and calculated to secure tho four-fold objects of human 
pursuit. All the savants desire objects as eulogised by society and 

prescribed by the Vedas. What is forbidden by them is irreligion or vice. 
This is why a Brahmin puts on the sacred thread at the time of the inves¬ 
titure-ceremony prescribed by the Vedas. Then he studies the Vedas and 
after giving the sacerdotal fee to his preceptor, ho marries a modest girl of 
noble family. 

10-13, This chaste woman also ixinistors to her husband; bIio cannot 
do otherwise ; for a glass panuot derive its orgia from a mine of rubies. A 
woman of mean origin, contaminated by the defect or the vice of her parents 
is immodest, wicked and self-willed in all her acts. A woman who is a purt 
of Laksm! i. e. owes bor origin to a digit of Lak§mi can never be unchaste. 
The origin of a woman of ignoble blood may be traced to tho whore3 of Heaven. 
A good woman praises her husband, though ho is devoid of any qualities. 

14-23. An unchaste woman dees not serve even a well-qualified 

husband bat slanders him in every way. A virtuous man, therefore, 

marries a woman of good rank \ and as soon as he begets a son on 
her, he retires from the world in his old ago, for devotion. It is true 
that dwelling in fire, or in the face of a snake, or in a place beset with 
thorns is profcrable to tho society of a shrew. But it is not proper to find 
fault \$ilh all the women of tho world. Bon Narada, you have studied 








1 * 1 UlSTfiy 



THE BRARMA-VAIVARTA PVrAnA. 


<SL 


the Vodas. In lieu of the payment of priest’s fee, you had hotter marry now ; 
(t your marriage will be a substitute for the priest’s fees )' Son N&rada, 
on an auspicious day, you had better wed Maldvati, your first wife, who comes 
out of a noble family. This chaste lady, having taken her birth in India, in 
the house of ferinjaya descended from Manu is absorbed in devotion- You 
should marry this lady (new named liatna-m&la) who is descended from a 
digit ot Laksmi, the goddess of fortune. The rule of conduct prescribed by 
the Vedas is this, first a man should be a householder, then a recluse for lonely 
meditation in the woods; and lastly an ascetic. The worship of Hari is the 
devotion proscribed for an. ascetic by the Vedas. You are a great Vaisnava. 
\ou should remain in the world ; and here in your house you should adore the 
lotus foot of Hari. He in whose mind and outside whose mind Hari exists 
need not try to reap the fruits of other devotions. He, in whose mind and out¬ 
side whoso mind Hari does not exist, in vain seeks to secure the fruits of de¬ 
votion. 


24-28. In a word, Hari alone is adorable by devotion ; and no one else. 
The service of Krisna, under all circumstances, constitutes his devotion. There¬ 
fore, son, stay in your house and servo Hari. 0 best of Munis, be a household¬ 
er, for a householder always enjoys pleasure. The pleasure which a woman’s 
society yields is greater than the bliss of Heaven. Even those who desire redemp¬ 
tion pray for thfe sight or touch of a woman. The touch of a woman is more 
pleasing than the touch of anything else in the world. 0 son, best of saints, 
this is why none is dearer to a man than his wife who is, therefore, called his 
beloved. A wife is dosired in order to secure a son ; this is why a son is dearer 
than a hundred wives. In a word, none is dearer or more friendly than a 
son. 

29-47. People want to gain victory over others ; but they court defeat 
from a son. Though the soul is dearer than wealth, yet a son is dearer than 
the soul; therefore it is proper for a man to give his dear son wealth better than 
himself (or better than the wealth which he has himself got.”) N&rada re¬ 
plied thus, “ Sire, a father knowing the Vedas and the metaphysics (philosophy) 
is unkind, if be points out the path of evil to his sons. The whole universe 
is transitory like water-marks or bubbles of water. Any one who 
leaves Hari and gets addicted to sensual enjoyments leads a vain human life. 
In this world, no one is a wife, sou or friend; union or disuuion is brought 
about by the law of causation (karma), A father who engages his son in 
good deeds is his friend; otherwise he is his enemy and cannot properly be called 
his father. Father, though I referred you to the rules prescribed by the 
Vedas, yet I should carry out your orders. I shall first go to the hermitage 
of JSaraand Nar&yanu, and there, having listened to the recitations of the glory 
and greatness of Vi$na, take a wife later on.” N&rada haviug finished his 
discourse, there was a shower of flowers upon his head. For a short time, 
he remained with his father and addressed him again thus “ Sire, give me 
the mantra of Kri$na congenial to ray heart and communicate to rue knowledge 
which deals with his virtues. 1 shall then marry, later on. For, whou a 
mau’s object is r gained, ho works cheerfully.” The wisest Brahma was pleased 
to hoar this and thus replied :—“ A clever person should not take mantras from 
the husband or the Cipher ; aud the mantra is, by no means, the source of happiness 






to one who has renounced the hermitage (or any of the four stages of Br&hmin 8 
life). And, just consider, destiny, and not human effort, can secure the possession 
of a wife, preceptor, woman, knowledge mantra, pleasure, fear, happiness or 
sorrow. Mahesa is the guru of your previous birth. Go to that tranquil 
benefactor and philosopher. After having received Mantras ana wisdom 
from him and after having beard tho narrative of N&rayarta, come oack to 
mo 8000 .” Thus enjoined by Brahmft, N Jlrada bowed to him reverntialiy 
and went to tho S'iva-loka. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1-8. Sautisaid, ‘N&rada went in a moment to the lovely land of S'iva. 
It is situated a lakh Yojans above Dhruva-loka and constructed by S'iva him- 
self with gems. The mansion of S'iva contains many houses and remains sus¬ 
pended in the sky solely through the strength of his asceticism. It is radiant 
with light, as excellent munis pray there day and night. There is no light of 
the 3un and the Moon there. It is only surrounded by a bright colossal (ire in 
tho form of a rampart with countless flames. f J his S'iva-loka is extended over 
an area of a lakh yojans, contains three crores of houses made of gems and is 
inlaid with diamonds. Tho houses contain looking-glasses of gom and diamond, 
the splendour of which was never even dreamt of, by Viawa-karrnS. lhis S'iva- 
loka contains numberless adepts, Bhairavas and hideous attendants of S'ivas. It 
has millions and millions of resorts for pilgrims. It contains Mand&rs (coral 
trees) and other blooming and fragrant trees. It is decorated with celestial 
cows called K&m-dhenus, (cows that grant the fulfilment of wishes), as the sky 
is decorated with a hundred cranes.” N&rada was astonished to see all this 
and concluded that nothing was imposiblo with S'iva, tho preceptor of the wise 
men and the Yogis. In a word, this place was superior to the three worlds of 
Brahm& and free from fear, death, disease, sorrow, decrepitude etc. 

9-14, Mrada saw the benefactor S'iva, the central figure of the assem¬ 
bly, from a distance. His face was tranquil and lovely. His three eyes were like 
lotuses!: each of his five faces resembled the Moon. His head sustained the Ganges; 
and bis forehead, the Moon. This white naked deity had clusters of hair on 
his head, bright like heated gold. He is Eternal and imperishable. He mut¬ 
ters the name of Krisna with a wreath of the seeds of Ganges-Iotus in his 
hand. He gives perfection. He is tho conqueror of Death, Time and Yama. 
His throat is blue. Ho is surrounded by snakes and adored by the anchorites, 
the adepts and the saints. His face is cheerful and smiling. He is 
the benefactor of the world, and is easily propitiated : He i3 dear to his 
devotees, lovely and Supreme, and void of the passions of the world. N&rada, 
agitated with religious fervour, bowed to him low and then began to play 
upon his three-stringed lute and sweetly reoifced the name of Krisna. S'iva 
beholding Narada who was versod in the Vedas got up at once from his seat 
along with the saints, adepts and^anchorites. 

15-18. S'iva embraced and blessed hi n. He gave him a seat, asked his 
welfare and enquired into the cause of his visit. S'iva and other* resumed their 
seats. N&rada, on the other hand, did not sit down but, with folded palms, began to 







mtSTjfy, 



THJ^BRAHAfArVAlVARTA PUR ANA 


adore him. He adored him (S'iva) according to the hymn composed by ih g king 
of the Gandarvas, bowed to him again and again, and, by his command, ulti¬ 
mately sat down. Narada expressed to S'iva, (who grants coons to mankind 
just like the Kalpa-tree) his desire. The merciful S'iva accepted bis petition. 


CHAPTER. XXVI. 

1-7. Santi said ‘ N&rada prayed S'iva with a view to the attainment of 
Harfs hymn, amulet, mantra, worship, devotion and wisdom. S'iva gave him all 
this and also granted him knowledge relating to his previous births. The 
Muni’s object was fulfilled. He bov/ed low to S'iva and said, “ 0 best of 
Vedantisls (those versed in the Vedanta system cf philosophy), kindly tell 
me about the necessary, and essential rites by which a Br&hmin is able to 
fulfil the duties assigned to him.” S'iva said, 41 At dawn a Brahmin should get 
up and in the delicate and pure lotus of a thousand leaves, free from langour and 
lassitude, located in the aperture at the crown of his head should roirember 
his guru or spiritual guide in the following way, .viz , that he has a cheerful and 
smiling face and is kind to his worshippers ; and that he is Brahma incarnate. 

8-16. After that, in the lotus of bis heart of a thousand petals he should 
recollect his tutelary deity. That recollection should be suited to the nature 
of the Deity be worships. First, the guru, then the deity should be worship¬ 
ed. Because the guru manifests the deity and introduces his worship. The 
deity does not reveal the guru. This is why the^wru is superior to the tutelary 
deity. He is like BrahmA. Visnu and Mahesa. He is the primordial Nature, 
the Sun, the Moon, the Fire, the Water, the Father, the Mother, the friend, 
the guru is the BrahmA; and so there is none so adorable as the guru . If the 
tutelary ged is displeased with a man, he may be protected by the guru . But 
the said god cannot protect him if the guru is angry with him. If the guru 
is pleased, victory attends him at every step. If the guru is angry with him, 
he is absolutely ruined. If a fool by mistake adores his tutelary deity before 
he worships his o nru y ho is guilty of the murder of a hundred Br&hmins. 

17-24 Hari hath said iu theS&m-Veda that the guru is superior to the 
tutelary deity. A worshipper, after having worshipped his guru , should relieve 
nature in a place specified by the Vedas. None should make water or discharge 
stool near or on the water, in a place associated with holes, in the presence of 
animals, near a temple, at the root of a tree, on a cultivated land, or a field of 
crops, iu a oow-pon, in the river, in a hole on the brink of a river, in a garden 
of flowers, in a village, near a dwelling house or a place containing poles, on 
a bridge, in a jungle of reeds, on a crematorium, near the tire, on a playing 
ground, in a dreadful forest, beneath the bedstead, (or a platform‘or pulpit), in 
a place shaded by trees, on the holy grass or tho bent grass, on ant-hill, 
on the soil where a tree has been planted or a place purified or cleansed for 
the performance of a ceremony, Relieve nature after having excavated a 
hollow avoided by tho heat of the sun. 

25-29. While you ease yourself in this way, turn your face upwards in 
the day, towards tho west in the night and towards the -south in the evening, 
keep quiet at the time and soe that the smell does not enter into the nose. A 





BRAHMA-KHAN DA 


clever man, after relieving nature, should conceal 
should first purify himself with earth and 
after urination is performed by the application of 
peni 9 and twice to both the hands. 


30-36. The purification after stool is performed by an ordinary house¬ 
holder (Brahmin) by the application of soil once to the penis, thrice to the 
anas, seven times to both the hands and six times to the feet. Donb e t, <unonn 
of this purification prescribed above is incumbent upon the widows. A. Braamin 
who has not been invested with sacred thread, a Sudra, or. an ordinary woman 
should use as much quantity of mud as is necessary to dispel the bad sme • 
A Ksatriya or a Yaisya should observe the same rule as. a orahmni. n ) 
double this amount of puiification is necessary for an anchorite or a Vuisnava. 
A violation of this rule entails a penance. Now I an going to tell you io 
rules about the quality of the mud which should be used fdr purification. 


37-43. Carefully avoid the mud or clay appertaining to an ant-hill, clay 
dug out by the rats or in the midst of water, the remnant of tho clay aftor 
purification, the clay of a dwolling house, the clay of a place wliere people die, 
tho clay dug out bv the plough or at the root of bent or hoiy grass or at the 
root of the holy fig-'treo, tho clay of a place whore people sleep or wliero tour 
ways cross one another, tho clay of a cow-pen or the place where oattle graze. 
A JMhmin, whether he bathos or not, is purified by the process mentioned 
above. 


44-48. If he is not purified, lie in not entitled to any act. Ho should 
therefore purify himself and then rinse his mouth. First he should take 16 
haudfuls of water and then polish his teeth with a green twig. I.e should 
then again purify his mouth with 16 handfuls of water. Mango, Oleander, 
Jasmine, S'&hor shorea robusts* Aaoka, (a tree of red flowers) Arjuna, Kadamba, 
(a kind of tree said to put forth buds at the roaring of. thunder-clouds), 
Jasmine, Fal&sa (Dhak), Jambu or roseapple tree, Catechu, Nut-meg, rig, Apa- 
marcra, Sindhuvara, Bakula, Peepul, are excellent for purposes of tooth-polish. 
Tho Coral tree, the Flum, tho Neem, the Sirlfa, the Silk-cotton-tree, thorny 
trees, excepting creepers, Peepul, Pi&l, Tamarind, Palm, Date, Palmyra and 
Oocoanut : these are trees which must not furnish a tooth-brush. 


49-57. A man who does not polish his tooth is impure in every respect 
and is?not privileged to do any work. After purification, a BrAhmin should 
put on neat clothes, wash his feet, and mouth and worship the bun m the 
morning. Whoever worships the Son three times a day gets the benefit at 
ablution in all sacred rivers ; otherwise he is impure and unfit ior all sacred 
work. lie who does not worship the Sun in the morning and evening is 
excluded from tho privileges of a Br&luniij. and reduced to the condition of an 
ordinary Siidra. lie who gives up only the morning; CrAetri is guilty ot 
Brahmin-slaughter and suicide. A Brahmin devoid of lbkadasi and GAetrl is 
for millions of years entangled in the cob-web of tune like the husband of a 
barren women. After SaudhyA, a Brahmin should bow to tho guru, spintua 
guide, tutelary deity, the Sun, Brahma, Visnu, S'iva, Nature (the primordial 
10 









mtsr/ty. 



THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


<SL 


principle of illusion), the goddesses of knowledge and fortune and having 
touched ghee , looking-glass, honey and gold, he should bathe in due time. 

58*65. A religious man, while bathing in the pond or pool of others, 
should, at tho time of bathing, first up-lift the five cakes and then have a dip 
in tho water. In a river, streamlet, cavern, or a stream resorted to by pilgrims, 
he should first bathe, then make avowal of the purpose to perform a rite, and 
aftorwards bathe again. The Vaisnavas make this avowal to propitiate 
Krisna ; and the house-holders do this, to wash away their sins. A Br&hmin, 
by the following purifying Mantra should apply mud to his body. 0 clay or 
earth, please destroy my sins. You are assailed by horse, chariot and the feet 
of V isriu and wield wealth in your womb. In days of yore, you were released 
by Krisna (in the guise of a boar) with hundred hands. Please climb my 
body and purify me.” With this mantra immersed in the water up to the abdomen 
worshipper should make a sphere measuring forr cubits. By touching the 
sphere he should, 0 saint whose sole treasure is asceticism, thus invoke the 
holy streams as named below: 

66-81. ‘0 Ganges, Yamunk, God&varl, Saraswati, Narmad3, Indus, 
Caveri, please approach me.’ Afterwards he should remember Nalini, Nandini, 
Sit4, M4lin!, the Ganges of three courses rising from the feet of Vianu, 
Padmkvati, Bhogvati, Swarnarekha, Vaisnavi, Saraswail, llkdhk (dearer to 
Krisna than his life\ SkntA, Gomati, SkvitrJ, Tulel, Durga, MahklaksmS, 
Diti, Kati, A balyk, A diti, Sangnk, Swadha, Swaha, Arundhati, S'atarupk, 
Devahfiti etc. After having purified himself with bath, he should apply 
sandal-mark to the root of his arras, forehead, throat and breast. Without 
application of sandal-mark to the forehead, bath, gift, devotion, offering 
of ghee to the fire and all acts in the interests of the gods and the manes 
booome ineffectual. Afterwards, the Br&hmiri should worship the Sun, offer 
oblation to the manes, wash his feet, put on his cloth and a sheet to wrap his 
body and then enter into his house. Entranoe into tho house without washing 
the feet (Hari ha(h said,) destroys the fruits of ablution, offerings to the fire 
and recitation of the name of god. If a householder enters into the house 
with wet clothes on, the goddess of fortune, highly incensed, curses him and 
leaves his house. A Brdhrain who washes his feet with his leg below, the 
knee upwards is turned into a Chandkla and remains in this condition as long 
as he does not see the Ganged. A holy Brahiniu after rinsing his mouth, with 
care, devotion and reverence should worship according to the method prescribed 
by the V^das. The best receptacle (or substratum) for the worship of Hari 
is the Holy stone (emblem of Vispu) gem, instrument (musical), image, water, 
.land, the back of a cow, tho religious preceptor or a Brkhmin. But the best 
of those is the Holy Stone or Sklgrkm. 


82-90. All gods preside over this Stone. Any one who has a dip in tho 
water of this stone gets fruits of ablution in all holy rivers and initiation in all 
sacrifices. Whoever drinks this water everyday is redeemed during his life 
time and goes to the Goloka after his death. That place, where the wheel of 
this stone abides, is a resort of pilgrims, and there Vianu himself dwells with 
his wheel. If any one dies there, consciously or unconsciously, he goes to the 
Golaka motmted on a cbaiiot of gem, A pious man never worship 0 Hari 







BftAHMA-KHANtiA. 



without this stone for ; he, through this stone, gets his complete reward. Now 
I am going to tell you the mode of worship prescribed by the Ustras. *-»™ 
Vaisnavas present to iiari sixteen holy and beautiful ingredients; some, only 
twelve; and others, only five. This depends upon the resources at the disposal 
of the worshipper, for the principal thing which matters is faith in llari, the 

key-note of all worship. . , .. P . . .. 

91-104. Seat (a carpet or a mat), raiment, water to wash the feet, water to 

wash the feet with offerings of green grass, rioe etc., water to rinse the mouth, 
flower, sandal, frank-inoense, light or lamp, good sacrificial offerings, 
articles, garlands, excellent and soft bedsteads, water in a pot 
or grain in a cup, botel-leaves in a case 


fragrant 

bedsteads, water in u pot, rice 
these are the sixteen ingredients. f lho 
twelve ingredients are all as mentioned above except incense, grain, betel-loaves 
and bedstead. Water to wash the feet, water mixed with green grass to wash 
the feet, etc., water, sacrificial offerings and Hewer: those constitute the hve 
ingredients. A worshipper should offer these articles with the fundamental mantra. 
Counsel by the spiritual preceptor is most essential in such matters, a 
should first purify the elements of the body by respiration- 


then withhold his ‘breath by religions austerities. He should 
different kinds of Nyatsa (viz, Anga-nyftsa, Mantra-iiyAsa, 
ny&sa). Ny&ea is assignment of various parts 
deities with corresponding gesticulations, 
an Arghya (water to wash the foot of a 


A worship- 
He should 
then perform 
and Vurna- 
of tho body to different 
After tha*, ho will maintain 

_ _ _ JU Brahmin with offer of green grads, 

riwT&Y Yhen he will make a sphere or circle of three angles on which he will 
worship tho god, Kftrma (tortoise). He will then fill the conches witu 
water. He will afterwards duly worship the water and invoke tho holy rivers. 
Ho will then wash the ingredients of worship and with wrapped attention, and 
..ocordiug to tho method of worship prescribed by his religious preceptor, adore 
Kiisna by adopting the proper posture for meditation and with a pure mini 
presont to him all the ingredients through the fundamental mantra. After having 
worshipped the gods presiding over the different members of the human body, 
ho will finish his worship in a suitable fashion out of deference to his god. Then 
he will make a gift of all the ingredients to the deity, read the hymn and the 
amulet aud, by way of submission or apology, lie prostiaip on tho ground 
like a staff-and bow to Uari. A clever worshipper, after having worshipped 
the gods, will offer oblations of ghee to tho fire according to the method 
prescribed by the S'ratis and Smritis and oat of deference to his maternal 
ancestors present to thorn the mgrediehts of worship- After haviog performed, 
to the best of his powers, the imperative funeral rites and made necessary pre¬ 
sents, lie should perform other rites. This order is jrescribed by the Vedas. 
O NArada, I told you tho rules prescribed by the Vedas regulating the daily 
conduct of the Brahmins. Now tell me what you desire.' 


CHAPTER XXVII. 

1 2. NAruda said : 0 Lord, kindly describe to me the diet 
allowed or forbidden to the householders, tho Vaisnavas, the widows and 
the Brahmach&ris. The Brah.-nachAfis are religious students or Brahmins in 
the first stago oE their life, who continue to live with their spiritual guide, 







misr/f^ 



Tl-IE BRAU MA-V A1V ART A PURaJVA. 




m investure with sacred thread and perform the duties of their order till 
they settle down in life. The Yatis, i.e., ascetics who renounced the world and 
controlled their passions. You are the mastef and cause of all ; you know 
e very-thing. 

3-14. S'iva answered : * Some Brahmins are ascetics, others are ever- 
fasting munis ; others subsist upon the wind or fruits. Some of them marry 
and take food regularly. Their tastes differ. They do as they will. Some 
householders always take boiled rice with ghee. If food or water is not de¬ 
dicated to Vi§nu, it is as impure as nightsoi| or f urine. Food taken on the 
Ekftdasi is equally impure and very sinful. Nay, any BrAbmin who conscious¬ 
ly eats on that day, undoubtedly accumulates or oats all the sins committed 
in the three worlds. Therefore, 0 Narada, a Brahmin householder should, 
by no means, eat on that day. A Br&bmin householder who eats on that day is 
implicated in the eob-web of time; and, tliore, subsisting upon urine and ordure 
he is devoured by worms big like Bal-troes and is subjected to torments for 
a period covered by the regime of fourteen Indras in succession. Whoever eats 
on the clay of Janmastami, R&m-navami or S'iva-ratri incurs double the 
amount of the sin as stated above ; but if he is unable to fast, he noay take 
fruits, sweets, vegetable etc. For if the body perishes through fasting, the sin 
of suicide is incurred thereby. Or he may eat only once a day the rice boiled 
with gltee, dedicated to Visnu. Thereby he will not transgress the rale; 
rather, he will reap the fruits of EkAdasi. A Brahmin housoholder who fasts 
on the day of EkAdasi goes after his death to the Yaikuntha and remains there 
throughout the longevity allotted to Brahma. 

15-21. 0 N&rada, this rule binds the S'aivu, the S&kta, and the house¬ 

holder. The case is different with the Vaisnavs, Yatis and Br&hmacharis. A 
Yaisnava who daily eats the offerings of Krisna reaps the benefits of a thou* 
sand fasts, lie is redeemed, in his life-time. The gods desire to touch him. 
The sight of his face or a talk with him destroys all sins. The consumption, 
twice a day of boiled or flattened rice, though sanctionced by custom in some 
place, is not proper for a Brahmin ; nor is such rice suited for dedication to 
a god. Like betel-leaves, it is forbidden to the Yatis, Brabmaohftris and 
ascetics. To all of them, the betel is prohibited just like beef. Now N&rada, 
listen to .the description of those articles of food which are prohibited to the 
Brahmans by the sacred precept enjoined by the Sfun-Veda, as stated by 
Hari. 


22-35. The drinking of milk in a copper-vessel, the consumption of gh'e 
which is the refuse of others, or the drinking of milk mixed with salt is equi¬ 
valent to the use of beef. Coeoamit-water in a bell-metal cup, honey in a copper- 
vessel or extract of sugur-cane and deposited iu the suid vessel should be 
avoided like wine. A Br&bmin who lifts water with his left hand with a view 
to drink it drinks wine and is excluded from all religion, 0 saint, all food 
that is not dedicated to Hari, the eating of the refuse of food or drinking 
of water touohed by others, with their lips or tasted by others, the use of brinjal 
iti the month of Kartika or radish in the month of Mftgha or aquatic plants 
on the day of Bk&dast should bo avoided like beef. White palm, lentil 
(Masur; and flesh aro prohibited to the Brahmins in every country. A 



mtsr/fy 


BtiAHMA-KBANtiA. v 




Brahmin vohiotarily eating meat can be purified by observing fast 
tor three nights consecutively ami by penance. On the lunar day of 

Pratipada, the flrst day of moon’s increase or wane, the ^ consumption 

of pumpkin-gourd entails loss of wealth. On the second day of the month 
the use of the medicinal plant called brihati (Vyakud&) will disentitle a man 
from the recollection of Hart. On the 3rd day, the Patai or the cticurbitaceous 
plant or its fruit is prohibited. On the fourth day, radish is forbiuden as 
its use may came loss of wealth. On the 6th day a man taking Neem is 
born as a bird. On the 7th day, the use of palm causes disease and injures 
the body. On the 8th day, the use of cocoanut destroys wisdom. On the 

9th day, the use of bottle-gourd or the white pumpkin and on the 10th day the 

consumption of the aquatic plant, called Kaiaaibi aro equal to the eating of 
beef. On the 1 lib day the use of kidney-beau, on the 12lh day the use 
of pot-herb and on the 13th day, the consumption of the brinjal or egg fruit 
Hiring about the loss of a son. On the 14th day, the consumption of kidney- 
bean, and on the day associated with the full moon or new moon the use of 
meat are very sinful. 


3G-46. On other days, the house-holders may use meat which ha3 been 
sprinkled with water for purification. 0 Naradu, on the occasion of the morning 
bath, on the day of tbo funeral ceremony, on a festive or gala-day, on the day 
conjoined with the full or the now moon, on the last day of the solar month 
called Sankr&nti and on the 14th or 8th day of tho lunar month, the use of 
mustard or boiled oil is very appropriate. On Sunday, on the day of this 
funerals or on a festive day, sexual intercourse, the rubbing of sesamum oil, 
the consumption of kidney-bean or red herb or eating in a bell-metal vessel is 
prohibited. On the day of Ek&da§i, the flesh of tortoise, though sprinkled with 
water, for purification, is prohibited. Sexual intercourse in the day-time is for¬ 
bidden to all castes. The use of curd in the night, sleeping in the evening 
and duriug the day, and intercourse with a woman in her menses are the causes of 
hell. No ope should eat the food offered by a woman in her menses, or food 
offered by a childless widow, a prostitute or the priest of a b'udra or the food 
offered by a usurer or the husband of a barren woman or an astrologer or a 
Brahmin who receives the first oblation nt a sacrifice or a physician, or the 
food connected with the funeral ceremony of a S'udra. Moat, though 
proscribed by tho S'&stras, taken on the occasion of Mula, Mriga-S'ira 
and Bb&dra-pada, Naksatras (lunar mansions) is unholy like beec. Oil 
should not bo used on the occasion of the lunar mansions of Uasta, (Jhitrfl. 
and S'ruvanA. Shaving is prohibited on the occasion of tho new moon and 
on the luuar mansion day of Krittika. Any one who offers oblations to the 
gods or the manes after shaving or after sexual intercourse goes to 
holl ; the water offered by him b as impure as blood. 0 Narada, L have just told 
you what is prop or and’improper, tho food which can be used and which is 
prohibited. Now what do you want to know ? 


OH A P T E R XX V I I r. 

1 -6. Naradu said, u O Lord of the universe, by your grace I hoard 
everything. Now describe to me the essence of the Brahma. Lord, is He cor- 







THE BRAHMA- V A1V ART A PUR AH A. 


poreal or incorporeal ? Does He possess qualities or not ? Is He visible or invisible ? 
la He associated with forms or not ? What are His essential features ? Is Nature 
separate from Brahma or is she the image of Brahma ? Which of the two 
has got the pre-eminence in the matter of creation ? After due deliberation, 
O omniscient lord* enlighten me on these points.” The five-faced S'iva smiled 
a little and said : 

7-16. ‘‘Child, this subject is very abstruse and only attainable by supreme 
knowledge. O N&rada, you will find this point rarely touched by the 
Vedas and the Pur&nas. I, Brahma, Visnu, Ananta, Dharraa and Virata are 
unable to realise His essence. 0 best of those who know the Vedas, we have dealt 
in the Vedas with those objects which are vested with attributes, visible and 
apparent to the senses. On reference to Hari at the Vaikuniha by rae, Dhar- 
ma and Brahmib, ha told us something about the essence of Brahma. Listen, 
for this subject constitutes the essence of all sciences the eye to those blinded 
by ignorance and serves like a lamp to all people by dispelling the gloom of 
delusion caused by the duality of Nature. That Eternal Brahma is the soul 
of all, sustains all corporeal bodies and is a witness of every thing. Visnu 
himself represents tho five vital air3 constituting animal life ; Brahm& repre¬ 
sents the mind ; I, the intellect and Nature, the energy. But we are al! 
subject to tho Supremo Being. We stay so long as he stays ; we part along 
with Him, i.e. y we depart, when He departs just as the obedient attendants of a 
monarch follow him wherever he goes. The sentient soul or the living being is 
but tho reflection of Brahma. The sentient soul reaps consequences of all actions. 
As the image of the Sun and the Moon is present in a jar full of water, but as 
soon as the jar is broken, the image disappears, so when the creation ia des¬ 
troyed, the sentient, being (Jivu) merges in the Supreme Being, 

17-26. When tho universe is destroyed, the Supfeme Being alone exists 
and all things including tho moveable and immoveable properties, animate and in¬ 
animate objects merge in Him. That Brahma is like a circular sphere of light and 
vies with millions and millions of suns in splendour. That light is all-pervading, 
expansive like the sky and inexhaustible. To the Yogis the Brahma looks lovely 
like the Moon. This accumulation of light, they consider as all-good, and this 
they contemplate as Brahma, day and night. This Supereme Being is formless, 
full of his own will or solf determin. t on, free from emotion and desire, in¬ 
dependent, and constituting the cause of all things. He represents and causes 
all happiness. He is void of all attributes, apart from Nature ; even Nature, 
tho primordial cause of tho world, merges in tlim. As tho power of con¬ 
sumption is characleristic of fire, as light characterises tho Sun, as whiteness 
distinguishes the milk, as coolness is natural to the water, as sound is 
natural to tho sky, as smell is natural to the earth, so this nature, void of 
qualities, is tho essential property of the Supreme Being. This Being, at the 
time of creation, through tho help of His digits, is turned into a Being vested 
with attributes. At that time, Nature also is vested with throe attributes 
and attaches herself to the Supremo Being like His shadow. 

27-36. 0 best of saints, as a potter is able to construct a jar with the 
help of the Garth or clay, so the Supreme Being is able to create the world 








BRAHMA-KHAN I) A. 

» • 

-.- --- -y 

with the help of Nature. The clay is permament,; but things constructed with 
the clay are not so. God creates things with Nature. The process is the same, 
as in the case of a goldsmith who constructs ear-ring with the help of gold. As 
the goldsmith is unable to construct the permanent gold, in the same way Brahma 
and Nature both are Eternal. In the matter of creation, both of them com¬ 
mand an equal superiority; this is the .view held by some theorists. But 
the potter and the goldsmith collect or secure the mud and the gold; the 
mud and the gold cannot secure the potter und the goldsmith ; therefore 
others hold that Brahma is superior to Nature. Borne hold that Brahma is both 
Natbre and the Eternal Bung. Others bold that Nature is different from 
Brahma. In fact, that Brahma is the eternal goal as well as the final cause. This 
is the feature of Brahma a3 mentioned in the Vedas. Brahma is the soul 
of the universe, unmingled with everything and a witness to all deeds. Ho 
is all-pervading and the root of everything. This is sanctioned by the Vedas. 
Nature, the plastic cause of the world, is the energy of Brahma; and that 
energy dwells in Brahma ; this is the essential feature of Nature. 

37-45. The Yogis always adore this eternal light. But the Vaisnavas 
of subtle intellect do not admit this thecry. They say, without some Being 
who is the contaiuer of that light, how can that wonderful light bo adored ? 
There can be no effect without a cause. Therefore without a receptacle of that 
light, the existence of that light is not possible. Therefore, they adore the 
lovely image which is in the centre of that light. Within the spherical light 
(bright like ten millions of suns) of that mighty corporeal Being, there 
exists a region called the Goloka, or the Cow-world, quadrangular, covert 
and expanded over an area of 9 lakh crores of miles. This region is very 
lovely and round like the Moon, built with precious gems and suspended on the void 
by the will of God, without any support;. Jt is situate 50 crores of Yojans above 
the Vaikuntha. It is full of cows, cow-herds, cow-hei desses and Kalpa-trees, 
teems with celestial cows which fulfil all desire, is decorated with the sphere 
of the ltasa (a circular dance of the cow-herdesses with Krisna at the centre) 
and encompassed by the wilderness of Vi ind&-Van&. It is surrounded by the 
river Viraj&, decorated by the hundred summits of the S'ata-Sringa mountains 
and ornamented with millions of hermitages possessing countless mansions. 

46-54. This Goloka contains moats, is surrounded by rampart* and 
adorned by the forests of Purijuta. The hermitages are rendeied bright by 
diamond water-jars and a continuous series of staircases constructed^ with 
diamonds. These hermitages are built with diamonds and are associated with 
gates pure like a looking-glass, 16 windows, brilliant lamps and inr umerabJe pic¬ 
turesque and wonderful objects. On a superb lovely throne, made of gems, tk© 
Supreme Bping is seated. His face is sombre like a new cloud, lie vouthful 
and looks like a boy. His eyes beat the autumnal sun in lustre. His face 
eclipses the full moon with its lovely grace. In a word, he admonishes by bis 
beauty ten millions of Gupids. The smiling, broad visage of that benefactor 
holding a flute in his hands is gracious, well-developed and obscures the 
light of millions of moons. A pair of garments yellow like fire adds to his 
grace. His body is annointed with sandal-paste ; his breast is decorated with 
the gem called Kaastubba, This Lord, with the grace of his peculiar three 










THE BRAHMA-V AIV ART A PUR AIT A. 


<SL 


bonds, is decorated np to his knee with jasmine-garlands, jur.gly wreaths, gems 
and diamonds 

55-64. His crest is adored with the plumage oE a peacock ; his head, with 
a diadem ; his feet, with anklet; his arms, with armlet and bracelet, and his face, 
with oar-ringS. His toeth. in splendour, shames the pearls. His lips are like 
the bimbas j'his noso is elevatod. The milk-maids of perennial beauty, decorated 
with ornaments, are casting lovely glances at him. Ho is adored by the best of 
2 ods munis and men; and by Brahma, Visnu, Mahesa, Dharrna and others 
ThisrDeity, kind to his votaries, and jovial, witty, dominating the li^ is 
dear to his worshippers. He is the supreme Lord. This Being, fit for our 
adoration, ranges in the heart of Mdhit; and, ia this light, He is held and 
adored by the Vaignavas.. 0 best of saints He is eternal, indestructible, solE- 
determining,—without any property (attribute , free from emotion and desire and 
distinct from Natfiro. He is the container and the cause of all. He is ommis- 
oient nay. He is lord of allhe is adored by all. He gives all success. 
]u the Goloka, ho wields two hands and in the form of a cow-herd, he is 
surrounded by other cow herds. 

65-715. He is the consort of Rtldhti. He is perfect, and constitutes, the 
aoul of all He pervades the universe; but everywhere He is imperceptible. 
Krisi means all ; and Na means soul; hence he is called Knsna. Or Knfi 
means all; and Na means origin; hence he is called Ivr.sna lhrough his 
digits, he appears as Visnu with four hands in the Va.kun ja where he is 
surrounded by his at endants vested with four hands each and where he is wedd- 
Tto Kumalft The Supreme Lord, in the form oE Visnu, preserves the world.. 
He'is the consort oC the daughter of the ocean and ranges at pleasure at the 
S'weta-Dwipa, or the White Islands. Thus l have described to you the Brahma. 
We always adU -serve and contemplate the Supreme Being, the object of our 
aspiration ‘‘0 S'aunaka, S'iva having finished his speech, he was adoted by 
Eh according to the hymn composed by the king ot the Hand-rvas ihe 
conqueror of death, S'iva who has no beginning or end, was p,eased witdi this 
Sfaud gave N&rada a knowledge which is courted by a 1 ihereupon the 
Muni cheerfully bowed to him low and, by his command, left the sacred land 
for the hermitage of N&rayana. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

1-11 Sauti said, “Thereupon the godly saint Narada beheld the wonder¬ 
ful hermitage of the saint N&r&yana containing the grove of plums or juj&be. 
That hermitage teem- with fruitful trees. The place constantly resounds 
w th the melody of male cuckoos, it is full of elepuants, tigers , and lions; 
bn through tho influence of the saint, the place is exempt from the fear 
of the beasts of prey. The forest, though inaccessible is more lovely 
of the neas l J orore3 0 f hermitages ot adepts and mums 

than Heav . 11 hermitage, in tho midst of the assembly, Nftrada beheld 

,n this *'V,ke the sun He was surrounded by millions of saints 

tho mum, g ono ^ saiiiin „ a8peot . The Qaivd irvus curious to soe the danco 
and adepts. h 'called Vidya-dharis wore contributing to the 

* U. «• 




BRAHMA^KnANDA. 


lord o£ the Yogis was seated on an excellent throne. He was constantly 
absorbed in the adoration of the Supreme Being. Nftrada bowed to him. He, too, 
got up as soon as he saw N&rada, embraced and hles?ed him, placed him on a 
lovely throne of gem, asked his welfare and accorded hospitality to him in 
every respect. N&rada, being relieved of the fatigues of the journey, addressed 
him thus : 

12-18. * 0 Lord, though my father taught me the Vedas and S'lVu gave 

me wisdom, yet my mind is not at rest. Deputed by my own ego or mind 
I behold the lotus of your feet..,, Lord, I want to acquire wisdom through yon 
whereby the virtues of Lord Krisna could he revealed to me and life, death 
and decrepitude might bo dispensed with. 0 Lord, who is adored by Brahm&, 
Visnu, Indra and other gods ? Who is the author of creation ? in whoso be¬ 
ing, everything merges ultimately ? Who is Vi§nu, the cause and lord of all 
creation ? What* is the image of the Supreme Bei ng ? What is the nature of 
his deeds ? Kindly tell mo all this, after due deliberation. The saint N&r&yana, 
when he heard Ntlrada, smiled and commenceed. to narrate a subject holy and 
likely to sanctify the world. 

CHAPTER kxX, 

1-10. NA.rA.yana said : *The lotus feet of Hart are adored by Ganesa, Visnu, 
S'iva, BrahmA, and other gods, the Manus, the munis, Saraswatt, Durg&, the 
Ganges (of throe courses) and KacnalfL S'iva who is surrounded by snakes 
constituting his family and who, after having crossed the dreadful ocean of the 
world, courts the homage of Hari : this S^iva, I say, constantly adores the feet of 
the Lord. The Vedas and the Vedangas (members of the Vedas) recite His 
deeds; the people who are constant victims to re-birth, fear of death and 
sorrow adore the lotus feet of Hari who is the ruler of destiny and the dispenser 
of the Vodas and the Ved&ngas. Everyone contemplates the Deity who, in 
the form of a boar, uplifted the earth with the fore-part oi His teeth or tusk s 
who, as Vir&ta, holds endless worlds on the pores of his skin, and who is superi¬ 
or to Nature. None is capable of reciting the deeds of Hari who can cause the 
downfall of iBrahruft, by the twinkling of His eye. You, too, ought to adore 
reverentially His lotus feet. You, we, Indra, the Manns and the saints arc 
the digits of His digits. Brahm/i, Mahesa, and Vir&ta are His particular 
digits. Nay, Ananta sustains the whole world including moveable and immove¬ 
able objects, animatoand inanimate objects on his back. As a gnat mounts the 
back of the elephant, so this god is mounted on the back of Kurma (tortoise). * 
This Kurma is a digit" otthe digits of Krisna. 0 son of BrahmA,, NArada, the 
Vedas, the Pur An as, BrahmA and other gods could not adequately recite His 
glory. You should adore that Supreme Being. The Vedas and the gods cannot 
determine the number of the Brahmas, the Visnus and the Budras in the 
whole creation sustained by the might of Hari. You should adore this Supreme 
Being. This ruler of deatiuy, with the help of the Eternal Nature (the goddess 
who represents the might of Krisna), the mother of the universe, creates every¬ 
thing; and BrahmA and ether worshippers of Hari style Laksmi (the Eountain 
of all faith) as Prakriti or Nature. 

11 






Ml mr^ 



11 -20, JPhis Nature is not separate from God All the women of the world 
are the outoome of the digits of Nature and have sprung into existence in the 
form of MAyA. Every one is deluded by her spell. This excellent, eternal, 
divine principle of illusion (M&y&) represents the energy of the Supreme Being, 
Nay, the Supreme Being himself, the lord of the soul, i» energetic through this 
M&y&- God can, by no means, create without her help. Child, now return 
home and marry. You should carry out the command of your father, by all 
means. Any one who obeys his father is adored everywhere and attains suc¬ 
cess. Any one who submits to the orders of his spiritual guide is adored and 
conquers everywhere. Any one who pleases his wife with gifts of 
ornaments, raiment and sandal wood and who worships the twice-born (Brahmins) 
propitiates the goddess Nature who is just like Krisrra. This Nature through the 
powers of her illusion descends to the world iu the form of a woman. Disres* 
peet to a woman, therefore, raoana indignity to Nature. Adoration of a chaste 
woman blessed with husband and a son means the worship of Nature, the uni¬ 
versal benefactress. This principle that represents the eternal spell of Vifnu, 
(Nature), though only one, is divided into five p^rts at the time of creation. 
The goddess who is dearest to Krisna among all his wives and presides over his 
life is called BAdhsL She who represents all prosperity and is the wife of 
Visnu is called Laksmi She who presides over the muses, male and female and 
is adored by all is celebrated by the name of Saraswati. The mother of the 
Vedas, the adored consort of Brahma, is called S&vitri. The mother of Ganesa 
and the wife of S'aokara is called DnrgA. • This fundamental, primeval goddess 
Nature manifests herself in theso five forms. 




I 


SECOND PART. 


\ 



Wm 


Pr^kritiKhanda, 

• • 


(Or the part relating to Nature ) 


CHAPTER I. 


1-3. Narada said, ‘Hn the course o£ creation Nature is said to have assum* 
ed five forms, viz., DurgA, RAdhA, Laksml, Saraswati and S&vitri. Why did 
Nature which is regarded by philosophers and sages as excellent manifest 
herself at all ? What is the outstanding feature of Nature ? Why did she divide 
herself into five parts ? Wbat are their characters ? iheir forms of worship r ^ 

What is the nature of their actions as determined by property and volition t 
PJeaso tell me all this in full.” 

4-15. Narayana answered, u Child, no one can describe the essence of. 
Nature. Yot 1 shall describe it to you as I hoard it from S'iva. Pra means com¬ 
petent, and Kriii means creation. She is expert in creation and is therefore 
styled Nature. According to Sruti, Pra means the property of virtue, Art 
means the principle of activity, and ti. is the principle of ignorance. She, there¬ 
fore, who is all powerful, vested with the above three attributes and pre-enoi* 
neatly gifted with the faculty of creation is styled Prakriti or Nature. Pra 
means first, and Kriti means creation. The primordial cause of creation la 
therefore called Prakriti or Nature. The Supreme Being, by the power of his 
Yoga or mental abstraction, split himself into two parts. The right side was 
called Ptiruaa, the left side was called Prakriti or Nature, this Nature is the 
image of Brahma, constant and eternal. As the property of burning or 
consuming * things is the sine qua non of fire, so Nature and the Spirit exist 
side by side, every where. This is why the best of Yogis obliterate all dis¬ 
tinction between a man and a woman. The Yogis (contemplative saints) 
behold the whole world as full of Brahma. At the desire of the 
eternally self-determining Krisna, at the time of creation, this primordial prin¬ 
ciple of Nature suddenly came into existence and, out of deference to her vo¬ 
taries, *he divided herself into five parts. The gods including BrahmA, the 
Manus and the munis constantly worship DurgA, the eternal goddess who 
presides over all oreatiou ; who is the imago of Brahma, the Supremo Being ; 
who is the likeness and the spouse of S'iva, the mother of Ganeaa; and who is 
all-merciful to her worshippers. 

16-2J.. This goddess, the imago of Brahma/imparts virtue, truth, reli¬ 
gious sanctity, fame, celebrity and welfare to all creatures, She gives 
happiness, redemption and pleasure and destroys grief, pain and sorrow. She 
is ever prone to preserve the fugitives, the sorrowful and the oppressed. She 
is the emblem of valour and presides over valour. She represents all power 
and typifies the all-pervading might of god-head. She is the goddess of suc¬ 
cess, the mistress of those who grant success and the very emblem of success. 

She*represents intellect, sleep, hunger, thirst, shadow, lassitude, mercy, me* 


\ 




THE BBAHMA-VA1V ARTA PUR AN A, 


<y. 


ory, caste, forgiveness, peace, grace,. delusion, consciousness, satisfaction, 
development, fortune and livelihood. She is just like a mother to all. She 
represents the absolute might of Krisna, the Supreme Being. Her virtues de ¬ 
lineated in the Vedas are very few. In fact, the virtues of this goddess of in¬ 
finite forms are infinite. 

22-30* That goddess who is the very emblem of chastity, virtue and 
truth is called Laksmi, the wife of Vifim, the Supreme Lord. She represents 
all fortune and is the presiding Deity of fortune. She is lovely, forbearing, 
very tranquil, of good disposition and is beneficent in every respect. She is 
free from avarice, lust, feelings of stupefaction, anger,, pride and other defects. 
She is al ways devoted to her husband, chaste, dear to her fx>rd as life itself and 
melodious in voice. She is the root of everything, the emblem of crops or 
agriculture ; hence she is the life of creatures, this great goddess of fortune. 
In the Vaikuntha, she is devoted to her husband ; in heaven she is the oelestial 
goddess of fortune; in the nether world, (earth) in palaces, the royal goddess 
of fortune ; and in ordinary houses, she is the household goddess of fortune. 
She represents the grace of all objects and creatures ;sb.e typifies the piety oftne 
virtuous and the valour of kings. She represents the trade of merchants and she is 
the spirit of dissension among sinners. She is merciful, behaving like a mother 
to her votaries and is compassionate to her worshippers. She is restless with the 
restless and also restless, i,*,, very busy in preserving the property of her ad¬ 
herents. Though animate, the whole world is dead without her. This is the 
second adorable goddess of energy as mentioned in the Vedas. How hear of 
others. 

31-37. The goddess who presides over the language, intellect, knowledge 
and wisdom of the Supreme Being and represents all knowledge is SaraswatL 
For the virtuous, she is, as it were, the spirit of poesy and imparts to them in¬ 
telligence, memory, genius and wisdom. She represents the faculty of different 
kinds of interpretations under conflicting theories. She represents commentary, 
exposition, solution of doubts and sound judgment. She is the authoress of 
various works and the emblem of energy. She U the determining cause of 
tpusio and the measure in music. She gives wisdom and speech to all the 
creatures of the world. To facilitate commentary, she appears to make a sign 
by intertwining her fingers in religious worship. She holds in her hand a lute 
and a book. Ska is very tranquil, serene, in disposition, vested with the attri¬ 
butes of truth and virtue. This good-natured goddess is the beloved spouse of 
Hari. Her body is radiant with a graceful, gentle light, analogous Jo dew, 
sandal, jasmine, the moon, white water-lily and white lotus, bhe always 
adores the name of the eternal Krisna with a bead of gems, She is a devotee, 
the oauso of devotion and yields its fruits, She is the emblem of perfect 
knowledge, gives all sorts of success and makes all sorts of gifts. Ibis is the 
third graceful goddess ot whom I spoke. How please hear something about 
the next division of Nature. 

38-40. This goddess (8&vitri) is the mother of the Vedas, the auxiliary 
branches of the Vedas and all the metres. This clever goddess is also the 
source of Q&etri (ode to the 8un), incantations relating to religious rites and 
esoteric codes prescribing forms of worship. 8ke is a devotee, represents de- 





votion and typifies different classes of Br Akinins. She is full of the efful¬ 
gence of BrahmA, over which she presides; I described to you the goddess 
the dust of whose feet 1 consecrates the world. -Now hear of the fifth division 
of Nature, RadhA. 

41-50. She is the pres iding deity of love and life and represents the 
Jive vital airs constituting human life: ^he is dearer to Bari than hisJife, 
excellent, graceful and constitutes the root of all objects. She is full of pros¬ 
perity, honour and glory. By dint of her virtues and valour, she occupies the 
left side of Hari, She is Supreme, eternal and primordial and remains absorb¬ 
ed in all kinds of rites. She is the emblem of supreme happiness. She is 
blessed, revered and adored. She presides over the R&sa of Krisna. She 
came into being to decorate the Rasa. Sho is adorned with the sphere of 
R&sa. Sho is the goddess of R&sa, very witty and constantly dwells in the RUtsa. 

She dwells in the Goloka and appears like a cow-herdess. She is the emblem 

of joy, mirth and cheerfulness. She is void of all property and form, uncon¬ 
nected with any thing; and yet she is the image of the eternal soul. She is 
void of determination and egotism and wields a form out of compassion for 
her votaries. The savants know her by contemplation or l)hy&n (lit. mental 
representation of her personal attributes) according to the process prescribed 
by the Vedas. But she is imperceptible to the philosophers, gods and saints. 
She is clad in a raiment bright like tire and decorated with many ornaments. 

She ha* the grace of ton millions of moons and is very exquisite. The homage 

due to Krisna she alone can bestow ; and she alono gives absolute prosperity to 
the world. 

• 

51-60. She took her birth as the daughter of Vrisa-bhftnu in the Var&ba- 
Kalpa. The earth is consecrated by the touch of her feet. She is imperceptible 
to Brahmil, etc., and yet the vision of her face is aspired at by all. She is j re-emi- 
nentiy beautiful among the fair and frequents the heart of Krisna, as the rest¬ 
less lightning*frequents the new and sombre cloud. Brahm& adored her mere¬ 
ly to behold the nails of the members of her feet and though he prayed for 
sixty thousand years for his purification, her vision was out of the question, 
for he could not behold her even in dream. In the Vrindu-vana, people see 
her constantly. Thus I described you the fifth division of Nature. All the 
women of the world are descended from the parts or digits of Nature or the 
digits of her digits. Tho entire Nature consists of five important sections or 
parts described above. Now I tell you of those who are pre-eminently the digits 
of Naturo. Ganga who oonscerates Tho world and sprang from Ytsnu’a body 
in the form of liquid is permanent or ever-lasting. Sho consumes sins of man¬ 
kind just as the fire consumes fuel. Ablution in the Ganges, her sight or touch 
and the drinking of her water give redemption. She is the stepping stone to 
the Goloka*, and the best and most sacred of the holy rivers. The knot¬ 
ted hair of tho head of S'iva is decorated by her as if with a gem. Through 
her, ascetics perform their devotions. 

61-70. She is white like conches, lotus and milk and imparts a thorough 
knowledge of the first principles of science. Sho is pure, chaste, (tear to 
Narayana and free from egotism. Tulsi also partakes of the principal charact¬ 
er of Nature and is the wife of Visnu. This chaste goddess, like an ornament 








THE BRAHMA.-VAlVARTA PURANA 


<sl 


oE Visnu, constantly adoros or courts his feet. Through her, vow, devotion 
ant! all sorts of worship are performed. She is the best oE flowers, (basiij 
holy and consecrating, tier sight and touch at once give redemption, mko 
fire that consumes the fuel, she reduces to ashes the sins ot the Kah-yuga. 
This goddess who constantly consecrates the earth; whoso sight and touch are 
desired oven by the holy rivers for their own purification, without whom he 
whole world is ineffectual or useless, who gives redemption to those who aspire 
for it; who fulfils the desires of people soliciting worldly enjoyments, who is 
just like the Kalpa tree in India; who is tho image of the world; this goddess, 

X say, ranks first among those who protect mankind from sins. Manasa, tho 
daughter of Kaayapa, is one of the principal digits of Nature fehe is the 
chief pupil of 6'iva and profoundly wise. She is the sister oE Annnta and 
adored by the snakes. Sho is very beautiful. The snake is her conveyance, bhe 
is the mistress and mother of the snakes. Sho is ornamented with snakes 
und surrounded by them. She is an accomplished devotee and dwells among 
aaakefl. 

71-80. Herself tho imago of Visnu, she is constantly devoted to Him. 
She is a devotee. She is the emblem of devotion and yields its fruits. After 
having dedicated herself to the worship of Hari tor throe lakhs of coles M 
years she lias boon adored in India by the male and female dovo eess she pre 
sides over the mystic incantations or charms of snakes and is radiant with the 
effulgence of Brahma. She is the image of Bralmm whom she constantly con- 
templtes. She is the slave of Hari-Hara * she .s chaste and devoted to her 
husband Jarut-IvArn. She is tho mother of the best saint, Aatik Mn ™y 
Narada, Dova-Sena is likewise one of the ptiucipm digits of Nature. Among 
the mothers, she is regarded* as the most adorable basthi : she preserves 
tho children of tho world. She is an anchorite, ^devoted to Han and the 
wife of K&rfika. She is the sixth division of: Nature; hence £ soil¬ 
ed She gives sons and grandsons ; hence she is also called BAtr . 
She looks like a young girl She looks very lovely to her husband. Before 
the children, she appears like a very old ascetic woman. "““JjP 

of Suslhi on tho sixth day oE tho child-birth as well as hor worship on lie 
twenty-first day of the child-birth in thtf confinement room foM.he pre^rvation 
of the now-born infant is essential and permanent, ihe ru os of ba ? thi are 
observed, as shown above ; in othor respects, the rules are merely options . 

81-90. . She appears in dream beEore children. She is the emblem of- 
mercy, and, like a mother, she preserves children on land and water and m 
skv.' Manga 1-Chandika is likewise one of the principal phases of Nature. - b_ 
sprang out, of her mouth. She is the principle of goodness at the time of 
creation, and principle of anger at the time of^ destruction, lienee she is sc 
called. On every tnesday, she is worshipped. J.ho ladies worst,p aer wi t. 
five ingredients 5 She gives sons, grandsons^wealth, i^sperHy, t ”f 

destroys pain, sorrow and poverty. When pleased, she yields the fulfilment of 
„,T Zirl to women. It displeased, this great goddess can destroy the 
whole world! She sprang out of tho forehead of DurgA m her war with 
S'umbba and Nisumbha. She is a moiety of Durga ;and equal to hey - * 

and virtue. Her body vies with ten millions of suns in valour. She is tho 
chief among all the faculties and is very powerful, 


She gives success to all 






MINIS 



and is a groat adept. She is devoted to Krisna and equal to him in virtue and 
valour. This eternal goddess has become swarthy in appearance by the con¬ 
templation o£ Krisna. 


91-100, By her mere breath, she can destroy the whole world. Fight 
with the demons for the preservation of the world is mere child s f>lay to her. 
When propitiated, she yields the four-fold objects of human pursuit. She is always 
adored by Brahma and other gods, by the munis, Manus and men. ihe earth 
(Vasandharft) is also a principal digit of Nature./ She is the support of the 
world and-the mother of crops. She is the mine of gems ; she holds gems in 
her womb ; she harbours oceans, the mine ol gems. The creatures oi the world 
and their rulers constantly adore her. She is the souroe of all livelihood and 
prosperity. Without her, the world is without a prop. 0 best of saints, now 
I am going to tell you\houtthe other digits of Nature aud thoir husbands* 
Sw&ha is the wife of Fire, She is adored everywhere. From any worshipper 
who does not utter her name, the gods are unable to accept the offerings of ghea^ 
Daksink is the wife of Yagna. She is adored everywhere. All the rites of 
the world are ineffectual (or useless) without her. Swadha is the wife of the 
manes. She is always adored by the Manus, the munis and men. A gift out 
of deferonce to the manes (of the deceased ancestors) is ineffectual without her, 
Swaati is the wife of the Wind and is adored every-whore. Without her, gifts 
and acceptance both are ineffectual. 

101-110. Pusti is the wife of Gauesa and adored everywhere. People 
jget emaciated without her, Tusti without whom every one remains discontented is 
the wifeof Ananta. Sampatti, without whom people are poverty-stricken, is the 
wife of Isana and is revered by gods and men. Dhriti the wife of Kapila, 
without whom people get impatient, is worshipped everywhere, K$am&, tho 
chaste, the mild, and adorable without whom people lose thoir temper or head, 
is the wife*of Yama. Haiti, the chaste, tho presiding goddess of amorous 
pastime, is the wife of K&ma; without her kindness, people lose all thoir amuse¬ 
ments. (Jkti, the chaste, adored everywhere and dear to all, without whom a 
man becomes friendless, is the wife of Satya. The all-ajorable i.)ava without 
vhorn people become cruel is tho wife of Moha. Pratistha without whom a 
man is dead, though alive, is the wife of Bunya or religious piety. Kirti, 
honoured and adored throughout the woiid, is the wife of Sukarma ; without 
her, people are defamed and turned into corpses, as it were. 

111-120. The adorable Knyk is the wife of Udyoga ; without her, the 
whole world is almost extinct. Lie, adored by. the cunning, is the wife of 
irreligion; without her the world almost disappears. This Mithyk, or the prin¬ 
ciple of mendacity or myth, is invisible in tho Satya-yuga: In Tretk r she is in a 
subtle or atomic state Half her boly is manifest in the Dw&para and yet 
she lives in disguise. In Kali-yuga she prevails everywhere and, very 
haughtily with her brother hypocrisy, she frequents every house. S'anti and 
Lajjk are the wives of Su-S'ila ; without them, the world would he infatuated. 
Gyilna has three wives, Buddhi, Medlia and Smriti ; without them, the world 
would be befooled. The gracelal Murti without whom the world would be 
Formless is the wife of Dharma. She is incarnate and the very personifactiou 
of beauty in all places. Vested with form and grace she is adored everywhere. 






THE BRAHM.A-VA1VARTA PVR AN A. 


<SL 


NidrA (sleep) the best of adepts is the wife of K&b&gm Rudra; by her influ¬ 
ence, everyone gets exhausted in the night. Evening , night and day , these are 
the wives of Time ; without their help, Brahma will not be able to oreace. 

121-138. Greed has two wives, viz., Hunger and Thirst, through whose 
influence, the world gots diffused and is always afflicted with care and anxiety. 
Toja has two wives, PrabhA and D&hika, without whose help BrahraA is not able 
to create. Death is the daughter of Time; and Decrepitude is the favourite 
spouse of High Fever. Through their influence the world created by JBraktnft 
conies to ail end. Priti is the daughter of sleep; and Lassitude is the wife of 
Sukha (pleasure.) 0 son of BrahmA, by the law of Providence, they all pervade 
the world* The wives of \ air&gya are S'rad-dhA and Bhakti, through whose 
grace, the whole world may be redeemed. Aditi, Snrabhi, JDiti, Kadru, VinatA 
and Danu are the digits of Nature. They are export in creation. Besides these, 
there are other digits of Nature. I am going to specify some of them. Rohixit, 
the wife of to Moon, Sang# A, the wife of the Sun, S'atarupA, S'ach!, TAra, 
Arundhati, AhalyA, AunsftyA, DeyahAti, Prasftli, the mother of AmbikA, Menokft, 
the intellectual daughter of the manes are digits of Nature. Lop&-mudr&, JLKfUi, 
Kunti, the wives of Kuvera, Yam a, Bali and Varuna and Damayauti, YasodA, Dova- 
ki, (the chaste) G&ndhAri, Draupadi, SAvitri (the wife of SatyavAna) the mother 
of KAdhA, «.*- KalAvati, (the wife of Vrisa-bhAnu) Manjudari, Kaifcabht, Kau- 
galyA, Subhadra, Bevati, Satya-bh&mA, SifcA, KAlindi, LaksmanA, Jamva-vatL 
Ndguajitl and Mitra-vindA and Rukminl these are the different forms of 
the goddess of Fortune herself. UsA, (the daughter of BAna), the most 
virtuous Yojan- SandhAyA (the mother of Vy&sa), bed friend Ohitra-lekha, PrabbA* 
vati, M&yA-vati, Bh&nu-matl, liohinl (the mother of BalarAina), Ranukft (the 
mother of the spiritual guide), DnrgA (the sister of Krisivi) and many others 
are the digits of Nature in India. The village goddesses are likewise her 
digits. 

139-150. The women of the world are descended from her digits. In¬ 
sult to women is indignity to Nature. Any one who adores a chaste BrAh- 
tnin lady with gifts of ornaments and dress adores Nature. If a Brahmin 
virgin aged 8 years ih adored with gifts of ornaments and dress, the said offer¬ 
ings are accepted by the goddess Nature herself. Good, bad and indifferent, 
ali kinds of women are descended from Nature. Those who spiring from the 
virtuous principle of Nature are chaste and good. Those who spring from the 
active principle of Nature love enjoyment. They court pleasure and are prom- 
ted by selfishness to gain their objects. Lastly, those who spring from the 
principle of ignorance appertaining to the goddess Nature belong to au obscure 
rank or lineage. They are shrewish, unchaste, independent-minded and quarrel¬ 
some. The whores of the earth and heaven are the outcome of the ignorant prin¬ 
ciple of Nature aud are aLo called prostitutes. I have said every thing •with 
regard to Nature. Her digits are worshipped everywhere, particularly in the 
sacred land of India. DurgA who ends misfortune was at first worshipped by 
king Suratha. Secondly llama worshipped her with a view to destroy Bavaria. 
Ultimately, she was worshipped everywhere. The wife of Daksa first gave 
birth to her in order that she may slay to demons; afterwards, a«‘ the sacrifice, 
performed by Daksa, she was offended by the slanders of her husband and com¬ 
mitted suicide., Then she was born out of the womb of the wife of HinaA- 



mtSTfiy 



laya and eventually got S'iva or Pasupati, lit: the lord of beasts as hor husband. 
Then she gave birth to Ganesa (the image of Krisna) ami Skanda, a digit 
of Vifnu. 

151-IGO. First king Mangala worshipped Laksnat. Afterwards she was 
adored by the gods, saints and men. SAvitri was, at fir3t worshipped by Bhakti 
and afterwards adored by all. Saraswati was, at first, worshipped^ by Brahm& 
and then by all. In the sphere of the Ilasa, on the day of K&rtiki Pnrnamaei, 
R4dha was first worshipped by Krisna ; and, afterwards, with flowers and frank¬ 
incense, eto., she was -worshipped by cowherds, milkmaids, children, cows, gods, 
M&y& (the principle of illusion), Brahmd, gods, Manus, munis and others. 
In the saored land of India, Suyagna, by the counsel of S'iva, first worshipped 
IlAdh&. Then the munis and gods, at tbo command of itrisna, reverentially 
worshipped her throughout the world with flowers and frankincense. Those 
who spring out of the digits of Nature are worshipped everywhere. The village 
goddesses are likewise worshipped in the villages. The auspicious character of the 
goddess Nature I described to you according to the esoteric Shastras and I 
related to you also her outstanding features. Now, what do you want to 
hear ? 


CHAPTER II. 

1-4. NSrada said, “ Lord, you narrated to me briefly the characters of the 
goddesses. Now describe thorn to me in detail for my odificatiou, igoorant as 
I am. Why was that primordial Nature manifest at the time of creation ? 
Why did she divide herself into five parts? Please describe in full the res¬ 
pective characters of those goddesses who sprang out of the digits of Nature 
vested with threo properties. At first, relate to mo their birth, then, their 
Dyhan (meditation), forms of worship proscribed for them, their hymns, amulets 
and their beneficient greatness and valour.” 

5-12. N3.rS.yana said. As tho Suprome Being, sky, time, and space are 
eternal, tho Goloka is also eternal. The Vaikuntha, a branch of tho (*oloka, 
is also eternal. Nature, tho image of sleep, that always merges in the Supreme 
Bein<r, i 3 also eternal. As the faculty of consumption is associated with 
fire, as beauty is combined with the lotus and the Moon, so Nature is indisso¬ 
lubly connected with the Divine Spirit. As a goldsmith is unable to construct 
ear-riog without gold, as a potter is unable to construct a jar without mud, 
so God is unable to oreate the world without Natnro. She is vested with ab¬ 
solute energy ; aud every one is energetic through her. S'ak means grandeur 
and Ti means valour. She who is the source of grandeur and valour is, there¬ 
fore, S'ukti. Bhag means prosperity, wealth and fame, the source of which 
all is Bhavwuti. She is vested with tho female organ, hence she is go called, 
and on this account the Supreme Lord is called Bhagw&na. The Supreme 
Being is self-willed (««., Ho may do anything as He wills) by the exercise of His 
will. He at times takes a form and at other times Ho is formless. 

id-22. The Yogis always adore that formless light. They call 
Him Brahma, Supreme Being, God., Fate, Omnisient Lord, tho cause or the 
root of all objects, agent, a Being vested with all forms, or formless,' the suppor¬ 
ter of th° Universe.' The Vaij naves of subtle intellect do not admit this. They 
12 








THE BRAH MA-V AIV ART A PVRaNA . 


this light is impossible without a container of that light. Brahma is the 
central figure of that light, valoroas, self-willed, vested with all forms and cons¬ 
tituting the final cause. He is very graceful, lovely, enchanting, young, tranquil 
and supreme, flis grace is like that of a now cloud. This dark, partly blue 
and partly green Being, is" matchless in the skill which He displays iu His amorous 
diversion, in the R&sa. His oyes resemble the autumnal lotuses blooming at 
noon. His teeth shame the peails. His crest or the top o f his head is decorated 
with the plumage of a peacock, His breast with jasmine-wreaths. His nose is 
very lovely. He is inclined to favour His votaries. He puts on a yellow 
garment bright like firo. He holds a flute in His hands and is decorated with 
gems. He is omnipotent, the support arid master sof all. He is the source of 
ad prosperity, all-porvading, independent and beneficial in every respect. He is 
perfect and accomplished ; the source and the cause of success. 

■23-29. The Vaisnavas always adore this eternal Image thah prevents birth, 
death, decrepitude, sorrow and fear. The whole life of Brakm& is equivalent 
to the period covered by the wink of his eye. Such a Being is Krisria, as tho 
Vaisnavas say. Kris means faith, and na means homage or service! * He who 
gives both is, therefore, Kri§na. Kris moans all, and na means seed ; the 
seed of all is, therefore, Krisna. Endless Brahmfts may be destroyed ; but his 
virtues can never be destroyed. There is none so virtuous as Krisna. This 
Being, iu the beginning, wanted to create. His offspring, Time,‘seeing the 
determination of the Eternal Being, was deputed to His aid. Tho self-willed 
J>ord, thereupon, divided Himself voluntarily into two parts. His left side be¬ 
came a female ; His right side was turned into Purusa, a male Being* 

80-49. The most Jioentious and voluptuous Eternal Being beheld Nature, 
the outcome His digit. Ho saw that she was graceful and lovely like 
Ohampakii. Her excellent buttocks shamed breast was the disk of the moon : 
her loins shamed the piaataiu. She was very handsome an d lovely. Her breastwas 
lovely like the Bael, Her waist was slender. Her bedy was well-developed 
and delicate. Her nature was tranquil : and her aspect was smiling, She was 
clad in dress bright like fire. She was deoorated with gems. With eyes like 
Ghakora (the rod-legged bartavolle), she was drinking the radiance of the face 
of Krisna graceful like ten millions of moons. Her forehead was markod 
with musk, below that, with sandal-paste and lower still with vermilion. Her 
crooked chignon was adorned with a wreath of jasmine and her breast with a 
garland of gems. Desirous to associate with her Lord, she acquired the 
charms of ten millions of moons. In gait she shamed the elephant, the wag¬ 
tail and the swan. At her vory sight, the most witty Sri-Krisna, infatuated 
with passion, indulged in the amorous enjoymeuts afforded by her company in 
the sphere of the K&sa. The Eternal Lord enjoyed the pleasures of her society 
for a period equivalent to the longevity of Brahmft and, then, being exhausted, 
at an auspicious moment, discharged semen into her womb. The nymph, also 
being exhausted by the labour of this grand seJcual intercourse, began to breathe 
very hard. . Out of the sweat which flowed copiously from her body in the 
form of a circle, the .spherical universe was created. Her breath became the 
vital air of all living beings, and was the support of tho world in the form of 
wind or air. From the left side of tbe Wind-god, a woman was born who 
was dear to him as his life. Five sons galled Prana. Ap&na, Samaun Udana ' 









and Vy&na were horn to the Wind-god and constitute the five vital airs 
or the animal life of mortals : Varuna is the presiding deity of the 
sweat or perspiration that came out of the body of Prakriti. From the left 
side of Varuna a woman named V&runi wa9 born and wedded to Varuna. 
Then Naturo the energy of Krisna sustained in her womb the semen of the 
Lord for a hundred Manwantars. This goddess was dearer to Krisna than 
His life, His constant associate and the mistress of His heart which she used to 
frequent. In due time she laid an egg, bright like gold, which was, as it 
were, the mam pillar or the corner-stone of the universe. 

50-55. The goddess, when she saw the egg, was dejected a little in spirit 
and threw it into the spherical water. The Lord, when He saw her forsaking 
the egg, began to larnont and cursod her in a manner appropriate to her act. 
He said, “0 passionate and crnol nymph, inasmuch as you have forsaken year 
offspring, henceforth you shall 1 c deprived of the bliss of a son ; i e you will 
never get a son ; and other celestial nymphs who are the outcome of your digits 
shall likewise never get sons, though they shall enjoy perpetual youth, 
“Hardly harl He said so, when, from the tip of His tongue came out a lovely 
white goddess clad in yellow dress, with a book and lute in her hands and 
ornamented with gems. She is the presiding deity of knowledge. 

56-61. After a while, Nature, the wifq of Krisna, was divided into two 
parts. The right side of Nature became Ufidhti ; and the left silo became 
Kamalfi. Krifna, at the same time, was divided into two parts or figures; the 
figure on His right aide was vested with two bauds ; and the figure on His 
left side was vested with four hands. Krisna said to Saraswatx, “you should 
become the spouse of N&r&yana. If Radh& is jealous of you, you will coino 
to grief.” So saying, Ho handed over Laksmi also to N&r&yana with 
pleasure. N&r&yaua went io the Vaikuntha with both his wives. 
Lak&ml and Saraawatl, both the outcome of the digits of Uadha, are 
childless, as H result of the curse. From the body of N&rayana, came out his 
attendants with four hands each. They wore equal to Nar&yana in valour, age, 
grace and virtue. Many serving maids, equal to Laksmi, in every respect, 
likewise came out of her body. 

62-72. , From the pores of the skin of Krisna, likewise, came out many cow¬ 
herds, equal to one another in valour and age. From the body of R&dha came 
out countless cow-herd esses equal to her, in grace* virtue and the melody of 
her voice. They possessed ever-lasting beauty and were decorated with gems ; 
but through the curse of Krisna, the defect of barrenness pursued them 
all. Thereafter, the Eternal Durg&, the principle of the spell of Vi§nu, 
came out of his body. She represents all energy and is the presiding deity 
of the intellect of Krisna. She is the primordial Nature aud the final 
cause of other goddesses. 4 She is the image of perfect light and vested with 
three attributes. Her graoo was like that of heated gold and, in splendour, 
she vied with ten millions of suns She had a smiling aspect, a cheerful 
appearance aud a thousand hands. She is versed in all sciences and sustains 
many weapons. She ha 3 three eyes. She is clad in raiment pure like fire 
and decorated with gems. All the women of the world are the outcome of 
the digits of her digits. The whole world is bewildered by hef spell Her¬ 
self a V a isnav&, she gives io people faith in Krisna. 






THE BRAFIM A-V AlV ART A PURANA. 


73*79. She gives redemption to those who desire it. In Heaven, she is 
the celestial goddess of fortune; in every household, she is the household 
goddess of fortune. To the devotees, she is the very embodiment of devotion. 
She represents the fortune of kings, the heat of the fire, the glory of the sun 
and the grace of the lotus and the moon. She represents the energy of Krisna. 
She endows the soul with power and vests the world with might. The world 
is a vast mass of inertia without her. She is the seed of the tree of life. 0 
N&rada, she typifies,the equilibrium of bodies, intellect, the fruit of action, 
hunger, thirst, esteem, lassitude, forgiveness, penorvorence, tranquillity, modesty, 
contentment, development, grace, etc She stood, facing the Lord; and the 
Lord placed her on a throne of gem. 


80-90. 0 saint, in the meantime, from the abdomen of Krisrrn, came out 

the four faced I3rahm& with his wife. He is graceful in appearance, holds a 
waler-poi in his hand, is an anchorite and the best of philosophers. Beaming 
with celestial light, he began to adore the Lord with four mouths. The nymph 
that emerged along with BrahmA had the grace of a hundred moons. She 
was clad in a raiment pure like fire and was decorated with gems. She also 
cheerfully, along with her husband, begun to adore Krisna*seated on a throne 
of gem. In the meantime, Krisna was split into two parts: the left side 
was turned into S'iva ; and the right side into tho husband of RadhA,. S'iva 
or Hara was white like crystal and bad tho glory of ten millions of suns. Ho 
held a trident and an axe in his hand. He was clad in tiger-hide. His head was 
covered with knots of hair bright like heated gold with a slight tinge of crimson. 
His body wa ; covered with ashes. Ho was constantly smiling and hold the 
moon on his forehead. He was nukod and surrounded by snaked. His tbroat 
was blue. His right hand held a pure garland of gems. With five mouths 
he was constantly adoring the name of the Eternal Being, Krisna. S'ankara, 
having adored Krisna, the final cause, the ultimate good and the exterminator 
of life, death, decrepitude, disease, fear and sorrow acquired tho name of tho 
conqueror of death, lie sat down on a throne of gom in front of Hari, 


CHAP T BE III. 

1-10. Narayuna said, 41 Thereupon, the egg laid by Rfidhd after having 
lingered in the water for a period equal to the longevity assigned to Brabmfi was, 
ia course of time, thatched: or it split into two parts. The offspring of that egg, 
a child effulgent like ton millions of suns, not being able to .suck his mother, 
began to lament loudly through pressure of hunger. Forsaken by his 
parents, be lay helpless in tho waters. Behold ! The lord of tho Universe 
was, this day, reduced to the coudition of an orphan,, looking up towards the 
vacant space I He is denser than the densest object and his name is Mah& 
Vir&ta. As the atem is subtler than anything, so this Being was denser than 
the deusesfc objects. In valour, he is equal to the sixteenth part of Kri§na. He 
is tho shelter of countless worlds, the primeval MahA-Vifnu. He holds a 
universe on each of the pores of his skin. Kri§na Himself cannot count the 
said Worlds. Similarly, the numbers of Brahmas, Visnus and S'ivas cannot 
be ascertained. , In every world, there are a Brahtn&, Visnu and Mahesa, The 




.r*wyi$ify 



PRAKRITI-KHANDA. 


world from the P&t41a to the Brahma-loka is called Brahmanda 
separate from it, is the Vaikuntha which is real and eternal li 
Jnfty krores of Yojans above the Vaikuntha, is the Goloka which 
and real like Kri$na. 


11-19. The earth contains sevcin islands, seven oceans, forty-nine peninsulas 
and countless woods and mountains. Above the earth, are the Brahm&-loka and the 
seven Swargn-lokas. Below the earth, is P&t&I. All these constitute the 
Brahm&nda. The earth, is surmounted by the Bhhr-loka, above that by the 
Bhuvar-loka, above that by the Swar-Ioka, above that by the Mahar-loka, 
above that by the Jama-loka, Tapa-loka, Satya-loka and above all these, 
by the bright, golden Brahinst-loka. 0 Nilrada, these are all artificial. 
They will be destroyed when the world is destroyed. These worlds are 
transoient like bubbles of water; but the Goloka and the Vaikuntha are 
permanent and. real. Child, the Vir&ta has A Brahna&nda on each 
of the pores of his skin Even Krisna cannot count these worlds. In each of 
these worlds, there are a Brahma, a Visnu, a S'iva, millions of gods, regents of 
quai tors, stars and planets. On earth, there are four castes, Br&hniins etc : 
in the P&tala t.l>ere are snakos and moveable and immoveable, animate and 
inanimate objects. 


20*28. In courso of time, this Virata first cast his eyes upwards, attd 
then looked inside the egg. Ho found that none was there and everything was 
void. Oppressed by hunger, he became anxious and cried again and again. 
Afterwards, having acquired a little sense or discretion, ho began to contemplate 
Krisna, the Supreme Being. After a while, Krisna with two hands, dark-blue 
in appearance like a new cloud, clad in yellow dress, of a cheerful mien, and 
compassionate to his votaries, manifested himself to him. The boy laughed 
loudly at the sight of bis father. Lord Krisna was pleased to see him and 
gave him a boon suited to the occasion saying : ‘‘(Child, be wise like me and 
exempt from hunger and thirst; and until the day of the final dissolution, 
you shall be the prop of endless worlds. You shall bo free from emotion and 
passions; and you shall grant boons to others. Decrepitude, death, disease, 
sorrow and pain shall not. be able to subdue you.” So saying, Krisna mut¬ 
tered into the ears of the hoy, first the Vedas, and thon, thrice the mantras 
prescribed by the esoteric science consisting of sixteen letters. Thon he said : 
“ Cm Kn§n&y sw&hfc,” auspicious mantra. Then ho gave him another mantra 
calculated to remove all obstaotes and calamities. Now I am going to toil you 
what diet the Supreme Lord prescribed for him, 

29-30 Oi the offerings prosonted to Visnu in the thrjoo worlds, Visnu 
addicted to enjoyments accepts only a fifteenth ora sixteenth part ; but the dis¬ 
passionate Lord Krisna, void of attributes, stands in need of no such offorings. 

31-40. A god accepts the peculiar offerings presented to him by bis 
votary ; but the glanco of Laksmi immediately rostores them to their former 
condition Krisna having given him the mantras and the boon asked ViraU 
if he required anything else. The toothless boy replied in a suitable manner 
thus : 4 ‘ 13o it for a short or long time, so long as I live, may my faith in Thee 

remain unshaken. Grant me this boon, lord. He who is devoid of faith iu 
Ihee is a fool ; and his animate body is a mere corpse. All his adorations, 
demotions, rites 3 fastings, pilgrimages and acts of virtu Q are useless. The life of 







THE BRAFIMAV AfV ART A PURANA. 


Sl 


this fool is ineffectual. For he slights the eternal spirit through whom 
be subsists. So long as this spirit pervades the l»ody ? it (the body) is energetic. 
Bat whoa the spirit disappears, all the other faculties follow suit. Therefore no 
faculty is distinct from the soul. 0 blessed Being, thou art the soul of i^jp 
universe and distinct from Nature. Thou art eternal, self-willed ; and thou 
art the primordial light.” 0 saint Narada, Kri$na thereupon gently replied 

thus ; 


41*47. “ Child, you shall remain fixed (unshaken) like me till Eternity. 

Brahm&s, countless, may be destroyed ; but you shall never perish: through 
my digits, you will wield the form of Virata and sustain a world on each of 
the pores of your skin. Brahma will come out of your abdomen ; and from 
iha forehead of Brahma eleven Uudras will come out for the maintenance of 
creation. One of them, named K&lagni-ttudra will be the destroyer of the 
world ; and the sensual Visnu, through the lowest of his digits, will descend 
to the earth as the preserver of the world. I grant you the following 
boon, uj, that you will also be able to observe by meditation my 
lovely image as well as the form of your mother that dwelleth in my hofirk 
I am going now ; farewell ” So Saying Kri$nu disappeared ; and, proceeding 
to Heaven, he addressed Brahmft and S'iva thus : 

48-57. “Brahma, my child, I commandyou to take your genesis from the 
abdomen of Vir&ta in order to create small worlds on the pores of hie skin. 
Ghjlcl Mahadeva, I likewise command you to spring through your digits from 
the forehead of Brahma for the distruction of the world. I command you 
personally to absorb yourself in devotion.’* The benefactor vS'iva and Brahm&, 
having heard this, bowed to him low, penetrated the huge mass of wators 
spherical like the universe and entered into the pores of the skin of the great 
Virata. Virata and ins digits were gradually reduced in size. The dark-blue 
Being, (Hari), the smiling image of the world, youthful, and clad iu aellow 
garment, in the meantime, reposed in the bod of the ocean. Brahma then 
manifested himsolf iu the lotus of his navel. This seif-existent BrabmA, 
though ho wandered in the midst of the stalk of the lotus for millions of Yogas, 
could not determine its limit; and thereupon the paternal grand-father felt 
rather anxious, lie then went back to his own place and adored the lotns-feot of 
Hari; and, in a moment-, having acquired celestial vision, he beheld that Hari, 
had assumed a diminutive form, Brahmii then adored Krisna, tho lord of the 
Goloka, the owner of cow-herds and, male and female, who wields a world 
on each of the pores of his skin and obtained a boon from him, by virtue of 
whioh, he was able to take part in creation. 

58-fi2. Thereafter, Brahma begat Sanaka and other sons, the offsprings 
of his mind. From the loft side of the small Vir&ta, the four-handed Vb$nu, 
tho resident of Sweta-dwipa, came iuto existence and undertook to preserve 
the world. BruhmA created the heaven, the earth, the PiU&la, all moveable 
and immoveable, animate and inanimate objects fixed in the navel of VirAta 
In each of tho pores of his skin he created a universe. In every universe, 
there are a small VirAta, Brahma, Vi$nu, S'iva etc. My son, I just narrated 
to you tho virtues of Krisna likely to give happiness and redemption Now, 
what do you wAnt to hear?” 





W»t$T*y. 


PRAKRITI-KHANDA. 


CHAPTER IV. 

1-3. N&rada said, “ By your grace, I have heard an extraordinary nar¬ 
rative, as sweet as nectar. Now tell me in detail the form of worship appro¬ 
priate to each of the goddesses of Nature. Lord N4tfftyana,’ please teil me by 
whom they were adored or eulogised by hymn)? ? Please describe to me their 
amulets, hymns, mantras, powers and exact characters. \V horn did any of 
them grace with boon ? All this kindly narrate to me in detail.'* 

4-12. N&r&yanaanswered : “ There are five forms of: Nature, viz,, Durgft, 
Radhk, Laksml, Saraswati and S&vitri in connexion with the matter relating 
to creation. Their worship is celebrated throughout the world. Their might 
is extraordinary ; they are all good, their character is sweet like nectar. Those 
who have sprung from the digits of Nature likewise possess a beilefioient nature. 
This subject I am going to describe to you. Please hear mo with wrapt at¬ 
tention. The characters of: K&ll, Vasundhar&, Ganga, Sasthi, Mo.ngabchandik&, 

» 

Tulbi, Manasft, Nidra, SwAhft, Swadha and Daksinii are delightful and sanc¬ 
tifying. I arn also going to tell you the fruits of action which a creature 
reaps, as influenced by the law of causation. I shall subsequently tell you ubout 
the characters of R4dha and Durgd which are very grand and liberal. The 
summary of their characters, I am first going to give you, hirst, Krifna 
established the worship of Saraswati by whose grace an ignorant man becomes 
learned. At the outset, she came out of the mouth of Krisna and, excited 
by lust, amorously went to Krisna. Lord Kriana knew her heart and addressed 
her with words" that were likely to do good and that were fraught with 
good consoquencea. 

13-24, Krisna said, a 0 chaste nymph, please to wed the four-handed 
JN&r&yana who is but a part of myself. He is youthful, lovely, vested with 
all attributes and equal to me in every respect Ho fulfils the wishes of women 
and is graceful like ten millions of Cnpids. In the skill of his amorous enjoy¬ 
ments, he puts the Deity even to shame. My love, you want to accept me 
for yenr husband, it is true. B8t by my side R&dha is stronger than you ; 
ami no good can, therefore, accrue to you. The stronger can protect the 
weaker party. But one devoid of might himself cannot rule others^ As the 
lord of the universe, 1 can rule every one, bat I cannot rule R4db& ; for R/idhii 
is equal to mo in valour, grace, virtue and everything. R&dh& is the presiding 
goddess of my life! Who can sacrifice his life ? Who is dearer than one’s life ? 
O good nymph, go to the Vuikunthu ; welfare will attend your path there, accept 
that god for your h us baud and pa a s your days in happines3. The goddess 
Laksuni is exempt from lust, fear, ang^r, avarice, jealousy and other passions. 
She is equal to you in bodily grace and mental qualities. Make friends with her 
and pass your days in poace Your husband, Visnu, will esteem yoa both equally. 
O my love, in every world, in the month oE M&ghu, on the lunar day of the !3uklu* 
Panchami and on the day when a man just begins to acquire knowledge, you 
will be worshipped at every Kalpa with sixtoen ingredients very reverentially 
by men, Gandarvas, inuuis, gods, adepts, Yogis, N&gas, manus and people 
desiring redemption. 

25-35. The saints who have subdued their passions will duly worship 
you by Dbyan (meditation of your figure) and with hymns’, on jars and 








THE BRAflMA-VAlVARTA PURANA. 


<SL 


hooks according to the method prescribed by Kanwa-S'&kha and hold with 
the right hand your amulet after adoring you with fragrant articles, sandal - 
paste ^arad golden bells. 0 adorable nymph, the Pandits will read your 
hymn.. So saying, Krisna worshipped her. Afterwards she was worshipped 
successively by Brahm&; Visnn, S'iva, Ananfca, Dharma, the saints, Sanaka 
and other sons of Brahna&, the gods, the Manus, kings and men. Thus the 
eternal Saraswafci was worshipped by all.” N^ada said, “ O adept in the 
\ edas 5 ! want to know everything about her worship, hymn, Dhy&n, amulet, 
H le °/^ er * n & 9 patented to her, including flower, sandal-paste etc. My curio¬ 
sity ie excited. Please narrate to me this interesting subject.” N&rayana 
sniul, * I am going to describe to you the form of her worship as prescribed by 
K&nWa-S'&kha. On the 5th day of the bright half of the lunar month of 
M&gha und on the day of the commencement of knowledge, with a pure heart 
and with self-restraint, you should bathe and perform the necessary rites. Then, 
reverentially you should fix or establish the earthen jar, the emblem of the 
deity^ On that jar, you should first worship with offerings the six deities, viz,, 
Ganesa, the Sun, the Fire, Visnu, S'iva ; and afterwards tho tutelary ieities. 


36-43. By Dhyftn or abstract meditation (rather mantal representation 
of the figures of a deity) a Pandit should invoke tho goddess on the jar and 
then worship her with sixteen ingredients. The prescribed offerings, as I read 
iu the Vedas, I am just going to tell you. Butter, curd, condensed milk, fried 
rice, aes am urn ball of sweetmeat, sugar-cane, boiled white molasses, honfey, 
sugar, conical cakes made with ground rice, ghee , salted vegetables, rice boiled 
with ghee, cakes of wheat or barley boiled with ghee, baked cake of ripe 
plantains, rice mixed with milk and sugar, excellent sweetmeat, cocoanut, 
oocoanut-water, the fruit of Vakula (raimUsops olengi) radish, ginger, ripe 
plantain fruits, plums, ripe white delicious fruits of the season, fragraut white 
flowers and sandal, new white garlands and ornaments; these are the offerings 
proscribed by the Ve f /as. 


44-51. 0 blessed N&rada, [ am now going to tell you, as I beheld 8 a- 

raswatt in Dhydn, the goddess who is eulogised by the Vedas, whose account 
is so pleasing to the ears aud who is instrumental in removing all doubts from 
tho mind. “ She 13 white in appearance, lovely and smiling. She has the 
grace of ten millions of moons, She is clothed in dress pure and bright like fire 
and adorned with excellent jewels. She is adored by the Manus, munis and 
men and I adore her reverentially.” The savants having adored her thus 
should present to her offerings by uttering the fundamental mantra and, after 
having read her ode or hymn, should wield her amulet and bow to her. He 
whose tutelary deity is this goddess should always perform this rite. On the 
day one begins to learn and on the 5th day of the bright half of the month 
Magh she should be worshipped. Now I am going to tell you the mantra 
of sixteen letters proscribed to her worshippers. The fundamental mantra is that 
mantra with which the Guru first imparted instruction to his pupil, “Sw&hA 
the wP’o of Fire to Saras wati ” u Sw&hA. to Laksmi.” u Sw&hA to Maylt ” 
those fundamental mantras are like the Kalpa tree. 


52-57. First the merciful Nar&yana gave it to V&lmiki on the coa9t 
of the Ganges. Bhrigu, at tho Pu§kara, gave it on the dark night (Aun&vasya) 






PRAKR ITDKHANDA. 


<8L 


^ S'akra, and Marichu, on the night of the full moon, gave it to Vrihaspati. 
BrahmA gave it at the hormitage of plains (Badri Kasram) to f3hrigu. JagatkAru, 
near the ocean of Ksiroda, gave it to Aatika. VibhAndaka gave it on the top of 
themonntain, to Ri?ya-S'rioga. S'iva gave it to Kan&da and Gautama. The Sun 
gave it to YAgha-Valka and KAtyA-yana. Ananta gave it, to P&nini, Bh'ira- 
dwAja and SakatAyana. To the last named, he gave at the PAfcAla (the world 
below the earth) at the asserafbly of Bali. The utterance of this mantra, four 
lakhs of times, gives success to the worshipper. One who attains success equals 
Vribaspati in every respect. 


58-60. I am now going to tell yon about the amulet which is theohief 
among amulets, which is the conqueror of the world; which was given by BrahmA 
to Bhrign. Bhrigu said. ‘ 0 Brahma, you are expert in the Vedas and possess 
the knowledge of Brahma. You are omniscient, father of all persons and adored 
by all beings. Please describe to me the amulet called the conqueror of thfc 
world relating to the worship of Saraswati. 


. Brahma replied, * 'Child Bhrigu, this amulet which falfils all wishes, 

which is adored by the S'rutis and prescribed by the Vedas, I am going to 
tell you. fr* the Goloka, the lord of the sphere, Krisna, spoke of this amulet. 
It is very secret, efficacious like the Kalpa-tree and full of extraordinary 
mantras, not heard of before. By the use and perasal of this amulet, Vribaspati 
has been celebrated as a wise saint; S'ukra has been adored by the gods; VAb 
miki has become a poet and orator; IVJanu has been revered ; KanAda, Gautama, 
F&nini, etc. have become the authors of several books. VyAsa has written 
the Pur Anas and the auxiliary branches of the Vedas; Vasistha, Par&sara, 
YAgna-Valka etc. wrote many books. Risya-S'ringa, BharadwAja, Astika, 
Idovala, and JavAJi are receiving worship and adoration overy-where. 0 best, 
of saints, the Risi of this amulet is Praj&pati, Kri§na, the Lord of the Rasa, 

is the god, Vrihati is its metro, the attainment of all science and the achievement 
of all desire constitute its object and aim. 


72-84. Om Hrim SarAsatayai SwAha, this mantra may preserve mv 
head ; d'rim VAgdevatAi SwAhA this may preserve my forehead; Om Sara* 
satyai SwAh.-j may this mantra preserve my ears. Ora S'rim Hrim BhArat- 
yai SwAhA ; may this preserve both my eyes. Aim Hrim Vag-vAdinyai SwAha, 
may this mantra always preservo both my nostrils. Hrim YidyAdhigthAtri DevatAi 
SwAbA. may this mantra always preserve ray lips. Ora Hrim S'rira BrAhnoyai 
SwAhA ; may this mantra preserve the row of my teeth Airn may this mantra 
of one letter preserve my throat; Ora Hrim Hrim ; may the deity of this 
raautrii preserve my neck. S'rira may the deity of this mantra preserve my 
shoulders; S'rirn VidyAdhisthAtri-devyAi SwabA, may this mantra ever pre¬ 
serve my breast ; Om Hrim VidyA-SwarupAi SwAha, may’ this mantra preserve 
my abdomen; Om Hrim Hrim VanyAi SwAha , may this mantra ever pre¬ 
serve my back. Ora Sarva-varnAtmik&i SwAhA, may this mantra preserve both 
my feet ; Om VAgAdbistbatri-devyAi SwAhA, may this mantra preserve all 
the parts of iny body. Om Sarva Kantha-VasinyAi SwAha, may this mantra 
preserve ray east side. Om Hrim JihvAgrA-vAsinyai SwAha, may this mantra 
13 






THE BRAHMA-V AlV ART A RERAN A. 


Si 


reserve my south east side. Om, Aim, Hrim, S'rim Saraswatyai budh-jjananyai, 
may the king <?f mantras preserve mo on the south side. Om HrStn, S'rhn, may this 
mantra o£ three letters preserve me on the south-west aide; Kavi Jibv&gra-vasin- 
yai 8w&h&, may this mantra preserve the west side ; Om Sadkmbikai Sw&ha, may 
this mantra preserve me on the south-west side ; Gadya-Padya-V&siayai Sw&biL, 
may this mantra always preserve me on the north side. Om S'arva-SAstra- 
V&sioyai Swfth&, may this mantra preserve mo on the north-east side ; Om Krlm 
Sarva-P&jit&i Sw&ha, may this mantra preserve my upper region ; Om* Hrim 
Pnstaka V&sinyai Sw&hfi. may this mantra always preserve my lower region ; 
Om Grantha-Vija-rup4yai Sw&ha, may the goddess, the seed of all learning, 
preserve me. v 


85-90. 0 learnod saint, I just described to you the amulet called the 

conqueror of the world, which contains all mystic formulae. This amulot I heard 
at Gandha-m&datia from Dharma. Out of affection, I told you this. You 
should not reveal it to pthors. A wise man should flrst worship his Guru 
properly with sandal-paste, cloth, jewels, etc. Then after having fallen prostrate 
on the ground before his Guru, he should hold this amulet. Utterance of 
this amulet, five laks ot times, will bring success. A man who attains accom¬ 
plishment in respect of this amulet will be wise like Vrihaspati. By the 
grace of this amulet, he will be a great poof, an orator and the conqueror of 
' the world. Thus I related to you the hymn, amulet, adoration, worship, 
meditation (Dhy&n) of Saraswati, as narrated by Ivanwa -S'akha. 


J 


0 H A P T E R V. 

1-5. Nar&yana said, < I am now going io tell you the hymn by which 
the great Muni Y&gna-valka, in days of yore, adored the goddess of knowledge ; 
the hymn by which all objects could be accomplished or gained. This saint, 
cursed by his Guru, lost all his knowledge and went to the Sun, the asylum 
of virtue. By profound meditation he was able to obtain a vision of the Sun- 
god ; and as soon as he saw him, he adored the Sun and in great distress wept 
bitterly. The god wfts propitiated and lectured him on the Vedas and the 
Ved&ngas (auxiliary branches.) He then said, * 0 Muni, in order to regain 
your memory, you ought reverentially to worship the goddess of learning.” 
So saying, he disappeared. The saint bathed ; and then with a modest 
inclination of his head he reverentially worshipped Saraswati thus : 

6-13. 0 mother of the world, by the curse of my Guru, I have been 

^deprived of my valour, memory and knowledge. I have been plunged into 
the sea of grief ; look compassionately at me. 0 goddess of knowledge, give 
me wisdom, memory, fame, poetical faculties, the power to teach my pupils, 
the gift of authors, the genius of orators and public speakers and the excellent 
power of debate or discussion. By the ill grace of Providence I have lost all 
the above faculties. Mother, be graciously pleased to revive them. A 3 the 
gods re-croate a thing whioh has been burnt to ashes, so kindly rekindle the 
faculties which have beqorne extinct in me. I bow to the goddess of knowledge 
who is the image of Brahma, who is all light, who is eternal, and who presides 
over knowledge; the goddess, without whose grace, the universe, though animate, 
becomes inanimate^ who presides over wisdom; the goddess without whose 





PR A KRITI'KB A N DA . 


- ^^^Htxndneis, the world is struck dumb and seized with a spirit of madness. I bow 
to the goddess who has the grace of jasmine, refreshing sandal,' the moon, the 
white water-lily and the lotus, and who presides over colour. 

\ 

14-20. I bow to the goddess who resides in dots andt*trokes, without 
whose help calculation is impossible ; who is the image of timo and number, 
who is the symbol and presiding deity of commentary, who solves all doubts, 
who represents memory, knowledge, iutelleot, imagination and genius. Once 
upon a time Sanat-Kum&ra referrod to Brahm& a point of knowledge or 
wisdom. Brahma, without being able to arrive at a solution, was reduoed to 
the condition of inertia. At that time, Krisma went to J3rahm& and requested 
him to adore Vant constantly. Brahm& complied and by hor grace solved 
the problem. 

21-29. On another occasion, Vasundhard referred to Ananta a noinfc of 
wisdom. Ananta was puzzled and could not solve anything. At the instance 
of Kasyapa, ho adored the goddess of knowledge who dispelled his doubt by a 
clear solution of the problem. Similarly, Valmiki being queried by Vy&sa 
about the system of the Puranas kept quiet for a while. But, O mother, by 
your boon he solved the problem. Afterwards Vy&sa, the product of the 
digits or Krisna, when he heard of the admirable solution of the system of the 
Pur&nas acquired pure wisdom calculated to dispel calamity. Then be adored 
you for a hundered years at the Puskara. Vy&sa, thereupon, by your boon 
became the best of poets and wrote the divisions of the Vedas aud the Puranas. 
Once Gauri asked S iva with reference to the subject concerning the mysteries 
* of creation. He remembered you and answered the intricate question put to 
him. When Inclra asked Vrihaspati a question about the science of words, 
or language, he was unable to answer it and for a celestial thousand years 
absorbed himself in your meditation at the Puskara. After that he obtained a boon 
and for a thousand celestial years he explained the meaning of words in detail 
to lodra. 

30 36. 0 goddess, the saints who study on their own account and who also 

teach their pupils, first contemplate your image and then devote thoraselves to the 
above task. You aro adored and worshipped by the munis, Manus, men* 
gods, demons, Brahma, Visnu Mahesa etc. The gods vested with a hundred 
months, five mouths and four mouths respectively, have worshipped you 
in a state of stupor or insonsibility. How is it possible for me, a 
human being, to adore you ? So saying the Muni reverentially bowed low 
and wept bitterly. At that time, the effulgent Saraswati, in an invisible 
condition, blessed him with these words, “ You will be the best of poets.” So 
saying, ahe went to the Vaikunlha. Whoever with a devoted mind reads the 
hymn composed by the above saint becomes an orator, a poet, and a saga like 
Vrihaspati. An idiot and a profoundly ignorant man by the perusal of the 
hymn will be placed in the category of poets, saints and intelligent men. 


CHAP T Eli VI. 

1-12. ^Narayana said, 1 0 Muni, in the Vaikunlha Sarasw&tt had a quarrel 
with Gangft, and beiog cursed by the latter, descended to India iu the form 







THE BRA 11M A- V A iV ART A PCRAjYA. 



of a river. She (Saraswati) is sanctifying and holy and is adored for ever by 
^he virtaous. She is the symbol of holy pilgrimage. She is the support of 
the virtuous, the index of devotion and, just like lire, incomparably adapted 
to consume the heaps of sins accumulated by mankind. Whoever knowingly dies 
on the coast of the sacred “waters of the Saraswati goes to the Vaiknntha and 
dwells there for ever. In India, sinners, by ablutions in her sacred waters, get 
relieved from sins arid dwell in the Visnu-loka till eternity. On the lunar day 
o£ Chaturdasi, P{trntm&, Akaayft-tithi, Dak siiiily ana, Vetlp&t-Yoga, eclipse 
or any other sacred day, if any one, accidentally or reverentially, inoideutally 
bathes in her waters, he certainly goes to the Vaikuntha and attains the form 
of Hari. If any profoundly ignorant man recites the uiaatras of Saraswati, 
he dovelopes into the best of poets. If any one shaves bis head on the brink of 
this river and then bathes in the water, he will never be born again after his 
death. I told you the delightful and essential virtues of this goddess. What 
more do you want ?” N&rada to remove his own doubts thus replied :—How 
did baraswati, by the curse of Gang*! assume the form of a sanctifying stream, 
through the medium of her sixteenth part? My curiosity is very much 
excited on this point. I do not get ample satisfaction with this narrative which 
is as sweet as nectar. Who, indeed, can bo easily satisfied with the attainment 
of good things ? Why did the virtuous, sanctifying, generous Gang& curse 
the adorable Saraswati ? And what was the cause of the quarrel betwene 
these two powerful deities ?" 

13-21. N&rftyana said ‘O N&rada, I am going to tell you the old story 
the recollection of which removes all sins. Laksmi, Saraswati and Gang& are 
the three wives of Hari. Enamoured of him, they always dwell by his side 
constantly. Once upon a time, Gang&, excited with lust, cast amorous glances 
at the Lord. Hari also returned the glance aud cheerfully smiled a little. 
Though Laksmi condoned this act, it was intolerable to Saraswati. The vir¬ 
tuous, smiling Laksmi tried to console her ; but the enraged Saraswati was not 
appeased thereby. In a moment, her eyes end face became red with anger ; 
and her lips and body began to shiver. She thus addressed Gangtl and Harf:— 

22-30. “ A husband, if ho is virtuous and pious, treats all his wives with 

impartiality. But the reverse is the case, if he is a hypocrite. 0 Lord, holder 
of the mace, you love Qang& and Laksmi more than you love mo. Nay, you 
love mo not in the least. Hence Laksmi condoned your lustful act. I am 
unlucky. I need not sustain my life any more. A woman not loved* by her 
husband ueed not live. The savants who call you the universal Lord and the 
image of virtue are really fools. They do not know the Vedas or your nature.’’ 
N&r&yana, realising the fact, that she was in a rage, hastily left the assembly. 
Then Ganga was also blinded with fury and fearlessly and rudely rebuked 
^baraswati thus“ 0 licentious creature, art thou proud of the fact that thy 
husband loves thee . Or dost thou reveal this fact- to the assembly ? 0 thou 

nymph, beloved of thy husband, I shall crush thy pride before Hari himself 
and see what lie can do. 

31-52, Thereupon Saraswati was about to seize her by the hair when 
Lakfuai intervened and prevented thorn both. But Saraswati was incensed 
against Laksmi {tud cursei her thus : “ Inasmuch as you see the perverse 







misT/f, 



PRAKBlTI-KHAtiDA. 


condition of Gang& and jet maintain a studious silence like a tr«e and a river, 
you shall unquestionably assume the form of a tree atid a river.” Laksmi, upon 
this, did not corse Saraswati in return; but she gently held her by t l ho*haud 
and kept quiet, at the assembly, in great mental distress. When the lotus-eyed 
Gang& witnessed the hot temper of {Saraswati, then with a fac& flushed with 
anger she addressed Lak$mi thus :—Let go the hand of this hot-tempered, 
shrewish and quarrelsome Saraswati. This presiding deity of words or langu¬ 
age can do me no injury. Let her fight with me to the utmost of her power. 
She wants to display to the world her might and valour. 0 chaste KamaJIL 
let people know our respective strengths.” So saying, Gang& cursed Saraswati 
thus : As Saraswati has cursed Kamala, she herself shall turn into a river, 

descend to the earth and by frequenting the resort or rendezvous of sinners will 
partake of their sins/ Saraswati then cursed the Ganges in return, u You will also 
descend into the earth and bear the burden of sins committed by mortals. 
At that moment, the four-handed Nar&yana arrived there with his retinue, held 
Saraswati by the hand and putced it on his breast. The Omniscient Lord 
couseted her with words full of wisdom; every one was afflicted with the 
history of the quarrel and the curee ; and the Lord addressed his wives thus, 
using words suited to the occasion : 'My good Laksmi, you through your 
digits will manifest yourself as the daughter of Dharma-Dhwaja in the world 
below, without being born out of the womb of any woman. By an irony of 
fate, there you will be turned into a tree or rather a plant. L ankha-Ohftda, 
who will spring oat of my digits, will marry you first; and then you will 
become my wife. In India, you will bo celebrated by the name of the all-sancti¬ 
fying Xulsi. 0 goddoss of excellent mien, by the curse of Saraswati, assume 
the form of a river and, bearing the name of Padra&vati, descend to India at 
once. 0 Ganges, you, too, affected by her curse, will subsequently go to 
India through your digits ; and the touch of your holy and sanctifying water 
will consume the sins committed by mortals. Bhugiralha, by austere devotions, 
will be able to cause you to deaceud to the earth ; hence you will be known 
as Bh&giratbi. My dear goddess, by my command, descend to the world 
aud there dwell for some time as the wife of the ocean and also as the spouse 
of Bhagirath (both of whom are descended from my digits.) 


53-60. 0 uuforbeariug Saraswati, by the cursed' Gungft, you, too, through 

your digits , must go to India and reap the consequences c£ your quarrel 
with your co-wives. But personally, you sho/ild go to Bruhmft and 
become his wife. Let Gauga also personally go to S # iva. LaLsmi, you had 
better remain here in person ; (i.e . your digits, by reason of the curso, will 
descend to the earth ; but you will remain hero personally); for you are 
tranquil in disposition, free from passion, devoted to me, chaste, good-natured, 
blessed iu every respect, and pious. The women of the world who are descended 
from you are peace-ful in disposition and good-natured. Throe wives, three 
houses, three servants and throe friends are always ominous and proscribed by 
the Vedas. The life of a hen-pecked husbani is useless or ineffectual ; the evil 
attends him at every step. The house of the husband of a shrew or an unchaste 
woman is worse than the jungles. Dwelling, water and fruits are obtainable 
in the forest but not in a house controlled by the petti coat governn ent of a 






THE BRABMA-VA1VARTA PORANA 


shrew. Life in fire or in the proximity of tho beasts of prey is preferable to 
the company of a wicked, troublesome woman. 


61-71. ‘ 0 handsome nymph, the pangs caused by disease, poison or death 

may bo tolerated ; but not the pain caused to the mind by the foul tongue of a 
woman. The life of a man subdued by a woman is useless. In this world, he 
is blamed everywhere; and, in the next world, he goes to hell. A man 
without fame and celebrity is dead, though ostensibly alive. Many wives of 
the same husband should not live together. A man is not happy even v itb 
one wife. What to talk of many wives P GangA and Saraswati, you had beHor 
go to S'iva and BrabmA respectively. But the good and mild Kamala should 
remain with me. The husband of a submissive, good-natured and chaste woman 
enjoys Heaven in this world and attains virtue and redemption in the next 
world. Such an individual is also holy and happy and enjoys a slate of 
freedom or redemption. The husband of a shrew, on tho other hand, is profane 
and really dead, though ostensibly alive.” 0 Narada, at these words, GangA, 
Lakgml and Saraswati embraced one another and began to weep very loudly, 
Fearful of the future and quivering with sorrow and fear, with tears in their 
eyes, they addressed NA.rA.yana by turns.—Saraswati said, ‘Lord, I am 
of a wicked disposition ; quit me, therefore, for ever. How can a woman live, 
forsaken by her husband ? I shall go to India and there quit my body 
throughd©voirni s. For a person who attains the pinnacle of glory is sure 
to fall.” 


72-82. GangA said, i€ Lord, why do you abandon roe ? I shall commit 
suicide, in which case you will surely participate in the sin of killing an 
innocent person. He who forsakes an innocent wife suffers torments of hell 
for ever. You are the eternal Lord and yet you will reap the fruits of your 
actions.” Laksml said, * Lord, you are all virtue ; your anger does not become 
you. 8how mercy to your wives ; for a good husband should be forgiving. 
How long shall 1 remain on earth ? When shall I see your lotus 
foot again ? The sins of mortals bathing in my waters will pollute me. 
How shall I be relieved of this contamination ? How shall I bo able to come 
to you again ? 0 imperishable lord, in the form of: Tulsi or tho daughter of 

Dharraa-Dhwaja, at what time I shall be,able to enjoy the sight of your 
face again ? 0 merciful lord, I shall be the presiding deity of the h&ly basil 
plant ; but when will you relieve me from the curse ? When will Gonga and 
Loksmi be respectively rolieved from their sins and the consequences of the 
curse that will overtake them ? You have asked them to go to S'iva and 
BrabmA respectively. But kindly excuse them : do not impose upon them this 
cammand ” So saying, she fell prostrate before him on the ground and encir¬ 
cling his feet with her hair wept very loudly.” The compassionate Lord 
embraced Laksrni and smiling cheerfully addressed her thus .* 

83-95. t( 0 goddess, I shall carry out your orders; but at the same time, 
I shall see that my orders are not t rendered ineffectual. I tell you the 
remedy. Plaaae listen. Let Saraswati through digits only descend to the 
earth ; and through othor digits lot her go to Brahma ; but personally let her 
lemain with me. GangA, led by Bhagiratha, shall go to India through her 
digits to consecrate the threo worlds. But personally she will remain with 





PRAKBITI-KHAN DA. 


10 



me. There, though holy herself naturally, she will be oonaobratod all 
the more by attaining the precious head of 58'iva. 0 Kamal&, by the 

digit of your digits, you will attain the form of the river Padm&vati as 
well as of Tulsi in India. After 5,000 years of Kali, you will be released 
from your curse and come back to me. 0 Padm&, to all living beings, you 
are the source of prosperity as well as of adversity. Without a taste of calami* 
ty, no one esteems virtue. By the dip and ablution of my worshippers in your 
water, you will be relieved from the heaps of sins cast into you by wicked 
mortals. 0 beauty, countless sacred rivers of the world are consecrated 
by the touch and sight of ray worshippers who, with a view to purify the 
world, ream hero and there. The places where they sojourn and wash their feet 
are turned into so many shrines and grand resorts for pilgrimage. By their 
touch, the murderers of women, cows and Br&hmips, the evil-doers 
and even those who ravish their preceptors.’ wives are redeemed in 
their life-time. 

96-105. The atheists, murderers, those who do not observe Ekfidasi and 
Sandhyfi, those who subsist upon sword and ink, Br&hmins who bog alms from 
the S'ftdras, those who carry bullocks, the traitors, the murderers of friends, the 
perjurers, the robbers of deposited wealth, the debtors, the usurers, the bastards, 
the gallants and sons of whores, the cooks engaged by the S'&dras, the Devalu 
Br&hmins (the Brahrni ns of an inferior order who subsist upon iho-otferings 
made to the images they attend), the village priests, those who have not been 
initiated into the mantras by their Gurus, the destroyers of the holy fig-trees, 
the slandorers of my rotaries, and those who eafc the art’cles not dedicated to 
the deity ;—these all aro chastened and purified by the sight and the touch 
of my worshippers. The greatest sinner is he who does not maintain his pa¬ 
rents, his wife and children, the family of his Guru, his sister, father-in-law, 
mother-in law, and a friend without issue or descendants. He, too, is purified 
. by their touch aud sight. Likewise those people are consecrated, who rob the 
property of the gods and the Br&hmins, who sell their daughters, who sell 
lac, iron, and mercury and who burn the dead bodios of the S'udras and they 
aro consecrated in spite of the fact that they are very great sinners. 

106-HOi Laksmi said, “ O compassionate lord, what is the character of 
these worshippers whose sight and touch sanctify men who have no faith in 
Hari, men who are conceited and always blow their own trumpet, the slan¬ 
derers of the virtuous, the traitors and the hypocrites ? Wbat is the feature 
of those saints whose dip and ablutions consecrate the rivers, the dust and water 
of whose feet purify the earth, whose sight and touch are desired by the gods, 
whoso adveut is profitable to all ? The holy rivers or the idols made of earth 
or stone cannot sanctify others even after the lapse of a very long time ; but, 
for a wonder, the Vuisnavas can do that in a moment. 

11L-116. Sauti said, 4 Hari, the consort of Laksml, smiled at her words 
and attempted to reveal the mysteries underlying the question. He said “O 
Laicsmi, the characteristic features of my worshippers are very abstruse and 
mysterious, sedulously guarded by the Vedas and the Pnr&nas ; they are sanc¬ 
tifying and likely to remove sins ; they impart happiness, faith and redemption. 
They are secret aud should not be revealed to tlie hypocrites. But I relate 




mtsTfy 



THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PUrAna 



them to you who are dearer to me than my life. The Vedas consider that man 
excellent and= holy into whose ears the mantra of Visnu has been poured hy 
bis G uru. As soon as fete is born, a hundred ancestors of his, obtain flnai em¬ 
ancipation, whether they are in heaven or hell. Irrespective of the nature cf 
their births, they are redeemed during their life-time and eventually go to 
Hari, 

117-123. My worshippers are devoted to my worship, always recite my 
virtues, set their heart upon me and with a fluttering heart, tearful eyes, and 
self-forgetful spirit they listen to my eulogies. They do not want any of the four¬ 
fold redemptions. They do not desire immortality or even the position of 
Brahmft. They want simply to do mo homage. They do not want the 
position of Indra, Mann, the rare condition of a god, the heaven or the bliss of 
a kingdom even in dream. All these may perish ; but rny virtuous and faith- 
fulbeiie vers are never destroyed. They take their births as human beings in 
India, wander here and there to consecrate the earth and ultimately they go 
to the Vaikuntha. Padma, I told you everything; now do the needful.’ 5 
Thereupon by the orders of N&rayana, Laksrni and others performed the works 
assigned to them. Hari resumed his seat. 


C HAPTB R V I I. 

!-10. N&r&yana said, * Saraswati cursed by Gangil went to India, 
through her digits only; for personally she remained with Hari. When she 
went to India, she was married to Brahmd and is celebrated by the name of 
the goddess of knowledge. She is the wife of the all-pervading Hari who lay 
for a long time in the ocean; hence she is so called. This holy goddess is my 
tutelary deity, fthe is the symbol of all pilgrimage and, like fire, consumes 
the fuel of sins. 0 Narada, afterwards Gangfi, carried or led by Bhagiratha, 
descended to the earth, through her digits. The earth unable to sustain 
her energy prayed S'iva who wielded her on his head. Padm&, likewise, through 
her digits came down to India in the form of the river. Padm4vati and herself 
remained with Hari. Laksmi came down as the daughter of king Dharma-Dhwaj i 
and was known by the name of Tulst. Afterwards, by the curse of Saraswati, 
at the command of Hari, she was turned into a sanctifying tree (holy basil). 
For 5,000 years of Kali, she will remained in India and afterwards forsaking 
the form of a river, she will go back to Hari. 

11-20. By His command, she will go back to the Vaikuntha along with 
all the places meant for pilgrimage except Kasi and Vrind& vana. Salgram 
(Holy stone) and Jagannftth are the forms of Hari. After 10,000 years of 
Kali they will also quit India and go back to the Vaikuntha. The Vaisnavas, 
Pur&nas, the entire Sankhya and the holy rites prescribed by the Vedas including 
offerings and oblatiou3 to the manes will go along will them.’ The worship 
and adoration of Hari, the Vedas and other S'astras will also go simultaneosly. 
Virtue, truth, religion, the villagegods, rites, devotions, fastings will all 
disappear. Men will be full of lust, falsehood and hypocrisy. The Pnjas 
will be denuded of holy basil leaves. People will*give up the worship of Ek&dAri 
and turn a\vay their face from the narratives of Hari. All people will he 
fraudulent, crooked at heart, proud, haughty, dishonest and jealous. At the 







imSTfty 



PEAKIIi 27- KHAN DA. 


f 


<§L 


time of marriage, no distinction of race or rank or sex will bo observed arv tho 
ownership of property and the proprietary title will be ignored. Lvory one 
will be uxorious ; and every woman will lead the life of a prostitute and rule 
her husband with an iron hand, 

21-30. The wife will be the mistress of the house; the husband 
will be worse than a slave. The wife will regard her husband's parents as her 
slaves. The owner of the house will he all powerful in his own circle", he 
will maintain connection with none except h s wive* and daughters. Lie will 
have no concern with his fellow-stu ients Men acquaintance will be regarded 
as friendship ; benefit to others will bo out of tho. question. & m an will do 
nothing without a woman’s permission.. In the Kuii-yuga, the Br&huai^r, Kr>a- 
fcriyas and others of high rank will abandon the study of their own b^astius, 
read the sciences of the Ybivanas (or infidels) and do homage to the udras. 
They will adopt the despicable professions of cooks and bearers of bullocks 
and letters and in this way they will earn their livelihood, i eople will 
leave the path of virtue. The earth will ho without crops. Trees will be 
without fruits; women, without sons ; cows, without milk: and milk, 
without ghee . The husband .and wife will not love one another. House¬ 
holders will be without happiness; kings without valour and subjects, 
without taxor revenue. Rivers, lakes and caves will be without water , the 
four castes including tho Brahmins will be without virtue. Out of millions 
of men, there will not be one virtuous. Men, women and children will go 
ugly and deformed. Foul messages and words will defile the mouths of the 
people. Some cities and villages will bo desolate. 

31-40. In a few villages, only a small number of men will construct 
houses and dwell therein. To.vns and villages vvill be covered with jungles. 
The inhabitants of the forest unable to pay the tax imposed upon them by 
society will be very much oppressed. On I In*, margin of large pools and rivers, 
crops will grow. Fields will be without crops and wealthy men will 
lose their wealth and energy. All this will hippen through the influence 
of the Kali-y uga. People of noble rank-will be mean in disposition, iruthful 
men will come to be regarded as false, cunning and fraudulent, binaors will 
ridicule and calumniate the virtuous. Vicious and lustful men, unchaste women, 
the sinners, the atheists* the thieves and the murderers will respectively slander 
and scoff the righteous and dispassionate people, the chaste women, virtuous 
men, the thaists, the honest folks, innocent and merciful people. Cunning people 
in the guise of beggars will slander and ridicule every one and, by ministering 
to the devils and evil spirits, they will wander abroad aud injure the cause of 
humanity. But these cunning men, though void of sense, will be adored every¬ 
where. Men and women will be diseased and small iu stature. through Kalis 

prowess, they will ho diseased oven in youth and short-lived. Kveu when six¬ 

teen years old they will be decrepit, and in the twentieth year of their age they 
will look very old." Out of a 1,000 women, one o* two, even when eight years 
old, will get menses and be pregnant; aud 
will be 

41-50. Otherwise, in the Kali-yuga, all women will be barren; and the 
custom of selling daughters will be current^ among tne* four castes including 

14 







THE BRA UM A-V ALVA R TA PUR AN A, 



<SL 


10 Brahmins. Mon will generaliy maintain themselves through the 
wealth acquired by the Jives of prostitution whipJh. .their mothers, wives, sisters, 
daughters and .•A n "') u >V will loa(l, In this age people will subsist 
upon the wealth acquired by the recitation of Hari’s name. That is, the) T will 
soil Hari’s name and thus maintain themselves. People will make gifts only 
to increase their fame. But On second thought they will repent and 
act otherwise. Men of this age will try their best to appropriate the fees allot¬ 
ted to the gods, Br&htmns, Guras, whether granted by themselves or by others. 

I Some will, go.for interp QW se to their own daughters, daughters*in-law etc ; 

I others will ravish their sisters and step-mottiers. Others by committing 
I sexual intercourse with their brother’s wives will incur tho sin of an act pro¬ 
hibited by the S'&stras, almost in every household. In fact, people will spare 
none except their mothers. There will bo no determination or selection of 
husbands or wives. There will be no hard and fast rules about the proprietary 
right or jurisdiction over objects or things meant for enjoyment. People will 
be untruthful, fraudulent and licentious. There will be mutual jealousy among 
castes. People will be foremoll among sinners by commitment of murders 
and other foul deeds. 

51-61. They will deal in lac, iron, mercury and salt; they will mount 
bullocks, eat food touched by the S'udras, commit adultery with S'&dra 
women and without observing the five festivals they will eat even on the occa¬ 
sion .of the dark night (amavasya). They will not use the sacred thread ; they 
will give up the worship of the Sun, as performed three times a day. They will 
not observe the rites of purification. In the kitchen, the prostitute, a woman in 
her menses, old women and procurers will cook food for others or be 
engaged as oooks. There will be no discrimination of food or sex. Every dis¬ 
tinction between society and hermitage being obliterated, all will bo Yavanas. 
A tree, in this Yuga, will be one cubit high and tho size of a human being will 
be one finger. At this time, Kalki will spring out of the digits of N&r&yana 
and be born as tho son of a Brahmin. He will be foremost among the strong. 
He will ride on a high horse; in three nights he will extripate all the Mlecohas 
(barbarians) with a huge sword and then disappear. There will be, thru, 
anarchy on earth which will fall into the hands of dacoits. Then for six 
nights consecutively it will rain cats and dogs. The earth will be denuded of 
trees, men and houses by reason of the deluge. Then, 0 saint, twelve Suns will 
rise simultaneously and dry up tho water caused by the rains. 

G2-71. The dauntless Kali-yuga being thus extinct, the Golden Age 
(Satya) will again be established. This age will again be full of piety, truth 
and virtue. The virtuous and ascetic Br&hmin9 will be thoroughly conversant 
with the Ved&ngas; in every house women will bo chaste and religious. The 
Ksatriyns, devoted to the Brahmins, will be kings. They will be valorous, 
pious and perform acts of virtue. The Vaisyas will deal in merchandise and 
be foremost among pious men. The S'ftdras will bo virtuous, religious and be 
devoted to the Br&hmiru. The three higher castes will be devoted to Yisnu 
and perform religious sacrifices. They will accept mantras of Visnu and be 
regarded as foremost among the Vaisnavas. They will be conversant with 
S'rati, Smriti,. Pur&na, etc. They will commit intercourse with wives who get 
periodical menses. In this religious age, there will be no trace of irvcligiou. 







PRAKRITI-KHAD DA. 


m, 


In theTreta-ynga, virtue or Dharma will maintain throe feet; t e, threo-four^ s o 
virtue will remain and one-fourth will disappear. In tho Dwapara half 
and in tho Kali only one-fourth of virtue will remain. Al the end ot the JUU, 
virtue will totally disappear. 0 saint, tho days ara.seven m number; the lunar 
days are lx toon in number; there are twelve months and six seasons; there are 
two Paksas (fortnights) and two Ayans (half-years). A day consists ot four 
prahars or parts; (three hours constitute a Prahar). A night likewise consists 
of four prahars A month consists of thirty days ; a year consists ot twelve 
months. Accor ling to the dispensation of time and number, a year is ot trvo 
kinds. A Yuga is brought about by tho revolution of years. 

72-76. One lunar yoar [is co-extensive with a Divine day and night- 
Three hundred sixty Yugas constitute one Divine yoar. Seven such Yugas 
constitute one Manwantara which is equivalent to the span ot nfe alloted to one 
Indra. The period covered by the downfall of twenty-five Indras successively 
constitutes only one day and one night of Brahma. Bra lima falls after the 
lapse of 108 years according to Brahm&io calculation. This downfall of 
Brahm& is fcbe occasion of complete and actual dissolution of the universe. A, 
this time the earth becomes invisible j the world is mm’dated With water : 
and Brahma, Visnu, S'iva, gods, animate and inanimate objects merge in 
Lord Krisna, the " Supreme Being. Nature at that tune also merges u 
Krisna. Hence this dissolution is called Pr&kritik, (natural), 

77-80. The time required for tho absolute dissolution of tho world and 
downfall of Brahma is equivalent to one moment, t e., wink of Krifija. When 
the world will be thus destroyed, Krisna with his rstmue, the Goloka and the 
Vaikuntha will exist. After this dissolution which takes piace in one moment 
of Krisna, creation oommenoes again. Nobody can count these endless crea¬ 
tions and destructions which come and go. 

81-93 0 N&rada, none can determine the number of created object.?, 

universes and Brahmas. The Supreme Being alone is separate from Nature. 
BrahmA and others, the Virata (small and great) and Nature are all his 
dibits. This Krisna, being divided into two parts, has becomo a Being 
vested with two'hands gracing the Goloka and a Being vested with four 
hands presiding over tho Vaikuntha. Everything from Brahma to a grass 
partakes of the character of Nature (PrAkritika); hence it is a created 
object, and, as such, is liable to destruction. 0 Nfirada, Krisna is internal 
truthful, self-willed, mixed with everything else and has uo attributes cr pro¬ 
perty; and so you ought to have vivid conception of Him. He is name- 
loss and invisible aod wields a form oqt of kindness to His votaries, tie is 
lovely like a new cloud, holds a flute, has got two hands and is clad like a 
Young cowherd. He is omniscient, adorable by all and is the lord ot the uni¬ 
verse? Through tho devotion of Krisna and knowledge of the Supreme Being 
Brahma is able to create ; the all proficient S'iva, the conqueror ot death, 
is able to destroy and having attained a form like Krisna has become omul- 
acient and been vested with Divine qualities. By comprehending Krisna, 
Visnu has become omnipresent, all-knowing, the preserver of the universe and 
the matchless author of all prosperity. By the knowledge of the deity, by 
devotion to Him and by faith and services rendered to Him, Nature hu3 become 






mtSTffy 



THE BRAHMA-VAIVAllTA PURAJVA. 


( a 


Mighty and is celebrated as a goddess. For the same reason, S&vitrf, the 
mother of the Vedas, has become the presiding deity of the Vedas and is 
adored by the learned. Laksmi is the source of wealth, crops and all pros¬ 
perity on the same account; and DurgA who destroys calamities, for the same 
reason, has become the presiding deity of all -villages, the source of all pros¬ 
perity and the mistress of all ; and for the same reason she is adored and 
eulogised by the whole world ; and, having acquired the faculty of omniscience, 
she has obtained S'iva as her husband. 

94*100. For the same reason, Rildha his become the presiding deity 
of the life of Krisua, has been pre-eminently vested with personal grace, honour 
and glory and, constantly ranging in the heart of Krisna, has become His spouse. 
At first, on the Mountain of a Hundred Summits (8'ata-S'ringaj, R Mb a, for 
a celestial thousand Yagas, con temp hr tod Krisna to such an extent that she 
was reduced to a skeleton. 

.101-1LI. When her breath was suspended and her body was reduced 
like the waning moon,-Lord Krisna clasped her in his breast and wept for her. 
Afterwards, Krisna granted her a rare aud invaluable boon. Ho said, “ 0 god¬ 
dess, you will always range in my heart, your faith in me will remain unshaken. 
Yon will be superior to me in matters relating to good fortune* honor, love and 
glory. You will bo all adorable and the best of women. 0 darling of my life, 
o* owned with excellence and grandeur, you will be the sole object of my ado¬ 
ration and eulogy. I shall be also subservient to you and be adored by you 
in return/’ So saying the Lord of the universe restored her to consciousness, 
wedded her aud denuded her of all rival wives,, e. g . he got rid of them. 
0 saint, the goddesses devoted to Krisna have respectively reaped benefits 
according to the nature of their devotions. DurgA, having adored Him for 
a celestial thousand years in the Himalayas, has now become a goddess adored 
by all. S&r&swati has become adorable by her devotions to Krisna in the 
mountains of Gandba-Madana for a celestial lakh of years. At the Puskara 
again Lalqmri who worshipped Him for a hundred Yugas has become the source 
of all prosperity. At the Malaya, SAvitri who adored Him for a celestial 60,000 
years, as a reward of her devotions is worshipped by the twice-born saints. 

• 112-116. In days of yore, S'iva worshipped Him for a. hundred Man- 
wantaras. For the same period, He was worshipped respectively by BrahtnA, 
Visriu and Dkarma who were venerated on this account. For the same poriod, 
He was worshipped by Ananta, the 8un, the Moon and Indra. The Wind, 
after having worshipped Him for a hundred Yugas became the support and 
life of all. The gods, munis, men, kings and brahmins by reason of their 
devotion to Krisna were adored by ail. 1 told you everything according to 
the Pur&nus and the Agamay. Now what do you want to hear ? 


CHAPTER V III. 

1-10. N&rada said, i In oue moment or twinkle of the eye of Mari, BrukmA 
falls ; and Utter dissolution of the universe results from the downfall of JBrahmA, 
as najrated above. At the time of destruction, it is said, the world becomes in¬ 
visible, is deluged with water and merges in tluri. But where does fch* Earth 






PR A Kill XI- KHAN DA 



remain at the time ? How does she appear again at the time of creation ? And 
how does the Earth, happen to become the prop o£ all a “ d ^ he S0 " rCe n ° 
welfare and how is she regarded as blessed and honoured t Mra>ana _an 
swered. “ The S'ruti holds that Krisna is the fountain-head ot all creation. 
At the time ot Pralaya, everything disappears ; at the. tune of creation, every¬ 
thing appears. Now listen to the extraordinary story of the birth Qt V“sun 
dharS, likely to destroy sins, increase religious sanctity and remote a oa. ' ‘ 

Some say that the Earth is created out of the fat ot the demons lul and 

Kaitava. But this theory is defective. At, first the demons fought with 
Vianu, and, much pleased with his valour, they said thus. Where the Ear * 
has not been merged in water, in that waterless place, kindly kill us. i i ■ 
shows that the Earth already existed before their de^th took place. Again, 
when thoy died, the Earth manifested herself and was simp.) c ev^ .one ? l | ln 
their fat or marrow, as she had been quite emaciated by leason o t le o age. 
This is why she is called Medini. 


11-20. But the view held at the Pfiijkaia by Dharma is correct, approve 
by all and sanctioned by the S'rutis. At first, MahA-Vir&ta was deluged with 
water for a long time. Heaps of dirt or rubbish came out of his body and 
entered into the pores of his skin. After a long time, tlie Eartn sprang out 
of the said rubbish. The Earth in different forms fixes herself speed! y m nob 
of the pores of his skin. Some times she appears and at ot.hor times s »e lsa P 
pears. At the time of creation she comes out of the water and, at the time ot 
eternal destruction, she again enters into the water. In every world the Earth, 
is full of hills, woods, seven seas and islands. In every Earth, there aro the 
Himalyas, the Merus, the hills, the Sun, the Moon, the planets, tie got s inn u 
ing Brahma, Vi#nu and S'iva, lands with golden soil, the holy land India, 
and places meant’for pilgrims and forts. Below every Earth, there is the 1 a.a ; 
and, above her, the Brahma-loka which contains the Dbruva-loka and other 
worlds. All the worlds have been thus created. Above all these there are the 
Vaikuntha and the Goloka which are distinct from the worlds of Brahma ana 
permanent. 


21-26 All the worlds are fleeting and artificial; ^ Brahm& fell, 
Krisna 1st created Mah&- Virata. At the time o£ the utter destruction oE the 
world, Krisna alone existed along with the sky (infinite space) and the sen- 
tient souls’' In the Varftba-kalpa, VasudliA, the presiding deity of the earth 
was worshipped reverentially by the gods, men, munis, Brahmins and Gandarvas. 
It is stated in the S'rutis that the Vasundhark (Barth) is the wife of Visnu who 
(in the guise of a boar) begat upou her a sou named Mangala the father of 
Ghantesa.” Narada said/ ‘How was tho Earth adored by the gods; and 
how was she united with the incarnation called the \ aruliu (?) Describe to 
me tho formula of her worship, her release from the bottomless abyss and the 
auspicious birth of Mangala.’ 

27-30. Narkyana said, “ At first, Brahma adored the Lord disguised as 
a boar who thereupon killed diranyakiia and oilier demons, released the 
Earth from the Pat&la and placed her on the watpr as a leaf of a lotus on the 
surface of the ocean. Beneath that boundless Earth (Vasudba, £rahm& created 
this lovely universe glorious like ten millions of Buns, Hari Qn the shape of 









THE ERAHMA-FA1VARTA PUPJnA 


<SL 


oar) beheld the lustful goddess of Earth and was himself excited with passion. 
There up oil he wielded a lovely form and in solitude enjoyed her for one 
celestial year. 


31-41- 'Jhe goddess fainted with the excess of pleasure. The union of 
clever gallants with their clever sweet-hearts is desirable, V T ii?nu, in his excite¬ 
ment, had uo idea of day or night; After the lapse of a year, the god came to his 
senses, left the society of the passionate Earth and resumed the form of a boar. 
Then he adored the goddess by means of abstract meditation. He worshipped her 
*with frankincense, light, vermilion, perfume* cloth, dowers etc., and said: 4 0 
auspicious goddess, be the prop of all. You will be adored by the Muni 3 , Manus 
gods, adepts and men. During the four days when agriculture is prohibited, 
ortthe occasion of the construction or consecration of a house or entry therein, 
in matters relating to the cultivation of fields or construction of pools and N 
ponds you will be adored by gods, etc,, by my boon. Fools who will abandon 
your worship will go to hell.’ The Earth said, ‘ By your command, Lord, I 
shall easily sustain the universe including inanimate and animate, objects. But 
I shall not be able to bear on my bosom the painful burden of pearls, shells, 
S'iva’s male organ, stone, conches, candle-lights, gems, diamonds, pearls, sacred 
thread, flower, book, leaves of the holy basil, rosary, camphor, wreath of flowers, 
gold, bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine or bile of a cow, sandal 
loaves, and tho water of the feet of S'algr&ma, 71 


42-46. Tho Lord said, “ Fair one, any one who would cast those thing 9 
unto your soil will, for a celestiai hundred years, bo implicated into the cob-web 
of Time.” 1 ON&rada, the Lord having finished his speech, the valorotfs Mangala 
came out of the womb of the Earth. Tho gods, at the command of Hari, then 
worshipped the goddess Earth according to the rites prescribed by K&nwa- 
S'akha. Having uttered the fundamental mantra, they presented to her due 
offerings. Since that day she has been worshipped throughout the world.” 


47-52. Narada asked, “ Etard, what are her Dhy&m, hymn and mantra ? 
I am curious to know these secrets of the Puranas.” N&r&yaiia said, “ The 
Earth was at first worshipped by VarAha, then by BrahmA, then by Prithur&ja 
and afterwards by the Munis, Manus and men. TIrim, S'rlm, Klim Sw&hii is 
the Mantra by which Visnu first worshipped the Earth 4 1 adore the goddess 
who is white like ehampaka, equal in beauty to a hundred Moons, anaointed 
with sandal-paste, decorated with ornaments, full of oceans, dressed in a 
garment bright like fire and vested with a smile. Every one worships her with 
this Mantra. Now I describe to ys>u her hymn as stated by Kanwa-S'&kha. 


53-64. 4 0 winsome nymph, you are tho source of victory, the wife of 

Var&ha and the vehicle of victory. Give mo victory, I pray. 0 auspicious 
cue, you are the harbour of universal good ; good is the sole object of your 
care ; your are a digit of good. So, 0 goddess, give me good. You are the 
support, the germ and energy of ail things. Give me the things that I desire. 
You are holy and eternal. You are the abode of sanctity. Holy men reside 
in you. Give me sanctity. 0 asylum of gems’, you are full of gem3 ; you 
wield oceans that hold gems; you are a gem among females; you possess gems 
and you bestow gems. Y6u are an asylum of crops; you own the treasure 






PRAKRITl-KIIAN DA. 


■Sl 


of crops ; you bestow crops; yon ere fnll of crops and you are tho germ 
of crops. 0 Earth, you represent the wealth of kings and their pndo and are 
devoted to kings. Grant me laud.” Whoever reads this very sacred hymn 
rules the world for millions and millions of years. By the perusal of this 
hvmn, men acquire the sanctity which could be gained by the g 1 o an an 
are purged of the sins committed by tho misappropriation of laud. “ re 

likewise released from the sins committed by digging the earth on the days 
when agriculture is prohibited or the sins committed by the digging ot wells on 
the land of others or by the oelebrution of funeral ceremonies on tae land of 
others or by the discharge of semen on the earth or fixing thereon candle- 
lights. They also reap the benefits of a hundred grand liorse-sacriuces 
(Aswa-medha-Yajnas) performed by over-lords. 


CHAPTER I X. 

I- 10. Narada said, “ 0 you proficient in the Vedas, wbat virtues are 

acquired by the gift of land* What are the sins committed by digging wells 
on land of others or by the performance of funerals on the iam o o ioi.. or 
by the discharge of semen on the earth or by fixing a candle- lg i ou re oni ^ 
Please describe to me these sins and other sins also and a =o eu remer jes. 
Ndrayana said. “Any one in India who gives to a Brahmin devoted to 
Sandhyi land measuring twelve fingers will surely go to the Visnu-loka. 
Any one who gives fertile land to a Br&hmin v.ill go to the a ovc sacre an 
and remain therefor as many years as there are atoms m t c an gr.eu y 
him. Whoever gives to another, whoever accepts from another a vi a 8 e \ an( 
or paddy is released from sins and dwells in the Vaikunt.a or evow Q- 

ever Countenances the gift of land goes to the Vaikuntha wit 1 m - ,i ® rKJ3 an 
relations- Whoever misappropriates land, the subject in-utor o ns own 
gift or tho gift of any other person is in plicated in the cob-web of lime as 
long as the Sun and the Moon exist ; and bis sons, grandsons*etc., being deprived 
of land, prosperity, son and wealth, go to the hell called Kauiava. \ noe\er 
obstructs the passage of'cattle and then makes a gift of crops etc., is consigned 
to the hell called Potter’s Cooking Utensil, (Kumbhip&ka) for a 1.0 years. 

II- 21. Whoever dispenses with the use of cow-pens, pools, etc., and then 
makes a gift of crops etc., dwells in the .hell named Asipatra for a period 
coextensive with the lives of 14 Indras. Whoever extracts soil from the pond 
of others and then dedicates the pond lives in the Brahma-loka for a number 
of years equal to the particles of sand or dust in the pond. A foolish man 
who, without offering funeral cakes to his landlord, performs the funeial cere¬ 
mony of bis father surely goes to hell. Whoever fixes candle-light on the 
earth becomes blind and attains blindness for seven births consecutively. Who¬ 
ever places conches on the earth becomes a leper in his next birth. Whoever 
places rubies, diamonds, pearls, gems and gold on the earth remains poor and 
attains poverty for seven consecutive births. Whoever places the male organ of 
S'iva and the Holy Stone on the earth is devoured by worms in liell for a hund¬ 
red Manwantaras. Whoever places the inscribed hymn, the water of the Holy 
Stone, flower or leaves of the holy basil ou the ground ,remains in hell for ten 
thousand years. Whoever places the rosary bead, wreath of flowers, camphor 











THE BRMIMA-VAIVARTA PURaNA. 


<SL 


or the yellow pigment of cow’s urine on the ground goes to hell. Whoever 
easts on the ground the sandal, the rosary of the harry and the holy grass 
remains in boil for one Manwantara. Whoever throws hooks or the scored 
thread on the ground is never born a Br&hnuin again and is guilty of the 
murder of a Brahmin l 1 ho sacred thread interwoven with a kuofc is adorable 
hy the Brahmins, Ksatriyas and other castes. 

t 22-28. On the oocadon of a sacrifice whoever does not ui>is£on tha 
earto with milk is afflicted at every birth and is churnei or whirled round 
with the currents of burning liquid proceeding from hot hell. Whoever digs 
the ground at the time of earthquake or oil the occasion of an eclipse is a great 
sinner doomed to bo a cripple or a deformed man in his next birth. The habi¬ 
tation of poopio is called the land. The Earth is called Vasudha as it gives 
wealth. She sprang from the thigh of Hari; hence the Barth U called IJrvi. 
She sustains all things', hence she is called Dharitri and D ha rani. She is the 
.prop of all sacrificial acts: hence she is called Ijfl At the time of partial 
disfiolu ion of the world she becomes emaciated. Hence she is called Ksuunt. 
At tlie time of the absolute dissolution of the world, she disappears ; hence 
s^ie is called Ksiti. She, being tho daughter of Kasyupa, is called Kasyapi. 
bho^is immovable, hence she is called AchalA,. She sustains the world ; hence 
she is called \ is wa mb hard. She is called Ananta, as she has endless forms 
ohe is fcue daughter ofc Prithu and is expansive; hence she is called Prithivi. 


0 H A P T E It X. 


I- 10. Narada said, />4 0 best of those who know the Vedas, I heard in 
detail the lovely narrative oE the Earth. Now narrate in detail the account of 
Ganga. flow did the chaste G mg&, residing at the foot of Visnu, the image 
of Hari, by the curse of Saraswati descend to India ? By whom was she 
sent here and at whoje instance? I am anxious to hear this holy, sanctifying 
and auspicious account of: Ganga.” NArayana answered, 4 ‘Sagara, the best 
oi kings, of Solar race, had two beautiful queens named Vaid-irbhi and S'aivya. 
In course oi time, S'aivya, the wife of the king (Bagara wlio was truthful, 
devoted to holy rites, curious to know the truth, who was justice-loving and 
Was attended by six attendants including the minister) gave birth to a lovely 
son named Asamanjft. His second wife, Vaidflrtbf, with a view to got a son, 
adored S'ankara by whoso boon in course of time she became pregnant and, 
after th* lapse of a hundred years, she gave birth tc a fetus or lump of flesh 
at whose sight sho was aggrieved, recollected S'iva and began to weep 
again and agains 1 hereupon 8'ambhu appeared in the form if: a Brahmin 
and divided the lump of flesh into 60,000 pafts. Each part was turned into a 
valiant son effulgent like the midday Sun of summer. 

II- 20. Encountering the angry glances of Kapila, the great, saint, they 
were at once reduced to ashes. The king hearing this wept for a long time 
and, unable lo restrain his sorrow, breathed his last. The prince Asamauja 
thereupon engaged himself in devotion for a lakh of years to bring down 
Ghng& and tyen died a natural death. His sou Asmum&n and after his death 
his sou Dili pa, and after his death, the Ulossel and wise Vai§niva, B hag i rat ha, 
the son of Dili pit,, free from death aad decrepitude with the same object iu 





gave themselves up to devotion for a lakh of years successively. Bhagiratha 
then beheld Krisna, the Eternal Being, withltwo hands, youthful, dressed like 
a cowherd, and wieldiug a form out of compassion for His worshippers. Lie 
is self-willed, perfect and is always adored by BrahmA, Visnu, 8'iva and the 
Munis. He is unmixed with anything, witnesses every act, is free from 
attributes, smiling and cheerful, kind to His votaries, clad iu dress pure like 
fire and decorated with gems. The king, when He saw His indescribable 
form, bowed to Him again and again. 

21-30. After that, Bhagiratha wanted a boon from the Supreme Being 
for the redemption of his nice. Then Krisna, the Supreme Being, remembered 
Gangil who appeared and bowed to Him ; and she stood before Him with folded 
palms and began to adore Him with her body fluttering with raptures Then 
the Lord, when He saw her lovely image, said, 4 0 goddess, by my command 
go to India and there redeem the sons of Sagara By your touch and by 
contact with your watery particles, they will be consecrated, assume celestial 
forms and riding on a celestial car, they will come to my abode, and after 
having get rid of the sins which they acquired in millions of years, they will 
remain with me as my attendant, free from all calamities. It is written in 
the S'rutis (Vedas) that by the touch of the Ganges and the wind saturated 
with her particles, the sins committed by a person in millions of births are 
removed; and the religious sanctitdes of a person are increased ten-fold. On 
an ordiuary day, t on a day marked by no religious festival, ablution in the 
Gauges removes the sins voluntarily committed by a person in millious of 
births, including the sin of tho murder of a Brahmin. 

31-40. 0 goddess, the Vedas, the sacred scriptures, Brahma, Visnu, 

and S'iva cannot adequately describe the nature of the religious sanctify acquired 
by a dip in your holy waters. 0 graceful goddess, hear of the Suukalpa, 
(avowal of a purpose to perforin a ceremony> made by a person with a view 
to bathe in your water on ordinary days. A dip in your water by immer¬ 
sion, even on ordinary days, gives religious sanctity, tea-fold ; bath on the last 
day of tho lunar month is thirty times more sanctifying ; a bath on the lunar 
day of the dark night (Amavasy&), the day on which the Moon comes in between 
the Sun and the Earth so that the three are in a straight line is as sanctifying 
as the above ; and bath on tho day of D&ksin&yana Samkr&nti is twice as much 
sanctifying as above; and bath on the Ut tar-&y alia Sankranti is ten times as 
much sanctifying. In the performance of the vow of the austerity that lasts for 
four months called Ghaiur-m&sya on the lunar clay of the full Moon, and on 
the Aksay& the benefit of the bath is eternal. The gift of anything on these 
days incases the religious ellicacy times without number. Bath ju the 
Gauges and gift on ordinary days yield a huudred-fold fruits. 0 goddess, ab¬ 
lution and charity (gift) on the days*of Manwanfara, M&ghi Ram-navaral bring 
equivalent fruits. And charity and bath on the days of Nanda, DasahrA. and 
VArani bring equal fruits ; and on the festive day of Maha-vAruni, four-fold 
fruits. Ablutibn on the occasion of tho Moon eclipse or the San eclipse is 
millions of times more sanctifying or meritorious. 

42 - 53 . On the occasion when the Sun rises out half, for instance, when he 
just emerges out of the horizon, the bath in the Gangos is a hundred times more 


i r. 








• misT/f 


THX BRABMA-VA1VARTA PURANA. 

» 


sanctifying than the* bath|during tho Sun eclipse. There is an avowal of pur¬ 
pose for ablution in this river; but the case is different with the Vaisnavas* 
The Vaisnavas are thoroughly disinterested. They aro redeemed in their life¬ 
time ; they simply desire to have faith in me mad cherish love for me. He into 
whose ears the Guru poured Visnu’s incantation or Mantra is redeemed 
in his life-time according to the Vedas and is regarded as the best of the V ai§- 
navas. As soon as he fakes the above Mantra, he redeems a hundred ancestors 
in his paternal line and a like number in his maternal line, his mother, mother’? 
mother, sistor, brother, sister’s son, maternal uncle, father-in-law, mother-in-law* 
preceptor^ wife, the teacher who imparts knowledge, friend, servant, pnpil, 
tenants along with himself. He is emancipated in his life-time. His touch 
consecrates all the shrines, temples, and places designed for pilgrims, India, 
nay, the earth herself. The food and water not dedicated to Visnu are just 
like ordure and urine. They are not taken by the Vaisnavas who eat only 
things dedicated to him. 

54-70. The touch of such Vaisnavas consecrates even the resorts for 
pilgrims. Any one who drinks the holy water of their feet is able to expel 
sins as the Divine Eagle expels the snakes. Their very sight purifies the 
three worlds; and Verm’s Sudarsaoa wheel preserves them constantly. The 
men who are felicitated and weep with joy at the recital of my eulogies are the 
best the Vaisnavas He who loves me more than his son and dedicates 
his house etc., to me is the best of the Vaisnavas. The Vaisnavas 
realise the fact that from Brahm&, the best of my worshippers up to 
a bush, all things, animate and inanimate, have sprung from mo, and 
that I am the soul of tho world. Countless universes, Brahmas, Visnns 
and S'ivas merge in me at the time of the Eternal dissolution of tho 
world; and those who realise this fact are the best of the Vaisnavas. Those who 
comprehend that- alt objects of Nature spring from me and ultimately dissolve 
in me, that I am full of ray own will or pleasure, void of determination and 
property and that I wield a bright form out of compassion for my votaries are 
truly the best of the Vaisnavas.” Then the goddess Gang& of three courses 
reverentially bowed low and thus answered, £ 0 Lord, if I have to descend to 
India by the curse of Sarasawati, or at your command or as a Result of the 
asceticism of Bhagiratha, the best of kings* the sinners will cast into ray 
waters their sins. Lord, how can X then be redeemed ? Universal Lord, how long 
ahall I remain in India and when shall I see your lotus-feet again? 
Lord, you are omniscient and represent the inner soul of all persons. You 
know my mind: graciously answer the questions that I have put to you. Ivrisna 
«aid, “ 0 goddess, 1 know your desire. The Lavana-ocean that is the image 
of Kudra will he your husband. This ocean has sprung from digits. 
You a^e also the likeness of Laksrai. Such a combination of clever persons will 
be fraught with excellent results. The junction of other rivers of India (in 
your company) with the said Ocean will be very delightful to him. 0 goddess, 
by the odrse of Saraswati, yon shall have to remain in India for 50,000 years. 
You will enjoy the bliss of amorous intercourse constantly with the ocean, as 
both of yon are very jovial and witty. Indians will adore you with the hymn 
composed by Bhagiratha and reverentially worship yon. 

71-81. Any one who will worship and adore you according to the Dhy&n 
m prescribed by Kauthura-sakha will unquestionably reap tho benefits of 








PR A KRITI-K U A N PA. 



i-medha or grand horse-saorifice. At a distance o£ a hundred yojana from 
yon, any one who pronounces the name of Gang&, Garsg& will be relieved 
from all his sins and go to the Vi?nu-loka. The sins accumulated by you 
by the ablution of sinners in your waters will be removed in a moment when 
yon will see my worshippers.' 0 Ganga, you with remain will fearaswatl and 
other rivers in those places where my names and virtues are recited with a 
view to absolve people from sins. These places will be turned into shrines. 
The toqch of the dust of such places will purify the sinners who will, arter 
their purification, remain in the Vaikuntha for numberless years. Whoever, 
after recollecting'me, will in a state of consciosness die in your waters will go to 
the Vaikuntha and permanently live there with my attendants. He will witness 
countless absolute dissolutions of the world. By virtue of his numberless reli¬ 
gious merits bis ashes will bo thrown into yonr waters. So long as his bones 


remain in your waters, he will remain in the Vaikurifcha. Afterwards I wiL 

J . 7 .. .v. !• iL. J.:CC_ l _ 


& vU..,£» l U Hi J wui ni'vwiwj ... ~ • 1j\ 

make an array of my body, (disposition of the different members of my body) 
take identical forms at one aud the same time, give him the fruita of 
his actions, grant him the redemption of S&rupya, i.e., invest him with ®y 
own form and make him my attendant. 


82-21. If .any one unconsciously touches your water, he will also attain 
the same form and be my attendant If any one dies elsewhere after remem¬ 
bering yonr nama, he will also ottain SArupya and merge in me for countless 
periods of world’s dissolution. In a place void of GangA, if any body dies 
remembering me, he will get the redemption of SAlokya as long as BrahtnA 
exists. If any body who worships me partakes of my offerings and dies whe¬ 
ther in a resort of pilgrims or otherwise, ho can easily sanctify the three worlds 
and mounted on a car of gems, he goes to tbo Goloka. The relations of tnj 
worshippers are also meritorious. They also ride on a precious car and go to 
the Goloka. 0 chaste one, whoever dies in the presence of ray worshippers in 
a conscious or unconscious condition is consecrated in bis life time. 
ing, Etari addressed Bhigiratha thus “ Iteverentia lly adore and worship Gang A. 
Thereupon Bhagiratha worshipped her according to the DhyAn and hymn 
prescribed by KaathumvS'&kha. Then both Ganga and Bhagiratha adored 
Krisna, the Supreme Being who disappeared. 


92-97.» Narada said, “ 0 you best versed in the Vedas, please tell me 
every thing in detail about the Dhy&u, hymn and form of worship adopted by 
Bhagiratha.” NftrAyana answered, “ People should, at first bathe, and beiug 
pure in body aud mind, and clad in a pair of washed clothes, they should worship 
six gods, vis., Ganesa, the Sun, the Fire, Visnu, S'iva and S'mY Then they 
will^bo entitled to perform religious rites. They should worship Ganesa, to re¬ 
move obstacles: they should worship the Sun to destroy sins: the Fire, for self- 
purification : Visnu, for redemption: S'iva, for knowledge aud S'iva., for 
wisdom. Transgression of this rule is fatal. 0 Narada, listen to that sancti¬ 
fying DhyAn prescribed by Kauthuma. 


98-108. Goddess Ganga is white like the Cbampaka and kills sins; she 
sprang from’the body of Krisna and is His likeness. She is very chaste and 
clad in dress pure like fire. She is ornamented with gems and is graceful like 
a hundred full moons. She is smiling in aspect, cheerful in m;eo, aud has 




TIL E- BRABMA-VAlVARTA PURANA. 


& 


asting and perennial youth: she is beloved of a N&r&yima, of tranquil disposi¬ 
tion and is vested with good fortune. Her chignon and neck are decorated 
with jasmine-wreath : she is very lovely on account of the marks of the sandal- 
paste and vermilion which sho wields. Leaves annotated with musk grace her 
•cheek. Her lips shame the Bimbas , hence they are lovely, Her teeth are beau¬ 
tiful like pearls. Her eyes are full of arch glances and very charming. Her 
breast hard like the Eael is decorated with a row of leaves. Her thighs 
are graceful like the plainfain-trce. Her feet are like land lotuses/ 
ornamented with gems, annointed with saffron and painted with lac-dye. 
It seems that they have become crimson by contact with drops of ambrosia 
emanating from the wreath of Mand&va (Parijat. or coral) which decorated 
the head of Indra. The pair of her blessed feet which are graced 
with oblations of water offered by the Munis and the gods and which adorned 
with the heads of devotees resembling a swarm of bees gives redemption to pious 
men and heavenly enjoyments to the worldly minded people. The goddess is 
•Supreme and grants boons. She is always disposed to favonr her worshippers. 
She can bestow even the position of Visnu and she herself is an outcome of the 
feet of Visnu. 

109-120. 0 Brahmin, by the above process of mental representation 
the goddess of three courses should be worshipped with sixteen ingredients, 
viz, mat or carpet (used as a seat), libations of water for washing the feet, 
the same libations mixed with holy grass, and rice otc , bathing ingredients, 
ointment (oil etd.,) frankincense, sucritioial offerings, betel-leaves, cold 
water, clothes and ornaments, wreaths, garlands, incense, materials for rmsiag the 
mouth and lovely bedstead. 0 N&rada, now I am going to describe to you the 
conversation which took place between BrahmA. and Visnu regarding Gauge’s 
hymn, as narrated by Ivautbunia. BrahraA said, 4 0 Lord of the universe, husband 
of Laksrnt, kindly narrate to me the hymn of GangA, the sanctifying goo doss 
that sprang from Visnu’s feet.” N&r&yana said “ Both Kriisna and R&dha 
melted like water at the song of S'iva ; and I bow to Ganga, the outcome of 
that liquid, with folded palms. I how to Ganga who took her birth in the 
beginning of creation in the presence of Siva iu the Goloka in the sphere of the 
R&sa. 1 bow to Ganga who manifested herself on the lunar day of K&rtiki- 
PurnimA in the grand festival of RadhikA surrounded by cow-herds and cow- 
hordessos ; that Ganga who has encircled the Goloka to the extent'of a crore of 
Yojans in breadth and a hundred thousand times as much in length : that GangA 
who has encircled the Vaikuntha to The extent of sixty Yojati3 in breadth and 
four times as much in length, that holy GangA who has encircled Brahma-loka 
to the extent of twenty lakhs of Yojans in breadth and four times as much in 
length. 

121-130. I bow to that celestial GangA who has encircled the S'iva-loka 
to the extent of a lakh of Yojans in breadth and live times as much in length. I 
adore the Ganges named Mand&kini in Heaven, who has encircled the Indra- 
loka to the extent of six Yojans in breadth and ten times as much iu length ; 
the world-sanctifying goddess who has encircled the Druva-loka to the extent of 
a lakh of Yojans in breadth and seven times as much in length ; the GangA 
who has encircled the Moon to the extent of a lakh of Yojans in breadth and 
j?ix times as#much in length; who has ebcircled the Bun to the extent gf 








imsr/ty 



PRAKFdTI-KHANDA. 


Yojans in breadth and ten times as much in length 



who has Qooiroled 

the Satya-ioka to the extent of a lakh of Yojans in breadth and six times as 
much in length ] who has encircled the World o£ Devotion iTapfcioka) to the 
extent of ten lakhs of Yojans in breadth and five times as ranch in length ; who 
has encircled the Jana-loka to the extent of a hundred Yojaus in breadth and 
seven times as much in length ; who has encircled the Kadlasa to the extent 
of a thousand Yojans ia breadth and seven times as ranch in length. 

131-140 1 adore that goddess called Bhoga-vati in the P&tala, extended 

over an area of ten Yojans in breadth and ten times as m^ch in length. I 
bow to the goddess who has enoircled the Earth to the extent of at least two 
miles in breadth and is celebrated by the name of Alak-naod&, the goddess 
who is white like milk ia the Satya-yuga, like the Moon in Treta, like tile 
Sandal in DwApara, and who is fall of currenls of water in the Kali yuga ; the 
goddess who assumes different forms in different places, and who has the lustre 
of milk in Heaven. I bow lo the goddoss whose p rowess is .incomparable, a 3 
held by the Par&nas and the S'rutis ; who takes away sin and imparts religious 
merits. .0 paternal grandfather, £ bow to the goddess the touch oi. whoso 
particles of water extinguishes the sins commited by l>rahrain-slaughter and 
other sins accumulated in ten millions of years. 0 Brahmin, I have just 
described to you an oda to Ganga consisting of l^ L b lokas 'which germinates 
virtue and destroys sins. Whoever worships the goodess every day and reveren¬ 
tially reads the hymn, no doubt, reaps the benefits of the great (royal) horse- 
sacrifice. A son!ess man thereby gets a son; a wifeless man gels a lovely wife , 
a diseased man is cured ; a prisoner is set at liberty t a man of no fame gets 
revown ; an illiterate man becomes learned : his bad dreamy also yield good 
fruits; and he gets the same reward that could be secured by bathing in the Ganges. 

141-145. N&r&yana said* ‘0 N&rada, Bhagiratha, after having adored 
her thus, took her to the place where the sons of Bagara were reduced to ashes 
by the curse of Kapila. These sons, by the touch of Ganges breeze, were at 
once redeemed and went to the Vaikuntha. Bhagiratha^ brought to the earth 
this river of three courses; hence, she is called Bhagirathi. I just told you the 
saactifyiug and redeeming account of GangA in detail. What more do you 
want to hear ? N&rada said, What happened to Lord Krisna and R4dh4 
when both of them were liquified by the spell of S'iva’a song ? What happened 
to those who were standing close by ? Please narrate these poiuts in detail.” 

146-151. Nar&yana answered. ‘On the K&rtiki lunar day of PurpmSsl 
and on the occasion of the grand festival of JT&dhA, in the sphere of the 
h&sA, Krisna ad.red RudWt and passed His days merrily in her campany. 
Thereupon the gods with BrahraA and the saints including kanaka also 
worshipped her. The goddess Saraswati began to play upon her lute and 
sweetly* recited the virtues of Lord Krisna. Brahma was pleased with the 
song and presented to her an invaluable garland woven with excellent gems 
which had liitlerto decorated his own head. Lord Krisna gave her the best of 
gems eaPe I the Kaustubha ; Radial likewise gave her an excellent garland 
of gems Vianu gave her a breath of wild flowers; Laksmi presented to her an 
ear-ring in the form of a fish. 

152-161. DurgA, the primordial Nature, made her the rare gift or faith 
in iiari. The Fire god presented to her a piece of cloth puie like lire. Dhaiw 







TEE BRAHMA-VA1VARTA PURANA. 




gave her virtue fame and a religious turn of mind. The Wind-god gave her i* 
pair of anklets made of gem. At this time, JS'iva, at the instance of Brahm& 
began to sing pleasing songs of Krisna calculated to produce in the mind rap- 
tures in relation to the R&sa. Whereupon the gods lost their consciousness 
and became motionless like pictures painted on the wall. They recovered 
after a while and observed the sphere of the R4s&. That sphere, later on, 
was deluged with water and became void of Radh4 aod Krisna. At tki3 ex¬ 
traordinary sight, the cowherds, male and female, the gods and the twice-born 
saints began to weep loudly. Brahra& realised the fact by meditation that 
Krisna with R&dhfi, bad been liquified ?md this incident took place with the 
approval of Krisna. Then the gods including Brahoa4 adored Him thus 
“0 Lord, manifest to us your image as desired by us. 1:1 Thereupon there was 
a sweet voice from the sky which wa3 audible to all this r ‘ O gods, I am the 
Eternal .spirit; and R4dh4, too, who wields a form out of mercy to her wor¬ 
shippers represents my energy. It is needless for us to assume forms. The 
Manus, men. Munis and the Vaisnavas being consecrated by my Mantras will 
be able to come to the Goloka to obtain a glimpse of our sight. 


162-170. 0 gods, if you are determined to see me, let S'iva carry out 

one of my commands. 0 Brahmft, you are the dispenser of fate. Please 
request S'iva, the preceptor of the world, to compose a particular S'&stra (holy 
scripture) and the Vedangas. The &'4stra should be such as to be able to fulfil 
all desire : it should be full of wonderful Mantras; it should prescribe the me¬ 
thods and order of worship, hymn, meditation, amulet etc. You should care¬ 
fully preserve my Mantra, amulet and Dhyan, Only one poison out of a hand- 
rod or thousand persons will adhere to my tenets ; and men of his type will be 
consecrated by my Mantras and thus be able to attain my proximity. If os hers 
come bore, every thing in Rrahm&'s creation will be ineffectual or rendered 
fruitless. There are live kinds of people in the world ; ei*., those who respec¬ 
tively live on Earth, in Heaven, in the P&tal, in the Brahmadoka, and in the 
Goloka, which last is the report of the Vaisnavas. First do promise before this 
godly assembly to perform the work assigned by mo. Then yon will be able 
to see mo. 


171-179. When this voice was heard, BrabroA, the lord of the universe, 
cheerfully told S'iva about, it. The great philosopher and the lord of wisdom 
S'iva, thereupon, took the Ganges-water in the folds of his hands and promised 
thus? (i With a view to carry out the Lord’s command, I shall compose su 
excellent S'&stra dealing with the illusions of Vi$nu and relating to incan¬ 
tations, Mantras, etc., and thus constituting the essence of tho Vedas. Who¬ 
ever perjure*'* himself with the Ganges-water in his baud is implicated in the 
cob-web of time as long as BrabraA exists.” 0 . Brahmin, when S'iva said so 
Krisna manifested Himself th ere along with EAdhA, When the gods saw the 
Supreme Being, the gods with great glee again began to perform acts of festi¬ 
vity. In course of time, Lord Sarabhu lighted up tho lamp of the S'Astras 
as promised I have just described to you tho rare, abstruse and mysterious 
subject desired by you Ganga is the outcome of the liquid that flowed from 
the bodies of lUdhA and Krisna at the Goloka. She, /.<?., Ganga gives redemp¬ 
tion and faith. The Supreme Lord has deputed her to different places. She 
is tho likeness of Krisna and worshipped throughout the world. 







PRAKR1T1-K BANDA. 



OE'APTE B X I. 

1*24. Nkrada said, “ After the lapse of 50,000 years of Kali, where will 
this most blessed goddess Gangs! go to? Please toll me this m ot;ul ; 
Nrtr5yana answered, “ By the will of God and by the onrse of Vani, she will 
descend to India; and when the curse is over, she will go back to the /auunttia. 
Sara swat!, Pudmd, and Pagha will go back to’Hari after the curse .sever. 
Gang?*, Saraswati and Laksmi are the three wives of Han. The b ruti holds that 
Tals! is his fourth wife. H&rada said, “ How did Gaug4 become the favorite 
spouse of Hari ? ” NkrAyana answered, “ Ganga emanated as liquid from the 
bodies of Badhft and Krisna. She had her genesis at tbo Qoloka. Bbe sprang 
from the digits of Badhfi. and Krisna ; hence she is their likeness, bhe is the 
oresiding deity of the waters. She has an incomparable beauty, a never-fading 
youth; she is decorated with gems ; her face is like the autumnal lotus bloom¬ 
ing at noon. She is lovely ; her colour is like that of heated gold- She baa 
the grace of a hundred Moons. Sho has a refreshing aspect and is virtuous ; 
her thighs are fleshy and hard ; her breast is thick, curved, elevated and hard ; 
her eyes are full of lovely and arch glances. She wields a wreath of jasramo 
flowers. Her forehead is marked with sandal-paste and vermilion. Her neok 
is adored with leaves annointed with musk. Her lips are crimson tike Bauihtt- 
ka flowers. Her teeth are bright like seeds of pomegranate. She puts on 
clothes bright like fire and dresses herself with the ends of her cloth Jiod m 
front into a knot upon the waist. Excited with lust, this goddess concealed 
her face and obscuring the face of Krisna with her glance, looking at Hun 
•with wrapped attention), she sat down with pleasure on Hia left side. VY ittmt 
winking, she began to drink the honey of His face with her eyes. She constantly 
smiled. Her mien was cheerful. The passion which animated her heart and 
impelled her to enjoy the fesh society of Krisna reduced hor to this condition. 
The grace of His body entirely subdued her and sho was about to faint; when 
R&dha suddenly turned up with millions of cowherds, graceful like countless 
Moons. Her face was flushed with anger; her eyes looked like red lotuses. 
H&dhikk who was beautiful like the white Champaka, whose gait was gentle 
like that of an elephant, who was decorated with precious gems and who put on 
a yellow ojoth, bright like fire, tied into a knot round her waist; whose loot, 
like lotuses, were coloured red and decorated with oblations presented by 
Krisna, with gentle steps descended from the car of gem. Her female 
attendants flourished the chowrie or fly-brush and served her. Beneath the 
partings of her hair, her bright forehead was marked with sandal-paste and 
vermiliou. Hor body was shivering with rage. At the same time her chig- 
gon covered with the garland of Parijkta, her nose and lips began to shivor. 

2.V30. She went and sat down on a diamond-throne by the side, of 
Krisna. Her attendants filled Krisna’s assembly. When Krisna saw hor, Ho 
got up reverentially and affectionately and sweetly greeted her. The cowherds, 
panic-stricken, bowed low and adored her. The Supreme Being also worship¬ 
ped hor : and Ganga, frightened, got up from her seat, accosted her and modest¬ 
ly enquired into her welfare. But, through fear, the throat aud palate of 
Ganga were dried up. Through moditation, she took shelter in the lotus feet 
of Krisna. Krisna, knowing her fear, fixed Himself in her heart, cheered 
her Up and encouraged her. Thus she became consulate. 









THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA . 


31-41. After a while, Granga looked up and saw U&dhika seated on a 
throne and effulgent with the glory of Brahma. She is the Eternal cause of 
countless worlds and yet young like a girl of twelve summers. She is matchless iu 
grace and -virtue;*tranquil in disposition, enchanting, having endless forms, with 
no beginning or end, lovely in appearance and refreshing in mien. She is ail 
good, chaste, blessed and devoted to her husband. She is a paragon of beauty 
among damsels, half: of the body of Krisna and equal to Him iu valour, age and 
grace She was worshipped by her consort as Mah&-Iiuksnn. She was full 
of radiance which pervaded the whole Divine assembly. She was constantly 
chewing the betel-leaves, (rare to o I hers,) offered to her by her maids. She is 
the Eternal goddess, blessed, honoured and exacted respect from others. She 
is the presiding goddess of the life of Kriana and the image oE Laksmi, His 
spouse. The goddess GangH was not satiated sufficiently with the sight of' 
RAdh& the mistress of the tt&sd and, without shutting her eyes, she be^an to 
drink, with her eyes, as it were, the beauties of LvidU&. At this time, 0 saint, 
Kftdh&r, modostly and sweetly addressed Krisnu thus. “ 0 Lord of my life, 
who is this auspicious nymph that lustfully * and with Hushed eyes is sitting 
by your side? She ‘almost faints with felicity c nisei by the sight of your 
beauty and, conceding her face with clo'h is beholding you again and 
again. 

42-50. You are also excited with passion and smiling. • Iu my very 
presence, you indulge in vile tendencies. But, belonging to the female sex, 

I am simple at heart and exonse you through l*>ve. . 0 licentious Being, get out # 
of the Goloka with your dear wife. Otherwise,* you will come to grief, fn 
the sandal forest, you wore united with Vir .j^ where at^the request of my 
maids, I oxousod you. There you got a hint of my arrival and instantly dis¬ 
appeared. Vi raj top, quitted her body. committed suicide) and took 

the form of a stream. This river is one crore of Yojans in breadth and four 
times, as much in length. She exists still as a mark or demonstration of your 
good fame. When Viraja was*turned into a river, I went horns. Then you 
went to her and loudly cried out “ VirajA! VirajA ’ The accomplished 
ascetic lady Vtrajacame out of the waters with a form covered with ornaments 
and showed herself to von. You embraced and impregnated her. This 
accounts for the genesis of the seven oceans. 

51-58. I have also seen that in the forest of Champaka you were 
united with a cowherdess named S'oblm. As you heard the sound of my foot¬ 
steps, you disappeared ; and S^obhA quitted her b)dy and wont to the sphere of 
the Moon. Her body was turned into a tender light and you, with a broken 
heart, distributed that light among gems, gold, diamonds, women s faces, ex¬ 
cellent clothes, silver, sandal-paste, leaves, ripe-fruits, crops, holy temples and 
royal palaces. I have also seen that you were united in the and of Yria- 
d&-vana with a cowherdess named Prabha. As you perceived my approach, you 
disappeared. Prabha quitted her body and went to the sphere of the Sun. 
Her body was turned into valiant lustre. Then yon went t> that place, began 
to weep out of love and wielded the lustre in your breast. But afterwards 
through fear and shame, you quitted the lustre and distributed it severally 
among the fire, the kings, the men, the gods, the robbers, the snakes, lhe 







mtsr^ 



PRAKRrri'KH AND A, 


% 


Brfthmins, the Munis, iha devotees, fortunate women and celebrated personages. 
Thereupon you were prepared to weep. * 

03-74. In the sphere of the tUsa you were like wise united with a 
nymph named jS'&nfci. In the month of spring, decorated with lovely wreaths, 
annointed with sandal-paste, adorned with gains and ornamefits, you enjoyed^ 
her society in a diamond temple lighted by lamps. Lord, the lovely & aut* 
chewed bet el-leaves offered by you ; and she offered betel to you, which you 
ate. But as 3oon as you heard the sound of my approach, you vanished.. 
too, dying, m^gcd iu you, and her body was turned into excellent virtues. 
Then you wept and out of love distributed those virtues severally among ^ dis¬ 
passionate people, the virtuous Visnu, the chaste and pious Laksml, the daisna- 
vas, the anchorites, virtue (Dharma) and pious men. I have already seen you 
(annointed with sandal paste, in bfeaatiful dress), fainting on account of the ejt- 
cos • of joy which you felt in the society of a cow-herdess named iv^aina 
who was likewise oinamerded with gems, annointed with sandal-paste, lynig 
down in sweet repose on a flowery bed and giving you a warm embrace. It was 
J who roused you both to consciousness, reineinbor. I took away your yellow- 
dress, your lovely flute, wreath of wild flowers, the Kaustubha gem and tue 
diamond ear-ring. But at the request of my maids and out of love re¬ 

turned them to you. Oat of shame, you turned black and still you are black. 

75-84. This nymph, in mortification, quitted her body and went down 
to the earth where her body was turned into excellent attributes. J.hen 
vou wept and affectionately distributed the attributes m different forms among 
Visnu, the Vaisnavas, the religious men, virtue, weak men, the anchorites, the 
gods and the savants. Lord, I told you everything. Do yon wish to near 
anything more ? 1 know your other attributes also, feo saying a wi 

eyes red like lotus attempted to address the abashed Qaug&. u )> atep 
Gangd realising the feelings of LUdha disappeared from the assembly and en¬ 
tered into the mass of waters#- The adept Ll&dtia also realisec } mom a i 
oondition of (Tanga and (prepared to drink up the a!l-porvading stream as it sljo 
were a handful of water. The adept Gang* happened to know of her ‘^termi¬ 
nation and, to save herself, she entered into the lotus-feet oi K r «?? a - 1 " e " 

it&dha searched her in the Goloka, the Vaikuntha, tlie Brahma-loka, bu. con 

not find her out. 

85-90. For scarcity of water, the Goloka lotuses were dried up and « 
water-animals almost lost their lives. Thereupon, Brahma, S iva Visnu, Ananta 
Oharma, the Sun and, all other gods ; the Manus, the .non and the adept ascett* 
with throats parched up for draught with thirst came in a body to the Goloka 
and worshipped the Super-natural, Eternal Being, Ivrispa. krisna is adorable 
and the'source and author of all boons. Ho is void of_ determination ^djmage. 
unmixed with everything and without any support, Ho is void of qualities without 
determination and'inco^tible. Be is self willed, and takes a km out of 
compassion for H is vatorics. He is eternal the likeness an< lord tro h and 
the witness of every act. He is supreme, the great Lord, the spirit nmv rea . 
All bowed to Him low and worshipped Hint. 

91-104. With a mind quivering with emotion, with streaming eyes, they 

all beg«n to adore Him thus -.—The effulgent Supreme Brahma is the final cause. 

16 






THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PUR AN A. 


<SL 


He enjoys the breeze of the fly-brush farmed by the cow-herds who are seated 
on excellent diamond thrones. Being surrounded by millions of cow-herds, He 
always witnesses the lovely dance of the milk-raaids. His body is annotated 
with sandal-paste. He is decorated with gems. He is dark like a new cloud, 
tender in age, clad in yellow garments. He looks like a shephered boy aged 12 
years. He has the grace and radiance of ten rmllons of Moons ; He is eclipsed 
by His own glory ; hence He is lovely and enchanting. He has the charm of 
crores of Cupids. The smiling milk-maids behold Him constantly and, gor¬ 
geously clad, drink His beauty as it were with their eyes. He lives in the 
heart of Radh& dearer than His life ; and He taste the fragrant betel-leaves 
offered by her. He is perfect. The gods beheld Him every-where in the sphere 
of the B& 3 &. The Mm is, men, adepts and devotees were astounded at the 
sight. They discussed the matter among themselves and they requested Brah- 
to reveal their object or purpose to Krisna. Thereupon Brahraft went to 
Kri?na and saw that Vi§nu was seated on His right hand arid S'iva, on His left 
hand. Then they saw that the sphere of the UHs& was full of Krisnas 
who were all happiness and joy ; and all were similar in dress and position. 

105-122. All had two hands each ; and each had a flute in his hand ; the 
diadem of each was adorned with the plumage of a peacock. Each was decorated 
with the gem calltd Kaustubha. All of them possessed lovely structures and were 
tranquil in appearance. &11 were equal to the Supreme Lord in points of virtue, 
ornament, beauty, valour, age, grace, garment, fame, action, form and curvaturo 
or bond. They were all perfect and vested with Divine attributes. It was im¬ 
possible to say who was the master and who was the servant. Krisna was at 
times full of incorporeal light ; at other times, He assumed a form. On other 
occasions, Ho was with and without a form at one and the same time. At one 
time there was only one Krisna with only one li&dha : at other times, there were 
distinct Krisnas seated with distinct R&dh&s. At one time Krisna assumed 
the form of R&dhft ; and, vtce-versa, R&dha assumed the form of Krisna on 
other occasions. This sight did not enable Brahma to make out whether the Sup¬ 
reme Being was male or female. Then Brahma by meditation adored Krisna 
centred in the lotus of his heart and expressed his own inferiority to Krisna in 
various ways. Later on, by the command of Krisna, the four-faced Brahma 
opened his eyes and saw only one Krisna planted in the heart of R&dh&.. He 
was surrounded by His retinue, the cow-herds. At this sight Brahmk and others 
cheerfully adored Him again and again. Then the omniscient Lord, the soul 
and Lord of all, the efficient cause of the universe, having realised their 
intention spoke thus: <c 0 Brahma, 0 Visnu, have you reached hero 
safe? “O S'iva, come here and may you all live in happiness l You 
have come bore to fetch Ganga. But Ganga through fear has taken refuge 
in my feet. Radha was about to drink her up as a handful of water. So 
$he has come to me. I am just going to release her from my feet ; but, 0 gods, 
cheer her up.” Brahma having heard this began to adore the all adorable 
Ii&dh& with a smiling aspect. The dispenser of the four Vedas, the four faced 
BrahmiL with his four mouths, with a modest inclination of his head adored her 
thus; “ 0 goddess, at the sphere of the Rasa when both you and Lord Krisna 
were spelbbcund by the song of S'iva, Ganga came out of your person in 
the form of liquid. Gang& is the product of the digits of you both. Therefore 
she is a dear to you as your daughter. Let her worship you by taking yonr 




tiwsr* y 



PRAK U1T1-KHAN£)A 


J 


123-126* a 0 goddess, you are the imago of that all pervading R&dhA who 
liives in the Goloka. AmbioA, her offspring is therefore called her daughter.” 
KAdhA, when she heard this, smiled and promised to condone GhmgA’s fault. 
Then GaogA emanated from the nails of the morn hers of the foot of Krisna, 
Afterwards the tranquil Ganges, the presiding deity of the water, got up and 
took her seat in a condensed form in the midst of the assembly. BrahmA took 
some water and poured the same in his wooden water*pot. S'iva put some 
water on the half Moon fixed in his head. 

12 7-137* Thereafter BrahmA gave RAdhA's Mantras to GarigA, related 
to her the hymn, amulet, DhyAn, method of worship appropriate to RAdhA and 
instructed her with regard to the Paras-charana (repetition of the name of a 
deity attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc). Gang A worshipped RAdb& 
and went to the Vaikuntha. 0 saint, Laksmi, Saraswatl, GangA and X'ulst 
are the four wives of NAr&yana. Then Krisua smiled and explained to BrahmA 
the revolution of Time, incomprehensible to the ignorant. Krisna said, “Q 
BrahmA, Visnu, Mahesa, you had better accept GarigA. Now just listen to me 
about the period of the time that has elapsed since your arrival here. You and 
other gods the Munis, Manus, adepts and devotees at present dwell by my 
side in the Goloka which is not affected in the least by the operation of 
lime. 1 his is why you are still alive. But thn is the critical time of the 
absolute dissolution of the world. The whole world has been deluged. The 
universe including BrahmA and others has merged in mo. Behold, 0 BrahmA, 
the whole world excepting the Vaikuntha has been deluged with water. There- 
fore go back and create the universe again. Other worlds with other BrabmAs, 
I also propose to create. Therefore go back soon with the gods. A single wink 
of ray eye causes the downfall of ouo BrahmA. In this way, countless Btahta&s 
have disappeared.” 

13d-l4i. 0 saint, the Lord of RAdhA having said so entered into his 

seraglio; and the gods also returned and took part in creation. GangA, the 
goddess, pervaded the GolokA, the Vaikuntha, the S'iva-loka and the Brahmu- 
loka and, by the command of god, occupied the plaos 3 which were her former 
resorts. She came out of Vi§riu’s feet; hence she is called Vianu-Pudl. I 
just told you the pithy, pleasing, sanctifying, excellent account of GangA in 
detail. Now what do you want to hear more ? 


0 H A P T JB R XII. 

1-1?. Nirada said: “0 Lord, Lakgmt, Saraswatl, the world-sanctifying 
GangA and Tulsi are the four wives of NarAyana. I heard they went to the Vai¬ 
kuntha; but I do not know how they became his wives.” NarAyana said, (i When 
Ganga went to the Vaikuntha, Narada followed her and addressing’ the Lord 
of the universe spoke thus:— “This goddess sprang From the bodies of IlAdhA 
and Krisna in the form of liquid. She is therefore the presiding deity of 
this element (water) and incomparable iu beauty. She has a pirpetual youth, 4 





THE RRAHMA-VA/VARTA PUR AN A. 


§L 


pure, free 
Him from 
of her on 


disposition and is a paragon of beauty. She is chaste and 
from anger and pride. She did not desire to marry any-one except 
whose body she came out. But the effulgent Ilk dh& was jealous 
this account. She was about to drink her up. Ganga was afraid and discreetly 
sought shelter in the feet pi Lord Krisna. When I found that the whole world 
was dried op, I went with a petition to the Goloka. Krisna, the soul of the 
entire universe,^ having perceived my intentions, released* her from the nails of 
the mom be re of His reet. I have filled this Golcka with water by giving Gangfl 
the Mantra of R&dha and after having bowed to Krisna have "brought her 
here. 0 witty Lord, you appreciate wit and you are the lord of gods. Marry 
this jovial damsel according to the Gandarva rites. You are a gem among 
gods; and she is a gem among nymphs and goddesses* Combination of a clever 
gallant with a clever sweet-heart is pleasing. Any one who shuns a damsel 
courting him voluntarily is forsaken by the goddess of fortune. A learned man 
does not despise nature ; as every man appertains to nature and every woman 
has sprung out of her digits. You are the identical Lord, having no beginning, 
void of attributes, super-natural, with two forms i.e., Krisna with two hands aud 
Visnu with four hands. R&dhA, in the beginning, came out of the left side of 
Krisna. As KamulA came out of His left side, so Ganga came out from the right 
side. Springing out of your body, she wants to marry you. Like Furusa (the 
Supreme Being) aad Nature, a man and a woman are indissolubly associated. n 

18-23. So saying Brahind handed her over to him and went away. 
Hari. then married her according to the Gandarva rites. He constructed a 
lust exciting bod annointed with sandal-paste and enjoyed the society of Gari¬ 
sh this goddess went to the earth and occupied her former position. But 
as she oame out from the feet of Visnu, she is styled Visnu-padt. The jovial 
Qang& almost fainted through the excess of enjoyments caused by associa- 
ation with her jovial Lord, but Laksmi was, by no means, jealous of her. 
V4nx was jealous of Ganga who, however, did not reciprocate the sentiment. 
When Ganga was married, Visnu had three wives. Subsequently, he had 
four wives, including Tulsi. 


OHAPTER X I I I 

1-6. NArada asked, “ How did the chaste Tulsi become the wife of 
jtfarayana ? In her previous life where was she born ? Who is she ? To what 
pedigree does she belong ? Whose daughter is this female ascetic? By the 
dint of what devotion did she attain NArAyana as her husband, a Being who is 
Supreme, super-natural, incorruptible, void of determination and omniscient : 
the supreme spirit who witnesses every thing, who is the form of all, who is 
the final cause, and who is the container and preserver of every thing ? How 
was she converted into a plant ? 0 solver of doubts, my inquisitive mind, 

curious to know ail these points impels me to put to you these questions. 
Kindly remove from my mind these doubts. 

7-ld. N&raya^a answered: (i 1 he Manu named Daksa-Sabarni who sprang 
from the digits of Vif?$u was famous for his good deeds and was virtuous and 
devoted to Visnu. His son was called Dharma-Sabarni. He too was a pious 
Yaienava, Be bad a pious son named Visnu-^barnt whose son, again, was a 





PR A KRI T!-K H A N DA . 


12 


severely. 



rescue went to the Vaikuntha where he was followed by S'ankura withdiis 
spear. Though fear the palate and throat of Brahma, Kasyapa and the ban 
were driejHp. Then they sought the protection of N&r&yana the Supreme 
Lord. They bowed to him again and agiiu and submitted to him the caufe 
of their fear. Hari graciously cheered them up saying, “ 0 frightened magna¬ 
nimous beings, be consoled ; you neod not fear anything while 1 am alive. I 
protect with my Sudarsana all those persons who remember me in emer¬ 
gency. 0 gods, I am the Supreme Lord; I create in the form of Brahma and 
destroy in the form of S'iva. I am the S'iva; and 1 am the Sun vested with 
three attributes. 1 preserve the world in vaiious forms- Gro hack cheer u ly. 
There is uo cause of fear. All will be well. n/ 

24-29. By my boon, upto this day, jou have nothing to apprehend 
from S'iva. This Lord S'ankara is the refugs of the virtuous. He is easily 
contented. He is the servant and the lord of his votaries and is great-minded. 
S'iva and the Sudarsana wheel are dearer to me than jay life. J nese two excel 
every thing in the world in valour. Mah&deva can easily create ten millions 
of Suns and Brahmas. Nothing is impossible with him. Because he is constantly 
devoted to me, he is void of consciousness with regard to external objects. W it.lv 
five mouths lie constantly recites my names and virtues and l also desire his 
welfare day jmd night. I favour people in the same proportion as they adore 
me. The presiding deity of .’good or virtue having worshipped me m the form 
of good is called S'iva (good) by the savants. 

30-32. While the Lord was'so saying, the red-eyed S'ankara arrived 
there, mounted on a bullock. Ho alighted hastily arid with a modest inclination 
of the head, bowed reverentially low to the tranquil, Supreme Being, ihe Lord 
of LakBtm seated on a throne of gem. 

33-45. 0 NsUada, that Being, who was decorated with diadem, oar-rings, 

wheel and wreath of wild flowers; who is dark in appearance like a new 
cloud- who is graceful and vested with fouv-hands : who is attended by his 
four-handed followers fanning the ohowrie or ihe tly-l.ru-h ; who constantly 
chews the betel presented bv his spouse Lakami ; who is always delighted with 
the dance and songs of the Vidya-dharis. who wields a form only with a view to 
show kindness to his votariesThis Being (Nurayaryi) was first reverentially 







THE BRAHMA-VA1VARTA PtJRANA. 


d by S'iva. Brabmk was saluted by S'iva next. The Sun and Kasyapa, 
that, respectfully saluted S'iva, S'iva worshipped Visnu, the Lord of 
all, and took his seat. Ihe retinue of Visnu then began to tend with their fiy- 
brnsh S'iva seated at re3t and relieved of the fatigues of his journey. S'iva on 
account of his* contact with virtues characteristic of Visnu assumed a cheerful 
aspect and with five mouths adored the Eternal Being. Thereupon N&r&yan* 
was highly gratified and, in that celestial assembly, thus addressed S'ankara 
with words lovely and sweet like nectar : 4 0 Mah&deva, you are the emblem 
of all good and welfare. To enquire into your welfare, therefore, is ridiculous. 
Out of deference to ihe rules of society and according to the method prescribed 
by the Vedas, I put to you the question. He who yields fruits of devotion 
and gives all prosperity ought not to be questioned with regard to his 
asceticism or material prosperity. You preside over knowledge : therefore, a 
question put to you with regard to knowledge is useless. You are free from 
all calamities. To question the conqueror of death, therefore, with regard to 
his immunity from danger is impossible. You have come to my hermitage. 
What can I ask you about matters concerning your arrival ? But why do you 
come here, so much agitated ? This question I can put to you ; and you ought 
to answer it;’ 

46-57. Mah&deva answered, 4 Lord, King Vrisa-Dhwuja is dearer to me 
than my life. The Sun has cursed him ; this is the cause of my hurried arrival 
here and my anger. Out of affection for my son, the king, I was about to kill 
the San who cursed him. But the Sun sought shelter with BrahmA ; and both 
have now sought your protection. Those who Take refuge with you even by 
word of mouth or by meditatiou enjoy exemption from fear and danger and 
conquer death and decrepitude. What to talk of those who personally 
seek your protection ? The recollection of Hari gives immunity from danger 
and causes all good. 0 Lord of creation, what will be the fate of my foolish 
votary who has forfeited grace by the curse of the Sun ? The Lord, hearing 
this, answered thus, <4 In half an hour which has elapsed in the Vaikuntfyn, 
tweuty-one \ r ugas of the Heaven, (Swarga) have passed away. Vripa-Dhwaja 
through the revolution of irresistible and dreadful time is dead. His son 
Hamsa-Dhwaja, deprived of his grace, also died in course of time. He has two 
sons named Dbarma-Dhwaja and Kttsa-Dhwaja who are groat Voisnavaa ; but 
they have, likewise, become graceless through the curse of the Sun, Deprived of 
their kingdom and prosperity, they prayed Kama!ft who, pleased with ' their 
meditation, will descend to the earth and through her digits, take her 
birth by turns out of the womb ot the wives of those two princes 0 S'iva, go 
buck ; your votary is dead. 0 Sun, 0 Brahm&, go back likewise.” So saying, 
the Lord with his consort wenFinside The gods with a cheerful heart went 
back to their respective hermitages; and Mah&deva also with a view to 
contemplation went to the perfect and Supreme abode. 

0 H A P T EE XX V. 

120 -. N&r&yana said, u Dhanna^Dhwaja and Ku»5a-Dliwaja adored Lak?« 
mi by austere devotions and gained their respective .boons. They got wealth, 
sons and the Kingdom of the earth by virtue of those boons. Mftl&vati, the 




after 




wife of Kusa-Dhwaja, in course of time, gave birth to a daughter who sprang 


ora Lak pirn’s digits, As soon as the girl saw the light, she was vested, with 


PRAKR1T1- KBANDA. 



profound wisdom, got up in the confinement room and commenced to reoite 
the Vedas. The savants called her VedavatL As soon as she was born, she 


bathed and went to the jungles for devotion. Kor one Manwantara, at the Pus- 


k&ra, she easily spent her time in devotion. She prevented every person from 
joining her and, devoted to Hari, went alone to the woods. By means of her 
devotion, her beauty increased with her youth and physical developments. 
Then, after the lapse of a Manwantara, as stated above, she heard a voice from 
the sky, Fair one, in the next birth, you will obtain as your husband Hari 
who can hardly be attained even by Brahma.” Hearing tin's 3he was much 
enraged and again absorbed herself in meditation in the solitudes of the Gundha- 
M&dana mountain* Thinking that the place was reliable or counting on the 
security of the solitudes she dwelt, there. Once upon a time, the irresistible 
RAvana appeared before her. Taking him for a guest, she greeted him with 
oblations of water for the feet and entertained him with delicious fruits and 
cold water. The sinner ate the fruits etc., sat by her side and said, “ 0 aus¬ 
picious girl, who are you ? Whose daughter are you ? u The vile monster 
when he saw Veda-vati blooming in her beauty like the autumn lotus, lovely, 
and with her breast elevated was excited with lust and, almost fainting, tried 
to ravish her by dragging her to his side, Veda-vati stupefied him with 
angry glances The sinner being paralysed was unable to speak anything to her. 
The sinner then contemplated JLakbsmi, the offspring of the lotus. The goddess 
was propitiated, restored him to his senses and again cursed him thus: “ For 

my sake, yon will be destroyed with all your relations. But as you have 
touched my body, behold, I am going to quit it” Bo saying, she died through 
the powers of her Yoga. Ravana threw the body into the Ganges and thought 
tine : 0 ! what a wonderful thing I have seen and what an improper act have 
I done I Thinking thus, he lamented a good deal and w’ent homo. 

21-29. This chaste woman was born again as the daughter of Janoka 
and was called SL& for whose sake Ravana was destroyed with all his 
descendants. But as a result of her asceticism she got the Eternal Hari, R&ma, 
as her husband and enjoyed his society for a very long time. She was 
conversant with the conditions of her previous birth and remembered the 
course or orde- of her antecedent devotions. But the enjoyments of her 
present life obliterated from her memory all traces of pain which she had 
experienced in her past life. The daughter of Janaka tasied the sweets of 
pleasure in the society of the young and graceful R&ma. Rama was virtuous, 
witty, tranquil, well-dressed and good-looking to women. She got the husband, 
as desired by her. Then the truthful Rama, to carry out the word of his 
father, went, to the jungles for a long time. Near the ocean, Sita and 
Laksmana were dwelling with R&tna, when Rama saw the Fire (god) in the 
guie£ of a Br&hinin* The truthful Fire-god was much afflicted at the 
sorrows of R&rna and addressed him gently thus: 

30-39. u Lord, I am going to tell you the future. The time has 
arrived when Sita would he stolen from you. Fate is indispensable. There 
is uo force like Providence. Therefore give my mother Sita to me; and keep 
the shadow of Sit& with yourself* At the time of the ordeal by fire, 1 shall 









THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PllRASA. 


<SL 


restore the real Slt& to you. Che gods have therefore sent me to you. I am 
not a BjrAhnain. I am the god of Fire/’ RAma when ho beared this did not 
say anything to Laksmana but with a heavy heart complied with the wishes 
of the Fire. 0 NArada, the Fire-god, by dint of his meditation, constructed 
an imaginary SitA virtuous like the real Sita and gave her to R&ma. The 
Fire-god requested Rama not to divulge the secret to any one, took SR A and 
went away. What to talk of others, even Laksunn a did not know anything 
about the matter. At that time RAma saw a golden stag. SitA affectionately 
asked RAma to go in quen of it. RAma deputed Laksmana to preserve 
SltA in that dense forest, followed the stag- and killed- him with a sharp 
arrow. Just before his death that fictitiotTs stag shouted “0 l aksmana, 
O Laksmana ” and with the spectacle and recollection of Hari who was 
standing in his presence expired. The treacherous demon forsook the form 
of a demon and riding on a celestial car went to the Vaikuntha. 

40-50. At the gate of the Yaikuntha, there were two door keepers 
named Jaya and Vijaya, Jay a was the stronger of the two and constantly 
guarded the threshold. By the curse of Sanaka and others, he had been 
bora as a ItAkaasa Nov lie quitted the body of a Raksasa and became a 
door keeper again. Then Sita, hearing the shout of Laksmana imitated by 
that demon, sent Laksmana in quest of Rama. When Laksmana went away, 
the haughty Havana stole Sita and easily cirried her away to Lanka (Ceylon"'. 
RAma, when he saw Laksmana coming, became very sorry, soon went back 
to the hermitage and could-not tindSitA. Missing Sita, RAma lamented bitterly 
and fainted. When he came to his Senses, he wandered through the forest 
in quest of SHA. In course of time, on the coast of the river, he got the 
message of Sita from JatAyu aud fastened («’*., constructed a bridge across) the 
ocean with the help of monkeys. With sharp weapons he killed Havana 
with all his kith and kiu and recovered the sorrowful Sit A. Rama soon 
prepared to test the chastity of Sit A by the ordeal of fire. Then the 
Fire-god restored the real SitA to RAma. The fictitious Sit A modestly thus 
asked Rama and the Fire thus: i4 Lord, tel! me what l shall do now.” The 
Fire-god said, “ Go to the Puskara for devotion by dint of which you wall be 
able to attain the dignity of the celestial goddess of fortune. 


51-54. Accordingly, at the said shrine, the shadowy Sit A by a course 
of devotion which lasted for three lakhs of years attained the condition of the 
Heavenly Lnk§ml. In course of time she emanated from the sacrificial pit and 
was styled Draupadl. In the golden age she is called Vedavati, the daughter 
of Kusa-Dwaja ; in the Treta, she descends as JSitA ; and her shadow is Dr^upadi 
the daughter of Drupada. As she exists in three Yagas, she is also styled 
Trihay ant. 


5*5-60 NArada said, 0 remover <F doubt, how did Draupadi get five 
husbands? NArayAna answered. “ When the real SUA at (Jeylon got back 
her husband RAma, the fictitious Sit A in the prime of her youth becatfie 
rather anxious. By the command of the god of Fire and Rama, however, she 
adored S'ankara. But being excited with lust she demanded a boon from cPiva, 
thus :—0 three-eyed god, give me a husband and repeated this statement five 
times. The merry S*iva smiled at her petition and said, “ You will get five 
husbands.” By virtue of this boon, the daughter of Drupada got five 













PEAK R1T1-K11 AN.DA 


husbands. 

narrative 


I just told yon the incident. Now please listen to the 



main 


61-6»). When Llama got back huia, he handed 6ver tho reins of the 
Government of Ceylon to Bibhisaua and returned to Ajodhy&. After that he 
raled India for eleven thousand years and then went to the Vaikunfcha with 
his relations. Vada-yati, the offspring of the digits of Kamalk ‘merged 
in Kamaia. O Narada, 1 thus related to you the holy narrative likelv to wash 
away sins and give religious pioty. As the four Vedas incarnate always vibrated 
00 her tongue, she was called Veda-vati. 1 told you the account of the daughter 
of Kusa-Dhwaja in brief. Now bear the story of the daughter of Dharma* 
Dhwaja, 


CHAPTER XV. 

N4raya ^ 8aid> “ Dhar ma- Dh wa ja, the King, had a wife named 
Madhavl who used to pass her days merrily by dalliance with her husband on a 
lovely bed covered with sandal and flowers iu the Gandha-raadan mountains. 
Her body was annointed with sandal-paste and full of fragrance caused by the 
wind that kissed the sandal and the flowers. Sho was a gem among women. 
The frame of her body was lovely. She was crowned with ornaments. Both 
the husband and the wife wero jovial and had a taste for amusement and a 
thorough knowledge of sexual soience. Their amorous pastimes went on 
continually. They were so much absorbed in pleasuro that though a celestial 
century passed away^ they had no idea of time. 

5-15. When the King came to his senses, he desisted from his lust- IJut 
the licentious Queen was not satisfied. JSho became pregnant and the concep¬ 
tion lasted for a celestial century. She became more and more graceful, day 
by day. On an auspicious day and moment, on tho lunar day of the Kartiki 
Purnim&, on Friday, she gave birth to a lovely, auspicious daughter who par¬ 
took of the digits of Laksmi. There were marks of lotus on her feet. There 
was the grace of tho celestial Goddess of Fortune in her person. She is the 
presiding goddess of Royal Fortune, Her face resembled the Moon of anfumn ; 
her eyes were the counterpart of blooming lotuses ; her lips, looked like Bimbas! 
Smiling she began to survey the room of confinement (where she was born;* 
Her hands and the soles of her feet were crimson ; her nave was deep and 
lovely. Above that, there were three folds or wrinkles close to the navel. 
Her buttocks wore round. Her body was delightfully warm in winter and 
cold in summer. She had huge loins, hard breast and a thin waist. The light 
emanating from her body encircled her like a halo. Her body had the hue of 
white Champaka and she was possessed of excellent hair. As 9he was a match¬ 
less beauty, the historians styled her Tolsi. As soon as she was born, dis¬ 
regarding tho remonstrances of others, 9he went to the Badri jungles for 
devotion, just like Goddess Nature deputed by Brahma, 

16-29. She resolved in her mind that Hari should be her husband and 
for a celestial lakh of years she prayed in tho said forest. In summer, she 
subjected heraelf to five kinds of heat: in winter sljo merged' in water ; 
and in the rainy season, she frequented the funeral grounds and was exposed 









THE BRAHMA-V AJVAMTA PUR ANA, 


<SL 


to tremendous rainfall. For 20,000 years ehe subsisted on fruits and water; 
for 30,000 years, she chewed rotter: leaves ; for 40,000 years, she subsisted 
merely on air ; and for 10,000 years she took no food. BrahmA, finding 
that she was beyond the range of vision and standing on one leg came to that 
hermitage to grant her boon. The nymph, when she saw BrahmA at that place 
mounted on a swan, bowed to him low, Brahma said, u Tulsi, crave a boon. 
X cna (?) give you faith in Ilari or emancipation or freedom from death and decre¬ 
pitude. ” * She replied 14 Lord, I tell you what I desire. You are all-knowing 
I cantvet feel any shame in revealing to you my heart’s desire. Formerly, I 
was a cow herdess in the Goloka. A servant ef Kri?na, I was constantly rn his 
service. In sprang from the digits of R&dhA and was her favourite companion. 
Once upon a time, I fainted through excess of enjoyments afforded to me by 
the society of Govinda in the sphere of the B&sa. Suddenly R&dha turned up 
and saw me in that condition. Blinded with fury, she rebuked Krisna and 
cursed me saying, ‘ Vile one, avaunt ; and take your birth as a human being.’ 
where upon Govinda told me, *0 cowherdess, by dint of your devotions in India, 
through Brahm&’s boon, you will attain the four-handed Visnu who is but n 
form of myself as your husband.” So saying he disappeared. Through fear of 
R&dha, I quitted my body and now I have been born in India. Lord, I wapt to 
have that graceful and tranquil NArftyana for my husband. I crave this boon.” 

30-40. BrahmA said, t; An outcome of the digits of Krisna, the valorous 
Sudama has taken his birth in India. In the Goloka, he was impatient with 
lust at your sight. But for fear of R&dhika, ho could not make yon any 
advances there. S'ankha-chucla who is conversant with the conditions of his 
former life, through the powers of his asceticism, will be able to obtain you as his 
spouse by my boon. Fair one, you, too, know the history of .your former life. 
Therefore wed him. Eventually, O nymph, you will attain NarAyana as your 
husband. By the dispensation of Providence, by the curse of NArynna, you will 
attain through your digits the form of an all-sanctifying plant (holy basil). You 
will bo the host of flowers and dearer to Visnu than his life. The workship of 
gods will be ineffectual without you. At Vrlnda-vana you will turn into a 
tree called VrindA-vani ; and with your loaves, the cowherds, male and female 
will worship Hari. In the shape of the presiding deity of the plant you will 
always enjoy the society of Hari in the guise of a cow-herd, by my boon. ” 
“Hearing this, Tulsi smiled and cheerfully addressed Brahma thus :—“ Lord, I 
desire, it is true, the two-handed dark-blue Lord Krisna ; and I do not desire the 
four-handed Lord to that extent.” 


41-51. But B3 I was disturbed in my sexual intercourse with Govinda, 
wbi’e my desire was not yet satisfied, so by the bidding of Govinda only, 
1 pray that I may bo married, to the four-handed Lord N&rayana. If, however, 
by your grace, I am to get Govinda again, then, first dispel by your boon my 
fear of RAdhikA. BrahrnA said, 44 1 give you this mystic syllable or Mantra of 
RAdhikA consisting of sixteen letters. By my boon, you will be like her life 
beloved to RAdbA who herself will sanction your clandestine intercourse with 
Krisna. Krisna will like you as much as KadhA. So saying the Lord of the 
universe instructed her wiih regard to the Parascharana, the Mantra of sixteen 
letters, the liymn, amulet and other forma of worship appropiiate to RAdhA 
and disappeared after blessiug her. 







PRAKRITI-KHA NBA. 


<8L 


hea TaSsi, according to Brahmas precept, in that Hermitage of Plums recited 
the desired Mantras of her previous birth. After twelve years' adoration, she 
became an adept. Whereupon she obtained the boon desired and reaped the 
fruits secured by very good luck, unattainable by others. She cheered up, as the 
troubles of her asceticism ended. When people gain their objects, the recol¬ 
lection of their past sorrows is also delightful to them. Tulsi ate and drank 
merrily and used to repose on a lovely bed decorated with flowers, sandal, etc. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

1-13. Nurayaria said, <s When the excellent Tulsi in the prime of her youth 
merrily spent her time, desiring all the while the society of Krifna, the God 
of Love Kama discharged five arrows at her. Tulsi annointed with sandal and 
covered with flowers was shattered by the shaft. She fluttered with joy ; her 
eyes became red. At times, she looked emaciated, in one moment she fainted, 
grew restless or drowsy. At other moments, she was excited or warm with 
lust. Now she fainted ; now she recovered and was afflicted with sorrow. At 
other times she got up from the bed, walked to and fro, sat down or lay down. 
This abnormal condition of her body and mind increased day by day. Her 
downy bed was turned into a bod of thorns ; the delicious fruits and water 
which she used were turned into poison ; her house became a desert ; her 
soft, delicate cloth became warm like fire; the mark of vermilion on her head 
was painful to her like a boil. In a moment, in a stale of coma, or while 
she was drowsy, she saw a well-dressed, smiling and jovial youth whose body 
was covered with gems # and annointed with sandal-paste. With his head 
adorned with wreath he beheld her face and with lustful words kissed her 
mouth and lips, again and again. On a lovely bed, ho enjoyed her society and 
embraced her. At times he wont away, but returned in a moment. Sha 
seemed to address him thus, “ 0 Lord of my heart, where are you going, stay 
a while. f Then she recovered from her fit and wept, again aud again. O 
Narada, Tulsi thus passed her days. 

14-24. On the other hand, the great devotee S'ankhya-chfida. having 
become an adept by virtue of his devotion to Kri$na at the Puskara, wielded the 
alLauspicious amulet and having obtained the boon after his heart from BrahraA 
came to the Hermitage of the Plums by (Badrik&srama) his command. 0 saint, 
Tulsi saw him approaching. He was in the j rime of his youth, valorous like 
Cupid, graceful like the white Champaka and decorated with gems. His face 
was like the full moon of autumn ; his eyes were like autumnal lotuses in full 
bloom; he was mounted ou a superb car; his cheek flashed with the lustre of 
the ear-rings ; his neck was adorned with Pflrijatu wreath ; his body was annoint¬ 
ed with musk and saffron ; and it was fragrant with sandal-pa.*te. Tulsi, at his 
sight, hid her face and with a smile cast slanting glances at him. She blushed at the 
idea of the first interview and bowed down her bend abashed. The lustful Tulsi 
drank the lotus of his face, as it were, with her eyes. S'ankha-chuda also beheld 
the handsome girl seated on a lovely bed covered with flowers and sandal. 

25-31 Her loins were fleshy and hard ; her teeth had the splendour of 
paarls ; her lips wore like Bimbis: her noso, very graceful • the colour of her 










body was like that of heated gold. She looked like the autumnal Moon. 
She attracted the mind by the splendour of her own lustre and was very lovely. 
Below the partings of her hairs, cue mark of sandal-paste with the mark of musk 
and, below that, the mark of vermilion considerably added to her grace, Her 
navel was low and yet deep. Below the abdomen, the three folds of wrinkles 
were prominent * The paling of her hands were red like lotus and graced with 
ahining nails ; her feet were radiant and crimson like land lotuses and coloured 
with lac-dye. The nails of the members of her feet were also like lotuses. In 
a word, she was covered with lotuses. Her bright nails surpassing in beauty 
the Moon of autumn gave her a matchless charm. She wore a valuable 
chain of diamonds. 

32-40. She was decked with excellent, jingling ornaments ; and her chig¬ 
non was decorated with jasmine wreath. Her cheek was adorned with ear-rings 
having the cut of a fish. An excellent diamond-wreath decorated her breast. 
Amulet, bracelet and lovely ornaments for arras made of conches adorned her 
frame. Her fingers were decked with rings of gem. When he saw tho 
lovely maiden, he addressed her thus “ 0 blessed nymph, whose daughter are 
you f And bow have you come hero to this forest to confer all sorts of bless¬ 
ings on people ? 0 honoured damsel, you are the visible representation of 

celestial happiness and sexual enjoyment; and you are the best of women. You 
are a paragon of beauty and can cause bewilderment among saints. Why are 
you silent, 0 graoioue lady? Accost your servant with the melody of your 
speech.” Hearing this, Tula! of charming eyes, excited with passion, with 
an inclination of her head add ratted him thus:— 

e 

41-51. 4 * I am the daughter of Dhannadhwaja. I dwell here to practise 

nsceiiotsm. Who are you ? A good man, if ho sees a virtuous woman alone, 
does not talk to her. Q-o away wherever you please. The S'rutis hold that 

only a vile man desires a woman. For she is sweet at first, but afterwards 
proves fatal to him. The mouth of a woman rains honey, but her heart is like 
a jar full of poison. She uses sweet words; but her heart is keen like a razor. 
She has an eye constantly fixed on her own object (or the main chance) on ac 
count of which she is submissive to her hus baud. Otherwise, she is disobedient 
Her face is cheerful, but her mind is unclean. Her character cannot be fathomed 
by the Vedas or the Pttr&nas. No wise man believes a vile woman. No oua 
is her friend or foe. She always desires a new lover, A woman when she 

sees a man well-dressed, desires him at heart; but, outwardly, she displays her 
chastity or modesty. Naturally, she is lustful, harbours lust and enchants the 
mind. Outwardly, she conceals her lust and is very modest ; bat she is ready 
to swallow her lover, as it were, if she finds him in secret. A woman sows the 

seed of quarrel, looks offended for want of sexual intercourse, is afraid of oxoess 

and at the same time grieved with moderate enjoyment. 

52'60. A woman like9 an accomplished gallant more than sweetmeat or 
refreshing water. She loves a man expert in matters of lust more than her 
/son. He h dearer to her than her life. A woman regards an old or impotent 
man as her enemy and is always ready to fight with him in a fit of rage. Like 
a lizard who sucks the blood of a cow, she sacks his blood on several phas. 
$he is the embodiment of rashness and a mine of vices. She is hypocritical, 



MIN ISTfy 


PRAKRITI-KHANDA. 




and 


gods. 


treacherous. Her beauty enchants even Grahm& and other 
obstacle to the path of devotion, a hindrance to em- 
ancipauuu, m impediment to Hari’s faith, an asylum of all delusion and is a 
living chain which ties mortals to the sea of the world She is practically a 
sorceress (a magician) and represents vile desire. Apparently, she wields beauty ; 
but inwardly she is like a cup of ordure, urine, foul fume and polluted blood. 


61-72. Providence, while creating her, designed that she should prove 
to be the spirit of delusion to the deluded and chat she should administer poison 
to those who desire redemption; in fact, she is a creature who should, on 
uo account, be desired and by all means be shunned.” O.N&r&da, S'ankha-ehuda, 
when he heard her words, answered thus with a smile:—' 51 0 goddess, your word* 
are not wholly untrue. A part of your statement is true and a part, not true. 
God has divided the fair sex into two classes, vis,, those who are chaste and those 
who mav be easily seduced. The chaste woman is praise-worthy ; the unchaste 
one should be condemned. Laksmt, SnraswatS, Durg&, SifcA, fUdh& are 
not the creatures of Brahm&j the women who are the outcome of their digits 
are chaste/ Such women are worthy of praise and celebrity and the source 
of all welfare. S'ata-rupa, Tulst, Aha!y&, Vedavati, Gang.*,, S'aehi, Afaaly& 
etc., are celebrated as virtuous or chaste women. In every age, they are born 
as such. 


73-80. The Heavenly prostitutes and the Earthly whores, concubines eto., 
are unchaste. They are not worthy of praise. A woman vested with the attri¬ 
bute of Satva (virtue) is naturally good and pure. Savants call her chaste. 
KrityA women are of two kinds, via., those who are respectively vested with 
the principles of activity and ignorance. A Krity& woman (one who can easily 
be seduced) vested with the attributes of activity, preserves her chastity for 
want of opportunity or place, through absenob of her gallant, through disease 
or bodily pain, on account of her association with virtuous people, owing to her 
habitation in an ovor-crowded place, through fear of enemies or the king. 
Savants regard such a woman as belonging to the second class, lhe Krityft 
(a woman who can be easily seduced) in whom the principle of ignorance is 
predominant belongs to the lowest class. She is irresistible. A virtuous man 
does not court the wife of another in public or in private; but I have come to 
you by Brahma’s command to marry you according to the Gandharva rites. 


81-97, I am S'ankhya-chuda, the demon, the enemy of the gods. Before 
this birth, i,e , in my previous birth, I was a cowherd named Sudama, one of 
the eight celebrated cowherds of Goloka. Now, by R&dh&’s curse, I have 
turned into a demon. But through Krisna’s grace I know everything. I 
know the history of my previous birth. You, likewise, know your own history. 
The society of Hari which you enjoyed led to your birth in India by R&dh&’s 
curse. I wa 3 desirous to enjoy your society in the Goloka but I was not suc¬ 
cessful in my design through fear of Ii&dh&.” 0 Muni, Tulst, when she heard 
these words, smiled and cheerfully thus spoke. ‘Learned people like you are 
admired even by savants and loved by ladies. You have defeated me in argu¬ 
ment*. A man subdued by a woman is unholy and contemptible. He is 
criticised by his friends, the Manes and the Gods, Jhis father umd brother, 
both mentally and verbally. When a child is born or a relation dies, the 






born people are purified in ten days; the Ksatriyag in twelve days.; the Vaisyas 
in fifteen days; and the S'ftdras in twenty-one days. The purification of a hy¬ 
brid takes place in the manner prescribed on the occasion of the death of a 
mother. Bat a man subdued by his wife remains always impure. He becomes 
only pure when he is burnt to ashes. The Manes or the Gods do not accept 
from him oblations, cakes, flowers etc. A man enticed by a woman does not 
stand, in need of discretion, devotion, offerings to fire, worship, knowledge and 
fame All this is ineffectual to him. I tested your knowledge simply. A 
virtuous woman should wed a man after having” tested him. Anyone who 
gives his daughter to a man unqualified, old, ignorant, poor, foolish v 
deformed, wrathful, foul-mouthed, cripple, blind, deaf, dumb, paralysed, im¬ 
potent, sinful, or recluse, (retired from the world) is guilty of Brahmin- 
slaughter. Anyone who gives his daughter to a Vaisnava well—talented, 
tranquil, learned and youthful gets at onco the benefits of ten grand horse-sacri¬ 
fices. 

98-105. Whoever sells his daughter in emergency or merely for the 
sake of filthy lucre goes to the Hell called the Potter’s Cooking Vessel where he 
has to eat the ordure and drink the urine of his daughter for a period covered 
by the regime of fourteen Indras, in secession and whore he is bitten by crows dud 
vultures. Thereafter the sinner is born as a fowlor and has to bear tbe burden of 
meat on his head and to sell meat.” When Tulsi said so, BrahmiX appeared there and 
was saluted by Tulsi and S'ankha-chada. Brahead then addressed them thus : — 
“ 0 S'ankha-clmdn, what were you speaking to.this girl ? Marry her accord¬ 
ing to the Gandarva rites. Yon are a gem among males; she is a gem among 
females. The union of a clover pair is delightful. 0 King, who can abandon 
happiness which is unqualified and indisputable ? Anyone who does so is a 
boast. 

106-115. 0 chaste one, have you examined your gallant who can subdue 

both the gods and the demons ? Be united, then, with this S'ankba-ehuda 
and enjoy good fortune and the happy gracos of your husband. Be united 
with him in the same manner as Itohini is united with the Moon, jpati with 
K/hna, Arundhati with Vasisfcha, S'achi with Indra, Ahalyft with Gautama? 
TftrA with Vrihaspati, S'atarupa with Manu, Aditi with Kasyapa,* Deva'jSeoa 
with Kartika and Murti with Dharma. 0 beauty, wander, here and there, at 
wih with your handsome gallant for ever. When your husband dies, you will 
go back to the Goloka and get Krisna as your husband.*’ So saying and 
blessing thorn both, Brahmd went back. Where upon the pair were married 
according to the Gandarva rites. 

116-125. Anon, there was a beat cf drum in the Heavens; and there was 
a rain of filcwers from the sky. The demon S'ankya-ebuda began to enjoy 
the society of his love. The chaste Tulsi fainted through the pleasures of the 
new love and was immersed in that lovely place in sensual enjoyment. S'ankba- 
chuda who was well versed in sexual science, by the conjunction of the diffe¬ 
rent members of the body, experienced sixty-four kinds of pleasure prescribed 
by th% science. At one time be took Tulsi covered with floweis and annointed 
with sandal-paste to a place redolent of flowers and at other times to the 
coast of the river or to a lovely grove and there enjoyed her society on a flowery 




prakmti-khanda. 


§L 


bed. The pair o£ lovers, expert in matters oE last, did not rest day and night. 
Talsi attracted the mind of her lord who in return deprived her of her conscious¬ 
ness. As a result ot mutual friction, Tulsi took away the sandal marks rom the 
arms and the sandal-paste from the breast of the demon who, in retain, ook 
away the vermilion-mark from her forehead. He hurt her breast with his 
nails. She impressed his left shoulders with her ornaments. 

126-132. He bit her lips. She bit his cheeks. After that, their sexual 
intercourse ended. Later on they got up from the bed and dressed themselves 
Tulsi annointed her husband's body with fragrance, put a mark on lus forehead 
with sandai-paste mixed with saffron and gave him a pah o o o i js pine i o 
fire, pleasing Parijata flowers, a valuable ring and costly gems, bho then 

addressed him saying; u Lord, I am at your service, k’o saying, sic egati 

to drink, as it were, the lotus of. his face with her arch glances. 

133-156. The demon smiled. He looked at her face veiled 

with cloth, kissed her oheek and lips looking like Bimoas and Ponied O 'er 
the cloth of which he had robbedVarana, the armlet which he bad tak J" 

BwahA, the car-ring of which lie had robbed llohmi, the rings_ of Katf the 

ornaments of conohos owned by Viswa-Karma a wonderful chum, a > “d 
different kinds of ornaments and thus pleased her. He arranged the a g on 
of his love and decorated it with garlands. He covered her cheek w i p e- 
turesque row of leaves and besmeared it with drops ot saffron a " d Kr fore , he ® d 
with vermilion bright like sparks of fire. He painted her lotus feet and the 
nails cf the member: of her feet with lac-dye. He then embraced he fee't and 
said: “ 0 nymph, I atn thy slave.” Afterwards both of them left the h rmitago 
and riding on a car of gem went to a different place 'lo several places, via., ho 
Malaya Range, the abode of the gods, the rook or ube va ey, 1I0 L > 
cavern, tha sea-coast, the lovely forest, the margin of the beau fu 1 Fujpa- 
bhadrd river, the middle of the river, the Gandha-tn&dan Range with foontarns 
resounding with the hum of bees, the Celestial Garden, the Naruian^the forests 
of the (Jhampak, the M&dhavt, the jasminb, the sacred pine or thei o- , the 
jungles of the lvalpa-treei or tha P&rij&ta, the lU-l otaro” l 10 , , ’ 

the Golden range, tire Golden woods, the forest ot KAnobi, reg'on of 
Kinchanaka (the mine of gold) the lovely region reverberating w .h the sound 
of cuckoos,) the licentious demon took Tulsi and cohabited with her on a lovely 
bed. Both of them remained unsated. Their desire increase,! ike fire cd 
with qhee. Later on this powerful demon went home with his wile and constructed 
a pleasure-garden. He enjoyed her and also the sweets of the' k» n g‘jom. ?Ana 
mighty demon ruled the gods, the demons, the Raksasas for one Alnnwantara. 
(equaUo the longevity of India or Mann). The gods, depnvsdof heir privileges, 
wandered, here and there, like mendicants. I he demon deprived them of then 
rights as regards worship, Horn (offerings of glice to the fare) etc., and took 
away by force their weapons and ornarrents. 

157-*65 Like pictures painted on the wall, the gods were dispirited a d 
with a heavy heart went to Brahma weeping. BrafamA went with them to 
Siva. Thereupon, S'iva, Brahma and the gods m a body went to the precious 
laud of the Vnikunt&a free from death and decrepitude. The door-keeper., they 
saw, were seated ou diamond thrones. They were clad in yellow dress and 












decorated with geois. Their nock was adorned with wreaths oE wild flowers. 
Their body was dark and very lovely. They looked very handsome like so 
many lotuses. They sustained conches, wheels, mace and lotus respectively with 
each of their four hands. Their lotus faces had three eyes each resembling lotuses, 
BrahtnH told them why he and the gods had arrived there and, with their 
permission, they entered. BrahmA saw that the town had fourteen gates. 
13rah in & etc. crossed the threshold and approached Hari’s assembly which 
was attended by four-handed attendants and godly saiuts. 

1(>G*173.* These attendants were equal to Hari in every respect and 
decorated with the gem called Kaustuhha, The council of Hari was quad¬ 
rangular, rather spherical, resembling the full Moon, inlaid with gems and cons¬ 
tructed by the will of Hari. There were millions of looking glasses, here ; and 
pearl, diamonds and pictures, there. There were a hundred stair cases cons¬ 
tructed of the Syamaotaka gems: and artificial lotuses made of gems contributed 
to the grace of the said staircases. The pillars were constructed with sapphire 
associated with knots of silken thread and decorated with leaves of, sandal, 
adding to the charms of that place. Some places contained golden jars full 
of water , others were decorated with wreaths of P&rijfita. The interior of the 
hall was besmeared with saffron, sandal and other sorts of perfume. The 
wind was redolent of the flower, sandal etc. The Vidy&-dhilris ((Temi-god- 
desses) were singing enchanting songs. 

174-183. The court or the council of Hari was 1,000 Yojans in circum¬ 
ference and full of attendants. BrahimV saw that Hari was seated there on 
a throne of gem and shone like the Moon surrounded by countless stars, lie 
w»3 decked with diadem ear-rings and a wreath of wild flowers. His four 
hands held the conches, wheel, mace and a sporting lotus. He looked lovely 
like a dark new cloud. His body was decked with precious gems and annoin- 
ted with sandal-paste. He was witnessing the dance and the song of the 
nymphs. His appearanoe was tranquil. Laksmi was pressing his feet. He 
was taking betel*leaves offered by his worshippers. Gang& was tending him 
with the Ohowri. His votaries were worshipping him with an inclination of 
their heads. The gods, when they saw the Supreme Being, fluttered with joy 
and wept for love. They bowed low rovorentially and worshipped him. Then 
BrahmA with folded bands informed him everything. 

184-188. Thereupon the omniscient Hari smiled and revealed to him the 
lovely mystery. He said * 0 Brahmft, I know every thing about S'ankha- 
ch&da. He is devoted to me and was a valiant cowherd in his previous birth. 
Listen io bis sanctifying history. In the Goloka, he was one of my best 
attendants named Sudani a. He has become a demon by B&dh&’s curse. Once 
in the Golaka, I quitted my beloved K&dha and wont to the Sphere of 
the Rasa. 

139-197, R&dha heard from a maid-servant that I flirted with Viraja, 
She was blinded with fury, went there, and seeing both of us, converted Viraj& 
into a river. But s eing that I disappeared, she again rushed home in anger 
with her attendants. Afterwards when she saw me silently seated with Sud&ma, 
she reproached us both. Sud&ma thereupon 1 lost his temper. She was like¬ 
wise enraged and rebuked Sud&rna in my presence. Sud&ma thereupon refca- 




lmsTfy 



PR A KRITi-K HA S DA . 



.. .led in a rage. Her eyes were red like lotuses. Highly agitated, she 
commanded that Sudilma should be turned out. Thereupon a 
sand female attendants <©f Rftdhfi got up and turned him out. Radha. at that 
time cursed him also saying $— 44 Thou shall be born as a domon. audauia, 
being cursed thus, bowod to me low and was about to<go away when Kauba 
was appeased and said. “ 0 my son, do not go away ; you bad better remain 
here. * With an afflicted heart, she also tried to follow him. 

198-203. All the cowherdessea there upon began to weep ; but I consoled 
them and restrained their grief. R&dh& said to Sud&ma: “ in half a moment, you will 
comeback to me/’ But, 0 BrabmA, half a moment of this Goloka is equivalent' to 
one Manwantara of the earth. That expert dissembler and devotee, the powerful 
S'ankha-chuda, will come back to the Goloka. Therefore 0 gods, hold this spear 
with which S 'iva will kill the demon. That demon holds on his throat my 
auspicious amulet, called the Conqueror of the World. So long as it decks 
his throat, no one can kill him. But I in the guise of a Brfthmip shall beg it 
from him. You have also granted him this boon that unless his wile’s modesty 
be violated, he can not die. I shull ravish his wife ; and then, he will ^surely 
die. Afterwards his wife will quit her mortal frame and be my spouse.” The 
Lord then gave the spear to S'iva and went inside. The gods inoluding Brah- 
m&, thereupon, descended to India, 


C H A P T ER XVII. 

I- 10. K&r&yana said, " Q great Muni, Brahma having deputed S'ivo 

to kill the demon soon went home. Later on S'iva, to preserve the gods, took up 
his abode at the root of the lovely fig-tree on the margin of the Chandra-bh%& 
river and having appointed Pu^padunta as a messenger after his heart, be 
gent him soon to S'ankha-ch&da, The messenger, accordingly, went to the 
capital of the demon. This city was better than Indra’s place and more pros¬ 
perous than Kuvera’s land It was five Yojans broad and ten \ojanslong. 
It contained seven inaccessible moats. It was-decorated with millions and 
millions of gems bright like fire. There were hundreds of shops full of articles 
of trade or marketable commodities. A hundred orores of celestial hermit¬ 
ages constructed with scarlet gems, inlaid with artistic devices and decorated 
with fancy articles lent a bouadiess charm to th it place. The Gaadarva saw 
that the palace of the detnou was spherical like the Moon It had four mo^s 
on each side resplendent like fire. It was surrounded by ramparts which 
touched the »ky. It was iuaccessible to the ecomieg, but offered no obstacle 
to anybody else. ^ 

II- 20. The twelve gates decorated with lotuses and looking-glasses 
made of gems were guarded by twelve door-keepers. These gates were decked 
with works of painting and statues constructed with bright and excellent gems. 
That place was guarded on all sides by very powerful, graceful, well-dressed 
,md tichly-ornamented demons holding celestial weapons in tbeir hands. 
P&spa-danta, when he saw them, first approached the main gate and saw that 
it was cheerfully guarded by a person armed with a gpear. He bad a fcidooua, 
tawny face. Puspadanta communicated to him bis design; and, by his per¬ 
mission, crossed v the threshold and went inside. He tvaa a war-ambasssador 

18 








THE BRAH MA-V AIV ART A PVR AN A. 


'tiL 


*ud> so, was prevented by none. He asked the door-keeper to communicate 
tie message to the King. The door-keeper went in and securing his permis¬ 
sion* ushered the Gandarva inside. There the Gandarva saw the lovely 
demon seated on a throne of gem, A golden umbrella or parasol was held 
over hja head by one of his attendants, 

21-25. His retinue were serving him by brandishing the fly-brush and 
fan. The demon S'ankba-chuda was clad in a tine dress, covered with wreaths, 
Annotated with perfume and surrounded by millions o£ demons. Armed de¬ 
mons were mounting guard, here and there. The Gandarva communicated 
to him the message of S'iva thus:—Lord, I am the messenger of S'iva. Listen 
to what he has said. 

26-29, 0 King, the gods sought the protection of Hari. You 

had better restore to them their kingdom and jurisdiction. Hari has given 
his own trident to S'iva and deputed him to the war. S'iva is abiding at the 
riot of the holy fig-tree on the coast of the river Ckandra-bh&ga. Either 
give the gods their dues or prepare for war. Please tell me what I shall 
say in reply to S'iva.” Hearing this, the demon burst into a loud fit of laughter 
and said, * Foil had better depart. I shall go to him to-morrow morning,’ 

30-38. The Gandarva went back to S'iva and communicated to him the 
message of the demon and gave him an account of his toilet etc. In the mean¬ 
time, K&rtika, Nandi, MahH-kala, Bana, Mani-bbadra, the dreadful eight 
Bhairavas, the eleven Rudras, the eight Vasus, the twelve Adityas, Indra and 
other gods, the Fire, the Moon, Viswa-karm&, the two Aswini-kum&ras Ku- 
reia, Yarna, Jayanta, Nala-Kuvera, the Wind, VaruPa, Budha, Mangala, Dhar* 
urn, S'aui, the powerful Kama, Ugra-ohanda, Kotfeari, the hundred-handed 
hideous Bhadra kAli, etc. all in a body catne to S'iva* 

39-68, Bhadra-k&li was seated on an excellent car, All her parapher¬ 
nalia, diess, wreath, etc., were red. She was dancing, laughing, singing. She 

was inspiring her adherents with courage and infusing fear into the mind of 

the enemy. Her rolling tongue and the skull which she held in her hand were 

a Yojan in circumference each She was armed with a trident, an iron spear, 
conches, wheel, mace, lotus, bow, arrows, dumb bells, thunder, scimitar, the 
weapons of Visnu and Vanina, the noose of snake, the weapons of Agni, N&- 
r&yana, Brabmk, Gandarva, Gariida, Pasupata, pestle for husking rice, shield, 
sti ff and other irresistible weapons. This dreadful goddess was accompanied 
by millions of female devotees and by countless hags. Kftrtika who was 
accompanied by ghosts, goblins, demons, who occupy the dead bodies of human 
beings, demons or false conceptions in the shape of pumpkin-gourds, Yak sag, 
Baksases, Kinnars (derai-gods), hags and female devotees bowed low to S'iva 
and, by his command, sat by his side. On the other hand, tho powerful 
S'anfcha-chuda went to his seraglio and informed his wife about the war. The 
palate, lips and throat of Tills! were dried up at the message. With a 
sorrowful heart, she addressed him thus, * O Lord of my life, 0 my beloved, 
please dwell in my heart for some time. You are the presiding deity of my 
life. Please preserve it for some time. Lord, bless my life by fulfilling my 
desire. With thirsty eyes, I may behold you. Lord of my life, my heart is agi- 
•fcted ; my zaiad ifi consumed with agony. To-day, at the latter portion of the 




WHlST/f 


PRAKRlTl-KIIAJOtA. 


night, I had a very bad dream.” The wise King of the demons, thereupon, 
ate and drank and addressed her, using truthful'and beneficial words thus: 

14 Queen, when the time for reaping the consequences of one’s act arrives, one 
experiences the good and the evil, pleasure turd pain, fear and sorrow. Wheu 
the tree puts forth blossoms, it is in time vested with a trunk and brings forth 
fruits and flowers. The fruitful tree, in time, decays: in this way, living 
beings spring and decline in time. Nay, 0 beauty, the whole universe flourishes 
and declines in time. In time, the creator creates; the preserver preserves end 
the destroyer destroys. This is the law of creation, preservation and destruc¬ 
tion. Therefore you should constantly adore Krisna who is the lord of 
Brahm4, Visnu and Mauesa; who is the creator, preserver and destroyer; who 
has neither beginning nor end ; who is independent of Nature. This lord 
Krisna has voluntarily created Nature with all animate and inanimate objects. 
All things from Brahma down to a grass are artificial and transitory. They 
grow and decay in time. So you had better adore the consort of R&dhu, who 
is distinct from the three attributes of Nature, who is the universal spirit, the 
image and the lord of all. Adore Krisna who in the form of waior creates, 
preserves and destroys water. Seek the protection of Krisna at whose com¬ 
mand the wind blows swiftly, the Sun gives boat in time, Indra pours raio, 
Death frequents living beings, Fire oonsumes, the Moon wanders in the sky. 
Seek that Supreme Krisna who is the death of death, the time of time, tlio 
Yaraa of Yama, (he creator of creator, the prosener of preserver and the 
destroyer of destroyer. My darling, no one is a friend of any body. Hari is 
the friend of all. Minister to Him, therefore. 

69-81. My beloved, who am I and who are you P By our karma, 
(fate,) Providence has united us. Providence will also separate us. Iherefore only 
fools are afflicted in danger. Wise men are never thus afflicted 
For pleasure and pain always revolve like wheels. 0 my dear, you will cer¬ 
tainly get N&r&yana as your husband, for whose sake you absorbed yourseh. in 
devotions in the Hermitage of Plums, or Jujube called \adarik4. Woman 
I have obtained you through the boon granted to me by Brahma. But you 
had turned a devotee for the sake of Hari; and you will get Goviada very 
soon at the Vrindavana of theGoioka; and I, too, shall go there by quitting this 
deironiac frame. At that place, we shall constantly behold one another. By 
the curse of R&dhii, I wa 3 born in the precious land of Indra. I shall go back 
to the Goloka, Therefore, beloved, do not worry on my account. You too 
will quit your body, and wield a celestial form; and, even as I go away, you 
will get Hari. Therefore, my wife, sorrow is useless.” The demon thus con¬ 
soled her ; and in the night, he entered the temple of gems lighted by dia¬ 
mond lamps. There, on a lovely bed, he slept and passed hi9 night in am¬ 
usements afforded the society of his beloved spouse. 1 hen the emaciated l^ulst 
overwhelmed with grief wept bitterly Whereupon the wise demon king 
clasped her to his breast and again consoled her by virtue ot his celestial know¬ 
ledge This excellent knowledge, Krisna at first gave him in the forest oi 
the holy fig-trees. This knowledge, calculated to relieve sorrow, ft ankha- 
chuda gave to Tulsi whose eyes and face thereupon flashed with joy. 

82-90. Regarding everything as transitory, she merrily .sported with 
her husband. The lovely pair were exhausted with their amorous diversions. 






WtNfSjjfj, 


THE BRAHMA V AIV ART A PUR AH A, 


0 saint, the pair, bent npoa sexual intercourse, with their bodies fluttering with 
joy, almost fainted through the excess of pleasure rendered by mutual association. 
Their bodies were so olosely united with one another that they looked like 
Hara and Gauri. At that time, Tnlsi and her husband regarded one another 
&s dearer than their lives. The well-dressed, handsome, sweetly reposing, 
nupdal pair at times felt drowsy; at other times through the raptures of sensual 
enjoyments, they felt quite exhausted. At one time, they were awakened 
to consciousness and took part in a witty, lovely and excellent 
conversation. At other times, they laughed and chewed betels of¬ 
fered by one another. At other times, they lovingly brandished or flourished 
the white Cliowri. Sometimes they slept ; at other times they got up and 
indulged in sportful games. In effect, both were expert in sexual intercourse 
from which none of them wanted to desist. Both became victorious in this 
game of lust ; and none of them was defeated even for a moment. 


OH A P T E R XVIII. 

1-1 2 . Nfintyana said, *0 N&rada, later on, the pious King of demons meditated 
Kristin and in an auspicious moment ho got up from his flowery bed and put 
off his night drosg. Ho then bathed, put on washed clothes, wielded bright 
9 aridal-rnark 3 on Ins body, finished his necessary riles and worshipped his 
tutelary deity. He saw curd, ghee^ honey, fri^d rice and other auspicious ob¬ 
jects. He then respectfully gave to the Brfthrains gems, pearls, gold, clothes 
etc., as usual. To make bis departure for war auspicious, ho gave a few pearls* 
gems and diamonds to his Guru and ultimately made a gift of horses, elephants 
and cows to the poor. He then gave to the Brahmins a thousand store houses, 
three lakhs of towns and seven lakhs of villages. He installed Su-ohandrahis son 
in the Raj and entrusted to him the care of his family, kingdom, treasury, 
subjects, wealth, store houses, (exchequer) conveyances etc , and armed himself 
with shield and arrow. With the help of his attendants he amassed a 
vast army consisting of 3 , 00,000 horses, one huudred thousand elephants, ten 
thousand chariots, three crores of archers, three crores of armourers and three 
crores of spear-holders and then appointed some hero as the general of the field. 

13-21. • He appointed Mah&ratha, the best of heroes as the Com¬ 
mander-in-chief of three hundred thousands armies (Aksaubints). An Aksduhini 
is a whole army consisting of 1,09,350 foct, 05,CIO horse, 21,8*0 chariots 
and 21,870 elophants. He ordered 300 Aksauhinls to beat the war dram and 
recollecting Hari came out of the pavflion. "The King of demons rodo on 
an excellent car and placing his Gurus in the van, ho went to S*iva. At the 
coast of the PuapabhadrA harbouring the inexhaustible banyan or auspicious 
bg-troe, there is a hermitage of adepts called Sidhwa-ksetra, It is a sacred 
place in India meant for die devotion of Knpila. It is bounded on the 
west by the Western sea, on the east by the Malay?* Range, on the south 
by the S'ri hill?; on the north by the Gandha-m&dan Range, The blessed 
PugpabhftdrA, is five Yojans in breadth and 500 Y plan's in length. White like 
crystal, this blessed river is the dear spouse of the Lav an a ocean and gives sanctity 
to people in India. This river rises from the Himalayas and being united with 
b'ar(i 3 vvati leaves the $oroftna range on the left side and unites with tho 







Western Ocean. The demon went there and saw S'iva (at the root of the holy 
fig tree), bright like millions of sun*. 


22-43. Effulgent with the radiance of Brahma, the smiling Lord had 
assumed the posture of meditation and was bright like crystal. He put on a 
tiger hide; he wielded the trident and the axe : and his head was covered with 
bright clusters of knotted hair. Each of his the faces had three eyes. He 
wielded round his neck the sacred thread of snakes. He was the death of 
death, the destroyer of the world and pre-eminently the Supreme Lord. His face 
was tranquil and lovely. He immortalises his votaries, gives fruits of asceti¬ 
cism and is the source of all prosperity. He wields a graceful form out of 
compassion for his worshippers and is the lord, the image and the cause of the 
universe. He destroys the world and rescues sinners from Hell. He also 
preserves the world and is-the final cause. The King of demons, when he saw 
the Eternal S'iva, the source and author of all knowledge, descended from his 
car and reverentially bowed to him low with all his army. He ihen likewise 
sainted Ehadra-K&li on his left side and I\&rtika in the front. They blessed 
him in return. Nandt and other adherents of S'iva got up and accosted 
him in a manner suited to the occasion.. The King of demons also commaned 
with them and sat beside S'iva who also cheerfully greeted him and spoke thns :—• 
u The religious Brahm&, the father of Dharma, who is the dispenser of. the 
world bad a Vaisnava son named Marlohi who begat the pious Kasvapa, 
Daksa, the Lord of creation, bowed f o Kasyapa and gave him thirteen daughters, 
(ie. married them to him). Out of these girls, the chaste Danu \va < the most 
blessed. She gave birth to forty sons celebrated as Danavas. Out of these 
sons, Vipra-chitti was the most valorous, pious and devoted to Visnu. He 
begat Lambha. Dambha secured S'ukra as his Guru and after having rdored 
KrjfU'ft for a lakh of years at the Puskara was, by the boon of Kri^na, able to get 
a son like yourself. In days of yore, in the Goloka, you were the most pious 
of the eight cow-herds of Krisna. By RAdluVs corse, you have attaiead the 
condition of a demon here. Yon are also a Vaisnava. A Vaisnava regards 
everything (from BrahinA to a plant) as mere delusion. He wants simply to 
offer homage to Liari and rejects even the lour kinds ot emancipation, even if 
offered to him, Nay, even the redemption consisting in identity with 
Bari. To him, the position of Indru, Kuvera or RrahmA is insignificant. 
Then, 0 king, why are yon so much interested in things which are delusive ? 
Better restore to the gods their kingdom and please me by this a6t. Govern 
your own kingdom with pleasure. Let the gods be reinstated in ihair position, 

Y on are all the descendants of Kaeyupa. A feud among brethren is not desirable. 

44-tb8. The murder of a Brahmaru does not occasion even the sixteenth 
part of sin committed by conflict with relations. Pause, 0 king. If you 
apprehend that the restoration of kingdom to tho gods will entail on you ios3 
of prestige, you should likewise consider that the position of no one is stable 
or unchanging. At the time of the absolute dissolution oE the world even 
BrfthncA disappears and subsequently reappears by the will of god. After¬ 
wards, by virtue of his wisdom, ho creates everything again : but the knowledge, 
intellect and memory of all persons are subservient to the asceticism practised by 
them in their previous births. Also consider ; Truth \s the support of Dharma or 
virtue, fa the Golden or Truthful Age, virtue is comp ete ; it is tfiree-fouDhs in 





mtSTfty 


tIJJfS BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PVRANA . 


I half in the Dwapara; and only one-fourth to the prime of Kali. At 
the end of Kali, it gets still more attenuated like the Moon of the dark 
night. The process is the same as in the case of the Sun, The light of 
the Sun is not so intense in winter as in summer; nor so great 
at noon as in the morning or in the evening. The Sun rises in time, gradu¬ 
ally increases in valor or lustre and sets in time. By the operation of time, 
he 13 obscured by clouds, eclipsed by K&bu and then released. The Moon 
-god is not so full on other days as on the lunar day of the P&rnimA ; but be 
g:ds thinner day by day. When the dark half of the month expires, he geta 
more and more developed. In the bright half of the month, he looks spleri* 
did ; aud in the dark half, he declines, being a victim (o consumption. Even 
in days of prosperity, through the influence of time, the Moon may he obscured 
by K&hu or the clouds. Similarly, Indra prospers or declines in time. Balt, 
void of grace, is living in the P&tAla at present. He will be Indra one 
day. Similarly, the fruitful earth, the asylum of every-thing, will one day merge 
in water and disappear. In a word, the whole universe appears and dis¬ 
appears in time. Only Krista, the Supreme Being, retains the same condition. 

59-65. That Krisna through whose grace 1 have become immortal and 
witnessed countless dissolutions of worlds is Nature as well as the Eternai 
Being. He is both spirit and animate matter. His worshipper conquers life, 
death, time, fear, disease and decrepitude. We are resourceful because Ho 
has made BrahmA, the creator; Visnu, the preserver; and me, the destroyer. 
But as I have deputed Kalagni-Rudra to the task of destruction, I am always 
free to recite the name and virtues of Kmna. By dint of my knowledge I 
have conquered death. Death flies at my sight liko snakes when they see the 
GarudA. When S'iva, the omniscient, the lord and efficient creator of the 
whole universe spoke thus, the demon-king praised his words, again and agaiu, 
and modestly thus replied 

66-68. “ 0 Lord, what you have said is trne. But, pray, listen to my 

submissions. Yon said, conflict with one’s relation is a sin. Then why was 
Bali deprived of everything und seat to the nether world (P&t&l) ? 

69-76 I have brought back from the PAt&l many valuable articles which 
Hari, the wielder o i the club, is unable to recover. Tel! me, also, why the gods 
killed their brethren Hirany&k§a, S'urabha and other demons? At the time 
of churning the ocean, why did the gods drink the nectar and why was pain 
only allotted to our share. O god. this universe is the sporting-ground of 
Krisua, People enjoy prosperity as assigned to them by Krisxxa. Again and 
again/gods and demons fight with one auother; and success and defeat are 
occasioned by time. At any rate, your interference in the quarrel is ineffectual 
or uncallcd-for. For you, 0 great god, are my relation as well as friead. 
But it is primarily discreditable to you that you boast to us of your valour, 
for a defeat sustained by you at our hands will over power you with sham® 
and infamy.” 

77-84. S'iva smiled at the words of the demon and gently thus replied, 
s O King, no shame or ignominy can accrue to me, if I am defeated by you who 
have sprung'•from BrahirA. The Supreme Lord Hari. first of all, fought with 
iiladhtvKaitabha, Hiraayaka-sipu and Hiranyaksa, I, too, in days of yore 







mtSTfty 



fooght with Tripura. Nataro, the universal Goddess and mother a !90 bad an 
extraordinary war with S'nmbha etc,, None of these demons who were killed 
in the war3 mentioned above could be comparable to you in valour in any 
respect. For you are the best of the attendants of Kriana. Therefore, 0 King, 
I have been deputed by Hari to approach you in the interests 0 ? the gods who 
* sought His protection. I cannot bo put to a ay disgrace by fighting with a 
sublime being like you. An accidental defeat sustained by me will bring me 
no infamy. I am surprised to find that you talk of shame and ignominy. At 
any rate, this controversy is useless. Now, either restore the kingdom t? the 
gods or fight with roe. My resolution is firm.” O Narada, at the word* 
of S'iva, S'ankha-chnja got op very soon with his ministers. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

I- 10. NArayana said, 4 The powerful king of demons with inclining 
forehead bowed to S'iva and soon mounted his car with his ministers, 
o iva also quickly sent his array and the gods to the war ; whereupon the demon’s 
king and his army resolved to fight. Indra fought with Vrisa-parva, the Hun, 
with Vipra-chitti; the Moon, with Dambha; the Fire with Gokatna ; Kuvera 
with K&Ikeya; Viswa-karma with MayA ; Death with Bhayankara, Yama with 
oamh&ra ; the Wind god with Bala ; the Saturn with Rakt&sa. Then Jayanta 
fought with RatnasAra; the Vasus with the Varch&s ; NaU-Kuvara with Dhuma ; 
Ife&na with S'obhA-kafa, Mamnatha with Pithara 5 the Adityas with Ulkamukba, 
Dhimra, Kharga-Dbwa ja, Kanchi-mukba, Pinda, Saba-nandi, Viswa and Pal Asa, 
The eleven Maha-rudras fought terribly with eleven hideous demons. 

II- 19. In this terrible battle resembling the utter dissolution of the 
world, the goddess Plague (Mahamari) fought with Ugra-cbanda and others: and 
Nandi fought fearfully wkh other demons. The Lord S'iva, the goddess 
K&li and his son Kftriikeya encamped themselves at the root of the holy fig- 
tree. 0 Muni, both the hostile armies began to fight continually. Than the 
demon-king S'ankha-chftda, decorated with gems and surrounded by millions 
of demons, seated himself on a lovely throne of gems. In the meantime, all the 
warriors of S'iva were defeated. The wounded gods, panic-stricken, beat 
a retreat. K&rtikoya was enraged. He encouraged the gods; and by dint 
of hi* valour he added to the strength of bis army. Though alone engaged 
in the battle, he destroyed a hundred Aksauhini of the enemy. (An Aksau- 
bini is an army consist of 1,09,350 foot*, 65,610 horse, 21,870 chariot and 
21,870 elephants). Kalika filled the skull in her hand with the blood of tho 
demons and drank tho blood. Highly incensed, she filled a hundred skulls with 
ten lakhs of big elephants and a hundred lakhs of horses which she dragged 
by force and swallowed them all. The headless trunks of 1,000 persons killed 
in the battle got up and began to dance. 

20-30. Besieged by the arrows of K&rtika, the enemies were frightened 
and began to run away. Thereupon VrisaparvA, Vipra-chitti, Dambha and Vikan- 
kana fought by turns with KArtika, and shortly afterwards, Mahamari joined the 
battle field. The above four demons were very much enraged at the discharge of 
arrows by Kum&ra., In their very presence, the godr showered flowers oa 





minis 



THE BRAHMA^ VA1V ART A PUR AN A. 


<SL 


Kumftra and there was a beat of drum, anon* The King of demons who 
witnessed i ha fight of Kartikawhich wa s as terrible as the final dissolution of 
the world descended from his chariot and began to shower his weapons. The dis¬ 
charge of arrows by the King resembled a shower of rains and covered the 
battle field with intense darkness relieved by occasional flashes of fire. Where-upon 
the gods including Nandi ran away. Only K&rtikoya was leftm the field. The 
King of demons showered unwieldy mountains, snakes and trees on him. Kum&ra, 
beseiged by his arrows, looked like tho Sun obscured by the clouds. S'ankft- 
obudu broke the car of Kurn&ra, cut off his unwieldy, dreadful bow and the 
horses of his chariot, shattered the peacock, (his convsyauce), and cast an 
irresistible iron spear valorous like the Sun at his breast. 

31-40. Kum&ra fainted for a while but, immediately recovering, lie 
wielded a celestial bow givon by Vi$na ; and, riding on a chariot of gem, he 
held several kinds of weapons in his hands and busied himself in tho fight again. 
The sou of S'iva became very angry and cut off all the weapons burTed 
upon himself by the demon, viz., snake, hills, stone and trees by means of his 
own celestial weapons. The valorous Kutn&ra, with the P&rjanya weapon, put 
out the fire, cut off the bow aud the chariot of the demon, killed his charioteer, 
armed with shield and decorated with diadem and coronet of gems and hurfed 
an iron spear bright like meteor at the breast of his opponent who thereupon 
"swooned. Recovering after a while, tho demon held another bow and rode on 
another car. Tho King of demons who was an 'arch dissembler, by virtue of 
his talisman* spread a net of arrows with which he enshrouded Knra&ra and 
held another inWafcible iron spear, effulgent like a hundred suns. The spear, 
inspired by the energy of Visnu, looked like a flame of fire on tfnday of the 
absolute dissolution of the world. As soon as the spear was hurled by tho 
demon, it fell on the body of Kutuara like a pile or mass of fire. The powerful 
K&rtikeya lost his consciousness and wvs taken by Kalikd in her lap to S'iva. 

41-46. S'iva, by virtue of his profound wisdom or knowledge, revived 
him and endowed him with inexhaustible strength, whereupea , K&rtikeya got up. 
Later on Kftli weufc to battle; and Kum&ra was guarded by 'Siva. She was fol¬ 
lowed by Nandiswara, the Gandharvas, the Yakfias, the^Raksae, tho Kinnars 
(semi-gods, human figures with head of horses), miilious of clouds or mountains 
and various bunds of concerts. Kali, the goddess, began to roar like a lioness in * 
the battle-field ; whereupon all the demons fainted. This goddess burst into 
a guffaw of horse-laugh again and again, cheerfully began to drink honey and 
danced frantically. At that time Ugra-Ohund&s, naked women, hags, female 
devotees and-even the gods wore infatuated with the drink of honey. 

47-52. Whoa the King of demons saw the hideous Jl&lt, he descended 
to the battle-field and cheered his army. KfLli hurled upon him the weapon of 
fire fearful like tho flame of Eternal destruction which was averted by the 
demon with tho weapon of Uarjanya. The extraordinary, fearful, rude 
weapon of Varunya hurled by Kali was averted and baffled by tho weapon 
of G&ndurva used by the demon. The weapon of M&hesw^ra used by K&li 
wa 3 destroyed by the King’s weapon called Vaisnava. Tho Dovi, with 
mantras, discharged tho weapon called Narayana. Thereupon the demon des¬ 
cended from bis carriage and bowed low so thnihe weapon went upwards like 
a flame of fire on the day of the eternal destruction of the world. Upon this, 






PBAXjnri'KHAXDA. 



_ha-ehuda fell prostrate on the ground like a stall; and the goddess 

charged with Mantras the Brabmft weapon. 

53 *63. The King prevented it and she aimed ad him the celestial weapon. 
This, too, being averted by the King, the goddess hurled upon him an iron spear. 
This spear was cut to pieces by the King by means of his weapouss- ino god* 
<less was enraged and muttering the mystic formula held in her hand the weapon 
called PAsupata. At once there was a voice frdm the sky, “O goddess, do not 
discharge this weapon; for it cannot kill the King. His throat is adorned 
with the amulet of tlari. So long as it- remains on his throat and his 
wife’s chastity is not violated, the King will bo absolved from deam or decre¬ 
pitude. This boon Brahma has given him ” But at that time the hideous 
XviUt became furious with rage, killed millions of demons and ran after the 
King to swallow him. The King prevented her with celestial weapons, where¬ 
upon she aimed at him a scimitar flashing like the midday sun. Xhis, too, being 
cut to pieces by the King of demons, she ran after him to swallow him. Ihon 
the great adept, the gracious King of tho demons, grew up in size. !.he 
dreadful goddess, highly enraged, broke with her fists his oarrLge, killed his 
charioteer and hurled upon him a spear dreadful like tho flame of die in the 
Pralaya, (eternal destruction of the world). 

64-75. The King held it with his left hand whereupon tho goddess ang¬ 
rily beat him with fists. The valorous demon was much agitated with pain and 
swooned for a while; then after a while recovering his oonseiousness, ho got up. 
Tho King of demons did not engage himself in a hand-to-hand fight with her, but 
bowed to-her low, and by dint of his own valour, ,he cut off her weapons and 
seized them. But regarding her as his mother he did not aim wea pons at 
her. The goddess hold him with her hands, revolved him and angrily with very 
great force hurled him upwards, towards the sky. The demon came 
down with a tremendous crash. As soon as he foil, he got up and bowed 
low to BUadra-KAH ; and riding on another car, he persisted iu fighting. 
KAH being hungry ate a huge quantity of flesh aud drank an enormous quantity 
of the blood of millions of demons. She afterwards came to S'iva and gave him 
an aeoount of the battle in detail from beginning to end. S'iva smiled at the 
account of the wonderful destruction of the demons ; and the goddess addressed 
him thus: “Lord, now iu the battle-field, only a lakh of demons survive. I was 
about to kill the King of the demons in the thick of the fight .with the weapon 
called PAsupata when there was a voioo from the sky, v:s., tho King is not 
destined to die at your hands.” But I found that the King wur profoundly 
wise and most valiant. He did dot discharge his weapons at mo, bat he always 
defended himsolf and averted my blows. 

CHAPTER X X. 

i-7. NArAyana said : “ The philosophical And wise S'iva who had a 
thorough insight into the nature of the things descended into the battle-field with 
his followers When the King of demons saw hitn.be reverentially threw 
himself prostrate on tile ground, and immediately getting up, put on a mili¬ 
tary dress aud held the unwieldy bow in his La id. 0 brahmin, tue fight 
lasted for a year; aud ou no side, there was victory or defeat. Both S'iva and 
19 ' 









the demon were unarmed: the farmer was mounted on a bullook and the latter, 
on a ohariot. Only a 100 heroes survived on the side of the demons ; and 
S'iva, on his side, revived those who were dead. Then Viffnu, by his spell, 
assumed the form of an old Brsthmin, arrived at the battle-field and thus 
addressed the King of demons: 

8-22. “ 0 King, I am a 3r&hmin; give me alms. You never hestitate 

to give even all your prosperity to any one who begs it from you. Therefore, 
fulfil my desire. I am not only old but afflicted, 1 have not tasted water 
or food for a long time. First make a vow that you will keep your word. Then 
I shall submit to you a petition.” The King cheerfully promised and was be¬ 
wildered by the talismanio skill of Hari who thereupon demanded his amulet. 
The King gave it to him at once and Hari went away. Hari, through 
the powers of his illusion, took the form of S'ankba-chftda, approached Tulsi 
and violated her chastity. On the other hand, the lord S'iva with a view to the 
destruction of the demon held the spear given to him by Hari, which was 
bright like a hundred summer suns. This spear was presided over by Nar&yana 
in front, by Brahmk in the centre, by S'iva at the root and by Time at tho 
edge. It was bright like the fire of Pralaya, dauntless, irresistible, certain 
and destructive in its aim. The best of weapons, this spear, was bright like 
the wheel of Hari. Hari and S'iva only oould possibly wield it. This eternal 
weapon the image of Brahmfl, was not created by any one. It was animate, 
14,000 cubits in length and 100 cubits in breadth. O N&rada, S'iva cast at 
the demon that revolving spear which could destroy easily the whole . world. 
The demon wisely laid aside his bow, adopted a posture of meditation end 
remembered Hari. That revolving spear fell upon tho King of demons and 
reduced him with his chariot to ashes. The demon, after his death, adopted 
tho form of a young cowherd with two hands holding a flute in his hands and 
decked with ornaments. The demon mounting a oar of gems went to the 
Goloka surrounded by millions of oowherds. 

23-34. O Muni, there he went to the Vrindivana ; and in the sphere of tho 
Rlsa he courted the lotus feet of Radba and Krisna with esteem who were 
delighted at his sight. They lovingly took him in their lap. On the other 
hand the spear, after having killed the demon, returned to S'iva who is hence 
styled the holder of the spear. Out of oompassion, S'iva threw the bones of 
the demon into the salt sot. From his bones, the conches which are used or 
the worship of the gods came out. The water of the oonohes is very holy and 
propitiates the gods. For the worship of all .gods except S'iva, the water of 
the conches is sacred like the water of a plaoe where pilgrims resort. Nay, 

the place where conches are sounded is the constant remrt of Laksmi. Vvlio- 

ever bathes in the waters of the conches reaps the benefits of bathing m all 
sacred rivers. H»ri always resides in the oonohes and in places where conches 
are sounded. Such places are always free from evil. But where oonohes are 
sounded by women and the SuJras, Laksrni sadly and angrily leaves that place. 
In the meantime, S'iva, aEter having killed the demon went home cheeuuliy 
with his followers. The gods recovered their jurisdiction. There was a beat 
of drum in tho heavens ; there was a rain oE flowers on S'iva’s head. Ihe 
Gandarvas anl the Kumars sang. The Munis and the gods praised b in, 
the spear-holde-" ; 




WNtST/fp 


PRAKRITEREANDA. 


CHAPTE R X X I. 

1 -22. N&rada said, “0 lord, please narrate how N&r&yana Inipreg* 
natad Tnlsl. N&r&yana answered, 1 Hari, in order to accomplish the design 
of the gods, took the form of S'ankha-chflda and cohabited with TuM. He 
took the amulet of the demon and approached the house of Tulsi. At the thres¬ 
hold he played upon a drum and, through a spy, announcing these words: “ may 
victory crown the King/’ he convinced Tulsi of the success of her husband. 
Tulst through a window gladly looked at the royal road. Anon, she 
made gifts to the BrfiJhqpdns, the bards and the mendicants and caused the 
performance of many auspicious deeds. Lord Hari subsequently descended from 
his car and entered into the lovely house of Tul^i constructed with invaluable 
gems in disguise. When Tulsi saw her tranquil husband, (whose form Hari 
had assumed,) she wept with joy, washed his feet with water and bowed lew to 
him. She entertained him with betel leaves rendered fragrant with camphor 
and considered herself truly blessed, inasmuoh as she saw her lord returned 
victorious from the battle. The licentious Tulsi, filled with joy, cast 
arch glances at him and sweetly or gently asked him thus: * My gracious 
Jiege, how could you conquer S'iva who destroys numberless worlds ? Reveal 
to me the matier.” Hari in disguise smiled and concocted a lie <hti« ; *0 

m/ lady, 0 my love, this fight lasted for a year and all the demons have 
been destroyed. BrahmA himself came to the scene of fight and reconciled 
us both. By his command, I returned to the gods their jurisdiction and came 
home. S'iva likewise returned to his domain.” So saying, Lord Hari slept. 
0 N&rada, Hari cohabited with Tulsi but owing to the transgression of 
the former method of sexual intercourse she became suspicious and said, 

1 0 Lord of dissemblers, who are you? You have violated my chastity. I 
must, therefore, curse you, whoever you are.’ Afraid of a enrse, Hari assumed 
a very lovely form. Tuisi beheld in her presence the Eternal Lord, the god 
of gods, dark like a new cloud. His eyes were liko autumnal lotuses, ilia 
face was beaming with smiles. He was decked with gems and yellow gar¬ 
ments. His grace was liko that of ten millions of Cupids/’ 

23-31. The woman, at his tight, was excited with Inst and fainted, but, 
immediately recovering, said to Hari, “ Lord, you are unkind to me and possess 
a heart of stone. You have fraudulently violated me and killed my husband. 
As yon are hard-hearted like a stone, you will be worshipped in the world in the 
form of a stone. Those who call you merciful are deluded. Tell me why you 
killed an innocent votary of yours for the sake of others ? You are the soul of 
all and, though all-knowing, you do not realise the pain of others. Therefore, 
when you will assume a certain incarnation, you will forget yourself.” say¬ 
ing, the chaste Tulsi fell at his feet and wept bitterly in sorrow. The-merciful 
Hari consoled her, using words fraught with counsel thus :—0 chaste lady,^you 
prayed for me for a long time in India. The lustful Sankha-chuda also had 
prayed for yon and thereby obtained you as bis ?pouse: and thus ho enjoyed your 
society for a longtime. J should now give you the fruits of your devotion.” 

32-39. You should now quit your body, take a celestial form and revel 
with me like RamA. You will now be converted in India into a ^sacred river 
called Qandakb Lot the clusters of your hair be converted into a plant called the 










Tulsi or the holy basil. Fair one, the flower* and the leaves of this plant will be 
conc«orated to the worship cl the gods. In the course of my worship, Tulst- 
flowers will be held superior to other flowers in the three worlds and even in the 
Vaikin^ha. This sanctifying plant will grow in the Goloka on the coast of the 
Viraj& river,,on the site occupied by the sphere of the R&sa, in the V rind A van a 
in the forest of the holy fig tree, the wood of the sandal, or the Champak, or in 
the groves of the jasmine, and the screw-pine tree, or in the grove of the climb¬ 
ing plants called M^dhavi. All the shrines of the world will converge at the 
root of Tulfll. 

40-53, Fair one, all the gods will preside there to secure the fallen leave** 
of the holy ban!. Any one who will be moistened or annointed with the waters 
of the holy basil will reap the benefits of .ablutions in all sacred rivers and the 
performance of all sorts of Yagnas or sacrifices. Sari will not be so much 
pleased with the gift of a thousand jars full of honey as with the offer of a 
Tulsi leaf. The gift of one such leaf will bring the reward secured by the gift 
of millions of cows. Any one who, dying, will get the water of the Tulsi leaf 
wpl be redeemed from all bis sins and proceed to the Vnikuntha. Whoever 
constantly drinks suoh water will be redeemed in his life-time and got the 
fruits of a dip iu the Ganges. Any one worshipping me with this leaf e^ery day 
will reap the benefits of a hundred thousand horse-sacrities Any one dying 
with the Tulsi leaf in his bands will be redeemed. Any one putting on a wreath 
of the wild Tula! will got at every stop the fruit of a horse-sacrifice. Whoever 
with the holy basil in his hand will break his vow or perjure himself will go to 
bell. Put any one who, at the time of his death, will get a drop of the water of 
the hojy basil will proceed to the Vuikuntha. flari will cut off the head of that 
person who, on the lunar day of the dark-night (AmavasyA) or the full moon, 
or on the twelth or last day of the lunar month, or being annointed with oil just 
before bath, or in the noon, night or at day-break or sun-down, or in a stale of 
impurity or in his nocturnal dress will cull or pluck the Tulat-leaf. 

54-69. 0 chaste one, if such a leaf is stale for three nights, it can still bo 

used on the occasion of funeral ceremonies, in connexion with vows, gifts, conse¬ 
cration of temples and the worship of the gods. Tulsi-leaves dedicated to Visnu 
and even if they drop on the ground or water, if properly washed, may, still be 
used for other holy purposes. The presiding deity of the Tulsi plant will always 
sport in solitude with Krisna in the Goloka which is free from diseases. The 
presiding deity of the Gandakt river will bo the wife of the salt ocean, born of my 
digits. And personally * (3 chaste goddess, you will everTfemain by my side and 
enjoy my company like Laksmi. I, too, by your curse, will turn into a stene 
on the coast of the Gunchki. At that place the worms ctiled Vajra-kila 
vill construct my wheel within tlio stone. That stone dark like a 

new cloud, which contains at one gate four wheels and which is de¬ 
corated with a wreath of wild flowers will be known as Lnksiai-jSur^yana. But 

the stone of the like nature without being decked with a wreath will be culled 

J.aksmi-JanArdAna. A slone without a wreath bat impressed with marks of 
cow-feet will be called RaghtmAtha. A stone of two wheels auspicious to tbo 
house-holder* will be called Dadhi bamnna. fSach a stone, if decked with gar¬ 
lands, will be called S'ri-dhara and giro grace to the house-holders. A stone 
without wreath, but thick and circular and containing two wheels vill be called 







Damodara. A ?tone, fairly round, assailed by arrows, having quivers and two 
wheels will be called Kana-r&mu. A stone of moderate size having seven wheefo 
associated with quivers will bo called the king of kings and give royal 
prosperity to the people. A stone, thick, dark like a now cloud and associated 
with fourteen wheels will be called Ananta and give four kinds o£ redemption. 

70-86- A stone which looks like a cloud and contains two wheels, which is 
spherical, graceful and moderate in size will be called Madhu-S&d&na A stone 
which will bear the mark of the Sudaraana on one of its wheels and whose other 
wheel will remain concealed will bo called Gad&dhara. The two-wheeled stone 
with the face of a horse will be called Haya-Griva The two-wheeled stone 
whoso face is expansive and hideous will be called Nara-Siraha. The two- 
wheelod broad-faced stone, decked with wreaths and p’ easing to the peopio will 
be called Laksmi-Nrisimha. - The stone whose gate is conspicuous by two 
graceful wheels of equal size will be called the V&sudeva Fulfilling all desire. 
The stone having a slender wheel and many holes at the threshold, dark like a 
new cloud, will be called Pradyumna, and the worship of this fione will give 
happiness to people. The stone whoso wheels are united and whoso back is 
excellent, which brings joy to the house holders, will be called Sankarsana. 
The yellow, beautiful, circular stone delightful to the house-holders will be stylod 
AuiiUJdha by the Savants. Fair one, the place where this stone will be discovered 
will be the resort of Llari and Luksmi with her attendant shrines and holy places. 
Nay, Brahmin-slaughter and all other sins of the world are expiated by the 
worship of this stone This stone, if it is in the shape of an umbrella, bestows a 
kingdom ; if round, it gives prosperity ; if like a cart, it causes pain ; if like the 
front of a spear, it brings about death. If deformed, it causes poverty: if 
tawny in colour, it destroys hippiness ; if its wheels are joined, it causes disease; 
j£ broken or split into fragments, it causes death. 411 holy deeds, consecration 
of a temple, performance of a funeral ceremony, worship of gods, etc , can be per¬ 
formed through this Holy stone. Deeds cr£ charity, circamambulation round the 
world, bath in sacred rivers, field, fruits can be attained by a person by 
ablution in the waters of this stone. The touch of such a person will bo 
desired even by the streams. He will be consecrated and redeemed in his life¬ 
time. The worship of the stone will give the same fruit as the study of the 
Vedas or asceticism. 

i 

87-140. Whoever will drink the immortalising water of this stone will 
sanctify by his touch resorts for pilgrims and be redeemed in his life. Ho 
will be the slave of Hari and witness countless dissolutions of the world. Sins 
as heinous as the murder of a Brahmin will fly at his sight like snakes at the sight 
of Garuda. The earth will be consecrated by the dust of bis feot. by his birth, he 
will redeem millions of his ancestors. Any one who, while dying, will drink this 
water will be omancipateda nd go to the Vaikuntha. He will be free from tho influ¬ 
ences of Karma and, being redeemed, will merge into the feet of Visnu. Who¬ 
ever, by laying hands On the stone, perjures himself or breaks his vow will remain 
in hell for -millions of years. My beloved, whoever will separate the holy basii- 
jeaves from this holy stone, will sutler the pangs of separation from his wife 
from birth to birth. Whoever will dissociate the conches from the Tulsi will bo 
deprived of his wife and health for seven births in succession A wise person 
who will mi in tain the Tulsi, the conches and the stone at one and the same 





WW'SJVf, 



TBJS BRAFIMA-fAlVARTA PVRANA. 


Sl 


place will be dear to Hari. It is painful to a person to part from his 
beloved whose society he once enjoyed. You were the favorite of S'ankha* 
ehftda for ono Man wantrna. Therefore separation from him has been a source 
of trouble to yon.” 


101-106, As Hari affectionately said so, Tulst quitted her body and 
went to the Vaikuntha in a celestial form. Tul§i frequented the heart of 
N&r&yana like KamalA. 0 Nfcrada, thus Hari happened to have four wires 
viz*, Laksmi, Saraswati, Gaoga and Tulsi. When Tulsi died, her body was 
immediately turned into a river called Gandaki ; and on the coast of this stream, 
a sanctifying hill out of the digits of Hari came into existence. The worms, 
on that hill, are constructing stones of various sorts. A stone that drops down 
into the river from the hill assumes the hue of clouds. A 3lone that drops 
from the rock on the dry land becomes tawny-coloured through the heat of 
the sun. Now I told you everything. Please let mo know what yoa 
want to hear more. 


CHAPTER XXII. 

I - 2. N&rada said, “Lord, I gather how Tula! became the favourite of 
Hari, how she became holy and was adored throughout the world. Now I 
want to hear the account relating to her form of worship and her hymn. In 
olden times, who worshipped her and recited her ode ? How did she become 
adorable in the world ? Kindly narrate those matters to me. 

3-10. tiuta said, NArayana smiled at these words and said, c ‘Hari sporte* 
with Tulsi as soon as he got her and made her as blessed and glorious as Ram& 
GangA and Laksmi bore this new acquisition to their society patiently. But 
it was intolerable to Saraswati. Once the dignified Saraswati in vain quarrelled 
with Tulsi in Hart’s presence and hart her. Tulsi in shame and disgrace 
disappeared. That accomplished, wise and adept Tulsi oeoame invisible 
to Hari also, out of anger. Hari thereupon took permission of Saraswati 
and went to the forest of Tulai-plants. There ho bathed and with holy basil 
leaves reverentially adored Tulsi with the mystic formula of tun letters contain¬ 
ing seeds or germinating principles of Laksmi, MftyA, Kama and VAnl. 

II- 16. 0 Narada, that Mantra prepared by Hari ends thus : “Sw&hA to 

VrindA-vani.” After having uttered this Mantra which is efficacious like the 
Kalpa-tieo. whoever will worship Tulsi with the lamp or light of ghee, frank¬ 
incense, sandal flowers and sacrificial offerings will attam ail perfection. Tulsi, 
pleased with the worship, emanated from the plant and took refuge in the 
lotus feet of Hari. Hari blessed her saying ; “You will be adored throughout 
the world”, and said, “Beloved, I. shall hold you on my head and in my heart. 
All the gods, therefore, will wield you on their heads.” So saying, Hari took 
her homo. 

17-20. N Arad a said, ‘‘Now, toll me about the Dhy&na or meditation 
appropriate to Tulsi, her ode, and her plau of worship.” N&r&yana answered, 
“When Tulsi disappeared; the afflicted Hari went to Tul^l-vana, (the forest 
of the holy'basil), worshipped her and adored her with this hymn *1 adore 
my beloved Vriudfi who in one place grows in the form of plants. I adore 





Ml Nisr/} 



PRAKB1T1-KHANDA. 


tbe forest of VrindA-vana and 



the blessed nymph who sprang at first from 
is hence styled VrindA-vani. 

21-30. ‘‘I worship that goddess, all adorable in the universe, who is so 

called as she is adored throughout the world. Being, afflicted by Cupid I 
adore the all-sanctifying goddess so called as she is always adored in the nreo 
worlds l want to see Puapa-sAra, the goddess, the esseuco of flowers, without 
whom the gods are not satisfied even with the offer of^ any number of (lowers. 
I crave tho favor of that goddess, also called Nandinl, as attainment ot Iul?i 
brings faith and joy. 1 seek the protection of this goddess oaltod Tulsi, 
a«sha is incomparable in the world. May she preserve my life, tho goddess 
who is also oalled the life of Krisna. Krisna having worshipped her thus 
manifested liimsolf to Tulst who was lying prostrate at His feet. When lio 
saw that the dignified Tulsi was weeping on account, of her susceptibilities 
bein'* wounded by Saraswati, he olasped her to his breast, took her to Huraswati 
and reoonoiled them both. He blessed her saying “ You will bo adored through¬ 
out the world and sustained by every one on tho head. You will be adored 
aud honoured by me as well.” 

31-39. When Tula! was propitiated, Saraswati embraced her and seated 
her by her side. Laksmi and GangA also embraced her smiling and took 
her home. Whoever will adore Tulsi by tho above eight names pregnant with 
meaniug, or, VrindA, VrindA-vanl Viswa-PAvanl, Viswa-PujilA, Pt;§pa-sar&, 
Nandiut, Krisna-Jivani and Tulsi will reap the fruits of liorse-sacrifioe. The 
benefactress Tulsi was born on the lunar day of the full moon iu the month 
of KArtika, hence Hari has prescribed this day for her worship. Whoever will 
worship her on this day will be redeemed from all sins and go to the Vaikun- 
tha. Whoever gives Tulsi-leaf (or the leaf of tho holy basil) out of reverence 
to Vifnu in the month of KArtik will reap the fruits secured by tho gift of 
ten millions of cows. Nay, the recollection of her hymn gives a son to tho 
aonloss, a wife to the wifeless, health to the diseased, liberty to tbe prisoner, 
sanctity to the sinner, courage to tbe frightened and a friend to the friendless. 

40-46. 0 NArada, I told you about her hymu ; now listen to the subject 

relating to her meditation and form of worship. You know tho meditation 
(DhyAn) as mentioned by KAnwa-eAkha. Without invoking tbe goddess, 
reverentially meditate her and adore her with sixteen ingredients. Nowlisten 
to her Dhy&n or meditation which destroys sins. Tho chaste Tulsi, the best 
of flowers, adorable and lovely, destroys the fuel of sins like a flame of fire. 
0 Muni, she is most sacred of all the goddosses. Being incomparable sho is 
called Tttljt. I adore the goddess who is solicited by alL; who crowns tbe head 
of all ; who is known as the conseorator of the world ; who gives emancipa¬ 
tion aud the bondage of Hari ; and who bas been herself redeemed ia ber 
life-time.” Wise men, after this meditation and worship, should read her eulogies 
and bow to her. Now that, I have finished her narrative,*iwtiat raoie; do you 
want to hear ? 

‘ G H A P T E tt XXIII. 

1 -9. NArada said, * Lord, by your grace I heard Tulsi’8 narrative as sweet 
as honey j now recite the narrative ofSAvitri, I heard already how she came into 





Mints?fly 



THE BR All MA'V AIV ART A PU.RANA, 


% 


Kindly toll me by whom she was worshipped at first and by whom, after¬ 
wards.” N&r&yaiia said, Tins mother of the Vedas was first worshipped by 
Brahm&, then by the gods and subsequently by the wise and lastly by Aswa- 
pati and the four castes, Brahmins, etc. Narddu asked who was Aswapati and how 
he worshipped her. N&r&yana sud, “ In region of Madra there was a King 
named Aswapati, pleasing to his friends, and a source of trouble to his foes. Ho 
had a Queen named M&latt who was as pious as Lakfint. O N&rada, she was 
barren and therefore, by the command of Vasistha, she worshipped 8/Lvitri. But 
she returned home with a heavy heart when she did not see the goddess or 
get any hint from her. 


10 -21. The King thereupon consoled her with sagacious counsel and himself 
went to the Puskar to worship the goddess. Having restrained his passions, lie 
prayed for a century and yet lie could not see S&vifcrl. Whero-upon he was directed 
by the powers above to recite the Gaetri (ode to the su?i) ten lakhs of times. There 
was an incorporeal voice fro n the sky giving the above direction. Suddenly, 
the King*saw the great Muni, Par&sara approaching him. He bowed to tho saint. 
The Muni said, 0 King the recitation of Gaetri only for a tine consumes the Juris 
committed during the day. [f it is recited a hundred times, it destroys the sins of 
a month and, if a thousand times, it destroys sins com nittei during tile year ; and 
if a hundred thousand times, it destroys the sin'i of the whole life ; and if recited , 
ten lakhs of times, it destroys all the sins committed during throe births succes¬ 
sively and, so, if it is recited a hundred lakh of times, it is even able to give re¬ 
demption. Hie twice-born saints having folded their bands upwards like tho 
expanded hood of a serpent, with a slight inclination of their heads, should 
recite this Man'ra iu an immoveable condition with fcbeir facos turned upwards. 
Tho worshipper should pass on his thumb from the middle joint of the ring 
finger, by a turn oil the left side, down to the root of tho forefinger. Or with 
the purified roods of tho white lotus or the chastened wreath of crystal, the. 
Gdetri may bo recited in a temple or holy land frequented by pilgrims. With 
a pure raiud and body, the worshipper should first aunoint the said wreath 
with the yellow pigment of cow’s urine after fixing it in seven leaves of the holy 
fig tree and then wash it properly. The recitation of tho Gaetri a huudred 
times will amouut to a purification of the crystal wreath. 


22-30. Or it may be purified by washing it with the five productions of 
tho cow or with the Ganges water. If you recite G&etri ten lakhs of times in 
this way, 0 King, the sins committed by you in three previous births wiil be 
condoned and you will then be able to see davritri personally. Pure in 
body, perforin this rite in the morning, noon and evening. Without this neces¬ 
sary rite (to be performed thrice a day) a man is impure and not outitled to do 
any thing. His works doue in the day are ineffectual, i.c., bear no fruits. Like 
a SAdra/ he should be excluded from all privileges. Aud whoever perforins this 
rite thrice a day is always effulgent like the sun. Hois valiant and redeemed 
in his life lime. Tho earth is consecrated by the touch of his lotus, feet. He 
consecrates the holy places frequented by pilgrims by his touch, and evils 
run away at his sight like snakes at the sight of tho Gamda. The manes and the 
gods do uot respectively receive funeral canes or libations from a man who does 
not perform this rite. 




PR A KRlThKHAN DA. 



31-37. A Br&hmin who doo9 not adore Visnu oV who does not fast on the 
day of Ek&dasi, who assumes the role of an ambassador or who adopts the 
profession of a washerman, who carries a bullook, wfho eats food touched by a Sfidra 
or burns the corpse of a S'lldra, who is the Jbusband of a S'udra woman or marries 
a virgin in her menses, who cook9 food for a S'ftdra or receives donations or alms 
from him. who subsists upon his sword or his pon ; who oats food cooked either 
by a childless widow or by a woman bathing in her menses, who is a pandor to 
the lust of others ; who subsists upon the interests of money lent to others, who 
•ells his daughter or the name of llari or milk, who eats twice a day, who eats 
fish or who turns away his face from*the worship of the Holy Stone etc., is 
deprived of his prerogatives, as a snake is denuded of his poison 

38-59. So saying the Muni described to him the method of his worship, 
Dhy&n eto., aud weut homo. The king worshipped g&vitri accordingly and 
got the necessary boon. Thereupon N&rada said : “ 0 most blessed being, I 
want to know the Puj&, Dhyau, etc., adopted by the king to obtain the boon from 
the mother of the Veda 8.” NAr&yana said, “ 0 N&rada, be abstemious on *he 
Kri^na Trayodast day^inthe month of Jaistha and perfoim the vow of S&vitiS 
on the next day. This vow is accomplished in fourteen years. Fourteen fruits, 
fourteen kinds of sacritioial articles, proportionate quantity of flowers aud 
frankincense, cloth, sacred thread and edibles should \je dedicated to the deity, 
A jar covered with flowers and branches of trees should be established or fixed 
in the ground and thereon Ganesa, the Sun, the Fire, Visnu, S'iva, Durgfl, and 
the tutelary deity should be invoked and worshipped Now hear about the Dhyftti 
etc. of SftvitrT as prescribed by Mftcibyan-din-S'akba which yields all sorts of 
fruits. I adore Sttvitri, the mother and the cause, the presiding deity and the 
image of the Vedas, whose colour is bright like heated gold, who beams with 
the radiance of Bruhina, who is equal to a 1,000 summer suns in lustre, 
who favours her votaries, whose dress is pure like fire, who has a cheerful, 
smiling and tranquil mien, who dispenses or administers the world, 
who is the wife of Brahmft, who is the source and image of all prosperity. 
i3y this Dhy&na, the worshipper should place flower on his own bead and 
invoke the goddess on the jar. The mattress, oblations of water to wash 
the feet, the same water with offer of green grass and rice, etc., bathing 
ingredients, ointment, frankincense, light or lamp, sacrificial offering, betel 
leaves, cold water, lovoly apparel, ornament, perfume, water for rinsiug 
the mouth and lovely bedstead: these are the fourteen ingredients which 
•hould be presented. Now hear about the Mantra (or mystic formula) appropriate 
to these gifts. 4 0 goddess, this sanctifying seat of gold or wood (the subs¬ 
tance of trees), I offer you for a seat. I reverentially give you holy water to 
wash the feet. I dedicate to you bent grass, sunned rice and water of the 
conches as offerings for your feet. Fragrant oil etc., for bathing purposes I 
reverentially submit to you. The sandal paste I likewise offer to you which is 
calculated to add to the grace of the body. 

60-71. This lovely perfume and frankincense, I submit to you with a 
heart full of devotion. Kindly accept the same. This lamp, bright and likely to 
dispel the darkness of the world, the tasteful sacrificial offerings likely to 
sanctify a person, satisfy hunger and develop the body, the delicious betel 
leaves seasoned with camphor, I offer: kindly accept them. 0 guides*, cool 

SO 








MWf STffy 


TUE BRAHMA-VA1VARTA PURANA, 

t 


find fragrant water which quenches thirst and which constitutes, as it were, 
the germ of the world 1 offer to you. Please accept it. Likewise accept 
the cloth woven with cotton and other agricultural produce likely to add to 
the grace of the body. • Please also accept this holy ornament, this fragrant 
wreath end this auspicious, sanctifying, perfume 'which I offer. Goddess, 
deign to accept the holy ingredients to rinse the mouth. Condescend to ac¬ 
cept this lovely, holy, delightful bed of gems covered with flowers and sandal. 

72-76. I offer to you excellent vermilion which decks the forehead and 
gives perfection to iho grace of ornaments. I otfer to you the sacred thread 
with holy joints or knots consecrated by the spoil of the Vedas. After 
making this gift the worshipper should read the hymn, bow to S&vitri and 
give Dak$in& or the priest’s fee to the Br&hmin.. The fundamental .Mantra 
consists of eight letters* viz., Sritji Hrlm Klim, S&vitrai Sw&h&. Now I am 
going to toll you the beneficial ’hymn of Savitri, dear as life to the Brahmins 
as reoited by M&dbyandin. j > 

77-78 0 N&rada, in days of yore in the Goloka, Krisna handed over 

B&vitrt to Brahruft; and yet she refused to go along with Brahmft. Therenpoo 
BruUn& adored hor ; when she was propitiated and fulfilled his wish. 

79-87. Fair one, tou are eternal. You are sprung from Hari and yot 
you urc the likeness of Hari. 0 spouse oE N&r&yana, be kind to me. You are 
Supremely good. You represent the valour, the happiness and the position of 
the Brahmins; be kind to me. Fair goddess, you are the image of supreme 
happiness ‘ You are all good. Be kind to me, goddess, you are all in all 
to the *aoerdotal caste ; you are the essence of mystic incantations ; and you are 
the source of happiness and redemption to mankind. Be propitiated. 
Fair one, like a flame of fire, you consume the fuels of sin and you give energy 
to the Br&hmins. Nay, the very recollection of your name reduces to ashes 
iho*© sins committed by the twice born castes, either with the body, mind 
or with words.” Brahmtl having worshipped her thus, Savitri accompanied 
him to the Brahm&-loka. The king Aswapati also worshipped her in the light 
of the above ode. Then he saw her and obtained the necessary boon. Whoever 
three times a day reads the above hymn gets the reward which could be 
secured by the study of the four Vedas. 


CHAP T ER XXI V. 

1-11. Nftrfryana said, 4 King Aswapati, having duly worshipped S&vitrS 
thus, saw the goddess manifesting herself effulgent like a thousand suns. Kind¬ 
ling all the quarters with the lustre of her body, with a propitiatory mien and a 
gentle smile she addressed the king as a mother addresses her son thus* u O king, 

I know your desire and the desire of your vvifo. Your chaste wife wants a 
daughter and you want a son. Both these desires will be fulfilled in due >\ 
time.’ So saying, &&vitri vanished and the king wont home. After a short 
time, the queen gave birth to a daughter, the offspring of the digits of 
Kamal& : and as she was the result of her devotion to S&vitri, she was styled 
S&vitrt by her father. She grew up in beauty and youth like the digits of the 
Mjoon of the bright half of the mouth. S&vitrt in her mind accepted 










PltAKIUTI-KIIANDA, 



tiirtruthful Satyav&na, the son of the well-qualified Dyuir»at.sGna for her 
husband. The king married his daughter well furnished with ornaments to 
Satyav&na v ho joyfully took her home. . After the lapse of a year, the truth¬ 
ful Satyav&na, by the command of his father, cheerfully weut out of hia 
house to collect fruits and fuels. By chance, the chaste S&vicrt followed her 
husband. As ill-luck would have it, her husband fell down from a tree and 
died. 

12-20- 0 Muni, Yama.then appeared and tried to take away the sentient 

aoul of the deceased Satyav&na of the size of a thumb. S&vitr! followed him* 
Tho great Yama, the foremost of the virtuous, the lord of the abstemious, 
having beheld her following him gently addressed her thu3: ° For a 

wonder, Sitvitri, where will you go to in this mortal frame ? ” If you want to go 
along with your husband, you shall have to quit your body. For no one can go to 
Pluto’s region with his or her body constructed of five elements. Besides, your 
husband’s days of eujoyment are numberod. To reap the fruits of his acts he ia 
going to my place. The births and deaths of sentient beings take place accord¬ 
ing to their Karma which is the source of pleasure, pain, sorrow and fear. 
People attain the condition of Indra, or become sons of BruhmA or servants of 
Hari exempt from life or death through Karma. All kinds of perfection, 
immortality and the four kinds of redemption can be attained through Karma. 
Men first atfcuin the position of a Br&hmin. and then final emancipation through 
Karma which also secures godhead, kingdom or the rank of a Manu. 

21-28, Karma alone confers upon a being the rank of a saint, anchorite, 
K§atriya, Vaisya, S'tidra, infidel, or the state of moveable or immoveable 
property, or the condition of a stone, tree, beast, bird, worm or snake or the con¬ 
dition of a Gandarva, Rftkeasa, Yaksa, Kinnara, false conception like a pumpkin 
gourd, devil that haunts corpses, hag, malignant demi-god or spectre ; and for 
the same reason people become sinful or virtuous, 

29-37. Through Karma, poople become handsome or healthy or deformed 
or dumb. People go to heaven or hell, to the regions of India, the Sun, the 
Moon, the Fire, the Wind or Varuna, Knvera, S'iva, Dhruva, the siara, the Satya, 
the Jana, the Tapa, the Mahar, the PfU&la, the Brahm&, the Vaikuntha or to the 
Cow-world, the region free from* diseases.. People are long-lived or short-lived 
through Ivarma. And through this law of Karma (causation, i.e., the agency 
whereby one reaps the consequences of ono’s act), people die as soon as they are 
animated with life or as soon as they see the light. Fair one, I recited to you 
the mysterios of creation. Now, go back to your house, for your husband 
quitted his body as a result of Karma. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

1-6. • N&iAya$a said, ° The sensible, chaste S&vitrl having heard the 
words of Yama reverentially adored him and said, 4 0 lord of virtue, what acts 
of men arc auspicious and what not ? How do the virtuous dispense with the 
consequences of their acts ? What is the seed or root of Karma ? Who yields 
fruits of Karma ? What is Karma ? What is its genesis ? What is Us cause ? 
Who is the victim of Karma? Who is not affected by it? -What is a 




THE BEAfiMA-V AlV ART A PVRANA. 


..^ ? Whit U body ? Who is the author of Karma that cotatroli 

thia body ? What is knowledge, mind or intellect ? What is life? What are the 
passions and thojir characteristics ? Wh > is their presiding deity ? Who enjoys . 
Who causes Srfjoymen*- ? What is enjoyment or suffering ? How can a man 
be released from it? What is tho sentient soul ? Who is tuo eternal Being * 
ttindly narrate these subjects to me in detail. 

7-21. Yama replied, i4 The acts prescribed by the Vedas are auspicious ; 
the acts forbidden by them are vicious. Tho disinterested acts of the virtuous 
including the worship of Visnu performed without any object in view dispense 
with the Karate and creates religions belief in Hari. One devoted to Hari can get 
rid of birth, death, decrepitude, disease, sorrow and fear and thus obtain final 
emancipation. This is enjoined by the S'astras (holy scriptures) which divide 
emancipation into two classes. One class of emancipation gives absolute re¬ 
demption to mankind, The other endows people with religious faith m nan. 
The Vaisnavas want the latter class of redemption, faith in Hari Other 
worshippers want Nirv&na. Krisna who is independent of nature is the seeu 
or fountain-head and imago oE Karma and yields fruits of Karma. He w the 
cause and source of Karma. Sentient beings reap the confluences of their 
acts. The soul is not mixed up with Karma. 0 child, the cdrporeai being, 

% <*., the animate body is the mere reflection of the soul. the body is transient 
and composed of five elements. At the dawn of creation Hari created five 
elements, viz. f the earth, the water, the wind, tho light, or beat and the sky. 
The animate bodies or sentient beings either do an act or suffer consequences of 
an aot. The Supreme Being causes those enjoyments and sufferings, feu terihg u 
but a modification of one’s attributes or qualities. Knowledge is of several kinds 
and provides for the distinoiion between good and evil. 0 chaste one, discrimi¬ 
nation is intellect and the mother of wisdom. Life is the strength of the body , 
it is a particular kind of vital air which sustains the body. Mind is the boat 
of tho senses and deputes men to perforin all sorts of acts. The nature of the 
mind cannot be determined : it is invisible and regarded as a faculty of know¬ 
ledge. The eye, the ear, the nose, the skin and fchb tongue are the senses, 
which constitute, as it wero, the limbs of the body and impel people to notion. 

22-26. These senses afford pleasure or pain like friends or foes; the sun, 
the wind, the earth, the sound etc., are the presiding deities of the flens<*> ibe 

animate or soutient being (Jiva) sustains tho life and the body, ibe Eternal 

Brahma, distinct from nature and void of all attributes ia the Supreme being. 
Krisna himself is the final cause. Now that, 0 child, l have told you every¬ 
thing, please go home. 

27-35. SAviti i said, “ 0 god, how can I go leaving behind me my husband 
and yourself, tho ocean of wisdom ? Now, kindly answer other questions which I 
put to you. What kinds of act lead to different sorts of births ? What act leads 
to Heaven or Hell or redemption, or to faith in Hari, or to disease, health, lon¬ 
gevity, short-life, pleasure, or pain, deformity, deafness, blindness, semi-blindness, 
miserliness, infatuation, madness, avarice, murder, perfection, four kinds of 
redemption, Heaven, the state of a Br&htnin or an anchorite -or the bliss of 
the Qoloka, which is free from all diseases ? How many kinds of hells are 
there ? Their uames and numbers I should like to know, >\h»t is the dura* 








P&AKMTl-KBANtiA* 



life in hell ? Who goes there ? What kinds of diseases are produced 
by diti >reat sins ? Sire, kindly answer the above questions. 


CHAPTER XXV X. 

1*10, N&riyana said, M 0 NArada, Yama smiled at the words of 84titfi 
and beg*n to describe the subject of Karma- Vip&ka, i.e. the punishment or 
reward consequent upon one’s act. He said, * 0 child, you are twelve year* 
old, but you are superior in wisdom to old men and anchorites. 0 auspicious lady, 
I see thlt king Aswapati, through his devotion, by virtue of the boon granted 
to him by S&vitri, has got a daughter equal to herself (S&vifcr!) and who is no off¬ 
spring of her digits. Child, you will be blessed in xespect o£ your husband as 
Lttksml is blessed in respect/of Hari; Gauri in respect of IS'ivo ; K6dh& in respee of 
Krisna ; S&vitri in respect o£ BrahmA ; Alftrti in respect of Dharma ; S'atarupA in 
respect of Manu ; Deva-huti in respect of Kardama ; Arundbati in respoot oC 
Vasi^tha ; Aditi in respect of Kasyapa ; Ahalyft in respect of Gautama. S'aohi 
in respect of India; Rohini in respect of the Moon ; Rati in respect of K&ma; 
Svikhk in respect of Fire; SwadhA in respect of the Manes ; SangnA in respeot of 
the Sun ; Varoriftni in respect of Varuna ; UaksinA in respect of the god of sacri¬ 
fice, Dbarft in respec* of Varaha ; and Deva-Senti in respect of K&rtika. I grant 
you this boon. 1 shall grant yo u whatever else you desire. 0 blessed lady, 
ask anything and it is yours.’ SAvitrl replied, *0 blessed god, may this 
SatyavAna beget oc me a hundred sons. This is ray petition. May my father 
get a hundred sons; and may ray fatfter-iu-iaw get back his eye-sight and 
kingdom. This is also my desire. 0 lord of the world, bless me so that after 
the lapse of a hundred thousand years, when we die, I may go to the world 
of liari along with Safyav&na. Now kindly relate to rae the law of 
causation, i.e. t Karma-Vip&ka which is the source of the propagation of 
the world/’ 

11-19. Yama said, 'All your desires will bo fulfilled. I, now, am going 
to describe to you the law of causation. A person is born in India by virtue 
of his good or bad deeds. But, although all bis religious merits be destroyed, 
he cannot acquire bis birth in any other place. O chaste girl, gods demons, 
men, etc., are all subject to Karma Every one reaps the .fruits of his act. 
By good deeds, a person goes to Heaven ; by bad deeds, he goes to Hell. 
V oluntarily, no one assunes his birh. Certain 1 ving beings, particularly, men 
acquire different kinds of births accor dng to their acts. When a man’s suffering 
radically ends, he is emancipated. Emancipation is of two kinds. One is the 
NirvAna and the other consists in homage to Supreme Kriana. 

20-31. Evil deeds germinate diseases and good deeds constitute the source 
of health. Karina is the cause of long or short life, pain or pleasure or defective 
limbs. Fair one, good acts even bring peifection. Thus I told you in a nutshell 
every thing. Now I am going to narrate in detail the theories main¬ 
tained by the Pur&nas. Listen to the mysteries. 0 child, of all the births, 
the birth, of a man in India is most precious ; a Bi Ahmin, among men ; 
ts prpioraHlo to others i; but the BrAhtnin who is a VaisuAva, of course, is the 
best of all men. A Vui§nAva maj have a selfish aim’ or he mav be di.iq- 










TBJti SllAHM A~V A1V ART A PD RAN A. 


fier&rited. The latter is the better of the (wo. for the former U subject to 
Karma and the latter is free from it. 0 chaste one, the latter will not after 
his diceaso be subject to birth again ; but he will attain the foet of Vissnu. Those 
who worship Krista will go to Krisna ; those who worship N&r&yana will go to 
the Vaikuntha. The interested Vaianfivas, though they go to the Vaiktmtlia* 
are again born in India as Brfihmiiis. In course of time they become dis¬ 
passionate. The worship of Hari eventually gives thorn good sense. 

32-41, The Brfthmins that are interested and not devoted to Visnu assume 
in succession several births and never attain good or pure sense. The Brfth- 
rams that are devotees and who frequent sacred places as pilgrims go to the 
JBrahma-ioka and arc again born in India. Those who frequent holy places as 
pilgrims and adhere to their own tenets go to the Sntya-loka and are again 
born in India. The religious BrAhmins who worship the sun go to the sun’s 
domain and again descend to India? A pious Brfthmin who worships S iva, 
S'akti or Ganesa goes to the B'iva-loka, but again comos to India." If a pious 
BrAhmin worships any other gods, he goes to the Indra-loka, but soon after¬ 
wards is re-born in India. But the dispassionate worshippers of Bari 
go to) his region, The impious and corrupt Br&kmins go to hell. 
The four castes, ii firm in their religious belief, reap good fruits ; otherwise, 
they go to hell and afterwards suffer torments in India. 

42-48. If a pious Br&hrain marries bis daughter to a pious Brhhmin, he 
goes to the laud of the Moon and dwells there fora period occupied by fourteen 
consecutive Indrus If the girl is decked with ornaments, the fruit reaped thereby 
is doubled, A person who does the above act with a selfsh motive goes to the 
land of the Moon ;but a disinterested Brahmin goes to the Vaikuntha* That person 
also goes to the Vaikuntha who gives to a Br&kmin the produce of a cow, silver, 
bride, cloth, crops, fruits and water. He lives there for one Manwautra. He 
who gives to a pure Br&hmin gold, cow, copper etc., lives in the region of the 
Sun, free from anxiety and disease for ten thousand years. 

49-60. He who gives to a Brahmin laud and immense quantity of paddy 
is able to chvell in the S'weta-Dwipa, the beautiful land of Visnu as long as 
the Sun and the Moon exist. 0 chaste one, he who gives house to a Br&kmm 
goes to the Visnu-loku and dwells there for a long time. If such & gift is made 
on any sacred day, he dwells there for as many years as there are atoms of 
dust in the house. He who consecrates a house to the gods dwells in 
Heaven for as many years as there are particles of dust in the house. Brahrak 
hath said, the gift of a mansion brings four-fold fruits, gift of a tank a 
hundred-fold fruits ; gift of a pond brings . fruits eight times the number of 
fruits specified last, The gift of a large poo) or bridge enables the donor to live 
in the Jarm-Ioka for ten thousand years. Gift of a canal is equivalent in religious 
efficacy to the gift of ten large pools. If that canal is ornamented, it brings 
fruits twice the number specified last Extraction of inud from a pool, largo 
Or small, is equal to the gift of the said pool. Whoever plants a holy fig tree 
lives in the world of devotion for ton thousand years. 

61-72. Whoever dedicates to the public a grove of flowers lives in the 
Dhruva-loka for ten thousand year#. Whoever dedicates a car to Visnu lives 
in his land lor cue Murvrautara. If the car is huge and artistic, the gift brings 





PRAKR1T1-KHANDA. 


fruits twioe the number specified last. The gift of a litter brings 1 ait the 
number of fruits that could be scoured by the gift of a oar. Whoever dedicates 
a house meant for swinging to Hari lives in his region for one Manwantara. < 
lady devoted to your husband, whoever constructs paiacps on the margin of the 
royal road goes to Heaven and enjoys celestial bliss for ten thousand years. 0 
chaste one, gifts to a Br&hmin and a god are equally efficacious, That which 
is given comes back. That which is uot given ia never attained. A virtuous 
person, after having enjoyed the bliss of Heaven, is born again in a good 
Bri\hmin family in India. A Ksatriya is likewise born as u Ksatriya. A 
Ksatriya ora Vuisya, even after an endless course of devotions, can never attain 
tho condition of a Br&hrnin in any birth \ this is mentioned in the Vedas. Pious 
Brahmins, though thoy acquire different births, yot after the end of their 
sufferings arc born as Brahmins again. A consequence of an act hitherto not 
reaped must be reaped in due time. Karma is inevitable. Only frequent acts 
of pilgrimage to holy places can sanctify a person, f told you everything now, 
What do you want more to hear ? 

’ C H A P T E It XXVI I. 

* 

I- 10. S&vitri said, i( 0 lord, describe to mo all the acts' by which 
virtuous men either go to Heaven or to other places. Varna replied, O chaste 
one, whoever gives food to a Brahmin goes to heaven. I hero is no deed more 
virtuous than the gift of food. In the case of such gifts, tho object or the time 
of charity is immaterial. He who provides a Brahmin with a matting for scat 
lives in the world of Fire, happily, for ten thousand years. Ho who gives an 
excellent milch-cow or a new-born cow to a Br&huiin lives in the Vaikuntha 
for as many years as there are hairs on the skin of the cow. On a sacred day, 
the merit of such a gift is four-fold ; in a place designed for pilgrims, the 
merit ia a hundred-fold ; in the holy place allotted to N&r&yana, the merit is 
a crore-fold. In India, the gift of a oow to a Brahmin enables the donor t:> 
live in the land of the Moon. Whoever gives the Holy-stone along with clothes 
to a Brahmin lives in the Vaikuntha as long as the Bun and tho Moon exist. 
Whoever gives a lovely umbrella to a Bahrain dwells with happiness in the 
land of Varwna for ten thousand yours. 

II - 20. Whoever gives a pair of sandals for the feet to a Br&bmin in 
India lives in tho land of the Wind-god with pleasure for ten thousand years. 
Whoever bestows on a iMhmin a lovely bedstead enjoys bliss in the. land of 
the Moon, so long as the Bun and the Moon exist. Whoever gives a candle-light 
or lamp to a god lives in the BrahimVloka for one Manwantra. 0 beauty, after¬ 
wards he attains the condition of a human being, gets celestial eye-sight and by 
diut of that virtue never goes to the land of Pluto agaiu. W hoever gives an 
elephant to a Br&hmin is entitled to the moity of a seat with Indra in heaven so 
long as Indra exists. Whoever gives him a horse lives merrily in tho land of 
Varuna for a period covered by fourteen Iudras. Whoever gives him u litter 
lives in the Vaikuntha for one Man want*™. Whoever gives him a fan or 
chowrie lives happily in the land of the Wind for ten, thousand years. Who¬ 
ever gives a BrA.hrnin Leaps of paddy lives in the Vaikuntha for as many years 
as there are grains of paddy. Afterwards ho acquires tue birth of a man again, 









A 



THE BRA IlMA-V A1V ART A JPUIiANA, 


<SL 


»ad enjoys loDg-life and happiness ; and after their death the donor and the douee 
go to the Vaikaijtha. 

21-30. In India, whoever always takes the uama of Hari enjoys a long 
life and scares away death. Whoever at the end of the night of he h nl* 
moon performs the ceremony of the swing or the Dola is redeemed in his life¬ 
time and dwells io the Vaikuntha for a hundred Manwantaras. VI hoever 
performs that ceremony od the lunar day of the Uttara-Phalguni Naksatra, 
reaps benefit twice as much till the end of a tvalpa, as Brahuift hath said. 
Whoever gives grains of sesammn to a Br&lvnin lives in the Vaikuntha for ns 
many years as there are grains of sesamum and if ho gives the grains in a oopper- 
pot the benefit derived from the gift is doubled. Whoever gives a chaste, 
well-deoorated bride to a Br&hmin lives in the land of the Moon for a tune 
covered by fourtoeu Indraa and there enjoys thesooioty of Heavenly prostitutes. 
Afterwards, in the land of the G-andarvas, he enjoys the superb bliss afforded by 
the company of Urvasl and, later on, for 1,000 births in succession he succeeds 
in getting a blessed, chaste, graceful wife of soft complexion and a sweet voice. 

31-41 Whoever gives a fruitful tree to a Br&hmin lives in the Indra- 
loka for aa many years as there are fruits of the tree. The gift of a thousand 
fruitful trees is still more meritorious. Whoevor gives mere fruits to a BrAbmin 
iivee in Heaven for a long time and is afterwards again born in Indra. W hoever 
give* many articles and a big house full of crops to a Bi-ahmin lives in Kuveia s 
laud for one Manwantara and is afterwards born as a great and wealthy man.. 
Whoever gives land with standing crops to a Brahmin lives m the Vsikuntha 
for a handled Manwantras and is afterwards born again as a wealthy man. Lam. 
never quits him even in a hundred births: ( i.e ., ho ever owns land.) He 
becomes prosperous and wealthy, the father of many sons and a land-lord pos¬ 
sessing many tenants. Whoever gives a good village toa Br&bmin hve3 m the 
Vaikuntha for one lakh Manawairras, is thereafter again born as mau an< 
acquires 1,00,000 villages. The earth or land does not quit him for a lakh 

of births. 

42-48 Whoever gives a town toeming with five kinds of crops, ponds, 
trees and fruits to a Br&hraiu lives in the Vaikuntha for a time covered by 
ton lakhs of Indras. He is then born as a king and acquires tea thousand 
cities. The earth does not quit him for 10,000 years. Whoever gives a 

province or a hundred cities teeming with ponds, pools, trees and subjects to 

a Brfthmm lives in the Vaikuntha for one crore Manwantras and is afterwards 
born a train, resourceful like Indra, as the king of the Jamba Islands, ifae 
oarth does not quit him for a crore of births. He lives like an emperor till 
the end of the Kalpa. 

49-60. Whoever transfers his entire jurisdiction to a Br&hraip teaps 
the above benefits Hour-fold. Whoever gives Jambu-dwipa to a Brahmin reaps 
the last named benefits a hundred-fold. O chaste one, a person who makes a gift 
of the entire earth containing seven islands, who observes all sorts of 
austere rites, or rigidly fasts or makes a gift of every thing and attains all 
sorts of perfection has still to come back to this world. But for a wonder, the 
worshipper ef Visnu is for ever relieved from the torments of the world. 1 he 

Vaisnavas, at. their residence in the Goloka or the V aiktmtha, witne-, the h » 








PR A KRJT1-KHANDA. 


of countless Br&hmfts. As soon as they quit their bodies, they wield.a form each 
free from oirth, death and decrepitude and attaining the likeness or \ i«r>u ■ )(, V 
worship Him; and, residing in the Vaikuntha they witness countless tdsso u- 
tions cf the world. Even gods and adepts at times see the earth s the immortal 
Vaisnavas do not. Whoever in the month of KArtiku offers basil leaves to, 
Hari'remains in his land for as many years as there are leaves. Afterwards 
he is bom again as man, attains faith in, Hari and becomes happy and longe¬ 
vous. Whoever in the same month offers a lamp of ghee to Hari dwells 
in Ida land for as many pa las (a pula =24 seconds) as the lamp burns and 
again assuming birth as man ho attains faith in Hari and becomes wealthy, clear- 
sighted and valorous. 

til-70. Whoever builu, in the ■ Ganges at, break of day in the month of 
MAffha lives in the temple of Hari for 60,000 YAgss, then assumes bis birth 
again as a mortal, attains faith in Hari and becomes the best ot those who 
subdue thoir passions. Whoever so bitlns in the holy land of pilgrims at 
IWW dwells in the Vuikunthi for a lakh of Manwantras, is then born again 
as a mortal, receives the * Mantra of Hari and alter quitting his frame 
attains the feet of Hari. Ho attains the likeness of Hari, devotes hunsoU: to his 
worship and has never to come bibk to the earth. He who bathes everyday 
in the Ganges becomes holy like the Sui; an I, ou his way to the river, ho reaps 
benefit at every .top as a person does, who pcrfo.ms the ceremony of horse- 
sacriuce. He consecrates «he earih by the dust of his feet; and so 1 ong as the 
Sun and the Moon exist ho dwells in the Vaikuntha ; and, afterwards being 
born a.-ain as a mortal, lie becomes pious, pure, learned, abstemious and devoted 
to <md. In Mav and Juno when tin Sun afflicts the world with heat, whoever 
refreshes any one in India with fragrant water dwells m the V aikunfha for a 

poriod covered by the successive jurisdictions of.fourteen Indras.- lhen he is 

born again and becomes faithful and happy. 

71-89, Whoever in those months, dedicates sandal to Hari dwells in his 
teinido for 60,000 Yugas. Then he is born again and becomes graceful and 
haoov The gift of a stored thread conf rs th> same benefit as mentioned 
Srn Whoever in the month of Vftis&kba gives flour of fried gram to a 
Brahmin dwells in the temple of Visnu for as many years as there aro par- 
iiole« of flour. Whoever performs the ceremony of JanmAstami is released 
from the sins of a hundred births and after death dwells in the Vaikuntha 
for a time covered bv fourteen Lid,-as. He then resumes his birth and 
acquires faith in Hari. Whoever pert - , mis the vow oU- i vara! rid wells in the 
SLva-loka for seven Manwantras. Whoever offers Bae-leaves to te'iva dwells m 
his temple for as many years as there are leaves. He is then born again, 
attains faith in 3'iva and acquires knowledge, sons, tenants and land. Who- 

over worships 1dm in the mouth of Ohaifra or MAgha; or with a cane in his 

\Zd for a whole month or for half a m mth or Lor ten days or a week dances 
out of deference to S'iva dwells in his land for as nvmy Yugus as the days 
on which he danced. Whoever observes the vow of LAm-navumi in India 
dwells in the Vaikuntha for seven Manwantras. Ho is then horn again, 
obtains faith in Llama, subdues bis passions end hoc ernes ext really pious. 
Whoeve 'reverentially worships DurgA with perfume, flowers, sacrifice offer- 
ings frankinceune and lamp in the month of autumn and u> connection with 






• c 0k=^X 

THE BE A H MA- VALVAR TA PVRaNA. 


this ceremony dances, sings, indulges in all sorts o£ music and performs aus¬ 
picious deeds dwells in the S'iva loka for seven Maawautras. He then is 
born again and acquires pure wisdom. His children multiply* JtUa prosperity 
becomes stable; he becomes the king of kings vested with great might and 
possessed of elephants and horses. 

90-101. Whoever in India on the lunar day of the Full Moon in the 
month o£ Kartika, by the construction of the sphere of the Ri\sa attended 
by hundreds of cowherds and oowhordesses or on an idol or sfatuo, by the offerings 
of sixteen ingredients worships Radha and Krisnadwells in the Goloka as long as 
Bmhm& exists. He then comes back to India and certainly acquires fiithin Ilari 
and his mantras and, subsequently quitting his body and returning to the Goloka, 
he attains the form of Hari and becomes one of his attendants free from life 
».nd death. He never falls again. Whoever fasts on the day of Ekadasi 
oomaected with the bright or dark half of the lunar month dwells in the 
Va : ktu)thaas long as Brahma exists. He then comes hack to India and 
acquires faith in Hari. After his deutli he reverts to Ihc Vaikuntha and never 
falls again. In the month of JBh&dra on the 1.1th day of the bright half 
— of the lunar month, whoever worships Jndra dwells iii his land for 60,000 
years. Whoever in India on tho seventh day of the bright half of the lunar month 
on the day of the Solar Sankrioti worships the Sun after taking ghee and boiled 
rice, remains in the solar region as long as the Sun and the Moon exist. He 
then comes baok. to India and acquires health and prosperity. Whoever on 
the foarieonth day of the bright half of the lunar nv nth, in the mouth of Jaistha, 
worships Savitri dwells in the Brahma-loka for seven JVJanwantars. He then 
comes bick to the earth and acquires valour, long life, wisdom and prosperity. 

102 -112. Whoever on tho fifth day of the bright half of the lunar month of 
MaghA, pure in body and mind, worships Saras watt with sixteen ingredients lives 
iu the Vaikuntha for one day and one night of BruhmA, Ue is then born 
again and becomes a poet as well as a savant. Whoever gives a well-ornamented 
cow to a Brfthmin every day throughout hn life parses his days merrily 
with Visnu for a number of years doable the hairs on the skin of the cow. 
Ho then comes back to India and acquires an empire, cows, song, knowledge 
and happiness in every way. Whoever in India feasts the Brahmins with sweets 
» dwells in the temple of Visnu for as 'many years as there are hairs on the 
pores of tho skin of tho Briihmin. If this deed is performed in the place 
allotted to N&r&yana, tho fruit is ten millions of times enhanced. 
Whoever recites his name ten millions tT times in the places allotted to N/lr&yana 
is redeemed in his life-timo and, dying, attains the likeness of Hari. Ue never 
again falls from ihe Vaikuntha. Whoever constructs tho male organ of S # iva 
v;ltH clay and worships him all his life, dwells in his land for as many years 
as there are particles of clay. He then roturus to India and beoomes a king. 

113-122. Whoever worships the holy stono and drinks the waters of 
2 f 3 feet dwells in the Vaikuntha for a time covered by 100 Brabm&s. He is 
rben bo^u again and dying goo* to the Vaikuntha whence he never descends. 
Whoever bathes iu the hoiy rivers by circa no ambulation round tho world gets 
final emancipation and is never born again. In the sacred land of India, 
whoever performs horse-sacrifice is entitled to half a seat with Irmra For ns 







pnAKinti-KHAh'hA. 

• « 


many years as there are hairs on the body of tho horse* Iho performance 
of the grand royul-sacrifice gives benefits four times as much.. Sacrifice of 
a man or a cow yields half the fruits of the horse-sacrifice. The sacrifice 
of tanks gives half the fruits of cow-sacrifieo and blesses the worshipper with 
a son. The plough-sacrifice is equal to the cow-sacrifice in point of merit. 
The lot ns-sacrifice is half as much beneficial as the cow-sacrifice. Tho Vijfoka- 
sacrifice kills sorrow, is half as much efficacious a9 tho lotus-saorifice and gives 
half as much bliss of heaven as the latter gives, A king who performs the 
sacrifice of Vijaya or victory become* successful in war and gets as much 
bliss of heaven as could be secured by the lotus-sacrifice. 

123-131. A king by the performance of Pr&japatya-saorifice acquires 
subjects and land. In this world, he secures the affection of other kings ; 
and after his death he enjoys the same amount of celestial bliss as he does in 
the case of lotus-sacrifice. In the sacrifice of prosperity (Iliddhi) a man 

enjoys the same amount of celestial bliss as in the case of sacrifice of lotuses. 
Fair one* tho sacrifice called Visnu-Yaga is the best of all sacrifices. With great 
eclat, it was performed by Brahma in days of yore. 0 chaste one, on the occasion 
of this sacrifice there was a quarrel hetween Daksa and S'ankara. The Br&hmfns 
cursed Nandi who cursed them in return. Thereupon in revenge >S / iva dissolved 
the Visnu-Yagna performed by Daksa. This sacrifice is equal to a hundred ho»*3e- 
sacrifices in point of merit. 1 hereupon Dhartna, Kasypa, Ananta, Kardaina, 
Alana, Priya-Vrata, S'iva, Sanat-Kumftra, Dhruva and Kapila performed this 
Visnu rite and reaped benefit equal to that which can bo secured by a thousand 
grand royal-sacrifices. In a word, there is no sacrifice so beneficial as this which 
redeems inau in his life-time and makes him equal to Visnu in points of know¬ 
ledge and asceticism. 

132-145. As Visnu is among the gods, S^iva among the Vai&navas, the 
Vedas among the S'ustras, the Brahmins among tho householders, the Ganga 
among rivers, the Vaisnava among tho holy, the Ekadasi among the 
vows, tho holy basil among flowers, the moon among stars, tho Gnroda 
among birds, the goddess Nature (Prakriti) among women, the Earth among the 
containers, the mind among the passions, Brahma among the lords of creation, 
Vrindavaua among forests, India amoug continents, Lakstni among tho 
graceful, $arasi«att among the learned, Durga among the chaste and KAdha 
among the blessed, So is Visnu-Yagna among sacrifices. A hundred horse-sacrifices 
secure the position of Indi a ; a thousand such sacrifices secure the feet of \ i?nu. 
Ablution in all holy waters, initiation in all sacrifices, performance of ah 
austerities and vows, the sfudv of the four Vedas, the eircuruambulation found 
the world are beneficial no doubt* hut the service of Krsna alone enjoined by 
the Vedas, the Pur&nas and histories can secuia redemption. The delineation of 
Krisna’s grace, His meditation (DhyAn), the recitation of the viitues of hi> 
names, tiie perusal of his hymns, his recollection and adoration, the 
drinking of the water of his feet and eating of articles of food dedicated 
to Him°evory day are sanctioned by all and universally desired 0 child, you 
should therefore worship Krisna, the Supreme Being who is distinct from 
Nature and void of all attributes. Now, take hack your husband and go home. 

I have already related to you ti e edifying law of causation sanctioned by ati 
and universally solicited. 








TliE BRAmiA-V aivarta pu 


CHAP T E H. X XVIII. 

I- 10. NA’rfiyann said, SAvitri having heard from Yama tho eulogies of Hari 

fluttered with joy aud with tears in her eyes addressed him thus, “god, I ^ 

learn that there is no. virtue so great as the recitation of Hari’s name. It 
redeems one’s race and dispenses with the death, re-birth and decrepitude 
both of the reciter and the audience. The reoit.ation of the virtues of Hari 

nnd his adoration are superior to any gift, or vow, or attainment of perfection, 
or devotion, or meditation or the Vedas. Redemption, immortality or any 
other perfection is not equal to a sixteenth 5 art of the sanctity acquired by sub¬ 
mission to tfari. Sire, you know the Vedas. Counsel me, (a foolish woman) 
how to worship Krisna who transcends nature. I have heard from you the descrip¬ 
tion of the fruits reaped by good actions. Now narrate to me the consequences 
of evil deeds. So saying, Savitrt reverentially adored Yama thus:— c I adore 
Yama whom tho Sun-god, by his adoration of Dharmaat the Puskara obtained as 
his son, a product of the digits of Dharma. I bow to the justice-loving 
S'amatm or Yama who witnesses all deeds. I bow to Krit&nta or Yama who 
rewards or chastises people according to their deeds. 

II- 18. I adore Dandadhara (the holder of the mace) who chastises people 'j 
according to their deserts. I bow to tho irresistible Time (Kftla) who always re¬ 
duces the span oE life allotted to the people in the world. I bow to Yama I 
who is dovoted to Visnu, who is a great ascetic, who is pious and controls his 
passions, who givos fruit3 of actions and is omniscient, who is a friend of the 
virtuous' and a foe of the vicious and who is self-c ontonted. I bow to Yama 
who is descended from BrahmA, who is radiant with the lustre of Brahma; 

who is constantly devoted to Brahma.” SAvitri having adored him thus, Yama 
described to her the worship appropriate to Visnu and the law of causation. ] 
Whoever in tho morning reals theso eight odes to Yama is relieved from 
all sins and tho fear of Yama. The greatest sinner, too, if he rends the 
above, is rescued by Yama after he has wielded several bodies successively. 

CHAP T E It XXIX. j 

i-G. N a r Ay an a said : “Then Yama, the son of the Sun-god, commenced 
to narrate to her the consequences of evil deeds thus “0 chaste one, von have 
heard an account of the results of good deeds. Now ’hear tho account of the 
fruits reaped by bad deeds. There are seyefal kinds of hell-pits distinctly 
described by the several PurAnns. 0,.ebi!'f, these pits are expansive, deep, 
dreadful, painful to animate beings and very ugly. The pits£as named in 
the Vedas are as follows :~ 




7-21. The pits of Bre, blood, boat, salt, ordure urine, saliva, fat, semen, 
tears, marrow, meat,nail, hair, hones, copper, iron, thorns, poison, perspiration, hot 
wine, heated oil, teeth, worms, pus. snakes, gnats, salt, thorns, reed, ashes, scimitar, 
alligator, crow, hawk, falcon, thunder, heated stone, wheel .tortoise, ashes, razor, ; 
anvil, scabbard, needles, itouch, iguana, tusk of elephants, Knmbbipaka, thread 
of lime, meteor, the dark well, ih<- pit of chastisement,, the pit of mace, tho 

kes and 
montod in 


pit for pounding-the body, pit For. sacking the. blood, the girdle of sna 
so on. l’hhy are eighty six in number. O SAvitii. the sinners are tormi 
tlv ,0 pits guarded by my myrmidons 







PH A KR1TLK HAS DA. 



22-27. The guards are severally armed with mace, spear, iron-spear, 
noose, club,etc., and are hideous in appearance. They are all absorbed indevotion, 
'jhey are adepts and can assume any shape. The sinners about to die see 
them constantly. But the followers o£ S^iva, ^akti> the Sun, Gapesa and the 
adept saints never behold them. Those who perform duties allotted to 
them, those who desist from Karma, l mean the Yaisnnvas who are powerful 
and fearless never see their faces even in dreams, 0 chaste one, I just gave 
vou an account of the hell -pits ; now hear of the sinners who have to reside 
therein. 

V'/ 0 H A P T E ll X X X. 

1 -11. Yama said : * Chaste one, those devoted to tiari, pure in mind, 

adept, accomplished, engaged in vows and meditations, the Brahma-chfina 
and the Yatis do not go to hell. Whoever, on the ground that he is strong 
uses harsh words to his relations and oppresses them therewith goes to the pit 
of fire and remains there for as many years as there aro hairs on his body. 
He then attains the birth of a beast thrice and is consumed by the heat of the 
Sun. A fool who doe3 not entertain a thirsty and hungry Brtlhmin guest, 
goes to tho pit of heat and dwells there for as many years as there are hairs 
on his body. He then assumes the birth of a bird seven times. Whoever 
applies calcine soil to the cloth on Sunday, on the lunar day of the solar 
Samkaranti, the lunar day of Ato&vasy& cr on the occasion of the funeral 
ceremony goes to the pit of salt and dwells there for as many years as there are 
fibres in the cloth lie is then horn as a washerman seven times. Whoever 
deprives a Brahmin of the allowance allot led to him either by himself or ethers 
dwells in the pit of ordure for 60,000 years. For a like period he has to 
roam again in India in the form of a worm. Whoever having constructed a 
pool ou the pool of another person unfortunately dedicates it to the public 
dwells in the pit of urine for as many years as thera are particles of dost 
in the pool and then assumes the form of an iguana for seven Uirths iu succession 

12-26. Whoever eats sweetmeat alone dwells in the pit of saliva for. 
a hundred years and hen acquires the form of a spectre in India and subsists 
upon saliva, and urine. W hoever dees not support his [arents, preceptor, wife, 
children and orphans, dwells in the pit of pot non and consumes poison for a 
thousand years. Then for a hundred years lie is horn as a spectre and is 
afterwards purified. Whoever frowns at a guest, is repulsive to the gods and 
the manes, is guilty of Brahmin-slaughter and consumes rheum in the rheum- 
pit for a hundred years. Then horn as a man seven times, he suffers the tor- 
meats of poverty. Whoever gives to anybody else things which were offered to a 
Brahmin at first dwells in the pit of fat and eats it for a century. Then 
thrice he is born as i Cliftnd&l, seven times as a chaiuelion, and then as a poor 
man living only for a short lime, ff a person causes the discharge 
of semen of a woman or a man, he dwells in the pit of semen and eats it for 
a century. f l hen for a century he live* as a Worm before he is purified. Whoever 
hurts a JBr&htnin or his preceptor and thereby causes blood-shed lives iu the 
pit. of blood and drinks it fora century. Afterwards ho is horn as a fowler seven 
times before he is purified. \V hcever laughs at a worshipper of Kri§na (whose 
voice is trembling with religious emotion and whose eyes are streaming with 
tears) is consigned to the pit of tears and drinks them for a Century. Theq 
he inborn as a Chaftdal thrive before he is purified. 








27-41. Whoever practices deception upon another with an impure heart 
dwells in the pit' of the dirt of the body and subsists upon it for ten years. He 
h then born as an ass thrice and as a jackal thrice before he is purified* Who¬ 
ever through the pride of his heart laughs at or slanders a deaf man is con¬ 
signed to the pit of the secretions of ears and subsists upon them for a 
century. He is then born seven times as a deaf man and seven times as 
a deformed man before he is purified. Whoever, out of avarice, for his 
own maintenance, kills other animals, is consigned to the pit of the marrow 
for a lakh of years. Ho eat* the ma:row there. Afterwards he assumes the 
birth of a hare, fish and deer seven times before he is purified. Whoever 
,selte his daughter for gain dwells in the pit of flesh and eats it for as many 
years as there are hairs on the skin of the body of his (laughter. He is then 
chastised by a club by my myrmidons. He wields the burden of ireat on his 
head and drinks the blood of animals, when he is hungry. He is then 
born as a worm and dwells for 60,000 years in the ordure of his daughter. 
Then he is born seven times as a fowler, thrice as a boar, seven times as a dog, 
seven times as a frog, seven times as a leech and seven times as a ctow before he 
is purified. Whoever does not shave on the day of the performance of a 
vow, or on a day meant for fasting or performing a funeral ceremony is deemed 

unholy for the purpose of every act. For as many years as the days on 

which he did not shave he dwells in the pit of* nails, eats the nails and is 
beaten with a stick. In India, whoever worships the male organ of S'iva 
conjoined with hair will, by S'iva's wrath, be consigned to the pit of hair for 
as many years os there are atoms of dust in the said organ. Afterwards he is 
lx)rn as an infidel and dwells as such for a century. Then ho is purified aqd 
born in bis own family. 

42-53. Whoever out of deference to the manes does not offer cakes 

to the feet of Visnu is consigned to the pit of bones for as many years as 

there are hairs ou his body. Then seven times, he is born as a lame and 
poor man; afterwards, he is consecrated by chastisement inflicted upon him. 
Whoever commits sexual intercourse with his pregnant wife, dwells in the 
pit of copper for a century. Whoever eats food offered by a childless widow 
or a woman iri her menses dwells in the pit of red-hot. iron for a century. 
Afterwards born by turn* as a washerman and carpenter seven times, he is 
rendered subject to poverty and horrible sores on his body. Then he is consecrated. 
Whoever with perspiring hand touches divine articles dwells for a century 
in the pit of perspiration. Any Br&hmin who, ordeied by a S'fidra, accepts his 
food has to dwell for a century in the pit of heated wine. Then he is born 
as a Brahmin (subsisting upon altrs and the food of a 8'ftdra) seven times 
before he is purified. A shrew who torments her husband with harsh words 
is consigned to the pit of thorns which she eats and, being chastised by the 
myuuidont of Vain a for four Yugas, at last assumes the birth of a dumb woman. 
After this, she is purified. Whoever pobons another dwells in the pit of 
poison for a thousand years and eats poison. Then lie is born as a murderer 
seven times and a leper seven , times. Lie is then purified. 

54-65. He who drives or carries a bullock and beats him personally 
or inflicts chastisement upon him through the agency of another person dwells 
ia the pit of heated oil for six Yugas. Then he becomes a bullock for as 







many years as there are hairs on the body o£ the bullock. 0 chaste on3. whovor, 
with tk© mace, book or iron kills animals lives for ten thousand years in the 
pit of teeth Afterwards he is born again and is afflicted for one year with 
paint in the stomach. Any Brahmin who takes animal food or food not 
dedicated to Bari is consigned to the pit of worms for as many years as there 
hairs an his body. Then he is born thrice as an infidel and is afterwards born again 
aa a Brahmin Whoever accepts alm9 from a S'udra or eats his food or burns the 
dead body of* a S'fidra goes to the pit of pus wherein ho is tormented for several 
years by the myrmidons of death. Then he is born as a S'&dra seven times 
and is afflicted with colic pain and poverty. Afterwards he is born as a 
Brahmin again. Whoever kills a snake marked on tho head with the foot-prints 
of Jvrisna is devoured hy snakes for several years, chastised by my myrmidons 
and fed with the orduie of snakes. Ihen he acquires the condition of a snake, 
then of a man attacked hy rir g-worms and ultimately dies of snake-bite, 

66-74. Whoever pints out to others the method of killing animals and 
destroys small animals by tempting them with bait dwells in the pit of 
gnats for as many years as the animals lie has killed and, though fasting 
himself, he is devoured by small animals and screams in pain. My myrmidons 
fasten and chastise him. Then he becomes a small animal and later on, a deformed 
ifun and is then purified. A fool who destroys bees and appropriates their honey- 
goes to the pit of poison where he lives for a9 many years as the bees he has killed. 
He eats the poison by which he is consumed and he is chastised by my myrmidons. 
Afterwards he is born as a bee and then as a human being, A king who 
oppresses his subjects for the sake of money dwells in the pit oi scorpions for 
os many years as the hairs on the body of bis subjects. He is then horn in 
India as a cripple and a valetudinarian. A Brahmin who wields a weapon or 
assumes the role of an ambassador or is devoid of religions rites dwells in the 
pit of reeds for as many years as the hairs on his body. Being pierced again and 
again by reeds and incessantly tormented he is chastened and is then born as a 
Brahmin again. 

75 84. A king who, infatuated, confines his subjects in a dark ce’l for. 
small offences dwells for a very long period in tbe circular pit of biting insects, 
After a long 1 sojourn in bell where; he has to work as a slave of his subjects? 
he is consecrated and born again. 0 chaste one, whoever kills an alligatoo 
dragged from the pool lives in the pool of alligators for ns many years as tfa; 
thorns or bristles on the skin of the alligator. Then lie is born as an aliigator 
arid after consecration he is born as a nr.an again, Whoever looks lustfully 
at the wife of another lives in the pit of crows that peck his eyes for as many 
years as the hairs on the skin of his body. Then for three successive births 
he is born as a crow. Whoever steals tho gold of a god or a Brahmin is 
consigned to the pit of falcons for years countless as the hairs on his body. 
There he is chastised by my myrmidons and his eyes? are pecked by falcons whose 
ordure he has to eat. This great hypocrite and sinner is then born as a 
blind man three times : as a poor goldsmith seven times and then as a gold- 
merchant. 

85-95. 0 fair one, whoever steals copper or it on in India is thrown into 

the pit of hawks whose ordure he eats for as many years as tho hairs on his 
body. The falcons peck his eyes and my myrmidons chastise him Then, after 







THE BRAHMA-VAIVARI'A TUHaNA. 


§L 


purification, bo is born as a man. Whoever steaks an idol or things appertaining 
to an bio! lives in the pit of thirader For as many years as the pores on the 
skin of his body. His body is consumed by thunder there, lie has to starve 
and my myrmidons chastise him. He screams in pain. After purification, he is 
born again as a man. Whoever steals the produce of a cow or silver or cloth 
belonging to a Brahmin or a god dwells in the pit of heated stone for as many 
years as the hairs on his body. Then he is born thrieo as a heron, thrice &3 
a white swan, once as a white kite and many ti nes as a white bird. After 
this, he is born as a man afflicted with white leprosy or colic pain and after 
the end of a short life allotted to him he is puriiiol. Whoever steals utensils 
of brass or dumb-bell belonging to a Brahmin or a god goes for as many 
years as there are hairs on the skin of bis body to tho pit of sharp, 
cutting stoues. Then ho is born in India seven times as a hors then as a 
monster and afterwards as a man afflicted with the dise ise of th^,log. Who¬ 
ever takes foo l offered by a prostitute or subsists upon her income <|well$ for as. 
many years as there are hairs on the skin of his body in tlvo pit offsah'va which 
he consumes. There ho is punished by ?ny mywniduus. Afterwards he is 
afflicted with eye-sore and is then redeomod. 

9b-»05. 0 chaste ouo. a BrAhmin who serves an infidel or subsists upon 

his iak a dwells in the pit of ink which he drinks for a like period. There 
ho is chastised by my myrmidons : after that ho is born thrice us a black 
animal, then grows as n palm-tree and is subsequently born again as a human being 
after purification. Whoever steals paddy, betel* matting used as a seat, or 
beddiag belonging to u god or BrAhmin is consigned into the pit of powder 
where my myrmidons beat him. Then that sinner is born thrice as a lamb, 
thrice as a oock and afterwards as a consumptive, dwarfish, shortlived, poor 
man having no issue. Then he is purified, lie win enjoys a thing belonging 
to a Brahmin after having stolen it is thrown into the spherical pit and 
chastised there. And afterwards thrice being born as an oilman subject to 
many diseases and having no is.<ue he is purified, die who is insincere to a 
tkahmin. or to his relations lives for one Ydga in tho crooked pit and afterwards 
he is born seven times as a man with deformed limbs or no liinbs and void 
of wealth, issue and wife. A Lor this he is purified. 

106-117. Whoever on tho day of Ek&dasi eats tho flesh of a tortoise 
dwells in the pit of tortoise for a century. There he is devoured by the 
tortoise and then assumes birth thrice as a tortoise, thrice as a boar, thrice as 
a Tom cat and thrice as a peacock. Whoever steals rjhee or oil of a Br&hmin or an 
idol lives for a oeutury iu tho pit of flames or red-hot ashes. Then by turns she is 
born as a cock-crouch, king-fisher and a rat seven times. After this, he be^* 
comes pure. Whoever in India steals fragrant oil or other fragrant articles 
of a BrAhmin ora god or emblio myrobalao belonging to him is thrown 
into the pit of bad smell for as many years as the hiirs on his body. Ulti¬ 
mately he attains the condition of a mole for seven births and a musk-deer 
for three births and then he becomes a man again. Whoever out of mischief 
or hypocrisy or by force misappropriates the paternal laud of another person 
goes to the pit of anvil and is persecuted there day and night. Irt this pit 
the sinners though tounented are not consumed to dust. For the body meant 
for suffering never perishes. Here a sinner lives without food for seven 
Mauwantras. Chastised by my myruii Ions, he sere i ns incessantly. Then lie is 






PJiAKBiTI-KnANVA* 



ourn a» a worra of tha night soil and dwells as such for 60,000 7 e * ri * 
after assuming his birth as * man roid of wealth and hud ho is reared frona 

his sins. 

118-128. Whoever cruelly slaughters animals with a sword or commits 

murders through avarice remains iu the pit ofbword foi a peiitx covered y 

the jurisdictions of fourteen Indras. If a Brahmin .3 murdered by hi. sot, the 
murderer has to dwell there for ono hundred Manwantaras. There the sinner be- 
ioe famished, cut by the sword and chastised by my myrmidons screams races* 
santly. Then he is born as a hawk, a hundred times ; a hoar, a hundred times ; a 

don seven times, a jackal seven times, a tiger seven times, a heron thrice, * 

rhinoceros seven times and a buffalo, thrice. Chaste one whoever burns a 
village or a town dwells for three Yugas m tho pit of Keen-edged Kazors, than 
he dwells on earth like a spectre having the face of fire. I hen be is born as 
a man who eats ordure, seven ltimes and as a fire-fly seven times. Afterwards 
he is born seven times as a man subject to acute oolic pain and seven times as a 
leper. After this, he is purified. Whoever slanders another with whispers 
in the ears of a person or whoever slanders a god or a Br&hmin or delight* 
in criticising others dwells in the pit of Needles for three Yogas where he is 
pierced with needles and is afterwards born as a scorpion seven times, a 
snake sevon times, a stone-insect (or diamond insect' seven tunes, a stomach- 
insect (which eats up whatever food is cast into the stomach and makes the 
consumer of the food ever hungry) seveu times. Ha is then born as a diseased 
man and is afterwards purified. 

129"13*7. Whoever causes rapture in the family of a person and 
steals cow, goat or sheep dwells in the hell of [guana. He is then born as a 
diseased'cow seven times, as a sheep tlirico. and as a goat, thrice. Ihenhe 
ii born as a man void of health, wealth, wife and friend, and after suffering 
endless torments becomes pure. Whoever steals ordinary things goes to tho hell 
of Alligators and then assumes bis birth as a diseased man before he is consecrated. 
Whoever slays a oow, an elephant or a horse is, for three Yugas, thrust into the 
pit of Elephant’s Tusk with whichhe is constantly laoerated for three Yugas. Icon 
he aeguires successively the birth of an elephant, horse, oow and an infidel before 
he is purified Whoever prevents a thirsty cow from drinking water or does not 
tend a cow properly goes into the hot pit of Cow-mouth where he lives for 
one Manwanfcra. Then he is born seven times as a man, diseased and void of 
cows and seven times as a man of very low origin. 

138-145. Whoever commits imputed cow-slaughter or imputed BxAhmia- 
sWhter, whoever commits sexual intercourse with women within tho pro¬ 
hibited degree, whoever is void of his daily religious rites, whoever is uninitiated 
or takes gifts everywhere or is a village priest or subsists upon the offerings 
made to an idol or cooks food for a 8'Adra or drinks wine or is the husband of a 
barren woman or kills a oow. a BrAhmin, a woman, a beggar or a fetus lives in 
the pit called the Potter’s Cooking Vessel for a time covered by the jurisdiction, 
of fourteen Indras. Here my myrmidous wheel him round and thrust him by turn 
into the fire, thorns, hot oil, hot water, heated stone or red-hot iron ; then ten 
millions of times he is born as a vulture, seven times as a boar and seven times 
as a crow and snake and for 60,000 years he lives as a worm. Then he is bor#as 
s SAdra afflicted with leprosy, poverty and consumption and void of a wife and 
ultimafclf becomes part.” 

22 * « 








THE BR AH At A-V AIV ART A PUR AN A. 


& 


146-159. Savitri tfaid: “ Lord, what is the imputed slaughter of a BrAh- 
min or a cow ?” (t Whioh women belong to the prohibited degree of sexual inter- 
course,’ Who are without SandhyA or necessary religious rites and who are un¬ 
initiated? Who accept gifts ? Who are village priests? Who aro called Deralas? 
Who cook food for the 8'ftdras ? Who are infatuated ? Who are Vrisal-patis ?” 
Yarna replied: “Fair one, whoever makes a distinction between Krisna and his 
idol or between S'iva and his organ, or between the Sun and his gem or between 
Ganesa and his idol is guilty of BrAhratn slaughter. Whoever makes a dis¬ 
tinction between his preceptor, father, mother and his tutelary deity commits 
the same sin. A fool who makes no distinction between a Vaisnava and other 
worshippers, a Br&hrain and other castes, the offerings and oblations of 
\ isnu and other offerings and obiations commits the .same sin, i. e. f BrAhrnm- 
slaughter. Whoever makes no distinction between the Supreme Being Krisna 
who is the final cause, the lord of all, the universal spirit, who is served by others 
godfl, who by virtue of his illusions wields endless forms, who is void of attributes 
and other gods, whoever forbids the worship of the gods and the manes, 
whoever slanders the holy Lord Krisna and hie worshippers or whoever 
slanders the goddess nature (who inspires faith for the Lord, who is the 
primeval cause, who like a mother is adored by every one, who represents the 
energy of the universe and the delusion of Visnu) likewise commits Br^hmin- 
sulaugbter. 

160-171. Whoever on the days of Janm&stami, Karaoavami, S'iva 
ratri, Lk&duei, Sunday, or on tho five important days of festival does not 
discharge his duties properly is worse than a Cbandftla and commits Br&hmin- 
alaughter. Whoever on the prohibited days digs the earth or on ordinary 
days discharges urine into the water or does not support his parents, preceptor, 
wife or children commits the same sin. Whoever is unmarried and void of 
sons, or does not worship Hari or the earthon organ of S'iva, or oats things not 
dedicated to Hari commits the same sin ^Br&bmin-slaughter). Whoever pre¬ 
vents a cow from eating or drinking or passes between a Br&hrnin and a cow 
commits the same sin. Whoever drives (or carries) a bullook or strikes 
a cow commits oow-slaughter. Whoever gives refuso of his food to the cow 
or causes his religious rites to be performed through tho driver of a bullock 
or foeds people with the food offered by the said driver commits cow-slaughter. 
Whoever eats food of a Vrisali-pati or performs religious rites through him 
or treads on the fire or kicks the cow or enters into Lis house without washing 
his feet or eats or sloops without washing his feot or eats twice a day commits 
cow-slaughter. 


172-182. A Brahmin who never performs religious rtyes three times* 
a day, who is a pandor to the lust of others, who eats food offered by a 
childless widow commits Br&hcntn-raurder. Whoever on a festive or gala-day 
(Parva) does not worship the manes, or, on the lunar day, does not worship 
the gods, whoever does not entertain the guests who arrives at his house 
commit* oow-slaughter. A woman who makes a distinction between Krisna 
and her husband or abuses her husband commits oow-slaughter. Whoever 
dig* tho road meant for the passage of the cows, or the margin of a pool and 




murr*,. 



sows grain therein commits cow-slaughter. Whoever through avarice or 
folly violates the rales of penance prescribed for the slaughter of « cow. 
whoever does not preserve a cow from the oppression of the king or a god, 
whoever troubles a cow, whoever scales over or over-steps an idol, Are, water, 
sacrificial offerings, flowers or crops, whoever denies very often the existence 
of gods, whoever is a liar or an impostor, whoever injures the gods or the 
preceptor, whoever does not reverentially bow to an idol, preceptor or a 
Brkhmip, whoever oat of anger does not bless a man who bows to him, who¬ 
ever does not impart knowledge to a student commits cow-slaughter. I nar¬ 
rated to you what I heard from the Sun. Now what do you want 'to 
hear ? ” ' , 

-r 

183-190. S&vitri asked, “ What is the difference, 0 lord, between a real 
and imputed act ? ” Yatna said. “ In some instances, the real act is superior 
in point of merit; in others, the c ise is the reverse. la other instances, the 
real act and the act attributed are equally meritorious. A Br&hmin (not 
being a stranger) who imparts knowledge or Mantra (if paternity is imputed 
to him) is regarded by virtue of this imputation more meritorious than the 
real father. For the mother is a hundred times more adorable than the 
father, and the preceptor is inoro adorable than the mother, as sanctioned 
by the Vedas. As a tutelary goddess is superior to the tutelary god, so 
is the preceptor’s wife superior to the preceptor. In the expression, 
This 13r4hmin is like S'iva, : . or the king is powerful like Visnu,’ the 
real object (S'iva or Visnu) is a lakh of times more meritorious thau the 
object compared (i. <?., the Br&hmin or king) But iu the expression,’ At 
the solar or lunar eclipse, all water i3 like the Ganges or all the Brahmins 
are like Vyksa ’, the real and the compared objeots are equal. 

191-200. Ileal murder, Brahma hath said, is four times more culpable than 
the murder attributed. Now I am going to describe to you the prohibited degrees, 
of sexual intercourse. Tho Vedas hold that ali women are withiu the forbidden 
degree except one’s wife. But this is stated in a general way. Now I am going 
to tell you in detail. ‘0 chaste one, sexual intorcour.se of a Brahmin with a S'udra 
woman or a S'udra man with a Br&hmin woman 13 highly reprehensible and 
censured by tho society and the Vedas. In the latter case, both the men andHhe 
woman go to the hell colled the Kombhipaka. In tho former-case the 
-• Br&braivTis styled as Vrisall-pati (i. /., a Brahmin who goes to a S'hdra woman 
for an immoral purpose) and is worse than a Gbandkl. The inanos aud the gods 
rogard his cakes and oblations as ordure and urine. The religious sandity of a 
Brkhmin which he has acquired in millions of births by a prolonod course 
c£ devotions and austerities is destroyed by his sexual intercourse with a S'fidra 
woman. A Brkbmin who drinks wine or eats ordure or enjoys a S'udra woman 
or takes his food on the days of Ekadasl is consigned to the hell called the 
Kumbhipkka. 

201-211. 0 chaste one, the wife of a preceptor, the queen, the step-mother, 

the mother, the daughter, the d»ughtei-in law, ths mother-in-law, the preguant 
wife, the sister, the brother's wife, the wife of the maternal uncle, the paternal 
or the maternal grandmother, the mother’s sister, the brother’s daughter, 
the famale pupil, the pupil’s wife, and the wife of the son of the sister or 
brother are prohibit© 1 in the highest degree. Whoever goes to any of 








THE B&AHMA-V A1V ART A PVRANA. 


*8L 


ihmi for an immoral purpose goes to his mother and is guilty of a hundred 
Br&hmin-slaughters. Whoever does SandhyA (Gaetri or) the worship of the 
Sun) io an impure manner, or avoids it even once or avoids it altogether la 
eaid to he void of Sandhy&. Whoever in the pride of his heart turns away 
his face from the worship of Visnu, S'iva, S'akti, the Sun or Ganesa is called 
uninitiated in sacrifice. In the currents of the Ganges, the space measuring 
four cubits is owned by N&r&yana. Within this space or in Kumksetra, in 
Parasattama, VHr&nasi, Vadarik5, at the junction of the Ganges and the ocean, in 
the Puakara, Bhftakar-land, Prabhasa, the sphere of the Rtlsa, Baridw&ra, Ked&ra, 
Soma, on the coast of the Saraswati or the Trivent, on the Himalayan heights 
or in the Vadar-P&chana whoever accepts any gift is called Tirtha Pratigr&hx, 
and goes to the hell called the Kumbbipaka, a hell in which sinners are baked 
like potter’s vessels. 

2.12-215 Any one who performs rites for any caste excluding a S'ftdra is 
called the Gr&m-Y&jl. Any one who subsists upon the offerings made to an idol 
is called the Devala. Whoever cooks food for a S'udra is called the S'udra’s 
cook. Whoever is void of religious rites is called infatuated or Pramatta. I have 
described to you the character of a Brahmin who commits sexual intercourse with 
a S'ftdra woman. All these great sinners go to the pit of. hell called the 
Ktimbhlp&ka. Now I am going to relate to you the case of other sinners 
who go to other hells. 


CHAPTER XXX I. 

1-9- Yama said, ‘0 chaste one, good or bad acta are not exterminated 
except through the worship of Mari. Good acts load to Heaven and bad acts, to 
Hell. Whoever oats food offered by a whore goes to the hell named the 
Thread of Time, lives there for a hundred years, is then bora as a diseased 
S'ftdra and is afterwards purified. She who is devoted to her husband only 
is chaste. She who goes to another man besides her husband for im norain 
purpose is called Kulata. She who goes to two gallants besides her husband 
with an immoral purpose) is called Dharsini. Sho who goes to four mei 
(including her husband) for purpose of cohabitation is called Purnsohale 

She who likewise goes to five or six men is called the VesyiL She 

who has 'seven or eight paramours is called the Yugmi. She who exceeds this 
limit is culled a great or accomplished whore. She should not be touched 
by any one. A Br&hmin who commits sexual intercourse with any of the 
women mentioned above goes to the hell called Avatoda. He who cohabits 
with a Kulata dwells in the above hell for a century, he who cohabits 

with a Dharsinl remains there for a period four times as lengthy; he wh; 
cohabits with a Pumschall remains there for a period six times as longthyo 
he who cohabits with a prostitute remains there for a period, eight 

times ai lengthy ; he who cohabits with a Yugmi remains there for a period 
ten times as lengthy ; and he who cohabits with a great whore remains there 
for a period a hundred times as lengthy. Brahma hath stfiid so. There 
the sinners suffer endless torments, 

10-21. Those who cohabit with the Kulat&s become Francolino partridges : 
fcho*$ who cohabit with the Pumschalis, Dhar?inls, Vesy&s, Yugmls or great 







PR A K1UTI-K HA N DA. 


whores become crows, ouokoos, herons, boars or silk-cotton trees respectively 
for seven consecutive births. Whoever eats foolishly on the day ol an eclipse 
a oes to the hell called Arantuda ns long as the Moon exists. Afterwards he i« 
born as a man denuded of oars and teeth and subject to spleen and dropsy and 
is ultimately purified after his death. Whoever hands over his daughter 
who has been betrothed already to .one man to another man dwells in the heii 
of Red-hot Ashes which he chows for a century. Whoever takes back the 
thing gifted by him lies on a bed of roeds in the hell called the lieu oi 
Noose where he is chastised by my myrmidons. Whoever does not reverenti¬ 
ally worship the male organ ofS'iva lives for a century in the hell called 
S'ula-prota. He is then bovn os a wild beast seven times, and a Hovala Brah- 
’min seven times before he is purified. Whoever chastises or frightens a 
JBrihmin goes to the hell called the Shivering Hell and dwells there for as 
many years as the hairs on the body of the Brahmin. A woman who frowns 
at her husband or abuses him goes to the hell of Meteors or torches and dwells 
there for as many years as the hairs on the body of her husband. 1 'ere 
my myrmidons thrust torches into her mouth and strike her on the head.. 
Then seven times she is born as a diseased widow bofroro she is purified. 

30 . 32 . A Brahmin woman enjoyed by a S , fl.dfa goes to tho bell called 
the Dark Tit where she is immorsod in boiling impure water day and night, 
made to drink it constantly and is chastised by my myrmidons. Then she is 
born a thousand times us a crow, a hundred times as a sow, a hundred times 
as a bitch or a female jackal or a pigeon and seven timos as a female apo. 
Then she is bom as an unchaste Cbandkl woman, then a consumptive prostitute, 
then a washer-woman, then a leprous oil-woman: after this she is purified. 
A Vesya goos to the hell of Perforation: a Yogrni, to the lioll called the pit 
of •‘Chastisement by a Rod”, A great whore goos to the hell of Meshes, a KuIatA 
to the hell oalled “The pit for grinding the body to dust,”, 0 . Pumsehall to iho 
hell called the Trampling pit and a Dharsin? goos to the hell called the blood¬ 
sucking pit. There they suffer endless torments. In their respective places, 
thoy eat ordure and urine for one Manwantara and afterwards they attain 
the condition of the worms of ordure for a hundred thousand years : alter which 
they are purified. But if any oue cohabits with a woman of his own caste (not 
being his wife), he goes to the hell of hitter water along with his srveot-hoart 
where both the man and the woman have to drink the said water for twelve 
years: after which they are purified. BrahmS. hath said so. 

33-43. If a Kfatriya or a YaisyA cohabits with a Brahmin woman, he 
is deemed to have gone to his mothor and is tnrnst into tho pit of C olic l ain. 
There both the man and the woman are devoured by worms as* big as 
winnowing-baskets and chastised by my myrmidons, there they drink 
heated urine for a period coverod by the jurisdiction of fourteen Indras. Then 
thoy are born seven times as boar and sow and seven times ag a he-goat and 
she-goat before they are purified. Whoever does not keep the promises which 
he has made with the holy basil in his hand or whoever perjures himself 
goes to the hell of Inflammation. Whoever does not keep a vow which he 
had taken by touching the holy stone or an idol, whoever betrays his friends 
or is ungrateful and treacherous dwells in the above hell for a period successive- 







m,sr *y^' 



ly occupied by fourteen Indras ; there he is chastised by my myrmidons &nd 
is consumed by burning embers. Persons who violate!the vow taken with the 
basil-leaf, the Ganges water, the holy atone, or an idol in their hands are born se¬ 
ven times as Cbandals, infidels, worms of the night-soil and as worms of the sores. 
A man who strikes another with his right hand i9 born seven times as a snake 
and afterwards m a man without hands. He.is then purified. 

43-5. Whoever perjures himself in a temple 13 born seven times as a 
Devala. A man who vows by touching a Br&hrniri is born seven times as au 
Agra-d&n! Br&lmiin (a Br&htnin who Las been oat-castod for having 
received first oblations at a sacrifice). Then he is born as a deaf ami dumb 
man on three occasions, denuded of a wife and void of intelligence. A traitor, 
an ungrateful person and a perjurer respectively are born seven times 
us a mongoose, a tiger and a bear. The perjurer consigns to hell seven of his 
ancestors and seven of his descendants. Whoever through laziness does not 
perform his necessrrv rites or takes no interest in the text of the Vedas 
or smiles at them, or whoever ridicules or 1 slanders others dwells in the hell 
of Dews for a century. Afterwards he is born as a water animal seven time* 
and then as a fish on several occasious. After this he is purified. Whoever 
steals the wealth of a god or a Brahmin causes the downfall of ten ancestors 
and ten descendants in his line and goes to the gloomy hell of Smoke. There 
he has to dwell for four Yugas and consume the smoke incessantly. Then he is 
born as a rat a hundred times, then as a bird and a worm several times. Then 
he is born as a S'abara (a savage or a hunter) void of health, wealth and issue. 
Then he is born by turns a goldsmith, a gold-unorehant and a Brahmin 
slave of aa mfidei. Lastly he becomes a Brahmin astrologer. A Br&nmin 
who subsists upon his skill as a prophet or upon his medical profession or who 
soils lac, iron, mercury etc , goes to the hell of Snakes by which he is surrounded 
and bitten for as mmy years as the hairs on his.body. Then he is born 
seven times as an astrologer and a physician and then by turns, a cowherd, 
a blacksmith and a maker of ‘conches.’ I described to you the famous 
pits of hell. Besides these, there are other small pits also meant to punish 
the sinner*! who also take various kinds of birth. Now what do you want 
to hear ? 

CHAPTE it X XXII. 

1*7. SAvitrl said, *'* 0 blessed lord, you are versed in the Vedas, the 
Vedaugas and the books called Panoh-iifrtra. Therefore kindly recite to me 
such an act as is adored and sanctioned by all ; au act which is supremely 
good, which dispenses with the root of Karma, which is most auspicious 
and gives fame and religious sanctity, which shields a mortal from the feaft 
of the world and from the dangers of hell, which excludes the hell-pita 
and their torments and which obviates or removes the necessities of rebirth 
etc. 0 god, describe to me the size, the form and the circumference of the 
pits. I tow do the sinners reside there? When the body 13 destroyed, how 
does the deceased wield another body and go to the next world to reap the 
consequence? of his acts? Why is that body not destroyed in spite of torments? 
How many kinds of bodies are there ? 



um$t r 



PRAKR1T1-KHANDA. 


Jl 


34 . 0 NArada, when Yama heard this, he remembered Han, bowed 

preceptor and said thus : ‘Child, the worship of Krisna alone is supremely good 
and most desirable and auspicious : a fact which is sanctioned by the tour \eaas, 
the code of religion, the Purinas, the history, tbo Ponch-fUtra, the \ edangas 
ahd many other S'astras. It dispels birth, death, decrepitude, disease, grset 
and sorrow. This service of Hari is the emblem of all good and the root of 
absolute happiness. By the worship of Hari, a man can attain all tor S ot 

perfection or success and can be relieved from the sea of lioll. I he worship 

of Hari germinates the treo of religious faith and outs asunder the tree ot 
Karma. 0 virtuous lady, this immortalising worship is the stepping-stone to 
the attainment of the Goloka and fcho source of the different kinds of redemption, 
Sftlokya etc. 0 chaste one, the myrmidons of Krisua never see the hell-pits, 
the Yama or his ambassadors or his attendants even in dream. Ibosc house- 
holders (who are liable to reap frnils of their actions) if they observe the riles 
of Hari, fast on the day of Ek&daat, constantly bow to Hari and worship his 
image never go to the region of Yama. Nor do they go to his land who 
observe the necessary rites of SandhyA, who are pure in their conduct, who 
are tranquil in disposition and who stick to their duties. They always enjoy 

Heaven. But whereas the pure worshipped of other gods have to go to 

Heaveu ar.d to come back, no one can obtain final emancipation without devotion 
to Hari. My myrmidons, at the sight of Hari’s worshippers, whether they are 
engaged in their religious rites or not, fly away like panio-strickeu snakes 
at the sight of the divine eagle. I always give this order to ray myrmidons 
armed with noose “Go everywhere but never go to the hermitage of a worship- 
per of Visnu.” Chitra-gupta himself, with the palms of his hands joined 
together, rooitea the names of Hari’s worshippers. Nay, for such worshippers 
ca their way to the Goloka as they transcend the bounds of the BrahonA-loka, 
Brahma prepares oblation of honey and milk etc. All sins aie destroyed by their 
touch as bay is destroyed by firo, 0 chaste one, even delusion itself is . deluded 
by the sight oE the worshippers of Hari. Lust over-takes other licentious 
persons. Avarice, anger, death, disease, decrepitude, sorrow, fear, time, Karma 
(good or bad), and even pleasure run away when they see the worshippers of 
Hari. 0 chaste one, I described to you those who do not go to hell. Now hear 
about this corporeal frame, the body as described in the religious books. In the 
creation of BrahmH, the earth, the wind, *be sky, the heat and the watei are men¬ 
tioned as the five causes of the body. f Jhe body composed of these five elements 
is transient, imaginary and liable to be reduced to dust. Within this body, 
there is another subtle body considered as the seat oi. enjoyment or suffering 
of the size.of a thumb, male in appearance. This is called the Bhoga-deha. 
This body can, by no means, bo destroyed in my land either by burning flamo, 
water, weapon, thorn, hot things, heated iron or stone or by the embrace of 
the image of fire, or by a fall from an elevated place. I described to yon 
the body and its cause. Now listen to the description of boll and its tea- 
tures. 


CHAPTER X X XIII 


1-10. Yama said, “0 chaste one, all the pits of hell are circular like 
the full Moon, very deep and constructed with particular stones ^ These pits, 




THE BE AH MA-V A1V ART A PVRANA. 


<61 

r-Ias tins'. 


^1/to sinners, were constructed by the will of God and are over-lasting. 
o£ these, the pit of fire is bright like a burning flame, 100 cubits in 
height and two miles in circumference. It is full of screaming sinners and 
guarded by my myrmidons who punish them. The pit of Hot Water is full of 
this element, beasts of prey and hideous darkness. The sinners are turned 
round^ by my myrmidon^ (who. mount guard over that place) and bowl in agony. 
This pit is a mile in circumference. The pit of Salt, two miles in circumference, 
is very dreadful. It is full of heated salt-water and surrounded by alligators. 
There the sinners, in hunger, with parched lips and throat, chastised by the 
guards constantly cry thus “Oh: preserve us, preserve us V s The pit of Night- 
soil, two miles iu circumference containing ordure and emitting foul smell is full 
of sinners who are bitten by worms, chastised by the guards aud in hunger and 
pain constantly cry thus, “Preserve us etc.” 

11 -20. The hell of Urine is full of hot urine and worms of urine and h 
four miles in circumference, There sinners who are bitten by worms and 
punished by the guards constantly scream. The pit of saliva is two miles in 
circumference, There the sinners who consume the Saliva are bitten by the 
worms which consume the saliva very cheerfully. The pit of Venom is a 
mile in circumference. Hero worms eat the venom aud are like snakes (with 
fangs of thunder) in appearance. The sinners bitten by the worms and 
chastised by my guards here horribly scream. The pit of the Rheum of the 
Eyes is a milo in oircumforenco and full of sinners bitten by the worms which 
devour the rbeum. The pit of Fat or Marrow is eight miles in circumference 
where the sinners dwell and subsist upon the fat. The pit of Semen is eight 
miles iu circumference where sinners bitten by the worms of the Semen cry 
constantly. The pit of Blood emitting a foul smell is like a pool in appearance, 
It is very deep and full of sinuers who, bitten by carnivorus worms, subsist 
upon the blood. The pit of Tears h full of sinners who drink the tears and 
chastised by the guards suffer endlos3 torments. It measures half a pool 
in size. 


21-29. The pit of the Dirt of the Body is full of this dirt. The sinners 
hero are bitten by the worms which devour the dirt and chastised by the 
guards. In hunger, they subsist upon the very dirt. The pit of Secretion 
or Wax of the ear is equal to four pools iu size. There, too, the sinners are 
bitten by insects and constantly cry, saying, “Preserve us, preserve us.” The pit 
of Nails, Bones, Hair and Wool is equal to four pools in size. It is full of sinners 
chastised by the guards. Iu the pit of Copper with brands of fire, there are 
a hundred thousand burning statues of iron. There chastised by my guards, 
the sinners embrace the .burning statues and constantly cry for mercy. It is 
eight miles in circumference. The greatest sinners go there. The pit of 
Perspiration and Hot Wine, half a pool in size, is full of siuners who, chastised 
by the guards, have to drink the perspiration. 


30-40 The pit of Keou or Sharp Thorns, a hundred thousand Purus 
i. e , measure of ouo man in length and two miles in breadth is fixed at / 

the jroot of the silk cotton tree and is very painful. It bristles with sharp 
thorns measuring Eour cubits each. Ihe sinners, chastised by my myrmidons, 
loll from the top of the tree and being lorn by the thorns scream horribly 
thus; %i Gi/ye us wafce^egive us water,” with parched lips. Thereupon the guards 







PRAKRITI-KHANDA. 


heads with clubs and thrust them into boiiiog oil, whereby they are 
perplexed with fear and agony. It is eight miles in circumference. The pit 
of Dreadful Weapons, two miles in circumference, is obscured by darkness and 
is full of iron weapons sharp like spear. The pit of Lance or Dart is eight miles 
in circumference and resembles a bed of weapons. It is full of helpless sinners 
pierced by the weapons. The throat, lips and palate of the sinners are constantly 
dried up by the chastisement of the guards. They are bitj^eo there by vulture? 
and other dreadful worms each possessing the size of a snake. 0 chaste or.e, 
the dark pit of Clubs or Maces is full of deformed, sharp maces. There the 
sinners, bitten by worms and chastied by the sentinels make a hideous noise 
and weep. 

41-50. The pit of Pus is full of bad smell and is a mile in circumference. 
Hew the sinners, chastised by the guards, consume the pus. The pit of Cold 
Water is eight miles in circumference and besieged by snakes, each as large as 
the palm tree. Beaten by the guards and bitten by the above snakes the 
smners scream loudly. Three pits of gnats, a mile in circumference each, are 
full of gnats. The great sinners whose hands and feet are tied fall into the said 
pits with their bodies wounded and besmeared with blood and scream horribly. 
The pit of scorpions is fall of these worms and Vajra*insects or insects that 
infect the stones and teems with sinners bitten by such insects. It is half 
a pool in size. The three pits cf reeds teem with reeds and are each half a, 
pool in size. Here the sinners lacerated by reeds are besmeared with blood. 
The Spherical pit is full of darkness and covered with heated water of the mud 
or mire. It is 400 cubits in circumference. Here the sinners are devoured 
by millions of deformed ravens and subsist upon urine and saliva. In the 
Hawk-pit and in the Falcon-pit, the sinners, bitten by fcheso birds, scream 
loudly. 

51-61. The Thunder-pit is four hundred cubits in circumference and very 
dark. Hero the sinners, bitten by worms whose teeth are like thunder, scream 
in pain. The pit of Heated Stone, equal in 3ize to two pools is bright like a fire¬ 
brand. Here the sinners are very much perplexed. The pit of Saliva erait- 
iug a bad smell is very deep and two miles in circumference. Here 
the sinners are compelled to eat the saliva. The pit of Ink is fall of 
hot water dark like coliyrium. It is 400 cubits in circumference. Hero 
the sinners are chastised by the guards. The pit of the Potter’s cooking uten¬ 
sils or Kumbhl-p&ka constantly revolves like a wheel and is associated with 
“ roace or club of sixteen points or edges. Here the sinners are turned round 
and round. The Crooked pit in the shape of a cavern is eight miles in cir¬ 
cumference and is full of hot water and water animals. The great sinners 
devoured by these animals scream in pain. The pit of Tortoises is full 0 f 
hideous, deformed tortoises which devour and torment the sinners. The 
Inflammatory hell, two miles in circumference, effulgent with lustre, is full of 
worms and screaming sinners. The deep pit of Hed-hot Ashes, two miles in 
cirourafereuoo, torments and agitates the sinners who have to consume the 
ashes. 

62-71, The Burnt pit is full of heated lumps of $arth and stone. It 
is very deep and dark. Here the sinners, chastised by the guards, dwell in 
23 - 














THE BRAHMA-'*'AIV ART A PURaNA . 


m 


agony with their bodies burnt and palates dried up* It is two miles in circum¬ 
ference, The pit oF. Hot \Vav 03 is very fearful. It is full oE surging currents, 
heated salt-water, very deep and dark. It is eight miles in cirouinference. It 
is frequented by fearful water animals. The sinners bitten by these animals 
lament and drink this water. They are unable to see one another. The Pit 
of Leaves sharp like the edge of a sword is dark and deep and teem wPh carni¬ 
vorous insects. It is fixed at the root of a palm tree and is a mile in circum¬ 
ference. This pit is full of leaves that fall from the tree and besmeared with 
the blood of sinners who cry for mercy. The dreadful Hell of th$ Edge of 
Razors is full of sharp weapons and covered with the blood of sinners. It is 
four hundred cubits in circumference. The Needle-mouthed Hell two hundred 
cubit in circumforenco is painful to the sinners and bristles with weapons like 
needles. It is covered with the blood of the sinners. 

72-84. The Iguana Pit resembles the face or the mouth of the iguana. 
It is deep like a well and eighty cubits in circumference. The pit of the Mouth 
of the Alligators* sixty-four cubits in circumference, resembles the mouth of the 
alligator and is deep like a well. It is painful to the crest-fallen great sinners 
constantly devoured by the worms. The pit of the Tusk of Elephants, four 
hundred cubits in circumference, is in appearance like a pit and surrounded by 
elephants. It is full of the blood of sinners bored by the tusk of the elephants 
and devoured by the snakes. The Pit of the Mouth of the Cows one hundred and 
twenty cubits in circumference is painful to the sinaors. O chaste one, the Hell of 
Kumbhtp&ka, a particular hell in which the wicked are baked like the potter’s 
vessel, is eight miles in circumference. This pit resembles a water jar. It is very 
hideous and dark. It is constantly revolved by the wheels of time. It is so 
deep and wide that a hundred thousand persons oan reside therein at one and 
the saline times. In a part of this hell, there are jars of heated oil; in oth?r 
parts, there are pots of heated iron or copper. The greatest of sinners dwell 
therein. They are unable to see one another. Struck with the mace or club 
and the pestle for husking the rice, the sinners scream. Sometimes they aro 
turned round and at other times they are hurled on the ground from an 
elevated place. They faint again and again, 0 fair one, this pit alone con¬ 
tains four times as many sinners as dwell in all the pits combined. They dwell 
hero for a long time with their bodies meant for suffering. In a word, this pit 
is pre-eminently superior to the rest. 

85*95. The hell of the Thread of Time is full of hot watef'whore sinners 
are iuvolved in the thread woven by time. Here the sinners are immersed in 
the waters for a long time and in spite of suffocation (for suspension of breath) 
they remaiu alive; as the body of suffering never perishes. Over and above 
this, the sinners here are struck by the sentinels with mace and pestle. The pit 
of Avatoda or well resembles a well and is full of hot water. It is eighty cubits 
in circumference and full of sinners who are chastised by my myrmidons and 
whose bodies have been burnt. As soon as a sinner merges into the water 
of a certain pit, the touch of the liquid suddenly produces many diseases which 
affect his vital parts and he roars in agony. This pit is called Aruntuda. The 
Hell of Ashes is full of consumed articles and burniag embers. Here the sin¬ 
ners consume the red-hot ashes. The pit of the Girdle of Noose is two miles 
in oirou inference; and here the sinners are fastened by the noose. The S'&la- 




WiNisr^ 



PRAKRIT 


proitTis that pit which is'eighty cubits ia circumference where sinners are bored 
on all sides by spears. The Shivering Pit is full of cold water, two miles in 
circumference, whore the sinners constantly shiver through cold. 


96-104. The pit of Torches or Meteors, eighty »cubits in circurafmenca, 
is fall of torches which the sentinels thrust into the mouth of the sinners. The 
Pit of the Blind Well is a hundred thousand Purus (a Purua=tsman’s length) in 
measure, four hundred cubits deep and is full of dreadful insect3 of various 
sorts. It is circular like a well and very dark. The sinners, are unable to see 
one another here. Their bodies are consumed by hot water and they are much 
perplexed by the bite of snakes. The hell where the sinners are pierced with 
several kinds of weapons and whose circumference is eighty cubits is called the 
Fit of Penetration. The pit where sianers are chastised by the mace and 
whose circumference is sixty-four cubits is called the pit of Chastisement by Maco.” 
The hell called the u Pit of Confinement in the Net or snares ” is a hundred and 
twenty cubits in circumference where sinners are entangled in the net of lish. 
The Pit of Pounding the Body is dark, eighty cubits in circumference and ten 
millions of Purus deep. The sianers, as soon as they fall thereinto are entangled 
in an altar of iron attached to the pit whereby their bodies are powdered. Then 
they faint and are paralysed. 

105-115. The pit wherein sinners are 9truok by the pestle and which is 
sixty-four cubits in circumference is called Dalana, The Sucking Pit, one hundred 
and twenty cubits in circumference and hundred Purus (Purus=sman’s length) 
deep, is dark, dry (without water) and full of burning sand, where the throat, 
the lips and the palate of the sinner are parched by thirst. The Bitter Pit is fall 
of the bitter water of the leather, urine and ordure which the sinners drink 
and eat. The pit is thirty-four cubits in circumference. Fair one, the 
Pit of Heat or Inflammation is eighty cubits in circumference wherein the 
sinners are consumed by the flame of fire. Jihma or the crooked pit is half 
of a pool in size. It contains heated bricks. The sinners falling thereinto are 
rendered crooked in appearance. The Pit of the Blinding Smoke is four hund¬ 
red cubits in 9ize and obscured by its smoke. Here sinners are blinded by 
the smoke and suffocated by the vapour. The pit called the GKrdie of Snakes, 
four hundred cubits in circumference, is full of snakes. Ihe sinners falling 
thereinto are instantly surrounded by snakes. 0 chaste one, I have just described 
tojou eighty-six pits and their characters. Now what do you want to hear V\ 


CHAPTER XXX I V. 

1 -7. SHvitri said :* “ 0 god, by your grace I have heard you fully and ac¬ 
quired the knowledge of everything, leaving nothing to be desired. Only bestow 
on me the faith m Hari, so rare and supremely good. Lord, kiudly recite to me 
a little the virtues of Rrisna which redeem millions of one’s ancestors, which 
rescue people from the sea of hell and from the consequences of Karma, which 
prevent evil and destroy heaps of sins and which cause final emancipation. Li ow 
many kinds of emancipation are there ? What is their trait or character ? 
What is the difference between emancipation and faith in Hari ? V\ hat is the 
outstanding feature of Niseka ? Q best qf those versed in the Vedas . Providence 








' '1* 


THE BRAllM.A-VAIVARTA PURANA. 



has made women ignorant of the principles of ontology. What is ontology ? 


Look ; gift, fasting, pilgrimage, vow or devotion is not comparable to a sixteenth 
part of that sanctity which oau be acquired by educating an illiterate person. 
The mother is greater than the father. A preceptor is greater than the mother 
by for ' 3 

8-21. Yarna said : u Child, I have given all the boons solicited by you. I 
say again ; by my boon, you will acquire faith in Had also. Good woman, you 
want to hear the virtues of Hari. This subject redeems the interrogator, the 
speaker and the audience. Auanta with his thousand mouths, S'iva with his 
five mouths, BrabwA with his four mouths are unable to recite the virtues of the 
omniscient Krisna. K&rtika with his six mouths, nay, even Ganesa, the precep¬ 
tor of the preceptors of the devotees, are uuable to recite them. The four 
Vedas, the best of the religious books, and the wise men jlo not know even the 
smallest digit of those virtues. The goddess of knowledge with all her efforts 
is unable to recite them. Nay, Sanat-Kumara Dharnua, Sanaka, San&tana, 
Sananda, the Sun and other sons of Brahm&, though accomplished iu all matters, 
cannot describe them. How is it possible for dull-headed persons to recite the 
virtuos ? We are out of the question. For the adepts, the saints and the de¬ 
votees, even BrahrnA, Visnu and S'iva who constantly adore His feet arc unable 
to describe His virtues. This description is possible only for His votaries, but im¬ 
possible for others. The great-minded saints know His virtues to a certain ex¬ 
tent : Ganesa, the preceptor of the wise, knows them still better; but the omnis¬ 
cient S'amhhu knows them best of all. In days of yore, in the Goloka, in the 
sphere o£ the R&sa, Krisna recited to S'iva some of His owu virtues. Then 
S'iva in his land revealed them to Dharma.” 

22-25. 0 chaste ouo, afterwards in the holy place of Paskara, Dharma reveal¬ 

ed to oqv father, the Sun, the greatness of Krisna. The Sun thereupon worshipped 
Krifna and obtained me as his son by meditation. 0 pious lady, once upon a 


time, owing to antipathy to temporal pursuits I was about to go out for devo¬ 


tion, leaving my jurisdiction ; then, my father recited to mo the incomprehensi¬ 
ble virtues of Krisna, I am going to recite them to you in detail. 

26-30. 0 fair one, what shall I tell you more? As the sky does not 

know its own limit, so Krisna does not know His own virtues. That Lord Kris¬ 
na is the soul and marter of all, the final cause, omniscient and wields any form 
at His pleasure* That Krisna is absolute happiness, form-less and yet wields 
an eternal form. Ho is free from trouble and tear, void of all attributes and 
requires no support. Tins Supreme Being is not mixed up with anything. He 
is the support of all and the witness of every deed. Nature is but His modifica¬ 
tion ; and all objects are modifications of nature. He is personally the absolute 
Being (Parasa), personally the Nature aud yet apart from Nature. He is form¬ 
less and yet wields a form out of supreme mercy to his worshippers. That form 
is very lovely, enchanting and graceful. He is tender in age, clad in the dress 
of a cow-herd. His colour is green with a tinge of blue like that of a new cloud. 

31*57. That graceful form is the sporting ground of ton millLns of Cupids. 
His eyes eclipse the grace of the mid-day lotuses of tho month of autumn. The 
lotus of His face can eclipse ten millions of full moons in grace. He is decked 
with invaluable gems. Radiant with the lustre of Brahma, He has a smiling 
aspect: and a precious yellow garment covering His body gives it a matchless 




Ml Msrfiy 



PRAKRIT1-KBAN&A. 



.13 appearance is tranquil and lovely. No one can comprehend this 
Lord of R^dh^, or assign a limit to Him. The smiling milk-maids who sur¬ 
round Him behold His face constantly. He is seated on a throne of gem in the 
sphere of the R&sa, ( i.e a dance of cow-herdesses with Krisna in the 
centre.) He is decorated with a pare wreath oE wild flowers and constant¬ 
ly playing upon the flute. His body is covered with saffron, red powder, musk 
and sandal paste His breast is lighted up with the diamond called the Kaus- 
tubha. His head is decked with a crooked diadem ; his breast is adorned with a 
wreath of lotus, jasmine and champaka flowers. In the manner shown below, he 
is meditated reverentially by his worshippers. We adore Hari through whose 
fear Brahm& registers the fruits of actions don8 by hia creatures ; by whose 
order the said Brahm& yields to people the reward of their actions and devotions ; 
through whose fear, Visnu preserves and Kal&gni- Rudra destroys the world; 
through whose instructions, S'iva has acquired wisdom and is styled the coii- 
quercr of death, the preceptor of the wisest men, a thorough adept, the best of 
anchorites, a devotee and a supremely happy and blessed being ; through whose 
grace, the god of wind, (he swiftest of runners) constantly blows; through 
whose fear, the Sun ever bestows heat on the world ; by whose order Indra 
showers rain, Death frecjuects animals, the-Fire cotisames things, the Water has a 
cooliug effect, the regents of the quarters preserve the people, the Zodiac and the 
planets wanders in the sky, the trees blossom and trustify, the fruits ripen and 
the flowers decay ; by whose command, the land-animals or the aqueous creatures 
are respectively unable to live in water or land ; through whoso fear I have be¬ 
come the dispenser of justice; by whose order, time constantly frequents the 
world and is engaged in the task of destruction, but cannot destroy any one 
prematurely ; through whose fear even death cannot snatch away any one hefbre 
his time, even if he is thrust into the flames or merged into the sea, or boi led from 
the top of a tree or cut by a sword or bitten by a snike or pierced by a sharp 
weapon in the war ; through whoso fear, death kills a man when Ins time 1*9 full 
even if he is protected by hi3 friends, comfortably laid on a flowery couch and 
guarded by enchantments and spells ; by whose command the air bolds the water; 
the water holds the tortoise, the tortoise holds the Anaota, Anaufca holds‘the 
earth, the earth holds the seven seas, the mountains, the animate and inanimate 
objects ; from whom every creature manifests himself in time and in whom every 
creature dissolves in time. India’s longevity consists of seveuc elestial Yngaa. 
The period covered by 18 such Indras constitutes the day and night of Brahmst. 
The calculating Pandits have determined that 25508 human Yugas constitute 
the span of life allotted to Ihdra. Thirty days of Brahm&, as mentioned above, 
constitute one month of Brahml. Two such months constitute a Rita or season. 


Six suoh seasons constitute a year; 100 such years constitute the life of Brahma. 
The whole life of Brahm& is covered by a wink (twinkle of the eye) of Krisna. 
The absolute dissolution of the world is caused by the wink of Krisna alone, 

58-68. At the time of this dissolution, the gods and everything, animate and 
inanimate, merge into the creator Brahma who himself dissolves in the navel of 
Krisna. Then that Visrnt who sleeps iu the ocean of milk and the four- 
handed Lord Nar&yana of Yaikunfha dissolve in the loft side of Kri$n i. The 
Rudra and the Bbaiiuvas dissolve in the person of the auspicious S'iva. At the 
time of the said dissolution, the wise S'iva himself, the source of wisdom, dissolve 





THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PVR AN A. 


in the knowledge of Krisna. All this takes place in a period equal to one 
moment of Hari. Durg&, tho embodiment of energy, totally disappears and 
merges into tho wisdom of Krisna; KArtika dissolves in His heart and Ganesa, in 
His anus. Women dissolve in Laksmi : Laksmi herself, the goddesses and tho 
milk-maids dissolve in ft&dha. lUdhA, the presiding goddess of Krisna’s life, 
dissolves in His life, S&vitri, with the Vedas, merges into Saraswati who dissolves 
in the tengue of Krisna, The cowherds merge into the pores of His skin ; the 
wind, into His breath ; the fire into His digestive organs: the water, iuto the tip 
of His tongue ; the Vaisnavas very cheerfully merge into His lotus feet. 




69-73. Then the small Virftta merges into the great Krisna ; and the whole 
universe, into the pores of His skin. The closing of Barfs eye-lids causes the 
iVrf ay a and the opening of His eyes ushers back the creation. It takes as 
much time to abut His eyes as to open His eyes. The time occupied by the open¬ 
ing of His eyes is equivalent to BrahimVs spaa cf life. And within that century, 
creation takes place and disappears agaio. The creations and destructions by 
BrahmA. are countless like particles of dust. Who can recite the virtues of Hari, 
whose desire alone, nay, a wink of whoso eyes causes destruction followed by 
creation again? I recited them to you just as I heard from my father. Eman¬ 
cipation again is four-fold ; but faith in Hari is pre-eminently superior to any 
of the above kinds of emancipations. One of the emancipations is Sftlokya, 
i.e. % attainment of His loka or land. The other is S&rupya, t.*., attainment of 
His form or image. - The third is Sftmipya, i.e. y approximation or attaining His 
vicinity. The fourth is absolute emancipation. But His worshippers want none 
of these. They want simply to serve Bari. Hi9 worshippers can easily attain 
the position of an adept, a god or even Brahmft. They are free from birth, life; 
death, decrepitude, disease, fear and sorrow. By virtue of His worship, they can 
wield even celestial forms and obtain emancipation. 0 child, these Oman 
cipations are void of the elements of flari’s service. But faith in Hari impels a 
man to the service of Hari. This is the difference botween faith and emancipa¬ 
tion. Now listen to the indications of Niseka or Bhoga (enjoyment or suffering). 


74 92. The reaping of the consequences of one's act is called Niseka by 
the Pandits. This Niseka can be dispensed with only by the auspicious service 
or bondage of Hari. This service of Hari constitutes real metaphysics or ontology 
and is the essence of all nets prescribed by the Vedas or Ethics. Thus I narrated 
to you the greatness of Hari. Now, child, go in peace.” Yama, the offspring 
of the Sun, thereafter, blessed S&vitri, restored to life her husband and was 
about to go away. Thereupon Sftvitrl held his feet and began to weep under 
the impression that separation from him would bo intolerable. 0 N&rada, the 
merciful Yama himself could not suppress a tear at this pathetic sight 
and said “Chaste lady, in the sacred land of India you will enjoy happiness 
for a hundred thousand years and then go to the Qo-loka. Now go home, 
daughter, and perform the vow of t&vitri. Women, if they perform 
this" vow for fourteen years, get redemption. This vow should be performed 
on the fourteenth day of the dark half of the lunar month in the month 
of Jaistha and the* vow of the great Laksmi should he performed in the 
month of BbAdra on the eighth day of the bright half of the lunar month. 
Whoever for sixteanyearc consecutively performs the latter vow from S'ukl&siami 





PRAKR1TI-KHAXDA. 




to to the end o£ tho Paksa or fortnight goes to tho Vaikuntha. A woman who 
with a view to gain wealth or a son, worshipsi Mangal-Ghandika on every ' 1 e - 
day, or the goddess Sasthion the sixth day of tho bright half of the month, or 

Manaaa on the last day of Asadlia, or tt&dhi (the darling of Kri§?a) on the 
day of tho li&sa in tho month of Kartika or the goddess Nature, i.«. Du rga who 
is the symbol of Krisna’s illusion by invoking any of: these goddesses on (he 
person of a chaste woman having issues or on a statue or on an instrument (ma¬ 
chine or prop) enjoys all sorts of happiness in this world and goes to fcUri 
in tbe next world .” 

93-98, So saying, Yama (Pluto) went home, and Savitri also returned 
and informed her relations everything from the beginning to t e eat . ' 4 ' 

on, by the influence of tbe boon, S&vitrt’a father got a son ; she horselE got 
a hundred sons and her father-in law got back his eyes and kingdom, lh.s 
chaste S&vitri enjoyed life for a century with her husband and ultimately went 
to the Goloka. 0 N&rada, the goddess S&vilri is the presiding deity of the 
Sun and the mystic formula. She is so callod as she gave birth to the \ edas. 
Son, 1 described to yon the excellent narrative oE Sfivitri and the law ot cau¬ 
sation or Karma. Now, vvliat more do you desire to hear ? 


0 II A P T E R X X X V. 

1-11. N&rada said, “ O lord, I have heard from you the dialogue between 
Yama and S&vitri, and tho blolless virtues of the eternal Kmna hy way of C P? S0< ~’ 
Now I want to hear the narrative of Laksmi. 0 best of those versed m tbe Veda , 
what sort of goddess is Laksmi ? By whom was she first worshipped . Mho 
recited her virtues?'’ Nirayana auswered, “0 Brahman, m days of yore, 

the goddess Laksmi in the beginning of creation sprang from the left side 

of Krism, seated in the sphere of the Rasa. Sho is very beanUfu! and bught 

like heated gold. Her body is warm in winter and delightfully cool in sum* 

n er. Her waist is slender; her breast, hard ; her buttocks lingo, lh.s nymph 
of eternal beauty appears only to be a lass of twelve summers. _ lhe hue ot hu 
body is just like the white Ghampaka. Her face could eclipse in grata millions 
of full moons in autumn. Her eyes seem to chastise the blooming mi -i ay 
lotuses of autumn.' This goddess, as soon as she was bom, suddenly .-pi 
herself into two parts by the will of god. Both those forms were, equal in 
every respect in beauty, colour, lustre, age, grace, fame, dress, otin, or « > 

virtues, smiles, sight, words, gait, melody of the voice,. P rlDC ’|’ ° S .‘' n< 

supplicatory attitude. The left side assumed the form of Laksmi , tb^ rig t 
side, that of JUdlift. R&dha, as soon as she sprang into being desired the so¬ 
ciety of the Supreme two-handed Lord. Afterwards, Laksmi desired Him ; and 
the Lord fulfilled the deal re of both. 

12-24. The right side of Ivrisna was turned into a form wielding two 
hands; and his left side, into a being wielding four hands. Ihen the two- 
handed Lord gave Laksmi to the four-handed Lord, This great goddess 
is called Mahft-Lakami as she complacently beholds the whole universe and 
is the best of all goddesses. The two-handed Krisna became tbe consort 
of R&dhft ; and the four-handed Nilr&ranu, of Laksmi. Kr.?na surrounded by 











THE BRABMA-VAIVARTA PUR AN A. 


Sl 


jure cowherds and the chaste milk-maids began to dwell in the Qoloka. 
N&rftyana tcqk Laksmi to the Vaikuntha. Krisna and Nar&yana are equal 
to one another in every respect. Later on, by dint of her devotions, she wielded 
many forms; but the perfect Maha-Laksnii herself presided over the Vaikuntha. 
She Vi chaste and very blessed. She bound Nar&yana with lies of love and 
became the chief of the goddesses. In Heaven she represents Indra's for¬ 
tune as the celestial goddess of fortune; she presides over the Pat&la and the 
mortal world (earth) as the royal goddess of fortune ; over houses, as the 
household goddess of fortune an i as the mistress of the house : and shejpervades 
the world in different forms, &uoh as Surabhi, the mother of cows, among the 
cows; as Daksina in sacrifice; as grace iu the following object, vfa. $ the lotus, 
the orb of the >Sun and the Moon, the gem, the fruits, the water, the king, the 
queen, the goddess, the house, the crops, the idol, the auspicious jar, the pearls, 
the diamond, the wreath, the milk, green branches of trees and new clouds 
and also as the daughter of the Sea of milk. 

2 5-114 She was first adored by Narayana, then by Brahma and theq 
hy S'iva. Afterwards, Visnu in the Sea of milk, . Manu, the son of the solf- 
existent Brahma in India, the kings, the saints, the pious householders, the 
Gandarvas and the snakes of the P&tA)a worshipped her in due order. 0 
N&rada, at first Brahiml worshipped her from the eighth day of the bright half 
of the lunar month in Bhadra till the end of the Paksa or fortnight ; since 
then, that worship his become current in the world. Mann, at the end of the 
year, in the month of Pans i invoked and worshipped hsr in his court-yard. 
This worship prevails in the world. Afterwards,-Mangala, Kedara. Baladeva, 
Subala, Dhrqv#, Indra, Bali, Kasyapa Daksa, Manu, the Sun, Priya-brata, the 
Moon, Kuvera, the Wind, the Fire and Varuna worshipped her. Thus, the 
Goddess of Fortune, the source of all prosperity, has been adored throughout 
ihe world. 


C H A P T E R X X X V I. 

1-11. N&rada said, ‘0 blessed lord, how was this presiding deity of the 
Vaikuntha, the spouse or Hau, the Eternal Laksml, born in the jworld as the 
daughter of the Sea ? What is the nature of her meditation (Bhy&na) and wor- 
hip? Who adored her first? N&r&yana eaid, 4 O ]S&rada in days of yore, 
by the cur3e of Durv&sft, Indra, the gods and the mortals lost their prosperity 
and glory. Thereupon Laksmi, the celestial goddess of fortune, left the 
Heaven etc., and went to the Vaikuntha where she merged into MahiX-Laksnai. 
The gods, overwhelmed with grief, wenS to the BrahmMoka and making BrahinA- 
their mouth-piece started for the Vaikun'h i where they sought the protection 
of Hari, Their lips, throat and palate were dried up with sorrow. Thereupon 
by N&rayana’s order, the celestial goddess of fortune was born as the daughter 
of the sea. The gods and the demous then churned the sea whereupon the god¬ 
dess appeared and gave the gbds the boon solicited by them. She also gave 
another boon to Vi§nu reposing in the sea of milk. The gods after having wor¬ 
shiped and eulogise l her recovered their kingdom from the demons by virtue of 
her boon. r 






PRAKmTl-KHAJrnA. 


!, 0 Br&hman, for what fault of Indra was he cursed 
l»y DurvAsa, ibo host of saints ? How was the sea churned by the gods ? By 
what ode of Indra, was Laksmi propitiated and how did she manifest herself 
before lodra. What was the nature of their conversation ? N&r&yana answer¬ 
ed, “Once upon a time, Indra intoxicated with wine and infatuated with last, 
was making merry in solitude with RambhA and, after having finished his dal¬ 
liances with her, he was spell-bound by her charms and began to dwell in that 
huge forest with a licentious heart. In *he meantime Indra saw DurvAsA ra¬ 
diant with the lustre of Brahma proceeding from the Vaikuntha to the Kai- 
]&sa.^ Hie grace of his body was like a thousand tnid-day suns ; he was decorat¬ 
ed with golden clusters of hair, holy thread, mace, wooden pot of water and a 
bright mark on the forohend like the moon- He was attended by % hundred 
thousand learned pupils. Indra bowed to him low and reverentially eulogised 
his pupils. The iViuni with his pupils blessed him in return and gave him a 
lovely wreath of the Parijata which he had obtained from Visnu. That flow r 
could prevent decrepitude, death, disease and sorrow and grant oven emancipation* 

23-31. The infatuated Indra did not accept the flower but indifferently 
dropped it on the elephant’s head. The elephant blessed by its mere touch be¬ 
came equal to Vianu in grace, virtue, valour, age and lustre. The fearless 
animal then entered into the dense forest. Indra could not control him in 
any way. On the other hand, DurvAsA seeing that Indra rejected the garland 
was highly incensed and cursed him thus, 4 Infatuated by prosperity, why 
didst thou insult me by dropping the garland offered by me on the head of tho 
elephant. Every one ought to partake of flowers’ sacrificial offerings, fruits and 
witer offered to Vi-mu. Whoever foolishly repudiates the said offerings which 
he secures by good fortune is deprived of grace, intellect and wisdom. 
Whoever consumes or eats such offerings reverentially redeems a hundred 
ancestors in his line and is emancipated in his life-time. Whoever daily 
eats the offerings rendered to Visnu, bows to him or peruses his hymn or 
eulogies becomes equal to him in everv respect. 

32-41. Fool, even the touch of the wind of his body consecrates the 
haunts of pilgrims ; and the dust of his feet purifies the earth at once. The 
sins caused by eating the food offered by a prostitute, or a childless widow, 
the food dot dedicated to Hari, forbidden meat and the food dedicated to 
the organ of Siva, the food touched by a S'udra, a BrAhmin physician, a 
Devala or the vendor of one’s own daughter, the food of a pander, cold or 
stale food, the refuse of food, the food of a Brahmin who goes to a 8'ftdra 
woman with an immoral purpose, the food touched by a bullook-drivor or an 
uninitiated Brahmin, the food of one who burns the dead, the food of a man 
who commits sexual intercourse with a woman within the prohibited degrees, 
food of a man false to his friend, food offered by an ungrateful person, by a 
traitor ora perjurer are all expiated by eating the food offered to Hari. The 
worshipper of Hari redeems millions of ancestors in bis own lino. A BrAhmin 
without faith in Hari cannot oven save himself. Whoever even unconsciously 
partakes of the remains of an offerings ma r, e to Hari is relieved of the sins 
accumulated in seven births. But whoever does so consciously is relieved 
of the sins committed by him in millions of births., As your pride has 
led you to cast the garland offered by me at the neck of tho elephant, Laksmi 
24 







mtST/ty 



THE BRAE M AVAIV ART A PURAJSA. 


will forsake you and go away to ihe Vaikuntha, I am a wor 
and so I do not fear fc/iva, fate, time, death or decrepitude, 
with me; no, not even your father Kasyapa or your Guru 1 


tearless through ihe grace of Hari. 


4548, I say also this, that he on whose head the garland has been 
thrust should be worshipped first of all. When the son ot S'iva. will be 
beheaded, the head of this elephant will be attached to his body. Indr a 
when he heard this caught hold of his feet and began to weep loudly through 
fear and grief. 


49-57. He said, “Loid, your curse is proportionate to my aot of 
infatuation ; you have cursed me justly. Now that you have deprived me 
of all prosperity, impart to me a little wisdom, 0 lord. Prosperity is the root 
of all calamity, the veil of wisdom, the obstruction of redemption and faith 
in Hari and the germ of life, death, decrepitude, disease and sorrow. A person, 
blinded by the gloom of prosperity, can not see his way to redemption. A 
drunkard may retain ^ome sense ; but one intoxicated with prosperity wholly loses 
one’s sense and injures one s relations by one’s company. A person infatuated 
with prosperity or worldly enjoyments or bewildered by lust represents the 
principle of activity. He is unable to see the way which loads to virtue. Bat 
a man maddened by worldly enjoyments is of two kinds. He who is not versed 
in the S'&stras represents the principle of ignorance; he who knows the S'^stras 
represents the principle of activity. The S'fistras havo determined two 
kinds of paths; one leading to desire and the other leading to cessation of 
all desires. People from the very outset frequent the path leading to desire, thp 
source of all evil. Ostensibly it is very easy-going and free from trouble. The 
immediate attainment of honey leads a man to think that he is happy oven 
at the time when he suffers endless pain. But he does not consider that it 
is the mine of death and deorepitudo and it will ultimately bring destruction 
in its train. Out of a thousand mortals who aro born again and again and 
cheerfully load different kinds of lives, perhaps one, by the grace of Hari, is 
able to cross the ocean of the world through the society of virtuous people. 


58-70. When he is thus able to discover the way to redemption, he 
tries to gel rid of his tetters. Then, by dint of his devotions, aiisierities and 
fastings for a series of births, he attains the way to redemption tree from 
thorns and ^roubles, Lord, incidentally I have heard all this from my Grurn j 
but, being implicated in the meshes oE tho not of my misfortunes, I have not 
been able 5 to put questions on this point to anybody. 0 lord, now Providence 
has brought me before an ocean of learning (yourself). My present danger is my 
prosperity in the sense that it will rescue me from evil. 0 ocean of learning 
and mercy, friend of the pcor, I am very poor ; kindly give me some wisdom, 
calculated to redeem mo from tho world. The great philosopher Durvasa 
was delighted to hear this, smiled and began to describe to him tho way to 
knowledge. Me said s “0 Indra, you want fortunately to know the path 
leading to virtue. This path, though it may cause immediate evil, is fraught 
with good consequences. This path dispenses with the evil and the agonies 
of re-birth and easily enables a man to cross the irresistible ocean of tho 
world. It cuts asunder the seed of Karma and preserves a man from evil. 






PRAKR1 TP It HA N DA. 


The path of knowledge or wisdom is tho best of all 
contentment. By aofc9 like charity and devotion and i 
attain, no doubt, the bliss of Heaven. But philosophers regarding such 
bliss as transitory endeavour to dig out the root of Karma and carefully adopt 
tho path of wisdom with a view to gain real happiness. Now £ am going to 
du3cribe to you the path of wisdom which can only be attained by disinterested¬ 
ness, i. <?., the absence of a selfish motive. Disinterested people, perform all 
acts by dedicating everything to Krisna and ultimately merge into Brahma. 
Worldly men call this path as the way to Nirvana, But the Vaisnavas do uof 
want to adopt this course as being void of the element of devotion to Hari 

71-81. They wield celestial forms and serve the Supremo Being either 
in the Goloka or the Vaikuntha. The Vaisnavas want tho redemption only 
in the shape of homage to Hari and thus they sanctify tho family to which 
they belong. They are emancipated in their life-time. The recollection of 
Hari, His worship and eulogy, the participation in His offerings and oblations 
for washing His feet, the recitation of His name: those arc matters desired by 
all and instrumental in rodoemiag people. fcVivu himself has given me this 
wisdom likely to conquer death, f am his pupil, fearless by his grace. 
He who transmits to his pupil the rare faculty of reposing, faith in Hari is 
his progenitor, spiritual preceptor, friend and the best of saints. He who 
points out to his pupil any other path than tho service of Hari is guilty of 
murdering him. He who constantly recites the name of Hari gets more and 
mere prosperous every day and prolongs his longevity. Death, disease and 
anxiety fly at his sight as snakes before the divine eagle. A worshipper of 
Krisna, be he a Ohaudilla, transcends the bounds of Brahm/l loka and makes 
straight for the Goloka. This all-happy worshipper is greeted in his way to 
the Goloka by Brahma with oblations of ghee, milk, etc., and adored by the 
gods and adepts. 

#3-02. The worship of the feet of Krisna has been described by S'iva 
a 3 the best of knowledge, devotion and asceticism and as very * auspicious. 
Every thing from Brahnad to a gras3 is imaginary. . Only tho Supreme 
Brahma, as distinct from Nature is real. He is the essence of, 
everything. Adjre Him, therefore. He is the source of felicity, faith, 
success in every undertaking, asceticism and all prosperity. Every one 
be he an adept, a hermit Or an anchorite has to suffer the conse¬ 
quences of his Karma, i. e. acts done in the previous birth ; hence, fate. Only a 
servant of Hari is absolved from them. As fuel is consumed by fire, so are 
sins burnt down by the mere touch of Hari 9 servant. His very sight scares 
away the myrmidons of Yama along with diaoase, sin and fear. A person so 
long as he doss not obtain Mantra from his Guru is enchained to this world. 

0 Indra, the Mantra of Krisna dispenses with the consequences of the acts of 
a person, frees him from delusion and is a stopping-stone to the attainment 
of the Goloka and emancipation. It breeds faith in Hari and is over progressive. 
It is tho essence of all devotion, success, the study of the Vedas, vow, charity, 
pilgrimage, worship, sacrifice and fastings. 

93*101. A man devoted to Hari, as soon as he accepts hU Manira, redeems 
a lakh of ancestors and descendants in his own line, a hundred ancestors m the 


/m ' 

—-—Sl 

the paths and engenders 
like Eastings, people 








THE BRAIlMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


§L 


hig maternal grandfather, also hie parents, brother, wife, Guru, friend, 
pupil, servant, daughter, father-in-law, (laughter’s son, fellow-students and 
himself. Ho is released from the world in his very life-time. His touch 
consecrates the holy rivers and the world. When a man’s sanctity is exhausted, 
he wanders uninitiated in the world for many births and thon accepts the Mantra 
of other gods. Then for aevea births after haying worshipped the demi¬ 
gods, he takes the Mantra of the Sun ; and at tor three births, he takes 
the Mantra of Qanesa and is rendered immune from all obstacles. Then that 
great-minded person quells the darkness of his own ignorance with the lump 
of,knowledge and deliberately adores Mah&-m&y& y the goddess Nature, tho 
principle of unreality or illusion that leads us to cousider the unreal world as 
real and distinct from God. 


102-109. She is Durg&, the symbol of VisnuV illusion (phenomenal 
emanation or creative power) who removes all impediments, who is an accom¬ 
plished adept, who is the source of all prosperity, who is the Word incarnate. 
The worshipper having adored this goddess for a hundred births in succession 
acquires wisdom and happiness by her grace. Then for three births, he wor¬ 
ships .8'iva, the god who presides over the wisdom of Krisna, who is the source, 
the image and cause of all prosperity ; who can bestow happiness, treasure and 
even redemption; who can, over and above, grant longevity, immortality, 
kingdom or evon the positions of Indra and Manu. The worshipper thus 
attains by the blessing of S'iva pure, celestial wisdom. This ©otologist, by 
the lustre shed by the lamp of his knowledge realises, the fact that everything 
in the world from Eralun& to a grass is transitory, 

110-120. Then, by the grace of the merciful S'iva, this metaphysician 
attains faith in Hari, peace and accomplishments. He quits thereupon 
his physical frame consisting of five elements, assumes a celestial form and 
goes to the Goloka or the Vaikuntha devoting himself to the service of 
Hari, Then he is rendered free from all delusion and supremely blessed, 
lie has not to acquire birth again and suck bis mother’s breast. For a wor¬ 
shipper of Visnu, a pilgrim of tho Ganges and an anchorite are exempt from 
the evils of re-birth. Brahma has decided that the duty imposed upon a holy 
pilgrim consists in laying aside his sinful acts and worshipping Hari, day and 
night. He should take His name and recite Hit? Mantras every day ; he 
should observe the vows and take part in fastings, etc. These are his duties. 
He is a tSanuyasi or a recluse who makes no distinction between a lump 
of earth and a piece of gold, between good and had food. A recluse (Saunyftsi) 
is ho who has no fixed abode ; but holding in his hand a mace and water-pot, 
and clad in red dress, lives in foreign land ; who, free from avarice and pure 
“m his dealings, eats food offered by a Brahmin and begs of none ; who 
observes tho vow of taciturnity and regards the-whole world as full of Brahma 
in the spirit of asceticism. 

121-131. A recluse is, truly, he who is strictly impartial everywhere, who 
is free from feelings of every attachment, anger, pride, etc. He ought not 
to he a merchant or a house-holder. He should sacrifice everything and devote 
himself to the meditation of Hari. He truly is a Sunny ibi or a recluse who 
cats anything lyisolicited, he it sweet or bitter, who does not see tho face 





of a woman or live by her side, who Joes not oven touch the wooden statue 
of a woman. Brahm& himself has fixed the duties of a recluse as stated above* 
The transgression of the above rules renders a recluse liable to re-birth, death 
and fe*r of Yama which are very painful to creatures. The residence of a 
person in the womb, be it the womb of a goddess or a sow, is very painful to him. 
The same is the case, if it is the womb of a small animal or a beast of prey. A 
person who dwells therein remembers the condition of bis past life; but as 
soon as he is born...he forgets everything t lough the illusiou of Visnu and is 
bent upon self-pretervation. This is the case with gods and insects also. As 
soon as the semen is cast into the womb, it is mixed up with blood. If there is 
excess of blood, the issue takes the from of his mother; and if theie is excess of 
semen, the issue takes his father’s form. The combination of tip semen with the 
blood on even days, i.e. Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday, results m a male issue: 
otherwise, in a female issue. 

132*136. A Prabar consists of three hours. Whoever is hern in the 
first Prahar has a short life; one born in the second Prahar has comparatively 
a longer life ; the issue of the third Prabar enjoys a longer life still ; but the 
issue of the fourth Prahar has the greatest longevity subject to other conditions. 
Pain and pleasure are deietmined by Karma i.e. the law.of causation rendering 
a man liable for bis acts in his previous life. The life of a person is regulated 
by his birth. Hence savants ascertain the moments of the birth. Semen and 
blood get united in one night. This union is followed by development from day 
to day. On the seventh day, the fetus takes the form of a jujube and it takes 
the form of a pillow in a month, the shape of a lump of flesh without hands 
and feet in three months and is vested with hands, legs and other members of the 
body in the fifth month. In the sixth month the body gets animation and 
consciousness ; the animate body then knows the past ; but like a bird in cage, 
it suffers endless torments. 

137-141. The child in the womb occupies the most unholy place for 
residence, partakes of the remains of the food eaten by its mother and 
contemplates liari in endless tortures. After four months cf trouble the child 
impelled by the wind of the womb ia born. But by the illusion of Bari, 
it forgets the past : and oblivious of the quartors, time, space and the necessities 
of the physical system it spends its childhood with a body besmeaied with 
urine and ordure. It cannot scare away the gnats, and dependent on others 
and bitten by insects, it weeps again and again. A person, for his sins, is 
born again and again and being nourished with the milk of the breast alone is 
unable to express his ideas until be attains the age of discretion. 

142-147. After having passed this period with the greatest difficulty, he 
attains youth when, bewildered by the goddess M &y& ; he absolutely forgets the 
troubles endured by him in the womb and absorbed in sensual enjoyments and 
pleasures, be is busy in supporting his family and servants. So long us his 
relations are maintained by his wealth, they care to obey his orders. But when 
old ago sets in, they slight him as if he were an old bullock. When old age 
paralyses his limbs and his senses, when he becomes consumptive and dependent 
on others, he lameuts thus : “ Absorbed in the fleeting joys, of the world, alas ! 

I did not remember Hari, nor did ^associate with * pious men,•' by acts of 










pilgrimage. Truly, [ an unfortunate. It l again be born in India as a 
man, I shall want lor us a pilgrim to the holy rivers and worship Krisaa 
in when all tha shrines converge. 


143-155. Thus immersed in self-mortification anl the recollection of 
his sins, ho dies. While dying, the spies of Varna appear before him with 
noose and club in their hands. Th?y are deformed and hideous; and their 
eyes are Hushed with rage. They are irrepressible by all moans, fearful and 
omniscient. Imperceptible to others, they appear before the dying man. The 
dying man discharges uriue through fear at their sight and thou quits his life 
and the body composed of five elements. Then the myrnrdons of death take 
hold of his subtle body of the size of a thumb and thrust it into a frame 
meant for enjoyment or suffering (Bhoga-Deha). Then they take the sinner 
to his destination at Yamapuri. There he Gnds the tranquil Yama, versed 
in all law| scaled with a smiling countenance on a throne of ge u. Yama, the 
dispenser of justice, the omniscient lord, the monarch of the world and the 
protege of Brahmil is observed there by every body. He is clad in a dress pure 
like fire and decked with many goui3. He is attended by tbree-huadre Is 
millions of myrmidons. With the help of a pure crystal rosary of beads, he 
recites the name of Hari and meditates His lotus feet whereby his bar stands 
on end with raptures. This Yama who enjoys the never-Eadiug grace of youth 
and who is strictly impartial she Is tears with a heart palpitating with religious 
zeal. 

156-161. Yama, graceful like the full moon of autumn and radiant with 
his own lustre is seated before Chitra-gupta. People there bow to him, terri¬ 
fied at his sight, pleasant to the virtuous and hideous to the sinners. The 
child of the Sun, Yama, by the administration of justice through Chitra-gupta, 
dispenses proper punishment or reward. People thus suffer endless torments 
by constant habitations in the womb qE their mothers and by their frequent 
admission into the infernal region. The lotus of Krisna’a feet alone is the 
sole harbour of the exhausted travellers in all the walks of life. Son, I have 
now recited to you the above suhjeot. I can give you everything you ask. 
Solicit any boon and I shall give it to you.” 


162-163. Indra was consoled at the words of Dorviisi and said: (i 0 
great saint, of what use will filthy lucre be unto him who is deprived of the 
delightful position of Indra ? 0 ocean of mercy resembling the Kalpa-tree, 

(wish-yielding tree), if you are kind to me, give me final beautitude. 


164-175. The saint DurvUsil smiled at his words and began to address 
him thus in the light of the essential maxims prescribed by the Vedas : 44 It 

is difficult for individuals like you whose heart is set upon worldly enjoyments 
to get emancipation even after the absolute dissolution of the world. As people 
aixTuwake and asleep by turns, so the universe by turns undergoes the process 
of creation and destruction. As the extremities of the wheels of a carriage 
ascend and descend, as time wauders in the form of day and night, so are living 
beiuga by the will of. god constantly susceptible to changes. A Vipala is 
eqna? to two and a half <?ocoud9. The astrologers, in calculating time, mention 
thus : sixty Vipals make one Pal: sixty Pals make one Danda ; two Oanqas 
make one MuhCirta; three hundred Muh&rtas make one day and night; 












PRAKRLTI-KHANBAs 


fificea days and nights make a Paksa (a fortnight), two Puksas make a month f 
two months make a Rita or season; three Ritas make one Ayana (six months)* 
two Ayanas make a year. ludra rules for 25,560 mortal Yagas. A* Manwantru 
is covered by the successive rules of teu lakhs of ludras.. Br&hmtt dies iu 
eight thousand Manwatifcras. This extinction of Brahma coincides with ttie 
absolute dissolution of the world. This dissolution is occasioned by the wink 
of Krisna; and as soon as ho opens his eyes, there is creation again. The 
S'rutis hold that in this way there have been endless creation* and destructions. 


176-179. The great god S'iva hath said, as particles of dust cannot bo 
eliminated from the earth, so the creatures of Brahma also cannot be absolved 
from the ties of tho world and get redemption. Those whoso longevity I just 
described to you constitute the thread or cob-webs if creation and can, by no 
means, get salvation- fcio you had better solicit some boon other than that of 
redemption.” Indra was astonished to hear this and desired again his own 
position, that of ludra. Durv&sft accepted his prayer aud went home. 
iSo long as a man does not acquire sober sense or wisdom through adversity, 
ho cannot gain prosperity. 


C H A P T B R XXXVI I. 

1-9. N&rada said : 44 What did Indra do after having gone home by the 

acquisition of wisdom ? Kindly relate this point to me in detail.” The lord 
answered : 44 Indra, when he heard of tho virtues of Krisna, suddenly became 
indifferent to wreath, sandal, etc. A deep stoicism subdued his mind. >When 
ho went to his capital, bo found his relations seated with sorrow in a place 
teeming with domons and he also found some placos (void of his relations and 
friends) in possession of his indomitable foe. Thereupon he went to his 
Guru Vrihaspati. He saw him seated on the coast of tho celestial river Man- 
dilkini with his face turned towards the Sun and adoring the Supremo Being. 
Feelings of religious piety and love swaying his mind, his body was palpably 
agitated with raptures and ho was shedding tears at times. Indra stood up 
thero and saw his religious preceptor in the aforesaid condition who wag 
the most pious of his well-wishers, tho dearest of his friends, senior to 
all philosophers, elder than his brothers, most harmful to his enemies and 
engaged in devotion. The Guru got up after a Prahar and was saluted by 
him. 

10-20. Indra hold his feet, wept again and again, and told him how 
he was cursed by Durv&sft, how he acquired wisdom through bis counsel, how 
Heaven was attacked and captured by the demons. He told him every¬ 
thing which caused this calamity. The wisest Vrihaspati with his eyes crimson 
with anger occasioned by the words of his pupil said, 14 Child Indra, do not 
weep. But listen to me. Savants conversant with religious books are not 
upset by danger. Prosperity and calamity are both fleeting like dreams 
They are caused by one’s previous acts. A person gets pain or pleasure accord¬ 
ing to his act (Karma), As the wheels of a carriage constantly go up and 
down, so happiness and misery in every birth rotate by turns. Remorse in 
such matters befits only a fool. Wherever a person may dwell, he must reap 
the consequences of his acb. He cannot do away with the necessity of reap- 






THE BRAHStA-VAlVARIA PURANA. 


in ton millions of years. He must reap thorn, some day or other. 
The Supremo Being Krisna has said so personally to Brahma, as mentioned in 
the Kauthura-SAkha of the SAma-Veda. When tho Karma of the past birth is 
exhausted, creatures must be born again by virtue of the acts performed by 
theifip in their previous .births. This law can, by no means, be violated. A 
person is cursed or blessed by a Brahmin as a result of his Karma. Karma 
alono confers endless prosperity upon him or the misery which is occasioned 
by his anxity to earn his livelihood. 




2 L-30. 0 King of the gods, as the shadow follows the substance, so the sin 
occasioned by a man’s aot incessautly pursoos him so loog as it is not obviated 
by sufferings or penalty. The benefits of an act vary according to time, 
spaoe or tho nature of the person benefited. A gift on an ordinary day brings 
ordinary fruits. A gift on the day of a festival brings fruits, a million¬ 
fold. A gift in an ordinary place brings ordinary fruits. A gift in a sacred 
place brings fruits, ton millions of times. A gift to an ordinary person brings 
ordinary fruits. A gift to the poor, to many relations, to one versed in the 
Vedas or to other deserving persons brings fruits a hundred and a thousand 
times. As by the dexterity of the agriculturists and through the fertile 
naturo of the soil, crops grow in abundance, and as by the folly of the 
farmers and through the birreuness of the soil, there is scarcity of crops, so 
gift, to the worthy or the unworthy brings diffirent kinds of fruits. 
On an ordinary day, (void of any lanar festival) gift to an ordinary 
Brahmin brings ordinary fruit. But on the lunar day of the dark 
night (Aia&vasyft) or the day of the transition of the San the gift to u BrAhrnin 
brings fruits a hundred fold. A gift on the occasion of a vow which lasts for 
four months and on tho day of the full moon brings fruits and countless 
number of times. A gift on the occasion of the moon-eclipse brings fruits ton 
millions of times and gift the during tho solar-clipso, ten times the fruit of the 
moon-oclipse. The gift on the day of AksuyA-TritiyA brings an inexhaustible 
and endless reward. Similarly, gift the during, other sacred days brings a great 
reward. 0 InUra, other holy acts, suoh as ablutions in holy stream 0 , bring 
great reward in the same way as gifts. 


31-41. Gift in an ordinary place briag3 ordinary fruits gifts in shriues 
or places of pilgrimages like Prftyaga bring fruits a thousand times. A 
gift on tho coast of the Ganges brings fruit ton millions of times ; a gift in tho 
NArAyana-Ivsetra, i.e. the spaoe of four cubits on oaoh side of the water of the 
Ganges, endless number of times aud a gift in Kashi, Kuruk§etra or Vadarika, 
a lg 0 ten millions of times. A gift in the temple of Visriu brings fruits ten 
millions of times. The merit of a gift varies according to the nature of the 
pilgrimage. A gift to an ordinary Brahmin brings ordinary fruits. A gift 
to a Brahmin who performs his rites aud has subdued his passions brings 
fruits a hundred thousand times ; a gift to a Visa u-worshipper, ten millions ot 
times. The merit of the gift varies according to tho nature of the donee. 
A gift at the shrino of KedAra or Haridw&ra brings fruits a hundred thousand 
titnea; a gift at the Puskara or the solar temple, ton lakhs of times. As the 
potto’, by tho command or god, constructs a jar with inace, thread, shallow dish 
or platter, water, wheel, mud, etc., so in the matter of croatiou, Providence with 
tho help of the thread 6E Karma, dispenses fruits of action. Adore that 







PRAKR1TI-KHANDA. 


Sl 


and gave him sagacious precept, 


C Hi A P T E R X X X VIII. 



and givim' Vrihaspati tiia load wont with the gods to the land of Dvahmft. A'fi 

o. ° . . « » i _ i U A TUai** (Turn f < . ! ■ I hi nr 


the a-oda. pakfia is your maternal grand father. You are valorous yourself and 
you are a votary of Vismi. The throe lineages to which you belong are pure. 
You have uo occasion for conceit. Those who belong to inferior rank are conceit¬ 
ed. He whose mother isohaste, whoso father is pure, who has subdued ins passions, 
whose maternal uncle and maternal grandfather are equally virtuous, can, on no 
account, be puffed up with pride and vanity. A person is hostile to Hari, 
through the fault, of his father, maternal grandfather or preceptor, or through 
the defect of education. A body from which the ubiquitous and all-pervading 
Hart parts is immediately desecrated like a corpse. I preside over all creature* 
in the shape of mind and regulate their passions ; S'iva presides over them m 
the shape of knowledge, Visnu in the shape of life, the goddess Nature ui the 
*hape of intellect. Sleep and other faculties are but tbo digits of Nature. J.he 
sentient soul that resides in the Bhoga-Deha (or body of enjoyment and • 
suffering) is only a reflection of Hari. 

12-1'b taking, while passing through the royal road, is followed by his 
retinue, so as soon as the Supreme Being Hari quits the body and goes away, 
all other gods presiding over fche body go aw.iy along with Him. \ou have 
«dmilted the* flowers, the remnant of the offerings to Hari who is adored by 
myself, S'iva, Atlanta, Vi? an, the great Virata and Dharma. The great saint 
Durv&s& had given you ’the flower dedicated to Hari, the flower with which 
S'iva worships His lotus feet.. But, by iui irony of fate, you slighted it, 0 Lving 
of the irods. The creature on whose hoid the flower touched by Hans foot 
falls should , be worshippel before other gods. Providence has deprived you 
of the flower dedicated to FL’iri’s feet, though quite within your reach. Ihia 
proves that fate is tbs most powerEul of all agencies. Who can save an 
unfortunate ignorant individual? Lakj.nl, tbo beloved spouse of .vrijna, is 
sure to quit that person who slights her lord adorod by the three worlds. In 
days of yore, you secured fortune by the performance of a hundred sacrifice*. 
The very goddess oE fortune, enraged at your conluot m slighting the 
wreath which was the remnant of Mari’s offering has abandoned you . Now 
accompany me and yonr prooeptor on our way to the Vaikontha where you 
should try to propitiate Hari by whom grace you will got back yonr prosperity. 

So saying, Brahmd went to the Vaikuntha along with the gods. In that 






Eternal laud, BrahrnA and other gods saw the effulgent. Supreme Being, the 
consort of Laksmi, radiant with his own lustre, bright like ten millions of! 
midday sans, having no beginning, middle or end, who was adored by his 
four-armed attendants, and by Sarasvrati, the Vedas and Ganga. They bowed to 
him low and being overwhelmed with feelings, they shed tears with 
raptures at his sight and then adored him. Brahm% with folded hands related 
to him the calamity of the gods ; and the gods, on account of the loss of their 
jurisdiction, began to weep. Ever prompt to relieve his adherents from fear, 
the Supreme Lord beheld the gods panic-stricken and afflicted with danger, 
denuded of clothes and ornaments, void of conveyance and deprived of grace. 
He then said, 4 0 Brahmft, 0 gods ! Cheer up. When I am here, you need 
not fear anything. I shall gruut you prosperity which shall never fade* But 
l want to toll you something appropriate to the occasiou. My beneficent counsel 
will he delightful in the end. As the whole universe with all its contents is sub¬ 
servient to me, so I am also submissive to my adherents who set their heart upon 
tne. If ray free and happy votaries are displeased with any one, it folloW3 then 
that I and my spouse KaraalA can no longer dwell in his house* My wor- 
?ihipper Durv&sA who is an offspring of the digits of S'iva hath cursed you. 

20-31. We have therefore quitted your house in a pair. Lakszni does 
not reside in that place where the Holy Stone is not worshipped with the sound 
of couches and offer of Tolst leaves and where the BrAbmins, the gods of earth, 
are not feasted 0 gods, Laksmt in a rage quits that place where 1 and my 
votaries are slandered ; for she realises her discomfiture. She likewise leaves 
that house where people do not fast on the day of EkAdasi or on tay btrth dav. 
Whoever in lieu of a consideration sells my name or his daughter or does not 
properly great his guest is forsaken by her likewise. Whoever through 
avarice g »es to the house of a sinner and eats bad food in the house of a SMdra, 
whoever, b big a Brahmin, (led by poverty) burns the dead body of a S'udra* 
and whoever being a BrAmnin. cojIss food for a S'ftdn or cultivates his land or 
serves an infidel or subsists upon the offerings made to an*idol or officiates 
as a priest, for a .3'ftira are abandoued by Lak$mi apprehensive to touch the 
water of such persons. The house of a Br&huaiu who is treacherous, false 
to his friends, who is i murderer, who is ungrateful or who commits carnal 
intercourse with women within the prohibited degrees is likewise abandoned 
by niy spouse. 

32-40. My Vaisnava spouse abandons the impure in heart, the crooked 
in disposition, the envious in nature, I he slanderers of the virtuous and bastards 
begofcfceuff>y the Brahmins upon S'ffdra women. The mother of the world 
abandons alio those who aro begotten by great sinners on prostitutes, who by 
the praotioe of deceit consume the food touched or tendered by widows having 
no issue, bhe quits also those who cut asunder grass with their nails, who 
with grass make marks on earth, who put on unciean clothes and assume 
a rough exterior. The spouse of flari becomes restless and also abandons the 
house of a BrAbmin who eats twice a d^y and cohabits or sleeps in the day, 
who is void of religious rites and accepts gifts from a S'Cldra, or vrho is not 
initiated in the mantras observed iu his family. She abandons a man likewise 
who foolishly lies down on the bed naked or with wet feet or who constantly 







' TdlNtSr^ 



PRAKRITI-KHANDA 


who annoio 


incoherent lauguage and smiles. She also quits a person 
)ody again with oil after hath or plays upon his body 
cal instrument. She also abandons a BrAhmin who does 
lecessary rites (Sandhya, etc ), who remaius in an impure 
has no faith in Hari. She quits him likewise who slanders the BrAhonins 
nercilesslv kills animals. In a place where Hari's name and virtues are 


54-50. 0 Brahma, grandaire of the people, the places where Krisn* 

and his votaries are eulogised, where Hari is contemplated and adored with 
conohes, the holy stone and the holy basil leaf, where the organ of S'iva is 
worshipped and his tiatne is eulogised, where Durgais adored and praised, where 
the gods are worshipped, whore the BrAhmins are esteemed and feasted, the?c 
places, l say, constitute the favorite resort of Laksmt, tho spouse of Krlfna 
Having addressed the gods in the manner n9 stated above, Hari asked Lak?tui, 
to accept birth through ono of her digits in the sea of milk (Kstroda). 


’ 51-55. Having said so, lord Hari directed BrahiuA to ohurn tho 

above sea with a view to discover the celestial go ideas of fortune and to 
restore her to the gods and entered into his seraglio-' After a long time, tho 
gods arrived at the margin of the sea. The Mandai mountain they made 
as their churning pole, the tortoise-god as tkoir basin or cup, tho god Anauta 
as their churning rope, fn this way they began to churn the ocean ; whereupon, 
0 Muni, Dhanwantri, the nootar, tho horse called Ucchaih-S'ravA, the elephant; 
called Air&vata, many lovely gems, the wheel called S'udarsana and KuiualA, 
herself, the daughter of tho sea, emerged from the bed of the ocean to the 
surface. 0 Muni, this chaste nymph, the daughter of the ocean, decked the 
shoulders of the lovely Visnu, the Lord of all, her husband (to whom she was 
devoted), lying in tho bed of the Ksiroda Sea with a wild wreath. Laksml, 
adored by BrahmA, S'iva and other gods, cast a propitiatory glance at In »ra a 
realm in order to remove the curse of DurvAsa. 0 NArada, then Laksini gave 
the gods a boon by virtue of which they recovered their jurisdiction from the 
gods. Thus I narrated to you the excellent,. substantial and delightful 
history of Laksmi and traced her character. What more now do you want to 
hear ?, 


CHAPTER XXXIX, 

1-9, At the words of Hari, NArada thus spoke, 41 0 best of gods, 1 
just listened to the reoiiatious of Bari’s virtue, together with the 
excellent, edify ing and auspicious narrative of Laksmt Now 1 should 
like to know the ode, the ‘meditation and the worship by which BiahmA, 
Iudra and other gods deprived of their kingdom had propitiated £ Lakgiiil.” 
NArAyana answered, “Son, at first, iudra bathed in the holy waters, put 
on the pair of clothes well*washed, fixed a jar on the margin of the sea 
of milk and with flowers, aandul, etc. reverentially worshipped the six 
gods, Ganesa, the Sun, the Fire, Visnu, S'iva and PArvati. Then he appoint¬ 
ed BrahmA as his priest und by invocation worshipped the grout LakamS, the 
source of all prosperity. Indra took in his hands the PArijAt-wreath be¬ 
smeared with sandal paste and* in the presence of the Munis, th^ priest- V’-j, 







THE BRAHMA-V AlY ART A PtJRANA\ 


^ «i, the Br&hmihs, the gods and tho great S'iva 
^gocl dess* La k a mi 'by the recitation of her mantras. 


began to 
"At first 


adore the 
liari had 
adored her 


<SL 


great 

given 

with 


a Dhyftn as specified in the Sfim-veda to Brahtnft. Indra 
the above Dhy&na. That 1 am going to tell you. Carefully listen. 

10-14. T adore tho great goddess Lakfun, the source of all prosperity, 
seated oa a bed of lotus, vested with a pair of graceful hands that shame the 
autumnal full Moon, the Supreme goddess radiant with her own lustre, 
lovely, with a hue of pure gold, incarnate, beautiful, decked with ornaments of 
gam and clad in yellow dress, with a stuiliug and cheerful aspect and with a 
youth that never fades.” Indra with the mantra as directed by BrahmH 
and with sixteen ingredients, excellent, adorable, delightful and adorable, 
reverentially worshipped her thus : 

lf)-41. 0 great Laksmf, please accept: this matting or carpet used as a 

seat constructed carefully with excellent gems. 0 resident of Kamala, (the 
lotus) please accept this holy water of tho Ganges which consumes sins as fire 
consumes the fuel. 0 resident^of Fadma, (lotus) please accept this holy water 
of the Ganges which was deposited in the heart of the conches with flower, sandal- 
paste and bent grass. 0 beloved of Hari, please accept this fragrant Visna 
oil and water perfumed with emblic myrobalan. 0 spouse of Krisna, please 
accept this sacred frankincense prepared out of the gura, decoction or juice 
of trees. 0 goddess, take this delightful sandal, the best of all the trees that 
grow on the mountains of Malaya. 0 deity, accept this burning lamp, the 
eye of the universe, a guide to the b ewildered travellers in the night, the 
oause of preservation of the lives of creatures. Also accept these delicious 
sacred offerings which consist of sweets and other delicacies. 0 image of 
JBrahmd, please accept this tonic, ohoering diet which saves life. 0 resident 
of lotuses, accept the delioious drink cooked with rice, molasses, milk, gh.ee, etc. 
Accept the conical symbol made of ground-rice (a kind of cake) tasteful 
cakes made with sugar, milk, ghee> etc. Kamala, deign to accept the ripe, 
sweet, lovely fruits. 0 darling of Achyula, (imperishable Being) accept the 
milk of SurabhT, the celestiil cow, which is just like nectar to mortals. 

0 goddess, accept the raw juice of sugarcane or molasses properly boiled. 0 
goddess accept this sweetmeat made of wheut-flour and molasses. Please accept 
these cakes with conical symbols made of ground-rice (Swastika.) Please 
accept the sweet sugarcane, the source of all the sweets in the world. O Karaalft, 
take this white chowrie or fan which yields refreshing breeze and is delightful 
to those afflicted with heat. 0 goddess, accept tho betel seasoned with cam¬ 
phor, etc., lovely, which removes the dullness or insensibility of the tongue. 
Goddess, please accept the pure water also offered by me, which is fragrant, cool¬ 
ing and refreshing. Goddess, accept these clothes made of silk and cotton, these 
ornaments made of gem ,and gold which add grace to the body. Please take 
this wreath of flowers dear to the gods and the kings, which gives a celestial 
charm to <he body. Please accept this incense, the lovely perfume, the best, 
tho most sanctifying and the purest of all the fragrant objects. .0 spouse of 
Krisna, please accept this pure, sanctifying, debghtful water for rinsing the 
mouth, also this lovely couch well decorated with gems and covered with 
flowers, sandal, etc. The rarest, the most wonderful and valuable things of 
nature, epurted by kings and gods, I offer : please accept them.” 






PRAKRiTI-KtiANDA. 


2-50. Indra having uttered this fundamental mantra offered to the 
goddess the above articles and recited the above mantra ten lakhs of times. 
Thus the mantra became perfect and, like Kalpa tree, was able to fulfil all 
desire. 0m 8'rim Hr!m Klim Kamala VAsinyai Sw&h&, this mantra consist¬ 
ing of twelve letters is the chief of all mantras. The great king, Kuver<*, became 
the lord of wealth by means of this mantra. By means of this very mantra, 
Daksa Savarni was celebrated by the name of Manu, Mangahi became the 
monarch of the earth with seven islands, and Priya-Vrata, Uttftn-pada and 
Kedara were renowned as kings. When Indra attained perfection through 
this mantra, the groat Laksmi, ascending an excellent car made of superior 
gems and lighting up the world of seven islands with her own effulgence 
manifested herself to Indra io grant him the boon required. She was decked 
with ornaments of gem ; her colour was bright like white chainpaka ; her 
cheerful face was kindled up with a gentle smile. She wag complacent (i e, 
apt to favour her votaries ) She wielded a garland of gems and bad the grace 
of ten millions of moons. She had a tranquil aspect. When Indra saw this 
universal mother, he began to adore her. 


<SL 


51-72. With folded bands, with tears in his eyes, with his hair on end 
with raptures, with a pure heart, he began to read the most effective ode in 
the following manner, “ 0 mother, benefactress, great Lak?mt v I bow to you 
^ I bow to Pudum, the Supreme, the excellent goddess, the spouso of Krisna*, 
I bow to Kamala” whose dwelling is in the lotuses, whose eyes bloom like lotuses 
and whose face is like the lotus. I bow to Pud ua svho is seated on a lotus and 
who is the spouse of Visnu. 0 source of all prosperity, 0 symbol of prosperity, 
O benefactress, the fountain head of all perfection and success, you can ever 
bestow redemption on any body. I bow to you, the source of all happiness and 
faith in Hark 1 bow to you who dwell in the heart of Krisna. 0 Padm&, great 
great goddess, you preside overall prosperity and the crops. You are the repre¬ 
sentative of wisdom. In the Vaikuntha, you are the Maha Laksmi, the Laksmi 
in the sea of milk, the celestial Laksmi in Heaven, the household Laksmi in the" 
houses of men ; you are the Daksin& in sacrifice, the Surabhi among the cows; 
j J oar Aditi, the mother of the gods. You are 8wuha in referenced the offer¬ 
ings made to the gods ; you are the SwadlrA in reference to the manes. You 
sustain the world. You are the emblem of chastity and virtue. You are absolutely 
tree from aeger. envy and other vile tendencies. You are devoted to N&rayana 
and give final heautitude. You are capable of bestowing the rare gift, viz., faith 
in Haii. Without you, this world looks like a corpse or inertia. You are the 
primeval mother of all creatures and the universal friend. Without you, 
triends do not greet one another. One oppressed by you is deserted by cue’s 
friends. One favoured by you is blessed with a number of friends. You are the 
cause of the four-fold objects of human pursuit, v\z. } virtue, wealth, enjoyment 
and boautitude. I bow to you. As in childhood, the mother suckles the help¬ 
less infant, so you act like a mother to every body under any circumstance. A 
new-born infant may live without its mother, but it is very difficult for a man 
, to exist, who has forfeited your kindness. 0 mother, the very image of pro¬ 
pitiation, be propitiated with me. O Eternal goddess, give mo back my domi¬ 
nion dominated by the demons. 0 beloved spouse of Hari, since you 
became unkind to me, I have been friendless. I have been subsisting upon alms 






s 



THE BRAHMA-VAlVARTA PUR AN A. 



and deprived oE all prosperity. 0 goddess, give me back my heaveu, 
grace, might, fame and celebrity. 0 darling of Hai i, give me back enjoyment, 
good sense, wisdom, piety, good lack, glory, influence, jurisdiction, victory, 
martial spirit and divinity. 

73*80 Indra having said so, he and all I he gods with streaming eyes 
saluted her. Brahma, S'aukara, Atlanta, Dharma, Kesava and other gods 
commended Indr a to her mercy, praying for the forgiveness of his offence. 
Lakanii was propitiated, gave the necessary boou to Indra and cast a garland 
round the neck of Kesava (\ isnu). 0 NArada, the gods pleased with the boon 
went away. Laksml, the daughter of the sea, sat down cheerfully in the lap of 
Vi^nu lying down in the bed of sea. Bnibraa and S'iva weut home. Who¬ 
ever, in the morning, noon and eveaiug, reads the above sanctifying hymn 
become^ aij adept and can do everything as he please3 like the Kalpa tree. He 
also becomes the master of incomparable wealth like Kuvera. This ode is ren¬ 
dered perfect, if a man reads it a hundred thousand times. Any one who reads 
H regularly for a month becomes a monarch having incomparable resources. 

81-87. NArada said, ‘ 0 lord, you just said that the being whose head 
was decked with the flower of Hari’s feet offered by DurvasA should be worship¬ 
ped first of all. The flower was placed o.i the head of Airvata. But the 
elephant went to the forest, flow then wa* Ganesa born ? When Ganesa 
ost his head at the sight of Saturn, Hari himself attached the head of the 
elephant to the body of Ganesa. And yet you juit told me that the gods in¬ 
cluding Indra after having worshipped Ganesa and five other gods on the coast 
of the sja of milk adored Laksmi. For a Wv>nder, the statement of the authors 
of the jrurAnas is incomprehensible. 0 best of prophets or best of those who 
know tho ways ol’ providence, kindly clear up the mystery.” NAi Ayana replied, 
When DurvAsa cursed Indra, Ganesa was not born. Afterwards when 
Indra was absorbsd in meditation and worship, he was bora 0 NArada, the 
gods cursed by DurvA<ci wandered round the world ,in {sorrow for a long 
time ; but afterwards, through ttari’s grace, they get hick their former pros¬ 
perity. 


CHAPTER XL 


1-8. NArada said, 14 0 great-minded NarAyana, you are equal to NArA» 
yan* in form, virtue, fame, might, grace and in every respect. You are tho 
best of the adepts and the devotees. You are the chief of the Munis andf 
people proficient in the Vedas. Kindly therefore reveal to me some wonderful 
matter which has not hitherto been described by the PuranAs, a narrative 
which is iu conformity with the Vedas and religion. NArAyana said, 4 There 
are many narratives of the nature desired by you. Please let me know which 
of them you regard as the cream of the aforesaid narratives ; and I shall satis¬ 
fy your cariosity.” NArada said, u O yon versed in the Vedas, there is pre¬ 
eminence of SwAhA in the matter of the oblation of ghee to the fire out of defer- 
fence to the god9 ; and there is pre-eminence of iSwadhA in respect of the offer¬ 
ings to the manes. In other matters, the superiority of Dak^inA counts as a 
fator. X want to know of their respective characteristics, births, fruits and the 
oauie of their pre-eminence. 





PR AKRIT1-K H AN DA. 


, “ NArAyana smiled at the words and answer od thus: 
In days of yore, the gods went to the lovely, inacoesibl© council of 
BrahmA in quest of food and said, *0 Brahmil, kindly fix our diet. Brahma 
agreed and accordingly adored the lotas foot of Hari. . Thereupon Hari, through 
Ins digits, wielded the form of -Yajna or sacrifice. Then the oblation of 
ghee to the fire was fixed by BrahmA as the diet of the gods. The Brfibmins, 
Ksairiyas, etc., out of deference to the gods offered the ghee but the gods did 
not receive their share of the offerings. Thereupon the gods with a heavy heart 
went to the assembly of Brahma again and expressed their grievances occa¬ 
sioned by hunger. Upon this, BrabmA again prayed Hari. Hari directed him 
to adore the goddess Nature. BrahuiA did his bidding. Then Nature, the em¬ 
bodiment of all energy, was celebrated by the name of SwAhA, the emblem oF 
the burning faculty vested in her, the spouse of fire. The goddess Nature, 
more splendid in appearance than the midday sun of summer, the goddess who 
is very graceful and enchanting and who ever favours her votaries gently smiled 
and cheerfully spoke thus :—** 0 BrabmA, solicit a boon/’ Brahtnft respectfully 
answered thus. 

20-30. “ 0 goddess of energy, you represent the burning faculty of Fire 

and are his beloved spouse called Sw&hA. The Fire, though all consuming, is not 
able without your help to reduce anything to dust u Whoever to the end of a 
Mantra will affix your name and then offer oblations of ghee to the fire will 
delight tho gods and make bis offer acceptable to them/' Kindly grant me the 
above boom Mother, you represent the prosperity and tho lustre oi! fire. May 
the gods and men worship you. “Sw&hawas grieved to hear his words and 
thus revealed to him her purpose. I shall by meditation adore Kiifna. Any 
impediment to tho main object which I have in view the adoration of 

Krisna), I regard as a trifle, nay, as an empty dream. I shall with my whole 
head and heart meditate the lftus feet of Krisna, tho Supreme Being, through 
whose grace you have created the three worlds, Mnh&deva by conquering the 
invincible deathly be m styled tb conqueror of death Gane.a among the gods 
enjoys the right of priority of worship, the all-adorable Nature is capable of 
yielding fruits to every one. I shall adore the Eternal Being with ray whole 
head and heart through whose worship the gods have attained positions which 
command reverence/ The goddess SwahA, having a lotus face, who sprang from 
the lotus feet of Krisna, having paid so, went away in order to please Visnu with 
her devotions. Thoagh she sto id on the ground on only one of her legs and thus 
meditated Liari for a hundred thousand years, yet she failed to seo the Absolute 
Being who is quite distinct * from Nature. Later on however, the fair 
Swahft below the graceful Krisna who could enchant with Hip charms even the 
charming Cupid sud being enamoured of Him fainted. 

31-40. The omniscient Krisna at once knew the heart of iSwaiiA 
emaciated with long devotions and excited with lust. He took her in His lap 
and paid, *• 0 my beloved, in the age ot Dwapara, you will be born as the 
daughter of King Nagua-jit and be known by the name of Nagna-jiti and 
then you will secme me as your husband. But 0 fair and chaste one, at 
present he consecrated by my grace aud wed the god of fire as a limb 6f 
the Mantras* This god will worship you first and then cohabit with you.” 





/ 


the beam M. A-V a l varta pc ran a. 


So spying* |vrisaa disappeared. The god of fire, frightened, appeared there 
by Brahma s command and adored Sw&hA with the DhyAria prescribed by the 
SAm-veda and then married her. In a solitary, lovely place he cohabited 
with her for a hundred cel’esml years and impregnated her with his radiant 
energy. She wielded the burden of pregnancy for 12 years, then gave 
hirth to thiee fair sons named Daksipa, QArhapatya and Ahava-niyA. The 
Br&hmina and other castes affixed the word SwahA to the end of a Mantra 
arid thus offered ghee etc. to the fire, 

41-40. Whoever affixes it in the above manner succeeds in his design 
in every way. As a snake without poison is undignified, as a BrAhinin 
ignorant of the Vedas and an unchaste woman are slandered every where, as 
an illiterate man and a dried tree void of fruits are slighted, so all the 
mantras without the suffix of SwAhA as indicated above are ineffectual, But 
if KwahA bo added to the end of a mantra, the BrAhmins are ploased, the 
gods receive their sharo of sacrificial offerings and all the rites are success¬ 
fully performed I have thus related to you the narrative of SvvahA delightful 
in this world and likely to redeem people in the next world. Now, what do 
you want to hear?” Narada said, “ 0 lord, I want to know the DhyAti 
and ihe hymn with which the god of fire adored Swaha. 

47-50. NArAyanu answered, “ 0 son of Brahma, I am going to describe 
what you want to hear. Pray, listou :—Those who have some definite object 
in view should first invoke Swaha, at the commencement of a sacrifice on a 
jar or the Uoly Stone. * : 1 adore the goddess Swaha, who is a limb of the 
mantras, who gives success in all acts performed by mortals, and who is a 
symbol of the perfection of the mantras or mystic incantations.” Through 
this Dbyari, a person worshipping her with the fundamental mantra can attain 
all success. Now I am going to toll you tho* above mantra. Om H.rim, 
S'rim Bah ni-jay Ay* SwAhA. Whoever worships her with this mantra secures 
all the objects of his desire. 

51-56,' The god of fire said, u fhe SwahA is a digit of the primeval 
nature, a limb of the mantras and the religious theories or tho codes, the 
source of all benefits reaped by the mantras, the prop of the universe, a chaste 
goddess, the very image of perfection, an adept, the benefactress of mankind, 
the burning faculty of the Fire, the beloved spouse of the Fire, tho essential 
substanoe of the world, tho preserver of tho world, the life of the gods and 
their preserver.” Whoever with esteem reads tho above 16 names of Swaha 
achieves all his objects beautifully. Noue of his acts remains defective. A 
childless man by the perusal of tho sa no gets an issue, a man without wife 
gets a fair spouse, 

C H A V T E U X L I, 

1-8. Narayana said, “ 0 Narada, now I am going to relate to you the 
excellent narrative of SwadhA, so gratifying to the manes, and beneficial to 
the funeral ceremony, In the beginning of creation BrahmA created seven 
fathers or manes (or primeval ancestors). Of these, four were corporeal and 
three, effulgent (i. e. full of light aoi having no body). Oblations of water 
and offerings, cakes, etc, during the funeral oeremony were fixed by BrahmA 
as their food. The S'rutis hold that as long as tho ceremony of presenting 






. MMSr/jy 


PfiAKirn'I-KHANDA. 


water to the pianos i 3 not performed, the fruits of ablutions can not bo reaped. 
•So long as revomice is aot engendered in the mind of the worshipper for the 
adoration of the gods, this adoration is ineffectual. So long as tho Gaetri is 
not complete, this rite is also fruitless. A Br&hmin who, does not 
perform the daily worship of the Sun or offer oblations to the manes or 
worship the gods or study the Vedas is as light and insignificant as a snake 
without poison, Whoever does not worship Hari or whoever eats aii}’thi«g 
not dedicated to Him, remains impure at the time of his birth. I3rfthm&, 
having said so, departed. The Br&hmins etc. made offeiings to the manes 
who, however, did not gel their share of the offerings. The manes in hunger 
and with a heavy heart went to Brahmft to whom they related everything. 

9-20. Brahinft was grieved to hear this and produced a daughter from 
his own mind She was youthful, graceful like a hundred moons* learned, 
intelligent and chaste. Her colour was like the white chaoipaka. She was 
decked with ornaments. She was an offspring of the, digits of Nature and 
had a smiling aspect She looked like a nymph who could grunt boous. 
Her teeth were beautiful Sho had all the chiraeteristics of the goddess of, 
fortune. Her feet were fixed in lotuses Brahma handed over this lotus-eyed 
and lotus-faced nymph to the manes as their wife, tie then secretly advised 
the Brahmins thus. u O Brahmins, when you make a gift or an offering to 
the manes, you should suffix the word SwadhA to the mantras * And they 
did accordingly. As in the case of offerings to the gods, the mystic syllable of 
Sw&hii is appropriate, so in th* case of the manes the mantra of BwadhA is 
appropriate. Dakaiaft or priest’s fee is imperative in all ri&te. Without it 
everything is ineffectual. Swa lh& was then adored by the mines, the god.*, 
the Br&lnnins, raunis and men. Their object was gaiued and they were 
very pleased. Thus I narrated to y:u the delightful anecdote of Swadha. 
Now what do you want to hear ? N&jrada said, 4 Lord, I want to know her 
hymn and worship’. N&r&yana answered, * you know ail this yourfcelf*; but 
I f*m going to give you the details. 

21-30. in the season of anlu no, on the 11th day of the dark half of 
the lunar mouth associated with tho Magh&-Naksatra, on the occasion ofc the 
fuueral ceremony, you should reverentially worship Swadh& and then perform 
the ceremony. Whoever omits the w>nhip of Swadbil in the pride of his 
heart will not reap the fruits of oblations etc. I worship SwadbA, the 
offspring of the mind of Bnihrnft, who has a never-fading youth, who is wor¬ 
shipped by the gods and the manes an 1 who yields fruits on the oooasion of 
the fuueral ceremony. After invoking her on the Holy stone, or on a jar 
(formally avowed) oblations of water for washing her feet should be tendered 
to her in the method prescribed by the Vedas. Tho following is the funda¬ 
mental mantra of Swudhft : Om Hrirn, S'rlm Klim Swadh.i Devyai 8wi\hd. 
After having, recited this mantra, the wor-hipper sh >uM worship ml eulogise 
her. That hymn I am going toiell yon Brabmtl path said, “ Whoever will 
merely say SuxiJhd will get the reward of bathing in all holy rivers, be released 
from his sins and get the fruits of the B&j-peya sacrifice. Whoever utters 
SwadhA thrice will fully reap the beuefits of worship an 1 the funeral riter. 
Whoever devoutly listous to the hyiun of Swadha acquires the religion* merit* 
26 









THE BRAHAIA-V AIV ART A PUllilfA. 


Sl 


a hundred funeral o v emonies. W noever in the morning, noon and evening o£ 
uttera bwadlift three times will get a chaste and modest wife ami an accomplished 

90Q. “ ^ r 


31-40. 0 life of the manes, 0 presiding deity of the funerals, 0 soul 

the twice-born, 0 sou ce of all benefits conferred on the occasion of the funeral 
ceremony come out of my heart for the satisfaction of the manes. Inspire 
confidence in the mind of the twice-born and foolish house-holders. 0 
immortal goddess oE excellent <Je neinour or pure dealings, yon appear at the time 
of creation and merely disappear at the time of Pralaya. You never die. Om, 
Swasti, natnah, SwAhA. SwadhA, DaksinA. by these names yon are known in the 
Vedas and <1. good to the people. At first, in the Goloku, you weie a friend oE 
ItAdbA and as you held Krisna. in your breast you beoame known as SwadhA. 
In the lovely grove of the holy ba-il in the Goloka, Radii4 saw you embracing 
Krisna ufl I cursed you. Oa this account, you have descended to the earth! 
By virtue of f.h> e nbraoa of ICr fJi, the Supreme Being, the enchanter of 
Cupid, you hy« o.in« out tff my mind and having failed to obtain satisfaction 
of your <1'.sire fro n bird Kri?:ii you Have become the spouse oE the four 
* cutes. At. first. Sw4li4 w,u also the friend of ItAdhA aad was so called because 
she asked Kri?na t> Cohabit with her... the approach of spring, the king of 
seasons, in the sphere of the lUsa covered with jasmine. U&dhft beheld "her 
amours and cursed SwAhA who, by virtue of the embrace she gave to Kri?na, 
became t!ie wife of the god of fire. 


41-48 She is ver y holy and adored by the gods and men. l'he mere 
mention of her name redeems mankind’fro n great sins. ‘ SusilA, likewise, a 
friend of R& lhA, was 'discovered by her seated on the lap of Krisna. RAdbA 
cursed Sa-ibl who descended to the earth and by virtue of the Vmlfraoe she 
gave to Krisna she was cubed DaksinA. She is also so called as she was expert 
in sexual intercourse while she sat on the right side of Krisna. Even before the 
carso of IUdhA was aunounoed S'rimatl, the ba’oved spouse of Krisna, had already 
adopted the above names, »«,, SwAhA, SwAdbA and DakfinA at the instance of 
her lover to fulfil the wishes of (hose who perform religious rites.” BrahinA, 
so saying, took his seat. Then SwadhA appeared there; and the paternal 
grand father BruhmA handed her over to the mines as their wedded bride. 
The manes beoame pleased with the gift and went away. Whoever listens 
with a pure heart and concentrated attention to the above hymn gets the benefits 
of bathing in all sacred rivers and reading iho four Vedas. 

CHAP FeTi X L I I. 

l-l 1. ft&rAyana sail ‘ I have related to yon the aneodote of SwAhA and 
SwalhA. Now bear the aoooimt of SuiilA, ths dining of Hari. The blessed, 
honoured; lovely, beautiful, chute, learned, aoqjmplished, tender, lotus-eyed! 
fawn-eyed, cheerful , lustful, good uatuiod nymph'SusbA (who hud a oharming 
row of teeth, who was versed in sexual matters, whi had a rising breast, slender 
waist and huge buttocks, who was radiant like the heated gold, who was de¬ 
lightfully warm in snmmsr an l cool in winter, who was decked with gems 
who was Hair like tbs c!n:n:u:;a. who had the gait of a swau, whoso lips were 
like the Biinbas, who was versed in the amusements of the RAsa, who was 
devoted to Kristin,^ sat ou the lap of Krisna in the preseuco of Radbi. Then 






PRA K'lUTb-K HANt)A. 


the Supreme Lord who dispels the fears of the world wa9 afraid of Rftdhft and 
hung down his head abashed. And as the Supreme Lord saw that RadhA, 
the excellent, the dignified, was approaching him with eyes flushed with rage 
like rospg with a view to rebuke him, he knew her purpose and disappeared foe* 
fear of a rupture. SusilA, witnessing the disappearance of the virtuous, tran- 
quil Lord, trembled with fear and vanished. 

12-17. Myriads of cowherdesses apprehending the danger with folded 
palms entreated the infuriated BadhA for mercy and fell down'at her feet. O 
N&rada, S'rld&uia and millions of cowherds likewise sought her feet for pro¬ 
tection. The eternal goddess Ll&dhA knowing that her consort had run away 
cursed her companion SusilA thus “if from this day forth, Susil4 come 
again to the Golcka, she shall bo at once reduced to ashes/’ Cursing her thus, 
the lady of the R&sa called out iu anger the Lord of the Rasa from the phere 
of the Rasa. 

18-30. When RAdhH of excellent demeanour could not see him inspite of 
invocation, she felt the pangs of separation, and one moment appeared to her like 
millions of Yagas. Then she cried, ‘ 0 Kiisna, lord of my life; dearer than 
my life a hundred times, the presiding god of my life, without you my life 
.. will be extinct. The wife is dignified through tlie prosperity of her husband. 
A chaste woman serves her hu*hund. the sovirce of her own dignity. To a 
chaste woman, the husband is a friend nut a god. Stic U helpless without him. 
He represents all her prosperity. The husband, the source of her virtue, hap¬ 
piness, contentment, tranquility imd honor can solely appease her jealousy and 
elevate her to dignity. Of all substantial things in the world prized by a wo¬ 
man, the husband is the best, hie is the host of her friends, tie is Rharf.il 
as he maintains her; Pali, as he preserves her; Sw&mi, as ho owns her; K&nU,*» 
as he satisfies her desire; Bandhft as he please* her ; Priya, as he is dear to her; 
Isa, as he gives her material prosperity; Pran-nuth, as he i9 lord of her life; 
Raranna as he eojoys her. So there is none dourer than the husband to a woman. 
A son is dear to her, as he is the offspring of her husband. The husband is dear¬ 
er to a woman than a hundred sons. A wicked woman who does not know the 
merits of her husband adopts the evil path. Ablution in all holy waters, initiation 
in all ceremonies, cirou mam halation round the world, asceticism, vows and gifts 
of ali kinds, fast 9 , worship of the preceptor or the gods and other difficult rito r 
are not equal in point of merit to a sixteenth part of the devotion of a woman to 
her husband. 

31-34. As to a man, the preceptor who imparts instruction to him is 
most adorable, so the husband is most adorable to a chaste woman* 

35-4f>, Alas 1 I could not appreciate a Being through whose grace I, 
though a cow-herdesa, have become the jmistress of millions of cow-herds and 
countless creatures of countless worlds. The character of a woman is incom¬ 
prehensible,” Lamenting thus, she began to meditate him and ultimately enjoy¬ 
ed the vision of his face. Then they dallied with one another in fciiat place. 

47-52. Then SusilH fell from the Goloka and after devotion for a long 
time she entered ioto the body of Laksuil. On the other hand, the gods did no 
obtain the reward of the sacrifices which they perforrhed with the greatest 









TffA BRA HMA-VAWARTA PVRANA 


'SL 


difficulty and apprcaohed Brahm&, BrahmA thereupon mediated Hari whose 
heart was filled with coir,passion. Bari produced Suwllk as Dakstail from 
the body of the great Laksitoi and gave her to Brahmft who in his turn gave 
her to Yagna or Sacrifice, Yagna or the god of sacrifice adored her thus : The 
colour of Daksink is pure like gold and graceful like millions of moons. Her 
face is lovely iike the lotus. The offspring of Kainal&, adored by Brahm&, 
the body of this goddess is very tender. Hor dress is bright like fire. Her 
lip** are like birnbas, her locks are decorated with jasmine. She has a smiling 
aspect. She is decked with gems and bathing in the holy waters she 
*uek:mi« the heart of the Munis. Be * body is annotated with musk and fra¬ 
grant sandal-paint. The part,of the head infront beneath the curls of her hair or 
ringlets is painted with vormilion. Her huge buttocks bend down through the 
load of her swelling breast. Yagna was excited with lust when he saw her 
and fainted, Brahm& restored him to consciousness and he immediately wedded 
Daksinff. 

47-52. Yagna cohabited with her in the solitudes of the forest for a 
celestial hundred yean. Then she wielded his energy (semen) and sustained 
the burden of pregnancy for 12 years, eventually, giviug birth to a son who re¬ 
presents the fruits of uctions. Duksinff requites all virtuous acts ; and when 
an act is finished, her son acquires efficacy, i.e becomes capable of yielding 
fruits. Those versed in the Vedas say; ct Persons who perform rites reap 
fruits of their actions through Yagna, Daksinfi, and her son. Thus the god 
of sacrifice and DaksinS, conjointly yield fruits. The gods being gratified 
went home. This ! heard from Dharma. 

53-64. 0 muni, the Vedas hold that the performer of a rite, immediately 

after the rite is over, should pay Daksin& or the sacredotal fee to the officiating 
priest at that very moment in which case he will at once reap the fruits of the 
ceremony. If be fails to do this either accidentally or by mistake and a 
moment elapses since his nou-payment be shall have to pay double the fee, 
II ojne night or three nights or one week or one month or one year expire, he 
ahull have to pay respectively four times, ten tiroes, twenty times, a hundred 
thousand times or 300 millions of times the amount of priest’s fee payable by the 
worshipper; otherwise, all his rites will be ineffectual. He who deprives the 
Brahmin of his foe is impure like one who takes away his property and for¬ 
feits his privileges in everything. For his sins, he becomes afflicted with 
poverty and disease. Laksuit curses him and leaves his house. The manes 
aud the gods do not receive oblations of water aud ghee respectively from him. 
A generons man does not give him anything. A beggar does not accept alms 
from him. A person who deprives a Br&hmin of his property or a priest of his 
f|e, goes down like a jar dissociated from the cord which sustained it. If the 
performer oi a sacrifice does not give fee to a priest in spite of his demand, he 
goes to the hell called the Ktimbhipftka and dwells there for a bundled thousaud 
years in endless torments inflicted upou him by the myrmidons of Yuma. He 
degrades each of his seven ancestors connected with seven of his previous births. 
Now I have answered all your questions. What do you want to hear more ? ? * 
JifU'adft said, 4 * Lord, who. eats the fruits offered in religious ritss performed with- 




peak iu ti -kb a n da 


out Daks in a, ? By what method did Yagna worship Dake'mA 
the above points to mo in detail." 


65-88. N&r&yana said, ‘ 0 son of Brahcnft, infamous is (he consequence 
of a deed performed' without DaksiuA. A worshipper who .offers Dab^iiuV 
reaps good results. The worshipper in this case is be tie ti ted by his rites, B&rnan* 
(the dwarf-incarnation of Hari) has assigned the offerings of a ritepertormed 
without DaksinA, as the proper food of Bali, the king of demons, lhe things 
offered to the rnaaos in the oonrse of a B'r&ddha ceremony performed by a Brah¬ 
min not versed in the Vedas, articles gifted in a heartless manner and the sacri¬ 
ficed offerings of a BrAbmin who cohabits with a S'ffdra woman or of a Brftboiin 
who dismisses his preceptor are likewise consumed by Bah. Mow I am going to 
recite to yon the meditation, the hymn and the worship due to Dakfinft as describ¬ 
ed by K&nwa-S&kbs. In days of yore, Yagna was enchanted with the beauty of 
DaksinA and adored her thus : ‘ 0 my beloved, in days of yore you were one 

ot the prmcipal attendant milk-muiJ* ot RAdliit ia the Golokn. iou were dear 
to Krisna like lUdbil, Iu the month of K&rfika, on the night of the ruil 
Moon, yon came out of the right side of KrisnA, hence ^you are so called. 
Owing to your sweet disposition, you were first named SueilA. You £ut on the 
right side of Krisna ; whereupon the jealous RAdhA cursed you ; hence yea 

were called Dokftttt. M y dear > b y K 00 ‘ J luck * y° a have deacended £rom 
the Goloka and arrived here. Be propitiated with me and accept me as your 
husband. You yield fruits to the people commensurate with their acts. 
Without you, every act is ineffectual. As trees become graceless when denuded 
C/E fruits and branches, so no act looks well without you. Nay, Brahma, T ianu, 
S'iva, Indra and others canuot yield fruits of actions without you. Brahma 
represents Karma ; S'iva, the fruit; and I, the sacrifice ; but you are the cream 
of all. Krisna who ia distinct from nature cannot yield fruits without you. 
Fair one, in every birth yon represent my energy. Combined with you, I can 
render a rite successful. “ The god of sacrifice, so saying, stood befoi e Daksinft. 
The goddess who is the digit of Laksmi was propitiated. Whoever at the 
time of saorifice reads the above hymn surely gets the benefits of all sacufices. 
In ali sacrifices, vis., grand royal sacrifice, the BAjpeye, or the sacrifices of cow, 
hotse, man plough, Vi?nn, Phalgn elephant, Indra, S'iva, Rudra, iron, Dharma, 
gold, Vanina, YAga, friend, gift of wealth, gift of lend, Kanduka, etc., or in 
the following sacrifices, vie., sacr fice for the benefit of one’s son, the cure of 
the disease called PAtuli, purification, Rechana, expiation of sins, Karma, 
Subhadra, Mani, etc., whoever reads tho above hymn brings success to his 
undertaking, with all its component parts without any impediment. 


89-99. 0 NArada, an intelligent, man ought to worship DaksinA with the 

above DhyAua, hymn and,method of worship by invoking her on the Holy Stone 
or on a jar. “ I worship tho good-natured, beneficent, goddess DaksinA who is 
the symbol of Vi^nu’s energy, who is tho offspring of the digits of Laksmi, who 
is the godde«s most sacred to every ceremony, who yields fruits to the wor¬ 
shipper for all his acts. - ’ With the above mantra, an intelligent person should 
meditate and worship her. Savants by offering to her water for washing 
the feet should worship the all-adorable goddess with the following mystic 


TILE BHAHMA-VA1VARTA PUR AN A. 



<§L 


tafion, Om Hrim Klim S'rim DoksinAyfti Swaha Thus I hare narrated 
to you the history of this goddess. In connexion vviih any. act, whoever, with 
profound attention, listens to this delightful narrative will he able to acchieve 
his design fully. That is, his act will t e exempt from defects. A man without 
a wife if he listens to it will be ab’e to got a good-natured, handsome, modest, 
chaste, wife of good rank and possessing a melodious voice ; an ignorant mail 
will thereby acquire knowledge; a poor n an will gain wealth ; a man who has 
no landed property will acquire land ; a person who has no tenants will get 
tenants, A person in danger or dissociated from his friends or a man in fetters 
will be certainly relieved from dreadful calamities, if he listens to the narrative 
of Dakpind for a month. 


C H A P T E li X L I I I. 


1-8. NArnda said 0 best of those who know the Vedas, I heard the excel¬ 
lent narratives of many goddesses. Now tell trie the characters of other goddesses*” 
Nftr&yana said. “ Their characters are separately described iu the Puramis. 
Please tell me wboee character you now want to hear. N&rada said, u I want 
4o hear about the characters of JSasthi, Mnngal-chandi and Manasa, as well as 
the etymology of their names.’ NaiAyana said, ‘Tim presiding go Idess of 
children who bestows issue on mortals U the sixih digit of nature iha» repre¬ 
sents the illusion of Visnu ; hence she is called Sa.jthi. This Sasthi is the 
favourite spouse of Kartika anduearer to him than bis life. One of the sixteen 
mothers, she is called Devi-sen4, always eager to prolong the longevity of 
children. This goddess adept in asceticism, always dwells by the side of chil¬ 
dren Incidentally iu connexion with her adoration, 1 will narrate to you a 
history, interesting and calculated to give offsprings which I heard from 
Dharma. 


9-11. Mann, the son of Brahma, had a son named Priya-vrata. King 
Priya-vrata who wig a perfect ascetic at firs'. did not marry. He afterwards 
married at Brahma’s command, hut did not get any issue. Kasyupa. Muni 
initiated him in the sacrifice beneficial in jespect of the attainment of a 
son and, at the termination of the sacrifice, the saint offered oblation of rice, 
milk and sugar boilod together to the queen in h$r menses. As soon as she 
svto it, aha became pregnant and sustained the pregnancy for tweliL&^elestia! 
years. Afterwards she giv* birth to a dead son of golden hue, auspicious 
in every respect. The pupils had come out of the socket of the eyes of the 
child, at. the sight c£ which the relations and the wife of the king who was 
austere in religious rites wept bitterly. The queen fainted. The king took 
the child to the .place where the dead bodies were burnt. Re embraced the 
corpse and lamented loudly in the dense forest. He could not forsake it and 
tried to devise a scheme which might lead to his own death. Overwhelmed 
with grief, occasioned by the death of his son, he lost his celestial wisdom. 
Later on, he beheld a chariot decorated with wraiths of flowers, adorned with 
white pi ce3 of cloths beaming like flowers and ornamented with gems pure like 
the crystal. In that chariot, he beheld a goddess, lovely, white like the chain- 
paka, with a youth that never fades, possessing a gentle smile that lighted up 
her lotus-face, docked with ornaments aud ready to favour her votaries, 







miSTQy 



PRAKR 1 TDK HAN DA 


When he saw her; he eulogised her and placing ihe child on the ground he 
adored the goddess. 0 NAradu, the king then said to the wife ofc Kartika 
effulgent like the summer sun ‘O handsome nymph, why have you come 
here ? 0 goddess o£ sacred vow, whose spouse you are ? Blessed and honoured 
among the fair, whose daughter you are ?” 


23-32. This goddess is also called Deva-SenA, as she represented the 
army of the gods when they were oppressed by the might of the demons and 
conquered them. This benef iotress of the world and the preserver of the god < 
when she heard his words answered thus :— u 0 king, 1 have sprung trooi tie 
mind of Brahma. My name is Deva-SenA. The creator wedded me to h^rtika. 

I am one of the sixteen mothers. In the world below, I have another name, 
vie Sasthl. I give sons to the sonless, friends to the friendless, wealth to 

the poor and good deeds to the inactive, or the unfortunate. Through 

Karina alone, the husband of a handsome girl becomes a widower ; the father 
of virtuous sons becomes sonless, the wealthiest man becomes poor , the 
man of vast resources loses all his property and a handsome man gets de¬ 

formed. Through Karma alone, a man gets a dead child or a child who lues 
long or a virtuous son or a son void of qualities. 0 king, I L.novv that the 
Vedas recognise the pre-eminence of Karma in every respect. Lord Hari 
himself is the image of Karma and gives fruits to people accordiflg to their 
acts. 

•m 

33-48. 0 NArada, the goddoss having said so easily revived the child 

by means of her profound wisdom. The king saw in the sky with staring 
eyes that the child was gently smiling. The deity was about to dairy her 
away when the king’s lips were dried up through grief. He then again 
eulogised her with hymns. The goddess was propitiated and recited to the 
king the Karma as described in the Vedas. She said, “ 0 son of Manu, you rule 
the three worlds. Therefor^ proclaim or advertise my worship personally 
throughout your kingdom. This son of yours named Suvrat.a like, a lotus 
in your family, will be well-qualified and learned. He will know the con- 
ditious of his former birth. He "dll be the best of ascetics, nay, ho will be 
devoted to Hari. By the performance of a Hundred sacrifices, he will secure 
the adoration of the Ksatriyas. This auspicious, mighty prince will wield the 
strength of millions of elephants. But this virtuous, warlike, well-qualified, 
holy” ascetic, adept and celebrated son of yours, a favourite of the learned, will 
squander all his property by gifts. “ So Saying, the goddess returned to him 
his Eon. The king promised to > introduce to his subjects her worship. She 
give him a boon and went to Heaven. The king thereupon gladly went homo 
described what had happened, worshipped Sasthl and distributed immense wealth 
to the Brahmins. In every month, on the sixth day of the bright half of the 
lunar month, the king tried to adopt her worship in every city with great ^ 

pomp. In all ceremonies sacred to children, in the ceremony when the child 
first takes his food etc , he directed her worship to be perEorni and worshipped 
her himself. 0 Nrtrada of good demeanour,, now I tun going to toll you the 
formula of her worship, her Dbyau uud hymn as stated by JDharraa according 
to Kautuma. 





rimsTny 




THE BRAHMA-V AlVATiTA PURUtA. 


49-57. 0 muni, a vyhq ruan ought, to worship SastM on the Holy Stone 

or a jar or at the root of the holy fig tree or by painting tier picture on the 
wall. 4V I worship the sacred Deva-3on&, the dixth part of goddess Nature, the 
goddess of celebrity wI\o gives issues, who is the mother of the world, auspi¬ 
cious and kind, who*e colour is Jike the champakn and who is decked with 
gems ” A wise man having uttered this Mantra should put flowers on his 
own head and by the radical Mantra worship iSasthi with the fallowing in 
gradients, viz. water mixed with grass, etc., to wash the feet and water to 
rinse the mouth, perfume, flowers, lamp, saorifical offerings ami delicious 
fruits. Om drim Sa$fhi Devyai 8w&h&, this is the fundamental Mantra of 

eight letters with which she should be adored. Afterwards she should be 
eulogised according to the hymn of S&m-voda calculated to give woa ? th, sou 
and ail success, lira hind Lath said, whoever recites the Mantra a hundred 
thousand times will be the father of a weil-qalified son. 0 NArada* listen to 
*the mysterious ode of the Vedas, which is auspicious and gratifies the desire 
of every one. , 

58-7o. 0 great goddess S&aihi, you are the source of all success and 
the very image of tranquility. You are the dispenser of all benefits. By your 
boon, a sunless man gets a virtuous son and by vour grace a man may got 
wealth, happiness and redemption. You are the sixth part of Nature. You 
are an adept and by your illusions you accomplish every deed. You are 
the essence or the substantial part of the universe. You confer benefits on 
mankind ; good acts become fruitful by your grace. You remove impediments 
or calamities of children. You are the spouse of Kartika. In every act, you 
•are adorable in the estimation of those who perform holy rites. 0 goddess, 
your very sight consecrates your worshippers, you are the image of Satva 
or virtue. You always preserve the gods. SMen adore you in the world. 
Envy, anger and other evil passions cannot affect you. I bow to you, O great 
goddess, again, and again with the greatest, estee u and reverence. Goddess, 
me, 1 pray, wealth, wife, sou virtue and fame. 0 adorable being, 

me welfare and 


irive me, 1 pray, wealth, wife, sol, virtue ami fame. 0 
bestow on me kingdom, subjects and knowledge. Give 
victory, 0 mother. ” Priya-vrata having worshipped her thus got through her 
.'race* a famous son who was the ornament of the royal race. 0 son of 
Brahmil. if a 'sonless man listens to the above ode for a year, be will get an 
accornphshed and longevous son. A barren woman listening to it for a year 
will be released from all her sins and assuredly give birth to a son vested 
with exceptional merits. A woman who Ins bivt one son and a woman who is 
-the mother of a dead son, if they listen to it according to the method prescribed, 
will, by the grace of Sasthi, 'give birth to valiant, qualified, learned an! 


If the parents devoutly hoar 
bv Sastbi’s grace. 


it 


famous sons who will live for a long time 
for a month, their diseased sou will recover 

CHAPTER X L I V. 

1-19. NArayana said, “ I have narrated to you the history of SAstiii as 
described in religious books. Now listen to the narrative of Mangal- 
ohandi, I relate to you 


the method of her worship as I have heard from 



PRAKRITI-KU.ASDA. 



Dharrna in conformity with the tenets oE the \ edus and the wishes ik the 
savants Cliandi means skilful; aud Majigala means welfare, she is expet t 
in matters likely 'to do good ; hettce sho is jo called. She Uiaiyli.as stie 
is classed among tho adorable : and she was worshipped by Man gala, the son 
of the guides* earth. Hence she is so called. She was the benefactress ot 


of this world, which contains seven islands and was 


MahgalaTthe monarch » » u « .- - 

adored by him. Hence she is so called. She is a modification of the gracious 
goddess, the primordial Nature, and personally manifests herself to women 
in order to grant them boons In dav s of yore, Mahadeva, being deputed by 
the Supreme Lord Visnn for the destruction of lYipira, worshipped this 
goddess. 0 son of Brahma, in olden times in tho war with gods, when 
the conveyance of S'iva was hurled dowu from the sky* the affllotea b iva ) 
Visnu’a command, adored Uurga. Then Dur*& manifested herself m the 


Yl»nU8 UOUilU.-tUU, wuuiru - o’ tI . 

shape of Mahgala-ohandi aud addressing Mahadeva spoke thus Lord, yo* 


need uotfear.” Then .Viva at once got the bullock to be used as hu conveyance. 
She said again, “ 0 Lord. 1 shall, as directed by you, represent your energy ; 
aud Vistan, the Supreme Being, himself will help you. You will be able to 
kill the demons through our assistance. ” So saying, the goddess disappears 
and helped S'iva in the shape of energy. Then S iva killed the demon with 
the help of tho weapon giveu by Visnu. Thereupon tho gods aud tho Mums 
with a reverential inclination of their heads eulogised S'iva and there was a 
rain of dowers on his head. S'iva, as directed by Brahma aou \ isnu who 
blessed him complacently, bathed and having parided himself worshipped 
Maagala-chandi with oblations of water (for washing the feet and rinsing tho 
mouth), with flowers,.sandal and other sacrificial offerings, with presents of goat, 
lamb, buff-aloe*, with cloth, ornament*, wreath, cakes, honey, music, ripei traits 
etc., and also meditated him according to the Mantra prescribes oy Malayan* 
diua. 


20-22. Narada, S'iva with tlie fundamental Mantra made the above 
offerings. Om Hrim S'rim Klim Sarva I’ujye Devi Mangala Chandt Aim 
Kruni Plat Swahft: this Mantra of twenty-four letters give.- trust like the 
Kalpa-tree. It is complete when recited ten l .khs of time-. Whoever is able 
to render the above Mantra perfiot is able to gratify the desire ot others like 
Visnu.. New listen to the Dhyuna sanctioned by the \ edas. 

23-27. “ I meditate the goddess who is always sixteen years old, whose 

'youth is perennial, whoso body obscures the fall moon, who is decked with 
ornaments of go n, whoso chignon is adorned with tho wreath of jasmine, whose 
face is like the b'unbii, vvlnse teeth aro pure, who hits a smiling aspect, whose 
eyes are like blue lotuses, who sustains the world and who is the-source of all 
prosperity and who serves as a raft to the people endeavouring to cross ilie 
ocean of the world ” 

23-34. 0 Muni, tho above is her Dhy&ua. Now 1 am going to describe 

to you her ode. B'iva in calamity eulogised her thus:-- *• 0 goddess, 
Maugal-ObandikA, mother of the world, preserver of people from danger, 
dispeuser of joy and benetit, preserve the afflicted aud the aggriev¬ 
ed, You give pleasure, benefit aud good things. Hence you are so called. 
O all-auspicious «r.oddes-s, O benefactress of saints.' you give what is good 


27 








imiST/fy 



THE BRAHMA-V AIVARTA PL) RAN A. 


<§L 


to every-body. 0 presiding goddess of good position, your worship is appro¬ 
priate do Tu0sd*y. Krng Man gala, the ornament of the race of Matins, adorer 
you constantly O goddess, saored to the good things of the world, you are 
the imago of the Supreme God. 0 benefactress of the world, you can give 
the best kind of redemption. 0 progenitor of good, 0 cream of virtue, yon 
are imperceptible to Karma and adored on the day of Mangala or Tuesday. 

35-41. S'iva, to propitiate her, used to worship her on every Tuesday. 
Whoever with wrapped attention listotis to her ode secures al Isorts of benefits 
and ba» no possibility of meeting any evil. Mangala-Cbandi was first wor¬ 
shipped by S'iva, then by the plaaet Mangala, then by king Mangala, then 
by women on the day of Maugaia (Tuesday), then by the men who seek their 
Mangalft or personal welfare ; lastly, by gods, Munis, Manus and men in all the 
three worlds. Whoever with wrapped attention listens to the auspicious hymn 
of this goddess gets happier and happier every day contributing to the increasing 
happiness of succeeding generations. 


CHAPTER X L V. 

1-8. 0 NArada, I have recited to you the anecdote of Sasthi and Maiigala- 

Chandt. Just listen now to the narrative of Manas A as I heard from Hharrna. 
Manasfi has come out of the mind of Kasyapa. She sports in the heart of men. 
Hence she is so called. Or, in her own mind, she recollects or meditates 
Hari. Hence she is so called. ManasA, the self-contented, for three Yugas 
adored Krisna. the Supreme Being and through her asceticisms and powers of 
Yoga, i.e. concentration of mental powers, she became an adept. Krisna, seeing 
that the body of Jarat-karu Muni was emaciated, named ManasA as Jaratk&ri. 
Krisna in order to fulfil her wishes kindly adored her himself. Manas A was 
called Jagat-Gauri as she was moat enchanting and graceful in the three 
worlds. She is (jailed S'aiv$, as being the palpi) of S'iva. 

9 20. 0 NArada, she is oalled Vaisnavi, being devoted to Vismi. In th$ 

sacrifice of snake performed bv the king Janamejaya, she preserved the life 
of the snakes, her brothers; hence she is called Nageswari. She is calbd Visa- 
harS, a9 she can takeaway poison. As she received the Yoga ot perfection, 
she is called an adept devotee. Asher superb knowledge is mysterious or, 
esoteric and as she can restore the dead to life, she h called u very wise ” bv 
savants. She is celebrate:1 as the mother of Astika as she gave birth to 
that saint. She is called Jarat-k&rl being the wife ot Jarat-k&ru. Being the 
sister of the snakes, she is called N&ga- blmgini. Whoever reads the above 
twelve names of Manasft is absolved from the fear of snakes, if a bed be sus¬ 
ceptible to the fear of snake?, if a temple be frequented by snakes, or if the 
body of man be entwined by a snake and also in the ca?e of snake-bite, the 
perusal of the above hymn at once releases the reader of the hymn from such 
dangers. Snakes fly at the sight of a man who daily recites the above hymn. 
The recital of the hymn ten lakhs oE times makes the reciter an adept. Such 
an adept can eat poison with impunity. By virtue of the perfection attained 
by the recital of the ode a man can decorate himself with snakes; o r he may 
ride, sleep or sit on snakes. 






Ml HlSTfy 



PBAKRlTl-K 11 AN D A. 



CHAPTER XL V I. 


1-9. N&r&yana said, “ 0 Narada, just listen to the account dealing with the 
mode of worship and the meditation appropriate to Manas&, as prescribed T t o 
BAraa-Veda. 4i I meditate the goddess whose colour is white like the champaKA, 
who is decorated with many gems and clothes that are pure like fire, who wields 
the sacred thread of anakea ; who is profoundly wise and pro -eminently w * 30 ♦ 
who is devoted to her husband; who presides over adepts and is an edep 
herself; nay, who is the very image of perfection.” After that meditation, 
with the fundamental Mantra, sho should be worshipped with offerings, 
incense, candle, perfume, flowers, and other ingredients. The basic or fun 
mental Mantra which consists of twelve letters as prescribed by the Vedas 
calculated to fulfil one’s desire is called the Kalpa-taru. Ora Hrim b rirp 
KHm Manas& Devyai Sw&h&. This mystic incantation is rendered pertoc- 
when a man recites it fivo lakhs of times. For a man who attains this perfection, 
bitter poison is turned into honey. „ Whoever ou the last day of As&dha on t o 
milk-hedge- plant invokes this goddess and worships her and whoever ou t la 
fifth day of Manasii adores her with many ingredients certainly attain wealla 
ions. etc. 


10-17. 0 blessed saint, I described to you the method of her worship. 

Now I relate to you her anecdote as I heard from Dbaruna. Once upon a time, 
there was a great fear of snakes. Whoever w&s bitten by the snake was sure to 
die. Saint Easyapa was much frightened and for the benefit of the 
world, by the command of Brahma, he created a mystic incantation in con- 
formity with the principles stated in the Vedas. The presiding goddess of the 
Mantra came out of the mind of Kasyapa at the time of his meditation ; 
and hence she was called Manasa. The virgin Manas a, as soon as she came 
into being, went to S'iva at tho mount Kail&fla and there adored him 
for a celestial thousand years. The god was propitiated. lie gave her celes¬ 
tial knowledge, taught her the Vedas and gave her the Mantra of Kriana 
consisting of eight letters. 8'rtm Hrim Klim Krism\y Sw&hiV This Mautr;* 
; : s called the conqueror of the three worlds. He read it to her in the coarse 
of worship. 

18-30. The chaste Manasa gained the knowledge of the hymn the 
meditation, the knowledge of the methods how to conquer death and Puras- 
chaiana (repetition of the name of a Deity attended with burnt offerings, obla¬ 
tions etc.) Then at his command, she went to Puskara for devotion. There 
she became an adept by praying to Kri?na for three Yugas and at last beheld 
tho Supreme Being before her. The merciful Hari, seeing that sho was maoh 
emaciated, worshipped her himself and caused others to worship her. Then 
He gave her a boou saying, you shall be adored in the three worlds, and then 
disappeared. She was at first worshipped by Kriana, then by S'iva and 
Kasyapa and afterwards by the gods, munis, Manus, snakes and men First 
Kasyapa gave her in marriage to Jarat-k&ru. The Muni accepted her who 
game to him of her own accord. He married her by Brahmas command 
and then slept at the hermitage at Puskara at the root of the holy fig tre* 
by placing his head on her lap. He recollected Hari and was ^erpowered 







by sleep. At suttset, the chaste ManasA cogitated in her mind that if her hus¬ 
band failed to perform the evening Sundhya which was a necessary rite, he would 
he practically guilty of the murder of a Brahmin. Whoever does not per¬ 
form the morning and the evening SandiiyOs is rendered impure for ever 
arid is guilty of the sin of Br&htpiu-slaughter. 

31-38. Meditating m her mind the method prescribed by theWedas, 
she awakened) the Maui. The Muni was highly incensed against her and 
said, 0 good nymph, though devoted to your husband, how could you possibly 
awake him against his will ? All rites nre ineffectual or fruitless to a 
Woman who tries to injure her husband. Her devotion, fasting, vow and 
acts of charity are all useless. Whoever adores her husband adores Hari. 
The husband cf u worn.m represents her vow. Gifts of all sorts, sacrifices, 
acts of pilgrimage, prayers, fastings, acts of virtue and truthfulness and the 
adorations of the gods are not equal in merit to the sixteenth part of the 
devotion of a woman to her husband. She who serves her husband in this 
world dwells with her husband in the Vaikuntha for the period covered by 
the jurisdiction of a hundred Brahmas. Whoever ill-treats her husband by 
Words or by deeds is consigned to punishment in the manner prescribed 
below. 

39-44. As long as the sun and the moon exist, she has to suffer the 
iormepts of the hell called KumbMp&ka. Afterwards, she is born as a 
Ohaiul&la woman void of husband and son. *’ While speaking, the lips of the 
Muni about to curso her began to quiver. Manas4 trembled with fear and 
said, “ 0 virtuous and magnanimous lord, 1 have awakened you lest you should 
be deprived of Samlhyd Do away with your curse, guilty us I .am. A 
woman who interferes with her husband while eating, sleeping or committing 
sexual intercourse shall for ever endure the torments of the hell called Kala- 
Sfttra Such a fate is particularly forbidden to a chaste woman. ” ManasA 
so raying fell down at his feet in great fright. 0 N&rada, the Muni 
was about to curse the sun-god, in a rage, when the sun appeared before him 
with the Sandhjfi., 

45 55. The frightened sun and the Sandhyti i,e. ode to the sun personified, 
consoled the sage with gentle words. The *uo said, “ 0 best of saints, 
your wife awakened you under a conception that I had set. in order that you 
might not be involved in sip, but as a matter of course l had not set 
at that time. 0 saint, control your passion, ft is not proper for you fo be 
displeased with me. The heart of the tranquil natured Munis is softer than 
butter. The displeasure of a Brahmin can. reduce to allies the three worlds; 
and a Brahmin, may, ulso it he chooses, create the world in a moment. There 
i* none so onergetic a? a Brahmin. A Brahmin is radiant with the lustre 
emanating from Brahma and ever re members the Eternal Being Kris mi. 3 arat- 
k&ru was pleaeed with the modest entreaties of the sun. i he sun aUo iiccejting 
Jibe ^blessings of the Brahmin went away. The Brahmin, to ke^p his word, 
abandoned Manama who, overwhelmed with grief, lamented a good deal. 
Afraid lest she should be abandoned for good by het husband, she in imminent 
danger remembered her spiritual guide (iS'iva), her favourite, deity, (Krisna), 
$rahm& aijd her father Kasyapa who all at once arrived there. The great 




imSTffy 



PR A KlUTJ-K H AN DA. 


@L 


Muni .Jarat-karn, as soon as be saw his tutelary Deity who is distinct from 
Nature, roost reverentially bowed to Him and adored Him. After having sepa¬ 
rately saluted S'iva, BrahmS. and Kas'yapa he said. “ 0 gods, why lmve you 
come hither ? M 


56-61. Thereupon BrabmA bowed to Krisna 'and using amiable wot da 
on the occasion spoke thus, ‘•O.best, of pious men, if yon are determined to 
divorce your legally married and chaste spouse, then in order to ra.nnt. in jour 
rectitude' or keep your I'hnrrm yon should first impregnate her. bo long as 
the wife does not give birth to a son to discharge tho paternal debt hit 
husband, he should not adopt the Following stages of a Brilium. sJ«t«,, Uu, 
Brahirachari. Bl.iksu and Vannchft.t. Whoever does not by begetting a son 
on his wife, discharge the debt of his father, forfeits all his religious merits 
which disappear like water from a «ean. Jarat-Wru having keatd this 
touched the abdomen of ManasA will, his fingers by concentration of hi. 
ajenfal powers. The gods thereupon blessed the Muni and departed. Manae& 
was pleased and 30 was the Muni. 

6°‘70 0 N&rada, Mannsft was impregnated by toe touch of the Muni s 

finger.” The great, saint said, “ 0 Manas*, yon will(give birth, ton son wuo 
will subdue hi” passions, who will be the bestfcof the adherents of V isnu who 
will he valorous! austere in his rites, crowned with fame and well qualified 


in every lespect. My son wiU be wise. 


meditative, the best of those learned 


in the'Vedas. That" son of mine, devoted to Vmnu, will be the ornament of 
my race and redeem my family. At his birth, the manes will dance with joy. 
A chaste, good-natured woman, of a melodious voice and good rank, who 
preserves the integrity of her husband's family who is dear to her consort. 
Is worth the name of a wife. He is a real friend, through whom truth in Han 
could be acquired, fie is a benefactor who is a source oC pleasure. 1 e » 
reallv the father of his child, who cuts asunder the ties ot the woild and 
points out to him the path to the attainment of Han. fehe is really a mother 
who alleviates the pain other child, occasioned by his residence m the • omb 
He is a spiritual guide who gives the Mantra of V.sim to Ins disciple and 


The best, kind of 


Iff IS ft SLHUlUttJ . ... . 0 

imparts instructions on matters relating to the faith m Hari. 
knowledge is the contemplation of Krisna from whom the who.e universe (from 
BrahmA down to a grass ...including animate and inanimate objects) emanates 
a nd into whom it ultimately merges. Ho who imparts the above knowledge ti, 
his dboiple is, properly speaking, bis spiritual preceptor, ihe service of Han is 
the cream of all act 5 * prescribed by the \og;a and the v etlas. 

71-78 Ravi is p.redicable of the essence of all metaphysical knowledge. 
fiWvtbinw e’«s is bosh. He who imparts pure knowledge to his wife is. 
properly Speaking, her husband. Through Supreme knowledge, a man »s re¬ 
leased from the fetters of the world. He who binds another with the above 
fetters is his greatest foe. He is the spiritual gmde of hi.wdjsc.ple if be m- 
parts to him faith in Uari. He who does not release his pupil non, ^ 
of the world is his greatest foe; for, as a result ot his perverse doctrine* a 
aiita has to accept birth again and again and also to suffer the tonnerus of 
i)e || eau ., f d bv the chastisement inflicted upon him by Yalta s myrmidon*. Such 
* preceptor or father is neve, friendly. Whoever dqes not administer counsel 




mtSTfiy 


TBS BRAHMAN AIV Am A PUR ABA . 


g fo tho Eternal and delightful belief in Hari is not a 
friend of his pupil, 0 chaste lady, by my precept adore that Supreme 
Being, the u&decaying Hari, void of all attributes and thereby get rid of your 
Karma. 0 goddess, L abandoned you on a mere ploa. You are really innocent. 
Please excuse me. Forgiving, chaste ladies on account of their piety never 
cherish feeling of anger in their mind. X am much abdicated in mind for want 
ot adoration of the feet of Hari. l ain therefore setting out for pilgrimage for 
His worship and meditation. You had better go to a suitable place after your 
liking. Women, in particular, value wealth and enjoyment more than redemp¬ 
tion. 1 herefore adopt a path which leads to the fulfilment of desires. A 
person, free from the inclination to pursue material enjoyments is alone capable 
of merging his mind into the lotus feet of Hari. 

* 9-90. Manas ft was filled with grief to hear this and with tears in her 
eyes thus addressed her lord:—“ O friend of my life, you abandon me for 
the offence ,oF awakening you while you were asleep. But you ought to 
manifest yourself to ino as soon as I remember you. Separation from a 
relation is painful to a person ; separation from the sou is more painful; blit 
most painful to a wife is the separation from her husband. The affection of a 
woman for her husband is greater thau the affection which she cherishes for a 
hundred sons combined. The husband has been styled beloved by savants as 
of all objects in the world, he is the dearest to his wife As a man loves his only 
son, as the Vaisuavas love Hari, as an one-eyed person is attached to his only 
eye, as a thirsty person likes water and us a hungry man likes food, as a licen¬ 
tious wan likes a woman, as a thief wants the property of others, as a learned 
man likes know-ledge, as a merchant likes his merchandise, so a chaste 
woman ;9 ever devoted to her husband.” So sayiug, JVIanusd. fell down at his 
feet, lhe compassionate Muni took his beloved spouse in his lap for a short 
time and moistened her body with tears. She too moistened him with tears. 

I hen the Muni by Yirtuo of his wisdom born of faith in Hari restrained his 
sorrow, consoled his spouse and went out for devotion. ManasA went to the 
summit of the KailAsa to her spiritual guide, S'iva. P&rvafct with gentle words 
consoled her. S'iva, the abode of virtue, dispelled her sorrow by doctrine* on 
wisdom. 

91- 10A then Manual* ou au auspicious day gave birth toastfn, the off¬ 
spring of the digits of Hari, a great philosopper and the pieceptor of the Yogis 
(contemplative saints.) This boy, while he was in the womb of his mother, 
u*td to listen.to the principles of the great knowledge recited by the five-faced 
S'i^a with bis five mouths. Therefore be became the best "of the contem¬ 
plative saints and the wisest person in the world. S'iva, by auspicious recitations 
of appropriate Mautras, performed the ceremony of the child-birth etc. and 
taught the boy the Vedas etc. for his benefit. At this time, S'iva gave three 
laid* crorevS of gorus to the Br&hmins. Ganri distributed to them a lakh of gems 
along with it hundred thousand coww. S'iva taught the boy the four Vedas 
along with tueir auxiliary branches and the supreme science dealing with 
the conquest of death. Manuka was called Asti as she had faith in her 
husband, her iavourite deity Hari and her preceptor. JJer sou was therefore 
called Astika. Astika, at the command of S'iva, went to Puskara to prav 






to Hari, Haying acquired the Mantra and the theory of asceticism, tne great 
ascetic AstfSa adored Hari for three lakhs of celestial year? and afterwards came 
S'iva in order to bow to him. Manas & bowed to S'iva and took the boy to 
the hermitage of Kasyapa. This Muni, when he found there his daughter along 
with her sou, distributed millions of gems to the BrAlmims and. at the instance 
of the boy, fed countless Br&hmius with delicacies. Diti, Aditi and other wives 
of Kasyapa were also very pleased. Manas ft lived in her paternal house 
with her son for a very long time. Now hear the narrative of Asti lea. 

103-112. By chance, Partksit, the son of Abhimanyu, was cursed by a 
Brfthmin. The valorous Muni S'ring! touched the water of the Kausild river 
and cursed him thus, 4 In a week yon will be bitten bv a reptile (Taksaka). 
The king Parlksit thereupon wont to the coast of the Ganges, dwelt there 
for a week and listened to the code of Dharroa. In a week, the reptile or 
snake ran to bite him when Dhamvantari saw the snake. Both of them were 
pleased to know one another. The snake gave a valuable gem to Dhanwantari 
who was satisGed and went back to his proper destination. The snake then 
bit the king seated on bis bed or platform. Tho king remembered Hari, expired 
and went to the Vaiknntha. His son Jan a me jay a, overwhelmed, with Glial 
grief, performed his funeral cer emony. To avenge his father’s death, he per 
formed the ceremony of the sacrifice of snake. By the power of the 
sacrifice, all the snakes consigned themselves to the radiant sacrificial fire 
and expired. Then the reptile who had bitten king Parlksit, through fear, 
sought Indra’s protection. r J lie Br&htnirts with Indra prepared to kill the 
reptile. 

113-118. 'Jhe gods and the Mums approached Manas ft. Indra, much agi¬ 
tated and frightened, adored Manasft, Astika, the great Muni by his mother's 
command, went to Janamejaya busy in his sacrifice and there begged the king to 
save the life of Indra and preserve the snakes. The king complied wifh his 
wishes od the recommendation of the Brfthmins and, after the sacrifice was over, 
be gave the priest’s fee to the Br&hmins. The Brfthmins, Munis and gods 
then went to Manasft and separately worshipped her. With sixteen ingredients, 
Indra worshipped her and afterwards by the command of Brahmft and Visnu 
eulogised her with a beautiful piece of odo. After this, all departed. The 
above is the narrative of Manasft. What do you want to hear now ? ” 

119-127. Nftradu said, “ Lord, I want to know the ode with which indra 
eulogised her and the formula of worship adopted by him.” Nftr&yana said, 
* ‘ Indra first bathed, then put on a pair of clothes well-washed and. after baying 
rinsed his mouth, reverentially placed the goddess on a throne of gem. He then 
recited the Vedas and with the pure water of the Ganges filled in several jars, 
he bathed or washed the goddess. He clothed her with lovely dress pure like 
fire and anointed her with sandal-paste. He then _3vitli oblations for washing 
the feet and other ingredients worshippe 1 Gane.ii, the ,Sun, the Fire, Visnu, 
S'iva and P&rvatl. Afterwards he adored Man as a- Om Hrim S'rirn Manama 
Devyai Swfthft. He recited this Mantra consisting of fen . letters and 
dedicated the offerings to her. He worshipped her with sixteen ingredients. 
The place, resounded with music ; and flowers were showered upon the head 



WHtSTffy- 


THE BRAHMA-YAIVARTA PURANA. 


of ManasA. The gods, the Brahmins, BrakmA, ^ isaa and Mahesa commanded 
Indra to adore her; and he complied with streaming eyes. ’ 

128-141 fc< 0 best of chaste nymphs, 0 supreme goddess Mauasa, 1 wish 
to eulogise you. But it is impossible for me to eulogise a supreme goddess 
like you. Eulogy in the Vedas moans recitation of tbo essence or reality of 
a Being. But it is impossible for mo to recite your interminable virtue, O 
image of purity, you are exempt from feelings of envy and ang« r . though 
JarafcrkA.ru abandoned you in spite of your innocence, you, did not curse him 
in return and thereby you advertised to the world the climax of devotion to 
the husband; of which a wife could bo capable. 0 goddess, 1 worshipped you 
as if you were my mother Aditi; and' you, iu a manner becoming my sistor, for- 
gave my sins and were propitiated with me. \ou have preserved ray 
sjO«, wife etc. I became happy after I worshipped you. 0 mother of the world, 
though you are worshipped by the whole universe, )*ot u I shall add to j'put 
reverence. Whoever ou the last day of Asftdha or during the period beginning 
from Matmfc Pafichami up to the end of Asvvina worships you wd) acquire 
fame, celebrity, knowledge, virtues and prosperity from generation to genera¬ 
tion, Whoever through ignorance slanders you or 'does not worship you will 
be constantly subject to the fear of snakes and he abandoned by Ukstn!. Vou 
sue the celestial goddess of fortune in heaven ; and you are a digit of Laksmi 
in the Vaikuntha. Jarat-k&ru, au offspring of Vianu’a digit, is your husband. 
Ear our preservation, your father Kasytipa created you out of his mind ; hence 
T o U are called Manaaa. You are an accomplished ascetic on your own strength. 
You sport in the mind ; banco you are called ManasA in the world. Ike godn * 
always contemplate von in their mind. Hence savants call you \Iau as A. by 
serving virtuous people, you have become virtuous* Any one who constantly 
adoreaan object acquires the quality of that object and its likeness. 

142*148. India, then having decorated his sister with ornaments, brought 
her home. ManasA{adored by h«*r brothers lived for a long time with her son 
at ludra’a place* Surabhi herself descended from the Q-oioka and bathed her 
reverentially in milk. She also communicated to Macias A. superb wisdom. 
ManaaA, then, adored by Surabhi and the gods, went back to Heaven.^ 
ever reads her sanctifying ode is relieved from the fear of snakes. bor him, 
even poison is turned ioto nectar. Men become adept *in this Mantra by 
rooiting it five lakhs of times. They can then sleep or sit on the couch or 
seat of snakes. 


C H A P T E R X L V I 1. 

1-33. NArada said, 0 lord, who is Surabhi that arrived from the Goloka ? 
Kindly relate to me her birth and character.” NAriyana answered. “ The 
presiding deity of the oowa and their primeval mother (Surabhi ) was boru in 
the Goloka Iu the beginning of creation, at \ vrind&vana, in the (.xoloka she 
was born. Once upon a time, Lord Krisna with RadhikA and her attendants 
weut to the holy forest of VrindAyami. While sporting there, He desired to 
driuk milk. So He created sportively, from His left side a lovelv m'iloh- 
cow (with her calf) named Surabhi. SulAma, the Friend of the Lord, there¬ 
upon, with a jar of gem iu his hands, began to milk her and the milk was 





mAKRITbKHANDA. 


qctar and its drink was likely to dispense with life and 

__ _o cowherdesses himself drank a little quantity of this delicious 

beverage. Out of the quantity of milk that dropped from this vessel a pond 
was created, which was a hundred Yojans in length and the same in breadth. 
,ln the Goloka, it is called the pond of milk. It became the sporting-ground 
of Radba and her maids. Ail its four limits, by the desire of lord Krisna. 
were inlaid with gems. From the pores of the skin of this cqw, millions of 
celestial cows called Kama-dhenus (cows of plenty) sprang into existence, 
eacli having a calf of her own. These cows had endless descendants and 
offsprings. The world teemed with cows through Surabhi. I described to 
you the creation of the cows. As the Supreme Lord Himself worshipped 
Surabhi, every one in the world should adore her. On the next day 
of the Am&-vasyi\ lighted up by candles, she was worshipped by Krista a 
command. This I beard from Dharinn. Now I recite to you her meditation, 
formula of worship, her ode and basic Mantra, as stated in the V edas. Om 
Stirabhyai namah, this Mantra of six letters is as effectual as the Kalpa-troe 
when it is recited live lakhs of times. Her Dhyan and worship, as recited in 
the Yajur-veda, are famous. I contemplate that goddess Surabhi who can 
give all prosperity, even redemption to mankind ; who is au image ol Laksmj 
and the friend of lUdbft; who is the Supreme deity : who iff tbo presiding 
goddess and the primordial mother of the cows: who is adored throughout 
the world : who fulfils the desire of her votaries and who consecrates the 
universe. Hor worship should be performed on a Rr&hmin, a pot, the hoad 
of a cow, a peg, the Holy Stone, water or fire. On the next day of the Do will/, 
at fore-noon, whoever reverentially worships her will bo adored throughout the 
world. In the Var&ha-Kalpa through the illusion of Visnu, all the milk of 
the three worlds .was stolen. The gods became anxious, went to Brahrnft 
and adored him. Indra, by the command of Brahma, prayed Surabhi thus : —0 
great goddess, Surabhi, the mother of the world, the source of the cows, the 
Friend of Kadh&, the image of Laksmi, the spouse of Kri$na, I bow to you. 
You gave birth to the cows. Like the Kalpa-troe you fulfil the desire of those 
who solicit boons from you. You are the source of prosperity, wealth and otm- 
nace. Grant me the above mentioned things. 0 you who give cows to the popple 
wh'm you are propitiated, you are capable of giving all good things to your 
worshippers. 0 source of fame, you give them celebrity and virtue : I bow to 
you. ” The goddess was pleased and manifested herself, then and there. She 
gave a very precious boon to Indra as solicited by him and vent to the 
Goloka. The gods also departed 0 N&rada, the three worlds were thus full 
of milk. Milk produces ghee. With ghee, sacrifices are performed whereby 
the gods are gratified Whoever listens to the above holy ode gets cow, virtue, 
celebrity aruf the merit acquired by bathing in all sacred rivers. He gets 
initiated in every rite and after earning his livelihood with ease in this world 
goes to the Goloka after his death. 0 N a radii, ho resides in the Vaikunthi 
and serves fiari. He is not born again. 


CHAPTE U X L V I I I. 

Narada said, “ 0 lord devoted to Narayana, product of the digits of Hari, 
0 great-minded lord Nftruyana, deign to recite to me the virtues of N&rayana. I 

28 


§l 

death. 



sweeter than 
The Lord of th 


n 





A 

THE BRAHMA-V A1VARTA PUR AN A, 


heatd from you the narrative of Surabbi, so interesting, rare in the Buraias, 
esoteric and revered by savants. Kindly relate to me the excellent anecdote 
of liadba.. The great saint Narayana replied, • In days ot yore, m the 
heights of the Kail&sa, the Eternal Lord 8'iva, (the master of the adepts, the 
source of all perfection, the image of the universe, the pre-eminently bupreine 
Being ; who is ail happiness and has a cheerful mien ; who is adored by the 
Munfs) had related to Kartika in the sphere of Krisnas Itasa the amorous 
sports of the Supreme Krisna with lladha When S'iva finished his aoeoant, 
Dnrga queried her lord further on the point with a smile. Then b tva recited 
the wonderful account ot R&dfcft, >0 rare even in the Puranas, to the great 
goddess Durga. 




9-15 P&rvati said, “6 lord, you have described tome the excellent 
snored scriptures, the Panchu-ratrus containing principles of Yoga, ethics etc. 
You have also related to me the code of religious ceremonies for the- worship of 
gods calculated to give every success and the philosophy ot faith which engen¬ 
ders reverenoe for the Supreme Lord, Krisna. Now kindly describe to me the 
excellent narrative of the goddess ttadhi. You have recited to me rerrbnrf- 
| T her eulogies according to the Vedas. At the time of dealing with the 
sLred scripture?, you promised to describe this subject m detail. The wor 
of a g„d L never be ineffectual or fruitless. Iheretore please to tell me 
about the origin of Kftdh&, her name, meditation (Dbyfirn), toimula ot hor 
worship, her character, hymn, amulet and the etymology ol her name. 

16-20. While dealing with the holy scriptures, you were silent on these 
. oints ” S'iva inclined his head at her words. The lips and the palate of the 
five-faced god became dry. The fear of violating his promise made bun 
rather anxious. Then he remembered his favourite deity, Lord Krisna. 
Through meditation tie obtained tlis permission and began to recite ttie 
history 1 of Itadhit to his better half, P&rvatl. lie, said “ While describing to 
vou tiro sacred scriptures I, though anxious to dwell upon it, was prevented by 
Lord Krisna from touching this subject. But you are my better halt: so 

the Lord has permitted me now to recite the virtues of lvi (ha to you. l 

know the esoteric history of RfldhA, the beloved spouse of my favourite deity, 
« history so interesting and likely to inspire faith in Bari from beginning to 
end I know her anecdote better than Brahma, Ananta, Sana'ana, Dharma 

Indra or the best of adepts or Munis. 0 goddess, you are more adorable 

,1 , n inyse'f. Besides, you threaten to sacrifice your hte. 1 heretore, I must 
reveal to you the secret. I am going to describe to you the wonderful, rare, 
sanctifying, mysterious and valuable character of lUdhft. In days of >ore 
in the Goloka, in the lovely grove of Vriodavana, when it was rendered frag-, 
rant by the jasmine produced on the top of the S'ata-S'ringa mountain t le 
1 wilful Lord Krisna desired to commit oexual intercom so. At once It&d.ia cams 

into existence ; as everything is done by the will of God. At that time, 

; who is all volition or desire, (*■<•, can do everything as be wills) divided hut - 
1 s0 |£ into two parts. The right side of his body became Krisna ; the eft side 
j became fUdha. The lovely iiadhft in the sphere of the Kasa wanted sexual 
intercourse with Krisna. bhe was decorated with many ornaments and seated 
t ou a throne'of ge ns. Bho was clad in a dress pure like dro, The grace o 











PRAK1UTL KHAN DA. 


Sl 


her body resembled h ate! gold and vied with ten millions of £□» moons. 
Her face was lighted up with a gentle smile and looked like-the autumnal 
moon. Her teeth were white. Her look was adorned with the wreath of 
jasmine. She put on a wreath of gems which vied ip lustre with the sun ot 
summer. She had a hard swelling breast decorated with leaves annoioterl 
with musk. In height, her breast vied with the Su noru mountains, lhe 
jovial Krisna wis excited with lust at the sight of his young licentious 
spouse whl»'was bending under the pressure other huge buttocks, bheran 
to her husband when she saw that he was .excited with passion, this is 
why the learned call her lUdha. " RAdhA and Krispa adore one another. | 
Both are equal.” This is what the saints hold. But the votaries of Kn 9 na 
think thus, “ In the sphere of the RAsA, KAdhA is running to embrace Krisna 
and, being enticed by Krisna, she is going to the tryatmg-plaoe. Inspired 
by this feelino they use words to that effect and in the frame of RAdbA a mind 
they regard the Supreme Lord of the universe as their husband. As soon as 
the worshippers use the word RA, they obtain redemption, and as soon as they 
say Dh4 they run towards the feet of Krisna RAdhA, the mistress of the 
llAsa, emanated from the left side of the body of Krisna, the enchanter of (,upid., 
Other goddesses are the offsprings of her digits. 

>12-50. From the pores of her skin came out the cowhordosscs : and 
from the pores of the skin ot Krisna, the cowherds. MahA-Lakfmt celebrated 
in the three worlds came out of the right siJe of RAdhA and was wedded to 
the four-handed N&r&yana. She resides in the Vaikuntha. The royal Lakftnl 
is an offspring of Maha-Laksmt. She multiplies the prosperity of kings. 
The temporal Lakami is an o&hoot of the royal Laks.nl _ and resides in the 
house of every man. RAdhA herself dwells constantly m the he.rt of Krisna. 
She presides over His life. 0}PArva(i, from Brahma down to a bush the whole 
world including animate and inanimate objects is imaginary, lhe .Lord ot 
RAdhA alone is real. Adore this Brahman, who is void of all qualities and 
determination, who is independent of Maya or Nature ; who is full of soil- 
will (i. r. oan do everything ho wills); who is adored by all and who takes a 
constant form oat of mercy to His votaries. 

5155 lho wife of this supernatural Doing Iiari, that, is, the blessed- RAdhA 
is 'dearer' to him than his life. Ti, 9 primordial Nature, RA Hii is tin mother pf 
Maha-Visau. Virtuous saints always adore her feet which are inaccessible 
to Brahma and others but accessible to her votaries, lhe cowherds do not 
see her faoe even in dream. KAyAn alone beheld the shadow of the goddess, 
devoted to her lord and seated in his lap. Btyjp was the clue of the oow- 
herds. He was an offspring of the digits of Krispa and equally va.orous. 
Rad hi being cursed by tho cowherd named SudAma, descended to the 
earth. ’ She was born out of the womb of Ka) Avail as the' daughter of King 
Vrisa-bb&nu, 

C H A P T E H X L I X. 

I 9 PArvati said “ Why was RAdhA cursed by SadAma ? Being a pupil 
of Krisna, how could Su d:\ms curse tho beloved spansi of his preceptor?” 










THE BR A E At A-V AIV A R T A PUR AiV A 


S'iya replied, “ 0 goddess, in this connexion, there is a mysterious and very 
wonderful incident, likely to give faith and redemption. Once upon a time, 
Lord lvrisna, well-decked, was sporting with a cow-herdess named VintjA on 
.u part ot‘ the S'ata-S'ringa mountain situated ill*VrindAvana at the Goloka, 
The sphere of the lift9a constructed with gems, was kindled by the candles of 
gem on all sides. Both of them were seated on a lovely couch of gem, 
covered with the chufnpaka and fragrant wreaths of gems and an noin ted with 
mask, frankincense aud sandal-paste. Their sexual intercourse was intermix 
able. Krisna and Vi raj ft, both expert, in sexual intercouse, enjoyed the plea¬ 
sures of that intercourse. For one Manwantrn according to the calculation of the 
residents of the Goloka free from death and birth their intercourse lasted, 
Four 'female measengervS of RAdhA went and informed RAdh& of the matter. 
liAdbA was thereupon highly incensed and threw down the garland from her 
breast. * .... 

10-23. She also put off her clothes pure like fire and cast to the ground 
her lotus meant for sports. With the hem of her garments, she likewise 
obliterated from her forehead the vermilion marks and the lines of painting 
drawn on the body with cosmetics by way of decoration. With a handful 
of water she likewise wiped out the hue on her lips aud the mark on her 
feet caused by the lac-dye. She dishevelled the lock of her hair and her 
ehiguon and shook with anger. Eulogised by ho r female attendants who 
were much afflicted at the sight of her wrath, she ascended, with millions 
of her beloved female companion?, a chariot constructed with excellent gems 
possessing a thousand wheels, ornamented with excellent pictures and diamond- 
mirrors and covered with flower-garlands and diamond-jars. This car was 
faster in speed than the mind. SudAnaa, the friend of Krisna, as sooh as he 
perceived the approach of RAdbA, warned Krisna and ran away with his 
associates. Afraid of forfeiting the love of his beloved RAdbA, Krisna left 
the chaste VirujA and disappeared. VirajA, too, through RAdh&’s fear com¬ 
mitted suicide. The female associates of Vi raj A subdued by fear and grief, 
nought the protection of VirajA who began to flow in the Goloka in the 
form of a stream. Like a moat, this stream, one hundred crores of Yojamr 
in length and a orore Yojans in breadth, encompassed the cow-world. 

24-34. Fair one, at that time, the female associates of VirajA were 
turned into rivulets. All the rivers of the world and the seven oceans aro the 
offsprings of the digits of VfrajA. Whon RadhA cairio to the sphere of the 
K&sa and did not find Krisna or VirajA, she returned to her own place. 
Krisna with eight of his friends approached RAdha. Their admission was 
barred, again and again, by the female door-keepers of RadhA. When RAdha 
at last enw Krisna, she rebuked him much. Sudanii, the friend of Krisna, 
was annoyed by her reproaches and admonished RAdhA, RAdha was exasperated 
and said. “ O crooked*minded JSudAtna, quickly take the form of a crooked 
demon. SudAma also cursed her saying, “ you will be horn as a milk-maid 
and descending from the Goloka to the earth below, you will suffer the tntoler 
—able torments of separation from Kristin for a century. Krisna will also 
descend to the world in order to relieve the earth of her burden, Iheu 









wwisr*, 



you will be united with him. ” So saying, he fell prostrate at Ivrisrjaa feet 
and was about to depart, KikUni overwhelmed with grief at the idea of 
separation from her son attempted to follow him with words like these, 
‘•Child, where are you going to ? n Krisna consoled her saying, you will 
soon get back your sou. ’ 


35-45. 0 P&rvati, Sud&naa will soon be born as a demon named Saukhya 

Ch ild a and in due time being pierced by my spear he will come back to 
the Goloka. In the Varilha-ivalpa Kadhtt will also descend to Goknl as the 
daughter of Vrisa-bh&nu, the best of Vai.yyas. Kalavafci will also wield a burden 
in her womb inflated with wind. In proper time, she will givo birth to the wind 
out of which, K&dh&, offspring of no womb, will come out. When she will 
be twelve years old, she will be married by her father VYiaa-bh&nu to a 
Vaisya named R&y&n. (The following account is in the form of a history). 
K&dhft disappeared by fixing her shadow to the person of the daughter of 
Vrisa-blninu ; and to this shadow* Kayan was married. After the lapse of 
fourteen years, on the plea of the fear of Kamsa, the Lord went to Gokula 
iu the form of a child. R&y&n wa 9 the brother of Yusodil, the mother of 
Krisna, and is himself a digit of the Lord. Haydn is the maternal uuole of 

..by. I« the holy grove oY tlir^undd^^T, the creator 

(Brahmfi) effected a union between Hddha and Krisna. Milk-men can not ob¬ 
serve the real R&dlift even in dream. R&dhft personally used to frequent the 
lap of Krisna ; and her shadow or phantom resided in the house of lib fan, 
Brabrnfi was engaged iu an austere asceticism lor 00,000 years with a view to 
observe the lotus feet of Kfvdha. When Krisna was born in the house of 
Nanda to relieve the earth of her burden, then only Brahmii, by virtue of his 
former asceticism, enjoyed the sight of the lotus feet of KddhA,. 


46-57. Krisna. the Lord of the Goloka, associated with liadh& in the 
Vrindavana in the Goloka for a moment only. Immediately afterwards there 
was a separation between them, through the curse of Sudaina. Thereupon 
the Lord descended to the earth to relieve her burden Vrisabh&nu, Nanda 
and other cow-herds again returned to the Goloka after their death, 
The cow-herds, male and female, who were merely shadows, were also 
emancipated in the presence of Krisna and enjoyed the pleasures of His 
company. Millions of cow-herds, male and female, Wore redeemed and after 
emancipation they went with RadhA and Krisna to the Goloka. At first, 
Nanda way named as Drona Praj&pati; and YasodA, was named as Dhara, the 
wife of Drona. By virtue of their asceticism, they were able to secure the 
Supreme Being as their son. Kasyapa and Aditi, the parents of the gods, 
from birth to birth take the forms of Vasudeva and Devaki respectively, 
Kalavati who sprang from the mind of the Manes was wedded to Vrisa-bhAnu,- 
the quondam tyri-d&noa who arrived from the Goloka. O Durgii, l thus 
described to you the sanctifying accbuut of ii&dhd likely to multiply one’s 
race and prosperity. Krisna divided himself into f wo parts, the two-handed 
and the foiir-hauded lord. The two-handed Lord reigns in the Goloka, 
aud the four-handed Lord, in the Vaikuntha. The latter is wedded to Laksmi, 
Saraswati, Gang A, and Tulsi. The former is wedded to his beloved liadhA, 
the virtuous, the young and beautiful. Learned * men should first, pro- 









nounce the name of Kadha and then that of Krisna, otherwise they w*ill be 
of Br4hinin-slaughter. 


%L 

guilty 


:>8-69. Hari after having worshipped Ll&dhA on the night of the Foil 
Moon in the month ol K&rtikA with small bell? of. gem iu the sphere of the 
itisa wielded the amulet of RAdh&’on the arms and the shoulders. Hari medi¬ 
tated and adored her. He also ate the Pan or the betel chewed by her. Then 
R&dba also worshipped Him in return. Whoever regards Rkdhb and Krisna 
as distinct suffers endless torments of hell. At first Krisna worshipped 
her I hen by Brahma’s command she was adored by Dharraa, Ananta, V&suki 
the Sun, the Moon, IriJra and the Munis. On the third occasion, she was 
cheerfully adore 1 by Suyagryi, the monarch of the seven islands in India 
with all his attendants. This king was unfortunately a victim to disease auJ 
calamity. But by adoration of R&dhiV he got back his kingdom which 
had fallen into the hands of his enemies, lie theu wielded On his shoulders 
and arms the impenetrable amulet of lladhft and formally worshipped her at 
Pufkara for a century and ultimately he mounted a ear of gem and went to the 
Goloku, I have answered all your queries. What more do you want to heart? 


CHAPTER L. 

I- 10 P&rv itl said, * Lor i, who was Suyagna ? Where was he born ? How, 
being cursed by alBr&htnin, did be adore Rddha ? Rfidha is loved and adored 
by the Supreme Being. How then could a mortal king whose body is pollut¬ 
ed with urine and ordure possibly worship her ? How did this Supreme 
R&dhll manifest herself to Bribing who, to get the dust of her feet, worshipped 
her for 60,000 years? How could R&dhA, invisible to the Yogis, be perceptible 
to men ? Why did Brahma give the king her amulet ? Kindly relate these 
matters to me in detail/’ S'iva said 4 Manu, the son of BrahmA and husband 
of S'a tar up A* was the chief of the Manus. He begat [Jtt&npftda who begat the 
famous Dhruva. The pious Duruva had a son named Utkila wh) at Puskara 
performed a thou and grand royal sacrifices. At the end of these sacrifices, 
he {presented all the vessels of diamond and all his gems to the Br Ah mins. 
O all auspicious goldess. when BrihoiA saw the sacrifice, he ciused it to be 
performed by king Suyagna. 

II- 19. Suyagna, the descendant of Manu, distributed crops, wealth and 

millions oi: cows or kine with their horns covered with gold to the Br&hmins. 
He feasted millions of Br&hmins every day with meat, well-cooked, and irave 
them money as priest’s fee. After the Brahmins had been fed, he enter¬ 
tained a hundred thousand cooks with delicacies that could be chewed, sucked, 
licked and drunk. The Br&hmins, after having consumed pure vegetable food 
with broth, did not praise the king but his ancestors. On, the last’ day of the 
.sacrifice, he again feasted countless Brahmins ; and when the feast was over, 
he gave them heaps of gold by way of DikftnA. or priest’s fee. Unable 
to bear them all, t.he Brahmins gave some quantity of gold to the S'udras and 
threw some quantity of gold on the ground. • 

20-30, Though many people were fed, yet there was much surplus food 
which remained intact. At the end of the sacrifice, the king was shaded with 







PD AKRl ti- k a a n da. 


5ns of umbrellas made of gems and (hen, in the midst of the assembly, 
took his seat on a throne of diamond besmeared with sandal paste; 
overshadowed by canopies, covered with branches of sandal and plantains, 
markovi with vermilion, annointod with aloe and mask and attended by the 
eight Vasu8, fndra the Moon, the Rudra, the Adifcyas, Munis, Manus, 
men, Brahuift, Visrm, S'iva etc. At this time, before the royal assembly, u 
BrAhwin clad in dirty, tough dress, with parched lips, throat and palate, put 
in appearance. With folded hands and a gentle smile, he blessed king seated 
on the throne and besmeared with sandal. The king bowed tohim wilhor.r 
geUiug up. None of the assembly greeted him by standing up. Every one 
smiled at his uncouth appearance. Thereupon the Brahmin bowed to the gods 
and the Vedas and rudely cursed the king thus : — “ 0 fook! 0 sinner, thou 
shalt have to leave thy kingdom and go abroad. Thou sbalt be deprived of thy 
prosperity and be attacked with leprosy.” Quaking with anger, he proceeded 
to curse the other members of the assembly. The Muni was propitiated to a 
certain extent when those win had held him up to ridicule stood up and 
expressed modesty of behaviour, as a token of submission. The king approached 
the saint and wept through fear and left the assembly in grief. The mysterious 
muni, radiant with the lustre of Brahma, likewise went away. The 
other Br&hmins followed him saving .* “ 0 Brahmin, do t)ot go away.” 

Puhiha, P u lusty a, PracbeU, Bhrigu, Angira, Marichi, Kasyapa, Yasistha, 
Kratu, S'ukra, Vrihuspali, Durvdsd, Lomasa, Gautama, Kanada, Kanwa, 
Katyayana> Katha, P&nini, Astika, 'N ar&yana, Devala, V&la-khilya, JSa- 
nata, Sananda, Sanat-kumara, Par its ar, Bhradw&ja, Valmiki, Kardama, and other 
Munis, the Manes, the regents of the^ quart ere, the gods fond of oblation of gl 
followed and detained him with a view to impart knowledge to him. Every 
one with the enunciation of the principles of ethics tried to appease him. 



C H A P T E Li L I. 

1-9. Pai vati asked S'iva thus : “ Lord, how did the Brahmins, vetted in 
ethics, impart instruction to the said Brahmin ? Kindly narrate to me the 
above subject.” 8'iva answered, 4 The Munis, one by one, worshipped the 
Brahmin and modestly spoke to him word* sanctioned by morality. First 
JSaual-kumara said 4 0 twice-born saint, as soon as yon left the assembly by 
cursing the king, the royal Laksmi, fame, good-nature, prosperity, nay, even 
the gods and manes followed suit and quitted, the king and his mansion. There¬ 
fore, be propitiated with the king, inasmuch as the Brahmins are easily con¬ 
tented. 0 Muni, the mind of the BrAhmins is soft like butter, pure and chas¬ 
tened by devotion. 0 Brahmin kindly forgive his fault, go back to his 
palace and consecrate his court yard.' Vrihaspati said : 44 0 best of Brahmins, 
whoever slights his guest who goes away in consequence offended thereby 
scares away the gods, the manes, the deity of Fire from hU house. Therefore, 
be propitiated, 0 .Br&hmin, and consecrate the royal mansion with the dust 
of your Feet One who flights, a guest is guilty of the slaughter of a woman, 
a cow and a Brahmin, The person is likewise guilty of misconduct and ravish¬ 
ment of his preceptor’s wife. 




rtHw THE BRAHMA-V AIV ARTA PD RAN A, 

\ ffyfr J * /' _ __ _ _ 

■>>« . 

10-32. Pulust said, “Whoever frowns at hi3 guest absorbs the sins 
of his gusst and confers upon him all his religious sanctity. 0 child, exouse 
the king by dint of your merits. The king through default of bis Karma 
did not greet you by standing up when yon came to him. Let him not 
greet you ; but you should return to his palace. <; Pulaha said, 4 If a person 
through the pride of his kingdom and knowledge slights a Bahrain, he 
(if a Br&hn in) is abandoned by his religious rites, Sandhya etc., and (if a 
Ksatriya) is abandoned - by fortune. He is also disqualified Erom the per¬ 
formance of $$adas5 and acceptance of the offerings of Hhiri. 0 best of Brahmins, 
please excuse his fault and grace his house with your footsteps. Whoever slights 
a. Brahmin, the best of all castes, is deprived of his privilege of initiation in 
holy rites and denuded of his wealth, sons and wife; child, oxouse the 
king's fault and grace his house with your advent. AugirA said, If a 
Brahmin, though wise, flights an # adorable Br&htmn, he is born as a bullock 
seven times and has to wield heavy burdeas. ” Marichi said, 14 Whoever 

being bora in the sacred land of India slanders $ Brahmin, a go! or his pre¬ 

ceptor is abandoned by the faith in Visnu, a faith which fulfils ail desire. 
Kasyapa said, 44 Whoever ridicules or neglects a Vaistiava Br&hrain is deprived 
of his faith in Hart and forfeits the privilege of t >e worship of Visnu veuerated 
in the world.” PrftchetA said, * Whoever does not get up at the sight of a 
Brahmin loses reverence for his parents aud is born as a rogue elephant seven 
times in India. Therefore deign to return and bless the king.’ DurvAsA said : 

“ Whoever does not bow down at the sight of his guru, a Brahmin or an idol 
is born as a boar for his sins and is implicated in the sins committed by trea¬ 
chery and perjury. Therefore return to the king and accept his hospitality.' 
The king said, 44 0 best of Munis, on a mere plea you have related principles 

of. virtue to me. Now tell me what penance must a man perform who has 

killed a woman, a cow or a Br&hmin, a man who is guilty of treachery 
ora man who ravishes his preceptor’s wife.’ Vasisilja said, “ 0 king, whoever 
voluntarily slays a cow should live for a hundred years in a holy shrine and 
there eat y&vafca or food prepared from barley and drink water in the folds 
of .his hands. Then along with priest’s fee, he should give to the Br&h- 

mins a hundred cows and feast a hundred Brahmins. Then ho will bo relieved 

of his sins. If this penance fails to expiate all his sins, for 

the remainder of his sins, he shall have to assume the sinful birth of a 

ohandal. It a man accidentally kills a cow, he incurs half the sin of the 
man who kills her voluntarily. $nch kinds of s*’us are not expiated merely by 
penance.” £'ukra said, “ The murderer of a woman incurs sins which are 
doubly as culpable as the sins committed by the murder of a cow. He has 
to undergo chastisement in hell for 60,000 years. Then he has to be born 
seven times as a boar and seven times as a snako. before ho is purified.” Vri- 
haspati said, 44 The murder of a Brahmin is doubly more culpable than the murder 
of a woman. The sinner lives in the dreadful bell of the Kumbhipaka for a 
iakh of years Then he has to range as the worm of ordure for a century un i 
assume the birth of a snake seven times before he is purified.” 

33-39 Gautama said, 4 ‘ A malefactor or an evil-door (kritaghna) is four 
times more culpable than the murderer of » Brahmin. Tho penance of the sin 







PRAKRlTI-KilANDA. 


evil-doors, (kritaghnas) has not been specified in the Vedas.” 
l’ko king asked, <4 0 saints, what are the characteristics of a wtong-doer (kri- 
taghna) ? How many kinds of malefactors, evil-doers or wrong-doers are there ? 
What sins are incurred by a kritaghna ? Risya-S'ringfr said, malfeasance 

(wrong doing) is- of sixteen kinds as described in the Vedas. Punishment depends 
on the nature of the sin. Truth, merit, duties incumbent upon a person, asce¬ 
ticism, digaity, i. self-respect gift, preservation of those who ought to be 
maintained, duties which a person owes to his religious preceptor, duties 
which a person owes to the gods, service of the twice-born, necessary duties, 
faith, charity to others, promise, virtue and acts which should be voluntarily 
performed i those are called Kritas. Whoever murders, i. e , violates them is a 
malfeasant or malefactor. The hells assigned to the malefactors differ 
according to the nature of their acts.” 

40-50. Suyagna asked .* 4C 0 MunL, kindly tell me the..nature of the sins 
committed by the Krikighnaa which lead to different kinds of hells.” 
K&ty&yana said 4 Whoever does not fulfil his promise dwolls as a malfeasant in 
the hell culled K&la-sutra for four Yugas. Then he is born seven times as 
a crow, seven times as an owl, and seven times as a diseased S'ftdra before he 
is purified,” Sanahda said, ‘ A wretch who blows his own trumpet or pro¬ 
claims his own merits to get fame remains in the hell called Anvil for three 
successive ages. Then he is boru five times as a frog, for three ages as a 
oral) and then as an illiterate, poor and diseased S'udra before he is purified. 
San&tana said, 4< Whoever fails to perform SancJhy& three times a day or per¬ 
form his duties or gratify the manes with oblations of water or eat offerings dedi¬ 
cated to Visnu and whoever eats on}the days of Ek&da.si, S'ivar&tri, Janmsistami 
or Ram-navami and whoever does not worship Visnu or take his Mantra; 
and whoever has no reverence for the rites performed out, of deference to the 
godg and the manes will, as malfeasants, dwell in the hell called Kumbhlp&ka 
so long as the sun and the moon exist. Then either of them will bo born 
seven times as a OhancliUa, seven times as a vulture and seven times as a boar. 
And afterwards though bom iu the pure family of a BrAhntfin, ho will work 
as a cook for au ugly ti'udra. Later on, though born seven times as a 
I3n\hmin, he will drive bullocks for the S'ftdras and burn their corpses. 

51-60. Subsequently, born as a Brahmin, he must have to pass his time 
as the husband of a IS'udra woman for seven births. After tasting the-sweets 
of life which are pleasing for the the time being, he must ultimately dwell in 
the hell called Ruuravu. Thus frequenting the hell and the sinful womb of 
his mother again and .again ho will be born five times as an ass, a cat and a 
frog before 4 he is purified.” Suyagna asked what sin was committed by eat¬ 
ing the food of a S'udra or burning the doad body of a S'ltdra or by sexual 
intercourse with a S'udra woman. ParA-sara answered, 41 That wretch who 
commits any of the above acts lives as a wrong-doer for seven ages in the hell 
called Asi-patra. Then be is born seven times as an ass aud a rat, seven times 
as a cock-croach before he is chastened. ” Jarat-Kilru said, ‘ A Brdhmin who 
himself or through others carries a bullock is, owing to the chastisement 
iuflicted upon the bullock, guilty of the sin of Brahmin-slaughter. The sin 
of putting load on its back makes him doubly culpable. Whoever ploughs 
29 











THE BRAHMA-PA1VARTA PUR AN A 



the Belli through a bullock oppressed by I he heat of tho sun, famished 
and thirsty is guilty of misconduct amounting to one hundred Brahmin- 
slaughters* 

61-69. Tho food of such a person is impure like ordure, his water is 
impure like urine. He is net entitled to the worship of the gods and the 
manes He goes to tho hell called the Fit of Saliva where he eats ordure 
and drinks urine. He dwells there as long a9 the sun and the moon exist. 
The myrmidons of Yama strike him with a spear and thrust torches into 
his mouth. For 60,000 years he subsists on manure and then five times he is 
born as a crow, a heron, a vulture and a jackal. Then he is born as a 
diseased 8'hdra. BharadwtYja said, “ He who burns the corpse of a S'Mra is 
also a Kritaghna or a malefactor. He .is gnitly of as many BrAhmin- 
slaughters as the oorpses ho .has burnt. He undergoes as many births and suffers 
the torments of as many hells as the bodies of the S'udras he has consumed. 
A Br&hmin incurs the same culpability by eating the food of a S'ftdra on the 
occasion of a funeral ceremony.” Viv&ndaka said, “ A person who eats on the 
occasion of a funeral coremony of a S'fidra is not entitled to,the worship of 
the gods and the manes. He is guilty of the sin of drinking wine and of 
murdering a BrAhmin.” 

70-75. MArkandeya said, “ A BrAhmin who cohabits wiib a S'ftdrani 
is the worst of malefactors. He dwells in the hell called the Pit of tho Bite 
of worms for a period ooverod by hundreds of Xndras. He is chastised by 
the myrmidons of indra, bitton by worms and made to embrace flaming 
iron statues. After having ranged for a thousand years in tho vagina of a 
prostitute like a worm and then undergone the birth of a S'fidra, he is 
chastened ’ Suyagri i said, “ 0 Mnni, the curse of a BrAhmin has been 
auspicious to me. Without adversity, there can be no prosperity. I am 
blessed. My life is blessed. My deeds are now perfect as adopts, gods and 
saints have crossed ray threshold.” 


CHAPTER L l I. 


1-9. PArvati taid. “ How did the savants describe the character of other 
Kritaghna s or malefactors to the king?” S'iva said, “ 0 my beloved, on a 
reference to the subject by the king, NArAyana, one of the Munis, said, 
“Whoever appropriates the fee of a BrAhmin ‘given by himself or another 
man is a malefaotor. For as many thousands years as the tears that drop 
from tho eyes of the oppressed Br&bmin he is consigned to the hell called 
S'Ala-prota whore he is beaten by the retinue of Yama, obliged to consume 
burning ashes and burning urine and made to lie down on burning embers. 
Afterwards he has to dwell for 1 000 celestial years in the ordure as a worm. 
Then deprived of land, wealth, generosity, health and fame, ho is born as a 
8'udra before he is chastened. Whoever interferes with his own celebrities or 
the celebrities of others, r. t , tries to defame others is also a malefactor aud 
dwells in the hell called the ‘ blind well ’ for a poriod covered by fourtoen 
Indras. Worms as big as tho mongoose constantly bite him tbore. 






PtlAK RITI-KII AN DA. 



*§L 


1C-18. He baa to drink daily very hot salt-water. Afterwards he is born 
seven times as a snake aud five times as a crow. ” Devala said, “ A wrong¬ 
doer who steals the wealth of a Br&hmin, a religious preceptor^or a god dwells 
in the hell called Avtaoda for a period covered by fourteen Indras. Then he 
is born as a S'lldra addicted to wine. Thu3 he is chastened. A person who 
' does not maintain his parents or an unchaste woman who reviles her husband is 
consigned to the hell called the Pit of Fire as long as the sun aud the moon 
exist. Before purification, eithor of them has to undergo birth as a leech seven 
times.” V&lmiki said, “ As the property of vegetation is the tine qua non 
of plants, so wrong-doing is the essential ingredient of every sinful act. 
Whoever perjures himself through lust, fear or anger or supports unjustly 
one of the two rival parties in the midst of an assembly (i. e . in a court of justice) 
is al$o a wrong-doer or a malefactor. Whoever destroys virtue by any act 
fa a malefactor. 


19-31. Whoever commits the offence specified by me above lives in the 
Pit of Snakes, a division of hell, for a period covered by 1,000 Indras where he 
is surrounded and bitten by snakes and compulsorily fed with the ordure and 
urine of snakes. Then he is born seven times as a chameleon and seven 
times as a frog in India. Theti he grows as a huge silk-cotion tree in India. 
Afterwards he is born as a dumb man and ultimately as a 8'ftdra before he is 
purified.!’ Astika said, “ Whoever cohabits with his preceptor’s wife practically 
ravishes his mother. There is no penance for either of these siqb. 0 king, u 
S'udra who cohabits with a Brahmin woman practically does so with his 
mother or his daughter or daughter-in-law or pregnant wife or wife of his 
brother or sister. Whoever • cohabits with a woman within the prohibited 
degrees is dead, though alive. Even a Ohand&l hesitates to touoh him. Ho 
is not entitled even to touch or feel the rays of the sun. He has no right 
to touch the water of the feet of th$ Holy Stone, or the water of the holy 
basil it laves or the water of the feet of the Vipras (learned Brahmins). That 
great sinner is as unholy as ordure. He is not entitled to adore the gods, the 
Gftrft or the Brahmins. Food touched by h«tn is impure liko ordure; 
water touched by him is detestable like urine. The gods, the manes and the 
Br&hmins do not accept his offerings. Even holy shrines are desecrated by 
his tonch,*as if, with the ashes of a dead body. 

32-41. If he accidentally touches a Brahmin or a god, the latter has 
to fast for seven nights. Even the earth cannot bear his burden. The 
country is rendered waste by his touch ns by the touch of a person who sells 
his daughter. A man is involved in the like s»n, if he touches the above 
sinner or talks or sleeps or eats with him. That sinner has to dwell 
in the hell called Kumbhlp&ka for a period covered by the jurisdictions 
of a hundred Brahmas. There he has to move round and round like 
wheels. He is there chastised by the messengers of Tartarus and oppress¬ 
ed by the flame of fire. To other sinners, diet is assigned. But to him there 
is none. After the grand dissolution of the universe is over, he is assigned 
a dwelling place. For sixty thousand years, he has to range as a worm in 
the vagina of a prostitute and for a like period in the same capacity in ordure. 
Then he is born as a diseased, impotent S'ddra aod afterwards as a leprous, 
untouchable, impotent, diseased S'udra for seven births consecutively, subso* 






Tttti BRAHMA-VAIV ART A 


$mly ho is boru as a hungry crow in a place designed for pilgrimage 
seven times, then as an impotent, issueless snake seven times. Then he is 
born as a leprous, blind, impotent Bt&hmin. After so many births, the great 
sinner is purified. 


42-46. The Munis said, 44 0 king, I related to you the account of the 
sinner according to the S&stras. Now, any one who turns out a guest from 
his house is equally a groat sinner. Revorentially bow to the Br&hmin, wor¬ 
ship him and then quickly go to the forest for meditation. By his blessing 
you will be relieved from his curse and soon get baofc your kingdom.” 0 
P&rvatt, the saints haying said so went away to their respective destinations ; 
and so did the gods, the king’s relations and the kings. 


CHAPTER L 0 I IX 

1-24. P&rvati asked, “0 lord, when the saints went away, what did the 
perplexed king do to remove his curse ? Did the Br&hmin guest, as advised bv 
the Munis, go back to the royal palace or not ?” S'iva said, when the saints 
went away, the abashed monarch,, by the command of his family priest, fell 
down prostrate at the feet of the Br&hmin. The Br&hram was proyitiaied 
and blessed him. When the king saw him smiling graciously, he addressed 
him thus with folded palms and streaming eyes :—“ 0 lord, to what illus¬ 
trious family do you belong ?- What is your name? What is your father’s 
name? Which city has been graced by your dwelling? Why have you 
come here ? Has the Supreme Lord, Bari, come in your guise Y Or has 
the effulgent god of fire, ia a corporeal frame, arrived hero ? Lord, who is 
your tutelary deity? Who is your preceptor? Has Supreme Knowledge 
come hero in disguise? Lord, I have begn bewildered by your extraordinary 
greatness. Take my kingdom, prosperity and my wealth. My son, my wife 
and myself are all your slaves. Deputing me, your servant, to rule India 
with its seven ocans, seven islands, seven peninsulas, mountains and groves, 
kindly sit on this excellent throne of gem.” The best of munis smiled at 
the words of the king and then began to counsel him on the mysterious 
aubjject of ontology as stated by me. Marichi was the sdn of the creator, 
Brahrnft and begat lvisyapa. The sous of Kasyapa attained divinity according 
to their desire. Of these, the wisest Twast& was engaged in the most austere 
devotion for a celestial thousand years at Pnshkara, Impelled by a wish to 
do good the Brahmins ho adored the god of gods, the Supreme Deity, 
Hari to obtain a Br&hmin son ; and by his grace he got the boon as desired. 
He begat a most valiant and ascetic son celebrated by the name of Viswa-rupa. 
The preceptor of the gods in anger having resigned his post, Viswa-rupa was 
appointed .asf their guru. When Vi’swa-rnpa offered oblations of ghee to the 
domotis, his maternal ancestors, Indra cut off the head of the Brahmin at the 
command ot his mother. 0 king, Vis'wa-mpa was my father. My name is 
Sntapft. I have renounced the world and its enjoyments. S'iva is the source 
of my Mantras, knowledge and wisdom. He is my preceptor. Krlsna who is 
distinct from Nature is my tutelary deity whose lotus feet I constantly adore. 
I have no .’attachment for trifling worldly enjoyments. Lord Kri$na bad 






i 



PRAKRITI-KHANDA. 



offered to mo tho four ^kinds of redemption (SAlokya etc.) but I abandoned 
them all for the sake of His feet, I regard the position of BrahmA or a god 
to be transitory like water*bubbles. I regard the position of Indra ; Mann or 
the Sun as unreal, delusive, void of faith in Hari and as fleeting as water-marks. 
What 'shall I do with a kingdom, intent upon acquisition of faith in Hari 
and understanding that the great-minded Munis had arrived at tho sacri¬ 
ficial place I have come to your palace. My curse has now proved to be a 
blessing to you. 


25-44. You were immersed in the dreadful sea of the world. My curse 
set you free from the chains of the world. Holy streams or earthen idols 
consecrate sinners utter a long timo. But the sight of the votaries of Krisna 
purifies people in the twinkling of an eye. 0 king, hand over the reins of 
government to your.son and entrust your chaste wife to his care. Then go 
to the forest at once. Everything from BrahmA down to a bush is unreal. 
Adore Lord Krisna who is inaccessible even to BrahmA and S'iva by means of 
your asceticism. Though Hari is above delusion, yet by the delusion which 
He exercises over others, £rahm& creates, Hari preserves and S'iva destroys the 
world. By his command, tho regents of the quarters roarn over the ten sides, 
the wind blows every where, (he suu rises, the moon-god refreshes the crops 
with bis rays in the night, death exorcises sway over the people. Indra* 
rains, fire consumes things, Yarna (the governor of the worldj brings people 
within his jurisdiction and time creates, sustains and destroys the universe. 
Lord Hari dominates tho sea, the earth, the mountain, the Heaven and 
the worjd beneath tho earth. 0 king, the seven heavens, the sevon islands, the 
fertile earth with mountains and seas, and tho throe worlds with the 
seven PAt&ls are merged into water and are as insignificant in the estima¬ 
tion of Hari as an egg. The countless worlds of Hari contain different 
Brahm&s, S'ivas, Visnus, gods, men, snakes, Gandarvas and demons ; and every¬ 
thing' from the P&tAl up to the B rah m AH ok a is reflected (appears) like, an egg. 
All these three worlds have, iprung from the great Brahma Krisna. When 
the all-pervading Visnu was lying down in the sea after having assumed a 
diminutive form, all the worlds in an inseparable condition were focused in his 
abdomen or navel as the seeds of a lotus lie in its pericarp. At that time, the 
great Yogi^ Visnu, afraid of time or death like ao drdinary being, rememberod 
Lord Krisna, the lord of time, who is distinct from Nature. In the pores of 
the skiu of MahA-Visnu, Lord Krisna dwells with all tho worlds. 0 king, 
no one is able to count the pores on the skin of the body of MahA-Visnu and 
Krisna .himself is unable to count the worlds sustained by tho pores. MahA- 
Visnu, the creation of Nature, has sprung out of the primordial egg laid 
by Nature. By the will of Lord Krisna, MahA-Vifnu came out of the 
womb of primitive Nature. The world is the a ylum of all creation made by 
Brahma* MahA-Visnu, afraid of the prowess of Time, constantly adores Krisna, 
the Lord of Time, in this way BrahmA, Visnu, S'iva, Mah&-Vi§nu and small- 
Visnu dwell like ordinary creations of Nature in the sphere of.the world. 


45-47. Even Nature herself, the final and primordial cause of creation 
in due time, merges into the Eternal Being and Constantly adores Him. In 
this way, Nature, Brahma and all other beings that owe their origvi to Nature 





mtSTfty 



1*14. Suyagna asked, li 0 excellent Muni, who is the support o£ Mah&- 
Visnu, the prop o£ the universe ? Maha-Visnu is afraid of time. What is 
his longevity, then ? The small and the great Virftlas, Visnu, Brahma, Nature, 
Manu, Indra, the Sun, the Moon are creations of Nature. What is the span of 
life allotted to each of them by the Vedas? 0 best of those versed in the 
Vedas, kindly relate to me the above points. What region is situated above 
the sphere of the world creatfsd by J3rahm& ? O magnanimous saint, remove 
my doubt on the above points. ” The sage replied, “ Of all the worlds, the all- 
pervading cow-world is most expansive like the sky. By the will of Lord 
Krisna, .il^inanifests itself like an egg. in the beginning of creation, it was 
moistened with the perspiration of the Supreme Being while he was flirting 
with the goddess Nature ; and it still appears to be somewhat wet or moist. 
This dow-world is the outcome of the egg that emanated from the womb of 
Nature and is the support of MaWLVisnu, the pillar of the universe. 0 king, 
the great. Vir&ta lies down in the vast expause of the waters. This lord of 
the universe is merely a part of the Lord of Radhft. Lord N&r&yana is green 
like bent grass: he has a smiling aspect; he has got four hands, he puts on 
a wreath of wild flowers and is graceful ; he is the soul of the universe ; he is 
clad in yellow dress. He eternally resides in the Vaikuntlia which is round 
like the moon, which is propless and expansive like the sky, which owes its 
existence to the will of God ; which is built with invaluable gems and which 
is beyond the range oE vision. This Lord of all creation, N&r&yana, is the 
husband of Laksmt, Saraswati, GangA, and Tulsi and is surrounded by his 
followers, viz., Sunanda, Nanda, Kmnada, etc. Lord Krisna who for ever favoars 
His adherents and who is the foremost of adepts manifests Himself in two 
parts, viz. the two-handed Lord and the four-handed Lord. 

15-23. The four-handed Lord reigns in the Vaikuntlia; and the two- 
handed Lord, in the Goloka. The cow* world is situated at a distance of fifty 
croras of Yojaos above tho excellent Vaikuntha. [t contains many temples 
of precious gems, several excellent diamond-pillars and gates lighted up by 
looking-glasses of pearl. It is decorated with many pictures,, it is a crore of 
Yojaus in breadth and one hundred crores of Yojans .in length. It is 
encircled by the river VirajA, and decorated by the mountain of a hundred 
summits. Half of it is occupied by the lovoiy Vrindavana. Half of the 
Vriodavana is occupied by the sphere of the Rctsa (a circular dance of the 
Gopis with Krisna at tho centre). The lovely Goloka is surrounded by hills, 
groves and 'streams on all sides. As a pericarp shines in the middle of the 
lotus, so Kri§na looks most enchanting in the centre of the.Rasa. Radhft, 
the mistress of the R&$a, always serves Lord Krisna decorated with two hands, 
holding a flute and looking like a oow-herd. His body is decked with a 
yellow dress pure like fire and ornaments of gem, besmeared with sandal- 
paste and adorned with wreaths of pearls. 








PRAKR1T1-K H AN DA 




24-33. Lord Kvisna is seated on a throne of gem shaded by diamond- 
parasols and fanned by his attendants with white chowriea., The well-dressed, 
submissive eow-herdes?os oast at him smiling glances and serve ^ ... Him with 
garlamjs and sandals. 0 King, in connection with the narrative of Kri§na, 
incidentally, I have also related to you the theory of creation according to 
the S'&sfcras. Now I am going to relate to you the matter dealing with the 
longevity of the gods, as 1 heard from S'iva. Perforate with a golden pin 
measuring four fingers in length and weighing fifteen grains’a pot, four fingers 
in depth and measuring six palas in weight. Then throw it into..,water. The 
time or period for which it remains immersed in the water is equivalent to 
one Panda. Two Dandas muko one Muhurta. Four Mahhrtas make a Prahar. 
Eight Prahars make a day and a night. Fifteen days and nights make a 
Paksa. Two Paksas make a month ; twelve months make a year. One human 
month is equal to one day and one night of the manes. The dark half of the 
Innar human month is the day of the manes ; the bright half is their night. 
The human year is equal to a day and night of the gods The North Ayan 
(the sun’s passage north of the equator) constitutes their day; the South Ayan (the 
sun’s passage south of the equator), their night, 0 king, the age or the span 
of life varies according to the human Yuga or Karma Now listen to the 
longevity allotted to Nature and and Bi*ahm& etc , the productions of Nature, 
There are four Yugas or ages, viz.,, Satya, TretA, Dw&para and Kali. 


34-42. 0 king, listen attentively. The Yugas last for a celestial twelve 

thousand years which also include the evenings of the Yugas and the divisions 
of the evenings: that is to say, the Satya Yuga lasts for a celestial four thou- 
sand years; the Tretft, for 3,000 years ; Dw&para for 2,000 years, and 
Kali for a thousand years. This is determined according to the Divine calculation. 
The remaining two thousand years include the evenings of the Yugas and their 
divisions> According to human calculation, the four Yugas consist of forty- 
three lakhs twenty thousand years ; out of this period the Satya Ynga consists 
of seven lakhs and twenty-eight thousand years. The Dwapara consists of twelve 
lakhs ninety-six thousand years ; the Tret A consists of eight lakhs sixty-four 
thousand years; the Kali consists of four lakhs thirty-two thousand years. 
The calculating Pandits hold that as seven weeks, sixteen lunar months, day 
and night, the dark and bright Paksas constituting the month and the year 
revolve constantly, in the same manner the four Yugas revolve by turns. O 
king, the Manwantaras also revolve like the ages or the Yugas. The Mon- 
wantara consists of seven celestial Yugas. The fourteen Manus also recur 
by turns to their Manwantaras. 


43-55. 25,560 Yugas make one Manwantara. O king, I am going 

to relate to you the character of the pious Manu, as I heard from S'iva. Your 
great grandfather, the son of Brahm3, the husband of B'atarupA, the foremost 
of the pious, the chief of the Manus, the disciple of >3'iva was the first 
Manu called Swayamhhuva. He was very wise and was emancipated in his 
life-time. This Marm on the coast of the Narmada duly performed a thousand 
grand royal sacrifices, three lakhs of horse-sacrifices and four lakhs of ^cow- 
sacritices. Daily he feasted three crores of Brahmirus and treated them to 
well-cooked and purified beef and other delicacies that could be chewed, sucked 











THE BRAHMA-V AlVARTA PURANA. 


licked and drunk, n By iho command of S'iva, ho used to give to the Brah¬ 
mins every day, for the satisfaction of Vignu, ton millions of invaluable gems, 
crores of gold, a hundred thousand cows with golden horns, clothes pare 
like tire, excellent gems, fertile land, one lakh elephants, three lakhs of horses* 
golden cars, a thousand litters, golden jars of water perfumed with camphor 
etc , millions of golden cups full of crops, golden vessels constructed by Viswa- 
karmA containing betel leaves und garlands of pearls. 


56-70. The king acquired the Mantra of Krisna and thereby profound 
wisdom from ft'iva and went to tho Goloka as the servant of Krisna Brahma 
was much pleased to see the emancipation of his son, adored S'iva and then 
created another Manu. The first Manu was called jSyAyauib.hu, as he was tho 
son of the Sayarnbhu or the self existent BrahmA. The second Manu was the 
son of tho Fire-god and hence named SwArochisa. He was like his predeces¬ 
sor generous and the preserver of his subjects. The third and the fourth Manus 
were the sons of Priyavrata, devoted to Krisna and the best of ascetics. The 
fifth Manu was the pious Raivataka. Chaksusa, devoted to Visnu was the sixth 
Manu. Tho seventh was S'rAddha, the offspring of tht Sun and likewise devoted 
to Krisna. Vaisnava S'&varni, the offspring of the Sun, was the eight. 
Tho ninth was Diiksa-SAvarni, devoted to Hah. The wise Brahma-S&varni, 
who had knowledge of the Supreme Being was the tenth Manu. Dharmu- 
SAvarni was the eleventh. The Vaisnava, pious and wise, Rudra-SAvarni was the 
iwelvth. The pious Deva-Savarni was the thirteenth, and the wise Chandra- 
SAvarni was the fourteenth Manu. A Manu reigns as long as tho jurisdiction 
of one Indra lasts. One day of BrahmA lasts till fourteen Indras disap¬ 
pear. Tho night of BrahmA occupies the same period. This night is the 
BrAhmi night equivalent to K Ala-night of the Vedas. The day of Brakin'A 
is known as a small Kalpa. The Muni MArkandeya lives for seven such Kalpas, 
In this Kalpa, all people residing beneath the Brahma-loka areJdestfoyed by 
tho fire which is quickly produced from the mouth of the god, the Sankarsana 
or BalarAma. The Sun, the Moon and the sons of BrahmA go to the BrahmA- 
loka‘. When the above night expires, BrahmA again creates. By this BrahmA 
night only a small dissolution of the world is occasioned. 

71-80. In this small Kalpa, the gods, Manu and men are ,all burnt. 
Thirty such days and nights constitute a month of Brail mA. The dissolution 
of the world which takes place after the expiration of BrahmtVs fifteen years 
is called the Hainan-Dina Pralaya in the Vedas. The ancient savants con¬ 
versant with tho Vedas coll this night the Mobil or the night of delusion. After 
that the Sun, the Moon, tho regents of the quarters, the Adityas, the Vedas, 
the Rudras, the longevous Munis, men, Manus, Gandarvas, demons, the saint 
Lomasa, the saint MArkandeya, kiag Jodra-Dunmina, AkflpAr * (the 
ocean), the tortoise, N&di-Jangha * (the crow), Vika * (the heron) are all 
destroyed. The snake-world etc., (beneath the w ild of BrohmA) and the 
sous of JBrahmA at that time go to the Brahma-lokA. When this Pralaya 
ends, BrahmA again creates. According to this calculation, Brahnaft lives 
for a century. Brahma’s destruction causes MahA-kalpa or MahA-rAtri as 
described by the savants. When the Brahmas are destroyed, all the creations 


0 Also names of saints. 









be Brahmas are submerj 
^ edas, the religion prescribed 
the time. Bat the primordial 


he Vaknavas then merge into the body of the immortal Vigaa ; 
and K&l&gm-ftudra with the Rudras is bent upon destruction. The principle oE 
ignorance merges into the quality of Satwa or virtue of S'iva. The destruction 
of Brahmft causes the wink (i.e. twinkle of the eye) of the goddess Nature. 
O king, after the wink ot: Mah&*-Visna, Hari and S'iva, the work of creation 
begins again at the desire of Krisna. Lord Krisna who is distinct from Na¬ 
ture and void of property is not subject to the law of time. Only the gods 
who iiave^ properties are susceptible to longevity, age, moments etc. But 
Krisna, without beginning or end, is not liable to such conditions. Thousand 
such winks (or twinkles of the eye) make a Danda of Nature. Sixty spell 
Bandas make a day of Nature. Thirty such days and nights make her 
moncb ; and twelve such months make her year. In a hundred such years, 
Nature dissolves in Krisna. This dissolution is called Pr&kritu or absolute 
destruction of the universe. Primordial Nature, the mother of Mahtl- Visnri, 
after having destroyed everything merges into the heart of Lord Krisna The 
worshippers of S'akti or energy call her Durga void of all attributes. She re¬ 
presents the illusion and energy of Krisua, is dearer to Him than His life 
•and presides over His intellect. Brabmft, Visnu and S'iva are all spell-bound 
by her charms. The Vaisnavas call her fi&dha representing the great goddess 
of fortune. In faot, the great goddess of fortune dearer than life to Hari 
void of all attributes has sprung out of half of the body of Md ha. 


93-101. At that time, N&r&yana and S'ambhu kill their respective fol¬ 
lowers and merge into the body of Krisna. The cow-herds, male and female, 
Surabbi, nay, the goddess of Nature herself merge in Him. The Small-Yisnas 
merge into the great (Maha)-Visnu who merges into Nature. Natnre and Yoga- 
Nidril (or the state of insensibility caused by meditation) preside over the will, 
the eyes and tho illusion of Lord Krisna. At that time, Krisna sleeps in 
Vrindd-vana. Hia bed is perfumed with saudal-paste, fragrant breeze and 
perfume and decorated with valuable germ and clothes pure like fire. The 
act of creation begins as soon as He awakes. Thus every thing except Kri§na 
is Pr&krita or Natural. I recited to you the worship, meditation, adoration 
and the virtues of Krisna (likely to destroy sins) as I heard from the immortal 
S'iva in conformity with the Sdstras. Now what do you want*to hear?” 


102-111. Suyagna said, ‘*0 great Muni, the destroyer KM&gni-Radra 
in whom the principle of ignorance is predominant merges into Rudra; and on 
the destruction of Brahma, S'iva who represents the principle of virtue 
(Safcwa) merges into Krisua. Such being tho case, why is S'iva called the 
conqueror of death ? And how could the primordial Nature he the mother 
of Mah/t-Visnu, in the pores of whose skin there are countless worlds?” Sufcapd 
answered, “ 0 king, the all-destructive damsel, Death, is dissolved like bubbles 
of water after the dissolution of Brahm*V When millions of Brahm&s disappear, 
Death also becomes extinct. After her extinction, S'iva, in due time, merges 
into Krisna. Thus you see, my tutelary deity S'iva has conquered Death. He 




TEE BRAHMA-V AIVARX A P UR AN A 



has not been couriered by Death. This fact is also mentioned in the Vedas. 0 
king, the Eternal S'iva, N&rfiyana and Nature dissolve in Krisna through 
His illusion ; m., their dissolution is imaginary, not real The Supreme Lord, 
Krisna, though void of property, is vested in time with property ; and N&r&- 
yana himself is manifested in the shape of S'iva as well as Nature. • ‘As the 
sparks of tiro are just like fire , a so are the parts or digits [of Lord Krisna like 
Himself. The Rudras and the Adityas created by Brahin& have been subdued 
by Death; but not S'iva, the conqueror of Death. The Eternal S'iva has not 
been created by Brahm&, 


112-121. In one wink of S'iva. countless Brahin&s perish. Lord Krisna 
in the beginning of creation, impregnated the goddess Nature in the sacred 
grovo of Vrinda-vana. At first, in the sphere of the Rasa, it&dha, the 
mistress of the Rftsa, had emerged from the loft side of Nature. RUdhft wield¬ 
ed the pregnancy for a period equal to the longevity of one Brahm& and 
subsequently, gave birth to an egg in ths said sphere at Vrinda-vaua. R&dlfo 
threw it away and wept, again and again, at the sight of the egg. Krisna con¬ 
soled her with his counsel on the grand Yoga. From that egg came out the 
Maha-Virftta or Maha-Visnu, the prop of all.” Suyagna said. “ To-day my, 
life bus been blessed. The curse of a Brahmin has proved a blessing to mo. 
The all-auspicious faij*h in Mari can very rarely bo secured. None of the five 
kinds of redemption as specified in the Vedas is equal even to a portion of that 
faith. 0 excellent Muni, deign to do for mo some act of grace whereby I may 
acquire faith in Mari. The sacrod rivers and the idols made of earth or stone 
consecrate people after they have worshipped them for a long time ; but the 
very sight of the Vaisnavas consecrates them at once. 

122-131. The Brahmins are the best of all castes, particularly in India, 
when they stick to their own tenets; of these, again, those Brahmins are 
foremost who daily eat the offerings dedicated to Krisna. You are the ocean 
of knowledge, a groat Vaisnava, the best of the twice-born and devoted to 
S'iva. After having been blessed with your presence, with whom else, shall 
I seek shelter or refuge ? 0 great Muni, by your curse I have nbw become 

a leper and thus forfeited my right to the meditation of Hari.” Sutapft 
answered The Eternal l\Uy& of Visnu inspires faith in Hari. He who 
is graced by this goddess acquires the above faith. He who is bewildered by 
her docs not secure that faith. With mere wealth, that is transitory, the 
worshipper is lured and defrauded by that goddess. Adore, therefore, 
Radha who is void of all attributes, who is the source of all prosperity, who 
represents energy and who is the favourite of Lord Krisna, dearer to Him 
than Mis life. By her grace, you will be able to go to the Goloka. She 
has been worshipped by Krisna Himself. The votaries of Lord Krisna who 
may be attained by meditation, who is void of all attributes, who is the 
Supreme Being and who can be adored with difficulty, go to the Goloka after 
a long, long time. But the meditation of Radha who is full of love for Krisna 
immediately leads to the Goloka. 








PRAKRITlKFtANDA. 


132-140. 0 king, regularly drink the water of the feet of a Br&hmin 

for a year; then you will be cured of all disease and be graceful like Cupid. 
For the period that the earth is moistened by a householder with the water 
of the feet of a Brfthmin, his ancestors drink water in 'the vessel of Puskara. 
All the sacred streams or shrines of the world converge in the ocean ; and all 
the holy streams or shrines of the oceans dwell iri the right foot of a Br&hmin. 
Thus the drink of the water of his foot is auspicious and gives redemption 
and faith, Hari himself fakes the form of a- Brahmin in the world. The 
gods eat the things ottered by a Brahmin. Sutap& having thus advised the 
king said , ° After a year, 1 shall come back to you,” So saying, be went 
home. 0 my beloved, 0 spouse of S'iva, the king reverentially drank the 
water of the* feet of the Br&hmins and for one year fed the Brahmins with 
many delicacies. After the lapse of a year, the king was cured ; and then 
Sutap&, the best of the race of Kasyapas, came to him and kindly gave him 
the amulet of the formula of her worship, her ode, her fundamental 

incantations (or initial Mantras) and the meditation (Dhyan) as prescribed by 
the S&ma-Veda. 


141-163. The Muni then said, “0 king, go to the forest for devotion” 
So saying, he went away. 0 Durg&, the king at his words immediately went 
to the forest, whereupon his relations and friends overwhelmed with grief 
fainted and wept for three days. The son of Suyagna was installed in the 
kingdom. Suyagna engaged himself in very austere devotions at Puskara 
and recited the great Mantra for a celestial thousand years. At that, time,’ 
the k»ng beheld in the sky the goddess R&dhil of perennial youth, The very 
sight of the goddess consumed all his remaining sins. The king thereupon 
immediately quitted his mortal frame and assumed a celestial appearanoe. 
R&db& mounted him on an excellent car of gem with a view to take him to 
the Goloka. The king then propitiated her with adorations. From a dig* 
tance, the king saw the Goloka which appeared to him thus. It was encircled 
by the Viraj& river and the mountain of a hundred summits; it was covered 
with Vrindd-vana and the sphere of the R&sa ; it was decked with lovely cow¬ 
herds, male and female, with pictures, gems, beautiful temples, R alpa trees, 
and tiers of P&rij&ta, twenty seven groves, and celestial railk-ccws. It was 
situated fifty crores of Yojans above the Vaikuntha. It was circular like the 
Moon, eternal and required no prop. It was sustained in the void by the will 
of God. This Goloka was expansive like the sky and infinite like the soul. 
The independent Absolute Being is unattainable even unto us. I, N&r&yana. 
Auanta, Brabm6 # Visnu, Vir&ta fgreat and small), Ganga, Laksmi, Saraswati, 
yourseif, .Nature, JS&vitri, Tulsi, Ganesa, Sanat-Kum&ra, K4rtika, Nar&-NfUa- 
yana, Daksina, Yagna, the sons of Brahmft, the Yogis, the Wind, Varuna, 
the JSuo, the Moon, the Fire and the Vaisuavaa have seen the cow-world ; 
and none else. R&dhft rendered Krisna perceptible to the king who observed 
Him thus. He was seated on a throne of gem in the sacred Goloka. He 
was clad in a yellow dress, pure like fire; His body v»as annointed with sandal- 
paste; He had the form of a young cow-herd ; He was green like a new cloud ; 
He bad a smiling, lovely aspect ; He had two hands with whiph He held 
a flute ; He was inclined to favour His votaries ; He was self-willed (i>*e, could 








v AIV ARTA PURAN A 


eased); He was distinct from Nature ; Ho was the Sup¬ 
reme nemg void of all attributes and scarcely attainable even by meditation ; 
He was most endearing and tended by twelve cowherds with white cbowries: 
Re was tormented by darts of Cupid; He hud a perpetual youth and occupied 
the central place in the LtSsii. Itadhft manifested' the Lord Krisna in that 
condition to the king. 


164-174. The Rik and otljgr Vedas, incarnate, were adoring Him. The 
musical instruments, the muses, mal^ and female, and songs captivated His 
ears 0 P&rvati, the Eternal Nature, who is the image of yourself, was ador¬ 
ing Him with holy basil, leaves annointed with sandal-paste, musk and frank¬ 
incense, and washing His feet with bent grass, snnned rice, the flowers of 
P&rijata and the holy water of the Viraja. As soon as the king saw the Lord 
Krisna who whs cheerful in aspect and independent of Nature; who was the 
final cause and lord of ever y thing ; who was Omnipresent and Supreme ; who 
was adored by all; who represented all prosperity and virtue, who was all- 
auspioioua and the fountain-head of all benefits, he was struck with awe arid 
hastily descending from the chariot, bowed low to Hari with streaming eyes 
and with a mind agitated with raptures. The Supreme (Lord blessed him, 
gave him his own bondage and the Eternal faith in Hari so rarely ac¬ 
quired even by us. H&dha hastily alighted and sat on the lap of Krisna. 
Her female associates ministered to her with white chowries. Lord Krisiia 
addressed the goddess Hadhft with a smile and reverentially worshipped her. 

175-180. A person should first ulter the name of R&dbfi, then that of 
KrisrA or Mldhava: a duty which has been enjoined by tho Vedas and history. 
Whoever violates the above rules or whoever slanders the lovely S'rt Ktidha, 
(dearer to Krisna than His life and the symbol of His energy) will dwell in the 
hell called the thread of time, so long as tho Sun and the Moon exist, and for 
seven consecutive births he will bo deprived of health and posterity. 0 
Dnrga, I have thus related to you tho excellent narrative of Uadha. You 
aro yourself tho eternal, primordial goddess of Nature, the symbol of the spell 
of Visnn. You are the Supreme goddess, tho spouse of _N&r&yana, the image 
of the universe. You know everything; but you put to me the above ques¬ 
tions under a delusion. You know the conditions of your past births and 
you preside over tho female sex. I just described to you the fine narrative 
of RftdiA. What more do,you want to hear ?” 


CHAPTER L V. 

1-9. Parvati asked thus S—" 0 lord, in tho face of your mystic formula 
and those of Lord Kri?na, how is it that the Vai§pava king took the Mantras of 
ttfidha ? What was the formula of worship, ode, incantation, as well as medi¬ 
tation which the sage gave to the king. " IS'iva answered : 41 The king enquired 
of,»the Muni thus, ‘ 0 best of Munis, by whose adorations shall I attain the 
Goloka soon ? ’ The Muni said ‘ 0 king, by the worship of Krisna, you 
will go to His domain after a very long time. Therefore adore It&dhtt, the 
presiding deity of His life. For by tho grace of the compassionate liadha you 







PRAK&ITI-KHANDA. 

#• 


will soon acquire a place in the neighbourhood of Krisna. After giving 
him this beneficial advice, he gave him the following Mantra, consisting of six 
letters, Om K&dh&yai Swaha, lie then (aught him the Prfty&y&dd (withholding 
the breath by way of religious austerity;, the Bh&ta>S'uddhi (the purification 
of the elements of the body by respiratory attraction and replacement), Anga- 
ny&sa, (the ceremony of touching certain parts of the body according to tho 
rules prescribed by the S'&stras), Karanyasa (a certain gesticulation with tho 
hands), hymn, amulet ; the knowledge of which could be acquired with very 
great difficulty* The king also recited the Mantras as advised by the sage. 
By the same auspicious meditation or Dhy&n which Krisna had given to 
R&dh&, as specified in the S&mveda, the king also worshipped Rfidha. 

fO-22. I meditate the goddess R&dh& who is graceful like white ohampaka 
and charming like ten millions of moons; whose lotus-ayes bloom in her face which 
is beautiful like the autumnal full moon who has got fair buttocks and loins ; whose 
lips are like bimbas ; whose teeth are like pearls; who smiles gently showing that 
she is inclined to favour her worshippers ; who puts on an apparel bright like the 
fire ; who is adorned with wreaths; whose features nro effulgent like the sun; 
who is decorated with ear-rings and a diadem of gem ; whose fingers are decorated 
with diamond-rings; who puts on a beautiful necklace; whose hands areadorned 
with armlets and bracelets ; whose gait is gentle, like that of an elephant; who 
is the presiding deity of beauty and attended with white cliowries by the milk¬ 
maids; whose ringlets of hair are adorned with marks of vermilion, musk 
and sandal-paste; who is reverentially adored by the Supreme Being, Krisna 
Himself; who is the blessed spouse of Krisna presiding over His life and 
dearer* to Him than His life ; who is void of all qualities; who is the mother 
of the Eternal Mahit-Visau ; who is the source of all prosperity ; who is the 
primordial Nature ; who represents tho tranquil M&yfi or spell of Visnu ; who 
-3 full of love for Krisna and very fair in appearance; who is the source of 
belief in Hari; who in the sphere of the tidsa is seated on a throne of gem ; 
and who, in the said sphere, sports with Bari, the lord of the sphere. 

23-25. Tho king having meditated R&dhtl thus with the Dhy&na coni' 
posed by;Krisna put flowers on tho head ; then he meditated her again and 
put flowers on the head again. The king worshipped her with sixteen ingre¬ 
dients, viz., straw mat, clothings, water to wash the feet, oblations for feet 
mixed with green grass and rice, perfume, oil, frankincense, lamp, flower, water 
for bathing, gems, sacrificial offerings, betel leaves, fragrant water, prepar¬ 
ations of honey and milk, bedstead of gem. 0 Durg&, I am going to tell you 
the Mantras as related in the Vedas. 

26-32. O Uadha, please accept this ornament of gem constructed by 
Viswa-Karma. 0 goddess, please accept this piece of valuable cloth which 
is delicate and pure like fire. 0 RAdh&, please accept the wafer for washing 
the feet which has been brought from the i acred stream and put in an excellent 
vase of gem. 0 R&dhA, please accept the oblaiious of water deposited ir. the 
conches on the south tide or right direction or turning mixed With bent grass, 
sandal paste and flowers to wash your feet. 0 R^dhtl, ploase, accept the 








auspicious perfume offered by me flavoured with the vegetable productions of 
the earth. 0 goddess, please accept this fragrant, refreshing sandal-oil mixed 
with musk and saffron. 


33-42. 0 goddess, please accept this frankincense prepared out of the 

juice of trees and consecrated by flames of fire. 0 great goddess, please 
accept this graceful lamp of diamond which dispels the fear of darkness. 0 
goddess, deign to accept this fragrant lovely flower of P&rijfita which I 
reverentially offer to you. Kindly accept this water for bathing, "rendered 
fragrant with Visnu oil and excellent fruits of emblic myro-balan. 0 RAdhA, 
please accept the valuable armlet, bracelet and veil-decorated conches which 
i you. Goddess, I offer to you local fruits of the season which 

are ripe, balls of sweet-meat, rice cooked with milk and sugar, sweet-meftt and 
other sacrificial offerings. Please accept them. Please accept these excellent 
hotel loaves perfumed with camphor which are better than any delic yfy. 0 
goddess, please accept the* hopey deposited in the diamond vessel which I 
reverentially ofi'er to you. Goddoss, deign to accept the bedstead covered with 
fine cloth pure like fire, annotated with flower and sandal paste and constructed 
with gems, for sleep.” Having worshipped the goddess thus, he offered a hand¬ 
ful of flowers. The king, bent on his vow, worshipped afterwards the eight 
Nayik&a also. 

43-56. O my beloved, from the southern or right direction down to the 
angles or corners, the worshipper should reverentially adore the female 
attendants of R&dhA also with five ingredients. In the eastern angle, M&1&* 
vati ; in the south-east corner, MAdhavi; on the south side, Ratnamalk ;*in the 
south-west corner, SusilA ; on the west side, S'asi-Kal& ; on the north-west 
corner, Parijaia; on the north side, P&dm&vatf ; on the north-east corner, 
SundarJ should be worshipped. Those who take the vow of R&dhA should 
offer to her garlands of jasmine and lotus and then pray for mercy or for¬ 
giveness thus : 4 0 goddess, you are the mother of the world, Eternal, and 
represent the spell of Yisnu. You are dearer to Krisna than His life, you 
preside over His life; you represent liis prosperity; you are the goddess of 
energy, overflowing with the love of Krisna ; you are the source of faith 
in Hari. O auspicious Il&dhA, l bow to you. To-day, my life and birth 
have been rendered blessed, inasmuch-as, you, the goddess RAdhA adored by 
Krisna, have been adored by me. You range in the heart of Krisna as 
RadhA ; you are the mistress of the R&sa in the sphere of the R&sa; you 
an S'ri-RadhA in the lovely grove of VrtadA-vana ; you are the spouse of 
Krisna in the Goloka ; you are the incomparable Tulsi in the forest of the 
holy basil ; you are the champA-vati in your sports with Krisna in the wood 
of ohampaka ; you are ChaudrA-vati in the Chandra-Vana ; you are the chaste 
nymph on the 8'ata-S'ringa mountain ; you are PudinA in the garden of 
iotusfe, you are RamyA in the Kamya-vnna : you are Bhadra in the bower or 
gkWe;you aro MiihA-Laksmi in the Vaikuntha; you are SarasvatS in the 
heart of N Arayanu; you are the daughter of the sea in the ocean of milk; 
you are Laksmi, the wife of Hart on earth ; you are the celestial goddess of 
fortune in heaven, destroying the calamity of the gods; you,are the Eternal 








PBAKHITIrSHANDA. 



Ektrga. the symbol of Visnu s illusion in*the heart of S'iva; and through 
your digits you preside over the heart of Lord KrLua 0,3 bavitrl, the mother 
of the Vedas, Through your digits, you figure as the spouse 
the mother of Nara and Nfr&yana. 


of Dharrm*, 


57-60. Tula! and Gang A have sprung from your digits : and the cow- 
herdesses Rohm! and Rati have come out from the pores of your skin. S'atarupft, 
S'achi, Diti, Aditi etc., have sprung from the digits of your digits. The wives 
of the Munis are the offsprings of your digits. 0 goddess, give me faith 


in Krisna. ” Worshipping her thus, the devotee should peruse her amulet. 
The above ode was used by Krisna while adoring RAdhA. An Indian 
who worships her in the aforesaid manner becomes equal to Visnu, is 
redeemed in his life and goes to the Goloka. ’ 0 P&rvati, every year on 
the occasion of the full Moon in the month of KArtika whoever worships 
RAdhA reaps the benefits of the grand Royal Sacrifice. In tnis mortal world, 
he accumulates heaps of wealth and being at last relieved from his sin3 goes 
to the region of Visitu. First of all, Krisna worshipped RAdha at VrindA- 
vana: afterwords BrahmA worshipped her according to the above method and 
by her boon, secured SAvitri, the mother of the Vedas ixh his wife. NArAyana 
then worshipped RadhA and by her boon gained as bis wives MahA-Laksra?, 
Baraswatl, holy Ganga and the excellent Tulsi. 

67*77. Visnu of the Ksiroda sea (sea of milk) obtained as his wife 
the daughter of the pea through her boon ; and I through her boon got 
you back as Durga for my bride, when the daughter of Daksa committed 
suicide at the shrine of Puskara. By adoration of RAdha, Kasyapa got Aditi, 
the Moon got Rohini, Kama got Rati, Dharma got Mftrfci : and the Munis 
and the gods secured the fourfold objects of pursuit (viz., virtue, wealth, en¬ 
joyments and beautitude). Thus I have related to you RAdh&’s Mantra 
used on the occasion of her worship. Now listen to her ode or hymn. Once 
upon a time, in the grove of the holy basil, Krisna was dallying with a cow- 
herdess named Tula!. The jealous RAdbA was offended and disappeared from 
the presence of Krisna, RadhA playfully dispensed with her digits and form. 
Thereupon, Brahma, Visnu and S'iva forfeited their glory, greatness and 
grace. They were deprived of their wives and afflicted with diseases. After 
mutual consultation, they sought Krisna’s protection. Krisna was pleased 
with them and after bathing enlogised her with a hymn which is as 
follows:—“Omcst handsome nymph, I am yonr favourite. You love me 
to an exkaordinary degree, it is alleged. This statement, however, is falsified 
byyour recent conduct. You always used to say before, “0 Krisna, yon are 
my soul and my life. ” Does your act now correspond to your statement ? 
0 mother of the world, it now appears that you are not true to yonr words. 
Besides, the heart of the female sox is keen like the edge of a razor. 

78-88. My words are true when I say that you preside over my five 
vital airs and deafer to me than my life. Though devoted to you with my whole 
head and heart, I could not save ycur life Now I am about to die without you. 
No one can sustain himself for a moment without his presiding deity. You are 
the primordial Nature, the mother of MahA-Vijnu, Though void of property, 









THE BRA IIM A- V A/VAR T A PURaNA . 


ytfa are vested with property through your digits. Though effulgent and in¬ 
visible, you take a form out of compassion for your votaries and manifest yourself 
in different shapes according to the nature of their meditations. Though you 
?u’e RAdh& only * a the Goloka as the mistress of all the cow-herds, you appear as 
Mahft-Lakatni in the Vaikuntha, as Saraswati, the goddess of learning in India, 
as the chaste Parvati, the sanctifying Gang&, as Sftvitri in the Brahma-1 oka 
and as the goddess earth through your digits. My life has become void without 
you. I have now been rendered incapable of action. Sustained by your energy, 
S'ivu is powerful ; otherwise he is a corpse. Through your might, JBrahmi 
engenders the Vedas, Vismi preserves the world; Yagna yields fruits to the 
worshipper on the occasion of sacrifice, Ananta holds the world on his head and 
thus represents the creation and 8 # iva holds the Ganges on his head. Through 
yon. the whole world is in motion ; otherwise, everything is inanimate. Y^u re¬ 
present knowledge ; through you, people are orators ; otherwise, they are dumb, 

89-98. As anpottor is able to construct pots with clay, so I am able to 
create the world through you aud Nature. Without you, I am but inertia, 
incapable of doing anything. You are the symbol of absolute power. Deign 
to appear before me, O.goddoes. Your are the burning faculty of tire. Fire 
cannot burn without you. You are the grace of the* Moon." Without you, 
the Moon is graceless. Likewise, you are the valour of the Sun. Beloved, 
you are the image of Rati (the amorous desire of women). Cupid befriends 
women with your assistance.” Whoa Krisna adored her thus, R&dha appeared 
and was united with Him. 0 P&rvati* at that time, every one in the world 
obtained his spouse. Through U&dh&’s grace, the whole Goioka was filled with 
cow-herdessos. King Suyagna, after having worshipped Rftdk&, went to the 
Goloka. Whoever reads the hyrrm of Radh& as composed by Krisna acquires 
faith in Hari and secures His bondage. A man who is without a wife (if pure 
in body and mind and if he listens to the above hymn for a month) gets rid of 
hundreds of obstacles and gains an accomplished wife. If any one deprived of 
his wife and good fortune listens to the above ode for a year, he gets a good- 
natured and virtuous wife. 

99 104. 0 P&rvati, when the daughter of Daksa died, I adored R&dba 

in the above way at Krisua’s command and obtained you as my spouse. By 
the perusal of the above ode Brahma obtained 8&vitri ; and the gods who had 
lost their prosperity through Darvfts&'s curse regained it. One who wants to 
obtain a son or acquire health will secure one's object by virtue of that eulogy. 
On the occasion of the Full Moon in the month of K&rfcika any oue through 
he worship of Rildha and the study of the o ie of Hadhtl may secure everlast¬ 
ing prosperity and reap the benefits of the grand Royal Sacrifice. A woman 
who listens to the ode gets a good match for her husbind and is released from 
the fetters of the world. Whoever worships Ra ilia and reads the hymn 
reverentially every day is released from the ties of the world and goes to the 
Goloka. 

OH AFT E R L VI. 

1-30. P&rvati said, 4 * Lord, I beard the mystic formula relating to the 
worship of R&dh& and her hymn. Now describe to me her amulet.” 8'iva said, 










PEAK Uni-KHAN LA, 


<SL 


1 0 1)argil, I am going to relate it to you. as stated to me by Lord Krisna iu 
the Goloka. I urn about to reoito to you the extraordinary, mysterious nod 
edifying amulet by virtue of which the creator BrahmA got Savitrl : by which 
T have been able to acquire you who constitute the prop and support of the 
world ; bv wielding which, NArAyana hag been wedded to MnhA-Lak^ml ; aud 
Krisna, though void of attributes and super-natural, has been capable of crea¬ 
tion ; by virtue of whioh Vifnu has wedded the daughter of the sea and pre¬ 
serves the world, Atlanta wields the earth on his head as easily as if she were 
a mustard-read ; and MuhA-Yisnu holds countless worlds on the pores of his 
skin;, by the perusal of which, Dlmrtna has become the witness of all actions ; 
by wielding which Kuverahas become the treasurer, Indra has become the king 
of gods and Mann, the king of men ; by virtue of whioh, the graceful Moon 
performed the grand, royal sicrifice, the Sun has become the lord of the worlds 
the Fire and the speedy Wind conseorate the worlds, Death (the damsel) exer¬ 
cises her sway over the universe ; by dint of whioh Parasur&ma, the son of 
the great ascetic Jamadagni, denuded the world of the Ksatriyas, twenty-one 
times, Agastya (the offspring of the jar) drank the whole ocean; on the 
strength of which, Sanat KurnAra is regarded as the best ot philosophers, the 
sage NAr&yana has been redeemed in his life, Vasi§tha and Kapila have become 
adepts, D.-kaa has become the lord of creation, Bhrigu has turned into my 
opponent and' the tortoise holds the Atlanta who holds the world on his head • 
bv^ dint of which, the wind is the life of all; by whose influeoco Varuna' 

Ie&n, the Wind and other regents of the quarters with Yaoia rule the universe • 
through whose prowess, Time and Kftlagui Rudra destroy the world ; and by 
wielding which Gautama became an adept, and Kasyapa, the lord of' creation 
obtained for his wife a digit of the daughter of Vasu-deva. I am goint/ to’ 
describe to you the amulet by virtue of which Durv&sA, whoa he was rendered 
» widower, obtained a wife, Rama got back his wife Sit A when she'was stolen 
by Havana. Nal* of sacred celebrity, whose name does good to one who utters 
it, got Damayantl and the heroic S'ankha-Chftda acquired a dominion over the 
demons; by whose might, the bullock bears me, the Divine Eagle hears Haii 
the Munis have attained perfection, the goddess of fortune is able to grant all 
prosperity ? Saraswatl is adored by the sages and has become an adept in matters 
oearmg on sexual intercourse, SftVitr! has attained perfection, the terrestrial 
Uksmi has been wedded to Visnu, MannsA has become an adept and is worshipped 
throughout the world ; by virtue of which, Aditi got BAinana as hor son IW 
huti got Kapila as her son, S'utarupa got Priya-vrata and UttAnpAda as her 

MnV* yW T “ 0th ?u 83 ber daughter; and by wielding- which LopA- 

Mmi a aud arun-dhati were regarded as trie chastest of women. I am now 
going to refer you to that amulet or taiisman. All adepts have maned nor 
feotion by virtue of this amulet. PrajA-pati Brahma is the Risi or saint of 
this amulet;.its metre is Gaetd ; its goddess j 8 RAdh&, the mistress of the 
riasa ; its object is the attainment of faith in Krisna. This amulet should 
if rf w- t0 ° ne ’ q own (ilsci P ies :lD,J Die BrAhmips devoted io Krisna. 
f a “ d ,“?* be f ve " out to treacherous people and to the disciples 
Of others, ihe revelation of the matter to the latter is fatal. 

* 

bi-44. Yo, may part with your life or kingdom ; but you "should not 
give it out toothers. Lord Krisna. held this amulet reverentially round his 
31 





THE BRASMA+VAIVARTA PORANA 



^throat. BrahraA, Vifnu and I have personally witnessed the fact that Lord 
Kri$$& himself adored RAdhA with the following mystic incantation in the 
Goloka, ** Ora RAdh&yai SwAhA.” Then again, Om Hrim S'rlm Kadhik&yai 
BwAhA i —this mantra like the Kal pa-tree may preserve ray head. Ora Rftm 
Hrim Sri RAdbikAyai SwAhA :—this mantra may preserve my forehead, ©yes 
and ears. XiAm RAdhAyai 6wAhA, this best of mantras, may preserve oiy head 
and the clusters of my hair Klim Hrim Krisna PriyAyai namah :—this mantra, 
the source of all perfection, might preserve ray nose, cheek and throat Om RAm 
RAs Aisayyai naraah: this mantra might preserve my shoulders. Om Rasa ^ilAsia 
yai SwAhA : this mantra might preserve my breast. Om Tulsl-vana-VAsinyai- 
SwAhA; this mantra might preserve my buttocks. Om Krigim-PrAuA-dhikyai 
Sw&hA ; this mantra might preserve my feet and other parts of the body- On 
the east side, RAdhA ; on the south-east angle, Kri^na-PriyA or the beloyed one 
of Krisna ; on the south side, the mistress of the RAsA ; on the south-west 
coiner, the mistress of the milk-maids ; on tho west side, RAdhA, void of all 
attributes ; on the north-west angle, the adored one of Kriana ; on the north 
side, the primordial goddess of Mature, on the north-east angle, 
of the universe, may preserve me. Tho mother of MabA-Visnu 
me in the water on the land or in the sky , whether I am asleep 
DurgA, I expressed to you the all-auspioious amulet. This is a 


the mistress 
may preserve 
or awake. O 
secret which 


you should not reveal to any one. 

tion. 


I expressed the matte r to you out of affec- 


45-56. After having adored the guru with clothes, ornaments and sandal- 
paste, a person should wield the amulet on tho right hand or shoulders; in 
which case he will be honoured like Vifiiu. Recitation of the amulet a hun¬ 
dred lakh Qf timeB will make the reciter perfect or accomplished in holiness. 
A man perfected by this amulet cannot even be burnt by fire. Duryodhana 
was, by virtue of this amulet, expert in the matter of subduing the water and the 
fire. I first gave this amdfet to Sanat-KuraAra at Puskara who gave it during 
tbt) sun-eclipse on theSumeru mountain to SAndipani, Muni. This Muni gave it 
to BaiarAma who gave it to his favourite disciple, Duryodhana. By virtue of 
this amulet a man is redeemed in his life-time, A worshipper of RAdhA who 
daily reads this amulet is adored like Visnu and reaps the fruits of the grand 
royal sacrifice. The perusal of this amulet confers the same benefit that can 
be attained by ablutions iu all holy rivers, gifts of every kind, fastings, oir~ 
ouraambulatiou round the world, initiation in every sacrifice, the fulfilment 
o£ every promise, the daily worship of Kriana, the consumption of his offerings, 
and the study of the Vedas. A man, by wielding this amulet, can protect 
himself from the dangers of trial in a court of justice or from the dangers of 
a wild forest teeming with wild animals or from the perils of wild fire, dacoits, 
thieves, imprisonment or jail. 0 great goddess, t answered your question. 
You are the image of MAyA (uurealifcy) and you put to roe the questions through 
MAyA in order to tempt me. r 

57-68. S'iva having described this narrative palpably moved with the 
recollections of Hari and shed tears. There is no god more honoured than 
Kri8na, no river more^aored than GangA, no shrine better than Puskara, no 
stage of life better than that of a Brahmin, nothing is .more subtle than 
an atom or denser than MabA-Visnu or more expansive tbao the sky. Sinai- 








, PRAKMT1-KRANDA. 


sl 


ar!y, there is no one wiser khan S'iva. 0 N&rada, S'iva has conquered lust, 
anger and ail other passions. Whether asleep or awake, he is always ab¬ 
sorbed in the demotions of Hari. 0 child, as Hari is the best of the gods and 
Si'iva is the best of the Vaienavas, so this amulet is' the foremost of amu¬ 
lets. 3'iva means productive of good. He w ho gives good things to men 
is S'ivft. He who yields redemption to men and confers on them benefit is 
S'ankara. He is called Mabadeva, as he is the god of Brahm&, the Munis 
versed in the Vedas and the celebrated great men of tbe world. He is also 
called by the last namo as he* is the Lord of the primordial Nature adored 
throughout the world. Wise men call him Makesa, as he is the Lord of 
great men. 0 son of Brahmil, you are truly blessed, as S'iva who is the source 
of faith in Hari is your spiritual preceptor. What do you want to hear more? 


CHAPTER L VII. 

1*11. N&rada said, * 0 Br&hman, 1 heard from you tbe wonderful account 
of the goddess Riidh&. Now relate to me the anecdote of Durgd. Duigd has 
sixteen names, viz., Durgd, N&r&yant, Vi^nu-M^yd, S'iWL, Sail, Nityd, 

Satyd, Bhagawati, Sarv&ni, Sarva-mangal&, Ambikft, Vai§navi,Gouri, Pdrvntl, 
Sandtaai as described in the Kauthuma- Vedas. Their meanings are also lucidly 
given in the Vedas. Please describe ihe above subject to me. By whom was 
Durgd worshipped ou the first, second, third and fourth occasions ? ” N&r&yana 
said, “ you know the meanings of the sixteen names as put down in the Vedas 
and still you ask me the question. I am going to describe the subject to 
you according to the S'&stras. Durga means a demon, obstacle, fetters of 
Karma, sorrow, hell, punishment by Yatxia, repeated births, fear and disease ; 
and A means to kill. Durgd is so called because she repels the above 
dangers. She is called N&r&yiini as she is equal to sun’s passage in respect 
of fame, lustre, grace and virtue and represents the energy of N&r&yana. 
&he is called Is&n& as she"gives all success ; for Is&n means success and A 
means to give, Visnu bound the world with his spell at the time of creation, 
heuce she is called Visnu-M&y& as representing his spell. 

12-20. She gives good things to the world and is the spouse of S'iva ; 
hence she is called S'ivA. She is called Sati as she is good-natured, devoted to 
her husbaud and presides over wisdom in every age. She is called Nity&, as 
she is eternal like the supreme Being. Bhaga means perfection, «. e tJ accomp¬ 
lishment. At the time of the absolute dissolution of the world when the great 
God disappears by virtue of His illusion, tko whole universe from Brahmft 
down to a bush appears fictitious, but the primordial Nature in the shape of 
Durg& alone appeals to be real. The great divine attributes, perfection, etc. 
dwell in Durg& in every age ; hence she is called Bhagawati. This goddess 
gives redemption to all creatures, L e. t release from life death and decrepitude ; 
hence she is called Sarv&ni, Mangal means benefit ; and A means donor. She 
is called Sarva-Mangalft as she confers ail benefits on people. She is also so 
called because she gives Mangala, i. e. t pleasure, prosperity and welfare. A mini 
means mother, adoration and worship, She is called Ambikft, as she is the 
revered mother of the universe, 

■7 ■ 






THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURaNA, 


'• Sho is called Vaisnavl a3 she i 9 the image of Visnu and 

represents his energy and as she is devoted to Visnu and was created by 

him in the beginning. Goar means yellow, unassociated or dissociated and 

pure Brahma : sho is called Gauri because she represents the energy of 

Brahma. 8he is so called because she represents the faculty of S'ambhu 
and the spell of Krisna She differs in her nature according to the Parvas 
(festivals), lunar months and the Kalpas hence sho is called Fimti. The 
highest climax, of a grand festival is called Parva. She presides over it ; 
hence she is called Pftrvati. Sho is the daughter of the mountain and presides 
over the mountain-god ; hence she is called P&rvatl. She lives for an oterrni 
period, hence she is called San&tani. I have told you the etymology of th 
sixteen names. O Muni. Now listen to her anecdote. The Supreme Bemg f# . 
Krista adored her, first of all, in the sphere of the RAsa in the beginning of 
creation Then BrahmA adored her through the fear of the demons, Madhu- 
Kaitava, For the third time, she was worshiped by S'iva to kill Tripura- 

31-40. Fourthly, sho was adored by Indra when he lost his jurisdiction by 
ih© curse of Durv&sA. Later on, she was worshipped by the gods, munis, adepts, 
etc. 0 Muni, OurgA at first emanated from the valour of the gods. The gods 
gave her weapon and ornaments DurgA after having subdued Durga and 
other demons restored to the gods their kingdom and gave them the boOns soli¬ 
cited by them. In the next Kalpa, DurgA was worshipped on the coast of the 
river by buratha, the disciple of Medhasa, on an earthen image. This king offer- 
red to her the sacrifices of buffalos, black antelopes, rhinoceros, goats, pumpkin- 
gourds and fowls. He recited the mantras and offered to her the sixteen ingre¬ 
dients prescribed by the Vedas. Then after having worshipped her, be wielded 
her amulet. The king then solicited the boon as desired by him. The Vaisya 
also obtained redemption by worshipping her on the coast of the river. The 
Vaisya and the king, after eulogising her, went home. The Vaisya wont to the 
Goloka after his death by virtue of the boon which he obtained from DurgA. 
The mighty king, also free from all obstacles, went back to his kingdom. 

41-43. The king enjoyed the sweets of his kingdom for GO,000 years and 
than entrusting the reins of government to his son gave himself up to devotion 
alone with his wife. He was subsequently known as BAvarni Mana. Oson, 1 
have briefly dealt with Dnrgft’s narrative as requested by you. Now> what do 
you want to hear ? 

CHAP T E R L V I I I. 

]."13 Narad a said, 4 ‘To what race or line did the pious king Suratha 
belong ? How did he receive knowledge from the wise Medhasa V To what 
lineage did Medhasa belong ? Where did he see the Muni, and where did they 
talk ? 0 sage, b st versed iu the Vedas, kindly describe the above points to 

m* in detail.” NArAyana said, “ Atri was the son of Brahma. The moon- 
god, the son of Atri, was rendered foremost of Br&hmlgts by the per¬ 
formance of the grand Royal sacrifice. The moon begat upon the wife of 
his preceptor a son named Rudba. Budha begat Chaitra who begat Suratha.” 
N&rada $aid> ** How oortld the moon begot a son upon his guru’s wife ? This 









• uwisr^ 



RRAKR1T1-KHANDA. 


is an act forbidden by the Vedas : kindly remove my doubts on this point.” 
MrAyana said : the lustful moon-god, infatuated with prosperity, saw his pre 
captor’s wife T&r& (on the coast of the Ganges) the outstanding features of 
whose beauty were as follows. She was pious, chaste and lovely"; her breast 
was elevated ; she had beautiful buttocks and loins and a slender 'waist. Bhf 
had a pretty row of teeth and soft complexion; she was in the prime of her 
youth and decorated witlr tine dress and ornaments ; her forehead was marked 
with musk and, lower still, with sandal-paste and vermilion; her glances were 
arch and her dress was brandished by the wind ; her face was like tiro autumnal 
tnooh ; her lips were like the bimbas; she had a smiling aspect; she was 
abashed at the sight of her own imago and she was gently advancing to her 
home with the gait of an elephant. When he beheld her charms as described 
above 4 he was excited with lust and impudently and passionately addressed 
her thus: 




14-27. 0 best of women, you are the most jovial of damsels. Just 
wait a bit. 0 most clever and witty woman, you are attracting my heart 
constantly. Vrihaspati, having adored the goddess Nature for a thousand 
years, has been able to seoure a damsel like you possessing huge buttocks, 
Alas! how unskilful is Providence. He has effected the union of a passionate 
girl like yourself with an anchorite. A wise person cannot derive any plea¬ 
sure from the society of a fool. But the association of a pair of clever lovers 
truly conduces to happiness. 0 goddess ! 0 nymph, in vain" you are afflicted 
with the darts of Cupid. This futility of your passion might be either dae 
to your fault or to the fault of Karma. Or, none perhaps can fathom the 
heart of a woman. You are young and your youth has been wasted in the 

society of jour old husband. That devotee Vrihaspati, either asloep or 
awake, always adores Hari. You are well versed iu sexual matters. It there¬ 
fore behoves you to seek the gratification of your passion by seeking the 
society of a young gallant. My beloved, you desire ono thing and your hus¬ 
band desires another thing. When the tastes of lovers differ, how 'can their 
union be delightful . In the present season of lovely spring, in the grove of 
MAdbavi (the creeper whioh grows in spring) on a bed covered with fragrant 
flowers and annotated with perfume, you should taste the pleasures of mv 
society. In this solitary sandal-forest which teems with fragrant flowers, 
dally with me, 0 blessed paragon of youth and beauty. Bport, with me in 
the lovely forest of the Chtmpaka on a bed of Champaka gently agitated by 
the wind redolent of the Cbaropaka. In the lovely valley of the mount Malaya 
in the solitary forest shaken by the wind redolent of the sandal, make merry 
witn mo. 0 beauty, flirt with me in the forest situated on the golden margin 
of the river Narmadk which is oourted even by the gods.” 

28-38. So saying, the foolish rooon-gt d who was more handsome than 
f'ui id and wlm was excited with passion fell at her feet on the coast of the 
river Mandftkini. Her passage being obstructed by the moon, the palate, the 
throat and the lips of Tarskft were dried up. Her eyes were hushed with 
anger and she addressed him boldly thus, “ 0 tbou adulterous traitor, fie upon 
thee ! I hou art most contemptiblo and I regard thee as mean as a blade of grass, 
it is due to the misfortune of Atri that he begat a son like tine, a blot on 
his family. Fool, dost thou oonsider thyself mighty by virtue of the per- 









ianoe q£ the royal sacrifice ? That sanctity or merit thou must lose to-day 


THE BRAHMA-YAIVARTA P U RAM A 



as thy mind has been attracted to thy preceptor’s wife. A person who 
desires the wife o£ another is impure for the purposes of every act. He does 
not reap the fruits of hi;s actions. He is despised in the three worlds. If my 
precious chastity be destroyed by thy conduct, thou shall be subject to the 
disease of consumption. The Vedas hold, that those who ride very high are 
sure to fall. Lord Kri§na who crashes the pride of the wicked will subdue 
thine, 0 son. I am like your mother. Pray, do not oppress me and if yon cease 
to persecute me, you will be truly blessed/’ The chaste Tarak&, so saying, 
wept again and again. She then cited Dharma, the Sun, the Wind, the Fire, 
Brahm&, the Supreme Being, Krisna, the sky, the day and night, the evening 


and the gods as witnesses. Tli8 Moon was not afraid of Tarok&. But he 
was angry, held her hands and thrust her into his chariot. He then drove 


it with the speed of mind and cohabited with the lovely Tarakft. 

39-58. Sometimes on the chariot, sometimes on the groves of Nandana 
and at other times in the wood called Puspa-bhadra, in the holy place of 
Puekara, on the coast of the river, in. the grove of flowers, on the bedstead 
ooverod with flowers and sandal, in the solitary valley of the Mount Malay 
redolent of the sandal, from hill to hill and from stream to stream, he coha¬ 
bited with her with so much ease that a hundred years appeared to him like 
a moment. Theft the Moon was afraid and sought the protection of the valor¬ 
ous S'ukra, the religions preceptor of the demons, S'ukra ridiculed his adver¬ 
sary, Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the gods and cheered up the Moon by granting 
him the boon of immunity from fear. The sous of Diti present in the 
assembly laughed and cheered up the frightened and the blotted or polluted 
Moon. Tho sins caused by ravishing the ohaste T&r& devoted to her husband 
disfigured the pure Moon and tainted him with spots resembling a hare. 
Then the learned S*akra gave him counsel, using truthful words likely 
to prove beneficial in the end conformably to the Vedas thus: “ For 
a wonder, you are the grandson of Brahmfl and the son of Atri. How 
have you performed an immoral and infamous act ? As a drop of wine 
spoils the honey, so you have put a stigma upon the celebrities which you 
acquired by the performance of tho grand Royal sacrifice. The chaste wife 
of the most pious saint Vrihaspati, the spiritual guide of the gods, is like a 
mother unto you. You had better forsake her now. Vrihaspati, the son of 
Angirft who is the master of S'ambhu and the gods, and who is likewise the 
son of my spiritual preceptor and the best of Br&hmms is always effulgent 
with the lustre of Br&hma. People of good rank appreciate the merits even 
of their virtuous enemies and criticise the conduct of their wicked guru. 
For such is their nature. There is none so hostile to me as Vrihaspati, and 
yet lam iu justice bound to recite bis virtues. Virtue dwells where pious 
men reside ; and Krisna is tho constant associate of virtue. The place where 
Krisna dwells is always erownod with victory. The cow gives birth to one 
oalf: the tigress gives birth to five cubs ; and the lioness to seven cubs. The 
harmful cubs are all destroyed, but the calf is protected for its virtue. The pre¬ 
ceptor of the gods and the Brahmins are able to preseive every one with their 
might; but voluntarily they do not preserve the wicked. If a god or a Br&hmin 
goes to his ^preceptor’s wife with an immoral purpose, he incurs by that act a 



misr/fy 



sixteenth pari of the sin cansed by Br&hmin-alaughtor. If the woman, how ¬ 
ever, makes advances herself, he only incurs one-fourth of the above sin. 
To abandon a woman of this class is not. sinful but meritorious, as Brahra& 
hath said. The Vedas hold that the rape of a chaste woman is as culpable 
as the murder of a hundred Brahmins* 

59-63. 0 blessed being, now do an act of piety and part with the 

Br&bmin woman. Repentance after sin is highly beneficial to the sinner. You 
are frightened and have sought my protection. I shall therefore purge 
off your sins. A pious person who does not protect the helpless lives in 
the hell called the Kumbhipaka in spite of his piety. But whoever protects 
the helpless reaps the benefits of a hundred horse-sacrifices and attains 
great .prosperity in this world.” So saying S'ukra took the moon on the coast 
of the Maud&kini, bathed, caused the Moon to bathe and’worshipped Visnu. 
lie then caused the moon to oat the auspicious offerings of Vi&nu and drink 
the holy water of the Gauges wherewith Visnu’s feet were washed. 

64-72. Then S'ukra took the abashed moon in his Jap and said with a 
smile thus : “ If the fruits of my devotion, Hari-worsbip, vow, the ablutions in 

holy waters, charity and fastings be real, then you will be relieved from your 
sins. Let the sins of the Moon overtake a Br&hmin who is void of his 
neccessary rites and denuded of Hari-worship. Whoever defrauds his wife and 
commits adultery with the wife of another will be involved in the sins of the 
moon and go to Bell. A wicked woman who reviles her husband will acquire 
the sin of the Moon and go to the hell called Slaver’s pit. Whoever eats food 
not dedicated to Hari will acquire the sin of the Moon and go to the hell called 
the Thread of Time. Whoever digs the earth on the days during which exca¬ 
vation is prohibited by the S'&sfcras will also suffer the above penalty. A 
woman who defrauds her husband and goes to another for an immoral 
purpose will acquire the sin of the Moon and go to the hell called the Fit of 
Fire, ” wherein she will dwell for four ages. 

73-82 Whoever owing to the predominance of the principle of acti¬ 
vity tries to eclipse the fame of others and establish his own fame will 
dwell in the Kumbhlpaka because of the sins of the Moon. Whoever does 
not maintain his parents wife and preceptor will turn into a Chand&l for the 
above sin. Whoever eats the food offered by a prostitute, a childless widow 
or a woman in her menses will acquire the sin of the Moon on account of 
which he will dwell for four ages in the Kumbhipaka and then turn into a 
Chandtlla. Whoever commits sexual intercourse during the day or voluntarily 
cohabits with a pregnant woman or a woman in her menses will dwell for 
four ages in the hell called the Thread of Time on account of the sins of the 
Moou. Whoever, excited with lust, sees the face, the breast or the buttocks 
of a woman will dwell in the hell of Saliva for four ages. Then he will turn 
into a blind man and later on, into a eunuch. Whoever, on the occasion of 
the Am&vasy& or the full moou, on the last day of the lunar month or on the 
fourteenth or eighth day of the lunar month cohabits with a woman or eats 
lentil or breadfruit will dwell for four ages in the hell called the Thread of 
Time on account of the sins of the Moon ; and then he wall be born as a ChandAl 
and seven times as a vaiitudinarian, a poor mm and afterwards a leper. 






THE BEAHMA-VAiVARTA PURANA. 


Sl 


83-93. Whoever eats on the lunar days of Ek&dasi, Janm&stami or S'iva- 
r&tri will* dwell in the Kutnbhipafea for the sins of the Modn. Whoever drinks 
milk, or honey in the copper-oup or eats ghee in a oup tasted by others or 
drinks coooamifc water, ob salted milk or relics of water drunk by others in a 
bell-metal cup and whoever in the course of the day or tlx9 night eats and 
drinks more than onoe will, on account of the sins of the Moon, dwell for 
four ages in the hell called the Blind Well. Whoever sells his daughter or 
subsists upon the fee of the temple or carries a bullock or burns the corpses 
of a 8'udra or cooks his food or cuts the hx ly fig-tree or slanders Visnu or a 
Vaienwa will dwell in the hell of the Heated Anvil for the sins of the Moon, 
Then he will he born seveQ times as a Ohtind&l ; five times he will acquire 
the form of a tree *, then he will he born seven times as an ass, a boar and the 
crow that frequents resorts for ^pilgrims : five times as the worm of ordure and 
a hundred times as an earth-worm. 

94-108. Whoever eats meat to no purpose or baked food not dedicated to 
Hari wiil five in the hell of Swords for four ages besmeared with blood: fchoti seven 
times he will take the birth of a snake. A Br&hmin who subsists upon U8U£y, 
female organ or medical profession, who sells the name of Hari or tho Vedas, 
who proclaims his own religion to others or blows his own trumpet, who under¬ 
takes the duties of* an ambassador or who is supported by a prostitute will be 
overtaken by the sins of the Moon, The Moon will be absolved from his sins. 
A Br&hmin committing the above sins will go to the hell called S'fWa-protn 
wherein ho will dwell for a period covered by the jurisdictions of fourteen Indraa 
and be pierced with spears. Then ho will be born as a poor and diseased man 
not initiated in religious sacrifices. A Br&hmin who sells lac, meat, mercury, 
Sesamum, oil, s.alt, horse or iron; a person who murders people or adopts the pro¬ 
fession of a thief ora mime will dwell in the hell called the Elge of Kazor for a 
period covered by a thousand Indras. Afterwards he will he born seven times 
as a jackal, a bear and a dog, a huadred times as a fish and seven times as a rhino¬ 
ceros and a frog. Then he will be born by turns as an artisan, a washerman, 
an oilman, a carpenter, a sailor one who subsists upon corpses, a fowler, a gold¬ 
smith, a potter and a blacksmith. Then he will be horn as a K§atriya and 
lastly as a Br&hmin.” S'ukra having purified the inoon thus, said to TAr& : 

0 chaste one, leave the moon anil go to your husband. Your heart is pure ; 
and you are therefore chastened without peuance. A virtuous woman if 
ravished by a powerful gallant is not polluted thereby.” S'ukra addressing 
the smiling Moon and T&V& in the way a? stated above blessed them both. 


0 H A PIER LI X, 

1*10. M&radtt said, "What did Vrihaspati do, after the rape of T&r& by the 
Moon ? How did he get her hack ? Kindly tell me all this in detail ” N&r&yana 
said, c< When Vrihaapati saw that TAr& did not return after bathing, he sent 
one of his disoiples in quest of her. The disciple went to tho coast of the Man- 
dakinl and heard from the people about T&ra’s rape. So he returned weeping 
and informed his guru of the matter. The guru fainted at the news but soon 
recovered. I n grief and soame he wept very loudly with big disciples. Then the 
afflicted Vrihaspati with streaming eyes addressed his sorrovvful disciples and 







PRA KRITi-KU AN DA. 



thus dealt with the history of the case according to the Vedas:—'\uy sons, uo 
not know why I was cursed and by whom. An impious man is sure to come to 
grief, tie who bi*/s not got u mmi and virtuous wife ought to go to the tolei . 
For him a house and a forest are both equal. A man whose wife has been 
ravished by the enemy ought to,go to the forest. For him the house and the 
wood are both equal. A man from whose bouse, las good-natured und hand¬ 
some wife goes away, ought to go to the forest. For him the wood aud the 
forest are both equal. 


12-45 A man whose house is denuded of his mother aud his smiling wife 
ought to go to the forest ; for him the house and the wood are both equal. A 
man who is without a wife should go to the forest in spite of his wealth ; for him 
the he use'and the wood are equal. A house without a wife is like a toresfc. . 
house with wife, is properly speaking, a house. I 1 or the mistress of the house 
is identical with the house The house itself does not constitute a house. A 
man without a wife is unfit for religious rites, if he performs the utes, lie 
does not reap any benefit. As tire without the power ot burning, as the 

Sun without lustre, os the Moon without grace, or as an animal without strength 
is unfit for action ; as the soul without body, the contained without the 
container; God without nature, or sacrifice without the priest e foe wluvc h os* 
sontial and fruitful is incapable of. yielding any benefit; as the goldsmith 
without gold, or as the potter without clay, is unable to act; so the householder 
without a wife is not entitled to do any work. The wife le at the root 
of every act. What chariot is to a hero or a warrior, so is wife to a husoand. 
The woman is the best of gems. A man should therefore accept a woman 
for his wife even from the lowest order of people, orahnm himself hath 
said so. As a lotus adorns the water and as water adorns the lotus, 

90 is a householder never crowned with happiness except through his 
wife.’' Vrihaspftti, so saying, left his house and entered into it, »ga u and 
a<rain, overpowered by grief. He frequently fainted and, reciting tile virtues 
of his wife, wept loudly. Then the wise Vrihaspau, being consoled by his 
disciple aud the sagacious Munis, went to ludra’s place. Vnha?pati who was 
hospitably greeted and adored by fndra communicated to him the cruel 
message which afflicted him like a dart across his heart. Indras lips began 

to quiver and his eyes flushed crimson with rage at the news, lie t.ien 

said. 4 Let a thousand spies, expert in their work, go in quest of the Moon at once. 
In the meantime J. shall dress myself and go to the spot, where the villain¬ 
ous moon is residing with my mother T&rfv 0 blessed being cheer up : ul will 
be well. This arduous oilainitv is the source ot good. Ihere is no prosperi¬ 
ty without adversity?' 0 Nkradu, lodra so s tying despatched 1,000 spies 
4perl in the matter of search. Those spies or envoys wandered over the 
most lonely and inaccessible places of the world for a hundred years and at 
last went to the house of S'ukru. There they discovered the frightened fugi¬ 
tive healthy moon along with Tftrk at.d communicated the matter to Inara 
who hung down his head abashed and was afflicted at the news. Ho then -aid, 
4 (J lord 1 give you betietieial advice* tilease listen, you had better take 
heart of pace. All will he well. Vou have not subdued .S'ukra ; nor have 
the demons been defeated by me. This thought has led the Moon to seel, the 
protection of S'dkrft. Let us now goto Brahm& at the Br abma-ioka with 


32 




A 

THE BRAUMA-V AIV ART A PURANA. 


whom wo shall go to the greatest god, Mtth&-dova.” The sorrowful Indra 
bo saying wont with Vrihaspati to the auspicious Brahma-loka. As he saw 
Brahm&, both of them fell prostrate at his feot and communicated to him the 
sad tidings Brabna& smiled and addressed the modest Indra thus* nsmg 
words full of ethics and truth : 4 ‘ The Eternal Krisna who chastises all over 
afflicts those who afflict others. I am the creator ; Visnu is the preserver ; 
Hudra ih the destroyer; ^'ivaisthe governor or manager of the universe 
Uharma is the witness of every act. The gods attached to worldly enjoyments 
fulfil the commands of SM-Kri^tia. Angir& has throe sons, the learned 
Vrihaspati, Utathya and the dispassionate Sambarta. 

46-55. Vrihaspati gave no ancestral property to his younger brother 
and disciple Sambarta. This is why the latter has turned a devotee ami is 
absorbed in the meditation of Lord Krisna. The chaste and unsophisticated 
pregnant wife of Utathya has been voluntarily ravished by Vrihaspati. 
Whoever cohabits with his brother's wife practically cohabits with his mother 
and is guilty of the murder of a thousand Brahmins. For bis sins, he is in 
the first place consigned to the hell called KumbhSpaka where he dwells as 
long as the sun and the moon exist. Then for millions of years he wanders, as 
a worm oi the ordure and the vagina of a prostituto. Afterwards for millions 
and millions of years he has to lead the life of a vulture. Then he »& born a 
hundred times as a dog and a hundred times as a boar. It a powerful man 
does not give to his weaker relation a share in the paternal property, he lives 
in the above-named hell as long as the sun and the moon exist. So long as a 
man doe 3 not suffer for his sinful acts, the sins cannot be expiated even in mil¬ 
lions of years. Every one must, reap the consequence of his good and had acts. 
Vrihaspati is the son of the religious preceptor of S'iva also (who is the 
preceptor of the world). This message should also be communicated to the 
most powerful S'iva, Let all the gods be ready with their conveyances on the 
ooast of the Narmada and let the munis also intervene. 

56*64. Let the adorable son of the preceptor of S'iva go to the Kail&sa 
and let me go to tho coast of. the sacred Narmad&.” Indra said, “ How 
could Vrihaspati be the son of the spiritual preceptor of S'iva who ie the author 
of the Vedas, the guru of the adepts and the devotees and tho conqueror of 
death ? Aogirft is your son and tho father of Vrihaspati. S'iva is wiser 
than you. How could he be tho disciple of tho father of Vrihaspati ?” Brahma 
said, 44 This is a secret of the Pnr&na which I am going to reveal to you. In 
days of yore, Angir&’s wife unfortunately gave birth to a dead child. So, by 
toy advice, she performed the vow of Krisna named Pumsft-vana. This she did, 
through the agency of Sanat Kumara. Then the all merciful Lord Krisn& who 
wields a form out of compassion for his worshippers, who is self-willed and full 
of resplendent glory arrived from the Goloka and was adored by Sanat-Kumara, 
The Lord thus said to the weeping wife of AngirA, who was emaciated Hoy fast¬ 
ings necessary for tho performance of her vows and who was bowing down 
very submissively, “ Eat this fruit replete with my energy which represents tho 
fruit of vour devotion. By the consumption of this fruit, you will get a 
blessed son of mine, the offspring of my boon, a product of my digits. 








Phak m ti-khaNda. 


65-75. 0 chaste one, this son of yours will be the preceptor of the 

gods, the foremost of wise men and will be called Vrihaspati. A son * 
who is born by virtue of my boon is blessed. This son will enjoy a long 
life. A son is of seven kinds : viz., one begotten by t.he semen, son acquired 
by boon, one begotten upcn the wife of another, one supported like a son, 
one who,is the result of knowledge, one who is the result of the mantras, one 
adopted.” So saying, the Lord of R&dhA, went to the Qoloka. This is why 
\ rihaspat.i is the son of Krisna, He has thus become the preceptor of the 
philosophers and the gods, lu days of yore S'iva adored Krisna for a celestial 
three lakhs of years. Thereupon Lord Krisna gave him superb knowledge 
relating to the couquest of death, his own knowledge of the universe, his own 
supreme valour, a bullock as a conveyance which is the product of his own 
digits, a trident, amulet, mystic incantation consisting of twelve letters and His 
energy which is replete with May® (or the illusion of Visnu). Then the merciful 
Kri-spa was adored by S'iva. This M&yll of Visnu was known in the S'iva-lcka 
as S'iva, the beloved spouse of S'iva. She represents the energy of Nftrkyana; 
hence she is also called NUrkyant. This energy emanated from the valour of 
the gods, destroyed the demonsand restored the gods to their former position. 

This primordial Nature, the adept MSyk of Visnu, :>t the end of the Kalpa, was 
born as the daughter of Daksa : but she committed suicide on the occasion of 
the sacrifice performed by her father when she heard her husband slandered 
by him. Eventually she manifested herself as the daughter of the HiirdUaya- 
mountain and after a course of austere devotion lasting for several years she got 
S'ankara as her husband. 

76-83. Lord Krisna is the preceptor of S'iva; and Vrihaspati is the 
blessed son of Krisna being the result of his boon. This is why Vrihaspati 
is the preceptor of the gods and the son of the gcru of S'iva. Now I 
have revealed to you the mystery of the Purilnas. This is the main 
relation which subsists between them, as I have heard. There is another rela¬ 
tion between the two (S'iva and Vrihaspati). Listen : Durvftsa and Garada are 
both offsprings of the digits of S'iva. Both of them (Durvasft and Gnruda > 
are disciples of Angirii In this sense Vrihaspati is the son of the preceptor of 
8'iva identical with Durvask. When Satl, the daughter of Daksa died, Lord 
S'iva through mental bewilderment lost his own knowledge or wisdom. Then 
AogirS, deputed by Krisna recalled the missing wisdom to his mind. This is 
why my son Angirft is the guru of S°iva. 0 Vrihaspati, go to the Kailasa soon 
Son Indra, get yourself ready with the gods to go to the coast of the 
Narmada.” 0 Nftrada Brahma so saying paused. Vrihaspati went to the 
Kailasa and Indra, to the coast of the Nartnadft, river. 


CHAPTER LX. 

1 11. N&rnda said, 0 great minded Narkyarta versed in the Vedas, to-day 
1 have drunk the honey of words whioh dropped from your mouth. * Now I 
want to know wiiat Vrihaspati said to S'iva at the Kailasa and what replv 
was given by S'iva Kindly narrate the subject to me in detail.” N&rfiyana 
said. ”Tho abashed, graceless and the crest-fallen Vrihaspati bowed to S'iva 
at the KailSsa and placed himself in the van. S'iva as soon as he saw him got 
up from the seat of holy grass and the embraced and blessed him? He then 
gently asked his welfare and said “ Why are you so sorry to-day ? Why are you 








THt BRAHMANAiVAtlTA PURA.NA. 



shedding tears ? Has there been any impediment to your asceticism or. to the 
service of Hun ? Have you lost faith in your preceptor or in your tutelary 
deity Hari ? Have you been unable to protect a fugitive ? Has any guest of 
yours turned ft way his Face from you ? 4 re these people whom you ought '0 

maintain oppressed by hunger ? Has your wife proved refractory ? Is your 
son scurrilous ? Have you nofc-been able to control your disciples ? Do your 
servants retort ? Has your good fortune abandoned you ?’ 

12-21. Is your preceptor angry with you ? Your guru Vasistha 
is dignified, great, contented and the fore-most of saints. He cannot 
possibly be angry with you. Has your tutelary diety Mari been displeased 
with yon ? Are the Vaisnavas and the Brftbmms angry with you ? Is 
your enemy too strong for you ? Have you bean deprived of yonr 
friends, position or wealth ? Which villain has defamed you ? Have you 
left any of your friends out of danger or through indifference to the 
world ? Have yon not made gifts on any holy occasion ? Has any 
wretch slandered your preceptor and caused in your mind a death-like mortal 
agony? It ife in the nature of base and internal hypocrites to condemn 
virtuous sages. And the sages who talk'well of others are worthy of ail praise 
mi enjoy, peace of mind A man’s heart is tested by his son, fame, water* 
wealth, might, prosperity, influence, subjects, land, words, progress, pure 
character, and rites, 

22-31. A man acquires materia! prosperity which is moulded! according 
to his inclinations. And his inclination is moulded According to the religious 
sanctities or merit which he acquired by the acta committed by him in 
ilia previoas birth.” 8'iva paused. Then the eloquent Vrikaspati thus 
Replied: *‘Whafc has happened is not worth description. Every one is 
subject to Karma. In every birth ho reaps the consequences of his act. 
The consequences of Karma cannot be dispensed with, without suffering, 
Some say, pleasure, pain and sorrow are due to Karma ; others hold, tney 
are duo to chance ; others hold, they take place naturally. 0 god learned 
in the Vedas and their auxiliary branches, the Vedas specify the a hove three 
views. A person is the author of his own Karma which is determined by pre¬ 
destination. A man a nature is deter mined by his o.vn Karma. In *very new 
birth, according to the acts committed by him in his previous birth, a man’s 
pleasure, pain fear and grief are born with him The Jiva i e the sentient or 
animate being os distinct from soul and vested with attributes suffers the conse¬ 
quences of his acts. The soul void of attributes and distinct from nature 
witnesses all acts and impels the sentient being (Jiva) to suffer the consequences 
of his acts. The son! that yields to a man the fruits of his actions is adored 
by all predestination and deter.nines the disposition of man and his Karma. 

32-40. According to Karma (the eternal law which makes a mau liable 
for his previous acts), a person acquires fame, obtains contentment or suffers 
disgrace. My ease is c andalous and yet l will reveal it to yon ” 0 NArada, 

Vnnaspati thereupon revealed the whole thing to him. 8'iva the lord of sharile, 
hung down his head, abashed at the news. He was so angry that the rosary 
of beads dropped from' his hands. He quivered through rage and his eyes 
turned fei. S iva, the lord of the destructive Rudras, the ft’ lend of Visnu, 









$j r'lfaffl i\;' J * ’ ' 

PRAKRlTl-KUANbA. 


the veneration of Brahma too non! of the Supreme Being ICrtsna 
void of ail property then said, (with his throat and pniate dried up through*,, 
anger): “ Let welfare be the lot of the Vaisnayas and let calamity seize at 
every step the villains who have no faith in Bari. A wretch who oppresses 
the Vaisnavas is sure to meet obstacles at every step anti court destruction 
inflicted by lord Krisna. The heart of one who is not a Vaiariava, is corrupt. 
Thn recollection of Hari alone can purify the mind. By the mantras and 
worship of Visnn, the bond of the heart is cut asunder, every doubt is 
removed and all sins are expunged. 

41*48. Oh. what a pure heart have the Vaisnavas in lhat Vribaspati did 
not curse his foe ! the moon pursues a wicked path and has ravished hid Guru’s 
wife. Vaai$'tha, the guru of Vribaspati, is no much dispassionate and pious that 
he did not curse the enemy who killed his hundred sons. My brother Vrtbttf- 
pati the preceptor of the gods can, by his breath in a minute reduce to ashes 
a hundred moons. For fear of losing his own piety, he did not do so, A devo¬ 
tee who curses others in anger loses the fruits of his devotion. For a wor»det y 
the pious Atri has got such a licentious, teaeherous and impious son. The sons 
of Brahma are all devoted to Vimn and bright with the iuatre of Brahma. Out 
of them, some are gods, some BrAhmins : and others, demons; the grand-sons 
are also equally pious. Those who have feelings of virtue, (SaWr/; are Brah¬ 
mins ; those who are swayed by the principle of activity are gods and the demons 
are subdued by the principle of ignorance. They arc powerful, haughty and 
rude. The BrAhmim observe their own rites and worship Bari. The gods 
adore 8'iva and the goddess of energy ; the demons arc void of acts of piety, 

49-64. The BrAhmms desire redemption and the feet of Hari ; tho gods 
desire prosperity and tho demon also want tho same thing. The religion pres¬ 
cribed by the S'&stras for the dispassionate Br&hmins consists in the adoration 
cd Lord Krisna. The Vaisima Brahmins easily attain the supreme goal ; the 
other Br&hmins are in course of time annihilated along with other objects. 
The Br&hmins ought to be the best of all the castes and must, adore Hari. 
A BrAhmin without faith in Hari is worse than a Ohand&la. Visnn’g Sudamna 
wheel protects a Vaisnava, be he foolish or wise As lire reduces to ashes 
fuels, sp a radiant Vaisuava consumes sins. A man into whose ear tho 
mantra of Visuu is poured hy his guru is very holy. He redeems a 
hundred ancestors in his paternal line, a hundred ancestors in the lmu of his 
maternal grandfather, his brothers and his mother. The offering of cakes 
n Gaya redeem* only those who eat the cakes; bat the Vaifpayas redeem 
hundreds of people. As soon as a Vaisnava takes mantra, he is redeemed 
in his life-time Vauia is afraid of him. as the snake, of the Divine eagle? 
O god of learning, the Ganges and ether holy streams are consecrated even 
bv the touch of a Vaisnava. The sins thrown into the streams by sinners wear 
out ; that is, they immediately disappear by virtue of the said touch. With 
the touch of tho dust of the foot of a Vaisnava, the earth is dolighied; nay, 
she is thereby crnseorhted and redeemed. The wind, the tire and tho sun also 
purify people. But they are tbyinsqlyeg easily purified by the touch of a Vais¬ 
nava. rtudra, Dhartna, Ananta and 1 are witnesses of every act, but we also 
desire the company of a Vnfyuava. In India, a man reaps as he sows. Asa 






lmstRf, 



TEE BRAEMA-VAIVARTA PtJBANA. 


hoifed paddy grain does not blossom into a plant, so a Vaismavu. does not reap 
the consequence of his act. 

£5-7 L Tbe merciful Lord Krisna, kind to his adherents, destroys the sins 
ok* a Vaiciiava and offers to him his position. The feeble and frghteoed moon 
has taken shelter with the valiant Vnisnava S'ukra. You cannot subdue S'uk- 
ra who is stronger than Sudar-eana : and yet by skill or by means of sagacious 
counsel I shall try to recover your wife. Adore, therefore, that truthful Sup¬ 
reme Being Krisna through whose grace you will be able io get her back., 
brother, I give you the mantra af Krisna eiiicacious like the Kalpa-tree which 
is very auspicious and kills the sins acquired by a person in millions of 
births Seek ihe protection of Lord Krisna. So long as a man does not 
obtain the mantra of Krigna from his preceptor, the desire of temporal en¬ 
joy meats and sexual intercourse is in full swing ; but as soon as he gets the 
mantra, he is exempt from desire. 

72-83. A pious man does not give up his faith. He wants faith alone. 
He does not want any kind of knowledge, even irnmoitality or perfection or 
accomplishment in speech (eloquence) or even the position of BrahmA. Brahma, 
Visruij I, Dharma, Ananta, Knsyap, Kapila KArtika, Nara-NArayana, Menu, 
PrahlAda FarAsara, Bhrigu, S'ukra, DurvAsA, Vasistba, Kratu, AngirA Bali 
V&likbilya tue Munis, Varuna, the Fire, Hfthn, the 8un, the Garuda (Divine 
Eagle), Daks^ and Oanesa are the principal worshippers of Krisna. He who 
springs from The digits of a deity is the worshipper of that particular deity. 
So saying S'ivu gave him the Mantra called the KaJpa-tree. 0 N&rada, 
Vrihaspati then received from B'iva on the coast of the Mand&kini the mantra 
containing the Vfjas, the first syllable of a mantra or mystic formula of 
Lakstni MAyA and Kama viz, Srtm lirim Klim Krisnai. With thin mantra, 
he obtained the formula of the worship of Krisna, his ode, amulet, Purascharana 
\od Dhy&n and was at, once liberated from desires. He then *uid to S'iva 41 0 
Lord, kindly bid me go to tbe forest to pray Mari. Let TArA remain there. 
Everything is transient and appears like gall and worm-wood to mo. Let me 
seek the protection of the Supreme Lord. 15 


84-93. S'iva said, “ One's devotion to god by slighting one’s wife that 
has been ravished by another is not praise-worthy. To one who has self respect, 
such conduct is worse and more painful than death. Now first go to the coast of 
the NarmadA. I shall also follow suit ; for, on the said coast the gods have 
assembled/' At first fe'iva went to the coast, of the said river. There the gods, 
Manus and Munis, when they perceived the approach of 8'iva, cheerfully adored 
him. 8'tva likewise adored Visuu and BrabmA, and they embraced quo another. 
In the meantime, Vrihaspati came there and bowing low to S'iva, Vianu, BrahmA, 
the Sun, Dharma, Ananta, Kara, myself, the Munis, his guru and his father 
graced the assembly. Then Lord V iff nil cogitated for a while in his mind and 
thus said to S # iva and BrahmA : (t You both and the Munis should go to the 
coast of the ocean. Lot us also send a mediator or anoimpire to S'ukra, 


94-103* If the stars are inauspicious, calarauty will undoubtedly set in. 
But by my blessing, Vrihaspati will get back 1 ArA. S'ukra, adored % tbe gods, 
yvill be propitiated. The gods will not be able to conquer him, as Sudargana 




-V; •;/> "v. .. '''• ’ ,4 - V. . '• *. 

PRAKRIT l- K flA N DA, 


(tbe who?] of Violin) always preserves him. The Vedas hold that a power¬ 
ful enemy is appeased with eulogies.’ Jagannftth, (the Lord of the . I inverse) 
having said so, was adored by Brahmft and other gods and thdb disappeared. 
0 NSrado when Jagann&th (Vianu) went to the White Islands, the gods felt 
rather anxious. Later on, Brahma, being informed by S'iva of the above 
fact, addressed the Munis and the god's thus : “0 my sons, 6 ambhu, Dharma 

and I are strictly impartial to the gods and the demons. iLo Mooi ban 
sought the protection of S'ukra. S'nkra was not subdued by the gods, but be 
was adored by the demons. 0 gods, I am going to S'ukra a aouso. You had 
better go to the coast of the ocean. 0 N&rada, the creator having said so, 
went to S'nkra ; tho gods and the Brahmins went to the coast of the ocean. 


0 E A P X E K L X I . 

1-11. Nftrada said, “ Lord, what happened next to the gods and tho de¬ 
mons ? My curiosity is much excited, so kindly desoribe to me the above sub¬ 
ject.” N&rftyana said, “I ater on, Brabnr ti went to tho house of S'ukra surrounded 
by a rampart of ruby, guarded by millions of demons, protected by forts, fenced 
by seven moats and attended by countless disciples of hie, who were reciting 
the Vedas. The creator of the world there beheld that the sou, of Bhrigu, 
(effulgent with the lustre of Brahma, bright like a hundred suns, seated in the 
midst of tho assembly on a throne of gems end adored by the demons^ and 
sagos) was reciting the name of Lord Krisna, the Supremo Being. 0 ^ftra- 
da, when he saw his blessed grandson in that condition, he blessed himself and 
his son. S'ukra, when ho saw his grandfather Brahma suddenly, was awe¬ 
struck. He at. once got up, bowed to him low with folded palms and wor¬ 
shipped him with sixteen ingredients. He then reverentially and respectfully 
eulogised the excellent Brabma, the source of knowledge, mantra, prosperity 
and reward. Brahmft was very pleased with the hymn. 

12-22. Brahmft hastily descended from his cur and took his seat on a 
lovoly throne of gems constructed by Viswa-Karmft and borne by S'ukra on his 
Vad S'ukra, with folded palms, reverentially bowed to Snnas-Kum&ra, Sanat, 
Kratu Vasistha, Maricb, Sananda, Sanfttana, Panoha-S'ikba, Kapila, Bodhu,(i') 
Anoiri, Nara and myself The pious S'ukra seated them all on thrones of gem. 
Thesmilit'or demons also bowed to all and properly adored Brahmftandt.be 
Risis. S'ukra with folded palms and streaming eyes adored them and said 

thus; “To-day my life and birth have been rendered blessed, as I personally 
see Evahmft in my own house. The Supreme Being Krisna must have been 
pleased with me, as I see in my place the blessed sons of Brahmft today. 
0 lords, you all enjoy supreme happiness. To enquire into your welfare ia a 
mockery. I am a child. Have you come here, therefore, to oblige me ? Is 
the object of your arrival to consecrate me 'i Or have you any other object, 
in view ? Please inform me on the point and direct me what to do. 

23-31. Brahm& said, “you are my grandson. I a.n anxious to see you : 
and therefore 1 have come here ; foi separation from one s sons or grandsons it; 
more painful to one than one s death. How aro you, your sons an'* your wife t 










THE BRAHMAN A!V:ART A PURANA 


Does ovferythiog go on well with vour religious rites and devotions . Do 
yon rogularjy perforin the service of Hari every day ? is the necessary 
adoration or your guru continuous ? The worship of the guru and the tufcolery 
or favourite deity is auspicious, sanctifying, delightful and destructive of sins, 
disease and grief. If the preceptor is pleased, the tutelary deity is also pleased. 
If the latter is pleased, all the gods are also pleased. The preceptor, Brrihtmns 
and the gods are by no means pleased with the wicked who never come to any 
good and are put to all sorts of obstacles or calamities. O child, Lord Kiisna, 
the mineral spirit, the ruler of Nature, (the Lord who is void of all attributes) 
is pleased with your piety. I, the ruler of the world,am also pleased with you. 
Ah I am pleased with you, your tutelary deity is also pleased w*itn you. When 
your tutelary deity is pleased with you, all the gods are also pleased with you. 
{vow hear why I have come here, deputed by S'iva and the gods. 

32-40. The moon is the son of the preceptor of S'iva. After having 
abducted TarA, the virtuous wife of Vrihaspafci, he has sought shelter with you. 
Therefore S'iva, Dbarma, the Sou, iudra, my sons, the eight Vasus, the twelve 
Adilyas, the regents of the quarters, thirty millions of gods, the abortions or false 
conception (like pumpkin gourds), «he Brithtna-B&ksase 5 , the fowlers and the 
Gandarvas, all are drawn up in buttle array on the coast of the ooean. In this 
War for lire sake of T&rft, I have become airediator along with Atri and other 
eons of mine, Either return Tar&, or tight with us or turn out the liccnt'ous 
moon.’ 5 S'ukva said, u Let all the gods in military array come to tt$* und tight. 
I challenge all except S'iva.The demons said, ‘* 0 lord, S°iva is the guru of 
both the parties.* hence he is adorable. S'iva, yourself and Dbarma are the wit* 
nesses of all acts. 0 lord, others wo do not regard even as trifling as straw. 
Go and tell them, they are welcome to fight. if S'iva comes himself out of 
kindness to his preceptor’s son, we shall not discharge weapons at him : but wo 
shall render ineffectual all hi* weapons. 

44-51. Brahma said. " Rudra, 0 my children, is deal rootive like tire 
and foremost of heroes. Who can dare fight with him ? Besides Bha- 
drakali, the mother of the world, has como here, armed with sword? and 
skulls ? Who can fight with the indomitable R&li ? She has got a thousand 
hands and h decked with a garland of human skulls round her neck. Her 
face is a Yojuna in expanse ; and she herself is expanded over au area of ten 
Yojace. Her teeth are long like the seven palmyra trees. (Til is uLo a kind 
of measure). Her tongue which JLs ever restless and fearful measures two miles 
in length. The dreadful, crimson myrmidons of S'iva. the hideous Bhairavas, 
the mufti »1 Nandi und the valiant attendants of S'iva are ready for war. Who 
can, indeed, fight with Rudra who regards the whole universe fixed on the ex¬ 
panded hood of the thousand.headed A nan ta like a mustard seed Hudra 
who is destructive like (he fire of l ralaya (Eternal dissolution) is but a servant 
of S'iva. Who then can fight with thus S'iva, effulgent with the lustre of 
Brahma, the slayer of Tripura ? The demons are quite insignificant in the esti¬ 
mation of a mighty Being like S'iva whose weapon called F&euptU can reduce 
to ashes the whole world, v /ho by his trident killed S ankha-chiida, a (companion oi 
lv.ri.sna ?) The wonderful Lord Vjsuu effulgent like thirty millions of suns who 
killed* the demons Madhii (with the amulet of JRadlift rouud his: throat , Ivaitava 
and tLianyakasipu is also arriving here at this time from the white Islands.” 






PR A KR2 Tl-K HAN DA . 


<SI, 


52*62. Brahma paused, 'I hereupon Prajd&da, the king of the demons, said 
with a smile: “0 cr eator of the world, primeval lord, revered by-every body, I 
bow to you. The irresistible wheel called Sndarsana, the product o£ the digits of 
the Supremo Lord Kri§na, is always protecting us and pur subjects. S'iva.PAst*- 
pata, Kftli or Rudra or any of the gods is not stronger than Krisna, The MahU* 
Vir&ta, the container of all, who is denser than the dense, who holds on the 
poies of his skin endless worlds is but a sixteenth part of Krisna. Ananta 
as not denser than he, nor is Kali greater. Let all the gods come and tight ; I 
am not even afraid of P&aupata. 0 creator, I bow to S'iva who is all good : 
to Ananta who is a form of Krisna and to the virtuous Vaisnavas. Through 
the grace of Krisna, 0 lord, I am immortal and healthy. I have no strength 
of my own. I wield the strength of Krisna. My father was destroyed °for 
&iaude~ing Visnu ; and S'ankka-Ohuda and Madhu-Kaitava were killed on 
account of their pride. 

63-69, Tripura was our servant. We do not reckon him among 
heroes ; aud yet he pushed back the oar of S'iva to a considerable distance. 
So saying, Prahl&da paused. Bnihma said, “My child, the tight between 
the gods and the demons will bring {.boat universal destruction. Good 
behaviour is at the root of every virtue. X am at present only a mendicant 
Brahmin. Give me T&ra as an alms If a beggar goes away disappointed, 
the householder is beset with all kinds of sins.” Sanat-Kum&ra said , (% 0 
King, you are the chief among gods and demons: you ought to keep 
up your celebrity, The fame of a person of whom Brahma himself bogs an 
alms cannot be adequately described. ” San&tana said, “ A holy Vaisnava 
is preserved by the gadarsana wheel of S'rf Krisna. He cannot bo* sub¬ 
dued by Brahma, S'iva and other gods.” Sananda said, “ No one can conquer 
that great personage whose tutelary deity is the Supremo Being, viz , the super¬ 
natural Krisna and whose preceptor is the Vaisnava S'ukra.” 

70-80. Banaka said “No one can conquer the vittuous. A sinner is subdued by 
his own sins. The lamp of virtue cannot be extinguished by the wind of vice 55 
The sages said ; “ 0 blessed king, please to restore to BrahznA the Moon who is 
dearer to him than his life and also TAr&. Thereby keep up your dignity and 
fame. This we are praying for, again and again.” Prah!ada\said, “ I can do 



authority. We are the 
servants of S'ukra, dependent on him. Those who carry out the commands of 
their preceptor deserve all bussing.” 0 N&rada, BrahmA hearing this, demanded 
the Moou and TAr& from S'ukra. S'ukra handed them over to Brahma, fell 
down prostrate at his feet, and bowing low to the raunis, went home. 0 
Narada, Brahma then sa w that T&ra was lying down abashed at bis feet and 
rendered pregnant by her association with the Moon. The merciful BrahmA 
took the submissive i{oon out of affeotiop in his lap and thus said to TAr&, 
“Mother Tar&, cheer up; you need not fear anything : by my boon, you will be 
loved by your husband. A chaste, weak woman, if ravished by a powerful 
.gallant, is not polluted or disgraced thereby ; she cau .be purified by peuance. 

81-93. A wicked woman who voluntarily courts a lover cannot be chustened 


by means of penance and must therefore be abandoned 
33 


by her husband That 








THE BRAHMA-VA1VAREA PURANA. 


<SL 


woman is consigned to the hell called KumbhlpAka, as long as (he Stitt and the 
inooa exist. The foot! of that sinful woman and her \vater are impure like ordure 
an a wine; Her touch is pollution and is therefore avoided by saints. 0 virtuous 
lady, tell me by whom you have been impregnated. Child, go to the house of 
V r rihiiepati. Pleased damsel, you need not blush. Every thing is occasioned by 
predestination.” Then the chaste Tara replied, “ 0 BrahmA, by the dispensa¬ 
tion of Providence, I have been impregnated by the Moon. I was feeble and 
powerless Everyone is a witness to the deed. The cruel, ill-natured Moon 
ravished me by force.” The goddess T&rft thereupon gave birth to a beautiful 
son of golden hue and radiant with the lmstre of BrahmA. The Moon bowed 
to the god, Brahm& and went home with his son. Brahm& also went to the coast 
of the river and cheered up Vrihaspati, the chaste lira and the gods. BrahmA 
then blessed S'iva and Dharma and went to his domain. The gods went tr their 
destination, and Vrihaspati, glad to get back his devoted wife, took her 
home. That valiant, great, good planet Budha was produced by Tftra begot¬ 
ten by the Moon. This Budha secured ia the solitudes of the groves of Nandan 
ttio society of a womau named OhitrA produced by QhiritAchi and begotten 
by Kuveia and married her according to the Gandarva # rites. 

94-107. He begat on her a son called Ohaitra who was the lord of the 
seven ialatuh, the ruler af the world, pious and mighty. He used to get readr 
every day the flesh of fifty millions of cows with hundred rivers of ghee, curd 
and milk and heaps of sugar, sweets, baked cakes and cakes io the form of conical 
symbols made with ground rice 'Swastika). With th*se, ho used to feast the 
Brahmins and to give millions of cows, gorns, pearls, gold, clothes, ornaments 
and vessels of gem to the Brahmins throughout his life. Ohaitra begat 
Ad hind ha who begat. Suiatha. Ttio wise Suratha acquired profound knowledge 
through the instruction of lhe sage, Medhasa and performed the great worship 
df the goddess on the coast of the river in the mouth of autumn along with the 
wise Vaisya named Sainftdhi. Viir&dka, the ruler of the Vaisyas, was the king of 
Kalinga, His sou was the wisest Drumina, The wise Vaisnava, Drumina, 
by virtue of his devotions, got a philosophical and Vaisttftva son named Bam Adah 
Being desertod by his most refractory wife and sons actuated by avarice or 
lovo of wealth, joined the king Suratha. This SamAdhi used to distribute 
to the people a huge quantity of gold every day before he drank water. 0 N&rada, 
Sarnadhi obtained redemption through the worship of the Eternal Visnu-mAyA, 
(Durgd) and the king Suratha also in the same way regained his kingdom, free 
from ail obstacles, and was tfi^ykoned as one of the oighteen Manus. BrabmA 
proclaimed this interesting fact to the three worlds. 


CHAPTB B LIT. 

i-iO. NArada said. “ 0 sage, relate to me how Sdfratha got back bis 
kingdom and how SamAdhi Vaisyawas redeemed. NArAyana said; “King Nandi, 
the virtuous and truthful descendant of Manu> the grandsou of Dhruvaand the son 
of Utkala amassed seven i eat armies (Aksauhinles,) and attacked KolA, the capital 
of Suratha. The war lasted for a year ; and ultimately the VaHnava Nandi^was 
victoria’The i:tightened Suratha was expelled from his ^kingdom by Nandi ; 








KJ1ANDA. 






ami aione in tbo night he entered into a dense forest on horse-back. U«eie he 
«aw Samftdhi Vaisyl on the coast of the P«apabhadr& and made friends with him. 
Both of them wont to Puskara, a sacred place resorted toby holy saints m iniw 
and arrived at the hermitage of sage Medhasa. There the 
was lecturing on the rare subject of metaphysics dealing vn ' *'> ,, 

Brahma to his disciples. When he saw the king Suratha the king and the 
Vaisya bowed low to him. The Muni duly greeted and blessed them both. Me 
then enquired of them their names and castes* 


11-17. Suratha said, “ 0 sage, I am king Suratha descended from Ohaitra. 
I have beeu turned out from my kingdom by the powortu. king Nandi. O 
blessed saint, kindly tell me what means l shall adopt to regain my kingdom. 
I now seek your protection. This pious Vaisya named bamkdhi has also been 
turned out from his house by his wife and children through love of wealth, in 
spite of the remoustrances of his family, he used to give countless gems to the 
Br&hmifls Hence* bis relations, kith and kin have turned him out in arage. . 
Afterwards in grief they attempted to find him out ; hut disgusted withi the 
world, this wise Vaisya did not return home. H.\a sons, through Uia! 
grief, were also disgusted with the world, distributed all their weuLn to the 
Br&hmins, left their home and went to the forest, l'he homage # o£ v isuu w now 
the solo aspiration of this dispassionate Vaisya. Kindly recite to me how he 
will be able to gain his object. 

18'28. Medhasa said: “The undying goddess (Vi^na-M&yft or tho illusion 
of Visnu) who is vested with the principles of virtue, activity and ignorance is 
obscuring (or throwing a veil over) the world by the command of Lord KriStt* 
who Is void of all attributes. Any one to whom tb>3 merciful goddess ia favour¬ 
ably inclined is able to acquire precious faith in Hari, A hypocrite who does 
not secure her grace is entangled ia the cobwebs of worldly affairs. 
Dances fancy that thi 9 world is eternal and thus give up the prayer of God. 
Under a false conception, they worship other gods and recite the mantras of other 
gods. (f, for seven consecutive births, a man worships a deity, who has sprung 
from the digits of Hari, then with the permission of the goddess. Nature, he 
can worship other gods, for instance, S'iva, who is eternal and full of know¬ 
ledge and bliss. A man who worships S'iva (the presiding deity of wisdom) 
soon acquires faith in Hari through S'iva. Men always adore Visnu who is 
devoted to worldly affairs and vested with attributes and thereby acquire 
the quality of Satwa (or virtue). Through this quality, they attain pure know¬ 
ledge. The virtuous Vaisnavas, on the other hand, by the worship of Visnu 
vested with the three qualifies, acquire faith in Kriflna who ia void of attributes 
and distinct from Nature, They take the Mantra of Krisna, therefore, and iu 
course of time, are themselves rendered exempt from ml qualities. 


29-37- These Vaisnavas witness the fall o£ countless Brahmas and, 
residing in the pare Goloka, they accept the vassalage of Hari. A person who 
takes Mantra from the worshipper of Krisna redeems ?\ thousand ancestors in 
his own line, a thousand ancestors in the line of his maternal grand -father, his 
mother and servants and ultimately goes to the Cow-world. In the sea of the 
world, the goddess Durg& herself, like a dexterous pilot, takes over the w ship¬ 
pers of Krigna to the other aide of the sea on the boat of Divine faith. O King, 








THE BRAHMA-VAlVmiA P UR ABA 


'aL 


Durg:\ represents a keen sword whereby the fetters which tie a Vaisnava to 
the world are cut asunder. 0 King, the mighty DurgA reveals herself in two 
forms: one h the power of deliberation, the other is the sense of bewilderment. 
8he give* deliberation to the Vaisnavas and obscures the intellect #f the imli- 
gous, <; Lord Krisna alone is real ; every thing else is transitory.” This 
knowledge is the power of deliberation which the goddess gives to the Vaisna¬ 
vas. On the other hand, the feeling that material prosperity Ip everlasting sways 
the mind of the irreligious and constitutes their faculty or sense of bewilder¬ 
ment, 0 King, I am the son of Pracbetd and the grandson of Brahm&. I 
have acquired knowledge through my preceptor, S'ankara and 1 adore Lord 
Krisna. 

38-41. 0 King, go to the coast of the rivet and adore the eternal JDttrgfi. 

She will infuse into your mind the seme of bewilderment. But to this dis¬ 
passionate Vaisya, she will gave discrimination. So saying, Medhasa gave 
them the formula of Durg&’s worship, her meditation (Dhy&n), ode^and amulet. 
The Vaisya, through the worship of Durgft, got redemption ; and king Suratha 
thereby obtained prosperity and the position of Manu. Thus I recited to you 
the delightful, edifying, substantial narrative of Durga. Now what do you 
want to he$r ? 


CHAPTER LIII. 

1-11. N&rada said, 44 Q blessed, learned N&r&ynna, how did Suratha adoie 
the goddess Durga ; and how by her advice did the Vaisya adore the supreme 
Being ? What sorts of formula, meditation, hymn, spell and amulet were 
given to them by the saint Medhasa? How did the goddess Nature instruct 
them ? How did she manifest herself to them ? What position did the 
Vaisya acquire? What happened to the king? Kindly answer these ques¬ 
tions.” N&r&yana said. “ The king and the Vaisya received the above 
mantra, eulogy, amulet, Dbyftn and Purascbaran from Medhasa and, after ablu- 
tatious thrice a day in the holy lake of Puskara for one year full, they recited the 
above superb mantra. Thus both of them became adepts. At last the primordial 
goddess of nature appeared before them. She gave to the king his kingdom, the 
position of Indra and happiuess, as desired by him. She gave to the Vaisya the 
super'or kind of esoteric knowledge. When she saw the Vaisya almost 
suffocated, paralysed, famished and distressed, her heart melted with pity. She 
took him in her lap and began to weep. The all-conscious Dnrg& then said to 
him, “ Child, revive” and thus restored him to consciousness. The gracious 
goddess much propitiated, said thus : 

12-22. 44 0 child, I will not grant you an ordinary boon and try 

to deceive you as though you were a mere boy. 1 can give you the 
position of Indra or Manu or even perfection, if you desire it. ” Tho 
Vaisya answered, “ Mother, I do not want the position of a Brahm& or a god: 
give me a boon, as you please. Give me some excellent boon.” Nature said, 
m i can grant you anything. I give you this boon, vh., you will go to the 
Goloka. I give you t ie best kind of knowledge, not attainable even by 
godly saints. Fleas© accept it, 0 blessed being, you wil) attain the feet 
of Vi^nu by my boon. The recollection., eulogy, homage, Dby&n of Vi§nu, 









PRAKRITI-KHANDA 


the recitation of his virtues, listening to his odes, the contemplation and 
service of Hari and the surrender of .every thing to Lord Krisna : these are 
the nine-fold indications of faith in Hari. These prevent or avert life, death* 
old ago, disease and the torments of death. The sun constantly reduces the 
longevity of those persons who are void of Ihe above kinds of faith. The 
Vaisnavas who are attached to Hari enjoy a long life and. being exempt from 
birth and death* are chastened and redeemed during their life-time. 

23-33 S'iva, Aaanta, Dharma, BrahmA, Visnu, MahA-VirAia, 3unat- 
KutuAra, Kapila, Sanaka, Sananda, Bodbu, Panch-S'ikha, Daksa, NArada, 
San A tana, Bhrigu, Marlchi, DurvAsA, Kasyapa, Polaha, AngirA, Medbasa, 
Loraasa, S'ukra, Vasistha. Kratu, Vrihaspati, Kardara, Saktri, Atri, ParAsara, 
Markmdoya, Bali, Prahlada, Ganesa, Yama. the Sun, Vartma, the Wind, the 
Moon, the Fire, AkupAra, UlAka, NAdi-JangbA, VAyrja, Nara, NAr&yana, 
Kftrnaa, Indra-Dumna, Bibbi^ana ; all these saints fully cherish the nine kinds 
of faith for the supreme spirit, Lord Krisna. They are religious and great- 
minded and occupy the foremost place among his worshippers The adherents of 
Krisna have sprung from his digits. They are redeemed in their life-time and 
take away the sine committed in all the holy places of earth. The Brah- 
m&nda (the universe of Brahma) is composed of seven heavens above, the earth 
with seven islands in the centre and seven FatAls below. There are counties# 
BramAndaa like t.hi 9 ; and each of them contains a BrahmA, Vianu, S'iva, Manus, 
gods and men who are spell-bound by the Deity. The MahA-Vienu who holds 
a BrahmAnda on each of the pores of his skin is only a sixteenth part of 
Lord Kri?na, 

.0 

34- . Adore, therefore* the Supreme Lord Krisna who is distinct from 

Nature, who is void of attributes and immortal, who is the inqage of Eternal 
troth, who is the favourite deity of all, who is invisible and free from all desire, 
who is incorruptible, dispassionate and un-offending, who is always happy, who 
can do anything he pleases and may wield any form at his pleasure, who only in 
order to favour his worshippers wields a body, who is all effulgence and glory 
and the source of all prosperity, who can, with difficulty, be attained even by 
S'iva and other adepts, who is the Lord of the universe and the receptacle of all 
objects, who is the final cause, who is the symbol of all virtue, adored by all 
creatures, who is omniscient, who is the life of the world, who is all in all, who 
is the fouutain-head of happiness, redemption, virtue, faith, and servitude and 
all kinds of perfection. Everything is fleetiug and unreal except God. Adore, 
therefore, 0 child, that auspicious, perfect, pure Lord Krisna. Take this mantra, 
vh, Krisna, consisting only of two letters and recite it ten lacs of times at Pus- 
kara. Then you will be an adept by virtue of this Mantra.” So saying, the 
goddess disappeared. 0 NArada, tho Vaisya reverentially bowed to her and went 
to the lake of Pnskara, where, by austere devotions, he attained Krisna and by 
the grace of the goddess, became Hi9 bondsman. 

CHAPTER LIV. 

1*S NArayana said, * 0 blessed saint, now hea the method prescribed by 
the Vedas according to which Suratha adored the supreme goddess Nature. The 
king bathed, raised his month and performed tho three kinds of (assign 












THE BRA H M A- V A / V AR TA PUR AH A. 


<§L 


monts of the various parts of the body to different deities accompanied with 
prayer* and corresponding gestioulationB).«Then he withheld his breath byway of 
religious austerity and purified the elements of the body by respiratory attrac¬ 
tion and replacement. Then after having washed and chastened his body, he 
invoked the goddess on ar\ earthen image. He aftarwards reverentially medi¬ 
tated and adored her again. He put the image of Lakarnf on the right aide of 
the goddess and worshipped her. Then in front of the goddess he invoked 
Ganesa, the Sap, the Fire, Visnu, S'iva and S'ivti on a jar and worshipped them 
with esteem. Afterwards the wise king meditated the great goddess according 
to the Dhy&n prescribed in the S&m-Veda. The primordial Nature, the great 
goddess Dargft, should always be contemplated according to the above Dhyiln. 

9-3 L The worshipper should adore the goddess DurgS, and make a mental 
representation of her figure thus: “ She is adored by Biahmft, S'iva &o; she its 
eternal and the consort of N dr Ay ana; she is the illusion of Visnu and the asylum 
of the world ; she is void of all property and yet vested with qualities. 8he is 
truthful and excellent. She is the mother of Mah&* V isnu and emanated from half 
of the body of Krisna, She is loved, adored and revered by ICrisna and repre¬ 
sents Hia intellect and energy ; she is the supreme knowledge, the fountain¬ 
head c£ faith in Visnu and the source of the Mantras and the faculties. She is 
the presiding-deity of the intellect of Krisiia. Her colour is like that of heat¬ 
ed gold; she is effulgent like ten millions of suns, she has a smiling and 
cheerful aspect and is tender to her votaries ; she is vested with a hundred hands 
and preserves people from great dangers. She is to S'iva dear like bis life: she is 
chaste and possessed of three eyes and three qualities. She is decorated with 
half-Moon on the head and a wreath of jasmine on the breast Her twisted *oek 
delights the heart of S'iva. Her face is illumined by ear-rings. A pearl said 
to he produced in th head of the elephant is prominent on the right side o£ her 
nose and above her ears. Her teeth are like pearls, her lips like bimbak Her 
face is marked with cosmetics, her hands are decorated with armlets, her neck 
with a luce; her fingers with rings. The nails of her feet are coloured with 
lao'dyc. Her dross is pure like fire: she is annoiuted with sandal-paste. Her 
breast in annointed with musk. She is fall of grace and virtue. Her gait is 
gentle like that of an elephant. She is tranquil and lovely and she i* like wise an 
accomplished adept. She rules even 13rahmA She is auspicious and beauti¬ 
ful like the Moon of autumn. Her forehead is marked with vermilion, musk 
and sandal paste. Her eyes are fair like midday ictuses. The grace of her 
body vies with millions of suns. She is an architect in creation, merciful in 
the act of preservation and hideous in the act of destruction. IShe killed 
S'mnbha, Nisumbba and Mahis&sura. She was brought into existence by S'iv a 
in his fight with Tripura. She represented Visual energy in his fight with 
Madhu and Kaitava. She killed all the demons including Hakta-Vija. She 
represented the might of Nribiinha when he destroyed Hiranayakasipu. 
She represented the energy of Vai&ha who slew Hiruny&ksa. She 
is seated ou a throne of gem and decorated with a diadem f gem. She is the 
image of BrahoiA and the qfnbieiii of all might. ” 

32-41. A clever person shall meditate her in the aforesaid manner. He 
shall then put tlowc-rs on hi* own head and invoke her. Holding the image of 
the godcio^ he shall reoite the following Mantra and infuse life into the said 








image or revive the goddess, i, e, restore hep to life. u 0 Eternal goddess Durgft, 
deign to come here from S'iva-loka and accept my autumnal worship. 0 
adorable mother, great goddess, come and dwell here. 0 revered goddess, 
restrict yourself within the bounds of my adoration. 0 imperishable deity, 
let your vital principles (or airs) and your energy appear here soon. Ora 
Hrira S'rim Klim Diirg&-yai Sw&hA : after reciting this Mantra, he shall 
worship her thus i “ Let your vital airs, 0 ever auspicious goddess, preside 
over the heart of this image. 0 Chandi, let the presiding gods of >our 
passions and lei vour faculties and let god himself enter into this image. 
0 N&rada, after invocation, sho shall be adored and by way of Parlh&ra greeted 
with the following words: Parih&r means atonement for an inproper action. 
“ O mother, beloved spouse of S'iva, have you {Arrived from the S'iva-loka 
safely ? O’ Bkadrak&li, show me mercy *, I bow to you ; 0 wife of Mahasa, I 
have been glorified and my life has been rendered blessed., as you have come to 
my house. 

42-64. I have been also blessed as 1 worship Durga in the holy land of India. 
A wiso man who worships DurgA gains prosperity in this world and goes to the 
Supreme land in the end. One who worships Vai^navi goes to the Vaikuntha ; 
he who worships S'iva goes to the S'iva-loka. There are three kinds of DurgA— 
worship which respectively partake of the characters of the three properties of 
nature, viz., the principles of virtuo, activity and ignorance. Those worships are 
classed as good, moderate and bad. The worship of the Vaisnavas is good : the 
worship of the S'&ktas is moderate or fair. The worship of the uninitiated is 
bestial or bad. The Vaisnavas in their Worship (Sattwika; desist from 
the sacrifice of animals and by the grace of the goddess go to the Goloka. The 
S'&ktas sacrifice animals at the time of worship (Kajasika) and go to the 
KaihVa. The fowlers adopt the base form of worship (T&masika;. O mother, 
you yield the fruits of the four-fold objects of human pursuit. You represent 
the might of Krisna. Yon destroy the germs of re-birth, death, old age and 
disease. You are the source of prosperity, virtue and faith in Hari. 0 blessed 
goddess who shield people from danger, the very mention of the name of Durg* 
destroys all calamities ” A devotee, thus praying her for mercy, should plaoe 
the conobes on the left side on a tripod. The conches should be filled with 
wafer, bent grass, flower and sandal. The worshipper then holding the conches 
with the right hand should utter the following incantations : 

55-64. O conches, in the former Kalpa, you sprang out of fhe bones of 
3'ankha-Ghuda. Therefore you are pure, auspicious and the most sanctifying of 
all the conches. A learned man by putting therein water, etc, for washing the 
feet should worship the goddess with sixteen ingredients. A pious man should 
construct a triangle with water and holy grass and after having worshipped 
the K&rma, the S'iva and the goddess Earth ought to place the tripod there 
and put the e niches thereon He should fill three-fourths of the conches with 
water wherewith he should worship the sacred rivers thus : “ O Oangft, YamunA, 
Godivari, Saraswati, Narmada, Sindhu, K/iveri, approach this water. 0 
Swarna-RcddiA, KankhalA, PAribhadm, Gantjakf, S'wat-GangA, (Jhandra-RekhA, 
Pair,pA, Champa, Gonpatl, Fadm&vuti, Parna-t&sa, Vip* sA, S'ubhA, VirajA, S'ata- 
hraclA, Mandakinl, please approach this waterWith this water, and with 
holy basil leaves and sandal, he should won-hip the Fire, the Sun, Vruu, Ganesa,. 
Varan a aud S'iva. All the ingredients of worship should be moistened with 








mtSffiy 



THE BUAHMA-VAiVARTA PUR AN A 


Sl 


this water. Then the sixteen ingredient should be offered in due course. Mat- 
dwed as a sea*, cloth, water to wash the feet, waterier bathing, 
obiauonot honey and milk, perfume, water to wash the feet mixed with grass) 
rice and flower, sacrificial offerings, water to nose the mouth, oil, 
betel, ornaments, fraukiacense, light, bedding: these are the sixteen ingre¬ 
dients. 

£5-74. 0 spouse of S'ankara, kindly accept this excellent picturesque 

ornamental throno. 0 S # iv&, please accept this cloth interwoven with excellent 
thread and purified by the heat of fire. 0 DurgA, please accept this holy 
water of the Ganges for washing your feet. 0 goddess, please accept this well- 
baked Yisnu oil perfumed with emblic rnyrobaiari. 0 mother of the world, 
please accept this fragrant sandal mixed with musk and saffron 0 
great goddess, please aocept this oblation of honey and milk, auspicious and 
holy, deposited in the diamond cup. 0 goddess, deign to accept this holy perfume 
prepared out of tho root of certain trees powdered to dust 0 Ohandi, 
please accept this offering for the feel, composed of bent grass, dowers, barley 
and wator of the Heavenly Ganges. 0 Mother of the world, take this fragrant 
garland of P&rijAia flowers. 0 S'ivA, deign to accept these cakes, milk boiled 
with rice and sugar, balls of sweets, fruits and other sacrificial offerings. 

75-88. 0 daughter of the mountain, please accept this gold and refreshing 
water mixed with camphor which I reverentially offer to you 0 goddess, please 
accept this lovely betel containing fragments ofjnuts and perfumed with cam¬ 
phor. 0 goddess, please accept this frankincense mixed with ingredients of vege¬ 
tables and aromatic substances. 0 great goddess, ploase accept this holy, heaven¬ 
ly light likely to dispel deep and dismal darkness. 0 goddess, please accept this 
excellent bedding covered with delicate cloth 0 NArada, the goddess should 
thus be worshipped with sixteen ingredients. Then handfuls of flowers should 
be offered to her. After this, the eight attendants of the goddess should be 
worshipped. From the east side, in due order, on a lotus of eight petals, the 
worshipper should adore Ugra-OhandA, Praclianda, Chandogra, Obanda-NAyikA. 
Ati-ChandA, ObAmnndA, Chandft, and Chanda-vatl, Then in the centre of 
the above sphere, he should first worship MafiA-Bhairava, and afterwards Sam- 
hAr-Bhairava, Asit&nga-Bhairava, Rura-Bhairava, KAla- Bhairava, Krodh*. 
Bhairava, Tarara-Ohfhla and Ohandra-Ohuda. Then in the heart of the lotus he 
should worship Vuisnavi, Brahman?, Raadri, Aindri, MAheswari, NAra Simbi, 
VarAhl, IvArtiki and Sarva-MaogalA. Afterwards, on tho jar, he should worship 
S'ankara, Kartika, the Sun, the Moon, the Fire, the Wind, the Varuna and 
afterwards the attendants and the children of the goddess. 

89*99. Afterwards, the savant should worship the sixty-four Yoginis, 
offer sacrifices and adore the goddess. He should wield the amulet of the 
goddess on the neck, beseech her forgiveness or express his modesty and how 
to hor. 0 best of saints, now hear the rules about sacrifice. A person 
having auspicious signs, a buffalo, a goat or a lamb may be sacrificed. 0 
NArada, the goddess is pleased with the sacrifice r for a thousand years 
if the victim be a man ^ for a hundred years, if the victim bo u buffalo ; 
for ten years ; if the victim bo a goat; for one year, if the victim be a 







PRAKRLTl-KHAtiDA 


lamb, fowl or deer or a tehis (a false conception or a pumpkin gourd) ; 
for ten years, if the victim be a black antelope : for a century, it the v^ciro be 
a rhinoceros ; for six mouths, if the victim be an artificial animal constructed 
with baked cakes ; for one mouth, if the object of the sacrifice be of barley, 
fruits, >S:c. A healthy, youthful, horned, symmetrical and well-developed 
/uumai should be sacrificed, If an immature animal be sacrificed, the sacri* 
fleer will lose his son. If win old animal be sacrificed, the worshipper will lose 
the senior members of his family. If a lean animal be sacrificed, the sacrifice!' 
v ill lose his relations If an animal of monstrous growth be sacrificed, the 
worshipper will lose his wealth. Jf he sacrifices an animal deprived of any 
of the members of his body, he will lose his subjects. If he sacrifices an ani¬ 
mal without horns, he will lose his wife. If he sacrifices an one-eyed animal, 
he will lose his brother. If he sacrifices an animal with bells, he will die 
If he sacrifices an animal having a spotted bead, he will be subjected to 
impediments or calamities. If he sacrifices an animal of a black colour 
like that of copper, ho will lose his friends. If he sacrifices an undeveloped 
animal, he will lose his bodily grace and personal charms. 0 great saint, let 
mo describe to yon the method of human sacrifice, as described in the Atharva 
Vedas. Transgression of the above method is harmful to the sacrifice*-. 

100-105 A good 9'ftdra who is fatherless and motherless,- young, healthy, 
married, initiated in the Mantras, indifferent or dispassionate to the wives of 
others, of legitimate origin, pure, and excellent, should be purchased in lieu of a 
handsome consideration from his relations and properly bathed. The worshipper, 
Then, should worship the goddess with cloth, sandal, wreath, frankincense, curd, 
vermilion, yellow pigment of cow’s urine, Ac. The Siidra should be made to 
wander at large for a year, after which ho should be dedicated and sacrificed 
to the goddess at the confluence of the fith and 9th days of the lunar month. 
,A savant should afterward? wield the hymn and the amulet, throw himself 
prostrate on the ground and give the usual fee to the priest. 


CHAPTER LX V. 

1-13, N&rada said : “0 blessed saint, I heard words from you sweeter 
than nectar. Lord, now recite the hymn, the amulet, the fornaof worship, 
sacred to the goddess.” Nar&yana said : “ On the occasion of Ardr&, £ 
the sixth of the twenty-seven lunar mansions, there ought to be Bodhana 
of the goddess, (i. *. invocation of Durgft in the month of Asvina 
before her annual worship). She should be admitted into the house on 
the occasion marked by the asterism called MftlA. She should be worshipped 
at the time characterised by the twelveth lunar mansiou (Ottar-Phalguni) 
and consigned to the river oil the occasion marked by the 8'ravaml 
(lunar mansion containing three stars). A man who invokes the goddess 
on the occasion of the sixth lunar mansion on the ninth day of tho lunar month 
reaps the same benefit as could be gained by her worship for a hundred voars. 
Admission of the deity on the occasion of theMfila brings forth fruits equivalent 
to those secured by the human sacrifice. Worship on he occasion of the twelveth 
lunar mansion secures fruits of the B&jpeya sacrifice. Consignment oi the 
gpddess to the river at the time marked by tho S'ravan^t multiplier issues. Oq 






THE BRAHMA.VA1VARTA PI! RAN A. 


<SL 


any,lunar day even without $wnsion, worship of the goddess secures fruits of 
ciromuambai&tion round the world. Worship of the goddess for a fortnight 
after her Bod ban*? on the Navarai, i. e ninth day of the lunar mopth securer 
fruits of a horse sacrifice. In the latter case, tho consignment of the image 
should take place on the Dasaml (tenth day of the lunar month). A clever man, 
after tho worship on the Sap taint (seventh day of the lunar month), should sacri¬ 
fice animals. Worship on the As tain 1 should be exempt from sacrifices ; other¬ 
wise the svorahipper will come to grief, Sacrifices should be performed on the 
lunar day of the Navamt. A sacrifice propitiates the goddess, but at the same 
time entails sins on tho worshipper for the slaughter of an animal The 
dedicator, the donor, tho slaughterer, the feeder, the keeper and both of 
them who tie the animal by the head and the leg, participate in the 
win of the slaughter. The Vedas hold, ‘One who slaughters another must bo 
slaughtered by him in return.” This is why tho Vaisnavas adopt the Vaisnavi 
form of worship. King Saratha worshipped her for a year, then respectfully 
wielded her amulet on the neck and adored the goddess. 

14-24, The propitiated goddess appeared before her. Suratha saw her who 
was effulgent like the summer sun. Having observed that glorious eternal deity 
in the middle o'. a brilliant sphere (the bright ring or halo), the King bowed 
reverentially low and oulogised the merciful nymph. She was pleased with 
tho eulogium and addressed him thus with a smile :—‘0 King, yon demand from 
me material prosperity and I grant you the boon accordingly. Ycu will gain 
back your kingdom. Afterwards you will be the eighth Manu called Savarni. 
Ultimately, I shall give you superior knowledge, faith in Hari and his bond¬ 
age. A fool who even after seeing me in person demands worldly prosperity 
is cheated by the illusion of Hari aud practically gives up nectar for the sake 
of poison. Everything from Brahma down to a bush is fleeting; the real, 
supremo Being Krisna alone is permanent. I am the origin of Brahtn&, \if:m 
and S'iva. Though eternal, yet I am transient. I am the primordial goddess, 
Nature, tho final cause, the root of the universe. 


25-34. In the lovoly'grove of Vrind&vana, I am the R&dh& : in the Vaikun- 
tha, l am the Laksroi as well as the Saraswatt. I am Durga, tho presiding 
goddess of wisdom and represent tho spell of Visnu i. e. M&y& or illusion. I am 
8&vitri, the mother of the Vedas, the wife of Brahmst. I am Gangft, Tulsi 
ah well as the Earth, the refuge of all. i manifest myself severally in the shape 
of women. And yet, O King, I have been created by Krisna by tho mere 
twinkle of his eye. The great Vir&ta who wields numberless worlds on the 
pores of his skin has, likewise, been created by Him by a mere wink. This 
unreal universe is imagined by the people to be real and, being the creation of 
Brahm&> is called Brahm&nda. In every Brahm&nda, there exist a 8rahm&, 
a Visnu and a S'iva. The knowledge that Krisna is the Lord of all is superb. 
Krisna is the oasence of the Vedas, devotion, pilgrimage and acts of piety. 
A fool without faith in Krisna is dead, though alive. 


35-43. The places frequented by pilgrims are consecrated by the 
touch of the Vaisnavas;—a fact meutioned in the S'&stras. A person, as 
.noon as he takes the Mantra of Krisna, attains the rank of Nar&yana, even 
without tb*: help of devotion, pilgrimage or worship. He redeems one thousand 






ancestors in his paternal line aud a hundred ancestors in the line of his mater¬ 
nal grandfather and subsequently attains the cow-world. 1 am thus impoi <ing to 
you the gist of all knowledge. In the next Manwantra when your suffering 
will be over, I will endow your mind with faith in Hari. Pfo sic. can be 
expiated even in a hundred kalpas without penalty. A man must reap the conse¬ 
quences oE his actions- To a person whom I favour, the Supreme Being im¬ 
parts faith in Hari. To him who is deluded by my spell, I give only mate¬ 
rial prosperity which is fleeting and imaginary like a dream. Child, I recited 
to you points of wisdom, now depart in peace/’ So saying, the goddess dis¬ 
appeared. The king abo, having regained his kingdom, bowed to her and 
went home. 0 N&ruda, the above is the excellent story of Durgft, 

CHAPTBB, L X V I. 

1*7. “0 best of Munis,” N&radasaid, fi< I have hoard every thing front 
you. Nothing practically now remains to be heard. The hymn and the amulet of 
Durg&, I want to hear.” N&r&yana answered : 4t At first, in the Golo&a, 
in the sphere of the Rasa, in the month of Vai«'&kha, Durg& was adored by 
Krisnu. Then in his fight with Madhu and Kaitava, eh** was worshipped 
by Visnu. Thirdly, on the same occasion, she was euIo£ Vrby Brahma in 
danger. Fourthly, she was adored by S'iva in his war with Tripura ; r;nd 
fifthly, she was worshipped by Xndra and other gods in their fight with V.ri- 
tra. Subsequently, in every age, she was worshipped by the Manus, Mania, 
men and gods. 0 saint, now listen to her hymn which is sanctifying and 
likely to give redemption. 

8-22. Lord Krisna said, “You are the mother and the mistress of 
creation. You are the primordial Nature, the final cause vested at your 
pleasure and discretion with the three properties of ignorance, activity 
and virtue. Though void of qualities, you invest youraeiE with qualities 
for purposes of creation : you are the likeness of Brahma, truthful, eternal and 
all in all: you are effulgent and wield a form out of compassion for your 
worshippers. You are the refuge, the seed, The likeness, the mistress and prop of 
all: you are all-virtuous, all-adorable ; all-wise, al-mighty, all-beautiful and sup¬ 
reme and without a prop. You favour or espouse every thing that is auspicious; 
you are the symbol of all intellect, tho source of all knowledge ; most enchan¬ 
ting and virtuous. In the interest of the gods, you are the Sw&ha, in the 
interest of the manes, you are tho 8wadh& and you are the ail-powerful 
Oakginll in matters of sacerdotal tees. You are the repose of my soul. You 
represent thirst, kindness, hunger, forgiveness, mercy, peace, grace, endless 
creation, esteem, vigour, indolence, sfaamo, beauty, mercy, prosperity to the 
virtuous and adversity to the wicked. You represent peace of mind to 
the pious, dissension to the sinners and the spirit of delusion to all people. 
In the interests of the gods, you graciously give them their jurisdiction and 
slay the demons. You create Brahma. You represent devotion and the 
abstraction of mind caused by asceticism; yon are yourself an ascetic: the pillar 
and emblem of asceticism : you give accomplishment to the adepts ; you are tLe 
source of perfection and an accomplished adept: ou are the Gauri, the 
wife of Brahin&, the spell of Visnu, Vadra-K31i a3 well as the gHdegg* hid- 










THE BRAHMA-YAW ART A PUP,AN A. 



floutf to all people, /n the village, you are the village goddess; in *ho house, 
you/ are the household goddess, You represent celebrity and fame to the 
virtuous and infamy to the wicked. You represent the spirit of all lostruo- 
tion in a great war when you slay the sinners, but preserve good men like a 
merciful mother that you are. You are adored oven by BiahmH and other 
gods. You represent the spirit of piety to the Br Ah mins and the spirit c£ 
devotion to the ascetics. 


k;3-35. You represent the knowledge of the learned, live wisdom of sages 
the genius, intelligence and memory .of talented people. 0 all-adorable 
goddess, yon are the valour of kings, the commerce of the Vaisyas, the. spirit 
of creation, preservation as well as eternal destruction in matters relating to 
creation, preservation and destruction. You are the fatal night, the grand 
night, the night of delusion and the spirit of enchantment. You represent cny 
irresistible power of illusion by which the world has been spell-bound and even 
virtuous people are bewildered arid consequently find out means for redemption.'’ 
Whoever reads the above hymn composed by the Supreme Being calculated to 
avert danger at the time of worship is crowned with suoceas in his desigln. 
A barren woman, 1* woman who has got only one son or whose son is dead, 
or a woman w’ o is not liked by her husband will get a good eon by listening 
to the afeoytr By the perusal of the ode, a prisoner is sot at liberty. A 
victim to consumption, leprosy, fever or colic is restored to health. A man 
without a son, a wife or tenants, attains the good which he desires, in a 
court of justice, in a crematorium, or in a forest teeming with wild 
whoever listens to this hymn is savod. If a house is set on tire or 
occasion of a wild tire, or in the event of an attack by a daeoit or an 
tho person in danger will be saved, if he listen to the above hymn, 
man will become wealthy and an ignorant man, learned, by virtue of the 
hymn. Nftrada said, “ Lord, please describe the aimilel called Brahman .k- 
Mohana.” 


beasts, 
on the 
enemy, 
A poor 


36-17. NanTyana taid, ** Son, at first Lord Krisna gave this amulet to 
BrahnjA. Tho latter gave it to Dfaarma who gave it to me By wielding 
it, 3'iva.killed Tripura, Bhadra-KMi killed Uakta-Vlja, and Indra got back the 
goddess Lak^mi. By wielding it* IVlabft*KMa (Time personified) h&s become 
longevous and pious, Nandi has become wise, king B&na lias become a warrior, 
dreadful to his foes and Purv&sft has acquired a position equal to that of 3'iva. 
Cm Durga*Yai SwAhA, may this Mantra preserve my head This Mantra of 
six letters is efficacious like the Kalpa tree. Tho doctrine regarding the accep¬ 
tance of this Mantra is incontrovertible even according to the Yedae. As 
soon as a man accepts it. he attains the likeness of Vispu, Namohanta Om 
DurgiVYai, may this Mantra preserve my face. Oin Durgft Kak^a, may 
this Mantra preserve my throat. Ora fclrirn. S'rim, may this Mantra 
preserve my shoulders, Hrirn S'rim Kiini, may this Mantra preserve 
my back. Hrini, this Mantra may preserve my chest. S'rtxp, may this Mantra 
preserve my hands. Aim Hrtm S'rim, may this Mantra preserve my body, 
whether 1 be asleep or ewak$. On the east side, may Prakriti preserve me. 
On the south-east angle, may Chaudi preserve mo. On the south 3ide, may 
Bhadn;.** K&li, on the sbuth-west angle may M&heswari, on’the west side may 
Yflrahi, n*-d on tho north-west corner may Sarya«Mangal& preserve me, 







PRAKRIT!-KHAR DA 



48-57. On the north side, may Yaijnavi and or. tho north-cast corner, 
may S'iva-Priyft preserve me. May Jagadambh preserve me on water am 
53 and in the sky. O child. I have described to you a very precious 
amulet which should not be revealed to every one. Whoever nlterMving 
worshipped his religious preceptor with the ingredients of cloth, ornaments 
and sandal wields this amulet attaius the likness of Vib*ju and reapi ijratta 
which can bo attained by ablutions in ail sacred rivers and ciroamatnbulation 
round the world. Whoever recites it live lakhs of tunes becomes an adept 
and cannot be killed by sword, water, tire or poison. He is' “ 
h-s lifetime. If a person attains perfection by virtue of this amulet, he 
acquires the rank of Vi ?9 u. This part which relates to Nature wsweeter 
than honey, and I have now described it to you- Hrtrga is the P n ®“5 d, j| l 
Native. Her soa is Ganosa whom she obtained by the worship o£ ^Kujga* 
Ganesa is an offspring of 'the digits of Krisiya. A person after hearing this 
interesting part (delightful like honey) relating to nature should - eed the 
reciter with curd and rice and give him reverentially gold and m lovely milch- 
cow along with her calf. His sons and grandsons multiply by the grace of 
the goddess. His fortune becomes stable or is rendered immoveable m his 
boose and in the cud he attains the Goloka or the Cow-world. 

25387 


Printed by l N. Mark at the City Presa, Allahabad. 











