===== Internet Archive OCR: The Sacred Books Of The Hindus Brahma Vaivarta Puranam Part 4 Ed By B D Basu Trans By Rajendra Nath Sen 1922 Allahabd - The Panini Office_djvu.txt =====

Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


JAN.—JUNE 1922]— ; [Nos. 151 to 156. 


SACRED BOOKS 


OF THE 


HINDUS 


TRANSLATED BY 


VARIOUS SANSKRIT SCHOLARS. 


EDITED BY 
Major B. D. Basu, I. M. S. (Retired.) 
VOLUME XXXIV. 


BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANAM, - 
PART IV. 
FRG 


TRANSLATED BY 


RAJENDRA NATH SEN, M.A.,LL.B. 


| GU» 


PUBLISHED 8Y 


X 


Sudhindra Nath Vasu, at the Panini Office, 
Bahadurgani, Allahabad. 


Manager's Office : THE PANINI OFFICE, Bahadurganj, 
tag Printed by Fa71-ur-Rahman at the Modera Printiag Works, Allahabad. 
Annual Subscription: INLAND Rs. 12—As 12.) (Pri 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by KSME 
T E 


* 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


JAN.—JUNE 1922]— > seat [Nos. 151 to 156. 


SACRED BOOKS 


OF THE 


HINDUS 


TRANSLATED BY 


VARIOUS SANSKRIT SCHOLARS. 


EDITED BY 
Major B. D. Basu, I. M. S. (Retired.) 
VOLUME XXXIV. 


BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANAM, 
PART IV. 
FRG | 


TRANSLATED BY 


RAJENDRA NATH SEN, M.A.,LL.B. 


| GAG 


PUBLISHED BY 


Sudhindra Nath Vasu, at the Panini Office, 
Bahadurganj, Allahabad. 


Manager's Office: THE PANINI OFFICE, Bahadurgani, Al 
“see Pristed by Pazl-ur-Rahman at the Modera Printiag Works, Allakabad. 


Annual Subscription: INLAND Rs. 19—As 12) (Price 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by KS-MoE x 
P p 4 "uu 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


THE 


Sacred Books of the Hindus, 


Translated by various Sanskrit Scholars : 
EDITED BY 


Major B. D. Basu I. M. S. (Retired. 
Annual Subscription, inclusive of postage. 
Rs, 13-0-0. 


Published in parts since July 1909. 

Tt is not too much tosay thata large numter of Enclish Educated 
Hindus, unacquainted with Sanskrit, possess very little knowledge of their 
scriptures. While the Christians and the Mohammadans are generally 
well acquainted with their religious scriptures, the Hindus alone are 
ignorant of their religious scriptures. 

To remove this WANT, the PANINI OFFICE has been publishing 
‘in parts, since July 1909, translations of various Sacred Books of the 
Hindus. This series has brought the scriptures of the Hindus to the 
-doors of the rich and poor alike and upheld the greatness of Hinduism 
before the world. 

The subscription may begin from July or January. 


Books Already Published in the Sacred Books of 
the Hindus Series. 


à 


Vol. I.—Upanisads—Third Edition. Price Rs. 7. 

Vol, IL—Yajfiavalkya Smriti. Part I. Re. 1-8. 

Vol. IIIL.—The Chhandogya Upanignd. Price Rs. 12. 

Vol, IV.—Aphorisms of Yoga, by Patafijali. Prica Rs. 6, 

Vol V.—The Vedanta Siitras. Price Rs. 16 (out of print, not 
available), 

Vol, VI.—The Vais'esika Sütras of Kanáda. Price Rs. 7 (out of print, 
not available). 

Vol. VIL—The Bhakti Sastra. Price Rs. 7. 

Vol. VIII.—The Nyáya Sûtras of Gotama. Price Rs. 7 (out of print, 
not available.) 

Vol. IX.—The Garuda Purina. Price Rs. 4 (out of print, not 

"i available), 

ig Vol. X.—The Mimimsd Sûtras of Jaimini, Chps. I—III. Price 

Rs. 10. 

Vol. XI.—The Sáfikbya Pravachana Sütra. Prie: Rs. 15. 

Vol, X11.—The Bribatjátakam of Varâha Mihira. Price Rs, 7. 


[Continuen on page 3 inside cover | 


.. CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


——————— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


SACRED BOOKS 


OF THE 
TRANSLATED BY 
VARIOUS SANSKRIT SCHOLARS. 


EDITED BY 


Major B. D. Basu, I. M. S. (Retired.) 


VOLUME XXIV. 


BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANAM. 
GANESA AND KRISNA JANMA KHANDAS. 


TRANSLATED BY Pi 


RAJENDRA NATH SEN, M.A., LL.B. 


WSS 


PUBLSHED BY 
Sudhindra Nath Vasu, at the Panini Office, 
Bahadurganj, Allahabad. 
1922. 


t Í 


CC-0. In Public; Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE we. E 


3 Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


áo 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


PREFACE. 


This part which is mainly devoted to-Krigna might aptly ‘be said to 
éonstitute the testament of the Hindus. Leaving ample margin for 
figures of speech and miracles from which gospels of no creed eould 
possibly be immune, what testimony, I ask, can carry greater weight 
than the statement of Vyása, the versatile genius who, with tte might 
of his magie quill, brought about a revolution in the world of thought 
and raised philosophy to the dignity of religion ? 

Krisna as represented in this Purána is, indeed, the same Brahman, 
the supreme Being alluded to in the Upanigada. But Brahman is in- 
comprehensible by hypothesis, Vyasa who had a head on his shoulders 
realised the difficulty of his position and hastened to give a sketch of 
the life of Krizna for the edification of the public and the illustration of 
the Vedas. 


The Bhagavat-Gita which is unquestionably a philosophy of sublime 


order is mainly confined to a dialogue between Krigna and Arjuna. In 


the Mahibharata, he figures, for the most part as a past-master of 
politics and espouses the cause of the virtuous Yudhisthira in the great 
‘Armageddon raging between the Kauravas and the Páundavas. The Sri 
Krigna Janma Khanda, on the other hand, deals with the lord in an 
exhaustive fashion leaving nothing to be desired. 


Many interesting episodes have likewise been introduced into this 


| portion of the Purána not only with a view to establish the glory and 


t 


tho greatness of the Lord, but also to denounce self-conceit, anger and 
other vices to which human nature is susceptible. For instance, the 


< great Rigi Durvásà, conscious of his superhuman powers, abuses the 


| 


| 
1 
| 
] 
y 
Í 


| 
| 


| hospitality of King Amvarisa, a votary of Krigna and rushes to kill him 
"in a fit of temper. The discus of the Lord comes to the rescue of the 


King. The Rigi perceives his danger. The instinct of self-preservation 


proves too much for his characteristic intrepidity. He runs away for 
| his life with all his might and finds no place beneath the face of the sun 
| to hide his head: for the celestial weapon haunts him like his shadow, 


whereever he goes. How amusing! Apartfrom the humourous aspect 
of the incident, it embodies sublime doctrines of ethics and casuistry 


a ehioh. might carry conviction even to the mind of a sceptic, 


CC-0. In Public a / 
D BLA: 


^». 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


(21) 


But the incidents of the above nature are so various, the characters 
introduced are so complex that in the language of Milton we are lost, 
in the wandering mazes of a labyrinth. = Behind these incidents, we can. 
not help realising the operation of an extraordinary species of mind, all 
powerful, opulent, equally master of the snblime and the low. The most 
inventive that was ever engaged in the copy of the details of actual life 
in the sallies of imagination, in the deep-rooted complications of super- 
human passions: a nature, poetical, inspired, superior to reason by 
the sudden revelations of his celestial vision: extreme in pleasure and 
pain: unexpected in his movements, boisterous and violent in his 
transports. Such, indeed, was Vyása! Whence comes “such another ? 
The gap caused by his disappearance, centuries ago, has never been 


filled. 
Or Lo put it in a nutshell : 


“O Vyasa, our sky is overcast : 
We mourn: our eyes are wet: 
Through vista of the ages past, 
We feel thy presence yet !” 


RAJENDRA NATH SEN, 


/ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


CONTENTS. 
GANESA KHANDA. 


CuariE:I—Disturbauce in the sexual intercourse between 


Hara and Parvati oo 
II—The lamentations of Pàrvtaí berore S. E 
l1lI— [Instructions given by Mahâdeva to Parvati 

with regard to the vow called Punyaka ; 

gift to the goddess by Siva of the Mantra 
reli ating to Hari on the coast of the Ganges, 
IV—The method of the performanee of the vow 
called Punyaka 
V—A history or narrative of the ahora vow ò 
VI—The grand festival of the vow; and permission 
secured by Parvati to perform this festival... 
VI1—The performance of the vow; the gift by 

Parvati of her husband to Sanat Kumara by 

way of priest’s fee at Krisna’s command ; 

ode to Lord Krişna by Parvati with a view 
to get back her husband , de 
VilI—The attainment of a boon by Parvati from 

Lord Krisna ; the recovery of her husband 

from Sanat-Kumára ; and the birth of 

Ganes'a 
IX— Observation of Ganes’ a by. Hoe xad Parvati, 
X—Auspicious rites with a view to secure the 

welfare of Ganes'a 
XI-— Discourse between Párvati andi R "^ 
XII—The removal of obstacles or calamities by 

Ganes’a ‘Sire 
XIII—The naming of Ganes' a: his amulets, CHIC o0 
X1V—Seeuring the message of Kartika PA 
XV—Arrival of Nandi and other Myrmidons of 

Siva at the house of Krittikà to fetch 

Kartika ; the conversation between Nandi 

and Ka Artika 
XVI—The arrival of Kártika at the Koik 


XVlI—The inauguration of Kârtika; the 


weddings of Ganes'a and Kârtika 
XVIII—Under the pretext of explaining the reason 
why Ganes/a lost his head, curses pro- 
nonounced by Kas'yapa against S'ankara... 
XIX—Eulogies and amulet sacred to the Sun 
XX — Reasons explaining why Ganes'a was pro- 
vided with the face of an olephant E 
XXI—Re-attainment of Laksmi by Indra e.. 
XXII— Ode to Mahá-Laksmí and her amulet as 
secured by Indra. from Hari ono 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Pages. 


1—3 
3—4 


PR 


oo ct 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


( 2) 
Pages. 
Cuarrre XXIII—A sketch of the character of Laksmt ... 48 
» XXLV—In connexion with the treatise explaining 
why Ganes’a has got only one tooth or 
tusk, a reference to the discourse between 


Jamadagni and Karta-Viryya 44 
3) XXV—The defeat of Karta Viryya in his fight 

with the army of Kapila 38s 47 
’ XX VI—The defeat sustained by Karta-Viryya ‘at 

the hands of Jamadagni 4T 


$5 XXV II—The death of Jam: adagni while fighting 
with IKárta-Viryya and the resolution 
of Pras'uràma —.. 45 
m XXVIII—Disecurse isis Bhrign eui Renukà ; 
the departure of Paras'u- Ráma for 
Brahma-Lcka ; conversation between 
Brahma and Parasu-Rama noo 7011 
3$ XXIX —Deseription of boon granted by Brahma 
to Parasurama, the arrival of the latter 
at S'iva-loka; recital by him of an eulogy 
sacred to Siva 54 
J XXX —Discourse between Siva and Paras’ urama... 57 
3 XXXI- Bestowal of an amulet called Trailokya- 
Vijaya (conqueror of three worlds) on 


Bhárgava by Siva 58 
A XXXII—The gift of Haris M: antra, ode, ete., by 
iva to Paras'urüma Gl 
5 XXXIII—Military expedition of eras! uráma ; 
visions in his sleep 60, (5) 


& XXX1IV—The despatch of an ambassador to 
Karta.Viryya | by Bhargava (Paras'u- 
rima); the recitation of a dream 
experienced by Karta Viryya to his 
wife Manoramá 67 

" XXXV—The exit of Manoramà to the. next world: 

f the discourse between ^ Bhürgava and 
Kárta-Viryya ; the narration of  Siva's 
amulet incidentally connected with the 
description of -the battle fought between 
Matsya-raya and Paras urama 7) 

3 XXXVI—The recitation of the ode to Kali | as 

composed by Bhrigu incidentally con- 

. nected with the account of the battle 

fought between  Paras'uráma and King 

Suchandra ; the discourse ^ between 

Brahmá and Bhargava; the destruction 

of Suehandra Pe l 

XXXV II— Deseription of theamulet Si Bhadrakáli 76 
XXX VIII— Description of the battle between 
Parag'uràma and Pusgkaráksa ; an account 

of the, amulet of Mahá- Visnu, ano, Sl 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


(2 
N er Pages. 
Guaptar XXXIX—Delineation of Durgá's amulet 22079 
D XL—The fightof Paras'uráma with Kárta- Viryya ; 
the possession of the amulet fraudulently 
secured by Siva from Kárta-Viryya; the exit 
of Karta-Virjya to the next world ; the dis- 
course between the king and Paras'uráma ; 
the dialogue between Brahmá and Bhargava, 80 
»  XLI—Arrival of Paras'uráma at the Kailása ... 83 
» XLII— Discourse between Ganes’a and Bhargava, 84 
" XLIII—The breaking or extraction of a tooth 
(tusk of Ganes'a) by Paras'uràáma oc 6 
$ XLIV—Counsel by Lord Visnu to Paras'urâma 
taken to task by Parvati; recitation of 
the ode to Ganes'a m .. 88 
$5 XLV—Ode to Parvati composed by Paras'uráma... 92 
$ XLVI—A description of the reciprocal curses of 
Tulst and Ganes’a as connected with the 
narrative of the worship of Ganes'a by 
Bhargava without the use of the holy basil , 
leaves oda doo .. 95 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 
The Khanda or part relating to the birth of .Lord- Krisna. 
Cuavtrr I—Interrogatories to the saint Narayana by Pages. 
Narada concerning Hari, and the recitation 
of the virtues of Visnu and the Vaignavas 
incidentally connected with the narrative of 
Hari addressed to Narada by Narayana, 99 
d II—-The amorous pastimes of Lord Krisna with 
Virajà, the disappearance of Lord Krişna 
through fear of Radha ; and the transforma- 
tion of Virajà into river ac oco 
5 IlI—Curse pronounced by Radha against Lord 
Krişna, the account of Radha and Sridima 
cursing one another uw Ls 2 
1V—The departure of the earth for the Brahma- 
loka with a view to get her burden relieved ; 
the representation of her case to Brahma ; 
the arrival of the gods at the domain of 
Hari ; the description of the Goloka or the 
eow-world oco ss . 107 
7 V—The arrival of-Brahmá and others at the cow- 
world ; ode to Lord Hari as composed by 
Brahma ae dus we TA 00 
5 VI—'The manifestation of Lord Krişna ; ode to the Sie 
Lord, as composed by Brahma and others ; 
their conversation with the Lord e.. 118 
» VII—CThe description of the marriage of Vasu-deva 
and Devaki after a recital of the history 
of their previous births; destruction of 


101 


104 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


(4) 


their six sons by Kamsa;. ode to Lord 
Krisna as composed by Bramá and others ; 
a brief account of the birth of the Lord and 
Balaráma ; ode to Lord Krisna as composed 
-by Vasudeva ; an account of the goddess 
Prakriti or Nature sos 


CuarrEez VIII—Determination of the vow called Janmás- 


» 


” 


tami and other vows 
IX—A ceceaniption of the festival “observed by 
Nanda. a 
X—A kets on the redemption of Putanà 
XI—An account showing how the demon Trind- 


Varta was put to death. - 
XII—The breaking of the car and ‘the wielding 
of tho amulet... 500 


XIII—The discourse between Garga and Nanda; 
the performance of Lord Krisna's Anna- 
Prás'ana ceremony W. 6., when tha child 
takes his food for the first time), the 
description of tha ceremony to give him 
a name 

X1V—The subject dealing with the breaking of 
the tree called Arjuna ; and an account of 
the curse to which tho son of Kuvera was 
rendered liable eee 

XV—The discourse of Radha andl Krigra ; the 
arrival of Brahma ; ode to Rádhá as com- 
posed by Brahmá; a description of the wed- 
ding and Krisna 

XVI—The subject dealing with ‘tho death of 
Vaka Kesî Pralamba ; description of the 
circumstance under which Vasa and other 
Gandharvas were renlered liable to the 
curse of Siva; an account of the arrival of 
Lord Krigna at Vrindà-Vana go 

XVII—The construction of Vrindá-vana; the 
marriage of Kalâvatî with Vrik-bhánu; 
reasons why Vrindd-vana is so called 
the otymology of the sixteen names of 
Radha; and ode to Rádhà as composed 
by the Lord tes 

XVIIL—The redemption of the wives of the 
Vipras or Bráhmins; ode to Lord Krigna 
as composed by the wives of the Brah- 
mins; reasons why the fire is ealled all 
eonsuming 

XIX —The subjugation or aoni d Kålia csl 
to Lord Krisna as composed by Káliya; ode 
to Krigna as composed by the wife of 
Kaliya; ‘the extinction of the wild fire ; and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


' Pages. 


127 
182 


185 
. 138 


110 


141 


143 


152 


154 


. 160 


166 


. 176 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


( 5.) 
Pages. 
ode to Lord Krista as composed by the í 
Cowherds and Cowherdesses 180 


CuaPrER XX— The stealth of the calves by Brahma and 
ode to Lord Krisna as composed by Brah- 
má 

XXI—The dissolution of the sacrifice performed 
by Indra; ode to Indra as composed by 
Nanda; the wielding of Govardhana by 
Lord Krisna; ode to Lord Krigna as 


187 


LE] 


: composed by Nanda 189 
1 XXII—The death of Dhanuka aud Gub to Lord "n 
Krisna as composed by Dhanuka . ... 197 


XXIII—The eurse pronounced against Tilottama 
and theson of Bali deseribed by way of 


episode e. 200 
" XXIV—Durvásá's marriage and death of his 
wife . 206 


XXV—-The defeat (or humiliation) ‘of Daurvásá 
through the eurse of Aurva; ode to Lord 
Krisna, as composed by Durvásà. An 


account of his redemption ... 209 
OF XXVI—The method of Dau the vow of 
Ekádas'i . 216 


XXVII—Ode to Lord "Krisna as “composed by 
1 the millkmaids ; stealth of their clothes; 
USE s ode to Lord Krisna as composed by 
Radha, the method of performing the 
vow of Gouri; a description of the vow, 
odo to Parvati; the gift of a boon by 
Párvati at the termination of the 


vow ... 220 
» XXVIII—A description of the amorous pastimes 
of the Rasa es. 229 


'XXIX— The redemption of the SA Asta-bakra 
and ode (as composed by him) to Lord 
Krisna . 235 
XXX—In connexion with ‘the anecdote of Radha, i 
a reference to the ode of Lord Krisna 
as composed by Asita; and a narration of 
the fact that the crookedness of the eight 
members of the body of Devala was due 


: to Rambha’s eurse e 287 
c XXX{—Mobin? s advances to Brahmé: ode to 
Kama as composed by Mohini 242 


ae XXXI- Questions and answers by Brahma and 
— Mohini; ode to Lord Krisna as com- 
UNS s posed by Brahmá . 246 
XXXIlI—Ourse pronounced by Mohini against 


^d Brahma. Curbing the pride of. Brah- 
Nar mÂ evs mm wee 249. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


fo) 


OHaPTER XXXIV—The birth of Gangá; etymology of 


Bbágirathi and other names of Gan- 
gá 
XXXV— Removal of Brabma’s curse by his bath- 
ing in the Ganges; his sexual intercourse 
otn Sarasvati ; the birth: of Rati and 
Kâma; the perturbation of the mind of 
Brahmá pierced by the darts of cupid; 
advice to Brahma by b M and the 
saints o06 
XXXVI—Curbing tho pride of Hara, A deserip- 
tion of his Divine attributes 
XXXVII—The inadmissibility of the ingredients 
of sacrifice offered to Siva “through 
Parvati’s curse; ode to Parvati as 
composed by Siva ses wee 
XXXVIII—In connexion with the narrative 
relating to the curbing of Durgá's 
pride, a reference to the suicide 
of Sati which she committed through 
humiliation: Ler birth in the shape 
of Parvati; an interview of the Moun- 
tain with Hari 
XXXIX—A view of Siva by Himalaya and Pår- 
vati and reduction of  Káma to 
ashes 
XL—Meditation (religious) of Par vati; the appear- 
ance of Siva before Parvati in the guise of 
a Brühmin boy; their mutual conversation; 
the appearance of Siva in the guise of a 
mendieant before Parvati dwelling in her 
paternal house counsel of the gods with 
Brihaspati 00 
XLI—The celf-slander of Siva who appeared in 
the guise of a Brahmin before Iimálaya; 
. the arrival of the seven Risis with Arun- 
dhati at the region of Himalaya, the king 
of mountains. Narration to the king 
Vasistha of the anecdote of Anaranya, by 
way of episode in connection with the 
subject of the gift ofa daughter in marri- 
age by the father.. 
X LII—N arration of the discourse between Padma 
and Dharma by Vasistha ; the suicide of 
Sati D 
XLIII—Pang of separation and bereav ement caused 
to Sankara ; ; alleviation of his grief Ve 
XLIV —Mahàdeya starting for marriage; ode to 
iva as eomposed by Seige 
XLV—Description of tha marriage of S 


soe 


` 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Pages. 


252 


263 


. 266 


.. 270 


212 


280 


286 
290 


295 
298 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


2 s (7 2 em 


Crarter XLVI— The amorous pastimes of Haraand Gouri; 


recitation of everything that is auspicious, 
XLVII—-Cu:bing the pride of Indra 
XLVIII—Curbing the pride of the Sun sse 
XLIX—Curbing the pride of the F'ire aoe 
L—Curbing the pride of Durvásá 
LI—Curbing the pride of Dhanvantari ; and the 
victory ‘achieved by Manas& 
LII—Lamentations by Radha 380 
LIII—Amorous pastimes of Radha and Krisna ... 
LIV—A brief sketch of the character of Krişna ... 
LV—A deseription of Krisna's might 
LVI—Curbing the prid» of Maha- Visnu and others 
ode to ‘Lakshmi as composed uy the gods... 
LVII—The departure of Brahma for the Vaikun- 
tha with Rádhà and his company, as she 
was offended at the slight which she 
received at the hands of Krisna and in her 
wounded susceptibilities was ready to 
commit suicide ... 
LVIII—A brief account of the pang “of separation 
from Krisna caused bo Radha 
LIX—In the detailed account of the humiliation 
of Irdra,, a reference to the discourse 
between Sachi and Nahusa, by way of 
“episode 
LX—A dialogue between Vrihaspati and the 
messenger of Nahusa ; the conversion of 
Nahusa intoa snake ; the redemption of 


Indra 338 
LXI—A discourse between Indra and Ahalyá; rape 

of Ahalyà by Indra; an account of the 

curse of Ahaly& by Gautama esa 
LXII—A short account of the Rimayana 343 
LXIII—Evil dreams experienecd by Kamsa 347 
LXIV—An account of the sacrifice performed 

by Kamsa oco e. 349 
LXV— Felicity of AXrürn. .. 85] 
LXVI—-Consolation of Rádhá in hos CH 1-298952. 
LXVII—Statement to Radha by Krisna of 

Metaphysical or psychic Yoga pos 

abstraetion) 358 
LXVI1I—The I feinem. of the grief of Radha . 857 
LX1X—Conversation of Lord. Krisna with 

Brahmi; statement of Ratna-Mala to 

Lord Krisna God 359 
LXX —Narration by Akrüra of his dreams ; D ‘ode: as s 

composed by him to Lord Krisna ; a sketch 

_by Akrüra of affairs relating to the cow- froh 

herdesses 000 wae = A 3 


CC-0. In Public 


328 


831 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


(8) 

TN e Pages. 
Curren LXXI—On the eve of the expedition of Lord. | 25 
zs Krisna to  Mathurá, performance of 


; auspicious rites oe .. 866 
M LXXI—The admission of Lord Krisna into ` 
Mathura ; a view of the town ; chastise- 
mert of the washerman; grace to the 
hunch backed woman; the slaughter of 
Kamsa ; and release of Vasudeva and 
Daivaki Pei 5d S. 307 
s LXXIlI—Consolation of Nanda, ete, in their 
grief by Lord Krisna dh 3 9/9 
$5 LXX1V—Counsel as to how the fetters of Karma ` 
could be split asunder M E "aod G5) OU] 
5 LXXV—Counsel as to the wisdom concerning 
temporal matters. ae Son. 59 
» . LXXVI—A description of the religious merits ` 
` acquired by auspicious sights; a reference 
to the fruits attainable by gifts 382 
3 LXXVII— Results of good dreams 2. 5986 
Š LXXVIII—Psyehie counsels ; a description of the 
sins acquired by inauspicious sights .. 890 
5 LXXIX- Determination of the cause of the solar ` 
: eclipse 60b ase 252,809 
m LXXX—Jn connexion with tbe subject relating 


to the cause of the lunar eclipse, an 
incidental reference to the curse pro- 
nounced against the Moon by Tari .. 896 
5 LXXXI—Release of Tara 


sve 2719008 
D LXXXII—An account of evil dreams and their 
ad pacification ve. sss -. 400 
»  LXXXllI—Assignment of duties to the four castes 
respeetively Tes 403 


E LXXXIV—-Assignment of duties to the house 
holder ; delineation of a woman's character ; 
determination of the characteristic 
features of a true believer ; a short account 

i of the universe (of Brahma), etc. . 409 

‘»  UXXXV—Determination of the articles of food 
that may or may not be consumed; a 
description of Karma-Vipika "ET 

^ LXXXVI—An account of the daughter of the 
King of Kedára; the curse pronounced 
by Padma against Dharma appearing in 
the guise of a Brahmin ; the remission of ` 
the curse affecting Dharma by Padma 

T upon the entreaties of the gods +». 423 

»  UXXXVII—Appearance of Pulahà and other 
saints before the Supreme Lord; their " 
conversation 55 500 vee 490 

» LXXXVITI—Ode to Nature (as composed by Siva) 


CC-0, In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


(2 ) 
Pages, 
received from the Mn Lord by king 
Ax ebd Nanda = e Pe. 434°) 
Cnarrz& LXXXIX— Statement made by the Lord to King 
J Nanda Xs «ue woe 497 
5 XC—A sketch of the character of the 
Yuga (age) cos E ... 438 
T XCI— Conversation of Vasudeva and Devaki 
with the Lord oco woe 442 
^ XCII-—The arrival of Uddhava, ‘as deputed by 
the Lord, at Vrindávana ; ode to Radha 
as composed by Uddhava UM we 443 
5 XCIII—Conversation between ^ Rá&dhá and 
Uddhava Gon 5 000 woe 44) 
- XCIV—Statement hy Radha to Uddhava and 
narration by Uddhava of the Kalávati 
and others opc ceo ... 451 
y XCV—Lamentations made by Radha ... 456 
= XCVI— Counsel to Uddhava by Radha ... 458 
5 XCVII—Dialogue between Rádhà and Ud- 
dhava DOO 462 


XCVIII—Return of Uddhava to Mathurá and 
his description of Vrindávana to the Lord... 465 
XOIX—The appearance of saint Garga to Vasu- 
deva ; proposal by him to perform the 
ceremony of the investiture of Rama and 
Krisna with sacred thread ; the arrival of 
Risis at that place; a description of 
Nature by Vasudeva 000 s 
C—Appearanee of the goddesses before Vasudeva, 469 
Ol—The investiture of Rima and Krisna with 
sacred thread ; and the return of the gods 
(who had assembled there to witness the 
ceremony) to their respective places Sew 
Cll—‘The appearance of Rima and Krisna before 
the saint Sandipani to study the Vedas ; 
ode to Lord Krigna as composed by the 
wife of the Muni and gift by Rama and 
Krisna of sacerdotal fee tothe Muni ... 473 
CIII—Under the pretext of giving instruction 
to Vis'va-Karmá on the construction of 
Dwárkà, the recitation by Lord Krigna of 
the auspicious or ominous sites of a house 
re under construction oco ves 
CIV—The appearance of Brahm and other gods, 
anat-Kumara and other holy saints before 
‘Lord Krişna ; the admission with Ugra-sena 
" and others wes ens e. 475 
-ClV—The statement of Rukmini (who was ex- . 
asperated a& the words of Satánanda) to 
king Bhigmaka in connexion with the pro- 


” 


474 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
4 Ji y Mo X e iot 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


( 10 ) 
^ Pages. 
posed marriage of Rukmin? ... we 482 
CHaPTsR CVI— The marriage of Balaróma with Revati ... 486 
5 CVII—The defeat of Rukmini in his fight with 
: Balaráma ; the  Adhivása (a ceremony pre- 
vious to a great festival such as marriage) 
of Lord Krisna ; the arrival of the Lord in 
the court-yard reserved for marriage ; ode 
to Lord Krisna, as composed by Bhismaka ; 
the' overthrow of Salva and others by 
the Lord m Ca wee 457 
x CVIIL—The gift of Rukmint in marriage to 
Krisna by her father 500 
S CIX— Conversation of Sarasvati, etc., with Lord 
Kiisna ina bantering spirit; and admis- 
sion of the party of the bridegroom with the 
bridegroom and bride into Dwarka wee 499 
A CX— Departure of Nanda and Yas'odà for the 
grove of plantains; and the dialogue be- 
tween R&dhiand Yas'oda eee 494 
y CXI—Counsel of Radha to Yas'odà with regard 
to knowledge and faith; and in connexion 
with this subject a disquisition, by way of 
episode, on the etymology of the names of 
Bana, Lord Krisni, ete, 51 "t 
5 CXII—The-birth of the god Kama out of the 
womb of Rukmini; the slaying of Sambara 
exit of Kama to Dwarka; Krisna's marri- 
age with 60.000 damsels; the determina- 
tion of the number of their sons; tho 
bestowal by Lord Krisna of his daughter 
(in marriage) on Durvásá; eulogies pronoun- 
eed by Daurvásà on Lord Krisna .& ... 500 
5 CXIII—Return of Durvisd from Kailâsa to 
: Dwárkà agreeably to the advice of Parvatt; 
a brief account of Mahábhárata; the fall 
of Jara-Sandha and Salva by Lord Krişna; 
the slaying of Sis'upá'a and Danta-bakra, 
The restoration of the dead son of Daivaki 
to lifeand delivery of the boy to his 
mother, the stealing of Parijata; the 
celebration of the vow of Punyaka by 
: Satya-bhámá i Doc ... 508 
5 CXIV—Conjugal intercourse between Usa and 
Aniruddha in dream; the abduction of- 
Aniruddha by Chitra-lekh4; the marriage of 
Usa and Aniruddha according to the 
Gandharva rites hee vee 505 
A CXV—Useful advice given by Mahâdeva ‘and 
others to Bàna who was highly ineensed 


491 


496 


* 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


ane 
to hear from the sentinel the news concern- 
ing the pregnancy of Usa, the military 
expedition of Bana, the demon ; the dialo- 
gue between Bana, and Aniruddha o 


CnarrE& CXVI—The description by Bana to: Aniruddha 


of the five husbands of Draupadi; the inci- 

dent of the abduction of Rati by Sambara; 

the defeat inflicted upon Bâna by Anirud- 

dha abo bes 000 
CXVII—The description of the valour of Anirud- 
dha by Siva to Ganes’a Axe ooo 

CX VIII— The conference of Hara and Parvati when 
they heard from the messenger about the 
arrival of Lord Krisna 28 wes 
CXIX—The arrival of Bali at the council of Bana; 
the dialogue between Hara and Bali; the eu- 

logies pronounced by Siva on the Vaisnavas; 
the.diseourse between Hari and Bali, ode 

to Lord Krisna'as composed by Bali; the 
guarantee of immunity from danger held 

out by Lord Krisna and Bali ooo 
CXX—The war between the armies of Yádavas 
and the demons; the genesis of the Vaisnava 

fever; the defeat of Bana at the hands of 

Lord Krisna 


Pages, 


510 


520 


. 524 


CXI— The redemption of King Srigála ... 597 

CXXII—The anecdote of S'yamantaka .. 530 

CXXIII—The worship of Ganes‘a performed by 
Radha in the hermitage of adepts .. 581 


CXXIV—The statement’ made by Ganes'a to 
Radha; the gift of a boon by Parvati; the 
adjustment of the toilet of Radha by 
her female attendants at the command of 
Parvati; the appearance of the gods, etc., 
before Rüdhà; ode to Rádhà as composed 
by Brahma ooo oo ooo 

CXXV— The acquisition of knowledge or wisdo 
by Vasudeva from Siva; the performance 
of the vow of the grand Royal Sacrifice ... 

CXXVI—The re-union of Râdhå and Krişna; ode, 


534 


539 


ete, to Lord Krisna as composed by Radha, ~ 


interorgatories to Lord Krisna by Radha 
counsel on psychic or metaphysical wisdom 
administered to Radha by Lord Krisna ... 
CXXVII—The amorous pastimes of Radha and 
Kuisna; the felicity of Yas’oda . o0 
CXXVIII— The narration of the character of the 
Yuga (age) by Lord Krisna to Nanda; 
and the exit of Râdhâ to the Cow-world 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


542 


. 547 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


E & 12) : 
à Pages. 
with all the inhabitants of Gokul soe 548 
Carrer OXXIX—Ode to Lord Krişna by Brahma and 
other gods assembled in the forest of the 
fig-brees; annihilation of the race of Yadu; 
accession of the Pandavas to Heaven; 
the gift of a boon by the Lord to Bhagi- 
rathi; ascension of the Lord to the Goloka 
(Cow-world) NS e ... 551 
CXXX-—Exitof Narada from the hermitage of 
Jujube to the Brahmá-loka; the wedding 
of Nárada with the daughter of Srifijaya; 
their honeymoon; departure of Nárada for 
the contemplation of the deity according to 
the advice of Sanat Kumüra; the advice of 
Siva to Narada; his redemption ses DDO, 
CXXXI—The Genesis of the fire and gold ... 559 
CXXXII—The determination of the meaning of 
the four parts of this Purina, Brahma, 


m 


ete. ... 306 008 ... 560 
CXXXIII—The character of the great Puranas; 
(secondary treatise on Hindu cosgomony); 
the number of the verses of all the great 
Puranas; the recitation of the names of all 
the upa-Purdnas; the meaning of the name 
of Brahma-Vaivarta; the description of its 
greatness or glory and the subsequent 
recitation of the fruits reaped by people 
listening to this Purdna in due order wee 564 


©- CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMAGHANDA - 983 


ee 


nine ways, kissed them in cight ways and co-habited with them in six- 
teen ways. The most licentious Hari embraced each limb of the milk-maids 
with each of the members of his body. Savants conversant with 
sexual intercourse are familiar with 16 kinds of intercourse out of which 
‘12 are real and 4 are performed in an inverse order. Krisna, howeser, 
performed them in a superior manner. At the commencement of the 
sexual intercourse, in the middle and in the end, Lord Krigna performed 
the incidental acts connected with the intercourse for the satisfaction 
of the girls in a manner better than that prescribed by the sexual science. 
Asa mountain is decorated with red chalk, so the body of Lord Krisna 
also was decorated with the scratches caused by atmlets and with the 
lac-dye painting the members of the feet of the milk-maids. When this 
game of Risa in its sphere was in full swing, the gods with their wives 
and attendants mounted the golden car and assembled in the heavens. 
The sight of the sports sent a thrill of emotion across their bodies and 
afflicted them with darts of Cupid. 1 
117-132. In this way, sages, saints, adepts, manes, Vidyá&dharas, 
Gandarvas, Yaksas, Ráksasas and Kinnars came there joyfully with 
their wives and witnessed the sports. Afterwards Siva with Parvati 
arrived there on a celestial car constructed with gold, adorned with gems, 
equipped with valuable furniture, covered with cloth chastened by the fre, 
_ containing puro looking-glasses of diamond, white chowries and wheels, 
speedy like the wind, lovely and with its top brightened by pure diamond 
jars. Mahá-Kála was on the left side of the Lord, Nandikes’wara was on 
his right side, Kartik and Ganes'a were on his front. He was attended by 
tho tawny-eyed Lord of the Ksetra-pàlas, 8 Bhairavas £c. His heart 
was occupied by Durgá graced with arch looks and a smiling face. At 
that time Brahma arrived there with Bharati on a golden car. Tis 
left side was occupied by the sphere of the seven Risis and his right side, 
by Sanaka, Sananda and other saints who all arrived there to seé the 
Ràsa. Then Dharma, the witness of good and bad deeds, arrived there 
on a golden chariot. At that time the chaste Marti with the face of 
Kâma occupied the heart of Dharma and passionately witnessed the 
game of Rása with slanting eyes. Surrounding the deities on all sides 
sab their attendants effulgent with the lustre of Brahma. At that time, 
Indra with Sachi, Chandra with Rohini, Agni with Swáhà, Kama with 
Rati in his embrace, the Sun with Sanjia arrived there. The regents of 
tho quarters likewise came with their wives to witness the Rasa. They 
remained in the sky and from that place they saw the tasteful sphere of 
the Rasa. The gods smiled for a while and gladly showered on the scenes 
sandal-liquid and flowers. Some of them were spell-bound; others almost 
fainted. The saints showered on the assembly wreaths perfumed 
with musk. The goddesses were animated with passion at the sight. f 
133-148. Afterwa-ds the Eternal Brahma  Krisna after having 
finished the sports of the Rasa onthe land entered into the waters 
of the Yamunà, The imaginary forms of Lord Krisna accompanied the 
eowherdesses to tho Yainund. Oppressed by darts of Cupid, they engaged 
themselves in aqueous sports. The passionate Krigna. in the first place, 
sprinkled Rádhá's body with water. Rádhá also poured three handfuls 
of va on the body of the passionate Krisna. Hari snatched away 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKSMoE — — x 
s any) 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
234 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


—R 


the cloth of Radha and thus denuded her Then he tore her 
wreath and loosened her chignon. When the damsel was engaged in 


aqueous sports by the vermilion marks on her forehead, the lines of 
the wonderful 


painting ou the body by cosmetics, her lovely toilet, t. 
hue of her lips and the linings of her eye with collyrium were all 
obliterated by the churning of the water. Hari embraced the naked 
Radha, sank into the water and after having played therein got up 
again along with her. Then Krigna after haying displayed the abashed, 
naked RAdhA to the cowherdesses threw her again at a distance into 
the water. Radh& got upin haste from the water, seized Krigua by 
force, took away his flute in anger, cast it atadistanee, snatched his 
yellow garment, tore the wreath of wild flowers and sprinkled water 
on him again and again. Then Radha dragged Hari and gave him a push 
whereupon the Lord of the universe was immersed in deep water at 
a distance. But shortly afterwards he emerged from the hquid with 
a smile, kissed and embraced. the naked Radha, again and again. In 
this way the imaginary forms of the Lord merrily played with the 
eowherdesses on the coasts of the Yamuna and within the water. After 
the play was over, the naked Lord and Radha both came to the coast 
and demanded their clothes from one another. Krişna gave Râdhà her 
cloth and lovely wreath, Then the mistress of the Ras’ gave him his 
cloth and flute with pleasure. Radha reverentially placed him on ber 
Jap and annointed his body with sandal mixed with flowers, aloo, 
musk and other perfume. She also constructed for his head a crest cal- 
culated to enchant the heart of ladies and encircled him with lovely 
wreaths of jasmine. 

149-160. Lord Krigna, in his turn, set up a lovely ehignon on the 
back of her head, arranged the lock of her hair and drew lines of paint- 
ing on the body with cosmetics. He applied to her forehead marks 
of vermilion and musk. Below these mark-, he drew a thin line in the 
shape of half-moon and having made an impression with his nails on 
her thighs and rising breasts wrapped her with a dress chastened by fire. 
Then he applied to her body saffron, aloe, musk-liquid and embraced and 
kissed her, again and again. Tbon the Lord embraced her once more, 
cast a garland around her neck and after having decked her with orna- 
ments, adorned her feet with anklets. Lord Hari painted her feet with lac- 
dye and in this way separately adorned all the girls. They wont again to 
the lovely sphere of the Rasa illumined by the moon-light and fit for 
sexual enjoyment while they were excited with passion. ‘The sphere, 
at that time, was-redolent of Madhavi, Champak, pine-apple and various 
species of jasmine. Rádhà when she saw tho flowers deputed tho 
eowherdesses to pluck them, She appointed them severally to twine 
wreaths of flowers, to prepare betel or to rub the sandal. When this was 
all over, she presented the above wreath, sandal, betel ete. most 
affectionately to Krişna. ‘Then she deputed some  milk-maids to sing 
the virtues of Krigna or to play upon small drums or tabors, 

161—171. The milk-maids haying wantonly played with Hari in the 
sphere of the Rasa played with him again on different occasions and 
in different places, in some lovely solitary place, ina grove of flowers, 
on the coast of a river, in the cave of a mountain, ina crematorium, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA-K, Tu ANDA. 235 


in the forest of the holy fig tree, in the Vrindávana, in the pleasing 
forest of the Kadam, in the forest of Nim, in the wood of the holy 
basil, in the grove of Kunda, in the Madhuvana, in the forest of lime, 
cocoanut, areca nut, plantains, plum, bamboo, pomegranate, peepul, bael 
orange, mandar, palm, mango, serew-pine free, As'oka, date. emblic 
myro-bolan, rose-apple, sil, thorn, lotus, jasminum grandiflorum, Indian- 
fig-tree. sandal and kesara. Tn these 33 forests very much liked by girls 
they pnssionately sported for 33 days and yet their desire was not satis- 
fied. Their passions instead of being satiated increased hke fire 
fed with clarified butter. The gods and goddesses were very much 
astonished at the sight and eulogising the scene went home. Subsequently 
actuated by the desire of sexual intercourse with Hari, the passionate 
goddesses assumed their birth in the houses of kings in India through their 


digits. 


CHAPTER XXIX 
I—10.  Nárüyana said, “O saint, the milk-maids, though they 
were grown up and respectable, could not realise the divinity of Lord 
Krişna but regarded him as their husband in the infatuation of their 
heart, A certain female cow herd in solitude glanced at Lord Krisna and 
- said, “Lord, pick up these jasmine flowers, twine a wreath and give it to 
ie." Some one said, ^O Krisna, place me in your lap." Some one held 
and mounted his shoulders. Some passionate milk-maid said to Krisna, 
the lord of her life, *Krisna, wrap me in your yellow dress." Some one 
said to Krişna, the Lord of the universe, “Lord, apply vermilion to my 
forehead,” Some one arrived there soon and said, “Lord, arrange the lock 
of my hair and bind my chignon.” Some milk-maid bent ou her toilet 
deputed Krisna to fetch sandal foliage for her ear-rings. Some one by 
mysterious signs explained to him what was passing in her 
heart and with a face beaming with smiles looked at him 
soliciting sexual intercourse. Some  milk-maid dragged - him by 
force, snatched from him the flute, took away his yellow dress, made him 
naked and smiled. Some dignified girl said to: the conqueror of Madhu, 
“Lord, paint the nails of my feet with lac-dye.” Some one said affection- 
ately to him, *O Lord of my life, paint my cheek and breast with lines of 
eosmeties of various colours." x 
a .11—21. When the milk-maids were thus excited with passion, 
Krisna knew what was passing in their heart and disappeared with Radha. 
The self-determining Lord went at different times to different hills, islands, 
coasts of rivers (free from animals), cow-pens, mountain. of gems, coast of 
the Ganges, temples of Kalinda and Pulinda, Gandba-Mádan mountain, the 
lovely grove situated on the dust-less coast of the Kaveri, and flower- 
garden on the coast of the Puspabhadra. The Lord having wandered in 
MES places prepared the toilet of Ràdháà and went to the top of lovely 
b n fanned by the wind redolent of sandal. ‘There ho constructed a 
pe of flowers and enjoyed the society of Radha. Rádh& in the height of 
QE exultation embraced Krisna and almost 
ROM ea Krisna saw  Rádhà. with her stooping breast 
deed covered that she was erest-fallen, excited with passion, 
nseless and naked, -Her toilet had disappeared and her hair had 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 8 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
286 THE BRAIIMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


been dis-hevelled. "Then he embraced the sleeping and prostrate Radha 
and restored her te. consciousness, He clad her and decked her with an 
excellent girdle, tied on the head a crooked chignon inclining a little 
towards the left and attrached to.it lovely jasmine-wreaths and Kunda 
flowers, 

22—82. He put on her forehead a beautiful mark of vermilion and 
painted linesofcosineties on her breast. He also painted the members of her 
lotus feet with lae dye and then with his nails constructed an artificial 
lotus on her loins. and breast. Then Krisna got up and ‘along with 
Radha went to the local lovely pond full of water pure like crystal and 
teeming with lotuses of various kinds. Therein the ganders and the 
drakes were gamboling; and the water-fowls wero making a melodious 
sound. The bees tempted by the honey of the water-lilies of the pond were 
wandering to and fro and sweetly humming without intermission. Krişna 
bathed with Râdhâ in the pond and being engaged in aqueous sports 
first poured water on the body of Radha. Radha retaliated in kind. 
Krisna took two lotuses of a thousand leaves. ho one he gave to Radha 
and the other he reserved for himself. Then Hari, the prince of the 
humorous, voluntarily annointed the body of Ráàdhà with sandal, musk, 
saffron and other perfume. After traversing a short distance, he saw an 
expansive banian tree with elevated branches. Ata short distance from 
that tree, there is a forest of serew-pine trees overshadowed by that banian 
tree extending to a distance of one Yojan. There the wind carrying the per- 
faue of the flowers‘blew gently and mado the shadowy region extremely 
fragrant. Govinda seated at the root ot tho holy banian tree was explain- 

- ing cheerfully the wonderful ancient history of the old people to Radha. 

33-46. At this time, -he saw that a great sage was approaching there 
with a cheerful mien. The Muni could not find in his heart the 
eternal being and so he desisted.from his meditation. And as soon as he 
opened his eyes, he saw before him that indescribable image. All the 
members of the body of this saint were crooked. He was black in 
appearance, dwarfish and naked. His name was Astà-vakra, He possessed 
knotted hair and was effuigent with the rays of Brahma. He was 
vomiting fire whieh Was, as it were, the emblem of his collective religious 
austerities, emanating from his mouth. It appeared from hs appearance as 
if, the energy of Brahma was arriving there incarnate, His rails, hait 
and beard were very long. He was valorous and of a tranquil disposition: 
With folded palms, frightened looks, inclining head and reverential 
le he stood up before Hari. Assoonas Radha smiled at his sight, 

nigga prohibited her from the display of levity and explained to her his 
pose Then the Muni bowed to Krisna and adored him ace 
EU LL br fia thus: "O container of all virtue, you 
VAR ae AME v ou are the genesis and the spirit of all virtue. 

i x SD germ and the cause of the virtuous. I bow to you 
again aud again. O Lord, you are the emblem of perfection. You are the 
part, the image and tho cause of perfection. You are the Lord and the 
spiritual guide of the adepts. I bow to you, again and again, O Lord 
you are the cause of the Vedas, You are conversant with the mailer 
branches of the Vedas and you are the best of those who know the YES 
O Lord, you can take any form. You are the likeness of Nature. You partake 


ording to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 237 


of Nature. You are wise. You are the supreme Lord of Nature, You 
represent the tree of the temporal world, its seed and fruits. I bow to 
you with folded palms. O god, you are the cause of the creation, preserv: 
tion and the destruction of the world. You are the origin of the tree of 
Mahá-Viráta. Therefore, O Lord of Radha, I bow to you. O Hari, you 
are the primeval tree. Brahma, Visnu and Siva are the three trunks of 
this tree. The gods are its branches. Excellent devotion is its flower 
and the world with its enjoyment is its fruit. Nature is the bud of that 
tree and you are its container. But you have no eontainer; rather, 
you are the container of all things. I bow to you. ; 

47-52. O Lord, you are the emblem of effulgence, invisible and self- 
evident. You are incontrovertible, eternal, very much obvious to the 
senses, assuming every form and self-determining; L bow to you." The 
great Muni so saying fell at his lotus feet. Then his body ‘dropped close 
to the feet of the Lord and a lustre like the burning flame of fire emanated 
from it, That accumulation of light got up to the height of seven tals, 
dropped down again on earth, and wandering for & while on all sides 
merged in the lotus feet of Hari. Whoever in the morning while getting 
up from the bed reads the hymn composed by Asta-vakra gets the 
redemption of final emancipation. O saint, this ode which is the prinee 
of odes is dearer to those who desire redemption than their lives. In days 
of yore Hari gave it to Sankara in the Vaikuntha. 

CHAPTER XXX. 4 

1-10. Narada said, “O great saint, I gathered from you a, 
wonderful mystery. When the great saint died, what» did Krişna 
who is kind to his believers do?” Nara-yana said, “O Nârada, when 
Krişna saw that the great saint died, he prepared to perform his funerals 
ina regular way. Afterwards he clasped his dead body to his breast and 
wept loudly like an ordinary mortal. By the embrace of the Lord and 
the friction of bis hands, the body of the saint was pulverised Qr reduced 
to ashes. "The cause of the emanation of ashes is this, the saint without 
taking any food had prayed for sixty thousand years. His body was de- 
nuded of blood and flesh. His bones (consumed in the fire of his stomach) 
had become red. Having been always engaged in the contemplation of 
the lotus foet of Krişna, he had no idea of the external world. Afterwards 
the destroyer of Madhu constructed a funeral pile with the sandal wood 
and being overwhelmed with grief placed therein his dead body and set 
fire to it. Then the Lord fainted for a while. When the body of the 
saint was reduced to ashes, there was a beat of drum in the heaven and 
there was a rain of flowers from the sky. At this time a beautiful chariot 
constructed with excellent gems and crowded with attendants (who resem- 
bled Krisna, speedy like the wind, decorated with clothes and wreaths 
furnished with suitable paraphernalia, descended from the Goloka. 

11-21. Then the attendants who were vested with the charms and 
virtues of Krisna hastily descended from the carriage and bowed to Radha 
and Krişna, They caused the great Muni (who wielded a subtle frame) 
to bow to the lotus feet of Lord Krigna, mounted the chariot along with 
the saint and then went up to the Goloka. When the great Maui as- 
eanded the Goloka, RAdh& who reyels in the Vrindávana was as-tonished | 


E 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


* 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


238 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. . 


ab the phenomenon and asked the Lord of the world thus, “O Lord, who 
was that great Muni, deformed, crooked,  dwarfish and effulgent? And 
why did curiously ashes come out of his body? And why did all his 
valour, resplendent like fire, merge in your lotus feet? And why did you 
being the Supreme Being, weep for him? And why did that pious grandmind- 


ed being ascend a celestial ear and go up to the Goloka? And why did you, 


with streaming eyes perform his funeral ceremony in various ways? O Lord, 
relate to me all this in detail”. The destroyer of Madhu smiled at her 
words and narrated to her the events of the past age thus, “O my dear, the 
history of the great Asta-vakra is famous throughout the world. In 
course of time, you will learn every thing in detail from Savants. 
Asta-vakra is the best of saints and famous throughout the world. O 
mother of the world, the universe rings with his fame.” 

22-35. When Radha, the spouse of Hari, heard this, she ruefully 
and with parched throat, gently and reverentially spoke thus:—*O Lord 
of my life when the thirst of the mind cannot bo extingiushed by the 
oeean of honey, how can it be satiated by the water of a place marked 
by the foot-prints of the cow? You are the dispenser of the Vedas, 
those whe recite the Vedas and Brahma. You are the Lord of Maha- 
Visnu. Who isa greater orator than you?” Krişna was very pleased 
with the words of Radha and prepared to reveal to her the extraordinary 
mystery. He said, “my dear, I am going to deseribe to you an ancient 
history which is connected with your queries. The narration of this 
subject or listening to the account dispels sins. Listen to that account, 
In days of yore, when the three worlds were deluged with water, then 
Brahma, the dispenser of the world, sprang out of the fleshy navel of 
Maha-Visnu through my digits. From the mind of that Brahma 
came out subsequently four boys devoted to Narayana and eifulgent with 
-~ the lustre of Brahma, viz. Sanaka, Sananda, Sanátana and Sanat-Kumár. 
They were five years old and naked like senseless children. They had no 
idea of the external world and yet they had full knowledge of the 
realities of Brahma. Once upon a time Brahmé said to them, “O my 
sons, take part in the act of creation.” But they did not carry 
out the behest of their father and went out for my devotion. Brahma 
thereupon became a little dejected. For if a son wilfully disobeys his 
father, the former causes great grief to the latter. Then the grand-father 
of all, i e., Brahma, by the strength of his wisdom, created from his body 
sons engaged in devotion, conversant with the Vedas and the auxiliary 


branches of the Vedas and effulgent with the lustre of Brahma, Their, 


names are as follows: — Atri, Pulastya; Pulaha, Marichi, Bhrigu, Angir, 
K ratu, Vasistha, Vodhu, Kapila, Asuri, Kavi, Sanku, Sankha, Danone 
n and Pracheta, They prayed for a long time and by the command 
of Brahma exercised themselves with the propagation of creation. They 
married and led worldly lives (or adopted the stage of life appropriate to a 
house-holder), Gradually they multiplied and begat sons and grandsons. O 
fair damsel T need not now deal in detail with tho sacred and interesting 
EE of the descendants of the above sages. Listen only to the main 
point, 
36-51. In course of time, Pracheta, the son of Brahma, begat a son 
named Asita who was the best of sages. Asita with a view to get a som 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA-KHANDA. 239 


EN ——— 


engaged hiwself in meditation along with his wife for a thousand celestial 
years. And yet he did not get a son. When he was about to commit 
suicide, there was a voice from the sky, “ O saint, please take Mantra 
from iva and make it Mature or perfect. ‘Then the deity presiding over 
the Mantra will accede to your wishes and grant you a boon by® virtue of 
which you will get a son.” The saint when he heard this wonderful voice, 
went to the pure region of Siva inaccessibla even to the Yogis. And this 
great Yogi, with his wife, adored Siva with a modest inclination of the head 
and folded palms, and said, *' O Lord, you are all- good. the source of 
good, the lord of Yogis, and the head of the spiritual guide of the Gurus. I 
therefore bow to you. O Lord, in that you are the death of deaths, you 
are the lord, the germ and victor of death. I bow to you. O Simbhu 
you are the death of the destroyers, the lord and the cause of time. You 


transcend the bounds of time, You reside in time and are the time - 


(or ender) of time. O Lord, I bow to you. O receptacle of virtue, you 
transcend all the properties of Nature. You are the germ and soul of 
virtue and the spiritual guide of the virtuous. I bow to you. O Lord, 
you are the image of Brahma. You know Brahm.a You are devoted to 
the thought of Brahma. You are the seedof Brahma and known as the 
sou of Brahma. Il bow to you.” The great Muni having tbus adored 
the efficient creator of beings, with a thrill of raptures in his body and 
with streaming eyes, stood up before him like one who is poor. Whoever, 
subsisting merely upon ghee and boiled rice reverentially reads the hymn 
composed by Asita for a year surely attains long life and wisdom aud gets 
a son devoted to Visnu. If he is poor, he becomes wealthy ; and if he is 
illiterate, he becomes learned, no doubt. A man without a wife gets a 
chaste and good-natured wife. enjoys happiness in this world and in the 
end goes to the domain of Siva At first Brahma gave this hymn to 
Prachetáà who ‘gave it to his son Asita. 

52-66, Lord Krisna said, Lord Sankara devoted to his adherents 
personally having heard the hymn said to Asita, the son of Brahma, 
“ O great saint, compose yourself. I understand what is passing in your 
heart, ‘Lhrough my digits, a son will be born to yon who will be equal 
to mé in every respect in form and virtue. Therefore I give to youa Mantra 
equal to mein every respect and unattainable by people.” So saying Sankara 
gave him your Mantra consisting of 16, letters, ode, method of worship, 
the wonderful amulet called Samsar-Vija and the method of Puras/charan. 
“ ‘the tutelary goddess, will come in person and grant you everything.” 
So saying he gave everything to Asita, "There-upon Asita bowed to him 
a hundred times and muttered the Mantra of 16 letters fora hundred 
years. O chaste nymph, you appeared to him in person and granted him- 
the boon saying, ‘ O saint. by my grace, you will get a wise son. So 
saying, you returned tc the Goloka. In course of time, Asita got a son 
through my digits. ‘Ihe son of the Muni was named Devala. He was the 
best of those who knew Brahma and more graceful than Cupid. After a 
while, Suvala married the fair and world-enchanting Ratnamálà, daughter 
of King Suyajfia. Afterwards the gallant Devala enjeyed the society of 
his wife in secret ‘places for à hundred years. After the lapse of & 
time,he desisted from his amorous pastimes and pleasures. 
Ho devoted himself to religion and recollected Hari. Once upon a time, he 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
= ee es Rus 


ware 


e 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


249 THE BRAHMA-VAIVARTA PURANA. 


was sleeping with his wife in the night. Butin ashor& time he became 
apathetic to the world, suddenly got up from his bed and went for devotion 
tothe caves of Gindha-Mádan moüntains. On the other hand, when Ratna. 
Mala got up from her bed, she could not see her husband. She was 
afilieted wita the fire of the pain of separation and lamented his absence 
very much. Every now and then, she sat, got up and bemoaned loudly, 
Her mind was very much agitated like paddy placed over fire in 9 
heated vessel. She totally abstained from food and gave up her ghost, 
whereupon her son performed her funeral rites, 

67-50. Afterwards my adherent. the dispassionate, great Muni Devala 

engaged himself in devotion in the hollow ot the Gandba-Madan mountain 
for a ce.estial thousand years. Accidentally one day  Rambhá saw him 
and desired his sexual intercourse: For the saint was graceful 
like Cupid and tranquil in disposition. Then Rambh& who enchants the 
three worlds carefully prepared her toilet in solitude and said to tho 
Muni, “O saint, listen to me.. Your grace is attractive to females. 
Therefore, be pleased to lay aside your rigid devotions for a while and 
enjoy my society. You excel the excellent in grace on earth, I too 
whoama graceful nymph, court your society. The union of a clever 
gallant with a clever nymph is most desirable. In India kings offer 
sacrifices for the sake of heaven; but we constitute the essence of Heavon. 
Who is not pleased with our rising breast,s thighs, our lotus face, smiles 
and the sweet contortions of our eye-brows ? The pleasures of woman's 
society constitute the cream of happiness. They are desired evon by 
saints. But if the woman be voluptuous or jovial, she affords a pleasure 
rarely to be enjoyed. Nay, any individual, be hea god, man, Gandharva or 
demon, if he is deprived of the pleasures of the society of Rambha, is 
actually deprived of the joy of a woman’s company. If any one who has 
subdued his passions does not enjoy the sociéty of a woman who has come 
to him voluntarily certainly dwells in the hell called the Kumbhipaka 
for as many years as there are pores on the skin of his body. Whoever 
quits a woman who makes advances to him practically kicks her and is him- 
self destroyed by her curse. Look! Brahma, by the curse of Mohini, has 
forfeited his position among those who are worshipped. Whoever shung 
& woman who has come to him voluntarily is regarded by her with 
greater indignation than the murderer of her husband, son or relations. 
A prostitute regards a gallant as the dearest person on earth. But if the 
gallant forsakes her, she tries her best to kill him. A prostitute is more 
wicked in disposition than the beasts of prey or maurdorers and is always 
eruel in her nature in every birth. : 

- 81-92. 9) great saint, in this solitudo I myself entreat you to give 
up your meditations, and by accepting me you will ever enjoy the 
fruits of your devotion.” ‘he great saint was much afraid at the words 
of Raiubh& and addressed to her words beneficial, full of ethical 
maxims and delightful in the end. He said, « O Rambhó, I am 
teling you truthful words constituting the essence of the Vedas and 
befitting the virtue of the family of the saints, A Brahmin who 
eommits sexual intereourse with a woman at the proper time as pres- 

'eribed by religion is always esteemed either in this world or in the next. 
But if a Brahmin, Kgatriya, or Vais'ya co-habits with the wife of another 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 241 


he scares away the indignant goddess of fortune from his house, though 
he may be worshipped throughout the world. He is condemned every- 
whore, in this world and is not entitled to perform any act. In the next 
world, he resides in the hell called the “blind hell” for a hundred years. 
Tt has been, no doubt, held that a house-holder should accede to 
the wishes of a woman who has voluntarily come to him. Ifhe shuns 
‘hor, it is said that he is cursed and commits a sin. But this rule does 
not apply to ascetics. Brahm4, the dispenser of the world, by virtue 
of his marriage, it is true, has secured a wife. Association with a woman 
may not cause in the mind of Brahma and others indifference to the world. 
But we have quitted for good the society of a woman. Why then should 
wo cherish desire for a woman in our heart? Whoever leaving his wife 
affectionately courts the wife of another person forfeits his. fame and 
‘longevity. His life is just like death unto him. In this world a man 
who has not acquired the slightest degree of fame leads an idle life. To 
him wealth, kingdom, happiness or prosperity is useless. Fair one, Iam 
an old anchorite. I do not stand in need of you. Therefore, © mother, 
go toa well-dressed, handsome, youthful person.” Rambha, the best of 
Heavenly whores, was incensed at these words and her lips and chins 
quivered, She again said to the Muni thus : 

93-101. “O best of saints, the colour ofyour body is like the lovely Cham- 
paka; you are handsome like Cupid. By dint of your devotions, you have 
acquired a lovely enchanting grace which appeals to the taste of women. 


Therefore, O Lord, to whom else should l go, if not to yourself? Who , 


ig more handsome than you? How cana passionate whore manage to 
live without you? O best ofsaints, my» heart is very much consumed 
with the flame of lust. Come and enjoy me immediately. As an 
elephant suddenly destroys a plantain tree situated in a forest, so 
assion that has sprung into existence at your sight is ready to destroy 
mo. O best of those who. know the Vedas, yield to my desire, other- 
wise Ishall curse you. Hither take me soon or my curse in the 
alternative, My mind and life are being constantly consumed by 
passion, and my soul is weeping continually. ‘My inflamed mind 
and body can, inno way, be appeased without drinking the nectar of 
your sexual intercourse. Look, the best of saints, Brahma, the Lord 
of the universe, was not able to avert the curse pronounced by an 
indignant woman in tho utmost distress of her heart. " When the Muni 
made no reply and was again absorbed in meditation, Rambba was’ 
very angry and cursed him thus, “O crooked Brahmin, all your body 
will be deformed and swarthy. You will be voidof grace and youth. | 
You will be most deformed in the three worlds ; and undoubtedly all! 
‘the powers of devotion which you acquired in the past will vanish 
immediately.” 


102-111. So saying Rambhá, the best of heavenly whores, went 
home. After a while the great. Muni failed to perceive any longer the 
lotus feet of Hari in his heart. Then this separation from his feet 
agitated him much and seeing that he was void of all his previous reli- 
gious sanctities and that he was deformed in appearance, with an afilicted 
heart he prepared a pit of fire and was about to rush into the flame. 
At that time I went to him and granted to him a boon, The saint was 

31 : 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


- 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


34b THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


— 


consoled by the celestial knowledge whichI impartedto him and assumed a 
tranquil mien. As I saw that the eight members of his body were crooked, 
out of fun I named him Astá-vakra. The Muni, by my advice, came at once to 
the summit of the Malaya and engaged himself in great devotion for sixty 


thousand years. When that devotion was over, I gave him redemption, as: 


he was my adherent. O my dear, everything is destroyed at the time of the 
eternal dissoluticn; but my adherents are never destroyed. He was immersed 
for a long time in devotion without food. His body was consumed in 
the flaming fire of his stomach. His body was burnt and reduced to 
ashes. O my dear, I have. come to the summit of this mountain merely 
for the sake of the Muni. ‘There is no one so devoted to me or will be 
ever so devoted to me as Astá-vakra. As Brahma lost his lustre through 
the curse of a prostitute, so did this dévotel great-grandson of Brahma, 
though the best of sages, lose his lustre. Thus I narrated to you the 
delightful, sacred, abstruse account of the great-minded Agtd-vakra. 
Now what do you want to hear more? 


CHAPTER XXXI. 

1-2. Radha said, *O Lord, I heard the delightful, wonderful history of the 
great saint. Now I want to know;why Brahma was cursed. How eould 
a being whois the creator of the world and yields benefits of devotion come 
to be regarded as unworthy of worship by the mere curse of a prostitute ?” 


8-9. Lord Krisna said, *O my dear, inthe Raivata Manwantara, 
there was a royal saint named Suchandra. He was a great ascetic, the 
best ofthe Vaisnavas and very pious. This great-minded king, in days 
of yore, came to the delightful top of this Malaya mountain situated in 
India and was absorbed in asceticism for a thousand years. As he performed 
the austere rites of the Munis, his body was worn-out and covered with 
ant-hills At this sight the merciful Brahma arrived at the solitary place 
of devotion to grant him a boon. Brahm’ annointed him with the water 
of his wooden pot, the outcome of my body, by means of the Mantra given 
by me. The best of kings, by the bare touch of that water, gob up, 
reverentially worshipped the creator of the world and with folded palms 
stood up before him. Then Brahma said to the prostrate king Suchandra, 
‘O best of kings, solicit any boon desired by you,” 


10-20. Thereupon the best of kings demanded from him faith in my 
feet and my bondage. Brahma kindly gave him the boon desired. The 
royal saint Suchandra who was effulgent like Cupid, after having got the 
boon required, stood up before him. At this time, the king saw thata 
chariot was descending from the sky to the earth and was valorous like 
a hundred suns. ‘That car was excellent, constructed with excellent gems, 
had a hundred wheels and was effulgent with its own rays. Its light 
kindled up the ten quarters. It was constructed with invaluable diamonds 
and brightened up by picturesque jars. It was graced with rubies, 
diamonds, pearls and radiant and pure looking—glasses of gem. It was 
decorated with celestial cloths, ten millions - of white chowries and 
surrounded on all sides by wreaths of Páripáta. It was speedy like the 
wind and as it was adorned with several sorts of pictures it looked mest 
wonderful. Within that car, were seated attendants of Visnu decked with 
many ornaments, haviny four hands, daik-blue and bright in appearance, 

aving perennial youth, clad in yellow dress and aunointed with sandal, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


€————————————————— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 248 


M 


aloe and other perfume. When the king saw the assembly of the gods 
in tko ear, he bowed to them with pleasure. At that time suddenly there 
was a rain of flowers on his head; and there was a flourish of drum, trumpet 
ani other sorts of music in the heavens. Then the saint, sages and k 
ndepts blessed the kinz. The over-rejoiced gols eulogised him. The 
king having adored the attendants of Visnu attained their form. 


91-31. Afterwards the attendants mounted him on the car and 
brought him to the Goloka, The king Suchandra, there, became one of 
my attendants and remained for ever in my vicinity. Afterwards Brahma 
was going home when Mohini who was wandering in a grove of flowers 
beheld him. She was at once consumed with the flame of passion 
and became spell-bound. She cast a slanting glance at him, smiled 
and concealed her face with the hem of her cloth. At that time the 
vermilion-mark on her forehead mixed with the mark of musk gave 
her a superb grace. The colour of her body was like the enchanting 
Champak flowers. fer youth was perpetual. Her loins, buttocks and 
breasts were thick. Her face thieved the charms of the full moou of 
autumn which added to hor own grace, She was clad in fine, slender 
dress and decked with several ornaments of gem. It seemed that Mohini 
by a mere glance of her eyes, could easily captivate the three worlds. This 
nymph, while she was gently walking with the gait of an elephant across 
the avenue of the garden, beheld Brahmá on his way homo, was enraptured 
at tho sizhtand fainted. ‘The heart of Brahm’ who sprang from the lotus, . 
who had subdued his passions and who is self-contented was not defiled in ` 
the least by the sight, He passed along, absorbed in the meditations of 
Hari. When Brahma went to his domain, the passionate Mohini almost 
lost her senses and, either asleep or awake, day and night remembered the 
four-faced Brabma. She abstained from food and sleep and forgot all 
her other gallants. The passionate Mohini got up and slept at times 
and wandered, to and fro, in the way like paddy put over fire ina heated 
vessel, 


32-44, At this time the clever Rambhá, the best of the heavenly 
whores was passing by that way to her trysting-place with some object 
in view and saw that her associate was strotting, here and there. Ram- 
bhá saw that her lips, throat and palate were dried up and realised the 
condition of her heart. And yet she asked Mohini smiling, “My 
associate, you can enchant the heart of the people of the three worlds: 
and yet why are you wandering in this way ? O blessed being, tell me 
quickly. Look here. lam Rambhá, your dear companion. Go to that 
favourite gallant of yours, on whose account you have been excited with 
passion and restore him to consciousness. For he, too, has lost his senses. 
My dear companion, we are prostitutes by profession and are always for- 
tunate. We are not liable to any anxiety with a view to maintain the chastity 
of our race, Particularly consider that every one desires sexual pleasures. 
Why should a person feel ashamed of her passion when her heart al- 
ways inclines to her lover? In these three worlds, there is no object 
dearer than the soul. Our attachment to our gallant is solely actuated 
by selfish motives. We love him as a woman loves her husband, so long 
as the body and soul live together. He to whom the mind ofa woman 
naturally leans is as dear to her as her life, Dear friend, look at me, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


en. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


244 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


I, too, being excited with passion, am going to my trysting place. There- 
fore discuss the point very well with me, who am your friend in ever 

respect and then go to your lover. My friend, prepare your Nibi (the 
ends of a woman's cloth tied in front into a knot upon waist) and the lock 
of your hair in an excellent manner. Dress yourselfin a lovely, tasteful 
garment likely to enchant the heart of saints. O blessed being, express 
to me the feelings of your heart. In these three worlds, the influences of the 
woman-kind and one's soul both ought tobe preserved. A woman ought not 
to reveal her desire of sexual intercourse to any body else. But there is no. 
harm in revealing it to your dear and simple-minded female associate or 
to your gallant. Therefore, my dear companion, carefully reveal your sec- 
ret to me. If you do not do so, you will be subjected to ridicule and bring 
about your own ruin, Rambha’s words abashed Mohini who smiled and 
disclosed her heart to her sympathetie friend. 


45-50. She said, “O Rambhá, since that day forth that I saw 
the four-faced Lord Brahma in the solitary garden, I have been consumed 
with the fire of lust. Since that day. I have cherished no desire for food. 
I have no idea of the time when the sun or the moon arises. O my 
companion, at present I cannot realise the difference between my waking 
moments and my dreams, My life always seeks the desired embrace. 
If my desire is not fulfilled in a moment, my soul will soon quit the body 
for the sake of the lord of my life. My dear companion, what can 
Isay more? My body, which is just like gold, boing consumed by the 
fire of lust is taking the aspoct of a burnt mountain for want of nourish- 
ment. Now, I cannot determine if I am walking, sitting or sleeping. 
Therefore fie upon prostitutes, particularly fie upon me a hundred 
times. O Rambhá, what measures shall I now adopt?’ Shall I quit my 
shame or my body ? Please tell me which of these two methods shall 
T adopt ?” 


51-60. Rambhá, the greatest of the celestial whores, when sho 
heard her words, pointed out to her celestial methods productive of future 
good saying: “O good nymph, what you say is true ; but I shall dispel all 
the evils by which you have been beset. Take heart of grace and listen 
to the method which I suggest. O Mohini, dress yourself gorgeously at 
this time and adore Káma. Go personally along with him and try to 
cause distraction in the mind of Brahma, your beloved gallant. With- 
out the holp of the god Kama, which woman will be able to subdue the heart 
of Brahma who is best of those that subdued thoir passions and 
who is like Narayana himself? Therefore, O my companion Mohint, 
go at this time to the holy lake of Pugkara and there on its coast engage 
yourself in the adorations and devotions of Kama. Then the Lord Kama 
who is kind to the female sex will appear before you in person." So say- 
ing Rambha, the best of the celestial prostitutes, went to KAma for the grati- 
faction of her lust. Mohini, to adore the god Kama, went to tho shrine of 
Pugkara, Afterwards Mohini having prayed Káma for a very long time 
was able to see the god and along with him went to the spotless land 
of Brahma, She found the offspring of the lotus, (Brahmá, alone and 
tried by facing him to cause bewilderment in his mind. At one time, 
she danced in a lovely manner and with well-regulated movements. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Y 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 245 


TTT 
SS 


At another time, she sang in a way likely to captivate the 
heart of a gallant. Then the Lord of the world was 
spell-bound by the enchanting music. Thre was a thrill of raptures 
in his body and tears trickled down his eycs: - 

61.04. Mohini saw that the four-faced Lord was enchanted. 
Then gladly and playfully according to the measure prescribed by 
the sexual science, she made blan lishments of love and with a smiling 
face and with the grace eaused by distortions of her  eye-brows, 
displayed her beauty. A person; rendered senseless by the darts of 
Cupid, loses all sense of shame. Brahma, as soon as he realised the 
mean thoughts which swayed her heart, hung down his head abash- 
ed. He remembered Hari, gave hera suitable reward ‘and refrained 
from witnessing the song and the dance any more. Mohini was 
discouraged when she realised the feelings of Brahma and with parched 
throat adored Kama, the source of passion thus: 

65-67. “O formless god Cupid, mind is the bast of the passions 
and is the outcome of the digits of Visnu. Mind is the root of all 
acts and you are the outcome of mind. Therefore I bow to you. 
]n the bodies of corporeal animals, Hari himself represents the soul? 

iva represents knowledge and Brahma’ represents the mind. You are the 
offspring of that mind. Therefore I bow to yo. You dwellin all 
the parts of the body of those who wield bodies. You have a partieular 
regard even for ascetics. You can be brought under control by the world. 
You can be adored with the greatest difficulty, You are irresistible. 
I therefore bow to you. ' 

68-78. “ O Lord of Rati,you are invineible in the world. You yonr- 
self have conquered the world. You are the radieal cause of all 
creatures. You are the root of the sexual intercourse enchanting to 
every body and you are yourself the favourite of your spouse Rati. 
I bow to you. O friend of women, you always dwell in the bodies 
of women. You are dearer to women than their lives. Women serve 
you and like your vehicles or sharp weapons. I bow to you. You 
engender love in the mind of the husband. You are the prop of 
endless charms and the sholter of virtue : the fragrant wind is your 
minister and the spring is your friend. Therefore, O Lord, I bow to 
you. O wielder of the weapon of flowers, you always dwell in youths. 
You excite in the heart of youths the desire to see women. You destroy 
those whose heart is consumed by the pang of separation. I bow to 
you. O ocean of mercy, you destroy tho wisdom of those who, unkind 


“to you, quit the enjoyments of their senses by the exercise of wisdom 


and you reside in your believers ina very subtle form. I bow to 
you. Youare the gorm of asceticism and the virtue of the ascetics. 
You can easily impassion the mind of those who have obtained emancipa- 
tion. So, O Lord, I bow to you, Persons whose bodies are composed 
of five elements can easily be controlled by you and 
such persons are submissive to you. The five senses are 
your harbour. Therefore, O wielder of five arrows, I bow to you.” In 
the presence of Brahma, Mohini, having adored Kama thus in her 
mind, absorbed herse!f in his meditations with a erest-fallen appearance. 
O my dear Radha, this enchanting hymn ig stated in the Mádhyandin 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


340 — THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA 

Sakha. Durvása whose sole wealth is his ascelicism gave this hymn 
to Mohini at Gandha Madan. A licsntious man who reverentially reads. 
this most sacred hymn surely attains his object. Cupid never seeks to 
oppress this individual, who is his favourite.. Rather, Incidentally 
he becomes healthy and vigorous like Kàma and gets a chaste wife who 
can enchant the three worlds, 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


1-10. Lord Krisna said “O Radha dearer than my life then 
Kama was pleased with the eulogies of Mohint and remaining 
in the sky discharged his arrows at Brahma, When Kama discharged 
at his father the weapon of Mohan consecrated with Mantras Brahma was 
very much agitated in his heart and for a while beheld the lotus face 
of Mohini again and again. After a while coming to his senses he 
recollected Hari and desisted from that mood. Brahma having realised 
in his mind the tactics of Kama cursed him in anger, He did not forgive 
him atallon the ground thathe was his son. He eursed him thus: 
“O foolish Kama, infatuated with youth and the pride of prosperity, thou 
art attemp‘ing to cause distraction in the mind of thy elders. Thy 
pride will soon be crushed." Thereupon the palate and lips of KAma were 
dried up. By the curse of Brahma he was frightened and disappointed and 
he departed with his friend, the spring. "Then the dispenser of the universe 
having said thus to Kama, addressed Mohini who was -excited with pas- 
sion and casting at him lustful glances thus “Mother Mohinî, go to such 
a person as ean pander to the desire of a prostitute, 1 have realised 
your intention. Abominable deeds are not fit for me, What is moro 
detestable to the author of the Vedas than a lustful aet like this? 
The theory that even yogis should not disappoint a woman who has 
voluntarily approached them for an immoral purpose does not appeal to 
their taste, 


11-21. “All women should be avoided. Particularly a prostitute should 
be avoided by all means. Fora prostitute after having destroyed the 
wealth, longevity, life and-fame of her gallant ultimately causes him 
great pain. A prostitute daily desires a. new gallant and interferes with 
the duties which he ought to perform. Whores are more cruel than mur- 
derers and are the root of all calamities, As tho flash of lightning, 


is greater apprehension of danger from a prostitute than from a beast 
of prey. A fool who is entangled in her love apprehends danger at 
every step. O Mohini, you are beautiful and blessed among Heaven’s 
women, You represent the prosperity of young men and the poison of 
ascetics. You are the best of celestial Whores and your youth is ever. 
lasting. "Try to find outa gallant suited to your taste, You are clever 
among women, It behoves you, therefore, to bring under your control 
a clever gallant. Wor the union of a clever man with a clever woman 
is most delightful. Iam an old Brahmin, worn out by decrepitude, and 
devoted to Vignu. How ean I, therefore, be attached to a prostitute? 


Child, I am like your father. Leave me, therefore, and go to another 


person. For I am the creator of the world, The Creator is, truly speak. 
ing, the father, A licentious woman who, leaving Kama, the moon, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


ERISNA JANMA KHANDA. 241 


` 


a 


Jayanta, Nala-Kuvara, the two As'wini-Kumárs, Budha (the son of the 
Moon) or the handsome demons expert in sexual science and competent 
in sexual intercourse comes to me and desires my society is decidedly 
void of all taste. 

22-31. “A man seeks a woman for sexual enjoyment; but if a woman 
seeks a man, the order is reversed and the result is a hideous mockery. 
A woman. is rare among gems; your lover, therefore, ought to court 
you and you should no& court a lover. A woman who voluntarily goes 


tó a man and courts his society forfeits her self-respect. For a gem . 


_also that spontaneously comes into the possession of a person loses its 


value. A man goes to his wife only. A woman also goes to her husband. - 


This is sanctioned by the Sistras. But a woman who goes to any other 
man violates the tenets of the Vedas and rules of society. A man who 
at the proper time enjoys his possessions according to the rules prescribed 
by the s'ástras is esteemed throughout the world. But he who covets 
the possessions of others can never be so esteemed. Frail nymph, none 
has got an enemy in the world. Ono’s passions are regarded as one’s 


enomies and the root-cause of all enmity. Performance of acts sanctioned - 


by the Vedas creates friendship; but an aet opposed to the Vedas turns 
also a friend into one's enemy. Hari is pleased with a person 
who performs an act according to the Vedas. The world is pleased 
with him, if Hari is pleased with him. If Hari is displeased with him, 
all are displeased with him, Both prostitutes and ‘chaste women reap 
tho fruits of their actions. Hari has constructed a woman asa di- 
git of Nature. He has created the prostitute as ill-natured and contemptible 
and the chastewoman as good-natured. À 

39-34, “A chaste woman and a prostituto are of three kinds. Among 
them there is none who voluntarily seeks the society of her husband 
or lover. In the whole world there is no woman who casts so great 
a slur on her race as she who voluntarily courts a gallant in an elegant 
dress. You are the only exception.” 

35-41. Mohini was much enraged at the words of the Lord of the 
universe and thus spoke, “O Brahma, I have just studied your nature 


in full. You preach morality; but I cannob compose my mind. My 


heart is seb upon you,so longas you encounter my sight. I have 
forgotten all my other gallants since I saw your lotus face. Lord, 
ecnsumed by the fire of lust, 1 was going to sacrifice my life when 
Rambhá gave me the advice which has brought me here and pre- 


vented me from carrying out my design. Agreeably to her advice, 


I came here with Cupid. But Kama also has been disappointed 
by your curse and has left with his friend, the spring. O - Lord, 
though you are rebuking me in several ways, yot I am unable to leave 
yor All the membors of my body have been paralysed. O ocean of mercy, 
show compossion to your slave. It is not proper for you to destroy 
me. Lord, your embrace alone can despel the fever of my body. 

42-55. “You are the dispenser of the world and, unluekily, I ama 
prostitute. The saints are never, however, proud. For every one is 
subject to Karma. Some people mount cars, others convey them. Through 
the influence of Karma, kings realise revenue ; and subjects pay them 
the said revenue. Some are always seated on the throno as. kings: others 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


248 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


are their subjects and attendants. Karma accounts for this difference. Some 
are mounted on the back of elephants and horses; some ride on con- 
sveyance: and others bear them. Through the inQuenco of Karma, some 
are born through sows; others are born through Sachi or as your sons, 
In this world through the influence of Karma and faith in Hari some 
are born as the Lord's attendants ; others unfortunately are born as the 
worms of ordure. Some kings,asa result of their Karma, go to heaven; 
others go to hell and eat ordure mixed with urine. Through Karma 
one is born as Indra, the best of gods: others are born as the inferior order 
of gods, or men or inferior animals. Some are born in the world as Brahmins, 
- the best of castes; other are born as Ksatriya, Vai'syas, Stidras 
or infidels. Some are born as wise and impartial; others are born as 
illiterate, blind and deformed. Some people teach Sistras to their pupils, 
others receive knowledge from their spiritual guides.. Through Karma 
some bodies become moveable or immoveable. Some are anchorites; others 
are murderers. As the result of your Karma, you have become Brahma. 
Some women are chaste for the same reason and are esteemed in this 
world as wellas in the next. Others are whores and earn their liveli- 
hood by the sale of their bodies. Iam a celestial whore. This is why 
I am enjoyable and adorable by the gods. Our bare embrace cuts asun- 
der the ties of Karma. 

56-60. “The mind breeds character. Character is the gorm of Karma. 
That Karma is the cause of fruits. But Lord Hari is the fountain-head 
of everything. The Lord always awards fruits of action through 
Karma. That Jandrdana who . represents Karma is eternal 
and most powerful. Why, was I so much slanderod and why 
did you so much rebuks mo? You are emphatically the creator 
of the world and I have come to see only your lotus feet. I have volun- 
tari come to court as my husband that being whoso lotus feet cannot be 
beheld even by the yogis in their dreams. Wither in this world or in 
the next I shall not seek the society of any ono else, nor shall I touch 
any one. No woman looks so graceful asshe who is touched by the dust 
of your feet.” 3 

61-72. Mohini, having said so, sat before Drahm4, the ruler of tho 
world who trembled through the fear of the prostitute. Mohini with 
crooked eyes and a smiling face expressed her sensual feelings and being 
oppressed by the darts of Cupid displayed her body to Brahma. At 
this time, the whole-bodied Káma, expert in abstract meditation appeared 
and discharged five arrows at one and thesame time. Enchanting, 
staying, infatuating, fever-producing, benumbing and other weapons Cupid 
discharged while remaining in the sky and haying deputed his myrmidons 
tried to be-witeh his father. Cupid also deputed to the task, the spring, 
the cackoo, the delightful fragrant breeze and other myrmidons. He en- 
tered into the body of Brahma and attempted to cause distraction in his 
mind. By his side , the male cuckoos uttered a melodious sound. 
refreshing breeze gently began to blow and the spring cheerfully wan- 
dered in all directions. Then there was a thrill of raptures in the body 
ofthe Lord of the universe. At that time Mohini. the enchantress of 
the universe, smiled and being rendered senseless by darts of Cupid 
expressed her sensual desire with her slanting glances, .Brahmá could 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. «249 


EEE al 


—_ 


realise very well thatthe disorder in his heart was due to the preponder- 
ance of passion recollected Lord Hari in fear to dispel Káma, the enemy 
of his heart from his mind. Afterwards Brahma mentally adored Lord 
Hari who was charming and dark-blue in appearance, who had a tranquil 
mien and smiling feature, who was decked with gems, who had a never- 
failing youth, a charming apparel, who was clad in yellow garments and 
who wielded a flute with both of his hands thus: 

7382. “O Hari, I have been immersed in the sea of evil and lust, 
which is full of water and difficult to cross. Preserve me soon. This 
impassable sea causes oblivion of faith in the mind ofthe devout. It 
is the only stepping-stone to danger, and is instrumental in obscuring the 
eye of wisdom. It is full of the waves of birth and ever teems with alli- - 
gators in the shape of women. Its bed is very deep: and the currents of 
sexual intercourse flow there with a great force. The sea of lust appears 
ab the first flush, to be full of honey but ultimately it is discovered to be” 
replete with poison. It blocks the way to redemption and widens th? 
way to hell. ‘Therefore, O destroyer of Madhu, be a pilot yourself and wit 
the boat of intellect and supreme wisdom relieve me from this impassabl 
ocean. © Lord, no one can ascertain the number of Brahmas like 
my humble self deputed to the task of creation: and no one can say how 
many Brahmas are there in this world. O Lord of the world, preserve 
me. O Lord, though this land is not a field cf action and is called 
Brahma-loka, yet I have no attachment for worldly enjoyments being so 
my impediments to your faith. O Lord, O ocean of mercy, O friend 
of the poor, show mercy to me. O all-illusion, I have been obscured 
completely by the darkness of ignorance. Do not cause me to experience 
ominous visions.” Adoring me thus, the Lord of the universe paused and 
with an inclination of his head he constantly meditated my lotus feet 
and remembered mo. Whoever reverentially reads this hymn composed 
by Brahma does not geb immersed in any matter caleulated to bring him 
notoriety or evil fame. He gets rid of all delusion, secures my homage 
and bong rendered devout in this world turns out to be the best of my 
votaries, 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


1-11. Sri Krisna said, “Brahma adored Lord Hari and restrained 
the infatuated elephant of his mind with the iron-goad of the celestial 
knowledge imparted to him by me and sat down by the side of Mohini.” 
‘then Mohini ridiculed him saying «O Lord, a being who, allured only 
by Aints from a woman, drags her to his side and enjoys her society is 
regarded as thé best person. Whoever having clearly perceived the 
intentions of a woman commits sexual intercourse with a woman after he 
is entreated by her to do so is regarded as the second best. Anda 

. wretch wh» being entreated by a passionate woman fails to commit sexual 
intereoarse with her even in solitude doas nob deserve to be called a man 
but a eunuch. Any one, be he a house-holder or an anchorite, or & 

licentious person, if be avoids a woman who voluntarily seeks his society, 
is condemned in this world and goes to hell in the next world. By the 
curse of that woman be is deprived of grace, beauty and pride and 


32 F 


4 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


TE ___ Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. — i , 
250 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. E 


— 


subsequently he becomes impotent. O Lord of the world, get up. I 
have fallen into the dreadful, impassable sea of Just. Be a pilot and 
release me. In this solitary place which is free from all animals, which 
is redolent of fragrant and gentle breeze. which is full of the sweet melody 
of the cuckoos, purchase this slave of yours at every birth, who is devoted 
to you with her whole head and heart by payment of the consideration of 
sexual intercourse.” Mohini who was agitated with lust, after having 
said so, pulled the clothes and arms of Brahma, the creator and ruler 
of the world. 


12-26. Brahma feeling that the time was suited to an address, with 
a heart agitated with fear; addressed Mohini, using words that were gentle 
and sweet like honey thus:— “O Mohini, I tell you plain, truthful, 
substantial, beneficial words. Listen. In these three worlds, it is not proper for 
& woman to adopt a course of impudence. O mother, I am your dis- 
passionate, old son. Therefore leave me and try to find cut a merry 
youth adapted to your purpose. Wair one, it is only through the dis- 
pensation of fortune that a wife, a spiritual leader, husband, son, good and 
evil results, mystic formula and skillare secured. No one has to make 
special efforts to secure them. O nymph devoted to good vows, fate 
has not ordained that I should commit sexual intercourse with you. Be 
an act great or small, it is performed through the dispensation of fate.” 
So saying, Brahmi remembered my lotus fect. ‘The prostitute, rendered 
Senseless by lust, pulled him again. At that time, in that delightful 
place, at my instance, refulgent with the lustre of Brahma arrived Atri, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Vasistha, Kratu, Angirâ, Burigu, Marîchi, Kapila, 
Bodhu, Pancha-Sikhá, Ruchi, Asuri, Prachetà, Sukra, Vrihas-pati, Uta- 
thya, Karatha, Kanwa, Kas’yapa, Gautama, Sanaka, Sananda, Kardam, 
Sanatan, the Lord Sanat-Kumar, (the great spiritual guide of the ancho- 
rites), Satatapa, Pippala, Sanku, Sankha, Parásara, Markandeya, Lomaga, 
Chyavana, Durydsi, Jaratkáru, Astika, Vibhándaka, Risya- ringa, 
Bbaradwája, Vámadeva, Kaus'ika and others. Seeing them, Mohini let 
go the hold of Brahma. Brahma took his seat and Mohini sat down 
on his left side, When the saints bowed to Biahmá with a reverential 
inclination of their heads, Brahma blessed them- and alloted to them 
their appropriate seats. He shone in their midst like the moon 
surrounded by stars. 


27-30. Then the saints asked Brahma thus: “O god, why is 
Mohini, the chief of the heavenly prostitutes, seated by your sido?” The 
Lord of Creation thus answered, “The females are naturally bashful. 
This nymph is unable to speak out the matter for herself. So I speak 
for her, Listen. This Mohini took par& in the most wonderful danee 
and song for a long time and has Consequently been exhausted. Therefore 
like a Caughter of mine she is seated by the side of her father." Brahm a 
laughed while he addressed the council of the sages in the above way. 
O Radha, the omniscient sages, by dint of their wisdom, having realised 
the secret, laughed also. 


_ B14). The heavenly whore Mohini having realised the mental con- 
dition of Drahmá in his laughter was highly incensed. Her body quivered, 
Her eyes became crooked and red like a pair of lobuses. Her lips and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 251 


chin shivered. Mohini got up ina rage, stood up before the assembly, 
and in their presence like damsel death addressed Brahm‘ saying, * O 
Brabina, you are the Lord of the world and the author of the Vedas. 
Now, is your acb sinctioned by the Vedas or adverse to the Vedas? (0) 
spiritual leader of those who know the Vedas, discuss in your mind how 
u person who is attached to his own daughter can ridicule a dancing gir]. 
God has made me a prostitute privileged to resort to any lover. But an 
adverse act performed by a saint is highly objectionable. Inasmuch a3 
in the pride of your heart, you have ridiculed a woman who, through 
the dispensation of fate, modestly sought your protection like a slave, 
you will soon be excluded from worship in the world and Hari will 
quickly subdue your vanity, O Brahmi, now realise your own strength 
and the relative strength of a whore. Whoever will accept your amulet, 
mystic formula or hymu will enccunter obstacles at every step and be 
subjected to ridicules. In every age, the. gods receive annual worship. 
But you alone will nob be entitled to the worship which you used to get 
in the month of Mágha. 


41-50. What is the use of discussing the merits of that worship 
which you used to receive? But heneoforth in any age, in this body or 
in any other body, you will no longer be worshipped.” . Mohini having 
said so went to the house of Kiama and there enjoyed his society whereby 
she dispelled the fever of her body. O my dear, when Mohini came to 
her senses, sho lamented again and again saying, “ Alas! Why did I 
curse the creator of the world ?” Sorrowing thus, the celestial prostitute 
went away and the saints became very sorry. The ruler of destiny, through 
fear of her curse, inclined his head and trembled. At that timo the saints 
advised Brahma to adopt beneficial methods with these words: “O Brahma, 
go to the Vaikunthaand seek the protection of Hari? So saying they 
went away. Thereupon Brahma sought the protection of Nàràyana, the 
lord of Kamala, dark-blue in appearance, charming, of a tranquil mien and 
a modilication or form of myself, ‘l'he dispenser of the world with a crest- 
fallen appearance, parched throat, palate and lips bowed to the four-handed 
god and sat by his side. He revealed his mystery to Narayana, the 
friend of the poor, the ocean of. mercy and proserver in danger. Hari 
smiled when he heard all this aif. addressed him with words, delightful, 
substantial, truthful and beneficial to the world thus : “ O Brahma, you are 
conversant with the Vedas. You are the chief of the spiritual guides of the 
learned ; und yet you have performed an act which cannot be committed by 
a murderer, é 


51-63. ‘ Wonen are the digits of Nature and ropresent the germ 
of the world. Humiliation of a woman is offering insult to Nature. Your 
region is not the excellent, sacred land of India. That is Brahma world, 
a field of amusement. Why did you subdue your passions ? Nay, even in 
India, if a women excited with passion accidentally appears before a man 
and desires his company, the latter, even if dispassionate, should not reject 
her offer. If he rejects her offer, he is defrauded in several ways’ in this 
world ànd goes to hell in the next world. The woman also, oppressed 
by sorrow, curses him, Whoever abandons his own wife and out of ayarica 

or loyo courts the wifo of another man is surely the basos6 of men; 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


252 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


degrades himself and also degrades ten ancestors and ten descendants in 
his own line. Ifa household woman abandons her husband anl courts 
another man, she is contaminated by her conduct. But a man is not 
contaminxted by sexual intercourse, if the woman desiring his society 
be a prostitute or if the woman, though she belongs to a certain household, 
seeks his society voluntarily. If a woman with various devices brings 
under her control the husband of another woman, she must reside in the hell 
called the blind well so long as the sun and the moon exist. Heavenly 
prostitutes always dwell in heaven under the rules which bind them. 
But a person who slights them is surely guilty. O dispenser of the world, 
for a while pass your days in the sea of the world designed for sinners. 
Afterwards I shall adopt means to relieve you from sins. At this time 
a sentinel arrived and said, **Lor', the ten-faced Brahma of another 
universe awaits your orders at the threshold and respectfully solicits 
‘an interview with you." Hari having heard his words permitted 
him to enter. The ten-faced Brahmá, introduced by the sentinel, appeared 
before Hari and was allotted a seat superior to that of the four-faced 
Brahmi. At the command of Hari, he sat down and, in a wonderful 
bymn unheard-of before by the four-faced Brahma, adored the Lord. 


64-76, Nardiyana again said to tho four-handed sentinel ofhis, "If any 
new visitor appears again at the threshold, bring him to mo with esteem”? 
O nymph who revellest in Vrindavana, O Radha, at this time the hundred- 
faced Brahma came to Hari bowing and with his hundred mouths adored Him 
with an abstruse and excellent hymn unheard-of by tho ten-faced 
Brahma, He then occupied a position ahead of the ten-faced Brahma, 
Atthis time the thousand-faced Brahma, lord of another universe, 
put in appearance and with a modest inclination of his head alored 
the Lord with a hymn unheard-of by others and then sat down at his 
command. ‘Then Hari asked the Brahm’ mentioned list about the affairs of 
the people (sunk in worldly enjoyment and dwelling in the worlds 
of all the Brahmas) and the gods. ‘The four-faced Brahma used to regard 
himself as the go! Visnu ; but when ho observed tho hundred-faced and 
thousand-faced Brahmas, his pride was crushed. When Hari saw that 
the four-faced Brahma, abashed, almost looked like a corpse, he 
kindly pointed out to him the Brahmás of the other worlds. In fact, the 
worlds are as numerous as the pores on the skin of Náráyana, who 
isa modification of my form ; and in each universe, there is à Brahma, 
The Brahmás bowed to Hari aud went home. Tho four-faced Lord now 
came to regard himself as the owner of very ordinary or humble resources. 
Visnu asked the abashed, bowing, four-faced Brahmá,*O Brahmi, what 
were you observing at this time, as if in a state of dream’? Brahma 
replied, “Lord, the present, the past and the future are all the outcome 
of your illusion.” So saying he sat down with his hoad hung down in 
shame, Afterwards Hari devised schemes for the purification of Brahma, 


CHAPTER XXXIV, 
. 1-12, Lord Krisna said, “At this time, before the assembly of 
[ Visnu, Sankara himself, possessed of a cheerful mien, mounted on a bul- ' 
lock and covered with ashes put inappearance, He was clad ina tiger-hide, 


! 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sep Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KIIANDA. 253 


——— 


hig neck was decked with the sacred thread of snakes ; his head was 
loaded with clusters of hair of golden colour; his forehead was covered 
with the crescent or the half moon ; he held in his band the enchanting 
trident, the axe, an excellent bedstead and a pure, vocal instrument cons- 
tructed with gems. Siva hastily descended from his convegance, bowed 
to the lord of Kamala and to Brahma and cheerfully took his seul. At 
this time, the sages, the gods ineluding Indra, Aditya, Vase, Rudra, 
Manu, the adepts and the snakes all arrived and with a thrill of 
raptures in their bedy ~ adored the best ¿f beings (Mari); aud the ged 
stooping low with reverence howed to Siva and Brahma. At this time 
Sankara respectfully busied himself in singing the delightful song of the 
Risa which was an exposition of our virtues and adapted it to the measure 
and key of the vocal instruments. ‘That song Was suited to the occasion, 
and based on delightful modes of music: and owing to the harmony of the 
instrument, tone and measure it was fascinating in the highest degree. 
Owing to the variety of feet and cadence (rise and fall), and its moderate 
length, it emitted a sweeb cound and had a gentle flow of music. Ile 
sang this song which is rarely heard even in India. lt was pathetie, full 
of meanings, audible and sweet. His body was repeatedly thrilled with 
raptures : and tears dropped from his eyes. O my dear, the myrmidons 
ot the Rudras who sat before Sunkara, the sages, gods, the rulers of fate, 
the attendants of Hari, Nàr&yana, Lnksmi and the singer Siva himself 
swooned at the song. 


13-25. O mistress of my life, at that time Vaikuntha was inundated ` 
with water. At this sight, 1 was frightened and ereated the image ef 
Gang’ out of the heap of waters ; and having supplied the goddess with 
weapon, a conveyance, ornament, mind. resources and proclivities suited 
to hor form and nature assigned to her a place round the Vaikuntha. 
Then the presiding goddess of the Ganges went to her allotted destination 
and as she emanated from the body of the gods, she was styled Sura-Nimna- 
gà. She is the source of redemption to the devout and promotes in the 
mind rehgious zealfor Hari. By the mere contact of the wind charged 
with hor vapour, heaps of sins accumulated by a sinner in millions of 
births are destroyed. O mistress of my life, when I do not know the 
fruit secured by the sight and touch of Ganga, then how can I determine 
the fruits of ablutions 1n her waters ? Of all the sacred places on earth, the 
Jake Puskara is regarded as the best in the Vedas ; but even the Puskara is 
not oven equivaient toa sixteenth part of this river in point of religious 
efficacy. Bhagiratha brought her down to the earth; hence ¿she is celebra- 
ted by the name of Bhágirathi. And as she descended to the carth in tho 
. form of a current, she is known by the name of Gangà. In days gone 
by, the saint Jahnu, in a rage, drank the Ganges and emitted her through 
bis knee. As she is like a daughter to the sage, sho is known by. . 
the namo of Jáhna-vi. Vasu was born out of her womb iu the 
shape of Bhisma ; hence she is called the mother of Bhisma. By my 
command, Gang’ began to flow in three currents passing to the heaven, 
earth and the nether world ; henco she is called Tripathaga. Her prin- 
cipal current called Mandákini flows in the heaven. Mandákini is a 
100 Yojans long and 100 Yojans broad, Her water is like milk and full 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


254 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


— 


of huge waves. At first MandAkint came from the Vaikuntha to the 
Brahma-loka and thence proceeded to the heaven. 


26-38. The current of the Ganges coming down from heaven descended 
to the Himalaya range and the earth was united with the sea of salt, Hence 
she is also called Alaknandà. Her water is pure like crystal and is very 
rapid. As fire consumes fuel, so this stream destroys sins of the wicked. 
The sages ascend the stair-case of the Ganges, surmount Brahma-loka, 
ride ona chariot free from danger and come to my domain. Sinners dying 
through the grace of God and asa result of Karma on the waters of 
the Ganges are relieved fom all sins and acquire my form. They be- 
come the best of the attendants of Siva and dwell hy his side. Being 
equal to me in form, they never die.even on the day of eternal dissolu- 
tion. If the dead body of a persoa falls into the water of the Ganges 
inany way, the said person dwells in the temple of Hari for as many 
years as there are pores onthe skin of his body. Persons dying on 
the bosom of the Ganges can wield many forms atone and the sama 
time: and in the course of a shoré time, they enjoy tho fruits of virtue or 
reap the consequences of vice. Afterwards in lndia, they are born in 
the house of virtuous men and, being devoted to me, certainly attain the 
position of my attendants, Ifa Südra bears the body of à dead twice- 
born person, the latter dwells in hell for a number of years 
commensurate with his footsteps. Afterwards the Ganges who has the 
image of the merciful Hari co aes to the rescue ant ultimately 
brings about his redemption. In India, she causes his birth in the 
house of a virtuous man and, in the next world, Vaikuntha gives 
him shelter. 

39-47. If a man starts on an auspicious day to bathe in the 
Ganges, he cheerfully dwells in tho Vaikuntha fora number of years 
commensurate with his footsteps. If any sinner going on some other 
business incidentally bathes in the Ganges, he is still released 
from other sins, provided that he is not implicated in any other 
sinful act. This Ganga will remain in India for five thousand years of 
Kali. So long as she will remain there Kali will not be able to exercise 
his influence over the world, My images and. the Puranas also will sub- 
sist in India for 10,000 years of Kali. As long as we remain there, Kali 
will not be able to exercise any influence over the people. The current 
of Gang& which has descended to the Patal is culled Bhogavati, lts 
waters resemble the foam of milk. This stream is very rapid and is 
the mine of all gems. ‘Ihe female snakes of perpetual youth always 
sport on the banks of Bhagavati. O mistress of my life, tho Ganges per- 
sonally surrounds the Vaikuntha and dwells there constantly. It is one 
lakh Yojans long and a thousand Yojans broad, My daughter Gangá can 
by no means die, *IIer eoist is the ore of many delightful mines. O god- 
dess, I thus narrated to you the sanctifying account of Jáhnavi, Now 
listen to the account how Brahma was releaased from the curse of Mohini, 


CHAPTER XXXV, 


1-7. Sri Krigna said, “On the other hand, when all the people observ- 
ed Ganga at the assembly of Nüriyama, they thought that all this was 


CC-0. In Public Dora Élnding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. . 255 


I 


due to my _ illusion. Then the lord of the Vaikuntha kindly said to 
Brahma, ** O four-faeed god, you have beon cursed. "Therefore I com- 
mand you to get up. Go and bathe in the Ganges : and all will be well 
with you. If you bathe there, you will be consecrated. Holy places also 
desire the touch of the principal Vaisnavas including yourself. But in spite 
of consecration, you are still tc a certain extent a victim of the curse for 
having subjected to indignity the goddess Nature. Pride is at the root of 
all evil and'is the germ of sin. You had better go quickly to the supreme 
Cow-world-— There-you will attain the benefactress Saraswati, a digit of 
Nature. You had better adore Nature, the germ of this auspicious crea- 
tion. ltisa matter of great regret that although you were engaged in 
devotion for full one Kalpa, no-body will now accept your Mantra, as you are 
the victim of the curse of a prcstitute.” Then Brahma, at the command 
of Hari who is buta modification of myself, bathed in the Ganges and 
bowed before the form of Náráyana, the spiritual guide of the world. 


8.90. Then the gods and the Munis eulogised my blotless fame and 
went back to their respective bomes. Brahma came to the Goloka and 
was very glad to attain the presiding chaste goddess of knowledge who 
emanated from my mouth and cogitated in his mind that this incident 
could not possibly bave been brought about except through the intervention 
of ono well versed in sexual science. ‘Phen he eame and bowed to me; and 
having secured Saraswati, the enchantress of the three worlds, as his bride 
Brahma dallied with her in several places in solitude. After a good deal 
of diversion, he desisted from his amours and came back to Brahma; loka. 
"he residents of the Brahma-loka saw that the very fair, white-coloured : 
smiling goddess Saraswati was dwelling there with acheerful heart. Her face 
resembled the moon of autumn; her merry eyes bloomed like a pair of autum- 
nallotuses. Her lips and chin were very enchanting. It seemed as if they 
thieved the grace of ripe. bimbas. The row of her teeth put to shame 
the pearls. Her cheek was decorated with diamond ear-rings. Her 
breast was adorned with a garland of excellent gems. She was clad in 
dress chastened by fire. She had a primeeyouth and was very lovely. 
Her hands held a lute and a book. Then they performed auspicious rites, 
greeted Brahma and the goddess Bharati, gladly ushered them in into the 
la nd of Brahm’. Brahma sported with her day and night and was absorbed 
in sexual enjoyments. O my dear, I thus related to you the mysteries 
of the Puranas. Now let me know what you want to hear. 


21.36. Nárayáma said, “ The great goddess Radha, when she heard 
the words of the lord of her life, smiled, merrily expressed to him her 
ideas and said, “ Lord, why did not Brahma who yields fruits of all 
actions accept the prostitute who yoluntarily arrived at that solitary 
field of action. Abandonment of a woman who comes voluntarily out 
of lust is very sinful. "The dispenser of the Vedas knew all this and yet 
he rejected her. Pray why?” "The destroyer of Madhu smiled at these 
words and told the mistress of merry damsels tho account relating to 
the Padma age thus:—“O my spouse, in days. of yore, events affecting 
the conduct of sages which are very mysterious, indescribable and 
scandalous had come to pass. I am going to deseribe them to 
you. Pray, listen, Onco upon a time Ideputed Brahma to the task of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
256 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


creation. Brahma, the off-spring of lotus, created issues out of his mind, 
effuloont with the lustre of Brahma. Their names are as follows: Sanaka, 
Sananda, Sanátana, Sanat.Kumára, Bodhu, Kavi, Panch-Sikha, Asuri, 
Siddha, Kapila and the adepts. The father, 7. e. the four faced Brahma 

- commanded the naked children who were five years old to create. Devoted 
to Hari, they did not earry out the command of their father and at once 
left the place for devotion. Then Brahma ina rage again created eleven 
hideous, weeping Rudras Later on, Brahmi, the greatest of ascetics, 
pure in spirit and of a tranquil mien contemplated me through the powers 
of his abstract meditations (Yogas) and created Vasistha, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Angira, Bhrigu, Atri, Pulasta, Daksa, Kardam, and Marichi and command- 
ed them to creato, ‘hen with a cheerful disposition, he created another 
son named Kama and a daughter. The girl decked with ornaments 
of gem and aged 10 years looked very beautiful, Afterwards Brahma 
addressed his beautiful son (Káma) standing by his side, who was the product 
of my digits, who was self-contented and who was irresistible and grace- 
ful thus : “O son, I gladly created you for tho mutual dalliance of men 
and women. By virtue of your abstract meditations, you will dwell in 
the heart of every one, 


37-46. I give you the following arrows or weapons viz, enchanting. 
agitating, stupefying, maddening, fever-produeing and sense-depriving. Please 
accept them and bewilder everybody. Child, by my boon, you will be irresis- 
tible.” Tho dispenser of the world was pleased to grant this boon to Kama, 
Then he perceived his daughter before him and prepared to grant 

"hera boon. At this time, K&ma decided to test tho efficacy of the weapons 
and discharged all of them at Brahm’. ‘Then tho great adopt and 
ascetic (Yogi), Brahma lost his senses through the prowess of the irresis- 
tible darts, consecrated by Mantras and discharged by Cupid. Ina mo- 
ment he recovered his consciousness aud saw his daughter before him, 
The senseless Brahma, with a view to enjoy her society, ran after her, 
The chaste nymph fled. The girl, seeing that sho was being parsuod by 
her father, soon sought the puotection of her devout brothers. The sages 
sheltered her by thoir side and in anger addressed their father with words, 
beneficial, ethical and constituting tho essenea of the Vedas thus, “ O 
father, whata vile act yor are going to perform? You are about to 
commit a deed which ean only be performed by a mean wretch. Virtuous 
people regard other women as mothers; and for having subdued their 
passions they nre worshipped in this world as well as in the next. 


47-56. A daughter has been classed among mothers, as stated in the 
Vedas. low is it that you, beinz the authorof the Vedas,are about to ravish 
your daughter? © sire, the following women are classed among mothers, 
viz, the wife of aspiritnal preceptor, thequeen, the wife ofa Bráhmin, a chaste 
woman, the wife of a brother, daughter-in-law, the mother of a friend, the 
wife of a friend, the mother of the father, the wife of the brother of either of 
th? parents, daughter, mother, step-mbther, sister, Surabht (cow), the wife 
of the tutelary deity, the nurse, the woman who sustains the issue in 
the womb and the wife of the preserver in times of danger. Out of theses 
no one is inferior in rank or position to the other, and according to the 

| Vedas, one who marries his daughter to another, one who gives food and 


- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


2 Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 257 


knowledge, one who guarantees immunity from danger, one who gives 
Mantras, one who begets, the elder brother, and the father of the mother 
are classed among fathers. Infamy to a man of fame is worse than 
death. A fool who injures his fame or who oppresses the fathers described 
above suffers the pangs of hell for the period of life allotted to Brahma 
and being thrust into the * blind pit" is chastised by the myrmidons of 
Yama and there has constantly to eat the ordure, unpalatable to the taste. 
You are yourself the lord of the world, the chastiser of Yama and dis- 
penser of the universe. And still are you going to ravish your daughter? 

57-66.  Licentious fellow get you out from this place. Your mind 
has very much been polluted with feelings of lust. Though we are able - 
to consume you to ashés, yet we excuse you because you aro our father. 
If an elderly relation has a thousand faults, a savant ought.to forgive ' 
him. A moralist destroys all oppressors but spares his spiritual guide. 
Ifthe Guru rushes in like a tyrant, appropriates every thing and is ready 
to curse, still he should not be slandered but respectfully adored 
by his:diseiple or pupil. Any one who slanders or spites the supreme 
Guru suffers torments in the hell called the Blind pit as long as the 
sun andthe moon exist where he is chastised by Yama and where 
being oppressed by hunger he eats ordure. He is also bitten there 
day and mght by snakes as big as the SAl-tree.” The sages having 
said so, fell down prostrate at his lotus-feet and resumed their respective 
functions. Then Brahma, thinking that all this mishap was due to 
Providence, pierced the six mystic circles of his body through the pow- 
ors of abstract meditation with a view to commit suicide and blocked 
up all his vital airs which he introduced into the aperture of his head. 
And, thus as a result of his Karma, he gave up his ghost, While dying 
he mentally remomberel .Hari and cherished in his heart a desire to 
this effect that his mind might never be attracted by other objects.” Think- 
ing thus, he merged in the Supreme Being. The girl when she saw 
thit hor father was dead lamented very much quitted her frame, by dint of 
her devotions and merged in the Supreme Being, Brahma. 

67-76. Afterwards the great saints when they saw that their father and 
sister were no more, lamented much and in a rage remembered the self-con- 
tented Hari. There Narayana, an offspring of my digits, soon arrived 
and through his divine knowledge he revived Brahma and his daughter. 
Brahmá seoing Hari before him accepted this boon from him that his 
faith in my feet might be firmly and permanently established. "Phe 
merciful Nardyana seeing the dejected plight of Brahma addressed him 
thus using truthful, ethical, lovely and :eonsolatory words, **O Brahma, 
eet rid of the shame which oppresses your heart, lift up your face and 
listen to what Isay. Whether a person be great or small he acquires 
good or bad reputation 7.e. celebrity or infamy or suffers calamities -accord- 
ing to his Karma. Karma is the most powerful of all agencies ; hence 
saints always perform good acts. Somo virtuous people after having 
reaped the consequenees of their acts dedicate their heart to the lotus 
fect of Hari and thus root out their Karma. Infamy is the result of a 
bad act; and shame is caused by infamy. Fame is the result of a goot 
act; and fame alone leads to celebrity. O Brahma, in course of time, through 
deerepitude, a man. luses his body, strength, beauty, grace, the merits 


33 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


258 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


or demerits -caused-by his good or bad deeds; but celebrity, virtue and 
fame are by no means destroyed. 

77-86. In course of time, people are relieved from ‘their debts, 
sores on the skin and disgrace; but in case of great men, the 
first two only disappear, the last viz, disgrace, never leaves them. 
The notoriety caused by offences affecting the wives and pro- 
perty of others remains intact at all times. Therefore virtuous men 
never interfere .with the property or wives of others, the source 
of all trouble. Now externally and internally you should always 
xemember me. Then your mind will never be attracted by property 
"belonging to others. (Maya) i.e. the feminine spirit of illusion that 
confounds every one can easily bewilder the Supreme Being who delights 
in himself. Those men who love the coquettish blandishments of 
women, their modern youth and fascinating smiles always regard their 
rising breast as the most supreme thing on earth. Their heart never 
rushes towards pure morality. The loins, face and breast of women 
constitute the home of Cupid; thisis why saints afraid of losing their 
sanctity and merits never look at women. 'Io those whose mind is 
always set upon women, piety, fame, celebrity, devotion, intelligence, 
knowledge and wisdom which they possess aro all fruitless. ‘I'he infamy 
of foolish men increases in this world; and in the next world they suffer 
terrible pangs of hell where they are chastised by the myrmidons of Yama 
and constantly bitten by worms. Unfortunately, they regard tho radical 
cause of misery as happiness ‘and gladly minister to the wives of others. 
In this world good men always contemplate my lotus-foct; men of 
average goodness perform good deeds; and base men always minister to 
&he wives of others. 

87-97. A person whose heart is set upon objects owned by others, parti- 
ularly the wives of others or the land of others apprehends, danger at overy 
‘step. lf any one accidentally sees the wife of another man, ho should recollect 
Hari and desist from pursuing her. If any one touches the gold of another, ho 
should wash his hands in the above way and purify himself. Saints afraid 
Jest they should be attacked by phthisis or any other disease or sustain 
loss of wisdom and incur public criticism are not constantly attached 
even to their own wives. Asceties are engaged in their asceticism ; savants, 
in the.eulture of sciences, Yogis, in their abstract meditations ; household 
people, in their house-hold affairs, and my worshippers in my service. 
Every one separately sets to his own work. ‘hus people aro | 
praised in council according to the deeds which they perform in confor- 
mity with the Vedas. ~ And those who perform rites which conflict 
with the Vedas are consequently condemned. © Brahma, from this day 
forth throughout your life, by my boon, your mind will nover bo 
attracted by sensual enjoyments and it will never be attached to the wives | 
or things of others. O Brahma, perform tke good acts prescribed by me and 
cherish in your mind thoughts in relation to myself and my lotus-feet . 
calculated to destroy all calamities. O Brahma, this your daughter is 
the presiding deity of sexual intercourse. Celebrated by the namo of Rati, 
she will be the -wife of Kama.” © lady who revellest in Vrindávana, | 
the husband of Kamala thus consoled Brahma and went to his own houso 
in the Vaikuntha. : di 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 259 
Sn 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 

1-7. Rádhà said, “ Lord Brahma rejeeted Mohini for the above 
reason : this is intelligible. But why was his worship discontinued 
through the curse of a prostitute ? And why-did the husband of Kamala 
crush his pride ? O root of everything, you are the god of all. Dispel 
the doubt from my mind by dwelling on this point. " The Lord of Radha 
when he heard the words of the mistress of the Rasa described to her the 
mysterious history thus :—* My beloved, Brahma having performed 
his devotions in various ways obtained a boon from me and. as he created. 
things in various ways he was celebrated by the name of Vidhata. He 
yielded fruits of devotion and was the Lord who governed the entire uni- 
verse. This circumstance led him to consider himself as a god. and filled 
his heart with a little pride. A man prospers in this. world, so long as 
pride does not set in. This thought led me to crush his pride. eing 
tlio all—pervading spirit am. able to realise the feelings of those who are 
animated with prido in this world. "Therefore Iam. at once prepared to. 
subdue their pride. 

8.18. O my beloved, you have already heard how at first I crushed 
the pride, of Brahma. Afterwards in due-course of time, I subdued the 
pride of Sankara, Parvati, Chandra, the Sun, the Fire, Durvásà, Dhan- 
wantari and others. Listen to these accounts. O:my dear, I crush the 
pride of all, great or small." At these words, the palate, lips, and throat of 
Radh& were parched up. She was bewildered. with fear and earnestly 
asked him thus :—® O. Lord of my life, how and. in whom did the pride 
originate and how. did you crush it? You are the crusher of pride: 
you give immunity from danger; and you are the matchless cause of 
tho life which sustains tho bodies of all individuals. Therefore narrate 
to mo how the pride of those just named. by you was crushed. “Krişna 
said, “O Radha, you know how the «pride of Brahmâ, tho ruler of the 
world, was humbled. Now I tell you,in detail how others. had to eat. 
tho humble pie. Listen, my dear, Siva, the destroyer of the world, is 
a digit of mine. He is equal to mo in valour, virtue and wisdom. He 
is perfect. The Yogis call him the leader of the spiritual guides of the 
Yogis and contemplate him as the emblem of wisdom and happiness. I 
am going to narrate to you his anecdote. Listen. The wielder of the 
spear (Siva) after having been engaged in devotion for 60000 years, day 
and night, has attained perfection in respect of all his digits and.is equal 
to me in every rospect. He is the personification of the accumulation 
of all energy and always effulgent through his asceticism. and valour. H 
is valorous like ton millions of suns and fruitful to- his votaries like th 
Kalpa tree. 

19-33. The Yogts after contemplating: the mass of light of which he 


is composed for a very long time afterwards behold his wonderful form. , 


within that light. ‘That form is white like pure crystal, has five faces, 
` three eyes, holds a trident anda spear and is elad in tiger-skin. With 
a wreath. of white lotus, he himself adores the Supreme Being. His face 
hasa smiling and cheerful aspect. The half-moon or erescent. adorns 
his forehead. His head wields clusters of hair of the colour of gold. 
His tranquil mien is desirable in the three worlds; and he is ready to 
favour his worshippors. Regarding himself as a god, he givos prosperity 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


260 THE BRAHMA FAIVARTA PURANA. 


to every body and grants boons to a person according to his desire, San- 
kara, the lord of boons, who is self-contented easily grauts boons, as stated 
above. This idea produced some conceit in his mind. Onco upon a time, 
a cortain demon named Vrika by the performance of austere rites prayed | 
S'1va for a year. Siva, the ocean of merey, was propitiated and every day 
eame to him to give him the desired boon. But the demon would by no 
means accept it, After the lapse of a year, Siva dwelt constantly by his 
side. The demon respectfully adored him so much that he could, not 
leave his society oven for a moment. Tho holder of the spear, Siva, 
repeatedy entreated him to accept the boon of all prosperity, all-perfec- 
tion, final emancipation or faith in the lotus feet of Hari, The demon 
did not accept ,any boon but continually contemplated the lotus feet of 
S'iva. Then Siva was frightened and seeing his non-supplieatory and 
paralytic attitude was overwhelmed with grief and wept. The great la- 
mentations of S'iva interrupted the devotions of the demon and ho observe! 
in his presence the giver of all prosperity. 

31-41. Deluded by me, he (the demon) reverentially craved this boon 
from him that the person on whose head the demon would lay his hands 
would at once be reduced to ashes, Siva complied with his wishes and 
‘departed. But the best of demon also pursued him. Thereupon the 
conqueror of death, being afraid of death, was much agitated in mind and 
speedily ran away. At that time, his small drum dropped from his hand; 
the tiger-skin slipped from his loins. He became stark-naked and through 
the fear of the , demon ran in all directions for safety. But tho friend 
of the devout (Siva) out of compassion did not kill him. If a virtuous 
person sees another person doing a bad deed, he does not retaliate. Saints, 
no doubt, kill assassins unless the latter turn out to bo their servants, 
sons or wives, But the holder of the spear, the friend of the devout, 
could not make up his mind; ze. he could not bring himself to take 
that line of action. Siva, taking mo to be his own imago, with a 
frightened heart again and again recollected mo and sought my protection. 
Good lady, then I saw that his throat, lips and palate were dried up. He 
repeatedy said, * O Hari, preserve me, preserve mo;” and, boing bewil- - 
dered with fear, camo to my hermitage, I seated Siva by my side and 
ina consolatory tone &sked of the demon what the mattor was. The 
demon narrated to me, every thing from start to finish. Being bawildered 
with the powers of my illusions, and 2b my command he placed his hand on his 
own head and was immediately reduced to ashes, At that time, adepts, | 
gods, the munis and the manus reverentially adored me; and Siva abashed, 
also worshipped me. When his pride was crushed, he was consoled by me 
and went ‘home, 

42 61. On some other occasion, Siva cogitatod in his mind that he was 
the destroyer of the world. With this idea proyailine in his mind he was 
puffed up with conceit and vanity aud prepared to kill the demon Tripura: 
“This demon Is as insignificant as an ordinary worm, No pompous 
preparation is necessary to kill him.” his idea led him to leavo behind 
him the amulet and the spear which I gave him. Afterwards he fought , 
with Tripura day and night for one year; but thoy could nob subdue 
one another. Both of them fought with equal valour. O my dear, 
. the king of demons then set his foot on tho ground and through tha | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 261 


power of his illusions got up fifty Yojans high. Then S ankara, the lord of 

the world, at once ascended the same height with a view ty kill t-e demon. 

In that place which was absolutely withoutany support, there was a coutinu- 
` J ' A Nie 

ous light for one month, "Phe powerful Tripura cus off the w.apons and bow 


of Siva, S‘iva also having broken the chariot of the demon aud cub — 


oft his weapons and bow very angrily inflicted a blow on the head of the 
demon with his fist. ‘This thander like blow rendered the demon sense- 
less. In a moment, he recovered and having raised the prostrate ‘iva 
threw him on the ground. When S/iva fell down with his chariot, the 
gods and godly saints were much frightened and adored me again and 
again saying: “Krisna, to the rescue.” Then S'iva fearlessly remembered 
me knowing that L was the source of immunity from ull danger and 
reverentially adored me with the hymn given by me. At that time, 
through my digits I took the form of a bull and with my horns, with 
grcat valour I supported the fallen Siva and gave bim my amulet as 
well as my spear which kills the enemy. ‘Then S'iva went up very high 
and resting in a place which had alsolutely no support approached the 
demon and killed him with the spear. The demon was reduced to dust 
by the burt caused by the spear and fell on the ground. ‘Then S‘ankara 
knew me to be the crusher of. pride and with a heart full of shame 
continued to adore me. Afterwards, Siva who is the emblem of happi- 
noss and wisdom, who is dissociated from all acts, laid aside his pride, 
which is the germ of impediments. O my beloved, in this world, there is 
none so dear to me as Siva; and therefore I, in the shape of a bullock, 
always sustain my favourite Siva. O my love, Brahma represents my 
mind; S‘iva, my wisdom; the primordial Nature Durga, my intellect ; 
and sleep and other faculties of mine are the digits of Nature. Saraswati 
is tho prosiding deity of my language; Gamnes'a presides over my joy and 
welfare; Dharma represents the highest aim or object of my life ; the 
Fire represents my vatour ; Kamala is the presiding deity of my prosperity. 

62-69, You are the presiding deity of my life and always dearer to me 
than my life, The cow-herds residing in the cow-world are the outcome 
of the pores of my skin; the sun represents my energy ; the wind 
represents my life ; Varuna represents the perspiration of my body ; the 
earth is the outcome of my mind ; the groat sky represents my void 
space or vacuum ; Kama is the outcome of my inclinations ; Indra and 
other gods are the offspring of the parts of my digits; the Mahat, the 
first principle evolved from nature being the fundamental intellect and 
first step towards creation and Tattwa etc., represent the germs of creation. 
I am the germ of everything, the supreme spirit and exist without any 
support. The soul that is liable to suffering or enjoyment is bub my 
reflection, But I am the witness of every act, void of will and free from 
liability to enjoyment or suffering. I wield a form to enable my worship- 
pors to contemplate me. Lam tho Supreme Nature, and the Supreme 
Being. O Radha, I narrated to you how I crushed the pride of Siva. 
When tho supreme spirit, Lord Krisna thus said, the goddess Radha re- 
ferred to him exbstruse and desirable matters. She said, * Lord, you are 
conversant with the mysteries of everything. You aro the germ of all 
and eternal. ‘Lherofore, © Lord, who dispellest the foar of the world, 
answer my questions in detail. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
262 THE BRAHMA VAIP ARTA PURANA. 


70-76. Lord Sinkara is the presiding deity of all wisdom. He 

4s a thorough oatolozist the conqueror of death, the time of time and is 

| great like yourself Why does he apply ashes to his body? Why has he got 
| five faces and three eyes? Why is he naked ? Why does he wield clusters 
| of hir and why does he put on ornaments of snakes? He is the best of 
the gods: and yet why does he give up excellent conveyances and wander, 
here and there, mounted on the back of a bull? Why does he not put on 
| ornaments made of gems? Why does he leave aside clothes chastened by 
| fire and put on a tiger-skin? Why does he leave Párijat flowers and wield 
| 
i 
|} 


the Dhaturâ, i.e., thorn-apple ? Why has he no taste for a diamond- diadem? 
But he is very pleased to wield clusters of hair. Leaving his celestial 
domain, he loves the crematorium ; and leaving the sandal, aloe, musk, 
vermilion and flower, he loves leaves of bael and the paste of the wood 
of bael. What is the reason? O Lord, I am very curious and desirous 
` to know all this. Therefore, O Lord, deal with the subject in detail. 
71-87. The destroyer of Madhu laughed at her words, embraced her 
and commenced the narration of the accounts concerning S'iva, He 
said, * O my love, in days of yore, S'iva medidated for sixty thousand 
years, attained perfection and then desisted from his Yoga. Mentally 
he contemplated my figure. At this time in tho form of a youth, 
dark-blue in appearance and most enchanting, I appeared before 
him. He saw my attractive appearance. The eyes of the three-eyed 
Lord could not be sufficiently satisfied with the gazo of my exoellent 
harms. ‘Then my adherent S'iva, not being satisfied with tho gaze with 
vhieh he feasted his eyes, was subdued by love through tho exuberanco 
freligious zealin his mind and with tho following thought uppermost 
n his mind, he wept. ‘ The thousand-faced Ananta and the four-faced 
rahmá see the Lord with many eyes and adore him with many mouths, 
With a pair of eyes and one mouth how is it possible for me to see the 
charms of the Lord and to eulogise him ?" Thinking thus, he absorbed 
himself in meditation with the result that he got four facos which, added 
to his original face, amounted to five, Each of his faces was blessed with 
three.eyes. his is why he is called the five-facod Lord and the three- 
eyed Lord. The sight of my figure is moro pleasing to S’iva than my 
| adorations. Hence he possessos extraordinary eyes. Dearest, the eyes 
| of S'iva are vested with the principles of virtue, activity and ignorance. 
| I tell you why. Listen. 

88.98. Through the eye which is the production of the digits of virtue, 
he seos and protects the virtuous, Through the eye vested with the 
principle of activity, be preserves the active ; and through the eye of 
ignorance, he saves the ignorant. At the time of eternal destruction, fire 
comes out of his eye of ignorance. It is buge like ten millions of palm- 
trees and valorous like ten millions ofsuns. Its flame touches tho sky 
and js colossal in size, The fire is able to consume the three worlds. O 
my beloved, S^iva has annointed his body with the ashes of Sat? dearer than 
his life; henee ashes are his ornaments; and the garland of the bones of that 

: goddess, he wields round his neok affectionately. hough S’iva is the 
supreme spirit, yet he wept in every town through which he passed with 
the dead body of Sati cast upon his shoulders, The places where the 

: members of the body of Sati were thrown, were turned into holy spots 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


oe 


- p 


— 


Digitized by eG: i 
RRISNS TANGA RAN DAO st 263 


LLLA 


where acts of sacrifices may be performed adopted to render success to every 
undertaking through mystie incantations. O Radha, at that time Siva 


held the remnants 


of the boly of Sati, swooned and fell into a place 


accomplished in sanctity. Then I affectionately went to Siva, took him 
in my lap, consoled him and counselled him on celestial ontology likel 
to dispel sorrow. ‘Then iva was pleased, went home and in course 0 
time obtained Sati in another form. Through _ powers of his Yoga, he puts 
on the dress furnished by the quarters i. e. he is staik naked. 


He does not desire 
wielded clusters of 


any other dress. While absorbed in meditation he 
hair which conscientiously he still puts on. He is a 


Yogi (a meditative devotee) ; hence he does not like to adorn his hair or 
deck his body with ornaments. He regards with equal feelings the 


sandal and the mud, 
99-115. At one 

shelter of Siva who 

else can bear him : 


the excellent gem and the pebble. A 

time, through fear of Garuda, snakes sought the 
thereupon kindly wielded them on his body. None 
and so I bear the barden of his body in the form of æ 


bull. - At the time of the destruction of the demon Tripura, this bull eame 
out of my digits. Parijat. and sandal, he has given to me and therefore ha 


is not satistied with 


them. He only likes the thorn-apple, leaves of bael, the 


paste of bael-wood, flowers without smell andthe Yoga. He always likes the 
tiger-skin. His mind is not attracted by a celestial bed, a celestial region 


or a crowded place. 


In the solitary crematorium, day and night ho adores 


mo, He regards everything from Brahma down toa grass imaginary like a 


droam. His mind 
indescribable grace. 


is always immersed in the contemplation of my 
Siva is not destroyed even if Brahma falls. 


1 myself donot SUO the duration of his longevit r. How could the 
Sratis know it? Siva is conversant -vith the science of conquering 


death. He holds a 
subdue him except r 


spear as valiant as myself. Therefore no one can 
nyself. He is dearer than my life, the emblem of 


my supreme spirit and is all good. My mind is always set firmly upon the 
three eyed lord. There is no one dearer to me than Siva. Iam the lord 


of the entire univers 


e which is obscured by my illusions. There is none who 


can bevilder S'iva except my illusion. Ido not dwel] in the Goloka, Vai- 
kuntha or even in your beart. But I am always entangled in the meshes 


of love in the heart 


of Siva. Siva with his five faces always sings m 
3 e n 


eulogies with the proper tune and measures. This is why I always dwell by 
his side, By the mere contortions of his brow, through his powers of 


abstract meditation, 


he can destroy and create all the worlds. ‘There is 


no one so great a Yogi as he. There is none wiser than $:và who, by 


the mere twinkling 


of his eye, by dint of his celestial wisdom, can des- 


troy and create death and time. With his five mouths, day and night, 
ho sings and recitos my fame, and he always contemplates my image. 


In the whole world, 
and I are ail equal i 
point of Yoga or val 
ties and strenath of 


what more you want to hear. 


there is none so devoutas he. Sudargana, Sambhu 
n valour. The creator Brahma is not equal to us in 
our. O my beloved, thus I recited to you the celebri- 
Siva and the subjugation of his pride. Now tell me 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


1-15. Rádhà said, * O remover of doubt, the great-minded Sankara is 


the lord and master 


ofall. But tho refuse of his food is not sacred. Now 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


264 T I Dlgitized GáofoUl ahB Bata Muse URAN 4. 


whaé& is the reason, I pray?" Lord Krişna said, “O goddess, as fire 
consumes fuel, so the history I am going to tell you destroys sins. Onco 
upon a time, Sanat-Kumara went to the Vaikuntha and saw that 
Nardvana was eating. Then the best of the Brahmins bowed respectfully 
to him and adored him with mysterious hymns. At that time the friend 
ofthe devout (Hari) was satisfied with him and gave him the refuse 
of his food. The twice-born saint ate it as soon as he gor it. Buta 
little quantity of that rare article he reserved for his friends, Afterwards 
Sanat-Kumara in the hermitage accomplished in sanctity gave it to 
Siva, the hold:r of the spear, who, as soon as he got it, ate it up at once 
throush access of religious zeal. After eating that rare article, he wag 
subdued by love and, with a thrill of raptures in his body, indulged in a 
dance. Tears flowed from his eyes. With his five mouths, he reveren- 
tially sang my praises, adapting his song to the proper tune, cadence 
and measure. The small drum shaped like an hour-glass and the horn 
dropped from his hands; the tiger-skin slipped from his loins, He 
fainted. Weeping much, he fell down on the earth; and at that time 
with rapt attention ha contemplated my grieofal form; and within 
the lotus of a thousand leaves fixed in his mind, he beheld mo. At 
this time, Dargai, the destroyer of calamity, eame there with a happy 
and cheerful mien. She saw there that the holder of the spear over- 
powered by religious zeal and shedding copious tears was lying down 
{ina swoon, At this sight the goddess smilel and asked of Sanat- 
| Kumara the reason, With folded palms, Sanat-Kumara told her what 
, the matter was. When the goddess heard this, sho was highly incensed. 
- Her lips quivered. She was about to curse Sank va. S'iva knowing 
her feelings got up, consoled her and with folded palms adored her with 
various kinds of hymns. , When Dargå heard the delightful hymn, 
she did not curse lord Siva buc only declared that the rotu-e of 
Siva’s food would thenceforth be unholy and therefore proscribed it 
to the savants. 

16-27. Letalone other individuals who have been rendered lucky 
and powerful by dint of their devotions, even the destroyer of the 
universe was afraid of Parvati an 1 shuddered from fear. Then Dargå, the 
mother vf the universe and the sourco of all virtues, with Ici eyes 
burning with indignation and erimson like a pair of lotuses addressed 
to Siva words full of ethical maxims thus: QO Lord, you are tho 
destroyer of the world and L am the daughter of the kine of mountains. 
When you tremble at my bare sight, what is the efficacy ofa person's 
asceticism and what is the use of his valour? You are the reciter and 
the author of the Vedas. You yourself are the lord of the universe, 
You deliberately give to people salvation and prosperiby of all sorts, 
But if you yourself misbehave, who, then, will practise virtus ? Dord, 
Iam your servant, always liable to be maintained and supported by you 
Through the fault of my Karma alone, I have been deprived of e tare 
of the food eaten by Hari. Some objects are consecrated by purchase or 
payment of price. Some objects are consecrated by air; and others by 
wash or polish. Bus everything is consecrated by its dodiextion tol he 
deity. Pandits, with the food dedicated to Visuu, perform tho 
worship of the gods and the manes and accord hospitality fo guests. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 265 


EE E IM eea 


This matter is specified in the Vedas. An article of food not dedicated 
to Visnu is unholy; and the food dedicated to Hari alone is wholesome. 
A person who eats food dedicated to Hari becomes equal to him, A man 
of virtuous disposition, if he voluntarily eats the food dedicated to Hari, 
acquires the fruits of devotion performed by a min for sixty thousand 
years. Ifa person eats food daily after having reverentially dedicated 
it to Hari, he need not practise asceticism.  Foreven without it he oan 
be as valorous as Hari. How can I recite to you the greatness of Hari 
so well as you recited itin the assembly of sages at the holy place 
named Puskara frequented by pilgrims? For you are the author of the 
Vedas and it is impossible for others to describe itso well as you did 
on the oceasion. 

98-40. My lord, I have got you as my husband after a long course of 
asceticism. Why did you deprive me of the refuse of his food? 
But as you have deprived me of it, you must reap the following conse- 
quence: Whoever will from this day forth eat the food dedicated to you 
will acquire his birth once as a dog in India. - * Parvati after having said 
so, with offended dignity, wept before the lord. ‘The glance of Parvati, 
when she was in that frame of mind having been, directed at the throat 
of Siva, it (his throat) became blue. Then Siva reverentially and 
affectionately embraced her to soothe her outraged feelings, wiped her 
tears with his hands and tried to comfort her with many pleasing 
ethical maxims. Then the goddess was appeased and said to the lord of her 
life, “O Lord, I shall commit suicide as I have been deprived of Hari’s 
offerings. O my master, I wield my body only because I have been for- 
tunate enough to secure your affection. But if I am deprived of that 
affection, why should I wield a body at all? Lord, [ have defiled 
your offering which removes birth, death and sdecrepitude. It is there- 
fore meet that I should part with my body. O great lord, the thing 
which will be offered to your male organ will be unacceptable. But it- 
will be consecrated if it be mixed with the offering of Visnu." So say- 
ing, the goddess was about to put an end to ber lfe when Hara was 
frightened, adored her and acceded to her wishes. Ile then spoke 
thus: - “Jair one, you should excuse me, though I commit many faults. 
O merciful goddess, I am your slave puchased with the price of your asceti- 
cism. Show compassion to me. O mother of the world, you are eternal, the 
germ of Brahma, Visnu, Mahes'a &e. O Chandiká, being such a great 
goddess, why are you so angry ? Compose yourself. 


41-47. O goddess void of all attributes, you transcend all attributes. 
You are the constant associate of the lord of the cow:wor'd. You re- 
present all energy. You are visible and invisible. You are self-deter- 
mining. O my beloved, through the grace of that lord, you dwell 
in my heart. You are the germ of everything, the spirit of the great 
illusion and enchantress:of the heart. O goddess, you grant every kind 
of perfection, redemption and genuiue faith for the feet of Mari. I 
am by no means able to give you the offering of Hari personally. Iu 
that case, O deity, void of all attributes, quit your body as you desire 
and go to that deity who is void of all attributes." When the moon- 
crested god adored her thus and became silent, Parvati was pleased 


23 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE + 


966) UE BRAT PARE PURANA, 


O eeno a E a 


` 
———— 


^ . 
and bowed to him," Thus Sankara in days of yore had adored Pâr. 
vati. Whoever in emergeney reads the above hymn composed by Siva 
is positively released from danger. The rupture with his friend ceases 


being propitiated always dwells in his house and never leaves it. 


48-53. | Lord Krişna said, “O my beloved. Parvat? was much pleased 
to hear of Siva's vow and by his command went hastily to bathe in. the 
Mandákini. After having bathed therein, she reverentially worship. 
ped the tutelary diety void of all attributes and quickly prepared 
sweet-meat, vegetables, ote. Then Siva, after having bathed, reverentially 
worshipped the eternal Hari, the emblem of the effulgence of Brahma 
seated in his heart and eulogised me. Then I left every thing, went there, 
ate the food and the curry and granted the boon as desired by Hara. Pár- 
vati arrived at the root of the tree and received the remnants of 
the food which was offered to me. Parvati herself along with her 
husband cheerfully ate the remnants of the food, vegetables, ete. reveren- 
tially adored S’ankara and bowed to him again and again. O god- 
dess, I thus related to you how the remainder of the offerings made to S'iva 
was cursed, a point concerning which you had put a question to me, 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

1-11, Lord Krisna said, “O goddess, you heard how the prido of 
Sankara, the spiritual guide of the world, was crushed. Now I am going 
to tell, you how the pride of Durgà was crushed. Listen. In days 
of yore, Durgà who emanated from the valour of all the gods assumed the 
very lovely and enchanting form of a damsel. Afterwards she was born 
out of the loins of Daksa and secured the wielder of the spear as her 
husband, (the lord who is adored by all the gods) and with great reverenco 
devoted herself to the service of ber husband. ‘Then on a certain occasion 
Brahma performed a sacrifice on the Himalaya mountain. There was an 
assembly of the gods at that place. In that assembly, there was a mean- 
ingless (useless) rapture, accidentally, between Daksa and Siva. After- 
wards, Daksa went home from that sacrifice ina rage and performed a 
sacrifice himself. There he invited all except Šiva., Later on, the gods 


with the result that the friendship is strongly re-established. —Párvati | 


came to that assembly with their wives. But Siva through anger and | 


wounded susceptibilities did not turn ap with his attendants. Then Sati 
out of affection used earnest cunsolatory words to her husband with a 
view to induce him to join the ceremony but could not dissuade him from 


his purpose. Whereupon with the permission of her husband in the .° 


pride of her heart she went to her father’s house; but Siva’s curse curbed 
her pride. When she went to her father, Daksa did not greet her even 
with words: but, on the contrary, he blamed Siva very much. Satí, when 
she heard the slanders used against her husband, committed suicide. 1 
just told you how her pride was crushed. Now I am going to tell yon 
how it wes subdued in her next birth. 


2-22. When Sati died, she was born ont of the womb of Menaká, the 


wife of Ilimálaya. Out of affection, Siva revorentially held the ashes 


of her body and skeleton. With the bones, he constructed his garland 
and with the ashes he besmeared his body ; and, being subdued by the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANNA KHANDA, 267 


emotion of love, he again and again remembered Sati and wandered 
throigh different places of the world. Menaká gave birth to this enchant- 
ing goddess, incomparable in the whole creation. The goddess Uma, the 
mother of virtue, vested with all virtue and grace, shone out resplendently. 
None of the wives of the gods had even a 16th part of her grace. In 
the house of the mountain, the goddess grew up day by day like the digits 
of the moon in the bright half of the lunar mouth and attained the age of 
puberty. Afterwards on a certain occasion, there was a voice from the 
sky addressed to th» mother of the universe to the following effect: “O 
Siva, attain Siva as your husbind by a course of austere asceticism. 
You have been burn out of the wonb; therefore, without asceticism 
you will not be able to secure j.va as your husband." Having heard 
this celestial voice, the daushter of the mountain laughed in the pride of 
her youth and covitated thus in her mind : ** Will not he who wields the 
ashes and the bones of the boly whieh I hal in my previous birth accept 
me in this life as his bride when he beholds my fresh and blooming youth ? 
Why should not a being (who, bs»wildered with grief on my aecount, 
wanders throughout the universe) accept me when he will find me so-very 
bexutiful? Why shoald not the merciful lord who interrupted the 
sacrifice of Daksa for my sake marry me in every birth? It his been 
previously ordained by the antecedent Karma thas such and such persons 


are the husbands or wives of such and such persons. Only donors are | 


different, For the natural consequences of Karma can by no means be 
obviated.” e 


23.91. Led by this idea, the chaste daughter of the mountain regarded 
Siva, tho container of all virtues, as one of her own creatures and 
not asa god. She did not therefore, worship him. She was so much 
fillol with pride on the occasion that she thought that there was 
no womin more beautiful than herself. In the pride of her heart 
therefore, she did not enzage herself in asceticism. She also thought 
that every man was solicitous of a woman vested with youth and 
beauty. Therefore S.va, as soon as he would hear of her personal 
charms and youthful appearane?, would accept her without any asces- 
ticism practised by her. Thinking thus, she gave herself up^ to 
sports with her female attendants and passed her days merrily. In the 
meantime, one day a messenger eame to the assembly of the mountain 
and with folded pums addressed the king of the mountains thus: 80 
king of the mountains, gct up soon and go to the immortal holy fig-tree. 
There Siva mounted on mball has arrived with his attendants. With a 
reverential inclination of your head, adore nkara, the king of the gods, 
imperceptible to the senses, with oblations of milk and honey. O king, 
ho is the emblem of perfection, the lord of perfection and the leader of 
the spiritual guides of the Yogts. Ie is the conqueror of death, the time of 
time, all effulgence and eternal. He is the eternal spirit, the lord vested 
with all attributes and void of all property. ‘This god takes a form simply 
to enable his votaries to meditate him." 


32-50. The king of the mountains having heard the words of the : 


horald cheerfully got up, secured oblations of honey and milk and quickly 
went to Siva, The face of the daughter of the mountain was also lighted 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE _ 


‘+ 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. : 


268 THE BRAHMA FAIVARTA PURANA. 


up with joy when she heard from the herald of the arrival of Siva. She 
thought in her mind that Siva had come for her sake and led by this idea, 
she dressed herself gorgzously. She put on enticing clothes, cast a delight- 
ful wreath of gems and a wreath of Pàrijit annointed with sandal round 
her neck, consultel her features in various ways in the losking-glass, pat 
on the mark of vermilion an] mask on the forehead ani lined her crimson 
eyes with unalloyeleollyrium. From her eyes it appeared as if the lotus 
blooming in‘ the mouth of autumn at mid-day was adorned with 
a cluster of bees. Her lips, being coloured with the juice of betel-leaves, 
looked crimson anl very graceful like ripe bimbas. Her cheek shining 
with the lustre of ear rings looked like the bright summit of the Sameru 
mountain ab sunrise., Like pearls of water, glittering at the approach 
of the rainy season, her teeth had an indescribable grace. As the Meru 
is beautified with the currents of the water of Mandakini, so the grace- 
ful nose of the daughter of the mountain was sweetly  bedecked 
with the pearl prolueel in the head of the elephant. As the row 
of heroes looks attractive beneath the new clouds, so the wreath of 
Jasmine attachel to the lock of the damsel looked very lovely. 
The splendour of her rising breast vied with the radiance and chirm of 


` the heated gold. Her gariands of pure gem l.oked like the limpid 


currents of Mandákini. Her attraciive nipples which had the colour of 

the fair Champak resembled the jujube and were covered with lines of 

painting with cosmetics. ler navel was deep and very bright. Her 

belly was circular and yet graceful. ler thighs put to shame the 

plantain-tree. "They were very lovely and at the same time hard and 

represented the mansion of the god of love. They were covered with 

cloth. Her graceful feet thieved tho grace of the lotus. She adorned 

them with golden Dàs'aka and painted them with lae.lye. She also 

decked her feet with anklets whose ringing notes imitated tho sound of 

the swan. She also decked her body with exceilent ornaments of gem. 

. constructed by, Vis.va-Karmá. She wielded on her head a diadem 
“sonstructed with excellent diamonds rendered. bright by the lotus used 
as a toy. She gracal her fingers with lovely rings. She decked her 

delicate hands having the lustre of gold with armlets, bracelets and 

ornaments constructed with conch-shells, ; 

91-64. The goddess, daughter of the mountain, after she had exam'ned 

her own beauty, mentally grasped the feet of Sankara and remembered 

him incessantly. Barring Siva, none in the world including her parents, 

relations, her chaste female associates, brother had a place in her memory. 

All her thoughts were merged in Sankara (Siva). Later on, Himalaya 

went there aud saw that the moon-erested god had arrived with a 

smiling appearance at the coast of the Mandákini. Je held a chastened 

wreath in his hand and was constantly muttering my name. His head 

was covered with clusters of hair which abstracted. the grace of heated 
gold. He was mounted on a bull, and decorated with the ornament of 
snakes, His body was white and shining like pure erystal. He was 
clad in tiger-hide. His skin was besmeared with ashes; his neck was 
adorned with a garland of bones. He was naked. He had five fices, 
each of which had three eyes, effulgent like ten millions of suns. The 
king of the mountains sa 7 tht the lord was surrounded by the Rudras 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA 269 


era — - 


offulgent with the lustre of Brahma. He was attended on his right and 
left sides by Nandikiswara, ghosts, evil spirits, the malignant spirits called 
the Pis'áches, fase conceptions, Brahm v-do.nons, Vetalas (spirits occupying 
dead bolies), Ksetrapálas (the guardians of the fields) and valorous 
Bairavas. -He was attended in tha van by Sanaka, Sananda, Sanat- 
Kumára, Sanátana, Jaigisavya, , Devala, Kanádw Gautama, Pippaláda, 
Apisanga, Bodhu, Pancha Sikha, Katha, Javali, Karatha, Kanwa, 
Lomas'a effulgent like the sun, KatyAyana, Panini, Sankha, Durvas4, 
S'atatapá, Paribhadra, Asta-bakra and other wonderful saints. Himalaya 
saluted these sages and with folded hands throwing himself prostrate on 
the ground saluted Siva. Ue then got up, held his lotus-feet reverentially 
and with a thrill of raptures in his body and with streaming eyes bowed to 
him again and again. Afterwards, perceiving in Siva the same image that 
the sun had witnessed in days of yore ab the holy place of Puskara 
at’ the termination of the Brihma-day, the king of the mountains 


adored the great god with the hymn which was given to him by- 


Dharma thus :— 


65-75. O Lord, you create in the shape, of Brahma, preserve in 
the shape of Vignu, do good in the shape of Siva and ultimately destroy 
the world-Lord, you are the god transcending all properties of Nature. 
You are effulgent and eternal. You are the emblem anddigit of Nature. 
You are natural (conjoined with Nature) and distinct from Nature. 
O god, to help the contemplation of your adherents, you take many 
forms. You take any form as you please. You are the cause of crea- 
tion, the container of all energy and in the shape of the moon, through 
your cool and gentle rays, you preserve the crops &e. O Lord, you 
ure the symbol of the wind, the water as well as the fire which consumes 
all things. You are Indra, the king of gods, time, death and Yama. You 
are yourself the conquerer of death, the time of time, the death of death 
and the Yama of Yama. You are the Vedas, the author of the Vedas, 
and you are versed in the auxiliary branches of the Vedas. It 
has been ascertained that you are the father of savants and the spiri- 
tual guide of the learned. You are the symbol of Mantras, the recitation 
of the Mantras, and asceticism respectively : you grant the fruits of 
asceticism and you are the presiding deity- and the master of language, 
its spiritual guide and the germ of Saraswati. Who, therefore will 
be able to adore you? Adoring him thus, Himalaya continued to hold 
the lotus-fee& of the lord. Then Siva consoled him with gentle words 
and, seated on the bull, lingered there fora while. Whoever reads 

_ this most sacred hymn in the morning, noon and evening is releas- 
ed from all sins and all kinds of fear in the dreadful soa of the world. 
lf a son-less man reads this hymn for a month, he will positively 
get a son; and a man without a wife by reading this hymn will 
get a good-natured wife. f 


] 76-78. By the perusal of this hymn and by the grace of Siva, the 
things that have long been stolen are recovered and a man who has 
lost a kingdom certainly gets it back. In prison or ina eromatorium, 
ot when a person is attacked by an enemy, or ina place deluged with 

water, or when s man is drowned, or when a man takes poison, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
270 THE BRAHMA FAITARTA PURANA. 


~ 


or ina willernoss, orin a droalfal phe: fall of wild animals, the person 


in peril is s wely rescasl by the grae» of $ inkara, if he adores him with 


this hymn, 


= 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 

1-11. Lord Krisna said, “The king of the mountains worshipped 
Sinkara mounted on a ball, stood up before him at his command and 
reverentiilly presented to him oblations of honey ^nd milk, Afterwards 
he duly worshipped the munis and the adherents of S.va, The king of tho 
mountains, with Menakà and his relations, again approached the hol 
fig-tree and saw the moon-erested lord sevbed ab its root. His 
fae» was cheerful anl smiling. He was elal in tizer-hide. As the moon 
shines amonz stars in the sky, so S'ankara effulgent with the rays of 


Brahma looked radiant in the circle of the munis, His graceful form . 


was delightful like ten millioas of Cupids, At that tim», he shook off 
his old age and wielded the appearance ofa young, man graceful, enchanting 
and likely to win the heart of damsels. Later on he, looke l like the Kàma 
of licentious women, like the son of a chaste woman, like the Muha 
Visnn of the Vaisnavas, like the eternal Siva of the sS'aivas, like wakti 
of tha-sS'àktas, like the sun of the Sauras, like the death of tho wicked, 
lik» the preserver of the virtuous, like the time of time, the death of death 
and Yama of Yama with a dreadful appearance. He pat on the tiger-skin 
anla delirhtful dress; and his ashes were Sabsequently converted into 
sanlal-paste. The wreath of snakes was traasform «l into an enchanting 
garland of flowers : and the siron» poison of the snakes was converted into 
musk. His graceful crest with clusters of h ur, the mark of the moon 
on his forehead, and the beautiful currents of the Gangos on his head 
took the form of a wreath of jasmine. The 2 wland of bones round the 
neck of the Lord resembled a wreath of gems; anl his thorn-apple took 
the aspect of a fair Champak. His five faces Were converted into one face 
vested with two eyes, 

= 12-21. The grace of liis body eclipsed the lustre of the full m son of 
autumn, His lips seemed to rebuke the Bandha-Jiva flowers. His bull 
was converted into an excellent white horse and his spiritual attendants 
turned into dancers. O my dear, when Menaka witnessel this wonderful 
transformation of Siva, she was much delighted. Certain women in- 
fatuated with lust observed him with eyes wide. open. Some women 
exeited with passion almost fainted. Some women criticised their respec- 
tive husbands and eulogised Siva, Some with hearts full of desire embraced 
other women. Some out of passion kissed §:y. in their heart. Some 
said thus, “In this sea of love, we shall make Siva who resembles Cupid 
our pilot.” Some said, “In this world, we shall enjoy the society of this 
bzing; and in the next world, we shall also try by our davotions to secure 
him as our husband.” Some Women, as they witnossod the grace of 
Siva, hid their faces with the hem of thoir garments and with smiling 
appearances and slanting eyes continued to observe him. Some said, 
-* We wil no more return home; evon this moment Wo shall go to Siva 
and constantly behold his faea which resembles the autumnal moon." 
Others said, “We shall no more go back to tho world; but with the desire 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


! 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. ` 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 271 


——— 


to secure Siva as our husband in our next birth we shall consign ourselves 
to the flames and commit suicide." 

92-39. Then some women said, «Oh! how meritorious is Durga ! 
Born in India, she is truly blessed." So saying in order to minister to him, 
they sent Dured to Siva. Parvati, ina charming dress and with several 
sorts of blandishments, went with her female associates to Siva, Then with 
a cheerful aspect and gaze, she saw the tranquil S iva, cireumambulated 
round- him seven times and bowed to him smiling. Siva blessed her saying; 
* O auspicious virgin, you will be blessed in respect of your husband whose 
love you will be able to secure and you will get a well-qualified son like 
Narayana. Fair one, you will get a graceful consort beyond the power of 
adoration by others, the container of all virtues and the best of sages. In 
the whole universe you will excel others. O mother of the universe, 
in the three worlds, your worship shall be first performed. You have express- 
ed your humiliation to me out of reverence by cireumambulating round me 
seven times. May you please me ab every birth. For this reason, O fair 
one.you will geb a suitable reward. My spouse, a person reaps fruits aecord- 
ing to the degreo of his confidence in pilgrimage, tutelary deity, spiritual 
guide, mystic formula, medicine etc. ‘So saying Sankara, the lord 
of the Yogis, soon adopted a posture cf meditation on the tiger-hide used 
as aseat and contemplated my form, the emblem of the effulgence of 
Brahma. Afterwards the goddess washed both his feet, drank the reetar 
of his feet (water with which they were washed) and respectfully rubbed 
them with tho cloth chastened by fire. Later on, the daughter of the 
mountain offered to him a beautiful throne of gem constructed by Vis'wa- 
Karma’ and sweet oblation of honey and milk deposited ina wonderful 
cup of bell-metal, presented to him the water of the Mandakini for wash- 


ing his feet with oblations of grass, barley, etc., fragrant sandal, graceful 


musk and saffron. Round his blue throat she cast a garland of jasmine 
presented to him four hand-fuls of flowers and in this way worshipped 
him. Afterwards the daughter of the mountain made to Sankara offer- 
ings of honey deposited in a vessel, hundreds of diamond lamps shed- 
ding ustre on all sides, delightful frankineense; cloth rarely to be had in 
tho three worlds, sacrificial thread, fragrant cool water for drinking, 
delightful ornaments constructed with excellent gems, precious cows of 
plenty with golden horns, water of sacred streams, water for bathing, 
delicious betel leaves ote. constituting the sixteen ingredients and bowed 
to him. Párvati thus used to worship Siva, the holder of the spear, 
every-day and go home. 

40-51. Siva was thus putting up at that place when Indra heard 
of this affair from the dancing girls of Heaven and himself dancing with 
joy sent messengers to bring Kama, the god of love. When Kama over went 
to heaven at the command of Indra, the latter directed the former to go 
where Siva and Sivà wore dwelling at the time. Kama, with a cheerful 
mien, took his five arrows and floral bow and, being vested with migth, 
went to that place. lle saw there that Siva, the lord of the world, 
sustaining a tranquil form attractive to the three worlds, was dwelling, 
with S/akti (Parvati) with a cheerful mien. Seeing this from the sky, 
he wielded the bow with his arrow, and gladiy discharged ab Siva with 
pleasure his irresistible and infallible weapon. Though itis infallible, yet, like 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ra by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
TÉ 


272 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


a weapon aimed at the unassilable sky, it fell flat upon the omniscient, oternal 
spirit S'iva dissociated from all objects. Whon the dart was ineffectual, Kama 
beheld the conqueror of death in dismay, sat down before him and trem- 
bled from fear. Siva shook with anger. At this sight, Kama, bewilder- 
ed with fear, remembered Indra and other gods who thereupon came to 
Sva, the lord of immortal beings, and, eulogised him. At this time, 
the fire of anger emanated from the eye of Siva fixed on his forehead. The 
gods engaged themselves in the adoration of S’iva. -But the burning fla me 
of fire emanating from his third eye like the fire of th» time of eternal 
destruction blazed upwards and ascended the sky. Then w hirling round, 
and round, it dropped on the ground. Afterwards with a tremendous fury 
it wandered in all directions an1 eventually swallowed Kàma who, through 
the anger of Siva, was reduced to ashes in a moment. At this sieht, 
the gods were afflicted with sorrow and Párvati hung down her head. 


52-60. Then Rati wept much before Hara;and the gods, trembling 
with fear, adored the moon-erested god. Afterwards, the gods said to 
Rati, “ mother, banish your fear and hold a little quantity of these ashes.’ 
So saying the gods wept again and again and said to Rati,“O Rati, 
when S'iva is appeased and an auspicious day sets in, we shall again 
bring to life the lord of your life. Then only you will get him back? 
Parvati, hearing the lamentations of Rati, fainted. Afterwards she adored 
the moon-crested lord who transcends the passions and attributes. Then 
S'aukara left the weeping Parvati and went to his destination. Thus the 
pride of Parvati was crushed. She at that time laid aside her pride result- 
ing from the consciousness of her youth and beauty, and was so much 
bumiliated that through shame she could not show her face to ber female 
associates, , Alterwards the gods consoled her and with an aftlicted heart, 
bowing to Siva, went home. O Radha, Rati weeping through grief and 
fear and with her eyes crimson with rage adored S'ankara and went home. 
Then the abashed Parvati did not go to her paternal, home and in spite 
of the remonstrances and entreaties of her female associates she slighted 
them and went to the forest for devotion. 


61-68. Her afllicted female associates followed her. At this time her 
mothers tried to dissuade her from her purpose ; but Pirvatt could not be 
prevailed upon to give up the austerities which she had proposed. 
Later on, after a long course of asceticism in a forest situated on the 
coast of the Ganges, she secured the three-eyed lord as her husband. 
Through the boon of Sankara, Rati also got back Madana. O Radha, 
I just told you all the mysteries connected with the subjugation of the 
pride of Parvati. Now what more do you want to hear? 

CHAPTER XL. 

1-11. Radha said,“ Lord, oh! what a wonderful narrative, delizhb- 
ful to the ears like drops of nectar and likely to give wisdom. did I hear, 
But you told me this in brief. I want to hear of 16 in detail. Lord, tell me 
the incident in detail. O my consort, what austere rites dil Párvati per- 
form? By that austere devotion what boon did she receive from Siva? 
And how did Rati restore Kima to life? O Lord Krisna, the mar- 
riage of Pàryati and Siva, their secret intercourse, the consolation 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


. Digitized by eG: i j 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA "7 TE 


of Pårvatî. All these points, O ocean of mercy, kindly narrate to me 
and dispel the horrors of this afflicted creature (myself) O Krisua, the 
story of the separation of the married pair afflicts the ears of a woman 
who has been listening toit. She therefore naturally desires to hear 
of their re-union. A woman can tolerate the pangs of fire or poison ; but 
sho cannot tolerate the pangs of separation from her husband ", When 
Krisna heard the words of Radha, he smiled, bowed down his head aud 
with an afflicted heart took up the thread of the narrative in detail. ‘Then 
this idea was predominant in his mind that when Ràdhà was unable to 
hear the description of the pang caused by the separation of the married 
pair, what would be her condition when she herself would be separated 
from him for a century ? Hari who is the ozean of mercy and all illusion 
having pondered thus in his mind set himself to narrate to her the main 
story thus, “O Radha dear to my life, you are the presiding goddess of 
my life, dearer to me than my life and the support of my life. Now Tam 
going to answer the points raised by you. Listen. 

1294. When Siva departed from the base of the holy fig-tree, 
Parvati went away for devotion, in spite of the remonstrances of her 
parents, which she did not mind. The goddess went to the coast of the 
Mandikint, bathed in the holy water of the river and sought my pro- 
tection when I gave her the mystic formula of Siva. Afterwards the 
mother of th: world being engaged in the recitation of the Mantra 
reverentially recited it for one year full and performed ^ austere devotions. 
In summer, sho kindled the fire on all sides and in the centre of the fire 
she placed herself day and night and uttered the Mantra of the Lord. 
Again, in the rainy season, in the crematorium she assumed the posture 
of meditation and being moistened continually by the rain of hail or 
currents of water, sho prayed day and night. In winter she was immersed 
continually in water and reverentially prayed god. Similarly, withoat 
food she engaged herself in asceticism during the day in spite of the heat 
of the sun in autumn; and during the night, she meditated in spite of 
the snow with which she was covered. But in spit? of hec austerities 
lasting for a year, Parvati did not attain Sankara. ‘Then being very 
much agitated with sorrow, she prepared a pit of fire and attempted to 
enter into the flame. At that time, the mind of inkara, the ocean of 
mercy, was moved with compassion to find that the attenuated Parvati 
was about to rush headlong into the flame. Then, by his valour, he 
assumed the form of a dwarfish, boyish Brahmin and arrived there. He 
held the pwasol and the club in his hand. He had clasters of hair on his 
head and assumed a cheerful appearance. His neck was adorned with 
a white sacred thread and his body was wrapped with a white garment. He 
had on his neck a garland of the Seeds of the white lotus ; and his forehead 
wielded a bright mark of sandal. ‘hen Parvati having seen the boy 
in solitude, her mind was filled with feelings of compassion for him and 
she began to smile. Being obscured by his rays, all the fatigues of her 
covered were relieved. Then she asked the boy standing before her 
(em best of Bráhmins, who are yon?" So saying, she paused. Then she 
felt a natural inclination to embrace Siva who had the shape cfa boy with 
affection. The great god when he heard the question put by the daughter 
of tho mountain, addressed her with words full of honey thus. 


85 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


274 TH DBR I dARI pr RANA, 


m r a. 


2536-. Lady, Iam an ascetic and the son of a Brahmin. We 
voluntarily wander everywhore. Fair one, who are you? Why are you 
engaged in this inaccessible, solitary forest in meditation ? Fair one, to 
what family do you belong? Whose dauzhter are you? What is your 
name? You can yourself bestow fruits of devotion ou others. Then 
„why do you practise these rigid austerities? O goddess, are you the mass 
of devotions incarnate? Goddess, are you the primordial Nature, the 
emblem of energy? Have you wielded a form to help the contemplation 
of your devotees? Or are vou the representative of prosperity, the goddess 

‘fortune of the three worlds arrived here for the preservation of ` 
the world? Are you Sàvitri herself, the mother ofthe Vedas, and 
descended to the earth to be subject to birth in Inlia? Are you Saraswati, 
the personal goddess of language or words who ‘was born in 
India to reveal the knowledge of various kinds to mankind? Who are you 
among these, I am unable to determine, QO auspicious nymph, I need not 
discuss what goddess you are. Be propitiate with me. O chaste ono, if 
you are propitiated, Narayana himself will be propitiatel. For he is 
propitiated, if a chaste woman is propitiated. As tue branches are 
moistened, if the root of a tree is moistened, so the three worlds are 
always satisfied if Nardyana is satisfied.” Ihe great goddess smiled at the 
words of the boy and spoke to him sweet words full of honey thus: “O 
great minded being, lam neither Savitri, the mother ofthe world nor 
Lakshmi nor Saraswati, the presiding deity of speech. At present I have 
been born in India as the daughter of the mountain. In my previous 
birth, I was born in the house of Daksaand known by the name of Sati. 
Hearing the Slanders of my husband from the mouth of my father, I 
parted with my body by the powers of Yoga. 


31-45. O twice-born saint, in this birth also, by virtue of my sanctity, 

I had attained Sankara but, unfortunately, he left me, reduced Kama to 

ashes and departed to some other place. When Sankara went away, through 

the affliction of my heart and shame I left my father’s house, arrived at 

the coast of the Mandákiní and engaged myself in devotion. Though I gave 

myself up to austere rites. yet I did not attain the lord of my lifo. 

Thereupon I attemnted to enter into the pit of fire, I desisted from the 

act for tne time being at your sight. Therefore, go now O Brâhmin, in 

order that with the dezire of obtaining Hara as my husband uppermost 

in my mind, J may enter into the fame which resembles the fire of eternal 

destruction and dispel the agony of my mind. Wherever I may be born, at 

every birth may I get Siva who is dearar to me than my life as my has- 
band. Every woman desires to geta husband after her heart at every birth. 

Women are born to secure suitable matches for themselves. This has 
been ordained in the Vedas. A woman gels the same man as her hus- 
band at every birth whom she had secured as such in her previous birth, 
Similarly the fame woman continues to be the wife of a man at every 
birth. But, alas! even by means of austere devotions, I have not been 
able to secure the husband, congenial to my heart. With the avowal 
of the purpose that I would geb him in the next birth, I would enter into 
the flame and thus secure him hereafter. So saying, in the presence of the 
great god in the shape of a Braéhmis, she entered into the burning flame 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
RRISNA JANMA KANDA. 275 


NU E 


of fre. The Brahmin repeatedly tried to prevent her from her design 
but she would nct listen. 

46-52. O great goddess Radha, when Parvati entered into the fire, 
it bacame cool like: sundal throagh tha might of her devosions. O Ridha 
who revellest in Vrinlivany, the daughter of the mountain remriinel for a 
while in the fire an l then came out when Siva in the shape of a Bràhmin 
address:d her thus: * Good lady, what a wonderful power of asecticism you 
have got | But you have no sensa atall Neither your body was con- 
sumed by fire, nor did you, eet the husbind as desired by you. Yo1 
desire to attain the auspicios Sivaas your husband. But supposing you get 
that incorporeal being, how will your object be accomplished ? O damsel of 
sweet smiles, you want 6» marry the destroyer of the world. What is the 
meaning of all this? Which woman wants to wed the destroyer? O go ldess, 
if by this intended m wriage you desire salvation, then your devotion is 
inelfee ual, For you yourself can give salvation., And then, again, that 
Siva whom you would wed for tho sake of redemption is the dostroyer. Hə 
cannot grant welf'we or salvation. The Volas have put a different mean- 
ing upon the word salvation. 


53-68. Fair one, if you are determine] to have the destroyer as your 
husband, then surely you will secure the society of Rudra who is fearful 
to all the worlds, Bat without the worship of your tutelary deity Hari, 
there ean be no redemption. Wor it has bean said that the recollection of 
Hari alone is capable of bestowing a good thit does not perish. Goddess, 
now go to your paternal house. By my blessing and as the result of your 
asceticism, you will behold there the inaccessible Sankara.” So ‘saying, 
the Brahmin disappeared. Durg’, also muttering again and again the 
name of Siva, went to her paternal house. On the other hand, Himalaya 
and Menaka, hearing of the arrival of Parvati, were animated with joy 
and having engaged a celestial car went to her ; and at the command of 


the king, sandal, aloa, musk and auspicious jars full of fruits and branches 


were placed on the mirgin of the royal roads. The foliage of- 


mangoes attached to jars with silken thread looked very beautiful. 
On all sides of the road, trees of plantains were fixed in a row. On the 
royal roids. women blessed with their respective husbanils and sons also 
arrived. Virtnous Brihmins, Munis and  Brahmaeháris arrived there 
with leaves, fried ries, piddy, bent grass ete. Many dramatic actresses 
and female dancers busied themselves with dineinz. Elephants, horses 
ete., well-decorated, arrived there. The best and most praiseworthy 
priests with graceful, jasmine wreaths in their hands reached there. 
Simultaneously there was a flourish of music of various kinds as well as 
the sound of couches. The royal road was besmeared with the dust of 
vermilion and reverbzrated with the sound of conchas. Then the 
goddess Darga entered into the city and saw th.t her parents were advanc- 
ing to her, greatly agitated. There was a thrill of rap&nres in their body; 
and tears were freely ‘trickling down their cheoks. At this sight, the 
goddess with her female associates cheerfully bowed to thom. Her parents 
embraced and blessed hor and being subdued by love; said, “© O mother ; 
O child." So saying they placed her on the chariot and took her to 
their house. Parvati was welcomed by the women and blessed by the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


TARD RAWI PA Pray RHR PURANA. 


r5 
~ 
o 


Brâhmins. Then the king distributed to the bards and the Bråhmins 
wealth in abundant: quantity and caused them to recite various kinds of 
auspicious verses. The king of tte mountains and Menaká with their 
daughter passed their days happily in their home. 

69-80 Once upona time the king of the mosntains went out to 
pray at the coast of the Mandákini. Menaka remained in her house with 
her daughter. At this time, a good singer and dancer who was a mendicant 
suddenly appeared before Menaki, He wasa decrepit old man. He 
hell with kis left hand the horn and witn his right hanl the small drum 
shaped like an hour glass. His body was besmeared with ashes, With 
a melodious voice, he sang of my virtues and danced ; and every now and 
then he played upon his drum anl horn. Hearing the sound, ‘he citizens 
ineluding the children, old men and women, young men and women {lucked 
there in a body infatuated with joy. They were all enchanted with the 
melodions and beautiful songs. Menakà alo fainted. Then the eoddess 
Durga also swooned and in a state of insensibility found that Sankara 
wielding a tiident and an axe;azd clad in liger-skin manifested himself 
in her heart. Ashes were his ornaments. A lovely wreath of bones was 
Cast round his neck. His charms were spotless; his fice was lit up with 
a smile and had a cheerful aspect. Both his eyes were serene. The 
five very beantiful facas of the moon-erested lord, the garland in his hand 
and the sacred thread of snakes were pleasing to the view. Hs said, 
“O Parvati, solicit the boon desired by you.” Tha daughter of the 
mountain having thus beheld Hara in hor mind mentally adored him 
and craved a boon thus,“ O lord, Le my husband yourself.” S’iva 
gave her the boon and vanished from her mind. A fverwards, Durga fail- 
ii g to see that tranquil appearance in her heart recovered Consciousness, 
opened her eyes anil saw the mendicant devoted to music. 


81-92 Then Menaka having heard the song and witnessed the 
danee of the beggar approached him with a view to give him various 
kinds of gems deposited in a golden vessel. But the beggar did not accept 
them. He demanded her daughter'as an alms and then danced with 
joy. Menaká was at first surprised at his words; bat afterwards highly 
incensed she rebuked him in various ways and asked her relations to turn 
him out. She also said, ** Uma will be the beloved spouse of Siva, the 
lord cf the three worlds, the supreme spirit : and this beggar, behold, 
is’ demanding her. Turn out this mendicant who has got an evil 
tongue.” In the meantime the king of the mountains, after his devotions 
Were over, came back home.and saw that a graceful beggar was standing 
in the court-yard. On the lovely coast of the Ganges, the king of the 
mountains, while adoring Narayana, could not see his image in spite of 
his meditations and being over-whelmed with grief returned home. At 
that time he heard all this news from Manakà. At first, a gentle smile 
was visible on his lips ; but, later on, it disappeared and he was very angry 
Then he commanded his attendants to turn out the mendicant. There- 
upon his attendants, far from being able to turn out the beeear, un- 
touehable like the sky and effulgent with the rays of Brahma, could not 
even approach him, Then the king of mountains saw for a moment 


that the beggar was the four-handed lord decorated with diadem and: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


D 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. "T 


———— 


ear-ring and elad in yollow dress, Then he found that he was dark-blue, 
charming in appearance and clad in a beautiful dress. When he marked 
him attentively, he found that he had a smiling, lovely face; and all 
his body was besmeared with sandal. He was inclined to favour his ad- 
herents. All the flowers which the king of the mountains had offered 
to the holder of the mace wore found on his body. The lovely frank- 
incense, limp and sacrificial offerings which he had reverentially prosent- 
ed to the holder of the mace were, (he saw), placed before she mendicant. 


93-103. Later on, the king of the mountains perceived for a time that 
the beggar was vested with two hands, young, dark blue in appearance, 
in the guise of a cow-herd and holding a flute in his hands. lle also saw 
that he was decke! with ornaments and that his crost was adorned with 
the plum ge of peacock. ‘The whole of his body was besmewed with 
gandul and eoverel with wild wreaths. He again saw for a moment that 
the mendicant was clad in tizer-skin, that he was holding a trident and an 
axe, ‘hat he was bedecked with ashes and that he was the moon-crested 
lord Sankara. His neck was adorned with a pure garland of bones and 
a sacred threal of snakes. His head was loaded with golden clusters of 
knotted haw. In the hands he held a small drum shaped like an 
hour-glass as well as & horn. He had a lovely, tranquil appearance. He 
was constantly reciting the name of Hari with a wreath ot white crystal 
in his hands. The king of the mountains again -saw that fora time 
the mendicant was shining with the lustre of Brahma in the shape of the 
radiant sun and vested with three attributes. Afterwards he saw for 
a moment that he had assumed the form of the fire effuleent with the 
lustre of Brahma, ‘Then he also beheld in him the delightful and grace- 
ful form of the moon. Then for a time he beheld that he was form-less, 
incorruptible, dissociated from all objects, without desire, the emblem 
of the supreme spirit and symbol of absolute lighs, When the king of 
the mountains thus saw the self-determining Sankara wielding so many 
forms, with tears of joy in*his eyes, and a thrill of raptures in his body he 
threw himself prostrate on the ground like a club or staff before him. 
He eireumambalatel round him reverentially, saluted him repeatedly and 
approaching him with a cheerful heart beheld him again. Afterwards 
when the king of the mountains saw the beggar as he had originally 
appeared, he was bewildered by the illusion of Visnu and forgot all about 
the different forms which he had witnessed before. 


104-115. Then the mendicant again bezzed alms of the king of the 
mountains. The satchel or wallet by his side, the rod dress which he 
put on and the musical horn and the small drum in the shape of the 
hour-glass in his hands became again prominent. The beggar was not 
inelined to beg any alms other than Durga. The king of the mountains 
being bewildered by the illusion of Visnu by no means acceded to his 
request. ‘The beggar did not accept any thing but disappeared. O my 
beloved, at that time the mountain and Menakà were disillusioned and 
. came to their senses. Then they thought thus, “Qh! what a wonderful 
system of creation the lord of the Universe has. In the day, he appe- 
ed to us parsonally like a dream. He defrauded us again and vanished.” 
Tho gods including Indra ete. seeing the immovable faith of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


2^ 


278 DBFES DREP pep Ta PURANA. 


Himalaya and Menaká became anxious. Then they assembled in the 
Sumeru mountain at the root of the immortal holy fig tree and hit 
upon a plan. If the king of the mountains reverentially hand Over 
his daughter to Siva, he will be at once redeemed If he goes away 
leaving the earth which is a mine of gems, then the nama, * the mother 
of gems " as applied to the earth will be quite ineffsctual and meaning. 
less. llimálaya after having bestowed his daughter on the holder of 
the spear in marriage will get rid of the quality of his immovableness, 
wield a celestial form and surely pass to the domain of Viena whore he will 
easily attain the form of Hari and bs classed am ng his a.tendants. A 
daughter is equal to ten ponds. If any one gives his dauzhier in marria ro 
toa Brihiain who does not accept gifts, who is holy, conversant with 
the Vedas and the Sandhya rites, who studies the Vedas ani is truthful 
certainly gains the reward which ein be secured by the gifs of ten ponds, 
But if the Brahmin to whom the daughter is given be a house-holder who 
performs Sandhyà in the morning, noon and evening, who is truthfal and 
conversant with the Vedas, the benefit reaped hy the donor is one-half. 
of the last-named benefit. 

116-141. And if the person to whom tho daughter be given accepts 
gifts from others, and be void of religious rites in the morning, noon and 
evening, the donor will still reap fruits lo the extent of one hilf of the 
last-named benefit. And if the donee be a Brihmin he ravishes the 
wives of others, who is a professional beggar, who will still acquire religious 
merit equivalent to that secured by the gift of one tank. If the donee be 
without religions rites and treacherous, tho donor will still acquire tha 
merit secured by the gift of half a tank. But if the daughter b» given 
to a person similar to a Chindal bee ston by a Südra upon a vila Brdhmin 
woman, she proves to b» a soure» of hell. Bit if the daughter bə given 
to the son of a Bràhmin devoted -to Viana, learned, truthful an 1 dis- 
passionate, the fruit reaped by the donor is equal t» tne fruit reapad by. 
the gift of thirty tinks. And any one who gives his dauchter to such a 
bride-zroom wields a celestial form and lives happily for 6),0)0 years in 
the land of Visnu. O my beloved, it is sp>cifiel in the Vedas that any one 
who gives his good-natured daughter to [Iii or Hara attains tho form 
of Narayana. If any magnanimous person devoted to Hart gives his 
daughter to the son of a Brdhmin out of deference to Visnu, he attains 
the bondage of Hart O my darling, the gols, after consultation and 
due deliberation departed with a view to send Vrihaspati to the house of 
Himalaya, Subsequently the gods approached the spiritual preceptor of 
the gods, bowed to him and submitted to him everything thus :—“ O 
Guru, go to the house of Himilava and blame (S'iva) the wielder of the 
aXe in various ways. Durgà will wed none except the holder of the 
trident (Siva). Thus Himalaya, provided that he is made to give his 
daughter to Hara in marriage against his will shail not reap the benefit 
commensurate with the gift of his daughter. It follows then, that for the 
time being he must remain on earth. ‘Therefore, O religious loader, 


.preserve the Earth, the one of endless gems. Thereupon Vrihaspati thrust , 


his hands into his ears, remembered Náràyana and said, * By no means 
I shall be able to perform this act.” So saying Vrihaspati who was 
eonversant with the Vedas and their auxiliary branches and who was 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


KRISN PGRN ACTOS Trust. 919 


a 


devoted to Hari and Hara again rebuked the gods saying, “ O selfish gods, 
I am going to tell you truthful words preseribed by the Vedas pregnant 
with ethical maxims and benelicial in the end. Listen. A sinner who 
slanders a person (devoted to Hari and Hara), or a Brahmin who is 
regarded as a god on earth, or a chaste woman or his own spiritual guide, 
or an ascetic, or à mendicant or. a Brahmachári, or the gods who constitute 
the ciuce of creation will remain in the hell called the Thread of Time so 
Jong as the sun and the moon exist, sleep there day and night on saliva, 
night-soil and urine and be bitten continually by worms where 
he will seream in agony. A sinner who slanders Brahmi, the creator of the 
wor'd, the goddess Durga who is the best of female deities, Laksmi, 
Saraswati, Sita, Tulsi, Ganga, the Vedas, the mother of the Vedas, @ 
vow, devotion, mystic formula pertaining to worship or the spiritual guide 
who gives the formula will dwell in the hell called the * blind well" for 
half the period of the longevity allotted to Brahmá, where bitten by 
snakes he will scream dreadfully. Whoever slanders Lord Hrisike'sa 
(Visnu, literally. lord of the senses) regarding him as an ordinary god or 
talks ill of the Puranas (which engender faith in Hari and are more 
praiseworthy than the S’rutis) or blames the cow-berdess, Radha, 
who sprang out of half of the body of Krisna or the ever-adorable 
Brahmins must dwell in the hell called Avatoda so long as Brahma 
exists. [Je dwells there with his feet upwards and face downwards 
surrounded by snakes There, bitten by fearful snakes, he screams 
horribly and oppressel by hunger. he consumes saliva, ordure and 
.urine. Then the fearful myrmidons of Yama in anger thrust torches 
into his mouth, chastise him in the morning, noon and evening; storm and 
thunder. He is then very much frightenel.and with the torments ` caused 
by beating he is rendered thirsty and drinks urine to quench his thurst. 


149.150. The offpring of the lotus hath said, “In the next Kalpa, 
only at the commencement of creation by Brahma, such a sinner will be 
released from hell. O gods, by the slander of S‘iva, shall I go to hell? Do 
you request me to render you this benefin ? In days gone by, Daksa at 
Brahmá's command, gave his daughter in marriage to the holder of the 

- spear; but when he slanderod S’iva he did not obtain redemption but merely 
acquired prosperity. Daksa unwillingly married his daughter to S'iva 
and acquired only religious marit. But, for a wonder, he sacrificed the redemp- 
tion in the shape of the attainment of che form of Visnu, and in lieu of 
that, he only secured the insignificant bliss of heaven. © gods, let some 

one among you go to the house of Himalaya and attain his object by hook 

or by crook. Let the king of the mountains wwillingly give his daugh- 

ter in marriage to Siva and thus abide with pleasure im India; for, bearin — - 

mind, if he gives kis daughter reverentially to Siva, he will surely be 
redeemed. Subsequently to obtain the consent of Himalaya to the marriage; 

the seven Risis will undoubtedly go with Arundhati to the house of the 

king of the mountains and use coaxing and consolatory language, Darga 
also will accept no husband except Siva, Therefore in spite of his relue- 
tance, Himalaya shall have to make over his daughter to Siva. O gods, 

| I now stated to you the whole case. Now go home. Vrihaspati, 80 

i saying, went to the coast of the Mandakini, 


* 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


— 


dun : S Trust. : 
930 IRE BRITA YATVARTA PURANA. 


Ex 
CHAPTER XIL. 


1-10. Lord Krisna said, “The gods then, afterdiseussing the matter among 
themselves, went to Brahma and stated everything to the lord of the uni. 
verse thus: —"O dispenser of the world, Himalaya in the midst of your crea. 
tion, is regarded as the container of vems. Tf Himalaya therefore, be re. 
leased, the earth will no lonzer be ealled the mine of gems. Tho king of the 
Mountains, if he voluntarily marry his.daughter to the holder of the 
spear, will undoubtedly "attain the same form ag Narayana, 
Therefore, O lord, go to the house of Himalaya, slander S'iva and pervert 
the intellect of the Mountain. Without you, no one is e1pible of this 
act’ Brahma thereupon spoke words delightful to the ears, soft like 
nectar and full of ethical m ixims thus: “O my children, I am incapable of 
slandering S^ va, an aet which is arduous and ealeulated to destroy prosperity 
and sow the seed of ealamity. Go to S'iva and send him to the house of 
Himalaya. He will slander himself; and he cannot he polluted by this 
act For the slander of others is the cause of destruction. But self-slander in- 
creases one’s fame," O my dear, the gods thereupon bowed to Brah ma, went 
to Kailás'a and adored S'iva. Afterwards they submitted the whole affair to | 
the all-mereiful S'ankara. Siva smiled, consoled the gods and went to the 
houso of the mountain. The gods were very pleased and went home. ‘The 
accomplishment of one’s desire is the cause of one’s happiness, and the 
frustration of one’s design is always distressful, 


mmm 


11-25. Later on. when Himálaya in eouneil was passing his* days 
happily with Parvati, Siva in the guise of a Brahmin suddenly turned up » 
there with a cheerful mien. He held in his hand the mace ànd parasol, 

He was dressed in a lovely manner. [lis fore-head was impressod with 

a very bright mark, Ho held a wreath of crystal and his neck wielded 

the holy stone (emblem of Visnu) covered with cloth. As soon ag 
Himalaya saw him, he got up from his seat and throwinz himself pros- 

trate on the ground saluted reverentially the wonderful guest, After-wards 
Himalaya enquired about his Welfare and asked the Brahmin thus, “Lord, 

Who are yon? Let me know your antecedents.” ‘The best of the Brahmins 
respectfully thus answered :—«O king of mountains, I wander over 4 
the surface of the globe by adopting the profession of a match-maker 
(one who negotiates matrimonial alliances), By the boon of my religious 
preceptor, I have become omniscient and can So anywhere with the 
Speed of mind. You want to bestow your daughter who resembles 
Kamala on S'ankara whose origin and nature are mysterious. This I 
know. But that Sankara has neither house nor society nor grace nor 
virtue, Ho dwells in the crematorium, He is the lord of all malignant 
Spirits and is famed ag a Yogi. He ig sturk naked. Ashes and snakes 
Constitute his Ornaments. fe is similar to a catcher of snakes, He is ; 
kind only to Snakes who represent time or death. He knows nothing 

about death. This Bhaya is ignorant. Ie is without patrous and friends, 

His head is covered with golden clusters of hair, THe is poor, decrepit and 
"neorruptible. His age is not known, He is a vagrant and hath his 

home every-where, His neck ig adorned with the sacred thread of snakes, 

He is a mendicant, Therefore, O King of mountains, if does not 
become you to give your daughter Paryati to him, ‘Tho saints wi 


er 


* 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


981 KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 


re 


ridicule you when they hear of this matter, You are the best of sages, 
and you have sprung from the digits of Náráyana. You should consider 
this point. O King, you are the Lord ofa hundred mountains. Have you 
no friends or relations? Just refer the matter to your friends and Menaká 
and hear what they say. Barring Parvati, the best of yourrelations, carefully 
enquire into the matter of all others. It is useless to ask Parvati ; for a 
patient has no taste for medicine and rather likes to eat forbidden articles.” 


26-38. O you who revel in Vrindávana, the Bráhmin having said so 
finished his bath and diet soon and went home with pleasure. Menaka, 
as she heard-the words of the Brahmin with an afflicted heart, said to 
Himalaya, “ O King of mountains, listen to my words which are delight- 
ful in the end and then refer the matter to your kinsmen, the mountains. 
I will by no means give my daughter to tho Mahadeva. O King of 
mountains, if you do not listen to me, I shall leave your house; or I 
will die of poison. Or, look, I shall tie Ambika to my neck and go to 
the solitary forest. So saying Menaka took Parvati to the house of 
indignation, slept on the earth, abstained from food and wept constantly. 
At this time Vasistha with his brothers went to the king of 
mountains and was followed there by Arundhati. Then the mountain- 
king bowed to them, provided them with seats and worshipped them 
with sixteen ingredients. In that assembly the saints sat down with. 
pleasure. hereafter Arundhati went to Menak& whom she found, lying 
down almost in an unconscious condition. Then the” chaste Arundhati 
addressed to her gentle and beneficial words thus, * O chaste Menaká, get 
up. I am Arundhati, the intellectual daughter of the manes and the 
daughter-in-law of Brahmá. Ihave come to your house. ” Thereupon 
Menak& got up, bowed low to Arundhati who was as effulgent as the 
goddess of fortune and waited on her. ‘Then she addressed her thus, “Ah ! 
How blessed is our existence today. Great is the strength of our pious 
deeds ! for today the wife of Vasistha, the daughter-in-law of the creator 
of the world (Brahm), has graced our house. Goddess, we are your 
servants. Why out of courtesy did you refer to this house as mine ? 
Today the goddess by virtue of my religious merits has come to see her 
female servant." 


49-48. Then Menak4 seated the virtuous Arundhati on a golden 
seat, offered her libation for washing the feet and entertained her 
with sweet-meat. ‘Then she ate something herself along with her daugh- 
ter. Incidentally, Arundhati having raised the question of betrothal, 
engaged herself in giving ethical precept to Menak& with 
reference to S‘iva. On the other hand,the excellent saints, having 
similiarly raised the question of betrothal incidentally set themselves 
to the task of giving ethical counsel to the king, of mountains. The saints 
said, “O king of mountains, take our blessed advice ; bestow your 
daughter Parvati on Siva and thus attain the -position of the father-in- 
law of the destroyer. O king of mountains, the wielder of the spear will 
nof sue for the hands of your daughter; but Brahma with a view to the 
destruction’ of Tàraka, the demon, carefully explained, to Siva the 
desitability of the proposed alliance. That best of Yogis Sankara himself 
is unwilling to marry ; but he has consented to take your daughter 

36, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE z » 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. “284 


only through tho entreaties of Brahma. And he has consented to Marr 
your daughter on the termination of her asceticism. For both thes 
reasons, the best ofsaints will marry." Himalaya when he heard the 
words of the saints smiled and being a little bit frightened modestly spoke 
to them thus, '* O great saints, I do not see any paraphernalia of S'lva, 
t.e. either his prosperity consists in hermitage or his friends or kitth and 
kin. Therefore it does not behove me to give my daughter to this asceti 
who has no connexion with the world. You are the sons of Brahma, con. 
versant with the Vedas. Please tell me what is your opinion on this point, 
39-48. Ifthe father through ignorance, avarice or fear bestuws his 
daughter on an unworthy bride-groom, he has to suffer the torments of hel| 
for a hundred years. It follows then that wilfully I shall never bestow my 
daughter on the holder of the trident. Therefore, O saints, tell me what 
is proper for me todo. Hearing this, Vasistha who was conversent with 
the Vedas and the auxiliary branches of the Vedas addressed: to him 
words prescribed by the Vedas thus:—*/O King of the mountains, there 
are three sorts of statements prescribed! by the Vedas and society. An 
omniscient person, at any place, can know all by virtue of his clear 
of wisdom. A statement which is sweet to the ear only for the 
being but untruthful and injurious in the end is used by j 
his enemy who is by no means edified or enlightened by the same. But 
a merciful and pious man uses words calculated to give relief in 
danger and bring happiness in the end to his friend and consoles 
him thereby. A word which is truthful, substantial and beneficial, 


aye 
time 


a person only to | 


which sounds like nectar and delightful in the end is tho best of all ; 


words and approved by all. 
words have been sanctioned by ethics. Now tell 
of words out of those 'specified above sh 
lord, S'ankara, the lord of gods, is devoid cf kingdom or material prosperity, 
His mind at all times is absorbed in the ocean of metaphysical specula- 
tion. Like the flashes of transient lightning, 
shines for a moment only in material prosperit 
and instantly disappears. How can God who has eternal happiness and 
who is self-contented have a taste for such prosperity. 

(59-71). If a house-holder marries his daughter toa king and ifin- 
spite of this she passes her days mournfully on the ground that her hus: 


band is not congenial to her heart, the father practically kills his daughter 
Kuvera is the slave of Siva. Mow then is Siva poor? He is capable 
of destroying the entire creation by a mere twinkle of his eye. The 
Lord, the wieldor of the trident, is void of attributes, He is the supreme 
Being, God, superior even to nature, He is unconnected with everything 


and isstill associated with all creatures, He is the sole author of destruc: 
tion. He can wield any form at pleasure, therefore he is incorporeal as 
wellas corporeal. For, purpose of creation, preservation and destruction 
he wields three different forms viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva. Out of 
these, Brahma lives in the Brahma-Loka, Visnu, in the ocean of milk and 

iva, in the Kailása. ‘hese three forms constitute the essence of Krişna. 
Lord Krigna has two arms as well as four. With four bands he lives in the 
Vaikuntha, and with two bands in the Goloka, Brahma, Vigne 
and Siva are the digits of Krigna, the ' Supreme ' Being. Among 


me what kind 
all I use to you? O mountain- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


O best of mountains, these three kinds of _ 


the goddess of fortune | 
y which is but a delusion . 


A 
} 


Mie mec 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
283 KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 


——— 


the gods, some are His digits ; others sre the _ digits of his 
digits. The same Krisna at the time of creation determines 
himself and at the outset having created Nature impregnated her with 
his semen. Then she laid an egg out of which emanated a mighty Being 
(Maba-Visgu). He is tho 16th part of Krisna and is called Mahá-Visnu. 
^ Brahma’ emanated from the lotus of the navel of this Mahá- Visnu 
while he was reposing in the waters ; and Sankara with the moon on his 
summit (head) came out of his forehead. ‘hereafter Visnu sprang 
out of his left side. O mountain-lord, Brahma, Visnu, S.va etc, are all 
creations of Nature. Nature, the outcome of Krisna, assumes different 
forms and wantonly being engaged in the task of creation through her 
digits and parts sustains var ous images. Radha, the mistress cf Rasa 
(the eow-herd-dance) herself eame out of the left side of Krişna. Vani, 
the presiding diety of speech, sprang out of his mouth ; and Liksmi, the 
source of all prosperity e nanated from his chest. 

72.8'. "Thereafter, Siva manifested herself ont of the accumulated 
valour of the gods. Sivà having thoroughly extirpwed the race of the 
demons restored to the gods all prosperity which they desired. In a 
subsequent kalpa, she eman itel from the wo nb ofthe wife of Daksa. was ~ 
celebrated by the nane of Satî and obtained S'iva as her husband. Duksa 
married her to S'iva. Afterwards having heard the slanders against 
her husband, she parted with her own body by dint of her abstract 
meditations (Yoga) «nd took her birth ou& of the womb of , your wife 
Menaki as the mother of ,the world. © mountain-lord, this Siva is a6 
every birth the wife of Siva anl in every age she is celebrate as the 
symbol of intellect to the wise anl as the greit mother. She remembers 
the conditions of her previous birth. , She is omniscient, fulfils desires and 
is herself. the imaze of perfection. Siva with great care sustains in his 
boly her ashes and bones. If you are prepared to give your daughter to 
him of your own accord, then please do so immediately. Otherwise 
she will herself go to her consort. A woman attains that man as her 
husband who has ben singled out for her by fate. ‘This law has 
been ordainol by the Lord of Creation and cın be rescinded by none. 
hat metaphysican S'ambhu who is self contentel is not particularly 
anxious for marriage. Only the gols beinz oppressed a good deal by 
"'àzaka have entreatel him in v.rious ways to mury. Therefore 
Lord S'ankara, the ocean of mercy, haying witnessed the oppression of 
the gols and yielding to the prayers of Brahma, has consented to marry 
while present in the said assembly of the gods. 

. 88-91. - Lord S’iva in the guise of a twice-born (Bráhmin) went 
to the place alotted to the meditation of your daughter and having witnes- 
sed her countless torments, pledge! himself to accede to ber prayers, 
granted her a boon using suitable words for her consolation and returned 
home. Hearing this, the gols inelading Indra, Lord Nàràyana, 
Brahma, Dharma, the saints and Munis assembled together, discussed the 
matter and deputed us to your plies. Arundhat? has preceded us and 
-has already arrived at your plac. We shall be highly obliged if you 
kindly yield to our wishes. You regard our counsel inauspicious for 
the time being, it is true ; but. ultimately it is fraught with good results. 
O mountain-lord; if you voluntarily do nob giva him your daughter 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 284 


she is bound to be his bride by prəlestination. The primeval god who 
gave the boon to Parvati afier havine arrived at the place of hor 


meditation is the best of all vols. We has no beginning, end or middle; hg | 


isthe preceptor of the wise, incorruptible, birthless and the best of 
ascetics. He will ride on a diamand car along with Narayana and go to 
your place : for the vow of a gol can never go amiss. 


92-101. O King of mountains, in this world everything from Brahma 
down to an insect is transitory ; but the wods of saints are rare and 
inviolable. Indra, the king of the gods to preserve his vow, unassisted 
easily clipped the wings of the mountains : the god of Wind also easily 
broke the summit of Sumeru. Therefore, O ILimálaya, who is there among 
the mountains so brave as to combat the gods? If any one rashly 
advances with a view to fight with the gods, the might of the 
wind will soon hurl him into the bosom of the sea. Therefore, O King 
of the mountains, if the preservation of only one person entails the 
destruction of all, then itis proper to hand over that person to the 
opposite side for che preservation of all property ; only refugees ought not 
to be surrendered. Moralists have held that for the preservation of a fu- 
gitive, the surrender of ason, wife, wealth and even life is desirable. In days 
of yore, a king named Anaranya by bastowine his daughter in marriage 
on the son of a Bráhmin was released from the curse of the Brahmin and 
thus preserved all his property. ‘The moralists advised the king, a prey 
to the curse, (who was very much afflicted with sorrow) to perform the 
above beneficial act. Therefore, O king of mountains, you too sheuld 
bestow your daughter on Siva and tbus preserve your relations and friends 
and appease the race of gods.” The king of mountains, having . heard 
this, with a heavy heart enquired into the history of king Anaranya and 
said with a smile, “O Brahmin, to what race did Anaranya, the best of 
kings, belong? Why did he preserve all his property by giving his 
daughter ? 

102-110. Vasistha said, *O king cf mountains, Anaranya, the best of 
kings, came out of the stock of Mann; he was longevous, pious, the best 
of Vaisnavas and had a complete mastery over his passions, .In davs of 
yore, the pious Manu, the son of the self existent Brahma justly ruled 
his kingdom for seven yugas and afterwards went to Vaikuntha with 
his wife Sata-rupa where he attained the bondage cf Hari and was classed 
among his myrmidons. Afterwards S‘warochisa Manu came into being 
and after his death the pious Támasa Manu came into prominence. 
When the period of his jurisdiction was over, Raivata, the wisest was 
born, After him respectively came into being Cháksusa Manu, then the 
seventh Manu called Vaivaswata-Manu, then the eighth Manu (the son of 
the sun) called Sávarna Manu (who was in his previous birth a king named 
Suratha descended from Chaitra), then after his demise the ninth Manu call- 
ed Daksnsávarni, then the 10th called Brahma-Sávarni, then the 11th call- 
ed Dharma-Sávarni, the best of Manus, tken-on his demise, tho great Vaig- 
nava, Rudrasàvarni who had subdued his passicns ; then after his jurisdie- 
fion was over Devasávarni ; and after him, Indrasávarni. O best of 
friends, I have thus given you an account of the origin of the 14 Manus. 
The period covered by all these Manus is equivalent to one day of Brahma. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


* Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


985 KRISNA JANMA KANDA. 


M ae 
411-125. O king of mountains, I am now going togive you an account 
of Indrasá-varni ; hear it in detail. This Manu. the best of Manus, was 
very pious and a great adherent of Gadadhara. After having justly ruled his 
kingdom for seven Yugas, he entrusted his government to his son Suchandra 
and went away for devotion. ‘This Suchandra begat a very powerful son, 
‘the graceful S'ri- Niketu. S'ri-Niketu begat a son named Purísa-Tara, a 
great ascetic who begat a son named Gokà-Mukha. Gokhá-Mukha begat 
Srimbhana. ‘lhe Jast-named begat Vriddha-Sravà who begat Bhisma, Bhánu 
begat Pundarika who.begat Sringi who begat Bhísma. Bhisma begat 
Jasaschandra who in point of celebrities acquired by him excelled even the 
moon. His spotless fame is recited by the gods even upto this day. He 
begat Varenya who begat Punya-ranya out of whose loins was born 
the pious, and graceful, Adhararanya who begat Mangaláranya, a great 
save ard an ascetic. Being sonless, he went for devotion to the shrine 
of Puskara were after a course of austere meditations lasting for a 
long time he received a bocn trom Mahádeva. By virtue of that boon, 
he got a son named Anaranya who was devoted to Visnu and 
had subdued his passion. The king handed over the reins of govern- 
ment to him and went away to the forest for devotion. Anaranya; 
the best of kings, became the lord. of the earth consisting of se 
ven islands and. pe: formed a hundred sacrifices through Bhrigu, his 
priest. The king Anaranya did not wish to attain the transitory 
position of Indra, on the ground that iv was insignificant, He wan- 
tonly conquered Indra, subdued Bali and other demon-kings and by 
dint of his own valour he gloriously developed the system of his- govern- 


ment. © King of mountains, afterwards, Anaranya begat a hundred ` 


sons and a daughter called P.dmá who was as charming as Kamala. 
The king was more attiched to his daughter than to his sons. The 
king had fifty queens, the best of women, moss fortunate and possessing 8 
never-fading youth. 

126-136. ‘Ibe princess grew up, day by day, in her paternal house 
and attained puberty. Then the king sent messengers to several 
places. At this time the Muni named Pippa-làda while anxious to 
return to his hermitage, beheld a Gandarbha in that sclitary place designed 
for meditation. This Gandarva was so much infatuated with sexual 
intercourse with his wife that he had no idea of day or night. The 
great Muni, when he witnessed this mood of the Gandarbha, was himself 
smitten with lust and through he was given to religious meditations, yet 
he was inclined to take a wife. Once upon a time this great Muni wert to 
bathe in the river ealled Puspa-bhadra, where he saw Padma, the daughter 
of Anaranya who was as enchanting and beautiful as Kamala. ‘There 
he enquired of the people close by as to who she was. They said that 
she was Padma, the daughter of the king Anaranya. O Himálaya, there- 
upon the Muni bathed, worshipped his tutelary deity Srikrisna and with 
a heart agitated with passion; he went to king Anaranya to solicit the 
hands of that princess. When the king saw the Muni, then with & 
frightful heart he bowed low to him, offered to him the oblation of honey 
ani milk and reverentially worshipped him. The Muni, out of lust, 
having accepted everything, sought subsequently the bands of his daughter. 
- Thereupon the king became silent and was unable to speak anything. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Fundin 


TIPPER WY PORY AIPIN DURA NA. 286 


The Muni again said to the king, “O king Anaranya, bestow your 
daughter on me; otherwise by the fire of my curse, I shall reduca 
everything to ashes. ‘hen, the valour of the Muni obscured every one 
i. e. threw every one into the shade. The king seeing that tha Muni 
was old and deerepit began to weep along with his kinsmen. 


137-140. The queens also bein» at a loss what to do lamented a 
good deal and the prineipal queen, the inother of the princess, being agita- 
ted with sorrow, fainted. At that time a servant conversant with ethics 
consoled the king, the queen, his sons and daughters with iffectionate 
terms thus: “O king, either at present or in future you must have to 
give away your daughter in marriage. It does not therefore bshove you 
to give away your daughter to any one except this Bráhmin I dont seo 
a better match for your daughter in this world than you Brihmin. There- 
fore preserve all your property by giving the princess to the Mani. O 
king, if you do not consent to th. act, all yoar property wil! probably 
be destroyed for the sake of your daughter ; therefore it is proper for you 
to preserve all your things by parting with your daughter, Only a 
refugee cannot be abandoned. " "The king having heard the words of the 
sage continued to weep again and again. Afterwards having decorated his 
daughter with ornaments, he handed her over to the best of saints. ‘The 
Muni having accepted her cheerfully went to his hermitaze, Then the king 
renounced the world and went to the forest fordevotion. The prineipal queen 
died of sorrow occasioned by the separation from her hasband and daughter, 
'l'he ministers, sons and servants almost fainted through the grief of separa- 
tion from the monarch. Anaranya, with his heart absorbed in the 
thought of the Lord of Radha gave himself up to meditation and having 
ministered to the Lord of the Cow-world went to the Go-loka.. O King 
of mountains, afterwards his eldest son became a famous kins 


and ruled 
his subjeets as if he were their father, 


CHAPTER XLII. 

1-20. Vagistha said, «0 King of mountains, the daughtor of 
Anaranya, by acts, words and thought reverentially served the saint as 
Laksmi serves Narayana, Once upon a time, the chaste daughter of 
Anaranya went to Mandakint to bathe. By virtue of his talismanie 
powers, Dharma in the guise of a king beheld her in the way. Thereupon 
in disguise, he mounted a chariot of gem, decked himself with ornaments 
of gem and arrived there, His youth was in its prime; and his body 
was effulgent like that of Cupid. Waving seen that graceful and lovely 
lady, Lord Dharma wanted to know the heart of the Muni’s wife 
and eraftily asked her thus: **Fair one, I see you possessing the charms 
and constant beauty of Laksmi, Therefore you are a woman fit for the 
enjoyment of a king, no doubt, It does not bshove you to dwell with 
the deerepit old man who is your husband, It ehoves you to dwell 
in the heart of kings, after having annointed yourself with sunlal and 
aloe. Therefore, O fair one, leave this Bráhman who is constanly devoted 
to austerities, conversant with Maxims of trath and is about to die. 
Look at me, the best of kings, adept in sexual intercourse and afflicted 
with lust, A beautiful damsel attains har beauty by virtue of the pious 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Lad 


E RBI PANIER ODE T 


— 


deeds which she performed in her previous birtb; but that beauty is 
rendered effectual and worth its name by the embrace given to the girl by 
a jovial or witty man. Tam the husband of a thousand fair damsels 
and an expert in sexual science. Therefore, O my love, accept me as 
"our slave. If L attain you, I shall leave other wives -of mine. 
enchantress of my heart, I shall flir& with you in solitary plaees in every 
mountain and each river and in every grove redolent of the wind kissing the 
flowers. Fair one, 1 alone am capable of dispelling the mental agony 
from the heart of women who are afflicted with the fever of lust. There- 
fore bless your life by dallying with me.” Sosaying Dharma dismounting 
from his car was about to catch hold cf her. ‘Then the chaste Padma 
thus addressed the malereant Dharma, “O sinner, O most profound 
villain in the line of kings, avaunt! If thou hast the face to address me 
again in a lustful manner, I shall surely reduce thee to ashes. Shall 
I after leaving Pippalàda. the best of Munis, who has been rendered 
sacred by his devotions, court a hen-pecked licentious wretch like thyself f 
The bare touch of a luxurious individual like thee, the meanest of mortals, 
is calculated to destroy all virtue. There is no sinner greater in the 
world than a man subdued by a woman. J am asa mother to thee and 
yet thou usest words to meas if I were thy wife. Therefore by: my 
curse, thou shalt be reduced in size.” ‘Then Dharma, when he heard the 
words of that virtuous woman, shook off the disguise of a monarch and 
having wielded his own form thus said with his body quivering, “ O 
mother, I am Dharma, the preceptor of the preceptors of those who know 
virtue. Chaste one, I regard other women in the light of my mother. 
eame to you simply to study your heart, and yet by an irony of fate, 
I have been defrauded. Chaste one, my chastisment has not been im- 
proper; I have been righty served. The punishment of recaleitraats 
has been ordained by god himself. 

21.95. Ibow to Krisna, the supreme being who ean teach virtue to 
Dharma (the principle of virtue), who can destroy time, who ean be 
the dispenser of the dispenser (Brahma). IL bow to that Lord 
Krisna who is able to destry Siva; the destroyer in course of 
time and to create even the creator Brahma. I bow to Lord Krisna who 
ean destroy Yama, who is the cause of the death of death and who can 
create and destroy providence. I bow to that eternal. _Krisna who is the 
source of curse, pleasure; pain, boon, prosperity, calamity. I bow to that 
great Lord Krisna who is capable of giving a friend or a foe and causing 
amity or rupture ete, ab whose desire the milk has become white, the 
water bas become cold and the fire has acquired the property of burning. 
I bow to the Supreme being, Lord Krisna, who has created nature Maha- 
Visnu, Brahma, Visnu, Siva ete , I bow to that Lord Krisna who is the 
embodiment of light and yet wields different forms through that light, 
who is the best of the virtuous and vet void of all attributes. I bow to 
Lord Krisna, the friend of all, who pervades all, who is the seed of all 
and who is the soul of the whole universe.’ So sayings the preceptor of 
the world took his stand before her. O my dear, then the chaste Padma 
knew him to be Dharma and respectfully ‘said, “O lord, you are the wit- 
ness of all acts; you know the Heare Gi p B aon Ene omniscient 
and yersed in all things. Why then did you defraud your slave 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 288 


in order to know hewheart ? O Brahman, tho inevitable has happened; 
lam not to blame for this. O lord, through anger and folly due to m 
feminine nature I have cursed you ; but now I am thinking what will be 
your fate. Even if the sky, the wind and all the quarters of the globe 
are destroyed, the words of a chaste woman can never go amiss. On 
the other hand, if you perish, the whole creation will be destroyed. I am. 
quite at a loss what to do. Yet I shall suggest to you a method, 
Listen. 


36-47. O best of the gods, as on the oceasion of the -full Moon, the 
moon-god appears in his entire form or his four feet, so you will main- 


tain your form intact in the Satya Yuga. O Lord, in the 'fretá, one of 


your feet will wane :in the D v&para, two of your feet and in the Kali, 
three of your feet will disappear. At the end of Kali the only remaining 
foot of yours will be latent. In the Satya-Yuga, again you will be omni- 
present ; and in other Yugas you will only manifest yourself in some places, 
O lord, I am going to describe to you the places of persons wherein you 
will reside. Listen O prince of virtue, you will dwell completely in the 
Vaisnavas, Brahmins, Yatis, pious kings, Brahma-Chirfs, chaste women, 
pure-sages, Vana-prasthas i.e. Brahmins who in the 3rd stage of their 
lives retire from all world's affairs for meditation in the woods, beggars, 
good men, virtuous Vaisyas, S'üdras devoted to the service of Brahmins, 
people who keep good company and persons of stable disposition, t.e. well- 
regulated principles. In every age, the above people will constitute your 
receptacle. You will also remain in the holy fig tree, the banyan tree, the 
holy basil, bael, flowers dedicated to the gods, saints ete. You will also 
constantly dwell in temples, places frequented by pilgrims, houses of good 
men, place where the Vedas and the auxiliaries of the Vedas are chanted 
and in councils. You willalso preside over places where the name of 
Krisna and his virtues are chanted, heard and sung, where vows are 
undertaken and sacred acts are performed, where asceticism is practised, 
justice is administered, sacrifices are made and truth is maintained, where 
initiation in sacrifices is made, trial takes place, oath is taken, places where 
foot-prints of cows are left on the soil and also over cow-pens and 
enclosure of cows. O Brahma, you will not be reduced in such places. 
Conversely, lam going to tell you the places where you will suffer 
reduction, Listen. 


48-59. Lord,-you will suffer deterioration in prostitutes,. brothels, 
murderers and their houses, base-minded people, ignorant men and hypo- 
erites as well as in those who steal the wealth of gods or re'igious pre- 
ceptors or Brahmins or virtuous men and likewise in wicked and crafty 
people, in places designed for carnal intercourse, in gambling houses 
and in places where kings gnarrel. You will suffer degradation in places 
which are void of the Holy stone, pious men, shrines or the Puranas, in 
places frequented by robbers and proud men, in places frequented by those 
who subsist upon the sword, the Deval or the village priest, the bearers of 
bulloeks, those who carn their livelihood by killing animals, women who 
slander their husbands, hen-packed husbands, Brahmins void of initiation, 
Gaetri and faith in Vignu, the vendors of their own persons, daughters or 
wives, vendors of holy stones, idols, books and land, You will likewise 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


m Digitized by eGangotri and S 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA S 289 


; eee 
RET 


suffer reduction in persons who belray their friends, in miscreants, 
traitors, in people who slay or betray the fugitives, in habitual liars, in 
those who transcend the boundaries of land, in those who perjure out of 
‘Just, anger or avarice, in those who do not perform virtuous deeds and 
who interefere with virtue. © Lord, all this will make good my state- 
ment and likewise preserve you. Now I am going to minister to my 
husband. Be pleased to go bome." When the chaste daughter of 
Anaranya spoke thus, Dharma, theson of Brahmá, cheerfully and gently 
gpoke thus, *Chaste one, you are a blessed woman, devoted to your hus- 
band: may you be always happy. You preserved me ; and so, ask a boon 
and I shall grant it to you. 


60.73. Daughter, by my boon, your husband will enjoy constant 
youth ; he will be clever in sexual intercourse, handsome, virtuous and 
eloquent. You, too, will be immensely prosperous and possess everlasting 
youth. Your hasband will be more longevous than the sun, more wealthy 
than Kuvera, more resourceful than Indra, a Vaisnnava like S'iva and more 


j accomplished than Kapila. Throughout your life, you will be blessed in 


respect of your husband whose love you will secure and your house will be 
more thriving than that of Kuvera. By my boon you will be the mother 
of sons more handsome and virtuous than Kuvera." O king of mountains, 
when Dharma paused, the chaste Padma circumambulated round him, 
then bowed to him and went home. Dharma blessed her and also went 
home. Subsequentlly he praised her before every assembly.. When 
Padma went home, she constantly sported with her husband now restored 
. to youth by the boon of Dharma in solitude. Afterwards she gave birth to 
sons more qualified than her husband. O mountain-king, I narrated 
to you the ancient history showing how Anaranya preserved all his 
property by giving his daughter to the Muni. You, too, by giving your 
daughter to the lord of all, should preserve your kinsmen, relations and 
property. O royal mount, from this day forth, when seven days will expire; 
tho rarest auspicious moment will arrive. On that day the lord of auspicious 
moments will attain its auspicious position. On thatday, the moon-god wil 
be suspiciously united with his son Budha and attain purification by his 
combination with Rohini. ‘Tard will also be purified. That day 
is the monday of the month of Agrahàyana. That day is free from 
all defect, On that day all planets will cast a favourable glance 
all round: and the glances of. ominous planets will disappear. Marriage 
on that day secures a suitable bridegroom and brings ima good son. That 
is a moment which secures immunity from widow-hood and is productive 
of happiness. ‘There can be no diminution in the nuptial love which 
shall be deep and lasting by virtue of that ‘auspicious, moment. There- 
fore, O moutitain-lord, make over your daughter to Siva on that aus- 
picious day and thereby acquire celebrity. 


74-79. O royal mount, this daughter of yours represents the valour 
of all the gods. She ‘is adored by the gods; she is the mother of the 
world, the supreme goddess, the primordial Nature. Make her over to 

iva, the futher of the world. In days of yore sho camo out of the 
valour of the gods for their preservation and illumined all the sides with 


her lustre. Solely through her persoual valour and strength, some of the ' 
demons were consumed, some ware routed and soma were reduced to ashes, 
ay 
á 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IK: 


ized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


290 THE BRAUMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


others entered into hollows or fainted or sought her protection with grass 
which they held with their teeth. Subdued by her hideous prowess some 
bocame stark-naked, some were astounded, others fought for a long time 
and eventually passed to Heaven which is free from disease. In olden 
times, the gods, through her prowess, were relieved from their foes, In 
the age which succeeded this event, the goddess, at the command of 
Lord Krisna, acquired her birth as the daughter of Daksa. 


82-05. Afterwards Daksa in due course gave his dauchter to the 
wielder of the spear, By chance, in the sacrifico performed by my, father, 
there was a great quarrel in the council of the gods between Siva and 
Daksw Then the three-eyed lord beeame angry, bowed to Brahma and 
went away. Dakga, too, was incensed and went home with his relations, 
Then the displeased Dakga performed a sacrifice at his place with great 
eclat and out of spite did not give to Siva, any share in the sacrifice. When 
Sati beheld the ill-treatment to which her husband was subjected by her 
father, she flushed crimson with rage, sorrowfully rebuked her father and 
went to her mother. Thereafter the supremo and fore-seeing Sati who 
is conversant with three ages (the present, the past and the future) related 
to ker mother everything concerning the coming disruption of the cere- 
mony, the defeat of her father and all future events. O royal mountain, 
she related to her mother an account of the retreat of the gods 
and gave her a vivid description of the sacrificial ministers and the 
mountains, the victory of the army of Siva, her own death and 
the subsequent travels of her husband to several places who would be overe 
whelmed with grief by the loss of his wife, She also described to her the 
origin of a pond from the tears of Siva. She said that she would again 
attain Siva when she would wield another form and then enjoy his society, 
These events she predicted to her mother ; and in spite of the remonstian- 
ces of her mother and sisters Which she slighted, she went away sorrow- 
fully. Then that accomplished asestie Sati went to the coast of the Ganges, 
in a for n imperceptible to others, (a condition which sho attained by virtue 
of her yoga). She bathed and worshipped S'ankara. Afterwards she re- 

membered his lotus feet, ported with her frame and eatered the oval 

vessel representing the body of Gandha-Mádan, This goddess, while re- 

siding in the Gandha-Mádan, in days of yore, had destroyed all tho demons. 

When the goddess entered into that body, all the gods lamented much. 

On the other hand the army of S'ankara destroyed the sacrifice of Daksa, 

defeated his party and being overwhelmed with grief went and related 

the whole affair to Siva, When S'iva heard this account, he suddenly 

fainted along with the Rudras, When he regained conciousness after 

a while, the three-eyed lord got up and went to the coast of Mandákini 

where the body of the goddess lay. 


———— 


CHAPTER XLIII., 


1-24. Nüráyana said, * Thereafter Siva, while going, saw that the 
lovely form of Sati graceful like the lustre of pure lotus was lying pros- 
trate on the coast of the river. That form wielding a rosary of beads’ 
was effulyent like heated gold, burning with lustre and was clad in white. 
At the sight of this image Siva was consumed with tho fire of the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


— an 


RIS ES INP mA NDE: rs 991 


g ol soparation. Though he is the embodiment of all the sciences 
connected with ontology, yet he lost his consciousness. The deep ‘sorrow 
occasioned by the loss of his wife tormented even S'ankara, the lord of the 
i the germ of the Vedas, the self contented supreme being. 
lord, after & while recovered his wits and wanted to 
speak 0 her, bat the sight of her lotus-face made him oblivious of the 
subject on which he had a mind to speak. Then he, stood transfixed 
at that place like an immoveable piece of stone. ‘Then Siva, the harbour 
of the poor and remover of their poverty, with streaming eyes; after 
the manner of the poor, lamented much and said thus, «O mistress of 
life, O my baloved spouse, get up. Nay, get up bat once. Fair one 
behold ! lam your husband Sankara. I have come to you. 1 grant good 
things ; L am the lord of every one; Iam the image of all; I am the 
sourso of success; I am the universal spirit ; but, O my beloved, without 
you, am but a corpse My dear, you represent the strength of 
all objects. Sheltered by you, I was vested with strength. Now devoid 
of strength, my will has become paralysed so that I am powerless to do 
any act and [ have been reduced to 9 corpse. Wise nymph, whoever 
does not know the nature of primordial energy criticizes it. He 
alone should be abandoned by you, O goddess of energy: Why then 
did you abandon me, my love? Ó mistress of. my life, Brahma himself, 
Visnu and I are entirely subject to your control. With a smiling face; 
deign to cast a glance at me and using words like honey relieve my heart. 
My dear, with interesting and sweet dialogues and by sprinkling 
on meo the water of delicious and honeyed glances, relieve my 
afflicted heart; and looking at me from a distance, quickly necost me 
with sweet and affectionate words. Why do you not address your helpless 
§ va who is lainenting SO much? My dear, you are supreme aud the 
refuge of my life. Geb up soon. You give harbour to the world and you 
are the mother of the universo. Therefore, O goddess, L modestly ent- 
reat you to got up. O daughter of Daksa, got up. Will you nob open 
your eyes and seo even once your,o vn S'iva lamenting your Joss? Fair one, 
vay and thus leave me and my life in the lurch. 
Why are you not ministering to me today? O mo- 
ther of the gods, why do you knowingly break the vows?” Lamenting 
thus and afflicted with arief, he held the dead body of his beloved wife 
to his breast and kissed and embraced it again and again. iva pressed 
his lips to the lips of his beloved, his preast to her breast and embracing 
her repeatedy swooned again. When he regained his senses, he gob UP 
hastily in sorrow and though he is the spiritual guide of the preceptors ' 
of the wise, he ran like a lunatic. Afterwards, like one void of intelli- 
gence, he held the corpse of his wife resembling & golden image and 
rambled over the seven islands, human localities and deserts, mountains 
and seven oceans. Afterwards in India by the side of the mountain 
containing 100 summits in the solitude of the Jambu islands, at the 
root of the immortal banian tree he wandered, here and there; on the 
Coast of the river and lamented loudly. saying, «© Sati! O virtuous one!” 
A tank was created out of the tears which flowed copiously from his 
eyes, It was called the pond of tears. There the munis pray he 
pond is two yojans wide. It is a lovely place frequented by pilgrims. 


CC-0:I i i 
n Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE i; 


: ri and Sarayu Trust. 
299 TEBRA TE PV ART PURANA 


O king of mountains, ablution in this pond ubsolves a Person from m, 

birth. A dip in the tank ab onee relieves a man from the sins of a hun. 
dred births and enables him to quit his mortal frame and go to th 
land-of Hari, | 


25-37. Afterwards the great Yogi S'iva left the tank and with 
heart agitated with the pang of separation revolved round the World: fo, | 
one year full. O mountain king, the places where the limbs dropping 
from the body of Sati fell were celebrated by the name of Siddha. Pi tha ; 
which yields all desire, Afterwards S'iva performed the funerals of the 
remaining body of Paryati and constructed a garland of her bones with 
which he decked his neck. S'iva every day reverentially applied to his 
body the ashes of the body of Sat? and again fainted saying, “O mis. 
iress of my soul, O Sati.” Then the self-existent lord S'iva who is also 
self-contented and who has secured the fulfilment of all his desires be. 
came quite helpless, a prey to the agony caused by separation and 
forgot the supreme being, the eternal spirit. The gods seeing" that S'iva 
was lying down near the huge fig-tree, went to him astonished, Lord 
Narayana whose lotus feet are constantly adorned by Lakşmî arrived 
at that place mounted on a diamond chariot with his attendants, He 
was decked with sems, clad in yellow and vested with four hands, 
He had a smiling and cheerful face and was decorated with wild wreaths, 
At that time, Dharma, Adharma, Ananta, the gods and the great saints, 
rushing hastily, assembled at the spot, bowed low to Hari and took 
their seats, 


34-45. "Then Harí, tho lord and spiritual guide of the wise, held the 
senseless Siva to his breast and with Consolatory words addressed him 
thus, “O Siva, how could you, being the Supremo being, become pos- 
sibly impatient like an ordinary man? Tam going to tell you meta. 
physical, beneficial, substantial doctrines likely to kil] sorrow. O Siva, 
you are the dispenser of Brahma and you are omnise/g4t You represent 
the system of wisdom and knowledge and are the emblem of tho sentient soul 
or animate being. All metaphysical truths subsist in you; and yet must 
I console you. For when life is in peril, even the ignorant ean Console 
the wise, lt is the practice in society that People console one another 
jn emergency, ' Al] attributes are harbonred by delusion; this jg why 
i i Powerful delu- 
sion of Visnu °ppresses people vested with attributes, O Siva, in evil 
' injurious agencies crop up. But 
- when the bad days eventually make Way for good days, all tho evil 
agencies stated above disappear, Then Prosperity, pleisure and pride 
maltiply ; but Pavants regard them as transitory as dream.” O king of 
mountains, the three-eyed lord, when he heard the words of Hari, open- 
ed his three eyes and said, “O magnanimous being, T see you as an 
embodiment, of glory, J pray you tell me who youare. Who are these by 
your side? What is your name? What are their names? Who is Sati? 
Whoam I? To whom are you speaking and what? Why have I come 
here? Where shall I go to? What are you speaking to mo? Where 
will they go to? Please answer all these questions,” Mountain, when 
Lord Hari heard this, he wept with his adherents and annointed ‘Siva 


ae j CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
s * 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. i 293 


with bis tears. The tears of Hari and Hara created a shrine likely to 
sanctify the three worlds. 


46-55. When that shrine came into existence behind the Asta mountain, 
near the immortal fig-tree, ib was reserved for meditation likely to grant 
salvation to the ascetics. Then Hari, being rendy again to administer counsel 
to the gods, Munis and those who had subdued their passions on meta-physical 
subjects spoke thus, " O S'iva, you are supreme, etornal, and full of wis- 
dom and happiness. You are the ocean of knowledge. At this time 
a prey to sorrow, you have lost the excellent wisdom that you ever pos- 
sessed. Listen; I am going to lecture you on Ontology. O Siva, in 
this world, good and bad days constantly rotate. Good and bad days 
occasion worldly (natural) misery and happiness. Pleasure, pride, heroism 
infatuation, passion, prosperity, desire and envy derive their .genesis 
from happiness ; and mental agitation and fear spring from grief and 

sorrow. O Siva, these are destroyed, when the cause is destroyed. O 
S'iva, good and bad days are che result of Karma. Karma is controlled, 
by asceticism; and good and bad deeds are controlled by Karma: asceti- 
cism is controlled by d'sposition and disposition by practice. This prac- 
tice is secured by company which is the result of good deeds. O S‘iva, 
mind is the cause of both virtue and vice ; and mind, which is the best 
of passions is the produet of my digits. O S'iva, you, 1 and the lord 
of creation Brahma are the progenitors of all; only through modification 
of attributes as images, we receive different nomenclatures O S'iva, 
this Brahma is of two kinds, one vested with attributes; vhe other, void 
of attributes. When Brahma is subject to delusion, he has attributes; 


when he is free from delusion, he is void of attributes. 

56.07. The Lord is self-willed. He creates everything at his plea- 
eure, The faculty of his desire is called Nature and is eternal. This 
Nature gave birth to the whole world. Some hold there is one Brahma, 
the emblem of eternal light. Others hold, Brahma is of two kinds, 
Prakriti and Puruga. These who hold that Brahma is one, maintain 
that Brahma is the cause of all and transcends both Prakriti and Paruga, 
both of whom emanate from Him; or, they maintain chab the same 
Brahma wilfully divided himself into two parts. Phat foree is Nature 
productive cf all other forces. . When the supreme Brahma is attached 
to the faculty of desire, he is vested with attributes and described as 
natural. When He is not so associated, he 1s described as void of all 
attributes and unrestrained. ‘That Eternal Deity is the supreme spirit, 
constant, the refuge, the lord, the witness of all. He is omnipresent 
and. gives fruits in respect of everything. O Lord. his body is two-fold; 
one is eternal and the other natural. ho former is immortal and tho 
latter, mortal © lord, your body and mine are eternal; but the bodies 
of those who spring from our digits are destructible and unreal. The 
Rudras are the offspring of your digits; and the beings having the forms 
of Visnu-are the offsprings of my digits. I have two forms, one vested 
with two arms; and the other, with four arms. As the four handed lord, 
I preside over the Vaikuntha with Laksmi and my adherents. With 
two hunds, I preside over the Goloka with the cow-heards and Rádhà. 
Those who hold that Brahma has two distinct forms maintain that both 


a e ois Public Domain, Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 

294 THE BRAHMA FAIFARTA PURANA, 

— N 
the forms are pre-eminent. Purnga is eternal ; and so is goddess Prakriti 
O Siva, they ars the parents of the world and both are always connect, 
ed with one another. Both of them take forms ‘voluntarily ; and the 
will become formless, too. Voluntarily, they assume different kinds of 
forms, 


68-78. The Prakriti (Nature) is as pre-eminent as Puruga. Therefore, 


if you wish to get Sati, you had better recite her hymns. O Siva, you 


had better adore the mother of the world with the ode which is mentioned 
in Kánwa-S'akha and which in days of yore I have given to Durvasa, 
O S'iva, may your grief be‘dispelled by my blessings and likewise the pain 
(caused by separation trom your wife) the cause of your bereavement, disap. 
pear. O king of mountains, when Hari paused, Siva reverentially and with 
folded palms bowed to Lord Krisna and Brahma and eulogised Nature 
thus. *O eternal goddess, you are the supreme spirit: you are tho 
source of perfect happiness. You aro the image of Brahma and celebrated 
by the name of Brahmi. ‘Therefore be propitiated with me. O Durga, 
‘the destroyer of calamities, you have destroyed the demon Durga. You 


confer blessings. Youaro like a new boat to enable a person to crosg | 


the sea of the world. Therefore, O good nymph, be propitiated with an 
individual who has been merged inthe sea of the world. O goddess, who 
const take all kinds of forms, you represent the seed of the world. You are the 
mistress and receptacle ofeverythinz andeonfer on people the boon of victory, 
O omniscient goddess, be propitiated with me. O all virtuous nymph, you are 
the emblem of blessings ; you are the source and container of all good, 
Therefore be propitiated with me. O mother of the world, you are the 
emblem of sleep, indolence, forgiveness, purity, contentment, development, 
mercy, victory an 1 great delusion. Therefore be propitiated with me. 0 
goddess, mercifu! to your votaries, you are tho emblem of peace, forbear- 
ance and the intellect of all people. You are the index of hunger, thirst, 
wisdom and memory, "Therefore, O goddess, ba propitiated with me. 


79-90. O mother ofthe Vedas, you are the image and eause of all 
the Vedas. You give the Velas anl rapresent all the Vedingis. Therefore 
be propitiatel with m». © dalusion of Vişan, you are the Laksmi 
seated in the lap of Niriyany and you si&on the chestof Brahma in 
the shape of Saraswati, and you occupy my lap as the great goddess of 
delusion, O friend of the poor, you represent the moasure of time 
including its divisions, Kásthis(a Kagtht=8 seconds ) You give 
results of actions to every body. Therefore, O goddess, be propitiated 
with me. O good nymph, you are the cause of all energy and occupy tho 
heart of Lord Krigna as Radha. You are to Krigna more endeared than 
his life and he constantly worships you. Be propitiated - with me. O 
goddess, you represent fame and are the source of all fame. You are 
the image of all the’ gods You have created everything in the 
garb of a woman and you have wielded the form of a woman 
through the digits of your digits, “Therefore, O goddess, be 
propitiated with me. O blessed nymph, you are tho cause, the image 
and sourco of all prosperity ; therefore, O all-happy goddess, bo pleased 
with me. O celebrated goddess, you are adored by distinguished sages 5 
therefore relent, O goddess, you are the receptacle of the whole world 


"€ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE " 


y ab 


gnisa JANIA KHANDA Saraya Tost 295 


A 


and you represent the castle (the container of gems) and you represent the 
¿nimate as well as the inanimate creation. O accomplished nymph, 
ou are tho image, source and cause of all success. Therefore, O goddess; 
relent. O great goddess, people differ in the commentaries or interpre- 
tations of al religious books ; therefore, goddess, forgive whatever I 
have said knowingly or unknowingly. Some of the savants hold that 
Nature 1$ superior to Puruga and others hold the contrary: ina word, 
different views give rise to conflicting commentaries. 

91-107. Goddess, in olden times, the indomitable Madhu-Kaitabha was 
about to kill promptly Brahma seated in the lotus of the navel of Mahà-Visnu. 
At that time, you held out an assurance to Govinda saying that you would 
destroy the demons and preserve Brahma ; and this, at the intercession of 
Brahm’ who was eulogising you. Then Hari assisted by you who represented 
energy killed both the demons. Through your help, one may be a god; but, 
without you, I am godless. O queen of the gods, in old times when I 
swooned and fell from the sky in my fight with the demons, then you 

voserved me along with Visnu. At present, I am consumed by the fire 
of bereavement. O, preserve me. O great goddess, purchase, me with 
the price of your vision “(i. e. manifest yourself before me)? Siva paused 
after this prayer. Al at once, the ten-handed goddess manifested 
herself before his eyes and was seated on a chariot of gem in the sky. 
Her body vied with the heated gold in the splendour of hue. She was 
decorated with ornaments of gem. She had a smiling and yet cheerful 
appearance. She was Sati, the mother of the world- iva, in the pain 
of his bereavement, when he beheld the ten handed goddess wept 
and quickly represented to her the pangs of separation which he was 
experieneing. He again adored her and showing to her the wreath of 
bones and ornaments of ashes tried most modestly to appease the goddess. 
Then Hari, Brabm4, Dharma, Ananta. the godly saints and all others 
said “O goddess, console Siva.” So saying, they eulogised the eternal 
goddess, who was appeased with their hymns. The goddess, Nature, who 
wasas dear to Siva as his life mereifully said to him (Siva). the lord of 
her life, 'O S/iva dearer to m? than. my life, compose yourself. Lord, 
you are the Supreme Being, the spiritual head of the meditative ascetics 
and the husband of mine at every birth. O great god, I shall be your 
wife after my birth out of the womb of Menakà, the wife of 
Himalaya. Better relieve yourself of the pang of separation." Thus 
consoling S'iva, she disappeared. The gods also having consoled S'iva who 
was hanging down his head with shame went home. Then S‘iva, with his 
heart filled with rapture, went to the Kailása, banished from bis: 
mind the anxieby caused by the fever of bereavement and danced with his 
retinue. A person who studies this ode to Nature composed by Siva 
is never separated from his wife at any birth and after having tasted the - 
pleasures of this life goes to the abode of Siva. Ile unquestionably 
attains the four-fold objects of human pursuit, viz, virtue, wealth, enjoy- 
ment and beautitude. 


CHAPTER XLI M 
1-10. ° Lord Krigna said, “Whon Himálaya heard the words of 
Vasigtha, ho was astonished along with his wife and ministers, Then . 


Pm In Publi | 
y bl i i > 
z u sie. pomen. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


296 THE BRAHMA VAIPARTA PURANA, 


— 
the goddess Parvati having herself heard those words indulged in a heart 
laugh. On the other h ind, Arundhati son 
Was weeping and afflicted with hunger. The latter dismis 
her mind, entertained Arundhati to many kinds of delicacies. She 
then partook of meal herself. Afterwards with a light heart she took 
part in many auspicious ceremonies. O my spouse, Himalaya was 
alo relieved at the command of Vasistha and sent letters to 
many places relating to the marriage of his daughter. Afterwards, 
he sent an auspicious letter to S'iva and eaused many objects to 
be distributed and musieal instruments to be played upon. Fair one, 
the king of mountains caused many hills to be constructed of betel leaves 
and flattened rice and got excavated several ponds consisting of oil, 
ghee, curd, molasses, honey, milk, fresh ghee, He like-wise ordered 
most carefully the preparation of cakes called Swastika, sugar balls, 
cakes of wheat-flour and cakes boiled with ghee. On that auspicious day 
he secured many kinds of cloths Consecrated by fire, moon-stones, gems, 


corals, gold, silver and other articles and duly performed many auspi- 
cious deeds. 


sed the vrief from 


11-23. Afterwards the hilly woman applied themselves to the task 
of making toilet for Parvatt. They bathed her and decked her with a pair 
of clothes. ‘They applied graceful lac dye to the members of her feet, 
drew lines of painting with eosmeties on her cheok. They likewise 
applied lamp-blaek to her eyes, decorated her with ornaments of gem 
and good clothes and placed in her hands a looking-glass with bent grass 
and barley or sunned ries. They prepared also a graceful ehignon for 
her head interwoven with silken thread, slightly curving towards the 
left side. O Radha, at this time the excellent gods escorting the three- 
eyed lord who was seated on a chariot arriyed at Himalaya’s honse. The 
king of the mountains with a view to greet them with greater esteem 


sent, for revered Brahmins and his subjects, the mountains. Afterwards at 


the command of Himalaya, in the court-yard of the city, a row of plan- 


tain-trees conjoined with jack-leaves interwoven with silken thread were 
planted ; and fruits and flowers were beautifully prominent on those 
trees. At the root of those trees were placed jars full of water asso- 
ciated with jasmine leaves, sandal, musk, and fragrant saffron, whereby 
the beauty of the court-yard was enhanced. Then Himâlaya scoing the 
gods before him bowed to them and order 
with thrones of Sem. Lord Narayana who had fou 
descended from the car and sat down with his retinue in that couneil. 
He was decorated With various kinds of ornaments made of gems, 
Mis four-handed followers tended him by brandishing white chowries 
with handles of diamond. He was ministered to in that assembly by 
the best of saints and gods. Atthat timo his lotus-face looked cheerful 
and with a view to favour his votaries, he sat down and joined that 
assembly. Afterwards Brahma and the £5ds took thoir seats by his. 
side; and saints and Sages also graced that auspicious place with 
pleasure, : 
24-38. At this time Siva alighted from the car, took up his quartors 
in the house of gem and witnessed the charms of tho city, Then old 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE hu 


ght to console Menaká Who | 


ed his servants to provide them ^ 
r hands hastily 


KRISNA orem DD rave Tust 997 
aaa 

women, girls, young damsels and other ladies of the town, decked with 
cams arrived there to see Siva. Some held in their bands vermilion ; others 
held boxes of betel or collyrium ot cloth. Others were either h:lf-deco- 
rated or denuded of half of their ornaments. Others were wholly devoid 
of ornaments. Others were fully equipped with jewels. Every one came 
to that mountainous mansion with joy and lingered there. In this way 
the enchanting daughters of thes aints, gods, snakes, Gandharvas; hills and 
kings arrived also. Then Rambhà and other celestial whores arrived 
by turns. Menikà with her daughters Saw the bride-groom Siva. At 
that time they saw that the hue of the body of Siva was bright like that 
of the graceful flower champak. He had at that time only one face and 
two eyes. He was decked with gems and had a smiling, and hence, 
cheerful appearance. He was brightly conspicuous by & pure diadem of 
gem associated with jasmine flowers which adorned his head; and he 
was decked with musk, sandal, aloe and fragrant saffron. He was like- 
wise decked with & pair of matchless clothes consecrated by fire. The 
clothes were fine, invaluable and wonderful, whereby his grace was en- 
hanced. He is the preceptor of the spiritual guides of the Yogis, self 
determining, transcending all attributes, emblematic of the lustre of Brah- 
má and eternal. He held at that time in his hand a diamond looking- 


. glass. He is formless; the variation of attributes alone gives him diffe- 


rent forms. He is the cause of creation, preservation and destruction 
of the world; only he redeems the fallen in the world. He is. the con- 
tainer, the seed, the master and the life of all. He is & witness fo all 
deeds, the supreme being, void of all desires, indestructible, without 
beginning, end or middle. He is the origin and image of the entire creaton. 
Menaka when sho beheld this grace of her son-in-law was pleased and relieved 
of her sorrows. The other young women, at the sight of his beauty, eulogise 
him saying, “ Blessed is he, blessed is he.” Some of the girls were simply 
astonished and said, ** How lucky is Durgá ! Since we attained the age 
of discrotion, we have never witnessed such a bride-groom. 

39-53. Some women beheld Siva with eyes wide-open ; some fainted 
at his sight; others slandered their respective husbands or desired to 
secure iva as their husband or wept with raptures ab his sight or being 
excited with lust were stupefied. ‘Ihe gods were pleased at the sight of 
his grace. ‘Then the Gandharvas sang and the Apsarás danced. At this 
time the musicians played upon delightful musical instrument of various 
sorts with a great dexterity. At that time the serving maids of the Seraglio 
decked with gems seated Durg& on & seat of gem and subsequently 
bringing her outside caused her to circumambulate round Siva. The gods 
beheld the goddess Párvati with all her limbs decorated and with her 
colour vie-ing with heated gold in splendour. They saw thab Durga 
possessed a graceful chignon. Her cheek was decked with lines of 
paintings with cosmetics ; her- forehead was marked with vermilion 
mixed with musk, which added to her grace. Her brow was round like 
the moon and brightened with marks of sandal. Her breast was adorned 
with a pure wreath of gems. Without casting her eyes elsewhere, she xvas - 
constantly looking at the three-eyed Lord with side-long glances. She - 
had a smiling appearance, by which the charm of her glances was enhanced. 
Her arms were decked with armlets and bracelets : the extremities of her 


$88 — EM 


P CC-0. In Public Domain. Fund g by H 
by IKS-MoE 


298 FB DELAY YAT PURANA, 
—— | 
i ings. Her face was kindled with tho lustr 
oppo ware ue um oT pearls. Her lips shamed the bimba; , 
p a Been usd with resounding anklets and Pásika. She put 
e RF invaluable elothes interwoven with ineomparably gracofy} 
Adde Bes ue figures. Her hands gracefuly held lotuses meant for 
ES Fin focted in diamond looking-glasses. The whole of her body” was 
d inted with aloe, sandal, musk and saffron Then every ons beheld 
dis mother of the world with pleasure. ‘he three-eyed lord also 
beheld her with pleasure with the corner of his eyes. 


9 ing that he was the exact counterpart of Sati, the pang 
of Mine ee pee Thon iva having set his heart entirely 
upon Durgá banished everything else from his memory. There was D eU 
of rapture in his body. Tears of joy flowed from his eyes, At that Wwe D) 
king of mountains arrived with tho priest and reverentially welcomed E: 
hailed the bride-groom Siva with celestial graceful incense, elon or 
washing the feet, wreaths, clothes and sandal. Then by ineantations of the 
Vedas, he bestowed his daughter on Siva in marriage. O Radha, thereafter the 
king of mountains gave to Sankara & hundred thousand heads of cow, blan. 
kets interwoven with gems, a thousand excellent elephants With iron-goods, 
30 lakhs of well-furnished horses, one lakh submissive maid-servants decked 
with pure gems, a hundred twice-born boys who were like brothers to 
Parvati and a hundred good-looking cars constructed with excellent gems, 

ankara after having uttered Swasti, or the particle of benediction to 
Parvati, accepted the articles offered by Himalaya with esteem and pleasure, 
i Himálaya after having bestowed his daughter on Xiva very modestly and 
with folded palms eulogised Siva according to the hymn stated by 
Madhyan-din-Sakha thus, * O destroyor of tho Sacrilice 
relieve people from the ocean of hell. . You represent the so 
you are the lord of all. Your body thrills with 
religious zeal, You are the ocean of attributes ; you tr. 
you are vested with attributes ;you are the lord and c 
you are the best of those who possess attributes, 
blessed being, relent. O container of asceticis 


1 eties. Therefore relent. O 
preserver, you are the Cause and origin of absolute destruction of the 


world. ou have no match j and you are the seed of 
the dissolution of the world. Relent towards me. O lord, y 


arbour of the world,” 
the saints praised 


him loudly. O Radha e ode composed by 


4, whoever attentive] reads th 
Himalaya receives his desired need from § A m 


E — 
CHAP "ER XLV, 

1-11. Lord Krisna said, * Then the lord Siva after haying 
consecrated the fire according to, the mathod presori bed UP IOS Dt 
put Parvati on his left side and set himself to the task of performing the 

[-] 


CC-0. in Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE x 


, 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 299 

‘ne 
sacrifice. O you who revel in the Vrindávana, after the sacrifice was over 
he gave 9 hundred pieces of gold to the Brühmins as their priestly fee. 
Then the , women of the hills brought lamps, performed auspicious deeds 
and took Siva and Parvati to the interior of the house. Then with 

leasure, they shouted words of victory, performed the auspicious ceremony 
ol Nirmanehhan (or greetings ?) and with their bodies animated with 
je and with smiling mien looked at} iva. Sankara when he entered 
into the house meant for the married couple to pass the night with their 
friends saw that 10 women, in the prime of their youth gorgeously clad 
and decked with gems, were seated in the bridal chamber. Their bodies 
were annointed with sandal and alos paste, musk and suffron : the grace 
of their glances was enhanced by their smiling and hence cheerful aspects. 
They pub on very fine garments. heir foreheads were marked with lovely 
vermilion. Their figures from head to foot were very graceful an 

possessed the colour of the lovely Champak. No one was able to count the 
number of the daughters of the gods, snakes and Munis that were present 
on the occasion. S'iva occupied a seat of gem offered by the damsels. 
Then by turns they used to Siva words sweet like nectar. First Saras- 
wati said, “O S'iva, now you have obtained Satî who is dearer to you than 
your life. Therefore, O lurd of time, pass yout time by giving embraces 
to your dear spouse and by looking at her lunar face, the fairest part of 
the body. By my blessing, henceforth you will never be separated. 


12.90. Laksmi said, “O lord of gods, now dismiss shame from your mind 
and hold that Sati to your heart by whose separation you nearly lost your 
life. You need not be ashamed of the women assembled here. You need 
not sorrow any more. Now take food yourself, feed Sati, rinse your 
mouth and then yeverentially take betel-leaves mixed with eamphor. Jáhnavi 
said, ^ O Sankara, take this golden comb and polish the heir of your wife. 
The good fortune of a woman in securing & suitable person as her hus- 
band is very delightful to her. Rati said, '* O god, in securing Parvati, you 
have been exceptionally lucky. Why did you without any cause reduce the 
lord of my life to ashes? O lord, restore to life Kama, the source of lust 
and relieve me of the pangs of bereavment. O ocean of merey, you know ` 
tho pain of separation and, knowing this, why did you in anger consume the 
lord of my life ? So saying Rati gave to iva the ashes of Káma tied in a 
piece of cloth and wept loudly saying Oh my lord ! Ob my lord ^ ‘then 
Hari, the ocean of mercy, hearing the Tamentation went to Siva's wedding- 
room along with Brahmà, Dharma and other gods. iva gob up hastily 
from his seat when he saw Hari, Brahm, Dharma and the gods and said 
to them with folded palms, “ what is your command in the matter of 
Rati 7” Hari when he heard the words of Sankara said, «O Riidra, restore 
Kama to life.’ So Saying he left that place. The goddesses also 
entreated Siva modestly in various ways to revive Káma; when rejuve: 
nated by the nectared glances of the wielder of the Spear Kama mani- 
tested himself out of the heap of ashes. When Rati saw ‘Kama restored 
to life with his floral dart and a smiling mien, she bowed 
low before, the lotus feet of Siva & hundred times. Then Kama 
eulogised iva according to the Srutis, sacred scriptures or the esoteric 
S‘Astras, that is, hymns stated by the Agama in various Ways and bowed 
prostrata before him. Then he went away from that place and bowing 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


; 300° THE BRAHMA VAITARTA PURANA, 


Lord Hari and other gods mixed with them.. The gods blesseq 
Eine conversed with him kindly and said, “ O Cupid, people live and 
die intime. The inevitable can never be avoided. lhen the kino 
of mountains feasted niost hospitably Narayana and other gods and 
allotted proper places to them for their sleep. 


27-48 Then Siva seated Parvati on his left sida in the wedding 
room, cheerfully entertained her to sweets and then himself took hig 
tood. Then Diti, the Mother of the gods with a smiling faea, affection. 
ately and merrily spoke thus: “O Siva, after having feasted På: vati, 
provide her with water for Purification and oblige me thereby, 
Nuptial love is so very rare.” Sachi said, « Why should you be so 
much ashamed of your beloved spouse, when you bewailed the loss of 
Sati.. for a long time, held her dead body to your breast and roamed 
throughout the world in several places, Lopá-mudrá said, “O Siva, this 
practice is enforced by ladies in the ‘wedding-room that the bride-groom 
should offer betel-leaves to his bride and then lie down with her, 
Arundhati said, « iva, Menaká was unwilling to give her daughter 
toyou. It was I who caused her to make you this gift. Therefore pro- 
pitiate your bride with Consolatory words and dally with her.” Ahalya 


ty being solicitous for the hands 
J lvà, by no means answer the 
questions, put by the ladies, I advise you to maintain a studious silence; 
or 1618 sanctioned by custom that Women of the town, at the - time 


Rohint said, “ O lord adept 
à i aa should now be- 
} and Pouse to cross the Ocean of lust,” The Earth 
said, “O omiscient lord, you know the condition of women oppreseed by 
lust, Woman does not Preserve her husband. The latter always 
preserves his Wife," Satarupa said, “O Sambhu, a hungry man is never 
satisfied except with food. A Person should do thoso things whereby his 


wife is appeased, Sanjiia said, « () i i i 
manna A PEN ALO my female Associates, light a diamond 


geb ready a loye] bed j li l 
hen send lva there with pa. d d ks Ext aa ions 
ruptible lord Sankara, the len » Lord Krisna said, ‘The incor- 
when he heard the word 
not use such words to me, 


ate sweet-meat, rinsed his 
censed with 


' Spouse, 
48-51 Siva also sat on the diam : 


witnessed joyously the Beate ond ‘throne offered by Menaká and 
lighted Up with hundreds of jos ehe md E PRESS m ted 
1 ornamente 

: ap come places he found 
n other plaços he observed sandal 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGa 


` pyp BRAHMA PATPORTA PUNATA. 901 
MC — — 


and pedsteads of flowers, perfumed with musk. Vis'wa-Karma had 
cted the house with the best of gems and adorned it with good 
y iebures. Some places were inlaid with best diamonds In other 
sve constructed figures of the lovely Vaikuntha, the Vrindà-vana, 

the sphere of the Risa, the Kaildsa or the heaven of Indras. This sight 
ased Siva very much. O darling of my life, at day-break musicians play- 
d upon differen’ sorts of musical instruments. hen the lord s of all (č. e. 
ob up, dressed themselves, mounted their conveyances and 
go to tho Kaiàsa. At that time Dharma at the command 
na arrived ab the Vásara, the room in which the married couple 
are led to Pass their nights slong with their friends and addressed suitable 
words to Sankara, the preceptor of the yogis thus, “ O lord of ghosts, get 
up. May you be blessed ! At this auspicious moment, remember Lord 
Hari and starb with. Parvati. " Then iva opened his eyes and saw that 
Dharma was standing before him. , Hearing his words-he soon got up and 
started at the auspicious moment. Siva, the lord of gods, the ocean of merey 

prepared to starb with Parvati. Thereupon Menakà loudly wept acd 
said, ‘ O ocean of mercy, O lod who is liable to be easily propitiated, 
kindly forgive ? thousand faults of Parvati (dearer to me than my life) 
and maintain her carefully. She is ab every birth the slave of your lotus 
feet and either in dream or in her senses, she thinks of none except the Lord, 


58-70. O conquerer of death, the recitation of your ode sends a 
f Uma and causes her to shed tears of joy. Your 
slander shuts her mouth and reduces ber to a corpse. So saying Menakå 
handed over Parvati to S'iva at once, wept loudly and fainted before 
S'iva and S'ivà. The wives of the gods also fainted when they heard 
the lamentations of Parvati. Siva himself, the lord of ascetics and other 
gods wept by virtue of the delusion caused in his mind by Visnu. At this 
time Himalaya quickly arrived there, affectionately embraced Parvatt, lamen- 
ted loudly and said, “child, where are you going by causing a gap in bhe 
Himilaya ? My heart bursts when I call to my mind again and again 
the recitation of your virtues.” So saying be handed her over to S'iva-and 
with bis son and subjects the mountain wept loudly off and on. Then the 
Lord Náráyana, the ocean of mercy, busied himself with consoling each 
and every one by virtüe of his metaphysical knowledge. Because 
Parvati wept, all the women, Munis and gods wept with their wives 
and followers. ‘Then the gods fleeting like the mind, ready 0 
go promptly to the Kailâsa, arrived in 8 moment at the house 
of S'iva with very great glee. On their departure, the wives of the gods 
and Munis to perform auspicious rites, held lamps in their hands and 
quiekly followed suit, The wives of the wind, Kuvera, 9 ukra, Vrihaspati 
and Durvâså, Anusuyâ, the wife of Atri, the wives of the moon-god an 
thousands of goddesses, serpents, nymphs and girls of the Munis also reached 
that place, (Kailâsa). No one could possibly count these nymphs. 

71-80. All these ladies ushered in Hara and Durg& into the bouse and 
seated S'ankara on & lovely throne of gem. Then lord Siva -cheerfully 
pointed out to Sati his former dwelling and said O Sati, do you remem- 
ber this former house from which you went to your paternal house. In your 
former birth, you wero the daughter of Daka; and now you are the daugh ter 


constr" 


of Nardya 


CC-0. In , ; 
C-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


802 KRISNA JANMA KHANDA, 


of the mountain. I remind you of the fact, though I an sure you know the 
condition of your former. birth. My beloved, tell ma if you remember 
that.” Sati smiled when he heard the words and Said, ") lord of gods, 
I remember all. Hold your peace, I pray you, ab this time.” After this 
sort of conversation, lord S'iva entertained Narayana ete. who were 
much relieved with many kinds of delicacies. After eating, tho gods 
well decorated with gems bowed to the moon erestel Lord Siva with their 
Wives and went home, Then Siva himself bowed low to Hari and 
Brahmà who embraced and blessed him in return and Went away, After 
a while, Himalaya and Menaká called their son Mainaika and said to 
him, “We bless you, son: go and fetch Parvati and iva soon." The said 
Mainika when he heard the words of his parents soon went to Kailasa and 
brought back Siva and Parvati. Then, hearing -of their arrival, children, 
old women, young damsels and hills rushed with very creat pleasure to 
see them he smiling Menakà with her two sons and daughters-in-layy, 
and Himalaya with great pleisure ran to see Parvati. Thereafter the 
goddess Gaurt alighted from the car, cheerfully bowed to her parents and 
elders whose sight immersed her in the sea of joy. Manaka held Parvati 
in her lap and fluttered with joy, The sight of his daughter pleased 
Himalayy also a food deal “Afterwards in great eleg ho took his - 
daughter home, offered a throne of diamond to the holder of the Spear : 
(Siva) and cheered his followers with oblations of honey and milk. The 
lord (with the moon on his head) and his wife Were constantly worshipped 
with 16 ingredients and Siva stayed at his father-in-lawy’s with hig 
retinue, Thus, O Radha, T related to yon the auspicious event of the 
marriage of ankara calculated to destroy crjof and bring happiness, 
Now what do you wish to hear again ? 


— 


CHAPTER XLVI. 
1-15. Radha said, O Lord, tell me when S'ank 
band of Rati Who was dead for a long time, 
after having attained him again? The Separation from the 


ub re-union gives the rarest 


e auspicious act of Marriage? m} 

, f he 

S Most painful toa man; but re-union gives him 
ton to life. Therefore how 


o me Accurately, The re-union of th 
the re-union of Rati with KA 3 


3 
the wedding 
a view to Sexua] intercourse 


: so dressed her husband wi 
her female attendants, The god ma, expert in lu cd 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


“PILE BRATEMitked sh LEG ára saraya Trust. 9. 


NEC ee 


cho feelings of Rati, rode on à diamond car and along with her, left 
his house and went to the woods. Afterwards he enjoyed her society in the 
ountains, every great or small river, every island, or the coast of the 

the graceful bower of flowers, and at the solitary root of the holy 
fig-treo near El-Dorado (land of gold). Lastly he revelled with-her in the 
midst of tho wood of blooming flowers in places reverberating with the hum 
of bees or the sound of male cuckoos, 10 places fanned by redolent winds 
charged with aqueous vapours. here according to the measure of 
Kala, a division of time according to-38 Kásthás or about 8 seconds, he in- 
dulged in sexual intercourse likely to enchant women. 


16-29. The god Kama enjoyed the society of Ratt at that place for 
a hundred celestial years. At that time his heart was so much engrossed 
or taken up by his wife that he had no idea of day and night. The 
young god and the young nymph gob constantly united with one .2n0- 
ther and lingered there with great pleasure None of them desisted 
from the act of intercourse. That pleasure banished from the heart of | 
Rati the pangs of separation ; in a word, this sort of excess is by no 
moans a matter of wonder. For if a person gèts back his stolen property, 
he does not want to part with that property for a moment. O Radha 
I thus narrated to you the incident which relieved the sorrows of Rati. 
Now Iam going to tell you the history of the incomparable amours of 
Siva and Šakti, which is very wonderful, desirable and as sweet as nectar to 
the ears. The recitation ot this event alleviates grief and secures happi- 
ness and virtue. While Siva was living at his father-in-law’s place, once 
upon a time, at his own instante, with a view to flirt with Parvati he 
rode on a car of diamond well equipped with the paraphernalia of gem, 
inlaid with diamonds and constructed by Vis wa.Karmà and went with 
her to the woods. There-alter with pleasure and with 2 heart full of lust 
he enjoyed tho society of Parvati in the mountains of Saha: ringa, Sura 
sina Malaya and Gandba Madan, in the grove of Nandana, in the grave ul 
woods of Pindra; Pándáraka, Andbaka, Püspabhadra, Pàri-bhadra, Bhadra 
and Kalinga in. each of the coasts of the oceans at the graceful root of the 
holy fig tree by the side of the mountain of Asta where in days of yore 
he had lamented after having left Sati (reduced to 4 corpse) and in other 
solitary places void of beasts and birds. Afterwards Siva joyfully pointed 
out to her the places on the surface of the globe where he hal wandered 
along with the corps? of Sati. As this association lasting even for a long 
time failed to satisfy the pair, iva, the father of the world, indulged 
in the great act of sexual intercourse which lasted for a thousand years. 
: The great Siva who transcends illusion and is the lord of illusion was 
deluded by virtue of his own illusion and owing to the excess of pleasure 
caused by the carnal act, he had no idea of day and night, though he is 


a great Yogi and the creator of time. 


30-44, At that, time, Parvati (who is the direct emblem of energy) 
and the powerful ankara were not in the least exhausted by the above 
act ; on the other hand, their intolerable sufferings which were occasioned 
by a long course of separation were removed. A that time they slapt 
ona bed covered with flowers and with their heart animated with joy 
and with their bodies thrilling with raptures they were pierced with the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
RR 


804 ISN4 JANMA KHANDA. 


(——— T€ 


darts of Cupid, fainted and thus passed their days. Both of them wh, 
Were expert in sexual science were rendered stark-naked th rough exces 
of pleasure; and their bodies were marked with the Injuries inflicted by 
teeth and nails. Tho sandal-paste, alog-paste and musk of ther 
bodies and the vermilion on the forehead of Parvati disappeared ; thy 
garland of both were torn and the chignon of Gauri was relaxed, 0 


fair one, at the time of intercourse her anklet, bracelet, anklet and ear. | 
rings continued to resound. Both were equally vested with energy and. 


through the accession of energy due to the excess of enjoyment, the bed 
of flower was trampled down by the movements of their feet. The earth 
being overloaded with the energy of Siva, ‘the supporter of the worl], 
Was about to be rent asunder and quaked along with mountains, forests 
and oceans. The god Ananta was burdened with the weight of the earth, 
The weight of Ananta oppressed Narayana in the shape of a tortoise, 
Afterwards Oppressed by the weicht of the tortoise the winds whioh 
constitute the refuge and life of all became paralysed, whereupon, the 
gods including Brahma who saw that the three worlds were bewildered 
with fear met together, took shelter with the Lord of the Vaikuntha and 
represented everything before his lotus-feet. The lord Hari said to 
Brahma, « 9 Brahma, this is not the proper time to interfere with the 
Jntereourse of Hara and Parvati. Look! Every act begins in time 
ara will himself 
t. Particularly, 
2 his wife in their 
Imself suffer the pangs of separation from his wife, 

; forfeit wisdom, celebrity 
and fortune and in the end must dwell in the hell called the thread 


In olden times, the ere; Muni vasa 
having separated the lustful Indra from Rambha, ja eae ; 


ohini and had to parh from his wife. 
Puskara, he prayed Siva for 1000 


Was associated With his 9; Hee ae Med de 
a à EDD n ry place i 
B um to Part with his son, eect ie ee 
ite arc " mand was consoled, And king Haris Chandra 
solitude ‘ite a Sina Main helpless agrieulturist who was united in 
secet ah = oman from the act of sexual intercourse reaped 
great saint Vis wà-Mitra Very easily de Bi ep Qo" Listen, The 
S'iva, the Source of al] pr i i 
retinue at the Vaikuntha, m uid d sited "un a 
or yore, Jamia 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by URS sS 


e 


RRIBNU dB NIM RAAND Trust 805 


the greatest of saints. having been united with a Vrisali, i. e. an unmarried 
ir) 12. years old, a barren woman or a S'udra woman, no god 
through fear could prevent him from his purposes. Afterwards, the said 
Ajamila after he had finished the act was bewildered and in distress 
* remembered my name, whereupon he at once came to my kingdom. 
Therefore, O Brahman, the result of every act, good or bad is determined 
fate. That Nisska (predestinarianism) is stronger than Providence 

or Brahm’. I also give fruits of Niseka which no body ean trans-gress. 
This act of enjoyment by Siva must last for a 1,000 years, as fixed by 
destiny. From the being who gives fruits of the Niseka, he has obtained 
this boon of sexual enjoyment lasting so long. After the lapse of & 
thousand years, Indra will go there and see tha& his semen should drop 
to the ground. This is inevitable. M 
61-71. From that gemen the auspicious Kartika would derive his birth. 


J am always the emblem of your prosperity. So long as l am by your 
side, you need not be afraid of anything. Now go with the gods and 
let the lord Siva enjoy the society of Parvati in that solitary place. 
The husband of Kamali having said so went to his seraglio and the 
gods went bome. On the other hand S'iva was also engaged in the 
soxual act.” Saint Narayana said, ‘Lord Krisna having said so to the glauc- 
, ing, smiling Radha went along with her to the sandal forest. That place is 
very solitary, incensed by the refreshing wind, teeming with groves, an 

reverberating with the hum of bees and sound of euckoos. It was there- 
fore very enchanting to women. Lord Krisna enjoyed the society 0 

Radha in that place containing floral beds. Enraptured by her association 
with Krişna, Radha at once fainted ; and Krisna by the bare touch of her 
body swooned liko-wise. O saint, Radha and the Lord of the sphere became 
paralysed through the pleasures of sexual intercourse and being intimately- 
associated with one another, they spent their time there. Now what 
do you want to hear more? O Narada, whoever with wrapb attention 
hears this auspicious account is never dissociated from his-friends. And 
if a person being immersed in thé ocean of sorrow caused by the separation 
from his son, family, good servants or friends listens to it for & month, he 
surely attains the object desired by him. Sata said, “The great sage» the 
son of Dharma, having paused, Narada, the godly saint, being excited with 
curiosity, further queried him thus.” " 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


1-12, Nárada said, “O ocean of mercy, when the amorous pastimes 
were over, what further questions Were put by Radha to Lord Hari ? 
What was said by Hari to him ? Please reveal this mabter to me." 
Nárüyana said, “Lord ' Hari there-after finished his enjoyments with 
Radha and sat down at the root of the graceful holy fig-tree. Then 
Radha questioned the smiling, lovely Hari anent the pleasing, mysterious 
account of the humiliation of Indra thus: «Q Lord, I have now heard about 
the fame of the wielder of the spear, his humiliation which was due to 
chance, the humiliation of Parvati and her wedding with Siva. Now I 
wish to hear the account of. the humiliation of Indra. O Lord of 
the Aigecen please narrate to meby turns the history of the humi- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


: Trust. 
306 PRE BRITA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


— 


liation of others also.” Sri Krisna said, “Fair one, listen to the stor 
the humiliation of the king of gods, celebrated throughout the three worlds, 
Ii is just like a drop of nectar to the gars and very pleasing, Ip days 
of yore Indra the lord of a hundred sacrifices, with pride and glee having 
performed a hundred sacrifices, was vested with prosperity and became 
the oflicer of all the gods. Then as azresult of his devotion his prosperit 
increased day by day : and Vrihaspati initiated him in the perfect mantras, 
Afterwards this great Mantra was recited by Indra for a hundred Years, 
As he accomplished or perfected the Mantra, his object was gained. Then 
Indra, being infatuated with prosperity, slighted the goddess Nature, the 
emblem of Brahma. Sho became angry and cursed the lord of gods 
saying, “You will be cursed by your spiritual guide.” Once upon a time 
Indra, the king of gods, being bewildered by the curse of Nature, while 
seated in his council, did not Stand np at the sight of his- Guru or bog 
to him. Therefore Vrihaspati was offended.-He did not sit down there: but 
€ returned home in disgust, Keenly realising his disgrace, he could ‘not 
even remain with Tara but Went to the forest for devotion, 


18-28. The sorrowful Vrihaspati heartily ‘desired the dissolution of 
the prosperity of Indra, When Indra eame to his senses, he said, “Where 
is my Garu gone?” «So saying he hastily got up from his thro 

e to Tara, the wife of his spiritual preceptor, and with 
inelination of his shoulders he bowed to her. "Then with fol 
he represented to her the whole Story and loudly wept again 

ara also wept when she Witnessed tho lamentati : 

“O child, go home, At this time you will not be 

` your Guru. When your evil days are over, you will get back your Guru 

and Prosperity, Now reap the consequences proport 

Wickeduess, And know it for certain that 
when your days are bad and pleased when the 

good days are the Cause of happiness and bad d 

9 saying, Tard the chaste paused, Then In 

to the ovely coast of Mandákini witnessed thero the approach of Ahalya, 

fair, smiling and possessi i glances Indra 

: 5 ^ : 5 5 . 
seeing her bulky hips and lovely pair of nipples was excited with passion 

Indra shortly 

: hed APA ap PRU and assuming the 

uns approache aya. Then the licentious Indra 
vier fie itt va aie and thus committed sexual intereource 


of the Muni 
and paralysed through 
tion as he was 


ns we , s at this time the 
Vere over. Came into the 3 PER i 
oth of them Were er ? house and Sceing that 


t , gaged jn Sexual intercon ne e 
flushed crimson like a fr B Pacey cine eee 


as he was Particularly wise, ho- 
arnal pleasure, though highly incensed, z e 


pee observed the best of Munis 
t í before as file: tas r; 
embodiment of time, Thereupon ho hej his lotuy fe a aH GD 


ne, went 
reverential 
ded palms 
and again. 


days are good. O Indra, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Your spiritual. euide is displeased 


I S hj 4:34. RITIRI Trust. : 307 


tho face and the eyes of the Muni became red with anger. And yet seeing 
that Indra sought the protection of his feet through fear, he did not kill 
im, but addressed him thus using words fraught with ethical maxims : 
Indra, fie upon you! For you are the best of tbe gods, a savant, the grandson 
of the creator of the world and the son of Kas‘yapa. And yet how has your 
intellect been perverted ? Daksa himself is your maternal grandfather: 
the chaste Aditi is your mother. From this 1 know that character is 
determined by Karma and has no regard for the rites observed in one’s 
race. Therefore, O Indra, as you have become attached to the vagina 
inspite of your omniscience and wisdom, you will get 1,000 vaginas in your 
body. Fur ono year full, your body will remain in this condition - after- 
wards by praying the sun, your vaginas will be converted into eyes. 
And, O° fool, as thou hast defiled my darling spouse, so evel at this 
moment through my curse and the anger of thy offended spiritual guide, 
thou shalt be deprived of thy prosperity. ` foolish god, through fear 
of losing my friond and on the entreaties of my great friend, thy Guru, 
the valorous Vrihaspati, I did not kill you. O king of gods, now 89 home. 
Tho.good and the evil spring from one’s Karma.” 


36-45. Then Indra, by the advice of the great Muni, went to the 
holy place called Puskara, reverentially worshipped the sun and was cured 
of his vaginas. On the other hand, addressing Ahaly& who crouched 
before his feet, the great Muni Gautama said, “ Tou had better go to 
the forest ard assuming the shape of a stone dwell there for a long time. 
My darling, Indra has enjoyed you in the innocence of your heart, and 
this I have -happened to know. And yet when another person has 
enjoyed your society, you can no longer be accepted by me. Therefore, 
wretch, go away from this place. O Ahaly&, through lust or otherwise if 
the somon of another man enters, 0S & dispensation of providence, into the 
womb of a womans sho may be purified and I tell you the method. If. she 
is enjoyed by another man while she is free from just'she is not defiled and 
can be purified by penance ; and if she lustfully surronders hor person 
to another man, she should be forsaken. She can be only puri ed after 
she had reaped the consequences of her Karma. She cannot eook food 
for the gods or the manes ; nor can she worship them. For 60,000 years 
sho lives in the. hell called the thread of time. Then Ahaly$, at the 
words of her husband, was frightened, bowed to him saying» “ O my 
husband! O my husband ! and wont to the forest. Then the spouse of the 
Muni, after having reaped the consequences of her act for 60,000 years, 
was at once purified by the touch of the feet of the lord Rima. There- 
upon she wielded a form which could enchant the three worlds and went 
to Gautama. ‘The great Muni took back the fair lady oh her return. Hair 
one, now I am going to tell you in detail the wonderful account o Indra 
which is the occasion of virtue and the bane of sins. Listen. 


. 46-57, Once upon a time; the wrath of the spiritual guide. 

contempt of nature entailed upon the senseless Indra the sin O the 
murder ofa Brahmin. O goddess, Indra (being abandoned by his Guru, 
oppressed by the demons and affrighted) sought the protection of Brahma, 
tho spiritual leader of the world. Then at tho command of Brahma, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


308 THE BRAHMA VAIPARTA PURANA, 
the bewildered Indra appointed Viswa-rüpa as his priest and as provi. 
dencé would have it, he reposed trust in him. After a while, the 


clever Indra perceived the bad intention of Vis'wa-rüpa, the son of tha 
daughter of the demon and at once cut-off his head : with a sharp arrow, 
The sage Twastà, the father of Vis'wa-rüpa was incensed at the news 
and, in order to create enemies for Indra, he performed a sacrifice : and 
from the sacrificial pit came out a great domon called Vritra, who in q 


rage continued to persecute the gods freely. Indra, the vanquisher of | 


demons, with a view to chastise his enemy constructed the hideous thunder 
with the bones of the great Muni Dadhichi and killed Vritrá-Sura who 
was a thorn in the way of the gods. Whereupon Brahma-hatyà (murder 
of a Bráhmin incarnate), clad in ‘scarlet and in the guise of an old 
woman rushed towards the be-willered Indra. Her body was as huge 
as seven palm-trees one above the other : and the row of her teeth was ag 
fearful as the blades of a plough. Her appearance showed that her 
throat, lips and palate were constantly parched. She wielded a scimitar 
and was strong and merciless, She ran cowards the frightened, oppress- 
ed, and disarmed Indra, At first he fled, then lost his senses and fainted, 
Later on, as Indra beheld the hideous spectre by his side, he remembered 
again and again the lotus feet of his Guru and entered into the slender fibro 
of the stalk of lotus of the Manasa- pond. Therein Brahma-haty& was 
unable to enter through the curse of Drahmá. So she lingered on the 
Perales of the holy fig-tree situated on the coast of the sacred pool of 
naga. : 

_ 98-68. On the other hand, the powerful Nahusa having conquered tho 
kingdom of heaven solicited the goddess Sach? from the gods. She was 
even ce to hear this and sought the protection of Tard, the wife 
EE iene a ite Jaan Whereupon ‘Tara rebuked her 
VEM CERES A ro achi, his  servant's wife. Then 
dep As © "ae Joyfully went to the lake of Mánasa and said 

9 ule aggrieved, bewildered Indra, « Child, get u So long as I 
nem by gonr side, Jou need not fear anythine, I, m spiritual guide, 

ave come,. That you can Know from the tone of my voico, Indra, the 


braced him affectionately and wept, - 
rishaspati Was appeased and Weeping, adored 


gods I alone am foolish but 
of the best of the gods antes Led ae n moata b Condition 


;, “ou are yourself th - 
y your side, You can destroy PES of Brahma, - 


rihaspati was much Pleased with the h Lachen ereate ery thing again. 


ymn of Indra, His faze and eyes: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Weeping, frightened and prostrate Indra, em- | 


- - 


i Digitize , 
lacently thus: 


showed that he was appeased. He then addressed him comp 
“0 plessed being, compose. yourself. May your fortune last for ever ! 
our times as lucky as you were before. Go to heaven and rule 


You shall be f j 
-our kingdom. O child Indra, by my grace your enemy will be destroyed. 


Now go and see the chaste gocdess achi.” So saying, as Vrihaspiti was 
about to g0 away, he saw before him the hideous and intolerable being 
Tatyd. Indra was frightened 88 he saw her and sought the 
his Guru. Vrihaspati was also much afraid and remembered 


Hari, the destroyer of Madhu. At this time, there was a voice from the 
sky, short bub pregnant with meaning 5o the following effect “O Gur, 
by the gift of Ràdhá's amulet called the conqueror of the world (Samsara 
Vijaya) calculated to remove all kinds of evil, you had better preserve 
isciple.’ Vrihaspati hoard it. ‘Then Vrihaspati who was affec- 
him the amulet and immediately with a 
shout reduced Brahma- Haty& . to ashes. Afterwards the Guru with his 
diseiple went to heaven and realised the bad condition of Indra caused 
by his enemies. S/achi hearing the arrival of her husband, joy fully 
approached him and reverentially bowed before the feet of her Guru. 
She then bowed to. her husband. O my dear, at this time, the gods, 
saints and Munis hearing of the arrival of Indra, poured in from all | 
directions with their heart pulsating with joy: Indra on his part, d put- 


ed Vis'wa-Karmá to construct Heaven again and that divine architect 


completed the construction of the lovely city in one year tu | That 
city constructed with exce 


llent gems and being ornamented with wonder- 
fal diamonds looked very lovely indeed. Nay, ib was incomparable in 
the world: but Indra was not, even then, satisfied. 

88-95. Vis wa-Karmá unable to go away without his command, with 
an aggrieved heart, sought the protection of Brahma who, knowing his 
purpose thus addressed him, “O god, to-morrow you will be relieved from 
your task ”. Hearing this, the divine architect soon went back to Hea- 
ven. On the other hand, Brahms went to the Vaiktintha, bowed to 
Hari and announced his. will: Hari consoled Brahmi, sent him back 


to the Brahma-loka, wielded the form of a child, and arrived at Heaven’s 
f pub on & white dress 


gate. He held in his hand a parasol and a stat 

and fixed a bright mark on his forehead. He was dwarfish, smiling and 
very lovely. He looked like a child, but he was wiser and more clever 
than an old man. ‘The dispense of even the creator, the source of all 
prosperity, Hart himself arrived at the threshold of Indra and said to 
the warder “O warder soon 8° to Indra and tell him that a Brahmin 
has atrived at the gate, to) ses him. The warder, went accordingly 
and told {ndra who came hastily and saw tho Brahmin boy. He saw 
full of the lustre of -Brahma. The boys 


and girls prompted by curiosity and with faces peaming with smiles 
, had surrounded him. Indra yevereatially bowed to Hari in the guise 
) of a child: and Hari, kind to his adherents, cheerfully blessed him. Indra 

ühmin boy with oblations of honey and milk &e» 
asked him, “O lord; tell me the cause of your arrival.” Phat Bráhmin 
who was the Guru of the Guru even of Vrihaspati, when he heard the 
words of Indra replied with words which were as deep as the voice of the 
clouds thus “ Q king of the gods, I have heard about the construction of 


your d 
tionate to his disciple gave 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


310 THE BRAMA TAIVARTA PURANA. 


your wonderful city: and so I have come to see rou and refer You to som, 
points I desire to know. O king of the gods, in how many years do you 

4 ve i nol . "av TR 
wish to get your city constructed and what more ergineering will Vis Was 
Karma display in the matter ? 


96-108. O best of gods, no Indra before you was capable of effecting 
such a construction.” Indra infatuated with the wine of prosperity and 
hearing the words of the boy laughed loudly and asked him again, “U 
Brahmin hoy, please reveal to me, how many Indras or V:swa-Karmag 
you have seen and about how many you have heard. he Br&hmin boy, 
having heard the words of Indra laughed in his turn and addressed Indra 
using words delightful to the ears like nectar thus: * Child, I know 
your father, Prajà-pati Kas'yapa and your grandfather Marichi, the Saint 
Whose wealth consisted in his devotions. I know also lord Brahma, 
the offspring of the navel of Visnu and I know the virtuous Visnu, 
the preserver of Brahma. O kine of tho gods, I also know of that 
dreadful dissolution of the world turning it into a huge mass of Water 
void of all animals, Indeed, no one ean say how many kinds of Creation, 
9r universes or ages are there and in each universe how many Brahmas, 
Visnus or S'ivas exist. O king of gods, the servants hold that it is pos- 

` sible to count the particles of sand or the Currents of rain- water bat no 
one can count the Indras. Indra’s longevity and jurisdiction Consist of 
Seven yugas according to the Divine standard of calculation; and the 
perio] covered by 28 Indras is equivalent to one day and night of Brahma, 
Brahma’s longevity consists of 108 years according to the above standard, 
Child, not to talk of tho Number of Indras, there is no end of those 
Brahmas. None Can calculate those universes each of which contains a 
Brahma, Visnu and Siva. Ag an artificial boat floats on the waters of the 
World, so the Brahmándas float on the pure water, arising out of the. 
pores ofthe skin of Maha Visnu, 

108-122, Like the pores of Maha-Vis 
which Ccntain Many gods like yourself,” 

: speaking thus, ab that Place a 
by that Way in the form 


nu, the Universes arg count-less, 
While the best of beings was 
Tow of ants happened to pass 
of a bow. Then tho Brihmin, when 


n ballad we Stonished, His palate lips and 
throat became dry and ho again asked, « Q Brahmin, Si Von dee i 
Peo ee You seem to me to be the 
elusion; 1e Brahmin boy, hearing thy 

duro. Obs [ À n boy, hearin f 
words o ndra, addressed ae 3 Pregnant with meta. 
al maxims «T laughed at the sight of the 
Do not query meon the subject which 


Contains tho i i 
germ of erwise a fruitful Source of your 


wisdom, That mysterio j 


1 o “ogis versed in the 
pride of fools, The Brahmin boy Aving said so paused 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


KRISIPBUEA N Mándi a Debye Trust öll 


and lingered there whereupon Indra with his lips, throat and palate parched 
again asked him, “ O son ofa Brahmin, soon reveal to me the old, mys- 
terious subject which dispels darkness like the lamp of wisdom. I do 
not know who are you n the guise of a boy; you seem to be the personi- 
"nof accumulated’ wisdom. Hari in the guise of a Brahmin, hear- 
ing this, again resumed the subject relating to wisdom rarely to be ac- 
wired even by the Yogis thus, « O Indra, I saw the ants, passing in & 
lino one by one; each of them was an Indra cn one oecasion by virtue 
of his Karma. Now in course of time after a series of pirths, these 


creatures have attained the condition of ants. 


123-136. Persons led by Karma either go to the stainless Vaikûn- 
tha or to the domain of Brahma or Siva or to Heaven or to a place simi- 
lar ġo Heaven Or to the nether world (patal or the hideous hell) where 
people are consigned to sufferings. Through Karma alone, people are 
born as boars or as small animals or spring out of the womb of female 
beasts or birds. Through Karma, a person abtains the womb ofan insect, 
the condition of a tree, the position of a Brahmin ora god oF Indra or 
Brahmi or acquires happiness or sorrow Or becomes a master or ® servant. 
Through Karma, he ascends a litter, becomes à king or gets disease or ac- 
quires beauty or deformity cr attains the condition of a monster. ‘This 
Karma is subservient to character which in its turn is controlled by habit.” 
All these metaphysical maxims which have been just announced lead 
to happiness and final beatitude. They constitute the essence of all 
things and help & person to cross the ocean of hell. Death deputed by 
time is at the top of tho list; for all the animate and inanimate objects o 
the world, O Indra, are transitory like dream. © Indra, the good and the evil 
which attend a person are destructible like bubbles of water. They rotate 
constantly like wheels. This is why servants are not attached to them. 
“he great Vipra (learned- Brahmin) having said so lingered in that 
assembly: and the king of the gods came to regard himself as a Very 
insignificent individual. At this time, a Very old and great ascetic 
arrived at that place. He was great in wisdom and years. The great 
Muni was dressed in the skin of a black deer. Ilo had clusters of 


knotted hair on his bead and had a bright mark on his forehead. There 
was a circle of hair on his chest. His head was shaded by 2 parasol made 
of grass, the cluster of hair on his chest was intact but appeared to have 
been uprooted in some places. The Muni of the above description arrived 


in their midst and took his seat there like a lump of stone. 


137-149. The great Indra when he saw the Brahmin (the new 
arrival) joyfully bowed to him, reverentially worshipped him with the 
offer of oblations of honey and milk, humbly enquired into his welfare 
and with pleasure and esteem offered to him the hospitalities due to a 
guest. Then the Vipra-boy communed with bim and modestly related 
to him everything as desired by Indra.” The boy said, «© Brabmin, 
whoneo have you come ? Tell me what is your name? What is the 
cause of your arrival ? At this time, where is your home? O Muni, 
what is the méaning of the parasol of grass over your bead and why in 
your chest has tho incomparable circle of hair been uprooted to a certain 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
812 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


4 


——— 


extent ? If you are kind to me, reveal to me everything in brief, All 
this wonderful matter, I am curious to hear." The great Muni, hearing 
the words of the boy, gladly stated his caso before Indra, He said, “ Q 
Brahmin, my name is Lomas'a. The cause of my arrival is to see Indra, 
As [am short-lived, I have not decided to build my house any where 
or to marry or to secure any sort of living. At present. begging is 
my only livelihood. To shield myself against raio and the sun, I hold 


that parasol or umbrella over my head. And listen to the reason why. | 


I wield a circle of hair on my chest. It isa source of fear to the people 
of the world and likewise productive of wisdom. The fall of one Indra 
causas the extraction of one hair from my chest.: This is why the hairs 
in the middle have been uprooted, (indicating the fall of so many Indras), 
In this way, as soou as the other halfof the period allotted to Brahma expires 
lam destined to die. O Brahmin, when endless Brahmas die, it follows 
that I am short-lived. Therefore what is the use ofa wife, son or 
house ? 


150-161. When the mere twinkle of the eyes of Hari causes the fall 
ofa Brahma, it necessarily follows that everything is unreal. This is 
why I am always thinking of the incomparable lotus-feeb of Hari. ‘The 
bondage of Lord Hart is very rarely to be secured. Faith in Hari is 
greater than redemption. All prosperity is transient like a dream and 
interferes with one's belief in Hari. S'ambhu, the good spiritual guide, 
has imparted to me this excellent knowledge, and, ‘ void of faith, I do not 
wish to attain even the four kinds of redemption, Sa-lokya ete.” Tho 
Muni, so saying, went to Siva ; and Hari in the guise ofa boy also dis- 
appeared. O great goddess, Indra was astonished to behold this wonder- 
ful phenomenon which appeared to him just like a dream. He had no 
longer the slightest desire to secure worldly prosperity. Afterwards the 
lord of a hundred sacrifices (Indra) sent for Vis'wa-Karmá, used to him 
sweet words, presented to him a large number of gems-(as much as could 
be possibly desired) and: after a display of hospitality sent him home. 
Thus acquiring wisdom and desirous to gain redemption, he entrusted the 
charge of his kingdom to his son and was about to proceed to the forest, 

. Then Sachi, beholding her husband on his way to renunciation, was over- 
whelmed with grief ; and oppressed by fear and sorrow, she sought the 
protection of her spiritual guide. The lustful goddess induced Vrihaspati 
to turn up there by representing to him all the ucts of the dae Md 
according to the rules of ethics she comforted Indra, The spiritual guide 


himself composed a science dealing itl 
th : 
husband or the wife and affection: tale pees ocd annoy to control the 


The lord of language (Vrihaspati 
of different kinds, ©’ goddess 
nected with the humiliation o t 
his disgrace on the cceasion of 


thus I narrated to you everythi z 
ything con 
f Indra: and you yourself have witnessed 
tho sacrifice performed by Nanda, 
CHAPTER XLVIII. 
1-18. Radha said,“ Lord I heard of Indra’ iliati 
T , a, h 
by you. Now I wish to hear accurately the pen ani pd 
humiliation of the gun", Lord Krişna said * Once Upon a time ‘the sun 
D 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGapgatri and. 3 
RRISNI david WIND Tr 313 


roe and set. After sunset the demons Mali and Sumáli attempted to 
shed light. Fair one, the sun-god thereupon came to know that through 
the lustre of the demons there would be no approach of night : and so he 
became angry and with his spear he easily struck them. Whereupon 
they swooned and fell on the | earth. Afterwards Lord ankara, 
kind to his adherents, realised their danger and by virtue of his great 
wisdom restored them to life. Thereupon tbe demons, with a glad heart, 
bowed to Siva and went home ; and iva, burning with rage, ran to destroy 
the sun. The sun, beholding that Hara, the lord of destruction, was de- 
sirous te kill him, ran away in fear and sought the shelter of Brahma. On 
tho other hand, Siva, tho time of time, the dispenser of Brahmá, wielded his 
irresistible Spear and also went to the domain of Brahmá. Brahmá, tbe 
lord of the world, seeing that Hara, the great god, was incensed, continued 
with his four mouths to adore him according to the hymn recited in the 
Vedas. Brahma said, “ O lord wbo hadst destroyed the sacrifice of Daksa, 
relont to the sun who has sought my protection. O spiritual guide of the 
world, you have created everything, the animate ‘and inanimate, for the 
propagation of ereation. O being who art easily contented, O most blessed 
lord, O god who showest compassion to your votaries, relent. O ocean of 
merey kindly preserve the sun. O Lord, you are the emblem of Brahma 
and the cause of creation, preservation and destruction. Yourself having 
created the sun, you are going to destroy him, O supreme being, 
Brahma himself (D, Ananta, Dharma, the sun, the fire, Indra; the moon 
and other zods all are afraid of you. The Risis whose wealth consists in 
their devotion and the Munis reap tho fruits of their devotion by serving 
you. You are the source of the fruits of devotion. You are the emblem 
of meditation and transcend its powers." Brahmá having reverentiall y 
said so brought the sun and with a glad heart made him over to S'iva, 
kind to his Votaries. ‘Then the gracious S/ambhu, the dispenser of the 
universe, blessed the sun and baving bowed to Brahma, gladly and with , 
a cheerful mien went home. Any one who in. peril reads the. above bymn 
composed by Brakma is relieved from fear, if he is afraid and released 
ftom confinement, if he is in prison. In the king’s court, in the 
funerals, in the bosom of the mighty ocean and while drowning, the 
Moreno of this hymn by the person in peril comes to his rescue, no 
oubt. -— 


— 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


1-18. Lord Krigna said, «Thereafter. the effulgent sun vested with 
three attributes gladly bowed to Brahma and at his command cheerfully 
discharged his duties. Now hear the excellent account of the Fire, which 
ic mysteriously recited in the Purinas, which is excellent and-sweeb like 
drops of nectar to the er. At one time, the Fire-god seb up 2 readful 
flame measuring a hundred tals and attempted alone to rec 
worlds to ashes. He thought that he alone was -effulgent and, 
. everything else by hisside. By the curse of Bhrigu, he was aggrieve an 
incensed, in the way as stated hefore. Ab 0e Ume Visnu came, 
confronted the fire and easily deprived him of his faculty of consumption. 
By the powers of his illusion, Hart assumed the guise of a child, and with 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


814 . HE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


his shoulders inclining with reverence, thus spoke modestly to th 
fire; “Lord, why have you become angry ? Tell me the — cause. Without 


$ 
cause, you are prepared to destroy the three worlds to ashes.. You haye - 


* been cursed by Bhrigu whom alone you ought to subdue, Through the fault 
of one, you should not consume the three worlds. Brah ma has created the 
fworld. Hart himself is its preserver : and Lord Rudra is its destroyer, This 
QN is the plan which has been adopted: 1n the presenceof S ankara, how can you 
N| consume the world? And if you can. you must first subdue Hari, the 
| preserver of the world. The Brahmin boy, so saying, held in his hand à 

| dry blade of reed which was lying befere him and gave it to the fire 

| god for consumption, When the fire god saw the dry fuel, he dreadfully 

| rolled his tongue and encompassed the Bráhmin-boy with his flame 

| as the cloud obscures the moon. Bat neither tho dry levf nor one hair of 
Athe boy was burnt. Seeing this, the fire-god was ashamed and struck 
dumb before the boy. Hari having thus curbed the prido of fire disappear- 

* Ned and the fire-god also having withheld his own image went home like 
one frightened. Thus I told you about the humiliation of the fire-god, 


.» Now tell me what new incident you wish to hear relating to the humilia. | 


tion of other gods. Radha said, “ Lord, recite to me by turn, the 

& \ humiliation of ‘others, Who in this world will not bo gratifiod by listen. 

N NV ing to your Narrative, sweet like nectar, in this sphere of the world 2" 

\ Narayan said, the Lord, hearing the words of Radha, again commenced to 
D recite the old narrative delightful to the ears, 


\ 


Q — 
V $ CHAPTER L. 


1-17. Lord Krişna said, * my beloved, I am now going 
iN Xj to recite to you the humiliation of Durvâsâ, a digit of Rudra, who 
; was very effulgent and ascetic. Once upon a time Amvaríiga 
$ having performed the vow of the twelfth day of tho moon fed many 
ay AY Brahmins and was about to take his food when tho reat Muni 

n Durvásá, devoted to the vow of Visnu, being hungry and thirsty 
Ny @ arrived there and said to the king, ^O blessed monarch, entertain me 
with food." The king reverentially gave him rice boiled with milk and 


Q ee, uh TO as honey. Afterwards Duryasa having observed 
air in that di ' '8 d i 
51 prepared to curse the king and having uproosed a 


eeter of knotted hair from his head threw i6 on the Ground, Af) 
Ime, out of that hair came out a being who was destructive like the 


seven Tals in height, and was effulgent like the flame of fire. As soon 


: ing along with his kingdom. 
Through fear, every ono trembled ; and the palate, ina AH ed of 
" very much frightened and remem=. 
Uu EE <a ction at once removod all his calamities. 
gees mes the irresistible wheel Called the Suber E OE Jilke ten 
2i E suns suddenly manifested itself beforo the assembly ad 
inner 4 evolve incessantly. Afterwards it cut off or destroyed mm 
x ag ary being an rushed. towards the excellent saint, Then the 
pudarsana which was more radiant than the sun Caused the frightened; 
Oppressed, eare-worn Muni who ran Away with all NE ight to 
Wander throughout the world With all it a^ ms mig 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE ` 


—— 1 


4 


T 


Digitize nosis 
KRISNA JA NMA opi PRN Ppa Trust. 915 


;anl the wheel followed him where-ever he went. The great 
his life to the Kailàsa, the seven heavens and the 
; g of Brahma and afterwards sought shelter with the 
i Vaikuntha. Hari, findinz the great mani lying prostrate at his 
feet mercifully guaranteed his safety. The great Brahmin, by the boon: 
i. obtained immunity from dinger and at his command went to the 
j ilace of vhe king again. When the king saw the saint, he entertained 
boiled with sugar and milk and himself took his food with 
hus wife and kins-mep. After the meil was over, the saint blessed the 
king and went home. For the preservation of my adherents, the Sudars ana 
wheel is thus deputed by me: At the time of the great dissolution of 
tho world every one is destroyed; but my worshippers are not killed. 
All the gods are as dear as life unto me; but my adherents are greater to 
ma than my life. You, Laksmi, Mahimaya (the grand principle of, 
illusion) SA vitri, Saraswati, Brahma, Visita, Ananta, Daarma, the Brah- 
mans and the cow-herds male and female, fe alll gie oo eee But my 
adheronts are denrer to me still ‘There is none SO Bae bo) qme me y 
worshippers. L depute my wheel Sudarsana for the preservation of my 
yotaries. And yet I ain not confident; for I go to see them mysek. 

goddess, you just heard of th? humiliation of Durvást. Therefore, O 
blessed being, command what you further wish to hear". Radha said, 
ʻO Lord of the universe, please reveal to me the mysterious account as 


given in the Puranas regarding the humiliation of Dhanwantari. Iam 


carious to hear it.” “Phe des;royer of Madhu langhed when he heard 
P a ofthe story of the 


une words of Radha’ and commenced the narration | 
Puránas, so pleasing to the ears. 
s 


CHAPTER LI. 
1-17. Lord Krigna said, “The lord Dh inwantari is & digit of Niriyana 


himself and great. At first while the ocea was churned, he rose out of 
the great waver (the ocean). Among the goes he is experienced, versed 
in tho incantations and yantras (eode of religious rites). Heils a pupil 
. of Garuda, the son of Vinatà an! tlio “pupil a Sto MN 
upona time with a thousand pupils he was going tO the Kaildsa 
when in the way he saw a serpent showing his tongue: an 
that poisonous snake- colossal as & mountain à 
snakes approaching him with 2 view to devour h 


naughty pupil of Dhanwantari hell that € : 
ed him and extracted bis 


D * oe 
Brahmin ran for 


of his incantations subdu 
abstracted the invaluable gem from his he: 
throw it ab a distance. The snake was paralys 
& corpse and halted in the way: H 3 
ropresented the matter to him. Vasuki, when ho heard this, burnt wit 

anger and despatched countless poisonous snakes and also five calebrated 
snakes named Drona, Kaliya, Karka ta, Pundarika and Dhananjaya who 
are also the cenorals of snakes. "Thay arrived at the place where Dhanwan- 
tari was, The pupils of Dhanwantari were much afraid, when they saw 
countless snakes approaching that place. All his disciples at the breath 
of tie snakes losb their will-power and lay like corpses on the. ground. ` 


CC- : 
C-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


—— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


816 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


I 
The lord of the world Dhanwantari in that emergency o his 
Guru and by power of his mystic incantations restored his pupi ls to lif 
by raining ambrosia on their bodies. Dhanwantari, the lord of : 10 World, 
"having thus revived them sublued tha poisonous snakes by the power 
of his mantras, O goddess, the snakes thus controlled became paral) sed 
and looked like Corpses ; and there was none left among them to communi. 
cite the news to Vasuki. Bat the omniscient Vasuki having realised 
the peril sammoned Jagad-Gouri, the emblem of wisdom and said to her, 
ʻO Manasá, you had better go there and Preserve the snakes. O blessed 
being, by virtue of your prowess, I am sure you will be worshipped in the 
three worlds’, Manasa laughed at the words and bowing low with 
humility used to him Words sweet like honoy thus : 


13-82. “O king of snakes, listen to my statement. I shall go to the 
battle and do the needful. But the good and the evi] 
io the will of. Providence, In tho batule field, I shall gl 

ho can preserve that person whom I shall destroy ? 
cluding Brahma arrive ab the field of ba 


conquer my enemy, Lord Ananta, my spiritual preceptor, has given me 
the most wonderful and perfect mantra sacred to Narayana. I hold on my 
neck the excellent amulet called the “Good of the three worlds.” p ean re- 
duce to ashes the world and e 


: leate it again, In the seienee of Mantra, I 
am the pupil of Lord ira: and that Lord, i 


wisdom." I donot count Garud 


are subservient 
ay the enemy, 
Nay, if the gods in- 
ttle, yet I shall undoubtedly 


a, the pupil of S'ambhu ; among heroes 


A ; count dim as a 
hero?” So Saying the soddess Manas bowed lov to Lord Hari, Siva and the 
Eod Ananta and in ange: i 


the snakes, she gladly went 
' alone, The goddess Manasá of a i I Mt. 


air nymph by hor mere 
Jpn, by 


` disciples of her enemy were para i 


her polsonous glances tho 
[ Will power, After- 
wards even Dhanwantari, though versed in 


a the science of Mantra could not 
Rm TAR Consciousness with all his Mantras, Then the « oddess Manasá 
seeing that T)ha 'l was p a auchtilo , esto yi 

Using «udo wore s and haughtily addressed him, 


j : ant with Meaning thus OM Han went r 
principal disciple of Gaida m : m matani yon arona 
da, eal to me how far you know 


: l meaning, the mystery and the skill of the Mantras and to what 
xtent you are conversant Wich isten Dhanwantari ! 
23 S x 


U but'he was tutored 
d for a long ttme. 


a 1@ enem 


Summer sun and having 
Spear cut it off With thg sp 


tari, secine that brilliant 
MOU, Tho goddess Manasa 


ny. Dhanwan 
oar given him by V 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


KRISNA TENE ACI IEN ND daraya Trost ole 


peeing her gpear ineffectual was highly incensed and with erimson eyes 
D b n - eye : 
held in her hand the excellent, invineible, dreadful noose whieh 


he : 
ontained a hundred thousand snakes and which possessed the radi- 
ance of Yama. She then charmed 16 and hurled 1t- with anger. Dhanwan- 


ing that noose of snakes was delighted and with a smiling appear- 
nce romembéred Garuda. The kins of birds hastily arrived there. This 
bird, the conveyance of Huri, who was hungry fora long time picked up 
the snakes contained in the weapon with his bill and hastily devoured 
them. O my beloved, when Maniusi saw that the weapon of snakes 
was rendered ineffectual, she was very angry and with flushing eyes she 
took up the handle of ashes given to her by Siva. Phen Garuda seeing 
this charmed handle, shielded his pupil with his back and with the wind 
caused by his wings, serttered the ashes. When the goddess saw that 
the handle of ashes had failed, she was ine nsed and held, the irresistible 
spear for the destruction of Dhanwantari. Sankara had given to her the 
spear which was bright like à hundred suns. '[ts radiance was like that 
of the fire at the time of eternal dissolation of the universe. [t could not 
possibly, be defeated in tbe three worlds. ‘Thereupon Brahmá- and after- 
wards Siva arrived at the battle-field for the preservation of Dhanwantart 
and to maintain the prestige of Garuda „The fearless Manasi who wielded 
the spear, pereeivinz the aporoaeh of Siva aad Brahmá, the lord of the 
world, bowed to them aod eulogised them reverentially, whereupon they 
blessed her. Brahma, for the good of the world and the worship of Manasi, 
cheerfully addressed Dhanwantari using beneficial and sweet words thus: 
1 O most blessed Chan wantari, O goddess expert in all sciences, in MY 
opinion you should not fight with Manaså. ‘This goddess is able to reduce 
to ashes the thre^ worlds completely by virtue of the irresistible spear 
given to hor by Siva. Therefore, forbear at this time and* worship the 

oddess reverentially with sixteen ingredients according to the form of 
meditation (Dhyán) preseribed by Kauthuma- ikhà and eulogise her 
with the hymn stated by Mavasi. She will then be pleased and will 
grant you & boon’. EN 


54-62. Siva; hearing the words of Brahma, also gave him permission. 
Thereupon the son of Vinatà was also pleased aud with great care invoked 
the goddess. When Dhanwantari heard their words, he bathed and after: 
becoming pure and having duly ornamenced himself he appointed Brah- 
má as his priest and prepared to worship her. Dhanwantari said, ' 
Jagat-Gourt, arrive here and accept my worship. O daughter of Kas yap s 
you are the most adorable and the best of all goddesses in the three worlds. 
O goddess, you are the emblem of Visnu and have conquered the whole 
world : this is why in the battle-field, I did notuse my weapon against you 
So saying, Dhanwantari humbled himself and inclining his shoulders 
with reverenco, ho held in his hand white flowers and meditated her thus : 
I adore the goddess the radiance of whose hue vies with the graceful 
champaka whose entire body is very lovely, whose pleasing circular 
face is lighted up with & gentle smile, who is clad in fine dress, who is 
Srriamented a o aa oi chignon on hor head and decorated with 
ornaments, who gives to all immunity from dangers who is. always eager 
to shower kindness upon her votaries, who is yersed:in_all sciences, who 19 


#- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


318 - THE BRAHMA FAIVARTA PURANA, 


the sonres of all knowledge, whose conveyance is the prinea of Snalteg 
and who is the queen of serpents, who is tranquil and suprenie, 

63 73. O my beloved, Dhanwantari, having meditated her in this Way, 
offered her flowers.Pan: than the sixteen ingredients and different Sorts of 
articles wherewith he worshipped her. Then with his bo ly thrilling with | 
raptures and with folded ‘palms, with his shoulders inelined with reverence, 
he eulogised, her thus: — O goddess, you are the emblem and the Sourea 
` "of perfection. You are the dinghter of Kas yapa and you, erant boons, it 
bow to you again and again You are the daughter of ankara: I bow to 
you. You are«the Spouse of S'ankara (Sankari) I bow to you again and again, 
I bow to the sister and queen of snakes, again and again. I bow bo the 
mother of Astika and again to the mother of the world, Your name ig 
Jarat-Karn, I bow to you. [bow to you who are the wife of Jarat- Kárg, 
l bow to you (a constant ascetic); and again and again, because you are 
the source of happiness, I bow to you, again and again, tho emblem 
of meditation, the source of the fruits of devotion You are good natur- 
ed, tranquil and chaste, I bow to you, repeatedly.’ So saying Dhan. 
wantari, with great esteem and reverence, throw himself prostrate bo. 
fore her. The goddess wa$ propitiated, gave him the desired boon and 
Soon went home, Later on, Brahma, S. va and Garuda went home ; and 
` the lord Dhanwantari went to his own house, Thereafter the snakes, 

decked with expanded hoods, merrily departed. Thus I recited to you 
the virtues of all the Sreab princely hymns, The saint Ástika showed due 
reverence to his mother Manasi Who was pleased with her son, the best of 
saints, | Whoever reverentially reads this Very sacred. hymn, no doubt 
brings Immunity to his descendants from the fear of snakes,” 

= 


CHAPTER LII. 


116. Lord Krisna said, «T just told You about the humiliation of 
all; and you listened to tho above accounts, Ina Word, the pride of every 
one, be he great or small, is curbed unquestionably, Pair one, now 
get ur and go to the Vrindá- vana, The milk-maids haya been oppressed 
wt ag pangs of my separation, I ought to see them now,” Narayana 
said, “ ie Rana, the Princess of jovial damsels, heard this, she be. 
ae Jealous and said to Krişna, Lord, Tam unable to o5 there myself 
er: Conduct me to that Place,” The “destroyer of Madhu lauehed 
2 n of Radha and disappeared saying, * Please ride on me,” 
E RUM foie held Ue milk-maids who vere running here and there 

the sps mind, who Were spine for j 
uttering a piteous lamentation like aa eae » p Hee Sd RE 

Dect M 2 lg, ly lord! O m 'd 1"; who 

ineonsed, hatte, Panes rd Panon without food A wars any 

» She Narrated t o d q j m 
MEME cone ae ie en 2 adventures on the Malaya range. 
cse IN millc-mai]s, me SA SAMOD wept asain and again 
Lord,” Afterwards, she became angry eb. T Oey Doro ae 
oly, bla ngua and held ont threats 


to him. A moment afterwards all the mj i 
am. so geen tds, all milk-maids ] 'e; aerifi 

Rue. At this time Lord K Isna displayed his formate pg more 
ied girls in the forest of sandal, hen Radha ay l tl S is fds 
saw the lord of their lives, they rushed joyfully to him witha Dore 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


F Digitized by eG i - 
giISNA JANMA ND a 319 


/ 


a— — 

in their bodies and with smiling faces. That jealous lady Rádhá soon embrac- 
ed Lord Krisna, angrily took away his wreath and flate, rendered him naked 
and stole his yellow clothes. A fterwards this damsel who revels in Vrindá- 
vana Was appeased. So she restored to him the clothes, the lovely wreath 
of garland and annointed. Lord Krişna with paste of sandal, aloe 
musk and saffron. Then with great esteem, she again and again observed 
his face and kissed bim. Afterwards Radha lectured him for a while, 
and at one time she eulogised him and at another time she gladly offered 
him betel-leaves seasoned with camphor. ; 


16-23. Tater on, the enamoured milk-maids wept, represented to him 
their pangs of separation, their consequent attempt at suicide, their aban- 
donment of food and bath and their constant adventure from wood to wood. 
Now they rebuked bim, and now they cheerfully eulogised him and offered 
him ornaments or sandal, At that time some wilk-maid said, “O my female 
associates, place this thiéf of our lives before our eyes." Others said, “He 
will not do so again." Others said, “Please place him at once in the cen- 
tre” others said, “Fasten him with the chain of love and preserve him in 
our beart.” Others said “We have no faith in him.” Others said, “Have a 
careful eye upon him as he has thieved our heart.” O Narada, some mili- 
maids angrily said, “This Krişna is a cruel murderer.” Others said; “Do nob 
use such words to him.” Subsequently all the milk-maids oub of curisity 
wandered with Krişna through all the lovely and solitary torests. They also 
took Lord Krisua, the Jord of the universe, to that forest which contained. 
the lovely sphere of the Rasa. ‘Then Krisna, the prince of the world, went 
to the said sphere and occupied a golden coat. At that time, he began to 
shine with the mill-maids, as tho moon shines in the sky when combined 
with stars. ‘There Krisna assumed several forms ab one and the same 
time and indulged with the eow-herdesses in the sport which enchants licen- 
tious people. He held in his embrace the passionate Eádhá and went up 
to the temple of lust constructed by Vis wa-Karmà. Afterwards at that 
place he slept with Hàdhà on a bed redolent of the Champaka and 
annointed her with sanal, aloe, musk and saffron. The lustful 
Krisna versed in sexual science sported with the licentious Radha in 
several ways. 


29.99, O Muni, there for a long time, the sexual intercourse lasted. 
Both of them were expert in this matter ; therefore they did not desist 
from the act for a moment. Radha and Krisna bent upon pleasure 
passed their times in this way 3 and all the images of Lord Krisna like- 
wise co-habited with the milk-maids. Narada asked, * O Lord dear to 
your adherents, what is the reason that savants first pronounce the name 
. of Rádhà and then of Krişna ? please reveal the seeret to this votary 
of yours (7 €. Narada).” Narayana said, the cause is three-fold. Listen. 
Nature is the mother of the world ; and the absolute being is the father © 
the world. But in the three worlds, the mother is a hundred times superior 
to the father. Secondly, terms like Ràdhà-Krisnas Gouris’a are sanctioned 
by the Sruti ; none has haard the contrary. O best of Munis, it has been 
observed in the Kaathuma braneh cf the Sàma-Veda * © Rohini and 
moon, relent and accept the offerings for washing tho. feet. O Sanjnà's 
consort, sun; please accept the offerings for your fect. O Kamalü's lord, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. ‘ 
320 ~ THE BRAUM4 VAIVARTA PURANA. 


e ÉÓÉÓUBBBBNNGNG z- = 2 


be propitiated and accept my gift of worship, Thirdly, Krisna is elateq 
with joy as soon as the word RA is pronouneel, and when Dhá ig 
pronounced, he runs respectfully after the speaker, O sage, Whoever 
first utters the name of the absolute being and then that of nature js prac. 
tically a matri-cide according to the tenets of the Vedas. O excellent 
Muni, the greatness of Radh& is indescribable. Look ! In the three 
worlds, the saerod land of India whieh is the source of virtue is blessed g 
and Vrindà-vana rendered sacred by the lotus feet of Ridha is still more 
blessed. In days of yoro, Brahma, with a view bo attain the lotus-feet of 
Radha and the dust of the said feet, had prayed her for sixty thousand 
years", 

DE 


CHAPTER LIII. 


1-15. Nàrada said, “What did Lord Krişna do, when the lunar day of the 
full moon expired ? How were thoir mysterious sports e lebrated ? 
Kindly reveal these secrots to mo." Narayana said, « The lord of the 
Rasa was himself unite] with the mistress of the sphere ; and whan in tho 
said sphere the Spor’ was over, he went from that place to the coast of tho 
Yamun4 where he bathed in the pure water. drank tho water and sported 
with the damsels, Then the Lord wont with Radha from that place to 
the forest, Whereupon the milk-maids oppressed by the pang of separation 
went back dejected to thoir respective homes, On tho ebhar hand, the 
Lord bent "pon intercourse sported in the solitudes of the Málati forest 
on the lovely bed of the Malati (a kind of Jasmine), Krigna, the Lord of the 
Rasa after the pastimos Were over went to the vernal woo and dallied 

with her in the lovely season of Spring, Subsequently he went to the 
forest of sandal where, after tha tise of the fal] moon the Lord annointed 
with sandal paste embraesd Radha who was Similarly annointed, : He 
ee with ber there on a bed associated with fragrant sandal and covered 
Mis refreshing sandal leaves, Whea this was over, the Lord went to 
the forest. of champaka and induleed in sexual intereours 7 ed. 
Covered with the champak, ‘Phe Lord MA Hee eee ON 
went to the tae BE UE lavino finished his intercourse thore 
wind of the lotus bs eol EM ace ventilate | by the refreshing 
the society of Radha M s eus pee ite ezim 
quently Krigna, the ord of lec à RAO Dd slept with her, Subse- 
lying down on the lotus bed ot qm cs ie eu beloved SE 
by the excess of the pleasuros of tho L5 through exhaustion occasioned 
ace which vied. with the autumn: rs on Al intorconrs», Radha’s round 
and the vermilion of ha ul mo ; 1 with perspiration j 
Nes of paintin te bright collyrium of her eyes, the - 
29. ^ palDtings with Cosmetics on her cheek had all 
chignon was dislocated and her | eee 
der care were ornamenteg EH invaluable ui ler lotus-eyes had faded, 
Produced out of the head of the elephant. wooo rings ; and the pearl, 
nose, phant, was Stacefully prominent on her 


16-27. Observing this matt i 
me ung this matter, Krişna who ; ompasi i 
VOtaries affectionately and reverential] y ‘rubba. he ice Rane sae 
of slender eloth GuNsecrated by fr Paas iesu 


T" — Aftorwardg Lord Harl 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


E i 


XRISNA JANMA EHM dana Sarayu Trust SAE 


rubbed her bair and fastened her chignon which . was adorned with 
adhavi (a large climbing plant) and a string of jasmine wreaths, tied 
IJken thread, erooked on the left side, abbractive, very round and 
ed with kanda, a kind of jasmine. Then he put the vermilion mar 
on her forehead. That mark was associated with marks caused by drops o 
musk on all sides and below that, with marks caused by the sandal- paste. 
Her cheek was picturesquely marked with lines painted by cosmetics. 
He then respectfully applied collyrium to her eyes which were thus 
rendered bright. Afterwards be passionately coloured her lips and polished 
the pair of her earrings. Then he placed round her neck an invaluable 


wreath of gem and also decorated the neck with the best of diamonds ; 


by fire and annointed with musk and saffron. After that, Lord Krisna 
decorated her feet with diamond anklets and reverentially applied lac-dye 
to the nails of the members of her feet. For a wonder! Lord Krisne 
who is served by the saints of the three worlds ministered to Ràdhà most 
reverontially like her servant with ‘white chowries. ‘Thereafter Lor 
Hari, the best of the sentimentalists, intelligent and expert in sexual 
acionce, roused Radhika from her sleep and held her to his breast. 
Afterwards, to show her the beauty of her own lunar face, he gave her 
a well-polished looking-glass of diamond. 

28.42. Thon Lord Hari encircled the neck of the lucky Râdhå with 
a pure garland of various kinds of flowers annointed with sandal to promote 
hor welfare. Then the dear Lord Krigna affectionately annointed the 
whole body of ber darling with fragrant sandal mixed with musk and 
saffron. Subsequently, O Narada, he attached the flower of Parijate 
given to him by Brahmá to the lovely chignon of Rádhá in solitude and 
likewise fixed to her right arm the bright, celestial, pure lotus ofa 
thousand leaves given to him by Siva in private. He then gave to ben 
in solitude, the best of gems called Kaustubba given to him by Dbarme 
for her satisfaction. Afterwards he gave to her articles of food kept 
ina diamond vessel and excellent. beverage calculated to excite passion 
given to him by the moon-god, in private. He then gave to her Madhavi, 
a creeping plant Malati and Kunda (species of jasmine) Mandar, Champak 
(a fragrant yellow flower) and other flowers kept in a vase of gems for her 
satisfaction. ‘Then Lord Krisna who is conversant with the present, past 
and future entertained Radha with precious betel.leaves seasone with 
camphor. Afterwards in that solitary place when Varuna reverentially 
presented to him an excellant, invaluable, very slender, incomparable piece 
of cloth rarely to be bad in the three worlds and manufactured by 


` Vrihaspati, Lord Krisna glady and in a spirit of amusement covered the 


naked Ràdhà with that cloth. Then he adorned her nose with the lovely 
pearl which is produced in the head of the elephant and which was given to 
him by Indra for her satisfaction. Afterwards 60,000 celebrated female asso- 
ciates of Radha including Susila ete, with 60,000 cow-herds with a glad 
heart arrived there to observe the foot, marks of Lord Krisna, the bearer o. 
MN good things. Out of the milk-maids some held.in their hands sandal; 
others held either chowrie or saffron or betel or musk oF wreath or ver- 
milion or comb, 
4l 


- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


$29 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, ; 


43-53. Others held lac-dye or cloth or ornament or honey or cymbals 
or small drums or vocal instruments or lute. And 60,000 muses (musical 
modes and modifieations of the said modes) wielding forms of cowherdesses 
had already arrived from the cow-world at India with Radha. As they 
reached this place, some sang; others danced; others ministered to 
Radha with white chowries ; others glady served her with a foot-stool or 
offered her perfumed betel-leaves for chewing. Lord Krisna seated in the 
heart of Radha gladly and merrily loitered in the holy land of Vrindávana. 
Krigna sometimes drank honey with his beloved spouse and at other 
times chewed betel-leaves or slept there with pleasure. At times he flirted 
with her in the house constructed with gems or indulged in aquatic sports 
1n the waters of the Yamuna. O son, I thus narrated to you the 
extraordinary game of the Risa played by Lord Hari who is self-determin- 
ing, perfect, supreme, void, of attributes, independent, above nature and 
superior to Brahma, Visnu, Siva and other gods. I already stated to you 
the mysteries of his birth, the interesting sports of his childhood and 
the career of his youth, Now what; do you wish to hear again ? 


CHAPTER LIV. 


1-11, Narada said, “O best of Munis, what was the nature of the 
mysterious sport of Hari after this incident ? How did he go to Mathura 
from the house of Nanda ? And how did Nanda, the king of the cows 
herds and the milk-maids whose heart was wholly set upon Krisna, manage 
to live without him? How could Radha’ who could not live without 
him even for the moment covered by the twinkle of the eye hold her life 
without the lord of her life? And how could the cow-herds who were 
ee ees in all acts including sleeping and eating forget such 
2 friend in the enclosure of th -herds 2 4 Tal IER 
after he went to Mathura ? SESS Es pidas: A cU i 
accession to heaven." Nârâyana said, « When K 

; : E for h 
CORE Jan M Dhanu malha, the lord, indike EIS eneki 

„o $225 place, The king Kamsa had sent Akrûra to 
ee aiis hing sees ae king, went to the house of Nanda 

1 ala-deva an "i | rf i 
Keven CEA Mathura, e killed tre to Mathura. O saint, when 


king. H r 
a penia Sudurmukha, two wieathers s A n 
ugtika and the principal elephant called Kuvalaya páda. He thus 


released his parents and other kins 
l | .Xins-men from confin b. Í 
the lord of the milk-maids merrily co-habited with a SE Ee db 


and sent her to the -world : : 
oflealinds\callea Sada world ; and he then mercifully redeemed a ‘weaver 


through Uddhava, ma and secured consolation for the milk-maids 


E n At this time 

and obtained knowledge from the spi i 
piritaal d sal ipani 

Then he eonquered Jará-Sandha, killed the rated DIM 


Dearks, meurt kings o. he went to the sea, constructed 
j , U : took away Rukminî : RI SA 
hee Saivy4, Satya, Sati Jamba-vatt, Mite. vindà tad Ni arith 
terwards he killed the demon Naraka, the new and Nagna-Jiti. 


60900 vomon, Afarrei im ely abled lado cl unis get 


$ > 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


y 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 323 


from heaven. He thea conquered Siva who has the moon on his crest 
and cut off the hands of the king Bana. Then he redeemed his grandson, 

again cameto Dwárká and displayed his form toevery personin every house. 

Then Krisna incidentally in connexion with the pilgrimage of Vasudeva 
saw Radha, the presiding deity of his life on the occasion of the 

sacrifice of Prabhása. When Sri-dima’s curse was alleviated after the 

lapse of a century, he came back to the holy Vrindá-vana with Radha. 

Later on, the Lord of the universe dwelt with Radha inthe sphere of . 
the Rasa in the sacred land of India for fourteen years. That Lord of 
wide valour passed his days in childhood in the house of Nanda for eleven 

years full and having dwelt in Mathura and Dwarká for a complete 

century passed away to the cow-world. 

24-29. He gave to Yas'odà Nanda, Vrika-bhánu and Kalà-vati, the 
mother of Radha, the redemption called Sámipya (the approximity to the 
supremo being). Ráàdh& with the cowherds and cowherdesses, in every 
age, in a spiri& of mirth constructs a bridge of virtue as stated in the 
Vedas. O great Muni, thus I narrated to you in brief the enchanting 
eareor of Lord Krigna calculated to give four-fold objects of human 
pursuit. O Narada, everything from Brahmi down to a grass is destruc- 
tible. Therefore gladly adore the son of Nanda who is supreme happi- 
ness. He is solf-determining, the superb Brahma, the eternal spirit and 
the supreme deity. That supreme being who is indestructible, invisible, 
out of compassion for his votaries, wields a form. He is real, eternal, 
independent, the Lord of all, transcending Nature, void of attributes, 
invisible, free from desire and spotless”. : 


CHAPTER LV. 


1-16. Náráyana said * That Lord Krisna is the spirit of all and. 
the best ofall beings. He can be adored with very great difficulty and 
yet he is manageable. He is adored by all and the source of all happiness. 
He ean be controlled only by his adherents and he is adorable by them 
alone. His votaries see him again and again, he is invisible to the faith- 
less. The disposition, ways and heart of the supreme being are incompre- 
hensible. „Every one is tied down to the world and bewildered by his 
cruel illusions. O son Narada, who can know the incomprehensible ways - 
of the Supreme, Being through whose fear the wind blows and the god 
tortoise though without a prop himself is always holding Ananta, on the 
head : through whose fear even the hundred headed Ananta is holding on ~ 
one side of his head the whole universe ; inspired by whose awe at the time 
of every creation Brahm& creates the earth with her seven Islands, 
mountains and forests, the seven Påtåls (nether worlds) and the seven 
heavens including Brahma-loka, though the whole universe consisting 
of three worlds has been described as imaganary ; through whose fear the 
great Virdta (Mahá-Visnu) holds countless worlds on the pores of his 
skin ; Whose digit is Maha.Vignu and whois adored by 
Mahá-Visnu: at whose command Visnu preserves the world, Kálágni 
Rudra, the emblem of time, destroys all creatures, Mahadeva vests 
himself with six attributes and though indifferent to the world meditates . 
him with passion; through whose fear, the fire consumes, the sun gives 


- CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


$24 7 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


heat, Indra rains and Death frequents living beings ; through whose fear, 
eat, 


ises sinners rth holds in her 
Yama, the emblem of virtue, diesen Gina ie A esse et aise geet 
bosom all objects, animate and inanima mange Mdetbe" ré princips 
towards ereation in the beginning creates I of small intellect 
being the fundamental intellect? Child, how can RS RANGA 
determine the will of the deity whose power is a py Beha a um 
Visnu and Mahes’a ? It is beyond the range of intellect to jv go ve 
6 V orm and went to Mathurà and why the sou o 1 mu 
mold the milk-maids as well as Rádhá who was dearer to him than 
his life, Yas'/odá, Nanda and his kins-men. i 
17-28. Butit may be safely conjectured that Pup uto ot all 
times and in every way the source of the pride of all individuals pat 
the same time crushes that pride. The Lord in days of me ime e 
ride of Mahá-Visnu, Brahma, Ananta, Siva, Dharma, ama, the sun, 
the moon, Garuda, the Fire the spiritual guide, Durvisa, the we 
devoted door-keepers named Jaya and Vijaya, the god Kama, Indra, the 
gods, the demons and yourself as well as the pride of Laksmana, Arjuna, 
Bana, Bhrigu, Sumeru, all the oceans, the wind, Varuna, Saraswati, 
Durgà, Padma, the earth, Savitri, the Ganges and Manas. Or when 
he curbed the pride of Rádbá who is the goddess - presiding over his 
life and dearer to him than his life, what to talk of others ? That 
Lord Krisna who is the destroyer and preserver ofall, who is tho ruler 
even of Brahma after having curbed the pride of every person shows him 
also mercy. O Brahman Narada, I related to you the prowess of Lord Krisna 
who is void of attributes; who is the supreme spirit; whom even Siva 
with his five mouths cannot adore; whom Anantadeva with his 100 
mouths cannot eulogise; whom even Visnu (that pervades the world) cannot 
worship; in whose worship the goddess of knowledge also gets paralysed 
i.e. is struck dumb ; and whose glory.is not known even to the Vedas, 
Now what do you. want to hear ?" 


CHAPTER LVI. 


1-6 .Nárada said, “O Brahman, what a wonderful, extraordinary, 
mysterious and praiseworthy account of the infnite and infallible Lord 
Krigna have I heard! Now kindly reveal to me how he curbed the pride 
of Visnu, Mahá-Vignu and others, Naturally, the history of Lord Krisna 
is very pleasing ; and particularly if it comes from the mouth of a poet 
itsounds more pleasing and interesting.” Nârâyaņa said, *"Mahá-Visnu 
suddenly became proud of the fact that all the worlds are eontained 
in the pores of his skin and he therefore thought that he alone was the 
god.” Then Lord Krisna took the form of Kala Bhirava and easily swal- 
lowed him, When the head alone remained to be swallowed, he relented. 
Lord Krigna, the ocean of mercy, seeing that Mahà-Visnu was fright- 
ened and engaged in the Prayers and adorations of Lord Krisna, the 
universal spirit, again oreated his body. . 3 

7-24, O Brahman, Brahma suddenly prided himself 
was the ruler and master of the three worlds and so 
the god himself, He was puffed up with coneeit, 
there was no one so venerable or free from passions 


‘he thought he was 
2s he thought that 
as he himself, Lord 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


on the fact'that he 


7? 


d 


Ai. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. ; 325 


Krisna, at once produced in the cow:world Brahmas with five, six, ten 
and à hundred faces respectively and countless worlds : and Brahma saw 
them. Then Brahmá, out of shame, inelined his shoulders and attempt- 
ed to commit suicide : whereupon the ocean of mercy again showed com- 
passion to him. At one time Krisna through powers of his illusion 
converted Brahma intoa Being whoily unworthy of worship and show- 
ing him his own daughter excited Just in his, mind : and on a subsequent 
occasion the Lord crushed his pride through Siva. Then Brahma through 
shame put an end to his life: but after a while resumed his existence. 
The very wise and eternal Lord Krisna who is full of profound know- 
ledge and all happiness then worshipped Brahmá and imparted to him 
knowledge." Vişņu once prided himself upon the fact that he was the 
great god, whe preserved the world. ‘Therefore Lord Krisna made him 
oblivious of himself (his divinity) when he acquired tbe birth of Rama. 
Once the god Ananta was proud of the fact that he sustained the world; 
so through Garuda, Lord Krisna crushed his pride. O saint, in days of 
yore, once upon a time, the god Ananta alone through pride did not 
worship Garuda, the conveyance of Visnu, though he was worshipped 
by all other snakes. Thereupon the angry Garuda defeated him in a 
great battle and the gracious Lord Krisna released the wise god Ananta 
from the hands of Garuda. Siva, himself, through pride, did not marry. 
Thereupon Krişna enchanted him with his spell and wedded him toa 
goddess. And afterwards when his wife the great Sati, the daughter -of 
Daksa, was snatched away by death, Sankara bore the burden of her dead 
body for as year and was much aggrieved. Through sorrow he wept 
again and again and wandered through several places; then in the next 
birth he was happy to attain her in the form of Parvati. And when Siva, 
being cursed by Daksa, lost all his knowledge, Krisna restored it to him 
through Angirà. Once upon a time, in days of yore, when Sambhu 
mounted on a car was repulsed by Tripura along with his car, Krisna 
caused the destruction of the demon through Siva whom he distinguished 
by the name of Tripurári, the enemy of Tripura. 

25-33. Once upon a time, in days of yore, the gracious Sanin in 
the capacity of a tree of desire (Kalpa-taru) promised to give boon to 
every body. Afterwards Lord Krisna presided over the body of Vrika, 
the demon and on his behalf demanded the boon as follows: ‘A person 
on whose head I (Virka) shall lay hands should ,be reduced to ashes." 
When Vrika obtained this boon and saw that Siva was going away, 
he ran after him quickly to touch his head. Then iva was much 
afraid and sought the protection „of Hari. Then Lord. Hari reduced the 
demon. to ashes for the benefit of Siva. In days of yore, the Lord seeing 
that Siva armed with an arrow was preparing to fight easily defeated 
him by the use of his gaping weapon, And the Lord having -thrust 
his.hand into the neck of Nandis'wara, the messenger of Siva who had 
intruded into the place where the sacritice of Daksa was performed easily 
turned him out. At onetime Dharma himself was by an irony of fate 
cursed by the daughter of Kedára, whereupon he became thin, timid, 
emaciated and infamous. Afterwards when the term covered by the carse 
of the girl was over, he again became perfect in the satya-yuga. In the 
Tretà, he had three feet; in the Dwüpara, he had two feet; in the” Kali, 


Ld * 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE TNT 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


826 ` THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


he had one foot. At the end of Kali when his body was reduced so> 


much that only a 16th part of it remained, he was much aggrieved and 
remembered the lotus-feet of the Lord. Then again on the restoration 
of the satya yuga, he attained perfection. The reduction of his body is 
regulated by the respective ages. M 


34-44. Yama. being eursed by the saint Mándavya attained the 
womb of a Sudra woman and was purified again after the lapse of a 
century. Swamba, bein « cursed by his step-mother, was attacked with 
leprosy and was purified again after having performed the vow of the 
Sun. The moon god being puffed up with conceit and infatuated with 
prosperity once stole the wife of his spiritual guide; whereupon he had 
an attack of consumption and his pride was crushed. The sun in hig 
pride went to the Asta-mountain in order to kill the demon called Sumali, 
the myrmidon of Sankara. For this demon had attempted to take away 
the jurisdiction of the sun and prepared to shed light, day and night 
The demon was afraid of the sun and took shelter with Siva. When 

iva saw the sun, he held his spear. O saint, then the sun-god 
observing before him the holuer of the spear, fled throuch fear, iva, ‘the 
lord of Kàs'i and holder of the spear, struek the sun-god with his spear 
at Kás'i, The sun lost. his consciousness : and his pride was subdued. 
At that time, the earth was obscured by profound darkness; but S'iva 
who is easily contented revived him at once. 4 1 
e iih ame P Peete S'iva. The graeious S'iva was pleased, 
Eo D m cae ies Tn olden times, Lord Krisna easily crushed 
‘of Sava. This bullock ; lé set 1n motion with tho breath of the bullock 
va. 3 ick being desirous to gee Narayana, the great god, 

took S'iva on his back and arrived at the Vail ; 1 5 

: À Od : Í e Vaikuntha when Garuda met 
with this fate. Harî, far from being offended was much pl owt 
With the religions feat of the bullock. 4 CPP C ud 

45-56. The fire-cod was o 
of Bhrigu, he became all-eater. 
the pede of ae spiritual guid 
crushed throue "aris, z : 

Su-dars'ana Es d ESEON liel of Visnu called 


Brahmin, hurled down from ue that they wero cursed by a 


age utha two of his do -keeper 
ya Mi Vijay e end crushed their pride. Afterwards anes Me 
C o A pany a kso and Iliranyaks'ipu, he, in the ouise of a boar 
iU s Boba ip the Pata] and killed the latter on nh in the 
ced i Next t i 
Mun D Poe aud Kumbha-Karna where the ay “aill m 
Hep ce wion of Brahma by the arr reo 
their Pod birth they took t Z: Ts Ho Gee Seal 
were easily destroyed by the w T e Oe ce 
SU dimension, erushed the pride of the. md VO d e 
and the gods through the demons. He Tr ques UNT 
Brahmá. At first you were Nárada, f à 
o paternal curse, you became successi a al 
S'udra; and now by the grace of the 


again, “The whole universa 


Vrihaspati's wifo was abducted and thus 


1 ord, you have become Narada 
13 under my Control,” thus boasted Kama 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


nee filled with pride and so, by the curse: 


e was crushed. The pride of Durvásá was. 


M 


WA 


A 


aa 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. t 


` KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. ey 327 


(the Indian Cupid). So Krisna reduced the infatuated Kama to ashes 
‘through Siva. Afterwards he revived Kama (devoted to the Lord, heart 
and soul) out of compassion and since that day Kama has made it a point 
not to discharge his weapon unlawfully. In the battlefield the Lord 
erushed the pride of the haughty Laksmana through the iron spear 
discharged at him by Ravana. 


45-56. O Narada, afterwards he revived him again upon the eulogies: 
of Visnu-Ráma who forgot his divinity through the curse of Brahma. In 
days of yore, the pride of Karta-Viryyarjuna was crushed by the infallible 
ase of Paras'uráma. The same Lord crashed the prido of Arjuna on the 
following occasions viz, the death of the son of a Vipra (learned Brabmin), 
the abduction of Krisga's wives and the fight o! Arjuna with Karna, 

Lord Krigna, on the occasion of the rape of Usa crushed the pride of 
king Bana by cutting off his hands and iu the sacrifice of Dukga subdued 
the pride of Bhrigu also. In olden times Rama was going home after his 
marriage was over. In the way he had a fight with Paras'uràma ; and on 
this occasion Lord Krisna crushed the pride of the latter through the 
former. The same Lord Krisna caused the summit of the mount Sumeru 
to be broken by the wind and caused Agastya to drink the ocean. Thus 
he curbed the pride of Sumeru and the ocean. In days of yore, the wind 
was provoked for some cause and was about to do away with the whole 
creation ; when Lord Krisna erushed his pride by effecting the death 
of his son. And in the course of his adventures for the abduction of Osa, 
Hari arrived at Dwárká and for the sake of the cow of king Bana, he 
cursed Varuna and thus humiliated him. Lord Narayana abandoned 
Saraswati and humbled her pride on the ground that she quarrelled with 
Ganga in his presence. In days -of. yore in the Himalayas, Lord 

ambhu left the conceited Gangà and went to devotion after having 
reduced Kama, the god to ashes, whereby the Ganges was put to shame 

and humiliated. Afterwards in order to attain S'iva, she went to a 
secluded place for the meditation of Visnu. The Ganges prayed in India 
for a long time: and by Visnu's boon she got the Lord, eternal S'iva as 
her husband. Then Ganga, the very fortunate spouse of S'iva, was pleased,’ 
became adorable among the goddesses in the three worlds and was wor- 
shipped by the gods. O great Muni, in days of yore, tue great goddess 
of fortune i.e. Laksmi, having been filled with conceit was vanquished or 
subdued by Jaya and Vijaya. Having given the desired boon to her 
myrmidons she was about to enter into the threshold of the Lord when 
she was prevented by these warders. 


72-84. Whereupon that most virtuous nymph being highly offended 
rebuked the door-keepers (Jaya and Vijaya) and having recollected the 
lotus feet of Hari was going to commit suicide. At that time, Brahma, 
Mahes'à, Visnu, Dharma, the sun, Indra, Varuna, the wind, the fire, the 
moon, Kama, the Lord of wealth, Vaisravana. the Risis, the Munis 
and the Manus (who remove impediments) eame weeping to Padma 
and adored the primordial goddess of Nature, i. e. Mabá-Laksmi. 
The gods suid, “O goddess, mother, you are forbearing, supreme, 
pure and void of anger and other passions. Therefore, forbear. 
O goddess, adored by the gods, you are the type of all chaste goddesses, 


N, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE: 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


328 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


Without you the whole world will be rendered in-effectual or useless 
like a corpse. O goddess, you are the emblem of universal pros- 
perity. You are the image of all and the presiding deity of the 
goddess of the Risa. All the women of the world are your digits. 
You are the Párvati in the Kailás/a, the daughter of the ocean in the 
Ksiroda, the Heavenly goddess of fortune in Heaven and the terrestrial 
goddess of fortune on earth. You are the Maha-Laksmi in the Vaikuntha 
as well as the goddess Saraswati, Ganga, Tulasi and you are the Savitri 
in the Brahma loka. In the eow-world, you are Radha, the presiding deity 
of the life of Krisna. You are the mistress of the Risa in the Rasa and 
Vrindà in the Vrindivan. You are the spouse of Krisna in the forest 
of the holy fig-tree, Chandra in the forest of the Sandal, Virayà in the 
forest of the Champak, Sundari on the mountain of a hundred summits, 
Málati in the forest of the jasmine, Kundavati in the forest of the 
Kunda, Sus'ilà in the forest of the Ketuki or serew-pine tree and the 
garland of Kadamba in the Kadam forest. You are the royal goddess of 
fortune in the royal palace and the household goddess of fortune in 
every house,” 


85-91. So saying, the gods, munis and manus began to weep. 
Then their throats, lips and palates were dried up. Whoever at break of 
day gets up and reads the holy and auspicious hymn of Laksmí composed 
by all the gods assuredly gains prosperity. A man without a wife by 
reading this hymn acquires a humble, chaste, good-natured, fair, pure and 
delicate wife excellent in every respect, of good rank, (bearing sons and 
having grandsons) of a melodious voice and haviag good teeth. By the 
perusal of this hymn, a man without a son getsa Vaisnava, longevous, 
prosperous, learned and famous son. By the perusal of this hymn, a 
person who lost his kingdom, prosperity, friend or wealth gets back 
the thing that he lost. A man ‘without fame gets- celebrity 
xd fame.by reading ib; and every one by reading it obtains tenants and 
and and becomes, asit were, a child of the goddess of fortune. In a 
word, this ode is the source of all prosperity, continued happiness and 
Joy, virtue, redemption and friendship and removes grief and sorrow, 


CHAPTER LVII. 


1-14.. Narayana said, “O Narada th thoes 

: 1 A ; the chaste Mahá-Laksmi ‘havi 
EM nus ce oe with the gods and having P DRE 

m thus, “O gods, I am not going to commit suici 

SUE A tell you the reason, _Asceticism impelled me (rrr 
dede ia my p ae In the estimation of the eternal 
g(s "bral every-where, i i i i i 
the universal spirit, dou VER AN Se MERE rio i 
and the mountain are equal. Ha can in the twi 


tering to him? Look! I am .the foremost of his 


servant of his servant’s servant, the respectful keeper 
did not even greet me. Just now, I ud ‘prohibited by cae 


ing the threshold. Therefore seeing that I have not 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


s. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


ERISNA JANMA KHANDA. 329 


— 


respect of my husband whose love I have been unable to secure, Iam going 
to consign myself to the flames to secure future prosperity or a better 
state, Any woman who is unfortunate in respect of her husband 
(i. e. who is not loved by her husband) is unlucky by all means. Her life 
is useless. She has no inclination for sleep or food. Whoever is unable 
to secure the affection of her husband lives in vain. She cannot enjoy 
her youth or prosperity which consists in the possession of sons or wealth. 
A woman who has no f.ith in her beloved husband is impure, impious and 
void of all Karmi, The husband is the friend of his wife, her refuge, her 
god and spiritual guide. ‘Tho husband is *the best of all persons in the 
world. There is no spiritual guide superior to the husband. O gods, the 
parents, son and brother of a woman most reluctantly give her maderate 
quantity of wealth ; but the husband gives all even to his foolish wives. 
The most virtuous woman who comes out of a respectful family, who is 
good-natured and preserves the integrity of her family knows the great- 
ness of her husband. And the woman who comes out of an impure stock, 
who has a bad nature and is void of all virtue. who is shrewish and corrupt, 
angrily slanders her husband. A woman who spites her husband, the 
greatest of all spiritual leaders and the emblem of Visnu, suffers endless 
torments in the hell called the Kumbhipaka for a period covered by four- 
teen Indras. 


15-25. ° Vow, abstinence, charity, voracity, virtue and prolonged 
asceticism observed or practised by a woman who is faithless to’ her 
husband are consumed to dust and rendered quite useless by her unchastity. 
Therefore I shall not use any cruel words to my divine husband; and as 
I havo been by the dispensation of providence insulted by a servant, I 


© shall put an end to my life ; for it is improper for a chaste woman to use 


eruel words to her husband even if she observes his faults. But if she is 
unable to bear the wrong, then in conformity to the dictates of virtue 
she can die. To minister to the husband is an act which constitutes to 
the wife the vow, the Dharma, the Divine worship, the great 
truth, charity and an act of pilgrimage. To a woman, her 
husband constitutes her god; the husband isas pureas the gods and 
represents all virtue. Nay, he is Janárdann (Hari). The sight and touch of 
a chaste woman who always eats the refuse of the food of her husband, 
and drinks water with which his feet are washed are desired always by 
the gods. This sight as well as touch consecrates even places frequented 
by pilgrims and relieves sinners from sins.” So saying the most chaste 
Laksmi wept again and again. Brahma was afraid and inclining his 
shoulders with reverence said thus.:—'* O goddess. Jaya and Vijaya 
will never attain welfare. You have not cursed both.bhe fools for fear of 
offending your husband. -O chaste one, know it for certain that though 
a saint patiently refrains from cursing a person who do:s wrong, yet the 
offender will certainly come to grief. And if any one is unable to curse- 
or punish the offender, the latter is chastisad by Dharma himself. 


26-38 O mother, excuse all the faults, which we commit. I aman 
adherent of your husband. Now be pleased todepute me to the task of 
creation, and I beseech you to go to your beloved consort.” Brahma having 
said so went with the gods and the Munis headed by Lakgmi to the 


44 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Lo] 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


830 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


i ———— 
o ——— e I M$RÓÀ MÀ 


i r 5 he spiritual guide 
fthe Vaikuntha. The four-faced Lord Brahma, t 
um oi kese the four Vedas, whose footstool is the lotus, went to 


Lord having saidso held Laksmi to his breast;sent for both the door- 
keepers and said, “ O my children, do not fear at all : but pass your days in 
happiness, You need not be afraid of any one while I am bere. Who can 


the Lord having said so paused, the gods bowed to the Lord of the world 
and went away. The door-keeper Jaya experienced a thrill of raptures 
S words and said, * Lord, when my 


tion of your lotus-feet, I am not 
'bune or the saints, ” 


heart is entirely set upon the medita 
afraid of the gods, or the goddess of for 


Prithu. Once Aditi boasted that she w 


The Lord made her sons invisible to her eyes ard thus crushed her pride. 
O Muni, once Ganga boasted that she was the Source of redemption ; and 


the Lord of creation crushed her pride through Jahnu, In days of yore, 
he crushed the pride of Manas 


i à â through Durga. In olden time, Radha 
angrily rebuked Krisna Enewing him to be enamoured of 


Radha. Therefore as desired by 
{ s believer tiddma, © Narada, Radha wag 
suddenly chastised by proyi 

Cow world she had to take 


r to gratify Radha 

I t uid | sa and went to the house of Nanda, This 
is why he is called the Son of Nanda. Brahma ‘hath said that the Lo:d in 
order to make good the words as Sridàma who had cursed Radha saying 
à m Krisna went back to Mathura leaving 
Radha in the lurch, O Narada, no body knows the motive of the Lord other 


place to Mathura, then as chance 
€ very much aggrieved, Byen wild 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Ag 


M 


- eowherds (male 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 331 


Z 


w a little how owing to the separation from Lord Krişna, the 
and female) and the cows with Vrindå suffered in every grove 
torments inflicted upon them by savages. O Muni, Radha also at times aban- 
doned the wild tracts and roamed through forests and at other times she went 
to cemeteries or places not meant for burning the dead. Radha callous to joy, 
was at times angry with Lord Krisna and at other times she was free from 
anger. At times she recovered her senses: at other times she was sense-less or 
hankered after Krisna. Frequently she upheaved a deep sigh: and at other 
timas she assumed her normal attitude. In] omergency, she slept or gob 


up or simply wept. 


animals kno 


CHAPTER LIX. 


1-12. Narayana said, * O Narada, I have described to you in 
detail the humiliation of all ; now hear at length thc humiliation of Indra. 
Once upona time Indra .was seated in his council on his throne of gem, 
when the great metappysician Vriliaspati, the spiritual guide, arrived there. 
Bat Inlra thouzh he saw him did: not get up in the pride of his heart. . 
The Guru thus disgraced by Indra was offended and left the place. But 
the pious Guru affectionately and graciously did not curse him. After- 
wards even without any curse, Indra had to eat the humble pie. O 
Narada, know it for certain that though a pious man out of affection, 
forbearance or piety does nob curse a person who happéns to do him wrong, 
yet the offender must reap the consequence of his sin. Dharma (virtue 
incarnato) himse!f chastises him. And if a pious man through anger 
curses a wicked person who does wrong, the offender comes to grief and the 
piety of the religious man is also wasted. O Narada, for the sin incurred 
by the humiliation of his spiritaal guide, Indra was beset by Brahma-haty& 
(murder of a Brdhmin incarnate). Indra was afraid of her. left his 
kingdom. ran and sought shelter in the pool sacred to Visnu. Thera in a 
very slender form he hid himself in the fibres of the water lily,and Brahma- 
haty& was unable to enter into the pool sacred to Vigau In India this 
lake is the most sacred place meant for devosion. Savants who know ancient 
history call it the sacred bathing place of Puskara. At this time, a pious 
king namod Nahusadavoted to Hari, seeing that Indra was deprived of 
his kingdom, seized it by force. Later on, the handsome, graceful goddess 
S'achi (without issue) was going aggrieved to the Mandakini to bathe 
when the youthful king of kings, Nahusa, seeing the weeping and most 
virtuous S'achi possessed of excellent teeth, e delicate constitution orna- 
monted with gems and in the prime of her youth fainted through lust. 
Afterwards he stood before her and humbly adiressed her like her 
servant {hus:— vio j 

13-16. “ Alas, the ways of providenca are mysterious. It cannot 
be comprehended even by philosopers how the wife of tho licentious Indra 
who bears on his person marks of vagina could be so fair. For a 
wonder! how gould the mind of a person be attached to another woman, 
when his own wife is so very beautiful? What is Rambhá or Urvas'i or 
Tilottamå or Ghitâchî or Ratna-málà or Kalàvati or the fair Kalika or 
Bhadrávati or Champivati before such a beauty? In a word, all these 
damsels do nob possess a sixteenth part of her. beauty. How could the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. — 
332 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


SS 


foolish Indra leave such a damsel and seek the company of another? I 
doubt if our women are even fit to be her maid-servants. O fair one, I am 
your myrmidon; Be pleased to court me. As Râdhå presides over the 
heart of Krişna in the cow-world, as Laksmi and Saraswati preside 
over the heart of Nardyana, as Brahmáni over Brahmá's heart, as Durga 
over Siva’s heart. in the Kailas’a, as in the lovely white Islands in the 
sea of milk the terrestrial goddess of fortune, the lucky daughter of the 
sea presides over Visnu’s heart, as the great chaste godless Marti pre- 

- sides over Dharma’s heart, as Vásanti, the goddess of fortune in the 
Patél presides over the heart of Ananta, as Pusti over Ganes'a's heart, 
as Devasen& over Kartiky’s bosom, as Varunàuí over Varuna’s heart, 
as Swiha over the heart of the fire-god, as Rati over the heart of Kiama, 
as Sanja over the Sun's heart, as the wife of the Wind over the Wind's 
heart, as Rohini over the heart of the moon, as your mother-in-Law Aditi, 
the mother of the gods, over the heart of Kas’yapa, as Mena, the intel- 
lectual daughter of the manes over Himálaya's heart, as Lopa-mudra over 
Agastya's heart, as Tard over Vrihaspati's heart, as Deva- llûtî over Kar- 
dam's heart, as Arundhati over Vagigtha's heart, as S'atarupá over the 
heart of Manu and as Damayanti over the heart of Nala, so, O fair one, 
befriended by good fortune, reign in my heart also. I can easily eut to 
pieces a thousand Indras. 


27-36. Women like strong gallants better than their husbands: 
Therefore be pleased to court me. I shall enjoy your society in the 
iRaceossiblonand yet solitary summits of the Sumeru mount, or in the 
lovely Malaya mountain with a graceful belt and perfumed by sandal of 
in the Nandan-forest ; and I shall dally with you at times near the 
mountain ofa hundred summits or on the coast of the Pugpa-bhadrá 
Mr the shore of the Godávari refreshed by eool winds and at 
dead or ae VS the cemetery or places not designed for burning the 
CERE 5 ree ot the lovely Champaka situate on the pleasant 
mountain, fro ver wüampA-vati or in a fortress, or from mountain to 
es NE Ee to cave, from island to island, from river to river, 
union of a im al coast of the ocean void of wild animals. In solitude, the 
OP oe pair Is very delightful. Fair one, in my company, enjoy 
Look! Iam Alm. intercourse on a bed annointed with flowers and sandal. 
oT so annointed with fiowers and sandal. O goddess, by Brahmá'g 

ıt am void of birth and death À » by : 
Iam well-dressed, fai ave ceath and have attained permanent youth. 
SAT M i M heroie and expert in sexual science, My face is fair, 
Therefore, O ee = aom Particularly, I come out of the lunar race. 

ymph, court me as your husband. Nay, goddess, Urvas'i 


h E 
tm no alee tg cll. But relier aer ae 1 
society has agitated my Er ORE D Only the desire of your 


37-48. Fair one, for 
ornaments of gem : dd MN sake I shall sure] 


dant maids. O beauty, 


y abandon my wives decked with 
can make them your atten- 


7 and even t, 
god and give you a pair of Jb dene eee Ae EERO uS A 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


~Ar 
ry 


À 


k 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


, KRISNA JANMA KIIANDA. - 888 


—— 


to-day I shall give you the pair of ear-rings fashioned into the form of a 
fish constructed with excellent gems which belongs to Aditi. the mother 
of the gods ; and having subdued the weak moon-god, I shall give you 
the pair of ornaments constructed with invaluable gems belonging to 
Rohini. Or that consumptive and emaciated timid moon will deliver to 
you the same without fighting : or perhaps being my aneostor, he may 
graciously be pleased to give the same to you. To-day I shall beg of 
Sankara the melodious, ringinz pair of ank!ets constructed with excellent 
gems belonging to Parvatt and deliver tho same to you. O auspicious 
nymph, that Lord who is easily contented is controlled by hymn. 
He is kind to his adherents and is the source of all prosperity. Nay, 
he is like tho great tree which fu'fils desire: so he will accede to my 
entreaties. O my beloved, to-day I shall by fight obtain the rare, invalu- 
able pair of bracelets: belonging to Gang and give the samy to you. 
O good-looking goddess, to-d iy for your use I shall give the pair of Bahulis 
(a kinl of orn ment) constructe] with excellent gems belonging to the 
wifafóf th: Sua. Ishall easily conqier Kàma and deliver to you the 
pure looking glass of his wife constructed with invaluable gems. Fair 
one, I shall beg of the Lord of Kamala the merry lotus and Mandar 
belonging to Kamala and give the same to you. 

49-63. I shall adore Brahma, obtain the rings of Savitri invaluable 
in the world and give them to you. By the observance of the Náráyanu 
vow, I shall fetch the lute of the. goddess of music which voluntarily 
indulges in modulations of sound and plays upon the musie according to 
the division ofthe notes of harmony and hand it over to you. Fair one, I 
shall likewise make ovor to you the diamond Pasakas decorating the 
members of the feet of Kuvera constructed by Vis'wakarmá." The great 
king Nahusa having said, so fell prostrate at her feet; the lips, throat and 
palate ofthe most pious Sichi became parched through fear. Ske again 
and again remembered Lord Hari and the lotus feet of her spiritual guide 
and said to the king who was, as it were, 9 var or bolt :an obstacle) to her 
in the royal road thus : “O great king, my son, listen. O child, O remover of 
all danger, the king is the preserver and the father of all. Thé king 
shields everyone from danger. Now Indra has forfeited his 
dignity and you are the ruler of heaven. So you stand in place of my 
father. For the king is undoubtedly the father and preserver of his sub- 
jects. Besides, O son, there are 16 kinds of women who can be ealled 
mothers. They are as follows : the wife of the spiritual leader, the 
queen, the wife of a god, the daughter-in-law, the sister of the father or 
the mother, the wife of the spiritual preceptor, the wife of the servant, the 
wife of the maternal uncle, the wife of the father, the wife of the brother, 
the mother-in-law, the sister, the daughter, one’s own mother and the 
tuletary goddess. So you are but a man, and I am the wife of agod. Hence 
according to the Vedas, I am your mother. Therefore; O son, if you 
wish to rape your mother, go to Aditi, the mother of the gods. O son, 
every sinner may be redeemed ; but not one who violates his mother. 
Ho has to suffer endless sufferings in the hell called the Kumbhipaka for 
the period of longevity allotted to Brahma. Afterwards he has to 
wander like a worm in the vagina of a prostitute and then like a worm of 
the night soil for seven kalpas. O son, afterwards, he is turned into the 


X CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


384 THE BRAHMA VAITARTA PURANA. 


worm of an ulcer for one Kalpa,' worm of the head t.e. louse for seven 
Kalpas and a worm of the bed (bug) for one Kalpa. Later on, ho ag 
afflicted with leprosy for seven births and then attains the womb of 4 
she-goat. Afterwards in respective order, he becomes a crow eating dune 
for seven births, a dog for seven births and a boar for seven births. d 


64-76. Later on,  ravishers of their mothers are born ag 
eunuehs in every birth. They are never redeemed. Brahma himself 
hath said so. O king, the same consequences are reaped if a Ksatriya, 
Vaisya or"S'üdra associates with a Brahmin woman. Vrihaspati holds 
that even the Vedas do not prescribe any means for their redemption. 
Child, it is no doubt delightful to the people of the world to secure the 
enjoyment afforded bythe prosperity of heaven. But redemption is the 
grand object solicited by those who want redemption ; devotion is sought 
by the devotee ; the position of a Bràhmin is sought by the Brahmins - 
silence or taciturnity by the Manis. the acquisition of knowledge by those 
who are conversant with the Vedas ; tha recitation of poetry, by the poets; 
the bondage of Visna and the luxury of the faith in Visnu by the 
Vaisnavas. O good soul, tell n h irti T um 

isnavas. good soul, tell me what pleasure can virtuous men 
derive from the residence in the womb of a woman which is the receptacle 
of urine and ordure yielding a foul smell. O creat king ou are, as it 
were, the lamp of the matchless r f ki " M is 
pup Mp tbe ma ss race of kings who were your predecessors, 
eu bue o gpa religious merits accumulated in several births, you have 
v n n in India. O king, asin summer the mid-day sun stimulates 

eb oem of lotuses, so you have manifested yourself for the glorification 
of the kings of the lunar race. Therefore it behove raab pers a 
E the luna) elre 1b behoves a groat personage like 
a to maintain virtue, For the preservation of virtue contributes 
e gin every Stage of life. Only fools by forfeiting virtue go to 
e * emo 8 duty consists in «he observance of the necessary ritos 
im ay 'shi 1 NIS Tib 
m n MR worship of Hari, the drinking of the water of the 
m E anpeter than nectar and the eating of the food which 
ee odu cos m dis ap. water not dedicated to him aro as 
their births through t:e womb aps : iios d them havo to take 
Gee thet liven ane eon à sow, O king, the Brahmins through- 
ee ee į ab the food dedicated to Hari; but th houl 
aretally fast on the day of Ekádas'i, the | irth A Sy penou d 
Ràmanavamí and othér sacrad days j ý " 2 day of Krişna, S/iva-ratri, 
dic fen En PA ihi du) $ tahm’ has prescribed the duties as 


71-103. For : iw A 
her supreme XU du ed woman, the service of her husband constitutes 
woman as her son RA She should regard the husband of another 
woman. dn DS vui Shoat eee ates the virtue of a 
them and t HOS: " male subjects as n 
inst s UR RN their mothers. Ont A DON VON 
the wieked and ARN 5 minister to the gods and the Brahmins ‘chasti 
by Dralmá DUE eosin ed Be ie the moral code meal 
an : á S rado is t PA 
i TOTUM E theróby, The service ofa E s 
who renounce the Rot oats üdra. .O king, the dnty of the er 
Krişna. A Sannvási Consists in surrenderine everythi Bscetigg 

9 yast ought to put on only req dress BIS AT aa Eu 

y sta 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


S 


A 


=> 


UO 


ES 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 835 


and sn earthen pot. Strict impartiality, constant recollection of Hari 
and visit from house to house constitute the duty of a recluse. He should 
live nowhere. A mendicant even by chance should nob impart knowledge 
or mantra to others and he ought not to secure a hermitage for his 
residence. He should not covet any article. He should be free from the 
ties of attachment and must shun. society. He should not associate with 
anybody. He should not take delicious food and even accidentally he 
must nob see the face of a woman. He should not solicit 2 nything which 
he desires from a house-holder. Lord Brahma, the offspring of the lotus, 
has prescribed the above rules for the ascetics who renounce the world. 
O son, he has expressly fixed the duties suited to all classes of men. 
Child, now depart with pleasure.” When S'achi desisted from her 
harangue and lingered in the middle ofthe road king Nahusa stooped low 
and said thus, ** O goddess, you have taken a perverted view of the whole 
thing. Now I am going to describe virtue to you, as stated in the -Vedas. 
Listen. © fair goddess, it is recited in the rutis that none reap the 
consequences of the act performed by him in the heaven, Patal or other 


islands. A person commits bad or goud deeds in the sacred land of India ` 


and reaps the consequences thereof according to his Karma in other places. 
The place from the Himalayas upto the sea is called the sacred land of 
India. This is the placè of devotion assigned to the Munis. India is 
the best ofall places. People born in. India are deluded by the illusion 
of Visnu and then they leave the worship of Hari and get attached to 
worldly enjoyments. Virtuous men, after having performed sacred deeds 
in India, go bo heaven and there attended by celestial damsels enjoy 
celestial bliss for a long time Fair one, a virtuous man first parts with 
his body and then goes to heaven. But mark the strength of my 
virtue. I have come to Heaven with my body. Through the piety of several 
births, I have been able to come physically to the. much desired land of 
Heaven. And now by means of what an unspeakable piece of virtue, I 
have been ablo to secure you ? Fair one, this Heaven is not & field of action ; 
it is a place for enjoyment. And of all enjoyments, association with an 
excellent woman is the best. In the field of enjoyment, the relinquish- 
ment of an enjoyable. article, if it is available, is not praise-worthy. Over 
and above this, you are sentimental and witty and henee a fit object of 
enjoyment on the part of the voluptuous. Whoever gives up an article 
of enjoyment owned by none is unquestionably a beast absolutely void of 
intelligence and taste and possessed of a submissive and peaceful disposition. 
O my darling, now please accept my advice. Please go home and in 
solitude, get ready an excellent, charming bed fit for sexual intercourse. O 
nymph of excellent hue, get rid for certain the scruples of your heart. 
O damsel of fair mien, now prepare to immerse yourself in pleasure afforded 
by my society in an excellent mansion. I shall beg the invaluable wreath 
of gems and diamonds which decorate tho heart of Lakgmi and give it 
to you. 

104-182. The  head-ornament of Siva vic, the half moon, 
removes birth, death and disease and is the excellent toy of Siva, 
which ean rarely be seeured in the three worlds and venerated in the 
universe. I shall perform the vow of iva and assuredly bring 
that pieco of moon to you. I shall reverentially perform the vow of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


836 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


= = = oo ee 


the sun: and the best gem belonging to the sun : called Syamantaka I 
shall offer to you. O my darling, that gem daily produces 8 loads of 
gold. I shall secure for you the enchanting cup of Kama ever full of hone 

constructed with invaluable gems, very amusing and calculated to do 
away with birth anl death. I shall perform the vow of Laksmi and 
assuredly secare for you her lotus used as a seat which is very pleasing, 
rare, pure, supremo, quadrangular, measuring a hundrad thousand cubits 
in circumference, ornamented with the best of gems, constructed ina circular 
form at the desire of god, inlaid with precious diamonds, effulgent like 
the sun and very picturesque.” S; saying the king Nahuga obstructed 
her passage und again and again fell at the fect of the consort of Indra, 
At his words the palato, lips and throat of the goddess were dried up, 
Then she again remembered her spiritual guide, Hari and cogitated 
thus, “To how many remarks made by this fool, who has been Oppressed 
by lust, who has lost his senses and who has no idea of right or wron 

shall I patiently listen? A min infaiuated with lust is more senseless 
than a man infatuated with honey or wine, A man swayed by lust doeg 
not care to die” She said the above in her heart (aside) and 
expressly spoke thus: O infatuated being, [ am in my menses and am at 
present like a mother to you. Leave me. © drunkard, I tell you for 
certain that this is the first day of my menses, A woman is considered ag 


as an infidel; on the third day, she is held to be a washer woman: on 
the fourth day, she is purified by the company of her husband, Sho is then 
also impure, so far as the performance of a divine act or an act of the manes 
is concerned. She resemblos a vile Sidra Women in her dealings: with others 
on that day, Whoever on the first day of her menses assosintes with a wo- 


unworthy of praise. Whoever lustfully §0es to a woman on the second 
day of her menses and gratities his Passion commits cow-slaurhter. Vrihag. 
pati bith said that this man is not entitled to perform an act on behalf 
of t 9 gods or the manes throughout his life and remaius ever infamous 
and 'Soorant. Ifa fool does that lustful act On the 3rd day, he practi- 
cally kills tho fetus ; there ig no doubt on this point. He algo, like the last. 
wo'nan in her mengeg resembles a vile üdra woman. Soa done EUR 


does not seek her company. © fool, if you wish to commit rape with 


ee am practically your mother, associate with me on that day when 
um ree from menses, At these words Nahuşa smiled and spoke 

p and GU to the pious wif» of Indra, “Pair one 

which you allude committed by association with a woman in | 

affects only India, the Sphere of action and nof Heaven, cate dee 


à í h and even j 
field of action (India) the good andl the evil acts specified OR AT 


do not in tho leist injure the Vaisnavas who i 

: Í Jure Savas who are effuleent with tl 
radiance of Brahma, O Goddess, before men the wives of gods are eos 
Pure, both ag regards sleeping and eating, They are nover rendered 
Impure. Asa heap of hay is consumed by the burning fire, sv are all the 


sins reduced to dust before the approach of a Vaigaaya, The aignavas arg 
3 Ge Uer uio: 


: CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


|» 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JAN MA KHANDA. 337 


brighter than the fire, the sun or the Bráhmin. They’ are constantly 
protected by the wheel of Vignu and wander independently like infatuated 
elephants. The Vaisnavas have not to decide about the nature of the acts 
to be performed by them nor do they reap their consequences. ‘This is 
stated in the Kauthuma|branch of the SAma- Veda and you may refer the 
point to Vrihaspati. : 

133-169. Here, in heaven also, every one knows about the Vaisnavas of 
tho lunar race. They never worship any other god than Hari. A virtuous 
Brahmin or a Ksatriya who does nof take the Mantra of Vignu is hoaxed by 


. His illusions. Of what use is an other mantra to me? To me, whoare the gods? 


Even Yama is not my chastiser. Ican subdue all except Brahma, Visnu 
and Mahes'a. Fair oue, now go home and get my bed ready." I shall just 
come over to your house. Sin willentail upon me if you are in your menses, if 
it does at all. You will not be injured thereby in the least." So saying the 
king Nahusa cheerfully rode on ‘his car of gem and went to the forest 
of Nandan. Sachi did not go home: but she went directly to the house 
of her spiritual guide who was occupying a seat of holy grass. She saw that 
the goddess Tara effulgent with the radiance of Brahma was ministering 
to the feet of Vrihaspati. He held in his hand the rosary bead and was 
reciting the name of Lord Krisna, the supreme Brahma, the embodiment 
of grace to his believers, self-determining and independent of nature. 
Sach? threw herself prostrate on the ground and bowed with her head to 


"Vrihüspati whose eyes were full of tears through raptures. Then the 


much aggrieved and frightened Sachi with streaming eyes.and & heavy 
heart reverentially adored her spiritual guide (merged in the sea of 
religious zeal), the ocean of merey and devoted to Brahma thus: “ O most 
blessed being, you alene are my preserver. Immersed in the sea of sorrow 
and frightened Iam seeking your protection. Preserve me. Be he 
a master or not, be he strong or weak, everyone is able to govern his pupil, ~- 
wife or son. You have expelled’ your disciple from your kingdom: and 
sufficient atonement has already been made for his sins. Now you ought 
to be kind to him. O Ocean of mercy. at this time I have lost everything 


` including my husband. ‘This immortal land is now vacant: and I am 


without shelter and prosperity. You ean bear wish your own eyes a 
testimony to this fact. O god, I have been beset with dacoits. Preserve 
me, and bringing your servant (Indra) here, give him the dust of your 
feet and your auspicious bléssings. Look, the father is the best of all 
religious preceptors. Ho is surpassed by the mother who is a hundred 
times more adorable, venerable and deserving of worship. The savants“ 
call the givor of the mantras Guru, as he vomits or throws out the mantra. 
Therefore the donor of the mantra is truly speaking, the Guru. To others 
the term is a mis-application. I bow to that spiritual guide who with 
the help of the probe or javelin of knowledge opens the eyes of a person 
blinded by the darkness of ignorance. An uninitiated fool obtains redemp- 
tion by no means. That beast, unfit for any act, assuredly dwells in 
hell. The.person-who begets, he who gives food, the mother or any other 
elderly relative cannot deliver us from the dreadful sea of the world. Only the: 
donor of knowledge, Mantra or wi-dom is capable of doing this. No 
other master can deliver his hench-man. ‘Lhe spiritual euide alone jg 
Vignu, Brahma, Mahes a, Dharma, Ananta or even the universal Spirit, 


43 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


338 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


Se 


the great god void of all attributes. The Guru constitutes all sacred 
land, the receptacle and the emblem of all the goda ; and Hari alone 
manifests himself in the form of a spiritual guide. Ifthe tutelary deity 
is angry, the Guru can save us; but if the latter is angry, even tho 
former cannot come tothe rescue. By an irony of fate, the Guru is 
displeased with that man who incurs the displeasure of the planetary gods 
and the Brihmins. Neither the soul nor the son nor wealth nor wife is 
‘dearer to a person than his spiritual guide. Devotion to God. tho vow ot truth 
‘or any other sacred act is not superior to the act of ministering to tho 
religious preceptor. 


161-180. There is no ohastiser or friend greater than the Guru who 
ponstantly stands in the place of a god, who is £ho- king and cbastiser of his 
pupils. The giver of food chastises only so long as he can give food ; bat’ 
the Guru is the chastiser of his pupils at every birth. The Mantra 
(mystie ineantation), knowledge, spiritual guide, and the godly husband 
die along with a person in every birth. Therefore they are regarded as 
the best of all objects. The father (who is also a Guru or an elder) is 
adorable aly in that birth in which ho begets the child. But the spiri- 
tual guide who gives the Mantra is adorable in every birth. O Bráhman, 
you are the best of all those who belong to the sacerdotal class, the guide 
of the devotees, foremost among the pious and supremely conversant with 
Brahma. O best of saints, now relent towards me and Indra, If you 
relent, the planetary gods will also relent.” O saint, Sach? so saying 
wept loudly. Tara also wept sympathetically very loudly, fell at tho 
feet of her husband and besought his forgiveness, Vrihaspati was propi- 
tiated and said, * O Tara, arise : all will bo well with Sachi who, by my 
Blessing, will soon get back her husband, “ O Nárada, when that 
spiritual guide of tho gods paused after having said so, tho goddess Tara 
am fell Prostrate at his feot and wept. Then Vrihaspati embraced 

rà, eonsoled her with many excellent metaphysical doctrines, Whoever 
at the time of worship reads the hymn composed by Sachi. leases the 
spiritual guide and the tutelary god at every birth. The nre gods 
Bráhmins, kings and friends are ever satisfied with him H That” IA 
assuredly Acquires reverence for his spiritual guide and Visnu nd Tetani 
other desirable objects and ever-lasting happiness, He n " 

ge Eha l : . He never comes to 
grie y the perusal of this hymn, a person desiring a son gets a 
virtuous son : and a man wanting a wife cots an accom plished h i wife 
who brings forth sons.. A disseased man gots cured; a E : 2 hi 
He ge mes ds never separated from his ten. WR a and 
es celebrities are considerably enhanced A. i 

ds ed, man, through this 
so tthe een Wik ws teal Dropar thi won 
nt eend. That person having attained the 


bondage of Hari is never born agai f 

3 Ju 2 gain. He be > am 
disposition and drinks the nectar of the faith of ERE Ed in 
death, decreptude, diseaso, grief and sorrow. 0 destroy 


CHAPTER LX. 


1-21. Narayana said, the tran uil Vrih 
the ode of Sachi and gently thus POS en tad 


pati was appeased with 
“O child, be of good cheer. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


^a 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
: KRISNA JANMA KIIANDA. 339 


You neod-not fear, while I am here. Fair one, like the wife of Kacha, you 
are also dear to mo. For a disciple is like one's son. 'l'here is no distino- 
tion bebween.a son and a pupil in matters of oblations, gifts to the parents 
preservation and maintenance. Brahma, the offspring of the lotus, has 
said in the Kanwa branch of the, Sama-Veda that a pupil can assuredly 
oblation of fire like a son. He has also said, a man must maintain his 
parents, spiritual guide, wife, children and orphans, iva hath said, 
«& Whoover does not maintain them is impure at his death and not 
entitled to do an act on behalf of the gods or the manos: Whoever 
regards his parents and his spiritual guide as mere human beings always: 
acquires infancy and ever comes to grief. Whoever flushed: with pro- 
sperity insults his spiritual guide is ruined very soon. Indra, not having: 
stood up in the council when he saw me has quickly reaped the fruit of 
his act. Child, you yourself are an eye-witness, of this fact. Now, child, 
Ishall surely relieve him from danger and save you from peril. 
Ho who is able to preserve and save his pupil can truly be called 
tho Guru. Good damsel, a woman whose heart is pure never forfeits 
her chastity. A woman who cherishes scruples in her, heart forfeits her 
chastity. Chaste one, your prowers will vie with that of Durga: and in: 
celebrity and fame, you will be equal to Laksmi. You will be blessed: 
like Radh& and gain tho affections of your. husband, to be sure: 
Like Radha, you will socure greatness, honour, affection and pre-eminent- 
ly the society of your husband. Like Rohini, you will secure the good: 
graces of your husband. You will be adored like Saraswati and you will 
always be pure and incomparable like Savitri.’ While he was saying: 
go, the messenger of Nahuga arrived there and said, * Goddess, get up: 
soon and startefor the lovely, solitary grove of Nandan for the diversion: 
of the king.” Hearing this, Vrihaspati trembled through anger and with. 
flushed eyes said to the messenger thus, “ go and inform your’ king. 
that if he desires to enjoy achi’s society, he ought .to come here 
mounted on an extraordinary conveyance... He ought rather to come here 
well-dressed, conveyed by an excellent litter: borne. on: the shoulders of 
seven Risis. When the messenger heard this,he wenb and represented the 
matter to the king who thereupon said to him thus; “ messenger, go soon 
and fetch the seven Rigis and I shall hit upon a plan with their co- 
operation. : : 
22-40. Thoreupon the messenger went and rovealed the matter to the 
seven Risis who came to the king in compliance with his wishes. The- 
king as he saw them, bowed reverontially and said, '*you are-all the sons of. 
Brahma, virtuous like him, effulgent with his radiance and always known to: i 
be kind to your adherents. You are always devoted to Hari, pure and good, 
You are void of tho vain worldly ties of attachment, envy, and conceit, You 
are as accomplished as Narayana in effulgence, fame, love:and generosity: 
in the grant of boons.” So saying the king reverentially eulcgised. them: 
and wept loudly. The saints who were greab benefactors, seeingithat the ` 
king was afflicted said, “ Child, solicit the boon desired by you. We cam 
give you any thing you ask. Nothing is impéssible with us. The posi- 


tion of Indra or Manu, immortality, the mastery of the seven: Islands, ever 


lasting happiness, every kind of accomplishment, or perfection, rare pros; 
perity or any thing that you desire, please announce to us cheerfully. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


340 TIBBA KEAK AM sang nue URANA, 


y give that to you and ‘then go back with a glad heart to pray, 
Rees which We pase. without devotion to Hari appears to us like 
a hundred thousand ages; ‘and to us, a day without the service and devo. 
tion of Hari is a bad dav,; indeed. Whoever wants any other thing than 
the bondage of Hari parts with nectar and drinks poison at his peril, 
Brahmá, S'iva. Dharma, Mahá- Visnu, ‘Ganes’a, the sun, the god Ananta 
and the Risis including Sanaka ete., day and night med. tate the lotus. 
feet of Hari celeulated to do away with death, deerepitude and disease; 
and those fee's we desire." The great king who was spoll-bound by de. 


lusion, hearing this, modestly and bashfully said, “O most blessed beings, ' 


you are kind to your believers and sre capable of giving every thing that 
is desired. So, please to give me Sachi this moment and fulfil my desire, 
The zhaste Sachi desires a husband who can mount a conveyance borne 
by seven Risis; and such a conveyance is solicited by me, 1 "prey you, 

~ Cy saints who fulfil every desire, to gratify this wish of mine.” O Nara- 
a, when the Munis heard this, they were very much amused and laughed 
heartily. Then, the saints compassionate to tho poor, thinking that the 
poor king was bewildered and defruaded by the illusion of Visnu, merci» 
fully promised to bear him on their shoulders, They placed on their 
shoulders the litter of Nahüsa ornamented with pearls and diamonds, 
The silly king also decked himself with good dress and ornaments of gem 

‘and having mounted the litter proceeded. 

i 41-58 But in the way perceiving the delay of the saints, he rebuked 
them where-upon the Muni Durvásà who was in the van cursed him 
saying, ©“ O méan-minded wretch, assume the form of a hugo snake and 
drop to the earth below. Afterwards you will be redeemed by the sight 
of the son of Dharma. (0) king, Karma can never ho ineffectual; you will 
eventually abandon the body of the snake and riding on a golden ‘ear you 
will go to the Vaikuntha and serve Hari.” After uttering this curse, the 
excellent saints laughed and went away. On the other hand, the king, too, 
was turned into a serpent by the curse of Darvása and dropped into a huge 
forest. When Sachi heard this event she bowed to her gura and went 
to the celestial city ; and Vrihaspati soon started for the place where. 

: Indra was hiding in the fibre of the lotus. The gracious Vrihaspati hay. 
ing approached the lake summoned Indra with a cheerful mien saying, 
“ Child, you need not fear anything, while I am here ; be of good cheer 
and come unto me, for I, your spiritual leader, have come. Then the great 
Indra, haying recognised the voice of his Guru, qnitted his slender form, 

y threw himsolf prostrate 


assumed his former Appearance, and respectful] 

on the ground, with his head before Ris lotus feet. When Vrihaspati saw 
that Indra was much frightened and weeping, he gladly held him to his 
breast. Then the religious preceptor of the gods, for the perance of 


Indra, caused him to perform tho ceremony of the Soma- Yaga and seated 


: him ona lovely throne of gem. By him, the material Prosperity of Indra 


was increased four-fold. Then the gods arrived and gladly ministered to 
him, The goddess Sachi also having got back her husband, Indra, the 


1 . » 
flowers ahd in his 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


M 


-4 


K n DYNA Baa fap ane Sera Trust. 841 


Nàrada said, “O best of saints, reveal to me tho method of the Somayaga, 
the way in which the Guru caused Indra to perform it and its fruits”. 
Narayana said, **O-Muni, the fruit of this rite (Sacrifice to Mcon) is the 
expiation of the ein of the Brahman:slaughter. Whoever cheerfully performs 
this rite by drinking the jutce of the moon-plant for a year, by eating only 
fruits in the next year and by drinking water in the year succeeding, is 
released from all sins after the lapse of 3 years as stated above. à man 
who has collected paddy equivalent to the remuneration pay able to his 
servants for 3 years or more is able to drink the juice of the Soma 
plant, O Muni, in days of yore a god or a king was only able to perform 
this ceremony effectually. Every one is not capable of it ; for it entails 
a heavy cost in the shape of payment of hoards of wealth and priest’s fee.” 


CHAPTER LXI. 


J-21. Náráyana said, “O saint, 1 told you some-thing about the 
humiliation of Indra; now listen attentively to another mysterious 
account of his humiliation. In olden times, after the churning of the 
ocein the king of the gods having drunk ambrosia subdued the demons 
and became very proud. Then Lord Krigna crushed his pride through 
king Bali: whereupon Indra and other gods were deprived of their grace: 
Later on, the Lord was pleased with the ode of Vrihaspati and the vow 
of Aditi: and he was born through his digits out ofthe womb of Aditi 
in the form of a dwarf. Afterwards the gracious Lord (H iri) fraudulently 
obtained by solicitation the celestial kingdom from Bali, restored it 5o ` 
Indrı and reinstated the gods in their former prosperity. O Muni, again, 
in some other age, Indra beéame proud : and the Lori humbled his pride 
through Durvásà and deprived him of his kingdom.and glory. After- 
wards out of compassion, the gracious Krisna, kind to his worshippers, 


‘gave him back his fortune. Again, maddened by his prosperity, [ndra 


once raped the spouse of Gautama with the result that he was cursed by . 
tho Mani and, being covered with vaginas throughout his body, he suffered 
torments. The Munis and the Rigis seeing him in this condition laughed 
loudly ; the gods were very much discomfited and Vrihaspati was almost 
reduced to a corpse. While he witnessed the sad condition of bis pupil, 
Indra prayed for a thousand years the sun by -whose boon the 
thousand marks of vagina were converted into a thousand eyes. [lis eyes 
continued to exist like marks of disgrace on his body resembled .the _ 
black spots which polluted the body of the moon-god as a result of his sins 
occasioned by the rape of Tara? Narada said “O lord, I should like to 
know the history showing how the pure-hearted and the very chaste wife 
of Gautama who was revered throughout the world, who consecrates others 
and is the very receptacle of purity, who is most blessed and regarded as 
the digit of Kamsla could possibly be ravished by Indra. Therefore, O best 
of those who kaow the Vedas, kindly reveal the matter to me. ” Nàràyana 
said, * O Narada, once upona time Ahaly& witha view to pilgrimage 
arrived at Puskara on the day of the solar festival and at that time she 
eneounterel the gaze of Indra. As soon as he saw her swelling breast, 
smiling face, tranquil mien and fine teeth, he fainted. The next day he 


also saw her, when she was bathing naked in the Mandakini with a 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE  , 


J 


igiti by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 2 
342 WHE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


smiling faco and bashful aspect, quite alone. Her huge loins and breast 
infatuated him with lust. He swooned, but soon recovered. Then going 
to Ahalvà he said gently and humbly to that woman devoted to her 
husband thus, ** O beauty, whata wonderful grace and virtue you possess ! 
How desirable do you appear in the prime of your life! Tho wonderful 
charm of your face shames the autumnal moon. Fair one, the heart ofa 
man i attracted by your lovely, crooked glances. Your enchanting eyes 
steal the grace of the lotus. Your beautiful gait subdues tho movements 
of the elephant and the wag-tail. Your super-natural voice is sweeter 
and rarer than ambrosia. 3 : 
22-41. Your huge loins delight the mind and are likely to entice 
the heart of sages. It seems that the thighs afford shelter to Cupid for 
the very sight of them engenders lust in the mind. They are very thick 
and hard and disgrace evena column of plantains, Your buttocks are 
also circular like moon-beams. Your breast is very swelling, hard and 


he luckily secured the possession of a very beautiful wife! By the worship 
of the :eternal goddess of Nature, (Parvati) who is the emblem of the spell 
of Visnu and by the adoration of Kamala, he has undoubtedly secured a 
wife like Kamala having looks ofa lotus, who is a woman of the first four 
classes (Padmini), of slender waist, huge buttocks, hard breast; of the colour 
of heated gold, of tiné teeth and soft and pure complexion, the tough 
of whose body is agreeably warm in winter and delightfully eool in summer, 
Fair one, Cupid versed in Sexual science or the lustful moon-god alone 
knows how to co-habit with a damsel like you. How can Gautama 
resourceful only in meditations know that ? In sexual science lama 
past-master, and on this score I am always eulogised by the above-named 
clever individuals and by the celestia] Whores Urvas? ete, O nymph 
possessing an excellent; faco, I shall make Sachi your maid-servant, Abandon 
Gautama, an ascetic raw in sexual silence, and undeser 
devoted to Hari, dispossionate, and weak and thus 
fortune of the three worlds. ' Providence 4 
juetion between a man and a woman; but he js very i 
has handed over such a lovely an 1 passionato cir] to an ascetic.” Tho lustful 


is misfortune, 
and his grandtather, even 


Jape um 2 2 is attracted by a woman 
neither meditation nor taciturnity nor the worship of tho 2 nor pigri 
"5 


mage is of any avail, There can be no i i Thi 
is why at the Command of Lord ten, oe ee omon ae 
to^entice the heart of lustful People. The bg 
of illusion, the bar or bolt (or obstacle) in 
Karma, the impediment of meditation and th 
is like iron-fetters for tho feet of worldly 


i men. Itis likea l to the 
Insect, like a hook to the fish ; and hence it is a mine of danger, Tike z me 


Y of a woman ig pleasing for the 
ay, it isa stepping atone to hell, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


e Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KII4NDA. 943. 


——— 
° 


Therefore the Risis, Sanaka etc. never desired to marry. To those.in parti- 
cular who are attached to the wives of others, all their holy acts are fruit- 
less. O Indra, a, lustful person who enjoys the wife of another man acquires 
infa ny in this-world and goes to the hideous hell in the next world.” 

49-50. The most chaste wife of Gautama having said so left the 
licentious [ndra and quickly went home. Later on, when she 1elated the 
whole affair to the great ascetic Gautama, he^with a smile contemplated 
the character of Indra and. paused. Afterwards, on a certain occasion 
Gautama went to the house of S'iva, wben Indra took the form of 
Gautama and enjoyed the society of Ahaly8. The omniscient Muni, 
knowing everything, suddenly appeared at his threshold at this psychologi- 
cal moment. He saw Indra passing away from his house and beheld 
Ahalya with'a swelling breast and thick loins lying therestark-naked. There- 
upon he angrily cursed Indra saying, * Let your body be covered with 
vaginas.” And he cursed his weeping, frightened wife saying, “ Go to 
the huge forest and dwell there like a lump of stone. " Later on Indra 
was much ashamed and went home ; and Ahalya, beset with fear, addressed 
her sorrowful husband thus ; “ O pious saint, I, your maid-servant, am 
innocent, Why then, do you forsake mo ? You are the best of those who 
know the Vedas. ‘Therefore justly decide the point." Gautama answered, 
“O Ahalyá, you are pure in hear& and deed ; and you are devoted to 
your husband, this I know. And yet Í must abandon you, for you have 
sustained the semen of another man in your womb. Look, a woman who 
is ravished by another man is rendered unholy in every act. A fool who 
associates with such a woman lives in the wilderness for one Kalpa. The 
food touched by such a woman is a8 impure as ordure ; and her water is 
unquestionably like urine. Nay, her bare touch destroys all the virtues 
previously secured by a man. O chaste one, listen to me. A woman 
associating with her gallant against her will is not polluted thereby. But 
if she voluntarily panders to the lust of another man she is defiled. 
Therefore when you under the impresssion that )ndra was your husband 
wilfully courted the pleasures of his company and when, after the act of the 
sexual intercourse way was over, my appearance brought you back to your 
senses, then you have been defiled O Ahalyd, now go to the big forest and. 
take the form of a stone; and the bare touch of the members of the feet of 
lord Rama will redeem you and make you holy. O my beloved, by dint of 
that virtue, you will come here again and secure my company. Now go to 
the great wood.” So saying, he went away for devotion. O Muni, I 
thus described to you fully the humiliation of Indra and the way in which 
he recovered his fortune by the grace of his guru. 

CHAPTER LXII. 

1-21, Narada said, “O lord, in what way and in whichage did Rima, 
the son of Das‘aratha, himself redeem the wife of Gautama? O most blessed 
being, please relate to me briefly the account of the incarnation of Rima, 
sa pleasing to the mind and delightful. 1am very curious to hear about it. 
Saint Narayana said, “In the age of Tretà, Lord Visnu with a 

. cheorful heart eame out of tho womb of Kaus'alyð in the house of Das'ara- 
tha, Kaikeyi gave birth to Bharata who was as qualified as Ráma; and 
Sumitrá gave birth to Lakgmana, the ocean of virtue and Satrughna. 


© 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE X 
= abb. a 


— ee 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


344 THE BRAHMA VAIPARTA PURANA, 
a ae ay 


4 dma, at the advice of Vis’w4-mitra started with Laksmana for the 
E i of Mithilà to gain the hands of Sita. When Rama, the 
lord of the universe, saw in the Way a woman in the form of a stone, 
he asked Vis’wa-mitra the cause. The pious saint whose asceticisu, 
was vast, when he heard Rama, explained to him. the mysterious Cause, 
Rama, the consecrator of the world, having ascertained the causo, touch. 
ed the statue of stone with the members: of his feet; and that imago 
regained the appearance ofa Padmini woman ; i.e. the first of tour clas- 
! ses of women according to erotical science, Ahalyá blessed Rama and went 
to her husband's house The great saint Gautama also having got back 
his wife deferentially blessed Rama. O Narada, then Rama went to 
Mithila, broke the bow of Hara and married Sita, At the end of the 
murriage, he crushed the pride of Paras'uráma and arrived at tho city of 
Ayoddhya where many sorts of amusing games and auspicious rites were 
performed. Then the king Das'aratha, with a view to install Rama in 
the kingdom, secured Jars full of chè waters of the seven seas, called to 
. the royal assembly the best Munis and performed the Adhivasa (the core- 
mony previous to a great festival) of Rama, the mine of all virtues; whero- 
upon the queen Kaikeyi, the mother of Bharata, was much offended and 
demanded the boons formerly promised to her by the king. The king having 
pledged his words of honour on a former occasion to grant the boons, the 
queen (Kaikeyi) demanded the exile of Rama to the forest and the king- 
dom for Bharata, Whereupon the king fainted ; but the intelligent 
Rama, for fear of transgrossing the holy vow of truth thus addressed 
the monarch, “O father, tho religious merit acquired by the gift of 
a lake is twice ag great as tha acquired by the gift of a tank, 
Again, the gift of a daughter is ten times as meritorious as the 
gift of a lake. A king reaps'as much benefit by the performance of a 
sacrifice as by the gift of ten ‘daughters. The sight of a son's face is as 
much meritorious as the performance of a hundred sacrifices by a meritorioug 


no friend of man greater than truth; there is no sin so great as a lio; there 
15 no saered place like tho Ganges, there ig No god like Kes‘ava or Hari. 
29.40. O king, there is no friend like virtue, there is no wealth so 
Precious as Dharma (virtue), Therefore carefully preserve your Dharma, 
(że. observe your vow). O sire, if Dharma is Preserved, all is well every- 
where : and fame, colebrity, dignity and valour are maintained. As on- 


£0 saying, wielded clusters of hair and bark of trees and t 78 — 
forest with Sita and Lakgmana, O Muni, afterwards, EL S 
of grief on his son’s account, On the other hand, Rama, in order to 
Preserve the vow of hig father, wandered from wood to wood. After a 
while Sürpa-nakhá, the sister of Ravana, while Wandering at pleasure 
through the woods with her brother in that dreadful forest, beheld lord 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


‘Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 348 


= 


Rima. That unchaste demoness, being excited with lust and with a 
thrill of raptures in her body, fainted when she was pierced by the floral 
darts of Cupid. Later on, the damsel who enjoyed perpetual yonth, who 
was fully developsl and infatuated with passion, approached Rama and 
said with a smile, “O Rama, of a dark-blue colour, mine of beauty 
and virtue, I have been enamoured of you and hence I come to this solitary 
placa. Therefore accept me as your bride." O Narada, the pious Ráma 
when he heard her words, recollected Dharma (virtue incarnate) and for 
fear of being cursed, spoke gently thus :-— ‘O mother, I have got a wife. 
Therefore go to my younger brother who is without a wife; for it is 
proper for you to court a desirable gallant who feels the want of a wife. 
Isis not desirable for a person to seek tho protection of those who have 
harboured other pleasures.” Having heard this, the female demon with 
pleasure went to Laksmana and having seen Laksmana distinguished by’ 
lucky marks, tranquil in mien and adorable, she said to him again and 
again, “ O lucky being, court me." Hearing this, Laksmana was amused 
and spoke this, “O fool, why do you desire me for I am but a servant of 
Rima? Why d»,you prefer me to Rama, the lord of all? Look, my wife 
is the servant of Sita. O chaste one. if you go to Rama, my lord, you 
will be the wife of my Lord; and as I am the son of Sité, so shall I be 
your son also." ‘The foolish Sürpa-nakhà whose heart was won by pas- 
sion, when she heard Laksmina, addressed him thus with her lips, throat 
and palate dried up, * Fool, I have come to you voluntarily out of lust. 
If you forsake me, evil will betake you both.” K 
41-59. Look, Brahma is no longer worshipped in the world, as he ! 
slighted Mohini; and Daksa's head was converted into that of a goat by | 
Rambhá's eurse. O Laksmana, the heavenly physician was deprived of ` 
his share in sacrifice by Urvas'i's curse; and Kuvera was deprived of ` 
his personal grace by Menaká's curse. Kama was consumed to ashes by 
the flames of Siva’s eyes through Ghritáehi's curse. The king Bali was 
deprived of his kingdom through the curse of Madálasà. Look! Vrihas- 
pati was deprived of his wife through Mis'ra-Kes'i's curse. Similarly, by 
my curse, Rama will be despoiled of ,his wife. I heard in olden times 
that it was stated in the Madhyandin Sakha that a person however vir- 
tuous, ought not to spurn a woman, young and lustful who voluntarily 
solicits his company. Whoever transgresses this rule is beset with 
calamities in this world and goes to hell after his death.” When Laksma- 
na heard this, he got up and at once cut off her nose with the keen- 
edged weapon called the Half-Moon. Then her brothers, the most powerful 
Khara and Düsana, fought with Laksmana and were killed with their 
armies by the latter armed with weapons. When the demoness saw that 
his brothers with 14,000 demons were slain, she rebuked Ravana, told him 
the whole affair and went to the holy coast of the Puskara where she 
prayed and obtained a boon from Brahm after a long course of devotion. 
O Narada, when the omniscient Brahma, the ocean of mercy, saw that 
emaciated, fasting female ascetic, he realised her feelings and said, “ O 
Sürpa-nakhà, I.know that you are engaged in this ardous meditation, 
as you have not been able to obtain Rama (who can with difficulty be 
secured) or Laksmana distinguished by lucky marks, who has conquered 
his passions, Fair one, in the next birth, you will be able to obtain ag 


44 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


946 ` THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


—- -————————— — -— —-- ——— 


your husband Ráma who is the Lord of even Brahma, Visnu and Siva 
and who transcends the principle of Nature." So saying, Brahma went 
away and Sürpa-nakhá very gladly consigned herself to the flames and 
after quitting her body, she was born as a hump-backed woman. On 
the other hand, the arch dissembler Ravana the king of the Ráksasas 
(demons), having heard her words shook with anger and by his art 
of delusion abducted Sità. O muni, Rima, not seeing Sita, fainted: 
and his brother Laksmana with metaphysical doctrines restored 
him to consciousness, O saint, the aggrieved Rima wandered day and night 
some times through the dense forest and at other times to the caves, rivers 
or hermitages of the saints. Lord Rama, having failed to find Sita 
in spite of his protracted search, personally made friends with Sugriva, 
Then Rama in order to preserve his vow easily killed Bali and vave 
the kingdom to his friend Sugriva who sent messengers on all sides 
eet of Sità. Rama with Laksmana put up in the house of 

griva, 

60-79. Later on, Rima, the Lord of the i 

0-7: ma, universe, gave 
Hanümána, handed over to him his lovely finger-rings of "din Pp 
municated to him some tidings calculated to save Sità's lifo. He then 
affectionately embraced him, gave him the invaluable dust of his feet 
and sent him to the southern side. Afterwards the most powerful 
Hanümána, the product of the digits of Rudra, having received the 
S ETUR E Goume to him by Rama went to Lankà in search 
of Sita, å wa i ai s Fus : E tei 
M Jmm T emaciated, grieved and living without food in the forest 
ns * eU PES burnt ee qmoon-plant). Sit’ who was as 

g ed gold, having wielded clusters of hair ] 
constantly reciting the name of Rama with vernis dad e OR 
dene ore Sian position, devoted to vows and POUND a EU 
nature, was day and ni i itat: 
ere Y A night engaged in the meditation of the lotus-feet of 

nof the Wind-god havine observed that Sita, th ^ 

goddess of fortune, distinguished by lucky mark fulo ae in 
lustre, likely to consecrate the world and > LOUP ulgent with her own 
which could be given by all tho sacred Stine ww o sane, 
bowed low and gladly gave her the ring of Ra "uy ae C Uu 
ing that Sita was much afflicted at React held he aS ee cone ae Sey 
promptly communicated to her the messace of Rar OD UNDE 
and said, *O mother, Ráma and Laksmana with zirded | 
their camps on the other side of the ,80a.. He ha 
great and powerful monkey Sugriva, He killed 


à sacred vow to recover you. This 
etions to find you, out. Rama 


with a smile, O holy mother, I r am about to perform 
2 4 egard zâ t 
monkey, the ocean as uriné antl the auth aa He rasis femalo 


balf'a minute, I can easily destroy Ravana and ee a E. * 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 347 


eee 


a 


ants. O my goddess, O most blessed being, I will not kill Ravana out of 
deference to the vow of Rama, Now, take heart of grace and compose 
yourself.” The chaste Sita, as she heard his words, wept loudly again 
and again and spoke timidly thus; «Q child, is Rima, immersed in the 
sea of sorrow on my account, still alive? Has no evil befallen to the Lord, 
the son of Kaus'alyà?" 

80-99, “Has Rama, the life of Sita, become very much emaciated ? 
How does my beloved lord, dearer to me than my life, take his food ? 
Child, is it truo that my lord with girded loins has pitched his tent on — 
the other side of the ocean? Is it true that he has not lost his life on 
my account? Doss he remember bhis sinful wife of his, the source of all 
his sorrow ? Alas! What a great torment my lord must be suffering for 
my sake! O lord, at first, even the golden wreath used to be put off by 
me; for I was afraid that it might cause separation between us; but now 
100 yojans of sea divide us both. Alas! Shall I be able to behold again 
lord Rama, the sea of mercy, possessing a tranquil and lovely mien 
and very much engaged in pious deeds ? ‘Through the fortune of this 
luckless woman, shall I able to minister again to the lotus-feet of my lord ? 
Alas! the life of a woman who cannot serve her husband is useless. Child, 
is my godson Liksma2a truly alive ? He must have been humiliated and 
immersed in the soa of sorrow for having lost sight of me. Is this 
younger brother of my lord, the best of heroes and most pious, 
roally determined to rolease me? Shall I truly be able to see again the 
blessed Laksmana?! O saint, the son of the wind having heard the words 
of Sita gave a suitable reply and easily burnt Lankà. ^ Afterwards 
Hanümána again consoled her and returned promptly to the place where 
Rima with his lotus eyes was. le related to him the whole account of 
Siti, Rama hearing of her welfare began to weep. O Narada, Laksmana, 
too wept loudly with Sugriva and other monkeys, O Narada, then the 
. descendant of Raghu soon mustered resolution with Laksmana and his army, 

gonstructed a bridge across the sea and went to Lanka’. O saint, Rima 
afterwards slew Ravana and his relations in the battle and released Sit& 
in an auspicious momerit. The truthful Ráma mounted with Sit& the 
chariot called Puspaka and in a sportive and cheerful mood arrived soon 
at Ayodhyà. Lord Rama embraced Sitd and passed his days merrily 
in her company. Both of them were relieved of the pangs of separation. 
Rama became the lérd of the seven islands on earth which, under his 
wise rule was rendered exempt from care and disease. In course of time, 
ho begat, two pious sons called Kus/a and Lava. ‘They are the ancestors of 
the kings that traco their descent from the sun. O son, I thus described ` 
to you the biography of Rama which is auspicious and is the source of 
happiness and redemption. Tt is the most substantial ofall accounts and 
is like a boat to enable a person to cross the sea of the world. 


CHAPTER LXIII. 


1-21, Náráyana said, “ Later on, Kamsa dreamt a bad dream and was 
agitated in his heart. Ho was much frightened and gave up his food, his 
joys and festivities. The most sorrowful Kamsa then called to his 
council his subjects, friends, relations and priests and said to them, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


848 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


i 


“ O my friends, O my priest, you are all learned. Towards the end of the 
night I dreamt a bad dream. Listen. A dreadful hag with a protruding 


restless tongue, black in appearance, it seemed, was dancing in my city,’ 


Her neck was covered with a wreath of China-rose mingled with red- 
sandal paste. Botb the arms of this woman who naturally indulged in a 
guffaw of wild laugh held a hideous keen sword and a skull of human 
head. It seemed to me also that a swarthy widew, Sidra by caste with 
her dishevelled hair and nose cut, clad in black, was desi:ing to embrace 
me. Another woman possessing rongh hair and clad with a dirty tough 
rag was applying marks of paste to my forehead and chest. O my priest 
Satyaka, methought an infidel having rough hair, deformed, and clad 
in tatters (i.e: shabbily dressed) was giving me fragments of broken 
eowries at dawn. Methought a celestial damsel having husband and sons 
was very angry with me and was with a curse breaking a jar full of 
water. Another Brahmin, highly incensed, was cursing me and offering 
me a pure garland of China roses annointed with red sandal paste. It 
seemed that in my city there was, off and on, a rain of extinguished embers, 
blood and cinders. Deformed apes, crower, dogs, hears, boars and asses 
were screaming horribly. At dawn, dried fuels, embers, collyrium, skulls 
and torn nails were perceptible to my eyes, and a chaste woman who was 
very angry was leavive my house with a curse. She was clad in a yellow 
dress and her whole body was besmeared with white sandal paste. ‘The 
woman was decked with vermilion marks and ornaments of gem. She put 
Ona wreath of jasmine on her neck and held in her hand a lotus used 
asa toy. Isaw In i Noose in their hands 
and dishevelled hair, entering into my house ; and 
deformed and naked, dancing and laughing 
It Seemed that a dreadtul, naked, S'üdra 
i i [ g my whole body with oil. Earl 
in the morning, I witnessed with a smile dreadfal fares piles full wien 
; and near the funeral pile, dance, song. grand 
dishevelled hair and clad in crimson dress were 


3 J people were constantly 
e dancing hideonsly ; others ran away or slept. 
1ultaneous eclipse of the 
o observed with my own 
; earth-quakes, revolutions of kingdoms, 
of a gravo naturo, T also saw that trees 
mountains uprooted by the whirl-wind were 


I saw that : 6 

cut was dancing in every house, few rod aad en with his nose 
Arg trii iren dr qm pir d gs hol 
eo 


reduced to embers and ashes Es iil AEN 
g ` 


sir priest, I als 


also I witnessed in m The ki t 
1 i H ung Kamsa, so savi i 
the council. His kinsmen having [Sn the isum at hey ae 
looked dejected and upheaved a deep s; the priest Satyaka, 
, 
d à totege Kamsa was 
ost his Consciousness, Then the en Bat Siva 
ing destruction wept loudly, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ay 


ES 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


RRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 849 


a a 


inn ir a a ia tta 


CHAPTER LXIV. 


1.10. Ná-yana said, eO saint, then the priest Satyaka, the wise 
disciple of Sukra, after consultation, used words ealeulated to be useful 
thus O most blessed being, be of good cheer. lt is not possible for you to 
come to grief in my society. You should now perform the delightful 
ceremony sacied to Mahes'a which removes all evils. Copious money and 
jesus fee in abundance are needed to pcrform (his ceremony called 
Dhanurmakha. It is apt to remove bad dreams and the fear of enemies. 
It removes three kinds of terrible calamities caused respectively by evil 
epirits, gods and diseases and increases material prosperity. When the 
sac. ifice is finished, Siva, the source of all prosperity, appears in person and 
jives the boon which removes deerepitude and death. In days of yore, 
tle most powerful Bana, king Nandis’war, Parasurima and Bhalla 
the best of herces had performed this sacrifice. In olden times, Siva 
gave this bow to the pious Nandi who, after securing it, performed the 
ererifice, gained his object and eave the vow to king Bina. Then Bana 
attained the position of a great adept after performing the sacrifice on 
the coast of the Puskara and gave the bow to Paras'ur&ma. The latter, 
the ceean of mercy, was graciously pleased to give it to you. O king, 
this very hard bow was constructed at the desire of Siva. It measures a 
1.0C0 cubits in length and 10 eubits in^ breadth. Originally Siva united 
to this bow the unwieldy weapon called PAs upata and destroyed the 
demons. No one is able to break it except god Narfyana. 

11-31. “In this auspicious sacrifice, the worship of the bow and Siva 
is necessary. You should now soon invite your kinsmen and perform this 
Llessed sacrifice. O king, ifon the occasion of the sacrifice, by an irony 
of fate the bow be broken somehow, the performers of the sacrifice will 
surely be killed. Ifthe bow be broken, the sacrifice also will be stopped. 
So, the work being imperfect or incomplete, who will bestow the fruit? 
O magnanimous being, Brahma is at the root of the bow, Náráyana is 
at the centre; and Siva possessed of rude valour presides over the front. 
This bow, free from contamination and inlaid with excellent gems, has 
obscured even the glory of the mid-summer sun. O king, not to talk 
of others, even the most powerful sun, Ananta or Kartika is unable to 
bend it. At first the enemy of Tripura with this weapon easily 
killed the demon. Now be of good cheer and promptly apply 
yourselfto the task of performing this grand and blessed ceremony.” 
Kamsa, the propagator of the lunar race, having heard the words 
of Satyaka who was his constant benefactor in every way said, * Sir, 
the son of Nanda meant to be the destroyer of myself and my 
family, has taken his birth in the house of Vasudeva and is growing 
in peace in the house of Nanda. This puissant boy has slain my 
heroio relations clever in giving counsel and my holy sister Putaná. 


‘This vigorous Krigna: by wielding with one hand the mountain 


Govardhan subdued even Indra, the great hero. This boy having gladly 
created artificial cow-herd boys and calves showed to Brahma’ the whole 
universe consisting of animate and inanimate objects. Now, O Satyaka, 
administer counsel how to kill this powerful boy. Barring him, I 
have assuredly no. enemy in the three worlds viz, Earth, Heaven and 
Patal, The kings present anywhere are now all my friends. Brahm8 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE — 
n pev S 


Oe ek ee PA 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


850 THE ig s RTA PURANA, 


: à i the soul 
and Sankara in person are great ascetics: and the ererol Vi ty E 
of all, is in all cases impartial ;so how can there v Su thefein. df 
hostility on their part towards me ? If T be a E e NA 
Nandana at this time; T shall be tlie great arid ee ku Jis ateata «tie 
islands adored in the three worlds, In Heaven, I myse à x doüs. “The 
position of Indra by killing the weak Indra subdued by en  Kuvera aüd 
sun, the moon-god (my consumptive ancestor), the V Hah 9b. ehe 
Yama ; any of these I can subdue, no doubt, Now on Ba BURR 
closure of the cowherds belonging to Nanda and fetch h eat a liag 
and the strong Balaráma, the brother of the latter. See a works 
heard Kamsa addressed him thus, usine ethieal, truthful, bene E 
and suited to the occasion, * O most blessed bainz, send either , 
Uddhava or Vasudeva to Nanda-vraja for the purpose. 


~ 89.42, Thereupon Kamsa said to Vasudeva who was Sard N 
throne of gem ir tho council thus; ** F'riend, you are expert » d E g 
schemes and well versed in the mysteries of ethics, So go to tha nes 
of Krisna sitüated in Nanda’s enclosure and bring to this sacrificial P RE 
Vrisy-bhánu, Nanda, Krişna, Palaráma and other residents of p o 
Let the messengers also with invitation-letters go everywhere table: 
sure and inform the kings and the saints of the intended sacrifice. o ne iy 
hearing the words of the king, thor palate, lips and throat of Vasudeva 


were dried up. So with a sorrowful heart and piteous tone he spoke to 


the king thus, « O best of kines, it is not proper for me at this time to 


go to Nanda-vreía, with a view to invite Nanda or his son. For if the 
latter come to this grand festival, there will be assuredly a great fight 
between him and you. Ido not think it advisable to bring him here and 
cause a rupture between you both. For, then, evil will bofall either him 
or you: and everyone will say that Krisna's father brought his son hero 
and caused the death of Krisna or that he effected the death of the king 
through his son. Tn a Word, one of you must die and many heroes will 
fall in the field ; for there is no battle without bloodshed. So I ought not 
to go in any Way." Hearing this, the eyes of the king glared like a pair 
of red lotuses, He took a scimitar in ‘his hand and ran after Vasudeva 
with a view to kill him. “O 


thereupon cried aloud and pre 
purpose. Vasudeva angril 
house, Thereupon the king sent Akrara to Nanda 
the cow herds), Subseqt 


arters, Bráhmins, 
ascetics, saints and king 


8 addréssed in various ways arrived there, 
Sikha, the lord Sanat- 
ila, Sumantu, 
Marichi, Kas'yapa, 
Parás'ara, Prache- 
Katyayana, Yajiia-Valkya Utathya, 
Saubhari, Parvata, Devala Jaigisavya, Jaimini, -ViswA: Mitra, Sutapa, 
igali, Apisali, Silánika, Astika, Jarat-Káru, 
Kalyan Mitraka, Durvás&, Bámdeva, Risya. ringa, Vibhándaka, Kavi, 
Patha, Kanáda, Kausika, Panini, Kautsa, Aghamargan, Valmiki, 
Lomasa, Markandeya, Mrikanda, Paras'u-ráma, Sankriti, Agastya and 


px 
> P4 


- CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


A——— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 851 


rr = a 


the ascetic Brahmins arrived there. There also came Jarasandha, Danta- 
bakra, Dambhika (the king of Dravida», Sis'upála. Bhismaka, Bhagadatta, 
Mudgala, Dbritarastra, Dhamakes’a, Dhümaketu, Samvara, Salya, Satrajita 
Sanku and other powerful kings. And to that council came by turns 
Bhisma. Drona, Kripa-charyya, Maba-bali, As'wa-thima, Bhüri Srava, 
Sálwa, Kekai and the king of Kos'ala. Then the great king Kamsa duly 
aceosted everyone and Satyaka, the priest, appointed the day for the 
performance of the sacrifice and the auspicious moment for the purpose. 


CH APTER LXV. 


1.10. Narayana, said, “Tbo most pious and tranquil-minded 
Akrüra having beard the words of Kamsa delightfully addressed the peace- 
ful Uddhava thus, ** Today, the end ofthe night has truly brought the 
morning of prosperity. Today is the most auspicious day for me. ‘The 
spiritual guide, the Brihmins and the gods have assuredly been pleased 
with me. Today, the sanctity accumulated by me in millions of births has 
arrived voluntarily, for today I have reaped its fruits. So long I was 
confined by the ties of Karma which have been rent asunder today. I shall 
be released from the prison of the world and go to the Vaikuntha. The 
wise Kamsa, being angry, has played the part of a friend. Fortunately 
his anger has proved a boon to me. Now for the glorification of the 
Lord of tho Viaja, I shall go to his kingdom and behold the adorable Lord. 
Krisna, green or dark-blue like a new cloud, the source of faith and ` 
redemption, I shall behold that his loins are decorated with a yellow garment 
or I shall behold that he has with a smile either besmeared his body with 
dust or sandal paste or butter. Or I shall behold that he has won the 
hoart of all by playing on the lovely flute or that he is driving the cow, 
here and there ov that he is seated, lying down or walking ; orm an 
auspicious moment I shall observe with my own eyes the lord of sleep 
(Krisna) in another form. . 

11.30. O my friend, today I shall go to behold Lord Hari, the 
universal Lord in the fictitious guise cf a human being whose lotus-teet aré 
adored by Brahma, Siva and other gods, whose limit cannot be determined 


by the god Ananta himself with his infinite forms, whose prowess cannot * 


be comprehended by the gods and saints, in whose eulogies even the 
muse is. struck dumb and frightened, who is served even by the great 
goddess of fortune also liko a maid-servant, from whose lotus-feet, the - 
pious Ganga emanates (the same Ganga who is adored in the three worlds 
and who, by ber sight and touch, removes rebirth, decrepitude, disease and 
all the sins of mortals) whose lotus fect is always contemplated by the, 
primordial goddess Nature, Durga, the mother of the three worlds ending 
all calamities; and the 16th part of whom is Mahá-Visnu (the same 
Maha-Visnn who holds countless wonderful. worlds on the pores of his 
skin and who is the densest of the denso.) "That Lord Krisna, the son of 
Nanda, in the guise of a boy is the internal spirit of all, omniscient, indepen- 
dent of nature and emblematic of the radiance of Brahma. ,He hokls & 


free from desire, void of happiness or support, and yet that supreme: being 
eternal being is the” 


body only out of compassion for his votaries. He is void of attributes, ., 


is absolute happiness. That happy, solf determining, 
me 3 i D 


C4 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


$52 THE BRAHMA PAIVARTA PURANA. 


— ene) Sait —-4 


best of all things and the cause of all. The devotees who recite his name 
and virtues in this way meditate him day and night. In days of yore, in 
the lotus Kalpa, Brahma, the offspring of the lotus residing in the lotus 
of his navel, became much emaciated for want of fool; and though he 
prayed Lord Krisna for a thousand Manwantaras (periods of lives allotted 
to Manu), yet he heard only one voice from the sky to the following 
effect “you will be able to see me, if you pray again” but he was not able to 
sea him. Afterwards Brahma, having meditated him again for a like 
period, beheld him and obtained a boon. O Uddhava, today L shall see with ? 
my own eyes the great Lord of that description. In olden times, S'iva 
having performed austere rites for the perio! of longevity allotted to 
Brahma saw him in the cow-world in the sphere of light; and from his lotus 
feet he obtained pure faith, insight into all the mysteries of creation, the 
boon of immortality and every kind of perfection. O Uddhava, today I 
shall be able to see the great Lord who has made S'iva (kind to his 
adherents) equal to himself. The god Ananta with an emaciated body 
and without food having reverentially prayed the Supreme Lord for a 
period covered by the lives of thousand Indras, the Lord imparted to 
him wisdom like his own ; and, O Uddhava, I shall have a vision of this 
Lord today. I shall behold the Lord of all, today, through whose grace, 
the god Dharma by a course of devotion lasting for a period covered by a 
thousand Indras, has becomo the witness of the deeds of pious men, the 
ebastiser of mortals and the source of the fruits of actions, 


31-88. Brahmá's one day and night are equivalent toa period of 
month and years covered by 28 Indras ; and according to this caleulation 
of months and years Brabmá's life lasts for a century. But the mere wink of 
Lord Krigna’s eye causes the downfall of the same Brahma, O Uddhava, the 
same Supreme Lord willbe manifest before my eyes today, Friend, endless 
are the Brahmás and the worlds like the particles of the dust of the earth, 
The great Mah&-Vignu is the container of that undivided universe ; and 
each world contains different Brahmas, Visnus, Sivas, Munis, Manes, 
adepts, animate and inanimate objects, men and others. But that grent 
Being is the 6th part of the Supreme being and is easily created and 
destroyed by him. O Uddhava, I shall seo tolay with my own eyes that 
great god, tho ruler of all.” So saying, Akrûra’s body thrilled with 
raptures ; tears of joy flowed from his eyes. Ho then fainted and meditated 
the lotus feet of Lord Hari. Having remembered those feet of tho perfect 
and supreme Lord, again, and again he was animated with religious zeal 
when Uddhava embraced him and after having repeatedly praised him soon 
went home. Akrüra likewise went homo. 3 


CHAPTER LXVI, 


_ Lf. Then tie Lord of the Rasa united with the mistress of the 
Rasy and being exeited with passion applied himsolf to the task of sexual 
intereourse with Radha, Radha. as soon as she tasted the pleasures of 
enjoyment, fell asleep: but having dreamt bad dreams she cot up cud 
modestly addressed her consort thus, “O my Lord, come to m" acon? 


Let mo press you to.my bosom, I do not kpow what is allotted to me. 


E 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Ja 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


` KRISNA JANMA RIANDA. 353 


EE — 


in the end.” So saying, the most gracious Radha sorrowfully embraced 
him and related to him her bad dreams. She said, *O Lord, it seemed to 
mo that I was seated on a throne of gem with a picture of gems in 
my hand; and at this time a Brihmin, being incensed against me, took 
away the umbrella from my hand, Afterwards seeing that I was weak, 
he threw me into a. swarthy, hideous ocean difficult to cross. As I fell 
into the torrents, I was agitated with grief and care and was tossed, here 
and there, by the huge waves teeming with alligators. ‘Then in spite 
of my repeated cries, «O Lord, save me" I was not able to see 
you when I appealed to the gods for resene, O Krisna, being drow- 
ned in the waves I saw that the orb of the moon had dropped into 
the earth and was divided into a hundred fragments. The next moment 
I saw that the orb of the sun dropped into the earth and was divided 
into four parts. And later on, I saw that the sun and the moon were ' 
absolutely eclipsed by Ráhu in the sky at one and the same time, on 
account of which they were rendered very black. The next momont I saw 
that a radiant Brahmin angrily broke the jar of honey placed on 
my lap. The very next moment I saw the same Brahmin very 
angrily seizing a man who passed across my vision. O Lord, later 
on, methought the stalk of ths lotus, used as a toy, somehow or , 
other dropped from my hand and was torn to pieces: and the looking 
glass constructed with excellent gems suddenly fell from my hold, turned 
black and was split into fragmehts. : 

16-25. It&seemed to me that the chain of diamond on my neck was 
suddenly torn from my breast and assuming the form ofa dirty lotus fell 
onthe ground. Then I saw that the toys of the palace at different 
times laughed, clapped their hands foreibly, sang and wept. Later 
on, I beheld that black hideous wheels were again and again revolv- 
ing in the sky and repeatedly falling down or rising up. Immediately after- 
wards I saw that the being presiding over my life emanated from the 
inner part (of a house) and said, * O Radhd, adieu, I am going away." 
Anon I saw thata black statue clad in sable embraced and kissed me. 
O Lord of my life, in the course of my dream, I beheld these perverse 
things. The right side of my body is dancing (shivering). My soul, 
being agitated, seems to weep: and my sorrows appear to attract my care- 
worn mind. Therefore O Lord, O best of those who know the Vedas, 
tell me what has befallen me. What has happened ?” So saying, the 
lips, throat and palate of Ràdhà were dried up. Frightened and over- 
whelmed with grief, she fell at the lotus-feet of Lord Krisna:” At 
that time, S’ri-Krisna, the Lord of the universe, at once held the goddess 
to his breast and consoled her with the maxims of metaphysical Yoga. 
Then the goddess having obtained clear wisdom dragged to her breast her 
consort, the Lord of tranquil disposition and relinquished her sorrow. 


* 


CHAPTER LXVII. 

1-8. Narayana said, * O Narada, later on, S/ri-Krisna, the enchanter 
of Cupid, having observed that Ridha was agitated very much by the 
pangs of apprehended separation held her to his breast and went to the 
pond of pleasure. O saint, as lightning flashes in the sky among new 


45 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


354 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


clouds, so Radha, the queen of queens manifested herself in the heart of 
Lord Krişna. Later on, when the Lord, the ocean of merey, was gracious. 
ly engaged in the act of sexual intercourse with Radha, the pair of lovers 
began to shine as emerald and gold combined. In their pleasure-room 
constructed with diamonds, diamond-lamps flashed brightly. ‘The prince 
of the witty (Lord Krisna) ornamented with gems and immersed in the 
lovely sea of mirth lay down on the bedstead of gem and merrily cohabited 
with Radha ornamented with gems who was the very personification of 
gems. Though they desisted from their amorous act which had: been 
carried to excess, yet their desires were not gratified. "Then Radha, the 
mistress of the Risa, said to S’ri-Krisna, the Lord of the Risa seated in 
the sphere of the Risa, '* O Lord of Kamala, as at daybreak the 
medicinal plants droop down or lose their lustre, so I become obscure 
and corpse-like when I fail to sce you; and Icheer up only in your 
company. O Lord, I become radiant in your society like a flame of candle 
in the night. But without you I get attenuated like the digite of the 
moon during the dark half of the lunar month, 


9-17 O ny beloved, when I dwell in your heart I acquire radiance 
like that of the full moon; but when I am abandoned by you, I become 
ab once as inerbas the digits of the moon during the dark half of the 
lunar month. O Lord, your society invests me with a brightness like 
that of the flame of fire fed with clarified butter; and as the lotus is 
dimmed by dews, I attain a similar condition in your absence, As the 
earth becomes dark when the sun and the mon set,so the fever of 
anxiety swallows me when you are away. Lord, asthe stars dwindle 
at sun-shine, so my toilet, beauty, youth and discretion fade when I do 
not see you. O Lord, if is true you are the spirit ; so without you, I am 
but a body without soul, O my beloved, you are to me like the five vital 
airs which constitute my animal life, As without pupils, the mere balls 
in the socket of the eye do not possess the faculty of sight, so without 
you I live like a corpse. I shine in your company like a spot associated 
with pictures ; and when Separated from you, 1 become fallow or uneultur- 
ed like a field covered with grass. O Krişna, as a place is adorned when 
associated with pictures, so I sustain beauty when Iam united with you: 
but without you, I become as graceless as a clay-statue washed by water. 
As a wreath of gold acquires grace when it is united with alabaster so, 
O Lord of the Risa, the milk-maids look graceful when they are united 
with you. 

18-26. O Lord of the Vraja, as the stars wl 
(shine in the sky, so O Lord, the kings look lov 
son of Nanda, as the trees are prominent; by 
trunks, so Yas'odâ and Nanda derive their grace from you. O Lord of 
Gokula, as the argval cf a monarch gives grace to kis subjects, so the 
residents of Gokula are glorified by attaining you. O Lord of the Rasa 
as the Heaven is adorned by the presence of Indra, so the sphere of the 
Rása looks very lovely, when vou preside over it ^is & word 

? À . , you nre 
the beauty, the refuge and the Lord of Vrindávana and its trees. As 
the lion is pre-eminently powerful among the strong, go you are pre-eminent- 
ly strong among the residents of Vrindávana. Yas'odà, when she does 


hen united with the moon 
ovely in your society. O 
their branches, fine fruits and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 355 


not see you, is immersed in the sea of sorrow like Surabhi when she 
loses her calf and weeps continually ; and if Nanda fails to see you, his 
life is agitated like fried paddy and his mind is consumed with sorrow.” 
So saying Rádhá very affectionately fell down prostrate at the feet of 
Lord Krisna ; and Lord Kiigoa again consoled her by metaphysical Yoga. 
As an axe having sharp edges cuts the-trees, so the above great Yoga, 
(metaphysical) is the cause of the destruction of sorrow. 


27.88. Nürada said, “O bast of those who know the Vedas, Iam 
very curious to hear about the metaphysical or transcendental Yoga men- 
tioned above, which relieves the sorrows of people. So please reveal it 
to me.” Narayana said, “O Narada. the above Yoza is mysterious 
even to the Yogis and is of several, kinds Only Hari knows it fuily. 
O saint, in olden times dear Lord Siva. the foe of ‘Tripura, the best 
ofthe Vaisnavas, having prayed for a period eovered by the successive 
downfalls of a thousand Indras, the Lord of Ridh4 was very pleased 
with him and communicate! to hima p tion of the esoterie Yoga in 
the cow-worll. As he devoted himself to aust:re asceticisin on the coast 
of the Puskara for a perio | eovered by the fall ofa hundred Indras, the 
gracious Krigna saw that he was.emaeiated, paralysed and reduced to a 
skelaton. So out of mercy and regard for him, he communicated to him 
a portion of the Yoza. Liter on, seeing that Dharma, the best of the 
workors, was emaciated by the rigours of his meditations for a period 
covered by the fall of 14 Indras, the lord who is the ocean of mercy was 
graciously pleased to mention to him a little af the Yoga. And as I 
prayed fora period covered by 109 Indras, he toll me something about: 
it. O Narada, Sanat-Kumira and the god Ananta having prayed for a 
long timo received fron him only a portion of the Yoga. Lord 
Krisna who is kind to his worshippers revealed it also to a certain extent 
to the ascetic Kapiladeva and to the sun who respectively prayed in the 
Himalaya and the Pugxara for a very long time and also to the profound- 
believer Prahlida, the great devotee Durvàüsà and Bhrigu. O great 
saint, 1am now going to tell you how the graeious Lord Krisna related 
this Yoga to the afflicted Radha, in the pond of pleasure (or amusement) 
Listen. 

39-49. At that time, Lord Krisna, the spiritual guide of the Yogis, 
seeing that Radha, the merry ascetic, was erest-fallen held her to his 
breast and related to her something about the above Yoga. He said 
“ O damsel who knowest ths conditions of the previous birth, do not forget 
yourself, O my beloved, why do you not recollect all the incidents con- 
cerning the Goloka and S'ridama's curse? O blessed being, it is true 
that the said curse will bring about us a temporary separation : 
but we shall be reunited. O my beloved, I shall then go back to my 
house in the Cow-world and there be reunited with the cow-herdesses 
residing in that region. Now, listen. I am going to relate to you the 
mysteries of ontology in pirt, which is delightful to the heart, which is 
the source of pleasure and the bane of sorrow. My dear, I am the inter- 
nal spirit of all, dissociated from all acts: and though 1 pervade all crea- 
tures, yet Iam invisible everywhere. As the wind, though blowing or 
passing through all animals is not associated with any thing, so I am 


* 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


856 THE BRAHMA FAITARTA PURANA. 


— 


dissociated: and yet Tam the witness of all acts. The ae re) 
reflection: for-l exist every-where in all creatures ; an ; * We 
soul always performs all acts and reaps the eee : = ue As in 
a jar full of water, the Sun and the Moon exist in _tho 2s 0 Pe 
or reflections and as the above reflections dissolve in the Sun an the 
Moon when the jar is broken, so when a person dios, my reflection, t.e, 
the soul, is also dissolved in me. I am visible In creatures in the shape 
of animate corporeal beings and invisible in the shape of their souls, A 
pervade all things at all times and in every place. I am vested with 
attributes when ! wield a body ; otherwise, I ám invisible and void of 
attributes, 


50-58. O fair one, all objects are transient ; and I pervade everything, 
But in some places I manifest myself in-a more prominent degree; and 
in otber places, less prominently. Some. gods are my parts : others are 
my digits; other gods are the digits of the digits of the parts of my parts. 
Some gots, again, are the parts of the parts of the latter. The subtle 
goddess of Nature is the outcome of my parts. She has beon divided 
into five forms, viz, Saraswati, Kamala, Durga, yourself and Sá vitri, 
And all the gods having forms are the outcome of the goddess, Nature, 
Only the Supreme Being, out of deference to the meditation of his 
worshippers, wields a constant form, O Radha, those who are the out- 
come of Nature are destroyed in the kalpa of Nature when the world 
comes toanend. Only I shall remain as lam, before and aftor, I am 
never destroyed. And you and I are identical. Ag the whiteness of 
milk is inseparable from the milk, so there is no difference between you 
and me. The pores of the skin of the huge being sustain the universe, 
I am the same hage being (Virdta) at the time of ereation. And you 
who are a production of my part, assume like-wise n huge form and thus 
become a huge consort of the Viráta at the time of creation, O chaste 
one, I am the same small Vira ta also from whose navel lotus, at the time 


of creation, Brahma, the cause of the whole universe, emanated : and I 
am also Visnu and Siva, Ina word, every one is the offspring of my 
part. And you, too, through your own digits, become the great, gracious, 
Auspicious wife of that small Viráta at all times. O goddess, every 


world, in this way, has a Separate Brahma, Visnu and Mahos'a, 


59-68. O goddess, Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a are t 
my parts, andthe rest of the sphere including animate a 
is the outcome of tho parts of my digits. In the Vaik 


figure having four hands; and you exist as the great goddess of Laksmi, 
That Vaikuntha, like the Goloka, is situate outside the universe of Brahmá 
high up in the sky, , There you exist as Saraswati, and in the Brahma-loka 
as Savitri, the wife of Brahma; and in the land of Siva, as the primordial 


Nature, the Sreat goddess Siva, You in the form of Siva slew the demon 

called Durga and are thus Styled Durgá who destroys all calamities, That 

fortunate Siva, the wife of Siva, was born as th 

on she was born as the daughter of the mo 

as Parvatt in the Kailasa. And you throug 

ter of the sea and pervade the heart of Visnu lying down in the sea of milk, 
ou manifest yourself in different forms, viz, Lakgmí, Siva, Dhátri, 


he offsprings of 
nd inanimate objects 
untha, I exist as a 


ry 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Ve d 


E 


957 


: Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA, 


— 


SA vitri, Radha (the mistress of the Rasa in the cow- world); Vrindà in the 
holy Vrindi-vana and Virajà on the coast of the Virajà. Fair ones 
through &ri-dama's curse you have come to the holy land of India with 
a view to consecrate India and Vrindà-vana. All the women of the worl 
duet of the digits of your digits. Woman and yourselt 
are identical ; and I am identical with man. Through my digits, 1 be- 
come Fire ; and you, through your digits, become Swáhá with consamptive 
owers and hence my wife. I, when joined to you, can burn everything: 
and without you I am quite unable to do s0. 

69-82. When through my digits, I manifest myself as the sun among 
luminaries, you combine with me in the form of light. Without your junc- 
tion, I cannot be bright. When through my digits ] take the form of moon, 
you assume the form of grace and thus become my gracious and beloved wife 
Rohini. Fair one, through your union I am lovely to everyone, otherwise 
not. Through digits Lam Indra: and you are ihe chaste celestial goddess 
of fortune. ‘Through your association, l am the king of the gods ; other- 
wiso lam graceless. Through my digits, I un Dharma; and you are 
Mürti, my beloved. You represent a pious deed ; without you, I am 
incapable of a pious act. Through digits | am Yajfía (sacrifice) and you 
aro Daksind (priest’s fee) ; and through your union, l give fruits in saeri- 
fico ; otherwise not, ‘Through my digits, I am the mane and you, the 
chaste Swadhà, my wife. When united with you, ] am able to receive 
offerings presented to the manes. I represent greatness į you repre- : 
sent prosperity ; and I am vested with fortuae on your account, as you 
are the goddess of fortune. Without you I am unfortanate. O my 
beloved, L am the supreme being and you are the nature. As the potter 
cannot construct a jar without clay, so I cannot creato without you. 
Fair one, through my digits I take the form of Ananta ; and you re- 

resort the earth (the refuge of the crops) whom L sustain on my head. 
O Radha, to those who are corporeal, you represent the body in the shape 
of tranquillity, grace, form, virtue incarnate, contentment, development, 
forgiveness, modesty, hunger, thirst, merey, sleep, drowsiness, insensibility, 
issue, deed, redemption and faith. O goddess, you are always my Cou- 
tainer and I am your spirit. In a word, yoa and I are identical objects, 
We equally prevail everywhere like the Supreme Being and Nature. 
When one of us is wanting, there can be no creation.” O Narada, so 
saying the Supreme Being, Lord Krisna, cheerfully held his dear Radha 

- dearer to him than his life to his breast and consoled her. Afterwards 
the lustful Krisna busied himself with amorous acts with the amorous 
Radha in the mansion of gems. 


are the pro 


——_- 


CHAPER. LXVII. 


1-10.. Narada said, “ O great saint, later on, Lord Krigna, tho origin of 
all, after the amorous diversion was over, got up from his bed and immedia- 
tely awakened the sleeping Radha dear to him as his life. ‘Then the des- 
troyor of Madhu rubbed her pure face with the hem of his garments and 
gently and sweetly addressed her thus :—“ O Radha, mistress of the 
Rasa, of a gracious smile, wait for a while ab this place and then start 
either for Vrindá-vana or the Vraja. My darling, you | are the presiding 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Fundi 
on : ing by IKS- 
OT S DN 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


es THE BRANMA VAIFARTA PURANA. 


deity of the Rasa ; therefore preside over the sphere of the Rasa for 
a timo, as the village gods preside over villages. Fair one, later on, pasg 
your time for a while with your female attendants in the sandal-\wood or 
Champak forest or even here. OU damsel dear to my life, be pleased to let 
me go oub fora while ; for I have soma urgent business at home. L shall 
leave you for a short timo. . My dear, you are the presidinz deity of my 
life : my life constantly dwells in you alone. So how can a person live, 
void of his life ? My heart is constantly associated with you. You 
represent my hearts desire. There is no one so dear to mə as yourself. Nay 
you are dearer to me even than S'ankara, O chaste one, it is true that 
S'iva is my life ; but you are dearer to me than my life. Tho. oinnis- 
cient Lord Krisna who is the universal benefactor, preserver and spirit, and 
the object of universal meditation, having perceived in his heart the 
approach of Akrûra prepared to embrace Radha, 


11-21. The goddess Radha (seeing that Lord Krigna was preparing 
to leave with a heavy heart) sorrowfully addressel him thus, © O Lord, 
O best of those versed in the act of sexual intercourse, You are dearer to 
methan other things. O Lord of Rama, O Krisna master of the 
Vraja, please take me to the Vraja. O Lord of my life, I see now that 
you are fiekle-minded. From thi: | conclude that you no longer cherish 
affection for me ; and I am no longer fortunate in your love. O Lord, 
Tam your refugee. Mow can you leave me and thereby bereave mo and 
immerse me in the sea of sorrow ? Abandoned by you, I will not go home. 
I will pass to some other foret and spend my day with the repiatition of 
the names of Krigna, Krisna day and night. Or Without going to the 
forest, I shall mako straight for the sea of desire and thoreafter cherishing 
the desire in my heart to have you again in my next birth, I shall part 
company with my body, This desire [ shall eherish in my heart that as the 
soul, time, the sun and the moon are my constant companions, so you may 
- also remain associated with me wherever I go and remain fastened to the hem 
of my garments for ever. O ftiend of the Poor, you are now leaving me and 
thus rendering my ease hopeless. But you should not abandon this 
fugitive helpless woman. O Lord, how can I, a foolish woman, compre- 
hend the Supreme Lord who in disguise has assumed the form of a 
cow-herd and whose lotus feeb are adored by Brahma, Visnu and Siva? 
O Lord, please forgive me for the hard words which I în my offended 
pride have used to you (my husband) and for a thousand faults which I 
might have committed in my hauchtiness, O Lord, my pride has been 


: humbled ana my ambition is gone. Nay, I have well realised my own 
misfortune, 


22-31, Though, in days of yore, Ganga deseribed you to ms and thus 
I was able to comprehend yon, yet bewildered by your spell or ont of 
religious zeal or affection, I could not speak anything to you. O Lord, 
you will be polluted or stigmatised, if you leave me in this way, Further, 
this act of yours will bring down upon you the wrath of . Brahma 
and cause the destruction of youc'sons and grandsons, © Lord, master 
of my life, if I do not see you, a moment seems to me as long as a 
hundred years, How then can I live for a hundred years literally?" 


O saint, so Saying the afflicted RAdhà suddenly fell on the ground 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


NEU 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 559 


— 


and fainted. Then Krisna, the ocean of mercy, restored her to cons- 
ciousness and out of compassion preserved her in his heart. Afterwards 
though by means of words of Yoga likely to relieve sorrow, he consoled 
her in:several ways, yet the damsel of pure smiles could not be relieved of 
her sorrows. Ina word, when the loss of trifling objects is a source of 
sorrcw to mankind, then the separation of the body and the soul can never 
bring happiness to any one. Seeing the condition of Radha, Krisna 
did not go on that day to the Vraja: but along with her he left that 
lake of pleasure and started fur the sphere of the Risa. When he 
reached there, the amorous pastimes were resumed again ; and the cheer- 
ful mistress of the Rasa was relieved from the agonies caused by the 
apprehension of separation. O Narada, Radha was annointed with flowers 
aud sandal-paste: and in that solitary place she loitered with her husband 
on a bed of flowers besmeared with sandal. i 


CHAPTER LXIX. 


1-11. Narada said, “O Lord, reveal to me the obscure and ` 
mysterious aecouns which deals with the subseqent movements of Radha 
and Krigna.” ^ Náráyana raid, ʻO Narada, I am going to tell you 
that most wonderful and secret account. Listen. It is not mentioned 
in the Vedas or the Puranas. © saint, later on, that clever 
self-determining Lord Krisna became again excited with passion and busied 
himself with sexual intercourse with the clever Radha. Like Kala- 
vati the mother of Radha, the intellectual daughter of the manes, the 
favorite disciple of Siva, (blessed, honoured, respectable, wise, longevous 
for a hundred Kalpas, expert in the Vedas and their auxiliary brauehes, cele- 
berated by the name of a female ascetic, accomplished in devotion, wielding 
several forms, chaste, skilled in the sixty-four practical arts, expert im 
sexual science, clever, witty, dexterous in matters affecting amorous inter- 
course, always lustful, the fairest of the fair and enjoying a permanent 
youth)  Rádhà was well-qualified. She possessed all the attri- 
butes possessed by her mother. This goddess Radha who was also in every 
aspect similar to her mother, lustful and good-natured, betrayed to her 
husband lustful feelings at the time of intercourse. Lord Krisna who 
was auxious to enjoy the taste of the Rasa copulated -with the clever 
Rádhà according to the measure supplied by sixty-four practical arts 
in the sphere of the Rasa.’ At that time the loins and the spherical 
breast of Radh& were lacerated with the injuries inflicted by the nails 
of Krisna :the vermilion-mark on the partings of her hairs on the head was 
obliterated; and her chignon was relaxel: Later on, the naked Radha 
thrilling with raptures and fainting with the excess of pleasure was bar- 
boured by the goddess of sleep. 

12-21. The gracious and affectionate lord Krisua, the lord of illusiunss 
seeing that Radha was asleep, wept through affection simply with a view 
to instruct the people. He kindly held the presiding goddess of his life to his 
breast, bathed her in tears and kissed her again and again, Inter 
on, he decked his beloved spouse dearer to him than his life with a 
pair of fine, invaluable clothes rarely to be had in the world and 


consecrated by fire, setup hor chignon, applied sattron and sandal | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


860 THE BRAMMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


——MMMÀ 


to her body and cast a precious wreath of gem round her neck. He 
then applied to the place below the partings of her hair a mark of 
vermilion (in the shipe of, pomegranate) which was combined with 
marks of sandal. He then painted her neck with various kinds of lines 
with eosmeties, decked her eolonred lotus-like feet with diamond anklets 
and applied vermilion an: lac dye to the front of the nails of the mem- 
bers of her fect. Lord Krisni, oub of affection, again gave the desired 
deep embrace to Ridh& who was dressed so nicely. Krisna, the Lord 
of the world, afflicted with the idea of future separation from his wife, 
again embraced and kissed her and went to sleep himself. At this time 
Brahma, the grandfather of the people, haviuy arrived there with Siva, 
the gods including “Sega and the best of saints bowed to that Eternal 
Being (Krisna) and with folded hands adored him according to the 
hymn as stated in the Sima-Veda. 


12-32. Brahm’ said, “Glory be to the Lrd of the universe! The 
whole creation adores your fect. Out of compassion for your adherents, 
you always take a form. O Lord of illusion, this form of a cow-herd you 
have assumed only as a disguise. O well-dressed, tranquil, good natured and 
patient Lord, the master of all full of profound wisdom, you are passing 
excellent, independent of niture and, as it were, the internal spirit of all. You 
are dissociated from all objects, the witness ot every act latent as well as 
patent and incorruptible. Your advent to this world is meant to reliove 
the earth of her burden out of compassion. You take away grief, anxiety, 
decrepitude, fear of death, ete. You preserve fugitives and are kind to 
your believers and so you are always impatient to do them kindness, O 
emblem of wealth accumulated by your believers, I bow to you. Brahma 
having thus adored Lord Krisna who, among the gods, presides 
over all bowed to him again and again and fainted through excess 
of religious zeal: Whoever attentively listens to this hymn com- 
posed by Brahma assuredly gains all his objects. And if he is wi.hout 
son, wife or wealth, he getsa son. a wife or wealth in abundance, And 
that man haying enjoyed happiness in this world cherishes in his heart 
unshaken confidence for Hari which is dearer than the bondage of Hari 
or redemption. Brahma, the ruler of the world, h wing thus eulogised him 
and bowed to him again and again, got up slowly and reverentially spoke 
to him thus & second timo, “O Lord of the gods of gods, O cause of 
supreme happiness, O son of Nanda, O eternally happy being full of happi- 
pees bow to you. Please to get up. O Lord, now recollect the curse 
on ain he ina Miao ee” Venton 
see ae RN m EH k o a Out of deference to the 
and, after the lapse ef this ai Sd. ST Ten pundzed EN 
Mr ep. m nu ate e m | go to the Cow-world along 
ESTER T SOLERE one pal a house and witness the arrival of 

8n: & whois ab present your blessed and 


honoured guest, O Lord Hari, now go with him to Madhupuri, break 
there Sankara's bow and kill your enemies, 


33-43, Thore kill the wicked Kamsa, console rouv rents truct 
Dwárká and relieve the earth of her burden. o Toth. bara. Vardnast 
(Benares) thecity of S'iva, subdue Indra, control S'iva in the battle-tield 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE o 


E 


ar 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANA KHANDA. 861 


€f 
natas 


out off the army of king Bana, elope with Rukmiui, slay the demon called 


Naraka and marry 16,000 women. O king of the Vraja, prepare to 
leave your beloved Radha dearer to you than your life and with that object 
in view go to Vraja now. Get up before Radha awakes and yon 
will be blessed. " So saying Brahma departed with the gods’ to the 
Brahma-loka ; and Ananta and S'iva also went home. O Narada, 
later on, the gogls reverentially and cheerfully showered flowers 
on the head of Sri-Krisna. "Then there was a voice from the sky 
to tho following effect : “ O god, kill Kamsa who deserves death, release 
your parents and relieve the earth of her burden. ” Krisna, the Lord 
of creation, having heard this, left Radha and rose slowly with his eyes 
constantly fixed on Radha. He went to a short distance and lingered for 
a while in the sandal-forest near th» sphere of the Rasa. Then Radha 
was roused from her sleep, got up from her bed, and not having seen her 
tranquil husband Hari dear to her life repeatedly exclaimed thus, ^ O 
Lord, O adept in sexual intercourse, O Lord of my life, O darling of my 
life, O thief of my life, O beloved, where have you gone to ?" 


44.52. Later on, she searched him for a while and went to the grove 
of jasmine. Then at times she sat down, or got up, or lay onthe ground, 
or lamented loudly, or wept repeatedly saying, “ O Lord, come once, come 
once." Atlast Radha, agitated and aggrieved by the paugs of separa- 
tion, swooned and dropped on the ground like a corpse covered with grass. 
O saint, then out of hundreds and thousands of cowherdesses some fanned 
her with chowries, others arrived there with sandal-paste. One of tho 
dear associates of Radha, secing that her beloved companion Radha 
appeared like a corpse, was suudued by affection, clasped her and wept. 
Ler associates laid Radha, inert like a corpse, on à heap of lotuses placed 
over the mud. They ministered to her by fanning her with a lovely white 
chowrie, as the chaste damsel lay on the moistened leaves of plaintains 
annointed with sandal-paste. Thereupon, O Nirada, Lord Krişna, seeing 
from a distance the piteous condition of Radha, who was dear to him as 
his life, arrived there and beheld her minutely. As an offender sentenced 
to punishment is expelled by the king’s myrmidons, so was his admission 
barred by the angry and powerful cowherdesses. Afterwards Krisna, the 
ocean of mercy, camo to Radha, placed her in his lap, restored her to 
consciousness and consoled her with cheering words. 

53 61. The goddess Ràdhà on her recovery, was composed at the 
sight of her Lord dear to her soul; and the pain of separation was 
removed. - Later on, Radha, the spouse of Krisna, deeply embraced her 
consort in a way to be desired and rested ona bed of gem. At 
that time, an esteemed, shrewd associate of Ràdhà addressed Sri-Krigna 
using words of ethical maxims thus: “O Krisua, I am going to give 
expressicn to certain maxims which are truthful, ethieal, beneficial, 
pleasing in.the end, sanctioned by moral and sexual sciences, the Vedas, 
the Puranas and social.rites and contributing to the fame and the bappi- 
ness of the married couple. O Lord, among the relations of a woman, 
the parouts and the brother have been reckoned as beloved ; but the son 
is dearer than the last-named, Saints hold that the husband is dearer 
to a chaste woman than a hundred sons produced by her. Ina word, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


382 THE BRAHM4 VAIVARTA PURANA. 


——— M ——— ———— —— Ant —— mm 


nothing is dearer to a clever and shrewd woman than her husband. If the 
husband is likewise shrewd, the pairis truly blessed ; if the husband is 
fraudulent in nature, he is odious to her like gall and worm woods. . 
62-77. The pleasures and concord of the married couple lead to their 
good. fortune and strengthen the bonds of affection. A house where the 
wedded couple do not agree is the haunt of poverty a d mars the sweets of 
their existence. Separation from a husband, who is after the heart of a 
woman, is a source of pain, sorrow and anxiety. Nay, her life is more pain- 
ful to-her than death. In every condition whether she is asleep or 
awake, the husband, as it were, constitutos her lifo. Ina word, he is a 
souree of redemption to her in this world as well as the next. This is 
why after you went, Radha fainted and dropped down insensible on the 
ground covered with grass. When I poured on her face pure and cool 
water, she breathed and recovered a bit ; but after weeping for a while, 
she fainted again through sorrow. ‘Then the whole of her body 
was consumed with the flame of separation and became hot like a redhot 
iron-rod and untouchable like fire, At that time Radha had no idea of 
her sleeping, or waking moments, night, day, house, wood, water, space, 
sky or the rise of the sun orthe moon. She became inert like a corpse 
and, adoring you constantly, saw that the wholo world was full of Visnu. 
When the bereaved Radha lay down on a polished bed composed of 
lotuses, be-sprinkled with water spread on the wet ground or soil, her 
associates constantly fanned her with white chowries. Some annointed 
her with sandal-paste or applied moistened cloth to her body. But the 
Moist earth was dried up at once by the mere touch of her body ; and the 
moist lotus leaves were likewise consumed todust. O Hari, the sandal- 
paste also became dry. The colour of her body which was like Champak 
turned black ; all her hair became yellow ; the lovely*mark of vormilion on 
her forehead became green ; and her toilet, grace and coquetry vanished. 
78-85. O Krisna, you are expert in ethics: now deliberate in your 
mind and do tbe needful so that you may not be guilty of wifo-slaughter. 
Madhava, hearing the words of Ratna-mala, luughed and addressed her 
thus, using words that are delightful in the end, pregnant with ethical 
maxims anl likely to be useful :—"My beloved, though I am able to 
rescind the consequences of good and bad deeds, yet I can not by any 
means transgress the decree of fate, For according to the law which I 
have fixed in the whole universa, the munis, gods and men always act, 
Fair one, through the curse of Sri-dàma, we must be separated for a 
bupdred years, though our separation is a matter not to be desired. O 
damsel of sober habit, thera will be only -separation between us in our 
waking moments ; but by my boon, there will be constant union between 
usin sleep. And now J am going to give her transcendonta] Yoga 
(faculty ot abstract meditation or the concentration of mind) by which 
her sorrow will be relieved. Now console Radha : and all will be well. 
Tam going to the house of Nanda.” Q Narada, Krigna, the Lord of the 
world, started for the house of Nanda after having said so ; and the lady 
friends of Radha tried to-console her,” On the other hand, Krigna went 
to bis bouse, bowed to his parents, sat on the lap of his mother, ate butter 


snd in order to show the levity of childhood, gladly returned to her the 
betel offered by her, 7 | Bady IF He 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KIANDA. > 363 


CHAPTER LXX. 


1-12, Nürüyena said, “O Narada, Akrûra, on the other hand, being 
deputed by Kamsa went home and, after eating most delicious 'sweeb-meat, 
lay down. Then havin tasted the pleasuros of drinking fragrant ‘water 
and chewing the betel mixed with camphor, he enjoyed a delightful sleep. 
Towards the close of the nizht, the gentle Akrüra, free from anxiety and 
sorrow, immune from excess of nervous excitement healthy, with his hair 
tied on his head, dressed in a pair of clothes and reposing on a luxurious 
bed dreamt good dreams sane:ioned by the Vedas and the Puranas. 
First he beheld in his presene» a Brahmin boy decked with a garland 
of wild flowers, clad in yellow with a flute in his hands, haviug two 
arms, dark-blue in appearance and youthful. The whole of his body 
was besmeared with  sandal-paste. ‘Th t boy worthy of the jewels 
he had put on was decked with a wreath of jasmine and excellent gems. A 
slight smile was playing ou his lips; and the head of this boy with a 
pair of lotus-eyes was adorned with a diadem of the plumage of peacocks. 
Later on, he saw a beautiful chaste woman having husband and sons. 
She was clad in yellow; the whole of her body was decked with jewels 
made of gems; her lovely, smiling fice resembled the autumnal moon. 
That woman, the source of boons and blessings, held with one hand a 
burning lamp and with the other, white paddy. Then a Brahmin (who 
was showering on people auspicious blessings), & white lotus, a swan and 
a horse were visible to him. Afcerwards he perzeived an auspicious 
mango-tree covered with wonderful fruits and flowers and the trees of 
Neem, cocoanut, eatechu aud plantain. Then he saw that a white 
snake attempted to bite him and that he was himself at different times 
placed on & mountain, tree, elephant, horse or boat. 


13-23. At times he seemed to play upon the lute or to drink milk 
boiled with sugar and rice or to eat coveted food mixed with eurd and 
condensed milk and placed on the leaf of the lotus. Later on, he per- 
ceived silver, white diamond, gold, pearl, gems, jar full of water, cloud, 
water, the Surabhi eow with her calf, an excellent bull, peacock, white 
swan, white kite, wag-tail, betel leaves, a wreath of flowers, burning 
fire, the worship of the gods, the image of Parvati and Krisna, the 
organ of Siva, a Brahmin boy and a girl, a field of crops with ripe fruits, 
a temple, a king, a lion, a tiger, the spiritual guide and a god. Akráüra 
having witnessed these auspicious dreams got up, performed the desired 
diurnal rites and related the whole affair to Uddhava. O Narada, he 
then at the command of Ud-dhava worshipped his spiritual guide and 
the gods, adored Sri-Krisna and then started. In the way, he saw 
many blessed. worthy, desirable articles foreboding immediate good. On 
the left side, he saw a corpse, as he-jackal, a jar full of water, a. mongoose, 
a sky-lark, a chaste, woman (decked with celestial ornaments and blessed 
with husband anl sons), white flowers, a wreath of white flowers, 
paddy and the auspicious wag-tail ; on the right side he perceived burning 
fire, a Brahmin, a bull, an elephant, a cow with her calf, a white horse, 
aswan,a whore, a wreath of flowers, a flag, curd, and sweetened milk. 

24-33. He also saw gem, gold, silver. pearls, desirable diamonds, fresh 
meat, sandal, honey, excellent ghee, a black swan, fruit, fried rice, white 
mustard, a looking-glass, a picturesque ear, â blessed bright statue, a 


. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


864 THE BRAITMA FAIVARTA PURANA, 


—— 


white lotus, a grove of lotus, a white kite, a red aged PUES a cat, a 
hill, a sheep, a peacock, a parrot and a swan. He also. eard auspicious Notes 
of eonehes, song of the cuckoos, scund of musieial instruments, wonderful 
songs dealing with the virtues of Krişna, recitation of 1 he name of Hari 
and proclamations of. victory. Akrüra having heard and seen these 
auspicious things cheerfully remembered Hari and entered into the holy 
forest of the Vrindá-vana. While entering, he saw b fore. him the desir. 
able sphere of the Rasa which was incensed on all sides with i sandal, aloe 
and musk and refreshed by the wind redolent of flowers: The threshold 
was decked with columns of plantains ; the bottom of the threshold Was 
adorned witn foliage of mangoes tied with silk and placed on an auspicious 
jar. He saw thatthe lovely sphere of the Rasa was adorned for ever on 
all sides with thirty millions of temples constructed with gems which 
vied with rubies. A hundred erores of lovely bowers added to its beauty, 
Akrüra having seen the sphere of the Rasa and Vrincá- vana passed on to 
a Short distance and beheld before him the superb and lovely Vraja of 
Nanda and the mansion of Krisna which vied with the Vaikuntha, 

34-43. That house of Nanda in-laid with excellent 
with stair-eases of gem, decorated with various kinds 
supported by pillars of diamond, was constructed 
Observing all this, he arrived at the threshol 
The warder guiding him, he crossed the royal gate and observed the scene 
as stated below. That royal entrance or portico was decked with flags, 
gems, pearls, diamonds and looking-elasses of gem. It was adorned 
with picturesque avenues of diamond and contained auspieious jars, 
Nanda, the king of the cow-herds, was very pleased to hear of his arrival. 
Attended by Krişna, Balarüma, /risa-bhánu and other kinsmen, he sceured 
before him the presence of prostitutes, loaded Jars, excellent elephants and 
white paddy, provided himself with black cows, oblatione of honey and milk, 
water for washing the feet and diamond seats and reverentially, gently and 
humbly with a smile arrived at the threshold torceeive him, “Phe rojoiced 

Nanda saw the most blessed Akrüra and embraced him, The cow -herds 
also bowed to Akrûra and accepted his blessings, O Muni, this interview 
Was very delightful. Akrûra by turns took Krişna and Balarâma in his lap. 
As the desire cherished by him was fulfilled, he rejoiced at the ideale 
the attainment of the supreme object of his life, There was g thrill of 
raptures in his body and tears of Jey filled his cyes. He then kissed 
their faces, 


gems combined 
of pictures and 
by Vis'wakarma, 
d of the hone of Nanda. 


44-14. Akrüra, then; beheld for a while ‘the tw n : 
blaek beautiful Krişna. "fits 10 two-handed, blue 


i ; a was decked with a yellow dress and a 
wreath of jasmine, The whole body of the wielder of tho flute 


was besmeared with sandal, This. perfect and’ supreme being s 
D 


plored By Draht Siva, Ananta and other gods as well ag by Sanata 
and other saints and continually obs ga) ae 
girls. í 


next moment he again beheld Kr He saw that the 
smiling god was vested now with With Laksmi and 
Saraswati, ornamented With a wreath of wild flowers and attended by 
Sunanda Nanda, Kumuda and other followers, This excellent being 
was adored by adepts with Vedie ineantations, Afterwards ho saw that 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Mise en 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KANDA, 305 


oreo earn TT m Ere DD 


the cams Krigga had three eyes and five faces, adorned with snakes whit 
like erystal and was sleeping naked in his lap in his form of the eternal 
Brahna. All bis body was besmeared with ashes; his head was adornel 
with the load of knotted hair. That great god, the best of the devotees, 
and engaged in meditation, held a rosary of beads in his hand. ‘hen 
again he beheld Krisna like the four- faced most intellectual Brahma in a 
meditative posture and at times hke Dharma or Ananta, or the sun or the 
moon, or a Bralman, or Nature, ora stream of light eternal or like a 
voluptuous being graced with a charm (attractive to the fair sex) which 
could censure millions of Cupids. O Narada, Akrüra, having thus seen 
the boy, took him from his bosom and plaagd him on a lovely throne of 
gem offered by himself. Afterwards, with reverence he threw himself 
prostrato ou the ground with his eight limbs, bowed to Lord Krişna 
cireum-ambulated round him and adored him. 


44-54  Akrüra said, ‘O Lord, you are the cause of all and the nearest of 
our eonnexions, l bow to you. You arethe Lord of the whole universe, 
1 bow to you again an4 avain. O Lord, you are independent of Nature and 
passing excellent, Youare void of all attributes and desiresand invisible. You 
are the Lord ofali the gods, the symbol of divine Nature and the God presid- 
ing overall other gods. O L rd, separate Brahmas, Visnus and Sivas preside 
over countless worlds ; and you are the germ of all the worlds. ‘This is why 
you have been regarded as the emblem of the universe. You are the lord 
of the cowherdesses, the lord of Gane.^4 and the other gods, the husband of 
Radha ; therefore, 1 bow to you again and again. Lord, you aro the emblem 
of the sexual intercourse with Radha, wielding the torm of Ràdhà, the god 
adored by Radha, more beloved to Radha than her hfe, presiding over her 
life and the image of the world. ‘Therefore, I bow to you. .O Lord, you 
are the Vedas and their auxiliary branches; you know the Vedas. You 
preside over the Vedas and you are their origin. All the Vedas recite 
your hymns. Therefore, bow to you. You are the Lord also of that Maha- 
Visnu who constantly holds countless worlds on the pores of his skin. 
Therefore, you are the Lord of the above worlds. I bow to you again and 
again. You are Nature herself and comprehend all the objects of Nature ; 
and you are the Lord ol Nature and you are the Supreme Being. ‘Therefore 
I bow to you again and again." 


55-64.  Akrüra, having thus adored him, suddenly fainted on account 
of his love and religions zeal for Krisna and fell on the earth. Thon he 
again saw the form of Krisna predominant inside and outside his heart 
and on all sides, Nay, it seemed to him that the whole world was full of 

‘Krigna, O Narada, Nanda, coeing that Akrüra was in a fit, placed him 
on a lovely throne of gem. When the fainting fib was over, Nanda asked 
him if he had seen anything wonderful and fod him with sweet-meat. 
When qnestioned again and again as to his welfare and all other incidents, 
Akrüra narrated to him the account of Krisna and said that it was now 
advisable for Krisna'and Balarama to start for Madhupuri for tho release of 
their parents. Whoover attentively reads this hymn composed by Akrü- 
ra gets a fon, if he is son-less, a wife of he is wife-less, wealth if he is poor, 
land incomparable if he is without land, subjeots if-ho has none, celebrity 
and fame if he is void of them. ‘Then Akrára, with a joyful heart, held 
"Krigna to his heart and lay down on a lovely bed of Champak. 


CC-O. In Public Domain! Fund 


€ cDomainFundinpbyIKSMoE —— 


a 


———— 


RR ERRARE — 4 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


868 THE BRAIIMA TAIVARTA PURANA, 


73.81. At day-break he got up, performed his diurnal rites and ac- 
comodated Ramaand Krisna, the lords of the lords of the world, Vrisabhán, 
Nanda, Sunanda and Chandra-bhan with various kinds of objects and five 
kinds of articles prepired out of the cow viz., milk, curd butter 
tirine and dung in his carriage. At that time, the ‘ord of the Vraja and 
the best of the cowherds i.e, Nanda joyfully caused to be sounded, kettle- 
drums, large and small drums, bells; trumpets, mails or armours and various 
kinds of musical instruments, - Tlie cowherdessess hearing the sound of 
the music and beiig apprised cf the depaftitre of Rama and Krigna beheld 
from a distance the chariot and rushed thither in anger. O saint. those 
milk-maids-deputed by Radha Promptly broke the chariot with kicks in 
spite of the remonstrances of Krisna. At this sight the cowherds lamenter 
bitterly. Some powerful milk-maids, placed Krisna on their breast and 
carried him away. At that time some milk-miils anzrily rebuked 
AkKrüra and called him crooked. Some of them tiel Akrüra with their 
clothes and marched in a boly. O Muni, later on, some of them chastised 


him with their arm-lets and hands. Some of them removed his eloth and 
rendered him naked. 


82-88. Later on, Krisna seeing that Akrüra was lacerated throughout 
his body, went to Radha and humbly and nff -ctionately composed her 
with doctrines of transcendental Yoga: whereby he effected the release of 
Alkrüra, Subsequentl; Lord Krisna, the master of the world, seeing 
that a celestial car furnished with picturesque clothes, inlaid with gems, 
constructed by Vis'wa-Karmà and engaged by Indra, descended from the 
sky, proceeded thereon to the house of his mother. Later on, he dined with 
his kinsmen and afterwards lay down cheerfully on his bed, preparing to 
start for the honse of Karna; and at that time he was adored by the Munis, 
gods, Brahma and Siva. O Narada, rimultaneously, al) the milk maids 
along with Radha lay down on lovely beds of flowers and slept. At 


this time all the residents of Gokul were filled with pleasure ; some of 
them sang and others danced, 


CHAPTER LXXI. 


“When, O Narada,’ Radha and the milk- 
bed of flowers courted by the fragrant wind, 
td Prahar of the night, a& an auspicious 
appy ge nation ofthe moon and the star 

yoga, (conjuction), free from th defeet of 
the glance of the harmful planet called RA ab a oe eost 
‘oda and caused auspicious 
smen to their respective 
the Lord of the universe, 
ha, as it were, like her 
He washed his feet, put 
t annointed with sandal 
ere placed jars full of water, purified by 


though quite independent 
dependent en prohibir the flourish of music 
on a pair of clothes and occupied a decent ; 
Bee ete. On his left side w RE 
sandal and associated with fruits and flowers is ri i 1 
; on his ht sid ere 
accomodated the fire and the Brahmins; and on his (m je eer 
women (blessed with husbands and sons) lamps and mirrors. 


places. Krişna, the Creator, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ay 


—————— ————— ———— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


ERISNA JANMA KHANDA, 367 


He held in his band auspicious and moist bent grass, flowers and 
white paddy, and put them on his head. He beheld give, honey; gold, 
silver and curd, annointed his whole body with sandal-paste and put round 
his neck a wreath of flowers. 


10-23. He reverentially adored the elders and the Brahmins and heard 
the sound of the conches, the recitation of the Vedas, the light auspicious 
songs anl the happy blessings of the Brahmins. Afterwards having 
meditated that blessed form, the soures of gool in all places, he set his 
lovely right foot on the soil. ‘Then the Lord held the left side of his 
nose with his middle finger and passed the auspicious wind through the 
right hollow of his nose. Later on, the son of Nanda, the Eternal Being, 
the emblem of supreme and eternal happiness, joyfully arrived at the 
court-yard of Nanda. He is eternal and yet trans:ient. He represents 
the eternal germ and the eternal form. He constantly takes a form; he 
ie over the master of all, and ever the past-master in all acts. His form 
and youth are continually new. His age and dress are ever green. His 
conversation is always original; his love is always fresh; aud the good 
fortune in securing him has a never-fa:ling novelty. The words (sweeter 
than honey) which he uses are ever fresh, and his believers are ever young 
and his position is ever neW. That Lord Krigna, subject to illusion or 
attachment and yet the author of all illusion, lingered again and again in 
the lovely courtyard of Nanda and then prepared to depart. Later on, he 
arrived at the threshold of the city well decked with enchanting columns of 
plantains stitched together with silken thread. ‘That threshold, inlaid 
with ruby, was constructed by Vis’ wa-Karma and purified with musk, 
saffron and sandal. Krişna, with Akrüra and his kinsmen, sat down 
fora while, whereupon Yas'odá, out of affection, embraced the left side 
of his body. Then Krisna was joyfully embraced by Nanda on the right 
side, accosted by his kinsmen and kissed by his parents. 


CHAPTER LXXII. - 


1-14. Nârâyaņa said, “ O saint, Krişņa then bowed to mis spiritual 
guide, came out cf the house of Nanda mounted a celestial car and 
started for the blessed Madhupuri. Akrüra also with his attendants 
having arrived at the enchanting, beautiful and lovely Mathura which 
vied with Amarávati (the immortal city of Indra) saw that the city 
which was constructed by - Vis’ wa-Karmd was inlaid with excellent gems 
and decorated with jars made of tine and invaluable gems. ‘The city was 
intersected with hundreds of pleasing royal roads. ‘The roads were, here 
and there, decorated with moon-stones. Hundred of shops, full of mercan- 
tile commodities and articles made of gems, added immensely to the charm 
ofthe avenues. ‘That city was beautifully surrounded on four sides by 
thousands of tanks adoraed with rubies whose waters had the bue of pure 
crystal. ‘hore was no limit to the beauty of the town in view of the fact 
that young Padmini women (the first of the four classes vf women according. 
to the erotical science) decked with various kinds of ornaments, with barley 
or sunned rice in their hands, with eyes wide open aud uplifted faces 
were standing there and the graceful twist of their brows constantly bet- 
tayed the regtlessnes of their eyes. Those lustful ladies vereed in the art of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
E ni por 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


368 PHE BRAHMA VAIPARTA PURANA. 


sexual intercourse possessed thick loins anl breast, slender waist and 
soft limbs. Some parts of the city were decorated with millions of 
picturesque chariots constructed with gems and equipped with ornaments, 
The city subtainel a great beauty by virtus of thirty millions of 
gardens decorated with various kinds of flowers. In those gardens, the 
male bees greedy of honey and infatuated witk the taste of honey wera 
wandering from flower to flower. The forts, in certain parts of the town, 
renlered it ever impreganble to the enemies. ‘Lhe principal sentinels always 
mounted guard over the forts, ‘Thirty millions of m imsions constructed 


with excellent gems by Vis wa-karmà contributed greatly to the be.uty of 
the town, 


15-28 The lotus-eyed Krişna, while thus o' serving the charms of 
Mathura, beheld in the way a very old and decrepit hump-bieked woman. 
He saw that this hag with a rough exterior stoopel low and was moving 
with the help of a stick and at that time the loo:e flosh of her body ` was 
flapping. O Narada, the oll woman held in her hind a golden cup con- 
taining paste of sandal mixed with saffron and musk, and also delightful 
fragrant articles possessing the smell of honey. 
the graceful Lord, the husband and abode of the 
germ of grace, of a tranquil mien bowed to him 
her head inclining with reverence and with folded palms she annointed 
his dark-blue body with sandil-paste. She also presented the sandal to 

his associates, cireumambulated round S'ri-Krisna aul bowed to him 


again and a:ain. Then that hump-backed woman, morely at tho sight 


of Krisn alone, suddenly became as young and fair as Laksmi herself, 


At that time she looked like a girl, twelve years old, blessed, enchanting, 
and decked: with jevels of gem and clothes purified by fire. — Her 
lips locked like Bimbas : her colour was like that of heated gold; her loins 
and the row of her teeth were enchanting and her rising breast looked like 
the fruit of bael. A smile ever played on her lips. A 


24-31. At that time, her neck became decorated with a 
fascinating wreath of invaluable gems ; her feot were decoratod with 
diamond anklets ; and her gait was turned as gentle as that of the king of 
elephants. She wielded on her head th> load of a graceful chienon cir- 
cular, crooked ou the left side and encircled bv a garlind of. PM 
Above the partings of the hair of tho head of that damsel, there was a 
mark of musk: and beneath the partings there were abandint marks of 
sandal combined with marks of vermilion which assumel the shape 
of a pomegranate flower, ‘That hump-backed woman, versed in sexual 
act, with a diamond mirror in her hand, contributed to the Joy of Krişna 
by casting at him restless glances.  Krigna having cheered her with 
words of encouragement, the chaste woman considered herself blessed and 
went to her own house like Kam dá. There she saw thas 
her house which resembled the mansion of Kamila ws constructed 
with excellens gems and decked with ba n 


Her i edsteads of diamond. That house 
was full of diamond-lamps and looking «lasses, Countless servants,.male 
s 3,.mr 


and female, filled the house. Among the maidservants, some were waiting 
M eo 


on her with vermilion ; others with cloths, betel-leayes, white chowries or 
garlands, 


The old hag having seen 
goddess of fortune, the 
with a smile, and with 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


a 


Digitized by eGangotri and 2A Trust. 


RRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 369 


24-31. The hump-baeked woman having gone there ate delicious sweet- 
meat, slept on a bedstead of gem and was ministered to by maidservants. 
O Mani, at that time, out of deference to Hari, the woman placed by her 
side over the bed betel leaves mixed with camphor, sandal mixed with musk 
and salfron, a pair of jasming-wreaths, cool water incensed’ with camphor 
ete, and delicious sweet-mert. Then with her body, mind and words, she 
contemplated the feet of Hari, his arrival and his graceful lunar face. O 
saint, the woman excited wish lust at the time was constantly engaged in 
the meditation of the form of Hari, beauteous and fair like ten mil- 
lions of Cupid. Nay the whole worll seemed to her to be full of Lord 
Krişna. On the other hand, Krisna saw a gardener going to the royal 
palace with gracefal wreaths of flowers. When the gardener saw the 
husband of Laks ni, he bowed to him with his eight limbs and presented 
all the wreaths to the Supreme Being. Krisna was pleased with his faith, 
eonferrerd upon him the invaluable boon of his own bondage, took the 
wreaths and went to other new royal roads. O great Muni, later on, 
Krişna sawa conceited, stoub washerman, proud of his youth and 
bearing à heap of clothes. He demanded the clothes of the washerman, 
who refused and also used to him hard words thus :— 


43-52. “O foolish fayourite of the cow-herds, these valuable clothes 
are fit for kings A keep2r of cow does not deserve them. O lustful 
villain, you enjoyed the society of cow-herd girls at Vrindávana which 
was without a king. Buton the royal road of Kamsa, you will not 
be capible of such an act. For here, the best of kings rules, and if he 
witnesses a foul deed, he at once chastises the offender.” Madht’s 
slayer (Krisna), Baladeva, Akrüra and the cow-herds laughed at the 
words of the washerman; and the virtuous Krişna killed the washer 
with a slap in his face, took away his bundle of clothes, dressed bis 
associates with some of the clothes and he put on some of 
them himself. Thereafter the prince of washers wielded a celestial body, 
excellent, blue-black, with a smiling face, clad in yellow-dress, enjoying 
a perpetual youth, free from death and decrepitude and, mounting a dia- 
mond ear, went to the Cow- world. Later on, that washer, who had subdu- 
ed his passions was reckoned in the Cow-world among the attendants 
of Lord Krisna and constantly awaited his arrival there. On the 
other hand, a& sunse& Akrüra with Krisna's permission went home. 
Afterwards Krisna went to the house of a certain Vaisnava named 
Kuvinda with pleasure attended by Nanda, Baladeva and the cowherds. 
Kuvinda having dedicated all bis property to Lord Krisna was dwelling 
in his house. That believer saluted aad worshipped Krisga, the asylum 
of fortune, whereupon Krişna gave him che boon of his own bondage 
hardly to be secured even by Brahma and others. 

53.0), Later on, all of them ate the most exquisite sweet-meat and 
slopt on excellent bedsteads. On the other hand, the hump-backed 
woman having slept also, Krigna, the lord of sleep, went to ber and found 
that the beautiful woman who was attended by maid-servants like Kamala 
was asleep on a belstead of gem. Krisna, the Lord"of the world, did 
not disturb the maid-servants in their Slumber bub only rousing the 


47 


D 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


870 THE BRAHMA VAIV ARTA PURANA. 


| 
hump-backed woman from her sleep said 
give me the desired sexual intercourse. [Pair one, you were at first Sûr- 
pa-Nakha, the sister of Ravana. My beloved, during my incarnation 
as Rama, you prayed to secure me as your busband. [Now I have been 
born as Krisna. By virtue of that meditation you won me as your hus- 
band.] Fair one, after haviug tasted the pleasures of my 
you had better go to my domain, the Cow-world, 
birth, death and deerepitude. So saying, Krisna, ths asylum of fortune, 
held the licentious woman to his breast, made her naked, associated with 
her and kissed her. Then the hump-backed woman, while relishing 
the initial sexual intereourse, dragged Krisna to her arms like Kamala 
and kissed his cheek. Both the pair were particularly proficient in 
matters relating to sexual intercourse from which they did not desist 
for a moment. The inter-course took several forms. Then Lord 
Krisna lacerated the rising breast and the loins of the woman with the 
strokes of his keen nails and her lips with the bite of his teeth. Later 
on, a& day-break, when he passed.the semen, the beautiful hump-backed 
woman in the excess of her enjoyments fainted. The 
the heart of Krisna had no idea of day or night, 
day-break, the moon, probably at the sight of the ] 
Later on,a car of diamond descended from the Coy 
backed woman decked with clothes purified b 
of gem sustained a body bright like the heated 
and went to the said world. O Muni, in 


company, 
which is free from 


woman reposing in 
heaven or earth. At 
apses of Krisna, faded. 
v-world and the hump- 
y fire and ornaments 


Kamsa in his sleep during the night, 
i his death. O 
sun dropped from the sky in four frag- 
oon likewise dropped and was divided into ten 
arts. ngs with thunders in their hands and the widowed 
wife ofa S'üdra, naked and with her nose eut, wero visible to him. That 
woman had a rolling tongue anda guffaw of laugh, The sandal-mark on 
her forehead was obliterated. _She held a scimitar and a skull, and put on 
a wreath of Jaya-flowors round her neck. Her cloth and hair were white. 
Taen he saw an ass; a buffalo, a bullock, a boar, a bear, a crow, a vulture, 
a neron, a monkey, a blade of pint grass, a dog, an allicator, a jackal, 
a heap of ashes, a pile of bones, fruits of palm, a cluster of hair clotted 
cotton, extinguished lire, a meteor, a corpse, a man lying om üle funeral 
pile, the potter’s wheel, an oil-mill, a crooked cowree, fuel burnt on the 
funeral pile, dried timber, a heap of erags piles of holy erass head les 
spectre running with a mace in his han? 4 NT 


j s hand, the skull of a dead man, a burnt 
place full of ashes, water-less or drv pool, burnt fish, iron, a wood on fire 


which was extinguished, a naked Sadra suffering. from sOriasis with 
dishevelled hair. Me also saw that his Brahmin SEU ede was 
cursing „him manger and that a mendicant ascetic. and a VOS were 
highly ineensed against him, Kamsa having witnessed iieo eae got 
up, related them to his parents, brother and wife whereupon is wife 
with the apprehension of evil wept with a heart filled with affection, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


“O blessed woman, awake and 


ay 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 371 


SR insna 


Later on, Kamsa seb up a platform or a pulpit in the centre of tha 
council, put his principal elephant on the threshold, directed his expert 
wrestling soldiers to perform auspicious rites and caused the Brahmins to 
perform beneficial and holy rites to secure welfare or avert calamities, after 
having well decorated the council and carefully appointed competent 
priests to perform the sacrifice. 


$3.91. Then he held in his hand the keen-edged scimitar, took Lis 
seat on the lovely platform, deputed to the war expert warriors and pro- 
perly accomodated the kings, Munis and his friends, pious and skilled in 
war, in their respective places. O Narada, Govinda, (Krişna) then came 
with Baladeva, entered into the house’ where the bow was kept and easily 
broke the bow of S’iva. At that time the sound caused by the breaking 
of the bow deafened all the inhabitants of Mathura to the sorrow of 
Kamsa and the great joy of Vasudeva and Devaki. Later on, Krisna 
killed at the threshold the elephant and the principal wrestler and 
entered into the council. The ascetics beheld Krisna as the Supreme 
Being and absolute spirit possessed of an ilentieal form either in the 
lotus of their heart or outside their heart. The assembled kings beheld 
him as a great king, as a chastiser with the mace or club in his hand ; aad 
Vasudeva and Devaki beheld him asa suek:ng infant with his mouth 
full of milk. The women beheld him as the fountain-head of charms 
vested in ten millions of Cupids. Kamsa beheld him as the emblem of 
all destructive time: and the relations of Kamsa saw him as an enemy. 
At that time, Krişna bowed to the Munis, the Brahmins and spiritual 
guide, held the wheel called Sudars’ana and approached the dais erected, by 


Kamsa. 


99.104. King Kamsa at that time saw that the whole world 
was full of Krigna and beheld before him a diamond car decorated with 
wreaths of pearls. O Muni, the gracious Krisna, the ‘friend of his 
believers, relented at the sight. of his believer, dragged Kamsa with ease 
and slew him. Whereupon Kamsa wielded a celestial form and being 
elated with joy went to the land of Visnu. A supreme light emanated 
from his body and merged in the lotus-feet of Krisna. Krişna, after 
having performed the funeral rites of Kamsa, distributed wealth to the 
Brahmins. He bestowed the kingdom and the royal: parasol on the 
wise Urga-Sena. This Ugra-Sena of the lunar race, though he became a 
king, was overwhelmed with grief for the loss of his son; Kamsa's 
mother and wives wept. His kinsmen, maternal relations, sisters and the 
wife of his brother thus lamented, “O great king, we pray you, 
manifest yourself for a while to us and having ascended the throne, 
preservo your kingdom, relations, wealth and armies. O most powerful 
king, where did you go after forsaking your orphan relations ? S'ri Krisna, 
the Lord of illusion, who has created endless worlds including animate and 
inanimate objects. from Brahma down toa grass; in whose meditation 
Brahma, S'iva, Ananta, Dharma the Sun, Ganes'a, the excellent Munis and 
saints are constantly immersed, who is adored with awe by the gods, Sara- 
swati and the goddess Nature ; who is self-determining (t. e. can do any- 
thing as he pleases), who is free from desire, void of attributes, incorruptible, 
passing excellent ; who is the suprema spirit and god eternal and full of 


* CC-O. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


872 | . TUE BRAHMA VAITARTA PURANA. 


MÀ € 


effulgence ; who wields a body out of compassion for his worshippers ; who 
is all happiness, eternal and imperishable, who constantly assumes a form ; 
the same Krisna through the powers of his illusion has descended to the 


earth in the guise of a cewherd boy to relieve the earth of her burden, 


105-115. None can preserve a person whom Krisna, the Lord of all and 
the Supreme Spirit, destroys ; and none: can deswoy him whom he pre- 
serves.” O great Muni, the relations of Kamsa paused after having said 
so. For their own redemption, they fed many Brahmins and gave them 
wealth profusely. At that time Lord Krisna, the universal spirit, 
went tohis parents, cut off the fetters of iron and restored them to 
liberty. Afterwards Krisna, the Lord of gods, bowed to his parents like 
a staff (z. e., prostrate) and reverentially inclining his shoulders adored them 
thus, “O father, O mother, a fool who does not support his parents 
or his tutor (the source of knowledge) or his spiritual guide (the source 
of mantras) remains impure throughout his life. Of all respectable persons, 
the father is the most adorable and venerable ; but the mother by sustain- 
ing the child in the womb and maintaining him isa hundred times 
superior tothe father. The mother is tho emblem of the earth and the 
greatest of all benefactors, male or female. There is no friend or relations 
greater than the mother. Only the authors of knowledge and the mantra, 
t. e., the tutor and the spiritual guide are vastly superior to the mother, 
They are like gods." O saints, Krişna. so saying, bowed to them again 
with Balarima, held them to their breast and entertained them 
to sweet-meat and milk boiled with rice and sugar. Afterwards 
with great esteem he fed Nanda and the cow-herds also. Later cn 
Vasudeva caused the Brahmins to perform auspicious rites, profusely 
feasted them and cheerfully gave them wealth in abundance, 


CHAPTER LXXIII. 

1-12, Narayana said, “ Krişna and Balarama, later on, consoled 
their father Nanda with the celestial, metaphysical Yoga. O best of 
Munis, Krisna, after having given him the above Yoga, again saw that 
Nanda was weeping aloud in a helpless manner for tho grief eaused 
by the separation from his son and said, *O father Nanda, gladly listen 
to iny words, banish your grief and Compose yourself. In olden times, 


on the holy coast of Puskara I imparted wisdom to Brahma, Ananta, 
Ganesa, Káma, the Sun, the saints and che ascetics ;and now Dm going 
to give you the same. Please accept it. O father, no one has a father, 
son or mother, Every one comes to the world or goes away from the 
world according to his previous Karma ; and subject to the same law, 
persons are born in partieular places : some Women are born as the wives 
of Brahma, Indra a king, ora Brahmin some persons are born in the 
womb of Ksatriya or Vaisya or Südra women, Some persons are born as 
birds or beasts, O sire, led by my illusions some people are engaged in 
the joys of material prosperity, others are overwhelmed with grief by the 
loss of relations, subjects, wealth and land ; but no wise man who is my 
believer or the follower of the tenets of, my religion, or who is engaged 
1n my service or inspired with religious zeal -is -ever loverwhelmed 


with grief, Only a fool is aggrieved: Through my fear, the wind 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


E) 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA 373 


Se 


constantly blows. the sun and the moon shed their beams in time, Indra 
rains in due tim», fire burns, death moves among animals, and trees yield 
fruits and flowers in time. 

13-22. O king of the Vraja, at my command, the win] rests without 
‘support. That wind is the receptacle of the tortoise: the tortoise is 
the container of Ananta who is the prop of the mountains: and the 
mountains constitute the prop of the seven Pàtáls. O sage, stationary 
water rests on the Patals ; and the earth rests on the waters. ‘The earth 
(Vasundhara) is the ree ptacle of the sevon heavens and planets that 
move on effulgent wheels ; and the Vaikuntha which transeerds the 
universe of Brahm’ is without a prop. The Goloka is situated 500 
millions of Yojans above the Vaikunthe. It is constructed with excellent 
gems and without a prop. It has seven gates, seven quintessences and 
' seven moats. It has a hundred thousand moats and is decorated with the 
Virajà river. It is surrounded by a lovely mountain of diamond called 
S'ata-S'ringa. Each of its bright summits measures ten thousand yojans. 
Its circumference is a hundred crores of Yojans ; and its hei:ht is 
a hundred times as great. It is a lakh of Yojans in breadth. In that 
mountain is manifest the circular sphere of the Rasa constructed with 
gens, bright like the rays of the moon and extended over an area of 
10,000 Yojans. It is surrounded by a thousand Kalpa trees and tecms 
with flowers. It contains a huudred gardens of flowers and plants 
growing flowers of various kinds It contaius thirty millions of palaees 
of gem aud countless diamond lamps and jars. It is constantly protected 
by a hundred thousand eow-herdesses. 


23-32. It contains many epjoyable articles, hundreds of pools of 
honey and nectar. It is full of countless articles even fit for the enjoy- 
mert of Kama. O king of the Vraja, no clever man versel in the 
Vedas can ascertain the number of houses situated in the Goloxa; mo, 
not even the Vedas themselves. In the midst of those houses is mani- 
fest the camp of Rádhà decked. with thirty millions of invalvable 
gems, That camp is rendered bright by invaluable jars of gem, 
filled with diamond looking glasses and invaluable columns of gem. 
That pavilion or camp inlaid with pearls and diamonds and decked. with 
diamond wreaths and various kinds of pictures has an indescribable 
charm.’ Therein diamond-lamps are constantly burning; the stair- 
cases are full of gems; and, here and there, shine cups of diamond and 
wonderful bedsteads. [t is surrounded by three picturesque invaluable 
ramparts of gem and three moats. It contains three inaccessible gate 
ways. That moat has gob 16 cells. On each of the gates of the cell, 
16 lakhs of cowherdesses are constantly mounting guard. In the interior 
of the pavilion, dwell the myrmidons of Radha bright like a hundred 
moons and possessing the grace of heated gold. Their toilet is made 
of cloth consecrated by fire: and their bodies are ornamented with 
gems, 

33-43. In the mansion of Radha, there is a lovely court-yard cons- 
tructed with excellent gems and decked with invaluable pillars of gem. 
That court-yard contatns ‘auspicious jacs of gem associated with fruits 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
374 THE BRAHMA PATPARTA PURANA., 
ccc NNNM ER — — 7 


and foliage and pulpits of gem adorned with strings of pearl, Some 
laces contain invaluable mirrors of gemi; arid other places Contain 
Ioa jewels constructed with precious diamonds. Jn the midst 
of these; Radha, fair as white champak and graceful like ten 
millions of full nioOns, is seated on a throne of gem and seryed by a hun- 
dretl thdiisand Edw-lietdesses, She is decked with precious ornaments and 
apparel of sem. She holds in Her felt land g ldokingy glass of gem. and in 
her right hand a lovely lotus of Sem, vermilion She js miarked with musk 
and sandal paste also with lovely vermilion : and the last mark assuities 
the form of a pomegranate. She is decorated with jasmine wreath and 
sustains on her head the lo d of a chiznon attractive to the: mind of the 
ascetics and leaning on the left side. In tht cow-world Radha is served 
with white ehowries bv cow-herdesses ornamented with invaluable jewels 
of gem like herself, “Radha, the best of goddesses, is the presiding deity 
of my life, O father, the same Radha, cursed by Sridâma has now 
deseended to the earth as the daughter of Vriss-bhánu and for that 
Curse she will he separated from me fora hundred ye urs, During this 
period I shail relieve the earth of ier burden and afterwards go again to the 
Cowworld along with her, Now please to go to the enclosure of eowherds, 


4451. 1 shall be united with tou, Yas'odá, cow-herds (male and 
female), "Vrisa bhann, his wife Kalàvati and other relations in that Cow. 
world. O father, I am the soul ofall beings. In their heart, I dwell] 
ühmixed with any one as the witness of all. The human soul is my 
reflection : this is sanctioned by all authorities. Nature is my modifica- 
tion; or even I myself am that Nature. Ina word, there is no difference 
between me and Radha as between milk and its whiteness, O King, as 
there is no difference between the water and its coolness, the fire and its 
burning faculty, the sky and sound, the earth and smell, the moon and its 
Brace, and the sun and its radianee, tho soul and the living being; so 
Radha and I are not different; O father, vivo up the idea that Radha 
1s but a, milkmaid and I am your son. I am the Cause of all, the 
original being; and Radha is the Naturo, the mistress of all. O father 
Nanda, at first to Brahma whose birth cannot bo ascertained, T revealed 
my glory and magnificence ; now listen cheerfully to the Samo account 
which gives delight, : 

52-61. I myself am the two-handed Krisn 
Goloka, the four-handed Visnu m the Vaiku 

iva. Iam Brahina in the land of Br 


a among the eodg. in the 
alkuntha and jiva in the land of 
ahmá. Tam the sun among the 
nd the water among liquids, I am 
among the Speedy, Yama among 
destroyers, Iam A among letters, 


the mind among passions, the wind 
ehastisers and the time among 


“ma among the Vedag the husband of Sachi among the fourteen 
Indras, Kuvera among the wealthy and fs ana among the lords of quarters; 
Iam the sky among things thai pervade, the son] among 


living beings 
1 ople oceupying different Stages of life, I 
Am the rare, invaluable gem among riches, gold amone metals and 
Kaustubha among gems, I am the holy stone among the receptacles 
of worship, the holy basil among leaves, the Párijáta among flowers, the 


uskara among sacred places or lioly lands, Sanat-Kumara among the 


and the Brahman among pe 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


bx. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. $15 


oe 


B >. (n 7-14 ^ = oe ^ Li 

Vaisnavas, Granos'a among ascetics, Kartika among generals, and Laksmana 
among archers. Lam Rama among kings, the moon among stars, the 
Agraháyana among months, the spring among seasons the sunday among 
days. tho Ekàdasi among festivals, the earth among those who forbear 
and the mother among relations. 


62.72. I am tho honey among eatables, the gee among things 
produced from the cow, the Kalpa among trees, the Surabhi among the 
cows of desire, she purifying Ganges among rivers, the muse (goddess 
of knowledge) among the learned, the Pranava “the mystie sylla- 
ble, among mantras. I am the seed of knowledge, the paddy among 
crops, the holy fig tree in the kingdom of vegetables, the source (main 
spring) of mantras among preceptors and Kas’yapa among the lords of 
creation. I am Garuda among birds, Ananta among snakes, the king 
among men, Dhrigu among Drühmin saints, Narada among godly saints, 
Janaka among royal saints, S‘uka among great saints. Iam Chitra-ratha 
among,the Gandarbhas, Kapila among adepts, Vrihaspati among the 
wise, Sukra among poets, Saturn among planets, Vis'wa-Karmáà among 
architects, the lion among fawns and the conyeyance of S'iva among 
bullocks. I am  Airávata among elephants, Giyatri among metres, 
Himalaya among those who possess gems, Durg& among goddesses of 
Nature, Laksmi among goddesses S'atarupà among women, Radha 
among my favourites, Sivitri (the mother of the. Vedas) among the 
chaste, Prahlada among demons and Bali among the strong. 

1383. I am Narayana the saint among the wise, Tanümán 
among monkeys, Arjuna among the Pandavas, Manasé among the snake 
nymphs, Dropavasu among the Vasus, Drona cloud among the clouds, 
India among continents, Kama among the licentious males, Rambhá 
among licentious females. I am S'/ánti among mothers, Rati among the 
fair, Dharma among witnesses, the evening among days, (or divisions of 
the day) the dawn among moments, Vibhisana among demons, Kálágni- 
Rudra ameng the eleveu Rudras, Samhár-Bhairava among the Bhairavas. 
O Nanda, I am Nandi among the followers of S'iva, Vrindávana among 
forests, Pànchajanya among conches, the head among the members of 
the body, the best and supreme Purina SrimatBhagvat among the 
Puranas, Mahabharata among histories and Paneh- Rátri by Kapila among 
the Pancharatris. I am the Sw ambhuva Manu among Manus, Vyása 
among tho Munis, Swadhà among the wives of the mines, Swiha among 
the wives of fire, the royal saerilice among sacrifices, Daksinà among the 
wives cf Yajfia and the great Paras u-rima, the son of Jamadagni among 
those who know the scriptures, I am Sita among those versed in the 
Purünas, Angirà among the moralists, the Vignu-eow among cows, the 
Divine strength among all kinds of strength, the bent grass among 
medicinal plants, the holy grass among grasses, truthfulness among 
pious deeds and the son ameng favourites. 

84-02. Iam the disease among enemies, the fever among diseases, 
my faith and bondage among“ boons, the stage ofa house-holdor among 
different stages of a human life ; renouncing the world among the discreet, 
the Sudarsana among weapons, welfare among auspicious bless- 


ings, profounl wisdom among groat virbues, ascetigiem or stoicism oF 


a 


7 


GUNT ON 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Fundin 
gal . ng by IKS ra ee 
F ee T Kou a tae ri 


376 THE BEALL VAIVARTA PURANA. 


— 


inliffarenee among pleasures. I am the sweet word among delightful 
things, self sacritice among gifts, the accumulation of virtues among thineg 
accumulate l, the worship of Hari among deeds, meditation among austere 
acts, the fruit of redemption among fruits. I am absclute freedom 
among the eight kinds of perfection, Kás'i among cities, Kanch? amon 

biz towns and a colony of Vaisnavas among places. Iam the Maha-. 
Visna, the container of all among dense things, and the indestructible 
atom among mintest objects. I am As’wint Kumara among physicians, 
aleemy among medicines and Dhanwantari among those conversant 
with spells which serves as antidotes of poison. I am Meyha-Mallara 
among the modes of music and Kamoda among the tunes of music, I 
am S'ri-dàma among my followers and Uddhava among my friends. Iam 
the cow among beasts, the sandal wood among forests, a place frequented 
by pilgrims among holy places and a Vaisuava among fearless people. 
In a word, there is none superior toa Vaisnava who recites the holy 
mantras, 


93-108. Fther, I am the blossom of trees. I exist in all things. 
lam the mine of all things. In a word, as there is fruit in the tree, as 
there is seed ofthe treein the fruit, so I always dwell in all beings 
and all beings dwell in me. But lalone am the cause of all causes. I 
myself have no cause. I am the gol and preserver of all. No ono 
preserves m». lam the cause and the effect. Therefore savants hold 
that I am the gol and genesis of all. Sinners bewildered by m 
illusion canaot comprehend me. Sinful persons mocked by fate foolishly 
slight me, although I am the spirit of all beings ; for thereby they slight 
their own spirit. O father, hunger, thirst and other propensities manifest 
themselves iu those places over which I preside: so as soon as I enter into 
the body of a mun, the above propensittes also, follow me there like my 
faithful adherents. O father Nanda, lord of the Vraja, take this wise 
counsel from me ; go to the Vraja and having arrived there communieate 
it to Radha and Yas'odà. Nanda the king of the Vraja, having 
gained this knowledge from Krisna went to the Vriaja with the obedi- 
ent cowherds and narrated the doctrine of wisdom to Radha and Yas'odà O 
Narada, later on by virt ie of this profound wisdom, they regarded Kris na 
as the great Lord, the Supreme Brahma, dissociated from all objects 
and associated with spell or illusion. Nanda, the king of the Vraja, 
being deputed by Yas'odà again came to Krisna, the sbn of Nanda, full 
of supreme happiness and eulogised him according to the hymn stated 


in the Sima Veda, which was given by Brahma bef ibti the 
side of bis son, wept continually. i See RS OS 


ee 
CHAPTER LXXIV, 

1-9. Narayana said, “O Narada, Lord Krisna, the eternal spirit, 
the supreme being who is always eager to show compassion to his 
beli:vers, who is vastly Superior even to nature void of attributes, who 
1s constantly adored by Brahma, S’tva and Ananta, who is all happiness, 
who is supreme and perfect, who is the Lerd of the universe, was 
pleased with the hymn of Nanda who arrived from Gokul and who was 
NUS the pinge of separation and. said, "o ober Nande, uo 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Sq 


Ww 


SE N TE 


, 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA, 311. 


listen to the doctrine of supreme truth (likely to cut asunder the 
ties of sorrow, and banish sorrows caused by delusion) and go to the Vraja. 
O king of the Vraja, the wind, the earth, the sky, the water and the 
heat (or fire) these objects constitute the five elements ascertained by 
the Vedas. O father, all creatures come out of these five elements 
and are hence styled as Pàneha-bhautika (č. €., eomposed of five elements) 
and as such are artificial. Living beings, deluded by my spell, make a 
distinction between themselves and others. These five elements, earth 
elc., constantly adopt the namo of “ bodies" a name which is erroneous 
and delusive. That is, they are fallaciously called bodies. O father, none is 
anybody’s son or father, or wife or husband. Every one according to his 
Karma repeatedly noder-goos birth and constantly frequents the globe. 
According to their Karma, living beings are born, or die, or are subject to 
pleasure, pain, fear and sorrow. 

10-20 According to Karma, some go to heaven or are severally born 
in the houses of a Brahmin, Ksitriya, Vai'sya or a S'üdra. S'ubject to the 
same law, some are born in ignoble families ; others are born as beasts 
or birds or small animals or worms subsisting on ordure. Sire, people 
come and go, again and again. through Karma. Only my believers whom 
Ilove can uproot Karma, O lord of the Vraja, there are four ages, 
(according to calculation) viz., Satya, "Tretà, Dwapara and Kali. After 
the lapse of 25,000 ages as mentioned above. one Manu deelines or falls. 
Indra's longevity is equal to Manu's. The period occupied by the 
longevity allotted to 14 Indras constitutes a -day of Brahma. 
Savants conversant with ages have fixed an equal period his night 
According to the measure of the days as stated above, his months and 
years have been determined. According to this ealeulation, a hundred 
years constitute the life of Brahma ; but a mere wink of my eye causes 
the fall of Brahm’. O father, all objects from Brahma down to a. grass 
are fictitious ; only the Supreme Being who takes a figure only out of 
compassion for his adherents is real, My believers who worship me in 
the light of my mantra or tenets, as soon as they quit their bodies on 
earth, eub off the ties of their previous Karma and go to the Goloka. Such 
people attain everlasting bodies free from birth, death and decrepitude. 


, They never die in spite of the downfall of countless Brahmas. My 


believers never ceme to grief; for my Sudars'ana wheel preserves them 
by all means, : 
21:25. My believer is strouger than myself. At times I may be 
anxious but he is never anxious. For I am his master; but I have no 
master ‘or parents. Now leave the idea that I am your son but adore 
me as Brahma: in which case you will be able to cut asunder the ties 
of Karma and go personally to Brahmé-loka. © lord of the Vraja, now 
go back to Vraja along with other persons who have arrived with you 
here and expound this doctrine relating to wisdom to Yas'odà, the 
cow. herds and cowherdeses.” Lord Krisna, so saying, paused and Nanda, 
the king of the cow-herd enclosure, again asked him thus: “ O Krişna, 
you are the author of the most interesting Vedas. I ama great fool. 
Therefore impart to me worldly wisdom whereby I might be able to 
attain the supreme position, " ‘I'he omniscient Lord Krisna listened to his 
words and gave a description of the diurnal rites independent of the Vedas. 


48 ; ! 


CC-0. In Public pomagao g by IKS-MoE 
3 = doolt E 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


578 THE BRAHÀA FAIVAnTÀ PURANA, 


ee 


CHAPTER LXXV, 


1-12. The Lord said,“ O Nanda, I am going to deseribe to you the 
most wonderful doctrine on wisdom hardly to be secured by the Vedas 
and the Puranas, which is most mysterious. O Lordof the Vraja, 
nob proper to repose trust in a whore who is full of delusion and e 
who isa thorn in the way of redemption. She thwarts the enjoyments 
‘derived from belief in Hari and is the root cause of its destruction. A 
house-holder who is my believer ought to get up every day in the Morning, 
put off his night clothes, recollect his tutelary deity in the lotus of his 
heart and his spiritual guide in the aperture at the top of his head, 
finish his morning rites and bathe in pure water. An intelligent 
believer, if he wants to secure redemption, must not cherish in his heart 
the desire of any thing worldly. Then after ablution, he ought to 
recollect Hari, perform his Gayatri, and go home. It is proper for him 
to enter his house after washing his feet and putting on a pair of 
clothes. Then he should worship me (the Supreme Being), the cause of 

redemption on the Holy Stone, a diamond, a musical instrument, a statue, 
water, a Brühmin, a spiritual guide, the cow-pen, or a lotus of eight leaves 
constructed with sandal. The person, who performs the vow, may in- 
voke me everywhere except on the Holy Stone, or the water, contemplata 
my figure according to the mantras and reverentially and with fourteen 
ingredients worship me with the radical mantra, Then the worshipper 
should worship Sri-dima, Sudáma, Vasndeva, Bir-bhanu and Sar-bhanu 
(i.e. the five cow-herds) Sunanda, Nanda, the attendent named Kumuda, 
Sudars'an, Laksmi, Saraswati, Durga, Radha, Ganga, the earth, the spiri- 
tualguide, the holy basil, S'iva, Kartika and Ganes'a. 


it is 
rror, 


13-22, A wise man should in the first 
impediments or calamities worship Ganes'a, the 


the quarters. "The Vedas hold that these g 
and are the sources of redemption. 
to remove evil, the sun to cure the 


A me ae i ain his object: 
S'iva to attain wisdom, and Párvatí to obtain intelligence and redone 
tion. The worship of these will surely purify the ‘heart, Later on, my 


read my hymn and 
do obeisance to the 
€ ) iurnal rites as well 
duties preseribed for him by the 
ot see ordure (the, 
a male organ, the 
ease, and poverty), the thigh, face, breast 
Woman is also the 
danger. ‘Therefore one must not 

intercourse with his omn Ue during the day, 
` diseased if a person looks at the sky Lining on] : 

fore one ought nof to do so. If one looks at it by eh Er 


j : ; bance, t llec 
Hari and recite the name of Narada, seven time, S Te ; 


1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


S. 


ligas caia 


i c 


€ 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


RRISNA JANMA KHANDA. - gro 


nimena — — U————ÀÁ—À— Á——— HÀ —À— 


93-35 The sight of the sun and the moon at sunset and of the sun 
obscured by dense clouds at noon (the source of disease) is also pro- 
hibited. The sight of the sun and the noon as reflected in the water 
and the observation of the sexual intercourse committed by others cause 
separation from one’s friend ; therefore such acts should be avoided. 
Sleeping, eating, bathing or dwelling with a sinner is improper; for 
such an act brings universal ruin. Like a drop of oil on the surface 
of the water, sins undoubtedly float over a person if he converses, 
sleeps, eats, or dwells with a sinner, or touches his body. A man 
approaching a destructive animal comes to grief. The society of a 
hypocrite brings sorrow and hence it is improper. One ought not to 
injure a Brahmin ora cow and particularly the Vaisnavas or do any 
other harmful act; for such an act cruses universal | ruin. The misappro- 
priation of the fees or wealth of a god, a Devala (a Brahmin who attends 
upon an idol and subsists upon its offerings) ora Vaisnava brings about 
universal destruction and is therefore improper. Whoever steals the , 
property of a Bidhmin either given to him by himself or others dwells 
in the ordure as a worm for 60.000 years. Afterwards he undoubtedy 
attains the condition ofa vulture for millons and millons of years, a 
boar for seven births, a beast of prey fora hundred births, a rhinoceros 
for a hundred births, a horse for a hundred births, an alligator for seven 
births, and a worm of the vagina of prostitutes for seven births. Later on, 
the sinner attains the state of a worm of the ulcer of a prostitute for seven 
births, an iguana for sevon births, a mongoose for seven births, a crooked 
snake for seven births, a jackal for scven births, a ram for seven births, 
and a goat for seven births. à 


36-42. Later on, he attains the condition of a boar for seven births, 
a jackal for a hundred thousand births and a leech for a long time. Be- 
sides, the sinner suffers endless torments in the hell called Kumbhipaka 
so long as Brahma exists. And if any one after having engaged a Brah- 
min to perform a ceremony does not give him his fee sacerdotal, he 
should give him double the amount of his fee after the expiry of a night, 
a hundred times his fee after a month, a thousand times his fee after lapse 
of two months; bit ifa year expires, the donor must go to hell. If the 
donor does not give the fee &hrough ignorance, and if the donee also does 
not demand his fee, then both of them shall go to hell. Besides this, the 
donor also gets diseased. O lord of the Vraja, any one who injures 
or kills a Brahmin loses his descendants, prosperity and grace and passes 
his days like a begar. Whoever does not bow toa god, or a Brahmin 
comes to grief. Whoever does not reverence his spiritual guide surely 
goes to the hell called Raurava. A silly woman of bad character who 
does not regard her husband as Hari and chastises him surely goes to 
the hell called Kumbhipaka. 
! 48-52. A woman who admonishes her husband is born as a crow; 
if she injures him, she is born asa sow;if she is angry with him, she 
ie'born a snake: ifshe shows her vanity, she is born as an ass ; if she 
uses hard words, she is born asa bitch; ifshe looks af him with an 
evil eye, she is born asa blind woman. A chaste woman ,goes to the 
- Vaikugtha along with her husband, A. fool who slande:s Siva, Durga, 


4 


M 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


, Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. ! 
330 THE BRAHMA TAIPARTASPURANA. 


a a a et NEY 6 


Ganes'a, the Sun, a Brahmin, a Vaisnava and Visnu goes to the hell called 


the great Raurava. A person who does not maintain his parents, chaste’, 


wife, spiritual guide, and widowed sister, and widowed daughter goes to 
hell. Ifa Ksatriya, Vais'ya or Südra male has no faith in Hari or a 
Brâhmin and if a youthful woman has no faith in her husband, then 
these wretches undoubtedly suffer the torments of hell. Those Brühmins 
whoalways drink the nectar of the feet of Hari represented by the 
Holy Stone and consume his offerings, conseerate holy plaees, the earth 
and hundreds of their paternal ancestors, A Bráhimin who eats flash 
dedicated to the manes is not polluted thereby ; but one who eats flesh in 
vain goes to the hell called the great Raurava. Ifa Brahmin voluntar- 
ily eats fish, he must fast for three nights and perform the vow of 
Chandrayana for the expiation of his sin, Whoever abstains from fish 
and flesh and daily takes the remnants of the food offered to Visuu no 
doubt reaps the fruits of the horse-sacrifice at every step. 

53-61. Whoever preserves the vow of EkÀ-Das'i and Janmástamt no 
doubt secures immunity from ali sins acquired by him in a hundred 


hirths. .Nay,all the sinful acts committed by him in his infancy, ehild- . 


hood, youth and oll ave are there-by reduced to dust. Eating on the day 
of Ek&-Das't or Janmastam) is just like eating all the sins engendered in 
the three worlds unquestionably, But this rule does not hold good with 
regard -to diseased men, very old popie and children. People ean 


be redeemed from such sins, if they eive to'a Brahmin twice as much ` 


food as could be consumed by themselves. Whoever -capable of fasting 
eats on the day of Siva-rátri or Ràm-navami goes to the hell ealled the 
great Raurava. A person who enjoys a woman or uses oil or meat on 
the days of the dark night, on the lunar day of the full-moon or on tho 
fonrteenth or eighth day of the lunar’ month is born as 4 Chandála, 
Every one must abstain on Sunday from fish, flesh, lentil, ginger, red 
pot-herb and must not eat on that day in a vessel of bell-metal. O lord 
of the Vraja, a Bráhmin who aceidentally uses’ food offered 
in her menses, a whore, or a childless widow undoubte 
ordure. He always leads an impure life ag 
does nof reap the fruits of any acb performed by 


by a woman 
dly consumes 
long as he lives. He 
him during the day. 


62-77. A woman who resorts to four Galiants is calle] a prostitute. She 
isnot entitled to cook in the interests of tha gods or the manes. A person who 
eats the food of a village priest or the food of a S'üdra inc y 
funeral ceremony performed by the said S'üdra dwells in 
sun and the moon exist. The Brahmins who on the day of th 
performed by a S'üdra eat food connected wit; 

1n hell as long as Brahma exists, Whoever, on the day of the above funerals, : 
even tastes his food elsewhere at the request of a S'üdra is excluded or 
outeasted by all religions and regarded : 
exclude like a S'üdra from the Privileges 
viz, a Brühmin who subsists upon ink 
(a Brahmin who subsists upon the offerings of an idol) 
carries or drives a bull or burns the dead body of a S/à 
min husband ofa S'üdra woman. An impure man voidlof his diurnal 
rites is always unworthy of all acts. None of the acts p 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


— 


á 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA RIMANDA. — " 381 


aa o o sooo 


mue RM 
is effectual. A Brihmin who does not worship Visnu is like a Chandal ; 
and one who adopts the tenets of Bama (name of Gouri, Laksmí or 
Saraswati) goes to hell A wise man should not east his ordure into 
the bed of a river, into a hole, or at the root of the tree, or near the 
water, or in the vicinity of temples or into a field of crops. O Nanda, 
king of Vraja, after having relieved nature a wise man in order to purity 
himself should avoid the mud eaused by white ants i.e. the anto hill or mud 
dug up by rats, the mud in the middle of water, or in the basin of 
water dug round the root of a tree, or the mud extracted from pools, 
fields of crops root of trees, or the bed of a river. 

73 82, A woman cutting a pumpkin gourd, or a man putting out 
a lamp becomes diseased for three births and is reduced to poverty at 
every birth. A person who casts into the ground a lamp, the male organ 
of Siva, a diamond, a pearl, the cow-dung, the holy stone, a gem, an idol, 
the saered thread, gold, the conch, the urine of cow, ghee or the water of 
the Holy Stone, sinks low. That sinner by turns attains the condition 
ofa poor man, à miser, a leper, a man without issne or wife or land or 
retinue or friend. a deformed man, a blind man, a cripple, a lame man, à 
He who sleeps both in the day and in the night or on 
both the occasions cohabits with women becomes diseased for seven births 
and is subject to poverty for seven births. A wretch who rinses his mouth . 
after the rise of the Sun (the lord of the world) is never entitled to say 
€ I shall worship Visnu". Even the worship of Siva's male organ for 
one time after having constructed it with clay or cow dung and 
sand sceures dwelling in heaven for a hundred ages : and whoever worships 
a hundred such organs obtains the desired meed; and whoever worships & 
hundred thousand such organs attains the position of S'iva, but one who 
does not worship S'iva goes to hell. 

$3.91. Those who slander or ealumniate the venerable, and most lovely 

ya dwell in hell as long as Brahma exists and suffer endless torments. 

If there be gvavel in the revered organ of S'iva, the worshipper becomes 
blind; and if there be hairinit he turns an infidel. It the organ be 
small, the worshipper is rendered poor, miserly, and diseased: if it is defective 
in form, he attains a mean birth. Among my favourites, a Brühmin is 
the chief. Laksmi who dwells in my heart is dearer to me than a Brahmin; 


erooked man. 


. Radha is dearer than Laksmi; my believer is dearer than Radha; and 


S'iva is dearer than my believer. I follow that man who constantly 
utters the name of S'iva, as soon as I hear his voice. My mind rests 
with my believer : my life is associated with Radha I and my soul always 
dwell with Siva, So S'iva “is dearer to me than my life. Look, that 
original faculty of Narayana, the source of the creation, preservation and 
destraction of the world, sustains me when I undertake the task of 
creation. ‘That faculty whereby Brahma and ocher gods have been created, 
wherely the world is ever erowned with success, and the universe is evolved 
into existence, and without whose support the world cannot last for a 
minute; the same faculty, I say, T have given to S'iva. 

. 92-102. That original faculty is the presiding goddess of mercy, sleep, 
hunger, gratifie ution, thirst, esteem, forgiveness, sustenance, contentment, 
development, . tranquillity and shame. That goddess exists in the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


883 THE BRAHMA VAIPARTA PURANA. 
_ PNE ei 


Vaikuntha as the most virtuous Laksmi, as the chaste Radha in the 
Cow-world and as the terrestrial godless of fortune in the sea of milk, 
She destroys poverty and calamity; she is Durgá, the daughter of Menakà: 
and that Durga in the form of the celestial guddess of fortune presides 
Over every house of the gods including Indra. She is the goddess of 
knowledge; she is Savitri presiding over the Bra hmins ; she is the faculty 
of Consumption in fire; the lustre in the sun, the grace in the full moon, 
the coolness in the water, and the faculty of producing crops and sustain. 
ing things on earth. She is the faculty of Brahma in the Brihmins, 
the divine faculty in the gods; she is the devotion of the asceties, the 
household goddess of the householders, the faeulty of redemption of those 
who have obtained emaneipation, the hope of worldly men and represents 
the faculty ` of worship (the  souree of constant faith in 
Hari) to my believers. The same goddess is the royal goddess 
of fortune tothe kings, profit to the merchants ; and also serves as a boat to 
those who want to cross the sea of the world and enables them to solvee 
the mysteries of creation. She represents the pure intellect to the wise, 
the power of interpretation of the Vedas and munificence to generous 
people. She represents the faith of the Ksatrias in the Brahmins 
and the devotion of chaste women to their husbands, I have conferred the 
original goddess of energy correspondinz to the ahove description on S iva, 
O Nanda, I have thus recited to you everything. Now what more do you 


want to hear? I am prepared to answer ali your questions reliting to 
any matter,” ` 


—— 


CHAPTER LXXVI. 


; 1-13. Nanda said, * O Lord of all, please to deseribe to me things the 
sight of which sanctifies or defiles people, as I am curious to hear on this 
subject.” The Lord said, € Q king of the Vraja, a man by seeing a good 
Brahmin, a holy place, a Vaisnava and an idol reaps the fruits of bathing in 
sacred rivers, The reverential observation of the sun, a chaste woman, a 
recluse, an ascetic, a Brahma. chart, 2 cow, the fire, she spiritual guide, 
an elephant, a lion, a white horse, a white parrot, a cuckoo, a wag-tail, a 
swan, a peacock, the bird called ehásá, a white kite, a cow with her 
calf, the holy fig-tree, a woman having husband and sons, a pilgrim, a lamp, 
the gold, & pearl, gem, a diamond, tho holy basil, and a white flower 
destroys sins : and the sight of fruits, white paddy, curd, ghee, honey, a 
Jar full of water, fried rice, a king, a mirror, the water, and a wreath of white 


flowers produces sanctity. O Nanda, the sieht i 
; ght of the moon of tl ht 
half of the lunar month, nectar, sandal eive HUN 


prepared „from cow-urine, the ewnphor 
flowers likewise gives sanctity. The sight of 
immortal fig-tree (banian) dedicated to the gods, a 
he spectator. The sight of a human 
r € gods, the perception 
t f » or the hearing of the sound of Quindi or ene 
of dreams likewise secures immediate piety, 

14-93. The sight of a shell, a Coral, a rosary of bead, the or stal, the 
root of the holy grags, listening to the eulogies of Vigna with the mystia 


` 
. 


` CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE - 


Y 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
ÉRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 483 
e E ———M————— 


; 7 
syllable forming the essential part ofa mantra, or the sight of moist green 
grass, the barley or sunned rice, and a gem is likewise productive of sanctity. 
Listening to the refreshing mantras chanted by ascetics, the sight of the 
ocean, a black deer and the spectacle of a sacrifice ora grand festival 
likewise contribute to sanctity. The sight of the cow-urine, the cow- 
dung, the milk, the cow-dust, the cow-pen, the place where the cows have 
imprinted their foot marks, and a field of ripe corn likewise contributes to 
the sanctity of the spectator. ‘The sight of a fair Padmini girl (tho first 
of the four classes of women according to the erctical science) clad in 
good dress and celestial apparel, whose hue islike that of heated gold, 
whose touch is delightfully warm in winter and cool in summer, whose breast 
is hard, hips huge and waist thin, and the sight of a benefactress, prosti- 
tute, incensed articles, bent grass, barley, rice, cooked rice, and milk boiled 
with rice and sugar likewise contribute to sanctity. On the occasion of 
the full moon in the month of Kartika the worship of the auspicious 
Radha, her sight and adorations give a man immunity from birth: In 

s'wina, on the 8th day of the bright half of the month, on the occasion 
of the pilgrimage of vermilion, tho sight of the image of Durga gives 
immunity from re-birth. On the day of S'iva-rátri a man who after fasting 
sees and worships Vis'wanátha at Kâsî is not liable to be born in this 
world again. Aman who during the Janmástami sees, worships and 
salutes me represented by Vindhya-mádhava is never born agaiu. 


24.32. In the dark night of the month of Pauga, any one who sees 
the image of Kamalà a& any place does not suffer the torments of the 
world ; and the sonsand grandsons of the spectator become as wealthy: 
as Kuvera for seven births. The sight of Anna-purnà at Kás'i in the 
morning after ablution on the 12th day of the lunar month after having 
previously fasted on the llth day of the lunar month secures to the 
spectator immunity from re-birth. On the 14th day of the lunar month 
the sight and worship of Bhadra-Kali represented by the sanuetitying 
Kama gives immunity from re-birth. My sight and worship at Ayodhya 
where I assume the form of Rama on the day of Ram Navami give 
immunity from re-birth. Whoever at Gay offers funeral cakes to the 
feet of Hari and worships Visnu redeems himself and his ancestors. 
Whoever after fasting sees and worships me after ablution in the Puskara 
or in the hermitage of plums is rendered immune from re-birth. Whoever 
in the forest of plums sees my image and afterwards boils and eats the 
fruits of plums is released from the ties of the world. Whoever, in the 
holy Vrindavana, after having observed my figure rocking in the cradle 
in the shape of Govinda, worships and salutes me is released ‘from the 
ties of the world. j 


33-42. A believer who in the month of Bhádra having seen me on 


, the pulpit represented by the figure of Madhu Südana worships and 


salutes ;me is never born again. A believer who in the age of Kali, 
having seen the image of Jagannütha worships and salutes the god is 
released from the ties of the world. On the last day of the lunar month 
when the sun makes his passage north of the equator, whoever at the holy 
junction of the Prayága worships.and salutes me alter ablution will not 


e boyu again, Whoever on the occasion of the rise of the full moon in 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


884 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


— 


the month of Kártika sees my auspicious image after fasting and worships 
it will no longer suffer the torments of the world. Whoever on the occasion 
of the rise of the full moon in the month of Magha modestly carries my 
image along with the image of Radha to the coast of the river Chandra. 
bhaga and sees the pair is not liable to be born again in this world. , Who- 
ever on the occasion of the rise of the full mom in the month of Asádha 
beholds the image of Rimes’ wara at Setu-band, and worships it is rendered 
immune from re.birth. In the nicht, ealestial damsels arrive there 
and dance again and again ; Vibhisina arrives there to observe S iva ; and 
the Gandharvas and the Kinnaras assemble there in the night. Whoever 
from the middle of the angle when the sun makes his passage north 
of the equator, after fasting, sees the sun-god, the lord of the poor 
and worships him is not liable to be born again. The sight of the images 
of Parvati, KArtika, Ganes'a, Nandi, and S'iva in the regions of Krisi- 
Gostha, Raj-Kostha Subalana,  Kalavinka, Yogandhara, Vis'yandaka, 
Ráj-kostha, Nandaka and Puspa-bhadraka renders the spectator inmune 
` from re.birth. 


43-52. Whoever after fasting worships, sees and salutes me in the 
morning and breaks his fast by taking curd is redeemed from the world. 
Whoever after having fasted at Manibhadra and Trikuta near the ocean 
sees me and then eats curd is able to attain redemption, Whoever 
worships my image or the imaze of Parvati after infusing life into it 
(t. e., after invocation) is not liable to be bora again. The gift of the 
temple of Hari, S'iva and Durgá and the consecration of S’iva’s statue 
render the author of these sacred acts immune from re-birth. Whoever 
dedicates to the public a grove of flowers, a sacrificial post to which the 
victim is bound, a bridge, a ditch, a tank or consecrates the image of a 
Brahmin is released from the world. O father, the Vedas, the Puránas, the 
virtuous men, ascetics and the gods including Brahma and others do not 
know to what extent fruit is reaped by the consecration of the figure of a 
Brahmin. Tt may be possible for Brahmi, to count the pirticles of the 
dust of the earth or drops of rain. But he cannot estim ute the fruits reaped 
by a person by the last act. A person who devises means for the live- 
Jihood of a Brahmin is redeemed in his life-time. He obtains ever- 
Jasting prosperity in this world and in the end secures four kinds of redemp- 
tion. That blessed being, having secured my bondage and faith, passes 
his days in felicity in the Vaikuntha for ever. Like me (the Eternal 
spirit) that man sustains no downfall. Whoaver having decorated his. 
virgin daughter aged eight years with app rel reverentially: makes a 
gift of her to a good Bráhmin, reaps tho benefits of the gift of Durgå. 

. 93-62. That virtuous man enjoys the sight of the entire heaven, 
is worshipped in the Brahma loka, obtains my bondage in che Vaikuntha 
= nd attains eternal felicity. Lhe sight of that marriage also confers 
benefit on the spectator like the gift of ten millions of gold coins, gives 
him perpetual prosperity in this world, and secares for him heaven in 
the next. Whoever causes the marriage of an orphan, poor and learned 
Brahmin to be celebrated surely gains redemption. Whoever on a sacred 
day, after fasting, reverentially makes a gift of an umbrella or sandal - 
in the interosts of the S'alagrám or Holy Stone which is my form reaps the 


D 
* 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


D 


AA. y 


-RF 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. a ET 


fruits of the gift of Earth. ‘The Vedas hold that the gift of an elephant 
to a Brahmin secures to the donor happy residence in my domain for 
as many years as there are pores on the skin of the beast; and if the 
elop ant be an excellent animal of his class, the period of residence is mal- 
tip ied four-fold. O sire, the gift of a white horse secures to the donor half 
of the fruits reaped by the gift of an elephant; if the horse be of a differ- 
ent colour, tho fruit is a moiety of the above. The gift of the cow of a 
black colour toa Brahmin secares the same reward as the gift of an 
elephant. The gift of a milch-cow brings equal reward; the gift of 
an ordinary cow brings half of the said reward, The gift of a cow with 
her calf secures the reward which can be secured by. the gift of the earth. 
O sire, the gift of land secures to the donor residence in the Vaikuntha 
for as many years as there are particles of dust in the gifted land. The 
gift of knowledge enables the donor to accumulate great religious piety 
and lve in the Vaikuntha for ever in happiness. The gift of gold secures 
prosperity ; the gift of silver secures a kingdom to the donor. The gift 
of food brings fruits which cannot be estimated by me and have not been 
described by the Vedas. O king of the Vraja, feasting the Brahmins 
secures the reward which may be obtained by the -gift of all objects. So 
there is no gift and there will be no gift superior to the gift of food, 


63-73. Noregard is paid to time or to the merit of the object of the gift 
ag regards the gift of food. A sinner is also worthy of such a gift ; and the 
donor -ec res excellent religious merits thereby. Blessed is the gift of food 
on earth : for 1n the result the donor easily goes to the Vaikuntha. The gift 
of cloth enables a man to enjoy happiness in the graceful land of the moon 
and the land of Varuna foras many years as there are threads in'the cloth 
which has been gifted. If man out of deference to the supreme spirit (Hari) 
gives an iron lamp full of ghee with candles of gold, will, by virtue of his 
genersoity never see the house of darkness in hell or the myrmidons of 
Yama or Yama himself. He goes to my land. ‘The gift of the same to a 
Jiráhmin frees him for ever from the tortures of hell. That generous 
man for a thousand celestical years enjoys the bliss of heaven. O king 
of the Vraja, the gift of a seat entitles the donor to the enjoyments of 
Heaven according to the merits of the subject and object of the gift. 
Lhe gift of an excellent seat entitles the donor to the above bliss for a lakh 
of years; and the gift of an ordinary seat, fora half of the above period. 
The gift of betel leaves enables the donor to enjoy the said bliss according 
to th» merits of the subject and object of the gift. The gift of fruits 
scoures similar bliss, no doubt. A man who gifts an ordinary bed-stead 


- enjoys heavenly bliss fora century : if the bed-stead be good, the period 


is doubled ; if the bed-stead ba excellent, the period of bliss is extended 
to the donor a hundred thousand times. ‘The gift of a honse to an orphan, 
who is a good Brálmin secures to the donor dwelling in heaven for as many 
years as there are particles of dust in the house. A man giving food toa 
hungry Brahmin secures a large nuraber of sons and grandsons and never- 
fəding prosperity. 

74-80, O king of the Vraja, now return to the Vraja and feast 
the Brahmins there and you are sure to go to Heaven. O father, the 
inhabitants- of Gokul teeming with mild.and gentle cows are much 


40 


= S Soa MAR nm 


E - CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


886 IHE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


SU. EE -n 


afflicted at Gokul at this time. Therefore, you should return to that 
place. O Nanda, I have thus gladly described to you the holy Subjects 
as desired by you. A good dream also, if it is not revealed to a man of 
base origin, yields religious sanctity to the dreamer. Besides, it should not 
be revealed to the descendants of Kás'yapa, a poor man, a man of low 
origin, an enemy, an illiterate man, and a woman: and it should be revealed 
not in the night, but in the day .to a learned Brahmin. If it is revealed 
in atemple, before an idol or the holy fig-tree, or the holy basil, the 
sanotity of the dreamer is doubled. And if it is not revealed to anybody, 
the sanctity is multiplied four times, A wise man after having witnessed 
a good dream reaps fruits after bathing in the Ganges and secures immense 
wealth, son, wife, land, retinue, great material prosperity and all other 
things, nay, even redemption. O father, I thus told you everything. 
Now what more do you want to hear ? 


CHAPTER LXXVIL | 


1-10. Nanda asked “ O lord, kindly relate to me in detail the nature 
of the sanctity secured by particular dreams, What dreams lead to pre- 
eminence and what are good dreams?” ‘The Lord said, *O father, 
the Sama is the best of the Vedas, In the Kánwa-braneh of the 
said Veda in the chapter whichdeals with delightfal virtuous deeds, some 
good dreams, the source of piety, have been described. Iam going to tell 
them all to you, Listen. O king of the Vraja (station of the cow-herds), I am 
going to relate to you the most consecrating chapter of dreams whose audi- 
ence secures the fruits of ablution in the Ganges. A dream dreamt 
in the first Prahar (=3 hours) of the night secures fruits in one year ; if 
dreamt in the 2nd Prahar, it secures fruits in eight months : if dreamt in 
the 3rd Prahar, it secures fruits in three months ; and if dreamt in the last 
Prahar, it secures fruits in half a month ; and if at sun-rise, it brings fruits 
in 10 days. O father, a diseased and an anxious man beholds in dream 
those very things which he eogitates in his mind during the day; 
therefore his dream Js ineffectual, no doubt, A man encumbered with 
uring and ordure, a diseased, frightened, dishevelled or naked man reaps 
no benefit from his dream. A sleeping man, if he sleeps again after his , 


dream or foolishly reveals it during the night, is not benefited by his 
dream, 


11-19. A man relating his dream to a descendant of Kás'yapa 
assuredly comes to Grief. A man revealing ib to a person in danger falls 
in danger. One revealing it toa man of low origin gets disease, One 
revealing it to an enemy is subjected to fear.: ' Ono revealing i& to the 
ignorant is involved in a quarrel : one revealing it to a woman loses one's 
wealth ; and one revealing it in the nieht is subject to the fear of 
thieves. O king of the Vraja, if a man sleeps again after his dream, he 


is rendered liable to Sorrow, but ifhe gives it out to a learned man, he - 


obtains the desired meed. Bat if the learned man belongs to the 
Kas‘yapa family, it should ‘not be revealed to him. O king of the Vraja, 
ifa man dreams that he mounts a man, the cow, the elephant, the horse, 
a mansion, & mountain or a tree or that he eats or sleeps, he acqiures 
wealth jand ifin the course of his dream, ho holds a lute, ho gets land 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


7 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 387 


ee SS SS T 


full of crops. If in the course of his dream, he is pierced by a -weapon 
or troubled by sores or sees in his body worm, ordure or blood, he acquires 
wealth. Ifa man in his dream commits sexual intercourse with a woman 
within. the prohibited degree, he gets a wife. Ifa man in dream goes 
to a hill or drinks semen mixed with urine or enters a town, or drinks 
ocean, blood or honey, he obtains immense wealth and receives good 
1inessuge. Whoever sees in his dream an elephant, a king, the gold, a 
bullock, a milch-cow, an island, food, a fruit, a flower, his daughter, his son, 
a chariot or flag gets relations, celebrity, and immense wealth, 

20-29. A man who witnesses in his dream a jar full of water, 
a Brahmin, the fire, a flower, a betel, a temple, the white paddy, a theatri- 
eal actor or a whore acquires wealth. A man seeing a cow, milk and g/ee 
obtains desired objects, religious sanctity and wealth, A man who in his 
dream eats boiled. rice cooked with milk and sugar, curd, milk, gees 
honey, sweet-meat and the cake of .rice on a leaf of lotus undoubtedly 
becomes a king; anda man who in his dream eats the flesh of a fowl or 
a man acquires immenso wealth, receives good message and secures 
desired objects. A man who swims on a raft bécomos the leader of all 
people. The sight of a fruitful tree, no doubt, secares wealth. The sight: 
ofa snake also secures wealth; and the sight of the sun and the moon 
release him from confinement and disease. ‘The sight of a mare, a bitch 
and the female red-legged ` bartavelle, no doubt secures a8 wife ; 
and if the dreamer is enehained, he acquires celebrity and obtains a son. 
A man who in dream eats food or boiled rice cooked with sugar, and 
milk mixed with curd and deposited on the leaf ofa verdant or dried 
lotus becomes a king. The sight of a leech, scorpion, or snake secures to 
the dreamer wealth, the birth of a son, vietory and celebrity. 

30-39, A man opposed in his dream by animals having horns or teeth 
or by boars and monkeys becomes a king and gains immense wealth. W-bo- 
ever in dream soes a fish, flesh, pearls, eonches, a sandal or & diamond 


acquires vast riches ; and the sight of urine, blood, gold, ordure, wealth, an . 


idolor the male organ of S'iva secures to the dreamer wealth and victory. 
The sight a fruitful bael (quince) or a blossoming mango-tree secures. 
wealth ; the sight of birning fire is productive of wealth, intelligence 
and prosperity. ‘The sight of an emblic myrobalan, an amalaka, and 
lotus secures wealth. An article given to a person in his dream in 
solitude by a god, a Bràhmin, a cow, the manes or & person elad like a 
Brahma-chari (a Brahmin prietising religious austerities) is gained by 
the dreamer, in his waking moments. A person embraced in. dream by 
a woman clad in white and annointed (or covered) with a white wreath 


` acquires pleasure and prosperity by all means. A. person embraced in his 


dream by a woman clad in yellow dress and covered with yellow wreaths 
also secures welfare. O king of the Vraja, every white thing witnessed 
in dream has been praised except ashes, bones and the cotton, A man 
seding in dream that a smiling excellent woman whois the wifo of a” 
Brahmin has arrived at his house acquires supreme wealth. A man who 
sees in his dream that a Brahmin, a god, a Brahmin woman or à goddess 
is giving him a fruit obtains a son. 

40-48. O Nanda, a man who is fortunately blossed in 'his dream by 
a Brahmin secures pleasure, honour; and glory at every ster. Ifa man in 


= = 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE j 


e 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


388 THE BRAHMA VAIPARTA PURANA. 


— — es 
his dream secures possession of a Surabhi cow, he obtains land and à 
devoted wife. If a man sees in his dream that he is uplifted bv an elephant 
with his trunk assuredly obtains a kingdom, as held by she Vedas. Q 
king of the Vraja, ifa man -dreams that he is embraced by a contented 
Brahmin surely gets the meed which can be secured by bathing in tho 
holy rivers and is vested with grace. A virtuous man who receivo- flowers 
from a Brahmin in his dream secures victory, fame, wealth and happiness, 
A man who in his dream sees a holy place frequented by pilgrims, or a 
diamond-house, well-polished, secures. the fruits of ablution in the holy 
streims and gains wealth and victory. Ifa man sees in his dream that 
a person gives to another a jar full of wator, he gets a son, prosperity 
and a dwelling house. Whoever sees in his dream a woman arriving at 
his house with 12 handfuls of grains or 7 pounds and 11 ounces of grains 
assuredly acquires material prosperity. A man who sees in his dream A 


celestial woman entering his house and diseharging her stool obtains 
wealth and. secures immunity from poverty and grief. 


49-58. Whoever sees in his dream a Brahmin man combined vith a 


Brahmin woman, or S'ambhu combined with Parvati, or Narayans combi. 
ned with Laksmi and witnesses the arrival of tho pair at his bouse or 
whoever sees a Brahmin man or woman o 


ffering paddy or a bancal of 
flowers secures supreme wealth and acquires happiness by all mcs... Q 
king of the Vraja, a man in his dream obtaining a wreath of pesris, or a 
garland of flowers, or sandal from a Brahmin acquires incom parabh alih 


and all sorts of happiness. A man who obtains in his dream yel ou pis 
ment prepared from the urino of the Cow, @ standard, turmerie or tusar 
cane likewise becomes happy in every a 

wealth, Whoever beholds in his dream that a Brahmin male or female is 
offering him & parasol or white wreath becomes aking, Ifa man in dream 
adorned with a white wreath and annointed’ with white sandal-paste 
sits ina chariot and eats curd, or milk boiled with rice and susar he 
becomes a king. If a pers gets honey or curd, or 
receives an excellent cup from a Brahmin, male or female, he undoabretty 
gains a kingdom, Parvati is Pleased with that person who sees in hia 
dream that a girl 2ged S years, decked with diamond jewels, is pleased 
with him, He surely acquires fame, wealth, land, retinue, lea?nins, 


a [shaggy ms To eco a savant, who belolds in his 
r “saata woman decked with diamonds, jewel: i ite o 
yellow is pleased with him, GM LS uM 


59.68. If a woman of the kj i 
: ; a ind named above gives i D 
virtuous man in hig dream, he becomes a MOTA 


celobra ba 8 
such a woman is found to teach her son, the E eat alt 
of the son .of the muses ; no savant can vie with him in UE E 
lfa Brahmin in dream teaches his son and gladly offers him à book, 
the son becomes a peerless savant, If any one in hi: dream 
obtains a book, lying in the Way orin any place, he turns to be a 
celebrated savant in the world ar i : A num Ue 
ráhmin maie or femala 
* A person who ob.ains in 
from a Brahmin beauings 


turns wise, wealthy, accomplished and happy, 
his dream a martra i 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Mp, o. puce 


? 


C Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 7 


KRISNA JANMA KITANDA. À 889 


am 


accomplished in his mantras. Whoever in dream bows to the 
Brahmins, male or female, standing b-fore him and receives blessings 
from them becomes a kiug or a poetic savant Whoever in his dream 
pleases a Pandit and receives from him land eovered with white wreath 
becomes the lord of the worl]. Whoever in his dream soes that a Brahmin, 
taking him in a chariot, shows to him different kinds of heaven attains 
longevity. Every day his longevity aud wea.th multiply. Whoever sees 


in his dream that a Brahmi, male or female, complacently gives bim his 
daughter becomes a wealthy king. 


69-76. ‘The sight of a pond, a sea, a river, a rivulet, the white anake or 
the white elephant brings unparalleled wealth to the dreamers. Whoever in 
dream sees a dead man attains longevity. If he sees a sickly man. he 
becomes healthy. If he sees an unhappy man, he becomes happy. If he 
sees a happ) man, be becomes unhappy. If in dream a person sees that a 
celestial woman asks him to be her husband, he certainly becomes a king. 
The sight of aa offering. a rain-bow anda white cloud and the acquisition of 
a crystal wreath in dream undoubedtly secure fair fame. Ifin droam a person 
asks the dreamer to be his slave, he acquires r« verence for Hari through 
the medium of a person devoted to Hari and becomes a Valgnava. 
Savants conversant with dream have decided that in the course of a Uream 
the sight ofa Bráhmin, Hari, Siva, a Brahmin woman, Kamala, Parvati, 
a woman clad in white, the mother of the Vedas, the Ganges, Saraswati, 
a woman clad. like a cosw-herdoss. m dar Radha, the figures of cow- 
herd boys and girls is unquestionably auspicious. O Nuda. I told you 
about auspicious good dreams. Now tell me what more you want to 
hear so that I may deseribe it to you.” i 


77-88. Nanda said, “O Krisna, lord ‘of the universe, I beard from 


you the account of good dreams L already heard from you the rules of ` 


zonduct constituting the essence of the Vedas anu the social rites con-titut- 
ing the essence of morality O child, now I want to hear «bout things 
or deeds the sight or performance of which produces evil. ‘Ther fore 
describe them to me. he followers of the Vedas afflicted with the 
sorrows of the world desire to hear from your mouth the words preseribed 
by the Vedas. O Lord. you are held by the Vedas to be the father of 
virtuous men (who tread the path pomted out by the Vedasi, the 
gods including Brahma, the Munis ard the whole world. © child, the 
words, like nectar. which have dropped from your lotus moath with 
proofs in support of your statement have moistened my bidy co sumed 
by the fire of separation. What a wonderful luck have 1}. That lotus 
face, tho source of the gratification of all desire, which cannot be seen 
by the gods including Brahma even in dream has been perceptible to 
my eyes to-day ! O god, hereafter when «hall I be able to see again your 
lotus face ? | am a sinner; this body. the mine of urine and ordure, ties me 
down tu earth, as the result of my own Karma. € son. when shall I, (a 
sinner), be so fortunate as to be able to converse with you again. the 
Lord of Braliimáà and others? O merciful great vod, under the delusion 
that you are my son, I have commit; d many faults; please kindly 
excuse them. Alas! [nthe light of, a son I have regarded yon “hose 
lotus-foot are adored by Brahm’, Siva, Ananta and the munis, ‘who 


— 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


LE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 2 [) 


890 THE BRAHMA FAIVARTA PURANA. 


— 


cannot be adored even by Saraswatî and the Vedas.” So saying, Nanda be. 


eame afflicted and unhappy at the idea of separation from his son and, bein 
overwhelmed with sorrow wep and fainted. Krisna, the Lord of the 
world, being agitated in mind carefully restored him to consciousness 
and gave him supreme, metaphysical or transcendental knowledge, 


CHAPTER LXXVIII. 


1-6. The Lord said, “O father Nanda, you are the lord of all 
You are dear to every body and the best of all. 
consciousness and hear about the supreme wisdom, which is productive 
of good. I am going to impirt to you the supreme, transcendental 
knowledge hardly to ue secured by philosophers and held mysterious 
in the Vedas. O Nanda, attentively and gladly listen to the doctrine 
relating to that knowledge the culture of which renders a man immune 
from birth, death, deerepitude and disease. O king, compose your- 
self. O Lord of the Vraja, by the acquisition of the knowledge im- 
parted by me, get rid of sorrow and worldly delusions and being filled 
with eternal happiness, go to the Vraja. O father, the whole world teem. 
ing with animate and inanimate ‘objects, like bubbles of water, 
is as unreal as the morning dream. People are attached to it through 


delusion. The body also composed of five elements is unreal and 
Imaginary. Man: only 
esteem, E 


people, 


Now regain your 


7-16. Man alone, foolish aud weak, constantly doluded by phantoms is 
beset by avarice, attachment, lust and anger in’ every act. Sleop, drowsi- 
ness (or indolence), hunger, thirst, forbearance, esteem, mercy, shame, 
patience, contentment, development and tranquillity preside over living 
beings. As birds roost on the bough of trees, so mind, intellect, conscious- 
ness, life and knowledge preside over al] living beings including the: gods. 
I, alone, the lord of all, am the soul of living beiags, S'ambhu is their 
knowledge or wisdom. Brahma is their mind ; and the Eternal Nature 
is their intellect. Visnu is the emblem of l 


1 ife and Padma presides as 
the emblem of consciousness. But they reside so long as I reside ; and 
they go away when I disappear. Without our predominance, the body 
is sure to collapse and immediately dissolves in the five elements. O 
mier the pues names of men are useless, They are only the cause 
ot 1 usion : therefore, wise men are never aggrie ed ; - 
whelmed with grief. All the faculties i e EU Sono Om 
of the digits of nature : whereas ay 
The three attributes, Sattwa 


; and I exist in the 
:' When united with 
nu, S'iva and all others 


, effulgent and void of attributes 
Nature, I am vested with attri 


have been deseribed as vested w 


17-28. Dharma o T 
digits: the Munis, : Manus and all the ood sro tiere the outoome of my 


[ g beings, I remain un-mingled with 
yery act, My believers are void of birth, death and decrepitude and are 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


through delusion regards it as real and holds it in | 


E 


‘Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 491 


ppc os 


redeemed in their life-time. They are adepts in all matters, gracious, 
celebrated, learned and vested with: poetic genius. Success of 34 
kinds, beneficial in every way, attends my believer. But my believer 
does not desire even that. Now hear from me the fourteen kinds of 
success or accomplishments or perfection and accept from me the Mantra 
likely to make you an adept in every way. 

Anim4=The faculty which enables a man to attain an esoteric subtle 

state. 

Laghimá = The esoteric faculty to attain the extreme degree of lightness, 

VyApti= The power to pervade the universe ; 

PrakAmya= Irresistible will : 

Mahima = Power of increasing the size at will ; 

{sitwa= Superiority or greatness. 

Vas‘itwa = Control or subjection ; 

Kámávasáyita = Supression of passions ; 

Diira Sravana = Listening from a distance ; 

Dwára Piaves'a= Entering inso the threshold ; 

Kaya’ Praves'a- Entering into the body ; 

Mano Yayitwa = Going at will or pleasure ; 

Abhipsita ldbha - Securing the desired object ; 

Sarva Jfiánatwa = Omniscience ; 

Jalajfidntwa=Kndowledge of water ; 

Jalastambhan = Control of water ; ; 

Chira Jivitwa= Immortality ; > 

Vayu Stambhan = Control of the wind ; 

Ksudbá Stambhan = Control of hunger ; 

Pipásà-Stambhan- Control of thirst; 

Agni Stambhan Control of fire ; 

Nidrá Stambhan 2 Control of sleep ; ; 

Kaya Vyüha- Wielding several bodies at once ; . 

Vak Siddhi= Accomplishment of speech ; 

Mritánayan = Invoking the dead ; 

Sristikaran — Creation ; 

Pránákargan = Attraction cf one's heart-or life ; 

Prana dâna = Restoration to life ; 

Lobhádi-Satak-Stambhak = Control of avarice etc., (six passions). . 

Indria-Stamhhan = Control of passions. - 

Buddhi-Stambhan = Control of intellect. ] 

These are the 34 kinds of accomplishments. O king of the Vraja, Om 
Sarves’wardi Sarva-vighna Nás'ine Madhü Sûdanâi SwAha: this mantra 
or the mystic incantation is the emblem of Kalpa tree; for every one 
can attain hereby all sorts of objects. This mantra is mentioned in 
the Sáma-Veda: itis the source of all accomplishments to the adepts. 
The ascetics, munis and gods reap benefits through this mantra alone. 

23-33. O father, if virtuous men eating only boiled rice and ghee, 
recite this mantra in the Nárüyana-Ksetra, they will attain perfection 
in respect of the mantra by reciting it a hundred lakh of times. There- 
fore go to Benares and reóite this Mantra on the coast of Mani-Karnika. 
O king of the Vraja, now hear what is Narayana-Ksetra (Geld of Narayana), 


The space of 4 cubits ọn each side of the water of the river constitutes 


— 


. 


, ? 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


893 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. ~ 


—- ———— —— ————— M À— 


this field: no one but Narayana is entitled to it. O king ofthe: Vraja, 
if auy one dies consciously here: he is released; and the r eitation of 
the mantra redeems a ian in his life time O king of.the Vraja, now 
resurn to the Vrijs ind consecrate this land. O father, now I am going 
to deseribe to you things whose sight is sinful. , ; 
34-41 Bad dream is the root of sin and sole cause of calamity. The 
sight of the following, viz., the slayer ofa cow cr a Brahmin or a “godi 
; ap vtricide, a matrieide, a man crooked in disposition, a traitor, a pet jurer, 
one who de'rauds his guest,a sinner, a village priest, a thief of artie.es 
sacred to the gads, one who misappropriates the property of a Drühmlm, 
the destroyer of a holy fig tree, tho slanderer of Siva or Visnu, a ivile 
man, a person not iniiiat d. in the mantras, .one addicted to evil pracices, 
a Brahmin who does not perform his diurnal rites, a Devala (a priest 
who attends upon an idol) a Vrisa Vàhaka (one wio carries a bulioek j, 
the c.ok of a S'üdra, one who burns the corpse of a S'üdra, a Brahmin who 
eats food prepared in connexion with the funerals of a S üdra, Avira 
(a childless widow), a woman with her nose cut, the slanderer of a wod, 
or a Brahmin, an uncha te woman who does not venerate her husband, 
a S'üdra, a w.do v. a Chandal, a licentious woman , a wickod man always 
excited with anger, « debtos, a bast wd, a thief, a liar, one wno botrays 
his refugees the thief of flesh, a Bra imin who is the husband ofa barren 
woman, a S'ülra who commits adultery with a Brahmin woman, a 
Brahmin who sub-i-ts upon the interest of money and the meanest 
wretch among the four. castes who commits adultery with a woman 
within the probibited «degrees is productive of sins and calamities, 

32-53. O king of the Vraja, the mother, the step-mother, the mother- 
in-law, the sister, the daughter, tho preceptor’s wife, the daughter-in-law, 
the brother's wife, a chaste wom in, mother's sister, the wife of the sister's 
son, the wife of the maternal unele (maternal aunt), newly married 
woman. uncle’s wifo, woman in her menses, the mother of the father, 
the mother of the m ther: these eizht kinds of women are within the 
prohibited degrees ace "Jing to the Sàma- Veda and ouzht to be maintain- 
ed by virtuous men, as determined by the Vedas. O sire, the sighv or 
touch of the above mentioned sinuers eutails ona man the sin commited 
by the slaughter of a Brahmin ; this is why tho accidontal sight of such 
men renders it imperative on che Spectator to seo the Sun ab first and 
then remember the name of lari. And whoever voluntarily sees those 
sinners attains equality to them in respect of sins. O lord of the 
Vraja, thiu is why eonseientious people do not look at them. And if 
the moon rests at the first, seventh, twelvth or tenth Mansion, savants 
ought not to seo the Sun-and the Moon during the solar or the lunar 
ee ipse. And even if the Moon rests at the first or last mansion and 
oceupies the fourth sign of the Zodiac, the Sun. and the Moon eelipseu 


by Ranu have been d:eided as luminaries unworthy of sight. Savants 
have prohibited the sight of the Moon on the fourth day of the briehé 
and dark half of the lunar month: this polluted moon should hot be 
seen, therefore, on any account O Nanda, ii any person yoluntarily 
sees this polluted moon-god, the moon transfers to him the profuund blot 
Ou his Character caused by tho rape of. l'àà, If a man: against hig 


E 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. ` 393 


will and (involuntarily) and accidentally sees the above moon, he ought to 
drink water consecrated by the.mantras, in which case he is immediately 
purified and relieved from stain. For the sake of the 3'yamantak gem (the 
gem worn by “Krigua), ia days of yore, the lion killed Prasena and Jámva- 
vâna killed the lion. O graceful Nanda, cease to weep now. ‘This gem is 
now yours. A virtuous man ought to drink the water consecrated by the l 
Mantra. O king of the Vraja I have thus:answered all your questions. Now 
refer to me any other point, if you please; and I shall let you know that.” 


CHAPTER LXXIX. 


1-11. Nauda said, “O Lord of the universe, why are the eclipsed 
sun and the moon held polluted and why in both the halves of the 
month, on the fourth-day of the lunar month is the moon polluted ? 
I wish to hear you on this point. You are the father of the Vedas ; 
without you, whom else shall I ask concerning the desired and mysterious 
subjects in the Vedas and the  Puránas." The Lord said, ** Those 
who know the Vedas have prohibited me from revealing the matter to 
any one; hence I ought not to speak on this point, therefore exeuse 
me and refer me to other subjects; and may yon be blessed. O father, 
Savants ought not to pick holes in virtuous men caused by chance; 
nor should they reveal the secrets of others.” Nanda said, 'O Lord 
ofthe universe, do not defraud your believers; please tell me the reason 
why thesight of the sun and the moon that are otherwise holy has been 
prohibited when they.are eclipsed” The Lord said, *O Nanda, I am - 
going to describe to you the ancient subject enquired into by you, by 
attending to which a man is purified and shares the fruits which may be 
reaped by him by ablutions in the holy rivers. The sins committed - 
by a man by observation of sinners are reduced to ashes, if he attends 
to this narrative. Once upona time, the great-minded Jamadagni out 
of curiosity eagerly went to the coast of the Narmada with his wife 
Renuka. On thé ‘coast of the solitary Narmada, he engaged 
himself in sexual intercourse with the newly-married, beautiful Renuka. 
The smiling Renuká in her gorgeous dress was inclining with the 
load of her rising breast and was motionless with the burden of her 
hips and loins. Hei colour was like the white Champaka and the orb 
of her face was enchanting like the full moon. At that time, that 
paragon of beauty again and again cast glances at Jamadagni. À 

12.90. O king of the Vraja, Renuks clad in fine dress and oppressed 
by the shafts of Cupid felt a thrill in her body through the excess 
of raptures caused by the sexual intercourse and fainted. Then in that 
lovely place redolent of the wind and resounding with the song of male 
euskoos, the Muni lying on a bed of flowers, completely annointed 
with sandal-paste and wielding a garland and cloth inundated 
witn the juicy fluid of the great Rasa was enjoying her society when 
the sun-cod saw him and addresse him thus, O saint, you are the great 
grandson of Brahma, the lord of the world, personally conversant in a 
pre-eminent degree with the duties prescribed by the four Vedas and 
always holy. You ave the author of the auxiliary branches of the Vedas and 
know the tenets of religion. You are the best of those who know the 


80 


ps 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


854 ITHE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURAN A; 


oe ~ - —— eaan 
i 


ey 


Vedas ?you are a great devotee, effulgent, of good behaviour and also 
Brahmaehárin. "Therefore you must know that virtue consists in doing 
an act prescribed by the Vedas, and vice consists in doing an act which 
is opposite to the doctrines of the Vedas. O Muni, though a virtuous 
man, how-have you quitted the path of virtue and how are you addicted 
to vice? Look, the Vedas hold that sexual’ intercourse during the day is 
particularly sinful. I am the witness of all acts ; therefore I tell you 
this. Then the great saint having seen before him the Sun god and 
heard his words desisted from sexual intercourse. At that time the 
chaste Renuka was also abashed and put ona pair of clothes. The great 
Muni, being ashamed and incensed, addressed the Sun-god with a flushed 
face thus, : 


21-883. “Who has the conceit of learning? You think that 
there is no savant like yourself. I am the pupil of Lord Bhrigu, ] 
understand that you are the sun, the pupil of Kas’yapa. I know the fonr 
Vedas and can distingu:sh between virtue and vice. The rule preseribed 
by the Vedas is virtue ; and what is opposed to the Vedas is vice, An 
illiterate man is always involved in the consequenees of his own act: and 
like the fire which consumes everything, a valiant man ean do no wrong, 
Other gods, you and Dharma are mere witnesses of acts; you ara 
also liable to death. It follows, therefore, you ean not give me reward or 
punishment for my acts. Iua word, you all cannot punish a Vaisnava 
like me, Know it for certain that the believers of Krigna ean never 
come to grief;-for they are always protected by the Sudars’ana wheel of 
Har. ©. Sun, Lord Narayana, Brahma himself, S'iva or Yama cannot 
punish us. How, then, can you all punish a person like me; O Sun, 
the prince can go only. to his own destination : 
at pleasure. Nay, I ean easily reduce to dust in a momeut, Yama, 
Indra and cther gods. O Sun, what relicious counsel ean you give 
me? Go to your destination, My chastiser is Lord ` Krispa 
who transcends Nature, And whereas you have disturbed me to-day 
in my pleasures in solitude, you wili be eclipsed by my curse 
^.^, possessed by Rabu: and your sight will then be unholy ; and 
those clouds that are dispelled at your appearance will be impelled 


by the winds’ and obscure you. You are puffed up with the conceit 
of your brilliant light; but by my eurse, your lustre will decline, and 
when obscured by the clouds, you will deteriorate in your effulgence 
and you will be also possessed by Ráhu." The Sun-cod havine heard 
the words of the Brahmin was frightened and with folded palms adored the 
best of the Munis thus :— 


but we can go anywhere 


31-40. O saint, the Brahmins e 
held to be blessed and esteemed and 
himself, Siva, Brahma, Ganes'a, 


an not be-killed, They have been 
are revered by all, Tord Narayana 
s Dra Ananta and the Eternal Dharma all 
adore the Brábmins. For Har ihimself is manifest in the form of a 


Brühmin. O saint, we eat through the mouth ofa Brahmin the food 
that is offered to a Bribmin. For the Brahmin and the fire constitute 
our mouths. But the Brahmin is better of the two mouths, You are 
the said pure Brahmin, particularly a follower of Visnu; ‘Therefore for- 
givo mo and thereby preserve your virtue, ook: slow em HO 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE ; 


SN 


Em *. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 895 


m er PEE M = : e — 


Vaisnavas who hold” Tari in their heart be possibly angry ? O twice-born 
saint, the Brühmius are worshipped by us and we are also worshipped by 
the Brahmins. This being the practice, we are mutually loved. But as 
you have cursed me, I shall also curse you in return : otherwise people 
will say that the Sun is void of power. O great saint, you shall be 
subdued by a Ksatriya and be killed by the weapon of a Ksatriya‘ 

41-0. Hearing this, the saint became angry again and with a flushed 
face, cursed him saying, ** you shall be defeated by Siva.” O king of the 
Vraja, later on, Brahm4, the dispenser cf the world, being apprised of 
their quarrel came there himself, with Kas'yapa. Brahma, the preceptor cf 
the pious having arrived there, composed the frightened Sun and the 
pious saint. Brahm’ said, * O Sun, you are Nariyana himself ; therefore 
pardon this great Muni, The Bráhmins are allliable to be maintained 
and not killed by you. ‘The Brahmin has cursed you and I am going 
to explain the curse. This is why I, beihg adored by Bhrigu, Marichi 

-and Kasyapa and despatehed by them have arrived here frightfully. 
O best of the gods, you are the witness of all acts. ‘Therefore 
compose yourself. O lord, on certain days you will be obscured 
by the cloud for a moment and be immediately released ; on other days, 
you will not be so obseured and thus remain pure. And in various 
years, you will be- possessed by Rabu ;and your sieht will be sinful to 
some and holy to others. At other times, your sight will always be holy 
to all. People will wash away their sins by seeing you and bowing to 
you. Being eclipsed by Raha, you will be imperceptible only to those 
people over whose first, seventh, Sch, 12th, 9th and 4th signs of the 
zodiac or over whose first or eighth mansion the moon will preside. 


51-60. Atisunsef or while clouded or at noon or when there will be 
half-rise of the sun above the horizon or when you will merge in 
water, your sight will be unholy. And whemyour wife will be unsbie 
„to bear your heat, your lustre will decline for her relief and for the satis- 
faction of your father-in-law and brother-in-law, Otherwise, your wife 
Sanjfíà will by no means he able to bear your heat ; and in the war with 
Mali and Sumáli you will be defeated by S'iva." O king of the Vraja, 
Brahmi having said so to the Sun, consoled the humble Jamdagni 
agitated with shame and anger and subdued by the curse of the Sun and 
addressed him thus: O saint. go home with pleasure. Child, by your 
lustre, the world can be reduced to ashes in a moment. © Muni, the 
Sun is always liable to be maintained and worshipped by you: and you 
are also ever liable to be maintained and worshipped by him. Your 
mutual relation is that of the maintainer and the maintained. O saint, the 
Karma of your previous birth ean never be set aside. You will, no doubt, 
be subdued and killed by Karta-Viryyarjuna, a Ksatriya, the product of 
the digits of Hari; but you will get a son through the digits of 
Náráyana. He will rid the earth of the Ksatriyas 21 times. O Brahmin, 
your death also will be a source of fame to you on earth. *O lord of 
the Vraja, Brahma, so saying, went away: and the sun and Jamadagni 
went home. © father, I have thus recited to you the sacred, lovely nar- 
rative showing why the Sun, possessed by Rahu, becomes invisible, 


Now, listen why the rising moon is unworthy of sight and regarded as 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


igitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. x 
390 PUE BRAMA PAIFARTA p URANA. 


polluted on the fourth day of the lunar month both during the bright 
and dark halves of the month. I am going to tell you the ancient 
story explaining why the Moon, in days of yore, was possessed by 
Rahu and polluted.” 


——_—___ 


CHAPTER LXXX. 

1.8, Krişna sald, “ O sire,. in olden times, the chaste Tara, the 
wife of Vrihaspati, in the prime of her youth, was decked with excellent 
and delicate garments and ornamented with jewels of diamond. The 
loins of this extremely beautiful damsel were very graceful : and there Was 
no end to her charms in that her chignon was surrounded by wreaths 
of jasmine. In the middle of her forehead, there wasa graceful mark 
of sandal ; and below that, was manifest the mark of vermilion with the 
mark of musk. Her feet were decked with anklets constructed with 
excellent gems which were ringing merrily. ‘The row of teeth of this 
graceful damsel of golden colour, delightfully col in summer and warm 
ia winter, and possessed of eyes beautifully lined wish lamp-black and 
characterised by slanting glances, were enchanting like pearls, 
eur-rings beautified her cherry cheeks. She had the gentle 
elephant. She was voluptuous and 

j)ve ; her Complexion was soft and her fice, lunar. None among the 
women could vie with her, O king of the Vraja, this helpless girl, after 
having bathed in the celestial Ganges, with her cloth moist was recollect- 
ing the feat of her hnsband and was about to go home, when the Moon- 
god, having observed all her body was afflicted with th» darts of Cupid 


and fainted at once. This inci lent took place on the fourth day of the 
lunar month of Bhádra, 4 


9-19, Later on; the powerful and witty moon mounted on his chariot 
recovered his consciousness in à momens, held Tara by the hand and 
placed her m the ear, The lustful N 
embrace to the lustfnl w 


adultery with her, when the wife of. the spiritua 
thus, O Moon, blot on the race of gods, la 
particularly the wife of your spiritual guide, devoted to my husband. 
Therefore leave me, leave me, Sexual intercourse with the Guru's wife 
Causes the sin of killing a hundred Bràhmins ; and if the wife of the 
Guru of the Brâhmiņ be Chaste, it Causes the sin of killing a thousand 
Brahmins, ; Fie upon You, great god, You are my son’ and I am your 
mother, Therefore Compose yourself, If the preceptor of the gods hears 
of this Dasty affair, he will reduce you to ashes. Vile sinner ou are 
the pupil of ay busband and dearer to him than his son, Therefore, I 
am your “mother. Leave me and intai J i i 

NET. Gee eos maintain yoar Sanctity, Aud if you 


Will surely be uilty. of cee 
But when the Moon, without minding her gover s 
rape with her, the dispassionate chaste 


€ J Woman cursed him t} PEO) 
Moon, you will be possessed by Ráhu ; you will be EEI » io elouds. 
You will bear staing on your person and by Consumption, ” 
Afterwards for the fault’ of the Moon, nowing. that Kama was at the 
root of the evil, she cursed him also Saying: Q Kama, you will he 


Diamond 
gait of an 


Oman and kisseu her was about to commit 


l guide addressed him 
m a Brahmin woman, 


* 


X CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


seemed to have harboured the god of, 


Loon, after having given a deep . 


EL EE 


LO 


= CER 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KITANDA. 397 


consume] to dust by some effulgent being.’ Iu spite of the curse, 
however, the Moon held her and associated with her. Afterwards, holding 
the sorrowful, weeping wife of the Guru in his lap, he left that place. 


20.90. Later on, the Moon-god prepared to cohabit with that damsel 
in various lovely solitary places, on the top of many enchantiug hills and 
on the pleasant coasts of many lakes and big and small rivers, also in 
flower gardens ringing with the sweet sounds of euckoos and bees. At 
that time, the moon-god infatuated with the diink of nectar and thorough- 
ly annointed with sandal paste was so much addicted to the pleasures of 
intercourse that he had no idea of day and night. He cohabited with 
Taya on different occasions in the forest of Malaya redolent of the wind 
of Malaya, in the sandal forest situated in the kingdom of Visyandana 
near the Western ocean, on the leaves of the lotus of the Chandra-lake 
annointed wirh sandal, in the lovely garden of the Champaka redolent of. 
the winds charged with the odour of the Champaka, on the golden land 
of the sea of milk, on the Krauncha hills, on the golden or diamond hills 
or in the fair temple of gem decked with strings of pearls or in some 
places of amusement (loved by the gods) furnished with graceful and 
picturesque sheets of cloth or covered with white chuwries and looking 
glasses, or adorned with a string of lamps constructed with gems, or in 
places where Neptune, the god of ocean, drinks wine and cohabits with his 
wife. Then he cohabited with her on the coast of the pure stream of Ratua- 
mila or in the holy garden of the wind incensed by the wind charged 
with the fragrance of the Parijat. or on the Aknaya mountain, or in the 
forest of the Kalpa trees. Afterwards he arrived at the coast of the sea 
of milk and there drank the milk of the cow of plenty. 

31-39. At that time, the fire-god - being pleased with the Moon 
gavo him a pair of clothes consecrated by fire; Varuna gave him a 
swing of ,gems; and the god of wind gave hima parasol of gem. 
Later on, Sukra, the preceptor of the demons, arrived there. The Moon- ~ 
god, having seen him, bowed to him, submitted to him the whole case 
and sought his protection. ‘The impartial S'ukra versed. in. the Vedas 
and their auxiliary branches addressed him in a manner consistent 
with the precept of ethics thus: “O son, listen to, me. Viihaspatt 
is the grandson of Dharma, and the son of the spiritual guide of Siva. 
Therefore restore to him his wife Tara. O son, he is adored and loved 


. by the gods. ‘Therefore restore to him his beloved spouse and seek his 


protection. O Moon, at my command, leave the wife of your spiritual 
guide whois like a mother to you. Abstinence is the sole means of 
the expiation of such an abominable sin and has been supposed to bestow 
groat fruits. The rape of the wife of the spiritual guide causes the sin 
of killing a thousand Brahmins. That sinner has afterwards to suffer 
endless agonies in tho hell called Kumbhipáka so long as. Brahma exists. 
Child, before Hari a grass and a mountain both are equal. Look, Hari 
rewards or punishes Brahmá also for his acts. How then can you be 
released from the consequences of your acts? In a word, the three kinas 
of animals that are born out of thy (1) womb, (2) the egg or (3) heat 
pud moisture i.e, germs are all subject to the government of Náráyana, " 


3 / B 
Y CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE - 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


398 THE BRAHMA FAIVARTA PURANA, 


os ET mm 


CAHPTER LXXXI. 

l-7. Krişna said, “O father, while S’ukra was saying so, he saw 
divine armies armed with weapons and equipped for war arriving in 
that direction. Thirty millions of-lazs, a hundred erores of heroes fight. 
ing on chariots, a lakh crore of excellent elephants, ordinary elephantg 
four times the number of the last named, dreadful horses a hundred times 
the number of the eleph its, infantty six times the number of horses, 
three hundred millions of drums, a hundred thousand tabors with Indra 
mounted on Airávata, Dharma mounted on the white horse, Kuvera riding 
ona chariot, the fire-god, Varuna, the Wind, the Sun, Yama on the 
baek ofa buffalo, ls'ana „ Mounted on an excellent elephant, Ananta 
mounted on the snake, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the adepts, the 
Gandharvas, the Kinnars, and the saints, as bright as the Sun, who have 
been redéemed in their life-time were perceptible to his eyes, 

8-12. O king of the Vraja, S'ukra was not frightened in the least at the 
sight of this celestial army but composed the Moon and invoked an army 
double the size of the divino army. The army of the demons aecomodat- 
ed itself on the coast of the Ratna-Mala, in the hermitage dear to the 
fire-god and on the coast of the sea of the milk. At this time, S'ukra 
saw the great benefactor Siva mounted on a bullock and approaching 
from the direction of the divine army encamped at the 
tal fig tree situated close by, on the coast of tho lake adjoining to the 
sacred hermitage. That Siva who takes a form out of compassion for 
his believers was the emblem of the Supreme Light and wielded a 
trident, a spear, and a tiger-skin. He is the source of all prosperity, 
omniscient and the cause of all. 

_ 138-22. This eterna] Siva, the lord of all, the image of the world 
universally worshipped is always eager to save the refugees, the 
poor and afflicted persons. He is effulgent with tho lustre of Brahma 
and has a smiling face, S’ukra having seen him respectfully got up and 
bowed before his lotus-feet, That Supreme Being was pleased and blessed 
him; and S'ukra with esteom placed him ona throne of gems, S'ukrà 
also beheld there Brahma mounted on a graceful chariot and serene in 


appearance. ‘The neck of that excellent, smiling, pro itious adept Lord 
of the universe was decked with a Gomi ean ee 


string of gems and he put on a pair 
of clothes consecrated by fire. He gives E GARE Seprosdnis d 
devotion of the ascetics, is the author of the Vedas and the husband of 
S'ukra having seen Brahma, the 
and with folded palms seated him 
throne c espectfully worshipped his lotus- 
feet. But feeling it Improper, he did E que C OG welfare of 
Brahm’ and others. O Nanda, later on, Brahma, the ruler of the three 
j ) dressed S'ukra, O son S'ukra, I 
am gomg to describe to you the ovi] deeds of the Moon disgraceful to 
the three worlds and condemned by the Vedas, : H 
23-31, As soon as Tard, the spiritual guide's wife devoted to her 
husband, after bathing in the river was about to go home, the wicked 
Moon-zo1 violated her anl has now sought your protection. Child, 
look, the army of the gods is ready to fight; and with this object in view 
lva and I have come to you. iva said, “O Brahmin, if you want your 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


base ofthe immor- 


ON 


a 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA VIIANDA, 869 


welfare, fetch the Moon soon; or with this trident, I will eut off the head of 
that rascal. O Brühmin, if you do not listen to me, I will destroy all the 
demons in a moment. If I am angry, who can preserve your demons ? By 
this infallible weapon called Pàs'upata, I can easily kill the enemies of the 
gods. ‘The great Muni Angrià is the spiritual guide of Durvásá, the 
outeome of my digits; and therefore by this relation, Vrihaspati is the 
sou of my spritual guide. The radiant Vrihaspati also can consume to 
dust the wicked moon ; but he graciously desists from the act, the moon 
being his favourite pupil. At first, the same Vrihaspati was excited with 
lust when he saw the beautiful wife of Utathya and committed sexual 
intercourse with her ;so by Utathya’s curse his chaste wife has also Leen 
ravished by another individual. O Brahmin, now return the fair 
goddess Tard to the son of my Guru ; and the son ofa Guruis like a 
brother to mo. ‘Therefore bring here my enemy, the Moon-god who has 
raped my brother's wife. 

92.40. It is true that if any one, though capable of affording 
protection, betrays the rafugee or the poor and afflicted persons, he has 
to suifer endless suffering in hell till 14 Indras pass away by turns : but 
the rule is not observed if the refugee be a sinner. lora person who 
harbours a.sinner is a sinner himself. Therefore, O great saint, do not 
delay, but hand over to me that wicked sinner who eohabited with his 
mother. Bring him here along with the chaste Tara”. Hearing this, S'ukra 
said, “Lord, you punish all the inhabitants of thé world ineluding the gods 
and the demons ; and you are impartial both to the gods and the demons 
and toall. Therefore why should you des.roy the demons by siding with the 
gods ? You are the destroyer of the world. What heroism then will 
you display by killing only the demons? Lord. you are the effulgent 
Supreme Brahma, personally vested with attributes and without attributes. 
According to the modification of your attributes, you manifest yourself 
in different forms, viz, Brahma, Visnu and S'iva. O S'iva, you, armed 
with a gadå (club), guard the:threshold of Bali ; and in the form of a dwarf 
you easily wrested from him the royal goddess of fortune and handed her 
over to Indra. ‘Therefore, O lord S'iva. restrain your temper and forbear. 
What eredit will accrue to you by killing a Brahmin? While I am 
alive, I will not betray even the sintal Moon who has, sought my 
protection. 

41.50. O Siva, I seek the protection of your lotus-feet. 
Now do what you think proper. The whole world is subject to your 
control.” Hearing S'ukra's word, S'ankara was pleased and said, “ Bring 
the Moon here .and all will be well. O king of the Vraja, while Siva 
was saying so, lord Brahma consoled S'ukra and fetching the Moon 
with Tard laid them at the lotus-fect of Siva. The niereiful Siva foud- 
ly clasped the Moon to his breast, removed his sins by the gift of the 
dust of his feet, touched his head and guaranteed his safety. Siva in 
co-operation with Brahma dipped the Moon into the sea of milk, purified 
him with acts by which atonement is made and thus rendered him 
immune from sins. ‘Then Siva, the, great ascetic, by powers of his 
Yoga, divided the Moon into two parts and wielded one piece on his head 
whereby he was styled the Moon-erested god. At that time, I 
entrustqd the fugitive, poor and aüligied Moon to Braümà with whom 


CC-0. Ih Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
^ x 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


400 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


ag en ag 
the other half remained. The polluted moon with ths mirk of deer on 
his body was abashed in the assembly of the gods and, by dint of his 
Yoga, parted with his body. The budy of tha Moya was mile over p 
Brahma to the sea of milk: and Atri, the great sanit lamented the loss of 
his son on.the coast of the said sea in great mental distress. O lord of 
the Vraja, at that time tears dropped into the sea and purified the body 


of the Moon who emerged ont of the water and m tnifested himself beforg 
the assembly of the gods, 


51-58. The moon being sprinkled over with water by Lord Brahma 
Siva mustered courage and took his seat when Siva said to him, *' Son, 
now cheerfully go home and resume your jurisdiction. Afterwards, by 
the curse of your father-in law; you will have an attack of consump- 
tion ; bat by my blessing you will be eured. And inasmuch-as, O child, 
you have corrupted your preceptor’s wife on the fourth day of the lunar 
month of Bhadra, therefore in every age the sight of the Moon on -that 
day will be sinful. For there ean be no atonement of sin without Suffer- 
ing even in millions and millions of years. Therefore heroes must reap 
tha fruits of their good and bad acts. O child, in every age you must 
bear on your body the mark of a deer as the symbol of disgrace sustained 
by you for the rape of Tard. Siva having said soto the Moon 


and 


addressed ‘lara thus : O my chaste child Ta rà, listen to what I say : tell 
me truly whose child you have sustained in your womb, If it be. 
longs to the Moon god, leave him and purify yourself in &he company of 
your consort, 


59-67, If a chaste woman, against her wish, is ray 
is not guilty. But if she consented to the act of se 
must dwell in hell as long as the sun and the moon exist. Tara with a 
smile said to Brahma, “The pregnancy was caused by the moon : where- 
upon the gods, Munisand Siva laughed merrily, . O king of the Vraja, 
later on, Siva handed over Tara to the abashed Vrihaspati who went home 
"with his chaste wife, ‘The moon also, holding in his lap his beautiful 
son bright like gold, produced by ‘lara bowed to S'iva and Brahma: 
and went home, The gods, munis, S'iva, Brahma and S'ukrácharyya 
with the demons gladly went home. O Nanda, L thas recited to you an 
auspicious ani sacred event by listening to which men are exempted 
from sins anl blots on their eharaeter, Blessed js this narrative, 
calculated to give fame, longevity, every kind of prosperity, joy and welfare 
in every place and is also destruetive of sins. O lord of the Vraja, 
now console yourself, go home with Pleasure and inform my mother 
Yas'oda and the milkmaids of the whole affair as represented by me to vou. 
Likewise console all women that are afflicted y communicating the 

sb imparted to you and always pass your days 


ished by a person, she 
xual intercourse, sho 


knowledge that I ju 
in happiness,” 

CHAPTER LXO, 

1-9. Nanda said, « Q Lord, [ 

me about bad dreams,” Thereupon 

who in dream laughs cheerfully or 

gr a performance of music surely 


heard every thing, Now tell 
the Lord said, “Listen, A man 
Witnesses a marriace or a dance. 


. a o 
,eomis to Briel, Tho . guashing ` 


i CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


s xm — 


I 


V 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANM4 KHANDA, 401 


DEE 


of teeth in dream or the sight of a person wandering, here and there, causes 
loss of wealth and health. Whoever being annointed with oil, mounts an 
ass, a camel or a buffalo and goes to the south no doubt dies. If any person 
in dream sees a powdered China rose, As'oka flower or oleander 
flower or oil or salt, he comes to grief. The sight of a naked, 
black, nose-cut woman, a Südra widow, cowrie or a palm fruit brings grief. 
Whoever in dream sees an angry Brahmin, (male or female) surely comes 
to grief and loses prosperity. Whoever in dream sees a red wild flower, 

'a flowery Palis’s tree (Dhak), cotton and a white cloth comes to grief. If 
any one soes in dream that a woman in black is singing or dancing or 
observes in dream a bluck widow, he dies. 


10-22. -If any one in the province within his jurisdiction sees the gods 
dancin, singing, laughing, or clapping their hands forcibly upon the 
arms, the province is rendered waste. Whoever, awake or in dream, seca 
a person vomiting urine, ordure, brass, silver and gold remains alive only 
for ten montha, Whoever in dream embracesa woman in black covered 
with black wreaths dies; and whoever in droam secures possession of a 
deer, a dead child or a skull ora wreath of bones surely comes to grief. 
Whoever in dream is annointed with ghee, milk, honey, whey or molasses 
surely comes to grief. Whoever having mounted alone a chariot driven 
by an ass or a camel awakes, is sure to die. Whoever embraces a woman 
in red and covered with scarle& wreaths surely falls ill. he sight of a 
fallen. nail, hair, extinguished embers and a funeral pile full of ashes 
unquestionably causes death. The sight of grasa on the funeral pile, or 
fuel or hoaps of dried grass, or iron ora small quantity of black ink 
assuredly causes sorrow : and the sight of sandal, a shield, a wreath of dread- 
ful China roses, lentil or bean is the immediate cause of sores on the skin. 
The sight in dream of a person, a vulture, a crow, a bear, an ape, saliva, 
pus and the dust of the body is only the cause of disease. The sight 
in dream ofa broken earthen pot, a Sudra covered with sores, a patient 
subject to psoriasis, a person with olusters of knotted hair on his head, 
a boar, a buffalo, an ass, very profound darkness, a hideous corpse, & vagina 
or & penis brings calamities. 

23-33.. The sight in dream ofan ugly, ill-olad infidel or.& dreadful 
messenger of Yama with noose in his hand causes death. The sight of - 
a Brahmin, male or female, a boy or girl, son or daughter angrily parting 
with a thing, causes sorrow. ‘The sight ofa black flower, a wre ith-of 
blaok flowers, an army wielding weapons or a deformed infidel woman 
surely oauses death. The sight in dream of some one singing or dancing, 
a musical instrument, a singer, clad in red, a drum and a festival of joy 
surely brings sorrow. The sight of a corpse assurely causes death : and 
the catching of a fish ete. in dream undoubtedly causes the deith of a 
brother, Whoever in dream sees a man cut to pieces or a man deformed 
with his dishevelled hair or a headless demon dancing wildly dies no doubt. 
Whoever sees in dream thata dead man or woman or & black hideous intidel 
is embracing him is sure to die, A person whose teeth are broken in 
dream or whose hair drops on the ground forfeits wealth and health, 
A dreamer who is oppressed by animals with horns or teeth or by persons 
wielding bows with a view to learn archery encounters perils at the hands 


bl 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE E 
io Hoe ee ee ee es). EC 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


405 THE BRAHMA FAIFARTA PURANA, 


SS 


of the government; and the sight of a fallen, broken tres, the rain of 
hailetones, the husk of Tice, & razor, red embers and the rain of asheg 
causes him grief. Whoever in dream falls on the ground from a chariot; 
a house, a bree, a mountain, a cow, an elephant, or tha sky surely comes 
to grief. 

34 40, Whoever in dream falls from a high place into a hole full 
of embers and ashes, or into a pit of salt, or inte a heap of powder 
surely dies. A person from whose head in dream a wickod man forcibly 
takes away an umbrella loses his father, spiritual guide or king, From 
the house of a sinner who observes in his dream that tho Surabhi (celestial 
cow) with her ealf is leaving his house in a panic, the terrestrial goddess 
of fortune also passes away. A man who in his dream sees that a myrmidon 
of Yama or an infidel has tied him with a noose and is taking him away 
by force surely dios. A person who is cursed in his dream by an 
angry astrologer (who tells the future), a Brahmin, male or female, or his 
*piritual guide surely comes to grief, A person whose body is assailed 
in dream by his opponents, crows, dogs or bears, undoubtedly dies, A 
person towards whom in dream the buffalos, camels, bears, boars and 
asses angrily rush surely becomes diseased. 

41-98. O king of the Vraja, after these bad dreams whoever consigns 
or dedicates to the flame fuels of red sandal annointed with ghee and 
recites the Gayatri (ode to the sun) secures atonement for the sins indicated 
by his dreams., Or whoever reverentiully recites the name of Madhu- 
Südana a thousand times is freed from his sins : and his bad dreams aro 
converted into good dreams; A wise man who after purifieation turns 
his face eastward and recites ten times the following eight auspicious 
names, viz. Achyüta, Kes'ava, Visnu, Hari, Satya, Janárdana, Hamsa 

dreams into good 
lis face eastwards 


Dames a hundred thousand times sets a prisoner at liberty. The most 


i i 8 gives birth to a son ; 
and a poor man who after eating ghee and boiled rice with a dovoted heart 


man reciting them a hundred lakhs of times is redee 


and the performance of this rite in a pure style in the Nardyana-Kgetra 


Whoever after 
; ) Durgá, Ganapati 
Kartikeya, Ganes'wara, Dharma, Ganga, Tulasi, Radha, akeni Pil 

a ee c € perieneos good dreams. 
Om Drim S'rim Krum Durgati-Nasinyaj Mahámáyà.yai VT ; thia 
e (a celestial tree which 
] j } after purifying himself recites 
it ten times converts his bad dreams Into good ones :and whoever recites 
it a hundred lakh of times attains perfection in his Mantras in which case 
he secures all kinds of success and objects desired, Om Namo Mrityun- 


Jay’i Sw4ha , the recitation of this Mantra a hundred thousand times 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


y RSS FANE IE oi de 


p TTE 


gives 2 hundred years’ longevity to a man in spite of his dream indieating 
his death. It is proper to reveal one’s dream (with one’s face turned 
eastward) to a wise min. Tho dream should not be revealed to a person 
bolonging to the Kás'yapa family, to a man in peril, to mon of ignoble 
rank, to a man who slanders the gods and the Brahming, to the illiterate 
and to the unwise. A man during the day may reveal it to the holy fig 
tree, to an „astrologer Brahmin by caste, to the soat allotted to one's 
father, to an Arya, Vaignava or a friond. O father, I have thus relate.l to 
you the holy narrative calcalated to remove gin. It increases longevity 
and fame. Now what more do you want to hear ?” 


CHAPTER LXXXIII. 

1-5. Nanda said, “O son, you are the cause of the Vedas and the 
gods including Brahmi. So whom ean I question except yourself ? May 
you be blessed! Please recite the things which Í want to know. O 
Krigna, please reveal to me the duties of the Sanyásis, Yatis, Brahma- 
eháris, Vipras, widows, Vaisnavas and chaste women. What acts are 
proper for householders and their wives ? Particularly how should the 
pupils behave ? How should parents behave towards chiidren ? 
And, O Lord, how many kinds of women are there ? How many kinds 
of believers ave there ? Hov many kinds of Brahmindas are there ? 
What is their size? Are they permanent (ever-lasting) or unreal ? 
Please relate all these matters to me by turns." 

6.15, ‘Lhe Lord said, “O father, a Brühmin after having purified 
himself with tho ode to the sun should constantly serve me and eat the 
remnants of the food dedicated to me. A thing not dedicated ro me has 
been forbidden as an article of food. Such food is like ordure ; and sueh 
wateris like urine. A Brihmin who constantly eats food dedicated to 
Vienu is redeemed in his life-time. A Brahmin should constantly 
meditate Hari. Ho should always remain pure, be ofa tranquil dis- 
position and conversant with holy books. He should be devoted to 
vows and acts of pilgrimage, pious and attached to the study of tho 
scriptures. He should first take the Mantra of Vignu and serve his -spri- 
tual guide and afterwards at his command he should become a householder. 
It is always proper to give the, sacerdotal fee of worship to one's spiritual 
guide ; and it is always proper to support the spiritual guide. This point 
cannot be disputed. Among the venerable preceptors, the father is the 
best; the mother is a hundred times superior to the father ; the god isa 
hundred times suporior to the mother; and the Guru, the souree of the 
Mantras and the ‘Tantras (codes of religious vites for worship of the gods) 
is four times as much revered as the gods ; in as much as he is celebrated 
as Lord Nardyana himself. ‘The Vedas hold that things are dedicated to 
the gods out of deteronce to the said God ; but the apiritual guide in the 
form of Lord Nardyana himself eats that food ; therefore he is the best of 
all religious preeaptors. ‘The gods in the forms of Brahma, Vignu and 
S'iva constantly dwell with pleasure in the body of a religious guide. 
The gods are pleased, if Hari is pleased ; and Hari is pleased, if the reli- 
gious preceptor is pleased. This preceptor ought to love his pupils, 
trenting them like his sons A preceptor who eats without blessing his 
pupile is guilty of the ein of the murder of s Brabmig. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


iaiti i and Sarayu Trust. 
404 PRE SAMIA PATP ARTA PURANA, 
; —— 
16-27, A Brühmin engaged in his religious rites and serving Vignu 
is always pure ; and a Br&hmin who does not observo his rites, and Bervg 


Visnu, is always impure. A Brahmin who carries a bullock, 
a Devala (Brahmin who subsists upon offerings to 
idol,) one void of solar worship, one who sleeps during the day, or 
Brahmin who eats the food cooked on the occasion of the funeral eeremon 
of a S'üdra, or one who burns his Corpse is like a S'üdra, 4 Drühmin after 
duly worshipping the S'álerám (Holy Stone) should eat the remnants 
of the food offered to it and drink the water with which the feet of 
the stone have been washed. A man who drinks the water of Hari’s 
feet reaps tho fruits of ablution on the sacred rivers and attracting pilzrims 
from all places and being redeemed from sins, ultimately goes to the land 
of Visnu. Whoever drinks the water with which the Holy Stone hag 
been washed reaps tho fruits secured by ablution in holy streams and 
initiation in all sacrifices, © lord of the Vraja, the water of the Holy 
Stone is ten times Superior to the Ganges water; a Brahmin who constant. 
ly drinks it is redeemed in his life and rendered equal to the gods, A 
Brahmin should Constantly eat with g devout heart the offerings of 
Visnu, w orship him and drink the water washing his fees: QO father, a 
Bra 4 min who always performs his diurnal rites three times a day, worships 
me e verentially and fasts on my birth day, € iva- Hátri and Rain-nayami 
is redeemed in his life-time. Ali the sacred places of the earth 
over his feet ; therefore he who drinks th water of the feet of a Br 
reaps the fruits of ablution in all sacred rivers, 
drink the water of the Puskara, so long as | 
in drinking tho waters of tho foet of a Brahmin, 


an 


preside 
'ühmin 
The ancestors of a person 
16 passes his days on earth 


28-38. A Brahmin who eats the remnants of the fo 
ignu is redeemed in his life and Consecrates all tho 
earth and her inhabitants, He reaps the frui 
streams, the performance of al] religi 
sacrifice at every step. Ho is holy like the fi 


like the sun, , He does not see tha land of Yama, his myrmidons or Yama, 
bimeelf even in dream, He becomes an attendant of Hari and spends 
his time with Hari in great happiness in the Vaikuntha. A Brahmin 
serving Hari never falls, A person who worships Visnu with proper 
rites is alone a Vaignava, He alone ig Wise ; there ig no being 80 Supreme 
as he, The Mantras described by the Vedas, the Puranas or Tantras 
IP appropriate to the gods) are regardec 

: alva, Sakta or Vaignava. But the 

sages call that pereon a great Vaisnava into whose ears tho mantra of 

1gnu has been poured by hig religious guide, i 


a mantra, he ig redeented in his life and in 
transcending the entire uniye 


3 150, he attains the feet of Hari. That 
follower of Vignu redeeras seven of his paterna] ancestors and seven of his 
descendants, seven maternal ance i i 


stors inoludino his materna] rand-father 
rothers, mother and mother's mother, lord of the Vash, those 


fruits are reaped -as goon ag a Man takes the mantra : and if there is 
Purus'eharana ‘4.4.5 repetition of the name of a deity attended with burnt 
offerings, oblations eto.) according to the Mantras, hundreds of his 
ancestors aod descendants are redeemed, Whoever heviog performed 


« 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


uml 


\ 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 405 


z 


— 


Puras‘charana in the Náráyana-Ksgetra recites the above -mantra easily 
redeems himself and thousands of his ancestors and descendents. 

39.43.  Who^ver, while reciting the above mantra, dispenses with all 
his desires and dedioites all his acts to th» feet of Hari redeems, 
by virtue of his unshik:n belief in tha deity, a lakh of his ances- 
sors, Tho Brahmins anl the gods are dear to meas my life ; but my 
believers are dearer to mə than my life, In w word, none is dearer to 
ma than my believar, among all my favourites on the surface of the globa. 
A clever min should take eagerly his mantra from a religious preceptor 
who is powerful and is able to proserve him everywhere. [Io must not 
take his mantra from a Guru (who is old, foolish, ignorant or out-casted or 
illiterate or homa-less or unhealthy or distracted or void of issue or wifo) or 
from his father or from an aseatic. He should not take his mantra from a 
person who his no faith in Visnu or a S'aiva or a S'ákta, A man taking 
his mantra from a younger person proves illiterate ; if he takes it from an 
illiterate man, he is turned into a fool; if he takes it from an out-caste, 
ha doclines iv health ; if he takes it fron an illiterate man, he loses all his 
literary knowledge ; if from a house-less man, he is rendered -poor ; if from 
his father, he forfeits his fam2;if from a recluse, he dies ; if from an 
unhealthy man, he gets disease; if from a man having no issue, he gets no 
issue : if froma person who has no wife, he loses his wife ; if from a dis- 
tracted man without mantra, he steps into the shoas of his religious precap- 
gor ; if from & min having no faith in Hari, he beaomes fiithless, an if 
from a S'aiva or S'ákta, his faith in Hari is never developed. 

49-50. A pure Vaisnava Bràhman is capable of giving cooked food to 
Hari; others are not. If a person not being a Bráhmin pronoaneas On, (the 
sacred syllable which symbolises the triad) worships the Holy Stone or offers 
cooked food, he is degraded. An intelligent man ought not to accapt 
food from a recluse ora wrong-doer. If accidentally he does that, he 
unquestionably losos his weaith. A Brahmin should always use pura 
vezetable food and rice boiled with gaze By abstaining from animal 
food, a Bradhmin becomes a: radiant as the Sun. A Brahmin should 
always oook his food ina new vessel; or he may cook his food in the 
Same vessel for a fortnight; but immediately after tha lapse of thit 
period, it should be cast aside. A Bráhmig, after having cleansed the 
place (kitchen), should cook his food in a pure style; after which he 
should reverontially dedicate tha food to ma on a plot of ground, well- 
polished. Afterwards having offered the same food with esteem to a 
Brahmin, he should raverentially eat the remnants of the food himself. 
A Brahmin eating food not dedicated to me commits the sin of drinking 
wine, During the solar or lunar eclipse, or while a person is rendered 
impure by the birth or death of a relation or by the touch of an unholy 
man, he must at once cast aside the utensil for cooking. A Brahmin, 
after washing his feet, should put on a pair of claan clothes and eat the 
fried articles or cooked food ina olean place. The twiea-born must not 
eat twica a day so long as the Sun shines in the sky. He who violates 
this rule does not reap the fruit of his actions and in the end himself 
goo: to bell. On the day of the performance of tha funeral ceremony, the 

. following aots, via. a battle, crossing the river, departure for & foreign land, 
repeated dinuers, and sexual intercourse abould be avoided. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


406 THE BRAHMA VAIFARTA PURANA, 


————— eee 


60-70. Tho husbani ofa Vrisili or birren wo:nan, the Brabmin who 
performs religious rites on bahilf of a S'üdra, one void of diurnal rite; 
(ode to the Sun, three timas a diy) an evil-do2r, one who sells semon and 
a Devala (ond who attends upon an idol) belon to that class of BrAliming 
to whom gifts should never bo mido. A Brahmin who gives utensils 
connected with funerals to the above Brahmins or after eating food de. 
pasited in those utensils commits soxnal intercourse with a woman goes 
to hell. O father, whoever sells liis. daughter for the sake of monoy is 
the greatest of all sinners, goes to the hell culled Mahi-Raurava after his 
death anil suffers en!less torments in the hell called the Kumbhipaka 
with his aneostors, sons anl priests for as many years as there are pores 
on the skin of his daughter. ‘Therofore a clever min should give his 
daughter to a worthy match. He should not give her to « Brihmin who 
is as impure as a S‘ddra or any of his descandants, O king of the Vraja, 
I have just relited to you tha duties of a Brdhm'n or n Vaigņava as- 
signed to him by all the Püranas and tho four Vedas. The daty of a 
Keatriya consists in the adoration of the twice-born, the worsh'p of 
Narayana, the rule of his kingdom, display of valour, war, maintenance 
of the subjects, preservation of the poor, cleverness in the use of weapons, 
dexterity in the battle-field, asceticism, performance of religious rites 
and behaving, like a father, with his subjects. ‘Therefore these acts should 
be gladly and duly performed. A K3ıtriya should always associate with 
learned men, maintain savants conversant with ethies and intro: 
duce them into the conneil. 


71-82. A eslebrated and poserful Ksutriya shoul! always miintain 
very carefully the four parts of the army, viz., elephant, horse, chariot and 
infantry. A ksitriya, invited to the bittle-fiold, should never turn fail; 
and a Kgutriya. wh» dies in tho battle-field goes to heaven and acquires 
fame, far and wida. Maintenances of trade, preservation of eattle, wor- 
ship of the Brih:nins aniths gols, charity, devotion and performance 
of rites are dubios assigned to the Vais'yas. Service of the Brahmins the 
sole business of the S üdras. A S'ülra who injuresa Brahmin or ap- 
propriates his paddy turns into a Chandàl A s'ülra who appropriates 
the wealth of a Brdhmin turns into a vulture for & crore of births, 
a boar for a hundrel births, ana boast of prey fora hundred births, A 
vile S'üdra who cohabits with a Brahmin woman practically ravishes his 
mother. In the end ho suffrs torments in th» hell called the Kumbhipák: 
so long as Briıhmå exists. This sinner drops there into boilinz oil, is bitten 
day and night by snakes and bsing chastised by the myrmidons of Yama, 
always cries inan unnatural manner. [ater on, the sinner becomes & 
Chindil for soven births, a snake for 7 births, a leach for seven births, 
a worm of the ordura for millions of births, a worm of the vagina of 
prostitutes for 7 births, and a worm of the ulcer of eows for seven births. 
Thus ha wanders through many wombs. Heis never born a min again. 
O father, now listen to the duties assigned to the Sannyasts (7. e. recluses 
w ho renounced the world), A min, as soon as he holds a Staff or a sceptra 

attains the position of Nårâyanı, All his previous acts, good or buds 
are consumed, and he is not bound by his subsequent nots to others: 
Ha contemplates me constantly and in the end comes to my land, 

YE L > Y Dt hi 


iss 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


RRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 407 


ee ea 


$3.92. O king of the Vraja, the earth is at once consecrated by his 
touch as by the touch of a Brahmin; and all the holy places are csn- 
secrated by his society. A man, by tho mere touch of his body becomes 
holy. One who feeds a Sannyási reaps the fruits of the grand ho:se-saerifice. 
WW hoever sees him voluntarily or does him obeisance reaps the fruits of 
the grand royal sacrifice. One who behavos in the same miinner with 
a Yati or a Brahma-chári reaps similar fruits. A hungry Sannyüsi should 
in the evening ge to the house of a house-holder und must not discard 
the food which the latter gives him, bo it good or bad. He should not 
beg sweet-meat or wealth from the house-holder or become angey with 
him. He should put on only one cloth and dispense with all bis desires. 
Ho should put on identical clothes either in summer or Winter: bo free 
from avarice and ties of attachment: and having put up for one night in 
the house of the house-holder should go elsewhere next morning A 
Ssnnyüsi who mounts a ear, accepts wealth from a  house-holder, or 
constructs a house wherein he lives like a house-holder, deteriorates in 
his faith ; and one who is addieted to evil habits by the adoption of 
cultivation or trado likewise declines in one's faith. Ifa Sannyási does an 
improper set; good or bad, he decliues in his faith and is held up to 
ridicule. A Brahmin widow should daily take boiled rice with ghee at 
sunset and never cherish lust in her heart as the S'ástras hold. 


93-101 Such a widow must not put on fine clothes ; she should avoid 
tho use of spices, incenso, oil, wreath. sandal. conch-shell, vermilion and 
ornaments. She should put on dirty clothes and remember Narayana alone. 
She should not use sweet-meat and must avoid riches (or splendour). A 
holy Brahmin widow should not eat anything on the day of Ekádas'i, the 
birth-day of Krigna, Ram-navami nnd Siva- rátri.. Aud on the occasion of 
the 14th day of the dark half of Bhádra sacred to Siva or Preta Chaturdas'i 
and during the solar and lunar eclipses, fried articles are prohibited to her: 
therefore she may use cn those days any articles except these. A 
widow, Yati, Brahma-chiri or a Sannyási should abstain from betel leaves, 
regarding thom as beef or urine, as the Vedas hold. Any of the above 
persons must also abstain frown red pot-herb, lentil, lemon or lime, leaves. 
and round white pumpkins or bottle-gourds. A widow sleeping on a 
bedstead causes the downfall uf her husband ; and if she mounts a ear, 
she goes to hell. A widow ought not to polish her hair or cleanse her 
body. And if the cluaters of her hair bo knotted, she may shave them 
off eveu in places nob meant for pilgrimage. 

102-124. A widow should not annoint her body with cil. She should 
not sce her face in the looking-glass or behold the face of any other man. She 
should not witness an opera, dance, a grand festival or see. the face of a dancer, 
a singer or a well-dressed man. She should rlways listen to pious narratives as 
recited in the Sima Veda. O king ofthe Vraja. now I am going to recite to 
you a subject rolating to the supreme object ofone's life. Listen. Teaching; 
studying, maintenance of pupils, incessant homage to the religious precep- 
tor, attainment of skill in religious books relating to Sid dhanta or settled 
doctrines, the contemplation of the Supreme Being delightful to the soul, 
the constant commentary of books in a lucid style, application of mental 
powers to the doctrines expounded therein; discussions sanctioned by the Vedas 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


93 THE BR4HMAÀ VAIPARTA PURANA. 


/ o" 


for the elucidation of a system and performance of rites as approved of 
by the S'åstras are duties incumbent upon virtuous people. Dexterit i 
the practice of diurnal rites, performance of desired rites, taking oe a 
food aud the performance of holy acts according to the Vedas are dune 
imperative on good men. O king of the Vraja, now attond to tha duties ag- 
signed to a chaste woman. She should always love her husband and reve- 
rentially drink the water of his feet, with hig permisgion. A 
woman devoted to her husband in M even, after giving up her Eos 
meditation and worship of the gods, carefully minister to the foot 
of her husband, adore him and contribute to his happiness. She should 
not do anything without her husband's permission. and num always 
regard her husbaad greater than even Narayana. O king of the Vein 
she should not sae the face of another man or even cast Sls ab bib 
and she should not witness an opera (or theatrical euh dpt a grand 
festival, a dance, any sort of amusement or sexual intercourso oommittad: b 
others. She should not see the face of a singer or dune She shoul 
eat what her husband eats. She should not for a moment leave the compan 
of her husband. She should not contradiot the state uent of her E, 
orbe angry with him or. ohastise him in anger, She should give E 
food when he is hungry: and water. when he is thir a Sh 
should not rouse hor sleaping husband or depute him ¢ Agi t A 
chaste woman should love her husband a hundred timo : ids T 
sons ; for the husband alone is the friend of a Eousbik nee i P 
alone is the source of her redemption and tho means BE hat EROR A 
chaste woman, reverentially, with a smile and with due ree d AE 
able glances at her husband whioh are 83 Eweeb as ior ry haste 
woman redeems a thousand ancestors. The husband of DE a chaste 
released from all sins. O king of the Vraja, a chaste wo LE. ir. 
effulgeneo, renders her husbund immune from tt o EUMQUE m) 
He is exempted from Karma and passes hi la cus eer 
company of his wife in tho land of Haris ATR on pesto in ae 
earth subsist in tho feet of a chaste wom n: and all B pol ECAELRN gr tos 
ofthe saints and gods exists in her person. | the radianoe or valour 
by ascetics, by the observance of RUM Te A do Maica Oade 
porformance of vows and by genorous men un ELENA E) a 
in chaste women. Nay, Narayana himself, Siva B A See eaten tua 
world and the munis are always afraid of thi , ama, the ruler of the 
the feet of virtuous women Consecrates the d [ho touch of the dust of 
released from all sins. A virtuous and ER Ea onig o dicus iD 
easily consume the three worlds to ashes Ths Hee y iso el rns ca 
chaste woman are always fearless, The do n t fo seat laoairheisonto ia 
125-136 A chaste woman is born i UG Is er d eod ATE 
virtue in previous births acquired by him a ua Pin qasn cli cy ree 


E i ndred ti a i 
holy, and her father is redeemed in her life RR Tm Her mothers 
maag p ine the morning, should put off her night did Died 

D 39 


husband and glady adore him. After havi 

duties, she should bathe, put on a pair Later eee Rein 

Wa and RUP her husband ‘Then she should Tree bar baba 
oy water, offer him a pair of washed olothes and i i 

feat, After having provided bim with a seat, she should DA 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


3 


B 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA: 409 


————————————————————————ÀMÁ: 


paste to his forehead thereby annoint his whole .body and put a wreath 
round his neck. Afterwards according to the mantra as stated in the Sama 
Veda she should give him tasteful articles sweet like nectar and cheerfully 
and reverentially adore him and do obeisance to him. Om namah Kántai 
S'Astre Sarva Deva S'rayài Swàhá ; with this mantra she shonld present to 
her husband flower, sandal, water for the feet (with oblation of flowers, 
barley, bent grass):frankincense, lamp, good clothing, offerings of food ete., 
perfumed water, pure water, purified betel leaves and read the ode for- 
merly composed by Saraswati and others. “O lord, you are my husband, 
my chastiser and the emblem of the moon on the head of Siva. I bow to you. 
You are patient, self-controlled, the image of Brahma, the harbour of all 
the gods. You are dearer to a virtuous wife than her life. I bow to you. 
O lord, you are venerable, adorable and the harbour of my heart. I 
bow to you. You are the presiding deity of the five vital airs of your 
wives constituting their animal lives, the pupi! of the eyes, the container 
of wisdom and the source of great joy. I bow to you. O lord, the huse 
band is the Brahma, Visnu, S'iva, the supreme Brahma, void of all 
attributes. "Therefore I bow to you. : 


137-144 O lord, please excuse the faults which I have committed con- 
sciously or unconsciously. O friend ofthe wife, O ocean of mercy, exousa the 
fault of the worshipper who is your maidservant. O Lord cf the Vraja, 
in the beginning of creation, Laksmi and in days of yore Saraswati 
Dhara and Ganga read this most conseorating hymn. At first Savitri used 
constantly to adore Brahma : and Parvati used reverentially to adore S’ane 
kara with this hymn;ani at first the wives of the munis and the gods adored 
their respective husbands with thishyma. It isdelightful to all chaste women. 
A chaste woman who listens to this holy ode or any other man or woman 
who listens to it seeures-all his or her desired'objeats. By listening to it, a man 
without son gets a son; a poor man acquires wealth; a siok man becomes 
healthy and a prisoner is released. 1f a chaste woman adores her husband 
with this ode,she reaps tha benefit secured by ablution in all holy rivers, by 
devotion and by performanas of all kinds of religious rites. After having 
reverentially read this ode, a chaste woman should take her food with her 
husband's permission. Thus I revealed to you, O king of the Vraja, the 
duties of a chaste woman. Now listen to the duties of the householder.” 


CHAPTER LXXXIV, 


1-12. Tho lord said, “O sire, a householder should alwaya worship the 
twice-born castes and the gods. The four castes, Brahmins eto., should 
daily perform religious rites. The gods and others expect hospi- 
tality from a householder. So a householder who does not serve his guests 
ie always impura. As tha cow always ges to tho placa which supplies her 
with drinking water, so the manes atall timas and the gods during a festival 
resort to the houscholders. A guest when he feels hungry impatiently rans 
to the householder in theevening and after having accepted his hospitality... 
blesses him and leaves his house. A house-holder who does not greet a 
new-comer (guest) is implicated in sins, Nay, he is overtaken by the sins 
ef the three worlds, Ifa mendicant guest goes away disappoiated from 


62 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


410 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


the house of a householder, the gods and the manes are thrice disappoint. 


ed with the conduct of the unkind host aud leave his house. In a 
house where the guess is slighted, the proprietor virtually commits the 


sin’ of the murder of a woman, a cow and a Brahmin, and is praetieally 
an evil-doer as well as the ravisher of his guru's wife : and more.over the 
disappointed guest transfers all his sins to him, takes avay all his vir- 
tuas and then departs. This is why a holy religious householder, first 
entertaius the gods and his dependents and afterwards takes his food, 
He who has lost his mother and has got an unchaste wife in his house 
should leave it for good, and go to the forest ; for to him the house and 
the forest are both equal. An unchaste woman always envies her hus- 
hand, regards him with anevil eye and does not givo him fuod. She 
always rebukes him. "That vile woman always slights her husband and 
regards him as insignificant as straw, though he may be as respectable 
as a saint and great in every way. 


12-23. Ifa man marries a woman of mean origin, he is d 
life-time, as he is. constantly consumed by the fire of hor 
O king of the Vraja, now listen. I describe to vou the rites 
on householl women as preseribed by the Vedas 
adored by the gods aud Brihmins should worship the husband 
and the gods and driw a circle in the court-yard with eow-dung plaster 
and water, A chaste woman, after performing her rites, shouid bathe, 
go home, bow to the gods, Brahmins and her husband and worship the 
household god. Later on, she should perform other household duties, 
feed her husband, welcome the mendicant guest and herself cat 
with pleasure. The father should be worshipped by the sous; and tho 
spiritual guide, by the pupils; and the son and the pupil with the 
permission of the father und the guru should perform all acts like minis- 
tering servants. A son or a pupil should not sond his father or preceptor 
respectively - on any business. The Son or the pupil should transfer 
everything to the father or the Guru. The son should not treat the father; 
or the pupil, his preceptor as if either of these is an ordinary mortal, 
If he does so, he is practically guilty of Brahmin slaughter. A man 
should revere his mother more than his father, and esteem his spiritual 
guide more than his mother, A man mast always maintain his parents 
preceptor, wife, pupil, incompetent son, widows, sister and the wife di 
his preceptor. "Ihus 1 related to you the duties of all, O father, now 
hear about women. At first all women were chaste and pure. 


ead in his 
foul words, 
imperative 
A pure, chaste woman 


24-94. At first Brahind created all women alike. They were all tho 
products of the digits of Nature, sacred and very wise, But when 
Dharma declined by the curae of the daughter of Keda ra, Brahma eeame 
angry and created artif al (Krityà) women. O king of the Vraja, such 
women are of three kinds, vis, good, moderate and DT : the eood TAN REO 
called the first. The good women lovo their husbands and are (Fons 
devoted to acts of piety. The good never desire the company ot allan 
which secures notoriety. They revere their husbands in | oae 
as they do the gods, Brahmins or mendieants, 
fasts and do good to everybody. A woman w 
her superiors and through their fear 


the same way 
They perform vow, observe 
ho is watched critically by 
does uot associate with her ygallants 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KIIANDA. 411 


belongs to the 2nd class and is very little attached to her husband. O 
Nanda, for want of opportunity, place or a gallant, a woman of this class 
preserves her chastity And women of ignoble blood, impious, ill-behaved, 
shrewish, quarrelsome and bad belong to the lowest class. Such women 
always rebuke their respective husbands and minister to their gallants. 
A woman of this class looks at her husband with an evil eye and wi vos his 
heart. Nay, she even tries to bring about the destruction of her pious, 
great, oxcelient and lovelv husband by some means through her gallant, 
This wretch always lustlully and cheerfully looks at her gallant and casts 
favourable glances at him as if he were the love-god. 


95.45. Her vagina gets always moist at the sight of a well-clad 
young man versed in the act of sexual intercourse. She does not give 
food to her husband and always accosts him with foul language. She 
ever contemplates with pleasure the society of her gallant. She mixes 
with her paramour, though rebuked by her elders and guarded by a hundred 
persons. Kings even cannot prevent her from her purpose. ‘There is 
nothing really dear to her. A man is dear or hateful to her in the same 
proportion as he is able to prnder to her lust Asa cow always desires 
new grass in the forest, so che ever seeks Lhe company of new gallants. 
This impious woman always adop's hypocritical words in her conversa- 
tion; her love is flecting like a flash of lightning or wafer mark. 
Vow, devotion, religious rite, heuse-holl affairs and gods are things quite 
fore gn to her composition. Her heart is constantly seb upon her gallant 
and is restless on that account. O father, I thus related to you the three 
kinds of women. Now I am going to tell you the nature of my three-fold 
beliovers My believer laying aside every-thing which is the source of 
material joy and lying down on 2 bed of grass should be solely engaged 
in the recitation of my name and in the contemplation and worship of 

, my lotus feot ina devout manner. A believer free from desire need not 
try to please other gods, the source of prosperity. My believers do not 
desire the kinds of perfection, viz Animà ete or the position of Brahma, an 
immortal or a god, capable ot rendering all happiness. Ina word, thev 
do not want the four kinds of redemption; (Sàlokya ete.). All that they seek 

They do nat desire the redemption of Nirvana ; nor do 

' ly wanb to repose strong 


is my bondage. 
they desire to drain a cup of nectar. They simp 
and absolute confidence in me. 

46-56, O lord of the Vraja these believers, tho best of the adepts, 
observe no distinction between a man anda woman, ‘They regard all 
creatures as undivided. he best of my believers disregard hunger, 
thirst, sloop, avarice, attach mentand other passions. Stark naked, they are 
absorbed, day and night in my meditation. Such — believers 
of mine are excellent. Now hear of the bolievers of the middle 
class, A pions housebolder (who is nob in touch with worldly affaire as 
a resulb of his Karma, who ever tries to cut off tho fetters of Karma) 
carefully abstains trom action, No motive acbuates his conduct and with 
hia body, mind and words he constantly thinks thus: "Everything 
ig to the will of faris Lam not the author of any act.” 


happens aecordir up 
his sort of person 13 a mediocre believer. And a person possessed of beliet 


to a still smaller extent is & believer of the lowest type. Ho is described 


e 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


$12 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


ee aes s svn a, 


asa natural (Pràkrit) believer in the Vedas. Tho first-named believer 
never sees Yama or a myrimdon of Yama even in his dream and redeemg 
& thousand of his ancestors. The mediocre believer redeems a hundreq 
ancestors of his: and Prakrit (natural) believers redeem twenty five of hig 
ancestors. O father, at your command, I have deseribed the three kinds of 
believers ; now attentively listen to the account dealing with 
the creation of the world, O father, my believers may 
(if they try) solve the mysteries of the creation (f the world ; and the 
munis and the gods may also know something about them with difficul. 
ty. And Brahma, Ananta, Siva, Dharma, Sanatkumára, Nara-Nardyana 
(the two Risis), Kapila, Ganes'a, Durga, Laksmi, Saraswati, the sods, the 
mother ot the Vedas and the omniscient Radha herself are thoroughly 
conversant with the mysteries of creation: others do not know anything 
about them. Nay, savants also cannot make out the secrets of creation, 


57-60. O king ot the Vraja, as the soul and the sky are eternal, go 
are the ten quarters and Nature ; so is the Cow-world. “The Vaik untha 
is eternal like the Cow-world. Once upon a time, O father. I wag 
dancing in the Cow.world in the sphere of the Risa, when a girl aged 
16 years possessing the graca of autumnal moon and the hue of Champak 
sprang from the left side of my body. "Phat nymph, the boss of all 
hymohs, was very pretty. <A slighS smile waa playing upon the 
cheerful face of thit delieite And exquisite damsel. As tho clouds are 
adorned with herons, so was she decked with earmonts Conseerated by fire 
and ornaments of gem. Below the partings of the hair on hor head, a mark of 
sandal like the moon, the mark of vermilion combined with the mark of mask, 
and ear-ring of gem decorated her face, Her beautital nose surpasse: the 
bill of the prince of birds in beauty. A Pearl emanating from the head of 
the elephant was Swinging on her nose whereby no limit ejuld be set to 
her charms. ‘Vhe row of teeth of that delicate girl was lovely liko a 
string of pearls, Her face vied with the full moon: her aves shamed the 


lous: and the mark of bright collyrium like a line of biack fawns 
supremely added to her beauty, 


67-77, Her arms Were decorated with rare diamonds, bracelets, 


aments constructed WIth coneh-shells, 
Sem and her feet winh ankloets 


e soles of her feet were + ainted 


Y Possessed tho gait of an elephant 
and a pair of lovely eyes, and being excited with lust, cast a glance 
at me. That nymph, revered by all 3 


: :88 500n as she was manifest in 
the sphere of tho Rasa, ran towards me. Hence ancient historians call 
her Radha.’ As she 18 excellent, she is algo called the Supreme Nature, 
She is capable of anything, hence she is called S'akti. That Râdhâ, 
the source ofal] good, the refuge and image of all creation, and a beine 
by all meang deserving good things ; V ll 


[ V is called  sarva-Manpalà (all 
good). In consideration of the different ki j seu N 


f I nds of redemption hieh she 
18 able to bastow, she is ealle1 Mahà-Laksmi in the Vo and 
there she is also culled Saraswati:and as she has givin birth to the 


Vedas, she is also called Veda-Mata, Ina word, she ig Savitri, Gayatri 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA 418 


— 


as well as Sakti which sustains the three worlds. In days of yore, 
she killed a demon named Durga, hence she is culed Dargá. Atb 
first she emanated from the valour of the œ> ls and killed all the demons. 
This is why she is calle] the primeval Nature. She. is all happiness 
and full of joy. She removes the fear of her believers and relieves 
sorrow and poverty. She is a source of fear to her enemies. 

18.83. This goldess is Sati, the daughter of Daksa, and Párvati, 
the daughter of thé mountain; and through her own digits, she is 
manifest as the Earth, the container of all. Rati, Ganga and other 
nymphs are the product of her digits; and through her assistance I 
create, again and again. O father, as soon as I saw the same Radha 
in the sphere of the Rasa, I began to flire with her; and the wonderful 
intercourse desired. by us continued for a very long time, i. e, for a 
period equal to the longevity allotted to Brahma. In that sphere we 
perspired so much that a deep, graceful lake was the outeoma of our 
perspiration, O lord of the Vraja, by and by the sweat rushed 
ina current towards the universe with so much foree that the world 
which was nob yet created was submerged in the water. Later on, after 
our intercourse was over I impregnated Radhd who sustained my semen 
in her womb fora period equal to the life of Brahma. Then she lay 
a wonderful egg, at the sight of which witha heavy heart she began 
to weep and angrily cast it ab the water inundating the universe. 
Later on, from that egg a huge colossal Being came out. 
When L saw my offspring cast into the water, | eursed Radha. :y my 
curse, she has become barren. ‘his is why Durga, Dakgmi, Saraswati 
and the supreme Radha (four goddesses) did not ever give birth to children. 
All the goddesses and other women who came out of their parts or digits 
have likewise got no issue). - 

90.97. O king of the Vraja, when through my digits the huge 
Being, the (Mahá-Vignu) the shelter of all came out of the egg, I gave him 
the nectar of my immortal finger which he drank. As a result of his own 
Karma, he lay immovable in the water, Through the powers of his 
Yoga, the water alone constituted his pillow as well as bed. The pores 
of his skin were ever submerged in the water; and a small Virata sprang from 
each of his pores and lay likewise in the water. from the lotus navel of 
the small Viráta, the lotus of a thousand leaves was produced : and Brahma 
sprang spontaneously out of that lotus : hence he was the product of the 
lotus. After his birth, with an anxious heart he (Brahma) eogitated in 
his mind thus : * How was my body created and where are my parents and 
kinsmen ?” and thus with this idea ho wandered in the lotus for three lakhs 
of years, Afterwards having rested on the stem of the lotus, he medi- 
tated for celestial five lakhs of years and recollected ma. Then I gave 
him my mantra which with a pare body and attentive mind he reeited for 
eclestial soven lakhs of years. ‘Thereupon the creator obtained a boon from 
meand applied himself to the task of creation. By his powor of illusions 
(Maya) a Brahma, a Visnu and a Mahes'a were created in every world. 

98.108. The regents of the quarters, 12 Adityas, 11 Rudras, 9 planets, 

Vasus, 3 crores of gols, Brahmins, Kgatriyas, Vais'yas, S üdras, 
Yakgas, Gandarbhas Kinnars (Demi-gods), spectros, demona- and all 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


414 THE BRAIIMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


comprehending the animate and inaminate objects were created by Brahma, 
The creator by degress attache! 7 heavens to each world. The earth 
with her seven islands, go'den-lands and seven seas and aft: rewards the land 
of darkness and 7 Pátáls came into existence. O king of the Vraja, the 
sum-botal of all this is Biahmanda. Thus in every world, there are the sun, 
the moon, the sacred continent of India and the holy rivers including the 
Ganges ete. O sire, the worlds are innumerable, no doubt, like the pores of 
the skin of Maha-Visnu. Above all these worlds, is the Vaikuntha 
without any support which has been ereated by my will Even the gods 
cannot describe it. It i; certainly invisible to the bad Yozis and un. 
believers. 50 crore Yojans above this Vaikuntha is the Goloka This 
wonderful and supreme land, the supreme harbour, has been created by my 
desire in a very graceful manner and rests solely on the support of the 
wind. ‘Therein are manifest tho mountain ol a hundred summits, the sacred 
Vrindà.vana and the lovely sphere of the Râsa [t is encircle by the 
Viraja river. O king of the Vraja, this praiseworthy, auspicious river 
is a crore of Yojans in breadth and ten times ss much in length, 
All the houses of the Goloka are constructed with excellent gars anl 
its rampart is so beautiful that even Vis wa-K má has not ever seen itb 
in his life. 


109-120. And there the sphere of the Rasa’ is crowded with astive 
cowherds, eonutless cows of plenty, Kalpa and Parijat trees, iakos and 
hundreds of greves, of flowers. It is illumined with diamond limps aud 
graced with a hundred erores of temples, Those temples are illumiaed 
with diamond lamps, surrounded by cowherds and filled with bedsteads of 
flowers. These temples are perfumed with musk, frank-ineense and fragrant 
sanlal. Here one meets with batel leaves ; and there, with fragrant water 
and articles of enjoyment or amusement. Thirty mi'lions of maid servants 
decked with clothes consecrated by fire and invaluable Jewels guard tho 
sphere of the Rasa. They possess matchless charms and are in tha prime 
of their youth. Tho sphere is encirelad by a foree of hundred thousand 
infatuated elephints. O king of the Vraja, this sphere inlaid with 
invaluable goms is ten Yojins b-oad. Tt is eirenlir and graceful like the 
moon beam. It is annointel with fiagnans musk, frank inesnse and 
sandal and eneire ed by blessed jars containing fruits and foliage, It is 
decked with ornaments, wreaths annointed with sandal, moist leaves 
of sandal stitched with silk, countless beautiful columns of plantains, fruits, 
blossoms of moist bent Stass, curl and fried rice, ‘The cow world is 
decked with the fa r mountain of S'sta-S'ringa constructed with excellent 
gems, This mountain is a crore of Wolfone tia Rer Bon res es ren vn 
in length and 50 crores of Yojans in breadth, It is very desirable : even tho 
Vedas cannot deseribe it. -Dhat mouutain, like a loyely rampart covered 
with wreaths of pearls: has encircled the Goloka, d 

121-181. Within that mountain, the lov 
the trees of Kalpa and mandára manifests 
lovely groves and beautifal Mansions for enjoyment and enchanting 

lakes for amusement. This beautiful, solitary Virindavana lib for habita- 
tion is always guarded by countless graceful cowherdesses, 1t is circular 
in appearance covering an area of 2 lakhs of Yojans and is 


ovely Vrindavána decke1 with 
itself and contains numberless 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ever ringing ` 


mas 


E 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 415 


LUE E e erem 


— 


with the ham of bees and male cuckoos. With a height measuring a 
thousand yojans and with a circumference measuring four times as mach, 
tho beautiful, immortal fig tree is situated in that solitary place. There the 
Kalpa trees owned by milk nymphs) which fultil every kind of desire are 
sodulously guarded by three lakhs of Rádbá's merry female attandauls. The 
wind redolent of flowers aud charged with particles of the water of 
Virajà gently blows for ever and makes that plaee very deli zhtful. 
Ràdhà who revels in Vrindá-vana, and is dearer to mo than my life 
surrounded by thousands of maid-servants is revelling in that place. O 
king of the Vrajw the same Radha adored by the best of gods, adepts 
and munis has through the curse ot Sri-dàma descended to the earth as 
the daughter of Vrisi-bhinu. O father, this Ràdhà loved by me and 
revered by all is equal to me in every respect, i.e. in perfection, accom - 
plishment, strength, intelligence, wisdom, Yoga and knowledge. O 
Nanda, I related to you the whole world and its measure. Now what 
do you want to hear D 


CHAPTER LXXXV. 


1.95. Nanda said, * O most blessed being, now tell me the food 
prohibited or allowed to the four castes including the Brahmins and their 
Karma-Vipàka (the future reward or punishment being the consequence 
of one’s act). © Lord of the world, you are the cause of causes and 
possess matchless wisdom. To whom else can I refer this subject ?” The 
Lord said, * What food is allowed or prohibited to the Brâbmins 
ete, is montioned in fne Vedas. And that I am going to tell 
you. Listen attentively. Drinking of milk or cocozuut water in a 
copper vessel or eating therein boiled rice, honey, molasses or any ordi- 
nary fruit or radish is improper, as Manu has held. — Brahmá holds that 
burnt crops and boiled jujube or sour gruel are also. probibited ; and heney 
and any preparation of milk except ghee in a copper vessel are likewise 
prohibited like wine. Milk in a copper vessel or refuse of food or ghee 
placed therein is strictly prohibited like beef. The Vedas hold that ghee 
mixed with honey, oil mixed with molasses, and giuger wised with 
molasses are prohibited Wise men hold that the refuse of driv king water 
or radish in the month of Mágha or pot-herb on the day of Ekádas'i is 
forbidden as an article of food or drink. Eating twice a diy or in the 
morning and evening or towards the end of the night is improper for 
intelligent persons. he drinking of water, or the use of milk boiled with 
rice and sugar, ghee, salt. lime, Swastika, (a kind of cake) butter, condensed 
milk, whey and honey by placing any of the above articles in the hands 
is just like cating beef ‘The S'ratis hold that the use of eumphor ina 
silver vessel is improper. If the distributer of food touches the guest 
who eats it, the-food in the hand of the former is prohibited to every one : 
this is sanctioned by all. O king of the Vraji, a man should always 
abstain from the flesh of a mongocse. a rhinoceros, it buffalo, a bird, a 
spake. a boar, an ass, a cat, a jieka! i dow, a tiger, and a lion. In the 
Kali Yuga, it has been held that the flesh of Kanjuka (@ bird) a Jerch, au 
alligator, au iguana, frog, crab, cow and the wild animal resembling a cow 
baying bushy hair-tail is-unBt for.foud. ‘Tbe fesh ofan elephant, a horee, * 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-N 


— m 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


416 THE BRAHMAVAIVARTA PURANA. 
oon ——— MGE ee 


aman, a demon, a biting insect, a fly, an insect and other similar animals 
is forbidden by the Vedas aul social customs. The flash of an ape, a bear, 
a young clephant, a musk, an ass is likewise forbilden. . The milk of 
she-buffalo, the curd, ghee, butter and whey of her milk are like wise 
forbidden to the Brahmins. The Vedas hold that horse flesh and horse. 
milk are forbidden to the four castes. The use of ginger on Sundaya 
is forbidden to all ; and the use of stale water, food%and milk is forbidden 
to the Brahmins, The food touched by a childless widow is forbidden to tho 
four castes ; for this food is lika urine and more hunnfal than beef Manu 
holds that a foolish Brahmin who eats food touehed by a childless widoy 
reaps no benefit from the worship of the gods and the manes. Fish is pro- 
hibited to the Brahmins and the Vaignavas: it is forbidden to others also on 
the five (important) days of festival, as Manu has held. Unpurified salt and 
oil are prohibited, but if they are chastened by fire and mixed with 
vegetables, they become pure and are then permitted to all. 


26-33. Water held by one hand, though puro and transparent or foul 
water or water (mixed with worms)—is unfit for drink: this is recognised 
by all. A thing not dedicated to Hari has beer described as unfit for use 
by the Yatis, Brahtnacháris, Brahmins and particulary the Vaignavas. O 
father, honey or anything prepared from cow's milk or molasses or any 
other articles mixed with ants are prohibited by the Vedas. A purely ripe 
fruit eaten by the bird or worm or any article eaten by the crow is prohibi- 
ted. Sweet meat cooked with oil or ghee by a S'üdra or flattened rice fried 
by a Sidra is prohibited to a Brdhmin. The water and food touched by an 
impure man are prohibited ; but they become pure on tho next day after 
the defilement caused by the birth and death of a relation is over. O king 
of the Viraja, I thus told you about things fit or unfit for food in the 
light of my supreme knowledge. Now listen to the doctrine of the 
arduous Karma- Vipáka (future reward or punishment as the result of one’s 
act) sanctioned by the S'rutis, Sire, the four Velas. hold four kinds of 
theories : but I have told you their substance. 


31-47. Without suffering, there can not b 
resulting from an act even in millions of ages, 
Consequences of his good or bad acts, A pilgrimage undertaken with 
Great care. the service of gods and the wielding of different forms at one and 
the same time contribute to a small extent tothe oxpiation of sins, O sire, 
a6 a river can not purify a jar of Wine, so a wretch not devoted to me cannot 
be purified even by the performances of several acts of penaneo. O king of 
the Vraja, a man cannot be purified by penance, charity, meditation and 
other holy acts. ‘The reaping of the fruits of good or bad acts ean by no 
means be avoided. “So, after rea ing them alone, people are purified 
and redeemed fro:n tha ties of Karma. By the merits of & man, lus vicious 
acts are destroyed: by his vices his virtuous acts are destroyed. Sacrifice y:6- 
votion, vow, fasting. an acs of pilgrimage, charity, observanees, cireumloca- 
tion round the world, listening to the Pura Das, taking holy counsel, 
worship of the religious preceptor and the gods, legitimate discharge cf 
duties, hospitality : all these acts never contribute to r 


: d ANE redemption which 
ean only be achieve. by ministering to ine, ‘The above mentioned good 


deeds lead oyly to the enjoymeut of beayen; aud bad deele lead to hell, 


e expiation of the sin 
A person must reap the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


NN 


Li 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 417 


dis^ase, and conception in abominab!e wombs, after which a man may be 
purified. Among the Brahmins, one who wilfully slays a aow is oppressed 
by sins and dwells in the hell ecalled-Danda ìka for as many years 98 
there are hairs on the skin of the cow. There he is eaten by snakes and 
agitated with the inflammation caused by thirst, disease and hunger. He 
is reduced in body and suffers great torments. After coming out of that 
hell, ho attains the body of a cow for as many years as there are hairs on 
the body of the cow, and subsequently attains the condition of a leper and e 
ehandal for a lakh of years; Then through his own laches, he turns into a 
Brahmin afflicted with leprosy. - Lastly after feeding a lakh of BrBhmins, 
he is restored to health and purified. 


48-55. A Brühmin committing that act involuntarily and a Ksatriya, 
voluntarily are liable for half of the sin committed by the act. And a 
Ksatriya committing it involuntarily and a S'üdra voluntarily are liable 
for half of the above offences specified last. A voluntary cow-slaughter 
by a Vais'ya and a S'üdra is half as much sinful as an involuntary act of 
the same nature. An? an act. whieh is but a substitute for the cow- 
slaughter entails one-foursh of the sins incurred by actual cow-slaughter. 
A sinful Brahmin who kills’a Brahmin incurs four times the sins incurred 
by cow-slauzhter. There is difference in the degree of the punishment 
according to the voluntary or involuntary nature of the deed and the 
caste of tho offender: and the sinful act is, no doubt, expiated by briths aud 
diseases, us the sinner reaps the fruits of his Karma. A Bráhmin-slaugh- 
torer attains the condition of the worm of the ordura for a number of 
years four times the period for which the cow-slaughterer takes the-form of 
& cow. Afterwards, for a period four times as long. he becomes an 
infidel; and for a period four times the period above specified, he becomes & 
blind Bráhmiü, At that time by feeding four lakhs of Brahmins, he may 
be released from his great sin, acquire purity and fame and regain his eyes. 
Whoever among the four castes k'lls a woman is regarded ns a great 
sinner by tho Vedas and consigned to the hell called the “thread of time” 
for es muy years us thero are pores on the skin of the woman, 


56.67. In that holl being oppressed by the bite of snakes he has to 
dwoll without food; and afterwards the wreteh is born as a boar. Later on, 
through his laches he is born as a consumptive S'üdra. During thia 
perio}, he ought to feed a lakh of Brahmins. In this ease be will be born 
for a while, as a devoted, pure and wise Bràhmin: and after the gift of gold 
he will be thoroughly purified. A great sinner who kills foetus 
lives fur a hundred years in the hell called s'üebimukha and is there pierced 
with sharp weapons. Then the wretch turns iuto» horse for a hundred 
years and afterwards through his own laches, he attains the life of a Vais'ya 
afficted with ring-worms, for fifty years, The gift of gold may 
make him pure; and afterwards he may attain tho rank of a s acred 
Brahmin of good rank, free from all disease. ‘A Brahmin’ who kills 
& Kegatriya, or a Kgutriys who kills a Brahmin dwells in the hell called 
* Heated spear’ where chastised by the iron-rod he screams loudly. 
Afterwards for a hnndred years he abtains the ‘condition of a rogue 
elephant, Later, for a hundred years he leads the life of a S'üdra suffering 
from impure blood. At that time the gift of slephants cures him of hig’ 


53 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


418 THE BRAHMA PAIFARTA PURANA. 
malady and restores'to him the “ privileges of a twiez-born.” A Vais ya 


who kills a Vais'ya or a.S'ûdra ; and a S üdra who kills a Vais'ya are equally 
sinful. They live for a hundred years in the hell culled the pit of worms, 
where they are devoured by worms and dwell in great distress. Afterwards 
they turn into Kirâtas (or savages who subsist by hunting) oppressed by 
worms and diseases, A Bráhmin voluntarily killing a Sadra ought to recite 
the ode to the sun, a lakh of times for purification: and if he does that 
act involuntarily, he ought to recite it halfa lakh of times for expiation 
9f bis sin, 

68-80. Any one among the four castes killing a dog is cursed by S'iva 
and thus dwells for a century in the hell called Raurava after which he 
takes the form of a dog for 16 years, Later on, he is born as a Bra hmin 
and devoured by dogs. At that time, a dip in the Ganges and the gift 
of gold secure his purity. Among the four castes, one who kills a cat 
is purified by bathing in the Ganges or by gift toa Bra hmin of salt 
measuring six palas (a pala 585 grains), Among the 4 castes, whoever kills 
a snake marked by my foot, is unquestionably liable for one-fourth of the 
sin incurred by Braébmin-slaughter. That wretch lacerated by keen 
weapons in the hell called ** Asipatra " suffers endless torments. Later 
9n, born as a water snake, he is oppressed by men and dies in great agony, 
Afterwards for his sin he wiolds the form of a weak man subjoct to fever, 
lives only for five years and dies for his laches, O king of the Vraja, 
whoever, among the four castes, kills a horse or an elephant lives for ten 
years in the pit of urine, then leads the life of a horse or an elephant for 
20 vears and afterwards assuredy turns into a Sidra, prond and diseased, 
Bas pu purified by feeding a hundred Brahmins and giving them 

’ person who kills small animals turns into a small animal after 


his death and afterwards attains tho conditi 
a ition ofa small snake for a 
ey: O lord of the Vraja, good men should always be kind to 
ae Da But £ 15 nob sinful to kill harmful animals, O 
whoever am t p zii 'seis li 
ET ES ET x RUE 9 four castes kills a horse is liable to penalty 


he off TANG 
the hell called Asipatra, - ce CU Brülimin-slaughter and goes to 


81-104. This wretch, lacerated there day and night, fora century with 
y * Then he exists fora lakh of years 
as a silk-cotton tree, Jao tho next birth, throughout his life, ho Seda the 
i üdra. Next he tuns into a Brahmin 
nd ulcers ; and the gift of gold at that time may 
A perjurer, a misereant, a great villain, a 
trays his miend; a person who appropriates 
e We => = Person who eats tho food connected 
b a. one PCM of a Südra, one who burns the corpse of a 
eee (s P NH ed hr pints the carrier ofa bull, a washer and a 
J ubsists i j | 
E NE have to dwell in NIE NER RD ns 
and nig in hot oil d 
3 j Š evoured } rorma 
Rois like aggrieved serpents and subjected to diseases, Then hon 
eve to live for a crore of thousands of years as vultures, Later on, they are 
aa beasts of prey, a hundred times, and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


EJ 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 419 


eventually a3 S'üdras suffering from: indigestion and fever. Ab that time 
tho gift of gold measuring a hundred palas (a pala 3585 grains) undoubtedly 
purifies the sinners. Whoever among the four castes steals oloth, 
milk or ghee ete silver, pearl or any other white article suffers for & 
century torments in the hell called the pit of urine. Then lie lives as & 
heron for 1000 years. Later on, O king of the Vraja. that sinner turns 
into a S üdra suffering from psoriasis. Then for one birth he takes the 
form of a Brühmin possessed of excess.of limbs. He is ultimately born 
asa Brahmin again and purified by feeding the Brahmins. One who 
steals spices or aromatic substances attains, no doubt, the life of a beast. 
Whoever steals to musk deer whose testicle is perfumed turns into a deer 
for 7 births and afterwards he assumes the condition of a beast called 


Gandhaka, (probably a musk ora mole) ‘Then he attains the condition 
of a S’udra sutfering from ulcerous leprosy ; and afterwards he resumes the 
er disease, But 


state of a Brahmin suffering from the remnants of his form 
the gift of gold measuring six palas (weights of gold) no doubt, purifies 
him. ‘The thief of tha paddy crops is liable to the sufferings of hell 
called the pit of ordure : and after leading the life of a poor man and 
miser for seven births he is released from danger. The thief of gold 
deteriorntes, is afflicted with leprosy and goes to the pit of ordure which 
he consumes fora century. Later on, he becomes a S'ûdra suffering from 
the disease of polluted blood : and in the last-named birth after having 

again attains the condition of & 


reaped the fruits of his sins, he 
Brahmin suffering from the climax of diseases and is purified by tho gift of 


gold. A man who goes to & prohibited woman dwells for countless years 
in the hell called Haurava and the most hideous hell called Kumbht pika 
He lives as a worm of tbe vagina of prostitutes for & thousand 
years, as a worm of ordure tora lakh of years and afterwards as a beast, 
hon in successive births, he is transformed into-a small animal, an infidel 


and a base S 'üdra. 

105-116. Subseqnently he becomes a diseased, impotent Brahmin and: 
afterwards, for the same sin, a Brahmin without issue. By pilgrimages 
in this birth, ha gradually gets-purified : and after having fed a lalch of 
Brahmins he becomes throughly pure and capable of begetting ohildren. Av 
man subject to anger turns into am ass for seven births : and a quarrelsome 
man turns into a Grow for seven births. A man stealing the holy stone 
surely resides in the hell oalled the wheel of time for a century and’ 
afterwards turns into « wag-tail The thief of iron leaves.no issue > 
the thiefof ink turns into a cuckoo : the thief of collyrium becomes a parrot: 
the thief of sweets turns into a worm: and one who injures one's precer tor 
ora Brahmin turns into louse. A whore after having suffered the torments: 
of hell called Raurava for a long time attains the form ofa useless worm 
for century and by turns for seven births she attains the condition of 
a widow, a barren woman, an untouchable woman of low class and a woman 
with her nose out. A parson who steals red things suffers front pollution of 
blood: a man without rites turns into an infidel: an injurious man becomes a 


cripple of low caste; an uninitiated man (#.e., one who does not take mantra) 
d. a proud man Le3omes 


becomes a dwarf, a man of evil eye becomes one-eye in Le: 
S'üdra of low caste, the slanderor of a god becomes dumb; the thief of word’ 
orone who resiles from his statement becomes a dumb, an envious man 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


4920 THE BRAHMA VAITARTA PURA NA. 


becomes baldheaded ; a liar becomes beardless; a man with an ovi 
beoomes toothless; a man who breaks his words 

loses his fingers; and the thief of a book be 
A man who robs or steals a horse is consigned for a century to the hell of 
saliva and urine and afterwards surely takes the form of a horse, 

117-126. Whoever steals an elephant lives in the 
thousand years and afterwards takes the form of 
S'üdra. A man who on an occasion where no saerifi 
steals a goat dwells for a century in the hell called the pit of mucus or pus; 
then he attains the condition ofa goat fora year, after w hich he becomes a 
man and, being ont off by tho enemy is purified, Whoevor steals the things 
gifted by him or breaks his promise suffers torments of hell for a long time 
and is then born as an infidel, Whoever eats sweet moat alune surely dwells 
for a contury in the hell called tho thread of time and afterwards wanders 
for a thousand yoars like a spectre. Thon he respectively turns into a fly, 
an ant, agbee, a honey-sueking bee, a bug, a gnat, a mosquitto, and bed- 
insect. Afterwards he takos the body of a silly, diseased $adra. Lastly he 
becomes a Brahmin released from sins. A manwho steals oil turns into a 

worm of oil for 3 births, a louse for threo birth and a wicked goldsmith 
for one birth. Whoever among the Brahmins earns hia livelihood by 
the culture of letters or whoever steals tho 
bim food lives in the pit of darkness for 
born as a wicked goldsmith a 
127-138, This caste Kayastha, 
does not devour her flesh for 
for none, O king of the Vr 
the gold-merohant and the Kayastha aro moat cunning and eruol. Their 
heart is like the keen edge W 
Rather, there may bo one gi 


there is no good man among 


' i tonguo 
; tongue-less; a wicked Map 


pit of ordure for a 
an elephant, then ofa 
Ge is necessary kills or 


learned, 
three castes Mentioned above Own wellfare. A wicked man 


nres or appropriates enone AMN "another, tho thief of 

'oprrates the land gifted by him surely goes 

to the hell parle the thread of time. There ho PLE by hanea 

» 00 years and afterwards turns into a worm of ordure Lier on, 

S'ücra for one birth and ig vltimately 

after having mado a gift of land, a prudent man 

fA gun Who steals red dress beccmos 

irth ^, B0 Who steals yellow dre:s becomes 
at one birth and later û 

4 ) i on, h e * ò 

En CUTE purity and becomes 3 one Bee p 

not perform his diurnal rites thries, one who sleeps in tho morning 


or evening, one who steals the sa one wh fi tho 
5 © performs : 


ceremony of solar 7 
who slanders the -Vod aaner or a Brühmin 


the S'astras) for threo 


A Brahmin Woman assuredly goes 
sing thrust. day and night, into 8 
orments; afterwards tho sinner 18 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


comes illiterate and diseased ; 


P —— NP 


y 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 421 


——— i = - 


turned into a worm of the vagiuy of whores for 60,000 years aud consumes 
the dirt of the vagina. 


139.148. | Afterwards by turns he turns iato a Chandal fora lakh. of 
births and a Südra sufferinz from ülcerous leprosy tor oue birth : and there- 
after he is born as a Brahmin and having suffered from the. remuant of 
bis former malady is purified by acts of pilgrimigo A maa worshipping 
a god in an improper place turns into a wicked Sidra; and a man who makes 
unholy offerings to the gods or constructs an earthen m Ho orgau of S'iva 
mixed with hair turns into an infidel. Jf the said organ which is worship- 
ped contains gravel, the worshipper is blinded in the next birth. Ifit is 
deformed, ho*hirself is deformed; if it is defective in form, he is rendered 
poor; if it has been construct-d with irreverenee, he becomes diseased and 
reaps apt consequences for his contempt. Whoever having constructed 
the organ of S'iva with mud ashes, dung or sand worships it only ome 
lives in heaven for ten thousand years and is afterwards born as a wise Brah- 
min owning lanl. Whoever similary worships a hundred male or, ans 
enjoys the bliss of heaven for a like period and is then born as the king of 
India. Whoever worships a thousand such organs enjoys the bliss of 
heaven for,a pretty long time and is then born as the emperor of India. 
Whoever worships fen thousand such organs becomes the lord of Emperors. 
Whoever worships a lakh of them becomes the sole monarch of the world. 
Worship of the said organs with extrao-dinary zeal brings extraordinary 
fruits, Pilgrimage, charity, feasting the Brahmins and auspicious deeds, 

tsuob as the worship of Narayana convert a man into a Brahmin. 

149-158 Excess of devotion makes a learned Bráhmin; and by virtue 
of the sanctities accumulated in several births, a man is born in India og a 
Brihmin devoted to Visuu and eapable of bringing the passions under bis 
control. The Vaisnavas are redeemed in their life time; and the earth is at 
onco consecrated by the touch ofthe dust of their feet; and their society also 
ponsecrates holy places and thousands of their ancestors. This is a point 
recognised by the Vedas. A wicked Brahmin turns into a bad physician 
for one birth and a snake catcher for three births. A man who is very 
orooked, ill-behaved snd onvious of the gods and the Brahmins turns into 
a crooked snake for a thousand years. O king of the Vraja, a woman who 
is the pander or pimp of a whore, or a licentious man lives for a hundred 
years in the hell called the thread of time. Afterwards he turns iuto an 
iguaaa for one birth, a deer for three births, a she buffalo for one birth, a she- 
bear for one birth, a female rhinoceros for one. birth and a female jackal 
for three births censecutively. Whoever having filled up the tank of another 
with earth sows crops therein turns into an alligator for three births and a 
tortoise for three births. If a. Bráhmin, fond of fish, eats fish or undedicated 
flesh is born as a fish and a deer by turns. That sinner having thus reaped 
the fruits of his sins for a thousand years is consecrated after the end of his 
sufferings and becomes a Brdbmin. A Bráhmin void of Ekádas'i sinks low; 
and if he gives to another Bráhmin twice as much food as he eats himself, 
he is redeomed from his sins. 


- 159-169 A wretoh who eats on my birthday is involved in the sin cf the 
murder of all persons in the three worlds and becomes a Chandal after having 
suffered the agonies of all the hells, Eating on tho: day of Ràm-Nàvami 
and S'iva-Ratri bringe a like penalty. But he who is incapable of fasting 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


$22 THE BhADNA FAIPARTA PURA VA. 


“~ 


ought to take on the day in question only boiled rice with whee. A man, 
who is incapable even of that, vught to feast the Brahmins by' way of 
atonement. A man who performs the grand, holy fes:ival sacred to Krisna 
is released from all sins. "Therefore he ought to recite my name carefully, 
. By eating on the day cf Amavas\a, a man turns into a vulture for tən 
thousand births, a b» r for a hundred births, and a beast of prey for a 
hundred hirths An uninitiated Brahmin turns intoa white kite or a parrot, 
An unmariied Brahmin certainly turns into a swan. Whoever steals 
eloth marked with various colours turns into a peaecek for three births and. 
then, for succeeding births, attains the conditions of a poor man, a diseased 
man, a deaf man anda humpbacked man. On the days of the five impor. 


tant festivals, a man n.ust abstain from woman, oil, fish and flesh. "'l'he 


great fool who violates this rule must go to the hell called * the tooth of 


thunder or adamant.” That sinner afer having lived there in great pain ` 


turns into an infidel for seven births and a ehandàl for soven births, 
A wretch who does not bow to a Brahmin or an idol remains impure all 
his life and is afterwards born as an infidel, 


170-181. Whoever does not greet a Brdhmin that has arrived as s 
guest at his place certainly attains tha condition of a bear for seven births. 
A rioh mi who holds with contempt the beggars becomes a swallow for 
seven births consecutively ; and a man who is envious of S'iva is born ag 
a dog seven timos and a Devala (x Brahmin who subsists upon idol's 
profits) seven times, A foolish and wicked man who interferes with thg 
Worship of the gods or the mines as prescrib2d by the Vedaa suffers tho 
torments of hell for a thousands years. O' king of the Vraji, after having 
suffered pain in the hell called Raurava, he turns into a crow for threo 
births and having. wielded the boly ofa jackal, he eats carcass. There- 
after -the wretch, on account of his sins, is doomed to the condition of æ 
Preserver of carcasses for three births at placas frequented by pilgrims 
aud levies tribute on corpses. A foolish, coneaited, sinful man, a robel to the 
gods, who after having duly worshipped' his gods does not worship his 
spiritual guide as well or fails to give him fo3d' does not reap the fruits of 
his worship. By the curse of the gods, he is born’ as a poor Dovala (o 
Brahmin who subsists upon offerings made to an idol. A man wao 
extinguishes light turns into a fire-fly for seven births ; and a woman who 
outs pumpkin-gourds turns into a white kite for three births, Afterwards 
he again attains the Condition of a diseased man for seven births, a poor 
man for threa births, a miser for seven births, and a beardless, hairless 
blind man for three births. In the Kauthuma branch of the Sámaveda, 
there is undoubtedly a reference to the panalty 


births and a cat for seven births, A person who stoals goni (gunny or 
tagged clothes) turns into a pigeon, for seven births: a person who steals 
sack-cloth turns into a bird for seven births ; the thief of pa ldy turns into 
a sparrow for seven births ; the thief of flesh turas into an elephant for 
seven births, 


182 193. He who steals poems composed by a savant tutns into a 
frog for seven births, a poetaster for seven births, a villags priest for 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


A 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 423 


——— 


seven births, a mongoose (ichneumon) for seven bir.hs, a house lizard for 
seven births, and a chameliou lor seven births consecutively. A man 
with an evil tongue turns into à :eurpion for seven bir. hs, a crow for seven 
births, a hornet for seven births, anl an old ast for one birth. And 
afterwards by turns he is born as a S'üdra, a Vais ya, a Ksgatriya and 
utterwards as a Brahmin. Among members of the four castes, whoever 
sells his daughter enters at once into the heli called Tàmi:ri and is there 
tormented as long as the sun and the moon exist. Later on, that sinner 
is born as a person selling meat (a butcher), afterwards asa map subject 
to diseases: and lastly he is restored to his former oondition, A very crooked, 
roheming, impious man at once turns into an oilman aud onse into a potter. 
A scandal-monger or the slanderer of a gud and a Brahmin is born seven 
times as a dealer in lime and seven times as a washerman. Those 
Brahmins, Keatriyas, Vais'yasand S üdras whoare addicted to evil practices 
aud void of purity attain the conditions of infilels for a thousand years. 
A licentious man who is very much addicted to the society of women is 
soon attacked with consumption and is rendered a eunuch at the next 
birth, Whoever licentiously observes the lips, loins or the face of other 
men’s wives loses his eye-sight and turns into a enuch at the next birth, 
O king of the Vraja, a foolish, lustful and envious Brâhmiņ lives in the 
hell called the blind pit of darkness for a thousand years. 

194-900. ‘Later on, that ill-natured Brahmin turns intoa Jiráhmin 
conversant with the ways of providence (an astrologer) and then an 
Agradani (a Brahmin outeasted for having received the first oblation at a 
sacrifice). He then attains the condition of a S ûdra and finaliy becomes 
a Brahmin at the end of his sufferings. A person convérsant with the 
ways of providence and knowing the S Astras, if prompted by avarice he 
speaks the untruth, turns into a wizard for a long tıme and a monkey for 
7 births. A Brahmin mindful of his duties is more sacred than the wind 
and more effulgent than the fire, Nay, even the gods fear him. An im- 
pious wicked man, as a result of his religious devotion for several suocecd- 
ing births, acquires superb wisdom and attains the rank of a Brahmin in 
India. As the Ganges among rivers, as the Pugkara among places frequented 
by pilgrims, as Kás'i among cities, as Siva among the wise, as the 
Vedas among holy books, as the holy fig or the peepu: among trees, as my 
worship. among acts of meditation, as fasting among vows, so is the 
Brahmin foremost among castes. All the sacred places and vows exist in his 
foot. The holy dust of his feet removes all diseases and sins : and his 
auspicious blessings bring about all kinds of welfare. O father, I thus 
related to you according to my knowledge the theory of human Karma- 
Vipaka (future reward or penalty caused by one’s acts) as stated in the 
S'Astras. Now hear what duties are assigned toa man who listens to 
the above doctrine. Such a man has been directed to give gold, silver, cloth 
and betel to the beggar. For my satisfaction he should at once distribute 
to other Brahmins hundred pieces of gold, as wallas silver, cows, cloths 
betel loaves. 


CHAPTER LXXXVI. 
1-11, Nanda said, “O Lord, in connexion with the daughter of 
Kedára you have incidentally recited to me the duties of women, artificially 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


424 THE BR£HMA VAIFARTA PURANA. 


created by Brahma (Keityà women) Nov describe to ma in detail 
who is the diuzhter of Koedadra, who is kine  Kedira andl how 
he is desesndod.” Tne Lord sail: O kins of the Vraji, in days of 
yore, in the  berinning of creation, a certain Manu called Swiyam- 
baüva, the son of Brahmi manifested himself. The namə of his wif 
was S'atarüpi who was the most blessed and honoured of women. Subse- 
quently thay had two sons named Priya-vrata and Jttànpáda, 
Uwàapàla bezat the most worthy Dhruva whose son wis Vatsa. 
rármi. The  iast-named bezat Kedára. ‘The gracious Kedára was 
a great Vaisaavi. He was the lord of seven islands: and for his 
preservation she great wheel eilled Sulars'ana was ever present at his 
council.” Tho gol Varun: gave him nine lakhs of auspicious cows, clothes 
consecrated by fire, a hundred thousand pieces of gold eoins, fertile land, 


excellent gems, diamonds, pearls, precious stones, a lakh of excollent 


horses anda lakh of elephants That king every day distributed to tho 
Brahwnins silver, corals, sweet-meat, a hundred piles of piddy and orna- 
ments of gem. He always fed a hundred lakhs of Brahmins and provided 
them with golden cups of water, Ont of deference to the Brahmins, he 
always presented to them sacred threads of gold, exesl'ent-golden rings aud 
seats of gold and gem with very great pleasure. 

J2 36. He had one lakh of cooks and two lakhs of Brahmins to distri. 
bnte food : and to gratify the appetite of common people he used to got 
read y graceful dishes of ghee, honey card, molass s anl milk. From mora 
to eve, the Brahmins were fed: and wealth was daly given to poor men and 
birra. l'his Viisnava king wh» hwl sublued his pas-ions ste only 
fraits and roots, dodieated everything to me and recited only my name, day 
aad night. Ones upon a time a cook said to the king thus, © O lord, to 
contribute to the pleisures of the palate of the Brahmias. 
Cows are available ; all the rest have beon exhausted. ' 
taking to-li only dry food. 


ouly a lakh of 
The Brahmins arg 
Does yoir majesty command that they 
should finish their maal with juice and vegotables alone? A king is he 
whose jurislietion extenls over four yojans. (A Yojan=9 miles.) The 
King of the mandala (sphere) is he whose Jurisdiction oxtends over n land 
twelve timəs aS spisious : and a greab king or an emperor is he the sphere 
of whose jurisdiction is 12 timos as great as that of the last-named.  Fiv3 
- lakhs of princes, as mentione: 
Kedára and presented to him invaluable gems, stones, pearls, 
excellent diamonds, superb horses and animals by way of tribute. From 
his sacrificial pit, eminated a girl who was the product of the digits of 
Laksmi, At the time of her'birth, she was clad in garments consecrated by 
fire and her whole body was decorated with ornaments of gem. ‘This 
excallent girl with lotus-like eyes as soon as she was born said to the king 
Kedára, “ © king. Iam your daughter. ” The kine thereupon reverentially 
worshipped her, handed her over to his wife oil happily passed his 
days. hat girl roverentially took tha permission of her parents and with 
pleasure went to tha lovely holy forest to Practise asceticism on the coast 
ofthe Yamuna. Her nama was Vrindà ; and so the forest marked by 
her devotion is also called Vrindi-Vana. : 


| I Vrindà, to obtain me as her 
husbsnd, enzigal horself in devotion anl souzht from the adorable Brahma. 


& boou to thateeffses, Brahmi was pleased anl said, “O Vrinda, you will - 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


labove, always attended the council of king , 


^d 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 438 


a rE z 

get Krigar aftor a while", Later on, one» upon a bima, in the season of 
spring bhar chiste wonw being deesed with ornaments of gem was 
gleapi iz o1 3 Ho vary bad on the coast of the Yamanà witha simile, when 
Brahmi, to test the chastity of this beutiful damsel, sent Dharma there 
inan attractive dress. She beheld a handsome youth in solitude; the 
whole of his boly was annointed with sandal paste and decorated with 
ornaments of se n. The lovely faca of this vouth with a golden hue was 
adapted to the desire of women. He looked like a passionate young man 
aged sixteen years. His grace was that of ten millions of Cupids. He was clad 
in vellov his faca possessed the ebarm of the autumnal moon and his eyes 
were blooming like a pair of autumnal lotuses When Vrindà saw him she 
got up, provided him with a seat worshipped him, glady gave him, fruits, 
delieio is roots and fragrant water and respeetfilly bowed to him. Then the 
lord Dnarma in the eni-e of a Brabmin beaming with the lustre of Brahma 
accapted the presents and affectionately addre-sed her with words delightful 
to whe ears of passionate girls and intolerable to chaste women thus: “O 
charming wiri, whose daughter are you ? Whatis your name ? What are 
you doing in this solitary place? Reveal to me these points. Fair one, 
what is the cause and object of your meditation? May all be well with you. 
Crave fron m+ the bson which you desire.’ Vriudá said, “O Brahmin, 
Iam tho daughter of king Kedára: my name is Vrindé. I am pray- 
ing in this solitary place. ‘lhe object of my prayer is to get Hari as my 
husband. O B-âhmin. give me this boon. 1f you can. And if you can not, 
go home.” What is the use then. of putting me this question ? 

3745 Dhirma said, Fair one, exe pt Laksmi and Saraswati, no 
woman can ever secure as her husband. tnat supreme Being, the great god, 
who is void of will. attributes and form who is incontrovertible and wields 
only a form ont of compassion for hie believers. This Hari who sustaing 
four arms and reposes in the V-ikuntha ts attended by his two wives named 
above But when this supreme Being. the eternal spirit, manifests himself 
with two hands in the from of a youthful cow-herd in the Goloka with a flute 
on his livs, then thi- tranquil, lovely, dark blue, fair and perfect Deity is con- 
stantly a lored by Radha, his consort, the great goddess of fortune, the sup- 
remo, exceilen: goddess, the emblem of Brahma. His attractive appearance 
censures the beauty of ten milllons of Capi-ls. He is the image of truth, wields 
an eternal form. is clad in yellow and is the donor of all prosperity. All the 
limbs of his body are decorated with diamond ornaments. This Krisna 
has two furms, on» with two hinds and the other with four hands. With 
four hands, he presides over the Vaiku utha; and with two hands, over 
the Goloka. O Vrindà, the mere wink of his eye causes the downfall of 
ono Brahma, 'Oae Indra falls in 25,059 Yugas. One day of Brahma is 
equal to the period covered by the enjoyment of L4 Indras in succession. 
he night of Brahma is as loag as his day. His month consists of 30 
days according to the above calculation ; twelve such months constitute his 
yenr. A hundrad years according to the abovo calculation constitute tho 
lif of Brahma, Tha Rigis, Sanaka and others meditate him for tho 
whoie of their lives. Millions an: millions of ages have passed away 
snd yet thay have not succeeded in attaining perfection in the 
meditation ol the Lord. The gol Anwb. with his thousand faces, for 
bundreds of millions of ages, continually «nd revorontially served that 


54 : 


-- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. » 


420 THE BRAHMA VAIFVARTA PURANA, 


benevolent, supreme beino, difficalt of adoration 


anil recited Flis | 
and yet he has not become an adept. 


Dame; 

49.57. O good nymph, Brahma is the author of 
He rewards every one for his virtuous act, de 
mainspring of all prosperity and the ruler of 
birth, the saine Brahma constantly with four mouths adores that constant 
Eternal, Supreme God, the emblem of Brahma. „Aud yet he has nog 
been able to comprebend truly that supreme Being indescribable even 
by the Vodas. Lord Siva who had subdued death, who is full of suprema 
happiness, who is the asylum and donor of prosperity to all, who is the le 
of the religious preeeptors of the Yogis (meditative ascetics), who 
time of time and the death of death, who through his own d 
ing the form of Rudra destroys the whole world, even the s; 
his five mouths constantly adores him, uot to talk of otl 
is the emblem of all energy, «ho de 
is tho primordial, radical goddess, 
who is celebrated by the names 
yan? and Vaisnayi ; through whose 


the four Vedas. 
is the fountain-head or 
the universe. [n every 


ader 
is the 
igits assum. 
tid Siva with 
ters. Durgå who 
stroys the calamities of all, 
the form of the eternal Brahma, 
of Visnu-Maya, Sanátani, Nara. 


delusion, this transient world cons. y 
tantly moves benighted, even that goddess herself, O Vrindà, reverentially 


adores him day and night. Fair one, the six-faeed god (Kàrtika) with 

his six mouths always adores him revorentially to the best of his abili- | 
ties, Lord Ganesa with the faco of an elephant who 
before other gods, who is the chief of all th 
sages, who is the best of the adepts, gods and 
knowledge, nay, who is the king of the 
contemplates him, 


who 


is worsaipped 
e gods and tho leader of 
ascetics, who excels all in 
colestials, constantly adores and 


f 

CN 

58-66, The groat goddess of knowledge herself is incapable of adoring | 

him ; and the goddess of fortune reverentially serves his lotus-fee& day 

and night, The whole world, at his m ?, teems with good things, 

Through his fear, the wind blows, the sun shines, Indra rains, tho tire 

burns and death moves among animals, [n his service, the earth 

sustains all objects and is the Container of wealth, Pair one, through his 
fear, the sea and the mountains aro motionless ; ( 

by services rendered to his lotus- feet, 


aod being consecrated | 
the Ganges has become the source | 
of redemption, renders holy the three 
rivers designed for pilgrimage, 


worlds and is the best of all holy 7 

Among all the gods in the universe, in- 
j yf ; 

cluding Brahma, V ignu, Siva, and Ananta and among all the munis and) 

other celestial beings, somo aro equal to the digits of Lord Krisia > 

and some are equal to his parís; and some are equal to tho parts of his 

digits, O auspicious girl, Yo" desire as yonr husband the supreme Beir 

Krisna who transcends even Nature. [Ie Ginnob be Controlled by be 

love of any one except Radha in the Cow-world, O blessed damsel, I 

the best of kings, © girl of excellent 

assembly of the gods and the ¢ 

meas your husband, 


ere slange 


mien, there js none in | 
lemons Sa ions = Therefore court 


67-80, O an-pivious nymph, by my stace, vou will, no doubt, enjoy 
all the bliss available in the three worlds, woman of melodious voice, 
in days of yore, Brahma Constructed a golden Jan] for the amusement 
of the gods ou the other side of the SRYODegens Teh tis go theta sand 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 421 


j taste the pleasures of sexual intercourse ; and all will be well with von 
Or let us go to the immortal eity of Indra; decked with gardens of flowers 
ass our days in happiness. Or let us go to the golden Ceylon, 
adorned with many gems, or to the cave of the Sumeru or to the attrac- 
tive sea of milk or to the lovely ya-loka or Drahm-loka: and there 
‘in solitude enjoy the pleasures of intercourse. ‘The Malaya mountain 
y contains many excellent and lovely places constructed wiih gems. It 
ig always redolent of the wind fanning the holy sandal and incensed- on all 
sides by different species of jasmine, the sere y-pine tree and the beautiful 
Champak, ^ fragrant yellow flower, There beautiful birds and bees are 
making melodious notes. Let us go there and indulge in pleasure O 
goddess, vou may select any of the graceful lands of Indra. Varuna, the 
Wind Yama, Kuvera, the fire and the moon, Leb us go and revel 
there. Or if you please. let us go to the Island of diamond or gem, or to 
the beautiful lunar lake and revel there; and you will be blessed". - O 
, king of the Vraja, god Dharma so saying. advaneed to her to enjoy 
, her soeiesy Bub this attempt was not made in earnest; it was a mere 
plea to test her chastity. Observing this, the face and.eyes of the 
daughter of king Kedara flished with anger. Sho addressed him thus, 
using words sinebionod by the Vedas, full of religious significance, likely 

tu bring fame, dealing with truth and calculated to do goon. 
81--9. “O most blessed being, have 


the best of all castes. 
ing rites connected with retigions melitation, in the study of the Vedas, 
in the adoption of truth, the performance of vows and in forbaarance. 
O best of the Brihmins, mean-mindad, impious men seek the society of 

Such an impious act does nob become you. By tbe 
n ean subdue all his enemies, A wicked 
all wicked men are destroyed, root and 
certainly means adultery 


and p 


Sa 


obhers’ wives. 
strength of nis virtue, a Brihimi 
man is the mine of evil. Nay, 
branch. © saint, rapé with a chaste woman 
with one's mother and at once involves the offender in the sin of a bun- 
deed Brihmin-slanghters. Afterwards the sinner lives in the hell called 
the Kumbaipáka, as long as the Sun and the Moon exist, wherein he 
is very much tortured with hot oil with which he is cooked. But the 
snbtle body is not killed, bence he does not die; and the myrmidons of 
Yama always strike him on the head ' 

qdultery is delightful only for a short time, but is the cause of eternal 
bii Nay, it brings Wwhole-sale destruction to the offender. A pious 


"does not wish to court grief by sexual intercourse with a woman 
ble intellect, now 


n th> prohibited degree. O twice-born person of fee ! 
ill bə well with you. As aa insect 
hooked fish 


xcuse me and go home: and all w 
eonsigns itsalf to the flame of fire shining before its eyes, a3 à 

rossed by hunger 

h milk st :ts 


EO 


baited by the sight of sweet-meat dies, as a man opp 
eats poisoned food, as a wicked man takes a jar of poison wit 
mouth, so a licentious man is stupefied by the sight of the lotus face of 
woman, delightful for the time being bub containing the germs of 


destruction. 
breast afford 


90-98 ‘Phe graceful face of a woman, her lips and rising 
Sager : p tos the abode * 


d constitu 


harbour to lust, contain the gorms of destruction an 
i o bles a pit of hell, Is 


of vico ; and her vagina full of slaver and dirt resem 


Ss 5 CC-0: In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


patience ; you are a Brahmin, ; 
The actual duty of a Brahmin consists in observ- ` 


with a rod of iron. Therefore ' 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


428 THE BRAHMA FAIVARTA PURAN A 


= re 


is fall of foal smell, boset with sin: ani beings down the ch ust sermant of the 
Yami on the head of the sinver, Wain a min enters his penis onto the 
vagina of a woman, he at tha samo tim? ersts his sonl into the hell called 
Raurava for agos aud agos tomache Sseinz the solitary place and in 
view of my ealamities ciusal by fustinzs are you realy to panca upon 
me? But do not hwbour such thorzhts in vour mind The gods and 
rogeubs of the quarters preside ova” this paca. Ani Hari has deputed 
Dharma himself, tha witnoss ofai] vets. tha raler of evary ons, nay, the 
chastiser of even Yam, to this phe». O Bethmin, Krisni himself resides 
in all things in the shane of soul. S iva in tho shape of wisdon, Oarsa in the 
shape of intellect, Brahmi, in the sh tp? of mind and tke gods in tho shape 
of passions exist everv-where thas bering tessimony to all acts. ‘Therefore 
there is nothing in the world lika a solitary or private phe» S , 0 
Brahmin of feeble intellect, excuse me. Go home : and all will be well with 
you. The Bráhmins are not liable to be killed by any body; or I would 
have reduced you to ashes. tut ib ha as it may, chili, new go away 
in peace. I have passed 108 yneas in the performance» of my austerities, 
Y have got no parents or p tternal deseendants; only, O tvice-born person, 
Lord Krigna, (the universal spirits, is Preserving me, 


99-104. And Dharma, deputed by Krisna, the Sun, the M. on, the Wind, 
the Fire, Brahma, s'iva and the goddess Durga are constantly eneawed in 
the task of preserving me, O Briümin. ho who has made the swan white, 
the parrot green, aud the Peacock  chequered will preserve m», All the 
gods are the preservers of or; hans, children and old men. Therefore 
do not slizht me on the ground that I ama feeble tenin (n. Know it for 
certain that the gols exist  everv.whore Child, 1 am 
like a mother unto you. Therefore leave ms and go away 
in peace, « Vrindà, SO saying, remained there lik: the iminoveable 
Earth, Dharma, in the guise of 4 Brdh-nin, did not however, go away 
in compliance with her Soothing words but approached her with a viaw to 
enjoy her society, Wrinda was inesnsed and curse] him hus, * OQ 
friend of Brahma you shall decline”, She was moine to surse him 
more, when she was Preyonted by the god of sun him self, ` 


; 105. ! 15. O father, at this time, Brahma, the lord of the world, - 
Vignu, iva and other gads arrive] there much Perplexxl. O kine of the 
Vraji at that tima, the gals seeing thas Dharma was Iber there 
(liks the moon afraid Of darknsss) o ly in dizits, Coane | onll los 6 
obscured by the fire of tha ep. of tha chasto tady aa] quite paraivsod 
in hia movements, took him in their lap. and wept bitsucty, “As that 
time Lord Vişņu said, “O my believor Vrindà fras fry.n bith, daath 
and decrepitude, excuse the fril6of Dhirm, O nymph davoted to your 
husband, restore my believer Dh una to [ifa and preserva hin ? Brahim t 
said, * O Vrinda, the whole waril hs been obscured by darknas without 
Dharma ; and the Moon, tho Sun, Ananta and the Eirih are naking” 
S'iva said, *' Pair one, withons Dnirma the who'e worl} js on a brink 
of destruction ; therefore, O pretty ny npa, resuscitate Daarna aal vou 
will ba blessed." Phe Sun said, * Bless You; chaste ony S eit a boon 
from me as you desire, Barn preserva Dharma's life anl m un ain the 
creation.” Ananta said, “O Vrinlà, yoa are accumulating virtue by 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


| 
| 
| 
| 


? 


| 


- 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 429 
: 


devotion ; then how is it thit you are gaing to destroy Dharma (virtue) ? 
Therefore revive Diarma and al your virtua will ba preserved: may 
all be well with you. Tha moon said, * O Vrindà, Dharma baing 
deputed by Brahma, eame here to try you in the gnise of a twice-born 
(Brahmi). You are going to injure au innocent person". Indra said, 
i O Vrindà, men accumniae virtue by the practice of austerities. On 
tha strength of their virtue, they reap the fruits of their devotion. If 
Dharma is therefore exhans'ed, how will you be able to reap the fruits of 
your devotion?” Varuna said, * O pious one. by restorning him to life, 
preserve eternal Dharma. O pious one, without Dharma, all acts of 
pioty become in-effeetual ". The Wind said, ‘Auspicious lady. by reviving 
Dharm. at this time eonscerate the world. Look. if Dhirma disappears, 
the fruits of your devotion will be lost to you, no doubt. 


116-125 You have come tu In lia to accamnlate virtue: and you have 
destroyed Doarma (the god of virtue) uneonsciously. Therefore bring him 
back to life now” Yama said, “Pretty nymph. I am thoroughly conver- 
cant with the Karma of those who aet in th» world anl I give reward to 
people aecording to Daarma Phereore revive him soon”, The ascetic 
and cha te voman Vrindà, hearing the word of the gols, got up, bowed 
before th» exe-ilenz gois and said, * O zods, I did not know that Dharma 
came here tu try mein the gaise of a Brihmin. When he seemingly 
attempted to rash upon me, I brought about his decline by my curse in a 
fit of anger Len it be as if may. now, by your grace I shall surely 
revive Dharma.” © Lord of the Vraja. Vrinda so saying, continued thus, 
“lf my devotion and thé worship of Visnu be real, then on the strength of 
that virtue, may this excellent Brahmin he rendered exempt from decrepi- 
tude. If Brahma, the gods, Supreme Nature, sacrifice and asceticism 
be real, then may this Brahmin be cured. 1f Narfiyana who always takes 
a form and who is the universal spirit and if S'iva who presides over 
knowledge be real, thea miy this Brahmin be cured” So saying the 
chaste Vrindà held Dhermi in her lap and seeing his body reduced to 8 
mere digit piteou:ly began to cry. 

126 135. In the meantim:, the goddess Marti arrived there, over-whelmed 
with grief and fallinz at the feet of Visau with a humble inclination of her 
head said, © O Lord, O ocean of mercy, friend of the poor, show mercy to me. 
O merciful lori of tha world. soon revive my husband. A woman who 
loses her hu-bind ia the sea of the worl: is undoubtedly a sinner. Like 
a face wichout eyes and «ike a body without life, she stands in no need of 
begnty even in the slightest degree. The father, the brother, the 
gon, the kinsman or the mother of a woman makes gifts to her only to a 
moderate extent. But tne husband alone gives to her anything that she 
desires”. So saving, the goddess Marti loitered there and wept bitterly. 
The Lord, the universal spirit who transcends Nature thus said to Vrindá, 
“ Pair one, by devotion you have attained a longevity which is co-ex- 
ténsiva with that of B-ahmáà Now transfer the same to Dharma and 


depart to whe Gye vorll. Aftarvuds as a result of your devotion, you 
ph. later on in the 


Gokul: and he born 
hadow of Radha; 


Ly 


will attain mẹ as your husband, O pretty nym 
Varáha axe you will dese-nd fiom the Uow-world to 
as the daughter of Vriga-bhánu, Thus you will be the s 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


iu) THE BRAHMA FAIVARTA PURANA. 

c = oe 
and Raydn who is an onteom2 of my digits will marry you The ocw. 
herdesses and Ridha will attain me in the sphere of the Rasa By the 
cise of S'ri-dama when the real Radha will descend as the danehter of 
Vrisy-bhina, you will ba her shadow. At the time of marriage the 
raal Ridha will deliver you to Riyàn and then herself disappear. : 

136 149. "Tha silly cow-herds, the residents of Gokul, will take you 
for Ridhà. Tho fact is this :--lhey are unworthy of the sicht of the 
lotus feet of Radhi even in their dreams. Ab thit time, tha real Radha 
will rest in my lap; and you, hər shadow will pass your days as the 
wife of Rayan. Then the fiir Vrindà, having heard the worls of Visuu, 
transferred her longevity to Dharma; and Dhirma, having sustained 

a form bright like heated goid, again got up with a perfect body. The 

lustre of his grace was greater than ever. At thit time he bowed to 

Hari and Mara (the lords of the world), Brahma an 1 tho supreme goddess 

Nature, Whereupon Vrindà said to the gods, “O cols, the words which 

T have addressed to Dharmu ein never go amiss, Tam jast.goiag to refor 

to this matter. Please listen to ine attentively. Know, then, my words 

can never fail. I was frivhtened and angry apd I cried out thrice 

* Decline”, [ was going to say something more, when [ was prevented 

by the Sun. Therefore Dh wma will attain in every Satya-yusa (ave of 

truth) his: previous condition and the same divelopel Gonstitation that 
he has attained now. Inthe Treta yuga, he will snstain only three feat, 
in the Dwápara, only two feet: in the beginning of Kali, he will sust tin 
only one foot; and in the enl of Kali, ho will b3 reduced only to a six- 
teenth pars of his bo ly. Afterwards, he will ag 
in the Satya- Yuga. 


1 141-149. As thrice the word cf decline has come out of my mouth, 
therefore thrice he will undergo declino in the shape of tho toss of one foot in 
every age ; but as I was dissuaded by the Sun when I was attempting to 
speak for the- fourth time. therefore he will bə reduced to a digit only at 

the end of the Kali.” O king of the Vraja, Dharma, being cursed in this 

way, certainly attains that condition at the end of Kali. O Nanda, when 

/rindà was saying so, tho gods sıw that a beautifal chariot swiftly 
descended from the Goloka.. [6 was construeted with excellent gems and 
refine] with a wreath of paarls Many kinds of diamonds, pearls, gems ` 
cloths, whito chowries, diamond lookin z-glasses and attractive ornaments 
magnified its beauty. Later on-Vrindà, bowed before the feet of Hari, 
Hara, Brahma and other gods, ascended that celestial chariot und went 


to the Cow-world. "Tho gods also went home, O Lord of the Vraja, 
What other subject do you want to hear ?'' 


—— me 


CHAPTER LXXXVIT. 


1-12. Nanda said, * O Lord, neither the four Vedis, nor persons - 
conversant with the Vedas nor Brahma, Siva and othor gods including” 
Ananta and others, nor the ascetics nor the adepts can comprehend you. 
But I am very curious to know who you are. Therefore, O Lord, give me 
a complete description of yourself: and this solitary place suits us well for. 
the Purpose. Niriyana said, © O. son Narada, while Nanda was spia lius 
thas, ‘suddenly the areal muni effulgont with the lustre of Brahma’ arrived 


ain regain his entire body: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


^ 


CC 


EJ 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 4i 


at the place tosee-Lord Krişna, They are as follows: Pulaha, Pulasiya, 
Kratu, Bhrigu, Angirá, Uraehetà, Vasigtha, Durvásá, Kanwa, Kátyá-yana 
Panini, Kanada, Gautama, Sanaka, Sananda, Sanátana, Kapila, Asuri, 
Bodhu, Panch-sikha, Vis'wa-mitra, Valmiki, Kas'yapa, Parás'ara, Vibhán- 
daka, Marichi. Sala, Atri, Vrihaspati, Gargya, Vatsya, Vydixa, 
Jiimini, Rigya-s'ringa, Yàjfa valkya. Sika, Saubbari, S’uddha- jatila, 
Pharadwija, Subhadraka, Markandeya, Lomas'a, Vrikankana, Asta vakra 
S'atânanda, Vamadeva, Bhargava, Samyarta, Utathya, Nara, myself, 
JavAli, Paras'urám, Agastya, Paila, Sumanya Gaura-Mükha, Upamunya, 
Sruta-sravya, Maitreya, Chyavana, Karatha and Kara. Lord Knsoa 
having seen all these Munis who arrived there got up, with folded palms 
bowed to their feet and reverentially seated them on attractive thrones. 


13.25. Later on, Krisna enquired into their welfare, duly worshipped 
them and after mutual greetings sat down in the centre. At tbis time, : 
in the sphere of the sky, a very radiant aeenmulation of light was mani- 
fest to his eyes and the eyes of the Munis. Within that light they observed" 
a boy elfulgent like goid. O son, Sanat-kumára, thus visible to them, 
looked like a very beautiful and naked boy aged 5 years. In the twink- 
ling of an eye the boy appeared before the council of the saints. O 
Narada, the excellent saints and Lord Krigna bowed to him when they 
saw him. He blessed them all, sat down in the council and said to all the 
Munis and the smiling eternal Lord Krisua whose eyes were moist with 
tears thus * * O Munis are you well? Have you not been interrupted 1n 
any way in reaping the desired fruits of all your actions. 16 is useless 
to ask Krişna of his welfare ; for he is.the source of all benefit. Or the 
present vision of the Eternal Being Krisna constitutes your welfare. 
{Krisna who transcends Nature takes a form only out of compassion for his 
believers. He is void of attributes and desire,.the germ of all objects and 
full of hght.” At present be has manifested himself to relieve the earth of 
her burden. Lord Krişna said, “O great Brahmin, it is mees that a- - 
question relating to welfare should be put to every person who wields 
a body or subject to desire. Then why shonli I be immune from this 
question?" Sanat kumára said “O Lord, 2 natural body alone is subject to 
goolandevil.. But with regard to a body that is eternal and souree of 
welfare to others, it is useless to pub questions regarding its welfare," The 
Lord ‘said, * O good Brahmin every one who wields a body is natural, 
(i é., a creation of Nature), for no one can be created without that eternal 
Nature.” Sanat kumára said, “Lord, a body emanating from blood and 
semen alone has heen held to be natural. But you are the origin of all, * 
the cause of all and the Lord of Nature. So how can. your body be : 
natural?” 

26-36. O Lord, the Vedas hold that you age the best of incarnations 
ever-lastine, eternal, immortal and the germ of everything, Yuu are the 
emblem of eternal light, the supreme spirit and the great god. You are 
excellent, the Lord of illusion and void of attributes; and still when 
subject to illusion, you are vested with attributes. O Lord, all the- 
Vedas and their branches and those who know the Vedas have described 
you in this way.” Lord Kr sna said, “ O good Brahmin at present Tam 
Uie sog of Vasudeva,- So-my body is produced from blood and semey, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


. digit of Krigna aud my container; for L rest ouly like a 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


432 THE BRAHMA VAIPARTA PURANA. 


emer 
Then why should [not be deemad nitucal or vor.hv of a question of 
welfare?" Sauat-kumara said, * O Lord Vasu mens a p rson in t^e poreg 
of whose skin the whole universe exists, (2.7. the huge Bans Maá-V snd) 
who acco:nolates all. You are his god or the Lord supreme Boing, 
Hence you are described as Vasudeva by all the Vedas, Puranas, history 
er gospel Which Veda holds that ycur boy is associated with, blood 
and semen ? Here are the Munis to bear testim my to the fact. Let them 
answer the question. Dharma also everywhere exists as a witue-s. Besides 
these, the four Vedas, the san and the moon arg my witaesses" — Dhrigu 


said, “ O goud Brahmin, you are sp. akiay $ruly You are, indeed, the . 


chiefs, of the Vaisuavas. Now I Say, you are w leome. low are you? 
What is the caus; of your arrival h re ?! Saict kimaras il, O Minis, 
O Krisna, know, then, the cause. of my hurried arrival, ” Krsua said * O 
lord. O saint, conversant with all the tenets of virtue, you are the best 
of the wise and omniscient L know why you have come hire? Sanat- 
kumira said, © Lord, joualoue are blessed; you clone are siorebla in 
the world ; and you alone are the god ofall gods, ‘Thera is none superior 
to you in the whole universe,’ Krişna said. * O good twics-born saint, 
I can only grant fruits of sacrifice, vow and asesticism when such acts 
` are accompanied with the priest’s fee.” 

37-47. When Sanat-kumára was about torun away from that place 
at these words of Krisna, the Muuis were astounded and in order to 
divine the meaning of this conduct they held Sanat kumára. ‘The 
saints said, * O best of adepts, O most blessed being, O mercitul boy, 
what words of doubttui import did you uso to Lord Krisua? Have you 
seen or heard anything extraordinary ? It sv, please relate it to 
us in detail.” In the meantime, Siva with Parvati, Ananta, Dharma, 
the Sun, the Moon, the dityas, the Vasus, the. Rudras, the 
regents of the quarters and other gods anived there, At their sight, 
Krigna at once got up, greeted them and by offering them separately 
oblation of milk and honey with reverence, worshipped them ; aud all the 
saints bowed before the feet’ of iva, Ananta, Brahma and Parvati. ‘The 
saints and the gods greeted one another. Sanat-kumara said, L went 
to the Cow-world and uot having seen the lord of Radha there, I went to 
the Vaikuntha. But there too, not finding the four-handed Lord, L went to 
the sea of milk where too Hari wasmissing. Afflicted and exhausted, | bathed 
in the above sea. Afterwards on the fielu of the expansive sand, n tortoise 
with a body extended over a hundred yojans, friv htened, shivering, Surrow- 
ful aud with sbrivelled skin was beheld by me., A huge nsh named 
aoe hed drazged hira from the water. When I said to tho tortoise, 
j e blessed,” he replied saying * O great Muni, I am not blessed, 
but the sea of milk which contains (big like myself and darger than 
myself, numberless animals "^ 3 a 

45-57 Then 1 said to the sea of milk, 
Bea replied, “Iam not blessed but the earth which contains seven seas. 
Then 1 said to the earth, “O earth, you are blessed.” The earth said, 
“lam not Liessed, bat A nanta, the prince of Snakes, the offspring of tho | 
4 ; é grain of mustard 
ln’ the winnowing basket on ons of his thousand expanded hooks, 
“Puen I said to Anantz, you are blessed.” Hy sal, I aw nov blessed, 


“O sea, you are blessed.” ‘The 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


RA 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 453 


but the Wind-god who sustains me constantly. On my saying to the 
Wind that he was blessed, he said, “ [ am not blessed. but the lord Brahma 
who is the ruler of the whole universe.” 1 went to Brahmà and said, 
“Tord, you are blessed." .He said, “Not J, but S'iva who is the leader of 
the spiritual guides of the contemplative ascetics. He is fit to be adored 
and worshipped by all, the emblem of eternal virtue. He is the time of 
time, the destroyer cf all and himself tae conqueror of death. “Then I 
went to S'iva, and said, “O S'iva, you are blessed." He said, “Not I : but 
Ganes'a who is worshipped first of all, who is the leader of the spiritual 
guides of sages and who is the best of gods. Among the excellent adepis, 
gods, Munis, ascetics and] wise men none has been held by. the Vedas 
to bo superior to Gauesa. As Ganges is among rivers, Pugkara among 
holy places, Kàs'i among cities, so is Gaues'a the chief among the gods." 
58.82, Then I went to Gaues'a and said, “Lord, you are blessed 
and revered among the gods." He replied with a smile, *O great Muni, 
Iam not blessed, but the four Vedas are blessed ; for the body of cere- 
monial acts and sacrificial rites is based on the system prescribed by the 
Vedas. Look, what is sanctioned by the Vedas is- virtue, and what is 
opposed to the Vedas is vice. The bulk of the Vedas is Narayana 
himself, ‘The Vedas have prescribed my worship. The Puránas and 
other holy books are the outeome of the Vedas. Therefore when the- 
Vodas alone are blessed, O great Muni, go to the four Vedas.” Shere- 
foro Ll went to the Vedas and said, “O Vedas, you are blessed and 
revered.” The Vedas replied, “ Not we, but the sacrifices. Lor we 
only lay down the system or the scheme. The saerifices themselves give 
fruits. — ''herelore, O great Muni, the sacrifices alone are blessed. 
* Accordingly I went to them and called them blessed." “hey said, 
& Not we, bub the good deeds." ‘Then I called the Good Deed (personified) 
and said, You are blessed.” But he said, * I am not blessed : but Lord 
Krisna who gives the fruits of all actions, the cause of Karma, the dispenser 
of everything, nay, even the ruler of Brahma, who is the origin and 
author of everything. This supreme Being alone is truly blessed and 
revered.” Whereupon I went to the land of Dharma where I gould not 
find the Lord of the universe. Therefore, in order to behold the all- 
perfect Lord, I hava come to Mithurà. But here as I saw the donor 
of the fruits of sacrifice, devotion, vow and good deeds, who is the cause 
of all causes, wh» is the chief among the gods including Brahma, who 3s 
the supreme spirit, the great god, I ealled him blessed. ‘Thereupon the 
Lord said, * I ean only give fruits of sacrifices and other acts, when such 
acts are accompanied with the priest's fee.’ He meant thereby, that 
he could not be blessed without sacerdotal fee payable to the officiat- 
ing priest. A sacrifice performed without such fee is ineffectual. Now 
hear a little about this priest’s foe. If this fee is not paid in due time 
to a Brdhmin, it must be doubled after the lapse of a night ; it must be 
iucreased a hundred times after a month. A thousand times, after two 
months. Aud if a year expires, the donor must go to hell. That sinner 
is consigned to the hell eilled the pit of urine for a thousand years and 
afterwards attains the condition of a diseased CLandàl, 1f the donor 
does not give to the donee his dues or if the donee does nob demand his 
dues from the denor, bath of them mist dwell in hall for a uos 
: bI 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri ane Sarayu Trust. 
134 THE BhAHMA VAITARTA PURANS, 


years. Afterwards the performer of the imperfees saerifiee turns irto a 
Chandal ; and the officiating Brâhmin turns into a priest of the Chan- 
dal: and both the sinners, as a result of their Karma (action), are attacked 
by disewses. All the gods and the munis having heard the above worda 
of Sanat- Kumára were filled with astonishment and joy as one and the 
same time. Nanda also was surprised aud ceased to regard Krisna as 
his son. Then with a heart agitated with sorrow and void of shame, he 
wept in tha assembly when Parvati consoled him saying, * O Nanda, 
compose yourself etc." Nanda said, '* O Lord of gods, as an invaluable 
gem or diamond kept in the house of a bad merchant who does not know 
its value is lost to him, so, O Lord, you were practically lust to ine through 
my ignorance, though vou were in my hands. O Lord, you transcend 
Nature, how ean L realize your greatness ? So, please to excuse me for 
my faults. I shall not go home or to Gokul or to the coast of the Yamund, 
O elder brother of the wielder of the mace, I need not go any more to the 
land which used to afford you pleasure with the sphere of the Rasa Vrinda- 
vana Yas'odà or the cowherdessess. Aud if I go at all, what shall 1 say to 
Yas'odà, the auspicious Radha and the loving children 2” © Narada, 
Nanda, so saying, swooned before the assembly : and Krisna, the Lord 
of the universe, a& once took him in his lap and consoled him." 


CHAPTER LXXXVII I, 

l-14. -Krigna said, ** O father, revive. The whole world containing 
animal and inanimate objects is transient like a bubble. O most blessed 
being, banish -your grief aud adore the supreme and great goddess of 
illusion (Maya), who is eternal and most blessed, who represents, the 
imaginative faculty of Visnu, who gives redemption and dispels all kinds 
of delusion. On the occasion of the dreadful battle between Siva and the 
demon called Tripura, Sankara was frightened, but on the strength of 
the hyinn or ole to the great Maya he was able to destroy his enemy. 
Before this assembly, I offer you the great ode whieh dispels all delusion 
and fulfils all sorts of desire, Listen.” Nanda said, * O Lord of the 
universe, mereiful to your believers, you transcend tlie properties of Nature: 
you are the supreme Being, the father of the Vedas. Therefore give 
mé an ode sacred to the great goddess (the mother of the world, tho 
destroyer of all calamities) an ode which js mysterious and excellent and 
which nay be attained with difficulty, with a view to relioye the sorrows 
of man, fulfl his d sires and contribu:e to his prosperity znd celebrity. T 
am one of your creat, believers and most submissive.” The Lord said “I am 
going to tell you the most wonderful ode ealeulated to ent off the bonds 
of attachment and destruetive of all calamities. Listen.” In days of yore, 

Sankara laid aside his weapons in the battle. field sand advised hy Nara yana 
and deputed by Brahma, he read this ode. The god Nara yana seeing 
that Siva was beset by enemies informed Brahma, Brahma arrived ab 
the battle-field and said to Siva fallen on his chariot, « O Siva, remember 
that primordial goddess nature, the emblem of Brahma, the destroyer of 
calamities ; and all will be well. O Lord ot the gods, as enjoined by Hari I 
gite you this tidings, In a word, no one js able to conquer his enemy with- 
“put the help of the guddess of energy ?' Siva ab the instance of Brahma 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


» 


E 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 435 


oe 


bowed down and with folded palms and a reverential inclination of his 
shoulders recollected Durgà. He hathed, then washed his feet and put on a 
pair of clean clothes. Afterwards he rinsed his month and held holy 
grass in his hand. ‘Then recollecting Hari ina pure condition of body 
and mind, he said this : | s 

15.99, “O Dargá, destroyer of calamities, O merciful great 
goddess, I am yonr believer aud adherent. I hive been beset by enemies, 
Preserve me. Preserve me. O Maya of Visnu, O most blessed gorde-s, 
O consort of Nàráyaua, O emblem of eternal brahmà, O supreme deity, 
image of eternal happiness, O mother of the world, you are the ‘mother 
of Brahma and other gods. When you are vested with attributes, yom 
have a form ; when you are void of attributes, you have no form O 
eternal goddes, inflaene«d by your own spell. at tines you are a supreme 
Being and at times the goddess Nature. You alone wield at times the 
form of Brahma and transcend both the supreme Being and Nature. You 
alone are the excellent Savitri, the mother of the Vedas. You manifest 
yourself in the Vaikuntha as Maha Laksmi the image of all prosperity ; 
in the sea of milk as the the c lestial goddess of fortune, the consort of 
Tord Narayana,who lies down on his eternal bed; in the heaven, Lakgsnit: 
on the earth as the royal Lakgmi: in the Patala (nether world) as the 
Inksmi of the snakes; and lastly as the household goddess of the house- 
holders. O goddess, you are the symbol of all prosperity and dispense or 
administer all prosperity, ; and you are Saraswati. the presiding deity of 
language, the spouse of Brahma. In the cow-world, you are the 
presiding deity of the life of Krisna and oceupy his heart in the 
form of Ridhâ. You are the presiding goodess of the cow-worll. 
You are tho Vrind& at Vrindavana and revel at Wrindd-vana 
in the sphere of the Rasa. Yon preside over the mountain of a hundre:t 
summits. Your namo is Chandrávali. At a certain aye, you are the 
daughter ol Daksa, at another age you are the daughter of mountain. 
Your are Aditi, the mother of the gods. Yos are the earth, the harbour 
of everything. You are the Ganges, the holy basil, Swáhá and the 
chaste Swadhà; and through the digits of your own digits, you manifest 
yourself in several forms as the wives of the gods. In a word, goddess, 
‘ou are the emblem of a man, woman and a eunuch You are the seed 
of trees, the germ of creation, the consumptive faculty of fire, the cold- 
ness of water. You constantly vepresent valour, displaying yourself as 
lustre in the eun and as grace in tho moon and lotuses. : 

30 39. You represent the creative faculty at the time of creation, 
preserving agency at the time of preservation, the great destruetive 
agency at the time of destruction and as aqua in water. Nay, yon re- 
present all energy and are the source of all prosperity. O great geddess, 
when the fonr Vedas and Ananta with his hundred mouths cannot 
adore you, how can a servant do so? Nay, Saraswati herself, 
Brahma and the eternal V gnu cannot adore you. Then how can 
1, afflietel by war, adore you, O great goddess ? O great faculty of 
illusion, by, Virtue of your personal merits graciously destroy all my 
enemies, Siva having adored her piteously in this way fell prostrate on 
the chariot in the battle-field. Whereupon Durga, bright like ten 
millions of suns, (deputed by the merciful Nárüyana, the supreme Being, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


age THE BRAM A PAIPARYA PURANA. 


PEA — — 


Ame ert EN 


soon appeared before S'iva to seenre his welfare and victory, 
the great goddess sail, "Kill the demon with the help of tho 
energy." She also said, “O s'iva, solicit the desired boon and L assure 
you all will be well with you You are the best of gods, I shall crown you 
with victory.” S‘iva said, “O gracious goddess, J so'icit the destruction 
of the demons. ‘Therefore, O primordial eternal Darga, give me the boon 
as desired by me." The god less said, “O blessed being, O spritual leader 
of the world, remember Haii and conquer the demon [ripura * That 
effulgent Lord God is personally the raler of the world. When the goddess 
was thus speaking, Lord Visnu took the form of a bull and with hia 
head sustained the chiriot of the wielder of the spear. 


Later on, 
supreme 


40-39. The wheel of the ear had been turned upwards and its top 
had heen turned downwards. Bat he restored the car to its origin il posi- 
tion, gave S’iva a weapon consecrated with mantras and afierwards sus- 
tained the chariot by lifting it with his horns. S'iva, as he held the weapon, 
recollected Visnu and the goddess anl hurled the weapon ^5 the demon who 
dropped down dead on the  yroand, Thereapon tha z «ls worshippe 
Siva and rained flowers on his head. Durg& gave him a spear. Vignu 
gave him a trident; and Brahina 


euspieiously blessed him. "The munis 
were pleased, all the gods danced and the Gandharbas and the Kinnaras, 


began to sing. O rather. I thus described to yon the best hymn likely to 
kill one's enemies and remove calamities. ‘This hymn leads to great 
prosperity, happiness, nay, reverence for Hari and even the great redemp- 
tion of final emancipation. ‘There js no doubt about it. Through the 
influence of this hymn, attainment of the cow-world and even the bond- 


age of Hari can-be secured : and avarice, affection, lust, anger and other 


passions which are at tha root of Karma are destroyed. This hymn is 
ealenlated to bestow on man strength and intellizence, annihilate 
the germs of birth and death. confer blessings in the shape of wealth, son, 
wife, land and all kinds of prosperity, removo grief and sorrow and even 
lead to all kinds ot perfection. The ‘study of this royal ode gives a son 
even to the most barren Woman, sets a "prisoner al liberty encourages 
the timid, cures the diseased and enriches the poor, i 

50-63 O king of the Vais'vas, a 


sinking in the water of a great ocean Owing to shipwreek or a man 
oppressed by robbers and enemies and attacked by beasts of prey is re- 
leased from his danger by virtue of this ode and attains prosperity. O king 


(7. 2 4 ys Y 4 n 
of the V raja, as a diamond among metals, as a Brahmin among house- 
holders, as Ganga among rivers : i; 


f » as the syllable Om amone mystic formnlae, 
as the holy basil among leaves, as the earth ; 
among flowers, as the sandal 


among containers, as Párijáta 
Tu I. among woods,as the worship of Visnu among 
devo us as Eka VR among vows, as S'ambhu among sages, as Ganes'a 
ET epte, as Visnu among gods, as the Vedas among holy books, ae 
i ema among de serene cy tranquil in disposition as Saraswati among the 
earned, as Radha among the beautiful, so this ode is supleme among: the 
odes. ‘There is No ode superior to this ole, In olden times, on the occasion 
of the solar festival, 1 gave it to Brahma who, subsequently, at my com- 
mand gave this ode destructive of all calamities to the frightened Siva op- 


pressed by demons, Siva, later onjgave it to Sanaka and other saints as well as 


` 


man encountering a wild fire, or 


- CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ae Vh 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 481: 


ees — ————————————— 


to Durvásü. Lord Sanat-Kumára mercifully gave it to Gautama ~ 
who gave it to Pulaha, The last-named gladly gave it to Angira, the 
Sun and the Moon. The Sun gave it to Yama. who mercifully gave it 
to Chitragupta. O father, you should once read this cde daily so that 
you may succeed in attaining the Cow-world Now, O lord, with this 

ode, just adore Párvati who is present before vou. Do not give it to 

an ordinary man. Conceal it from a sinner. lt may be aan in eood 

faith to one who is a believer of Náráyana, to a man of tranquil disposi-. 
tion, to a learned man and to an omniscient Biáhmin. You should not 

give it to one who carries a bullock, the husband of a barren woman, 

the cook of a S'üdra and one who eats the food offered by a S'üdra on 

the occasion of the funeral of his relations. Particularly you should never 

give it to a Brahmin who sells his daughter. i. 

6471. lf a man recites this ode a hundred lakh of times, he is 
rendered perfect in this ode: and through it he attains perfection in 
all matters. A man who has attained perfection in respects of this ode 
ean easily control the fire, tle water, the earth and the mind. The 
perusal of this ode is productive of greater relioious merits than a thou- 
sand horse sacrifiees. cireum ambulation reuud the world and ablutions 
in all holy places designed for pilgrims. O father, l gave you this 
ode which is as dear to meas my life. New once adore Parvati before 
this council" O great Brahmin, Nanda having heard the words of 
Krigna adored with this hymn the goddess Parvati, the source of all 
prosperity ; whereupon she was pleased to give him a boon. O Muni, 
she gave to Nanda the following boons, viz, residence in the Cow-world, 
as desired by him, supreme knowledge, the reverence for Hari, hardly 
to be secured even by the Vedas, the kingdom of Gokul, the bondage of 
Hari and all kinds of perfection and after mutual greetings she departed 
with Siva. The gods and Munis adored Krisna, ihe son of Nanda and 
also went home. On the other hand, Krisna said to Nanda, “O king 
Nanda, by my counsel which can be secured with ditliculty, the delusion 
of vour mind has been dispelled. Now be pleased to go soon to (he Vraja." 


CHAPTER LXXXIX. ; 

1-10. Krişna said, * O Nanda, O king of ihe Vraja, now go to the 
Vraja. You have now known all the mysteries: and yon had an inter- 
view with the Munis and the gods. You heard all the narratives relating 
to virtue and also the princely ode of Durga, hardly to be attained, by which 
a person may be rcleased from the ties of the world. O sire, T passed my days 
in vour howe with great pleasure. Excuse me for the offences which 1 
committed in your house as due to the levity of childhood. I have 
experienced in your house a pleasure which I even conld not enjoy by the 
side of my parents in the royal palace and which could not be secured 
even in heaven. Please give my greetings, affectionate and submissive, 
and offer my apologies to my mother Yas’oda (soliciting her to condone 
my faults), also to the cow-herdesses, the cow-herd boys with whom I had 
constantly associated. But particularly remember me to Radha. O sire, 
after having experienced the pleasures of this world, you shall goin the 
end to the cow-world with Yas'oda, Rohini, the cowherds and cowherdesses, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


483 THE BRAHMA VIVARATA PURANA, 


dne 


the eaw- herd boys, Veiga. bhinn, Kalavatt (the mother of Rádhá and Radha 
herseif.) O father, at the time of your departure seven lakhs of chariots 
chastened by strings of diamonds and eonstruesed with invaluable gems will 
descend from, the eow-world. ‘Those ears will be decked with gems, dia. 
monds and strings of pearls and covered with yellow-coloured lovely clothes 
consecrated by fire. 


11-20, On the four sides of the curs, the best of my attendants having 
graceful features and holding white chowries in their hands will take their 
stand, The chariots will be decked, here and there, with excellent and 
lovely looking glasses made of diamonds. You will then qui& your mortal 
frame and assume a celestial boly and, surrounde | by eowherls and cow. 
herdesses, you will ride on the ew and unquestionably go to the eow-world 
with very great pleasure. Kalávati (the mother of Radha) alias Mená, the 
onteome ol no womb, with her body that is imperishable will undoubtedly 
go to the cow-world on the samo car. Meni alias Kalavati, (the 
intellectual daughter of the manes) the mother of Sita and Menaká, the 
mother of Parvati, are truly b!essed. © father, the philosophy which is so 
mysterious and ean hardly be secured by any person has been deseribed 
to you: and Dargá and L both have given voa boons.” Nanda, the 
worshipper of Kr'sna,-and the king of the Vraji. hearing this, again said 
to the Lord of the world compassionate to his adherents, “O Lord, deserihe 
‘to me the eternal Dharma i., permanent features of the four ages in 
detail by turns. Also tell me the nature of the virtus and vice at the end 
of the Kali yoga and also the fite whieh awaits the earth, Dharma and all 
creatures, Describe to me, | pray, all these subjects.” Krişna with eyes 
resembling a pair of lotuses as he heard bis words, began to recite a 
sweet and wonderful narrative, 


CHAPTER XC. 
1-9, The Lord said, « O Nanda, with alacrity * am going to recite 
to you all the sweet narratives that are stated clearly in the Purünas. 
Listen. In the Satya age, Dharma is perfect, men are perfect: trath and 
mercy are perfect also. At that time all the Vedas and th 
branches, various kinds of histories and lite 
Paficha-rátras (works by Nárada ete., 
systems of religion are discusse:| frealy, In that ave all Brühmins are 
conversant with the Vedas, and virtues and wholly devoted to relieious medi- 
tations. ‘They are constantly engaged in tho contemplation of Nara vana 
and the recitation of his Mantras. At that time all the four eastes, 
Brahmins, , Ksatrivas etc., ure Vaisnavas and the Sadras devoted to 
truthful relixious rites are engaged in the service of the Brahmins, At 


that time all kings are pious and apt to support their subjects from whom 
they realize only a sixteenth part of their profits by way of revenue. In 
that age the Brahmins are exempt from payments of revenne and pass 
their days in happiness : and the earth always leems with crops and 
diamonds. At that time pupils are devoted to their spiritual euides ; sons 
are devoted to their fathers, and women, to their respective husbands. 
10-16, Everyone enjoys the society of his wife at the due time after her 
menses ; No one is licentious, "T'hére is no fear of thieves or robbers af 


l their auxiliary 
rature, the lovely Purdnas, the 
Yand the beneficial and delightfal 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA FANJA RAN DA. . 458 


the time; and none is enamoured of another man’s wife. All trees 
are loaded with fruits, every cow is fall of milk and people are strong, 
tall and fair. Nay, many virtuous “men maintain their health pro. 
perly for a long time, and tbus live for a lakh of years. As the Brahmigs 
are devoted to Visuu, so are tle three castes also devoted to Visuu and 
serve the Brábmius. Rivers (large and small) and the caves or valleys of 
mountains are full of water. ‘lhe four castes consecrate themselves by 
acts of pilgrimage; aad the Brahmins, by religious austerities. 
The mind cf all persons is pure ; the world is free from hypocrisy aud 
ring: with celebrated deeds. In the famons and blessed age of Satya. the 
wanes during the festivals, the gods on the lunar days, and the guests at 
all times are worshipped. The three castes including Ksatriyas are 
devoted to the Brahmins aud ever eager to feed them ; for the mouth ot 
a Brahmin is like a fertile field freo from thorns Ze, all sorts of desired 
fruits are secured through such fields. In that age every one recites the 
name of Hari aud always cbeers himself with the celebration of the grand 
fostival of Ilari. 


17-28. In thatage oftruth, every one derives pleasure from the celebra 
tion of his name and from festivities sacred to Hari No one slanders the 
god, the Brahmin or the servant. No one blows his own trumpet (praises 
himself) : but every one is engaged ia reciting the virtues of others. No 
one adopts a hostile attitude towards others. Every one tries todo good 
to others. No man or woman is illiterate : every one is learned. In that 
age, no one is poor; every ono owns a temple constructed with gems. 
The house of every one teems with gold, diamonds, gems, pearls and 
precious stones. ‘There is no Leggar or unhealthy man at the time. 
Every one is free from sorrow and full of joy. No man or woman is 
wanting in clothes or jewels. No one is cunning or wrathful, hungry or 
deformed ; every one, free from deerepitude, enjoys perpetual youth. 
Every one is incorruptible. No one is subject to mental disease or any other 
malady. ‘Truth, virtue or merey which is synonymous with Dnarma as 
described in the Satya age, loses one foot ia the Tret and two feet in 
the Dwapara age. In the beginning of Kali, Dharma maintains only one 
loct and becomes very feeble. O king of the Vraja, at this time the seed 
of evil, robbery and dishonesty is sown. People at this time secretly 
commit sins; through fear they do not wake their acts public. Afraid of 
publicity, whores commit foul deeds in private People attached to tha 
wives of others have not the moral courage to announce their guilty act 
to the puble. Sinners are afraid of the virtuous. Kings are compara- 
tively less pious: the number of Brahmins conversant with the Vedas is 
limited ; and out of innumerable persons. only a few are devoted to 
religious rites and vows. Most of the people do as they will. So long 
as the holy shrines, Visnu, the village gods, the scriptures and the worship 
of the gods exist on earth, religious contemplation, truth, piety and 
desire of heaven prevail also to a certain extent. 

29-37 O sire, the age of Kali, the mine of vice, has one great 
redeeming feature. At this time, sins are not produced by the oporation of 
the mind; bnt virtue and good deeds derive their genesis from mental 
proccess O father, when pho boly places designed for pilgiime 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


uin RM 


A4 PIR BRAHMA PAPPARPA PURANA, 


disappear, the remnants of virtue also disappear. _ Like the moon obscured 
by the dark night of the Ama&-Vasya, Dharma will be roluce.l to a digit 
at the end of Nal”. Nanda said, *O child, plewse mlate to m3 how 
long the holy places, Vasya, the village gods and the istras will subsist 
on earth", The Lord said, “O father, Hari will remain on earth for 10,090 
years even afcer the appearance of Kali. Mor the period specified above, 
the worship of the gods and the idols, the S Astras and the Purdnas will also 
remain. Gang’ willonly remain here for half of the above period; and for half 
of the period specified last, the village gods aud the Vedas valued by savants 
will remain. O father, later on at the end of Kali, the measure of Adharma 
(vice) will be full. All the four castes (Brahmins, Kg triyas, Vais vas and 
ddras) will be re.lueed to one homogeneous whole; marriage will not bo 
consecrated by mystic incantations: truth or forgiveness will no longer 
previil: ths Brahmins will give up the use of saered threads and the 
marks of sandal on tbeir. foreheads; the descendants of the Brahmins 
will be void of S uidhyà (ole to the Suu) and lay aside their discussion of 
the Vedas. One easte will oat indiscriminately with the other estes ; no 
hard and fast rule will be observed; the four castes will become dissolute 
and grow impatient to eat forbidden articles. Women will practically 
lose their chastity. In every house unchaste women will be found though 
their husbands will tremble at their sight and obey them like servants, 
yet the wives will constantly rebuke them. 


38-900. O sire, women will nob give excellent food to their respective 
husbands perplexed with hunger. On tho other hand, they will gladly 
entertain. their gallants with sweetineat, botel, sandalete, [n Kali, the 
son will rebuke his father; the pupil, his preceptor. Subjects will 
oppress the king and the king" will oppress his subjects. Virtuous men 
will be very much oppressed by robbers, thieves and wicked men. Tho 
subjects persecuted by the Government for revenue will dwell in the 
wilderness in agony. ‘hs earth will be without crop anl the cows 
Without milk — For seareity of milk, the Ghee and butter will hardly ba 
obtained. ^ People will always speak the untruth. Brahmins, 
giving up the performiuee of Sandhyá (solar worship) anl other purifying 
rites will travel hither anl thither (mounted on bulloeks) aal engage 
themselves as cooks in the servie» of S'üdras. They will develop a taste 
for burning the corpses of the Südras and for copnlating with Sùlra 
women. ‘The Südras will in their turn be attached to Brahmin women. 
The wife of a Brahinin who maintains Sidra servants is more than a 
mother to them aceordins to the Jisbras; but lieentious servants will 
enlist theinselves in her service. Through the  influeneo of Kali, & 
servant will ki the king and become a king himself, and womer 
will kill their respective husbands and faithfully serve their. maltants 
The king wiil ba killed by his son who ‘will rule in his place. 
‘The king will adopt the rites of an infi lel proseribal bv Dharma aud 
efface the good deeds and celebrities of virtuous men. Allmen will become 
wilfal, licentious and greedy. Constantly subject to diseases. they will 
look deformed. ‘Thev will-be also destitute of decent clothes, A man will 
take imperfect mantra (mystic formala) ab the time of initiation): 
spritaal guidas will be reoruited from low castos. Thay will bo younger 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


NA uua 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


_ERSLNA jinta KHANDA id 


than their pupils, slanderers of the Vedas and exponents of false systems 
of theology. In the Kali-yuga, luxury will always replace the worship 
of the gods, the Brahmins, the guests, the spiritual leaders and the 
parents. ‘The wife and the relations of the wife will alone be entitled to: 
esteem. Through the influence of the yuga, in due course, a man of noble 
blood will adopt the profession of a thief and steal the property of a Brahmin 
or a god ; and actuated by lovo of money he will commit murder in cold 
blood, without any scruples of conscience, 


51-08. O sire, through the influence of Kali the whole world will be 
denuded of temples ; and subject to anarchy and immorality it will assume 
a hideous aspect. People will be afflicted with hunger, poverby, and 
diseiseand put on only shabby clothes, emperors will own only cowries and 
jars, people will measure only a thumb in height; and trees -will be as 
sinall as pot-herbs. Palm, cocoa-nut and jack-trees will be small like 
mustards. Later on, they will be smaller still. Houses void of 
water cups and dishes containing food and without furniture will 
be dirty in the highest degree, emit a foul smell, and (void of candle-light) 
remain steeped in darkness. All people beset with sins will be afraid of 
beasts of prey. — Lustful men and women will quarrel among themselves. 
Women will be void of beauty and men, void of grace. In the 
Kali-yuga, rivera, great and small, caves or valleys of mountains, or 
ponds and lakes will be void of water-lilies and water, jars will be 
entirely void of water.. Women will not be able to sustain children 
in their wombs. 'lhey will always be excited with lust, while in 
the society of their gallants. Every one will cut the Pecpul or the holy 
fig ; the trees will be denuded of fruits, branches and trunks. There will be 
no taste in the fruits, crops or water. People will be cruel and impious and 
always use foul language. O king of the Vraja, then after a heavy rainfall 
t.e, a deluge, twelve suns will rise in the sky and kill all men and animals 
with tho intensity cf their heat. The world will exist only in name, 
After the end of the Kali, the Satya age, again will come to the fore. 
O father, lam but a boy reared with your milk. As far as I could, I 
described to you the four yugas. What ean I say more? Now go to the 
Vraja with pleasure. By weeping, which is the only strength of an infant, 
l secured from you as my food butter, gee, milk, purified curd, whey, 
swastika (a kind of cake), eweet-meut like nectar and every other sweet 

` article dedicated to the gods and the manes. For crying is the weapon of 
children. Therefore, O father, excuse my fault; I am but a child and 
commit offence at every step. You are my father and Yas'odà is my mother, 
l am your affectionate son. Please nlso beseech my mother Yasoda and 
Rohini to excuse my faults. Please announce to the inhabitants of Gokul 
what I am and recite to them whatever you have heard from the mouth of 
this boy, 

69-79. Time unites friends : aud timo creates a rapture between them. 
Ail time alone engenders satisfaction. ‘Time creates and preserves 
things ; time produces happiness and time destroys all people ; time alone 
di-peuses to a parson ploisure, pain, fear, grief, decrepitude, death, birth 
Sie. with due deference to his Karma, O father, everything is occasioned 
by tine therefore, do not he surprised ab tbe incident of my separatioy, 

56 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


tHE BRÀHNA VAlVARIA PURANA 


Now go to the Vraja. Just look at the rovolution of time. You are Nanda, 
the king of the Vais'yas, the lord of the cow-herds ab Gokul, . whereas 
J was at Mathura, the son of Vasudeva. My father, from fear of Kamsa, 
transferred me to your house and placed me by the side of Yas'odà ; 
therefore vou are more honoured thau my father, Yas'odà, my mother, 
is wore affectionate than my own mother. .0 king of the Vraja, now 
set aside your delusions (affection ete.,) by virtue of that know ledge which 
Land Parvati imparted to you. O father, now go home with _ pleasure, 

Nanda said * O child Krisna, remember for a time Vrindàvana, tho 
lovely grand festival, the Gokul, tha wilch-eows and the beatiful Coast 
of the Yamuna. O son, do you remember the sphere of the Rasa, so 
dear to you anl delightful to the women, the cow-herdesses and tho 
cow-herd boys, your mother Yas'odà, Rohini and Radha dearer to you 
than your life’ © son Krişna, I request you to go to Gokul once for ib 
short time only." So saying he held Krişna in his lup, Through griich 
tears constantly flowed fron bis eves aud anuvinted the whole body cf 
Krisna, King Nauda out of affection, held him in his lap and constantly 
kissed bis face, Then Lord Krisna most gladiy spoke to him thus 


CHAPTER XCI. 

1-14. The Lord said, “O father, asa result of Karma, ail persons 
are united with one another and dwell together they are again, separat. 
ed from one another for the sune cause. Who ean resist the fruits of 
Karma ? O father, Ud-dhava will tell you every thing at Vrindávana. 
lam sending him to.Vrindávana, You will gather all information from 
him. That Uddhava, imusediately on his arrival there, will console you with 
cheering words, My mother Yas'odà, Itohini (the cow-herdess), the cow- 
herd boy and Radhi are dearer to me than my life." 
so, when Vasudeva, Daivakî, Baladeva, Ud dhaya 
arrived there. Vasudeva said, “ O kine Nand 
I have got a good true friend like you. You should now banish the 
emotion of grief from your mind and go home, The child Krisna is my 
son as well as yours. ^ "Phere is no difference in this matter, O father, 
it is vot a far cry from Mathura to Gokul: So you will no doubt be able 
lo see your son among grand festivals avd on other joyous occasions." 
Daivaki said, “ O king Nanda, why are vou so much dejeeted with 
sorrow ? Krisna is your son as well as ours, He hus already dwelt in 
your honse with Balardm for about eleven years, Why have you 
been afflicted with sorrow in 


cannot bear tlie absence ol Krsna, vou had better stay at Mathura 
with your son for s few days more and bless yourself with the sight of 
his lunar face,’ At this time, the Lord said, € O Uddhava, go to 
Gokul at once : aud all will be well with you. Go there with pleasure 
and with cheering words-and Metaphysical doctrines calculated to 
banish grief, console mv mother Yas'odá, Rohini. the cow-herd boys, 
Nadha and the cow-herds who are staying there with sorrow on my 
account. Also teli mother Yas'odÀ that at the command of mother 
Daivaki, king Nanda would ulup with us fora while at Mathura.” 
Bo saying, Krigua soon entered into the seraplio of his house with his 


Krista va: saying 
and Akrüra suddenly 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


à, through this boy, - 


the course cf £0 short a tine? If vou, 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. . 443 


aronts, Baladeva and Akrüra. O Narada, Ud-dhava having passed the 
night at Mathura went quickly in the morning to the lovely Vrindávana," 
CHAPTER XCIL.. 

1-11, “O Narada. U J-dhava, deputed by Krisna, proceeded as a messenger. 
While starting, ha first bowad to trines'/a then he remembered Nàráv ana, 
S mbhu, Durgâ, Liksmi, Saraswati the regents of the quarters and Siva, 
observed many auspicious omens in the way and started for Vrindàvana. For 
instane s, hə witnessed th» sound of tho drum, bell, conces, the recitation 
of the name of Hari anl auspicious blessings  proneuneed by the 
Brihmins. Further on, he saw inthe way a chaste woman (devoted 
to har husband and having sons) a lamp, a wreath, a locking-elitss, a jer 
full of water, curd, fried ries, feuibs, sprouts of ben’ grass, white paddy, 
silver, gold, honey, Brahmins, a black antelope. a bull, ghee. fresh 
me.t, an excellent elephant, the best of kings, white horse, a flam, a. 
monzoose, a parrot, a whité flo ver, sandal and other anspicio is articles : 
anlafter he had proceeded a little further, he reached Vrindayana, 
There. in tho first place, ne saw the immortal fig tree in the forest of 
fix trees. Its leaves werered and very smooth. Afterwards ha observed 
the well-dressed cow-herd boys. They were decked with ornaments 
of zom and impatient with grief, were crying loudly saying, “Oh? 
Krsiv! Oh Krisai!’ After having consoled them with cheering 
worlds he observe! the city which was hailing him from a distance and 
saw the graceful pavilion or camp of Nanda manifesting itself before his 
eyes. That pavilion was constracted with excellent diamonds, decked 
on all sides with gams, diamonds and pearls, and interspersed, here and 
there with graceful jars of pure gem. s 

12-23. He obsarvol its picturesque threshold and then prepared 
to enter into the city. lo descended from his car and rested in 
the courtyard. Afterwards, Rohin? and Yas'olà enquired into his 
welfare. grocted him with matting usel as a seat, water, cow ete. and 
oblations of honey ani milk and sail. “O U.ldhava, whera are 
Nanda, Balarima and Krişna? Teil me truly." Theo Uddhava 
communiested to them the tidings of tha welfare of every one in 
due order.. He also said, *O Yas'odà, Nanda is putting up ab ease 
with Krişna and Balardma. Io will reburo after a while. Let me at 
prosent know fully of your welfare so ihat I may communicate it to 
them on my return to Mathura.” 'Yas'odà and Rohini, after having 
heard of their welfare, gave to the Brahmins precious gems, gold, cloth 
etc. Afterwards, having entertained Uddhava with sweetmeat delicious 
like nectar, they offered to him excellent gems, diamonds and precious 
stones. At their command, musicians began to play upon different 
kinds of musical instruments. "Ühereafter they fed many Brahmins and 
performed many anspicious deeds They caused the Vedas to be chanted 
by the Brahmins and with srant pleasure they worshipped lord Siva 
with sacrificial presents. (lowers, frank-incense, light, cloth, betel, oblations 
of milk and honey, ghee, ete. ‘Thereafter with 16 ingredients, many 
kinds of offerings (or victims), a hundred buífaloes, a thousand pure goats, 
ten thousand sheep ani other presents they worshipped Bhavani, the 
goddess of Vrindávana. : i : z Ha 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


di TIE DRAWMA FuIVARTi p URANA, 


DN 


a 


24-94. With a view to secure the welfare of Krisna, they distribut. 
td a hundred pieces of golland, by way of priestly fees, a hundred 
milch cows to the Bra hmins. Afterwards, they worshipped Ud dhava with 
Teverenee again and again. Uddhava, after having eonsoled ihe cow-hords 
Yas'cdà, Rohint, the cow-herd boys and the old ee attended 
the sphere of the Rasa, Having arrived there he saw that the sphere 
of the Rasa was round like the graceful orb of the moon and decked 
with the columns of Sri-Rama (large wild) plantains overhung with 
enchanting and eracefnl rows of garlands and associated with leaves of 
verdant jack and sandal trees stitched together with the thread of silk, 
The land situated within the sphere of the Rasa was purified by cued, 
fried rice, fruits, silk, flower, sprouts of bent erass, sandal, aloe, musk, 
and saffron, "lhis Sphere of the Rasa contained three lakhs of beautiful 
anl lovely temples dedicated to pleasure. I6 was carefully puard lp 
all sides by three crores of cowherds; and lakhs of cowherds, thinking 
that Krişna had arrived there, wandered at large, Afterwards U d-dhava 
eirenmambulated ronud Yamuna, By turns, ha also cireumaun dulated 
round the forests of sandal, Champak, small varloty of jasmine, screw. 
pine tree, Midhavi (creeping plants), Vakula (mimusops Elengi) ltangalà, 
A-^ka (Jonesia Roxb), Siris'a, Dhatri-Kánehan (emblie , inyrobalan; 
Dik and Karnikár (holy tree havine excellent flowers with no smell), 
Similarly, Uddhaya in the gladness of his heart walked through the 
fo-est of Nakiswara, the clove wood, the wood of marshy date- trees and 
the forest of palm-trees and made a eireni& round all the forests of 
different descriptions. 

35-48. In this Way, having left on the left side the bread-fruit trees, 

the jack, the 'eocoanut trees and the forest of mandár, he passed on-ward 
and observed a lonely grove. Afterwards having crossed its limits he 
reached the sweet and lonely forest of honey (Madhu-vana) ringing 
with the note of male cuckoo. There the beos were humming and that 
ragion of the harbour of Madhavi (a creeping plant) was full of «wild 
and enchanting trees. The wind bearing the perfume of flowers was gonte 
ly blowing and filling all the sides with incense, After having sren that 
forest, Ud.dhava Went to the lonely forest of Jujube situated on tho 
margin of the roval road as mentioned above; He then observed by 
turns the forests of bael, Neem (a tree with bitter fruit), orange, lotus, 
tha oleander tree and holy basil and saw red and ripo fruits, blooming 
before him. 


Having left them on the left side, he entered into the forest 
of plantain : and there he 


saw the hermitago of Radha situated in a 
solitary place "hat hermitage was surrounded by a rampart, a moat and 
forig constructed of precious stones. Hence it was inneeessible to foes 
and easily accessible to friends. tg danger signal was always guarded by 
sentinels, “This hermitage was built by Vis'wa-karma and adorned with 
several sorts of Pictures, inlaid with d; onds, gems, pearls and precious 
etones and ornaments with pillars of diamonds, Therein temples decked 
with staircases of diamond Contributed to its beauty : and jars of dinmond 
were placed in a row. Above the hermitage, flags of cloth’ Consecrated by 
fire and fluttered by the wind greatly magnified itg charm. Some places 
were adorned with diamonds, looking glasses and white chowries, Later on 
Ud-dhava perceived the lion-gate of i 


the hermitage, Constructed with gems. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


FERISN4 JANMA RITANDA 445 


ee 


Thereafter he entered into the threshold and observed the wonderful lonely 
forest of Kadamba at Vrindå- vana. There he saw the.charming sphere of 
the Rasa constructed by Vis’wa-karm4 and containing figures which 
represented the theft of garments. Inside the sphere, he saw many bowers 
or arbours occupied by eowherds and cowherdesses. : 


49-57. Uddhava having seen this gate crossed the lonely second gate 
and the third gate and then arrived at the fourth gate. He thoneht that 
this gate was the best of all. Then arriving at the fifth gate he beheld 
many kinds of pictures and after- wards arrived at the lonely sixth gate. 
There he saw that the walls contained painted pictures representing the 
firht of Rama and Rivagaand theitenth incarnationof Visnu. Vis'wa karma 
also painted on them pictures representing the artificial sphere of the Risa 
and aqueons sports of the Yamuna ina very graceful manner. A thousand 
milk-maids were carefully guarding the sixth entrance. They were decked 
with various kinds of ornaments constructed with excellent gems. ‘They 
held in their hands excellent staffs of gem; and their girments and jewels 
wero in-laid with gems, pearls and diamonds. First of all, Madhavi, their 
chief, enquired into his welfare, and Ud-dhava returned to her a suitable 
answer. Madhavi having left Ud-dhava there, wont rejoiced and 
informed the female associates of Radha of the whole affair. 


58-7), ‘Thedear lady companion of Radha having heard the gool news 
gladly sounded conches, bells. Mridanga (a small drum,) and Panava 
(n small tabori, duly greeted Ud-dhava and very gladly ushered him into 
the interior of Radha's mansion. Ud-dhava having arrived there saw that it 
was excellent and made of excellent gems. Before him was lying down the 
aggrieved Radha resembling the digit of the moon in the dark night ofthe . 
Amavasyd, in a sense-less condition on the leaves of lotus eovered. with 
mud or soft elay: constant weeping had flushed her face ; her bo:ly was lean 
and her garments dis-hevelled. She was lying down without food in a 
helpless eoudition. Ter lips were parched ; she was upheaving a gentle 
sigh ; and the clusters of her hair assumed a golden colour. At the very 
sieht, of Ridh& Uddhava experienced a thrill of raptures in his body. 
He bowed down before her feet with a reverential inclination of his head 
and said, “ I adore the lotus feet of Rádhá who is worshipped by Brahma 
and other gods, and the recitation of whose virtues consecrates the three 
worlds. [bow low before the goddess Radha, the resident of the Cow 
world. O "goddess, you are Chandravalt, the resident of the mountain of a 
hundred summits. I bow to you. You are the mistress of the Rasa, the 
resident of the sphere of the Risa. L bow to you. O ` Goddess, you are 
Vrinda, the resident of the coast of the river Virajà. So I reverentially bow 
to you. Yon are Krisná (the wife of Krisna) who revels in the Vrindávana 
therefore this servant bows to you. O Goddess, you are Anti, the wife 
of Krisna ; therefore I bow to you. You always d vell in the hear& 
of Krişna. You are his darling : So, goddess, I bow to you. (0) 
Mother you are Laksmi dwelling in the Vaikuntha, Saraswati, the 
goddess presiding over knowledge and Kamala the goddess presiding 
over all prosperity. So [ bow to you. O Goddess, you are Padma, 
the darling of the god who hasa lotus-navel and the mother of Maha- 
Visnu, You are the primordial energy. So I bow to yoy 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


(ER THE DRAHMA FAIVARTÀ PURANA, 


Ra et re m a ane 


nnn arn eee aaa Sree 


24-94. With a view to secure tha welfare of Krigna, they distribug. 
ed a hundred pieces of goldand, by way of priestly fees, a hundred 
milch cows to the Brahmins, Afterwards, they worshipped Ud dhava With 
reverence again and again. 

Yas'cdà, Rohini, the cow-herd boys and the old milkmaids attended 
the sphere of the Rasa. Having arrived there he saw 


that the sphere 
of the Rasa was round like the graceful orb of the moon and decked 


with the columns of Sri-Rama (large wild) plantains overhung with 
enchanting and gracefnl rows of garlands and associated with leaves of 
verdant jack and sandal trees stitched together with the thread of silk, 
The land situated within the sphere of the Rasa was purified by cued, 
fried rice, fruits, silk, flower, sprouts of bent erass, sandal, aloe, musk, 
and saffron, This sphere of the Rasa contained three lakhs of — beautiful 
anl lovely temples dedicated to Pleasure. It was carefully guarded on 
all sides by three crores ofcowherds; and lakhs of cowherds, thinking 
that Krisna had arrived there, wandered at large. Afterwards Ud-dhava 
eirenmambulated ronud Yamuna. By turns, ho also cireumam dulated 
round the forests of sandal, Champak, small Variety of jasmine, Screg 
pine tree, Mâdhavî (creeping plants), Vakula (mimusops Elengi) Rangala, 
A-J ka (Jonesia Roxb), Siris'a, Dhatri-Kánehan (emblie ; inyrobalan; 
Dik and Karnikár (holy tree having excellent flowers with no smell), 
Similarly, Uddhava in the gladness of his heart walked through tho 
fo'est of Nakiswara, the clove wood, the wood of marshy date-trees and 
the forest of palm-trees and made a cireni round all the forests of 
different descriptions. 

35-48. In this way, having left on the lefé side the bread- fruit trees, 
the jack, the cocoanut trees and the forest of mandar, he passed on-ward 
aud observed a lonely grove. Afterwards having crossed its limits he 

reached the sweet and lonely forest of honey (Madhu-vana) ringing 
with the note of male cuckoo. ‘There the bees were humming and that 
ragion of the harbour of Madhavi (a creeping plant) was full of «wild 
and enchanting trees, The wind bearing the perfume of flowers was ont- 
ly blowing and filling all the sides with incense. After having seen that 
forest, Ud-dhava went to the lonely forest of Jujube situated on the 
margin of the royal road as mentioned above; Hoe then observed by 
turns the forests of bael Neem (a tree with bitter fruit), orange, lotus, 
tha oleander tree and holy basil and saw red and ripo fruits, blooming 
before him, e, he entered into the forest 


1 d ermitago of Radha situated in a 
solitary place That hermitage was surrounded by a rampart, a moat and 
foris constructed of precious stones He 


and easily accessible to friends, 

sentinels. This hermitage was by 
Several sorts of pietures, inlaid with diamonds, 
stones and ornaments with pilla 
with staircases of diamond contri 
were placed in a row. Above the of cloth consecrated by 
fire and fluttered by the wind 8 charm. Sore places 
were adorned with diamonds, looking glasses and white chowries. Later on 
Ud-dhava perceived the lion-gate of the hermitage, constructed with gems. 


gems, pearls and precious 


Therein temples decked 
buted to its beauty : j 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE - 


Uddhava, after having eonsoled the cow-herds, 


-3 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


WRISNA JANMA RITANDA 445 


m 
Thereafter he entered into the threshold and observed the wonderful lonely 
forest of Kadamba at Vrindá.vana, There he saw the.charming sphere. i 
the Rasa constructed by Vis'wa-karmá and containing figures whieh 
represented the theft of garments. Inside the sphere, he saw many bowers 
or arbours occupied by cowherds and cowherdesses. 

49-57. Uddhava having seen this gate crossed the lonely second gate 
and the third gate and then arrived at the fourth gate. He thonght that 
this gate was the best of all. Then arriving at the fifth gate he beheld 
many kinds of pictures and after- wards arrived at the lonely sixth gate. 
‘Phere he saw that the walls contained painted pietures r-preseating the 
firht of Raima and Rivanaand thejtenth incarnationof Visnu. Vis'wa karma 
also painted on them pictures representing the artificial sphere of the Rasa 
and aqueons sports of the Yamuna ina very graceful manner. A thousand 
milk-maids were carefully guarding ihe sixth entrance. They were decked 
with various kinds of ornaments constructed with excellent gems. ‘They 
held in their hands excellent statis of gem ; and their girments and jewels 
were in-laid with gems, pearls and diamonds. First of all, Madhavi, their 
chief, enquired into his welfare, and Ud-dhava returned to her a suitable 
answer. Madhavi having left Ud-dhava there, went rejoiced and 
informed the female associates of Radha of the whole affair. 


58-7),  Thedear lady companion of Rádhá having heard the gool news 
gladly sounded conches, bells. Mridanga (a small drum,) and  Panava 
(n small tabor), duly greeted Ud-dhava and very gladly ushered him into 
the interior of Radha’s mansion. Ud-dhava having arrived there saw that it 
was excellent and made of excellent gems. Before him was lying down the 
aggrieved Ràdhà resembling the digit of the moon in the dark night of the 
Amavasyd, in a sense-less condition on the leaves of lotus covered. with 
mud or soft clay: constant weeping had flushed her face; her boy was lean 
and her garments dis-hevelled. She was lying down without food in a 
helpless coudition. Her lips were parched; she was upheaving a gentle 
sigh ; and the clusters of her hair assumed a golden colour. At “the very 
sight, of Ridh& Uddhava experienced a thrill of raptures in his body. 
He bowed down before her feet with a reverential inclination of his head 
and said, * I adore the lotus feet of Rádhà who is worshipped by Brahma 
and other gods, and the recitation of whose virtues consecrates the three 
worlds. {bow low before the goddess Radha, the resident of the Cow 
world. O goddess, you are Chandrávali, the resident of the mountain of a 
hundred summits. I bow to you. You are the mistress of the Rasa, the 
resident of the sphere ofthe Rasa. L bow to you. O- Goddess, you are 
mum pnt of ie Soat 2 p river Viraja. Sof reverentially bow 
ayes mee viec ed n revels in the $ Vrindavans 
of Krisna : nee. it Boc MT Y Cal TU PUN bo 
[2 Krisna. You IN his atic S * » ade um e us p 
iot ce NN B "E g: So, go Geh ow to you. 
a are Liksmi dwelling in the Vaikuntha, Saraswati, the 
P an presiding over knowledge and Kamal& the goddess presiding 
Ok dk Pgaperity So [ bow to you. O Goddess, you are Padma, 

ss ns of the god who has a lotus-navel and the mother of Mahá- 
va, Kou are the primordial energy. So I bow to vou, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


413 IE BRAWMATAIVARTA PURANA, 


Sateen —- — - —— à 
t ——À 


O moshar, you are the celestial goddess cf fortune, the daughter of the 
sea; Nirdyani, the wife of Narayana, so I bow to you. Yon are the 
illusion of Visnn, the Mahamaya of the Vaisnavas and the emblem of 
prosperity. So L bow to you. i 
71-84. You are the emblem of gool. the source of prosperity and 
Savitri, the mother of the four Vedas. This servant bows to yon 
with folded pilns © golless, you aro the emblem of intelleat anl 
the sonree of wisdom. In the golden age, you  presided over tlie 
valour of the gos; you are Natura herself: I bow to you. Yon 
are the goddess Darg& dwelling ina forb: I bow to you. O moll "sy 
you are "Priparà who dil away with Tripara. I bow to you. You 
are the fairest of the fair, pure, virtuons and endowed with attributes, 
So | bow to vou. You are Siti, the daughter of Daksa, Parvitt, 
‘the daighter of the mountain and Uma, tha female aseetio: I am 
boxing to you. You are the greas gol lass resilins in the K uilis'a, 
the emblem of sleep, mercy and esteem: I bow to you. You ary 
Aparna the symbol of fasting and GowÌ the resident of the 
Gouri land. I bow to you. O goddess, you are the emulem of thirst, 
hunger, error, grace and creation, the source of preservation. So [ boy 
to you. O goddess, von are the blessed Abhaya, Swad^i, tha 
source: of redemption, Swáhá, the emboliment of peace ani physical 
grace, Therefore, I bow to yon. O goddess, yon are the emblem of 
contentment, development, merev, sleep and esteem. | therefore - bow to 
you, Ycu are the symbol of hunger, thirst, shame, forbearance, 
patience and consciousness. I pow to you. O goddess, you are ‘the 
emblem ofal! energy aud universal motherhool. You represon& tha 


. consumptive faculty of fire, the graca of the fall Moon and tho blooming 


lotus of autumn. : 

8591. O goddess, as thero is no differencs between milk an] ifs 
whitoness, earth and smell, water and its coldness, sky and sound, the 
, Sun and his light ; so according to the moral- cole of the world, viz, the 
Vedas and the Puranas, there is 


i ux no difference besweed Radha anl 
Madhava. O nuspicious goddess, regain your  oe»nseiousness anl 
answer my question.” Thug adoring her Uldhava bowed tò her 


Spain and again. Whoever Teverentiily studies this oda com posed 
by Ud-dhava enjoys . pleasure. in this world and in the en] gos to tha 
land cf Hari. He is never bsset with grief or illness or separated from 
his Mende, A woman prose husband has Zone ont is soon réstorel to 
um. A man separated from his wife gets her hack « : wi 5 
Paes Sh ci ee 9 ioa ; gets her back santa man witho vs 
ees „= Door man gots wealth: a man withoat land ae rires 
land; a man without subjects or adherents is able to secure them, An 
unhealthy. man gots back his health: a prisoner is seb at liberty; a 
Fae Sei man 1$ rationed from his fours; and a inan in peril is removed 
rom nis dangers. By the perusal of this hyma, an in£vn2us min ary tires 
fame and an illiterate man attains learnine 
g. 


‘CHAPTER XCITI. 

1-23, Narayana said, Radha, enlovised by 

senses and seeing that he resembled Krisna in ey 
sorrowfully thus: “O son, what is yonr name ? 


Ud-dhava, regained her. 
ery respeet said to him' 
Who has sent you here?’ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


d- 


a Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu, Trust. 255 
kiusNA JANA KHANDA. 447 


a e 


a 


Whence are you coming and wherefore ? ‘Tell me all this ¥en 
semble Krişna Whence I conclude you are his attendant. o te 
Mn onee about the welfare of Krisna and Balarama. Also tell me in 
ni | why Nanda is lagging behind ? Will Govinda come back to 
S ER > “Shall l be able again to sec his face whieh resembles the 
full moon ? Shall i be able to play with him asain in the sphere of the 
Rasa? Shall I, after indulging iu aqueous sports with my female 
associates, bo able to annoint the gracotul body of the son of anda 
with | Sandal-paste again?’ Hearing the aftlicted words of .hádhá, 
"Ud.dhava said. “O goddess of fair countenarce, I come out of the 
stock of tho Kgatriyas: my nan is Uddhava I am the attendant 
of the Supremo Being Hari, it is true. It is he who has sens me to 
communicate to you the good meszage ; therefore I have come to you. 
At present Ieigua, Balarama and Nanda are residing there in peace aud 
prosperity.” Radha said, “O son Ud-dhava, the things noted below, 
riz, tho coast of the Yamuna, the fragrant ‘wind, the base of the 
Kadamba tree which afforded amusement, the lovely holy Vrindavana, 


-thy free adventures of the male cuckoo through the woods and the 


taste of honey by that bird, the frolies of that wicked, sinfal Kama, the 
burning lamp of diamond in the sphere of the Rasa, the temple of lust 
constructed with precious son's, the eow-herdesses and the full moon 
are still iu fullswing, ‘Phat flowery bedstead besmeared with fragrant 
sandal.paste, the betel incensed with camphor suited to the purpo-e of 
soxual intercourse, the same fragrant. wreath of jasmine, the white chow- 
rie, the looking glass, the lovely string of pearls associated with gems 
and diamonds, the musk, the satfron, the cup full of sandal paste, the 
lake with all jts sceneries dedicated to pleasure, the fragrant gardens of 
flowers and lotuses still exist in the same condition. In fact, all my 
quondam prosperity and material glory still esist. But, alas ; where is 
the Lord of wy life? O Krsna, O lord of Ramá, where are you? O 
favourite of my life, has your maidservant (meaning Radha) committed 
auy offence? Why, she is ever guilty.” So saying, sbe fainted again 
and Ud-dhava attempted to restore her to consciousness. Ud-dhaya, the 
best of the Ksatrivas, was very much surprised fo see her in that plight. 
ler soven female attendants fanned her with the white chowrie. Three 
lakhs of milkmaids dey uted. to her service stood round her. A hund- 
rod crores of milk-maids surrounded her, day anl night, Some of them 
held collyrium; others held wreath, vermilion, yellow pigment prepared 
out of the urine of the cow or the cup o! sandal; and all stood up there. 
Others waited on ker with looking-glasses or the saffron or the precious 
cup of musk or the vessel of Champak (a kiad of yellow and fragrant 
flower), : 3 5 

9) t54. Others with a sorrowful heart held the sweet cup of honey or Irag- 
rant oil or betel incensed with campher or refreshing, cool water or pictures- 
que puppets or balls or ornaments of gem or invaluable cloths consecreted 
hy eii putigles ef fog SON a gestis esed her He Wo 
nS je R Enn T 16 maus. ome with combs in 1 Up han E 
lo. Standing elore the goddess. Others waited on her timidly with 
"Cdye paint, or the juice of emblie myrobo'un in their hands, ata 
Tespectabls distance, Others were adoring her through fcar; others 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


* ift (gGangotriand Sarayu Trust. — ; 
445 PHE BETA Val PARTE Purana, 


altlicted with grief were weeping ; Others were consoling Radha in her 
bereavement. Some milk-maid whose boly possessed the hu 
gold, to allay her grief, was laying her on a lovely bed of lotus- leaves, 
Uddhava, observing the lamentable condition of Radha, again addressed 
her fearlessly using gentle words delightful to the ears thus: “O goddess, 
L know that you are the gentle goddess of primordial energy ruling over 
gods, goddesses and the adept cowherdesses. By tbe curse of Sridama, 
you have descended to the earth asa eowherdess. You are tho goddess 
presiding over the soul of Krişna and dwell constantly in his heart, 


6 of heated 


35 46. O goddess, I am going to communicate to you an item of, 
good and interesting news likely to cheer the heirt, Listen to me 
patiently along with your handinaids, "liis message of mine is like a 
rain of neetar on a person consumed by the wild fire of grief and. like 
alchemy to a woman afilicted with the disease of bere vement 
(—separa'ion from her husband), Vasudeva having requested Nanda to 
remain there till the eeremony of the investiture of Krisna with the 
sacred thread was over, he has complied with his request with 
pleasure. After the good deed is over, Nanda accompain 
and Balaráma will gladly come back to Gokula. After his arrival nere, 
Krisna will first bow before the fect of his mother and then in the course 
of the night he will cheerfully direct his footsteps towards the sacred 
Vrindávana. O chaste one, then you will at once be able to dispel all 
your pangs of separation by the sight of the lotus face of lord Krişna. 
Therefore, O mother, take heart of grace, put on with a smile the 
lovely garment consecrated by fire and the Jewels coustructed with 
excellent diamonds. O goddess, annoint your body with refreshing 
saudal paste mixed with musk and saffron, polish the clusters of your 


hair and cover them with the wreath of jasmine, decorate’ yourself with 
fine clothes and ornaments and line your 


: u cheek with punt of your eo - 
meties O goddess, at the portion of th» head whieh devotes the partings 
of the hair, sustain the mark of yermilion and, below that sustain the marks 


of musks and Sandal-paste. Please apply lae-dye to your feet covered with 
ornaments. Chaste one, getup. 1 say, again, get up, grace that throne 
of gem, leave the bed of lotus mingled with soft c] ty. dedicate your mind 


to Krişna, consume pure and sweet honey, chow fragrant betel-leaves and 
drink perfumed water, : 


46-59. O godless of the gods, lie down on the graceful auspicious 
bed constructed with excellent gems, furnished with pillows and gar- 
lands of flowers, polished by gems, diamonds and pearls, adorned on all sides 
with jasmine wreaths and string of pearls, redulont of musk, Játi (a kind 
of jasmine), Champak and sandal associated with jasmine wreaths anl 
covered with clothes purified by fire, Afterwards Jet your hand-maids 
and other female attendants minister to voa by fanning you with 
white chowries, O exquisite nymph, let the cowherdesses, devoted to youl, 
engage themselves in the service of your lotus feet. You should also observe 
your lotus fuce in the looking glass Coustructed with pure diamon ls.” O 
muni, Uddhava so saying bowed before the pair of her lotus feet served by 

. Brahm4 ; and other gods stood up there silently before tha goldess, ‘I'he 
ehasto Radha, az sho heard his worda, smiled and prosented to him a ring 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ed by Krigna . 


i 


D 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Tus; 
it NDA 5 449 


KRISNA JANMA KA 


constructed with gems.. The ring was invaluable, constructed by MEE 
Karma, very delightful to the sight, yellow in eolour and bright, like 
the lamp. At first in the sphere of the Rasa, the fire-god had presented 
the ring to Lord Krisua. Radha very gladly also gave to ‘Ud-dbava 
a palt of diamond ear-rings and a precious jewel constructed with superb 
goms. ‘Then she gave to Ud-dhava '& eloth consecrated by fire, & cat 
constructed with gems, à lovely wreath constructed with excellent pearls: 
(the same which Kuvera had presented to the supreme deity Krişna). 
She also gavo him a lovely lotus used as a toy constructed with superb 
diamonds which Varuna had presented to Krisua. She also gave him 
tho gem ealled Syamantaka whick the Sun-god bad presented to Lord 
Krişna, the gem called Kaustubha presented by Lord Hari in days of yore 
and a throne of gom which was the gift of Indra. 

60-70. Sho also gave him a lovely diamond parasol, adorned with 
pieburesquo, artilicial lotuses, decked with excellent pearls, gems, diamonds ` 
and precious stones, and covered on all sıdes with looking glasses which 
was formerly presentd by Brabmá in the sphero of the Rasa. She also 
gladly gave him a saered rosary of beads which was formerly presented 
by Siva. Tuo goddess Ràdhâ, aftor having giveu him the dolight- 
fal, sanctifying rosary of beads calculated to do away with birth, death, 
deerepitude and disease, gave him also a gein formerly presented by tho 
moon) which was bright like bhe moon and polished in a nice and do- . 
lightful manner. She also gave him the inexhaustible cup of nectar full 
to tho brim which was on a former occasion gifted by Dharma. She gava 
him likewise a cup of water, constructed with pure gold, entertained him 
with milk boiled with rice and sugar, sweet-meat and delicious cakes, betel 
porfumed with camphor, refreshing garlands aud sandal. She then blessed 
him, gave him the desired boon and imparted to him the knowledge 
which Krisna, in the cow-world in the sphere of the Rasa, had communi- 
cated to her. Radha also gave to Ud dhava the boon of lasting fortune 
which might continue fora hundred generations, knowledge likely to 
bring celebrity, spotless fame and renown, absolute perfection, the bondage 
a! ari, everlasting reverence for the feet of d ari and the position of the 
oremost attendant of Hari. Y $ ; 

71-82. Radha haviag given him reward aud all these boons gladly 
got up, wielded on her person invaluable ornaments of gem, the 
NEN a pe abe cae ol lovely gems, vermilion, eollyrium, the 
ESOS A jan moit sandal-paste and sat down on the throne of 
Wissen to ae Du ue Phen her maids stood up round her and 
ENSE S eNoroehas E SM white ehowries. Apprised of this aus- 
DINE Au d p ans p „also prosented to Ud-dhava many 
CINA Pes c n: hen Radha sat down on the throne of gem, 
uA SE er ue throne of gem and greeted with several sorts of pre- 
UMS E s um by a hundred erores of smiling cowherdesses who 
moons. They EU M gol aud who had the grace of a hundred 
*O Ud dhava, is DE ae ic Radha sweetly and gently thus spoke: 
Sis ps E: ees nuit us soon ? Leave your hypocrisy and 
speak the Fath, ae nave nothing to apprehend in this assembly : so 
wells, as aserifice * ities UE a andipool iò bette: than a hundred 
is þattor than a olei areas bandied oblong, ponds or pools, as & son 

rod sacritise-: so there is no virbue greater than truth. 


AT 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


igitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
Tue 


450 BRAHMA FAIVARTA PURANA, 


— 
Thera is no relation superior to mother ; and thera is no prece 
to the Guru who gives the mantra. Similarly thera is no sin 
falsehood.” Uddhava said, “O fair one, Hari will really 
you will undoubtedly be able to banish sorrow from your mind py the 
sight of his lunar face. © most excellent nymph, the sight of my: 
alone has alichated much of the fever esed by his sey 
do not be anxious any more. Now amuse yourself. 
to Mathura, I shall send Hari bu this place. Without e 
will think of doing nothing else, 


§8-90. © mother, now permit me to co, After reaching Haris 
place, I shall duly communicate your message to him." Radha sail, 
“O son, if you are, indeed, bent "pon going to Mathura, please see that 
you forget not my message. lam very mach afflicted with tho pangs 
of separation. © Son, compose yourself fóra while still: I am going 
to communicate to you a few more sorrowful tidings, After having 
delivered to my beloved consort Krisna the following massage, please 
send him to Gokul at once. Please tell him that no savant ean sse 
through the heart of a woman. The Sastras perhaps, may determine 

` the point only to a limited extent: or how ean tha Sastras determine a 
point unknown to tho four Vedas? O Ud-dhava, you are just like a 
sontome. Iam going to tell you everything, . provided that you con- 
munieate it to Krişna. Child, 1 was so much afflictel that throughout 
day and night, I could make no distinction betwosn a hoase and a 
wood,a map and a beast, the water and the land, dream aud reality. 
Indeed, I did not know myself. I could nob pereeive the rise of the San 
and the Moon ; only this moment, the m 


essago of the welfare of Hari has 
Testored me to Consciousness, Ido nothing elsa but sinply behold tho 
face of Gord Hari every moment, hear the melody of his flute ‘and, void of 
the shame and fear characteristic of my family, I always contemplato 
the lotus fect of Hari ; x 


Š y face 
Darabion, Prae 
abion Pray, 
AS soon as I go 
onsoling you, he 


91-108. In spite of the fact that I attained the supreme Deing who 
‘transcends Nature, I had no idea of anything through the influence of 
his Maya or Illusion : only I knew this, that ho is my cow-herd husband. 
This thought is now eyer uppermost in my mind that I have angrily 
rebuked a Being whose lotus-feet ar ] 
gods including Brahma, O Ud-dhaya, according to the dispensation of 
Providence I could reap benefits, indulge in pleasures and secure longevity 
during the time which I spent in ministering to his lotus-feet, in 
the recitation of his virtues, in Tevereneing him, and in worshipping 
and meditating him. Now the sorrow of my heart caused by his 
Separation interferes with the Privileges whieh J formerly possessed. 
I have no taste for Amusement; I no longer secure the same good 
fortune or love that was formerly my share” Shall I be able to ronew 
the joy of his Society in solitude? O Ud dhava, shall [ bo able to 


accompany him again to Vrindá- vang, 9r to apply sandal paste to the. 
bosom of the son of Nanda, or to offer him a wreath or to direct my 
steps along with Hari towards the wood of jasmine, Serew-pine tree or 
the Champaka, or to Proceed with Hari fo the lovely wood of sandal or 
Madhavi (ihe spring ereapar)or ty the hiddou or inysterious grove of the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


9 everadored by the Vedas and. thal 


KTS TTP RIN DS 451 ` 


——— —À 


sc apccana 2 Shall E be able again to play merrily with Krispa and my 
e sae the solitary waters of Eo Yani or the lake dedicated 
E a eerie ? Shall I be able to go again to the temple of gem, forest 
d: ecl or the transparent lunar lake situated on the Malaya range ¢ 
Sha!l jm able to starb with Hari again for Visyandan, Surasana, Nandaka, 
Puspa-blradraka and Bhadraka ? Where is that large climbing plant 
Madhavi (the ereeper with white fragrant flowers) which blooms in spring ? 
Where is that sweet (MAdbavf) or vernal night ? Where is that honey ? 
And where is Madhava, the consort of my life ?" While speaking thus and 
contemplating the lotus feet of Hari, Radha wept bitterly through grief 
and fainted again. 


CHAPTER CXIV. 

1-12. Narayana said, “O muni, the sight of the fainting fit ofthe 
goddess produced in the mind of Ud-dhava fear and astonishment at one 
and the same time. He restored her to consciousness and accosted Radha 
who nearly lost her life. Knowing the feelings of reverence which possessed. 
her heart and beholding that fortunate chaste damsel, he reekoned him- 
self among believers and slighted the whole world. He said, * O mother 
of the world, I bow to you: reg iim your consciousness. Everything happens: 
in the world spontaneously in conformity with the laws as laid down 
bv destiny. You will soon see Krisna. The earth has also been conseerated. 
by the dust of your feet. Through you alone, the milkmaids have acquired 
sanctity and generosity of heart People recite your name in.auspicious 
songs. Tho Vedas and the munis viz.. Sanaka and others always eulogise 
your fame which is extensive. Your celebrities consecrate even holy places,. 
the resorts of pilgrims which take away sins. They produce in the mind. 
pure reverence for Hart. impart blessings to your believers and destroy all 
sorts of calamities. O goddess, you.are Radha ; and you are even Krisna: 
you are Puruga (the supreme Being) aud you are also the excellent nature. 
Neithor the Purdnasnor the Srutis make any distinction between Radha and 
Madhava.” While Ud dhava said so, 2 eowherdess named Madhavi seeing 
that Radha had fainted preceded Ud-dhava, stood: up before Radha and said 
td her “Priend, do you recollect the grace of Krigna, his excellent dress, his 
raptures, his glory and supreme grandeur, his heroism, prosperity and 
irresistible valour, his accomplished virtues and qualities not yet publ'shed ? 
From whieh place did he come? And where did he goto? [fe is not a 
prince but a mere boy in the guise of a cowherd. O'auspieious nymph, 
why do you remember tke son of Nanda the preserver of the cows? 
Carefully and constantly preserve your soul (ego): for what ean be de irer- 
than the soul?" : 

13-:7. Mülati said, ** Fic upon you, Ràdhá. You are very shameless. 
An impudent woman need not exist. You have obliterated the fame of 
young women in tho world. Friend, restrain your tears, suppress 
the feelings which you entertain for your hnsband and cherish others in your 
mind and thoughts. © goddess, friends and foes are tarred with the same 
brush ; action alone produces friendship or enmity. A wiso person altains 
his object, by hook or by crook ; for failure in design only demonstrates 
ignorance ou the part of the agent. O Radha, in this world, no one 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
452 THE BRAIIMA FAIVARTA PURANA, 


possesses a favourite or a friend ; only virtuous people act as friends or 
favourities, having due regard to time and the natare of the act. O my 
companion, I tell you the features of an enemy. Please listen. Tite 
enemy, having reduced people to poverty, slanders and disiresses them 
and ultimately kills them. Just consider. That ernel man eot you 
outeasted from your family, immersed you in the sea of sorrow, took 
away your consciousness and life and has now left you for good. There- 
fore, O fool, why do you remember him ? Leave aside this heart-rending 
grief and carefully preserve your own ego. Friend, nothing is dearer toa 
person than the soul." Padmavati said, * my dear, that day while going 
to the coast of the Yamuná, you yourself said that women derivo no 
pleasure from the love of a person who is void of taste. My friend, the 
love of a hypocrite, water-mark and the flash of lightning are all equal; 


for none of them lasts fora long time. Ethics does not prescribe a rule 
according to which a hypocrite conld be trusted. Fora wonder, when 
on the coast of the Yamuna you encountered the glanees and the smiles 
belonging to the lotus face of Hari, you hid your own face. But subse- 
quently you beheld that face again and again, lost your wits and consigned 
to the waters (abandoned) for ever the fear of your superiors and all your 
household affairs in utter disregard of the consolatory words nsed by your 
attendant-maids, Even now you are abstaining from food and remembering 
Mari with all your heart and soul. It isa far ery botween Mathura, the 
abode of Krisna, and Gokul which is your home. Fair one, even if you 
commit suicide this moment, he will not appear. But if you preserve 
yourself, in course of time you may be able to see bim." Chandra.Mukhi 
said, “ Pleasure, pain, good or evil, sorrow, affluence, prosperity and 
calamity overtake a person according to the Karma of his previous exis- 
tence, This most holy land of India is desired by all ; and here, my 
affectionate companion Radha has been able to secure as her husband 
Mari who transcends Nature, 
. 28:43. And yet her body is consumed by the darts of Cupid. Her 
foe is either the moon or the spring : or both the spring and Mádhava(Krispa) 
are her foes, Káma (Cupid) was once consumed by the fire of [Iara's wrath. 
The Rabu swallowed the moon-god and vomited him again : the spring also 
afflicted on account of the death of his friend committed suicide and went 
fo Yama's house Alas! the moon-god who is the ocean of nectar appears 
to us like a sea cf poison. Attractive clothes and ornaments have assumed 
the aspect-of burning fire. Perfumed sandal-paste, moreover, appears to 
us like oblations of ghee into the fire. We seam to be almost consumed 
by the breath of the fragrans wind. Our dear companion Radha abstains 
from food and slumber and seems to sustain her existence by the mere 
breath of her nostril. Therefore, praise Krigna constantly ; and slan.ler him 
by ro means. Our dear Radhé may revive, if she hears nis name, listens to 
tha recitation of his virtues and receives his blessed message.” iskal 
said, “O Madhavi, what do you know ? Krisna is the God. the supreme 
Being. _ Brahm& and other gods, the four Vedas constantly meditate 
him. Virtuous men (saints) also conste ntly contemplate his lotus feet. How 
ean you know him who ean not be comprehended by Padma, Saraswati, 
Durea, Ananta, Siva and the best of the adepts and devotees? Ie is the 
supreme Spirit voil of attributes ; so how is it possible for him to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


p PIRSSIN R Serb Dutt. 453 


` ataa? What you had said at first is true. 

OREN he 22 Oa earth of her burden, that delightful 
Onl with a view to relieve 1e 1 : : 5 

IM who is always bent upon showing compassion to his believers has 
T a beautiful indeseribable form, attractive to all persons lhat 
W va is the receptacle of the sportive charms of ten millions of Cupids. 
NE the lord of all, has reverentially wielded on liis head we water ee 
Ganges which resembles the honey of his lotus-feet. That S iva, indi or 
ent to the world, recites his eulogies with his five mouths an con tina 
dances, nay, he has even given up his food, clothing, jewels etc ; DE 
constantly contemplates the light of that white effulgent Brahma. ow 
can you know him ? Brahma devoted to his ‘service has been released 
from the peril of his birth; and in his service, the god Ananta, Sanat- 
Kumira and the adepts have attained the knowledge of Yoga (union with 
cod through abstract meditation)" Sus'ilà said, O my companion, even 
hundreds of Kámas are not able to serve that Krigna. Chandra the moon- 
cod or As'wini-Knmára cannot be compared to bim in beauty. In the 
endless worlds Brahma, Visnu, S'iva, Munis; Manus, the adeptes, believers 
and saints constantly contemplate that supreme Being void of qualities. 
The Vedas are incapable of adoring that Supreme Being. The god with 
a thousand faces trembles in his vain attempt to praise him ; the goddess 
Saraswati looks frightened and helpless in her attempts at his adoration. 
Brahma the author of the Vedas, is unable to eulogise him. Madhavi slandera 
even the same truthful, constant and Eternal Being. To-day our assombly 
has been disgraced by her conduct. Nay, the lives of us cowherdresses bave 
been rendered useless by her remarks. Among us Radha alone is blessed : 
for day and night she meditates him. Friend, the mere recollection of 
his name certainly destroys sius, fear, griefete., accumulated in millions 
of births.” Ratna-mala, said ** Hari held the mountain of Govardhan with 
his left hand. What can redound more greatly to the heroism and credit 
of that lord of the universe ? The king of demons can reduce it is true, 
thousands of mountains to dust, but Hari can easily kill millions of such 
demons. Visnu who was but an offspring of his digits once manifested 
himself in the form of a boar and with she front of his tusk easily extract- 
ed the earth, At that time, hundreds of mountains and numberless 
powerfui demons used to dwell on earth; bnt, friend. will that deed also 
fail to establish the heroism, manliness, fame or celebrity of the Supreme 
Being "? 

43-64. Parijata said, “My dear, numberless mountains, seas, golden 
lands ete , exist on earth with her seven islands. The earth is the refuge 
of all and has an enchanting form. The world contains seven heavens 
beginning from the Brahma-loka, seven Patals (nether worlds) and several 
sorts of wonderful and beautiful objects. Thishuge universe was created by 
Brahma. Each universe rests on the pore of the skin of Mahà-Visnu in a 
very subtle condition like an atom. And yet the same Mahá-Visnu is the 
16th part of the Supreme Being Krisna. So how is it possible for the greedy 
Madhvi, the daughter of a eow-herd, to comprehend the fame, heroism and in- 
comparableglory of Krigna ?" Madhavi said, “hese foolish milk-maids are 
discussing in various ways the point which I have raised without grasping 
it. O Ud-dhava, just listento me. Visnu voluntarily vests himself with attri- 
butes and divests himself of attributes, Only to relieve the eaith of her 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


igitiz i st. 
454 PAE BREET LIT RTT EUR NA. 
mr 
burden, he has deseanded to the earth in the shape cfa eo sherd bov. 
Vedas, Puránas, adepts, mendicants, Brahmà, Siva, Ananta 
believers are unable to realise the true nituro of the Supreme B ‘ine. f[ow 
ean,then, a silly. greedy, ordinary daughter of a cowherd do so? But, O son 
Ud dhava, listen for a while to the doctrine of truth whieh I am going to 
speak out. What subject iutinitely concerns the lord? What is the desigua- 
tionof that Supreme, formless Being Vigna who transcends the properties 
of nature ? These foolish cowherdesses are slanlerinz me without under. 
standing a word that I have spoken. Can deluded girls comprehend 
that excellent real Krisna ? 


m 
T'he 
and other 


65-77 Ye is the emblem of eternal light, God, the Supreme Deine. He 
is indescribable and ever prone to show mercy to his believers. How ean the 
four Vedas adore the Supreme Being whose lotus feet are served by Padma, 
the mother of the three worlds quivering with fear before him like His maid- 
servant: whom even Saraswati is unable to worshipas if paralysed with foar 
and et whose right hand the goddess Primordial Nature, the image of external 
Brahma, occupies her position?” Ud-dhava, at their words, was filled with 
love und emotion: there was a thrill of raptures in his body. At one time he 
wep and at another time, he rolled on the ground. fn chis way. he medi- 
tated the supreme Being and swooned. Afterwards he recovered; and 
realising the faith of the cowherdesses he regarded himself comparatively as 
very insignificant. Afterwards Ud-dhava said to them, “The Island of 
Jambü is the most delightful praise-worthy ofall islands; for it contains 
the auspicious and sanctifying land of India. It is the land of trade 
coveted by holy merchants: People acaumiulate virtue in this land and 
reap fruits in the next world. India of all places in the world is the most 
Sacred, blessed and auspicious; it has been renderel sicred anl spotless by 
the holy dust of the feet of the millk-maids. Of all the women in India. 
the eowherdesses are the most blessed and esteemed; for they constantly 
bahold the sanctifying lotus feet of Radha. Brahma maditated this 
goddess for sixty thousand years in order to obtain even a partiele of 
the dust of the lotus-feet of Radha. The goddess Radh& is the excellent 
Nature dearer to d Krisna than his life and resides in the Cow-world : 
By the eurse of S'ridáma, she has now descended to bbo earth as the 
daughter of Vrik-bhann, Brabmá and other gods, the believers of 


Kriena, are not equal to a sixteenth part of Ràlhà and the 
cowherdesses, 


78-88. Truly speaking, S'iva, the prince 
the cowherdesses and the cəwherds, the 
know how to reverence Krişna. 
absorbed in worldly matters. th 


of devotees, Radha, 
residants of Vrinii vina alone 
Besides these, Sanat-Kumira, Brahma 


à p e adepts and deyout people know that to a 
certain extent. Truly am I blessed: and I hava attatnsd this object of 


my desiré; for having arrived at Gokul. I learnt from the cowhardesses 
who are my superiors the Propriety of cons tant reverence for Hari. Now 
J shall not go to MathurA In every birth I shall render my services to 
these co wherdesses and always listen to the sacred eulogies of Krispa. 
There is no believer of the supreme Being Krisna greater than these 
eow-herdesses, No one is so je 


A ^ much devoted to Hari ns these girls. 
Kalüvati said, "Dhanyá,  Menákà and T are the intellectual 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 4 


Ot 


p eon 
daughters of the manes. We, three sisters, are roaming at large throughout 
the world. Blessed is the wife of Janaka, the mother of Sità. Dhanvà 
like Sita did not come out of the womb of a woman — Msnáká, the wife 
of Ifimaldya, is the mother of Durga’. She is devoted to religious vows. 
Menfka, like Durgà has not come out of the. womb of a woman O 
Ud-dhava, I am the wife of Vrik-bhanu and the mother of RAdha ike 
Radha I have not come out of the womb of a woman. Radha, through 
the curse of S'ri-dàma has descended to the earth as the daughter of 
Vrik.hhánu. Through the curse of Sanat Kumára, we have also descended 


to the earth. 


99-104. Thero isa beautiful white Island amidst the sea of milk, 
which ts always inhabited by Visau. We, three sisters, went there to see 
him. Later on, while we were seated there, lord Sanat-Kumara, 
the leader of the spiritual guides of the devotees suddenly turned up. 
We did not got up at his sight. For this offence, he was incensed against 
us and cursed us saying. *O deluded women, you have been very much 
puffed up with pride. Go to the earth in the form of human beings. You 
shall never bo able to return to heaven". Later on, we flattered him a 
good deal, whereupon the great saint was appeased and gave a boon to 
each of us saying: “O Monaka, you are the eldest of the three; so 
descend to the earth and be the wife of Himalaya, an offspring of the 
digit of Visuu. Parvati will be your eldest daughter. Dhanya,- you 
will bo the wife of the great ascetic, king Janaka ; the great goddess of 
Laksmi, Sità will be born as your daughter. Kalàvati is the youngest 
of the lot. So, O Kalàvati you will be the chaste and affectionate wife 
of Vrik-bhànu the great Vais ya, the favourite disciple of Durvasd, the 
best of Yogis. In the end of the Dwapara age, the goddess Radha the 
resident of the Gow-world will descend to Gokul on earth through the 
curso of S'ri.dÀma where she will be celebrated as your daughter. The 
Lord Krign: also, who is the god of S'iva and Ananta will likewise 
‘descend to the sacred land ot India to relieve the earth of her burden. 


` At that timo, O Kalavati, both you and Vril-bhànu will be redeemed in 


your life-time along with your daughter and then will return to the 
Cow-world. Dhanyd, also, with her daughtor Sita will go to heaven ; 
aud Menaka, tho accomplished female ascetic, by my boon, will go 
physically to the Vaikuntha along with Parvati. When the Kalpa ends, 
Laksmi lives in the land of Visna. No one unless and until he is beset with 
danger-is able to establish his greatness. When the sufferings of those who 
toil hard are over, thon they always attain happiness which could with dif- 
culty be secured. We are the intellectual daughters of the m ines. In 
days of yore, we were absorbed in the voluptuous pleasures of heaven : 
after wards when we went to see Vigna, we were at first cursed by tho 
Muni anil then blessed by him: and by virtue of that blessing we dwell 
on carth like so many goddesses of fortune. The sight of Visnu alons 
did away with our Karina, (liability to reap fruits of our actions) and 
asa result of that ksen merit, we enjoyed to-day the sight of our son. 
Sanat-Kumira was pleased to te'l us everything and imparted to us a 
kuowledge which coull hardly be secured by Brahmi, Visnu, Siva, the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


456 | THE BRAUMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


adepts and eveu by the world. Sri-Krisna is the God, Supreme Being, 
separato from Nature, void of attributes, without desire, self-determining 
and excellent "'. 
105-115. Tulasî said, * My dear companions, Visnu is the symbol of 
our life; Visnu, absorbed in worldly affairs, is the symbol of our 
mind; Brahma represents our consciousness ; and Nature is the symbol 
of our intellect. Sambhu is the emblem of our knowledge : and Dharma 
represents tho different membors of our body. Krişna, void of attributes, 
the supreme Being, superior to Nature, is the emblem of Biahmá. He 
testifies to the deeds of people : he is the author or dispenser of sufforing 
or enjoyment. The sentient soul is but his reflection. Similarly, the 
sun and the moon exist in his eyes : Saraswati in his tongue : the Barth 
in his skin, and the kings, in his arms. They are all, as it were, tho 
servants of the supreme Being. As the gods attend Siva in his couneil, 
so every person sheltered by the supreme Being always attends hin 
in all his movements. Excellent mendicants contemplate him with 
great reverence. Ho is the witness of all actions ; therefore no action 
eau be concealed from him. That Krisna who knows the heart of all 
announces or proclaims the actions performed by people ". © Kalika 
said, Old men, boys and youths, the gods and the adepts, all know 
the supreme Being Krişna. Osage Ud-dhava, it now behoves you to 
restore Radha to consciousness. This is the best counsel that could bo 
given by us in the circumstances. Therefore, O Ud dhava, bring her 
back to her senses.” Ud-dhava said, ' O auspicious nymph, recover. 
O mother, of the world. I am Ud-dhava, devoted to Krisna and the. 
slave of his slave I wish to go to Mathura. Be propitiated, end permit 
me to go. A dependent man is always subject to his lord like an 
image of wood; he ein never be free. As a bullock is always subject 
to his driver, so is the whole world subject to the Lord of the universo ' 


CHAPTER XCV. 

1-11. Narayana said, * Rádhà having heard the words of Uddhava 
revived, got up and occupied a throne of gem. Whereupon the seven 
cow-herdesses respectfully fanned her with white chowries and ministered 
to her. With a heavy heart she gently said thus: ** O son, now go to 
Mathura. People, like you immersed in the sea of the world commit 
no sins, even if they do not remember me.: O Ud dhava, please com- 
munieate all these words of mine to Krisna and soon bring that Lord 
who is the emblem of supremo happiness to me. Born as a woman 
secured such a husband and now have been separated from him. Who 
is more sorrowful in the. world than myself? O Ud-dhava, what con- 
solution can you offer to me ? hers is nothing likely to give me cou- 
solation. ‘The whole body of a person is useless to him or her without 
the soul. O Ud dhava no other idea prevails in my mind fhe thought 
of that ever fresh joy, the wool luck which attended me, the dignity 
whieh I attained, the love hardly to bo secured, and the sexual inter- 
course just commenced and committed in private are alono ever awake in 
my mind, In the night the current of my sorrow flows with a donble 
force with the result that I am wide awake and cogitate in my 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


i 
1 
| 


‘the sun and the ocean became motionl 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
ERISNA JAN MA KHANDA. 457 


mind all that I stated above. Child, I have been immersed in me 
sea of sorrow. Please extricate me from the same. To guaran e 
safety to people in danger brings & reward equivalent to that secure 
py ablution in holy streams. My miad which cannot be gaverned Be 
disconsolate. It is exclusively absorbed in the cootamplation of ths 
lotus-feet of Hari. The recollection of his virtue, greatness; affection 


and prosperity makes it all tho more restless, which cannot be composed 


by any means, ] : 
“ 19 87. Among young women, whois so unlucky as Tin the world ? 
Who bas felt so much as I the pangs of separation from her husband ? 
Gita, to a certain extent, felt these ; but she and myself are identieal. 


-Therefore in these three worlds there is no woman as sorrowful as I. 


And who will believe me if I tell people of my agonies? O son 
Ud.dhava, who is so unfortunate among young women as I? No woman 
has been born in the world or will be born in future who is so mach 
sorrowful, so much afflicted with the pangs of separation and so unfor- 
tunate as Radha. Lam agreat sinner. For after having attained the 
Lord of the world as my husband who grants wishes like the Kalpa trae, I 
was deprived of his seciaty by the craft of the author of the dispsnsation of 
fate. Q child, what on earth can make mo forget that being, the sight of 
whose lotus-feet, face, form and dress r^freshes one's mind aud blesses one’s 
lifs and birth, the reevllecsion of whose name sustains even the five 
vital airs and rejuvenates tho soul, and the passionate touch of whose 
body animates the whole world? What prosperity, O child, ean make 
me forget my husband whois the Supreme Being, tho consors of tha 
goldess of fortune, who constitutes the germ of creation, wào is the 
Lord of ull and possesses a tranquil mien, who is superior to the Kalpa- 
tree, who is the source of all happiness, who is the ruler of Bribma, 
who has created Brann’ lhas not been created by him, and 
wields a form and virtue caleulated to subdue the three worlds ? O son, 
what fortune ean make me for the Lord whose lotus-fset are cons- 
tantly adored by Brahma, Siva C 3 i 
world in virtue and to. whom tho 


d 2, who is mate 

aid others also are unfit to render homage? O 
can make me forget my affectionate husband out of deference to whom 
;» who is adored day and night 
by people obsorvant of his lovely, incomparable grace even in dream and 
indifferent to all world’s pleasures : nay, by whose virtues, the mountain 
turns into water, the dry wood malts, the decaying tree blooms, the 
wind is hushed or lulled into silence ? O son, what material prosperity 
can make me forget the Eternal Lord who is independent and separate 
Sm peeing through whose fear the wind blows every where, the 
| sheds his rays, Indra rains, the fire consumes everything, death 
passes through animals ; through whose fear trees are loaded in’ time 
with fruits and flowers, the ocean, planets, the ascetics and the gods 
pm the functions respeetively alloted to them ? O most experienced 
ae nothing can afford me consolation fer the grief caused by bis 
paration, Tn a grief of nature, neither the  Ved«a nor tha 
d of tho Vedas nor the virtuous men nor the gods, nor sven 
vitri nor Saraswati ean console me. Ananta with his bundred faces, 


58 


et 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


456 THE BRAUMA FAIFARTA PURANA. 


adepts and even by the world. Sri-Krisna is the God, Supreme Boing 
separato from Nature, void of attributes, without desire, self-determinine 
and excellent ”. $ 

105-115. Tulasi said, * My dear companions, Visnu is the symbol of 
our life; Visnu, absorbed in worldly affairs, is the symbol of our 
mind ; Brahma represents our consciousness ; and Nature is the symbol 
of our intellect. Sambhu is the emblem of our knowledge : and Dharma 
represents tho different members of our body. Krisna, void of attributes, 
the supreme Being, superior to Nature, is the emblem of Biahmá. He 
testifies to tho deeds of people : he is the author or dispenser of suffering 
or enjoyment. The sentient soul is but his reflection. Similarly, tho 
sun and the moon exist in his eyes : Saraswati in his tongue : the Barth 
in his skin, and the kings, in his arms. They are all, as it were, tho 
servants of the supreme Being. As the gods attend Siva in his council, 
so every person sheltered by the supreme Being always attends him 
in all his movements. Excellent mendicants contemplate him with 
great reverence. Hois the witness of all actions; therefore no action 
can be eoneealed from him. That Krişna who knows the heart of all 
announces or proclaims the actions performed by people ". — * Kahika 
said, * Old men, boys and youths, the gods and the adepts, all know 
the supreme Being Krisna. Osage Ud-dhava, it now behoves you to 
restore Radha to consciousness. This is the best counsel that could bo 
given by us in the eireumstanees. Therefore, O Ud dhava, bring her 
back to her senses." Ud-dhava said, '* O auspicious nymph, recover. 
O mother, of the world. I am Ud-dhava, devoted to Krisna and the. 
slave of his slave I wish to go to Mathura. Be propitiated, end permit 
me to go. A dependent mau is always subject to his lord like an 
image of wood; he ein never be free. As a bullock is always subject 
to his driver, so is the whole world subject to the Lord of the universo ' 


CHAPTER XCV. 

1-11. Narfyana said, * Radhd having heard the words of. Uddhava 
revived, got up and occupied a throne of gem. Whereupon the seven 
cow-herdesses respectfully fanned her with white chowries and ministered 
to her. With a heavy heart she gently said thus: ** O son, now go to 
Mathura. People, like you immersed in the sea of the world commit 
no sins, even if they do not remember me.: O Ud dhava, please com- 
mupieate all these words of mine to Krisna and soon bring that Lord 
who is the emblem of supremo happiness to me. Born as a woman 
secured such a husband and now have been separated from him. Who 
is more sorrowful in the. world than myself? O Ud-dhaya, what con- 
sulution can you offer to me? hers is nothing likely to give me cou- 
solation. The whole body of a person is useless to him or her without 
the soul. O Ud dhava no other idea prevails in my mind — ?he thought 
of that ever fresh joy, the gool luck which attended me, the dignity 
which Í attained, the love hardly to bo secured, and the sexual inter- 
course just commenced aod committed in private are alono ever awako in 
my mind. Inthe night the current of my sorrow flows with a donblo 
forge with the result that I am wide awake and cogitate in my 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ee 


407 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
RRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 


stated above. Child, I have been immersed in the 
cen of sorrow. Please extricate me from the same. Jo guarantes 
safety to people in danger brings & reward equivalent to that secured 
by ablation in holy streams. My mind which cannot be gaverned is 
It is exclusively absorbed in the coutamplation of ths 
The recollection of his virtue, greatness, affection 
tall tho more restless, which cannot be composed 


mind all that I 


disconsolate. 
lotus-feet of Hari. | 
aud prosperity makes 1 


by any means. 3 Y im 
12 37. Among young women, who is so unlucky as Tin the world ? 


Who bas felt so much as L the pangs of separation from her husband ? 
Gita, to a certain extent, felt these ; but she and myself are identical. 


-Therefore in these three worlds there is no woman as sorrowful as I. 


‘And who will believe me if I tell people of my agonies ? O son 
Ud.dhava, who is so unfortunate among young women as I? No woman 
has been born in the world or will be born in future who is 80 much 
sorrowful, so much afllieted with the pangs of separation and so unfor- 
tunate as Ràdhà. Iam agreat sinner. For after having attained the 
Lord of the world as my husband who grants wishes like the Kalpa-trae, I 
was doprived of his sociaty by the craft of the author of the dispsusation of 
fate. Q child, what on earth can make me forget that being, the sight of 
whose lotus-feet, face, form and dress r»freshos one’s mind aud blesses one’s 
lifs and birth, the recolleesion of whose name sustains even the five 
vital airs and rejuvenates tho soul, and the passionate touch of whose 
body animates the whole world? What prosperity, O child, can make 


me forget my husband whois the Supreme Being, the consors o: the 
goddess of fortune, who constitutes the germ of creation, wao is the 
Lord of all und possesses a tranquil mien, who is superior to the Kalpa- 
tree, who is the source of all happiness, who is the ruler of Brábmá, 
who has created Brahmi and has nos been eteated by him, and wao 
wields a form and virtue ealeulatel to subdue the three worlls ? © son, 
what fortune ean make me forget tke Lord whose lotus-f 
tantly adored by brahma, Siva and Ananta, who is m 2 
world in virtue and to.whom the Moon-god, the love-god, A:'wiai-Kumárg 
aud others also are unfit to render homage? O ‘son, what affluence, 
can make me forget my affection husband out of deference to whom 
the sun and the ocsan me motionless, who is adored day zad night 
by people observant of his lovely, incomparable grace even in dream and 
indifferent to all world’s pleasures : nay, by whose virtues, the mountain 
turas into water, the cry wood malts, the decaying tree blooms, the 
wind is hushed or lulled into silence? O son, what material prosperity 
nie make me forget the Eternal Lord who is independent and separate 
S d through whose fear the wind blows every where, the 
sheds his rays, Indra rains, the fire consumes everything, death 
Passes through animals ; through whose fear trees are loaded in time 
MENU Phe. c Planie the cirie: and the gods 
i RE NUNT RON QD alloted to them ? O most experisuced 
Gute à can ln ord me consola for the grief caused by his 
auxiliaries of dis Ved: E operis Ri » neither ouod ve “a. TG Ma 
SUE SEC vedas nor the virtuous men nor the gods, nor oven 
or Saraswati ean console me. Ananta with his bundred faces, 
58 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


458 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


Brahma, the author of the Vedas, Siva, the leader of the spiritual guides 
of the excellent ascetics and even Ganes'/a cannot console me, The 
movement ofan objeet is conceivable ; but object is ineoneeivable with. 
out space. Pleasure and pain, good and evil are all subservient to time ; 
but that time is most irresistible. The world is also controlled by time, 
O child, now go with pleasure to that _ delightful land of Mathura, 
I see that you are also about to leave Vraja and start. Separation from 
Krisna for a long time brings about both happiness and pain. Therefore 
derive pleasure from the sight of the lunar face of Krigna calculated to 
do away with birth, death and decripitude.” So saying, Ràdhá became 
agitated at heart, seeing that his friend was about to part -and began 
to weep. Impressed by this sight as well as by her gentle words, 
Ud-dhava also shed tears, 


CHAPTER XCVI: 


1-11, Nárüyana said, “O Narada, Ud-dhava bowed before the 
jotus-feet of Radha, recollected Lord Krisna and was about to leave 
for Mathura. Whereupon the cowherdess, Madhavi, moved with affec- 
tion began to weep and thus addressed the devout Ud-dhava who was 
weeping loudly because of his separation from Rádhà : ** O Ud-dhava, 
wait a bit. Listen to my doctrines on the mysterious and sublime 
philosophy. WhatIam going to communicate to you can hardly be 
secured by people ; it is mysterious even in the Vedas and the Puranas, 
© most blessed being, refer the matter, if you please, to Radha, the 
mother of the three worlds.” Madhavi, so saying, stood up before the 
assembly. Then Ud-dhava said to Hádhà who possessed a tranquil 
mien, ‘ People repeatedly eome to the world alone and also go away 
alone. Therefore it has been held that persons reap the fruits of their 
own actions. Asa result of their Karma people appear or disappear ; 
they attain pleasure or pain or are subjected to fear and sorrow. People 
having reaped to a certain extent the consequonees of their acts in this 
world, again come and go to reap the remaining Consequences of their 
former aets. O chaste nymph, of what use to me are those gems ete, 
which you have given me? They will never go along with me to the 
next world. O goddess, you are the best of women and, as ib were, 
the only boat to enable a person to eross the sea of the world. Therein 
Krisna himself is the pilot. In order to cross that soa of life, impart 
to me that kind of knowledge which alone is the radical means of attain- 
ing Lord Krigna. After having gained that knowledge through your 
grace, I shall go to Mathura, 

_ . 12-22. O mother, describe to me the science relating to the revolution 
of time affecting gods, men, manes and people residing above Brahmá's 
land, go that by means of this knowledge I may be able to get over that 
hideous unsurpassed revolution of time and attain the lotus-feot of Hari. O 
goddess who residest in lotuses, please give me counsel with regard to such 
a method, Brahma, Siva, Ananta etc., adore Hari, day and night : and you 
again dwell inhis heart." RAdhá (who dwells in the midst of lotusos) smiled 
at his words, wiped her tears with the hem of her cloth and thus said, 
^ O Ud-dhaya, you are putting mo this question at the instance O 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


‘in these days 3n the Cow-world, V 


Digitized b : 
KRISNA JANIE? RYEVDAT- 459 
NE 


îi; but, child, Tam but a feeble woman of a fickle disposition. 
? Oehild, Lord Hari is thoroughly 
to the movements of time. Virtuous 


conversa ] 1 
gen know ib toa certain extent according to the Vedas. But I am 
n heard in the Cow-world: 


describe the revolution of time just as I 
ho Rasa from the mouth of Krisna and as I witness 
aikuntha and the land of Brahma. 
to tell you the method by which men may get over the 
heel of time which is more than a match for men, gods 
and manes, for residents of the land of Brahma, for the whole creation 

à down to Patal (the nether region) 


from the universe of the Brabm 
and even for people living outside the jurisdiction of Brahma’. © 
Ud-dhava, only those people who adore Krisna, the Supreme Being, the 


Lord of the universe, who is the time (deatb) of time, the spiritual 
guide of the world, who is free from all desire are rescued from the dreadful 
effect of the revolution of time ; for their transient bodies which are 
otherwise apb to perish immediately are sustained by the holy spirit of Lord 
Krigna. 

23.39. The Sun. affects the longevity of all persons except the 
pure and holy believers of Lord Krisna. O son, remember the intellec- 
tual sons of Brahma, viz, Sanaka, Sananda etc, who havea fixed age 
(i. e. who never grew old and always maintain the same age). Also remem- 
ber Rudra and other gods. They are the head of the spiritual guides 
of sages, have fixed or unalterable ages and always look like boys: 
only five years old, not yet invested with the sacred thread. But their: 
mind is very sublime ; they are cheerful and have smiling faces. ‘They: are: 
constantly consecrated by the meditation of Krişna. 'Phey are: 
the followers of Vigsnu:and their bodies are consecrated by ablutions 
in holy streams, They never think of the Vedas or their auxiliary 
branches; only with a cheerful and devout heart they are enga- 


going to 
in the sphere of t 


Jam going 
jrrisistible w 


‘ged in Hari's meditation. They do not worship anything externally.. 


They are over absorbed in mental worship. Those most fortunate people: 
cong! doath and subdue the beasts of prey which are, as it were, the 
nuns embodiment of time or death. Now those who always remember 
im E Sananda, Sanátana, Sanat Kumára and the intellectual sons of 
eae reap tha fruits of ablutions in holy rivers. are redeemed from 
E EE and attain reverence for Hari and his bondage. O son 
NG d juas discuss in your mind the case of the son of Mrikandu. 
is hanes Ts DM whieh he aequired could not exceed ten years : yet 
et D » etiu gont with the lustre of Brahma. Afterwards in the service 
AS x , he was privileged to live till the end of a Kalpa (age). Discuss 
They ae wind the eases of Bodhu, Pancha- ikhâ, Lomas'a and Asuri. 
ae ate s a other acts and entirely gave themselves up to. the: 
NS A MCN E of whose lotus feet they could live ap 


34- 5 : i 

D Ee E diseuss in your mind the cases of Paras'ü-ráma (the 

Kripáehhr a agni), Hanümána, Bali, Vyása, As'wathümà, Bibhisana, 

conten lad , J) mbuvana and other longevous people. Only by the 
plation of Hari, they were able to enjoy a long life, in fact, the longest 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


— 


life among adepts and ascetics. And look, Prahlada, the son of the 
vile Hiranyakasipu who was the enemy of Hari was regarded 
eminently magnanimous among the demons in view of his devotion to 
Hari. In this way, there are other great people who were born in India 
&nd by a long course of devotion attaiued longevity and subdued tho insur. 
mountable time. "They who do notserve the Supreme Being, Hari, are 
fools addicted to vies. ‘Those fools who desist from the service of Harj and 
apply themselves to worldly affairs voluntarily quit nectar and 
poison. In this transient world, who is the wife of à person ? 
hisson? Who is his friend? Who befrisnds him 
merciful Krişna is all-in-all, Therefore virtuous 
night, adore that excellent Lord Krisna who rem 
and decrepitude. ‘Therefore, O son, that perfect, 
Lord Krişna, the son of the graceful Nanda, is the sole means of 
crossing the insurmountable time. Now I am going to describe to you 
the revolution of time (in tho light of my intellect) which affe 
manes, gods, snakes and demons. Attentively 
Mahá-Virüta (haga being), the receptacle of all, who sustains countless 
worlds on the pores of his skin is denser than the dons objec 
subtle than an a and ell other subtle objec 
primordial and thoughtless (i. e. dull or inert), & 
such atoms make a iw 
Renu, Three T 
48-75. A bur 
i three lavas ta 
make a KAgtha; 
and the measure 
necessary for 
grains) with th 
golden Mázas messuri 
makesa Danda. Tivosuch Dandas make : 
day contains six Dandas. Eight Dandas make a Prahara whose measure has 
already been desecibed. Four Pr ws make a night, and four 
make a day. Fifteen 'lithis make a Pakga. 
biight and half. ‘Pwo Paksas make a month; 
and six seasons make a your. 
autumn, cold, winter and spring, Savants conversant with time 
have determined five kinds of years, viz., Sambatsara, Pari-year, Jda-year, 
Anu-year and Udá-year. O Uddhava, 12 months make an Abda. 1 
am going to tell you duly the names of the months: Listen. Vaisülha, 
. Jaigtha, AgAdha, S'rüvana, Bhádra, Ás'wina, Kártika, Pausa, Magha, 
Phalguna, Chaitra : which last marks the end of the year. Ont of these, 
Chaitra and Vaigsikh constitute the spring; Jaistha and Ásádha, the 
: Summer; S‘rdyana and Bhádra, tho rainy; As wina and Kartika the 
autumn ; Agrabàyana and Pausa, the cold; Mágh and Phalenna, the 
winter ; all these seasons appear by turns, The passage of the sun towards 
the North or South of the equator constitutes an Ayan, and two Ayans 
make an Abda (a year.) The period of 6 .nonths froin Mágha to Ásádha 
eoustitutes the North Ayan; and the pericd of 6 months from Srüvana to 
Pausa constitutes the South Ayan, In the pesod lasting from Magha to 


aS pre. 


drink 
Who is 
in peril? he 
ion always, day and 
oves birth, death, disease 
sapreme, absolute Boing 


ic 


ts men, 
listen to me. O child, that 


nd more 
Those atoms are 
vants hold that two 
anuka. hree such Dwyanukas mako a Tras 


make a Vedha; threo Vedhas make a lava; 

three nimesas make a ; five Ksanas 

thas make a lambu; 15 ] D 
l am going bo tell you 


make a Dand 

od isten. "Phe time? 
a cup of water m 
trickling: oat of y 


rr 


wing six palas (a pala-585 
y minute holes caused in fonr 


o 


four fingers (a Masa-weisht of 15 


grains) 
à Muhürta.| A Tithi or a lunar 


Prabars 
Pakgas aro of two kinds, 
two months make a season; 


Seasons are of ý kinds viz , summer, rainy, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


"Ame" 


jc RIS Ries spanontri Ansa Trust —. 463 


Asidha, the day increases by degrees; and in the period lasting from 
G'ràvana to Pausa, the night increases by degrees. Ihe bricht Paksa 
lusts from the first day of the Moon till Purgimà (the night of the full Moon) 
and after Purnimd the period from the Ist dıy of the lunar month till 
Amâvasyå (totally dark nich) is the dark Paks as determined by those 
who know the Vedas. After the end of Purnimá, you should calculate 
Junar days in the way as follows after Pratipada, viz., the 2nd, the 3rd, the 
fourth, the sixth, the seventh, the eighth, the ninth, the 10th, the ilth, 
the 12th, the 13th day, the 14th and the Amávasyá. O Ud-dhava, the 
bright half of the night should also be calculated inthe same way. As'winl, 
Bharani, Krittika, Rohini, Mriga Sra, Adra, Punarvasu, Pusya, As'lesa, 
Magha, Uttar-Phalguni, Purva-Phalguni, Hasta, Chitra, Swati, Vis'àkhà 
Apüràdhà, Jegtha, Mala, Purvasidha,.Uttarasidha, Sravaná, Abhijit, 
Dhanisthà,  Satabhisa, Parva-bhadra-pada, Uttar-bhadra-pada, and 
Revati : these 28 stars are the wives of the moon-god, Chandra, by turns, 
dwell, with each of them. It is stated in the S'rutis, that 27 stars are the 
wives of the meon god ; but Abhijit is the mere shadow of Sravanà and 
ineluding that, there are 98 stars. Once upon a time, in the season of 
spring , the lunar god was immersed day and night in sexual intercourse 
with Sravand, This incensed Chitrá very much ; so that Sravaná from fear 
transferred her own shadow to the moon and went to her father’s place. 
Later on, she fetched her father and effected 4 partition of love between 
herself, her shadow and her eo-wives. ‘This is how, Abhijit-Star -came 
into existence. This story I heard from Krisna on the mountain of a. 
hundred summits. Child, I already deseribed to you the lunar months 
and the stars. Now hear about the Yoga (union with the supreme Being 
through mental abstraction) and K ranas (or the organs of sen-eor action j 
76 86. The Yogas which I described to you are as follows: — 
Viskumbha, Priti,, Ayusman, Saubhágya, Sobhana, Ati-ganda, 
Sukarmà, Dhriti, Stila, Ganda, Vriddhi, „Dhruva, Vyagháti, Ia gan 
Vajra, Asrik, Vyatipata, Vaviv ân, Parizha, Siva. Sådbya, Siddna, S'ubha, 
Sukra, Brühma, Indra, Vaidariti, The Karans are as follows: Vaya, 
Jàlava, Kaulava, Taitila, Gara, Vapija, Visti, akuni, Chatuspat and 
Kintughna, O Ud-dhava, one month of mankind constitutes one day 
and night of the manes. The night consists of the bright half. Similarly. 
one year of mankind consists of one day and night of the gods. Out of 
these, the North Ayan constitutes the day; and the South Ayan the 
night. A celestial 71 Yugas constitute a Manwantara (i.e, the life 
allotted to Manu). Indra’s longevity is co-extensive with that of Manu. 
According to human calculation, one Manwantara is equal to 25 506 
Yugas. ‘This period brings about the fall of one Indra and obstruets the 
movements of the sun in Indra’s laud. ‘The period occupied by fourteen 
Indras eonstitutes one day of Brahma. According to this standard of 
exleulation, indeed, the day and night of Brahma have been regulated by 
S'avants, The period covered by the lives of 14 Indras constitutes the 
day of Brahma , and a similar period constitutes his night. The fall of 
Indras determines the movement of the sun in the Brahma-loke and 
enables the residents of that land to realise day and night. 
87-106. Thirty days, according to this calculation, make the month of 
Brahma ; 12 months, his year ; and a hundred years, the span of his life. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
402 THE BRAITMA PAIVARTA PURANA, 


The period covered by the fall of Brahma is equal to a Nimesa (wink of 
the eye) of Lord Hari. The fall of Brahma regulates the day and night 
in the Vaikuntha obstrueting the movement of tho sun in the Vaikuntha 
as well as the cow-world. ‘lhe fall of Brahma gives to the residents of 
these two worlds an idea of day and night. At that time the motion of 
the sun and the moon is suspended and at the desire of Hari the Zodig 
also ceases to move. During the day, the light of the Supreme Being 
Lord Krisna is immanent ; during the night the Lord enters into hig 
seraglio and thus conceals his light. This is how night is caused in the 
supreme land. O Ud-dhava, the progress of time is similar in the land 
of Visnu. That formless Lord, the Supreme Being, is the emblem of 
time. The sun and the moon do not move in the seven Patals (nether 
regions) where signs only enable the inhabitants to make out day and 
night. When the gem shines on the head of the snakes, they feel that 
it is day ; and when the gem loses its lustre and darkness sets in, they feel 
that if is night. The inhabitants of the Patal regulate time 
according to the measure of Tantra (religious code teaching of magical or 
mystic formula) The measure of time in the Patal is the same as that on 
earth. There are four Yugas; viz., Satya, Tretia, Dwapara and Kali, 
A celestial 12,000 years constitute all the four Yugas. Out of theso, 
savants conversant with time have allotted 4,800 . celestial years to the 
Satya Yuga. According to human calculation, 17 lakhs and 28 years 
belong to that age. According to the Divine standard of ealeulation, 3,600 
years are assigned by savants (who calculate time) to the Tretd-age. 
And the very savants have determined 12 lakhs and 96,000 years 
as the period covered by that age according to the human standard 
of calculation, Similarly, the above savants hava deb'rmined 2400 
years according to the Divine standard of calculation which is equivalent 
to 8 lakhs and 64,000 years according to the human standard of calcula- 
tion as the period covered by the Dwapara age. Similarly they have 
determined 1200 years according to the Divine standard which is eqnal to 
432000 years according to the human standard as the period covered by the 
Kali-Yuga. According to the last standard of ealeülation the 4 Yugas 
convist of 20084 lakhs of years, as determined by sages. O child, at 
your command, I have described to you the ealeulations of time as [ heard. 
Now go to Hari." 


CHAPTER XCVII. 

1-11. Náráyana said, “O Narada, later on Rádhá, the wife of Hari, 
seeing that Uddhava was about to go, j i 
heavy heart. Tho chaste Rádhà overwhelmed with grief along with 
green bent grass, 


barley or sunned. rice and white paddy and provided his rear with fruits, 


fried rice, curd ete. Radha, the great goddess of fortune, having shown 
him the following, viz., a looking glass, foliage, fruits, perfume, vermilion, 
musk, jar (full of water annointed with sandal) flower-wreath, a lamp, a 
gem, an excellent Brahmin, a chaste woman blessed with husband and sons, 
silver, gold ote., addressed him thus, using beneficial and auspicious words: atb 
which time she suppressed the tears that were falling on her afflicted bosom: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


4 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRSINS JANMA KHANDA. 463 


luck attend your path and may you be blessed: may you 
A pauore Pi of Hari E Aes knowledge through him. an ae 
boons belief in Krisna and bis bondage are. the best ; aD ME. e "d j 
kinds of redemptions, the sublime reverence for Hari is the E E 3 
The position of Brahm, a god or an immortal, the attainment of necta 


i fecti é a i secured than the 
` hievment of perfection can more easily be secu 2 
ARE i n India learns. 


P ice-born, if any one born) 
boudage of Hari. © best of the twice-bora, ! y 0! I l : 
to revererce Hari by a long course of devotion, he is not liable to be borm 
again or to suffer the pain of conception in the womb of his mother.. 
Blessed, indeed, is his life. The Karma which binds him as well as bis 


parents comes to an end, 

12-25. A hundred ancestors in his own line, his maternal grandfathers 
hundreds of his brothers, friends, wives of his friends, hundreds of the 
wives of his spritual guide, pupils, and servants are relieved from Karma, 
O child, an aot dedicated to Krisna as well as an act done for his satis - 
faction is excellent ,and pure. An act done accordiug to the rules 
prescribed by the SAstras is most blessed, useful and delight{ol in the end. 
The performance of the rites sacred to Lord Krisna, his meditation, wor- 
ship and veneration, and fastings with a view to propitiate him contribute 
to his bondage. Cireumambulation round the whole world, ablution in holy 
streams, all kinds of vows, meditation, sacrifices, acts of charity, the study 
or the instruction of all the Vedas and their auxiliary branches, the preser- 
vation of people in danger, the gift of knowledge which can hardly be 
secured, hospitality to guests, protection of a fugitive, the worship and 
adoration of the gods, the recitation of the mantra, the feasting of the Br&h- 
mins after Purusicharan (the preparatory or initiatory rites), the service of 
tho spritual guide, the reverence and hospitality due to the parents, 
obsequies and other sacred deeds are not equal to a sixteenth part of the 
bondage of Hari in point of religious efficacy. Therefore, © Uddhava, 
carefully adore the supreme and excellent Lord S’rt Krisna who is void of 
desire and qualities. He is the eternal, truthful, supreme, excellent, perfect, 
and pure Brahma; he is always inclined to show mercy to his worshippers ; 
ho bears testimony to all acts ; he is dissociated from everything ; he is the 
emblem of the great light ; he is the cause of cause, the image and lord of 
everything, the source of all prosperity. He gives to his believers his Jotus 
feet, the source of all prosperity calculated to engender faith in their mind 
and reveal his image before their eyes. Therefore you should banish 
from your mind that Hari is your relation: an idea that is likely to cause 
jealousy and adore the son of Nanda who is all happiness. 


26.42. "The Kauthuma branch of the SAma Veda recites his thousand 
names : but of all his name-, this name viz., “ the son of Nanda” dispels 
all impediments and calamities. Ud-dhava was very much astonished 
to hear all this and having attained perfeot knowledge he himself became 
porfect. Uddhava tied the hem of his cloth round his neck, threw himself. 
prostrate before the goddess and fastened her lotus feet with clusters of 
his hair. There was a thrill of raptures in his body: through religious 
fervour agitating his mind, tears began to flow from his eyes: and out of 
love and through ‘grief of separation he wept loudly. Radha and the 
milk-maids also held his neck and moistened him with tears. R&dhà 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


464 THE BRAHMA FAIVARTA PURANA. 


seeing that Uddhava had fainted, raised him quickly, poured water on his 
lotus-face, restored him to his senses and blessed him in an auspieious 
manner. . Ud-dhava having recovered said thus to the sotrowing Radha 
that goddess who could easily give one the supreme object of one’s lify 
5 This Island of Jambu is the best of all Islands. It contains the holy 
land of India. In India again, Vriudà-vana is a very lovely place and eyar 
consecrated by the dust of the lotus feet of Radha, - In the three worlds, 
the earth of all planets is the most blessed, honoured and adored, as she has 
been conservated by acts of pilgrimage and mado sacred by the dust of 
the lotus-feet of Radha. In days of yore, Brahma with a view to soe 
Radha and Krisna reverentially meditated thom for 60,000 years at the 
coast of the Puskara. But far from seeing them in the Cow-world, ho 
eould not observe them even in his dream. ‘Phen he heard an iucorporeal 
eteral voice from the sky to this effect : “O jord, in the age of Varüha 
(boar), you will no doubt see the conjugal pair in the sphere of the Rasa 
encircled by the gods atthe time of the grand festival of the Réasa, 
Therefore compose yourself.” Hearing this, Brahma desisted from his 
meditation and went home. Aftorwards in course of tima Brahm. was 
gratified by the sight of Krisna. Indeed, there was no limit to his happi- 
ness, when he saw him. Ah! Blessed are the lives of the cow-herds aud 
cow-herdesses whe ever behold his lotus-fee& which could hardly be secured 
by Brahma and others, 


43-53. The excellent Yogis, Munis, adepts, virtuous men and the 
Vaisnavas always adore the chaste, virtuous and honourable Radha 
consecrated by acts of pilzrimaze. Great sinners who slander, envy 
and ridicule Radha (dearer to Krisna than his life) whose lotus-feet can 
hardly be secured even by Brahma’ and others, the nails of whose lotus-feot 
“are coloured with lac-dye by Lord Krişna himself, the supremo Boing aud 
Lord of all (adoring her and reciting her invaluable odes), to whose lobus- 
feet Kriga. hid offered handfuls of Pàrijàt flowers, incanse and perfumod 
bant gras and sunne? rico or b wley at the mountain of a hundred summits 
in the sphere of the Risa in tho Cow-world, who is the head of three 
hundred millions of cow-herdesses, who is the mistress of 30 waitine-m ids, 
practically commit sins occasioned by tha slaughter of a hundred 
Brahmins. They also suffer the torments of hells ealled the Kumbhipüka 
and the Haurava and are consigned to boiling oil. There they dwell in 
dark pits fall of worms with seven of their ancestors for a period covered 
by the conseeuttive jurisdictions of fourteen Indras. Then they are born 
as boars, afterwards fora thousand  gelestial years as worms of ordure, 
afterwards as worms of the female organs of prostitutes (where thoy suck 
blood and eat dirt) and ultimately as worms ol night-soil wherein they 
subsist npon rubbish for a like number of “years, Brahma who 


sprang from lotus has alluded to tho above fact in the Kanwa branch of 
the Vedas,” f - : 


54-65, Thereupon Rádhà began to woep and said, * O son Ud- 
dhava, go with pleasure to Madhupuri and relate everything to Krisna 
and devise a scheme whereby we might be able to see him again, Child, 
go there at ones. False hopes upon which we subsisted rendored out 
lives quite useless, [Tope is the mine of great sorrow ; dospair alone is 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


"s 


a ae 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA 465 


ce of happiness. The prostitute Pingala at first almost despaired of 
m 15 Dol aE through the meditation of Krisna, she was redee- 
med in her life-time." Uddhava at her words fell down at her feet, and 
went to the house of Yas'odâ. O Nârada, when Uddhava left, Radha fainted 
and was absorbed in meditation in an unconscious state. The cow-herdesses 
plaeed her on a bed of lotuses sprinkled with water and mingled with soft 
clay. ‘Tears incessantly flowed from her eyes. The mere touch of Radha 
reduced the bed moistened with water, as it were, to ashes. They again 
placed Radha suffering from the fever of separation on a sheet of cloth 
printed with sandal-paste and spread on the moist ground. But suddenly 
the fragrant water of the sandal also evaporated. Without Uddhava, 
moment seemed to her like a hundred Yugas. She suddenly exclaimed, 
* O Uddhava, O Uddhava, depart quickly. Inform Hari, my lord, of my 
avonies and send him:soon to this place.” So saying, she fainted : and the 
eowherdesses held her to their breasts and wept loudly. After a while, they 
restored her to consciousness and cheered her up with suitable words of 
consolation. 


CHAPTER XCVIIT. 


1-10. Náráyana said, * O Narada, later on, Uddhava bowed low to 
Yas'oda, left the forest of the dates on the left side and went to the coast 
of the Yamunà. Thereafter having bathed and taken his food he went 
back to Mathura and saw that Krisna was loitering at the solitary base of 
the holy fig tree. Krisna, when he saw the afflicted, sorrowine Ud-dhava 
with streaming eyes, said, * Come, Ud-dhava, come. Is everything well 
with you? Ismy Ráàdhà alive? Are the cow-herdesses afflicted with 
my separation alive ? Is it well with the cow-herd boys and the calves? 
Ilow is my mother Yas'odá who was afflicted with my separation ? 
Friend, tell me how she is passing her days. What did she say 
when she saw you. What was your reply? What did she reply, 
then? O friend, did you see the coast of the Yamun$, the sacred 
Vrindá-vana, the solitary groves, the more lovely sphere ofthe Rása, the 
enchanting green-houses, the pleasant lakes dedicated to pleasure, the 
becoming gardens of flowers full of bees, the verdant banian tree, the 
children playing in the forest of figs, the enclosure or pasture or drove 
of cows, Gokul and the vow performed at Gokul? If Radha is alive, 
what did she say as she saw you? O friend, I am very curious to 
know all this. 


11-22. What did the cowherdesses and the cowherd boys tell you ? 
What did the old cowherds, the friends of Nanda, Rohini, the mother of 
Baladeva tell you ? My dear friend, what did my other friends, tha cow- 
herds say? What did you eat there? What extraordinary articles 
did my mother and Rádhá present to you? How did they greet you 
with sweet words? How did the cowherds, cowherdesses, the children, 
my mother and Radha show their love to me? Do my mother, Yas'odà 
Rohini, Radh& (moved with love) the cowherds, the cowherdesses, the 
cowherd boys recollect me ? Do the cowherd boys still play at the root 
of the banian tree in the forest of fig trees? Have you seen the desired 
Place where I with young handsome women and boys took the food, sweet 


59 - 


- CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


466 . THE BRSHMA VAIFARTA PURANA 


— nt ne rma 


like nectar, offered by the Bráhmin women ? Did you see Govardhana, the 
sacrificial place of Indra and the place where Brahma had stolen the cow 7” 
Uddhava at these words addressed the Lord. sorrowfully using the followine 
gentle words: * O Lord, I have seen all the places to which you refer, 
The sight has blessed my life and birth. 1 have seen the holy land of 
Vrindavana constituting the essence of India. I have seen the sphere of 
the Rasa in the enclosure of the cowherds, constituting the essence of 
Vrindávana. I have seen the cowherd girls, residents of Gokul constituting 
the essence of the said sphere of the Risa, Nay I have seen Radha, the 
mistress of the Risa constituting the essence of the said girls. They 
appeared before me. 


23-37.. The emaciated goddess Radha putting off, the ornaments of 
gems was lying down in a condition in the solitary forest of the Champak 
on a bed composed of soft clay moistened with water and annointed with 
saudal, The waiting maids, very much agitated with sorrow, were fanning 
her with white chowries and ministering to her in several ways. Her belly 
had shrunk without food. Some times she was breathing hard: at other 
times, not, Fora while she recovered from a fainting fit, and at other 
times she was much afflicted with the pangs of separation. O Hari, she 
had no idea of water or land, day or night and could make no particular 
distinction between a man and a beast. She could not distinguish 
between herself and others. Dead to all sense of the external world, she 
was wholly absorbed in the contemplation of your lotus fect. Ifshe dies, 
then your infamy will be broadly proclaimed in the world. Nay, O Lord, 
it is nob proper even for senseless robbers to kill women. O Lord of the 
universe, soon go to the interesting plantain-wood. Indeed, the whole 
world is under your surveillance. Rádhà who is most submissive and 
devoted to you is not outside the world. Therefore you should leave her on 
no account. The supremacy which you have acquired over others in tho 
world is a means of their preservation. There is no one in the world in the 
present or the furture, more devoted to you than Radha. Cupid is afraid 
of Siva, He worships you but torments Rádhà who secured you as 
her husband, Hence I gather that Karma is the most powerful of 
all agencies. No one can resist him. Look both the spring and the 
pon god (the latter by tke lattice of his rays) are always consuming 

cee 8 body ; and even the fragrant cool wind is an everlasting source 
0 Kippréssion to that goddess forsaken by her husband and possessing no 
other refuge. She is as bright in colour as the heated gold : but she is now 
Res aah ab peerence. At first she had the hair of gold ; her hair was 
Ram ar eine lost ger charms. Brahma himself, the cause of 
sting Seat Kone. zd 1s Siva, tbe leader of the spiritual guide of the 
Mine ot dhe NL dra Tanes'a, (tke preceptor of the wise).and various 

int of belief, N your believers. But none can equal Radha in 
point of boliet, Nay, even Lakgmi cannot meditate you like Radha. 


38-44, I said to Rádhà that Hari w ing refor 
O blessed being, hasten there and make EL oii M 
Hari began to laugh and thus addressed Uddhava, using. words of good 
import and words sanctioned by the Vedas, “ O Uddhava, untruth 
spoken to women or on the sporting ground, or in an emergency whioh 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


RN LISP HSE Be 467 


Sd 


— 


a cows.or the Brahmins is not con- 


endangers life or for the good of th 
temptible. Therefore you need not be afraid of hell, even if I fail to make 
world. They never 


good your words. My believers always go to the cow- 
Yet I must make good your words.” The celebrated Ud- 
dahava, having heard the words of Hari, went home. Hari also went to 


Gokul in his dream, consoled Râdhå in her dream and imparted to her 
celestial knowledge w hich can be attained even by.a sage with difficulty. 
‘Afterwards in his dream he cohabited with her and duly enjoyed the society 
of other milk-maids also, Lastly having roused the sleeping Yas'odà, he 


sucked her, consoled the cowherds and children and went back to Mathura. 


_ 


CHAPTER XCIX. 3 
" gaid Narayana, * The lord Gargas 
a great devotee who thoroughly restrained his passions and decorates his 
hite sacred thread, arrived at the hermitage of Vasudeva. 
Tle held a staff and a parasol in his hands. Clusters of knotted hair were 
guspended from his head, Ho was radiant with the lustre of Brahma. 
He put on a white piece of cloth. He 
t of the descendants of Yadu. As Daivaki saw him, 
d bowed low before his feet. Vasudeva also re- 
th a throne of gem and respectfally wor- 


shipped him. with oblations of honey and milk, milch-eows of plenty, 
clothes conseerated by fire, perfame, and wreaths of flowers. Afterwards 


he entertained him with esteem with sweet-meat, rice boiled with milk 
and sugar, sweet cakes and honey and lastly offered him perfumed betel 
harbours the afflicted, bowed 


leaves. Garga, having seen 
to him in his heart and said to Daivaki (devoted to her husband,) and 
d to the 


Vasudeva thus: ‘O Vasudeva, look, the present occasion is suite 
investiture of Krigna and Balarama with sacred thread.. Krigna has 


attained an age suited to the purpose.” Vasudeva said,“ O spiritual 
guide, you are the adorable god. of the descendants of Yadu., Therefore 
determine the auspicious period suited to the ceremony eulogised by virtu- 
ous men." Garga said, “O Vasudeva, you are as wealthy as Kuvera ; so 
carefully send invitation letters to your friends and kinsmen and make 
necessary arrangements for the ceremony. On the approaching thursday 
the moon and the planets are pure. The very day is most suited to the - 
investiture, as recommended by sages That day is very sacred.” 
Vasudeva who resembled Vasu, when he heard the words of Garga, sent 
auspicious invitation letters to his friends in all directions regarding the 
approaching ceremony. Afterwards he collected heaps of gems, diamonds, 
gold, pearls, precious stones, various articles, jewels and clothes and 
constructed artificial.rivers of ghee, milk, eurd and honey, molasses &e. He 
recollected with esteem Lord Krisna, (kind to his adherents) the gods, the 
ascetics, the best' of adepts and the believers. A A 
i 18-30. Tater on, when the auspicious day arrived, the Munis, his 
oom the gols and kings arrived at the house of Vasudeva. ‘There, 
Gane appeared goddesses, princesses, snake-nymphs; Vidy&dharas, 
an arvas and countless concerts or musical bands. Brahmins, beggars, 
ards or panygerists, Yalis, Brahma-Cháris, reclusos; hermits who 


1-14. * At this time, O Narada 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
468 THE BRAHMA PAIVARTA PURA NA 


peces UU" 
disregard ceremonies and Yogis poured in from allsides, The relations 
of the wife of Vasudeva, his own kinsmen, the relations of his materna] 
zrand-father, the kinsmen of his friends with Bhisma, Drona, Karna, 
As'wa-thima, Kripacharyya, the best of Brahmins, the sons and wife “of 
Dhrita-rágtra likewise graced the house of Vasudeva in connection with 
the ceremony, Agitated with both joy and grief (Kunti who had lost 
her husband) with all her sons as well as mighty kings and princes from 
different parts of the world graced the occasion. Atri, Vasistha, Chyavana 
Bharadwâja, the great ascetic Yajfia-Valkya, Bhima, Pulastya, Pippaláda, 
Saubhari, Sanaka, Sananda, Sanátana, Sanat Kumara, the Lord Bodhu 
Pancha-S"kha, Durvása, Angira, Vyasa, S'uka, the son of Vyasa, Kus'ika, 
Kats'ika, Rama, Risya-Sringa, Vibhándaka, S'ringi, Vàmadeva, Gautama 
the harbour of virtues, Kratu, Yati, Aruni, S’ukra-Charyya, Vrihaspati, 
Astabakra, Vamana, Paribhadra, Valmiki, Paila, Vais’ampayana, Pracheta, 
Purajita, Bhrigu Marichi, Madhujita, Prajapati, Kas'yapa, Aditi, the 
mother of the gods, Diti, the mother of the demons, Sumanta, Subhanue 
Kanwa, Kátyayana, Panini, Parijat, Paripatra, the best of saints, Márkan- 
deya, Lomasa, Kapila, Pards’ara, Samvarta, Utathya, Viswa mitra, 
Satananda, Jajali, Taittiri, Sandipan, the product of the digits of 
Brahma who is a contemplative ascetic and the leader of the sages pcured 
to Vasudeva's house. Nara and I likewise went there, 


31-44. By degrees, Upa-manyá, Gaura-mukha, Maitreya, 
Kacha, Karata, (the son of Kacha), 
Munis with their disciples came to 


unis [ the hermitage of Vasudeva. At 
this timo Brahma ridi 


ng on a Swan, Sankara with Parvati on a, chariot 
Mani bhadra, "Kártika 
royal elephant, Dharma, the Moon, the Sun, 
Yama, the consort of Sanjami, 
Vasus, the Rudras with their 
y arrived at Vasudeva/s place. 


d thi olling on the ground, 
ptures in his body and reverential inclination of his 


gods and divinities. He said, 


the author of the Vedas and . S'iva who is the great ritual leader of the 
gods, of the , Munis and of the excellent g a mee 


my house, Siva, the c 


Parvati Whose lotus feet are not observed by an ordinary man: liké 
- Nay, the very re:ollec- 
a dispels all evils-and.. rescuing men. from all 
perils, secures to them piles of happiness, Ganes’a himself whose worship 
has been ordained as the firs i by the respect- 
at foremost of the 
gods and destroyer of calamities and Kartika, adored by all the gods, 
have personally : graced my threshold. The great colless of fortune, 
the sublime deity, adorable in the three worlds, has manilested herself ju 
my templo. ae 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA RHANDA 469 


supremo goddess, the emblem of the 


.58;. Parvati, the excellent 1 
ab T i enting all energy and sustain- 


: rahma, the rimordial Nature repres i 
UM ovd has today arrived at my house. Men, in the season of quan 
secure all desired objects through her worship ; the same goddess as 
personally manifested herself at my house. The merciful goddess 
Durga, kind to her adherents, has graciously been pleased, to arrive in 
India with the goddesses and the spectres (the retinue of Siva.) Today 
Lam blessed, indeed. Today I am supposed to have discharged my duties 
thoroughly in as much as, O Durga, pre-eminently _the chief of all 
goddesses, you have graced my threshold.” Vasudeva iu this way, with 
the hem of his cloth tied round his neck and with folded palms separately 
and by turng adored his guests comprehending the gods, munis and men. 
fle seated all of them on precious thrones of gem and separately and 
duly worshipped them by turns. He respectfully greeted the gods 
including Brahma, the Munis, the Brahmins and the family priest Garga 
with presents of gems, corals, diamonds, pearis, precious stones, jewels, 
cloths, wreaths, perfumed sandal etc. Ona lovely throne of gem in 
the contre of the assembly, he placed Ganes’& and prepared to adore 
him. He worshipped him with flowers and sandals, with the perfumed gand 
caol waters of the seven holy rivers deposited in golden jars, the holy 
water of the Puskara, the water of the celestial Ganges, the five pure 
nectreous substances viz. milk, curd, ghee, honey and sugar, five kinds 
of articles prepared from the cow, and sea-water and with reverential 
utterances of the mantras. O Narada, he greeted Gaues'a with wreaths 
of Parijata, precious ornamerits of gem, conveyances, white clothes, perfumed 
sandal, flowers, strings of gem, rings etc. Afterwards, he eulogised the 
son of Parvati, the eternal lord, the chief of all the gods, auspicious and 
tranquil, who removes all calamities. 


CHAPTER C. 

1-10 Nardyana said, “Later on, Aditi, Diti, Devaki, Rohini, Rati, 
Saraswati, Süvitri, the chaste Yas'oda, Lop&-Mudra, Arundhati, Ahalyá, 
Tard ote. hastily left their houses and ran to see Parvati and on their 
arrival there, there were mutual greetings, bowings, embraces and the 
observances of other rites suited to the occasion. ‘They sat down in the 
temple of gem, seated the goddess (Durgà) on a lovely throne of 
gem and greeted her with wreatli, clothes and ornaments of gem. 
Diivaki with reverence dedicated the very lovely Parijata flower 
brought by Indra to the lotus feet of Parvati. Devaki applied to the 
line dividing her hair cn the head marks of vermilion. She also applied 
sandal marks to her forhead. Between these two marks, she imprinted 
marks resembling the figure of the moon with musk and saffron. She 
entertained her with various kinds of sweet-meat and cool and incensed 
water and for the purification of her nfouth, she offered her graceful betel 
leaves perfumed with camphor. She also applied lac-dye to the nails of 
the members of her feet and thea presenting to her saffron powder, she 
fanned her with white chowries. Daivaki, devoted to her husband and 
blessed with husband and sons. having thus adored Parvati. by turns 
worshippod each of the wivosfof (ho Munis Daivaki dedicated 
to excollont vow also adored the beautiful princesses, goddesses, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
470 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA 


the daughters of the Munis, the serpent-nymphs and the daughters of her 


friends and relations. 


11.21. She cheerfully directed the performance of music, the cele. 
bration of auspicious rites and the entertainment of the Brahmins She 
also worshipped with 16 celestial ingredients, the village goodess Bhairavi, 
Sasthi, Mangal-chandi and other goddesses who preside over ehildren, 
The wife of Vasudeva eaused the performance of the auspieious, holy and 
pure Swastüyana or rites to secure welfare and caused the recital of the 
Vedas through the Brahmins conversant with the Vedas, Daivakt 
affectionate to her sons, bathed Krigna and Balarama with the water of 
the celestial Ganges contained in golden jars. Afterwards sho made the 
toilet of Rama and Krişna with cloth, sandal, wreath, precious gems and 
lovely jewels. O Narada, Balaráma and Krigna being thus furnished with 
various kinds of jewels arrived at the assembly graced by the gods and 
accomplished saints. Observing the arrival of Krisna, the lord of the 
world, Brahma, S^iva, Ananta, Dharma, the sun and other members of the 
assembly got up from their seats at once. ‘The Munis, Kartika, Ganes/a 
and other gods adored the Supreme Being Krigna by turns. At first 
Brahma said ** O Lord, it is difficult to trace you out. To show compas- 
sion to your believers you take an indescribable form. Even the Vedas are 
unable to recite your virtues. Therefore such a person is rare who can 
please you with eulogies.” Lord S'iva said, “ O Supreme Being, you are 
invisible : unlike ordinary persons, you have no inclination or desire. You 
dwell in the bodies of men and animals, without being associated with 
them ; and you are the great god, the universal witness bearing testimony 
(pure and simple) to all acts performed by workers. O Being void of 


attributes, you are without form and qualities, How then can I adore 
you?" 


22-24. Ananta said, * O Lord of all, remover of sorrow, O absolute 


eternal Being, how can I comprehend you who are the cause of numberless | 


worlds ? Endless, wonderful, unreal worlds exist in the pores of the skin 
of Mahá-Visnu who sleeps in the waters. In each of these worlds exist 
the saints who are your digits, viz. Brahma, Visnu, S'iva and other gods, 
holy places and the excellent land of India. I, a lean serpent who rest only 
on one of the countless universes have been stationed by you at that place 
like a gnat on the back of a royal clephant. In the whole creation there 
is nothing more subtle than an atom and nothing denser than Mahá- 
Visnu. But you are denser than Mahá-Visnu and subtler than the atom. 
In the form of water, you are the harbour of the Mahá-Visnu; in the 
form of the immovable Go-loka, you are the container of that water. 
The great wind which represents the breath and respiration of the eternal 
Being who wields an image out of compassion for his believers is the 
container ‘of all. © Lord, you have graciously been pleased to give. mo 
various mouths ; therefore I am inclined to adore you. But you have not 
given me wisdom in the same Proportion.” "Phe gods said, ** O image of 
the eternal, the god Ananta himself, Bralimá.and S'iva (the soul of wisdom) 
are unable to recite your. eulogies. . Nay, even the goddess Saraswati is 
paralysed in her attempt -to adore.: you. How can we please you, then, 
with eulogies ?? The Munis said, “ O Supreme Being unknowable even 
by the Vedas, the Vedas are unable to eulogise you. How ean we, who 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


TW 


ee 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
ERISNA JANMA RANDA 471 


have read only a portion of the Vedas, adore you then ?” That great- 
minded person who with a pure heart, reverentially reads this holy hymn 
composed by the gods and excellent saints enjoys great happiness 1n this 
world and having acquired superb wisdom from the Supreme Being, Lord 
Krisna, ultimately mounts a chariot of gem and goes to the Cow- 
world. 


—— 


CHAPTER CI, - 


1-10. Narayana said, “ O Narada, the gods and the Munis, 
assembled there, could not behold Lord Krisna in their mind but 
they saw, in the ecourt-yard of Nanda, the Lord, clad in yellow. O 
saint, asa new cloud is graced by lightning and row of herons, so 
was Krisna decked with his yellow garment and garlands of jasmine. 
The circular mark of sandal on his forehead combined with the mark 
of the musk looked like the blotted moon partially obscured by a 
cloud, ‘Lhe face of the consort of Radha of a tranquil mien and two 
hands, lovely and dark-blae in appearance, was lighted üp with a gentle 
smile. He sustains a form only out of compassion to his believers. 
Decked with most precious armlets, bracelets and ankiets of gem, he 
was seated in the lap of his father with Baladeva. Later on, at an 
auspicious, lovely moment marked by peaceful planets, presided over by the 
lord of the Lagnas (auspicious moments), imperceptible to the evil stars, 
and adorned with the sphere of beautiful planets, Vasudeva at the 
command of the Brahmins pronounced Swasti (ths particle of benediction) 
and set himself to the task of performing the auspicious ceremony. He 
deferentially distributed to the Brahmins a hundred pieces of gold and 
bowed to the royal gods, munis, the family priest ete. He then 
worshipped Ganes’a, the Sun, the Fire, his son Visnu, Siva aud 
Parvati (altogether sixdeities) in the presence of the Divine assembly 
and reverentially offered to each of them sixteen ingredients. With 
the incantations of the mystic hymns prescribed by the Vedas, he 
performed the Adhivdss (the ceremony previous to a great festival) 
in the interests of both of his sons. 

11-20. He then worshipped reverentially with five ingredients other 
gods, the regents of the quarters, the nine planets and 16 mothers and 
offered ghee to the earth, a hundred times. Then hiing worshipped 
Vasu, the king of Chedi, and bowed to him. he performed the preliminary 
ceremony of Nàndi-mukh: (oblation to the manes) and funeral rites as 
preseribeu by the Vedas. After having performed the sacrifice as ordained 
by tha Vedas, he graced the neck of Lord Krisua with sacred thread. The 
Muni Sándipani gave counsel on Gayatri (ole to the sun) out of deference 
to the Supreme Being. At the outset, the goddess Parvati 
most affectionately presented to Sri-Krisna a cup of gem filled 
with gems, also pearls and a very precious wreath of pearls 
giren to her by her father by way of charity and blessed him with 
Ms of white flowers and bent grass  Afterwardts Aditi, Diti, the 
EC wives, Daivaki, Yas'odà, Rohini, Krignâ Savitri, Saraswati ete, 
ae gave hin alms in the shape of gold, gems etc. ‘The wives of Indra, 

aruna and the Wind, Rohini, Swáhà, Swadhá, Rati (the wife of Kama), 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


472 THE BRAHMA FAIPARTA4 PURANA 


— 


the wife of Kuvera, the earth and the sun's wife also gave him alms in the 
shape of ornaments of gem ete The tender-eyed, chaste and s i 
@oldesses, princesses, snake girls and the wives of Vasudeva’s ki 
too, gave alms to Lord Krisna. 
21-50. The Lord with Bularéima, accepted the charity offered b 
the revered women and out of tha things receive by them, he handed Wi 
‘a portion to the Muni Garg» and a portion to his owa spiritual guide 
Sàndipani. Vasudeva after having performed the rites prescribed by the 
Vedas presented priest's fee to Garga, He also lovingly fed the gods and 
the Brahmins assembled there. ‘These who had come to the house of 
Vasudeva with a view to witness the ceremony blessed Rim& and Krisna 
and gladly went home. Nanda and Yas'odá, after having performed the 
auspicious ceremony of their sons, held them in their laps and being 
satisfied with kisses which they imprinted on their lunar faces were about 
to depart. Nanda and the chaste Yas'odà, owing to the agony of separa- 
tion from Lord Krisna, wept loudly. Lord Krisna consoled them saying, 
“ O mother Yas'odá, O father, go home with pleasure. You are my mother 
who maintained me. Nanda is really my father. O father, even today, 
I shall go with Balarama to the house of saing Sándipani in tho city of 
Avanti, to prosecute the study of the desired Vedas. After a few days 
I shall come back from that place, and observe the feet of you both. 
Time alone causes mutual union and separation. O mother, sepaction, 
union, pain, pleasure, joy, grief, immense felicity and other conditions to 
which a person is liable are occasioned by time. I have also deseribed to 
you the nature of women, a subject which is so very abstruse. My father 
peace will glady recite to you every subject which I have described 
to him. 

31-41. Lord Krisna, the master of the world havine thus aecosted 
Nanda aud Yas'oda, went to Vasudeva at whose command, at an auspieious 
moment he set out for the house of the saint Sándipani. Nanda after having 
accorded Vasudeva departed with a heavy heart with Daivaki. Daivaki 
delivered gems, pearls, gold, diamonds, precious stones, clothes eonsecrated 
by fire and various kinds of articles to Nanda. Vasudeva and Krisna 
presented white horses, excellent elephants, good ears constructed with 
gold to Nanda with esteem. The Brahmins, Daivaki and other women 
Vasudeva and his kinsmen including Akrüra and Uddhava went to Vrind4- 
vana with Nanda and Yas’oda, Having approached the vicinity of Kalindi 
M ea, fins eion from. thoir koana 

r g ace l her, they returned home. 
Narada, the widowed Kunti having received CU kinds of diamonds 
ete as presents went back to her house with pleasure accompanied by 
her children. Vasudeva and Daivaki desiring the welfare of doi: ehil- 
dren distributed several kinds of diamonds, gems, clothes, gold, silver, 
pearls, precious stones and articles delicious like nectar and eweet-meat 
tothe bards and Brühmins with pleasure and esteem. " Thoy also caused 
grand festivals to be performed here and there. They Rete the recita- 
tions of the Vedas and the name of Hari whieh is the solo cause of wel- 
faro and with great regard feasted the Brahmins. They also satisfied 


their relations and friends with suitable eift of re i j] 
lovely clothings ete. © some, diamonds posse 


miling 
nsmen, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA K HANDA. 473 


CHAPTER CII. 
1-16 Narayana said, “ Krisna with Balaràma wcnt to the house of ' 
the saint Sándipant and gladly bowed before the feet of his spiritual guide 
and his chaste and devoted wife. Krigna having received his blessings 
presented to him and his wife the gems; diamonds etc., which he had 
brought from his house and said to him, “I wish that you should give me 
the desired Vidya (knowledge). O saint, determine the auspicious moment 
and depute me to my study in a suitable manner.” The great muni agreed 
and gladly worshipped him. He served him to a treat of oblation of honey 
and milk and entertained him with sweetmeat and also perfumed betel 
for the purification of his mouth. He adored the Supreme Being „Lord 
Krisna with gentle words thus, * O Supreme Being, O excellent Deity, 
you are foremost of those who have gone before or are to come afterwards. 
You are the great Brahma, the embodiment of the Supreme and eternal 
light. Relent to mo, therefore. You are a Being most lovely to the saints, 
most venerable, superb and ancient, Lord, relent to me; for you are 
that Being whose merey does away with the liability of rebirth. 
O incorruptible,” self-determining Being, void of attributes, you 
have no will. You transcend Nature. O Being full of light, you ara 
not associated with anything and you have none to rule you, 
Lord of the beliovers, O sole Lord of the faithful, you sustain a form only 
out of compassion for your adherents. O favourite of the souls of your 
believers, you are just like a Kalpa tree and fulfil all the desires of your 
believers." ‘The wife of Sandipani said, “O Being adored by the whole 
universo, through Mâyâ or the spirit of illusion, you appear like a ehild; 
and through the same May you appear like a King to relieve the earth 
of her burden. O radical cause of the four Vedas, the Yogis call you the 
eternal light of Brahma. On the other hand, your believers with raptures 
constantly meditate you thus:—you are an offuleent Being (vested 
with two hands, with a flute in your hands,) dark-blue in appearance, 
with a body annointed with Sandal-paste, with a gentle smile on your 
face, compassionate to the devotees, in yellow dress, decked with ‘celestial 
wild wreaths, of black hue, likely to enchant cupid himself by a mere 
twinkle of your eye, possessing an enchancing celestial grace, with a 
cheerful aspect, with your lotus-feet painted with lae-dye, with your breast, 
graced with the gem called the Kaustubha, with an attractive garment 
adored by all gods. You are the god of gods, the Lord of the Universe, 
the best of those who enchant the three worlds, bright liko ten millions of 
EAS adorable; the Lord of all, ornamented with preeious gems, courted 
E) saints and the source of all boons. Though a Being of the 
d lescription, you have como through Maya to my husband to 
ceive instruction from him. 


Rete O most perfect and self-contented Lord, yout education is a 
Bae at o ipani instruction to tha people. Your excursion to the 
Je eee more fup on your part, Tolay my birth, life, chastity, the vow 
Palin ae ablution in saerel streams, fastings ete., have really borne 
DM lay ray. hand expert in es king is blessed: for with this hand, 
peek aie yon delicigus articles of fool. My harmitage marked today 

y your lotus-feet which constitute, as 1t were, a god of pilgrims lssuperior 

90 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


474 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


a 
to any other place frequented by pilgrims, The court-yard of my house 
consecrated by the dust of your feet is excellent. The sight of your lotus. 
fect has today dispensed with my liability to be born again. So long as 
people blinded by ignorance do not see you and minister to your lotus-feet, 
they have to endure sorrow, grief, agony caused by diseases, the trouble 
of repeated births through the influence of Karma (or fate which dispenses 
fruits according to one’s previous acts) and the strong propensities of 
hunger and thirst to which the body is naturally subject.” The wife of 
the religious preceptor with streaming eyes continued thus, “O destroy- 
er of the creator, O destroyer of illusion and vain attachments, O time 
of time, O Lord, show compassion to us.” Speaking thus, she held 
him into her breast and like his mother Daivaki, suekled him out of 
affection." Lord Krişna said, “O mother, I am an infant fit only to be 
nourished by milk, Why are you adoring me ? Proceed at once to the 
desired Cow-world with your husband. Quit this mortal, unreal, illusory 
frame (i.e. your body) and acquire a stainless constitution free from 
birth and death.” So saying, he reverentially studied the four Vedas for 
one month under the tutelage of his spiritual guide. After his eduzation 

was over, he brought back to life the son of his spiritual preceptor who ^ 
had pre-deceased him and presented to him three lakhs of gems, 5 
lakhs of diamonds, 4 lakhs of precious stones, 5 lakhs of pearls, 2 lakhs of 
rubies, precious clothings, the wreath whieh he had received from Durga, 
the diamond ring of his fingers and -a hundred millions of gold coins. 
The saint in his turn gave all these articles to his son and having mounted 
a car constructed with wonderful and valuable gems went with his wife to 
aving performed this wonderful act also went home 


the Cow-world. Krisna h 
baek with pleasure, O Narada, you have thus listened to the history of 
hoever most respectfully reads 


Lord Krisna, the supreme Brahma. W 

this sacred hymn surely attains a fixed belief in Hari, A person 

whose fame has nob as yet spread far and wide, acquires celebrity by 
An ignorant man, by reading it, turns into a savant and 


reading it. 
world approaches the feet of Hari in the 


passing his days happily in this 
end and there certainly lives in the bondage of Hari day and night. 


CHAPTER CIII, 
1-15. . Narayana 


! said, “Later on, Krisna with Baladeva came to 
Madhupura, greeted the feet of his parents anl having arrived at the 
root of the fig tree, he remembered Garuda and also recollected with 
esteem, the sea of salt, Vis'wa-Karmá, the desired wheel of Sudars’ana, the 
elub ealled Kaumodaki, the variety of conches called Paficha-janya, and 
the desired land of Vaikuntha. Le laid aside his cow-hord dress and 
put on the garb ofa king. In the meantime, the excellent irresistible 
Sudars ana, the King of weapons ealeulated to vanquish the foe radiant 
like Iari and bright like millions of suns appeared before Lord Krişna. 
Garuda following in the track 


ae f t of the chariot of diamond also appeared 
before him.  Vis^wakarmá with his pupils, trembling also appeared 


there with a respectful inelination of his head and bowed before the feot of 
Krisna, Lord-Krigna smiled and spoke to them by turns affectionately 
thus: “O great minded ocean, give me some space measuring a hundred 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


K R SQiaitiaediot eBahabtntahlisalVuftrust 4o 


mm 


Yojans, ou which I wish to construct a city and afterwards I shall return 
O Viswakarmá, the best of architects, construct a temple, 


it to you. | : 
Roiove to all people, enchanting and hardly to be secured in the three 
worlds on the land which Neptune (Ocean) will offer to me. That eity 


must be like the Vaikuntha always courted by believers, better than the 
seven heavens and very delightful. O magnanimous royal bird, until 
the construction of Dwárka, always remain with Vis^wa-Karmá., 
Sudars'ana, the best of wheels, you, t00, should always remain by my 
side”. O Narada, Neptune and others, having bowed to the command of 
Krisna, went away. But the wheel remained by the side of Krisna. 
Lord Krisna installed the powerful and magnanimous Ugrasen, the father 
of Kamsa on the throne and the Ksatryas of noble rank recognised him 
(Ugrasena) as king and honoured him as such, The most blessed 
Krisna, rewarded the royal Yádavas, conquered Jari-Sandha and by strat- 
gem killed the dreadful Kálayavanas despatehed by Jari-Sandha. The 
tranquil Vis wa-Karma, with a thrill of raptures 1n his body through 
reverence, with streaming eyes and folded hands said to Krişna, the 
groat Lord of the world, “O Lord of the world, how shall I construct 
Dwárkáà as directed by you? O most blessed Lord, please point out to 
me the method of its construction. 

16-32. Lord Krisna said: «With rabies, emeralds, excellent gems 
called Indra-Nila, (sapphire) Ruchaka, (alkali) Paribhadra (the Devadara) 
Kalanka (rust of iron) Syamantaka, (the gem which yields eight loads 
of gold everyday) Sulphur, blue stones, the Moon stone marked with 
crystal, the Sun stone, green stones, dark-blue stones, stones of various 
hues, yellow stones of the colour of the pigment of cows, blue stones of the 
colour of the seeds of lotus and pomegranate, black stones, stones of the 
colour of lotus, white champak or heated gold, stones a hundred times 
more valuable than gold, reddish stone, (good-looking, bright, heavy, 
excellent and adored) and polished stones, in a proper manner and after 
due consideration, construct a lovely city extending over an area of a 
hundred Yojans. So long as the construction is not finished, the 
Yaksas must bring from the Himálaya mountains heaps of precious 
stones. Soven lakhs of Yaksas deputed by Kuvera, one lakh of Vetáls 
(corpses animated by evil spirits) and Kusmándas (false conceptions) 
deputed by Siva, demons and Brahma-demons deputed by Parvati, the 
daughter of the mountain will assist you in the construction of the 
celestial palaca fit for the habitation of 68,000 married damsels, Also 
construct pavilions consisting of excellent trees, void of bad trees, 
containing picturesque gates of architectural design, having lion-gates 
encireled by moats and ramparts, and containing twelve additional 


' gates fit for the habitation ofa hundred principal queens. Attach to 


every house an auspicious court-yard consisting of lunar altars. After 
constructing the habitation of the Yadus, build quarters for servants. 
After having constructed a most excellent mansion for Ugrasena, the, 
King of kings, construct a house for my revered father, Vasudeva which 
should be delightful by all means.” Vis'wa-Karmá said, “O Lord of the 
universe, which tree is forbidden, which tree is celebrated and which 
tree is useful ? I shall construct the house according to your mandate. 
Tell me, please, the planting of which tree in the pavilion is auspicious 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
476 THE BRAHMA PAIVARTA PURAN A, 


Sr 
and the absence of water on which side is injurious. On which side 
is the planting of ths tree auspicious? What should be the Measure 
of the houses and the court-yards ? On which side will the planting of 
the garden be auspicious? O great god, 
the ramparts constructed with timbers ? o Lord, the timber of which 
tree is best adapted to the construction of pavilion ? And the timber of 


of which tree is unfit for the purpose ? Please lob me know the above 
points in detail." 


33-44, Lord Krisna said, “O divine achitect, cocoanut treo on the 
north-east side of a house brings wealth to the house-holder, and | 
planted on the east side of the pavilion, brings a son. A lovely tree, on 
whichsoever side of the house it is situate, is auspicious in overy way, 
O Vis'wa-Karmá, mango-tree growing on the east side is a source of 
wealth to the householder; and growing on other sides also it is auspi- 
cious. Nim, jack, lemon and jujube growing on the east side of the 
house secures tho birth of a son. Growing on the south side, they 
bring wealth ; and growing on other sides, they are also sources 
of prosperity. The rose-apple, pomegranate, plaintain and emblie 
myrabalan growing on the east side of the house multiply friends ; 
on the south side they increase wealth ; and on other sides, they 
bring vast wealth and sons.  Catechu on. the south: and west side 
inereases joy ; and on the north-east side, and other sides als 
same result. A pure Champak tree growing on 
is auspicious. Bottle gourds, pumpkin gourds, a 
date, the sugarcane and b 
Vástuka, Karavilwa and 
and ereepers, and fruits, 


0, it produces 
any side of the house 
nd suka (a kind of grass), 
ael growing in the pavilion bring pleasure. 
brinjal growing in the house- aro auspicious : 
growing on any side of the house, bring happiness. 
O architect, I recited to you the virtues of excellent trees, Now hear 
of the forbidden fruits, In a town of pavilions, the planting of wild trees 
is forbidden. The preservation of the fig tree in the pavilion is prohibited 
as in that case, there is an apprehension of thieves, Buta fix tree in the 
city is auspicious ; and the sight of such a tree is sanctifying. The silk- 
cotton tree is everywhere improper in the pavilion ; for the tree, growing 
1n such places, afflicts even great-minded kings, Ina village ora town, 
such a tree is neither particularly ominous nor auspicious, Bub such a 


tree noar a pavilion is particularly prohibited ; for it is a source of constant 
sorrow. 


45-55. O architect, the tamarind tree is very much prohibited ; you 
should carefully avoid it. The S'Àl treo (a iE tree, us useful) Ash 
loss of wealth and subjects. If this tree grows in the town it may not be 
particularly injurious ; but it is particularly injurious, if it grows by the 
side of a pavilion. Barley, wheat, gram and paddy are auspicious either 
in the city or in pavilions, Cotton, lentil and mustard are noither aus- 
pleious nor ominous in the city or the Pavilion. Sugarcane growing in 


the village, city or a place where pavilions are erected is a source of 
benefit and happiness in every way, 


an ] .As'oka S'iriga, Kadam (Nauclea), Katati 
(a medicinal plant) turmerie and Ginger growing in the above mentioned 
places bring happiness and prosperity, But Amalaka and myrabalan 
growing in houses are injurious, A person planting the bone of an ex- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


what will be the measure Ge. 


A 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KIIAND: 477 


cellent horse or an elephant in the site of his house reaps benefits from 
generation to generation. But any other person living therein comen 
to grief and is radically destroyed. T he bones of a monkey, man, Econ 
cow, dog, jackal, cat, sheep, boar and other animals are injurious. Water 
on the north-east side, east, west and north sides is auspicious ; but on 
other sides, it is injurious. O architect, the house should be equal in 
length and breadth. A eireular house destroys the wealth of the house- 
holder. 

56-63. The length and the breadth of the house should be regulated 
properly. Tho absence of empty space or vacuum Is auspicious ; for a house 
constructed accarding to the measure of a zero or a vacuum brings no 
fruits. Lhe gate of the house of a householder should be a little above two 
cubits in breadth and five cubits in height and then 16 becomes auspicious. 
No gate should be constructed in the middle of a house. More or less near 
the centre of a house, the gate should be constructed. A round pavilion 
censtrueted on the occasion of perforation of the moon (moon eclipse) 18 
auspicious ; but a court yard constructed on the occasion of the perforation 
of the sun (sun-eclipse) is ominous. Planting of the holy basil within the 
house is auspicious and secures the blessings of a son, sanctity, nay, even 
reverence for Hari. The sight of the holy basil in the morning secures 
gold. The different kinds of jasmine (viz. Málati, Yuthika Kunda, a 
kind of jasmine white, small and delicate, Mallika), the creeping plant 
of spring called Madhavi, the serew-pine plant, Nageswar, (an ornamental 
tree), the thorn apple, Vakula and Aparájità (a creeper with pretty blue and 
white flowers) aro auspicious. A lovely garden consisting of these trees 
en the east or south side of the house is surely beneficial. ‘The height of 
the rampart of a house should not exceed 16 cubits ; if i& exceeds 16 cubits, 
the householder will come to grief. A wise man should not accomodate in 
the vicinity of his house or in the village a carpenter, an oilman, a gold- 
emith or those who deal in diamonds. A Brahmin, a Ksatriya, a Vais'ya, a 
good Sidra, a fortunate astrologer (one who foretells the future), a bard, a 
physician or a gardener may be accomodated beside the pavilion. A moat, 
a hundred cubits deep and a hundred enbits broad, encircling a pavilion is 
excellent. ‘Zhe threshold of the moat should be constructed according to 
one’s discretion in such a manner that friends may easily enter and tho ene- 
mies may not enter at all. The silk cotton tree, the tamarind, the marshy 
date, the Neem, the Sindhu våra, the banian, the thorn apple and castor 
etc., are prohibited and injurious. Savants should carefully avoid a tree struck 
by lightning. Brahmá, the offspring of the lotus, says, the said tree destroys 
son, wifo and wealth. 


69-5. For the edification of the people regarding things injurious 
or useful I alluded to timber; but .Dwárkà will have no concern 
whatsoever with timber. Apply yourself to the construction of that city 
exclusively with gems etc. The auspicious time has arrived now.” 
Vis'wa Karma having bowed low to Lord Krisna went with Garuda to 
the lovely root of the fig tree situated near the ocean. The royal bird 
and Vis'wa Karma slept there in the night. Garuda in his dream saw the 
lovely Dwárkà. O Nárada, the divine bird observed in the town all the cha- 
racteristic features as desired by Lord Krisna while giving instructions to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. = 
478 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


| 


T 


Vis'wa Karma, the godly engineer. The architects who constructed the eit 
ridiculed Vis wa Karmáin his dream. Other Garudas and other powerf] 

birds likewise mocked Garuda. When Garuda in his dream awoke » r 
beheld the most wonderful city of Dwarka extending over a hundred Yojans 
The sight of the city abashedVis'wa-Karmá also. That city obscured with : 
the accumulation of its rays even the land of Brahma and concealino even 
the sun and heaps of diamonds with the halo of its effulgence manifested 
itself in a splendid style. 


— ——— 


CHAPTER CIV. 


1-14. Nardyana said, “In the meantime, Brahma, Siva, Párvati 

Ananta, Dharma, the sun, the Fire, Kuvera, Varuna, the god of wind, 
Yama, Indra, the moon-good, the eleven Rudras, the Vasus, the twelve 
Adityas, the demons, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and all others arrived at the 
root of the holy fig tree with a view to see the city of Dwáàrká. Seeine 
that Lord Krisna had arrived there with Baladeva, they soon adored that 
excellent Being. The inhabitants of the sky, mounted on the car, con- 
tinued to observe the delightful and enchanting city of Dwürk from the e 
sky. They saw that Dwárká, decked with pearls, gems, diamonds and 
other precious stones was circular in appearance and covered a square 
area of a hundred Yojans. Seven bottomless moats encireled the city. A 
hundred thousand lakes dedicated to pleasure came into existence 
Three lakhs of beautiful groves containing lotuses kissed by bees conte 
buted greatly to tha charms of the town. — Dwárká all round redolent of 
blooming, delightful flowers was refreshed by the wind associated with the 
cooling, fragrant sandal. The city teemed with a hundred erores of 
cocoanut trees and four hundred crores of catecheus and likewise with 
mangoes and jacks delicious to the taste, Palm trees, as delicious as | 
mangoes, the holy fig-trees, the jejube, the hog-plum and the banian ‘bree | 
graced the town in all directions. The silk-eotton tree the roso- jle 

the Kadamb, the bamboo, the tamarind, the Champak, the Becr 
Nageswar fan ornamental trea) the orange, the lime, the pomegranate 

me emblie myrabalan and the Amalaka all the more graeed that beautiful 

ciby. 

15-29, The Sala (a timber tree), the Pivála lint: 4 
date tree) the Siriga) the tree producing very eee deu. n 
plant and several other beneficial trees made that polished city still more 
auspicious. That city ornamented with most precious gems T sale and 
diamonds, full of jars constructed with diamonds, pearls aa recious 
stones, marked by excellent stair cases constructed with enchantin p yems 
protected by strong bars or bolts and chains eat Sh 
columns constructed with emerald, embellished with samosi olished 
pictures, decked with gems, graced with white chowries, delicate io and 
looking glasses and adorned with conntless elevated temp] inlaid witl 

hire and beautifully furnish i e a inlaid es 
sapp : ly furnished with court-yards constructed with rubies. 
It was charmingly intersected by royal roads and other avenues. The 
gods who had arrived there were astonished at the sight of the celestial 
Dwárkà which contained stables, a hundred thousand windows effulgent 
with the lustre of gems and radiant like tho noon-tide sun of summer, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 479 


Lord Krişna and Baladeva, with a cheerful mien remembered Ugra-Sena; 


Devaki, the descendants of Yadu, the Pándavas with Kunti, Nanda, 


-Yas'odà, the preservers of the cows, the cowherds, the royal saints, the best 


of the Munis, the Kinnaras or demi-gods having figures of men, and heads 
of horses, the Gandharvas, (demi-gods who are ehoristers of heaven) the 
celestial whores, tbe Vidy&dharas, the Kinvaris the musicians who play on 
concerts), the singers, dancers, and the bards engaged in mimicjesty. At 
that very time there arrived Vasudeva, Devaki, the king Ugra-Sena, the 
Yadus, Nanda, Yasoda, the cowherds, the Pandavas with Kunti, 
Gandharvas, the Kinnaras, the Vidyádharas, the Kinnaris, the. female 
dancers, those who play bands of the music mendicants, the kings of 
several places, the Vais yas, other men, recluses Yatis, (ascetics, beggars or 


` devotees) abadhütas (ascetics who observe no rites) and Brahmacharis 


(young Brahmins practising religious austerities.) 

3.48. The naked lord Sanaka, aged five years, the spiritual leader 
of sages, Sananda, Sanat-Kumára with three huudred millions of 
disciples, the unborn Lord Durvásá with three lakhs of disciples, Kas'yapa 
with a lakh of disciples, Valmiki with three lakhs of disciples. Gautama 
with a lakh of disciples, Vrihaspati with a crore of disciples, Sukra with 
3 crores of disciples, Bharadwàja with 3 lakhs, the unborn Lord Angira 
with 3 erores, the Lord Pracheta with one crore, Pulastya with 3 lakhs, 
Agastya with one crore, Pulaha with one lakh, Kratu with.one lakh, Atri 
with 3 crores, Bhrigu with five crores, Marichi with 3 crores, Satánanda 
with one thousand, Risya Sringa and Vibhandaka with 3 crores, Panini. 
with one crore, Kà6yá-yana with one lakh, Yájfía-Valkya with one thou- 
sand, Vy4sa with three crores, uka with -8 crores, Parás'ara with four 
crores, Kanâda with 3 crores, Chyavana with 3 crores, Garga, the family 
priest with one lakh, Gálava with one thousand, Saubhari with one 
thousand, Lomasa with 3 crores, Markandeya with 3 crores, Vamadeva 
with 1 crore, Jaigisavya with 3 crores, Sàndipani and Devala with 8 crores, 
Bodhu with one crore, Paficha-Sikh& with one lakh, I (Narayan saint) and 
my brother Nara with 3 crores, Vis’wA-mitra with one crore, Jarat-Káru 
with 3 crores, Astika with 3 crores, Paras'uràma with 8 crores, Vatsya 
with one lakh, Daksa with 3 lakhs, Kapila with 5 crores, Samvarta with 
3 lakhs, Utathya with 3 lakhs, Jaimini with one thousand, Paila with 1 
Jakh, Sumantu with one thousand, Vais'ampáyana (the best of the pupils 
of Vyasa) with one lakh, ringi with one lakh, Upamanyu with one lakh, 
Ganra-Mukha with one thousand, Kacha the son of Vrihaspati with one 
lakh pupils, As’wa-thama, Drona, and Kripd-cháryya with their respec- 
tive pupils arrived there to see the prosperous city of Dwárká. DBhisma, 
Karna, Sakuni, King Duryyodhana with his brothers and other kings 
also arrived thero. ‘The best of the saints and kings adored the supreme 
Being Lord Krisna and blessed him. z 


49-59. The Lord Krigna, the spiritual Lord of the world possessing 
a serene appearance. said respectfully to Ugrasena, the fore-most of kings 
with a smile. (Siva, Brahm’ and other gods, and saints went away after 
the ceremony was ovor.) He said, “Lord, the most auspicious moment 
has now arrived. So now enter Dwárkà with father and mother. The 
other Yadus will go to Madhupur.” King  Ugrasenà was frigh- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


480 - THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


tened at these words and with a dejected heart thus spoke, “O son of 
Vasudeva, I shall not leave my ancestral land Madhupuri that has been 
rendered sacred by the performance of divine and ancestral rites, A 
land-owner who (leaving his native land) offers water to the Manes, in 
- other places, however sacred in other respects is killed by the manes while 
performing the funeral ceremony. The performance of a funeral ceremony 
out of deference to the manes in any other place than one’s native land 
may not be fruitful at all or may only be fruitful in a slight degree; but 
the above ceremony performed on one’s ancestral land is absolutely 
fruitful. The- ancestral land is superior to ones parents and 
causes greater delight than the son, grandson, wife, nay, evon life. For 
the purpose of performing an act out of deference to the gods or the 
manes, there is no place more sacred than one’s native land. An act of 
charity in other places is as insignificant as the child’s play; a gift also 
pollutes the donor in such places. Death on one’s native land is just 
like death in a holy place. O Hari, even the water ofa tank or ditch 
constructed by one’s ancestors is as holy as the Ganges water; and ablu- 
tion therein brings the fruits ef bathing in the Ganges. Offering of 
water to the manes and the worship of the gods with that water is 
sanctifying ; and if the place be the birth-place of one's father, the benefit 
reaped by the worshipper is doubled. ‘The place where holy men make 
gifts is as sacred as the father-land.” 


60-71, The Lord said, “As soon as the terms fixed by fate for the 
residence ofa man ina particular place expire ho shall have to quit 
the place. Who can surmount or transcend the Karma as established 
by Providence? Particularly, Dwarka is similar to one’s native land. 
The holy land of Dwark4 is better than any other holy land. O Lord of 
the universe, gift, a funeral ceremony, the worship of the gods and 
other holy acts in Dwarka yield benefits four times as much as ablution 
in the Ganges and other sacred streams. Jet Brahma aud other gods, 
the Yadavas and the Munis go to that place. In that place there are 
excellent mansions fit for the accomodition of emperors. You had 
better occupy thom with pleasure, The most deliehtful city of Dwarka 
always mocks the celestial city of Indra by virtue of ifs pros- 
perity. O gem among kings, at the most auspicious moment 

- that has now arrived, you had better enter into that pious 
assembly of gods. As the gods subservient to Indra offer him tribute, so 
kings of different places in the Island of Jambu will pay you tribute. May 
Kuvera be subdued „by the wealth of the king Ugra-sen. May the sun 
be conquered by his radiance ; may Indra he subdued by his prosperity ; 
and may the gods be vanquished by him in military skill, may saints 
be subdued by the valour of his piety ; may devotees be beaten by his 
devotions and worshippers by his rites. There is no king like Ugra- 
sena at present and there will be no king like him in future, The most 
powerful Baladeva will be his support. King, how can I deseribe the 
prowess of Baladeva? The world rests on one of his heads, like a 
grain of mustard in the winnowing basket. What god may hold candle to 
him in respect of honour or prowess? Thero is no end to his virtues ; 
heuce sayauts call him Auauía. The eight great-minded Vasus, tho 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


KRR PIIR ne Bere poe 45i 


the twelve powerful Adityas, Indra with the 


leven Rudras except Siva 
; ) onquer King Ugra-Sen.” 


gods are certainly unable to c 
72-52. Ab the words of Krigna, King Ugra-Sen, with a cheerful dis- 
position attended by the Yadus went to his excellent palace situated in the 
heart of Dwark& which was superior even to the mansion of Indra and 
effulzent with the lustre of valuable gems. Thousands of sentinels armed 
‘with spears and clubs were guarding the threshold of the house. He 
then beheld his own pavilion which was graced with hundreds of temples 
“constructed with gems and which was protected on all sides by six gates 
ofasimilar type. The king saw 4 crore of excellent elephants (in the 
enclosure of elephants) infatuated with wine and four crores of ordinary 
elephants in the elephant-shed. Horses (six times the number 
of the powerful elephants) that shamed in lustre even the horse mounted 
by the sun-god were accommodated in the stable. O Narada, king 
Ugra-S'en saw among the royal elephants, a peerless elephant, in 
fact, the lord of all conveyances. That elephant by his personal 
accomplishments even put to shame Airavata, the elephant of 
Indra. The king also beheld one crore of big horses of the type of 
Ucchai-S'ravi 10,000 ordinary horses and 60,0U0 soldiers constituting the 
infantry. The King also beheld 5 lakhs of charioteers, chariot-horses out- 
numbering the chariots six times and cavalry suited to the horses. This 
army encompassed the mansion occupied by the -Sudharma council con- 
structed with precious gems, In the centre was convered the Sudharma 
council (council of the pious) guarded by a hundred crores of over-awed 
myrmidous, effulgent with the lustre of avenues constructed with valuable 
gems, adorned with countless lovely thrones of gem, furnished with 
red blankets and exquisite clothes and encompassed by gods and saints. 
He then listened to the auspicious sound of the econches, the drums and 
the recitation of the Vedas by the Munis and entered the council. 
83-93. Having witnessed his arrival Krisna, Baladeva, Brahma, 
iva, Ananta (the best of gods), other gods, the Munis who practise aus- 
terities, the best of adepts and the kings including Vasudeva got up. The 
most powerful Ugra-Sena, at the bidding of the Munis and Lord Krisna, 
sat down ona lovely throne of gem. Garga and other Munis and 
the gods likewise directed him to sit down. O Nárada, the 
installation of the great king was performed” with mantras of the 
Vedas enchanted with the holy waters of seven sacred streams and 
deposited iu golden jars. The Supreme Being Krisna gave to 
the great King Ugra-Sena a pair of lovely clothes formerly 
presented to him by Varuna. The most powerful Baladeva gave to Ugra- 
Sena à wreath of Párijàt, an ornament of gem and a parasol of gem. 
Brahma offered to king Ugra-Sena an earthen pot ; Siva gave bim the 
spear: Parvatt, a string of gems ; and Lakgmi, a garland. The other gods, 
Munis, the best of adepts and kings gave dowries to Ugra-Sen by turns. 
Vasudeva presented to the monarch a white chowrie which in days of yore’ 
was presented to Krisna by the wind-god. O saint, Nanda, king of 
cow-herds, presented to the king a revered cow of plenty called Surabhi ; 
and Devaki likewise offered to him excellent gems: Akrüra who was 
himself tended by seven servants with white chowries held on the head of 
61 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


482 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


SS 


the king a parasol at the command of Lord Krisna and by way of prae. 
tical demonstration of the esteem in which he held his master. 

94-98. King  Ugra-Seua being helped to the lovely throne of 
gem by Lord Krisna, the benefactor of the world, consulted his face in 
the first place in the looking-glass and then beheld his most Meritorious 
kingdom. The bards and mendicant Brahmins glorified the king with 
pleasing panegyrics. The gods and the Bráhmins blessed him in an 
auspicious manner, The great king algo respectfully distributed to the 
Brahmins crores of gold coins. He likewise gave hundreds of gems to 
the bards and mendicants. The Yádavas having installed the monarch 
Ugra-Sen on the throne and worshipped the gode, the Munis, the Brahmins, 
the bards, the mendicants, the twice-born castes and the spiritual guides 
glady went home. "The remaining myrmidons of Hari also went home: 
and next day in the morning they came back to the beneficial assem biy of 
Hari called Sudharma, bowed low before his feeb and sat down." 


CHAPTER CV, 

1-10. Nardyana said, “The most powerful, truthful and pious 
Bhismaka, the source of all prosperity, the foremost among virtuous 
kings, and the ruler of other kings was the sole monarch of Vidarbha. He 
had a daughter named Rukmint, very lovely and beautiful, the best of 

" damsels and very much esteemed by them, nay, the very personification 
of the great goddess of fortune. Her person had the hue of heated gold; 
she was in the prime of her youth. She was graced with ornaments of 
gem, whose lustre added to the brilliance of her charms, The pure, 
virtuous, truthful, chaste, tranquil girl possessed of a strong determin- 
atiod surpassed all other women in virtue. The wives of Indra and Varuna, 
Rohini, the wife of the moon-god, the wives of Ku 0 
SwAha, SAnti, Rati, Kala and other excellent fair damsels could not 
attain even a sixteenth part of her beauty. The monarch Bhismaka 
observed his beautiful daughter engaged in child-like sports and 
increasing in splendour day by day like a digit of the moon in the 
midst of clouds, Considering it advisable to marry his youthful and lovely 
daughter whose face wag hanging down through bashfulness, whose 
superb eyes Surpassed even a pair of autumnal lotuses in charms, who 
Was graceful like the autumnal fall moon, the pious, virtuous and fault- 
ess king grew rather anxious to securo a suitable match for her and 


e fumily priest and the 


. 11-19. * Whom shall 1 accept as a m 
is suited to be the bridegroom, either the son of a god ora Muni or the 
accomplished son of a king? My lovely daughter is growing day by day; 
therefore it is proper to celebrate her wedding, ^ 

bridegroom for her. That bridegroom should 
resolution, devoted to Narayana, conversant with the Vedas and their 
auxiliary branches, learned, handsome, fortunate, 
possessing the attributes of patience, self-contr 
accomplished in every respect. If such a talented bridegroom be a. 
prince, he should also bo versed in the science of war ir 


atch for my daughter and who 


— 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


rR PENA’ ae Raas 483 
Jae ai . 


ecarve his presence of mind as the head or the chief of the 
un must, prosene geld. If he fulfils these conditions, I shall greet him 
aan n-in-law. And if he is the son of a god, then he should also 
Cea aie above qualifications. And if he be the son of a religious saint, 
eet to be an orator, decide abstruse questions of religion and be 
s d in the four Vedas. Him shall I accept as my bridezroom. 
Paine the words of the king; Satánanda, the family priest, the son d 
the experienced, ‘pious, meditative aud friendly saint E oe M 
was versed in the Vedas and their auxiliary branches, conver a wie 
the secrets of all sciences in the world and clever in all acts pee a 
monarch, you are pious and versed in. all seient i Mn yo 
must I describe to you previous chronicles as state y the 


Vedas. i 
90.32. Lord Nàráyana himself, perfect, wielding an image only out 
of compassion for his graceful alherents, bearing testimony to all acts, 
free from all desire, dissociated from everything, separate from Nature, 
the supreme soul of all living beings; fall of light, adored by Brahma, 
Siva, Ananta and the ruler even of Providence who dispenses all kinds of 
eood things and boon; has accepted the position of the son of Vasudeva 
merely to relieve the Earth of her burden. O monarch, give to that 
perfect and . Supreme Being, the Lord of the Cow-world, your daughter 
in marriage and you are sure to attain the said world with your 
hundred ancestors. By giving your daughter attain the redemption of 
emancipation as well as Sárupya after your death ; and in this world, be 
adored by all as the spiritual guide of the spiritual guides of the Universe. 
O monarch, deliver Rukmint, the emblem of the great goddess of fortune, 
to the Lord of Lakgmi and then, by way of priest’s fee, surrender every- 
thing to him and thus conquer the germs of re-birth. O King, it must 
be admitted on all hands that Brahma had already by inseription on the 
forehead singled out the proper match for every girl. Send Brahmins to 
Dwarka and fetch Lord Krisna here. Consult all people, determine the 
proper time and bring the Lord here who wields a form only out of compas- 
sion for his worshippers. O monarch, by the mere sight of that eternal, 
excellent form which is visible only out of deference to the meditation of 
the adherents of Krisna, get rid of the elements of your birth and Karma. 
O sovereign, how ean I, being an illiterate boy, describe the virtues of 
that Being who can hardly be secured even by the Yogis through 
ascotism; who cannot be sufficiently adored by all the scriptures, or the 
Vedas or by Ananta with his 1,000 mouths or by Siva with his five 
mouths or by the creator of the world with his four mouths, or by 
Sanat-Kumára, or Kártika or by ascetics or even by believers who 
are foremost among the Vaignavas; whose adoration even paralyses 
the goddess of knowledge in her attempt to recite his eulogies ; who can- 
not be comprehended even by the Yogis through their meditations or 
even by the Vedas, . virtuous saints, the gods. and the best and most 
eccomplished Munis "? 

93-40. As soon as the king heard his words, he cheerfully got up 
from his seat and hastily embraced him. The king who was rejoiced 
offered to him various kinds of gems, gold, picturesque clothes, excellent 


CONUM ee 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


484 THE BRATIMA TAITARTA PURA N4, 


—— 


Bk u———— 


elephants, horses, chariots constructed with precious stones, 
quantity of wealth, adorable, fruitful and auspicious plots o 
(which spontaneously bring forth crops) and famous villages 
Rukmi was angry, when he witnessed this affair. He 
with anger and perspired copiously. Later 
flushed with tage, he stood up before tho assembly and in an agitated 
manner addressed his father and the Brahmin, thus : * O king, listen tg 
my words that are praiseworthy, beneficial and truthful. Fora wonder ! 
How avaricious are the mendicant Brahmins! You should never believe 
them. A dancer, prostitute, a bard, a beggar, a Kayastha and a mendieant 
always speak the falsehood and defraud other persons. A poor man, a 
mediator in marriage (7.e., a match-maker), a Nata(a mimic ora dancer), an 
actor, a voluptuous man, a lustful man and an illiterate man al Ways use 
flattering words based on falsehood. O great king, that Krigna in the 
exercise of his detestable intellectual powers brought about the assasination 
i hrough the agency of others and wrested his 
Krisna is only wealthy in Dwarka through 
that Yavana, Well, if he is so brave, why then 
i 16 a house in the midst of the 
‘ed Jard-Sandhas this moment. No king 
on earth ean hold his own against me, A pupil of Durvásá, I am versed 
in mili i certainly able to destroy the whole world with the 
weapon called Pas'upata. The only persons who ar 
are Paras'urima and Sis'upála, The mighty hero Sis'upála who is my 
friend ean conquer Heaven ; I can also subdue Indra with all his adherents 

In à moment, 


immense 
f ground 
* Prince 
i Qquivereq 
on, with eyes red and face 


47-67. O king, do you not know all this yourself ? If the foolish 
Krisna infatuated with conceit and boastful of the heroism which he 
displayed by slaying the feeble Jard-Sandha, in the decline of his life 
has the audacity to turn up here to secure the hands of my sister in 
Marriage, I declare m send him to the house 


5 ; 
of Yama this very moment. Alas Simply at the words of a mendicant 


ni, desired even by the gods, to 
vho was a, keeper of the Cows of Nanda, who was the pronounced 
ae Des ie remnants of the food of 
c ; S, a Drühmin is natura avaricious and is at great 
Paine to acquire wealth. Your intellect has A perverted by the words 
of this deluded Brahmin, i risna induced you fto select 
x as the bridegroom of Rukminî ? Is hen prince or a hero ? Is he 
rieh or poor ? d Penerous.? «Or has he subdued his 
Tasten like Rukmini ? I O king, give your 
aughter to Sis'upal, m; for he is a prince 
and as Powerful 88 Rudra, O ing, soon invite by. letters kines of diforant 
Praces, your kinsmen and the excellent Munis, Send Brahmins to Anga, 
Vanga, Kalinga, Magadha, Saurdstra, Valkala, Guru, Radha, Varendra, 
Gujarat, Pepara, Mahá-rástra, Virdta, Mudgala, Subanga, Bhalluka, 
Bhallaka, Kharva, Durga, etc, Get ready a thous 7 : 
thousand pools of hone 


milk, 500 Pools of water, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


c] 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 485 


es 


eee 


les of cakes, a hundred thousand piles of rice parched and 


a hundred pi much. Get also slaugh- 


ttened and boiled rice and vietuals four times as ; 3 
Eon a lakh of cows, two lakhs of deer, 4 lakhs of rabbits and tortoise. 
Reverentially sacrifice to the village goddess on the night of the full-moon 
ten lakhs of goats and sheep four times the number of the last-named 
and get the flesh properly cooked for food. O lord of the world, get 
also vegetables cooked for the purpose.” The monareh Bhismaka having 
heard the words of bis son took his family priest aside and also consulted 
his minister in private. After consultation, he sent a, suitable Brahmin 
to Dwarka. He fixed a date which was regarded auspicious unanimously 
and procured articles adapted to the occasion. By the advise of his son he 
held out invitation to different places. The Brahmin sent by Bhismaka 
reached the council assembly of Sudharma attended by kings and geds, 
and gave the auspicious invitation letter to king Ugra-Sena. The kings, 
hearing the contents of the good letter, distributed with a cheerful mien 
and glad heart hundreds of gold to the Brâhmins. 

68-78. He ordered the beat of drum everywhere at Dwárkà. The 
gods, several princes, the relations and friends of the king, and mendicants 
wero feasted by him with esteem. ‘The king decorated Lord Krisna with a 
vory lovely garment hardly to be secured in the three worlds ; and having 
dressed the Lord of the universe as @ bridegroom, at ® lovely and 
auspicious moment he recited the mantras of the Vedas and sent Krisna 
to the place where marriage was to take place. In the first place, 
Brahma, the creator of the world, mounted the chariot with Savitri ard 
accompanied Lord Krigna to that place. Siva and his wife likewise mounted 
a chariot and started. Ananta, the sun-god, Ganes'a, Kártika, Indra,, the 
moon-god, Varuna, the wind-god, Kuvera, Yama, the fire-god, and isána 
eagerly followed suit. ‘The remaining three hundred millions of gods, 
six hundred millions of Munis and three lakhs of kings with white parasols 
surrounded Ugra-Sena and invested him with the grace of moon surrounded 
by stars. The powerful king proceeded in the direction of the city of 
Kundila, The most powerful Baladeva, Vasudeva, Uddhava, Nanda, 
Akrüra, Sátyaki, the eowherds and the best of Yadus mounted chariots of 
gem and marched in a body. Duryyodhana and his brothers (the sons 
of Dhrita-rástra) and the five Pandavas, viz., Yudhisthira, Bhima, Arjuna, 
Nakula and Sahadeva mounted chariots, and joined the procession. The 
most powerful Bhisma, Drona, Karna, As wa-thima, Kripáà-cháryya, Sakuni 
Sahya and others Kurus also rode on chariots and proceeded with alaerity. 

79-83. Three crores of bards, 7: crores of Brahmins, one thousand 
Sannyüses (recluses) one thousand Yatis and Brahma-cháris, two thousand 
Avadhutas (ascetics not subject to any rites) who had subdued anger and 
other passions likewise proceeded. Thousands of gardeners holding lotus 
flowers and splendidly dressed, various kinds of architects, musicians with 
a lakh of concerts or musical bands and lakhs of dancers took up the rear. 
The Gandharvás singing in a melodious tone also started with Lord Krigna. 
O Nárada, you were at that age a Gandharva named Upavarhane and 
courted by fifty damsels. You also started with Krisna. One lakhVidyà- 
dharis, one lath celestial whores, three lakhs of Kinnara women and one 
lakh of Gandharvas, paraded proficiency in their arts or respective branches 
of knowledge and joined the retinue of Lord Krigna.”’ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


itized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


486 THE BRAHMA VAIVADTA PURANA, 


Es: eee 
CHAPTER CVI. 


1-10. The great saint Nardyana said, * At this time, the yer 
powerful king Kakudvan in quest ofa suitable match for his daughter 
arrived at that place from the land of Brahma, He glady bestowed in 
marriage his daughter Revatî who had a never-fading youth, who wag 
decked with ornamonts and invaluable gems and who was the most Joye] 
damsel in the three worlds on Baladeva who was in every respect her suitable 
mifeh with various kinds of dowry. His age had exceeded twenty-seven 


gods, he also presented to his son-in-law with great esteem three lakhs 
of royal elephants, ten lalchs of horses, cne lakh of chariots, one lakh of 
maidservants ornamented with gems, a lakh of gems, a lakh of diamonds, 
ten millions of gold coins, lovely clothes consecrated by fire and various 
kinds of pearls, diamonds and precious stones. ‘The king Kakudmi.having 
given his dauzhter to the powerful Baladeva mounted with his retinue 
a valuable chariot of gem and went to Kundinpur, By the dispensation 
of providence, when the auspicious act was over, the lovely Devaki, 
Rohini, Yas'odá, the wife of Nanda, Aditi, Diti, Santi and other women 
performed all kinds of acts indicative of success, ushered Revati who was, 
as it were, the digit of the goddess Kamala into the zenana or Seraglio 
and introduced her to the ladies. The wife of Vasudeva, feasted the Brih- 
mins in various ways, gladly distributed to them wealth and caused them 
tojperform Many auspicious acts, 


11-26. All of them beheld the most beautiful city surrounded by 
Seven deep moats and seven ramparts, graced by a hundred gates and 
constructed by Vis wa-Karmâ with several kinds of gems. The party. 
of the bridegroom attended by guards and led by four Warriors who fight 
on ehariots saw tha exterior of the town. Rukmi, the son of the king, 
mounted on a car, i$upál, the most powerful Danta.vakra and Samba, 
the best of those who Practise illusion and expert in the science of war, 
as they observed the tmy of Lord Krigna, were highly inclined and armed 
with different kinds of Weapons prepared to fight. Rukmt held up to 
ridicule the best of the Munis, the chief of the gods and kings and used 
to them hard, cruel aud unploasaat words, He said “For a wonder, how 
great is time! Or Perhaps who can arrest the progress of time? Ah! 
The preserver of the cows of Nanda with a view to marry Rukminf, 
- the lovely girl hardly to be secured 9ven by gods has arrived hore 
Tocompaniel by the gods, and Munis. What can I Say within the 

earing of the gods? The fool who is the personal gallant of the 
milk-maids, who eats tho Poona eS ROL the food of the "mraziers of 
the cows, whose caste has not been determined and who indiscriminately 
commits sexual intercourse with every woman, Poses as a prince or 


and slaughter of euch a woman implicates tho murderer in five kinds of 
great sins, How cruel! He Committed sexual intercourse with Kubja 
and then killed her, Hə beheaded the washerman for the sake of his 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


hy oem 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


ERISNA JANMA KITANDA. 487 


riptures hold that a wicked man who 
the sin of the murder, of a Brahmin. 


He killed the most pious king Kaisa at Mathura.” alwa said, “O 
gods, whit part of the statement of Rukmi is untrue ? Being the 
keeper of the beasts of Nanda, he desires to oppress the hands of Ruk- 
mini (f. €., through marriage).” Sis'upála said, “ For a wonder ! Brahma. 
the principal gods, and saints (the sons of Brahma) have descended to 
the earth at the bidding ofa man!" Danta-vakra said, “ The Brah- 
mins actuated by avarice may do anything ; and the gods favour their 
own adherents. Let them come, here, if they please. But why should 
the sons of Brahma who are free from avarice come here at the request 
of the son of Nanda ?” At these remarks the gods, the Munis, the king; 
and the Yadavas with Baladeva were highly incensed, 


——— 


CHAPTER CVII. A 
1-10. “O Narada,“the best of saints, the most powerful Baladeva, 


lator on, was excited with anger and broke the chariot, of Rukmî with 
his plough. Baladeva, the lord of the world, after having killed his 
horse and charioteer rushed to kill the wicked Rukmf deprived of his 
chariot. Rukmi spread a lattice or net-work of arrows, easily resisted 
Baladeva and with a view to bind the gceat god, the wielder of the plough, 
discharged the weapon of snakes which Baladeva destroyed with the 
weapon of Garuda. Rukmi, too, angrily held in bis hand the supreme 
and irresistible weapon called Pás'upata effulgent like a hundred suns 
and calculated to kill his enemies.  Baladeva, before discharging his 
own weapon, bewildered Rukmi with the weapon of gaping (Jrimbhana) ° 
and discharged the weapon of sleep. Thereby Rukmi dropped down 
asleep on the earth like a dry tree. Salwa seeing that Rukmi was 
asleep, began to rain incessantly mountains, hail, water, flaming sparks 
of fire and arrows. The wielder of the plough, by the strength of his 
arms and weapons, resisted the arrows discharged by Sâlwa and reduced 
to dust his chariot with his weapon, č. e., the plough. He easily killed 
his horse and chariot. Then there was a voice from the sky addressed 
to the incensed Baladeva, who was about to kill Salwa to the follow- 
ing effect: “ Leave: Salwa who deserves to die at the hands of Krigna. 
What military glory will accrue to you by this unequal fight with 
a man inferior to you? ‘The whole universe rests on your head as a 
mustard on a winnowmy basket : Upon this Baladeva struck the head of his | 
foe with his plough. Salwa was pained and dropped on the battle-field. 
11-22. Ag the clouds rain water on the earth, so the most power- 
ful S'is’upâla witnessing the fall of Salwa, began to rain weapons. 
With his, plough, the wielder of the plough reduced to dust the chaa 
riot of Sis'upála and resisted the shower of his weapons with his own 
weapon called the Half-moon. The primeval and great gcd iva having 
seen that Baladeva was about tok ill Sis'upála prevented him from the 
act saying, * Leave Sis'upal, the best of my myrmidons, who is destined 
to die at the hands of Krisna.’ Baladeva, thereupon, broke the rows 
of the teeth of Danta-vakra with his plough. The party of Krisna, 
seeing that Danta-vakra with broken teeth was going to fight, indulged 


clothes. The authors of the se 
kills a king practically commits 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


488 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


in a heaaty laugh. The other keepers of the gate observing the valour 
of Baladeva ran away. The party of the bridegroom fearlessly 
entered Kundinapura. At this time, the great Muni Satânanda 
with a crore of Munis arrived at that place and appeared bofore Hari, 
They caused Lord Krisna (dressed as a bridegroom) to enter 
the hundred gates inaccessible to the enemies and delightful to the 
friends. The goddesses, princesses, snake-nymphs and the d 
of the Munis arrived there with a gentle smile to see the bridegroom, 
Women, with eyes wide-open beheld Lord Krigna. The moon-crested 
great god (Siva) gently smiled and caused Krisna to relent towards 
the damsels, They (the girls) saw that the great god, mounted on a 
chariot constructed with valuable gems, in spite of the fact that he 
was the Supreme Being, was wielding an image only out of compassion 
for his worshippers, His body, blue-black like a new cloud, was beauti- 
fully graced with yellow garments. A wild wroath was hanging on his 
Person besmeared with sandal. His shoulders associated with arms that 
were decorated with armlets and bracelets were rendered bright by a 
wreath of gems. His face was graced with ear-rings of gem, 

23-32. Valuable anklets constructed with gems were merrily ringing 
round his feet. The wielder of the flute was gently smiling and consulting 
the looking-glass of gem. Seven of the attendant cowherds were dis- 
palling his fatigue with the breeze raised by the flourish of white chowries, 
Having attained the prime of his youth, he had a pair of eyes as enchant- 
ing as autumnal lotuses. His lotus-face beautiful as a hundred Cupids 
was slandering the autumnal full moon. The celebrated deeds performed 
by Lord Krisna, truthful, constant and eternal, who is adored by Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahes'a, have consecrated the holy places of the earth. His 
achievements are famous and held sacred: and his grace is bright like 
millions of moons and very delightful. He is beyond the range of medi- 
tation and can be adored with difficulty. He is the Supreme Being, 
separate from Nature: and yet he holds in his hands silken thread with 
bent grass, a looking-glass constructed with valuable gems, leaves of 


Plantain not in fall bloom and a small sword. He likewise sustains 
flowers offered by women 


aughterg 


the adorable great god, the women faintec 
to their feelings said, “ Blessed and pr 
alone!” The great queens, the wives 
son-in-law with eyes wide-open, assume 
great gratification at the sight. 


pleasure with his ministers and family pri b feet of the 
gore AM S ae amuy priests, bowed before the feet o 


gs and provided them with dwelling houses full of 
articles of food delicious like hone 


heard, « Freely distribute articles th 


. 98-45. Krisna passed the night there with the gods and Bráhmins 
With pleasure : and the next day he performed morning rites. After the 
hours of the morning, he performed the Sandhy& (ode to the Sun) and 
other necessary rites, put on a pair of washed clothes and was initiated 
ta the ceremony of the auspicious Adhi-vàsa (the ceremony previous to 4 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


end 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. : 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA 489 


King Bhismaka having worshipped the sixteen mothers 
who are just lixe personal coddesses offered eurrents of water to the ean 
and pure, in body and spirit, performed the Adhi-vása of Hari. He then 
performed the ceremony of oblation to tbe Manes and the Vriddhi-S raddha 
(an offering made to deceased ancestors for prosperity on the occasion of a 
sacred ceremony), feasted the Brahmins, gods and kinsmen with 
delicacios, ordered the drummers to beat the drum and, with 
a view to do good to the Lord, the fountain of all good, he directed 
the performanee of auspieious rites. Bhismaka splendidly apparelled 
the adorable Lord and dressed him as a bridegroom. . The king 
Bhísmaka, having thus performed all sorts of auspicious rites suited 
to the occasion and pronounced the Mantras of the Vedas, a pplied — 
himself diligently to the celebration of other acts. He gladly gave alms 
to the bards, Brahmins and mendicants in the shape of precious stones, 
gems, diamonds, pearls, articles for food and other presents. AII the 
four quarters of the globe were filled with the sound of musical in- 
struments at his instance. Auspicious acts demonstrated themselves 1n 


great festival). 


several places. The queen of Bhismaka got ready a beautiful apparel 


for Rukmini in a suitable manner. At last the auspicious moment 
associated with Lagna, t.e., the period suited to the marriage during 
the Mahendra-Yoga (conjunction of all propitiatory stars) arrived. Af 
atime calculated to do good to the married couple and secure their 
happiness, at the period associated with favourable stars void of the 
defects of Vedha and Saldka combined with the pure moon and the 
planets; unobserved by evil stars, sanctified by the glances of auspicious 
planets and presided over by the Lord of the Ligna, Lord Krisna 
attended by the gods, Munis, Brahmins and family priests arrived in 
the courtyard of king Bhigma. 

46-61. Lord Krisna was attended by his relations, kinsmen, friends, 
his parents, kings, attendants, graceful cowherds, bards, prophets, as- 
trologers, musicians, dancers, singers, architects, gardeners, and lotuses. 
Vidyádharis, celestial whores and Kinnars and nymphs likewise waited on 
him. ‘The gods, Munis, kings and other persons who arrived to witness 
the marriage saw the placo well-decorated. The place was decked with 
a thousand columns of plantain polished with the thread of silk, and 
decked with leaves of Champak, sandal and jack. ‘That place, 


. teeming with wreaths of flowers of various colours, viz. yellow, red and 


black, associated with fruits aud foliage, combined with musk, sandal 
and saltron and graced with leaves, fried rice, fruits, flowers, bent grass 
and othor auspicious articles, aiforded a beautiful scenery. That place 
decorated with altars, lovely and made of precious gems, was occupied by 
Munis, Brihmins and kings. The gentle, cool and refreshing wind was 
redolent of the sandal, musk and saffron. At that place, a thousand bright 
and burning lamps constructed with gems were perfumed with the vapour of 
frankincense. That council was adorned with statues of various kinds fixed 
in all directions and set up by engineers and gardeners. There lovely 
Gandharyas were singing sweetly in various ways. People were sitting 
there with rapt attention to witness the clever performances of 
the Vidy’-dhiris, dancers and architects. Youthful women wore observing 
the graco of tho assembly through secret doors anl windows. Aus. 


62 


-t 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


: j Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
450 THE BRAUMA PAIVARTA PURANA, Y 
0. —0 km 


picious jars, the most learned family priest, articles | of gift and the king 
Bhigmaka with holy grass in his hand greatly contributed to the bright. 
ness or grandeur of the assembly with their presence. The. gods in. 
eluding Brahmá and the kings, seeing the place, descended from the car 
and;sat down in the courtyard. The kings, the Yadavas, Sanaka and the 
other Munis and Krigna with his attendants also took their respective 
seats. 


62-74. King Bhigmaka, as soon as he saw them, quickly stood up; 
adored the gods, the Munis and kings, bowed low and after having wor. 
shipped them in a suitable manner deferentially seated them each on a 
lovely throne of gem. King Bhismaka reverentially eulogised them and 
with streaming eyes and folded palms respectfully said to Krişna, the son 
of Vasudeva, “To-day my life has been rendered worthy and my birth 
has been glorified. My Karma accumulated in a crore of births has been 
radically destroyed, i.e, I have got rid of my Karma. That supreme 
Being who is the creator of the world and the source of all prosperity, whose 
lotus feet could not have been observed by a man like me even in dreams, . 
who rewards tho devotions of people, is present to-day in my courtyard 
in person. "Phat perfect Being, who is solf-contented, is not fit to be 
questioned like ordinary people thus: “Welcome! or are you well?" The best 
of adepts, gods, devotees, and ascetics do not observe even in meditation 
that Being, the auspicious Lord, the harbour of Siva: and yet he has graced 
my courtyard to-day. That Being who is the time, (end) of time the death 
of death, the universal Lord of all who has conquered death is porceptible 
to-day before my eyes like an ordinary mortal. The god Ananta who on 
one of his thousand heads sustains the whole world with the animate and 
Inanimate objects and who has no end has to-day arrived at my courtyard 
with the gods. The sons, grandsons, great-grandsons and descendants of 
Brahma, radiant with the lustre of Brahma have to-day come to my ' 
house. Ganes’a who gives all success, whose worship has been prescribed 
as the foremost, who is the best of the gods is in my courtyard. The 
Vaignava Sanat-kumára, the chief of the Munis, the spiritual guide of the 
wise has to-day manifested himself before my eyes in my courtyard. 


79-86. Ah | my house will be rendered sacred like a place frequented 
by pilgrims till the day of final dissolution. The pure water of the 
feet which consecrates such a placa is to-day available in my house. All 

_ the holy places designed for pilgrims in the world subsist in the ocean alone: 
tand all the holy places which (as deseribed above) subsist in the ocean 
exist in the water of the fect of a Brahmin. So long as a man who 
drinks the water of the feet of a Brahmin dwells on earth, his ancestors 
drink water from the sacred lake of Puskara. A person, who after drinking 
the water which washes the feet of a Brahmin, gives him his priestly 
fee, assuredly reaps the fruits sceured by ablutions in all holy streams. 
Brahma, the offspring of the ‘lotus, hath said, that a man respectfully . 
drinking the blessed and excellent water of a Brühmin's feet is released 
from danger and disease and secures great happiness. There is no holy 
place like tho Ganges, no god superior to Krisna, no believer better 
than. Sanat: Kumâra, no tree superior to the Kalpa, no flower better than 
Parjiata, no vow more sacred than Bkadas'i, no leaf more holy than the 


CC-0--In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


XC 


KRISTE JA NIPE RAND 491 


to Nature, nothing more expansive than the 
dense than Maha-Vignu and nothing more 


subtle than the atom. There is no hermitage or holy land_more sacre 
than a Brahmin ; there is no god more adorable than Kes'ava. The 
primeval gol, the origin of other gods, i. ês Lord Krigna who is superior 
to Brahma, Visnu, S'iva and even Nature, who certainly cannot be 
attained even by devotees through meditation, who can be adored with 
difficulty, who, though void of attributes and form, wields & form out 


of compassion for his believers has to-day been perceptible before the eyes 


of ordinary men in my house.” 

87.99. So saying, king Bhismaka eyed Lord Krisna standing 
before him and eulogised him according to the hymn as stated in the 
Sama Veda thus: “ O soul of all persons, you are not associated with 
anything; and yet you are the witness of every act. You are the Lord 
controlling the actions of all people and you are the original cause or the 
cause of causes. Some say that you are full of light Eternal and only 
one. Other theorists maintain that you are the supreme soul reflected 
in the bodies of living beings. Some deluded persons maintain that you 
are vested with attributes, born of nature and a created being. Alas! 
What a popular fallacy! For, from the body ofthe permanent Eternal 
Reing alone zan eternal light emanate. Ië cannot omanate from the 
body of anyone else.” O Narada, Bhismaka, the best of kings, having 
thus adore! the Lord, offered oblations of water to the lotus feet of Krigna 
(adored by the goddess Kamala) and subsequently offered to .the 
said feet oblations of water mixed with flowers, bent grass, barley, ete.- 
He then delivered to him the perfumed oblation of honey and milk, 
and annointed all his body with sandal paste. King Bhísmaka, on this 
auspicious occasion, adorned the neck of his son-in-law with a wreath of 
Parijit which he received from Indra by way of dowry; and on 
the occasion of the ceremony of the very auspicious marriage, the king 
gave him as dowry invaluable ornaments of gem which he had formerly 
received from Kuvera. The king also gave the perfect Lord Krigna a pair 
of clothes consecrated hy fire which the fire-god had given to him (the 
king) before. The king likewise gave him a diamond radiant with light 
which he had first obtained from Vis^wa-Karmáà. He then greeted the 
lord with frankincense, lamps of gem, graceful sacrificial offerings, various 
kinds of flowers, thrones of diamond, water brought from seven holy streams 
to rinse the mouth, delightful bedsteads and perfumed water for drinking. 
Lastly, he humbly besought his forgiveness or condonement for his faults 
and with folded palms offered to him a handful of flowers. 


CHAPTER CVIII. 

, 1-14. Nárüyana said, “ At the time, Rukmint, the great goddess of 
ortune, attended by the gods and the Munis arrived at the council. The 
goddess Rukmini seated on a throne of gem put on a piece of eloth con- 
secrated by fire and was decked with jewels constructed with ‘gems of 
groat value. Her head was adorned with the load of chignon. Tha 
óc ae of the goddess Rukmint was annointed with refreshing sandal 
combined with drops of musk. Her forehead was deeked with bright 


ae X a 


basil, no goddess superior 
container Wind, nothing more 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
492 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


marks of vermilion : and the chaste goddess witha smile was consulting 
her face in a precious glass. Her bright body, graceful like a hundred, 
moons or the heated gold, was covered with sandal paste and wreaths of 
jasmine. Seven princes ushered her into the council. The best of adepts, 
Munis, gods and kings beheld Rukmini who was the emblem of the great 
goddess of fortune. The chaste Rukmint circumambulated round hey 
husband seven times, bowed before his feet and sprinkled cool water on him 
with refreshing sandalleaves. The consort of Laksmi, the Lord of the world 
likewise moistened his sweet and smiling spouse with water. Rukminî, the 


emblem of Laksmf, beheld her consort at an auspicious moment, who did ` 


the same in return, The beautiful Rukmini shining with the radiance of 
her own beauty then hnug down her head with shame and sat dewn on the 
lap of her father, O Narada, king Bhismaka, after having pronouneed 
the Mantras of the Vedas, bestowed tho hands of his daughter, 
the great goddess, on the perfect and Supreme Lord Krişna along 
with dowry. At the command of Vasudeva, Krisna uttered the. 
particle of benediction and gladly sat down. He accepted Rukminî in 


the same manner as Siva had accepted Parvati. King Bhîsmaka 


“presented 5 lakhs of gold coins as priest’s fee for tho gift of his danghter 
to the Supreme Being and eternal spirit, Lord Krisna. When the 
auspicious rite was over, king Bhismaka held his daughter in his lap 
before the assembly of the gods and saints and eried like ono who lost his 
sensos, Later on, with modest words expressivo of apologies for his faults, 
he delivered his daughter to Lord Krigna and moistened the girl (blessed 
in the world) with his tears, 


CHAPTER CIX, 

1-12. Nürüyana said, “ At that time, the blessed queen, the mother of 
Rukmini attended by chaste women who were blessed with husbands and 
sons gladly arrived there, performed the ceremony of greetings or reception 
and other sacred rites and seated the nuptial pair in the house which was 
rendered bright-with pearls, gems, looking glasses, ete., and graced with the 

` strings of pearls of various sorts and of 2 wonderful deseription. Lord Krigna 
also observed at that place Durga, the remover of calamities, seated on a 
throre of gem decked with ornaments of gem. and attended Saraswati, 
Savitri, Rati and the chaste Rohit. They, too, seeing the lord of the world 
gladly seated him on a throne of gem. The wives of the gods and the Monis, 
with folded palms, adored each of them by turns. The queen feasted the 
bridegroom and the bride and gave them betols and fragrant water. Durga 
handed over to Krisna an auspicious lotter and at the command of all 
directed Krigna to read it, Lord ,Krisna, according to the desire of the 
goddesses, read the epistle thus, « May Laksmi, Saraswati, Durgá, 
Savitri, the chaste Radha, Tulsi, the Earth, the Ganges, Arundhati 
Yamuna, Diti, S'atarupá, Deva-putt, Sita, MenakA and other goddesses 
bless the married couple", ^ When Krişna read the letter, the 
audience began to laugh, à i 
. 18-22, Parvati said, “ O Lord of Rukmlnî, Rukminî is observing 
you with a sweet smile. You should also look at your beautiful spouse 
who has attained her beauty and is in the prime of her youth." S'achí 
said, * Rukminí, who is your mateh in every respeet, who is decked with 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Bir. 


Digitized by eG : 
RRISNA JANA RHANDASS 493 


:ewels of gem and vested with youth in its prime prefers you to others 
and has been solicitng your society: for a long time.” :Sávitri said, * Pro- 
videnee has united an accomplished bride with an equally accomplished 


bridegroom. The union of a clever pair is always fraught with good 
bs Rati said, * O Lord of the universe, who can cut jokes with 
Being particularly when he is not perceptible to the eyes of 
a person even by meditation, when he ean hardly be adored and is 
superior to other gods ? O Lord of the universe, I put fo you one question. 
Return a correct answer before the assembly of the ladies. How lovely 
is Radha and how enchanting is Rukmini ?" Saraswati said,“ you 
do not-love Rukmini so wellas you love Radha ; for Radh&, clever in 
amusements, is your former associate and represents your five vital airs. 
Radhi who is dearer to you than your life presides over your life ; 
whereas Rukmint who represents the energy of Krisna is the presiding 
goddess of all prosperity, nay. Kamali, the goddess of fortune herself. 
The great goddess Darei (Nérdyani) presides over intellect ; and 
Savitri, the mother of the Vedas, presides over the Vedas. I am alsoa 
digit of Nature presiding over knowledge. There are other digits besides 
elf, The Supreme Being is not so much attached to iva, Ananta, 
Laksmi, Parvati or myselfor any of his believers 


results." 
the Supreme 


mys 
Ganes'a, the Sun-god, 
as to Radha. 


99-34, The earth is truly blessed in the three worlds: for it contains the 
holy land of India. Vrindávana is the most blessed land on earth, for it is 
constantly trodden by the footsteps of Radha. Râdhâ is the most honoured 
and sacred of all goddesses ; for her lotus feet were painted with the liquid 
of lac-dye by Lord Krisna, the god of gods himself. The goddesses 
laughed, as Saraswati continued thus: “Radha dwellsin the heart of Krisna 
who is worshipped by other women from a respectable distance. Hence 
Rukmini, only by bowing low to Radha, ean attain her likeness to a 
certain extent.” Savitri, Parvati, Rati and other women congratulated 
Saraswati on the artful words which she used. Lopà-Mudcá, Auusüyá, 
Ahalyá, Arundhati and other. celebrated women of the Munis amused 
themselves at the expense of Lord Krisna. Later on, king Bhigmaka 
ador»d with due esteem the best of gods, Munis and kings and feasted 
them all with various kinds of ingredients. Bhigmaka’s party continually 
cried thus: Freely distribute things to the guests according to their 
desire: eat to your fill, ete., etc. This demonstration of hospitality combined 
with’ the melody of the drums and the, sound of music caused & 
great commotion throughont the city. Afterwards, on the next day, 
ín the morning, Brahma, Siva, Ananta and other gods, and the kings, 
hurriedly rode on their respeetive ehariots. King Ugrasen and Vasudeva 
promptly issued orders for the necessary preparation to. be made for the 
auspicious departure of Krigna and the chaste Rukmini. Subbadrá, the . 
mother of ,Rukmini, held her daughter to-her breast. With her attendant 
maids she wept a good deal saying, “O child, or, O goddess, where are 
you going ? Why are you leaving your mother? How shall we live with- 
out you? And how will you live without us ? The chaste and beloved 
spouse of Krisna,. the great goddess of fortuna who was born through 
Visnu’s illusion as my daughter, is now going from my house to the house 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


d ` Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
44 THE BRAUMA PAIVARTA PURANA. 


SS 
of Vasudeva.” So saying she moistened all her body with tears whioh . 
flowed copiously from her eyes through grief, : 


35-47. King Bhísmaka with streaming eyes, having delivered 

to Krisna his daughter, humbly besought his forgiveness for his faults 
and wept loudly. The goddess Rukmini also wept. Krisna who hag 
assumed the imige of a man through his illusions slightly wept. Vasu. 
deva placed the nuptial pair in the chariot. In this interval, the king 
gave to his son-in-law 1,000:elephants, 60,00) horses,one thousand maid- 
servants, hundreds of maid servants, a thousand gems, invaluable jewels 
of gem, 5 lakhs of gold coins consecrated by fire, refreshing water-glasses 
or cups of gold constructed by Vis'wa-Karmá with great care. He also 
gladly gave him as dowry the cow called Surabhi, anda thousand mileh-cows 
with calves. Vasudeva and Ugrasen, with the gods and Munis, eheerfully 
proceeded to Mathura soon. After entering into the beautiful city, they 
caused auspicious deeds to be performed and delightful musical instruments 
to be played upon. Devakî, Rohini, Yas‘oda, (the wife of Nanda, and an 
excellent damsel), Aditi, Diti and the wives of Uddhava repzatedly looked at 
Lord Krisna and his consort Rukmini, conducted the pair to the house and 

supervised the performance of all sorts of auspicious deeds, Vasudeva, 

having feasted the gods, Munis kings and tho Brahmins with four kinds 

of delicacies which could ` be chawed, sucked, licked or drunk, 

modestly apologised to them for any fault committed by him and having 

distributed gems, ete., to tha celebrated bards and Brahmins and thus 

gratified them, he treated them to a feast, Everyone having thus 

enjoyed a hearty meal and received wealth according to his desire went 
home, The wife of Vasudeva also eansed auspicous deeds to be performed, 


CHAPTER CX. 

1-14. The gods, ete., who had arrived the 
were over, went back to their places. Nanda and Yas'odà approached 
both of their sons, Yas'odá said,“ O Krisna, I am told that you kindly 
Bave counsel to your father Nanda with regard to pure metaphysical 
knowledge, Child, I am your mother: therefore, O gracious Being, relent 
to me as well. You are the sublime Being, who onge assumed the form of 
a boar and thereby released the world. Release me also for. I am nof pro- 
ficient in Swimming. Look! T am sinking beneath the dreadfal ocean of the 
world. That primordal.goddess Nature, the emblem of illusion serves as 


a boat. to enable a person to cross the sea of the world, O gracious 
Being, in order to enable your believers t 


are the pilot of the said boat." The exco 


at her words, The great spiritual leader of sages respectfully said to 


his mother thus 260 mother, there are fiye kinds of knowledes relating to 
the concentration of mind—viz, menta] i “ang Y 


attainment of perfection, my bondage (t.e., the bonda 
in Hari, These are sanctioned by the V, 


re, after the auspicious rites 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ak 


Digitized by.eGangotri a rayu Xr ; " 
RRISNI ANNA CRHANDYS 495 


Ep—— —— 
s including Idà, etc., and baving penetrated the six 
divisions of the human body, he should meditate with 
a pure heart the Supreme Being vested with the faculty of nature 
Kundalini). He should subdue- his passions and carefully control 
the avarice and other desires. Mulàdhàr, Swadhisthan, Manipur, Aná- 
hata, Vi'sudhha and Ajiia are celebrated as the six Chakras or wheels. O 
chaste one, the knowledge relating to Yoga (concentration of mind) hardly 
to be secured by women and particularly by ignorant people is attainable 
and desirable only by adepts. The knowledge with regard to self or 
ego which men acquire ab my instance relates to worldly enjoyments. 
Thirty-four kinds of knowledge which enable the adepts to perform every 
act and impel them to perfection constitute the knowledge relating to 
attainment of perfection. The knowledge relating to redemption, the 
cause of Kaivalaya (absotute identity with divine essence), is very pure. A 
believer does not desire the knowledge which points out the path leading to 


the final emancipation of the soul. 
15-26. Radha will give you kno 


the arteries or yein 
Chakras or esoteric 


wledge relating to religious belief, which 
can be acquired only by believers. You should cease’ to regard her asa 


human being and must consider her asa goddess: Radha will give you 


the same knowledge that I have imparted to my father Nanda.” Krişna 


having modestly consoled his.mother with these words weut to the seraglio. 
Nanda and Ya'sodà went to the forest of plantains, As they reached 
that place, they saw Radha. They saw that she was emaciated for want of 
nourishment. Clad in a white garment she was lying down on a bed 
composed of lotuses and soft clay. She was annointed with sandalpaste and 
drenched in water. Tears were flowing from her eyes. She was fainting 
every moment. Dead to all sense of external world, she was meditating 
attentivaly the lotus feet of the Supreme Being, Krigna. Radha 
haying seen her smiling consort Krigna in dream was observing 

his lotus face with eyes wide open. At times she was smiling and 

at times she was weeping. Her female companions were fanning 
her on all sides with fly-fans. A hundred crores of cow-herd girls armed 
with sticks were carefully watehing her. Mounting guards over the seven 
gates and the courtyard, they were ministering to Radha. Nanda and his 

wife were astonished to see Radha in this condition. With great reverence, 

Nanda bowed low and threw himself prostrate at her feet. Radha, 

as Providence would have it, was suddenly roused from slumber. In a 
moment she attained consciousness ; but still she had no idea of the 

world. The chaste Rádhà when she saw Nanda and Yasoda, accosted 

them thus with esteem, using gentle words in the presence of her female 

associates : ** Who are you ? Soon tell me the object of your visit. Listen 

likewise to my ease. I cannot distinguish between a man and a beast 

water and land, night and day, a man, a woman and a ennuch." Nanda 
was astonished at the words of Radh&, and Ya'sodà was frightened. 
Being gently greeted by the cowherdesses, she approached Radha, 

. 21-40. Yas'odà seated by the side of Rádhá tried to console her 
with sweet words. King Nanda also occupied the seat furnished to him 
by the cowherdesses. Yas'odà caid, * O Rádhà, recover and carefully 
preserve your life, As soon as the auspicious moment sets in, you will 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding byIKS-MoE ~~ : 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


496 HE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


Baa 


see the Lord of your life. O supreme goddess, this world, the asylum 
of good, has been consecrated by your presence; and the Cowherdesseg 
have been rendered saered by ministering to your lotus feet; People recite 
your ancient ballads which are beneficial and consecrate even places 
frequented by pilgrims. Virtuous sages, the four Vedas and the 
four Puranas recite your celebrities. O emblem of intellect, why hag 
your intellect been perverted ? I am Yas'odà and he is Nanda, the great 
king. O performer of good vows, you are the daughter of Vriga-bhaou : 
do not forget yourself. O good and chaste damsel, deputed by Hari, I have 
come to you from Dwárkà. O goddesses, please listen to the good mes- 
sage which I have brought for you. You will see Krişna soon. Therefore 
gather your wits. At the command of your husband, I have come to you, 
Please leeture us on the knowledge relating to belief. O fair one, afterwards 
Krigna will come to you for a while and you will soon be released from the 
curse of Sridama. Ya'soda communicated to Radha. the good news relat. 
ing to Krigna and the mere recollection of his name dispelled all thoughts 
of evil “from her mind. Radha was thus restored to consciousness. She 
then gently proceeded to deal with the subject relating to supernatural 
belief. r 


CHAPTER CXI, 

1-11. Radha said, “The great and wise Lord adored by Brahma, 
Siva, Ananta and other gods has not imparted to you knowledge, though 
you went to him. The import of that knowledge and its significance 
how shall I be able to explain to yon ? The four Vedas and the sages of 
dignified rank cannot realise its significance. I am but a feeble and 
silly woman obscured by ignorance. I haye now partieularly been rendered 
senseless by the absence of Krisna. The fever of his separation op- 
presses me. Ihave no patience. What Shall I say more? You are 
the mother of Krigna devoted to your husband. What ean you learn from 
me? Just, then, listen to the knowledge, excellent and supreme, which 
Hari, full of Brahma, had imparted. to Nanda. Among the five kinds 
of knowledge which shall I describe to you ? Then listen to the excellent 
knowledge which relates to faith. O virtuous Being, do not be fearless 
even after having obtained a boon from Krisna A bad ascetic, even 
after attaining the Cow-world with great difficulty, is liable to fall 
again from that place. Therefore saerifico everything and worship 
the Supreme Being. Cease to regard Krisna as your son and regard 
him as Brahma. O Yas'odà, lay aside your religious rites which are 
transcient in their nature and go to the sacred Vrinddvana in the heart 
of the holy land of India. There bathe in the pure water of the Yamuná, 
in the morning, noon and evening and annoint a lotus of vight leaves 
with moist sandal- paste. With that lotus, mutter the pure and great 
mantra given by Garga, Worship that Being full of Eternal happiness 
and proceed to his land. O chaste one, if you are able to root out 
your Karma, you willbe able to conduct to that place your ancestors 
connected with hundreds of your births, Always converse. with the 
Vaisnavas, 

12-37, The adherents of the supremo Lord do not hesitate 
ven to encounter the torture of fire or to dwell iu a. place beset with 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


y 


* the pious. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 497 


m 
t r thorns, Nay, they may even choose to take poison, rather than 
ton ' void of belief in Hari; for such- wicked men bring 


associate with men vol 3 
about destruction to others and are able to pervert even the mind of 
The tree of life grows in the society of saints and, irrigated 


with the nectar of Hari’s name, acquires excellence. Communication in 


the slightest degree with the impious consumes the tree like a fire-brand. 
But sprinkled again with the said nectar itis rejuvenated. As a man 
runs away at the sight ofa deadly snake, so you should also carefully 
avoid th» company of unbelievers. O Yas oda, worship with concentration 
of mind, reverence your son and regard him as the Supreme Being, 
the great god and the Lord of the universe. Whoever takes these names 
or the synomymns of the following eleven names: Rama, Narayana, 
Ananta, Mukunda, Madhusüdan, Krisna, Kes'ava, Kamsári, Hari, Vaikun- 
tha, Vamana out of deference to Hari or causes others to take them is releas- 
éd from the sins committed in the course of ten thousand millions of births. 
The word “ RA” indicates the universe ; and “Ma” indicates god. _ There- 
foro the beautiful word Ráma is used with reference to the Lord of the 
world. He who cohabits with Ram&, the goddess of fortune, is also called 
Rama by savants. He is also styled RAma by them, as heis the fit 
subject for sexual intercourse with Rama who is the emblem of the entire 
year. Some pandits hold that “RA” means the goddess of fortune ; and 
^^ Ma” means the Lord ; therefore Rama is so called, as he is the consort of 
the said goddess. The utterance of the name of Rama for one time, 
certainly ‘secures the same fruits as the recollection of the names of a 
thousand gods. The Pandits hold that Nara means the attainment of 
the form of the Lord as well as redemption. He who therefore points 
out the path leading to redemption and attainment of his form is 
celebrated as Narayana. Nara also means sinners ; and Ayan means going. 
Therefore Narayana is he by the mere utterance of whose names siuners 
go to the supreme land.- Men, by the mere utterance of the word Nár&- 
yana for one time, assuredly secure the benefits of ablutions in all holy 
streams including tho Ganges for three hundred Kalpas. Or, Nara means 
redemption and Ayan conveys the idea of desired sanctity. Hoe is, 
therefore, called Lord Náráyana through whom we gain the idea or 
knowledge of both, ¢. ¢. redemption and sanctity. He whose limits 
cannot be traced by the four Vedas, Puránas and other esoteric or 
mystic sciences is called Ananta by the Saints. Mukum, the word begin- 
ning with M, means a thing inexhaustible and also final emancipation and 
redemption. The giver of all these is called Mukunda, Mukum, ip the 
Vedas, implies also love and faith; 80 he who gives to his believers love and 
faith is Mukunda. He who killed the demon Madhu is alone Madhu- 
Südana. Pious men put also a meaning upon the word different from that 
given in the Vedas. The word Madhu after neuter gender means the juice 
of flowers and also good and bad deeds. He who destroys the Karma of 
his believers, good or bad, is called Madhu-Südana. The word Madhu 
means, sweet to the deluded persons for the time being, but ultimately 
bringing about remorse.” He who destroys such an act is called Madhu- 
Südana. Krisi means excellent; Na means holy belief and A means donor. 
So he who gives excellent belief is called Krisna. Krisi also implies great 
happiness and na implies bondage; and A means donor. He who gives 


63 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


M4 FAIFARTA PURANA, 


igitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
408 THE BRAN 


=e ae ae 
supreme happiness and bondage to his believers is also called Krigna, The 

word Krisi also implies the sins accumulated by a person in hig Previoug 

births and also pain: Na means annihilation; therefore he who annihilates 
the above sins is called Krigna. The mere utterance by men of the name 

of Krisna for one time brings the same fruits as the mention of three 
thousand names of gods, 


38-49. Learned men conversant with the Vedas hold that there is no 
name, or there can be no name superior to the name of Krigna, This 
name alone is more glorious than any other name. O cowherdess, whoever 
having pronounced the name of Krigna, Krişna, remembers the supreme 
Being or any name Synonymous with that name is released by me from 
hell, as a lotus appears on the surface after having surmounted heaps of 
water in which it was merged. Whoever pronounces the auspicious 
name of Krisna, the source ofall good, immediately succeeds in consuming 
millions and millions of great sins subsisting in hi 
of the name of Krisna brings forth fruits which could be secured by a 
thousand ceremonies of horse-sacrifice. Rather, a man is liable to be born 
again, in spite of his thousand sacrifices; but a believer after pronouncing 

risna's name is at once relieved from the agonies of re-birth. A hundred 


round the world hundreds of times and other holy aets are n 
in point of religious efficacy to a sixteenth part of the act of 
reciting the name of Krisna. A man, by virtue of 
may attain a place in heaven for 
from heaven one day. But he who utters the name of Har 
fall and ultimately attains the feet of Hari. 
sleops in Ke, t.e., water and in the bodies of ani 
by sages conversant with the Vedas, The 
calamity, or disease, grief and a demon. Thee 
is Kamsári, He is called Hari, because he d 
of Rudra and daily removes the sins of his believers. Kuntha means the 
material world, The being who qualifies the world or endows it with 
Property is called Vikuntha Prakriti by the four Vedas. The Lord, 
though void of virtues, endows himself with virtues for the genesis 


of creation and is himself produced by the above Prakriti or Nature. 
ence savants call the supreme Being Vaikuntha, 


50 54, The Vedas personally hold that Váma means danger; and na 


at originator of all the gods, therefore, who cuts off 


(or removes) the dangers of other gods is celebrated by the name of Va- 
mana, I have thus r 


ecited to you the etymology of the names, as I 
heard from the Vedas and according to the ae or the esoteric 
scriptures, Krişna knows all this," Yas’oda said, “O Radha, I hoard 
most wonderful accounts from your mouth. You are the eterna) mother 
of the four Vedas, “ She is not Râdhâ but my equal’: with this idea 
qon in Bs mne llari has lectured you on metaphysics. D 

ue oi this good luck on our part. i an 
are adored Ly 3 RE your part, you have acquired excellence 


» You alone are blessed in the world. Now 
tell mo by turns the etymology of the follow 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA 499 


a 
Govinda, Murari and Madhava. 
logy of other names.” i 

-55-64. Radha said, “That Being, the refuge of the world in the pores of 
whose skin the whole world exists is called Vasu; Deva is th name of the 
supreme Being. Hence he is called Vasudeva. He easily sustains the 
burden of Go=the earth and all other worlds, and is the sea of endless 
knowledge. Hence he is called Govinda. He has been recited as Murari, 
as he is the enemy of Mara which means pain, affliction, the consequences 
of one’s evil acts anda certain demon. Ma means Náráyani, (the 
spouse of Hari); and Sri-Krisna is called Mádhava because he is the 
husband of the radical Nature (the emblem of Brahma, the eternal Maya 
of Visnu), also of the great goddess of fortune, of Saraswati, the mother 
of the Vedas of Radha, the earth and the Ganges, Carefully adore that 
thiefof butter who is revered by Brahm4, Visnu, Siva and the god Ananta : 
whose limit could not be determined by Sanaka and other saints in spite 
of their meditations: whose real ossence could not be discovered even by 
the Vedas and the Puranas. Where is that milk, curd, ghee or the desired 
fresh whey and where is the thief of all those articles ? And where are you 
and where is that confinement of Hari at the root of the tree ? How will 
you be able to bind at the root of a tree a Being whom ascetics, adepts, 
the best of of Munis, the believers, Mahes'a, Brahma and god Ananta 
could neither preserve in the temple of their heart nor attain by means of 
meditation ? Chaste one, always adore carefully the most holy Being 
seated in the lotus of your heart with love, faith, eulogies, devotion and 
meditation. O good matron ? may you be blessed. Demand from me the 
same boon that you fervently” desire. I shall give you things which can 
hardly be secured by sages.” 


65-75. Yas'odá said, **I desire, O mother, toshave firm (unshaken) faith 
in Hari and his bondage. But I ask, what is the etymology of your 
name ? Reveal to me who you are.” Radha said, “By my boon, you. 
will have unshaken faith in Hari and secure his bondage. Now I am 
going to reveal to you my nature or essence. Once upona time, I was 
seated at the root of the fig tree when I observed Nanda, the wise king of 
the Vraja. I told him that I was but the wife of Ráyána and hence the 
mere shadow ofthe real Rádhá. Râyana is the digit of Lord Hari and 
ig the best of his adherents. Mah&-Visnu is he who sustains the whole 
universe on each of the pores of his skin. That Mahá-Visnu including the 
universe and all its inhabitants is implied by the term Râ. And Dhà 
implies sustainer and the mother. Iam the sustainer and the mother of 
Maha.Visnu including countless worlds and the inhabitants of the 
worlds. I am the supreme goddess and the primordial Nature. This 
is why, in days of yore, savants and Lord, Krisna have assigned to me 
the name of Rádhà. At present through Sridama’s curse I have been 
born as the daughter of "Vrisa-bhánü. I shall be separated from 
Hart fora hundred years. And Vrisa-bhint is also the foremost of the 
chief attendents of Lord Krişna. My mother Kalávati isthe intellectual 
- daughter of the manes. Both land my mother, have been born in India 
without the medium of wombs and will merge again in the feet of Hari 
along with yourself. © mistress of the Vraja, Ihave thus related everye 


Li 


Ido not now want to know the etymo- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
500 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


—— 
thing to you. Now go back to the Vraja with your busband, tho Wise 
king of the Vraja. You have at this time disturbo mo in my meditation. 
Fair one, it is also most sinful to disturb people in thoir meditation,” 


3 CHAPTER OXII. 

1-10. Narayana said, “O Muni, Krisna, at the command of V 
arrived at Dwarka and went to the excellant palace of Rukmini constructe] 
with gems, That mansion was constructed with invaluable gems ard could 
vie in colour with pure crystal. The front of the house was decorated with 
various pictures l& was graced, here and there, with invaluable j 
The house was decorated on all sides with white chowries, look 
and fine clothes consecrated by fire. Lord Krigna beheld t 
Rukminí in the prime of her youth lying down with g 
bed adorned with gems. She was not yet fully developed and ha 
attained puberty. She had just ceased to be a newly married bride, 
So she was abashed at the idea of the 
begun or about to be commenced. Hor body was ¢ 

constructed with invaluable gems. Her hand held a looking-glass of 
Her forehead was adorned with marks of vermilion : 
of her head, with wreaths of Jasmine. Rukminî, the daughter of Bhisn 
as soon as she saw Krisna bowed before his feet, Later on, Lord Krisna 
committed sexual intereourse with her at an auspicious moment, The 


act and fainted. 


a d himself on the 
occasion, This god Kama after having slain 'Sambara had got back Rati 


ati had taken: 


ásudeva 


ars of gem, 
ing-@lasseg 
he smiling 


' Course, Narada said, * how did Kama slay the 
blessed being, recite to me in detail that sacred 


11-18, Narayana sald, “The love-god, whose standard is fish, having 
been born only seven days ago, the demon Sambara took the newborn child 
from Rukminí's confinement-room and returned home. The king of 


demons had no isiue. So pleased with his achievement he delivered the 
child to his wife and Teared him ag his son. The chaste MA yá vati 


with care and affection. Once upon a time tho 
Private: “Your husband, in days 
Siva’s wrath, This child is 
en by your husband. The 
m the confinement-room of: 


$ to you. He is your husband, and not your son." 
After having spoken to her, the chasto Saraswati, the mother of ie «ca 


thus addressed Kama, * O Kama, she is Rati, your wife, Flirt with her. 
O Cupid, you are the son of Rukmini and not the son of this dem. n. 
This chaste woman (Rati) daily used to lament your loss, as an ewe 


After having said so, the wife of 
rahmá: and, later on, the boauti: 
the society of his wife Máyá vati, 


demon Sambara ? O most 
story,” 


artful Sambara craftil fetched the chil 
Rukmini and TOA MM e child frg 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


rea& pleasure on a; 


y iPiatses bye Panapui aR Ratan Dedst. 501 


^ 


—— 


* 19.33. Once upon a time, the king of demons was surprised to see 
Kama mounted on the breast of his wife and engaged in solitude in the 
act of sexual intercourse with the smiling Máyávati. He also saw*his 
wife fainting through lust, Thereupon he was excited and held up a 
scimitar. Armed with the weapon he approached Rati devoted to her 
husband, the god Kama. Addressing the latter, he said, “O fool, mean- 
minded and most licentious, fie upon thee! Dost thou aspire to the 
position of a learned man? ‘There ig no sinner more abominable than 
thyself in the world. Thou art so mad as to ravish thy own mother.” 
Then. addressing Rati he said, “O prostitute, fie upon thee too. 
Thou bast be:n so mach infatuated with lust that thou art committing 
sexual intercourse with thy son in private.” So saying, the king of 
demons at once hurled his keen-edged sword at Madana: but it was 
broken immediately by the mere ouch of his body. Sambara, with his eyes 
flushed with rage, caught hold of the hair of Rati and attempted to kill 
her. O snint, the wielder of the weapon of flowers (Cupid) struck the demon 
who was desirous to kill Rati with so much violence that ambara lost his 
senses and, smarting under the injury, he fell at & distance. When he 
revived, the , king of demons burnt with rage and angrily held the spear 
given him by Siva. O Muni, how can I deseribe that spear? Seeing 
that spear which was bright like the fire of the time of the entire dissolu- 
tion of the world and had the effulgence of a hundred suns, Brahma, 
Visnu, Mahes'a, the god Ananta and other gods arrived at that place. -The 
god of wind carefully whispered in the ears of Kama thus: “O 
Kama, recollect Durga, the great principle of illusion, who destroys all 
calamities.” Kâma, hearing this, remembered Darga. The mere recollec- 
tion of her converted the spear of Siva into a lovely and charming wreath. 


"phe husband of Rati, in the gladness of his heart, killed the demon 


Sambara, took Rati, ascended & chariot and went to tha city of Dwárká. 
The gods also having adored Siva and Parvati went to their respective 
places. On the other hand Rukmini, with due performance of rites, 
received back her son with her daughter-in-law Rati. Lord Krisna 
directed the performance of desirable rites to secure welfare or avert 


- calamities, feasted the Brahmins and also worshipped Parvati. 


34.46. O Narada, later on, Lord Krişna in due order by turns com- 
mitted sexual intercourse on the auspicious day prescribed by the Vedas 
with seven women, viz., Kalindi, Satya-bhdma, Satya, Nigna-Jiti, Sati, 
Jambavati and Laksmand. In course of time, each of these seven 
women bore ten sons and one daughter. On a subsequent occa- 
sion, the husband of Rukmint with his son killed the demon king Naraka 
and likewise slew the powerful demon Mura in the battle-field. There 
he beheld sixteen thousand girls and a hundred more of their attendant- 
maids, Their beauty was everlasting. Lord Krisna, having observed 
that all the girls were well-decked "with ornaments and eheerful in 
appearance, married them all on an auspicious occasion. © And having in 
due order committed sexual intercourse with them on auspicious occasions, 
he begat on each of these youthful women in due order one daughter 
and ten sons. Each of these children of Hari was separately born, Once 
upon a time Durvásá, the greatest saint, with 3 crores of his disciples, 
arrived with great facility at Dwarka, King Ugra-Sen with his minis- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


502 THE BREA YEAR Bin ayy 


ters and family priests, Vasudeva, Altrüra and Ud-dhava holding sixteen 
ingredients in their hands, bowed before Durvasa, the best of Munis, 
O safnt, he also blessed them one by one in an auspicious manner, At 
a favourable moment, Krisna bestowed in marriage on Durvásá the gir] 
called Ekánam'sá, Darvasa enjoyed the society of the gir] in a temple of 
gem which resembled the palace of Indra, Lord Krişna gave him g 
blessed hermitage constructed with exeellent gems, 

47-62. Once upon a time Durvas4, the best of Munis, deliberate] 
went to each of the houses of the Uord Krigna, He saw that the perfegt 
Lord Krisna was present everywhere. Lord Hari was playing in a 
certain house, He was lying down on a lovely bedstead of gem in another 
house. He was respeotfally listening to the "Pará nas in a different house, 
In some house ho was taking part in a grand festival in the auspicious 
courtyard. In some house he was eating the betel respectfully presented 
to him by his wife named Satya. In some house, Rukmint, with the 
fly-fan in her hand, was ministering to the feet of Krisna lying down 
on the bed. In some house, KAlind? was gladly ministering to his feat. 
Lord Hari was Speaking ‘to her, At this most wonderful phenome. 
non, Durvasi was astonished and eulogised the most enchanting Krisna, 
the Lord of the universe, who was seated in tha palace of Rukmint as well 
as in the council of the saints called S idharm4 thus; € © Lord of the 

world, O Janárdana, success In every undertaking is due to you alone :and 
it is exclusively your Share: for you hayo Conquered the world. O Lord 


) r i are Incorruptible, and you 
wield a form only out of compassion for your believers. You are the 


image of truth. © Eternal Being, you are Constant and always new, 


ore your lotus feet, You are the 
O supreme 
4, the best of the Bráhmins, 
» Stood there before him at his command. 
d, addressed Durvasa the best of saints, 
time-honoured, sagacious, 
the virtuous. He said, 
nh : in the world.” You area 
digit of iva, Can you not yourself judge that Tam the author of the 
whole creation ? Everything has been originated or Started by me. I 
am the soul of the universe, With 


corpses. When the Soul leaves the hod 


class or Species (for instance, the Brahmin or the cow), I am only 


r ctively I am One). But individually 
lam different and thus assume a distinct entity, Fora man who eats 
is alone satisfied ; others ane, Nob satisfied by his eating, When I 


preside over animals or over the gods that subsist 

Come separate,- But when I remain in 
cow-world, I am perfect, The beloved Radha 
present through ' the curse of Sridama, I exist through my digits in 
all places. In some Places T exist as a part; and in ot à 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 503 


ee) 


P 


- of the part of my parts. In the houses of my wives leaving out-Rukmini, 


T exist only as a digit ; but in the house of Rukmint I exist as a part. 
Thus only & part of mine exists 1n some places anda part of my parts 
in other places ; only a digit of a part of my parts exists in some idole 
or living beings.” The Lord of the world, having said so, entered into 
his house ; and Durvásá, also forsaking his wife, departed to pray Hart. 


——e— 


CHAPTER CXIII. 


1-19. Durvásà, surrounded by three crores of his disciples, , left 
Dwárká, and respectfully went to the Kailds’a to see the great god Siva. 
On his arrival there, he bowed before the feet of Siva and Durga and 
with great reverence he threw himself prostrate at their feet. 
Having purified. himself, he eulogised them along with his disciples. He 
then related to them the whole history including the circumstances which 
led him to asceticism. The chaste Parvati smiled at the words of the 
Muni and, in the presence of Siva, addressed Durvásá thus, using words 
that were obviously true and beneficial : * O saint, you do not know the 
nature of virtue and still you regard yourself as virtuous. Leaving your 
wife who has got no issue, how could you possibly go out for asceticism? A 
person who leaves his young and virtuous wife of noble rank before a son 
is born to him and adopts the life of a hermit (Sannyási, ‘Yati or Brahma- 
chari) or:a person who leaves his house for good and goes to a foreign Jand 
or to a distant place for trade or on some other business does not attain 
redemption. Rathor, he deviates from the path of virtue. By his wife's cursa 
he forfeits renown in this world and goes to hell in the next. Lord 
Brahmá, the offspring of the lotus, hath said so. Therefore, O saint, to 
preserve the integrity of your character, go to Dwárká at once 
and maintain Ekánam'sà (who is my digit) according to the tenets of 
virtue. For'a wonder, you are going out to practise asceticism, leaving the 
lotus feet of the spiritual guide of the gods, the supreme Being, which 
are adored constantly by Brahm’ and Laksmi, which can hardly be secured 
by anyone and which are contemplated by Sanaka and other Munis ! 
O son, you are determined, I see, to give preference to poison above 
honey. Anyone who even in dream beholds the lotus feet of Lord Krisna 
is undoubtedly released from sins committed by him in a hundred births. 
A sin committed consciously or unconsciously by any person in infancy, 
childhood, youth or old age is thereby at once consumed to dust. Anyone 
who has witnessed with his own eyes the lotus feet of Krisna in India is at 
once purified and assuredly redeemed’ in his life time. He is instantly 
released from sins committed by him in crores of births. The sight of 
those lotus feet alone which consecrate a land designed for pilgrims consti- 
tutes, indeed, the vow, the meditation, the trutb, the piety and the 
worship of Hari. The recitation of the virtues of Krisna destroys the 
elements of birth. A Brahmin void of belief in Hari is worse than a 
Chandál For by association and conversation with him, the faith of the 
believers also is destroyed. A Brahmin who eats the remnants of. the 
food offered to Krisna and is the believer of Krişna is rendered more 
sacred than water, fire and wind and can consecrate the world. O twice- 
born saint, where are you going after having left Lord Krigna ? 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


504 THE BRAHMA TAIVARTA PURANA. 


a aa 
Mankind ‘reap the fruits of meditation only by the recollection of Lord 
Krisna. That spiritual guide who does not inspire faith in the mind. of 
his disciple for the supreme Being, Lord Krisna, is his great enemy and 
renders his life absolutely useless. 


20-28. There was a thrill of raptures in the body of Siva at 
the words of Parvati. Ho was subdued by the emotion of love, 
Saint Durvásá having bowed low to the lotus fect of Siva and Durga 
went back to Dwarka, all along remembering the lotus feet of 
Krisna. Having gone there ho saw Hari and eulogised him. Hg 
then went to the house of his wife Ekánams'à and began to flirt with 
her. On the other hand, Krisna went to Hastinapur in response to the 
call of Yudhisthira, the son of Dharma, where with pleasure he first 
accosted Kunti, then her sons and lastly the other kings. Later on by 
degrees he killed Jardsandha and Salwa, offered priest’s fee as prescribed 
by the Sástras and performed the grand royal sacrifice as desired by 
the best of kings and Munis. At that sacrifice, Krisna in council 
assisted by gods and kings killed the scandal-mongers, Sis'upála and 
Danta-vakra. Their bodies fell on the ground, no doubt; but their 
Sentient souls on departure could not see the feet of Hari and tl 
they returned and eulogised Krisna, the Lord of all thus: “O Krigna, you are 
the father of the four Vedas, viz., Rik, Yaju, Sima and Atharva and their 
auxiliary branches. You are also the father of the gods and the demons, 
You are also the author of the natural beings (beings produced by 
Nature) who wield bodies. In different Kalpas you create the subtle 
elements and having adopted Maya or illusion you undertake the 
task of creation in the forms of Brahma himself, Siva and Ananta. 


29-38. "The fourteen Manus, the seven Risis, the four Vedas, the lords 
of creation, the regents of the quarters, the planets: all these are either 
your parts or the parts of your parts. You are yourself the male, the 
female and the neuter. You are yourself the cauge and the effect. 
You are yourself the father and tho offspring. We have heard in the 
Vedas the qualities and the defects of the engi 
yourself) as well as the engine, f, €, the system 


subject to you. O Krisna : 
your machine. 
O Kvisna, we are fools. 
ed a& the eulogies of. 
that Krisna was the 
saorifice performed, 
y ethical maxims, 
ándavas. ‘The 
n, and having 
at last returned to Dwarka 
ught back the 
the funeral pile and restored them to 
riably used to 
and sail to Krişna : 
Accordingly Krigna 
nd restored them to 


1erefore 


lose all her sons. At this sight Devaki was pleased 
^O son, then restore my dead sons also to life. 
brought his dead brothers from the crematorium 3 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 505 


He promptly relieved the poverty of Sudáma Bráhmin who 
at Dwárkà and sought his protection. . The 
Lord, kind to his believers, ate the particles of rice offered to him by 
the faithful Sudáma Brahmin and endowed him and sovon of -his 
descendants with royal grace and everlasting ‘prosperity. 

. 39-54. His kingdom resembled the immortal city of Indra. The 
Brahmin’ became as rich as Kuvera. ‘Hari, merciful to his believers, 
im unshaken faith in Hari, Hari’s bondage which could hardly be 


ave hi 
P sided and ample good space in the immortal land of the Cow-world. Tho 
Lord stole Parijata from Heaven, subdued the pride of Indra who was 


puffed up with the perfume of his kingdom. He caused Saty& to perform 
the desired ceremony of Punyaka. O Muni, through Krigna the casual and 
usual rites were multiplied in the world. In the vow of Punyalta, ho 
offered himself as priest’s fee to Sanat-Kumára. In connexion with that 
vow, he gladly feasted the Brahmins and gave them gems. In this way, 
having added to the prestige and glory of Satya-bhama, Rukmint and his 
other wives, he even contributed to their good luck. O Muni, the casual 
and usual.forms of worship sacred to the Vaisnavas, Brahmins and gods 
likewise increased in number everywhere. The Lord instructed Uddha- 
va alone the subject of super-human, transcendental knowledge ^ and 
likewise loctured Arjuna on the subject of auspicious rites associated with 
ten millions of Homâs (oblations of ghee of the fire). For the satisfaction of 
Parvati he caused Brahmins to be feasted and rites to be performed with 
various kinds of lovely ingredients, frankincense, lamp, ete. He worshipped 
the Supreme Being Ganesa, the god of gods, in the temple constructed with 
invaluable gems situate on the lovely mountain of Raivata and gladly 
offered to him delicious, delightful, nourishing five lakhs of balls of 
S'egamum and other sacrificial ingredients. He also offered to him seven 
lakhs of sugared balls of Swastika which were like nectar, ten lakhs of 
wonderful ripe fruits of plantain, delicious cakes. of Swastika, tasteful 
milk boiled. with sugar and rice, sweetmeat, ghee, butter, curd, of 
ingredients for food, honey, nectar, frankincense, lamp, flowers of Párijáta, 
adorable garlands, perfumed ssndal, incense and cloth consecrated by fire. 
The Lord. caused the performance of sacrifices with crores of Homas 
(oblations of ghee to the fire), feasted countless Brahmins and eulogised 
Ganesa. At that place ten kinds of musical instruments were also sounded. 
Lord Hari, in order to cure the leprosy of S'ámba worshipped the 
sun for one complete year with excellent ingredients and caused S&mba 
and his mother to subsist upon boiled rice and shee alone. The sun 
was propitiated and presented an ode and a boon to Samba. . 


CHAPTER CXIV. 


1-9. Náráyana said, * The most powerful Pradyumna was the son 
of Krisna. Aniruddha, a digit of Brahmá, was the son of Pradyumna. 
Once upon a time this Aniruddha, in the prime of his youth while lying 
down in solitude on a bed annointed with flowers and sandal, saw in a 
dream a beautiful woman gently smiling, vested with the prime of youth 
and lying down ona fragrant bed of flowers annointed with refreshing 


64 


his mother. [ 
had. arrived from his house 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


506 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


sandal paste in a garden full of blooming flowers. The whole of ber body 
was decked with jewels of invaluable diamonds. Her hands were decked 
with charming anklets, bracelets, ornaments for arms made with conch. 
shells and ornaments for the wrist: her ears were graced with rings 
extended up to her cheek. Her lips were red like bimbas, her eyes were 


like autumnal lotuses, her forehead was covered with marks of vermilion, ' 


her breast resembled pomegranate. Her thighs slandered even Ram. 
bh (wild large plantains), Her breast was very much elevated and 
hard. Her waist inclined with the weight of her heavy buttocks, Her 
body was pierced with the floral darts of Cupid. The soft, arch 
glances which animated her face demonstrated her lust. Her lotus feet 
were decked with saffron and lae-dye. The clothes which she put on were 
agitated by the wind and displayed her private parts, 


10-20. Aniruddha, the son'of Kama, being oppressed by lust and infa- 
tuated with passion beheld the damsel who was desirous of sexual intercourse, 
who was well developed in spite of her poverty, who was filled with raptures 


one, are you the daughter of a god or a Gandarbha ? ` O damsel, who 
are you? Whose wife or whose daughter are you? Whom do you 


and versed in sexual matters, I am 
of passionate women. O good-natured 
expert in sexual intercourse, 
ercourse and addicted to them. 


husband who can gratify her desire, 
1n sexual matters with a witty man is delightful" That lady, 
shed : ; ourso with regard to which she had 

no previous experience, hid her face with the hem of her garments 
f id thus: “Ifyou are the son 

ist and if you are fit for the society of a passionate 
wotnans then why do you not remember Kama? And if you are the 
grandson of Hari, the lord of the three worlds and the son of the honoured 


Pradyumna and if you are the worth f i do you 
not marry a worthy woman ? Bb oer dow 


. 21-30, A woman who is the legally married wife of a person, t.e., who 
is wedded according to the holy rites before the Fire-god asa witness to 
the marriage 13 alone chaste and Virtuous. Such “A woman is always 
constant, attached to her husband, ever his com 
trolled by him. A secret wife or a wife 


IY married ding to the 
Gandarbha rite is ever faithful and capable of c. VERE 


ausing pleasure or inspiring 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


panion and may be ocon-: 


le 


I n Panes DANAA ded Baa Dust. 507 


o pi 
— 


awe, Buta casual wife or one meant only to gratify the lust of a person 
ean never be @ constant companion for life. Besides, such a wife is 
condemned by the Vedas. Such a wife, being & stepping stone to hell, 
prings infamy in this world as well as in the next. A virtuous man, if he 
belongs to a noble rank and is devoted to Visnu, will never be attached to. 
a causal wife who is condamned by the Vedas. At first it ig natural to a 
person to avoid good company through pervers‘on of intellect. But to 
desist from the evil tendency of one’s nature is fraught with excellent 
results. A man who after atonement for his sins is again implicated in 
sins is held up tə ridicule. He is as pure as an elephant ; for an elephant 
is not purified in spite of ablutions. A legally wedded wite, fair, of a good 
and tranquil disposition is praised ; for she is chaste and obedient and has 
a melodious voice. Anda S'yámá woman (one who is bright lile heated 
gold, who is delightfully cool in summer and warm in winter) of soft com- 
plexion, versed in sexual arts also gives pleasure at the time of sexual in- 
torcourse. If the woman be well-developed, chaste, and ever of a tranquil 
disposition, a person who is devoted to Visnu may yet leave her and turn an 
ascetic provided that she has given birth to a son. If the ease is otherwise, 
his asceticism is misdirected and useless. A very crooked and wicked man 
committing adultery with the wife of another person is consigned to 
hell along with seven of his ancestors, I'am“ Usd, the daughter of 
king Bana who is the sorvant of Siva. Siva is the Lord of the world: 
my father Bana has also subdued the three worlds. A good woman can’ 
never bo independent in the three worlds : rather, she is dependent in 
every way. Women of ignoble birth alone are unchaste and independent. 
31-41 A woman, in her virginity, is protected by the father ; in her 
youth, by the husband ; and in her old age, by her son. A chaste woman, < 
(n fact, is nevor free. A father gives his daughter to a suitable bride- 
groom. A girl should never of her own accord solicit a husband : this is’ 
the eternal Dharma. You are a suitable match for me. I am fit for 
marriage. O Lord, if, you desire to marry me, please solicit my hands from 
my father Bana, or Sambhu or the chaste Sati.” O Muni, the chaste and 
fair one, so saying, disappeared ; and the son of Kama, deeply enamoured 
of Usa, was suddenly roused from slumber. Aniruddha, of a tranquil dis- 
position, when he got up, realised the fact that the previous incident was 
à dream ; but nob being able to see the darling of his heart was oppressed 
in his mind and agitated with lust. He ceased to take his food and was 
infatuated with passion with the result that he became always absent- 


_minded, emaciated and exhausted. He at times slept and at times wept in 


solitude. Devaki, Rukmini, Rati and other wives of Krişna seeing that 
their son was weeping in this way related the matter to Lord Krisna. 
Krisna, the slayer of Madhü, who is conversant with the mysteries of 
every affair was gratified to hear the news and said, “ Usa, the daughter 
of Bana, observing the mutual love of Siva and Parvati, was herself 
oppressed with lust. She has obtained a boon from Durga ; and now she is 
a prey to the floral darts of Cupid. The same Parvati has caused 
your grandson to dream : and out of fun has made him absent- 
minded. I shall also infatuate the daughter of Bana with lust in her 
oe I am not anxious for Aniraddha at all; let him remain in 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


508 TIE BARMA PATA SPP Pie aa, 


Se 

43-53. Krisna, who knows the heart of all and who is in fact omni. 

scient, having thus the consoled ladies caused on his -part the daughter 
of Bina to dream. That girl in the prime of her youth and decked With 
ornaments of gem lying down on a bed graced with gems and annointed 
with flowers and sandal fell asleep and dreamt ga pleasant dream to the 
following effect. The chaste Usa saw a man lying down on a bedstead 
of gem which was annointed with flowers and sandal, in a very solitary 
place in a palace constructed with gems. He was in the prime of hig 
youth and dark-blue in appearanee : he was smiling gently and his „body . 
vied with ten millions of Cupids in point of grace ; he. was enchanting’ to 
everybody ; he wielded diamond armlets and bracelets, The grace of 
his cheeks was brought into prominent relief by the lustre of his ear. rings, 
the whole of his constitution was annointed with Sandal; his breast 
was adorned with yellow cloth and lovely wreaths of jasmine. Usa there- 
upon went to him with very great pleasure. The future wife of the son of 
Kama, of a delicate frame, being oppressed by floral darts gently spoke 
to him with an aggrieved heart thus : ** O licentious being, who are you? 
May you ba blessed ! I am afflicted with passion. ‘Lherefore Court me as - 
your bride. I have attained the state of puberty and am well-developed. 
I desire with all my heart the pleasures of sexual intercourse which I neyer 
exparienced before, I am°attached to you and have respeet for you, 
Marry me according to the Gandharbha rites. Of the eight forms of 
marriage. Gandharbha marriage can most cheaply be secured by men. A 
hypocrite who after having attained a wife devoted to him rejects her ig 
liable to a dreadful ¿Curse in the first place and subsequently abandoned 
by the great goddess of fortunc." The man said, “ I am the grandson of 
Krisna and the son of Kama himself, Without the permission of these 
two, how can I accept you?" So saying the Being disappeared. ‘Lhe 
fue wife of Kàma, not being able to see her desired consort, got excited 
with lust, 

, 94-63, Usa got up from her lovely bed, wept loudly, became absent- 
minded and appeared extremely dejected before her female associates, 
The most competent of them, Chitra-lekhá, consoled her and enquired into 
the state of her feelings saying *“ What has happened ? O auspicious 
nymph, gather your wits. Of whom are you so much afraid ? 

aste one, over this insurmountable city, Siva and his spouse both 
preside, The place supervised by these deities is everywhere attended 
with prosperity, Whoever contemplates the goddess Durga gets 
rid of calamities. Tho auspicious Durga, mother of all good, confers on 
er worshippers all sorts of benefits." The beautiful Osa, having heard 
the words of Chitra-lekha did not vou i 


and desisted from sleep, She eonstantly adore r i ind. 
Her friend Chitra-lekta went to Bana, t Tee dee ES p iL 
wifo and related to them the whole incident. She likewise went to 
Durga, Siva, Kártika, Ganega, the spiritual guide o 
related to them the case of Usa. The queen 
Sana, the servant of Siva, was grieved to hear:th 


iva’s presence, iva, Darga, Kartika and Ganega indulged in a hearty 


laugh, Ganega said, « Whoever, deluded with pride, afflicts another, 
is afficted four times as much according to the impartial judgment of 


CC-0. In Public: Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


- 


MÀ 


RR 18 Wide y edn aa Sarayu Trust. hia 


SS 


E 
arma. Your daughter Usa was exeited with passion while she wit- 
nessed the amorous pastimes of Siva and Durga. Durgà therefore 


a boon hardly to be secured by the gods. 
64-71. The goddess herself having infatuated the son of Kama with 


Just in his dream is now mutely sitting on the left side of Sambhu and 
‘nthe matter. The omniscient all-power- 


affecting perfect indifference 1 5 all- 
ful Lord Hari having realised the actual state of things has in his turn 


shown to your daughter in her dream ʻa young man, handsomely dressed. 
Tf a chaste young woman gees a well-dressed young man, she gets ena- 
moured of him with all her heart, it is true: but that chaste woman 
afraid of forfeiting her virtue resists the tendencies of her heart. 
An unchaste woman of vile orgin, ifshe perceives a well-dressed man, gets 
enamoured of him, leaves her food, bed, husband, son, wealth for the sake 
of her lover and takes leave of her senses, house-hold affairs, the honour 
of her family and even her maternal and paternal relations. Buta 
heroie and youthful gallant, however mean: ‘cannot leave her. Nay, he 
ean sacrifice. for ber his caste, virtue and ultimately his life. ‘This is 
why a wise man preserves his youthful wife more carefully than his life. 
Tt is nob proper to trust that phantom of delusion (woman). The heart of 
women is like the keen edge of a sword; but their words are sweet. Saints, 
gods and people expert in the Vedas cannot fathom the heart of a woman. 
Let the most clever Chitra-lekhá at once go to Dwárká and drag by all 
means that mad Aniruddha to this place by force. 

72-86. Siva, dear to Bana, hearing this, said to Ganesa “Manage 
things in such a manner that king Bana may not get wind 
of this: auspicious matter.”  Chitra-lekhd ^ soon went to Dwarkd 
and, ‘imperceptible to all, easily entered the palace at Dwàrkà&. 
There on the strength of her Yoga the celestial whore Chitra-lekhá stole 
the sleeping boy Aniruddha and laid him in her chariot with great plea- 
sure, Flying with tho speed of wind, the auspicious Chitra-lekh& 
with the precious booty in her possession sounded the conch and arrived 
at Sonitpur in a moment. Later on, at Dwürká all the women cried 
out bitterly saying, * Alas! my child Aniruddha, where are you gone te 
iscient Krisna, conversant with the mysteries of all affairs, 
consoled the women, armed himself with the wheel called Sudarsana, the 
conch called Páncha-janya and the club called Kaumodaki and aecom- 
panied by Samva, Kima, Bala, SAtyaki and the most heroic Garuda 
uickly mounted his chariot and arrived at Sonitpur guarded by Sankara 
and Párdati. They were followed later on by their myrmidons, 
Chitra-lekhà ou her arrival saw the fasting, emaciated, sleeping gå 
guarded by her female associates and roused her at once from slumber. 
She bathed with water the virgin gå who was decked with loyely gar- 
lands, sandal-paste, marks or dots of auspicious vermilion and ornaments 
of gem and with the consent of her fomale friends ab an auspicious mo- 
ment : she caused Usa and Aniruddha to converse with one another in 
that place in private, The ‘chasto Us suffering from the pangs of 
separation from her husband now indulged in sexual intercourse. Anir- 
uddha, the son of Kama,. wedded her according to the Gandharbha form of 
marriage. ‘The delightful sexual intercourse lasted for a long time, The 


granted her 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


510 PRE IREAWA PIPART PURANA, 


passionate son of Kama had during that period no ide 
The lustful Üs in the prime of her youth, excited with 
the intercourse just tasted by her, fainted. O Brahmin, 
course continued from day to day in private, Later on, kin 
all the above news from his guard, 


CHAPTER CXV. 
18. Nüráyana said, “ Later on, the guards were frightened, threw 
themselves prostrate before Kártika, Ganesa and Durga and related every- 
thing to their master Bana thus: ** Ajas ! What a pity | The times are 


a of day or nicht} 
the pleasures of 
this sexual inter- 
g Bâna gathered 


insurmountable. Your shameless daughter Usa has now become indepen.’ 


dent and desires a husband. O lord, undesirable company is the cause 
of sorrow to the virtuous ; for merits and faults are constantly brought 
about by the society which a person keeps. Chitra-lekha herself plays 
the role of a go-between in the matter, for she has seeured the attendance 
ofa hero versed in war. He is the best of princes and can fight well on 
chariots. This nymph has effected sexual intercourse between him and 
the girl. The bridegroom, I am told, is fairer than Cupid, and free from 
disease and young. Excited with lust he has no idea of day and night. T 
think, by this time your daughter has become pregnant. Though she 
belongs to a noble family, yet practically she is a fire-brand ealenlated 
to consume both of her houses, maternal and paternal, Your very shame. 
less voluptuous daughter is now united with her gallant. Took to it 
therefore. "The whole of her body has been lacerated with nails. I am 
Sure, you will soon witness the birth of your daughter’s son or daughter's 
daughter, She is now entirely under the Control of 

levity knows no bounds. She is constant] 8 
she merrily relishes the act of sexual intercourse, A gentle smile always 


plays "pon her lips. Her eyes are full of glances, She eonstantly;looks at 
things with restless eyes,” i 


9-22. Bana, the diadem of the demons, was incensed 
and abashed at the words of the guard, Though dissuaded by Siva, 
he gave his consent to — war. 


[ 2 AS a mother, to do good to 
his son, Prevents him from an evil aet, so Ganesa, Kártika, 
Durgá, Bhairavi, Bhadrakáli, the Yoginis, the eight Bhairavas, the 


mándas (false conce tions) 
the Vetálas, the Brdhma,-Raksasas, the best is and i the 
'» and the village. 
war but to no purpose. - Siva 


t y } 16 of his learning), / 
o RR delightful 1n the end, useful, truthful and instructive thus : 
' Ma, i tell you an ancient history, listen, "p S ing ' 
himself has deseended to Indra to reli Manet Sie ae eee 


1 eve the earth of her burden, : He: 
is celebrated by the name of Vasudeva, Therefore savants call : him-" 
1 Vasudeva. That Lord, the wielder f the wheel, is the god and: the 
dispenser or the ruler even of Brahma. He ig the god of Brahma, 
Vienu, Siva, and other gods and transcends Nature. He is void of 
attributes and will-power, He takes a form only ont of compassion ' 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


—— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA &HANDA." 511 
O E 


ee 


Se 
‘for his believers. He is the great Brahma, the sublime abode, the 
supreme spirit of all creatures. If he departs, his creatures are sure 
ght with him. O fool, 

rated by weapons, he 


to follow suit. It is not possible for you to fi 
He is formless, only he takes a form 


as the great sky and the quarters ‘cannot be penet 
is also similarly impenetrable. 
to help the meditation of the people. The most powerful Aniruddha is his 
grandson. He is capable of destroying the three worlds in a moment. The 
gods, demons and most powerful heroes who fight on chariots are not 
equal to a sixteenth digit of Aniruddha. If the resources or the might 
on both sides be equal, the parties may either come to terms or fight 
with one another. Buta rupture or friendship between the weak and 
; the strong is improper. Your father Bali, the diadem of the demons an 
a great hero (who warred on chariots), was yet hurled to the Patala or the 
nether region» ina moment by Bamana, the incarnation of the supreme 
Being and only a digit of Lord Hari. 

93-34. Everyone isa digit of the digits of the supreme and perfect 
Being Lord Krisna, the master of Mathura.” Parvati said, “Brahma, 
Mahesa and Ananta, absorbed in meditation day and night, contemplate 
the eternal Being in the lotus of their heart. The lord of day and Ganega 
the spiritual guide of the Yogis (devotees), meditate that supreme Beings, 
the Eternal Lord who transcends even the powers of meditation. All 
the sages meditate that Eternal Being who is the origin and the cause 
of all who excels everything in the world.” Ganesa said, ** The great- 
minded, Vaisnava Bali is surely unfortunate ; for his son is so foolish. 
Bali is not alone unfortunate, but also his father, the supremely wise 
Prahlada.” Kartika said, “ Brother, have you not heard of the most 
powerful and valiant Titans, viz, Hiranyak-Sipu, Hiranyaksa and 
Madhu Kaitabha? Visau easily sent those demons, your most powerful 
ancestors, to the land of the shades. Brother, if the Lord himself wants 
to destroy anyone, he can be preserved by none. Therefore desist from 
the evil path, if you seek your welfare.” Bana the king of demons having 
heard their words flushed red with anger and, armed with, bow spoke 
thus like Yama: “O mother Durga, O father Siva, O brothers Kartika 
and Ganesa, listen to what I say. : 

35.48. Living beings subject to the law of Karma reap good and 
evil fruits according to their acts. Noone reaps fruits beyond those that 
could be secured by one’s acts. No one dies except at the time fixed for 
his death ; but when the appointed time arrives, he may die even by the 
bare touch of the blade of grass. It is inevitable and true that a person 
will die at the hands of one who has been already appointed by providence 
to kill him. Who ean surmount destiny ? But vain is the life of a man 
who is.afraid to fight. Look, victory in the war secures heaven, death in the 
war brings fame. The wretch had the audacity to enter into the city 
guarded by Siva, Durga, Ganesa and the most powerful Kartika and 
ravish my daughter. Therefore, fie upon me, my prosperity, my heroism 
and my life! Who has thus even entered into another person's city so 

well protected and violated his daughter? The guard said before tha 
council, “ your daughter is pregnant." ‘These unpleasant words are still 
adhering to my ears like the thunder. l shall kill Aniruddha in the battle- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


hi2 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTÀ PURANA. 


————À 


field and then kill my daughter, or I will consign myself to the burning 
flame.” Kottari said, ** O child, lawfully I am your mother also. Listen 
to what Isay. Ifthe son ultimately comes to grief, evil, attends the . 
parents at every step. Ifa person accepts the daughter of another person 
as his bride, she cannot be given to anybody else. So, if the suitor is. 
unfit, the matter should be regretted and resented. But in the present 
case, the son of Pradyumna, the grandson of Krisna himself, has accapted 
the hands of your daughter. Aviruddha is worthy of praise. , Bestow 
on him in marriage your daughter voluntarily. If you do this pious act 


in India, you will be for ever redeemed along with your seven ancestors, . 


Give everything that you have as dowry to your son-in-law to secure 
favour and fame throughout the world. If you fail to do so, Krisna will 
kill. you in the battle-field with his wheel called Sudargana and. then no- 
body will be able to rescuo you.” Narayan said, * Bana, O great 
Muni, was incensed at the words of the Kottari, angrily ascended his . 
chariot and went to the grandson of Lord Krisna. Then, as directed 
by Siva, Kártika took the chief command. Siva and Ganesa themsolves 
performed S wastayana (a ceremony to secure welfare and avert calamity 
in the interests of Bana.) j 


49-57. Parvati, Kottari, the eight Bhairavas and the eleven Rudras 


auspiciously blessed him. All armed with weapons soon went in the 
direction of the battle-field. In the meantime a messengar deputed by 


Parvati and the wife of Bana started quickly and said to Aniruddha, ; 


“O Aniruddha, get up. May all be well with you. Listen to the words 
of Parvati. O son, dress yourself in military array and come out ; you 
shall have to fight." Usa was frightened, wept and recollected the 
chaste Parvatî saying, “O great goddess of illusion, preserve the lord of 
my life whom I desire, © goddess that guarantees safety, render immune 
from fear the lord of my life in the dreadful battle-field, for you are the 


given him by Usa. As he came out of the pavilion, he saw the great hero 
the king Bana armed with a shield and weapon and with his eyes and ; 
face flushed with anger. Bana also, as soon as he saw Aniruddha, burnt as 
it were, with anger and used hard words to him even in that hideous 
battle-field thus: Thou wile wretch, void of ethical principles, callest 
thou thyself a hero? Thou art a blot on the lunar race and a disgrace in 
the holy land of India, 


. 58-68, Thy father killed Sambara and stole his wife who had given 
birth to thee. “Hast thou now heard of the malpractices of my house 
hold ? Thy grandfather, the keeper of the beasts, and the most licentious 
and wicked preserver of cows. is the gallant of the cowherdesses at 

! Vrindávana. That impious being having actually killed Pátaná, has been 
implieated in the sin of woman-slaughter. Then he went to Mathura and 
during the course of sexual intercourse he killed Kubjá. The most cruel 
and lusty Krisna having killed the demon Naraka with his son stole all 
his wives, Having subdued Bhigmaka and his faeble son, he stole his 
daughter Rukmini suited even to the gods. Satrajita, the servant of the 
Bun-god obtained from the sun an excellent gom, Thy -grandfather 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE e 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. ad 
518 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 


B ——— 
conspired to kill him and took away his daughter and gem. He managed 
to ereate a dreidfal war between the Kauravas and the Pandavas and 
brought about the destruction of many kings of the world. Krigna, of a 
hideous nature, killed isupala at the place of sacrifice and slew 
Danta-bakra and Salwa. Jari Sandha has also been killed by his. 
stratagem. Krisua, by devices killed Kale-Yavana and robbed him of 
everything. What shall Isay more? This weak wretch, for fear of Jara- 
Sindha, sought shelter in the bosom of the sea. At the request of his 
wife he subdued his brother Indra and stole the Parijata flower 
which can hardly be secured even in heaven. 

69.81, The impious wreteh killed his maternal uncle Kamsa and 
seized everything that he had. What shall Isay more to theo? He 
conquered Bhalluka and took away his daughter. It is known throughout 
the world that Kunti, the sister of the father of thy paternal grandfather, 
had four gallants. And Draupadi, the wife of the son of the sister of the 
father of thy paternal grandfather, had five gallants, Balarama ; the elder 
brother of thy paternal grandfather, always drinks spiritual liquor ; he 
intentionally made amorous advances to Yamuna, the wife of his brother. 
Thy kinsmen are similarly all most licentious and treacherous. Arjun, the 
son of Indra, again, ravished ubhadra, the daughter of his maternal 
uncle and the sister of Balarama. Hast thou now listened to the vicious 
practices of thy family 2” Narayana said, *O Muni, Aniruddha, the son 
of Kama, became angry at the words of Bana and gaye an accurate and 
suitable reply thus: *“ Listen, my father in his previous birth was the 
god Kama, the most sacred son of Brahma. The three worlds were entirely 
under the control of his weapon. As the result of his own Karma, he. 
was reduced to ashes by the fire of Siva's wrath and has now become | 
the son of the most supreme Being, Lord Krisna. My mother Rati, 
devoted to her husband, was forcibly taken away by the demon Sambara : 
and when the god Kama was reduced to ashes,.she was sorely afflicted 
with grief for the loss of her husband and remained in the house of the 
demon. Mother Rati, by the powers of her illusion, created an imaginary 
woman called Máyávati out of her shadow who used to lie with 
Sambara: and in this way having cited Dharma as her witness, she 
maintained her integrity in the house of Sambara. My father having 
killed his enemy Sambara took back his wife and arrived at Dwárká. 
"Ihe sun and the moon are the witnesses of this act. low can you know 
my grandfather Vásuleva who cannot be comprehended by the four 
Vedas and the virtuous men conversant with the Vedas? You area 
fool. Vasudeva means the refuge of the entire universe, Mahá-Visnu 
is the colossal Being who sustains hundreds of worlds on the pores of his 
skin. The great Brahmá, the Lord who is the god of even that colossal 

Being, is celobrated by the name of Vasudeva. 

89-99. If you do not believe me, just refor the matter 6» Siva whose 
servant you are, Alas! how could you be so wicked, being the son of 
Bali, the servant of Krisna ? Your knowledge is very limited. “Therefore 

ou call Lord Krisna the son of a Vais'ya ab Vrindávana. No fault is 

committed by a person if he eats the food of a Wais’ya. The iuter- 

dining of the Kgatriyas and the Vais'yas is enjoined by tha Vedas. 

Drona is one of.the principal Lords of creation ; the chaste Dhara is his 
3 * 65. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


TS 1 Trust. 
bia TRI BRDABHEPTPATRYRIA PURANA. 


—— MÀ MÀ —— 


spouse. Both of them, by virtue of their meditations, have been able to 
obtain Lord Krisna as their son. Nanda, the king of the Vais'yas, is the same 
Drona and Yas'odà is the same Dhará, Radha is the daughter of Vrisa. 
Bhanu, a victim to the dreadful curse of Sridima. She has at the 
command of her husband descended from the Cow-world to the holy land 
of India with three hundred millions of cowherdesses as her attendants, 
Lord Krişna gladly revels at Vrindávana only with those of his wives 
who were the residents of the Cow-world. He also wedded Radha at 
Vrindàvana; Brahma was the priest who officiated at this marriage, 
Millions and millions of cowherds have gladly descended from the Cow. 
world into Vrindàvana. They are the principal adherents of Lord Krisna 
and possess equal valour. Wari, the supreme Lord, kept or guarded the 
cows in the shape of a eowherd, it is true: but this he did with a view 
to impart instruction to the cowherd boys bewildered by the illusions 
of the Lord of illusions, O demon, your sister Pütanà, the daughter of 
Bali, having beheld the warfish appearance of Vamana, respectfully 
thought thus in her mind, “If I get a son as fair as Vamana, I shall suckle 
him in my breast. Lord Krisna gratified her wish. Pütanà after 


having suckled the Lord, mounted a chariot of gem and went to the 
Cow-world. ; 


99-102. Kubja, in her previous birth, was the sister of the wicked 
Ravens, Her name was Sürpanakhá. Actuated by lust, she desired 
the society of Rama. Laksmana, the chief of the pious men, cut off her 
nose, Then this Sürpanakhà, by dint of her meditations, obtained a boon 
from Brahma to the effect that God himself will be her husband. By 
virtue of her religious merits, she in the form of Kubjá secured the 


-world. By virtue -of the 


can bear testimony, ‘The chaste Rukmi 
the spouse of Lord Krisna and the great 
nymph, with the consent of Brahma 


Your ancestors Hiranyakas’ipu and his brother Hiranyáksi were the two 
forms in which Jaya and Vijaya had been born at first. Lord Hari 
very easily killed Hirany&kas'ipu in the shape of a lion and Hiranyákga in 
the shape of a boar, Now have you heard of thoir first birth 2 

103.1183. At the seconed birth they took the forms of Ravana and 
Kumbha-Karna. Both of them were killed by Rama, The present one 
ls their last birth in the iron age, Lord Krigna killed them at the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


—— — 


) 


wr 


PPLE IPE orc AHEM Dt 5] 


d by King Yudhisthira. JarieSandha, Salwa and the 
wicked Kamsa were liable to be killed as a result of their Karma in 
their previous birth by Lord Hari who was desirous to relieve the earth 
of her burden. Kila-Yavana was also liable to be killed as a result of 
his Karma by Mucha-Kundu, the son of Mandhata. Lord Krisna, the 
Lord of the goddess of wealth, requires no wealth himself, therefore avarice 
could not have led him to an act of murder, And out of deference to 
his promise to Satya-bhima he brought Párijáta sacred to the vow of 
Punyaka and fulfilled his own vow. Jamba-vati the daughter of 
Bhalluka, is the digit of Dare’ herself. Lord Hari wedded her in India 
being impressed with the faculty of meditations which she possessed. 
Wich the consent of her husband, Kunti got Ksetraja sons; offsprings 
of awife by a kinsman begotten upon herself. The begetting © 
such sons was valid in the three Yugas including the Satya- 
Yuga. It has only been prohibited in the iron age (Kali Yuga). Yudhisthira 
is the son of Dharma; Bhisma is the son of the Wind ; the pious 
Arjuna, the conqueror of the world, is the son of Indra to whom iva 
himself presented the weapon called Pàs'upata. The horse-sacrifice, the 


legitimate sacrifice of cows, Saunyása (renunciation of the world), the 


begetting of Ksetraja sons and begetbing a son through the husband’s 
By the boon of 


brother: these five acts are forbidden in the iron age. 

Siva, Draupadi has five husbands. Baladeva always drinks the sacrad 
honey extracted from flowers. ‘Che holy and pious Balarama had 
called Yamuna, only that he may bathe therein. Krigna himself bestowed 
Subhadr& in marriage on the great-minded Arjuna, The people of tha 
Southera Provinces may, according to the eustom of these places, marry 
the daughter of their maternal uncle, Brahma hath said, “ This act is 


sinful in other places.” 


sacrifice performe 


—— 


CHAPTER CXVI. 


1-11. Bana said,“ O Aniruddha, you are undoubtedly learned 
Siva also told me the very thing ; I under- 


anl your words are true. 
t said that the blessed Draupadi, 


stand everything in my mind. You jus 
by virtue of the boon of Siva, had become the spouse of five busbands. 
Please recite to me the matter in detail. How did the demon Sambara 
steal your mother Rati? And how could the gods let her go ? The 
probability is, they were all defeated by Sambara. But how could all of 
them have been possibly defeated.” Aniruddha said, * Once upon à time, 
Rama with Sità and Laksmana bathed in & pond situate in the wood 
called Pancha-vati and while lingering there he said to Sita, “In the 
cold season water is pure and delicious ; food and vegetables are pleasant 
to the taste and everything is delightfully cool.” So saying, the Lord 
tasted the fruits, 2.6., he first offered them to Sita and then to: Laksmana 
. and afterwards ate them himself. Laksmana accepted the fruits, it is true ; 
but in view of the fact that he had taken a vow to kill Megh-náda in 
connexion with the recovery of Sita, he ate nothing himself. That 
meditative being who abstained from sleep and food for fourteen years 
was by virtue of that vow eventually able to kill the son of Ravana and 
the conqueror of Indra, In the meantime, the fire-god came there to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


516 TITE ThitzbAMyeGgnabFVaptroarayo Purp N A 


EMEN 


see the lotus-eyed Rima and foretold to him events un 
ear thus: “O blessed Rama, listen. Conceal Sita, The Wicked 
Ravana will abduct the daughter of Janaka in a week, This abduetion 
cannot be resisted as pre-ordained by destiny. Who is able to 
resist Karma or withstand destiny ? The four Vedas maintain * There 
is no power greater than Providence or Fate.” 


Pleasant to the 


12-28. Lord Rama said, * You had better take Siti along with you an 
away from this place. Letthe shidow of Sita remain with me. l'or to aban- 
don one’s wife is reprehensible.” The fire-g od took away the weeping Sita, 
The shadow which was the likeness of Sita remained with Rama, tivana 
was only able to seize her at the time, as she was the mere sh ulow of the 
real Sita. Rama having killed Ravana with all his descendants recovered 
the shadow of Sità. At the time of the trial or ordeal of Sità by fire, 
the said shadow entered into the fire. The fire-god preserved the shadow 
and restored the real Siti to Rama, Her shalow, with a heavy heart, 
remained <with the fire-god. Later on, the shadowy Sita engaged 
herself in the meditation of Siva in the lake dedicated to Narayana for 

a hundred celestial years, Whereupon Siva came to her and said, 
“Bless you! Solicit from me the boon desired. ‘The shadowiy Sita, 
afflicted with the grief of separation from her husband, eagerly solicited 
from the three-eyad Lord Siva a husband five times. Then jankara, the 
dopor of all Prosperity, was pleased and gave her the boon desired, 

iva said, *O chaste one, in the perplexity of your heart you have said 
five times thus, “Give me a husband.” Therefore five Indras, the digits 
of Visnu, will be your husbands. The five Pàndavas of the present age 
are the five Indras. And the shadowy Sit& is the. present Draupadi 
who came out of the sacrificial pit. She is the Veda-vati of the Satya age, 
the shadowy Sita of the Treta age and Draupadi of the Dwápara age. 
This is why Krişna is called Trihàyani, . e., pertaining to three ages. She 
is called Krigna, ‘as she isan adherent of Visnu and a believer in the 


tenets of Lord Hari, This Krisnà in future will be the celestial goddess 
of fortune presiding over the Indras, 


, 24-30. At the time of the wedding ( 
king Drupada handed her over to Arjuna. Later on, when the 
heroic Arjuna came to the colony or new ‘settlement he asked his mother 

h the object that I have gained to day ?'' Her 
yourself along with your brothers.” In 
lope oun the command of the mother 
raupadi has the five Pandayas for her 
husbands. "The five Pandavas are E else but the five Indras out of 
the fourteen Indras. When my father was reduced to ashes by 
the fire of the anger of Rudra, my mother rebuked Siva who there- 
upon cursed her Saying, “You will very soon fall into the hands 
of the enemy. ' The demon Sambara will Conquer Indra and other 
gods and carry you away.” Later on, the god was appeased threuch the 
entreaties of my mother and ended her curse saying, * you will get back 
your husband, But so long as your hus x li 


ud, band is not restored to life, you 
shall remain inthe house of a demon in the form of a shadow,” O ae of 


Gan larbha form of marriage), 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


EI 


a 


KRI, NA JALIL S 
i Bidifzed by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust 


E = ee 


the demons, 1 have thus recited to you the old history relating to the 
mysterious Ways of the gods. Now have you heard it d 

31-52. At this time, the commander-in-ohief of king Bana, the most 
powerful and heroic Subhadra, the brother of Kumbhànda armed with 


arrived at the battle-field and having removed Bana from that 


weapons ving 
place rudely hurled a spear at Aniruddha whieb in fury resembled the fire of 
the time of the eternal dissolution of the world. Aniruddha out off the spear 


with the weapon called the half-moon. Thereupon Subhadra cast at him the 
iron-spear effulgent like a hundred suns. The, son of Pradyumna cut it off 
with the weapon called Vaisnava. Later on, Subhdra diseharged in the 
battlefield the weapen ealled Náráyana. The most powerful Aniruddha, 
with a fearless mind swallowed the weapon andlay down. Upon this, the 
weapon eapable of destroying the world and effulgent like a hundred suns 
went up and disappeared in the sky. When the weapon Náráyana was 
resisted, Aniruddha held a big club in his hand in the battle-field where- 
with he destroyed the chariot, horse and charioteer of Subhadra and 
easily slew Subhadra also. When Subhadra was killed, thə most 
powerful king Bana discharged in the battle-field a hundred arrows 
at Aniruddha. ‘The son of Pradyumna. burnt all those arrows with the 
weapon of fire. Later on, Bana discharged the Brahma weapon calculated 
to destroy the world, at the sight of which Aniruddha quickly pronounced 
the mystic syllable whispered in the ear by the spiritual guide and discharged 
the Brahmástra whereby he easily resisted the weapon of Brahma discharg- 
ed by Bana. Then, inspite of the remonstrance of iva, Ganes'a and Kâr- 
iika Bina in an anger attempted to diseharge the weapon «called pás'upata, 
Seeing this, Aniruddha discharged the gaping (or benumbing) weapon 
at king Bina who was light of hand, most-heroic and armed with bow 
and arrows. Bana thereby lost his will power in the battle-field. Aniruddba 
again discharged the weapon ofsleep at King Bana and thus brought about 
his sleep. ‘The valiant lucky Aniruddha armed with a bow seeing that Bana 
was asleep attempted to kill him with an excellent scimitar which he held 
in his hand, whereupon Kartika by the discharge of © hundred arrows 
easily prevented him from his design. Aniruddha, later on by a stroke 
of his irresistible, celebrated iron Spear; suddenly broke the excellent 
chariot of Kartilca constructed with most precious gems. Kartika 
retaliated by breaking the chariot of Aniruddha with ease with an angry. 
stroke of his club and was delighted at the act. Aniruddha, then, with 
the thin-edged weapon called Ardhastra, easily cut: off the bow of Kártika 
and discharged at him the weapon called Bhalla. It was destroyed by 
the stroke of the irresistible club of Kártika. This club was forcibly 
taken away,from his hands by the son of Kâma, Later on, Kartika 
suddenly rushed towards Aniruddha to kill 


holding & spear in his hand 

him, whereupon the son of Pradyumna pushed him back in anger. 
Kartika again came and dragging Aniruddha repeatedly with his hands _ 
threw him on the ground. The most powerful Aniruddha forcibly seized 


him and got up from the ground. Ganes'a ultimately came and effected 
a reconciliation between the parties, whereupon Kartika went home and 
Aniruddha made for the house of ah, Ganes'a, 000; went to Siva to 


represent to him the whole affair, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


518 THE BRAHMA VAITARTA PURANA. 


CHAPTER CXVII. 

1-10. Narayana said, “.Ganes’a went to Siva, bowed low to him and 
related to him, one by one, the death of Subhadra, the battle between 
Bana and Aniruddha, the battle batween Kartika and Aniraddha and 
the valour of Aniruddha. Lord Siva laughed at the words of Ganes’a and 
gently spoke to him about mysterious matters sanctioned by the Vedas: & 
most blessed Ganes'a, I tell you beneficial and truthful words full of ethical 
maxims and delightful in the end. Listen; O son, the endless worlds 
are full of Krigna. Lord Krisna is the effect and also the cause of all 
eauses and you should know him accordingly. O Ganesa, everything 
from Brahmà down to a grass, you should know as unreal, But know 
it for certain that the Lord Krisna is eternal and the emblem of truth, 
This eternal Lord Krisna, as he manifests himself in the Cow-world, is the 
husband of Radha, lovely, vested with two hands, perfect and clad as a 
cowherd boy. ‘This Krisna, adored by Ananta, Brahm’ and Mahes‘a 
roams in the lovely Vrindávana, in the beautiful sphere of the Rasa on 
the beautiful mountain of a hundred summits at the solitary root of the 
holy fig tree, at the enclosure, drove or pasture of cows in the forest of 
the holy fig trees and on the coast of the lucid stream of Viraj& encircled 
by the eow-herds and cowherdesses. He is accompanied by the cows of 
plenty and holds the flute in his hand. Ah! What a blue black grace of 
complexion he has got resembling a new cloud ! Over and above this, he 


is clad in yellow dress and looks like a wreath of new clouds lighted up 
with flashes of lightning. 


11-19. His manifestation is not so much in evidence in the beautiful 
Gokul or in the holy forest of Vrindávana as in the sphero of the Rasa 
in the Cow-world, Every incarnation is a digit of the god or a digit of 
his digits. Only Lord Krisna himself is perfect. Lord Ráma is also 
perfect, but cursed by Brahma, he forgot himself, Aniruddha is the 
most powerful and valiant grandson of the same Lord Krişna. Even I 
had deputed Kartika to that dreadful Armageddon, Bana almost lost 
his life in the battle, but Kartika saved him. O Ganesa, you effected a 
compromise in the battle besween Kartika and Aniruddha. The eight 
Bhairavas, the eleven Rudras, the eight Vasus, the gods including Indra, 
the twelve Adityas, all the demons, Kártika the commander of the gods, 
Bana with all his attendants, nay, even all people. combined cannot con- 
quer Aniruddha. Aniruddha is Brahma himself. Pradyumna, the god Kama, 
Baladeva, Ananta and Lord Krisna constitute tho supreme Brahm’ 
transcending nature, O Ganes'a, now I told you everything. You should 
now preserve Bana, You are the emblem of welfare and the destroyer of 
all calamities. Lord Krisna, armed with the irresistible and excellent 

weapon called Sudars'ana, effulgent like ten millions of suns, will soon 
arrive, i 


CHAPTER CXVIII. 


1-15, When Siva, aftar having consoled Ganes’a, went inside the 
house, Durgá who destroys calamities, Bhairavi, Bhadrakáli, Ugra-Chandá, 
and Kottari at once got up from their lovely thrones of gem and bowed 
prostrate before the feet of the Lord of the world, Then subsequently 


Z 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


K RIRA OEE NI Han Sil D. 014 


po 
Ganes’a, the most powerful Kártika, Bana,’ Vira-Bhadra, Nandi himself, 
Nandaka, Mahá-Kála, the great minister, and the eight Bhairavas also 
arrived there. In the meantime. Mani-bhadra, the guard at the Lion 
ate, arrived there and said to Siva, “ O great god, countless hordes of 
Yadavas headed by Baladeva, Pradyumna, Samba, Sátyaki, king 
Ugra-Senr, Bhima, Arjuna in person, Akrüra, Uddhava and Jayanta 
are coming. The Supreme Being Lord Krisna, served by seven cowherd 
attendants with white chowries, vested with the sportive charms of ten 
millions of Cupids and adorned with wild wreaths .—this supreme Lord 
who is the dispenser even of Brahm’, armed with the matchless discus, 
the club called Kaumodaki, the irresistible spear and the great scimitar 
capable of destroying the whole world and mounted on a lovely, excellent 
chariot constructed with precious gems and accompanied by a hundred 
thousand heroes who fight on chariots, thirty millions of chariots, thirty 
millions of wrestlers, a thousand millions of horses, 4,000 millions of 
soldiers wielding shields, two hundred and eighty millions of soldiers 
armed with scimitars and 580 millions of archers has already arrived. 
As Rima, the son of Dasaratha, had besieged Ceylon on all sides, so has 
he besieged Sonitpur. Garuda, the king of birds, has extinguished by 
the rain of the water of the celestial Ganges the bright and burning 
moat encircling the city measuring & thousand palm-trees in height 
insurmountable to the gods and the demons. Baladeva with the plough 
and through the help of a hundred thousand wrestlers broke the ramparts 
constructed with excellent gems. 


16-35. Lord Baladeva has levelled to the ground three lakhs of gar- 
dens, killed the door-keepers and easily crossed the huge threshold. 
Mahadeva when he heard this, said to Parvati and Bhadrakali in the 
council of the gods :—* Let Kártika, Ganes'a, the eight Bhairavas, the 
eleven Rudras, Virabhadra, Mahakali and Nandi protect those who are 
in command of my armies. Krigna, the Lord of the Cow-world, armed 
with the wheel has arrived. In a moment he can destroy the whole 
universe. What to talk of an ordinary despicable city ? Therefore let 
them jointly devise expedients to presrrve Bana. Let Bana meditate in 
his mind the figure of the excellent Ganes’a and then go to the battle- 
field. The eight sides of Bana will be protected by Kartika, his front by 
Ganes'a, his left side by the Bhairavas, Rudras, and the great hero Nandi, 
his back by Maha-KAla, Vira-bhadra and other soldiers, his top or 
upper part by Durgâ, Bhadra-Kâlî, Ugra-Chanda and Kottarî (a naked 
nymph). O most blessed Durga, destroyer of calamities, you had better 
preserve Bana. You are the energy of Lord Krigna and hence called 
Nár&yani. O mother of the world, O prineiple of Visnu's illusion favour- 
iug everything that is good, you, should protect Bina from the irresist- 
ible or infallible Sudars'ana wheel which is the best of all wheels. Bana 
is my greatest favourite, nay, dearer to me than even Kártika and Ganes'a. 
O Durga, apply your hand and the dust of your lotus feet to the head of 
Bana. S 
26.98. , Durgà who destroys calamities laughed at the words of Siva 
and addressed him with gentle and truthful words suited to the 
occasion, thus: “O Bana, decorate your son-in-law Aniruddha with orna- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


520 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURAN A. 


— —— IPSUM P? 


sn 
ments of gem, place him before yourself and deliver pearls, diamonds, gems 
excellent stones and everything else as well as your daughter Üsà orna. 
mented with jewels of gem to the supreme being Krigna. Thus you wil] 
be able to rule your kingdom without a hitch. What means à war with thg 
soul? What means the fightagain with Krisna, the supreme spirit along 
with whom life vanishes for ever, without whose support the sentient sou] 
cannot exist in the body ruled by passions without whom even I the emblem 
of energy cannot exist and with whom Brahmá who represents the 
mind and, Siva, the symbol of knowledge, also disppear, thus causing the 
downfall of the body and reducing it to a mere corpse ? O Siva, who will 
be able to withstand in the battle-field the valour ofthe wheel of 
Sudars’ana ? The soul or the sky cannot be penetrated by any weapon, 
Then how is it possible to fight with a soul ? The perfect Lord Krisna 
who wields a body only out of compassion for his believers is eternal 
and real and constitutes;the supreme spirit of everyone, Ganes'a and Kártika 
are dear to me, it is true; but you are dearer to me than these; Bana is 
dearest to me of all my myrmidons, but none is dearer to me thau Lord 
Krisna. Iam the great goddess of fortune in the Vaikuntha. Iam 
Radha herself in the Cow-world; I am Durgá in the land of Siva and 
Saraswati in the land of Brahmá. In days of yore, I killed the demons 
and manifested myself as Sati, the daughter of Dakss. And even the 
self-same I, hearing your slander, in disgust quitted my frame as Sati and 
was born as the daughter of the mountain. The other form which I wield- 
edin my fight with Rakta-Vija is Kali. Even I am Savitri, the mother 
of the Vedas, Sita, the daughter of Janaka and Rukmini, the daughter 
of Bhismaka residing in the city of Dyárkà in India. Ever I again 
accidentally a victim to the curse of ridàma, appear on earth as 
Radha, the lawful wife of Krisna and the daughter of Vriga-bhánu. 
You are the Lord eternal : the omniscient Siva, What shall I say more to 
you? Novw do the thing suited to the occasion, 


CHAPTER CXIX. 


1-10. Narayana said, “Kartika, Ganes'a, Káli and. $i himself. 
praised Parvati when they heard her words, Lord Siva said to ts 
ss of primeval Nature, the mother of 
the world thus: “O excellent goddess elitave you said is true, beneficial 
and approved of by the Vedas. I6 is highly improper and ridiculous to ficht 
with tho supreme spirit. Let Bàn deliver his daughter Usa after having 
decked her with several kinds of ornaments (OU ne in which case 
everything will be systematic, Bana will acquire fame and celebrity and 
all will be well. lf he does not glve his daughter, this descendant of 
Hiranyakas'ipu will assuredly turn tail in the battle-field through fear 
and thus secure infamy, If, however, he is determined to co to war, 
let him dexterously cover himself with a shield and take the van, 
We shall thereupon follow suit. Siva then entreatel Bina to give his 
daughter £o Krigna : but he refused, Durga also persuaded him in vain to 
yield to her wishes. In the meantime, the most powerful Bali, supremely. 
prous, the foremost of the Vaisnavas, expert in the use of great weapons 
and attended by seven lakhs of excellent demons mounted an oxcellent 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


RRISNA JANMA KHANDA 521 


ENCORE 5 


chariot of gern and inhaling the wind caused by the flourish of the white 
chowrie arrived at that lovely assembly. 

11-20. Perceiving his approach, everyone stood up except Siva. Lord 
Siva, the donor of all prosperity, gently accosted him, using delightful and 
beneficial words thus : “Communication with the Vaignavas in itself is 
a great gain ; even the touch of the Vaisnavas consecrates all holy places 
frequented by pilgrims. A sacred Brahmin is worthy of adoration by 
all householders : but & Vaignava Brühman is more adorable than a sacred 
B:&hmin. I do not see anything more sacred than a Vaignava Bráhmiu 
who in fact is more sacred than the fire, the wind or any holy places 
resorted to by pilgrims. Even the gods fear him. All the sins coming in 
contact with his body are consumed like dry heaps of grass consigned to 
the flame.” Bali said, “O Lord of the world, I do not deserve these 
eulogies. Iam but a servant of yours. O Lord, why do you adore me ? 
O Lord, you have given me the supreme divine glory which can be se- 
cured with the greatest difficulty by others. Now, by the dispensation of 
Providence you have consigned me to the bottom of the nether world 
(PAtal). O Lord of the gods, you took away prosperity from me your 
servant in the guise of a dwarf and transferred it to Indra. You are 
omnipresent and may take any form. Now explain matters useful to my 
son Bana who is dearer to me than my life: for fighting with the spirit 
is opposed to the Vedas.” Bali having said so bowed low before the 
feot of Siva, blessed his son and subsequently went to the place where 
the Lord, the supreme Being, was dwelling in the guise of a man, As soon 
as Bali saw Krisna wielding the Chakra (wheel)in his hand and 
bright like ten millions of suns he respectfully cireamambulated round 
him and with the inclination of his head bowed to him. 


21-30. Later on, with a thrill of raptures in his body and with stream- 
ing eyes and with great reverence swaying his heavy hearh, he recited the 
Mantra of 11 letters given to him by Sukra and adored the supreme 
and most fascinating Lord fit to be constantly meditated in the lotus 
of one's heart with;bhe;bymn mentioned in the Sama-Veda thus: *O Lord, 
in days of yore out of deference to the prayers of my mother Aditi and 
the vow which she had undertaken, you once appeared in the guise of 
a dwarf imposed upon me. With very great esteem you transferred 
the celestial goddess of fortune represented by my prosperity to my 
virtuous brother Indra who was by far a greater worshipper of yours 
than my humble self, one of your devoted servants. This Bana is my 
son, the myrmidon of Siva. That Being, compassionate to his believers 
and residing close by, is preserving bim at this time. Parvati supports 
him like his mother. Your grandson has abdueted his youthful 
and chaste daughter. He was also about to kill him in the battle-field, 
but he was prevented by Kártikà from this design. Not being able to 
chastise your offending grandson, for a wonder, you have appeared at this 
place to kill my son! The supreme Being is everywhere strictly 
impartial ; this is what I have read in the Vedas. Then why do you 
act contrary to the doctrines of the Vedas? In the world, none can 
preserve him whom you wish to kill. Your Sudars'ana alone is bright like 
ten millions of suns, It can be resisted by the weapon of no god. As the 

66 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


TR i and S. Trust. 
522 VE ERAHNA PAIPARTA PURANA 


wheel of Sudars'ana is the best of all weapons, 
among gods. As you are the dispenser even of Bra 
is also suited to your design. 


31-40. "Visnu and Siva are vested with the attributes of truth and 
virbue ; Brahmá himself, the paternal grandfather and the ereator of. 
the world, is vested with the prineiple of activity. And Lord Kálágni. 
Rudra, the destroyer of the world is vested with the principle of 
ignorance. He is foremost of the Rudras and isa digit of Siva, The 
other Rudras are the digits of his digits, You are void of attributes, the 
director of the above-mentioned agencies and of the goddess Nature. You 
are the spirit ofall: Visnu is the life; Brahma is the mind; Siva is 
knowledge; the goddess Nature, the best of all faculties, is the 
intellect, The Jiva (sentient soul) that presides over all bodies is the 
reflection of yourself, i. e., the supreme spirit; the Jiva (sentient soul) 
that acts reaps the fruits of his actions: and you are a mere witness to 
those actions. As the attendants of a king follow in his wake, so all the 
above-mentioned beings (Siva, efe.) follow suit, as soon as you quit the 
body and depart. People collapse as soon as you leave and are converted 
into untouchable corpses. Savants, deluded by your spell, fail to eompre- 
hend you, Virtuous men who adore you are alone capable of surmounting 
your illusion. Nature vested with threeattributes, fs‘ant, the great female 
Vaignava, Narayan? and Durga are the symbols of your illusion, This 
is why it is so difficult to transcend these agencies. In overy world, 
lva exist as your digits. Tho huge Being, Maha: 

; absorbed in his sleep of meditation is 

he universe of Brahma. 
You are also his supreme god. 
ient chronicles call you Vásu- 


S0 you are supreme 
hmá, so your Weapon 


deva. : 


41-56. Through your digits, i; &., the parts of our parts, you are the 
Sun, the Moon, the Fire, the Wind, Vini Karas Yom, tna, Dhar- 
ma, Ananta, sana, Nir-riti, the Munis, Manus and the nine planets 
yielding fruits of actions, Through the digits of your digits, again, 
you are all creation, animate and inanimate. You are the. emblem of 


Pisce supremo ae ths Yogis constantly meditate you. Your 
5 reverentially contemplate withi i Šri 
the Lordof believers, as Gee a Weare at Redken P Enia 


I ] ) in the heart of Radha having two arms, 
olding a flute in his hands, friendly to his believers, vested with a, 
cheerful and smiling aspect, clad in yellow and red dress, and dark-blue 
in complexion like a new cloud. The whole ; 
besmeared with Sandal ; ha p k’s plumage 
your neck with a wreath of asmi A AEE aB ed 
with invaluable gems, 

ing your cheeks, your fi 
with ringing anklets. In your charms you vie with millions © 
Capids ; your eyes resemble a pair of autumnal lotuses, Millions and 
millions of cowherdesses are glancing at you with smiling faces. Your 
friends, the attendant cowherds, are fanning you with chowries, You dress- 
yourself like a cowherd boy. You aro too difficult for adoration” and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


qc BERROPYRENREM RBAN Ds 220 


ee  ———— mem € 


ed by meditation. You are constantly adored by Brahmá, 
he best of adepts, Yogis and, deyolees humbly 
oulogise you. You are indescribable by the Vedas. You ara the Lord ; 
golf-determining and supreme. Your form is denser than the densest object 
and subtler than the subtlest object. You are the emblem of truth. You 


have no destruction, no origin. 

world. You transcend Nature. 
associated with any object. You are v 
residing in the endless time. Your believers; consecrated by me i 
these, attempt to offer to your lotus feet served by Brahma and Laksmi 


bent grass and barley or sunned rice. How can foolish people adore yous 


when you cannot be adored by the four Vedas, Saraswati, A nanta, Brahma 


&.va, Ganeg'a, the sun, the moon and Indra ? 

57-67. You transcend the three attributes, the prineiples of virtue, 
activity and ignorance. No one ean determine your nature by vesting you 
with attributes. Your are void of three attributes, and superior 5o anything 


cannot be secur 
Siva and Ananta. 


in the world. How ew Iadore you? Jam neither a savant nor & £06» 
but an ordinary demon. Therefore forgive me.” Kri8na, the Lord of the 


world, the perfect deity, kind to his believers, having heard the eulogies of 
Bali, said, “Child, you need not fear. Go home. 
Pavala. By my boon and grace, your son will be rendered immorti and 
free from decrepitude. I shall only crush the pride of that ignorant, 
conceited fellow. I have given a boon to my great believer, 
Prahlada, saying. “ L shall not kill any of your descendants." With a 
cheerful mien, I-shall impart the great knowledge likely to conquer death 
In days of yore, Brahma had given to Sanat Kumara the 
ode as stated in the Sama-Veda, the ode with which you just adored me, 
the ode which I desire. The merciful Sinkara, on the occasion 0 
this ode to his pupil Gautama, one of his great 
believers, in the hermittage of adepts in the excellent and sacred placa 
on the coast of the celestial Ganges frequented by pilgrims. [had given the 
same ode to Brahm’ and Siva on the coast of the river Viraja. In days 
of yora, the wise Sanat-Kumára had given it to Bhrigu. I shall give it to 

th this hymn. Whoever, after bathing 


king Bana who will adore me wi : 
tual guide (disposed to religious acts) 


and afier having worshipped his spiri 
idal, listens to this hymn emanating from 


with cloths, ornaments and san 
the mouth of the sai] guide is undoubtedly released from the sins of 


millions of births. 

68-73. The perusal of this ode destroys calamities and is the source 
of all prosperity: Its perusal ief and sorrow; enables a man to 
cross the insurmountable sea of the world and wholly exempts him from 
his liability to suffer the -pangs of conception in the won 
from death, decrepitude, confinement and disease. This ode, in fact 


constitutes the ornament Or paraphern 
it undoubtedly reaps the benefits tha 
in all holy streams resorted to by pilgrims or 
by all gorts of sacrifices, VOWS; devotions, tru 
reading it a hundred thousand times, a man attains perfection. A man 


rendered perfect by this ode achieves all kinds of success and, haying 


to your son. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


as AA B iAy Uds V ALRART HP URA NA 
— NN NNNM 


ttained the di nity of a god in this World, secures the feet of Lord Hari 

in the next worlds So saying, Krisna, the Lord of the world, Paused. 
King Bali with a` cheerful disposition bowed low before the foet of tho 
supreme Being and went home, 


CHAPTER CXX, 
15-25, Narayana said, “Later on, Lord Krisna, 
consulted Uddhava and Baladeva sent a messenger 
iva, Ganes'a, Durga (the destroyer of calamities), Kartika, Bhad 
Ugra-Chanda and Kottari were abiding. The messenger ar 
low before Ganes' a, Siva and other adorable deities and Inspite 


after having 


great god (Siva), Lord 
Krişna is challenging king Bana to fight. Therefore let the kii of the 


demons bring Aniruddha and Osa and seok his protection, Whoever 
runs away from the battle-field wounded behaves like a Poltroon and ig 
consigned to hel] with seven of his ancestors.” The goddess Parvati in 
council, as she heard the words of the herald, used suitable language in the 
presence of Siva and addressed Bana thus,“ O most blessed Bana, go 
to Lord Krigna, deliver to him your daughter and everything that 
you have by way of dowry and seek his protection: That risna is the 
God of all the cause of everything, the donor of all prosperity, the foremost 
of beings, the preserver, merciful and favourable to his believers,” Tke 
i ised her Saying ‘you are the most 
na, the king of the 
» bowel low before the 
me, everyone remonstrated 
is body Quivered with anger and his eyes 
demons, four commanders-in- 
chief, vsz., Kambhanda, Küpa-Karna, Nikumbha and Kumbha armed with 
shields accompained him, The ma hairava, the Bhairava of destruction, 
the Bhairava of black colour, the Ruru-Bhairava, the Maha-Bhairava, the 
nda-Bhairaya and the 
followed him With their respective forces, Lord Kálagni, Bhairava 
1 ( e advanced, Ugra-Chanda, 
raohandá, Chandika, Chanda-Nayika, Chandes'warj, Chamunda, Chandf 
and Chanda-Palika (the eight Nayikas) aqva; i : i 
their hands, The Presiding deity of § 
Sword and a seimitar, cheerful] 
advanced. Indrani (a Vai nayi 
iscourses on Brahma Kaumari,-N åra. i i 
sight be abdmbya Maher vari gn] es ab of a hidoous. ap conte 
sight faculties or energies) glad 
The three-eyed Bhadra-Ka]j w osea body was red 
rolling and fearful, who wielded jn her hands 
spear, the mace, the scimitar and the 
gems and proceeded. Siva armed with bow and weapons also advanced, 
All went except Ganes’a and Parvat}, Krigna, the wielder of the wheel, 
seeing Siva and Bhadra-K4]i encircled by' army greeted them in a 
suitable manner, Later on, Bana, the king of Physicians bowed low | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


~y 


KRENA HAGAN cri KEBAN Dist. 929 


D UU A T EAE ERE 


a 
before the the feet of párvati's husband, sounded the conches and attached 
colestial weapons to the bow with strings, which he held in his hand. 
Satyaki, seeing that Bana was ready for the battle, gladly advanced to 
the battle-field in military array inspite of the remonstsrances 


of all. 

96-37. O Narada, the great king Bana discharged the celestial weapon 
called Manchhana that was keen-edged, irresistible and effulgent like the 
noontide suo of summer. Sátyaki, having observed before him the 
celestial weapon, bowed a little bit, whereupon the dreadful weapon 
consumed only & portion of his hair and passed into the sky. 
Bana then discharged the weapon of fire, bright and huge like a 
alm tree, which was extinguished’ by Sityaki with the weapon 
called Varuna. Then Bana, whose exterior was rough, discharged 
the bright and hideous weapon’ called Varuna which Satyaki 
easily cub off with the weapon called Párjanya. Whereupon Bana, 
the king of physicians, discharged the arrow ealled Narayana. By 
virtue of the instruction which he had received from Arjuna, Sityaki 
threw himself prostrate on the ground. Then Bana, the best of those 
conversant with the use of weapons, discharged the weapon called 
Mahes'wara which was easily cub off by Satyaki with the weapon 
called Vaignava. Thereupon king Bana discharged the weapon 
Brahma in the battle- field which was averted in a moment by the weapon 
Brahmá used by Sàtyaki. Bana, clever in the use of weapons, later on 
discharged the weapon of snakes which was destroyed in a moment by 
the weapon of Garada used by Sátyaki. Whereupon the demon Bana 
hurled at his foe the most hideous and irresistible spear of Siva ; but as 
goon as Satyaki eulogised Darga, it turned, as it were, into a garland 
round his neck. Bana attached the arrow of Pás'upata to his bow, 
Satyaki, by the use of the arrow called Jrimbhana, spell-bound Bana 
armed with bow. The most, powerful Kártika, seeing that Dàna was 
bewildered, discharged the arrow of half-moon which was easily cut off 
by the god Kama. Kartika hurled at Kama a club valorous like hundreds 
of suns; but Mama divided it into seven parts with the weapon called 
Vaisnava. 

38.48, Kartika hurled at Kama the iron spear (bright like the fire 
used on the occasion of the eternal dissolution of the world) which was pub 
out by Kama with the weapon called Narayana. Kartika hurled at hisenemy 
the missile called the Brahma weapon in the battle-field; whereupon Kama 
at once used his own Brahmá weapon and defeated the Brahma weapon aimed 
at by Kártika.. Kartika thereupon quickly discharged at his opponent the 
weapon called Narayana: whereupon Prádyumna, in pursuance to the ins- 
truction which he had received from Krisna, lay prostrate on the ground 
like a staff. Kürtika with a feeling of anger combined with savage joy 
aimed at his enemy the arrow called Pas’upata. But Kama promptly 
used the weapon of sleep and benumbed his foe with sleep. Bhadra- 
KAli seeing that Kartika was asleep and Bana was spell-bouad angrily 
swallowed Kama with his chariot and taking Bana and Kártika in her 
lap went from the battle-field to the place where the chaste Parvati, the 
mother of the universe, was abiding. Bhadra-KAli, having arrived there, 
restored Kártika to consciousness and Bána to health; and immediately 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


i Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


526 THE BRAHMA VAIPARTA PURANA 
D CDP— Áo  L — 


the god Kama with his chariot came out of her nostrils and returned to 
the battle-field. Atthat time the Yádavas observing Kama with his 
chariot indulged in a hearty laugh. On the other hand, the attendant, 
of Siva with parched lips were very much frightened. Later on, Bang 
and Lord Kartika having respectively mounted their chariots rushed 
back to fight at a white heat. Bana, having returned to the battle-field 
aimed five arrows at Baladeva who cut them off with the arrow called 


the half-moon. Later on, Baladeva armed with plough broke the chariot - 


of Bana and with the stroke of the pestle for husking rice killed his 
charioteer and horse. 

49 60, Later on, Lord Kalagni-Rudra seeing that the most 
powerful Baladeva armed with plough was about to kill Bana easily 
prevented him from his design. Baladeva armed with plough angrily 
broke the chariot of Kálàgni-Rudra and with the stroke of the pestle 
killed his horse and charioteer. Whereupon Kaldgni-Rudra in anger 
inflicted upon Krigna’s party a plague called the dreadful fever. All the 
Yádavas except Hari were attacked by fever. Lord Krigna,. having 
perceived all this, created a fever called the Vaisnava fever and hurled 
it at his opponents in the battle-field particularly to checkmate Siva. 
For a moment there was a dreadful fight between the Siva fever and the 
Vaisnava fever. The latter attacked the former and laid it prostrate on 


2a promptly returned and discharg- 
which were as bright as the 
dissolution of the world. 
them with a rain of arrows, 
iron spear bright like the acute 


sun, The most powerful ambidexter Arjuna using the left hand with 


» having easily cut off the Spear, the demon 
, ar, e de 

âna grasped the arrow called Pás'upata effulgent like 4 hundred suns. 

a » having observel that irresistable . 

as‘upata calculated to destroy the whole world 


less through pain, fell on the ground. 


: i arrived at that pl ce and clasp- 
ing Bana to his bosom wept loudly through o. ATUS INLS WE) 


likewise created out of Siva's tears, Lord Siva, the ocean of mereys 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


jc agio DARM oi ES D Aust TEE 


SSS 


__. ee = 
=< a - = 
restoring Bana to consciousness took him to the place where | Lord 
Krisna was seated. Siva with the moon on his head delivered Bane 
to the lotus feet of Lord Krisna s smi 
eulogised Iriso» the master of the world, and the Lord of i his 
believers with the same ode with which Bali bad adored him. Then 
at that time Hari gave to Bana the knowledge relating to the conquest 
of death, applied his lotus hand to the body of the demon and exempted 
him from death and decrepitude. Bana, the king i 
ith the hymn composed by Bali fetched his 


respectfully adored bim wit 
daughter decorated with orna nents of gem and, before the assembly © 


the gods revərentially handed her over to Hari. King Bana, at the 
command of Siva, reverentially inclined his shoulders and 
Lord of the world five lakhs of elephants, horses four times 
of elephants, a thousand maidservants decked with ornaments of gems 
a thousand cows of plenty with calves capable of fulfilling all desires 
7 lakhs of gems, pearls, diamonds, 7 lakhs of beautiful and precious 
stones, rubies, thousands of golden water-cups and dishes. 

` 73.78, O Narada, king Bana having delivered to the lotus feet 
of Hari exquisite and fine clothes, clothes consecrated by fire, vessels 
containing betel-leaves, cups full of honey, thousands of cups of various 
kinds as well as his daughter wept very loudly and mcst respectfully 
begged Hari’s pardon. Lord Krisna granted a boon to Bana according 
to the method prescribed by the Vedas, blessed him in an auspicious 
manner and went to Dwarkipur. Lord Krisna himself went and 
delivered the newly-married daughter of Bana to Rukminf and Daivaki. 
Later on, Lord Hari earefully caused grand festivals and celebrated 
deeds to be performed, distributed wealth to the Brahmins likewise and 


feasted many a Brahmin. ; 


CHAPTER CXXI. 

1-19. Lord Náráyana said, “Later on, Krigna with his friends and 
relations arrived at the council called Sudharma, when & Bráhmin 
igent with the lustre of Brahma arrived there, beheld the excellent 
Being, reverentially eulogised him and assuming a modest, gentle. timid 
tone accosted him thus :—“Srigâla, alias Vasudeva, the king of kings 
apd the Lord of the sphere, has delivered a mes;age which T PO 
going to communieate to you. Listen attentively. Srigâla hath said, 
« T am Vasudeva presiding over the region of Vaikurtha. J am the 
chief of the gods, the husband of Laksmi and possess four arms, Iam 
the preserver of the world and even of Brahma. Ihave come to India 
at the entreaties of Brahma to relieve the earth of her burden. Krişna 
the son of Vasudeva, is an ordinary Ksatriya, very haughty, dicsembling 
and fraudulent. He poses as Visnu. The most cunning Krigna 
creates a rupture between strong and weak kings and then subdues 
and destroys the weaker party. Krisna brought about the death 
of Dur-yodhana, Jarà-sandha and other weak kings through the 
powerful Bhima. That Krisna likewise by fraudulent means effected the 
destruction of Drona, Bhigma, Karna and other kings of the world 
through the powerful Arjuna. Besides this, he fraudulently caused the 


Get 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


528 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA 
—_______ 


destruction of weak, famous and infamous men through the aid of powerful 
men. Krisna killed Sis'upala, my son Neraka, the weak Narakásura and 
the demon called Mura through treachery and insinuations, The 
treacherous Krisna never took part in a lawful fight:—he has been unjust 
even since his childhood. 


18-283. That vile impostor, the deceitful Krisna, killed Ptitand and 
Kubjà ; and hence it follows heis the slaughterer of women. For the 
sake of mere trifling clothes, he killed a washerman of good character, 
Having killed the most powerful and valiant demons Hiranyaka-Sipu, 
Madhu and Kaitava, I myself am preserving the creation. I myself am 
Brahma as wellas Siva. I am the preserver of the world and the chastise 
of the wicked. All the Manus and Munis are either my digits or tho digits 
of my digits. I myself am Narayana and void of attributes, I 
transcend Nature. ‘Through forbearanoe and out of compassion, I 
excused all his faults up to this time, regarding him all the while in the 
light of a friend. But the inevitable has happened. Now let him come 
and fight with me. My messenger tells me that Krisna is very proud. 
I ought, therefore, to curb his pride. The first and foremost duty of a 
king consists in subduing haughty people. Now I must chastise him, 
Vested with four arms and wielding the conch, wheel, mace and lotus, 
I shall personally go over to Dwárkà with my attendants and fight 
with him. If he means to fight, let him fight. He need not seek my 
protection. Ifhe does not yield to me, I shall in a moment reduce 
Dwárká to ashes. I seek the assistance of no one; but single-handed, easily 
and in a moment I shall destroy Krisna, his brother Baladeva and all his 
sons, relations and attendants. Having conquered the devotee Sankara, old 
and submissive to the will of his wife, and for the sake of Parijat and 
without any useful purpose in view having subdued Indra 
fall of female organs, who is ever subject to disease 


curse of a Brahman, Krigna considers himself as a hero and 
infatuations of his heart, 


through the 
god in the 


24-93. Krigna is treacherous, adulterous, subservient to Radha, hen- 
pecked and servile to all his wives including Satyabhama.” O Muni, 
the Bråbmin, so saying, kept quiet: and at his words, Krigna laughed 
very loudly with all his attendants, Later on, he feasted the Brahmins 
with four kinds of food (viz , food which can be chewed, sucked, licked 
and drunk) and being lacerated with the Shafts of words likely to burst 
his heart (¢. e , cut to the quick by the remarks) he passed the whole 
night in agony. Next morning, Krisna with. hi 
rode on a chariot and in a merry mood went to the place where Srigála 
was. King Srigála, being apprised of the 
on four artifieial hands and went with his 


did not accept his offer, Srigála 
tof Krisna and addressed him thus: — 


x 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


whose body is . 


Digitized by eGangotri and S. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA S 529 


ooo E 


= a 
E 


I was also your doorkeeper named Subhadra. O omniscient Lord, you 
know everything : SO please do not make any delay. à 3 
/ 94-47. .I have attained this degraded condition through the eurse of 
Laksmi : my time is now full (7. €; MY days are numbered). After thé 
lapse of & hundred years, my curse will be ended; and I shall, then, return 
to your land. Lord Krigna said, «O friend, give the first blow yourself 
and I shall fight with you afterwards. Son, I know all. You had better 
go to the Vaikuntha with pleasure.” When Krisna said so the king 
Srigàla discharged ten arrows at Krisna. Those arrows; the symbol 
of death, bowed before the feet of Krigna and quickly entered into the 
. The king thereupon promptly hurled at Lord Krisna the mace 
pright like the flamo of fire used at the time of the eternal dissolution 
of the world. But it was broken as soon as i& came in contact with 
the body of Krigna. Afterwards king rigála aimed at the Lord the 
spear, pestle, iron-spear and axe which were broken in a moment by the 
mere touch of Krisna's body. Tater on, he discharged the arrow an 
the hideous scimitar fatal like death which were likewise broken by 
the touch of Krisna’s body. The most gracious Lord Krisna, seeing 
that the king was without weapons said, “Friend, go home and fetch 
keen-edged swords. Thereupon rigála said, “Can the supreme spirit 
be penetrated by a weapon ? So how is it possible for me to fight with 
the supreme spirit ? Kindly rescue me, O Lord, from the sea of the 
world. You alone can etfect a rescue. O Lord, the sea of the world is 
more dreadful than poison. Kindly therefore cub asunder the chain of 
illusion and remove all the delusions or pewilderments of the mind 
caused by my Karmaor fate. You are the Lord of all actions, the ruler or 
dispenser of avents, the ruler even of Brahma, the donor of auspicious 
fruits and the source of all prosperity. You are the cause of the destiny 
brought about by one's previous birth and you can set aside the sai 
destiny. Let me quit this mortal frame pertaining to nature and 
composed of five elements. Let me proceed to the Vaikuntha even UP to 
its seventh gate. Krisna, the ocean of mercy, hearing in the thick of 
the fight the eulogies of his friend and his words sweet like {nectar,.wept 
with compassion. In that battle-field, a charming lake named Vindu 
Jake ranking pre-eminently the foremost among celestial lakes frequented by 
ilgrims, was created oub of his tears. ‘The mere touch of the water of this 
fake redeems a man in his life-time and relieves him of the sins committed 
by him in his previous seven pirths, no doubt. 


48-54. The Lord said, “My friend, if your heart is so pure, how is 
it that that you were inelined to fight? And how is ib that you 
addressed to me such dreadful and eruel words through your messenger ?” 
Srigàla said, «O Lord, I have used such language to you: therefore 
you have come here in anger ; otherwise your sight would have been rare 
even in dreams.” So saying; &rigàla, by dint of his meditations, quitted 
-his body of nature or physical body which was composed of five elements, 
rode on a chariot and observing Krigna all the while went with pleasure 
to the Vaikuntha. At that time, a hideous light, huge like Sapte-Tala 
or seven palmyra trees, (Tal is a articular kind of measuré) 
emanated from the body of Srigàla, bowed before the:lotus feet of 
67 2 z 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


530 TRE BRIR VATVIRTA PURANA. 


Krişņa served by the goddess of fortune and disappeared, Krisna with 
his attendants having witnessed this wonderful phenomenon proceeded 
with a cheerful mien to Dwárká, Having reached there, he first of all 
bowed before the feet of his parents: then he went to the house of 
Rukmini which was incensed with flowers and sandal, lay with her on 
the floral bed and thus passed the night, Rukmini, the daughter of 
king Bhigmaka, pressed Krişna to her bosom and fainted, 


CHAPTER CXXIL 


1-11. Narada said, ^O most blessed saint you, have recited to me 
with pleasure the Subject relating to the marriage of certain women 
with the supreme spirit Krisna; but I am desirous to listen to the 
narrative of the gem called Syamantaka : therefore give me an account of 
the same.” Nardyana said, “ In days of yore, the moon god, on the fourth 
day of the bright half of the lunar month of Bhadra, abducted Tard : and 
later on, on the fourth day of the dark half 
Afterwards, the spiritual guide incensed at the 
nant ‘Tara who was abashed and angrily curse 
you be blotted by my curse ; and may any cor 
likewise be blotted and affected with sins,” 
words, went to the lake dedicated to N 
was thus relieved from the sins commi 

(Purugottama) the ocean of merey, 
frightened and emaciated by meditations said, “O moon 


consists in digits), you have been polluted for all times P 
from me the boon of redemption. 


12-21. For the edification of the i 
: I people, I am going to tell you 
everything as to how Lord Krisna was in des first place “polluted zd 
Ger duently how he was relieved from the blot or stigma on his character. 
ne Satraji 2 hi Wee d 
enol ekine of SED OM gave himself up to meditation in 


d from the sun xcellent gem 
called Syamantaka, The most pious Satrajita, un an excellent g 


hertowed Satyabhàmá on Krisna, was about to give him the gem called 


by way of dowry, when the evil-mj 
forbade him from the act and P n 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA: - 531 


beast. The powerful Jámbha-Vána, the king of the bears, killed the lion 
before his time, seized the gem and arrived at his city constructed with 
gems. Everyone was speaking thus in Dwarka, “Krigna has stolen the gem. 
What sort of intellect he has and by what expedient did he manage to 
steal it, we are at a loss to make out.” Lord Krigna, when ho heard this, 
went to the forest and followed the track of the thief with a view to 
remove the stigma from his riame. 

_ 92-32, The sorrowful Krigna saw Prasena and the lion both lying 
dead in the midst of a jungle. But he was very much afflicted to find 
that none of them had the gem on his body. The omniscient Krisna 
thereupon happened to know the whole affir, went to the house of the 
bear-king and at his place saw & boy weeping in the lap of his nurse. 
At that time, the nurse was consoling the boy thus, «O child, take this 

em Syamantaka : for it is yours. The lion killed Prasena ; and Jambhavan 
Killed the lion. O boy, do nob weep. This Syamantaka gem is now yours.’ 
Whoever after recollecting this verse recited by the nurse drinks water is 
relieved from the sin caused by the accidental sight of the polluted moon. 
Brahma, the offspring of the Jotus, hath said that haughty people who 
slander the Vedas, if they voluntarily see the moon on those days, are: 
unquestionably stigmatised by the sight. Krisna, as he heard the words of 
the nurse, took the gem from that boy ; and the nurse in anger went and 
informed the bear of Krisna’s proceedings. At that time, Jambha- Vana 
came to Krisna, bowed low and eulogised him. He then gave his own 
daughter Jàmbha-Vati to Krigna in marriage and presented to him the 
gem Syamantaka by way of dowry. Krisna thereupon took the above 

em to Dwárkà and showed it to the Yadavas. He was thus purified and 
nbsolved from the stain. Q son; [have thus recited to you the excellent 
narration of the gem yamantaka. Whoever listens to this chapter is 
released from all stigma on his character. I have now given you the 
account of the gem yamantaka (hardly. to be secured) as mentioned 
in the Vedas and as I heard from Dharma. Now tell me what 
more you want to hear.” . 


CHAPTER CXXIII. 


1.7, Narada, the godly gaint, said, ‘ The narrative of the 
worship of Ganes'a is hardly to be secured in the sacred book of the 
Purünas. I heard it in brief only in part from the mouth of Brahma 
Now I want to hear in detail the glory of Ganes’a, the spiritual guide of 
the religious preceptors of the best of devotees, the Lord of all and 
worthy of the veneration of everybody. In days of yore, the inhabitants 
of the three world performed the grand worship of Ganesa in the 
hermitage of perfection (Siddhás'rama) wherein a complete union of R&dh& 
and Krisna was effected. For O saint, after the lapse of a hundred years 
the ourse of riddma was over. Tell me the reason, pray» why Radha, at 
tha» time, first of -all worshipped Ganes'a, setting aside the claims of 
Brahma, Visnu, Siva and Ananta, and regardless of the presence of Yogis- 
accomplished adepts, principal. snakes, distinguished kings, all powerful 
PO Gandharvas and all the valiant Rüksas that inhabit the 
globe. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


532 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


ruly blessed in the three 
ded as very holy. India, 


8-20. Náráyana answered, “ Tho"earth is ¢ 
worlds. She is revered by all people and regar 
again, on earth is most blessed, as this country rewards all Karma, con- 
tributes to the enhancement of fame, breeds welfare and is revered by all 
people. In this sacred land ot India, again, the hermitage of perfection 
is a very blessed and auspicious place which is capable of giving rodemp- 
tion. Lord Sanat-Kumára, the best of devotees, aseeties, and adepts 
including Kapila, nay, Brahmá himself attained perfection by meditation 
in this hermitage. Indra, the king of gods, achieved perfection there by 
the performance of a hundred sacrifices. Hence tht place is called the 
adept’s temple or the hermitage of perfection, which can hardly be 
secured by anybody. O saint, Ganes'a constantly lives in that hermitage, 
The gods here worship the most beautiful image of Ganes'a, constructed 
with invaluable gems on the night of the full-moon of the month of 
Vaisükha. Once upon a time, serpents, men, demons, Gandharvas, 
Rásaksas, the choicest of adepts and asceties, the best of devotees including 
S'anaka, etc., and Parvati attended the benefactor Siva on his way to that 
place. Kártika with Ganes'a, Brahma himself, the Lord of creation, the 
god Ananta with his attendants, the princely snakes soon arrived at that her- 
, mitage of perfection. All the gods, Manus, Munis and kings gladly arrived 
at that place to worship the image of Ganes/a. Lord Krigna with tho resi- 
sidents of Dwárkà, Nanda with the residents of Gokul, arrived at that 
hermitage. After the lapse of a century, the fair Radha, tho presiding 
deity of the heart of Krisna, with two hundred millions of cowherdesses, 
two hundred millions of the inhabitants of. the Cow-world, ten millions 
of female attendants, powerful like elephants, arrived at tho hermitage 
of perfection to worship Ganes'a. Radha, the merry lady of the sphere 


of the Rasa, with a set of excellent teeth bathed, put on a pair of washed 
clothes and ina pure condition 


of body and mind and without eati = 
thing proceeded to the tomple ee mind and without eating any 


21-31, The beautiful Radha, likely to consecrate the three worlds, 


washed her feet and having performed the avowal for the purpose of 
making a vow (Sankalpa) reverentially dipped Ganes'a in the water of 
the Ganges. Afterwards Radha, the mother of the four Vedas, eight 
Vasus and the three worlds—tho goddess who i í 
the mother of all knowledge wl 

saints, held in her hand white 
excellent son who is bey 


who is affectionately disposed towards hj h 
the faithful; whose body is a Nae s his belie 


of Brahma, whose face 


25 of fire, who has got 
tooth (husk), who has no end, who is the itis pae the 


adepts, devotees and philosophers, who is ot l 
the best of Munis, gods and adepts and by fh d de pu 
Ananta, who is pre-eminently superior, who is the symbol and harbour 


» Whose hue is like that 


- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


KRISH TAN ML RAI NT 533 


———— 


of all good, who removes all impediments, who is very tranquil in nature, 
who is the donor of all prosperity; who is, as ib were a pilot rowing the 
boat of illusion in the sea of the world for the benefit of people desiring 
to reap the fruits of their actions, who is constantly engaged in the 

reservation of the fugitives, the poor, the diseased or the oppressed. 
The chaste Radha,” after, this sort of meditation, put flowers on the 
head and assigned various parts of the body to different deities with 
prayer and corresponding gesticulations likely to purify the whole body. 
‘Afterwards with that auspicious Dhyana, as stated above, she contemplated 
him again and offered flowers to the feet of the long, bellied god. 


39.45. Afterwards Radha herself, the resident of the Cow-world, offered 
lotus to the same lotus feet that are worshipped by Laksmi and other gods 
with the fragrant and cool waters procured from the seven sacred streams,, 
and then presented to them (the feet) offerings in the shape of bent grass, 
sunned rice, white flowers, fragrant paste and water. Radha herself 
the lady of the sphere of the Rasa, placed round the neck of Ganes'a a 
wreath of fresh, moist and beautiful Pàriját flowers mixed with sandal- 
paste. Ràdbà, who revels in Vrindóvana applied to the whole body of Ganes'a 
fragrant and cool sandal-paste mixed with mnsk and saffron. The 
chaste Rádhà who dwells in the great lotus presented fragrant white 
flowers mixed with the perfume of sandal to the lotus feet of Ganes'a. 
Ridha, the beloved spouse of [Krigàa, presented excellent and fragrant 
frankincenso extracted from holy articles to Ganes'a, the god of the 
three worlds. Out of deference to the same god, the goddess of primeval 
Nature, the eternal Rádh& presented to him a lamp of ghee calculated 
to dispel eternal darknnss. O Narada, later on, Radha, the presiding 
goddess of the life of Krigna, ont of deference to god Ganes'a presented 
to him very delightful, delicious and charming sacrificial ingredients, four 
kinds of food which taste like ambrosia, viz., food that can be 
chewed, sucked, licked and drunk, very sweet, large, ripe country fruits 
and wild fruits hardly to be secured in the three worlds, countless balls 
of sesamum and other countless, delicious, well-baked balls of sweetmeat 
and pleaseut cakes made of wheat and barley flour mixed with sugar, 
beautiful aud huge balls of Swastikas, several kinds of fried articles 
mized with sugar, artificial rivers of ghee, milk, honey, and molasses and 
milk boiled with rice, sugar, etc., heaps of Swastika, piles of plantains, 
very sweet and fine (boiled) winter rice mixed with vegetables. 


46-53. Later on, Radha who dwells on the coast of the Virajá river pre- 
sented to Ganes'a a charming excellens throne constructed with excellent 
gems. Radha, the resident of the mount ofa hundred summits, presented 
to Ganes'a, the son of Siva, a pair of invaluable, slender (fine or delicate) 
and charming clothes consecrated by fire, Radha who dwells in the Vrinda- 
vana, out of deference to Ganes/a presented to him oblations of milk 
mixed with pure and sweet honey and unadulterated ghee. Radha, the 
mistress of the cowherdesses, presented to him with pleasure saered, 
cool and fragrant water procured from-the seven holy streams for his 
drink. The daughter of Vriga-bhanu presented to Ganes'a capable 
of yielding all prosperity, very lovely aud excellent betel-leaves perfumed 
with camphor. ‘The primordial goddess of Nature Radha, out of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


584 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


deference to the great god Ganes'a presented to him a pure, invaluable, 
white chowrie which can be secured with the greatest difficulty. The 
goddess who resides in the heart of Krigna offered to the son of Siyg 
a bedstead furnished on all sides with white and delicate pieces of 
cloth, besmeared with flowers and sandal, graced with pearls, diamonds 


aud precious stones and constructed with excellent gems. Afterwards. 


Vrindà, having presented to him a cow of plenty with her calf 
ealeulated to yield desired fruits, solicited his pardon by way of atonement 
and offered him a handful of flowers. 


‘54-59. Afterwards RAdh4 who resides on the coast of the river 
Kalind? presented to him sixteen ingredients with the radical or basie 
mantra containing celestial and bright Vijas (mystic syllables pronounced 
into the ear by the spirituul guide) or the mystical letters with which 
a Mantra begins or which form its essential part. Afterwards Om, Gam, 
Gaum,  Ganapataye, Vighna-Vinásine Swáhá: this excellent Mantra 
consisting of sixteen letters and representing the Kalpa-tree the tree 
which fulfils all desire) she recited a thousand times. Later on, Radha 
with reverential inclination of her head, streaming eyes and with a 
thrill of raptures in her body respoctfully eulogised Ganes'a with tie 
hymn mentioned in the Kanthuma branch of the Vedas thus: You are 
the supreme Brahma, the symbol of the supreme light, You direct 
nature (7.¢., yon are the ruler of nature). You destroy all calamities : you 
are ofa tranquil disposition; you have the face ofan elephant. I bow to you. 
The gods, demons and the most accomplished adepts adore you : there 
is none superior to you. As the sun causes the lotus to bloom, so you 
cause the gods to manifest themselves: therefore I eulogise you. 
Whoever having risen from his bed at break of d wy reads this exeellont 
hymn calculated to secure the greatest religious sanctity and destroy 

grief and impediments is released from all sorts of calamities, 


—— 


CHAPTER CXXIV, 


1-13. Náráyana said, “Radha, devoted to her husband, 
worshipped and adored Ganes'a, the big-bellied god in due fo 
allhis body with ornaments. Ganes'a of a tranquil disposition having 
heard the ode of Radha and having seen the method of her worship and 
all the objects presented by her gently thus spake to Radha of-a serene 
nature and the mother of the threo worlds: 


O auspicious goddess, you are symbol of Brahma. 
the heart of Lord Krişna. You just worshipped me, only to teach the 
people. The gods, Brahma, Siva, Ananta, the best of Munis ineluding' 


eit life-time, the believers, the best of 
I others contemplate the incomparable 
lotus feet of Lord Krisna hardly to be secured; ae you are the preside! 
f 1 $02, nay, dearer to him than his life; 
Radha is the left side of his body : and Krisna is the right side of his’ 
body. ‘The great goddess of fortune the mother of the world, has come’ 
out of your left side, You are the mother of Maha-Visnu, the mother 
of the world, You are the supreme goddess, the mother of the four 
Vedas and the three worlds: you are the goddess representing the 


having thua 
rm decorated 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


a $5 a d 


. the principal mouth of a go 


Digitized by eGangotri an u;Trus 
 ghISNA JANMA KHANDA = 535 


See 


Nature. O mother, \"theswhole Nature constituting the 
digit. The whole world is-the effect and you 
are the cause. At the time of the eternal dissolution of the world, 
when Brahmé falls, you wink, i. e, shut your eyes: and Hari shuts 
his eyes too atthe same time. That person who first pronounces the 
name of Radh4 and next that of Hari is truly a savant and a Yogi and 
oes to the world in a playful mood. Whoever violates this rule is 
a great sinner and assuredly commits the sin of Bràhmin-slaughter. 
You are the mother of the three worlds: and the supreme spirit Hari is 
their father. The mother is a spiritial guide superior to the father, more 
adorable and venerable than the father and passing excellent. If a person 
adores Lord Krisna or any other god in any sacred land but slanders 
Radha then the great fool loses all his descendants, attains grief and 
sorrow and is consigned to a hideous hell-pit wherein he dwells as long 
as the sun and the moon exist. sagt 
14-95, A spiritual guide is so called because he sows the seed of know- 

ledge in the mind of his pupils. The knowledge of mantra (mystic formula) 
and Tantra (a code of religions ceremonies for the worship of the deities) is, 
properly speaking, knowledge. And properly speaking, that is Mantra or 
Tantra which inspires reverence for Radha and Krisna. A person wielding 
a body and worshipping any other gods acquires at every birth reverence 
(hardly to be secured) for the lotus feet of Durgà. Whoever reverentially 
ministers to, the Durgá-Mantra at every birth attains the eternal 
Mantra of Siva which gives knowledge and happiness. Whoever 
ministers to the Mantra of Siva, the cause of the universe, attains the 
lotus feet of you both hardly to be secured. A virtuous man who attains 

our precious lotus feet never, even casually, spends a sixteenth part of 
Lait a moment of his time in vain. Whoever takes from a believer of 
Visnu the Mantra of you both, eulogises you and reads your amulet never 
reaps the consequences of his actions. Whoever in the holy land of 
India very reverentially recites the Mantra or the mystic formula 
appropriate to Radha and Krişna redeems himself and a thousand of his 
ancestors. Whoever duly worships his spiritual guide with cloths, orna- 
and wields an amulet assuredly attains the rank of 
© mother, bless (or render fruitful) all those objects which you 
have offered or tendered to me. For my satisfaction, tender them all 
to Brahmins, in which case I shall be able to appropriate or enjoy your 
gifts through the medium of the said Bráhmins. Offer the articles in the 
first place to your god and respectfully give him also priest's fee. Then 
deliver them all to the Brahmins: in which case you will reap eternal 
fruits. For the god will eat with the mouth of a Brahmin. O Radha, 
dis the mouth of a Brahmin. The gods get 
everything that a Brahmin puts into his own mouth. 

96-32. O Narada, the chaste Radha thereupon feasted the Brahmins 
with all those things : and ab that, time Ganes'a also was very much 
satisfied. At that instant, Brahma, Siva, Ananta, eo. arrived at the root 
of the fig tree to worship Ganes'’a. Later on, the guard, an attendant of 
Siva, being frightened, went and said to the gods, goddesses and Lord 
Krisna with his throat parched : Radha, the powerfal daughter of Vriga- 


primordial 
genesis of creation is your 


Visnu. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


536 THE BRAHMA PAIVÁRTA PURANA, 


— 
bhánu, attended by three hundred millions of cowherdesses has, at an aus- 
picious moment, after pronouncing Swasti (particle of benediction) wor- 
shipped  Ganes'a in the first place. I was resisted by those strong 
cowherdesses. Iam going to tell you why. Whoever worships Ganes'a 
in the first place (or before worshipping any other god) reaps 
endless fruits. Whoever worships him in the middle secures moderate 
fruits : and one who accords him the last place in worship gets the least 
fruit, as stated in the Sastras, Ganes'a has first of all been worshipped by 
Radh& associated witth cowherds and cowherdesses, in preference to the 
best of gods, Munis and the goddesses who are present here," All the 
gods, godlesses, Munis, Manus and kings laughed at the words of the 
messenger ; the women of the race of Yadu were astonished at his worda j 
and Saraswati, Sávitri, the great goddess Parvati, Rohini, Swadha, 


Samjfá, SwAha and other goddesses and the chaste wives of the Munis 
advanced with very great pleasure, — E 


83-43. All the Munis, Manus, gods, kings, Lord Krigna himself and 
everybody else with his attendants likey 


vise proceeded with immense g'ee. 
Everyone, weak or stiong, by turns, at an auspicious moment, worshipped 
Ganes'a separately with several ingredients. ‘Then a thousand millions of 


heaps of balls of sweetmeat, hoaps of sugar and Swastika (a kind of cake) 
measuring half the above quantity, heaps of boiled rice and fried articles 
and countless delicious and sweet fruits were deposited at that place. In 
connection with that worship performed by the residents of the three 
worlds, hundreds of pools of honey, milk and ghee were constructed. After 
worship, they sat-down with pleasure and Pårvatî very gladly went to 
Radha. Radha, seeing Durga, got up and affectionately accosted her ina 
suitable manner, They embraced and kissed one another, Durga holding 
Radha to her breast gently said, “O Radha, you are the harbour of all good, 
How can I put to you any question ? The pang of your separation from 
Krigna disappeared, as soon as the curse of Sri-Dàma ended, I am devoted 
to you, heart and soul ; and you are likewise devoted to me. As between 
the supreme Beiag and Nature, there is no difference between you and me. 
Anyone of my believers who slanders you and anyone of your believers 
who slanders me dwell in the hell called the Kumbhipáka, as long as the 
sun and the moon exist, i 
44-55, The basest of m 
Separate lose their descenda, 
attain the condition of boars 
You alone haye worshipped 
mind ; Ganes'a, inspite of th 


en who think that RAdhà and Krigna are 
nts, dwell in hell for a very.long time and 
with a hundred of their paternal ancestors. 
my son Ganes'a; I have not done so. Never 
1 18, will be worshipped first of all, For Ganes'a 
js the Same to me as to you, O goddess, henceforth, there will be no 
separation between Radha and Krigna(as long as they live), as there is no 
difference between milk and its whiteness, Worship Ganes'a, the Lord of 
impediments, in the hermitage of perfection and in places sacred to pil- 
grims in the holy land of India and thereby secure Govinda without any 
hindrance. You are the merry mistress of the Rasa ; Lord Krisna is the 
merry king of that Rasa: the combination of merry and witty pair is praise- 

over after a century. By my 


worthy. Tho curse of Sridáma has been 
boon be united with Krisna this day, Fair one, make at my command a 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


uu———— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA © 587 


raedful toilet on this auspicious occasion ; instances are exceptional : 
when a woman is able to secure the society of a good man." ‘The dear : 
female associates of Radha, at the command of Durga, secured a good 
dress for Ràdhà and seated the goddess on & lovely throne of gem. 
Her companion Ratna-mala, first, put a garland of gems round Radha’s 
neck, Padma gave her a diatrond looking-glass wherein she might see 
the reflection of her face. Padma-Mukhi placed in her right hand a lotus 
used as a toy and painted her lotus feet with lackdye. The cowherdess 
named Sundart applied excellent and lovely vermilion annointed with 
sandal-paste to the part of hor face just below the partings of her hair. 
56.68. MAlati adorned the beautiful clusters of her hair likely to 
enchant the heart of the Munis with wreaths of jasmine ; and the chaste 
Chandant-attached to her hard breast delicate leaves of sandal annointed 
with musk and saffron. Malavati gave her a wreath of fragrant and 
graceful Champaka and blooming and fresh Mallika flowers. The witty 
cowherdess Rati adorned the merry Radha desirous of sexual intercourse 
with ornaments of gem. Her companion, the chaste Lalita. by the 
application “of collyrium to her eyes large like autumnal lotuses, lighted 
them up and gave her the fragrant flower of Parijata which she obtained 
from Indra, The cowberdess Sus’il4 taught her ethics and the use of 
sweet and suitable language likely to improve manners. . Her mother 
Kalàvati reminded her of the sixteen digits of womanhood (or, perhaps, 
raotioal] arts) whieh she had. forgotten in her adversity. Her sister 
Sudha-Mukhi reminded her of things relating to sexual intercourse and 
delightful like nectar. Her companion Kamalà prepared for her a softs 
bed likely to give facility to the act of sexual intercourse with leaves of 
lotus and Champalk annointed with sandal-paste. The chaste Champ&- 
vàti deposited graceful flowers of Champaka annointed with sandal- 
paste in a cup of leaves for the sake of Krigna. © She then prepared 
for his use a bunch or bouquet of the flowers of Kadamba and a wreath 
of Kadamba. Krigna-Priyà perfumed excellant betel.leaves and seasoned 
them with camphor, etc., for the satisfaction of Krisna. i 
69-78. At this time, all the gods and Munis beheld the whole 
hermitage including the ground on which it stood and its environments 
imbued with the colour of the yellow pigment prepared out of the urine of 
the cow and, being astonished at the phenomenon; enquired of Lord Krigna. 
about it. The omniscient Lord thus described the cause: «Radha, cursed by 
Sridama, lost her grace and (feeling my separation acutely) forfeited all her 
knowledge. After the lapse of a century, the curse of Sridama being 
over, the same knowledge has now been restored to the ohaste goddess ; 
and through the lustre of the mistress of the Rasa, the hermitage has been 
lighted up and has assumed a yellow colour. That light of Rádh& is grace- 
ful like ten millions of moons, very delightful, charming and tasteful to the 
spectator. The Munis, goddesses, Brahm®, Siva and other gods and the 
inhabitants of the three worlds having heard of this wonderful event 
quickly went to the place and observed Rádhà with a reverential 


 jnelination of thoir heads. Rádh& is fair like the Ohampak. She is very. 


pretty, incomparable in beauty and likely to enchant the heart of even 
the Munis who subdued their passions. She is handsome and possesses 
graceful hair ; she is of golden colour, delightfully cool in summer and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA. 


Warm in winter. She possesses hard: breasts, 
Waist, She is bending with the weight of her buttocks, hard loing and 
elevated breasts, She is vested with good teeth and & sweet smile. 
19-100. Shoe is the great goddess of fortune representing the germ of 
ereation, ^ supreme, primeval, eternal: she is the presiding 
deity of the life of the supreme Being and adored and worshipped by the 
supreme Being. She is excellent, the symbol of Brahma, unmixed with 
everything, constant, transcending all qualities, She is the goddess 
Nature pervading the whole universe. She wields a form only out of 
compassion for her believers. She is truthful, pure, chaste, calculated to 
consecrate the fallen and rendered sacred by holy acts of pilgrimage. 
She even contributes to the fame and glory of those who rule the world, 
Most beloved and sublime, she is the mother even of Mahá-Vignu. She is 
the. mistress of the Lord of the Rasa, lovely, witty and the princess of 
witty damsels. She is self-determining (i. €., may do anything that she 
leases) and is the asylum of good. Her garment consists of cloth, pure 
ike fire, She is being fanned constantly by seven cowherdesses with 
white chowries ; and her lotus feet are ministered by four of her favourite 
female attendants. She is decked with ornaments constructed with in- 
valuable gems, Her ears and cheeks are rendered bright by beautiful 
earrings, Her lips are like ripe bimbas. She is graced with a wreath of 
wild flowers and sustains on her head the load of a chignon deoked 
with lovely garlands of jasmine. The part of her forehead just below 
the partings of her hair is lighted up with marks of moist sandal-paste 
and musk combined with marks of vermilion, Hor eyes are painted with 
collyrium. Her nose puts to shame the bill of the prince of birds and 


is decked with the pearl springing from the head of the elephant. That 
lustful damsel of 


a soft complexion is possessed of cheeks refreshed 
by musk, rendered crimson by saffron and painted with sandal-paste. 
Her gait is that of an elephant. She is an excellent and desirable 
damsel representing the bow of victory held by Cupid (Kama). Thie 
nymph, the abode of millions of Cupids, holds in her hand lotus used as 
a toy, the flower of Párijáta and a bright looking-glass constructed with 
invaluable gems. She is contemplating in the lotus of her heart, mentally 
as well as verbally, asleep or awake, the lotus feet of the supreme spirit, 
Lord Krigna (seated on a throne constructed with various species of 
auspicious and worderful gems) and cogitating in her mind about that 
love which is ever new and due to her own good luck, Sha is profoundly 
absorbed in the sentiments of Hari, pure in her belief and devoted to her 
husband. She is blessed, honoured, worthy of greatness and celebrated 
in the holy land of India as the daughter of Vrisa.bhánu. Her form 
ig mysterious. She is the source and symbol of all perfection and can 
be adored with a great difficulty. She Cannot be attained even by 
meditation. She is adored by virtuous believers, We adore that 
Radha, the best of the cowherdesses, People bent on meditation and 
contemplating her in the method above prescribed are redeemed in their 
life-time in this world.and become the 


attendants of Krisna in the next 
world, Brahma, the ruler of the world, having seen his mother, the 
great goddess, in this form adored her first of all thus: “O great goddess, 


I practised austere devotions on the holy coast of Puskara in the sacred 


huge buttocks and a thin 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


oe 


ERRITEN AMD dis 589 


Jand of India for sixty thousand years according to the Divine caloulation. 
Chaste one, the greedy bee of my mind had become impatient for the 
sweet honey of your lotus feet, and yet I was unable to secure your 


desired lotus feet. 

101-110. Idid not see those feet even in dream ; but there was & 
this effect : O most blessed being; desist, for you 
f the world. The bondage of Radha and 
In the age of Varáha (boar), you will be 


able to see the lotus feet of Radha and Krigna in Ganes'a's hermitage of 
perfection situated in the sacred wood of Vrindavana in India. I was 


when I heard that the boon could hardly be secured and 
fully reaped the desired fruite 


the heart of that 


said, “O goddess devoted to excellent vows, Lord Hari who cannot be 
sufficiently eulogised by all the 
Purdnas, Saraswati and virtuous men, the twinkle of w 
hardly be secured to our vision by our eulogies has been frightened by 
onitions and has become a mediator between us both." In. 
the gods and all other persons that arrived there including 
d down and adored Radha. The women 
heir heads in shame and polluted tha 
f their breath. O Narada, the 
h her wounded 


susceptibilities banished from her mind all conceit or vanity. 
—— 
CHAPTER CXXY. 
1.12, The gracious Narada said, “O Lord, recite to me the 


dents subsequent’ to the worship of Ganes'a and 
“The gods, Munis and the 


hose eyes can 


other mysterious inci 
adoration of Radha.” Lord Náráyana said, 
best of Yogis who have arrived to celebrate the worship of Ganes'aat 
¢hat holy place sat down at the root of the fig tree when Vasudeva and 
Daivakt respectfully asked Brahma, Siva (the god Ananta, the best of 
Munis) thus: “O best of saints, what method should we- poor wretches 
adopt to cross the sea ofthe world and thereby seoure for ourselves e 
happy destination 1 O friends of the poor, O blessed beings, you are the 
sole pilots of the boat in the sea ofthe world. So please enlighten us soon 
on the point. A pit full of water does not, as & matter of course, 
constitute a holy stream: and an image of stone or clay does not necessarily 
constitute a god. The celebration of sacrifices, holy deeds, vows Of: 
fastings, etc., devotional austerities, gifts of various kinds, the service - 
of the Brahmins and the gods and other sacred acts consecrate the wor- 
shipper. But the mere sight of a Vaignava conseorates & man at once. 
The mere touch of the holy dust of the lotus feet of the virtuous 
Vaignavas instantly consecrates the earth, the holy streams saorad 
to the pilgrims, the oceans and the mountain. The gods also desire to 
see the Vaignavas who destroy sins, a8 fire. consumes fuel. As 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding bylKS-MoE - 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
540 s THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 
——— 
an ignorant man, though in the company of a learned man, fails to realise 
knowledge which is as agreeable as milk and curd, so I, the father of: 
Krisna, and Daivaki, his mother, inspite of our company. with- 
Krişna failed to comprehend him as the spiritual guide of the religious. 


preceptors of the sages.” . Lord Siva, the author of the four Vedas 
Including the Sdma laughed at the words of Vasudeva and said : 


18-20. Contact with sages is sometimes the basis of contempt 
for knowledge, as people inspite of their consecration by a dip in the, 
Ganges go to other holy streams also for purification. Pandit Vasudeva 
the father of Krigna, the supreme spirit and an offshoot of the digit of the 
wise Kas'yapa, the father of Vasu, being obsessed with the idea that Krigna 
was his son, could not comprehend him and refers to us for his edification the 
subject of knowledge. Ah! the goddess Nature, a charming and powerful 
divinity, ean with difficulty be adored even by the bewildered wise people, 
The goddess that represents the illusion of Visnu cannot be brought under 
the control of the world. Even we, the progenitors of the gods, have been: 
bewildered by the illusion of Vistu. The knowing Brahma, also, being 
bewildered by the charms of Krigna, contemplates his lotus feet throughout 
his life. The period covered by the fall of ten lakhs and eight hundred 
Indras end by the fall of one Brahma is equivalent to one Nimega (tho 
period covered by the twinkle of the eye) of Krişna. Thore was a 
contest between Indra and Krigna for the sake of Parijat, Then I 
turned into a tree of Parijatand thus saved Indra’s life. Only sages 
(wise men) may acquire temporal or transcendental knowledge with 
regard to the essence of the Supreme Being ; ignoranb men fail to acquire 

that knowledge. Virtuous men, on the other hand, over acquire that 
knowledge. Though we are ignorant of the essence of self, yet into 


other matters we have some insight whioh falls far short of the knowledge 
possessed by Krisna, Therefore, refer every point, good or bad, to 
rigna, ——. 


21-29, Pandits conversant with the movements of time hold that 
four Prahars of Brahmá make one Kalpa, The great Muni Markandeya 
lives for seven such Kalpas, That Muni fall [ 


] s after the downfall of 98 Indras 
and then obtains the bondage of Hari by virtue of his devotions, The 
Muni Lomasa falls when Brahma falls at the time of the eternal dissolution 


of the world. The longevity of the saint Lomasa is Co-extensive with the 
age allotted to the regents of the quarters, the planets, etc. That period 
is also co-extensive with the longevity of the Munis who had subdued 
their passions, the adepts and all gods except myself, the conqueror 
of death. Brahma himself falls at the time of the eternal dissolutiou of the 
world: and I (Siva) dwell in the land of Siva. I have emanated from the 
forehead of Brahmá and thus Y reveal the original creation. As Radha 
has emanated from the left side of Krigna, so have the gods, Durgá 
Lakgmi, Savitri, Saraswati, twelve Adityas (the sons of Aditi), fourteen 
Indras, eight. Vasus and eleven ¢ Rudras, by virtue of the Kaya- 
byuha of Krigna. (e, the faculty to take several forms at one and 
the same-time) come out from the body of Krigna.:Indra falls as soon T 
Manu falls. Fall moans only loss of Jurisdiction; otherwise the’ longevity 
of Manu and Indra is co-extensive, and their destruction» takes place gt- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


KR PRES JANDA SEED Hust. 041 


the time of the eternal dissolution of the world. At the time when the . 

whole universe is inundated with water, Krigna manifests to me and 

Brahm’ his eternal spirit together with the Cow-world and all his faculties. 
* 90.89, The same Krigna is the lord and root of all. Therefore 

porform the grand royal sacrifice and adore your owu fon who is the root 
and cause of the same sacrifice. O Yadava, at the end of the sacrifice 
give the customary priest's fee and thus crossthesea of the world. You are 

- a form of Kas'yapa, addicted to the pleasures of the world: hence you 

cannot obtain the redemption of the final emancipation from the ties of the 
world. For you do not possess the resources or affluence of the believers, 
viz., the bondage of Lord Krisna. Devaki and Aditi are similar to you in 
this respect: so they too cannot secure the redemption which consists 
in the bondage of Krigna or fnal emaneipation. You had therefore better 
go to the Swarga (heaven), the world of enjoyment; or the place of Kas yapa 
or my dominion. Yas'odà and Nanda will surely attain the redemption of 
Sálokya and the bondage of Hari. Now I told you everything. Perform 
the sacrifice with pleasure, and we shall go home after you, have accom- 
plished your task, Then Vasudeva, having heard the words of Siva collected 
all sorts of ingredients and, having restrained his passions, performed there 
tho grand royal sacrifice at an auspicious moment. ‘The. gods personally 
accepted the ghee offered to the fire by Vasudeva. What wonder that 
this should take place when Hari (the master of the sacrifice), and Sacri- : 
fice in person with his wife Dakgind (priest’s fee) were present? O 
Narada, later on, Lord Sanat-Kumára at Lord Krisna's command, 
said to Vasudeva who was offering oblations of glec to the fire: “ (0) 

* father of the husband of the goddess of fortune, render this act of sacrifice 
blessed or fruitful by payment of priest’s fee in the shape of everything 
that you possess. lam going to tell you what is stated in the Vedas, 
listen. If the priest’s feo is not given out of deference to Visnu, as soon 
as the work is finished, it is doubled at the expiry of a momeat ; it is 
inoreased four times after the expiry of a day and certainly increased six 
times after the expiry of three nights. J 

40-55. After the expiry of a fortnight, it is increased to an amount 
four times the last named amount: and if six months, more or less, expire 
from that day, it is increased a thousand times. O descendant of 
Yadu, if fullone year expires from that date, the priest’s fee payable is 
jnoreased & lakh of times. In the event of non-payment, both the author 
of the ceremony and the officiating priest must go to hell. Vasudeva, 
having heard the words of Sanat-Kumára, at once bestowed without the 
least hesitation on the priest all his property at the command of Krisna. 
Wasudeva, the father of Krigna, 1n the first place gave to the Muni 
Garga & hundred millions of invaluable and excellent diamonds, a thousand 

= millions of excellent gems; gold four times the value of the gems, pearls, 

' rubies, emeralds, precious stones, corals, all sorts of golden cups, invalu- 
able ornaments of gems belonging to his wife and -daughters-in-law, & 
lakh white chowries, a lakh diamond looking-glasses, all the cows of 
plenty; horses four times the number of elephants and all the 
wealth he had obtained from demon-kings with the sanction 

/ end approval of all other kings. He gave him lakhs of villages full of 
crops, many heaps of winter rice, milk boiled with rice, sugar, ete, cakes, . 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


549 THPSRATINPASP/ er) PR Y orm aw 


sweetmeat delicious like nectar, Swastika (à kind of cak 
lovely balls of sweetmeat, a hundred thousand heaps of sugar and 
candy and hundreds of pools of milk, honey, eurd, molasses and ghee 
and then solicited condonement for his offences, With a cheerful aspect 
he gave to the Brahmins betel.leaves mixed with camphor, cool and 
sweet-scented water, fragrant sandal, the wreath of the flowers of Parijata, 


delightful seats, cloths consecrated by fire, bedsteads of diamond, flowers i 


and fruits. He then feasted the gods and.the Brahmins with delicacies, 
The gods and the Munis arrived there with pleasure and made merry with 
their wives in the night. In the morning, at Krigna’s command, all the 
Y8davas went to Dwarka (the city fall of invaluable diamonds and 
maintained by Lord Krisna) to see Rukmini, 


— 


CHAPTER CXXVI. 


the inhabitants of Gokul, other cowherdesses and his mother, the Cow. 
herdess Yas'odá he accosted his parents and his friends (t 
using suitable language pregnant with ethical principles thus : 0 
father, O Nanda dear to my life, I entreat you to 
of your eowherds, O most adorable being of distinguished birth, and O 
celebrated mother Yas'odà, you should go there ikaw; 

spent the remaining portion of your life at that pléce, 
to the cow-world. T shall grant you and all the ras 
the redemption of Sayujya, i. e. the ultimate absorption 
the divine essence, Having said so, Lord Krigna, at tho 
parents, went to Radha; and Nanda went to Gokul, 
saw_the smiling and beautiful Radha decorated w 
like a damsel aged twelvo years and enjoyed a never-fadi 
was seated on an elevated seat; of gem and attended 
millions of smiling cowherdasses armed 


10-21. Radha saw the smiling Lord of her life in 
very handsome boy from a distance, 
like a new cloud, and was clad in à garment 
The whole of his body was annointed with 
jewels of diamond, This diadem, 
was Sie ned vith wreaths of jasmi 
8 gentle smile, 9 ever wields a body out i i i 
He at that time held in his hands eee relat eta Eau Dens 


are my life (or being) and birth to-day, Dearest, tho sight of your 
lunar face has cheered my eyes, my five vital aira ‘and “my supreme ` 
spirit, The interview of a lover, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


e) sesamum, 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
7 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 543 


a 


hardly be secured. Immersed in the sea of sorrow, I was consumed 
by the fire of separation. But your sight annointing me, as it were © 
with nectar, has cooled my body. O root-cause of all good, associated 
with you I am good and auspicious; without you, I am but a helpless 
and untouchable corpse. A person is gracious and holy, so long as you 
exist in his body, but he is reduced to a corpse when fhe omnipotent 
god quits him. O Lord, separation from a husband or wife is equally 


dreadful. Life is divorced from all energy, when the body is separated 


from the supreme Being.” Goddess Radha having thus adored the 
supreme Being, Krigna, the emblem of eternal spirit, gladly worshipped 
his lotus feet and seated him on her throne. 


22-35, The gracious Lord Krigna sat with Radha on a gracious 
throne of gem. Seven cowherdesses served the pair with white chowries 
in their hands. Radha later on, annointed the body of Hari with fragrant 
sandal. The Cowherdess Ratna-mala put a wreath of diamonds round his 
neok with a smile. Padmávatt offered to the lotus feet which are worshipped 
by Kamala ‘the goddess of fortune) bent grass, flower and sandal combined 
with water constituting oblations for the feet. Malati adorned the top 
of his head with jasmine wreaths: and Champávati puta cup of leaves con- 
taining Champak flowers on his head. Parijata, having gladly present- 
ed oblations of water with barley, bent grass, éte., to his feet gave him 
PArijita flowers, cool and fragrant water and betel seasoned with camphor. 
Kadamba-MAlikà adorned his neck with a wreath of Kadamba and 
pum bis hands with holy, gay lotuses and a looking-glass of diamond. 

amalá ofa soft complexion gave to Hari a pair of beautiful clothes 
formerly awarded to her by god Varuna. The fair Madhu placed in 
his hands a cup of very sweet honey resembling the sweet yellow pigment 
prepared from the urine of cows. One of the companions of Radha named 
Sudhá-mukht having filled a cup of nectar respectfully handed it over 
to him. The other cowherdesses prepared for Hari a floral bed graced 
with jasmine wreaths and annointed with sandal-paste. The sleeping 
room of Hari was constructed with delightful diamonds. Some portions 
of the room were decked with excellent gems, diamonds and strings of 
pearls, The sleeping-room was redolent of the fragrant wind associated 
with musk, saffron, etc. It was perfumed on all sides by the smoke of 
the burning frankincense and filled with several kinds of articles. 
In spring, that house rang with the sweet sound of infatuated cuckoos 
and rendered delightful with the sweet hum of bees seated on 
blooming flowers. It was graced with various kinds of articles calculated 
to excite lust and decked with several sorts of pictures. The cow- 
herdesses, having prepared a bed of pleasure for Hari in that room, came 
out with a smile. Later on, Krigna and Radha having beheld in solitude 
a charming and lovely bed of flowers were excited with passion and 
indulged in jokes and smiles in various way calculated to excite 
ust, . 
86.47. Ràdhå offered wreath, Musk, sandal mixed with saffron to 
hie breast and pfesented to him fragrant water. She also attached fair 
Champak flowers to his head and placed in his hand a lotus of thousand 
leaves, She removed the flute from his hands, substituted in its placa a 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


544 THE BRAHM4 VAIVARTA PURANA. 


looking-glass of diamond and placed before him the pure flower of Prijátà, - 
The smiling and beloved damsel Radha with a smile addressed hor sweet, 
tranquil-natured, smilinz and handsome consort gently thus: “You aro the 
abode, the seed and the source of welfare: you are auspicious and full of good- 
ness. It is useless for me to enquire into your welfare. Yob it is proper tor 
me to put to you a question regarding your welfare as suited to the occa- 
sion. An act sanctioned by custom is moro po verlul than an act sanctioned 
by the Velas. O Lord of Rukmin? and Satya-bhámá, at the bidding of the 
latter, you easily fought with Indra, conquered the gods of the immortal 
land (Heaven), rooted out the tree of Parijat and presented it to her. This 
Thave heard. Satya-bhama performed the vow and other holy deeds 
with that Parijita and presented to the officiating priest her adorable 
husband (ie, yourself) by way of priest's fee. You are beyond, the 
Control of Brahma, Siva and even the god Ananta. For a wonder how 
could you be eontrolled by Satya-bhima ? You fear her more, if seems, 
than any other woman, Rukmint is, no doubt, great and luoky, for sha 
enjoys the greater share of your love, but that blessed Satya-bhama is. 
honoured and dreaded by you. This I have heard. 

48-58. O consort of Yàmva-vati, tell me truly and positively whioh 
of your spouses you love most—which of them is most expert in matters 
relating to sexual intercourse, Among them, the clevor woman who 
loves you most is truly blessed and is rendered pious by the perform. 
ance of her vows. A woman who loves her husband is traly his wife ; 
and a man who loves his wife is truly her husband. Mutual love betwoan 
the husband and the wife is raro in the three worlds. A chasto, 

, heroio, good- 
xual intercourse. 
mpts it; but a 


frog knows nothing aboat it and stretches in vain its legs towards the top 


of the lotus, A person who plays upon a musical instrument appreoi- ` 
ates the music, but the musical Instrument does not. A clever man realises 
the taste of the milk; but the cup and the ladle (or spoon) do not. A person 
who eats ripe fruits knows thoir taste ; but the fruitful trees though 
they grow together, do not, A farmer knows the taste of coo] water, but 
the lake and the jar, thaugh placed side by side, do not. Those who con- 
sume the winter rice know its taste; but the field which produces it is not 
Conversant with its taste. Those who smell the sandal understand its 
smell; but the container of the sandal-paste, viz, the cup, does nof. 


How cau a woman know that Being who cannot be comprehended b 
Brahma, the gods, the Vedas, the ascetics and the Sowers : A 


was cursed by me. By his curse I was besot with a. cala 
nature. B whom ean i 


'CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


> 
~— i 


cosa s. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


RRISNA JANMA KHANDA 545 


—— 


The four Vedas, virtuous men conversant with the Vedas 
and the l'urtnas, uo doubt say that Lord Krisna is controlled by Radha. 
But this doctrine is idle. What did Rukmini say when you with all 
your attendants conquered Mahadeva, cut off the hands of the demon 
Bana and conducted Aniruddha, the grandson of Rukmini, along with his 
wife to Dwirka ? Is your love to Rukmini the same as i& was before 
or has it increased ? You (as the emblem of the eternal spirit) have 
killed the Kurus in the war between the Kurus and the PAndavas and 
preserved the kings who had taken the part of the Pandavas. In the 
orb of kings, you personally assumed the role.of the charioteer of Arjuna 
(the son of Indra and Kunti). What did the pure hearted and great- 
minded Bhísma (abashed at your conduct) tell you in the midst of that 
council ? In what light did your celebrated believers, Brahmá, Siva, 
Ananta and other gods observe this matter and what did they say ? 
How could the supremo Being -(distinet from Nature) maintain tho 
n of a charioteer ip the car of Arjuna? Fora wonder, the Being 


positio 
deseribed by the four Vedas, the Puránas and all the 


who cannot be 
chronicles : 
71-77. Who is void of attributes and desire, who is dissociated 
from all acts, who bears testimony to the act of holy persons, 
who wields a body: out of compassion for his believers, 
who is the great and excellent Brahma and the symbol of the eternal 
light and who is the supreme, universal spirit: this Being, I say, assumed 
the role of a charioteer. You enjoyed the society of the hunch- 
backed woman, old, vested with an excess of limbs, without sons, a 
Ksatrya by caste and not worthy of the touch of young men, simply in 
consideration of the virtuous deeds performed by her in her previous 
birth. Why did you kill your maternal uncle. Kamsa? And after 
having promised to come here, why did you not come back ?' So 
saying, the goddess Rádhà wept very loudly and fainted. Suddenly her 
breath was suspended. ‘The - cowherdesses who through the aperture 
of the window witnessed this incident, rushed in haste and exclaimed, 
“RadhO is dead.” Then taking her on their laps, they began to weep and 
said, *O Lord, Hari, Hari, O preserver of the world, to the rescue, to the 
rescue !" : 
78-88, The cowherdesses said, “O Krisna, what have you done? 
Hari, you have killed our Radha. Restore her to life, we pray, and all will 
be well with you.’ We are ina hurry to go to the forest. If you do not 
revive her, all of us will charge you with the sin of woman-slaughter.” 
O Narada, Lord Krisna, hearing the words of the cowherdesses, cast an 
immortal glance at Radha and restored her to life. The chaste goddess 
Radha got up and the cowherdesses took her in their lap and tried to 
console her. Lord Krigna said, “O Radha, I am going to deseribe to you a 
subject relating to superb and transcendental knowledge, listen. By 
listening to this subject, an illiterate farmer also may turn into a savant. 
While wielding an image, I am the consort of the whole world, not to valk 
of Rukmini and other women. Iam the cause and the effect and manifest 
myself in various ways. I am the sole spirit of the world, and, while 
wielding an image, I am, full of light. I am separately associated with 


69 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 
^ 


igitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
THE BR 


546 AHMA VAIVARPA PURANA 


all objects of the animate world from Brahma 
instance, if one person eats, other persons cannot 
If the soul passes away from the body of a person, he dies : but other 
persons live. lam the Lord himself, perfect and in the form of Krigna 
dwell in the Cow-werld at Gokul, or in the sacred land of 
Vrindá vana, Iam buta boy in the guise of a cowherd at Vrindávang 
vested with two hands. As the Lord of Rádhà and united with the 
Cowherds and cowherdesses as well as with the milch-cows of plenty 
I dwell with you at this place. In the Vaikuntha, I am always ofa 
tranquil mien, eternal, the Lord of Laksmf and Sarasyati and am there 
vested with four hands. Thus I have two forms. I am wedded to the 
terrestrial goddess of fortune, the intellectual daughter of the sea with 


whom l dwell in the sea of milk and White Islands where I have 
four arms, 


down toa grass, For 
possibly be satisfied, 


89-105. I am the eternal and pious Náráyana Risi, the son of Dharma 
who speaks on Dharma (virtue) and points out the way to Dharma. In 
the holy land of India, I am the husband of Santi, who is pious, devoted 
to her consort and vested with the image of the goddess of fortune, Fair 
one, l am Kapila, the source and god of perfection, the husband of Sati 
and wield different images according to the modification of my personali- 
ties. At Dwârkâ, I, as the digit of the four-handed Lord, am tho 
husband of Rukminí : and in the house of the good Sabyabhámá, I am the 
same Lord who sleeps in the sea of milk, I ‘preside over the 
Káya-byuha which enables mo to take at the same time identical forms and 
live separately with other women. Iam the samo Narayana Risi and the 
charioteer of Arjuna. The same Arjuna, the human saint and 

the son of Dharma, is Powerful on earth, as he is an offspring of my 
digits. He prayed at the Puskara that Ishould be hig charioteer, Ag 
you are Radha in the Cow-world and at Gokul, so you are Laksmí and 
Saraswati in the Vaikuntha. You are the favourite terrestrial goddess of 


fortune, the spouse of tlie Being who sleeps in the sea of milk, 


Anti (the image of Laksmi), the wife of the s 


you are Sati, the favourite spouse of Kapila in India and the great goddess 
of fortune at Dwarka, You 


are the chaste Rukmini, and Sita at Mithila, 
Your shadow is Draupadi, th 


you yourself are Kamala. You were stolen by Ravana, you are the wife of 
Ardyana. You take many forms throug 


[ 'eme spirit always dwell by 
your side day and night in the holy land of Vrind 
the curse of Sridáma, YOU were unable to see 
life, you have all along been 
through my parts and with other wives through my digits. Other women 
are your parts, You are dea i 


is pre-eminently my favourite, 


8 nymphs ; none 
- O chaste Radha, I thus related to you 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


TERES) PINA RANDA m EA 


CHAPTER CXXVII. 


121. Nârâyaņa said, “The cowherdesses were pleased at the 
words of the Supreme Being. bowed low to the Lod of Radha and went 
home. Then the chaste Radba with a smile and with arch, restless 
glances displayed amorous feeling of her heart in sixteen differ- 
ent ways or Kalas. She again offered to her husband sandal and 
wreath and coquettishly abandoned him. Lord Krisna dragged her to his 
breast and kissed her lips (upper and lower), the chin an 1 both the sides of 
her cheek. Radh& also kissed the handsome lunar face of Krisna and with 


both her hands pressed Krisna, the Lord of her life, to her bosom, Lord 


Krisna committed the desired act of sexual intercourse in sixteen ways 


as prescribed by the sexual science and calculated to please both man 
and wifo, He lacerated the whole constitution of Rádhà with marks of 
nail and bit her lips whereby there was a thrill of raptures in 
his body and he experienced a feeling of lassitude. Excited with passion 
he fainted, was denuded of kis clothes and lost his consciousness. He 
shut his eyes in sleep and his breath alone remained. The supreme 
Radh’, inclining with the burden of her delightful buttocks, expert in 
mattore relating to sexual intercourse, of a soft complexion, fixed in the 
ith a constitution delightfully warm in winter 


heart of her husband, wi 
and cool in summer, with huge buttocks and rising breasts and calculated 
to yield pleasure to all the parts of the body of her lover. again and again, 


imprisoned the excellent and supreme deity with both her arms and 
buttocks and said, “O most blessed Being, let us go to the sphere of the 
Rása in the holy land of Vrindà vana, whore I shall play with you on land 
and water and afterwards go to the Malaya range and the beautiful 
tomple of gem. I shall join you in your adventures to other mysterious 
places about which I never heard before in my life. ‘This is my heartfelt 
desire. When the auspicious night was spent by mntual conversations 
of this nature, RAdh& did not leave Krisna even at sunrise. With the 
use of many affectionate words, Krigna consoled her as-much-as he could. 
Later on, Hari possessing eyes of autumnal lotuses performed the morning 
rites and mounted the chariot with the gracious Radha and cowherdesses. 
That chariot was one Yojana in breadth and was graced with three 
thousand millions of radiant chambers constructed with sapphire. It 
was associated with a thousand wheels, moved by a thousand horses and 
decorated with thirty millions of diamond pillars and strings of diamonds. 
It was likewise adorned with ~ picturesque and variegated 


white chowries, looking-glasses, cloths consecrated by fire and shining: 
garlands. That chariot was covered with bedsteads constructed with 
gems and annointed with flowers and sandal. It was occupied by a 
hundred thousand cowherds, all similar in appearance The Lord mounted 
the car and went back to Vrindávana. After his arrival there, he enjoyed 
her society on land and sea in the night. 

29.31. Having thus performed the aet. of sexual intercourse in 
woods and bowers, he exhibited to Rádhá new curiosities. He 
committed sexual intercourse with Râdhå at different times in the follow- 
ing places, 22. Visyanadaka, the hilly region of Surasana, the wood 
of Nandana belonging to Indra, Sumeru, the mountain of - Gandha- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
548 THE BRAHMA VAITARTA PURANA 


GALL ————— ÁO 


eeu o 


Eae —á 
Mádana, the lakes of Subhadra, Pugpabhadra and Nandan, the sum nit 
of Malaya which is the abode of the wind, the immortal city of Indra, 
the Trikita. Pancha-Kiita, Su-Kukkfita, the lovely land of Kánehani, 
the holy pond of Chaudra, Supárswa Manipárswa and other plaees and 
continued the act from sea to sea, from island to island and in the most 
lovely land of Kharbara. Krisna immediately afterwards left those 
places, arrived at the holy Jambu Islands and showed to her DwArka and 
the mountain of Raivataka. Later on, he eamo to Gokul teeming with 
cows and cowherds and having observed the forest of the holy fiz trees 
he arrived at the sacred land of Vrindàávana. Nanda, Yas oda and the 
old eowherds and cowherdesses, being apprised of tha arrival of Lord 
Krigna, with streaming eyes and great eagerness started with the bost 
elephants, prostitutes, theatrical dancers, pure Brahmins, and women 
blessed with husbands and sons. Krigna also, with a view to seo his 
mother Yasoda and Nanda took the form of a boy and along with Radha 
appeared before them like gods summoned before the fire. 


32-41. Krisna with a smile climbed tho lap of his mother. Both 


Nanda and Yasoda kissed his lotus face and embracing him a good deal 


annonited him with tears. Lord Krigna himself sucked the breast of 


Yas'odà. All people saw him decked with ornaments of gon, yellow 
dzass and jasmine wreaths, holling a (late in his hands and azed only 
coven years, that is, they saw hi.n in the same eondition in whieh he had 


gone to Mathura.  Yas'odá ushere! Krigna with Radha into the house, 
performed auspicious deeds and feasted the Bra hmins. She worshipped 
the cuwherdesses and the Munis and gladly distributed to the Brahmins 
gems, precious stones, coral, gol l, touchstones, excellent elephants, most 
beautiful horses, seats, cups, Ornaments, crops, paddy, clothes, pearls, gems 
and diamonds. O Narada, Nanda exhibited to Krigna as woll as Radha 
many wonderful oujects and offered Sweetmeat to the cowhordesses with 
preat esteem. He caused drums to bo beaten and other auspicious rites to 


be performed and very gladly worshipped the gods on the oceasion of that 
grand festival. 


CHAPTER CXXVIII, 
1-10. Nârâyana said, “ Subsequently Lord Krigna called the cow- 
herds and himself sat down at the root of the fig tree in the forest of 


the fig trees, In days of yore, Brahmin women hal provided him with 
food in that place. The goddess Radha sat down on his left side; 
Yas'odà and Nanda, on his right side. On his right side, sat Vriga- 
bhánu ; and on his lett, sat Kalávati, the other eowherds and cowherdessos 
and his intimate friends, "Then Krigna 
suited to the occasion thus: « O Nanda, at present I am 
to you on a subject calculated to contribute to the happiness of the next 
world, embodying truth and the granl obj 

tho. occasion. Listen. As flashes o 
bubbles of water are transient, so m 
Brahmá down to plant is a mera delusi Id DM 
Mathurd, nothing now remains to be said. What Radha also explained 
he supreme truth and just like 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ip 


E 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sara [i 
KRISNA JANMA RHANDA 549 
EEUU M 


alamp to dispel the darkness of delusion. Therefore leave the vain 
illusions of the world and remembar the supreme feet (of Hari) calculated 
to destroy birth, death, decrepitude, disease, sorrow and agony, cut 
asunder the root of Karma and produce supreme happicess. Now cease 
to regard me as your son. But with the conviction that Iam the 
supreme Being, the eternal Lord, meditate me again and again and attain 
the supreme fect. Soon go to the Cow-world with the residents of Gokul. 


11-29, The approach of Kali, the destroyer of the germs of good deeds, 
is impending or near at hand. On the approach of Kali, there will be 
no distinction between persons of different castes. The worship of the 
Brahmins, the ode to the sun, will disappear in that age ; only the sacred 
thread will remain in name or merely as a symbol. At the end of 
Kali, the sacred thread and the mark on the forehead with the Sandal- 
paste will certainly disappear. People will be absorbed in that age 
in sexual intercourse during the day and desist from acts of virtue. 
Vow, sacrifice and acts of austere meditations will certainly disappear. 
Dharma will maintain but one foot through the curse of the daughter 
of Kedàra. Women will be licentious and their husbands will always be 
addicted to sexual intercourse with the wives of other persons. O cow- 
herd, women will, day and night, admonish and chastise their husbands. 
In every house there will always be predominance of the wives and 
their relations, for instance, the brother-in-law. The husband, always 
subdued by his wife, will be devoted to her. In the Kali-Yuga, women 
will always minister to their gallants. A woman in that age will love 
her gallant with the same fondness: which she may display to a hundred 
sons. She will look at him voluntarily with» smiling, tender, nectareal 
glances. Whereas she will always look at her husband with poisonous 
glances (i. e., with an evil eye). She will always adore and love the 
relations (or friends) of her gallants. A woman will always strike her 
husband with cuffs and angrily give him food, asit were to her servant. 
She will give sweetmeat to her gallant with reverence and esteem. 
Sho will be constantly engaged in arranging toilet for her gallant and 
rendering services to him. In the iron age, the gallant is the life, the friend, 
the soul and the source of redemption to a woman: Hospitality to 
guests, the service of Visnu, the worship of the gods and the manes will 
totally disappear. Men will always malign Visnu and his worshippers. 


93-34. All the four castes will stick to the mystic tenets of Raima! 
Behaving like infidels, cunning men will never touch the holy 
stone, the holy basil, the holy grass and the holy water of the Ganges. The 


ildered by my illusions, will abandon me, the cause of cause, 


Bráhmins, bew! 
the Lord and germ of all, the donor of happiness and all prosperity and 


recite only the Mantras of the Vedas and Rima that yield but slight 
prosperity. The goddess Visnu Maya (the principle of the illusion of 
Visnu) that can by no means be controlled by anyone will, at my 
command, defraud the world. My worship will subsist on earth in the 


iron age only for ten thousand years ; and Ganga, the consecrator of the 


world, will remain only for half of the above period. Very little of the 
Puranas will remain on earth ; and that will remain only so long as the . 


holy basil and the Vaisnavas remain and so long as the eulogies of the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


550 PH BRANME PIPIR A PURANA 


G 


I 
Ganges, ete., are recited. O Nanda, after the lapse of the said period, 
my worship and recitations will cease and all the four castes will be re. 
duced to one caste Men and women will measure only a thumb in height ; 
boys aged 16 years will become old, sunken, grey-haired and Subjeet to 
deerepitude, People, oppressed by famine aad the demand of revenue 
payable to the king, will run away to the forest. There, too, they will 
be oppressed by powerfal and cunning savages or hunters. All people 
will turn away from the service of their fathers, spiritual guides, gods, 
Brahmins, and guests (or pilgrims), Por want of rain, the earth will also 
be barren of crops, the trees barren of fruits, and the rivers and rivnlets 
devoid of water. The Brahmins will be without the Vedas, the kings 
without might and people without castes (Z.e., there will be no distinction 
of castes). Only infidels will rule as kings. 


35-45. "The son will chastise his father; the pupil, his religious precep- 
-tor; and the wife, her husband, treating them like slaves. For this 
reason a householder will ba reduced to the condition of a hungry dog. 
At the end of Kali, all people, addicted to a sinful course of life, 
will perish, some through the heat of the Sun and otherg 
through the deluge. O king of the Vais'yas, tho oarth will be destroyed 
in every Kali Yuga: bnt at the time of the subsequent ereation everyone 
will be rejoiced, for truth alone- is ever the germ of creation,” 
O Narada, at this time tho residen!s of the Vraja (enelosure of the 
cowherds) soon beheld a beautiful chariot, four Y 
five Yojans in height, entirely covere! with fine 
occupied by millions of eowherds who Jescended 
That chariot was constructed with emer 
(pure) flowers of Pàrijáta and ornaments o 
It was white lik pure crystal, 


overhanging strings of diamonds and ten 
temples, 16 revolved on two thousand wheols and Was moved by two 
thousand horses. O Narada, thereupon Kalávati, the blessed Radha 
who was the offspring of no vomb, other cowherdesses likewise, 
offsprings of no womb who had formerly deseended from the Cow-world, 
and all other wives of the cowherds, at K rigna's command, mounted the 
chariot and went physically to the beautifu] Cow-world. They quitted 
their mortal bodies and went to the undoubted Cow- world. Radha, too, 
with all the residents of Gokul, went back to the Cow-wworld, ‘There thay 
beheld the coast of the river Viraja decked with severa) kinds of ornaments, 

46-53. O Brahmin, kaving 
Viraja, they went to tho 
many kinds of gems and graco 


the coast of the river 
d ummits teaming with 
d with the sphere of the Rasa. Aftor 


exhaustible (immort 


à al) fig tree, Tt was 
Jans in breidth, 


t was encircled by 
countless branches of trees and their offshoots and beautifully graced 
with thick and red flowers, Vrinda of a delightful appearance along with 
ten thousand millions of cowherdesses approached tho Vraja with a 
smile, eagerly dismounted Rádhà from the c] 


j f the charjot, bowed before her foot, 
conversed with the mistress of the Rasa and Conducted her to her mansion, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA RHANDA 551 


Se E sas Fe 


Vrindà seated Rádbá ona throne of gem decorated with a spring of 
diamonds and ministered to her lotus feet. Seven of her female associates 
fanned her with white chowris, All the cowherdesses came to observe 
the great goddess. Vrindá constructed separate dwelling houses for 
Radha, Nanda and others: whereupon Radha, the emblem of supreme 
happiness, very gladly went with the cowherdesses to her own charming 


abode. 
CHAPTER UCXXIX. 


1-138, Náráyana said, “ Later on, that perfect Lord, gracious 
Krişna after having witnessed the immediate redemption of the residents — 
of the Cow-world as well as their emancipation in the shape of Sálokya 
(residence in the same world with the supreme Being,) arrived with 
five cowherds at the root of the fig tree in the forestof the said fig 
treos and saw that Gokul with its entire population of cowherds was very 
much excited and the whole Vrindávana was about to perish and very much 
perturbed. Whereupon Krisna, the ocean of mercy, through the influence 
of his Yoga (concentration of mind by meditation) cast on all sides glances 
of nectar whereby he filled Vrindâvana again with cowherds and 
cowherdesses and addressed them thus, using words that were sweet, 


-beneficial and full of ethical maxims : “O cowherds, my friends, you had 


better pass your days in peace and with pleasure in this wood of 
Vrindávana. Better attain, all of you, a never-fading youth and longevity 
ofa hundred years, sport with pleasure with your wives and transmit 
the household goddess of fortune, from geners:ion to generation, to your 
sons, grandsons, ete. At these words, all of them bowed low before the 
feet of Lord Krişna and went to the lovely sphere of the Rasain the 
sacred Vrindávana with other youthfuldamsels. Since that time Lord 
Krisna has always presided over that place (holy Vrindávana) 
and will preside over it as long as the sun and the moon exist. 
the ruler of the world, Brahma, Ananta, Dharma, Siva himself with 
Durga arrived at the forest of the fig tree. The sun, Indra, the moon, 
the fire, Kuvera, Varuna, the god of wind, Yama, Isina, the gods, the 
eight Vasus, the planets, the Rudras, the Manus and Munis all went 
there quickly. Brahma threw himself prostrate before Krigna on the 
ground like a stuff and said, “O perfect Brahma, immortal Being, 
transcending Nature, O supreme object. I bow to you. O formless Being 
unassociated with any object and taking a form only to help the medi- 
tation of your believers, O self-determining Being (t. e., one who can do 
anything at his will), O supreme object, excellent spirit, I bow to you. 
O Lord of Brahma, O god of Visnu and Siva, O Lord of the sun, you 
are the effect and the cause of all causes, I bow to you. O Lord of 
Saraswati, Laxsmi, Parvati, Savitri and Radha’, O god of Rama, 
supremely excellent, I bow to you. 

14-25. You are the origin of everything, the universal Lord of the 
world, the preserver and destroyer of the world, I bow to you. The earth 
is consecrated and blessed with the dust of your lotus feet : and when 
you go back to your destination at the Goloka, the earth becomes void. A 
hundred and twenty-five years have elapsed since your arrival and you are 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


552 THE BRAIIMA FAIVARTA PURANA 


——— ——— 
going to leave the earth now weeping with sorrow at your departure,” 
The gracious Siva said, *O Lord, deputed by Brahma, you relieved 
the earth of her burden and now you are going home. The earth alono 
in the three worlds, marked by your feet, has been blessed and consecrated 
atonee, We and the Munis, having observed your lotus feet personally, 
have likewise been blessed. The same Lord who can be adored with 
very great difficulty and who is beyond the range of meditation of even 
the contemplative ascetics that have subdued their passions has been 
perceptible even to our eyes. Vasudeva, the god even of Mah4-Visnu, 
who is the abode of Vasu and all objects and who harbours all the worlds 
in the pores of his skin exists on earth in your person. Those incom- 
parable lotus feet that can be secured with very great difficluty by a long 
course of austere devotions and that can hardly be secured even by the 
best of adepts have been perceptible to-day to all persons.” Ananta 
said, “You are the Lord infinite: I am not even a part of your parts, I 
reside on the back of small tortoise in one part of the world, as a gnat 
rests on an elephant, 


26-95. Ananta, Kurma, Brahm, Visnu, Siva and the endless worlds 
are all lorded over by you. O Lord, when will that auspicious day 
arrive when God, imperceptible even in dreams, will be perceptible to 
all living beings ? O Lord, after having even consecrated the carth, you 
are going to reduce the earth (weeping and immersed in the ocean of 
grief) to the condition of an orphan and departing for the Cow-world. 
The gods said, “How can we adore that Being who cannot be eulogised 
by Brahma, Siva and other gods and by tho four Vedas? We bow to 
you." - So saying, the gods quickly went to Dwárk& with pleasure to soe 
the Lord loitering at Dwárkà. Later on, the five Gopálas (keepers of the 
Cow) went to the most excellent region of the Cow-world. The earth 
shook and was frightened and tha Seven seas were agitated. The husband 
of Radha, also, left Dwarka (now donuded of all its charms by the curse 
of Brahma) and passed into his image consecrated at the root of the 
Kadamba tree. Afterwards all the Yádavas also fell in the battle -field. 
The goddesses likewise mounted the funeral pile and went to heaven 
along with their husbands, Arjuna also went home and related the 
whole affair to king Yudisthira who, thereupon, went to heaven with 
his brothers and wife. On the other hand, Brahma and othor gods, seeing 


the supreme Being seated at the root of the Kadam tree, respectfull 
bowed before his feet, ote : 


36-46. They eulogised the supreme Being Nardyana decorated with 
ornaments of gem and wild flowers, 


tender in age, very handsome, enchanting, tranquil, blue-blaek in 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ae —— EE EE UEM M Nm ar. to 


C EREA 


Yr 


———— ÉÉ— 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 
KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 553 


an —— u a 


and the energy of Aniruddha passed into Brahm’. O Narada, the 
great goddess of fortue Rukmini,in the presence of all, physically 
passed into the Vaikuntha: she is also a goddess that did not spring 
out of the womb of any woman. Satya-bhámá, an offspring of the digit 
of Laksmi, entered into the womb of the earth ; and the goddess 
Jámba-vati passed into the body of Parvati herself, the mother of the 


world. The goddesses separately entered into the bodies of those 


goddesses from whose digits they had originally come out and descended 
into the earth. The most wonderful energy of Sámya entered into the 
body of Kártika ; the energy of Vasudeva entered into the body of 
Kas’yapa and that of Daivaki into the body of Aditi. The Sea left the 
temple of Rukmini and occupied the whole of Dwárká. The sea of salt 
eame. out with a form, adored the excellent Lord and being extremely 
afflicted at heart began to lament his departure and shed tears. 

47-57. O Narada, afterwards Ganga,  Saráswati, Padmávati,' 
Yamuná, Godavart, Swarna-Rekhá, Kaveri, Narmada, Sarávati, Vabuda 
and the sanctifying Krita-Mala: all these rivers arrived and bowed 
before the feet of the supreme Being. Poor Ganga afflicted with the 
pangs of separation from the Lord wept much and with streaming eyes 
thus said to the supreme God : * O Lord, O best of those who know how 
to commit sexual intercourse, you are now going to the excellent Cow- 
world. O Lord, what will be our fate in the iron age ?" The gracious 
Lord replied, * O Ganges, you had better remain on earth for five thou- - 
sand years of Kali. The sins which sinners, after ablutions in your 
water will communicate to you will at once be consumed to dust by the 
touch, bathing and sight of the adberents of my mystic tenets (¢.e., the 
Vaignavas). You should frequent those places where the names of Hari 
and thé Purfinas are recited along with the rivers mentioned above 
and listen to them. Attending tothe Puranas and chanting the name 
of Hari will reduce all the sins transferred to your water. to ashes in a 
moment. All sins including the slaughter of a Brahmin committed by 
a person are consumed, if he receives the embraces of a believer of Vignu. 
O Ganges, all the sacred places of the world always exist in the bodies of 
my believers. , . | 

58 87 The earth is at once consecrated by the dusb of the feet of 
my believers : and the places sacred to pilgrims, nay, the whole universe 
are thereby rendered sacred at once. Those Bráhmins alone who 
devoutly stick to my Mantras, eat the remnants of my food and always 
meditate my figure are dearer to me than my life. Their bare touch 
consecrates the fire and the wind. My believers will remain on earth 

for ten thousand years of the iron age. When they will go away from the 
world all people will be reduced to one caste and the world void of my 
believers will be absorbed or eclipsed by Kali." While he was speaking thus, 
the Being armed with four hands, marked with a tuft of hair on his breast 
and holding in his hands the conches, discus, mace and lotus, and bright 
like a hundred moons emanated from the body of Lord Krişna. He 
' ascended a beautiful chariot and went to the sea, of milk. The fair 


' terrestrial goddess of fortune, the daughter of the sea who had emanated 


from the mind of Krigna, wielded a form and likewise followed him. 
When Visnu, the pure and virtuous preserver of the world, went to the 


70 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


554 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 
Uo M 


white Islands, Krigna divided himself into two parts. The right side of 
his body became the supreme Being vested with two hands and assumed 
the form of a cow herd boy, dark-blue in appearance like a new eloud, 
clad in yellow dress and well decorated, graceful, smiling, with eyes of a 
lotus, perfect, lordly and distinct from Nature. He wielded the grace of 
a hundred millions of moons and the charms of a thousand millions of 
Cupids. He is the great Brahma, the supreme harbour, the absolute 
spirit transcending all attributes, wielding a form only out of com passion 
for his believers, vested with a body, indestructible, and full of suprome 
happiness. The Yogis (ascetics given to meditation) call him eternal 
and all-resplendent with light. But his believers invest him with an 
eternal form inside that light. The four Vedas call him the emblem of 
truth ; learned or wise men call him the primordial, eternal Being: all the 
gods call him the supreme Lord who acts at pleasure (whose will is law), 


The Munis who are the best of the adepts call him the image of. 


all things (the form of tha universe): and Siva, the best of the 
meditative ascetics, calls him indescribable, Brahma, the dispenser of 
the world, calls him the cause of all Causes. The god Ananta 
calls the god who is capable of taking nine kinds of forms 
Infinite. The six Dars'ans (systems of phi'osophy) assign to him six kinds 
of forms ; the Vaisnavas assign to him only one form as desired by them ; 
the Vedas assign to him one form : and tho Puranas, also one. This is 
how he has nine forms. What is styled “indescribable” by Sankara 
and the Nyåya system is eternal according to the system of philosophy pro- 
pounded by Kanada: and it is primordial according to the theory advanced 
by learned or wise men. The Sankhya galls him the effulgent, eternal 
god; the Mim&msá calls him the form of everything : and the Vedanta 
Calls him the cause of all. Patanjala calls him infinite; the four Vedas 
eallhim the emblem of truth ; the Puránas hold that he is fall of self- 


' determination (ie. his will is law) ; his believers hold that he ever 
wields a form ; he himself is the Lord of the Cow 


i for t g ing 
oe grims for three hundred Kalpas. That Being 


à arlands, holding the 
coneh, diseus, mace and lotus in his hands and iieri with A tuft of hair 
on his breast was surrounded by gods at that time (i 


On the eve of his departure for the Vai- 
played upon the supreme 
e worlds, O Narada, énchanted by the 


i. On that occasion that almighty 
3 i the chaste, full of solf-deter-- 
transcending all attributes, yet vested with attributes, 


: supreme spirit thus said to tho 
eternal Lord Krigna “O Lord, I am alone now ane sphere of the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


RRB JANMA KIRAN Dust. 555 


the form of Râdhå ; now it behoves you to fill 
ld caused by the absence of the Rasa. 


m 
Rasa in the Cow-world in 
up the gap in the cow-wor 


88.97. Deck yourself with a string of pearls, mount your own 
chariot and preceed to the Goloka. I have already been rendered perfect 
by presiding over your heart, At your command, I reside in the- 
Vaikuntha as the great goddess of fortune : and even in that place I dwell 


on the left side of Hari as Saraswati. Even I have emanated from your 


mind as the daughter of the sea; by your direction I have become 


Savitri, the mother of the Vedas : and through my digits I dwell by the 
side of Brahma. In days of yore, in the Satya-Yuga (Golden Age), at 
our command, [ presided over the valour of all the gods assembled 
together. There I wielded a celestial form : and the gods including 
Sumbha, ete., were easily killed by me on the oceasion. I killed Durga 
and assumed the name of Durg4 ; and having killed Tripura, I took the 
name of Tripura. At your command, I killed Rakta-Vija, acquired the 
name of the slayer of Rakta-Vija and was celebrated by the name of 
Sati (the imago of truth, the daughter of Daksa). At your command, 
I parted from my body on the strength of my Yoga and was subsequently 
born as the daughter of the mountain. You bestowed Sankara on me in 
the sphere of the Rasa in the Cow-world. I am devoted to Vignu ; 
hence { am called she Vaisaavi and Visnu-Maya ; and I am the principal 
of the illusion of Narayana and hence lam called Nardyant. I am the 
goddess who prosides over the life of Krisna, and am dearer to him than 
his life. Iam also Radha herself, the mother of Vasu and Maha-Visnu. 
As directed by you, I divided myself into five parts in the shape of the 
five prineiples of nature and I exist in the houses of the gods through my 


parts and digits as their wives. 

98-111. © most blessed Lord, afllieted with your separation, I am 
here and there, distracted in the Cow-world with the cow- 
Please, therefore, start for that place soon." Krigna, the prince 
e words of Parvati, mounted a chariot of gem 
rld. The eternal Maya of Vignu 


roaming, 
herdesses. 
of wits, having heard th 
and went to the excellent Cow-wo 
(Parvati), restored to consciousness the gods spell-bound by the charms 


of the illusory or talismanie flute. They shouted the name of Hari 


and went home. Durga also was pleased and went home with Siva. 
Later on, the omniscient Radha realising in her mind the advent of 


Krigna went with pleasure to the Vraja with the cowherdess. The 
chaste Radh4 caused the lord of the world to dismount from the chariot 
and seeing that he was approaching her, she bowed modestly to him with 
all her might. The cowherds and cowherdesses were pleased at 
the arrival of Lord Krigna and played upon the drum with a cheerful 
mien. The Lord of the world, having crossed the Viraj& river, saw 
Radha and, hastily alighting, held her hands. He then ascended the 
mountain of a hundred summits, passed through the lovely sphere 
of the Rasa, and having observed the holy fig tree, went to the 
oharming Vrindávana. He saw the forest of the holy basil and subse- 
quently proceeded to the grove of jasmine. He left behind him on the 


left side the wood of Kunda (a species of jasmine) and Madhavi (a 


spring creeper) and on the right, side the desired forest of Champaka and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


We Ny Lit haidd EM dango EART "PURANA, 
D e ae 7 
advanced. He soon left behind him the beau 
he observed the charming mansion of Radha 
excellent throne of gem. He took bete 


and 
fragrant water, slept on a floral bed besmeared with perfumed sandal and, 
being thus immersed in the sea of pleasure, sported with Radha, I 


the subject relating to the 
ow what more do you 


a 
tiful wood of sandal. First 


and sat down With her on an 


CHAPTER CXXX, 


l-11. Narada said, ** O most blessed being, I have heard every- 
thing “you have left nothing to be desired. How wonderfully gratifying 
is the Brahma-Vaivarta Purána. O religious preceptor of the world, now 
tell me what I shall do. Command me now to go tothe Himalayas for 


devotion.” Narayana said, “In your previous birth, you were a 
Gandharbha named Upa-Varhana, 


fty ladies ; and now 
you have been born as the son of Brahma. Out of those fifty ladies, one 
chaste woman, by auster 
him the desired boon to secure y 
golden neck and of a high rank 
S'rimafijaya. Marry her, The word of § 
damsel is pre-eminently fair 


That lady with a 
daughter of king 
iva can uever Eo amiss, lhat 

She is gentle in hor dis- 
position. She is an offspring of tho digits of Laksmi, devoted to her 
husband, most blessed, i 


g lous yoice, lustful, desirable 
and possessing a youth which never fades. No one ean resist. the Karma 


in a thousand crores of Ka millions. of mortal years) 
unless he reaps the fraits of his actions, whether they be good or bad.” 
Sita said, “ The godly saint Nara a, having heard the words of Narayana 
bowed beforo his feet with a heavy heart and quickly went to the house 
of Srimjaya," aunaka said, € O most blessed Sata, what an extra. 
ordinary, interesting, wonderful, i j i 

ow I am anxious to hear the 
great saint Narada, the son of Brahma 


gems along with other. 
his son, he went to 
the house i 


i Timjaya having h d thi ) 
gladly handed over to Narada his fain 2! having heard this mows 
of gems, Having likewise p 


' - 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


ra and received from ` 


e 


KR BSN EISNATA RST AN Dust, 557 


faults with folded palms. The great ascetic king, having given his daughter 


to Brahmá, loudly wept saying, “O my child! O my child!” Healso 


said, “ O daughter possessed of lotus eyes, why are you vacating my 
house and where are you going ? I must now go to a dense forest ; 1 am 
almost dead without you.” Then the weeping girl bowed before the feet 
of her lamenting parents and mounted the chariot of Brahma. Brahma, 
was satisfied. He took in his company his son and daughter-in-law and 
attended by Indra and the Munis, went to the world of Brahma. There, 
after having performed the necessary auspicious rites, he feasted the 
Brahmins, gods and adepts and ordered the beat of drums, as suited to the 
oocasion. O Saunaka, Narada, the great Muni, was deluded by his 
Karma. Noone can help reaping the fruits of his actions in his 
antecedent birth. ‘The same Narada sported with his wife, day and night, 
on a lovely bed of flowers annointed with sandal: and he was so much 
absorbed in pleasure that he had no idea of day and night, 


95-44, The great Muni Narada, having revelled with her in this way, 
began to dwell at the root of the lovely banyan tree in the land of 


‘Brahma, While he was thus passing his time, Lord Sanat-Kumara, 


absolutely naked liko a boy and effulgent with the lustre of Brahma 
appeared before him. Before creation, he was also five years old without 
any tuft of hair on the top of his head, without sacred thread round his 
neck and never observant of the diturnal rites (ode to the sun, etc.) as 
prescribed by vhe Vedas. He was reciting the Mantra, viz., Krigna. This 
gaint whose spiritual guide is Nár&áyana dwells for endless Kalpas with 
his three brothers in the Vaikuntha. He is the foremost of the Vaignavas 
and the spiritual guide of the religious preceptors of sages. Narada, 
having observed before him his brother, the best of virtuous saints, suddenly 
bowed to him and threw himself prostrate before him on the ground like 
a staff. The boy Savat Kumara smiled and, using words of deep import, 
thus addressed Narada, “O brother, what are you doing ? O husband of a 
young woman, are you well? The love of a man and wife develops every- 
day and is ever renewed. It destroys the knowledge of the supreme being. 
It shuts ths gate of virtue on the married pair, blocks their redemption 
and enchains them for ever. Itisthe paramount source of hell and 
contains the germs of re-birth. A sinner drinks poison under the 
impression that it is nectar. A man who turns aside from Narayana 
and devotes himself to the enjoyments of the world is bewildered by 
vain illusions and practically takes poison in lieu of honey. All those 
who work in the world except, of course, the supreme Being, must reap 
the consequences of their acts. We are the sons of Brahma: and as we 
have bodies, we are liable to sufferings and enjoyments, If you say 
you are not liable, why were you born then as a Gandarbha or as the 
son of a female slave ? And why were you able to redeem yourself through 
the society of people who were themselves redeemed? O brother, now 
leave your spouse who isa phantom of illusion and practise asceticism. 
Adore Krisna in the holy land of India. In the presence of Náráyana 
(the source of redemption) who exists through his digits ou earth, a 
worldly man alone is ensnared by temporal eri and practically 
duped by vain illusions, Accept from me this Mantra (mystic formula) 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


558 TERI BRIN VATPARTA PURANA. 


consisting only of two letters. viz. Krisna, which is the excellent Mantra 
and the essence of all Mantras. There is no Mantra superior to the Krisna 
Mantra either in the Puránas or the fair Vedas or other holy scriptures, 
Nardyana gave me this Mantra on the occasion of the solar eclipse on the 
margin of the holy lake Puskara. For endless Kalpas T have reoite d 
this Mantra and, being adored by all, I am now roaming at large through- 
out the world. Sanat-Kumára, having said so, caused Nárada to bathe in 
the river and gave him the supreme Mantra. From that day forth, he 
has always been reciting this Mantra day and night with a saerad thread 
of gems round his neck. Sanat-Kumara, the foremost of, Vaisnavas, blessed 
; him in an auspicions manner and gave him the Mantra. After this, he 
Need to the Cow-world to observe Lord Krigna, the eternal Being. 
árada also having obtained the Mantra which is Calculated to grant 
all kinds of perfection, produce in the mind everlasting reverence for 
Hari and destroy the gems of Karma abandoned his illusory spouse and 
went to India with a view to practise asceticism. 


45-60. Saint  Nárada beheld Siva seated on the coast of the 
Krita-Málà river and immediately bowed before his feet with a modest 
inclination of his head. The Lord of the world, kind to his believers, 
thus said : “O Narada, to-day I have been gratified by your sight. The 
sight of the Vaisnavas is desirable for those who wield bodies. Interview 
with such believers is a source of benefit to people. Such sort of interview 
secures the fruits which can be obtained by bathing in all holly streams. 
You are versed in all the Mantras (t-e, religious codes prescribing the form 
of worship), all the great Mantras which are so very abstruse I havo given 
the same Mantras to my sons Kartika and Ganes‘a, Krigna had given that 
Mantra to me, Brahma and Dharma in the sphere of the Rasa. In the 


root of Karma, , A Vaisnava should with this Mantra absorb himself in 
Dhyana which isas follows: he is dark-blue in complexion like a new 
cloud, he is clad in yellow and tender in age. He wields the matchloss 
grace of millions and millions of moons: he is the lovely play-ground 
of the charms of ten millions of Cupids. He is decorated with jewels 
constructed with invaluable gems and graced with the gem called 
Kaustubha; all his body is besmeared with sandal-paste, the top of his 
head is adorned with a peacock's plumage, He is beautifully coyered with 
Jasmine- wreaths; he has a gentle smile playing on his cheerful face, he is 
constantly worthy of the adoration of Siva and other gods; he is the 
supreme spirit; he wields a body out of compassion for his believers; he 
cannot be deseribed by the Vedas.” You should adore Krigna, the Lord 
- of all, in the way as described above, After having contemplated the 
figure of the eternal Lord according to the Dhyana as described above, 
you should adore the truthful, excellent supreme Brahma. Sambhu, tlie 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


REISE JARIT RAM NOY. 559 


ooo 


Sisi 


supreme Lord, having said so, went to bis place. Narada, also, having 
bowed low before the feet of the Lord, left for meditation. Afterwards, 
Narada, having remembered the gracious Lord Hari, parted with bis ‘body 
on the strength of the concentration of his mental powers (Yoga) and 
was dissolved in the lotus feot of Lord Hari served by Laksmi. 


CHAPTER CXXXI. 


1-11. Saunaka said, “What an extraordinary, indescribable, most 
wonderful, interesting and mysterious account, ever new and lovely, have 
I heard! You have related to me an account which can hardly be secured 
and which is regarded as ancient even by the Purana. When, again, shall 
I enjoy a happy day like this? The life of that person alone is truly 
blessed and worthy who is able to secure an interview with the Vaisnavas. 
What an extraordinary narrative dealing with the birth of Ganes'a, what 
a wonderful history of Tulsi and Radha and other interesting subjects 
latent and patent, have I heard to-day ! For themes like these are likely 
to remove the germs of Karma and rebirth, impart the pure bondage of 
Hari, engender reverence for him, root out sins and remedy the perver- 
tion of intellect caused by bad company. O blessed being, I am fully _ 
satisfied. I am now desirous to hear the interesting subject dealing with 
the genesis of fire and gold. Kindly recite ib to me." Sita said, “As 
the eternal Nature and the grand principle or element (i. e., the intellect) 
are the essentials of creation, so are the water and the fire. Fire partakes of 
the same character as the quarters, the great sky, the creation of the 
Cow-world, the element of nature, the great element (intellect) and the 
element of egotism, form, taste, and sound. Notwithstanding this, I am 
going to describe to you its genesis. Once, at the time of creation, Brah- 
ma, Ananta and Siva went to the White Island to see Visnu, the Lord of 
creation. After mutual greetings they sat down in the council before 


Vienu on thrones of gem. 


2.99, Subsequently at that place nymphs who had sprung out of 
the body of Vignu and who were the digits of Visnu began to dance and 
chant Vignu’s hymns in a melodious tone. The paternal grandfather 
Brahma, observing their hard buttocks, thick spherical breasts and smil- 
ing lotus faces, was excited with passion. He could not control his heart ; 
his semen was discharged ; and out of shame he concealed it on the ground 
with his cloth. O Saunaka, after the music was over, he threw the semen 
along with the cloth rendered hot by lust into the sea of milk. Whereupon, 
a being effulgent with the lustre of Brahma got up from the water and 
sat down in the council on the lap of tbe abashed Brahm’. The god of 
ocean the Varuna was incensed at the sight and quickly rising out of the 
water bowed before the feet of the gods and attempted to take y 
the child by force. O twice-born saint, the weeping boy eld 
Brahma with his arms, but the ruler of the world (Brahma) 
maintained a studious silence. Varuna also in anger held the arms of 
the boy and dragged him. The ruler of creation 
down the god Varuna in council. The weak god Varuna fell at a distance 

and afterwards by the angry glances of Brahma, he was almost reduced 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


560 THE BRAHMA VAIVARTA PURANA, 


— 
by casting at him 
his consciousness, 
erefore he is my son; 
à chastise me in the 


toa corpse. But Siva restored him to consciousness 
glance of nectars. The lord of water, having recovered 
said, “This boy has been created in the water; th 


ldesire to take him back. Why did „Brahm 
matter ?”! 


23-33. Brahma said “O Visnu, O Mahes'a, 
protection. How can I surrender a weeping, 
fool who does not preserve a person in danger seek 


tocks of 
the sea 

Therefore, lawfully 
dstras he is also the 
egotten by another), 
d on an equal footing 


& woman. He, therefore, out of shame, threw it into the water of 
of milk. This boy is the offspring of that semen. 
he is the son of Brahma; but according to the § 
Ksetraja son of Varuna. (A Keetraja is a son b 
by virtue of which the pupil and the son stan 

atér on, Siva said, “The Vedas determine kinship by sex and learning, 
This view is upheld by savants conversant with the Vedas. Let the 
-god Varuna, therefore, impart both Mantra and knowledge to this boy. 
The boy will thus be known as the fire-god,.son of Brahma :and he will 
also be celebrated as the pupil of Varuna. Let Visnu give him the 
excellent faculty of burning, by virtue of which he will be known by the 
name of Hutasana that consume everything. But the god Va 
be able to quell that power (i.e, he will 
Visnu at Siva's bidding gave him the faculty 
Varuna gave him Mantra, knowledge and an 


and Siva, Later on, Brahma and Siva bowed b 

and went home, great saint, I have recited to you the 

of the genesis of the fire-god ; now I am going 
| origin of gold. Listen, 


account 
to describe to you the 


ssion and discharged his semen, Out of 

i Later on, very bright heaps 
en burst out of the covering of cloth and 
| n volume that they were converted into a 
huge mountain called Sumeru. Hence ' savants describe the. fire'as 
one possessing the semen of gold.” 


: i I bave thus answered the 
y" raised you? What more do you want to hear ? 


ED 

CHAPTER CXXXII. 

118. O sSüta, best of the sainte I have listened to a faithful 
Narrative of all subjects, as desired by me. Now, nothing remains to be 
heard ; please recapitulate to me the Brahma Vaivarta Purdna, I have 
never heard a description of the Puránas more vivid than yours; and I 
have nowhere come across a speaker on the Puranas so eloquent as yourself 


'CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA 561 


Süta said, “Q most blessed being, listen carefully and attentively. By lis- 
tening only to one chapter of the Purána a man reaps fruits, as if he 
had listened to the whole Purana. In the part of Brahma the 
investigation into the nature of the supreme Brahma who is 
indescribable, void of attributes or vested with attributes, corporeal 
or ineorporeal, and the demonstration of these points according 
to the Srutis have been separately Ideal& with. The methods of 
Dhyana and subjects’ dealing with the Cow-world have also been 
desoribed by me in due order and’ to the best of my powers. O best of 
the “twice-born,” the introduction of incidential matters to explain the 
main subject, the determination of the origin of the hybrid classes, 
narratives aptly and necessarily adapted to questions, the amorous 
pastimes of Radha and Krisna, the genesis of. Maha-Visnu, the creation 
of the world by Brahmá, the dialogue between Brahma and Narada, the 
acquisition of the knowledge of the supreme object of one’s life by 
Narada, the departure of Narada to the hermitage of Narayana at the 
command of Brahma, his interview with Narada, and the announcement 
by Narada of the purpose of his visit have all been received by turns in 
the Brahma-Khanda (part I). O saint, now listen to the part relating 
to nature which is as sweet as nectar. The characteristic features of 
Nature, the origin of the goddesses springing from Nature, their antecedents, 
the incidents of their worship and the lives of Laksmí, Saraswati, Darga, 
Sávitriand Radha have been separately dealt with in this part. The 
most wonderful accounts of the great goddess, of fortune, Saraswati and 
Durga’, the great war between Siva and Sankha-Chüda, the interview 
of Tulasi with Krisna, an account of their sexual intercourse, the fall 
of Sankha-Chiida, the removal of the curse of Sridáma, the recovery by 
the gods of their jurisdiction, the destruction of calamities, the germ of 
salvation, the interesting narrative of Gang, the delightful anecdote of 
Manas, Swâhâ; and other matters incidentally arising out of questions 
and other circumstances have been dealt with in detail in the part 
relating to Nature. Now hear of the part relating to Ganes'a, 


19-45. This patt is most mysterious in the Puranas, very interesting 
and ever new. "This narrative can be secured with very great difficulty 
and is most delightful to the audience. The magnificent amorous pas- 
times of Parvati and Siva, the great god, the disturbance 
in their sexual intercourse, the birth of Kartika, the consolation of 
Parvati, the relief to her wounded susceptibilities, the vow of Punyaks, 
the interesting history of the goddess Durga, the gift of a boon to the 
good-natured or well-behaved Parvati by Visnu, the interview (by Hara 
and Parvati) of Narayana who appeared before them in the guise of a 
guest, the gracious manifestation of Ganes'a in the house of Siva, the 
birth of a son to Parvati and the great god Siva, the celebration of a 
happy, grand festival, the appearance of the gods before Narayana, the 
eternal Being who had taken the form of a child (the Being who has no 
origin, who removes all dangers; who is tranquil in his disposition, 
ewho is the source of all prosperity, who requites people engaged in’ 
‘recitations of his name, sacrifices, meditations, vows, ete; who is most 
desirable, who enehants the hearts of women, whois dearer to Párvati. 


T4 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


582 THE BRAHMA PAIVARTA PURANA, 


00777 a A -—— 


- and Siva than their lives, who is the emblem of the supreme Brahma, 
the Lord who is cause of all and tke eternal spirit) are points dealt with 
in the part which relates to Ganes’a. The sight, adoration, obeisance, 


worship and Dhyána of Ganes'a destroy the sins of his adherents, which. 


they had accumulated in ten millions of births. O twice-born saint, the 
fetching of Kártika, his installation as commander of the divine arms, 
the worship of Ganes'a who destroys all calamities, the battle fought 
~ between Jamadagni and Kárta-Viry&rjuna, the theft of the cow 
Surabhi, the deathof Jamadagni, the ascension by the chaste Renuka 
of the funeral piles of her husband, the extirmination of the Ksatriyas by 
Paras'urama twenty-one times from the face of the earth in pursuance 
of his hard and iron resolution, the interview of Ganes'a and Paras'uráma, 
their mutual dissension, the breaking of the tooth or tusk of Ganes'a, the 
lamentation of Durgà and her curse, the manifestation of Náráyana at 
the mere recollection of his name by Paras'uràma ; the consolation of 
Parvati by Lord Narayana himself, a glimpse into the wonderful and 
desired land of Siva, the gift of a great weapon to Paras'urama by Siva 
(the source of all prosperity), the extirmination of the Ksatriyas 21 times 
by Paras'uráma, and thus relieving the earth of her burden and other 
incidents arising out of questions are matters dealt with in brief in the 
eventful part relating to Ganes’a. Now listen attentively to the part 
relating to the birth of Krisna apt to remove death, birth, decrepitude 
and disease, calculated to give supreme redemption and the bondage of 
Hari, pure, sweet like honey and delightful to the ears of audience. This 


Part is full of extraordinary anecdotes, extremely interesting, completely 
new and delightful at every step. None ever heard of these matters in 
his life. This part like a lamp light 


s up the mysteries of the all esoteric 


l ) to cross the sea of the world and 
like alchymy is calculated to destroy disease in the sha 


$navas and the supreme 
questions put by Narada 
given by this saint, eulogies of 
e between Sridima and Radha, 
casioning their departure from the Cow-world, the 


he form of a river, the 
abandonment of the cowherdesses Y 


onment. » the intercourse of Lord Krisna with 
the Virajà river, and the birth of th 


T 9 seven seas are points fully dealt 
with at the outset in this Dart, p : 


Bard pho. wenderinl, "bitth:of. Lord-Krigna in the world) as desired 
by Brahma, his manifestation in the house of Vasudeva have also been 


described in this part. "The childish frolies of th i iri i 
at Gokul to which Krisna had ca Gee ea 


y * to run away through fear of the 
demon Kamsa, the manifestation of Radha as the daughter of 
Vrisa-bhanu through the curse of ridama, the destruction of the 
demons, ete, the arrival of 


k Garga Muni, the performance 
of the eating ceremony (the ceremony performed on the oceasion of Lord 
mena, t, C., when the child first takes his food), the killing of Patuna, ` 


oF 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


CUN 


a: 


Digitized by eGanggtri 
E KRISNA JANMA KANDA. 503 
GERMEN ue e ccce 


the breaking of the chariot in a moment, the release of Krigna from 
confinement, the breaking of the tree called Yamalárjuna, the perception 
ef the three worlds within the mouth, the theft of the cows and the 
calves, their reproduction, the adoration of Lord Krisna by Brahma, ete, 
aro also recited in this part. When Lord Krisna suddenly left Gakila 
for the holy land of Vrindávana; his father Nanda through fear followed 
him. Subsequent construction of the most wonderful land of Vrindáva- 
na by Krigna, his pastimes with the boys there, the eating by Krigna 
of food offered by the Brahmin women, the gift of boons to these women 
gommensurate with the merits of their previous acts, the description of 
heaven and an account of the theft of clothes are matters set forch in this 
part in detail. Later on, O twice-born saint, the gift of boon to the cow- 
herdesses by Krisna, the vow of Kátyáyani, the worship of Durg4, the gift 
of boons by Durga to the milkmaids on the coast of the Yamuna, the 
eating of palmfruits by Krisna, the dissolution of the sacrifice of Indra, 
the marriage of Krişna with Radha, their union, the merry pastimes 
of Rádhà in Krisna's lap, the 


of the cowherdesses, the placing 
creation of shadows in the house by Krisna through his illusion, 16 kinds 


of acts of sexual intercourse performed by Krisna in the sphere of the 
Rasa, the subsequent disappearance of Radha and Krisna and their 
he Malaya range, the undoubted interview of Radha and 
arious accounts connected with the redempticn of the cow- 
ts which have been exhaustively dealt with in this 


arrival at t 
Krisua and v 
herdesses are poin 
part. 

62.75. The re-arrival of Lord Krisna in the holy Vrindávana, 
the felicity of the cowherdesses as they beheld Lord Krigna, amusements 
on land and water, the good luck of the cow herdesses, particularly the 
good luck of Radha etc, are matters which have already been recited by 
Veda- Vyasa. Later on, the observation of the scene by gods settled in 
the sky, the mental agitation of the goddesses as they witnessed the 
circular dance in the sphere of the Rasa, the entry of Lord Hari into 
Mathura, the slaughter of the washerman, the sexual intercourse with 
the hump-backed woman, the grant of redemption to her, the breaking 
of Siva's how, the killing of the elephants, an act of favour to the gardener 
called Kulinda, the grant of redemption to him, the entry into Kamsas 
council, the fall (death) of Kamsa, the lamentation of his friends, due 
performance of his funeral vites, the bestowal of the kingdom on his 
father, the lamentation of Nanda and his wonderful eulogies, the eonver- 
sation of the father and the son.in solitude, the gift of the supreme 
‘and transcendental Yoga to Nanda by Krişna (the Lord of the world), 
and the departure of the Munis are subject-matters of a blessed and 
excellent narrative hardly to be secured and recited in a very beautiful 
manner in this part of the Purana. The arrival of Ud-dhava at the 


house of Radha, disquisition by Radha on auspicious divine knowledge 
the ceremony of the investiture of 


in the course of their conv T c 
Lord Krigna with sacred thread, education of Krigna 1n the house of his 
religious preceptor, the revival of the dead son of the spiritual guide, 

d to life and the chastisement of 


handing him over the said son returne l 
Jarâ-Sandha, the destruction of Kålayavana, the construction of Dwârkå 


ersation, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


564 THE BRAHMA PAY HE n 


and entry into the city, the humiliation of Vis'wa-Karmâ, the 
tion of Ugra-Sena, the abduetion of Rukmini, the fetching of Parijata from 
heaven, the dismemberment of the arms of king Bána, the eulogies 
of Bali, the valour of Aniruddha, the war between the Kur 
Pandavas, the relieving of the earth of her burden, the abduction of Usa, 


la menta. 


> 
the conversation between Radh& and Yas'odá, the wonderful redemption of, 


king Srigála, the worship of Ganes'a ineidentally mentioned in connexion 
with the subject of pilgrimage, the interview of the eternal spirit Lord 
Krisna with Radha, excursions of Lord Krisna with Radha, the manifes- 
tation by Radha of the feelings of her heart, the intercourse of Radha 
with her consort, adventures to places’ sacred to pilgrims, all these also haye 
been set forth in this part in detail. O Saunaka, the destruction of the 
Yádavas effected by the curse of Brahma, the redemption of the PA D dá vas, 
Hari's arrival at his own destination, the wedding of Narada, the genesis 
of the fire and the gold have also been stated by me in brief. All 
these subjects have been described in the Brahma Vaivarta Purdna 
divided into four parts. O great saint, what more subject do you wish to 
hear ? 
Teen ° 


CHAPTER CXXXIII. 


1-17. Saunaka said, “To-day my birth has been redeemed, and m 
precious life has also been blessed ; for I haye without interruption 
tasted the fruits of the Brahma Vaivarta Purana which gives redemption, 
O child or O sire, guarantee to me immunity from fear, in which case 
I shall refer to you the thing desired by me.” Sita said, * O 
magnanimous being, lay aside your fear, ùe., be of good cheer. You can 
question me freely, if you want to know anything else, for I shall describe ~ 
to you every subject that is mysterious and interesting,” aunaka said, 
“O son, at present I desire to know the feature of the Puránas, the number 
and the fruits of the Purdnas.” Sita said, “O great-minded saint I am 
going to describe to you accordingly the Sastras, tho Puranas, the oode 


Narada and others) (1) Creation(2)absolute 
Manus, belonging to the solar 

and lunar races, (4) and (5) the geueology of the kings of the solar and 
1 Sary features of tho Puránas, 

ow I am gomg to tell you the main features of the Maha (great) 
Puranas. “Creation, Preservation and eterna] destruction of the world, 
Karma (necessity or fate which makes a man liable for his acts), desire, 
description of scenes, connexion of the names of the fourteen Manus with 
_ one another, the account relating to the eternal dissolution of the world, 
the determination of the nature of redemption, the eulogies of Hari 

and a sketch of the qualification of different gods, these are the ten out- : 
standing features of the Maha Puránas Now I am going to tell you 
the number of the verses Contained in all Puranas, listen, “Tho Brahma- 

Purana contains 10,000 ver ; 

verses, : savants calculate that there are 13,000 verses in the Visnu 

Purina, - The iva-Purána contains 24,000 verses ; Sri-Mad-Bhagvata : 
contains 18,000 verses, the Nárada-Purána 25,000 verges ; the 

Márkandaya.Purüna 9,000: the Agni Puráng 15,400; the Bhavisya-Purána, : 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Whe 


4 utr 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 565 
E 


14,500, the Brahma-Vaivarta-Purána, 18,000 ; the Linga-Purána, 11,000; 
and the Varáha-Purana, 24,0U0 verses. ` 


18-31, The Pandits conversant with the Puranas hold that the 
excellent Skanda-Purána contains 81,100 verses. They likewise main- 


- tain that the Vámana-Purána contains ten thousand verses ; the Kürma- 


Purina, 17,000 verses, the Matsya Purana 14,000 verses. They hold that 
the Garüda-Purána contains 20,000 verses and the Brahmánda-Purána 
12,000 verses. In this way the sum total of the verses of ali the Puranas 
is four lakhs. Savants have assigned names to the eighteen 
Puranas as shown above. Like the Puránas there are eighteen branches of 
the Purana or secondary treatises on cosmogony, histories and poems com- 
posed by Valmiki and Bharata as held by savants. There are five Pancha- 
rátras dealing with the sublimity of Lord Krisna composed by Vasigtha, 
Narada, Kapila, Gautama and Sanat-Kumára. Five codes: of law 
(Samhitá) dealing with faith in Hari and eomposed by Brahmá, Siva, 
Prahlada, Gautama and Sanat-Kumára have likewise been announced by 
savants. Thus I deseribei to you everything. séparately and in due order. 
Similarly there are many holy books or religious seriptures which I already 
recited to you in the light of my knowledge. Lord Krisna himself recited 
this Purana to his believer Brahma in the sphere of the Rasa in the 
Cow-world. Brahma narrated this to Dharma devoted to virtue; 
Dharma, to Narayana, Rigi ; Narayana to Narada who said all this to 23 
-(his believer). You are the best of Munis. I therefore described 1 is 
excellent Purana to you. The desired Brahma- Vaivarta-Pur A 
ean hardly be secured. The whole universe has been deseribed in this 
Purana. It describes the form of the eternal spirit that animates 
living beings, the Karma (fate orthe law of causation) of meus on 
gaged, in their acts and the Suprems Brahma who is a witness oie 
aote, This Purana deals with the'Supreme Brahma and his exce ee 
ualities : hence savants call it the Brahma Vaivarta Bue, is 
Purâna is very sanctifying and is the source and emblem of pros 
perity. . Y . . . bi ts 
. eals with many new (original) and essential subjects, 
M eu and teron calculated to inspire rororo ea is 
Hali and -give the bondage of the ko ia happo po ne pp 
and apt to relieve sorrow and mental agony. ; SOME DEO 
j i lent among all the greatest Purápas 1 
Pd m is the best of pen i Pe ips e n 
tion, ` is the most sacred Of a la. d fo 
Rn ented nen great among cities, a ee 2 
Theidno blessed and the best of continents calculate n pie 
iuit diate emancipation, as Sumeru is foremost of moni d ics 
Parista is the best of flowers, as the holy basil is the best pe M 
aatthe vow of Ekádas'i is us ae of vote s d ls is 
à | o risna i st of le 
y i Siva T ie Bact y the wisest saints, as Ganesa 1S the fom 
Yogis (meditative eene as Kapila is e Parte ne Pins 
is "the ' effulgent beings, : > : 
mu De wot are devoted to Visnu, as Raima ranks 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


566 THE BRAHMA VAIV ARTA PURANA. 


frst among kings, as Lakgmana is the foremost of archers, as, Dur 
is pre-eminently virtuous and chaste among goddesses, as Radha i, 
dearer to Krisna than his life and ranks first among his fa vouritas, 
as Laksmi is the best of goddesses and as Saraswati heads the list 
of savants. This Purana has therefore been deseribed as Superb, in. 
teresting, sweet, sanctifying and as calculated to remove all doubtg 
from the mind. This Purána is the source of joy and all prosperity, 
auspicious and sanetifying, apt to destroy all sorts of impedimenta or 
calamities, calculated to impart the bondage of Hari and. 
hence likely to bring happiness in the next world. The 
performances of sacrifices, pilgrimage to the holy land, the ob. 
servance of vows, religious austerities, and. cireumambulation round 
the spiritual guide do not yield the same fruits as this Paurána does. 
41-50. 'Phe perusal of the four Vedas also secures excellent re- 
wards. If a man void of issue, with rapt attention, reads this 
Purána, he obtains a virtuous and learned Vaisnava son. An unfor- 
tunate woman reading this Purina becomes g9 lucky as to secure 
the affection of her husband. A woman whose children all die or 


gå 


who 
has become barren after having given birth only to one son or who is 
so sinful as to be absolutely barren, (provided that she listens to 


. this Purana), is blessed with a son leading a long life. By attending 
to this Purana an infamous man aequires fame, an ienorant man 
aequires learning, a diseased man is cured and a prisoner is set at liber. 
ty. By listenning to it, a man afraid is relieved. from fear ; aman in 
danger gets out of danger. and a man benighted in the fores& or wood 
or beset with the peril of the wild fire is assuredly released from 
his danger. A man who attentively listens to a half of the Sloka - 
(stanza or distitch} or even one-fourth of the Sloka of this Purdna 
practically reaps the benefits seeuredfby ‘the gifts ofa hundred thou- 
sand cows. As soon as a person listens to the Purana he accu- 
mulates merits and cannot even know the evil arising out of, blindness, 
leprosy, poverty or any hideous malady or grief, 

51-64, Whoever, with due control over his passions an 
ing avowed the purpose for the performance of a rite on an auspicious 

Occasion and having reverentially paid his sacerdotal fee, listens 

only tothe fourth part of this Purana from start. 

doubtely released from the sins commi 
childhood or while he attained the age of 
agein ten millions of births. Wielding the 

e mounts a car constructed with Boms, goes to the eternal land of 

the Cow-world and secures the bondage of Hari. 


d after hay- 


Š F : 8n ever remains 
absorbed in his service, A man, after having bathed, should. with rapt 


attention and with a pure heart listen to that part of the Purana whioh ; 
relates to Brahma, feast the resiter of the said Purána with cakes and 
rice boiled with sugar and milk, entertain him with betels. and give him 
his sacerdotal fee, And then having dedicated sandal, white wreath, : 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


— 


"E 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


KRISNA JANMA KHANDA. 567 


cl S EE ee ee 


SS MENENTIESETOTT 


and fine exquisite cloth to Lord Krisna, he should deliver the same to 
the reciter. A person, after having heard the part relating to Nature 
which is delightful to the ear and sweet like honey, should feast the 
reciter with food mixed with eurd and give him the cow named Surabhi 
along with her calf. After having listened attentively to the part relating 
to Ganes'a, the hearer should present to the reciter gold, a sacred thread, 
a white horse, a white parasol, a white wreath, Swastika (a kind of cake), 
balls of sesamum and ripe fruits suited to the season and place. A believer, 
after having respectfully listened to the part relating to the birth of 
Lord Krisna, should tender to the reciter excellent ear-rings of gold and 
all his property by way of sacerdotal fee, recite eulogies or hymns and 
feast a hundred Brahmins with great esteem and regard. Whoever, 
h belief in Lord Krisna, listens to this Purana attains 


inspired wit 
for Krisna and is released from the sins committed by him 


reverence 


previously. 
65.68, O best of Brahmins, I have recited to you everything that 


I heard from my religious preceptor. Now permit me to go. I intend to 
proceed to the hermitage of Narayana. Seeing the assembly of Brahmins 
here, I came to this place only to render you homage. Afterwards at 
the command of you all, I have recited to you this Brahma Vaivarta 
Purana. With body, mind and words, day and night ; adore the favorite 
consort of Radha, the supreme and truthful Brahma who transcends 
the three attributes or the principles of Nature. I bow to the Brahmins; 
I ever bow, again and again, to the supreme spirit Krişna, Siva; Brahma 
and Ganes‘a. I bow to the goddess Saraswati, the Vyasa of the Vedas 
who is the spiritual guide ofthe Puranas. I bow again and again to 
goddess Durgá who removes all impediments (i. e., calamities). 


Saunaka, after having seen the SOM lotus feet of you all, 


N 


roceeding to the hermitage of perfeatiom (or the hermitage of adepts) 
established by Ganes'a." 


“ye Exp.] 
ses 
B91 -262 V ae 


ya 


130 


at the Modern Printing Works, Allahabad, and 


Printed by M. Fazl-ur- Rahman 
published by S. N. Vasuat the Panini Offices, Allahabad. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 

. ( Wi) 

Vol. XII. —Sukra-niti, Price Rs. 6.” : 

Vol. XIV.—The Brihadáranyaka Upanisad. Price Re. 15. 

Vol. XV.—A Treatise on Practical Yoga. Price Rs. 5. 

Vol, XVI.—The Positive Background of Hindu Sociology. Book 1. 

Price Rs. 7 (out of print, not available). ’ 

Vol. XVII. Part 1.—The Matsya Purànam. Chapters 1-128, with 
important appendices. Price Rs. 10. 
Part 2. Chapters 129-291. Price Re. 10. 

Vol. XVIIT.— Part 1. BrahmopanisatzSára Samgraha. Price Re. 1-8-0. 
Part 2. S rotás'vatara Upanisad. "Price Rs. 3. 

Vol. XIX.—Devata. Price Rs. 2 (out of print). 

Vol, XX.—The Daily Practice of the Windus. Price Rs. 3. 

Vol. XXL—-Yajiiavalkya Smriti, with the Commentary Mitáksará and 
notes from the gloss of Balambhatti. The Achara 
Adhyáya (Translated for the first time into English.) 


Price Rs. 15. 
Vol. XXII.—Studies in the Vedanta SBtras fand Upanigads. Price 
R n 


s. 8. 
I.—Nárada Paficharütram (Jfiàna Samhit4), translated into u 


` Vol, XXII 
English by Swimi Vijüánananda, Price Rs. 6 (paper 


cover). 
_—Brahmavaivarts Puránam. Part I, containing Prahma _ 
X A oed Khandas, translated into English - by 
Rajendranath Sen, M. A., LL. B. Price Rs. 6. Part II 
containing Ganes'a and Kriána Khandas, Price Rs. 11. 
Vol. XX V.— Positive Background of Hindu $ Sociology, Book TI, 
5 art I (Political), by Prof. Benoy Kumar Sarkar, M. A. - 


Price Rs. 3. $ EN 
I, translated into English by — 


Swami Vijfanananda. Price Rs. 7. 
es (1)—The Adhyatma Rámáyana. Price Re. 3. 


(3)—A Catechism of the Hind 
(4)—The Ai 


: ver), F 
N.B.—The mea the 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


Caves) 
NO LIBRARY SHOULD BE WITHOUT 


INDIAN MEDICINAL PLANTS, 


Containing Botanical Descriptions, Names in the Principal 
Vernaculars, Properties and Uses of over 1,300 
Indian Plants used in Medicine by the Medical 

Profession all over the World, 
BY 
The Late Lieut.-Col. K. R. Kirtikac, F. L. S., I. M. S. (Retd.); 
Major B. D. Basu, I. M. S. (Retd.), and an 1. C. S. (Retd.). 


l This work is useful to Botanists, Medieal-Men, Forest Offieers, and all 


: those interested in the Development of the Economie Resources of India. 


wir: It contains ilustrations of above 1,800 medieinal plants, on above | 
= 1,000 Royal 4to-sized lithographic plates kept in nice portfolios, in 4 Vols. — || 
. The letterpress in 2 vols, over 1,500 pages. 


In his letter, dated the 23rd June 1919, th 
Government, United Provinces of 
Panini Office :— 


e Under-Secretary to ] 
Agra and Oudh, writes to the Manager, 


** His Majesty’s Secretary of State for India is desirous of purchasing 


ten copies of the work......I am also to inform you that the Government 
of India has been pleased to bring the work to the notice of all the other 
Local Governments and Administrations,” l 


Patronised by His Majesty’s Secretar 
- of India, Bombay, Bengal, U. P. of Ag 
local administrations, 2 


y of State for India, Governments 
ta and Oudh, and several other 


N.B.—The Ninth All-India Ayurvedie Conference and Exhibition, 
ald at Lahore in 1918, awarded First Class Certificate, together with a 
ilver medal to the Editor, Major B. D, Basu, I.M.S. (Retired), for ex- 

ting this work at the Ninth All-India Ayurvedic Exhibition, Lahore. 

Rs, 275 (two hundred and seventy-five rupees only.) 


1 OFFICE, BUUVANESWARI A 
ALLAHABAD, 


SRAMA, BAHADURGANY, 


blic Domain. Funding by IKS-MoE Ps y 


Digitized by eGangotri ai 


nd Sarayu Trust. - 


Digitized by eGangotri and Sarayu Trust. 


(ovn) 5 
NO LIBRARY SHOULD BE WITHOUT 


INDIAN MEDICINAL PLANTS, 


Containing Botanical Descriptions, Names in the Principal 
Vernaculars, Properties and Uses of over 1,300 
Indian Plants used in Medicine by the Medical 


Profession all over the World, 


BY f 


_ The Late Lieut.-Col. K. R. Kirtikac, F. L. S., 1. M. S. (Retd.); ; | 
Major B. D. Basu, I. M. S. (Retd.), and an I. C. S. (Retd.). : 


This work is useful to Botanists, Medieal-Men, Forest Officers, and all 3 
those interested in the Development of the Economie 


Resources of India. 


| | 
Tt contains illustrations of above 1,300 medicinal plants, on above E 
1,000 Royal 4to-sized lithographic plates kept in nico portfolios, in 4 Vols. 
The letterpress in 2 vols, over 1,500 pages. 


In his letter, dated the 23rd June 1919, th 
ae Government, United Provinces of 
Panini Office :— 


i 

e 
e Under-Secretary to | 
Agra and Oudh, writes to the Manager, 


** His Majesty’s Secretary of State for India is desirous of purchasing 


ten copies of the work......I am also to inform you that tho Government — i 


of India has been pleased to bring the work to the notice of all the other 
= Local Governments and Administrations," 


. . Patronised by His Majesty's Secretary of State for India, Governments 
. of India, Bombay, Bengal, U. P. of Agra and Oudh, and several other ' 


,— The Ninth All-India Ayurvedic Conference and Exhibition, 
t Lahore in 1918, awarded First Class Certificate, together with a 
edal to the Editor, Major B, D, Basu, I.M.S. (Retired), for ex- 
lis work at the Ninth All-India Ayurvedic Exhibition, Lahore. 
(two hundred and seventy-five rupees only.) 


E, BUUVANESWARI ASRAMA, BAHADURGANJ, 
ALLAHABAD, 


ain. Funding by IKS-MoE - P 


a 


nd Sarayu musi ; 


Digitized by eGangotri a 


RN 
NN 


N NN 


Ss 


a 
I 


