===== Internet Archive OCR: chaitanyahiscomp00senduoft_djvu.txt =====

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2008  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/chaitanyahiscompOOsenduoft 


CHAITANYA 


AND 


HIS  COMPANIONS 


CHAITANYA 

AND 

HIS    COMPANIONS 

(With  Two  TrI-colour  Illustrations.) 

(  Being  Lectures   delivered  at   ttie    University  of 

Calcutta  as  Ramtanu  Latiiri  Research  Fellow 

for  1913^14  ) 

By 
RAI  SAHIB  DINESH  CHANDRA  SEN,  B.A., 

Fellow  and   Head   Examiner,   Calcutta  University,  Associate  Member.-Asiatic 
Socety  of  Bengal,  Author  of  'History  of  Bengali  Language  and  Literature- 
Typical    Selections  from  Bengali   Literature',    'Banga  Bhasa=0= 
Sahitya',    'Vaisnava  Literature  of  Mediaeval  Bengal', 
and   otFier  worlcs. 


Published  by  the 

UNIVERSITY   OF   CALCUTTA 

1917 


PRINTF.n    BY    ATI'I.CHANIJRA     BHATTAf  HAKYYA. 
AT    THK     rAI.<rTTA    TNIVFRSITY     PRF.SS,    SFNATF     HOr^F,    (AI.fl'TTA. 


To 

The    MEMORY    of 

The   Late   Ramtanu    Lahirl 

These   Lectures 

The    First    Fruit  of    the    Research    Fellowship 

Associated   with    his   revered   name 

are   Respectfully   Dedicated 

By  the   Author. 


INTRODUCTION 

In  the  vast  literature  of  the  Vaisnavas,  a 
stress  is  laid  on  Prema  oi*  spiritual  love.  It  is 
not  that  romantic  sentiment  Avhich  a  man  feels 
for  a  woman,  nor  that  a  mother  feels  for  her 
child,  though  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  it 
in  literature,  it  hecomes  inevitable  to  adopt  the 
phraseology  of  human  passion.  The  Chaitanya 
Charitamrta  says  that  an  earthly  passion  is 
'Kama'  and  not  'Prema.'  The  former  limits 
tlievision  to  a  narrow  place,  nay  darkens  it ;  it 
does  not  allow  a  person  to  see  beyond  his  self, 
while  the  latter  (Prema)  is  like  the  glorious  sun 
illuminating  the  truths  of  the  Universe.'  Chai- 
tanya himself  said  "the  romance  of  sexual  love, 
often  confounded  Avith  Prema,  is  not  true  love. 
It  is  when  sexual  feeling  is  totally  extinct  that 
true  love  will  grow  in  the  soul."^ 

Prema   or     spiritual     love    may    grow   from 
earthly   passions    even    in    their   debased    form, 


Chaitanya  Charitamrta,  Adikhanda. 

-  c^^  c^7[  ^z^  jh:^  c^^  w\ui{  c^l  i 
C'S^c^  f%  ^^  ^?i  7^l[^<^  c^^]  I 
^c^ff  '^^^  ^if\  mn  SftHc^  I 

'«[f^i  citf^?rj  ^tft  ^f^  c^■^  5?i  I 

^t  ?^C^  C^^  ^^  twit's  ^ra  II 

Kadacha  by  Govinda  Dasa, 


Mil  INTRODUCTIOX. 

as  it  (lid  in  the  case  of  Bilvamangala  Thilkur. 
But  in  its  full  blown  aspects,  it  presents  an 
unearthly  beauty,  as  tlie  lilv  does,  j?i"o\vinf]j  from 
the  filthy  underground  soil 

What  then  is  this  Prenia  of  the  Vaisnavas  ? 
The  image  of  Krsna  is  worshipped  by  them. 
AVhether  it  be  a  Christ  or  a  Ivi-sna  or  some 
other  defied  Man,  no  matter,  but  the  image  in 
the  temple  has  some  power  to  attract  the  soul 
and  lead  it  to  the  realization  of  the  highest 
spiritual  joy.  When  the  bells  of  the  Evening 
Service  are  rung,  the  incense  is  burnt  and  five 
lights  are  waved  before  the  image,  the  soul 
endowed  with  fine  susceptil)ilities  often  drinks 
deep  joy  from  an  inward  source,  the  nature  of 
which  cannot  be  well  defined.  To  a  lover  and 
poet,  the  image  appears  not  as  a  gross  thing  but 
as  something  immaterial,  a  fount  of  joy  and 
beauty  for  ever. 

Such  joys  have  been  tasted  l)y  the  mystics 
all  over  tne  world.  The  experiences  of  St. 
Theresa,  St.  John  of  Cross,  Suso,  Catherine  of 
Siena,  St.  Juan  and  other  mystics  of  Europe 
ott'er  points  of  close  affinity  to  those  of 
Crnivasa,  Narottama,  (^yamananda  and  other 
Vaisnavas  of  Bengal.  What  matter,  A>hether 
it  be  a  Christ  or  Krsna  ?  The  spiritual  ex- 
perience, the  ecstasies  of  joy,  the  exalted  emotions 
and  the  pain  of  separation  are  the  same  in  each 
case. 


INTRODUCTION.  IX 

To  Cliaitcinya  the  image  of  his  Kisna 
flashed  from  all  directions  in  whatever  he  saw 
around  him.     He  says  : 

"Everywhere  is  the  image  of  Krsna 
presented  to  the  eye.  Only  those  who  have 
attained  a  clear  vision  are  privileged  to  see  the 
glorious  sight."^ 

Beyond  the  phenomena  of  the  world,  there 
is  a  higher  plane,  the  paradise  of  the  mystics. 
There  a  hundred  lyres  sound  the  melodious 
music  of  a  strange  land,  there  a  hundred  flowers 
of  undecayed  blossom  send  forth  their  sweet 
fragrance,  and  there  Beauty  herself  opens  her 
doors  and  enters  the  soul  of  Man  overwhelming 
it  with  tender  emotions  and  ecstasies. 

Read  the  portion  of  Chaitanya  Charitamrta 
where  Chaitanya  at  the  sight  of  the  temple  of 
Jagannatha  Avept  aloud  and  uttered  'Jag'  'Jag' — 
'  Ja,'  half  broken  words,  in  his  attempts  to  utter 
'Jagannatha,'  and  faltering  in  his  speech  fell 
senseless  on  the  ground  in  the  height  of  his 
emotional  felicity.  Recovering,  he  recited 
before  Svarupa  Damodara  a  (^loka  of  Kavya 
Praka9a,  which  may  be  thus  freely  translated. 

"I  remember  the  day  when  we  loved  each 
other  on  the   banks  of  the    Reva.      To-day   the 

•    Jp^  f  C^^  ^^  "^C^  ^  151  I 

Kaflacha  by  Govinda  Dasa. 


X  IXTRODITCTION. 

sweet  Lrceze  l)lows.  The  Mfilatl  blooms  around 
and  the  Kadamva  flower,  drenched  with  dew, 
sends  its  fragrance,  and  you  my  beloved,  are 
present  before  me  here,  and  so  am  I  before  you, 
the  same  that  I  ever  was.  But  yet  does  my  heart 
long  for  a  union  with  you  in  the  shades  of  the 
cane-bowers  on  the  banks  of  the  Reva.'" 

This  language  of  earthly  passion  has  borne  a 
spiritual  interpretation.  The  palace  of  a  powerful 
Raja  was  near  the  temple  of  Purl.  Jagannfitha 
was  worsliipped  with  great  array  and  pomp. 
God-vision  was  beheld  by  Chaitanya  there  though 
in  the  midst  of  earthly  splendour  ;  but  his  soul 
yearned  for  it  in  the  sweet  retirement  of  the 
woodland  bowers  of  Vrndavana. 

This  vision  kept  him  in  a  highly  strung  state 
of  emotional  joy  during  his  life,  and  it  proved 
to  be  the  greatest  source  of  attraction  to  those 
who  beheld  it  in  him.  What  truth  there  is  in 
this  mystic  vision— whether  it  is  the  result  of  a 
frenzied  l)rain  or  the  disease  'calipathy',  the  name 
with  which  Western  rationalism  has  branded  it, 
is  a  problem  which  is  not  for  me  here  to  solve. 
The  psychologists  will  find  out  the  truth  on  this 
point.     Rut  if  it  be   a    disease,    how    could    it 


c^  cst^i  c^^  "^W^^  CF«?  Jl^<^^^IC^  I 

Tlie  Kfivyn  Prakatfa. 
Quuted  l)j-  Chaitanya  Cliaritanirta,  Madhya,  lath  Chapter. 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

purify  hundreds  of  lives  ?  Those  who  were 
wicked,  became  good, — the  cruel  hearts  became 
tender, — the  uncharitable  hands  learnt  to  distri- 
l)ute  charity,  and  the  false  became  true  under 
its  spell.  Could  a  disease  ever  do  that  ?  A 
maniac  and  a  diseased  brain  are  despised  every- 
where. Even  the  dogs  of  the  streets  bark  at 
them.  But  the  mystics  are  worshipped  and 
their  influence  works  Avonders  in  the  moral 
Avorld. 

The  vision  which  the  Indian  mystics  saw  was 
not  a  matter  of  chance-acquisition  to  them. 
The  Vaisnavas  have  laid  down  the  laws  to  be 
observed  for  the  attainment  of  the  plane  from 
which  these  visions  may  be  beheld,  in  a  com- 
prehensive manner.  The  moral  development 
should  be  first  of  all  perfect  in  one.  The  next 
stage  is  to  train  the  soul  to  humility  and 
reverence, 

"One  should  be  humbler  than  a  straw,  more 
meek  and  patient  than  a  tree,  and  without  seek- 
ing honour  for  one's  ownself  freely  give  it  to 
others  and  in  humble  spirit  sing  the  praises  of 
Krsna."^ 

The  psalm  XXII  says  "  But  I  am  a  worm 
and  not  a  man — a  reproach  of  man  and  despised 
of  the  people." 


'  ^'tftffn  ^%:^^  ^it^f^  ^^'f1 1 

"51'iti^'il  ^\vj^  ^^^^m  ^^\  ^f<[i 


Xll  INTRODUCTION. 

This  Christian  humility  is  similar  to  that 
enjoined  in  the  Vaisnava  scriptures. 

The  tree  is  the  2^reat  emblem  of  religious 
meekness  and  sacrifice  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Vaisnavas.  Chaitanya  Charitamita  details 
some  of  its  features  which  should  be  the  guide 
of  all  seekers  of  the  mj^stic  light. 

"The  tree  does  not  want  a  drop  of  water 
from  anyone  though  it  dries  up.  It  does  not 
speak  of  the  wrongs  it  sufPers,  but  gives  shelter 
even  to  one  who  cuts  it  with  his  axe.  It 
exposes  itself  to  sun  and  rain  only  to  give  fruits 
and  flowers  to  others." 

Is  not  Christ  the  Tree  thus  spoken  of  in  Chai- 
tanya Charitamita  ?  and  here  also  the  Vaisnava 
ideal  has  a  parallel  in  Christianity.  The  tree 
it  might  be  further  said,  nourishes  itself  by  the 
sweet  juice  it  draws  from  the  mother  earth,  all 
unseen  by  others.  This  is  the  spring  and 
fountain  of  its  all-sacrificing  love.  If  one 
nourishes  his  soul  secretly  with  god's  love,  like 
the  tree  will  it  give  its  highest  gift  to  humanity 
Avithout  complaining  against  the  wrongs  it  may" 
suffer.  Even  the  enemies  will  have  nothing  but 
love  from  such  a  soul.  AVlien  this  all-sacrificing 
love  and  meekness  have  been  developed  in  the 
soul,  it  will  be  privileged  to  enter  the  mystic 
plane  from  which  it  will  see  sights  of  imperish- 
able beauty  and  hear  the  sound  of  that  music 
which  never  dies  away. 


INTRODUCTION.  XIU 

My  lectures  in  connection  with  Ramtanu 
Laliiri  Research  Fellowship  and  as  a  University 
Reader  will  unfold  tlie  history  of  the  mystics  of 
Bengal  derived  mainly  from  the  sources  of  old 
Bengali  literature.  I  have  also  tried  to  draw 
parallels  from  tlie  history  of  Western  mystics  in 
several  places.  As  the  whole  of  the  past 
Bengali  Literature  is  permeated  by  a  religious 
element,  I  may  not,  I  venture  to  presume,  be 
blamed,  while  exploring  this  literature,  for 
laying  stress  on  its  predominant  ideas,  which 
are  not  confined  merely  to  tliose  of  a  literary 
nature. 

These  lectures  were  delivered  by  me  to  the 
University  of  Calcutta  as  Ramtanu  Lahiri 
Research  Fellow  in  the  History  of  Bengali 
Language  and  Literature  for  1913-1914.  The 
Ramtanu  Lahiri  Fellowship  was  created  by  the 
University  out  of  the  funds  supplied  by  Late 
Babu  Sarat  Kumar  Lahiri  to  commemorate  his 
illustrious  father's  name  which  the  Fellowship 
bears.  Babu  Ramtanu  Lahiri's  name  is 
revered  throughout  Bengal  for  his  great  piety 
and  love  of  letters.  It  was,  therefore,  a 
fitting  tribute  to  his  memory  to  associate 
his  name  with  the  cause  of  research  in 
the  field  of  Bengali  Literature.  I  only  fear 
lest  I  prove  unworthy  of  my  task,  associated, 
as  it  is,  with  such  a  dear  and  revered 
name. 


XIV  INTRODUCTION. 

In  conclusion,  1  must  thankfully  acknowledsje 
my  indebtedness  to  Mr.  William  Rothenstein  who 
kindly  revised  the  manuscript  of  these  Lectures 
two  years  ago.  Mr.  A.  C.  Ghatak,  Superintendent 
of  the  University  Press,  kindly  read  some  of  the 
proofs  for  me,  hut  as  considerable  alterations 
and  additions  had  to  be  made  subsequently  and 
Mr.  Ghatak  could  not  read  all  the  proofs,  there 
have  been  many  printing  mistakes  in  the  book 
and  I  am  sorry  they  escaped  me  as  I  am  not  a 
good  proof-reader  myself. 

Behala,        ^ 
(Near  Calcutta)  [    DINESH  CHANDRA  SEN. 
May  IHth,  1917.) 


CONTENTS 


PAGE. 


I. — Bengal's  great  love  for  Chaitanya — 

Cliaitanya      in      paintings,      the       Gaura- 
ebandrika,      a    favourite    couplet,      the 
appreciation     by     scholars,    aversion    for 
theological  disputes  ...  ...  1 — 5 

II. — Chaitanya  and  Pratapa  Riidra — 

Purusottama  Deva  and  Padmavati,  'the 
Royal  Sweeper^,  Prataparudra's  scholar 
ship  and  valour,  Chaitanya  refuses  to  see 
the  King,  the  origin  of  klrtana  songs, 
the  interview,  Chaitanya 's  unwilling- 
ness to  meddle  in  worldly  affairs,  his 
frenzies  of  love  ...  ...         6 — 15 

III. — Interview     with     Sanatana     and 
Rupa — 

J'he  anecdote  of  the  burning  of  a  rich 
garment,  Riipa's  works,  the  report  of 
Sanatana's  illness,  his  Hight,  15  gold 
mohars  attract  a  robber,  the  lesson 
received  from  an  old  woman,  interview 
with  Crikantha,  the  coarse  blanket 
worth  Rs.  3,  Sanatana  afflicted  with 
eczema,  Sanatana  tries  to  remain  aloof 
from  Chaitanya,  Jagadananda's  advice, 
'your  praises  bitter  as  niyn  juice',  burnt 
toes,  Sanatana  starts  for  Vrndavana       ...        16 — 28 


XVI  COKTENTS 


PAGE. 


I V. — Advaitacharya — 

His  ancestor  Nrsinha  Naiiel,  learnin<;'  with- 
out faith,  Advaita's  prayer^  Qaf;hT  charges 
Advaita  with  turnin<;'  the  head  of  her  son, 
Advaita  departs  from  thi'  hltuhti  cult  for 
a  while,  his  wives,  CrTvasa  Aeharya        ...        ::il) — ."H 

V. — Nityaiianda — 

Sympathy  with  the  fallen,  'death  of  Budhism' 
in  ]k'n«;al,  l^dharana  Datta,  Chaitanya's 
threat  faith  in  Nityananda,  Jagili  and 
Madhai,  the  ])rut  al  assault,  the  remorse, 
the  pardon,  the  Madhai  nlml ,  Nitya- 
nanda's  marriage,  \  irachandra  ...        oo — 16 

VI. — Crivasa — 

Orivilsa's  status  in  society,  Crivasa  and  the 
child  Chaitanya,  the  turnin<if  point  in  his 
life,  the /i/'i/^^/  llowers  in  Crivasa^s  court- 
yard and  talk  about  Chaitanya's  love  for 
God,  Crivasa's  dia^^fnosis,  the  courtyard  of 
Crivasa,  the  play  or<i^anised  by  Chaitanya, 
the  hostile  people,  Chaitanya's  Hanniiaxn 
and  the  <^eneral  mournin<i^,  Crivasa's 
grief,  Crivasa  at  Purl  ...        17 — ()•> 

A^II. — Haridasa — 

Early  life  and  conversion  to  Vaisnavism, 
Persecution,  victory  over  temptation,  the 
harlot  turned  a  devotee,  a  retribution, 
Haridilsa  as  a  i)layer  in  the  dramatic  per- 
formance given  by  Chaitanya,  what  takes 
])laee  during  the  Hood,  Haridasa  reconciled 
with  the  Hindu    community,    the    respect 


CONTENTS  XVll 

PAGE. 

iu    which    he   was  held,  attempts  to  prove 

him  of  Hindu    extraction,  Kalidasa, — the 

great  champion  of  caste-reform  ...       64 — 73 

VIII. — Lokanatha  Goswami — 

Pedigree  and  early  life,  the  order  inviolable, 
journey  to  Vrndavana,  he  misses  Chai- 
tanya,  his  piety  ...  ...        73 — 78 

IX. — Vasudeva  Sarvabhauma^ — 

The  rise  of  the  Navadvipa-school  of  logicj 
Ragunatha  his  worthy  disciple,  the 
Mohamedan  persecution  and  the  flight  of 
Vasudeva  from  Nadiya,  honoured  by  the 
King  of  Orissa,  interview  with  Chaitan3'a, 
Vasudeva's  resolve  to  improve  (>haitanya's 
spiritual  training,  the  silent  listener,  the 
extraordinary  discourse,  Vasudeva  admits 
Chaitauya's  divinity,  Durgadas,  his  son  ...        78 — 89 

X. — Kamananda  Roy — 

Interview  with  Chaitanya,  the  famous  dia- 
logue, the  Gopi,  the  ragannga,  Rama 
Roy's  admiration  for  Chaitanya,  the  song 
of  Ramauanda,  its  mysticism  ...     89 — 100 

XI. — Narahari  Sarkar — 

The  pedigree,  why  he  is  not  mentioned  in 
the  Chaitanya  Bhagavata,  Loehana  Dasa — ^ 
his  disciple,  the  first  vernacular  songs  on 
Chaitanya,  he  is  the  first  to  preach  the 
Chaitauya-cult — Chaitanya's  recollection 
of  Narahari  in  the  Deccan  ...    100^ — 103 


XVm  -  CONTENTS 


PAGE. 


XII. — Vancivadana — 

The  \'an(;i(;ik.sri,  \'an(;!   ^"adana^t^  suuj^s,  his; 

descendants  ...  ...    lOi— 107 

XIII. — Vasudeva  Ghosa — 

His  indebtedness  to  Narahari  ...  ...    107 — 108 

XIV. — Murari  Gupta — 

Desists  from  committing   suicide,     the     first 

bioi^raphy  of  Chaitanya         ...  ...    108 — 111 

XV.— Gopala  Bhatta— 

His  pedigree,  the  tale  of  Chailanya^s  stay- 
ing for  four  months  with  Gopilla  Bhatia 
in  the  Deeean  is  unreliable,  one  of  the 
six  apostles  ...  ...    ill — 115 

XVI. — A^akrecwara  Pandit — 

His  dancing  ...  ...    115 — 116 

XVII.— Gauri  Dasa— 

The  images  of    Chaitanya    and    Nityanauda 

at  Kalna  ...  ...  ...   110—117 

XVIII.—  Paramananda      Sen      (Kayi- 
karnapura) — 

The  village  Krinchrilimra,  the  KrsJja  temi)le, 
an  extract  from  the  Chaitanya-chandro- 
daya  ...  ...  ...    117 — 121 

XIX. —  Paghunatha  Das — 

Saptagrama,  Hiranya  and  (lovardhana, 
early  spiritual  training,  interview  with 
Chaiianya,  the  necessity  of  ai)plying  force, 
he  meets  Chaitanya  again,  Chaitanya^s 
stern       altitude      towards      Raghunatha, 


CONTKNTS  XIX 

PAGE. 

the  Emperor's    oppression,    a     reeoncila- 

tion,      Nitylinanda's    visit     to     Paniliati, 

the    JJajiila    Mohoimvu,    force  no  remedv 

his    flight,    the    fruitless    search,     meets 

Chaitanya,    direct      instructions,     Govar- 

(Ihana    sends    him    money,    he    no    more 

invites    Chaitanya    to    dinner,     his    last 

moments,  routine  of  his  daily  life,  Kaghu- 

natha's  works,  the  subjects  treated  ...    1:^1  — 151 

XX. — Purther  notes  on  Chaitanya — 

The  unique  charm  of  Chaitanya^s  life, 
Chaitanya  and  Jagadananda,  the  world 
vainly  tried  to  win  him  to  glory,  *mad 
after  God,'  a  breaker  of  the  caste-system, 
iiis  strictness  in  dealing  with  the  mnni/lHis. 
of  his  Order,  the  story  of  Haridasa, — 
tlie  younger,  Chaitanya  sternly^  rejects 
all  requests  in  behalf  of  Haridasa,  the 
strange  melody  from  the  sea,  the  drown- 
ing, his  treatment  of  Govinda  Ghosa      ...   151 — 166 

XXI. — A  comparative  study  of  Mysti- 
cism (Occidental  and 
Oriental) — 

St.  Catharine  of  Siena,  the  stages  of  Orison, 
St.  Teresa,    other     mystics,    'the  pain  of 
God'  ...  ...  ...   166—177 

XXII. — Chaitanya's  Sannyasa  and 
love-ecstasies — 

The  Mathura  songs,  some  of  the  Chait  iiiy;i- 
songs,  the  bearing  of  Chaitanya-songs  on 
those  of    Krsua,  the   Gaurachnndrika  and 


XX  CONTENTS 


PAGE. 


the  klrlann  sontrs,  some  of  the  klrfniia 
singers  of  Chaitanya's  time,  an  examph'  of 
popular  devotion  for  Cliaitanya  ...    177 — 198 

XXIII.— The      four      Sects     of      the 
Vaisnavas — 

Maddhi, — Madhyaeharya,  Jayatirtha,  Sanaka, 
Nimbaditya,  Rudra  ;  Vallavaeharya  meets 
Chaitan\'a,  his  commentary,  the  pun  on 
the  word  '^Swamy",  some  of  their 
peeuh'ar  rules,  the  Cri  sect?  ...    198 — 200 

XXIV.— The    Gurus    of    the    Maddhi 
sect — 

Madhavendra  Pari,  I(;\ara  PurT,  Ke(;ava 
BharatT,  ^tadhavendra's  trances,  mystic 
regard  for  dark-blue  colour,  Madhavondra's 
visit  to  Vrndavana,  the  strange  lad 
offering  milk  to  Mudhava,  "you  truly 
love  me,"  the  discovery  of  the  image  of 
fiopala,  the  thief  of  the  milk .  ...   200— .:>  1 7 

XXV. — The     pedigree     of     Chaitanya 

and  liis  wife—  217—220 

XXYI. — Tlie    tour    of     Chaitanya     in 
Eastern  Bengal — 

The  last  24  cantos  of  the  Premavilasa, 
P'aridpur  and  Suvarnagrilma,  Egara 
Sindura,  Bhitadifi,  Dhaka  Daksiiia         ...    220 — 224 

XXVII. — Chaitanya's  tokens — 

The  k(tnl/ni,  the  Ke(;asamadlii,  th<'  Gitri, 
the  oar,  the  sandals;    the    present    Nadiyfi 


CONTENTS  .  XXI 

PAGE. 

i!^  not  what    it    was    in  Cliaitanja's   time, 

the     imag'e    of    Chaitanya,   the   pictuiTR, 
Claduda-damUia  ...  ...   224 — 232 

XXVril. — Chaitanya's  tour  in  Southern 
India — 

Why  the  Kiideha  is  not  recognised  as  a 
standard  book  by  the  orthodox  Vaisnavas, 
the  writer  of  the  Kadcha  and  the  famous 
servant  of  Chaitanya  "Cr!  Govinda"  are 
identical,  it  is  a  great  book  inspite  of  the 
indiiference  with  which  it  was  treated, 
the  latter  part  of  Groviuda  Dasa's  life,  his 
family  history,  Chaitanya  travels  to  Pari, 
at  Piiri  till  March,  1510  A.D.,  in  southern 
India,  coversion  of  Ramagiri^  the  leader 
of  the  Buddhists ;  Tirtha  Riima  and  the 
two  harlots,  Chaitanya  begs  clothes  for 
an  old  woman  at  Munna,  the  reformation 
of  the  robbei'-chief  Bhilpantha,  visit  to 
different  shrines,  Bhargadeva,  at  the 
sight  of  the  sea,  Rudrapati,  the  Raja  of 
Trivaneore,  Ramgiri  and  other  shrines, 
I^vara  Bharati,  further  south,  the  Gurjara, 
the  Sahya  hills,  a  black  sheep  at  Poona, 
the  Muraris,  conversion  of  Naroji,  the 
robber  chief,  Khandala,  Nasik,  PanchavatT, 
Damana,  Suratha,  the  Raja  of  Baroda, 
crosses  Ciibhramati  and  reaches  Dvaraka, 
Somanatha,  the  Grinar  hills,  Dhanantari 
Jhari,  Prabhasa,  Amaravati,  Dohada  on 
the  bank  of  the  Narmada,  Chaitanya 
gives  his  share  of  bread  to  an  old  woman. 


XXn  CONTENTS 

PAGE. 

a  strange  .vinnaij.n,    the  cure  of  a  lepor  at 

Df'0<>;hai'a,  Vidyanao^ara,  Oanti^vara  the 
Rajs  of  the  place,  Dasapala,  return  to 
Piiii  and  the  f^reat  reception  ...   23:! — :27(l 

XXIX. — Chaitanya's    tour    in     ["pper 
India — 

Starts  privately,  Balladeva's  description  not 
adequate,  to  Benares,  Prakjl(;ananda's 
oonteinpt  of  Chaitanya,  to  Allahabad,  to 
Muttra,  Vrndavana,  the  Pathan  horsemen   270 — 284 

XXX. — The  pedigree  of  Advaita — 

A dvaita's  early  life  ....,  ...284—293 

XX XT.— A  list  of  the  Mystics— 

I'he  mystics  who  developed  the  BhaktT- 
cnlt  in  India  specially  in  Benfj-al  ...   293 — 301 

XXXII.— The  shrine  of  Vrndrivana—      311—305 

XXXIIL— The  Story  of  some  Pretenders— 

Vasudeva,    Kapindra,    Chudadhari,     Josepli 

Smith  ...  ...  ...   300—309 


CHAITANYA 

AND 

H15  COMPANIONS 


I.     Bengal's  great  love  for  Chaitanya. 

Chaitanya  passed  away  from  this  world  in 
1533  A.D.  In  the  eyes  of  the  people  he  had 
already  become  an  incarnation  of  God.  The 
Vaisnava  biographers  wrote  long  and  erudite 
memoirs  of  his  life  and  teachings.  The  poets 
sang  of  his  emotional  fervour  and  trances.  The 
sculptors  and  painters  basied  themselves  in  re- 
producing the  beauty  of  his  handsome  person  and 

Chaitanya  in  paint.        of    tllC     SaukirlaUa     SCCUCS    whcrC 

^"^'^  his  trances   and    songs  captivated 

the  soul  of  the  admiring  multitude.  These  were 
often  painted  in  lacquer  on  wooden  boards  used 
as  book  covers  and  produced  for  the  decoration 
i)i  the  Bhngavata-literature  in  Bengali  from  the 
16th  to  the  early  18th  centuries.  Parents  in 
Bengali  homes  gave  to  their  children  those 
names  by  which  Chaitanya  was  called,  showing 
how  dearly  they  loved  and  cherished  his  memory. 
Gauranga,  Gaur,  Chaitanya  and  Nimai  have 
since  become  very  common  names  in  this 
country.     Even    the     beloved     city    of  Nadiya, 


2  CHAITANYA  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS. 

ronderecl  holy  by  his  hirth,  contrihutecl  its  share 
to  the  forminc^  of  a  Beuf^ali's  name.  NadevasT, — 
a  resident  of  Nadiycl,  Nagaravasi — a  dAvellor  of 
the  city  (the  city  is  here  Nadiyjl),  Xader-Chand 
or  the  moon  of  Nadiya  and  its  more  elegant  form 
Navadvlpa-chandra  now  hccame  the  favourite 
names  in  which  the  Bengalis  prided  out  of  their 
great  love  and  admiration  for  theNadiya-prophet. 
From  Orissa  to  Manipur  through  a  large  tract 
of  country  covering  an  area  of  ahout  224750  sq. 
miles  Chaitanya  was  now  worshipped  in  temples, 
while  the  streets  of  cities  and  village-paths 
resounded  with  his  praises  in  popular  songs. 
The  country  was  full  of  Radhjl-Ivrsna  songs, 
btit  in  a  Kirtaua,  no  llfidha-Krsjgia  song  could 
he  introduced  without  a  preliminary  song  in 
The  Ganra-  liouour  of  Gauracliaudra  (Chaita- 
nya)  and  this  prehmmary  song  was 
called  Gaurachandrikfi.  The  love  songs  of 
Rfidha-Krsna,  which  had  a  deep  spiritual 
significance  long  before  the  advent  of  Chaitanya, 
became  now  thoroughly  idealised  and  bore 
another  beautiful  symbolic  meaning  in  which 
the  love-ecstasies  of  Chaitanya  formed  a  charm- 
ins:  back2:round.  In  the  midst  of  the  loud 
music  of  fambonr'uw  and  the  shrill  clang  of 
cymhals,  the  Gaurachandrikfi  sounded  the 
keynote  of  a  new  j^hase  of  Vaisnavism  in 
which  the  incidents  of  Cliaitanya's  life  illustrated 
in  a  concrete  form  tlie  high  spiritual    pliilosophy 


bengal's  great  love  for  chaitanya.        3 

of  the  sect.  The  rustics  and  the  unclean 
castes  particularly  showed  a  frenzied 
fervour  in  singing  the  praises  of  one  who  had 
opened  the  portals  of  brotherhood  to  all  men 
irrespective  of  caste.  Sometimes  for  whole 
nights  they  would  be  seen  dancing  in  joy  and 
singing  his  name  in  the  small  courtyards  facing 
their  straw-roofed  huts.  The  Vaisnava  singers 
visited  the  house  of  the  rich  and  the  poor  alike 
every  morning,  and  sang  that  sweet  couplet 
which  Nityananda,  the  great  apostle,  had  himself 
composed  during  the  life-time  of  Chaitanya: — 
,  .        .^  "Sini?  praises  of  Chaitanva, 

A  favourite  ^    '  '-      ^ 

couplet.  brother,   and  take  his  name. 

One  who  loves  him  is  dear  to  me  as  my  life."  ^ 

In  short,  love  for  Chaitanya  had  entered  deep 
into  the  heart  of  rural  Bengal  and  this  can  be 
said  of  none  other  of  her  sons  with  equal  force. 

In  his  life-time  also  this  great  love  for  him 
was  manifest  among  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the 
literate  and  unlettered  alike.  Vasudeva  Sarva- 
bhauma,  the  greatest  Indian  logician  of  the  age, 
honoured  in  the  court  of  Raja  Prataparudra  of 
Orissa — was  defeated  by  Chaitanya  in  a  public 
debate,  and  when  Chaitanya  by  his  devotion  and 
trances   showed    himself   far  above 

Ihe    apprecia-. 

tion  by  scholars,     [lic  plane  of  scliolarship,  his  learned 


4  CHAITANYA  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS. 

antagonist  tlircw  liiniself  at  his  feot  and  ret^arcled 
him  rather  as  a  God  llian  as  a  man.  His 
passionate  panegyric  of  Cliaitanya  still  vibrates 
with  all  the  warmth  of  true  poetry  in  liis 
celebrated  Sanskrit  hymns.^  The  vt^teran 
scholar's  vehement  admiration  for  Chaitanya 
also  found  expression  in  his  exclamation  quoted 
in  the  Chaitanya  Charitamrta  (^NTadhya  Khanda). 

"Even  if  my  sons  die    or  a  thunder    l)olt  falls 

on  my  head 

I  can  bear  it,  but  T  cannot  1)ear  parting  with 

Chaitanya.""^ 

Prakacananda,  the  leader  of  the  learned 
Sannyasis  of  Eenares,  found  himself  in  a  like 
manner  unable  to  meet  the  scholarly  arguments 
of  Chaitanya ;  but  when  tlie  latter  revealed 
himself  as  a  Lover  of  God,  the  great  ascetic  of 
Benares  discovered  in  him  far  higher  qualities 
than  those  of  a  mere  scholar,  and  accepted  him 
as  his  saviour  and  god.'  BharatI  Gosain  of 
Chandipur  was  the  foremost  scholar  of  the 
Deccan  at  the  time.  Govinda  Das,  one  of  the 
biographers  of  Chaitanya,  gives  a  detailed 
account  of  how  this  scholar  was  made  to  acknow- 


'   See  his  liymns  to  Cliaitanya    quoted    by    Krsna     Dasa      Kaviraja 
in  the  Chaitanya  Charitanirta. 

-  '-f^m  ^W  m^  ^  ^3i  ^  ^tn 

ChaUaiiyncharitamrld. 
^  Sve  Chaitanya  Charitanipta. 


bengal's  great  love  for  chaitanya.        5 

ledge  the  greatness  of  Chaitanya  and  accept  him 
as  his  Guru.  By  the  conversion  of  these  three 
leading  scholars  of  the  three  different  parts  of 
the  country  Chaitanya's  greatness  as  a  scholar 
was  admitted  all  over  India. 

As  time  advanced  he  showed,  however,  a 
growing  aversion  for  scholarly  disputations  of  all 
sorts.  In  most  cases  he  remained  silent  to  the 
enthusiastic  challenge  of  scholars  and  Avould 
simply  smile  and  nod  his  head  declining  to  enter 
into  a  debate,  and  saying  that  he  admitted  the 
superiority  of  his  assailants  uncondi- 

Avei'sion       for  ,  "  .  .      .,  , 

theuiogicai  dis-     tloually.     But  tlic  irresistiblc  charm 

putes.  n    1    •       1  i         •  1         1  c 

of  his  love-ecstasies  had  a  tar  more 
convincing  effect  than  scholarship  and  humbled 
the  proudest  scholars  and  convinced  them  of 
the  beauty  of  spiritual  life. 


//.      Challanya  and  Pratapoiudra. 

As  Orissa  had  become  the  chief  theatre  of 
Vaisnava  activities  during  1516-1533,  the  period 
when  Chaitanya  lived  there,  Prataparudra,  the 
king  of  the  place  having  heen  one  of  his 
staunchest  followers — I  shall  here  briefly  relate 
certain  facts  about  the  latter  which  may  be  of 
some  interest  to  the  students  of  Yaisiiava 
literature. 

Purusottama  Deva,  father    of    Prataparudra, 

ascended   the    throne    of  Orissa    in    1478    A.D. 

He  took  a  fancy  for  the  princess  of  Kiinjivarem, 

a  remarkable    beautv,  and    wanted 

Purusottanui  ' 

Deva       and       to  marry  her.     The    king  of  Kanji- 

Padnuivatl.  '       .  i    i   • 

varem  rejected  his  proposal  on  the 
ground  that  the  king  of  Orissa,  according  to  an 
old  custom,  served  as  sweeper  in  the  Jagannatha 
temple  for  a  day  every  year.^  Purusottama  Deva 
on  hearing  that  his  proposal  was  declined  took 
an    oath    that    at   anv    cost    he  would  carrA'^  the 


»  Wc  find  in  the  Chaitanya  Charitamrta  (Madhya  Khanda,Chap. 
XIV)  Kaja  Prataparudra  acting  as  sweeper  with  a  golden  broom  in 
tlic  temple  of  Jagannatha.  Cool  water  perfumed  with  sandal  was 
employed  for  cleansing  the  doorways  of  the  temple  l>y  the  royal 
sweeper.     Here  are  the  lines  : — 

^M  Tt^^  51^1  ■'Ft?  'If  TWt^  II 


CHAITANYA   AND    PRATAPARUDRA.  7 

princess  hy  force  and  marry  her  to  a  real 
sweeper.  He  fought  a  hard  l)attle  and  defeating 
the  Raja  of  Kanjivarem  seized  the  fair  princess 
and  carried  her  a\Yay  to  Purl.  True  to  his  oath, 
hoAvever,  he  made  over  the  princess  Padmavati 
to  his  cliief  minister  desiring  him  to  wed  her 
to  a  sweeper.  The  minister  as  well  as  the 
people  of  Purl  all  commiserated  her  misfortune, 
and  at  the  next  Rath  a  Yatra  ceremony  when 
the  Raja  began  to  perform  the  office  of  Chandal 
(sweeper)  with  a  golden  broom,  the  individual 
entrusted  with  the  charo;e  of  the  ladv  brous^ht  her 
The  Royal  fortli  and  presented  her  to  him, 
sweepei.  sayiug  "You  are   the  sweeper   upon 

whom  I  bestow  her."  Moved  by  the  intercession 
of  his  subjects,  the  Rjlja  at  last  consented 
to  marry  Padmavati  and  carried  her  to  his 
palace  at  Cuttack.  The  narrative  is  given  in 
detail  in  a  Uriya  poem  called  the  Kanjikaveri 
Punthi  and  in  all  the  important  histories  of 
Orissa.  Orme  mentions  the  tradition  of  this 
incident  (Vol.  II),  though  there  are  some  dis- 
crepancies in  his  account  as  to  the  details. 

Raja     Prataparudra    was     the    only  son  of 
Raja  Purusottama  Deva   and    Rani 

Prataparudra's 

scholarship  and     Padmavati  and  ascended  the  throne 
''"^""''  of  Orissa   in    1503    A.D.      Mr.    A. 

Stirling,  the  historian  of  Orissa,  says  of  this 
monarch  :  "His  wisdom  and  learning  soon  became 
the  theme  and  admiration  of  the  whole   country. 


B  CIIAITANYA  AND  1II8  COMPANIONS. 

He  liad  studied  deeply  all  the  Castras  and  was 
very  fond  of  disputinu;  and  conversing  on  points 
of  theology  and  he  introduced  many  curious 
constructions  of  Jiis  own  and  doctrines  which 
were  altogether  new.  Ke  Ava«:  withal  devout 
and  built  many  temples.  His  skill  in  the  art 
of  Avar  and  civil  government  was  eminent  ;  in 
short  he  was  equally  celebrated  as  an  able, 
learned  and  warlike  and  religious  prince."  '  Mr. 
Stirling  then  writes  at  some  length  about  the 
overthrow  of  Buddhism  in  Orissa  and  the  influ- 
ence of  Chaitanya  over  the  king  and  says,  "The 
E-aja  who  could  find  leisure  for  schemes  of 
conquest  and  controversies  marched  with  his 
army  down  to  Setubandha  Rilmecvara,  reduced 
several  forts  and  took  the  famous  city  of  Yijaya- 
nagar.  TIk^  Mahomedans  of  the  Deccan  also 
gave  abundant  occupation  to  his  arms  on  the 
southern  frontier  of  the  Rjlj ;  and  whilst  he 
was  occupicnl  in  repelling  or  provoking  their 
attacks,  the  Afghans  from  Bengal  made  an  in- 
road into  the  Province  in  great  force — when  the 
Governor  Ananta  Singhar  finding  himself  unable 
to  oppose  any  elTeclual  resistence  took  lefuge 
in  the  strong'  foi-tress  of  Saranglier,  soulh  of 
the  Katjudi."  The  ^Mahomedans  committed 
dreadful  devastations.     "But  Ivaja    Prataparudra 


'  History  of  Orissa  liy  A.  Stirlinor,  Kstj.,    ])riiitf>(l   at    tlie    De's    Utkal 
Press,  131,  Matiganj  Street,  Balasore,  1891,  p.  131. 


CHAITANYA  AND  PEATAPARUDRA.       9 

on  receiving:  intelligence  of  these  disastrous 
occurrences  hastened  back  from  the  Deccan  and 
performing  a  journey  of  months  in  a  few  days 
he  came  up  with  the  invading  army  before  they 
had  left  Ksetra,  gave  them  battle  and  destroyed 
a  great  nnm1)er  of  Mahomedans."  ' 

The  destruction  of  Hindu  temple  by  the 
Afghans  referred  to  above  are  mentioned  in  the 
Chaitanva  Charitamrta  and  other  Benarali  works 
of  the  Vaisnavas.  Husen  Saha,  the  Emperor 
of  Gaur,  had  himself  led  these  expeditions. 
After  this  Prataparudra  contemplated  the  con- 
quest of  Bengal  in  order  to  avenge  himself  upon 
Husen  Saha  for  the  harm  done  by  the  latter  to 
his  territories,  but  desisted  from  doing  so  out  of 
humane  considerations  for  the  Hindus  of  Bengal 
to  Avhom  great  sufferings  would  be  caused  by 
such  an  expedition.  "^ 

According  to  Peristha's  account  there  were 
some  local  revolutions  between  1493  and  1524 
in  the  kingdom  of  A^ijaynagar  and  Prataparudra 
availed  himself  of  this  opportunity  of  extending 
his  kingdom  in  the  South.  In  1524,  however,  Baja 
Krsna  Ray  ascended  the  throne  of  Vijaynagar 
and  ruled  the  kingdom  with  great  vigour  and 
tact.  He  successfully  coped  with  the  Maho- 
medans   in   the    field    and    made    a    treaty  with 


'  History  of  Orissa  by  A.  Stirling,  Esq.,  p.  133. 
-  See  Chaitanya  Maii^ala  by  Jayananda. 

B 


10  CHAITANYA  AND  HIS  COMPANIOXS. 

Pratfipanulra  by  niarryini?  his  daugliter.  Accord- 
ing to  ^[v.  Stirling,  Pratjlpariidra  reigned  from 
1503  to  ir>21.  But  the  date  of  his  death  (1521) 
is  open  to  objection.  AYhon  Chaitanya  came  to 
Purl,  in  1510  the  king  was  away,  fighting  with 
the  Raja  of  Vijaynagarin  tlie  Deccan.  Returning 
shortly  after  he  heard  of  the  arrival  of  Chaitanya 
in  his  capital,  he  begged  an  interview  with 
him.  He  addiossed  a  letter  to  Sarvabhauma 
requesting  him  to  get  Chaitanya  to  agree,  Sarva- 
bhauma  wrote  in  reply  that  Chaitanya  was  not 
willing  to  comply  with  his  Majesty's  request. 
The  Raja  wrote  letters  to  the  companions  of 
Chaitanya  severally  asking    thom  to 

Chaitanya    re-  '  .  '. 

fuses  to  see  the  iutcrccde  lu  liis  bclialf  ;  but 
Chaitanya  refused  them  saying  that 
as  a  sarinyasl  he  should  keep  himself  as  far  as 
possible  away  from  tlie  fountain  of  earthly  ])ower 
and  riches. 

Sad  at  heart  Pratfiparudra  continued  liis 
attempts  to  interview  Chaitanya.  He  sent  his 
minister  Ramananda  Ray  who  was  a  friend  ol" 
Chaitanya  to  plead  his  cause  before  liim.  Chaitanya 
said  to  liim,  "A.  saiiui/dsl  should  be  l)lameless  in 
thouglit,  in  speech  and  in  net.  A  familiarity 
with  the  king  is  sure  to  bring  in  its  train  a 
connection  witli  the  world  whicli  J  hav(^  re- 
nounced and  I  can  by  no  means  allow  it."'  The 
outer  robe  of  Chaitanya  was  carried  l)y  Rama 
Ray    <o    the    king    who   accepted    it  as  a  sacred 


CHAITANYA    AND    rKATAPARUDliA.  11 

thing  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  since  he  was  not   to 
have  a  visit  from  Chaitanya  himself. 

The    Hatha    Yatrfi    or    tlie    Car  festivities  of 
Jagannatha  drew  near.     The  king  was  sorry   not 
to  be  permitted  to  see  Chaitanya  which  even  the 
meanest   of   his    subjects    could   do.       He    was 
advised      by     KacI     Micra,      in     whose    house 
Chaitanya  stayed,  to  wait  for  the  occasion  of  the 
march    of   the  Great    Car    when  Chaitanya  with 
his  party  would  come  out  in  the    streets    sinuina^ 
the  Kir  tana  songs.     The  Raja  ascended  the  roof 
of  his  palace  and  saw  the  procession.     When  he 
heard    the    Klrtana    songs  he    was 
Kirtena'fong^s.      bcside    himsclf    in   admiration    and 
said  to  Goplnatha  Miyra,  "Never  did 
I    hear   such    melodious    songs  in  my  life.     The 
very  tune  captivates    my    soul.     Whence    could 
they  have  learnt  this    strange    musical    mode  ?" 
Gopinatha  replied,  "This  Klrtana  song  Avhich    is 
not  comparable  to  any  earthly  music    originated 
with  Chaitanya."  The  followers  of  Chaitanya  had 
all  assembled  at  Puri    and  joined  the  procession, 
and    Goplnatha,     at    the    bidding    of    the  king, 
mentioned  the  names  and  qualifications  of  each, 
and  the  Uaja  from  that  distance  saw  the  figure  of 
Chaitanya  in  the  centre  of  the   procession,  look- 
ing more  like  a  God  than  a  man  ;  he  was  in    one 
of  those  trances    in    which    silent   tears    bespoke 
his  great  emotion  and  love  for  the  Unseen.     The 
Raja's    mind    was    filled  with  admiration  but  he 


12  CIIAITAXYA  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS. 

did    not  find    chance    for   an    interview    on    this 
occasion. 

But  an  opportunity  soon  presented  itself  In 
the  courtyard  of  Knci  ^Micra  Cliaitanva  had 
his  trance  ai^aiu  and  Avas  unconscious  of  the 
outer  world — in  the  arnisof  Nityananda,  whilst  his 
companions  enthusiastically  sang  Klrtana  songs 
around  him.  The  Raja  instructed  hy  Sarva- 
bhauma  suddenly  stole  into  the  assembly  and 
fell  at  his  f(^et.  Chaitanya,  legaining  conscious- 
ness, beheld  the  king  and  said,  "  "Woe  to  me,  I 
have  touched  one  given  to  worldly  j)ower  and 
wealth."  When  the  Raja  heard  this  he  burst 
into  tears  and  said,  "Here  do  I  forego  all  my 
power  and  wealth  and  surrender  them  at  your 
feet.  Take  me,  master,  as  the  meanest  of  those 
that  love  you."  Chaitanya  was  overcome  by 
these  words.  He  embraced  the  Raja  in  love 
and  the  latter — a  tall  and  robust  man — became 
,„    .  all  tears  in    iov.     Ramananda    Rav, 

J  he  interview.  ''    '  ' 

the  author  of  the  celebrated  Sanskrit 
dra(na  "  Jagannatha  Yallabha "  refers  to  this 
occasion  in  the  following  passage  :  "  This  is 
indeed  a  marvel.  Raja  Pratilparudra,  who  is  a 
terror  to  the  Pathans,  whose  physical  might 
surpasses  that  of  most  men,  whose  iron  contact  is 
dreaded  1)\  the  strongest  of  wrestlers,  has  melted 
like  a  soft  thing  at  the  touch  of  Chaitanya." 
Govinda  D<1sa,  the  contemorary  biographer  of 
Chaitanva  records  "  whenever  Chaitanva    walked 


u 


m 


u 


< 

a: 

Q 

3 

cr 

Q. 

< 

<    o    -c 

Qi   -  ^ 

Q.    ^     o 

Q    V    ™ 
Z  -^    ■- 


Ql 


CHAITANYA   AND    PliATAPARUDRA.  13 

in  the  streets  with  a  large  c^o^vd  of  men  following 
him  with  song,  music  and  dance,  Eaja  Pratapa- 
rudra  walked  on  bare  feet  behind  them  all  like 
the  humblest  of  his  subjects."^ 

At  one  time  Chaitanva  was  asked  by  some  of 
liis  com})anions  to  speak  a  word  to  the  Eaja  on 
behalf  of  a  criminal  named  Goplnatha  Eay  who 
was  sentenced  to  death.  He  was  a  brother  of 
Eamananda  Eay — a  friend  of  Chaitanya.  The 
family  of  the  Kays  was  devoted  to  the  Master 
and  this  was  made  a  plea  for  the  request. 
Chaitanya  said,  "  I  am  sorry  for  him,  but  I  have 
no  sympathy  with  his  crime.  You  may  pray  to 
God  for  him.  You  put  me  in  a  very  delicate 
position  by  asking  me — a  beggar— to  intercede 
for  him.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  wanted  to 
avoid  a  familiarity  with  the  Eaja.  It  only 
makes  me  sad  to  think  of  the  misfortunes  of 
wordly  men.  After  this  my  stay  at  Purl  is  no 
longer  fitting."  He  got  ready  to  go  to  Alala- 
natha,  and  when  the  king  heard  of  this  from 
Kagi  Mi9ra  he  released  the  criminal  simply 
because  the  matter  Avas  brought 
chaitanya's     ^q    tlic    noticc    of    Chaitanya.     The 

unwillingness  to  ,   .    '         •  , 

meddle         in     latter    ou   hearing    of    this   said    to 

worldlv  affairs.  ,, -ttti       ,         i 

Kagi      Micra,    "  A^  hat     have     you 


Kadca  by  Govi7ida  iJasa. 


14  CHAI'lAXYA  AND  JUS  ("0>r  I'AN  IONS. 

(lone,  Miyra?  You  should  not  have  represented 
me  as  a  supplicant  before  the  king-."  The  Kaja 
interviewed  Chaitanya  and  said,  "If  you  leave  my 
capital  I  shall  turn  an  ascetic  or  commit 
suicide."' 

In  tht^  wilds  of  the  Deccan — Chaitanya, 
accompanied  by  the  hlacksmith  Govinda, 
wandered  visiting  the  holy  places.  AViih  a  torn 
rag  for  his  dress,  his  body  covered  w  itii  mud 
and  dirt,  he  walked  like  a  mad  man  throui^li 
untrodden  paths ;  children  threw  dust  at  him 
and  clapped  their  hands  saying,  "  Lo  I  the]  e 
goes    the    ascetic    mad    after  God." 

His  freuzies  of       xt  ii.ii  i  i  i   • 

]ove.  Ii<^  gazed  at    tlie   sky    and    sa^A'    nis 

Krsna  mirrored  tlierij ;  the  rainboAv 
to  him  was  the  croAAii  of  Krsna  ;  the  flying  cranes 
a  string  of  white  pearls  on  his  breast ;  the  flasli 
of  lightning  like  Krsna's  purple  robes;  and  the 
dark-blue  colour  of  tlie  clouds  again  and  again 
called  up  the  vision  of  Kisna's  figure.  Every 
river  that  he  saw  Avas  to  him  the  sacred  ^'anuina 
on  whose  banks  Krsna  had  sported,  every 
forest  Avore  to  his  eyes,  the  beauty  and  sacred- 
ness  of  the  A'rndfi  groves — the  resort  of  Krsna. 
Sometimes  as  at  the  village  Ghoga  in  Gujrilt  he 
clasped  a  Nim  tree  covered  with  dark-blue  leaves 
and  thought  that  the  touch   was    of   Krsna,    soft 

'  The  details  nbout  Cliaitanya's  interview  and  conversations  with 
Raja  Prat;li>;inulni  arc  to  be  lound  in  tlie  Chniraiiyn  Clmritrnnrta  \>\ 
Ki'Kiia  Uasa  Ka\iiaja  and  in   the  woik*  of  \\;\\'\  Karnaimra. 


CHAITANYA    AND    PRATAPARimilA.  15 

and  sweet,  niid  for  the  whole  day  he  lay  nncons- 
oioiis  as  if  in  the  arms  of  his  Lover  while  tears 
trickled  down  his  cheeks.  Sometimes  he  nodded 
his  head  to  and  fro  seeing  some  celestial  vision 
and  remained  mnte  for  days  while  tears  alone 
indicated  his  joy  in  communion  with  God. 
Often  three  or  even  four  days  passed  in  this  con- 
dition during  which  he  would  neither  speak  nor 
touch  any  food.  When  he  came  to  Trivancore 
in  1511  A.D.  Raja  Rudrapati,  the  reigning 
monarch,  paid  a  visit  to  him  and  was  so  much 
impressed  hy  the  ardour  of  his  faith  and  the 
heauty  of  his  trances  that  he  paid  him  the  same 
homage  of  worship  as  lie  did  to  his  tutelary 
God.i 


^    For  details  of  tlie    above    narrativpR    tlie  I'eader  is  referiorl    to  t)ie 
Karlcliii  bv  Govinda  Dasa, 


TTT.      Tntprripw  icHh  Sandifnio  and  Ttvpa. 

Salcar  Mallik  and  Dabir  Klias,  two  Brahman 
scholars  Avho  had  adopted  Mahomcdan  names 
and  habits  of  life,  were  the  ministers  of  Hiisen 
Saha,  the  Emperor  of  Gauda.  They  were  brothers 
and  their  expert  knowledge  of  Sanskrit  poetry 
was  eqnalled  by  none  in  Bengal  at  the  time. 
They  saw  Chaitanja  first  at  Bamakell,  a  town 
near  Gauda,  and  felt  that  they  had  met  the 
greatest  poet  ever  ])orn  in  (he  world.  It  appeared 
to  them  after  their  interview  with  him  that  the 
universe  was  a  poem  and  that  the  spiritual  soul 
alone  was  privileged  to  read  its  deep  poetry. 
They  parted  from  Chaitanya  completely  changed 
men.  Chaitanya  gave  the  brothers  Hindu  names 
and  they  were  henceforth  to  be  called  Sana  (ana 
and  Bupa,  by  which  names  they  have  since  been 
known  in  the  field  of  Sanskrit  drama,  theology 
and  poetry,  and  in  fact  in  all  the  wiitings  of  the 
Yaisnavas, 

Riipa's  mind  now  yearned  lor  that  life  which 
is  freed  fi-om  th(^  worry  of  the  world  but  is 
devoted  to  (lie  good  of  (he  world,  w  liicli  (lo(\s  not 
seek  its  final  rest  in  the  Nirvana  or  in  the  extinc- 
tion of  passions  but  that  which  brings  something 
l)Ositive,  once  a  victory  over  passion  has  been 
won,  i:iz.^  the  realization  of  God  in  the  soul. 


INTERVIEW  WITH  SA-NATANA  AT^D   RUPA.  17 

Whil(^  in  this  state  of  mind  an  incident    took 

place  which  was  a  turning    point  in 

The   anecdote     his  lifc-     The  foUowing    anccdotc  is 

of  the  burning  of  t    i_     i       n  -n  —  i 

a  rich  garment,      related  oi  liiipa,  who    was    only  27 
years  okl  at  the  time,  in  the  Prema- 
vilasa  by  Nityananda  Dasa. 

Rtipa  came  home  one  night  very  late  after 
doing  some  important  State  work.  After 
retiring  to  rest  he  was  hitten  hy  a  poisonous 
insect.  His  room  was  dark  and  E,tipa  called  out 
to  his  wife  asking  her  to  light  a  candle  imme- 
diately. But  the  good  wife  in  her  haste  could 
not  find  a  candle.  The  silken  robe  of  her 
husband  embroidered  with  gold  was  near  the 
bed  and  she  lighted  a  fire  with  it.  Rupa  said, 
"You  have  spoilt  a  costly  garment  in  this  way  1" 
The  wife  said,  "My  duty  is  to  minister  to  your 
comforts  and  I  have  done  my  duty.  Precious 
stones  or  silken  robes  are  nothing  to  me  when 
that  duty  is  to  be  done."  Eupa  said,  "My  darling, 
you  have  done  your  duty  to  your  lord  but  I 
have  not  done  mine.  I  have  hitherto  only 
occupied  myself  with  jn'ecious  stones  and  silken 
robes."  Early  in  the  morning  the  next  day  he 
took  the  beggar's  bowl  in  his  hand,  clad  himself 
in  rags  and  left  his  palatial  house.  Before 
starting  he  distributed  his  treasure  in  the 
following  way :  One  half  to  the  poor  and  to 
Brahman  scholars ;  one-fourth  reserved  for  the 
maintenance  of  his  family  and  an  equal   amount 

c 


18  CHAITANYA  AND   HIS  COMPANIONS. 

he  left  to  his  ekler  brotliev  Saiiatana.  On  coming 
to  Allahabad  he  wrote  the  following  motrioal 
epistle  in  Sanskrit  to  Sanatana  : 

"Where  is  now  gone,  alas,  the  splendour  of 
Mathura,  once  the  capital  of  the  lord  of  Yadavas 
and  where,  alas,  is  that  of  Uttara  Kocala,  the 
kingdom  of  the  lord  of  the  Raghus !  Think  of 
the  fleetinsf  nature  of  earthly  srlorv  and  decide 
the  course  you  should  take."  ^ 

Rupa  met  Chaitanya  at  Benares  where  the 
latter  took  pains  to  instruct  him  in  the  cardinal 
points  of  the  Vaisnava  religion.  His  instructions 
are  sriven  in  detail  in  tha  Chaitanya  Charita- 
mi  ta.  Chaitanya  ordered  liim  to  go  to  Vrndavana 
and  write  poems  and  dramas  in  Sanskrit 
elucidating  the  principles  of  spiritual 

Rupa's  works.  o  j.  i 

loye.  The  works  that  he  wrote  at 
the  bidding  of  the  Master  such  as  the  Lalita- 
madhava,  the  Bidagdhamadhaya,  the  Danakell- 
kaumudr  etc.,  are  now  the  master-pieces  of 
mediaeval  Sanskrit  Literature. 

Sanatana,  who  too  was  no  less  attracted  by 
Chaitanya's  personality,  when  he  receiyed  the 
yerses  from  his  brother  finally  made  up  his  mind 
to  renounce   the   Avorld   and    take   the    ascetic's 


INTERVIEW  WITH  SANATANA  AND  RUPA        19 

voAv.  He  did  not  attend  the  Emperor's  court 
for  some  days  and  a  report  Avas  spread  that  he 
was  ill.  Husen  Sha,  after  Rilpa's  adoption  of 
asceticism,  had  his  suspicions  about  Sanatana  and 
was  on  the  alert.  He  sent  a  physician  to 
examine  if  the  minister  was  really  ill.  The 
physician  came  back  to  him  and  reported  that 
so    far   as  he  could  judge,  Sanatana 

The  report    of       ,       ,  .  ,ti      "i  • 

Sanatana's  ill-  i^acl  no  illncss.  The  King  was  angry 
and  called  his  minister  to  his 
presence.  Sanatana  could  not  hide  his  thoughts 
from  his  master,  and  Husen  Sha  trying  in  vain 
to  dissuade  him  from  his  contemplated  course 
got  very  much  annoyed  and  ordered  him  to  be 
thrown  into  prison.  Just  at  that  time  the  king 
was  called  away  from  Gauda  to  fight  his  enemies 
abroad,  and  the  relatives  of  Sanatana  offered  the 
jailer  a  bribe  of  Rs.  5,000,  which  in  the  16th 
century  was  at  least  15  times  its  present  value, 
for  setting  the  ex-minister  at  liberty.  Mir 
Habul,  the  jailer,  was  at  first  afraid  of  the 
Emperor  and  declined  to  take  the  risk.  Next 
they  offered  him  Rs.  7,000,^  the  jailer  accepted 
the  offer  but  felt  the  danger  of  such  a  course 
and  sought  advice  as  to  how  he  could  avert  it. 
He  was  told  that  it  might  be    stated 

His  flight.  .  ^ 

that  the  minister  was   taken   to  the 

^  In  some  of  the  Vaisnava  works  the  amomit  is  stated  to  be  a  lakh 
of  rupees.  But  we  accept  the  statement  of  the  Chaitanya  Charitanifla 
and  other  authentic  works  on  this  point. 


20  CIIAITAXYA  ANJ)   1118  COMl'AMONS. 

Ganges  for  a  1)atli  and  he  disappeared  wliile 
batliiiii»'.  yanataiui  was  thus  set  at  liberty.  He 
lost  not  a  moment  l)Lit  at  once  left  Gaiida  as  an 
ascetic  accom])anied  by  a  servant  named  Tcana. 
He  crossed  the  Ganges  and  arrived  a  few  days 
after  at  the  foot  of  a  small  hillock  called  Patra. 
I9ana  had  taken  15  gold  niohars  Avithout  the 
knowledge  of  his  master.  They 
15  Gold  Moimrs     Ymd    howovcr     siibsistcd    on     fruits 

attract  a  robber. 

and  fountain- water  for  a  few  days 
and  reaching  a  village  at  Patra  became  the 
guests  of  a  respectable-looking  man.  He  was 
called  Bhuya.  The  unusually  Avarm  attention 
this  man  paid  to  his  guests  roused  suspicions  in 
the  mind  of  Sanatana  ulio  asked  l9ana  if  he 
had  brought  any  money  from  home.  Icana 
said  he  had  15  gold  moliars  Avitli  him.  Sanatana 
paid  11  mohars  to  his  host  \\ ho  A\as  really  a 
robber  in  disguise.  The  man  made  no  secret  of 
his  intentions  but  said  he  Avould  have  murdered 
them  at  night  if  the  money  were  not  ])aid.  The 
remaining  one  gold  mohar  was  paid  back  by 
Sanatana  to  lc;ana  Avho  Avas  ordered  to  leave  the 
place  and  return  home  at  once  since  he  still  canjd 
for  money. 

Sanatana,  now  left  alone,  sle])t  under  the 
shadow  of  trees  at  night  and  passed  through 
great  hardships  It  is  related  in  the  Prema- 
A^ilasa  that  on  one  occasion  he  laid  himself 
doAA^n  on   the  bare   earth    in   a    field   for    sleep, 


INTERVIEW    AVITH    SANATANA    AND    RUPA.        21 

making  pillows  Avith  brickbats  and  clods  of  earth 
to  rest  his  head,  hands,  and  feet  on.  An  old 
Avoman  passed  by  and  Avas  heard  to  make  the 
following  reflection :  "The  ascetic  must  haA^e 
lielonged  to  a  noble  and  rich  family  ; 

The  lesson  re- 
ceived from  an     he  lias   left    his    riches    bnt    cannot 

dispense  Avith  his  old  habits." 
Sanatana  as  he  heard  this  rose  up  and  boAved 
to  the  woman  and  said  "You  have  indeed  given 
me  a  lesson,  good  mother.  Old  habits  and  modes 
of  life  are  so  difficult  to  avoid  ;  but  I  shall  try 
to  be  born  aneA\^  in  my  spiritual  life  from  uoav."^ 
Sanatana  came  to  Ilajipur  and,  dressed  in 
rags,  lay  under  the  shadow  of  a  tree  singing  the 
praises  of  God  and  prayed  to  Him  to  grant  him' 
a  speedy  intervicAV  Avith  Chaitanya.  His  brother- 
in-laAv,  Crikaiitha,  happened  to  pass  by  the  Avay 
where  he  lay.  Crikaiitha  Avas  sent  by  Husen 
Sha  Avith  three  lakhs  of  rupees  for  purchasing 
horses  at  Hajipuv.  He  could  barely  recognise 
Sanatana  in  that  condition  and  Avas  moved  to  tears 

seeing  the  great  minister  reduced 
^^S^.^''''     to  such    a    plight.     "I    am  happy", 

said  Sanatana,  "happier  iioav  than 
ever  I  Avas."  It  was  January  and  the  sharp 
Avinter-wind  blew,  the  biting  cold  eating,  as  it 
Avere,    into    the    very    bones.  Crikaiitha  said,  "If 

'  This  anecdote  is  related  in  the  FremaTilasa  by  Nityananda.  The 
succeeding  narratives  about  Sanatana  are  mostly  taken  from  the 
Chaitanya  Charitanifta. 


22  CHAITANYA  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS. 

you  nuist  remain  an  ascetic  and  a\  ill  not  alter 
your  way  of  life,  pray  take  this  shawl  to  cover 
your  body  with."  The  rich  shawl  Sanatana 
declined  to  accept.  Next  a  valnable  wrapper 
was  offered  which  Sanatana  declined  also. 

But  Crlkantha  would  not  allow  him  to  go  with- 
out putting -something  warm  round  his  body  for 
protection  from  cold  and  forced  him  to~  wear  a 
coarse  blanket  of  the  value  of  lis.  o.  Sanatana 
went  to  Benares  and  met  Chaitanya.  'J'lie  inter- 
view was  full  of  pathos.  The  ex-minister  said, 
"I  am  an  outcast.  Admittance  to 'your  presence 
is  admittance  to  heaven.  If  you  would  con- 
descend to  accept  it,  here  do  I  offer  my  body 
and  soul  for  your  service."  Chaitanya  received 
him  with  great  kindness,  and  Sanatana  took 
leave  of  him  for  a  few  minutes  in  order  to  give 
away  his  blanket  to  a  beggar,  for  he  had  seen 
Chaitanya  glancing  at  it "  several 
blanket  worth  tiuics  whllc  spcakiug  to  him.'  When 
^^  '^  with  a  coarse]^cotton  rag  that  he  had 

received  from  the  beggar  in  return  lie  came  to 
Chaitanya  again,  theTatter  said,  "  delighted  am 
I,  that  you  have  now  parted  "with  all  that  is 
Avorldly.  Now  vision  of  God  will  be  clear  to 
you."  ' 

Sanatana  went  to  Mathura  in  nvdcv  to  have 
an    interview    w  ith  his  l)r()ther  llupa  and  thence 

'  "C^t^  "^m^H  ^t^  «2|^  5ti:?  ^tnKtS"     Choifdnijd  Charitamrtn. 


INTERVIEW    WITH    SANATANA    AND    RUPA.        28 

returned  to  Purl  to  meet  Chaitanya  again.  He 
came  by  the  woodland  path  of  Jhari  Khanda 
(Ohota  Nagpur).  The  dirty  water  and  moist  air 
of  the  forests  brought  on  eczema  all  over  Sana- 
tana's  body.  In  this  plight  he  arrived  at  Purl. 
He  thought  of  his  sins  and  this  weighed  on  his 
mind.  He  was  fallen  from  the  Brahmanic  order 
and  would  have  no  access  to  the  temple  of 
Jagannatha ;  but  when  the  imao-e  of  that  deitv 
Avould  be  brought  out  on  its  Car  in  May,  he 
determined  that  he  would  make  an  offer  of  his 
body  to  the  god  and  die  under  the  wheels  of  the 
Great  Car.  "My  body  full  of  this  foul  eczema 
and  burdened  with  sins  will  be  of  no  use  and  as 
a  punishment  for  my  sins  I  will  thus  die  here." 
With  this  determination  he  called  on 

San  at  ana  ^^      •   -r\~  j_i        t/t    i 

afflicted  witii  xiari  Dasa,  tiie  Maliomedan  convert 
to  Vaisnavism  and  resided  with  him 
in  his  cell ;  for  as  he  was  an  outcast  now  he 
dared  not  go  to  the  house  of  the  Brahmaiji 
Kaclnatha  Mi9ra  where  Chaitanya  lived. 

Chaitanya  used  to  come  often  to  Hari  Dasa's 
place,  and  Saniltana  thought  that  he  might  be 
permitted  an  opportunity  to  meet  him  there. 
As  expected  Chaitanya  called  on  Hari  Dasa  one 
day ;  but  Sanatana,  full  of  remorse  for  his  sins, 
distressed  by  his  eczema  and  with  his  accustomed 
humility,  retreated  into  a  corner  of  the  room  and 
saw  the  Master  from  afar  with  tearful  eyes. 
When  Chaitanya  saAV  him  he  ran  to  meet  him  and 


Ii2  CllAlTAXYA  AND  II IS  COill'AXIONS. 

Ranatana  shrinking  a  little  away  said,    "  ^Nfaster, 

I   am    full    of  sins  and  my  1)ody  is  alllicted  with 

eczema.     It  should  not   he    touched 

Sauataiia  tries       ,  jj        /-.i       •< 

to  remain  nioof     by    you.       Chaitauya   at  once    em- 

from  Cliaitniivn.        ,  i      i    •  •  -j  i>    i    • 

hraced  hiin  mspite  ot  his  remons- 
trances, saying,  "  Your  dear  self,  Sanatana, 
is  my  constant  joy."  Saniitana  was  sorr}^  to  see 
Chaitanya's  ])ody  marked  with  discharges  from 
his  eczema.  Anupama,  one  of  the  hrotliers  of 
Sanatana,  had  died  shortly  before,  and  Chaitanya 
alluded  to  his  higli  character  and  faith  ^vith 
respect.  He  made  enquiries,  as  to  Avhat  Sanatana 
thought  of  Mathura  and  in  many  sweet  and 
kind  words  parted  from  him  that  day. 

But  Sanatana  was  sad  at  heart  inspite  of  the 
kind  treatment  lie  had  received  from  the  blaster 
and  meeting  the  young  scholar,  Jagadananda, 
one  of  Chaitanya's  constant  companions,  thus 
spoke  to  him,  "  A^'oe  to  m<\  tliat  I  came  here. 
Our  dear  Master  touches  my  1)ody  afflicted  with 
eczema.  I  am  deeply  depressed  with  the  weight 
of  my  sins  hut  now  it  breaks  my  heart  to  see  the 
Master  emhrace  my  loathsome  hody."  Jagada- 
nanda did  not  like  Chaitanya  to  receive  Sanatana 
with  open  arms  and  come  in  contact  with  his 
diseased  body,  hut  without  m(3ntioning  it  he  said, 
"  Tt    would    he    helter    for    you    to    go    hack    to 

]\rathurri    or    Vrndilvana.     I    heard 

Jagatlanaiula  s 

a^^^'ce.  once  that  the  Master  wanted  you  to 

go  there."     Next  day  when  Chaitanya  came   as 


INTERVIEW   WITH    SANATANA    AND    RTJPA.        25 

usual  he  again  embraced  Sauatana  and  said,  "  Do 
not  think  of  putting  an  end  to  your  life  under 
the  wheels  of  the  Car  of  Jagannatha.  It  is  a  sin 
to  commit  suicide.  This  grief  and  remorse  that 
you  feel  for  your  sin  is  unholy  if  it  leads  to 
suicide.  God's  grace  is  to  be  obtained  by  love 
and  self-dedication  and  not  by  suicide."  And 
Sanatana  wondered  how  Chaitanya  could  know 
his  innermost  thoughts.  Then  Chaitanya  said 
again,  "  This  body  of  yours,  you  told  me  at  our 
first  meeting,  you  had  dedicated  to  me.  It  is 
mine  now  and  you  cannot  use  it  as  you  wish. 
By  my  mother's  will  I  have  to  live  at  Purl  and 
I  cannot  violate  her  orders.  But  much  remains 
to  be  done  in  the  upcountry  where  people  are 
illiterate  and  without  faith  in  God.  There  you 
will  have  to  work  and  employ  your  talents  and 
learning,  writing  beautiful  books  on  the  cult  of 
faith."  Saying  this  Chaitanya  again  embraced 
him  to  his  great  dismay,  and  Sanatana  was 
down  on  his  knees  and  implored  "  Master,  do 
not  do  so.  My  heart  breaks  at  this.  See,  my 
body  is  vile,  it  is  full  of  eczema  and  untouch- 
able." And  Chaitanya  said,  "Who  said  that 
your  body  is  vile  and  untouchable,  Sanatana?  A 
selfless  god-loving  spirit  dwells  in  your  body. 
Your  embrace  is  sweet  to  me  as  nector."  Sana- 
tana fell  at  Chaitanya's  leet  with  tears  and  said 
that  he  had  Jagadananda's  advice  to  go  to 
Yrndavana   in    order   to  avoid  the  contact  of  his 

D 


20  CII.VTTANYA    AXB    HTS  COMPANIONS. 

l)ody  with    tlio    Master's.      CliHitrniya  uas  aiio;ry 

wlien  lie  heard  this  and  said,    "  A  youni,^  schohir 

Jagadananda  dares  to  advise  a  veteran  like  you  ! 

He   is  impudent  and  foolish.     I  am 

bitter"  as''^  »in<     au  ascetlc,  and  \i  is  well  known  that 

^"'"^'  to  one  A^ho  takes   that    sacred    voav, 

ashes  and  sandal  marks  are   of  the    same    value. 

An    ascetic    must    have    contempt    for  none  but 

should  have  kindness  for  all  livint;-   heings.     The 

youngster    is    conceited    enough    to    teach   his 

superiors    in    this    way."     Sanataua    in    humhle 

words   addressed   Chaitanya  and  said,    "Master, 

fortunate  is  Jagadananda.     Your  abuse    of   him 

only    shows    the    great    familiarity    and    love  in 

which  you  hold  him  ;  whereas  the  formal  respect 

that    you    pay    me    shows    me    far    away     from 

your    heart.     He    drinks    the    nector    of    sweet 

familiarity  at  your  liands  but  your  praises    seem 

bitter    to   me    as    the    juice    of   Nim-fruit,  only 

proving  that    I    am    not    one    of    those    blessed 

men  who  bcdong  to  your  own  circle.'"  Chaitanya 

was    abashed  a  little   at  these  remarks  and  said, 

"  No   Sanatana,    this    is   no  vain   glorification,  I 

assure   you.     T    have    a  real  admiration  I'or  your 

faith,    your    self-sacrifice    and    for  the    spirit   of 

humility      becoming     a    truly     spiritual     soul. 

Jagadanaiula  is  only  a  boy  and  far   below  you  as 

Vlictitanya  Charituiurhi.  Anhi  Kluiudn,  Ch.  IV. 


INTEEVIEW   WITH    SANATANA   AND    RUPA.        2*7 

a  scholar  and  should  not  have  dared  advise  you." 
On  another  occasion  Chaitanya  had  gone  to 
Yamecawra  Tota  and  sent  a  man  to  Sanatana 
wishing  the  latter  to  meet  him.  It  was  midday 
and  the  sun  had  scorched  the  sands,  and 
Sanatana  on  l)are  feet  gladly  trod  the  sands  which 
burnt  his  toes.  A¥hen  he  came  to  the  Master, 
he  marked  the  burns  on  Sanatana's  toes  and  asked 
by  what  way  he  had  come.  Sanatana  replied, 
"  It  was  by  the  sandy  shore  of  the  sea."  Chaitanya 
again   asked  why  he  did   not  come 

Burnt  toes.  ''  .  i*^  i        i  • 

bv  the  mam  road  leadmo*  to  the  cnate 
of  the  Temple.  Sanatana  humbly  replied,  "I  am 
an  outcaste ;  the  Brahmans  there  might  take 
objection."  Chaitanya  pointed  to  the  burns  and 
regretted  the  pain  they  must  have  caused  liim. 
Sanatana  said,  "I  was  not  aware  of  these  till  now. 
I  was  so  glad  that  the  Master  called  me ;  I 
thought  of  nothing  else."  Whereupon  Chaitanya 
said,  with  a  voice  that  trembled  iu  emotion, 
"  Your  touch  will  sanctify  the  holiest  of  temples 
and  the  most  pure  of  the  Brahmans.  Your  faith 
and  love  for  God  is  such  that  the  angels  of 
heaven  may  sit  at  your  feet  and  receive  lessons 
from  you  ;  but  still  you  do  not  violate  the  local 
rules  of  the  Temple.  It  only  shows  your  high 
breeding  and  noble  character."^ 

Sanatana   stayed   at  Puri    for  some   months 

c^st^l  ^v^  ^:g  w^  cw^  ^f^i^l  II 


28  CHAITANTA    ANJ3     IITS    COMPANIONS. 

during  whieli  lie  got  cured  of  his  eczema  ;  and 
after  l)e]iolding  the  Dol  Yatra  ceremony  of 
Krsna  took  leave  of  Chaitanya  and  started  for 
Vrndavana.  Before  leaving  Purl  lie  took  notes 
from  Valadeva  Acharya,  a  companion  of 
Chaitanya  as  to  tlie  route  followed  by  Chaitanya 
\\lien  he   visited    Vrndavana.     The 

Sanatana 

starts  for     j)l^^-6s  whcrc   Chaitanya  had  halted 

Vrndavana.  •    n  i       i'        tt  •    • 

were  specially  marked.  He  visited 
them  all  with  great  reverence  considering  them 
as  holy  places.  Rupa  had  come  back  to  Purl  a 
year  before,  so  that  when  Sanatana  arrived  at 
Vrndavana  he  did  not  meet  his  brother.  But 
Bupa  returned  to  Vrndavana  after  some  months, 
and  both  the  brothers  now  busied  themselves  in 
writing  books  in  Sanskrit  on  the  doctrines  of 
faith  as  taught  them  by  the  Master.  But  I 
shall  write  in  some  detail  about  the  work  they 
did   in  Vrndavana  in  the  course  of  my  lectures. 

i^Jtffl  ti^m  ^1 1^  o^  'R  II 

Chaitanija    Churitamrta. 


IV.  Advaitacharya. 

Next  to  Chaitanya  the  two  most  illustrious 
apostles  of  the  Vaisnava  faith  in  Bengal  were 
Nityananda  and  Advaitacharya.  Their  names 
are  now  inseparable  from  Chaitanya.  Advaita- 
charya was  the  title,  the  real  name  of  the 
apostle  being  Kamalakara  Bhattacharya.  He 
was  an  inhabitant  of  Laur  in  Sylhet  and  w^as 
born  in  1484  A.D.,  or  52  years  before  Chaitanya. 
His  great  scholarship,  especially  in  the  Upani- 
sadas,  was  much  admired.  He  was  descended 
from  Nrsinha  Nariel,  the  prime  minister  of  Raja 
Gane9a  ('Kans'  of  Mahomedan  historians),  who 
is  said  to  have  succeeded  in  killing  the  Emperor 
of  Grauda  by  following  the  statesmanly  advices 
of  his  minister.'  Advaita's  father, 
His  ancestor       Nava,    was   a      courtier    of    Krsna 

Nrsinha  Nariel.  _  "  '  " 

Dasa,  the  Raja  of  Laur,  and  the 
family  enjoyed  the  esteem  and  confidence  of 
people  of  the  locality.  Advaita  first  took  his 
lesson  in  Sanskrit  from  ^antacharya,  a  renowned 
scholar  of  Cantipur,  and  came  to  Navadvipa 
to  complete  his  studies  and  settled  at  ^antipur, 
residing  for  the  most  part  at  Navadvipa.  His 
pious  life,  scholarly  attainments,  and  spiritual 
faith  marked  him  out  as  a  conspicuous  figure  in 
Navadvipa.     It  is  said  that  he  was  deeply  grieved 


^  See  Advaita  Praka9a  by  Isana  Nagora. 


30  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

to  mark  the  materialistic  tendencies  of  the  age. 
The  people  of  Navadvipa — the  greatest  centre  of 
learning  in  India  at  that  period — paid  great 
attention  to  studies  but  were,  it  is  alleged  by  the 
contemporary  Vaisnava  historians,  without  any 
faith  in  God.  They  pursued  learn- 
Learnin^         iug  for  secular    objects  and  even  for 

without  faith.  i  i       j  ->       , 

its  own  sake,  but  none  cared  to 
interpret  the  ^astras  in  the  light  of  faith.  The 
rich  spent  huge  sums  of  money  in  the  marriage 
of  their  children  and  in  the  worship  of  Vasuli 
and  other  local  deities.  The  streets  of  Nava- 
dvlpa  resounded  with  songs  in  honour  of  the 
Pala  kings  which  were  very  popular  at  the  time. 
Vrndavana  Dasa,  the  contemporary  historian, 
regrets  that  thus  did  they  all  spend  their  lives  in 
vain.  Advaita's  mind  yearned  for  faith  in  God 
and  it  is  believed  by  the  Vaisnavas  and  is 
written  in  their  holy  books  that  Chaitanya   came 

to  the  world  in  response  to  Advaita's 

Advaita  s  pray- 
er, earnest  appeal  to  the  Most  High    to 

send    some    one    into    the    world    Avho    would 

teach  faith  and  remove  the  sophistical  tendencies 

of  the  age. 

Vi9varupa,  the  elder   brother   of   Chaitanya, 

had  taken  Sannyasa  and  left   liomo   in    his  16th 

year ;  he    was    never    since     heard     of.     Their 

mother  (^aci  had  lost   eight   daughters,   and   on 

the  eve   of   Chaitanya's    sannyasa   her   husband 

Jacjannath  Micra  had  also  died.     She   had   none 


ADVAITACHARYA.  31 

left  in  the  world  amongst  her  numerous  children 
except  Chaitanya.  The  Sannyasa  of  Chaitanya 
was  disastrous  to  her  material  prospects.  It  was 
hut  natural  that  Chaitanya  should  have  a  deep 
feeling  for  his  mother  throughout  his  life.  Though 
he  had  taken  the  Sannyasa  vow  which  required  a 
person  never  to  revisit  his  native  village  or  his 
home  in  life,  Chaitanya  had  promised  his  mother 
that  he  would  never  remain  very  far  away  from 
her,  for  any  length  of  time.  And  he  kept  his 
promise  by  staying  at  Puri  from  Avhere  constant 
messages  ahout  him  reached  her. 
9aci  charges     Chaitauva     used     to    send    Pandit 

Advaita        with        -^  -,  _    '         -, 

turning       the     Jagaciananda   to   his    mother    every 

head      of      her  .   ,  . 

son.  year  with  many  endearing  words   of 

affection.  On  one  occasion  he  sent 
tliis  message:  "  You  are  old  now,  my  mother. 
I  should  have  stayed  with  you  and  ministered  to 
your  comfort.  This  Avas  my  sacred  duty.  But 
my  head  turned  away  and  I  violated  this  duty  • 
forgive  me,  a  mad  child,  for  this  my  sin,  and 
know  me,  dear  mother,  to  he  your  little 
darling  as  ever."  ^  He  added  to  such  messao-es 
"Mother,  your  kitchen  is  a  holy  place  Avhere 
I  have  taken  the  food  cooked  by  your  dear 
hands.  When  you  cook  your  meal,  know, 
that  I  shall  always  be  there  in  spirit."^ 
But     Chaitanya's     memories    and     associations 


Chaitanya  Charitamfta,  Madhya  Khanda,  Chapter  III. 
Chaitanya  Charitamfta,  Madhya  Khanda,  Chapter  III. 


32  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

passed  awav  like  a  fiasli  of  lisrhtniniic  as  soon  as 
tlipy  arose  in  liis  mind.  After  having  delivered 
such  messages  he  became  unconscious  of  the 
outer-Avorld  passing  into  one  of  his  trances, 
enjoying  the  inward  union  Avith  his  God. 

When  Chaitanya  first  began  to  manifest  that 
devotion  to  God  which  eventually  resulted  in  his 
adopting  the  vow  of  Sannyasa,  CacT,  his  mother, 
made  Advaita  responsible  for  it.  8he  wept  and 
said,  "  Who  says  that  Advaita  is  a  great  sage  ? 
He  turned  the  head  of  my  eldest  son,  bright  as 
the  moon,  by  his  sophistry  and  made  him  leave 
home  as  a  Sannyasi  for  ever.  Not  satisfied  Avith 
this  he  is  noAv  trying  a  similar  experiment  of  his 
teachings  on  this  young  lad  (Chaitanya).'" 

Durin":  more  than  half  a  centurv  Advaita 
was  an  esteemed  figure  amongst  the  A'^aisnavas 
of  Navadvlpa.  Chaitanya  after  his  Sannyasa 
paid  a  visit  to  him  at  his  house  at  Cantipur.  He 
stayed  at  the  place  for  10  days  and  Advaita  then 
aged  75,  sang  and  danced  like  a  young  man  in 
the  Klrtana  party  that  assembled  round 
Chaitanya.  When  the  latter  was  about  to 
depart,  the  old  man  sobbed  and  cried  like  a  child 
and  followed  Chaitanya  for  a  long  space. 
Chaitanya  said  on  the  occasion,  "  Oh  tliou  vener- 
able scholar,  if  thou  bebavest  in   this  way,   how 


ADVAITACHARYA.  33 

will   my  mother  control   her   feelings.     I  leave 
her  in  thy  care." 

Advaita    paid    visits    to    Chaitanya    at    Purl 
with    other    residents    of  Navadvipa    once  every 
year.     The   Premavilasa  writes  that  at  one  time 
he    deviated  a   little   from  the  Vaisnava  concep- 
tion   of     Bhakti    and    tauo;ht    the 

Advaita  _  ^ 

departs     from     doctrincs  of  Jiiana  as  he  had  learnt 

the  Bhakti.  f       ^  i 

cult  for  a  or  oul.  A  meeting  Avith  Chaitanya 
completely  reformed  him  and  since 
then  and  all  through  his  long  career  he  remained 
firm  in  the  cause  of  Bhakti  as  taus^ht  bv 
Chaitanya  and  formed  one  of  the  blessed  trio  of 
whom  the  other  two  were  Chaitanya  himself  and 
Nityananda.  The  Premavilasa  writes  that  Advaita's 
two  disciples  Kamadeva  Nagara  of  Guzrat  and 
Cankara  could  by  no  means  be  led  to  accept  the 
tenets  of  the  emotional  creed  of  the  Vaisnavas, 
but  remained  Yedantists,  and  when  Advaita  was 
once  more  reconciled  with  Chaitanya,  they  left 
their  teacher  and  the  country  for  good. 

According  to  the  Premavilasa  Advaita  died  in 
the  year  1539,  but  according  to  Advaitaprakaca 
by  l9ana  Nagara,  in  1581.  The  latter  statement 
carries  the  apostle's  earthly  career  to  the  utmost 
span  of  human  life,  clz.,  125  years.  Por  obvious 
historical  reasons  we  are  inclined  to  credit  the 
statement  of  the  Premavilasa.  The  descendants 
of  Advaita  live  mainly  at  Cantipur  up  to  this 
date.     The  piety,  high  character  and  fervour  of 

E 


34  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

faith  of  Advaita's  Avife,  Sita,  have  heeii  made  the 

subjects  of  memoirs   of   many  A'^aisnava  writers. 

Sita  and    CrI,    tlie    two    wives  of   Advaita,  were 

dausjrhters    of     Narasiihha    Bluldudi 

His  wives.  ^ 

by  his  wife,    Menaka.     The    couple 

w^ere    the    inhabitants  of  the  village  Narayanpur 

near    Satgaon    in    the  Hughli  district.     Among 

the    numerous    disciples  of    Advaita,   the    name 

n  -  SM     A        of    Crinatha    Acarya,  the    Guru    of 

yrtnatha  Ac-  y  -^     ' 

^^y^-  Kavi  Karnapura  and  author  of  the 

celebrated  commentary  of  the  Bhagavata  called 
"  Chaitanya  Mala  Manjusa,"  deserves  a  promi- 
nent mention.  ^ 


^   See  the  Premavilasa,  Ch.  xxv. 


V.    Nityananda. 

Though  junior  to  Advaita  by  many  years, 
Nityananda  occupies  the  second  place  in  the  trio 
according  to  popular  estimation.  The  organisa- 
tion of  the  Yaisnava  community  in  its  later 
forms  was  eminently  due  to  this  apostle.  His 
compassion  for  the  depressed  castes  was  a 
marked  feature  in  his  career  devoted  to  the  good 
of  people.  Though  a  Brahman,  he  had  no  caste- 
prejudices  and  he  mixed  freely  Avith  the  fallen 
and  lowly  without  caring  for  the  consequence.  He 
opened  the  doors  of  the  Vaisnava  society  to  all  peo- 
ple irrespective  of  caste.  Though  the  chief  inspira- 
tion of  this  came  from  Chaitanya  himself,  the 
prophet  of  Nadiya  was  too  far  steeped  in  his  emo- 
tional felicities  to  he  able  to  organise  a  sect  or 
frame  laws  for  it.  Nityananda  did  so  at  his 
biddins;.  The  merchant  communitv  of  Ben  oral, 
,,        outcasted  and  fallen  after  the    de- 

Sympathy  ^ 

with  the  fallen,  cadcncc  of  Buddhistic  ascendency 
gave  a  warm  response  to  Nityananda's  call  of 
brotherhood  and  were  admitted  by  him  to  the 
Vaisnava  order.  The  Chandals,  the  Farias  and 
other  depressed  castes,  the  Sahajiyas,  a  sect  of 
Buddhist  Bhiksus  and  Bhiksunis,  known  by 
their  nick  names  Neda  and  Neclis,  were  admit- 
ted to  the  Vaisnava  community  by  Nityananda's 
son  Virachandra.  The  story  is  related  how  2500 
Buddhist    Bhiksus   and  Bhiksunis  assembled  at 


30  CHAITANYA    AND    TTTS    fOArPAXTONS. 

Khaddalici  and  surrendered  theniselves  to  Vlracliaii- 
dra  who  graciously  made  them  members  of  the 
Vaisnava  society.  A  distinguished  i^iiropean 
friend  of  mine  once  went  to  Kliaddaha  (a  few  miles 
to  the  north  of  Calcutta)  to  see  the  place  where 
these  people  had  assembled,  and  referred  to  the 
spot  as  markino'  tlie   death   of   ]kid- 

D  e  a  t  h       o  f         -^   ^ 

Budfiiiisni      i"     dliisui   in    Beniiral  ;   for  here  did  the 
last    vestige    of    Buddhistic    powers 
surrender    itself     and    was    incorporated    with 
Vaisnavism. 

The  merchants  of  Satgiion,  the  chief  mercan- 
tile centre  in  Bengal  at  the  time,  Avith  Uddharana 
Datta  of  the  Suvarna  Banika  caste  at  their  head, 
gathered  round  Nityananda  and  were  so  devoted 
to  him  that  they  were  prepared  to  sacrifice 
everything  they  had  for  his  sake.  Nityananda  is 
described  in  a  popular  Bengali  song  as  "  one 
without  anger,  always  cheerful  and  without 
Ucihar.  n-.  pi'id^^",  luiviug  compassiou  for  all 
^f^^i^'  men".'      His     love-ecstasies     often 

matched  those  of  Chaitanya  and  he  was  devoted 
to  the  master  so  greatly  that  when  Chaitanya 
passed  away  fi"om  this  earth  he  pined  aAvay  like 
a  lover  speaking  of  nothing  else  but  of  the 
incidents  of  his  life,-  despising  all  earthly 
comforts  till  he  too  died  two  vears  later  in  1585. 


"^3ft«(  t^t^'f  f^TsTt^  ?t^  1" 
"■^^  5^  fkl^^  ^?tt  f^«lt*t  I 


NITYANANDA.  37 

At  one  time  the  rich  merchants  (*f  Saptagrama, 
Nadiyjl  and  other  districts,  ij^ratel'ul  to  Nityjinanda 
for  their  admittance  to  the  Yaisnava  com- 
munity, offered  him  fine  sillven  apparels 
embroidered  witli  gokl  and  chains  studded  with 
pearls,  ru])ies  and  diamonds.  Though  an  ascetic 
Nityananda  wore  these  ornaments  to  please  them  ; 
upon  which  a  Brahman  of  Nadiya  named  Rama 
Dasa,  a  friend  of  Chaitanya,  went  to  Purl  and  said 
to  the  latter,  "  Nityananda,  your  colleague,  though 
an  ascetic,  is  given  to  luxury.  The  rich  merch- 
ants give  him  valuable  articles 
great   faith  in     and    finerics    and    he    uses    them." 

Nityananda.  ,  i  •     i       <     t->         -r   i 

Chaitanya  replied,  '  But  I  know  he 
is  a  true  ascetic  at  heart.  Don't  look  at  his 
exterior.  Dust,  ashes,  and  the  jewels  and  stones 
of  Avhich  you  speak  are  to  him  of  the  same  value. 
Even  if  you  told  me  that  he  paid  court  to  low 
courtesans  or  indulged  in  wine,  I  would  not  lose 
my  trust  in  him.  ^  Indeed  he  was  a  true 
ascetic,  full  of  kindness  for  men  and  love  for 
God.  The  following  incident,  of  Avhich  most  of 
the  Bengalis,  have  heard,  but  the  details  of 
which  are  not  perhaps  so  Avell  known,  shows 
some  of  the  noble  traits  of  his  great  life. 

Niti/anandn  Vanra   Visfmrt  hij  Vrnduvniui  Dns:n. 
I     The  Chaitanya  Bhagavata. 


38  CHAITANYA    AND    HTS    COMPANIONS. 

Details  about  the  two  ruffian  chiefs,  Jagai 
and  AEcidhai,  ai-e  to  be  fouud  in  the  suppleinentarv 
2J  Chapters  of  the  Premaviliisa  recently 
discovered  in  a  j\JS.  of  that  ^vorlv  found  by 
Yacodiilfila  A^anika.  I  give  these  and  the  inci- 
dent leading  to  their  conversion  below  : — 

Subhananda  Hay,  a  Kulln  Brahman,  became 
a  very  rich  and  powerful  man  in  Nadiyji  and 
obtained  the  title  of  Eaja  from  the  Emperor  of 
Gauda  about  the  year  1450  a.d.  He  was  a  great 
man  and  his  reputation  spread  far  and  wide  in 
the  country.  Owing  to  his  friendship  with  the 
Emperor  he  carried  great  influence  everywhere, 
r    -.  ,     His    two     sons,     Raij^liun^itha     and 

.lagai  and  '  ^ 

*^"'"'^'-  Janardana    were    distinguished    for 

their   scholarships   and   for   their  great  personal 
beauty.        Raghunatha     had      a      son       named 
Jagannatha,    and    Janardana's    son    was  called 
Madhava.     The   cousins  were  popularly    known 
as    Jagai   and    Aladhai    and    had  the    hereditary 
titles    of    Rclja.     These    two    young    noble    men 
became  robbers  at  thier  early  youth,  and  carried 
on  depradations  all  around,  so  that  their  names 
grew  to  be  a  terror  to  Nadiya  and  the  neighbour- 
ing districts.     They  carried  away  the  wealth   of 
villagers  not   even   sparing  their  wives,  set  fire 
to    their    houses,    and    though    l)orn    of    a    good 
Brahman   family    freely    indulged    in    wine    and 
beef. '     They  set  at  deffiance  all    law    and    order 


Chaitanya  Bhagavafn, 


NITYANANDA.  39 

and  Gorai  KazI,  the  Maliomedan  Magistrate  of 
Nadiya,  could  not  punish  them  because  of  then* 
great  power.  They  not  only  killed  cows,  hut 
also  Sadhns,  to  the  horror  of  the  Hindu  com- 
munity. 

Chaitanya  had  now  become  the  central  figure 
of  a   spiritual    ])and    of   workers    who    sang    the 
praises    of  God    day    and  night    in  the  streets  of 
Nadiya.     The  robher-chiefs  were  offended  by  the 
loud  music  and  nproar  of  the  crowd.     And  when 
Haridasa   and    Nityananda    one   day    passed   by 
them    exhorting    peo])le    to   pay  homage  to  God 
and    seek   His  mercy    by    pure    lives,  Jagai  and 
Madhai  stood  before  them  reeling  in    a    drunken 
condition.     The  sweet  and  compassionate    words 
of   Nityananda   liad   no  effect  upon  the  Ijrothers 
and  Madhai  ordered  him  to  stop  singing  the  name 
of  God.    But  Nityananda  was  neither  frightened 
nor   did   he   feel    any  anger ;  a  deep  compassion 
moved  him  while  he  continued  singing  the  praise 
of  the  Lord.     The  infuriated  chief  had  an  empty 
bottle  of  wine  in  his  hand  with  which    he  struck 
Nityananda  making    a   deep    wound  on  his  fore- 
head.    The  apostle  cried  'Oh  God'  'Oh  Lord'  and 
while  blood  streamed  forth    from  the  wound  and 
drenched  his  clothes,  he  said  to  Madhai,  'You  have 
struck  me  for  no  fault,  this  I  can    bear   Madhai, 
but  I  cannot  see  your  wretched  condition.     You 
have  struck  me,  no  matter,  but  dear  friend,  only 
sing   the   praises  of  the  Lord  once,  if  I  hear  His 


U)  CHAITANVA    ANT)    IITS    COIMPANTONS. 

name    uttered    In    you     1  will  forget  the  pain  of 
tlie    wound/'     Mfulhrii    was    about 

The  l.nifal 

!»^-^">'it  to  strike    the   apostle    as^ain,    when 

♦Tagai,  wliose  drunlvon  lit  had  passed  away,  held 
In's  hands  and  forbade  him  to  do  so  saying,  "Why 
have  ^'ou  struck  a  SannvasJ,  vou  Avicked  man  r 
He  is  a  great  Sadhu  and  lias  abondoned  all 
earthly  pleasures  for  God.  AAliat  good  can  you 
attain  by  assaulting  a  pious  man  ;  do  not  do  so 
again."-  At  this  time  Chaitanya  came  up 
and  as  he  saw  Nityananda's  face  drenched  in 
blood  but  quite  cheerful  and  unmindful  of  his 
pain  singing  God's  name  ecstatically,  the  Master 
ran  to  him,  embraced  him  and  with  his  oAvn 
clothes  wiped  away  the  blood  from  his  face. 
He  looked  at  IMadhai  with  sorrow  and  said  in  a 
touching  tone,  "Why  have  you  struck  my  brother, 
dear  as  my  life  ?  "  and  then  stopping  a  little  said 
in  a  voice  that  trembled,  "  Madhai,  if  it  was  in 
your    mind    to  strike   one  of  us,  why  did  you  not 


CSir^fl^  Ci|Ci|f^>l  \5tC\5  ^f%  5it^  I 

af»rt^  ^if^^l  f^  ^tc^  ^  ^  0 

Chaitanija  Bliuynvata. 


NITYANANDA.  41 

strike  me  ?  "^  "With  tender  love  did  he  take 
NitytUianda  with  him  and  the  crowd  followed 
them  in  deep  hut  silent  grief. 

The  two  brothers  stood  there  silent,  wondering 
at  what  they  had  heard.  The  popular  song 
ascribed  the  following  speech  to  Jagai  at  this 
stage^ : — 

"  Strike  not  Nitai  any  more,  Oh  brother 
Madhai  1  One's  pain  is  healed  as  one  looks  at 
his  sweet  face,  full  of  compassion.  Eeign  Avould 
I,  Oh  Madhai,  clasp  his  feet  and  hold  them 
close  to  my  breast  !  This  would  cool  my  heart 
burning  with  remorse.  Behold  there,  angel-like 
he  looks,  with  his  hair  bound  into  a  knot  and 
with  marks  of  God's  name  all  over  his  body. 
Being  struck  he  has  compassion  for  the  striker. 
Where,  Oh  Madhai,  was  such  compassion  ever 
seen  !    Blood    flows    from  his  head  minsrled  with 


"Ttft^  ^fw  TiTt^i:^!  "^j:^  fl?!  csf<i  ^^  I 

Chnifan  ya  Ma  hgn  I  a . 

^t^t^  ^5^1  ^^  ^^«\  5^«i,  ?w  jfrg  srti  ^^ft  I 
fjTst^^i  •^im  f»t*i1,  ^%  c<\%  "m^  ^%  irift  c^^l, 
fV  ^-^^  ^^  i\^\  ^ci^  ^5)1  ^  I 
Ttif  c'fni  w^  ^?,  ^^  w?itci  c?R  ^rt^  I 
f^t^^  ^  ^:^  ^f«<^  mm,  ^tc^  ^^  c«tt  ^\ 

An  old  song. 


42  CHAITANYA   AND    HTS    COMPANIONS. 

tears    of   forg-ivinsj  love  ;  Oli  wliat  a  divine  si(^ht 
do  I  see  before  me  to-day  I'*' 

The    two    hrotliers    went  home  l)ut  could  not 
sleep    for    remorse.       ^Ifulhai    was 

ic  lemoiso.  j-jjovcd  to  tears  and  lonc^ed  for  tlie 
sight  of  the  divine  man  wliom  lie  had  so  oruelly 
struck  but  who,  Avhile  bleeding,  liad  spoken  only 
sweet  words.  The  brotliers  walked  about  the 
extensive  courtyard  of  their  house  the  whole 
night  through  in  bitter  repentance ;  the  dews  of 
night  fell  upon  tlieir  bare  heads  and  tlie  wind 
blew  softly  from  the  Ganges  but  could  not  heal 
the  pain  of  their  hearts.  They  became  changed 
men  in  one  night. 

AVhen  the  morning    dawned  in  deep  agony  of 
heart    they    ran    to   the    house    of 

le  pai  on.  Chaitauya  and    knocking  at  his  gate 

cried  aloud,  "  Oh  Master,  receive  your  sinners." 
And  when  Chaitanya  came  out,  weeping  they 
fell  at  his  feet  without  poAver  of  speech. 
Chaitanya  said  "You  boast  of  being  the  llajas  of 
Navadvlpa.  It  is  a  marvel  that  you  cry  like 
women.'"  He  added  that  lie  had  already  par- 
doned Jagai ;  for  himself  he  could  not  take 
offence   at   anv  thins:.     But    Madhai   must  seek 


Chaitiinyn  Mnngaln. 

"8«  *f35  itf^c^i  f¥  ^ti  ^%n  ^ra  I 

Chaitanya  Bhagavain. 


NITYANANDA.  43 

the  pardon  of  NityXiiaiida  wiiotn  he  had  so 
brutally  hurt."  Upon  this  they  approached  the 
latter  and  most  humbly  prayed  for  forgiveness. 
Nityananda  said,  "  If  a  child  beats  his  parents 
do  they  take  offence  ?  I  have  treated  the  assault 
in  the  same  way,"^  And  when  Madhai  with 
tears  insisted  on  pardon  the  apostle  said,  "  Your 
remorse  will  be  complete  and  effective  if  you  sin 
no  more."  They  said  nothing  but  by  silent  tears 
showed  tiieir  sincerity.  Nityananda  added, 
'•'  Not  only  do  I  pardon  you,  but  if  I  have  done 
anything  good  or  noble  in  this  life  or  in  previ- 
ous lives,  may  the  reward  be  yours,  dear  souls, 
this  is  my  prayer  to  God,  You  struck  me  with 
a  broken  bottle,  the  punishment  receive  at  my 
hands.     I  give  you  the  name  of  God  in   return." 

Jagai  and  Madhai  each  took  in  his  hand  a 
leaf  of  the  sacred  Tnlasl  plant  and  at  Nityananda's 
direction  gave  it  over  to  him  saying,  "Oh  Master, 
my  burden  of  sin  I  give  unto  you."  This  simple 
act  completed  their  admittance  to  Nityananda's 
discipleship.  They  had  only  to  add  that  thence- 
forth they  would  lead  blameless  lives. 

The  two  noble  men  did  not  return  to  their 
place  but  lived  with  their  spiritual  master 
repenting  their  sins  and  singing  the  praises  of 
God. 


Chaitiinija  Bliagavata,  Madhya  Khanda,  Chapter  XIII. 


44  CHA.ITANY\V    AND    Ills    COMPANIONS. 

M^idliai's  mental  aHi:;uisli  did  not  cease,  l)ut 
the  more  lie  realised  the  kindness  of  Nityananda, 
the  i^reater  gre^v  liis  remorse  for  havini;  made 
the  beastly  attack  on  his  person.  XityHiianda 
repeatedly  assured  him  of  his  pardon.  But 
Madhai  one  day  told  him  in  private,  "  Vou  may 
pardon  me,  gracious  Master,  hut  to  hundreds 
of  my  fellow-men  I  have  caused  pain.  In 
drunken  state  I  have  assaulted  men  whom  I 
do  not  know  or  even  rememher.  AVhat  penance 
is  there  that  may  cleanse  my  sin  ?  Tell  me, 
Master,  my  heart  longs  for  punishment  of  some 
sort  for  my  lifelong  wickedness."  Nitytinanda 
said,  "  Tf  you  want  to  heg  pardon  of  tlie  })uT)lic 
whom  you  have  wronged,  go  to  the  bathing  ghat 
of  the  Ganges  and  seek  pardon  of  all  who  may 
go  there  for  bathing." 

Madhfii   took   a  spade   in    his  hand  and  made 

with  it  a   bathing   (jJiat   himself    on 
Ghat.  "'         the  bank  of  the  Ganges,    where   for 

the  whole  day  and  a  considerable 
portion  of  the  night  lie  would  sit  reciting  the 
name  of  God,  Avhile  silent  tears  would  occasionally 
be  seen  rolling  down  his  cheeks.  Hundreds  of 
men  bathed  in  the  Ganges  every  day.  To  every 
neAV  arrival  he  would  go  with  joined  hands,  no 
matter  to  what  caste  the  person  belonged,  and 
with  tearful  eyes  would  say,  "  Whether  know- 
ingly or  unknowingly  if  I  have  caused  you  any 
pain  or  harm,  be  gracious  enough  to  pardon  nu' 


NITYANANDA.  4)5 

for  the  same."  His  pride  of  birth  and  wealth 
was  thus  completely  humbled  and  thus  he  was 
born  again,  so  to  speak,  in  his  new  spiritual  life. 
Jagai  also  became  known  for  his  great  piety  and 
faith. 

Thus  passed  the  lives  of  two  famous  men  of 
Navadvipa  who,  born  in  wealth  and  power,  but 
spoiled  by  wicked  company,  went  back  to  the 
righteous  course  and  lead  lives  worthy  of  Bralima- 
charis.  The  Ghat  of  Madhai  became  a  sacred 
place  in  Navadvlpa.  Many  years  ago  the  ghat, 
that  stood  like  an  emblem  of  the  sins  and  suffer- 
ings of  its  builder,  was  washed  away  by  the 
Ganges  as  his  sins  were  by  true  penitent  tears  ; 
but  it  existed  even  at  the  time  of  Narahari 
ChakravartT,  the  author  of  Bhaktiratnakara  who 
wrote  his  work  about  1725  a.d. 

The    conversion    of  Jagai   and    Madhai   took 
place  in  the  year  1509  a.d. 
At  a  rather  advanced  stage  of  life,   Nityananda 

broke  the   vow   of  asceticism,   it   is 
'ma'^n-'iage/        ^ald,   at    tlic     bidding  of   Chaitanya 

and  married  the  two  daughters  of 
Suryyadas  Sarkhel,  a  brother  of  Gaurdasa  Sarkhel 
of  Kalna.  The  latter  was  a  companion  of 
Chaitanya  in  his  early  years.  Vasudha  and 
Jahnavl  are  the  names  of  the  two  wives  of  Nitya- 
nanda. Jahnavi  after  her  widowhood  became  a 
conspicious  figure  in  the  Vaisnava  community 
for  a    long    time    and    honoured    for     her    high 


46  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

character.  The  Promavilasa  mentions  tlie  fact  that 
Nityananda  havin£^  broken  the  ascetic's  vow  lost 
his  position  in  society  and  no  good  Brahman  was 
willing  to  give  him  his  daugliter  in  marriage 
with  him.  Uddharana  Datta,  a  follower  of 
Nityananda,  proposed  his  marriage  with  the 
daughters  of  Siiryyadclsa  Sarkhel,and  the  latter 
at  first  refused  the  proposal  for  fear  of  social 
ostracism.  But  his  admiration  for  the  apostle, 
who  is  said  to  have  shown  liim  some  miracles, 
afterwards  triumphed  over  his  weakness  and 
Suryyadasa's  family  now  stands  exalted  in  the 
popular   estimation  owing  to  this  connection. 

Nityjlnanda's  son,  A'irachandra  (also  called 
Virabhadra),  became  a  great  figure  in  the 
,,.    ^    ,  succeeding     period      of      Vaisnava 

\  irac-nandra.  c        j. 

history. 


VI.      (^rlvasa. 

Next  to  INityananda  and  Advaita  who  deser- 
vedly head  the  list  of  Chaitanya's  companions, 
there  were  other  comma ndinij^  fi2:iires  in  the 
Yaisnava  community,  each  great  in  his  OAvn  way. 
The  special  claims  of  Nityananda  and  Advaita 
on  popular  respect  rest  on  the  fact  that  they 
organised  the  Vaisnava  community  in  Bengal. 
Communial  gratitude  has  therefore  paid  the 
highest  tribute  of  honour  to  them,  while  others, 
so  me  of  whom  equally  great,  have  remained  some- 
what in  the  back-ground,  their  lives  being  not 
so  much  devoted  to  the  enlargement  of  the 
Vaisnava  circle  as  to  doing  good  work  silently 
among  their  fellowmen.  Of  these  the  sweet  and 
saintly  life  of  (^rivasa  deserves  special  mention. 

^rivasa,  a  Brahman  scholar,  came  with 
Advaita  from  Sylhet  to  study  at 
in^sodltV^  Nadiya  and  settled  there.  He  had 
three  brothers  (^rlkanta  {alias  Cri- 
nidhi),  (^rl  Kama  and  ^rlpati.  Crivasa  is  some- 
times called  ^rinivasa.  The  family  enjoyed 
moderate  attluence.  The  author  of  the  Chaitanya 
Bhagavata  mentions  that  they  had  a  large 
following  of  servants  and  attendants.  In  those 
days  when  luxury  was  unknown,  a  Mahomedan 
tailor  lived  in  one  of  their  out-houses,  whose  sole 
occupation  was  to  sew   clothes  for  the  members 


48  CHAITAXVA    AND    H  fS    COMPANIONS. 

ol"  the  family.  Chaitaiiya  is  said  to  liavo  pro- 
phesied once  that  "  thoii<>'li  LaksmT,  tlie  Goddess 
of  wealth,  might  he  reduced  to  hedging  her 
broad,  yet  ^rlviisa's  family  would  never  he 
poor."  Long  after  ^rlvasa  had  been  dead  when 
Jaytinanda  wrote  his  Caitanya  Marigala  about 
1540  A.D.  the  descendants  of  Crlvjisa  were  still 
rich  at  Kumarhatta. 

(^rlvasa  was  junior  to  Advaita,  bnt  could   not 
he     less     than      40       years       when 

Oiivasa  and  the         /^\      'x  i  -itt       n       i   r 

child  chaitanya.  Chaitauva  was  l)orn.  W  e  find  trom 
the  accounts  in  the  several  biogra- 
phies of  Chaitanya  that  Crlvasa  and  his  wife, 
MalinT,  were  present  at  Jaganniitha  ^Ficra's  house 
when  Chaitanya  was  born  and  that  they  made 
many  beautiful  presents  to  the  bal)y  on  the 
occasion.  MalinI  was  a  friend  of  Cachi  Devi, 
Chaitanya's  mother,  a\  ho  had  already  given  birth 
to  nine  children  at  the  time.  From  this  fact  we 
may  take  Crlvasa  to  be  at  least  40  years  old  when 
Chaitanya  was  born  and  thus  we  take  1446  a.d. 
to  be  the  year  of  Crivasa's  birth.  Chaitanya  as 
a  boy  was  a  frequent  visitor  to  Crivasa's  house 
and  carried  out  the  or<l(M-s  of  (^rlvfisa  as  a  child 
does  of  his  elders  and  even  in  liis  youth 
he  was  often  accosted  by  (^rivasa  in  such 
language    as    "  AA'hether    l)ound,   thou     haughty 

l)oy?"(')- 


Cliaitditijd  Bhuynvdtii. 


CRIVASA.  49 

^rivasa  grew  into  a  spoilt  child  mixing  in  his 

early  youth  with    had    companions.     But   all    of 

a   sudden    there    came  a  chans^e  over  his  wicked 

life.     When  he  was  barely    17,    he   dreamt    one 

night   that  a    Sannyasi   knocked    at     his    door. 

^rlvasa     forthwith     came    to    meet   him.     The 

holy     man     said,     "  Crivasa,     you     have    only 

one    year    more    to    live,    take    this    warning." 

The   dream  vanished  and   the  day  dawned  when 

to    his    great    surprise     Crivasa     found     at    his 

gate    the    Sannyasi    of    his    dream    Avaiting     for 

him  ;  he  too    disappeared    having    delivered    the 

selfsame    message.     From    that   time     Crivasa's 

mirth    and   light-brained  follies  were  gone.     He 

had  the   sure   belief    that    the    span    of    his    life 

extended    for   a   year    only.     He    did  not  speak 

out  his    thoughts    but    became    emaciated,    lean 

and  pale,  eating  spare  meal  and  often  fasting  for 

fear.     When  sorely  troubled  in  this  way,  he  one 

day     came    across    the    following    line    in     the 

Vriliat    Naradiya    Purana  :  "  Sing  the  praises  of 

the    Lord,  nothing    else    will    save    a  man  from 

the     sorrows    of    the    world    in    this    kali  yuga 

(iron    age)  ".^      As  the   drowning    man    catches 

at  a  straw,    even  so   (^rlvasa    caught    the  w^ords 

,     .        which     henceforth      became      the 

The        turning 

point  in  his  life,     guiding     principle       of     his      life. 
But    the  words  were  no  straw,  they  proved  to  be 


"?c<i<t^  ^irg<t^  ^c^<t^^^  c^^^^  I 

"^l^  ^t"^^  ^tC^^  =Ttt^^  ^<I^»ll  II" 


G 


50  ClIAl'J'ANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

a  source  of  strtni'^th  and  support.  AVe  (|uote 
his  owu  statement,  "  I  took  the  <-loka  as  the 
word  of  God  Himself  and  thous^h  I  was 
derided  for  it,  T  left  all  work  and  resigned 
myself  absolutely  to  His  will.  When  people 
laughed  at  me  I  was  not  angry  but  awaited 
patiently  the  summons  from  Him,  losing  all 
attachment  for  home  and  the  world,"  He 
visited  the  house  of  Devaiianda  where  the 
Bhagavata  was  read  every  evening,  and  there 
became  the  most  attentive  listener.  AYe  find 
that  one  day  he  was  turned  out  of  the 
room  as  he  sobbed  loudly  and  showed  other 
signs  of  emotion,  which  the  audience  considered 
unbecoming  in  an  assembly  of  learned  men 
while  listening  to  sermons.^ 

The  one  year  i)assed,  and  on  the  last  day 
Crivasa  went  to  the  house  of  Devananda 
Acharya  as  usual.  The  text  for  that  day  was 
the  Chapter  of  Bhagavata,  Avhich  told  of  the 
devotion  of  Prahlfida,  the  son  of  Hiranyakacipu, 
and  while  hearing  the  interpretations,  all  of  a 
sudden  his  head  reeled,  and  in  a  moment  he  fell 
senseless  on  the  ground.  They  took  him  for 
dead  and  carried  him  out  of  the  house,  when 
the  same  Sanny^lsl  whom  he  had  seen  a  year 
before,  appeared  there  and  touching  (^rivjisa's 
body  said,    "  Arise  son,  you  have  many  things  to 


'   See  the  Cliiiitiuiyu  Bliugiivata,  Maclliyu  Kliaiula,  C'liaptcr  IX. 


CRIVASA.  51 

do  yet."  When  Crivasa  awoke  as  from  a  sound 
sleep,  the  figure  of  the  SannyasI,  to  his 
utter  amazement,  liad  vanished  from  the  spot.  ^ 

Thus  (^rlvasa  was  re-born  in  the  life  of  faith 
and  became  a  constant  companion  of  Advaita. 
They  both  sang  the  praises  of  God  aloud  in  their 
houses  and  in  the  streets.  Crivasa  had  a 
musical  voice  and  as  he  sang  hymns  and  praises 
of  God,  many  hearers  stood  b^  listening  to  the 
songs  with  rapt  attention,  though  there  were 
many  who  derided  him  for  the  excess  of  emo- 
tion he  displayed. 

When  Chaitanya  had  founded  a  tol  in  Nadiya 
at  the  house  of  Mukunda  Sanjaya  in  the  year 
1508,  ^rivasa  often  met  him  and  advised  him 
to  devote  himself  to  spiritual  culture  rather  than 
to  secular  learning,  but  the  young  scholar  not 
being  then  of  a  religious  bent  of  mind,  kept  out 
of  his  way. 

It  is  well  known  that  Chaitanya's  visit  to  Gaya 
brought  a  complete  change  into  his  life.  It 
was  there  he  first  saw  that  vision  of  God,  Avliich 
continued  till  the  last  moment  of  his  earthly 
career.  On  his  return  from  Gaya,  his  trances 
were  taken  for  fits  of  hysteria.  He  could  not 
speak   of   anything   other  than  of   his  God ;  the 


^  A  full  detail  of  this  incident  is  to  be  found  in  many  Vai§nava 
works  and  particularly  in  the  Chaitanya  Chandrodaya  Nfitaka  by 
Kavi  Karnapura. 


52  ClIAITANYA    AND    HIS   COMPANIONS. 

name  of  Ood  carelessly  uttered  even  hv  by- 
standers would  call  forth  a  flood  of  tears  from 
his  eyes.  He  would  often  sing  the  name  of  God 
for  hours  together  till  he  could  sing  or  speak  no 
more,  remaining  absorbed  in  his  vision,  uncons-  , 
cious  of  the  world,  for  days  and  nights,  taking 
no  thought  of  food  or  sleeping. 

Facing  the  spacious  historic  courtyard  of 
Crivasa's  house,  stood  thick  rows  of  kmula  plants, 
the  pearl-like  white  flowers  of  Avliich  presented  to 
the  sight  what  an  .Eschylus  would  describe  to  be 
the  eternal  smile  oP  the  landscape.  The  flowers 
bloomed  there  during  all  seasons,  and  Vrndavana 
Dasa  says  in  his  Chaitanya  Bhagavata  that  the 
constant  })lucking  of  them  by  the  worshippers 
and  boys,  morning  and  evening,  did  not  cause 
any  perceptible  diminution  in  their  number. 
There  the    small    band  of   Yaisnava 

The  Icunda- 

flowers  in  ^ri-      worsliippcrs  met  every  morning  and 

vasa's      court- 
yard and  talk       talked  ovcr  diverse    matters  as  they 

about      Chait-  ,  ^        n  •  n 

anya's  love  for       gathered     flowers     in    small    cane- 
baskets.      Here     (^uklamvara,    one 

of  these  Vaisnavas,  spoke  one  morning  of  the 
wonderful  love  for  God  that  dawned  on  Cliaitanya. 
Since  liis  return  from  Gaya  "  he  is  tlioroughly 
changed;  he  no  longer  cares  to  comb  his  beauti- 
ful curling  hair,  liis  mother  follows  liim  witli 
wistful  eyes  but  he  talks  not  with  her  and  cries 
'Oh  God'  and  sees  vision  of  Him  in  tlie  clouds ; 
he  runs  willi    his    hands    outstretched    and   eyes 


CRIVASA.  53 

full  of  tears  to  catch  the  Unseen ;  despising  his 
soft  coucli  and  white  hed  he  sleeps  on  the  bare 
earth ;  he  no  longer  wears  his  gold  chains,  ear- 
rings and  lockets  nor  the  fine  krsnakeli  cloth 
of  silk  with  black  borders ;  he  neither  takes  his 
bath  nor  does  he  eat  his  usual  meals;  he  no  longer 
worships  gods  and  goddesses,  nor  does  he  recite 
the  sacred  hymns  as  prescribed  by  the  Castras ; 
but  weeps  and  cries  'Oh  my  God,  do  not  hide 
your  face  from  me'. 

^uklamvara  added,  "  Chaitanya  has  promised 
to  tell  me  of  the  wonderful  vision  he  saw  at 
Gaya,  in  the  evening  to-day.  Since  he  saw  it, 
he  says,  he  cannot  control  his  feelings.  His 
mother  is  in  great  distress." 

They  all  said,  "He  was  proud  of  his  learning 

and  ridiculed  sacred    things.     Is  it  possible  that 

God  has  given  him  the  faith  which  he  lacked,  or 

is  it  madness  ?"     They  had  not  to  wait  long,  for 

^achl  Devi  sent    for    (^rlvasa   just  at  that  time, 

with    the    tidings  that    her    son  had 

'^gaSs.  '^        become  insane.  She  had  tried  Civadi 

Ghrta  and  other  medicines  prescribed 

by  the  physicians    but    these    had    produced    no 

effect.     The  malady    Avas    in    fact    the    same   as 

that  attril)utod    to    the    European    mystics    who 

displayed  similar  symptoms. 

(^rivasa  called  on  Chaitanya  forthwith  and 
after  long  and  earnest  talk  came  back  himself  a 
changed    man.     He    saw    in  Chaitanya  only  the 


51  CIIAITANYA    AN])    Ills    COMPANIONS. 

Ijloom  aiul  perfection  of  that  vision  of  Avhich  ho 
had  but  got  glimpses  himself  after  his  're-birth'. 
The  tears  that  flowed  from  Chaitanya's  eyes  while 
speaking  with  him,  appeared  to  liini  holier  than 
the  stream  of  the  Ganges,  and  as  he  listened  to 
him,  flashes  of  a  new  light  dispelled  his  spiritual 
doubts,  and  it  seemed  to  Crivasa  that  he  too 
saw  the  One  whose  glorious  vision  had  so  abso- 
lutely possessed  the  young  scholar.  Crivasa 
could  not  help  bowing  down  before  Chaitanya, 
though  he  was  much  his  junior,  and  when  at 
parting,  Chaitanya  with  joined  hands  prayed 
Crivasa  to  find  a  cure  for  his  insanity,  distressed 
as  he  was  for  his  mother,  Crivasa  said,  "Your 
insanity  is  what  we  all  covet.  The  addiction 
to  worldly  pleasures  which  last  for  a  moment 
only  plunging  men  shortly  after  into  a  sea  of 
misfortune,  is  real  insanity."  What  Crivasa 
felt,  all  people  of  Nadiyil  felt  shortly  after 
except  the  l^hattjlcharyyas,  ever  vain  of  their 
great  learning. 

The  courtyard  in  Crivasa's  house  became  the 
favourite  resort  of  Oliaitanya  ev(M'y  evening. 
It  was  here  that  the  daily  growing*  number  of 
his  follow(n's  met  aiul  sani;'  kh-ha/a  songs  from 
sun-set  to  sun-rise,  whih^  h(^  inspired    th(Mn   with 

his  trances    standing    in    the  centre 
""'"f^'S!"       of  them.     It    was   Inn-e    that    when 

Crivasa's   only    son    died  one  niglit, 
he  whispered    to    tlie    women    of  tlie    house  not 


CRIVASA.  55 

to  mourn  aloud  lest  tlio^  heavenly  joy  imparted 
hy  Cliaitanya's  ecstasies  of  love  might  he  dis- 
turbed, for  in  them  the  Vaisnavas  saw  the 
real  vision  of  God-in-man.  His  son  had  died 
at  7-30  in  the  night  and  the  klrtana  continued 
till  2  A.M.  Never  before  had  (^rivasa's  songs 
been  so  fervent  and  impressive.  Chaitanya 
at  last  heard  of  the  bereavement  lliat  had  he- 
fallen  his  friend,  and  stopped  klrtana.  Upon 
Crivasa's  asking  permission  of  him  to  leave 
home  for  the  cremation  of  the  child,  Chaitanya 
said,  "How  can  I  leave  the  company  of  one  who 
forgot  the  loss  of  his  only  son  for  my  love  !"^ 
Here  in  this  courtyard  of  Crivasa,  Chaitanya 
often  discussed  religious  matters  Avith  Cridhara, 
the  poor  Brahmin,  rich  in  faith  and  character, 
whose  humble  calling  was  to  sell  plantain-leaves 
in  the  streets.  In  his  childhood,  Chaitanya  used 
often  good  humouredly  to  advise  Cridhara  to 
earn  money  by  performing  priestly  functions  in 
the  houses  of  those  who  worshipped  Chandi  and 
other  local  deities  with  great  pomp.  "  Why 
should  you,"  he  had  once  asked,  "  be  content 
with  your  rags  and  wretched  hut  ?  "  Cridhara's 
meek  answers  on  such  occasions  would  be  "  Well 
hast  thou  said,  oh  Brahmin  lad,  yet  time  passes 
and  at    the   end  makes  no  dilference.     The  king 

C^  \5^  Jf^  ^  Itf^  (.W^-CH  II" 
Chaitanya  Bhagavafa,  Madhya  Khaiida,  Chap.  XXV. 


156  CHAITANYA    AND    IIIS   COMPANIONS. 

ill  his  i^olden  liull    i)artHlves    of    rich  meals,    and 
hcliold    tlie    hirds    livt;    on    tlie    ])oug"lis  of  trees. 
Wlieii    death    comes    it  levels  all.     Eacli  has  his 
lot  apport'oned  by   God."  ^     ^rldhava,  the  faith- 
ful, was  now  a  constant  companion  of  Chaitaiiya. 
Here    in    this    courtyard    Crivasa    used    to   read 
passages  from  the  Gitagovinda  and  the  Bliagavata 
making    clear     the    hidden    meaning  of  Krsna's 
love  and  sports  in  the   Vrndjl  groves.     The  earth 
earthy — the  flesh  and  its  desires — vanished  before 
his  glowing  speech,    the  texts    being  interpreted 
as  symbolic  forms  of  the  highest  spiritual  truths. 
Chaitanya  became  frenzied    with  joy  as  he  heard 
these,  and  said  to  (^rlvasa  "say  again    what   you 
said   and    tell    nu;    more,  beloved  friend,  sweeter 
than    nectar    is  your   speech."     On  one  occasion 
when  Chaitanya  lay  nnconscions   in    this    court- 
yard,   his    face    beaming  with  joy  at  the  beatific 
vision,  Advaita  touched  the  dust  of  his  feet  with 
reverence,  which  he    would  never  alloAV  while  in 
sense.     Discovering    this   afterw^ards    Chaitanya 
admonished  this  old  scholar    saying    "Yours  is  a 
sea   of   devotion    and  faith,  mine  is  a  mere  well. 
Why   do   you   covet   it  from  so  small  a  place  ?  " 


^'Itf'l  JTst^  ^t^  ^t^  ^^  ^^  II 

?^^^  'itr^  ^t^l  fw^i  '(tT)  n^^ 

JTUk  f^lSf  ^il  ^cg?  5r'.{?  X^\ri  \\" 
Chaitanija  BhUfjayalu,  Madlnjd  Klia7idii,  Chap.  17//. 


CRIVASA.  57 

It  was  in  ^rivasa's  courtyard  that  Chaitanya 
acted  as  a  sweeper  and  cleansed  the  temple  of 
Krsna  with  a  broom,  calling  himself  '  Krsner 
haddipa  ' — Krsna's  sweeper  all  the  while  and 
weeping  for  joy  at  his  ow^n  humility.  Here 
Narayani, — the  niece  of  ^rivasa,  who  became 
latterly  celebrated  as  the  mother  of  the  historian 
Vrndavana  Dasa,  is  said  to  have  shown  spiritual 
tendencies  even  when  she  was  a  girl  of  4,  inspired 
by  Chaitanya.  Here  the  Mahomedan  tailor  of 
^rivasa's  house  attracted  by  the  emotional  fervour 
of  Chaitanya,  openly  renounced  his  faith  and 
turned  a  Vaisnava.  From  this  courtyard  Advaita 
reverentially  took  up  some  dust  and  exclaimed 
"How  can  I  claim  the  fortune  of  Crivasa  whose 
courtyard  is  the  favourite  haunt  of  Chaitanya  ?"' 
Here  Chaitanya  once  ate  some  grains  of  coarse  rice 
from  the  begging  bowl  of  Cuklamvara,  the 
ascetic,  and  said  "No  poor  food  is  this,  received 
from  the  hands  of  one  of  the  most  pious  of  men, 
it  gives  purity  of  heart  to  its  pertaker." 

The  courtyard  of  Crivasa's  house  has  a 
hundred  associations  of  Chaitanya.  It  is 
now  in  the  bed  of  the  Ganges,  but  the  sanctity 
of  this  shrine  is  now  attributed  to  a  spot  now 
called  by  the  same  name  and  considered  a  holy 
place  by  a  thousand  of  pilgrims  who  visit  it 
annually. 

The  Chaitanya  Ohandrodaya  Ndtaka. 
H 


58  CHAITANYA    AND    HlS    COMPANIONS. 

In    the    (^ri  Krsna  play    organised    by  Cliai- 

tanya,    played   at    the    house    of     liuddhimanta 

Kliau   of    Nadiya   who   bore    the    cost,    ^rivasa 

took  the  part  of  tlie  musician-sage  Nilrada  which 

he  played  very  well.     Chaitanya  himself  figured 

as  "llukminl",  one  of  the  queens  of    Kisna,  and 

so  perfect   was    his    play    that    even  (^achi,    liis 

mother,  could  not  recognise    him    in  his    female 

The  play    oi-a-     giii^G.     lu    Cliaitauya     Chandro- 
nisedi.ychaitanja.     ^^.^^,.^     ^^    j^.^^.j     Karuapilra,     a 

contemporary  poet,  (^rivasa  as  Narada  is 
thus  described.  "He  presents  himself  on  the 
stage  with  his  long  grey  beard  and  sandal  marks 
all  over  his  body.  Prom  his  left  sboulder  hangs 
his  lyre  and  in  his  right  hand  he  holds  the  sacred 
kuga  grass.  As  he  makes  his  appearance  he 
hears  the  music  of  Cri  Krsna's  flute  floating 
from  afar  and  thus  muses.  "Is  it  the  merry 
chuckle  of  the  geese  as  they  sportively  swim  in 
the  lake  of  sweet  love  or  the  humming  of  bees 
as  they  suck  honey  from  the  blooming 
flowers  in  a  lovely  garden  r" 

On  the  eve  of  the  play  Chaitanya  had 
said  "Those  who  have  entirely  subdued  the 
passions  of  the  flesh  should  only  be  entitled  to 
Avitness  this  play  of  ours''.  He  had  feared  lest 
the  loves  of  liadha-Krsna  be  interpreted  by 
materialistic  people  as  sensual  love."  To  this 
Crivasa  and  Advaita  both  replied  "Take  out 
our  names  from  the  list  first ;  for  if  this    be    the 


CRIVASA.  59 

law   to-day,    we   are   not   fit,"   and     Chaitanya 
smiled  at  this, 

Haridasa  and  Nityananda  lived  for  two  years 
in    Crivasa's   house   (1508-1510  A.D.)    One  was 
a  Mahomedan  and  the    other   an   ascetic  and  no 
respecter   of  caste.     The    propriety   of  Crivasa's 
conduct  in   receiving    these   guests  at  his  house 
was  called   in    question    by  the  orthodox    Hindu 
community,   but    he    paid    no  heed   to  their  dis- 
approval.   The    Chaitanya   Bhagavata   says   that 
"Crivasa  and  the  members  of  his  family   were 
devoted  to  Chaitanya  and  to  him  alone.  They  did 
not  believe  in   any    other    god    or     goddess."  ^ 
Nityananda  and  Haridasa  remained  in    Crivasa's 
house,     and   every     morning    they  made    their 
round    in    the    city    singing    praises  of  God  and 
calling  on  the   house-holders    to  give  them  alms. 
When,    however,   they   came  to    give  them  alms, 
the  apostles  said  "Sing  the    praises  of   the    Lord 
and  lead  holy  lives.     This  is  the  alms  we  beg  of 
you, — none  other." 

Often  did  Chaitanya  come  out  with  his 
Saiiklrtaiia  party  and  march  through  the  streets 
of  Nadiya.  The  Bhattacharyas  were  greatly 
offended ;  they  did  not  accept  the  emotional 
creed  of  hhakti.  They  were  proud  of  their 
learning  and   power,    and    made    representations 


§1^^*¥  H'^  ^  li^  CW^-C?R|  II' 


60  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

to  the  Kazi  praying  him  to  stop  the  loud  uproar 
of  the  Yaisnavas  in  the  public  streets.  The 
Vaisnavas  sang  the  name  of  God  "with  the 
psaltery  and  the  high  sounding  cymbals"  in 
the  streets,  but  the  courtyard  of  Crivilsa's  house 
was,  of  course,  the  central  meeting  place  of  the 
band.  At  one  time  a  rumour  passed  current 
that  a  ship  carrying  soldiers  of  the  Emperor  was 
about  to  land  in  the  city  of  Nadiya  to  arrest  the 
„„    ^   ^.,        ,        offenders.     Even     some     of     the 

ihe  hostile  people, 

unbelievers  got  alarmed  at  this 
rumour.  The  Chaitanya  Bhagavata  records  the 
following  conversation  among  some  of  them. 
One  said  "I  had  already  suggested  that  the  house 
of  Crivasa,  the  resort  of  the  Vaisnavas,  should 
be  at  once  destroyed  and  thrown  into  the  Ganges. 
You  did  not  take  recourse  to  force  which  is  the 
only  remedy  in  such  cases.  Now  you  will  see 
how  many  innocent  men  will  suffer  for  the 
wickedness  of  these  Vaisnavas."  Another  said 
"why  should  we  be  alarmed  ?  If  the  King's 
soldiers  come ,  we  will  have  Crivasa  arrested, 
and  the  matter  will  end  there." 

His  enemies  had  recourse  to  various  means 
to  annoy  Crivasa.  We  find  it  mentioned  in  the 
biographies  of  Chaitanya  that  a  Brahmrin  of 
Nadiya,  named  Gopal  Chilpal,  kept  at  the  gate  of 
Crivasa  objects  of  tdntric  rites  which  caused  a 
horror  to  the  Vaisnavas.  These  consisted  of  meat 
and   wine  with  which  Chandl    was  worshipped. 


CKIVASA.  61 

But  all  this  opposition  ended  when  Chaitanya 
took  the  Sannyasi's  vows.  This  implied  his 
desertion  of  Nadiya  for  ever.  A  sannyasi  may 
never  revisit  his  native  place  nor  live  with  his 
family  ever  after  in  life.  Chaitanya  wore  rags 
and  shaved  his  head  and  became  a  Sannyasi  when 
only  24  years  old.  Even  his  enemies  were 
sorry  to  see  him  cut  off  all  earthly  ties  while 
still  so  young.  The  people  had  all  along  felt  a 
sense  of  love  for  this  divine  man, 

Chaitanya's  Saim-  til  o 

yas  and  the  general       tllOUgh     SOmC     did    UOt  apprOVC  01 

m  inning.  ^^^  f  orwarducss  and  over-winning 

manners  of  a  few  of  his  followers.  It  was  a 
day  of  general  lamentation  in  Nadiya.  Erom  the 
day  when  Chaitanya  left  the  place  for  ever,  the 
courtyard  of  Crlvasa  became  as  it  were  a  desert 
in  the  eyes  of  his  numerous  friends  and  associates. 
The  last  part  of  (^rivasa's  life  was  spent  in  re- 
collecting the  incidents  of  Chaitanya's  early  life. 
And  Murarl  Gupta,  a  great  scholar  of  Nadiya, 
was     the      first     to    write  notes 

Crivasa's  grief.  /-ni      •!  ? 

in  Sanskrit  verse  on  Chaitanya  s 
life,  at  the  order  of  ^rivasa,  who  spoke  of 
nothing  but  of  Chaitanya  after  his  desertion  of 
Nadiya  and  dreamt  of  him  in  his  sleep  by 
night.  Often  while  gathering  fiowers  for 
worship  he  recollected  Chaitanya  and  fainted 
away  in  grief,  the  basket  of  flowers  falling  from 
his  unconscious  hands.  Sometimes  going  to  the 
banks    of    the    Ganges,    he    missed    his    great 


62  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

companion  and  sat  for  hoars  together  meditating 
on  him  who  was  dearer  to  him  than  everything 
else  in  the  world  and  he  forgot  that  he  had  come 
there  to  bathe.  In  his  own  courtyard,  the 
sankirfana  party  sang  the  praises  of  the  Lord 
again  with  the  high-sounding  cymhals,  the 
timbrel  and  dance,  and  he  stood  there  listening  to 
the  singers  but  often  his  A^oice  was  clicked 
with  tears  and  he  fell  down  on  the  bare  earth 
in  great  grief  crying  like  a  child.  Sometimes 
he  felt  that  the  God  of  his  songs  and  Chaitanya 
were  the  same,  so  that  while  offering  flowers 
to  Krsna  instead  of  saying  '  I  bow  to  thee,  oh 
Krsna,'  he  said  unconsciously  '  I  bow  to  thee, 
oh  Chaitanya.'  And  as  he  remembered  himself, 
tears  rolled  down  his  cheeks. 

The  residents  of  Nadiya  all  except  Chai- 
tanya's  wife  and  mother,  had  permission  to 
go  and  see  him  once  a  year  at  Puri.  This 
was  on  the  occasion  of  the  great  Car 
festivities.  Needless  to  say  that  Crlvasa  was 
one  of  the  foremost  to  avail  himself  of  this 
opportunity.  How  happy  was  once  more  the 
venerable  old  man  of  Nadiya  to  meet  his  young 
"  master "  and  sing  the  name  of  God  in  the 
kirtana  party  at  Puri !  We  find  him  once  in  a 
delirium  of  ioy  pushinsr   throu2:h 

(^rlvasa  at  Puri.  -J    ^     1  o  o 

the  crowd  to  be  near  Chaitanya. 
In  his  attempt  he  pressed  against  Pratjlpa 
Rudra,   the  king.     Upon  which    Harichandana, 


CRIVASA.  6S 

his  minister,  pushed  him  away  with  his  hands ; 
but  the  old  man's  ecstasies  knew  no  hounds,  and 
he  a^ain  unconsciously  pressed  upon  the  king 
on  which  the  minister  again  pushed  him 
away  with  his  hands,  (^rivasa  got  angry  and 
slapped  the  minister  on  his  cheek.  Harichandana 
was  very  angry,  but  Pratapa  Rudra  said  "  Do 
not  be  oifended  with  him  ;  his  devotion  for  the 
Master  is  such  that  we  are  not  worthy  of  touch- 
ing the  dust  of  his  feet."^ 

While  parting  from  Chaitanya  on  the  expira- 
tion of  the  few  days  he  was  permitted  to  stay 
at  Puri  in  the  year,  he  wept  every  time  like  a 
child  leaving  his  mother,  and  on  one  of  these 
occasions  Chaitanya  is  said  to  have  spoken  to 
him  thus :  "  Do  not  weep,  vetaran  scholar. 
Though  I  am  at  Purl,  I  shall  be  always  in 
spirit  in  your  courtyard.  That  place  and  the 
kitchen  of  my  dear  mother  where  I  took  meals 
cooked  by  her  hands,  I  can  never  for  a  moment 
forget.  You  will  feel  my  presence  when  the 
Sankwtana  party  assemble  in  your  courtyard  and 
sing  Krsna's  name." 

(^rivasa's  family  had  two  residential  houses, 
one  at  Nadiya  and  the  other  at  Kumarhatta.  In 
the  latter  place  there  is  a  mound  of  earth  mark- 
ing the  spot  which  was  once  his  home. 

^   See  the  Chaitanya  Charitamrta. 


VI.     Ilai'ldasa. 

One  of  the  most  ardent  and  sincere  of  Chai- 
tanya's  companions — one  Avho  showed  his  ii;reat 
devotion  for  him  and  adhered  to  his  spiritual 
convictions  in  the  teeth  of  great  persecution — 
was  Haridasa,  popularly  known  as  yavana  Hari- 
dasa, — the  Mahomedan.  AVe  liave  not  come 
across  his  Mahomedan  name.  He  was  given  the 
Hindu  name  'Haridasa'  after  his  conversion  to 
Yaisnavism.  His  father's  name  was  Malai  Kazi. 
He  was  the  owner  of  a  consideraljle  property  in 
the  district  of  Ambua,  and  as  the  name  Kazi 
implies,  was  a  Mahomedan  Magistrate.  Haridasa 
Avas  horn  in  Bu(lan  near  Banagram  in  the 
district  of  Jessore  about  the  year  IJ^Gl  A.D. 
He  came  to  Santipur  as  a  young  man  and 
,     was    converted   to    the   Vaisiiava 

Early      life      and  ^  .      i     i   • 

conversion  to  Vais-  faitli  hy  Advaita.  We  hnd  hun 
living  at  the  house  or  yrivasa  in 
Nadiya  between  ]  508-1510.  Here  Nityananda 
and  he  became  fast  friends  and  both  preached 
the  Chaitanya-cult  in  the  city  and  its  suburbs. 
As  already  mentioned,  they  visited  the  houses  of 
the  villagers  as  beggars  and  in  the  place  of  alms 
which  the  good  people  were  ready  to  give  them, 
they  asked  for  a  promise  on  their  part  to  sing 
the  praises  of  God  and  lead  pure  lives. 


HARIDAS,  65 

Gorili  Kazi  who  was  the  Mahomedan  Kazi 
of  Kulia,  a  ward  of  Nadiya,  was  greatly 
enraged  to  find  a  Mahomedan  l^ecome  a  Hindu 
convert;  and  he  reported  the  matter  to  the 
Emperor  of  Gauda.  Orders  were  received  to  try 
him  in  a  court  presided  over  by  12  Kazis,  and 
they  passed  the  unanimous  judg- 

Persecution.  ■    ii      i    •£  i  i 'ii  •   ^     i      • 

ment  that  it  he  still  persisted  m 
reciting  the  name  of  Hari  through  the  streets, 
he  should  be  publicly  whipped  in  22  different 
markets  of  the  country.  This  was  done. 
'^Jhe  persecution  was  so  unceasing  and  the 
punishment  so  severe  that  he  was  at  one 
time  taken  for  dead.  But  Haridasa  triumphed 
over  all  this  and  kept  to  his  course  out  of  the 
great  love  he  bore  to  Chaitanya. 

In  his  youth  Haridasa  had  for  a  time  led  a 
life  of  penance  passing  through  a  process  of 
spiritual  training  in  the  jungly  tracts  of  Benapole 
near  Jessore.  It  is  well  known  that  Eamchan- 
dra  Khan,  a  powerful  local  zemindar  and  a 
bully,  sent  a  beautiful  Moghul  harlot  to  Haridjlsa 
promising  her  a   reward  if   she  could  succeed  in 

winning  him  to  the  pleasures  of 
tenqSon!^^  ^     worldly  life.      Haridjlsa  lived 

in  a  small  hut  at  Benapole  where 
the  harlot  visited  him  one  evening«and  said  that 
she  was  smitten  Avith  love  for  him.  Haridasa  said 
he  would  attend  to  her  after  saying  his  prayeis. 
Saying  so  he  shut  liis  eyes  in  order  to  take  the 
I 


GO  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

fixed  numl)er  of  God's  name  which  were  three 
lacs  by  day  and  night.  So  quiet  and  lonely  was 
the  place  and  so  profound  was  the  meditative 
mood  of  Haridclsa,  that  his  lovely  seducer  waited 
till  morning  without  a  word  and  when  at  the 
dawn  of  the  day  people  gathered  at  the  place  to 
see  the  holv  man  she  went  awav  savin 2:  she 
would  visit  him  the  next  evenins;.  That  ni<?ht  also 
she  had  a  similar  experience,  the  all  ahsorving 
meditation  of  Haridasa  could  not  he  disturbed, 
and  on  the  third  night  she  could  not  resist 
the  influence  of  the  saintly  life  before  her.  To 
the  great  disappointment  of  llamchandra  Khan 
The  harlot  turned  ^^  ^^^^^  discovcrcd  that  the  beauti- 
a  devote.  ful  Mogliul  courtlzau    had  taken 

to  the  life  of  a  Vaisijava  recluse  by  shaving 
her  head  and  accepting  Haridasa  as  her  spiritual 
guide.  We  know  from  the  accounts  given 
in  tlie  Chaitanya  Charitamrta 
how  a  retribution  came  to  Eama- 
chandra  Khan  from  the  most  High  for  oppress- 
ing Haridasa  and  doing  other  wicked  things. 
He  had  insulted  before  this  Nityilnanda  who  had 
been  a  guest  at  his  house  one  night.  He  had 
grown  proud  of  his  army  and  refused  to  jiay 
annual  revenue  to  the  Mahoniedan  court.  A 
powerful  army  of  tlio  Emperor  laid  si(^go  to  his 
fortitied  town  and  making  a  forciljlo  entry  into 
it,  occupi(Hl  it,  defiHng  his  temples  with  the  Idood 
of  cows  slain  there. 


A  retribution 


HARIDASA.  67 

Kavi  Karnaptira  relates  that    in    (he  drama- 
tic    performance    organised    by    Chaitanya    at 

Nadiya,  Haridasa  played  the  part 
yei^7n^the^d?ania-  ^f  thc  Sutradliara.  He  had  a 
gLnb'/chaL";:     turban  on  his  head,    ear-rings    on 

his  ears,  a  string  of  pearls  on  his 
neck  and  bracelets  on  his  arms.  Erom  his 
shoulders  hang  a  flowing  wreath  of  field-flowers. 
The  dramatic  character  representmg  the  abstract 
virtue  of  Brotherhood  asked  the  Deity  of  love 
and  faith  on  the  stage,  how  it  was  that  a  Maho- 
medan  was  allowed  to  take  part  in  the  religious 
functions  of  the  Hindus.  The  latter  said  "The 
way  of  love  and  faith  is  different  from  the  one 
prescribed    in    the    Castras."     Brotherhood    said 

"If  one  takes  an  irregular  course, 
dSslt^Llt™     it  will  take  a  long  time  to   arrive 

at  the  spiritual  goal,  if  it  is  to  be 
attained  at  all  by  such  means."  The  Deity  of 
love  and  faith  replied  "Not  so  always,  though  it 
may  be  true  generally  speaking.  There  are 
occasions  when  by  embracing  an  undefined  and 
irregular  course  the  destination  is  reached  the 
sooner.  Behold,  when  the  country  is  deluged 
with  flood  and  there  is  no  fixed  course  for  the 
boat  to  take,  it  goes  faster  to  its  destination 
by  following  an  undefined  course  than  it  would 
do  by  taking  the  zigzag  course  of  a  well-defined 
river  in  the  dry  season.^ 

^  See  Chaitanya  Chandrodaya    Natakam  by  Kavi  Karnaptira,    (Ber- 
hampur  Edition),  Act  III,  Scene  iii,  pp.  169-170. 


68  CHAITANYA    AND    lllS    CU:H1' AXIONS. 

This  refers  to  the  violiitioii  of  Cfistric  ordi- 
nances whieli  marked  tlie  course  of  the  Yaisuavas 
in  the  pursuit  of  their  spiritual  goal.  The  Maho- 
medans  we;e  oll'ered  the  same  respect  and,  what 
is  more,  the  same  social  prestige  as  the  Hindus, 
in  their  own  community.  The  flood  is  here  the  one 
of  faith  and  devotion  brought  on  by  Chaitanya. 

When    Ilaridasa  was  at  Silntipur  living  with 

Advaita,  the    latter  was  for  some- 

c.ii"r'tTth"X      time      excommunicated     by    the 

nin.iu     coi.mui-      orthodox  community  for    his  inti- 

nity.  ^ 

mate  associations  with  a  Maho- 
medan.  A  public  diet  took  place  there  in  which 
Haridasa  made  a  speech  quoting  chapter  and 
verse  from  various  Sanskrit  works  and  success- 
fully meeting  all  the  arguments  advanced  by 
his  chief  opponent  Yadunandana  Acharya  Avlio 
held  an  undisputedly  high  position  as  a  scholar 
not  only  at  Santipur  but  in  the  neighbouring 
districts.  The  diet  resulted  in  the  hitter's  accept- 
ing the  creed  of  Vaisiiavism  as  propounded  by 
Ilaridclsa.  Ilis  triumph  over  such  a  powerful 
adversary,  no  less  than  his  great  meekness  of 
character  and  exalted  life,  overcome  the  preju- 
dices of  the  i)cople  of  Santipiu"  and  thence- 
forward they  ceased  their  hostile  attitude  towards 
Haridasa  and  to  his  friend  Advaita. 

From  Santipur  Haridasa  came  to  the  village 
of  Fuliya  the  l)irtli  place  of  the  distinguished 
Bengali    poet    Kittivasa.       Here    the    inspiring 


HARIDAS  \ 


69 


presence  of  Haridasa  made  a  deep  and  profound 
impression  on  a  Brahman  scholar  named  Eamdasa 
who  acknowledged  the  Mahomedan  devotee  as 
his  Guru — spiritual  master. 

Haridasa  followed  Chailanya  at  PurT.  And 
out  of  respect  for  orthodox  notions  he  lived  out- 
side the  Puri  temples.  But  Chaitanya  paid  him 
a  visit  there  almost  every  day.  We  have  already 
noticed  that  in  this  resort  of  Haridasa  outside 
the  Temple  jurisdiction,  Sanatana  lived  for  a  while 
hefore  going  to  Vrndavana. 

Sanatana's  admiration  for  Haridasa's  character 
was  great.  Once  he  praised  him  iu  the  follow- 
ing words  :  "  There  are  those  who  preach 
religious  truths  but  do  not  live  holy  lives  them- 
selves. Others  there  are  who  lead  pure  lives 
as  religious  recluses,  cut  off  from  men.  But 
you  have  not  only  preached  the  truths  yourself 
but  have  practised  them  in  your  OAvn  life.  Who 
is  there,  so  noble  and  good  as  you  are  ?  "^ 
Chaitanya  also  admired  him  thus :  "  Your 
Tho  respect  iu  ^^^^V  thoughts  are  as  the  streams 
which  he  was  hcki.     ^f  ^j^^  Gaugcs  iu  which  your  soul 

bathes  every  hour.  Your  pious  acts  earn  for 
you  that  virtue  which  the  people  seek  in  sacri- 
ficial rites  prescribed  in  the  Castras.  You  are 
constantly    in    touch    with    the  loftiest  of  ideals 

(1)     "^MC^  ^t^tC^  C^^  1^1  ^C^  0^t^  I 

^WH  ^^\^  ^\c^^  ■^^  I^  Tt^I  I 

The  Chaitauya  Charitanirta.  Antyakhanda  Chap.  IV. 


70  CJIAITANYA    AND    IIJS    COMPANIONS. 

wliit'li  i;iv('  you  (Ik;  sanic  lucrit  ns  ihr,  .study 
of  the  A^edfis.  AVJiat  Sfidlui  or  ]5mliman  is  there 
wlio  is  good  tind  great  as  you  arc?  " 

Wlien  he  felt  the  approacli  of  d(>atli  he  told 
Chaitaiiya  that  he  Avas  disahled  by  age  from 
reciting  the  luiinher  of  names  of  Cod  daily  that 
he  had  done  for  long  years.  Chaitanya  said 
"  You  should  not  do  anytliing  to  weaken  the 
body.  You  are  a  true  saint  and  may  dispense 
with  the  forms."  That  very  night  Avhen  he  felt 
the  approach  of  death  Avith  joined  hands  he  said 
to  Chaitanya  "  Pray  remain  near  me  at  my  last 
moment,  so  that  I  may  see  that  beautiful  face 
of  yours  Avhich  has  been  the  fountain  of  all  my 
spiritual  bliss.  Oh  my  friends  present  here, 
recite  the  name  of  my  Master.  So  that  I  may 
hear  the  SAveet  name  of  Chaitanya  uttered  by 
yo\i.  This  is  the  last  great  act  of  kindness  I 
expect  to  receive  at   your  hands. "-^     Turning   to 

(3)    "^^^  s(fl^  ciimt<i  w^  ^1 

fk^\^  ^\m  (.tu\<\  ft^-^^s^  ^t^ 

Tho  last  scene  is  tlnis  descrilicd  — 

Tm  c^5  ^^  ^^  ^'^  ^t^  T^  II 
Ti^w^  '^\f^  ^f^  ^^  Ri  I 
^^  -^^  tw  c<i'3^^'sr^  f^i  II 
^f^  l^^  fii^  -^m  ^1^  ^t?  I 

The  Chaitanya  Cliaritiimrta  Antya  Khantla  Chaj).  X. 


HARIDAS,  71 

Chaifcanya  he  said  again  "A  low  Ijorn,  vile  fellow 
I  was,  through  your  grace  I  have  been  saved,  and 
have  known  the  sweets  of  a  higher  life.  You  have 
His  last  moments,  givou  me  au  exaltcd  rank  in  the 
society  of  Hindus  so  that  though  a  Mahomedan  I 
have  received  presents  at  the  CrcTddha  ceremony 
from  high-caste  Hindus,  as  though  I  were  a 
Brilhman.  But  all  this  temporal  glory  is  nothing 
as  compared  with  the  spiritual  bliss  which  you 
have  brought  to  my  soul."  When  his  last  moment 
came,  Chaitanya  called  all  his  companions 
near  the  bed  of  the  venerable  saint  and  at  his 
bidding  the  best  of  the  Erahmaus  bowed  at  the 
feet  of  the  departing  sage  while  all  sang  the 
praises  of  God.  As  the  last  flicker  of  life  passed 
away,  his  remains  were  carried  to  the  sea  coast, 
where  Chaitanya  with  his  own  hands  dug  up 
the  sand  and  made  a  burial  place  for  him. 

It  has  been  attempted  by  later  Vaisnava 
historians  to  prove  that  Haridasa  though  brouo-ht 
up  by  a  Mahomedan,  was  a  Brahman  by  birth 
and  as  a  child  was  taken  care  of  by  Malai  Kazi. 
Malai  Kazi  was  not  his  father  ])ut  his  god-father. 
In  the  earlier  writings,  however,  no  reference  as 
to  his  Brahmanic  origin  is  found  ;  he  is  simply 
called  '  Mahomedan  '  Haridasa.  We  have  often 
found  that  as  the  Vaisnava  circle  gradually 
expanded  itself,  it  took  by  degrees  a  secterian 
Attempts  to  prove     cliaractcr,  relaxing  its  high  prin- 

him    of    Hindu  ex-  .     ,  „  ,  ,  . 

traction.  ciplcs  ot  brothcrliood  given    to    it 


iZ  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

hy  Chaitanva  and  Nityrmanda.  The  caste- 
j)rejudicos  of  the  orthodox  community  gradually 
entered  into  it  and  the  descendants  of 
Gosains — the  Gurus  of  Yaisnavas — Avho  were 
mostly  J^rahmans — felt  it  as  a  stigma  on  their 
l)edigrce  that  their  ancestors  had  eaten  from  the 
same  plate  with  one  who  by  hirth  was  a  Maho- 
medan,  and  had  l)owed  at  his  feet,  nay  more,  had 
in  a  few  cases,  acknowledged  him  as  their  reli- 
gious teacher.  They  have  thus  probably  invented 
stories  to  mitigate  the  force  of  this  evil  as  far  as 
possible  by  attributi'.g  Erahmanic  ancestry  to 
Haridasa.  Chaitauya  was  no  believer  in  caste, 
nor  in  any  difference  l)etween  man  and  man. 
His  motto  was  the  text  of  the  Vrhat  Naradiya 
Purilna  "  Even  a  Chaiuhil  is  to  be  honoured 
more  than  a  Brahman  if  the  former  has  attained 
the  knowledge  of  God."  As  an  ascetic  he  could 
not  have  any  caste-prejudices  himself,  but  he 
admired  freedom  from  them  in  those  of  his 
followers  who  were  not  ascetics  but  belonared  to 
the  orthodox  community.  We  find  it  mentioned 
in  the  Chaitanya  Charitilmrta  that  one  Kalidasa, 
a  Kayastha,  had  made  it  his  mission  to  eat  the 
refuse  food  from  the  plate  of  such  low-caste 
,  ..      ,  people  as  Doms   and    llfidls   with 

Kiilidiisa  tlio  great       ■■•        ^ 

ci.iin.piou  of  casto-     tlic    fuU  approval  of    Chaitanva. 

reform.  _    .     _  ^  ^  "^ 

Kalidasa  defended  his  procedure 
l)y  saying  that  when  the  taking  of  meal  touched 
by  others  formed    siicli    an    important    factor  of 


LOKANATHA  GOSVAMI  73 

the  grounds  for  condemning  a  man  in  society, 
it  was  necessary  to  tak3  the  extreme  step,  that  he 
did,  in  order  to  convince  the  people  of  the  folly 
of  such  a  view. 


VII. — Lokcmatha  Goscdml. 

The  history  of  the  Vaisnavas  in  Bengal,  so 
full  of  sacrifices  and  hardships  undergone  for  the 
sake  of  religion,  hardly  presents  a  more  striking 
example  of  patient  faith  and  silent  self -dedication 
to  Chaitanya  than  that  of  the  famous  hermit 
Lokanatha  Gosvami.  The  Vaisnava  biographers, 
so  lavish  in  their  praise  of  other  leaders  of  their 
faith  and  in  minute  details  of  their  lives,  are 
strangely  silent  about  Lokanatha  whose  pure  life, 
spiritual  fervour  and  uncompromising  adherence 
to  his  lofty  ideals  are  almost  unique  in  Vaisnava 
history.  The  writers  make  little  more  than 
an  incidental  reference  to  his  life  given  in  the 
biographical  notices  of  other  Vaisnava  worthies. 

Lokanatha  was  the  son  of  a  Kulin  Brahman 
named  Padmanabha  Chakravartl  of  Talgoria,  a 
village  in  the  district  of  Jessore.  His  mother's 
name  was  Sita  and  he  was  born  about  the  year 
li90  A.D.  Lokanath  was  a  fellow-student  of 
Chaitanya,    reading    Avith   him  at 

Pccligieo  and  early       ^j^^     ^^     ^oZ  Paudit  Gaiiga    DaS     at 

Nadiya.      When   Ohaitanya's  life 
suddenly    took   the    religious    turn,  for  which  it 
was  predestined,  no  one  admired   it   more   than 
J 


7 A  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

Lokanfitlia,  who  for  some  time  was  his  constant 
companion,  Cliaitanya  wanted  him  to  ^.^o  to 
Vrndavana  to  reclaim  the  deserted  shrine,  a 
mission  for  the  accomplishment  of  which  Sanfi- 
tana,  Rupa  and  others  wore  employed  by  Cliai- 
tanya in  latter  years.  Separated  from  Chaitanya, 
Lokanatlia  felt  miserable,  but  he  could  not  refuse 
it;  a  request  from  Chaitanya  was  as  binding  as 
the  holiest  writ  of  scripture  to  his  companions, 
and  Lokanatha  silently  carried  out  his  bidding. 
,    .    .  ,  ,         The  Premaviliisa    thus   describes 

1 110  order  inviolable. 

what  lie  said  to  Chaitanya  on  this 
occasion  in  one  of  his  messages  to  him:  "No  more 
shall  I,  oh  my  Lord,  be  permitted  to  see  your 
feet.  Think  not  that  I  seek  my  own  pleasures. 
To  carry  out  your  wishes  must  always  be  the 
sole  end  of  my  life.  For  this  object  have  I 
reconciled  myself  with  the  solitary  life  I  lead 
lun-e.  You  are  there  in  the  midst  of  those  who 
are  more  fortunate  than  I.  I  am  deprived  of 
that  company  than  which  nothing  is  dearer 
to  me."^ 

A  journey  to  A^rndavana  from  Nadiya  was  not 
an  easy  matter  in  those  days.  Lokanfitha  Avas 
accompanied  by  another  Brahman  scholar  named 
Bhugarljha.     At  the  time  they   went,    the    main 

^i  ^1ii?fi  o{\i^  c^*(i  nt^f^  II 

The  Premavilaaa. 


LOKANATHA    GOSWAMl.  75 

road  was  blocked  by  the  contending  armies  of 
Hindus  and  Mahomedans  near  Eajmabal.  It 
was  the  month  of  October,  1510  A.D.  when  they 
started  for  tlie  holy  city.  When,  however,  the 
pilgrims  asked  the  people  of  Eajmahal  about 
the  route,  they  were  told  that  it  would  be  impos- 
sible for  them  to  get  to  Vrndavana  in  the  distur- 
bed state  of  the  country,    by   the 

Journey  to  Vrnda-  •  i        r\Li  -i  i 

vana,  maiu  roau.    Other  roads  were  also 

infested  by  robbers.  But  they 
were  not  daunted.  They  went  on  inspired  by 
faith  alone.  They  took  the  route  by  Tajpur  and 
reached  Purniya  from  where  they  came  to  Luck- 
now.  It  took  them  three  days  to  reach  Agra 
from  this  place.  In  23  days  Loknatha  and 
Bhugarbha  reached  Vrndavana  from  Nadiya. 
They  were  dressed  in  rags  and  carried  beggar's 
bowls  in  their  hands.  The  holy  city  was  deserted. 
It  was  overgrown  by  the  jungle,  with  huts  of 
poor  people  dotted  here  and  there,  and  was 
nothing  more  than  a  name  even  to  the  Vaisnavas 
who  held  it  sacred.  But  the  hermits  in  co-oper- 
ation with  Saniltana  and  Rupa,  who  subsequently 
joined  them,  identified  the  places  associated  Avith 
Krisna's  early  life,  and  the  wonderful  tale  of 
their  devotion  and  holy  lives  spread  far  and  wide. 
In  half  a  century  the  city  rose  again  with  its 
gay  array  of  lofty  tiara-shaped  temples,  some  of 
which  claim  the  glory  of  being  considered  among 
the  foremost  architectural  monuments  of   India. 


76  CHAITANTA    AND    HTS    COMPANIONS. 

The  transformation  Avas  as  sudden  as  though  it 
were  accomplislied  by  the  touch  of  a  magician's 
wand.  But  of  tliis  we  propose  to  speak  at  some 
length  elsewhere.  From  1511  to  1512  Chaitanya 
Avas  in  the  Deccan,  and  Loknjltha  like  others 
heard  of  his  presence  there,  lie  accordingly  left 
Vrndavana  for  a  time  to  meet  the  Master  in  the 
south ;  but  unfortunately  he  could  not  overtake 
hira,  missing  him  narrowly  at  the  several  stations 
where  Chaitanya  had  halted  for  some  days. 
Lokanatha  heard  again,  while  still  journeying  in 
the  Deccan  in  quest  of  the  Master, 

He    misses    Chai-       j.i      i.     i  i       i  i.      ^r        i- 

tanya.  ^^at   he   had   gone  up  to  Vrnda- 

vana.    He  hurried  back  to    that 
town    as    soon     as   he    heard    this,    but   on   his 
arrival  there   was   again    disappointed   to   learn 
that    Chaitmya    had  left  the  holy  city.     Loka- 
natha had  no  orders  from    the    Master   to  return 
to    Purl    or  Bengal ;  so  though  greatly  mortified 
at  the  separation  from  him,  he  spent  the  remain- 
ing days  of  his  life  at  Vrndavana    following    the 
paths    of    spiritual    advancement  and    humane 
service.      The    Vrajaba-sis,    as    the    residents    of 
A^rndiivana  and  its  vicinity  were  called,  paid  him 
unique  homage  acting  as    he    bade    them    to   do 
without   a    question — so    high   was   the  place  he 
occupied  in  their  estimation.    The 
isp't  y-  Anuragavalli  describes  him  thus: 

"  Always    scrutinising    liimself    hy    meditation, 
not    given    to    many    words,    l)ut  when  he  opens 


LOKANATHA    GOSWAMI.  77 

his  mouth,  his  short  speeches  are   full    of  sweet- 
ness and  wisdom,  wielding  a  great  influence."^ 

We  shall  have  to  return  again  to  the  life 
of  this  great  Vaisnava,  when  referring  to  the 
suhject  of  the  reclaiming  of  the  shrine  of 
Vrndavana.  Loknatha  was  absolutely  averse  to 
a  glorification  of  himself  hy  the  writers  of  the 
Vaisnava  history.  It  is  well-known  that  Krsna- 
dasa  Kaviraja,  who  wrote  the  most  valuable  ac- 
count of  Chaitanya's  life,  drew  his  inspiration 
and  materials  in  no  inconsiderable  degree  from 
Lokanatha  Gosvaml.  But  while  describing  the 
noteworthy  incidents  of  the  lives  of  other  devo- 
tees, he  does  not  mention  the  help  he  obtained 
from  Lokanatha  anywhere  in  his  elaborate  work, 
nor  does  he  refer  to  any  anecdote  of  his  illus- 
trious life.  This  is  because  Loknatha  had  pre- 
vented the  Kaviraja  from  writing  anything  to 
glorify  him.  This  incident  is  mentioned  in  the 
Premvilasa  written  only  a  few  years  after  the 
Chaitanya  Charitamrta. 

Lokanatha  had  made  it  a  point  not  to 
take  disciples,  and  this  accounts  for  the  com- 
parative silence  of  the  Vaisnava  historians  about 
him.  The  disciples  generally  take  elaborate 
notes  of  the  lives  of  their  Gurus  and  write  their 
biographies.  The  only  disciple  whom  Lokanatha 

'  ^^  f^^«=  ^»tl  ^\fk  ^\^'  ^^  I 
c^  ^'^u  c^  ^  ^ii:<[  'm'^  w 

The  Anuragavalli. 


78  CIIAITANYA  AND  IIIS  COMPANIONS. 

admitted  was  Narottilma.  Lokanatha  had  relaxed 
his  stern  principle  in  favour  of  Narottama 
under  exceptional  circumstances  which  I  shall 
relate  wliile  writing  about  the  latter.  Lokanatha 
was  unwilling  to  admit  disciples  because  they 
were  required  to  pay  honour  to  their  Gurus  verg- 
ing on  worship.  Lokanatha  was  afraid  lest  this 
might  lead  to  self-glorification  and  vanity. 
Throughout  his  long  life  he  remembered  the 
words  which  Chaitanya  spoke  to  him  while 
l)idding  him  God-speed  on  the  eve  of  his  journey 
to  Vrndavana.  "Know  this  Lokanatha,  that 
neither  you  nor  I  are  meant  to  enjoy  the  pleasures 
of  the  world." 

Lokanfitha  remained  a  bachelor  all  his  life 
and  died  at  a  good  old  age  mourned  by  the  whole 
Vaisnava  community. 


VI I. —  Vastideva  Sarvahhauma. 

We  have  incidentally  mentioned  Yasudeva 
Silrvabhauma  in  a  previous  lecture  in  connection 
with  a  controversal  discussion  which  he  held 
with  Chaitanya  at  Puri  on  spiritual  matters, 
and  his  eventual  defeat  and  acceptance  of  Chai 
tanya  as  his  master  (Guru)  and  the  true  inter- 
preter of  religious  truths. 

Vasudeva  Sfirvabhauma  was  unquestionably 
at  the  head  of  the  scholars  of  Eastern  India 
at  the  time.  Having  read  the  Upanishads  at 
Benares   he    became   a   pupil   of  the  celebraetd 


VASUDEVA  SARVABHATJMA.  79 

Paksadhara  Mi9ra  of  Mithila,  which,  during 
the  youth  of  Sarvahhauma,  was  the  most  impor- 
tant centre  of  learning  in  Northern  India.  The 
proud  position,  however,  of  this  place  it  was 
reserved  for  Yasudeva  himself  to  break  down 
in  latter  years.  He  succeeded  in  establishing 
the  glory  of  the  tol  he  founded  at  Nadiya — far 
exceeding  that  won  by  the  college  where  he 
had  completed  his  education.  Paksadhar  Mi9ra 
made  it  a  condition  Avith  his  pupils  that  they 
were  not  to   transcribe  any   copy 

The    rise    of  the  .        /-^^   •     i  -  •  i  r^ 

NavadvTpa    school     ot      Lhuitamani        by      (jrange9a 
ogic.  Upadhyaya  for  their  own  use.  This 

book  was  the  store -house  of  contemporaneous 
knowledge  of  Logic ;  and  Paksadhara  having  in 
his  possession  the  only  MS.  of  the  great  work, 
jealously  guarded  it  for  the  benefit  of  his  oAvn 
college.  His  own  interpretations  of  the  work  and 
teaching  on  the  subject  were  also  considered  to 
be  of  rare  value.  So  that  as  far  as  Logic  (which 
was  one  of  the  most  important  branches  of  learn- 
ing at  the  period)  was  concerned,  the  reputation 
of  the  Mithila  College  was  far  greater  than 
that  of  any  other  college  in  Upper  India. 

As  no  copy  of  the  work  was  allowed  to  be 
made,  each  pupil  of  Paksadhara  having  to 
take  a  solemn  vow  to  that  effect  before  the 
teacher  gave  him  lessons  on  the  subject,  the 
precious  learning  lay  confined  within  the  four 
walls   of   his    college-room.     However  complete 


80  CllAITANYA    AM)    II  fs    COMPANIONS. 

their  education  at  ^Fitliila,  his  ])iipils  couhl  not 
disseminate  so  porl'ect  a  knowledf:!:e  of  the 
subject  in  their  respective  countries,  witliout 
having  in  their  possession  any  copy  of  the  origi- 
nal work,  whicli  was  further  enriched  hy  the 
annotations  of  several  generations  of  accomplish- 
ed teachers  of  Mithila. 

Vfisudeva  Srirvabhauma  committed  to  memory 
not  only  the  four  parts  of  Chintamaui  with  its 
valuable  store  of  annotations,  but  also  a  very 
considerable  portion  of  the  famous  work  Kusu- 
manjali.  Without  violating  the  conditions  to 
which  he  had  subscribed,  he  came  to  Nadiya  fully 
equipped  with  the  latest  knowledge,  and  founded 
a  lol  there,  the  reputation  of  whicli  soon  spread 
far  and  wide,  drawing  hosts  of  pupils  from  all 
recognised  centres  of  Sanskrit  learning  through- 
out India,  till  the  fame  of  the  Maithil  College 
rapidly  diminished  and  was  eventually  extingui- 
shed. Vasudeva's  teachings  gave  a  fresh  stimulus 
to  the  cause  of  the  study  of  Logic  and  his 
famous  pupil  RaghunatliaC^iromani's  name  stands 
first  in  the  list  of  those  who  founded  the  new 
school  of  Logic  named  Navya  Nyaya  which  to 
this  day  remains  a  monument  of  the  keenness 
of  the  Bengali  intellect,  liaghunatha  was  a  son 
of  a  widowed  Brahmin  woman  \\\\o  earned  her 
Jiving  by  doing  menial  work  at  the  house  of 
Silrvabhauma.  When  only  a  lad  of  3,  Eaghu- 
niltha  was  asked  by  Sarvabhauma  to  get  some  bits 


VASUDEVA    SARVABHAtJMA.  8l 

of  burning  wood  from  the  kitchen  for  his  pipe. 
Raghunatha     hh     The  boy  fii'st    toolv   a  quantity   of 

worthy  desciple.  ^^^^^^   .^^  j^j^  j^^^^^^  ^^^^^  ^j^^^^  protect- 

ed brought  the  bits  of  burning  wood  to  his 
master.  It  is  said  that  this  little  incident  struck 
the  teacher  as  a  sign  of  the  boy's  intellectual 
powers  and  he  undertook  to  teach  him  himself. 
At  5  when  Raghunatha  began  to  read  the  alpha- 
bets, he  startled  his  teacher  by  the  question 
"  Sir  why  is  the  letter  '  ^  '  placed  before  '  ^'  ? 
What  harm  if  their  situation  is  changed  ?" 
Raghunatha  afterwards  rose  to  conspicuous  fame 
and  eclipsed  that  of  his  contemporaries  in  the 
field  of  Logic.  Vasudeva's  own  work  in  Sanskrit 
"  Sarvabhauma-Nirukti'  gave  the  first  start  to 
the  pure  intellectual  basis  on  which  this  new 
school  of  Logic  is  founded.  Gautama  had  kept 
the  subject  on  a  spiritual  plane,  but  Navya  Nyaya 
entirely  freed  it  from  monastic  thral. 

The  tol  of  Vasudeva  flourished  in  Nadiya 
between  1470  and  1480  A.D.,  but  a  great  calamity 
befell  the  Hindu  residents  of  the  ancient  city 
later  on.  It  was  reported  to  Husen  Saha,  the 
Emperor  of  Gauda,  that  a  persistent  rumour  of 
a  prohetic  nature  was  in  the  air  that  the 
Brahmans  of  Nadiya  would  once  more  assert  their 
supremacy  in  Bengal.  The  fire  of  heroism  still 
lingered  in  the  old  Capital  of  the  Hindu  Kings, 
as  the  residents  of  the  place  were  fine  archers 
and  had  retained  till  then  some  of  their  warlike 

K 


82  CllAITANYA    AND    Ills    COMPANIONS. 

traits.  The  Emperor  l)elievocl  in  tlie  prophecy 
and  ordered  a  j^eiieral  devastation  of  tlie  place 
and  a  forcible  conversion  of  its  Brahmans  to 
Islam.  The  prophecy  referred  to  is  mentioned 
in  the  Chaitanya  Mangal  by  Jayananda,  Avho 
The  Mohain.uii  1.  was  a  coii temporary  of  Chaitanya, 
rhrfliKht"of  Vas'u-  '"^^^^  confirmed  by  A^rndavana  Dasa 
(leva  from  Nariiya.      j^^       j^j^      Chaitanya      Bhagavata 

written  in  1530.  The  ani^ry  monarch  sent  a 
strong  Mahomedan  army  wliich  Avas  stationed 
at  the  village  of  Piriilya  near  Nadij^a,  and  forcibly 
converted  the  Brahmans  to  the  Islamic  faith. 
This  is  the  origin  of  the  Pirulya  Brahmans.  We 
are  told  how  the  Hindus  were  not  permitted  to 
sound  the  conch  shell  in  their  temples  and  l)athe 
in  the  Ganges  ;  if  they  did  so  they  were  forci- 
bly served  with  beef.  The  temples  were  dese- 
crated, the  fig  trees,  sacred  to  the  Hindus,  were 
uprooted,  and  a  general  panic  seized  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  old  city  who  fled  from  it  in  great 
numbers  and  settled  in  other  provinces.  Mahcs- 
vara  Yicarada,  the  father  of  Stlrvabhauma,  went 
to  Benares  at  this  juncture,  and  the  latter  fled 
to  Puri.  Sarvabhauma's  brother  Vidyavtichaspati 
deserted  his  country-seat  and  settled  in  a  difTerent 
part  of  Bengal. 

So  great  was  the  fame  of  Vasudeva  as  a 
scholar  that  Pratri])a  lliidra,  the  king  of  Orissa, 
accorded  him  a  royal  reception,  offering  him  a 
a  gold  throne  next  to  his  own  in  his  court.  Thus 


VASUDEVA    SARVABHAUMA.  83 

Honoured  by  the     honoured  Vasudeva  continued   to 
Kino  of  oiissa.  jj^,^  ^^  p^^j.j      ^Tq  j^j^o  leam  from 

Jayananda's  work  how  a  change  came  over  the 
spirit  of  Husen  Saha's  administration.  He 
shortly  after  repented  of  his  oppression,  heing 
convinced  of  the  innocence  of  the  Nadiya 
Brahmans  and  repaired  as  far  as  was  possible 
the  wrongs  inflicted  on  thom. 

Husen  Sah{1  had  before  this  time  destroyed 
some  of  the  great  temples  of  Orissa  and  led  an 
expedition  to  conquer  the  province.  But  Pratapa 
Rudra  was  more  tlian  his  match  in  the  field. 
Not  only  lie  obliged  Husen  Saha  to  retreat,  but 
himself  planned  an  expedition,  by  way  of 
retaliation,  for  the  conquest  of  Bengal.  Owing 
to  some  cause  he  could  not  however  carry  out 
his  plan.  He  effectively  held,  however,  the 
aggressive  Islam  spirit  in  check  so  far  as  his  vast 
kingdom  was  concerned. 

It  was  at  Purl  that  Vasudeva  first  met  Chai- 
tanya.  He  was  then  a  lad  of  24,  of  handsome 
appearance,  and  had  taken  the  ascetic's  vow 
and  come  to  Purl  to  visit  the  temple  of  Jagan- 
natha.  The  sight  of  the  temple  threw  him  into 
one  of  his  fits  of  delirious  joy,  and  heedless  of 
the  pilgrims  and  priests  he  ran  ahead  of  them 
like  a  mad  man  and  entered  the  temple.  Before 
the  image  of  God  Chaitanya  swooned  in  the 
height  of  his  emotion.  The  Pandas — the  custo- 
dians of  the  temple — taking  him  for  a    mad  man, 


84  CHAITANYA    AND    II IS    COMPANIONS. 

beat  him  with  ?i  cane  wliih'  in  that  unconscious 
state.  AYisudeva  Sarvabhauma  was  at  tlie  temple 
and  was  attracted  by  the  siglit  of  the  handsome 
Interview  will.  yo^Hg  SannvasI  lying  unconscious 
chaitanya.  ^^  ^^^   ^q^^,      jj^   prevented  the 

Piindils    from    beating    him,  and    ordered  him  to 
be  carried  to  his  own  house.     For  8  hours    Cliai- 
tanya  lay  unconscious,  the  tears    trickling   down 
his   cheeks,   but   he   occasionally   spoke    a    tew 
broken  words  indicative  of  the  joy  at    his   union 
with    the    Deity.     By    this    time  liis  companions 
had  already  arrived  and  were  now  at   the   house 
of    Sarvabhauma.     They    recited    the    name    of 
Krsna  aloud  and  sang   his    praises,   ujDon    which 
Chaitaiiya   came  back   to  his  senses.     Vilsudeva 
asked   his  brother-in-law    Gopinatha  who     that 
interesting  young  man  was.     The  latter  told  him 
that   he   was   a   citizen  of   Nadiya.     Nilamvara 
ChakravartI,    the    father    of  Chaitanya's  mother 
Cachi,   was    a    great    friend    of    Sarva1)hauma's 
father  Mahesvara  Vicarada.  Sarvabhauma  liearing 
this     became    interested    in     Chaitanya.       The 
venerable    scholar    himself    served    the    young 
SannyasI  with  meal  on  a  golden  plate,  and  invited 
him  to  stay  in  his  house.     He  also   showed  great 
hospitality  to  his  companions,  who  were   for   the 
most  part  citizens  of    Nadiya.     This  happened  in 
1509    A.D.    Chaitanya    Charitamrta    relates    the 
following  dialogue  bet\v(^en   Vasudeva  and  (Jopi- 
uatha  at  this  stage  :      Vasudeva: — "This    voung 


VASUDEVA   SARVABHATJMA.  85 

man  is  a  Sannyasl.  To  what  Order  of  ascetics 
does  he  belong  ?"  Gopinatha  :— "  He  is  a  disciple 
of  Ke9ava  Bharatl."  Vasudeva  : — "  But  there  are 
better  Orders  of  Saanyasis.  He  is  quite  a  young 
man  and  has  attractive  looks,  it  will  be  difficult 
for  him  to  keep  the  chastity  of  the  ascetic's  voav. 
I  shall  teach  him  Vedanta  and  give  him  a  better 
vasudeva's  resolve  spintual  ideal.  Hc  must  forgo 
ta  improve  chai-     ^jjg    inferior    Order  in    which   he 

tanya  s        spiritual 

training.  ^^s    euHstcd    his    uamc    and   be 

made  to  enter  into  a  higher  Order."  Gopinatha; — 
"  He  does  not  care  for  forms,  it  matters  little  to 
what  Order  he  belongs.  You  have  not  known 
him  yet,  when  you  do  so,  you  will  find  him  nuich 
above  anything  that  you  may  have  to  teach." 

Vasudeva  told  Chaitanya  in  his  next  inter- 
view with  him  that  as  a  Sannyasl  he  deserves 
every  respect  from  him ;  but  he  asked  what 
ricjlit  he  had  to  take  a  Sannvtlsa  vow  while  still 
so  young.  The  (^astras,  he  said,  liave  laid  it 
down  that  one  may  renounce  the  world  and 
become  a  Sannyasl  only  Avhen  he  has  jiassed  at 
least  two  thirds  of  the  usual  term  of  life. 
Chaitanya  huml)ly  replied  "  Do  not,  oh  venerable 
sir,  think  me,  to  be  so  exalted  a  personage  as  a 
Sannyasl.  A  longing  for  union  with  God  has 
driven  me  mad,  and  thus  have  I  shaven  my 
head,  torn  my  sacred  thread  and  come  away 
from  home.  I  am  only  a  boy  before  you  and 
do  not  know  even  what  is  good  and  what   is   bad 


86  CHAITAXYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

for  ino.  Kindly  !2^ive  mo  lessons  and  teach  me 
the  rii;lit  course.  I  am  grateful  to  yon  for 
protectini^  me  from  tJie  liands  of  the  Pandas 
to-day."  'J'hat  day  Vasiuleva  called  him  again 
„„     .,    , ,.  to  his  ])resence  and  asked  him    to 

J  lie  silent  lisliicr.  ' 

listen  attentively  to  the  inter- 
pretations of  the  sacred  texts  Avhich  he  would 
deliver  in  the  evening;.  Chaitanya  quietly  sat 
and  listened  to  the  wonderful  dessortations  on 
theolo2:v  which  the  veteran  scholar  s^ave.  Not 
one  day,  but  for  seven  consecutive  days  he  did  so, 
before  a  large  and  admiring  audience.  On  the 
8th  day  Vilsudeva  said  to  Chaitanya  "  Por  seven 
days  you  have  hoard  my  discourses  on  the  sacred 
Upanishads  but  have  made  no  commonts,  sitting 
mute  all  the  while."  Chaitany.i  replied  "  I  am 
no  scholar,  and  have  not  the  capacity  to  enter 
into  the  spirit  of  your  learned  discourse.  I  listned 
to  it  simply  because  you  ordered  me  to  do  so  and 
also  because  it  is  the  duty  of  a  Snnnyjlsl  to  hear 
the  interpretations  of  holy  books."  Sarval)hauma 
said  "Those  who  could  not  undeistand  any  por- 
tions of  my  speech  referred  their  difficulties  to 
me,  which  I  have  taken  pains  to  elucidate.  But 
you  have  not  done  so.  I  am  not  sure  in  what 
spirit  you  have  taken  my  discourses.  Your 
attitude  seems  mysterious  to  me."  Chaitanya 
said  "Sir,  since  you  wish  nn;  to  speak  I  must 
confess  that  the  texts  of  the  Upanishads  are  quite 
clear   to  mo,  but  your  explanations  have  clouded 


VASDDEVA   SARVABHAUMA.  87 

their  meaning.  You  avoid  the  direct  meaning 
of  the  texts  and  indulge  in  niceties  which  do 
not,  to  my  mind,  represent  the  real  spirit  of  the 
sacred  books."  Chaitanya  then  explained  the 
texts  himself  quoting  profusely  from  the  (^astras. 

He   first    referred   to    the    31st 
^Lo^ir"^"''^     ^loka,  Chapter  XiV  of  the  10th 

Skanda  of  Crimat  Bhagavata  and 
next  dwelt  upon  the  text  of  the  64th  ^loka  of 
the  7th  Chapter  of  the  6th  Part  of  the  Visnu- 
purana,  referring  in  support  of  it  to  the  5th 
Cloka  of  the  7th  Chapter  of  the  Gita  beginning 
with  ^f^ti;^t^1^C«n  Ttll  ^1°  ^C*^1l^f^U^^^  and  made  a 
speech  which  struck  Sarvabhauma  as  extraordi- 
nary. But  Sarvabhauma  brought  up  an  array 
of  controversial  arguments  to  dimolish  cw^^t^ 
(dualism)  which  Chaitanya  had  established. 
Chaitanya  replied  eloquently  with  a  spiritual 
fervour  which  made  the  deepest  impression  on 
his  audience.  His  reply  supported  as  it  was  by 
scholarly  references  and  a  clear  and  straightfor- 
ward statement  of  his  points,  demolished  the 
advaitavada  of  Vasudeva  to  its  foundation.  When 
Chaitanya  at  the  end  recited  the  31st  Cloka  of 
th  62nd  Chapter  of  the  Padmapurana  and  burst 
into  emotional  ecstasy  singing  the  hymn  W.^  ft*( 
vf^t^  ^N     (Oh   thou   compassion   itself   and   the 

refuge  of  those  who  are    heavy- 

Vasudeva  admits        ii\i  ii  iii; 

chaitanya's  divinity,     ladcn)  bc  couM  Say  uo  morc;  half 
broken  words  'oh  thou,  compassion 


88  CHAITANYA   AND    IIIS    COMPANIONS. 

itself  only  came  out  of  his  lips,  while  tears  drop- 
ped from  his  eyes  and  choked  his  voice  till  he 
passed  into  that  trance— the  lieatific  vision — 
which  showed  him  to  be  more  than  a  common 
mortal.  His  eyes  rained  tears,  and  were  fixed 
heavenwards.  His  arms  were  outstretched,  as  if 
to  embrace  the  Unseen ;  he  became  unconscious  of 
the  physical  world  and  a  radiance  came  into  his 
face  which  showed  the  heavenly  sight  of  God-in- 
Man. 

So  irresistible  was  his  charm  that  the  old  scholar 
of  80  who  was  looked  on  as  the  very  fountain  of 
all  learning  now  fell  at  the  young  Sannyasi's 
feet  and  accepted  him  as  his  God  and  saviour.  The 
beautiful  Gaurangastaka,  or  8  stanzas  in  honour 
of  Chaitanya,  that  he  wrote  in  Sanskrit,  bears 
testimony  to  his  profound  faith  in  the  apostle  of 
Nadiya. 

It  was  from  Vasudeva  Sarvabhauma  and 
Gopinatha  that  the  king  Pratapa  lludra  had  heard 
of  the  greatness  of  Chaitanya,  which  made  him 
so  eagerly  seek  an  interview  with  him. 

Vasudeva's  great  reverence  for  Chaitanya  is 
expressed  in  his  celebrated  utterance  mentioned 
by  the  author  of  the  Chaitanya  Charitamrta  in 
the  9th  Chapter  of  the  Madhya  Khanda  of  his 
work.  We  have  already  referred  to  it  on  p.  4 
and  quote  it  here  again  : — "  If  a  thunderbolt 
falls  on  my  head  or  even  my  sons  die — that  I  can 
bear,   but   not   that  I  should  be  deprived  of  the 


RAMANANDA    RAY  89 

company  of  the  Master."'  Goviuda  Dasa,  \\ho 
took  down  notes  of  Cliaitanya's  tour  in  the  Deccan 
while  he  travelled  with  him,  writes  that  on  the 
return  of  Chaitanya  to  Puri  the  venerable  Sarva- 
hhauma  with  joined  hands  addressed  him  and 
said  "  That  I  could  bear  a  separation  from  you 
bespeaks  a  heart  of  stone  in  me  "  and  the  man 
fell  on  his  knees  weeping  like  a  woman.^ 

Sarvabhauma  died  at  about  1520  A.D.  His  only 
son  Duro'adasa  was  also  a  scholar.    He  annotated 

the  celebrated  Sanskrit  Grammar, 
^''lon''''  ^"' '°"      *he    Mugdabodha    by    Bopadeva 

and  also  wrote  a  commentary  of 
Kavikalpadruma.  Durgadasa  had  the  title  of 
Vidyavagi9a  or  'the  master  of  learning  and  speech.' 


IJ^.  Ramananda  Bay. 

Ramananda  Ray  was  the  prime  minister  of 
Raja  Pratap  Rudra  of  Orissa.  His  celebrated 
Sanskrit  Drama  "Jagannatha  Vallabha"  was  one 
of  the  few  books  Avhich  were  raad  and  sung 
before  Chaitanya  every  day  by  his  order. 
This  proves  the  admiration  in  which  the 
^    "f»tci  w  ^c^  ^  'l^  it%  ^t^  I 

c^W^  fe^  ^h  ^foi  f^M  I 

L 


90  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS   COMPANIONS. 

book  was  held  l)y  the  ]\[aster.  llama  Ray 
was  a  native  of  Vidyaiiagara  in  central  India. 
The  prime  minister  of  the  kini;-  of  Orissa 
had  the  title  of  Raja.  When  Chaitanya 
was  at  Piiri,  Bhahananda  Ilily,  the  father  of 
Riimjlnanda,  still  lived,  and  it  is  mentioned  in 
the  Ciiaitanya  Charitamrita  that  Chaitanya  once 
eml)raced  the  old  man  sayinpj  "Your  son 
Ramananda  is  dear  to  me  as  my  own  self." 
Ramananda  had  four  brothers ;  Gopinjitha 
Pattanayak,  Kalanidhi,  Sudhanidhi  and  Bani- 
natha.  They  were  all  devoted  to  Chaitanya. 
Ramjlnanda  met  Chaitanya  first  on  the  bank  of 
the  Godavarl,  a  few  miles  from  his  own  town  of 
Vidyanagara.  It  was  in  the  month  of  June 
1510  A.D.  The  former  had  gone  there,  borne 
in  a  picturesque  palankin,  with  a  large  escort 
,  ,     .  .,,      and    a    ejood  number  of   Vaidika 

Interview        with  '-' 

Chaitanya.  Brahmaiis.     Here  Chaitanya  paid 

him  a  visit  and  said  that  he  liad  heard  a  good 
deal  about  his  fervent  faith  from  Vasudeva  Silrva- 
bhauma  and  had  longed  to  see  him.  Saying  this 
he  embraced  the  minister  much  to  the  surprise 
and  embarrassment  of  the  Brahmans  present,  who 
said  to  one  another  "  Look  at,  this  holy  man, 
resplendant  as  a  god.  How  strange  that  he 
touches  a  Cudra  and  weeps  for  joy!  "^ 

Chaitanya  Charitamrita, 

Mndhya  Khanda. 


RAMANANDA  KAl.  91 

Tlie  famous  dialogue  of  Cliaitanya  with 
^amanauda  unfoldiug  the  very  spirit  of  the 
religion  which  the  former  preached,  has  heen 
elahorately  discussed  in  the  Chaitanya  Charita- 
mrita,  and  we  cannot  help  here  giving  the  gist 
of  it.  Ramananda  at  the  bidding  of  Chaitanya 
describes  the  various  stages  of  Bhakti  (devotion). 
The  first  is  the  Sadhya  Bhakti  or  that  faith  which 
has  for  its  final  goal  the  carrying  out  of  the 
The  famous  dia-  ^^^^^^^^  prescribed  to  each  caste  by 
'°""''-  the  (^astras ;  the  text  quoted  was 

the  verse  VIII,  Chapter  8,  Part  III  of  the 
Visnupurana.  For  elucidation  of  the  next 
higher  stage  Ram  Ray  took  for  his  text  the 
verse  XXVII,  Chapter  IX  of  the  Gitii  which 
says  that  one  should  work  without  a  thought  of 
the  result-^dedicating  it  to  God.  "  Even  this  is 
merely  external,"  said  Chaitanya,  "  enter  deeper 
still."  and  Rama  Ray  in  describing  the  next 
higher  stage  took  for  his  text  the  verse  XXXII 
of  Skanda  XIII  of  the  (^rlmat  Bhagavataand  the 
verse  67  of  Chapter  XVIII  of  the  Gita  which 
urges  upon  a  spiritual  aspirant  the  duty  of  resign- 
ing himself  absolutely  to  God,  leaving  aside  all 
forms  and  rites  that  belong  to  his  sect — "  leave 
every  thing  else,  all  professions  and  callings,  and 
surrender  yourself  to  me  " — says  Krisna  in  the 
latter  verse  "  and  I  will  save  you  from  all  sins 
and  sorrows."  When  called  upon  to  enter  still 
decider    into    the    truths    of  religion,  Rama  Ray 


92  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPACTIONS. 

said  that  the  spiritual  soul  iinist  yearn  for  faith 
which  sprinL;s  from  a  true  knowledge  of  things. 
The  text  quoted  was  the  verse  50,  Chapter  XVII 
of  the  Gita  which  says  that  one  who  has  known 
God  is  content  in  himself  and  neither  mourns  a 
loss  nor  feels  a  desire. 

A  still  higher  plane  of  Sadhya  Bhakti  is 
explained  hy  Kilma  Rfiy  at  the  bidding  of  the 
Mastei',  the  text  quoted  being  verse  III,  Chapter 
15  of  the  10th  Skanda  of  the  ^rlmat  Bhagavata  in 
which  knowledge  (^^t^)  falls  into  the  back-ground 
and  faith  (^»f%>)  becomes  the  sole  object.  In  a 
still  higher  plane  of  spiritual  life  faith  takes  the 
character  of  love ;  the  text  being  a  verse 
from  Padmavall. 

This  closes  the  sphere  of  Baidha  Bhakti  or 
that  faith  which  follows  the  monastic  rules  and 
the  injunctions  of  the  scriptures,  and  Rama  Bay 
elucidates  the  principles  of  higher  Yaisnava 
theology  which  aims  at  a  direct  communion 
with  God.  The  first  stage  of  this,  according  to 
verse  XIII,  Chapter  III  of  ^rlmat  Bliilgavata  is  to 
worship  God  by  work,  even  as  a  servant  does  his 
Master,  not  as  a  matter  of  duty  alone,  but 
impelled  by  love. 

The  servant  carries  out  the  command  of  the 
master  and  though  he  may  do  so  with  love,  he 
remains  one  step  below  and  cannot  approacli 
Him  too  close.  Th(^  second  stage  referred  to  in 
verse    II,    Chapter    XII   of  the   10th  Skanda  of 


RAMANANDA  EAY.  93 

Bhas^avata  describes  the  Sakhya  in  which  God 
becomes  our  friend  and  guide.  He  no  longer 
commands,  but  is  actually  with  us,  play- 
ing on  the  stage  of  the  world.  The  players 
love  one  another,  as  they  are  conscious  that 
He  is  one  of  themselves  and  is  the  Main  Player 
directing  their  plays.  When  danger  comes,  it 
loses  its  terror,  as  they  know  their  friend  to  be 
in  their  midst,  controlling  their  destiny  and 
taking  care  of  them.  "Next"  says  Eamananda 
Hay  at  the  l)idding  of  Chaitauya,  "is  the  stage 
of  Batsalya  Prema  or  love  for  a  child."  The 
text  quoted  in  support  of  this  is  verse  XXXVII, 
Chapter  XVIII  of  the  10th  Skanda  of  the 
(Jrlmat  Bhagvata.  The  world  plays  round  the 
spiritual  man  as  children  and  lie  watches 
it  with  affectionate  care,  as  parents  do. 
His  only  duty  is  to  offer  his  constant 
and  anxious  care  to  the  well-being  of  all.  This 
'air  is  his  God.  His  affection  is  of  a  cosmo- 
politan character.  Jasoda,  like  Madona  of  the 
Christian,  typities  the  Mother  anxious  for  the 
protection  of  the  divine  child — the  ever-growing 
new  babe  of  humanity.  Even  one's  own  enemy 
appears  to  him  in  this  stage  as  a  mere  child  and 
is  regarded  with  compassion  and  kindness.  How 
this  may  be  possible  is  to  be  found  in  the  little 
incident  of  Nityananda's  conduct  to  Jagai  and 
Madhai  described  on  pp.  38-42.  The  baby  of 
humanity    grows    wicked    at  times  and    kicks  in 


94j         chaitanya  and  his  companions. 

return  of  love.  Tlio  ii;o(lly  man  feels  no  anger 
but  blesses  the  children  i^oiu?  astray  and  prays 
for  them  sayini?  :  "Father  forgive  them,  for 
they  know  not  what  they  do"  even  when  they 
put  a  crown  of  thorns  on  his  head  and  nail  him 
to  a  cross. 

In  a  still  higher  stage  of  spirituality    the  soul 
approaches   God    as  a    Gopi — the 
"' '  maid  who  forgets    herself    in    the 

delight  of  witnessing  the  spectacle  of  devine  love 
that  comes  from  all  sides.  The  text  quoted  is 
verse  A^III  of  the  10th  Canto  of  Govinda  Llla- 
mrta  which  says  that  the  Gopi  does  not  desire 
direct  contact  with  Krsna.  She  deeply  appre- 
ciates and  enjoys  the  sight  of  supreme  bliss 
which  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Vrnda  groves  in  the 
amours  of  the  eternal  God  Krsna  and  his 
eternal  lover  Radha.  The  function  of  the  Gopi 
is  identical  with  that  of  the  poet  which  Sir 
llabindranath  Tagore  expresses  so  hai)])ily  in 
the  language  of  modern  poetry  : — 

"Ah  poet,  the  evening  draws  near  ; 

Your  hair  is  turning  gray, 

"Do  you  in  your  lonely  musing  hear  the  mes- 
sage of  the  hereafter  ? 

"It  is  evening,"  the  poet  said  "and  I  am 
listening  because  some  one  may  call  from  the 
village,  late  though  it  be. 

"I  watch  the  young  straying  hearts  meet 
together,  and  (wo   pairs    of   eager   eyes    beg    for 


RAMANANDA    RAY.  95 

music,    to    break    their    silence    and    speak     for 
them. 

"Who  is  there  to  weave  their  passionate 
songs,  if  I  sit  on  the  shore  of  life  and  contem- 
plate death,  and  the  beyond  ?" 

"The  early  evening  star  disappears.  The 
glow  of  the  funeral  pyre  slowly  dies  by  the 
silent  river. 

"Jackals  cry  in  chorus  from  the  courtyard 
of  the  deserted  house  in  the  light  of  the  worn- 
out  moon. 

"If  some  wanderer,  leaving  home  comes  here 
to  watch  the  night  and  with  bowed  head  listens 
to  the  murmur  of  the  darkness,  who  is  there 
to  whisper  the  secrets  of  life  into  his  ears,  if  I 
shutting  my  doors,  should  try  to  free  myself 
from  mortal  bonds  ?" 

"It  is  a  trifle  that  mv  hair  is  turnino;  s-rav. 

"I  am  ever  as  young  or  old  as  the  youngest 
or  the  oldest  of  the  village. 

"Some  have  smiles,  sweet  and  simple,  and 
some  a  sly  twinkle  in  their  eyes. 

"Some  have  tears  that  well  vip  in  the  daylight 
and  others    tears    that  are  hidden  in  the  gloom. 

"They  all  have  need  for  me  and  I  have  no 
time  to  brood  over  the  after  life. 

"I  am  of  an  age  with  each,  what  matter  if 
my  hair  turns  gray  ?" 

The  Gopis  are  represented  as  'witnesses  and 
helpers  of  the  eternal    play'    without  a    thought 


9()  CHAITANYA    AND    IT  IS    fO^Nri'AXTONS. 

of  their  own  personal  hap])inoss.  I'hus  forget- 
ful of  their  own  selves,  they  are  privilo<ijed  to 
enter  the  <^roves  of  sacred  love,  aidin^j  in  the 
nnion  of  soul  M'ith  soul — ministrants  to  the  cause 
of  love  which  Hows  from  the  eternal  fountain 
of  bliss.  They  are  ever  young;  in  their  appre- 
ciation of  all  that  is  beautiful  and  good  in 
nature.  'Time  writes  no  wrinkles  on  their 
brows.'  They  live  in  Vrndavana — the  spiri- 
tual heaven  of  the  Vaisnavas,  where  the  soul 
entirely  free  from  the  bonds  of  social  traditions 
on  one  hand,  and  from  the  obligations  of  scrip- 
tural rites  on  the  other,  finds  out  its  own  ])ath 
inspired    by    love    alone.       This 

The  Kaganuga.  .1        •  '11     i      .1  -     - 

path  IS  called  the  raganiKja  as 
opposed  to  that  of  Baidhi  Bhakti  or  faith  that 
aims  at  observance  of  the  instructions  contained 
in  the  scriptures.  The  texts  quoted  by  llama  Ray 
for  elucidation  of  this  stage  Avere  verse  XX, 
Chapter  XXXX,  verse  XIX,  Chapter  XXXVII, 
verse  XVI,  Chapter  IX,  and  verse  54-,  Chapter 
XXXVII  of  the  lOth  Skanda  of  ^rimatvilgvata. 
The  GopI  is  unattached  to  the  world.  No  narrow 
selfish  vicAV  clouds  her  perfect  vision  of  that 
bliss  which  pervades  the  universe.  Hence  she 
occupies  the  position  of  Guru  in  the  A^aisnava 
theology.  She  is  the  witness  of  the  "eternal 
play"  and  is  its  right  interpreter.  "Without 
lier  help"  adds  Rama  Ray,  quoting  another 
text     from     the      CrimatTagvata     "No    one    is 


RAMANANDA    RAY.  Q"? 

privileged  to  enter  into   the   region    of   spiritual 
love". 

In  the  Vaisnva  theology  the  position  of  the 
Gopi  as  Guru  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  all 
the  recognised  religious  preceptors  of  that  faith 
who  were  either  Chaitanya's  contemporaries  or 
lived  within  half  a  century  of  liim  are  believed 
by  the  Vaisnavas  to  be  the  incarnations  of  the 
Gopis  of  Vrndavana.  Thus  Narahari  is  believed 
to  be  an  incarnation  of  the  Gopi  named  Madhu- 
mala,  Vasu  Ghosh  of  Gunatunga  and  so  forth. 

The  highest  stage  in  this  field  belongs  to 
E-adha,  who  typifies  the  full  lilown  beauty  of 
spiritual  love.  Chaitanya's  suggestive  enquiries 
made  Ilamilnanda  speak  with  great  emotion 
and  force  of  the  love  of  Radhfi  for  Krsna ;  and 
Chaitanya  supplemented  the  interesting  dialogue 
by  quoting  verse  XXXIV,  Chapter  II  of  the 
11th  Skanda,  and  verse  IX,  Chapter  XXV  of  the 
10th  Skanda  of  the  Crimatvagvata  which  says 
"Whatever  the  spiritual  soul  sees  in  this  perfect 
stage  of  bliss  becomes  to  it  a  reminder  of  God. 
The  gross  goes  into  the  back  ground  and 
all  that  is  seen  presents  to  the  eyes  the  all- 
embracing  spirit  of  love — the  perfect  and  clear 
vision  of  the  living  God. 

Rama  Ray  said  "This  highest  stage  of  spiritual 
love  has  assumed  a  material    form 

Rama      Ray's    ad-       .      „  -  ^       t        n      i 

miration  for     botorc     uic    to-day    and     1     find 

Chaitanya.  ^j^^     Tapturous    ccstasies   of    love 

M 


98  CHAITANYA    AND    His    COMPANIONS. 

attributed  to  Krullia  in  yon,  oli  my  ^Master", 
llama  Ray  saw  tlie  li^reatest  marvel  viz.  a  man 
loving  God  with  all  the  ardour  of  his  soul — 
frenzied  l)y  the  emotions  of  love  and  steeped  in 
ecstasies  of  boundless  joy. 

Ten  days  and  nights  Rama  Hay  and  Chaitanya 
spent  together  and  Krsnadasa  Kaviraja,  the 
author  of  Chaitanya  Charitamrta  says  "As  a  man 
finds  a  clue  to  an  underground  treasure  from 
which  he  at  first  collects  bronze  and  copper 
and  then  jewels  and  diamonds,  so  the  longer 
he  talked  with  Chaitanya  the  more  he  found 
new  paths  opened  to  unknown  treasures  of 
spiritual  experience.  Th<^  beauty  of  Chaitanya's 
trances  and  emotions  convinced  him  of  the  truth 
of  what  he  had  read  in  the  sacred  books 
with  an  overwhelming  force.  The  presence  of 
Chaitanya  inspired  him  to  compose  a  mystic  song 
of  great  beauty  which  may  thus  be  rendered 
into  English  : 

"At  the  beginning  glances  from  each  other 
revealed  to  us  both  the  wonders  of  love — of  the 
new  world  Ave  now  entered  upon. 

"From  that  time  forward  our  impassioned  feel- 
ings have  blossomed  in  an  uninterrupted  beauty. 

"Neither  he  nor  I  took  any  account  of  our 
The     song      of     scx — that    lic    Avas  a    man    and  I 

lirmu-n,anda.  ^  wOman. 

"Cupid  shot  his  arroAvs  through  our  hearts 
and  we  were  draAvn  to  each  other. 


UAMANANDA    KAY/  99 

"Oh  maid,  tell  Krsua  of  those  sweet  days 
and  pray  him  that  he  may  not  forget  them. 

"We  took  no  help  of  any  third  person  nor  of 
the  path  which  the  learned  follow. 

"If  any  one  helped  us.  it  was  Vimga — the 
spirit  of  renunciation,  and  Cupid  alone  was  our 
o-uide".i 

We  find  in  the  Kadcha  by  Govinda  Dasa  that 
Chaitanya    preached   this    "You 

Its  mysticism.  "         ^ 

think  that  the  romantic  relation 
between  man  and  woman  is  love,  but  I  warn  you 
it  is  not.  True  love  will  dawn  only  on  those 
hearts  which  have  risen  above  sexual  feelino-s."^ 

The  next  thing  required  for  spiritual  growth 
is  the  spirit  of  renunciation.  Both  these  elements 
are  hinted  in  the  above  mystical  song.  It 
further  refers  to  the  stage  where  the  help  of  a 
Guru  or  a  third  person  is  not  needed  and  the 
paths  prescribed  by  the  scriptures  are   ignored, — 

'    "'tf^ft  ^t^  ^^  ^^^  c^  I 

5f>  fij^  i{\^^  n't?  ^ti 
^niL^^  c^^  ^W{  frfs  II 

'^^^  'If ^  ^ifi  ^«R  ©itf^c^  I 


100         CIIAITANVA    AND    HIS    COAI  PAN  IONS. 

The  spell  of  love  alone  possesses  the  soul    which 
longs  for  direct  conimunion. 


JC.     Narahari   Sarkar. 

Among  the  other  followers  and  friends  of 
Cliaitanya,  Narahari  Sarkar  of  the  village  of 
Crikhanda  in  the  District  of  Eurdwan  deserves 
a  prominent  mention.  His  father  was  Narayana 
Deva  Sarkar — a  Vaidya  hy  caste.  The  family 
claimed  descent  from  Pantlia  Dasa  (1100 — 1169 
A.D.)  who  was  the  Commander-in-Chief  of 
Vallala  Sen's  army.  In  the  Sanskrit  genealo- 
gical work  the  Chandra  Pral)ha — 

The  pedigree.  '-^ 

Ave  find  it  mentioned  that  Pantlia 
Dasa  settled  in  a  flourishin<i;  villa2:e  named 
BalinasI  in  the  district  of  Burdwan.  Some  of 
his  descendants  later  on  moved  to  the  village  of 
Maarecwara  in  the  same  district  and  thence  to 
Crikhanda. 

Narahari's  elder  hrotlier  IMukunda  was  physi- 
cian to  Husain  Saha,  the  Enqoeror  of  Gaur, 
Mukunda's  son  Raghunandana  acquired  celilirity 
in  the  suhsequent  period  of  Vaisnava  history 
as  a  scholar  and  pious  man.  Narahari  was  born 
in  1-178  A.D.  and  w^as  one  of  the  constant 
companions  of  Cliaitanya  when  the  latter  was 
at  Nadiya.     We  find  him  also  paying  his  annual 


NAllAHARI    SAUKAR.  101 

visit    to    Pari    to    meet    Chaitaiiya    along    with 
Why  lie  is  not     othci'  Bciigalis   clui'ing    the    rainy 

mentioned    in    the  -n-      .       ■,  •!       i      • 

Chaitanya  Bhnga-     scasons.     Hc  IS  described    m  con- 
temporary   historical    works  as  of 
a  handsome  appearance  and  a  bright  fair  colour. 
It    is  stated  that  Vrndavana  Dasa,  the  author  of 
the    Chaitanya    Bhagavata    had     some    private 
grudge  against  Narahari  on  which  account  he  was 
not  mentioned  in  his  work.    The  next  biographer 
of   Chaitanya,    Lochana  Dasa,    was,  however,    a 
disciple  of  Narahari  and  made  several  respectful 
references    to    his    Guru    in  his  work.     TiOchana 
Lochana    Dasa,     Dasa's    Chaitanya  Mangala    was 
istipe.  composed   in  1537  A. D.  only  two 

years  after    the    Chaitanya  Bhagavata  of  Vrnda- 
vana Dcisa.^ 

Narahari  is  chiefly  known  for  the  songs  he 
composed  in  praise  of  Chaitanya.  The  burden 
of  these  songs  is  often  a  tender  yearning  of  the 
poet's  soul  for  meeting  Chaitanya.  They  show 
the  ardour  of  womanly  passion  and  their 
language  is  borrowed  from  that  of  the  Gopis 
of  Vrndavana  as  described  in  the  Bhagavata- 
literature.  Late  Babu  Jagatbandhu  Bliadra 
collected  a  little  above  100  of  these  songs,  and 
these  are  the  first  that  Avere  composed  in  the  ver- 
nacular in  glorification  of  Chaitan^^a.  Later  on 
Vasudeva  Ghosh,  also  a  contemporary  of  Chatianya, 

"  See  Preface  to 'Gatirapacla  Tarangini'by    Jat^atbandliu   Bhadra, 
(1904),  pp.  130  and  154. 


102  CllAI  TANYA    Alt!)    TTfS    COM  I'A  XIOXS. 

took  (h(^   Hold  eomposiiii;-   niaster- 

Tlif    first    verna- 
cular    songs     on     piecos    01'    simihii'    song's.      These 

Chaitixn3'a.  i  m  •        •  i 

describe  every  incident  of  Chai- 
tanva's  life  in  an  impassionate  language,  often 
reaching  a  high  level  of  genuine  patlios.  But 
Narahari  must  ])e  given  the  credit  of  being  the 
pioneer  in  the  field.  In  liis  day  Chaitanya's  life 
was  not  yet  written  in  the  vernacular ;  for  in  one 
of  his  sonars  Narahari  writes : 

"One  who  will  write  his  (Chaitanya's)  hio- 
gra})hy  is  not  yet  born.  Long  may  we  have  to  wait 
for  him.  If  the  Master's  life  be  written  in  the 
vernacular  all  people  will  understand  it.  Oh  when 
will  the  lord  fulfill  this  expectation  of  ours  •  " 

It  appears  that  a  biographical  account  of 
Chaitanya  in  Sanskrit  was  already  written  by 
]\Iurari  Gupta  when  Narahari  wrote  these  lines. 
In  them  a  stress  is  laid  on  the  word  '  vernacular ' 
which  may  be  taken  as  hinting  at  the  already 
existing  Sanskrit  work. 

Besides  these  songs  Narahari  wrote  a  book 
named  Nrimamrta  Samudra  in  Bengali  and 
another  named  Bhajanamrta  in  Sanskrit. 

Narahari  was  the  first  among    the    numerous 

followers    of  Chaitanya  to  preach  the  Chaitanya- 

cult.     He    prei)ared  the  code  and 

He    is    the     lirst  ^      / 

to  preach  the  Chai-       tllC     IIKHlira     for     tile     WOl'sllip     of 

Cliaitanya  and  these  were  accepted 

«f^f?]  <i5'fi  \\m,  ^%^  m\-^  Ji^c?!,  ^^  ^t¥l  ^^f^^  "^^  II 


NARAHARI    SARKAR.  103 

by  other  Vaisnavas  in  Bengal,  a  short  time 
after.  The  descendants  of  Narahari  are  known 
as  Vaidya  Goswamis  of  Crikhanda  having  a 
large  follovAdng  of  Brahmin  disciples. 

The  great  love  in  which  Narahari  was  held 
by  Chaitanya  is  indicated  l)y  the  fact  that  the 
latter  while  touring  in  the  Deccan  about  the 
year  1510  mentioned  Narahari  in  one  of  his 
trances.  Chaitanya  was  totally  absorbed  in 
his  emotional  felicities  and  seemed  to  have 
forgotten  the  rest  of  the  world  for  the  two  years 
during  which  he  visited  the  shrines  and  holy 
cities  of  the  South.  This  mention  of  Narahari 
shows  that  he  remembered  at  least  one  of  his 
friends  at  Nadia.  The  passage  which  refers 
to  this  mention  is  found  in  Govinda  Dasa's 
Kadclia  and  may  be  thus  translated  : 

"Sometimes    in    his    frenzy    Chaitanya   says 
'Oh    Narahari,    dear   as    mv   life, 

Chaitaiij'a's  recol-  _  '■ 

lection  of  Naralmri  COUIC  aud  sing  tllC  praisCS  of 
in  the  Deccan. 

Krsna   and  tor  this,   dear  friend, 
I  will  embrace  you." 

"Narahari  died  in  the    Caka    11G3    or    1511 
A.D. 


^''R  ^c^  c-^f*tt  ■n\'\  ^<\^, 

Kaducha  by  Govinda  Dasa, 


lOJj         CIIAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

XI.   Vanqlvadaua. 

Vanclvadan  was  the  writer  of  some  exquisite 
soiiE^s  on  Chaitaiiya  and  Iladha  Krsna.  Jndii- 
nandana  Dilsa  wrote  a  memoir  of  YancTvadana 
HI  tlie  9ika  1038  or  1710  A.D.  Tliis  work  is 
called  the  Van9i9ilcsii,.  We  learn  from  it  tliat 
Vancivadana  was  horn  in  the  year  1491-  A.D. 
He      was      therefore      iunior    to 

Tli(>  Van9T9ik.s;i. 

Chaitanya  l)y  8  years.  His  fatlicr 
Clihakari  Chatto  was  a  resident  of  the  villai^e 
of  Patuli  near  Kalna,  hut  afterwards  settled  at 
Kulia,  one  of  the  wards  of  the  town  of  Nadiya, 
now  merged  in  the  Ganges.  Besides  his  numerous 
songs  which  are  to  he  found  in  the  Padakalpa- 
taru  and  other  song-anthologies  of  the  Vaisnavas, 
Vancivadana  wrote  two  works  named  Dwipakoj- 
jala  and  l)\vipannit;l. 

Chtiitnnya  held  frequent  discussions  with 
Vancivadana  on  the  cardinal  doctrines  of  tlie 
Vaisnava  creed  and  these  are  emhodied  in 
th<'  work  Vancisiksa  which  we  have  just 
mentioned. 

To    Ihe    Vaisnavas    Van9Tvadana's  name    is 

s])ecially  sacred,  as  he  hecame 
gon^J;  guardian    ot     A'lchnupriya    Devi, 

wife  of  Chaitanya,  when  the 
latter  took  Sannyas  and  left  Nadiya  for  good. 
An  image  of  Chaitanya  was  made  hy  Vanci- 
vadana at  her  hiddiniz:  and  wns  daily  worshipped 
bv  her.     The    descendants    of   ^'adava  jNIicra  are 


VANCIVADANA.  105 

the  present  custodians  of  this  image  which  is 
now  worshipped  in  a  temple  at  Nadiya. 

I  shall  attempt  here  to  translate  two  of  the 
songs  of  A'anclvadana.  The  pathos  of  the 
original  Bengali  and  their  perfect  rythm  must 
inevitably  he  lost  in  my  translation. 

[Hadha,  though  a  princess  is  a  milk-maid 
and  as  such  goes  to  sell  milk  and  curd,  this 
heing  her  professional  calling.  It  is  mid-day 
and  Krsna  thus  accosts  her  in  the  path.] 

"  Oh  my  charming  one,  how  can  you  walk 
by  such  a  path  as  this  ? 

"  Here  take  your  seat  under  the  cool  shade 
of  Kadamva  and  I  shall  myself  buy  all  that 
you  may  have  to  sell. 

"  The  mid-day  sun  shines  over  head  and  the 
dust  of  the  path  burns  below.  Your  feet,  my 
love,  are  tender  as  the  lily-buds. 

^\s5i  ■^^  ^m,  ^^^  ^fsrf^  c^tr:^,  'f^^  f%f^^1  «T^  "^srit^ ; 

dt::?  ^\\^^\m  T-^,  cwf^  ^(^51  ^  ^s«i,  ^-^-"su  ■A'^]P\  ^^  ; 
^^^u  ^^  ^rtc'i.  c^fet^ra^  "^  "^^  ^rf^t  ^t^  ^t^  ^if|^l  i 

^t  '5i*tf«t  w^  w.^,  wi  ^1^  ^^,  '^\^  "^  ^^^  ^'^  ; 

f^^tf^^  W^'^  J^^R  C^«51  csit^ 
cixm  c^  ^s'rt^,  •^t  ^sripi  fwsi  f¥«f; 

^t^  ^C'lit  ^tt^  -^^  I 

?f^^  i%?ii  ^rtt^w,  1 1^  ^5  ^tf^cw,  •^51  •si^tt^  ^  "^t^, 
ft ^t^  ^-nra  ^if^,  ^^  ^f^  "^tf^,  ^'^^  ^^  "^  ^. 


106  CIIAITANYA    AN3)    JUS    COMPANIONS. 

"  It  pains  me  to  boliold  your  sueet  face 
flushed  by  lieat  and  your  l)raided  liair  hangius^ 
all  loose  from  lahour. 

"  Priceless  diamonds  are  on  your  person  ;  not 
safe  are  these  from  the  rohhers  ^vho  infest  the 
high -way. 

"Here  do  T  hold  the  tax-collector's  Office 
only  for  you,  my  beloved.  Leave  me  not, 
1  pray." 

"  The  maidens  all  wandered  away,  leaving 
Radha  alone  in  that  charming  woody  land. 

"  His  eyes  glistening  with  tears  of  joy, 
Krsna  came  and  fell  at  her  lotus  feet,  saying 
'Oh  my  charming  one,  blessed  am  T,  God  be 
thanked  that  we  have  met  in  this  place.  My 
hapj)iness  knows  no  bounds  to-day. 

"  The  sun  has  smitten  your  moon-like  face 
with  its  rays  and  the  sound  of  the  anklets  on 
your  feet  proclaims  the  labour  of  your  walk,  my 
beloved. 

"  Fain  would  I  place  your  lovely  feet  on  my 
bosom  and  they  will  be  a  delight  to  my  eager 
eyes. 

"  Permit  me,  dear,  to  sprinkle  fragrant  sandal- 
drops  on  you.  Saying  this,  with  imploring  looks 
he  held  her  by  the  hand  and  with  his  own  purple 
garment  did  he  wipe  away  the  dust  from  lier 
feet. 

"  In  the  lonely  bower  thus  did  the  lovers 
meet  and  A^ancldasa  is  pleased  at  their  meeting." 


VASUDEVA    GllO.SA.  107 

Van9lvadana  Chatto  following'  the.  traditional 
courtesy  of  the  Vaisiiava  poets  subscribes  him- 
self as  YancTdasa  in  the  above  colophon. 
These  songs  were  written  about  the  year 
1620  A.D. 

Vancjivadana  had  two   sons — Chaitanya  Dasa 

and     Nityananda      Dasa.       Prof. 

-Bhagavata  (joswami,   M.A.  or  the 

Hughli  College  is  descended  from  A^anyivadana. 


XII.      Vasiideva   Ghosa. 

A'^jlsudeva  Ghosa,  the  famous  musicion  and 
poet,  was  one  of  the  most  conspicous  figures  in 
the  processions  of  klrtaiia  led  l)y  Chaitanya  at 
Nadiya.  Vasudeva  and  his  tA\  o  brothers  Madha- 
vananda  and  Gobindananda  were  all  devoted  to 
Chaitanya.  They  were  originally  residents  of 
Kumarhatta  from  where  they  came  down  to 
Nadiya  and  settled  there.  Vasudeva's  songs  are 
now  by  far  the  best  of  those  which  have  for 
their  themes  the  incidents  of  Chaitanya's  life. 
He  was  one  of  those  who  deeply  mourned  the 
Sannyas  of  Chaitanya  and  his  desertion  of  Nadiya. 
This  invests  his  songs  with  intense  pathos  and 
intrinsic  poetry.  Vasudeva  acknowledges  that 
he  owed  his  first  impetus  in  Avriting  songs  on 
Chaitanya  to  the  poems  of  Narahari  Sarkar.  He 
thus  refers  to  his  indebtedness : 


i08  ClI.VETAN'i'.V    AXJ)    ll£S    COMl'AXIONS. 

"  I  (h-aiik  from  the  fount  of  souses    composed 

[.Kiti.tid  t..  Nil-      '^y    Narahari     Sarkar     and    thus 
'■"'""'•  conceived    tlie    notion    of  writing 

poems  on  Chaitanya.  "  ' 

"When  he  sang  the  sonus  of  his  o\vn  compo- 
sition "  writes  the  venerable  Krsna  Dasa  Kavi- 
nija  in  his  Chaitanya-Cliaritamrta  "  descriptive 
of  Chaitanya's  life,  even  the  Avood  and  stone 
would  melt  at  hearing  them. "  ^  We  tind  it 
mentioned  in  work  named  V^aisnavachara  I)ar- 
pana  that  A'asudeva  Ghosa  spent  the  last  jiart  of 
his  life  at  Tamluk — the  old  maritime  town 
Tamralipta. 


XIII.     JIurari   Gtipla. 

Murjlri  Gupta  was  horn  in  8ylhet  a])out 
1171  A.D.  and  Avas  a  A'aidva  bv  cast(\  Aloni; 
with  Crivasa,  Chandra  Cekhara  and  others  he 
left  Svlhet  and  came  and  settled  at  jSadiva  in  his 
early  youth.  He  acquired  profound  scholarship 
in  Logic,  Medicine  and  other  subjects  and  though 
older  than  Chaitanya  by  at  least  15  years,  held 
many  learned  disputations  Avith  him,  Avhile  the 
latter  Avas  a  student  in  the  lol  of  Gangadasa 
l*andit  at  Nadiyil. 

■■■  ^f^^ff^  %5  ^r^i  3[f^  7i<^rj{ 


MURARI    GUPTA.  109 

Mui-aii  became  so  devoted  to  Chaitanya  that  on 
hearing  the  news  of  his  resolution 

Uosists  from  co«»-        i.xici  -  i  i.L  i-ix 

luittiug  saicick--  ^o  take  Sannyas,  he  attempted  to 
commit  suicide  and  was  discover- 
ed l)y  Chaitanya  preparing  his  self-destruction 
with  a  knife  and  was  dissuaded  from  this  course. 
Murari  Gupta  is  said  to  have  been  a  worship- 
per of  Rama  and  is  therefore  believed  by  the 
orthodox  Vaisnavas  as  an  incarnation  of  Hanu- 
mana — -Rama's  devoted  servant.  Murari's  humi- 
lity and  high  morals  form  the  subject  of  praise  in 
all  the  memoirs  of  Chaitanya.  We  find  it  men- 
tioned in  Chaitanya-Charitamrta  that  when  on 
his  visit  to  Chaitanya  at  Puri,  the  latter  touched 
him  with  his  hand  in  an  affectionate  manner, 
Murari  shrank  a  little  and  said  that  he  was  a 
great  sinner  not  worthy  of  the  Master's  touch. 
Chaitanya  said  "  Murari  no  more,  it  breaks  my 
heart  to  see  the  humility  of  such  a  venerable 
and  pious  man.  "  In  the  Kadcha  of  Govinda  we 
find  Murari  as  one  of  the  foremost  of  those  who 
welcomed  Chaitanya  at  Puri  on  his  return  from 
the  Deccan.  His  emotion  on  the  occasion  was 
so  great  that  he  fell  unconscious  on  the  ground 
near  Chaitanya's  feet.  ^ 

Murari  Gupta  is  the    first     writer    of  a  bio- 
,,,,    .   ,,.  graphical  account    of    Chaitanya. 

Ihe  nrst  biogra-        o       ir  j 

phy  of  cLaitanya.       jje  wrotc  It  in  Sanskrit  in    151J^, 

Kadcha  by  Govinda  Dasa. 


LlO  CHAITAXVA    AND    Ills    COMl* ANIONS. 

foiii'  years  after  Chaitanya  liad  left  Nadiyfi  as  a 
Saiinyasl.  During  these  years  wild  stories  had 
grown  at  Nadiya  attributing  superhuman  quali- 
ties and  powers  to  Chaitanya.  And  the  veteran 
scholar  in  his  touching  admiration  believed  them 
all  and  poetically  described  them  in  his  cele- 
brated work.  Chaitanya  was  unwilling  that  his 
life  should  be  written  by  any  one.  Murari,  as 
I  have  said,  wrote  one  after  Chaitanya  had  left 
his  native  town.  Govinda  Dasa  alone  recorded 
facts  of  his  life  as  he  saw  them,  but  tells  us 
that  he  did  so  very  privately  without  the  know- 
ledge of  Chaitanya  who  was  averse  to  self-glori- 
tication.  Swarupa  Damodar,  one  of  the  most 
learned  admirers  of  Chaitanya,  is  also  said  to 
have  written  some  biographical  notes  of  hi?n 
about  this  time  ;  we  have,  however,  come  across 
only  a  few  incomplete  specimens  of  them. 
Grovinda  Dasa  wrote  his  notes  on  Chaitanya's 
tour  in  the  Deccan  in  vernacular  in  1511-1513, 
but  these  were  kept  in  strict  privacy.  OP  the 
contemporary  records  of  Chaitanya's  life,  there- 
fore, Murari's  book,  written  in  elegant  Sanskrit, 
was  by  far  the  most  widely  read  among  the 
Vaisnavas  and  respected  l)y  them  as  a  standard 
authority  to  which  all  subsequent  biographers 
referred  in  a  spirit  of  reverence  and  with  perfect 
trust. 

Krsnadasa  Kaviraja  the  author  of  Chaitanya 
Charitamrta,  says  of  tliis  Mork  : 


GOP ALA   BHAITA.  Ill 

"  All  the  incidents  of  Chaitanya's  boyhood 
have  been  recorded  in  the  form  of  notes  by 
Murari  Gnpta."  ' 

Later  on  Lochana  Dasa,  the  author  of  Chai- 
tanya  Maiigala,  mentions  these  notes  as  follows: — 

"  Murari  Gupta  of  the  Vaidya  cast  was  a 
resident  of  Nadiya.  He  was  one  of  the  constant 
companions  of  Chaitanya.  Murari  wrote  in 
Sanskrit  the  incidents  of  the  Master's  life  up 
to  his  youth.  I  read  this  narrative  and  was 
charmed  with  it.  This  is  how  I  first  conceived 
the  idea  of  writing  Chaitanya's  life." " 

Murari  Gupta's  Kadclia,  as  his  work  is 
called,  has  lately  been  published  from  the  Amrta 
Bazar  Patrika  Press,  Calcutta. 


XIV.—Gopala  Bhatta. 

Gopala  Bhatta,  who  is  reputed  as  the  author 
of  Hari  Bhakti  Vilasa,  a  work  which  he  elabor- 
ated rather  than  wrote  himself,  was  the  son  of 
Benkata  Bhatta  and  a  nephew  of  the  celebrated 
Pravodhananda    Saras  vati   of  Benares  whom  Ave 

'    "  ^Itf?  %Tl  ^C«(I  SS^  Tfc«^  ^1%s  , 

-    ^tf^  ^^  cm  'l'^u\  ^ft?:^  1 

1%?^  itc^  c^r^fCTf^  ^'t  II 
^^  tfus  ^rtw^  5fe  ^trt  l-^^  I 

'ft5tf%  •2(^^  fC?1  aHt^-5f?^  II 


112  CHAITANY'A    AXD    HIS    COMPAXIONS. 

have  already  meiitiuiied  in  a  previous  lecture. 
Benkata  Bliatta  had  two  l)rotliers,  Pravodha- 
nanda  who  ohtained  celehrity  as  the  leader  of 
the  Dandi  sect  of  the  ascetics  of  Benares,  and 
TrimaUa  who  lived  in  the  Deccan.  Giopala  Bhatta 
was  horn  in  1;")()8  A.D.  in  the  vil]a2:e  of  Bhat- 
tanitlri    in    Soutlierern    India,    so 

llis  pedif^ree.  ' 

he  was  only  7  years  old  Avhen 
Chaitanya  visited  his  native  country.  We  do 
not  credit  the  account  to  he  found  in  tlie  l*rema- 
vilasa,  the  Bhaktiratnakar  and  other  later  works, 
that  Chaitanya  spent  four  months  of  a  rainy 
season  at  the  house  of  Benkata  Batta  at  Bhat- 
taniari.  Govinda  Dasa,  who  mentions  minute 
details  of  Chaitanya's  tour  there,  does  not  say 
that  the  latter  stayed  anywhere  in  the  country 
for  more  than  a  week  except  at  Dvaraka.  The 
author  of  Chaitanya  Charitamita  was  greatly 
indehted  to  Gopala  Bhatta  for  some  of  the 
materials  of  his  monumental  work.  But  while 
treatiui^  of  other  particulars  ahout  him,  Krsna- 
dflsa  Kaviraja  does  not  refer  to  Chaitanya's  stay 
for  four  months  at  Bhattamjiri.  This  omission 
is  significant,  and  shows  tlie  untrustworthy 
character  of  the  tradition.  It  must  have  heen  fahri- 
cated  hy  the  later  writers  in  order  to  give  import- 
The  tale  otchai.  ^"^^  to  Gopfila  Bhatta  for  his 
fanya's  staying  for     jq^^.  associatioii  with  tlic  Master. 

4        months       with  ~ 

oopaia    Hi.atta   in      jf      jv^    (oiito   possihlc    that     after 

tli«}  Dfcciui  is  iinrc-  ^  ^ 

liable.  Fravodliauauda's    acceptance      of 


GOPALA   BHATTA.  113 

Chaitanya  as  his  saviour  and  Guru,  his  nephew  was 
naturally  attracted  to  take  the  banner  of  Vaisna- 
vism  in  his  hand  and  preach  the  Chaitanya-cult. 
We  do  not  however  disbelieve  that  Chaitanya 
saw  Gopala  Bhatta  in  the  Deccan.  If  he  did 
so  it  was  of  so  slight  and  trifling  interest  that 
Govinda  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  notice  it 
in  his  acconnt.  Indeed  people  outside  the  pale 
of  the  Vaisuavas  did  not  credit  the  story,  as 
will  be  observed  from  the  following  incidental 
references  to  it  by  Narahari  Chakravarti  in  his 
Bhaktiratnakara . 

"When  the  Master  was  travelling  in  the 
Deccan  he  stayed  in  the  house  of  Benkata 
Bhatta  for  four  months.  The  author  of 
Chaitanya  Charitamrta  did  not  mention  it  in 
the  account  of  the  Master's  tour  there.  There 
is  a  mention  of  Chaitanya's  visit  to  Benkata 
Bhatta's  house  but  not  of  his  stay  there  for  four 
months." 

And  again  "As  Chaitanya's  stay  at  Bhatta- 
mari  for  four  months  has  not  been  mentioned 
in  any  authoritative    works,    incredulous    people 

do  not  seem  to  be    willing  to  accept  the  account 

i        "  1 
as  true. 

The  Gaurpada  TarauginI  says  that  Gopala 
Bhatta  was  30  years  old  when  Chaitanya  visited 
the   Deccan.     We  all  know  that  Gopala  Bhatta 

^  The  Bhakti  Ratnakara  1st  Taranga. 


Hi  CnA.ITANVA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

was  born  in  1503  and  Cliaitanya  toured  in  the 
Deccan  during  1510-1511.  So  from  whatever 
point  the  tradition  is  assailed  it  proves  weak  and 
untenable.  The  Preniavililsa  first  mentioned  this 
unauthentieated  tradition  invented  probably  to 
exaggerate  the  importance  of  the  already 
important  man  GoprJa  Bhatta.  I  dwell  on  this 
point  at  some  length  because  it  h?is  been  made 
much  of  by  later  Vaisnava  biographers.  Gopala 
Bhatta  was  the  Guru  of  Crinivas  Achfirya — • 
the  greatest  of  the  latter  day  Vaisnava  Avorthies. 
Crinivasa  evinced  wonderful  faith  in  his  youth. 
His  scholarship  and  other  qualities  of  the  head 
and  heart  led  him  deservedly  to  a  position  of  the 
highest  eminence  in  Vaisnava  society.  After 
leaving  Vrndavana,  however,  he  came  to  Bengal 
and  married  at  Visnupur  where  he  quietly  settled 
down  to  a  prosperous  worldly  life,  receiving 
gifts  of  considerable  money  and  lands  from  Raja 
Vira  Ilamvira  of  Visnupur  who  had  become  his 
disciple.  Crinivasa  succeeded  from  a  A\orldly 
point  of  view  in  enlarging  the  Vaisnava  circle, 
and  drawing  within  its  gradually  widening 
boundaries  many  of  the  influential  members  of 
the  Bengal  aristocracy.  The  fame  of  this  leader 
rang  in  the  ears  of  the  Vaisnavas  throughout 
the  country.  But  when  Manohara  Dilsa,  a  native 
of  Visnupur  paid  a  visit  to  Gopala  Bhatta  at 
Vrndavana  and  spoke  of  the  attainments  of 
Crinivasa   in   glowing     terms,     Gopala     Bhatta 


VAKRECWARA  PANDIT.  115 

remained  silent  for  some  time  and  then  said 
"Fallen  alas,  fallen  from  his  path."^  The  ideal 
of  Gopala  Bhatta  was  the  founding  of  a  spiritual 
kingdom  which  does  not  perish,  and  not  the 
attainment  of  worldly  success  even  in  the  cause 
of  the  extension  of  Vaisnava  faith  in  India.  ^ 
Gopala  Bhatta  with  Raghunatha  Dasa — 
Raghunatha  Bhatta,  Bupa,  Sana- 
One  of   the    six     ^j^^ia  and  Jiva  formed  the  i^lorious 

apostles.  ~ 

group  of  the  "Six  Goswamis" 
whose  works  possess  scriptural  authority  with 
the  Vaisnava  community  of  Bengal. 

XV.  Vakreqwara  Funclit. 
Vakrecwara  Pundit  was  horn  in  Setan.  He 
left  Nadiya  and  spent  a  considerahle  part  of  his 
life  at  Puri  as  a  companion  of  Chaitanya.  It 
is  mentioned  in  the  Chaitanya  Chandrodaya 
Kaumudi  by  Premadasa  written  in  9aka  1534 
or  1G07  A.D.,  that  the  dance  of  Vakrecwara  in 
the  Vaisnava  procession  attracted  the  attention 
of  Raja  Pratapa  Budra  of  Orissa.  Gopinatha 
Acharya  introduced  him  to  the  Raja  by  saying 
that    his    dance    in  an    ecstasy  of 

His  dancing. 

devotion  was  almost  as  perfect 
as  that  of  Chaitanya  himself.  Chaitanya 
Chartamrita  says : — 

^    CTt^  ^n  ^  f^  '^  "^c^  ^U  I 

"'51«1<s'^t?  "Sm*.^  "^C^ '^tC^  ^^"  II 

The  Chaitanya  Chandrodaj'a 

Kauinudi. 


110  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

"For  hours  and  liours  together  he  could  dance 
without  exhaustion,  keepiiig'  up  a  continuous 
flow  of  animation  and  emotional  interest  anu)nu- 
the  processional  party.  Chaitanya  Iiiinsell' sani;' 
when  Yakrecwar  danced." 


XV J.      Gaur'i  Dnsa. 

Gauri  Dasa  was  a  native  of  Kalna.  He  was 
descended  from  Varunacharya  of  the  ^lukhati 
family  ol'  Brahmins.  His  father's  name  was 
Kansari  and  mother's  name  Vimala  Devi.  He 
had  five  ])rothers  of  whom  SuryadcTsa  Sarkhel 
became  afterwards  a  noted  figure  in  the 
Vaisnava  community  as  Nityananda  married  his 
two  daughters  A-^asudha  and  Jahnavl.  It  is  said 
that  Chaitanya  crossed  to  the  other  side  of  the 
Ganges  once,  steering  the  hoat  himself  with 
an  oar.  This  oar,  together  with  a  copy  of 
the  Gita  in  Chaitanya's  own  hand-writing  was 
preserved  with  great  care  hy  Gaurl  Dilsa.  In 
due  course  they  passed  into  the  hands  of  Hridaya 
Chaitanya,  a  disciple  of  Gauri  Dasa  and  are  now 
to  he  seen  in  the  Chaitanya  Temple  at  Kahia. 
Gauri  Das  made  images  of  Chaitanya  and  Nitya- 
nanda in  Nimha  wood  during  their  lifetime. 
Tliese  images  which  are  now  Avorshipped  in  tlie 
temple  at  Kalna  are  said  to  hear  a  striking 
resemblance  to  those  whose  likenesses  they    are ; 


PARAMANANDA    SEN.  117 

and  many  legendary  tales  are  told  by  the  simple 
village  folk  about  them.  One  of  tliem  rnns 
thus  : 

When  Chaitanya  and  Nityananda  paid  a  visit 
to    Gaurldasa   at    Kalna    in  1510 

The     images     of 

Chaitanya  and  Nj-     A.D.     the     latter    was    SO    much 

ivananda  at  Kalna. 

impressed  and  charmed  by  their 
presence  that  he  implored  them  to  stay  with  him 
at  Kalna  as  long  as  he  lived.  Chaitanya  unable 
to  resist  his  importunities  said  that  he  Avould 
comply  with  his  request.  In  the  klrtana  pro- 
cession at  his  house  that  night,  Gauridasa  was 
surprised  to  find  two  figures  of  Chaitanya  and 
two  figures  of  Nityananda,  exactly  alike,  singing 
songs  in  his  courtyard.  He  approached  all  the 
four  when  they  said  :  — 

"  Keep  any  two  of  us  and  we  will  stay  with  you." 
Upon  this  Gaurldasa  caught  hold  of  a  pair  and 
they     became     transformed    into    Nimba- wood- 
figures  which  have  since  been  worshipped  in   the 
temple  at  Kalna. 


XT  IT. — Paramaufnida  Sfii  ( KavikaDiaiJiiro.) 

Paramananda  Sen,  who   was   afterwards    dis- 
The         village     tinguishcd    as     '  Kavikarnapura ' 

Kanehrapara.  ^^^.     ,  ^^^     ^^^.     o^.i^ainent     of  pOCtS,' 

was  ])orn  in  the  1528  at  Kanehrapara,  a  village 
28  miles  to  the  North  of  Calcutta.  This  village 
was  once  a  celebrated  seat  of  scholars, 
and    stories     of     wonderful     physical     strength 


118  ClIAITANYA    AND    llTS    COMPANIONS. 

of  its  inhabitants  in  olden  times  are  still  related 
in  the  neighbouring  locality.  Here  a  Yaidika 
Brahmin  named  Bacharama  Adhikarl,  possessed 
of  lierculian  strength,  is  said  to  have  removed 
unaided  a  big  palm  tree  that  lay  obstructing 
the  passage  of  the  women  to  the  landing 
()hat  of  the  Ganges.  The  story  of  his  gallant 
feat  is  still  narrated  enthusiastically  by  the 
people  of  the  locality.  It  is  also  said  that  a 
youth  of  this  village  Avas  once  caught  by  a  croco- 
dile in  the  Ganges,  Avhereupon  his  companions 
swam  across  the  river  and  succeeded  in  drawing 
the  crocodile  by  force  to  the  bank  with  its  victim 
who  revived.  In  this  village  stands  the  cele- 
brated temple  of  Krsna  Baya,  the  god  established 
by  Sivananda  Sen,  the  father  of  our  poet.  This 
temple  was  re-built  in  1785  A.D.  when  the  one, 
founded  by  Kachu  Bay  of  Jessore  for  the  deity 
in  the  16th  century,  had  sunk  in  the  bed  of  the 
Ganges.  The  cost  of  building  the  present  temple 
was  one  lakh  of  Rupees  which  was  borne  by 
Nimaicharana  Mallik  and  Gauracliarana  Mallik 
of  Calcutta.  It  is  one  of  the  most  artistic  temples 
that  adorn  the  Gangetic  valley ;  on  account  of  its 
lying  in  an  almost  deserted  village,  it  has  not  yet 
attracted  the  notice  of  the  critics  of  Indian  art. 
The  inscription  on  the  pedastal  of  the  image 
runs  as  follows : 


tARAMANANDA    SEN.  119 

Sivananda  Sen  established  the  image  in  the 
The  Krsna  name  of  his  Guru  Crnath  Acharya. 
^^^^p^^-  Sivananda  belonged  to  the  physi- 

cian caste  and  was  one  of  Chaitanya's  respected 
friends.  It  is  said  that  Paramananda,  his  son, 
displayed  poetical  powers  from  a  very  early  age 
and  received  the  title  of  '  Kavikarnapura '  from 
Chaitanya  himself.  The  Chaitanya  Chandrodaya 
written  by  our  poet  is  a  master-piece  of  Media3val 
Sanskrit  dramatic  literature.  It  was  completed 
by  Kavikarnapura  in  the  year  1568  A.D.  I  give 
below  a  free  rendering  of  the  preliminary  portion 
of  this  Avork : 

"  Look !  here,  and  behold  the  god  Purusottama 
who  looks  dark  as  collyrium,  or  the  blue-tinted 
emarald  on  this  sea  coast,  or  like  the  Tamala-trees 
of  the  Nilgiri  Hills,  or  like  a  proud  elephant 
chained  to  the  immortal  tig-tree  the  '  Akshaya 
Bata.'  The  great  god  will  shortly  march  in  his 
Car- journey,  and  the  ceremony  has  drawn  an 
immense  multitude  whose  exclamations  of  "  Vic- 
tory to  the  Lord  "  have  now  filled  the  whole  air's 
space. 

"In  the  height  of  spiritual  ecstasy  these  people 
have  forgot  their  caste-distinctions,  and  the 
Brahmins  and  Sudras  have  joined  their  voices 
in  singing  the  praises  of  God. 

<<  The  gleeful  exclamations  of  the  women, 
whose  voices  are  musical  like  those  of  the  nymphs 
presiding   over   the   ten    directions,   are   echoed 


120  CHAITANYA    AND    1118    COMPANIONS. 

afar.  On  the  other  side,  hark  to  the  solemn  song 
of  the  tal)er  and  of  the  trumpet  and  the  shrill 
soLindini;'  Imi^le.  These  have  raised  a  minified 
noise  whicli  has  vvell-nii^h  deafened  the  ear 
drowning'  the  voices  of  the  great  crowd. 

"  At    this    moment,    the    great  king  Pratapa 

liudra,  the  custodian  of  the  temple  of  Jagannatha, 

approaches  with    slow    pensive    steps,    his    mind 

full    of   gloom,    for  Chaitanya  has 

An  extract    from        .  ,  , 

the  Chaitanya  jusl  passod  awav  Irom  tliis  Avorld. 
It  IS  the  mind  tliat  lends  its 
colour  to  the  sorroundings.  The  joyous  shouts 
of  the  multitude  do  not  produce  any  effect  on 
the  unhappy  king.  A  few  moments  after,  the 
King  addressed  me  and  said  : — 

"  Oh  thou  master  player,  there  stands  res- 
plendent as  ever  the  great  God  of  the  Nilgiri 
Hills  ;  the  pompous  ceremony  of  his  Car- journey 
is  as  grand  now  as  ever  it  was.  Look  there 
and  ])eliold  the  pilgrims  coming  from  all  direc- 
tions as  on  previous  occasions.  They  await  with 
reverence  the  forthcoming  religous  festivities. 
This  garden  in  the  precincts  of  the  temple- 
courtyard  is  even  more  beautiliil  than  para- 
dise. But  in  my  eyes  there  is  a  void  in  all  that 
I  see,  because  Chaitanya  has  left  us. 

"  Dost  thou  give  me  some  comfort  by  play- 
ing a  drama  in  Avliich  tiie  lieavenly  life  of  that 
prince  of  ascetics —that  very  soul  of  love — 
Chaitanya  may  be  the  fitting  subject." 


RAGHUNATUA    DASA.  121 

111  the  above  prologue  the  author  states  that 
the  drama  was  written  by  the  order  of  and 
played  before  the  king  Pratapa  Ptudra. 

Some  modern  writers  have  confounded  this 
Paramananda  Sen  whose  title  is  Kavikaniapur, 
with  Paramananda  Purl.  This  is  a  serious  mis- 
take as  the  latter  was  an  elderly  ascetic  of 
Tirhut,  much  respected  by  Chaitanya  himself, 
whereas  the  former  (Kavikaniapur)  was  a  mere 
child  when  Chaitanya  saw  him  at  Purl  and 
prophesied  his  future  greatness. 


XT^III.  — -Raglian a tha  Dasa . 

In  the  history  of  the  Vaisnava  apostles  who 
gathered  round  Chaitanya  there  is  perhaps  no 
one  who  deserves  such  prominent  notice  as 
Raghiinatha  Das,  born  in  the  year  ]  498  at  the 
village  of  Chandpur  within  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  old  town  of  Saptagrama. 

Saptagi'cima,  probably  the  ^Gatija  regia'  of  the 

Romans,  was    at    that    time    a    most  flourishing 

town    in    Bengal.     It    was    the     capital    of     a 

Mahomedan    General    who    ruled    lower  Bengal 

under  the    Emperor    of    Gaur.     It    consisted    of 

seven  wards,  named  after  seven  princely  saints — 

sons  of  an  ancient  Hindu  king    of 

Ivanau],    who    had  m  pre-historic 

times  conquered  Bengal.     Saptagrama    in    those 

days    was    the    residence    of    a    large  number  of 

P 


122  CHAITAXVA    AND    HIS    COM  I'AXfOX.S. 

Europeans  whose  sliips  lay  ancliored  on  tlie 
river  Saraswatl,  laden  with  nicrchandisc.  This 
river  lueetini^'  the  (jani^es  and  Jumna  at  'J'riven' 
branched  otf  a  short  way  down,  and  Mowed  in 
a  semi-circular  course  by  Saptaiirania  and  met 
the  Ganges  again  near  Alipur.  The  SaraswatJ 
is  now  a  dead  river  and  the  great  commercial 
activdty  wliich  once  marked  its  course  is 
a  matter  oi'  interest  merely  to  the  students  of 
antiquity.  It  was  the  most  important  port  lor 
sea-going  vessels  in  liengal  during  the 
Mahomedan  times,  and  when  it  fell  into  de- 
cadence owing  to  various  causes,  the  chief  of 
which  was  the  silting  up  of  the  river  Saraswatl, 
Chittagong  rose  to  distinction  as  a  seaport, 
though  it  could  never  equal  even  faintly  the 
historic  glory  of  the  older  town,  as  far  as  her 
political  importance  and  great  economic 
resources  were  concerned.  .V  Bengali  poet  of 
the  17th  Century  who  had  visited  all  the  impor- 
tant towns  of  India  of  his  times  describes 
Saptagrama  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  of  them,  ' 

'      Kr.sija    Kaiua,    who    wrote    a    puem    in    honour    nt'     Sastbi     D^evi 
ill  1687  A.D.,  makes  the  following  lueutiou  of  Saptagrama. — 


^t^l  tt^t"^  («S^I^)  Cfff-^t'l  f^tW  *t^  II 
iir^  ii^"^  ^^'\  ''^J^\^  Ctt»1  Wt  I 
Cfff'^f^  Ctffl<l  'JSif  ^^»ra  f^»1^  II 

^^s^  C!ff■^^\■^  ^^  ^«t?  ^^«i ! 
'^m  w\^  Ik^  c^pf  »fTO»T(  "f =1 II 


HAGHUNATHA   DASA.  123 

The  Mahomedan  Governor  of  the  town  was 
so  powerful  that  he  frequently  revolted  against 
he  Emperor  of  Gaur,  and  the  revenue  of  the 
^lace  could  not  be  recovered  without  sanguinary 
skirmishes.  This  made  the  Emperor  do  away  with 
the  Governorship,  and  lease  the  town  and  its 
adjoining  villages  to  two  influential  Kayastha 
Chiefs,  Hiranya  and  Govardhana.  The  condition 
was  that  they  should  pay  a  revenue  of  12  lakhs 
of  rupees  a  year,  and  the  Emperor  would  not 
interfere  with  the  internal  administration  of  the 
district.  Under  this  new  arrangement,  the 
annual  income  from  the  land  alone  rose  to  20 
Hiranya  and     laklis,    bcsidcs   wliicli   the    taxcs 

Govardhana.  .1  ,  ,        , 

on  the  exports  and  imports — 
were  a  source  of  considerable  additional  income 
to  the  brothers,  Hiranya  and  Govardhana;  so 
that  they  held  a  very  important  position  amongst 
the  aristocracy  of  Eastern  India.  I  need 
scarcely  remind  my  readers  that  the  value  of 
money  was  much  higher  in  the  16th  Century 
than  it  is  now. 

Both  Hiranya  and  Govardhana  were  well 
versed  in  Sanskrit,  Persian  and  Arabic,  and  their 
court  was  a  favourite  resort  of  distinguished 
scholars.  In  the  '  Sangit  Madhava'  a  work  by 
Govinda  Dasa,  the  famous  Vaisnava  poet  of  the 
16th  Century,  there  is  a  line  which  says  :  "  If 
you  seek  a  really  charitable  man  in  Bengal  where 
can  you  find  one  greater  than   Govardhana   and 


124  CllAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

if  you  seek  a  true  poet  where  can  you  find  one 
better  than  Damodar  of  Srikhanda.'" 

So  the  brothers  had  a  reputation  not  only 
as  scholars,  but  as  honest  god-fearing  men 
who  gave  much  in  charity  and  lived  in  the 
spiritual  environment  of  the  Bengal  of  those 
days.  Nilamvara  Chakravarti,  grandfather  of 
Chaitanya,  was  a  great  friend  of  the  two 
brothers,  and  Chaitanya  himself  in  his  childhood 
used  to  call  them  uncles,  though  they  were 
Kilyastha    by  caste  and  he  a  Brahmin. 

Iliranya  had  no  children  and  Govardhana 
had  an  only  son  Eaghunatha  Dasa — the  idol  of 
the  family,  and  sole  heir  to  their  vast  property. 

In  his  childhood  Raghunatha  received  his  edu- 
cation in  Sanskrit  from  one  Valarama  Acharya, 
a  native  of  Chandpur.  Valarama  Acharya 
was  a  devout  Vaisnava,  and  Baghunatha  had 
a  spiritual  training  under  this  excellent  man. 
It  happened  at  this  time  that  Haridasa,  the 
Mahomedan  convert  to  Vaisnavism,  paid  a  visit 
to  Valarama  Achjirya  and  stayed  Avith  him  for 
seven  or  eight  days  at  Chandpur.  A  world  was 
revealed  to  young  B-aghunatha  of  Avhich  be 
had  already  obtained  only  glimpses  from  the 
Early  spiritnai  tcachiugs  of  Valarama.  He  saw 
training.  -^^  Haridasa,  the  fulfilment  of  the 

best  ideal  of  a  man.     He  was  passionless,  sweet 

Sang'tta  Madliara. 


KAOHUNATHA    DASA.  125 

and  resigned  to  God,  full  of  peity  and  tenderness 
and  with  an  overilowing  devotion  which  the 
more  the  hoy  saw  he  admired  the  more,  and 
when  Haridasa  went  away,  Eagliunatha  saw  the 
workl  in  a  new  light — reading  the  mercy  of 
God  every  where  and  striving  for  the  good  of 
all. 

Valarama  Acharya  used  to  pay  his  visit  to 
Hiranya  and  Govardhana  every  day;  for  he 
was  their  family  priest  as  well ;  and  when  he 
spoke  of  the  little  incidents  of  Haridasa's  life 
to  the  ])rothers,  liaghunatha  heard  them  with 
rapt  attention  and  was  all  tears  in  admiration. 
In  January  1510  the  report  that  Chaitanya 
left  Nadiya  for  good  and  turned  a  Sannyasi  spread 
throughout  the  country,  and  created  a  great 
feeling  amongst  all  classes  of  men.  It  was  the 
constant  topic  of  conversation  and  as  elsewhere, 
it  was  discussed  in  the  court  of  the  hrothers 
who  were  full  of  admiring  love  for  Chaitanya. 
But  the  news  impressed  Raghunatha  most  of  all, 
and  lie  longed  to  see  one,  who,  it  was  said,  had 
seen  the  Unseen  and  was  mad  with  joy.  Chai- 
tanya. after  his  Sannyas,  paid  a  visit  to  Advaita 
at  Santipur.  It  must  have  heen  towards  the 
end  of  January,  1510.  Raghunatha  asked  per- 
interview  with  mlsslou  to  scc  the  Mastcr,  and  he 
*^'''^'*''"'^'*-  was  accordingly  sent    there    with 

a  number  of  escorts  hy  his  father  and  uncle 
who    never  suspected  that  this    interview   would 


120  CI[AITANVA     AND     HIS    COMPANIONS. 

he    fi'Huti'ht   with  coiispqueiieps  a\  liich  would  mar 
tlieir  worldly  coin  fort  for  ever. 

'riic  interview  hroke  tho  chord  which  attaclied 
him  to  tainil\  life.  It  revealed  to  him  tlie  wondersof 
the  spiritual  world.  Tt  maddened  and  completely 
transformed  him.  It  also  appeared  that  he  too 
had  seen  the  Unseen.  He  stayed  at  Santipur 
with  the  Master  for  four  or  live  days.  Chai- 
tanya  left  Santipur  and  started  for  Purl. 
lia£?hunatha,  it  is  mentioned  in  the  Kadcha  hy 
Grovincbi  Dasa,  met  him  again  on  the  hanks  of 
Suvarnarekhjl  near  Hariharpur,  hut  had  to  come 
back  to  Saptas^rama  at  the  bidding  of  liis  father 
and  uncle. 

They  saw  in  him  a  completely  changed  lad. 
The  very  name  of  Chaitanya,  uttered  before 
him,  l)rought  tears  to  his  eyes.  He  fasted  and 
repeated  tho  name  of  God  and  said  to  all  that 
the  worldly  life  was  miseral^le.  He  wanted  all 
passions  to  be  at  rest  and  the  joy  of  union  with 
God  to  be  the  sole  aim  of  mankind.  The  two 
chiefs  were  now  alarmed  that  what  they  had 
allowed  to  grow  unchecked  might  now  prove 
dangerous  Raghunatha  might  renounce  the 
world  and  turn  a  Sannyasi. 

As  time   passed     the    lad's   anguish    of    soul 

and    desire    to    meet      Chaitanya 

Th..  nt.r..ssity   „(     increased  aud   the    Chiefs    felt    it 

upplv  iii<^  iorcc. 

advisable    to  use    stronger  means 


RAGHUNATHA    DASA.  127 

to  keep  him  at  home.  'They  accordingly 
appointed  five  soldiers,  four  servants  and  two 
Braiimiiis  to  hd  his  constant  attendants.  The 
two  Brahmins  were  to  teaeli  him  the  sacredness 
of  family-ties  and  obedience  to  parents  and 
superiors.  It  was  unavailing.  A  greater  force 
than  that  of  family-ties  was  tugging  at  his 
heart. 

Five  years  passed  in  this  way  and  in  1515 
Chaitanya  again  paid  a  visit  to  Santipur  on  his 
way  to  Ramakeli,  near  Gaur.  Raghunatha  said 
to  his  father  that  if  he  were  not  permitted  to 
see  Chaitanya,  he  would  fast  and  die,  and 
Govardhana  really  feared  from  what  he  saw  of 
the  boy,  that  this  might  really  happen.  So  he 
sent    him    to    Santipur    with     a 

He  meets  Cliaita-  ,  i       i  f  i 

nay  again.  stroug     oody     ot      armed     men. 

Raghunatha  was  l)eside  himself 
with  joy  and  meeting  Chaitanya  fell  at  his  feet 
and  wept.  The  accumulated  grief  of  his  soul 
found  expression  in  his  tears,  for  he  had  never 
enjoyed  uu])roken  sleep,  nor  eaten  regular  meals 
for  these  live  years,  owing  to  his  intense  desire 
to  see  the  Master.  Chaitanya  read  the  boy's 
heart,  but  his  attitude  \\as  one  of  austerity, 
versiino;  on  rudeness.     He  said  :  — 

"Quiet  your  mind,  return  home  and  do  not 
act  like  a  mad  man.  It  is  by  slow  degrees  that 
a  man  outgrows  his  family-ties.  Do  not  show 
morbid  sentiments  in  imitation  of  others,  before 


128  CllAITANVA    AM)     Ills    (  O.M  I'ANIOXS. 

spirituality  lias  reallv  ui'ow  ii  in  you.    (io  and  lead 
the  ordinary  life  of  the  world.   Be 

Cliuitanya's    slcrn 

attitude  '   towards      not    attached    to    it    and  let  faith 

Ratfliuiiat  lin. 

U'row  in  your  lieai't.  md  out- 
wardly do  as  other  worldly  nu'u  do  and  you  \\ill 
find  that  God  will  hel|)  and  save  you  in  no 
distant  future." 

Uao'hunatha  went  hack  home  a  thorouij-hlv 
chan<j,'ed  man.  He  beg'an  to  sujjervise  the  all'airs 
of  the  Estate  and  did  what  his  father  and  uncle 
bade  him  to  do.  In  order  to  keep  him  attached 
to  home-life,  Govardliana  had  already  married 
him  to  a  girl  whose  beauty  was  unequalled  in 
the  country,  and  lla^huniitha  was  kind  to  her. 
It  was  a  delijs^ht  and  surprise  to  tiie  Chiefs  to  find 
him  so  completely  clian<Tjed,  but  this  was  a  mere 
outward  g*arb,  for  Raghunatha  followed  Chai- 
tanya's  instructions  to  the  letter.  He  did  not  make 
any  outward  display  of  faith,  only  tliat  it  might 
gi'ow  the  more.  He  mixed  w  iih  th(>  a\  orld  and 
did  his  duties  unattached  ;  for  he  had  dedicated 
himself  to  God,  and  to  Chaitanya  who  had  shown 
him  the  gates  of  heaven. 

A  calamity    overtook    the    family    about   the 
year    1510.     The   ex-governor   of  Saptagrama,  a 

:5!r51  3pU  "^^  r.^t^  s^  Rf  ^  II 

Chaiiniivii    Cliariiamrta. 


RAGHTJNATHA.   DAS  A.  129 

Turk,  had  a  well-founded  grudge  against  Hiranya 
and  Govardhana,  for  they  had  usurped  his  posses- 
sions.      This    man,    formerly     hostile     to    the 
Emperor  of  Gauda,  now  ingratiated  himself  into 
his  confidence,  and    inflamed   him  by  many  false 
reports  against   the    brothers.     He  was  informed 
that    though    they    paid    only  12 
oppression." ^^^'°'  ^     ^'^^^   '<^   X^ar    to    the  Royal   trea- 
sury, their  collection  was  immen- 
sely greater  and  that  His  Majesty   was    a    great 
loser   by   granting    them    the    lease.     Moreover 
they  had  grown  very  powerful   and  might  prove 
dangerous  at  any  moment. 

No^v  at  a  time  when  Govardhana  was  away, 
the  king  sent  a  large  body  of  soldiers  to  arrest 
the  chiefs.  Hiranya  fled,  without  being  able  to 
induce  Raghunatha  to  join  him.  The  latter  was 
found  by  the  Emperor's  soldiers  quietly  doing 
the  duties  of  his  office  as  usual.  He  offered  no 
resistance  and  silently  accompanied  the  army  to 
Gauda.  On  being  produced  before  the  king  he 
was  required  to  divulge  where  his  uncle  and 
father  were  hiding.  Raghunatha,  as  was  really 
the  case,  pleaded  ignorance,  upon  which  the  king 
ordered  him  to  be  tortured  till  he  gave  the 
information.     Raghunatha  meekly  said: 

"  Your  Majesty  saw  me  as  a  child  and  I 
remember  the  day  when  you  addressed  my  father 
and  uncle  as  brothers.  Nothing  has  since  hap- 
pened to  cause  this    change  of   attitude    in  your 


130  CHAITA:JfYA   ASB    HtS   COMPANIONS. 

Majesty.  May  I  not  claim  the  rii^ht  of  an 
atfectionate  treatment  at  your  hands  such  as  a 
nephew  niay  expect.  Your  Majesty  is  my 
Master  and  I  resis^n  myself  to  you.  Is  it  not 
your  duty  to  protect  my  interest  even  as  a  father 
does  of  his  child  ?  Your  Majesty  has  the  reputa- 
tion of  being  versed  in  the  scriptures  and  is 
moreover  known  to  be  a  pious  man.  What  should 
I  say  more  ?  " 

The  emotion  and  sweetness  with  which  the 
young  Raghunatha  delivered  himself,  made  a 
deep  impression  on  the  Emperor.  Por  Raghu 
had  an  unspotted  life  dedicated  to  God.  His 
countenance  reflected  the  purity  of  his  heart, 
and  his  words  w^ere  sweet. 

Chaitanya  Charitamrta  says  that  the  Emperor 
melted  into  tears  at  this  address  and  they  fell 
over  his  long  flowing  beard.     His  Majesty  said  : 

"  Erom  to-day  you  are  my  god-son.  I  release 
vou  to-day.  I  have  only  one  thinc^ 
to    add.     Your     uncle     Hiranya 

enjoys  more  than  8  laks  a  year.    I  am  his  partner  ; 

it  is  only  fair  that  he  should  give  me    something 

more.    Go  home  and  do  so  that  he  may  meet  me. 

Let  him  do  what  is  but  fair.     I  leave    it    to  him 

entirely.  "  ^ 


^^  <!sf5t  c^^ '^^  ^tg'  1^  I 

vftf^  ^  ^«F  ^U5  ^^tf^c^  ^rtf^fsT  n 
c^  ^):vi  ^tsf  5|cs  ^f^  cTt^  ^  . 

"SltfBF    CftvStt^    Cst^    ^f5    ^"^    '?.^  II 


RAGHUNATHA   DASA.  131 

Raghunatha  went  hack  and  induced  his 
uncle  to  meet  the  Emperor,  and  an  amicahle 
settlement  was  the  result. 

It  was  ahout  this  time  that  Nityananda  paid 
a  visit  to  Panihati,  a  village  four 
to  panrhatir  ^  '^'  miles  to  the  North  of  Calcutta. 
The  Sankirtana  party  mustered  in 
strength  around  the  apostle.  He  resided  at 
the  house  of  Eaghava,  which  hecame,  as  it 
were,  a  sacred  place  for  the  time.  Hundreds 
of  people  gathered  there,  and  it  seemed  as 
though  the  material  world  had  vanished  and 
the  spiritual  one  had  opened  its  gates  for  all. 
Night  and  day  God  was  praised  "with  the  timhrel 
and  dance  and  the  high  sounding  cymbals" 
and  songs  of  great  spiritual  beauty  were  composed 
and  sung.  At  Panihati  Nityananda  stayed  for 
three  months  and  the  author  of  Chaitanya  Bhaga- 
vata  says  that  he  turned  the  very  tide  of  the  life 
of  people  there  during  this  time.  Raghunatha 
heard  of  all  that  transpired  there  from  Saptagrama 
which  was  not  very  far  from  Panihati.  He  asked 
the  permission  of  his  father  to  go  there.  Both 
he  and  his  uncle  agreed  to  his  request   this  time, 

4t1%    ^   l^t^t    4f^t-«    ^tf^  II 

'^\^  ^t%  ^5(tc^  f^i  f^^  7{\  crrirmi  ii 

Cliaitanya  Charitamrta,  Antya  Khanda,  Ch.  VI, 


132  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

for  their  suspicions  had  been  ahnost  lulled  by 
the  outwardly  mundane  life  which  Piai^^hunatha 
had  led  all  this  time. 

Nityfinanda  sat  on  a  hrick-built  seat  beneath 
a  lar^i^e  fi«i;  tree,  which  still  exists,  looking  like  a 
true  messenger  of  God.  When  Eaghunjitha  met 
him,  Nityjlnanda  said, 

"  Thou   dessembler,    I   shall    give   thee   a 
punishment  "  ' 

"  Dessembler  "  because  he  affected  worldly 
life,  while  at  heart  he  was  an  ascetic.  Nitya- 
nanda  added 

"  You  shall  give  a  feast  to  the  people  here, 
and  that  shall  be  your  proper  punishment.  " 

This     good-humoured    joke    was    taken    in 

earnest,    and    Raghunatha   made 

Maho^tsava/'^ '^  extcnsivc  preparations  for  feeding 

sumptuously   the  vast   multitude 

that  had  gathered  at    Panihtlti.     He  must   have 

spent  a  large  amount  of  money    over  it  ;  for,    at 

the  end  of   the  feast,   he    sent   to   Nityananda's 

home  a  hundred  Rupees  and  seven  tolas  of  gold, 

this  of  course  without  Nityananda's    knowledge. 

Raghunatha  gave  one  bunded  Rupees    with  two 

tolas  of  gold  to  Raghava  Pandit  at  whose  house 

Nityananda   stayed.      Besides   this  he   gave   to 

»    "<!5fi(  ^-|  t^t:^  cFt^  fw#i  ?^»Pi 
^tn  "3it^  "5(if5i  c^sfi:?!  -^f^^  5f«s^i" 

Cliaitanva  Cliaritaiiirta,  Aiitva  Kliarula,  Cli.  VI. 


RAGHUNATHA    DASA.  138 

innumerable  people  of  more  or  less  note  that 
had  assembled  there  from  Ks.  20  to  Rs.  2 
each  according  to  their  merit.  This  festivity  is 
known  amongst  the  Vaisnavas  as  the  "  Danda 
]\[ahotsava"  or  the  festivity  of  punishment. 
The  anniversary  of  this  festivity  is  held  with 
great  pomp  up  to  this  day  at  Panihati  on  the 
13th   day   of   the    bright    moon  in  the  month  of 

Jaistha  (May- June).' 

At  the  end  of  the  festivity  Raghunatha  had 
a  private  interview  with  Nityananda  and  touch- 
ing his  feet  gentlv  said  : 

"  Pondly  have  I  cherished  the  hope  of 
surrendering  myself  to  Chaitanva.  This  has 
proved  like  the  dwarf  aspiring  to  catch  the 
moon.  I  am  a  great  sinner  ;  how  may  I  expect 
to  be  admitted  to  the  heaven  of  his  presence  ! 
I  tried  several  times ;  but  each  time  I  fled, 
the  men  set  by  my  parents  caught  hold  of 
me  and  brought  me  back  by  force.  Now 
bless  me,  revered  sir,  that  I  may  succeed  in 
my  attempts  and  meet  the  Master."  And 
Nityananda  laid  his  hand  on  Raghunatha's 
head  and  silently  blessed. 

After  this  Raghu  came  back  to  Saptagrama. 
This  time  his  old  sentiment  which  had  been  kept 
hidden  from  his   people   manifested   itself   once 

^  Accounts  of  this  festivity  are  to  be  found  in  almost  all  the 
standard  biographies  of  the  Vaisnavas  of  this  period  particularly  in 
the  Ghaitanya  Charitamrta,  Antya  Khanda,  Ch.  VI. 


134  CHAITANYA     VXI)    ITTS    COMPAXroXS. 

again,  ITe  tried  again  and  ai^ain  to  escape  from 
the  palace  1)iit  a  strong  body  of  guards  uas 
appointed  to  keep  watch  over  liis  movements. 
They  found  him  out  every  time  he  attempted  to 
escape.  He  did  not  visit  his  wife,  but  slept  on 
the  bare  floor  in  the  courtyard  of  the  temple 
attached  to  the  palace.  He  no  longer  attended  the 
affairs  of  the  State  and  silently  wept  remember- 
ing Chaitanya  of  whom  he  dreamt  in  his 
sleep  and  thought  all  day.  Alarmed  at  the 
frequent  attempts  of  her  son  to  leave  home, 
his  anxious  mother  had  said  once  to  her  husband  : 
"  I  wiih  he  could  be  kept  bound  to  a  pillar 
Avith   a   rope.     Possibly   he   may 

Force  no  remedy.  " 

escaj^e  the  guards  some  day." 

The  sorrowful  father  replied : 

"  The  attractions  of  a  treasure,  vast  as  an 
emperor's,  the  beauty  of  his  wife  like  a  celes- 
tial nymph  cannot  bind  him  to  this  home  of 
ours,  do  you  think  a  slender  rope  will  do  it?'" 

It  was  the  month  of  July,  1517,  the  time 
of  the  great  Car-festivity  of  Jagannatha,  w^hen 
the  people  of  Bengal,  especially  those  of  Nadiyil, 
used  to  pay  their  annual  visit  to  Chaitanya  at 
Puri.  They  made  preparations  for  the  journey. 
An  opportunity  occurred  to  llaghunatha  at  this 
time  to  renounce  home  for  ever. 

vff^  ^i:^  vstr^  ^tf*R  QW^^  I" 

Chaitanva  BliSgavata, 


RAGHUNATHA   DAS  A.  l35 

Jadunandana  Acharya,  the  spiritual  head  of 
the  family  of  Hiranya  and  Govarddhana,  called 
on  Raghunatha  at  ahout  4  a.m.  of  a  July 
morning.  The  latter  was  in  the  courtyard  of 
the  temple  within  the  palace,  a  strong  body 
of  guards  keeping  watch  over  him.  Jadu- 
nandana wanted  Eaghunatha  to  mediate  on  his 
behalf  with  his  family-priest  Avho  had  quarrelled 
with   him.     In   the    morninj?  the 

His  flight.  ,  ^  ^ 

priest's  service  would  be  required 
at  his  home  for  worship.  Raghunatha  gladly 
undertook  to  induce  the  priest  to  perform  the 
worship  as  usual,  and  accompanied  Jadunandana 
to  his  home.  The  guards  had  implicit  confi- 
dence in  one  who  was  the  Guru  of  the  house 
and  did  not  object  to  Raghunatha's  accompany- 
ing him.  As  soon  as  he  got  out  of  the  palace  he 
told  Jadunandana  that  he  would  visit  the  priest 
himself.  It  Avas  not  necessary  for  the  Guru  to 
be  with  him.  The  simple-minded  Brahman 
took  him  at  his  word  and  Raghunatha  after 
having  paid  a  visit  to  the  priest  and  extracting 
a  promise  from  him  to  continue  his  religious 
duties  at  the  house  of  Jadunandana,  fled  away 
as  fast  as  his  legs  could  carry  him. 

In  the  morning,  the  guards  went  to  the 
house  of  Guru  to  enquire  about  Raghunatha, 
and  he  was  astonished  to  hear  that  Raghu  had 
not  gone  back  to  the  palace.  In  a  moment  the 
whole  city  was  astir  searching  for  the  absconder. 


136  CHAITAXYA    AND    HIS    COMTANIOXS. 

Govarddhana  thoiii^ht  that  as  the  people  of 
Nadiya  were  then  about  to  start  for  Purl  to  meet 
Chaitanya,  Raghuiiatha  had  doubtless  joined 
them.  So  he  sent  ten  horsemen  to  make  en- 
quiries witli  a  letter  addressed  to  Civananda 
Sen,  father  of  the  famous  Kavikarnapura,  of 
wliom  wo    have    spoken  in  our  previous  lecture. 

(^ivananda  Sen  was  a  venerable  man  and  a 
i^reat  friend  of  Govarddhana  Dasa  ;  he  was  besides 
the  leader  elect  of  the  pilii:rims  bound  for  Purl. 
Govarddhana  wrote  in  the  letter  that  his  son  had 
turned  mad  for  love  of  Chaitanya.  He  was  the 
only  child  in  the  family.  His  wife  was  young 
and  was  deeply  distressed.  If  he  could  not  be 
made  to  return,  it  would  blast  their  happiness  for 
ever. 

The  ten  horsemen  returned  in  due  course 
with  a  reply  from  Civjlnanda  Sen  saying  that 
Raghunatha  had  not  joined  the  prilgrims.  Men 
were  sent  to  places  far  and  near.  But  nowhere 
was  he  to  be  found.     Where  had  he  gone  then  ? 

It  w^as  the  march  of  a  soul,  deep  drunk  with 

inward   joy,    to  meet  the    object 

The      fruitless       ^f  \^[^  \ove.  Nothini]^  could  deter 

search.  ^         ^ 

it ;  no  obstruction  was  unsur- 
mountable,  no  risk  too  great,  ilaghunatha  was 
"•oinir  to  a  heaven  of  bliss.  What  matter 
that  hardships  had  to  l)e  undergone?  He  followed 
those  paths  which  no  one  had  trodden  before. 
Through    jungles      and     deserted    villages    he 


UAGHUNATIIA    DASA.  137 

walked  on  and  on,  bare  footed.  He  walked 
30  miles  on  the  first  day  towards  the  east  and 
spent  the  nii^ht  in  a  cowshed.  In  the  morning 
he  turned  to  the  south  and  reached  a  village 
named  Yatrabho2:a.  Thence  he  came  westward  to 
Saran.  In  12  days  he  reached  Purl.  During 
these  days  he  had  but  three  meals.  The  l)ody 
fasted  but  the  spirit  feasted  on  the  joy  of  the 
prospect  of  meeting  the  Master. 

Chaitanya  Avas  at  the  house  of  Kaci  Micfra 
at  Purl.  Some  of  his  companions  were  near 
him  and  Mukunda  Datta  was  the  first  amongst 
them  to  see  Raghu  approaching  from  afar. 
He  cried  aloud  pointing  with  his  finger  : — ^"Look 
there,  Raghu,  our  beloved  Raghu  has  come, 
how     emaciated  does    he  look  P" 

Meets  Chaitanya.  ^i-j  ^^     t      ^   •  ,  i- 

Chaitanya  called  him  to  his 
presence  and  Raghu  humbly  touched  his  feet 
and  bursting  into  tears  said  : 

"  Much  have  I  suffered,  my  Master.  Sinner 
as  I  am,  do  not  leave  me  this  time.  I  am  too 
humble,  but  yet  yearn  for  your  grace." 

Chaitanya  embraced  him  affectionately 
and  asked  Govinda,  the  servant  of  the  house, 
to  prepare  a  good  meal,  saying,  "  Surely  he  has 
not  tasted  any  proper  food  during  his  long 
journey." 

Raghu  was  served  with  substantial  food  for 
5  days,   but   on   the    6th   he  said  that  he  would 

R 


138  CHAITANYA  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS. 

touch  nothiiiL^-  rich.  'It  serves',  he  said,  'to 
nourish  my  jihysical  life ;  l)ut  my  spiritual 
vision  grows  less.'  From  that  time  forward  he 
used  to  stand  for  a  couple  of  hours  at  the  gate 
of  the  great  temple  of  Puri  every  evening  and 
the  pilgrims  gave  him  alms  without  his  seeking. 
They  gave  him  a  handful  of  bread  or  rice  not 
knowing  that  he  was  a  prince,  and  often  it  so 
happened  that  he  got  nothing  from  them,  and 
then  he  gladly  fasted.  He  received  regular 
instructions  from  Svarupa  Damodara  whom 
Chaitanya  had  appointed  to  teach  him  the 
tenets  of  Vaisnava  scriptures  and  instruct  him 
in  those  practical  ways  by  which  the  realization 
of  God  is  brought  to  man. 

Ragunatha's  reverence  for  Chaitanya  was  so 
great  that  for  a  few  years  he  would  not  venture 
to  speak  to  him  direct.  What  he  had  to  say  to  the 
Master,  he  said  to  Govinda  or  Svariqm  Damodara 
who  communicated  it  to  him. 

One   day    Svarupa  told    to     Chaitanya  that 

Raghunatha  wanted    to      receive 

Direct    Histnic      instructions   directly     from  him. 

tions.  '' 

He  would  not  speak  out  his  great 
wish  at  first  for  shyness.  And  when  he  did 
so  at  last  he  feared  lest  he  might  be  considered 
too   forward.     Chaitanva    called  Rac:hu    to    his 

4-  O 

presence  and  said  : 

"  SvarQpa  Damodara  knows  the  Vaisnava 
theolosrv   and    the    rules   of  monastic  life  better 


RAGHUNATHA   DAS  A.  139 

than  I  do.  For  you  know  I  have  always  rather 
followed  my  own  natural  inclinations.  That  is 
why  I  entrusted  your  training  to  this  worthy 
man.  But  should  you  still  care  to  learn  from 
me,  follow  these  instructions  : 

"  Do  not  listen  to  gossip,  do  not  seek  honour 
for  yourself  but  give  it  freely  to  others.  Have 
your  mind  fixed  on  God.  Consider  yourself 
humbler  than  the  grass  you  tread  upon.  Live 
upon  spare  diet  and  have  humble  clothing.  Be 
patient  as  a  tree."  ^ 

About  the  qualities  to  be  learnt  from  the 
tree,  Chaitanya  had  once  said  to  Svarupa 
Damodara  and  Ramananda  Raya : — 

"  The  tree  does  not  complain  against  him 
who  cuts  it  to  pieces.  Though  its  sap  dries  within 


^^^  c^f^  ^t^  -^i^  ^^  ^t^ll 

^=ii«(  f^cw:^  -3^1  5^c«i  II 

f¥   c^t^  ^#^  ^  ^1  Sftf^  ^U^  I 

^^J?    ^^^    C^t^    ^^    ^'iCTf^f  II 

Cxst^t^    ^tWll    ^^    ^IC^C^    1?^  II 
Tt^d  lt«R  ^W  ft^  ^1?   Tt^  I 

^«rtf*t  '^t^t^  ^sjlu  ^  21^1  ^^  I 

^W^    >i|^   ^fC^   ^fsj   ^f^5   fj^*5^  II 

«t^  ^1  «rtti:^  ^t^  ^t^  ^1  if^u^  II 
"^ttfffi  A^J?  ^<;tf^  Jif^^^i  I 
'mtf^'^  ^^uf^  ^%  Ji?i  ?f^°o  II" 

Chaitanya  Cliaritamrta,Antya  Khanda,  Ch.  VI. 


140  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

it,  it  does  not  a.sk  a  drop  of  water  from  any 
one.  It  gives  freely  all  its  treasure  to  tliose 
wlio  seek  it.  Exposed  to  the  lieat  of  the  sun 
in  the  summer  and  to  the  rains,  it  gives  shelter 
to  others.'" 

These  instructions,  it  should  he  understood, 
were  meant  for  those  wiio  had  hroken  their 
family-connection,  and  turned  ascetics  devoting 
themselves  to  universal  good  and  having  a 
l)rotherly  ideal  hefore  them.  They  could  not 
he  followed  by  lay  men  to  their  fullest  extent. 

The  grief  of  Govarddhana  Dasa  and  his  family 
at  Saptagrama  at  Raghunatha's  continued  absence 
was  great.  They  had  sent  men  in  quest 
of  the  missing  Raghunatha  all  over  the  country 
and  even  to  Purl,  (^ivananda  Sen  had  in  the 
meantime  returned  from  Purl  with  other  pil- 
grims and  Govarddhana  again  sent  men  to  him 
enquiring  whether  he  had  seen  Raghunatha 
there  with  Chaitanya.     Civananda  said  : 

"Yes,    he    is   there   with   the   Master.     The 
faith  he  has  shown  is  great  and  he    has    already 
become  a  noted  man  there.     Chaitanya  has  made 
Govarddhana  sends     ^vcr   the    chargo  of  his   Spiritual 
him  money.  training  to  Svarupa,  and    all    the 

companions  of  the  Master  hold  him  dear  as 
their  lives.  Day  and  night  he  repeats  the  name 
of  God    and     scarcely   leaves     the   presence   of 

'  See  Chaitanya  Charitamrta  Antya  Khanda. 


RAGHUNATHA    DASA.  141 

Chaitaiiya.  A  true  ascetic  is  he,  caring  neither 
forfood  nor  clothing.  At  10  O'clock  in  the 
night  he  stands  at  the  main  gate  of  the  temple 
of  Jagannatha  and  the  pilgrims  give  him  some 
scraps  on  which  he  lives.  If  they  give  him 
nothing,  he  fasts.  Many  are  the  days  in  the 
month  when  he  fasts,  at  other  times  he  lives 
upon  whatever  chance  brings  him."^ 

Govarddhana's  heart  melted  in  unbounded 
compassion  for  the  poor  child,  and  night  and 
day  he  wept  and  was  sad.  He  sent  two  Brahmans 
and  a  servant  with  Rs.  400  to  Purl,  hoping  that 
Raghunjitha  might  be  induced  to  accept  the  small 
offer  for  his  personal  comforts.  Raghunatha 
said  to  them  : 

"  A  thousand  times  do  I  bow  to  my  parents. 
Give  them  this  message  that  I  pray  for  their 
blessing  in  order  to  attain  a  spiritual  life.  I 
was  not  born  for  food  and  clothing.     If  I  attend 

^<^  r^^rt^  f^c^l  c^^i  ^tfk  w\i^  n 

W-'\'HtA  ^If^  W\U5  >2f^  S^l  II 

Iw:^  Ivscf  ^f^f^  ^  j\'Ai'^  ^^  II 
f>iv?^<i  «rt^5i  ^?i  ^t^t^  mt^]  II 

C^%  ^f?  Ot^  ^r^T  ^IC^  ^^1  I 
^  ^^^t^l  ^  ^C^^  ^W{  II 

Chaitanya  Charitamrta,  Antya  Khanda,  Ch.  VI. 


142  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPA^^IONS. 

to  material  comforts,  the  vision  within  me  o;rows 
less  bright.  I  cannot  hear  it.  My  only  care 
is  to  keep  it  clear.  For  the  satisfaction  of  my 
father  I  will  accept  a  small  portion  of  the 
money,  not  for  myself,  but  to  serve  my  Master. 
You  may  return  home  now." 

As  he  Avould  not  touch  any  money  with  his 
own  hand,  they  did  not  go  back  but  stayed 
at  Purl.  Twice  in  a  month  Raghunatha  took  a 
small  amount  from  this  money  and  invited  and 
entertained  Chaitanya  with  it  in  a  very  humble 
way,  the  two  meals  that  he  gave  to  the  Master 
each  month,  costing  him  only  8  pans  of  kaudis 
something  like  2  annas.  For  two  years 
Kagbunatha  continued  inviting  Chaitanya  to  this 
humble  repast,  but  at  the  end  of  two  years  he 
discontinued  it.  A  month  passed  and  Chaitanya 
did  not  receive  any  invitation  from  Raghunatha 
and  when  the  next  month  passed  also  Chaitanya 
asked  Svarupa  : — '  Why  is  it  that  Raghu  does  not 
invite  us  any  more.'    Svarupa  told 

He    no    more    in- 
vites Chaitanya  to     the    Mastcr     that    Raghu    would 

not    further    accept    any    money 

from  a  worldly    man.     This    could    not,    he  was 

convinced,    give    any  satisfaction  to  the  Master, 

though   the    latter   accepted    the    invitation    for 

the    sake    of  mere  courtesy  ;  so  he  had  dispensed 

with   it.     Chaitanva    said:    "  Raij-hu    has  under- 

stood   aright.     It   is  even   so ;   acceptance    of   a 

gift  from  a  rich  man  makes  the  life  of  an  ascetic 


llAGHUNATHA    DASA.  14o 

poor   spiritually.       It    spots    bis    clear   vision  of 
God."' 

Cliaitanya  however  made  enquiries  of  Svarfipa 
about  the  physical  needs  of  Raghunatha,  though 
he  did  not  like  any  one  to  make  any  provision 
for  him.  A  sannyasi  must  absolutely  resign 
himself  to  God,  without  thinking  of  the  morrow. 
Whatever  Raghunatha  did,  he  did  with  an  inward 
strength  and  joy,  which  raised  him  above  all 
human  compassion.  Through  his  spiritual  and 
physical  needs,  hoAvever,  the  mother-like  eyes 
of  the  Master  followed  him  at  every  step 
watching  with  keen  interest  his  progress  in 
spiritual  life. 

Chaitanya  one  day  heard  that  Raghu  no 
longer  stood  at  the  gate  of  the  Temple  for  alms, 
but  he  gathered  a  handful  of  scraps  and  rice 
thrown  outside  the  courtyard  of  the  Temple, 
which  he  washed  carefully,  and  took  with  a  little 
salt.     Yet  he  was  as  cheerful  as  ever. 

Thus  did  Raghunatha  spend  16  years  of  his 
life  at  Puri  He  came  there  when  he  was  only 
19,  and  now  at  his  35tli  year,  Chaitanya  passed 
away  from  this  world.  Raghunatha  had  once  said 
to  Chaitanya : 

"  Of  what  other  God  you  speak  to  me, 
Master  ?     You  are  my  God." 

Chaitanya  Charitamvta,  Antya  Kharida,  Ch.  VI. 


lit  (ilAlTANYA    AM)    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

When  the  great  calamity  took  place,  Jiaja 
Pralapa  Riidra  who  had  already  made  over  tlie 
helm  of  administration,  and  all  marks  of  royalty 
to  his  son,  retired  from  Purl  to  village-life  in 
deep  sorrow  and  spent  his  remaining  days  in 
calling  to  mind  the  incidi^nts  ol"  Chaitanya's  life. 

Many  of  Chaitanya's  companions  left  Pari ; 
for,  they  had  not  seen  God  in  the  image  of  the 
Temple  there  so  much  as  in  Ihe  Man  before 
them,  and  their  grief  was  now  overwhelming, 
llashunatha  carried  the  stone  which  Chaitanya 
had  given  him  for  worship  together  with  a  string 
of  sacred  Goonja-heads  to  Yrndavana,  and  at  the 
moment  of  worship  he  bathed  them  every  day 
with  his  tears,  rememl)ering  the  kindness  of 
their  giver. 

Raghunatha    lived    till    a  good  old  age  dying 
in    his    8()th    year   in    1584  A.D. 

His  last  luoiiioiits.         ->-t'     i       i.  i  xi  i  •!       i 

His  last  hours  arc  thns  descril)ed 
in  the  Padakalpataru  : 

"  On  the  bank  of  the  Radha  Kunda  he  lay 
breathing  heavily.  He  could  speak  no  word, 
and  his  closed  eyes  shed  a  few  drops  of  tears 
indicative  of  the  joy  of  union  with  Krsna." 

Raghunatha's  name  is  insi^parably  associated 
with  those  of  Rfipa  and  Sanatana,  who  had 
become  his  most  intimate  friends  at  Arndiivana. 
There  the  ascetic-prince  earned  the  admiring 
love  and  esteem  of  the  Rrajabasls  by  his  faith 
and    pure    unspotted    lif(\       He    wrote    many 


HAGHUNATHA    DASA.  145 

Sanskrit  works  which  Avill  be  enumerated  below. 
He  was  innocent  and  simple  as  a  child.  And  his 
sinless  mind  mirrored  in  its  unsullied  trans- 
parence the  glories  of  a  true  spiritual  life. 

In  the  last  part  of  life  he  lived  upon  whey 
only  and  often  slept  under  the  canopy  of  the 
sky  which  showed  him  far  greater  splendour 
than  the  ornamental  roof  studded  with  jewels  of 
his  father's  palace  at  Saptagrama. 

Some  of  the  sons-s  on  Radha  and  Krsna  that 
he  composed  contain  invocations  to  TuiigadevI, 
Rangadevi,  Lalita,  Bisakha  and  other  Gopis  of 
Vrndavana  to  teach  him  how  to  decorate  the 
God  whose  vision  he  saw  ;  for  they  were  finished 
mistresses  of  the  art.  In  one  of  them  he 
addresses  the  Deity  saying, 

"  I  am  thine — I  am  thine  alone  for  ever. 
Take  me  to  thyself." 

This  was  a  short  time  before  his  death.  One  of 
his  constant  companions  in  the  latter  part  of  his 
life  was  the  venerable  Kisnadasa  Kaviraja  who 
was  inspried  to  write  his  Ohaitanya  Charitamrta, 
on  hearing  an  account  of  the  great  life  of  the 
Master,  recited  for  the  most  part  by  Raghunatha. 
At  Vrndavana  we  find  him  receiving  some  of 
the  later  Vaisnava  worthies  such  as  ^rinivasa  and 
Cyamananda  with  kindness,  and  paying  his 
respects  to  Jahnavi  Devi,  wife  of  Nityananda 
when  she  visited  the  holy  city. 
s 


146  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

He  is  one  of  the  few  Kayasthas  who  were 
admitted  to  Braliiiiauliood  in  the  VaisLiava  society 
of  Bencjal,  beiiii^  recognised  as  one  of  the 
six  Gosvamls.  But  to  Rai^hunatlia  Bralimans, 
Kciysthas  and  even  the  lowest  castes  as  ILidls 
commanded  the  same  respect.  For  foUowinij^ 
the  instructions  of  Chaitanya,  he  had  learnt  '  to 
respect  every  living  being  knowing  that  the  holy 
God  dwelt  in  every  one.' 

The  routine  of  Baghunatha's  daily  life  is 
„     .        ,.   , .     given  to  us  by  Krsnadasa  Kaviraia 

Kontino     ot     Ins      ~  ^  .  .  .  j 

f'=^''y  'if*^'  who  Avrote  from  intimate  personal 

knowledge.     He  says  : 

"  The  routine  of  his  day  he  follows  to  the 
letter.  It  is  unalterable  like  curving  on  stone. 
Por  seven  and  half  Prahars  (21  hours)  he  remains 
plunged  in  God  realization  or  in  recording  his 
spiritual  experience.  The  rest  is  spent  in  sleep 
and  in  taking  his  meals.  There  are  days  when 
he  does  not  reserve  even  these  small  hours  for 
that  purpose.  His  asceticism  is  wonderful. 
He  has  abstained  entirely  from  rich  meal.  He 
dresses  himself  in  rags  and  carries  out  the 
Master's  instructions  to  the  letter."^ 

If  we  read  the  Sanskrit  works  of  Baghunatha, 
we  will  find  what  a  fount  of  joy  Avas  in  him, 
inspite  of  the  rigour  of  his  life.  If  he  left 
home,    it    was    to    extend  his  home,  to  make  the 

*  Chaitauya  Charitanirta,     Autya  Khanda,  Cli.  VI. 


EAGHUNATHA    DASA.  147 

narrow  broad,  for  his  home  is  not  now  the 
palace  of  Saptagrilina  but  the  hearts  of  thousands 
of  admirers.  If  he  denied  himself  the  pleasures 
of  life,  it  was  to  taste  higher  joys.  In  the 
pages  of  Indian  history  he,  with  Rtipa,  Sanatana 
and  another  great  Vaisnava,  whose  life  will  be 
narrated  hereafter,  shows  the  continuity  of  the 
line  of  princely  ascetics  from  the  time  of  the 
Buddha.  It  is  the  same  story  repeated  in  the 
pages  of  the  religious  history  of  our  country, 
of  men  placed  in  positions  of  power  and  wealth 
surrendering  all,  for  higher  pursuits.  We  find 
a  parallel  of  the  great  asceticism  practised  by 
E-aghunatha  in  some  of  the  Catholic  saints  of 
Europe,  chiefly  in  the  life  of  St.  Catherine  of 
Siena  (born  1347  A.D.)  of  whom  it  is  said  : 

"At  her  liith  year  she  wholly  abandoned 
the  use  of  animal  food.  At  15  she  left  off  wine. 
At  23  she  gave  up  bread  living  only  on 
uncooked  vegetables.  She  used  to  sleep  but 
one  quarter  of  an  hour  in    the    four  and  twenty. 

She  lived  3  years    without  speaking . . .  And 

finally  remained  wholly  without  food  for  many 
years."  ^ 

God-realization  has  not  been  a  matter  of 
speculative  discussion  in  India.  Throughout 
this  vast  Peninsula  the  belief  is  deep-rooted 
among   all    classes    of    people    that  the   human 


'  Quoted  by  the    Encyolopa3dia  Britannica  (Ninth    edition,  Vol  V,  p. 
230)  from  Father  Rainiond's  life  of  St.  Catherine. 


148  CHAITANYA   ANIJ    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

soul  can,  under  a  course  of  training  and  in  some 
cases  l)y  virtue  of  heredity  or  accumulated 
karma  of  past  lives,  reach  the  stage  in  wliich 
God  may  he  realised  in  spirit.  One  who  has 
attained  this  hlessed  condition  is  like  livinsj 
joy — untouched  by  the  sorrows  and  worries  of 
the  world,  having  only  compassion  for  those  of 
others.  Tailaiiga  SvamI  and  Bhaskarananda  of 
Benares,  Loknatha  Brahmacharl  of  Dacca,  and 
Paramhansa  Ramkrsna  of  Daksinecvara  have, 
in  our  own  times,  evinced  in  their  wonderful 
lives  the  attainment  of  the  highest  mystic 
vision.  The  beauty  of  their  lives  and  visions 
permeates  the  whole  atmosphere  of  India  as  do 
the  scent  of  the  Sephali  flower  make  fragrant 
the  air  of  an  autumnal  day.  The  rational  view 
which  often  sneers  at  them  will  be  nowhere 
with  us,  when  life  presented  before  our  eyes 
unfold  the  beauty  of  spiritual  vision  in  such  a 
prominent  manner.  In  no  case  will  an  Indian  be 
prepared  to  give  up  his  faith  in  the  Sadhu  and 
his  god-realization,  in  Raghunatha  Dasa  and  men. 
of  his  type. 

Raghnnfitha's works.    Kaghuniltha  wrotc  among  others 
the  following  works  in  Sanskrit  : — 

1.  Vilapa  Kusumanjall. 

2.  Prema  Parabidha  Stotra. 

3.  Radhiistaka. 

4.  Premambhujamaraudakhya  Stotra. 

5.  Swashankalpaprakaca  Staba. 


RAGHUNATHA   DASA.  149 

6.  Namastaka. 

7.  Utkanthadacaka. 

8.  Ahhista  Prarthanastaka. 

9.  Abhistasuchana. 

10.  Caclilnandana  Cataka. 

11.  Crlf^aurangastavaka  Kalpabriksa. 

12.  Nama  Ciksa. 

13.  Prai'thana. 

14.  Govarddhana9rayadacakam. 

15.  Govarddhanadacakaprarthanada9akam. 

There  are  13  more,  making  29  in  all. 

Premambhujamaranandakhya    Stabaraja    by 
Ras^hunatha  Dasa  explains    how 

The  subjects  ^  -*- 

treated.  the    trances    of   a   spiritual  soul, 

perfect  in  its  love  for  God,  show  themselves  in 
their  glowing  poetical  manifestation  in  the 
character  of  E-adha.  Her  ornaments  when  she 
goes  to  meet  Krsna,  are  really  the  qualities  of 
the  soul  in  deep  mystic  love.  She  is  represented 
as  bathing  in  the  sweet  stream  of  humility ;  next 
in  that  of  child-like  simplicity  and  then  in  that 
of  divine  grace  wliich  lends  beauty  to  her  person. 
She  clothes  herself  with  the  blue  coloured  Sadi 
of  her  coyness  and  resignation ;  next  wears  the 
outer  pink  robe  of  her  first  love,  she  covers  her 
breast  with  the  bodice  of  her  false  anger  ;  the 
love  of  her  companions  for  her  is  the  perfume 
that  surrounds  her  person ;  the  subtleness  of 
her  ways  to  gain  the  heart  of  the  beloved  is  the 
collyrium  with  which  she  paints  her  eyes.     Pure 


150         CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

thought  from  whicli  all  earthly  attachments 
have  been  wiped  away  is  the  roiint  of  her  joy; 
the  memories  of  her  romantic  play  with  Krsna 
are  personified  in  her  maids,  and  the  fortune  of 
her  union  AA^ith  Krsna  is  the  red  sii^n  on  her 
forehead,  and  so  forth/ 

The  spiritualization  of  the  sensual  forms 
makes  the  great  mystic  attraction  of  the  Yaisnava 
literature.  Uadha,  as  described  hy  the  Vaisnava 
poets,  possesses  all  the  sweetness  of  a  lorely 
mortal,  but  she  is  more.  True  we  find  her  some- 
times in  a  sensual  garb  but  she  is  always  set  forth 
from  a  highly  spiritual  back  ground — an  exalted 
extra-sensual  plane,  Chaitanya'-^  love  for  God, 
which  could  not  be  expressed  well  without  being 
represented  in  a  material  form,  latterly  came  to 
be  emphatically  symbolised  in  the  picture  of 
Eadha  drawn  by  contemporary  poets  and  those 
who  wrote  shortly  after.  His  life  is  the  perspec- 
tive which  gives  us  a  closer  survey  of  Yaisnava 
poetry  showing  in  many  of  the  glowing  and 
inspired  lines  the  transition  of  emotions  from 
sensual  to  spiritual.  This  poetry  flows,  as  it 
were,  through  the  familiar  scenes  of  human 
passions  into  the  great  sea  of  mystic  love,  till  we 
meet  what  the  eye  cannot  command — the  endless 
and  the  illimitable.  E^aghunatha  did  not  write 
from   mere  imagination.     Before    his    eyes,    the 


'    This    allfgoriiil    nieanin<<    is    fully     explained     in     the     Cliaitanya 
Charitanirta,  Karrianda  and  other  works. 


NOTES   ON    CHAITANYA.  151 

Master's  great  love  for  God  manifested  itself  in 
a  hundred  romantic  ways,  compared  with  which 
Dante's  love  for  Beatrice  is  mere  child's  play. 
Chaitanya  was  in  one  of  those  oceans  of 
joy  and  sorrow,  in  the  small  rivers  of  which 
every  man  and  woman  struggles  more  or  less  for 
a  time  in  their  youth.  The  life  of  the  Master 
was  a  grand  epic  poem  of  sweet  emotions  of 
which  many  of  us  have  sung  short  lyrics  in  our 
youth,  and  wiiich  constantly  supply  the  poet's 
pen  with  colour  and  imagery  in  his  romantic 
works.  Raghunatha  not  only  read  the  great 
poetry  in  the  Master's  life  unfolded  before  his 
eyes,  but  himself  tasted  it  by  life-long  devotion 
and  faith.  It  is  on  this  account  that  he  gives 
a  mystic  explanation  of  Eadha's  adornments. 
At  every  stage  he  is  reminded  of  what  really 
adorns  the  soul,  not  the  outward  ornaments  but 
the  inner  ones,  what  constitutes  the  chief  beauty, 
not  the  external  form  but  the  qualities  of  the 
soul.  Kadha  in  the  Vaisjjiava  poetry  represents 
this  heaven  of  love's  ideal. 

Raghunatha  wrote  many  poetical  pieces  in 
Bengali,  some  of  which  will  be  found  in  the 
Pada-kalpataru. 

XIX. — Further  notes  on  Chaitanya. 

Let  us  now  analyse  what   it   was    that   made 

Chaitanya  the  centre  of  universal 

orcLTt?n7a'f  ufe!     admiration  in  our  country.    Rupa, 

Sanatana    and  Raghunatha  Dasa 


152         CHAITAKYA    AND    HTS    COMPANIONS. 

liad  passed  through  o:ieat  hardships  aiul  sacri- 
fices for  tlieir  love  ol"  him  and  so  did  Hari  Ufisa, 
the  Mahomedan  convert.  What  difterence  is 
there  hetween  their  lives  and  his?  Chaitanya 
did  not  practise  austerities  as  Ra£i;hunatlia  did. 
He  had  no  princely  fortune  to  give  up  for 
spiritual  pursuits,  like  the  first  named  three 
amongst  his  followers.  As  a  Sannyasi  he  was 
not  very  stiict ;  for  he  was  often  taken 
to  task  by  Damodara  Pandit  for  ^  iolating  the 
rules  of  his  Order,  and  he  frankly  told  llaghu- 
natha  that  he  did  not  know  the  details  of  A^aisnava 
theology  as  Svarupa  did.  He  was  no  organiser 
of  the  Vaisnava  community  as  Nityananda  was. 
And  as  a  result  of  it,  the  descendants  of  his 
uncles  now  living  in  Sylhet  do  not  enjoy  that 
high  position  in  society  which  those  of  Nityananda, 
Advaita  and  even  of  lesser  Vaisnava  worthies 
do  at  the  present  time.  He  Avas  no  doubt  a 
great  scholar.  But  scholarship,  however  lofty, 
does  not  make  any  lasting  impression  in  this 
country.  He  Avrote  no  books  as  his  followers 
did.  Why  is  it  then  that  he  is  revered  as  a  god 
by  his  countrymen  and  is  held  in  a  much  higher 
estimation  than  others  whose  great  sacrifices 
in  the  cause  of  religion  deservedly  command  the 
respect  and  admiration  of  all. 

Other  lives,  great  as  some  of  them  no  doubt 
are,  represent  more  or  less  the  struggle  of  the 
spiritual    soul    for    the    attainment    of   its    tinal 


KOTES    ON    CHAITAKYA.  153 

goal,  whereas  Chaitanya's  life  shows  not  the 
worry  and  strife  in  pursuit  of  perfection  but 
at  once  its  full  blown  beauty— its  bloom  and 
fragrance.  The  plant  has  many  worrying 
experiences  and  inward  struggles  before  it  brings 
forth  the  concentrated  treasure  of  its  beauty  and 
fragrance  in  the  flower.  Those  lives  show  the 
struggle  and  worry,  but  not  so  much  the  beauty 
of  mystic  vision  as  Chaitanya's  does.  The 
scholars,  poets  and  ascetics  gathered  round  him 
as  the  bees  gather  round  the  flower  ;  for  in  him 
they  found  a  store  of  that  joy  which  has  been 
figuratively  called  'heaven'  by  all  religions. 

Wherever  he  happened  to  be,  the  young  and 
old  followed — mad  after  him,  as  he  after  his  God. 
"Many  gathered  the  sacred  dust  trodden  by  his 
feet  in  such  quantities  that  the  track  of  his 
passage  could  be  followed  out  over  a  large  stretch 
of  country."  Just  as  the  rose  in  its  full  bloom 
attracts  the  eye,  the  little  thorns  of  the  stalk 
with  which  nature  protects  it,  lying  almost 
hidden  from  our  sight,  the  asceticism  practised 
by  Chaitanya  which  helped  to  develop  his  realiza- 
tion of  God  in  the  like  manner  does  not  strike  us 
so  forcibly  as  is  the  case  in  the  lives  of  Rasrhu- 
natha,  Hupa,  Sanatana  and  Haridasa.  Yet  did  he 
practise  austerities  to  keep  the  flame  of  his  faith 
burning,  though  not  always  in  the  way  required 
by  the  scriptures.  Jagadananda,  a  young  scholar, 
always  tried  to  minister  to  his  personal  comforts. 
T 


154  CflAlTANYA   AND    II  IS    COMPANIONS. 

He  insisted  upon  the  ]\ Easter's  partakinj?  of 
something?,  in  however  small  quantity,  of  the 
good  food  presented  to  liini  by  his  admirers. 
And  when  Chaitanya  would  not,  inspite  of  his 
importunities,  do  so,  Jao^adananda,  deeply 
a^-rieved  would  fast  for  the  whole  day.  One 
day  Jagadfinanda  offered  him  a  pillow  ;  for  the 
Chaitanya      aiui     ^If^ster  Qsed  to  slccp  ou    the    hare 

Jagarlananda.  ^^^q^.  ^f  ^^^^     temple     without    OUe. 

Chaitanya  was  angry.  He  said  *'Look  here, 
this  lad  wants  me  to  enjoy  worldly  comforts  ! 
why  not  bring  a  costly  couch  for  me  r"  One 
of  the  hhaktas  of  Eastern  Bengal  presented 
Chaitanya  with  a  jar  full  of  scented  oil ;  and 
Jagadananda's  earnest  wish  was  that  the 
Master  would  use  a  little  of  it  at  the  time  of 
bathing,  and  with  this  object  he  approached  him. 
Chaitanya  said  "Send  this  jar  to  tlie  temple  of 
Jaganucitha.  There  the  lights  will  burn  with  this 
oil."  The  Pandit  said  not  a  word  that  day, 
thou'-'h  he  was  deeply  sorry.  The  next  day  at 
the  time  when  the  Master  took  his  bath, 
Jagadananda  brought  before  him  some  oil  from 
the  jar.  Chaitanya  said  "I  told  you.  Pandit, 
that  I  would  use  none  of  this.  Send  the  jar 
to  the  temple  of  Jagannfitha."  And  ^lagadananda 
was  very  angry  ;  he  carried  the  jar  to  the 
courtyard  and  broke  it  to  pieces  and  its  perfumed 
contents  flowed  on  the  ground.  Not  content  Avith 
this,  he  went  to  his  room  and  fasted    three   days. 


NOTES    ON    CHAITANYA.  155 

So  that  Cliaitanya  liad  to  2^0  to  him  and  soothe 
his  temper  witli  sweet  words.  We  have  seen 
on  p.  42  that  Jagadananda  did  not  at  all 
like  the  Master  to  eml^race  Sanatana  when 
he  was  afEicted  with  eczema  and  advised 
the  latter  to  leave  Purl  and  go  to  Vmdavana. 
Chaitanya  was  very  angry  with  him  for  this. 
One  of  the  chief  reasons  which  made  him  leave 
Purl  for  two  years,  and  go  to  the  Deccan  is  here 
described  in  his  own  words  : 

"  Jagadananda  is  determined  that  I  should 
taste  worldly  pleasures.  Whatever  he  wants 
me  to  do  I  do  for  fear,  lest  he  take  effence.  If 
T  do  not  do  as  he  wishes,  for  three  days  he 
would  not  speak  to  me.  Mukunda  is  sorry  at 
heart  because  in  the  winter  I  bathe  three  times 
a  day  and  sleep  on  tlie  bare  earth.  It  is  not  the 
habit  of  Mukunda  to  speak  out  his  sorrow  but 
I  feel  that  he  is  deeply  aggrieved.  This  pains 
me  the  more.  I  am  a  SannyasI,  the  ascetic 
Damodara  always  keeps  his  strict  watch  over  me, 
warning  me  at  every  little  violation  of  the  rules 
of  our  Holy  Order.  I  do  not  know  how  to 
behave  as  he  washes  me  to  do.  I  have  so  often 
to  suppress  my  personal  impulses  for  fear  of  him. 
He  cares  only  for  religion  and  does  not  mind 
what  people  think.  I  do  not  wish  to  give  pain  to 
people.  Por  all  these  reasons  I  want  to  be  alone 
and  free  for  some  time.    I  shall   travel   visiting 


15G  CHAITANYA    AND    niS    COMPANIONS. 

the  shrines  of  India  and  you,  dear  friends,  must 
remain  liere  at  Purl.'" 

The  importunate  entreaties  of  Xityananda 
and  other  friends  who  wanted  to  accompany 
him,  did  not  shake  his  determination  of  travelling 
alone. 

The  world  often  tried  to  seduce  him  hy  praise 
and  Avorldly  fame.     But  as  often 

The  world   vainly  I'li  ii  u?ii  a  ^    ' 

tried  to  win  iiim  did  lic  sliakc  ott  tlicsc  irom  him  as 
*"  ^''°''^'  a  traveller  does  the  drops  of   rain 

from  his  cloak.  We  find  that  at  the  report  of  his 
intended  visit  to  Vrndavana,  Pradyumna  Micra 
[alias  Nrsinhananda)  placed  his  whole  property 
at  the  service  of  Chaitanya  for  beautifying  and 
improving  the  roads.  The  road  from  Kulia 
to   Kanairnatcala,    extending   over  a  distance  of 

(pqt   "^C^    (Tit    «i:^    5"ff^C?I    "^fk^  II 
C^^   f%^    f?J(    C^tC^    ^tf^    ^C^    ^Tl  II 

^'f  w-'^  Y"^  c(ff«t  -!m\^  '<,^  I 
f5^  ^  «tt^s  ^t^  ^fsfc*  »ra^  11 
^^n  5^^  ^^  ^^  wc-^  ^^ 
^^  ^°,^  c5fR  c^Xz^  1%9t  w^'^  yj--^  li 
^ff^-s  JTait^  tftc^t^^  3^^rt  I 
Jivfi  ?c^  '^tita  ^15  f*wi  ?^  «d%  II 
^r^  ^tc^  ^f^  ^rfsft'^i  ^^^H  I 
^^<  irl  ^^  '^a?  5H3J  ^rW^  II 

Cliaitunya  Charitumrta,  Madhya  Khanda. 


NOTES   ON    CHAITANYA.  157 

two  hundred  miles,  was  adorned  with  beautiful 
stones  and  metallic  decorations,  and  at  proper 
intervals  tanks  were  dug^  for  the  pilgrims  who 
would  journey  to  the  holy  city  in  Chai- 
tanya's  company.  Luxurious  plants  were  made 
to  grow  on  both  sides  of  the  road  many  months 
before,  so  that  Chaitanya  when  he  travelled 
found  sweet  and  fragrant  Bakul  ilowers  on  all 
sides.  Each  day  the  road  was  filled  with  soft 
petals  so  that  nothing  hard  might  give  pain  to 
Chaitanya  who  walked  barefoot.  Not  this  only, 
Raja  Pratapa  Hudra  ordered  that  a  pillar  should 
be  raised  where  Chaitanya  halted  every  day  to 
commemorate  the  journey.  Each  ghat  where  he 
would  bathe,  should  be  made  a  shrine. 
Thousands  of  people  accompanied  him.  But  he, 
when  he  saw  all  this  fuss,  quietly  returned, 
giving  up  all  idea  of  going  to  Vrndavana 
that  time.  xVnd  when  after  a  year  or  so  he 
went  privately,  the  popular  song  thus  describes 
him  : 

"  Look,  how  Chaitanya  goes  to  Vrndavana, 
a  torn  rag  at  his  back,  his  head  shaven  and  a 
begging  bowl  in  his  hand."  ^ 

The  people  of  Nadiya  when  they  saw  the 
ascetic  Chaitanya  at  Purl  naturally  felt  a  great 
sorrow  ;  for  "  he  had  no  longer  his  beautiful 
stuif  of  curling  hair  which  had  adorned  his  head. 
It  was   shaven.     He  was   reduced   to   skeleton. 

"  Q^^  #  gsF  ^-m.  ci^  ^-W  '^p[\'Ai  ^1^  ^^1  ^^  I" 


158  CHATTANYA    AND    HIS    COMPAXTONS. 

He  had  a  strip  of  cloth  to  covor  liis  loins  and 
a  Yiin;  for  his  outer  mantle.  His  l)odv  was 
covered  with  dust.  He  looked  like  a  inad  man 
only  his  tears  bespoke  the  joy  of  love." 

In  tlie  Deccan  children  threw  dust  at  him 
,. ,,  ,   ,.     ,.  ,  „      savins^    "  Look,    there    fjoes    the 

'•  Mad  aftor  fiorl.'  ^        r^  '  r^ 

SannyasT  mad  after  God."  And 
he  often  turned  round  to  speak  of  God  and  then 
an  immense  crowd  slathered  round  him  :  old  and 
younj^  men,  children  and  women,  lay  transfixed 
to  the  spot,  charmed  l)y  every  word  that  fell 
from  his  lips. 

It  is  said  that  he  was  a  Yaisnava.  So  far  as 
the  fact  goes  that  he  interpreted  the  Kcidha- 
Krsna  cult,  and  Avas  the  disciple  of  a 
Vaisnava  Guru,  it  may  be  true ;  but  his  faith  had 
a  universal  character  ;  it  was  a  religious  philo- 
sophy which  appeals  to  reason  and  can  be 
accepted  by  all  people.  Though  repeatedly  saying 
that  the  lladha-Krsiia  cult  had  an  emblematic 
significance,  expressing  the  highest  form  of  love 
for  God,  he  did  not  give  up  his  faith  in  the 
shrines  associated  with  the  Krsna  legends.  This 
w^as  W'hat  he  said  addressing  Jagannatha  at  Purl : 

"  Here  am  I,  and  here  art  thou,  oh  Krsija, 
and  the  joy  of  our  union  is  ever  new  here  as  of 
old,  yet  my  mind  yearns  for  an  union  with  thee 
in  Vindiivana."  This  utterance  relating  to 
Chaitanya's  predilection  for  the  holy  city,  should 


NOTES    ON    CHAITANYA.  159 

not  be  g;iven  an  exaggerated  importance.  The 
temples  of  Durga,  (^iva,  and  Ganeca  and  in  fact 
all  other  shrines  that  he  visited  invoked  in  him 
spiritual  emotions  of  the  same  nature.  Every 
temple  was  sacred  to  him,  as  he  believed  his 
God  to  dwell  there — nay  more,  every  forest 
expressed  to  liiin  the  message  of  Vrndavana, 
every  river,  the  sacredness  of  the  Yamuna.  In 
the  sea  he  saw  his  Krsna  smiling  and  beckon- 
ing him,  and  he  jumped  into  it  with  arms  out- 
stretched to  embrace  his  God  ;  a  fisherman 
saved  his  life.  A  young  child  once  stood  before 
him  whose  lovely  colour  reminded  him  of  his 
dark-blue  god,  and  he  fell  into  a  trance. '  Once 
when  a  meal  was  placed  before  him,  he  was 
attracted  by  the  sweet-smelling  rice  and  asked 
by  what  name  it  was  called.  They  said  it  is 
called  the  meal  of  Krsna.  Hearing  this  Chai- 
tanya  betrayed  sudden  emotions  and  weeping 
with  joy  had  his  trance  again.  Often  he  recited 
verses  and  songs  with  tears  of  joy,  as  he  madly 
ran  to  embrace  his  god  mirrored  in  the  sky.  He 
found  Him  in  the  trees,  and  Govinda  Dasa  men- 
tions that  at  Chandipur  in  the  Deecan  he 
remained  leaning  on  a  Tamala  tree  as  on  a  lover, 
unconscious  for  the  whole  day,  and  when  restored 
to  his  senses  he  spoke  of  the  great  joy  of  union 
with  God  in  half -broken  words  chocked  by  emo- 
tion.    Sometimes  he   would    quote    verses    from 

1  Chaitanya  Charitaiufta,  Madhya  Khancia,  Ch.  XXII. 


loo  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

tlic  Bliai^avata  and  other  l)ooks  or  siiiL?  songs  of 
Chandidasa,  Vidyapati  and  Jaydeva  for  the  whole 
night,  with  interpretations,  whipli  as  the  andience 
heard,  they  tliought  that  they  lieard  a  god  speak 
of  God.  They  worshipped  the  speaker  uitli 
tears  of  love  and  joy. 

He  laid  axe  at    the    very    root  of   the  caste- 
system,  though  like  some  aromatic 
A  breaker  of  the     plauts  it  has  the    power  in    India 

caste-system,  ^  ^ 

to  revive  and  multiply  where  it  is 
cut,  and  is  not  a  thing  to  be  easily  destroyed. 
Chaitanya  expressed  himself  freely  and  in  plain 
language. 

"  Even  if  a  Muchi  (a  cobbler)  is  devoted  to 
God,  a  thousand  times  do  I  bow  to  him."* 

"  If  a  man  eates  from  the  plate  of  a  Dom 
(hated  by  all)  he  becomes  pre-eminently  entitled 
to  god's  grace  by  that  act  of  mercy.  "- 

At  Nadiya  before  his  Sannyas  he  often  carried 
the  buskets  of  people  to  their  homes,  and  some- 
times bore  their  clothes  to  the  bathing  Ghat  and 
did  other  menial  acts  which  as  a  Brahman  he 
should  not  have  done.  When  the  people  whom 
he   thus   served   forbade   him   to   do  so,  he  said 


Kaflcha  by  Goviiida  Uasa. 

^f^f^    5f^    C^t    "^n    J1^%t?l  II" 

Karlcha  bv  (ioviiida  Dasa. 


NOTES    ON    CIIAITANYA.  161 

"Don't  object  good  friends  !  These  little  acts 
make  my  vision  of  God  clearer  to  me,"^ 

He  was  strict  in  dealing    with    those    ascetics 
in    Avhom    he    discovered    the    least    tendency  to 
worldliness.     An  ascetic  should  have  an  unspot- 
ted character    and    l)e    above    blame.     He  could 
tolerate   no   breach  of  conduct   in 

His    strictness    in       ^|^Qg^,  ^J^q  J^j^^j     adoptcd     thc      SaU- 

dealing    with     the  J- 

Saniiyfisis   of   his     nyjlsi's  VOW.    Chaitanva,  however, 

Order.  f  ^  ;      '  ' 

did  not  deal  with  all  in  the  same 
manner  ;  he  had  studied  the  weaknesses  and 
strength  of  those  Avho  were  near  him  in  a  discrimi- 
nating manner.  Hama  Ray  used  to  be  often  in  the 
company  of  women,  but  Chaitanya  knew  that 
they  sang  holy  songs  to  him  giving  fervour  to 
his  faith.  His  chai  acter  stood  on  the  firm  rock 
of  unflinching  devotion  to  God.  But  in  the  case 
of  Haridasa,  the  younger,  Chaitanya's  treatment 
was  hard,  for  he  knew  the  man  to  be  weak 
though  he  had  taken  the  ascetic's  vows.  The 
little  incident  leading  to  his  tragic  fate  related 
in  the  Chaitanya    Charitamrta  is  full  of  pathos. 

Haridasa  was    a  handsome  young 

The    storv     of  thc  .        -.  .  ^ 

Haridasa/  thc  man  With  a  uiusical  voice.  One 
■^"^"'°*^  "  day  when  Chaitanya  took  his  meal, 

he  found  the  rice  to  be  of  a  superior  quality  and 
asked  Gopinatha  Acharya  where  the  rice  came 
from.  Gopinatha  said  'one  of  us  got  it  from 
Madhavl '.  Madhavl  was  an  accomplished 
woman  noted  for  her    many   excellent    qualities. 


^  Chaitanya  Bhagavata  Adi  Lila. 


102  CHAITANYA    A^fl)    HIS    COMl'ANJOXS. 

She  used  to  transcribe  doeuiiients  for  use  in  the 
Jciijfcannatha  temple.  Chaitanya  said  attain  '  avIio 
is  it  that  went  to  lier  to  £i;et  tliis  rice  ?'  He  was 
informed  in  re})l\  that  it  was  ITaridilsa 
wlio  did  so.  Cliaitanya  praised  tli(^  (luality  of 
the  rice  and  was  silent  for  a  time.  After  taking 
his  meal,  however,  he  said  '  I  should  not  like 
llaridasa  to  come  near  nu\'  The  freinds  of 
Cliaitanya  did  not  understand  why  he  was  so 
hard  upon  the  young  Sannyasi.  Haridfisa 
fasted  three  days  in  grief  over  this  })unishment, 
and  yet  the  Master  did  not  relent ;  and  then 
when  one  near  him  pleaded  in  behalf  of  llaridasa, 
Cliaitanya  said  "  A  young  Sannyasi  pays  atten- 
tion to  a  woman.  This  is  what  I  can  never  endure. 
These  men  whose  passions  have  not  yet  been 
controlled  fei2;n  asceticism  and  seek  Avomen." 
Saying  so  he  entered  his  room  and  they  did  not 
dare  speak  to  him  more  on  the  i)oint  that  day. 
The  next  day  they  again  interceded  in  his  behalf, 
pleading  that  the  fault  was  a  small  one.  Chaita- 
nya  said  '  You  know  that  I  always  follow  the 
dictates  of  my  heart.  The  company  of  a  false 
ascetic  I  avoid.  The  desires  of  the  flesh  are 
hard  even  for  a  llishi  to  conquer.  How  careful 
chaitiiiiya  stonily  sliould  a  Saunyasi  be  whose  vows 
[utwu","";;:,"^  i^  <>no  of  totkl  al.steiumce!  If 
'^^^'^-  you  plead  for   him  again,  you  will 

not  se(;  me    here.'     Then  iarmananda  Turi,  tl)(> 
saint  and  scholar  whom  Cliaitanya  revered,  called 


NOTES    ON    CIIAITANYA.  163 

on     him      and     spoke     for     tlie    young      man. 
Chaitanya  said  : 

'  You  are  the  leader  of  Sannyasis  and  may 
do  as  you  like.  Gather  them  all  in  this  temple  to 
teach  them  manners.  But  permit  me,  Sir,  to  go 
to  Alalnath.     I  shall  start  to-day  for  that  place.' 

Saying  so  he  asked  Govinda,  his  attendant,  to 
make  himself  ready  for  the  journey.  Parama- 
nanda  Puri  apologised  for  his  request  and  dis- 
suaded him  from  leaving  the  place. 

Poor  Haridasa  was  advised  by  his  friends  to 
take  his  meal  as  usual ;  for  they  said  '  Your 
fasts  would  only  oifend  the  Master  the  more ' 
and  the  young  Sannyasi  tasted  his  meal  for  the 
first  time  after  three  days  at  their  request.  He 
however  stayed  at  Purl  for  one  year  after  this 
time,  and  saw  from  a  distance  the  trances  of 
Chaitanya  and  his  lily-like  face  bedewed  with 
tears  of  spiritual  joy.  But  to  the  blessed  circle  of 
the  Master's  constant  associates,  ITaridasa  had  no 
access.  His  grief  became  unsupportable  and  he 
went  away  to  Triveni  and  drowned  himself.  The 
following  story  of  a  marvellous  nature  is  related 
at  this  stage  of  the  account,  in  the  Chaitanya 
Charitamrta. 

One  night  Chaitanya  accompanied  by  Jaga- 
dananda,  Swariipa,  Govinda,  Kacicwara,  Cankara, 
and  Damodara  visited  the  sea-coast.  Prom  the 
distance  a  strange  melody  came  bursting  into  the 


KM  ClIAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMrANIOXS. 

air  suddenly,  a  soiiij^  from  an  unseen  source, 
tremhliug  with  pathos,  full  of  sweet  appeals  for 
mercy.  They  all  heard,  and  Chaitanya  said 
'  Don't  you  know  it  is  youni;-  Ilaridasa.  His 
spirit  is  there.  lie  committed  suicide  and  has 
been    reduced    to    this    condition,    but    a   trucly 

penitent  soul  Avill  have  mercy.' 
melody  from   tiio     Nouc   Ivucw  tlicu   that    Ifaridasa 

had  drowned  himself.  After  a 
year  Civananda  Sen,  (J^rivasa  and  other  Bengalis 
came  to  Purl  from  Nadiya,  and  when  the  resi- 
dents of  Purl  asked  if  Haridilsa  bad  gone 
to  Nadiya  a  year  ago,  (^rivasa  said  "  No  friends, 
he    went   to   Allahabad    and     there    committed 

suicide  l)y  drowning  himself  in 
Ti>o  drowning:.         ^^^^  Treveni."    The  story  filled  all 

of  them  with  astonishment. 

This  shows  how  strictly  he  treated  the  ascetics 
of  his  Order.  Another  instance  is  related  of 
Govinda  Ghosa  of  Agradwipa.  After  his  meal 
Chaitanya  was  one  day  served  with  portion  of 
Haritaki  fruit  by  Govinda  Ghosa.  The  IMasNter 
asked  him  as  to  where  he  had  got  the  ITaritaki 
from.  Govinda  replied  that  it  w^as  the  remnant 
of  the  day  before.  Chaitanya  said  '  Then  you 
rr-  .     .      .   r     store  thinr^s  for  the  morrow,  even. 

His  treatment  of  ^ 

Govinda  Ghosn.  j^g  Avorldly  men  do.  A"ou  are  not 
fit  for  this  Order.  Go  home  and  live  as  a  man 
of  the  Avorld.'  He  obliged  him  to  go  back  to  his 
home  at   Agradwip.     One   may    think    that    the 


NOTES   ON   CHAITANYA.  165 

little  breaches  of  conduct  slioald  not  have  been 
treated  so  hard.  But  Cliaitanya,  who  knew  his 
fellow  ascetics  better  than  others,  often  dis- 
covered in  their  small  faults,  great  moral  or 
spiritual  defects  which  unfitted  them  for  tlie 
Holy  Order.  His  treatment  of  the  house- 
holders and  even  of  robbers  and  thieves,  however, 
is  characterised  by  that  mercy  which  can  alone 
win  them  to  spiritual  life. 

What  is  it  that  Cliaitanya  saw  in  his  trances  ? 
The  late  Swami  Yivekananda  had  asked  Para- 
mahansa  Ramakrscia  if  he  had  seen  God,  about 
whom  so  much  was  said.     The  latter  replied  : 

'Yes,  I  have  seen  God  as  vividly  as  I  see  you 
or  the  wall  before  me.'  The  emphatic  Avay  in 
^vhich  he  spoke  this  impressed  the  scholar  who 
had  never  before  heard  anybody  say  that  he 
had  seen  God,  and  that  with  so  much  force.  The 
young  scholar,  so  proud  of  his  modern  learning, 
questioned  the  prophet  minutely,  and  he  himself 
eventually  became  a  disciple  of  ilamakfsna. 

Visions  such  as  Chaitanya  saw  were  beheld 
by  many  of  his  followers.  We  will  deal  in 
a  future  course  of  lectures  with  the  life  of 
(^rinivasa,  towards  the  latter  part  of  the  16th 
c?ntury,  in  which  the  visions  were  seen 
frequently,  and  were  sometimes  of  long  duration, 
making  him  lose  all  consciousness  of  the  physical 
world.  In  Chaitanya  we  find  the  trances 
not  only  in  their    most   attractive  form,  but    we 


!()()  CUAITANVA    AM)    Ills    COM  PASIOXS. 

also  come  in  contact  with  a  stoic  strength  of 
character,  a  great  learnini;'  and  a  power  to  impart 
his  feelings  and  ecstasies  to  otlnn-s  in  a  way 
which  is  perha])s  unjn'ecedented  in  the  annals 
of  mysticism.  In  other  lives  the  glow  of  vision 
drt  vv  only  the  kindred  souls  to  an  admiration 
for  it  ;  in  Chaitanya  its  fascination  was  so  })()wer- 
ful,  its  effect  so  far-reaching,  that  every  one 
who  beheld  him  while  in  his  trances,  felt  an 
overwhelming  force  which  turned  the  very  tide 
of  his  life.  The  cool-headed  materialistic  felt 
its  charm  no  less  than  the  poet  and  the  dreamer. 
J'^.ven  the  Mahomedans  were  sometimes  inspired 
hy  his  ecstasies  of  love  for  Krsna.  The  General 
Bijali  Khan  turned  a  A'aisnava  under  their  spell. 
Gorai  Kazi,  the  jMagistrate  of  Nadiya,  and  the 
^Eehomedan  tailor  at  Civasa's  house  turned 
his  great  admirers,  not  to  speak  of  Haridilsa,  the 
Mahomedan,  whose  life  was  dedicated  to  him. 
The  conversation  w  liich  Husan  Saha  had  A\ith 
Ke9ava  Ksetri  quoted  in  Chaitanya  Charitamrta 
shows  in  wdiat  high  admiration  the  Emperor 
held  Chaitanya. 

XX. — A  CUnii j)<ir<i(}r<'  sltidii  of  J/i/.sf/cis)//, 
Occi(/(')//('/  and  Oriciildl. 

The  mystic  light,  it  A\ill  l)e])roved  h\  history, 
shone  in  the  East  and  the  AVest  alike  in  the 
favoured  medieval  ages.  I'or  the  puipose  of 
sliowing    the    similarity    of    the    experiences    of 


A    COMPARATIVE    STUDY.  1 G7 

European  and  Asiatic  mystics  we  shall  Ijiiefl}^ 
refer  to  the  lives  of  some  Catholic  saints   of  the 

St  Cxtiiaiiiu'  of     ^^^est.      St.     Catharine    of    Siena 
S'^'^'-^-  (born    l.'M7    A.    D.)    used    to  see 

the  imag'e  of  Christ  in  the  sky  over  the  Domi- 
nican Churcli  even  when  she  was  a  girl  of  six. 
It  is  recorded  that  she  used  to  commune  with 
Christ,  who  taught  her  "  hy  means  of  a  clear 
bodily  appearance,"  Avith  such  fervour  that  she 
would  "  pass  into  the  state  of  ecstasy,"  and 
remain  unconscious  of  the  external  world  for 
hours  together.^ 

The    stages    of    orison    as    described    by    St. 

Ti>o    stnges    of     ^crcsa   (bom   1515  A.  D.)    in  her 
^^"^o"  'el   Castillo'    show   a  remarkable 

parallel  with  the  progressive  steps  of  the  Vais- 
nava  faith.  A  further  exposition  of  the  Vaisnava 
tenets,  as  detailed  in  many  of  their  works  in 
Sanskrit  and  Vernacular,  Avill  make  a  compre- 
hension of  the  situition  easier.  I  have  already 
referred  to  Dasya  a  stage  in  which  the  spiritual 
soul  considers  itself  as  a  servant  of  God,  carry- 
ing out  tlie  behests  of  its  Master.  Vatsalya — 
the  stance  in  which  God  manifests  himself  as  a 
child.  Humanity  represents  the  Divine  child, 
and  the  soul  offers  its  paternal  care  and  services 
to  it.  Sakhya  where  God  is  our  friend  and 
l)laymate.  We  play  with  others  in  a  spirit  of 
concored  and  of  harmony,  realising  that  He  is  the 

^  Father  EainioncVs  life  of  St.  Catharine. 


168  ClIAITANVx\    AND    1118    COMPANIONS. 

]\rain  riavor,  iiispiriiiL!,'  and  uuidiiiL;'  our  play. 
The  spiritual  soul  I'eels  itself  secure  and  ha})py 
because  its  sees  the  Main  Player  near  it — the 
source  of  hope,  of  love  and  perennial  joy 
to  the  players ;  Madhurya  the  staii;e  of 
love  in  whicli  the  spiritual  soul  ])asses  into 
visions  of  heautitude  and  into  trances,  where 
it  yearns  for  union  with  the  Lover.  He  is  the 
Bridegroom,  and  the  soul  of  Man  His  devoted 
bride.  This  bride  is  lladhfi  of  the  Vaisnava 
Literature.  The  soul  of  man  is  bound  by  a 
thousand  ties  to  the  world,  but  it  frees  itself 
from  these  and  lonsjs  for  the  Bridet^room  onlv. 
The  Lover  dwells  in  the  sacred  Vrinda  groves 
where  nothing  but  the  sound  of  his  sweet  flute 
is  heard,  liadha  the  soul,  mad  after  Him, 
seeks  Him  and  meets  Him  everywhere.  From 
the  blue  of  the  sky,  from  the  river  and  sea  He 
beakons  the  human  soul  to  meet  Him.  AVhen 
the  vision,  by  long  prayers  and  devotion,  by 
the  virtues  acquired  in  this  life  or  in  the 
previous  ones,  becomes  clear  to  the  spiritual 
soul,  it  realises  God  as  vividly  as  we  do  mate- 
rial objects.  This  woman's  ardour  of  the  soul 
has  been  the  characteristic  of  spiritual  longings 
in  Europe,  and  Asia  alike.  This  is  represented 
in  the  conception  of  liadha  in  the  A^aisnava 
Literature.  Mrs.  lender  Hill  says  "Those  for 
whom  mysticism  is  above  all  things,  an  intimate 
and    personal    relation — the  satisfaction  of    deep 


A    COMPARATIVE    STUDY.  169 

desire — Avill  fall  back  upon  imac^ery  drawn  large- 
ly from  the  language  of  earthly  passion.''^  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  God  is  some  times  called 
the  Bridegroom  and  the  human  soul  the  bride 
in  Biblical  literature.  Newman  says  '*If  thy 
soul  is  to  go  on  into  higher  spiritual  blessed- 
ness, it  must  become  a  woman  ;  yes,  however 
mainly  thou  may  be  among  men". 

St.  Bernard  (1091-1153  A.D.)  writes  "When 
I  love  God  with  my  will,  I  transform  myself 
into  Him,  for  this  is  the  power  of  virtue  of  love 
that  it  maketh  thee  to  be  like  into  that  which 
thou  lovest.''^ 

St.  Teresa's    (born  1515  A.D.)    visions  were 
so    fervent,    that    at    times    she 

St.  Teresa. 

fancied  herself  to  be  one  with 
Christ.  This  stage  is  beautifully  expressed  in 
the  10th  Skanda  of  (^rimadvagavata  where  the 
Gopi  forgets  herself  and  "thinks  herself  to  be 
Krsna  herself."  In  the  Gita  Govinda, 
Jayadeva  (1168-1200  A.  D.)  has  a  beautiful 
line 

"I  am  Krsna  thought  Radha  in  her  trance" 
which  was  imitated,  in  the  famous  stanza  of 
Vidyapati  (11th  century) 


'  Under  Hill's  mysticism,  p.  153. 

^  Soliloquies  of  St.  Bonaventura  ex  I,  quoted  by  Under  Hill  p.  104. 

V 


170  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS   COMPANIONS. 

''Constantly  thinkini;  of  Krsna,  the  beautiful 
one  (  Radha  )  became  as  Krsna  himself.'' 
Chaitanya  is  said  to  have  uttered  in  some  of  his 
trances  the  words  'I  am  He'.^  All  these  owe 
a  kinship  to  the  celebrated  utterance  of  Christ 
himself.     "I  and  my  father  are  one." 

We  have  described  the  four  stages  of  spiritual 
worship  but  there  is  one  which  we  have  omitted, 
and  which  precedes  them  all.  It  is  the  (^anta 
the  stage  in  which  all  weed-like  passions  are 
removed,  and  the  soul  of  man  becomes  fit  to 
grow  spiritual  love  in  its  fullest  bloom,  ^anta 
means  quiet.  This  is  a  state  for  which  our 
Rsis  strove,  and  which  we  find  pre-eminently 
in  the  Buddha.  Look  at'  any  stone  image  of 
the  Buddha,  what  this  quiet  means  will  be 
realised  at  the  sight  of  it.  The  Mongolian 
sculptor  has  given  him  flat  lips  and  eyes.  The 
Magadha  has  given  a  sharp  Aryan  cut  to  his 
face.  The  Gandhara  art  has  given  lit  propor- 
tions to  his  body.  But  in  the  great  gallery  of 
the  Buddhistic  images,  whether  the  stone  is  so 
roughly  iiewn  as  to  give  it  but  the  crudest 
likeness  of  a  human-figuie,  or  cut  with  the  finest 
strokes  of  the  chisel,  giving  it  the  most  realistic 
perfection,  the  quiet  of  the  soul,  indicated  in 
the  face,  is  the  prominent  feature  of  all  the 
statues  of  the  Buddha,  whether  he  is  represented. 


'  "^  c^  ^pp  c^^  ^  Tf^  ^tPl  I " 

Chaitanya  BhSgavata. 


A    COMPARATIVE    STUDY.  171 

in  his  standing  or  sitting  posture.  The  four 
other  stages  are  not  possible  unless  this  stage 
of  quiet  has  been  attained.  Eor  if  the  soul  is 
to  mirror  the  beauty  of  the  spititual  world,  all 
evil  possions  must  be  removed  by  a  perfect 
moral  life,  by  abstinance,  fast  and  prayer. 

St.  Teresa  thus  classifies  the  sta2:es  of 
worship  in    "El.  Castills  Interior." 

1  Recollection,  2  Quiet,  3  Union,  i  Ecstasy, 
5  Rapt,  C)  The  pain  of  God,  7  The  Spiritual 
marriage. 

In  all  the  later  Vaisnava  poems,  the  stages 
of  Radha's  love,  which  are  but  a  reproduction 
of  the  ecstasies,  experienced  by  Chaitanya,  are 
thus  classified.  Purva  Raga — the  dawn  of  love  ; 
Milana — union  and  ecstasy ;  Sambhoga  Milana — 
Rapt  ;  Viraha — (Mathura)—  the  pain  of  God, 
and  Bhavasammilana  or  the  Spiritual  marriage. 

These  are  some  of  the  main  divisions  ;  but 
the  Vaisnava  poets  have  introduced  a  hundred 
niceties  and  the  heads  under  which  the  emotions 
have  been  grouped  are  altogether  360.  In  some 
of  the  standard  Vaisnava  works  we  find  these 
emotions  fully  defined  and  treated  in  a  scientific 
manner,  particularly  in  the  Sanskrit  work  of 
Rupa  called  the  Ujjala  Nilamani,  which  gives 
copious  illustrations  from  standard  love-poems. 
This  was  subsequently  summarised  in  Bengali 
by  Narahari  Chakravarti  in  his  Bhaktiratnakara, 
One  may  be  naturally   struck   by  the  wonderful 


172  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

coincidence    which    the    main    classifications    of 
the  Vaisijavas  bear  to  those  made 

Otlior  iiivstics.  1  oi         ni  T  -1 

by  St.  Teresa.  It  shows  that 
similar  ideas  and  experiences  of  the  spiritual 
world  have  taken  place  throughout  the  Globe 
irrespective  of  creed  or  colour.  The  Mahome- 
dans  have  amoni^st  them  their  Sufi  poets  and 
mystics,  such  as  Jelaluddin  (1207-1273  A.D.), 
Hafiz  (1300-1388  A.D.)  and  Jami  (1111-1493 
A.D.),  who  have  expressed  the  ideas  which  are 
closely  similar  to  those  to  be  found  in  the  Songs 
of  Songs  and  in  the  lyrical  poems  of  the 
Vaisuavas.  Many  of  the  Catholic  Saints  of  the 
middle  ages  saw  visions  of  Christ  and  experienced 
mystic  trances  of  this  nature..  There  are  even 
sects  among  the  Protestants,  such  as  the  Quakers 
(founded  by  George  Fox  1624-1691  A.D.) 
whose  faith  is  characterised  by  physical  mani- 
festations of  joy  similar  to  those  to  found  every 
where  amongst  the  Vaisnava  of  Bengal.  They 
have  declared  this  before  the  world  in  an 
emphatic  way,  that  "those  who  did  not  quake 
and  tremble  are  strangers  to  the  experiences  of 
Moses,  David  and  the  Saints."^  They  wanted 
to  realize  "Christ  within".  Contrary  to  the 
Puritan  teaching  of  the  time,  they  insisted  on 
the  possibility  in  their  lives  of  complete  victory 
over  sin.  Those  who  attain  such  a  stage  among 
the    Hindus   and   Buddhists  are   known   as   the 

*   Fox's  Journal  (1650).     Barclay's  Apology  Trop   II  Q  8. 


A    COMPARATIVE    STtJDY*  173 

Sicldhyas.  An  authoritative  writer  thus  com- 
ments on  the  European  mystics  of  the  middle 
ages  :  "  The  new  idea  of  ol)edience  was  not 
obedience  to  ecclesiastical  superiors,  but  the 
subordination  of  the  lower  part  of  man's  nature 
to  the  higher,  and  of  the  Avhole  to  God.  This 
'  renunciation  '  cut  off  from  practical  sympathy 
wdth  the  visible  church,  feeding  itself  on  a 
vague  idea  of  union  with  Christ,  might  easily 
have  fallen  a  prey  to  Buddhist  notions  floating 
in  the  atmosphere."^  The  Mahayanists  among 
the  Buddhists  had  already  spread  the  mystic 
ideas  in  the  far  East.  That  they  may  even 
have  reached  Europe  is  indicated  by  the  above 
passage.  They  believed  not  only  in  the  Buddha 
and  in  the  innumerable  gods  and  goddesses, 
most  of  whom  are  worshipped  by  the  Hindus, 
but  also  in  the  emancipated  Man — the  Siddha, 
wdiom  the  Christians  call  mystic  and  the  Jains, 
'Tirthankara'.  If  the  experiences  of  these  people 
are  to  be  credited,  we  may  take  it  that  the  soul 
like  a  mirror  reflects  certain  spiritual  phenomena 
not  known  to  ordinary  men,  when  it  is  purged 
of  all  dross  of  material  passion.  From  the 
time  of  Pliilo,  the  mystical  Alexandrian  Jew 
(B.C.  20  to  A.D.  40),  Europe  had  heard  of 
this  mysticism,  and  at  one  time  there  were  many 
whose  inner  eyes  had  actually  beheld  the 
glorious  visions.  The  West  however  could  never 

'See  Encyclopaedia  Britanica  Vol.  XIV,  p.  23.     (9th  edition). 


171-         ruAriANVA  and  hts  co^mpanioxs. 

a])solutely  dissociate  liersell'  from  the  idea  ol' 
nationality,  which  iiai-iows  the  raiisje  of 
humanity,  Icadini^  to  conflicts  of  interest,  nor 
free  herself  from  political  ideals  hased  on  a 
desire  for  ac([:iisition  of  power.  She  has  not 
therefore  l)een  able  to  develop  introspection 
and  other  qualities  of  the  soul  in  a  sustained 
manner.  This  has  reduced  her  mystics  to  a  sect 
isolated  from  the  church  and  bevond  sreneral 
appreciation,  whereas  in  Asia  and  particularly 
in  India,  the  mystics  rank,  amono^  the  highest 
in  popular  estimation.  Elal)orate  Avorks  and 
treatises,  have  been  written  here  describing 
the  ways  by  which  one  may  attain  the  stage 
of  spiritual  perfection.  These  works  are  treated 
in  a  scientific  manner,  though  for  the  purpose 
of  practice  the  help  of  a  Guru  is  required. 

The  stages  of  worship  or  orision  have  already 
been  mentioned.  All  of  these  we  find  in  a 
pre-eminent  degree  in  the  life  of  Chaitanya.  He 
realised  the  presence  of  God  in  his  soul  with 
that  ardour  of  romantic  love  by  w^hich  the  inward 
vision  is  supplemented  and  fed  by  a  symbolical 
significance  given  to  external  phenomena.  One 
of  the  stages  of  orision  given  in  "El  Castillo  " 
is  called  '  The  pain  of  God.'     It  is 

The  paiii  ol  Goil. 

the  pain  of  separation  from  God. 
The  mystics  often  call  it  '  The  dark  night  of  the 
soul.'  Says  Mr.  Underbill : — 


A   COMPARATIVE    STUDY.  175 

"In  some  temperaments,  it  is  the  emotional 
aspect — the  anguish  of  the  lover  who  has  suddenly 
lost  the  Beloved — which  predominates."^ 

In  St.  Teresa  the  pain  grew  to  such  a  degree 
that  she  cried  aloud.  It  is  said  that  Madame 
Guyon  (164.8-1^17  A.D.)  felt  this  loss  of  her 
intuitive  apprehension  of  God  as  one  of  the  most 
terrible  characteristic  of  'the  night.'  She  writes  ; 
"After  thou  hast  wounded  me  so  deeply  as  I 
have  described,  thou  didst  begin,  oh  my  god,  to 
withdraw  thyself  from  me :  and  the  pain  of  thy 
absence  was  the  more  bitter  to  me  because  thy 
presence  Avas  so  sweet  to  me."" 

Suso,  Hulman,  Marswin,  Taunber,  Angelo 
of  Foligmo,  Michtheld  of  Magdeburg  and  other 
mystics  knew  the  sufferings  of  the  loss  of  this 
God- vision. 

In  Chaitanya's  life  'the  night  of  the  soul' 
created  a  pathos  which  has  found  expression  in 
a  remarkable  literature  of  lyrics  known  as  the 
'Mathur'  lit.  'going  to  Mathura.'  It  means  the 
grief  caused  to  the  people  of  Vrndavana,  chiefly 
the  Gopis,  by  Krsna's  deserting  the  place  for 
ever  and  going  to  Mathura,  where  a  short  time 
after  he  became  the  king.  Krsnakamala 
Goswami,  a  Bengali  poet  in  his  Divyonmada 
'  The  divine  Frenzy — Avritten  about  the  year 
1810,  describes  the  Mathur  in  this  way : 


Under  Hill,  p.  463. 
Under  Hill,  p.  465. 


176  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

"When  God  vision  is  clear  in  a  spiritual  soul, 
it  is  expressed  by  the  allegory  of  Krsna's 
coming  to  the  Vrnda  groves,  when  the  vision 
fails,  it  is  indicated  by  that  of  his  going  to 
Mathura."  ' 

The  loud  lamentations,  the   nights   of   sleep- 
less  agony,     the    cryings   aloud    and    the    mad 
utterances     of     love     lend     the   most   pathetic 
interest    to    the   literature    of    '^Fathura.*     "He 
(Chaitanya)  saw    the    hill  of    Chatak  (in  Orissa) 
and   mistook   it   for   the     hill    Gobardhana    (in 
Vrndavana)    and    ran    after  it,   crying    aloud."  ^ 
Sometimes  he   breathed   heavily  and  leanins:  on 
Govinda,  said  with  tears  'Govinda,    where   is  my 
God  gone,  pray   tell   me   how   may  I  have  Him 
again  ?"'^    Sometimes  he    cried   'Oh  my  God,  mv 
father,    where    art   thou    gone  ?     I    cannot  live 
without    thee'"'   saying    this    in    deep    agony   of 
heart  he  wept  and  then  passed  into  an  unconsci- 
ous state — into  one  of  those  trances   which  made 
it  clear  to   all    that   he    was    united    with   Him. 
When  he    came  to  his    senses  again  he  a])pealed 
in  a  tender  tone  'He  was  here  with  me,  oh  where 
is  He  gone   again,    my    grief   is   unsupportable,' 


The  Uivyonnidila 
Cliaitaiiya  Charitanirta,  Madhya  Klianda. 
Ksuklia  by  Goviuda  Dasa. 
Chaitanya  Bhiigavata. 


THE    SANNYASA.  177 

and  then  he  sang  songs  from  Chandidasa  and 
Vidyapati,  from  Jayadeva  and  Billamangala, 
and  he  commented  them  with  his  tears  and  sighs 
and  passed  again  and  again  to  his  accustomed 
trance.  "The  periods  of  rapid  oscilation  hetween 
a  joyous  and  a  painful  consciousness,'*  says  Mrs. 
Under  Hill,  "are  called  by  the  mystics  'the 
game  of  love  in  which  god  plays  as  it  were 
'hide  and  seek'  with  the  questioning  soul." 

Chaitanya  is  adored  in  India  for  this  love. 
His  life  not  only  inspired  religious  men  but  also 
supplied  inspiration  to  those  writers  who  have 
given  poetical  accounts  of  his  emotions  under 
the  allegory  of  Radha  and  Krsna.  Jnanadasa, 
Govinda  Dasa,  Valarama  Dasa^  E,ai9ekhara, 
Krsna  Kamala  and  other  poets  have,  in 
their  beautiful  lyrics,  shown  the  highest  flights 
of  emotional  poetry  that  bears  a  deep  symbolic 
meaning.  The  sighs  and  tears  of  Radha  and 
her  poetic  ecstasies  are  but  those  of  the  j)oor 
Brahman  scholar  who  took  his  Sannyasa  at  the 
age  of  24  and  wandered  from  door  to  door  like 
a  mad  man,  displaying  the  profoundest  love 
for  One  not  seen  by  us,  but  who  is  our  only 
Beloved. 

XXI.    Chaitanya^ s  Sannyasa  and  love-ecstasies. 

The  Sannyasa  of  Chaitanya  which  meant  the 
total  severance  of  his  home-ties,  in  order  to  offer 

w 


178  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

himself  to  the  service  of  humanity  and  of  God, 
created  i^reat  distress  at  Nadiya,  i^'ivinLi:  rise  to 
an  impassionate  burst  of  poetic  feeling  whicli 
has  created  a  literature  of  ii:reat  beauty  and 
tenderness.  The  sorrows  of  CacliT,  liis  mother 
and  of  Visnupriyjl,  his  wife,  arr  the  sorrows  of 
the  whole  of  Bengal  and  Orissa  to-day.  As 
Chaitanya  sought  his  God  Krsna  and  lamented 
his      separation      from      him,     nourishing    the 

Mathura  songs  from  a  living  fount 

Tho  Miltliuni  Sougs.         r>         i  i  •       i   •  i  j  > 

ot  pathos  m  his  own  heart, — so  to 
his  innumerable  worshippers  at  Nadiya,  separation 
from  him  caused  the  growth  of  similar  songs 
which  are  now  sung  as  the  prelude  to 
Mathura  songs.  In  fact  his  life  is  constantly 
before  those  singers  avIio  sing  of  the  love  of 
Radha  and  Krsna,  and  it  is  indispensil^le  that 
they  should  first  sing  the  Gaura  Chandrika 
or  songs  of  which  some  emotions  of  Chaitanya  is 
the  theme,  before  they  are  permitted  to  introduce 
similar  songs  relating  to  Eadha-Krsua  love. 
These  Gaura  Chandrikas  are  in  fact  reminders  to 
the  audience  that  the  iladhjl-Krsna  love  should 
bear  to  them  a  spiritual  meaning,  that  though 
sometimes  presented  in  a  sensual  garb,  it  actually 
belongs  to  a  super-sensuous  plane.  The 
great  life  of  the  Master  Avas  itself  the  most 
powerful  symbol  of  this  love  and  there  could 
be  but  one  meaning  to  this  mystic  literature 
of  love. 


THE    SANNYASA.  179 

I  have   already   stated    that  Narahari  Sarkar 
Some  of  the         ^nd    Vcxsudeva     Ghosh     are     the 

Chaitanya  Songs.         ^^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^..^^^^^  ^^    (3,^^^^.^  ^^^,^^^_ 

drikas — or  songs  describing  Chaitanya's  emotions. 
All  other  Vaisijava  poets  of  the  16th  and  l7th 
centuries  have  more  or  less  written  on  this 
subject.  Vasudeva  excelled  all  of  them,  and  at 
the  present  day  when  a  klrtana  is  sung,  it  is 
invariably  preluded  by  a  Gaura  Chandrika  by 
Vasudeva  or  some  other  poet.  The  stories  of 
Chaitanya's  satmyasa  given  by  these  poets  are 
often  very  touching  and  give  rise  to  tender 
pathos. 

I  shall  attempt  to  translate  some  of  these : 

(1)' 

Visnupriya  like  one  insane  runs  from  the 
landing  Ghat  to  where  ^achl  was. 

Her  hair  is  not  braided  after  her  bath,  but 
she  cares  not  for  this. 

^^1  "^  ^tlt  "srtf?!  »tt^frc^  w.^  II 

stf^fe-n  "^^w^  4^^i^  "^stpl  II 
^fwc^  ^nt^i  ^tc«(  ^Vsi'^  'm^  II 

(ff^Cl  N^5f^  (?H  if?  if^  C5ff»t  II 
<.-tW  ^C5  ^t^C^lt^  fV  ^^  3=f"#t  I 


180  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

She  attempts  to  ease  her  mind  to  Caclil  hut 
hursts  into  tears. 

(^achl  says  "  what  grief  ails  thee,  Child  ?  " 
Whereat  she — "  At  the  time  of   hathing,  my 
nose-ornament  fell    into    water,  and  inauspicious 
signs  have  I  seen  around,  I  cannot  speak. 

"It  seems  good  luck  will  leave  me  to-day  and 
thunder  will  fall  on  my  head." 

Vasudeva  says  :  "  What  shall  I  say  to  thee, 
o  loyal  wife !  to-day  your  dear  husband  a\  ill 
leave  Nadiya  for  good." 

Chaitanya  leaves  Nadiya  to-day. 

No  waves  dance  on  the  Ganges'  breast. 

The  images  of  (^iva,  Ganapati  and  other  gods 
in  the  temples  look  strangely  pale. 

The  new  leaves  do  not  open ;  nor  flowers 
bloom  on  the  boughs. 

Says  Narahari  "  The  beauty  of  NadiycT  is  gone, 
she  cannot  support  her  grief." 


■"ra  «'5i?ift  '5f«r^t%  ^f%  fl^  ^  ^^  tr^  u 

^t^  ^\  t^u:^  m  f^Ti  x^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^'^  ^^' " 
\^^v\  -^scni^  f^<if^,  5fi  ^tz^  'i[^n  ^^tt  J^:^  I 

«ci  J^f^  c»lN  ^%  5'ol  Ji^f^c*  ^f;:^  ^1  f*lt%  II 


THE    SANNYASA.  181 

(3)' 

The  people  of  Nadiya,  sadly  ask  those  Siidhus 
and  ascetics  who  come  from  Orissa  side. 

"  Holy  pilgrims,  did  you  meet  anywhere  a 
SannyasI  named  Chaitanya.  Young  is  he,  and 
his  colour  bright  like  melted  gold. 

"  He  repeats  the  name  of  Krsna  night  and 
day  and  tears  flow  from  both  his  eyes. 

"  He  sometimes  smiles,  and  at  other  times 
weeps,  and  sometimes  falls  down  on  the  bare 
earth  in  deep  emotion." 

The  Sadhus  say  in  reply  "Yea  have  we  seen 
him.     He  lives  near  the  seacoast. 

"  He  is  a  God,  who  says  he  is  man  ? 

"  Those  who  have  seen  his  dance  in  ecstasy 
of  love,  his  emotion  and  tears,  hold  him  dear 
as  life. 


^^  Ji^Wra  #tfwnl  ^5ft^  w  ^ft^^t^  II 

^f^'t^a^  ^t^t^  ^,  "^ni  f%  c«tTlt^  II 
^w.^  ^ffi^,  ^Fi\5  ^ t*^,  M^  ^5«rtf^  c^tal  I 
^^f  ^  ^t^,  "^w:^  Ji^^  ^^i^  ^^i^  5(t^i  II 

^«t^  ^t^,  ^^  (Tsltfffl,  ^^^  ^tf  t?  «lt^  I 

est  ®i^5tt  '^^t^  iW^s,  ^stc^  c^  it^^  ^c?r  11 
c^-i\  ^a  Sim,  ^\^u  HM,  mi'^  ^m?  <itR  ii 

f^^t  %itF?l,  '«|C'5!J  CT  ^P\^,    C#l^  551  vst?!  I 


182  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

"It  was  good  luck  tliat  we  mo\  liiiii  at  Orissa." 

Says  Premadasa  "Surely  it  is  he,  the  dear  one 
of  the  Nadiyfi  people  ". 

(•I)' 

'From  Orissa  comes  Ja2:ad;inanda  to  Nadiya 
with  Chaitanya's  message  to  his  motlier. 

'From  afar,  does  the  scholar  see  the  town, 
deserted  as  the  Vrnda  groves  were  of  old,  and 
hesitates  thinking  '  shall  T  find  her  living  still  ? ' 

'Stopping  a  moment  he  starts  again  and  finds 
the  people  there  merged  in  grief. 

'The  shops  are  closed  and  people  move  about. 

But  none  smiles  in  that  vast  city. 

'The  women  he  saw  weeping,  seated  here  and 
there,  each  by  herself, 

'and  as  he  saw  these,  he  entered  the  house  of 
the  adored  one. 

'Cachi  lay  in  a  corner  half-dead  Avith  grief, 


"sf-r/t^  <if^i]1  ^^  ^%  lf^^  5F^?ti{^  I 
^Ijfl^l  ^"^li,  Oii^  ^1^  ^^,  "^t^t^  ^tf^"^  "^'"^  II 
^\  r.^m  ^^\^,  ^  ^^  ^t^t<l,  ^irgl  ^m  ^IR  ^rPi  I 
^'i\ZH  ^t'stft,  ^t'f':^  '^'ift,  Tf^I^  f^^  ^f^  II 
Ctff«l^1  5^^,  ^tfT^  ^,  >2JC^  ^f%c^  Tit?  I 

«!(«<  'ral  c^.  ■'ife  "^rtcf  c^.  ^i¥m  *i^  ^\t  ii 


THE    SANNYASA.  IS'^ 

'and  the  wife  poorly  clad  sat  near  her  mother- 
in-law  with  down  cast  eyes  from  Avhicli  large 
drops  of  tears  fell. 

'The  trusted  servant  Icana  in  silent  grief 
served  them  but  often  did  he  wipe  away  the 
rising  tears  with  his  hand. 

'The  attendant  maids  sat  silently,  and  as  the 
scholar  entered  they  asked  him, 

'  "Pray  sir,  tell  us,  whence  hast  thou  come  ?'  " 

'Whereat  he  "  I  come  from  Orissa,  Chaitanya 
has  sent  me  from  there  to  look  after  you." 

'And  one  of  them  as  she  heard  it,  wept  for 
joy  and  bore  the  message  to  (^achi. 

'And  another  ran  at  once  to  Crivasa's  place 
with  the  glad  news. 

'And  when  Malini  and  Crivasa  heard  it,  they 
felt  as  restored  to  life. 

'And  the  whole  city  came  with  iliem  trem- 
bling with  joy  to  Cachi's  house. 

lf^^  ^RW^,  ■sif^  "^m,  ^fifvs  ^JlU{  5fi?l  II 

f^'^t^  ^ni^,  f%^  ^t^,  ^i[u{  c»t Wsf  ^ci  I 

'S\  im-i  '^U,   »tt<Sft  ^^,   ^^fl  ^2|i^  '^l'^  II 

w\^  w\^  ^,  ^tic^  %^,  c^Tm\  nf^  ®r^  i 

=5Sf%^  \51C?.  ^^C-m  7\^\US,   C^tll  t^US  ^MlR  II 

•?sf^^t  ^5^,  ^m^  ^^^,  »tftc?  ^^  f^tfl  I 
^\n  ^^sjJi,  ^P^  ^■^,  ^■^\^  ^h^  «rt^1  II 


184  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

'They  waited  at  tlie  2^ate  hut  Malini  went 
and  held  (^aehl  and  Visnupriya  hy  the  hand  and 
raised  them  from  tlie  stupor  of  grief. 

'Slie  said  "  Look  there  your  son  lias  sent  a 
friend  to  make  enquiries.'  " 

'Hearing  this  surprise'!  Cachi  looks  up  and 
sees  our  scholar  standing  at  the  srate. 

'And  seeing  liim  she  said  "Oh  tell  me,  how 
far  has  my  son  come  on  his  way  towards 
home  ?" 

'The  Pandit  wept  to  see  her  grief  and  related 
little  incidents  of  Chaitanya  staying  there  in 
Cachi's  house  and  giving  solace  to  all. 

'Chandragekhara,  the  poet,  is  hard-hearted  as 
a  beast,  ministering  to  his  lower  self  ; 

'and  cares  not  for  the  heavenly  nector  that 
the  story  of  Chaitanya  brings'. 


^t^1  ^t^!.  ■siff%^  ^^t^l,  WS  ^^t  ^t^l 

'ral  c^^  fw^,  "^^  ftt^i,  -^^ti  It^^i  ^tf^ » 

"^m  ^\h  Cft^l  nt^tt^  C^t^,  ^IJ  ^^RTs  C^Wfl  II 

■^f^  *\i\  ■sitt,  ^^V^^  5t^,  c!rfim^  ifsu^c?  I 
■^fr^  \»ta  ^t^,  ^W?i  f^Rt^,  ^srtf'nitcf  ?^  ^ci  n 
cirf^  c>2t^%rl,  c^i^  ^^f^,  ^tf^^t  tfQ^s  ^ti: 

lRs«  "^h^l  *)ft^t  ^^irg,  i^I^t^  ^^  fff^  1 


THE    SANNYASA.  185 

Oh,  why  does  he  hold  the  staff,  and  Avears 
the  ochre -colored  garb  of  an  ascetic  ? 

Oh,  why  has  he  shaven  his  head  ? 

Why  is  it  that  he  weeps  and  says  '  Radha,' 
'  Radha.' 

The  loud  lamentings  of  Crlvjlsa,  it  seems, 
Avoiild  melt  the  very  stone  and  Gadadhara  cannot 
bear  life, 

Mukunda's  two  eyes  float  in  tears. 

And  Haridasa  goes  from  door  to  door  solacing 
those  who  are  in  grief. 

The  youthful  Avife  is  like  a  flame  in  the 
house. 

Oh,  why  has  he  left  her,  for  what  fault  ? 

Vasu  Gliosa  says  '  It  breaks  my  heart  day 
and  night  to  recollect  it.' 

(6)' 
Chaitanya,  our  beloved  has  left  Nadiya. 
His  friends  are  overwhelmed  with  grief, 
Advaita,  Crivasa,  Gadadhara,    Vasudeva  and 


S^rl  \»^  J\^  C^WZ^^  ^\'i\C.<{  II 

^l^^^^f^    ^tfff    ^ft^    ^\^  II 
<if^^^   ^Vi\^    ^^ff^    ^f-r^l  I 

^^•^J^  ^~i9^  ^f^^  ^fl^l^  I 


186  CHAITANYA    AN!)    Ills    COMrANIONS. 

Bakrecvara    silently    uei'p    but     A'asiulatta    and 

J  el 

Narahari  erv  aloud, 

Ra£?hunandaiia  sits  on  the  dusty  ground 
bowed  in  sorrow, 

Haridasa's  eyes  are  closed  but  a  tear  silently 
trickles  down  bis  clieek. 

And  Nityananda  cannot  control  bimseli"  as 
he  sees  the  poor  mother  in  the  agony  of  grief. 

The  happy  nights  of  Lh-tana  songs  are  over, 
and  Vasudeva's  heart  breaks  to  think  of  it. 

(7)' 

Tlie  empty  couch  her  right  hand  touches  and 
the  poor  wife  rises  with  a  start  as  if  thunder  has 
fallen  on  her  head. 

She  cries  "  Oh  lieaven  you  have  at  last  done 
your  worst ". 

Weeping  she  runs  with  dishevelled  hair  to 
the  room  of  Cachl. 

Visnupriya  sits  near  the  door  and  says  in 
accents  soft, 

>    ^s()  ^tc§  fw^i  t^,  ^  'tfe^  it«it^.  "^n  f^f^  C5it^  ftsR^ii 
■^^■'W  -^m\  ^icff,  c^*\  -^\^  -i{\h  %«(.  "••t^t^  ^^  '^t^  i'>\^  II 
»rffi  ^ff^fi  ^ift,  5?it^^  ^tcw  ^ft,  %<!  '^u  ^ci  r^^-f^i^  I 

»t?H  ^f^R  fl^,  fj?f»t  W.'^  C^«l1  Cilpf,  C^  ^C^  ^^  ^tfMl  U 

c^^tw  ^Hc?i  ^?:^:  fet  ^tf%  55i?i?:^,  ^^fsi'Pi  ^1l^  »ifi^t"5l  I 

\51  «>f^  s)lltTlt<I  r.a|r,^,  ^fCW  ^^65'?C^  c^TU"^,  ^tR  ^t!:<i  ic^^  ^ta'St  I 
^■^5?si  ^1  «(t^,  Ip«r^  tlJW  ^t?I,  C'Stl^tC^  C?W5  C^^  C^tfl  II 

cn  ^m  ctfc«rf¥  c"^ra,  ^t<r  c^?  ^tf^  ^f?:'!,  ^t*^  ^^trg^  'l':'i  ^r^  n 
11^  ^c^  ^t^1  ^fg,  ^f^f^  c^^^^f^,  ^t^5  sitf^  1^^  ^^t^  tt 


THE    SANNYASA.  18? 

"  He  was  in  the  sleepincf  room  and  at  the  end 

of  night  has  2;one  away 

My  heart  l)i*eaks,  oh  mother.  " 

The  suspicion  was  ever  in  Cachi's  mind 

and  she  did  not  sleep  all  the  night. 

She  rises,  her  liair  un braided   and  loose,  and 

cloths  flovA^ng  in  the  air 

She  lights  a  candle  in  eager  haste   and  looks 

about  her  but  noAvliere  is  he  seen 

She    goes  to    the    road,    the    sori'owf ul    wife 

following  her 

Crying  aloud  "oh  my  darling  son." 

The  people  of  Nadiya  are  all  wide  awoke  and 

share  in  her  grief 

And  she  asks  whomsoever  she  meets 

"  Oh  have  you  seen  him  going  r  " 

One  man  is  seen  in  the  street  and  he  says 

"  Yes  have   I  seen    him    going   towards    the 

village  of  Kanchannagara  all  alone.  " 

Vasudeva  says  "  Alas,   I  fear   lest  he  gets  his 

head  shaven  there.  " 

(8)' 
I  have  beheld  him  to-day 
Sometimes    he   sits    resting  his  cheek  on  his 
left  hand. 

^^-^^  ^T(\^  ■^^^  ^1%it^  i 


188  CHAITA.WA    AND    HIS    CO-MPAXIONS. 

And  tlicii  Pilfers  liis  room  and  l^^ops  out  to  the 
street  again — call  without  nipaiiius;-. 

There  is  he  again  w  liere  the  flowers  bloom, 
shedding  tears  that  fall  from  his  eyes,  beaut ii'ul 
as  lotus  leaves. 

His  emotions  charm  one  who  sees  them, 

They  are  strange  and  new  every  time. 

He  sits  all  by  himself  and   repeats  the  name 

of  God 
Accustomed  was  ho    to    scent    himself    with 

sandal  drops. 
Now    behold     the     dust    on     his   body — all 

uncared  for. 
The  precious  stones  and  golden  chain  lie  does 

not  touch. 
And  he  has  left  his  spacious    room,  to    sleep 

under  a  tree. 
The  ascetic's  staff  is  in  his  hand 

and  he  bathes  in  the  holy  tears  of  love. 
Vasudeva's  heart  breaks  at  all  this. 


1  r^nzsi  np\vi\  ^cT'^Tpg  I 

^%t^  wc<i  fkim^ 

^^F?  B'WR  ^Nl  ^ff?I,  ilC^  ^fel  f^^^Sf  5|tf^  ^91 

5iPt^  ^^  ^1,  '^'ic^  ^1  w:^  ^\^^ 

ft^  clf?!^  f^liTt^— fV^-^tfn  ^^  «^  ^fJ!  I 


THE    LOVE-ECSTASIES.  189 

(Loy 

As  he  sees  the  flower  fi^arden,  he  sighs, 

Sometimes  he  rests  his    clieek    on    his    hand, 

and  at  others  casts  his  vacant  look  around. 
His  emotions  are  ever  new. 

His    glances    are    often    directed    to    where 

flowers  bloom, 
We  cannot  devine  what  he  finds  in  them. 
But  such  are  his  emotions  of   joy    that  those 
who  see  them  are  saved  from  sin 

His  tears  flood  the  world  with  their  love 
Only  poor  Radhamohan  is  denied  a  drop. 

{Uf 

What  is  it  he  sees. 

Why  is  this  unmeaning  smile  on    his    lips  by 
night  and  day  ? 

1      f^«  ^t^,  C^^  ^^J^^-^,  ^5t^  ^^t^  •^'%\^  I 

^1  ^<f«!:^,  ^^^"^^  ^5*t%  ml  w.'\  ^a  ^?t^  II 

Cff«|  ^^U  "MW  I 

5*^  ^?IC»[,  5^tC^  S^^f'ffs,  '5tf^f%^  ^W  ^^t5?, 
<^«j;.^  ^^,  c^^3  ^^^,  ^^  ^t,^  ^c^  "^tsi  I 
^^j?  's\f^  <?f%  vstg^  ^^^m,  ^tJ^ft?!  C'^t^tTs  ^i^  ! 
^«(1<:^t^J(  f¥<i^\  ^\Q^  ^t^  '^^  f^'it^  II 

sftft  w\z^  %|  Rf*r,  ^f<i'^  f^^u{  ^\\^, 

C^t'tt^  ^i^H  '2lt'W»l  I 


190  CIIAITANYA    AND    UTS    C0:N[PANI0NS. 

Sometimes  he  siiig-s,  a  strange  melodious  song, 
and  cries 

*'0h  lord  of  my  heart,  whore  art  thou  gone?" 

Sometimes  his  body  trcmibles  in  sweet  emo- 
tions and  he  runs  after  some  one  we  do  not  see. 
And  often  does  he  stretch  his  hands  upwards, 
as  if  to  emlirace  the  Heaven, 

At  times  he  bewails  the  loss  of  some  one  we 
do  not  know  ; 

Now  does  he  close  his  eyes  from  Avhich  silent 
tears  fall. 

Then  cries  aloud  saying  "Oh  my  Beloved." 

Says  Narahari  "  These  ecstasies  of  love  are 
like  those  of  Radha, 

"  Por  saving  the  sinners  of  this  Kali  Yuga — 
the  iron  age — has  he  brought  this  emotion  from 
heaven. 

^«1  %«  ■^^  ^"pf,  nER:«i  ^ci  ctf^  ei'Jp, 

^t^i  tr«  ^t€  ^t^  ^i»i  I 
^c«i  ^i  ^t^  ^r<i,  i\\\^  ^C5i  k-h  f^f?, 

<]f^^5  ?^5j  ^jfvp  ^^^ 


THE    DllEAMS.  191 

"A^^hy  is  it  tlien  that  I  am  deprived  of  a  sight 
of  this  ?  " 

One  of  these  or  a  similar  song,  of  which 
there  are  hundreds,  is  sung  as  tlie  Gaura- 
chandrika  which  is  prehide  to  all  lladha-Krsna 
songs. 

The  follo\Ying  songs,  one  describing  a  dream 
of  Jacodcl  aliiicted  with  separation  from  Krsna 
and  another  that  of  Cachi  distressed  by  the 
Sannyasa  of  her  son,  will  show  the  affinity  of  tlie 
Krsna  songs  with  those  of  Chaitanya  and  will 
rp,      ,      .        ,.     accentuate  the  bearinc^  which  the 

The      bearing     ot  o 

Chaitanya  sougs  on     Gaurachaudrika      have      on    the 

those  ot  Krsna. 

Krsna  songs.  Cachi  interviewed 
in  the  morning  by  Malini,  (^rivasa's  wife,  thus 
describes  her  dream  : 

"  Here  my  dear  friend  the  story  of  my 
dream  last  night.  "Nimai,  I  saw,  returned  home. 
He  stood  in  the  courtyard  and  looking  towards 
my  room  called  out  'Oh  mother'  in  his  accus- 
tomed tone.  I  was  then  sleeping  in  my  room 
and  hearing  his  voice  came  out  in  unconscious 
fascination  of  the  voice.  He  touched  the  dust 
of  my  feet  and  embracing  me,  wept  and  said 
'  Though  I  travel  afar,  my  heart  is  subdued  by 
your  love  and  I  could  not  stay  at  Purl  without 
seeing  you.  Por  seeing  you  liave  I  come  back 
to  Nadiya,  and  as  he  said  this  his  voice  was 
chocked  with  tears.'      '  Oh  my  darling,   come   to 


10-  CllAITANiA    AND    IHS    COMrANIONS. 

me'  I  cried  and  saying  so  T  embraced  him  but 
my  dream  vanished  just  at  that  time  and  I  saw 
liim  not  aij^ain.  T  wept  Um  rest  of  the  nii^ht  in 
bitter  pain.  From  tliat  time  my  heart  knows 
no  re'st.  Say  fiiend  Iioav  may  T  soothe  my  heart. 
\  ilsudeva  Ghose  says  'Do  not  weep,  dviw  mother, 
Chaitanya  is  your  own.  If  it  were  not  so  how 
could  you  i^et  a  sii^-ht  of  liim  (in  the  dream). '  "  ^ 

Her(?  is  tlie  dream  of  Jacodil :  Slie  describes 
it  to  lier  husband  Nanda. 

"Hear  me,  oh  kini^  of  Braja,  K.sni  appeared 
to  me  tliis  niij^ht  in  a  dream.  ]?ut  instantly  he 
vanisiied  where  I  know  not.  I  saw  his  moonlike 
face  bedewed  with  tears,  as  lie  hekl  by  the 
eds^e  of  my  Sadi  and  cried  for  some  butter, 
'  mother  s^ive  me  a  little  butter  to  eat '  he  said 
again  and  again.  The  more  my  darling  wanted 
it  from  me,  the  more  I  tried  to  avoid  him 
saying  '  Go  away  hence  1  have  no  time  to    spare. 


^tMtc«  tf^tt?il  ^^itc^i  c^^ff^?!,  ^1  ^Ng|  sti'>^   ^Wu  II 
■nz^cs  «^^ffl^r^,  'S[(3^u{  ^ff^^  l^^\-s[,  f^^[t^  ^^t^fst  f  i|tl  i 

^Rtl  5^'f?f  ^jf^l,  f^?i  fi{-H\t  f»IC?l  ^r^,   ^'i  ^tC^  -sf^tf  ^m  II 

csMa  C'Sfrsi?!  ^c»l,  f^f^  ^\h  cffc»t  cm*\.  ^fe t  ^\fm\^  ^^\k^  i 
«itt^  csit^  ^f^1  ^fii,  f^jjt^  ^t^tc^  ^m,  C5^  "^tz^  \^s\-s^  ^^  I 

^3^1  STI  Cfff^J^  «tC?,  ■^Sh  C^sisj  -^c^,  ^tr??l|  HW^  cnt^tl^l  II 

cJit  ^?c«  ^tl  "^tc^,  r^si  f'l^  Jttf?  ^tci(,  f^  ^f^^  -^^c^rt  ^*lt5 
^[^cff^i  cnK'1  ^5,  c^'lst^  csrsrr^l  ?;5,  s^Ncvi  f^  ctf^j  fits  ?.rgij 


THE    DEEAMS.  193 

don't    trouble    me.'      And    thus    I    turned    liiin 
away."^ 

The  legend  of  Krsna  has  thus  been  vivified, 
and  the  human  and  spiritual  interest  of  it  has 
developed,  being  constantly  fed  by  the  incidents 
of  living  history. 

The  Gaurachandrika  prepares  a  spiritual  atmo- 
sphere for  the  audience.  The  emotions  of  one  Avho 
was  mad  after  God  are  emphasised,  so  that  they 
might  serve  as  a  key-note  to  Radha  Krsna-songs 
which,  viewed  in  this  light,  assume  a  symbolical 
significance,  even  in  their  sensuous  descriptions. 
I  have  said  in  a  previous  lecture  that  the 
Vaisnavas  have  spun  out  intricate  details  of 
tender  emotions  in  their  Alankara  Castras — the 
poetics,  as  Dr.  Jacobi  would  call  them.  There 
are  altosrether  360  such  emotions  defined  and 
illustrated  in  the  Ujjalnllamani  to  which  refer- 
ence has  already  been  made.  Some  of  the  main 
divisions,  such  as  '  the  dawn  of  love,'  '  the 
rapture,'  '  the  pain  of  God  '  and  '  the  spiritual 
marriage,'  which  St.  Teresa  and  other  mystics  of 
Europe  have  described,  are  almost  the  same  as  is 
in  the  Bengali  classifications,  with  this  difference 
that  the  niceties  introduced  in  Bengali  are  hundred 


^j(  ^sfitsf,  ^^m:^  ^sf  OT^  f^  c^^t^  c^t«lt?i  g^^c^  I 
C5R  c^  ^^^  iftcvf,  '^^^  ^mi  ^t^^,  ^=wt  cff  ^^  c^r  ^^  ^ra  ii 
■^■^  w\z^  ^t^t  ^f%  '^^'  '^^'  ^tf^  «.^tf^t^  ^f^  ^^  ^^  I 

Y 


194<  CHAITANYA    ANJ)    llIS    COMPANIONS. 

times  greater.  'The  daAvii  of  love'  and  other 
divisions  luive  each  of  tlieni  many  sub-licadinfT;s, 
and  hundreds  of  old  songs  are  attached  to  each 
by  way  of  illustration  of  all  its  minutest  shades. 
When  the  Kirtaniya,  or  the  head-singer  of  the 
Kirtana-songs,  takes  up  a  subject  for  his  night's 
performance,  he  selects  as  many  songs  of  a  group 
as  he  can  sing  within  six  or  seven  hours,  and 
commences  with  a  Gaurachandrika  descriptive  of 
the  particular  emotion  which  is  the  subject  of  the 
night. 

Of  the  Gaurachandrikas  that  I  have  quoted 
Nos.  5,  8,  9,  10  and  1 1  l)elong  to  the  group  of 
the  '  dawn  of  love  ' — the  Purva-raga. 

The  clang  of  Kartala  (cymbals)  and  the  dull 
beat  of  Khol,  which  has  however  a  heart-moving 
effect,  is  continued  for  some  time.  The  deafen- 
ing noise  drives  away  all  other  thoughts  and  the 
audience  expectantly  looks  for  some  higher 
music.  Gaurachandrika  is  next  introduced.  The 
„„    ,.  sinsjer    does  not  consider  his  task 

chandrika  and  the         ftnished      by      siugiug     the      SOUgS. 

Kirtana  songs.  -p,^^j^  line—each  word  of  them— he 
explains  l)y  rhymed  commentaries  made  by  some 
earlier  master,  which  was  also  learnt  by  rote  by 
the  sinsier  when  he  committed  the  son^^s  to  his 
memory.  The  poetical  import  of  each  word  is 
analysed  with  its  bearing  on  Chaitanya's  life,  till 
history,  theology  and  poetry  are  mingled  together 
and    the    musical    flow    of   (he  whole  makes  the 


THE    GOURACHANDUIKAS.  195 

audience  rapt.  Kir  tana  is  unlike  all  other  music. 
It  is  a  continued  source  of  inspiration  in  Bengal 
owing  to  the  great  life  of  Chaitanya  which 
nourishes  it  with  idealistic  poetry.  The  atmosphere 
created  is  one  of  renunciation,  of  equality  for  all 
men,  of  love  that  lights  its  unflickering  flame 
for  illuminating  the  dark  corners  of  life,  of 
pursuing  one's  liighest  good,  of  giving  away  one- 
self to  the  cause  of  the  beautiful,  of  the  suhlime 
and  of  the  good.  The  music  around  the  Gaura- 
chandrika  swells  and  grows  in  volume,  till  like 
the  sea  it  surrounds  the  audience,  separating 
themselves  from  the  visible  world.  It  leads 
them  to  a  superior  plane  creating  pathos  which 
draw  from  their  eyes  silent  tears  of  exalted 
emotions. 

It  often  happens  that  some  one  amongst  the 
audience,  unahle  to  support  his  emotion,  silently 
joins  the  singers  and  dances  for  joy.  I  have  seen 
good  scholars  do  so.  In  fact  the  attention  of 
the  audience  is  captivated  to  such  an  extent  that 
they  are  often  found  to  forget  their  dinner-hour 
and  the  most  urgent  business. 

When  Gaurachandrika  has  been  sung,  the 
main-singer  begins  to  sing  the  songs  of  Uadha- 
Kisna.  Sensuous  matter  loses  then  its  indecency, 
being  drawn  on  parallel  lines  with  Chaitanya's 
emotions,  which  interpret  them  in  a  new  light. 
The  songs  are  thus  given  a  suggestive  import- 
ance which  takes  away  from  them  all  the  gross- 
ness  which  cursory  reading  may  find  in  them. 


19G  CIIAITANTA    AND    HIS   COMPANIONS. 

Amoiin-st    tlie    names    of    a    large  nunilxT  of 
lurloiKi    sill  liters    of    the    time  of  Cliaitaiiya,    we 
may  mention  some.     At  the  head  of  Klrtaniyas, 
the  companions  of    Chaitanya,    stands    Narahari 
Someofti.ukTrtana     ^avkai'  of  ^rikaiida,  (^rlvasaand 
singers  of  Vasudova  Ghosa,  Vasu  Datta  and 

chaitanya's  time.  Mukuncla  Datta  of  Nadipa.  Refer- 
ences to  tlieir  wonderful  power  of  singing  are 
to  be  found  in  all  important  biographies  of 
Chaitanya.  Bakrecwara  pleased  all  by  his 
wonderful  dancing.  They  were  all  saintly  people, 
good  scholars  and  devoted  to  Chaitanya.  Their 
music  and  dance  in  l-lrtaua  performances 
belonged  to  a  higher  plane,  answering  the  glow- 
ing exortations  of  the  Psalms. 

"  Let  them  praise  His  name  in  the  dance,  let 
them  sing  praises  unto  Him  with  the  timbrel 
and  harp  Let  the  floods  clap  their  hands.  From 
the  rising  of  the  sun  until  the  going  down  of 
the  same,  the  Lord's  name  is  to  be  praised." 

Chaitanya's  life  is  important  to  the  students 
of  the  history  of  Bengal,  owing  to  the  great 
bearing  on  the  subsequent  social  evolutions  that 
took  place  in  the  country.  To  those  who  are 
spiritually  inclined  his  life  is  of  a  never-ending 
interest  like  that  of  the  Buddha  or  of  Cankara, 
showing  some  of  the  greatest  features  of  religious 
activity  and  development  in  India.  To  the  poets 
the  dream -like  charm  of  his  life  is  a  source  of 
constant  delight.     His  whole  life  is  now  a  song, 


GATJECHANDHIKAS,  197 

sung  in  the  streets  and  in  tlie  country  side. 
It  is  an  epic-poem  formed  of  the  sweet  lyrics 
of  Gaurachandrikas  which  are  on  every  Mrtana 
singer's  lips.  The  poetry  of  his  romantic  life 
is  spread  like  tlie  flowers  that  spring  on  the 
grassy  meadows,  all  over  Gangetic  valley.  The 
weaver  sings  it  as  he  spins  his  thread,  and  the 
ploughman  fills  the  whole  air  with  the  pathos 
of    his   lament    over    Chaitanya's    desertion    of 

home. 

A  beautiful  story  illustrative  of  the  popular 
devotion  for  Chaitanya  was  related  sometimes 
ago  by  Mr.  Kshitimohan  Sen,  Head  Master  of 
Sir  Rabindranath  Tagore's  School  at  Bolpur. 
"While  at  Nadiya,  he  heard  that  in  a  small 
neighbouring  village  kirtana  songs  accompanied 
by  the  play  of  Khol  and  cymbals  were  sung 
there  every  night  from  6  p.m.  to  6  a.m.  There 
were  two  bands  of  musicians,  one  singing  and 
playing  till  12  a.m.  and  the  other  for  the  rest 
of    the    night.      For   these    four 

An      example   of 

popular    devotion     huudrcd    ycars,    generations     of 

for  Chaitanya.  .„  £      i-U     ^  11      1  I'i. 

Villagers  or  that  small  locality 
have  kept  up  an  uninterrupted  course  of  musical 
play  in  the  village.  The  reason  of  this  is  that 
Chaitanya  had  once  paid  a  visit  to  that  village 
before  taking  Sannyasa.  The  little  village  re- 
sounded with  kirtana  songs,  ^proclaiming  its  glad- 
ness at  the  event.  When  he  was  about  to  leave 
the    place,    the    villagers    begged  of  him  to  pay 


198  CHAITANYA    A^^D    UIS    COMPANIONS. 

them  a  visit  ai;'ain  and  Chaitanya,  it  is  said, 
promised  that  he  would  do  so  at  some  future 
time.  They  formed  from  amongst  themselves 
two  bands  of  kirlana  singers  to  keep  up  the 
continuity  of  the  songs  till  he  returned.  That 
blessed  day  never  came.  But  they  have  kept 
up  an  unceasing  flow  of  music  night  after  night 
during  these  long  generations,  believing  that 
he  will  come  once  more  and  visit  their  villasre. 
For  the  words  of  one  whom  they  knew  to  be 
God  himself  could  not  l)ut  be  fulfilled. 

XXI] . —  The  four  sects  of  the  Vaisnavas. 

The  Vaisnavas  are  divided  into  four  sects :  viz 

Maddhi,     Sanaka.     Rudra    and     CrI.     Maddlia- 

charya    (born    1911:  A.  D.)    was   the  founder  of 

the  Maddhi  sect.      He  was  the  son  of  a  Brahmin 

named  Maddhageha,  an  inhabitant 

of    Tajikaksetra,  a   village   close 

to   the   town  of  Udipi  in  the  country  known  as 

Tulava   in    the    Deccan.     The    town    stands    on 

the   river    Papanacini    which    is   only  two  miles 

and  a  half  from  the    sea.     As   a 

child    Maddhacharya    was    called 

Vasudeva   and   adopted   the    name    of    Ananda- 

tirtha   when    he    was  only  9,  on  the  occasion  of 

his    taking  Sannyasa.  His  Guru  was  a  Brahmin, 

named    Achyutapracha    of    the    Sanaka    family. 

Maddhacharya    received    his    early   education  at 

the   Anante9wara    temple   of  the  Deccan.     His 


THE    FOUll    SECTS.  199 

commentary  on  Brahmasutra  is  a  standard 
authority  and  guide  to  his  sect.  Besides  this, 
he  embodied  his  higher  philosophical  views  in 
a  work  called  the  "  Purnaprajnadarcana."  The 
next  revered  name  anion 2;  the  Maddhi  sect 
is  that  of  Jayatirtha,  standing  5th 

Jaya  TTrtha.  ,  i   .    1  .n     i 

m  the  list  which  will  be  sub- 
joined below.  He  was  initiated  in  the  ascetic's 
career  while  yet  a  child  in  124^5  A.D.  He  wrote 
the  following  works  in  Sanskrit : 

(1)  Tattwaprakacika  (2)  Nyayadipika  (3) 
Tattwasankhya  Natika  (4)  Upadhikhandana 
(5)  Upadhikhandanatikcl  (6)  Mayarahukhandana 
(7)  Tattwanirnaya  Tika  (8)  Cudlia. 

Jayatirtha  died  in  his  46th  year.  His  earthly 
remains  were  buried  at  Malkheds-ate — now  a 
railway  station  in  Southern  India. 

From   Saoaka   there  was   evolved   a   sect   of 
Avhich  Nimbclditya  was  the  leader 

Sanaka. 

in    later    times.      His   name  was 

Bhaskaracharya   and    he    obtained    the    title   of 

Nimbaditya,  it  is   said,    owing    to 

Nimbaditya.  .  .      ' 

his  having  secured  the  favour  of 
Aditya,  the  sun-god,  who  appeared  through  a 
Nim  tree  one  evening,  so  that  the  saint  might 
take  his  meal,  his  vow  having  been  to  eat  it  in 
the  day-time  only.  It  is  said  that  the  literature 
of  this  sect  in  Sanskrit  and  Hindi  was  burnt 
by  Aurangzeb.  Some  of  their  religious  views 
are  remarkably  lofty  and    rational,   and   bear   a 


200  CHAITAXYA    AND    Jlirs    COMPANIONS. 

close  affinity  to  Cliristiaiiity.  "Many  of  them" 
says  Mr.  Gi'owse,  "are  pious,  simple  minded  men 
leading  such  a  chaste  and  studious  life,  that  it  may 
charitably  be  hoped  of  them  that  in  the  eye  of 
God  they  are  Christians  ])y  the  baptism  of 
desire." 

Visnuswami's  follower  Vallavacharya  became 

in  the  16th  century  the    reputed    leader    of    the 

,,  ,  lludra  Order    of    Vaisnavas.     He 

Rudra.  •  • 

was  a  Drilvidian  Brahmin — a 
contemporary  of  Chaitanya — born  in  a  village 
called      Kakuraparahu       near      the       Railway 

station    Nidada      Bhelu     in     the 

V  allavacharya. 

Deccan.  His  father's  name 
was  Laksmana  Bhatta.  At  Kakuraparahu  there 
is  a  temple  marking  the  spot  AAdiere  Vallabha- 
charya  was  born.  He  wrote  a  commentary 
on  the  Brahma  Sutra  and  called  it  A^allabha 
Vasya.  His  commentary  on  the  Crimad- 
bhagavata  is  an  authoritative  work  to  the  people 
of  his  sect.  Vallabhacharya  lived  for  a 
considerable  time  at  Gokul  and  was  known  as 
Gokula  Gossain — '  The  preceptor  of  Gokul'. 
Some  of  the  anecdotes  relating  to  his  int(n'view 
with  Chaitanya  at  Puri  are  described  in  detail 
in  the  Chaitanya  Charitamrta.  It  appears  that 
Avhile  revering  the  Master,  Vallabha  Avas  proud 
of  his  learning  and  had  little  regard  for  his 
companions.  Yallabha  flattered  Chaitanya, 
saying  that  he  had  for  a  long    time    cherished    a 


TiiE    FOUR    SECTS.  ^Ol 

desire    of    seeing    liiin    and    that    he    considered 
himself    blessed   at  having     seen 

Meets  Cliaitanva.  .^  -v-         i 

hiin  at  lasr.  "JNowhere  Avas 
seen  "  he  said  "an  apostle  of  failh  like youreelf, 
the  very  sight  of  whom  inspires  devotion 
to  God  among  men.  " 

Chaitanya,  knoAving  that  Vallabha  Avas  proud 
and  that  he  slighted  his  companions,  said  "  Sir, 
I  am  a  very  humble  soul,  quite  unworthy  of 
your  praise.  If  there  is  any  faith  in  me  for 
which  these  encomiums  are  bestowed,  I  owe  it 
to  Advaita  Acharya  who  has  mastered  all 
branches  of  human  learning — to  Nityananda 
Avho  knows  six  schools  of  philosophy  as  few 
know    them  in  India   and     whose 

His  commentary-  i  •  i  • 

company  has  given  me  a  glimpse 
of  that  hiu^her  life  to  AvJiich  a  man  of  such   hum- 


^^ 


ble  j)arts  as  myself  could  hardly  otherwise  have 
got  access.  There  are  besides  Jagadananda, 
Bakre9wara  and  Gadadharn  Pundit  from  whom  I 
Jiave  learnt  much  and  have  yet  to  leani  more. 
If  you  think  of  profiting  by  discussion  with 
any  one  among  us,  it  is  these  scholars  whom  I 
recommend  to  you. "  Vallabhacharya  had 
wiitten  his  commentarv  on  the  Bhaii;avata, 
as  I  have  already  mentioned,  and  his  object  in 
cominii^  down  to  Puri  was  to  show  it  toChaitanTa 
and  have  his  approval.  But  Chaitanya  had 
hoard  that  this  commentary  was  directly  opposed 
to  the  one  written  by  Cridhar  Swami,  the  great- 
est authority  in    Bhagavata-interpretations,    and 

z 


202  CIIAITAXYA    AND    HIS    COMrANIOXS. 

therefore  avoided  tiie  request  of  Valbiblifieluirya 
savins:  l^hauravata  is  too  l)iuli  for  me.  I  deliiihtiii 
the  name  of  Krisna.  Tlie  v.ixnw  is  a  poem  to  me 
and  i^ives  me  joys  untold.  1  am  not  a  competent 
judy-e  of  a  commentary  on  the  ]5hai^avata. " 
A'^alhibhaeharya  went  to  tlie  dilTerent  Vaisuava 
wortliies,  wliom  Chaitanya  Jiad  named,  in  order 
to  read  his  commentary  to  them.  But  no  one 
in  that  vast  city  would  listei\  lo  it  and  he  was 
so  struck  with  the  great  learninu,'  of  the  scliolars 
who  admired  Chaitanya  and  lived  at  Puri  simply 
to  be  near  him,  that  the  proud  scholar  felt  ij;reat- 
ly  humiliated.  When  he  referred  to  his  commen- 
tary ai^ain  in  his  conversation  with  Chaitanya, 
the  latter  said  that  unless  he  closely  followed 
the  interpretations  of  the  Swamy,  the  commentary 
could  not    be  acceptable    to   any 

Till'     pun    oil    the  .  , 

word  •' Swamy."  OMC.  Chaitanya  used  a  pun  on 
the  word  "Swamy" — the  name 
by  wliich  Cridhar  Swamy  Avas  o-enerally  known. 
Swamy  means  a  husl)and  ;ind  as  A^allabhacharya's 
views  ran  opposite  to  his,  Chaitanya  said  'Your 
commentary  is  corru])t'  havini!,'  disres;arded  the 
Swamy.  Vallabha's  [iride  was  humbled  and  he 
took  lessons  in  the  J^hap^avata  afresh  from  Pundit 
Jagadananda,  one  of  Chaitanya's  constant  asso- 
ciates, and  had  to  chanijje  many  of  his  religious 
views.'     Tliere  are  at  the   present  day    numerous 


'  An  elaborate  aceount  of  Vullavricharya's  visit  to  I'liri  ami  dis- 
cuRsioiia  with  Clinitaiiya  and  liia  companions  is  to  ho  foiiiiil  iii  I  lie 
Chaitanya  Charitamrta  (Antya  Khanda,  Chap.  Vl[.) 


THE    FOUR    SECTS.  203 

follo\yers  of  Vallabhjicharya  at  Vrndavana. 
Pundit  Caratchaiidra  Castri,  refers  in  his  Bengali 
work  '  Ramanuja  Charita  '  to  the  worklliness 
and  luxury  which  characterise  some  of  the  people 
of  this  sect.  It  is  said  that  a  very  rich  and 
influential  class  of  Southern  merchants, — 
are  followers  of  S^allavacharya.  And  their 
complete  surrender  of  themselves  to  the  wishes 
of  their  religious  preceptors — the  Gokul  Gosains 
as  they  are  called  in  Brindavana, — form  one  of 
the  characteristic  features  of  the  tenets  the}^ 
follow.  These  Gossains  are  generally  well-to-do 
and  receive  presents  from  a  certain  class  of  their 
disciples  for  every  little  mark  of  recognition. 
Eor  instance  the    disciple    has    to 

Some       of    their  t-»  j-      p  •      • 

pecuiar  rules.  pay    Lls.    5    tor    pcrmission  to  see 

his  Guru,  Rs,  20  for  touching  him, 
Rs.  35  for  the  right  of  washing  his  feet,  Rs.  11 
for  receiving  a  kick  from  him,  Rs.  60  for  the 
privilege  of  occupying  the  same  seat  witli  him, 
Rs.  13  for  receiving  strokes  from  his  cane. 
There  ai-e  many  other  marks  of  recognition 
requiring  payment  of  enormous  fees,  some  of 
which  seem  to  convey  immoral  suggestions  but 
I  abstain  from  quoting  them  here,  as  I  am  not 
sure  how  far  the  account  of  Pundit  (^aratchandra 
Castri  is  to  be  credited. 

Ramanuja  is  considered  the  most  conspicious 
figure  among  the  promoters  of  the  views 
represented    by    the    Cri    sect.     He  wns  l)orn  in 


201<  CM.VITANVA    AND    IITS    COMPANIONS. 

]\[;ir('h  1070  A.l^.  in  tlie  villaj^^e  of  PemniLli'ulara 
ill  tho  district     Cheiiii'lat    in     the 
Tho^nsectB.         ^Madvas  Vresidencv.     Tliis   villa-e 
is  only  1)^  miles  from    the  town  of    ^Fadras    and 
was    celebrated    in    the    pre-historic  age  as  the 
shrine  of  Bhutipura.     llamanuja    was    the    son 
of  a  Brahmin  named  Ke9ava ;  In's  mother's  name 
was    Kfintimati    Devi.     He  took  Sannyasa  owin": 
to  his  wife  Ivakshambha's  repeated    violations   of 
his  instructions,    and  we  know  that  Jayatlrtha  of 
the  Maddhi  sect  also  left    home  as    a    Sannyasi 
because    his    wife  was  a  shrew.     Tukarama,  the 
o-reat  Marhatia  saint,  suffered  from  the  same  mis- 
fortune  and  left  home  to  escape     from     his  wife, 
before    he    had    distinguished  himself  as  a  saint, 
and  we  shall  see  in    future    ho\v    Govinda  Dasa, 
the   devoted     follower    of    Chaitanya  quarrelled 
with  his  wife  Cacimukhl  and  turned  a  Sannyasi.' 
Sannyasa  means  in  popular  opinion   the  cutting 
of     all     ties     Avitli     home,     and     the   strongest 
tie    of     home-life    is    that    which    binds    a    man 
to    his    wife.       It    will   thus    be    seen    that  one 
of   the    chief  reasons   which   led  to  the  Sannyasa 
of      many       distinguished        saints      was     tlicii- 


f^3l:i  ^»)  ^f^  ^ff%  R^  c^tc^  I 

Kadflia  Ijv    (Jovinda  Uasa, 


THE    FOUR    SECTS.  205 

clis:ippoiiitmeiit  in  luiptuil  love.  15iit  the  Buddha 
and  Chaitanya,  adored  in  their  I'ainily  circle, 
ren  ):i.iced  home  not  for  any  untoward  domestic 
friction  hut  in  order  to  ohey  a  higher  call  fioni 
their  inner  selves. 

T.ie  Vaisnava- views  at  the  earlier  epochs  of 
their  growth  were  marked  hy  a  hostile  attitude 
towards  Civa,  and  in  the  11th  century  they  seem 
to  have  heen  inspired  hy  two  missions,  one  for 
subverting  the  Civaite  worship  and  another  for 
disapproving  and  attacking  the  theory  of  illu- 
sion propounded  hy  Cankara,  and  these  we  lind 
to  he  the  marked  features  of  the  doctrines  of 
the  Kamanuja  sect.  This  will  he  seen  from  wliat 
Govinda,  a  disciple  of  Ramanuja,  said  after  his 
conversion  to  Vaisnavism  from  the  Civaite 
faith  ; 

*'  Hail,  oh  lord,  (Visnu)  I  take  refuge  in  (hee, 
save  me  from  my  sins.  I  had  shunned  Vicva- 
kantha  (Visnu — the  refuge  of  tlie  world)  and 
taken  refuge  in  Yisakantha  (Civa — tin;  poison- 
throated  one)  ;  I  had  shunned  Pundarikfiksa 
(Visnu — the  lotus-ey(Hl  one;  and  taken  rc^fuge 
in  Birupaksa  (Civa  — the  evil-eyed  one)  ;  I  had 
shunned  the  Pitamvara  (^ Visnu — dressed  in  purple 
robes)  and  taken  refuge  in  the  Digamvara  (Civa — 
the  naked  one)  ;  I  left  the  heavenly  garden  of 
Tulasi  plant  (sacred  to  the  Vaisnavas)  and  ])re- 
f erred  the  bitter-juiced  Haritaki  (sacred  to  the 
Caivas.") 


200  fllAITANVA    AND    II  [S    COMrANIONS. 

The  puns  on  the  words  in  the  a])ovo  extract 
sliow  the  hitterness  and  tlie  liostile  attitnde  of 
the  convert  towards  tlie  creed  he  had  forsaken. 

Maddhyficharya  believed  in  Hari  (Krsna)  and 
Hara  ((^iva)  alike.  A^allavacharya  was  a  believer 
ill  Krsna  as  the  diviiK^  child — the  Vala-£^opala. 
Ramanuja  believed  in  Krsna  and  LaksmI  and 
Yisnu  Swamy  in  Krsna  and  the  Gopis.. 

Chaitanya,  thongh  he  was  initiated  by  a 
Guru  of  the  ^NTaddhi  sect,  owed  but  little  alle- 
2:ienc(^  to  their  tenets.  His  was  almost  a  new 
and  dilferent  creed  based  on  mystic  love  with 
its  emotional  features. 

XXIII.— The  Gums  of  the  3Iadi1M  Sect. 

As  we  are  conc(n-ned  with  the  A'aisnavas 
of  PxMij^^al,  we  need  not  take  any  further 
notice  of  those  wlio  beloni^ed  to  sects  other 
than  the  Maddhi  in  which  Chaitanya  had 
inscribed  his  name.  Mclddhficharya  alias  Ananda- 
tlrtlia  as  already  mentioned,  was  the  founder  of 
this  s(?ct.  The  followinc^  list  Avill  show  the  line 
of  successive  leaders  of  the  sect,  each  of  whom 
stands  in  th(^  relation  of  a  disciple  to  his  ])rede- 
cessor.  This  list  is  quoted  from  Gaurani^anadde- 
sadipika,  a  Sanskrit  woi'k  written  by  Kavikania- 
pura  in  1520  A. I).  A  summary  of  this  will 
also  be  found  in  the  HenL^ali  work,  the 
lihaktiratnakara. 


MAUUHI    SECI.  207 

1.  Maclclhachnrya  (born  1101  A. I).) 

2.  Padiiavacbaryyci. 

3.  Narahari. 
1<.  Aksova. 

5.  Jayatlrtha. 

6.  Jnana  Sindhu. 

7.  Mahasindhu. 

8.  Vidliyanidhi. 

9.  Rajendra. 

10.  Jayadliarma. 

11.  Puvusottama. 

12.  Vyasatirtlia. 

13.  Laksmitirtha. 

11.     Madhavendra  Puri. 

15.  Icwara  Puii. 

16.  Chaitanya  (l)orn  Pebmaiy,  18,  11£6). 

Madhavendra  Pari  was  the  first  man  in  the 
■  Maddhi  sect  whose  name  became 
honoured  m  the  annals  ot  iiens^ali 
Vaisnavas.  He  was  born  about  the  year  1100 
A.D.  and  was  known  by  the  title  of  Bbaktichan- 
drodaya — ^the  rising  moon  of  faith.  We  surmise 
from  a  historical  reference  made  in  the  Chaitanya 
Charitamrta  in  its  account  of  Madhavendrcipurl's 
work  at  Vrndavana  that  he  was  a  Bengali.  It 
is  stated  that  for  the  purpose  of  discharging 
priestly  functions  in  regard  to  the  image  of 
Gopala  which  Madhavendra  had  estal)lished  at 
Vrndavana  he  brought  two  Brahmins  from 
Bengal.     Now    it    is    well  known  that  Bengal  is 


L'OS  ClIAITANVA    aXD    his    COMPANIONS. 

not  a  r<:!C()i:;iiisod  seat  of  i^oocl  Brahmins ;  at  least 
this  Ills  l);'en  the  ciii-rent  belief  of  the  people  of 
Northern  as  well  as  olhei-  ])arts  of  India  outside 
Benural  The  faet  of  ^ladhavendra's  sendini^ 
for  two  Brahmins  from  Benij^al  for  worship  of  a 
deity  held  in  so  much  po[)ular  reverence  in  the 
holy  city,  cannot  he  explained  by  any  other 
reason  than  that  of  Madhavendra's  havini^  been 
liiniself  a  Bengali. 

Two  of  the  discipU^.s  of  ]\ladhaveiidra  Burr— 
Tcwara  Burl  and  Advaita  liad  a  ii;reat  influence 
on  Chaitanya  in  liis  boyhood.  A^'e  all  know 
how  Tewara  Biiri  was  attracted  by  the  scholai-- 
ship  and  otlier  ])ersonal  qualities  of  Chaitanya 
and  frequently  called  on  the  youuii;  .scholar  in 
order  to  impart  reliij^ious  instructions  to  him. 
Chaitanya  was  almost  sceptical  in  his  early  youth 
and  would  not  listen  to  religious 
advice,  icwara  Bun  (pioted  irom 
the  holy  texts  in  order  to  convince  Chaitanya 
of  the  force  of  some  spiritual  points  that  h(^ 
prrached.  But  the  young  scholar  detected 
i;rammatical  mistakes  from  those  texts  to 
the  great  bewilderment  ar.d  disappointment 
of  the  venerable  man.  ihit  inspiti;  of  the 
frivolf)US  jokes  and  light  liumour  with  which 
Chaitanya  treated  Tcwara  Burl's  teachings, 
the  voung  scholar  secretly  cherished  a  deep 
reverence  for  tht^  ])ious  Yaisnava.  After 
liis  life  had   become    changed,  he    felt    an    eager 


MADDHI    SECT.  209 

desire  to  meet  Icwara  Purl  and  went  to  Kumara- 
hatta  with  that  object.  The  old  man  had 
been  cooking  his  own  meal  when  Chaitanya 
arrived  at  his  house.  The  ever  refractory, 
pedantic  and  light-brained  young  scholar  had 
become  a  thoroughly  changed  man  and  as  he 
touched  the  feet  of  the  revered  teacher,  he 
could  not  express  his  profound  gratitude  to  him, 
his  voice  becoming  choked  with  tears.  When 
leaving  Kumarahatta  he  passed  into  a  trance, 
tying  some  dust  of  the  place  in  the  edge 
of  his  garments  like  a  precious  thing,  and 
murmuring,  'the  dust  of  this  spot — the  birth 
place  of  l9vara  Puri  is  dearer  to  me  than  any 
riches,  nay  dear  as  life  itself.'^ 

At  Gaya,  Chaitanya  again  met  l9vara  Puri 
and  with  joined  hands  stood  before  the  saintly 
man  saying,  "  Blessed  is  my  journey  to  Gaya,  for 
I  see  you  before  me.  *  *  *  *  You  are,  Sir,  better 
than  all  the  shrines  of  the  world,  for  a  sight  of 
you  cleanses  the  soul." 

We  gather  the  following  brief  account  of 
l9vara  Purl  from  the  Prema  Vilasa. 

He  was  born  about  the  year  1486  A.D.  His 
father  was  a  RadTya  Brahmin  named  Cyamsundara 
Acharya  of  Kumarahatta.  Icvara  Purl  thoroughly 
studied  the  Upanisadas  in  his  youth  and    became 

'  "  ^^  ^c^  ^'^^  ^tr^  w^f  t^  I 

The  Chaitanya  Bhagavata, 
AA 


210  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

can  ascetic  of  the  Maddhi  sect  of  the  Yaisnavas, 
l)eini^  initiated  into  that  faitli  by  Mfidhaveiidra 
Purl  himself. 

The  man  generally  known  to  be  the  Guru   of 

Chaitanya  was,  however,  Ke9ava  Bharati.    "When 

Cliaitanya  resolved  to  take  the  vow  of  Sannyasa,he 

happened  to  go  to  Kecava  Bharati  for  initiation ; 

the  latter  also    belonged    to     the 

Kecava  Bharati.  ^ir-  ^  -n   -  i  i  t       •     i 

Maddhi  sect  and  was  a  disciple 
of  Madhavendra  Purl.  Ke9ava  Bharati  conducted 
the  ritual  of  Chaitanya's  Sannyasa  and  beyond  this 
we  are  not  aware  that  he  exercised  any  influence 
on  tlie  spiritual  advancement  of  his  illustrious 
disciple.  Tcvara  Puri  was  Chaitanya's  Diksa- 
Guru  who  initiated  him  into  the  Vaisnava  faith  and 
Ke9ava  Bharati  was  hisSannyas-Guru,  who  minis- 
tered  to  the  religious  function  of  his  Sannyasa. 
Ke9ava  Bharati  was  known  as  Kalinath  Acharya 
before  he  took  Sannyas  and  was  an  inhabitant  of 
the  village  of  Kulyti  in  Navadvlpa.  He -was  born 
in  the  earlier  half  of  the  15th  century  and  resided 
chiefly  at  Katwa. 

We  now  revert  to  Madhavendra  Purl,  the  foun- 
tain head  from  whom  flowed  that  current  of  devo- 
tion whicli  within  a  century  and  a  half  flooded 
the  whole  of  Bengal.  Many  tales  are  told  about 
him  in  the  Bengali  historical  Avorks  of  the  A'aisua- 
vas.  There  is  a  significant  couplet  in  the  Chaitanya 
Bhagavata  attril3uting  to  him  some  of  tliose  1)eau- 
tiful  trances  at  the  sight  of  a  cloud  which  we  find 


MADDHI    SECT.  211 

in  a  more  developed  form  in  Chaitanya.  The 
images  of  Vasudeva  in  black  stone  worshipped  in 
the  temples  of  Bengal  had  captivated  the  imagina- 
tion of  the  Vaisriavas  of  the  country.    The  sculp- 

Madhavendra's  ^^rS    gaVC    tO    the     CUrVcd     lipS      of 

trances.  thcsc    imagcs     an      indescribable 

sweetness  and  to  the  eyes  a  joyous  expression 
which  spoke  of  a  world  higher  than  the  Avorld  of 
worry  and  strife  Avhich  we  live  in.  When  these 
images  were  mutilated  and  thrown  out  of  the 
temples  by  the  iconoclasts,  the  worshippers,  who 
like  the  sculptor  described  by  Schiller,  had  actual- 
ly fallen  in  love  with  the  stone,  felt  deeply  dis- 
tressed. The  dark  blue  colour  of  the  images  like 
the  Cross  of  the  Christian,  became  a  sacred  emblem 
of  grief  to  them.  The  colour  of  the  image  became 
a  reminder  of  their  Eeloved.  They  saw  it  in 
the  dark  cloud  tinted  with  blue,  in  the  sky, 
in  the  river,  and  in  the  Tcmiala  tree.  This 
became  to  them  a  fountain  of  sacred  association 
reminding   them    of  Krsna.     The  country   bards 

-,   ^        have  been  full  of  passionate  pane- 
Mystic  regard    tor  ^        ^  -■■       ■ 

dark-blue  colour,  gyrics  of  this  colour  in  their 
religious  songs.  The  images  were  broken,  but  the 
memory  of  the  colour  remained.  The  universe 
shows  a  rich  display  of  this  deep  blue  colour  in  its 
mountains,  its  rivers  and  seas.  Such  an  all  perva- 
ding colour  might  well  be  made  an  emblem  of 
the  Deity,  and  in  Bengal  the  tragic  history  of  the 
mutilation  of  the  dark  blue  images  lent  a  power- 


212  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

fill  and  pathetic  association  to   the  colonr,  bring- 
ing on  trances  and  ecstasies  in      spiritual  souls,* 

We  read  in  the  Chaitanya  Cliaritamrta  that 
Madhavendra  Pari  was  one  of  the  few  pious 
Mririhavendra^s         pilgvims    who    visitod  the   Yruda 

visit  to    Vrndava-  ^      ,,  j  i      j  i      • 

na.  groves    l)eiore    that    shrine    was 

restored  by  the  followers  of  Chaitanya.  A 
tender  and  lovely  legend  is  told  in  connec- 
tion with  this  visit  of  Madhavendra  Puri. 
He  went  tliere  fasting  for  a  day,  for  he  never 
beiji^ed,  and  unless  some  one  brought  him 
somethinG:  to  eat,  he  would  fast  and  remain 
absorved  in  his  religious  reveries.  He  sat  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill  Annakuta  all  alone,  con- 
templating Krsna,  caring  nothing  of  the  world, 
when  he  was  suddenly  accosted  by  a  boy,  who 
if  the  crown  of  peacock- feathers  had  adorn(;d 
his  head  and  a  flute  had  been  in  his  hand,  might 
well     have     passed     for     that     Krsna      whom 

*  It  is  curious  that  some  of  our  Eiifrlish  poets  have  also  felt  a  strange 
liking  for  the  blue  and  the  dark-bhie  colour,  almost  in  the  spirit  of  a 
Vai^nava.  The  following  lines  of  Keats  may  be  ([noted  as  an  illustra- 
tion : — 

"  Blue!  't  is  the  life  of  heaven— the  domain 
Of    Cynthia — the  wide  palace  of  the  Sun, 
The  tent  of  Hesperus  and  all  his  train, 
The  bosomer  of  clouds,  gold,  grey  and  dun. 
Blue  !  't  is  the  life  of  waters— the  Ocean 
And  all  its  vassal  streams,  pools  numberless. 
May  rage,  and  foam,  and  fret,  but  never  can 
Sub-side,  if  not  to  darlchlae  nativeness. 
Blue  !  gentle  cousin  of  the  forest  green. 
Married  to  green  in  all  the  sweetest  liowers 
Foi-get-me-not,  the  Blue-bell,  and  that  queen 
Of  secrecy,  the  Violet,  what  strange  powers 
Hast  thou,  as  a  mere  shadow  !  " 

Keat's  Poems. 

Forman,  Vol.  JI,  i>.  257(1883). 


MADDHI    SECT.  213 

Madbavendra  worshipped.  The  ascetic  was 
struck  by  the  lovely  figure  of  the  boy  who 
offered  him  some  milk  and  fruits.  He  asked 
the  boy  why  he  took  all  this  trouble  to  come 
from  the  villai^e  side  for  the  sake  of  offering 
him  food.  The  lad  said  "I  live  in  this  village. 
The  villagers  would  not  allow  any  body  to  fast 
here.  Some  ascetics  beg  rice  and  bread,  and 
others  beg  milk,  the  villagers  give  them,  hat  I 
give  io  those  who  do  not  tie g  of  any  one.^^^ 
Madhava  took  the  milk  which  was  sweet  and 
the  fruits  which  had  a  heavenly  fragrance.  The 
boy  vanished  from  the  place,  and  Madbavendra 
sat  there  under  a  tree,  repeating  the  name  of 
Krsna  for  nearly  the  whole  of  the  night,  but 
towards  its  end  his  eyes  closed  in 

The    strange     lad  *" 

offering  milk  to     slecp,     Hc    dreamt   a    dream    in 

Madhava.  i   •    i     ;i 

which  the  same  boy  appeared  to 
him  and  said  "Madhava,  long  have  I  waited  for 
you,  for  you  truly  love  me.  Dig  me  up  from 
yonder  forest,  I  Avas  thrown  into  a  tank  there  by 
a  pious  Brahmin  who  wanted  to  save  me  from 
the  Mahomedan  invader.  In  time  the  tank 
was  filled  up  and  in  the  depth  of  the  jungle 
below  the  upper   layers  of    earth    I    am    hidden 

1  "^t^^  ^i^  cnt^  ^tf^  ^^  stc^  ^U  I 
^t^t^  attacks  c^  A\  ^\  %'^\^  ;i 

The  Chaitanija  Charitamvta,  Madhya  Khanda,  Chap.  IV. 


21i  CHA.ITANYA   AND    HIS   COMPANIONS. 

"You    truly  love     ciwav.    I  am  in  g-rcat  pain    owinj^ 
™^'  to  cold  and    lieat   and   forest-lire. 

Yet  know  me  to  be  the  Lord  of  this  shrine." 

Madhava  woke  and  a  strange  emotion  filled 
his  mind.  With  tears  in  his  eyes  he  related  the 
story  to  the  villagers  next  morning.  They  cut 
the  jungle  and  dug  the  earth  and  a  large  and 
beautiful  image  of  Krsna  was  recovered  from 
there  to  the  great  joy  of  all  who  had  assembled. 
This  image  was   brought  doAvn  to 

The   discovery    of  '  '^ 

the  image  of  tlic  Village  With  great  pomp. 
The  joyous  music,  both  vocal  and 
instrumental,  welcomed  the  deity  and  people 
made  rich  offerings  to  him.  The  women  began 
to  sing  and  dance.  The  festivity  was  a  unique 
one  in  the  annals  of  that  locality,  for  the  people 
believed  that  the  Lord  of  the  village  had  come. 
They  bathed  the  image  in  the  sacred  waters  of 
the  shrines  and  anointed  it  with  scented  oil. 
By  applying  shell-powder  and  sulphur  they 
restored  it  to  its  bright  colour  and  then  purified 
it  by  JPaticha  Gai:ija  or  the  five  holy  things  of 
the  cow.  Madhavendra  brought  two  Bramhans 
from  Bengal  for  the  worship  of  the  deity. 

Another  legend  says  that  Miidhava  dreamt 
one  night  that  Gopala,  the  name  by  which  this 
image  of  Krsna  was  called,  again  appeared  to 
him  and  asked  him  to  bring  from  Orissa  the 
sweet-scented  sandal  wood  to  be  found  there 
for  his  adornment.     The   ascetic  came  to  a  i)lace 


MADDHI    SECT.  215 

named  Remuna  in  Orissa.  The  image  of  Gopl- 
natha  was  the  principal  deity  of  the  temple  there. 
Gopinatha  and  Gopala,  it  should  be  understood, 
wore  the  different  names  of  the  God  Krsna. 

Tired  with  the  journey  and  fasting,  Madhava 
stayed  in  the  temple  for  a  little  while  and  saw 
Gopinatha.  Tie  asked  the  priests  there  what 
were  the  meals  offered  to  the  God.  They 
mentioned  amons^  other  thins^s  the  kslra  or 
the  condensed  milk  which  was  a  special  prepara- 
tion there,  and  praised  it  much.  The  ascetic 
thought  "If  I  could  but  once  get  it  without 
seeking,    I    could  learn    how  to    prepare   it    and 

offer  to  my  god  Gopala  at 
The^j^hief  of  the     Yrndavaua."     As  he  thought    so, 

he  was  ashamed  of  himself  for 
indulging  in  a  desire  and  prayed  to  God  for 
pardon.  He  saw  the  Evening  Service  in  the 
Temple  and  saying  nothing  to  anyone  came  out 
of  it  and  went  to  rest  under  a  tree  outside  the 
village.  Madhavendra,  as  it  has  been  said, 
asked  nothing  of  any  one,  if  anything  came 
unsolicited  he  ate,  and  if  not,  he  fasted.  He 
regretted  again  that  a  desire  for  condensed  milk, 
even  though  it  was  for  offering  it  to  his  God,  had 
occurred  in  his  mind  and  sat  quietly  near  the 
market-place,  singing  the  glories  of  God  and 
striving  for  a  union  with  Him. 

In  the  noon-time  the  offering  of  rich  meal 
was  made  as  usual  to  Gopinatha  in   the    temple. 


216  CIIAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

The  doors  were  shut  and  dedicating  the  meal  to 
God,  the  priest  went  out  of  the  temple  for  some- 
time as  usual.  He  came  hack  and  distrihuted  the 
meal,  first  offered  to  the  god,  among  the  worship- 
pers. This  was  what  usually  happened,  hut  when 
the  priest  took  his  afternoon  nap,  Goplnatha 
appeared  to  him  in  a  dream  and  said,  "I  have  kept 
pieces  of  the  ksli'ci  tied  in  my  outer  rohes  for 
Madhava  Avho  is  one  of  my  truest  worshippers. 
Go  and  seek  him  from  the  town  and  offer  him  the 
food."  The  priest  ran  to  the  temple  and  was 
surprised  to  find  pieces  of  condensed  milk  tied  in 
the  edge  of  the  robe  of  Gopinjitha.  In  a  voice  that 
trembled  with  emotion,  the  priest  called  Madhava 
by  his  name  and  ran  through  the  streets  of 
Remuna,  till  he  met  the  venerable  ascetic,  under 
a  tree  in  the  outskirts  of  the  town.  The  story 
was  related  to  him  and  Madhava  with  tears  in 
his  eyes  touched  the  sacred  food  and  was  trans- 
ported with  joy.  Goplnjxtha  stole  the  food  for 
his  worshipper  and  hence  he  got  the  name  of 
^'■Kslr  a- Choral  or  "the  thief  of  condensed 
milk."  By  the  time  the  report  had  spread  of 
this  wonderful  ev^ent  and  people  began  to  gather 
to  see  the  divine  ascetic.  But  he,  knowing  that 
fame  was  to  be  avoided  by  an  ascetic  above  all 
things  as  it  brings  pride  and  desire  for  the 
world's  esteem,  fled  away  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  night  to  avoid  men  and  women  seeking 
him.     Savs    Chnitanya  Charitamita    here    "the 


chaitanya's  pedtghee.  217 

people  followed  and  traced  him  even  to  Purl. 
For  God  gives  fame  to  a  good  man  who  does  not 
seek  it.  Madliavendra  lived  at  Puri  in  quiet 
concealment,  in  order  to  avoid  fame.  But  fame 
hi'ought  him  out  into  the  light. "^ 

Such  are  some  of  the  legends  that  are  asso- 
ciated with  the  name  of  Madhavendra  Puri.  They 
serve  to  estahlish  heyond  all  douht  the  piety  and 
spiritual  fervour  of  the  leader  of  the  Maddhi  sect 
of  the  age.  Por  supernatural  tales  are  told  hy  the 
populace  of  India  about  those  men  only  whose 
piety  of  life  and  devotion  are  unquestionable. 

XXV.     The  pedigree  of  Chaitmiya  and 
Ids  wife. 

AVe  have  mentioned  that  Chaitanya  in  his 
early  life  was  indebted  to  Icvara  Purl  and 
Advaita  for  his  first  impulses  towards  the 
spiritual  life.  I  have  briefly  described  his  asso- 
ciations Avith  Icvara  Purl.  I  have  also  men- 
tioned on  p.  32  that  Caclii,  Chaitanya's  mother, 
made  Advaita  accountable  for  the  spiritual 
tendencies  of  both  her  sons,  leading  them 
eventually  to  sever  their  home-ties  permanently. 
I9vara  Purl,  Advaita  and  Kecava  BharatI  are 
the  three  spiritual  masters  to  whom  Chaitanya 
owed  his  connection  with  the  Maddhi  sect.  If  a 
name  is  to  be  added,  we  should  mention  that  of 
Crivasa.  Chaitanya's  early  education  was  com- 
pleted at  the  tol  of  Gangadasa  Pandit  of 
Vidyanagara  in  Nadiya. 

^   Chaitanya  Charitamfta,  Madhya  Khanda,  Chap.  IV. 


218 


CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 


w 

=*I 

rt 
rt  C^ 

a 

o 

(—4 

.»_) 

-^   o 

m 
m 

S 

c=s 

13 

rt 

;za 

P^ 

m    4-3 

ffl 

.s 

~  ^ 

fo 

-c  ■" 

5 

rt 

rt  1 
rt    S 

iH        to 

rt  irt 

cS 

o 

rt 

5  rt 

t-H 

4S 

ce  - 

—  -- 

C    it 

<1 

s 

i2 

^    rt 

a 

3 

c3 

r^ 

£    rt 

o 

y- 

m 

■^ 

»S5 

fe 

,'*\ 

> 

ICB 

rt 

itj  _d 

►>• 

'rt         U 

ffl 

O    to 

fd 

=4-1 

^    O 

C 

o 

rt  -i: 

cS 

.2  be 

i5 

o  ^ 

Pi 

M 
-^ 

^1 

4:  'rt 

-  C  "rt 
0)    S 

.'^rt 


rtS 

rt 

-r 

^ 

«   rt 

^H 

rt   t. 

rt 

S    rt 

^^ 

O 

C5 

rt    c 

iC  d, 

o 

ci   i4 

oO" 


—  ^  .H 

o  o  i 
cc  ^  5 
^-^  rt  s 

05 

rt 

3 

rt 

(/J 

CO 

c; 

o 

r:  '-0 

ai 

^?^ 

M 

rt  -I 

CO 

^. 

a  ^ 

'.^ 

1; 

^  ^ 

"rt 

r-^  ^^ 

ai    rt 


-1     -t^    O  '-' 


■3      O     g 


CO 

111- 

o 
o 

f*    t^  rt 

bo 

3 


P£) 


CHAITANYA  S   PEDIGREE. 


219 


H 

,^ 

Q 

a 

(—1 

3 

CQ 

"3 

GQ 

m 

« 

cS 

H 

HI 

1-" 

£ 

Eh 

"g 

O 

a 

CO 

u 

M 

w 

5 

s 

w 
« 

5 

<B  - 

o 

ts 

1^ 

cS 

3 

g 

^ 

i5 

o 

02 

J^ 

:m 

s 

J2h 

o 

<1 

o 

H 

r^ 

t— 1 

^ 

<tj 

c« 

w 

c3 

o 

g 

s  S-- 

i"  '^  X, 

cj    s    cS 

>•   Q    « 


o 

3 

«+-< 

o 

-C 

cS 

iH 

ics 

a- 

<D 

~ 

a 

a 

■  O 

'a 

c3 

s 

ee 

^ 

1-5 

T 

o 

a- 

CU 

CS 

Q 

Lj 

Ti 

3 

S 

.2 

&H 

o 

H 

'C8 

5 

^ 

P^ 


CO  *  a 

02    Cl,  OS 

O    n    CB 
O    t*    «  ^-^ 

-MO-  ,    • 

%>     t     I 

S  ^  2  ci 


< 

< 

o 

fa 

o 

fa 


p 

PL, 


"S  W 
M  '^ 


"S 
<5 


c3  '^ 

03     O 

.--? 

p 

w 

? 

tjQ     ^ 

> 

be 

S 

cS  S 

pq 

02 

o 

wj 

•2  5 

.5 

.    ctf 

-a  o 

cS  -3 

t>^o 

cS 

t>> 

t<  o 

"cl 

^ 

«  J 

I    O    C3  ^    tC 

3  2  *  t^  2; 

A—  in  j:    Hi 

ai  +i  +J   ^ 


220  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

In  tlio  month  of  Mjis^lia  (January)  1106  Caka 
(1185  A.D.)  CacliI  Devi  conceived,  and  was 
delivered  of  the  cliild  Chaitanya  after  13  months, 
in  Phalguna  ;18th  February)  1107  ^aka  (1186 
A.D.) 

XXVI. — The  tour  of  Chaitanya  in  Fjasfcni 
Bengal. 

The  standard  works  on  Chaitanya's  life  have 
very  briefly  alluded  to  liis  tour  in  Eastern  Bengal; 
the  Chaitanya BhjXgavata  mentions  that  Chaitanya 
visited  some  villages  on  the  banks  of  the  Padma. 
He  was  a])Out  22  years  old  at  tlie  time,  and  had 
written  a  commentary  on  a  Sanskrit  grammar 
which  was  read  in  some  of  the  tols  of  Eastern 
Bengal.  He  had  the  title  of  Vidyasagara  and 
was  already  a  scholar  of  some  renown  in  one  of 
the  most  important  centres  of  Sanskrit  learning 
in  India  viz  :  Nadiya.  But  no  body  had  antici- 
pated his  future  greatness  as  one  of  the  foremost 
of  India's  religious  teachers,  so  the  places  he 
visited  in  his  early  youth  were  not  carefully 
noted  doAvn  by  any  of  his  contemporaries.  He 
himself  avoided  fame  of  all  kind  and  would  not 
encourage  any  one  Avho  wished  to  Avrite  his 
biography,  indulging  in  the  interval  l)etween  his 
trances,  in  talks  on  spiritual  matters  only,  so  that 
there  was  no  opportunity  for  gaining  informa- 
tion as  to  the  incidents  of  his  early  life  outside 
Nadiya.  We  beg  to    add    by    way    of    a    little 


IN    EASTERN   BENGAL.  221 

digression  that  it  was  his  habit  to  conceal  his  great 
emotions  so  far  it  was  possil^le  from  outsiders. 
We  find  in  the  Chaitanya  Charitfimrta  the  line 
"  if  any  outsider  was  there,  he  tried  to  collect 
himself  so  far  as  possible,"  This  also  was  the 
reason  "  why  in  the  midst  of  the  public  he  only 
sang  the  praises  of  the  Lord,  but  within  the 
small  circle  of  his  intimate  friends  he  indulged 
in  the  joys  of  sweet  emotion,  while  discussing 
the  minute  questions  of  spiritual  ecstasy."^ 

The  historical  account  of  his  tour  in  Eastern 
Bengal  has,  owing  to  causes  mentioned  above, 
remained  incomplete.  The  Prema  Vilasa  in 
its  last  two  and  a  half  cantos  which  have  been 
lately  discovered  mentions  some  of  the  places 
he  visited,  but  we  do  not  know  how  far  the 
account  is  authentic.  The  Prema  Vilasa  is 
certainly  one  of  the  most  trusted  historical  works 
of  the  Vaisnavas  in  the  16th  and  the  earlier  part 
of  the  17th  century.  But  it  was  up  till  lately 
The  last  21  kuowu  to  coutaiu  20  cantos  only. 
Premviiasa.  The    last    tAvo   and  a  half  cantos, 

recently  added,  contain  matters  w^hicli  should  be 
approached  with  caution.  Whether  these  sup- 
plementary chapters  formed  a  part  of  the  origi- 
nal work  is  doubtful.  But  this  does  not  altogether 
prove  the  untrustworthiness  of  the  accounts 
given     in    them.     Some   of  these  are  certainly 


222  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

well-estal)lished  historical  facts  and  whoever  may 
have  heeii  their  author,  tliore  is  no  douht  that  they 
were  collected  witli  considerable  trouljh;  and 
possess  undoubted  reliability.  But  there  are 
others  which  are  open  to  doubt  and  objection. 
Chaitanya's  tour  in  Eastern  Beni'al  is  a  subject 
wliich  we  may  place  under  the  latter  head.  The 
reason  ot*  our  doubt  is  tliat  as  Chaitanya's  visit  to 
a  place  would  undoubtedly  give  it  great  sanctity, 
the  people  of  a  particular  locality  may  be 
interested  in  enhancing  its  importance  by  pro- 
ducing forged  records.  But  at  the  same  time 
there  is  no  positive  proof  to  sIioav  that  the  two 
and  a  half  Chapters,  referred  to,  were  not  a 
portion  of  the  original  work.  Whether  they  be 
so  or  no,  we  find  it  our  duty  to  mention  our 
doubts  on  this  point.  I  will  now  indicate  the 
places  which  Chaitanya  is  said  to  have  visited 
in    course  of  his  tour  in  Eastern  Bengal. 

It  is  recorded  that  Chaitanya  visited  Sylhet. 
We  will  credit  this  account ;  for  his  grandfather 
Upendra  Micra  and  his  uncles  still  lived  at 
Dhaka,  Daksin  in  that  district.  There  is  no  reason 
to  doubt  that  one  of  the  objects  of  his  touring 
„   .,  ,  in  Eastern    Bengal   was    presum- 

Faniliinr     and  ^  ^ 

Suvainagran.a.  ably  to  visit    the  membcrs    of  his 

own  family  in  their  original  seat  in  Sylliot. 
He  is  said  to  liave  first  gone  to  Earidpur. 
As  a  ccmfirmation  of  tliis  statement,  Ave  may 
mention     that    there    is   a    local     tradition     at 


IN    EASTEIIN    BENGAL  223 

Kotalipjira  in  that  district,  which  says  that 
Chaitanya  stayed  for  sometime  at  that  village 
during  his  tour.  Prom  Faridpur  ho  came  to 
Bikrampur  in  the  district  of  Dacca.  He  visited 
the  villages  of  Nurpur  and  Suvarnagram.  Erom 
Bikrampur  he  crossed  the  Brahmaputra  and 
oame    to   a    place    named   Es^ara- 

Lgara  STudura.  *-  ^ 

sindura.     Close  by  was  the  village 

of  Betal  which  he  visited  next.     From  Betal    he 

moved     to    Bhitadia    which    was 

Betal. 

then  a  seat  of  great  Sanskrit 
learning.  One  of  its  most  noted  men  of  the 
earlier    generation    was  Padmagarbha    Acharya. 

He    was    a  irreat    Pandit  and  had 

Bhitadia. 

married  a  daughter  of  Jayarama 
ChakravartT  of  Nadiya,  He  had  learned  the 
Upanishads  at  Benares  and  Avas  instructed  in 
Logic  and  in  higher  Metaphysics  at  Mithila.  He 
was  besides  the  author  of  a  commentary  on 
Bhramaradipika,  and  annotated  Pingala,  the 
work  on  poetics  in  Prakrit,  and  made  commen- 
taries on  the  Brahmanas.  His  Guru  was 
Laksmltlrtha  of  the  Maddlii  sect  whose  disciple 
was  Madbavendra  Puri  himself.  Padmagarbha's 
son  Laksminatha  Labirl  lived  at  Bhitadia  when 
Chaitanya  visited  the  place.  As  Lahiri's  mother 
hailed  from  Nadiya,  Chaitanya  was  naturally 
attracted  to  the  place  and  stayed  for  some  days 
with  Laknninatha  in  that  village.  We  all  know 
that  Purusottama,  a  step-brother  of  Lakslmiinatha 


224  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

took  Sannyjlsa  and  met  Cliaitaiiva  at  Eenares 
and  latterly  became  distinguished  as  Svarupa 
Damodara. 

From    the    village  Bhitadia  Chaitanya    came 

to  Dhaka    Dak  sin    (or    Badagaiiga  according    to 

some)  where    his     grandfather    still     lived.     He 

met  the    elders    of  his    family    and    he  is  said  to 

have  relished  a  lack    fruit   which 

Daklin  Daksin.  •' 

his  grandmother  Kamalavati 
offered  him.  It  is  also  said  that  he  made  a 
transcription  of  the  Sanskrit  work  Chandi  for 
his  grandfather's  use  during  his  short  stay 
there. 

XXVII.      Chaitanya'' s  tokens. 

The  Kantha  (a  cotton  rohe  of  coarse   quality) 

which    Chaitanya    wore  is    still  preserved    in  the 

temple    of     Purl.     The     })ious     pilgrims    often 

hrihed  the  Pandas  for   so  much  as 

The  Kautha. 

a  few  threads  or  a  little  cotton 
from  the  sacred  robe,  till  after  these  four  hundred 
years,  we  find  it  now  reduced  to  a  mere  shred  a 
few  inches  in  size.  Chaitanya  got  his  head 
shaven  at  the  time  of  his  Sannyasa  at  Katwa  and 
there  is  a  small  brick  memorial  where  his  hair 
was  buried.  It  is  called  the  Ke9a  Samadhi  or 
the  burial   place    of   the  sacred  hair.     The  place 

Avhere     he    sat   for     shaving    his 

Tlio  Kc9aSaiiiailhi.  i       i         -it  i      •    i 

head  is  also  marked  Avith  a  brick- 
pavement  at  Katwa. 


chaitanya's  tokens.  225 

Madhava  Micra,  an  inhahitant  of  Beleti  in 
the  district  of  Dacca,  Avas  the  father  of  the 
celebrated  Gadadhara  Avhoni  we  have  already 
noticed.  Gadadhara  received  his  education  at 
Nadiyji  and  was  a  fellow-scholar  and  a  great 
friend  of  Chaitanya.  Once  upon  a  time 
Chaitanya  called  on  his  friend  and  found  him 
copy  in  2^     the      Glta.       Chaitanya 

The  Gita.  fJr'  ^  J 

took  the  pen  from  him  and 
copied  a  couplet.  The  MS.  of  the  Gita  in 
Gadadhara's  hand-writing  bearing  the  transcript 
of  a  couplet  by  Cliaitanya  passed  from  the 
former's  hands  to  those  of  Nayanananda 
Mi9ra,  nephew  of  Gadadhara  and  a  son  of 
Baninatha,  Gadadhara's  elder  brother.  Naya- 
nananda in  later  times  settled  in  the  village 
of  Bharatpur  in  the  district  of  Murshidabad, 
and  the  historic  copy  of  the  Glta  is  still  wor- 
shipped in  the  temple  of  Gopinatha  there.  In  one 
of  the  late  exhibitions  held  in  Calcutta  in  con- 
nection with  the  National  Congress,  the  Sahitya 
Parisat  made  an  exhibit  of  a  facsimile  of  the 
memorable  page  which  contains  the  couplet 
copied  by  Chaitanya.  In  the  latest  revised 
edition  of  the  Vanga  Sahitya  Visayaka  Prastava 
by  Ramgati  Nyayaratna,  this  facsimile  has  been 
reproduced. 

It    has   already    been    stated    on    p.  116  that 
„,  Chaitanya  arave  an  oar  with  which 

ine  oar.  "        c" 

he  used  to  row  his  small  pleasure- 
cc 


220         CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

boat  on  the  Gaiigcs  and  a  (llta,  copied  h\  liim- 
seir,  to  Gauridasa  Sarkel.  Tliis  he  did  about  the 
^,    ^.,.  vear    1510,    when   he   crossed  the 

The  Gita.  " 

Ganges,  plying  the  boat  himself, 
from  near  a  village  named  Harinadi  and  came  to 
Aml)ika  (Kalna)  in  order  to  meet  Gauridasa. 
An  image  of  Chaitanya  made  immediately  after 
this  event  in  Nim  wood  by  the  order  of  Gauridasa, 
and  believed  to  be  a  superior  specimen  of  the 
sculptor's  art  of  that  time,  and  an  exact  likeness 
of  its  model,  is  still  worshipped  in  the  temple 
founded  by  Gauridasa  at  Ambikji.  There  the 
Gita  and  the  oar  were  jireserved  and  probably 
exist  to  this  day.  They  were  positively  there  in 
1700  A..D.  when  the  Ehaktiratnakara  Avas  written. 
The  author  writes : 

"  The  oar  and  the  copy  of  the  Gita  given  by 
the  Lord  are  still  seen  by  the  fortunate  pilgrims 
near  the  Lord's  image  (at  Ambika)". 

Chaitanya  after  his  Sannyasa  paid  a  visit  to 
^,    „    ^  ,  Earanagar,  foiu' miles  to  the  north 

The  Sandals.  " 

of  Calcutta,  and  met  Eaghu- 
natha  who  afterwards  translated  the  ]5hc"Igavata 
into  Eengali  and  Ijecamc^  known  by  his  title  of 
'Ehagavatjlcharya'.  The  k]ia(]a')]i,  or  the  sandals 
used  by  Chaitanya  are  still  preserved  in  Eaghu- 
natha's  Tat  (place  of  worship)  at  Earanagar. 
The  sandals  have  decayed  in  the  course  of  these 
four  hundred  years,  and  very  little  now  remains 
of  them. 


chaitanya's  tokens.  227 

The  Bhagavata  which  Pandit  Gadaclhara  used 
to  read  before  Cliaitanya  at  Purl  has  disappeared 
but  it  was  seen  hj  (^rlnivasa  Acharya  towards 
the  end  of  the  16th  century ;  all  the  letters  of 
the  book  Avere  found  disfigured  by  the  tears 
of  Cliaitanya.  Gadildhara  himself  showed  it  to 
^rinivasa  and  other  pilgrims.  It  naturally  pos- 
sessed a  special  sanctity.  Por  18  years  it  had 
been  read  before  the  Master  and  was  a  source  of 
his  inspired  ecstasies.  This  sacred  book  is  men- 
tioned in  many  of  the  works  of  the  Vaisnavas  in 
the  16th  and  the  l7th  centuries,  such  as  the 
Karnananda,  Bhaktiratnakara  and  the  Prema- 
vilasa. 

Many  of  the  places,  which  were  the  favourite 

resorts    of    Chaitanya    at  Nadiya, 

TZr^:^''^     such  as  the  courtyard  of   grivasa, 

was^iu  Chaitanya's       ^^^  ^^^^^   -^^  ^j^^  ^^^^  ^f  ^^IG  GailgCS. 

But  inspite  of  the  freaks  of 
Nature's  destructive  agencies,  the  Pandas  (priests) 
do  not  allow  any  Indian  shrine  to  be  lost  or 
obliterated  from  her  annals,  as  it  is  a  source  of 
immense  pecuniary  interest  to  them.  They 
earn  money  from  the  pilgrims  by  pointing  out 
the  spots  associated  with  a  god  or  a  great  reli- 
gious teacher.  So  that  when  the  shrine  goes 
dow^n  to  the  bed  of  a  river  or  is  destroyed  by 
earthquake,  they  carry  tlie  sacred  relics  to  a 
near  place  and  give  it  the  name  of  the  shrine. 
The    past    traditions    are   thus    kept   up.       The 


228  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

topo<]^raphy  of  Nadivjl  as  detailed  hy  Narahari  in 
his  Bliaktiratnakara  in  the  17th  century  is  not 
identical  with  that  of  the  present  Nadiya.  'J'he 
identitications  may  he  assailed  from  a  purely 
geographical  point  of  view,  hut  the  courtyard  of 
Crivasa  and  other  sacred  spots  are  still  pointed 
out  to  thousands  of  pilgrims  T\ho  accept  the 
account  of  the  Pjlndas  with  pious  helief  and 
never  trouhle  themselves  as  regards  the 
validity  of  their  accounts.  The  place  where 
Chaitanya  was  born  at  Navadvipa,  like  ^rlvasa's 
courtyard,  was  certainly  submerged.  It  is  noAv 
identified  with  a  part  of  the  town,  called 
Mayilpur.  This  place  had  been  called  Miyapur 
(the  seat  of  jMohamedans) ;  but  the  Bhaktas 
gave  it  a  Hindu  name  in  order  to  keep  up  its 
sanctity.  If  the  place  pointed  out  be  really  the 
home  of  Chaitanya,  it  is  here  that  his  five 
big  lovely  straw-roofed  huts  stood  facing  the 
Ganses,  as  described  bv  Govindadasa  in  his 
Kadcha. 

The  images  of  Chaitanya  in  Nim  wood    made 
The  images    of     duriug    liis    life    tinu;    or   shortly 
Chaitanya.  after,    arc    to    be    seen     in     the 

following  places : 

1.  The  celebrated  image  at  Nadiya  (now  en- 
shrined in  a  ])cautiful  temple),  made  by  the 
order  of  A^isnupriya  Devi,  wife  of  Chaitanya,  and 
Avorshipped  by  her  after  his  Sannyasa. 


chaitanya's  tokens.  229 

2.  The  one  made  by  Gadadhara,  during  the 
lifetime  of  the  Master,  this  is  now  worshipped 
in  a  temple  at  Katwjl  near  the  Kfga-samadhi, 
standing  at  the  junction  of  the  Ganges  and  the 
Damodara. 

3.  The  ima2:e  of  Chaitanva  made  bv  Gauri- 
dasa  Pandit  of  Ambika  (Kiilna).  This  has  been 
already  referred  to.  It  was  made  about  the 
year  1510  A.D. 

4.  Pratapa  Rudra,  the  King  of  Orissa,  had 
an  image  of  Chaitanva  made  immediately  after 
he  passed  away  and  made  extensive  grants  of 
lands  to  the  temple  dedicated  to  the  image  at 
Pratapapura. 

5.  About  the  year  1600  Narottama,  son  of 
Raja  Krisiiananda  Datta  of  Kseturi  in  the  dis- 
trict of  Rajshahi,  had  an  image  of  Chaitanya 
made  which  is  probably  worshipped  there  even 
now.  The  image  was  called  Gaura  Raya  and 
was  stolen  away,  immediately  after  it  was  duly 
installed  in  the  Kseturi  temple,  but  was  subse- 
quently recovered  in  a  strange  manner.  The 
account  is  to  be  found  in  the  Preina-vilasa,  and 
we  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  it  in  my  lec- 
tures as  Reader  to  the  University. 

6.  Chaitanya's  images  made  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  16th  and  in  the  beginning  of  the 
17th  century  are  to  be  found  all  over  Orissa  and 
Bengal.     One    of   these    made    in    Nim   wood  is 


280         CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

worshipped  in  the  house  of  Manichfiiid  riosyfimi 
at  the  Simla  Street,  Calcutta.  The  original 
seat  of  this  image  was  at  Khaddli,  a  few  miles  to 
the  north  of  Calcutta. 

In  the  old  temples  of  Govindaji  and  Madana- 
mohana,  there  are  images  of  Chaitanva  which 
were  probably  established  there  towards  the 
end  of  the  lOth  century.  We  make  no  mention 
of  the  more  recent  images  as  they  are  innumer- 
able. There  is  no  important  village  in  Orissa 
where  Chaitanya's  image  is  not  to  be  found. 
On  the  wooden  T)oards  meant  as  covers  of  old 
Vaisnava  woiks,  presented  to  us  in  the  form  of 
manuscripts  written  in  the  lOth  and  early  I7th 
centuries,  are  frequently  to  be  found  pictures  of 
Chaitanya  and  his  companions,  painted  in 
lacquer.  One  of  these  has  been  reproduced  by 
me  in  my  Typical  Selections  from  old  Bengali 
Literature  published  by  the  University,  and  is 
to  be  found  facing  p.  11  i6. 

Raja  Pratapa  Rudra  is  said  to  have  a  picture 
of  Chaitanya  drawn  during  the  lifetime  of  the 
Master.  This  picture  was  made  sometime  between 
1512-1533  and  is  said  to  have  been  cariied 
to  Nadiyil  by  (JrTvasa.  Prom  his  descendants, 
it  passed  to  the  family  of  Raja  Nandakumara  of 
East  India  Company-fame  and  is  preserved  by 
them  at  their  country  seat  of  Kunjaghata  in 
Murshidabad.  A  facsimile  of  this  celebrated 
picture   forms   the    frontispiece    of    my  History 


CHAITANYA  S    TOKENS  231 

of  the  Bengali  Language  and    Literature,    but    I 
regret    to  say  that  the  reproduction  has  not  been 
satisfactory.     The    original    picture    now     pre- 
served   at    Kunjaghata  is    a    re- 

The  pictures.  i      i  i  •  f       i  i      t      i  • 

marivable  specimen  or  old  Indian 
painting  and  shows  Chaitanya  in  an  emotional 
attitude  which  powerfully  appeals  to  the  mind. 
The  reproduction  does  not  give  any  good  idea 
of  the  original. 

Another  picture  of  Chaitanya  made  by  the 
order  of  king  Pratapa  Kudra  during  Chaitanya's 
life-time,  I  was  told  by  Achyutacharan  Tattva- 
nidhi  (  of  Maina,  Kanaibajar,  Sylhet,  )  existed 
in  a  temple  of  Yrndavana.  Pandit  Ptadhikalala 
Gosvami  was  approached  by  Achyuta  Babu  for  a 
facsimile  of  it,  but  this  could  not  be  secured. 
The  picture  is  probably  lost. 

For    eighteen    years    Chaitanya    stood    by  the 
side  of  the    pillar    known   as    the 

Gaduda  Stamblia.  /^      i      i  r-u  t  i 

(jraduda  l^tambha  resting  his 
elbow  on  it  for  hours  together  every  day, 
and  beheld  the  image  of  Jagannatha  from  there. 
He  dared  not  go  further  near  the  Temple  lest 
the  sight  of  the  image  maddened  him  with  joy, 
as  it  had  done  him  once,  making  him  ran  in  an 
unconscious  state  to  the  very  pedestal  of  the 
image  and  embrace  it.  He  could  exercise  no 
control  over  his  feelings  on  such  occasions. 
Even  as  he  stood  near  the  Gaduda  Stambha  he 
was  all  tears  with  joy   feeling   an    all-absorbing 


232  CIIAITANi'A    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

passion  for  the  vision  which  was  ever-glorious 
to  hi/n.  On  the  Gaduda  Staml)ha  there  is  a 
mark  showinsj,"  the;  particular  spot  -where 
Chaitanva's  elbow  had  rested  lor  hours  toudher 
every  day  during  his  eighteen  years  of  stay 
at  Purl.  In  the  spot  now  known  as  Crivasa's 
courtyard  at  Nadiya,  there  is  a  considerable 
number  of  clay  images  of  Chaitanya  illustrating 
the  incidents  of  his  life.  These  were  made 
nearly  200  years  ago  and  are  surely  specimens 
of  art  of  Krsnanagar  potters. 

XXVIII. —  CJialtanyci'  s  tour  in  Soul  hern  Tudia. 

The  brief  notices  of  Chaitanya's  tour  in 
Southern  India  that  we  find  in  the  Chaitanya 
Charitamrta  and  Chaitanya  Ehagavata  are 
neither  complete  nor  reliable.  The  Chaitanya 
Bhagavata  was  written  in  the  year  1573  and 
Chaitanya  Charitamrta  in  1581  A.D.  13ut 
Chaitanya  toured  in  the  Deccan  during  1509- 
1511.  A  consideral)le  time  had  thus  elapsed 
before  these  accounts  were  written.  "We  have 
already  mentioned  that  Chaitanya  himself 
would  by  no  means  encourage  any  one  to  take 
notes  on  any  incidents  of  his  life.  We  shall 
afterwards  prove  that  the  story  of  Kala- 
Krsnadasa's  accompanying  him  to  the  Deccan  is 
totally  untrustworthy.  Govinda  Dasa  alone  had 
accompanied  him  and  he  took  down  minute 
notes   of   what    he  saw.     But  he  assures  us  that 


CHAITANYA's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.         233 

he  did  so  very  privately,^  for  surely  the  Master 
would  have  resented  it  if  it  had  been  known  to 
him.  Govinda  therefore  could  not  give  publicity 
to  these  notes.  He  found  no  opportunity  of 
doing  so.  Eor  throughout  the  rest  of  his  life 
he  was  with  Chaitanya  night  and  day,  and  he 
could  not  possibly  take  a  step  which  would 
offend  him. 

In  the  subsequent  times  Vrndavana  became 
the  chief  seat  of  Vaisnava  learning.  The  six 
Gosvamis — E,agliunatha  Dasa,  Haghunatha 
Bhatta,  Rupa,  Sanatana,  Jiva  and  Gopala 
Bhatta  were  the  fountain-heads  from  whom 
flowed  all  Vaisnava  theology ;  the  canons 
laid  down  in  them  governed  Bengal  and  Orissa. 
No  book  that  was  not  approved  by  these  masters 
was  accepted  as  a  standard  work  on  Vaisnavism. 
Hence  Vrndavana  Dasa's  Chaitanya  Bhagavata, 
written  at  Denur  in  the  District  of  Burdwan, 
was  first  submitted  to  the  Gosvamis  of  Vrnda- 
vana who  approved  of  it  and  then  it  was  recog- 
nised as  an  authoritative  work.  Chaitanya 
Charitamrta  was  written  in  Vrndavana  itself 
under  the  direct  teachings  of  the  Gosvamis. 

Books    written  outside  Vrndavana  or  without 
,    ,,  , ,  _     the   sanction  of  the  six   Gosramis 

Why  tlie  Kadcha 

is  not   recognised     could   not   posscss   the  Same  pre- 

as  a  standard  book 

by    the   orthodox     cedcnce.  And    Govinda  Dasa  who 
wrote  the  notes  had  another  very 


'      '"^W\  ^^1  Ttf^t  ^5ff%  Jl'vCStt^l^"  Oovinda's  Kadcha. 
DD 


234  CIIAITANYA    AN[>    i  -S    COMl'ANIOKS. 

stroiii;-  reason  to  hide  Hir  wnvV  from  popular 
notice.  His  Kadclia  contains  a  brief  account 
of  himself  ;  lie  mentions  in  it  the  names  of  his 
parents  and  of  his  wife,  Avho  first  appears  as  a 
shrew  and  then  an  ideal  of  chaste  womanhood. 
He  mentions  some  incidents  of  his  own  domestic 
life  which  are  interesting.  We  find  in  them 
that  when  he  passed  hy  Kanchana-nagara,  as  a 
companion  of  Chaitanya  in  the  year  1509,  his 
Avife  and  his  relations  made  a  vigorous  attempt 
to  hring  him  back  to  worldly  life.  The  appeal 
was  so  strong  that  even  Chaitanya  had  to 
change  his  mind,  and  in  response  to  the  pathetic 
requests  of  Govinda's  wife,  desisted  from  giving 
her  spiritual  advice  (such  as  on  the  value  of  resig- 
nation to  the  Lord's  will  and  depending  on  Him 
alone  &c)  with  which  he  had  commenced,  and 
expressed  his  resolve  to  leave  Govinda  at  his  home 
at  Kiinchannagara.  Govinda  had  to  struggle  hard 
to  extricate  himself  from  his  family-bonds  in  order 
to  accompany  the  Master.  Under  these  circum- 
stances it  was  but  natural  that  he  would  try  to 
remain  hicof/tiifo  as  far  as  possible  on  his  return 
to  Puri.  To  Chaitanya  he  was  devoted  as  a 
faithful  dog  is  to  his  master.  We  find  that 
when  he  was  asked  by  Chaitanya  to  go  to 
Cantipura  from  Puri  with  a  letter  to  Advaita, 
he  l)urst  into  tears.  It  was  only  a  few  days' 
absence  from  tlie  service  of  his  Master  that  he 
thought  it  hard  to  bear.     He  writes : — 


CHAITANYa's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.        235 

"  Healing  this  order  tears  came  to  my  eyes,  for 
I  could  not  bear  a  separation  from  the  Lord." 

On  Chaitanya's  return  from  tlie  Deccan,  we 
lind  Govinda  to  be  always  with  him .  But  none 
of  the  Master's  numerous  Inographers  mentions 
who  this  Govinda  was.  In  the  Vaisuava  works 
of  the  time,  we  find  full  accounts  of  all  the 
other  companions  and  associates  of  Chaitanya, 
but  while  held  in  high  esteem  and  called 
"  Cri  Govinda  "  by  the  Vaisnavas,  no  one  gives 
any  account  of  the  family  to  which  he  belonged 
nor  of  his  native  place.  He  is  called  as  a 
Cudra  of  humble  origin,  and  in  the  Chaitanya 
Charitamrta  there  is  a  characteristic  line  express- 
ing wonder  that  a  (^udra  should  be  admitted 
to  the  personal  service  of  Chaitanya  in  prefer- 
ence to  hundreds  of  those  who  belonged  to  the 
Brahmin  and  other  high  castes,  anxious  and 
willing  to  serve  the  Master.  We  thus  see  how 
a  fable  of  Govinda's  claim  to  serve  the  Master 
was  fabricated.  It  was  to  give  some  special 
merit  to  Govinda  in  the  eyes  of  the  orthodox 
people  who  had  rigid  notions  about  caste,  that 
a  story  was  invented  to  the  effect  that  he  was  a 
servant  of  the  great  Master  Icvara  Purl,  (the 
Guru  of  Chaitanya),  and  as  such  though  he 
was  of  humble  origin,  Chaitanya  Iiad  no  hesi- 
tation in  taking  him  to  his  service.  This  is  not 
a  o'ood  explanation  and  shows  only  the  weakness 
of     the     theory.      Chaitanya      had     absolutely 


23G  CIIATTANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

no  casto-pvejiulices,  and  we  cannot  there- 
fore credit  the  story  that  he  took  Govinda  to 
his  service  simply  because  the  hitter  liad  to  a 
certain  extent  redeemed  himself  from  the  blame 
of  humble  birth   throni^h    servini? 

The  writer  of    the  ~  - 

Karchfi    and     the     Icvara    Purl  for    a    time.       The 

fiinioua    eervant    of  "* 

chaitaiiy.a    '^riOo-     mystcrlous  silcncc    of    all   biof^ra- 

vinda'  are  identical.  ,* 

phers  as  to  MJiere  he  Avas  born 
and  the  family  to  which  he  l)elonged,  only  proves 
the  fact  that  Govinda  had  obvious  reason  for 
avoidino^  the  difficulties  of  facing  strong  appeals 
from  his  Avife  and  relations,  and  preferred  to  live 
incognito  at  Purl.  We  find  that  Govinda  was 
at  Nadiya  only  for  a  few  days — it  may  not  be  for 
more  than  a  month.  The  Kadcha  states  that  he 
came  to  Chaitanya's  house  in  the  year  1509,  and 
within  a  short  time  of  this  Chaitanya  left  home 
as  a  Sannyasl.  He  travelled  with  Chaitanya  for 
two  years  and  seven  months  in  the  Deccan  and 
then  when  he  returned,  it  was  not  likely  that  the 
people  of  Nadiyfl  would,  during  their  occasional 
visits  to  Purl,  recognise  him  amongst  thousands 
of  Chaitanya's  admirers,  if  Govinda  really  wanted 
to  avoid  recognition,  as  we  believe,  he  did.  The 
tale  of  having  served  l9vara  Purl  may  have  l)een 
invented  by  him  in  order  to  avoid  recognition. 
At  any  rate  it  seems  possible  that  he  had  good 
reasons  to  countenance  the  story  whoever  might 
have  fabricated  it. 

The  services  offered  to  Chaitanya  by  Govinda 
Ivarmakara  and  by  Govinda   of   the  Purl-temple 


CHAITANYA's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.        237 

are  of  such  similsir  nature  that  we  may  take  it 
as  another  reason  for  believing  that  the  persons 
were  not  really  two,  but  identical. 

Jayanancla,  who  was  a  contemporary  of 
Chaitanya,  mentions  in  his  Chaitanya  Mari£fala 
that  a  man  named  Govinda  Karmakar  accom- 
panied Chaitanya  in  the  Deccan.  In  a  pachf  by 
Valarama  Dasa,  a  poet  of  the  16th  century,  we 
find  it  mentioned  that  Govinda  accompanied  the 
master  in  his  tour  in  Southern  India. ^ 

In  Chaitanya  Bhagavata  too,  we  find  it 
mentioned  that  one  Govinda  was  a  companion  of 
Chaitanya  at  Nadiya,  thougli  in  a  work  written 
63  years  after  the  events  described,  we  may  not 
expect  the  chronology  of  events  to  be  always 
faithfully  observed. 

I  have  tried  to  explain  Avhy  Govinda  Dasa's 
Kadcha,  of  which  two  MSS. — one  over  200  years 
old,  and  another  a  little  less, — were  discovered 
by  the  venerable  Jaygopala  Gosvjlml  of  Cantipur 
about  25  years  ago,  did  not  gain  the  same 
amount  of  publicity  as  the  other  standard  bio- 
graphies of  Chaitanya  did.  The  Kadcha  of 
Govinda  Dasa,  contain  references  to  certain  actions 
on  the  part  of  Chaitanya  which  the  later 
Yaisnavas  would  not  like  to  preach.  Chaitanya 
was  not  an  orthodox  Vaisnava.  The  line  "  we  pay 
our  homage  to  Krsna  alone,    but   do  not    blame 


1  SeeGoar  Pada  Tarangini  edited  by  Jagat  Bandhu  Bhadra. 


238  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

othoi*    deities,   nor    l)ow    to    tliem'"  became    the 
eanoii  of  tho  later    Vaisnavas.     The   Avorshi])    of 
Kfili     was     to    them    a    hideous    practice.     Tlie 
incident  related  in   the   Chaitanya    Charitamrta 
about  the  articles  of  Kali  w  orsliip  being  thrown 
at  the  gateway   of  (^rlvasa,  was    believed    to    be 
such  a  grave  offence  that   the  Brahmana  Gopala 
who  did  it    is    said  to    have  been   afHicted    with 
leprosy  for  it.     We  find,  however,  in  the  Kadclia 
that  Chaitanya  was  affected  by  ecstasies  aud  tran- 
ces before  every  temple.     The  devotional  fervour 
that  he  showed  in  the  temple  of  Astabhuja  (Kali) 
was   remarkable.       To  Chaitanya's    eyes,  which 
saAV  the  clear  vision  of  God  everywhere,  nothing 
was  there  in  the  world  which  could    not    inspire 
him  with  devotion.     A  tree,  a  leaf,  a  river  and 
the  sea  all  raised  him  to  mystic  trances,    serving 
as    a    reminder    and   a  token    of    his   Beloved, 
and    he     was     deeply    affected    1)y    any    temple 
which    men   had    erected     for    the    purpose    of 
worship.       The      sectarian     Yaisnava    of      later 
times  would  not  care    to    emphasise    these    little 
incidents    in  Chaitanya's  life  and  hence  they  did 
not  give   publicity    to    the    Kadclia    of    Govinda 
Dasa,  which  inspite  of  the  indiiference  by    whicli 
it  was  treated  by  the  Vaisnavas  and  by  the  author 
liimself,  is  a  noble  work  on  Chaitanya.     True,  it 
does    not    record    any    learned    discussions    of 
Chaitanya  with  his  opponents.     Govinda  was  not 


"ill  ^ll1=1  -51^  rM^\  S\<-\\^  ^^-^  \" 


CHAITANYA*S  TOUR  IN  SOUTHERN  INDIA.        239 

himself    sufficiently    learned    to    be  able    to  do 
so ;    but    the    book  shows  us  the 

It   is  a  groat  hook  . 

inspito     of     the     Master    as    he    appeared    to  his 

indifference      with  .  _ 

which     it      was     own     contemporaries,     it    gives 

treated.  i        •  i  nj.ii  i.      i? 

besides  a  tirst  hand  account  ot 
nearly  three  years  of  Chaitanya's  life,  full  of 
freshness  and  of  the  vivid  colour  of  personal 
observation. 

Abundant  references  to  Govinda  Dasa's  latter 
rr,    ^  ,,        ,   .     life,  if  he  is  indeed  identical   with 

ine  latter  part  of  ' 

Goyinda  Dasa's  life,  g^.j  Goviuda  of  Purl,  will  be 
found  in  the  Madhya  and  Antya  Kliandas  of 
the  Chaitanya  Charitamrta,  and  we  need 
scarcely  mention  them  here  as  they  are  too 
well-known  to  the  readers  of  that  work. 

I  give  below  a  brief  summary  of  the  account 
given  by  Govinda  Dasa.  Nowhere  else  in  the 
Vaisnava  works  do  we  find  such  a  true  and  vivid 
account  of  Chaitanya  as  in  the  pages  of  his 
faithful  attendant.  The  places  visited  by 
Chaitanya  in  southern  Tfidia  are  given  in  detail 
in  this  account. 

Govinda  Dasa's  father's  name  was  (^yamadasa ; 
his     mother   was    Madhavi  ;     his 

His  family  history.  .„  ^->       -         i  i  nii 

wite  Avas  Cacimukiii.  ihey 
belonged  to  the  blacksmith's  caste  and  were 
residents  of  Kahchana-nagara  in  the  district 
of  Burdwan.  Govinda  Dasa  quarrelled  Avith 
his    wife    and  left    home,  one  winter   morning, 


2i-0  CllAITANYA  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS. 

ill  gaka  1130  (1500  A.D.).'  lie  came  first  to 
Katvva  and  there  he  heard  of  Chaitauya.  He 
felt  au  ardent  desire  to  see  the  Master  who  was 
only  23  years  old  at  the  time.  For  the  whole 
day  Govinda  Dasa  travelled  across  the  corn-lields 
and  crossing'  the  Ganges,  the  next  morning, 
arrived  at  the  landinsj  Ghat  called  the  Micra's 
Ghat  at  Nadiyii.  On  the  right  ran  the  small 
river  Bilgdevl.  The  courtyard  of  Crivasa  was 
very  close  to  the  Miyra's  Ghat  and  near  it  was  a 
large  tank  called  the  Ballalasagara.  On  one  side 
of  it  lay  the  ruins  of  tlie  palace  of  that  king. 
Govinda  took  his  seat  at  the  GluTt,  where  he 
saw  Chaitanya  for  the  first  time.  The  latter  with 
his  companions,  among  whom  was  the  venerahle 
Advaita,  with  beard  and  hair  all  hoary  with  age, 
had  come  to  bathe  there.  Govinda  was  charmed 
at  seeing  the  Master.  He  became  a  willini*- 
servant  in  Chaitanya's  house  where  he  saw  Cachi 
Devi  "  of  short  stature  and  a  quiet  temperament" 
and  Visnupriya  "a  coy  girl  just  risen  to  woman- 
hood, always  busy  in  serving  the  Lord."  Govinda 

^\-<^  ^\r.WS  ^  ^s?^  -^p[H  II 

^t^t^  mM  ^N  »t^^^  5^  I 
^^  f?j»  ^^  ^f^  cyit^  ^t  ^^  ll 

f^^"*]  ^^f  ^  ^\f^  %T  C-sitC^  I 
CJll  '^'^^t^  9J^  wtf^fi  c^fc^  II 

^lf%^^  ^V5  ^5  fW-U  ^f^  ^1  II  _ 

Kudcha  by  Ooiinda  Dasa. 


CHAITANYA's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.         241 

describes  Chaitanya's  house  as  consisting  of  five 
large  and  beautiful  straw-roofed  huts  on  the 
bank  of  the  Ganges.  He  mentions  the  names  of 
the  followers  of  Chaitanya  and  describes  their 
great  sorrow  at  his  proposed  Sannyasa.  Towards 
the  end  of  the  night  of  the  last  date  of  Pausa 
(January)  1431  (^aka,  (1510  A.D.)  Chaitanya 
accompanied  by  Govinda  went  to  Katwa  where 
his  followers  also  went  on  the  folloAving  day. 
On  the  way,  at  Kanchannagar,  Govinda's  wife 
Ca9imukhi  met  him  and  tried  to  win  him  back 
to  the  sweets  of  domestic  life.  Chaitanya  could 
not  resist  her  pathetic  appeal  and  ordered  his 
servant  to  give  up  the  idea  of  going  with  him. 
Govinda,  however,  managed  to  run  away  from 
his  wife  and  relations  and  rejoined  Chaitanya 
some  miles  further  on.  Chaitanya's  preaching 
,      at    Katwa   and    his    initiation   as 

Chaitanya  travels 

to  Puri.  Sannyasi   under  the    direction  of 

Ke9ava  BhiXratl  are  described  with  great  force. 
A  barber  named  Deva  shaved  Chaitanya's  head 
on  the  occasion  under  a  Bel  tree.  The  tradi- 
tional name  given  to  a  barber,  who  shaves 
one  at  the  time  of  his  Sannyasa,  is  'Madhu'  and 
it  is  no  wonder  that  Deva  is  called  'Madhu' 
by  some  of  the  Chaitanya's  biographers.  In  the 
song  of  Gopichand  written  in  the  11th  century 
we  find  the  barber  who  shaved  the  monarch 
at  the  time  of  his  Sannyasa  called  Madhu. 

Erom   Katwa   Chaitanya  came  to  ^antipura 
where  his  mother  came  to  meet  him.    Chaitanya 

EE 


212  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

Cliaritamrtci  says  tliat  the  blaster  visited  Canti- 
pura  on  his  return  from  Purl.  There  is  therefore 
a  slight  difference  between  two  versions  of  the 
account  of  his  visit  to  ^antipur.  Govinda  was  an 
actual  eye-witness,  hence  we  credit  his  account. 
Crossing  the  Dilmodara,  Chaitanya  came  to  the 
house  of  a  respectable  man  named  Kagi  Mi(;ra. 
Thence  travelling  towards  the  south  he  came  to 
Hajipur  and  next  to  Midnapur,  Avliere  a  rich 
man  named  Kepava  Samanta  abused  him  as 
unworthy  of  being  a  Sannyasi  at  such  a  tender 
age.  Next  Chaitanya  visited  Nayangarh  and 
performed  his  worship  before  the  image  of 
(^iva  there,  called  Dhalecwara.  Many  ascetics 
gathered  round  him  as  he  fell  into  one  of  his 
trances  at  the  sight  of  the  temple,  and  they 
became  his  ardent  admirers.  Here  also  two  rich 
men  named  Bire9wara  Sen  and  Bhawanl9ankara 
Sen  paid  a  visit  to  him.  Bhawaniyankara 
was  a  very  rich  man.  His  officers  rode  horses 
and  elephants  and  followed  in  his  train. 
Bhawani9ankara  was  seated  in  a  gold  palankeen 
on  a  large  tusker  attended  by  four  orderlies, 
each   with   a    large    silver    stalf    in    his  hand.^ 


«^t^  *i^  ^  ^  !f^  ®r^  I 

Govinda 's  Kadaclia. 


CHAITA-NYA's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.        243 

Chaitanya's   preaching   deeply  affected  the  rich 
men   and  they  listened  to  him    with    rapt  atten- 
tion.    Thence  Chaitanya  came  to  Jale9wara  and 
beheld  the  image  of  Civa  there  called  Bilve9wara. 
Here  he  was  in   ecstasies  of   spiritual  joy  during 
many   hours   and   met   a  Sannyasi   who  said  "I 
do   not   know   who   you   are,  but  it   appears  to 
me   that   you   are   the   reward   of  my  life-long 
austerities  present  before  me  in  the  flesh.     Your 
presence  has  given  me  the  holy  vision  for  which 
I    have   striven    all  my   life."    From  Jale9wara 
Chaitanya  crossed   the    Suvarnarekha,   and    met 
Raghunatha    Dasa    again.      Thence  he    visited 
Hariharpur,  Balasore   and   Nilgarh.     From    the 
latter  place   he  crossed  the  Mahanadi  and  visited 
Gopinatha,  the   image   of   Krsna,  known    as  the 
thief   of    khir,    (condensed   milk),    described   on 
p.  215.    He   next  visited  the    temple  of    Krsna 
called   the   Sakshi    Gopala.     Here   he    was    all 
emotion   for   a  day,  embracing  every   one  whom 
he  saw  in  deep  joy  and  weeping  at  the   sight   of 
the  image   with   which   is  associated  a  beautiful 
old   legend.     Next    he    visited    the    temple   of 
Ningraja  and  went  thence  to  Athaianala.     From 
here   lie   saw   the  flag   on    the   summit   of   the 
great  temple  of  Puri.     "Here  is  the  flag  of   my 
Lord — the  Lord  of  the  universe"     he  said.   And 
on   entering   the   temple    the  flow  of   his   tears 
was  so  blinding  that  he  could  not    see  the  image 
through   his  tears.     He   said   again   and   again 


244  CIIAITANYA   AND    TITS    COMPANIONS. 

"1  have  beheld  ITim — yea,  tlie  Lord  of  the 
Universe  is  before  me."  He  eml)raced  all  whom 
he  met  and  pointed  heavenward,  but  in  liis 
deep  joy  he  could  find  no  words.  Inside  the 
temple  of  Purl  he  swooned  away,  and  the 
great  scholar  Sjlrvabhaiima  carried  him  un- 
.   T.   .  ..„  ..    ,      conscious  to  his   house.     He  was 

At  Pun  till  Maicli 

1510  A.D.  at    Purl    for    three    months     till 

the  end  of  march,  1510  A.D.  In  April  he 
started  for  southern  India  accompanied  by 
Govinda  Dasa  and  a  Brahmin  named  Ki'sna 
Dasa.  Kisna  DiXsa  was  ordered  to  go  back 
after  he  had  travelled  a  few  days,  so  that 
Govinda  alone  accompanied  him. 

Leaving    Purl   he    came    to    Alalanatha,  and 

met   Ramananda    Ray,    the    Prime   Minister    of 

Rjlja    Pratilpa    Rudra,    on    the     banks    of  the 

Godavari.     From  the  latter  place 

In   Southern  India.        ,,,       .,  ,  n^    •  ^ 

Chaitanya  came  to  Irimanda 
wiiere  he  had  a  public  discussion  with  the  Bud- 
dhist monks,  the  Raja  of  Trimanda  serving  as 
the   mediator.      Rilmagiri,    the    leader   of    the 

monks,  acknowledged  his    defeat 

Conversion         of  .,  n         ii 

liimagiri,the  loader     and     a     large    numhcr    or      the 

uf  the  JJuddhists.  -r»      i  ii    •    i  i  •     j_  x 

Buddhists  became  converts  to 
Vaisnavism.  The  next  place  he  visited  was 
Tungabhadra  where  Dhundi  Rama  Tirtha,  a  proud 
scholar  of  extensive  learning,  came  to  liold  a  dis- 
cussion w^ith  Chaitanya.  Chaitanya  said  lie  would 
not  indulge  in  controversy  of  any   sort.     But  the 


CHAITANYA's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.        245 

sight  of  his  ecstasies  charmed  Dhuncli  and  humi- 
liated his  pride,  and  he  became  a  staunch  admirer 
of  Chaitanya.  After  his  conversion  Dliundi  Kama 
took  the  Vaisnava  name  of  Haridasa.  Chaitanya 
next  came  to  a  place  named  Siddhavatecwara 
Tirtha  Rama  and  whcrc  a  rich  young  man  named 
the  two  harlots.  Tirtha  Rilma  came  with  two 
courtezans  Satya  Bai  and  Laksmi  B^ii  to  tempt 
the  young  ascetic  and  try  his  moral  strength. 
Chaitanya  here  fell  again  into  one  of  those 
trances  which  no  one  has  described  so  vividly 
as  Govinda  Dasa,  and  the  sight  of  which  acted 
with  overwhelming  force  on  his  youthful 
tempter.  Tirtha  Iljlma  took  the  ascetic's  vow 
leaving  his  vast  properties  to  his  wife  Kamala 
Kumarl.  The  incident  of  this  remarkable  change 
has  been  very  graphically  descrilied  in  the 
Kadcha.  Chaitanya  was  at  Vategwara  for  seven 
days  and  from  there  marched  through  a  deep 
forest  which  extended  over  20  miles.  Crossing 
the  forest  he  came  to  a  village  named  Munna 
in  the  evening.  He  sat  under  a  tree  at  the 
outskirts  of  the  village,  and  the  people  there 
came  together  in  hundreds,  attracted  by  the 
ardour  of  his  faith.  He  sang  and  danced  and 
passed  into  his  usual  trances  which  kept  the 
people  of  Munna  transfixed  to  the  spot,  so  long 
as    he    remained.     He   begged  of 

Chaitanya     begs  i     ii  p  i  i "  "^ 

clothes  for  an  oki     them  clothcs  Tor  a  poor  old  woman 

woman  a       unna.  ^^^^  ^^^  StOOd  bcggiug  help    fronj 


246  CIIAITANTA   AND    IILS    COMPANIONS. 

him.  Ramagiri,  the  Buddhist  monk,  was  with  him 
up  to  this  time.  From  Munna  the  Master  came 
to  Benkat.  Here  he  had  a  discussion  on  religion 
with  a  great  Sannyasi  and  scholar  named  Bama- 
nanda.  The  latter  also  became  a  convert  to  the 
Vaisnava  faith.  Chaitanya  was  at  Benkata  for 
three  days.  He  next  visited  the  wood  of  Bagula 
which  was  the  resort  of  a  robber  chief — a  Bhil — 
named  Pantha  Bhil.  There  is  a  graphic  descrip- 
tion of  how  the  Bhil  and  his  fellow-robbers  turned 
Vaisnavas  through  the  influence 

The    reformation  o         "i      . 

of    the      robber-     of    Cliaitauya,    giving    up    their 

chief  Bhilpantha.  .,         „.  —  .-r»  i_i 

evil  callmg.  Leavmg  Bagula  he 
wandered  like  a  mad  man  without  tasting  any 
food,  and  weeping  for  the  joy  of  communion 
with  Krsna  for  three  days  and  nights.  During 
this  time  he  spoke  to  no  one,  and  tears  flowed 
from  his  eyes  incessantly.  He  next  visited 
Girlcwara  where  there  was  a  large  Vela  tree 
near  a  temple  of  ^iva.  A  particular  kind  of 
delicious  food  named  pareta  is  mentioned  by 
Govinda  here.  Chaitanya  met  a  Sannyasi 
at  this  place  who  did  not  speak  with  anyone. 
Govinda  Dasa  says  that  Chaitanya  and  the 
Sannyasi  communed  with  each  other  in  a  mys- 
terious manner.  The  next  place  he  visited  was 
Tripadi  where  he  converted  a  Ramite  Sannyasi 
named  Mathuranatha.  From  Tripadi  he  came 
Visit  to  different  *»  ^  placc  named  Panna  Nara- 
shrines.  siugha.     The   high   priest  of   the 


CHAITANYA's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.        2d..7 

tem2:)le  there  showed  him  every  mark  of  respect 
and  entertained  him  with  pcuina — a  sort  of 
syrup  which  was  specially  prepared  for  offering 
to  the  deity  Nara  Sinha.  He  next  came  to 
Visnu  Kanclii  (Kanjiveram)  where  he  was  wel- 
comed hy  a  rich  merchant  named  Bhavabhuti 
Seth.  Chaitanya  was  received  in  the  temple 
of  Lalvsminarayana  at  that  place  with  high 
honour.  Twelve  miles  away  was  another  image 
of  ^iva  which  Chaitanya  also  visited.  From 
here  he  saw  the  Paksa  hill  at  the  foot  of  which 
stood  the  shrine  of  Paksa  on  the  river  Bhadra. 
Here  Chaitanya  partook  of  a  fruit  named 
Champa.  Erom  this  place  at  a  distance  of  10 
miles  lay  the  celebrated  shrine  named  Kala- 
tlrtha.  Here  was  a  temple  of  Yaralia  which 
Chaitanya  visited.  Going  southward  from  the 
temple  Chaitanya  visited  the  Sandhitirtha,  a  place 
of  special  sanctity  where  the  rivers  Nanda 
and  Bhadra  met.  Here  Sadananda  Purl, 
a  learned  Brahmin,  who  advocated  non-dualism 
changed  his  views  after  a  discussion  with  Chai- 
tanya. From  this  place  Chaitanya  came  to 
Chaipalli  (Trichinopali)  and  met  a  female  ascetic 
of  great  fame  named  Siddhe9wari.  Visiting 
the  image  of  ^rigalabhairavl  he  went  to  the 
banks  of  the  Kaveri.  He  next  visited  the  city 
of  Nagara  where  there  was  at  the  time  a  beauti- 
ful temple  dedicated  to  Rama  and  Laksmana. 
Chaitanya    stayed    at    Nagara    for  three   days. 


248  CHAITANYA   AND    UlS    COMPANIONS. 

Here  a  lirahniin  had  come  to  assault  him,  takint^ 
him  i'or  a  false  ascetic.  The  peo2)le  wanted 
to  treat  him  severely  hut  this  Chaitaiiya 
prevented.  Chaitaiiya  thence  came  to  Tan j ore, 
fourteen  miles  from  Nagore.  He  was  shoA\  n  the 
sacred  spots,  with  which  the  city  abounded,  hy  y« 
Brahmin  named  Dhalecwara.  There  was  a  lari;e 
tank  in  the  centre  of  the  city  called  Kuntlkarna- 
para  Avhich  struck  Chaitaiiya  as  very  wonderful. 
Close  hy  Avas  the  hill  Chandalu  in  aa  hicli  there 
were  many  Goomphas  (caves)  inhabited  by  asce- 
tics and  monks.  Here  a  man  named  Bhatta 
charmed  with  the  devotion  of  Chaitanya  invited 
him  to  his  house.  Here  he  also  met  Surecv.ara, 
the  leader  of  the  ascetics,  in  a  pleasant  spot, 
surrounded  by  avenues  of  trees,  and  passed 
some  days  in  his  company.  The  place  was 
Avithin  the  jurisdiction  of  the  king  Jayasingh 
who  had  exempted  all  ascetics  from  paying  any 
tax.  Chaitanya  next  came  to  Padmakota  aa  here 
he  visited  the  temple  of  Astabhuja  Chandi. 
The  female  pilgrims  Avept  to  see  Chiiitanya's 
emotions  and  ecstasies  there  and  a  blind  old 
man  Avas  so  much  excited  that  he  fell  dead  at 
his  feet.  Trom  Padmakota  Chaitanya  came  to 
Tripatra  Avhere  he  visited  the  image  of  pva 
called  Chandecwara.  The  old  priest  Bharga- 
deva,  Avho  had  already   heard  that 

Bhargadevii.  _    _      '' 

a  young    Sannyasi    of  Avonderful 
devotion   to    God    Avas    touring   in  the  country. 


CHAITANYa's  tour  in  southern  INDIA,        249 

longed  to  have  a  sight  of  him.  Lean  and    ragged 
as  Chaitanya  was,  the  beauty  of  his  person    was 
still  considerable,  his  eyes  which  overflowed  with 
tears  at  the  mere  mention  of  Krsna's  name  liad 
an  irresistible  charm   and    on  seeing  him  the  old 
priest  Bharga  fell  at  his  feet  saying,  *'  It    is   for 
you,    my  saviour,  that  I  have  waited  all  my  life. 
Blessed  am  I  that  I  see  you  to-day."     Chaitanya 
said    that    he    was  a  very  humble  man  of  small 
merit.     But  admiration  for  him  was    already   at 
its  height  in  the  locality,  and  thousands  of  people 
came  to  see  him.     Often  we    find  him    forgetful 
of  the  world  wandering  about  the  fields  absorbed 
in    mystic    vision,    while    children    threw    dust 
at  him,  saying,  "  Look,  there  goes  one  mad  after 
God."     Leaving  Tripjltra    he    came   to    a    forest 
which    required    fifteen  days  to  cross  and  he  did 
so    in    company    with    pilgrims  and    ascetics  ; 
Govinda  was,  of  course,  his   constant   attendant. 
Chaitanya  came  next  to  ^ri  Bangam  and    visited 
the    temple    of     Narasinha     Deva.       Here    he 
fell  into   ecstasies  of    joy  and  charmed,  amongst 
others,  a  very  pious  Brahmin  named  Yudhisthira 
who  followed  him  for  some  miles  when  he    left 
Cri   liangam.     Chaitanya  came  from  the  latter 
place  to  Risava  Hills  where  he  met    a  pious  and 
learned  ascetic  named  Paramananda  Puri.  He  next 
came    to    Bjlmanatha  and  thence  to  Ramocwara 
where    he  visited  the  celebrated  temple  of  (^iva. 
We  find  in  the  accounts  of  Govinda    Dasa,    that 


250  CnATTANYA    AND    TTTS    COMPANIONS. 

people  of  the  neic^hbourinf?  places  2^ave  him  the 
name  of  "  Tlari  holfi,"  as  he  cried  "  ITari  bol  " 
day  and  nii^ht  and  wept.  The;  word  "  ITari  holfi " 
is  a  pur(*ly  Benij^ali  Avord,  at  least  it  is  not  current 
in  any  of  the  southern  dialects.  Curiously,  how- 
ever, we  find  in  the  temple  of  Ilame9waraan  old 
statue  of  one  known  as  "  ITari  hola."  It  is  quite 
probable  that  this  is  a  statue  of  Chaitanya.  The 
Civ^aites  did  not  like  the  religion  of  emotion  that 
he  preached,  hence  they  were  not  very  favourably 
disposed  towards  him.  The  legend  current  in 
the  locality  is  that  this  'Hari  bola'  was  an  asura. 
In  Bengal  also  one  of  the  ^aiva  taniras  has 
called  Chaitanya  an  incarnation  of  Tripurasura. 
A  learned  Sannyasi  in  the  Ha-mc^cwara  temple 
challenged  Chaitanya  to  a  discussion  and  yielded 
like  many  others  to  the  great  fascination  of  his 
inspired  speech  and  devotion.  Chaitanya  stayed 
at  Ramecwara  for  three  days  and  at  Maddhivana 
he  met  a  Yogi — an  old  and  venerable  looking 
man — who  seated  on  a  rock,  merged  in  commu- 
nion w'ith  God,  ate  nothing  for  days  together 
nor  opened  his  mouth.  Chaitanya  stood  with 
joined  hands  soliciting  the  favour  and  blessings 
of  the  sage ;  whereupon  he  opened  his  mouth 
for  the  first  time  after  long  yc^irs  and  greeted 
Chaitanya  with  the  mysterious  words  "  Chambani 
(^'nifinri.''  The  other  ascetics  present  there  fell  at 
Chaitanya's  feet  in  great  admirntion  ms  their 
venerable  senior  had    spoken  to    him    as  he  had 


CHAITANYA's  TOUJi  IN  SOUTIIEIIN  INDIA.        251 

done  to  none  else  for  years.  Prom  Macldhivana 
Cliaitanya  came  to  Tattwakunda  and  thence  to 
the  Ijanks  of  the  river  Tamraparnl.  He  stayed 
here  for  fifteen  days  and  left  it  on  the  full  moon 
day  of  Maghl433  (^aka  (Pehruary  1511  A.D.). 
Crossing  the  Tamraparnl  he  arrived  at  Kanya- 
kumari  (Cape  Comorin).  At  the  sight  of  the  sea 
which  in  the  words  of  Govinda  Dasa  "had  nothing 
striking  to  see  yet  everything 
the^seu.  ^'^ '^  °  wondcrful  there"  '  Chaitanya's 
frenzy  knew  no  bounds.  He 
seemed  to  see  the  Unseen  and  the  illimita])]e 
in  shape  before  him.  Chaitanya  joined  a  band 
of  Sannyasis  and  marched  with  them  to  the 
Santhal  hills —  a  distance  of  30  miles  from  Kanya 
Kuniari.  Tliere  Govinda  looked  worried  and 
pale  having  had  nothing  to  eat  for  the  whole 
day.  But  Chaitanya  while  fasting  was  as  cheerful 
as  ever  in  the  joy  of  divine  communion  and  sang 
songs,  while  the  Sannyilsis  surrounding  him 
played  on  cymbals.  A  merchant  unexpectedly 
came  there  with  the  offer  of  a  good  meal  of  which 
the  Sannyasis  partook,  Govinda  thanking  God 
for  it  more  than  any  one  else.  Through  tlie 
hilly  tracts  they  came  to  Trivancore  of  which  the 
reigning  king  was  then  Rudrapati.  On  hearing 
of  the  fame  of  Chaitanya  which  had  spread 
throughout  the  Deccan  by  that  time,    Rudrapati 

Kadaclia  by  Govinda  Dnsa. 


252  CHAITANVA    AN])    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

sent  ;i  man  invitins^  liim  to  his  palace.   Chaitanya 
refused  to   go  there.     Whereupon 

l{u(lr;ii)iiti,       tlic  ,1  -i   •  i    •  i  <•  j        i   • 

Ruj.urTrivaiicorc.  the  kiug  liimselt  came  to  him 
apologizini^'  for  having  made  the 
request,  lludrapati  was  deeply  versed  in  the 
lihagavata  literature  and  found  in  Chaitanya  a 
manifestation  of  those  signs  of  devotion  which 
made  a  man  adored  as  a  God  The  king  shed 
tears  in  deep  spiritual  joy  and  Chaitanya 
embraced  him  saying  "He  who  sheds  tears,  at 
the  name  of  God  is  dearer  to  me  than  life." 
Chaitanya  stayed  there  a  fortnight  and 
saw  the  liamagiri  hills  on  which  stood  the 
temple  of  llama  and  Sita.  Thence  he  proceeded 
to  Payosni  where    he    visited  the 

Ram yiri  aud  other       i  i  c  r^'  tvt-  -  tt 

siij.ji^j;  temple  or  Liva   JNarayana.     iierc 

he  met  and  defeated  a  scholar 
who  Ijelieved  in  the  tenets  of  Cankara.  lie 
was  in  the  temple  of  ^ingari  at  the  time.  Chai- 
tanya next  went  to  Matsatlrtha  and  next  to 
Cachara  where  there  was  a  temple  of  Durga. 
From  this  place  he  marched  towards  the  bank  of 
the  river  Bhadr?!  which  jjranches  otf  from  tiie 
Krsiia.  From  this  place  he  proceeded  to  Nfiga- 
panchapadi  where  he  stayed  tor  three  days. 
Thence  crossing  the  Tungabhadra  he  came  to  the 
hill  called  the  Kotgiri  from  where  flows  the 
river  Kaveri.  Chaitanya  proceeded  from  here 
towards  the  soutli  leaving  on  the  left  the  hill 
Satyagiri    which    looked  like  a  Ijlue  painting  on 


CHAITANYA's  TOUU  in  southern  INDIA.        253 

the  horizon.  lie  came  next  to  Chandipur.  It 
was  here  that  the  celebrated  ascetic  and  scholar 
lyvvara  Bharati  challenged  him  to  a  controversy 
but  afterwards  acknowledged  Chaitanya  to  be 
his  superior  in  every  respect.  So  ardently  did  he 
Ion"-    for    Chaitanya's     company 

l9wara  Bharati.  ^  J  i.         ,J 

that  the  latter  with  difhcuity 
dissuaded  him  from  his  resolve  to  accompany 
him  throughout  the  rest  of  his  tour.  Bharati 
however  went  with  Chaitanya  for  many  miles 
till  he  could  l)e  persuaded  to  return.  Leaving 
him  Chaitanya  penetrated  into  the  depth  of  hilly 
lands  where  he  wandered  for  two  days  unable  to 
find  his  way  out  of  the  forest.  At  one  place 
rows  of  Kadamva  trees  met  his  eyes  and  he 
was  mad  with  joy  owing  to  the  associations  of 
the  sacred  tree  with   Krsiia.     "There    goes    my 

iiute-sin"'er  Krsna"  he   cried  and 

Further  South.  ^  •  •  • 

in  ecstasy  ran  after  the  vision  that 
he  saw,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  Govinda 
knew  not  how  to  bring  his  frenzied  Master  to  his 
senses.  Emerging  at  last  from  the  forest  they 
came  to  a  small  village  where  a  poor  Brahmana 
was  struck  with  his  appearance  and  asked  him 
to  l)e  his  guest  The  Brahmaiia  said  "It  may  be 
that  I  see  in  thee  my  Krsna  in  the  flesh,  else 
why  does  a  flash  of  lightning  seem  to  emanate 
from  your  person  ?"  Eor  the  whole  night  Chai- 
tanya sang  the  praises  of  Krsna  in  the  small 
courtyard  of  the    Brahmana's    house  where    the 


25 1<  CUAITANYA    AN  J)    JUS    COMPANIONS. 

liltlu  village  had  lijatlieretl  (o  witness  the  beauty 
of  his  emotions  and  ecstasies.  Afterwards  they 
said  "This  little  courtyard  is  sacred  to  us  today  as 
Vrndavana."  From  this  little  a  illai,^e  Chaitanya 
came  to  a  i)lace  called  Kandara  commanding 
the  view  of  the  l)eautiful  Nllai^nri  (lit.  the  hlue 
hills).  Govinda  i^-ives  here  a  very  eloquent 
descri})ti(m  of  this  hill.  In  the  morning' 
Chaitanya  came  to  the  city  of  Gurjara.  The  city 
was  a  flourishiiiij;'  one  at  the  time.  Here 
Arjuna,  a  learned  Pundit,  ai^ain  touched  on 
controversial  theoloij^ical  toj)ics,  but  Chaitiiiya's 
mind  was  elsewhere  ;  without  listeninfj-  to 
him  he  yeilded  to  his  'divine  frenzy'.  He  cried 
aloud  "Oh  Krsiia,  oh  my  Lord"  and  tears  flowed 
from  his  eyes  and  a  halo  was  seen  round  his  head. 
„,  ,,    .  With    sojiijjs    ami    speech    full  of 

devotional  fervour,  he  became  the 
centre  of  a  charmed  multitude.  The  Marhattas 
were  taken  by  surprise  at  his  wonderful  display 
of  devotion. — the  women  wipini^  away  their 
tears  witli  their  draperies  as  they  heard  him 
speak  in  his   ecstasy    of    spiritual    joy.'     Some- 


vfi:?!  ^t:c\  5ii5ty  c^t^  ^tf^  c^r^  fw^^i  n 


CIIAITANYA's  tour  in  SOTITHERN  INDIA,        255 

times  Chaitanya  spoke  in  Tamil  (he  had  ac- 
quired that  language  in  the  course  of  his  tour) 
and  at  others  in  Sanskrit.  From  Gurjara 
Cliaitanya  travelled  to  Poena.  For  seven  days 
he  was  mute  and  scarcely  ate  anything.  On 
the  way  to  Poena  he  ascended  the  Bijapur  hills, 
and  thence  proceeded  northward  towards  the 
^,    „  , .     ,  .„       Sahiya     hill.     It     was    a    nohle 

Tho  Salijya  lulls.  ''" 

mountain  scene  which  struck  the 
pili^frims  with  its  solitary  grandeur.  In 
Chaitanya  it  gave  rise  to  great  emotion  and  he 
ran  mad  with  joy,  seeing  the  vision  of  Krsna 
there.  He  came  to  Poena  where  he  stopped 
near  an  artificial  lake  called  the  Achhasara 
under  the  shade  of  a  large  Bakula  tree.  Poena 
is  described  as  a  great  centre  of  Sanskrit  learning 
whore  tho  Gita  and  the  Bhagavata  were  ex- 
clusively studied  by  a  considerable  num])er  of 
scholars.  Chaitanya  here  found  a  congenial 
element  and  went  into  his  inspired  ecstasies 
.  ,,   ,    ,  again  and  again,  as    the    scholars 

A  i)liick  sheep.  ^  ^ 

discussed  Bliakti.  There  was 
among  them  a  certain  materialistic  Brahmana 
who  ])elievi ng  Cliaitanya  to  be  insane,  told  him 
that  Krsna  himself  was  in  the  lake.  As  he 
pointed  to  the  water,  tin;  mad  prophet    of  Nadia 

^fft-ni  5[*F5i5i  ^fkp  ^^\^m  I 

Kaclclia  bj'  Govimla  Dasa. 


250  CIl.VITANYA    AND    TTTS    COMPANIONS. 

looked  down  into  if  with  a  look  full  of  lovo,  and 
wlioii  tli(;  ]ii'.ihinin  ropcatxMl  his  j(;.st,  (.'haitanya 
suddenly  jumped  into  th(^  lake  and  became  un- 
conscious;. Many  people  at  once  went  to  hfs 
help,  and  pulled  him  out  of  the  water  where 
\m  would  have  been  drowned,  ])ut  for  their 
timely  assistance.  They  censured  the  sceptical 
Brahmana  stron2;ly,  Init  Chaitanya  rei?ainin£j 
consciousness,  said  gently.  "AVhy  do  you  cen- 
sure him,  friends,  it  is  true  that  the  Lord  is 
everywhere,  in  the  land  and  water  alike. 
Blessed  is  he  for  he  saw  Ilim  there  aiid  I  a 
beggar  of  His  mercy  that  I  am,  sought  ITim  in 
vain"  and  as  he  said  this,  he  wept  in  deep  emo- 
tion. At  Poena  he  heard  from  a  Brahmana 
named  Tannu    that    there    was    a 

At  T'oonn. 

temple  of  Civa  called  Billecwara 
near  Oourghat  at  the  city  of  Patas.  At  the 
foot  of  the  temph^  a  fair  was  held  annually. 
And  Chaitanya  visited  Civa  and  the  fair  which 
was  being  held  at  the  time  and  proceeded  thence; 
to  Devale^wara.  At  some  distance  from  the 
latter  place  lay  the  city  of  Jejuri.  Ivhandava 
was  the  god  of  the  temple  there  and  parents  used 
to  oiTer  their  daughters  to  that  deity.  These 
daughters  called  themselves  'wives  of  Khandava' 
and  led  unholy  livf^s  and  the  pilgrims  were  often 
enticed    by  these    wretched    women,    known    in 

the    localitv     as     th(;     '^Turaris,' 

The  ]\liir.iri«. 

Chaitanya,  wlien  he  saw  them,  felt 


CHAITANYA's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.        25.7 

a  deep  compassion  for  them  and  said  to  Govinda 
"How    cruel    are    the    parents    of  these  girls, 
Govinda  ?  How  have  they  the  heart  to  offer  their 
own  children  to  Khandava  to  lead  vicious  lives  ?" 
He    went    to    the    Muraris     himself,      though 
Govinda  did  not  like  his  going  there. ^     The  most 
conspicuous    among    the    Muraris    was    Indira 
Devi,  and  as  Chaitanya  held  a    sweet    discourse 
full  of  spiritual    fervour    with    the    unfortunate 
women,  they  felt  a  thiill  of  repentance    and    an 
ardent    desire    to    reform    themselves.     Indira 
Devi    particularly    was    greatly      moved.     She 
eventually    left    the    city     as      an     anchoress. 
Chaitanya    next   visited    the    Choranandi  forest 
where  dwelt  the  Brahmana  robher  Naroji — an  old 
man  of  sixty.     He  met  Chaitanya  when    he  was 
in  one  of  his    trances,    which    suggested    to    the 
bewildered   eyes    of    the    wicked  Brahmana,  the 
beauty     of     heaven    itself.       The    old    robber 
threw  away  his  weapons,  deserted    his  band  and 
followed  Chaitanya  as  an  ascetic.  Govinda  Dasa's 
description  of  the  change  that  came  over    Naroji 
is  a  vivid    one.     The  ex    robber-chief  undertook 


^"  Govinda  wanted  to  avoid  those  women  out  of-  moral  considera- 
tions. But  Chaitanya,  "the  saviour  of  the  fallen"  ("Patita  Pavana") 
was  over  swaved  by  compassion  and  had  hatred  for  none.  The  moral 
caution,  sua:a;'estod  by  G  )vinda  in  the  foUovvino-  words  of  his,  shows 
how  ardentTe  was  to  keep  the  reputation  of  Sannyas's  vow  unspotted 
in  the  eyes  of  the  people. 

^  ^f^  c^  '%\(w^  \'m\  M^  ^tt  I 

Kaclacha. 
GG 


258  CIIAITANYA    AXB    IITS    COMPANIOyS. 

to  show  Chaitanya  all  tho    shrines  on    that   side 
,.     of    the   counti'V,    savinpr    to    liim 

Conversion        ot  *  •        '-- 

Naroji  the  robber-     with     tpars    of    repentancc     that 

chief.  ^ 

every  spot  there  was  made 
familiar  to  him  by  the  exigencies  of  his  vicious 
calling. 

From  the  depth  of  the  Choranandi  forest 
Chaitanya  emerged  accompanied  by  Govinda 
and  Naroji  and  proceeded  towards  Khandala, 
a  village  on  the  river  Mula.  The  people  of 
Khandala  were  so  ho  spitable  that  they  quarrelled 
among  them  selves  over  their  rival  claims  of 
entertaining  their  guest.  "I  saw  him  first" 
one  of  them  would  say,  when  another  gav??  him 
the  lie  and  often  the  quarrel,  that  ensued, 
resulted  in  a  hand  to  hand  fight/  Chaitanya 
stood  quiet  and  would  not  go  to  finy  one's  house, 
though  so  many  were  eag(M-  to  have  him.  A 
,  ,  rich  man  offered    him  fine  clothes 

Khnndala. 

and  a  good  meal.  Chaitanya 
said  "These  two  men  with  me  have  got  alms 
given  by  some  poor  people.  80  I  do  not  need 
your  presents.  The  whole  world  with  all  its 
glories    will   pass    away    like    a   dream   and  you 


i)^  5fj{  ^z^  ^f5  ^ti-st  aff*ratff  I 
•3TT5  ss»  ''m  'sitfsi  f%^i  ^tfJi^ttl  11" 

Kadachtt. 


cuaitanya's  tour  In  southern  India.      259 

and  I    shall  be  nowhere,    my   friend.     Only  the 
_   .,  Lord  will  be    there.     I  seek  Him 

iMasik. 

and  not  rich  food  or  clothes."^ 
So  saying  he  closed  his  eyes  from  which 
fell  tears  of  spiritual  ecstasy,  while  Naroji 
sat  by  him  in  mute  wonder.  Chaitanya  next 
visited  Nasik  and  Trimukha   and    then    came  to 

Panchavati.     Here    he  had  vision 

Pauchavati. 

of  God  and  he  closed  his  eyes, 
while  his  face  glowed  with  radiance.  Govinda 
said  that  as  he  saw  him  in  that  condition  he  was 
struck  by  the   sight,  and  thought  that  he  saw^  a 

ffod.     Chaitanva  proceeded  thence 

Damana.  ^  v       i. 

to  Damana  and  still  further  north 

where  wandering  for  fifteen  days  he  came   to  the 

ancient     city    of     Suratha.      The 

Suratlia. 

Goddess  Astabhuja  was  there, 
it  is  said,  established  by  Raja  Suratha  himself. 
Here  an  ascetic  asked  him  how  God  should  be 
loved.  Chaitanya  said  "Just  as  an  ordinary 
woman  when  she  falls  in  love  with  a  handsome 
youth  yearns  for  him    so    may  the  soul  yearn  for 

^    Chaitanya    then    advised    the    rich  man  to   distribute   his  presents 
among  the  poor  people  who  needed  lielp.     He  paid, 

ill  c^  3^t^  ^f^  cffNw  ^m  ii 
c^t'tt^  sf^^l  ^n:^  c^i^  cft«r  ^R  II 

Kadacha. 


2G0  CllAITAXVA    ANJJ    11  IS    COxMl'ANiONS. 

llim.  This  is  tlie  mystery  of  s})iritual  love."'^ 
At  this  time  a  Bmhmana  came  there  with  the 
olVeriiii^  of  a  goat  lor  a  sacriiice  to  the  goddess. 
Chaitaiiya's  teachings  made  him  alter  his  mind 
and  he  set  the  goat  at  lilierty.  Trom  Suratha 
Chaitanya  came  to  the  bank  of  the  river  Tapti, 
where  lie  visited  the  temple  of  the  god  Vamana. 
The  city  of  Bharoch  (Broach)  on  the  Narbada  had 
a  sacred  altar  famous  for  centuries  and  Chaitanya 
visited  it.  Next  he  came  to  Baroda.  There 
was  a  temple  of  Dakarji  to  the  cast  of  ilie  Igaau, 
to  which  Chaitanya  paid  a  flying  visit  and  llien 
came  to  the  town  proper.  The  llaja  of  Baroda 
is  described  as  a  pious  prince  who  paid  his 
respects  to  Chaitanya.  Here  Naroji  got  fever 
and  died.     And    Govinda    begged 

At  Baroda.  ,  ,.  ,  .  , ,  ,        , 

alms  lor  burying  the  dead. 
Chaitanya  sang  the  praises  of  the  Lord  over  the 
grave  of  the  deceased  for  the  whole  night.  I'rom 
Baroda  Chaitanya  went  in  a  western  direction 
and  crossed  the  Mahanadi  and  reached  Ahamada- 
bad.  The  town  was  a  verj  flourishing  one  but 
Chaitanya  did  not  go  to  any  one's  house  though 
many  wished  to  entertain  him.  He  stayed  near  a 
public  garden  named  Nandinl.  zVn  ascetic  who 
was     deeply    read    in     the    Bhagavata    realised 


^5^  ^1?!^  C#l  Jimt^  JTtf?I*1  I 
(Tit  ^\m  (Mn  ^f^  ^^  ^WffWl  II 

KadacliJi. 


CHAITANYa's  tour  in  SOUTIIEllN  INDIA.        261 

Chaitaiiya's  purity  and  told  tlic  people  of  tlie 
town  that  he  was  a  remarkable  man.  Many 
came  to  see  him  and  Govinda  Dasa  says  that  he 
could  not  understand  their  spce'ch.  "As  the  Master 
liowever  had  })icked  up  different  dialects  in  the 
course  of  his  tour  he  talked  with  them.  I  could 
^  , ,         only  2;ather  facts  from  tlie  Master. 

Crosses    yubhra-  *      - 

mati     aud  reai;lies        But  tllls  I  did  UOt    dai'C   to  do  OftcU. 
Dvvaraka. 

I  took  my  notes  privately 
from  what  I  learnt  in  this  way."*  Chaitanya 
addressed  the  multitude  who  had  assembled  at 
Ahmedabad  to  receive  instructions  from  him 
and  thence  proceeded  further  west  reaching-  the 
river  Subliramati  which  he  crossed  and  arrived 
at  Dvvaraka.  Here  they  met  two  Bengali 
pilgiims— Govinda  and  Bamacharana  of  Kulin- 
gram  Vasu  family.  They  were  great  admirers 
of  the  Master,  and  Govinda  Dasa  writes  : 
"Meeting  Bengalis  after  a  long  time,  my  heart 
felt  a  thrill  of  delight."^  The  four  came  to  a 
village  named  Ghoga  where  lived  the  celebrated 
courtizan  named  Baramukhi.     Her    beauty    w^is 

^  itfl  ^t^1  f^f^  'srw^  ^f^  II 
^w(.m  ^  "^  "tft^  ^^t=i  II 

^  W\f<[  ^VS  ^  s^i<\  ^^\  I 
^®^  ^f^^l  ^iR  ^U{  f^5tf^fl  II 

Kadaclia. 

-    *'^!?  ^t^  ^<[  c'^<[^\^  cwpmi  I 

^tilC^  ^t^^  C^i?  ^t5^  srtf^l  ll"      Kailacha. 


202  CltAlTANYA    AXIJ    Jlls    COMPANIONS. 

great  and  tlie  wealth  she  had  accumuhited  M-as 
immense.  A  vivid  and  interestini^  description 
is  given  of  her  adopting  th(^  vow  of  asceticism 
under  the  intluence  of  Chaitanya.  She  l)estowed 
all  her  wealth  on  li<>r  maid  servant  Mini,  and 
thenceforth  followed  the  pious  life  of  a  Vaisnavl. 
Nabhaji,  the  author  of  the  Hindu  Bhaktamala, 
describes  the  career  of  Baramukhi,  but  as 
Chaitanya's  stay  was  sliort  his  name  was  not 
remembered  in  the  locality  in  later  times. 
Nabhaii  savs  that  bv  the  influence  of  a  ^reat 
Sadhu  her  life  was  changed.  It  is  from  Govinda 
Dasa  that  \\e  learn  the  manner  in  which  her 
life  was  so  changed  and  that  it  was  Chaitanya 
himself  who  converted  her.  Here  also  a 
sceptical  and  wicked  Bnihmana  named  Bahlji, 
who  had  at  first  abused  Chaitanya  and  tried  to 
assault  him,  afterwards  became  one  of  his  most 
huml)le  admirers.  From  Ghoga  Chaitanya 
started  for  Jaffarabad  whicli  he  reached  in  three 
days.  From  the  latter  place  it  took  Chaitanya 
six  days  to  come  to  Somanatha  The  ruined 
temples  and  the  remnants  of 
its  ancient  splendour  filled  Chai- 
tanya with  grief  and  he  gave  free  expression  to 
his  feelings,  when  suddenlv  a  Sannvasi,  who 
looked  like  the  god  (^iva  himself,  came  and  lifted 
his  hands  to  bless  Chaitanya.  The  latter  ran  to 
meet  him.  But  he  said  a  word  or  two  to 
Chaitanva,  which  Govinda  could  not  understand, 


CHAITANYA's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.        263 

and  disappeared.  The  three  companions  of 
Cliaitanva  could  not  ascertain  where  the  Sannyasi 
went.  Chaitanya  smiled  at  their  questions  about 
the  latter  without  saying  anything,  and  walked 
three  times  round  the  temple  of  Somanatha. 
A  panda  (priest  of  the  temple)  came  and  wanted 
something  from  Chaitanya  who  said  he  had 
nothing  to  give  ;  whereupon  Govindacharana  of 
Kulingrama  paid  the  panda  two  Rupees.  From 
Somanatha  the  party  went  to  Junagada  where 
they  stayed  two  days  and  visited  the  temple  of 
E,osanji.  Chaitanya  stayed  here  in  the  house 
of  a  Bnthmana  named  Miraji.  From  there  the 
four  started  for  the  Grinar  hills.  At  the  foot  of 
the  hills  lay  Bharga  Deva,  the  leader  of  a  sect  of 
local     Sannyasis,     very    seriously 

The  Gi-inar  Hills.        -n  ii  i     i      i  i    • 

ill,  attended  by  his  companions 
who  all  looked  sad.  Chaitanya  prescribed  nim 
juice  for  him  Avliich  cured  Bharga  Deva.  After 
his  restoration  to  health  he  not  only  felt  grateful 
to  Chaitanya  but  was  so  moved  by  his  spiritual 
life  that  he  accompanied  him  on  his  tour.  They 
reached  a  high  point  of  the  Grinar  hill  where 
Chaitanya  was  shown  the  foot-prints  of  Krsna. 
Here  the  vision  of  God  came  again  and  again  and 
he  was  in  trances  of  ecstasy  and  devotion  for 
days  together.  Descending  from  the  hill  the 
five    came    to    the    bank    of    the    river    Bhadra, 

crossins:    which    thev   came    to  a 

Dhanantari  Jhari.        „  .  i     -rxi  ^  ti  _    • 

forest   named   Dhanantari  Jhari. 


201.  CITAITANY.V   AND   TITS   ro:\rrANTOXs. 

Here    a    pecnlijir  fruit  of  tho  Kfimrfnigri  species 
is  described  hy  Govinda  as  l)oini]^  of  a  very  sweet 
and   delicious    taste.     Chaitaiiya    witli    liis    four 
companions  and  a  numl)orof  Sannyasis  wandered 
in  Wm  depth  of  the  forest  for    seven    days,    after 
wliich  they  arrived    at    Gopitala    in    Amaravati 
which    local    tradition    identified   as  the  ancient 
shrine  of  the  Prabhasa.  Chaitanya 
p;ave  an  address  to  the    people   of 
Aniaravati  with  tears  in   his    eyes,    askini]^    them 
to    love    God     with     thcnr     whole     soul.     They 
responded  and  sanp^  the  praises  of  God    hut    said 
"You  sir,  you  look    like    tlie    ii:od 
you    speak    ol.         At    Amaravati 
he  was  for  three  days  and  reached    Dwarakjl    on 
the  1st  of  Aswin,    1432    (^aka    (September   1511 
A.  D.)  The  town  commanded  the  view  of  the    sea 
from  one  side  and  from  the  other  the   picturesque 
scenery    of    the    Raivatnka    hill,  and    Chaitanya 
saw  ill  these  and    in  tlie  temple  of  Dwjirakadhica 
th(i    vision    of    his    Krsua    and    was    mad    with 
joy  for  a  fortniglit.     I'iie  people  said  "We  never 
saw   a    Sannyasi    like    this     younp^     man.     His 
presence    is   heaven    to    us."     Chaitanya   was  at 
Dwaraka  for  two  weeks  and  r(^turiied    to    l?arad<T 
on    the    last    day   of     Aswin      (October,      1511). 
After  leaving  Baradfi,  the  party  travelled  for    10 
days  and  reached  tlie  banks  of  the  riven*  Narbada. 
Here  l^harga  Deva  took  leave  of  Chaitanya  withe 
many  words  expressive  of  his    high    regards    for 


CHAITANYA's  tour  in  southern  INDIA.         265 

him.  Bharga  said  "  I  take  you  to  be  Krsna 
hitnself."  Cliaitanya  gave  him  a  look  of  censure 
and  requested  him  not  to  say  such  profane  things 
again.  Eharga  wanted  to  know  from  the 
Master  how  faith  in  God  coukl  he  attained. 
Ghaitanya  said  "It  is  His  grace  alone  that  can 
bring  unto  the  soul  of  man  faith  in  God. 
Neither  learning  nor  reasoning  can  do  this." 
The  next  day  Cliaitanya  and  his  companions 
reached  the  banks  of  the  Narbada,  and  thence 
came    to    the    city     of     Dohada. 

Doiiada     on    the  " 

bauk  of  the  Nar-     Hcrc   a   Vasya   millionaire  had  a 

bada. 

temple  of  Krsna.  The  man 
dreamt  that  Krsna  himself  appeared  to  him 
and  told  him  that  He  was  present  in  the  town 
as  a  young  Sannyasi.  The  merchant  Avas 
surprized  to  find  in  Cliaitanya  the  same 
Sannyasi  whom  he  had  seen  in  his  dream,  and 
he  offered  his  tribute  of  worship  to  Cliaitanya. 
So  deep  was  the  impression  in  his  mind  that 
he  gave  up  his  vast  property  and  turned  a 
Sannyasi.  b'or  two  days  the  four  travelled  in 
a  jungle  without  tasting  any  food  and  Govinda 
Dasa  writes  "  We  felt  the  pangs  of  hunger,  but 
Cliaitanya  was  as  cheerful  as  ever."  They 
reached  a  place  named  Am j bora  next,  and 
Cliaitanya  said,  noticing  the  dejected  spirit  of 
his  half -starved  companions  "  When  the  Lord 
will  bring  us  meal,  we  shall  eat."  To  the 
village  Govinda  went  and  got  two  seers  of    flour 

HH 


2GG  CHAITAXYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

as    alms.     Chaitanya    prepared    IG    pieces     of 
bread     with      liis      own     hands, 

Chaitauya    ffives 

his  share  of  bread     but     an    olu    woman  Came    witn 

to  an  old  woman.  ,    .,  i  i     i  ^  .i   • 

a  child  and  be^^ged  somethmp^ 
to  eat.  Chaitanya  i^^ladly  gave  her  his  own 
share.  In  the  night  Govinda  brought  some 
fruits  A\hich  he  ate.  Next  day  he  visited  the 
Laksmankunda  and  then  reached  a  village 
named  Mandura  on  the  Vindhya  hills.  Here 
in  the  cave  of  the  mountain  there  sat  a  vener- 
able Sannyasi  with  l)eard  and  hair  all  knotted 
and  gray,  nails  grow^n  big  and  body  emaciated 
by    fasting    and    austerities.     His    presence  was 

A  strange  San-  imposiug,  hc  had  a  bright  fair 
"y^"-  colour  and  he  was  entirely  naked. 

Chaitanya  with  joined  hands  stood  before  him, 
and  the  revered  saint  spoke  one  or  two  Avords 
to  him  and  smiled.  Govinda  could  not  under- 
stand what  he  said.  They  proceeded  in  their 
journey  and  Govinda  said  "  On  our  right  lay 
the  Narbada  and  on  the  left  the  A'indhya  hills ; 
at  the  foot  of  the  hill  was  the  city  of  Mandura." 
After  three  days  the  travellers  reached  Deoghar. 

The  cure  of  a  Here  a  Vaisya  named  Adinara- 
lepor  at  Deoghara.  y^jya,  afflicted  with  Icprosy,  camc 
to  Chaitanya  and  implored  him  for  some  cure. 
Chaitanya,  full  of  compassion,  gave  him  some- 
thing to  eat  from  the  meal  he  had  offered  to 
God.  This,  it  is  said,  cured  him.  Adinarayana 
turned  a  Sannyasi.     Thirty  miles  from    Deoghar 


CHAITANTa'S  TOTIll  IN  SOUTHERN  INDIA.       267 

was  the  villaj^e  of  ^ivani  and  on  the  East  stood 
the  Mahal  hills  (Rajmahal?)  After  visiting 
Civani,  Chaitanya  came  to  Chandipiir  where 
there  was  a  temple  of  the  Goddess  Chandi. 
Thence  he  came  to  Raipur  where,  the  report  of 
his  return  having  already  spread,  people  came 
from  different  places  to  meet  him.  From 
Raipur  Chaitanya  came  to  Vidyanagara,  the 
town  where  Rama  Ray,  the  minister  of  Pratapa 
Rudra,  lived.  Chaitanya  asked  him  to  accom- 
pany him  to  Purl.  Rama  Ray 
^  said      that      important         state- 

business  would  keep  him  there  for  a  few  days 
more,  but  he  would  meet  Chaitanya  at  Puri 
shortly.  Chaitanya  left  Vidyanagara  and 
marched  towards  the  south.  In  six  days  the 
pilgrims  arrived  at  a  place  called 
Ratnapur.  Ratuapura   which  was  a  fortified 

town  and  full  of  fine  buildings,  (^antlcwara  was 
the  name  of  the  Raja  of  the  place  who  inter- 
viewed Chaitanya  and  paid  his  respects  to  him. 
9antT9wara  the  In  the  momiug  the  party  camc 
Raja  of  the  place.       ^^     Sauivalpur      surroundcd     by 

hills  on  all  sides.  Twenty  miles  from  this  town 
was  a  place  named  Vramara  which  was  a 
favourite  resort  of  Yaisnava  ascetics.  Chaitanya 
stayed  here  four  days.  One  of  the  staunchest  ad- 
mirers of  Chaitanya  at  this  place  was  a  Uriya 
Brahmaua  named  Visnu  Rudra  who  was  held  in 
considerable    esteem    by    the    people     of     the 


268         CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMrANIONS. 

locality,     i'rom     Yram.ara    Chaitaiiya    came    to 

tho    town  of  Uasapala  where  there  was  a  temple 

of      Kurma — the    Great  Tortoise. 

aritq.a  a.  r^]^^    image    was    in  a  well  called 

the  liasala  Kunda.  Chaitanya  stayed  here  three 
days.  A  Marwari  Brahmana  living  in  the  town 
was  hostile  to  the  N'aisnavas.  A  youthful  son 
of  this  Brahmin  came  to  Chaitanya  and  com- 
plained to  him  that  his  father  was  a  sworn 
foe  to  all  religion.  He  ])egged  Chaitanya  to 
reform  him  if  it  was  at  all  possible.  Hardly 
had  he  finished  saying  so,  when  the  infuriated 
father  came  with  a  stick  in  his  hand  and 
threatened  to  beat  Chaitanya  with  it  for  having 
turned  the  head  of  his  only  son.  Chaitanya  said 
"Here  am  I  completely  in  your  hands,  beat  me 
as  much  as  you  like,  but  sing  the  praises  of  the 
Lord  ;  that  is  the  price  you  will  have  to  pay  for 
beating  me,  my  friend."  And  as  Chaitanya 
said  this,  the  vision  of  Krsna  came  to  him  and 
he  was  unconscious  of  the  external  Avorld.  He 
lay  like  a  painted  picture  fixing  his  gaze 
heavenward,  tears  falling  from  his  eyes.  The 
Brahmana  was  awe-struck  and  soon  after  became 
a  A^aisnava  convert.  From  Dasapala,  Chaitanya 
with  his  three  companions  came  to  the  l)ank  of 
the  river  Risikulya.  He  stayed  here  for  three 
days  aiul  wlien  he  came  near  Alalanatha,  all  his 
companions  of  Bsngal  and  Orissa,  who  were 
Avretched  during  his  absence,  formed  themselves 


CHAITANYa'S  tour  in  southern  INDIA.        269 

into  a  grand  procession  and  marched  from    Purl 
to      meet      him.      There      were 

Return     to      Pari 

and   the    great     Gadadharaand  Murari,  Khanjana- 

reception.  i        ii  i.  i  ' 

charya,  who  though  a  lame  man 
ran  faster  than  others  \  Sarhahhauma,  the  scholar, 
Eamadasa,  Krsnadasa,  Haridasa  the  younger, 
Jagannatha,  Daivakinandana,the  excellent  singer 
Laksmana,  Gauridasa  and  hundreds  of  others. 
Balarama  Dasa  sounded  the  horn  in  the  procession 
and  Narahari  held  the  flag. '  It  was  a  superb 
sight  to  see  him  again  at  the  house  of  Kaci 
Micraat  Purl.  Sarhahhauma,  the  great  scholar, 
with  joined  hands  stood  before  him  and  Murari 
Gupta,  that  prince  of  physicians  and  scholars, 
knelt  down,  both  saying  how  hard  and  pain- 
ful had  l)een  their  separation  from  him.  The 
Master  had  not  allowed  them  to  accompany 
him  and  they  had  spent  all  this  time  in 
expectation  of  liis  return.  King  Pratapa 
Hudra^  was  there — casting  aside  all  his  royal 
splendeour,  as  a  humble  soul  in  whom  a  true 
spiritual  longing    had    begun    and    from    whom 

Kadacha. 

^^  MP\  ^ttW  ^m  ^ilt^  1 1 

Kadacha. 

Kadaclia. 


270  CHAITANTA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

the  Inst  shadow  of  vanity  had  hecn  driv(m  out. 
Govinda  Diisa's  description  of  Chaitanya's  return 
to  Puri  is  so  urapliic  tliat  the  reader,  while 
reading  it,  feels  himself  to  he,  as  it  were,  in  the 
midst  of  this  ii^atherini]:,  paynii:^  homas^e  to  the 
Master  with  the  rest.  On  tlie  third  day  of  Mai?ha, 
in  January,  1511,  Chaitanya  came  ])ack  to  Purl. 
So  his"  travel  from  Purl  and  hack  took  him  alto- 
gether one  year  eii^ht  mouths  and  twenty-six 
days.  A  few  days  after  his  return  Chaitanya  sent 
Govinda  Dasa  to  Cantipur  with  a  letter  to 
Advaita.  Here  the  narrative  ])reaks  off  suddenly. 

The  above  is  a  mere  outline  and  a  brief 
summary  of  the  elaborate  descriptions  of 
Govinda  Dasa.  The  charm  of  the  work  lies  in 
the  simplicity  of  its  descriptions  and  a  total 
absence  of  exaggeration.  It  is  a  plain  tale 
divested  of  all  supernatural  elements  which 
were  attributed  to  Chaitanya  by  the  later 
biographers.  The  beauty  of  Chaitanya's  life  is 
realized  here  in  its  simplest  and  therefore  in  its 
most  impressive  form.  The  only  supernatural 
anecdote  to  be  found  here  is  the  cure  of  a  lepor 
at  Deoghar  by  Chaitanya.  But  the  account  of 
this  incident  is  so  unassumingly  simple  that  it 
is  difhcult  to  discredit  it,  coming  as  it  does  from 
an  eye-witness  of  unquestionable  veracity. 
XA'IX. —  Tour  in  Zipper  India. 

Chaitanya,  as  we  have  seen    above,    returned 
to  Pari  in  February,  1511.     lie    remained  there 


TOUll   IN    UPPER    INDIA.  271 

till  October,  1516.  During  this  time  he  had 
attempted  several  times  to  make  a  trip  to 
Vrndavana.  But  the  importunities  of  Rama- 
nanda  Kay,  Vilsudeva  Sarbabhauma,  Raja 
Pratapa  Rudra  and  many  others,  to  whom  his 
presence  was  so  precious,  had  held  him 
back.  In  October,  1515,  however,  he  had  left 
Purl  and  we  have  seen  that  extensive  prepara- 
tions were  made  for  his  tour  by  Raja  Pratap 
Rudra  and  Pradyumna  Micra,  alias  Nisingha- 
nanda ' .  He  went  to  Ramakell  via  (^antipur, 
followed  by  thousands  of  men.  At  a  place 
called  Kanaier  Natacala,  he  changed  his 
mind  and  spoke  as  follows  :     "To  Vrndavana    I 


1  Pradyumna  Mi9ra  (Nrsinghananda)  constructed  a  road  for 
Chaitanya's  tour  from  Knlia  to  Kanaier  Xata9ala.  We  already  noticed 
it  in  a  foi-egoing  page.  We  reproduce  here  the  full  text.  "The  road  from 
Kulia  was  made  with  stoue  with  metalic  decorations.  Bukula  trees 
were  there  on  both  sides  of  the  road  and  tanks  were  dug  for 
the  use  of  the  pilgrims, — the  companions  of  Chaitanya.  The  ghats, 
the  landing  steps,  were  built  with  stone.  Acquatic  birds  made 
pleasant  sounds  there,  and  the  air  was  fragnaut  and  cool.  When 
Chaitanya  passed  by  the  road,  he  found  it  strewn  over  with  thousands 
of  flowers  from  which  stalks  were  removed.  The  road  went  up  to 
Kanaier  Natala".  From  Kulia, — a  ward  of  Nadia — to  Kanaier  Nata9ala 
the  road  e.Kteuded  over  a  space  of  many  miles. 

1«t  ^\wf^  -sum  ^l%rl  ^t^^  II 
f  f^!il  ^'^H  ^cs  ^9|  nus  mi^  I 

<f5^^    ^t^  'st^^  <£(^  ^?Rvf  I 

^t^1 1^  cTf«it^=i  '^^iy\^^  ^^  li 
'^t^^  ^ft^  w:^  ^[^  ^w  ^^1  I 

The  Chaitanya  Charitamrta,  Madhya  Khanda,  Chapter  1. 


272  CHAiTANYA    AND    HIvS    COMPANIONS. 

must  go  all  alone.  Madhavendra  Puri  went  there 
in  a  true  spirit  of  devotion  sutt'(u-inf^  hardships 
which  hut  served  to  fan  the  flame  of  his  faith. 
And  lo,  I  am  ii:oinii;  there  like  a  prince  with  a 
retinue  of  soldiers  and  drummers  who  heat  drums 
to  proclaim  ray  journey.  Oh,  fie  upon  me  !"  '  He 
came  back  to  Purl  and  stayed  there  for  four 
months  till  the  middle  of  1516,  and  then  he 
requested  the  few  friends,  to  whom  he  had 
communicated  his  intention  to  start  out  alone  for 
Vrndavana,  not  to  speak  of  his  intended  trip  to 
anv  one.  Thev  remonstrated  with  him  and  ur<^ed 
that  at  least  a  Brcihmana  servant  should  i»o  with 
him  to  cook  his  meals.  He  addressed  Rama- 
nanda  and  Swarupa  and  said  "  There  are  so 
many  willing  to  go,  if  I  take  one,  others  will  be 
disappointed."  But  a  IkTihmana  named  Baladeva 
Bhattacharya  had  already  projected  a  tour  to 
Vrndavana  and  when  Chaitanya  started  for  the 
place  he  joined  the  Master  on  the  road  and 
Chaitanya  could  not  get  rid  of  him.  A  journey 
to  upper  India  on  foot  was  not  safe  in  those  days, 

^    Pratapa  Rudra,    the  king,  had    orderod    that    wliorevor  Chaitanya 
would    batlic,    a    i)illar  should  be  raised  to  mark  tlic  landing--  ^diat. 

^>1  ^fl?  ^f?  <2tNg  ■^t^  ^  Ira  t 
The  Chaitanijii  Choritamrtn,  'Madhija  Khando,    Chapter  16. 

Chaitanya  Churitdmrta,  Madhyn  Khanda,    Chapter  16. 


TOIJR    IN    UPPER    INDIA.  273 

as  there  was  often  iigliting  between  the  different 
States  makini^  the  position  of  the  pil- 
grims extremely  insecure.  But  the  ascetics 
had  little  risk  of  being  molested,  as  they  were 
merely  beggars,  and  Chaitanya,  when  he  started 
depended  on  God's    mercy   alone. 

Starts  privately.         ^-p        i     oi      t-»  ^        • 

He  lett  run  durmg  the  night 
and  it  was  kept  so  secret  that  in  the  morning 
people  assembled  in  hundreds  as  usual  to  pay 
their  respects  to  him  and  were  not  told  where 
Chaitanya  had  gone  till  a  long  time  after. 
Chaitanya  did  not  follow  the  main  roads  lest 
people  should  track  him  (mt  and  join  him. 
Leaving  Cuttack  on  the  right  he  travelled 
through  the  foiest  path  of  Jhari  Khanda,  which 
was  a  part  of  Chotanagpur. 

The     description     which     the       Chaitanya 

Charitamrta    gives    of    this    tour    is  very   inade- 

Baiadcva's  quatc.      Baladcva    Bhattacharya, 

description  not  ^,      ..  ,  .  •  i        ii 

adequate.  Cliaitauya  s  companion,  evidently 

took  no  notes  of  it.  And  what  he  reported  to 
others  was  evidently  in  course  of  time  greatly 
distorted.  The  names  of  the  places  visited  were 
generally  forgotten,  whilst  the  marvellous  and 
legendary  stories  gathered  round  each  little  inci- 
dent which,  when  recounted  l)y  story-tellers,  made 
a  deeper  impression  on  the  country  people  than 
historical  facts.  This  accounts  for  the  super- 
natural elements  that  have  occasionally  entered 
into  the  descriptions  of  Krsnadasa  Kaviraja,  who, 
II 


271  CIIAITAXY'A    ANJJ    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

tliouij^h  liimself  a  truthful  narrator  of  those  facts 
wliich  lie  personally  observed,  beiniJ!:  an  orthodox 
Vaisiiava,  too  often  allowed  credulity  to  get  the 
better  of  his  judgment.  Krsna  Dasa  sets  down 
in  all  seriousness,  for  instance,  such  puerilities  as 
the  account  of  a  tiger  who  utters  the  name  of 
Krsna,  being  inspired  by  Chaitanya.  It  should, 
however,  be  said  that  in  the  first  hand 
accounts  about  Chaitanya  that  Krsiiadfisa 
obtained  from  Rupa,  Sanatana,  Raghuniltha, 
Lokanatha  and  Gopala  Bhatta,  his  records  are 
characterised  by  the  vividness  of  living  history. 
In  the  minuteness  and  patient  industry  with 
which  the  theological  topics  are  treated  and  the 
various  important  incidents  of  Chaitanya's  life 
are  narrated,  Chaitanya  Charitamrta  stands  as 
a  monumental  example  among  the  biographical 
works  of  that  age. 

Reverting  to  Chaitanya's  tour,  it  is  said,  that 
during  his  wanderings  in  the  forests  of  Chota- 
nagpur  he  w^as  much  pleased  with  ]^alad(!va 
Acharya's  modesty  and  earnest  desire  for  the 
spiritual  life.  Chaitanya  is  said  to  have  made 
this  reflection  on  the  occasion.  "  When  with 
the  intention  of  going  to  Vrndavana,  I  left  Purl 
five  months  ago  and  came  to  Bengal  I  was  over- 
joyed to  see  the  sacred  banks  of  the  Ganges 
again  and  to  behold  my  beloved  mother.  But 
there  was  such  a  large  crowd  who  persisted  in 
their  resolve  to  accompany  me  that  I  had  to  leave 


TOXJR   IN   UPPER   INDIA.  275 

my  plan  of  visiting  Vrndavana  at  the  time. 
The  loneliness  of  this  place  and  your 
companionship  give  me  an  infinite  degree  of 
pleasure.  In  this  woody  tracts  ray  mind  revels 
in  the  sight  of  God's  mercy  everywhere."  ' 

From  Jharikhanda  Chaitanya  came  to 
Benares  and  stopped  at  the  house 
of  Tapana  Mi9ra,  whose  son  Raghu 
and  Chandra9ekhara,  a  Vaidya,  were  his 
constant  companions.  At  their  earnest  request 
ho  stayed  for  ten  days  near  the  Manikarnika 
Ghat.  The  Sannyasis  of  Benares  believed  that 
the  earth  was  an  illusion  and  discredited  the 
theory  of  a  personal  God.  They  studied  the 
Upanishads  and  strove  to  reach  that  quiet 
state  of  the  soul  in  which  the  passions  are  sub- 
dued. They  rediculed  the  emotional  religion 
which  delights  in  ecstasies  of  joy.  Chaitanya  did 
not  like  to  mix  in  tlieir  company  and 
hence  avoided  all  invitations  from  outside. 
One  Mahratta  Brahmana  who  had  interviewed 
Chaitanya  and  was  full  of  admiration 
for  him  said  to  Prakagananda,  the  leader 
of  the  Sannyasis  oP  Benares  :  "  Master, 
a  very  remarkable  Sannyasi  has  come  here  from 
Puri.  His  merits  are  uncommon.  A  young 
man  of  remarkably  handsome  features  and  of 
a  bright  fair  colour,  he  looks  like  a  god.  He 
speaks  of  Krsna  and  of  nothing    else  and  his  two 


The  Chaitanya  Charitamfta,  Madhya  Khanda,  Chapter  17. 


276  CnAITANTA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

eyes  constantly  pour  forth  tears  of  love  which 
look  holy  as  the  Gani^es.  One  feels  as  thoui^h 
cleansed  of  one's  sins  as  one  sees  his  tears  and 
hears  him  speak.  He  weeps  in  ecstasy  of  joy 
and  ho  certainly  has  a  hicfh  vision.  Such  an 
impression  has  this  Sannyasi  produced  on  me 
that  I  take  him  to  be  an  incarnation  of  Krsna 
himself."  To  which  Praka9ananda,  the  haup^hty 
leader  of  the  scholars  of  Benares,  replied  with  a 
smile  of  derision  : 

"  Yes,  we  have   also    lieard    that    from  Gaur 
Prakri9Xnanda's     ^as  comc   a   vouni?    Sannv^lsi   of 

contempt   oi  Cliai-  '  '  '' 

tanya.  strango  manners.   He  is  a  disciple 

of  Kecava  Bharati  and  an  emotional  man.  By 
some  mysterious  power  in  him  he  draws  men 
to  him  and  even  such  a  scholar,  as  Vasudeva 
S{irl)al)hauma,  has  turned  mad  and  is  now 
one  of  his  staunch  advocates.  Proba])ly  this 
Sannyasi  knows  some  black  art.  But  is  it 
credible  that  such  an  impostor  will  be 
accepted  by  the  people  of  Benares  ?  It 
is  impossible.  Leave  the  mad  man  alone  and 
stay    here  quietly  and  read  the  Upanishadas.  "  ^ 


fic^  ^^r^  ^f^  ?Ff|?:^  ?itf?f^  II 

(M^  W*!  5fIC5t  5rt:5f  ^C?I  Ccft^  J?t^?)1  I 

c^  ^t^  axA  (y^  5^^  ^1%  ^5  I 


TOUR   IN   TIPPER   INDIA.  277 

We  know  that  when  Chaitanya  visited  the 
holy  city  of  Benares  on  his  way  back  from 
Vrndavana,  he  converted  the  haughty  leader  of 
the  Sannyasis — •Praka9ilnanda.  The  abuser 
became  an  worshipper  of  "  the  mad  young  man  " 
and  wrote  many  hymns  in  Sanskrit  in  his  praise. 

The  Brahmana  scholar  was  very  sad  at  the 
a]nise  showered  upon  Chaitanya  by  Praka9a- 
nanda.  Chaitanya  understood  how  deeply  the 
scholar's  feelings  were  wounded,  and  said  "  I 
came  to  sell  a  little  of  the  emotional  sweetness 
with  which  my  soul  is  charged  to  the  people  of 
Benares.  But  there  is  no  purchaser  here.  The 
burden  of  my  emotion  oppresses  me  and  fain 
would  I  sell  it  to  you  at  whatever  small  price  you 
would  offer".  ^  And  the  merchant  who  came  to 
trade  with  his  sweet  stock  of  emotion  left 
Benares  that  time,  only  to  return  some  years 
after  with  the  royal  monopoly  which  made  him 
the  master  of  trade  in  the  spiritual  commerce  of 
Benares. 

The  Marhatta  Brahmana  followed  him  and  the 
three  came  to  Prayjiga (Allahabad). 
His  tour  along  the    banks   of  the 


1    ^t^^tf%  c^fk^s  ^t^^fst  ^i^Tf'iti^  I 

«1ft  c^H\  ^M  ^tt^itsi  c-^^cj^  af^i  ^t^  I 
^5(^  ^^  ^T  n%fi  >ii«lt^  c^f^  II 

The  Chaitanya  Charitamrta,  Madhya  Khanda,  Chap.  17. 


278  Cn.VlTANYA   AND    HIS    COMrANIONS. 

Jumna  was  characterised  by  constant  ecstasies  of 
devotion  at  the  sight  of  the  river,  which  recalled 
at  every  turn  his  vision  of  Kisna.  He  jumped 
into  the  river  several  times  frenzied  with  love, 
and  was  saved  from  drownini'-  bv  Baladeva 
JJhattacharya.  He  stayed  at  Allaha])ad  for 
three  days  and  then  came  to  Muttra,  where  he 
first  visited  the  Bi9rama  Tirtha.  Here  did  lie 
meet  a  Brahmana  who  like  him  was  a  seer  of 
sights  not  vouchsafed  to   ordinary 

To  Muttra.  ,     ,,  i         z^i      -^  ' 

mortal  s  eyes,  and  Chaitanya 
marvelled  to  see  his  love-ecstasies.  This  Brah- 
mana belonged  to  the  Sonoria  sect — one  whose 
social  status  was  very  low  among  the  Brahmanas. 
lUit  Chaitanya  took  alms  from  him,  though  the 
Brahmana  objected  saying  that  by  doing  so  tlie 
Master  might  be  degraded  in  popular  estima- 
tion. The  latter  however  had  no  hesitation  in 
touching  the  dust  trodden  by  a  col)l)ler's  feet 
if  he  found  him  to  be  god-fearing  and  faithful. 
So  Chaitanya  did  not  attach  any  importance  to 
social  considerations. 

But  he  wonderingly  asked  the  lirahmana  as  to 
how  he  realised  such  love  for  God.  The  J^rahmana 
said  that  he  was  a  disciple  of  Madhavendra  Purl. 

^1311%  ^ tsRt3i  ^nri  l^sit^  II 

^  ^^  C«Tt''P  iW  ^t^  ^f  II 
?f  The  Clifiitaiiya  Charitiimrtii,  Madhya  Khauda,   Cliiiji.    ]7. 


TOUR    IN    UPPER    INDIA.  270 

The  latter,  it  will  bo  remembered,  was  the  Guru 
of  Chaitanya's  Guru  Icwar  Puri.  On  hearins: 
this  Chaitanya  showed  him  great  respect.  He 
visited  tlie  24  bathing  Ghats — such  as  the  Sayam- 
bhu,  Bi§rama,  Dirgha,  Visnu,  Bhutecwara, 
Gokarna — and  the  celebrated  groves  known  as  the 
Madhuvana,  Talavana,  Kadambavana  and  Behula 
Vana.  When  he  came  to  the  village  of  Acali, 
he  asked  of  the  people  as  to  where  the  Radha- 
kunda  was.  None  could  tell  him  anything  of 
the  places  which  were  associated  with  Krsna. 
These  were  long  forgotten.  It  was  Ghaitanya 
and  his  followers  who  identified  them  and 
invested  Vindavana  with  its  modern  glory  and 
magnificence.  This  however  will  form  the 
subject  of  my  lectures  as  a  Beader  of  the 
University  of  Calcutta.  The  only  image  of 
Krsna  that  Chaitanya  saw  at  Vindavana  was 
that  of  Gopala  which  was  discovered  by  Madha- 
vendra  Puri  and  enshrined  in  the  village  of 
Annakuta  on  the  Gobardhana  hill.  The  people 
of  this  locality  w^ere  in  perpetual  fears  of  the 
Mahomedan    iconoclasts,  and    at 

Vrudavana.  ^,  ..  >-mi      •>  ^ 

the  time  Chaitanya  came  to 
Vrndavana,  the  image  of  Gopala  was  brought 
down  from  the  hills  and  kept  concealed  in  a 
village  named  Gothuli,  owing  to  an  alarming 
rumour  that  the  Turks  were  coming  in  quest  of 
the  god.  The  god  had  very  hard  days  in  these 
troublesome  days.     We  find  the  image  in  serious 


280  CIIAITANYA    ANIJ    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

tlangei'  \\]um  l)r()Hi^]it  b.-ick  to  its  own  lioiiu!  on 
the  Gobai'dliana ;  for  another  rumour  of  the 
approach  of  the  Turkish  army  made  it  leave  the 
cottage  and  move  to  the  temple  of  lMt]ihale9wara 
at  Muttra.  When  Chaitanya  was  at  A^intla,- 
vaiia  there  was  already  a  strong  band  of  his 
Vaisnava  followers  there — Rupa,  Sanatana, 
Bhugarbha  and  others  who  all  stayed  witli 
him.  From  Vfndavana  Chaitanya  went  to 
Mandicwara  where  there  was  a  temph^  or  cave 
in  which  there  were  three  images,  ulz :  of  Jasoda, 
Nanda  and  Krsna,.  From  this  place  lie  came  to 
the  Bhandir-groves  and  at  Amelitola  met  a 
Brahmana  named  Krsna  Dasa  and  heard  from 
him  the  tale  of  Krsna's  appearing  every  night 
in  the  Jumna  on  the  head  of  the  great  snake 
Kaliya.  Chaitanya  treated  the  story  ^\  ith  the 
contempt  it  deserved.  It  was  afterwards  found 
that  the  illusion  of  Krsna  and  the  snake  was 
created  by  a  fisherman's  boat  with  a  light  in  it.  ^ 


*  When  th(>  report  was  broiiglit  to  Clin,itan3'a,  he  merely  laughed  at 
the  foolish  story,  llesuid  "  absurd,  it  is  a  fable  manufactured  by  the 
illiterate  eountry  folk,"  ho  advised  the  people  not  to  turn  mad  over 
the  false  story  and  when  actually  made  cntjuiries,  he  found  that  a 
lishernum  with  his  boat  used  to  catch  fish  every  night  on  the  river — 
with  a  light  in  the  boat,  ;nid  this  created  the  illusiou.  Here  is  the 
original  passage. 

"^m  vsti:?  ^i?  ^f  ^f"^®  ^rr%i  i 

f ^  c^  tf^^  ffC^  ^t5lt<FtC^  I 
f^5f  ^U\  ^^f  C^^  W.ii  C^f^T^C^  II 

^f^  ^1  ^l«  -^^  wi  m^\  I 

f  ^  W«H  ^f^5  ^tf?l  ^tr^  ^t^^  II 

-2)t«j^n:ci  ^^  c^f^  51^  -^w^  «it^i  I 


TOTJR   IN    UPPEJl    INDIA.  281 

The  ecstasies,  speeches  and  spiritual  emotions 
of  Chaitanya  attracted  the  people  more  strongly 
than  a  great  poem.  For  his  words  were  like 
psalms,  his  songs  as  marvels  of  lyrics  and  his  god- 
realization  and  trances — the  crowning  chapter 
of  a  noble  epic.  He  appealed  irresistibly  to  all, 
and  daily  hundreds  of  men  and  women  came  to 
invite  him  to  their  houses.  The  great  concourse 
of  people  and  tlieir  ardent  desire  to  interview 
him  at  all  hours  became  almost  oppressive.  And 
though  Chaitanya,  lost  in  his  own  inner  joys, 
heeded  not  his  surroundings,  Baladevacharya 
could  not  endure  the  press  of  Chaitanya's 
admirers,  none  of  whom  would  leave  the  place 
without  having  talked  with  him  for  some  time. 
Baladevacharya  requested  Chaitanya  to  visit 
the  great  meld  at  Allahabad  which  was 
then  being  held,  and  Chaitanya  gave  his 
ready  assent  to  his  request.  Four  Brahmins 
among  whom  was  Krsnadasa,  accompanied 
Chaitanya,  and  they  crossed  the  Jumna. 
Chaitanya  was  subjected  to  frequent  trances, 
and  on  one  occasion  Avhen  he  Avas  totally 
unconscious  they  brought  him  to  the  other  bank 
and  waited  till   he    recovered    consciousness.     It 


^tf%«TC^  ^^^  ^tC^  CVfStg  ^tf^^l  II 

f5  l^i-^  ^\\\  (.'<iv>\  c^rtc^^  ^^  ^5[  I 

Chaitanya  Charitamrta    Madliya  Kanda. — Chap.  18. 


JJ 


282  CHAITAXVA    AND    IIIS    COMPANION'S. 

SO    happened    that    ten  Pathan    horse -men  were 
goini;-    l)y    that     road,  and  seeing- 

'J'lie  IMilian  horse-  ■,     •  ■,  i      ,^ 

men.  '^  J^'^n    lyi'^o    senseless    ;ind    hve 

men  surroundinfj;  him,  then* 
natural  inference  was  that  the  five  men 
were  robhers,  who  had  drui^ged  tlie  sense- 
less man  in  order  to  rol)  him.  The  Pathans 
l)ound  the  live  Brahmins,  hand  and  foot,  accusing 
tliem  of  thieving.  Kisnadasa  was,  however, 
a  daring. follow.  He  said  that  he  had  relations 
in  the  court  of  the  Emperor ;  they  carried  a 
great  infiuence ;  he  himself  Avas  the  master  of 
a  fortified  town  guarded  by  strong  cavalry. 
He  in  his  turn  charged  the  Turks  with  beinir 
robbers,  and  added  that  if  he  sounded  his  pipe, 
hundreds  of  soldiers  would  come  there  presently 
and  revenge  themselves  on  the  aggressors.  The 
Turks  thereupon  untied  the  hands  of  the  five 
men  but  stayed  to  watch  the  unconscious 
Brahmin.  Chaitanya  soon  recovered  his  senses 
and  hearing  the  story  as  told  by  the  Turks, 
said,  "These  five  Brahmins  are  my  com- 
panions. I  am  subject  to  epileptic  fits,  and 
they  have  helped  rather  than  hindered  me.  I 
am  a  saunyasl  and  a  beggar  and  I  liave  nothing 
to  be  robbed  of."  '      One  of  the  Turks  was  a  plr 

nf^t^  c^w\  ?tcvs  ^^f^5ii  II 

<2tfr^  cwf^^  ^Tii  ^^cTi  T^m  1 


TOUR    IN    UPPER    INDIA.  283 

dressed  in  black  rol)es  ;  he  readily  entered  into 
theological  topics  and  soon  felt  the  influence 
of  the  Master.  One  of  the  Mahomedans  was 
Bijali  Khan,  a  general  in  the  Emperor's  army, 
and  he  too  was  greatly  attracted  by    Chaitanya's 


G^  f^5t  f^^?J  ^l  ^  W5  II 

f^Sf  ^l^  "^ tM^  C^t^t<^  ^t^^t<I  ctff^tt  I 

5^  ^  ^tf^i  f»f^?t^  ^tc*i  ^tt  II 
i]  ^i%  ■^w<\  m  ^tf^  5ff^^l  it^i  I 
it^^fi  ^ic-sf  ^t5rf<i  ^fc^  ""1^  w^  II 

«I^  C^^^  niC^  ^^C^  JTF^  II 

^c't<[^  tf I  ^^^  ^tf%  ^N  7i«f^t^  1 
t^ti^  ^fel  ^sc^  ^tf^^  '^^\i<i  II 

C^\T%^  ^  '^t  ^tC^  1%^  SfJI  II 

»ic^^  ^  ^1  ^t^  ^^  »r«  ^tsrf^  II 

C^tSl  Pt^l  #  ^I^  C^f^l  J^C^  ^lf?t  II 
^«if^t^1  ^?  ^11  5t^  'Sfff^^f?!  II 
C^^T  ^tCsl  ^^t2t^  C5^  ni|^  II 

^¥t^  ^m\  ^1^5  ^f^i  ^fl  ^f<i  I 
C'Smtr^iPt  ^^i  ^;r<i  ^  ^t?  ^R  ii 
•21^  ■^c^  i"^  ^?  ^t  1*W^  I 
f%^^  ^aif^  c^rti  ^\]k  r^i  «(^  II 

il^  <t5  ?^  ^f^  ^C^^  nt^^  II 
Chaitanya  CharitiXmrta  Madhya  KIkiucIi — Oka  p.   IS. 


284  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

faith, and  the  upshot  was  that  tho  touMahomedans 
became  converts  to  Vaisnavism  and  Avete  known 
as  the  Pilthan  Vaira^Is.  Chaitanya  returned  to 
Allahabad  and  tlience  visited  Bonares.  Here 
he  met  Rupa  and  Sanatana  wlio  had  come  back 
from  AEatliiu'a  and  discoursed  with  them  on 
several  points  of  Vaisnava  tlieoloL,^y.  These 
learned  discourses  are  fully  described  by 
Kavikarnapura  in  his  Chaitanya  Chandrodaya 
Nataka. 

XXX— 77/^  IWIifjrrr  of  Aclvaila 

I  have  already  given  tlic  jiedigree  of  Chai- 
tanya. In  regard  to  those  of  the  two  other 
apostles,  Advaita  and  Nityananda,  I  res^ret  to 
say,  that  I  cannot  place  the  same  reliance  on 
the  genealogical  lists  suj)plied  l)y  their  descen- 
dants. As  they  were  not  Kulins  the  names  of 
the  ancestors  of  the  two  apostles  were  not 
preserved  in  any  authentic  work  of  the  ghataks. 
The  three  tables  given  below  each  showing 
the  pedigree  of  Advaita,  are  quoted  from  an 
article  by  Mr.  Stapleton  iu  the  'Dacca  Review.' 
Two  of  these  were  supplied  ])y  me  from  two 
different  sources  and  the  remainiuij^  one  ^fr. 
Stapleton  obtained  from  the  Gosvamis  of  l" thiili 
in  the  District  of  Dacca,  who  claim  to  be  the 
descendants  of  Advaita.  Tt  will  l)e  seen  tliat 
apart  from  Narasinha  Narial,  the  names  obtained 
from  the  three  dilferent  places  do  not  coincide 
and  cannot  at  all  ])(^  relied  upon. 


THE    PEDIGREE  OF    ADVAITA.  285 

I  shall  first  of  all  quote  Mr.  Stapleton's 
remarks,  which  though  they  refer  to  a  different 
suhject,  have  a  bearing  on  the  present  problem. 

"Dinesh  Babu's  new  sugestions  for  the  date 
of  Kirttivasa  that  are  made  in  his  note  are 
based  on  the  extremely  perilous  foundation  of 
the  tradional  genealogies  current  in  Bengal. 
1  fear  he  hardly  realises  what  unsound  ground 
this  is ;  but  as  an  indication  of  the  undesira- 
bility  of  referring  to  these  at  all  as  independent 
liistorical  autliorities,  I  contrast  in  parallel 
columns  the  pedigree  of  Advaita  given  by  Dinesh 
Balui  with  (a)  the  presumably  authentic  one 
supplied  by  the  Uthuli  Brahmins  which  is  said 
to  l)e  quoted  direct  from  the  Valya-lihl  Sutra 
and  (b)  a  pedigree  lately  obtained  for  me  by 
Dinesh  Babu  from  the  Santipur  descendants  of 
Advjiita  who  also  claim  descent  from  the  same 
son  of  Advaita — Krsna  Micra  as  the  Uthuli 
Goswamis  do." 


280  CHAITANYA    AM)    HIS    COMPANIONS. 


I. 


Pedii^rcp  sii|t])He(l  by 

Diiiosli  Habu  from 

an  old  M,  S.  preserved  in 

the  "Viswakosa  OHiee" 

also  liis  "  History  " 

page    496.) 


II. 


I  tliuli  (ifisvami  j)et]i<4re< 


JSudliukara 


.Sidher;\vara 


Tikari 


Narasinha  Narial 


Kuvera 


Chakravarti   Kanialakara 

alias 

ADVAITACIIARVA 


Cripati 

Kulapati 

Bibhakara 

Prabhilkara 

Narasinha   Naiual 

Kuvera  (Tarkapanchniiaua) 


Katnalakiuita  Aeliarya 

alias 
ADVAITACHARYA 


THE    PEDIGREE  OF    ADVAITA, 

III. 

Cautipur  Gosvami  pedi<;Tee. 
Jatadhar   Bharati. 


Banlkaiitha  Sarasvati 


287 


Caktinatli   I'un 


Ganegachandia  OastrT 


Narasinha    Lauri. 


Kuvera    Aebaryya. 


Kamalakanta  Aeharyya 

alias 
ADVaITACHARYA. 

Mr.  Stapleton  aptly  remarks  "  One  might 
imagine  that  these  relate  to  three  different 
families  of  Varendra  Brahmins  instead  of  one 
and  the  same,  and  similar  instances  of  flagrant 
contradiction  in  pedigrees  are  often  met  with." 

The  names  from  Narasinha  Narial  downwards 
tally  in  all  the  three  pedigrees.  Narasinha 
Narial  was  the  Prime  Minister  of  Raja  Gane9a 
who  killed  the  IMahomedan  Emperor  of  Gauda 
and  occupied  his  throne.  Advaita  Prakaca  by 
Icana  Na£?ara  savs  "Narasinha  Narial  was 
the  Minister   of   Raja    Gane9a,   and    the    latter 


288  CUAITANVA    ANJJ    HIS    C0MPA:N10NS. 

succeeded  in  killinii-  tlie  Emperor  ol"  Gauda 
and  oecupyiiii;'  his  tliroiie  l)y  tlie  statesniaiily 
advice  of  his  minister.  ' 

In  the  face  of  tlie  disere2)ancic's  in  the  names 
ahove  that  of  the  Narial,  as  found  in  the  three 
tabh^s,  there  is  no  other  alternative  left  to  us 
than  to  reject  them  all.  jMr.  Stapleton  seems 
inclined  to  favour  the  one  supplied  by  the  L'thuli 
Gosvamls  on  the  sjround  that  they  got  it  from 
the  Valyallla  Sutra.  The  claims  of  the  A^jilyalila 
Siitra  (lit.  the  incidents  of  childhood — of 
Advaita)  by  Lauria  Kisna  Das  to  authenticity 
are  however  open  to  question.  But  if  we  should 
give  preference  to  any  of  these,  it  would  be  the 
one  supplied  by  Jayagopala  Gosvami  of  (^anti- 
pura.  Cantipur  was  the  seat  of  Advaita  himself, 
and  his  direct  descendants  there  are  presumably 
in  possession  of  all  authentic  records  regarding 
the  genealogy  of  the  family,  if  really  any  existed 
at  the  time  of  Advaita. 

But  I  am  not  inclined  to  credit  any  of  th(>m 
as  true.  The  reason  I  may  briefly  put  as  follows. 
The  followers  of  Chaitanya  did  not  usually  care 
to  preserve  the  names  of  their  ancestors.  They 
oflered  their  services  to  humanity  in  the  spirit  of 
true  spiritual  humilily,  and  were  ashamed  of 
any  distinction  which  might  aitach  to  their 
names  on  account  of  their  noble  lineage.  It  is 
for  this  that  the  Brahmin  A^aisnavas  often 
eliminated    their     surnames   and    took   pride   in 


THE    PEDIGREE    OF    ADVAITA.  289 

calling  themselves  "  dasas"  ov   servants — servants 
of  all,    or   better,    servants  of  God  ;  every  great 
poet  among  them   has    subscribed   himself   as   a 
Dasa  in  the  colophon  of  his  lyrical  masterpieces. 
In     the     introduction      to     a     theological      or 
biographical    work,  the  Vaisnava  writers     as   a 
rule    give   a    prominent   place    to    the   praise  of 
those    whom    they    revere,    and    while    in    this 
eulogistic    preface   they  pay    their  respects  to   a 
number  of  illustrious  Vaisnavas,  living  and  dead, 
they  rarely  or  never  allude  to  the  names  of  their 
parents.     The  fact  is  that  the  Vaisnava   religion 
rather   strengthened  the  ties  of  spiritual  kinship 
and   was    inclined    to    diminish  the  family-ties. 
It     is    for    this    reason    that    Advaita     never 
cared    to    refer    to    his    pedigree.     He  is  said 
to    have    lived    to    120    years — the   full  span  of 
human  life.     Whether  this  be  true  or  not,   there 
is  no  doubt  that  he  lived  up  to   a    good  old  age. 
When,   liowe\er,    he    died,    the  orthodox  Hindu 
instincts    had    already    revived    even    amongst 
the  Vaisnavas.     His  descendants,  however,  could 
scarcely    find    any    authentic    record    of    their 
pedigree  after  the  lapse  of  so  many  years.    They 
became   Gosvamis   and  holding  an  exalted  posi- 
tion  among   the   Vaisnavas,    wanted    to    match 
the    genealogies  of    the    Kulin   Brahmins    who 
could  name  their  33   ancestors  or  more.     This 
may  account   for  the  long  tables  which  some  of 
them  produce  now  and  also  for  the  disagreement 

KK 


200  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPAXIONS. 

among  tliese  obtained  from  did'erent  sources. 
While  we  cannot  positively  assert  that  none 
of  these  three  pedii^rees  is  correct,  we  cannot 
also  credit  any  one  of  them  as  accurate  until 
some  other  docuuientary  evidence  is  produced  to 
support  it. 

I  agree  with  Mr.  Stapleton  tliat  the  genea- 
logical records  such  as  those  of  Advaita  cannot 
be  accepted  as  authentic.  But  I  can  by  no 
means  subscribe  to  his  sweeping  remark  as  to  the 
unreliability  of  all  ancient  pedigrees  as  a  whole. 
While  the  trustworthiness  of  records  apart  from 
those  of  Kulin  families  may  reasonably  be 
questioned,  the  pedigrees  of  the  descendants  of 
the  Kulins,  so  far  as  the  three  upper  classes  are 
concerned,  possess  undoubtedly  great  authenticity 
and  may  certainly  be  used  as  historical  evidence. 
The  great  care  Avith  which  such  records  are 
preserved  by  a  special  class  of  men  known  as  the 
ghatakas,  the  high  prestige  Avhich  the  Kulins 
have  always  enjoyed  in  society,  the  least 
infringement  of  the  strict  rules  in  matrimonial 
affairs  leading  to  the  lasting  disgrace  of  a  family, 
the  custom  of  reciting  the  pedigrees  of  the  Kulln- 
families  during  the  marriage  festivities  before  a 
large  audience  thoroughly  conversant  with  the 
genealogical  accounts  of  Kulins  and  ready  to 
assail  any  errors,  however  small, — these,  among 
other  reasons  equally  important,  invest  the 
genealogical  records  of  the  Kulin-families    with 


THE  PEDIGREE  OF  ADVAITA.       291 

an  unquestionable  authenticity.  If  Mr.  Stapleton 
would  take  the  troul3le  to  compare  the 
pedigrees  of  high  caste  Kulins,  he  would 
scarcely  come  across  any  disagreement  though 
he  might  look  into  a  number  of  such  cases. 
It  is  true  that  in  the  distant  villages  of 
Bengal,  outside  the  chief  seats  of  the  Kulins, 
some  families  have  occasionally  tried,  by  forging 
names,  to  connect  themselves  with  some  recog- 
nised Kulin  families,  but  such  cases  are 
exceptions  proving  the  rule.  But  where  this 
has  happened  the  country  bards  have  kept  afresh 
the  memory  of  the  infamous  tale  by  exposing  the 
forgery  in  songs. 

Advaita's  genealogical  accounts,  so  far  as  his 
remote  ancestors  are  concerned,  are  therefore 
unreliable.  He  was  not  a  Kulin,  he  was  a 
Vaisnava.  And  though  his  family  obtained  a 
lustre  from  him  and  became  exalted  in  popular 
estimation,  so  that  his  descendants  sought  for  a 
lono-  list  of  their  ancestors  to  put  themselves  on 
a  par  with  the  Kulin  Brahmans,  Advaita,  himself 
simple  and  pious  as  he  was,  never  cared  to  shine 
by  the  borrowed  light  of  his  ancestry,  but  claimed 
kinship  with  the  whole  of  humanity.  Had  he 
cared  to  preserve  his  pedigree  we  would  have 
found  it  in  the  Chaitanya  Charitamrta  and  in  the 
Chaitanya  Bhagavata  where  long  chapters  have 
been  devoted  to  his  glorification. 


292  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

Aclvaita's  latlier  Kuvera  Pandit  was  the  court- 
panclit  of  the  Raja  of  Lfuira  in  Sylhet.  He  had 
married  Navjl,  a  daus^hter  of  Mahilnanda  of  the 
same  viUago.  'J'he  pair  came  down  and  settled 
at  (Jantipur.  They  liad  six  sons  and  one  dau2;ht(M' 
who  had  died  in  childhood.  The  six  sons  were 
Crlkautha,  Laksmikantha,  Hariharilnanda,  Sadil- 
civa,  Kucaladas  and  Kirtlchandra.  They  all 
A.ivaita's  early  ^^^nt  on  a  pilgrimasfc  and  four 
^''^'-  of  thom    died    in    the    course    of 

their  journe3^  Advaita  married,  in  a  rather 
advanced  age,  Sita  and  CrT,  the  daughters  of 
one  Nrsinha  of  Narayanpur  near  Satgaon. 
His  marriage  expenses  were  home  hy  the 
hrothers  Hiranya  and  Gohardhana^  of  Siltgaon. 
Sita  had  five  sons  Krsnadas  Mi9ra, 
Gopala,  Valarama,  Svarupa  and  Jagadica.  CrI 
had  only  one  son  named  Cyamadjlsa  known  hy 
his  familiar  name  of  Chhota  Cyaraa.  Advaita 
was  horn  in  the  month  of  February  in  the 
year  1434  A.D. 

Omitting  the  four  earliest  names  in  Advaita's 
pedigree  which  are  disputed,  we  subjoin  here 
a  list  of  his  ancestors  and  descendants  about 
whom  no  question  or  doubt  is  likely  to  arise  : 

'   Govardhana  Das  was  the  father  of  the  celebrated  Raffhiiiiruha  Das. 


A    LIST  OF    MYSTICS.  293 

Narasinba  Narial 

married  Nala  Devi. 

Kuvera  Pandit  (title  Tarkapanchanana). 

married  Nava, 

Kamalakar  aliast  Sada^iva  (title  Advaitacharya). 

married  Sita  and  Cri. 

I 
Chhota  Cyamadas. 

r         \      '~\         \        ^ 

1  Krsnadasa.  2  Gopala.  3  Valarama.  4  Svarupa.  5  Jao-adT^a. 


THE   PEDIGREE  OF  NITYANANDA. 

Suiidaramalla  alias  Nakari  Bhadnri 

(of  Ekchaka  in  Birblium). 

Mukunda  alias  Horai  Ojha  (married  Padmavati). 

.r h 1 

1  Chidananda.  3  Sarvananda.  5  Paramananda. 

2  Krsnananda.  4  Brahmananda.  6  Parananda 

{alias  Nityananda), 

(born  1477  A.D.) 

married  Vasudha 

and  JahnavT, 

I 
Virabbadra. 

XXXI.— A  list  of  the  Mystics. 

The  Vaisnavas  had  from  pre-historic  times 
developed  the  mystic  longings  of  the  soul  for 
communion  with  God.  While  the  Yogis  strove 
for  the  soul's  conquest  over   passions  and  for  the 


294  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS   COMPANIONS. 

attainment  of  that  state  of  tranquillity  which 
raises  a  man  above  the  sorrows  and  pleasures  of 
the  world,  the  Vaisnavas  went  a  step  beyond, 
and  loniTjed  for  God-realisation.  This  stage 
presupposes  the  attainment  of  the  hip^hest  i^oal 
of  Buddhism,  viz :  perfect  ethical  development 
in  man  and  an  extinction  of  his  passions  and 
desires.  The  experiences  of  a  mystic  are 
strange.  To  his  senses  the  incomprehensible 
becomes  recognizable  as  clearly  as  a  material 
object,  and  the  soul  becomes  full  of  ecstasies  of 
joy  when  the  vision  is  clear,  and  of  anxious 
lon2"ini?s  when  the  vision  fades.  This  I  have 
already  shown  by  examples  from  Europe  and 
Asia  alike.  I  give  below  a  list  of  some  of  the 
mystics  of  Europe  and  Asia  with  their  dates.^ 
Those  who  would  like  to  have  a  fuller  account 
of  them  are  referred  to  Mrs.  Under  Hill's 
excellent  work. 
Philo  the  mystical  Alexandrian 

Jew  ...  ...   B.C.  20  to  A.D.40 

St.  Clement  of  Alexandria  ...   A.D.  160-220. 
Pope  Gregory  the  Great       . . .  A.D.  5  i0-()04. 
St.  Bernard       ...  ...   A.D.   1091-1153. 

Richard  of  St.  Victor  ...  A.D.  1173. 

(Dante  spoke  of  this  mystic  as  'in  contempla- 
tion more  than  man.') 
St.  Hilde-arde...  ...  A.D.  109S-1179. 


'   I  have  not  inclufled  any  name  of  tho   Indian    .s-S./Ziks    in    the   sub- 
joined  list. 


A   LIST    OF   THE    MYSTICS.  295 

St.  Elizabeth  of  Schoenau  ...   A.D.  1138-1165. 
Gertrude  'the  -Nun  ...   A.D.  1251-1291. 

Mitchhekl  of  Hackborn       ...    A.D.   1310. 
MichthUd  of  Magdeburg     ...   A.D.   1212-1299. 
St.  Gertrude  the  Great         ...   A.D.  1256-1311. 

(She  was  admired  for  her  beautiful  and 
significant  dreams  and  her  loving  conversations 
with  Christ  and  the  blessed  Virgin). 

St.  Erancis  of  Assisi  ...  A.D.  1182-1226. 
St.  Bonaventura  ...  A.D.  1521-1271. 
St.  Donceline  ...  Born  A.D.  1211. 
Blessed  John  Ruysbroeck  ...  A.D.  1293-1381. 
Geraid  Groot  ...  A.D.  1310-1381. 
Thomas-A-Kempis  ...  A.D.  1380-1171. 
Richard  Bolle  of  Hampole  ...  A.D.  1300-1349. 
Julian  of  Nawrich  ...  A.D.  1343-1113. 
Gerlac  Peterson  ...  Died  A.D.  1411 
Joan  of  Arc  ...  A.D.  1412. 
St.  Catherine  of  Siena  ...  A.D.  1347-1380. 
St.  Catherine  of  Jenoa  ...  A.D.  1447-1510. 
St.  Teresa  ...  A.D.  1515-1582. 
St.  John  of  Cross  ...  A.D.  1542-1591. 
St.  Erancis  de  Sales  ...  A.D.  1571-1622. 
Madame  Guyon  ...  A.D.  1648-1717. 
Jacophone  da  Todi  .  ...  Died  A.D.  1306. 
The  Blessed  Angela  of  Eoligno  A.D.  1248-1309. 
St.  Thomas  Aquinas  the  Domi- 
nican ...  A.D.  1226-1274. 
Jelalu'd'din  ...  A.D.  1207-1273. 
Hafiz  ...  A.D.  1300-1388. 


296  CHMTA.NYA   AND    HIS   COMPANIONS. 

Jami  ...   A.D.  11]  t-1192. 

Dante  ...   A.D.  ] 265-1321. 

Meister  Eckhart  ...   A.D.  1260-1329. 

John  Tanler  ...   A.D.  1300-1361. 

Blessed  Henry  Suso  ...   A.D.  1300-1365. 

Mariijaret  El)ner  ...   A.D.  1291-1351. 

Rulman  Merswin  ...   A.D.  1310-1382. 

AVilliam  Blake  ...  A.D.  1757-1829. 

In  India  such  names  are  endless.  Every 
true  Sadhu  is  a  mystic  and  these  men  care 
nothing  for  self-glorification  or  even  for  contact 
with  ordinary  men.  They  associate  Avith  the 
chosen  few  who  are  already  prepared  to  receive 
the    truths  of   a  higher  plane  from  them.' 

Amongst  theVaisnavas,not  to  speak  of  Narada, 
Cukadeva  and  others  who  had  direct  messages 
from  the  higher  spiritual  Avorld  in  pre-historic 
ages,  we  come  across  a  host  of  others  who  have 
shown  in  their  lives  a  manifestation  of  supreme 
bliss  due  to  god-realisation  in  comparatively 
modein  times.  We  find  in  the  Vaisnava  work 
of  Prapasu  IMrita  the  details  of  ecstasies  of  de- 
votion shown  by  KanchiPurna — a  Cudra  disciple 

*  Some  of  these  Sadhus  betake  themselves  to  the  forest  and  live  as 
recluses  ;  others  work  in  the  field  of  the  human  world  ;  but  an  Ind.'an 
Badhu  even  while  practisii^j;  Yoga,  self-i'ulture  and  devotion  in  a  lonel.y 
place,  should  not  be  considered  as  cut  off  from  the  world  and  therefore 
of  no  use  to  it.  The  cocoanut  tree  grows  far  ahead  of  other  trees, 
beyond  the  reach  of  men,  and  in  the  sky  its  treasure  of  fruit  hangs 
where  ordinary  men  can  scarcely  climb  up  to  secure  it,  the  Sadhu 
works  in  the  same  way  for  the  world.  The  chosen  few  are  allowed  to 
approach  him  and  they  briiig  the  fruit  of  the  Siidhu'.s  spiritual  labour 
for  the  service  of  the  humanity,  even  as  the  expert  climber  alone 
reaches  the  toj)  of  the  cocoanut  tree  to  get  the  fruits  for  his  fellow- 
men. 


A   LIST    OF    THE    MYSTICS.  297 

of  Jamunacharya,  Kanchi  Purna  lived  about 
the  year  103Ji  A.D.  in  the  temple  of  Barada  Ray 
(Krsna).  There  his  joys  and  trances,  which  all 
belonged  to  a  higher  plane,  attracted  the  great 
The  mystics  who  Hamanuja  SvamI,  who  was  in- 
BhaklS^!;^ia  spired  by  them  and  himself  exhi- 
specially  in  Bengal,  bited  thc  mystlc  longings  shortly 
after  in  a  far  higher  degree.  So  far  as  may  be 
gathered  from  the  accounts  found  in  Bengali 
literature,  the  followers  of  Ramanuja  do  not  seem 
to  have  had  much  hold  upon  the  people  of 
Bengal.  Ramanuja's  influence  was  confined 
chiefly  to  southern  India.  He  worshipped  Laksmi 
and  Narayana,  and  it  yet  remains  to  be  proved 
whether  the  Sen  kings  of  Bengal,  who  come 
from  the  Deccan,  were  influenced  by  the  apostle's 
followers.  The  images  of  Vasudeva  with  which 
the  temples  of  Bengal  abounded  during  the  reign 
of  these  kings  do  not  apparently  conform  to  any 
earlier  local  artistic  or  religious  tradition  here. 
They  seem  to  have  been  conceived  after  the 
models  prevalent  in  other  parts  of  India — parti- 
cularly the  Deccan.  It  was  to  the  Maddhi  sect 
that  Bengal  owes  her  great  Vaisnava  faith,  the 
culminatiug  point  of  which  was  reached  in  the 
life  of  Chaitanya.  We  find  in  the  Bhakti- 
ratnakar  that  Visnu  Purl,  a  disciple  of  Jaya- 
dharma,  the  10th  leader  of  this  sect,  popularised 
the  Bhagavata  amongst  the  Bengalis  about  the 
middle  of    the    13tli    century   by  his  celebrated 

LL 


208  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

Sanskrit  work  eall(Ml  (lie  Bliaktiratnavall.  This 
seems  to  he  the  first  impetus  to  Vaisnavism  that 
came  from  the  ^NTaddhi  order  in  Bengal.  If 
Jayadeva  m  as  an  earlier  poet,  he  was  inspired  hy 
ihc  Canaka  sect  more  than  any  other ;  for 
it  was  Nimhaditya  of  the  latter  sect  who 
promulgated  the  Radha-Krsna  cult,  while 
Maddhacliarya's  followers  worsliipped  Hari 
and  Ilara.  I  have  stated  in  a  foreoroin";  lecture 
that  Chaitanya  did  not  truly  represent  the 
creed  of  Maddhacharya,  though  he  outwardly 
l)elonged  to  the  sect.  And  I  think  the  songs 
of  Eadha-Krsna,  with  which  the  whole  air  of 
Bengal  rang  in  those  days,  are  responsihle  for 
the  origin  of  the  mixed  creed  which  started 
with  Chaitanya  and  has  since  given  to  its 
followers  the  distinctive  name  of  Gaudiya 
Vaisnavas.  The  Madlihi  sect  from  whom  were 
derived  the  rituals  of  the  Gaudiya  Vaisnavas, 
contrihuted  but  little  share  to  the  development 
of  the  highest  ideal  of  spiritual  love  ty  pi  tied  in 
the  Radha-Krsna  legend. 

I  will  not  weary  my  readers  hy  attemj^ting 
to  solve  the  intricate  problem  of  the  origin  of 
the  different  sects  of  the  Vaisnavas.  AVe  tind 
that  it  was  Visnu  Purl,  a  disciple  of  Jaya- 
dharma,  that  first  paved  the  way  for  the 
influence  the  jMaddhacharya  sect  was  to 
have  upon  Bengal  in  the  13th  century.  The 
Bhaktiratnavali    of    A'isnu    Puri    was  translated 


A    LIST    OF    THE    MYSTICS.  299 

into  Bengali  verse  by  Lauria  Krsna  Dasa  in  the 
beginning  of  the  15th  century. 

The  13th  leader  of  the  Maddhi  sect  Avas 
LaksmI  Tirtha.  He  was  born  about  the  middle 
of  the  11th  century  and  lived  to  a  good  old  age. 
We  do  not  credit  the  story  to  be  found  in  some 
old  Vaisnava  biographies  that  Nityananda  ever 
met  him  during  his  tour.  Nityananda  was  born 
in  1477  A.D. 

It  was  Madhavendra  Purl,  the  14th  Guru 
of  the  Order,  whose  influence  was  the  greatest 
in  Bengal.  He  was  most  probably  a  Bengali 
and  the  reasons  for  such  an  assumption  I  have 
already  stated  in  an  earlier  chapter.  He  made 
many  disciples  in  Bengal  of  whom  the  following 
rose  to  distinction  :— 

1.  Pundarika  Vidyanidhi,  a  Varendra 
Brahmin  and  a  Zemindar  of  Chakra9ala  in 
Chittagons:.  He  had  also  a  residential  house  at 
Nadiya.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  man  of 
extensive  charity  and  his  wife  Ratnavati  was 
also  distinguished  for  her  chaste  and  noble  life. 
Chaitanya  had  a  high  regard  for  Pundarika  Vidya- 
nidhi ;  he  usually  addressed  him  as  father.^ 

2.  Advaitacharya.  It  is  said  that  Madha- 
vendra Puri  visited  Advaita  at  his  house  at 
Cantipur.  The  first  meeting  between  them  had, 
however,  taken  place  at  Vrndavana. 


1    This  is  mentioned  in  many    of    the    Vaisnava    biographical  works, 
particularly  in  the  Chaitanya  Bhagavata  by  Vrndavana  Das». 


300  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

3.  Nityananda,  durinij^  liis  tour  in  Southern 
India,  is  said  to  liave  met  ]\radliavendra  Purl  at 
(^rl  Parvata  and  was  deeply  impressed  by  his 
ecstasies  of  love. 

4.  Madhava  Micra  of  Belati  in  the  district 
of  Dacca.  He  was  a  fellow  student  of  Pundarlka 
and  passed  many  years  in  Chittagong.  He  is, 
however,  chiefly  known  as  the  father  of 
Gadcldhar  Micra,  one  of  the  constant  associates 
of  Chaitanya  at  Nadiya. 

5.  Tcwara  Purl,  the  Guru  who  initiated  Chai- 
tanya   into  the  doctrinal  portion  of  Vaisnavism. 

0.  Kecava  BliaratI  alias  Kalinath  Acharya, 
who  ministered  to  the  rituals  of  Chaitanya's 
sanuycisa. 

All  these  men  were  miicli  older  than 
Chaitanya,  excepting  Nityananda,  who  was  older 
than  Chaitanya  by  nine  years  only,  and  had 
accepted  the  doctrines  of  the  Madhavacharya 
sect  long  ])efore  Chaitanya  did  so. 

These  men  gathered  round  Chaitanya  and 
proclaimed  the  triumph  of  the  ]\Iaddlii  sect  in 
Bengal,  though  Cliaitanya  turned  tlie  views  of 
the  sect  altogether  into  a  new  channel  recognis- 
ing the  beauty  and  superiority  of  the  lladha,- 
Krsna  cult,  already  popularised  l)y  the  poems  of 
Jayadeva,  Vidyapati  and  Cliandidasa,  in  the 
country.  The  new  features  introduced  in  this 
way  have  given  to  this  faith,  originally  derived 
from  the  Deccan,  the  stamp  of  Bengali  genius. 


THE  SHRINE  OF  YRNDAVANA.        301 

While  all  these  men  and  hundreds  of  others 
that  gathered  round  Chaitanya  were  mystics, 
the  Master  was  as  it  were  the  rose  in  a  garden  of 
flowers.  He  proved  that  without  speech,  with- 
out self-assertion,  without  victories  won  in 
public  debates  he  could  irresistibly  attract 
hundreds  of  souls  by  the  beauty  of  life  alone. 
During  24  years  of  his  life  Chaitanya  saw  the 
vision  of  Krsna  and  sang  and  wept  over  the 
unspeakable  charm  of  this  experience  in  his 
soul,  showing  altogether  a  new  and  strange 
source  of  joy  to  the  multitude  who  had  hitherto 
fruitlessly  knocked  at  the  iron-doors  of  the 
materialistic  world  in  their  pursuit  after 
happiness.  He  fell  in  love  with  that  Arch-poet 
whose  creation  of  fancy  this  world  is,  and  his 
life  turned  to  a  love  lyric  to  be  read  as  a 
commentary  on  the  Radha-Krsna  songs,  which 
are  as  plentiful  in  Bengal  as  her  field-flowers. 

J^^JlII. —  The  Shrine  of  Vrndavana. 

We  have  not  dwelt  in  these  lectures  upon  a 
great  work  that  was  achieved  by  Chaitanya's 
followers  on  his  initiative,  viz.,  the  bringing  of 
the  old  Vrndavana  to  the  fore-front  of  Indian 
shrines.  Chaitanya  had  once  addressed  the 
God  of  his  love  and  said,  as  I  have  quoted 
elsewhere  in  course  of  these  lectures,  "I  see  Thee 
here,  and  here  do  I  enjoy  the  happy  union  which 
is  ever  new  to   me,  vet   does  Vrndavana   charm 


302  CHAITANYA   AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

my  fancy".  The  preference  to  A^'indavana 
^vhich  Chaitanya  indicated  in  tlie  ahove  words 
was  prolmhly  meant  to  give  to  his  followers  a 
localised  place  of  sanctity  for  the  culture  of 
faith.  In  consequence,  all  the  spots  associated 
witli  tlie  incidents  of  Krsna's  life  from  the  time 
he  was  brought  to  Vindavana  down  to  his  final 
departure,  were  identified  by  liis  followers  ;  and 
these  turned  in  course  of  a  few  years  into  sacred 
shrines. 

Vrndavana  was,  of  coui  se,  an  ancient  Hindu 
shrine.  Mathuni  was  a  great  centre  of  Buddhist 
activity  as  early  as  the  2nd  century  B.  C. 
Mr.  Growse,  however,  denies  that  Vrndavana 
was  ever  noted  as  a  reputed  seat  of  the 
Buddhists.  Of  late  years  some  images  of  the 
Budhha  have  been  discovered  there,  proving  that 
the  Buddhists  had  also  erected  temples  at  that 
place  in  ancient  times. 

But  to  the  Hindus,  especially  the  Vaisnavas,  the 
place  was  a  sacred  one  from  times  immemorial.  In 
comparatively  modern  times  we  find  Ilamanuja 
paying  a  visit  to  Vrndavana  in  the  11th  century. 
Mfidhavendra  Puri,  Advaita  and  Nityananda  had 
visited  it  before  Chaitanya  did.  The  place  lay 
neglected  in  the  midst  of  a  deep  jungle.  The 
enthusiastic  recos^nition  of  it  bv  Chaitanva,  how- 
ever,  led  to  its  fresh  glorification  and  advancement. 
Rupa,  Sanatana,  Lokanatha,  Jiva  and  Kaghu- 
natha  spent   a   great   part  of    their   lives  in  this 


THE    SHRINE    OF   VRNDAVANA.  308 

shrine  at  the  command  of  the  Master,  studying 
the  holy  texts  and  leading  exemplary  lives  of 
unstained  purity.  This  drew  the  attention  of 
the  whole  Indian  community  to  the  place. 
Magnificent  buildings  rose  where  once  isolated 
huts  had  stood  in  the  clearings  of  old  forests,  and 
some  of  these  buildings  are  unsurpassed  in  India 
in  point  of  architectural  beauty.  At  the  present 
day  there  are  more  than  a  thousand  temples 
adorning  the  town,  surrounded,  as  it  is,  on  three 
sides  by  the  river  Jamuna.  It  was  Rupa  and 
Sanatana  who  first  invested  the  old  shrine  with 
its  new  glory.  The  four  earliest  temples  of 
Vrndavana  were  built  as  a  tribute  of  admiration 
to  these  Vaisnava  worthies  and  for  enshrining 
the  images  discovered  by  them.  Chaitanya  had 
first  sent  Utipa  with  this  object  in  view.  When 
Sanatana,  Rupa's,  elder  brother,  being  afHicted 
with  eczema,  had  conceived  a  desire  of  committing 
suicide,  Chaitanya  suspecting  the  wish  in 
Sanatana  took  him  to  task  for  cherishing  such 
an  unholy  idea.  He  said  that  as  Sanatana  had 
already  dedicated  his  soul  and  body  to  him,  he 
had  no  right  over  them.  Chaitanya  required 
him  to  go  to  Vrndavana  and  work  in  the  cause 
of  its  restoration  to  its  ancient  glory  as  well  as 
in  that  of  propagating  the  true  religion  of  love, 
by  writing  books  on  Vaisnava  theology.  Thus 
did  Sanatana  leave  Purjt  and  go  to  Vrndavana 
where  Chaitanya  himself  met  the  two  In'others 
and  directed  their  work  in  1510. 


304  CHAITANYA    AND    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

Not  only  did  tlio  influence  of  the  Vaisnava 
worthies  manifest  itsell'  in  investing  the  shrine 
with  material  glories  but  the  presence  of  the 
scholars  and  devotees  served  to  turn  it  into  a 
reputed  centre  of  learning  which  drew  scholars 
from  all  parts  of  India.  In  Vrndavana  Sanatana, 
llupa  and  their  nepheAV  Jiva  wrote  their  great 
classical  works  in  Sanskrit  Avhich  will  be  dealt 
with  in  my  lectures  as  Header  to  this 
University.  1  shall  there  treat  of  the  wonderful 
activities  which  characterised  these  Vaisnavas 
in  A^rndilvana,  and  their  achievements  in 
theology,  poetry,  rhetoric  and  jurisprudence. 
Not  only  did  the  followers  of  Chaitanya  muster 
strong  ill  that  ancient  shrine,  but  those  who 
professed  the  three  other  creeds  amongst  the 
Vaisnavas,  as  already  enumerated,  were  inspired 
by  Chaitanva  and  his  followers  to  show  2:reat 
activities  and  propagate  their  views  from  this 
common  centre  of  Vaisnavism.  The  followers 
of  Vallabhacharya  specially  (called  the  Gokul 
GosJlins)  dAvell  at  the  present  day  in  a  very  con- 
siderable number  at  A^rndavana.  ]Many  temples 
of  the  place  belong  to  this  sect.  But  Vrnda- 
vana of  the  present  day  with  her  architectural 
glories,  her  great  learning  and  the  reputation 
of  the  unspotted  lives  of  her  greatest  Vaisnava 
worthies  is  essentially  marked  by  the  influence 
of  Bengal.  It  is  Chaitanya  and  his  followers 
who  have  raised  this  place  of  ancient  renown 
from  a  neglected,    forgotten  and  almost  deserted 


THE    STORY    OF    SOME    PRETENDERS.  305 

condition  to  the  magnificience  of  a  city  and  that 
of  a  resort  of  learning  and  culture,  with  associa- 
tions which  are  really  inspiring  to  the  soul. 
The  subject  deserves  a  more  detailed  treatment, 
which  I  reserve,  as  I  have  already  stated,  for 
my  lectures  as  University  Reader. 

XJiXIII. — -The  Story  of  some  Treteuders. 

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  some  pretenders 
during  Chaitanya's  life-time  came  to  pose 
as  religious  teachers  and  declared  themselves  to 
have  direct  messages  from  God.  They  thus  tried 
to  reach  the  level  of  Chaitanya  in  popular 
estimation.  We  have  found  some  of  these  men 
trying  to  assert  themselves  as  incarnations  of 
God  chiefly  amongst  the  rural  people.  They 
were,  as  I  have  stated,  all  contemporaries  of 
Chaitanya  and  met  with  a  general  rebufl"  from 
the  enlightened  classes. 

1.  The  first  of  these  men  was  one  Yasudeva, 
a  Brahmin  of  the  Ejadha  Deca,  who  in  inspired 
speeches,  listened  to  l)y  a  great  multitude, 
declared  himself  to  he  no  other  than  Krsna 
himself.  The  Vaisnavas  gave  him  the  nick 
name    of  Cvyala — a   fox.     If   we 

Vasudava.  ' 

take  the  account  of  the  standard 
biographical  works  of  the  Vaisnavas  as  true, 
he  was  despised  by  the  upper  classes  of  the 
Hindu  community.^ 

MM 


306  CHAITANYA    ANT)    HIS    COMPANIONS. 

2.  In  Eastern  BenG^al  a  man  of  undouhted 
powers  named  Yisnii  Dasii  Iricd  to  i)rove  that 
lie  was  an  incarnation  of  llama.  His  title  was 
Kavlndra,    tjie    priiice    of  poets,  hut  they  made, 

a    ])nn    on    the    word    and  called 

him   '  Kapjndra '— the    prince    of 

monkej's.     He  also  appealed  to  the  loAver  classes, 

some  of  whom  believed  what  he  said  and  became 

his  followers.     He  was  a  Kayastha  hy  birth/ 

3.  Madhava'^  was  the  priest  in  a  certain 
temple  belonging  to  a  Raja.  He  is  said  to  have 
stolen  golden  ornaments  from  the  temple  and 
fled  away.  Latterly  he  settled  in  a  place  in 
Eastern  Bengal  inhabited  mostly  by     he  Goyalas 

'5'5tt5i  7\x^\i  TR^t^t  <rtc?  I" 

The  Gaiuaii.tja  Chandrika. 

C^\js\  ^tf^  ^^f»l  l^f^  ^tc^  1 
^^^  ^It^  ®^  5lt^  JTRBR  11 

^\^\  ^m  c«it^  Jig  ^c^  ^^t5i^  I 
^^?t^  ^Fl^l  ^t't  ^t?i  ^\^H  II 

Tlio  T'rciiia  Yilasa. 

2  ^i!(^  ^?i  |^2(  c^t^  ^fsiri  *j^ff^  I 
?if^5l!:?<i  w\T\n  fk^  ^  ^f^  II 

^fWrs  ^t€^t^  f  ^*  ^t<itni  ^f^  « 


THE    STORY    OF    SOME    PRETENDERS.  307 

(milkmen).  Krsna,  it  should  be  remembered, 
was  in  his  early  life  assoeiated  with  the  milk- 
men of  Vindavana.  So  that  the  Goyalils  were  all 
warshippers  of  Krsna.  Madhava 
lived  amongst  this  class  of  men 
and  tried  to  impose  upon  the  unassuming 
country-folk  as  the  god  Krsna  himself.  He  said 
that  he  Avas  Krsna  and  had  come  into  this  world 
again  out  of  his  love  for  the  community  of  milk- 
men and  this  he  asserted  with  such  eloquence  and 
scholarship  that  illiterate  people  took  him  for 
what  he  said.  He  imitated  the  amours  of  Krsna 
with  Gopis  and  had  a  large  following  of  low 
class  women.  With  the  milk- women  he  sported, 
danced  and  sang  even  as  Krsna  himself  is  said 


c^rti  at%  ^^1  m\  ^Q^  #l9^  II 

5^55t^tl  ^^  ^Cl  f^^jt^  ^^1  II 
f  ^^t^E^^     *    *    *    *      II 

^]uis\  ^^f^xs  ^c^r^  <[i^  i 

>£J^  TC^  ^1 C^^  ^t^f[  5^t«(tft  I 

c^  cw^  ■^c^  Tt^  c?*t  ^^  j?l  n 
'j^'Rt^  ?^  %  ^t^tl^  f^^  II 

5I5tsftlt  'tsrt^  ^^XW^  C^  II 


The  Prema  Vilasa. 


^08  OIL  VITA  Mi' .A.    AMD    IILS    COMPANIOxVS. 

to  have  done.  Even,  the  women  of  the  Chaiidala 
class  were  admitted  to  his  Order.  He  used  to 
make  a  sort  of  crown  Avith  his  braided  liair.  This 
is  called  the  ChTi'Id  in  the  popular  language. 
Those  who  followed  him  wore  accordingly  called 
ChU'ladharis — the  wearers  of  ChTicla.  It  is  said 
that  at  one  time  he  paid  a  visit  to  Purl  when 
Chaitanya  was  there.  IMadhava  took  his  female 
companions  ^^  ith  him  and  wanted  to  join  the 
religious  procession  of  Chaitanya.  But  he,  when 
he  saw  this  man  with  his  following  of  women, 
shrank  back  from  him  and  said  ""Who  is  this 
fellow  that  cometh  with  women  to  join  our 
company,  upsetting  all  rules  of  moral  conduct 
and  purity  ?  This  fellow  is  an  impostor,  he 
will  ruin  people  by  the  example  of  his  un- 
restrained conduct."  He  forbade  the  pious  people 
around  him  to  mix  with  the  Chnradhadrls. 
The  Vaisnavas  turned  this  infamous  leader 
away  from  Purl,  probably  Avitli  the  help  of 
Pratapa    Rudra,  the    king    of  the  place. 

We  find  reference  to  these  men  in  the  Chai- 
tanya Bhagavata,  Chaitanyacharitamrta,  Prema- 
vilasa  and  other  works  written  in  the  lOth  and 
the  beginning  of  the  l7th  centuries.  This 
proves  that  these  impostors  really  possessed  a 
considerable  influence  since  they  were  worthy 
of  mention  by  the  biograjihers  of  Chaitanya, 
by  whom,  hoAvever,  they  were  strongly  con- 
demned. 


THE    STORY    OT'    SOME    PRETENDERS.  309 

In  the  West  examples  of  religious  pretenders 
are  by  no  means  rare.  Many  have  no  doubt 
heard  of  the  American  Joseph  Smith  who  even 
in  the  19  th  century  could  be  so  audaciously  bold 
as  to  announce  a  revelation  authorising  him 
and  all  those  whom  he  should  license  to  take 
an  unlimited  number  of  wives.  Joseph  Smith 
(born  1805  A.  D.)  claimed  a  large  number  of 
followers  who  accepted  him  as  infalliable  by 
divine  authority.^ 

*  History  of  Christian  Churches  and  sects  by  the  Rev.  I.  B.  Marsden 
(1856)  Vol.  II.     pp.  83—88. 


The  End 


©PINIONS 

^'HISTORY  OF  THE  BENGALI  LANGUAGE  AND 
LITERATURE"  (IN  ENGLISH) 

BY 

RAI  5AHIB  DINESH  CHANDRA  SEN,  B.A. 

Published  by 
CALCUTTA   UNIVERSITY 

Price— Rs    12.      Demy  8vo    Pp    1030 
with  illustrations. 

His  Excellency  Lord  Hardinge    of   Penshurst  in  his 

Convocation  Address,  dated  the  16th  March,  1912,  as    Chancellor  of  the 
Calcutta  University  .• — 

"  Durinoj  the  last  four  years  also  the  University  has,  from  time  to 
time,  appointed  Readers  on  special  subjects  to  foster  investigation  of 
important  branches  of  learning  amongst  our  advanced  students.  One 
of  these  Readers,  Mr.  Sen,  has  embodied  his  lectures  on  the  History  of 
Bengali  Language  and  Literature  from  the  earliest  times  to  the  middle 
of  the  19th  century  in  a  volume  of  considerable  merit,  which  he  is 
about  to  supplement  b}'  another  original  contribution  to  the  history  of 
one  of  the  most  important  vernaculars  in  this  country.  May  I  express 
the  hope  that  this  example  will  be  followed  elsewhere,  and  that  critical 
schools  may  be  established  for  the  vernacular  languages  of  India,  which 
have  not  as  yet  received  the  attention  that  they  deserve." 

His  Excellency  Lord  Carmich£el,  Governor  of  Bengal, 

in  his  address  on  the  occasion  of  the  laying  of  Foundation  stone  of  the 
Romesh  Chandra  Saraswat  Bhawan,  dated  the  20th  November,  1916: — 

"For  long  Romesh  Chandra  Dutt's  History  of  the  Literature  of 
Bengal  was  the  only  work  of  its  kind  available  to  the  general  reader. 
The  results  of  further  study  in  this  field  have  been  made  available  to 
us  by  the  publication  of  the  learned  and  luminous  lectures  of  Rai  Sahib 
Dineschandra  Sen.  *  *  In  the  direction  of  the  History  of  the 
Language  and  the  Literature,  Rai  Sahib  Dineschandra  Sen  has  created 
the  necessary  interest  by  his  Typical  Selections.  It  remains  for  the 
members  of  the  Parishad  to  follow  this  lead  and  to  carry  on  the  work 
in  the  same  spirit  of  patient  accurate  research." 


11  OPINIONS 

Sir  Asutosh  Mookerjee,  in  his  Convocation  Address,  dated 
the  VMh  March,  1009,  as  Vicc-ChanccUor  of  Hic  Calcutta  Univorfsity  :— 

■'  We  liave  had  a  long  series  of  luminous  lectures  from  one  of  our 
own  graduates,  Babu  Dinescliandra  Sen,  on  the  fascinating  subject  of 
the  History  of  tlio  Bengali  Language  and  Literature.  These  lectures 
take  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  development  of  our  vernacular,  and 
their  publication  will  unquestionably  facilitate  the  historical  investiga- 
tion of  the  origin  of  the  vernacular  literature  of  this  countrj',  the  study 
of  which  is  avowedly  one  of  the  foremost  objects  of  the  New  Regula- 
tions to  promote." 

Sylvain  Levi  (Par/.s) — "I  cannot  give  yon  praises  enough — your 
work  is  a  CJiiutanifmi — a  Rafnaliara.  No  book  about  India  would  I 
compare  with  yours Never  did  I  find  such  a  realised  sense  of  litera- 
ture  Pundit    and  Peasant,    Yogi  and  Raja  mix  together  in  a  SI  akes- 

pearian  way  on  the  stage  you  have  built  up." 

Extract  from  a  review  by  the  same  scholar  in  tlie  "  Revue 
Critique  "  Jan.  1915  ;— (translated  for  the  "  Bengalee  ") 

(Jno  cannot  praise  too  highly  the  work  of  Mr.  Sen.  A  profound  and 
original  erudition  has  been  associated  with  vivid  imagination.  The 
historian  though  relying  on  his  documents  has  the  temperament  of  an 
epic-y)oet.     He  has  likewise  inherited  the  lyric  genius  of  his  race." 

A.  Barth.  (Paris) — "  1  can  approach  your  book  as  a  learner,  not  as 
a  judge." 

C-  H.  Tawney — "Your  work  shows  vast  researcli  ami  niucli 
general  culture." 

Vincent  Smith — '"A  work  of  profound  learning  and  high  value." 

F.  W.  Thomas — "  Characterised  by  extensive  erudition  and 
independent  i(  sciiich." 

"E  J.  Rapson — "  I  looked  through  it  with  great  interest  and  great 
admiration  for  tlic  knowledge  and  research  to  which  it  bears  witness." 

p.  H.  Skrine — 'Monumental  work — I  have  been  revelling  in  the 
book  whicli  taught  me  much  of  which  I  was  ignorant." 

£.  B.  Havell — "  Most  valuable  book  which  every  Anglo-Indian 
should  read.  I  congratulate  you  most  heartily  on  your  very  admirable 
English  and  perfect  lucidity  of  style." 

D.  C  Phillott  — "  I  can  well  understand  the  enthusiasm  with  wliicli 
the  work  wa.s  received  by  scholars,  for  even  to  men  unac(|uainted  wiih 
3our  language,  it  cannot  fail  to  be  a  source  of  great  interest  and 
profit." 


OPINIONS  111 

L.  D.  Barnett— "  l  congratulate  yon  on  having  accomplished 
sucli  an  adiuirsiblo  work." 

G  Hultzuh— "  Mr.  Sen's  valuable  work  on  Bengali  Literature,  a 
subject  hitherto  unfamiliar  to  me,  which  I  am  now  reading  with  great 
interest." 

J  P.  Blumhardt— "  An  e.vtremely  well-written  and  scholarly 
production,  exhaustive  in  its  wealth  of  materials  and  of  immense 
value." 

T.  W.  Rhys  Davids—"  It  is  a  most  interesting  and  important 
work  and  reflects  great  credit  on  your  industry  and  research." 

Jules  Bloch  (P«)-(s)—"  Your  book  I  lind  an  admirable  one  and 
which  is  the  only  one  of  its  kind  in  the  whole  of  India." 

William  E-Othenstein— "  I  found  the  book  surprisingly  full 
of  suggestive  information.  It  held  me  bound  from  beginning  to  end, 
ihspite  of  my  absolute  ignorance  of  the  language  of  which  you  write 
with  obviously  profound  scholarship." 

Biuile  Senart  (Farts)  — "I  have  gone  through  your  book  with 
lively  interest  and  it  appears  to  me  to  do  the  highest  credit  to  your 
learning  and  method  of  working." 

Henry  Van  Dyke — ( [7.  S.  4.)—"  Yonr  instructive  pages  which 
are  full  of  new  suggestion  in  regard  to  the  richness  and  interest  of 
the  Bengali  Language  and  Literature." 

C.  T.  Winchester — (U.S.A.) — "A  work  of  profound  learning 
on  a  theme  which  demands  the  attention  of  all  Western  scholars." 

From  a  long  review  in  the  Times  Litei'ary  Supplement, 

London,  June  20,  1912 — "  In  his  narration,  as  becomes  one  who  is 
the  soul  of  scholarly  candour,  he  tells  those,  who  can  read  him  with 
sympathy  and  imagination  more  about  the  Hindu  mind  and  its  attitude 
towards  life  than  we  can  gather  from  50  volumes  of  impressions  of 
travel  by  Europeans.  Loti's  picturesque  account  of  the  rites  practised 
in  Travancore  temples,  and  even  M.  Chevrillon's  synthesis  of  much 
browsing  in  Hindu  scriptures,  seem  faint  records  by  the  side  of  this 
unassuming  tale  of  Hindu  literature — Mr.  Sen  may  well  be  proud 
of  the  lasting  monument  he  has  erected  to  the  literature  of  his  native 
Bengal." 

From  a  long  review  in  the  Athcn8eum,  March  16,  1912 — "  Mr. 
Sen  may  justly  congratulate  himself  on  the  fact  that  in  the  middle 
age  he  has  done  more  for  the  history  of  his  national  language  and 
literature  than  any  other  writer  of  his  own  or  indeed  any  time," 


IV  Ol'IXlONS 

Fioiu  a  luiiy  review  in  the  Spectator,  -Uiuv  12,  1<)12— •' A  book  of 
extnionliuary  interest  to  tliose  wli<,  \v(jiil(l  make  an  imjiartial  study 
of  the  Bengali  mentality  and  cliaracter-a  work  whieh  reflects  the 
utmost  credit  on  the  candour,  industry  and  iearninf";  of  its  author. 
In  its  kind  his  Look  is  a  masterpiece — modest,  learned,  thoroiif^h  and 
sympatlietic.  Perhaps  no  other  man  living  has  tlic  learning  and  happy 
industry  for  the  task  he  has  successfully  accomplished." 

From  a  review  hy  Mr.  H.  Beveridge  in  the  Koyal  Asiatic 
Society's  Journal,  Jan.  1912.-  "  It  i.s  a  very  full  and  interesting  account 
of  the  development  of  the  Bengali  Literature.  He  has  a  power  of 
picturesque  writing. ..his  description.^  are  often  elo(|uent." 

From  a  long  review  by  S.  K.  Ratcliffe  in  "  India,'"  London, 
March  15,  1912—''  There  is  no  more  competent  authority  on  the  subject 
than  Mr.  Dineschandra  Sen.  The  great  /alue  of  the  book  is  in  its 
full  and  fresh  treatment  of  the  pre-English  era  and  for  this  it  would 
be  difficult  to  give  its  author  too  high  praise." 

From  a  long  review  by  H.  Kern  in  the  B'Jdragen  of  the  Roijal 
Institute  for  Taal  (translated  by  Dr.  Kern  himself) — "Fruit  of  investi- 
gation   cai-ried  through    many    years  ..highly    interesting  book the 

reviewer  has  a  admire  in  the  pages  of  the  work,  nothing  to  criticise, 
for  his  whole  knowledge  is  derived  from  it." 

From  a  review  by  Dr.  Oldenberg  in  t\w  Fiunkfarter  Zistung, 
December  3,  1911  (Translated  by  the  late  Dr.  Thibaut)..."  It  is  an 
important  supplementation  of  the  history  of  modern  Sanskrit  Litera- 
ture. The  account  of  Chaitanya's  influence  on  the  poetical  literature 
of  Bengal  contributes  one  of  the  most  brilliant  sections  of  the  work." 

From  a  review  in  Deutsche  Rlindschan,  Ai)ril,  1912— "The 
picture  which  this  learned  Bengali  has  painted  for  us  witli  loving  care 
of  the  literature  of  his  native  land  deserves  to  be  received  with  atten- 
tive and  grateful  rcsjJecL." 

From  a  review  in  Luzac's  Oriental  List,  London,  May-June, 
1912 — "A  work  of  inestimalile  value,  full  of  interesting  information, 
containing  complete  account  of  the  Avritings  of  Bengali  authors  from 
the  earliest  tijnes,..lt  will  undoubtedly  Rnd  a  place  in  every  Oriental 
library  as  being  the  most  complete  and  reli.ible  .standard  work  on  the 
Bengali  Language  and  Literatntc." 

From  a  review  in  the  Indian  Magazine,  London,  August,  1912— 
"For  Mr.  Sen's  erudition,  his  .sturdy  patriotism,  his  instructive  perccj)- 
tion  of  the  finer  qualities  in  Bengali  life  and  literature,  the  reader 
of  his  book  must  have  a  ])rofound  respect  if  he  is  to  understand  what 
tn':d<)rn  Bengal  is." 


OPINIONS  V 

From  a  long  review  in  the  Madras  Mail,  May  \),  1912,  "  A 
survey  of  the  evolution  of  the  Bengali  letters  by  a  student  so  com- 
petent, so  exceptionally  learned  can  hardly  fail  to  be  an  important 
event  in  the  world  of  criticism." 

From  a  long  review  in  the  Pioneer,  Maj^  5,  1912—  "  Mr.  Sen  is  a 
typical  student  such  as  was  common  in  mediaeval  Europe — a  lover  of 
learning  for  learning's  sake... He  must  be  a  poor  judge  of  characters 
who  can  rise  from  a  perusal  of  Mr.  Sen's  pages  without  a  real  respect 
and  liking  for  the  writer,  for  his  sincerity,  his  industry,  his  enthusiasm 
in  the  cause  of  learning." 

From  a  review  in  the  Englishman,  April  23,  1911— "Only  one 
who  has  completely  identified  himself  with  the  subject  could  have 
mastered  it  so  well  as  the  author  of  this  imposing  book." 

From  a  review  in  the  Empire,  August  31,  1911 — "As  a  book  of 
reference  Mr  Sen's  Avork  will  be  found  invaluable  and  lie  i.=i  to  be 
congratulated  on  the  result  of  his  labours.  It  may  well  be  said  that 
he  has  proved  what  an  English  enthusiast  once  said  that  "  Bemrali 
unites  the  mellifluousness  of  Italian  with  the  itovver  possessed  br 
German  for  rendering  complex  ideas." 

From  a  review  in  the  Indian  Antiquary,  December,  1912  by 
P.  G.  Pargiter : — "  This  book  is  the  outcome  of  great  research  and 
study,  on  which  the  author  deserves  the  warmf»st  praise.  He  has 
explained  the  literature  and  the  subjects  treated  in  it  with  such  ful- 
ness and  in  such  detail  as  to  make  the  whole  plain  to  any  reader. 
The  folk-literature,  the  structure  and  style  of  the  language,  metre 
and  rhyme,  and  many  miscellaneous  points  are  discussed  in  valuable 
notes.  The  tone  is  calm  and  the  judgments  appear  to  be  generally 
fair. 


BANGA  SAHITYA  PARICHAYA 

•  'K 

'J'VPICAI,  SELKCTIOXS   FROM   (JLD 
HKXCAT.I    Ln'KHATUHK 

I'.V 

Rai  Sahib  Dinesh  Chandra  Sen,  B  A. 

2  vols.  pp.  1914,  IJoyal  8vo.  with  an  Introduction  in  p]nglisli  riinniiiir 

over  99  pages,  published  by  the  University  of  Calcutta 

{Wifh  10  coloured  ill nsfyatir>i,.<)  Price  R.<.  12. 

Sir  George  Grierson— "  Invaluable  work That  I  have  yet 

read  thiough  iis  li)iM»  pages  I  do  not  ]iretend,  Ijut  \vliat  1  have  read 
has  tilled  nie  witli  admiration  tor  the  industry  and  leai'ning  displayed. 
It  is  a  worthy  secjuel  to  your  monumental  History  of  Bengali 
Literature,  and  of  it  we  may  safely  say  "finis  coronat  opus."  How  I 
wish  that  a  similar  work  eould  be  coinpilcd  for  otlier  Indian  languages, 
specially  for  Hindi." 

E.  B.  Havell — "  Two  monumental  volumes  from  old  Bengali 
Literature.  As  I  am  not  a  Bengali  scholar,  it  is  impossible  for  me  to 
appreciate  at  their  full  value  the  splendid  results  of  your  scholarship 
and  researcli,  but  i  have  enjoyed  reading  your  luminous  and  most 
instructive  introduction  winch  gives  a  clear  insight  into  the  subject. 
1  was  also  \ cry  miuh  interested  in  tJie  illustrations,  the  reproduction 
of  which  from  original  ])aintings  is  ver_y  successful  and  ci'cditablc  to 
Swadeshi  work.' 

H.  Beveridge       '  Two  magnilicent  volumes  of  the  Banga    Sahitya 

Parichaya I    have    read  with  interest  Rasa  Siindari's  autobiography 

in  your  extracts." 

F.  H.  Skrine— "The  two  siilemlid  vdlumi's  of  Banga  Sahitya 
Parichaya  1  am  reading  witli  jileasure  and  profit.  They  are  a  credit 
to  your  profound  learning  and  to  the  University  which  has  given  them 
to  the  world." 

From  a  long  review  in  The  Times  Literary  Supplement, 
London,  November  4,  1915--"  In  June,  1912,  iji  commenting  on 
Mr.  Sen's  History  of  Bengali  Language  and  Literature,  we  suggested 
that  that  work  might  usefully  be  supplemented  by  an  authologj- 
of  Bengali  prosi;  and  jioetry.  Mr.  Sen  iuis  for  many  years 
been  occupied  with  the  aid  of  other  patriotic  students  of  tiie 
mediaeval  literature  of  Bengal  in  collecting  manuscripts  of  forgotten 
or  half-forgotten  poems.      In  addition  to  these    more  or    less    valuable 


OPINIONS  VU 

nionumGiits  of  Bc^np^ali  poetic  art,  the  chief  popular  presses  hare 
published  great  masses  on  literary  matter,  chiefly  religious  verse.  It 
can  hardly  be  said  that  these  piles  of  written  and  printed  matter  have 
ever  been  subjected  to  a  critical  or  philological  scrutiny.  Their  very 
existence  was  barely  known  to  the  Europeans,  even  to  those  who  have 
studied  the  Bengali  Language  on  the  spot.  Educated  Bengalis  them- 
selves, until  quite  recent  times,  have  been  too  busy  with  the  arts  and 
sciences  of  Europe  to  spare  much  time  for  indigenous  treasures.  That 
was  the  reason  why  we  suggested  the  compiling  of  a  critical  chresto- 
mathy  for  the  benefit  not  only  of  European  but  of  native  scholars. 
The  University  of  Calcutta  prompted  by  the  eminent  scholar  Sir 
Asutosh  Mookerjee,  then  Yice-Chancellor,  had  already  anticipated 
this  need  it  seems.  It  had  shrunk  (rightly,  we  thii;k)  from  the 
enormous  and  expensive  task  of  printing  the  MSS.  recovered  by  the 
diligence  and  genex-osity  of  Mr.  Sen  and  other  inquirers  and  employed 
Mr.  Sen  to  prepare  the  two  bulky  volumes  now  before  us.  The 
Calcutta  Senate  is  to  be  congratulated  on  its  enterprise  and 
generosity." 

From  a  review  in  The  Athenaeum,  January  16,  1915 — "We  have 
already  I'eviewed  Mr.  Sen's  History  of  Bengali  Language  and  Litei*a- 
ture  and  have  rendered  some  account  of  his  previous  work  in  Bengali 
entitled  Bavgn  Bhasa  0  Shahitya.  Mr.  Sen  now  supplies  the  means  of 
checking  his  historical  and  critical  conclusions    in    a    copions  collection 

of  Bengali  verse Here  are  the  materials,  carefully   arranged  and 

annotated  with  a  skill  and  learning  such  as  probably  no  one  else  living 
can  command." 

From  a  review  by  Mr.  F-  G.  Pargiter— i"  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society's  Journal — "These  two  portly  volumes  of  some  2100  pages  are 
an  anthology  of  Bengali  poetrj'  and  prose  from  the  8th  to  the  19th 
century  and  are  auxiliary  to  the  same  author's  Histoiy  of  Bengali 
Language  and  Literature  which  was  reviewed  by  Mr.  Beveridge  in  this 

Journal  for  1912 The  Vice-Chancellor  of  the   Calcutta  University 

Avho  was  consulted,  decided  that  the  best  preliminary  measure  would 
be  to  make  and  publish  typical  selections.  The  University  then 
entrusted  that  duty  to  Babu  Dinesh  Chandra  Sen  ;  this  work  is  the 
outcome  of  his  researches.  There  can  be  no  question  that  Dinesh 
Babu  was  the  person  most  competent  to  undertake  the  task  and  in  these 
two  volumes  we  have  wit!  out  doubt  a  good  presentment  of  typical 
specimens  of  old  Bengali  literature.  The  style  of  the  big  book  is 
excellent,  its  printing  is  fine,  and  it  is  embellished  with  well-executed 
reproductions  in  colour  of  some  old  paintings.  It  has  also  a  copious - 
index." 


THE 

VAISNAVA  LITERATURE  OF  MEDIAEVAL  BENGAL 

<  Being  lectures  delivered  as  Reader  to  the  University  of  Calcutta) 

llAl   SAHIB  DIXKSII  CHANDRA  SEN,  B.A. 

JUST    PUBLISHED    BY    THK 

CALCUTTA  UNIVERSITY 
Demy  8vo.  257  pages. 

WITH     A     PItKFACE     BY 

J.  1).  ANDERSON,  Esq.,  LC.S.,  {Retired). 

Price  Rs.  2  only. 

OPINIONS. 

Sir   George    Grierson:— Very  valuable  book I    am    reaclin? 

it  with    till-    wicatcst  interest  and  am  learninff  mueh  from  it. 

William  Rothenstein. — I  was  delighted  with  your  book,  I 
cannot  tell  you  ho^\  touched  I  am  to  be  reminded  of  that  side  of  yoni' 
beloved  country  which  ai)iicals  to  me  most — a  side  of  which  I  was  able 
to  perceive  something-  durinii-  my  own  too  short  visit  to  India.  In  tlie 
faces  of  the  best  of  your  countrymen  I  was  able  to  see  that  sjnrit  of 
which  you  write  so  charininaly  in  yonr  book,  the  spirit  which 
animated  Chaitanya  Deva  and  his  followers.  Through  your  book  I  am 
able  to  recall  these  faces  and  ligures  as  clearly  as  if  they  were  before 
me.  I  hear  the  tinkle  of  the  temple-bells  along  tlie  ghats  of  Benares, 
the  voices  of  the  women  as  they-  sing  their  sacred  songs  crossing  the 
noble  river  in  the  boats  at  sunset  and  I  sit  once  more  with  the  austere 
Sanyasin  friends  I  shall  never,  1  fear,  see  more.  But  though  I  shall 
not  look  upon  the  face  of  India  again,  the  vision  I  had  of  it  will  fill  my 
eyes  through  life,  and  the  love  T  feel  for  your  country  will  remain  to 
em  jch  my  own  vision  of  life,  so  long  as  I  am  capable  of  using  it. 
Though  I  can  only  read  you  in  English,  the  spirit  in  which  your  write 
is  to  me  so  true  an  Indian  spirit,  that  it  shines  tl  rough  our  own  idiom, 
and  carries  me.  T  said  before,  straight  to  the  banks  of  ^our  sacred 
rivers,  to  the  bathing  tanks  and  white  shrines  and  temples  of  3'our  well 
remembered  villages  and  tanks.  So  once  more  I  send  you  my  thanks 
for  the  magic  carpet  you  sent  me,  upon  which  my  soul  can  return  to 
your  dear  laiul.  May  the  .songs  of  which  you  write  to  me  remain  to  fill 
this  land  with  theii'  fragrance  ;  you  will  have  need  of  them,  in  t\w  years 
before  you,  as  wt;  have  lu^ed  of  all  that  is  best  in  the  songs  of  our 
own  seers  in  the  dark  waters  through  which  we  arc  steering. 


OPINIONS  IX 

From  a  long  review  in  the  Times   Literary  Supplement, 
2nd  August,  1917. 

The  Vaisnara  Literature  ot  Meclia3val  Bengal.  By  Rai  Sahib  Dineschandra 
Sen.     (Calcutta  : — The     University.) 

Though  the  generalization  that  all  Hindus  not  belonging  to  modern 
reform  movements  are  Saivas  or  Vaisnavas  is  much  too  wide,  there 
are  the  two  main  divisions  in  the  bewildering  mass  of  sects  which 
make  up  the  217,000,000  of  Hindus,  and  at  many  points  they  overlap 
each  other.  The  attempts  made  in  the  1901  Census  to  collect 
information  regarding  sects  led  to  such  unsatisfactory  and  partial  results  that 
they  were  not  repeated  in  the  last  decennial  enuu'eration.  But  it  is  un- 
questionable that  the  Vaisnavas — the  worshippers  of  Krishna — are  dominant 
in  Bengal,  owing  to  the  great  success  of  the  reformed  cult  established  by 
Chaitanya,  a  contemporary  of  Martin  Luther.  The  doctrine  of  Bhakti  or 
religious  devotion,  which  he  taught  still  flourishes  in  Bengal,  and  the  four' 
lectures  of  the  Reader  to  the  University  of  Calcutta  in  Bengali  here  re- 
produced provide  an  instructive  guide  to  its  expression  in  the  literature  of  the 
countrj''  during  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.  The  first  third  of 
the  book  is  devoted  to  the  early  period  of  Vaisnava  literature,  dating 
from  the  eleventh  century,  and  to  the  life  and  work  of  the  reformer. 

The  Rai  Sahib  is  filled  with  a  most  patrioticlove  of  his  nation  and  its 
literature,  and  has  done  more  than  any  contemporary  contryman  to  widen 
our  knowledge  of  them.  His  bulky  volume  recording  the  history  of  Bengali 
Language  and  Literature  from  the  earliest  times  to  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth 
century  is  accepted  by  Oi-ientalists  as  the  most  complete  and  authoritative 
work  on  the  subject.  The  industry  and  learning  displayed  therein  and  in  his 
thaught  is  still  dominant  in  modern  Bengali  literature  not  directly  Vaisnavain 
-  import. 

Subsequent  "Banga  Sahitya  Parichaya"  "Typical  Selections  from  Old 
Bengali  Literature",  are  also  shown  in  the  present  small  volume.  It  forms  a 
useful  pendant  to  them,  and  on  some  points  modifies  or  corrects,  in  the  light 
of  further  research,  some  of  his  previous  conclusions.  There  is  refreshing 
ingenuousness  in  his  claim,  "my  industry  has  been  great",  and  the  "for- 
bearing indulgence"  for  which  he  asks  if  he  has  failed  from  any  lack  of 
powers  will  readily  be  granted  in  view  of  an  enthusiasm  for  his  subject 
which  somewhat  narrows  the  strictly  critical  value  of  his  estimates,  but  does 
not  impair  the  sustained  human  interest  of  the  book. 

Chaitanya  clearly  taught,  as  these  pages  show,  that  the  Krishna  of  the 
Mahabharata,  the  great  chieftain  and  ally  of  the  Pandava  brothers,  was  not 
the  Krishna  of  Brindaban.     The  latter,  said  the    reformer,  'Rupa,  the   author 


X  OPINIONS 

of  those  masterpieces  of  Sanskrit  di-aina,  the  Vidagdha  Madhava  ujid  the 
Lalita  Madhava,  was  love's  very  self  and  an  embodiment  of  sweetness  :  and 
the  more  material  glories  of  Mathui-a  should  not  be  confused  with  tiie 
spiritual  conquents  of  Brindaban.  The  amours  of  Krishna  with  Radha  and 
the  milkmaids  of  Brindaban  are  staple  themes  of  the  literature  associated 
with  the  worship  of  the  God  of  the  seductive  flute.  But  Mr.  Sen  repeatedly 
insists  that  the  love  discussed  in  the  literature  he  has  so  closely  studied  is 
spiritual  and  mystic,  although  usually  presented  in  sensuous  garb.  Chaitanya 
who  had  frequent  ecstesies  of  spiritual  joy  ;  Rupa.  who  classified  the 
emotions  of  love  in  ^60  groups  and  the  other  author  whose  careers  here  traced 
were  hermits  of  unspotted  life  and  religious  devotion.  The  old  passionate 
desire  for  union  wliich  they  taught  is  still  dominant  in  modern  Bengali 
literature  not  dirt  tly  Vaisnava  in  import.  As  Mr.  J.  D.  Anderson  points  out 
in  his  preface,  the  influence  of  Chaitanya's  teaching  may  be  detected  in  the 
mystical  verses  of  Tagore. 


University  of  Toronto 
library 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 

Uader  Pat.  "Re(.  Index  FUe" 

Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU 


