CHAPTER  LX  XX  I. 


IWarkANDEYA  said  : — “The  Savurni  (son  of  the  sun)  was 
said  to  have  been  the  eighth  Manu.  Hear  i I will  copiously 
relate  his  birth. 

Manus,  possessors  of  great  shares,  were  the  founders  qf 
Manwantaras,  by  the  favour  of  MahamSya,  among  them  was 
Savurni. 

In  the  Manwantara  of  Swaro-chisha  in  former  times  Surad- 
ha,  who  was  born  of  the  race  of  Chytra,  became  a monarch  of 
the  whole  earth. 

He  ruled  this  subjects  paternally;  the  kings  who  were 
hunters  of  wild  boars  then  became  hostile  to  him. 

A valiant  and  mighty  kiagi  among  the  hunters  of  wild 
boars,  conquered  him  in  battle,  and  reduced  his  power. 

Thence  the  holder  of  extensive  portions  returned  to  his 
city,  and  ruled  over  only  his  owa  tract  of  country ; that  king 
then  became  endompassed  by  the  greatest  enemies. 

The  counsellors  and  evil  disposed  possesssed  the  wealth 
of  the  humble  king,  who  lost  all  the  treasures  in  his  city. 

He  lost  his  royalty.  Under  the  pretext  of  hunting,  he 
retired  tp  a dreary  forest  alone,  mounted  on  his  horse. 

He  saw  the  hermitage  of  an  excellent  .Dwija,  thronged 
around  with  wild  beasts  and  adorned  by  the  presence  of  his 
disciple!  and  sages. 

He  lived  there  some  time,  revered  by  the  Muni,  and  wan- 
dered about  here  and  there. 

He  ruminated  there  on  the  love  that  agitated  his  mind 
thus : what  my  predecessors  ruled,  I afterwards  lost. 


markandeya  puranam. 


334 

I wonder  whether  my  subjects  are  governed  with  equity 
«r  not,  I know  not  the  fate  of  my  counsellors,  and  my  trained 
elephant  Surahusti. 

They  arc  now  in  the  possession  of  my  enemies ; what 
pleasure  can  they  now  enjoy,  who  were  formerly  pampered 
with  food  and  riches. 

Now  they  are  certainly  maltreated  by  the  foreign  kings ; 
lavished  on  vain  purposes  is  the  treasure  that  was  assumed. 

The  king  was  sorrowful  that  his  treasury  was  expended. 
On  these  and  other  things  he  was  perpetually  meditating. 

He  saw  a Vysa  near  the  cell  of  a Vipra,  “O  who  art  thou" 
said  he  “what  is  the  cause  of  thy  coming  here?" 

Why  dost  thou  appear  pensive  and  melancholy,  O wealthy 
man  ? why  are  your  eyes  red  with  sorrow  ? 

M&rkandeya  said,  “hearing  the  humble  speech  of  the 
king,  the  Vysa  obsequiously  replied  to  him." 

My  name  is  Samadhi,  a Vysa.  I am  born  of  a wealthy 
tribe,  I am  banished  through  my  sons  and  wife's  covetous- 
ness, and  wickedness. 

My  sons  are  possessed  of  my  fortune,  and  I have  become 
destitute  of  wealth,  a consort,  and  children  ; in  sorrow  I took  re- 
fuge in  the  forest,  leaving  behind  me  my  friends  and  relations. 

I live  here  unacquainted  with  the  happiness  or  misery  of 
my  sons,  the  welfare  of  nny  people,  or  wife. 

Whether  their  house  is  in  safety  or  danger,  at  present  ? 
how  my  sons  are,  whether  they  are  engaged  in  moral  or  evil 
deeds?  ‘ ' 

The  Rajah  asked,  “ why  do  you  love  those  sons  and  that, 
wife,  through  whose  avarice  you  are  banished  ?”  ^ , 

The  Vysa  replied,  “ knowing  my  sentiments,  why  do  you 
interrogate  me,  I cannot  harden  my  heart,  what  can  I do.’* 

Covetousness  has  .extinguished  their  filial  affection,  yet  I 
fed  for  my  people. 

‘0  wise  man,  I am  simple,  for  my  heart  is  attached 

to  wy  trt^fierous  kinsmen  ttior^h  1 know  them. 


MARKAND^YA  PURANAM, 


W5 


How  can  I hate  them,  or  bear  malice, in  my  heart, 

Markandeya  said,  » the  VysA  by  name  Samadhf.  and  the 

noble  king  went  to  the  Muni.’*  . a me 

They  were  duly  respected  by  him  as  prescribed  in  the 
ordmances:  they  both  conversed  on  history. 

ask  one  ^ divine  personage  j I am  desirous  to 

its  flcH  ? -P'ain  it  to  me,  my  mind  has  lost 

on,  I am  troubled  with  anxiety  y 

tran;i/"“"'"‘  ' ^ ‘^°-cious  of 

tan, .tor, lii,, 

and  all  my  retinue.*  ^ ® ’ 

latillt  >>y  'ds  son,  wife,  attendants,  and  his  re- 

lations, yet  he  feels  pity  for  them. 

unto"^e?^'""T,' 

unto  reprehensible  actions.f 

on,'^« ‘J“  “"r  ° “K'r  ">»”«>>  ta  nre  ingnni- 

. y t our  affection  produces  cecity  in  action. 

The  Rishi  said,  «'0  great  sharer,  wisdom  exists  in  all 

others  again  that  appear  equally  blind  both  day  and  night. 

so  - all  H prudent,  but  are  not  really 

, all  the  beasts,  birds,  animals  have  knowledee 

What  kaowledge  mankind  i,  pnisessed  of,  the  other,  are 
equally  endowed  with.  * 

See  the  birds  being  wise,  though  oppressed  with  hunger 
themselves,  yet  lovingly  pick  up  the  crumbs  with  their  befks 
and  feed  their  young  ones? 


* J Wh  conscious,  &c,  that  is,  though  I have  sufficient  knowledge  to 

know  the  instability  of  human  transactions,  yet  like  an  ignorant  penon  /am 

sulififirvi^nt  to  the  finotions  of  my  soul. 

t Reprehensible  action;  w>.,  mundane  affection,  and  the  neglect  of  ab 
atracted  religiom  devotion.  ff  ect  of  ab- 


336 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


O chief  ef  kings ! do  you  not  see  men  lovingly  support 
their  offspring  for  the  benefit  of  others.* 

By  attraction  they  fall  in  the  vortex  of  love.  By  the 
fiower  of  Mahamaya,  the  world  was  originally  created. 

Mahamaya  seized  the  lord  of  the  world  when  at  his  slum- 
her  yoga;  the  great  illusion  enveloped  Hari,  she  shackles  the 
wdrld-t 

The  divine  goddefls  possesses  irresistibly  the  heart  of 
even  the  wisest,  and  forcibly  leads  into  great  deception, 

By  her  the  universe  consisting  of  animates  and  inanimates  - 

was  created,  her  blessings  procure  emancipation.J 

The  knowledge  of  her  is  the  means  of  supreme  salvation ; 
she  is  eternal  and  links  mortality  ; she  is  the  supreme  goddew 
over  air  goddesses.  i 

The  Rajah  said,  “0  divine  personage  1 who  is  that  god-  J 

dess?  O twice-born  1 whom  you  mentioned  just  now,  how  1| 

was  she  born  ? what  miracles  did  she  do  ?”  ' 1 i 

What  stupendous  action  did  she,  whose  form  is  admirable,  li 
perform  ? I am  desirous  of  hearing  about  those  things,  0 li 
excellent  among  those  who  know  the  almighty,  tell  me  ? I 

The  Rishi  said,  “ the  form  of  the  world  is  eternal,  alJ  f 

things  were  created  by  her,  I was  frequently  toJd  her  birth.’'  J 

She  is  eternal  and  only  took  form  for  the  benefit  of  ■ I 
the  gods.§  I 

When  the  world  was  deluged,  Vishnu  the  Divine  Superior  i 
Lord  was  reclining  on  the  serpent  bed  at  the  end  of  Kalpa.  J 

Then  two  horrible  Asuras:  named  Madhu  and  Kitabha,  I 

was  born  from  the  wax  of  Vishnu^s  ear  and  endeavoured  to  I 
slay  Btlhma.  I 

Prajapati  residing  in  the  lotus  naval  of  Vishnu,  saw  the  ‘ 
two  wrathful  Asuras  and  the  sleeping  Janarddana,  who  was 

- -lOf.. Others  posterity. 

t.ShacklM  the  wQrid,  being  the  great  attracti^^ 

f r«^w»  emaaoipaMott  from  eecokr  noncerns. 
f Benefit  of  the  God*,  that  is,  to  destroy  demon*. 

; . ' 

V ' - . 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  337 

(in  Yoganidra),  he  thus  prayed  with  strict  fafth  to  her,  who 
made  Hari^s  eye  to  be  her  abode. 

O goddess  of  the  universe  ; mother  of  the  earth  ! creator 
of  matter  and  destroyer  of  it  Goddess  of  the  slumber  of 
Vishnu,  who  has  extreme  brilliancy,  is  surpassing  and 
superior. 

Brahma  continued,  thou  art  Swaha,  thou  art  Swad^ha, 
thou  art  Vash-ut-kara,  thou  art  Sudha,  thou  art  Akchara, 
thou  art  eternal,  and  of  three  powers;  Matra. 

Ardha-matra,  constant,  perpetual,  thou  art  she  who  is 
moreover  inexpressible,  thou  art  Savitri,  thou  art  the  light, 
and  a superior  matron. 

Thou  art  the  sustainer  of  all  things,  thou  hast  ^.created  all 
f things,  thou  governest  all  ^things,*  thou  existest  to  the  end 

constantly. 

Thou  art  the  principle  of  creation,  thou  art  plastic,  thou 
art  the  preserver,  thou  art  the  destroyer  in  the  end,  thou 
pervadest  through  the  universe. 

‘ Thou  art  the  supreme  knowledge,  thou  art  the  great 
illusion,  the  supreme  intellect,  the  supreme  memory,  the  great 
love,  the  ample  light,  the  mighty  goddess. 

Who  contemplates  all  matter  by  three  kind  of  powers, 
Kalaratri,  MaharStri,  and  Moharatri,  dreadful. 

Thou  art  prosperity,  thou  art  the  goddess,  thou  art  Hari, 
thou  art  the  wisdom  that  creates  understanding,  thou  art 
modesty,  strength,  and  gratification;  thou  art  mildness  and 
forgiveness. 

Thou  art  Khudgini,  Sulini,  the  frightful  Gadini,  Chakrini, 
Sankhini,  Chapini  Bana,  Brusundi,  Parigha. 

Thou  art  placid,  the  greatest  among  the  meek  ; beautiful, 
excellent,  supreme  among  the  excellent ; thou  art  the  great 
goddess. 

Thou  existest  in  all  that  is  little,  and  all  that  is  great ; in 


Three  powers. — Creation,  preservation,  and  destruction. 

43 


338 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


gay  and  sad  things,  and  thou  powerful  by  the  acquirement 
of  their  strength,  who  is  left  to  praise  thee  ? 

Thou  makest  the  world,  thou  destroyest  the  world,  who 
can  praise  thee  ? 

Thou  possessest  the  body  of  Vishnu,  and  also  Maha. 
Esina,  both  of  whom  were  made  by  thee,  and  who  is  able  to 
praise  thee  ? 

He  plauds  the  goddesses’  eminent  actions,  that  she  may 
link  the  wicked  giants  h^fidhu  and  Kitabha. 

And  that  she  might  awake  the  supreme  lord,  who  was  to 
slay  both  the  great  wicked  demons. 

The  Rishi  said,  the  creator  thus  praised,  that  the  enraged 
goddess  might  awake  Vishnu  to  kill  Madhu  and  Kitabha. 

She  liberated  Vishnu’s  eyes,  nose,  arms,  bosom,  and 
breast,  and  appeared  to  Brahmi,  whose  birth  is  pure. 

Janarddana  was  delivered  by  her  ; the  lord  of  the  earth 
arose  from  his  serpent  bed  in  the  ocean  and  beheld  them. 

Madhu  and  Kitabha,  ill  disposed  heroes ; warlike,  with 
red  vision,  endeavoured  to  extirpate  Urahmt. 

Rising  afterwards,  they  both  wrestled  with  the  divine  Hari 
for  five  thousand  years. 

TIjey  were  intoxicated  by  (he  great  deception ; the  elate 
with  pride  desired  Keshava  to  mention  bis  wish. 

Bhagavfin  relied,  “You  shall  both  die  by  met  what  other 
desire  have  I,  know  this  is  my  only  wish." 

The  Rishi  said,  that  they  looked  at  the  universe  over, 
flowed  with  water  and  deemed  themselves  deceived,  th^ 
looked  at  the  divine  lotus-eyed,  and  spoke  thus— 

“We  are  satisfied  with  the  combat  and  praise  thee;  0 
vanquish  and  conquer  us  in  a spot  not  moistened  by  water} 

The  Rishi  said  to  the  holder  of  the  Saoka  and  Chakon,  the 
■divine  said,  I will  do  so.  He  then  cut  off  their  heads  with 
the  Chakra  on  his  thigh. 

Brahma  himself  applauded  the  deed.  I will  tell  thee  copi* 
ously  of  the  miracles  of  the  goddess,  hear  them. 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  339 

Thus  far  extends  the  first  chaper,  mentiornng  the  destruc- 
tion of  Madhu  and  Kitabha. 


CHAPTER  LXXXII. 

In  former  times  war  was  waged  between  the  deities  and 
demons  for  the  full  space  of  one  hundred  years  ; also  be- 
tween Mahisha-sura,  the  greatest  of  demons,  and  Poorunder 
(the  greatest  of  deities). 

The  Asura  of  ample  heroism  repulsed  the  army  of  the 
Devas ; Mahishasura  vanquished  all  the  angels  and  became 
as  Indra. 

After  this,  the  conquered  deities  went  with  Prajapati 
whose  abode  was  the  lotus  to  Garuda-dhwaja  (or  the  eagle 
bannered. 

The  Tridasas  laid  before  him  the  distress  of  the  gods  with 
an  account  of  Mahish-asura^s  actions. 

That  he  had  usurped  the  authorities  of  Surya,  Indra  Anila, 
IndU|  Yama,  and  Varuna;  and  others  hims'elf. 

They  said,  the  gods  are  oppressed  by  the  ill  disposed 
Mahisha;  the  whole  multitude  of  Devas  have  left  heaven  and 
wander  on  the  earth  like  mortals. 

Those  are  the  deeds  of  the  enemies  of  the  immortals,  wt 
humbly  bow  to  thy  asylum  to  meditate  on  their  death. 

Madhusudana  hearkened  to  the  words  of  the  deities ; 
Sambhu  was  wroth  contracting  his  brows  with  furious  ire. 

Afterwards,  Chakrini's  face  was  transported  with  rage, 
abundance  of  light  issued  from  BramhA  and  Sankara. 

An  immense  mass  of  light  proceeded  from  the  bodies  of 
Sakra  and  all  the  other  Devas,  and  conglomerated. 


340 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


This  effulgent  lustre  appeared  as  a flaming  mountain : the 
Suras  having  seen  the  flame  receded  to  the  extremities  of 
regions. 

The  peerless  light  issued  from  the  bodies  of  all  the  Devas 
and  the  phenomenon  was  transfigured  as  a woman  extending 
through  the  three  worlds. 

The  energy  of  Siva  created  her  face ; the  brightness  of 
Yama  made  her  hair ; her  arms  were  formed  by  the  light  of 
Vishnu. 

Her  two  breasts  were  made  by  the  moon  ; the  space  be- 
tween them  by  Indra ; her  thighs  and  the  calves  of  her  legs 
by  Varuna;  her  loins  by  the  light  of  Bhuvi. 

Her  feet  by  the  energy  of  Brahma';  her  toes  by  the  rays  of 
the  sun ; her  fingers  by  Vasus  her  nose  by  Cubdra. 

Her  teeth  were  created  by  the  brightness  of  PrajSpati ; 
her  three  eyes  by  the  energy  of  Pavaka.  * 

Her  forehead  by  the  light  of  Sundhia ; her  ears  by  Anilaj 
the  brightness  of  other  deities  formed  her  body. 

From  the  glory  of  the  light  of  all  the  Deva-s,  Siva  sprang ; 
the  Amaras  perceived  the  destroyer  of  Mahisha  and  exulted. 

The  holder  of  the  Pinaka  took  out  his  Sula  and  conferred 
it  on  her;  Vishnu  gave  her  a Chakra  drawn  from  his  own 
Chakra. 

Varuna  gave  her  the  sank;  Hutasana  the  Sacti;  Maruta 
spread  a bow  with  arrows,  and  quiver  complete. 

Indra  took  the  Vajra  from  his  Culisa,  the  one  thousand 
eyed  god  took  the  bell  from  the  elephant  Iravata,  and  gave 
it  to  her. 

Varuna  gave  her  a Cala-dunda;  and  Yama. the  Pasa, 
PrajSpati,  lord  of  the  subjects,  bestowed  an  Akchamdla  and 
Comundala  on  her. 

^ The  maker  of  day  filled  his  rays  in  the  roots  of  her  hair; 
Cila  granted  a transparent  sword  and  shield. 

A necklace  pure  as  milk,  immaculate  Panoply,  a Chuda- 
mani,  and  divine  Cundala  and  Cataca. 


IMARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


341 


V 


A crescent;  a beautiful  Keyura  over  her  arms;  shoulder  j 

ornaments  and  beautiful  neck  jewels. 

Rings  of  precious  stones,  on  all  her  fingers.  Viswa  Karma 
afforded  her  the  limpid  Parasu. 

Implements  of  different  forms:  likewise  an  invulnerable 
coat  of  arms  ; a never  fading  garland  of  lotus  for  her  head 
and  neck.  , 

Jaladhi  conferred  on  her  a prosperous  Chaplet  of  lotus  ; 

Himavunt  gave  her  lion  vehicle  and  various  gems.  I 

Dhanadhipa  gave  her  a golden  vase  with  imperishable  | 

wine  to  drink  ; Sesha  gave  her  a necklace  of  serpent^s  orna-  ] 

ments  and  magnificient  gems.  ; 

Prudhwi  granted  a neckless  of  snakes,  and  the  other  Suras  I 

geve  her  jewels  and  arms. 

She  shouted  frequently  with  a terrible  voice,  the  sound  of  1 

which  filled  the  sky. 

The  eternal  vault  echoed  with  the  terrific  sound  of  ‘‘  0 ! 

Mayah/^  all  the  world  was  alarmed,  the  ocean  trembled.  ; 

The  earth  quaked,  all  the  mountains  were  moved,  the  | 

Devas  joyously  exclaimed,  ^Wictory  be  to  the  rider  of  the  ' 

lion.*'' 

5: 

Munies  were  delighted  and  faithfully  made  obeisance  to  < 

her;  she  beheld  the  whole  of  the  three  Lokas  grieved  by  the  ^ 

enemies  of  the  Amaras.  I 

All  the  nearest  armies  were  amply  provided  with  imple-  | 

ments,  Mahisha-asura  furiously  said,  what  is  this?^' 

The  sound  of  his  voice  reached  the  surrounding  multi-  j 

tude  of  Asuras  ; he  saw  the  goddess  pervade  the  three  Lokas.  j 

She  indented  the  earth,  occupied  by  her  foot,  her  crown  ! 

struck  the  sky:  tthe  sound  of  her  bow-string  terrified  the 
whole  subterraneous  world. 

She  grasped  all  the  space  of  the  regions  by  her  one  | 

thousand  arms ; fierce  war  was  waged  between  the  goddess  | 

and  the  enemies  of  the  Suras. 


342 


MARkANDEYA  PURAN.  AM 


They  shot  many  powerful  arrows;  her  arms  extended 
towards  all  the  cardinal  (points ; the  leader  of  the  army  of 
Mahisha-sura  was  a great  Asura,  by  name  Chickchura. 

He  fought  at  the  head  of  an  Ayuta  of  great  cjieeked 
Asuras.  The  mighty  Asura  Asiloma,  advanced  with  50,000 
Neyutas. 

Bhaskala  conducted  one  hundred  and  sixty  thousand 
Ayutas  to  the  battle,  accompanied  by  one  hundred  elephants, 
and  many  steeds. 

Bidala  led  one  ATo/Zof  in  that  war,  and  fifty  thou' 
sand  Ayutas. 

The  other  leaders  were  attended  by  one  Ayuta  of  ele- 
phants, ruths  and  horses. 

The  great  Asuras  encountered  the  goddess  with  Koti-Koti 
thousands  chariots,  and  elephants. 

And  with  the  same  number  horses,  Mahisha-asura  wielded 
the  Tomara,  Bindivala,  sacti  and  Musala. 

He  fought  the  goddess  with  his  Khudga,  Parasa,  and 
Puttisa;  some  of  the  Asuras  threw  the  sacti,  and  some 
the  Pasa. 

Devi  began  to  destroy  them  with  her  sword  Chundica 
afterwards  threw  arrows  and  astras. 

She  sportively  cut  them  in  pieces  by  the  shower  of  her 
powerful  shafts  and  arrows,  Devi,  the  imperishable  was 
greeted  by  the  excellent  Suras  and  sages. 

The  goddess  shot  the  powerful  shafts  and  arrows,  and 
severed  the  bodies  of  the  Asuras;  the  lion  of  the  goddess 
being  enraged,  swiftly  shook  his  mane  and  marched  against 
the  hostile  army,  like  fire  against  a forest. 

During  her  achievments  in  war,  the  goddess  sighed 
thereby  instantly  were  produced  hundreds  and  thousands  of 
GanSs  (or  Amazons). 

Who  fought  with  the  demons,  with  Parasa,  Bindivala, 
and  Puttisa ; the  powerful  voice  of  Devi,  destroyed  the  hosts 
of  Asuras, 


MARKANDEYA  PtjRANAM. 


343 


The  Amazons  sounded  the  Pataha,  likewise  the  conches, 
kettle-drums,  and  other  instruments  in  the  festival  of  war. 

Afterwards  Devi,  by  the  trident,  by  the  mace,  by  the 
sactivrusti,  by  the  ’sword,  and  so  forth,  killed  immense 
number  of  Asuras,  and  made  others  to  fall  by  the  ringing  of 
the  bell. 

She  tied  the  Asuras  with  the  Pasa  on  the  earth ; and  some 
were  cut  down  into  pieces  by  the  keen  cut  sword. 

She  afterwards  crushed  the  troops  with  her  mace  on  the 
earth:  some  vommited  blood,  having  been  struck  by  the 
Musala. 

She  cast  some  on  the  earth,  breaking  their  bosom  with 
the  trident,  she  destroyed  some  by  the  keen  shaft,  in  the 
field  of  battle. 

The  commander  of  forces,  the  oppressors  of  Tridasas,  for- 
feited their  lives  : some  had  their  arms,  others  their  throats 
cut. 

The  heads  of  som’e  of  the  vigorous  Asuras  were  cut  off, 
and  the  calves  of  the  legs  of  others  were  severed  and  thrown 
down  to  the  earth. 

Devi  had  maimed  each  of  the  Asuras  of  an  arm,  an  eye, 
and  a foot ; and  though  their  heads  were  severed  from  their 
bodies,  the  trunks  rose  again. 

The  trunks,  holding  the  excellent  arms,  fought  with  Devi; 
the  Apsaras  danced  during  the  battle,  accompanied  by  great 
shouts. 

The  trunks  of  the  Asuras,  whose  heads  were  cut  off,  still 
held  the  sacti,  Khudga,  Vrusti,  and  spoke  aloud  ; stand  j 
stand. 

The  fallen  chariots,  elephants,  and  steeds  of  the  Asuras 
'were  innumerable ; where  the  great  battle  was  fought,  ins- 
tantly rivers  of  blood  were  streaming. 

The  centre  of  the  army  of  Asuras,  the  chariots  and  horses 
of  Asuras  were  annahilated  by  AmbikS,. 


344 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 


In  a moment  the  forces  of  the  Asuras  were  destroye4  in 
abundance  by  fire,  like  grass  and  wood. 

The  Kesari  (or  lion)  made  an  excessive  roar,  it  produced 
a concussion  among  the  bodies  of  the  foes  of  the  Suras. 

By  the  Amazons  of  the  Devi,  victory  over  the  Asuras  was 
achieved,  the  gods  were  gratified  and  poured  down  Amaran- 
thine flowers  from  heaven. 


CHAPTER  LXXXin. 


m 

1 HE  Rism  said  .-—The  mighty  Asur.a,  by  name  Chick* 
chura,  general  of  the  army,  on  beholding  the  destruction 
his  force  proceeded  to  fight  again.sl  Arnbikil. 

That  goddess  poured  a shower  of  arrows  on  the  Asur,  as 
the  clouds  rain  on  the  peak  of  Meru  mountain. 

The  goddess  sportively  cut  hts  mighty  weapon,  and  killed 
the  steeds,  and  driver  by  her  arrows. 

She  instantly  broke  his  bow  and  his  highest  flag-staff : she 
wounded  him  in  the  body. 

Having  lost  his  bow,  he  was  deprived  of  hw  chariot,  his 
horses,  and  drives  were  killed  : the  Asura,  holding  a shield  and 
sword,  ran  against  Devi. 

He  struck  the  head  of  her  lion  fiercely  with  the  keen  bladte 
of  his  sword  : he  struck  the  right  arm  of  the  goddess. 

0 prince  | when  the  sword  reached  her  arm,  it  broke  s 
Asura  then  took  a Sula,  Ida  eyes  being  red  with  wrath. 

And  discharged  it  at  Bhadra-KSli,  flaming  with  a bright- 
ness equal  to  the  orbit  of  the  sun  in  heaven. 


■ MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  345 

The  goddess  receiving  the  Sula,  discharged  by  the  demon, 
threw  a trident  which  cut  the  mighty  Asura’s  weapon  into  a 

hundred  pieces  and  killed  him.  ■ 

When  the  great  valiant  demon  was  dead,  Chamara,  the 
general  of  Mahisha’s  army,  oppressor  of  Tridasas,  mounted 
on  an  elephant. 

Firmly,  discharged  a Sacti  on  the  Devi,  but  by  her  shout 
^ she  made  it  to  fall  on  the  earth  innoxious. 

With  anger  he  beheld  the  Sacti  broken  and  fallen,  and 
discharged  a Sula,  she  then  cut  it  with  her  arrows. 

She  leapt  from  the  lion  to  the  globular  forehead  of  the 
elephant,  and  direly  wrestled  with  the  foes  of  Tridasas. 

During  the  combat,  they  both  dismounted  and  began 
furiously  to  beat  one  another. 

Afterwards  the  enemy  of  the  beasts,*  swiftly  attacked  and 
! separated  the  head  of  Chamara,  from  his  body,  by  the  strokes 

j of  his  paws. 

Devi  killed  Vudagra,  by  hurling  stones,  trees,  &c.  upon 
him,  she  made  Carala  to  fall  by  her  teeth  and  feet. 

Devi  being  enraged  by  the  blows  of  her  mace,  ground  him 
into  powder;  Bhiscala  by  Pindivala j Tomara  and  likewise 
Andhaca  by  her  arrows. 

The  supreme  goddess  killed  Vugramsa,  Vugra-Virya  like- 
wise Maha-Hanu  and  Trinatra,  by  her  trident. 

She  made  the  head  of  Bidala  to  fall  by  her  sword  ] deJs** 
troyed  Durdhara  and  Durmukha  by  her  arrows. 

While  she  was  thus  destroying  his  army,  Mahishasura 
impeded  those  Ganas  in  the  form  of  Mahisha. 

Some  by  biting  with  his  mouth,  and  others  by  kicking 
with  his  hoofs,  some  by  the  lashes  of  his  tail  and  by  the  gor- 
ing of  his  horns. 

Some  of  them  by  the  loudness  of  his  bellow,  by  his  burn- 
ing  breath  he  made  them  to  fall  to  the  ground. 


♦ Enemy  of  the  beasts— lion. 

44 


MARKANDEYA  PURA^AM 


34fi 

The  Asura  having  caused  Pramadas  to  fall,  angrily  ran  to 
kill  the  lion  of  the  goddess. 

The  great  hero  enraged,  tore  up  the  earth  with  his  hoofs 
and  cast  down  the  highest  hills. 

He  speedily  turned  about,  cracked  the  earth,  laslied  the 
ocean  with  his  tail,  and  made  it  to  overflow  everywhere. 

The  clouds  were  dispersed  by  his  long  horns,  the 
mountains  and  sky  were  blown  into  hundred  pieces  by  his 
breath  and  sighs. 

The  great  Asura  vvrathfully  bellowed  ! Chandiki.  looked, 
highly  enraged  and  endeavoured  to  lay  hold  on  him. 

She  threw  out  a PSsa  to  bind  him,  he  w.is  tied,  and  relin- 
quished his  buffaloc's  form  in  this  great  combat. 

He  instantly  turned  into  a lion,  within  the  time  that 
Ambika  cut  of  this  head  ; he  then  converted  himself  into  a 
man,  held  a sword  and  disappeared. 

Afterwards  the  goddess  pierced  him  with  her  arrows,  he 
with  his  sword  and  shield  turned  into  a mighty  elephant. 

1 he  elephant  pulled  the  lion  with  his  trunk,  and  made  a 
terrific  noise,  the  goddess  cut  his  proboscis  with  her  sword. 

Afterwards  the  great  Asura  assumed  the  form  of  a buflfaloe, 
and  terrified  the  three  Lokas  of  animates  and  inanimates. 

The  passionate  CliandikS,  matron  of  the  world,  frequently 
drank  excellent  liquor,  bearing  wrathful  redness  in  her  eyes. 

The  Asura  being  highly  endowed  with  bravery  and  Inst, 
furiously  hurled  mountains  with  his  horns  on  ChundikS. 

She  pulverized  them  with  her  strong  arrows,  and  with 
increased  intoxication  and  angry  looking  face. 

Devi  cried.  Oh  ! vain  noise  j noise  1 wait  a moment  until 
r perfectly  drink  this  liquor;  wlien  you  are  slain  by  me  here, 
all  the  gods  will  exclaim'. 

The  Rishi  said,  she  laid  hold  on  the  great  Asura,  (who 
advanced  towards  her  conveyance),  with  her  feet,  she  struck 
him  with  her  Sula. 

When  he  was  caught  held  an  by  her  feet,  hb  half  teal  form 


r 


ruKANAM. 


f . 

hy  a blaze  ^fghry"'*  goddess  was  surrounded 

Afterwards  every  one 

Daitya  was  annihilated  ■ the  army  of  the 

bighly  delighted.  ’ " ^ multitude  of  deities  were 

the  god7eL"‘^tretingrorGL!^^  applauded 

Thus  far  is  related  in  the  third  Cht 
destruction  of  Mahishasura.  ^ 


chapter  LXXXIV. 


£ rf  f 

and  ,„™,.  Q An.MkI,  ,h„„  art  rC nd 

y le  tmes;  the  magnificent  sages  faitlifuliy  prostrate 
hemseives  to  tiree  r mayest  thoo  give  us  prosperity  ^ 

arrH  H “"P»rallele<I,  BhagavSn.Auanta,  Brah-ni 

»»d  Kara  are  unable  ,„  express  it.  Mayest  tbou.  O ardihfi  I 

.ndeavour  to  preserve. he  „or,d,  and  dispel  the  tear,  .ahj 

ef  " » S'xi'l«=3 

Vieie  ^ “ *”  «y  in  the  abode  ol  the 

Vicmus,  as  sense  ,„.  the  heart  of  the  wise,  as  faith  i„  mankind, 


34* 


markandeya  puraman. 


and  modesty  in  the  Superior  castes ; to  thee,  O Goddess  j I 
make  obeisance  and  implore  thee  to  rule  the  universe. 

How  can  I describe  thy  form  which  is  inconceivable  ? 
thou  art  great,  heroic,  ample  : destroyer  of  the  giants.  Thy 
deeds  in  war  are  admirable,  0 Goddess  f and  superior  to  the 
hosts  of  giants  and  gods. 

Thou  art  the  instigating  cause  of  the  universal  earth,  of 
three  powers ; incomprehensible  to  sinners,  and  even  to  Hari- 
Hara,  and  so  forth ; thou  art  attended  by  all,  and  art  the 
proprietress  of  this  world  : thou  art  undefinable,  inscrutable, 
and  the  excellent  principle  of  matter. 

Thou  art  Swihl.  in  all  tlie  sacrifices.  By  the  devout 
expression  of  thy  name  all  the  deities  are  gratified  : people 
pronounce  thee  by  the  name  of  SwadhS  for  the  expiatory 
oblation  for  deceased  ancestors. 

Thy  stability  confers  inconceivable  salvation,  which  is 
obtained  by  those  votaries,  who  subdue  their  organs,  thou 
art  a goddess,  thou  art  the  supreme  knowledge  to  edify  the 
searcher  after  beatitude,  sages,  and  those  that  are  free  from 
different  offences. 

Thou  art  the  word,  source  of  the  purest  Rig,  Fq/m,  and 
Sdman,  of  eloquent  florid  phrases.  0 divine  Goddess  | thou 
art  of  three  powers : for  the  augmentation  of  the  world  j thou 
art  the  destroyer  of  the  universe  and  remover  of  severe  evils, 

O Goddesss  j thou  art  intelligence  ; essence  of  the  Sub- 
stance of  various  sciences  ; impenetrable  ; a vessel  on  the 
difficult  sea  of  secularly  ; unassociated  ; chiefly  resident  in 
the  heart  of  the  enemy  of  KhytS.bha,'^  Gouri,  thou  art  worn 
by  the  crescent  crowned  god. 

..  With  a soft  smile,  thou  art  the  purest  representative  of  the 
perfect  orbit  of  the  moon  ; thou  hast  a beautiful  golden  hued 
body.  It  is  an  entire  wonder  that  Mahishasura,  with  self- 
created  anger  could  look  on  the  enraged,  and  brow-contract- 


• MARKANDEYA  RURANAAfi 

ti  courtMance  oMteg„ddess.glowing  as 

not.nslanOy  ,„ie  his  ,„„|. 

■enraged  Untaka  ? 

0 Goddess!  we  now  entreat  thy  con 

ample  increase- of  generations;  we  ii^plore 

thy  wrath  the  extensive  posterity  of  the  fore 

and  ‘o  bestow  the  desired  wealth,  fame,  ine. 

■off  pangs,  attendants,  consorts,  and,  pr;moti 

>e  countries  thou  favourest,mayest  thou  c 
da,  n,  the  virtuous  by  faithfully 

y *^0  different  divine  services,  and  consecj 

eayen,  and  thereby  reap  the  fruit  of  their  la 
worlds. 

O Durgaj  all 
thee ; thou  dost 
release  from 
ful  to  oblige  in- 
than  thee. 

All  the  uni 
-giants,  and  tho  _ 
long  time  which 


creatures  lose  thei 
grant  abundance  of  pre 
pain  and  grievous  distress; 
every  respect ; and  who 


Sasadhara-Iiterally,  hare.ho!dery  fh.  muon, 


3S0 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


Thy  prowess  is  without  equal,  ftljy  form  will  create  fear  in 
the  enemy  : in  peace  thou  art  complacent,  and  in  war  thou 
art  implacable.  O goddess!  thou  givest  benedictions  in 
the  three  worlds. 

Thoii  hast  killed  the  foes  at  the  head  of  the  battle,  and 
Paved  (he  whole  of  the  three  worlds  ; multitude  of  enemies 
proceeded  to  heaven.  We  are  exempt  from  fear,  and  pros- 
trate ourselves  to  thee,  who  art  a foe  to  the  intoxicated  enc- 
of  Surns- 

O Ambika ! preserve  us  by  thy  trident  and  sword  ; pre- 
serve us  by  the  ringing  of  thy  bell,  and  by  the  sound  of  thy 
bow-string.  0 ChandikS  \ guard  the  East  and  the  West, 
and  the  South.  Oh  Erahmani  j defend  (he  North  with  thy 
trident, 

Mayest  thou  support  the  saints  and  good  spirits  that 
wander  in  three  Mas;  mayest  thou  retain  a number  of 
tremendous  forms  on  the  earth,  that  wield  the  sword,  trident, 
club,  and  other  instruments  in  their  hand,  to  defend  us  at  all 
times  and  places. 

Xhe  said,  tbe  Suras  tbus  praised  and  joyfully  wor*' 

shipped  her  with  the  divine  flowers  of  the  garden  of  Nandana, 
tubbing  sandal  on  the  universal  DhStri. 

All  the  Tridasas  faithfully  offered  her  sweet  smelling  in- 
cense, the  mild  faced  goddess  said  to  the  humble  Suras. 

Devi  said,  O Tridas.is  j I am  pleased  with  your  worship 
I will  affectionately  give  you  whatever  you  desire.  The  Devas 
replied,  O divine  goddess  j we  have  every  thing  that  we 
require. 

Thou  hast  sl.iin  our  adversary  Mahiohasura,  all  our  de- 
sires have  been  obtained  through  thy  favour,  we  have  only 
one  thing  more  to  request  of  thee. 

Secure  from  harm  whatever  mortal  recollects  to  call  upon 
thee,  repeatedly,  in  the  time  of  danger, 

O beautiful  Face  I deign  to  pve  them  aogamtation  of 


M*RKA-NDEVA 

ncto.^spo„«s,  a.d  p„p„,i=.  Ma,.,ul,ou  p“ 

w.r“.“  4:a7rd\f"T’ 

then,  O KiagI  .1,,  vanlhaj  Ehadra-Kali;  aad 

He  related  to  the  kincr  fi.a.  i,- 

of  fho  goddaaa  a,  o/Z°w;' a°"'r““'°“ 

anxious  for  the  weal  of  these  three  worlds. 

Again  she  was  born  from  the  bodv  n(  r 

r:L‘" ir-sic.: 

Pfof» ::  sr.,a 


a K,s„,  said,  fomari  Aaaraa 

Nmmbha,  by  ,ha  a.r.npb  of  i„obriation  Z 

Z pTd”  Z ‘’’O  “‘'oe  y-orlda." 

cl  , , '"'*'■0.  Sarya,  Kubora 

■bonZd  d7“  H,a  deUUa' 

=»  a„d  dopnvod  of  their  realms  .„d  fled. 

He  assumed  the  authority  of  Tirdasa.!  <. 

t .e  mghty  Saras  beiag  deserted  recollected  S 

Thou  hast  bestowed  tliis  favour  on  all  of 

shall  remember  thee  in  the  hour  of  danger  tl 

Mmove  the  peril  from  us."  ^ ' 


35» 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 


Thus  they  meditated  on  the  goldess  in  their  hearts  and, 
repaired  to  Himavant,  (king  of  mountains)  there  they  greeted 
the  goddess  of  the  illusion  of  Vishnu- 

The  Devas  said,  we  salute  the  great  goddess,  maker  of 
joy,  and  continually  prostrate  ourselves  and  pay  homage  to 
the  auspicious  matter ; we  humbly  bow  to  the  pious. 

Salutation  be  for  ever  to  Radri,  reverence  be  to  the 
Dhatri,  eternal  prostration  to  the  light,  to  the  form  of  the 
moon  and  beatitude ; twice  obeisance  to  the  prosperous,  to 
the  prolonger,  maturer,  and  Kurme. 

Twice  salutation  to  the  Niruta  supporter  of  the  earth, 
and  the  goddess  of  riches,  SarvSni. 

Twice  salutation  to  Durga,  remover  of  difficult  limits  j 
constant  salutations  to  the  renowned  one,  likewise  to  the 
sable  and  dusky. 

Twice  salutation  to  the  ample,  the  mild  and  the  austere; 
prostration  to  the  cstablisher  of  the  world  and  to  the  gaddess. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  called  an 
illusion  of  Vishnu  in  all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  godde.ss,  who  is  the  mind  in 
all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  the  intellect 
in  all  ceatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  repose  in  all 
features. 

Five  times  prostration  to  the  goddess,  who  is  the  appetite 
in  all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  the  shadow 
in  all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  ;to  the  goddess,  who  is  a power  in 
all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  gratification 
in  all  creatures. 

Five  timef  salutation  to  the  goddess*  who  is  mercy  ta  a^ 
creatures. 




" 353 

c "»« i>  a caal.  i„  all 

all  creatu'^irs"  ""  S»'i'i«ss,  who  is  modesty  i„ 

creamms.‘““  “■  Saddess.  who  is  pi,y  io*,, 

all  ■“  ""-a  - Wt*  ia 

allc^IL'::'  -pl^ioo,,:., 

proverityT„'l|7'“s“°"s.'’  »‘"aa  “a  farm . of 

all  oreti're's““'“'“‘'°”  SPddess,  who  is  the  intelleot  ia 

Five  times  salutation  to,  the  goddess  who  i,  ft, 
in  all  creatures.  S^^aess,  who  is  the  memory 

in  all.creatures!^'''^^^'°"  &°^dess,  ,who  lives  as  favour 

all  '^"‘“■“  ‘a.ke.Pddes,  who  li.e.  asJoyi„ 

Five  times  salutation  to  the.  goddess 
mother  in  all  creatures.  ^ 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess  wh'k  n 
of  delusion  in  all  creatures.  ' ® 

ia  au"e'e!ra“s“'°“"°°  "iddoo, 

Five  times  salutation  to.  the  goddess,  who.  is  above  .h 

arg^s  and  eternally  .petvades  through  all  creator!, 

We  salute  the  goddess  who  resides  in  all  th^,  1.1 
a.form  of  effulgence.  " all  the  woHd  as-i' 

Suras,  Indras,  Dinesa  assembled  together  and  nrt.  j 1 
ber  aecording  to  their  former  re,„esl  0 g^^s 

of  happmess  ; bestow  prosperous  blessings  on  ns  d .„!! T 
danger  that  encompasseth  us.  ^ “s , dispel  : the  , 

We  and  the  Suras  salute  thee:'  Destroy  the  proud,  Paity„ 


354 


MARKANDEVA  pur  a NAM. 


whoever  conlefnplates  thee  with  obei.sancr,  their  misfortunei 
shall  he  instantly  removed. 

The  Rishi  said,  when  the  deities  applauded  PUrvati,  0 
prince]  she  went  to  perform  ablntion  in  the  water  of  JSnhavi. 

She  asked  them,  " Whom  did  you  greet  there.”  The  res- 
plendant  Siva  emanated  irom  her  hotly,  and  spoke  thus 
to  her. 

" They  recited  my  praise.s,  because  they  were  expelled  by 
the  giant  Sumbha,  all  the  deities  retreated  before  Nisumbha 
in  the  war." 

From  the  body  of  PUrvati,  AmvikS  issued,  and  was  deno- 
minated Koufiki  throughout  the  univcr-se. 

When  she  had  emanated  from  P.'lrvaii,  (who  turned  black), 
she  was  called  Kouyiki  and  resorted  about  HimSchala. 

Her  transcendent  form  beautiful,  and  creating  admiration 
was  seen  by  Chanda  anti  Munda,  who  were  ailendanU  of 
Sumbha  and  Nisumbha. 

They  mentioned  to  Sumbha,  O great  sovereign  j there 
is  a beautiful  female,  exalted  on  the  Him&chala  mountain, 
she  charms  the  heart  of  all  beholders. 

There  is  no  shape  resembling  her  yet  seen  by  any  body. 
Find  out  who  she  is  and  pass  that  angelic  female, 

Tliat  charming  body  it  a gem  among  the  damsels,  glow- 
ding  in  all  directions  ; 0 Indra  of  the  giants  I it  remains  fw 
thee  to  behold  her. 

0 Lord  I you  have  already  stored  in  your  mansion,  all 
the  precious  gems  of  these  three  world# ; steeds  and  ele- 
phants.  The  elephant  AirSvata,  yon  have  brought  from 
Purandara,  or  Indra,  the  tree  Pirijita,  Ukewbe  the  steed ' 

U.cchaisravS. 

‘ €ir  wilh  divine  swans  rtroittis  in  y^iir  miRslosi  ■ 

wMch  was  made  of  preciou#  stone#  to  the  astonishment  of 
Veda,  you  have  brought  the  Nidhi  and  Mahl-Padma  from  the ' 
god  of  riches. 


The  ocean. has  conferred  on  you  the  lotus  and  a garland 

of  unfading  lotus. 

The  gold  shedding  umbrella  of  Varuna  is  in  your  house> 
and  so  is  the  excellent  vehicle  of  Praj5pati,  who  passed, it 
formerly. 

Yqu  took  the  Sakti,  by  name  Utcranta,  the  cord  of  the 
king  of  waters,  was  occupied  by  your  brother. 

Vanhi  has  bestowed  on  Nisumbha,  all  sorts  of  gems  found 
in  the  sea  at  the  time  of  his  performing  his  holy  rites. 

0 sovereign  of  the  demons  j you  have  acquired  all  the 
precious  articles ; why  do  you  not  take  this  auspicious  female 
gem. 

The  RIshi  said,  Sumbha  was  constantly  listening  to  the 
speech  of  Chanda  and  Munda ; the  mighty  giant  sent  a mes- 
senger Sugriva,  to  the  goddess. 

Said  he,  “go  and  tell  her  that  I want  her;  convey  my 
errand  swiftly,  effect  the  mandate  you  are  sent  upon,  pleas- 
ing her  in  any  manner*’’ 

He  proceeded  to  tlje  mountain,  where  the  auspicious  wasS 
Motioned,  and  delivered  the  message  to  the  goddess,  endea- 
vouring to  move  her  with  mellifluous  accents. 

The  Duta  said,  0 Goddess  j Sumbha  is  the  lord  of  the 
Daityas,  he  is  a mighty  sovereign  of  the  three  worlds,  I am 
hi  s messenger  sent  by  him  hither. 

He  has  perpetual  and  unbounded  authority  over  all  the 
deities,  he  has  conquered  all  the  foes  of  Daityas,  hear  what 
he  says. 

1 possess  all  the  deities  of  the  three  worlds,  and  receive 
solely  all  the  sacrificial  oblations. 

1 have  gained  the  excellent  gems  of  the  three  worlds  ; 
the  precious  elephant  of  Indra,  he  humbly  delivered  to  me. 

I am  lord  also  of  the  horse,  named  Ucchaisravg.,  which  was 
producted  from  the  milky  ocean,  when  the  mighty  Sura^ 
churned  it. 


356 


MA«KANDRVA  PUftANAM. 


All  Ibe  precious  things  foun4  among  the  deities,  Gan- 
dliarvas  and  Uragas  are  mine. 

The  world  esteems  thee,  O Goddess  j as  a female  gem 
come  to  us  and  we  will  wear  thee. 

0 thou  of  the  darting  glance!  choose  either  meoriny 
valarous  younger  brother  Nisumbba,  who  are  the  possessors 
of  the  gems.  * 

You  shall  gain  abundant  and  unmeasured  wealth  by 
taking  me  ; consider  and  be  wise,  and  forthwith  possess  me. 

“ The  Rishi  said,”  the  goddess  with  a disdainful  smile, 
replied  to  him. 

"Devi  said,”  what  you  have  declared  is  true,  there  is  no 
falsehood  in  your  speech.  Sumbha  is  lord  of  the  three 
worlds,  and  so  is  Nisumbha. 

But  how  can  I repeal  my  determined  vow,  hear  what  I 
formerly  swore  to  without  consideration. 

That  whoever  can  vanquish  me  in  combat,  whoever  can 
oppress  my  pride,  whoever  is  equal  to  me  in  vigour  in  this 
world ; he  shall  be  ray  husband. 

Whether  Sumbha,  or  the  mighty  demon  Nisumbha,  call 
them  here  to  conquer  me,  I will  seize  their  hands  without 
delay. 

The  messenger  said,  how  do  you  arrogantly  say  this  in 
my  presence,  is  there  any  individual  in  the  three  worlds  able 
to. cope  with  Sumbha  and  Nishumbha. 

All  the  deities  united  were  unable  to  withstand  the  giants 
in  the  war,  then  how  canst  thou,  a single  woman,  resist  them. 

Indra  and  all  the  other  deities  could  not  cope  with  him ; 
how  could  it  be  possible  for  Sumhha  to  enter  into  the 
presence  of  a woman  ? You  will  be  obliged  at  last  to  go, 
disgracefully  dragged  by  the  liair,  to  Sumbha  and  Nishumbha. 

Devi  said,  "is  such  the  vigour  of  Sumbha,  and  is  such 
the  great  valor  of  Nisumbha  ( I have  formerly  resolved  and 
rowed  without  deliberation,  what  can  I do  now  ? 

Go  directly  and  reveal  to  your  master  all  that  I spoke, 


attd  appeal  to  the  Indra  ^of  dem'on$  ; awd  let  tlienl  ife  '#balt  is 
expedient. 

Thus  far  is  related  in  the  fifth  Chapter,  containing  fte 
conversation  of  the  goddess  and  messenger. 


CHAPTER  LXXXVI. 


TThe  Rishi  said,  hear  the  word  of  goddess  ! the  mes- 
senger transported  with  rage  went  to  the  king  of  Daityas, 
and  addressed  him  thus — 

0 sovereign  of  Asuras,  hearken  to  the  speech  of  your 
messenger,  he  then  related  the  whole  circumstances  to 
Nisumbha,  who  furiously  told  Dhumralochana,  (who  is  a 
superior  of  the  giants). 

0 Dhumralochana,*  surround  with  your  force  and  bring 
that  wreth  to  me,  forcibly  drag  her  into  my  presence  by  her 
hair. 

4f  there  is  one  remaining  to  protect  her,  bring  him  also 
whether  he  be  immortal,  Yaksha,  or  Gandharva. 

I 

The  Rishi  said,  the  giant  Dhumralochana,  as  directed, 
marched  accompanied  by  sixty  thousand  Asuras. 

To  the  goddess,,  resident  on  Tuhinachala,t  he  beheld 
her  arid  spoke  loudly,  '^come  to  Sumbha  and  ]Nishumbha. 

If  you  go  not  cheerfully,  I shall  convey  you  by  force  to 
my  King,  dragging  you  by  your  hair/^ 

Devi  said,  ^‘the  Lord  of  the  Daityas. has  sent  a valiant 
demon  with  an  army,  if  you  carry  me  away  what  can  I do  ?’' 


* Dhumralochana — liberally  smoky-eyed, 
t Tuhinachala— snowy  mountain. 


The  Rishi  said,  the*  gia„t  Dhumralorh 

She  funousfy  rose  and  made  a fnVhtfu 
Proved  the  force  of  Asuras  by  her  Hon/ 

each'^lfr'"*^  j ^eraons  she  dasf 

each  other  and  killed  the 

hy  the  blows  of  her  hand, 

The  lion  tore  some 

strokes  of  his  paws,  separs 

Havi 

the  lion, 


some  by  the 

hoi  '*',’1!^  by  Ih, 

hole  of  h.s  army  was  defeated  by  the 

g™'  Asi™ 

goi'r.xtCh.'r  h^r”''' 

■**  fs  related  iu  the  iIjpiIi  t. . 

humralochana,  general  of  V 'ncntioning  the 

I general  of  Sumbha  and  NianmM.™ 


^UMBHa  havin 
Munda  attended  1^ 
roarched  the  foremost 
The  goddess  be 
Stupendous 
The  demons 
accomplish  their  designs,  and  the 
bOw  dfew  near  to  her. 

Ahivika  then  became  terribly 
changed  her  face  into  a hideous  I 
Her  contracting  brows  oven 
terrific  faced  Kali  slung  her  Paga 
She  wore  a wonderful  Khutw 
of  human  skulls,  she  wore  a tig< 
dried.  ^ 

Her  mouth  expanded,  she  had 
red-tinged  eye,  her  front  filled  the 
She  furiously  fell  upon  the  Asu 
of  deities  and  devoured  their  force 
She  took  Parswagrahi  with  < 
Yadha-Ghumta,  with  the  other,  anc 
Likewise  the  troopers’  chariot 
threw  them  in  her  mouth, -.and  chev 
Ijorribly. 

She  laid  hold  of  some  by  their  h 
or  by  the  hand,  she  crushed  somt 
bosoms  of  others. 

She  wrathfully  swallowed  up  her 
powerful  arrows,  and  the  arms  of 
chewed  with  her  teeth. 


g directed  those 
by  four  sorts  of  I 
--  to  the  fight. 

'ng  on  the  lion 
golden  mountain,  saw  thei 
beheld  her  and  hicrii 


Chanda  and 
arms,  thev 


enemies 


360 


MARKaNDEYA  puranam. 


The  magnanimous  goddess  devoured  or  crushed  all  the 
forces  of  the  valiant  Asuras. 

She  killed  some  with  the  sword,  and  struck  some  with  the 

Khutwanga  weapon  ; the  giants  died  with  the  pressure  of  her 
teeth. 

In  a moment  all  the  forces  of  the  Asuras  fell ; Chanda 
beheld  it  and  ran  to  the  frightful  KHIi. 

The  mighty  Asura.with  a shower  of  numerous  and  tremen 

arrows,  and  ,ho™a„d.  o(  Chakras  apcodil,  tnv.lopad 
the  dreadful  eyed  goddess. 

^ Abundance  of  the  discuses  she  swallowed,  her  face 
became  as  the  orbit  of  the  sun  enveloped  by  the  clouds. 

Then  Kaii,  angrily  shouted  : her  voice  was  horrible,  her 
thouth  became  distended  and  frightful,  and  she  gnashed  her 
tremendous  teeth. 

The  goddess  made  her  lion  to  rise,  ran  at  Chanda,  and 

laying  hold  on  him  by  his  hair,  she  cut  off  his  head  with  her 
sword, 

After  this  Munda  seeing  the  fall  of  Chanda,  marched 
against  her,  she  made  him  to  fall  on  the  earth  and  fnstanta- 
killed  him  with  her  sword, 

thol!r  perceived  the  fall  of  Chanda,  and 

. ^ _iant  Mundri,  and  through  fear  retreated  in  all  directions. 

.;hn  ' 1 °°  of  Chanda,  likewise  of  Munda,  and 

shQutnigly.  exclaimed  to  ChandikS. 

I have  killed  the  great  beasts  Chanda  and  Munda,  you  will  • 
s|4y_Sa„jbha  and  Nisumbha,  in  the  sacrifice  of  battle. 

prosperous  m, 

as  thou  hast  brought  the  heads  of  the  great  demons 

Chanda  and  Munda,  you  shall  be  renowed  in  the  world  by 
we  name  of  CbamundH.” 

deaW  nf  comprising  thp 

death  of.  CJhanda.  and  Munda. 


chapter  LXXXYllI. 


1 HE  Rishi  said,  Chanda  was  killed  and  Munda  fell  their 
abundant  forces  were  diminished,  ’ 

The  bravest  lord  of  the  Asuras,  Sumbha  was  moved  to 
nger  and  directed  all  the  forces  of  the  demons  to  be  prepared, 
en  the  giants  of  various  forces  with  eighty-six  sorts  of 
arms,  eighty-four  kinds  of  cumboos,  set  out  in  legions 

One  hii  of  heroes,  fifty  thousand  of  the  giant  race  the 
tribes  of  Dhoumra  marched  by  his  order.  ’ 

Kihkas,  great  Mowryas,  and  likewise  Kalakeya,  directly 
prepared  for  battle  by  his  order.  ^ 

The  lord  of  the  Asuras,  the  frightful  leader  Sumbha  ad- 
vanced,  attended  by  myriads  of  cohorts.  ’ 

Chaiuiilti  viewing  the  approach  of  this  dreadful  armv 

"■«  ‘■•Ilf 

The  sound  of  the  roar  penetrated  to  the  e,l,.„etie,  of 
the  repons,  the  mouth  of  Devi  eapanded  hideously 

The  army  of  fhe  giaut,  having  heard  the  sound  ta  the  four 
wile  Khir°“^  --tounded  the  goddess,  the  lion,  uud  like- 

O king  I previous  to  the  time,  that  the  enemies  of  the  Su- 

Mmortut'' 

The  powers  of  Brahma,  Efa,  Guha,  Vishnu.  likewise  of 
Indra,  issued  from  their  bodies  and  proceeded  on  their  respec 
tive  forms  towards  Chandika.  respec- 

The  similar  forms  with  their  vehicles,  ornaments,  and  valour 
of  the  deities  went  to  fight  with  the  giants 
46 


with  a strinff  of  heads,  and  a piccner  ot  water  in  ner  hand,  she 
was  called  Bralimani. 

M^heswari  rode  on  the  ox,  she  held  an  excellent  trident, 
great  serpents  were  coiled  round  her,  she  was  adorned  by  the 
signal  crescent. 

Koumari  held  a Sakti  in  her  hand,  she  was  mounted  on  an 
ekcellent  Mayura,  and  proceeded  in  the  form  of  Ouha  to  fight 
with  the  giants. 

Vaishnavi  sitting  on  the  Garuda,  held  the  conch,  dis- 
cus, mace,  SSrana,  and  a sword  in  her  hand  and  marched 
cmt. 

Hari  assumed  the  peerless  form  of  Yagna-Varaha,  took 
the  form  of  the  boar  and  attended  there  in  a terrific  shape, 

Narasimha  assumed  the  dreadful  body  of  Narasimhi,  and 
with  her  mane  extinguished  the  constellation. 

Indri,  holder  of  Vajra,  Was  mounted  on  a mighty  elephant 
having  one  thousand  eyes  like  Sakra. 

E5lna  Was  surrounded  by  the  Sakti,*  of  the  deities,  and 
said  to  Chandika,  “kill  directly  the  Asuras  for  my  satisfac- 
tion.” 

The  implacable  power  of  ChandikH  proceeded  from  the 
body  of  the  goddess  in  a dreadful  form,  named  Siva,  whose 
voice  increased  an  hundredfold. 

She  said  to  Egana,  (who  was  smoky-hued,  unattainable, 
ah'd  a divine  messenger),  “go  to  Sumbha  and  Nisumbna. 

' Tell  those  proud  giants  to  prepare  for  war,  together  with 
the  other  demons. 

- • Irtdra  Sshall  resornd  the  three  worlds,  and  gods  will  devour 
the  sacrificial  oblations  : if  they  wish  to  live,  let  them  go  to' 
t%aik. 

" If  they  '^resdtfre  to  wage  war  with  me,  the  jackals  shall  be 
glutted  with  their  flesh.  > 

^ powQm.  ' 


^AUKANDfYA  fURAMAM. 


* As  Siva  sept  the  message  bjr  the  gedde^s  tp  the  giants 
she  was  called  a Siva-DutS,  or  Slva^s  messenger  in  thJjf 
wopld. 

The  great  Asura  having  hearkened  to  the  message  of  the 
gpddess  sent  by  Siva,  was  transported  with  rage  and  repaired 
to  the  place  where  K^ttyani  lived. 

First  the  enemies  of  the  immortals  furiously  rained  show- 
ers of  arrows  and  Saktis  on  the  goddess. 

She  in  turn  discharged  the  great  arrows  from  her  boyv  a^d 
sportively  cut  off  their  arrows  by  her  trident,  Chakra  and  Pa- 
rusu. 

In  their  front  Kali  struck  them  with  her  trident,  and  with 
the  Khutwanga  and  achieved  mighty  deeds. 

Brahmani  destroyed  wherever  she  went,  the  heroic  and 
Valliant  enemies,  by  pouring  water  from  her  Kamandalp  on 
them. 

Maheswari,  by  her  trident,  likewise  Vaishnavi  with  her 
discus,  Kaumari  with  her  wrathful  Sakti  killed  the  giants. 

Indri  pierced  one  hundred  decnons,  and  evil  gepies  wich 
her  Kuhfa,  and  threw  them  on  the  earth,  their  Wood 
gushed  out 

Brahmamurti  broke  their  breasts  with  the  discus. 

By  her  nails,  she  tore  and  devoured  many  of  the  great 
Asuras;  Narasimhi  talked  in  the  battle ; her  voice  filled  the 
directions  and  sky. 

The  goddess  shouted;  she  struck  the  dpmons  to  the 
ground  and  devoured  them. 

The  chief  amazons  detested  the  mighty  Asuras,  and  the 
Various  demons  were  ineffectual,  and  having  overcome  their 
nfteasures  and  stratagems,  the  warriors,  adversaries  of  god, 
fled  away. 

Seeing  the  retreat  of  the  Daityas,  the  great  demon 
^ackta-Bija,  (whose  blood  is  a seed),  became  enraged  and 
l^roceeded  to  fight. 


3^4 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


When  a drop  of  the  blood  from  his  body  fell  on  the  earth ; 
it  produced  the  same  sized  giants  from  the  ground.  ; 

The  great  demon  holding  a mace  in  his  hand,  fought  with 
Indri,  who  held  the  Sakti  Vajra. 

He  was  struck  by  the  Kulifa,  the  blood  gushed  out:  other 
demons  immediately  arose  of  similar  form  and  valour. 

Equal  in  number  to  the  drops  of  blood  that  fell  from  his 
body,  demons  of  the  same  heroism,  vigour  and  fortitude,  were 
produced. 

By  the  severe  beating  of  the  weapons  of  the  chief 
amazons  as  also  by  the  cut  of  the  Va)ra,  his  head  fell  off. 

When  the  blood  was  streaming,  thousands  of  demons 
were  produced  by  it;  Vaishnavi  beat  him  in  the  battle  with 
her  discus. 

Indri  smote  the  lord  of  giants  with  her  mace ; Vaishnavi 
struck  him  with  her  discus,  and  the  blood  was  spilt. 

Thousands  of  the  giants  of  the  same  feature  abounded 
in  this  world;  KaumStri  beat  him  with  her  Sakti;  likewise 
VarShi  with  her  sword. 

BrShmani,  with  a cudgel  of  BrShnaani,  and  Narasimhi 
tore  him  with  her  claws, 

Maheswari  beat  on  the  bosom  of  the  great  giant  Rackta- 
Bija  with  her  trident  for  be  did  not  move. 

He  being  surrounded  by  the  enraged  chief  amazons, 
severely  beat  them  with  his  clubs. 

He  tcut  off  abundant  of  the  Sakties,  tridents,  and  so  forth 
and  made  a hundred  to  fail  on  the  earth. 

The  giants  produced  by  the  blood  thronged  over  all  the 
world ; the  gods  afterwards  were  overwhelmed  by  fear. 

ChandikS.  looked  at  the  discomfitted  Suras,  and  speedily 
said. to  Kali,  “O  Chaniunda  open  your  mouth  widely. 

Great  Aspras  are  produced  by  the  drops  of  the  blood  of 

lUckn-Bija,  you  must  instantaneously  lick  up  the  lood  before 
it  falls  to  the  ground. 


- 365 

* DevoMT  the  blood  before  the  demons  are  pfodliced;  the 
Daityas  will  be  diminished  and  become  void  of  blood. 

If  you  do  this  they  never  can  spring  up  again/' saying 
thus^the  goddess  pierced  them  with  her  trident. 

Kill  sucked  up  the  blood  of  Rackta-Bija  ; ChandikS  beat 
him  violently  with  her  mace. 

By  the  vehement  beatings  of  the  clubs,  a profusion  of 
blood  gushed  out  all  over  bis  body. 

Chandika  licked  it  up  ; ChSmunda  drank  his  blood. 

Devi  by  her  trident,  arrows,  sword,  and  fists  killed  Rackta- 
Bija,  and  drank  his  blood. 

He  being  overwhelmed  by  a number  of  arrows,  O Ruler 
of  the  earth!  the  mighty  demon  Rackta-Bija,  fell  on  the 
earth,  and  became  void  of  blood. 

Afterward  the  deities  felt  the  highest  degree  of  pleasure, 
the  chief  amazons  proudly  danced. 

Thus  extends  the  eighth  Chapter,  mentioning  the  death 
of  the  Rackta-Bija. 


chapter  LXXX  X. 


1 HE  Rajah  said,  '^0  divine  one  ! you  have  disclosed  to 
me  the  wonderful  story,  and  the  sacred  action  of  the  goddess, 
which  exterminated  Rackta-Bija. 

I am  now  desirous  of  hearing  the  actions  of  Sumbha,'  and 
the  excessive  anger  of  Nisumbha. 

The  Rishi  said,  at  the  death  of  Rackta-Bija,  and  others 
in  battle.  Sumbha  and  Nisumbha  were  uncommonly  enraged- 


366 


MARKAN0SYA  FURANilM 


Seeing  their  immenae  army  destroyed,  the  demons  tvere 
filled  with  ire.  Nisumbha  ran  to  their  succour  with  consider*^ 
able  reinforcement. 

In  the  front,  rear,  and  flanks,  he  was  attended  by  mighty 
giants,  who  were  wrathfully  biting  their  lips,  and  meditating 
the  death  of  the  goddess. 

The  mighty  Asura  Sumbha,  surrounded  by  his  force, 
fought  with  the  chief  amazons,  and  furiously  proceeded  to*, 
wards  Chandiki, 

Sumbha  and  Nisumbha  then  commenced  a dreadful  com- 
bat with  the  goddess,  and  shot  powerful  showers  of  arrows, 
thick  as  clouds  of  rain. 

ChandikS.  cut  them  to  pieces  witli  her  own  parts,  and 
pierced  both  the  chief  Asuras  with  several  arrows. 

Nisumbha  then  took  his  keen  sword  and  resplendent 
shield,  and  struck  on  the  head  of  the  lion,  the  noble  convey- 
ance of  the  goddess. 

When  her  excellent  aiumal  was  beaten,  Chicbura  took 
a sharp  sword  and  cut  in  two  pieces,  the  shield  of  Nisumbha, 
called  Asta-Chandra.* 

That  Asura  after  his  shield  was  destroyed,  shot  a Sakti, 
but  as  it  was  whizzing  towards  her,  the  goddess  cleft  it  in 
twain  with  her  discus. 

Then  Nisumbha  made  a furious  charge  with  his  Sula ; the 
goddess  pulverized  the  hostile  weapon  witli  her  fist. 

The  demon  then  swung  his  mace  at  ChandikI,  but  the 
goddess  by  her  trident  reduced  it  to  calx  instantaneously. 

After  this  disappointment,  the  chief  of  the  Daitayas  seized 
a battle  axe  and  approached  Devi,,  she  levelled  the  warrior  tO' 
the  earth  with  her  arrows. 

When  the  dreadful  Nisumbha  fell  to  the  ground,  htg 
lifother  burning  with  fire  repaired  to  kill  Amvikl. 

..  Being  mounted  on  his  chariot,  he  grasped  h!s  missiles, 


Mi^SKANQfiYtA  PtlMAMM/-  3^ 

ah4  potent  implemeti-t,  and  with  unequafled  vora:  peftetrated 
over  all  the  sky, 

Thte  goddess  perceived  his  conaing  and  sounded  her  conch 
and  her  bow-string,  the  noise  of  which  was  insupportable,  ' 
The  sound  of  her  bell  filled  the  etherial  space  ; the  diffe- 
rent detachments  of  the  Daityas  were  dismayed.  ■ ■ 

The  hon  lustily  roared,  the  sound  penetrated  the  sky  earth 
aftd  the  ten  directions. 

Afterwards  Kali  leaped  up  towards  heaven  and  kicked  the  ' 

ground,  at  the  piercing  sound  of  her  voice  the  giants  ■ 
vanished. 

Siva-Duti,  shouted  at  the  misfortune  of  the  Asura  the 
noise  reached  the  giant  Sumbha  who  furiously  proceeded 
towards  the  goddess. 

Amvika  said  to  him,  O impious  wretch  i stand'  stand* 

the  gods  immortal  inhabitants  of  the  sky  have  cried  "victor# 
to  be  thee  ^ 

Sumbha  discharged  a Sakti,  which  issuing  in  a terrific 
flame,  became  a mass  of  fire,  she  opposed  him  with  a 
Maholka. 

The  lion  like  voice  of  Sumbha,  overspread  the  three  world  ’ 
(Oh  lord  of  the  earth)!  by  the  appalling  sound  of  it,  he  hoped 
to  conquer.  , . ; 

The  goddess  cut  off  the  arrows  of  Sumbha,  by  her  own 
shafts,  into  hundreds  and  thousands  of  pieces. 

Chandika,  was  enraged,  and  struck  him  with  her  trident: 
the  giant  thereon  fainted  and  fell  on  the  earth. 

Nisurnbha  having  revived,  took  his  bow  and  beat  the  god- 
dess Kali,  and  the  lion  with  bis  arrows- 

The  king  of  giants,  with,  ten  thousand  arms,  enveloped 
Chandika,  with  numerous  weapons,  discuses,  and  arrows. 

■ Then  the  goddess,  the  iniccessihlfc,  thfe  subduer  of  various 
ills,  being  enraged  cut  off  those  direful  weapons  with  her  ar-  : 
rows  into  hundred  pieces.  ...  ; ; , 


368  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

Nisumbfia  swiftly  took  the  club,  (and  attended  by  hjg 
giant’s  forces),  ran  to  kill  Chandikl. 

The  goddess  destroyed  his  club  and  threw  her  keen  sword 
the  demon  took  a trident. 

Nisumbha,  the  oppressor  of  immortals,  was  going  to  Chan- 
dika,  she  broke  his  bosom  with  a Sula,  with  a mace  fixed 
to  it. 

His  bosom  being  broke,  another  demon  came  out  of  him 
the  goddess  smiled  and  cut  off  his  head  with  her  sword,  and 
he  fell  on  the  earth. 

By  the  teeth  of  the  lion,  by  Kali  and  Siva-Duti,  other 
giants  were  decapitated. 

Koumari  destroyed  some  giants  by  her  Sakti ; Brahman! 
with  her  enchanted  water  slew  others. 

Maheswari  demolished  some  by  her  trident  Varihi  by  beat- 
ing reduced  them  to  powder  on  the  earth. 

Vaishnavi,  with  her  discus,  crushed  the  giants  to  pieces; 
Indri  with  her  weapon  Vajra  killed  others. 

Many  of  the  giants  retreated,  many  were  annihilated  in 
that  horrible  war,  Kali,  Siva-Duti  and  the  great  lion  devoured 
others. 

Thus  far  is  related  in  ninth  Chapter,  comprising  the  des- 
truction  of  Nisumbha. 


CHAPTER  XC. 


The  Rishi  said,  Sumbha  perceived  the  discomfittirf  ftf 
his  lorces,  and  tke  death  of  his  brother  Nisumbha,  who  w» 
dear  to  him  as  bis  own  sout),  and  furiously  said. 


MARKAJjoe  vll' ' 


" Darga  1 do  not  be  prbud  « " O rttlmrtrtA.f 

you  prevail  by  the  aid  of  others.”  niodest  one  I 

Devi  said,  "l  am  alone,  who  is  &ere  besides  • *t-* 

»-ia.  “ O profligM.  o.,  1 behold,  h u " ! , 

lliat  IS  created  into  many  forms,"  ^ ”” 

As  she  spoke  Brahmani  and  the  other  or.rl^s=;  j 

tions,  and  powers  coalesced  to  her  Spirit  - the^^'^rl 

became  alone  and  sole.  ^ ^ §o'^‘iess  then 

Devi  said,  “ I can  assume  at  will  several  f i ■ 
sbalUetain  one  form  only,  meet  me  therefore  in  Me  ” 

The  Rish.  said,  after  tins  challenge  Sumbhl  and  th 
goddess  began  a fierce  combat;  the  gods  and  dd-  I 

spectators  of  this  dreadful  encounter.  ™ons  stood 

With  showers  of  arrows,  powerful  weapons  and  c 1 

cr„.,^t,,cy  both  dcsparotCy  fooght  for  the  o^T' 

0.  ttrsfjr o'ppi^fd  rr'by 

Parameawari  sportively  destroyed  his  holy  arrows  bi/  the 

sound  of  her  voice  HumeSra.  /the 

Th,  Aror>  corcrod  the  godde,  b„,<,,od,  of  ir„„, 
she  gtowmg  d,  deefroyed  his  bo»  with  her  dWo#,.  . 

The  .chief  of  the  giants,  having  Idsl  this  weapon,  speedity 

yetrL^taS'  !■ 

‘f’e  shield 

fhe'oir"  He  ran  furiously  towards 

(ihandika  cut  through  his  sword  and  discharged  her  keen 
arrows,  pure  as  the  beams  of  the  sun. 

a trim!  ^ow,  seised 

a tiemv-nuous  Mudgara,  intending  to  kill  Amvika. 

his  ^ ™ l-e,  with 


47 


markandeya  puranam. 


Hft  hastily  shot  a musti,  she  made  it  to  fall ; and  struck  the 
bosom  of  the  chief  of  the  Daityas. 

. The  severity  of  the  blow  felled  him  to  the  earth  ; the  king 
of  giants  speedily  rose  up  again,  and  flew  up  to  heaven  with 
the  desire  of  laying  hold  on  the  goddess ; though  he  was 
incumbent  in  the  skies,  he  fought  with  ChandikS. 

They  mutually  fought  in  the  sky,  and  perform'  d wondrous 
feats  in  battle,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  sages  and  angels 
. By  leaping,  turning,  and  casting  each  other  on  the  earth ; 
they  fought  a long  while. 

, The  ill  disposed  descended  to  the  earth,  directly  closing 
his  fist  with  an  intention  of  killing  ChandikS. 

The  goddess  saw  the  lord  of  giants,  coming  and  pierced 
his  bosom  with  her  trident,  and  made  him  to  fall  on  the 
ground. 

He  yielded  his  life,  being  transfixed  by  the  trident  of  the 
goddess;  as  he  fell  on  the  earth,  the  seven  islands  and 
mountains  moved. 

Every  one  was  delighted  at  the  death  of  the  miscreant, 
the  world  was  in  peace ; the  sky  became  serene. 

, The  clouds  dissolved  in  air;  inauspicious  omens,  hence- 
forth ceased  ; while  the  sun  beams  converged  as  usual ; and 
the  rivers  flowed  in  the  beds  a.ssigned  them. 

. All  the  gods  were  filled  with  joy ; Gandharvas,  on  his 
death  pleasantly  sang. 

Others  shouted.  Apsarls  danced  | hallowing  breezes  began 
to  blow ; the  sun  became  resplendent. 

The  inflaming  fire  moderated } the  noise  of  the  elephants 
of  the  regions  was  hushed ; the  planets  revolved  in  peace ; 
tfte  moon  enlightened  the  whole  firmament. 

Thus  far  is  related  in  the  tenth  Chapter,  containing  the 
4eath  of  Sumbha. 


CHAPTER  XCI. 


The  RiSHI  said,  when  the  chief  of  the  Asuras  was  killed 
by  the  goddess,  ladra,  Suras,  and  Vanhi  appeared  before  her, 
and  with  joyful  countenances  advanced  to  greet  KStySni  for 
the  favor  slie  had  conferred  on  them. 

0 goddess  i thy  countenance  removes  the  grievances  of 
thy  people,  thou  art  the  beneficent  mother  of  .the  whole 
universe.  O sovereign  of  the  world  1 save  the  earth. 

, Mayest  thou  preserve  the  world;  thou  art  • the  goddess 
of  animates  and  inanimates. 

Thou  dost  sustain  alone  the  world  in  the  torm  of  the  earth, 
.0  parragoii  of  heroism  i thou  as  water  refreshest  all  the 
people. 

^ Thou  art  the  power  of  Vaishnavi,  thy  valour  is  endless,  thou 
art  the  element  of  the  universe,  thou  art  the  supreme  illusionj 
O goddess  [ thou  bindest  all  things  in  love,  thou  art  the  great 
first  cause,  thou  art  the  bestower  of  salvation  on  the  earth^ 
thou  art  the  essence  of  all  sciences,  thou  art  the  rich  one; 
thou  fillest  all  things,— who  can  praise  thy  holy  eloquence  ? 

Thou  art  the  bestower  of  heaven,  and  salvation  on  all 
creatures  ; what  expression  can  sufficiently  applaud  thee?  * 

1 salute  thee,  O goddess ! NirSyani,  who  liveth  in  the 
hearts  of  thy  subjects,  as  a form  of  intellect,  and  giveth  to 
paradise  a local  and  unperishable  abode. 

I salute  Narayani,  who  protects  all  things  in  a spiritual 
and  material  form,  she  is  the  over-ruling  power  of  ih6 
universe.  ‘ 

I salute  NSlrSlyani,  who  is  the  auspicious  bestower  of  pros- 
perity, happiness,  and  every  desire;  who  is  the  conferer  of 
obligations,  who  is  three  eyed  and  brown.  . ^ * i 


372 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


I salute  Narlyani,  who  has  power  to  create,  preserve,  and 
destroy ; who  is  the  reservoir  of  virtue  from  all  ages. 

I salute  the  goddess  NarSyani  who  saveth  those  that  seek 
her  protection,  who  comfortelh  the  wretched  and  grieved  ; 
who  is  the  dispeller  of  all  sorrows. 

I salute  NatSyani,  who  sits  mounted  on  a car,  drawn  by 
divine  swans,  who  asumes  the  form  of  Cr5hmani,  and  eats 
vegetables. 

I salute  NarSyani,  holder  of  the  Sura.s,  Chundra,  Jyuda,* 
who  rides  on  t!)e  ample  ox  in  the  form  of  Maheswari. 

I salute  Namyani,  attended  by  the  peacock,  and  holder  of 
the  mighty  mountain  on  her  nails  who  acquired  the  form  of 
Kaum3.ri. 

I salute  NarSyani,  the  posse.ssor  of  the  Sanka,  Chakra, 
Gads,  and  Sarna ; who  favors  all  in  the  form  of  Vai.shivavi. 

I salute  NarSyani,  who  took  the  ample  Ch.ikra,  and  sus- 
^ned  the  earth  on  her  proboscis,  in  the  form  of  VarSha  and 
Siva. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  who  assumed  the  wrathful  form  of 
Nrisimhi,  and  slew  the  giaiit.s  to  preserve  the  three  worlds. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  who  is  crowned  Indra,  the  holder  of  the 
Vajra,  who  glowes  with  one  thousand  eyes,  the  drawer  of  the 
soul  of  Vritra. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  who  destroyed  t!>e  valiant  giants,  in 
the  form  of  Siva  Duti,  whose  form  was  dreadful  in  the  great 
battle. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  whose  teeth  and  mout!>  are  frightful 
like  the  lions;  and  who  is  adorned  by  a necklace  of  skulls; 
the  crusher  of  the  head  of  ChSmundS ; tho  modest  j the  omni... 
scient ; the  faithful ; and  strong  Swadha ; the  steady ; the 
pighty  ; and  the  skilled  in  abundant  arts. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  .who  is  intelligence  and  excellence; 
Sa|-4wati;  the  bestower  of  prosperity;  the  wrathful ; the 
ftttsiece;  aai  the  giver  of  all  benefits. 

I salute  the  godd^  DargS*  who  has  nsaiofold  forms;  who 


MARKANDEYI^  tlfRANAM. 


373 


is  Itie  lord  of  all  things  : abounding  with  different  po^wers  ; 
the  saviour  of  the  fearful. 

I salute  Katytni,  whose  face  is  mild  ; who  is  adorned  with 
three  eyes ; who  preserves  all  creatures. 

I salute  Bhadra-Kali,  whose  face  is  terrific;  who  destroyed 
the  whole  race  of  giants  5 may  such  a trident  guard  the 
fearful. 

May  the  bell  of  the  goddess,  the  sound  of  which  has 
appalled  the  energy  of  the  giants,  and  penetrated  through  all 
the  worlds  : preserve  us  as  its  childern. 

We  prostrate  ourselves  to  Chandika,  whose  exquisitely 
bright  sword  was  stained  by  the  blood  and  flesh  of  the  giants; 
and  became  the  instrument  of  the  death  of  Sumbha. 

Thou  healing  from  all  kind  of  disorders,  givest  pleasure 
and  strength  to  all  people  ; those  that  desire  to  follow  thee, 
shall  not  feel  distress,  but  will  be  restored. 

Thou  hast  destroyed  the  great  Asuras,  who  are  the  enemies, 
of  virtue,  by  thy  actions  and  transfigurations. 

Thou  art  supremely  exalted  in  the  sciences;  in  knowledge; 
in  wisdom  ; in  eloquence  ; in  virtuous  practice  ; the  vrorld  is 
overwhelmed  in  the  excess  of  thy  love. 

7*hou  dwellest  even  among  venomous  serpents  ; amongst 
hardened  and  depraved  robbers;  ane  where  there  are  com- 
bustibles and  fire  5 thou  art  in  the  sea,  and  thou  supportest 
the  world. 

O Goddess  of  the  universe!  thou  shouldest  preserve  the 
world,  thou  pervadest  through  the  world  holding  it.  The 
world  prostrates  itself  to  thee ; thou  art  followed  by  the 
world ; thou  art  faithfully  loved  by  the  world. 

O Goddess  1 protect  and  preserve  the  people  from  the  fear 
of  enemies,  by  destroying  always  the  giants,  as  thou  didst  of 
late  : extinguish  the  sins  of  the  world,  which  proceed  from 
accidental  causes. 

0 Goddess  1 thou  shouldest  favour  him,  who  humbly  bows  * 
O dispeller  of  universal  alarm  ! the  inhabitants  of  the  three 


?374 


MARKANOEYA  PURANAM. 


worlds,  shall  prostrate  themselves  to  thee ; O bless  the 
people  ! 

Devi  said,  “O  band  of  Suras  t I will  bless  you  ; ask,  and  I 
will  bestow  what  you  desire,  for  the  benefit  of  the  gods." 

The  Devas  replied,  "0  supreme  godde.ss  of  the  three 
worlds  1 we  solicit  thee  to  expel  all  danger  and  destroy  our 
enemies  ; this  is  thy  task." 

Devi  said,  on  the  twoniy-eigluh  age  of  Vibhasvvatta,  Sura- 
bha,  and  Nisumbha,  shall  he  regenerated. 

I shall  reside  on  the  moiuitain  of  Vindhya,  I shall  be  born 
in  the  race  of  cowherds  in  the  womb  of  Yasoda,  and  destroy 
them. 

I shall;be  incarnate  on  the  earth,  and  shall  slay  the  great 
giant  Viprochitta, 

I shall  have  my  teeth  red,  like  pomegranate  flowers,  then 
all  tlie  gods  and  mankind  shall  give  me  applause  and  call  me 
conslanily  Racta-DauticH. 

A famine  shall  happen  for  one  hundred  years  without  raiui* 
being  greteed  by  the  sages  I .sliall  be  self-born. 

Then  shall  I look  at  the  sages  with  one  hundred  eyes, 
therefore  mortals  will  call  me  Satakshi,  (or  hundred  eyes,)  , 

The  whole  world  shall  subsist  by  the  divine  vegetable, 
which  shall  be  produced  from  my  body  until  the  rain  shall  fall. 

I shall  be  esteemed  in  the  earth  by  the  name  of  Sacura- 
bhari,  the  preserver  by  vegetables,  I shall  be  denominated 
Durga  Devi. 

I again  shall  assume  a dreadful  form  on  the  mountain 
Himadiala,  and  devour  the  giants  to  protect  the  sages  : all 
the  ascetics  will  bow  and  applaud  me, 

I shall  be  called  Bhim&-Devi,  when  Aruna  shall  disturb 
the  three  world  ; then  I shall  turn  a roving  beettle. 

I will  destroy  the  great  giant  for  the  advantage  of  these 
thfee  worlds : ah  wUl  applaud  me  by  the  name  of  Bramhani 
in-thfe,w.o#^i., ^ . ..r 


MARKANBEYAr  PURAMitM. 


37  S 

Whenever  disturbances  shall  arise  from  the  giants,  then 
I shall  incarnate  and  destroy  the  enemies, 
j 'fhus  far  is  related  in  the  eleventh  Chapter,  mentioning 
the  d^ath  of  Sumbha  and  Nisumbha. 


.00 


CHAPTER  XCII, 


Devi  said,  he  who  forever  joyfully  applauds  me,  him 
I will  undoubtedly  shield  from  all  kinds  of  danger. 

; Whoever  recites  the  dissolution  of  Madhu  and  Kaitabha, 
and  the  destruction  of  Mahishasura  ; likewise  the  death  of 
Sumbha  and  Nisumbha, 

On  the  Astami  or  eighth,  Navami  or  ninth,  Chaturdasi 
or  fourteenth,  with  an  intent  and  pure  heart  and  faithfully 
praise  of  my  noble  actions,  ^ 

They  shall  incur  no  manner  of  sin,  shall  never  be  exposed 
to  distress,  and  never  suffer  any  trouble,  or  feel  any  pain. 

Nor  shall  he  be  in  fear  of  foes,  or  thieves,  or  fire,  sword, 
or  water,  at  any  period. 

Therefore  my  actions  should  at  all  times  be  chaunted  in 
peace  voluntarily ; and  always  be  heard  with  joy. 

All  the  dangers  of  evil  and  the  three  different  plagues,'^^ 
shall  be  counteracted  by  my  meritorious  deeds. 

Whoever  daily  attentively  reads  my  words  in  his  house 
I shall  not  leave,  but  dwell  in  his  presence. 

During  the  offering  of  food  to  Bali  worship,  fire  oblation. 


* ’•‘  Three  different  plagues,  viz,,  Adhi-Infirmity,  Viadhi-disease,  and 
Itlbadha — annoyance  by  animals. 


376 


karkakdeya  puranam 


or  festival,  mankind  should  completely  read  and  hear  my 
actions. 

Whoever  either  knowingly  or  ignorantly  gives  the  offer- 
ing, food,  or  fire  oblation  ; 

Whoever  yearly  performs  the  adoration  in  the  Sarat  (or 
sultry  season),  and  hears  willingly  my  action  recited,  they 
will  undoubtedly  obtain  my  favour. 

Whoever  hears  my  consecration,  pro.sperity  will  attend 
him,  and  he  shall  be  brave  in  combat. 

Their  enemies  shall  be  de.stroyed ; the  rich  will  attend, 
and  listen  to  my  miracles  the  race  of  mankind  will  b» 
pleased. 

Every  where,  when  the  preliminary  ceremonies  are  per- 
formed, evH  dreams,  the  inau.sjncious  aspect  of  the  planets 
shall  cease  during  the  recital  of  my  actions.  i 

The  disturbances,  the  malignant  influence  of  the  placets 
will  discontinue,  unlucky  dreams  shall  turn  out  prosperous^  ' 

Evils  to  which  children  are  liable  fioin  demons,  I will  re- 
move, and  heal  the  breach  of  friendship  in  my  people. 

By  reading  it  with  strict  faith,  the  strength  of  all  ill- 
disposed-persons,  the  giants,  demons,  and  evil  spirits,  shall 
be  destroyed  j 

Wliocver  brings  me  an  offering  of  noble  beasts,  of 
flowers,  Arghya  incense,  sandal  and  tapers  ; 

Whoever  feeds,  the  Vipras,  performs  the  various  rites  of 
the  Homa,  every  day  and  night ; 

Pleases  me  throught  a year,  and  hearkens  to  my  actions,  ■ 
shall  have  their  sins  remitted  and  shall  obtain  the  blessings  ; 
of  earth. 

I will  preserve  all  creatures,  who  read  of  my  birth  and 
deeds  in  words  comprising  the  dissolution  of  the  wicked  ; 
giants. 

They  ^all  not  be  in  fear  of  foes  and  shaU  obtain  the  ^ 
praise  o!  sacred  sages. 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 

This  is  ordained  by  Brahmi  who  provides  for  the  pros- 
perous  wise.  If  in  the  skirt«  nt  (■!».»  'u  ^ 

devouring  fire;  «^ilderness  parched  by 

While  surrounded  by  robbeirs  in  Ibe  plain,  attacked  by  the 
lion,  tigers,  or  wild  elephants  ; ^ 

persl\ccu^ed\T'^^'‘^-'‘"‘^^^  t«>r  bwd,ftr  ^ecute  a 

When  in  d ’ ^”7  ane  fail  m the  wide  ocean  ; 

, tootle  when  m imminent  risk  and  tormented  by  pain- 
him  hiraffl-  actions,  I will  remove  from 

Htn  his  afflictions  though  they  be  as  fierce  as  the  lion 

Z be  dispelled, 

e I?.ishi  said,  the  warlike  goddess  Chandika  while 

ished,  and  the  gods  regained  their  former  authoritiel 
without  any  obstruction.  ,«».  tnorities 

Tbuu  enemies  being  destroyed,  they  enjoyed  the  sacri- 
fic.^  oblations,  after  .the  demons  and  Snmbba  yere  plain 

m "“Vb  p«bflei«  atlJ 

^MrNip«bm.,ng  dead,  the  .urvisjng 

o King  I tbe  diyUw  goddes,  pras  r.p„ud|y  incarnated  to 
preserve  the  world,  she  shakles  and  creates  the  universe  ’ 
bbe  gives  knowledge,  pleasure,  intellect.  O sovereign 

J?-  V-c'  “""e'"’"'  globe  ol  Btahmi.  , 

ill  ' ‘I’O  form  ol  a grept  goddess,  the  high 

lllpsion,  Ihe  ancient,  creates  the  world  occasionally  ^ 
neriof  r”"!*’  :®'*’'''  “ ‘'''‘‘''l'^  '''l'”=  P'oP‘«i”fulor. 

period  where  she  is  not  present  their  mislortnnes  cause  rin 

hoeyet  ptmse,  "otships  her  tyilb  flowers,' sandal 
««se,^.ds,  .lorth,sh=  gives  t^.m  pmsperiiy,  ok“i„;: 

TMdP  ^Ar  c^ttend.  the  twelfth  Chapter,  mentioning  the 
advsw)|:^g^s  of  praying  to  the  goddess.  ^ 

48  " 


CHAPTER  XCm. 


0 King,  these  are  the  excellent  actions  of  tlie  Devi 
I mentioned  now,  such  is  this  glorious  goddess,  the  holder  of 
the  universe. 

The  illusion  of  the  divine  Vishnu  constructed  this  vast 
machine;  by  her,  you,  the  Vysa,  and  others  are  being  bound 
in  love. 

0 chief  sovereign,  go  to  the  assylutn  of  the  goddess, 
whoever  adores  her,  will  enjoy  both  Iieaven  and  earth. 

MJlrkaudeya  said,  Surdha,  hearkened  to  his  words;  the 
chief  of  mankind,  the  possessor  of  great  shares,  prostrated 
himself  before  him  and  made  a vow. 

Being  puzzled  by  love,  and  deprived  of  his  kingdom,  he 
instantly  repaired  to  perform  devotion. 

The  Vy.sa  remained  on  the  shoal  of  the  river  to  have  an 
interview  with  goddes.s. 

fie  performed  the  devotion  praying,  repeating  the  Devi- 
Sukli,  he  made  a clay  form  of  the  gorldess  on  the  shoal,  and 
invoked  her  with  flowers,  incense,  Arghya,  Tarpana,  and  other 
offerings. 

He  mortified  his  body,  and  in  this  manner  he  worshipped 
for  three  years. 

Chandika,  the  matron  of  the  world,  being  pleased,  appear- 
ed to  him,  and  said,  "0  King,  Prince  of  a goodly  tribe  j I 
have  heard  you  pray,  and  cheerfully  bestow  on  you  all  you 
request. 

M&rkandeya  said,  the  monarch  being  distressed,  entreated 
her  to  restore  his  realm,  vanquished  by  the  arms  of  his 
enemies. 

He  Vysa,  having  a susceptible  heart,  implored  from  her 
wisdom,  and  abstraction  from  social  and  secular  concerns. 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


379 


Devi  said  to  the  king,  O lord  of  men  f you  will  destroy 
your  enemies  and  resume  your  kingdom  ; you  shall  afterwards 
die  and  be  regenerated  as  Vibhaswata,  by  the  name  of 
Savarnika  Manu  of  the  earth. 

O excellent  Vysa,  according  to  your  desires  you  shall 
obtain  wisdom,  the  goddess  thus  blessed  them  and  granted 
their  desires;  she  then  vanished.  Suradha,  the  chief  Chatrey- 
ah,  having  thus  obtained  her  blessings,  became  Savurni  Manu 
in  his  next  birth. 
