===== Internet Archive OCR: srimaddevibhagav26vijnuoft_djvu.txt =====

THE 


5ACRED  BOOKS 


OF  THE 


HINDUS 

TRANSLATED    BY 
VARIOUS   SAiNSKRIT  SCHOLARS. 

EDITED  BY 
.Major  B.  D.  Basu,  I.  M.  S.    Retired), 


.0^0-;^^  .ofo* 


VOLlJiyiE  XXVI.   Part  3. 

THE  SRIMAD  DEVI  BHAOAVTAn. 

TRANSLATED    BY 

SWAIMI  VIJNANANDA. 


THIRD  EDtTiON.  / 

PUBLISHED  BV  ^^ 

S'-i'ihindratiath^  Vasu  at  the  Panini  Offics,  B!T^van.5S  fVeiPi 
Asrama,  Bahadurganj,  Allahabad. 

;*riitoil  ijv  M.-iuzur  Ahtuad  at  the   Mjijru   Priut-u ,' \W>rk:s,  AUs-iifrrsi, 


0  319 


*^.  ^ 


THE  NINTH  BOOK. 

Page, 

'hapter  I—On  the  description  of  Prakriti       ...  ...  797—810 

„  II — On  the  origia  of  Prakriti  and  Purusa  ...  810 — 815 

-■,  III — On    the    origin   of  BrahmS,   Visnu,  Mahes'a 

and  others.  ...  ...  ...  815—819 

5»  IV — On   the    hymn,    worship     and    Kavacha    of 

Sarasvati  ...  ...  .  8l9— 82i 

V-On  Sarasvati  Stotra  ...  ...  824,-826 

„  VI — On    the    coming    in   this   world    of   Lak^mi, 

Ganga  and  Sarasvati  ...  ...  826—830     . 

VII — On   the   curses    on     Ganga,    Sarasvati    and 

Laksmi  ...  ...  ...  830—833 

„  VIII— On  the  greatness  of  Kali       ...  ...  833—839^- 

IX  — On  the  origin  of  the   Sakti  of  the  Earth        ...  840—841  ^ 
,,      .     X — On    the    offences    caused    to  the    Earth    and 

punishments  thereof  ...  ...  844 — 846 

XI — On  the  origin  of    the  Ganga     ...  ...  h46  — 850 

XII— On  the  origin  of  the  Gan?a     ...  ...  850—854 

XIII— On  the  anecdote  of  the  Ganga  ...  855—862 

XIV— Oq  Ganga,  as  the  wife  of  Narayana  ...  862—862 

XV— On  the  anecdote  of  Tulasi         ...  ...  863—866 

XVI— On  the  incarnation  of  Maha    Laksmi  in  the 

ho^ise  of  Kus'adhvaja  ...  ...  866—870 

XVII— On  the  anecdote  of  Tulasi     ...  ...  870—873 

XVIII — On     the    union      of    ^ankhachiida     with 

Tulasi  ...  ...  ...  873-878 

XIX— On    the    going   of  the  Devas  to  Vaikuntha 

after  Tulasi's  marriage  with  Sankhachuda,  8"8 — 882 

„  XX — On  the  war  preparations  of   Sankhachada  ...  883—887 

„  XXI — On    the    war    between      ]SIaha    Deva    and 

Sankhachuda     ...  ...  ...  887—892 

„  XXII— On    the   6ght     between     the     Devas    and 

.^ankhachuda     ...  ..,  ...  892—895 

XXIII — On  the  killing  of  ^ankhachuda  ...  895—897 

XXIV— On  the  glory  of  Tulasi  ...  ...  897 -i>03 


(     2     ) 


Chapter  XXV — On    the  worship  of  Tulasi 

XXVI-On  SavitrT 

XXVII— On  the  birth,  etc.,  of  S&vitri 

XXVIII— On  Savitrl     ... 
,,  XXTX — On  Sdvitri,  on    gifts,  and  on  Karmas 

„  XXX — On  the  convevsation  between  Savitri   and 

Yama 
„  XXXI— On    Yama's  giving   the    Sakti  Mantra  to 

S§vitri 
„  XX XI I — On  various  hells 

„  XXXIII — On  the  destinies  of  the  sinners 

„  XXXIV — On  various  hells 

,,  XXXV — On  various  hells 

„  XXXVI — On   having   no    fear    of   Yaraa   of  those 

who  are  the  Panehopasakas 
„  XXXVII— On  the  Eighty-Six  Kuiidas 

„  XXXVIII — On  the  glories  of  the  Devi 

XXXIX— On  Mfiha  Laksmi 
,,  XL — On  the  birth  of  Laksoji 

„  XLI — On  the  churning  of  the  ocean 

„  XLII— On  the  stotram  of  Mahft  Laksmi 

„  XLIII— On  Svaha 

XLIV— OnSvadha 
„  XLV — On  Daksiua         ...  ...  .., 

XLVI— On  Sasthi  Devi 
„  XLVIl — On  Manas! 

„  XLVIII— On  Manasa     ... 

,,  XLIX — On  Surabhi 

„  L — On  the  glory  of  ^akti 

Notes  on  Sakti  and  th«!  J^Sktas 

THE  TENTH  BOOK. 

»  I — On  Svayambhuva   Maru 

»♦  II — On  the  conversation  between    NSrada  and  the 

Bindhya  Mountain 
„  III — On  Bindhya'a  obstructing  the  Sun's    Course 

in  the  Heavens  ... 

j>  IV— On  the  Divas'  going  to  Maha  Dt-va 

w  V — On  the  Devas'  going  to  Viaou  ... 


Pages. 

9f03_905 

905—910 

910—911 

912-913 

914—917 

918-9r^5 

92.5— 9-6 
926—927 
927—984 
934—939 
939-942 


942- 
945- 
952- 
957- 
959- 
965- 
970- 
973- 
976- 
979- 
985- 
989- 
992- 

leoo- 

1002- 
1018- 


-945 

-951 

-957 

-959 

-96.5 

-969 

-973 

-976 

-979 

-955 

-989 

-992 

-1000 

-I0o2 

-1008 

-1021 


.   1022—1028 

1023—1025 

1025—1026 
1027—1028 
1028—1030 


(     3     ) 

Chaptbr  VI — On  the  Devas'  prayinpf   to  the  Muni  Agastya,  1030 — 1031 
„  VII— On  the  checking  of  the    rise  of  the  Bindhya,  1032  — 1033 

„           VIII— On  the   Origin  of  Manu         ...  ...   1033—1035 

„           IX— On  the  anecdote  of  Chaksusa  Manu  ...1035—1036 

X— On  the  history  of  the  king    Suratha  ...   1037—1038 

XI— On  Madhu  Kaitabha  killed       ...  ...   1038—1040 

„           XII— On  SSvarni  Manu                      ...  ...    1040—1045 

XIII— On   Bhraraari  Devi                  ...  ...   1046— 1C53 

THE  ELEVENTH  BOOK. 

„           1— On  the  Morning  Duties               ...  ...   1054—1059 

V           II — On  cleaning  the  body                   ...  ...    1059 — 1061 

,,           III — On  the  glories  of  the  Rudraksa  beads  ...   1061 — 1064 

.,           IV — On  the  greatness  of  the  Rudraksam  ...   1064 — 1067 

V— On  the  Rudraksam  rosaries         ...  ...    3067— 1069 

.,           VI— On  the  greatness  of  Rudraksam  ...    1069—1072 
,,            VII — On    the      different     numbers    of    facets  of 

Rudraksam?       ...                 ...  ...   1072—1074 

VIII— On  Bhuta  ^uddhi                     ...  ...   1074—1076 

IX— On  the  rules  af  ^irovrata            ...  ...   1076—1079 

n           X— On  Gauua  Bhasma  ...                  ...  ...   1079—1081 

„           XI— On  the  three  kinds  of  Bbasmas  ...   1081—1083 

„           XII— On  holding  the  Tripundrams  ...  ...  1083—1085 

,.           XIII— On  the  greatness  of  Bhasma  ...  ...   1085—1087 

XIV— On  holding  the  Bibhuti           ...    .  ...   1088—1089 

,,  XV— On  using  the    Tripundra  and    t^rdhapundra,  1091 — 1098 

XVI— On  the  Scindhya  Upasana        ...  ...    1098—1106 

,.  XVII — On  the  Sanchja  acd  other  daily  practices,  1106 — 1109 

„           XVni— Onthe   greatness  of  the  Devi  Puja  ...   1110—1114 

„           XIX— On  the  mid-day  Sandhya         ...  ...   1114—1115 

„           XX — Onthe   Brahma  Yajna,  Sandhyas,  etc.  ...   1116 — 1120 

,,           XXI— On  the  Gayatri    Puras'charnam  ...   1120—1124 

XXII— On    the  Vais'adeva                 ...  ...   1124—112? 

XXIII— Onthe  Tapta  Krichehhra  Vrata  ...1127—1131 

XXIV— On  SadSchara  ...                  ...  ...1132—1138 

THE  TWELFTH  BOOK. 

,.           I — On  the  description  of  the   Gayatri  ...   1139 — 1140 

„  II— On  the  description  of  the  ^aktis  of  the  Gayatri,  1140—1141 

III— On  the  Gayatri  Kavacham        ...  ...1141—1143 


(     4     ) 

Page. 
Chapter  IV— -On  the  Oayatri  Hridayam         ...  ...  1143—114* 

„  V— On  the  Gayatri  Stotram  ...  ...   1145—1146 

„  VI — On    the   one    thousand    and  eight  names  of 

GSyatri  ...  ...  ...  1146—1154 

VII— On  the  Diksa  vidbi  (Initiation)  ..,1154—1163 

„  Vlfl— On  the  appearance  of  the  Highest  5akti  ...    1163—1169 

„  IX — On   the  cause    of  Faith    in   the  other  Devas 

than  the  Devi  Gayatri          ...  ...   1169—1174 

„  X — On  the  description  of  the  Mani  Dvip I  ...   1174  —  1179 

„  XI — On  the  enclosure  walls  of  the  Mani  Dvipa  ...   1179 — 1185 

„  XIT  — On  the  description  of  the  Matii  Dvipa        ...    1185—1189 

,,  XIII — On  Janamejaya's    Devi  Yajna  ...   1189 — 1190 

„  XIV — On  the  fruits  of  hearing,  etc  ,this  PurSnara,  1190—1192 

The  End. 


FORE^VORD. 

Sri  BhagavSn  Veda  Vyasa  first  composed  one  PurSnam  only.  From 
this,  the  three  disciples  of  his,  Lomaharsana  and  two  others,  compiled  the 
three  other  Sarahit§s.  So  at  first /these  four  Purdnas  were  extant.  From 
these  four  Puranas,  the  eighteen  MahS,  PurSnas  were  written.  And  long- 
after  this  many  other  Upa-Pur3-aas  came  into  appearance.  That  the 
Puranas  were  collected  and  compiled  from  the  original  Adi  Purana  SamhitS. 
can  easily  be  traced  if  each  PurSnam  be  read  attentively.  Lots  of  proofs 
can  be  obtained.  If  one  reads  the  orders  of  creation  in  the  Visnu,  Matsya, 
Brahmanda,  Padma  and  other  Puranas,  one  will  find  that  all  the  ParA,nas 
are  ti-eating  of  one  and  the  same  thing,  the  same  subject  ;  so  much  so,  that, 
at  some  places,  the  verses  are  the  same.  In  some  places,  some  verses  are 
more  similar  and,  in  some  Puranas,  some  verses  are  less  similar.  This 
is  all  the  difference.  The  ideal  is  one  and  the  same  in  all  the  Puranas. 
Henee  so  great  and  striking  are  the  similarities  and  resemblances  wit- 
nessed in  verses  and  descriptions.  If  there  were  different  Puranas  in  their 
originals  before,  many  in  number,  and  if  the  Puranas  at  present  extant 
were  written  from  those  different  Puranas,  then  so  many  striking  similari- 
ties and  resemblances,  seen  at  present,  would  never  have  occurred. 

The   following   eighteen    PurSnas    are    mentioned    in   due  order  in  the 
Visnu    Puranam.     First,    the     Brahma;    second,  the    Padma  ;* third,  the 
Visnu  Puranam  ;     fourth,   the  Saiva  ;    fifth,   the  Bhfigavata  ;    sixth,    the 
N^radiya  ;  seventh,  the    Markandeya  ;   eighth,    the    Agneya  ;    ninth,  the 
Bhavisya  ;  tenth,    the   Brahma   Vaivarta  ;  eleventh,    the  Linga  ;  twelfth, 
the  Vara  ha  ;  thirteenth,  the  Skanda  ;    fourteenth,  the    V^mana  ;    fifteenth, 
the  Kurma  ;  sixteenth,  the  Matsya  ;  seventeenth,  the     Garuda  ;  and  eigh- 
teenth, the  Brahmanda  Puranam.  In  one  and  all  of  these  Puranamsare  des- 
cribed duly  the  (1)  Sarga  (creation),  (2)  Pratisarga  (the  secondary  creation), 
(3)  Vams'a  (lineage  of  kings),     (4)    Manvautara    (duration    of  the    Mann 
periods)  and  (5;  Vams'anucharitams  (histories  of  the  several  lines  and  their 
descendants).     "  O  Maitreya  !  The  PurSnara  that    I  am    describing  to  you 
is  the  Visnu  Puranam.     This  has  been    composed  after   the    Padma   PurS- 
nam."     From   the    above    statement    of  the    Visnu    Puranam,    it   is  seen 
that  the  eighteen  Puranas  were  not  composed  and   compiled  at  one  and  the 
same  time.     First  the    Brahma  Puranam    was    written  ;  next,   the  Padma 
Puranam  was  written  ;  next,  the  Visnu  Puranam  and  so  forth.    Gradually, 


(    n    ) 

one   after  another,  the  eighteen  Pur^nas  were  composed,  written  and  pub- 
lished. 

Aecordino'  to  Dr.  H.  H.  ^Wilson,  the  several  Puranas  were  composed 
from  the  ninth  century  A.  D.  to  the  sixteenth  century  A.  D.  Many 
savants  of  the  west  and  B^bu  Aksaya  Kumara  Datta,  and  several  others 
of  the  east  agree  with  Dr.  H.  H.  Wilson. 

The   above   learned   men   declare    that   the    Skanda    Puranam    is  very 
recent.     But  other  savants  of  India  are  not  ready   to  admit  or   accept    this. 
Lately   Mah^   Mahepadhyslya    Hara    Prasad    oSstri     has   got    one    Puthi 
(manuscript)  of  the   Nandikes'vara  M^hatmya    of  the    Skanda   PurSnam 
from    Nepal    that    clearly    belongs    to    the     seventh   century  A.  D.     In 
the  Calcutta    University   there    exists    one    Puthi   containing    the   Kas'i 
Khanda  of  the  Skanda  Puranam,  handwritten  in    933    Saka   Era.     Owing 
to  these  reasons,  the  original    Skanda    Purapam,    now   extant,    cannot    be 
considered  so  recent.     That  the  Skanda  Puranam  had  been    qui  te  in  vogue 
even  before  the  seventh  century  A.  D.  is   beyond  any   doubt.     Beside  s   the 
extracts  by  Samkaracharya  from  the  Markandeya    Puranam,    the    collec- 
tions by  Vlina  in  the  7th   century    A.  D.    of   his    materials  from  the  Devi 
Mah§.tmya  in  the  Markandeya  Puranam  and    his    mentioning    the    Pava- 
naprokta  Puranam,  the  collections  of  details    of  the    Surya    Satakam    from 
the  Saura   Puranam  by  his  contemporary    Mayurabhatta,  the    compilation 
at  that  time  of  the  Brahma  Siddh^nta  from  the  chief  source  Visnudharmot- 
tara    Pur&nam,   the   collecting    of  proofs   by    Alberouni    in    the    eleventh 
century  A.  D.    from  the    Aditya,   Vayu,    Matsya  and    Visnu    and  Visnu- 
dharmottara    Puranas,    from    the    gifts    made    by  Ballala  Sen,  the  king  of 
Bengal,  mentioning  the  Brahma,  Matsya,    Markandeya,    Agni,   Bhavisya, 
VarSha,   Kurma,    and    Visnudharmottara    Puranas,    and     Adya,    Ktilika, 
Nandi,  ISSra  Simha,  and    Samba    Upapuranas    we   can    safely    reject    the 
opinions  held    by    Dr.  H.  H.    Wilson,    and   Aksaya  KumSra   Datta    and 
others. 

That  the  eighteen  Puranas  were  extant  before  the  period  of  Sankara- 
charya,  VSna  Bhatta  and  others,  thei'e  is  no  doubt.  If  the  order  of 
sequence  of  events  be  seen,  as  far  as  the  origins  of  various  personages 
and  dynasties,  etc.,  are  concerned,  then  it  may  be  safely  admitted 
that  the  original  first  nine  (9)  Puranas  were  composed  and  written 
before  the  Apastamba  Dharma  Sutras  were  written.  Thus  the  compo- 
sition period  of  the  chief  Pur&nas  comes  just  after  the  Vaidik  period. 
Now  the  eighteen  (18)  Purdnas,  that  we  see  current  in  their  present  forms 
now,   were    not   so   in   the   previous   times.         We     may    conclude    that 


(     in    ) 

the":  Adi  ^  Visnii  Puranam  was  written  in  the  time  of  Pariksit ;  the 
Garuda  rui-anam  was  written  in  the  time  of  Janamejaya/  the 
son  of  Pariksit,  and  that  the  Matsya  and  Brahmanda  Pardnas' were 
.  composed  in  the  time  of  the  grandson  of  Janamejaya,  named  Adhisima 
Kri§na. 

The   description  of  Bhavisya   Rdja  Vamsa,  the  dynasties  to  come,  was 
added  afterwards. 

Amongst   the   five   characteristics,  the   recitation  of  the  Bhavisya  Rttja 
Vamsa,  the  dynasties  to  come,  does  not  seem  to  be  a   principal   element   of 
the    Pm-anas.     The    meaning    of  Vamsanucharita    is  the  recitation  of  the 
characters   of  the  famous  kings  and   their  descendants  that  lived  and  died  • 
not   that   of     the     future     dynasties    of     kings     (as     coming     after    the 
time  of  the  writing  of  the  Puranas)    and   so   is   not   settled   in    the    more 
ancient  PurSnas,  the  Visnu,  Matsya  or  Brahma   Puranas.     In  the  later  5ri 
Mad    Bhagavata,    the   descriptions  of  the    past,    present   and  future  lines 
of   kings    were    meant    and  so  written    out.     But  it  should  be  remembered 
that   to  write  of  the    present  and  the  past  is    one  thing  and  to  write  of  the 
future    is    a   different   thing.      Though  we  do    not  find  in  the  JSva  Dvipa 
edition    of  the    Brahmanda  Puranam,  of  the    fifth  century  A.  D.  anything 
about   the   future   dynasties,   yet   since   that  period   they  began   to  be  in- 
serted  gradually   in   the  different  Puranas.     This  can    be  proved  from  the 
Tantra  vartik  of  the  famous  Kumarila    Bhalta.     Bhatta    Kumarila    writes 
in  one  place  : — The  divisions  of  the  earth,  the  chronology' of  the  dynasties, 
the    measurements    of    countries   and   their      periods     of  existences,    the 
future  events,  etc.,  are  the  subjects  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  Purdnas. 

The  different  Puranas  treated  by  the  different  sects  have  assumed,  as 
it  were,  the  aspect  of  the  pure  gold  mixed  with  various  alloys.  Now  to 
extract  the  pure  gold  by  burning  and  smelting  the  ore  has,  indeed,  become 
a  very  difficult  task.  What  the  eighteen  PurSnas  were  in  their  first 
pure  stage  can  be  somewhat  made  out    on  seeing  the  Matsya  Pur^nam. 

The  famous  Pundit  Aksaya  Kum&r  Dutt  .  writes  : — "  In  the  Puranas, 
the  creations  both  primary  and  secondary,  the  description  of  the  dynasties 
and  the  lives  of  the  famous  persons  of  the  dynasties  form  the  subject 
matter.  To  advise  on  the  religious  rites  and  ceremonies  is  not  the  object. 
But  in  the  Puranas,  and  then  in  the  Upa-PurSnas,  now  extant,  the 
recitations  of  the  glories  of  the  Devas  and  the  Devis,  their  worship, 
their  festivities  and  the  Vratas  and  Niyamas  form  the  greater  part.  The 
aforesaid  five  characteristics  form  here,  as  it  were,  the  appendages  merely. 
If  to   give   instructions    on  Dharma  were  the   object  of  the  older  Pur&na?, 


(      IT      ) 

as  is  now  the  theme  of  the  present  PurSnas,  then  it  would  not  have  been 
spoken  by  the  Siita  caste  people  ;it  would  then  have  been  one  of  the  duties 
of  the  Sat  Karmas'ali  Brahmanas,  performing  duly  the  six  Karmas.  To 
instruct  the  Risis,  Munis,  and  other  ordinary  Brihmanas  would  not  have 
been  the  duty  of  the  inferior  Suta  (carpenter)  caste. 

These  Puranas  form,  as  it  were,  the  different  centres  of  the  different 
religious  sects  in  promulgating  the  superiority  of  their  own  tenets.  The 
Avat&ra-Vada  is  one  of  the  chief  features  of  the  Pur3,nas.  In  the 
Puranas  dwelling  on  the  glories  of  Siva,  many  AvatSras  of  Siva  are 
described.  So,  in  the  Vaisuava  Purinas,  many  Avatiras  of  Visnu  are 
dwelt  upon.  The  theory  of  re-incarnation  is  not  of  the  latest  periods  as 
most  people  imagine  from  the  ten  Avataras.  It  goes  far  back  into  the 
oldest  treatises  of  the  Vedas.  The  Matsya  incarnation  is  treated  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana  (1-8-1-2,10)  ;  the  Kurma  incarnation  in  the  Taittiriya 
Aranyaka  (1-23-1)  and  in  Satapatha  Br&hmana  (7-4-3-5) ;  the  Varaha 
incarnation  is  mentioned  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhit^,  in  the  Taittiriya 
Br&hmana  (1-1-3-5)  and  in  Satapatha  BrShmana  (14-1-2-11);  the 
V^mana  incarnation  in  the  Rik.Samhita  (1-22-17)  and  in  Satapatha  BrSh- 
maua  (1-2-5-1,7) ;  the  RIma  Bhargava  incarnation  in  Aitareya  Brahmana  ; 
the  Krisna  incarnation,  the  son  of  Devaki,  in  the  Chhandogya  Upanisada 
(3-17)  and  the  Vilsudeva  Sri  Krisna  is  dwelt  with  in  the  Taittiriya  Aranya- 
ka (10-l-6).'According  to  a  major  part  of  the  Vedic  books,  the  incarnations 
of  Kurma  and  Varaha,  etc,  are  the  incarnations  of  Brahma.  But  in  the 
Vaisnavic  Puranas,  those  very  same  are  regarded  as  the  Avataras  of 
Visnu. 

So  in   the    Brahmanda   and  other  Saiva  Purinas   various   incarnations 
of   Siva   are  acknowledged.     So  the  incarnations    of  the  Sun  are  also  men- 
tioned in  the    Bhavisya  and  Saura  Puranas,    etc.     As,  on    the   one    hand, 
the  devotees   of   BrahmA,,    Visnu,    Siva,   and    the    Sun    dwelt    ujson  the 
o- lories    of  their    own    Ista    Deities    in   their    various    incarnations,  so,  on 
the    other  hand,     the    Risi    Markandeya   and   the  other   sages    sang   the 
clories    of  the  Devi    Bhagavati  in  their   Sakta  Puranas.     BrahmA    is  men- 
tioned in   various    places  in   the   Vedas  as   the   oldest  Deity  to   be   wor- 
shipped.    It   is  not   on  that   account  to   be   thought  that  the    worships  of 
Visnu,    Siva  and   the  other   Devas   are    very  latest.     In  the    Rik  Samhita, 
in  various  places,    hundreds  of  Visnu  mantras   are  found.     So  in  the  Sama, 
Yajus,   and   Atharva   Vedas.     Maha    Deva  is  known  as   Rudra  in   the  Rik 
Samhita.     In  the  four   Vedas,   the   hymns   are    sung  of  the  Rudra   Deva. 
The  most  famous   of    these     is   the  Rudrfidhyaya    in   the  Yajur   Vedas. 


(     V     ) 

Though  the  modern  Pundits  shew  their  reluctance  in  acknowledging  the 
identity  of  the  Vaidik  Rudra  and  Mahd  Deva,  yet  we  do  not  hesitate  to 
admit  of  the  above  identity  when  we  find  in  the  V&jasaneya  Sata  Rudri 
the  names  of  Siva,  Giris'a,  Pas'upati,  Nilagriva,  Sitikantha,  Bhava, 
Sarbba,  MahS,  Deva,  etc.  Especially  in  the  Atharva  Samhitsi,  when 
we  see  the  names  Maha  Deva  (9-7-7),  Bhava  (6-9  3- P,  Pas'upati  (9-2-5), 
etc,  we  do  not  entertain  any  doubt.  When  we  study  the  origin  of  Siva 
in  the  Sata  patha  Brahmana  (^(d-1-3-7/19)  and  in  the  Samksyeiyana  Br&h- 
mana  (6-1-3-7/19)  we  do  not  find  any  great  difference  between  the  above 
and  what  are  mentioned  in  the  Markandeya  Purana  and  in  the  Vifuu 
Purana.  So  the  worship  of  the  Sun  is  also  very  ancient  in  the  Vedas. 

Now  we  come  to  the  topic  of  Sakti  in  the  Vedas.  Those  persons 
who  on  merely  hearing  the  names  of  t'fva,  Durg§,  consider  them 
as  of  a  very  recent  period,  ought  to  know  that  the  worship  of  Durga 
or  Sakti  is  not,  really  speaking,  of  a  very  late  origin.  When  we  read 
in  the  Vajasaneya  Samhita  "Ambika"  (3-57)  and  "^iva"  (16-1),  in  the 
Talavakdra  Upan'sad  (3-11,12;  4-1,2)  Um^  Haimavatt  as  Brahma  Vidya 
Incai'nate,  and  in  the  Taittriya  Aranyaka  (10  Pra;  "Kanya  Kum&ri," 
"Katy^yani,"  Durga,  etc,  we  remember  the  same  Durga,  the 
consort  of  Siva.  From  those  very  olden  times,  the  worship  of  the 
AdyS  5akti,  the  Brahma  incarnate,  is  extant.  These  can  be  very  well 
seen  if  we  study  the  Vedas. 

What  is  indicated  in  the  germ  form,  rather  commenced  in  the  Vedie 
treatises,  that  very  thing  is  expanded  and  matured  in  the  Pur^na^. 
Seeing  this  dilation  as  if  of  a  story,  we  may  take  the  Puranas,  as  if  of 
a  very  late  origin.  The  Purvapaksins  believe  that  what  is  reflected  in  the 
Vedas,  that  same  thing  is  twisted  and  tortured  fully  and  fabricated  into 
a  huge  body  in  the  Puranas.  Take  the  Rik  of  the  Rik  Samhita  "Idam 
Vignur  vichakrame  tredh4  nidadhe  padara,  samu  dh^masya  j^amsure" 
(1-22-17)  and  Trini  padS,  vichakrame  Visnur  gopa  ad^bhyah,  ato  dhar- 
mani  dh^rayan  "(1-22-18),"  Visnu  strode  his  three  steps  in  this  world. 
The  whole  universe  is  pervaded  with  the  dust  of  His  feet."  "  Visnu,  bold 
and  dauntless,  difficult  to  be  overcome,  and  the  Preserver  of  the  whole 
world  put  his  three  steps  on  the  earth,  etc.,  for  the  preservation  of  the 
Dharma."  But  the  Paur^nikSs  have  rendered  it  as  the  V^mana's  act  of 
overcoming  Vali,  and  so  on.  What  is  stated  very  concisely  in  the  Vedas 
with  an  object,  distant  in  view,  that  same  thing  is  expanded  in  the 
Pujanas  in  the  form  of  a  big  narrative.  Therefore  wa  see  some 
distortions    and    differences   in     the     PurSnas,    rendering   the    anecdotes 


(       VI       ) 

in  the     PurS.nas  assume   a  somewhat     separate  and  independent    aspect. 

But  for  this  reason  merely,  we  eannofc  reject  the  PurSinie  descriptions  as 
if  of  a  very  strange,  fanciful  character  or  as  of  a  very  recent  and  worthless 
production. 

From  the  very  earliest  times  there  have  sprung  up  different  worshippers 
of  the  different  Devas  and  Devis.  Worshippers  of  the  different  Deities 
would  consciously  or  uuconsciously  give  rise  to  different  religious  sects. 
This  will  be  seen,  if  we  study  the  religious  and  moral  histories  of 
the  people.  Now  it  is  quite  natural  for  the  Risi  who  had  got  his  desired 
end  by  worshipping  a  particular  Deva,  that  he  would  pay  his 
devotion  to  that  Deva,  love  him  with  his  heart  and  soul  and  expect 
earnestly  that  others,  too,  pay  similar  deep  love  and  devotion  to  his 
Deity  and  thereby  derive  the  highest  bliss  and  get  their  desired 
ends.  From  this  tendency  of  love  and  devotion  and  a  desire  that 
others  may  also  taste  of  the  sweetness  thereof,  the  different  Devas  have 
come  to  be  wot;shipped  by  the  different  Risis  and  the  different  peoples. 
Again  from  the  disciples  of  these  Deva  Bhakta  Risis,  many  different 
religious  sects  have  cropped  up  in  this  world. 

The  Veda  is  not  the  general  property  of  all.  The  Ritvigs,  HotSs, 
Udgatas  and  various  Yajniks,  claim  the  Veda  as  their  own  property. 
But  the  Itih^sas  and  the  Puranas  are  nob  so  ;  they  are  the  general  pro- 
perty of  all  men  and  women.  To  advise  and  give  instructions  on 
various  religious,  moral,  social,  industrial,  technical,  and  other 
cognate  subjects,  the  Puranas  were  composed.  Therefore  it  is  written 
in  the  Brahmaoda  PurSnam  that  that  Brahmana  who  has  studied 
even  the  four  Vedas  with  their  Angas  and  the  Upanisadas  and  yet 
has  not  studied  the  Pur^uas,  cannot  be  clear-sighted,  wise,  and  skilful. 
For  it  is  the  Vedas  that  are  enlarged,  expanded,  and  explained  in  the 
Itih§sas  and  in  the  Puranas.  Hence  the  parsons  void  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Puranas,  are  afraid  of  the  Vedas,  for  they  are  verily  the  persons 
that  insult  the  Vedas.  The  Pur4nas  are  very  ancient  and  they  explain 
the  Vedas;  hence  they  are  named  the  Purinas,  Those  who  know 
these    Puranas   are  freed    of  all    their    sins. 

The  Visnu  Bhagavat  was  written  after  the  Itihlsas  and  the 
other  Puranas  were  composed,  and  written.  And  then  ^ri  VySsa 
Deva   found   his    full   satisfaction.     Hence   this     treatise     is     known     as 

the    Panchametara  Purana.       Some    hold     the  opinion     that    this     6ri 

Mad  Bhagavat   was   written  by    Bopa     Deva,  the     great     grammarian 


(      VII      ) 

of  Bengal.  There  ara  the  ten  characteristics  of  the  PurSnas: — (1) 
Sarga,  (2)  Visarga,  (3)  Samstha,  (4)  Raksa,  (5)  Manvantara,  (6) 
Vams'a  kathana,  (7)  Va>;is'anueharita,  (8)  Pralaya,  (9)  Hetu  and, 
(10)  Apas'raya.  Whereas  some  others  consider  the  five  characteristics  as 
the  angas  of  the  Puranas  to  be  dwelt  upon.  Those  that  are  charac- 
terised by  the  ten  qualities  are  denominated  as  Maha  Puranas  antl 
those  of  five  qualities  are  known  as  the  Upa-Puranas  or  the  Alpa 
Pur3nas. 

The   creitions  of   Mahat,    Ahamkara,    the    Sthula    and      Suksma     in 
driyas  and  the  gross  creations  are  known  as  the  Sarga,   From    the  inherent 
tendencies  and   desires,   the   vijas,   as    it    were,    the  creation  of  all   these 
moveables  and.non-moveables      is     known      as    Visarga    or  the    secondary 
creation.     The  ways    and   means    of    living     of     all   the     Chara  Bhutas 
and    men    are    known    as    Samstha  or  Sthiti.     The  A  vataras  of  Nerayana 
for  the    preservation    of  the  Devas,    Tfryakas,     men,    and  the    Risis   are 
known   as  the  Raks&.     The  periods  of   the  Amsavataras     are    known     as 
the  Manvantaras.    The  descriptions  of  the  histories  cr  stories,  past,  present, 
and    future    of   the     several    holy    kings    born    of   Brahma  are  known     as 
Varas'akathana ;     and    the    descriptions    of   the    characters    of   their    de- 
scendants   are    known   as    Vams'anukathana.     The  four    different   Layas 
Naimittika,  Pr^kritik,  Nitya  and  Atyantika  are    known     as  the  Pralayas. 
Describing    the    Jivas   as    the    cause   of  the  origin,  creation,  preservation, 
and   destruction    of    this    vis'va  is    known     as  Hetu.     And    Apas'raya  is 
the    Great  Refuge   of  All,    the    Great  Solace    of   all,    the    Great  Witness 
of  the    three    stages    Jagrat.    Svapna     and     Susupti.     The    five     charac- 
teristics   of  the   Upa    Puranas  are  Sarga,  Pratisarga,  Vams'a,  Manvantara 
and    Vams'&nucharita.     If    we     consider     the      five   characteristics,     this 
Devi    Bh^gavata    is    reckoned  as    one     of     the    Maha      Puranas.     There 
are    three    hundred    and  eighteen     Adhyayas    in     the  Devi    BhSgavatam 
whereas    in  the    Bhtlgavatam   there    are    three     hundred    and     thirty-two 
AdhyS,yas.     So    some   discrepancy     arises   here    as    far    as    the     Adhyayas 
are    concerned.    iSri   Visnu   Bhagavat  is    mainly    philosophical,     following 
the   Dars'anas.     Whereas  the  ^ri    Mad    Devi     Bhagavatam    follows   the 
Tantras.     Therefore    in    the  treatises  on  Devi  Y^mala,  etc.,  the  superiority 
of  this  Devi  Bhagavata  is  maintained.     By  no  means,  therefore,  anyone  is 
to  consider  this  Devi  Bhagavatam    as    of   a   very   recent    date.     It   is  now 
proved  that  in  the  first  century  A.  D.  the  Tantras  were  widely  current.  The 
worship  of   Radha   is  the  effect  of  the    Tantrik    influence.    In  the   Viynu 
Bhagavat  no  mention  is  made  of  R&dhiv.     Owing  to  these    various  reasons, 


(     vtti    ) 

though  some  portions  of  5ri  Devi  Bh%avatam  were  more  ancient  than 
Visnu  Bhftgavatam,  yet  the  present  treatise  got  its  present  bearing 
and  form  between  the  (9th)  ninth  and  (llth)  eleventh  century.  A.  D.  And 
Nilakantha  and  Swamt  are  the  two  commentators  of  this  Devi 
BhSgavatam. 

From  various  considerations  •  it  may  be  seen  that  in  very  ancient 
times  there  was  only  one  Bh^gavatam  and  that  was  respected  by  the 
Bh^gavatas.  Then  on  account  of  the  Bauddhik  influence,  when  the 
Brahmanya  Dharma  declined,  that  old  Bhagavatam  was  on  the  point  of 
dying  out.  Next  when  the  BrShminism  revived,  the  Vaisnavas 
and  various  other  sects  became  powerful,  the  Vaisnavas  composed  their  Sri 
Bhagavat  and  the  ^aktas  composed  their  Devi  Bhagavatam.  In  conclusion, 
we  asserb  also  that  on  account  of  the  anecdotes  of  Mangala  Chandi,  Sasthi 
and  Manasa  and  other  Devis  occurring  in  the  Devi  Bhagavatam,  we 
hesitate  much  to  accept  the  treatise  in  the  ranks  of  the  ancient 
Puranas  and  we  are  very  much  inclined  to  think  that  there  had  been 
many  interpolations  of  a  recent  character  and   that,  too,   from  Bengal. 


OM  TAT  SAT. 


CHAPTER  I. 


1.  Sri  N^rayaiij  said  :— This  (Highest)  Prakrifci  is  recognised  as 
five-fold.  When  She  is  engaged  in  the  work  of  Creation,  She  appears 
as  : — 

(1)  Darga,  the  Mother  of  Ganes'a  {2)  Radha,  (3)  Laksrni,  (4) 
Saras vati  and  (5)  Savitri. 

2-3.  NS.rada  replied  : — 0  Thou,  the  Best  of  Jnanlns  !  Who  is  this 
Prakriti  ?  (Whether  She  is  of  the  the  nature  of  Intelligence  or  of  matter?) 
Why  did  She  manifest  Herself  and  then  again  why  did  She  reveal 
Herself  in  these  five  forms  ?  And  what  are  Her  characteristics  ?  Now 
Thou  oughtest  to  describe  the  lives  of  all,  the  different  modes  of  their 
worship,  and  the  fruits  that  are  accrued  thereby.  Please  also  inform 
me  which  Forms  of  them  manifested  themselves  in  which  different  places. 
Dost  Thou  please  narrate  to  me  all  these. 

4-18.  NSrSyana  said  : — "  0  Child  !  Who  is  there  in  this  world  that 
can  describe  fully  the  characteristics  of  Prakriti  !  Hoivever  I  will  describe 
to  you  that  much  which  I  heard  from  my  own  father,  Dharma.  Hear.  The 
prefix  "•  Pra"  in  the  word  Prakriti  means  exalted,  superior,  excellent  ;  and 
the  afiix  "  Kriti"  donotes  creation.  So  the  Godless,  the  Devi  Who  is  the 
most  excellent  in  the  work  of  creation  is  known  as  the  Devi  Prakriti. 
To  come  closer  ;^''  Pra"  signifies  the  Sattva  Guna,  the  most  exalted 
quality,  ''  Krl"  donotes  the  Rajo  Gun  v  and  "  Ti"  denotes  the  Tamo 
Guni.  i^Thfj  Sattvi  Guna  is  considerad  !\s  the  Highest  as  it  is  perfectly 
clear  and  free  from  any  iiupuritias  whitsoevar  ;  the  Rajo  Guna  is  con- 
sidered intermsiiata  as  it  hi?  this  defect: —  thab  it  spreads  a  veil  over  the 
reality  of  things,  so  as  not  to  alio. V    men  to  understand  the    True    Reality > 

while  the  Tamo  Guna  is  considered  worst    as  it  completely  hides  the    Real 

Knowledge). 

So  when  this  Intelligence  of  the  n iturR  of  Brahma,  beyond  the  three 
attributes,  gets  tinged  with  the  above  three  Ciunas  and  becomes  omni- 
potent, then  She  is  superior  (Pradhanu)  in  the  work  of  creation.  Hence 
She  is  styled  as  Prakriti. 


^98  &Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

O  Child  N^rada  !  The  state  just  preceding  that  of  creation  is  denoted 
by  "  Pra"  ;  and  "  Kri"  signifies  creation.  So  the  Great  Devi  that  exists 
before  creation  is  called  Prakriti  after  creation"  The  ParamSttna  by  His 
Yoga  (i.e.,  Maya  Sakti,  the  Holy  Ghost)  divided  Himself  into  two  parts  ; 
the  right  side  of  which  was  male  and  the  left  side  was  the  female  Prakriti. 
{Note  : — The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  principle  of  Conception  and  Emanation, 
Creation).  So  the  Prakriti  is  of  the  nature  of  Brahma.  She  is  Eternal.  As  the 
fire  and  its  burning  power  are  not  different,  so  there  is  no  separate 
distinction  between  Atman  and  His  Sakti,  between  Purusa  and  Prakriti. 
Therefore  those  that  are  foremost  and  the  highest  of  the  Yogis  do  not 
tecoo-nise  any  difference  between  a  male  and  a  female.  All  is  Brahman. 
He  is  everywhere  as  male  and  female  for  ever.  There  is  nothing  in  this 
•world  that  can  exist  for  a  moment  even  without  this  Brahman  consisting 
of  male  and  female,  {i.e.  they  are  Brahman  with  Maya  manifested).  Out 
of  the  Will  of  Sri  Krisna,  to  create  the  world  Whose  Will  is  all  in  all, 
came  out  at  once  the  Mula  Prakriti,  the  Great  Devi  Is'vari,  (the  Lady 
Controller  of  the  Universe)  Brahma  with  Maya  in  a  state  of  equilibriums). 
By  Her  Command  came  out  five  Forms  from  Her,  either  for  the  purpose  of 
creation  or  for  bestowing  Favour  and  Grace  to  the  Bhaktas  (devotees).  Durg& 
the  Mother  of  Ganes'a,  comes,  as  the  first,  the  most  auspicious,  loved  by 
»§iva.  She  is  N^rayani,  Visnu  M4y£l,  and  of  the  nature  of  Purna  Brahma 
(the  Supreme  Brahma).  This  eternal,  all  auspicious  Devi  is  the  Presiding 
Deity  of  all  the  Devas  and  is,  therefore,  worshipped  and  praised  by 
Brahma  and  the  other  Devas,  Munis,  and  Manus.  This  Bhagavati 
DurgA,  Devi,  (when  She  gets  pleased)  destroys  all  the  sorrows,  pains  and 
troubles  of  the  Bhaktas  that  have  taken  Her  refuge,  and  gives  them 
Dharma,  everlasting  name  and  fame,  all  auspicious  things  and  bliss  and 
all  the  happiness,  nay,  the  Pinal  Liberation  !  She  is  the  Greatest  Hefuge 
of  these  Bhaktas  that  come  t3  Her  wholly  for  protection  and  are  in  "-reat 
distress,  whom  She  saves  from  all  their  dangers  and  calamities.  In  fact 
know  this  Durga  Devi  as,  verily,  the  Presiding  Deity  of  the  heart  of  Krisna 
and  as  His  Highest  Sakti,  of  the  nature  of  the  Holy  Fire  and  the  Holy 
Light.  She  is  Omnipotent  and  resides  always  with  Krisna,  the  Great 
God.  She  is  worshipped  by  all  the  Siddha  Purusas  -(those  that  have 
attained  success;  ;  the  (eighteen)  Siddhis  all  go  to  Her  and  when  pleased 
She  gives  whatever  Siddhis   (success)  that  Her  Bhaktas  want. 

19-40.  This  Great  Devi  is  the  intelligence,  sleep,  hunger,  thirst, 
shadow,  drowsiness,  fatigue,  kindness,  memory,  caste,  forbearance, 
errors,  peace,  beauty,  and  consciousness,  contentment,  nourishment, 
prosperity,  and  fortitude,     She  is  sung  in  the  Vedas  and  in    other   S  astras' 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  I.  799 

as  the  MahJi  Maya,  of  the  nature  of  the  Universe.     In  reality,  She    is  the 
All-Sakfci    of  the    Universe    and    She    is   the    Sakti    of  Krisna.     All  these 
qualities  are  also  mentioned  in    the  Vodas.  What  is     mentioned    here   is   a 
tithe  merely,    in     comparison   to    that    of   the    Vedas.     She    has    infinite 
qualities.     Now  hear  of  other  Saktis.     The  second    Sakti  of  the    Paramat- 
man  is  named  PadmS,  (Lak?a\i).     She  is  ot  the    nature    of  Suddha    Sattva 
(Higher  than  Sattva  Guna)  and  is    Krisna's  Presidino;  Deity    of  all  wealth 
and  prosperity.     This  very  beautiful  Laksmi     Devi  is  the  complete    master 
of  the  senses  ;  She  is  of  a  very  peaceful  temper,  of  good    mood    and   all-aus- 
picio'is.     She  is  free  from  gread,  delusion,  lust,  anger,    vanity    and   egoism. 
She    is      devoted    to    liar     husband      and      to     Her      Bhaktas  ;       Her 
words  are  very  sweet  and  She   is    very   dear    to  Her    husband,  indeed,  the 
Life  and  Soul  of  Him.     This  Devi  is  residing  in    all  the  grains    and    veget- 
ables and  so  She  is  the  Source  of  Life  of  all  the  beings.     She  is  residing    in 
Vaikuntha     as    Maha    Laksmi,  chaste   and  always  in    the   service    of  her 
husband.     She  is  the  Heivenly  Liksmi,  residing  in    the    Heavens  and  the 
royal  Laksmi  in  palaces  and    the  Griha  Laksmi  i?i  the  several    families    of 
several  householders.     ONarada!     All  the  lovely    beauty  that  you    see    in 
all  the  living  beings  and  all  the  things,    it    is  She  ;    She  is    the  glory   and 
fame  of  those  that  have  done  good  and  pious  works  and  it  is  She  that  is  the 
prowess  of  the  powerful  Kings,     She  is  the  trade  of  merchants,  the    mercy 
of  the  saints,  engaged  in  doing    good  to  others  and  the  seed  of  dissensions  in 
those   sinful   and    viscious    persons  as  approved    of  in    the    Vedas.     She  is 
worshipped  by  all,  reverenced  by  all.    Now  I  will  describe  to  you  about   the 
third    Sakti  of  the    Great    God  who  is  the  Presiding  Deity  of  knowledge 
speech,    intelligence,  and    learning.     This   third  Sakti  is  named  Sarasvati. 
She  is  all  the  learning  of  this  endless    Universe  and  She    resides   as    raedha 
(intelligence)   in   the    hearts  of  all  the  human  beings  ;  She  is  the  power  in 
composing   poetry  ;  She   is    the  memory   and    She  is    the  great  wit,  light, 
Splendour  and  inventive  Genius.     She  gives  the  power   to     understand   the 
real    meaning  of  the    various   difficult   Siddhanta  works  ;  She  explains  and 
makes  us  understand  the  diflicult  passages  and   She    is    the    remover  of  all 
doubts  and  difficulties.     She  acts  when   we   write   books,    when   we  arsue 
and  judge,  when  we  sing  songs  of  music  ;  She  is    the   time  or  measure   in 
music  ;  She    holds   balance  and    union   in  vocal    and    instrumental  music. 
She  is  the  Goddess  of  speech  ;    She  is  Presiding  Deity  in  the  knowledge    of 
various    subjects  ;  in    argumentations    and   disputations.     In    fact   all   the 
beings  earn  their  livelihood  by  taking  recourse  to  Her.  She  is   peaceful  and 
holds    in   her    hands    Vina  (lute)  and  books.     Her  nature  is  purely  Sattvic 
(Suddha  Sattva),  modest   and    very   loving   to    ^ri    Hari.     Her   colour  is 
white  like  ice  clad  mountains,  like  that  of  the  white  sandal,  like  that  of  the 
Kunda  flower,  like  that  of  the  Moon,  or  white   lotus.     She   always  repeats 


800  i§Rl  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

the  uame  of  Paramatma  Sri  Krisna    while    She  turns  Her   bead    composed 
of  jewels.     Her  nature  is  ascetic  ;  She  is  the    bestower  of  the  fruita    of  the 
asceticism  of  the  ascetics  ;  She  is  the  Siddhi  and  Vidy^  of  all  ;  She     grants 
always   success   to   all.     Were   She     not  here,  the  whole    host  of  Brahmins 
would  always    remain  speechless   like  the    dead    cluster    of  persons.      What 
IS    recited    in  the    Vedas  as    the   Third  Davi  is  the  Holy  Word,  the  Third 
^akti,  Sarasvati.     Thus  I    have  described  Her.      No>v     hear   the    glorios    of 
the    other    Davis    in  aecordaaca    with  the  Vedis.     She  is  the  mother  of  the 
four  colours  (castes),    the   origin    of   the    (^six)  Vedumgas    (the  limbs  of  the 
Vedas    aud    all    the   Chhandas,  the    Seed    of  all  the  mantrams  of  Sandhy^ 
vandanam  and  the  Root,   the  Seed  of  the    Tantras  ;  She    Herself  is    versed 
in  all  the  subje3^,s.      Herself  an  ascetic,    She  is  the  Tapis  of     the  Brahmins  • 
She  is  the  Tejas  (Fire)  and  the  caste    of  the   Brahmin    ciste    and    embodies 
in  Herself    all   sorts   of  Samskaras  (tendencies;    inclinations);  She  is     the 
Japam.     Pure,    known  by  the   names    of    Savitri    aud    Gayatri,  She    re- 
sides always    in    th3    Brahma  Loka   (the    Sphere    of  Brahma)  aad  is    su3h 
as  all    the  sacred  places    of  pilgrima^^es    want    Her  touch   for    their    purifi- 
cation. 

41-47.     Her    colour    is   perfectly   white    like    the   pure   crystal.  She  is 
purely  Buddha  Sattva,  of  th^  uatura  of  the   Highest   Bliss  ;  She    is     eternal 
tiud    superior    to    all.     She    is    of   the    nature    of    Para    Br.dima  and  U  th3 
bestower    of   Moksa.     She    is  the  Fiery  S'akti  and  the  Presiding  Deity  of 
the  Brahmi  Teja  (ihe  fiery  spirit  of  Brahma,    and    the    Brahmanas).      The 
whole  world  is  purified  by  the  touch   of  Whose    Feat,  this  Sdvitri  Davi  is 
the  Fourth  5akti.     O  Child  Narada  !     Now    I  will  describe    to   you    abo  it 
the  Fifth  ^akti,  the  Devi  Badhika.     Hear.     She    is    the    Presiding    Deity 
of  the  five  Prana-5  ;  She  Herself  is  the  Life    of  ail  ;  dearer  than  life  even    to 
§ri  Krisua  ;  and  She  is  highly  more  beautiful  and  suparior  to  all   the  other 
Prakriti  Devis.     She  dwells  in  everything;     She  is  very  proud  of   Her  good 
fortune  (Saubhagyam)  ;  Her  glory  is  infinite  ;  and  She    is  the  wife,  the  left 
body,  as  it  were,  of  ori  Krisna  and   She  is  not  in  any  way  inferior   to    Him, 
either  in  quality  or  in   the    Tejas  (fiery  Spirit)  or  in  any  other  thing.     She 
is  Higher  than  the  Highest;  the  Essenca  of   all,  infinitely  superior,  the  First 
of  all,  Eternal,  of  the  nature  of  the  Highest  Blisa,  fortunate,  highly  respected, 
and  worshipped  by  all.     She  is,  the  Presiding    Devi  of   the    Rasa   LiB    of 
Sri  Krisna.    From    Her    has  sprung    the    Rasa   mandalam   and  She  is  the 
Grace  and  the  Ornament  of  the  RSsa    mandalam  (the   dance  in  a   circle    in 
Rasa). 

Note  : — Extracts   from  a  paper  on    Creation   as   explained    by    Hon'ble 
Justice  Sir  G.  Woodroffe. 

The    Lecturer  commenced  by  pointing  out  that  an  examination    of  any 
d)3'riu3  of  cmfjioi  ravnh     two   lundamental   concepts;    Thoie    of  Being 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  I.  801 

(Kutastha)  and  Becoming  (Bbava) ;  Changelessuess  and  Change  ;  the  one 
^nd  Many.  The  Brahman  or  Spirit  in  its  own  nature  (Svarapa)  is  and 
never  becomes.  It  is  the  evohites  derived  from  the  Principle  of  Becoming 
/MuU  prakriti)  which  constitute  what  is  called  Nature.  The  latter 
principle  is  essentially  Movement.  The  worll  is  displayed  by  conscious- 
ness (chit)  in  association  with  Mula  prakriti  in  cosmic  vibration  (spandana). 
Recent  iVestern  hypotheses  have  made  scientific  "  matter"  into  M^y^  in 
the  sense  that  it  is  but  the  varieJ  appearances  pvoduced  in  our  mind  by 
vibration  of  and  in  the  single  substance  ether.  The  doctrine  of  vibration 
(Spandana)  is  however  in  India  an  ancient  inheritance.  The  whole  world  is 
born  from  the  varied  forms  of  the  initial  movement  in  Muld  Prakriti.  The 
problem  is  how  does  such  multiplieit}'  exist  without  derogation  to  the 
essential  unit  of  its  efficient  cause,  the  spirit  ?  The  lecturer  then  made  a 
rapid  survey  of  the  Sankhya  philosophy  on  this  point,  whi?h  assumed  two 
real  and  independent  principles  of  Being  and  Becoming  which  it  calls 
Purusi  and  Prakriti  and  passed  from  this  the  easiest  dualistic  answer  lo 
the  pure  monism  of  Sankara  which  asserted  that  there  was  but  one 
Principle  of  Being,  the  Sadvastu  and  May 3,  whether  considered  as  a 
^akti  of  is' vara  or  as  the  product  of  such  Sakti  was  Avastu  or  nothing. 
He  then  pointed  ou*;  that  the  Tantrik  doctrine  with  which  he  dealt 
occupied  a  middle  position  between  these  two  points  cf  vie»v.  Siva  in  the 
Kularnava  Tantra  says  ''Some  desire  Monism  (Advaitavada),  others 
Dualism  (Dvaitavada).  Such,  however,  know  not  My  Truth  which  is 
neither  Monism  nor  Dualism  (Dvaitadvaita  vivarjita).  Tantra  is  not 
DvaitavSda  for  it  does  not  recognise  Prakriti  as  an  independent  uncons- 
cious principle  (Achit).  It  differs  from  Sankara's  Advaitavada  in  holding 
that  Prakriti  as  a  conscious  principle  of  Becoming,  that  is  as  Sakti,  is  not 
not  Avastu,  though  its  displayed  picture,  the  world  is  Maya.  It  effects  a 
syntheois  of  the  Sankhya  dualism  by  the  conversion  of  the  twin  principles 
of  Parusa  and  Prakriti  into  the  unity  which  is  the  Ardhanaris'vara  Siva 
Sakti. 

As  reo-ards  other  matters  it  adopts  the  notions  of  the  Sankhya  such  as 
the  concepts  of  Mdl^  prakriti  with  the  three  Gunas,  vibration  (spandana), 
evolution  (Parinama)  of  the  Vikritis  and  the  order  of  emanation  of  the 
Tattvas.  Sakti  which  effects  this  exists  and  is  Herself  never  unconscious 
(Achit)  though  It  has  the  power  to  make  the  Jiva  think  It  is  such.  If 
this  were  understood  one  would  not  hear  such  nonsense  as  that  the  S^ktas 
(whose  religion  is  one  of  the  oldest  in  the  world)  worship  material  force  or 
gross    matter  (Jada). 

101 


802  .^r!  M.VD  DEYI  BriAOAVATAM. 

The  lecturer  then  shortly  explained  the  nature  of  5alcti  (5akti  Tattva), 
a  term  wliich  derived  from  the  root  "  5ak"  meant  the  Divine  Power 
whoraby  fchfl  world  was  created,  manifested  and  destroyed.  In  Tantra  the 
powar  and  the  Lord  who  wields  it  (SaktimS.n)  are  one  and  the  same,  Siva 
and  S  dvti  are  one  and  the  same,  Siva  is  Brahman,  Sakti  is  Brahman. 
The  first  is  the  transcendent,  the  second  the  immanent  aspect  of  the  one 
Brahman, Who  is  both  Siva  and  Sakti.  The  INIother  creates  (Karya- 
vibhavini).  The  Father  wills  what  She  does  (Karya-Vibhavaka).  From 
their  union  creation  comes.  Sakti  is  not  like  the  diminutive  female 
figure  which  is  soen  on  the  lap  of  some  Indian  images,  to  which  is 
assigned  the  subordinate  position  which  soma  persons  consider  a  Hindu 
wife  should  occupy.  She  is  not  a  handmaid  of  the  Lord  but  the  Lord 
Himself  in  Her  aspect  as  Mother  of  the  worlds.  This  ^akti  is  both 
Nirguna  andSaguna  that  is  Chit  S'^akti  and  MtiyS,  Sikti. 

After  th  IS  defining  Tii6  nature  of  Sakti  by  which  the  world  was  created, 
the  lecturer  commenced  an  account  of  its  manifestation  as  the  universe, 
foUowin  >•  in  tha  main  the  SaradA,  Tilaka  written  in  the  eleventh  century 
by  L.iksmanachaiya.  the  Guru  of  the  celebrated  Kashmiriun  Tantrik, 
AbSinava  Gupta.  The  following  is  a  very  abbreviated  summary  of  this,  the 
main  portion  of  the  paper.  The  lecturer  first  referred  to  the  Aghanavastha 
siato  which  was  that  Niskala  ^iva  and  touching  upon  the  question  why 
^iva  became  Sakala  (associated  with  Kaluj  and  creative  explained  the  term 
Kala  and  the  theory  of  Adristasristi  taught  by  the  Tantra  as  by  other  ^iis- 
tras.  The  former  is  according  to  Sankhya,  Mulaprakriti  ;  according  to 
VedSnta,  Avidya  and  according  to  the  ^iva  Tantra,  Sakti.  The  latter  is  the 
doctrine  that  the  impulse  to  creation  is  proximately  caused  by  the  Karma 
of  the  Jivas.  It  is  the  seed  of  Karma  which  contains  the  germ  of  Cosmic 
will  to  life.  W  hen  Karma  becomes  ripe,  there  arises  the  state  called 
Iksana  and  other  names  indicative  of  creative  desire  and  will.  There  then 
takes  place  a  development  which  is  peculiar  to  the  Tantra  called  Sadris'a 
Parinuma,  which  is  a  kind  of  Yivartta.  The  development  is  only 
apparent  for  there  is  no  real  change  in  the  Anandaraaya  Kosa.  iSakti 
which  exists  in  Sakala  Siva  in  a  purely  potential  state  is  said  to  issue 
from  Him.  This  is  the  first  Kinetic  aspect  of  Sakti  in  which  Sattagurj a 
is  displayed.  This  is  the  Param^kasavastha.  N^da  (Sound,  Word)  then 
appears.  Sakti  becomes  further  Kinetic  through  the  enlivening  of  the 
Raio  Guna.  This  the  Aksaravastha.  Then  under  the  influence  of 
Tamne,  Isvara  becomes  Ghanibhuta  and  what  is  called  the  Paravindu. 
This  is  the  AvyaktavasthS.  Thus  the  Supreme  Vindu  men  call  by 
different  names,  MahsL  Visnu,  Brahma  purusa,  or  Devi.  It  is  compared  to 
a  »rain  of  gram  which  under  its  sheath    contains   two    seeds    in    undivided 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  I.  808 

union.  These  are  Siva  Sakti  and  their  encircling  sheath  is  MayS.  This 
Vindu  unfolds  and  displays  itself,  in  the  threefold  aspect  of  Vindu,  Viji, 
NS.da  ;  or  Siva,  Sakti,  and  Siva  bakti  ;  the  three  Saktis  of  will,  knowledge 
and  action.  This  is  the  mysterious  K^mi  Kala  which  is  the  root  of  all 
Mantras.  These  seven  : — Sakala  Siva,  Sakti,  Nada,  Paravindu,  Vindu, 
VJja,  N^da  are  all  aspects  of  oakti  which  are  the  seven  divisions  of  the 
Mantra  Om  and  constitute  what  is  called  the  creation  of  Para  sound  in 
the  Is'vara  creation. 

The  lecturer  having  explained  the  nature  of  these  Saktis  which  formed 
part  of  the  sound  (Sabda),  Sadrisa  Parinama,  referred  to  the  form  or 
meaning  (Artha)  creation  in  the  same  development  by  the  appearance  of 
the  six  Sivas  from  Sambhu  to  Brahma  which  were  aggregate  (Samasti) 
sound  posvers.  It  was  he  said,  on  the  differentiation  of  the  Paravindu  that 
there  existed  the  completed  causal  babda  which  is  the  Hidden  Word.  The 
causal  boJy  or  Para  Sabda  and  Artha  being  complete,  there  then 
appeared  the  Displayed  word  or  tsabdartha.  This  is  a  composite  like  tho 
Greek  Lojros.  The  Sabda  Brahman  or  Brahman  as  cause  of  oabda  is  the 
Chaitanya  in  all  beings.  The  Sabdartha  in  the  Vedantin  N^marupa  or 
world  of  name  and  form  of  this  Sabdartha  the  subtle  and  gross  bodies  are 
constituted,  the  Saktis  of  which  are  the  Hiranyagarbba  sound,  called 
Madhyam^l  and  the  VirSt  sound  Vaikhari.  By  Sabda  is  not  meant  merely 
physical  sound  which  as  a  quality  of  atomic  ether  is  evolved  from  Tamasik 
Ahamkara. 

The  lecturer  then  pointed  out  that  there  had  been  Adrista  Sristi  up 
to  the  appearance  of  Sakti  and  Vivartta  development  up  to  the  comple- 
tion of  the  "  Word"  or  causal  sound.  There  then  takes  place  real  evo- 
lution (Parinama)  in  which  the  Tattvas  (or  elements  discovered  as  a  result 
of  psychological  analysis  of  our  worldly  experience)  are  said  to  emanate 
according  to  the  Sankhya  and  not  the  Vedantic  scheme,  though  there  were 
some  peculiarities  in  the  Tantrik  exposition  which  the  lecturer  noted. 
Finally  Yogika  Sristi  was  accepted  in  so  far  as  it  \va><)  the  elements  which 
in  varied  combinations  made  up  the  gross  world. 

In  conclusion  the  lecturer  pointed  out  that  Indian  ^astra  was  a 
mutually  connected  whole.  Such  peculiarities  as  existed  in  any  particular 
S^stra  were  due  to  variety  of  standpoint  or  purpose  in  view.  The  main 
point  in  this  connection  to  be  remembered  was  that  the  Tantra  was  prac- 
tical Sadhana  Sastra.  Whilst  ^ankara  dealt  with  the  subject  from  the 
standpoint  of  Jnanakanda,  the  Tantra  treated  it  from  the  point  of  view  of 
worship  (tJp;\san'ikanda)  the  Tintrik  doctrine  is  compounded  of  various 
elements  some  of  which  it  shared  with  other  Sastras,  some  of  which  are 
its  own,  the  whole  being  set  forth  according  to  a  method  and  terminology 
which  is  peculiar  to  itself. 


804  ^Rt  MAD  DEVI  BHAgAVATAM. 

48-70.  She  is  the  Lady  of  the  Rasa  Lila,  the  Foremost  of  the  Jovial, 
humourous  (witty)  persons  and  dwells  always  in  Rasa.  Her  abode  is  ia 
Goloka  and  from  Her  have  come  out  all  the  Gopikas.  Rasa — The  circular 
dance  of  Krisna  and  the  cow-herdesses  of  Vriodavana.  Her  nature  is  the 
Highest  BHssj  the  Highest  Contenment,  and  Excessive  Joy  ;  She  trins- 
cends  the  three  Sitjva,  Rajo  and  Tamo  Gunas  and  is  Nirakara  (without 
any  particular  form)  ;  but  She  dwells  everywhere  but  unconnected  with 
any.  She  is  the  soul  of  all.  She  is  without  any  effort  to  do  anything  and 
void  of  Ahamkara.  She  assumes  forms  only  to  show  Her  favour  to  Her 
Bhaktas.  The  intelligent  learned  men  (Pundits)  read  Her  MahiraS,  (glories) 
in  meditating  on  Her  according  to  the  Vedas.  The  chief  of  the  Devas  and 
the  Munis  could  never  see  Her  ;  Her  clothings  are  fire  proofs  and  She  is 
decorated  with  mauy  ornaments  all  over  Her  body.  Her  body  looks  as  it 
the  crores  of  moons  have  risen  all  at  once  ;  She  is  the  Giver  of  Bhakti 
(devotion)  towards  Krisna,  service  towards  Krisna  ;  and  She  bestows  all 
wealth  and  prosperity.  lu  Varllha  Kalpa  I.  c,  when  the  Varaha  incarna- 
tion took  place,  She  incarnated  Herself  as  the  daughter  of  one  Gopa  (cow- 
herd), named  Vrisabhaiiu.  And  Earth  was  blessed  by  the  touch  of  Her 
feet.  She  is  such  as  Brahma  and  the  other  Devas  could  never  perceive 
Her  by  any  of  their  senses,  yet  every  one  at  Vrindaran  saw  Her  very 
easily.  She  is  the  Gem  amongst  women.  And  when  She  is  seen  on  the 
breast  of  Krisna,  it  seems  that  lightening^  Hash  in  the  blue  mass  of  clouds 
in  the  sky.  In  days  gone  by,  Brahm^  practised  several  austerities  for  sixty 
thousand  years  to  purify  Himself  by  seeing  the  nails  of  Her  toes  ;  but  far 
from  seeing  that,  He  could  not  have  that  even  in  His  dreams.  At  last  He  suc- 
ceeded in  seeing  Her  at  Vrind^vana  and  became  blessed.  O  child  Narada ! 
This  is  the  fifth  Prakriti  aul  she  is  denominated  a3  Radha.  Every  female  in 
every  Universe  is  sprung  from  a  part  of  ^ri  Radha  or  part  of  a  part.  O 
Narada  !  Thus  I  have  described  to  you  the  five  Highest  Prakritis  Durga 
and  others.  Now  I  am  going  to  describe  those  that  are  parts  of  these 
Prakritis.  Hear.  The  Ganges,  Ganga  has  sprung  from  the  lotus  feet  of 
Visnu  ;  Her  form  is  fluidlike ;  She  is  eternal.  And  She  is  the  veritable 
burning  Fire  to  burn  away  the  sins  of  the  sinners.  She  is  sweet  to  touch  in 
taking  baths  and  in  drinking  ;  She  gives  final  liberatioB  to  the  Jivas,  aiid 
leads  easily  to  the  Goloka  Abode.  She  is  the  holiest  amongst  the  places  of 
pilgrimages  and  is  the  first  of  the  running  rivers.  She  is  the  rows  of 
pearls  in  the  clotted  hairs  of  Mahadeva's  head  and  She  is  the  Tapasya 
(asceticism)  incarnate  of  the  Tapasvis  (ascetics)  of  the  Bharata  Varsa. 
This  Ganges  purifies  the  three  worlds  and  is  the  part  of  Mula  Prakriti  • 
She  shines  like  the  Full  Moon,  is  white  like  white  lotus  and  like  milk  ; 
She  is   pure  S'uddha  Sattva.  clear,    free  from    any  Ahamkara,   chaste   and 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  I.  805 

,   b3lovei  of  N^i-ayain.     Tlio    Tiilasi    Ujvt  is  tha  contort  of  VisQu.  She   is 
fcheoraaraent  of  Narayain,  and  dwells  always  at  the  lotus  feet  of  NArayaaa.. 
By   Her   are  performed  all    tbe   act?    of  worship,    all    austerities,   and   all 
Sankalaps   (resolves).     She  is    the  chief  of  all  the   flowers,    holy  and   able 
to   give  merits  (Punyam)  to   others.     At  Her   sight   and   touch,    Nirvana 
can  be  obtained  ;  and,  were  it  not  for  Her,  there  could   be  no    other   fire    in 
this   Kali  Yu^a  to  burn    the  sins.     She    Herself  is  of  the    nature    of  Fire 
and   at  the  touch  of  Whose  lotus-feet,  the  earth  is  purified  ;  all  the  Tirthas 
desire  to   have    Her  sight  and  touch  for   purification   and  without    Her   all 
acts  in   this   world  become  fruitless,     She    bestows   Mokaa   (liberation)   to 
those  who   want   final   liberation,   grants  all   sorts    of  desires    to   several 
people,  Who  Herself  is  like   a  Kalpa  Vriksa,  Who   is   the  Presiding  Deity 
of  all     the    trees   in    Bharata      and   Who    has     come     here      to     orant 
satisfaction  to  the   ladies  of  BhSrata   Vara*   and    She   is   considered   very 
superior  throughout   all  parts   of  India.     This   Tulast   Devi   is   the  chief 
factor  of  Muia  Prakriti. 

71-95.     Then   comes   the   Mauasa   Devi,   the    daughter   of    Kas'yapa. 
She  is  the   dear  disciple  of  Sankara  and  is  therefore  very  learned  in  matters 
of  S'astras.     She  is  the  daughter  of  Ananta   Deva,   the    Lord   of  Snakes 
and   is  respected  very  much  by   all   the  Nagas.     She  Herself  is  very  beau- 
tiful,   the    Lady  of  the    Nagas,   the  mother  of  the  Nilgas    and    is   carried 
by  them.  She  is  decorated  with  ornaments  of  the  Snakes  ;  She  is  respected 
by  the  NSgendras  and  She  sleeps  on  the   bed   of  Snakes.     She   is    Siddha 
Yogini,   the  devotee  of   Visnu  an  I  always  ready    in  the  worship  of  Visnu; 
She   is   the  Tapas   and  the  besitower    of  the   fruits   of     Tapas.  .Herself  an 
ascetic,    She  spent  three  lakh  years  (according  to  the    Deva    measure)   and 
has  become  the  foremost  of  the  ascetics  in  Bhavatvarsa.  She  is  the  Presiding 
Deity   of  all    the  mantras  ;    Her  whole  body   shines  with  Brahmateja  (the 
Holy   Fire    of  Brahma).     Herself  of  the  nature    of  Brahma,   She   again 
meditates  on  Brahman.     She  is  sprung  from   a  part  of   Sri  Krisna  and   the 
chaste  wife    of  Jarat  Karu  Muni,  the  mother  of  Astika,  the  great    Muni; 
She  is   the    part   of  Muia  Prakriti.     O    Child  Narada  !     Now   comes   the 
S'asthi   Devi,   the  Mother  of  Davasen^.     She  is  the  most  superior  amongst 
the  Gauri  and  the  other  sixteen  Matrikas.     This  chaste  woman  is  the  giver 
ot   sons  and  grandsons  in  the  three  worlds  and  the  nurse,  the  foster  mother 
of  all.     She  is    the  sixth  part  of  Muia    Prakriti    and  is    hence    known    by 
the   name  of  Sasthi.     She    lives   near  to  every  child  as   an   aged   Yogini. 
Her    worship   is   everywhere  prevalent   in   the    twelve  months    Vais'akha, 
etc.     When  the  child  gets  born,  on  the  sixth    day  Her  worship   is   done   in 
the  lying-in-chamber  and  again  on  the  2 1st  day   (after     twenty   days    have 
passed  away)  the  most  auspicious  worshipful  ceremony  of  Her  is  performed* 
Tho  Munis   bow  down  to  Her  with  reverence  and  want  to  visit  Pier  daily. 


806  §Rt  MAD  DEV!  BHAgAVATAM. 

She  protae^^  all  ehi]ii'e;i  al  vays    with  a    uDbbir's  affec^^jiiite    heirt.     This 
Sisthi  Djvi  is  a^ain    the  pvrfc  of  Miili  Pi-akrifci.     Than  appears  the    Devi 
MaQgala  Chandik^.  She  goes  trom  one  house  to  another,  oq  land  or  through 
water  or  in  air,  doing  great  good  to  them  ;    She  has  come  out  of  the  face  of 
the  Prakriti  Devi  and  is  doing  always  all  sorts  of  good  to  this  world.     Her 
name  is  Mangala  Chandi  because  She  is  all  auspicious  at  the  time  of  creation 
and  assumes  very  furious  angry  appearance  at  the  time  of   destruction.     So 
the  Pundits   say.     On  every   Tuesday  in   all   the   worlds    Her   worship   is 
done  ;   and  She,  when    pleased,    gives  to  women  sons,   graodson?,    wealth, 
proaperity,   fame  and   good    of   all  sorts   and      grants   all   desires.     This 
Mangala  Chandi  is   again   the   part   of   Mfila    Prakriti.     Now   come   the 
lotus-eyed  MUhes'vari  K41i  who  when   angry  can  destroy  all  this    universe 
in  a  moment,  who  sprang  from  the  forehead  of  the  Mula  Prakriti,  Durga  to 
slay   the   two   Demons  Sumbha  and    Nis'umbha.  She  is   the  half-portion 
of  Durga  and  qualified  like  Her,  fiery  and  energetic.  The  beauty  and  splen- 
dour of  whose  body  make  one  think  as  if  the  millions  of  suns  have   arisen 
simultaneously.  Who  is  the  toremoat  of  all  the  Saktis  and  is  more    powerful 
than  any  of  them,  Who  grants  success  to  all  the  persons.  Who  is  superior  to 
all  and  is  of  Yogic  nature,  Who  is  exceedingly  devoted  to   Krisna   and  like 
Him  fiery,  well-qualified,  and  valorous,  (Those  body  ha^  become  black  by  the 
constant  meditation  of  S'ri  Krisna,  Who  can  destroy  in  one  breath  this  whole 
Brahmanda,  Who  was  engaged  in  fighting    with    the    Daityas   simply    for 
gport  and   instruction  to   the  people  and  Who,  when  pleased  in  worship  can 
grant  the  four  fruits  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama  and  ]SIoksa.     This   K41i  is  also 
the  part  of  Prakriti.     The   Devi    Basnndharii  (Earth)  is  again    the  part  of 
MulA  Prakriti.  Brahma  and  the    other  Devas,    all     the    Muni  mandalams 
(the   spheres   of   Munis),   fourteen  Manus  and  all  men  sing  hymns  to  Her. 
She  is  the  support  of  all  and  filled  with    all   sorts   of  grains.     She   is    the 
source   of  all   gems   and  jewels,    She   bears  in  Her  womb  all  the  precious 
metals.     All  sorts  of  best  things  issue  from  Her.     She  is  the  Refuge  of  all. 
The  subjects  and  kings  worship    Her   alwAys   aud    chant    hymns    to    Her. 
All  the  Jivas  live  through  Her  and  She    bestows  all    sorts    of   wealth   and 
prosperity.     Without  Her,  all  this,   moving    or    non  moving,  become    void 
of  any  substratum.     Where  to  rest  on! 

96-143.  O  Child  Nfirada!  Now  hear  about  them  who  are  issued 
a<»ain  from  the  parts  of  Mula  Prakriti  as  well  as  the  names  of  their  wives. 
I  will  now  narrate  duly.  The  Dev?  "  Svaha  "  is  the  wife  of  Agni  (Fire)^ 
and  the  whole  Universe  worships  Her.  Without  Her,  the  Devi  can  never 
take  any  oblations.  Daksina  and  Diksa  are  both  the  wives  of  Yajoa 
'Sacrifice).  They  are  honoured  every  .vhere.  So  much  so  that  without 
«r»ak8in&  (the  fees  given  at' the  end  of  the  Sucrilice)  no  sacrificial  ceremonies 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  I.  807 

can  be  complete  and  fruefcifyio^.  The  D3vi"Sva(lh^"  is  the  wife  of  the  Pitris. 
All  worship  this  Davi  "Svadlia  "  whether  they  are  Munis,   Mauus,  or  men 
If  this  oiiutra    "  Svadha"    be    not    uttered    while     making    an    offering 
to  the  Pitris,  all  turn  out  useless.     The  Devi  '•  Svasti  "  is  the   wife   of  the 
Vayu  Deva ;  She  is    honoured    everywhere  in   the  Universe.   Without   this 
"Svasti"  Devi  no  givinf,'  nor  taking    nor  any   action   can    be  fructifying 
and   useful.     "  Pusti  "   (nourishment)  is  the   wife  of   Ganapati.    All  in  this 
world  worship  this    Pusti  Dovi.     Without  this    "  Pusti  ",    women  or    men 
alike  alt  become   weaker  and    weaker.     Tusii    (satisfaction,   contentment) 
is  the  wife  of  Anant v  D^va.     She    is    praised    and    worshipped    everywhere 
in  this  wjrld.     Without  Her  no  one    anywhere  in  the  world  can  be  happj'. 
'•  Sampatti  "  is  the  wife  of  fsSna  Deva.     The    Suras,    the    men   all    alike 
worship    Her.     Were    it   not   for  Her,  all  in  this  world  would  be  oppressed 
with  dire  poverty.     The  Ddvi  "  Dhriti  "  is  the  wife  of   Kapila   Deva.     She 
is  honoured  P(|aally  in  all  places.     AVere  it  not  for    Her,  all    the   people    in 
this    world    would  have    become  impatient.     The  "  Sati  "  Devi  is  the  wife 
of  Satya  Deva.  (Truth.)  She  is  endearing  to  the  whole  world.     The  liberated 
ones  worship  Ht>r  ahv.ays.     Were  it  not.  for  the  .truth  loving  Sati,  the  whole 
world  would  have    lost  the    treasure    in    friendship.     Dayu    "  Mercy  "    en- 
dearing to  the  whole  world  is  the    chaste    wife    of   "  Moha   Deva".     She  is 
liked  by  all.  Were  it  not  for  Her,  all  the  world  would  have  become  hopeless. 
The  Devi  "  Pratistha  "  (fame,  celebrity)  is  the  wife  of   Punya  Deva  (merit). 
She   gives    merits    to  persons  according  as  they  worship  Her.     Were  it  not 
for    Her,    all    the    persons    would    remain    dead    while   living.     The    Devi 
"Kirti "  (fame)  is  the  wife   of  Sukarma    (good  works).     Herself  a  Siddha 
(one  who  has  acquired  the  result  of  one's    success),   all   the   blessed    people 
honour  Her  with  great  reverence.     Were  it  not   for    Her,   all    the  persons 
in  this    world    would  have  been  dead,     devoid  of  any   fame.     Kriy^  (work- 
efforts,  action,  doing)  is  the  wife  of  "Udyoga"  (enthusiasm).     All  honour 
Her   greatly.     O  Muni   Narada  !     Were  it   not   for  Her,  the  whole  people 
would  be  void  of  any    rules   and    regulations.       Falsehood    is   the   wife    of 
Adharma  (unrighteousness)    She   is    honoured   greatly   by   all   the    cheats 
that  are  extant  in  this  world.     Were  she  not    liked  by  them,    then   all   the 
cheats  would  bocome  extinct.     She  did  not  fall  in  the  sight  of  any   body 
in  the  Satya  Yuga.     Her  subtle  form  became  visible    in    the  Tretu    Yuga. 
When  the  Dvapara  Yuga  came,  She  ^became  half  developed.     And   at   last 
when   the    Kali   Yuga    has   come,     She   is  fully  developed  and  there  is  no 
second  to  Her  whether  in  bold  confidence  and  shamelessnesa  or   in   talking 
much  and    pervading   everywhere.     With    her  brother   Deceitfulness   She 
roams  from   one  house   to  another.     Peace   and   modesty  and  (shame)  are 
both  the  wives  of  good   behaviour.     Were   they  not  existent,   all   in    this 


808  5r!  mad  devI  bhagavatam. 

world   would   have   turned  out  deluded  and  mad.     Intelligence,  genius  and 
fortitude,  these  three  are  the  wives  of  J  nana   (knowledge).     Had   they    not 
lived,   every   one  would  become   stupid    and  insane.     Murti  is  the  wife  of 
DharmiDeva.     She  is  of  the    nature   of     Beauty  to  all  and    very   charm- 
ing.    Were  it  not  for  Her,  ParamatmSn  would  not  get  auy    resting   place  ; 
and  the  whole  universe  would  have    become  Nir41amba  (without   anything 
to  rest).     This  Chaste  Murti  Devi  is  of  the  nature  of    splendour,  loveliness 
and  Laksnit.     She  is   everywhere  respected,    worshipped    and    reverenced. 
*  Sleep ',  the  Siddha  Yogint,  is   the    wife    of    Rudra    Deva,    who   is    of  the 
nature  of   KalS,;^ui    (the    universal  couflagratiou   at   the    break-up  of  the 
world).     All  the    Jivas   spend     their     nights     with    Her.     Tlie   twilights, 
night   and   day   are    the  wives    of  K^la    (Time.)     If  they    were    not,  the 
Creator  even  would  not  be  able    to    reckon  time.     Hunger  and    thirst    are 
the    wives   of  Lobha  (covetuousness).     They  are  thanked,  respected    and 
wdrshipped    by    the   whole   world.     Had   they    not  lived,  the  whole    world 
would  have  merged  ever  in  an  ocean  of  anxieties.     Splendour  and    burning 
capacity  are  the  wives  of  Tejas  (firej.     Without    these,   the    Lord   of  the 
world  could   never    have    created  and  established   order   in    this   universe. 
"Death   and   old   age  are  the   daughters  of  the  Kala,  and  the  dear  wives    of 
Jvara  (the  disease).     Without  these,   all   the    creation    would  come   to   an 
encl.  "The    Tandra   (.drowsiness,,   lassitude)  and  Priti  (satisfaction)  an  the 
daughters    of  Nidr^    (sleep).     And  the/    are     the    ilear   wives     of  Sukha 
(pleasure).     They  are  present  everywhere  in  this  world.     O  Best  of  Munis  ! 
SraddhS,   (faith)   and    Bhakti   (devotion)    are    the     wives     of     VairSgyam 
(dispasgion).     For  then  all  the  persons    can   become  liberated     while  living 
(jivanmuktas).     Besides  these   there    is  Adhi,    the  Mother  of  the    Gods, 
Surabhi,  mother  of  cows;  Diti,  the  mother    of  the    Daityas  ;  Kadru,    the 
mother  of  the    N^gas   (serpents)  ;    Vinata,    the  mother    of  Gaduda,   the 
prince  of  birds  ;  and    Danu,    the    mother   of  the    Danavas.     All   are   very 
useful   for    the    purpose   of    creation.      But   these   all  are     parts  of  Mfih\ 
Prakriti.     Now    I    will    mention  some    of    the    ocher    parts    of   Prakriti. 
Hear.     Rohini,  the  wife  of  the  Moon,  Sanjn^,  the  wife    of  the   Sun  ;  ^ata- 
rdpS,   the    wife'  of  Manu  ;  5achi,    the    wife    of   Indra  ;  T^r^,  the  wife  of 
Brihaspati  ;  Arundhati,    the    wife   of   Vas'istha  ;    Anasuya,    the     wife   of 
Atri;    Devahuti,   the    wife  of    Kardama  ;    Prasuti,    the    wife   of  Daksa ; 
Menak&,  the  mind  born  daughter  of  the  Pitris  and  the  mother    of    Ambikd, 
Loplimudr^,  Kunti,  the  v\ife   of  Ku vera,   the  wife    of  Varuna,    Bindhy^- 
vali,  the  wife  of  the  King  Bali  ;  Damayanti,    Yas'od^,    Davaki,   G^ndhSr?, 
Draupadi,  SaivyS,  Satyavatt,  the  chaste  and  noble  wife  of  Brisabh^nu  and  the 
mother    of  Radhjl  ;  Mandodari  ;  Kaus'alya,  Kauravi  ;    Subhadr^  ;     Revati, 
Sfttyabbftm^,     K^lindt,  Lakaoiiiria  ;  JSmbavatt  ;  Nigaajiti,     Mitrabindfi, 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  I.  809 

Laksana,Rukmiai,  Sita,  the  Lakfvni  iacarnate  ;  Oli,  Yojana  gandhS, 
the  chaste  mother  of  Vyasa,  tTsI,  the  daughter  of  VSna,  her  companion 
Chitralekh4;  Prabhavati,  Bhaniimati,  the  Sati  May^vati,  RenukS,  the 
mother  of  Paras'uraraa  ;  Rohini,  the  mother  of  Balararaa,  Ekanandsl  and 
the  sister  of  Sri  Krisna,  Sati  Durga  and  many  other  ladies  are  the  parts 
of  Prakriti.  The  village  Deities  are  also  the  parts  of  Prakriti  and  all  the 
female  sexes,  everywhere  in  the  Universe  are  all  come  from  the  parts  of 
Prakriti.  So  to  insult  any  woman  is  to  insult  the  Prakriti.  If  one 
worships  a  chaste  Brahmin  woman,  who  has  her  husband  and  son  living,  with 
clothings,  oruamauts,  and  sandal  i)i>:te,  etc.,  one  worships,  as  it  were, 
Prakriti.  If  any  Vipra  worships  a  virgin  girl,  eight  years  old,  with  clothings, 
ornaments  and  sandalpaste,  know  that  lie  has  worshipped  the  Prakriti 
Devi.  The  best,  middling,  and  worst  are  all  sprung  from  Prakriti. 
Those  women  that  are  sprang  from  Satbva  Guna  are  all  very  good  natured 
and  chaste  ;  those  that  are  sprung  from  Rajo  Guna  are  middling  and  very 
much  attached  to  worldly  enjoyments  and  do  their  selfish  ends  and  those 
that  are  sprung  from  Tamo  Gunas  are  recognised  as  worst  and  belonging  to 
the  unknown  families.  They  are  very  scurrilous,  cheats,  ruining  their  families, 
fond  of  their  own  free  ways,  quarrelsome  and  no  seconds  are  found  equal 
to  them.  Such  women  become  prostitutes  in  this  world  and  ApsarSs  in  the 
Heavens.  The  Hermaphrodites  are  parts  of  Prakriti  but  they  are  of  the 
nature  of  Tamo  Gunas. 

141-159.  Thus  I  have  described  to  you  the  nature  of  Prakriti.  So  in 
this  Punyabhumi  Bharata  Varsa,  to  worship  the  Devi  is  by  all  means 
desirable.  In  days  past  by,  the  King  Suratha  worshipbed  the  Mulu 
Prakriti  Dur^a,  the  Destructrix  of  al!  evih.  Then  again  Sri  Rima  Chandra 
worshipped  Her  when  he  wanted  to  kill  Ravana.  Since  then  Her  worship 
is  extant  in  the  three  worlds.  She  was  first  born  as  the  honourable  daughter 
of  Daksa.  She  destroyed  -the  whole  hosts  of  Daityas  an  I  Dunavas.  It 
was  She  who,  hearing  the  abusive  words  uttered  against  Her  husband  at  the 
Yajua  by  Daksa,  Her  father,  gave  up  Her  body  and  took  up  again  Her 
birth.  She  took  Her  birth  in  the  womb  of  Menaku  and  got  a»ain 
Pas'upati  as  Her  husband.  And  of  the  two  sons,  KSrtika  and  Ganes'a, 
born  to  Her,  Kartika  was  the  Ansa  (part)  of  Ndrayana  and  Ganapati 
was  Sri  Krisna  Himself,  the  Lord  of  Radha.  O  Devarsi!  After  the  two 
pons,  Lakami  Devi  came  out  of  Durga.  Mangala  R^ja,  the  King  Mars 
first  worshipped  Her.  Since  then,  all  in  the  three  worlds  began  to 
worship  Her,  whether  they  are  Devas  or  men.  The  King  As'vapati  first 
worshipped  Sivitri  Devi;  and  since  then  the  Davas,  Munis,  all  began 
to  worship  Her.  When  the  Devi  Sarasvati  was  born,  the  Bhagavan 
Brahnt   fir-it    w>rshlpp3l  H^r;    next    the  greatjst  Munis,  Davas  all  began 

102 


810  SRI  mad  DEVt  BHiGAVATAM. 

to  worship  Her.  On  the  full  moon  nij^hb  of  the  aaonth  of  K^rtik,  it 
wa3  Bhxgav^a  Sri  Krisna,  the  Highest  Spirit,  that  worshipped,  firat  of 
all,  the  Devi  llidha  within  the  R\sa  Mandalam.  the  enelos'ire,  within 
which  the  Risa-liU  was  performed  (tlie  circular  dance)  in  ihe  region 
Goloka.  Then  under  the  command  of  Sri  Krisna,  all  the  Oopas  (cow- 
herds), Gopi?,  all  the  boys,  girls,  Surabhi,  the  queen  of  the  race  of  the 
cows,  and  the  other  caws  worshipped  Her.  So  since  Her  worship  hy  the 
inhabitants  of  Goloka,  by  Br.ihmu  and  the  the  other  Devas  and  the  Munis, 
all  be^an  to  worship  ever  Srt  R^dhS,  with  devotion  aud  incense,  light  and 
various  other  offerings.  On  e.irbh  Sha  wis  first  worshipped  by  Suyajni, 
in  the  the  sacred  field  of  Bharatvarsa,  under  the  direction  of  Bhagavan 
Mahadeva.  Subsequently,  under  the  command  of  the  Bhagavan  Sri  Krisna, 
the  Highest  Spirit,  the  inhabitants  of  the  three  worlds  began  to  worship 
Her.  The  Munis  with  great  devotion,  with  incense,  flowers  and  various 
other  offerings  worship  always  the  Devi  Radha.  O  Child  NSrada! 
Besides  these,  all  the  other  Devis  that  have  issued  from  Prakriti  Devi 
are  all  worshipped.  So  much  so  thit  in  the  villages,  the  village  Deities,  in 
the  forests,  the  forest  D.Mtie^  an  1  in  th^i  cities,  the  city  Drtiti^^are  worshipp- 
ed. Thus  I  havo  descrlhel  ti  you  all  according  to  the  Sastras  the  <;;h)rious 
lives  of  the  Devi  Prakriti  and  Her  parts.  What  more  do  you  want  to  hear  ? 
Here  ends  the  First  Chapter  on  the  Description  of  Prakriti  in  the 
Ninth  Book  of  the  Mahupuranam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bh^gavatam  of  18,000 
verses   by    Maharsi     Veda  Vyasa. 

CHAPTER  II. 

l-i.  Ndrada  said  :  — O  Lord  !  I  have  he  ird  all  that  you  said  in 
brief  about  the  Prakriti  Devi.  Now  describe  in  detail.  Why  the  MCi  la 
Prakriti  Adyii  Sakti  (the  Prime  Force)  was  created  at  the  very  beginning 
before  the  creation  of  this  world  of  five  elemDuts.  How  did  She,  being  of 
the  nature  of  the  three  Gunas,  coma  to  be  divided  into  Ci\e  parts  ?  I 
desire  to  hear  all  this  in  detail.  Now  kindly  describe  their  auspicious 
births,  methods  of  worship,  their  meditation,  their  stotras,  (praises)  Kavaehas 
(  the  mystic  syllables  considered  as  a  preservation  like  armour)  glory  and 
power  in  detail. 

5-26.  Nurayana  spoke  :— "  0  Devarsi  !  The  Miila  Prakriti,  of  the 
nature  of  M^ya  of  Para  Brahman  is  an, eternal  entity  (Nitya  padartha)  just 
as  the  Atman,  the  celestial  space  (the  nabho  mandal)  ;  Time  (Kala),  the  ten 
quarters,  the  Universe  Egg,  the  Goloka  and,  lower  than  this,  the  Vaikun- 
tha  dhuma  all  are  eternal  things.  Atman  and  Prakriti  are  in  inseparable 
unipn  with  each  other  as  Fire  and  its  burning  capacity,  the  Moon  and  her 
beauty,  the  lotus  and  its  splendour,  the  Sun  and  his  rays  are  inseparably 
united   with    each  othar.     As   the  '>)Usmith   cannot  prepare  golden    orna- 


i5ooK  IX.]  CHAP'TEK  11.  .8il 

mants  witbo'.ifc  gold  aud  as  tbu  potter  cannot  make  earthen  pots  without 
earth,  so  the  Atmin  cannot  do  any  work  without  ■  the  help  of  this  omni- 
potent Prakriti.  The  letter  "  Sa"  indicates  "  Ais'yaryam"  prosperity, 
the  divine  powers  ;  and  "  Kti',  denotes  might,  strength  ;  and  in  as  much 
as  She  is  the  Bestower  of  the  above  two,  the  Mula  Prakriti  is 
named  "  OAkti".  "  Bhaga"  is  indicative  of  knowledge,  prosperity,  wealth, 
fame  ;  and  in  as  much  as  Mula  Praki'iti  has  all  these  powers,  She  is  also 
called  "  Bhagavati."  And  Atnian  "is  always  in  union  with  this  Bhagavati 
Who  is  all  powers,  so  lie  is  called  ''Bhagavun."  The  Bhagavan  is  therefore 
sometimes  with  form  ;  and  sometimes  He  is  without  form.  Note  : — When 
Prakriti  becomes  latent,  God  is  without  form  ;  with  Prakriti  manifest,  God  is 
with  form.)  The  Yogis  always  think  of  the  Luminous  Form  of  the  Form- 
loss  Bhagavan  and  declare  Him  to  be  all  blissful  Para  Brahma,  the  God. 
Though  He  is  invisible,  the  Witness  of  all,  Omniscient,  the  Cause  of  all, 
the  Giver  of  everything  and  of  every  form,  yet  the  Vaisnavas 
do  not  say  so.  The  Vaisnavas  declare  bow  can  fire,  strength  and 
energy  come  when  there  is  no  fiery,  strong,  energetic  Person  behind  it? 
Therefore  He  who  shines  in  tho  centre  of  this  fiery  sphere  is  the  Para 
Brahma  ;  He  is  the  Fiery  Person  ;  He  is  Higher  than  the  Highest.  Ho 
is  All  Will  ;  He  is  All-Form,  the  Cause  of  all  causes  and  His  Form 
is  Very  Beautiful.  He  is  Young  ;  He  looks  very  peaceful  and  loved  by 
all.  He  is  the  Highest  ;  and  His  Blue  Body  shines  like  new  rain-clouds. 
His  two  eyes  defy  the  beauty  of  the  autumn  lotuses  in  the  mid»day; 
His  es(juisitely  nice  rows  of  teeth  pub  all  the  series  of  pearls  in  the 
dark  back-ground.  Th  e  peacok's  feather  is  seen  on  His  crown;  the 
garland  of  Malati  flowers  is  suspended  from  His  neck;  His  nose  is 
exceedingly  beautiful;  the  sweet  smile  is  always  seen  on  His  lips.  There 
is  no  second  lilie  Him  in  showing  favour  to  the  Bhaktas.  He  wears 
yellow  clothings,  as  if  the  burning  fire  is  emanating  all  round;  the 
flute  is  seen  on  both  His  hands,  reaching  to  the  knees.  His  bodv  is 
decorated  all  over  with  jewels.  He  is  the  Sole  Refuge  of  this  Universe  ; 
the  Lord  of  all,  omnipotent  and  omnipresent.  No  trace  of  deficiency 
can  be  seen  in  Him;  He  is  Himself  a  Siddha  ^perfect)  Purusa  ; 
and  the  foremost  of  all  Siddha  Purusa?;  bestows  Siddhis  to  all.  The 
Vaisnavas  nuditate  always  Thit  Eternal  Sri  Krisna,  the  Deva  of  the 
Dovas.  He  takes  away  fully  all  the  fears  of  birth,  death,  old  age,  and 
all  ills  and  sorr)w^.  The  age  of  Brahml  i.'^  the  twinkling  of  His 
eye.  Thit  Highest  Sjlf,  the  Para  Braiiini  is  denominated  as  Krisna. 
The  word  "  Kris  "  denotes  Bhakti  to  Sri  Krisna  and  the  letter  "  na  " 
signifies  devotion  to  His  service.  So  He  is  the  Bestow^cr  of  Bhakti  and 
devotion    to    His    Service.      Ag.iin    "  Kris  "    ilcnotos  all;    everything;   and 


812  SKt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

•»n*"   signifies    tin   rojt.     Sj  He  Who    i^    the  Root  aul    Creator    of  all, 
is   :§i-i    Ki-isna.    Wh3ii       II3  desirad,    iu    the    very   ba^iatiing,    to    create 
tbii    Universe,    there    \va?     nothing    then     except    Sri     Krisna;     and    at 
last,  impelled  by  Kaia,  (His  Own  Creation)  He  became    ready,  in  His  part, 
to  do  the  work  of  creation. 

27.61.   The  Lord,  who   is  All    Will,   willed   and  divided  Himself    into 
two  parts,  Hig  Left  part  becoming    female   and    His  Right  part  becoming 
mab.     Then   that  Eternal    One,    Who    is    greatly    loving,   looked  at  the 
female,    His  left    part,   the    Sole  Receptacle  to  hold   all     the     contents   of 
love,   very   lovely   tj  the  eyes,  and    looking    like     the     beautiful     lotus. 
The   loins   of  this    woman   defy    the    Moon;    Her    thighs  put  the  plantain 
trees   quite   in    the    background;     Her     breasts     are     mistaken     for    the 
beautiful  Bel    fruits  ;    flowers    are   scattered  as    Her  Hairs    on    the    head; 
Her    middle    part  is  very   slender,  very  beautiful  to  behold  1     Exceedingly 
lovely;   appearance  very   cihn;   sweet   smile    reigning    in    Her   lips;    side 
long    glances   with    Her;    Her     clothing  is   purified   by  fire;    all    over  Her 
body  decorated   with  gems.    Her  eyes,   also,  like  the  Chakora  bird  (Greek 
partridge)   beajan   to   drink    incessantly    with   joy   the  moon  beams   from 
the   face   of  ori   Krisna,   defying,   as   it  were,   the  ten  mill  ions  of  moons. 
On    Her    forehead   there    was    the  dot   of  vermilion   (red-lead);   over   that 
the  dot  of  white  sandal    paste    and   over    that      was  placed    the     musk. 
The   fillets    or   braids   of  hair  on  Her    head  are  slightly  curved;  this  was 
decorated     Avith      Malati  garland*  ;    on    Her    neck     was     suspended    the 
necklace   of  gems    and   jewels    and    She   is    always  very  amorous  towards 
Her     husband.     On    looking  at    Her    face,    it  seems     that     ten    millions 
of  moons    have  arisen  at  once;  when  She  walks,  her  gait  puts  (humiliates) 
those  of  ganders    and  elephants   in   shade.     O  Muni!  Sri  Krigna,  the  Lord 
of  the    Rasa   Dj,nce,    and   the  Person  of  Taste   in  the  Risa  Sport,  looked 
askance   at    Her     for    a    while   and    then   catching    hold   of   Her   by  Her 
hand    went   to    the  Riisamandalam  and  began  to      play   the   Rasa    sport, 
(the  amorous    pastime).     It   seemed  then    the    Lord    of  amorous    pastimes 
had   become   incarnate    t'lere  and    had  been  enjoying  the  various  pleasures 
of  amorous    passions   and   desires.     So    much,    that    Brahma's     one     day 
passed  away   in    that    sport.     The  Father  of  the    Universe,  then  becoming 
tired,    impregnated    in    an    auspicious   moment   in     Her    womb   who    was 
born  of   His    left    portion.     The    Prakriti     Devi     was    also    tired   of  the 
embraces   of  S'ri  Krisna;   so   after  the    intercourse,  she  began  to    perspire 
and  breathe  frequently.     Her    perspirition   turned   into  water  and  deluged 
the  whole  universe,  with  water  ;  and  Her  breath  turned  into  air  and  became 
the  life   of  all    the    baiugi.     Tha    Idinilc   that  sprung  from  the  left  side  of 
VAyu  became  his  wife  and  out   of  their   contact   orginated  PrSna,   Apfina, 


Book   IX.]  CHAPTER  II.  8X3 

Samana,  Udana  and  Vyana,  the  five  sons.  These  are  the  five  vital  V^yus 
of  all  the  beiugs.  Besides  these  from  the  womb  of  the  Vayu's  wife  came  out 
Naga  and  the  oiher  four  IowiH-  Vayas.  The  water  that  came  out  from  pers- 
•piratijii,  VarjiiA  Deva  became  the  presiding  Ddifcy  of  that;  and  the  female, 
sprung  out  of  the  left  side  of  Varuna  Ddva,  became  the  wife  of  Varuiia, 
called  Varunani.  On  the  other  liand,  the  S'akti,  of  the  nature  of  knowledge 
of  S'ri  KrisiiA,  remained  pregnant  for  one  hundred  manvantaras.  Her  body 
became  effulgent  with  Brahma-teja  (tiie  fire  of  Brahma).  Kri§na  was 
her  life  and  She  again  was  dearer  to  Krisiii  than  his  life  even.  She 
remained  always  with  S'ri  Krisua  ;  so  mach  so  that  She  constantly  rested 
on  His  breast.  When  one  hundred  Manvantaras  passed  away,  that 
Beautiful  One  gave  birth  to  a  Golden  Egg.  That  egg  was  the  repository  of 
the  whole  universe.  The  Beloved  of  Krisna  became  very  sorry  to  see  the 
e^g  and  out  of  anger,  threw  that  within  the  watev  collected  in  the  centre 
the  Universe.  Seeing  this,  Sri  Krisna  raised  a  great  cry  and  immediately 
cursed  Her  duly  and  said: —  ^' O  Angry  One!  O  Cruel  One!  When 
you  have  forsaken  oat  of  anger  this  son  just  born  of  you,  1  say  then 
that  you  become  from  to-day  bereft  of  any  issue.  Besides,  let  all  those 
godly  women  that  will  spring  out  of  your  parts,  they  also  be  deprived 
of  having  any  issue  or  sons  and  they  will  remain  ever  constant  in  their 
youth,  O  Muni  I  \Vhilo  S'ri  Krisna  was  thus  cursiag,  suddenly  came 
out  from  the  tongue  of  the  beloved  of  Krisaa,  a  beautiful  daughter,  of 
a  white  colour.  Her  clothings  were  all  white,  in  her  hands  there  were 
lute  and  book  and  all  Her  body  wis  doorated  with  ornauients  made  of 
gems  and  jewels.  She  was  the  presiding  Deity  of  all  the  S'astras  .  Some 
time  later  the  Miila  Prakriti,  the  Beloved  of  Krisua  divided  into  two 
parts.  Oat  of  Her  left  portion  came  Kamala  and  out  of  her  right  portion 
came  Radhika.  In  the  meauoime  S'ri  Krisua  divided  himself  into  two 
parts.  From  his  right  siJe  appeared  a  form  two-handed  ;  and  from  left 
side  appeared  a  form  four-handed.  The  S'ri  Krisna  addressed  the  Goddess 
Speech,  holding  flute  in  her  h;ind,  "  O.  Devi  I  You  follow  this  four-handed 
Person  as  his  wife  "  aud  then  tpoke  to  Ritdha  : — "0  Rddhe  !  You  are  a 
sensitive,  proud  lady  ;  let  you  be  My  wife  ;  so  it  will  do  y  ougood  .  " 
S'ri  Krisna  also  told  Laksmi  gladly  to  become  the  wife  of  the  four- 
handed  Narayana.  Then  Narayaua,  the  Lord  of  the  world,  took  both 
Laksmi  and  Sarasvati  to  the  abode  VaikanUia.  0  Muni  !  Both  Lakami 
and  Sirsvati  became  issueless,  beings  born  of  Radh§..  From  the  body  of 
Narayana  arose  his  attendants,  all  four-handed.  They  were  all  equal  to 
him  in  appearance,  in  cpialifications  :  in  spirit  and  in  age.  On,  the 
other  hand,  from  the  body  of  Kamala  arose  millions  and  millions  of 
femalo    attai.dani:-    all    fi.|nal    to    Her    in    form    and    qualifications.     T'heu 


] 


814  5r1  mad  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

arose  innumerable  Gopas  (cow-herds)  from  the  pores  of  S'ri  Krisna. 
They  were  all  equal  to  the  Lord  of  Goloka  in  form,  Gunas,  power  and 
age  ;  they  were  all  dear  to  Him  as  if  they  wore  His  life. 

62-88.  From  the  pores  of  Hadhika  came  out  the  Gopa  Kanyaa 
(cow-herdesses).  They  were  all  equal  to  R^iha  and  all  were  Her  atten- 
dants and  were  sweet-speaking.  Their  bodies  were  all  decorated  with  __ 
ornaments  of  jewels,  and  their  youth  was  constant,  they  were  all  issueiesa^l 
as  S'ri  Krigna  cursed  them  thus.  O  Best  of  Brahmanas  !  On  the  other 
hand,  suddenly  arose  DurgA,,  the  Mayd  of  Visnu  (The  Highest  Self)  eternal 
and   whose   Deity  was  Kri§na. 

{N.  B)  Durgd  was  the  Avatara   of   Miila    Prakriti  not  the  Avatara    ol 
Radha  as  Laksmi  and  Sarasvati   were.)     She  is   Ndrayani ;  She  is  ls'4ni  j 
She  is  the  oakti  of  all  and  She  is    the    Presiding  Deity   of  the   intelligenc 
of  Sri   Krisna.     From    Her   have   come    out   many    other  Devif ;    She  is^ 
Mula  Prakriti  and   she  is    Is'vari ;  no  failings    or    insufficiencies    are   seen 
in  Her.  She  is  the  Tejas   (of  the  nature  of  Fire)  and    Sh?    is    of   the  nature 
of  the    three    Gunas.     Hsr   colour   is    bright   like    the    molten  gold ;  Her 
lustre  looks  as  if  ten    millions    of  Suns    have    simu  Itaneonsly   arisen.    She 
looks  gracious  always    with    sweet   smile    on  Her    lin?,    Her  haodg  are  one 
thousand     in    number.      Various    weapons    are    in    all    Her    hands.      The 
clothings  of  the  three-eyed  one  are  bright  and  purified  by  Fire, She  is  deeorated 
with  ornaments  all  of  jewels.     All    the    women   who    are    the   jewels    are 
sprung  from  Her  parts  and  parts  of  parts  and  by  the  power  of  Her  M^ya,  all 
the  people  of  ths  world  are  euchanbed.'    She  bssto  ws    all  the    wealth    that 
a   householder    wants ;    She    bestows    on    Krisna's  devotees,    the   devotion 
towards  Krisna  ;  nay,  She  is  the  Vaisnavi    S  akti    of   the    Vaisnavas.     She 
gives    final    liberation    to     those    that     want    such    and     gives    happiness 
to  those  that  want    happiness.     She  is  the  Laksmi  of  the  He.ivens  ;  as  well 
She  is  the    Laksmi    of  every  household.     She    is  the   Tapas  of  the   ascetics, 
the   beauty    of  the  kingdoms    of  the  kings,  the  burning   power  of  fire,  the 
brilliancy     of  the  Sun-,  the    tender    beauty   of     the     Mojn,     the     lovely 
beauty   of  the   lotus    and    the     S'akti  of  S'ri  Krisna  the    Highest    Self. 
The    Self,    the    world  all    are    powerful     by     Her    ^ikti;    without     Her 
everything    would   be    a   dreary    dead   mass.     O    N4rada!  She  is  the  seed 
of  this   Tree  of  World;  She  is  eternal  ;  She  is  the  Stay,  She  is  Intelligence 
fruits,   hunger,   thirst,    mercy,   sleep,    drowsiness,     forgiveness,    fortitude, 
peace,  bashfulness,    nourishment,     contentment    and     lustre.     The     Mula 
Prakriti   praising    Sri    Krisna   stood    before   Him.     The  Lord  of  RSdhikd 
then  gave    Her  a  throne  to  sit.     O  Great  Muni  !   At  this   moment  sprang 
from   the   navel  lotus   the   four — faced   BrahmS,   with    his    wife   S^vitrf, 
an   exceedingly  beautiful  woman.      No     sooner     the    fourfaced   BrahmS, 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  III.  815 

the    foremost    of  the  Jnlnins,  fond  of  asceticism   and  holding''  Kamandalu 
in   His    hand   came   into   being    than   He    began     to   praise     Sri  Krisna 
by  His  four  mouths.     On  the  other  hand  the  Devi  Savitri,   with   a  beauty 
of  one    hundred    moons,    born    with   great   ease,    wearing  apparel  purified 
by    fire   and   decorated    with    various    ornaments   praised   Krisna,  the  One 
anl   Only  Ciise  of    thu  Universe    and  then  took  Her    seat  gladly  with  Her 
husband   in     the     throne    made   of  jewels.     At  that  time    Krisna  divided 
Himself    into   two   parts  ;  His  left  side  turned  into  the  form  of  Mahadeva; 
and  his    right  side    turned    into  the    Lord   of    Gopikas     (cow-herdesses). 
The    colour   and    splendour   of   the   body   of  Mahadeva  is  pure  white  like 
white    crystal  ;gs  if   one    hundred    suns     have  arisen  simultaneously.     In 
His    hands    there    are  the  trident.(Tris'al)  and  sharp-edged  spaar  (Pattisi); 
His    wearing    is    a    tiger  skin  ;    on    His  heads  matted     hair    (Jat^)     of  a 
tiwny    hue    like   molten    goll  ;    His  body    was     besmeared    all    over    with 
ashes,   smile    reio^nindr   in    Hia    face    and    on  His  forehead,  the  semi-moon 
He   has  no  wearing  on  his  loins  ;  so  He  is  eallftd  Digambara   (the   quarter- 
of  the  Sky   being    His   clothing^i;  His  neck  i^  of  a  blue  colour;  the   ssrpent 
being    the  ornaments   on    His    body    and    on    Hi?   right     hand    the    nicQ 
baad    of  jewels    well    purifed.     Who    is    alwiys    repeating  with    His   five 
faces  the  Eternal    Light   of   Brahmn,    and  Who  has   conquerred  Death    by 
praising    Sri    Krisna,   Who    is    of    the    nature  of  Truth,  the  Highest  Self, 
the    God   Incarnate,    the  material  caus.^  of  all  things  and  the  All  auspicious 
of    all    that    is  good  and    fuvourable,    and    the    Destroyer    of     the    feir  of 
birth,    death,    old    age    and  disease  md  Who  has  been  name!    Mrityunjaya 
(the    conqieror    of  Death).     This    Mihaleva   took    His    seat    on    a  throne 
made    of    jewels  (diamonds,   emeralds,  etc.) 

Here  ends  the  Second  chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  origin  of 
Prikriti  and  Purusi  in  the  Mah^pur^nam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam 
of  18,000  verses   by  Maharsi    Veda    Vy.^sa. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1-34.  Ndrayana  said  :--  "  0  Devarsi !  The  egg  (born  of  Mula  Prakriti) 
that  was  floating  in  the  waters  for  a  period  equal  to  the  life  period  of 
Brahma,  now  in  the  fulness  of  time,  separated  into  two  parts.  Within 
that  egg  there  was  a  powerful  Child,  lustrous  like  one  thousand 
millions  of  sua?.  This  child  could  nob  suck  mother's  milk,  as  it  was 
forsi'-cen  by  Hor.  So  b2ing  tired  of  hunger,  the  child  for  a  moment 
cried  repeatedly.  The  child  that  will  become  the  Lord  of  countless 
Brahm^ndas  (universes),  now  an  orphan  having  no  father  nor  mother 
began  to  look  upwards  from  the  waters.  This  boy  came  to  be  denominated 
afterwards  by  the  name   of    Miha    VirAt,  when  he     became       gross   and 


810  5Rt  MAD  DEVt  JiUAc AVATAM. 

grosser.     A§   there .  is   nothing   finer    than    radium    so  there    is    nothing 
"grosser   than  Maha  Vinlt.     The  power  of  this  Maha    Virat    one-sixteenth 
of   that  of  S'ri   Krigna,  ihi    Highest   Self.     But  this    bo\ ,     ^boin  of   ihe 
Prakriii  Ridha)  is  the  Sole  Stay  of  all  this  UniveVse  and  he  is   denominated 
by    the    name    '' Maha-Vigau  ' .     In  his  every  pore  countless  universes  are 
existing.     So    much   so    that    even    §vi    Krisna  could  not  count  them.     If 
it    were  possible    to  cjunt  the  numbor  of  the  dust  particles,  it  is  impossible 
to   count    the   nu(aber    ot   t'le    Universjs.     So  there  are-  endless  Brahmas, 
Visnus,  and  Mahes'varas.  In  every  Brahmaada,  'hn-e  is  BrahuvA  Visnu,  and 
Mahesa.     Eich    I3rahra a nda  extends  from   l*i\taU  to  the  Brahmaloka.    The 
abode    of  Vaikuntha   is   higher    than    that    [i.  e.    it   is    situated  outside  of 
Brahraand^y,     agiiu    the    abode    of   Goloka  is    fifty    koti    yoyanas      (50  X 
]0x4x2  million  miles)  higher   than  Vaikuntha.     This  Goloka  Dhama  is 
eternal    aad  r>3al  as    Sri    Krisnx    is  eternal  and  real.     This  world   composf'd 
of  the    seven    islands    is  surrounded  by  the  seven  oceans.     Forty-nine  I  pa 
Dvipas     (smaller    ishnls   adjicent    to- then)    are    existinJ  here.  •  Besides 
there  are  countless   mountains,  and  forests.      Higher  than    this  earth  is     the 
Brahmiloka   with   saven  heavens   and    below   this    are  the  seven    Pataia^. 
This  is    the  bounding    limit    of   Brahraanda.     Just    abave    this  earth  there 
is   the     Bhurloka;  above    is    Bhuvarloka  ;  then    Svarloka,  then  Janailoka, 
then   Taparloka,    then    Satyaloka,    and   above    that    is     Brahraaloka.     The 
splendour    of   Brahraaloka    is     like     that    of       raolien       gold.       But       all 
the      substances     whether     outsidj    or    inside     this       Brahmaloka,      are 
transient.       When  this  Brahminda  (cosmos)  dissolves,  everything  dissolve^ 
and   is     destroyed.      All    are    teff'porary    like     bubbles      of   water.       Onlv 
Goloka     and     Vaikuntha     arc    etarnal.     In     every     pore    of    this    Maha 
Vir^t  is    existing    one    Braham^nda    (-iosnios).     What  to    spe»k    of   others 
even  Krisna  cannot  count  the  .  number    of   these    Brahma ndas.     In   everv 
BrahmSnda  there  ia    Brahma,    Visnu   and  Mahes'a.     O   Child  Narada  !  In 
every  Brahmi^nda,  the  number  of  the    gods  is  three    kotis    or    30    millions. 
Some  of  them  ire  the  Dikpatis  (the    Regents    of   the   quarters)  ;    some     are 
the  Dikpalas  (the  Rulors  of  the  Quarters),  some    are    asterisms,    and     some 
planets.     In  the  Bhurloka,   there   are    four  Varnas    (Brahmins,    et?.,)   and 
in  the   Patfilas   there    are    NSgas.     Thus  ihe    Universe    exists    composed 
of   moveable   and     non-moveable     things   (this  is  Brahmanda  Vivriti).    0 
Narada!  Now  the  Virat  Puriisa  began  to  look  up  to    the    skies    ao-ain    and 
again  but  He  could  not  sep  anything  within  that  egg  except  the  void.    Then 
distressed   with  hunger  he   cried    out    repeatedly    and   became   merrred    in 
anxiety.      Next   moment   getting    back    his     consciousness,  he    began    to 
think  cf  Krisna,  the  Highest  Person  and  saw  there  at  once  the  eternal  li^lit 
of  Brahma.     He  saw  there    Hi.  form    as   deep    blue  like     new    raio-eloiul  • 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  IIT,  .  817 

with    two  hands,  garment  of  a  yellow  colour,  sweeb  smile  on   His  faee,  fluta 
in  His  hand  and    He  seemed    to    be   very   anxious  to  show    His  Grace   to 
Devobeos.     Looking  at  the    Loid,    His    Father,      the     boy    becime     glad 
and  smiled.  The  Lord,  the  Rfistowerof  boon  granted  him  boons  appropriate 
for  that  moment  *'0  Child  !  Let  yon  possess    knowledge  like  Me  ;  let    yonr 
hnncrer   and  thirst  vanish ;  let  you  be  the  holder  of   innumerable    Brahman- 
das  till  the  time  of  Pralaya   (the  universal    dissolution).      Pe    Nvithout    any 
selfishness,  be  fearless  and  the  bestower  of  boons    to  all.     L^t   not    old  age, 
death,   diseare,    so»tow    nor   any   other    ailings    afflict  thee.    'Thus   saying 
He    repeated    thrice  on    his     ear   the       six-lettered    great    JNIantra    *'  Om 
Krisnilya  Sviiha "  vorshipped^by  the  Vedas   with   their    Amgas,    the    Giver 
ot  desires  and  the    destroyer    of  all    troubles    and  calamities.     O   t'rahmri's 
Son  1  Thus  giving  the  mantra,    Sri  Krisna  arranged  for  his  foodiog  thus  :  — 
In  every    universe,   whatever  ofiferings    will    be    given  to   S'ri  Krisaa,  one 
sixteenth  of  that  will  go  to  Narayana.    the    Lord    of  Vaikunthaand  fifteen- 
sixteenth  is  to  go  to     this     boy,   the    Virat.     S*ri   Krisna   did   not   allot 
any  share  for  Himself.     Himself  transcending    all  the  Gunas,  and  Full,    He 
is  always   satisfied   with    Himself.      What     necessity    is   there    for     any 
further  offerings?     Whatever  the   people     offer    with   devotion,  the     Lord 
ofLaksmi,  the    Virat  eats  all  these.     Bhagavan    S'ri    Krisna   giving  thus 
to  the  Yn'^t  the  boon  and  the  Mantra  said  :—    "  O  Child  !  Say  whac  more 
you  desire;  I  will  give  you  that   instantly.     The  Vir3t   boy,  hearing    thus 
the  words   of   Sri  Krisna,    spoke:— "O    Thou    Omnipresent  !•  I  have  got 
no  desires  whatsoever,  save  this  that  as  long  as  I  live,    whether   for  a  short 
time  or  for  a  long  time,  let  me  have  pure    Bhakti    towards    Thy    lotus  feet 
•»5-.l-L     In  this  world  he  is  .Jivanmakta  (liberated   whilst    living)   who 
is  your   Bhakta ;  and    that    bewildered    fool    is    dead    while    living    who    is 
devoid  of  any  Bhakti  to  Thee.  Whit  needs  he  to  perform  .japam,  asceticism, 
saerifi3e,  worship,   holding  fasts    and  observances,  going  to  sacred  places    of 
pilgrimages   and    other     virtuous    acts  if   he    be    without     any    bhakti    to 
S'ri  Krisna?     Vain  is  his  life  who  is  devoid  of  any  devotion  to  S'ri    Krisna. 
under  Whose  Grace  he  has  obtained  his  life  and    VVhom  he    does    not    now 
pay  homage  and  worship.     He  is   endowed    with  S'akti    as   long  as    Atma 
I      (Self)  resides  in  his  body  ;  no  sooner  the  Atma   departs  from  his  body  all  the 
I      S'aktis  accompany  him.  O  Great  One!  And  thou  art  the  Universal  Atman 
(soul)  who  transcends   Prakriti,   W'ho  is  Ail  will,  the  Primeval     Person    and 
oUhe  nature    of  the   Highest    Light.     0     Child!    Thus  saying,  the  Virut 
boy  remained  silent,  ^.ri   Krisna  tiien,   spoke  in  sweet  words  :—  "'  O  Child  ! 
Let  you   remain  as  fresh  as  ever  like    Me.  You  will  not  have  any  fall  even 
if  inuuirerable  Brahmas  pass  away. 

^^2-87.     Let  yon  divide  yourself  in  parts  and    turn   into   smaller    VirAts 
in  every  universe.     Brahmll  will  spring   from  your    navel    and   will   oreata 

103 


818  ^Rt  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

the  cosmos.  From  the  forehead  of  that  Brahm3  will  spring  eleven  Rudras 
for  the  destruction  of  the  creation.  But  they  will  ail  be  parts  of  S'iva. 
The  Rudra  named  Kulugni,  of  these  eleven  Rudras,  will  be  the  destroyer 
of  all  this  Vis'vas  (cosmos).  Besides,  from  each  of  your  sub-divisions,  the 
Visnu  will  orignate  and  that  Bhagavan  Visnu  will  be  the  Preserver  of 
this  Vis'vu  world.  I  say  that  under  my  favoui  you  will  always  be  full  ot 
Bhakti  towards  Me  and  no  sooner  you  meditate  on  Me,  you  will  be  able 
to  see  My  lovely  form.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  ;  and  your  Mother,  Who 
resides  in  My  breast,  will  not  be  difficult  for  you  to  see.  Let  you  remain 
here  in  ease  and  eomfoft.  I  now  go  to  Goloka'.  Saying  thus  S'ri  Krisna,  the 
Lord  of  world  disappeared.  Going  to  His  o.vn  abode  He  spoke  instantly 
to  Brahmu  and  S'ankara,  skilled  in  the  works  of  creation  and  destruction  : — 
"  O  Child  Brahmtl !  Go  quickly  and  be  biru  in  p\rts  from  the  ni#vol.s  of 
each  of  the  smiller  Vin\ts  that  will  arise  from  the  pores  ot  the  Great 
Virat.  O  Child  Mahfldeva  I  Go  and  be  born  in  parts  from  the  forehead 
of  each  Brahma  in '  every  universe  fir  the  destruction  of  the  creation ; 
(but  be  careful  that  you  not  forget)  and  perform  austerities  for  a  long,  long 
time.  O  Sou  of  the  Creator  Brahmil!  Thus  siying,  the  Lord  of  the  Universe 
remained  silent.  Brahmi\  and  Siva,  the  auspicious,  bowing  to  the  Lord, 
went  to  their  own  duties.  Oa  the  other  han.l,  the  Great  VirAt  that 
lay  floating  in  the  waters  of  the  Brahra:indii  sphere,  created  from  his 
every  pore  each  smaller  Virat.  That  youth  Janardan  of  the  form  of  the 
Great  Cosmos,  wearin,'  yellow  garment  of  the  bluish-green  colour 
of  the  Durba  grass,  lay  sleeping  pervading  everywhere.  Brahma  took  his 
birth  in  His  navel.  He,  then,  after  his  birth,  b^gan  to  travel  in  that 
navel-lotus  and  in  the  stem  of  the  lotus  for  one  lakh  yugas.  But  he 
could  not  find  out  the  plac3  whence  the  lotus  or  its  stem  had  spruu" 
up.  O  Narada  !  Then  your  father  bee  ime  very  anxious  and  came  back 
to  his  former  place  and  began  to  meditate  the  lotu^  faat  of  ^rl  Krisna. 
Then,  in  meditation,  with  his  intro  pective  eye,  he  fir^t  sa*v  the  small 
Virat,  then  the  endless  great  Virat  lying  on  tha  watery  bed,  in  whose 
pores  the  universes  aie  existing  and  then  he  s.iw  the  Gjd  S'ri  Krisna 
in  Goloka  with  Gopas  and  Gopis.  He  then  bjgan  to  praise  the  Lord 
of  Goloka  when  He  granted  boons  to  your  father,  and  he  began  to  do 
the    work   of  creation. 

58-62.  From  the  mind  of  your  father,  were  born  first  Sanaka  and 
other  brothers  and  then  from  his  forehead  eleven  Rudras  sprang.  Then 
from  the  left  side  of  that  small  Virdt  lying  on  the  bed  of  waters 
the  four-handed  Visnu  Bhagavan,  the  Preserver  of  the  Universe,  came. 
He  went  to  Svetadvipa,  where  he  remained.  Then  your  father  became 
engaged   in  creating   this  Universe,  moveable  and  non-moveahle,  composed 


i3ooK  iX.J  CHAPTER  IV.  819 

of  three  worlds,  heaven,  earth  and  Patella,  in  the  navel  of  that  small 
Virat  Purusa.  O  Narada  !  Thus  from  the  pores  of  that  gteat  Virat 
each  universe  has  sprung  and  in  every  universe  there  is  one  small 
Virat,  one  Brahma,  one  Vianu  and  one  S'iva  and  S'anaka  and  others. 
O  Best  of  twice  born  !  Thus  1  have  described  the  glories  of  Krisua,  that 
give  exceeding  pleasure  and  Moksa.  Now  say  what  more  you  want 
to  hear  ? 

Here  ends  the  Third  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  Origin  of 
Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahes'a  and  others  in  the  Mahi\  Pur^nam  S'ri  Mad 
Devi    Bhflgavatam    of   18,000   verses    by  Maharsi    Veda  Vy^sa. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

j-3.  Narada  said : — By  your  Grace  I  have  heard  everything  very 
sweet  like  nectar,  of  the  origin  of  things.  Now  may  I  ask  you  which 
Devi  of  these  five  Prakritis  has  been  worshipped  by  what  Mantra  ?  and 
by  whom  ?  How  has  each  of  them  been  praised  ?  and  by  whom  ?  How  has 
the  worship  of  their  Murtis  (form)  become  prevalent  in  this  world  ?  What 
are  the  Stotram  (hymn  of  praise),  the  Dhyan  (meditation)  glory  and 
life  of  these?  Also  what  sort  of  boon  do  eaoh  of  the  Devis  granf.  ?  and  to 
whom  *?  Kindly  describe  all  these  in  detail. 

4-12.  Narajana  said: —  "O  Child!  Durga,  the  mother  of  Ganes'a, 
Radha,  Laksmi,  Sarsavati  and  Savitri,  these  are  the  five  Prakritis 
pprung  directly  from  Mula  Prakriti.  The  methods  of  their  worship, 
wonderful  glorious  acts,  excellent  stotrams,  and  their  lives,  inculcating 
good  to  all,  and  sweet  like  nectar  are  all  widely  written  in  the  Vedas, 
Puranas,  Tantras  and  other  S'astras.  So  there  is  no  need  to  describe  them 
here  again.  Now  I  am  describring  in  detail  the  auspicious  characters 
of  these  that  are  sprung  from  the  parts  and  Ka1c\3  of  the  Prakriti.  Hear 
attentively.  Kali,  Vasundhard,  Ganga,  Sasthi,  Mangai  Chandika,  Tulasi, 
ManasA,  Nidr^,  Svadha,  SvSha,  and  Daksiua,  these  are  the  parts  of 
Prakriti.  By  and  by  I  will  describe,  briefly,  the  merit-giving  characters, 
and  pleasant  to  hear.  Along  with  these  I  will  describe  the  Karmas  of 
the  Jivas,  and  the  great  exalted  lives  of  DurgS  and  Radha.  I  am  now 
describing  Saras vati's  character.  Hear,  0  Muni !  S'ri  Krisna  introduce*^ 
first  in  this  Bharata,  the  worship  of  the  Djvi  Sarasvati,  the  holder  of  Vind 
in  Her  hands,  under  whose  influence  the  hearts  of  illiterate  stupid  persons 
become  illumined  .with  knowledge.  The  amorous  Devi  Sarasvati  sprang 
from  the  end  of  the  lips  of  Ridha  and  so  she  desired  to  marry  Krisna 
out  of  amorous  feelings.  S'ri  Krisna,  the  controller  of  the  hearts  of 
all,  knew  it  insta-itly  and  a  Idre^s^d  the  Mother  of  the  people  in  true 
words  proper  to  Her  and  bsneficial  to  Her  in  the  end.  O  Chaste  One  !  The 
four-armed  NSrayana  is   born   from  My  parts;   He   is    young,  of  good 


b20  ^Rt  MAD  DEV!  BHAgAVATAM. 

features  atij  endowed  with  all   qualiticatious  ;  so    much   so,    he    is    like  Me. 
He  is  a  Knower    uf  amorous    sentiments    of    women    and    He     fulfils    those 
desires;  what  to  speak  of  His    beauty,  ten  millious   of  the    God    ofloveai'e 
playiug  in  His  body.     O  lieloved  !  And  if  you  desire  to  m   arry    and   remain 
with  Me,  that  will  nob  bd    of  &ny  ^ood    to  you.      For       liadha    is   near   to 
Me  ;  She  is  more  powerful  than  you.     If  a  man    Le    stroDger    than    aLother, 
be  can  rescue     one   who    takes    his     shelter  ;    but     if  he    be    weaker,    l:ow 
can  he  then,    himself    weak,    protect    his  dependant  from    others.     Though 
I  am  the    Lord    of  all,    and   rule    all,  yet    I  cannot    control    Radhi.       For 
She  is  equal  to    me    in    power,    in    beauty,    in    qualifications,    equal    to   Me 
in  every  respect.     Again  it  is    impossible  tor    Me   to     quit    Radha    for  She 
is  the  presiding  Deity  of  My  life.     Who  can  relinquish    life  ?   Though  a  son 
is  very  dear  to  his    father,    still    it    may    be    questioned,   is     he  dearer  than 
his  father's    life  ?     So,  O    Auspicious    One  !    Go  to  the    abode  Vaikuntha  ; 
vou  will  get  your  desires  fulfilled  there.     You    will    get    for    your    huebnnd 
the  Lord  of  Vaikuntha  and  you  will  live    ever  in  peace  and  enjoy  happiness 
Though    Laksmi    is    residing    there   yet   like    you    she    is   not    uiicier   the 
control  of  lust,  anger,  greed,  delusion    and    vanity.       She    is    ako  equal    to 
you  in  beauty,  qualities,  and  power.     So    you    will     live    with    her  in  gi eat 
delight  and  Hari,  the  Lord  of  Vaikuntha,    will    treat    both  of  yo  u  equally. 
Moreover,  I  say  this  in  particular  that  in  every  universe,  on  the   fifth    day  of 
the  bright  fortnight  of  the    month  of  Magha,  every    year,  the  day  when   the 
learning  is  commenced,  a    great    festival    will    be    held    and   men,    Manus. 
Devas,  and  the  Munis  desirous  of  liberation,  Vasus,  Yogis,  Niigas,   Siddhas, 
Gandarbhas.    Raksasas,  all  will    perform  your    worship    with    devotion    ijj 
everv  Kalpa  till  tiie  time    of   Miha  Pralaya   comes.      All  are  required  to  be 
Jiteudriya  (^having  their  senses  under  cuutrol)  and  Saniyami    (concentrating 
his    mind,    and    with  a  religious    vow)    and    they  will    invoke    Thee    ou    a 
jar  or  on  books    ani   then    meditate    according    to    what   is    stated   in    the 
Kanva  oakha  of  Yajardeva  and    then    worship    and    sing    hymas    to    Thee. 
Thy  Kavacha  (an  armour  ;  a   uiyc-tical    syllable  %%  considered  as  a  preserva- 
tive like  ariuJur)  i-3    written    on    the    birk    of  the     Bhurja   tree    and    then 
with  eight  kinds   of   scents     mingled    with    it    is    placed    within    a    golden 
nut  or  ring  named  Maduli)  and  then  held  on  the  neck  or  on    the   right    arm. 
The  learned  should  recite  Thy   Stotras  during  worship.     Thus  saying,    the 
Turan    Brahma    S'ri   Krisna    Himself  worshipped    the     Devi      Sarasvati. 
Since  then,  Brahma,  Visnu,  Mahes'a,  Ananta    Deva,  Dharma,    Sanaka  and 
other  Muniudras,  all  the  Devas,  Munis,  all  the   kings    anJ    all  the    human 
beings  are  Avorshipping  the  Devi  Sarasvati.  O  Narada  !  Thus  the  worship  of 
the  Eternal  Devi  is  made  extant  in  the  three  worlds. 

,'iU-3l.     Tvc\rada    sai'l  :  —    "O    Chi(f   uf   the    Knowers   of    the  Vedas   ! 
J(o\v  desciibe  to  lue  the^methods  of  worship,  DhySn,  Kavacham,  hymns,  the 


fit)ok  IX.]  CflAPTER  IV.  821 

appropriate  ofEeriu^s  of  the  Puja  flowers,  sandalpaste  and  other  good 
things  necessary  in  these  worships  and  which  are  so  sweet  to  hear.  I  am 
ever   very  eager  and  anxious  to  hear  these. 

o2-5U.  Naiuyana  said.-— ''O  Narada  !  I  am  now  stating  the  method 
of  worship  of  the  Devi  Sarasvati,  the  Mother  of  the  Worlds,  according  to 
Kanva  S'akha  of  the  Yajurveda.  Hear.  On  the  day  previous  to  the 
fifth  day  of  the  bright  fortnight  of  the  month  of  MSgh  or  the  day  of  com- 
raencemeni  of  education,  the  devotee  should  control  his  senses,  concentrate 
his  mir>d  and  take  his  bath.  Then  he  is  to  perform  his  daily  duties 
and  instal  the  jar  (Ghata)  with  devotion  and  according  to  the  Mantras 
of  the  Kanva  Sakha  or  the  Tantra,  as  the  case  may  be.  He  is  to  worship 
first  on  that  Ghata  (jar)  Ganapati  (Ganes'a),  then  meditate  the  Devi 
Sarasvati  a?  described  below,  invoke  Her  and  again  read  the  DhyAn  and 
then  worship  with  Sodas'opachara  (sixteen  good  articles  offered  in  the 
worship).  O  Good  One  !  Now  I  am  speaking,  according  to  my  knowledge, 
about  the  ofiPeringa  as  ordained  in  the  Vedas  or  Tantras.  Hear.  Fresh 
butter,  curd,  thickened  milk,  rice  freed  from  the  husk  by  frying,  sweetmeats 
(Til  Laddu)  prepared  of  Til,  sugar  cane,  sugarcane  juice,  nice  Gud  (molasses), 
honcv,  svastik,  sugar,  rice  (not  broken)  out  of  white  DhSn,  chipitak  of 
t'lble  rice  (Alo  ch\l),  white  Modak,  Harbisyanua  prepared  of  boiled  rice 
with  clarified  butter  and  salt,  Pistaka  of  jaoa  or  wheaten  flour,  Paramanna 
with  "-hee,  nectar  like  sweetmeats,  cocoanut,  uocoanut  water,  Svastik 
Pistaka,  Svastik  and  ripe  plantain  Pistaka,  Kaseru  (root),  Miila,  ginger, 
ripe  plant  tins,  excellent  Bel  fruit,  the  jujube  fruit,  and  other  appropriate 
white  purified  fruits  of  the  s-eason  and  peculiar  to  the  place  are  to  be 
offered  in  the  Pooja.  O  Ntirada!  White  flowers  of  good  scent,  white 
sandalpaste  of  good  scent,  new  white  clothes,  nice  conchshell,  nice 
garlands  of  white  flowers,  nice  white  necklaces,  and  beautiful  ornaments 
are  to  be  o-iven  to  the  Devi.  I  say  now  the  DhySnam  sweet  to  hear,  of  the 
Devi  Sarasvati  according  to  the  Vedas,  capable  to  remove  errors !  Hear. 
1  hereby  bow  down  to  the  Devi  Sarasvati,  of  a  white  colour,  of  a 
smiling  countenenee  and  exceedingly  beautiful,  the  lustre  of  whose  body 
overpowers  that  of  the  ten  million*  of  Moong,  whose  garment  is  purified  by 
fire  in  whose  hands  there  are  Vina  and  books,  who  is  decorated  with 
new  excellent  ornaments  of  jewels  and  pearls  a'^id  whom  Brahma,  Visnu, 
Mahes'vara  and  the  other  Dcvas  Munis,  Manus  and  men  constantly  worship. 
Thusmeditatingthe  Devi,  the  intelligent  persons  should  offer  all  articles, 
after  nronouncing  the  root  Mantra.  Then  he  is  to  hymn  and  hold  Kavacha 
and  make  SSstanga  pranams  before  the  Devi.  O  Muni!  Those  whose  Devi 
Sarasvati  is  the  presiding  Deity,  are  not  to  be  spoken  of  at   all    (*.  e.   they 


822  SrI  mad  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

will  mturally  do  all  these  things  auJ  with  a  greater  fervour).  Besides 
all  should  worship  the  Devi  Sara^^vati  ou  the  day  of  commencemeat 
of  education  and  every  year  on  the  Siikla  Panciiaini  day  of  the  month 
of  Ma«'h.  The  eight-lettereJ  Mantra,  as  mentioned  in  the  Vedas  is  the 
root  Mautra  of  Sarasvati.  (Aim  Klim  Sarasvatyai  nainah).  Or  the 
Mantra  to  which  each  worshipper  is  initiated  is  his  Mulmautra  (nob 
Mantra).  Or  uttering  the  Mantra  "  Srim  Hrim  Sarasvityai  Svah^." 
one  is  to  offer  everything  to  the  Divi  Sirasvati.  Tuis  Mantra  is 
the  Kalpa  Vriksa  (i.  e  ,  the  tree  which  yields  all  desires).  Narayana,  the 
ocean  of  mercy,  gave  in  ancient  times,  this  very  Mautra  to  VsLlraiki  in  the 
holy  land  BhSrata  Varsa  on  the  banks  of  the  (ranges  ;  next  Bhrigu 
gave  this  Mantra  on  the  occasion  of  solar  eclipse  to  Miharsi  Sukrd- 
charya  on  the  Puskara  Tirtha  ;  Marieha  gave  to  Brihaspati  on  a  lunar 
eclipse  ;  Brahma  gave  to  Bhrigu  in  the  Vadariku  As'rama;  Jaratkaru 
gave  to  Astika  on  the  shore  of  the  Ksiroda  ocean;  Bibhandaka  gave 
this  to  the  intelligent  Risyasriuga  on  the  Sutueru  mountain,  Siva 
gave  this  to  Kanada  and  Gotama,  Surya  gave  to  Yajnavalkya  and 
K^tyayana,  Ananta  Dava  gave  to  Fanini,  to  the  intelligent  Bharidvaja 
and  to  Sakatayana  in  Bali's  asseaibly  in  tha  PatSla.  If  this  Mantra 
be  repeated  four  lakhs  of  times,  all  men  attain  success.  And  when 
they  become  Siddhas  with  this  Mantra,  they  become  powerful  like 
Brihaspati.  In  past  times,  the  Creator  Brahma  gave  a  Kavacha  named 
Vis'vajaya  to  Bhrigu  on  the  Gandhamadana  Mountain.  I  now  speak 
of  that.     Hear. 

00-tM.  Once  on  a  time  Bhrigu  asked  Brahma  the  Lord  of  all,  and 
adoreJ  by  all,  thus:— "O  Brahmin  !  Thou  art  the  foremoit  of  those 
that  know  the  Ve:las;  there  is  none  equal  to  thee  in  matters  regarding 
the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  ;  (so  much  so  thxt  there  is  nothing 
that  is  not  known  to  thee  ;  for  all  these  have  sprung  from  iheo). 
Now  say  about  the  Vis'vajaj'a  Kavacha  of  the  Devi  Sarasvati,  that 
is  excellent,  without  any  faults  and  emboilying  in  it  all  the  properties 
of  all  the    Mantras. 

62-91,  Brahma"  said: — '•  O  Child!  What  you  have  asked  about  the 
Kavacha  of  Sarasvati  that  is  sweet  to  hear,  ordained  and  worshipped 
by  the  Vedas,  and  the  giver  of  all  desired  fruits,  now  hear  of  that, 
lathe  v.ory  beginning,  the  all-pervading  ^ri  Kri§na,  the  Lord  of  the 
lUsa  circle,  mentioned  this  Kavacha  to  me  in  the  holy  Brindavana  forest 
in  the  abode  Goloka  at  the  time  of  Rdsa  in  Rasa  Mandala.  This  is 
very  secret  ;  it  is  full  of  holy  unheard,  wouderiul  Mantras.  Reading  this 
Kavacha  and  holding  ib  (on  one's  arm)  Brihaspati  has  becunie  foremost 
in    matters    of    intelligence;    by    the    force     of  this  Kavacha   ^ukrach^rya 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  IV, 


823 


has      git    his    a^ceridanoy    over      the     Daityas;      the     foremost     Muni 

Vaimiki    his    beconie  eloquent    and  skilloJ    in    language  and    has  become 

Kavindra  and     Svayambbuva   Manu  ;  holding   this  Kavacha  he  has  become 

honoured     everywhere.     Kanada,  Gotama,   Kanva,     Panini,      5akat&yana, 

Daksa,   and    Katy4yana    all    have  become   great     authors     by      virtue    of 

this   Kavacha ;  Krisna     Dvaipdyana    Veda    Vyasa    made    the    classification 

of   the    Veda?    and     composed  the  eighteen  Puranas.     ^dtatapa,  Samvarta, 

Vas'istha,    Parasara     and   Yajnavalkya    had   bsooiue     authors   by    holdin<:' 

and   reading   this^    Sarasvati  Kavacha.     Risyas'ringa,  Bharadv^ja,     Astika, 

Devala,   Jaigisavya,     and  Yaj^^ti   all    were    honoured  everywhere  bv  virtue 

of   this    Kavacha.       O    Dvija!  The  Praj^pati   Himself  is    the  Risi     of    this 

Kivacha;     Brihatt   is  its  Chhanda;  and    Sarada   Ambika  is    its    presiding 

Deity.     Its     application   (Viniyoga)   is     in    the     acquisition    of    spiritual 

kaowlege,    in    the   fruition    of  any  desires    or    necessities,    in      composing 

poems   or   anywhere     wheresoever  succeso  is   required.     May    ^rim   Hrim 

Sarasvatyai      Svuha       protect      fully   ray      head;       ^r?m      Vagdevatuyai 

Svaha,    my    forv^head  ;  O  n    Hrim    Sarasvatyai    Svuh:!,    my      ears    always 

Om  Srim   TIrini    Rhagibatyai    Sarasvaiyai  Svih-i   always   my   eyes  ;  Aim 

Hrim    V;'\gvadinyai  Svtlha,  always    my  nose  ;    Om    Ifrtm     VidyadhisthuUT 

Dftvyai  .Svahl,  my  lips     always  :    Om    Srim    Hrim    Brahmyai    Svaha    mv 

loWis  of  teelh  ;  Aim,  this    single    letter    protect    my  neck;  Om    S'riin  TirTin 

my    throat  ;   S'rim,    my    shoulders,   Om     Hrim    Vidyiidhisthatri       Devyai 

Svaha,    alwiys  my  chest;  Om  Hrim  Vidyadhi  svarupayai  Sv^h4  my  navel; 

Om  Hrim  Klim  VSnyai   Sviihi   my   h&nds  ;  Om     Svarva   varnatmi    Kayai 

Svaha  my    feet  ;    and    lot     Om    VagadhisUmtridevyai     Svuhi    protect     all 

my  body.     Let  *'  Om    Sarvakanthavasinyai  Svaha     protect    my   east  ;   Let, 

Om  Svarvajihbagra  va^inyai  Svaha,  the    South-east  ;  Om  Aim    Hrim  S'rim 

Klim  Sarasvatyai    budhajanauvai  Sv^ha,  my  Suuth  ;  Aim    Hrim  S'rim,  this 

threedettered     Mintri      my    South-wesb  ;    O.n      Aim       .Jhibbagravasinyai 

Svaha,    my    West;  Om    Svarvam     bikayni    Svah3,   my   Northwest;  Om 

Aim    S'ri  n    Klim      Gidyavasinyai      Svah/i    my    North  ;  Aim    Sarvas'Sstra 

vasinyai  Sv^h^,    my    North-ea-t  ;     Om    Hrim    Sarvapujitayai  Svaha,   my 

top  ;  Hrim     Pustakavfisinyai     SvAha    my     below   and    let   •'  Om    Grantha 

vijasvarupiyai  Svaha  prjbac':   all    my    sides.     O    Nirada  !  This     Vis'vajaya 

K%vaeha  of  tha    nature    of    Brahma  a^-d     its    embodied    Mautra  I  have  now 

•poken  to   you.     1   heard    this    before     hoin    the    mouth   of  Dharma  Deva 

in  the    Gandhdmadana  mountain.     Now    I  speak  this  to  you  out  of  my  great 

affection    for    you,     But;    never    divulge      this      to     anybody.     One   is  to 

worship   one's   spiritual    Teacher    (Guru     Deva)  according   to  due  rites  and 

ceremonies    with    clothings,    ornaments,    and     sandalpaste     and   then   fall 

(^own   prostrate  to    hirn  and     then    hold     this     Kavacha.     Repeating     this 


824  5r1  mad  DEVl  BHAGAVATAM. 

five  lakhs  of  times,  one  gets  success  and  becomes  a  Siddha.  The  holder 
of  this  Kavaeha  becomes  intelli<?ent  like  Brihaspiti,  eloquent,  Kavindras, 
and  the  conqueror  of  the  three  world?,  no  sooner  one  becomes  a  Siddha 
in  this.  In  fact,  he  can  conquer  everything  by  virtue  of  this  Kavaeha. 
O  Muni  !  Thus  I  have  described  to  you  this  Kavachd  according  to. 
Kanva  Sykha.  Now  I  am  speaking  about  the  method  of  worship, 
Dhyana  and  the  praise  of  this  Kavaeha.     Hear. 

Here  ends  the  Fourth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  hymn, 
worship  and  Kavaeha  of  Sarasvati  Devi  in  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhigavatam  of 
18,000  verses  by  Mahaisi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  V. 

1-5  Narayana  said  :— "  0  NtVada  !  I  now  describe  the  Stotra  (hymn) 
of  Sarasvati  Davi,  yiekling  all  desires  that  Yajfiavalkya,  the  best  of 
the  Risis  recited  in  dtys  of  yore  to  Her.  The  Muni  Yajhavalkya 
forgot  all  the  Veda^  out  of  the  curse  of  Guru  aal  with  a  very  sai 
heart  went  to  the  Sun,  the  great  merit-giving  place.  There  he 
practised  austerities  for  a  time  when  the  Lolakhya  Sun  became  visible 
to  him,  when,  being  overpowered  by  great  sorrow,  he  began  to  cry 
repeatedly  ;  and  then  he  sang  hymns  to  him.  Then  Bhagavsln  Surya  Deva 
became  pleased  and  taught  him  all  the  Vedas  with  their  Amgas 
(limbs)  and  said: — •"  O  Child!  Now  sing  hymns  to  Sarasvati  Devi  that 
you  get  back  your  memory."  Thus  saying,  the  Sun  disappeared.  The 
Muni  Yajfiavalkya  finished  his  bath  and  with  his  heart  full  of  devotion 
began   to    sing    hymns    to    the    Vag   Devi,  the  Godless    of    Speech. 

0-32.  Yajfiavalkya  said:—"  Mother  !  Have  mercy  on  me.  By  Guru's 
curse,  my  memory  is  lost  ;  I  am  now  void  of  learning  and  have 
become  powerless  ;  mj-.sorrjw  knows  no  b)u:id?.  Give  m3  knowlege, 
learning,  memory,  povver  to  impart  knowlege  to  disciples,  power  to 
composo  books,  and  also  good  disciples  endowed  with  genius  and 
Pratibha  (ready  wit).  So  that  in  the  council  of  good  and  learned  meji 
my  intelligence  and  power  of  argumest  and  judgment  be  fully  known. 
Whatever  I  lost  by  my  bad  luck,  let  all  that  come  back  to  my  heart 
and  bo  renftwed  as  if  the  sprouts  come  again  out  of  the  heaps  of 
ashes.  O  Mother !  Thou  art  of  the  nature  of  Brahma,  superior  to  all ; 
Thou  art  of  the  nature  of  Light,  Eternal  ;  Thou  art  the  presiding  Deity 
of  all  the  branches  of  learning.  So  I  bow  down  again  and  again  to 
Thee.  O  Mother!  The  letters  Anusvara,  Visarga  :  and  'vhandravindu  that 
are  aflSxed,  Thou  art  those  letters.  So  obeisance  to  Thee!  O  Mother! 
Thou    art     the   exposition  (Vy^kbya)   of   the     Su'stras  ;     Thou     art     the 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  V.  825 

presiding  Deity  of  all  the  expositions  and  annotations.  Witiioat  Thee 
no  mathamatieian  can  count  anything.  So  Thou  art  the  numbers  to 
count  time  ;  Thou  art  the  Sakti  by  which  Siddhantas  (definite  conclusions) 
are  arrived  at  ;  Thus  Thou  dost  remove  the  eirors  of  men.  So  again  and 
again  obeisance  to  Thee.  0  Mother  !  Thou  art  the  Sakti,  memory,  know- 
ledge, intelligence,  Ptatibhu,  and  imagination  ^Kalpana).  So  1  bow  down 
again  and  again  to  Thee.  Sanatkumura  fell  into  error  and  asked 
Brahma  for  solution.  He  beeanio  unable  to  solve  the  difficulties  and 
remained  speechless  like  a  dumb  person.  Then  Sri  Krisna,  the  Highest 
Self  arriving  there,  said  :  — "O  Prajapati  !  Better  praise  and  sing  hymns 
to  the  Goddess  of  speech  ;  then  your  desires  will  be  fulfilled.  Then 
the  four-faced  Brahma  advised  by  the  Lord,  praised  the  Devi  SarasvatT  ; 
and,  by  Her  grace,  arrived  at  a  very  nice  Siddhanta  (conclusion). 
One  day  the  goddess  Earth  qiestiouad  one  doubt  of  Hsr  to  Ananta 
Deva,  when  He  being  unable  to  answer,  remained  silent  like  a  dumb 
person.  At  last  He  became  afraid  ;  and  advised  by  Kas'yapa,  praised 
Thee  when  He  resolved  the  doubt  and  came  to  a  definite  conclusion. 
Veda  Vyasa  once  went  to  Valmiki  an'l  asked  him  about  some  Sutras 
of  the  Puranas  when  the  Muni  Valmiki  got  confounded  and  remembered 
Thee,  the  Mother  of  the  world.  When  by  Thy  Grace,  the  Light 
flashed  within  him  and  his  error  vanished.  Thereby  be  became  able  to 
solve  the  question.  Then  Vyasadeva,  born  of  the  parts  of  Sri  Krisna, 
heard  about  the  Purana  Sutras  from  Valmiki's  mouth  and  came  to 
know  about  Thy  glory.  He  then  went  to  Puskara  Tirtha  and  became 
engaged  in  worshipping  Thee,  the  Giver  of  Peace,  for  one  hundred 
years.  Then  Ihou  didst  become  pleased  and  grant  him  the  boon  when  he 
ascended  to  the  rank  of  the  Kavindra  (Indra  amongst  the  poets).  He 
then  made  the  classification  of  the  Ve  las  and  composed  the  eighteen 
Puranas.  "When  SadcX  Sfva  was  questioned  on  some  spiritual  knowledge, 
by  Mahendra,  He  thought  of  Thee  for  a  moment  and  then  answered. 
Once  Indra  asked  Brihaspati,  the  Guru  of  the  Devas,  about  ^abda 
^astra  (Scriptures  on  sonnd).  He  became  unable  to  give  any  answer. 
So  he  went  to  Puskara  Tirtha  and  worshipped  Thee  for  a  thousand 
years  according  to  the  Deva  Measure  and  he  became  afterwards  able 
to  give  instructions  on  ^abda  Siistra  for  one  thousand  divine  years  to 
Mahendra.  O  Sures'vari  !  Those  Munis  that  give  educa,tion  to  their 
disciples  or  those  that  commence  their  own  studies  remember  Thee  before 
they  commence  their  works  respaetively.  The  Munindras,  Manus, 
men,  Daityendras,  and  Immortals,  i3i-ahm£l,  Visnu  and  Mahef  a  all  worship 
Thee  and  sing  hymns  to  Thee.  Visnu  ultimately  becomes  inert  when  He  goes 
on  praising  Thee  by  His  thousand   mouths.     So  Miha  Dava  becomes  when 

104. 


826  ^llt  M.\D  DEVt  BHAGAVATAM. 

ho -praises  by  His  five  mouths;  and  so  Bi-ahm&  by  His  four  mouths.  Wheu 
wreit  parsoniges  so  desist,  then  what  to  speak  of  me,  who  is  an  ordinary 
mortal  having  one  mouth  only!  Thus  saying,  the  Maharsi  Yajoavalkya,  who 
had  observed  fasting,  bowed  down  to  the  Devi  Sarasvati  with  great  devotion 
and  began  to  cry  frequently.  Then  the  Mah^mayd  Sarasvati,  of  the 
nature  of  Light  could  not  hide  Herself  away.  She  became  visible  to  him 
and  said  '•  O  Child !  You  be  good  Kavindra  (Indra  of  the  poets)." 
Granting  him  this  boon,  She  went  to  A^aikiintha.  He  becomes  a  good 
poet,  eloquent,  and  intelligent  like  Brihaspati  who  reads  this  stotra  of 
Sarasvati  by  Yajnavalkya.  Even  if  a  great  illiterate  reads  this  Sarasvati 
stotra  for  one  year,  he  becomes  easily  a  good  Pundit,  intelligent,  and 
a    good   poet. 

Here  ends  the  Fifth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  Sarasvati  stotra 
by  Y&janvalkya  in  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bh§gavatam  of  18,000  verses  by 
MaharBi    Veda    Vylsa. 


CHAPTER  Vr. 

1-10     Nirayana     said: — "  O     Ni\rada  !     Sarasvati     lives    always    ]f\ 

'Vaikuntha   close   to  Narada.     One  day    a    quarrel  arose  with   Ganga,  and 

by  Her  curse,  Sarasvati  came  in  parts  as  a    river  here  in  this  Bharata.     She 

19  reckoned    In    Bharati    as   a    great  sanetifiying  holy    and    merit-giving 

river.     The   good  persons  serve    Her   alwaysi!,   residing  "  on     Her   banks. 

She  is    the    Tapasvfl   and    the  fruit  thereof  of  the   ascetics.     She  is  like 

the  burnin""   fire   to    the  sins    of  the  sinners.     Those  -that  die  in  Bharata 

on   the  Sarasvati   waters   with   their   full   consciousness,     live     for    ever 

in   Vaikuntha    in    the   council    of    Hari.     Those      that     bathe     in      the 

Sarasvati    waters,   after  committing   sins,    become   oisily    freed    of    them 

and  live   for   a    long,   long    time   in    Visnu-Loka,     If  one    bathes   even 

once    in   the    Sarasvati  waters,  during  Chaturmasya  (a  vow  that  lasts  four 

months),  in    fall    moon    time,    in   Aksyayti     or  when     the   day     ends,    in 

Vvatipata   Yoga,  in   the   time   of  eclipse    ir   ou   any     other  holy  day   or 

through   any   other    concomitant    cause     or     even     without    any     faith 

and    out    of    sheer    disregard,    one    is   able  to   go     to     Vaikuntha     and 

get   the  nature   of  Sri     Hari.     If   one     repeats     the     Sarasvati  Mantra, 

residing   on    the   banks    of  the  Sarasvati,  for  one  month,  a  great  illiterate 

can  become  a   great   poet.     There    is   no  doubt   in    this.  Once   shaving 

one's   head,   if  one   resides   on  the   banks   of  the    Sarasvati,  daily    bathes 

in   it,    one   will   have    not   to   meet   with    the  pain  of    being  again    born 

in   the     womb.     O     Narada  I    Thus    1     have   described    a   little    of    the 

unbounded   glories   of   Bharata    that   give     happiness    and    the    fruits    of 

all  desires. 


Book  IX.]  CHAVTER  VI.  827 

11.  Sufca  said  : — ^"  0  Sauoaka  !  The  Muni  Ndrada  hearinjj  thus,  askeU 
ajjaiii  at  that  very  mooient  to  solve  his  doubta.  1  am  now  gpeakiuj^  of  that. 
Hear. 

12-13.  Narada  said  :—  "  O  Lord  !  Ho>v  did  the  Devi  Sarasvati 
quarrel  with  the  Davi  GaugA  aud  how  did  she  by  Her  curse  tura  out 
in  India,  into  a  holy  river  in  giving  virtue^.  I  am  boeomiug  more  aud  more 
eager  and  impatient  to  hear  about  this  critical  incident.  I  do  not  find  satiety 
in  drinking  your  nectar-like  words.  Who  finds  satiety  iu  getting  his  good 
weal  ?  Why  did  Ganga  curse  Sarasv.iti,  worshipped  everywhere.  Ganga 
is  also  full  of  Satfcva  Gunas.  She  always  besto.vs  good  and  virtue 
to  all.  Both  of  them  are  fiery  and  it  is  pleasant  to  heai  the  cause  of 
quarrels  between  these  two.  These  are  very  rarely  found  in  the  furanas. 
So  you  ought  to  describe  that  to  me. 

10-21.  Narayana  said  : —  "  Heir,  O  Narada  !  I  will  uow  describe  that 
incident,  the  hearing  of  which  removes  all  the  sins.  LaksuiT,  Sarasvati 
and  Ganga,  the  three  wives  of  Hari  and  all  equally  loved,  remain  always 
close  to  Hari.  One  day  Ganga,  cast  side-long  glances  frequently  towards 
Narayana  and  was  eagerly  looking  at  Him,  with  smile  on  Her  lips. 
Seeing  this,  the  Lord  Narayana,  startled  and  looked  at  GaugS,  and  smiled 
also.  Laksmi  saw  that,  but  she  did  not  take  any  offence.  But  Sarasvati 
became  very  angry.  I'adma  (Lakami)  who  was  of  Sattva  Guna,  began 
to  console  iu  various  ways  the  wrathful  Sarasvati  ;  but  she  could  not 
be  appeased  by  any  means.  Rather  Her  face  bec-ime  red  out  of  anger  ; 
she  began  to  tremble  out  of  her  feelings  (passion)  ;  Her  lips  quivered  ;  and 
She  began  to  speak  to  Her  husband. 

22-38.  The  husband  that  is  good,  religious,  and  well  qualified 
looks  on  his  all  the  wives  equally  ;  but  it  is  just  the  opposite  with 
him  who  is  a  cheat.  O  Gadii.ihara  !  You  are  partial  to  Ganga  ;  and 
so  is  the  case  with  Laksmi.  I  am  the  only  one  that  is  tloprivcd  of  your 
love.  It  is,  therefore,  that  Ganga  and  Padm^  are  iu  love  with  each 
ether  ;  for  you  love  Padma.  So  why  shall  not  Padma  bear  this  contrary 
thing  !  I  am  only  unfortunate.  What  use  is  there  in  holding  my  life  ?  Her 
life  is  useless,  who  is  deprived  of  her  husband's  love.  Those  that  declare 
you,  of  Sattva  Gunas,  ought  not  to  be  ever  called  Pundits.  They  are 
quite  illiterate  ;  they  have  nob  the  least  knowledge  of  tJie  Vedas.  They 
are  quite  impotent  to  understand  the  nature  of  your  mind.  O  Narada  ! 
Hearing  Sarasvati's  words  and  knowing  that  she  had  become  very 
angry,  Narayana  thought  for  a  moment  aud  then  wont  away  from  the 
Zenau*  Qutside.  AVheu  Nan\yan.i  had  thus  g<»uo  avray,  Sarasvati  becauiu 
fearlyts  aud  begau  to  abubo  Gauga  downright  out  of  auger  iu  au  abusive 
language,  hard  to   hoar  : — ''  O    Shameless  One  !  0  Paesiouate  Que  !   What 


828  ^ttt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

pride  do  you  feel  for  your  husband  ?  Do  you  like  to  show  that  your-  husband 
loves  you  mueh  ?  I  will  destroy  your  pride  to-day.  I  will  see  to-day,  ib 
will  be  seen  by  others  also,  what  your  Hari  can  do  for  you  ?  Saying  thus 
Sarasvati  rose  up  to  catch  hold  of  GangA,  by  Her  hairs  violently.  Padma 
intervened  to  stop  this.  Sarasvati  became  very  violent  and  cursed  Laka- 
rai : — "  No  doubt  you  will  be  turned  into  a  tree  and  into  a  river.  In  as  mueh 
as  seeioor  this  undue  behaviour  of  Ganga,  you  do  not  step  forward  to  speak 
anything  in  this  assembly,  as  if  you  are  a  tree  or  a  river.  Padma  did 
not  become  at  all  angry,  even  whca^she  heard  of  the  above  curse.  She 
became  sorry  and,  helling  the  hands  of  Sarasvati,  remained  silent. 
Then  Ganga  became  very  angry  ;  Her  lips  began  to  quiver  frequently 
Seeing  the  mad  fiery  nature  of  the  red-eyed  Sarasvati,  she  told  Laksmi  :  — 
"  O  Padme  !  Leave  that  wicked  foil-mouthed  woman.  What  will  she 
do  to  nie  ?  She  presides  over  speech  and  therefore  likes  always  to 
remain  with  quarrels.  Let  Her  shew  Her  force  how  far  can  she 
quarrel  with  me.  She  wants  to  test  the  strength  of  us.  So  leave  Her. 
Let  all  know  to-day  our  strength  and  prowess. 

39-44.  Thus  saying,  Ganga  became  ready  to  curse  Sarasvati 
and  addressing  Laksm?,  siid: — "O  Dear  Padme!  As  that  woman  has 
cursed  you  to  become  a  river,  "  so  I  too  curse  her,  "  that  she,  too,  be 
turned  into  a  river  and  she  would  go  to  the  abode  of  men,  the  sinners, 
to  the  world  and  take  their  heaps  of  sins.  Hearing  this  curse  of  Gangfi, 
Sarasvati  gave  her  curse,  ''  You,  too,'  will  have  to  descend  into  the 
l^hurloki  (the  world)  as  a  river,  taking  all  the  sins  of  the  sinners.  " 
O  N^rada  !  While  there  wms  going  on  this  quarrel,  the  four-armed 
omniscient  Bhagavaa  Hari  came  up  there  accompanied  by  four  attendants 
of  His,  all  four-armed,  and  t)ok  Sarasvati  in  His  breast  and  began  to 
speak  all  the  previous  mysteries.  Then  they  came  to  know  the  cause 
of  their  quarrels  and  why  they  cursed  one  another  and  all  became 
very    sorry.     At   that    time    Bhagavan     Hari    told  them    one     by    one:  — 

45-67.     O  Laksmi  !  Let  you    be    born   in    parts,    without    being    born 
in  any  womb,  in  the    world    as    the   daughter   in    the    house   of  the  Kins 
Dharma-dhvaja.     You    will   have    to  take  the  form    of  a  tree    there,  out 
this  evil   turn  of    fate.     There    Sankhachuda,   the    Indra   of  the    Asuras 
born    of  my   parts    will     marry   you.     After   that   you    will    come    back* 
here  and  be  my  wife    as  now.     There   is    no    doubt   in    this.     You    will  be^, 
named  Tulasi,  the  purifier  of  the    three    worlds,   in    Bh  arata.     O    Beautiful 
One  !    No\/    go   there   quickly   and    be    a    river   in  your   parts    under   the 
name    Padmavati.     O  Gauge  !     You    will    also    have    to    take    incarnation     l 
in  BhSrata    as  a    river,    purifyintr    all    the    world^^.    to  destroy  the    sins  of    I 


1 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  VI.  829 

the    inhabitants    of    Bharata.       Bhagiratha     will     take    you    there  after 
much     entreatins^   and    worshipping'    you  ;   and   you    will    be   famous    by 
the  u*ine  Bh^girathi,    the  most  f^anctifying  river  in  tho  world.     There,  the 
Ocean  born   of  my  parts,  and  the  King  Suntanu  also   born  of  my  parts  will 
be  your  husbands.  O    Bharati  !    Let  you  go  also  and   incarnate   in  part  in 
Bharata  under  the  curse  of  Cianga.     O  Grood-natured  One  !  Now  go  in  full 
Ainaas  to  Brahma  and  become  His  wife.  Let  Gangu,  go  also  in  Her  fullness 
to  Siva     Let  Padm^  remain  with  Me.  Padma  is  of  a  peaceful  nature,  void  of 
anger,  devoted  to  Me  and  of  a  Sattvika  nature.  Chaste,  good-natured,  fortu- 
nate and  religious  wom'in  like  Padma  are  very  rare.     Those  women  that  are 
born  of  the  parts  of    PadmS,   are   all    very    religious    and   devoted  to  their 
husbands.  They  are  peaceful  and  good-natured  and  worshipped  in  every  uni- 
verse. It  is  forbidden,  nay,  opposed  to  the  Vedas,  to  keep  three  wives,  three 
servantsr",  three  friends  of  different  natures,  at  one  place.  They  never  conduce 
to  any   welfare.   They  are  the  fruitful  sources  of  all  jealousies  and  quarrels. 
Where,  in  any  family  females  are  powerful  like  men  and  males  are   submis- 
sive to  females,  the  birth  of  the  male  is  useless.    At  his  every  step,  he  meets 
with  diHiculties  and  bitter  experiences.     He    ought  to  retire   to  the   forest 
whose  wife  is  foul-mouthed,  of  bad  birth  and   fond   of  quarrels.    The   great 
forest  is  bettor  for  him  than  his  house.     That   man  does   not   get   in   his 
house  any  water  for  washing  his  feet,  or  any  seat  to  sit  on,  or  any  fruit  to 
eat,  nothin'^  whatsoever  ;   but  in  tho  forest,  all  these   arc   not   unavailable. 
Rather  to  dwell  amidst  rapacious  animals  or  to  enter  iuto  fire  than  remain 
with  a  bad  wife.     O  Fair  One  !  Rather  the  pains  of  the  disease   or  venom 
are  bearable,  but  the  words  of  a  bad  wife    are    hard    to  bear.     Death   is   far 
batter  than  that.     Those  that  are  under  the  control  of  their    wives,    know 
that  they  mver  get  their  peace  of  mind  until  they  are  laid  on  their  funeral 
Jt^res.     They  never  see  the  fruits  of  what  they  daily  do.  They  have  no  fame 
anywhere,  neither  in  this  world  nor  in    the  next.     Ultimately    tho    fruit   is 
this  :— that  they  have  to  go  to  hell  and  remiin  there.     His  life    is    verily  a 
heavy  burden  who  n  without  any  name  or  fame.  Never  it  is  for  the  least  good 
th*4t  many  co-wives  remain  at  one  place.     When,  by  taking  one  wife    only, 
a  man  does  not  become  happy,  then  imagine,  how   painful    it   becomes    to 
have  many  wives.  O  Gauge  !  Go  to  ^sivi.-O  Sarasvati  !  Go  to  Brahma.  Let 
the  good-natured  Kamala,  residing  on    the    lotus    remain    with    Me.     Ho 
gets  in  this  world  happiness  and  Dharuia  and   in    the    next    Mukti    whose 
wife  is  chiste  and  obedient.     In  fact  he  is  Mukta,  pure   and    happy  whose 
wife    is   chaste  ;    and   he    whose  wife  is  fonl-uatured,    i^    rendered  impure, 
unhappy  an'l  dead  whilst  ho  is  living. 


830  5r1  mad  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

Here  ends  the  Sixth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  coming  in  this 
world  of  Laksmi,  GangS  and  Sarasvati  in  the  Mahtipuranam  Srimad  Devi 
Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Mahars'  Veda  VyAsa. 


CHAPIER  VII. 

1  -2.  Naiuyana  said  :—  ''0  Ntirada  !  Thus  saying,  the  Lord  of  the  World 
stopped.  And  Laksmi,  Ganga  and  Sarasvati  wept  bitterly,  embracing  one 
another.  All  ot  them  then  looked  to  ori  Krisna,  and  gave  vent  to  their 
feeling's  one  by  one  with  tears  in  their  eyes,  and  with  their  hearts  throb- 
bing with  fears  and  sorrows. 

3-4.  Sarasvati  said  : —  "O  Lord  !  Whit  is,  now,  the  way  out  of  this  curse, 
so  severe  and  paining  since  our  births  ?  How  long  can  helpless  women  live, 
separated  from  their  husbands  ?  O  Lord  !  I  certainly  say  that  I  will 
sacrifice  my  body  when  I  go  to  Bharati,  by  taking  recourse  to  yoga.  The 
Mahatmas  always  protect  all  the  persons  without  fail, 

5-6.  Gangu  said  : — "O  Lord  of  the  Universe  !  Why  hare  1  been  abandon- 
ed by  You.  What  fault  have  I  committed  ?  I  will  quit  my  body.  And  You 
will  have  to  partake  of  the  sin  due  to  the  killing  of  an  innocent  woman. 
He  h  surely  to  go  to  hell,  even  if  he  bo  the  Lord  of  all,  who  forsakes  in 
this  world  an  innocent  wife.  " 

7*15.  Pfidma  said  :— "  O  Lord  !  Thou  art  of  the  nature  of  Sattva  Guna 
in  fuUues?  ;  what  wonder,  then,  how  Thou  hast  become  angry  !  "  However 
let  Thou  be  pleased  now  with  Sarasvati  and  Gangi^.  Forgiveness  is  thr 
best  quality  of  a  good  husband.  I  am  ready  just  now  to  go  to  BhSrata 
when  Sarasvati  has  cursed  me.  But  tell  me,  how  long  I  will  have  to  stay 
there?  After  how  niiny  days  I  shall  be  able  to  see  again  Thy  lotjs-feet  .•' 
The  sinners  will  wash  away  their  dirts  of  sins  in  my  watgrs  bv  their  cons- 
tant baths  and  ablutions  ?  By  what  means  shall  I  he  freed  asfain  and  "■et 
back  to  Thy  lotus-feet.  How  hng  shall  I  have  to  remain  in  my  part,  the 
daughter  of  Dharma  Dhvaja,  at  the  expiry  of  which  1  will  be  able  to  see 
Thee  again  ?  How  long  shall  I  have  to  assume  the  form  of  Tulasi  tree  the 
abode  of  Thine.  O  Thou,  the  Ocean  of  mercy  !  Say,  when  wilt  Thou  deliver 
me?  And  if  Ganga  have  tj  go  to  Bharati,  by  the  curse  of  Bharati 
.when  shall  She  b?  freed  of  the  curs3  and  sin  and  when  shall  She  see 
baak  Thy  feet  ?  Again  if  Sarasvati  have  to  go  to  Bharata  out  of 
Ganga's  curse,  when  will  that  period  of  curse  expire  ?  How  many  davs 
after  shall  She  be  able  to  come  back  to  Thy  feet  ?  Now,  be  pleased  to  can- 
eel  Thy  order  for  them  to  go  to  Brahma  and  ^iva  respectively.  O 
mrala  !   Thus  speaking  to    .Jagannatha,  the    Devi    Kamaia    bowed  down 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  VII.  831 

at  His  feet  and   embracing    them    by    Uer    own    hairs  of  the   head,   cried 
frequently. 

16-37.    Now  the  lotus-navelled  Hari,  always  eager  to  shew  favour  to  the 
devotee?,  smiled  and  with  a  gracious  heart  took  up  Palma  on  His  breast  and 
said: — '*  O  Sures'vari  !  I  will  keep  my  own  word,  also  I  will  act  according 
as  you  like.    O  Lotus-eyeJ  !   Hgar.   How  the  two  ends  can  be  made  to  meet. 
Let  Sarasvati  go  in  her  one  part  to  have  the  form  of  a  river  and  in  her  one- 
half  part  to  Brahma  and  remain  with  me  in  Vaikuntha    in    Her   full  parts. 
Ganga  will  have  to  go  in  one  part  to  Bharata — to  purify  the  three  worlds, 
as  she  will  be  urged  eagerly  to  do  so  by  Bhagiratha.     And  She  will  remain 
in  her  one  part  in  the  matted  hair  of  Chandra  Sekhara  (the  Mahadeva  with 
Moon  on  his  forehead),  obtained  with  a  great   difficulty,  and  so  will  remain 
there  purer  than  her  natural  pure  state.     And  let  her  remain    with    me    in 
fall  parts.     O  Padma!  O  Lively  eye  1  One  !  You  are  most  innocent  ;  so  part 
of  your  part  will  go  to  BhSrata  and  be  the  Padmavati  river  and  you  will  be 
the  Tulasi  tree.     After  the  expiry  of  Ci\'q  thousand  years  of  Kali  Yaga,  your 
curse  will  e>;pire.     Again   you    all    will    come    to    My  abode.     O    P.adme  ! 
CaUmities  are  the  causes  of  the  happiness  of  the  embodied  beings.    Without 
dangers    no  one  can  understanl  the   true    nature    of  happiness.     The  saint 
worsliippers  of  My  mantra  who  will  perform  their  ablutions  in  your    waters, 
will  free  you  all  of  your  curse  by  touch   and    sight.     O  Fair  One  I  By   the 
sight  and   touch     (Darsan,     Spars'an)    of     My     bhaktas     (devotees),   all 
the     sacred     places     of    pilgrimages    in    the    world      will     be      purified. 
For   uplifting     and   sanctifying    the     holy  earth.  My  mantropasakas,   /.  e., 
^aivas,   5aktas,     Ganapatyas,  e^c,    that   are    devoted    to    Brahma  all    are 
residing  in  BhArata.     Where    My  Bhaktas  reside  and -wash  their  feet,    that 
phce    is    undoubtedly    reckoned  as   the    holy  places  of    pilgrimages.      So 
much  so  that   by   the  sight  an  1   touch    of   My  devotees,  the     murderer  of 
a  woman,  of  a  cow,  of  a  Brahmin,  tha  treacherous  and  even   the    stealer    of 
the  wife   of  one's    Guru     will   be   sanctified    and  liberated    while     living. 
Those   who   do   n^t    perform  the   vo.v    of   EkMas'i,    who  do    not  perform 
Sandhyas,   who    ara    Na^tikis     (atheists),     the    murderers,    all  are    freed 
of  their  sins  by  the  sight  and  touch    of    My   devotees.     By   the    sight   and 
touch  of  My  devotees,  those  who  live  on  their  swords,  pen?,  and    the   royal 
officials,  the  beggars  in  a  village  and  the  Brahmanas    who   carry    (deal   in) 
bullocks  are  also  freed  of  their  sins.     The  traitors,    the    mischief  makers  of 
their  friends,  those  who  give  fabe  evidence,  those    that  steal    other's    trust 
properties,  are  also    freed   of  their   sins  by   t'le  sight    and  touch  of   My 
devotees.     Those  who  are  foul-mouthed,  bastards,  the  husbands  and  sons  of 
unchaste   women  are  all  purified   by    the   sight  and   touch  of  My  Bhaktas. 
The   Brahmin   cooks   of  Madras,  Brahmins  of  an  inferior  order  ''who  subsist 


832  SRt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

upon  the  offerings  made  to  the  images  which  bo  attends),  the  village  mendi- 
cants, those  who  are  not  initiated  by  their  Gurus,  these   all  are  purified  by 
the  sight  and  touch  of  My  devotees.     O  Fair  One  !  The  sins  of  those  persons 
who  do  not  maintain  their  fathers,  mothers,  brothers,  wives,  sous,  daughters, 
sisters,  the   blind,    friends,   the    families  of   the    Gurus,   the   fnthers-in-law, 
the  mothers  in-law   are  also  removed  by  the  sight  and  touch  of  My  devoteef. 
Those  thit  c  it  the    As'vdttha   trees,    that  slan  ler    My  devotees,    and    the 
Brahmins  tiiat  eat  the  food  of  oudras,  &re    also    freed    of  their  sins.     Those 
who  steal  the  Deva's  articles,  the  Brahmana's  articles,   those  that   sell    lac, 
iron,   and*  daughters,   those    who  commit    Mahu    Patakas    (Brahmahatyu, 
Surapanam,    Steyam,  (iurbanganaganah,  Mah^nti   jiatakimyahuh,  tatsam- 
sargaliseha  Panchamam)  aud  those  that  burn  the  Sudra'^  dead  bodies,  these 
also  are  freed  of  their  respective  sins  by  the  sight  and  touch  cf  My  deyniees. 
o8«42.     Mahfi  Laksnu  said  :—  "O  Thou  gracious  to  faithful  attendants  1 
AVhataro  the  characteristics,  the  marks  ol  those  Rhaktas  of  Thine  thai  Thou 
ha*t  spoken  of  just  now  whose  sight  and  touch  destroy  instantly  the  Maha- 
p^takas  I  five  gre^t  sins),  that  arc  destroyed  after  a  long  time  by    the    water 
of  the  Tirthas  and  the  earthen  and  stone  images  of  the  (lods.  The  tins  of  the 
vilest  of  men,  devoid  of  Ilari  bhakti,  vain  aiid    egoistic,    cheat?,   hxpocrite?, 
slanderers  of  saints,  vicious  souls  are  destroyed  by  your  Bhaktas.  whose  touch 
and  ablutions  sanctify  the  sacred  places  of  pilgrimages  :    b}  the  touch  of  the 
dust  and  water   of  whose  feet,  the  earth  is  purified  ;    whom  the   Bhaktas    «  : 
Bharata  always  pray  to  see;  aud  there  is  nothing  higher  thm  the  meeting  of 
those  Bhaktas. "  Suta  said  : —  '"O  Great  Risi  !     Thus  hearing  the  words    of 
Mahu  LaksmT,  the  Lord  smiled  and  began  to  speak  ab)ut  the  fecrer.  things 
or  the  marks  of  the  Bhaktas," 

44  54.     0  Laksmi  !     The  marks  of  the  Bhaktas  are  all  mentioned    very 
hiddenly  in  Srutis  and    Puranas.     These  are   very    sanctifying,    destructive 
of  sins,  giving  happiness,  devotion,  and  liberation.     These  are    never   to  be 
described  to   deceitful   persons  ;    these   are    the   essences   aod   to   be    kept 
hidden.     But  you  are  very  simple  and  like  my    life.     J    therefore    speak    to 
you.     Hear.     O  Fair  One  !     All  the  Vedas  declare  him  to  be  holv  and  the 
best  of  men,  in  whose  ears  are  pronounced  from  the  mouth    of  a    (^'iru,   the 
Visnu  mantra.     At  the  very  moment  of   liis    being   born   into   this    world, 
one  hundred  generations  back  of  that  person,  whether  they  be  at  that    time 
in  heaven  or  hell,  get  instantaneous  liberation  and  if  any  of  thera  happen  to 
be  born  then   t.s   Jivas,     they  become  liberated  at   once    while   living  and 
finally  get  Visnupadam    (the  place  of  Visnu).     That  mortal  is   My    Bbakta 
(devotee)  who  is  full  of  devotion  to  Me,  who  always  repeats  My  glories   and 
acts  according  to  My    directions,  who  hears  with   all  his  heart  My  topics, 
and  hearing  which,  whose-  mind  dances  with  joy,  whose  voice  gets  choked  and 


Book  IX.J  CHAPTER  VIII.  883 

tears  iuce^ssautly  flow  out  fr3Qi  whose  eyes,  who  losos  his  outward  conscious- 
ness. Such  a  man  is  indeed,  My  Bhakta.  My  Bhaktas  do  not  long  for  happi- 
ness, or  Mukti,  or  the  four  states  Salokya,  S&yujya,  Simipya  and  Sarsti,  nor 
the  Brahinahood,  nor  the  Davahoo  i  (the  state  ot  immortality) ;  they  want 
only  10 do  Seva  (service)  to  Me  and  they  are  solely  intent  on  doing  this.  Even 
in  dreams  they  do  not  desire  the  Indraship,  Maiiuship,  the  state  of  Brahma, 
so  very  difficult  to  be  had  ;  nor  do  they  want  the  enjoyment  of  kingdoms  and 
heavens.  My  Bhaktas  roam  in  Bharata,  eager  to  hear  My  glories,  and 
always  very  glad  to  recite  My  sweet  glorious  deeds.  The  birth  of  such 
Bhaktas  in  Bhirata  is  very  rare.  They  purify  the  world  and  go  ultimately 
to  My  abode,  the  best  of  all  Tirthas  (sacred  places).  Thus  I  have  spoken 
O  Padme  !  all  that  you  wanted  to  hear.  Now  do  as  you  like.  Then  Oanga 
and  others  all  went  to  obf'V  the  order  c,f  Srt  Ilari,  Who  went  to  His  own 
nbode. 

Here  ends  the  Seventh  Chaj)tpr  of  tlie  Ninth  Book  on  the  curses  of 
(ji:»n'^'2,  Saras vati,  and  Laksmi  and  the  way  to  freedom  therecf  in  the 
M.ihiijMKanam  Srtmad  Dovi  Bhttgavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda 
Vvasa. 


CHAPTER  YI II. 

I.no.  NSrf^yana  sail  :  -*  A  part  of  Sarasvati  descended  in  this 
BnJirata  Punya  Bhumi  (land  of  merits),  owing  to  the  curse  of  Ciang&  ;  and 
She  remained  in  full  in  Visnu'a  re'^ion,  the  abode  of  Vaikuntha.  She  is 
named  Bharati,  on  account  of  Her  coming  to  Bharata;  she  is  called  Brahmi 
because  she  is  dear  to  BrahnaS  ;  and  She  is  called  Vani  as  She  presides  over 
Spieoh.  I[ari  is  seen  everywhere,  in  tanks,  in  wells,  in  running  streams 
{i.e..,  in  Saras).  Because  He  resides  in  Saras,  therefore  He  is  called  Sarasvan. 
Vani  is  the  oakti  of  that  Sarasvun  ;  therefore  She  is  denominated  Sarasvati. 
The  river  Sarasvati  is  a  very  sacred  Tirtha.  .She  is  the  burning  fire  to  the 
fuel  of  sins,  of  sinners.  0  Narada  !  Through  the  curse  of  Sarasvati,  the  Devi 
Gariga  also  assumed  the  fjrm  of  a  river  in  part.  She  was  brought  down  to 
this  earth  at  the  request  of  Bhagiratha.  Hence  she  is  called  Bhagirathi. 
Wliilo  Tiangci  was  rushing  down  to  the  earth  oiva  capable  to  be&r  the  great 
rusli  of  Hor,  held  Her  on  His  head  at  the  request  of  the  Mother  Earth. 
Laksmi  also,  through  the  curse  of  Sarasvati  came  in  part  of  parts  to 
Bharata  as  the  river  Padmavati.  But  She  remained  in  full  with  Hari. 
Laksmi  appeared  also  in  Her  other  part  ae  the  well-known  daughter  Tulasi 
of  the  king  Dharmadhvaja  in  India.  Last  of  all,  through  Bhftrati's  curse 
and  by  the  command  of  Sri  Hari,  she  turned  into  the  Tulasi  tree,  purify- 
ing the  whole  world.  Remaining  for  five  thousand  years  of  Kali,  all  of 
them  will  quit  their   river   appearances   and   go   back    to   Hari.     By   the 

105. 


834  ^rI  mad  DEVt  JSIIAGAVATAM. 

command  of  ^ri  Hari,  all  the  Tirthas  save  Kas'i  and  Bindraban  will  go 
alon''  with  them  to  Vaikantha.  Next  at  the  expiiy  of  the  ten  thousand 
years  of  Kali,  ^alagrami  §ila  (the  stone  piece  worshippad  as  Narayana) 
^iva,  and  J§iva  5akd  aad  Purasottami  Jai^annatha  will  leave  the  soil  of 
Bhdrata  and  go  to  theii-  respective  places,  {i.e.  the  Muhatmyas  of  these 
will  be  extinct  from  Bhilrita).  Thare  vill  then  cea^e  to  be  the  saints  (of 
^iva  ^akta,  Ganapatya  and  Vaisnava  sset',  (ftij>hteen)  Purinas,  the 
blowinf  of  conch  shells  (auspicious  signs),  Sraddha",  Tarpana^,  and  all  the 
rites  and  ceremonies  dictated  by  the  Veda?.  The  warship  and  glorification 
of  the  Gods,  the  recitation  of  their  praises,  their  names  will  be  extinct. 
The  Vedas  with  their  Amgas  will  no  longer  be  hear!  of.  All  th-'se  will 
disappear  with  them.  The  assembly  of  the  Sidhis,  the  true  Dharma, 
the  four  Veduf=,  the  village  Devas  and  WivU,  tho  Vratas  (vow?) 
the  practising  of  tho  austerities,  fa>tlng,  all  will  disappear. 
All  will  bo  addicted  to  the  Vamaehara  ritual  (the  left-hand  ritual 
Tantrik  form  of  worship  ;  sarcastic  illy  used  in  tho  sens3  of  drinking 
wine  and  eating  flesh,  etc.)  They  will  spaak  falsehood  and  be  deceitful. 
If  any  body  worship.?,  his  worship  will  be  void  of  Tulasi  leaves. 
Almost  all  will  be  deceitful,  cruel,  vain,  egoistic,  thievish  and  mis- 
^  chievous.      Men    will    be    at  Variance    with  one    another;    women    will  bo 

^^t¥tu^  at  variance  with  one  another;  no  fear  will  exist  in  marriage  ties.  Pro- 
perties will  be  only  of  those  that  will  make  them  (/'.  e.  there  will 
cease  to  be  any  inheritance  from  father  to  son  and  so  forth  ).  Una* 
bands  will  be  obedient  to  their  wives;  unchasLe  women  will  be  in 
every  house.  Wiveg  will  rebuke  their  husbands  by  incessant  noisings  and 
ehidings.  Wives  will  be  the  sole  mistresses  of  houses  and  husbands 
will  stand  before  them  as  servants  with  folded  palms.  Fathers-in-law 
and  mothers-in-law  will  be  their  servants.  The  brothers  of  wives,  and 
•their  friends  will  be  the  njanagers  of  the  household  affairs.  But  there 
will  be  no  friendship  with  one's  own  class  fellow:s.  The  brothers  and 
friends  of  the  house  owners  (masters  of  the  house)  will  appear  quite 
strangers  as  if  they  are  new-comers.  Without  the  command  of  the  house- 
wives, the  masters  of  the  houses  will  be  unable  to  do  anything.  The 
divisions  of  caste  (Brahman a,  Ksattriya,  Vaisya,  and  Sudra)  will 
^,.  entirely   disappear.     Far    from     practising    Saudhya    Bandanam  and  other 

j^W'  daily  practices,  the  Brahmanas  will  cease  to  hold  the  holy  threads 
even  on  their  bodies.  The  four  colour-classes  will  practise  the  doings 
of  the  Mlechchas,  read  tha  Sastras  of  the  Mlechchas  and  forsake  their 
own  Sastras.  The  BrShmins,  Ksattriyas,  and  Vais'yas  will  become  the 
.slaves  of  Sudras,  will  become  their  cooks,  runnero  and  carriers  of  buffaloee. 
Every   one    will   be   devoid    of  truth.    Earth    will     not  yield    any    grains; 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  Vltl.  835 

trees  will  uofc  yield  auy  fruits  and  womon  will  bo  issueless.  The 
Cows  will  not  yield  milk;  even  if  there  be  a  little,  milL',  ^lice  will  not 
eome  out  of  it.  The  aft'eetion  between  husband  and  wife  will  die  out 
and  the  families  will  be  devoid  of  truth.  The  King  will  not  wield 
any  powm'j  the  subjects  will  be  over  burdened  with  taxes.  The  ever 
tlovving  big  rivers,  the  petty  streams,  the  caves  of  mountains  all  will 
gradually  have  very  little  water  in  them.  The  Four  Varnas  will  be 
devoid  of  Dharma  and  Punya  (merit,  virtue).  One  in  a  lakh  may 
be  virtuous.  Afterwards  that  too  will  cease.  Men,  women,  boys,  all 
will  be  ugly  and  defjrmed.  They  will  utter  bad  words  and  vile  sound?. 
Some  villages  and  towns  will  be  completely  deserted  by  men  and  will  look 
terrible;  at  some  others  few  cottages  with  few  inhabitants  will  be  seen. 
Villages  and  towns  will  be  jungles  and  jungles  will  become  filled  with 
men.  The  inhabitants  of  the  forests  will  become  heavily  taxed  and 
disconsolate.  The  beds  of  rivers  and  lakes  will  become  dry  owing  to 
want  of  rains  and  will  be  cultivated.  The  Kulinas  of  high  families 
will  become  very  low.  The  whole  earth  will  be  filled  with  liars, 
untruthful  cheats  and  hypocrites.  The  lands,  though  cultivated  well, 
will  yield  grains  in  name.  Those  who  are  well  known  as  the  millionaires, 
they  will  become  poor  and  those  who  are  devoted  to  the  Devas  will 
be  atheists.  The  towns  folk  will  have  no  trace  of  merey;  rather  they 
will  hate  and  envy  their  neighbours  and  turn  out  murderers  of  men. 
In  the  Kali  age,  males  and  females  will  be,  everywhere,  of  a  dwarfish 
stature,  diseased,  shortlived,  and  of  very  little  youthful  virility.  The 
hairs  will  turn  out  grey  uo  sooner  the  people  reach  their  sixteenth 
year.  Aud  they  will  be  very  old  when  tliey  become  twenty  years 
old.  The  gills  of  eight  years  will  have  menstruation  and  will  become 
pregnant.  They  \Vill  deliver  every  year.  Old  age  will  attack  them 
when  they  become  sixteen  years  old.  Some  women  will  have  their 
husbands  and  children  living.  Otherwise  almost  all  will  be  barren, 
childless.  The  four  Varnas  will  sell  their  daughters.  The  paramours 
of  the  mothers,  v/ives,  son's  wives,  daughters,  and  sisters  will  be  the 
source  of  support  to  them  all.  No  one  will  be  able,  without  monejj  to 
collect  the  merits  by  repaating  the  name  of  Hari.  Persons 
will  make  gifts  for  name  anJ  fame  and  ultimately  will  take  back 
what  they  had  made  as  gifts.  If  there  be  any  gifts  made  by  one's  own 
self  or  by  one's  forefathers  for  a  Deva  purpose  or  for  Brfihmins  or  for  the 
families  cf  the  Gurus,  there  will  not  be  found  wanting  attempts  to  take 
back  those  gifts.  Some  will  go  to  daughters,  some  to  mothera-in-law, 
some  to  the  wives  of  sons,  some  to  sisters,  some  to  mothe-rs  of  oo..wives, 
some  will  go  to  the  brother's  wives.  In  every  house,  those  who  are 
unfit  to  be  mixed  will  be  mixed  with,  excepting  one's  mother.    In  Kali  Yuga 


S36  sr!  mad  devI  bhAgavatam. 

who   is    whose   wife  ?  AnJ    who  is    whose    husband  ?   There    will     be    no 
certainty  ;  who    is   whose   subject   and    what    village    is  to  whom  ?  There 
will  bo  no  surety  that  such  a  property  belongs  to  such  and  such  a  man.    All 
will  turn    out    to      be  liars,    licentious,  thieves,  envious  of  other's   wives, 
and  murderders  uf  men.     In  the    houses  of  the  Brahmins,  Ksattriyas,   and 
Vais'yas,   the  throe     higher   castes,   the    current   of  sin    will  flow.    They 
will  live  by  selling    lac,  iron,    and   salts    prohibited    by    the   Sslstras.     The 
Brahmins  will  drive  buffaloes,    burn    the    dead   bodies  of  the   Sudras,  eat 
the  food  of  the   Sudras   and   go   to    unchaste  women.     There    will   be    no 
more  faith  existing  in  the    five   llisi  Yajfias.     Almost  every  Brahmin   will 
not  observe  the    vowrf   of  Amtivasya,    Nis'ipulaua.     The  holy   threads   will 
be  cast   away     and   the    Saudhya    Bandauam    and    cleanliness  and  good 
practices  will  cease  altogether.     The  unchaste  women  who  deal   in   giving 
loans,  etc.,  and  live  on  interests   and    the  procuresses  during  menstruation 
will  cook   in    Brahmin  families.     There   will  be    no   distinction   of   food, 
no  distinction  of  wombs,  no    distinction    of    As'ramas,    and    no   distinction 
of  iHjrsons.     All  will   turn   out    Mlechchaa.     O  Narada  I    Thus,  when   the 
Kali  will  have  its  full  play,  the  whole  world  will  be  died  with  Mleohchas, 
the  trees  will    be   one  hand   high  and   the    mou  will   be  of  the   size,  of  a 
thumb.     Tlieu    the    most    powerfal    Bhagaviiu    Ndrayana    will    incarnate 
in  His  part  in  the   house   of  a    Brahmin    named    Vi§nujas'u    as    his   sou. 
Mounted  on  a  long  horse,  holding  a  long  sword  He  will  make  the  world  free 
of  the  Mleehchas  in  three  nights.     Then  ho  will   disappear   from   the    face 
of  the   Earth    aiiJ    She    will  ba    without  any    sovereign  and    be  filled  with 
robbers.  There  will  be  incessant  rain,  for  six  nights  and  it  will  rain  and  rain 
and  the  whole  earth  will  ba  deluged  ;  no  traces    of  man,  houses,  and    trees. 
After  this  the  Twelve  Suns    will  rise  situultaueously  and   by  their  rays  the 
whole  water  will  be   dried    up   and    the   earth    will    become    level.     Thus 
the  dreadful  Kali  will  pass  away  when  the  Satya  Yuga    will    come   back, 
Tapasya   and  the    true    religion  and     Sattva    Gruna     will    prevail   again. 
The  fcJrahmins  will  practisa  Tapasy^,  they  will  be  devoted  to  Dharma   and 
the  Vedas.     'Ihe    womon     will    bechiste  and    religious  in     every    h)use. 
Ajfain   the    wise  and  intelligent    Ksittriyas    devoted  to     the    Brahmanas 
will   occupy   the   royal   thrones    and    their    might,   devotion     to    Dharma 
and   love   for   good   deeds    will  increase.     The  Vais'yas     will     again     go 
on   with    their   trades   and    their     devotion     to       their      trade    anJ     the 
Brahmins    will     be     reestablished.     The     Sudras,     too,     will     be     again 
virtuous,   and   eeive    the    Brahmins.     Again    the    Brahmins,    Ks'attriyas, 
and    Vais'yas  and    their   familios    will    have    Bhikti     towards    the    Devi,] 
be    initiated  in    Dovi    Mantras  and    all     will     meditate     un     the    Devi«] 
Again    there   will   be   spread    the   knowledge    of  the  Vedas,  the   Smritis, 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  Vllt  83? 

and  the   Puranas,     all  will   go    to  their  wives   ia     tuenstruation  periods. 
No   Adharma   (unrighteousoess)    will   exist   and    the    Dharma   will   reiga 
in  full,  with  all  the  parts  (Kalds)  complete.     Wheu  the  Treta  Yuga  oomes, 
the  Dharma  will  be  three  footed  ;  when   the  Dv4para     Yuga     will    oome, 
the  Dharma  will  be  two-footed  and  when  Kali  will  begiu,  the  Dharma   will 
be   ODe>foote1,  aud  when  Kali  will  reiga  supreme,  no    Dharma   will   exist, 
even  in    name.     (0    Naradi,  !  Now  I    will  speak   of     time.)     The   seven 
days   of  the   week,    Sunday,   &c.,     the   sixteen   tithis,  Pratipada  &c.,  the 
twelve   months    Vais'^khsi   &o.,   the   six  seasons    Summer,   &e.,  the    two 
fortnights   (dark    and     bright)    and  the     two    Ayanas     (Northern     and 
Southern)  are  rendered  in  vogue.  One  day  consists  of  four  Praharas,  one  night 
consists  of  four   Praharas  ;   a  day  and    a     night   constitute   one   so-called 
day.    Thirty   such  days   make    one    month.       In    the     computation     of 
time,    five     kinds    of    years   (Var§as)    were    already     mentioned   (in   the 
8th    Skandha).      As     the    Satya,   Treta,     Dvapara     and  Kali    roll     on 
turn     by    turn,     so     the     days,    months     and    years     also     roll  on   in 
turn.      One    day,     according   to     the    Devas,   is     equal    to     one    year, 
according    to   men  ;    three    hundred   aud   sixty    human    Yugas    equal    to 
one    Deva    Yuga.     Svanty-oue     Dava     Yugas     make    one    Manvautara. 
The   life   period   of   Indra,     the    Lord    of     Sachi,     is    one     Manvautara. 
Twenty-eight   Indras'   lives  equal    to    one    day  of  Iliranyagarbha     (the 
golden  wombed)  Brahmil.    One  hundred  aud   eight  such  years    tjqual   to  the 
life  of  one  Brahma.  When  this  Brahma  dies,  there  is  the  Pr&krita    Pralaya. 
The  earth  is  not    visible  then.  (The    dissulutiou     of   Prakriti  takes  place.) 
The   whole    Brahniauda   is  deluged  by  water;   Brahma,  Visnu,  Mahes'vara 
and   the   other  wise  Risis   get   dilute  1    in   Para  Brahma  whose  substance 
is  all  truth  and  consciousucss.     That    time,   the  Prakriti  Devi,     too,  gets 
merged   in    Para    Brahma.     The    fall   of  Brahma    and   the    dissolution  ol 
Prakriti   are    called    the   l*r?.krita    Pralaya.     The    duration  of  this  Pralaya 
is    one  Nimesa   of  the    Para    Brahma    Mula    I'rakriti  united  with  MSyfi, 
All   the    Brahinandas    (universes)  are   destroyed    -it  this  time.     Wheu  this 
Nimeea  expires,  the  creation  begins  again  in  due  order.  So  one  cannot  count 
the   endless    numbers   of  times    when    thi^    eio.ition  and  dissolution  works 
are  going  on.     So  who   can  tell  how    many    kalpas  had  past   away,  or  how 
many   Kalpas   will  come,    how    many    Brahmandas    wore   created    or  how 
many   Brahmandas   will    be   created.      Who    will    bo    able    to   count  how 
many    Brahm&e,    how  many  Vi9nas  or    how    many  Mahes'varas  there  have 
been.    But  One   and    Only   One  Para  Brahma     Parames'vara   (the     Great 
God)    is  The     Supreme     Lord     of     these    countless     Brahmandas.     This 
Parames'vara  of  the  nature  of  Existence,  Consciousness     aud    Bliss   is   the 
Highest  Spirit    of  all,     All   others,   BraUma,    Viguu,     Mahes'vara      the 


838  ^Rt  M^D  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

Great  Vii-at,  the  Suxallci-   Virat,  all  are    11..^     parts.     This  BiahuKv  is  Mula 
Prakriti    and    from    That    has    appeared    5§ri    Krisna,    the     Lord    of      his 
left  half  which    is    woman    (Ardha   Naris'vara).     It     is   She  that  divided 
Herself     into    two   forms ;  in  Her  one  form,  She  resides    as    the  two  armed 
Krisna  in  the  region  ot  Goloka  ;   and   as  the  four-armed  Narayaiia  in   Vai- 
kuntha.     All    the    things    from     Brahma,  the     Highest,    U     the      mere 
ti-rass   the   lowest,    all   are  originated  from  Prakriti.     And  all  the  Prakriti- 
boru   things   are    transient.     Thus    the  Trua,  Eternal  Para  Brahma,  beyond 
the  three  gunas,  the    Source    of  all  creation.  Whose    substance  is  All-Will 
is   the   Only    Substance  beyond  the  region    of   Prakriti.     He    is    without 
Upadhis    (conditions,,   as    time,    space,    causation   and     attributes);    He  is 
without  any  form  ;  and  the  forms  that    He  assumes,    they    are  for  shewing 
His  Grace    to   the  devotees   only.     The    Lotus-born    Brahma    is   able  by 
His   Power   of  Knowledge   to   create  the      Brahma nda.     It   is     by     His 
Grace  that   ^iva,  the    Lord  of  the    yogis     is   named    Mrityumjaya      (the 
Conqueror   of   Death),    the    Destoyer    of   all,     and     the     Knower    of    all 
Tattvas.     By  His  Tapas,    oiva    has    realised    Para    Brahma  and    therefore 
has  become   the   Lord    of  all,    All-knowing,  endowed  with  great  Vibhutis 
(lordly   powers),   the   seer  of  all,    omnipresent,    the   protector   of  all,  the 
bestower   of  all   prosperities.     The    devotion    and     service     towards    Para 
Brahma    have   alone    made    ori    Visuu  ■  the  Lord  of  all  ;  and  it  is  through 
(the   power   of  Para   Brahma,    that    Mahamaya    Prakriti  Devi  has  become 
omnipotent    and   the  Goddess   of  all.     Bhagavati     Durga   has     got    His 
/  Grace    by    Her   devotion  and   service    to  Him    and     has     become     Mala 
"Prakriti   of  the    nature  of  Being,    Consciousness  and    Bliss,     And   so  has 
the   Devi   S&vitri,    the  Mother    of  the    Vedas,  become  the  presiding  Deity 
of  the    Vedas   and  She    is     vvorshipped     by     the     Brahmanas     and     the 
Knowtrs   of  the    Vedas.     That    She   presides     over     all   the    branches   of 
knowledge,  is  worshipped  by  all    the   learned  assemblies  and  by  the  whole 
Universe    is    the    result  only    of  worshipping  the    Prakriti     Devi.     That 
Laksmi    has   become   the    bestower    of  all  wealth  and  the  presiding  Deity 
of  all    the  villages    and    the    mistress    of  all,    worshipped    by    all   and  the 
bestower  of  sons    to    all  is  also   the    result   of  worshipping  Her.     Thus  it 
is   through    the    worship    of    I'rticriti    that    Durga,    the     Destroyer    of  all 
calamities  and  troubles    has   appeared    from    the    left    side    of  Sri   Krisca; 
and    Radba    has    become   the  presiding  Deity    of    His    Praiii    (vital  airs), 
and  She     is     worshipped  by    all  and  possessed    of   all     kno>vledge.     It    is 
by    the   worship    of  Sakti   that    Kadhika    has    so     much    excelled    in  love 
has    become    the    presiding    Deity    of  the    prana    of    Krisna,   has    got  His 
love    and    respect,   has    bedu    pi  iced    on    His    breast  and    is     exceedingly 
beautiful.     With    the    object   of  getting    Krisna    for   her     husband.    She 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  VUl.  839 

practised   severe  austerities    for    one  thousand  Dava  years  on  the  mountain 
5at.is'rini^a   in     Bharata     to    j^eb-  the    Miila  Prakriti's  Grace.     And  when 
th3  Sak!;i    Miila    Prakriti    became    gracioiisly  pleased     towards    Her,    Sri 
Krisni    seeing    Ridhiki    inere.ising    in    be.iuty    like  the    Crescent    Moon 
to)k   Hic  to    His    breast*  and    out    of  tenderness    wept  and    granted  Her 
highest    boons    so    very  rare  to  others     and     said  : — O     Beautiful    One  ! 
You  better   remain   always    in    My    hrei-t    and    devoted   to    Me   amongst 
all     my     wives;  let    you    b?    superior     t)    them     all     in    goo  i     fortune, 
vaspecfc,  love  and  glory.     Prom  to-day  you  are  my  greatest  best  wife.  I  will 
love  you  as  the  bast  a-nongst  them  all.     O  Daar  !  Always  I  will  be  submis- 
sive to  you  and  fulfil  what  you    say.     Thus    saying,    Sri    Krisna   selected 
hiv  as  his  wife  witho  it  any  co-wives    and    made  Her  dear    to    His    Heart. 
Th?  other  Devis  hesidas  the  five  Prakritis,  already  mentioned,  also   derived 
superiorities    by   serving    MCila    Prakriti.     O   Muni  !   What    shall    I    say, 
everyone     reaps  the     fruits     as   he   practises    TapasyS.  Bhagavati    Uur^a 
practised  on  the  HimMy^s  tapasya  for  one  thousand  Deva  years  and    medi- 
t.ited  on  the  lotus-feet  of  Mdla  Prikriti  and  so  has  come    to  be    worshipped 
by  all.     The  Davi  Sarasvali  practised  tapasya  for  one  lakh  Deva  years  and 
IS  come  to  be  respected  by   all.     The    Devi  Lakami    practised  tapasya    at 
Pusk  ira  for  one  hundriid  Divine  Yugas  and,  by  the  Grace  of  Miila  Prakriti, 
h  IS  become  the  bastower  of  we.ilth  to   all.     The  Devi   Savitri    worshipped 
^akti   for  sixty  thousanl  divine  years    in  the   Malaya    mountain    and    is 
respected   and    worshippe  1      by    all.     O    Bibhu  !    Brahma,     Visnu,     and 
Mihes'vara  worshipped  oa^kti  for  one  hundred    Manvantaras    and    so    have 
become  the  Preservers,  etc.,  of  this    worli.     Sri   Krisna    practised    for    ten 
Man.Viintaras  terrible  austerities  and  therefore  obtained  his  position  in   the 
region  of  Goloka  and  is  remaining  there  to-day  in  greatest   bliss.     Dharma 
Deva    worshipped  Sakti  with  devotion  for  ten  Manvantars  and  has  becoaie 
the  lives  of  all,  worshipped  by  all,    and   the    receptacle    of  all.     0    Muni! 
Thus  all,  whether  the  Devis,  Dava?,  Munis,  Kings,    Br^hmanas,    all  have 
got  their  respect  in  this  world  by  the  worship  of  Sakti.  0  Devarsi  !    I  have 
thus  described  to  you  all  that  I  heard   from  the    mouth    of  my     Guru,     in 
accordance  with  the  rules    of  th?    Vedas.     What    more    do   you    want    to 
hear  ? 

Here  ends  the  Eighth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  Greatness  of 
Kali  in  the  Maha  Puranam  Srimad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses  by 
Maharsi  Veda  VySsa. 


540  5h1  mad  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 


(^HAPTRR  IX. 


1-4.  §ri  Narada  said:— In  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  of  the  Devi,  the  Pr*- 
layafcates  place  ;  and  in  that  very  time  also  the  Brahm&nda  (cosraos)  is  dis- 
solved, which  is  called  the  Pralaya  of  Prakriti.  Daring  this  Pralaya,  the 
Devi  V«siindhara(Eirbh) disappear.-!;  the  whole  world  is  deluged  with  water 
and  all  this  appearance  of  five  elements  called  Prapancha  vanishes  in  the 
body  of  Prakrit!.  Now  where  does  Vasandhar&  (Earth),  thus  vanished, 
reside  ?  And  how  does  She  Again  appear  at  the  beginning  of  the  creation  ! 
What  is  the  cause  of  her  being  so  ranch  blessed,  honoured  and  capable  to 
hold  all  and  victorious.     So  tell  about  tier  birth,  the  source  of  all  welfare. 

5-23.     6rl  NarSyana  said  :  — "  O  N^rada  !    So   it    is    heard   that  the 
Earth  appears  at  the    very    outset   of  the   creation.     Her   appearance  and 
disappearance  so  occur  in  all  the  Pralayas    (This  earth)  the  manifestation  of 
the  »reat  ^akti,  sometimes  becomes  manifest  in  Her- and  sometimes  remains 
latent  in  Her  (the  5.iUti).lt  is  all  the  will  of  that  Great  Sikti.     Now   hear 
the  anecdote  of  appearance  (birth)  of  the    earth,  the  cause  of  all  good,  the 
source  of  destruction  of  all  calamities,  the  destroyer  of  sin  and  the  cause  of 
furtherance  of  one's  religious    merits.     Some  say  that  this  earth    has  come 
out  of  the  marrow  of  the  Daityas,  Madhu  and    Kaitabha  ;  but   that  is  not 
the  fact.  Hear  now  the  real  fact.     Those  two  Daitya)  were  greatly   pleased 
with  Visnu's  valour  and  prowess  in  the  fight  between  them  and  Visnu;  and 
they  said  :  — "  Kill  us  on  that  part  of  the  earth  which  is  not  under    water.  '' 
From  their  words  it  is  evident  that    the   earth    was   existent  during  their 
life-time  but  she  was  not  visible.     After  their  death,    the    marrow   came 
out  after  their  bones.     Now  hear  how  the  name    "  Medini  "    came   to   be 
applied  to  the  earth.     She  was  taken  out   of  the  water,   and    the   marrow 
came  to  be  mixed  with  the  earth.     It  is  on  account  of  this  mixing  that  she 
is  called  T^Eedini.     Now  I  will  tell  you  what    I    heard   before    in    Pujkara, 
the  sacred  place  of  pilgrimage,  from  the  mouth  of  Dharma  Deva,  about   the 
'origin  of  earth,  approved   by    the  Srutis,   consistent,   and    good.      Hear. 
When  the  mind  of  Mah&  Vir^t,  merged   in    water,  expanded  all  over   his 
body,  it  entered  into  every  pore  of  his  body.  Next  the  MahUprithvi   or  tha 
Great  Earth  appeared  at  the  time  of  Pancht  Karana  (mixing  of  one-half  of 
each  of  the  elements  with  one-eighth  of  each  of  the  other  four   elements). 
This  Mah&prithvi  ^was       broken   into    pieces   and    placed   in  every  pore. 
It  is  this  difEerentiated  earth  that  appears  during  creation   and   disappears 
during  Pralaya.     From  this  raind,  concentrated  in  every  pore  of  the   body 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  IX.  841 

of  MfthS  Vir&t,  is  born  this  earth,  after  a  long  Interval.  In  every  pore  in  the 
skin  of  this  VirSt  Puruaa  there  is  one  eirbh.  Shs  gats  manifested  and  she 
disappears.  This  occurs  again  and  again.  When  she  appears,  she  floats  on  the 
water  ;  and  when  she  disappears,  she  gets  mergeJ  in  the  water.  There  is 
this  earth  (world)  in  every  universe  ;  and  along  with  her,  there  are  moun. 
tains,  forests,  seven  oaeans,  seven  islands,  Sunietu  mountain,  the  Moon,  the 
Sun  and  other  planets,  Brahmaloka,  Visnuloka  (the  abode  of  Vi?nu)  ^iva- 
loka  and  the  regions  of  the  other  Devas,  sacred  places  of  pilgrimage,  the 
holy  land  of  Bh^ratavarsi,  the  K^nchani  Bhumi,  seven  heavens,  seven 
Pat^las  or  nether  regions,  on  the  above  Brahmaloka,  and  Dhruvaloka. 
This  law  holds  good  in  every  world  in  every  universe.  So  every  universe 
is  the  work  of  MayS,  and  thus  it  is  transient.  At  the  dissolution  of  Prakriti, 
Br»hma  falls.  Again  when  creation  takes  place,  the  Maha  Virit  appears  from 
Sri  Krisna,  the  Supreme  Spirit.  Eternal  is  this  flow  of  creation,  preserva- 
tion and  destruction  ;  eternil  is  this  flow  of  time,  Ofthi  ;  eternal  is  this 
fl)w  of  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahes'a,  ets.  And  eternal  is  this  flo^v  of 
Vasundhari  who  is  worshipped  in  the  Varaha  Kalpa  by  the  Suras,  Munis, 
Vipras,  Gandarbhas,  etc.  The  Sruti  says  that  the  Presiding  Deity  of  this 
eternal  earth  is  the  wife  of  Visnu  in  His  boar-form.  Mangala  (Mars)  is  the 
son  of  that  earth  and  Mangala's  son  isGhates'a. 

2-1-26,  N&rada  said  : — "  In  what  form  was  the  Earth  worshipped  by 
the  Devas  in  Varaha  Ivalpa.  The  VSr^hi,  the  receptacle  of  all  things,  mov- 
ing and  non-moving,  how  did  she  appear,  by  what  method  of  PaSchi 
Karana,  from  the  Mulaprakriti  ?  What  is  the  method  of  her  worship  in 
this-Bhurloka  and  in  the  Heavens  (Svarloka).  Also  tell  me,  O  Lord  !  in 
detail,  the  auspicious  birth  of  Mangala  (Mars). 

27-34.  Nftrayana  spoke: — In  ancient  days,  in  the  VSrSha  Kalpa,  Varaha 
Deva  (the  boir  incarnation)  when  entreate  1  and  praised  by  Brahma, 
killed  the  Daitya  Hirany^ksa  and  rescued  the  earth  from  the  nether 
regions  Rasatala.  lie  then  placed  the  earth  on  the  waters  where  she  floated 
as  the  lotus  leaf  floatg  on  water.  In  the  meantime  Brahm4  began  to 
fashion  the  wonderful  creation  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Bhagavan 
Hari,  in  His  boar  form  and  brilliant  like  ten  million  sun«  saw  the  beautiful 
and  lovely  appearance  of  the  presiding  deity  of  the  earth,  possessed  of 
amorous  sentiments.  He  then  assumed  a  very  beautiful  form,  fit 
for  amorous  embraces.  They  then  held  their  sexual  intercourse 
and  it  lasted  day  and  night  for  one  Deva  year.  The  beautiful  Earth, 
in  the  pleasant  amorous  plays,  fainted  away  ;  for  the  intercourse  of  the 
lover  with  the  beloved  is  exceedingly  pleasant,  And  Visnu,  too,  at  the 
■%me    time    was    very     much   exhausted   by   the  pleasant  touch   of  the 

106. 


S42  ^Rt  MAD  DEV!  BIliGAVATA.M 

body  of  the  Earth.  He  did  not  become  conscious  even  how  days  and 
nights  passed  away.  When  full  one  year  passed  away,  they  got  back  their 
sainea  and  the  am)i-0'i3  mm  then  left  his  hold  o(  the  loved.  He  assume  1 
o.i3ily  his  former  Boar  forji  and  worshipped  Her  as  the  incarnate  of  the  Devi, 
with  incsnse,  li;,'ht^,  offering-;  of  fool,  with  veniiiiion  {Sinlur,  red-powder), 
>4.i-ilU-pisbe,  (jarmeuts,  Hjwors  and  variojs  other  offerings  of  fool,  ete 
11:1  then  said  :  — 

35-87.  0  Auspicious  One  !  Let  Thou  beest  the  recejitacle  of  all  things. 
All  t!ie  Muni?,  ^Manus,  Devas,  Siddhas,  and  DanavTi=',  et  c,  will  wors.hip 
Taee  iv'ith  pleasure  and  « illing-ness.  On  the  day  the  AmbuvSchi  cere- 
m  my  closes,  on  the  day  when  the  house  construction,  /.  e.,  the  foundation  is 
laiJ,  on  tlie  day  when  the  first  entry  is  made  into  the  u  ewly  built  hoi:s<g 
wheu  the  digging  of  the  well  or  tank  commence^',  and  on  the  day  when 
tilling  the  gro.iud  commences,  all  will  warship  Thee.  1  iiose  stupid  fools 
thit  will  nob  observe  thii>,  will  certainly  go  to  hell. 

38-41  The  Earth  spoke  :—"  O  Lord  !  By  Thy  commani  I  will  assume 
thi  forui  of  Vardhi  (fdmale  bjar)  xn  1  support  easily  on  uiy  back  this  whole 
world  of  uDving  and  non-moving  things,  but  tha  tdlowing  thiugs,  pearly  sm  ill 
shells,  Salagram,  (a  black  stone,  usually  round,  fjinJ  in  the  river  (jan dak', 
and  worshipped  as  a  type  of  Visnu),  the  phallus  or  emblem  of  Siva,  the 
images  of  che  goddesses,  couch-shells,  lamps  (lights),  the  Yantras,  gem.-, 
dia.nonds,  the  sacred  upanayana  threads  flowers,  books,  the  Tulasi  leavi  s, 
the  bead  (Japa  maU),  the  garland  of  flowers,  gold,  camphor,  Gorochanri 
(bright  yellow  pigment  prepared  from  th3  urine  or  bile  of  a  eo.v). 
Sandal,  and  the  water  after  washing  the  ^Magrama  stone,  I  will  not  be  able 
to  bear.  I  will  be  very  much  pained  in  case  I  were  to  bear  these  on  Me. 
42-45.  ^ri  Bhao'avSn  said  : — ''  O  Fair  One  !  The  fools  ihat  will 
place  the  above  articles  on  Thy  back  will  go  to  the  Kalasutra  hell  for  one 
hundred  divine  years.  O  Narada  !  Thus  saying,  the  Bhagavan  Nar^yana 
remained  silent.  Now  the  Earth  became  pregnant  and  the  powerful  planet 
Mars  was  born.  By  the  command  of  ori  Hari,  all  began  to  meditate 
on  E  irbh  according  to  what  is  mentioned  in  Kanvas'akha  and  began  to  praise 
Her.  Offerings  of  food  were  given,  uttering  the  root  Mantra.  Thus  became 
extant  all  over  the  three  worlds  Her  worship  and  praise. 

A'C).     N§.rada  said  : — O    Bhagavan  !     Very    sacred    is     the    meditation, 
hymn  and  the  root  Mantra  of  the  E  irbh.     I  am  very  anxious  to  hear  them 
Kindly  describe  it  in  detail. 

47-48.     NSrayana  said:— The  Earth  was  first    worshipped    by    Varaha  i 
Deva  ;  next  She  was  worshipped  by   Brahma,     Next   She    was    worshipped 
by  all  the  Munis,  Davas,  Manus  and  men.  O  Narada  !  Now  hear  the  Dhyiin, 
praise  and  Mantra  of  the  Devi    Earth. 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  IX.  84S 

49-51.  The  Earth  was  tirsfc  worshipped  by  Bha^avau  Visnu  with  this 
root  Mantra  (iniil  mantra).  "  Om  Hrim  Srini  Klim  Vasiindharayai  SvahS. 
Next  He  said  :— 0  Devi  Earth  !  O  Thou  Smiling  One!  I  worship  Thee, 
who  art  worshipped  by  the  three  worlds,  whose  colour  is  white  like 
white  lotus,  whose  face  is  beautiful  like  the  autumnal  moon,  who  art  the 
Store-house  of  all  gems  and  jewels,  and  in  whose  womb  all  the  precious 
stones  and  pearls  are  inbedded,  and  who  Las  put  on  a  raiment  purified  by 
fire.     All  then  began  to  worship  Her  with  this  Mantra, 

52-68.  Sri  Narayana  said  :—"  Now  hear  the  hymn  sung  before  Her 
according  to  K^nva  Sakha  :  -  O  Thou,  the  Giver]  of  Victory.'  Holder  of 
waterl  Endowed  with  water,  full  of  victory;  Consort  of  the  Boar  Incarnation, 
Carrier  of  victory  !  Bestow  victory  on  me.  0  Thou  Auspicious  One  ! 
The  Store-house  of  all  gooil,  O  Thou  incarnate  of  all  auspieiousness  ! 
Bestower  of  gcod,  Thou,  the  Source  of  all  good  to  bestow  all  sorts 
of  welfare  !  Bestow  all  things  that  are  good  and  auspicious  to  me  in 
this   world. 

0  Thou  !  The  Receptacle  of  all,  the  K newer  of  all,  all  powerful, 
the  Bestower  of  all  desires,  0  Devi  Earth  !  Give  me  the  fruits  that  I 
desire. 

O  Thou  !  Who  art  all  merits  Thou,  the  Seed  of  all  religious  merits, 
O  Thou,  the  Eternal,  the  receptacle  of  all  religious  merits,  the  home  of  all 
religious  persons.  Thou      bestowest  merits  to  all. 

0  Thou  !  The  Store-house  of  all  grain?,  enriched  with  all  sorts  of 
corns,  Thou  bestowest  harvests  to  all  ;  Thou  takest  away  all  the  f^rains 
in  this  world  and  again  Thou  producest  all  corns  of  various  kinds 
here.  O  Earth  !  Thou  art  all-in-all  to  the  landlords,  the  Best 
Source  of  refuge  and  happiness.  O  Bestower  of  lands  !  Give  me  lands. 
The  above  hymn  yields  great  religious  merits.  He  becomes  the  sovereign 
of  the  whole  earth  for  millions  and  millions  of  births  who  risintr 
early  in  the  morning  reads  this  stotra.  Men  who  read  this  acquire 
merits  due  to  giving  away  lands  as  gifts.  People  become  certainly- 
freed  of  their  sins,  if  they  read  this  stotra,  who  take  back  the  binds 
after  making  them  as  gifts,  who  dig  earth  on  the  day  of  Ambuvachi, 
who  dig  wells  without  permission  on  another's  well,  who  steal  other's 
lands,  who  throw  their  ?emen  on  earth,  who  place  lamps  on  the 
earth.  Relii;ious  merits,  equivalent  to  one  hundred  horse  sacrifices  accrue 
from  reading  this  siotra  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  This  stotra  of 
the   great    Devi   is    the    source    of    all    sorts  of  welfare  and  auspieiousness. 


844  ^r1  mad  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

Here  euds  the  Ninth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  origin 
of  the  {§akti  of  the  earth  in  l§ri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of  18,000 
verses    by  Maharsi    Veda  Vyusa. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1-3.  Narada  said  :— 1  am  now  desirous  to  hear  about  the  merits 
acquired  by  makinj^  gifts  of  land,  the  demerits  in  stealing  away  lands, 
digging  wells  iu  other's  wells,  in  digging  earth  on  the  day  of  Am- 
buv^chi,  in  casting  semen  on  earth,  and  in  placing  lamps  and  lights 
on  the  surface  of  the  earth  as  well  the  sins  when  one  acts  wrongly 
in  various  other  ways  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  and  the  remedies 
thereof. 

4-30.  ^ri-NSr^yana  saidi— If   one  makes  a  gift  of  land   in  this  Bhslrata 
of   the    measure   of  a   Vitasti   fa   long   span    measured   by   the  extended 
thumb   and    little  "finger)   to   a   Br^hmana    who    performs  Sandhyft   three 
times   a     day   and     is    thus    purified,     one    goes    and     remains     in   Siva 
Loka  (the   a,bode  of   Siva).     If  one     gives   away   in   charity    a  land  full 
of  corn  to   a   Brahmin,    the   giver   goes  and     lives  in     Vijnu   Lok«   in 
the   end   for   a   period   measured  by   the     number   of    dust    particles   in 
the  Jand.     If  one    presents   a   village,   a    plot  of    land,  or    grains   to  a 
Brahmin,   both    the    giver   and   the    receiver,    become    freed  of  their  sins 
and  go  to  the  Devi  Loka  (the   abode   of  the      Devi).     Even     if   one     be 
present    when   a   proposal   for   a   gift   of  land    is    being  made   and   says 
"This  act  is   good,"    one    goes    to   Vaikuntha   with     one's    friends  and 
relatives.     He   remains  in  the  K4lasutra  hell  as    long    as    the     Sun     and 
Moon   exist,    who    takes    back    or  steals    away   the   gift    to    a     Br&limin, 
offered    by   himself   or   by   any    other   body.     Even     his  sons,   grandsons, 
etc.,  become    destitute  of    lands,    prosperity,    sons,  and  wealth  and  remain 
in   a   dreadful  hell    named    P»iaurava.     If   one    cultivates   the  grazing  land 
for    the     cows    and    reaps    therefrom   a    harvest    of    grains,  one    remsius 
for   one  hundred  divine  years    io  the  Kumbhipuka  hell.     If    one    cultivates 
any  enclosure    for   cows    or    tanks   suid      growj      grains    on      them,     one 
remains  in  the  Asipatra  hell  for   a    period  equivalent   to    fourteen     Indra's 
falls.     One    who   bathes    in   another's    tank    without   taking  o  ff  five  band- 
fuls   of  earth    from    it,    goes   to    hell    and  one's    bath  is  quite  ineffectual 
If  anybody,   out  of    his     amorous     passion   casts    his     semen     privately 
on   the    suface   of  the  ground,  he    will    have    to    suffer     the     tormeute   of 
hell   for  as    many    years   as    are    the   numbers    of   dust    particles  on  that 
area.     If  anyone  digs   ground  on  the  day     of  AmbuvSchi,     one   remains 
in   hell    for   four  Yugas.     If,    without  the    permission    of  the    owner   of 
a  well  or  tank,    a   stupid    man   cleared   the   old  well  or   tank  and  digs 


feooK  IX.]  CHAPTER  X.  845 

the  slushy   ea-rth   ffoia   the  botfcotn,    hn  Uboui'  goes  in  vaia.     The   merit 
goes    to   the    ved    owner.     Ani    the    man  'who  laboured  so    much  goes  to 
Tapta   Kunda    Narak;t   for    fourteen     Indrai's     life-periods.     If     any    o«ie 
tikes   out    five    hmdfuls   of   earth    from    another's    tank,    when    he     goes 
to  bathe    in   it,  he  d^vells    in    Brahma -Loka  for   a  p3.viod  of  years  amount- 
ing  to   the    number  of  particles    in   those    handfuls     of     earth.     During 
one's    father's   or   grandfather's    Sradha    ceremony,    if  one    offers     pinda 
without   ofifering   any    fojd    (pinda)    to    the    ownar  of  the  soil,  the  ^rSdha 
performer   goes  certainly    to    hell.     If     one     places     a     light     (Pradipa) 
directly   on    the   earth    without  any    holding    piece    at    the     bottom,'   one 
becomes   blind   for   soven  births;   and     so  if    one     places    a      eonch-sbell 
on  the  ground  (Sankha),  one  becomes  attacked  with  leprosy    in    one's    next  ' 
birth.     If  any  body  places  pearls,  gems,  diamonds,  gold  and  jewels,  the   five 
precious  things  on  the  ground  ho  becomes  blind.     If   one  places  the  phallic 
emblem  of  oiva,  the  image  of  Sivani,    the   oaUgrama  stona  oa  the  ground, 
he  remains    for   one   hundred     Manvantaras     to     be     eaten      by     worms. 
Conchshells,    Yantras   (diagrams   for    Sakti    worshippers),    the  water  after 
washing   Silas    (stones)    L    c.    Charan&mrita,     flowers,    Tulasi    leaves,     if 
placed  on  the  ground,  lead  him  who  places  these,  verily  to  hells.    The  beads, 
garlands   of     (lowers,     Groroebana,    (a    bright   yellow     pigment     pi^epared 
from    the    urine    or   bile  of    a   cow),  and   camphor,    when    placed   on  the 
ground,  lead    him     whj   places  ^so  to   suffer  the    torments    of   hell.     The 
sandal    wood,    Rudraksa   mala,   and  the   roots  of     Kus'a     grass      also,    if 
placed  on   the   ground,   lead    the   doer   to   stay  for  one  manvantara  in  the 
hell.       Books,  the  sicred    Upauayaua  threads,    »v  hen   placed  on  the  ground 
make   the   doers    unfit    for    BrUhmin    birth  ;  rather    he    is   involved    in    a 
sin   equivalent    to  the   murder   of   a    Brahmin.     The     sacred    Upanayana 
thread    when    knotted    and   rendered    fit   for     holding,     is     worth     being 
worshipped    by    all    the    castes.     One    ought    to    sprinkle    the    earth    with 
ouril,  -milk,   etc.,  after   one    has    complobed   one's  sacrilices.     If  one  fails  to 
do    this,    one    will    have    to    remain    for   seven    births    in    a     hot    ground 
with    great    torment.      If  one    digs    the    earth   when  there    is     an    earbli 
Huake    or    when    there    is  an    eclipse,    that    sinner    becomes      also    devoid 
of   some    of    his    iiuibs    in    his  next    birth.     O  Muni!  This  earth  is    uatned 
IJhumi    since  Sho    is    the    abode    of  all;  she  is   named  Kas'yapi  since    she 
is    the   daughter    of  Kas')apa;    is  named  VisVambhiU-a,  since  she  supports 
the    Universe  ;     She  is  named  Auanta,  since  she  is  cudleslly  wide;  and  Sht] 
is     named    Prithivi    sine-    she     is     the   daui,^hter    of    th«     King     Pritliu, 
or   she    is    extensively    wide. 

Here  ends    the    Tenth  Chapter  of   the    Ninth     Book    on    the    offences 
caused   towards   the     surface     of    the     earth     and     punishments  there  of 


846  3Rt  MAD  DEVt  BhAi^AVATAM. 

in   belia — in  the    Mahapur&nani    bri  Mad    Devi     BhAjja .  ataa;  ox    18,000 
verses  by  Maharai    Veda  Vyasa, 

CHAPTER  XI. 

1-3.  The  Devarfi  N^rada  said:—"  O  Thou,  the  t'oiemost  of  the  knowers 
of  the  Vedas  !  I  h&ve  heard  the  excellent  narration  of  Earth.  Now  1  want 
to  hear  the  anecdote  of  Gaog^.  I  heard,  ere  loo*;,  that  Ganga,  of  the  na- 
ture of  Vipnu  and  appearing  from  the  feet  of  Visnu,  the  Is'vari  of  the 
DeviMi,  appeared,  due  to  the  curse  of  Bharati,  on  B^&rata ;  why  has  she  come 
to  Bharata  ;  in  which  Yuga  aud  asked  by  whom  did  she  come  to  Bhdrata  ? 
O  Lord  I  Now  describe  to  me  this  auspicious  anecdote  capable  to  destroy 
eins  and  yield  religious  merits. 

4-3S.     NUrslyana  said:—"  O  Child  !  In  ancient  days  there  was  born  a 

prosperous  Emperor  King  of  Kiugs,    iu   the    Solar  dynasty,     lie   had  two 

beautiful  wives ;  one    was   named    Vaidarbhi,   and   the   other   was   named 

Saivya,     Saivy4  delivered  a  very  lovely  son  ;    his  name  was  Asamanjsl.    On 

the  other  hand,  the  queen  Vaidarbhi  desirous  of     getting  a  son,  worshipped 

Sankara,  the  Lord  of  Bhiitas  who  became  pleased    and  granted  her  request; 

and  Vaidarbhi  became   pregaant.     After    oue   hundred  years  of  pregnancy 

she  gave  birth  to  one  mass  of  flesh.     Seeing  this,  the     queen   became   very 

afflicted  and  taking  refuge    of   Mahadeva,  bigan  to     cry   loudly   and   very 

often.     Bhagav&n  Sankara,  then,  ap^jeared      there  iu  a  Brahmin   form  and 

out  that  mass  of  flesh  into  thousand  pieces.     Those   thousaud'pieces   turned 

out  into  thousand  very  powerful  sons.  Their  bodies  looked  morebrillant  than 

the  mid-day  sun.     But  they   were   all    burnt     to    ashes   by   the    curse   of 

Kapila  Muni.     And  the  King  began    to    lament   bitterly   and   he   entered 

into  the  forest.     Asamaj^  practised  tapasya  to  bring   the    Ganga    for   one 

lakh  years  when  he  quitted  his  body    in  course  of  time.     His   son  Ams'u- 

m&u  practised  tapasya  for  one  lakh  years  to  bring  Gaug&  unto  BhArata  and 

he,  too,  died.     Then  the  son  of  Amsuman  ,   the    intelligent  Bhagiratha,  a 

great     devotee    of    Vi^nu,    free    of   old   age    and   death    aud    the     store 

of  many  qualifications,  practised  tapasy^    for    oue    lakh     years   to     bring 

Gang&  on  earth.     At  last  he  faw  •"  ri  Krifna  brilJant  like  ten   millions   of 

summer  suns.     He  had  two  hands  ;    there  was  a  Bute    in  his  hand;  he  was 

full  of  youth  in  the.dress  of  a  cow-h^rd.  A  sight  of  His  Gopala  Sundari  form, 

wearing  a  Sakhi's  dress,  makes  one  think  that  He   is  ever   ready    to   show 

grace  on  His  devotees.     He    is  Para  Brahma,  whose   Substance    is    Will  ; 

he  has   no   deficiencies.     Brahma,  Vi§nu  and     Mahea'vara  and  the   other 

Devas  and  Munis,  etc..  all  praise  Him,   who  pervades   everywhere.     He  is 

nob  concerned  with   anything  ;  yet  He  is  the  Witness  of  all.     He  is  beyond 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XI.  847 

the  three  gu^as,  higher  than     Prakriti.     A  sweet  stniU   is   always   in    bis 
face,  which  makes  it  the  more  lovely.   There  is  none  eqaal  to  him  in  showing 
Grace  to  the  Bhakhas.     His  rairaant  is  purified  (uninflammable)  by    fire  and 
he  is  decorated  with  gems,  jewels  and  ornaments.  The  King  Bhagiratha  saw 
that  unforeseen  appearance,  bowed  down  and  began  to  praise  over  and    over 
again.      His    whole    body    was    filled    with    ecstaoy.      Then   he    clearly 
told  what  he    wanted   for   the   deliverance   of  his   family.     BhagavSn  5ri 
Kri^na  then,   addressed   GangS  and     said: — "  O    Sures'varT  !  Go  quickly 
and  appear   in  BhUrata,  under  the  curse  of  Bharati.     By   My   command  oo 
quickly  and  purify  the  sons  of  Sagara.     They  will  all   be  purified   by   the 
touch   of  the  air  in  contact  with  the    Ganges    and   rise    up  in  divine  aerial 
oars,  assuming   forms  like  Mine  and  they  will  come  to  My  abode.  They  will 
there  remain  always  as  My  attendants   and   they  will   not    be  involved    in 
the  sins  that  they  committed   in   their   previous  births.     O  NSrada  !    It  is 
stated  thus  in  the   Vedas,   that  if    the   human  souIj,    taking   their  births 
in  Bh^rati,  commit  sins  for  millions  and  millions  of  births,  the  sins  will   be 
corapletaly  destroyed  if  they  touch  once  the  air  ia  contact  with  and  carrying 
the  particles  of  the  Ganges.     The  sight  of  the  Ganges  and  the  touch  of  the 
Ganges  water   give    religious   marits   ten    times    more    than      the     touch 
with   the  air   in  contact  with  the   G.tngas    witer.     People    become    freed 
of  their  sins  then  and  there  especially  if  they    bathe    in    the     Ganges.     It 
is  heard  in  the  nrutis  that  the  bathing  in  the  Ganges,  if  done   according 
to  rule?,  destroys  all  the  sins  e.g.  the  murder  of  a    Brahmin,  etc.,  acquired 
in  one  thousand  millions  of  births  done  consciously   or  unconsciously.     The 
merits  that  are  acquired  by  the  bathing  in  the  Ganges   on   a    day    of  reli- 
gious merit,  cannot  be  described  even  by  the    Vedas.     Whatever  is    men- 
tioned in  the  Agaraas  is  but    a    mere    trifle.     Even    Brahmft,    V^isnu  and 
Mabes'a  cinnot  describe  fully  the   merits  of  the  bsthing   in   the  Ganges. 
O  Br&hmin  !   Such  is  the  glori  of  ordinary   bathing.    Now  I   will  describe 
the  effect  of  the  Ganges  bath  done    with  a   Sankalap  (resolve) ;    hear.     Ten 
times  more  the  result  is  obtained  when  the  Ganges  bathing   is   done    with 
a  resolve  (Sankalap)  than  ordinary  bath  and  if  one  bathes  on  the  day  when 
the  sun  pisses  from   one   sign    to  another  (in   the    Zodiac),  thirty   times 
mora  religious    merits   accrue.     On   the   new  Moon    (Am^vyas)  day,    the 
Ganges  bath  gives  the  merits  as  above  mentioned  ;   but    when   the  Sun    ia 
in  his  Southern  course  (Daks  in^yana;  double  the  merits  are   obtained   and 
when  the  sun  is  in  his  Northern  course,   ten   times  more  religious    merits 
are  obtained.     The   Ginges    bathing   in   the  time   of  Ch^turmasya,   full 
Moon  day,    Aksaya  Navami  or  Aksiya   tritiya  yields  merits   that  cannot 
be  measured.     And  if  on  the  «bove  Parva  (particular  periods  of  the  year  on 
which  certain  caremonies  ar-j  eomnAuled)  day:?  both  bathing,  and   making 


I 

V4.8  ^hI  mad  DEVt  liHiOAVATAM. 

over  gifts  are  done,  there  is  do  limit  to  the  Veligious  merits  acquired  ;  hun. 
dred  times  more  than  ordinary  bath,  religious  merit?  are  obtained.  Great  reli- 
fj:ioas  merits  acaruo  from  the  Ganges  bath  on  Manvantara  tithi,  YugadvA, 
S'ukla  seventh  day  of  the  month  of  Magha,  Bbismastami  day,  As-ckastamt 
day,  "and  ^ri  HTiraa  Navamiday.  A<?ain  double  the  merits  than  thoseof  the 
above  arise  from  bathin^j  m  the  Ganges  during  the  Nandu  ceremony.  The 
Gauges  bath  in  the  Das'aharS,  tenth  tithi  gives  merits  equIva'niH  to  Yugadyi 
Sninarn  (bath).  And  if  ths  bathing  be  done  on  Mahauanda  or  in  MahlLva- 
rnni  dav,  four  times  more  religious  merits  aoerue.  Ten  million  limes  more 
religious  merits  accrue  from  the  Ganges  bathing  on  ^^aha  Mahd  Vdruni 
day  than  ordinary  bath.  The  Ganges  bath  in  the  Sjlar  eclipse  yields  ten 
times  more  religious  merits  than  in  the  Lunar  eelipso.  Again  the 
Snanam  in  Ardhodaya  Yoga  yields  hundred  times  more  religions  meiits 
than  that  of  the  (>olar)  eclipse.  Thus  saying  to  Ganga  before  ]Jhagiratha, 
the  Lord  of  the  Devas  remained  silent.  The  Devi  Ganga  with  her  head 
bo.veddown  with  devotion,  said.  :  — 

.30--4'2.  Ganga  said  : — If  I  am  after  all,  to  go  to  l^harata  as  Thou 
commandest  and  under  the  curse  given  previously  by  iiharati,  then  tell  me 
how  1  would  be  freed  of  the  sins  that  the  sinners  will  cast  cm  me.  How 
long  will  1  have  to  remain  there  ?  When,  O  Lord  !  Shall  1  be  able  to 
return  to  the  Highest  place  of  Visiiu  ?  O  Thou,  the  Inner  Self  of  all  !  O 
All  Knwoing  !  O  Lonl  I  Whatever  else  I  desire.  Thou  knowest  them  all, 
So  be  pleased  to  instruct  me  on  all  these  points. 

43—69.     Bhagavan  5ri  Hari    said  :— "  O  Sures'vari !     I  know  all  that 
you   desire  ;  whpn  you  will  assume  the  liquid  form,  the  Salt  Ocean   will  b- 
your  husband.     He  is  My  part  and  you  are  of  the  nature  of  Laksmi  ;  so  the 
union  of  the  lover  with  the  love  stricken  in  the  world  will  turn  out  a  happy 
and  qualified  one.     Of  all  the  rivers  Sarasvati  and  others    in    Bharata  that 
go     to    mix      with    the      ocean,      you      will  be  the  best     and      highly 
fortunate   of  them  all.   From    today    you  will  have  to  remain  in    Bharata 
for  a    period   of    five    thousand   years,     under      the     curse      of    Bharati. 
You    will    be    able   to   enjoy   daily    and    always     the    pleasures  with     the 
Ocean.     O  Devi  !     As    you  are  a  clever  lady,  so  He  is  also  apt  and  expert. 
The  inhabitants  of  Bhdrata  will  praise  Thee  and    worship    Thee  with  gre&t  - 
devotion  by  the  stotra  which    Bhagiratha    has  composed.     He    will   derive 
the  fruit  of  one    horse-sacriSce  who    will   meditate   on  Thee   as  per  Kanva- 
s'akha  and  worship,    praise   and   bow   down    to    Thee   daily.     Even   if  one 
ntter  "  Ganga, "    "  Ganga, "-  though  one    is  one    hundred    Yojanas   away 
from  the   Ganges,  one    will    be  freed   of  all  sins   and   go    to   Visnu-loka. 
Whatever  sins  will  be  cast  in   Thee  by     thousand  •  sinners   bathing 'in  Thee 
will  be  destroyed  by  the  touch  of  thd  devotees   of   Prakriti   Devi.     B?en  if 


Book  IX.]  GtUPTER  XI.  849 

thousaads  and   thousauds   of  sinners    touch    the   dead     bodies     and    bathe 
in  Thee,  all  those  will  be  destroyed  when  the  Devi  Bhaktas,the    worshippers 
of  Bhiivanes'vari  an.l  'Mhy^  Vija,  will  3ome  and  touch  Thee.     O  Auspicious 
One  !  Thou  wilt  wash  a,vay  the   sins  of  the  sinners,  by  Thy  stay  in    Bh3,rata 
with  other  best  rivers  Sarasvatiand  others.  That  will  be   at    once   a   saered 
place  of  pilgrimage  where  Thy   glories  will  be  chanted.  By  the  touoh  of  the 
dust  of  Thine,  the  sinner  will  be  at  once    purified   and  he    will  dwell  in    the 
Devi-loka  (Mani  Dvipa)  for  as  many  years  as  will  be  the  dust  there. All  Hail 
to  the  Devi  Bhuvenes'varl!  He  who  will  leave  his  body  on  Thy  lap  with  full 
consciousness  and    remeio   bering  My    name,  will  certainly  go  to  My  abode 
and  will  remain,  as  My  chief  attendant;  for  an    infinite  period.     He  will    see 
eonotless  PrUkritik  Layas  (dissolutions  of  the  Universe).     Unless  a  man  has 
collected  hordes  of  religious  merits,  he  cannot  die  in  the  Ganges  ;   and    if  he 
dies  on  the  Ganges  he  goes  to  Vaikuntha  as  long  as  the    Sun    rises    in    this 
world.  I  get  many  bodies  for  him  where  he  can  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  Kar- 
mx  and  I  then  give  him  My  Svurupya  (Form   resembling    Mine)    and  make 
him  My  attendant.  If  any  ignorant  naan,  void  of  any  Jnanam,  quits  his  body 
by  touching  merely  Thy  water,  I  give  him  Salokya  (place  in  My  region)  and 
make  him  My  attendant.  Even  if  one  quits  one's  body  in  a  far  off  place,  utter- 
ing Thy  Name,  I  give  him  place  Jn  My  region  for  one  life  time  of   Brahma. 
And  if  he    remembers    Thee  with  devotion,  and  quits  his  mortal  coil  at    an- 
other place,  I  give  him  Sarupya  (Form  resembling  Mine)    for   a   period   of 
endless   Prakritik    Layas.      He    instantly  gets    on   an  aerial   ear    made    of 
jewels  and  goes  with  My  attendants  to  the  region  of  Goloka  and  gets  form 
like  Me.     Those  that    worship    daily   My   Mantra,    that   pass   their  days, 
eating  the  remnant  of  the  food    offered    to    Me,    tliey   need    not   have    anv 
distinction  whether  they  die  in  Tjrath  or   not.     They  themselves  can  easily 
purify  the  three  worlds.  Getting  on  the  exccellent  and  best  aerial  car    built 
of  jewels,  they  go  to  the  region  of   Go-loka.     O  Chaste    One  !  Even  if  the 
friends  of  My  devotees,    be  born  in  animal  births,  they  also  will  be  purified 
by  the  devotion  shewn  towards  Me  and    getting   on    a   jewelled    aerial    car 
will  be  able  to  go  to  Goloka,  so  difflcult  of  access.     Wherever  the    Bhaktas 
maybe,  if  they   simply    remember    Me    with   devotion,  they    will    become 
Uberated    while   living    by   the    power    of    My    Bhakti.     Thus   saying  to 
Ganga,  Bhagavan  ^ri  Hari  addressed  Bhagiratha:— O  Child  !  Now  worship 
Ganga  Davi  with  devotion  and  chant  hymns  to  Her,  The  pure    Bhagiratha 
meditated   with    devotion  as    per    Kauthuma    ^Skhtl  and    worshipped  the 
Devi  and   praised   Her   repeatedly.     Then  Ganga  and  Bhagiratha  bowed 
down  to  5ri  Krisna  and  He  disappeared  at  once  from  their    sight. 

70.     The  Devarsi  Narada  said  :-"  O  Thou  the  foremost  of  the  Knoivers 
oftheVedaal     How,  by  what  Kuthuma  Sakha,   the   noble    Kin»   Bbaoi. 

107. 


850  SRt  MAD  DEVt  BH^GAVATAM. 

ratha  meditated  on  the  Devi  Grang^l ;  vvliat  atotra  did  he  recite  and  what  was 
the  method  with  which   he  worshipped  the  Ganges. 

71-75.  NSr^yana  said: — "O  N^rada !  One  should  first  take  one's 
bith,  and  putting  on  a  clean  washed  clothing  should  perform  one's  daily 
duties.  Then  one  should  control  oneself  and  wltli  devotion  worship  the 
six  DevatSs  Ganesa,  Sun,  Fire,  Vi§nu,  Siva  and  bivS,  Thus  one  becomes 
entitled  to  worship.  First  worship  is  to  be  given  to  Ganes'a  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  obstacles.  ;  the  Sun  is  to  be  next  worshipped  for  health  ;  Fire,  for 
purification  ;  Visnu  is  then  worshipped  for  getting  wealth  and  power  ;  Siva 
is  worshipped  for  knowlege  and  Sivani  is  worship pe.d  for  Mukti.  When  these 
Dovatas  are  worshipped,  one  is  entitled  to  worship  tiie  Deity.  Otherwise 
contrary  become  the  effects.  Now  I  am  saying  what  Dhyftnam  (meditation) 
did  Bhagiratha  practise  towards  the  Devi  Gang4 . 

Here  ends  the  Eleventh  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  origin 
of  the  Ganges  in  the  Mahipuranam  Sri  Mad  Devi  BhAgavatara  of  18,000 
verses  by  Mahar|i    Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1-5.  N&r^yana  said: — "O  Narad*!  No;v  about  the  meditation 
(Dhyan)  of  the  Devi  Ganga  as  per  Kanva  Sakh;!,  which  destroys  all  the 
sins.  "  O  Gange  1  Of  white  colour  like  white  lotuses  !  Thou  destroyest  all 
the  sins  of  men.  Thou  hast  appeared  from  the  body  of  Sri  Krifna.  Thou 
art  powerful  like  Him.  Thou  art  very  chaste  and  pure.  Thou  haet  worn 
the  raiment,  uninflammable  and  decorated  all  over  wioh  ornaments  made  of 
jewels.  Thou  art  more  brilliant  than  one  hundred  autumnal  Moons.  Thou 
art  also  well  pleased  with  a  smile  on  Thy  lips.  And  Thou  art  always  of 
steady  youthful  beauty  (that  never  wanes).  Thou  art  dear  to  N^rayana, 
cal.n  and  of  peaceful  temper,  an  1  proud  of  being  His  with  His  fortune. 
Thou  bearest  the  braid  of  hair,  decked  with  girhnds  of  M^lati  flowers; 
Thy  cheeks  are  anointed  with  sandal  dots,  with  Sindura  biadu  (dots  of 
red  powder,  vermilion)  and  well  adorned  with  various  artistic  lines  made 
of  musk.  Thy  garment  and  Thy  beautiful  lips  are  more  red  than  the 
ripe  Bimba  fruit  (the  red  fruit  of  a  cucurbitaceous  plant)  ;  Thy  teeth  vie 
as  it  were,  with  the  rows  of  pearls.  How  lovely  are  Thy  eyes  !  How 
delightsome  is  Thy  side-long  glance!  Flow  close  are  Thy  breasts  like  Bel 
fruits!  Thy  loins  are  thicker  and  more  solid  then  the  plantain  trees, 
How  do  Thy  feet  look  beautiful,  defying  the  beauty  of  the  Sthalapadraa 
(ground  Lotus)! 

How  do  the  red  sandals  look  lovely  with  Kunkuma  and  alaktak  (red 
powder)!     What  a  red  tinge    Thy    faat    hivi   sh^va    with    tha    honey    of 


Book  iX.]  CHAPTER  XII.  851 

PSrij^ta  flower  that  ia  seen  ou  the  head  of  ludra).  The  Devas,  the  Siddhas, 
the  Munis,  offer  always  Arghyas  (offerings  of  rice  with  Durba  grass)  at 
Thy  feet ;  the  ascetics  bow  down  at  Thy  feet,  and  it  seems  as  though  so 
uaaoy  lines  of  bees  are  on  Thy  lotus  feet.  O  Mother  !  Thy  lotus  feet  give 
liberation  to  those  that  want  Mukti  and  eujoyment  to  those  that  want 
Bhukti  (enjoyments).  O  Mother  !  Thou  ar  t  the  boon  ;  Thou  art  the  chief 
excellent;  Thou  grantest  boons  and  Thou  showest  Thy  favour  to  Thy  devo- 
tees;  Thou  bestowest  the  Vi§nupadam  (the  place  of  Visou) ;  but  Thou  hasfj 
come  from  the  feet  of  Vi§nu.  Thus  meditating  on  the  Devi  Ganga  flowing  by 
three  routes  (in  Heaven,  earth  and  juferna!  regions),  the  bestower  of  good 
things  one  should  oSer  to  the  Devi  t^ixbeen  t'ling;?: — A-saua,  Padya,  Arghya, 
water  for  bathing,  ointment  (anulepana),  Dhupa  (scents),  Dipa  (lights^, 
Naivedya  (ofterings  of  foodjj  betel,  eool  water,  clothings,  ornaments, 
garlands,  sandal-paste,  Acharaaniya  (water  for  sipping),  and  beautiful 
beddings  and  worship  Her  with  these.  Then,  with  folded  bauds,  one 
should  perform  stotra  to  Her  and  bow  down  to  Her  with  devotiou.  Thus 
the  worshipper  gets  the  fruits  of  A'svamedha  sacriliee. 

lO.  Narada  said: —"  O  Lord  of  the  Devas!  At  present  1  am  desirous 
Ac  bear  the  sin-destroying  and  virtue — bestowing  stotra  (hymn)  of  Ganga 
Devi,  the  Purifier  of  all  those  that  are  fallen  from  virtue,  originated  from 
the  feet  of  Visnu,  the  Lord  of  world  and  the  husband  of  Laksmi.     Kindly 

narrate  all  these  in  detail. 

17-4L  NAr&yana  said  :— "  O  Narada  !  Now  I  am  narrating  the 
stotra  of  Gang3  D  evi,  that  destroys  all  sins  and  bestows  all  religious  merits. 
Hear.  I  bow  down  to  the  Ganges  who  appeared  from  the  body  of  Sri 
Krisna,  enchanted  by  the  music  of  Siva,  and,  who  was  bathed  with 
the  prospiration  (water  coming  out  of  the  body)  of  Sri  RadhS,.  I  bow 
down  to  Gang&  Devi  who  first  appeared  in  the  circular  dance  (Rasa 
Mandalam)  in  the  region  of  Goloka  and  who  always  remains  with  Sankara. 
My  obiesance  to  the  Devi  Ganga  who  remains  in  the  auspicious  ^and 
utsab  of  R4(ih3,  (RSsa  MSndlam),  crowded  with  Gopas  and  Gopis,  in  the 
Full  Moon  night  of  the  month  of  KSitik.  She  is  one  koU  yojanas  wide 
and  one  lakh  times  one  koti  yojanas  long  in  the  region  of  Goloka.  My 
Obeisance  to  Her!  In  Vaikuntha,  Ganga  is  sixty  lakh  yojanas  in  width  and 
four  times  that  in  lenght.  My  Obeisance  to  Her  I  In  Brahma-loka, 
Gang^  is  thirty  lakh  yojanas  wide  and  five  times  as  long.  1  bow  down 
to  Her.  In  Siva-loka,  She  is  thirty  lakh  yojanas  wide  and  four  times 
that  in  length.  1  bow  down  to  Her.  In  Dhru%'a-loka,  She  is  one^lakh 
yojanas  wide  and  seven  times  as  long.     1  bow  down  to    Her.     In    Chandra- 


852  SRI  mad  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

loka  She  is  one  lakh  yojaaas  wiJe  and  five  times  as  lon;^.  My  obeisance 
to  Sri  GaofjI.  Devi.  1  bow  dovvn  to  the  Ganges  who  is  sixty  thousand 
yoj.xnas  wide  in  the  Siiryu  loki  and  ten  times  that  in  length.  I  bow 
down  to  Ganga  in  Tapo-loka  who  is  one  lakh  yojanaa  wide  and  five  times 
that  in  length.  My  obeisance  to  Gang^  Devi  in  Janar-loka,  who  is  one 
thousand  yojanaa  wide  and  ten  times  that  as  long.-  I  bow  down  to  GangS 
in  iMahar-loka  who  is  ten  lakh  yojanas  wide  and  five  times  that)  in  length. 
My  obeisance  to  Ganga  Devi  in  Kailus'a  who  is  one  thousand  yojanas  wide 
and  one  hundred  times  as  long.  I  bow  down  to  GangA,  Devi  who  is 
known  as  Mandakiui  in  Indra-loka,  and  who  is  one  hundred  yojanas  wide 
and  ten  times  than  that  in  length.  My  obeisance  to  Ganga  Devi,  known 
a's  Bhoi^avati  in  PatSla  who  is  tan  yojanas  wide  and  five  times  as  long. 
1  bow  down  to  Ganga  Devi,  known  as  Alakanauda  in  this  earth,  who  is 
two  miles  wide,  in  some  places  more  wide  and  in  some  places  less  wide. 
•  I  bow, down  to  GangA,  Devi  who  was  of  the  colour  of  milk  in  Satya  yuga, 
of  the  colour  of  Moon  in  Treti  Yuga  of  the  colour  of  white  sandal-paste  in 
;  DvSpara  yuga.  I  bow  down  to  Sri  Gang^  Devi  who  is  as  water  in  Kal; 
yuga  in  this  earth  and  as  milk  in  Kali  yuga  in  Heaven.  O  Child  ! 
By  the  touch  of  one  molecule  of  the  water  of  the  Ganges,  all 
the  horrible  sins  incurred  in  ten  million  births,  the  murder  of  a 
Brahmin  and  so  forth,  are  burnt  to  ashes.  Thus  1  have  described 
in  twenty-one  verses  the  great  stotra  (human)  of  the  sin-destroy- 
ing and  the  virtue-increasing  merits  of  Ganga.  He  reaps  the  fruit  of  the 
A'svamedha  sacrifice  (Horse  sacrifice),  who  daily  sings  this  praise  of  Ganga 
after  worshipping  Her  with  devotion.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  The 
persons  that  are  without  any  sons  get  sons  hereby  and  those  who  have 
no  wives  get  wives.  'Vho  drseased  get  themselves  free  from  their  diseases, 
and  the  man  who  is  under  bondage,  is  liberated  from  that  bondage.  He 
who  wetting  up  early  in  the  mo  ruing  reads  this  stotra  of  Ganga,  becomes 
widely  known  even  if  he  be  not  known  at  all  and  he  becomes  illumined 
with  wisdom  even  if  he  be  quite  ignorant.  Even  if  he  sees  a  bad  dream, 
he   acquires  the  merit  of  bathing  in  the  Ganges  and   of  seeing  good  dreams. 

42-44.  ^ri  Nariyana  spoke  : — "  O  Narada  I  With  this  stotra  (hymn) 
did  15ha">iratha  praise  the  GangH  Devi.  Who  then  went  with  him  to 
the  spot  where  the  Sagara's  sons  were  burnt  to  ashes  by  the  curse  ol 
Ivapila.  By  the  contact  of  the  wind -in  touch  with  the  particles  of  water 
of  the  Gangfs,  tliosa  sons  of  8agara  were  instantly  freed  of  their  curses 
and  they  all  repaired  to  Vaikuntha.  She  is  named  Bhagirathi,  because 
Bhagiratha  brought  Her  to  this  earth.  Thus  1  have  discribed  to  you 
the   story  of  the  Ganges. 

42-441.  This  anecdote  is  highly  meritorious  and  the  great  step  to  libe- 
ration, What  more  do  you  now  want  to  hear  V  Say. 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XII.  853 

45-46,  Ntlrada  said  : —  "  O  Lord  !  How  did  Gaug^  come  to  flow 
tbroagh  the  three  worlds  by  three  routes,  and  thus  purify  them  ?  How  was 
she  carried  and  to  which  places  ?  How  did  the  people  of  those  localities 
accord  respect  to  Her?  Kindly  describe  all  these  in  detail. 

47-79.  Narayana  said  :—  *'  O  N^rada  !  On  the  Full  Moon  night  of 
the  month  of  Kartik  in  the  113,3a  mandalara,  at  the  great  festivity  iu  honour 
of  Radha,  Sri  Krisna  worshipped  Radha  and  remained  there.  Next 
RSdhS,  worshipped  by  S'ri  Krisna,  was  worshipped  by  Rrahma  and  the 
other  Devas,  by  Saunaka  and  the  other  Risis,  who  also  stopped  there  with 
much  gladness.  At  this  moment  the  Devi  Sarasvati,  the  Presiding  Deity 
of  the  Science  of  Music  began  to  sing  lovely  songs  regardin  j  Krisna,  in 
tune  with  vocal  and  instrumental  music.  Brahma  became  glad  and  pre- 
sented to  Sarasvati  a  necklace  of  jewels  ;  Maha  Deva  gave  her  gems  and 
jewels  rare  in  this  universe  ;  Krisna  presented  the  best  Kaustubha  jewel  ; 
R^hikS  offered  excellent  invaluable  necklace  of  jewels ;  N§,rayana  pre- 
sented to  her  the  best  and  most  excellent  garland  of  jewels  ;  Laksmi  gave 
her  invaluable  golden  earrings  decked  with  gems  ;  Visnu-M^ya  Mula  Pra- 
kriti,  Bhagvati  Durga,  who  is  Nurayani,  Is'vari,  Is'ani,  presented  Her 
devotion  to  Brahma,  so  very  rare  ;  Dharma  gave  her  devotion  to  Dharma 
and  high  fame  ;  Agni  (fire)  gave  her  excellent  raiments  purified  by  fire 
and  Vayu  gave  Her  Nupura  (toe  ornaments)  made  of  gems  and  jewels.  At 
this  time,  Mahes'vara,  the  Lord  of  Bhiitas  (elements)  began  to  sino-,  at 
the  suggestion  of  Brahma,  songs  relating  to  Sri  Krisna's  o-raod  Rasa 
festival.  Elearing  this,  the  Devas  became  very  much  enchanted  and  remain^ 
ed  motionles  like  statues.  With  great  diflBcalty,  they  regained  their  cons- 
ciousness. Then  they  paw  that  there  was  no  Radhil  nor  Krisna  in  the 
Rasa  mandala  ;  everything  was  deluged  with  water.  The  Gopas,  Gopi^-, 
Devas  and  Bruhmanas  began  to  cry  loudly.  Brahma  in  his  meditation 
then  came  to  know  that  Rcldha  and  Krisna  both  have  assumed  this  liquid 
appearance  for  the  deli voranoo  of  the  people  of  the  world.  Brahma  and 
others,  all  began  to  praise  Sri  Krisna  and  ^aid:—'*  O  All  prevading  One  ! 
Now  be  pleased  to  show  us  Thy  form  and  grant  us  our  desired  boons.  At 
that  instant  a  swoet  incorporeal  vcice  was  clearly  heard  'by  all,  as  coming 
from  air  above,  that,  "  I  am  the  Self  of  all,  pervading  all ;  and  this  my  Sakti, 
R&dha,  i«3  also  the  Self  of  all,  prevades  all  ;  so  there  is  no  separation  of  us 
from  you  all  even  for  a  moment.  It  is  only  to  show  our  favour  to  the 
devotees  that  we  assume  special  forms.  For  this  reason  only  there  is 
separation  of  us  from  you  as  regirds  this  body  !  There  is  nothing  else. 
Besides  you  have  no  necessity  with  our  bodies.  O  Devas  !  Now  if  mv 
Manus,  men,  Munis,  Vaisnavas  and  tyou  all,  purified  by  Mantras, 
desire  very  much  to  see  My  Form  clearly,  then  I  tell  you  to  request 
Mabes'vara  to  oarry  out  My    word.     O  Br^hm^  I   O  Creator  1  Better  ask 


864  5Rt  MA.D  DEVi  BHAqAVATAM. 

MabadavA,  tho  Worli.Teicher,  thib  He  would  batter  oompose  the  beautiful 
Tantra  S'Sstra,  ia  accordauce  with    the    limbs   of  the  ^eda?.     And   that 
the  above  S'ilstra  be  full  of  Mantras,  capable  to  yield  desired  fruits,  Stotras 
(hymnB)  and  Kavachas  (protection  mantras)  and   rules    of  due   worship   iu 
proper  order.     And  that  also  My  Mantra,  My  Stotra,  aud  My    Kavacha  be 
aleo  '▼iven  there  in  a  hidden  form.     So  that  those  people  that  are  sinners 
might  not  understand  their  real  meanings  and  thus  turn  out  agaiuat  Me.  It 
may  be  that  one  iu  a  thousand  or  in  a  hundred  may  worship  My  Mantra.  And 
Mv  Mantra  worshippers,  the  saints,  become  purified  and  come  to  My  Abode. 
If  My  ^astra  be  not  well  made  (».  e.,  if  every  one    be  able   to   understand 
its  meaning)  and  if  every  one  be   able   to   go   from   Bhiirloki   to   Goloka, 
then     Thy   labour  in  this   creation    of  the      world    will    all    be  in  vain. 
Therefore     dost     Thou   better    create   different    worlds   according   to  the 
differences   of  Sattvik,    Rajasik,  and  Tamo  Gunas  ;  then  some  will  be  the 
inhabitants  of  this    Bhurloka,    some   will    be   the    inhabitanfcs  of  Dyuloka 
according  to  their  Karmas.    O  Brahman  !  If  Mahu  Deva  promises  earnest]}* 
in  this  assembly  of  the    Devas,  I    will  then    exhibit   My    True  Form.     O 
Narada  I  Thus  speaking,  the   Eternal    Purusa   Sri  Krisna   remained  silent. 
(e.  e.,   the   aerial   incorporeal   voice  stopped),     ilearing  this,  IJrahma,  the 
Creator  of  the  world,  gladly   informed   Siva  of  this.     When    the   Lord  ot 
Knowledge,  the  Foremost    of  the   Jn^nins,    BhCitanatha  heatd   the    words 
of  the  Creator,  He   took  the  Ganges   water   in  His    hands  and  swore  that 
^''  I  will  complete  the  Tantra  S^^stra,  full  of  Radha  mantras  and  not  opposed 
to  the  Vedas.  "     If  one  touches  the    Ganges    water   and  speaks    lies,    ono 
remains  in  the   terrible    Kalasutra  hell  for  a   period  of  one    Brahma's    life 
time.     O  Dvija  !    When  Bhagav^n  Sankara  said    this  before  the    assembly 
of  the  Devas  in  the  region    of  Goloka,    S'ri    Krisna  appeared   there    with 
Radha.     The  Devas  becama  exceedingly  glad  to   sec    Tliru.     They    praised 
Ilim,  the  Best  Purusa  and  they  were  all  filled  with    rapture  and  again  en- 
gaged themselves  in  the  grand  Risa  Festival.    Some  time  after,  Mahd  Deva 
lighted  the  Torch  of  Mukti  i.e.  the  Tantra   S'astra  was  published   by  Him, 
as  promised.     O  Child  !     Thus  I    have    disclosed   to   you    this   anecdote, 
so  very  secret,  and  hard  to  be  attained.     Thus  ^ri  Krisna  Himself,  is  verily 
the  liquid  Ganga  sprung  in  the  region  of  Goloka.  This  holy  Gauga,  born  of 
the  bodies  cf  Krisna  and  Radb^  inseparable  from  each  other,  grants    enjoy- 
ment, lordship  and  liberation,     ^ri  Krisna,   the    Highest  Self,   has   placed 
Her  iu  various  places;  so  Ganga  is   of  the   nature    of  ^ri    Krisna   and    is 
everywhere,  equally  honoured   everywhere  iu   the    Brahmanda   (universe). 
Hero  ends  the  Twelfth  Chapter  iu  the  Ninth    Book  on    the  origin  of 
a»uga  in  the  Mahapuragam  Srimad  Devi   Bh^gavatam    of  18,000  verses 
by  Maiiarfi  Veda  Vyasa. 


I 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XIII.  855 


CHAPTER  XI 1 1. 

1.  Narada  said;  — '"  O  Lord|of  the  Devas  I  Kiudly  say  in  what  Loka 
did  G-aiigd  go  after  5000  (five  thousaud)  jeai-  >  of  the  Kali    Yuga  ? 

2-4.  Nfir^yana  said  :— The  Bhagirafchi  C4anga  came  down  to  Bharata 
under  the  euree  of  Bh>lrati  ;  and  when,  the  term  expired,  She  went  back, 
by  the  Will  of  God,  to  the  region  ot  Vaikaniha.  Also  at  the^oud  of  the 
period  of  their  curses,  Bh^rati  and,  Lakatni,  too,  left  Bharata  and  repaired 
1,0  Nurayana.  Oranga,  Lakami,  and  Sarisvati,^  these  three  and  Tnlasv 
all  thebe  four  are  so  very  dear  to  S'ri  Hari. 

.5-6.  Narada  said:— How  did  Gang^  appear  from  the  lotus  feet  of 
Vi§nu  ?  Why  did  Brahma  put  Her  in  His  Kamandalu  ?  I  have  heard  that 
Gauga  is  the  wife  of  S*iva  ;  how  then,  eame  S'he  to  "be  the  wife  of 
Nar^yana  ?     Kindly  describe  all  these  in  detail  to  me. 

7.8.  N'urayana  said  :— "O  Muni  !  In  s^ncient  times,  in  the  region 
fGoloka,  Gauga  assumed  the  liquid  app mrance,  She  was  born  of  the 
'odios  of  RadhS  and  Krisna.  So  She  is  of  the  nature  of  both  of  them 
■,nd  their ^)arts.  Gang4  is  the  presidin^'  ddity'of  water.  S'he  is  un- 
•jualled  in  Her  beauty  in  this  world.  Shp  is  full  of  youth  and  adorned 
with  all  ornaments. 

9-43.  Her  face  was  like  the  autumnal  mid-day  lotus  and  sweet  smile 
was  always  reigning  on  Her  lips  ;  Her  form  was  very  beautiful  ;  Her  colour 
vas  ay  bright  as  melted  gold  and  She  looked  brill'ant  like  the  Autumnal 
Moon.  Eyes  and  mind  get  cool  and  become  pleasant  i,t  Her  beauty  and 
radiance;  She  was  of  purely  Suddha  Sattva  ;  Her  loins  were  bulky  and 
iiard  and  She  was  covered  with  excellent  clothings  all  over  Her  body 
Her  breasts  were  plump  and  prominent  ;  they  were  raised,  hare',  and 
'iicely  round.  Her  eyes  very  fascinatirw-,  always  casting  side-long 
^^lauces.  Her  braids  of  hair  situated  a  little  oblique  and  the  garland 
if  Malati  flowers  over  it  made  Her  look  extremely  handsome.  The 
tandal-paste  dot  and  the  vermillion  dot  were  seen  on  Her  foro-head. 
On  Her  cheeks  the  leaves  of  musk  were  drawn  and  Her  lips  were 
red  like  Bandhuka  flowers  and  they  looked  enchanting.  Her  rows  of 
',oeth  looked  like  rows  of  ripe  promegranates  ;  the  ends  of  Her  cloth 
not  inflammable  by  fire,  worn  in  front  in  a  knot  round  the  waist. 
She  sat  by  the  side  of  Krisna,  full  of  amorous  desires,  and  abaahod. 
She  covered  Her  face  with  the  end  of  Her  cloth  and  woe  seeing, 
^-  ith  a  eteadfast  gage  the  face  of  the  Lo/d  and   She  was  drinking  the  nectar 


856.  ^Rt   M.VD  DEVt  HHiOAVATAM. 

of  His  face    with   jjroat  gladuess.     Her   lotas  face  bloomed  and     became 

i^Iaddoaed  at  the   expecation   of  a   first    amorous    embrace.     She    fainted 

on  seeing  the   Form   of    Her   LorcV  and  a    thrill   of  joy   passed  all  over 

Her  body.     In   the     raaan while    Radhika    came    up    there,     R5dhu    was 

attended   by  thirty   kotis    of  Gopis.     She    looked   brilliant  like     tene    of 

millions   of  Moons.     Seeing   Gang^   by   the    side     of    Sri     Krisna,    Her 

face   and   eyes   became  reddened   with     anger     like     a     red     lotus.     Her 

colour   was  yellow   like   champaka    and    Her   gait   was   like    a  maddened 

elephant.     She   was  adorned    with    various     invaluable  'ornaments     made 

ot   jewels.     Her    pair   of  clothings    were   tied    round     Her     waist.     They 

wore    decked     with     invaluable     jewels    and    not     inflammable    by    fire. 

(Gre-proofj.     The   Arghya  offered   by    Sri    Krisna   was    on    Her  lotus-feet 

of  the   colour   of  a  flowcing  shrub — Hibiscus  mutabilis  and  She  was  going 

slowly  step  by  step.     The  Risis   began  to  fan  Her  with  white  Ch^maras  no 

sooner   She,   descending   from  the   excellent  aeroplane  decked    with  jewels, 

began  to  walk.     Below   the    point  whore     the     parting    of    the  hairs     qq 

the     head     is     done,  there    was   the   dot  of    Siodura    on     Her   fore-head. 

It   looked   brilliant   like   a    bright    lamp    flame.     On   both     sides    of  this 

Sindurabindu,    the    dot '  of   musk    and    the   dot    of  Sandal-paste  were  seen. 

When   She   began  to   quiver   with     an^er,     Her     braid,     with     PSrijata 

garland   round    it   began     to      tremble     also.     Her      lips     adorned      with 

beautiful   colours,  began  to   quiver    also.     She  took  Her   geat  angrilv  on  a 

jewel   throne    by    the    side   of    Sri    Krisna.     Her    attendants    took     their 

seats    in    their   allotted  positions.     Seeing     Radhu,   Sri     Krisna  got     up 

at  once   from    His  seat   with  reverence   and   addressed    Her,    smiling  ami 

began    to     eouvei'se  with  Her   in  sweet  words.     The    Gopis,    very     much 

fifraid    and    with    their   heads     bent    low,     began     to     chant      hymns  to 

Her    with    devotion.     Sri    Krisna   also    bagan  to   praise  Her  with  stotras. 

At  this    moment    Ganga    Devi   got    up   and    praised    Her    with    various 

hymns    and  asked   Her    welfare    with     fear    and     with     hunible      words. 

.Out  of  fear.    Her  fchroat,  lips  and  paluta  were  parched  up.     She  took  refuge 

humbly   at  brl   Krisna's   feet,     Jsri   Krisna   then    took   Ganga    Devi   on 

His   breast   when   She     became     calm     and     quiet.        At     this    interval 

Suros'vari   Gang^   looked  at   R^dha,   seated    on   a     throne,     lovely   and 

sweet,   as    if  She    was    burning    with    Brahma  Fire.     Since  the  beginning 

of  creation,  She   is    the    Sole    Lady   of  innumerable     Brahmas     and   She 

is  Eternal.     At   the    first   sight,  She  looked  yonng  as  if  of  twelve  years 

old.     Nowhere   in   any    Universe   can   be      seen   a  lady  so   beautiful  and 

90  qualified.     She    was    peaceful,   calm   and    quiet,     lovely,     infinite   and 

having  no  beginning  nor  end.     She    was  auspicious,  well  endowed  with  all 

auspicious  signs,  proiperous,  aad  having,  the  good  fortune  of  having  a  hesi 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XIII.  S67 

husband.     She     was     the     foremost     jetvel      amongst    the    ladies     and 
appeared   as   if  all   the   beauties    were  concentrated   in    Her.     R&dh&    is 
the   (left)  half  of  ^ri  Krisna's  body  ;    whether  in   age     or    in     strength 
or   in    beauty   she    was    in  every  way   perfectly    equal    to      Sri     Krisna. 
Lakstni  and  the   Lord  of  Laksoii   both    worship   Radh^.     The  excellent 
briUianee    of   Sri    Krisna    was    overpowered    by    the     beauty      of  R4dha,, 
Taking     Her   seat    on    the    throne    She    began    to     chew     betels     offere" 
by    Her   attendants    (Sakhis).     She  is   the    Mother  of  all     the     worlds  ; 
but   no   one    is    Her     mother.     She    is     fortunate,    respected   and   proud. 
She  is   the    Ruling   Lady    cf   ^v\    Krisna's  Life  and    Soul  and  ever  dearer 
to   Him   than      His      Pr^na     (vital     breath).     O     Devarsi!     Gang^,     the 
Governess   of  the    Devas,    looked    at    Her   over   and   over     again  with  a 
steadfast  gaze  ;  but    Her  eyes   and    mind    were   not   at    all    satiated.     At 
this   moment,    R3.dhSi    addressed  smilingly  to  ori  Krisna,  the   Lord  of   the 
world,   humbly  and    in    sweet  words.     O   My    Lord!    Who    is    that  Lady 
sitting    by    Thy     side,   looking   askance,     eager     and     with     a    smiling 
countenance.    She  is   enchanted  with  Thy  beauteous     form   and     fainting 
away.    Her     whole    body     is    excited    with     rapturous   joy.  Hiding     Her 
face    with    cloth   She   is   frequsntly  looking   at     Thee.     Thou     also    dost 
look    on    Her   smilingly   and    with   desires.    What     are    all   these  ?  Even 
during    My    presence    in    this    GoUka,  all   these  bad   practices  are   being 
rampant. 

44-51.     It  is  Thou  that  art  doing  ail  these  bad  things  often  and  often  ! 
We  are  female  sex  ;  what  shall  we  do  ?  We  are  naturally,  of  a  very  pleasing 
temper,  simple.  I  bore  and  forgave    all  these  out  of  our  love.     O  Licentious 
One  !  Take  Thy  Beloved  and  go  away  quickly  from  this  Goloka.  Otherwise 
these  things  will  not  bid  fair  to  Thee.     Firstly,  One  day  I  saw  Thee,  united 
with  Yiraja  Gopi,  in  ChanJana  (Sandal    wood)    forest.  What   to   do  ?     At 
the  request  of  the  Sakhis,  I  did  forgive  Thee.  Then,  hearing  My    footsteps, 
Thou   didst    Hy    away.     Viraja,    out   of    shame,   quitted     Her   body   and 
assumed     the     form    of  a    river.     That    is     million    Yojanas     wide     and 
four  Limes  as  long.     Even  to  this  day  that    Viraja    is    existing,    testifying 
to  Thy  Glory  (near  Pari,  Jagannatha)  !     When    I    went  back  to  My  home 
Thou  didst  go  to  Virajl  again    and  cried    aloud  "  O  Viraje  !     O  Viraje  !*' 
Hearing  Your  cry,  Viraja,  the  Siddha  Yogiui  arose  from  the  waters,  out  of 
Her  Yogic  power,    and    when    She   showed    Thee    Her  divine   appearance^ 
decked  with  ornaments,    Thou   didst   draw    Her  to  Thy  side  and  cast  Thy 
seed  in    Her.     It   is   owing  to   the   casting   of    that  seed  in  the  womb  of 
Viraj4  that  the  seven  oceans  have  come  into  existence  ! 

52-107.  Secondly— One  day  I  saw  Thee  iu  actual  intercourse    with    the 
Gopi  named  ^obhft  !  Hearing  My  footsteps,  Thou  fled'st  away  that  day  also. 

108 


us  ^r1  mad  DEvl  bhAgavatam. 

Oat  of  shiuia  ■  ^obh^    quitted    Her    body    and   departed    to  the  sphere  of 
Mooa    (Chandra  Maadal).     Tha  cooling  effect  of  the  Moon  is    due    to  this 
Sobha.  When  Sobhl  was  thus  distressed,  Thou  didst  divide  ller  and  put  somg 
parts  to  gems  and  jewels,  part  to  gold,  partly  to  excellent  pearls  and  gems, 
partly  on   the  face   of  women,  partly   to  the  bodies  of  Kings,  partly  to  the 
leaves  of  trees,  partly  to  flower?,    partly    to    ripe   fruits,   partly  to   corns, 
partly  to  palaces  and  temples,  partly  to  purified    materials,  partly  to  young 
and  tender  shoots  and   foliage,  and   partly  to  milk.     Thirdly — I   saw  Thee 
united  with  Prabhti    Gopi   in   BindrSban.     Thou  fled'st  away,  hearing  My 
footsteps.     Out   of  shame,    Prabhsl  quitted  Her  body  and  departed  to  the 
Solar  atmosphere.     This    Prabh^   (lustre)    is  fierce  luminosity  of  the  Solar 
atmosphere.     Out  of  the  pangs  of  separation  Thou  criedest  and  didst  divide 
Prabha  and  didst  put  some  parts  in  Fire,  partly  amidst  the   Yal<sas,  partly 
into  lions,   among  men,  partly    amongst  the   Devas,    partly  in  Vaisnavas, 
partly    in    serpents,    partly  in    Brahmanas,    partly   in    Munis,   partly    in 
ascetics,  and  partly   in    fortunate    and    prosperous   ladies.     Thou    hadst  to 
weep  then  after  Thou   hadst   thus   divided  Prabha,  for  Her  separation  and 
and  fourthly   I   saw   Thee    in   love   union    with   the   Gopi  oSuti  in  Rasa 
Mandalam.     On  the    coming    of  the    spring   season,    one  day    Thou  with 
garlands  of  flowers  on  Thy  neck  and  with  Thy  bjdy  besmeared  with  sandal 
paste  and  decked  with  ornaments,  wast  sleeping    on  a  bed  of  flowers    with 
Santi   Gopi,  decked    with    gems,    in  a  temple  made  of  gems  and  pearls  and 
illumined   by  a  lamp   of  jewels  and  Thou  wast  chewing  the  betel,  given  by 
Thy  beloved.  Hearing  My  sound  Thou  fled'st  away.  Santi  Gopi,  too,  out  of 
fear  and  shame   quitted   Her   body   aud   disappeared    in  Thee.     Therefore 
SSinti  is    reckoned   as    one    of  the    noblest   qualities.     Out   of  the  pain  of 
separation.     Thou    didst  divide    the  body    of    Santi  and  distributed  partly 
to  forests,    partly   to   Brahma,    partly   to    Me,  partly    to    Suddha    Sattva 
Laksmi,   partly   to    Thy   Mantra    worshippers,  partly  to  My  Mantra  wor- 
shipfiers,   partly   to    the   ascetics,"  partly    to   Dharma,    and    ])artly  to  the 
religious  persons.     Fifthy-Dost  Thou    remember    that    one    day   anointing 
all  over  Thy  body  fully  with  the  sandal    paste   and    good    scent  and    with 
garlands  on  Thy  neck,  well  dressed,  decked  with  jewels,  Thou  wast  sleeping 
with  Ksama  (forgiveness)  Gopi  in  case  and  happiness,  on  a    nice    bedding 
intespersed    with   flowers    and    well  scented.      Thou   wcrt    .so  much    over- 
powered by  sleep  after  fresh  intercourse  that  when  I  went  and  disturbed,  then 
Thou  two  didst  get  up  from  the  sweet  sleep.  I    took  away  Thy  yellow  robet, 
the  beautiful  Murali  (flute),  garlands  made  of  forest  flowers,  Kaustubha  gems, 
and  invaluable  earrings  of  pearls  and  gems.     I    gave  it   back    to  Thee   at 
the  earnest  request  of  the  Sakhis.  Thy  body  turned  black  with  sin   and  dire 
shame.     K^amS  then  quitted  Her  body  out  of  shame  aud   went  down  to  the 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XIII.  859 

earth.  Therefore  Ksam^  turned  oubto  be  the  repository  of  best  qualities. 
Out  of  affectioQ  to  Her,  Thou  didst  divide  Her  body  and  distributed  them 
partly  to  Visnu,  partly  to  the  Vaisnavas,  partly  to  Dharma,  partly  to 
the  religioua  persons,  partly  to  weak  persons,  partly  to  ascetics,  partly  to 
the  Devas,  and  partly  to  the  Pundits  (literal y  persons).  O  Lord  !  Thus 
I  have  described  Thy  qualities  as  far  as  1  know.  What  more  dost  Thou 
want  to  hear  ?  Thou  hast  many  more  (lualitiflft  !  Bat  I  am  not  aware 
of  them.  Having  thus  spoken,  the  red-lotus  eyed  Radha  began  to  re- 
buke Ganga  sitting  by  the  side  of  Sri  Krisna  with  Her  head  bent  low 
out  of  shame.  At  this  time  Ganga,  who  was  a  Siddha  Yogini  came  to 
know  all  the  mysteries,  and  instantly  disappeared  from  the  assembly  in 
Her  own  water  form. 

The  Siddha  Yoigni  R\dha  came  to  kuow  alsj,  by  Her  Yogio  power,  the 
secrets  of  Ganga  and  beoime  ready  to  drink  the    whole    water   in    one   sip. 
Gang4,    knowing    this    intention   of   Radha,   by    Her  Yogio    power,    took 
refuge  of  Krisna  and  entered  into  His  feet.     Then  ll&dhu  began  to  look  out 
for  Ganga  everywhere  ; — First  She  searched  in  Goloka,    then    Vaikuntha, 
then  Brahma-loka  ;  then  She  searched  all  the  Lokas    one    by    one    but   no- 
where did   She    find  Gan<;i\.     All    the   places    in    Goloka   became    void  of 
of  water  ;  all  turned  out  dried  mud  and  all   the  aquatic   animals   died   and 
fell   to    tlie    ground.      And     Brahma,     Visnu,     Siva,     Ananta,    Dharma, 
Indra,   Moon,  Sun,    Manus,    Munis,   Siddha?,     ascetics     all    became  vary 
thirsty   and    their  throats    became   parched.     They    then   went  to  Goloka, 
and   bowed    down    with  devotion  to    Sri     Krisna,  Who     was     the     Lord 
of  all,   beyond    Prakriti,    the    Supremo,  worthy  to     be     worshipped,     the 
Bestower   of  boons,  the    Best,   and    the  Cause      of    boons  ;  Who    is     the 
Lord    of  Gopas    and     Gopts;    Who      is   formlesa,     without    any     desire, 
unattached,     without     refuge,     attributeless,     without    any     enthusiasm, 
changeles?,    and  unstained ;  Who   is    All    Will  and  who    assumes    forms  to 
show  favour    to    His    devotees;   Who    is   Sattva,    the    Lord  of  truth,    the 
Witness  and  eternal  Purusa,  a-d  Who   is  the  Highest,  the    Supreme    Lord, 
the    Best   and    Excellent,    the     Highest     Self  and     the     Supreme     God. 
They  began   to  hymn  Him.     All  were    filled  with     intenee     feelings     with 
devotion  ;    tears    of   love    were    flowing  from  their  eyes    and     the     bodies 
of  all    were   filled    with   ecstacy,   the    hairs    standing    in    ends.      He  was 
Para    Brahma  ;  His   Substance  was    made  of   Transcendental  Light,  Who 
is   the    Cause   of  all  Causes,   who  was    seated     in     a     wonderful    throne, 
built   of  invaluable  gems  and   jewels    who    was     being     fanned    by    the 
Gopas    with    white   chowries,    who  was  seeing  and    hearing     with    great 
delight,  and   smiling    countenance,    the     dancing     and      singing     of  the 
Gopis,   who   was   chewing   the  scented  betel    offered  by   Uadha  and  who 


860  ^r1  mad  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

was   residing  in   the   heart  of  His  dearest  Sri     RSdh§,    who     was     the 
Perfect,   all   pervading,    and   the   Lord  of  the  RUsa   Circle.     The  Manus, 
Munis,    and  the  ascetics   all   bowed   down     to   Sri     Krisna,     no     sooner 
they    beheld    Him.     Joy   and    wonder  at   once     caught    hold     of    their 
hearts.     They    then   looked   at   one    another    and    gave   over   to    Brahma 
the   task   of  communicating    their    feelings.     The     lour     faced     Brahmu. 
with    Visnu    on    His    right   and    Varaa   Deva    on      His     left,    gradually 
came  in    front   of   Sri    Krisna.     Wherever    He  cast   His     glance    in    the 
R^sa  Mandalam,    He    saw    Sri  Krisna,    full  of    the  Highest  Bliss,  of  the 
nature   of  the    Highest   Bliss,     sitting.     All  have*  turned    out   Krisnas  : 
their    seats    were    all   uaiform;   all    were    two  armedj  and  with    flutes  in 
their   hands;   on  every    one's   neck   is    the   forest  garland  ;  peacock's  tail 
was   on   the    top   of  everyone's  crest    and   Kaustubha  jewels  were  on  a  1 
their   breasts.     The    Forms   of   all   of    them    were     very     beautiful;    very 
lovely   and   very    peaceful.     No   difference   at    all    between  them  whether 
in   form,   or  iu    qualities,  or    in    ornaments,   or   in     radiance,    in     age,  in 
lustre,    in  no  respect  no   one  was    inferior  to  another.     No     one   was   im- 
perfect ;  no  one  wa8  deficient  in  lordliness.     It  was  indeed-  very  difficult     to  I 
make  out    who  was  the    master  and  who    was  the  servant.     Sometimes  He 
is   seen   in    His    Tejaform-as    the    Great  Light,    and     there    is    nothing 
elie;   sometimes      there  is  that  Clear  Divine  Form  ;  sometimes    He   comes 
Formless  ;'  sometimes    with  form  ;  and  again  sometimes     both    with     anu 
without    form.     Sometimes    there  is    no   Radhit;    there -is    only    Krisna; 
And   sometimes    again   in  every    seat    there     is    the    Yugal    Milrti  RadhA 
and   Krisna   combined.     Sometimes    Radhu   assumes    the   form  of  Krisna. 
So   the    Creator  Brahma  could  not  make  out    whether    l§ri     Krigna  was  a 
female  or  a  male.     At  last  He  meditated  on  ^ri     Krisna  in  his  heart-lotn^^ 
and    began  to  chant  hymns  to  Him  with  devotion  and  prayed  for  foraivene«»s 
for  his    misdoing..     When   SVi    Krisna  got    pleased,  th^  Creator,  oponinc 
His   eyes,   saw  S'ri    Krisna  on    the    breast   of  S'ri    Radha.     There    were 
His   attendants    on   all   the    sides    and     the    Tiopis     all     around.     Seeino 
this,    Brahma,    Visnu,    and    Mahes'vara    bowed    down     to  Him    and  san^. 
His   praises. 

108-U3.  'Sri  Krigna,  the  Lord  of  Lakshmi',  the-  Omnipreseni 
Cause  of  all,  the  Lord  of  all,  and  the  Internal  Ruler  of  all,  knef 
their  intentions  and,  addressing  them,  separately  said--"  O  Brihmai 
Is  it  all  well  with  you  ?0  Lord  of  Kamala  !  Come  here.  O  Mahadev, 
Come  here;  let  all  be  well  to  you.  "  You  all  have  come  to  me  fJ 
Ganga.  Ganga  has  taken  refuge  under  My  feet  out  of  fear  for  Radhsl 
Seeing   GangA   by   My  side,  RSdha  wanted  to  drink  Her  up.     However 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  Xlll.  861 

will  give  over  Ganga  to  the  hands  of  yon  all;  but  you  will  have  to 
pray  to  Rftdhil,  so  that  GangS  becomes  fearless  of  Her.  "  The  lotus 
born  Brahma  smiled  at  S'ri  Krigna's  words  and  began  to  sing  hymns 
to  lUdha,  Who  is  fit  to  be  worshipped  by  all.  The  Creator  Brahm^, 
the  Compiler  of  the  Four  Vedas,  the  Four-faced  One  praised  RSdha 
with    His    Four    heads,  bent  low  and  addressed    Her  thus  :— 

114-125.  Jirahma  said:— "0  Rsldhe  1  Ganga,  appeared  from  Thee 
and  the  Lord  S'ri  Krisna.  Both  of  you  were  transformed  before  into 
the  liquid  forms  in  the  Rasa  Mandalara,  on  hearino  the  music  of  S'ankara. 
And  That  Lquid  Form  is  Ganga.  So  She  is  born  of  Thee  and  S'ri 
Krigna.  Hence  She  i?  like  Thy  daughter  and  to  be  loved  as  such. 
She  will  be  initiated  in  Thy  Mantra  and  She  will  worship  Thee.  The  four 
armed  Lord  of  Vaikuntha  will  be  Her  husband.  And  when  She  will 
appear  in  parts  on  earth,  the  Salt  Ocean  will  be  Her  husband.  O 
Mother!  The  Ganga  that  dwells  in  Goloka,  is  dwelling  everywhere. 
O  Governess  of  the  Devas!  Thou  art  Her  mother;  and  She  is  always 
Thy  Self  born  daughter.  Hear-ng,  thus,  the  words  oi  Brai-ma,  llTidhd 
gave  Her  assent  towards  the  protection  of  Ganga.  And  then  Ganga 
appeared  from  the  toe-tip  of  6ri  Krisna.  The  liquid  Ganga,  then, 
assumed  Her  own  form  and,  getting  up  from  water,  was  received  with 
great  honour  by  the  Devas.  Bhagavan  Brahma  took  a  little  of  that 
Gauges  water  in  His  Karaandalu  and  BhagavSn  Mahadeva  kept  some 
of   it    in    His    own    head. 

The  lotus  born^Brahmil,  then,  initiated  Ganga  into  the  R<^dh^  Mantra  and 

gave  Her  i  nstruetions,  Radha  Stotra  (hymn  of  Badha)  according  to  the  Sfima 

Veda,  RadhA  Kavaeha  (protection  mantras),  Kadh4  Dhyan  (meditation   on 

Radha),  method  of  worship  of  RSdha,  and   RSdha's  pui-ascharana.     Gangft 

worshipped  RSdh3.  according  to  these  instructions  and  went  to   Vaikuntha. 

O  Muni !  Laksmi,     Sarasvati,     Ganga,  and   the    world  purifying   Tulasi, 

these    four   became   the   wives   of    Narayana.     Krisna,    then,    smiled    and 

explaiiieJ    to    Brahma   the   history  of  Time,  hardly  to  be  comprehended  by 

others.    He    then    spoke  : — "  O  Brahma  !  O  Visnul  O   Mahes'vara  1  Now 

you  better    talic    Ganga    and  I    will    now   tell  you    what      a   change   has 

baen  effected  by  this    time.  Hear. 

126-13(5.  You,  the  three  Devas,  the  other  Devas,  Munis,  Manus, 
Siddhas,  and  other  Mah^tmSs  that  are  preseot  here,  are  living  now.  For 
this  region  of  Goloka  is  not  affected  by  Kala  (Time).  Now  the  Kalpa  is 
going  to  expire.  So  in  the  other  regions  than  Goloka  and  Vaikuntha,  the 
Brahm§s,  etc,  that  were  existing  in  all  other  Universes,  have  all  now  dis- 
solved in  My  Body.  0  Lotus-born  !  Save  Goloka  and  Vaikuntha,  all  are  now 
under  water,    the  pra-stJite   of  ei^rth     Better  go  aad  or<»alf9    /our   owa 


862  SRt  MAD  DEVf  RHA.GAVATAM. 

Brahra&iidtts  ami  Gang&  will  go  to  that  newly  created  Biahoiiinda.  I 
will  also  create  othor  worlds  and  the  Biahrals  thereof.  Now  you  all 
better  go  with  the  Devas  and  do  your  own  works  respectively.  You  have 
waited  here  for  a  long  interval.  As  many  Brahinas  that  have  fallen  all 
appear  again.  Thus  saying  Sri  Krisna,  the  Lord  of  Radha  went  to  His 
Inner  Chamber.  The  Dava?;  also  instantly  retired  from  that  spot  and 
engaged  themselves  earnostly  in  the  creation  work.  CUngl  remained  nn 
before  till  then  in  the  region  of  Goloki,  Vaikuntha,  ^ivaloka, 
Brahraa-loka,  and  in  other  places,  by  the  command  of  S'ri  Krisna.  She  is 
named  Visnupadi,  because  She  appeared  from  the  feet  of  Visnu.  Thus 
I  have  described  to  you  this  pleiant,  essential  story  of  Gangd,  leading  to 
liberation.     What  more  do  you    cow  want  to  hear  ?    Say. 

Here  ends  the  Thirteenth  Chapter  the  anecdote  of  Ganga  in  the 
Ninth  Book  in  the  Mahapuranam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhdgavatam  of  18,000 
verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vya^a. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  N'irada  said  :— "  O  Lord  !  Ganga,  Laksmi,  Sarasvati,  and  the  worl  1 
purifying  Tulasi,  these  four,  are  dearest  to  N^rav^ana.  Out  of  these,  Ganga 
went  did  the  region  of  Goloka  to  Vaikuntha.  So  I  have  heard.  But 
how  did  She  come  to  be  the  wife  of  Narayana,  I  have  not  iieard.  Kindly 
describe  this. 

3.  N^r^yana  said  : — Brahma  came  from  Gbloka  to  the  region  of 
Vaikuntha  accompanied  by  Gan^a. 

4-23,  Brahma  said  to  Narayana  :—"  O  LordlGinga,  born  of  the 
bodies  of  R^dha  and  Krisna,  full  of  youth,  modest,  extraordinarily  beautiful, 
ot  pure  Suddha  Sattva,  and  void  of  anger  and  egoism,  does  not  like 
to  marry  anyone  save  Thee  as  She  is  born  of  Thee.  But  Radh^  is  of  a  very 
proud  nature  and  very  wrathful.  She  was  even  ready  to  drink  up  Ganga. 
But  Ganga  at  once  and  intelligently  took  refuge  into  the  ftet  of  Sri  Krisn  i. 
So  the  whole  Goloka  became  void  of  water.  Seing  this,  Ijhave  come  here  to 
know  in  particular  the  whole  history  of  the  case.  Then  Sri  Krisna,  the 
Knower  and  the  Ruler  of  the  hearts  of  all,  came  to  know  my  heart  and 
instantly  caused  GangS  to  issue  from  His  toe  and  handed  Her  over  to 
me.  I  bowed  down  to  Sri  Krisna  and  now  I  have  come  with  Ganga  to 
Tbee.  Now  Thou  dost  marry  the  Sures'vari  Ganga  according  to  the 
G&ndharva  rule  of  marriage.  As  Thou  art  a  Deva  of  taste  and 
humorous  in  the  assembly  of  the  Devas,  so  Ganga  is.  As  Thou  art 
a  gem  amongst  the  males,  so  She  is  the  gem  amongst  the 
females.  And  the  union  of  a  humorous  man  with  a  humorous  woman  is 
fxoeediogly  pleasant.     Now. marry  this   Lady  who  has   come   of  Her  owrj 


Book  TX.]  CHAPTER  XV.  863 

accord  to  Thee.  Sri  Maha  Lakstui  becomes  annoyed  with  one  who  does 
not  marry  a  woman  who  has  come  spontaneously.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this. 
The  wise  men  do  never  insult  the  Prakriti.  All  the  Puru§as  (males) 
are  born  of  Prakriti  and  all  the  females  are  parts  of  Prakriti. 
So  Prakriti  and  Purusa  are  both  inseparabU  and  verily  one  and 
the  same.  So  these  two  should  never  insult  tach  other.  (If 
Thou  Slyest  that  Ganga  is  attached  to  Krisna  ;  how  canst  Thou  marry 
Her.  The  reply  is)  As  ?ri  Krisna  is  beyond  th j  attributes  and  beyond 
Prakriti,  so  Thou  art  also  above  Prakriti.  The  oue-halfof  Sri  Kriana  is  two- 
armed;  the  other  half  of  Sri  Krisna  is  four-armed.  R^dha  has  appeared 
from  the  left  side  of  S'ri  Krisna.  He  Himself  is  the  right  half  and  Padmu  is 
Uis  left-half.  (As  there  is  no  difference  between  Radha  and  Kamala  so 
there  is  no  difference  between  Sri  Krisna  and  Thee.  Therefore  as  Gang£i 
is  born  of  Thy  body,  she  wants  to  marry  Thee.  As  Prikriti  and  Purusa 
are  really  one  and  the  same  without  any  difference,  so  the  males  and  females 
are  one.  Thus  speaking  t)  NSr^yaua,  Brahma  handed  Gauga  over  to 
Narayana  and  went  away.  NSrayana,  then,  married  Ganga  smeared  with 
sandal  paste  and  flowers,  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Gandarbha  marriage. 
The  Lord  of  Laksmi  i  hen  spent  his  time  happily  in  enjoyment  with  Gang3. 
Ganga  had  to  go  to  the  earth  (under  the  Bharati's  curse)  and  afterwards 
returned  to  Vaikuntha  As  Ganga  appeared  froin  the  feet  of  Yisnu,  She 
is  denominated  Visriupadi.  Ganga  Devi  was  very  much  overpowered  with 
enjoyment  m  Her  first  intercourse  with  Narayana  ;  so  much  so  that  She 
remained,  motionless.  Thus  Ganga  spent  the  days  happily  with  Narayana. 
Sarasvatis  jealousy  towards  C«ang^  did  nut  disappear,  though  She  was 
advised  by  Laksmi  Devi  not  to  do  so.  Sar.isvati  eherisjied  incessantly 
the  feeling  of  jealousy  towards  Ganga.  But  (!anga  had  not  the  least 
feeling   of  jealousy  towards  Sarasvati. 

At  last,  one  day,  when  vexed  too  much,  Gangd  became  angry  and  cursed 
Sarasvati  to  take  llcr  birtli  in  Bharata,  So  Laksmi,  Sarasvati  and 
Ganga  were  the  wives  of  NArayana.  Lastly  Tulasi  became  the  wife 
of  Narayana.     So  the  number  of  wives  of  Narayana  amounted  to  four. 

Here  ends  the  Fourteenth  Chapter  iu  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  story 
of  Ganga  becoming  the  wife  of  Narayana  in  the  Mahapuranam  5ri  Mad 
Devi  Bhagavatan  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

1-6.     Ngirada     said  :— "  0    Bhagavan  !    How  came    the     pure    chaste 

,  Tulasi  to  be  the  wife  of  Narayana?  Where  was  Her  birth  place?  And  what 

was  She  in  Her  previous  birth  ?  "What  family  did    She  belong   to?  Whose 

daughter  was  She  ?  And    what    austerities  did    She   practise,  that   She  oot 


8«*  ^nt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgaVATAM. 

Nftr&yana  for  Her  husband,  Who  is  above  Prakrifci,  not  liable  to  change 
whithout  any  effort,  the  Universal  Self,  Para  Brahma  andthe  Highest  God  ; 
Who  is  the  Lord  of  all,  omniscient,  the  Cmise  of  all,  the  Receptacle  of  all, 
Omnipresent,  and  the  Preserver  of  all.  And  how  did  Tulasi,  the  chief  Devi  of 
N^rSyaua,  turn  out  into  a  tree?  Herself  quite  innocent;  how  She  was 
attacked  by  the  fierce  Asura?  "  O  Remover  of  all  doubt?  !  My  mind,  plain 
and  simple,  has  become  restless.  I  am  eager  to  hear  all  this.  So  kindly  cut 
asunder  all    my     doubts. 

7-40.  Nar^yana  said:— '"O  Narada !  The  Manu  Daksa 
SSvarni  was  very  religious,  devoted  to  Vistiu,  of  wide  renown,  of 
a  great  name,  and  born  with  Visnu'a  parts.  Daksa  SAvarni  s  son  Brahma 
S&varni  was  also  very  religious,  devoted  to  Visnu  and  of  a  pure  Suddha 
Sattva  (luna.  Brahma  SSvarni's  f?on,  Dharma  Savarui  was  devoted  to 
Vifnu  and  He  was  the  mastar  of  his  senses.  Dharma  Savarni's  sons  Rudra 
Savarni  was  also  a  man  of  restraint  and  very  devoted.  Rudra  Savarni's 
son  was  Deva  Savarni,  devoted  to  Visnu.  Deva  Savarni's  son  was  Indra 
Savarni.  He  was  a  great  Bhakta  of  Yisnu.  His  sou  was  Vrisadhvaja. 
But  He  was  a  fanatic  Saiva  (devoted  to  S'iva).  At  his  house  S'iva  Himself 
remained  for  three  Yugas  according  to  the  Deva  measure.  So  much  so 
that  Bhagavaii  lihiitan&tha  loved  him  more  than  His  own  son.  Vrisadhv- 
aja did  not  recognise  Nttrayana,  nor  Lak§mi  nor  Sarasvati  nor  another 
body.  He  discarded  the  worship  of  all  the  Devas,  He  worshipped  Sankara  only. 
'Vhe  greatly  exciting  Laksmi  Puja  (worship  of  Maha  Laksmi  in  the  month 
of  Bhadra  and  Sri  Pauchami  Puja  in  the  month  of  M2,gha,  which  are 
approved  of  by  the  Vedas,  Vrisadhvaja  put  an  entire  stop  to  these  and  the 
Sarasvati  Puja.  At  this  the  Sun  became  angry  with  the  King  Vrisadhvaja, 
the  discarder  of  the  holy  thread,  the  hater  of  Visnu,  and  cursed  Him  thus  : — 
'•  O  King  !  As  you  are  purely  devoted  to  Siva  and  Siva  alone,  and  as  you 
do  not  recognise  any  other  Devf>s,  I  say  within  no  time,  yon  will  be 
deprived  of  all  your  wealth  and  prosperity.  "  S'ankara,  hearin"  this 
curse,  became  very  angry  and  taking  His  trident,  ran  after  the  Sun.  The 
Sun,  becoming  afraid,  accompanied  His  father  Kas'vapa  and  took  refuse  of 
Brahma.  Bhagavan  Sankara  went  to  the  Bra  hma  Loka,  with  trident 
in  His  hands.  Brahma  became  afraid  of  Mahadeva  and  took  Sun  to 
the  region  of  Vaikuntha.  Out  of  terror,  the  throats  of  Brahma, 
Kas'yapa,  and;  Sun  became  parched  and  dry  and  they  all  went  afraid 
for  refuge  to  N^rayana,  the  Lord  of  all.  They  all  bowed  down  to 
Him  and  praised  Him  frequently  and  finally  informed  Him  of  the  causa 
of  their  coming  and  why  they  were  so  much  afraid.  N^r^yana  -showed  them 
meroy  and  granted  them  »*Abhaya"(u)  fear).  O  You  I  Who  are  afraid, 
take   rest.   What  cause  of  fear   there  can    bo   to   you,  when  I   am  here  1' 


Book  IX.j  CHAPTER  XV.  866 

Whoever   remembers    Me,  wherever  he  may  be,  involved  in  danger  or  fear, 
I    go    there    with    the    Sudars'an   disc    in   My  hand    and    save     him.     O 
Devas !    I    am    ajways    the    Creator,    Preserver      and     Destroyer   of     this 
universe      In    the    form   of  Visiiu,    I    am   the    Preserver  ;    in     the  form 
of  Brahm^,    I   am    the  Creator  ;    and    in    the    form    of  Mahes'a,     i    am 
the     Destroyer.     I    am     isiva  ;      I    am     you ;      and    I   am     the     Surya, 
composed  of  the   three     qualities.     It    is    I    who     assumes     many    forms 
and  preserves  the  universe.    Better  go  to  your  respective  places.    What  fear 
can  ye  suspect  ?  I  say,  all  your  fears  due  to   SVnkara,   are  verily    removed 
from  this  day.     Bhagavau  S'ankara,  the  Lord  of    all,    is    the    Lord    of  the 
Sadhus.     He   always    hears    the    words  of  His  Bhaktas  ;  and  He  is  kind  to 
them.     He  is   their  Self.     Both  the  Sun  and  Siva  are  dearer    to  Me   than 
My   life.     No  one    is    more     energetic     than     S'ankara     and     the    Sun. 
Mah^deva   can    easily   create    ten    million    Suns  and  ten  million  Brahm^s. 
There    is   nothing    impossible    with    Sulap4ni.     Having    no   consciousness 
of  any   outer    thing,     immersed,   day   and  night,    in    meditating    on  Me. 
with    His    whole    heart    concentrated,     He    is     repeating     with      devotion 
My    Mantra   from    His    five    faces   and    >le    always    sings    My  glorieg.     I 
am   also   thinking,   day    and    night,    of    His   welfare.     Whoever    worships 
Me    in    whichever   way,    1    also   favour    him  similarly.     BhagavAn   Maha 
Deva   is   of  the    nature    of  Siva,  all   auspiciousness  ;    He    is   the  presid- 
ing  deity   of   S'iva,  that  is,  liberation.     It  is  because  liberation  is  obtained 
from    Him,    He   is  called    Siva.     O  dear   N&rada  !    While    Ndr^yana  was 
thus    speaking,    the    trident    holder   Mahadeva,  with    his    eyes   red     like 
reddened   lotuses,    mounting   on    His   bull,   came  up    there     and  getting 
down   from    His    Bull,  humbly    bowed     down   with  devotion  to    the    Lord 
of     Laksmi,     peaceful     and     higher     than     the  highest.     Naiayana  was 
then    seated     on     His    throne,     decked     with     jewel     ornaments.     There 
was     a   crown     on    His     crest  ;    two   earrings     were    hanging    from    His 
ears  ;     the  disc  was    in  His  hand,  .^orest    flower's  garlands   on    His     neck  ; 
of    the   colour   of    fresh    blue    rain  cloud;   His  form  exceedingly  beautiful. 
The  four-armed    attendants    were    fanning    Him  with    their    four  hands  ; 
His   body   smeared   all   over  with   sandal-paste    and    He   is    wearing    the 
yellow   garment.     That  Bhagavan,  distressed  with    the  thought  of  welfare 
for    His    Bhaktas,    the    Highest    Self  was   sitting    on  a  jewel  throne  and 
chewing  the  betel  offered  by  Padma  and  with    smiling  countenance,  seeing 
and  hearing  the  dancing  and  singing  of  the  Vidyadharis.  When  MahSdeva 
bowed  down  to  NArayana,  BrahmS  also  bowed    down  to     MahSdeva.     The 
Sun,   too,   surprised,     bowed  down    to    Mahddeva    with    devotion.     Kas'- 
yapa,   too,   bowed    and     with    great   bhakti,    began    to  praise    Mahadeva. 
On    the   other   hand,    Sankara    praised    N^rSyana    and   took    His  seat  on 

109. 


866  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

the  throne.  The  attendants  of  N^rSyana  began  to  fan  Mahadeva 
with  white  chowries.  Then  Visnu  addressed  Ilim  with  sweet  nectar 
like  voice  and  said  :— "  O  MahesVara !  What  brings  Thee  here  ?  Hast 
Thou  been  angry  ?  " 

41-45.  Mahldeva  said  :—"  O  Visnu!  The  King  Vrisadhavaja  is 
My  great  devotee  ;  he  is  dearer  to  Me  than  My  life.  The  Sun  has 
cursed  him  and  so  I  am  angry.  '  Out  of  the  affection  for  a  son 
I  am  ready  to  kill  SArya.  Suryi  took  Brahma's  refuge  and  now  he 
and  BrahmA  have  taken  Thy  refuge.  And  Those  who  being  distres- 
sed take  Thy  refuge,  either  in  mind  or  in  word,  become  entirely 
safe  and  free  from  danger.  They  conquer  death  and  old  age.  What 
to  speak  of  them,  then,  of  those  who  come  personally  to  Thee  and 
take  Thy  refuge.  The  remembrance  of  Hari  takes  away  all  dangers. 
All  good  comes  to  them.  O  Lord  of  the  world  !  Now  tell  me 
what  becomes  of  My  stupid  Bhakta  who  has  become  devoid  of  fortune 
and   proeperity   by   the   curse   of  Siirya. 

46-51.  Visnu  said  : — "  O  Sankara!  Twenty-one  yugas  elapsed  within 
this  one-half  GhatikA,  by  the  coincidence  of  Fate  (Daiva).  Now  go 
(juickly  to  Thy  abode.  Through  the  unavoidable  coincidence  of  the 
cruel  Fate,  Vrisadhvaja  die  1.  His  son  Kathadhvaja,  too,  died.  Rathadb. 
vftja  had  two  noble  sous  Dharmadhvaja  and  Kus'adhvaja.  Both  of 
them  are  great  Vaisnavas;  -but,  through  Surya'a  curse,  they  have 
become  luckless.  Their  kingdoms  are  lost  ;  they  have  become  destitute 
of  all  property,  prosperity  and  they  are  now  engaged  in  worshipping 
Mahft  Laksmi.  Maha  Laksmi  will  be  born  in  parts  ot  their  two 
wives.  Then  again,  by  the  grace  of  Laksmi,  Dharmadhvaja  and 
Kus'adhvaja  will  ba  prosperous  and  become  great  Kings,  O  J^ambhu  ! 
Your  worshipper  Vris'adhvaji  is  dead.  Therefore  Thou  dost  go  back 
to  Thy  place.  O  Brahmll,  O  Sun  !  O  Kas'yapa  !  Yon  all  also  better  f^o 
to  your  places  respectively.  O  N4rada !  Thus  saying,  Bha^avSn  Vijnu 
went  with  His  wife  to  the  inner  rooms.  The  Devas  also  went  gladlv 
to  their  own  places  respectively.  And  Mahadeva,  too,  Who  is  always 
quite  full    within    Himself,    departed   qu'ckly   to   perform    His  Tapas. 

Here  ends  the  Fifteenth  Chapter  on  the  question  of  anecdote  of 
Tulasi  in  the  Ninth  Book  in  the  Mah&puranam  Sri  Mad  Devi 
Bh^gavatam    of   18,000    verses  by    Maharsi  Veda   Vya§a. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

1-30.  Sri  NsirAyana  said  :  — O  Muni !  Dharmadhvaja  and  Kus'adhvaja 
practised  severe  tapasyas  and  worshipped  Laksmi.  They  then  c^ot 
separately  their   desired   boons.     By    the   boon     of  Mahsl     Lak?mi,  they 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XVI.  S67 

became  again    the   rulers    of   the    earth.     They   acquired    great   relij,'ious 
merits  and   they    also  had    thsir  chiUreu.     Th3  wife    of  Kus'adhvaja  was 
Darned   MlUvati.     After   a   long  time,   the     chaste     wife     delivered  one 
daughter,   born   of  the   parts     of    KaraalH.     The     daughter,     on     being 
bjro,    became    full   of   wisdom.    On  baing  born,  the   baby   began   to   sing 
clearly   the   Vedic   mantrams  from    the    lying-in-chamber.     Therefore  She 
was   named    Vedavati  by   the    Pundits.     She  bathed   after   her    birth  and 
became   ready   to    go    to   the     forest  to  practise    severe  tapas.     Everyone, 
then,   tried   earnestly   to   dissuade    her,   devoted    to   Narayana,    from  this 
enterprise.     But  she   did    not   listen    to   anybody.     She    went  to  Puskara 
and  practised    hard    tapasj'd    for   one    Manvantara.     Yet     her     body   did 
not   get   lean   a   bit  ;    rather  she   grew    more     plumpy    and     fatter.     By 
degrees  her   youth   began   to   shew    signs  in    her  body  ;  one  day  she  heard 
an   incorporeal    voice   from    the   air    above,    "  O  Pair   One  !    In  your  next 
birth   Sri     Hari,   adored  by    Brahmsl     and     other     gods,     will     be     your 
husband.''     Hearing    this,    her  joy  knew    no    bounds.     She    went    to    the 
solitary    caves  in  the  OandhamMau    mountain    to  practise    tapas    again. 
When  a    long   time  passed    away   iu  thia    tapasyH,    one  day  the    irresisti- 
ble   Havana   c  ime   there    as   guest.     No   sooner   Vedavati    saw  the  guest, 
than   she    gave    him,   out   of  devotion  to   the   guest,    water   to   wash  his 
feet,   delicious    fruits, .'and  cool  'water   for   his  drink.     The  villain  accepted 
the    hospitality     and     sitting     there,    began     to     ask: — *' 0    Auspicious 
One!   Who   are   you  ?  Seeing    the    fair    smiling  lady,  with  beautiful  teeth, 
her    face     blooming    like    the    autumnal    lotus,  of  heavy  loins,    and  of    full 
breast,    that    villain   became    passionate.     He    lost   entirely   all  conscious- 
ness  and   became    ready    to    make    violence      on    Her.     Seeiug    this,    the 
chaste     Vedavati,    became      angry     and     out     of     her     tapas     influence, 
astounded    him    and  mude  him    insensible  to    move.     He  remained  motion- 
less  like   an    inanimate  body.      He   could  not   move  his  hands  nor  feet    nor 
CDuld   he    speak.     That    wicked    fellow ;  then   mentally    recited    praises  to 
her.     And   the  praise   of  the    Higher    bakti    can    never    go  futile.     She 
became   pleased   and    grunted    him    religious   merits    in    the    next    world. 
But   she  also   pronounced     this  curse:— "  That    when   you    have  touched 
my   body    out  of  passion,   then   you    will    be  ruined     with     your    whole 
family   for   my    sake."      Now  see  my  power.     O  Narada  !    Thus  saying  to 
Rlvana,   Vedavati    left    her   body   by    her   yogie    power.     Then     lUvana 
took   her   body   and  delivered   it   to   the    Ganges   and    he    then    returned 
to   his    own   home.     Rut.Ravana   thought   over   the     matter   repeatedly 
and  exclaimed.     "  What    wonder   have    I   seen  !  Oh  !    What   a     miracle 
thi^  lady  has   wrought  !   RSvana   thus     lamented.      This     Vedavati,     of 
pure   character,   took  her   birth   afterwards   as     Sita,     the     daughter   of 


St)8  Slit   MAI)    \W.Vt  BliidAVATAM. 

Jaiiaka.  i^'or  the  sake  of  this  Sita,  Havana  was  ruiaod  with  bis 
whole  fatally.  By  the  relisjions  merits  of  her  previous  birth,  the  ascetic 
lady  got  Bhagavaa  Hari  &ri  Rama  Chandra,  the  Fullest  of  the  Full,  for  her 
husband  and  remained  for  a  long  time  in  great  enjoyment  with  the  Lord 
of  the  world  ;  a  thing  very  difficult  to  be  attained  !  Though  she  was  a 
Jatismara  (one  who  knows  all  about  her  past  li/es),  she  did  not  fed 
any  pain  due  to  her  practising  severe  austerities  in  her  previous  birth  ; 
for  when  the  pains  end  in  success,  the  pains  are  not  then  felt  at 
all.  Sita,  in  Her  fresh  youth  enjoyed  various  pleasures  in  the  company 
of  her  husband,  handsome,  peaceful,  humorous  and  witty,  the  chief 
of  the  Devas,  loved  by  the  female  sex,  well-qualified,  and  just  what 
she  desired.  But  the  all-powerful  Time  is  irresistible  ;  the  truthful 
ii^machandra,  the  scion  of  the  Raghu's  f;imily,  had  to  keep  up  the 
promise  made  by  his  father  and  so  he  had  to  go  to  the  forest,  ordained 
by  Time.  He  remained  with  Sita  and  Laksmana  near  the  sea.  Once 
the  God  Fire  appeared  to  Him  in  the  form  of  a  BrShmana.  Fire,  in 
a  Brahmin-form,  saw  Kama  Chandra  morose  and  becume  himself 
mortified.  Then  the  Tiuthful  Fire  addressed  the  truthful  Ramachandra:  — 
"  O  Bhagavan  Ramachandra  !  I  now  speak  to  you  how  time  in 
now  coming  to  you.  Now  has  come  the  time  when  your  SitSj  will 
be  stolen." 

31-48.  The  course  of  Destiny  is  irrestible  ;  none  el-e  is  more 
powerful  than  Time,  Fate.  So  give  over  your  Sit^,  the  World  Mother 
to  me  and  keep  with  you  this  Chhaya  Sit4  (the  shadow  SftS ;  the 
false  SitJl).  When  the  time  of  Site's  ordeal  by  firj  will  take  plaee» 
1  will  give  Her  back  to  you.  The  Devas  united  have  seat  me  to 
you.  I  am  not  really  a  Brahmin  ;  but  I  am  Agin  Dova  (eater  of 
oblations).  Ramachandra  heard  Fire  and  gave  his  assent.  But  his 
heart  shattered.  He  did  not  speak  of  this  to  Laksmana.  Bv  the 
yogic  power  Agni  (Fire)  created  a  MayA  Sita.  This  May^  Sita,  O 
Nftrada,  was  perfectly  equal  to  the  real  Sita.  Fire,  then,  handed  this 
M4ya  Sita  to  the  hands  of  Ramachandra.  Hiitasana  (fire)  took  the 
real  Sita  aud  said  "Never  divulge  this  to  any  other  body  "  and  went 
away.  What  to  speak  of  divulging  the  secret  to  any  other  body, 
Laksmana  even  could  not  know  it.  By  this  time  R&ma  saw  one 
deer,  made  of  all  gold.  Te  bring  that  deer  carefully  to  her,  Sitft 
sent  Rllmachandra  with  great  eagerness.  Pufctini'  Sita  under 
Lakjmana's  care,  in  that  forest,  Rama  went  himself  immediately  and 
pierced  the  deer  by  one  arrow.  That  Maya  mriga  (the  deer  created 
by  magic  powers)  on  being  pierced,  cried  out  "  tia  Lak?mana  I  and 
seeing    Hari   before   him   and   remembering   the   name   of   Hari,    quitte4 


J 


Book  IX.]  CHAVTEli  XVI.  S(\[* 

his  life.  Tlie  deer  boily  then  vanished  ;  and  a  divine  body  made  its 
appearance  in  its  stead.  This  new  body  mounting  on  an  aerial  car 
made  of  jewels,  ascended  to  Vaikuntha.  That  Mayik  (raajic)  deer 
was  in  its  previour*  birth,  a  servant  of  the  two  gate-keepers  of 
Vaikuntha;  but,  for  the  sake  of  some  emergency,  he  had  to  take  up 
this  Kakbsasa  birth.  lie  again  became  the  servant  of  two  door-keepers 
of  Vaikuntha.  On  the  other  hand  Sita  Devi,  hearing;  the  cry  "  Ha 
Laksmana  !  "  became  very  distressed  and  sent  Liksmana  in  search  of  Kama. 
No  sooner  did  Laksmina  get  out  of  t fie  hor.nitage,  :the  irresistible  R^lvana 
took  away  Stta  gladly  to  the  city  of  Lanki  (CeyIon)t  Now  R^machandra, 
seeing  Laksmana  on  the  way  in  the  forest,  became  merged  in  the 
ocean  of  sorrows  and  without  losing  any  tune  came  hurriedly  to  the 
hermitage  where  he  could  not  tind  Sita.  Instantly  he  fell  unconscious 
on  the  ground  ;  and,  after  a  long  time,  when  he  regained  his  eonscionsness, 
he  lamented  and  wandered  hero  and  there  in  search  of  Her.  After  some 
d  iys  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Godavari,  getting  the  information  of  Sitfi,  he 
built  a  bridge  acrjss  the  ojean  with  the  help  of  His  monkey  armies.  Then  he 
entered  wi*^^h  his  ar.oy  into  Lanki  and  slew  Havana  with  arrows  with 
all  his  friends.  When  Sita's  oide.»l  by  lire  came,  Agni  (Fii-e)  handed 
over  the  real  Sita  to  Ramachandra.  The  Shadow  Siia  then  humbly 
addressed  Agni  and  llama  Chandra  *'  O  Lord  !  What  am  1  to  do  now  ? 
Settle  my  case. 

4i9-5o.  Agni  and  Ramaohandra  oot\\  of  them  then  said  to  Chhayu 
SitA  : —  "O  D>3vi  !  rio  t)  Puskar*  and  practise  tipasy;\  there;  that 
j)lace  is  the  giver  of  religious  merits  and  then  you  will  be  the  Svarga 
Laksmi  (Laksmi  of  Heaven).  Hearing  this,  the  ChhSyft  SitS  went  and 
practised  tapasya  for  the  three  divine  l^kh  years  and  became  Mah4  Lakami. 
This  Svarga  Liksmi  appeared  at  one  time  from  the  sacrificial  Kunda  (pit). 
She  was  known  as  the  daughter  of  Drupada  and  became  the  wife  of  the 
five  mndavas.  She  was  Veda  Vati,  the  daughter  of  Kus'adhvaja  in  the  Satya 
Yug^  ;  Sit^,  the  wife  of  Rama  and  the  daughter  of  Janaka  in  Tret^  Yuga  ; 
and    Draupadi,    the    daughter    of  Drupada,  in  the  Dvupara  Yuga.     xVs  she 

existed  in  the  Satya,  Treta,    and    DvApara  Yugas,  the  Three  Yugas,   hence 
She  is  TrihSyani. 

54.  NSrada  said  : —  "  O  Chief  of  Munis  !  O  Remover  of  doubts  ! 
Why  had  Draupadi  five  husbands  ?  A  great  doubt  has  arisen  in  my 
mind  on  this  point.     Remove  my  doubt. 

55-63.  NarAyana  said  :—  "  O  Devargi  !  When,  in  the  city  of  Lanka, 
the  real  Sit^  came  before  Rflma,  then  Chhay^  Sita,  full  of  youth  and 
beauty,  became  very  anxious.     Agni  Deva  and   .Mmaohandra     both     told 


870  ^Rt  MAD  DEV!  BHAg AVATAM. 

Her  to  go  to  Puskara  and  worship  Samkara.  While  this  Chb^ya  Sita 
waa  practising  austerities  in  fuskara,  She  becima  very  anxious  to  »et  a 
good  husband  and  asked  from  MahSDeva  the  boon  "  Grant  me  a 
husband  "  and  repeated  it  five  times,  ^iva,  the  ohief  among  the  humorous, 
witty  persons,  hearing  this,  said  "  O  Dear  !  You  will  get  five  husbands." 
and  thus  granted  her  the  boon.  Therefore  She  bacime  the  dearest  wifj 
ofthe  five  Pandavas.  Now  hear  other  facts.  When  the  war  at  Lankft 
was  over,  5ri  Rimaehandra  got  his  own  dear  wife  Sita,  and  installing 
Vibhi^ana  on  the  throne  of  Lanka,  returned  to  AyodhyS.  He  ruled  fo"r 
eleven  thousand  years  in  Bharata  and  finally  went  to  Vaikuntha  with  his 
all  his  subjects.  Vedavati,  the  iocarnation  in  part  of  Liksmi  dissolved 
in  the  body  of  Kamaia.  Thus  I  have  described  to  you  the  pure  anecdote 
of  Vedavati.  Hearing  this  destroys  sins  and  increases  virtue.  The  four 
Vedas  reigned  incarnate,  in  their  true  forms,  on  the  lips  of  Vedavati  ;  hence 
She  was  named  Veiavati.  Thus  I  have  told  you  the  anecdote  of  tho 
daughter  of  Kus'adhvaja.  Now  hear  the  story  of  Tulasi,  the  daughter  of 
Dhajmadhvaja. 

Here  ends  the  Sixteenth  Chapter  in  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  incarnation 
of.Maha  Laksmi  in  the  house  of  Kus'adhvaja  in  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bh^gvatim 
of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

1-19.  Srt  Nurayana  said  :—  "  O  Narada  !  The  wife  of  Dharraadhvaja 
was  Madhavi.  Going  to  the  Gandhamadan  mountain,  She  began  to  enjoy, 
with  great  gladness,  the  pleasures  with  the  king  Dharraadhvaja.  The  bed 
was  prepared,  strewn  with  flowers  and  s3euted  with  sandal-paste.  She 
smeared  all  over  her  body  with  sandal-paste.  The  flowers  and  cool 
breeze  in  contact  with  the  sweet  scent  of  sandal-paste  began  to  cool  th3 
bodies.  MSdhavi  was  the  jewel  amongst  women.  Her  whole  body 
wis  very  elegant.  Besides  it  was  adorned  all* over  with  jewel  ornaments, 
A^  she  was  humorous,  so  the  king  was  very  expert  in  that  respect.  It 
seemed  as  if  the  Creator  created  especially  for  Dhirmi  Ihvaja,  th^  humorous 
lady  Madhavi  expert  in  amorous  affiirs.  B  jth  of  them  were  skilled  in 
amorous  sports.  So  no  one  did  like  to  desist  from  amorous  enjoyments. 
One  hundred  divine  yeaivs  passed  in  this  way,  day  and  night  passed 
unnoticed.  The  kin^  then  got  back  his  consciousness  and  desisted  from 
his  amorous  embraces.  But  the  lustful  womau  did  not  find  herself 
satisfied.  However,  by  the  Devi's  influence,  she  became  pregnant  and 
conceived  for  one  hundred  years.  In  the  womb  there,  was  the  incarnation 
of  Laksmi  j  and  the  body's  lustre  increased  day  by  day.  Then,  on  an 
auspicious  day,  on  an  auspicious  moment,  auspicious  Yoga,  auspiciousJ 
lAgQa^  auspicious  Amsa,  and   on   an   auspicious    combination  of  planetary 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XVII.  871 

rulers   and   their   houses,  she   delivered   oa   the   full    moon   night   of  the 
month  of  K/lrtik  one  beautiful  daughter,  the  incarnation  in  part  of  Laksmi. 
The  face  of  the   baby    looked  like    the   autumnal    moon ;    Her   two   eyes 
resembled  autumnal  lotuses  and  her  upper  and  lower   lips   looked    beautiful  , 
like  ripe    Bimba  fruits.     The  daughter  began,  no  sooner    it    was   born,   to. 
look  on  all  sides  of  the  lying-in-room.    The  palm  and  lower  part  of  feet  were, 
red.     The  navel  was  deep  and  below  that  there  were    three  wrinkles.     Her.  ; 
loins  were   circular.      Her   body    was    hot   in   the    winter   and  cold  in  the 
summer  and   pleasant   to   touch.     Her  hairs    on   the    head  were    hangipg 
like  the  roots  of  the  fig   tree.     Her  colour  was  bright  like  Champaka  ;    She 
was  u  jewel  amongst  women.     Men  and  women  cannot  compare  her  beauty. 
The  holy  wise  men  named  Her  Tulasi.  As  soon  as  she  was  born,  she  looked 
of  the  female  sex,   full    in  every    way.     Though    prevented    repeatedly    by 
all,  She  went  to  the  forest  of    Badari    for    practising    TapasyS.     Theie   she 
practised    hard   Tapasyil     for    one  lakh    divine   years.     Her     main   object 
was   to    get    Narayana    for     her      husband.     In    summer     she    practised 
Panchatapii  (surrounded  by  fire    on    four   sides   and   on    the    top)  ;   in   the 
winter  she  remained  in    water   and    in  the    rainy    season     she     remained 
in  the  open  air  and  endured    the    showers     of    the    rain,    twenty    thousand 
years.    She    passed    away    thus    in    eating    fruits    and    water.    For   thirty 
thousand  years   she   subsisted    only    on  the    leaves    of  trees.     When    the 
forty  ihousa;  dth  year  came,  she  subsisted  only  on  air  and  her   body  became 
thinner  and  thinner   day   by    day.     Then    for    ten    thousand   years   after- 
wards she  left   eating   anything    whatsoever  and    without    any   aim,   stood 
on  only  one  leg.     At  this  time  the  lotus-born  Brahm^,  seeing  this,  appeared 
there  to  grant  her  boon^.     O  i  seeing  Him,  Tulan  immediately  boved  dow.i 
to  Brahm^,  the  Four-faced  One  riding  on  His    vehicle,  the  Swan.     {Note. — • 
The  vehicle    theory   of  the  Devas   came  from    Egypt.     The    Devas    were 
without    vehicles    at    first   and    were    faced    half- beasts.    Then    they    were 
1    rendered  men  and  their  vehicles  were    fancied    as    boasts.     The  face    of   the 
Durga  Devi  was  thought  of  as  that  of  a  tiger.] 

20.     He     then   addressed     her    and   said  : —     "O    Tulasi  !    Ask    any 
boon  that  you  like.    Whether  it  be  devotion  to  Hari,   servantship   to    Hari, 
)    freedom  from  old  age  or  freedom  from  death,  I  will  grant  that  to    you. 

21-27.  Tulasi  said  : —  "  Father  !  I  now  say  you  my  mind.  Hear.  What 
is  the  use  of  hiding  away  my  views  out  of  fear  or  shame  to  One  who 
knows  everything  reigning  in  One's  Heart. 

I  am  Tulasi  Gopi  (cowherdess) ;  1  used  to  dwell  before  in  the  Goloka.  I 
was  a  dear  she-servant  of  UadhikA,,  the  beloved  of  Kri§na.  I  was  also  born  of 
Her  in  part.  Her  Sakhis  (female  attendants)  used  to  love  me.  Once  in  RSsa 
Mandalam  I  was  enjoyed  by  Govinda ;  but  I  was   not   satiated   and  while 


872  &Rt  MAD  DEVf  BHAgAVATAM. 

1  was  lyiH;^  dovvo  in  an  unconscious  state,  Kadba,  the  Goveroess-in-chief 
of  the  H^sa  circle,  came  there  and  ?aw  me  in  that  state.  She  rebuked 
(iibinda  and,  out  of  ani^'er,  cursed  me: — "  Go  at  once  and  be  born  as 
a  human  being."  At  this  Guvioda  spoke  to  me  :  — "  If  you  go  and  practise 
Tapas  in  Bharata,  Brahma  will  get  pleased  and  He  will  grant  you  boon. 
When  you  will  get  Narayana,  the  Four-armed,  born  of  Me  in  part  as   your 

husband.  "  O  Father  I  Thus  speaking,  Sri  Krisni  disappeared  out  of  sight. 

Out  of  Radha'e  fear,  T  quitted  my  body  and  am  now  born  in  this  world.     Now 

grant  me  this  boon  that  I  get  the  peaceful,    lovely,  beautiful  Narayana    for 

my  husband." 

28-37.     Brahma     said  :— "  O    Child     Tulasi  !    The      Gopa     (cowherd) 
Sudama  was  born  of  Sri  Kiisna's  body.  At    the     present   time    he  is    very 
eneroretic,  He  too,  under  the  curse  of  RadhS,    has  come   and  taken   his  birth 
amongst  the  D&navas.  He  is   named  S  ankha  Chuda.  No  one  is  equal  to  him 
in  strength."  In  Goloka,  when  he  saw  you   before,  he   was  overpowered  with 
passion  for  you.     Only  out  of  K&dha'a  influence,  he  could    not  embrace  you. 
That   Sud&mS    is    Jatismara    (knows  all   about   his    previous    births)  ;  and 
you,   too,    are   Jati    Smara.     There     is     nothing     unknown    to    you.     O 
Beautiful    One  !    You    will  now   be   his    wife.     Afterwards       you   will  get 
Ntlr^yana,    the  Beautiful  and    LoJ^ely     for     your    husband.     Thus     under 
the   curs.i   of     Niruyana,    you     will     be     transformed     into     the     world 
purifying   Tulasi    tree.     You    will    bo    the    foremost   amongst  the  flowers 
and   will   be   dearer  to  Narayana  than  His    life.     No    one's     worship   will 
be  complete   without   Thee  as  leaf.     You    will     remain     as   a     tree     in 
BindrSban   and  you  will  be  widely  known  us  Vrindabani.     The  Gopas   and 
Gjpis    will    worship    M^dbava    with  Your    leaves.     Being    the    Presiding 
Deity   of  the  Tulasi  tree,  you  will  always  enjoy  the    company    of    Krisna. 
the    best   of  the    Gopas.     O  Xirada  !    Tims      hearing     Brahma's    words, 
the   Devi    Tulasi    became    very  glad.     Smile    a}»peared    in  her   face.     She 
then    bowed    down    to   the  Creator    and  said  : — 

38-40.  "  O  Father  !  I  speak  now  truly  to  Thee  that  1  am  not 
as  devoted  to  the  four-armed  NarSyana  as  1  am  devoted  to  Syama 
Sundara,  the  two-armed.  For  ray  intercourse  with  Govinda  5ri  Krigna 
was  suddenly  interrupted  and  my  desire  was  not  gratified.  It  is  because 
of  Sri  Govinda's  words  that  I  prayed  for  the  four-armed.  Now  it  appears 
certain  that  by  Thy  grace  I  will  get  again  my  Govinda,  very  hard 
to  be  attained.  But,  O  Ff/ther  !  Do  this  that  I  be  not  afraid  oi 
Radha. 

41-48.  Brahma  said: — "0  Child!  I  now  give  you  the  sixteen 
lettered  RSdha  mantra  to  you.  By  Her  Grace  you  will  be  dear  to  RSdhA 
as    Her   life.     Kadhika    will    cot  be    able  to  know  anything  of  your  secret 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XVIII.  873 

dealings.  O  Fortunate  !  You  will  be  dear  to  Govinda  like  Rcldhft,  Thus 
saying,  Brahma,  the  Creator  of  the  world,  gave  her  the  sixteen 
lettered  R'ldha  mantra,  stofcra,  Kavacha  and  mode  of  worship  and 
puras'eharana  and  He  blessed  her.  Tulasi,  then,  engaged  herself  in  worship- 
ping Hadha,  as  directed.  By  the  boon  of  Brahm4,  Tulasi  attained  Siddhi 
(success)  lik°  Laksmi.  OuC  of  the  power  of  the  Siddha  mantra,  She 
got  her  desired  boon.  She  became  fortunate  in  getting  varioug 
pleasures,  hard  to  be  attained  in  this  world.  Her  mind  became  quiet. 
All  the  toils  of  TapasyS,  disappeared.  When  one  gets  the  fruit  of 
one's  labour,  all  the  troubles  then  transform  to  happiness.  She  then 
finished  her  food  and  drink  and  slept  on  a  beautiful  bed  strewn  with 
flowers  and  scented  with  sandal  paste. 

Here  ends  the  Seventeenth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
anecdote  of  Tulasi  in  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bh£i.gavafcam  of  18,000  verses 
bv    Maharsi    Veda   Vvasa. 


CHAPTER  XVI II. 

1-9S.  NArayana  said: — "  Thus  highly  pleased,  Tulasi  went  to  sleep 
with  a  gladdened-hearb.  She,  the  daughter  of  Vrisadhvaja,  was  then 
in  her  blooming  youth  and  while  asleep,  the  Cupid,  the  God  of  five  arrows, 
shot  at  her  five  arrows  (by  which  one  ge^s  enchanted  and  swooned). 
Though  the  Devi  was  smeared  with  sandal  paste  and  She  slept  on 
a  bed  strewn  with  llowers,  her  body  was  felt  as  if  being  burnt.  Out  of 
joy,  th3  hairs  stood  on  their  ends  all  over  her  body  ;  her  eyes  were  reddened 
and  her  body  began  to  quiver.  Sometimes  She  felt  uneasiness,  sometimes 
dryness  ;  sometimes  She  got  faint  ;  sometimes  drowsiness  and  sometimes 
a^jain  pleasantness  ;  sometimes  she  became  conscious,  sometimes  sorrowful. 
Sometimes  she  got  up  from  her  bed  ;  sometimes  she  sat  ;  and  some- 
limes  sha  fell  agiiu  to  sleej).  The  flower-bed,  strewn  with  sandal- 
piste,  appeared  to  her  full  of  thorns  ;  nice  delicious  fruits  and  cold 
water  appeared  to  her  like  poison.  Her  house  appeared  to  her  like  a 
hole  in  a  ground  anl  her  fine  garments  seemed  to  her  like  fire. 
The  mark  of  Sindura  on  her  forehead  appeared,  as  it  were,  a  boil,  a 
sore.  She  began  to  see  in  her  dreams  that  one  beautiful,  well 
clothed,  humorous,  young  man  with  smile  in  his  lips,  appeared  to  her. 
llis  body  was  besmeared  with  sandal-paste  and  decked  with  excellent 
jeweh  ;  garlands  of  forest  flowers  were  suspending  from  his  neck. 
Coming  .there,  he  was  drinking  the  honev  of  her  lotus  face.  He  was 
speaking  .on  love  themes  and  on  various  other  sweet  topics.  As  if 
he  was  embracing  amorously  and  enjoying  the  pleasures  of  intercourse 
After  the    intercourse    he   was   going   away;  again    he    was    coming  near. 

110 


874  §Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

The  lady  was  addressing  him  "  O  Darling  I  O  Lord  of  nay  heart !  Where 
do  you  go.  Couie  close.  "  Again  when  she  bscame  conscious,  she  began 
to  lament  bitterly.  Thus  on  entering  in  her  youth,  the  Devi  Tulasi 
began  to  live  in  the  hermitage  of  Badari  (Plum  fruit,  It  may 
signify  womb,  Those  who  visit  Badari  are  not  to  enter  again  ia 
any  womb).  On  the  other  hand  the  great  Yo^i  Sankhachuda  obtained 
the  Krisna  Mantra  from  Mabar^i  Jaigisavya  and  got  siddhi  (euccess) 
in  Pufkara  Tirtha  (sacred  place  of  pilgrimage  where  one  crosses  the  worlds. 
Holding  ou  his  neck  the  Eavacha  named  Sarvamangalamaya  and  obtaining 
the  boon  from  BrahmS  as  he  desired,  he  arrived  at  Badari,  by  Brahma's 
command.  The  signs  of  the  blooming  youth  had  just  begun  to  be  visible  in 
the  body  of  Sankhachuda  as  if  the  God  of  Love  incarnated  in  his 
bodf  ;  his  colour  resembled  that  of  white  Champakas  and  all  his  body 
was«  decked  with  jewelled  ornaments.  His  face  re^^embled  the  autumnal 
full  moon;  his  eyes  were  extended  like  the  lotus  leaves.  The  beau- 
tiful form  was  seen  to  sit  in  an  excellent  nerial  car,  made  of  pearls  and 
jewels.  Two  jewel  earrings,  nice  and  elegant,  suspended  upto  his  cheek ;  his 
neck  was  adorned  with  Parijata  flower  garlands  ;  and  his  body  was  smear- 
ed with  Kunkum  and  scented  sandal-paste..  O  Narada  !  Seeing  Saukha- 
ohiida  coming  near  to  her,  Tulasi  covered  her  face  by  her  clothings 
and  she,  with  a  smiling  countenance,  cast  repeatedly  sidelong  glances  on 
him  and  bent  her  head  low  abashed  in  the  expectation  of  a  fiesh 
intercourse.  How  beautiful  was  that  clear  face  of  her  !  It  put  down 
the  autumnal  moon  in  the  background.  The  invaluable  jewelled  ornaments 
were  on  her  toes.  Her  braid  of  hair  was  surrounded  by  sweet  scented 
M^^lati  garlands.  The  invaluable  jewelled  wonderful  earrings  like 
the  shape  of  a  shark  were  hanging  up  to  her  cheek.  Extraordinarily 
beautiful  necklaces  were  seen  being  suspended  to  the  mid  lie  of  her 
breasts  and  added  to  the  bJiut.y  thereof;  on  her  arms  and  hand-i 
were  jewelled  bangles  and  conch  ornaments  ;  jewelled  armlets  and 
on  fingers  excellent  jewelled  rings  were  seen.  O  Muni  !  Seeing  that 
lovely  beautiful  chaste  woman  of  good  nature,  Sankhuchuda  came  to 
her  and    taking    his    seat    addressed  her  as  follows  :  — 

27.  *' O  Proud  One!  O  Auspicious  One!  Who  are  you?  Whose 
daughter  are  you  ?  You  look  fortunate  and  blessed  among  w«men. 
I    am    your    silent    slave.   Talk    vvith   me. 

28-30.     That  beautiful  eyed    Tulasi,   full    of  love,    replied    to  Sankha- 
chuda with  smiling    countenance  anl  face  bent  low  : — "  I  am  the  daughter 
of  the  great  king  Vrisadhvija       I  hava    come    to   thi«     forest    for    tapasya 
and  am  engaged  in   this.     Who    are    yoa  ?     What    business    have    you    to 
talk   with  me  ?     Yau  can   go    away    wherever    you  '  like.     I   have    heard 


Book  IX]  CHAPTER  XVIII.  875 

in    the  Sastras    that  persons    born    of  a    uoble    family    never  speak    with 
ladies  of  a   respectable    family    in    privacy. 

31-703.  Only  those  that  are  lewd,  void  of  any  knowledge  in  the  Dhanna 
Sastras,  void  of  the  Vedic  knowledge  and  who  are  not  Kulinas,  like  to  speak 
with  women  in  privacy.  And  those  women,  too,  that  look  externally  beauti- 
ful but  very  passionate  and  the  Death  of  males,  who  are  eweet  tongued 
but  filled  with  venom  in  their  hearts,  those  who  are  sweet  externally 
but  like  a  sword  internally,  those  that  are  always  bent  in  achieving 
their  own  selfish  ends  and  those  that  become  obedient  to  their  husbauds 
for  their  own  selfish  ends  otherwise  behaving  as  they  like,  those  that  are 
filled  in?i(le  with  dirty  things  and  outside  looking  pleasant  in  their  faces 
and  eyes,  whose  characters  are  pronounced  as  defiled,  what  intelligent, 
learned  and  noble-minded  man  c^n  trust  them  ?  Those  women  do  not 
di^cli^^inate  who  are  their  friends  or  w'lo  are  their  enemies  ;  they 
want  always  new  persons.  Whenever  they  see  a  man  well  dressed,  they 
want  to  satisfy  their  own  passions.  And  they  pretend  with  great 
care  that  they  are  very  chaste.  They  are  the  ves.-ela  of  passion  ;  they 
always  attract  the  minds  of  others  and  they  are  very  enthusiastic  in  satisfying 
their  own  !u«t.  They  verbally  shew  that  they  want  other  men  to  go  a\tay 
but  at  hearts,  feelings  for  intercourse  remain  preponderant  ;  whenever 
they  fcce  their  piramours  in  private,  they  laugh  and  become  very  glad 
iMit  externally  ihtii  shame  knows  no  bounds.  When  they  do  not  have 
their  intercourses  with  their  paramours,  they  become  self-conceited  ; 
I  heir  bodies  burn  with  anger  and  they  begin  to  quarrel.  When  their 
I  assions  are  satisfied  fully,  they  hecome  glad  and  when  there  is  a 
deficienev  in  that,  they  become  sjrrowlul.  For  the  sake  of  good  and 
jiweet  food  and  cold  drinks,  they  want  beautiful  young  persons,  quali- 
fied and  humorous.  They  consider  witty  young  j  ersons  clever  in  holding 
intercourses,  more  dearly  than  their  sons.  Vnd  if  that  beloved  one 
becomes  incapable  or  aged,  then  he  is  considered  as  an  enemy.  Quarrels 
and  anger  then  ensue.  They  devour  these  men  as  serpents  eat  rats. 
They  are  boldness  personified  and  they  are  the  source  of  all  evils 
and  vices.  Even  Brahma,  Visiiu  and  Mahe.?'a  remain  deluded  before  them. 
They  cannot  find  out  any  clue  of  their  minds.  They  are  the  greatest 
obstacle  in  the  path  of  tapasya  and  the  closed  doors  for  liberation. 
Devotion  to  Hari  cannot  reach  those  women.  They  are  the  reposi- 
tories of  Maya  and  they  hold  men  fast  by  iron  chains  in  this  wor'd. 
They  are  like  magicians  and  false  l»ke  dreams.  'I  hey  enchant  others  by 
external  beauty  ;  their  lower  parts  are  very  ugly  and  filled  with 
excrements,  faeces,  of  foul  scent  and  very  unholy  and  smeared  with 
blood.     The    Creator    Bhagavlln    has  created  them    ^s  such,  the  Maya  to 


876  ^Hl  MAD  DEVt  BHAGAVATAM. 

the  M^y^via  and  the  venom  to  those  who  waut  libaration,  and  as  invisible 
to  those  that  want  to  have  them.  Thus  saying  Tulasi  stopped.  O  Narada  ! 
^ankhaehuda,  then  smilingly  addressed  her  as  follows  : — "  O  Devi  !  What 
you  have  spoken  is  not  wholly  false  ;  partly  it  is  true  and  partly  it 
is  false.  Now  hear."  The  Creator  has  created  this  all-enohanting  female 
form  into  two  parts.  One  is  praiseworthy  and  the  other  is  not.  He 
has  created  Laksmi,  Sarasvati,  DurgA,  SAvitri,  and  R'idha.  and  others 
as  the  primary  causes  of  creation  ;  so  thpre  are  the  prime  creations. 
Those  women  that  are  born  of  their  parts,  are  auspieions,  gloriou?, 
and  much  praiseworthy.  Satariipl,  DevahutT,  Svadha,  Svaha,  Dakaina 
Chhayavati,  Rohini,  Varun^ni,  Saehi,  the  wife  of Kuvera.'Diti,  Aditi, 
Lop3,mudrA,  AnasuyS,  Kautabhi  (Kotari),  Tulasi,  Ahalyji,  Arundhati, 
Mena,  TllrS,  Mandodari,  Damayanti,  Vedavati,  Ciang4,  M-nasa,  Pusti, 
Tusti,  Smrifci,  MedhS,,  KllikS,  Vasundhar^,  Sasthi,  Mangalaehandi, 
Murli,  wife  of  Dharma.  Svasti,  Sraddha  ;  Saiiti,  KSnti,  Ks^nti,  Nidra, 
Tandra,  Ksudhgl,  Pipasa,  Saudhy^,  RStri,  Diva,  Sampatti,  Dhriti, 
Kirti,  Kriy^,  Sobh^,  Prabha,  Siva,  and  other  women  born  of  the  Prime 
Prakritig,  all  are  excellent  in  every  Vu^a.  The  prostitutes  of  the 
neavens  are  also  born  of  the  above  women  in  theii-  parts  and  parts  •  of 
parts.  They  are  not  praiseworthy  in  the  universe  ;  they  are  all  regarded 
as  unchaste  women.  Those  women  that  ive  of  Sattva  Gunas  are  all 
excellent  and  endowed  with  influence.  In  the  universe  they  are  good, 
chaste  and  praiseworthy.  This  is  not  false.  The  Pandits  declare 
them  excellent.  Those  that  are  of  Rajo  Gunas,  and  Tamo  Gunas  are 
not  so  praiseworthy.  Those  women  that  are  of  Rajo  Gunas  are  known 
as  middling.  They  are;  always  fond  of  enjoyment?,  yield  to'  them,  and 
always  ready  to  achieve  their  own  ends.  These  womeo  are  ^euerallv 
insincere,  delusive,  and  outside  the  pale  of  religious  dutie?.  Theret^'ore 
they  ai'e  generally  unchaste.  The  Pandits  consider  them  as  mid- 
dling. Those  women  that  are  of  Tamo  Gunas  are  considered  as  worst. 
Those  born  of  noble  families  can  never  speak  with  other  wives  in  a 
private  place  or  when  thej  are  alone.  By  Brahma's  command  I  have 
come  to  you.  O  Fair  One  !  I  will  marry  you  how  aceordino-  to 
the  Gandharba  method.  My  name  is  Sankhachuda.  The  Devas  fly  away 
from  me  out  of  terror.  Before  I  was  the  intimate  l^akha  (friend)  of 
Sri  Hari,  by  the  name  of  Sudama.  Now,  by  RSdhika's  curse  1  am 
born  in  the  family  of  the  D^navas.  I  was  a  Pari  sad  (attendant)  of 
Sri  Krisna  and  the  chief  of  the  eight  Gopas.  Now,  by  Radhika's  curse 
I  am  born  as  Sankhachuda,  the  Indra  of  the  Danavas.  By  Sri  ICrisna's 
grace  and  by  His  mantra,  I  am  Jatismara  (know  of  my  past  births). 
You,    boo,   are  Jacismira    luhsi,     5:1   Krisna   enjoyed   you    before.     By 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XVIII.  877 

Kadhika's   anger,  you  are  now  born  in  Bh3,rAtj,.     I  was  very  eager  to  enjoy 
you  then  ;  out  of  Rudhik^'s  fear  1  could  not. 

72-87.  Thus  saying,  ^aikhaohuda  stopped.  Then  TuUsi  gladly  and 
smilingly  replied  : — "  Sueh  persons  (like  you)  are  famous  in  this  world  ; 
good  women  desire  such  husbands.  Really,  I  am  now  defeated  by  you 
in  argument.  The  man  who  is  conquered  by  woman  is  very  impure  and 
blamed  by  the  community.  The  Pitri  Lokas,  the  Dava  Lokas,  and  the 
(iandharbba  Loki,  loj,  look  upon  men,  overpowered  by  women,  as  mean, 
despicable.  Even  father,  mother,  brothftr,  et3.,  hate  them  mentally  It 
is  said  in  the  Vedas  that  the  impurities  during  birth  and  death  are 
expiated  by  a  ten  days  observances  For  the  Brahmanas,  by  twelve  day* 
observances  for  the  Ksattriyas,  by  Hfbeen  days  observances  for  the  Vais'vas 
and  by  one  month's  observances  for  the  ^Cidtas  and  other  low  castes.  But 
the  impurity  of  the  man  who  is  conquered  by  women  connot  be  expi  ited 
hy  any  other  means  except  (his  dead  body)  being  burned  in  the  funjrai 
pyre.  The  Pitris  never  accept  willingly  the  pindas  and  offerings  of  water 
(Tarpauas)  offered  by  t'la  women— conquered-men.  So  much  so  that  the 
Devas  even  hesitate  to  accept  flowers,  water,  etc.,  offered  by  them  on  their 
names.  Those  whose  hearts  are  entirely  subdued  by  men,  do  not  acquire  any 
fruits  from  their  knowledge,  Tapasya,  Japam,  five  sacrifice^,  worship, 
le.irning  and  fame.  I  tested  you  to  ascertain  your  strenu'th  in 
learning.  It  is  highly  advisable  to  choose  one's  husband  by  examining 
his  merits  and  defects.  Sin  equivalent  to  the  murder  of  a  Brahmin 
is  committed  if  one  gives  in  marriage  one's  daughter  to  one  void  of 
all  qualifications,  to  an  old  man,  to  one  who  is  ignorant,  to  a  poor, 
illiterate,  disease],  ugly,  very  angry,  very  harsh,  lame,  devoid  of 
limbs,  deaf,  dumb,  inanimate  like,  and  who  is  impotent.  If  one  gives  in 
marriage  a  daughter  to  a  young  man  of  good  character,  learned, 
vvoll  qualified  and  of  a  peaceful  temper,  one  acquires  the  fruits  of 
performing  ten  horse  sacrifices.  If  one  nourishes  a  daughter  and  sells 
her  out  of  greed  for  money,  one  falls  to  the  Kumbhipaka  hell.  That 
sinner  drinks  the  urine  and  eats  the  excrements  of  that  daughter,  remaining 
in  that  hell.  For  a  period  equal  to  the  fourteen  Indra's  life-periods  they 
are  blttoa  by  worms  and  crows.  At  the  expiry  of  this  period,  they 
wil!  have  to  be  born  in  this  world  of  men  as  diseased  persons.  In 
their  human  births  they  will  have  to  earn  their  livelihood  by  sel'ing 
flesh   and    carrying    flesh. 

SS-IOO.  Thus  saying,  when  Tulasi  stopped,  Brahm&  appeared  on 
the  scene  and  addressed  oankachuda  : — "  O  Saukhachuda  !  Why  are 
you  spending  uselessly  your  time  in  vain  talks  with  Tulasi  ?  Marry 
her   soon   by  the  G^ndharba   method.     As     you    are     a  gem    amougst; 


878  !§Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

males,  so  She  is  a  gem  amongst  females.  It  is  a  very  happy  union 
between  a  humorus  lovor  and  a  humorous  beloved.  O  King  I  Who 
despises  the  great  happiness  when  it  is  at  one's  hand  I  He  who 
forsakes  the  pleasure  is  worse  than  a  baa^t  in  this  world.  O  Tulasi  ! 
And  what  for  are  you  testing  the  u>bly  qiialified  person  who  is  the 
tormentor  of  the  Devas,  Asuras  and  D^navas.  O  Child  !  As  Laksmt 
Devi  is  of  N&rayaua,  as  Radhik^  is  of  Krisaa  ;  as  is  My  Savitri, 
as  Hhava's  is  Bhavani,  as  Bot^r's  is  Earth,  as  Yajua's  is  Daksinil, 
Atri's  Anasuyi.  Gaufcama's  Ahalya,  Moan's  Rohini,  Brihaspati's  Tdr^, 
Manu's  Sitarupa,  Kandarpa's  Rati,  Kas'yapa's  Aditi,  Vas'igtha'a 
Arundhati,  Karddama's  Davdhiiti,  Fire's  Sv^hS,  Indra's  Sachi,  Ganes'a's 
Puati,  Skanda's  Devasena,  and  Dharma's  Murti,  so  let  you  be  the  dear  wife 
of  5ankhachuda.  Let  you  remain  with  Sankhaehuda,  bf^autiful  as  he 
is,  for  a  long  time,  and  enjoy  with  him  in  various  places  as  you 
like.  When  Sankhaehuda  will  quit  his  mortal  frame,  you  would  go 
to  Goloka  and  enjoy  easily  with  the  two-armed  Sri  KrifUa,  and 
in    Vaikuntha    with    the    foar-armed     Kri^na     and    with    great    gladness. 

Here  ends  the  Eighteenth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
union  of  Sankhaehuda  with  Tulasi  in  the  Mahapuranam  Sri  Mad  Devi 
Bhagavatam    of   18,000   verses    by    Maharsi     Veda     Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

1.  Narada  said  : — *'  O  Bhag.ivan  !  Wonderful  is  the  story  that 
has  been  now  recited  by  yoij.  My  ears  are  not  satislied.  So  tell  me 
what   happened    afterwards.  " 

294  Naiftyana  said:—"  O  Ndtada  !  The  Creator  Brahm^,  blessini; 
them,  departed  to  His  own  abode.  The  Danava  married  Tulasi  under 
the  Gandharba  method.  The  uelestial  drums  t^runded  and  the  Howers  weie 
showered.  In  the  beautiful  lovely  house  the  Danavehdra,  remained  in 
perfect  enjoyment.  Tulasi,  too,  being  busy  with  fresh  intercourses, 
became  almost  mad  after  them.  The  chaste  Tulasi  ar.d  Sankhaehuda 
both  became  deeply  immersed  in  the  ocean  of  bliss  in  their  sexual  ui.ion 
and  began  to  enjoy  sixty-four  sorts  of  amorous  sports.  In  the  Sastras 
on  love  affairs,  all  the  connections  of  limbs  rfith  limbs  that  are 
described,  as  the  lover  and  the  loved  desire,  they  both  enjoyed  these 
with  perfect  freedom  and  pleasure.  The  place  was  solitary  ;  to  add  to  it, 
the  scenery  was  grand  and  lovely  ;  so  nothing  remained  untasted  of 
the  several  tastes  of  amorous  pleosures.  On  the  banks  of  the  river, 
in  llower-gardens,  they  slept  on  the  flower-beds  smeared  with  sandal- 
paste,    and   enjoyed    the   amorous  pleasures.     Both      vvere     adorned     with 


« 


Book  IX.J  CHAPTER  XIX.  879 

jewel  ornaments  ;  both  were  skilled  in  amorous  practice j ;  so  no  one 
«lesisteJ.  The  chaste  Tulasi  out  of  her  nirableness  due  to  young  age, 
easily  stole  into  the  heart  of  her  husband.  Sankhachuda,  too,  a  great 
expert  in  knowing  other's  amorous  sentiments,  attracted  the  heart  of 
Tulasi.  Tulasi  obliterated  the  sandal  marks  from  the  breast  of  the  King 
and  the  sign  of  tilak  from  his  nose.  The  King  also  wiped  away 
the  dot  of  Sindur  and  AlnksL  (vermillior.)  marks  from  Tuksi's  forehead  and 
put  marks  of  nails  on  her  round  plump  breast.^.  Tulasi  also  hurt  the  King'n 
left  side  by  her  bracelets.  Then  the  King  bit  the  lips  of  Tulasi. 
Thus  each  one  embraced  the  other,  kissed  each  other  and  each  one 
bejan  to  champoo  the  thighs,  legs,  etc.  When  both  of  them  thus 
spent  their  time  in  amorous  sports,  they  got  up  and  began  to  dress 
themselves  as  they  desired.  Tulaci  smeared  Sankhachuda's  nose  with 
red  sandal-paste  mixed  with  kunkum  (saffron),  smeared  his  body  with 
sweet-scented  sandal-paste,  offered  sweet-scented  betels  in  his  mouth, 
made  him  put  on  celestial  garments  (fireproof;  brought  from  Fire; 
put  unto  his  neck  the  wonderful  garbind  of  Parijata  flowers,  destructive  of 
jisea^^e  and  old  age,  invaluable  jewel  rings  on  his  hand,  and  offering 
him  exeellent  gems,  rare  in  the  three  worlds,  said: — "O  Lord  !  I  am 
your  maidservant  "  and  uttering  this  repeatedly  bowed  down  to  the 
feet  of  her  husband  with  devotion.  She  then  got  up  and  with 
smiling  countenance  began  to  look  on  his  f^ce  with  a  steadfast  gaze. 
The  king  Sankhachuda  then  attracted  his  dear  Tula«i  to  his  breast  and 
took  off  the  veil  fully  from  her  face  and  began  to  look  on  that,  next 
moment  he  kissed  on  her  cheek  and  lips  and  gave  her  a  pair  of  gar- 
ments brought  from  the  Varuna's  house,  a  necklace  of  jewels,  hard  to  get  jn 
the  three  worlds,  the  tinklets  of  Svaha,  the  wife  of  Agni,  the  Keyura 
(armlets)  of  the  Sun's  wife  Chhaya,  the  two  earrings  of  Rohini,  the 
wife  of  tha  Moon,  the  finger  rings  of  Rati,  the  wife  of  Kamadeva,  and  the 
wonderfully  beautiful  conch,  given  by  Vis'va  Karma,  excellent  bedding 
studded  with  pearls  and  jewels  and  various  ornaments  ;  and  when  he  gave 
her  all  these  things,  he  smiled.  The  king  then  put  garlands  on  Tulasi's 
braid  ot  hair,  nicely  variegated  Alakas  on  her  cheek,  three  crescent  lines 
of  sweet-scented  sandal  paste  within  the  Alakar,  dots  ot  saffron  all 
around  that,  the  brillant  Sindura  mark  looking  like  a  flame,  and  red  Alta 
on  the  feet  and  toes  ;  he  then  j^biced  those  feet  on  his  breast  and 
utterred  repeatedly  : — "  I  am  your  servant  "  and  then  held  her  on  his 
breast.  They  then  left  the  hermitage,  in  that  st-ite  and  began  to 
travel  in  various  places.  In  the  Malaya  mountain,  in  mountains  after 
mountains,  in  solitary  flower  gardens,  in  the  mountain  caves,  in  beau- 
tiful   sea-beaches,   on     the   banks    ot  the  Puspabhadra    river,    cool    with 


S80  ^r1  MA.D  DEVl  BHAqAVATAM. 

watery  breeze,  in  various  rivers  and  riversides,  in  Vispandana  forest 
.v'l  )i  I  ivith  SiViU  songs  of  the  birds  of  the  vernal  season.  They  then 
went  from  Vi§pandana  forest  to  the  Surasana  forest,  fromithe  Surasana, 
forest  to  the  Nandana  forest,  from  the  Nandaoa  forest  to  the  nice 
Chandana  forests,  from  Chandana  forest  to  Champaka,  Ketaki  ;  Madhavi 
Knnda,  Malati,  and  Kumuda  and  lotus  forests  ;  thence  they  went  to  the 
forest  of  desire  gratifyinj^  trees  (Kalpavriksa  forest,)  and  PSrijata  trees. 
They  then  went  to  the  solitary  place  Kanehan,  thence  to  theKancLi  (forest) 
they  then  went  to  the  Kinjalaka  forest,  thence  to  the  K&nchan^kar  (the  gold 
mine),  thence  to  Kanchuka  and  various  other  forests  echoed  with  the 
sweet  sounds  of  cuckoos.  There,  on  beds  strewn  with  flowers  and  scented 
with  sandal-paste  they  both  enjoyed  each  other  to  their  hearts'  content 
and  with  great  pleasure.  13ut  none  of  them,  whether  Sankhachiida  or 
Tulasi,  got  quenched  with  their  thirst.  Rather  their  passions  were  inflame  1 
like  the  fire  on  which  clarified  butter  is  poured  (in  sacrifices).  The 
King  of  the  Danavas,  then,  brought  Tulasi  to  his  own  kingdom  and, 
there,  in  .his  own  beautiful  garden  house,  he  incessantly  enjoyed  her. 
Thus  the  powerful  king  of  the  Danavas  pa''sed  away  one  Manvantara 
in  the  enjoyment  of  his  kingdom.  He  spread  his  sway  over  the  DevatS?, 
A-uras,  Ddnavas,  Gandharbas,  Kinnaras,  and  Raksasas.  The  Devas,  dispos- 
sessed of  their  real'ns,  wandered  everywhere  like  beggars.  At  last  they 
united  in  a  body  and  went  to  the  Brahma's  assembly  and  thero  they 
began  to  cry  and  then  related  the  whole  history  how  the  Danava  Sankha- 
chuda  oppressed  them.  Hearing  all  this,  Brahma  took  them  to  Sankara 
and  informed  Him  of  the  whole  history  of  the  case  When  Mahadeva 
heard  all  this,  He  took  them  all  to  the  highest  place,  Vaikuntha 
devoid  of  old  age  and  death,  doing  tovvards  the  first  entranceof  Narayana's, 
abode,  they  saw  the  gate-keepers  watching  the  gate,  taking  their  seats  on 
jewel  thrones.  They  all  looked  brilliant,  clothed  with  the  )'eIlow  gar- 
ments, adorned  with  jewel  ornamenta,  garlanded  with  forest  flowers,  all 
of  5yAma  Sundtra  (dark  blue,  very  beautiful)  bodies.  They  were  four- 
armed,  holding  on  their  hands  conch,  mace,  discus  and  lotus  ;  sweet  smile 
was  on  their  faces  and  eyes  beautiful  like  lotus  leaves.  On  Brahm3.  asking 
them  for  entrance  to  the  assembly,  they  nodded  their  assent.  He,  then, 
accompanie  1  by  the  Devas,  passed  one  by  one,  sixteen  gates  and  at  last 
came  before  Nar^yana.  On  reaching  there,  He  saw  that  the  assembly 
was  completely  filled  with  Devarsis,  and  four-armed  NArayanlike 
P&risadas  (attendants),  decked  with  Kaustubha  jewels.  The  sight  of 
the  Sabh^  (assembly)  makes  one  think  that  the  Moon  has  just  arisen, 
shedding  effulgent  rays  all  round.  By  the  will  of  S'ri  Hari,  excellent 
diamonds,     invaluable     gems    and     necklaces   of  gems   and  jewels    were 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XIX.  8dl 

plAOod  at  varioiiB    places.     At  other  places   rows     of    pearls  were    shedding 
their     aplendaur   and   brilliance   like      the   garlands   of  gems  and-  jewels* 
At     others,, the    mirrors  were    pla?ed    in    a  circle  ;     and    at  various   other 
placas,  the  eijdless  wonderful  artistic' picture  lines    were    drawn.     Again   at 
other   place.',  the  jewels  called  Padtnardgas  were   artistically    arranged  as   if 
the  lotuses   were,  there     spreading     their     lustrous     beauty     all    around. 
At   lu-ijiy  other  places    rows  of  steps,  ware  made    of     wonderful   Syamantafc 
jewels.     All. around  the  assembly,  there     were    the    excellent   pillars,    built 
of  Indranilam  jewels.     Over  those  pillars,    sandal  leaves   strung  on   strings 
from  pillai;  to  pillar,  were  suspende  I.     Grolden    jars,  all    brimful  with  water 
were  locite.l  at.  various  peaces.  All  around,  the    garlands  of  Pari j4ta  flowers 
were  seeu.     Tae  hall  was  decorated  with  sweet  scented   sandal   trees,   red 
like  siffropaiKl   mask..  S.veet   scents   were  being  emitted  all  round.     The 
Vidyadharis  were  dancing  at     places.     The     assembly   hall     measured   one 
thousiiud  Yoj^nas.     Countless  servauts    were   engaged    all   over   on   various 
liVorks.      8i-ahtui,  bankaia,    and  the  other  Grocis     saw  there  Sri  Hari  seated 
in  the  centre  ou  ao  inv.tluible -jewel  throne,  as  a  Moon  looks  surrounded  by 
stars.    Tbere  were   the    erosvu    on    His  head,    the  ear-rings   on   His    ears  ; 
y;arlatids  male  of  wild    fljivars  were  u:i  his  neck  and  His  body  was  smeared 
all  over  with  sandal  paste  and  He  was  holding  Kelipadma  (a  sort  of  lotus)  in 
His    li*ud.     He    was  seeing,  with  a  smiling    countenance,  the  dancing  and 
music  before  Him.     He    was  full  of  peace,  the  Lord    of  Sarasvati    Laksmi 
Wcis    holdiug  gently  His  lotus  feet  and    He  wasichewing  the   sweet  scented 
lietel   ofEdred    by    Her.     (j.<iuga  also  was    fauniug  Him    devotedly    with    a 
white  Chumara  and  the    others    were    singing    hymns    to    Him  with    their 
heaJs  bent  low    with   devotion.      JkahmA  and  the     other    Gods    all    bowed 
down   to   Him  ;  their  bodies    were    all    filled    with  Pulaka   (excessive  joy 
causing     hair   blind    on   end)  ;  tears    flowed     from  their   eyes   and    their 
voices    were   choked    out   of  emotion.     The. creator     Brabmd.,  then,    with 
clasped    hands  informed  Him,    with  head    bowed  down,  of  the    whole    his- 
tory  of   Saukbacliuda.     Hearing  this,  the  omniscient  Hari,  knowing    the 
minds  of  all,    smiled    and  spoke    to   Brabnia   all   the    interesting   secrets: — 
*0    Lotus    born  1    I    know     all     about  •'S'ankhachiida.     He    was     in  his 
previous    bvith  .Nly  groat  devotee,  an  energetic  G-opa,     Now  I  speak  to  you 
the   ancient    histjrv   of  (ioloki  ;   hear.     This  story  about  Goloka    is    sin- 
destroying    and  highly  meritorious.     S'ankhachuda,  in    his  previous    birth 
was    the    Gopa   Sudelma,   My    chief    Parisad    (attendant}.     He    has    now 
become     a    D'lnava   on    accoupt    of  thja    dire    curse     pronounced  by   SVi 
HUdha.     One   day  when  I  went  from  My    abode,  -accompanied    by   Viraja 
Gopi,     to   the     ll4sa  Mandala,    My   beloved   RadhA,    hearing    this    news 
frtm    a.  n^^aid  servant,   came  up   atocce   with  Her  whole    host  of  Sakhis 

111 


882  flat  MAD  DBVt  BHiOAVATAM. 

wrftftfifiil,  to  the   Risa  M»nd»!»  u   ib»ll  a»Q03    in  Golok»)  •ud,  not  being 
able  to   see  Me,  8»w  Viraji    turned  into   «   river  .  She  thought  tb«t  I  hsd 
disappeared.  So   She   went  back  to    Her  owa  abode  with    Her   Sakhis. 
But  when  I  returned  to  the   house   with   Sudama,   Radhi  rebuked  Me 
very  much.     I  remained  silent.     But  Sudima  could    not   boar  and   he  re- 
buked Radha  ia  My   presence,  a  thinjj   quite   intolerable  to    Her  .dignity! 
On  hearing   this   rebuke,    RSdha's   eyes  became   red  with   anger  and  She 
immediately  ordered  Her  Sakhis  to  drive   him   away.     Sudama  began   to 
tremble  with  fear.     Immediately    on    Her   command  lakha*  and   Ukh^   of 
Sakhis  got  up  immediately  and  drove   that   hot  irreii«tible  Sudama  sway. 
Sudama   repeated   his   chafings   and   roarings.     On   hearing     these,    Sher 
cursed  hiqi :— "  You  better  be  born  in  the  womb  of  a  Danavi."  Hearing  the 
terrible  curse,  Sudama   bowed  down  to   Me  and   went  away  crying  ;  then 
Radha,  who  was  all-mercy,  became  melted  with  mercy.  And  She    prevented 
him,  repeatedly,  not  to  go  aviay.     Radha  wept  and   told  him,    *'0  Child  1 
Wait.   Where  are  you  going  ?  No  more  you  will  haver  to  go  ;  return."  Thus 
saying  She  became   very   distressed.     The   Gopas   and   Gopis  also   began 
to  weep.     I  then  explaind  to  them.  "  In  about  half  a  moment  Sudamft  will 
come    back,   fufiUing   the   conditions   of    the    corse.     O   SudAma  !   Come 
here  when  the  curse  expires.     **  Then    he   appeased    Radha   also.     "  Know 
that  one  moment'(K9an)  in  Goloka  is  equal  to  one    Manvantara   on   earth. 
The   Yogi   Sankhachuda,   expert   in   MiyA   and  very  powerful  will   toon 
return  from   the  earth.  Take    this    My   weapon    Si^la  and   go  early  to 
Bharata.     Siva   will   ^lay   the   Danava    by   this   Suiastra.      The*  Danava 
holds  always  on  his  neck  My   auspicious  Kavacba  and  will  therefore  become 
the  conqueror  of  the  universe.     No  one  will  be   able   to    kill   him   as   locg 
as  he  holds  the   above   Kavacha.     So,  first  of  all,  I  will  go   to   him    in   the 
form  of  a  Brahmana   and  ask  from    him    the  Kavaeha.     O  Creator  !   Thou 
also  didst  give  him  the  boon  that  his  death  woull   occur  when  the  chastity 
of  of  his  wife  would  be  destroyed.     I  will  go  and  hold    intercourse  with   hi» 
wife.  Then  his  death  will    occur    without    fail.     His    wife   after   her  death 
will  come  and   become-  My  dearest   wife.     Thus  saying,   Narayana   gave 
over  to   MahSdeva   the   Suiastra.     Then    He   went  gladly   to    His    inner 
compartments.  Ou  the  other  hand,  Brahma  and  Rudra  and  the  other  Devas 
incarnated    themselves  in   Bharata. 

Here  ends  the  Nineteenth  Chapter  on  the  going  of  the  Devas  to 
Vaikuftha  after  Tulasis  marriage  with  S'ankhaehadda'in  the  MabApuranam 
l^ri  Mad  Devi  Bbi\gavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Mafaarfi  Veda  VyAsa. 


Booi  IX.j  CHAPTER  XX.  883 


CHAPTER  XX. 

1-21.     Nariyana  said  ;— BrahmS,     then  piibtiapr  S'iva   to  the  task   of 
kilHn?   S^aokhaebada  went  to  His  own     abode.  The   other  Devas   returned 
to  Iheir  homes.     Here  under  the  beautiful    Bata  tree,    on  the   banks    of  the 
river  ChandrabhAgu,  Mahadeva  pitched    His  big  tent  and  encamped.  Himself, 
*to  get  the  victory  of  the  Devas.     He,    then,  sent  Chitraratha,  the   Lord    of 
the    Gandharbbas,     as   a  messenger     to   S'ankhaehilda,  the   Lord   of  the 
Dilnavas.     By    the     command     of  MahSdeva,    Chitraratha    went    io  the 
city  of  the  king  of  Daityas,  more     beautiful    llian  Indra's   place  and  more 
wealthy  than  the  mansion  oY  Kuvera.       The   city   was  five  yojanas    wid^ 
and  twice  as   much    in   length.     It   was     built   of  crystals   of  pearls   and 
jewels.    There  were   roadways   on   all  sides.       There  were   seven   trenches, 
hard  to  be  crossed,  one  after    another,   encircling   the    city.     The   city    was 
built  of  countless    rubles   and  gems,    brilliant   like      Hames.     There     were 
hundreds   of  roadways   and    marteta  and  stalls,  in   the     wonderful  Vedis 
(raised   platforms)     built  of    jewels.     All   around     were   splendid  palacial 
buildings    of     traders    and    merchantmen,     filled    with    various     articles 
There  were  hundred?  and  kotis  of  beautiful  buildings,   adorned  with  variouf 
ornaments   and  b;;ilc  of  variegated  red  stones  looking  like    Sinduras.     Thus 
he  want  on  ml  3>'V,  in  tha  middle,  the  building    ot    Sankhaehuda,  circular 
like  the  lunar  sphere.     Pour  ditches  all  filled    with     fiery  flames,  encircled 
one  •fter  another,  hi*  house.     So    the   enemies  could   not   in  any  way  cross 
them  ;  but  the  friend  could  easily  go  the?re.  On  the   top    were  seen  tiirrets, 
buill  of  jewel*,  rising  high  to  the  heavens.  The    gate-keepers  were  watching 
the  twelve  gates.     In  the  centre  were  situated    lakhs  and  lakhs  of  excellent 
jewel  built  houses.     In  every  room  there     were  jewelled  steps  and  staircases 
and  the  pillars  were    all  built  of  gems,  and  jewels,  and  pearls.     Puspadant  a 
(Chitraratha)      saw     all   this   and    then    went  to  the    first   gate  and  saw 
one     terrible   person,   copper   coloured,  with   tawiiy    eyes,    sitting    with   a 
trident    in    his    hand   and    with  a  smiling   count enance.     He   told   he    had 
come  as    a  messenger    and    pot  his   entrance.     Thus  Chitraratha   went   one 
after  another  to  all  the  entties,  not    beiug  prohibited  at  all  though  he    told 
that  he    had  come  as  a  messenger  on    war  service.     The  Gandharba   reached 
one     after   another,   the    last    door    and   faid^:—' "  O   Door  keeper  ! — Go 
Qiiiokly  and    inform  the   Lord  of    the    DSnavas   all   about   the   impending 
war.     When  the    messenger    had     spoken   thus,    the   gate-keeper  allowed 
htm  to  go    inside.     Going     inside,   the   Gandharba  saw  S'ankh&chuda,   of 
AU  excellent  form,  seated  in  the  middle  of  the  royal      assembly,  on  a  golden 


884  SRf  MAD  DEVt  BHIgAVATAM. 

throne.  One  servant  was  holding  on  the  king's  head  an  umbrella,  decked 
with  divine  excellent  gems,  the  inner  rod  of  the  umbrella  being  made  up  of 
jewels,  and  decorated  with  expanded  artificial  flowers  made  of  gems. 
The  attendants  were  fanning  him  with  beautiful  white  ch^maras  ;  he  was 
nicely  dressed,  beautiful  and  lovely  and  adorned  with  jewel  ornaments. 
He  was  nicely  garlanded,  and  wore  fine  celestial  ganments.  Three  Koti 
DSnava<^  were  surrounding  him;  and  ppyon  Koti  OanavAa,  all  armed,  were 
walking  to  ;«id  fro.  .  , 

22-4!).  I*(i8padanta  was  thunderstruck  when  he  saw  thuV^  the  Ddiiava, 
and  he  addressed  him  thus  : —  O  King  !  1  am  a  servant  of  Si^a  ;  My 
nan^e  is  Puspadanta  ;  hear  what  Siva  has  comma aded  me  to  tell  you. 
"  You  better  now  give  back,  to  the  Devas,  the  rights  that  they  had  before  " 
The  Devas  went  to  Sri  Hari  and  had  takeo  His  refuge,  ori  Hari  gave 
over  to  Siva  one  S'iila  weapon  and  asked  the.  Devas  to  depart.''  "At 
present,  the  three  eyed  Deva  is  residing  under  the  shade  of  a  Ba|a  tree 
on  the  banks  of  the  Puspabhadra  river.  He  told  me  tot  speak  this  tp  you, 
"Either  give  over  to  the  Devas  their  rights,  or  fight  with  me.''  Please 
.reply  and  I  will  speak  to  Him  accordingly."  Sakhachiida,  hearing  the 
messenger's  words  laughed  aud  said  "Tomorrow  morning  T. will  start, 
ready  for  war.  Better  go  away  to-day."  The  mesjsenger  went  back  to 
Siva  and  replied  to  Him  accordingly.  In  the  meantime  the  following 
personages  joined  Siva  and  remained  seated  on  excellent  aerial  cars,  built  of 
jewels  and  gems.  The  following,  were  the  persons  :-^Skanda,  Virabhadra, 
Nandi,  Mahakala,  Subhadraka,  Vis'^laksa,  Bana,  Pingalaksu,  Vikampana, 
Virupa,  Vikriti,^  Manibhadrd,  Vasklla,  Kapil^ksa,  Dirgha  Dangalra, 
Vikata,  Tamraloebana,  Knlikintha,  Balibhadra,  .  Kalajihba,  Kiitichara, 
Balonmatta,  FJanas'laghi,  Durjaya^  Durgama,  (these  eight  Bhairavas), 
eleven  Rudvas,  eight  Vasus,  ludra,  the  twelve  Adityai*,  firu,  ,  moon, 
Vis'vakarm^,  the  two  As'vins,  Kuvera,  Yama^  Jayanta, .  Naia,  Ki^bara. 
V&yu,  Varuna,  Budha,  Mangala,  Dharma,  Saul,  Is'anjsi,  Jbp  powerful 
Kamadeva.  Ugradamatra,  Ugrachanda,  Kotara,  Kaitabhi,  and  the  eight 
armed  terrible  Devi  Bhadrakali.  Kali  wore  the.  bloody  red  clothings 
and  She  smeared  red  sandal  paste  all  over  Her  body.         .      .      ,      -. 

Dancing,  laughing;  singing  songs  in  tune,  very  jolly,..  Shq.  bids  Her 
devotees  discard  all  fear,  and  terrifies  the  enemies.  Her  dip  is  terrible, 
lolling,  and  extends  to  one  Y'ojaua.  On  Her  eight.,  arnjs. She  holds 
conch,  disc,  mace,  lotus,  axe,  skin,  bow  and  arrows.  She  was  hplding  in 
Her  hands,  the  bowl  shaped  human  skull  ;.  that  was  very,  deep  and  one 
Yojana  wide.  Her  trident  reached  up  to  the  Heavens  ;  Her  weapon  called 
S'akti  (dart)  extended     to    one   Yojana.      Besides     there  .were..  Mudgara 


Book  IX.]  '         CHAPTER  XX.  885 

(maoa),    Musala     (club),     Vajra   (thunderbolt),     Kbeta,    (club),    brilliant 
Phftlaka     (shield),     the      Vaianava   weapon,     the    Varu  na    weapon,     the 
Agneyastra     (the  fire     weapon),  NAgapds'a    (cbe    noose    of  serpents),   the 
NarSyanastra,   the   Gandharva's     weapons,     the    Brahma's  weaponj?,    the 
Gadudistram,  the  Parjanayustram,  the  Pas\ipata8tram,the  JrimbhanJistram 
the  Purvatastram,    the     Mahes'Vdl-aatram,     the   Vayavyastraoa,    and    t-he 
, Sanmohanam      rod      and      various     other      infallible      divine'   weapons. 
Besides  hwiidreda  ot   other   divine  weapons  were"  with  Her.     THreh  Kotis  ot 
Yoginis  and    three    Kotis    and    a  hali    ot    teirible    DukinTs    were  attending 
Bbadrakllli.    Bhdtas,    (demons)    Pretax,     Pis^achas,     lvir^nianda»,  Hrahom 
UaiiSii^ia?,  Rakhfsasis,  Vetalas,   Yaksas    and   Kinnaras  also    were    there    in 
eounble^s  numbers.  At  this  time  Kartikeya  came  there   and  bowed  down  to 
his  father  Mahadevk.   He   askei    him  bo  take  his  seat  on  H:s  left  pide  and 
a»ked  him  to  help.  Then  che  army  rem  line  1  there  in  military  array.  On  the 
obher  hand,  when  Siva's  messenger  daparted,     S.»nkhaohuda  Vent   to  the 
zenana  and  informed  TtJasi  of  the  newy  of  an  impending    war.     No    sooner 
She  heard  than  her  throat  and  lips  and  palat»   baoimft  dried.  She  then  with 
♦.a  iorro>»ful    heirfc  spoke    in    s^rean  words:— "()  my    Jiord -I  0  my  Krieiid  ! 
.0  the  filler  of  My  life  !    Wait    foi    a    moment  and  take  your  seat    on    My 
heart.     Instil  life    in    Me    for   a  moment.     Sabisly  My   desire    of    Kirman 
birth.,    hat  me  behold  you  fully  so  that  my  eyea  be-  satijflied.     My    breath 
is  now  very  agitated.    1    eaw    by    the    end    of  the    night   one   bwi   dream. 
Therefore,  I  feel  an    internal    burning*     Thus   at   the  •words    of  Tulasi,  the 
king  S'ankhaehud.*    finishad  his  me&ls  and   began  to  address    her.    iru  good 
.and  true  words,  baneficinb   to    her:—"  0  My  Laxly  !    It  is  Kaia  (the  time- 
ifchat  Ufings  out  these  variou' ombinatioos  by  which    the    Karmie  fruit   is 
enjoyed  ;    it  u  Kala  thao  awanls  auspieions  and  inauspicious    things  ;   this 
Kala  is  the  Sold    M»ster  t  >  impart  pain,    fear,  ami.  good    and    bud  thing*. 

.'1-84.  Trees  grow  up  in  lime  ;  their  branches,  etc.,  come  out  iu  tim©  ; 
I  flowers  appear  in  time  and  fruits  come  out  in  lime.  Friiit.s  are  ripened 
in  timo  an  1  after  giying  th-  fniit;s,  they  die  out  also  in  time.  0  Fair 
One  !  The  univeiise  corner  into  existence,  in  time  and  die*  away  in 
tfimj.  The  Craitif,  Preieivei,  an  I  l)es  troyer  of  the  univerie,  are  creat- 
ing, preserving  and  destroying  tie  worlds  with  the  .  help  of  .time. 
Time  guides  them  in  every  way.  But  the  Highest  ^^rakriti  is^  the  God 
of  Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Mahes'a  (  i  e.^  the  .Creatrii:  of  Time).  This 
Highest  Prakriti,  the  Highest  Ood  is  .creating, .preserving  and  destroying 
this  universe.  She  make i  the  Time  dance.  i3y  Her  mere  Will,  She  has 
converted  Her  inseparable  Prakriti  jnto  Maya  and  is  thus  creating  all 
things,  moving^  and  unmoving.  She  ia  the  Uuler  of  allj  the  J^priu^^f  all, 
■ad  She  is  tha  Highist   Goi.     By    Hdr   is   beiaj  djaa  thu   ortA^iaA    »i 


8S6  ^Bt  MADPEVt  BHiOAVATAM. 

persons  by  per^oas,  this   preservftCioa    of  pcrsoQs   by   peisoui,    and   this 
deelructiou  of  {tersoas   by   i^ersoDs.     So  you  better  dow  Uke  refuge  of  kbe 
Highest  Lord.     Know  it  is  by  Iler  commAod  the  wind  \b  blowing,   by  Her 
comuftod  tbe  ^uu  is  giving  heat  in  dae  time)   by    Her  command  Indr^^   is 
showering  rains  ;   by  Her  command,  Death   ia   striding    over  the  beings  ; 
by  Her  command  fire  is  burning  all  things  and  by  Her  command   the  oeol- 
iog  MooQ  is  revolving.     She  is  the  Death  of  death,  the  Time  of  time,  Yama 
of  yama  (the  God  of  death),   the    Fire   of   fire   and  the   Destroyer  of    the 
destroyer.     So  take  Her  refuge.     Vou  cannot  find  .  and  fix   who   is   whose 
friend  in  the  world  ;   so  pray  to  Her,  the  Highest  CJoi,  Who  is  the   Frieod 
of  All.     Oh  !    Who  am  I  ?  And   who  are  you  either?  The  Creator  is  the 
combiner  of  us  two  and  so  He  will  dissooiate  us  two  by  our  Karma.    When 
difficulty  arises,  the   ignorant   fools   become    overwhelmed    with    sorrow  ; 
but  th«  intelligent  Pandits  do  not  get  at  all  deluded  or   become  distressed. 
By  the  Wheel  of  Time,  the  beings  are  led  sometimes  into  happiness  ;  some- 
times into  pain.     You  vill  certainly  get  Nar&yana   for  your   husband  ;  for 
which  you  practised     Tapas  before,  in  the  hermitage  of   Vad»ri   (the   source 
oi  the  Gfknges,  the  feet  of   Visnu).     I    pleased    Brahm^   by    my    Tapasya 
and  have,  by  his  boon,  got  you  as  my  wife.     But  the  object  for  which   you 
did  your  Tapasya,  thai  you  may  get  Hari  as  your  husband,  will    csrtainly 
be  fulfilled.     You    will   get  Gobinda    in    Vrin  Iftban^   and  in    the  region  ot 
Goloka.    1  will  also  go   there  when  I  forsake  this,  my  Demjn  body.     Now 
I  am    talking   with  you   h^re ;    afterwards    we    will    meet  again   in    the 
rrgion    of  Goloka.    By    the   curse    of   B^dhiksl,     I    have    come    to   this 
BhArata,  hard  to  bo  ikttainsd.     You,  too,  will  quit  this  body  and,   assuming 
the  divine  form  will  go  to  S'ri  Hari.     So,  O    Beloved  !    You    need    not  be 
sorry."     O  Munit   Thus  these  conversations  took    them    the    whole  day 
and  led  them  to  the  •veuing   time.     The   king   of  the  demons,  S'ankba* 
cbiida  then  slept   with  Tulasi    on  a   nicely    decorated    bed,   strewn    with 
flowers,  and  smeared    with   sandal  paste,   in    the    Itatna   Mandir   (temple 
built  of  jewels.)    This  jewel   temple   was    adorned   with    various   wealjth 
and  riches.     The  jewel    lamps  were  lighted.     Sankbach&da  vassed  the  night 
with  his  wife  in  various   sports.     The     thin    bellied    Tuhisi    was    weepipg 
with  a    veiy   sorrowful     heart,     without    having    taken   any    food.      The 
king,  who  knew  the     reality  of  existence,  took  her   to  his  breast  and  ap- 
peased her  in    various  ways.     What  religious  instructions  he  had   received 
in  Bhindira  forest  from  S'ri  Krifna,  those  Tattvas,  capable  to  destroy  all 
sorrows   and  delusions,   he   now  spoke   carefully  to  Tnlasi.     Then  Tulast's 
joy  knew  no  bounds.     She   then  began  to   consider    everything   as   tran- 
sitnt  and  begaa   to  play  with  a  gladdened  heart.     Both  became  drowned  in 
'^'oOMi  of  bins;  aod  the  bodies  of  both  of  them  were   filled  with  joy 


Booi  It.]  CHA1?TiR  XXI.  8g^ 

.and  the  hairs  BtooJ  on  tbeir  euJs.  Both  of  them,  then,  a©«irous  to  have 
aiuoroas  sports,  joiiieJ  themaelvea  aud  became  like  Ardhanaris'vara  and 
go  oM  bodv.  As  Tulasi  considered  S'ankhachada,  to  be  h«r  lord,  so 
the  DSnava  Kioj  considered  TuUsi  the  darling  of  his  life.  They  bo- 
came  senseless  with  pleasureable  feelings  arising  out  of  their  amorous 
intercourses.  Next  moment  they  regained  their  consciousness  and  botu 
began  to  converse  on  amorous  matters.  Thus  both  spent  their  time 
jsiometimes  in  sweet  conversations,  sometimes  laughing  and  jokin**,  some- 
'  times  maddened  with  amorous  sentiments.  As  S'ankhachudai was  clever 
in  amoroas  affiiirs,  so  Tulasi  was  very  exj)ert.  So  none  felt  satiated 
with    love  aftairs  and  no  one  was  defeated  by  the  other. 

Here  ends  the  Twentieth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  war  pre. 
|i«rations  of  S'ankhachuda  with  the  Devas  in  the  MahapnrAnam  Sri  M»id 
Devi    Bh&gavatam  ot  IS, 000  verses  by  MahArpi  Veda  Vyftta. 


CHAPTER  XXr, 

1-33.  S'ri  N^ruyana  spoke: — Then  the  DSnava,  this  devotee'  of 
S'ri  Kri?n<»,  got  up  from  his  flower  strewn  bed,  meditating  on  S'rl 
Krisna,  early  in  the  morning  time,  at  the  Brahma  Muhilrta.  Uuitting  hit 
night  dre.«s,  he  took  his  bath  in  pure  watf>r  and  put  on  a  fresh 
Wished  clothing.  He  then  put  the  bright  TiUk  mark  on  hie  forehead 
and,  performing  the  daily  necessary  worship,  he  worshipped  his  Ista 
devati\  ( The  Deity  doing  good  to  him).  He  then  saw  the  auspicious 
things  such  as  curd,  ghe^,  honey,  fried  rice,  etc.,  and  distributed  as 
usual,  to  the  Bruhmanis  the  best  jewels,  pearls,  clothing  and  gold.  Then 
f«^r  his  marching  to  turn  out  auspicious,  he  gave  at  the  feet  of  his 
Guru  Ueva  priceless  gems,  jewels,  pearls,  diamonds,  etc.  ,and  finally 
he  gave  to  the  poor  Br&hmins  with  great  gladness,  elephants,  horses, 
wealth,  thousands  of  stores,  two  l&khs  of  cities  and  one  hundred  kolis 
of  villages.  He  then  gave  over  to  his  sou,  the  charge  of  his  kingdom 
snd  of  his  wife,  and  all  the  don)inioup,  wealth,  property,  all  the 
servants  and  niaid  servants,  all  the  store;?  and  conveyances.  He  dies"- 
sed  himself  for  the  war  and  Look  up  bows  and  arrows  and  arrow 
cases.  By  the  command  of  the  King,  the"  armies  began  to  gather.  Three 
iakhs  .of  horses,  one  lakh  elephants,  one  ayuta  ohariota,  three  Ket  e 
of  bowmen,  three  Kotis  armoured  soldiers  and  three  Kotis  of  trident 
holders  got  themselves  ready.  Then  the  King  counted  his  forces  atod 
appointed    one    Com  macder-in-Chief,     (Mahfiratha*),    skilled     in     trts    of 


S8S     '  ^nt   MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

warfare,   over     the   whole   army.     Tbua     the     generajs     were    a^Roipteil 
over   tfie    three  .  lakh    Aksauhiui    forces    and    their  provieious  were  eolleQ- 
tiii   by   three  huodraj    Vk§  auhini     men.     He,    then,     thinkyig     of    5i"»;v^ 
lUri,   starCeJ    for  war,    rtccompanied     by     his     vast  .^riuy.     iVo^ :— Qnfl  . 
AksiuhinV  ooiisists   ot  a   large,  army     copBisti»g,    of     2187Q    Qbariofcfl,   . 
as  many   elephauts,  (55,010  horses,  and  lp9,350    foot).     He   theq    moimted 
on   a   chariot   built  of  exeallent  jewels  and,   headed  by  his  Gum  and  all  his    . 
other   elder:!,    went   tj  S'ankiM.     O  Xarala !.  Bhajf^vriii    Mahsldeva    was     . 
at   that   time;     staying     on    the      bauka    of     Pu^pj^bhadr^.     That  ..  place 
was   Siddhria'rama   (the    hermita;,'e   where    the  yoj^icj   successes    bad    boen 
obtained    and   can   easily   be  acquired    in    future    for.  the  Siddhas   as   well 
a    Siddha    Iv§ettra.)     It.    was    the  place     where    the    Muui     Kapila     prac- 
tised   Tapasy&j    in   the    holy   land    of   hhHeMn.     Jt   was  bounded    on    the 
east    by   -tbe   western    ocean,  on  the  wefet  by  trhe  Malaya   mountain*,  on  the 
south,   by    the    SVi    Saila   mountain,  and    on- 'the    north  by    th^  •Gaudha 
M3dana   Mountain.     It  was  live    yojanas   wide    and     one    hundred  times 
&9   long.     This   auspicious    river   in    Bharata   yields   j,a-oat  religious  merits 
and   is   always    full    of   cle-tr,     sptrklint^     ruouin;^     water.     She     is     the 
favourite   wife   of  the    Salt    Ocean    and    She     is    vary     blessed.     Issuing 
from  S'ararvati-.  llim^layus,  She   drops     into    the     ocean;     Keeping    the 
river    Gomati    (Goomti)    by    her    left;   She    falls     i'.'to    the     west    ocean.' 
Sankhachuda,     arriving   there,     saw     Mah^deva      under   a     Poepal     ttee 
near    its    root- with  a   smilin.:   cou-ntenance,  like  one   Koti  Suue   seated  iii 
a    yogie    iMjatui-e.     Lli^  colour   was  white    like  a  pure    crystal  ;  as    if  the 
Fire  of»  13rahuia  .was    emitting    from    every    pore    of  Hi«    body   (burning 
witii    Brahmi-'iltjja)  ;    lie    wa^.  wearing    the  tiger    ekin    and  hcflding     the 
uident-and  axe.      He  dispels  the    fear   of  death  of  His    Bhaktas  ;  His  face 
IS  <iuite   calm,     lie,   tiie    Lord  o\'  Gauri,    is    the   Giver  cff  the   fruits  of 
Tai>asy&  and    of    all    sort*  of    ^vealth    and    prosperity.     The   smiling  face 
of  As'utosa   (one   who    is    pleased   quickly)  is   always     thinking    of    the 
welfava 'ot    the    Bhitktas ;    He   is   the    Lord  of  the    X^niverse,     the    Seed 
of  the  universe,    the 'All-form     (all-pervading),  and  the  Progenitor   of  the 
iinivertse.     Hn   is   omnipresent,    AH  pervading,    the    Best    in  this  nniverse-, 
the    Destroyer    ol    tliis    tiniver«!e>    the  Cause    of  all  causes,  and' the  Saviour 
from   the   hells.     H«    is  -the    Awakoner   and    Bostower  of  Koowledi»e,  the 
Seed  o£.  all    knowledges,   and   He    HimseU  is    of  the  nature  ot  Knowledge 
and    Bliss.     Seeing    that    Eternil    Purusi,    the    King   of  rthe   D&navas  at 
once   des»jeuded   from,  his  •  chariot   and   bowed-  down     with     devotion    to 
Him   and   to    Bhadra  Kali,    on-    lUs     left   and     and    to     Karfcikeya    ob 
his  front.  .The  o^hev  attjjjujiantd  didv-jthe    same, —  S'ankara,  Bhadra  Kali  and  '* 
Skanda  t\\   blessed   him.     Nandis'vara   and    others  •  got     up   from  their 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXI.  889 

seats   on   seeing    the    Diuava  Kini^    and  began    to   talk  with  each  other 
ou    thut   subject.     The    King    addressed    S'iva   and  sat  by  tlini.      Bhaga- 
van    Mdhldeva,    the  Tranquil  Self,   then,    spoke  to   him,  thus:  — "  O  King  ! 
lirahma,    the    knower    of   Dharma   and    the    Creator      of   the     world,     is 
the    Father    of  Dharma,     The   religious    Marichi,    a  devotee  of   Visnu,  is 
the    tjon    of    Brahma.     The    religious      Prajttpati     Kas'yapA   i^      also   the 
Brahma's    son.     Daksa    gladly    gave   over    to    Kas'yapa    in    marriage,  his 
thirteen    daughter.^.     Danu,    fortunate    and    chaste,    is    also    one  of  them. 
34-64.     Danu    had    forty    sons,    all    spirited    and    known    as   D^navas. 
Tlie     powerful    Viprachitti    was    the     prominent   amongst    them.     Vipra- 
ulutti'a   son  was    Dambha,    self   controlled  and     very  much    devoted     to 
Vijnu.     So    much    so     that    for  one  lakh    years    he     recited     the    Visnu 
mantra    at    Puskara.     His    Guru    (spiritual     teacher)    was     S'ukracharya; 
aud,   by    his    advice,    he   recited    the  mantra    of   Sri  Krisna,    the  Highest 
Self.     He    got    you    as    his    son,     devoted   to    Krisna.     In    your     former 
birth,  you    were    the    chief   attendant    Gopa  (cow-herd)    of  Krisna.     You 
were    very    religious.     Now,  by  Radhika's  curse,  you  are  born  in  Bharata, 
as   the    Lord    of  t'le  Datiavas  powerful,  heroic,    valorous,    and   chivalrous. 
All  the  things  from   Brahm^    down    to    a  blade   of   grass,    the    Vaisnavas 
regard  as  very  trifling ;    even  if   they    get    Salokya,    Sarsti,    Sayujya    and 
Samipya  of  Hari,  they  do  not  care  a  straw  for  that.   Without  serving  Hari, 
they  do  not  accept  those  things,  even  if  those  are   thrust    on   them.     Even 
Brahmahood     and      immortality,     the       Vaisnavas     count      for    nothing. 
Th'y  want  to  serve    Hail    (Seva-bhava).      Indrahoou,    Manuhood,    they  do 
not  care.     You,  too,  are  a  real  Krisna  BhakLa.    So    what  do    you    care    for 
thosft  thiugs  that  belong  to  the  Devas,  that  are  something  like  false  to  you. 
Give    back   to    the    Devas    their    kingdoms  thus  and  please    Me.     Let  the 
Devas  remain  in  their  own  places  and  let  you  enjoy  your  kingc'om    happily. 
No  nee  J  now  for  further  quarrels.      rhiiik  that  you  all    belong  to   the  same 
Kas'yapa's  family.     The  sins  that  are    incurred,    for  example,    the    murder 
of  a  Brahmin,   etc,   are    not  even    one-sixteenth    of  the  sins  incurred  by 
hostilities  amongst  the  relatives.     If,  0  King  !  Y'ou  think  that   by    giving 
away  to  the  Devas  their  possessions,  your  property  will  be  diminished,  then 
think  that  no  one's  days  pass  ever  in  one  and  the  same  condition.  Whenever 
Prakriti  is  dissolved,  Brahma  also  vanishes.   Again  He  appeara  by  the   Will 
of  God.     This  occurs  always.     True,    that  knowledge  is    increased  by  true 
Tapasy^  ;   but    memory   fails     then.     This     i?    certain.     He    who    is    the 
creator  of  this  world,  does  his  work    of   creation    gradually  by    the  help   of 
his  Knowledge-power  (Jnana-S'akti).     In  the    Satya  Yuga,  Dharma  reigns 
in    full  ;    in  the    Treta    Yuga,    one    quarter    is   diminished  ;   again    in    the 
Dvilpara  only  one-half  remains.     And  in  the  Kali  Yuga,    only   one   quarter 
remains.    Thus    Dharma    gets    increase   and  decrease.    At  the    end    of    th^ 

112 


890  &Kt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM.  . 

Kali,  the  Dhanna  will  be  seen  vary  feeble  as  the  phase  of  the  Moon 
is  seen  very  thin  on  the  Dark  Moon  night,.  See,  again,  the  Sun  is  very 
powerful  in  summer  ;  not  so  in  winter.  .\t  midday  the  Sun  i:^  very  hot  ; 
it  does  not  remain  so  in  the  morning  and  evening  ?  The  Sun  rises  atone 
time  ;  then  he  is  considered  as  youug  ;  at  another  time  he  becomes  very 
powerful  and  at  another  time  he  goes  down.  Again  in  times  of  distress  {i.  e., 
during  the  cloudy  days)  the  Sun  gets  entirely  obscu'-ed.  When  the  Moon 
i^^  devoured  by  Kahu  (in  the  Lunar  Eclipse),  the  Moon  quivers.  Again  when 
the  Moon  becomas  liberated  (i.e.,  when  the  eclipre  passes  away)  She 
becomes  bright  again.  In  the  Pull-Moon  night  She  becomes  full -but 
She  does  not  remain  so  always.  In  the  Dark  fortnight  She  wanes  every  day. 
In  the  bright  fortnight  She  wtixes  every  day.  In  the  bright  fortnight, 
the  Moon  becomes  healthy  and  prosperous  and  in  the  dark  fortnight,  the 
Moon  becomes  thinner  and  thinner  as  if  attacked  with  consumption.  In  the 
time  of  eclipse  She  becomes  pale  and  in  the  cloudy  weather,  She  is  obscured. 
Thus  the  Moon  also  becomes  powerful  at  one  time  and  weak  and  pale 
at  another  time.  Yali  now  resides  in  Patala,  having  lost  all  his  fortunes  ; 
but,  at  some  other  time,  he  will  become  Devendra  (the  Lord  of  the  Devas). 
This  earth  becomes  at  one  time  covered  with  grains  and  the  restiu^-place 
of  all  beings  ;  and,  at  another  time.  She  becomes  immersed  under  water.  This 
universe  appears  at  onetime  and  disappears  at  another.  Every  thino-,  movin" 
or  non-moving,  sometimes  appears  and  again,  at  another  time,  disappears. 
Only  Brahma,  the  Highest  Self,  remains  the  same.  By  His  grace,  I  have  got 
the  name  Mrityunjaya  (the  Conqueror  of  Death).  I,  too,  -am  witnessing 
many  Pr^kritik  dissolutions,  I  witnessed  repeatedly  many  dissolutions  and  will 
in  future,  witness  many  dissolutions,  The  Paramatman  bscomes  of  the  nature 
of  Prakriti.  Again  it  is  He  that  is  the  Purusa  (male  principle).  He  is  the 
Self;  He  is  the  individual  soul  (Jiva),  He  thus  assumes  various 
forms.  And,  again,  Lo  !  He  is  beyond  all  forms  !  He  who  always  repeats  His 
Name  and  sing?  His  Glory,  can  conquer,  at  some  occasion,  death.  He 
1=  not  to  come  under  the  sway  of  this  brith,  death,  disease,  old  age  and  fear. 
He  has  made  Brahmi  the  Creator,  Visau  the  Preserver  and  Me  the  Destro- 
yer. By  His  Will,  we  are  possessed  of  thase  influences  and  po.vers.  O  Kin<:r  i 
Having  deputed  Kaia,  Agni  and  Rudra,  to  do  the  destruction  work,  I  Myself 
repeat  only  His  name  and  sing  His  glory,  day  and  night,  incessantly. 
My  name  is,  on  that  account,- Mrityunjaya.  By  His  Knowlege  Power,  I 
am  fearless.  Death  flies  away  fast  from  Me  as  serpents  flv  away  at  the 
sight  of  Gariida,  the  Vinatfi't-  son.  O  Narada  !  Thus  .aying,  ^arabhu,  the 
Lord  of  all,  the  Progenitor  of  all,  remained  silent.  Healing  the  above 
words  of  gambhu,  the  King  thanked  Maluuleva  ag.in  and  ag.ln  and  spoke 
in  sweet  humble  words. 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXI.  891 

65-74.  SaukhaehuJa  said:— "The  words  spoken  by  Thee  are  quite  true. 
Still   I   am   speakiiii^    a   few     words.  Kindly    hear."     Thou    hast    spoken 
just  now  that  very  great   sins    are   incurred   by    kindred    hostilities.     How 
is  it,  then,  that  He  robbed    Vali    of  his    whole    possessions    a  cd    sent   him 
down  into  Piitala.  ?     Gadadhara    Visnu    could    not    recover     Vali's  glory. 
But    I     have    done    that.      Why     did     the     Davas    kill    Hiranyaksa  and 
Hiranyakas'ipu,  S'utnbha  and   the    other  D&navas  ?  In  by   gone    days,  we 
laboured  hard  when  the  nestar  was  obtained    out    of   the    churning   of  the 
ocean;  but  the  bsst  fruit  was  reapad  by  tha  Davas  only.  However,  all  these 
point  that  this  universe  is    bub  the  mere  sporting    ground  of    Pararaatman, 
Who  has  become  of  the  nature  of  Prakriti  (the  polarities  of  the  one  and  the 
same    current  to    produes  electric  effects).      Whomsoever    He  grants    glory 
and  fortune,  he  only  gets  that.  The  quarrel  of  the   Devas  and  the  Danavas  i^ 
eternal,     Victory  and   defeat    cjme    to    both    the    parties    alternately.     So 
it  is  not  propar  for  Thee  to   come  hera  in  this    hostility.      For  Thou  art  the 
God,  of  the   nature   of  the  Highest  Self.     Before  Thee,   we  both    are    equal 
So  it  is  a  matter  of  shame,  no  doubt,  for  Thee  to  stand    up    against    us    in 
favour  of  the  gods.     The  glory  and  fame    that  will  result  to  Thee,    if  Thou 
art  victorious,  will  not  be  so  much  as  it  will  be  if    we  get  the    victory.     On 
the  contrary  the  inglory  and  iuTimy  that  will  result  to    Thee  if  Thou    dost 
get  dire  defeat  will  be  inconceivably    much    more    than    what   would   come 
to  us  if  we  are  defeated.    (For  wo  are  low  and  Thou  art  Great.) 

75-79.  Mahadeva  laughed  very  much  when  he  heard  the  Danava'.s 
words  and  replied; — "O  King!  You  are  descemled  from  the  BrShmin 
family.  .So  what  shame  shall  I  incur  if  I  get  defeat  in  this  fighting  against 
you.  In  former  days,  the  figlit  took  place  between  ISFadhu  and  Kaitabha  ; 
again  between  Hirany"^  Kas'i[)U  and  Hiranyaksa  and  S'ri  Hari.  I  also 
fought  with  the  Asura  TripurS.  Again  the  serious  fight  took  place  aLo 
between  S'umbha  and  the  othtr  Daityas  and  the  Highest  Prakriti  Dev't, 
the  Ruler  ot  all,  and  the  Progenitrix  of  all  and  the  Destructrix  of  all. 
And,  then,  you  were  the  P^risada  attendant  of  oii  Krisna,  the  Highest 
Self. 

Note: — ori  Krisna  is  the  Eternal  Purusa  beyond  the  Gunas.  He 
creates  Prakriti.  All  the  creation  is  effected  by  Him.  He  is  the  Master 
of  all  the  Saktis.  These  Saktis  come  from  Him  and  go  unto  Him.  Sri 
Krisna  plays  with  these  Saktis,  these  lines  of  Forces,  very  powerful  and 
terrible,  indeed,  that  go  to  create,  preserve  and  destroy  the  whole  universe. 
These  Lines  of  Forces  have  their  three  properties  : — (1)  Origin  ;  (2)  direc- 
tion and  (3)  magnitude.  And  finally  they  come  back  to  their  origin. 
This  makes  one  Kalpa,  one  Life,  one  Moment,  one  in  the  Full  One.  The 
Gunas   come    out  of    these    Saktis,   these  Lines    of    Forces,     ori    Krisna 


892  5r1  MA.D  DEVt  BHiClAVATAM. 

is  the  Grreat  Reservoir,  the  Great  Centre  of  Forces,  Powerful,  Lovely  and 
Terrible.  All  the^e  eveuts  as  described  here,  appear  iti  the  intermediate 
stages  when  the  Fourth  Dimension  passes  into  the  Third  Dimension, 
etc.  The  Fourth  Dimension  does  not  at  once  turn  out  into  the  Third 
Dimension  but  it  takes  place  by  degrees.  This  explains  our  dreams, 
visions,  etc.  which,  if  seen   when  the  mind  is  pure,  turn  out  to  be  true. 

80-82.  So  the  Daityas,  that  were  killed  before,  cannot  be  compared 
with  you.  Than  why  shall  I  feel  shame  in  fighting  against  you  ?  I  am 
sent  here  by  Sr'i  Hari  for  saving  the  Devas.  So  either  give  biick  to  the 
Devas  their  possessions,  or  fight  with  Me,  No  need  in  speaking  thus 
quite  useless  talks  O  N:\rada  !  Thus  speaking,  Bhagav^n  Sank'ira 
■remained  silent.     5ankhaehada  got  up  at  once  with  his  ministers. 

Here  ends  the  Twenty-first  Chapter  in  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  meeting 
of  Mahadeva  an  1  ^ankaehuda  for  an  encounter  in  conflict  in  the 
Mahapurarjam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhigavatam  of  18,000  vers'is  by  Mah%rsl 
Veda  Vy4sa. 


CHAPrERXXII. 

1-75      bri  Narayaua  spoke: — "  Then  the  King  of  the    Dmavas,    very 
powerful,  bowed  down  tj  Mahadevaaud  ascended  on  the    chariot  with  his 
ministers.  Mahadova  gave  orders  to^His    army    to    be  ready    at    once.      So 
:sankhachuda   did.    Terrible    fight    then    ensued    between    Mahendra   and 
VrisaparvS,  Bhiskara  and   Viprachitti,    Nis'akara  and      Danibha,    between 
Kala  and  Kales'vara,  between  Fire    and    Gokuna,     Kuvera  and    Killakevg 
between     Vi=!'vakarm§.    and      INIaya,  between    Mrityu       and      Bliavamkar 
between  Yama    and    Sarahara,    between     Varnna   and    Vikamka,    between 
Budha     and    Dhritapristha,    between    ^ani    and    Kakt^ksa,    .Tayanta   and 
Ratnasara,    b-twean  the  Vasus  and    Varcha^as,    between    the    two    As'vin 
Kumaras    and    Diptim^M,      between     Nalakiibara    and    Dhumra,    between 
Dharma  and    Dhurandhara,    between    Ma.igala    and     Usaksa,    Bhanu    and 
Sovakara,  beeween  Kandarpa    and    Pithara,   between    the   eleven   Aditvas 
and  Godbamukha,  Churna  and  Khadgadhvaj-i,   Kanchimukha    and    Pinda 
Dhumra  and  Nandi,  between  Vis'va  and  Pal^s 'a,  between  the  eleven  Rudras 
and     the   eleven     Bhayamkaras,     between     Ugrachanda    and      the    othe . 
Mahamaris  and  Nandis'vara  and  the  other  Danavas.     Tne  battlefield,  then, 
assumed  a  grim  aspect,  as  if  the  time    of  Dissolution  had  come.    Bhagavan 
Mahadeva  sat  under  the  Vata  (peepul)  tree  with  Kartikeya  and  Bhadrakaii. 
Sankhachuda,  decked  with  his    jewel   ornaments,  sat   on    th  jewel   throne, 
surrounded  by  kotis  and  kotic  of  Danavas.  The  ^ankara's  army  got  defeated 
at  the  hands   of  the    Danavas.     The  Davas,     with   cuts   and    wounds    on 


Rook  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXII.  893 

their  bodies,  fled  from  the  battlefield,  terrified.  Iv^rtikeya  gave  words 
'•  Do'ut  fe»r  "  to  the  Devas  aud  excited  them.  Only  Skanda  resisted  the 
Daaava  forces  In  one  moment  he  slew  one  hundred  Aksauhini  Dan:iva 
forces.  The  lotus  eyed  KSli  also  engaged  in  killing  the  Asuras.  She 
became  very  angry  and  no  sooner  did  She  slay  the  Asura  forces,  than  She 
began  to  drink  their  blood.  She  easily  slew  with  Her  one  hand  and  at 
every  time  put  into  Her  moath  ten  lakhs,  and  hundred  lakhs  and  Kotis 
and  Kotis  of  elephants.  Thousands  and  thousands  of  headless  bodies 
(Kivandhas)  came  to  be  witnessed  in  the  field.  The  bodies  of  tlif- 
Danavas  were  all  cut  and  wounded  by  the  arrows  of  Kartikeya.  They  were 
all  terrified  and  fl<id  away.  Only  VrisaparvS,  Viprachitti,  Dambha^  and 
Vikamkanah  remained  fighting  with  Skanda  with  an  heroic  valour. 
M&hamarl,  too,  did  not  shew  his  back  and  he  fought  out  vigorously.  By 
and  by  they  all  became  very  much  confused  and  distressed  ;  but  they 
did  not  turn  their  backs.  Seeiug  this  terrible  figfit  of  Skanda,  the  Devas 
began  to  shower  flowers.  The  killing  of  ihe  D&navas  looked  like  a 
Pr^kritik  Dissolution.  Sankhachuda,  then,  began  to  shoot  arrows  from 
his  chariot. 

The  shooting  of  arrow-^  by  the  king  seemed  as  if  rains  were  being  poiire  I 
in  by  the  clouds      Everything  became  pitch    dark.      Piros    only    were    seen 
emitting  their  golden  tongues      The    Devas,    Nandis'vara  and    others,    fled 
away,     trurified        Only     Kartikeya    remained    in    the    battlefield.      Then 
bankh^chuda   began   to    throw    terribly    sh>wers    and    showers    of   moaii- 
tiiins,  snakes,  stones,  and  tr.^es.     So  much  sj,  that   Kartikeya    was    covered 
by  them  as  the    Sun  becomes    obscured  by    fjg.     The    Damon    King    cut 
off  the  weighty  q-iiver  and  the  pedestal  of  Skanda  and    broke   Ilis    chariot. 
By  the  divine    weapons    of   the     Danava,    the     peacock   (the    vehicle)    of 
Kartikeya  became    exhausted.      Kartikeya    threw    0!)e    ^akti    (weapon)    on 
the  breast  of  the  Dauava  ;   but    before    it    fell,    the    Ddn  iva   cut    off  that, 
lustrous  like  the  Sun  and,  in   return,    darted  his  ^akti.     By    that    stroke, 
Kartikeya  beoima  stunn'.d  for  a  moment ;  but  he  immeJiately  regained  his 
cjnseiousness.  He  then  took  up  the  quiver  thit  Bhagavan  Vi?nu  gave    him 
before  and  many    other    weipons  ;  and  ascending  on    another  chariot,  built 
of  jewels,  began  to  fight  out    violently     and  valiantly.   (Jetting   angry,    he 
resisted  all  those    showers   of  snakes,  mountains   aud  trees    by    his    divine 
weapons.      He  resisted  fire  by  his    watery  (P:lryannya)    weapon.     Then    He 
C'lt    off    easily    Sankhachuda's    chariot,    bow,    armour,      charioteer,    and 
his  bright  crown  aud  he  threw  on  his  breast   one  blazing  5akti    of    white 
cjloar.     Thd   Danaveudra  fell  unconscious;  bub,    at    the    next    moment,  he 
regained     his    consciousness    quickly,    mounted    on   another     chariot   aud 
took  a  fresh  quiver.     The  Dftnava  was  the   foremost  in  his    magio  powers. 
He,  by  his  power  of  MXyX,    maid  a   BhjWdr    of  arrows    so    much   so   thai 


894  ^Rt  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

K^rtikeya  became  completely  eovi3ifiJ  by  that  maltitiule  of  airowa.     Then 
the  Dinava  took  one  invincible  Sakti,  lustrous  like  one  hundred  Suns,     It 
seemed  that  flimes  of  fire  were  licking  high  as  if  the    Disolution  Time    had 
come  aright.  Inflamed  by  anger,  the  Dilnava  threw  that  Sikti  on  K^rtikeya. 
It   seemed,  then,  that  a  burning  m:i«s  of  fire    fell   on   him.     The   powerful 
Kartikeya  became    sensales?.   Bhilrakali    immediately  took    Him    on   Her 
lap  and  carried  him  lefore  S'iva.     S'iva  easily  rcitored  him    t  >    his    life  by 
his  kriowledge-po.ver  and  gave  him  the  indomitable  stren<^th.      He  then  got 
up  in  fud    vigour.    Mhadrakali    went    to    the  field  to   see  the  Kortikeya's 
f)rees.       Nandi^'vara  and    other  heroes,  the  Devas.    Gindharbas,    Yaksas. 
li^ksasas   and    Kinnaras   followed    Her.       Hundreds   of    war    drums   were 
sounded  and  hundreds    of   persons   carried    Madhu    (wine).     Going   to   the 
battle-ground,  She  gave  a  vvar-cry.     The  Danava  torees  y:ut  fainted  by  that 
cry.     Bhairakaii  shouted  aloud    in  luspicious  peals  after  peals  of   laughter, 
Then  She  drank  Madhu  and   dancid    in    the    battlefiell.      Ugra   DamsUA, 
Ugrachand^,    ICoUvi,    the    Yoginis,    Dakinis,  and    the    Devas   all    drank 
Madhu   (wine).     Seoini;    Kali  in    the  battlefield,    S'ankhaehuda   came    up 
again   and  imparted  the    spirit    of  Fearlessnes    to  the    Daityas,  trembling 
with  fear.     Bhadr^kili  projected,  then,    the    Fire  weapon,  flaming  like  the 
Great  Disolution  Fire  ;   bat  the  ki.ig  quickly  put  out  that    by  the    Watery 
weapon.     Kali    then  projected  the  very  violent  and  wondertul    Varua&stra 
TheDiuavi    cutoff   that    easily   with    Gandharbastrn.      Kali    then   thre.v 
the  flame-like  Mahes'varflstra.    Th'^  king  made  it    futile     by    the    V  lisna- 
vHstra.     Then  the    Devi    purifying    the    Narayanastra   with    the    mantra, 
threw  it    on    the    king.     At    this    the    king   instantly    alighted    from    his 
chariot  and  bowed  down  to  it.     The  N^rayan^stra    rose  hitrh   up    like    the 
Dissolution  Fire.   S'ankhachuda  fell  prostrate  on  the  ground  with  devotion. 
The  Devi  threw,  then,    the    Brahmastra,    purifying   it  with   Mantra,     But 
it  was    rendered    futile    by   the    Danava's    Bralimaatra.     The    Devi  again 
shot  the   divine    weapons    purifying   them    witli    mantras  ;    but  they    also 
were  nullified  by  the  divine    weapons    of  the     Danava.     Then    BhadrakSli 
threw  one  Sakti  extending  to  one   Yojana.     The  Daitya  cut    it  to  pieces 
by  his  divine    weapon.      The    Devi,      then,   being    very     much      enraged, 
became  ready  to   throv  Pas'upata  Astra,  when  the  Incorpereal    Voice    was 
heard  from  the    Heaven«,  prohibiting    Her,    and    saying    "0    Devi!   The 
high-souled  Danava   would  not  be    killed    by  the  P^s'upata    weapon.       For 
Brahma    granted    him    this    boon    that    unt'l   the    Visnu's    Kavacha    wdl 
remain   on  his  neck  and  until  his  wife's  chastity   be    not    violated,    old   age 
and  death  will  not  be  able  to    touch  him."     Hearing   this  Celestial    Voice, 
the  Devi  at  once  desisted.     But  She    out    of  hunger,   devoured    hf\ndreds 
and  lakhs  of  Danavas.     The    terrible  Devi    Kali,  then,  went    with    great 
speed  to  devour  oankliAchada  but  the  P^nava  resisted    Her   by   his  sharp 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXIIL  895 

divine  weapons.  Tha  Devi  then  threw  ori  hira  a  powerful  axe,  lustrous 
likd  <i  juin  uer  Sun  ;  but  th3  Diaava  eat  it  to  pieces  by  his  divine 
weapon.  The  Devi  seeing  thi*?,  becaiuo  veiy  angry  and  proceeded  to 
devour  him  ;  bub  the  Danava  King,  the  Lord  of  all  Siddhis,  expanded 
his  body.  At  this,  Kali  basatne  violently  angry  unJ  assuming  a  terrific 
appearance,  went  quickly  and  with  the  blow  of  one  fist,  broke  his 
chariot  and  dropped  down  the  charioteer.  Then  she  hurled  on  the  Asura 
one  oula  weapon,  blazing  like  a  Pralaya  Fire.  Sankhachuda  easily  held 
that  by  his  left  hand.  The  Devi  became  angry  and  ttruck  the  Danava 
with  Her  fist;  the  Daitya's  head  reeled,  and,  rolling,  he  fell  unconscious 
for  a  moment.  Nest  m)ra9nt  regaining  his  consciousness  he  got  up.  But 
he  did  not  fight  hand  to  hand  with  the  Devi.  Rather  he  bowed  down 
to  lldr.  The  weapons  that  the  Devi  threw  afterwards  were  partly  cut  down 
by  the  Danava  and  partly  taken  up  by  hira  and  absorbed  in  him  and  thus 
reaJiral  futilj.  Th3n  BhiJrakali  caught  hold  of  the  Danava  and  whirling 
him  round  aud  round  threw  him  aloft.  Then  the  powerful  Sankha 
ahdda  fell  down  on  the  ground  from  high  with  great  forca  ;  he  imme. 
di-itely  got  up  and  bo.ved  down  to  Her.  He  then  gladly  ascended  on  his 
beautiful  chariot,  built  of  excellent  jewels.  He  did  not  feel  any  fatigue 
with  the  war  and  went  on  fighting.  Then  the  Devi  Bhadrakali,  feeling 
hungry  began  to  drink  the  blooJ  of  the  Danavas  and  ate  the  fat  and  flesh. 
She  came  before  Mahadova  and  described  to  Him  the  whole  history  of 
the  warfare  from  beginning  to  end.  Hearing  the  killing  of  the  DSnavas, 
Mthadeva  began  to  laugh.  She  went  on  ^»ying  '•  The  Danavas  that 
get  out  of  my  month  while  [  was  chewing  ihem,  are  the  only  onOg 
that  are  living.  Thi^  number  will  be  about  one  h\kh.  And  when  I 
took  up  the  Pas'upata  ue«|:ou  to  kill  the  Danava,  the  Incoiporeal  Celestial 
Voice  spoke:  — "  He  is  invulnerable  by  you."  But  the  very  powerful  DSnava 
did  u)  more  (ling  any  weapon  on  Me.  lie  simply  cut  to  pieces  those 
that    I  threw  on  h»m. 

Here  ends  the  Twenty-Second  Chapter  in  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  fight 
between  the  Devai  and  Sankhachuda  in  the  Mahapuranam  l§ri  Mad 
Dt-vi  Bh^gavatan  of  18,000  verseri  by  Maharai  Veda  Vya^a. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

1-6.  Njirayana  .^aid:  — Siva,  versed  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Highest 
Reality,  hearing  all  this,  went  himself  with  His  whole  host  to  the  battle. 
Seemg  Him,  Sankhachuda  alighted  from  his  chariot  and  fell  prostrate 
before  him.  With  great  force  he  got  up  and,  quickly  putting  on  his  armour 
he  took  up  his  huge  and  heavy  bow  case.     Then  a  great  fight  ensued  between 


896  Sr!  mad  DEVt  BUiGAVATAM. 

5iva  and  S'ankhachudrt  for  full  one  hundred  years  but  there  was  no  defeat 
nor  victory  on  oibher  siJe.  The  result  was  stalemate.  Both  of  them, 
Bhagav^n  and  the  Uan'iva  quitted  their  weapons.  SankhachAda, 
remained  on  his  chariot  and  Mahadava  ro  le  on  His  Bull.  Hundreds  and 
hundreds  of  Dinavaa  were -si  lin.  Bub  extraordinarily  endowed  with  divine 
power,  S'ambhu    restored  to  life  all  tho^e  of  His  party  that    were  slain. 

7-30.  lu  the  meanwhile,  an  aged  Bruhmana,  very  distressed  in  bis 
appearence,  came  to  the  b»ttletieH  and  asked  S'ankhachuda,  the  King 
of  Danavas  : — "  O  lvin«^  !  Grant  me  what  I  be-^  of  you  ;  you  give  away  in 
charity  all  sorts  of  wealth  and  riches  ;  give  me  also  what  I  desire  ;  give 
me,  a  Brahmin,  something  al-»o.  I  am  a  quiet  peaceable  aged  BrShmin,  very 
veiv  thirsty.  Make  your  Promise  first  and  then  I  will  speak  to  you  what  1 
liesire.  (.Vote. —The  Brahmins  only  are  fib  for  receiving  frauds  and  eheatiogs). 
The  King  S'ankachuda,  with  a  gracious  countenance  and  pleasing  ej^e^ 
swore  before  him  that  He  would  give  him  what  he  would  desire.  Then 
the  Br&hmin  spoke  to  the  King  with  great  affection  and  M^ya  : — "  1  am 
desirous  of  your  Kavacha  (amulet)."  The  King,  then,  gave  him  the 
Kavacha  (the  amule  t,  mantra  written  on  a  Bhurja  bark  and  located  in  a 
•Tolden  cup).  Bhagavin  Hari  (in  the  form  of  that  BrShmin)  took  that 
Kavacha  and,  assuming  the*  form  of  ^ankhchuda  came  to  Tulasi. 
Cominf  there,  He  made  His  MiyA  (magic)  mainfest  and  held 
sexual  intercourse  with  her.  At  this  time  Mah&deva  took  up 
the  Hari's  trident-aiming  at  the  king  of  the  Danavas.  The  trident 
looked  like  the  IVlid-day  Sun  of  summer,  flaming  like  a  Pralaya  fire,  It 
looked  irresistible  and  invincible  as  if  quite  powerful  to  kill  the 
enemies.  In  brilliance  it  equalle  1  the  Sudars'an  (Jhakra  (disc)  and  it 
was  the  chief  of  all  the  weapons.  No  other  body  than  6iva  ami 
Kes'ava  could  weild  such  a  weapon.  And  everybody  feared  that 
but  Siva  and  Kes'ava.  In  length  it  was  one  thousand  Dhanus  and 
in  width  it  was  one  hundred  hands.  It  seemed  lively,  of  the  nature 
of  Brahma,  eternal  and  not  capable  to  be  noticed,  whence  and  how 
it  proceeded.  The  weai)on  could  destroy,  by  its  own  free  Lila  (Will) 
all  the  worlds.  When  Siva  held  it  aloft  and  amining  at  6ankha- 
chuda  He  hurled  it  on  him,  the  King  of  the  Demons  quitted  his 
bows  and  arrows  and  with  mind  collected  in  a  yoga  posture,  began  to 
meditate  on  the  lotus-fjst  of  ^ri  Kiiana  with  great  devotion.  At  that 
moment,  the  trident,  whirling  round  fell  on  ^ankhachuda  and  easily 
burnt  him  and  his  chariot  to  ashes.  He,  then,  assuming  the  form  of 
a  two-armed  Gopa,  full  of  youth,  divine,  ornamented  with  jewels, 
boldin<»     flute,     mounted     on     a     Divine     Chariot,  surrounded  by    kotis 


Book  IX  J  CHAPTER  XXIV.  897 

and  kotiri  of  Gopas  who  caine  there  from  bhe  region  of  Goloka, 
whose  boiiei  weie  builfc  up  of  excelleafc  jewels,  and  Sankhaehuda  chen  went 
ii{)  to  the  Heaveos  (Goloka,  wher  i  Sri  Brindabana  is  located  ia  the  middle), 
lie  went  to  Vrindaban,  full  of  Ra?as  (sentimeats)  and  bowed  down  at 
the  lotus  feet  of  Radha  Krisria  with  devotion.  Both  of  them  were 
filled  with  love  when  they  saw  Sud3,rad,  and,  with  a  gracious  coun- 
rcianea  and  joyful  eyes,  they  tjok  him  on  their  laps.  On  the  other  hand 
the  Sula  weapon  came  with  force  and  gladness  back  again  to  Kri§na 
The  bones  of  Sankhr.chuda,  O  Narada  1  were  transformed  into  conch- 
shells.  These  conch-shells  are  always  '  considered  very  sacred  and  aus- 
picious in  the  worship  of  the  Devas.  The  water  in  the  conch-shell  is 
also  very  holy  and  pleasing  to  the  Davas.  What  more  than  this, 
that  the  water  in  the  conch-shell  is  as  holy  as  the  water  of  any 
Tirtha.  This  water  can  be  otfared  to  ail  the  Gods  but  not  to  ^iva. 
Wherever  the  conch-shell  is  blown,  there  Laksmi  abides  with  c^reat 
pleasure.  If  bathing  be  done  with  conch -shell  water,  it  is  equivalent 
to  taking  bath  in  all  the  Tirthas.  Hhagavun  Hari  resides  direct  in 
the  conch-shell.  Where  Sankha  is  placed,  there  Hari  resides,  Laksmi  also 
resides  there  and  all  inauspicious  things  fly  uway  from  there.  Where  the 
females  and  Sudras  blow  the  Sankhas,  Laksmi  then  gets  vexed  and,  out  of 
tarror.  She  goes  away  to  other  places.  O  Narada  !  Mahadeva,  after  killin*' 
the  Dauava,  went  to  His  own    abode.     When  He  gladly    went  away  on  His 

Vehicle,  on  the  Bull's  bick,  with  His  whole  host,  all  the  other  Devas 
went  to  their  respective  places  with  great  gladness.  Celestial  drums 
were   sounded  in  the  Heavens.     The    Gindh'3rba3  and  the  Kinnaras    began 

to  sing  songs.  And  shower^  of  flowers  were  strewn  on  l^iva's  head. 
All   the    Munis   and    Uevas    and    their    chiefs    began    to    chant    hymns  to 

Him. 

Here  ends  the  Twenty-Third  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
killing  of  5ankhachiida  in  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhugavtam  of  18,000  verses 
by  Maharsi    Veda  Vyasa. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

1.  Narada  said:  —  How  did  Narayana  impregnate  Tulasi  ?  Kindly 
describe  all   that  in  detail. 

2-11.     Narayana  said  : — For    accomplishing    the    ends    of  the    Devas 
BhagavSn    Hari    assumed  the    Vaianavi    Maya,    took   the    Kavaeha  from 
Sankhchiida      and      assuming      his     form,    went  to  the    house  of  Tulasi. 
Duudubhis    (celestial   drums)    were     sounded     at     Her     door,     shouts    of 

113 


I 

898  5Rt  MAD  DEVt  BhAgAVATAM. 

victory  ware  proclaimed  and  Tulasi  was  informed.  The  chaste  Tulasi,  bear- 
ing that  sound  very  gladly  looked  out  on  the  royal  road  from  the 
window.  Than  for  auspicious  observances,  She  offered  riches  to  the 
Brahmins  ;  then  She  gave  wealth  to  the  panegyrists  (or  bards  attached 
to  the  courts  of  princes),  to  the  beggars,  and  the  other  chanters  of  hymns. 
That  time  Bhagavan  Narayana  alighted  from  His  chariot  and  went 
to  the  house  of  the  Devi  Tulasi,  built  of  invaluable  gems,  looking 
excedingly  artistic  and  beautiful.  Seeing  her  dear  husband  before  her, 
She  bexjame  very  glad  and  washed  his  feet  and  shed  tears  of  joy  and 
bowed  down  to  Him.  Then  She,  impelled  by  love,  made  him  take 
his  seat  on  the  beautiful  jewel  throne  and  giving  him  sweat  scented 
betels  with  camphor,  began  to  say:—"  To-day  my  life  has  been  crowned 
with  success.  For  I  am  seeing  again  my  lord  returned  from  the  battle. 
Then  she  cast  smiling  glances  askance  at  him  and  with  her  body  filled 
with  rapturous  joy  lovingly  asked  him  the  news  of  the  war  in  sweet 
words  :— 

12-13.  O  Thou,  the  Ocoan  ot  meroy  !  Now  tell  me  of  your  heroic  valour, 
how  you  have  come  out  victorious  in  war  with  Mahadeva  who  destroys 
countless  universes.  Hearing  Tulasi's  word,  the  Lord  of  Laksmt,  in 
the  f'uise  of  ^ankhachuda,  spoke  these  neetar-Iike  words  with  a  smiling 
countenance. 

14-17.  O  Dear  1  Full  one  Samvatsara  the  war  lasted  betwixt  us. 
All  the  Daityas  were  killed.  Then  Brahma  Himself  came  and  mediated 
Peace,  then,  was  brought  about  and  by  the  command  of  Brahma.  1  gave 
over  to  the  Devas  their  rights.  When  I  returned  to  my  home,  S'iva 
went  back  to  His  S'ivaloka.  Thus  saying  !  Hari,  the  Lord  of  the 
world,  slept  and  then  engaged  in  sexual  intercourse  with  her.  But  the 
chaste  Tulasi,  finding  this  time  her  experienca  quite  different  from  what 
She  used  to  enjoy  bafore,  ar^'ued  all  the  time  within  herself  and  at  last 
questioned  him  : — 

18-22.  Who  are  you  ?  O  Magician  !  By  spreading  your  magic,  you 
have  enjoyed  me.  As  you  have  taken  my  chastity,  1  will  curse  you. 
Bhagav^n  Narayana,  hearing  Tulisi's  words  and  being  afraid  of  the 
curse,  assumed  His  real  beautiful  figure.  The  Devi  then  saw  the  Eternal 
Lord  of  the  Devas  before  her.  He  was  of  a  deep  blue  colour  like  fresh 
rain-clouds  and  with  eyes  like  autumnal  lotuses  and  with  playful  Lilas 
equivalent  to  tens  and  tens  of  millions  of  Love  personified  and  adorned  with 
jewels  and  ornaments.  His  faca  was  smiling  and  gracious  ;  and  he  wore  his 
yello<v-coloured  robe.     The  love-stricken  Tulasi,  seeing  That  Lovely  Form 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXIV.  899 

^  of  Vilsuleva,  immediately  fell  senseless  ;  and  at  th'3  next  moment,  regaining 
consciousness,  she  began  to  speak. 

23-27.     O  Lord  !  Thou   art   like  a  stone.     Thou    hast    no    mercy.     By 

hypocricy  Thou  hast  destroyed  my  chastity,  my  virtue  and   for   that  reason 

didot   kill    my    husband.     O  Lord  !   Thou    hast   no   mercy  ;   Thy   heart  is 

like  a   stone.     So   Let   Thee   be   turned  into  a  stooe.     Those    who  declare 

Thee  as  a  saint,  are  no  doubt   mistaken.     Why  didst     Thou  for  the    sake  of 

others,  kill  without  any  fault,  another    Bhakta   of  Thine.     Thus   speaking, 

Tulasi    overpowered    with   grief  and   sorrow,   cried    aloud    and  repeatedly 

gave  vent  to  lamentations.     Seeing  her     thus    very   distressed,  Nar^yana, 

the  Ocean  of  Mercy,  spoke  to  her  to  cheer    her    up    according   to  the    rules 
of  Dharma. 

2S-102'  O  Honoured  One  !  For  a  long-  time  you  performed  tapasy^ 
in  this  Bh3,rata,  to  get  Me.  S'ankhachuda,  too,  performel  tapasyS,  for  a 
long  time  to  get  you.  By  that  tapas,  Sankhachuda  got  you  as  wife.  Now 
it  is  highly  incumbent  to  award  you  also  with  the  fruit  that  you  asked  for. 
Therefore  I  have  done  this.  Nov  quit  your  this  terifestrial  body  and 
assume  a  Divine  Body  and  marry  Me.  O  Rame  !  Be  like  Laksmi. 
This  body  of  yours  will  be  known  by  the  name  of  Gandaki,  a  very  vir- 
tuous, pure  and  pellucid  stream  in  this  holy  land  of  Bhilrata.  Your  hairs  will 
be  turned  into  sacre  1  trees  and  as  th^y  will  be  born  of  you,  you  will  be  known 
by  the  name  of  Tulasi.  All  the  three  worlds  will  perform  their  PujMs 
with  the  leaves  and  flowers  of  this  TulasT.  Therefore,  O  Pair-faced  One  I 
This  Tulasi  will  be  reckoned  as  the  chief  amongst  all  flowers  and  loaves, 
In  Heavens,  earth,  and  the  nether  regions,  and  before  Me,  O  Fair  One,  you 
will  reign  sl^  the  chief  amongst  trees  and  flowers.  In  the  region  of  Goloka, 
on  the  banks  of  the  river  Viraji'i,  in  the  RSsa  circle  (the  celestial  ball 
d-mce,)  where  all  amorous  sentiments  are  played  in  Vrindavana  forest,  in 
Bh^ndira  forest,  in  Champaka  forest,  in  the  beautiful  Chandana  (Sandal  ■ 
Forosts  and  in  the  groves  of  Madhavi,  Ketaki,  Kunda,  Mallika,  and  Malati, 
in  the  sacred  places  you  will  live  and  bestow  the  highest  religious  merits. 
All  the  Tirthas  will  reside  at  the  bottom  of  the  Tulasi  tree  and  so  reli-' 
gious  merits  will  accrue  to  all.  O  Fair-faced  One  !  There  I  and  all  the 
Devas  will  wait  in  expectation  of  the  falling  of  a  Tulasi  leaf.  Any-body 
who  will  be  initiated  and  installed  with  the  Tulasi  leaves  water,  will  get 
all  the  fruits  of  being  initiated  in  all  the  sacrifices.  Whatever  pleasure 
Hari  gets  when  thousinds  and  thousands  of  jars  filled  with  water  are 
offered  to  him,  the  same  pleasure  He  will  get  when  one  Tulasi  leaf  will 
be  offered  to  Him.  Whatever  fruits  are  acqnired  by  giving  Ayuta  cows 
a^  presents,  those    will  bo  al">  ^cquirpd   by  giving  Tuln<»i  leave'.     Espnpialh- 


90  J  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHIGAVATAM. 

if  one  gives  Tulasi  leaves  in  tha  month  of  K^rtik,  one  gets    the  fruits  same 
as  abDve  mentionod.     If  one   drinks    or    gets     the   Tula  si    leaf  water   at 
the  momentous  Time  of  Death,  one  becomes  freed   of  all    sins   and  is  wor- 
shipped in  the  Visnn  Loka.  He  who  drinks  dvily  the  Tula  si  leaf  water  cer- 
tiinly  fets  the  fruit  of  one  lakh  horse  sajriSces.    He  who  plucks  or  culls  the 
Tiilasi  leaf  by  his  own  hand  aiiil  hollins^    it  on  his  body,  quits  bis  life  in  a 
Tirath,  goes  to  Visnu    Lok*.     Whoever  holds    in    his    neck    the    garland 
m^de  up  of  Tulasi  wood,    gets    certainly    the    fruit    of  horse    sacrifices    at 
every  step.     He   who  does    not  keep  his    word,  holding   the   Tulasi    leaf  in 
his  hand,  goes    to  the  Kalasutra  Hell  as    long   as  the  Sun  and   Moon   last. 
He  who  gives    false    evidence    in    the  presence  of  the    Tulast    leaf,    goes    to 
the    Kumbhipaka   Hell  for    the  life-periods    of  fourteen  Indras.     He    who 
drinks    or  gets  a    bit  of  the  Tulasi  leaf  water  at    the    time   of  death,   cer- 
tainly goes  to  Vaikuntha,   ascending    on  a  car  made  up  of  jewels.     Those 
who  pluck     or   call    the    Tulasi      leaves   in  the  Full  Moon  night,   on   the 
tsvelfth    lunar  day,  on  the    passing  of  the   sun   from    one    sign  to    another, 
the    mid-day,  or  on  the  twilights,  on   the  night,  while  applying  oil  on  their 
bodies,  on    the  impurity  period?,  and  while  putting  on    night  dresses,    verily 
cut   off  the  Narayana's  head.     O  Chaste  One  !  The  Tulasi  leaf  kept    in    the 
night,    is    considerad   sacrnd.     It  is   considered    good   in     SrAddha,    vow, 
ceremony,  in  the  making  over   of  any   gift,  in  the  installation  of  any   image 
or  in    worshipping  any     Deva.     Again,  the  Tulasi  leaf  fallen  on  the  ground 
or  fallen  in  water  or    offered  to  Vi^nu,    if   washed  out    can  be  used  in    holv 
and    other  purposes.     Thus,  O  Good   One  !    You    will    remain   as   tree    in 
this    earth  and    will    remain    in    Goloka  as    the    Presiding    Deity    thereof 
and  will  enjoy  daily  the  sport  with  Krisna.  And  also  you  v,'\\\  be  the  Pre^id- 
\n<*  Deity    of   the   river    Gandakt    and    thus    bestow     religious    merits    in 
IBharata  ;   you  will  be    the    wife    of  the    Salt   Ocean,    which    is    My    part 
You  are    very   chaste  ;  in    Vaikuntha   you   will    enjoy    me    as    Kama  lives- 
with  Me.       And  as    for  Me,  I   will   be  turned    into    stone    by    your    curse  ; 
I    will  remain  in  India   close    t)    the    bank    of   the    river    Gandaki.    Mil- 
lions   and    millions    of   insects    with    their    sharp  teeth    will    make    rings, 
(the   convolutions    in    the    Sdlagr^ma    or    sacred   stones),  on   the    cavities 
of  the    mountains   there,  representing  Me.     Of  these   stones,  those    that- 
have  one  door  (entrance  hole),    four  convolutions,    adorned    by  the    garland 
of   wild    flowers   (having     a    mark  like    this)    and    which    look    like    fre.-li 
rain-cloud,     are    called    Laksmi    NSrayana     Murtis    (forms).     And  tho^e 
that    have  one  door,  four  convolutions  and  look  like  fresh  rain-clouds  but  no 
garlands    are   called     Laksmi    Janardana   Chakras  (discus).     Those    that 
have  two   doors,    four    convolutions,    and    decked    with    mark    like    cow's 
hoof  and  void  of  the  garland  mark  are  called  Raghun^tha   chakras.     Those 
that  are  very  sraill  in  size,     with    t  vo    Chakras    and   look  like  fr^sh    raiu- 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXIV.  .  901 

clouds  and  voiJ  of  the  <>arlanl  marks  are  name  I    V^raaua  Cliakras.     Those 
that  that   ara  very  small   in   size,    \' ith  two    Chakras     and    the    garland 
mark  added,  know  the  a  to  ba  the  S'ridhara  Chakras.     These  always    briny; 
in   prosperity  to   the    hoa.s3hold.       Those    that    are    big,  cireulAr,   void  of 
garland     mark,    with   two   eireular     Chakras,    are    known    as    Dumodara 
forms.     Those  that  are  mediocre    in   size,   with  two  Cliakras   and    marked 
as   if   struck    by    an  arrow,    having    marks   of   arrows  and   bow-cases    are 
kiown    as  Rina- llamas.     Those    that   are    middling,  with  seven  Chakras, 
hiving    marks  of  an    umbrella    and  ornaments,  are    called   Rajarajes'varas. 
They    bestow    the  royal    Laksmi    to    persons.     Those      that     have     twice 
seven  chakras,  and  are  big,  looking  like  fresh  rain-clouds  are  named  Anantas. 
They   bestow    four   fold    fruits   (Dharma,    wealth,    desire    and    liberation). 
Those  that  are  in   their  forms  like    a    ring,    with    two     chakras,    beautiful, 
looking   like  raiu-elouds,    having    cow-hoof    marks    and    of  mediocre   size, 
are    named     MadhusCidanas.      Those     that    have     one    Chakra   are  called 
Sudars'anas.    Tnose  that  have  their  Chakras    hidden  are   called  Gadadhara.=. 
Those  that  have    two   Chakra?,    looking   h arse-faced,    are    known   as   Haya. 
grivas.     O  Chaste  One  !    Those   that    have   their      mouths    very    wide  and 
extendel,     with     two     Chakra?,    and      very        terrible,     are      known      a* 
Narasimhas.     They-     excita     V.iirdgyas    to   all    who    serve     them.     Those 
that     have     two     Chakras,     mouths     extendo  1    and     with    yarland  mark- 
^ellipitieal  marks)    are    called  Laksmi    Nrisifigha*.      They  always  hies-  the 
householders    who    worship    them.     Those      that    have    two    Chakras    uear 
their  don-s  (faces),  th  it  look  even     and  beautiful,  and  with  marks  manifested 
;ire   known  as     Vasu  levas.     They    yield    all    sorts    o  f    fruits.     Those   that 
iiave  their  Chakras    fine  and  their  forms    like   fresh  rain-cloud?    aiid     have 
many    fine     hole    marks     within    their    wide    gaping     facets     are     called 
Pradyumnas.      They    yield   happinesa     to    every  householder.     Those  that 
luve    their    fayes  of   two    Chakras  stuck     together      and  their    backs    capa- 
cious,   are    known     as    Sankarsanas.     They      always    bring     in     happiness 
to  the  householders.     Those    that    look   yellow,     round  and    very    beautiful 
are  Aniruddhas.     The  sages  say,  they    give      happiness  to  the  hou!«eholder>'. 
Where  there  is  the  S'alagrdma  stone  there    exists    Sri    Hari    Himself;  and 
.vhere  there  is  Hari,  Laka-ni  and  all  the  Tirthas  dwell  there.  Worshippiu'T 
S'alagram    SiU,  destroys  the    Brahmahatya    (killing    a    Brahmin)   and  any 
other  sin  whatsoever.      In     worshipping     thi     S^lagrama     stone     looking 
like  an  umbrella,    kingvloms    are  obtained  ;    in    worshipping  circular  Silas, 
great   prosparity  is  obtained  ;  in    worshipping    cart-shaped  stones,  miseries 
arise  ;  and  in    worshipping   stones,  whose  ends    look    like    spears    (l§ulas, 
death  inevitably     follows.     Those    whose    facets    are   distorted,    bring    in 
povert)    ;  and   yellow   stones  bring    in  various  evils  and  afflictions.  Those 
whosi?  C'jikras    look  broken,  bring   in  diseases  ;    and  those  whose  Cbakraa 


)02  ^rI  mad  dev!  bhAgavatam. 

are   rent    asunder  bring   in     death   certainly.     Observing   vows,   making 
gifts,  installing  images,  doing  Sr^ddhas,  worshipping   the   Devas,  all  these 
become  highly  exalted,   if  done  before    the   Saiigrama   Sila.    One  acquires 
the    tnirits     of     bithing    in  all     the    Tirthas    and      in      being   initiated 
in  all  the  sacrifices,    if  one     worships     the     S^ligraraa   Sil3.  What  mote 
than    this,  that    the    merits  acquired  by  all  the  sacrifices,  all   the  Tirthas, 
all  vows,  all  austerities  and   reading  all  the  Vedas  are  all  acquired  by  duly 
worshipping  by  the  holy  Sulagrama  Sila.     He  who  performs  his  Abhis'eka 
ceremony     always      with      Silagraraa      water       (being      sprinkled    with 
6illaframa  water  at  the  initiation   and  installation  ceremjnies),  acquires  the 
reli"'ious  merits  of  performing  all  sorts  of   gifts  and    circumambulating  the 
whole  earth.   All  the  Devas  are,  no  doubt,  pleased  with  him  who  thus    wo:« 
ships  daily  the  .'^ll'igrflmi.   What  mare  than  thij,  that  all  theXirthas    want 
to  have  his  touch.     He  bacomes  a  Jivanmukta  (liberated  while    living)  and 
beaomas    very    holy;    ultiraitely    he  goes  to    the   region    of  Sri     Hari  and 
remains   in    H-iri'.s  service    there    and    dwells     with      him     for     countless 
PrILkritie   dissolutioni?.     Every    sin,    like    Brahma    Hatya.  flies  away  from 
him   as   serpents   do    at    the    sight    of   Gaduda.     The     Devi    Vasundharii 
Cthe    Earth)   besomes   purified   by    the   touch    of   the   dust     of    his    fe.^t. 
At  his   birth,   all    his    predecessors    (a    lakh    in  number),  are    saved.     He 
who   gets    the    Salagr&ma  Silll   water   during  tin     time     of     his     death, 
he  is  freed  of  all  his   sins  and     goes   to  th-?  Visnu  Loka    and  gets  Nirvana  ; 
he  .becomes   freed   entirely    from    the     effects    of     Karma     and   he    gets, 
no   doubt,  dissolved   and   dilated    for   ever    in    (the    feec    of)   Yisnu.     He 
who     tells      lies,     holding     S.ihgrama     in     his      hands,      goes     to     the 
Kumbhip^ka  Hell   for   the  life-period  of  Brahma.     If  one  does  not  keep  his 
word,  uttered    with    the    Silagr^ma   stone    in    his    hand,   one   goes  to  thi 
Asipatra    Hell  for  one    lakh    manvancaras.     He    who    worships  the  SSla^- 
rama     stone     without  offering    Tulasi  leaves     on    it     or      separates     the 
Tulasi   leaves    from    the   stone,   will    have    to   suffer   separation    from    his 
wife    in  his    next    birth.     So    if  one   does    not    offer     the     Tulasi  leav.?-! 
In    the   conchshell,   for  seven    births    he    remains    without     his    wife    and 
he   becomes   diseased.     He  who     preserves     the     Salagrama     stone,     the 
Tulasi   and    the   conchshell,   in    one     place,     becomes     very     learned  and 
becomes   dear   to    NarSyana.     Look  !     He    who   casts    his   semen   once  in 
his   wife,     suffers    intense    pain,    no   doubt,    at     each     other's  separation 
So   vou     become   dear    to     bankhachuda     for    one     Manvantara.     Now, 
what    wonder  !    That     you    will     suffer    pain,     at     hitj     tereavement.     O 
Nftrada  !   Thus   saying,    Sri    Hari    desisted.     Tulasi     quitted    her    morial 
coil   and  assumed  a  divine    form,    began    to   remain     in     the     breast     of 
Sri    Hari   like  Sri  Laksmi.    Devi.    Hari  also  went  with  her  to  Vaikunth* 
Thus    Lak§mi,   Sarasvati.     Gang3,   and    Tulasi,    all   the    four    came   so 


Boo^  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXV.  903 

very  dear  to  Hari  and  are  recognised  as  Is'varis.  On  the  other  hand^ 
the  mortal  coil  of  Tulasi,  no  sooner  quitted  by  Tulasi,  became  trans, 
formed  into  the  river  Grindaki.  Bhagavan  Hari,  too,  became  also 
converted  into  a  holy  mountain,  on  the  banks  thereof,  yielding  reli- 
gious merits  to  the  people.  The  insects  cut  and  fashion  many  pieces 
out  of  that  mountain.  Of  them,  those  that  fall  into  the  river,  yield 
fruits  undoubtedly.  And  those  pieces  that  fall  on  the  ground  become  yellow 
coloured;  they  are  not  at  all  fit  for  worship.  O  Narada  !  Thus  I  have 
spoken  to  you  everything.  What  more  do  you  want  to  hear  now  ?  Say. 
Here  endi  the  Twenty-fourth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
glory  of  Tulasi  in  the  Mahapurunam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of 
18,000    verses    by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

1-2  Nftradi  said -.—When  the  Devi  Tulasi  has  been  made  so  dear  to 
NarSyana  and  thus  an  object  for  worship,  then  describe  Her  worship  and 
Stotra  {the  hymn  of  Tulasi)  now.  0  Muni  !  By  whom  was  She  .  rst 
worshipped  ?  By  whom  wern  Her  glories  first  sung  ?  And  how  did  She 
beeone   therefore    an   object    of    worship  ?     Speak    out   all  these   to   me. 

3.  Suba  said  : — Hearing  these  words  of  Narada,  Narayaiia,  laughing, 
began   to  describe   this  very  holy  and  sin-defetroying  account  of  Tulasi. 

4  15.  Narayana  said: — Bhagavan  Hari  duly  worshipped  Tulasi, 
and  began  to  enjoy  her  wtth  Laksmi  ;  He  raised  Tulasi  to  the  rank  of 
Liksmi  and  thus  made  her  fortunate  and  glorious.  Laksmi  and 
Gingc\  allowed  and  bore  this  new  union  of  Narayana  and  Tulasi.  But 
Sirisv.iti  coull  not  eniui'e  this  high  position  of  Tulasi  owing  to  Her  anger. 
She  became  self-coaceited  and  beat  Tulasi  on  some  quarrel  before 
Hari.  Tulasi  became  abashed  aid  insulted  and  vanished  ofif.  Being 
the  Is'vari  of  all  the  Siddis,  the  Devi,  the  Self-manifest  and  the  Giver 
of  the  Siddhiyoga  to  the  J  nanins,  Tu!asi,  Oh  !  what  a  wonder, 
became    angry   and  turned    out  as   invisible  to  Sri  Hari  even. 

Not  seeing  Tulasi,  Hari  appeased  Sarasvati  and  getting  Her  permission 
went  to  the  Tulasi  forest.  Going  there  and  taking  a  bath  in  due 
accord,  and  with  due  rites,  worshipped  with  His  whole  heart  the 
chastg  Tulasi  and  then  began  to  meditate  on  Her  with  devotion. 
O  N^radi  !  Ha  gets  C3rtainly  all  siddhis  who  worships  Tulasi  duly 
with  the  ten  lettered  mantra  : — "  Srim  Hrim  Klim  Aim  Vrind^vanyai 
Svaha,  "  the  King  of  mantras,  yielding  fruits  and  all  gratifications  like 
the  Kalpa  Tree.     O  Ndrada  !  At  the  time  of  worship,  the  lamp  of  ghee,  was 


i 


yoi  iSrI  mad  dev!  bhAgavatam. 

lightad  aud  Jhiip,  siuJura,  aatidal,  offerings  of  food,  flowers,  eto.,  ware  offer- 
ed to  Her.  Tbu3  hymnal  by  Hari,  Tulasi  cirue  out  of  the  tree,  pleased. 
And  She  glad'y  took  refuge  at  tiis  iotu3  feot.  Visau,  then,  grautad  her 
boon  that  "  You  will  be  worshipped  by  all  ;  I  will  keep  you  in  My 
breast  and  in  My  head  and  the  Devas  also  will  hold  you  on  their 
lj;3*ds.'*  Anl  He  then  cook  her  to  His  own  abode, 

IG.  Nurada  saiJ:  — "O  Highly  Fortunate  One!  What  is  Tulasi'i 
dhyiin,   sbofcra   aud    mithodof  worship?     Kindly     describe    all   these. 

17.  NArllyana  said:— v7hen  Tulasi  vanished,  Hari  became  very 
much  agitated  at  h>r  bereavement  and  went  to  Vrindavaua  and  began  to 
praise    her. 

18-44.  The  Bhagavau  said  : — The  Tulasi  trees  collect  in  multitudinouy 
groups  ;  hence  the  Pundits  call  ic  Vrindi,  I  praise  that  dear  Tulasi. 
Of  old,  She  appeared  in  the  Vrindilvana  forest  and  therefore  known 
as  Vrindavmi.  I  worship  that  forbunalc  and  g'orious  One.  She 
is  worshipped  always  in  innumerable  universes  and  is,  therefore,  known 
as  Vis'vapujita  (worshipped  by  all).  I  worship  that  Vis'vapujita.  By 
whose  contact,  those  countless  universes  are  always  rendered  pure 
and  holy;  and  therefore  She  is  called  Vis'vapavani  (purifying  the 
whole  universe).  I  am  suffering  from  her  bereavement,  I  remember 
the  Devi.  Without  Tulasi,  the  Devas  do  nob  get  pleased,  though 
other  flowers  be  heaped  on  them;  therefore  She  is  considered  as 
the  essence  of  all  the  flowers.  Now  I  am  in  sorrow  and  trouble 
and  I  am  very  eager  to  see  her,  who  is  of  the  nature  of  purity 
incarnate.  The  whole  universe  gets  delighted  when  the  Bhaktas  receive 
her;  hence  She  is  called  Nandini;  so  may  She  be  pleased  with  me. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  universe  that  cj,u  be  compared  to  Her  ;  hence 
She  is  calleJ  TuUsi,  I  tike  refu,'e  of  that  dear  T-.lagi.  That  chaste 
dear  one  is  the  life  of  Kri§nia,  hence  She  is  known  as  Krisnajivani. 
Now  may  She  save  my  life.  O  Nilradi  !  Thus  praising,  Ramapati 
remained  there.  L^■19  chaste  Tulasi  then  came  to  llis  sight  and 
bowed  down  to  His  lotus  feet  ;  when  She  becoming  sensitive  out  of  the 
insult,  began  to  weep.  Bhagavun  Visnu,  seeing  that  sensitive  dear 
one,  immediately  took  her  to  His  breast.  Taking,  then,  Sarasvati's  per- 
mission. He  took  her  to  His  own  horn?  and  brought  about,  first  of 
all,  the  agreement  batween  her  and  Suvsviti.  Tnen  He  granted  her 
the  boon,  "  Vou  will  bo  worshipped  by  all,  respected  by  all,  and  honoured 
by  all  ,  and  uU  will  carry  you  on  their  heads-.  "  I  will  also 
worehip,  respect  and  honour  you  aud  keep  you  on  My  head.  Receiv- 
ing   this    boon    from    Visnu,    the     Devi     Tulasi     became     very      glad. 


Book  IX.J  CHAPTER  XXVI.  905 

SarasvatJ  then  attracted  her  to  her  side,  made  her  sit  close  to  her^ 
Laksmi  and  Ganga  both  with  smiling  faces  attracted  her  and  made  her  enter 
into  the  house.  O  Narada  !  Whosoever  worships  her  with  her  eight  names 
Vrind^,  Vrindavani,  Vis'vapujita,  Vis'vapavani,  Tuiasi,  PuspasAr^,  Nandani 
and  KrisQa  Jivaai  and  their  meanings  and  sings  this  hymn  of  eight  verses 
duly,  acquires  the  merit  of  performing  A.s'vamedha  Yajna  (horse  sacrifice). 
Specially,  on  the  Full  Moon  night  of  the  month  of  KSrtik,  the  aus- 
picious birth  ceremony  ot  Tuiasi  is  performed.  Of  old  Visnu  worshipped 
her  at  that  time.  Whoever  worships  with  devotion  on  that  Pull  Moon 
combination,  the  universe  purifying  Tuiasi,  becomes  freed  of  all  sins 
aid  goes  up  to  the  Visnu  Loka.  Offerings  of  Tulan  leaves  to  Visnu  in 
the  month  of  Kelrtik  bring  merits  equal  to  those  in  giving  away 
Ayuta  Cows.  Hearing  this  stotra  at  that  period  gives  sons  to  the 
sonless  persons,  wives  to  the  wife  less  persons  and  friends  to  friendless 
persons.  On  hearing  this  stotra,  the  diseased  become  free  of  their 
diseases,  the  persons  in  bondage  becomi  free,  the  terrified  become 
fearless,  and  the  sinners  are  freed  of  their  sins.  O  Narada  !  Thus  it 
has  been  mentioned  how  to  chint  stotra  to  her.  Now  hear  her 
dhy4n  and  method  of  worship.  In  the  Vedas,  in  the  K4nva  ^^kha 
branch,  the  method  of  worship  is  given.  You  know  that  one  is  to 
meditate  on  the  Tuiasi  plant,  without  any  invocation  (^v^hana)  and  then 
worship  her  with  devotion,  nresenting  all  sorts  of  offerings  as  required  to 
her.  Now  hear  Her  Dhyanara.  Of  all  the  flowers,  Tuiasi  (the  holy 
basil)  is  the  best,  very  holy,  and  captivating  the  mind.  It  is  a 
flame  burning  away  all  the  fuel  of  sins  committed  by  man.  In  the  Vedas 
it  is  st.ited  that  this  plant  is  called  Tuiasi,  because  there  can  be  made 
no  comparison  with  Her  amongst  all  the  flowers.  She  is  the  holiest 
of  them  all  She  is  placed  on  the  heals  of  all  and  desired  by  all 
and  gives  holiness  to  the  universe.  She  gives  Jivanmukt:,  mukti 
and  devotion  to  Sri  Hari.  I  worship  Hor.  Thus  meditating  on  Her 
and  worshipping  Hrr  according  to  due  rites,  one  is  to  bow  down  to 
Her.  O  NSrada  !  1  have  described  to  you  the  fall  history  of  ^ri 
Tuiasi   Devi.     What    more   do  yo    want  to    hear    now,    say. 

Here  ends  the  Tvventy-fifth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
method  of  worship  of  Tuiasi  Devi  in  the  Mahapuranam  Sri  Mad  Devi 
Bh3.gavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi    Veda  VySsa. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

1.  Narada  said  : — I  have  heard  the  anecdote  of  Tuiasi.  Now  "describe 
in  detail  the  history  of  Savitri.  SWitri  is  considered  as  the  Mother  of 
the  Vedas.  Why  was  She  born,  in  days  gone  by  ?  By  whom  was  She  first 
worshipped  and  subsequently  also  ? 

114 


906  SRf  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

3.  N4r^yana  said  : — "  O  Muni  !  She  was  first  worshipped  by  Brahma, 
Next  the  Vedas  worshipped  her.  Subsequently  the  learned  men  wor- 
shipped her.  Next  the  King  As'vapati  worshipped  Her  in  India.  Next  the 
four  Varnas  (^castes)  worshipped  Her. 

5.  NSrada  said  : — "  O  Brahman  !  Who  is  that  As'vapati  ?  What  for 
did  he  worship  ?  When  the  Devi  Sdvitri  became  adorable  by  all,  by 
which  persons  was  She  first  worshipped  and  by  which  persons  subsequently. 

6-14.  Nsirdyana  said  : — "  O  Muni  I  The  King  AsVapiti  reigned  in 
Bhadrades'a,  rendering  his  enemies  powerles.s  and  making  his  friends 
painless.  He  had  a  queen  very  religious  ;  her  name  was  Malati  ;  She  was 
like  a  second  Laksmi.  She  was  barren  ;  and  desirous  of  an  issue,  She 
under  the  instruction  of  Vasis'tha,  duly  worshipped  Savitri  with  devotiuu. 
But  She  did  not  receive  any  vision  nor  any  command  ;  therefore  She 
returned  home  with  a  grievous  heart.  Seeing  her  sorry,  the  king  con- 
soled her  with  good  words  and  himself  accompanied  her  to  Puskara-with 
a  view  to  perform  Tapas  to  Sdvitri  with  devotion  and,  being  self-con- 
trolled,  practised  tapasya  for  one  hundred  years.  Still  he  could  nob  see 
Sllvitr',  but  voice  came  to  him.  An  incorpareal,  celestial  voice  reached 
his  ears  : — "  Perform  Japam  (repeat)  ten  lakhs  of  '^ayattri  M*ntrara." 
At  this  moment  Parisara  came  up  there.  The  king  bowed  do.vn  to  him. 
The  Mur.i  said:— "  0  King  !  On3  japa  of  GSyatri,  destroys  the  days 
sins.  Ten  Japams  of  GAyatri   destroy   day   and  night's   sine. 

15-40.  One  hundred  Gayatri  Japams  destroy  one  mouth's  sins.  One 
thousand  Japams  destroy  one  year's  eins.  One  lakh  Gayattri  Japams 
destroy  the  sins  of  the  present  birth  and  ten  lakh  Gayattri  Japams 
destroy  the  sins  of  other  births.  One  hundred  lakhs  of  Japams  destrov 
the  sins  of  all  tha  births.  If  ton  times  that  (^e.  i.  1,000  lakhs)  be 
done,  then  liberation  is  obtained.  (Now  the  method,  how  to  m^ke 
JApam).  Make  the  palm  of  the  (right)  hand  like  a  snake's  hood;  see 
that  the  fingers  are  all  close,  no  holes  are  seen  ;  and  make  the  ends  of  the 
fingers  bend  downwards;  then  being  calm  and  quiet  and  with  one's  face 
eastward,  practise  Japam.  Then  count  from  the  middle  of  the  ring  (name- 
leBi)  finger  and  go  on  counting  right-handed  (with  the  hands  of  the 
watch)  till  you  come  to  the  battom  of  the  index  finger.  This  is  the  rule 
of  counting  by  the  hand.  O  King  !  The  rosary  is  to  be  of  the  seed  of 
white  lotus  or  of  the  crystals  ;  it  shoulp  be  consecrated  and  purified.  Japam 
is  to  be  done  then  in  a  sacred  Tirtha  or  in  a  temple.  Becoming  self-controll- 
ed one  should  place  the  rosary  on  a  banyan  leaf  or  on  a  lotus  leaf  and 
emear  it  vriih  cowdung  ;  wash  it,  uttering  Gayattri  Mantra  and  over  it 
perform     one   hundred  times  Gilyabtri    Japam  intently  in  accordance   with 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER   XXVI.  907 

the  rules.     Or   wash   it  with    Panchagavya,   milk,  curds,  clarified  butter, 
cow    urine  and  eowdung),  and  then  consecrate  it  well.    Then  wash    it  with 
tha  Giu>a3  watir  and  perform  best  the    consecrationa.     O  Rdjarfi  !    Than 
perform  ten  lakhs  of  Japam    in   due   order.  Thus  the   sins   of  your   three 
birth?    will   be   destroyed    and    then   you    will  see  the   Devi  Savitri.     O 
King  !    Do   this  JSpam,  being  pure,   everyday  in  the  morning,    mid-day, 
and    in    tha    evening.     If  one   b3    impure   and    devoid    of   SandhyS,    one 
has   no   right  ta   do  any   action;   and   even    if  one   pirform^   an   action, 
one   does  not  get   any  fruit  thereby.     He    who  does    not  do  the   morning 
Sivndhya  and  thj  evening  Sandhya,,    is  driven  away  from    all  the  Br^hminic 
Karraas  and  he  becomes   like   Siidra?.     He   who  does  Sandhya  three  times 
throughout  his  life,  becomes  like  the  Sun  by  his  lustre  and  brilliance  of  tapas. 
What  more   than  this,  the  earth  is   always  purified  by  the  dust  of  his    feet. 
The   Dvija  who   does  his  Sandhya   Bandanam  and  remains  pure,   becomes 
energetic   and   liberated    while    living.     By    his   contact    all   the   tirthag 
become    purified.     All   sins  vanish   away   from   him   as   snakes   fly   away 
at  the   sight  of  Garuda.     The  Dvija  who  becomes  void  of  Sandhya   three 
times  a  day,   the    Devas  do  not   accept  his    worship  nor   the  Pitris    accept 
his   Pindas.     He  who  has  no   Bhakti  towards  the  Mula  Prakriti,  who  does 
not  worship  the  sp3cific  seed  Mantra  of  May^  and  who  does  not  hold  festivi- 
ties in   honour  of  Mula  Prakriti,  know  him  verily  to  be  an  Ajagara   snake 
without  poison.  Djvoid  of  the  Visnu  mantra,  devoid  of  the  three  SandhyAs 
and  devoid   of  the   fasting  on  the  EkMas'i    Tithi    (the   eleventh  day   of 
the  fortnight),   the    Brahmin   becomes    a   snake   devoid    of    poison.     Tha 
vile    Brahmin    who    does     not   like   to   take   the   offerings  dedicated   to 
Hari    and  who  does  the  washerman's  work  and  eats  the  food    of  Sudra   and 
drives    the    bufalloes,    becomes  a   snake  devoid  of  poison.     The  Brahmin 
who  burns  the    dead   bodies   of  the  5udras,    becomes    like  the    man    who 
is    the    husband   of  an  unmarried  girl.     The  Brahmin  also  who  becomes  a 
cook   of  a   §udra,    becomes  a  snake  void   of  poison.     The    Brahmin    who 
accepts   the   gifts  of    a   Sudra,    who   performs    the  sacrifice   of  a    Sudra, 
who  lives    as  clerks  and  warriors   beoomes  like   a   snake    void   of   poison. 
The    Brahmin     who     sells    his  daughter,    who     sells    the   name   of  Hari 
or  eats   the  food   of  a   woman    who   is   without      husband    and   son,    as 
well  as  of  one    who   has   just  bithed     after    her     menstruation     period, 
becomes   like  a   serpent     void     of  poison.     The   Brahmin    who   takes    the 
profession   of  pimps    and     pampers    and    lives   on   the   interest,    is  also 
like   a    serpent   void   of   poison.      The    Brahmin   who   sleeps   even  when 
the  Sun   has  risen,   euts  fish,  and  does  not  worship  the  Devi    is   also   like 
a  poisonless  serpent.     Thus   stating  all   the   rules    of    worship   in   order, 
the   best     of    the    iluuis   told    him     the    Dhyinara,    etc.,     of    the    Devt 


908  SRI  mad  DEVt  BHAgaVATAM. 

Sllvitri,  what  he  wanted.  Then  he  informed  the  King  of  all  the 
mantras  and  went  to  hip  own  As'rama.  The  king,  then  worshipped 
accordingly   and  saw  the    Devi   Savitri  and  got  boons. 

41-43.  Narada  said  : — What  is  the  Savitris  Dhyan,  what  are  the  modes 
of  her  worship,  what  is  stotra,  mantra,  that  Paras 'ara  gave  to  the  King 
before  he  went  away?  And  how  did  the  King  worship  and  what  boon 
did  he  get  ?  This  great  mystery,  grand  and  well  renowned  in  the  Srutis, 
about  Sdvitri,   I  am  desirous  to  hear  in  brief  on  all  the   points. 

44-78.  Narayana  said  : — On  the  thirteenth  day  (the  traycdas'i,  tithi) 
of  the  black  fortnight  in  the  month  Jyaistha  or  on  any  other  holy 
period,  the  fourteenth  day  (the  chaturdas'i  tithij  this  vow  is  to  be 
observed  with  great  care  and  devotion.  Fourteen  fruits  and  fourteen 
plates  with  offerings  of  food  on  them,  flowers  and  incense  are  to  be 
offered  and  t^^is  vow  is  to  be  observed  for  fourteen  years  consecutively. 
Garments,  holy  threads  and  other  articles  are  also  offered  and  after 
the  Vrata  is  over,  the  Brahmins  are  to  be  fed.  The  lucky  pot  (mangal 
ghat)  is  to  be  located  duly  according  to  the  rules  of  worship  with 
branches  and  fruits.  Ganes'a,  Ag  li,  Visnu,  Siva  and  Siva  are  to  be  wor- 
shipped duly. 

In  that  ghat  Savitri  is  to  be  next  invoked  and  wcrshipped.  Now  hear 
the  Dhyanan  of  Savitri,  as  stated  in  the  Madhyan  Dina  ^akhu,  as  well 
the  stotra,  the  modes  of  worship,  Lnd  the  Mantra,  the  giver  of  all  desires.' 
I  meditate  and  adore  that  Savitri,  the  Mother  of  the  Veda?,  of  the 
nature  of  Pranava  (Ona),  whose  colour  is  like  the  burnished  gold,  who  is 
burning  with  Brahma  teja  (the  fire  of  Brahma^,  effulgent  with  thousands 
and  thousands  of  rays  of  the  midday  summer  Sun,  who  is  of  a  smiling 
countenance  adorned  with  jewels  and  ornaments,  wearing  celestial 
garment  (purified  and  uninflammable  by  fire),  and  ready  to  grant  blessings 
to  Her  Bhaktas ;  who  is  the  bestower  of  happiness  and  liberation,  who 
is  peaceful  and  the  consort  of  the  Creator  of  the  world,  who  is  all  wealth 
and  the  giver  of  all  riches  and  prosperity,  who  is  the  Presiding  Deity  of  the 
Vedas  andwho  is  the  Vedas  incarnate,  I  meditate  on  Thee.  Thus  recitin^r 
the  Dhy^nam,  mantra  and  meditating  on  Her,  one  is  to  offer  Naivedya's 
(offerings  of  food)  to  Her  and  then  place  one'^  fingers  en  one's  head; 
one  is  to  meditate  again,  and  then  invoke  the  Devi  within  the  pot' 
One  should  next  present  fourteen  things,  uttering  proper  mantras 
according  to  the  Vedas.  Then  one  must  per-form  special  poojS  and 
chant  hymns  to  tie  Devi  and  worship  Her.  Tbe  fourteen  articles  of 
worship  are  as  under  : — 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXVI.    ♦  909 

(1)  Seat   (isan)  ;  (2)    water  for    washing   feet   (Padya),  (3)  offering 
of  rice   and     Durba     gra?s    (Arghya),    (4)     water  for    bath     (Sniniya), 
(6)  anointment  with  sandalpaste  and  other  scants  (Anulopana),  (7)  incense 
(Dhupa),  (8)  Lights  (Dipa),  (9)  offerings   of  food  (Naivedya),  (10)  Betels 
(Tarnbul),  (11)  Cool  water,  (12)  garments,  (13)  ornaments,  (14)   garlands, 
scents,  offering  of  water  to  sip,  and  beautiful  bedding.  While  offering  these 
articles,   one   is   to   utter   the    mantras,  this  beautiful   wooden   or    golden 
seat,  giving  spiritual  merits  is  being   offered   by  me  to  Thee.     This  water 
from  the  'lirthas,  this  holy  water   for    washing    Thy    feet,  pleasant,   highly 
meritorious  pure,  and  as  an  embodiment   of   Pooja    is   being  offered  by  me 
tj  Thee.     'I'jis  holy    Arghya    with    Durbi  grass  and    Howers    and  the  pure 
water  in  the  conch-shell    is   being   offered    by    me  to  Thee,     (as  a  work  of 
initial  worship).     This  sweet   scented  oil  and  water   being   offered   by    me 
to     Thee     with     devotion     for      Thy   bathing  purposes.     Kindly    accept 
these.     O    Mother  !  This   sweet-scentfld    water    Divine-like,   highly   pure 
and  prepared  of  Kunkuma  and   other   scented   things   I   offer  to  Thee.     O 
Parames'vart  !  This  all-auspicious,    all  good   and    highly  meritorious,   this 
beautiful  Dhupa,  kindly  take,  O    World   Mother!     This  is   very   pleasant 
and   sweet   scented ;    therefore   I    offer  this   to   Thee.     O   Mother  !     This 
light,  manifesting  all  this  Universe  and  the  seed,  as  it   were,  to  destroy  the 
Darkness  is   being    offered   by    me   to  Thee.     Devi  !     Kindly  accept   this 
delicious  offering  of  food,  highly   meritorious,    appeasing  hunger,    pleasant, 
nourishing  und  pleasure  giving.     This  betel  is  scented  with   camphor,   etc., 
nice,  nourishing,  and  pleasure— giving  ;  this  is  being  offered  by  me  to  Thee. 
This  water  is  nice  and  cool,  appeasing  the  thirst  anj  the  Life  of   the  World. 
So  kindly  accept  this.     O  Devi  !  Kindly  accept  this  silken  garment  as  well 
the  garment  mide  of  Karpasa  Cotton,  beautifying  the  body   and  enhancing 
the  beauty.     Kindly  accept  these  golden   ornaments   decked    with   jewels, 
highly  meritorious,  joyous,  beauteous  and  prosperous.     Kindly  accept  these 
fruits  yielding  fruits  of  desires,  obtained  from    various   trees  and  of  various 
kinds.     Please  have   this   garland,   all   auspicious   and  all    good,    made    of 
various   flowers,   beauteous   and    generating   happiness.     O  Devi  !  Kindlv 
accept   this    sweet  scent,  hi^'hly  pleasing  and  meritorious.    Please  take  this 
Sindura,   the   best   of   the    ormments,    beautifying    the    forehead,    highly 
excellent  and  beautiful.  Kindly  accept  this  holy  and  meritorious  threads  and 
purefied  by  the  Vedic  mantrams  and  made  of  highly  holy  threads  and  knitt- 
ed with  highly  pure  knots.  Uttering  thus,  offer  the  above  articles  that  are  to 
be  offered  to  the  Dj\  i,  every  time  the  specific  seed  mantra   beiriij  uttered. 
Then  the  intelligent  devotee  should  recite  the  stotras  and  subsequently  offer 
the  DaksinSs  (presents)  with  devotion  to  the  Br^hraanas.  The  Radical  or  the 
Specific  Seed  Mantra  mantra  is  the  eight  lettered  mantra  Srim  Hrim  Klim 
Syaitrai  Svaha;  So  the  sages  know.  The  Stotra,  as  stated  in  the  M^dhyandina 


910  SRI  mad  DEVI  BHA.GAVATAM. 

Sakha,  gives  fruits  of  all  desires.  I  am  now  speakini*  to  yon  of  that  mantra, 
the  Life  of  the  Bruhmanas.  Listen  attentively.  O  NiracI  i  !  Savitw  was 
fjiven  to  Brahm.^,  in  the  ancient  times  of  oil  in  tli9  region  of  Goloka  by 
Krisna  ;  but  Savitri  did  nob  come  Brihma  loki  with  Brahma.  Then  by  the 
command  of  Krisna,  Brahml  praised  the  rao^h'^r  of  the  Vedas.  Anl  when 
She   got   pleased,    She  accepted  BrahmA,    as  Her  husband. 

79-87.  BrahmS  said  : — "Thou  art  the  everlasting  existence  intellio-ence 
and  bliss  ;  Thou  art  Muiaprakriti ;  thou  art  Hiranya  Garbha  ;  Thou  didst 
get  pleased,  O  Pair  one  !  Thou  art  of  the  nature  of  firo  and  Energy  ;  Thou 
art  ths  Highest;  Thou  art  the  Highest  Bliss,  and  the  CiSt.e  of  ,  the  twice- 
born.  Dost  thou  get  appeassed,  O  Fair  One  !  Thou  art  eternal,  dear 
to  the  Eternal  ;  thou  art  of  the  nature  of  the  Everlasting  Bliss.  O  Devi, 
O  Thou,  the  all  auspicious  One!  O  Fair  Cue  !  Beest  ihon  satisfied.  Thou 
art  the  form 'of  all  (omnipresent)!  Thou  art  the  essence  of  all  mantras  of 
the  BrShrcanas,  higher  than  the  highest !  Thou  art  the  bestower  of  happines 
and  the  liberator  O  Devi,  O  Fair  One  !  Beest  thou  appeased.  Thou  art  like 
the  burning  flame  to  tlie  fuel  of  sins  of  the  Brahmanas !  O  Thou,  the 
Bestoiver  of  Brahma  teja  (the  light  ot  Brahma)  O  Devi  !  O  Fair  One  !  Best 
appeased.  By  Thy  mere  remembrance,  all  the  sins  to  me  by  body,  mind 
and  speech  are  burnt  to  ashes.  Thus  -aying,  the  Creator  of  the  world 
rea3hed  the  assembly  there.  Then  Sdvitri  came  to  the  Brahraalok-i  with 
Brahm^.  The  King  As'vapati  chanted  this  stotra  to  Savitri  and  saw 
Her  and  got  from  Her  the  desired  boons.  Whosoever  recites  thi'*  highly 
sacred  king  of  Stotras  after  SandhyS  Pandanam,  quickly  acquires  the 
fruits   of  studying  the  Vedas. 

Here  ends  the  Twenty  Sixth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
narration  of  SSvilrt  in  Srimad  Devi  Bhagavatnm  of  18,000  verses  bv 
Maharsi  Veda   Vvu?a. 


CHAPTER  XXVil. 

1-2.  Narayana  !^aid: — "  O  Nara-'a  !  After  hiving  chant-^d  the 
above  hymn  to  the  Goddess  Savitri  and  worshipped  Her  in  accordance 
with  due  rites  and  ceremonies,  the  king  As'vapati  saw  the  Devi,  effulgffnt 
like  the  lustre  of  thousand  suns.  She  then  smilingly  told  the  king, 
as  a  mother  to  her  son,  whilst  all  the  quarters  were  illumined  with 
the    lustre    of    Her  body : — 

3-14.  SSvitri  said: — "  O  King  !  I  know  your  desire.  Certainly  I 
will  give  what  you  and  yo'.ir  wife  long  f9r. ,.  Your  chaste  wife  is 
anxious   for  a   daughter,   while     you    want  a  son.     So,  one  after  another, 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXVII.  911 

the  desires  of  both  of  you  will  be  fulfilled.  Thus  saying,  the  Devi 
went  to  thej  Brahma  Loka.  The  King  also  returned  to  his  house. 
First  a  daughter  was  boru  to  him.  As  the  daughter  was  born,  as  if  a  second 
i^aksmi  was  born  after  worshippini^'  Savitri,  the  King  kept  her 
name  as  Savitri.  As  tim3  rolle  1  on,  tha  daughter  grew,  day  by 
day,  like  the  phases  of  bright  fortnight  moon,  into  youth  and  beauty. 
There  was  a  son  of  Dyumat  Sena,  named  Satyavana,  always  truthful, 
good  natured  and  endowed  with  various  other  qualifications.  The 
daughter  chose  him  for  her  bridegroom.  The  King  betrothed  her  with 
jewels  and  ornaments  to  Satyavana,  who  gladly  took  her  home.  After 
one  year  expired,  the  truthful  vigorous  Satyavana  gladly  went  out, 
by  his  father's  command,  to  collect  fruits  and  fuel.  The  chaste 
S&vitri,  too,  followed  him.  Unfortunately  Satyavana  fell  down  from  a 
tree  and  died.  Yama,  the  God  of  Death,  saw  his  soul  as  a  Purusa 
of  the  size  of  one's  thumb  and  took  it  and  went  away.  The  chaste 
Savitri  began  to  follow  Him.  The  high  souled  Yama,  the  Foremost 
of  the  Sadhus,  seeing  Savitri  following  Him,  addressed  hdr  sweetly: — 
"  O  Savitri  !  Whither  are  you  going  in  your  this  mortal  coil?  If  you 
like    to    follow   after   all,    then    quit   your   this   body. 

15-2.5.  The  mortal  man,  with  his  transient  coil  of  these  five 
element?,  is  not  able  to  go  to  My  Abode.  O  Chaste  One!  The  death 
time  of  your  husband  arrived;  therefore  Satyavana  is  going  to  My  Abode 
to  reap  the  fruits  of  his  Karma.  Every  livmg  animal  is  born  by 
his  Karma.  Ho  dies  again  through  his  life  long  Karma.  It  is  his  Karma 
alone  that  ordains  plea-ure,  pain,  fear,  sorrows,  etc.  By  Karma, 
this  embodied  soul  here  becomes  lr)dra;  by  Karma  he  can  become 
a  Brtihm^'s  sod.  What  more  than  this  that  Jiva,  by  his  Karma,  can 
be  in  Ilari's  service  and  be  free  from  birth  and  dath  I  By  one't: 
own  Karma  all  sorts  of  Siddhis  and  immortality  can  be  obtained; 
the  four  blessed  regions  as  Visnu's  Salokya,  etc.,  also  can  be 
obtained  by  Karma.  What  more  than  this  that  by  Karma,  a  being 
becomes  divine,  human,  or  a  King,  or  Siva  or  Gsnes'a  !  Ihe  state  of 
Munindra,  asceticism,  Ksattriyahood,  Vais'yahood,  Mlechhahood, 
moving  things,  stones,  Raksasahood,  Kinnaras,  Kingship,  becoming 
trees,  beasts,  forest  animals,  inferior  animals,  worms,  Daityas,  Danavas, 
Asuras,  all  are  fashioned  and  wrought  bvKarma  and  Karma  alone.  0  Naradal 
Thus   speaking,    Yama   remained  silent. 

Here   ends    the  Twenty-seventh    Chapter    of    the     Ninth     Book      on 
the    birth  etc.   of  Savitri    in    ^ri    Had    Devi      BlDgavatam    of      1S,C00 
1    verses   by    Maharsi    Veda    Vyasa. 


912  :§Ri  MAD  DEVi  BHAgAVATAM. 


CHAPTER   XXVllI. 


1-4.  Ndrslyana  said  : — '*  O  Narada  !  Hearing  the  words  of  Yama, 
the  chaste  intelligent  S^vitri,  replied  with  great  devotion: — "  O  Dharma- 
rajan  !  What  is  Karma  ?  Why  and  how  is  its  origin  ?  What  is  the  cause 
of  Karma  ?  Who  is  the  embodied  soul  (bound  by  Karma)  ?  What  is 
this  body?  And  who  is  it  that  does  Karmi  ?  What  is  Jnana  ? 
What  is  Buddhi  ?  What  is  this  Pr^na  of  this  embodied  Jiva?  What 
are  the  Indriyas  ?  And  what  are  their  characteristics  ?  And  what  are  the 
Devatas  thereof  ?  Who  is  it  that  enjoys  and  who  is  it  that  makes  one 
enjoy  ?  What  is  this  3njoyment  (Bhoga)  ?  And  what  is  the  means  of 
escape  from  it  ?  And  what  is  the  nature  of  that  State  when  one  escapes 
from  enjoyment?  What  is  the  nature  c/  Jiv^tm^?  And  what  of 
Pararaatm^?  O    Deva !   Speak   all    these   in   detail  to  me. 

5.21.  Dharraa  said; — Karma  is  of  two  kinds — good  and  bad. 
The  Karma  that  is  stated  in  the  Vedas  as  leading  to  Dharma  is 
good  ;  all  other  actions  are  bad.  The  God's  t^ervice,  without  any 
selfish  ends  (Sankalap)  and  without  the  hope  of  any  fruits  thereof 
(ahaituki),  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  root  out  all  the  Karmas-and  gives 
rise  to  the  highest  devotion  to  God.  A  man  who  is  such  a  Bhakta 
of  Brahma  bacomes  liberated,  so  the  orutis  say.  Who  then  does  the 
Karma  and  who  is  it  that  enjoys  ?  {i.  e.  no  such  body).  To  such  a 
Bhakti  to  Brahma,  there  is  no  birth,  death,  old  age,  disease,  sorrow 
nor  any  fear.  O  Chaste  One  !  Bhakti  is  two-fold.  This  is  stated  by  all 
in  the  orutis.  The  one  leads  to  Nirvana  and  the  other  leads  to 
the  nature  of  Hari,  The  Vaisnavas  want  the  Bhakti  to  Hari  i.  e. 
the  Saguna  Bhakti.  The  other  Yogis  and  the  best  knowers  of  Brahma 
want  the  Nirguna  Bhakti.  He  who  is  the  Seed  of  Karma,  and  the 
Bestower  for  ever  the  fruits  of  Karma,  Who  is  the  Karma  Incarnate 
and  the  Mula  Prakriti,  is  the  Bhagavan  ;  He  is  the  Highest  Self.  He 
is  the  Material  Cause  of  Karma.  Know  this  body  to  be  by  nature 
liable  to  dissolve  and  die.  Earth,  air,  akas'a,  water,  and  fire  the^e 
are  the  threads,  as  it  were,  of  the  work  of  creation  of  Brahma 
Who  is  of  the  nature  of  Being,  "  Dehi  "  or  t  he  Embodied  Soul  is  the  Doer 
of  Karma,  the  Karta  ;  he  is  the  eujoyer  ;  and  Atma  (self)  is  the  prompter, 
the  stimulator  within  to  do  the  Karma  and  enjoy  the  fruits  thereof. 
The  experiencing  of  pleasures  and  pains  and  the  varieties  thereof  is 
known  as  Bhoga  (enjoyment).     Liberation,  Mukti  is  the  escape  there  from. 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXVltt  9l3 

The  knowleJ<,'e  by  whleb  A.ttna  (sat)  aud  M^ly^  (Asab)  are  discriminafced 
is  called  Jnauaiu  (Braliini  J fiauain).  The  knowledge  is  considered  as  the 
root  discriminator  uf  various  objects  of  enjoyment?,  (i.  e.  by  which 
the  various  objects  are  at  once  recognised  as  different  from  Atman). 
By  Buddbi  is  meant  the  right  seeing  of  things,  (as  certain)  and  is 
considered  as  the  seed  of  Jnitiiu.  By  Priina  is  known  as  the  different 
Vayus  in  the  body.  And  this  Prana  ia  the  strength  of  the  embodied.  Mind 
is  the  chief,  the  best,  of  the  senses,  it  is  a  part  of  Is'vara  :  its  characteristic 
is  its  doubtful  uncertain  state.  It  impels  to  all  actions,  irresistible.  It 
is  inascertainable,  invisible  ;  it  obstructs  tho  Jnana.  The  senses  are 
seeing,  hearing,  smelling,  touching  aiul  tasting.  These  are  the  several  limbs, 
as  it  were,  of  the  embodied  aud  the  impellers  to  all  actions.  They 
are  both  enemies  and  friends  as  they  give  pain  (when  attached  to 
wordly  objects)  and  happiness  (when  attached  to  virtuous  objects)  both. 
The  Sun,  VAvu.  Earth,  Brahma  aud  others  are  their  Devatas.  The 
Jjva  is  the  holder,  the  sustainer  of  Pruna,  body,  etc.  The  ParamStma, 
the  Highest  Self,  is  the  Best  of  all,  Omnipresent,  transcending  the 
the  Gunas,  and  bn'ond  I'rakriti.  He  is  tha  Cause  of  all  causes  aud 
He  is  the  Brahma  Itself.  ()  Chaste  One  !  I  have  replied,  according  to  the 
SSstras  to  all  your  questions.  These  are  .In^nas  of  the  Jn^nins,  O  Child  ! 
Now  f^o  back   to   your  house    at   pleasure. 

22-30.  S^vitri  said  : — Whither  shall  I  go,  leaving  my  Husband  and 
Thee,  the  Ocean  of  Knowledge?  Please  oughtest  to  answer  thequei'ies 
that  I  now  put  to  Thee.  What  wombs  do  the  Jivas  get  in  response 
to  which  Karmas  ?  What  Karmas  lead  to  the  Heavens  ?  And  what  Karmas 
lead  to  various  hells  ?  Which  K<irmas  lead  to  Mukti  ?  And  which  Karmas 
give  Bhakti  ?  What  Karmas  make  one  Yogi  and  what  Karmas  inflict 
diseases  ?  Which  Karmas  make  one's  life  long  ?  or  short  ?  Which 
Karmas  again  make  one  happy  ?  And  what  Karmas  make  one  miserable  ? 
Which  Karmas  make  one  deformed  in  one's  limbs,  one-eyed,  blind,  deaf, 
lame  or  idiotic  ?  Which  Karmas  again  make  one  mad  ?  Make  one  very  much 
avaricious  or  of  a  stealing  habit  ?  What  Karmas  make  one  possess  Siddhis  ? 
Or  make  one  earn  the  four  Lokas  Salokya,  etc.  ?  What  Karmas  make  one  a 
Brahmin  or  an  ascetic  ?  Or  make  one  go  to  Heaven  or  Vaikuntha  ?  What 
Karmas  enable  one  to  go  to  Goloka,  the  par  excellence  and  free  from 
all  diseases  ?  How  many  are  the  hells  ?  What  are  their  names  and  how 
do  they  appear  ?  How  long  will  one  have  to  remain  in  each  hell  ?  and 
what  Karmas  lead  to  what  diseises  ?  O  Deva,  Now  toll  me  about  these 
that  I  have  asked  to  you  and  oblige. 

Here  ends  the  Twenty-Eighth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
story  of  Savitriin^ri  Mad  Devi  Bhagwatam  of  18,000  verses  by 
Maharsi   Veda    VySfa. 

115 


914  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 


CHAPTER  XXiX. 


1.  NArAyana  saidr—Yama  got  thimdeisfcnick  at  these  (queries 
of  SSvitr?.  He  then  began  to  describe,  with  a  smiling  eountenance, 
the   fruition     of    the  several    works   of   the  Jivas. 

2-8.  He  said:—"  0  Child  !  You  arc  now  a  daughter  only  twelve  years 
old.  But  you  speak  of  wisdom  like  the  Highest  Jn^nins  and  Yogis, 
Sanaka  and  others.  O  Child  !  By  virtue  of  the  boon  granted  by 
Savitri,  you  have  become  incarnate  of  Her  in  part.  The  King 
As'vapati  got  you  before  by  performing  severe  penances.  As  Lakgmi 
is  dear  and  fortunate  with  regard  to  Visnu,  as  Mahadevi  is  to 
Mahadeva,  Aditi  to  KasVapa,  Ahalya  to  Gautama,  so  you  are  to  Satya- 
vaoa  in  respect  of  affection  and  good-luck  and  other  best  qualities. 
As  Sachi  is  to  Mahendra,  as  Rohini  isto  Moon,  as  Rati  is  to  Kama,  as 
Svaha  is  to  Fire,  as  Svadha  is  to  the  Pitris,  as  Sanjfia  is  to  the  Sun,  as 
Varun§ni  is  to  Varuna,  as  Daksina  is  to  Yajna,  as  Earth  is  to  Varaha,  as 
Devasena  is  to  Kartika,  so  you  are  fortunate  and  blessed  with  respect  to 
Satyavana.  O  Savitri  !  I  myself  grant  you  this  boon  of  my  own 
accord.  Now  ask  other  boons,  O  highly  fortunate  One  !  1  will  fulfil  all 
your  desires. 

9-12.  Savitri  said  : — "O  Noble  One  !  Let  there  be  one  hundred  sons 
of  mine  by  Satyavana.  This  is  the  boon  that  I  want.  Let  there  be  one 
hundred  sons  of  my  Father  as  well  ;  let  my  Father-in-law  get  back  his 
(lost)  eyesight  and  may  he  get  back  his  lost  kingdom.  This  is  another  boon 
that  I  want.  Thou  art  the  Lord  of  the  world.  So  grant  me  this  boon, 
too,  that  I  may  have  this  my  very  body  for  a  lakh  years  when  1  may  go  to 
Vaikuntha  with  Satyavana.  Now  I  am  eager  to  hear  the  various  fruitions 
of  Karmas  of  several  Jivas.  Kindly  narrate    them  and    oblige. 

13-70.  Dharma  said: — You  are  very  chaste.  So  what  you  have 
thought  will  verily  come  to  pass.  Now  I  describe  the  fruition  of  Karmas 
of  the  Jivas.  Listen.  Excepting  this  holy  land  of  Bharata,  nowhere  do  the 
people  enjoy  wholly  the  fruition  of  their  two-fold  Karmas,  good  and  bad. 
It  is  only  the  Suras,  Daityas,  DA, navas,  Oandharvafi,  Raksasas,  and  men 
that  do  Karmas.  The  beasts  and  the  other  Jivas  do  not  do  Karmas.  The 
special  Jivas  e.  g.  men,  etc.,  experience  the  fruition  of  their  Karmas  in 
Heavens,  hells  and  in  all  the  other  Yonis  fwombs).     Specially,  as  the   Jivas 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXIX.  915 

roam  in  all  the  diflferent  Yonis,  theyeajoy  their  Karmas,  good  or  bad,  as  the 
ease  may  be,  carved  in  their  previous  births.  The  good  works    get    fructified 
iu  Heaveus;  aud  the  bad  works  lead  the  Jivas  to  hells.     This  Karma  can   be 
got  rid  of  by  Bhakti.     This  Bhakti  is  of  two  kinds  : — (1)  Nirgima  of  the 
nature  of  Nirvana  ;  and  (2)  towards  Prakrifci,  of  the  nature  of  Brahma,  and 
with  Melya  inherent.  Diseases  come  as  the  result  of  bad  and  ignorant  actions  ; 
and  healthiness  comes  from  good  and  certain  scientific  Karmas.  Similar  are  the 
remarks  for  short  and  long  lives  for  happiness  and  pain.   By  bad  works,  one 
becomes  blind  or  deformed  in  body.  So  by  doing  excellent    Karmas,  one   ac- 
quires Siddhis,  etc..  These  are  spoken  generally.  I  will  now  speak  in  detail  ; 
listen.  This  is  very  secret  even  in  Puranas  and  Smritis.  In  this  Bharatavarsa, 
men  are  the  best  of  all  the  various  classes  of  beings.  The  Brahmans  are    the 
best  of  men  and  are  best  in  all  Kinds  of  Karmas.  They  are    responsible,    too, 
for  their  actions.  0  Cbaste  One  I  Of  the  Brahmins,  again,  those  that  are  at- 
tached to  the  Brahmanas  are  the  best.     The  Brahmanas  are  of  two  kinds  as 
they   are    Sak^ma  (with    desires)    or     Niskama   (without     desires).     The 
NiskSmi    Brahmanas    are   superior  to    the  Sak^mi     Brahmanas.     For  the 
SakSmis    are    to   enjoy    the   fruits    of  their    Karmas,    while  the  Niskami 
Brahmanas   are    perfectly  free   from   any    such    disturbances    (they     have 
not   to    come    back    to    this  field    of  Karma).     The     Niskama     Bhakta«. 
after    they   quit    their    bodies,  go   to   a    place      free      from      sickness     or 
diseasp,    pure   and   perfect.     From    there  they    do    not   come  back.      The 
Niskama    Bhaktas    assuming    the   divine   forms  go  to  the     Goloki     and 
worship   the     Highest    God,   the    Highest    Self,   the     two-armed     Krisna 
The    Sakami    Vaisnavas   go   to    Vaikuntha  ;    but   they     come     back     in 
Bharata  and  get    into    the    wombs  of  the  twice-born.     By     degrees    they 
also   become   Niskama     when     they      certainly     acquire     pure     undefiled 
Bhakti.     The   Brahmanas   and   Vaisnavas    that    are    Sakamis  in  all  their 
births,    never   get    that      pure     undefiled     intellect     and   never     get    the 
devotion   to  Visnu.     The  Brahmanas,  living  in  the  Tirthas   (sacred  places 
of    pilgrimages)   and    attached    to  Tapas  go    to  Brahmaloka    (the    region 
of    Brahma)  ;   they    again   come    down     to     Bharata.     Those     that     are 
devotedly   attached    to    their    own     Dharma      (religion)     and     reside     in 
places    other    than   Tirthas,    go    to  Satyaloka   and  again  come  to  Bhirata. 
The    Brahmanas,   following   their   own   Dharma    and   devoted    to  the  Sun 
cro   to   the    world    of   the    Sun  and   again   come    to    Bharata.     And  those 
who   are   devoted   to  Mala    Prakriti    and    devoted    to    Niskama    Dharma 
go    to    ManiDvipa    and   have   not    to    come   back     from     thither.     The 
Bhaktas    of*  5iva,   ^ikti,    and  Gane'sa,    and     attached      to     their      own 
Dharmas    respectively   go   to    the  ^iva    Loka     and      return    from  thence. 
Those  Brahmauas    that    w)rship    the    other   Devas   and    attached  to  their 


916  5rI  mad  DEVl  JBHAGAVATAM. 

own    Dharmas   go   to  those   regions   of      theirs    respectively     and     again 
come    to    Bharata.      Attached   to   their     own      Dharmas,     the    Niskatni, 
Bhaktas  of  Hari    go  by  their   Bhakti    step  by    step    to      the    region  of  Sri 
Hari.     Those    that    are   not   attached      to  their   own  Dharmas   and  do  not 
worship  the  Devas  and  always    bent  on  doing  things  as  they  like  without  any 
regard  to    their    Achuras  go  certainly   t  j    hells.     No  doubt  in    this.     The 
Br^hmanas  and   the   other   three    Varnas,  attached    to  their  own    Dharmas 
all  enjoy  the  fruits   of  their  good  works.     But  those  who  do   not     do   their 
Svadharma,  go  verily  down    into  hells.     They  do    not     come   to  Bharata  for 
their  rebirth,  they  enjoy  their  fruits  of  Karmas  in    hells  I  Therefore  the  four 
Varnas   ought  to  follow  their  own  Dharmas     of     the  Brahmanas,    they  are 
to  remain  attacheJ  to    their    own    Dharmas    anJ  give      their    daughters    in 
marriage  to  the  similarly    qualified    Brahmtnas.      They     then     go    to    the 
Chandraloka   (the   region    of  the     Moon).     There     they    remain       for    the 
life  periods   of  the  fourteen  ludras.     And     if   the    girl     be     given,     with 
ornaments,     the   results    obtained  would   be    twicj.     If     the  girl   be  given 
with    a   desire   in    view,   then  that   world    is    obtained  ;    but      if     the   girl 
be   given   without  any  desire  but  to  fulfil    the  God's  will  and    God's    satis- 
faction only,  then  one  would  not   have   to   go   to  that   world.      They   go  to 
Vianu  Loka,  bereft  of  the    fruits  of  all   Karmas.     Those    that   give     to   the 
Brahmanas   pasture     ground    and     cattle,    silver,     gold,     garment,      fruits 
and   water,   go    to   the     Chandraloka   and    live    there     for  one    Manvantara 
They  live  long  in  those   regions   by    virtue  of  that  merit.  Again    those  that 
give     gold,   cows,     copper,    etc.,    to    the     h  )ly   Bruhmana>,       go      to    the 
Surya    Loka    (the    region    of  the    Sun)  and  live    there  for   one    Ayuta  years 
(10,000    years),    free    from    diseases,    etc,    for    along     time.       Those     that 
give    lands    and    lots  of   wealth    r<)    the    Brahmin^:,  go     lo  the    Visnu    LoKa 
and  to  the    beautiful    Sveta    Dvipa    (one    of  the    eiiihteen     minor    divisions 
of   the    known    continents).     And    there    they     live    as     long      as    the  Sun 
nnd    Moon   exist.     O  Muni  !     The  meritorious    persons    live    long    in    thut 
wide  region.     Note  : — Sveta     Dvipa  may    mean     Vaikuntha,    where    Visn^ 
resides.     Those    who     give     with     devotion      dwelling      places      to        the 
Bnlhrnanas,     go    to   the  happy    Visnu    Loka.     And  there,   in     that     great 
Vi§nu  Loka,     they    live    for   years    equal    to    the    number    of  molecules    in 
that   house.     He    who   offers   a    dwelling      house    in    honour    of  any  Deva 
goes    to    the    region    of   that     Deva   and  remains  there     for   a     number  of 
years   equivalent    to    the    number    of  particles     in    that  house.     The  lotu.<«. 
born  Brahm^  said  that  if  one  offers  a  royal  palace,  one    obtains    a  result  foui- 
times   and   if  one    offers   a     country,    one  gets    the  result      one   bundled 
times  that  ;   again   if  one   offers    an  excellent       country,   twice    as  much 
merit    one    aoquires.     One    who   dedicates    a    tank        for    the   expiation    of 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXIX.  917 

all  one's  sins,  one  lives  in  Janar  Loka  (one  of  the  pious  regions)  for 
a  period  equivalent  to  the  number  ot  particles  therein).  If  any  man 
offers  a  VSpi  (a  well)  in  preference  to  other  gifts,  one  gets  ten 
fold  fruits  thereby.  If  one  offers  seven  V^apis,  one  acquires  the  fruits 
of  offering  one  tank.  A  Vapi  is  one  which  is  four  thousand  Dhanus 
long  and  which  is  a^  much  wide  or  less  {Note  : — Dhanu  equals  a  measure 
of  four  hastas).  It  offered  to  a  good  bridegeroom,  then  the  giving  of 
a  daughter  in  marriage  is  equivalent  to  a  dedication  of  ten  VSpis. 
And  if  the  girl  be  offered  with  ornaments,  twice  the  merits  accrue. 
The  same  merit  accrues  in  clearing  the  bed  of  the  mud  of  a  pond 
as  in  digging  it.  So  for  the  VSpi  (well).  O  Chaste  One  !  He 
Nvho  plants  an  As'vattha  tree  and  dedicates  it  to  a  godly  purpose, 
lives  for  one  Ayuta  years  in  Tapar  Loka.  0  Savitri  !  He  who  dedicates 
a  flower  garden  for  the  acquirement  of  all  sorts  of  good,  lives  for 
one    Ayuta   years    in    Dhruva    Loka. 

O  Chaste  One  !  He  who  gives  a  Vimana  (any  sort  of  excellent  carriage) 
in  honour  of  Visnu,  in  this  Hindoos  than,  lives  for  one  Manvantara  in 
Vianulok-i.  And  if  one  gives  a  Vim.^na  of  variegated  colours  and  work- 
manship, four  times  the  result  accrues.  And  one  who  gives  a  palan- 
quin, acquires  half  the  fruits.  Again  if  anybody  i»ives,  out  of 
devotion,  a  swinging  temple  (the  Dol  Maniir)  to  Bhagav&n  Sri  Hari,  lives 
for  one  hundred  Manvantras,  in  the  region  of  Visnu.  O  Chaste  One  ! 
He  who  makes  a  gift  of  a  royal  road,  decorated  with  palacial  buildings 
on  either  siie,  lives  with  great  honour  and  love  in  that  Indraloka  for 
one  Ayuta  years.  Equal  results  follow  whether  the  above  things  are 
offered  t)  th^  Gob  or  to  the  Brahmana?.  lie  enjoy^!  that  which  he 
"Ives.  No  giving,  "No  enjoying.  After  enjoying  the  heavenly  pleasures,  etc., 
the  virtuonsj  person  takes  birth  in  Bharata  as  a  Brahmin  or  in  other 
good  lamilies,  in  due  order,  and  ultimately  in  the  Brahmana  families. 
The  virtuous  Brahmana,  after  he  has  enjoyed  the  heavenly  pleasures, 
takes  his  birth  again  in  Bhflrata  in  Brahmana,  Ksattriya  or  in  Vais'ya 
families.  A  Ksattriya  or  a  Vais'ya  can  never  obtain  Brahmanahood,  evea 
if  he  performs  asceticism  for  one  Kotl  Kalpas.  This  is  stated  in  the 
Srutis.  Without  enjoying  the  fruits,  no  Karma  etn  be  exhausted  even 
in  one  hundred  Koti  Kalpas.  So  the  fruits  of  the  Karmas  must  be 
enjoyed,  whether  they  be  auspicious  or  inauspicious.  By  the  help  of 
seeing  the  Divis  and  seeing  the  Tirthas  again  and  again,  purity  is 
acquired.     O   S^vitrl  !   So     now    I   have     told     you     something.     What 

more  do  you   want  to  hear?  Say. 

Here  ends  the  Twenty-Ninth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
anef^dote  of  Savitri  on  the  fniitsof  making  gifts  and  on  the  effects  of  Karmas 
in   Sri    Mad    Devi     Bhagvatara  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharfi  Veda  VySsft; 


918  ^Rt  MAD  DEVI  BIIAgaVATAM. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

1.  Sftvitri  said  :— "  O  Dharmar^jan  !  Kindly  t<»ll  me  iu  detiil 
about  those  works  that  lead  the  inQritoi-ious  persons  to  the  Heavens 
and   various  other    spheres. 

2-20.  Dh«irmaraj  said  :— "  O  Child  !  He  who  ^'wea  riee  and  food 
to  the  Brahtnanas  in  India,  goes  to  the  Sivaloka  where  he  dwells 
with  Teat  respect  for  years  equivalent  to  the  measure  of  that  food. 
This  "  Anna-d^na  "  (the  giving  of  boiled  riee  and  other  eatables)  is 
a  great  dan  (charity)  and  this  can  be  done  not  only  to  the  Brahmanas 
but  to  the  other'  castes  also,  where  similar  results  also  follow.  There  is, 
or  will  be,  no  other  charity  superior  to  this  charity  of  anna  (rice,  boiled  it 
may  be  and  other  eatables.)  For  here  no  distinction  is  made  as  to  what 
caste  will  get  it  or  not,  nor  the  discrimination  of  tiraa,  when  to  give  such 
a  charity.  O  Child  !  Seats  (Asanas)  given  to  the  Devas  and  the 
Brahmanas,  carry  the  donor  to  the  V^isnu  Loka,  where  he  dwells  for 
Ayuta  years  with  groat  respect  and  love.  Giving  excellent  C)\v3 
yielding  milk  to  Brilhmanas  take  the  donor  to  Visnuloka,  where  he  is 
glorified  and  remains  for  years  equivalent  to  the  number  of  pores 
in  that  cow  or  those  cows.  And  if  cows  be  given  on  a  meritorious  day, 
four  times  the  merits  accrue,  and  if  given  in  a  sacred  place  of  pilgrim- 
age, hundred  times  the  result  occurs ;  and  if  given  in  a  tirath,  where 
Narayana  is  worshipped,  koti  times  the  results  accrue.  He  who  gives 
with  devotion,  cows  to  the  Brahmanas  in  Bh^rata,  remains  in  the  , 
Chandraloka  for  one  Ayuta  years  and  is  glorified.  He  who  gives 
a  two-mouthed  cow  to  a  Brahmana,  goes  to  Visnuloka  and  remains  there 
for  as  many  years  as  there  exist  the  numbers  of  hairs  on  the  body 
of  that  cow  and  is  glorified.  A  gift  of  a  beautiful  white  umbrella  to  a 
Brahmana  makes  one  go  to  Varunaloki  for  Ayuta  years  where  he 
remains  with  great  pleasure.  Giving  garments  to  the  diseased  Brahmanas 
makes  one  fit  to  remain  with  glory  in  Vayuloka  for  one  ayuta  years^  I 
Giving  to  a^Brahmana  the  Saligrama  with  garments  makes  one  remain 
with  glory  in  Vaikuntha  as  long  as  there  exist  the  Sun  and  Moon. 
Giving  a  beautiful  bedding  to  a  Brahmana,  glorifies  a  man  in  the  | 
Chandraloka  as  long  as  theie  exist  the  Sun  and  Moon.  To  give  lights': 
to  the  Devas  and  Brahmana  glorifies  a  man  iu  Agniloka  (the  region ; 
of  Fire)  for  one  Manvantara.  To  give  elephants  to  the  Brahmanas  in ' 
Bh^rata,  makes   one   sit  in  the  same  throne  with  Indra  for  his    life   period  ( 


Book  IX.]  CHAFTEU  XXX.  9l9 

(liviiif;  borsos  to  the  Briliraanas  makes  one  remain  in  Varunaloka 
for  fburteou  Itulfas'  liCo  perioJs,  Giving'  a  <^ood  palanquin  to  a 
lirahmana  iiiaked  one  remain  in  the  Varunaloka  for  fourteen  Indras' 
lile-periods.  Givin<^  a  j^ood  site  or  a  good  orchard  to  a  Brahmana 
leads  one  to  the  VAyuloka  where  he  remains  with  glory  for  one 
Manvantara.  Giving  a  white  chamara  and  fan  to  a  Brahmana,  leads 
the  donor  to  the  Vilvaloka  wiiere  he  rsmains  for  one  ayuta  years. 
Giving  grains  and  jewels  make  one  long-lived  and  both  the  donors 
and   receivers    go    certainly    to    Vaikuntha. 

21-40.  lie  who  always  recites  the  name  of  ^li  Ilaii,  lives  for 
ever  and  Death  goes  far  far  away  fioni  him.  The  intelligent  man 
that  celebrates  the  Swinging  Festival  ( Dol  Jatra)  in  the  last  quarter 
of  the  Full  Moon  night  in  this  land  of  Bharata.  becomes  liberated 
while  living,  enjoying  pleasures  in  this  world,  goes  in  the  end  to 
VisQuloka,  wh^re  he  remains  for  one  hundred  Manvantaras  ;  there  is 
no  doubt  in  this.  If  the  Swinging  Festival  be  performed  under  the 
influence  of  the  asterism  Uttara  Phalguni  then  the  fruits  become  doubled  * 
this  is  the  saying  of  Brahma  Himselfi  The  performer  lives  to  the  end  of 
a  Kalpa.  To  give  til  (Sesamum)  to  a  Brahman,  leads  one  to  ^iva  Loka 
where  one  enjoys  for  a  number  of  years  equal  to  the  number  of  til.  Then 
one  is  born  in  a  good  yoni  and  becomes  longlived  and  happy.  To  oive  a 
copper  plate  yields  double  the  effect.  To  give  in  India  a  chaste  wife  with 
garments  and  ornaments  to  a  Brahman  (and  then  to  purchase  her  with 
an  equivalent  in  gold)  leads  one  to  Chandra  Loka  where  one  remains  for 
fourteen  Indra's  life  periods  and  enjoys  day  and  night  the  celestial  Apsaras. 
Thence  the  donor  goes  to  the  Gandharba  Loka  for  one  ayuta  years  and 
day  and  night  enjoys  Urv^s'i.  Then  he  gets  for  thousand  births  chaste 
fortunate,  wealthy,  gentle  and  sweet-speaking,  beautiful  wives.  He  who 
gives  nice  and  delicious  friuts  to  the  Brahmanas,  remains  with  (»lory  in  the 
Indra  Loka  for  a  number  of  years  equivalent  to  the  fruits.  He  »ets  a^ain  a 
good  Yoni  (birth)  and  gets  excellent  sons.  To  give  thousand  trees  while 
there  are  fruits  on  them,  or  nice  friuts  only  to  the  Brahmanas,  makes 
one  enjoy  the  Heavens  for  a  long,  long  time  and  he  then  comes  back  to 
Bharata.  To  give  various  things  and  good  edifices  with  grains,  etc.  to  the 
Brahmanas  leads  one  to  the  regions  of  the  Devas  where  he  remains  for  one 
hundred  Manvantaras.  Then  he  gets  a  very  good  birth  and  becomes  the 
master  of  abundant  wealth.  He  who  gives  with  devotion  to  the  BrAhmanas 
lauds  certainly  goes  for  one  hundred  Manvantaras  and  remains  there 
in  glory  for  one  hundred  Mauvantras  ;  and,  coming  again  to  bo  born-in  '>ood 
wombs,  they  become  Kings.  The  earth  does  not  leave  him  for  hundred 
births.     He  becomes     prosperous,     wealthy   and   possesses  many  sons   and 


920  ^r!  mad  DEvt  bhAgavatam. 

becomes  the  lord  of  his  subjects.  He  who  gives  a  good  village  with 
pasture  laud  and  cow;^,  dwells  with  glory  in  Vaikunth*  for  one  lakh 
manvantaras.  Then  he  gets  a  good  brith  (becomes  born  in  a  high  caste 
iamily)  and  obtains  a  lakh  villages.  The  earth  quits  him  not  even  if  he  be 
born  a  lakh  times.  (This  is  very  bad  then,  to  one  who  does  not  like  to  be 
born  again). 

41-60.  He  who  gives  a  village  inhabited  by  good  and  obedient  subjects 
with  ripe  excellent  grains,  various  tanks,  trees  and  adorned  with  fruits  »ud 
leaves  dwells  in  Kailasa  witli  great  glory  for  ten  lakh  Indra's  life  periods. 
Cretting  again  born  in  a  high  family,  he  becomes  Raja  Dhir^ja  in  BhUrata 
and  obtains  Niyuta  towns.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  The  earth  quits 
him  not,  even  if  he  be  born  uyuta  times.  Really  he  gets  tha  highest  pros- 
perity in  this  earth.  )le  who  gives  to  a  Brahmana  one  hundred  towns  and 
countries,  inhabited  by  good  or  mediocre  subjects,  with  wells,  tanks,  and. 
various  trees,  remains  with  glory  in  Vaikuntha  for  one  koti  manvantaras. 
Then  he  becomes  born  in  this  ear  th  in  a  high  caste  family,  becomes  the 
Lord  of  Jaiubudvipa  and  attains  in  thii«  earth  great  prosperity  like  Indra. 
The  earth  quits  him  not  even  if  he  comes  here  Koti  times  ;  in  reality  he  is  a 
Mah^tma  (a  great-sould  man),  Rajrajes'vara  (the  Lord  of  Kings)  and 
lives  upto  the  end  of  a  Kalpa.  He  who  gives  his  whole  property  to  a 
Brahmin,  gets  in  the  end  four  times  that ;  there  is  no  doubt  in  this.  He 
who  gives  Jambu  Dvipa  to  an  ascetic  Brahmana,  gets  undoubtedly  in  the 
end  one  hundred  times  the  fruit.  Jf  you  sive  away  Jambu  Dvipa,  the 
whole  earth  ;  if  you  travel  all  the  Tirthas,  if  you  perform  all  sorts  of 
asceticisms,  if  you  give  shelter  to  all,  if  you  make  gifts  of  all  sorts, 
know  that  you  will  have  to  come  again  to  be  reborn  in  this  earth  ;  but  if 
you  become  a  devotee  of  Mula  Prakriti,  then  be  sure  that  you  w'ont  have 
to  come  here  and  be  reborn.  The  devotees  of  Mula  Prakriti  go  to 
Maoi  Dvipa,  the  Highest  place  of  Sri  Bhuvanes'ari  Devi  and  remain  there 
and  they  see  the  fall  of  innumerable  Brahmas.  The  worshippers  of  the 
Devi  Mantra  when  they  quit  their  mortal  coils,  assume  divine  appearances 
endowed  with  Bibhiitis  (manifestations  of  powers)  and  free  from  birth, 
death  and  old  age,  assume  the  Sarupya  (the  same  form)  of  the  Devi  and 
remain  in  Her  Service.  They  reside  in  Manidvipa  and  see  the  part  Pralayas. 
The  Devas  die,  the  Siddhas  die,  the  whole  universe  vanishes  ;  but  the 
Devi  Bhaktas  never  die  and  ihev  remain  free  form  birth,  death,  and  old  asre. 
He  who  otfers  Tulasi  leaf  to  Bhagavau  Hari  in  the  month  of  Kurtik 
resides  for  three  yugas  in  the  temple  of  Hari.  (letting  again  a  good 
birth,  he  ae(iuircs  the  devotion  to  Sri  Hari  aeid  becomes  the  Foremost  of 
those  who  restrain  their  senses.  He  who  bathes  in  the  Ganges  early 
before  the  rising  cf  the  Sun  remains  in  enjoyment  in  the  temple  of 
Hari   for   sixty   thousand   yugas.    Getting  again   a    good    birth,    he     gets 


BookIX.J  chapter  XXX.  921 

th  e  Visnu  Mantra,  and,   quitting  his   mortal  coil,  becomes  united  with  the 
Feet    of  Sri  Hari. 

61-77.  He  has  not  to  come  back  from  Vaikuntha  to  this  earth. 
He  remains  in  Hari's  Service  and  gets  the  same  form  of  Hari.  He 
who  bathes  daily  in  the  Ganges,  becomes  purified  like  the  Sun  and 
gets  the  result  of  performing  the  Horse-sacrifice  at  every  step.  The  earth 
becomes  purified  by  the  dust  of  his  feet  and  he  enjoys  in  Vaikuntha  as 
long  as  the  Sun  and  Moon  exist.  Then  again  he  becomes  born  in 
a  good  and  beautiful  womb,  and  is  liberated  by  acquiring  the  devotion  to 
Hari.  He  becomes  very  energetic  and  the  foremost  of  the  ascetics, 
pure,  religious,  learned,  and  selt-restrained.  When  the  Sun  comes  midway 
between  Pisces  and  Cancer  and  heats  intensely  the  earth,  the  man 
who  in  Bbarata  gives  cool  water  to  drink  to  the  people,  resides  in 
happiness  in  Kailas'a  for  fourteen  Indras'  life  periods.  Getting  again 
a  good]  birth  here,  he  becomes  beautiful,  happy,  devoted  to  Siva, 
energetic  and  expert  in  the  Vedas,  and  the  Ved^ngas.  He  who  gives  to 
a  BiShmana  the  Saktn  (sattu)  in  the  month  of  Vais'ltkhe  enjoys  in 
the  Siva  temple  for  as  many  years  as  there  are  number  of  partioles 
in  that  quantity  of  sattu  (powders  in  parched  oat).  He  who  performs 
the  Krisna  Janmastami  vow  in  this  Bh^rata,  is  freed  from  the  sins 
incurred  in  his  hundred  births  ;  there  is  no  doubt  in  this.  The 
observer  of  the  vow  remains  in  great  enjoyment  in  Vaikuntha  for 
fourteen  Indras'  life  periods,  gets  again  a  good  birth  here  and 
acquires  Hari  Bhakti.  He  who  performs  the  Sivaratri  vow  in  this  Bhftrata 
Varsa,  resides  with  great  joy  in  Siva  Loka  for  seven  manvantaras.  He 
who  offers  the  Bel  leaves  to  Siva  in  Sivaratri  time,  resides  with  great 
joy  in  Siva's  Abode  for  as  many  yugas  as  there  are  numberW  leaves. 
Getting  again  a  good  birth  here,  he  acquires  the  devotion  to  Siva 
and  becomes  learned,  prosperous  and  possesses  sons,  subjects  and  lands. 
He  who  performs  vow  and  worships  Sankara  in  the  mouth  of  Chaitra 
or  Magha  an  1  who,  with  a  branch  of  a  tree  in  hand,  dances  day  and  night 
for  one  month,  or  half  a  month,  for  ten  days  or  for  seven  days, 
dwells  in  tsiva  Loka  for  as  many  yugas  as  the  number  of  days  he 
dances.  He  who  performs  the  vow  of  Sri  Rama  Navami,  lives  in  the 
abode  of  Visnu  for  seven  Manvantaras  in  great  joy.  Getting  again 
a  good  birth,  he  becomes  devoted  to  Sri  Rama,  the  foremost  of  those 
who    have    self  restraint   and    he  becomes  very  wealthy. 

78-87.  He  who  performs  the  Saradiya  Puja "  (the  great  Durga 
Puja  in  the  month  of  autumn)  of  the  Mula  Prakriti  with  incense,  lights, 
offerings  of  food,  and  animal  sacrifices  of  buffaloes,  goats,  sheep,  rhinoceros, 
frogs  or  other  animals,  together  with  dancing,  music,  and  various  other  aus- 

116. 


922  ^r!  mad   DEVt    Bll  Ali  AV  ;>  i  VM. 

pioious  things,  resides  in  the  Siva  Loki  for  seven    Manvantaras.    GetUrig  an 
excellcnb  birth,  and  a, pure  understindinj?,  he<^'3ts  unbounded  prosperity,    sons 
and,  no  doubt,  grandsons  and  he  becomes  a  very  powerful    sovereign  possess- 
ing many  horses  and  elephants.     There  is  no    doubt  in    this.  Again  ho    who 
worships  daily  with  devotion  for  a  fortnight  beginning  from    the   eighth  day 
of  the  bright  fortnight  the  Maha  Devi   Laksmi,  remains     in  the    region    of 
Goloka  for  fourteen  Indras'  life  periods.    Then,  obtaining  an    excellent  birth, 
he  becomes  a  sovereign.     He  who  in  the  full  moon    night  in   the    month    of 
K^rtik  prepares  a  Rasa  mandal   with    one    hundred    Gopas  and  Gopis    and 
worships  ari  Krisna  and  Radht\  in    Salagraraa    or  in  images    with    sixteen 
variotiea  of  offerings  remains  in  Goloka   for   BrahmS's  life-time  and  cominsr 
again  to  Bb3,rata  acquires  an  unflinching  devotion  to  Sri  Krisna. 

88-99.  And  when  this  Bhakti  becomes  greatly  intensified,  ho  gets  initi- 
ated into  Sri  Hari  mantra  and  after  quitting  his   mortal  coil,  he  "-oes  to  the 
Goloka.     Then  he  gets  the  Sarupya  (the  same  form)  of  Krisna  and  becomes 
the  chief  Parisad  (attendant  of  Krigna)  and,  becoming  free  from  old  age,  he  has 
no'fear  to  fall  again  down  to  this  earth.     He  who  observes  the  EkSdas'i  day 
remains  fasting  and  performing  penances  in  the  bright  or  dark  eleventh  day, 
remains  in  Vaikuntha  In  great  enjoyment  and  comfort.  Then,  again  coming 
into  this  Bharata  he  becomes  a  devotee  of  Hari.     And   when   that   Bhakti 
is  intensified  he  becomes   solely  devoted   to    Hari    and    quitting  his  mortal 
coil,  goes  again  to  the  Goloka  and  gets  the  SSrupya  of  Krisna  and  becomes 
His  PArisada  (attendant).     Then,  freed  of  old  age    and  death,    he   does   not 
fall.     He    who    worships    Indra  in  the  month  of  Bh§dra  in  the  twelfth    day 
of  the  white  fortnight   is    worshipped   in     the   regions   of  Indra     for   sixty 
thousand  years.     He  who  performs    in    BhSrata    the   worship     of  the  Sun 
on  Sunday  Sankr^uti  (when  the  Sun  goes  from  one  sign    to  another)  and  the 
bright  seventh  Tithi,  according  to   due    rules   and    ceremonies  and  eats  the 
food  called  Havisyanna     (rice     boiled     in  ghee),    dwells    in  the  Suryaloka 
for  fourteen  Indra's  life  periods.     Then  coming  to  Bharata,  he  becomes  free 
from  all  diseases  and  becomes  prosperous.  He  who   worships  Sdvit-ri  on   th^' 
fourteenth  day  of  the  black  fortnight  dwells   in  the  region  of  Brahma  for  seven 
Manvantaras  with  great  ecl4t  aud  glory.  Coming  again  to  Bharata      he   en- 
joys beauty,  unequalled  valour,  long  life,  knowledge  and  prosperity.  He  who 
worships  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  bright  fortnight  in  the    month    of   Mai«-ha 
with  his  senses  controlled  and  full  of    devotion,    the    Devi   Sarasvati    with 
sixteen  articles  of  food,  resides  in  Mani  Dvipa  for  one  day     and  one    nifht 
of  BrahmS,. 

100-140.  On  getting  re-birth,  he  becomes  a  poet  and  a  learned  man. 
He  who  daily  gives  with  devotion  for  his  \»hole  life,  cow  and  gold  to  a 
Brfthmana  dwells  in  Vifnu    Loka    for    twice   as   many  years  as   there  ar.. 


Book  IX]  CHAPTER  XXX.  923 

the  numbers  of  hairs  on  the  boJies  of  these  cows  and  plays   and     jests    with 
Visnu  and  doing  auspicious  things  he  finds  pleasure.     In  the  end   ho    comes 
again  to  this  Bharata  and  becomes  the  King  of  Kings,    He    becomes   fortu- 
nate, prosperous,  po3se.sses  many  sons,  becomes  learned,  full  of  knowledge  and 
happy  in   every  way.  He  who  feeds  a  BrShmana  here  with  sweetmeats  goos 
to  Vi.snu  Loka  and  enjoys  there  for  as  many   years   as    there    are    lisirf^    on 
t  he  body  of  the  Brahmin.  In  the  end  he  comes  again  to  Bhtirata  and  becomes 
happy,  wealthy,  learned,  long  lived,  fortunate  and    very    powerful.   He    who 
utters  the  name  of  Hari  or  gives  the  name  (/.e.  tlie  mantra)  of  Hari  toothers, 
is  worshipped  ia  Visnu  loka  for  as    many  yiigas   as  the  number  of   times, 
the  name  or  mantra  was    uttered.     Comiog  again    to  Bharata,   he  becomes 
happy   and    wealthy.     And    if  such    things    be  done  in  N^rayana  Keettra, 
koti    times      the    above   results    ensue.     He    who   repeats     the     name  of 
Hari     koti   times  in    Nar^yana    Ksettra,     becomes,    no   doubt,     freed    of 
all  sins  and    liberated    while    living    and     he    will   not     get   rebirth.     He 
lives   always    in    Vaikuntha.     He    gets    the  Salokya   (the      same     region 
of  Visnu,  is  not   liable    to    fall,     becomes   a   Bhakta  of  Visnu.     He     who 
daily  worships   the    earthen   phallic    symbol    (after     making  it   daily)  lor 
his    whole    life,   goes    to    the    Siva   Loka    and   dwells    there   for   a.?  many 
years   as  there    are  the  number  of   particles  of  earth.     Getting    rebirth  he 
becomes    the  King  of  Kings.     He  who  worships    daily  the  SMagrdma  stone 
;md    eats     the    water    (after    bathing    it)  is     glorified    in    Vaikuptha    for 
one   hundred     Brahma's     lives     and     becomes    born      again.      When    he 
acquires  the   rare    Hari   Bhakti    and    quiting     his     mortal    coil     goes     to 
Visnu    Loka,    whence    he  is    not    to    return.     He  who  performs     all  the 
Tapasy^s    (asceticims)    and    observes   all    the     vratas    (vows),     dwells    in 
Vaikuntha   for    fourteen    Indras'    life  peroids.     Getting  rebirth  in  Bharata 
he    becomes    the    King   of  Kings    and   then    he    be3omes    liberated.     He 
is    not    to   return    any    more.     He   who   bathes  in     all   the    Tirthas    and 
makes   a   journey    round  the  while  world,    gets    Nirvana.     He     is     not 
reborn.     He  who   performs  the  Horse-Saeriiice  in  this    holy    land    Bharata 
enjoys    half  the  Indraship    for   as  many  years  as    there  are    hairs  on  the 
body   of   the  horse.     He    who    performs    a    R3,jasuya  Sacrifice,    gets  four 
times    the   above   result.     Of  all  the  sacrifices,     the     Devi    Yajna,   or  the 
Sacrifice    before   the    Devi   is    the   Best.     O  Fair    One  I  Of    old.     Visnu, 
Brahma,    Indra    and    when     Tripurasura     wa?    killed,     Maha     Deva    did 
such  a  sacrifice.     O  Beautiful  One  !  This  sacrifice  before    the    Sakti    is  the 
highest  and  best  of  all  the  sacrifices.     There    is   nothing  like  this     in     the 
three    worlds.     This    Great   Sacrifice    was   done  of    yore  by    Daksa    when 
he    collected    abundant    sacrificial    materials  of  all    sorts.     And    a  quarrel 
ensued   on   this    action nt   between    Oik.sa  aud     Sankara.     The    BrJlhmin.^ 


I 


924  5rI  MA.D  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

conducting   the   sacrifice  cursed  the  Nandi  and    others.  And  Nandi  cursed 
the  Brahmanas.     Mahudeva,  therefore,  disallowed  the  goiug  on  of  sacrifice 
and   brought    it   to  a   dead   stop.     Of  yore    the     PrajSpati     Daksa     did 
this  Devi    Yajna ;   it   was     done   also    by    Dharma,  Kas'yapa  ;     Ananta, 
Kardaraa,      Svayambhuva     Manu,     his     son     Priyavrata,      Siva,    Sanat 
Kumllra,    Kapila   and  Dhriiva.     The    performance  of  this    sacrifice  brings 
fruits    equal     to    performing      thousands     and     thousands     of     Riijasuya 
sacrifices.     Therefore   there  is  no   other  sacrifice  greater   than      this    Devi 
Yajna.     One   becomes      surely    endowed    with  a  long  life    of  one  hundred 
years   and   is    liberated   while  living.     He   becomes   equal   to     Visnu     in 
knowledge,  energ/,  strength,  and  asceticism.     This  is  as  true  as  anything. 
O  Child  !   This    Devi   Yajna   is    the    best   and    highest  of  all  the  sacrifices 
as    Visnu    is    the    highest    amongst   the  Devas  ;     Narada,     amongst   the 
Vaisnavas  ;   the   Vedas,  amongst  all  the    Sastras  ;  the  Brahmanas  amongst 
all   the   castes  ;    the    Ganges    amongst   the    sacied    places  of  pilgrimages, 
Siva  amongst  the  Holy  of  Holies,  the  Ekadas'i  vow  amongst'all  the  Vratas  ; 
Tulasi,   amongst    all    the   flowers  ;     the  Moon,    amongst  the    asterisms  ; 
Garuda,   amongst   the    birds  j     Prakriti,     RSdhS,    Sarasvati    and     Earth 
amongst  the  females  ;  tha  mind,  amongst  the    quick-going    and       restless 
senses  ;    Brahma,    amongst    the    Praj^patis  ;    Brahma,     amongst    all    the 
subjects  ;  Vrindruban,   amongst   all   the    forests  ;    Bh3.rat    Varfi,  amongst 
all   the   Varsas  ;    L.iksmi,   amongst    the    prosperous  ;    Sarasvati,  amongst 
the   learned;    Durga,  amongst  the  chaste;    Radhika,  amongst    the  fortu- 
nate.    If  one    hundred   horse  sacrifices   are    performed,    Indrahood  is  sure 
to   be   obtained.     It   is   by  the   influence    of   bathing    in  all  the.Tirthis, 
performing  all  the  sacrifices,  observing  all   the    Vratas,     practising   all  the 
austerities,  studying  all  the  Vedas  and   circumambulating  the    whole  earth, 
that  this  Highest  Sakti's  service  is  obtained  and  this  service  of  ^akti  is  the 
direct   cause    of  Mukti    (liberation).     To   worship    the     lotus-fa et   of  the 
Devi   is    the    best   and   highest,   is   stated  in    all   the    Puranas,  in  all  the 
Vedas,   and    in   all   the    Itih^sas.     To  sing    the    glories  of  Mula  Prakriti 
to   meditate   on    Her,  to   chant   Her  Name    and    attributes,  to  remember 
Her  stotras,    now  down  before    Her,,  to  repeat    Her  Name,  and   to  drink 
daily    Her   PAdodoka    (water   after   washing    Her   feet)    and  the  offerinog 
already  offered  to  Her,  these  are  approved  of   by  all  ;  and    everyone    desires 
this.     So  worship,  worship  this  Miila   Prakriti,  Who    is  of   the    nature  of 
Brahma,  and,  lo  !  Who  is  again  endowed  with  MIya.     O  Child  !  Take  vour 
husband   and    live     happily    with  him   in    your     home.     O  Child  !    Thus 
I   have   described   to  you   the    fruition  of  the  Karmas.     This  is  auspicious 
to    every  human   being,  desired     by    all   and     approved   of  by   all.     The 
Real    Knowledge     springs      from    this.     There    is    no     doubt    in     this, 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXXI.  925 

Here  ends  the  Thirtieth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  con- 
versation between  Savitri  and  Yama  and  on  the  fruition  of  Karmas  in 
the  Great  Puranam  5ri  Mad  Devt  BhSgavatam  of  18,000  verses  by 
Maharsi    Veda  Vyasa. 


OHAPIER  XXXI. 

1-2.  Narayana  said  : — '*  O  Ntlrada  !  Hearing  thus  the  supreme 
nature  of  Mula  Prakriti  from  Dharmardja  Yama,  the  two  eyes  of 
savitri  were  filled  with  tears  of  joy  and  her  whole  body  was  filled 
with  a  thrill  of  raptuie,  joy  ani  ec-^tacy.  She  aorain  addressed  Yama:— *'0 
Dharmarija  !  To  "icf;  the  glories  of  Mula  Prakriti  is  the  only  meaus  of 
saving  all.  This  takes  away  the  old  age  and  death  of  both  the 
pj)eaker    and    the    hearer. 

3  12.     This   is  the  Supreme    Place   of  the       Uanavas,  the   Siddhas,  the 
asceties.     This   is  the    Yoga   of  the    Yogin^-    and       this    is     studjing  the 
Veda^   of  the    Vaidiks,     Nothing    can    compare  even   to   one-sixteenth  of 
the    sixteenth    parts    of    the    (full)    merits  of    those    who    are   in     J^akti's 
Service  ;  call    it    Mukti,  immortality,  or  attaining  endless  Siddhis,  nothing 
can   come    to   it.     O  Thou,   the  Foremost  of  the  Kuowets    of   the  Yedas  ! 
I    have   heard    by  and    by     everything    from    Th  e.      Now   describe  to  me 
how    to    worship    MuU    Prakriti    and    what    ar*     the     ends     of    Karmas 
auspicious    and    inauspicious.     Thus     saying,    the    chaste    Stlvitii    bowed 
do>vn    her    head    and     began    to    praise    Yama     in    stotras     accnrdinti-     to 
the    Vedas.     She    said: — "  O  Dhamarajan  !    The    Sun    praetisrd    of    yore 
very    hard    austerities    at    Puskara    and    worshipped    Dharma.     On     this 
Dharma   Himself  became    born    of  Surya  as     his   son.     And      Thou    art 
that   son   of  Surya,    the   incarnation   of  Dharma.     So    I    bow     down   to 
Thee.     Thou    art   the    Witness   of    all  the     Jivas ;     Thou     seest    them 
equally ;   henee   Thy   name   is    Samana.     I    bow    down   to    Thee.     Some- 
times  Thou    by   Thy  own    will    takest    away    the  lives  of  beings.     Hence 
Thy   name   is   Krittijita.     Obeisance   to  -Thee  !     Thou  boldest   the  rod  to 
distribute  justice   and   pronounce   sentence  on    them   and    to    destroy  the 
sins   of  the   Jivas  ;    henee    Thy   name     is     Dardadhara  ;     so     I     bown 
down    to   Thee.)     Note: — Any    Jiva,    in    course   of  his   travelling  towards 
Mukti,   can   expect  to  pass    through   the    stage     Yamaship  ;     and    if  he 
pleases,  he  can  become  a  Yama.)    At  all  times  Thou  destroyest  the  universe. 
None   can   resist   Thee.     Hence   Thou    art   named     K41a  ;  so    obeisance 
to   Thee !     Thou   art   an   ascetic,     devoted     to    Brahma,     self-controlled, 
and    the    distributor   of   the    fruits   of     Karmas     to     the     Jivas;     Thou 
restrainest  Thy     senses.     Hence     Thou     art     called   Yama.     Therefore  I 
bow  down  to  Thee. 


020  5lit  MAD  DEVt  BIIA.GAVATAM. 

13-17.  Thou  art  delighted  with  Thy  Own  Self  ;  Thou  art  omuiscient  ; 
Thou  art  the  Tormentor  of  the  sinners  and  the  Friend  of  the  Virtuous. 
Hence  Thy  name  is  Punya  Mitra  ;  so  I  bow  down  to  Thee.  Thou 
ari  born  as  a  part  of  Brahma  ;  the  fire  of  Brahma  is  shining  through 
Thy  body.  Thou  do?t  meditate  on  Para  Brahma,  Thou  art  the  Lord. 
Obeisence  to  Thee  !  0  Muai  !  Thus  praising  Yama,  She  bowed  down  at 
the  feet  of  Him.  Yama  gave  her  the  mantra  of  Mula  Prakriti.  How 
to  worship  Her  and  He  began  to  recite  the  fruition  of  good  Karmas.  O 
Narada  !  He  who  recites  these  eight  hymns  to  YamR  early  in  the 
morning,  getting  up  from  his  bed,  is  freed  of  the  fear  of  dsath. 
Rather  he  becomes  freed  of  all  his  sins.  So  much  so,  that  even  if 
he  be  a  veritable  awful  sinner  and  if  he  recites  daily  with  devotion 
this   Yamastakam,     Yama    purifies  him  thorughly. 

Here  ends  the  Thirty-first  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
Yama's  giving  Sakti  Mantra  ta  Savitri  in  the  Mahapuranam  Sri  Mad 
Hevi     BhSgavatam     of   18,000    verses    by    Maharsi    Yoda   Vyasa. 


CHAPrER  XXXII. 

1-28.     NArayaiia   said  : — Then,  initiating  her  with  the  Great   Seed,  the 
Adi  Radical  Mantra  of  the    Maha  Sakti,    Sri  BhiivaneasVari  in  accordance 
ivtthduQ   rides,   the   son    of     Siirya  began  to  recite  the  various  effects   of 
various   Karmas,   auspicious    and      inauspicious.     Never   do     the     persons 
go   to  hell    when    they     perform    good    Karmas  ;    it  is  only  the  bad  works 
that   lead    men   to   hells.     The   different  Puranas    narrate   various  heavens. 
The    Jivas    go    to   those     places    as    the    effects    of     their    various     good 
Karmas.     The    good     Karmas    do    not    lead    men    to   hells  ;    but    the   bad 
Karmas   do   lead    them    veritably   to  various    hideous    hells.       In  different 
^dstras,    different    hell-pita    are    ascertained.     Different       works    lead  men 
to   different    hells.     O  Child  !    Those      hell-pits     are      very     wide,     deep, 
painful   and    tormenting,     very     horrible       and     ugly.     Of  these  !  Eighty 
six    pits    or      Knndas  are    prominent.     Many    other  '  Kundas    exist.    Now 
listen     to    the    names    of  the    Kundas    mentioned    in    the    Vedas.     Their 
nameb    are: — Vahni    Kunda,    Tapta     Kunda,    Ksara     Kunda,    Bhayjinaka 
Kunda,    Vit    Kunda,    Miitra     Kunda,     olesmi     Kunda,     Gara     Kunda, 
Dusika    Kunda,    Vasu    Kunda,      Sukra-Kunda,     Sonita     Kunda,     As'ru 
Kunda,    Gatramala  Kunda,  Karnamala  Kunda,     MajjS     Kunda,    Mamsa 
Kunda,     impassable     Nakra     Kunda,     Loma      Kunda,      Kes'a      Kunda, 
impassable  Asthi  Kunda,    Tdmra  Kunda,    the    exceedingly  hot  and  painful 
Lauha    Kunda    (the    pit    of  molten  iron).     Charma    Kunda,    the  hot  SurS 
Kunda,   sharp    Thorny  Kunda,    Visa   Kunda,    the    hot  Taila  Kunda,  very 
heavy   Astra     Kunda,     Krimi     Kunda,    Puya     Kunda,     terriable     Sarpa 


Book  IX.]  OHA.PTER  XXXUI.  927 

Kunda      Mas'aka     Kundfi,     Dams'a     Kuridii,     dreadful      Gai'ala    Kuadi, 

Vaira   Damstfa    Vris'chika    Kandi,     ^ara     Kundi,    Siila     Kunda,      awtul 

Khad'^a    Kunda,    Gola    Kunda,    Nakra    Kunda,    sorrowful    Kaka   Kunda, 

Manthani    Kunda,   Vija       Kunda,  .  painful    Vajra     Kunda,   hob    PSs^ana 

Knnda,    sharp   Pc\srina  Kunda.     LaK^  Kunda,  Ma=!i  Kundi  Chakra    Kunda 

Vakra  Kunda  very  terrible  Kur.'ua  Kuudi,    Jvala     Kunda,  Bhasma    Kunda, 

Da^^dha    Kunda,    and    others.     Besides    these,  there    are      the    Taptasuchi, 

A.sipitra,       Ksuradhara,       Suchimukha,       Gokhamukha,       Kumbhipaka, 

Kalasutra,   Matsyoda,    Krinii    Kautuki,    Panis'ubhojya,      Pas'avesta,  Sula- 

pro'-a,    Prakampana    Ulk^niakha,    Andhakupa,    Vedhana,    Tadana,     .Tdla- 

randhra,    Dahachurna,    Dalana,       Sosana,     Kasa,      Sarpa,     Jvalamukha, 

Dhumandha,      NA,gavestana      and      various       others.      O  Savitri  !     These 

Kundas   give    much     pain      and    torment   greatly  the    sinners  ;    they    are 

under    the    constant    watch    of   innumerable     servants.     They     hold    rods 

in    their  hands  :    some    of    them    have   uooses  ;   others    hold  clubs,  Saktis, 

awful    scimitars  ;    tliey    are    fierce    fanatics,    maddened      \vith  vanity.      All 

are    filled  with    Taniogunas,    merciless,   irresistible,    energetic,  fearless  and 

tawny-eyed   (like     copper).     Some      of    them     are       Yogis  ;     some     are 

Siddhas,    they  assume    various  forms.     When    the     sinners   are    about  to 

die,    they   see   these    servants   of  Yama.     But    those    who   do   their  own 

duties,    who   are   S^kta?,    Sauras,     or     Ganapatyas     or   those     who     are 

virtuous    Siddha   Yogis,    they   never    see    the    servants    of  Yama.     Thos-i 

who    are    engage]    in    their  own    Dharmas,    who    are  possessed    of  wisdom, 

who    arc    endowed    with    knowledge,     who     are      mentally     strong,    who 

are    untouched  by    fear,    who   are  endowed    with     the      feelings     of  the 

Devas,    and    those    who    are    real      Vaisnavas,      they      never     sea     these 

servants    of  Yama.     O  Chaste    One  !    Thus    I   have     enumerated    to   you 

the  Kundas.     Now    hear    who    live   in  the     Kundas. 

Here  ends  the  Thirty-second  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
enumeration  of  various  hell^  for  sinners,  iji  the  Mahapuranam  !§ri  Mad 
l)3Vi  Bhugavatam  of  18,000    -verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XXXII r. 

l-ll).  Dharmarajan  siad  :  -Those  that  are  in  Ilari's  service,  pure, 
the  Siddhas  in  Yoga  (those  that  have  attained  success  in  Yo^a),  the 
performers  of  Vratas  ;(vows),  the  chaste,  the  ascetics,  the  Brahmacharis 
never  go  to  hells.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  Those  persons  that 
are  proud  of  their  strong  positions  and  who  use  very  harsh  burning 
words  to  thier  friends,  they  go  to  Vahni  Kunda  and  live  there  for  as 
many  years  as  there  are  hairs  on  his  body  ;  next  they  attain  animal 
births  for  three  births  and  get  themselves  scorched  under  the  strong 
heat    of  the    Sun.     He    goes    to    the  Tajta   Kniida     helJ    who   does    not 


928  ^Rt  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

entertain  any   Brafioian    <|aest    with    any   eatables     who    comes   to    his 

house   hungry    and    thirsty.     He    lives   there    for   as  many   years  as  there 

are    hairs   on   his    body   and     he    has    to    sleep    on    a    bed     of  fire,     very 

tormenting.     Then    he    will    have   to   be    bora   for    seven   births   as  birds. 

Jf  anybody   washes  any     clothing     with    any  salt     on     Sunday,    or     on 

the   day    of  Samkranti  (when    the  Sun    enters   another   sign),   or   an  any 

new-moon   day  or    on    any    Srdddha   day    (when   funeral     ceremonies  are 

performed),    he    will    have   to   go    to   the    Ksara     Kunda  hell     where  he 

remains   for  as    many   years    as    there   are   threads  in  that    clothing    and 

finally    he    becomes    born    for   seven    births     as    a   veritable    washerman. 

The  wretch  that  abuses   Mula  Prakriti,    the  Vedas,   the   Sastras,  Puranas, 

Brahma,  Visnu,  tsiva  and  the  other  Devas,  Gauri,  Laksmi,  Sarasvati   and 

the  other  Devis,  goes  to  the  hell  named  Bhayanaka  Narakakunda.     There 

is  no   other   hell    more   tormenting    than    this.     The  sinners  live  here   for 

many    Kalpas  and  ultimately   become    serpents.     There    is  no   sin  greater 

than  the  abase  of  the  Devi,     There    is    no   expiation  for  it.  So  one    ought 

never  to  abuse    the    Devi.     If  one  discontinues  the   allowances    given  by 

oneself  or  other'persons  to  the    Devas    or  Brahmana?,  one   goes  to    Vistha 

Ivunda  and  has  to  eat  the  ffeees  there  for   sixty  thousand  years    and  finally 

to  be  born  in  Bharata  as  worms  in  faeces  the    same  number    of  years.    If 

any  person  without  the    owner's  peruiissiou    digs   another's   tank  dried  of 

water,  or  makes  water  in  the  water  of  any     tank,  he  goes  to  Mutra  Kunda 

and  drinks  urine  for  as  many  years  as  there    are  the  particles  in  that  tank. 

Then  he  becomes  born    in    this    Bharata   as  an  ox  for  one    hundred  years. 

If  any  per^son  eats  good  things  himself  without   giving  any  portion  thereof 

to  the  member   of  his   family,    he  goes    to  Jblcsma  Kunda  where  he   eats 

phlegm,    for    full  one   hundred  years.     Then  he   becomes    born    as    Preta 

(disembodied     spirits)    in    this    Bharata   for     hundred   years   and   drinks 

phlegm,  urine  and  puss  ;  then  he  becomes  pure.   He  who  does  not   support 

his  father,  mother,  spiritual  teacher,  wife,  sons,  daughters  and  the    helpless 

persons,   goes  to  Gara  Kunda  where  he   eits    poison  for  full  one    hundred 

years.  Finally    he   becomes    born    and    wanders    as    Bhutas    (disembodied 

spirits).     Then  ho  becomes  pure. 

20-41.  He  who  becomes  angry  and  shrinks  his  eyes  at  the  sight  of  a 
guest  who  has  come  to  his  hou-:e  offends  the  Devas  or  Pitris,  who  do  not 
accept  the  water  offered  to  thona  by  that  villain.  On  the  contrary,  he  earns 
all  the  sins  of  BrahmahatyA,  (murder  of  a  Brahmin  and  so  forth)  and  finally 
goes  to  Dusikakund;i  where  he  rem^iins  for  one  hundred  years  and  eats 
polluted  things.  Then  wandering  as  Bhutas  for  one  hundred  years  he 
becomes  purified.  If  anybody  makes  a  gift  of  any  article  to  a  BrShmin 
and  then  again  gives  that  article  to  a  different  man,  he  goes  to  Vasa  Kunda 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXXIII.  929 

where   he  eats   marrows   for   one    hauired  years.     Thao  he    has    to   roam 
about   in  India  for  seven  births  as  a  Krikillsa  (lizard)  and  finally  f he   be- 
eonaes  born  as  a  very  poor  man  with  a  very  short  life.   If  any  woman  or  any 
man  makes  another  of  a  different  sex  eat  semen,  out  of  passion,    he  goes  to 
Sukra  Kunda    where  he  drinks   semen  for    one    hundred    years.     Then  he 
crawls  about  as  worms  for  one  hundred  years.     And  then  he  gets  purified. 
If    anybody    beats  a  BrShmana    who    is  a  family  preceptor  and  causes  his 
blood  to  come  out,    he    will  have  to   go    to  Rakta  Kunda  where  he    has  to 
drink  blood   for  one    hundred    years,     Finally    he    has    to  roam  about  for 
seven  births  in  India  as  tigers;  then  he    becomes  pure    by  degrees.     If  any 
body  mocks  and    laughts   at   any  devotee    of  Krisna  who   sings  with  rapfc 
consciousness  and  sheds  tears  of  joy,    he    will  have  to  go  to    As'ru    Kunda 
where  he  drinks  tears    for   one   hundred   years.     Then  he  has  to  roam  as  a 
Chandala    for    three   births    and    then  he   becomes  pure.     He  who  always 
cheats  his  friends,  lives  for  one  hundred  years  in  Gratramala  Kunda.     Then 
roaming    about  for  three   births  as  an   ass    and  for  three    briths  as  a  fox 
concurrently,  he  becomes  purified.     Out  of  vanity,    if  anybody    jests  at  a 
deaf  person,    he  goes    to   Karnamalakunda    where    he  eats  for  one  hundred 
years  the  wax  of  the  ear.      Next    he   comes  to  the  earth   as    a     deaf  and  a 
very  poor  man    for  seven    births,   when   at   last   he  gets  purified.     If  any- 
body commits  murder  out  of  greed    to  support   his  family,    he    goes  to  the 
hell  Majj^kunda  where  he  eats  marrow  for  one  lakh  years.  Next  he  becomes 
a  fish  for  seven  births,    for  seven    births    he   becomes  a  mosquitto,  for  three 
births  he  becomes  a  boar,    for  seven    births   ho   becomes    a   cock,    deer  and 
other  animals  concurrently  ;  at  last  he  gets  purified.     If  any  stupid  person 
sells  the   daughter    whom  he    has  sapported,   out    of    greed  for  money,  he 
goes  to  Munsakuuda  and  lives  there  for  as    mxny   years  as    there  are  hairs 
on    her  body.     The    Yama's   servants    beat    him    with  their    clubs.     His 
head  becomes  overloaded  with  the  burden  of  the  flesh;  and,  out  of  hunger,  he 
licks  the  blood  coming  out  of  his  head.  Next    that  sinner  comes  to  Bh&rata 
and  for  sixty  years  becomes    a    worm  in  any  daughter's  faesces,  for  seven 
births  he  becomes  a  hunter;  for  three  births,  a  boar;  for  seven  births,    cock; 
for  seven  births,  frog  ;  for  seven  births,    leeeh;  and  for  seven   births,  crow; 
when  he  gets  purified.     One    who   shaves  on    the   day    of  observing  vows, 
fasting  and  funeral    ceremony  day,  becomes    impure  and  unfit    to  do  any 
action,  and,  in  the  end,  he  goes  to  the  Nakha  Kunda  where  he  receives  blows 
of  clubs  and  eats  nails  for  one  hundred  Deva   years.     If  anybody    worships, 
out  of  carelessness,  the  earthen    Siva    phallic  symbol  with    any  hairs  on  it, 
he  goes  to  the  hell  Kes'a  Kunda  where  he  remains   for    as   many    years  as 
there  are  particles   iu   that   hair;    then    ho    gets    to  the    yoni  (womb)  of  a 
Vuvauuui    (a  Mlechcha  woman)  out  of   Hara's   wrath.  After  one   hundred 

117  , 


(ISO  ^Ht  MAD  DEVt   BHACfAVATAM. 

yeai'a  ho  bscomes  freed  from  that  aud  then  he  becomes  a  Hulvsasa;  there  is  no 
doubt  iu  this.  lie  who  does  not  offer  PincUs  to  the  Visnupada  in  fionour  of 
his  Pitri?  at  GayS  goes  to  the  hell  Asthikanda  where  he  remains  for  a^^ 
many  veiirs  as  there  aro  dirts  on  his  bady.  Then  he  becomes  a  man; 
but  for\'even  births  ho  becomes  lame  aud  poor.  Then  he  gets  purified. 
The  stupid  man  who  commits  outrage  and  violeneo  on  his  pregnant  wife, 
resides  for  one  hundred  years  in  tho  hot  Tumra  Kunda  (where  copj»ers  are 
in  a  molten  condition).  He  who  takes  tho  food  of  a  childless  wid«nv  and 
the  same  of  any  woman  that  has' just  bathed  after  menstruation  goes  for 
one  hundred  years  to  the  hot  Lauha  Kunda  (where  iron  is  in  a  molten 
condition).  For  seven  births  ho  becomes  then  a  crow  aud  for  seven  births 
he  becomes  born  of  a  washerwoman,  full  ot  sores  and  boils,  and  poor. 
Then  he  gets    purified. 

5i-01.  If  one  touches  the  things  of  the  Devas  after  Louchiug  skius  or 
impure  hydes,  one  remains  in  the  Charma  Kunda  for  full  one  hundred  years. 
If  any  Brahmin  eats  a  oudra's  food,  requested  by  him,  he  lives  for  one 
hundred  years  in  the  hot  Sura  Kunda.  Then  for  seven  births  he  performs, 
the  funeral  rites  for  a  S'udra  ;  at  last  he  becomes  pure.  If  any  foul-mouthed 
person  uses  always  harsh  and  filthy  language  to  his  master,  he  will  have 
to  go  to  Tiksna  Kantaka  Kunda  where  he  eats  thorns.  Besides,  the  Yaraa's 
servants  give  severe  beatings  to  him  with  their  clubs.  For  seven  births 
he  will  have  to  become  horses  when  he  gets  purified.  If  atiy  man  ministers 
poison  to  another  and  so  takes  away  bis  life,  ho  will  have  to  remain  for 
endless  years  in  Vi§akunda,  where  he  will  have  to  eat  poison.  Then  he 
will  have  to  pass  for  one  hundred  years  as  a  murderer  Bnilla,  full  of  sores 
and  boils,  and  for  seven  births  he  will  have  to  be  a  leper  when  at  last  lie 
gets  purified.  Being  born  in  this  holy  land  Bharatavarsa,  if  any  man 
strikes  a  cow  with  a  rod  or  any  driver  does  so  whether  by  himself  or  by  his 
servant,  he  will  have  to  dwell  certainly  in  the  hot  Lauha  Kunda  for  four 
vu^as.  Ho  will  have  to  pass  as  many  years  as  a  cow  as  there  are  hairs  on 
that  cow  when  ultimately  he  gets  j>urified.  If  anybody  strikes  any  other 
bodv  with  a  red-hot  iron  dart  (Kunta  weapon),  he  will  have  to  dwell  iu 
the  Kunta  Kunda  for  ayuta  years.  'LMien  he  will  have  lo  remain  for  one 
birth  in  a  good  womb,  with  a  diseased  eonstituiion,  when  ultimately  he  will 
be  purified. 

62-85.  If  any  Brahmin  villain  oat?,  out  of  greeJ,  any  flesh  (not 
sacrificed  before  the  goddess)  or  anything  not  offered  to  H:iri,  he  will 
have  to  remain  iu  the  Krimi  Kunda  where  he  eats  those  things  for  as 
many  years  as  there  are  hairs  on  his  body,  Thou  he  will  have  to  pass  f-n" 
three  births  as  Mlcuhchas  when    ultimatolv  he  becomcf^    born  in  a  Brahmin 


-Book  IX  ]  CHAPTER  XXXIIT.  931 

family.  If  any  BrShmm  performs  the  S^radh  of  a  Sudra,  eats  the  food 
pertaining  to  a  Sradh  of  a  Sadra  or  barns  the  dead  body  of  a  Sadra,  he 
will  have  to  dwell  certainly  in  Paya  Kunda,  where,  being  beaten  by  the 
rod  ofYama,  he  eats  the  puss,  etc.,  for  as  many  years  as  there  are  halt's 
on  his  holy.  Then  he  become?  reborn  in  this  Bh^rata  as  one  greatly 
diseased,  poor,  deaf  and  dumb  and  ultimately  he  will  have  to  roam  for 
seven  births  as  a  oadra.  lie  who  kills  a  black  serpent  on  whose  hood 
there  is  the  lotus  mark,  lives  in  Sarpa  Kunda  for  as  many  years  as  there 
are  hair^  on  his  body  and  he  is  bitten  by  serpents  there  and  beatei  by 
the  servints  of  Yama  and  eats  the  excrescences  of  snakes  and  fin;illy 
becomes  born  as  a  serpent.  Then  he  becomes  a  man  shortlived  and  having 
the  cuticaneous  disease  and  ringworm.  And  his  death  also  comes  out. 
of  snake-bite.  He  who  kills  mosquittoes  and  other  small  fanged-animal?, 
that  earn  their  substiuce  rightly  and  pass  so  their  liyes,  goes  to  Daras'a 
m^s'a  Kuivia  where  hs  is  eaten  by  mosquittoes  and  other  fanged-ereatures 
and  lives  Mierc  without  food  anJ  crying,  weeping,  for  as  many  years  as  the 
number^;  ot  jives  destroyed.  Be -ides  tin  Yama's  servants  tie  his  hands 
and  feet  and  beat  him.  Then  he  becomes  born  as  flies  when  ultimately 
he  becomes  purilied.  He  who  b^ats  an!  chastises  any  man  not  fit  to  be 
chastised  and  bsat'in  and  as  wall  as  a  Brahmana,  goes  to  Vajra  Damstra 
Kundi,  full  of  worms,  and  lives  there  day  and  night  for  as  many  years  as 
there  are  the  number  of  hairs  on  the  chastised  person.  When  he  is  bitten 
by  the  worms  and  beaten  by  Yama's  servants,  he  cries  som-stimes,  weeps 
sometimes,  and  becomes  very  miserable.  Next  he  is  reborn  as  a  crow 
for  seven  births  wh^n  ultimitely  he  gats  purified.  If  any  foolish  king 
punishes  and  gives  trouble  to  his  subjects  out  of  greed  of  money,  he  goe3 
to  Vrischika  Kunda  where  he  lives  for  as  many  years  as  there  are  hairs 
on  the  bodies  of  his  subjects.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  Finally  he 
becomes  born  in  this  Bharata  as  a  scorpion  ;  then  a  man  diseased  and 
defective  in  limbs,  when  ultimately  he  becomes  freed  of  his  sins.  If  any 
Bruhmin  carries  or  raises  \veapons,  washes  the  clothes  of  others  who  do 
not  perform  Smdhyas  and  abandons  his  devotion  to  Hari,  he  lives  in 
Saradi  Kunda  for  as  many  years  as  there  are  hairs  on  his  body  ;  he  is, 
then,  pierced  by  arrows.  Firaally  he  becomes  purified.  If  any  king 
maddened  by  his  own  folly  and  fault,  shuts  his  subjects  in  a  dark  cell 
and  kills  them,  then  he  will  have  to  go  to  a  dreadful  dark  hell  filled 
with  worms  having  fanged  teeth  and  covered  with  dirt.  This  hell  Is 
named  Oola  Kunda.  He  lives  there  bitten  by  insects  for  as  many  years 
as  there  are  hairs  on  the  bodies  of  his  subjects.  Finally  he  becomes  a 
slave  of  those  subjects,  when  he  gets  purified. 

86-103.     If  anybody  kills   the    sharks   and   crocodiles,    etc.,    that  rise 
out  of  the  water  Bpontanaously,  ha   will    hivo   to   reaiain,   thjn,   in  Nakra 


932  SR!  mad  DEVt  BHAGAVATAM.  .  | 

Kunda   for  as    many   years   as   there   are    thorns    or  edged  points  on  those 
animals.     Then    he    will    have   to    be   born    as  crocodiles,    etc.,    for   some 
time,  when    he    will    be    purified.     If  any    man,   overpowered   with    lust, 
sees    another's    wife's    uiioovered    breast,    loins,     and    face,     he    will    have 
to  remain  in  Ki.ka  Kunda   for  as  many   years    as    there    are    hairs    in    his 
own   body.     Here  the  crows  take  out    his   eyes.     Finally    for  three    births 
he  gets  himself  burned  by  Fire  when  he  becomes  pure.  He  who  steals  in  India 
the  gold  of  the  Devas  and  the  Brclhmanas,   dwells  certaialr  in  ManthSna 
Kunda   for  as  many  years  as  there  are  hairs  on  his  body.  My  servants  yive 
him    ffood  beatings,    and  cudgellirjgs  ;  his  eyes  are    covered   by   Mantliana 
Danda  insects   (or  animals)  and    he   eats    their  dirty  faeces.     Then    he    is 
reborn    as  a  man  but  for  three  births  he  becomes  blind  and  for  seven  births 
he  becomes  very  poor,  cruel,  and  a  sinful  goldsmith  and  then    he    is  born  a 
Svarnavanik  (Sonar  bene).  O  Fair  One  !  He  who  steals  in  India  copper   or 
iron,    silver  or  gold,  dwells  in  Vija  Kunda  for  as  many  years   as    there   are 
hairs  Tjn  his  body.    There  the  Vijas  (a  kind    of  insect)    cover   his   eyes  and 
he  eats    the    ex-crescences   of    those  insects.    My  messengers  torment  him. 
Finally  he  gets  purified.     If  any  body  steals    in  India  any    Devata  or    i\u*. 
articles  of  a  Devata  ,  he  dwells  in  Vajra   Kunda    for  as   many  years  :is  thern 
are  hairs  on  his  body.  There  his  body  gets  burnt  up.  My  messengers  torment 
him  and  he  cries  and  weeps  and  remains  without  any    food.     Then  he  oe(s 
purified.  If  any  body  steals  the  metal  gold  or  silver,  cows,  or  garments  of  anv 
Deva  or  a  Brdhmana,  certainly  he  dwells  in  hot  Pdsana  Kunda  for  as  mar.v 
years    as  there  ar<i  hairs  an   his  body.     Next    for    three    births  he    becomes 
a  toitoise    and  all  sorts  of  white  birds.     Fiui^lly  for  three  births   he  becomes 
a  leper   and   for    one    birth    he    becomes    a    man  with  white    marks  on  his 
body.     Next  for  seven  births  he  becomes   diseased  with  a  severe  colic   pain 
and    bad   blood  and    lives    short.     When    he   gets   purified.     If  any  body 
steals  brass   or  Kamsya  properties   of  any    Deva   or  a  Brabmana,    he  will 
have  to  remain  in  the  sharp   Pasana   Kunda  for  as  many  years  as    there  are 
hairs  on  his  body.     Next  he  becomes  born  in  Bbdrata  for   seven    births  as 
horses  J      and  ultimately  his    both  the  jbestacles  get  enlarged  and    he  gets 
diseases      in      his   legs  when  he  gets  purified.     If      any    body     verily  eats 
the  food  of  an  adulterate  woman  or    lives    on   her  alms,  he  will  have  to  go 
to  the   Laia  Kunda  for  as  many  years  as  there  are  hairs  on  his  body.     My 
messengers   torment   him  there  and  he  eats  the  saliva  and  thus  lives  miser- 
ably.  Than  he  gets  eye  diseases  and  colic  ;  when  ultimately  he  gets  purified. 

104-126.  If  any  Brahmana  lives  on  writing  only  or  on  the 
service  of  Mlechehas,  he  lives  iu  Masi  Kunda  very  painfully,  eating 
ink,   tormented  by  My  massenger-s  for   as    many  years    as  there    are    hairs 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXXIII.  933 

on    his   body.     Then    he    becomes   a   black    animal   tor    three    births    and 
for   another    three    births    he   b3conae3   a    black     goat.    Then  he    becomes 
a   Tal    tree     when    he  gets  purified.     If  any     body    steils]  a    Deva's  or 
a  Brahmana's   grains,    or    any   other   good    materials,    betel,    Asan    (seat) 
or  bedding,    he     lives     in    Churna     Kunda     for      one      hundred      years, 
tormented    by    My    Diitas  (messengers).     Next   for    three    births  he   gets 
himself  born    as    a    goat,    cock,  and    monkey.    B^inally     he    becomes    born 
as  a  man  with  the  heart  disease,    without     any     issue,      poor,      and     short 
lived.     When,  at  last,  he  gets  purified.     If  any  body  steals  any    Brahmin's 
property     and    thereby   does     ehakra     piija     (the    famous     chakra     circle 
worship  in  Tantra),  or  prepares  a  potter's  wheel  or   any    other    wheels,  he 
will    have   to  go    to    Chakra    Kunda    and  remain    there  for    one    hundred 
years,  tormented   by    My   messengers.     Then    he  will    be   born  for    three 
births    as    an     oilman     suffering      from     very  severe  diseases  when  he  will 
ultimately   be    poor,    without   any    issue   and   diseased.     Finally    he   gets 
purified.     If    any    body   casts   a    sinful   eye   on     any     Brahmana     or    on 
cows,    he    will    have   to  remain   in    Vakra  Kunda  for  one  hundred  Yugas. 
Next   lor     three    births    he    becomes   a   cat,   for   three    births  he  becomes 
a  vulture  ;    for   three    births    he    becomes   a   boar  ;    for    three     births   he 
becomes  a   peacock  ;    for    seven    births   he    becomes    a    man  deformed  and 
defective    in    limbs,    his    wife   being   dead,    without    any     issue.     Finallv 
he  becomes    purified.     If  any    person    b.orn    in  a     Brahmin     family   eats 
the    flesh    of  a   tortoise    that   is    prohibited,    he   lives    in    Kurma  Kunda, 
for   one     hundred    years,     eat'^n       by       tortoises.      Then     he       becomes 
for  three    births    a   tortoise  ;   for      three      births,      a      boar  ;     for      three 
births     a  cat  ;    for      three      births,      a   peacock  ;     till   at     last    he     gets 
purified.    If    anybody       steals  clarified    butter    or     oil    of     any      Devas 
or  a  Brahmana  he  will   ha'  e  to  go     to      Jvala     Kunda  or  Bhasma  Kunda. 
That  sinner  remains  in   oil   for    one    hundred  years  and  gets  soked  through 
and  through.     Then  for  seven  births  he  becomes  a   fish    and  a  mouse    when 
he  gets   purified.     If  anybody,   born    here   in     this    holy    land     Bharata, 
steals-sweet   scented    oil    of  a   Deva     or  of  a     Brahmana,    the    powdered 
myrobalan   or  any   other    scent,    he   goes    to    Dagdha   Kunda     where    he 
lives,   burnt    day    and   night   for   as    many   years    as    there   are  hairs    on 
his    body.     For    seven    births    he    becomas    born    emitting  a   nasty  smelJ 
for   three   births  he  becomes   musk  (mriga-ndbhi ;)  for    seven  births,     as  a 
ManthSna  insect.  Then  he  becomes  born  as  a  man.  If,  out.of  envy,  a  power- 
ful  man    appropriates    to    his    purpose    another's     ancestral     property   by 
cheating,   by   using   force,    he   goes   to    the    hot     Suehi     Kunda,    being 
tormented    there   like   a    Jiva   dropped   in  the    midst  of  a    very   hot  oil 
tank,  full  of  boiling  oil.     His  body  is,  thou,  baing  burnt  up  severely  as  the 


934  SRI  mad  DEVt  BHA.GAVATAM. 

result  of  his  owa  Karma;  the  wonder  being  that  his  body  never 
gets  completely  destroyed  nor  reduced  to  ashes.  For  seven  manvan- 
taras  he  lives  there  without  any  food.  My  messengers  give  him  good  beat- 
ings and  cudgellings  and  chastise  him  ;  he  cries  aloud.  Next  he  gets  him. 
sell"  born  as  worms  of  faeces  for  sixty  thousand  years.  AVhen  he  becomes 
born  as  a  pauper  without  owning  any  land.  Thus  that  villain,  getting  a 
fresh  leaee  of  human     birth,    begins   again    to    do    fresh    good    acts. 

Here  ends  the  Thirty-third  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
description  of  the  destinies  of  different  sinners  in  different  hells  in  bri 
Mad   Devi    Bhagavatam   of    18,000    verses    by    M;ihar§i    Vedi  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

1-28.     Dharma  Raja  Yama  said  :— "  O  Fair    One  !    If,  in  this  Bharata, 

any     murderer,    merciless    and    fierce,   kills    any    uii»n,    out    of    greed    f'^' 

money,  he  goes  and  miserably  dwells  in  the     Asipattra    hell      for  fourteen 

Indra's     life    periods.     And    if   thit    murderer     kills     a     Brahmana,     he 

lives    in     that     hell     for     oud    hundred      manvantaras.     While     in  hell, 

his  body  becomes  Qarc^ly  c  it  and   wou'idei       by        the     swords.       Therf 

My    messengers    chastise    him    and    beat    iiim    anl    he     cries    aloud     an  I 

passes   his   tima    without    any    foo:l.     Then    he     beoomas     born      for     or.e 

hundred  years  as  a  ^lauthana  insect,  for  hundrei  births  as  a  boar,  for  seven 

birt/hs    as    a    cock  ;  for   seven  births    as    a    foX,  for  seveu  births  as  a  tiger  ; 

for   three    births,    as    an    wolf;    for    seven   births,    as    a      frog;     then    a^ 

a  buf£aloe    when    he    becomes     freed   of   his     sins   of     murders.     If     any 

body   sets   fire    to  a  city    or  a  village,    he    will  have  to  live  in   Ksuradhara 

Kunda   for   three  yugas    with  his    holy    severed.     Then     he     becomes    a 

Preta   (disembodied    spirit)   and    travels    over     the     whole    earth,     being 

burnt    up    with    fire.     For   seven  births   he  eats    unclean  and    unholy  food 

and   spends    his    time   as  a  pigeon.     Then   for  seven     births    he      becomes 

diseased   with    a    severe   colic    pain,    for    seven    births    as     a  leper ;  when 

ultimately     he     gets  a    pure    human    body.     If  uny-body     whispers     in 

one's    ear    another's    calumny    and    thus   glorifies   himself  and  abuses  and 

vilifies    the    Devas    and    Brilhmanas,    he     goes     and     remains     in    Suchi 

Kunda   for   three    Yugas,  and   he   is    pierced     there      by     needles.     Then 

he   becomes   a   scorpion    for   seveu  births,    a    serpent    for      seven     birth;*, 

and    an   insect    (Bhasma    Kita)     for    seven     births  ;     then     he     gets     a 

diseased  human  body  when,  at  last,  he  becomes  purified.  If  any -body  breaks 

into   another's    house    and   steals   away    all   the  household    articles,  cows, 

goats   or  buffaloes,    he   goes  to    Gokii    Mukha  Kunda     where  faeces  are 


l^looK  IX.]  (JllAPTER  XXXIV.  935 

like  cowV;  hoofs,  there,  beaten  by  My  servaats,  for  three  Yugas, 
(Goka  is  Goksara,  hoof  of  a  cow).  Then,  for  seven  birth?,  he  beooraes 
iv  diseased  cow  ;  for  three  births,  a  sheep  ;  for  three  births,  a  goat  ; 
and  finally  ho  beeoine.s  a  man.  But  in  this  man-birth  he  is  born 
lifst  as  diseased,  poor,  deprived  of  wife  and  friends,  and  a  repenting  person; 
when  nltimafct  ly  lie  is  freed  of  his  sin.  If  any-body  steals  any  ordinary 
Lhin",  ho  goes  to  Nakra  Mukha  Ivunda  and  lives  there  for  three 
vears,  "-reatly  tormented  by  My  messengers.  Next  for  seven  births,  he 
becomes  a  diseased  ox.  Then  he  attains  a  very  diseased  man-birth, 
and  ultimaiely  ho  is  freed  of  hid  sinj.  Such  are  the  horrible  results. 
lfanvbf»dy  kills  a  cow,  elephant,  horse,  or  cuts  a  tree,  he  goes  to  Gaja 
D  ims'a  Kunda  for  three  yu^as.  There  he  is  punished  by  My  messengers 
freely  by  the  teeth  of  elephants.  Th^n  he  attains  three  elephants'  births, 
three  horse-births  ;  then  he  beeomos  born  as  a  cow  and  ultimately  he  is 
born  a  Mlochcha  when  he  becomes  pure.  If  anybody  obstructs  any 
thirsty  cow  from  drinking  water,  he  goes  to  Krimi  Kunda  and  Gomukha 
Kunda  filled  with  lut  water  and  lives  there  for  one  manvantara.  Next 
when  he  attains  a  human  birth  he  owns  not  any  cattle  nor  any  wealth  ; 
rather  he  is  born  as  a  man,  very  maeh  diseased,  in  low  castes,  for  seven 
births  when  h3  becomes  frocl  If  anybody,  being  born  in  Bhslrata,  kills 
cows,  Brahmins,  women,  beggars,  causes  abortions  or  goes  to  thosa  not  fit 
to  be  gone  into,  he  livei  in  the  Kumbhipaka  hoU  for  fourteen  Indra's  life 
periods.  There  he  is  pulverised  always  by  My  messengers.  He  is  made 
to  fall  sometimes  in  tire,  sometimes  over  thorns,  sometimes  in  hot  oil,  some- 
times in  hot  water,  sometimes  in  molten  iron  or  copper.  That  great 
sinner  gets  thousand  vulture  births,  hundred  boar  births,  seven  crow  births 
and  seven  serpent  births.  He  then  becomes  worms  of  fasces  for  sixty 
thousand  years.  Thus  travelling  frequently  in  ox  births  he  at  last 
becomes  born  as    a  very  poor  leper. 

29-31.  Savilri  said: — "O  Bhagavau  !  What  is,  according  to  the 
Sastras,  Brahraahatya  (murdering  a  Brahmin)  and  Gohaty^  (killing  ft 
cow)  ?  Who  ar3  called  Agamyas  (women  unfit  to  be  approached)  V 
Who  are  designated  as  void  of  Sandhya  (^daily  worship  of  the  twice 
born  castes)  ?  Who  can  be  called  uninitiated  ?  Who  are  said  to  take 
Piatiorahas  'iiifts  in  a  Tirath  ?  What  are  the  characteristics  of  a  real 
GrdmayS-ji  (village  priests),  Devala,  (Brahmana  of  an  inferior  order  who 
subsists  upon  the  offerings  made  to  the  images  which  he  attends),  the  cook 
ofaSudra,  of  one  who  is  iidutuated  (Praroatta)  and  the  Vrisalipati  (one 
who  has  married  an  unmarried  girl  twelve  years  old  in  whom  menstruation 
ha?  commenced  ;  a  barren   woman).     Kindly   describe  all    these  to  me. 


'936  Silt   MAD  DEVl  BHA.GAVATAM. 

32-91.  DharamrSjan  said: — '' 0  Pair  SIvifcri  !  If  anybody  makes  a 
distinction  between  Kiisna  and  His  Image  or  between  any  Deva  and 
his  itnage,  between  Siva  and  His  phallic  emblem,  between  the  Sun  and  the 
scone  Surya  Kanta  (a  precious  stone  of  a  bright  and  glittering  colour) 
between  Ganes'a  and  DurgS,  he  is  said  to  be  guilty  of  the  sin  Brahma- 
hattya.  If  anybody  makes  any  difference  (superiority  or  inferiority)  between 
his  own  Ista  Deva  (his  Deity),  his  Spiritual  Teacher,  his  natural  father, 
and  mother,  is  certainly  involved  in  the  sin  of  BrahmahattyS.  He  who 
shews  any  diff'^rence  (superiority  or  inferiority)  between  the  devotees 
of  Visau  and  those  of  other  Devas,  is  said  to  commit  Brahmahattya, 
He  who  makes  any  difference  in  matters  of  respect  between  the  waters 
of  the  feet  of  any  Brahmana  and  those  of  SSlagrama  stone,  is  said  to 
commit  BrahmahattyS,.  The  difference  between  the  offerings  to  Hari  and 
Ilara  leads  to  BrahmahattyS.  He  who  shews  any  difference  between  Krisna, 
Who  is  verily  the  God  of  gods,  the  Cause  of  all  causes,  the  Origin  of  all, 
Who  is  worshipped  by  all  the  Devas,  Who  is  the  Self  of  all,  Who  is  attribute- 
less  and  without  a  second  yet  Who  by  His  Magic  powers  assumes  many  forms 
and  who  is  Is'aua,  is  said  to  commit,  indeed,  the  Brahmhatty^.  If  any  Vais- 
nava  (a  devotee  of  Vianu)  abuses  and  envies  aSakta  (a  devotee  of  S^kti),  he 
commits  Brahmahattya.  He  who  does  not  worship,  according  to  the  Vedas, 
the  Pitris  and  the  Devas  or  prohibits  others  in  doing  so,  commits 
Brahmahattya.  He  who  abuses  Hrisikes'a,  Who  is  the  Highest  of  the  Holy 
things,  Who  is  Knowledge  and  Blisa  and  Who  is  Eternal,  Who  is  the 
only  God  to  be  served  by  the  Devas  and  Vaisnavas,  and  those  AYho  are 
worshippers  of  His  Mantra,  and  those  who  do  not  worship  themselves  are 
said  to  commit  BrahmabattyS.  He  who  abuses  and  vilities  Mulaprakriti 
Maha  Devi,  Who  is  of  the  nature  of  Causal  Brahma  (Karana  Brahma),  Who 
is  All  Power  and  the  Mother  of  all,  Who  is  worshipped  by  all  and  vVho  is  of 
the  nature  of  all  the  Devas  and  the  Cause  of  all  causes,  Who  is 
Adya  Sakti  Bhagavati,  is  said  to  commit  Brahmahattya.  He  who 
does  not  observe  the  Holy  Sri  Kriena  Janmastami,  Sri  Rama  Navam?, 
Sivar^tri,  the  Ekadas'i  happening  on  Sunday,  and  five  other  holy  Par- 
vanas  (festiva's),  commits  Brahmahattya  ;  is  considered  more  sinful  than 
a  Chandaia.  He  who  in  this  land  of  Bharata,  digs  earth  on  the  day  of 
Ambuvachi  or  makes  water  etc.  in  the  waters  of  the  tanks,  is  involved 
m  the  sin  of  Brahmahattya.  He  who  does  not  support  his  spiritual 
teacher,  mother,  father,  chaste  wife,  son  and  daughter,  though  they  are 
faultless,  commits  Brahmahatty^.  He  whose  marriage  does  not  take 
place  during  his  whole  life-time,  who  does  not  see  the  face  of  his  son, 
who  does  not  cherish  devotion  to  Hari,  who  eats  things  unofferod  to 
5ri  Hari,  who  never  worshipped  throughout  his  life  Visuu  or  an  earthen 
j^iild    ci     ^ivp.  Aoily  c(r  iT^il!-  Pifilir;  lulha,    O  Fail  Cue  !  Kow  I  will 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXXIV.  937 

recite   tha    characteristics,      according     to     the     S'ttstras,  of    Gohatty^, 
(Killing  a   cow),    Listen.     If  anybody   docs    not   prohibit   one,  seeing  one 
to  bait  a  cow,or  if  he  goes  between  a.  cow  and  a  Brahmin,  he  is    involved  in 
the  sin  of  Gohathya.  If  any  illiterate  Brahman,  carry  ing  an  ox,  daily  beats 
with  a  stick,  the  cows,  certainly  he  commits  the  Gohattya.  If  anybody  gives 
the  remains  of  another's  meal  to  a  got  to  oat,  or  feeds  a  Brahmin  who   car- 
ies, rather  moves  or  drives,  cows  and  oxen  ;  or  eats  himself  the  food  of  such 
a  Brahmin  driver,  he  commits  Gohatty^   Those  who  do  sacrifices  of  the  hus- 
band of  a  barren  woman  (Vrisali)  or  eat  his  food,  commit  sin  equal    to   one 
hundred  Gohattyas  ;  there  is  no  doubt  in  this.     Those  who  touch   fire    with 
their  feet,  beat  the  cowa   or  enter   the   temple   bathing    but    not    washing 
their  feet,  commit  Gohatty^.     Those  who  eat  without  washing  their  feet  or 
those  who  sleep  with  their    feet  W3ttjd    with    water  and  those  who  eat  just 
after  the  Sun  has  risen,  commit  Gohattya,  Those  who  eat  the  food  of  women 
without  husbands  or  sous  or  the  food  of  pimps  and  pampers  or  those  who  do 
not  perform    their    Sandhyas  thrice,     commit    Gohatty^.     If  any    woman 
mikes  any  difference  between    bar    husband   and    the  Devata,  or  chastises 
and  uses  harsh    words   to    her    huaband,    she   commits  Gohattyil.     If  any 
body  destroys   cow's  pasture    land,    tanks,   or   land  for   forts  and  cultivates 
there    trains,  he   commits  Go-hattya.     lie  who  docs  not  do  Prayas'chitta 
(expiation,  atonement)  for  the    expiation   of  the  sin  of  Gohatty^  done  by 
his   son  (for   fear   of  his   son's    life),    commits     the    sin    himself.     If  any 
trouble   arises  in   the   state     or   from    tlie    Dcvas,    and  if  any  master  does 
not  protect  then  his  own  cows,  rather  torments  them,  he  is  said  to  commit 
GohattyS.     If    any    Jiva  oversteps    the    image    of  a   Devi,   fire,   water, 
offerings  to    a  god,   flowers,  or  food,    ho    commits    the   great  sin  Brahma 
hattyS.     When  a  guest  comes,  if  the  master     of  the   house    always   says 
•'there   is  nothing,  nothing   with  me;   no,   no"   and  if  he  be  a    liar,    cheat 
and  an  abuser  of  the  Devas,  he  commits  the  above  sin.  0  fair  One!  Whoever 
seeing    his  spiritual   teacher,  and   a  Brahman,    does  not   bow    down  and 
make     respectful    obeisance     to       them,     commits    Gohattya,     If    any 
Brahmin,  out  of  sheer  anger,  does    not  utter  blessings  to  a  man  who  bows 
down  or  does  not  impart  knowledge  to  a  student,  he   commits  GohattyS. 
O    Fair    One!       Thus  I   have     described     to     you     the   characteristics, 
approved  by  Sastras,    of  cow-killing  (Gohattya),  and  murdering  a  Brahmin 
(Brahraahattya).    Now     hear   which     women  are  (Agamy Ss)  not  fit  to    be 
approached  and  those    which   are  fit    to  be  approached   (Garayas),     One's 
ovu   wife    is   fit  to   be  approached  (Gamya)   and   all  ofeher     women   are 
Agamyas,  so  the  Pundits,  versed  in  the  Vedas,  declare.     This  is  a   general 
tciuaik;  now  hear   everything   in  particular.   O  Chaste  One!   The  Brahmin 
wive-!  of  y  udras   or  tl.e  Sudra   wives  of  Brdhmanas  are  AtySgamyas  (very 

118 


938  l§Rt  MAD    DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

unfit  to  be  approached)  and  blameable  both  in  the  Vcdas  and  in  the  society. 
A  Siidra  going  to  a  Brc^hmani    woman    commits  one    hundred  Brahmahat- 
tyas;  so  a  Brahmana  woman  going  to  a  Judra  goes  to  the  Kumbhipaka  hell. 
As  a  Sudra  should  avoid  a  Brahma'ii,  ?o  aBrlhmana  should  avoid  a    Sudra 
woman.   A  Brahmana  going  to  a  Siidra  woman    is   recognised  a  Brisalipati 
(one  who  has  married  an  unmarried  girl  twelve  years  old  in  whom  menstru- 
ation has  commenced.     So  much  so  that  that  Brahmana  is    considered    an 
outcast  and  the  vilest  of  the  Chandsllis.  The  offerings  of  Pindas  by  him  are 
considered  as  fiBces    and    water  offered  by  him  is  considered  as    urine.     No 
where     whether    in     the    Devalok*     or     in    the      Pitriloka,    his     offered 
Pindas    and    water  are    accepted.       Whatever    religious     merits    he    has 
acquired    by    worshipping      the       Devas,     and    practising    austerities    for 
Koti  births,  he  loses  all  at  once  by  the  greed  of  enjoying  the  Sudra  woman. 
There  is  no   doubt    in    this      A.   Brahmin,     if  he    drinks    wine,    is  consi- 
dered  as  the  husband   of  a  VrisaU,    eating  faeces.  And  if  he  be  a  Vaisnava, 
a   devotee    of  Visnu,   his  body    must    be    branded    with    the    marks  of  a 
Taptamudra    (hot  seal)  ;  and  if  he  be  a  Saiva,  his    body   is  to   be   branded 
with  the  Tapta  oula  (hot  trident).  The  wife  of  a  spiritual  teacher,  the  wife 
of  a   king,  step-mother,   daughter,      son's    wife,        mother-in-law,    sister 
of  the   same   father  and    mother,   the    wife  of  one's    brother  (of   the    same 
father   and  mother),      the      wife     of     a     maternal     uncle,    the    father's 
mother,    mother's    mother,     the     mother's    sister,    sisters,    the   brother's 
daughter,    the  female  disciple,  the  disciple's    wife,   the    wife  of  the  sister's 
eon,  the  wife  of  the   brother's   son,  these    all   are    mentioned    by    Brahma 
as  AtySgamyas  (very  unfit  to    be    approached).     The    people    are     hereby 
warned.  If  anybody,  overpowered    by  passion,    goes  to    these    Atyagamy^ 
women,  he  becomes  the  vilest  of  man.  The  Vedas  consider  him  as  if  going 
to  his  mother  and  he  commits  one  h'lndred  Brahmahat'ya  sins.  These  have 
no  right  to  do  any  actions.     Thay  arj  not  to  be  touched  by  any.     They  are 
blamed  in    the    Veda.-^,   in   tho    society    everywhere.     Ultimately     they    go 
to  the  dreadful  Kumbhipaka  hells.  O  Fair  One!  He  who  performs  Sindhyas 
wrongly  or  reads  it  wrongly  or  doo«    not  perform  at  all    the  three  Sandhyas 
daily,  is    called    as    void  of    Sandhya.      He    is  said    to     remain    uninitiated 
who  does  not,    out  of  sheer    vanity,  receive    any    Mantra,  whether    he    be  a 
Vaisnavite,     Saivite,    or    a    Sun     worshipper    or    the    Ganes'a    worshipper. 
Where  there    is  the    running    stream  of  the  Ganges,    lands  on    either   side, 
four  hands  in  width,  are  said  to  be  the   womb  of  the  Gang  «  (Ganga  Garbha) 
Bhagavan  Narayana    incessantly  dwells  there.     This  is  called  the  KSrayana 
(K§etra).     One  goe*to  Visnupada    who    dies    in    such  a    place.     Varanas'i 
(Benares),    Vadari,  f he  Confluence  of  the    CJanges   with   the  ocean    (Ganga- 
S^gara),    Puskara,    Hari    Ilara  Ksodra  (in    Bt-har  near  Chapra),  Prabhasa, 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXXV.  939 

Karaarupa,    HarJwar,  Keda  ra,    Matripura,  the  backs  of  the  river  Sarasvatf, 
the  hily  land    Bindraban,    Godavari,  Kaus'iki,   Triveni    (Allahabad),    and 
the    Himalayas   are  all  famous  places     of  pilgrimages.  Thoso  who  willingly 
accept    gifts    in   these  sacred  places  are  said    to    be    Tirthapratigrahis  (the 
acceptor)    of     the    gifts    in    the    Tirtha=).      These  Tirthaprathigvuhis    go 
in  the   end    to     Kambhipaka   hell.     'I'he    Brdhraana    who  acts    as    priests 
to  the    Sadras     is      called       Sudrayajj  ;     the     village    priests   are     called 
GramiV^jis.      Those  who  subsist  on  the  offerings    made   to   the     gods    are 
called    Devalas.     The  cooks    of   the    .^u  Iras   are  called    Siipak3ra'.     Those 
who  are    void    of   Smdhyii       Bandanams     are  called    Pramatfcas  (mal).     O 
Bh<idre!     These  are  the    marks    of    the     Vrisviipatis    that     I    have   (^now) 
enumerated.      These     a-e   the     Great    Sinners  (Maha   Patakas).     They  go 
ultim  itely  to  the  Kumbhipaka  hell.       O  Fair  One  !      I    novv    state    by    and 
by    the  othar  Knn  las    (hells)  where  other  people  go.     Listen.  | 

Here  ends  the  Thirty  fourth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  des- 
cription of  the  various  hells  in  the  Mahii  PiirAnam  ^rimad  Deri 
'iShaiTiV.itim  of  48,0 O  verges  bv   Maharsi     Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER    XXXV. 

1-5;}.     Dharmiraj  in  said  :  — "  0    C  laste      One!     Without  serving   thfl 
Gods,    the   Kir.Da    ties  can  never    be   severed.     The  pure  acts  are  the  seeds 
of  p  irlties  and  the  im;)ure  aet^  lead  to    impure       se-^ds.     If   any    Brahmana 
goes  to  any  unchaste  woman   anl  eats   her  foiJ,  he   will    have   to    go   ulti- 
ra  itely  to  the  Kalasiitra  hpll.       There  he  lives  for  one  hundred   years  when 
ultimately  he  gets  a  human  birth  when  he   pas-?e3  his  times  as  a  diseased  man 
and    ultimately  he  gets  purified.     Those    women  who  are  addicted    to  their 
(one)    husbands   only  are  called  Pativrata--.      Those  addicted  to  two  persons 
are     named  Kulatfis;   to  three,    are  called  Dhaisinis  ;  to  four,  called  Pums'- 
challs  ;   to  five,   six  persons,    called    Vesyas;  to  seven,  eight,    nine  persons 
are  cillad    Pungis  ;   anl    to    more    th  m    th^se,    are   cill°d    Mahaves'yus. 
Th'.  Mahilves'y^s    arj    unfit   t)    bi    to  iched     by    all  the    classes.     If  any 
Brahnmaa  goes    to    Kulata,    Dharsini,    P.imschali,     Pungi,    Ves'ya     and 
Mabaves'yas,   he  will  have  to  go  t)  the  Matsyodi  Kunda.     Those  who    go 
to  KuUlas  remain  there  for  one  hundred  years  ;  those  who  go  to  Dharsinis, 
remain  for  fjur  hundred    year-?,  those  who  go  tj     Pums'chalis  for  six    hun- 
dred  yeirs  ;   those  who  go   to  Ve/yas,  for  eight  hundred  years  ;  those  who 
go  to  Pungis,    rem  lin  for  one   thousand  yeirs  anl  those  who  go  to    MahA- 
ves'yas  remain  in  the  Matsyoda  Knnda  for  ten  thousand  years.  My  messen- 
gers  chastise  and  beat  and  torment  them  very    severely.     And  when  their 
terms  expire,  the  KulaU-goers  baeoma  Tittiri^  (a  bird),  the  Dharsini-goers 


940  ^lit  MAD  DEVl  BHACtAVATAM. 

beeomo    crows,     the    Piims'chaU-mongers    become    cuokoos,    the   Ves'ya 
ImuottMo    become  wolves  ;    the  Pangi-goera   become  for  seven  births  boars. 
If  any    ii^iioranfc   person   eats   food   during  the   lunar   and    solar    eclipvses, 
he  '^oes  to   Aruutuda  Kunda   for  as  many   years   as    there    are   particles  in 
that   food.       He   then    becomes   born  diseased   with    Galma  (a    chronic 
enlari:?ement  of  spleen)    having  no   ears    nor  teotli,    and    after  passing    his 
time  so,  he  becomes  freed  of  his  previous  sin.     If  anybody  makes  a  promise 
to  give  his  daughter    to  one    but  he  gives  actually  to  a  different  person,  he 
goes   to  P^ras'u  Kunda  where  he  eats  ashes  for  one  hundred  years.     Again 
if  anybody  sells  his    daughter,  he  slee[)3  on  a  bed  of  arrows  in  Pams'uvesta 
Kunda  for  one   hundred   years,    chastised   and  beaten   by  My   messengers. 
]f  any  Brahmana  does  nob   worship  with  devotion  the   phallic   emblem   of 
Siva,    he  goes    to   the    dreadful    oulaprota   Kunda    for   that   heinous  sin. 
He  remains    there  for  one    hundred   years  ;   then   he   becomes  a  quadruped 
animal    for  seven  births  and  again  he  becomes  born   a  Devala  Brahmin   for 
seven   births    when   he  becomes  freed.     If  any  Brahmana  defeats  another 
Brahmana   in  a   bad    useless    argument   and    trilles    him  and    makes  him 
tremble,  he  goes  to  the  Prakampana  Kunda  for  as  many  years  as  there   are 
hairs  on  his  body.     If  any  woman,  being    very   furious    with  anger,   chas- 
tises and  uses  harsh  words  to  her  husband,   she  goes  to  Ulk^mukha  Kundi 
for  as    many  years  as  there   are    hairs  on  his  body.     My    servants  put  Goiy 
meteors  or  torches  in  her  mouth  and  beat  on  her  head.    At   the  end  of  the 
term,  she  becomes  a  human  being  but  she  has  to  bear  the  torments  of  widow 
hood  for   seven   births.     Then  she    is   again   born  as   diseased  ;    when    at 
last  she  gets  harself  freed.     The   Brahmana  woman,  enjoyed    by  a   5ddra, 
goes  to  the  terrible  dark  Audhakupa  hell,  where  she  remains,  day  and  ni«>ht, 
imm3rsed  in  the  impure  water   and    eats    that   for    fourteen     Indra's    life 
periods.     Her  pains  are  unbounded  and  My    messengers  beat  her    severely 
and  incessantly. 

Vt  the  expiry  of  the  term  in  that  hell,  She  becomes  a  female  crow 
for  thousand  births,  a  female  boar  for  one  hundred  births,  a  female 
fox  for  one  hundred  births,  a  hen  for  one  hundred  years,  a  female 
pigeon  for  seven  births,  and  a  female  monkey  for  seven  births.  Then 
she  becomes  a  Chdndali  in  this  Bh^rata,  enjoyed  by  all.  Then  she 
becomes  an  unchaste  woman  with  the  pthisis  disease,  a  washerwoman, 
and  then  an  oilwoman  with  leprosy  when  she  becomes  freed,  O  Fair 
One  !  The  Ves'yas  live  in  the  Vedhana,  and  Jalarandhra  hells  ;  the  Pungis 
live  in  the  Daudatudana  hell  ;  the  Kulaias  live  in  the  Dehachurna  hells  ; 
the  Svairinis  live  in  the  Dalana  hells  ;  the  Dharsinis  live  in  ^ogana  hells. 
Their  pains  know  no  bounds  at  all  those  places.  My  messengers  always 
beat   and   chastise  them   and  thay   e\t   always  the    urine   ani    faeces  for 


]^ooK  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXXV.  941 

ono  Manvantara.  Then,  at  the  expiry  of  their  hell  period,  they  beoome 
worms  of  faeees  for  one  lakh  years  when  they  become  freed.  11  a 
Brahmana  goes  to  another  Brahmana's  wife,  if  a  K§attriha,  Vais'ya 
and  Sudra  do  9o,  they  gj  to  the  Kasaya  hell.  There  they  drink  the  hot 
Ea§^ya  water  for  twelve  years  when  they  become  purified.  The  lotus- 
born  Brahma  has  said  that  the  wives  of  Brahmins,  Ksattriyas,  etc. , 
live  in  hells  like  Brahmins,  Ksattriyas,  etc.,  and  they  then  get 
freed.  If  a  Ksattriya  or  a  Vais'ya  goes  to  a  Brahmin's  wife,  he  ia  involved 
in  the  sin  of  his  going  to  his  mother  and  goes  and  lives  in  the  Siirpa 
hell.  There  the  worms  of  the  size  of  a  Sdrpa  bit  that  Ksaltriya, 
that  Vais'ya  and  that  Biuhniina's  wife.  My  messengers  chastise  them 
and  they  have'to  eat  the  hot  urine.  Thus  they  suffer  pains  for  fourteen 
Indra's  life  periods.  When  they  become  bjars  for  seven  births  and 
goats  for  seven  births,  when  at  list  they  are  freed.  Now  il  any 
body  makes  a  false  promise  or  swears  falsely,  taking  the  Tiilasi  leaf  in  his 
hands,  if  anybody  rnxka^  a  false  promise,  t  iking  the  Ganges  water, 
Salagrama  stone,  or  any  other  images  of  God  in  his  hand  ;  if  any 
body  swears  falsely,  placing  his  right  palm  on  the  palm  of  another ; 
if  anybody  swears  falsely,  being  in  a  temple  or  touching  a  BrShmana 
or  a  cow  j  if  any  body  acts  agiinst  his  friends  or  others,  if  he  be  treacherous 
or  if  he  gives  a  false  evidence  ;  then  all  these  persons  go  to  Jval^  Miikha 
hell,  and  remain  there  for  fourteen  Indra's  life  periods,  chastised  and 
-  beaten  by  My  messengers  and  feeling  pain  as  if  one's  body  is  being 
burnt  by  red  hot  coal.  One  who  gives  a  false  evidence,  with  the  Tiaasi 
(holy  basil;  in  his  hand  becomes  a  Chandala  for  seven  births;  one 
who  makes  a  false  promise  with  the  Ganges  water  in  his  hand 
becomes  a  Mlechcha  for  five  births  ;  one  who  swears  falsely  while  touching 
the  S-ilagrama  stone,  hpcomes  a  worm  of  the  foeces  for  seven  births  ;  one 
who  swears  fal-ely,  touching  the  image  of  the  God,  becomes  a  worm  in 
a  Brahmin's  house  for  seven  births  ;  one  who  gives  a  false  evidence 
touching  with  the  right  hand,  becomes  a  serpent  for  seven  births ;  then 
he  becomes  born  as  a  Brahmin,  void  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas, 
when  he  becomes  freed.  One  who  speaks  falsely,  while  in  a  temple, 
is   born  as  a  Devala  for  seven    births. 

4o-47.  If  one  swears  falsely,  touching  a  Brahmana,  one  becomes  a 
tiger.  Then  he  becomes  dumb  for  three  births,  then  for  three  births 
he  becomes  deaf,  without  wife,  without  friands,  and  his  family  becomes 
extinct.  Then  he  becomes  pure.  Those  that  rebel  against  their  friends, 
become  mongoose;  the  treacherous  persons  become  rhinoceroses;  the  hypocrite 
and  treacherous  persons  become  tigers  and  those  who  give  false 
evidences   bscome    frogs.     So   much     so,    that    their    seven     generations 


942  l§Rt  MAD  DEVi  BHAGAVATAM. 

above    and    seven    generations    below  go   to   hjll.     If  any  Brahma na  does 
not    perform    his   daily    duties    (Nitya    Kurmii),    ho    is    reckoned   a*?   Jada 
(an   inert   matter).     He    lias    no   faith    in  the    Vedas.     Rather    he   laughs 
at   the     Vedic   customs.     He   does  not   observe   vows     and     fastings  ;   he 
blames   others  who   give   good    alvice?.     Such    persons    live  in    Dhumran- 
dhakftra  hell  where  they  eat  dark  saioke  only.     Taou  he    roa;iis      about    as 
an    aquatic  animal    for      one      hundred     births      successively.     Then      he 
becomes  born     as    various     fishes    when    he    is    freed.      If      anybody    jests 
at    the    wealth    of  a     Deva  or    a     Brahmana,     then     he     with     his     ten 
generations    Bbove   and    belo.v    b3Cj  nes  fallen  and  he    himself  goes    to  the 
Dhumrfindhakird    heil,    terribly    dark    and   filled     with    smoke.     There  his 
pains'know    no    bounds    and    he    lives   there  for  four  hundred  years,  eating 
smoke  only.     Then  he  becomes  a  mouse  for  seven  births,   atid    he    becomes 
various    birds    and    worms,    various      trees     and     various     animals     when 
ultimately    he   gets  a  human    birth.     If  a    Brahmin     earns   his    livelihool 
by     being     an    astrologer   or    if   he    be   a    physician      and    lives     lhervd)y 
orifhes(-!ls    lac,    iron,    or    oil,   etc.,    he    goes  to  the  Nagav   sfani    Knnda 
hell   where  he    lives    for   as    m:\ny  years   a^  there    are    hairs  on  his  bo  1\', 
tied    up  by   snakes.     Then    he  becomes  born  as    various  birds  ;   ultimately 
he     gets  a    human   birth     and     becomes    an  astrologer    for     seven    births 
and  a   physician   for   seven    births.     Then   for   sometime    he     becomes    a 
cowherd     (milkman),     for     sometimes    a   blacksmith  ;    for     sometimes      a 
punter,    when    he    becomes    freed  of   hi?  sin.     O  Chaste    One  !     Thus     I 
have   described   to   you    all   the    famous    Kundas  or  hells.      Besides    there 
are    innumerable    small    Kunda*.     The    sinners   go   there    and  'suffer    the 
fruits   of  their   own  Karmas    and    travel      through      various     wombs.      O 
Fair    One  !    What    more   do  you    now    want    to  hoar  ?   Say. 

Here  ends  the  Thirty-Fifth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
description  of  the  various  hells  for  the  various  sinners  in  the  Mahd 
Puranam  §ri  M  id  Davt  Bhilgavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  .Maharsi  Veda 
VySsa. 

CHAPTER   XXXVI. 

1-7.  Savitri  said: — ''  O  Dharmarajan!  O  Highly  Fortunate  One  !  O 
Thou  !  Expert  in  the' Vedas  and  the  Amgas  thereof!  Now  kindly  describe 
that  which  is  the  essence  of  the  various  Puranas  and  Itihasas, 
which  is  the  quintessence,  which  is  dear  to  all,  approved  of  by 
all,  which  is  the  seed  by  which  the  Karmic  ties  are  cut  asunder,  which 
is  high,  noble  and  happy  is  this  life.  Kindly  describe  the  above  by 
whioh  mm  c*a  acquire  all  his  desires,  arl  whit  is  the  only  source  of 
ftll  the  gool  and  audpioioaij  things.    Ail  by  knowing     which  maQ    has 


fiooK  IX.]  CHAPTlilR  XXXVI.  943 

not  to  face  any  dangers  or  troubles,  nor  has  he  to  go  to  the  dreadful 
hells  that  thou  hast  severally  just  now  described  and  that  by  which  men  can 
be  freed  of  those  various  wombs.  Kindly  now  describe  all  these.  O 
Bhagavan  !  What  is  the  size  of  the  several  kundas  or  hells  that  Thou 
hast  just  now  enumerated  ?  How  do  the  sinners  dwell  there  ?  When 
a  man  departs,  his  body  is  reduced  to  ashes.  Then  of  what  sort  is 
that  other  body  by  which  the  sinners  enjoy  the  etfects  of  their  Karmas  ? 
and  why  do  not  those  bodies  get  destroyed  when  they  suffer  so  much 
pains  for  so  long  a  time  ?  What  sort  of  body  is  that  ?  Kindly 
describe    all   these    to    me. 

8-33.  N^r^lyana  spoke  : — Hearing  the  questions  put  forward  by 
SavitrijDharmaraja  remembered  Sri  Hari  and  began  to  speak  on  subjects 
that  sever  the  bonds  of  Karma  : — *'  O  Child  !  O  Ons  of  good  vows  1 
In  the  fjur  Vedas,  in  all  the  books  on  Dharma,  (Smritis)  in  all  the 
Samhitas,  all  the  Itihasas,  all  the  PurAnas,  i  n  the  Narada  Panchar^ltram, 
in  the  other  Dharma  SSstras  and  in  the  Ved^ngas,  it  is  definitely  stated 
that  the  worship  of  the  Pancha  Devatas  (the  five  DevatSs)  Siva,  Sakti, 
Vi§QU,  Ganes'a,  and  Surya  is  the  best,  the  highest,  the  destroyer  of 
the  old  age,  diseise,  death,  evils  and  sorrows,  the  most  auspicious 
and  leading  to  the  highest  bliss.  In  fact,  the  worship  of  these  Pancha 
DevatSs  is  the  source  of  acquiring  all  the  Siddhis  (the  success)  and 
saves  one  from  going  to  the  hells.  From  their  worship  springs  the 
Bhaktic  Tree  and  then  and  then  only  the  Root  ot  the  Tree  of  all  Karmic 
bonds  is  severed  for  ever  and  ever.  This  is  the  step  to  Mukti  (final 
liberation)  and  is  the  indestructible  state.  By, this  one  can  get  Salokya, 
Sarsti,  Sarupya,  and  SSmipya,  the  different  state  of  beatitudes  in  which 
the  soul  (1)  resides  in  the  same  world  with  the  Deity,  (2)  possesses  the  sam8 
station,  condition,  or  rank,  or  equality  with  the  Supreme  Being  in 
power  and  all  the  Divine  attributes  (the  last  ot  the  four  grades  of 
Mukti,  (8)  possesses  the  sameness  of  form  or  gets  assimilat'^d  to  the 
Deity  or  (4)  gets  intimately  united,  identified  or  absorbed  into  the 
Deity,  O  Auspicious  One  !  The  worshipper  of  these  five  Devatas  has 
never  to  see  ^ny  of  the  hells,  watched  by  My  messengers.  Those 
who  are  devoid  of  the  devotion  to  the  Devi  see  My  abode  ;  but  those 
who  go  to  the  Tirthis  of  Hari,  who  hold  Harivi\saras  (festivities  on 
the  days  of  Hari)  who  bow  down  at  the  feet  of  Hari  and  worship 
Hari|  never  come  to  My  abode  named  Samyamana.  Those  Brahmanas 
that  are  purified  by  their  performing  the  three  Sandhyas  and  by  their 
following  the  pure  Achuras  (customs  and  observances),  those  that  find 
no  pleasure  until  they  worship  the  Devi,  those  that  are  attached  to 
their  own    Dbarmas    and    their  ow.'i   Aeharas,    never    come  to   My  abode. 


I 


9U  §Rt  MAD  DEVt  BmAgAVATAM. 

My  terrible    messengers,    seeing    the  devotees   of  Siva,  run   a\v4y  out  of 
terrjr   as  snakes  ran  away  terrified    by    Gadada      I    also  order  My    mea- 
serr^ers    with    nooses  ia  their  hands  never  to  go  to  them.     My  messengers 
go  mostly    to    other    persons    than    the   servants    of  Hari.     No      sooner 
do    My  Messengers  ses  the  worshippers    of  the  Krisna   Mantra,  than  they 
run    away    .i^;  .snakes  get  terrified    at    the  sight   of     Gadudi.    Chitragupta, 
too,    one  of  the    beings     in  Yama's     world,      recording     the     vices     and 
virtues  of  mankind),    strike    off  the   names  of   the  Uovi    worshippers,  out 
of   fear  and   p-'opare    Madhuparka,    etc ,   for  theui    (a    mixture    of  honey  ; 
respectful      offering     made  to   a     guest    or    to     the     bridegroom   on   his 
arrival   at    the  door  of  the    father  of  the  bride).     They   rise    higher  than 
the  Brahma    Lokas   and   go    to  the    Devi's    abode,    ic,     to     Manidvipa. 
Those  that  are  the    worshippers  of  the  Sakti  Mantra  aud  are  highly  fortu- 
nate,  whose   contact   removes  the    sins   of  others,   they   deliver  the  thou- 
sand  generations  (from  the  downward   course).     As  bundles  and    bundles 
of  dry  grasses  become  burnt  to  ashos,  no   sooner    they  are  thrown  into  fire, 
so   the  delusion  at  once  becomes  itself  deluled  at  the   sight    of    the    forn>s 
of    those    devotees.      At     theii-     sight,     lust,        anger,     greed,     disease, 
sorrow,  old  age,  death,  fear,    Kala   (time  thit     takes     away    the     life   of 
persons),    the  good   and  h\d   karmas,    pleasures  and     enjoymeutsdrop  oflE 
to   a  great   distance.     O    Fair  One  !   Now    I  have    described  to     you    the 
states   of   those    persons    that  are    not   under  the    control    of   Kula,   good 
and  bad   karma"?,    pleasures   and  enjoyments  etc.,   and    those    that    do  not 
suffer  those    pains.    Now    I  am    speaking  of    this    visible  body.     Listen. 
Earth,   wster,   fire,    air,    and    ether  are  the   (iva  Maha  Bhutas    (the  groat 
elements)  ;    these  are  the   seeds    of   this    visible  body  of   the    person    and 
are  the    chief  fictors   in    the    work  of  creation.     The    boJy  that    is  made 
up  of  earth    au.l    othor  elements   is  transient    aud  artificial,    i.e.,  that  body 
becomes  burnt    to  ashes.     AVithiu    this    visible     body,     bound,  is    there    a 
Turusa  oi    the     size   of  a     thumb;    that   is    called  the  Jiva  P  irusx  ;    the 
subtle   Jiva  assumes     those     subtle   bodies    for    enjoying     the    effects  of 
karmas.     In   My   world,   that     subtle  body    is  not  burnt  by  the  burning 
fire.     If  that  subtle    body   be   immersed     in    water,     if    that    be    beaten 
incessantly  or   if  it    be     struck   by     a   weapon    or     pierced    by   a   sharp 
thorn,   that   body   is  not  destroyed.    That   body    is   not   burnt  nor  broken 
by  the  burning  hot  and  molten  material,  by  the  red  hot  iron,  by   hot  stones 
by  embracing  a  hot   image   or   by    falling  into  a  burning  cauldron.     That 
body   has  to  3uffer  incessant    pains.     O    Fair    One  !     Thus    I    have  dwelt 
on  the   subject  of  tho  several    bodies    and    the     causes     thereof   according 
to  the  SAstras.    Now    I    will    deacribo  to  you  the  eharaclera  of  all  the  other 
Kundae.  Jjistcn. 


hooK  IX.]  CHAPTER  XXXVII.  945 

Here  ends  the  Thirty-sixth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
destruction  of  the  fear  of  the  Ya  lia  of  those  who  are  the  worshippers  of 
the  Five  Devala-,  in  the  Mah^  Para  nam  Sri  MaJ  Devi  Bh^gavatana  of 
18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

1-60.     Dhartnar^ja   said  : — All    the  Kundas   (hells)     are   circular    in 
form    like    the  Full     Moon.    Of  these,    the  Vahnikunda  his   the    fire    lit 
at   its  bottom,   by  the    help    of  various  kinds    of    stones.     This     Kunda 
will    not   be   destroyed    till   Mihapralaya   comes.    Herj  the     sinners     are 
tormented   severely.     It    looks  like    a     blazing     coke.      The     flames   are 
rising   from  it   one   hundred   hands    high,    [n  circumference  those   flames 
are   two   miles.     This  is    named   Vahnikunda.     Tt  is   full    of  sinners  cry- 
ing  loudly.     It  is    constantly      watched    by     My     messengers    who    are 
chastising  and    punishing  the  sinners.     Next  comes  the  Tapta    Kunda.     It 
is    filled    with    hot    water   aud    fall     of  rapacious    animals.     The     sinner^ 
there   are   severely    beaten    by    My    messengers    and     they     ;ire    always 
crying  out  very  loudly,   which  is  being  echo3d  and  re-eehood  all  around   ter- 
ribly.    It   extends   for   one    mile.     This    Kunda    is     filled    with   hot   salt 
water  and  the  abode  of  many  crows.     Then  there  is  the  Bhayuuaka  Kunda. 
It  extends  for    two    miles    aud    it  is    filled  with  sinaers.     They  are   being 
punished   by    My    messeni;'ers   and  ihey  are   ineus^iiitly  crying  "  Save    us, 
Save  us.  " 

Next  comes  the  Vifthil  Kanla.  It  is  filled  with  foeoes  and  excrements, 
where  the  sinners  are  moving  without  any  food  and  with  their  palates 
and  throats  dry.  Its  ^Izo  is  two  miles  and  it  is  very  bad  and  ugly, 
with  foetid  and  nasty  smell.  It  is  always  filled  with  sinners,  who  are 
being  chastised  by  My  Dutas  (messengers)  and  eat  those  foeces  and 
excrements.  The  worms  therein  are  constantly  biting  and  stinging 
them  and  they  are  crying  "  deliver  us,  deliver  us."  Then  comes  the  hot 
Muttra  Kunda.  It  is  filled  with  the  hot  urine  ani  the  worms  thereof. 
The  great  sinners  always  dwell  here.  It  measures  four  miles  ;  and  it  is 
({uite  dark.  My  Dutas  always  beat  them  and  their  throats,  lips,  palates 
are  all  dry.  Then  corner  the  Slesma  Kunda.  It  is  filled  with  phlegm 
aud  the  insects  thereof.  The  sinners  dwell  in  {ihlegm  and  eat  that 
phlegm.  Then  comes  the  Gava  Kunda.  It  is  tilled  with  (factitious!  poison 
It  measures  one  mile.  The  sinners  eat  this  poison  aud  dwell  here.  The 
worms  thereof  bite  them.  They  tremble  at  the  ciiastisemeut  of  My  Dutas  and 
cry  aloud.  My  messengers  look  like  serpents,  with  teeth  like  thunderbolt 
aud  they  are  very  furious  and  (iereo,  with  their  throats  dry  and  their  words 
very  hars-h.       Then   comes   Dusikft    Kunda.     It  is    filled    with    the    rheum 

119 


946  Sr!  mad  devI  bhAoavatam. 

ftud  dirt  of  the  eyes  and  it  measures  one  mile.  Innumerable  worms 
are  born  therein.  Numberless  sinners  live  there,  and  as  they  move,  the 
insects  immediately  bite  and  sting  them.  Next  comes  the  Vasa  Kunda 
It  is  filled  with  the  serum  or  marrow  of  the  flesh  and  it  measures 
one-half  mile.  The  sinners  dwell  there,  chastised  and  [Dunished  by 
My  messengers.  Then  comes  the  Sukra  Kunda.  It  measures  two  miles 
in  diameter.  The  insects,  born  in  the  semen,  bite  the  sinners,  and  they 
move  on  and  on.  Then  comes  the  Rakta  Kunda,  with  very  offensive, 
fojted  smell.  It  is  deep  like  a  well  and  filled  with  blood.  The 
sinners  dwell  here,  drinking  blood.  Th3  insects  therein  are  always 
biting  them.  Then  follows  the  As'ru  Kunda.  It  measures  in  size 
one  fourth  the  measure  of  the  well  (above-mentioned).  It  is  always 
filled  with  hot  tears  of  the  eyes  ;  aad  many  sinners  are  seen  there  living 
weeping  and  crying  and  being  bitten  by  the  snakes.  Then  there  is 
the  Gatra  Mala  Kunda,  The  sinners  are  chastised  and  punished  there 
by  My  messengers  and  being  bitten  by  the  insects  thereof,  they  eat  the 
dirts  of  the  body  and  dwell  there.  Then  comes  the  Karna  Mala  Kunda. 
The  sinners  eat  the  vvax  of  the  ear  and  fill  the  place.  The  insects 
always  bite  them  and  they  are  crying  aloud.  It  measures  one  fourth 
the  measure  of  a  Vapi.  Then  comes  the  Majjd  Kunda.  It  is  filled  witii 
fat  and  marrow,  emitting  foeted  offensive  odour.  It  measures  one 
fourth  the  measure  of  a  V^pi.  The  great  sinners  always  dwell  there. 
Then  comes  the  Mdmsa  Kunda.  This  is  filled  with  the  greasy  llesh.  Ii 
measures  (one-fourth)  that  of  a  VApi.  Those  who  sell  their  daughters 
dwell  here.  My  messaugers  always  chastise  and  punish  tliem  ai.d 
horriblo  insects  bito  and  sting  them  a  ;d  they  cry,  out  of  fear  and 
agony,  i'Save  us,  Save  us,"  and  eat  at  times  that  flesh.  Then  come 
in  succession  the  four  Kundas  Nakha,  Louia  and  others.  'J'hey  also 
measure  each  one-fourth  that  of  a  Vipi.  The  sinners  dwell  there,  alwavs 
chastised  by  My  messengers.  Next  comes  the  very  hot  TAmra  Kunda. 
Hurning  cokes  exist  on  the  top  of  very  hot  coppers.  There  are  lakhs  and 
lakhs  of  very  hot  copper  figures  in  that  Kunda  The  sinners,  being  compelled 
by  My  messengers,  are  made  to  embrace  each  of  these  hot  copper 
figures  and  they  cry  loudly  an  I  live  there.  It  measures  four  miles.  Then 
come  the  burning  Angara  Kunda  and  the  hot  Lauha  DhAra  Kunda. 
Here  the  sinners  are  made  to  embracs  the  hot  iron  fiorures  and,  feelin" 
themselves  burnt,  cry  out  of  fear  and  agony.  Whenever  My  messengers 
punish  them,  they  immediately  cry  out  "Save  us,  Save  us."  It  measure.i 
eight  miles  ;  and  it  is  pitch  dark  and  very  awful.  This  is  named  the  hot 
Lauha  Kunda.  Then  come  the  Charma  Kunda  and  Surd  Kunda.  The 
sinuors,  beaten  by  My    mon,    cat     the     <kin  aud    drink  the  hot    urine  and 


Book  IX,]  CHAPTER  KXXVII.  ^47 

dwell  there.  Then  comes  the  S^hnali  Kunda  ;  it  is  overspread  with 
thorns  and  thorny  trees,  causing  intense  pain.  It  measures  two  miles. 
Millions  and  millions  of  great  sinners  are  made  by  My  men  to  fall 
from  the  tops  of  those  trees  down  below  where  their  bodies  get  pierced  by 
very  sharp  thorns,  six  feet  long;  and  thus  they  dwell  there,  beaten  by  My 
man.  Out  of  thirst,  their  palates  get  dried  up;  and  they  cry  out 
repeatedly  "Water,  Watsr."  Oat  of  fear,  they  get  very  anxious  and 
then  their  heads  get  broken  by  the  clubs  brought  down  on  them 
by  My  men.  So  they  move  there  like  the  beings  burnt  in  ver)  hot  oil. 
Then  comes  the  Visoda  Kunda.  It  measures  two  miles  in  diameter 
at  (1  is  filled  with  the  poison  of  the  serpent  called  Taksakas.  My  men 
punish  the  sinners  and  they  drink  the  poison  thereof  and  dwell  there. 
Tlien  comes  the  hot  Taila  Kunda.  There  are  no  insects  here.  Only 
the  great  sinners  dwell.  All  around  burning  coals  are  flaring  and 
when  My  men  beat  the  sinners,  they  run  hither  and  thither.  It  is 
filled  with  horrible  intense  darkness  and  it  is  exceedingly  painful.  It  looks 
dreadful  and  measures  two  miles.  Then  comes  the  Kunta  Kunda. 
Sharp  pointed  iron  weapons  like  tridents  are  placed  in  order  all  round. 
The  sinners,  pierced  by  those  weapons,  are  seen  encircling  the  Kunda.  It 
measures  one-half  mile.  Beaten  by  My  men,  their  throats  and  lips 
get  dried  up.  Then  comes  the  Krimi  Kunda.  It  is  filled  with 
terrible  worms  and  insects,  snake,  like-with  sharp  teeth,  of  the  size 
of  a  Sanku  (a  Sal  tree)  deformed  and  hideous  looking  ;  and  it  is 
filled  with  pitch  darkness,  terrible  to  look  at.  Beaten  by  i^Iy  men, 
the  great  sinners  dwell  there.  Then  comes  the  Puya  Kunda.  It 
measures  eight  miles  in  diameter  (or  in  eireuaiference  ?).  The  sinners 
dwell  and  eat  the  puss;  thereof  and,  are  beaten  by  My  jaen.  Then  comes 
the  Sarpa  Kunda.  Millions  and  millions  of  snakes  of  the  length  of  a  Tul 
tree  are  existing  there.  These  serpents  encircle  the  sinners  and  as 
they  bite  them.  My  mju  also  beat  them  at  the  same  time.  So  there 
arises  a  general  hue  and  cry.  "Save  us,  Save  us  ;  we  are  done  for." 
Then  come  in  order  the  Dams'a  Kunda,  Mas'aka  Kunda,  and  the  Oarala 
Kunda.  These  are  filled  with  gad-flies,  mosquittoes,  and  poison 
respectively.  Each  of  them  measures  one  mile.  The  sinners'  hands 
and  feet  are  tied  up.  So  when  the  gad-flies  and  mosquittoes  fiercely 
sting  them,  and  My  men  violently  beat  them  simultaneously,  they 
raise  a  loud  uproar  and  are  made  to  move  on,  in  their  tied  states 
by  My  persons.  Their  bodies  get  thoroughly  reddened  and  coversd 
with  blood  by  the  stinging  of  the  flies,  etc.  Then  come  the  Vajra 
Kunda  and  the  Vris'chika  Kunda  filled  respectively  with  Vajra  insects 
md  the  scorpions.     Each  of  them  measures  oae-half  that  of  the  Vdpi.     The 


9^8  ^RtMADOKV!   BIlAoWATAM 

sinaers   that  (Iwell  there,    aio    iucessanily    bitten   by  insects   ^Vaji-a.     aud 
scorpions.    Then  come  in  order  the  ^art*   Kunda,  Sula  Kunda,  and  the  Khadija 
Kundas.     They  are    tilled    respectively    with   arrows,  spikes,  and  scimitars. 
Ivaeh  ol  them  measures  one  half  that  of  the  V^pt.     The  sinners  are  pierced 
bv    arrows,   etc.,   and  become    covered   over  with   blood   and   dwell  there. 
Then  comes  the  Grola  Ivunla.     It  is  filled  with  boiling  hot  water    and  it  i-^ 
pitch    dirk.     The     sinners     live     there,     bitten    by    the      insects.     This 
Kundi  rasa?(U-ei  half  that  of  the  Vapi.     The  insects  bite  them  and  My  men 
beat   them  ;  so  their    iear    knows     no      bounds  ;  everyone  of  them  is  weep- 
iiin-  and  crying  loudly.     This  Kunda  is  filled  with  hideously  offensive  smalls. 
So  the  pains  of  the  sinners  are     infinite.     The  Nakra  Kunda  cornea    next. 
It  measures    hilf  the  Vapi,     is   filled    with    millions    and    millions   of  cro- 
codiles   living  in    water.     The   horrible    looking     deformed     sinners     live 
there.     The  K\ka  Kunda  then  follow?.     Tii::  sinners  here  are    being    bitten 
by    hundreds    of  deformed   crows   eating      foeces,     urines     and      phlegm. 
Then   come  the  Manthana  Kunda    anl  Vija  Kunda.     These  are    filled  res- 
pectively   with    insects   called     Manthana   and     V]J!i.     Each     of     them 
measures     one     hundred     Dhanus.     (One     Dhanu-four     hastas.)     Those 
insects  are  stinging     the    sinners   and    they  cry  out  very   loudly.     Then 
follows  ihe  Vajra  Kund  i.     It  meisures  one  hundred  Dhanus.     Many  insects 
with     their   teeth    as    hard  as   thunderbolt    live  there  and  bite  the  sinners 
who    cry    out    loud'y.     It    is    pitch    dark.     Then  comes    the    hot    P^s^na 
Kunda.     It  measur-^s  tsvice  that    of  the  VSpi.     It    is  so  built  of  hot  stones 
as  it  resembles  a  burning  mass  of  coal.  The  sinners  become  restloiss  with  the 
heat   and    turn  round  and    round    in    thj  middle.     Then  comes  the  Piisana 
Kund  I  a!i  1  the  L\[\  Kinda.  The  Pasaoa.    Kunda  is   made    up  of  the  sharp 
j)ointed  stones,  havmg  sharp    edges.  Innumerable  sinners  dwell  there.  Many 
red  beings  live  in  the    Laia  Kunda.     Then   comes   the     Ma  i    Kunda.     Its 
size   is   one  hundred    Dhanus     and    its    depth  is    two   miles.     It  is  made 
up   of  hot    stones,    each  measuring  the  Anjana     mountain.    The    sinners, 
beaten    and    driven   by   My   persons,    move   on   and    on    in    the     middle. 
Then  comes   the   Chiirua   Kunda.     It      measures   two    miles   (in    circum- 
ference) and  is  filled    with  (seven)  churoas  (powders).  The  sinners,  driven  and 
beaten     My   men,   go   on,    restless     hither    and      thither   and     eat    the 
powders   and   get  themselves   burnt.     Then  comes   the     Chakra    Kunda. 
Here   a  potter's   wheel   with  sixteen    starp-edged    spokes     is     constantly 
whirling  round     and  round  ;  the   sinners  are   being   crushed   by  this  wheel. 
01-80.  Then  comes  the  Vakia    Kunda.     Its    depth  is    eight   miles.lt  is 
fashioned   very   much  curved;  and  with  and  sharp   slope  it  has  gone  down.  It 
is  built  on   the   plan  of  a  mountain  cave,  filled  with  hot     water    and     it     ii 
enveloped   with  deep  dense   darkness.     The  aquatic  anitn^U  there  are  bitmg 


Book  IX.]  CHArrfiH  XlXV  ll.  941) 

the  siunersj  \4\o  get  vci y  niueli  re^ticss  anl  arc  ci'vmg  oat  very  loudly.  Then 
bottif  s  the  Kurma  Kuada.  Here  millions  and  millions  of  tortoises  in  the  water 
awfully   distorted,   are  biting   the   sinners.     Then  comes  the  Jvila  Kunda. 
It  IS  built  of  Beree  fiery    flames.      It    m-asures  two  miles    iu   circumference. 
The  eiuners  here   are    always    in    iire  it    dilTicalty,    with  intense    pftin  and 
crying  out  lo;dly.     Next  foiio.vs  the  Hh.sina  Kuada.  It  measures  two  miles 
The   sinners    get   themselves    well    burnt    in   hoi    ashes    and     live     thbl-e; 
eating   the    ashes.     It    is    fiilel    with    hob     &t)nes    and     hot     irons.     The 
sinners  here  are  always  b3in^  burnt,  in    hot  ir^ns    and    hot  stones  and  their 
throats    and  palates  are    being'     parched    up.     Then   comes      the     Dagdh\ 
Kunda.     It    is    deep   and    horrible      It    mei^iua.^    tA-o    miks    in  circum- 
ference.    My    messengers     tlue.iten     aUvays      t.lio      sinners     there.     Theti 
comes  the    rfiiebi  Kunda.     It   is     lillo  I    with   salt   Water.  Waves  are  always 
rising    there.     It    is    filled    with    virions     avjuitio    animals  making  all  sorts 
of  noises.     It    measures    eight    miles    in    circumference  and  it  is  dcilp  at.nl 
dark.     The    sinners  here    cannot   see     eaoii    other   and  Ave    bitten   by     the 
animals.     Pained    very   much,      they    cry    out     loudly.     Then     comes  the 
Asipattra    Kunda.     On    the    t>p    surface    of   the    Kubda  there  is     A  very 
big   TAl  tree    very    high.     The  edges  of  the    leaves    of   this  tree  at'e  sh»rp 
like    the   edge    of  a   sword.     One    mile     btlovv    this    'lal  tree    is    situated 
the    Kunda.     The   sharpedged  Tal    leaves,   then,  fall  on  the    bodies   of  the 
sinners     Irom    the     height     of  a  mile     and  they  get  cut     and     wounded; 
blood    comes    ont   of  them   and   the    sitjners,    in     great     pain,      cry      out 
"  sav«,    save."     It    is    very    deep,    very  dark   and  filled  with  Rakra  Kita 
a   kind   of  bload    like   insects.     This   is   the     horrible     Asipatra     Kunda. 
Next   comes    the    Ksura    Dh^ra  Kunda,  measuring  one    hundred    Dhauus 
(one  Dhanu-Iour  hastas).     It   is   filled    with  keenedged  weapons,  as  sharp  as 
nice  razors.    The  blood  of  the  sinners  is  flowing  here  profusely.  Then  comes 
the    Suchi  Mukha  Kunda^   filledwith    shirp  weapons  of   ihe  form    of  long 
needles.     It     measures   fifty  Dhauus.     The    sinners   get    pierced    by  them 
».nd  are  constantly   emitting  blood.     Thc:ir  intense  pain  knows  no    bounds. 
Then   comes   the    Gokfimukha   Kunda  ;    inhabited    by    a    sorb  of    insect, 
called  Goka.     They  look  like  mouths  ;    hence  they    are    named     Gok^mu- 
kha.     It  is  deep  like  a  well   and  it  measures  twenty  Dhanus.     The     great 
sinners   suffer   an  intense  amount  of  pain    there.     They  have  got  to   keep 
their  mouths   always    downwards    as    the  Goka    insects    always    bite    and 
Bting  them.     Then  comes  the  Nakra  Kunda.     It  resembles  like  the  mouth 
of  a  crocodile   and  measures  sixteen  Dhanus.     It  is  djep   like   a  well  and 
numbers  of  sinners   dwell  there.     Then  comes    the    (iaja    Dams'a    Kunda. 
It  measures  one  hundred  Dhmu?.     Next   comes  the  Gomukha  Kunda.     It 
maasures   thirty    Dhanus  and    resjrab'es  the  mouth   of  a     co.7.     It  given 
ino9S9Ant  pains  atid   troubles  to  the  einners, 


950  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

81-101.  Tlion  couics  tlic  KuinbhipAka  Kuiida.  It  is  like  a  wheel 
retjotublini*  that  ot'lhn  Kiilaohalvra,vory  horrible;  and  it  is  rotating  ine3ssanfcly 
Jt  looks  like  a  water-jir,  measuring  eig;ht  miles,  and  it  is  quite  dark.  Its 
depth  is  one  lakh  I'musis  of  the  height  of  100,000  persons.  There  are 
many  other  ICundaa,  Faptv  Taila  Kunda  ar.d  Tapta  Taila  Tamra  Kunda, 
eto.,  within  it.  This  Kundi  is  filled  with  almost  uueonscious  great 
tinners  and  insects.  They  beat  each  other  and  cry  out  loudly.  My 
messengers  also  threaten  them  with  clubs  and  MuSilas.  So  at  times  they 
fall  dizzy-headed,  at  times  tliey  get  unconscious,  and  sometimes  thev 
get  Up  and  cry.  O  Fair^One  !  The  numbers  of  sinners  here  equal  to 
fuur  times  that  of  all  the  other  sinners  in  all  the  other  Kundas.  They  know 
no  death,  however  much  you  beat  them.  Their  lives  persist.  For  the  bodv 
is  built  up  for  sufferance,  it  is  indestructible.  This  Kumbhipaka  Kuncli 
is  the  chief  of  all  the  Kundas.  This  Kunda  where  the  sinners  are  tied 
to  a  thread  built  by  K^ila,  wbere  My  men  lift  the  sinners  on  high  at  one 
time,  and  sink  them  down  below  at  another  time,  where  the  sinners  becom- 
ing sufiocated  for  a  long  time,  get  unconscious,  where  their  sufferings  know 
Qo  bounds,  where  it  is  fille.l  with  boiling  oil,  is  named  the  Kalasutra  Kunda. 
Then  comes  the  Matsyoda  Kunda,  hollow  like  a  well.  It  is  filled  with 
boiling  water  and  it  measures  twenty-four  Dhanus.  Next  comes  the 
Abatoda  Kunda.  li.  measures  one  hundred  Dhanu«.  The  sinners  get 
their  bcdies  burned  and  chastised  by  My  persons,  live  there.  No  sooner 
they  drop  into  the  water  of  this  Kunda,  than  they  are  attacked  with  all 
sorts  of  diseases.  Then  omes  the  Krimikantuka  Kunda.  The  sinners 
are  bitten  by  the  Krimi  Kmtuka  insects  and  cry  out  loudly,  creating  a 
general  coosternatiou  anl  live  there.  Its  another  names  is  Aruntuda 
Kunda.  Next  coma^  the  Pams'u  Kunda.  It  measures  one  hundred  Dha- 
nus. It  is  oversperead  with  burning  rice  husks.  The  sinners  eat  tho^e 
hot  husks  and  live  there.  Then  comes  the  Pas'avestana  Kunda.  It 
measures  two  miles.  Xo  sooner  the  sinners  fall  in  this  Kunda  than  they 
are  twined  round  by  this  rope  or  P4s'a.  Hence  its  name.  Then  come-; 
tie  Siilaprota  Kunda.  It  measures  twenty  Dhanus.  No  sooner  the  sinnerr; 
fall  here  than  they  are  enei-cled  with  the  Sulastra  (darts).  Then  comes 
the  Prakampana  Knndi.  It  measures  one  mile.  It  is  filled  with  ice- 
cold  water.  The  siniters,  going  there,  shiver  at  once.  Next  follows 
the  Ulka  Kunda.  It  measures  twenty  Dhanus.  It  is  filiel  with  burn- 
in"  torches  and  metoors.  My  messengers  thrust  the  torches  and  meteors 
into  the  mouths  of  the  sinners  living  there  Next  comes  the  Andha- 
Kupa  Kunda.  It  is  pitch-dark,  shaped  like  a  well,  circular  and  very 
horrible.  The  sinners  beat  each  other  and  eat  the  insects  thereof. 
Their  bodies  are  burnt  with  hot  water;  they  cannot  see  anvthiag  on 
nocount  of  dire  darkness. 


^ooK  IX.]  CiJAi>TKll  XXXVII.  05i 

102-llS.       The    Kunda     where    the     siuners     are     pierced   by    various 
weapons  is    known   as  the  Vedhana  Kunda.     It  measures  twenty  Dhanus. 
Then  comes    the    Dandatadana     Kunda.      It    measures   sixteen    Dhanus. 
The   sinners   dwell    here,  threatened     by    My  messenj^ers.      Then   comes 
the     Jalarandhra    Kunda.       Here     the    sinners     live   encompassed    by    a 
great  net   as    fishes,    etc.,    are    tied    in    a  net.      Next    comes    the    Deha- 
chiirna  Kunda.     Ifc    is    quite    dark  and    Its   depth  is    that   of  the  height 
of  one   koti   persons  ;    its  circumference  is  twenty    Dhanus.       The  sinners, 
here,  encompassed  by    iron    chains    are    made    to    /all   below    where    their 
bodies     are     reduced     to     powders     and     they    are      inert     and   almost 
unconscious.     The  Kunda    where  the    sinners  are  crushed   and  threatened 
by    My   messengers    is    known    as  the  Dalana    Kunda;  it  measures  sixteen 
Dhanus    in    circumference.       Next     comes    the     Sofana     Kunda.      It   is 
deep    up   to  the    height    of    one     hundred    persons  and  it   is    very   dark. 
It   measures   thirty    Dhanuf.    On    falling  on     the    hob     sand,  the    throats 
and    palates   of  sinners    get   dried    up.       Their    pain     knows   no    bound.-. 
Hence    it    is     called  the  oo§ana    Kunda,       Then  comes  the  Kasa    Kunda. 
It  measures     one    hundred    Dhanus.       It    is    filled     with     the   juices    of 
skins    and    its    smell    is    very    ollensive.      The    siuners    eat   those    astrin- 
gent  waters  and    live      there.        Then      comes       the    Siirpa     Kunda.  lb 
measures    twelve     Dhanus    and    is    extended     like    a    winnowing    basket. 
It    ia    tilled    with    hot    iron    dust    and     many    sinners  live   then*,    eating 
those    foetid    iron     dusts.     Next    comes  the  Jvalamukha  Kunda,       It    13 
filled  with  red  hot  sand.     From  the  (bottom)    centre   rises   a     flame,   over- 
spreading   the  mouth  of  the  Kunda.     It  measures  twenty    Dhanus.     The 
sinners   are   burnt  here  by  the  flame  and  live  awfully  ;  they  get  fainted  no 
sooner   they    are    dropped  in  this   Kunda.     Then   comes  the  Dhumr3,ndha 
Kunda.     lb  is  dark,  quite  filled  with  smoke.      VVitliin  that  the    hot    bricks 
are   placed.       The    sinners  get    hutf'ocated    with    smoke  ;     and   their   eye- 
sight  becomes     also    obstructed.      It     measures      one     huudred  Dhanus, 
Then  comes    the    Nugabe?taaa    Kunda.     lb    is   encircled    and  filled    with 
the   serpents.     No  sooner  the    sinners    are    let    fall  there,   than    they   are 
surrounded   by    the      snakes.      O    Suvitri!       J'hus     I    have    spoken      to 
you   about   the  eighty-six  Kundas    and    their    characteriotics,     Now  what 
more    do    you     want    to     hear  ?    Say. 

Here  ends  the  Thirly-seventh  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on 
the  eighly-six  Kundus  and  their  characteruitics  in  the  Mah4  Purunam 
6ri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Voda  Vyasa. 


'.'V.J  ^i{{   MM)  DKvt   r.llAf.  WAl'AM, 


CHAPTER  XXXVUl. 

1-6.  S^vitii  said  : — "0  Lord  !  Give  tne  the  devotion  to  the  Devi 
to  that  Advd  Sukti  Bhagavati  Maha  Miiye,  Parames'vari  Mayi 
that  is  the  Ksieeuce  of  all  essences,  the  Door  of  final  liberatico  to  the 
human  beings,  and  tiie  Cause  of  deliverinfj  them  from  hells,  that  is 
the  Root  of  all  the  Dharmas  that  lead  to  Mukti,  that  destroys  all  the 
iuauspieiousness,  that  takes  away  the  fear  of  all  the  Karmas,  and  that 
takes  away  always  all  the  sins  committed  before.  O  Thou,  the  Foremost 
amongst  the  knowers  of  the  Vedas  !  How  many  kinds  of  Muktia  are 
there  in  this  world  ?  What  is  the  True  Bhakti  ?  What  are  its  charac- 
teristics? What  is  to  be  done  by  which  the  enjoyment  of  the  karmas 
done  can  be  desisted  and  nullified?  0  Bhaijavan  !  The  woman  kind  has  been 
created  by  the  Creator  as  devoid  of  any  Tattvajnana  or  true  knowledge  ; 
now  tell  me  something  about  this  True  Knowledge.  All  the  charities', 
sacrifices,  bathing  in  the  sacred  places  of  pilgrimages,  observing  vows 
and  austerities  cannot  be  compared  with  one- sixteenth  of  imparting 
knowledge  to  those  who  are  ignorant  (of  true  knowledge).  Mother  is 
hundred  times  superior  to  fither;  this  is  certain;  but  the  Spiritual  Teacher, 
the  Giver  of  True    Kno.vledge,  is  hundred    times    more  to   be    reverenced 

and    worshipped     than     the   mother.       O  Lord  ! 

7-79.      Dharmaraja    said: — '*  O  Child  !     What    boons  you    desired     of 

Me  before,    I   granted     them    all    bo    you.      Now    1    grant    this    boon  to 

vou  that     "Let   the    devotion     towards     the    Sakti    now   arise    in   your 

mind"     0  Auspicious   One  !      You    want   to     hear    the     reciting  of  the 

Glories    of  Sri  Devi;   by    this,  both    hj    who    puts    forward   the  question 

and  he  who    hears    the   answer,  all    their     families     are  delivered.     When 

the   Sega   Naga    Ananta    Dava    with     Ilis     thousand    mouths    is  unable 

to   recite  the  glories  of  the  Devi,    when    Mah;iieva   cannot  describe    with 

His    five    mouths,  when  the   Creator    Brahmu    is    incapable  to    recite    Her 

glories    with    His  four  mouths,  when    Visuu,    the  Omniscient,  falls   back, 

when  Kartik^ya   with    His      six     mouths      cannot    sufliciently   describe, 

when  Ganes'a,   the  Guru    of  the  Gurus  of  tiio    great    yogis   is   incapable, 

when   the    Pundits,   the    knowers    of  the    four      Vedas,   the     Essence    of 

all  the  Sastras,  cannot  know  even  a  bit  of  Her,    when    Sarasvati     becomes 

inert   in    going  to   describL'  Her   glories  ;   wiicn     Sauatkumara,     Dharmii, 

Sanatana,  Sananda,  Saiiaka,    Kapila,  Siirya  and    other    sons  of  the  Creator 

have   fallen   back,     when       the      other     Siddhas,    Yogindras,   Munindras 

are   quite  incapable   to   glorily   tho  dcod^    of     Piakriti    Devi,    thou    how 

ean   1   recite   fully  the     Glories   of     Her?      Whose   lotus-feet     Brahma, 


Book  iX.]  CHAPTER  XXXVIlt.  953 

Visnu,  biva  and  others  meditate  ;  and  lo  !  when  it  becomes  difficult  for  Her 
devotees  even    to    think  of    Her,    then    what  wonder   is  there   that    She 
will    be  so  very    rare  to     others  !       Brahma,  skilled  in  the    knowledge   of 
the  Vedas  knows  more   of     Her    than   what  other   ordinary  persons    know 
so  little  of  Her  auspieiou3  Glories.  More  than  BrahmA,  Ganes'a,  the  Gara  of 
the  Jnanins,  knows;  again  Sambhu,  the  Omniscient,  knows  the  best   of  all. 
For,  in  ancient  times,  the  knowledge  of  the  Prakriti  Devi  was  given  to  Him 
by    Krisna,  the  Highest   Spirit  in  a  solitiry    place  in  the  Rasa  Mandalam 
in    the    region    of  Golokj.      Mahadeva,   again,     gave    it    to    Dharma   in 
the  Sivaloka  ;  Dliarma  again  ga\e  the  Prikriti  Mantra  to  My  father.     My 
fit  her   b?came   successful     (Siddha)    i:i     the     worship     of    Prakriti   Devi 
when  he  practised    austerities.     Of   old,    the  Djvas  wanted    to    offer  to  me 
the    Government   of  the    Yam  i      Loka;    but   as    I    was    very     much   dis- 
passionate towards    the    world,    I    became     unwilling   and    became    ready 
to    perform   austerities      Then    my    Father  told    the  Glories  of    Prakriti 
Devi.   Now  I   describe    to   yo\i  wh  it  I    heard   from  my  Father  and    what 
is  stated  in  the  Vedas,  though  very  difficult  to  comprehend.  Listen  carefully. 
O  Fair    Faced    One  I    A?    the   eternal     space     does    not     know  its     own 
extent,    so    Prakriti    Devi    Herself   knows    not    Her     own     Glories  ;  then 
what   can    be   said    of  any   other    person   on     this  I     She      is   the    Self 
of  all,   endowed   with     all     power?     and     lordship,     the    Cauee    of    all 
eatises,  the  Lord  of  all,    the  Origin    of    all   and  the    Preserver   of  all;  She 
is  Eternal,  always  with  Her  Cosmic  Body,  full  of  everlasting   bliss,   without 
any  special  form,  unrestrained,  having   no   fear,    without  any    disease   and 
decay,  unattached,  the  Witness  of  all,  the  Refuge  of  all,  and     Higher    than 
the    Highest;    She    is  with    Mdy^  and  She  is  Mula  Prakriti  ;  the  objec's 
created    by    Her   being   known  as   the  Prakrit   creation  ;    Who    remains 
as    Prakriti     and    Purusa   inseparable    from    each    other     as     Agni    and 
Her  burning  force  ;  the  Mah^    Maya,    of  the  nature   of  everlasting   exis- 
tence,  intelligence  and  bliss.   Though  formless.  She  assumes    forms   for  the 
gratification  of  the   desires    of    Her     Bhaktas.     She     created     first    the 
boautiful  form    of   Gopala   Sundari    i,.    e  ,    the    form    of  Sri  Krisna    very 
lovely    and    beautiful,    captivating    the    mind.      His     body      is    blue     like 
the    fresh  ra'n    cloud  j  He  is   young  and  dresi'od    like  that    of  a  oow-her.]. 
Millions   of   Kandarpis    (the    Love    deity)    ate,  as    it     were,     playing    iu 
His   body.     His   eyes    vie    with    the    midday    lotus  of    the  autumn.     The 
beauty  of    His   face    throws   under   shide    the     millions    and    millions    of 
the  Full    Moon.     His  body  is  decorated  with  invaluable  ornaments   decked 
with   jewels.     Sweet  smile   reigns   ever  in    His  lips  ;  it  is    adorned  more- 
over  with    His  yellow  coloured  iovaluable  robe.     He  is    Parama  Brahma. 
His  whole  body  is    burning    with    the    Brahma  Teja,  the  Fire  of  Brahmi. 

120. 


954  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BIIAGAVATAM. 

His    Body    is    Fiery.     He    is    lovely,    sweet    to    look    at,    of     a      peaceful 
temper,  the  Lord  of  R^h^  and  He  is  Infinite.  {Note:  -The  Univers?,  as  we 
see,    is    unreal    like    what    we    see    in    tbo    K  d-jiJoscopa  ;  various  appirent 
pictures  of  an  endless  variety  of  beautiful  colour^  anl  forms.)     He  is  sittini^j 
on    a   jewel  throne  in    th3  Risi  Mandilatn,  anl  i-  incessantly  1  )oked  upon 
by  the  smiling  lovely  Grjpis  at  one     and  the  s^-ue  time.    He   is    two-armed. 
A  garland  made  of  wild    (lo.vers    is    hinging     from      His     neck.       He    is 
playing  on    His    Hate.      His   brea-t    is    rasplendant  with    Kaustubha    gem 
that    He    always   wears.     His    body    is   anointad  with  Kunkuma  (saffron), 
aguru    (the   fragrant    and   cooling    paste    of  the  Aguru  wood),     mu?k,  and 
sandal-paste.     The   garland  of   beautiful  Champaka  and    Malati    flowers  is 
hanging   from    His    neck.     On     His    head,    the    beautiful      cresc    is  being 
seen,  a  little   obliquely   situated   in    the    form     of     the     beautiful    Moon. 
Thus    the   Bhqktas,    filled    with    Bhaktis,  meditate     on     Him.     O  Child  ! 
It    is    through    His     fear  that    the  Creator    it^    doing  His  work  of  creation 
of  this      Universe  ;   and     is      recording     the      Prarabdha     fruits  of    their 
Karmas.     It     is    through    His  fear  that     Visnu    is     awarding    the     fruits 
of  Tapas    and     preserving    the    Univer.-e.     By    His  command  the  KAlagni 
Rudra    Deva    is    destroying   all.     Hy    Whose     favour     biva    has     become 
Mrityumjaya,  the   Conqueror    of    Death  and  the    Foremost  of  the  Jnanis  ; 
knowing   whom     Siva    has   become    Himself    endowed     with     knowledge 
and    the    Lord    of  the    knowc-s    of    knowledge,    full  of   the    Highest  Bliss, 
devotion   and    dispassion.     Through      Whose  fear    the    wind  becomes     the 
foremost   of  runners  and   carries  things,    the  Sun  gives     heat,    Indra   gives 
rain,   Yama   destroys,    Agni   burns,  and  Water   cools  all     the    thingc.     By 
Whose   command   the    Regents    of    the     (ten)    quarters    of     the    sky   are 
watching  and  preserving  nice  orders  ;  through     Whose  fear  the   planets   are 
describing  their  several    orbits.     Through      Whose    fear,    trees    flower  and 
yield   fruits  ;    By   Whose     command    the  Kala  destroys     all.     By     Whose 
command  all  the  beings  whether    on  l\nd  on  in  water  are  quitting  their  lives 
in    time  ;  until  the  proper  time   comes  no     man   does   not  die  even  if  he  be 
pierced   whether  in  battle    or  in  danger.  By  Whos-e  command  the  wind  sup- 
ports the  water;  the  water   supports  the  tortoise;    the    tortoise  supports    the 
A-nantaand  Vai  Ananta  supports  the  earth  ;  the  earth     supports  the  oceans, 
mountain-  and  all  the  jewels.    Tlie  earth  is  of  the    nature  of  forgiveness,  /.  e. 
endures    all.     For    this  reason    all    things,      nnviiig  and  non-moving,  rest 
on     Her    and    again    melt    away    in      Her.       Seventy-one      Divine    YugH'^ 
constitute   one   Indra's  life  period.     Twenty-eight    Indra's  life  periods  cors- 
titute    Brahma's    one   diy    and    one    night.     Thus      thirty    days  constitute 
Brahma's  one    month  ;  so    two    months    constitute     one     Ritu    '^season)  j 
six   Ritus    make    one   year.     Thus    one  hundred  yeare    constitute  Brahma"; 


I 


l^ooK  IX.]  CHAPTEli  XXXVIIL  955 

life.     When  Brahma  dies,  ^ri     Hari's    eye   elos'Ts.     That  is  the    Prakritik 
Pralaya.     At   this  time,    everything,  moving      and      non-moving,      from 
the    Deva    loka    to    Bhur  lok*    (earth)  dies.     The     Creator    Brahm^   gets 
dissolved    in    the    mvel     of     ^ii     Krisna.     The     four-armed    Vianu,     of 
Vaikiintha,   sleeps    on  Ksfra  Saraudra,  the  ocean  of  milk,  i.  e.,  He  dissolves 
on    the   left   side    of   5ii    Krisna,    the   Highest     Spirit.     All      the     other 
feaktis    (foicas)   di^sjlve    in  Mula    Prakriti,     the     Maya   of    Visnu.     The 
Miila    Prakriti    Durga,    the    Presiding    Deity   of  Buddhi  (reason)  dissolves 
in    the    Bcddhi    of   Krisna.     Skanda,    the   part    of     Narayana,    dis.-;olves 
in    His    breast.     Gane'sa,  the   foiemost    or  the    Devas,    bora    in    part     of 
Krisna,    dissolves    in    the    arm    of  Sri    Krisna.     And    those  who  are  born 
in    parts   of   Padma,    dissolve    in    Her    body    and    Padma  dissolves    in  the 
body    ot   Itadha.     All    the   cow-herJes?es    and    all    the    bodies  of  the  Devas 
dissolve    in    Radha's  body.     But    Ua,dha,     the    Presiding     Deity  of     the 
Prana    of   S'ri    Krisna,    dissolves  in    the    Pr3,na    of  ort  Krisna.     SavitrT, 
the    fut;r    Vedas    and    all   the    Sastras     dissolve   in    Sarasvati  ;  and  Saraf- 
vati   gets   dissolved    in     the    tongue    of   Sri    Krisna,     the      Highest    Self. 
The    Gopas    in   the    region  of  Goloka  dissolve    in    the  pores  of  His    skin  ; 
the  Prana  Vayu  of  all  dissolve  in  His  Pr^aa   Vayu  ;    the  fire   dissolves  in 
the    fire    in    His    belly;   water    dissolves    in    the    tip    of    His    tongue,  and 
the    Vaisnavas,    (devotees    of   Visru),  drinking   the    nectar    of   Bhakti,  the 
Essence   of   all  essences,  dissolve    ia    His   lotus-feet.      All     smaller     Virats 
dissolve    in   the  Great  VirSt    and    the    Great    Vir^i    dissolves   in  the  Body 
of  S'ri    Krisna.     O  Child  I    He    is     Krisna,     on    the    pores     of    Whose 
sk'n  are   situated    endless    Universes  ;  at    the     closing      of    Whose   eyes, 
the  Prakritic  Pralaya  comes  atd  on  the  opening  of  Whose  eyes,  the  creation 
takes    place.     The   closing    and    opening    of     the     eyes    takes    the    same 
time.     Brahma's    creation    lasts    one     hundred     years     and  the      Pralaya 
lasts    one    hundred   years.     O  One   of  good    vows  !    There    is  no  counting 
how   many  Brahmins  or  how  many  creations    and    dissolutions  have     taken 
place.    As   one  cannot   count   the  number  of  dusts,    so    one    cannot   count 
the    creations  and    dissolutions.  This  is  the  Great    Unspeakable    Wonder! 
Again  on  Whose  closing  of  the  eyes  the  Pralaya  takes  place  and  on    whose 
opening  of    the    eyes  tlie  creation  takes     place,  out    of   the    will    of   God, 
That    Krisna  dissolves    at   the  time    of  Pralaya    in  Prakriti.     This   High- 
est  bdkti,  the  Miila    Prakriti  is  the^^Only^One    without     a    second  ;    it    is 
the    only    on^    Nirguni  and    the     Highest    Purusa.     It    is     considered    as 
•'Sat"   existing,  by    the  Seers    of   the    Vedas.     Such    a    thing     as     Mula 
Praktiti  is    the    unchang<^d    state  (Muktl).     During  the  Pralaya,  this  only 
One   Mula  Prakriti    appears  as    Jn4na  oakti    or     the    Knowledge    Force, 
Who  can  in  this   universe   recite  Her    glories  ?     Mukti  is  of   four    kind^, 


956  §\i\  MAD  ni5Vt  BliA<JAVATAM. 

(1)  Salokya,  (2)  SAr upya,  (3)  Sainipya  and  (4)  Nirvaua.  So  it  is  stated 
in  the  Vedas.  Oat  of  them  Bhakti  towards  the  Deva  is  the 
highest  ;  so  nvjjh  S3  that  th:;  Djvj,  B'iakti  is  superior  to  Mukti. 
Mukti  gives  SAlokya,  Sarupya,  Sumlpya,  aud  Nirvaii:i.  But  the 
Bhaktas  do  not  want  anything.  They  want  service  of  the  Lord. 
They  do  not  want  anything  else.  The  state  of  becoming  biva,  of  becoming 
an  Amara  or  an  im;nyrtal,  becoming  a  Brahm\,  the  birth,  death,  disease, 
old  age,  fear,  sorrow,  or  wealth,  or  a«isimiing  a  divine  form,  or  NirvSna 
or  Mok§i  all  are  looked  on  alike  by  the  Bhaktas  with  di.-regard  and  con- 
tempt.  Because  Mukti  i^  without  any  servio  5  whila  Bhakti  inoreasos  this 
service.  Thus  I  have  told  you  tbe  differenoe  between  Bliakti  an! 
Mukti.  Now  he'ir  about  th"  cutting  oft  of  the  fruits  of  the  pa^i 
Karmas.  O  Chaste  one  !  This  service  of  the  H'ghest  Lord  severs 
the  ties  of  Ivarmas  (past  acts).  This  service  is  really  the  True  Know- 
ledge. So,  O  Child  !  I  have  now  told  yoii  the  Real  Truth,  leading  to 
auspicious  results.  Now  you  can  go  freely  as  you  desire.  Thus  saying 
to  Savitrt,  Yama,  the  son  of  Surya,  gave  life  back  to  her  husband 
and  blessing  her,  became  ready  to  go  to  His  own  abode.  Seeing 
Dharmaraja  ready  to  go  away,  Savitri  became  sorry  to  have  the 
bereavement  of  a  good  company,  bowed  down  at  His  feet  and  began 
to  cry.  Yama,  the  Ocea.i  of  Mercy,  hearing  the  crying  of  S4vitri 
began  to    weep    and  told   the    following    words:  — 

80-96.  Dharma  said  :— "  O  Child  !  You  enjoy  in  this  holy  BhSrata 
happiness  foronedakh  years  and  you  will  in  the  enl  go  to  the  Djviloka 
or  Mani  Dvipa.  Now  go  back  to  your  house  and  observe  for  fourteen 
years  the  vow  called  Savitri-vrata  fur  the  mukti  of  women.  This 
Vrata  is  to  be  observed  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  white  fortnight 
in  the  month  of  Jyaistha.  Then  observe  the  ]Maha-Laksmi  Vrata. 
Its  proper  time  is  the  eighth  day  of  the  bright  fortnight  of  the  month 
of  Bh^dra.  For  sixteen  years  consecutively  without  any  break  this  vow  is  to 
be  observed.  The  woman  who  practises  with  devotion  this  vow,  goes  to  the 
abode  of  Miila  Prakriti.  You  wouldworship  on  every  Tuesday  in  every  month 
the  Devi  Mangala  .Chandika,  the  giver  of  all  good  ;  on  the  eighth  day  in 
the  bright  fortnight  you  should  worship  Devi  Saethi  {I.e.  Devasen^,)  ; 
you  should  worship  Manasa  Devi,  the  giver  of  all  siddhis,  on  the 
Samkrinti  day  (when  the  Sun  enters  another  sign)  in  every  year  ;  you 
should  worship  Radha,  the  Central  Figure  of  Rlsa,  more  than  the 
PrSna  of  Kri§na  on  every  Full  Moon  night  in  the  month  of  K^rtik  and 
you  should  observe  fasting  on  the  eighth  day  in  the  bright  fortnight 
and  worship  the  Visnu  Mdya  Bhao;avati  Davi,  the  Destructrix  of  all 
difficulties  aud  dangera, 


Book  TX.]  CHAPTER  XXXIX.  in? 

i;};ote. — The  R^sa  is  the  playing  out  of  the  VeJiubic  saying  of 
Brahma  as  "  Raso  vai  Sah  ;  "  He  is  of  the  nature  of  Rasa,  the  most 
sweet  and  lovely  Divine  Principle  which  unites  the  Rasika  and  the 
Rasik^j.  The  chaste  woman  having  husband  and  sods  who  worships 
the  World  Mother  .  Mula  Prakriti,  whether  in  Yaotra,  or  in  Mantra 
or  in  image,  enjoys  all  pleasures  in  this  world  ;  and,  in  the  end,  goes 
to  the  Deviloka  or  Mani  Dvipa,  O  Child  !  The  worshipper  Sadhaka  (one 
who  is  in  one's  way  to  success)  must  worship  all  the  manifestations  of 
the  Cevi,  day  and  night.  At  ail  times  one  must  worship  the  omni- 
present Durga,  the  Highest  Isvaii.  There  is  no  other  way  to  attain 
blessedn^^ss  than  this.  Thus  saying,  Dharmaraja  wtnt  to  His  own  abode. 
Savitri,  too,  with  her  husband  Sutyavun  went  to  her  home.  Roth 
SAxitri  and  Satyavun,  when  they  reached  home,  narrated  all  their 
stoiies  to  their  friends  and  acquaintances.  In  time,  by  the  blessing 
of  Yama,  Savltri's  father  got  sons  and  father  in-law  recovered  his  eje- 
sight  and  kingdom  and  Savitri  Herself  got  sons.  For  one  lakh  yeara, 
Savitri  enjoyed  pleasures  in  this  holy  land  of  Bharata,  and  ultimately 
went  with  her  husband  to  the  Deviloka  Savitri  is  the  Presiding  Deity 
of  the  Suryamandalam,  the  solar  orb.  The  Sun  -.s  the  central  Para 
Brahma.  The  Gayatii  Mantra,  the  Presiding  Devi,  proves  the  exis- 
teoce  of  the  t^ighest  Brahma  in  the  centre  cf  the  Sun.  Therefore 
She  is  called  Savitri.  Or  Her  name  is  SSvitrl  beeau&e  all  the  Vedas 
h  »ve  come  out  of  Her.  Thus  I  have  narrated  the  excellent  anecdote 
o(  Savitri,  and  the  fruitions  of  the  Karma^  of  the  several  Jivas.  No.v 
what  more  do   you    want    to  hear  ?    Say. 

Here  ends  the  Thirty-eighth  Chapter  in  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
glories  of  the  Devi  and  on  the  nature  of  Bbakti  in  the  Malia 
Puranam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda 
VvSsa. 


CHAPrER    XXXIX. 

1-3  Nilr.ada  said  :  — "  O  Lord  !  I  have  heard  in  the  discourse  on 
Savitri  and  Yama  ah)iit  tho  Pormlass  Devi  Mdla  Prakriti  and  the 
glories  of  Savitri,  all  tru  >  a'ld  Ija  liri^^  t.)  the  endless  good.  Now!  want 
to  hear  the  story  ol"  tjie  Devi  Laksmi.  O  Thou,  the  Chief  of  the 
knowers  of  the  Vedas  !  What  is  the  nature  of  Laksmi  ?  ]5y  whom 
was  She  first  worshipped  ?  and  by  what  Mantra  ?  Kindly  describe  Her 
glories  to  me. 

4-33.  ISarayana  said- — Of  old,  in  the  beginning  of  the  PrSkritik 
Creation,  from  the  left  side  of  Krisna,  the  Supreme  Spirit,  appeared 
in  the  R&samandalam  (the  Figure  Dano)  a  Dv3vi.  She  lookei  exceedingly 
handsome,   of  a  d*rk   blue   colour,   of  spacious    hips,   of  thia    waist,   and 


958  SRI  mad  DE\'1  BHIgAVATAM. 

with  high  breas*-,  looking  t'velve  years  oU,  of  steady  youth,  of  a  colour 
of  white  Champak'*  flovver  and  very  lovely.  The  beauty  of  Her  face 
throws  under  shade  millions  and  millions  of  autumnal  full  moons. 
Before  Her  wide  expanded  eyes,  the  midday  lotus  of  the  autumnal  season 
becomes  highly  ashamed.  By  the  Will  of  God,  this  Devi  suddenly  divided 
Herself  into  two  parts.  The  two  looked  equal  in  every  respect  ;  whether 
in  beauty,  qualities,  age,  lovelines,  colour,  body,  spirit,  dress,  ornaments, 
smile,  glance,  love,  or  humanity,  they  were  perfectly  equal. 

Now  she  who  appeared  from  the  right  side  is  named  Radha  and  she  who 
came   from    the    left   side    is     named      Mah^     Laksmi.      Radh^    wanted 
first  the  two  armeJ  Sri  Krisni,  Who  was  Higher  than  the     highest  ;    then 
Maha  Liksrai  wanted    Him.     Radha  came     out    of     the    right   side  and 
wanted  first    Krisna  ;    so    Krisna,    uoo,   divided   himself  at   once  into  two 
parts.     From    His    right   side    cvrae    out    the   two-armed    and      from     his 
left   side   came    out    the    four-armed      The    t.vo-armel     pers-^n    first  ni.ide 
over  to  Maha      laksmi     the    four-aimed    One  ;    then  the  two-nmied    Per- 
son    Him^elf   took  Radha.     Laksmi   locks  on  the  whole  universe   with    a 
cooling  eye  ;  hence  She  is  named  Laksmi  and  as  She  is  great,    She  is  called 
Maha  Laksmi.  And  f^r  that  reason  the  Lord  of    Radha    is  two-armed  and 
the  Lord  of  Laksmi  is  four-armed.  Radha  is  pure  Apra  kritic  Suddha  Sattva 
(of  the  nature  of  pure  Sattva  Guna,  the  illuminating      attribute)    and    sur- 
rounded by  the  Qopasaud  Gopis.  The  four-armed  Purufa,  on  the  other  hand, 
took  Laksmi  (Padmaj  to  VaikunthA.  The  two-armed  perfon  is  Kriina;  and 
the  four-armed  is  NarSyana.  They  are  equal  in  all  respect.".     ^Mahii  Laksmi 
became    many    by   Her    Yogic  powers,     (t.    e.  She    remained    in    full     in 
Vaikuntha   and     assumed     many    forms    in     parts).       Maha     Laksmi     of 
Vaikunthais    full,    of   pure    Sattva     Guna,   and  endowed  with     all     sorts 
of  wealth   an  1    prosperity.     She    is    the    crest  of    woman-kind    as    far   as 
loving    one's  husbinds    is  concerned.     She   is    the  Svarga   Laksmi    in  the 
Heavens  ;    the    Nai^a    Laksmi    of    the     serpents,      the     Nagas,     in     the 
nether    regions  ;    the      Raja     Laksmi    of    the     kings    and    the  Household 
Laksmi    of   the    householderi      Sho     resides     in      the  houses     of     house- 
holders   as    prosperity   and  the    most    auspicious    of   all    good  things.  She 
is    t'le    progenetrix,    She    is   the  Surabhi  of  cows     and  She  is  the  Daksina 
(the    sacrificial  fee)    in    sacrifices.      She     is     the     tlaughter     of     the    milk 
ocean    and  she  is    Padmini,  the    beauty  of  the     spheres  of  the    Moon    and 
the    Sun.       She    is    the       lustre    and    beau?y    of     the     ornaments,    gems, 
fruits,    water,    kings,    queens,  heavenly    wo.nen,  of   all    the  houses,  grains, 
clothing:*,    cleansed    places,    images,    auspicious    jars,    pearls,  jewels,    crest 
of  jawels,     garlands,     diimonds,     milk,      sandal,    beautiful    twigs,    fresh 
rain   cloud,  or    of  all  other  colours.     She    was    first      worhipped   in   Vai- 
kuntha  by  Nar^yana.    Next  She    was    worshippad  by     Brahra^  and  then 


Book  li.J  CHAPTER  XXXX.  959 

by  Sankaja  wiih  devotion.     Sho  was  worshipped  by  Visnii  in  the  Kshirode 
Samuilrtj.     Trien    she    was     worshipped      by     Svlyambhuva    Maim,    then      ( 
by    Indras    amongst    raeu,      then     by    Munis,     Hisis,    g-ooJ     householders,  'j/ 

by  the  Gaiidharbis,   in  the  Gandharbaloka  ;  by  the  !Nagas  in  the  Nagaloka.  "^ c'^" 

She  was  worshipped  with  davotion  by  Brahma  for  one  fortnight  commenc  *<= 

in«^  from  the  briijfhj  eighth  day  in  the  month  of  Bhadra  and  end- 
ing on  the  eighth  day  of  the  dark  fortnight  in  the  three-worlds. 
She  was  worshipped  by  Visnu,  with  devotion  in  the  three  worlds 
en  the  meritorious  Tuesday  in  the  months  of  Pausa,  Chaitra,  and 
}3hadra.  Manu,  also,  worshipped  Her  on  the  Pausa  Sankranti  (the 
last  day  of  the  month  of  Pausi  when  the  Sun  enters  another  sign) 
and  on  the  auspicious  Tuesday  in  the  month  of  Magha.  Thus  the 
worship  of  Maha  Laksmi  is  made  prevalent  in  the  three  worlds. 
Shd  was  worshipped  by  ludra,  the  Lord  of  the  Devas  and  by 
Maogala  (Mars)  on  Tjesday.  She  was  then  wcrshippei  by  Kedara,  Nila, 
Subala,  Dhruva,  IJttSnapada,  Sakri,  Bali,  Kas'yapa,  Daksa,  Kardatnai 
Surya,  Priyavrata,  Chandra,  Vayu,  Kuvera,  Varuna,  Yama,  HutSsana 
and  others.  Thus  Her  worship  extended  by  and  by  tj  all  the  places.  4^ 
She  is   the    Presiding  Deity    of  all  wealth  ;   so    She    is  the  wealth  of  all.  '  r^ 

Here   ends    the  Thirty-ninth    Chapter    of  the    Ninth    Book     on     the  ^ 

itory  of  Maha  Laksmi  in  the  MahA  Pur^nam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam 
of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

12.  Narada  said: — "0  Lord  !  How  did  the  eternal  Devi  Maha  Laksmi, 
the  dweller  in  Vaikuntha,  the  beloved  of  Nar^yaiia,  the  Presiding  Deity 
of  Vaikuniha,  come  down  to  the  earth  and  how  She,  became  the  daughter 
of  the  ocean  ?  By  whom  was  She  fir&t  praised  ?  Kindly  describe  all 
these  in  details    to  me  and  oblige. 

3-10,  Narayana  said; — O  NSrada  1  In  ancieit  days  when  on 
DurvSsas  curse,  Indra  was  dispossesed  of  his  kingdom,  all  the  Devas 
came  do\vn  to  earth.  Laksmi,  too,  getting  angry,  quitted  the  Hea- 
vens, out  of  pain  and  sorrow  and  went  to  Vaikuntha  and  took  the  shelter 
of  Narayana.  The  Ddvas,  then,  went  to  BrahmTi  with  their  hearts 
full  of  sorrow  and,  taking  Him  from  there,  they  all  went  to  Narayana  in 
Vaikuntha.  Going  there  they  all  took  refuge  of  the  Lord  of  Vai- 
kuntha. They  were  very  much  distressed  and  their  throats,  palates 
and  lips  were  quite  dry.  At  that  time  Laksmi,  the  wealth  and  pros- 
perity cf  all,  came  down  on  earth  by  the  command  of  Narayana  and 
became  born  in  part  as  the  daughter  of  the  ocean.  The  Devas,  then, 
with  the    Daityas    churned    the    Ksiroda  Ocean    andj    out   ofthit,    Maha 


960  SrI  mad  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

Lakfmi  appeared.  Visnii  looked  on  Her.  Her  joy  knew  no  bounds. 
She  smiling,  granted  boons  to  the  Devas  and  then  otfered  a  garland  of 
flowers  on  the  neck  of  Nariyaiii  (as  a  symbol  of  marriage  celebrated') 
O  Nilrada !  the  Devas,  on  the  other  hand,  got  back  their  kingdoms 
from  the  Asiua>?.  They  then  worshipped  and  chanted  hyraus  to  ^laha 
Laksmi  and  since  then  they  became  free  from  further  dangern  and 
troubles. 

11  12.  Narada  said: — "O  Bhagavan  1  Darv^si  was  the  best  of  the 
Munis;  he  was  attached  to  Brahma  and  had  spiritual  knowledge.  Why  did  ho 
curse  Indra  ?  What  offence  had  he  committed  ?  How  did  the  Deva^ 
and  Daitj'as  churn  the  ocean  ?  How,  and  by  what  hymns  Laksmi  became 
pleaged  and  appeared  beford  Indra?  Whit  passed  on  between  them. 
8ay  all  this,  O  Lord. 

13-25.  Nariyana  said  :  — In  ancient  days,  Indra  the  Lord  of  the  three 
worlds,  intoxicated  with  wine  and  becoming  lustful  and  shameless,  began  to 
enjoy  RambhA  in  a  lonely  grove.  After  having  enjoyed  her,  he 
became  attracted  to  her  ;  his  mind  being  wholly  drawn  to  her,  he  remained 
there  in  that  forest,  his  mind  becoming  very  passionate.  Indra 
then  saw  the  Muni  Durvasll  on  his  way  from  Vaikuntha  to  Kails'a 
burning  with  the  fire  of  Brahma.  From  the  body  of  the  Risi,  emit- 
ted, as  it  were,  the  rays  of  the  thousand  mid-day  Suns.  On  his  bead 
was  the  golden  matted  hair.  On  his  breast  there  was  the  hoary 
holy  thread  ;  he  wore  torn  clothes  ;  on  his  hands  there  was  the  Danda 
and  Kamandalu  ;  on  his  forehead  there  was  the  bright  Tilaka  in  the 
form  of  the   Ciescent    Moon. 

(Tilaka—  a  sectarian  mark  on  the  forehead  tuade  with  coloured 
earth  or  sandalpaste.)  One  hundred  thousand  disciple?,  thoroughly- 
versed  in  the  Vedas  anl  the  Vedangas,  were  attending  him.  The 
intoxicated  Puraudara,  seeing  him,  bowed  down  to  him  and  he  began  to 
chant  with  devotion  hymns  to  his  disciples  also.  They  were  very  glad. 
The  Ri§i  with  his  disciples  then  blessed  Iridra  and  gave  him  oue 
P3rijt\ta  Hower. 

When  the  Muni  was  returning  from  the  region  of  Vaikuntha,  Visnu, 
gave  him  that  beautiful  Parijata  flower.  Old  age,  death,  disease,  sorrows, 
etc.,  all  are  removed  by  the  influence  of  the  flower  ;  and  the  final 
liberation  is  also  attaiud.  The  Devendra  was  intoxicated  with  his 
wealth  ;  so  taking  the  llowor  given  by  the  llisi,  he  throw  h  on  the 
head  oi  ihc  elephiut  Airavata.  No  sooner  tho  elephant  touched  the 
flower,  than  he  became  suddenly  like  Vi?nu,  as  it  were,  in  beauty, 
form,   qualities,  fire  and   age.     The   elephant,    then,      forsook     Indra   and 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XL.  SM 

entered  into  a  dense  forest.  The  Lord  of  the  Devas  could,  in  uo 
way,  get  hira  under  hig  control.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Muni 
Durv^s^  s!?eing  that  Mahendra  had  thus  dishonoured  the  flower,  became 
intl  imed  with  rage  and  cursed  him  saying  "  0  Indra  !  You  are  so 
mad  with  waalbh  that  yoi  have  dishonoured  me.  The  flower  that  I 
gave  you  so  lovingly,  you  have  thrown  that,  out  of  vanity,  on  the 
elephant  s    head  ! 

26-45.  No  sooner  one  gets  the  fooJ,  water,  fruits  that  had  been  offered 
tj  Visnu,  one  should  eat  that  at  onca.  Otherwise  one  incurs  the  sin  of  Brah- 
mahattyS.  If  anybody  forsakes  the  things  offered  to  Visnu,  that  he 
has  got  perchanee,  he  becomes  destitute  of  wealth,  prosperity,  in- 
telligence, and  his  kingdom.  And  if  he  eats  the  food  already  offered 
to  Vignu  with  devotion,  he  then  elevates  his  hundre'd  families  passed 
before  him  and  he  himself  becomes  liberated  while  living.  If  any- 
body daily  eats  Visau's  Naivedyam  (food  offered  to  Vi§nu)  and  bows 
down  before  Him  or  worships  Hari  with  devotion  and  chants  hymns 
to  Him,  he  beco  nes  like  Visnu  in  energy  and  wealth.  By  mere 
touch  with  the  air  round  about  his  body,  the  places  of  pilgrimage 
become  all  purified.  O  You  Stupid  !  The  earth  becomes  purified  by  the 
contact  of  the  dust  of  the  feet  of  such  a  one  devoted  to  Visnu.  If 
anybody  eats  the  food  unoffered  to  Hari  and  fle-^h  that  is  not 
offered  to  any  Deity  ;  if  he  eats  the  food  of  any  unchaste  woman, 
any  woman  without  husband  and  sons,  the  food  offered  at  any  Sudra's 
SrAdh  (funeral)  ceremony,  the  food  offered  by  a  Brahmana,  who  is 
a  priest  to  the  Sudras  in  honour  of  a  Siva  Lingam,  the  food  of  a 
Brahman  priest  who  subsists  on  the  presents  of  a  temple,  the  food 
of  one  who  sells  his  daughter,  the  food  of  one  who  subsists  on  dealings 
with  womb  concern?,  th«  leavings  of  others,  the  stale  food  lefc  after 
all  others  had  eaten,  the  food  of  the  husband  of  an  unmarried  girl 
(t.velve  years  old  in  whom  menstruation  has  commenced),  the  driver 
of  oxen,  the  food  of  one  uninitiated  in  one's  Istamantram,  of  one  who 
burns  a  corpse,  of  a  Brahmin  who  goes  to  one  not  fit  for  going, 
the  food  of  a  rebel  against  friends,  of  one  who  is  faithless,  treacherous 
who  gives  false  evidence,  the  foad  of  a  Brahmin  who  accepts  offerings 
in  a  sacred  place  of  pilgrimage,  all  his  sins  (incurred  in  the  ways 
above-mentioned)  will  be  removed  if  he  eats  the  prasadam  of  Visnu, 
i.e.  the  food  offered  to  Visgu.  liivei  if  a  Chandila  be  attached  to 
the  service  of  Visvi,  he  sanctifies  h'n  millions  of  persons  b)fn  in 
his  family  before  him.  And  the  man  who  is  devoid  of  the  devotion 
to  Hari  is  not  able  even  to  save  himself.  If  anybody  takes  un- 
•  knowingly  the    remains    of  an    offering   (such   as  flowers)  made  to  Visnu? 

121 


962  SRt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgaVATAM. 

he  will  Coftainly  ba  freed  from  all  the  sins  incurred  in  his  seven  births.  And 
if  he    does   this  knowingly   and    with   intense   devotion,  he  will  certainly 
be   freed    of  all    sorts    of   sins     incurred      in      his      Koti     births.     So,  O 
Indra  !   1   am  a  devotee  of  ori  Hiri.     And  when  you    have    cast  away  the 
Parijata  flower  offered      by  me  on   the  elephant's  head,   then     I   say  unto 
you  that  the  Maha  Laksi   will  leave  you  and  She  will  go  back  to  NarSyana. 
I    am    highly    devoted    to     Narayana  ;     so     1     do      not     fear     anybody, 
I   fear   neither   the    Creator,   nor    Kala,    the  Destroyer,  ncr    old   age,  nor 
death  ;    what    to    speak    of  other    petty     persons  !     I    do    not     fear    your 
father    Prajapati    Kas'yapa    nor   do    1  fear   your  family  priest  Brihasp.iti. 
Now   he,   on    whose    head   there    lies    the     tiower     Parijelta     offered    by 
me,    verily  he   should    be    worshipped    by     all     mevns.     Hearing     these 
word    of   Durvas^,    Indra     became     bewildered     with     f^^ar,     and     being 
greatly   distressed    and    holding    the    feet   of     Muni,     cried    out    loudly. 
He   said  : — "  The   curse    is    now    well    inflictsd  on   m3  ;  and  it  has  ciused 
my    delusion    vanish.     Now    I   do    not    want    back    my      ll^j*     Lak§  ni 
from   you  ;    instruct    me   on    knowlege.     This    we  vlth    is    the     source    of 
all    coils  ;    it   is    the   cause   of  the     veil    to    all    kaowledge,    it  hides  the 
final  liberation  and  it  is  a  great  obstacle  on    the    way     to    get  the  highest 
devotion. 

47-G7.  The  Muni  said  : — "  This  birth,  death,  old  a:^e,  disease,  and  afflic- 
tions, all  come  from  wealth  ani  the  manipulation  of  great  po  .ver.  Being  blind 
by  the  darkness  of  wealth,    he   does  not   see    the     road     to     Mukti.     The 
stupid    man     that     is    intoxicated    with    wealth   is    1  ke    the     one    thit  u 
intoxicated    with    wine.     Surrounded   by  many  friends,  he  is  surrounded  by 
the  unbreakable  bondage.  The  man  that  is  intoxicated    with    wealth,    blind 
with  property  and  overwhelmed   with  these  things  has  no  thought    for  the 
real    knowledg'».     He   who    is    llajasik,    is  very  muah  addicted  to  passion^ 
and   desires;    he    never   sees   the    path    to    Sittvaguni.     The    man    thit 
is    blind    with     sena^-objects    is     of      two     kinds,     tirstly,    Rajasik     and 
secondly   T&masik.     He    who    has     no     knowledge     of     the    S^stras     fs 
Tamasik    and   he    who    h  vs    the    knowledge     of    the    SSstras    is     KAjasik. 
O  Child    of  the    Devas  !    Two    paths    are     mentionel    in     the     Sastras  ; 
one    is   Pravritti,  going     towards  the  sense      objects     nnd    the      other     is 
Nivrif-.i,    »oing    away    from    them.     The     J'vas    first    fo!l')w      the     path 
of  Pravritti,    the    pith    thit    is    piinful,    ghdly    and    of  thnir  own  accord 
like    a    mad    man.     As    bees,    blind   with     the    desire    of    getting    honey, 
go    to   the    lobas    bud    and    get     themselves     entangled     there,      so     the 
Jivas,   the    embodied    souls,   desirous    first    of   getting     enjoyments    come 
to    this    very    painful    circle    of  births    and    deaths,  this  wordly  life,  which 
in    the    end    is    realised    as    vapid    and    the    only    cause    of  uld  a^e,  death, 
ani   sorrow    and   get   themselves     enchained  there. 


Book  IX  J  CHAPTER  XL.  96-^ 

For  many  births  he  travels  gladly  in  various  wjmbs,  ordaitiej   by    his    own 
Karmas,  till  at  last  by  the  favour  of  gods,  he  comes  in  contact  with  the  saints. 
Thus  one  out  of  a   thousand  or  out  of  an    hundred    finds   means    to     crosa 
this  terrible  ocean  of  world.     When    the   saintly   persons    kindle    the  lamp 
of  knowledge  and  ?hew  the  way  to  Mukti,  then    the  Jiva  makes  an  attempt 
to  sever  this  bondage  to  the  world.     After    many  birchs,    many    aasfceritiea 
and  many  fastings,  he  then  finds  safely  the  way  to  Mukti,    leading    to    the 
highest  happiness.     O  Indra  !     What  you  asked  me,  I  thus  heard  from  my 
Guru.  O  Narada  !  Hairing  the  words. of  the  Muni  DiirvAs^  Indra  became  dis 
passionate  towards  the  Sam-^ra.      Day  by  day  his  feeling  of  dispa^sion    in- 
creased. One  day,  when  he  returned    to  his  own   home  from  the    hermitage 
of  the  Muni,  he  saw  the  Heavens  overspread  by      the  Daityas    and    it  had  • 
become  terrible.     At  some  places  outrage  an  1  oppression   knew  no  bounds; 
pomo   places    were   devoid      of  friends  ;   at     some    place,    some      persons? 
had  bst    their    fathers,    mothers,      wives,     relations ;    so    no      rest   and 
repose   could  be    found.     Thus,    seeing    the       Heavens,    in    the  hands    of 
the  enemies,  Ind»*a    went      out    in     quest     of    Brihaspati,      the      family 
preceptor     of   the      Devas.       Seeking      to      and      fro    Indra     ultimately 
went   to   the    banks    of   the    Mandakinl    and    saw    that   the    Ouru    Deva 
had  bathei    in    the    waters   of  the    Mandaktni    and    sitting    with  his  face 
tur.ied    towards    the    E  ist    towards    the     Sun,      was     meditating  on  Para 
Hrahma,  Who  has  His  faces  turned  everywhere.     Tears  were   flawing   from 
his  eyes  and    the    hairs    of  the   body    stood  erect    with  delight.     He    was 
elderly    in    knowledge  ;    the     spritual    Teacher   of    all,     religous,     served 
by  all  great  men;    he    was    held   as    most  dear    to   all    the    frends.    Those 
who   are   Jnaijins    regard    him   as    their    Gurus.     He    was    th"^   eldest   of 
all  his    brothers  ;    he    was  considered  as  very  unpopular   to  the   enemies  of 
the  Devas.     Seeing  the    family  priest    Brihaspati      merged    in   that    state 
of      meditation,        Indra        waited     there.        When    after   one     Prahara 
(three  hours),    the    Guru    Deva  got    up,    Indra    bowed    down    to    his    feet 
and  began  to  weep  and  cry  out  repeatedly.     Then    he    informed    his   Guru 
about  his  curse  from    a  Brahmin,    his     acquiring   the     true    knowledge  as 
so  very  rare,  and  the  wretched  state  of  Araaravati,  wrought  by  the  enemies. 

68-92.  O  Best  of  Brahmanas  !  Hearing  thus  the  words  of  the  disciple, 
the  intelligent  speaker  Brihaspati  spoke  with  his  eyes  reddened  out 
of  anger.  "O  Lord  of  the  Devi«»!  I  have  heard  everything  that  you 
said ;  do  not  cry;  have  patience  ;  hear  attentively  what  I  say.  The 
wis^  politicians  of  good  behaviour,  with  moral  precepts,  never  lose 
their  heads  and  get  themselves  distressed  in  times  of  danger. 
Nothing  is  everlasting;  whether  property    or   adversity  ;  all  are   transient  ; 


964  SRt  MAD  DEVt  BH^GAVATAM. 

they  only  give  troubles.  All  are   under  one's   own   Karma  •    one    Is    master 
of  one's  own  Karma.     What  had  been  done  in  previous  births,    so   one  will 
have  to  reap  the  fruits  afterwards.  (Therefore    property     or    adversity,   all 
are  dae  to    one's    own    Kanna.)     Thi^s    happens    to    all    persons    eternally, 
births  after  births.  Pain  and  happiness  are  like  the  rini;  of  a  rolling  wheel.  So 
what  pain  is  there  ?     It  is   already    stated   that    one's    own    Karma    must 
be     eiijoyed    in    this    Holy    Bharata.     The    man     enjoys    the    effects    of 
hi-5    own   Karmas,   auspicious  or    inauspicious.      Never    the    Karma    gets 
exhausted    in    one   huudred    Koti    Kalpas,      without     their     effects    beiJig 
enjoyed.     The  Karma,  whether  auspicious  or  inauspicious  must  be  enjoyed,  m 
Thus  it  is  stated  in  the   Vedas    and  as  well  by   5ri    Krisna,    the    Supreme  H 
(Spirit.     Bhagavan  5ri  Krisna  addressed    Brahma,  the    lotus-born,    in   tlic  ^M 
Sama  Veda  Saklia  that   all   persons    acquire     their  births,     whether,     in 
Bharata  or  in  any  other   country,  according    to   the    Karma   that   he  had 
done.     The  cour-jC    of  a    Brahraana   comes  though  this  Karma  ;   and   the 
blessings  of  a    Brfihtnana    come   again    by  this    Karmi.    l^y     Karma    one 
ge.s  gr^?at  wealth  and  prosperity    and    by  Karma  again   one   gets    poverty. 
You    may    take  one    hundred     Koti     births;    the     fruit    of  Karma    must 
follow  you.     0  Indra  !    The  fruit  of  Karma  follows  one    like  one's    shadow. 
Without  enjoyment,  that  can  never   die.     The    etfects   of     Karma    become 
increased    or  dicreased  accordin.^  to  time,  placa,  and  tne  person     concerned. 
As  you  will  give  away  anything  to  person^,  of  different  natires,  in  different 
times  and  in  different  places,  your  merit  acquired  will  also  vary  accordingly. 
Gifts    made     on    certain     special    days    bring    in    Koti     times     the    fruiis 
(merits,  punyana)  or  infinite  times  or  even  more   than  that.     Again     gifts, 
similar  in  nature,  made  in  similar  paces  yield  punyam  the  same,  in  character 
also.     Gifts  made  in  different  countries  yield  punyams,  Koti  times,  infinite 
times,   or   even    more    than    that.     But   similar    things    given  to   similar 
persons  yield  similar  punyams.     As  the  grains  vary  in  their  natures   as  the 
fields  differ,   so    gifts    made  to  different  persons  yield   different   grades    ot 
punyas    infinitely     superior  or  infinitely  inferior  as  the  case    may  be. 

Giving  things  to  a  Brahmana  on  any  ordinary  days  yields  simple  punya 
only.     But  if  the  gift  be  made  to  a    iirahman    on  an  Amavasya    day   (new 
moon  day)  or  on  a  Sankranti  day    (the   day  when  the  Sun  enters  another's 
sign)    then  hundred    times    more  punyam  is     acquired.      Again     charities 
made  on  the  ChaturmSsya  period  (the    vow  that  lasts    for   four    months  in 
the  rainy  season)  or  on  the  full  maon  day,  yield  infinite  punyams.  So  chari- 
ties made  on  the  occasion  of  the  lunar  eclipses   yield  Koti  times    the   result 
and  if  made  on  the  occasion  of  the  solar  eclipse  yield  ten  times  more  punyams. 
Charities    made  on   Aksayaya  Tritiy^    or   the    Navami   day  yield  infinite 
and  endless  results.     So  charities  on  other  holy  days  yield  religious    merits 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLI.  965 

hi<^ber  than  those  made  on  ordinary  days.  As  charities  made  on  holy  davs 
yields  religious  merits,  so  bathing,  reciting  mantrams,  and  other  holy  acts 
yield  ineritorioas  results.  As  superior  results  are  obtained  by  pious  acts  ;  so 
inferior  results  are  obtained  by  impious  acts.  As  an  earthen  potter  makes 
pots,  jars,  etc.,  out  of  the  earth  with  the  help  of  rod,  wheel,  eartheil  dups  or 
plates  and  motion,  so  the  Creator  awards  r^spectiv^  fruits  to  different 
persons,  by  the  help  of  this  thread  (continuity)  of  Karma.  Therefore  if 
V6u  want  to  have  cassation  of  this  fruition  of  Karma,  then  worship, 
NSrayana,  by  whose  command  all  these  things  of  Nature  are  created.  He 
is  the  Creator  of  even  Brahma,  the  Creator,  the  Preserver  of  Visuu,  the 
Preserver,  the  Destroyer  of  ^iva,  the  Destroyer  and  the  K^la  (the  great  Time) 
of  Kala  (the  Time).  Sankara  has  said  : — He  who  remembers  Madhusiidana 
(a  name  of  Visnu)  in  great  troubles,  his  dangers  cease  and  happiness  begins. 

O  Narada  !  The    wise  Brihaspati  thus  advised    Indra  and   then    embraced 
him    and    gave  him  his      hearty  blessings  and  good  wishes. 

Here  ends  the  Fortieth  Chapter     of  the     Ninth    Book     on     the  birth 
of  Laksmi  in  the  discourse  of  Nurala  and  Narayana  in  the  Maha   Pur^nam 

Sri    Mad   Devi    Bhagavatam  of  13,000  verses  by  Mahar§i  Veda  Vyasa. 

CHAPTER  XLI. 

1-2.  Nardyiia  stid  : — '*  O  Twice  born  !  India  the.i  remembered 
llari  and  took  Brihaspati,  tho  Guru  of  the  Devas,  to  the  assembly  of 
Brahma,  accompanied  by  the  other  Devas.  They  soon  reached  the  region 
of  Brahm4  and  no  sooner  they  saw  Him,  than  Indra  and  the  other  Devas 
and  Bihaspati  all  bowed  do>vn  to  Him. 

3-25.  Brihaspati,  the  Aeharya  of  the  Devas,  then  communicjted  all 
to  Brahma.  Hearing  this,  He  smiled  and  spoke,  addressing  Indra  :— "  O 
Indra  !  You  have  been  born  in  My  race  ;  nay,  you  are  My  grandson  ; 
the  Arya  Brihaspati  is  your  Guru  ;  you  yourself  are  the  ruler  of  the 
Devas  and  you  are  very  wise  and  sagacious  ;  the  mother  of  your  father 
is  the  powerful  Daksa.  a  great  Visnu  Bhakta.  How  is  it,  then  that  when 
the  three  sides  of  tho  family  are  pure,  one  would  turn  out  so  haughty  and 
arrogant  !  Whose  mother  is  so  much  devoted  to  her  husband,  whose 
father,  mother's  father  and  mUher's,  brother  are  self-controlled  and  of  pure 
Sattva  Guna,  he  is  not  expected  to  be  so  very  haughty  !  Every  man 
may  be  guilty  to  Hari  for  the  three  faults  :— For  some  fault  due  to  that  of 
his  father,  or  of  his  mother's  father,  or  of  Guru,  the  Spiritual  Teacher.  Bha^^a- 
van  Narayana,  resides  in  this  great  holy  temple  of  our  this  physical  bo'dy 
controlling  the  hearts  of  all.  At  whatever  moment,  ^ri  Narayanu 
quits  thig  temple-body,  at  that  momant  this  body  becomes  dead.  I 
myself  am    the   mind  ;     ^ankua   is    the    Knowledge,    Vi?nu    is    the  yitai 


&Rt  MAT)    DEVt  BHAgaVaTAM. 

breaths,  Bhagvati  Dur<,'d  Is  the  intelli*,'ence  (BuJdhi),  sleep,  etc.,  the- 
powers  of  Prakrit!;  when  these  are  being  reflected  on  by  the  Atnnan, 
Jira  is  foniieJ  with  a  bo.ly  forenjoyraent  called  Bhoga  Sarirabhrit. 
When  a  king  deparfc^^  his  attendants  also  follow  him  ;  so  when  this 
Atmkn.  departs  from  this  tenlple  of  bdJy^  his  attenlant^  mind,  buddhi, 
e^.d.,  instantly  depart  from  this  boJy  and  follo\y  the  Atnian.  O 
Indra  I  \Ve  all,  are  Verily,  the  parts  of  Sri  Krisna.  I  myself,  Siva*, 
Ananta  Deval,  Viftnn^  Dharma,  Mah^  V'iriit,  yon  all  are  His  parts  and 
entirely  devoted  to  Him.  And  ydii  have  sho.vn  CDntempt  for  His 
flower^.  Bhagav^u  Saiikira,  the  Lord  of  the  fih(it<\Sj  worshipped  the  lotus- 
feet  of  v'^ri  Krisna  with  that  Ibwer,  The  Risi  Dnrv^sa  gave  yon 
tha";  flower.  But  you  showed  disrespect  to  it.  The  flower,  Parijati, 
after  being  offered  at  the  lotus-feet  of  Krisna,  should  be  placed  on 
tha  head  of  an  Immortal  ;  His  worship  is  to  be  done  first  ;  and  it  is  the 
foremoft  amongst  the  Des'as.  So  you  are  now  being  afflicted  by  the 
inevitable  course  of  Fate  ;  Fate  is  the  most  i)o\verfiil  of  all.  Who  eau 
save  that  unlucky  man  against  whom  Fate  has  turned  ?  Seeing  that 
you  have  rejected  the  flower  offered  to  bri  Krisiia,  Sri  Laksmi  Devi 
has  left  you  out  of  anger.  Now  come  with  Me  and  with  voiir 
family  priest  Brihaspili  to  Vaikuntha  and  worship  the  Lord  of 
Laksmi  ;  then  by  His  grace  you  may  get  back  ycur  Heavens.  Thu? 
saying,  Brahma  with  Indra  and  all  the  other  Devas,  went  to  the 
Eternal  Purusa,  Rhagavan  N;\iilyMna  and  saw  that  He  w  .s  full  of 
Fire  and  Energy  like  one  hundred  k)ti  summer  mid-day  Suns,  yet 
perfectly  cool  and  calm.  He  has  no  beginning,  and  no  end,  nor  any 
middle.  Hs  is  Infinite.  The  four-armed  Parisadas,  Sarasvati,  the 
four  Vedas,  an<l  the  Ganges,  all  were  surrounding  Him.  Seeing 
Him,  Brahma  and  the  other  Devas  bowed  down  with  devotion  and 
began  to  chant  hymns  to  Him  with  tears  in  their  eyes.  Brahm3, 
then,  informed  Him  of  everything  when  all  the  Devas,  dis^poisessed  of 
their  places,  began  to  weep  before  Him.  Narayaiia  saw  that  the 
Devas  were  very  afraid  and  much  distressed.  They  had  no  jewel 
ornaments  as  before,  no  vehicles  (VAhana?),  nor  the  Daivic  splendour 
as  before,  not  that  brillanee  ;  always  fearful.  Then  Ndrayana,  the 
Destroyer  of  fear,  seidng  the  Devas  in  that  state,  addressed  Brahmft 
and  the  other  Devas  :— "  O  Brahman  !  0  Devas  !  Discard  all  fears.  What 
feir  can  overcome  yoa  ?  I  am  here.  I  will  give  you  again  the  immoveable 
prosperous    Btijya  Laks.-ni  [tha  Laksmi  of  the    kings). 

2(5-47.  But  for  the  present,  T  give  you  some  advice  proper  for 
this  moment.  Listen.  There  are  endless  universes  where  exist  innu- 
merable  persona.     All    of  thnn    are    under    Me,     So    kuo.v     verily,    that 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLI.  967 

1  am  under  them  al?o.  My  devotees  regard  Me  ag  the  Highest 
They  kaow  no  other  than  Me  ;  they  are  fearless  ;  so  I  do  not  remain 
in  th:il;  ho;iso  where  My  devotees  ara  dissatiisded.  I  instantly  quit 
that  house  with  Laksrai.  Durbasa  llisi  i.-s  born  in  part  of  Sankara. 
He  is  highly  devoted  to  Me.  He  is  a  pakk'i  Vaisnava.  He  cursed  you 
and,  as  a  matter    of   fact,  I  and  L-iksmi  instantly  left  your    house. 

Laksnii  does  not  reside  in  that  house  where  conehdiells  are  not 
blown,  where  there  are  no  Tulasi  trees,  where  there  is  no  worship 
of  oiva  and  Siva,  where  the  iirahminas  are  not  fed.  O  Brahman  ! 
O  Devas  !  Where  I  and  My  Bhaktis  are  blamed,  Mah&  Laksmi 
becomes  greatly  displeased.  She  instantly  goes  away  out  of  that  house. 
Laksmi  does  not  stay  even  for  a  moment  in  that  house  where  the 
stupid  person,  without  any  d..votiju  for  me,  takes  his  food  on  the 
HarivSsara  Ekadas'i  day  (the  eleventh  day  of  the  moon's  wane  or 
increase)  or  on  My  anniversay  birthday.  If  anybody  sells  My  name 
or  his  own  daughter,  where  the  guests  are  not  served,  Ltiksmi  quits 
that    house    instantly    and    goes    away. 

i^Note  : — That    Guru  is    the  Real  Guru,    who,   being    capable,    irnparts 
the    name    of   God    to    worthy  persons     without   taking    any    fee  at    all.') 
If  the    son    of   an     unchaste    woman    be    a    Brahmana,  he    and    the  hus- 
band    of  an    unchaste    wnjman   are    great   sinners.     If    anybody   goes   to 
such    a    person's  house    or    eats    the    food  of    a  Sudra    during   a  Sraddha        \. 
ceremony,     Laksmi     becomes      very      angry     and     vacates     that    house.       *!, 
Being  a  Brc\hmin,  if  one  burns  a    Sudra's  corpse,  one  becomes  very  wretch-        '^  j 
ed   and    the    vilest     of     the      Brahmins.        Laksmi    never     stays   for     a     ^%» 
moment    more    in    that  house.       Being     a     Brahmin,    if  he  be   a   Sudra's 
cook  and  drives    oxen,    Laksmi     fears  to    drink    water     there    and    quits 
his    hou:e.     Being   a    Brahmi  n,    if   his    heart  be    unholy,  if  he   be  cruel, 
envies    others    and    blames    per  sons,    if   he    officiates  as    a  priest    for    the 
Sudra,     Laksmi    Devi    never     stays   in     h  is    boubc.     The    World-Mother 
never  stays    even    for  a  momsnt  in    his     house     who   eats    at    the   house 
of  one    who    marries    an     unmarried     girl     twelve     years     old     in    whom 
menstruation   has    commenced.      He    who    cuts     grass    by     his     nails,     or 
writes    on   the    ground    with    his  nails,    or    from   whose  house  a  Brahmana 
finest    goes    back    disappointed,   Laksmi     ne  ver    stays     in    his    house.     1' 
any    Brahmana    eats    food    at    the  ea  rly  sunrise,    sleeps    durirg     the   day 
or    engages    in    a  sexual    intercourse      during      the      day,     Laksmi    never 
stays  in  his  house.     Laksmi  slips  away  from  that  Brahmana  who    is  devoid 
of   Achara     (rules    of     conduct),    who    acce[)ts     gifts      from    Sudras,    from 
him    who  remains    uniuitiated    in    his  Mautram.     The  ignorant    man    who 
sleeps    naked    and    with    his    feat   wet,    who    laughs    always,    and    alwavj* 


968  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

talks  at  raaiJoni  on  disconnected  sabiects  like  a  mad  man,  is.  forsaken 
a^  on;  b/  Li'jfai.  LikJiii  b^3J.n3i  an^i-/  aai  g03s  away  from 
the  luii-o  of  that  man  wba  applied  oil  all  over  his  body  first  and  then 
touj^a^  tn  bjJies  of  others  and  always  tn  ikas  some  sounding  noise  on 
several  parts  of  his  body.  If  any  Br^hmana  forsakes  observing  vows, 
fastings,  tl.  e  Sandhy^  ceremony,  purity  and  devotion  to  Visnu,  Kamal^ 
(Likami)  does  not  remain  in  his  house  any  longer.  If  anybody 
blames  always  the  Br^hmanas  and  shews  his  hatred  always  towards 
the  Brdhmanas,  if  he  does  injury  to  th«  animals,  and  if  ha  does  not 
indulge  in  his  heart  anything  of  pity,  kindness,  Laksmf,  the  Mother 
of  the  Worlds,  quits  him.  O  Lotus-bora!  But  where  Hari  is  worship- 
ped and  Plari's  Name  is  chanted,  Laksmi,  the  Mother  of  all  auspicious - 
ness,  remains  there.  Ljk§mi  remains  where  the  glories  of  Sri  Krigna  and 
His  Bhaktas  are  sung, 

4fS-59.  Laksmi  always  remains  there  with  the  greatest  gladness  where 
eouch-shells  are  blown,  where  there  are  conchsells,the  Salagrama  stone,  the 
Tulasi  leaves  and  the   service  and  meditation  of    Laksmi  are  daily  done. 

Where  the  phallic  emblem  of  Siva  is  worshipped,  and  His  glories 
sung,  where  Sri  Durgu  is  worshipped  and  Her  glories  are  sung,  Laksmi, 
the  Dweller  in  the  Ljtus,  remains  there.  Where  the  Br^hmanas 
are  honoured  and  they  are  gladly  feasted,  where  all  the  Devas  are 
worshiped  ;  the  chaste  Lakjmi,  the  Lotus-faced,  remains  there. 
Thus  saying  to  the  Devas,  the  Lord  of  Laksmi  said':— O  Devi  I 
Go  without  any  any  delay  to  the  Ksiroda  Ocean  and  incarnate  there 
in  part.  He  then  addressed  Brahma  and  said  :— "0  Lotus-born  I  You 
also  better  go  there  and  churn  the  Ksiroda  Ocean  ;  when  Lak§mi 
will  arise,  give  tier  to  the  Devas."  O  Devarsi  !  Thus  saying,  the  Lord 
Kamala  went  to  His  inner  compartment.  On  the  other  hand  the 
Devas,  after  a  long  time,  reached  the  shores  of  the  Ksiroda  Ocean. 
The  Devas  and  the  Daityas  then  made  the  Golden  Mountain  (the 
Sumern)  the  churning  rod,  the  Deva  Karma  (the  tortoise),  the  churning 
pot  and  Ananta  Djva  (the  thousand  headed  serpent)  the  churning  cord 
and  began  to  churn  the  ocean.  While  churning  was  going  on,  by  and 
by  arose  Dhanvantari,  Amrita  (the  nectar),  the  horse  Uchchaihs'ravS, 
various  other  invaluable  jewels  that  were  desired,  the  elephant  Airavata 
and  the  bsautiful  eyed  Laksmi.  Visnupriya,  Sri  Laksmi  Devi, 
no  sooner  She  got  up  from  the  ocean,  she,  the  chaste  woman,  presented 
on  the  neck  of  Nar^yana,  of  beautiful  appearance,  the  Lord  of  all.  Who 
slept  on  the  Ksiroda  ocean  the  garland  (indicative  of  accepting  Him 
for  her  bridegroom).  Then  Bvahmk  and  Mahes'vara  and  the  other  ^Devas 
gladly  worshipped  Her  and  chanted  hymns.  At  this  time  Lak§mi  Devi 
being  pleased,  cast  a  favourable  glance  towards  the  homes  of  the    Devas, 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER    XLII.  900 

in  order  to  free  them  from  their  curse.  Then,  by  the  grace  of  Mah3. 
Laksmi  and  by  the  granting  of  the  boon  by  Brahm^,  the  Devas  got 
back  their  own  possessions  from  the  hands  of  the  Daityas.  O  Narada  ! 
Thus  I  have  described  to  you  the  story  of  Laksmi  Devi,  tho  Essence  of 
all  Essences,  and  very  pleasant  to  hear.  Now  what  more  do  you  want  to 
hear  ?  Say. 

Here  ends  the  Forty-first  Chapt'^r  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
churning  of  the  ocean  and  on  the  app?aring  of  Laksmi  in  the  M^iia  Purdnam 
Sri    Mai  Devi  Bhagavatim    of    18,000  verses    by  Maharsi    Veda  Vyasa, 


CHAPTER  XLII. 

1-50.  Ndrada  said: — 0  Bhagavan  !  I  have  heard  about  the  glories 
of  Hari,  about  the  Tattviijn^natn  i^the  True  Knowledge)  and  the  story  of 
Laksmi.  Now  tell  me  Her  Dhyanam  (maditation)  and  Stotram  (recita- 
tion of  hymns)  of  Her.  NSrayana  said: — "O  Narada  !  Indra  then, 
bathed  first  in  the  Tirath  (holy  place)  and,  wearing  a  cleansei  cloth, 
inst'illed,  first  of  all,  an  earthen  jar  (gha'a)  on  the  beach  of  the  Ksiroda 
Ocean.  Then  he  worshipped  with  devotion  Ganes'a,  Surya,  Fire,  Visou,  Siva, 
and  Siva,  the  six  deities .-Avith  scents  and  flowers.  Next  Indra  invoked  Mah^ 
Laksmt,  of  the  nature  of  tlie  highest  powers  and  greatest  prosjierity, 
and  began  to  worship  Her  as  Brahma,  who  was  acting  as  an  offieiatiug 
priest  in  the  presence  of  the  Munis,  BrShmanas,  Brihaspati,  Hari  and 
the  other  Ddvas,  had  dictated  him.  He  first  smeared  one  P^rijata  flower 
with  sandal  paste  and  reciting  the  meditation  mantra  of  Maha  Laksmi 
ofiftred  it  to  Her  feet.  The  meditation  mantra  that  was  recited  by  Devendra, 
was  what  Bhagavan  Hari  first  gave  to  Brahma.  I  am  now  telling  you 
that.  Listen. 

"O  Mother  !  Thou  residest  on  the  thousand-petalled  lotus.  The  beauty 
of  Thy  face  excels  the  beauty  of  koti  autumnal  Full  Moons.  Thou  art 
shining  with  Thy  own  splendour.  Thou  art  very  beautiful  and  lovely 
Thy  colour  is  like  the  burnished  gold;  Thou  art  with  form,  chaste, 
ornamented  all  over  with  jewel  ornaments  ;  Thou  art  wearing  the  yellow 
cloth  and  look  !  What  beauty  is  CDming  out  of  it!  Always  a  sweet 
smile  reigns  on  Thy  lips.  Thy  beauty  is  constant ;  Thou  art  the  bestower 
of  prosperity  to  all.  O  Mnha  Lakfmi  !  I  meditate  on  Thee."  Thus 
meditating  on  Her  endowed  with  various  attributes  with  this  mantra,  Indra 
worshipped  devotedly  with  sixteen  upach^ras  (articles  offered).  Every 
upachara  (article)  was  offered  with  the  repetition  of  mantra.  All  the 
things  were  very  exoellent,  right  and    commendable.     *' 0  Mah4    Laksmi  ! 

122 


970  5Rt  MAD  DEVl  BHAGAVATAM. 

Vis'vakarmS  has  made  this   invaluable    Asao  (a  carpefc   seat)    wouderfally 
decked  with  jewels  ;  I  am  offering;  this  Asan    to   Thee.  Accept."     O    Thou 
residinfi-  in  the  Lotus  !  This  holy    Ganges    water  is    considered    with    great 
regard  and  desired  by  all.     This    is    like    the    fire  to    burn    the  fuel  in  the 
shape  of  the  sins   of  the   sinners.     O  Thoa  !  The    Dsveller  in    the    Lotus! 
This  DCirbba  grass,  flowers,  this  Arghya  (offering)  of  the  Ganges  water  per- 
fumed with    sandalpaste,  I  am  offering    to  Thee.    Acoept.     O    Beloved     of 
Hari  !     This   sweet  scented    flower  oil   an  J    this  sweet    scented     Amalaki 
fruit    lead    to   the  beauty  of  the   body  ;  therefore  I  present   this   to  Thee, 
Accept.     O  Devi  !  I  am  presenting  this  clobh  made  of  silk  to  Thee;  accept. 
O     Devi  !     This     excellent      ornament      made     of      gold      and     jevvels, 
which  increases  the  beauty,  I  am  presenting  to  Thee.    Accept.     O  Beloved 
of  Krisna  !    lam   presenting    this    sweet   scented    holy     Dhupa     prepared 
from    various    herbs    and    plants,     exquisitely     nice    and    the    root    of    all 
beauty,  to  Thee,  Accept.     This  sweet    scented  pleasant,    sandalpaste    I  offer 
to  Thee,  O  Devi  !  Accept.     O  Ruler  of  the  Devas  !  I  present  this  pleasing 
holy  Dipa  (lights)  which  is  the    eye    of  this    world  and    by    which    all  the 
darkness    is    vanished  ;  accept.     O    Devi  !  [    present  to    Thee    these    very 
delicious  offerings  of  fruits,  etc.,  very   juicy  and    of  various    kinds.  Accept. 
O  Deves'i  !     This  Anna  (food)  is  Brahma  and  the  chief  means  to    preserve 
the  life  of  living  beings.      By  this  the    nourishment    of   the    body    and    the 
mental  satisfaction  are    effected.     Therefore  I  am    presenting    this  food    to 
Thee.  Accept.  O  Maha    Laksmi  !      I    am    presenting   this    most   delicious 
Paramanna,  which  is  prepared  out  of  rice,  milk  and  sugar,  to  Thee.  Accept. 

0  Devi  !  I  am  presenting  this  mo-,t  delicious  and  pleasant  svastika  prepared 
of  sugar  and  clarified  butter  to  Thee  ;  accept.  O  Beloved  of  Achyuta  !  I  am 
presenting  to  Thee  various  beautiful  Pakkaunas,  ripe  delicious  fruits  and 
clarified  butter  out  of  cow's  milk;  accept.  O  Devi  !  The  sugarcane  juice, 
when  heated,  yields  a  syrup  which  again  heated  yields  very  delicious  and 
nice  thing  called  Qur.  I  am  presenting  this  Gur  to  Thee  ;  accept.  O  Devi  ! 

1  am  presenting  to  Thee  the  sweetmeats  prepared  out  of  the  flour  of 
Yava  and  and  wheat  and  Gur  and  clarified  butter;  accept.  I  am  presenting 
with  devotion  the  offering  made  of  Svastika  and  the  flour  ot  other 
grains  ;  accept.  O  Kamule  !  T  am  presenting  to  Thee  this  fan  and  white 
ch&mara,  which  blows  cool  air  and  is  very  pleasant  when  this  body  gets 
"hot  ;  accept.     O  Devi  I  I  am  presenting  this    betel   scented  with  camphor 

by  which  the  inertness  of  the  tongue  is  removed  ;  accept.  0  Devi  ! 
I  am  presenting  this  scented  cool  water,  which  will  allay  the  thirst  and 
which  is  known  as  the  life  of  this  world;  accept.  O  Devi  !  I  am  presenting 
this  cloth  made  of  cotton  and  silk  that  increases  the  beauty  and  splendour 
of  the  body.  Accept.  O  Devi  !  I  am  presenting  to  Thee,  the  ornaments 
made  of  gold  and  jawela  which  are  the  source  of  beauty  and  love-liness,  Ac- 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER    XLII.  971 

cept.  O  Devi  !  I  am  presenting  to  Thee  these  pure  garlands  of  flowers  which 
blossom  in  dififerent  seasons,  which  look  verj  beautiful  and  which  give  satis- 
faction to  the  Devas  and  to  the  kings.  Accept.     O    Devi  !  I  am  presenting 
to  Thee  this  nice  scent,  this  very  holy  thing  to  Thee  by  which  both  the  body 
and  mind  become  pure,  which  is  most;  auspicious  and  which    is    prepared  of 
many  fragrant  herbs  and  plants  ;  accept.  0  Beloved  of  the  God  Krisna  !  I  am 
presenting  this  Achamaniya  water  to  Thee  for  rinsing  the  mouth,  pure   and 
holy,  and  brought  ftom  holy  places  of  pilgrimages  ;  accept.   O  Devi  I  I  am 
presenting  to  Thee,  this  bed  made  of  excellent  gems  aud  jewels  and  flowers, 
sandalpaste,  clothings  and  ornaments;  accept.     O  Devi  !  I   am   presenting 
to  Thee  all  those  things  that   are    extraordinary,  very    rare    in    this  earth 
and  fit  to  be  enjoyed  by  the  Devas  and  worthy  of  their  ornaments  ;  accept. 
0  Devarsi !     Uttering  those  mantras,  the  Devendra   offered    those  articles, 
with  intense  devotion    according  to  the  rules.     He,   then,    made   Japam  of 
the  Mula  Mantra  (the  Radical  Seed  Mantra)  ten  lakhs   of  times.     Thus  his 
Mantra  revealed  the  Deity  thereof  and    thus    came    to  a   successful   issue. 
The  lotus  born  Brahm^gave  this  Mantra  "Srim,  Hrim  Klim  Aim  Kamala- 
vasinyai    Svaha'^to    the    Devendra.      This  is   like     a   Kalpavriksa    (the 
tree  in   Indra's   garden  yielding  whatever  may  be  desired).     This    Vaidik 
mantra  is  the  chief  of  the    mantras.  The  word   "Svah^"    is    at   the    end  of 
the   mantra.     By  virtue  of  this  Mantra,  Kuvera  got  his  highest  prosperity. 
By   the    power   of    this    Mantra,     the      King-Emperor     Daksa     Savarni 
Manu    aud    Mangala  became    the    lords    of  the  earth  with  seven  islands. 
Priyavrata,    Uttanapada,     and    Kedararaja     all     these     became      Siddhas 
(were    fructified    with  success)    and  becan)e    King-Emperors.     O  Narada  I   . 
"When    Indra   attained    success    in    this    Mantra,    there    appeared     before 
him    Maha    Lak^mi,   seattjd    in   the    celestial     car,  decked:with    excellent 
gems   and  jewels.     The   Great     Halo,    coming    out   of   Her     body    made 
manifest  the  earth  with    seven   islands.     Her  colour   was    white   like  the 
white   champaka    flower   and    Her   whole    body   was    decked    with    orna- 
ments.    Her  face  was  always   gracious    and    cheerful    with    sweet   smiles. 
She   was   ever   ready    to   shew    Her   kindness   to    the     Bhaktas.     On  Her 
neck    there    was    a    garland    of  jewels     and    gems,    bright  as    ten  million 
INIoons.     O  Devarsi  !    No    sooner   did     ludra     saw     that     World    Mother 
Maha    Lakarai,    of  a    peaceful     appearance,     than    his     body     was     filled 
with  joy   and    the    hairs   of  the    body    stood    on     ends.     His     eyes    were 
filled  with  tears ;    and,    with   folded    [)alms,  he     began    to     recite     stotras 
to   Her,    the   Vaidik    stotras,    yielding  all  desires,    that  was  communicated 
to    him   by    Brahma. 

51-75.     Indra      said:— '' O  Thou,      the      Dweller      in    the     lotus!    O 
Nfirayani!    O    Dear    to     Krisna  !    O    Padmlsaue  !    O    MabS      Laksmi  ! 


972  ^nl  MAD  DEVl  BhAgAVAT 

Obeisance  to  Thee  !     O  Padmadaleksane  !  O  Padmanibhanane  !  O  Padma 

saue  !0     Padme  !     O     Vaisnavi  !     Obeisance  to  Thee  !     Thou      art   the 

wealth    of  all  j    Thou   art   worshipped    by   all  ;   Thou    bestowest     to    all 

the    bliss   and   devotion    to    Sri    Hari.     I    bow    down  to  Thee.     O  Devi  I 

Thou   always    dwellest    on    the    breast    of  Krisna     and     exercisest     Thy 

powers   over    Him.     Thou    art   the  beauty  ot   the    Moon  :     Thou    takest 

Thy  seat    on     the   beautiful  Jewel    Lotus.     Obeisance  to  Thee!     O  Devi  I 

Thou  art  the  Presiding  Deity  of  the  riches  ;     Thou   art    ihe     Great  De?i; 

Thou  increasest  always  Thy  gifts  and  Thou  art  the  bestower  of  increments. 

So    I    bow   down    to    Thee.     O  Devi  '    Thou    ar*;   the     Maha   Laksmi    of 

Vaikuntha,  the  Laksmi  of  the  Ksiroda    Ocean  ;  Thou  art    Indra's  Heavenly 

Lak^oai  ;  Thou    art   the    R^ja    Laksmi    of    the     Kings  ;  Thou    art     the 

Griha   Laksmi    of   the   householders  ;    Thou     art    the     household      Deity 

of  them  ;    Thou    art  the    Surabhi,    born  of   the    Ocean  ;    Thou     art    the 

Daks'inU,    the    wife   of  the    Sacrifices  ;  Thou    art  Aditi,     the     Mother  of 

the  Devas  ;   Thou  art  the  Kamal^,  always  dwelling    in    the     Lotus  ;     Thou 

art   the    Svaha,    in    the    offerings  with    clarified    butter   in  the    sacrificial 

ceremonies  ;   Thou   art   the    Svadha   Mantra   in    the   KSvyas    (an  offering 

of  food   to  deceased   ancestors).     60     obeisance     to    Thee  !     O  Mother  ! 

Thou   art    of    the  nature   of  Visnu  ;   Thou    art   the   Earth  that  supports 

all  ;   Thou    art    of  pure   Suddha   Sattva  and  Thou    art  devoted    to  Nara- 

yana.     Thou    art    void   of   anger,  jealousy.     Rather    Thou  grantest    boons 

to   all.     Thou   art   the   auspicious   Sarada  ;     Thou   grantest   the     Highest 

Reality  and   the  devotional    service    to     Hari.       Without     Thee     all    the 

worlds  are  quite  stale,  to  no  purpose  like  ashes,   always  dead  while    existing. 

Thou   art    the    Chief  Mother,  the   Chief  Friend    of    all  ;     Thou     art    the 

source    of  Dharma,    Arthi,    K^ma   and    Moksa  !     As  a  mother  nourishes 

her    infants    with   the     milk    of  her  breasts,   so     Thou    nourishest    all   as 

their    mother  !     A   child    that   sucks    the    milk   might   be    saved   by    the 

Daiv*    (Pate),    when    deprived    of   its    mother  ;     but     men    can     never    bo 

saved,   if  they     be     bereft      of    Thee  I     O  Mother  !    Thou     art      alwavs 

gracious.     Please    be  gracious    unto    me,     O  Eternal  One  !  My  possessions 

are   now    in  the   hands   of  the    enemies.     Be     kind     enoucrh     to     restore 

my   kingdoms  to    me     from    my    enemies'    hands.     O  Beloved     of    Hari  ! 

Since   Thou    hast    forsaken    me,    I    am    wandering   abroid,    friendles,  like 

a  beggar,  deprived  of  all  prosperities.     O  Devi  !  Give  me  Jnanam,  Dharma. 

ray   desired    fortune,   power,    infiuenea   and    my    pjssessions.     O  Narad  i  ! 

Indra   and    all  the  other     Devas     bowed     down       frequently     to      Mihil 

Laksmi     with     their   eyes    filled    with  tears.     BrahmV  ^ankara,  Ananta 

Deva,    Dharma  and    Kes'ava   all    asked    pardon      again     and     again    from 

Maha    Leksmi.     Lak§mi    then    granted    boons    to     the    Devas   and  before 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLIII.  973 

the  assembly  gladly  gave  the  garland  of  flowers  on  the  neck  of  Ke'sava. 
The  Devas,  satisfied,  went  back  to  their  own  places.  The  Devi,  Lakami, 
too,  becoming  very  glad  went  to  ^ri  Ilari  sleeping  in  the  Ksiroda 
Ocean.  Brf'hraa  and  Mahes'vara,  both  became  ?very  glad  and,  blessing 
the  Devas,  wont  respectively  to  their  own  abodes.  Whoever  recites 
this  holy  Stotra  three  times  a  day,  becomes  the  King  Emperor  and 
gets  prosperity  and  wealth  like  the  God  Kuvera.  Siddhi  (success)  comes  to 
him     who    recities    this    stotra    five    lakhs   of  times.     If     anybody    reads 

regularly    and    always    this    Siddha  Stotra     for  one     month,  he    becomes 

very  happy  and  he  turns  out  a  Rajarajendva. 

Here  ends  the  Forty-second  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the 
Dhyansm  and  Stotra  of  Maha  taksmi  in  the  Maha  Puranam  Sri  Mad  Devi 
Bhao^avatam  of    18,000    verses    by    Maharsi    Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

1-4. — Narada  said: — "  O  Rifii  Narayana  !  O  Highly  Fortunate  One  !  O 
Lord  !  Thou  art  equal  to  Narayana  whether  in  beauty  or  in  qualities,  or  in 
fame  or  in  energy  or  in  everything  Thou  art  equal  to  Narayana.  Thou  art 
the  foremost  of  the  Jnanins;  there  cannot  be  found  a  second  like  Thee  as  a 
Siddha  Yogi,  the  ascetics  and  the  Munis.  And  Thou  art  the  crest  of  the 
knowers  of  the  Vedas.  I  have  heard  the  wonderful  anecdote  of  Mah^ 
Laksmi  that  Thou  hast  told  me.  Now  tell  me  any  other  thing  that  is 
unknown,  very  good  in  everyway,  in  accordance  with  Dharma,  in  the  Vedas, 
and  that  which  is  not  as  yet  wiitteu  in  the  Puiatias. 

5-6.  Narayana  said: — '" There  are  many  wonderful  hidden  anecdotes 
that  are  not  published  as  yet  in  the  Puranas.  What  you  have  heard 
is  very  small  in  fact.  Please  mention  me  what  you  like  to  hear,  what 
you  think  as  best  amongst  them  and  I  will  describe  that  to  you. 

7-8.  Narada  said  : — '"When  clarified  butter  is  poured  a?  libations  in  all 
the  sacrificial  ceremonies  to  the  gods,  Svaha  is  to  be  uttered  everywhere  as 
excellent,  and  commendable ;  so  Svadha  is  to  be  rep'^ated  in  the  offerings 
when  the  obtations  are  offered  to  the  Pitris,  the  deceased  ancestors.  Then, 
again,  Daksina  (the  sacrificial  feejis  always  to  be  paid  as  right  and  excellent. 
So,  0  Knower  of  the  Vedas  !  I  like  to  hear  the  accounts  of  Svadha,  and 
Daksinji  and  their  merits.  Please  now  fell   me   about  them. 

0.     Suta  said: — "Hearing  the  words  of  Narada,    Narayana    Risi  smiled 
and  began    to   speak    the  very  ancient  words  of  the  Puianas. 

10-11.     Narayana  saidt — Before    Ihe   creation,    the    Devas    assembled 
in  the  beautiful  Brahma's  Council  to  decide  on  their  food  question." 


i 


974  ^rI  mad  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

They  all  brought  to  the  notice  of  Brahma  the  scarcity  about  their 
food.  Brahma  promised  to  remove  their  food  difficulties  and  began 
to  chant  hymns  to  Hari. 

12.  Narada  said: — "0  Lord  !  Bhagavan  Narayana  Himself  incarnated 
in  part  as  Sacrifico.  Are  not  the  Devas  satisfied  when  the  Brahmanas 
pour  oblations  of  ghee  to  the  Devas  in  those  sacrifices  ? 

13-17.  Narayana  said  ; — "0  Muni  !  The  Devas,  in  fact,  did  not  get  the 
offerings  of  the  clarified  butters  that  were  poured  in  with  devotion  in  sacri- 
ficial acts  by  the  Brahmanas  and  Ksattriyas.  So  they  were  very  much 
depressed  and  went  again  to  the  council  of  Brahma  and  informed  Him  that 
they  could  not  get  any  food  for  themselves.  On  hearing  this,  Brahma  at 
once  meditated  and  took  refuge  of  Sri  Krisna;  Krisna  advised  them  to  wor- 
ship Miila  Prakriti.  Brahm^  theu,  by  the  command  of  Sri  Krisna,  began 
to  meditate  on  Prakriti,  worship  Her  and  chant  hymns  to  Her.  Then  from 
the  part  of  Prakriti,  an  all-powerful  Devi  appeared.  She  was  very 
beautiful,  Shyama  (of  a  blue  colour)  and  very  lovely.  This  Devi  was  Svaha. 
She  looked  always  gracious  with  smile  in  Her  face  ;  it  seemed  that  She  was 
always  ready  to  show  favour  towards  the  Bhaktas.  She  appeared  before 
Brahma  and  said: — ''O  Lotus  born  !  Want  any  boon  you  desire." 

18-22,  Hearing  Her  words,  the  Creator  spoke  reverentially: — "O  Devi  1 
Let  Thou  be  the  burning  power  of  Fire  ;  without  Thee  Fire  would  not 
be  able  to  bavn  anything.  At  the  conclusion,  of  any  Mantra,  whoever  taking 
Thy  name,  will  pour  obtations  in  the  Fire  to  the  Gods,  will  cause  those 
oblations  to  go  to  the  Gods  and  reach  them.  And  then  they  will  be  very 
glad.  O  Mother!  Let  Thou  be  the  wealth  of  Fire,  the  beauty  and  housewife 
of  Fire  ;  let  Thou  be  incessantly  worshipped  in  the  regions  of  the  Gods  and 
amongst  moa  and  other  beings.  Hearing  these  words  of  Brahma,  Sv^h^ 
Devi  became  very  sad  and  expressed  Her  own  intentions  : — "  I  will 
get  Krigna  as  my  husband  ;  let  me  perform  TapasyS  as  long  as  it  takes, 
This  is  my  object.  All  other  thiuge  are  false  as  dreams. 

23-28.  I  always  meditate  with  devotion  en  the  lotus-feet  of 
Sri  Krisna,  serving  Which  You  have  become  the  Creator  of  this  world, 
Sambhu  has  become  the  Conqueror  of  death,  Ananta  Deva  is  supporting 
this  universe,  Dharma  is  the  Witness  of  the  virtuous,  Ganesa  is  getting, 
first  of  all,  the  first  worship.  Prakriti  Devi  has  become  the  adorable  of  all 
and  the  Munis  and  the  llisis  respected  by  all.  O  Child  !  Having  spoken 
thus  to  the  Lotus-born,  Padma,  with  Her  lotus-face,  meditating  incessantly 
ou  the  Lotus-Feet  of  Sri  Krisna,  free  from  any    disease,  started    to  perform 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLIII.  975 

tapasyJi  for  attainitig  Him.     She,  first  of  all}  stoed  on  one  leg  aud  practised 

austerities    for    oiio   lakh   yeftt's.      "th^.n    She   Hw   the    lli^^hest    PuriiSa 

«        .   .  .  .  •  '^ 

Sri    Kri^aa,     \Yhd  is  yyond   Prakriti  anl  iter  attributes.     Tile  bda'itifiil 

artioroiis  Svuha,  seeing  the  Lcvely  Form  of  the  Lord  of  Love,  fainted. 

29-43.  Tha  omniscient  Bhagavan  Krisna  knowing  Her  intentions, 
took  Her  to  His  lap,  redaeed  very  niach  in  body  by  long  continued 
Tapasya.  and  He  said  : — ''  0  D^vi  !  Thou  shalfc  be  My  wife  in  the  nejct 
Varllha  Kalpa-.  Then  Thou  wilt  be  tha  daughter  of  Nagnajit  and  wilt  tja 
known  by  the  nanie  of  NSgn^jifci.  •'  0  Beloved  I  At  present  let  Thou  be  the 
Energy  of  Fire  and  be  His  wife.  By  My  boon  Thou  wilt  be  worshipped  by 
all.  Fil'e  will  make  Theo  ihe  Lidy  of  His  house  and  take  the  utmost  care  of 
Thee.  Thou  wilt  be  able  to  enjoy  easily  with  Him,  0  Narada  I  Thus  saying 
to  Svaha,  Bhagavi^n  disappear.nl.  On  the  other  hand,  Fire  came  in 
there  by  the  command  of  BrahmS,  with  a  doubtful  mind  and  began  to 
meditate  on  Her,  the  World  Mother  as  per  Sama  Veda  anl  worshipped 
Her.  Ho  then  pleasod  and  married  Her  with  mantrams,  etc.  For  one 
hundred  divine  ye  irs  tliay  enjoycl  each  other,  (n  a  very  solitary  placd 
while  they  were  enjoying  each  other,  SvAh^  Devi  felt  pregnant;  For  full 
twelve  divine  years  Sha  retained  Her  pregnancy.  Then  She  delivered  »i'&- 
dually  throj  sons  Uaksin&gni,  GarhyapatySgni,  and  Ahavaniydgni.  The. 
Risis,  ^lunis,  Brahman  »s,  Ks  ittriyas  poured  oblations  of  clarified  buttef 
pronouncing  the  terminal  mantra  *'  Svaha."  He  who  pronounces  this  excel- 
lent terminal  Mantra  "Svahfi"  gets  immediate  success  in  his  actions. 
Then  all  the  mantras  without  "  Svahd  in  the  end  became  impotent  as  snakes 
become  when  void  of  poison,  the  Brahmauasr  when  they  are  devoid  of  the 
knowlege  of  the  Vedis,  the  wife  when  she  does  not  serve  her  husband,  the 
luen  whenthey  turn  illiterate  find  the  trees,  when  void  of  fruits  and 
branche.-^.  O  Child  !  The  Brahmanag  then  became  satisfied.  The  Devas  began 
to  receive  the  oblations.  With  the  "Svaha  ''  mantra  everything  turned  out 
fruitful.  Thus  I  have  described  to  you  the  anecdote  of"  Svuha."  One  who 
hears  this  essential  a«ecdote  gets  his  happiness  enhanced  and  tho  Moksa 
in  his  hands.     What  more  do  you  want  to  hear  ?  Say. 

44).  Narada  said  : — I  like  to  hear  how  Fire  worshipped  Svaha  and 
recited  stotras  (hymns  of  praise)  to  Her,  Kindly  tell  me  the  method 
of  worship,  the  Dhyanam  and  Stotra. 

45-49.     Narayana  said  : — "  O  Best  of  Brahmanas  !   I  now  tell  you  tha 

meditation  (Dhr)anam)  as  per  Sama  Veda,    the  method   of-  worship     and 

stotra.   Listen   attentively.      At    the     commencement   of    any  sacrificial 

ceremony,  one  should  first  of  all  worship    whether  on   the    Salagrama  stone 

or  in  an  earthen    jar   (ghata),   the   Dsjvi    Svaha    and    then  eommenoe  the 


976  l§Rt  MAD  DEVi  HIIAgWATAM 

ceremony  with  the  expectation  of  getting  tbo  desired  fruifc.  Tho  following 
is  the  Dhjanam  (meditation)  of  Svaha  Devi : — "  O  Devi  Sv4ha  !  Thou  art 
embodied  of  the  Mantras  ;  Thou  art  the  saacess  o^f  the  Mantras  ;  Thou  art 
Thyself  a  Siddba :  Thou  givest  success  and  the  the  fruits  of  actions  to  men. 
Thou  dost  good  10  all.  Thus  meditating,  one  should  offer  PSdya  (water 
for  washing  the  feet),  etc.,  uttering  the  basic  Mantra;  suceass  then 
comes  to  him.  Now  hear  about  the  Radical  Seed  Mantra.  The  said  mantra 
(mula  mantra)  is  this :—"  Om  Hi'im  ^rim  Vahnij^yayai  Divyai  Svi\ha,." 
If  the  Devi  be  worshipped  with  this  Mantra,  all  the  desires  come  to  a 
successful  issue. 

50-54.  Fire  recited  the  following  stotra:  — "  Thou  art  Sv^hA,  Thou 
art  the  Beloved  of  Fire,  Thou  art  the  wifa  of  Fire  ;  Thou  pleasest  all' 
Thou  art  the  Sakti,  Thou  art  the  action,  Thou  art  the  bestower  of 
Kala  (time)  ;  Thou  dost  dige-t  the  food  ;  Thou  art  the  Dhruvsl  ;  Thou 
art  the  resort  of  men  ;  Thou  art  the  burning  power  ;  Thou  canst  burnt 
everything,  Thou  art  the  essence  of  this  world ;  Thou  art  the  deliverer 
from  the  terrible  world  ;  Thou  art  the  life  of  the  gods  and  Thou 
nourishest  the  Gjds.  "  O  NArada  !  He  who  reads  with  devotion 
the^e  sixteen  names,  gets  success  both  in  this  world  as  well  as  in  the 
next.  None  of  his  works  become  deficient  in  any  way  ;  rather  all  the 
works  are  performed  success fuly  and  with  a  successful  issue.  Reading  this 
stotra,  one  who  has  no  wife,  gets  wife.  So  much  so  that  the  man  who  recites 
the  stotra  gets  for  his  wife  equal  to  Rarabhsl,  the  heavenly  nymph,  and 
passes    his  time  in  greatest  bliss. 

Here  ends  the  Forty-third  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  history 
of  Svaha  in  5ri  Mad  Devi  Bh^gavatam,  the  Maha  Pur  a  nam,  of  18,000 
verges    by  Mahar^i  Veda  Vyasa. 

CHAPrERXLlV. 

1-18.  NarSyana  said  : — "  O  Narada !  I  will  tell  you  now  the 
excellent  anecdote  of  SvadhS,  pleasing  to  the  Pitris  and  enhancing  the 
fruits  of  the  Sridh  ceremony  when  foods  are  offered  to  the  Pitris. 
Listen.  Before  the  creation,  the  Creator  created  seven  Pitris.  Four 
out  of  them  are  with  forms  and  the  other  three  are  of  the  nature  of 
Teja  (light). 

Note  : — Kavyavahoanalah  Somo  Yamaschaivaryama  tatha,  Agni§- 
v^ttah  Barhisadah  Somapa  Pitri  devatah.  These  seven  Pitris  are  according 
to  the  other  Puranas.  Seeing  the  beautiful  and  lovely  forms  of  the  Pitrie, 
lie   made   arrangements    for   their     food   in    the    form    of  ^rSddhas   and 


hbOK  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLiV.  9l7 

Tarpanas,  etc.  (funeral  ceremony  and  peaee-offerings),  etc.  (Sr&dh, 
solemn  obsequies  perfor me i  in  honour  of  the -maaes  ot  decaased  ancestors.) 
Taking  bath,  performing  Sr&dh  ceremony  upto  Tarpauam  (peace-offerings), 
worshipping  the  Devaa  and  doing  Sanddhya  thrice  a  day  these  are  the 
daily  duties  of  the  Brdhmanas.  If  any  Brahmana  does  not  perform 
daily  the  Trisandhyas,  Sraddha,  TArp  laan,  ^vor^h^p  and  the  reciting  of 
the  Vedas,  he  becomes  devoid  of  fire  like  a  snake  without  any  poison. 
He  who  does  not  perform  the  devotional  service  of  the  Dovi,  who  eats 
food  not  oiiered  to  Sri  Hari,  who  remains  impure  till  death,  is  not 
entitled  to  do  any  karma  whatsoever.  Thus,  introducing  the  Sr^ddhas, 
etc.,  for  the  Pitris,  Brahma  went  to  His  own  abode.  The  Brahmanas 
went  on  doing  the  Sr^ddhas  for  the  Pitris,  but  the  Pitris  could  not 
eujoy  them  and  so  they  remained  without  food  and  were  not  satisfied. 
They  all,  being  hungry  and  sad,  went  to  the  Council  of  Brahm&  and 
informed  Him  everything  from  beginning  to  end.  Brahma  then  created 
out  of  His  mind  one  daughter  very  beautiful,  full  of  youth  and  having 
a  face  lovely,  as  if  equal  to  one  hundred  moons.  That  woman  was  best 
in  all  respects  whether  in  form,  beauty,  qualities  or  in  learning.  Her 
colour  was  white  like  the  white  Ohampaka  flower  and  her  body  was 
adorned  all  over  with  jewel  ornaments.  This  form  was  very  pure, 
ready  to  grant  boons,  auspicious  and  the  part  of  Prakriti.  Her  face 
was  beaming  with  smiles  ;  her  teeth  were  very  beautiful  and  her 
body  shewed  signs,  of  Laksmi  (i.e.,  of  wealth  and  prosperity)  Her  name 
was  Svadha,  .Her  lotus-feet  were  situated  on  one  hundred  lotuses. 
She  was  the  wife  of  the  Pitris.  Her  face  resembled  that  of  a  lotus 
and  Her  eyes  looked  like  water  lilies.  Sho  was  born  of  the  lotus 
born  Brahma,  The  Graul-father  Brahma  made  over  that  daughter 
of  the  uature  of  Tusti  (Contentment)  tj  the  hands  of  the  Pitris 
and  they  were  satisfied.  Brahma  advised  the  Brahmanas  privately 
that  whenever  they  would  offer  any  thing  to  the  Pitris,  they  should 
offer  duly  with  the  mantra  Svadha  pronounced  at  the  end.  Since  then 
the  Brahmanas  are  offering  everything  to  the  Pitris,  with  the  Mantra 
Svadha  uttered  in  the  end.  Svaha  is  laudable,  when  offerino-s  are 
presented  to  the  Gods  and  Svadha  is  commendable  whea  ofFerinc's 
are  made  to  tbe  Pitris.  But  in  both  the  cases,  Daksina  is  essential. 
Without  Daksina  (sacrificial  fee),  all  secriiicas  are  useless  and  worthless. 
The  Pitris,  Devata>,  Brahmanas,  the  Munis,  the  Manus  worshipped 
the  peaceful  Svadh4  and  chanted  hymns  to  Her  with  ^reat  love. 
The  Devas,  Pitris,  Brahmanas,  all  were  pleased  and  felt  their  ends 
achieved  when  they  got  the  boon  from  Svadha  Devi.  Thus  I  have 
told  you  everything  about  Svadha,  It  i?  pleasing  to  all.  What 
more  do  you   want   to   hear  ?     Say.     I   will  answer  all  your     questions, 

123 


978  ^rI  mad  DEVl  BhAgAVATAM 

19.  Marada  said  : — "  O  Thou,  the  Best  of  the  Kiiowera  of  the  V'edas  ! 
O  Muni  Sattaraa  !  1  want  now  to  hear  the  method  of  worship,  the 
meditation  and  the  hymns  of  Svadha  Devi.  Kindly  tell  me  all  abou^ 
this. 

20-27.  Narayana  said:— "You  know  everything  about  the  all- 
auspicious  Dhyjin,  Stotra,  as  stated  iu  the  Vedas  ;  then  why  do  you 
ask  me  again  ?  However  I  will  speak  out  this  for  the  enhancement  of 
knowledge."  On  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  Dark  Fortnight  in  autumn 
when  tha  Magha.  asterism  is  with  the  Moon  an  1  on  the  Sraddha  dav.  One 
should  worship  with  care  Svadha  Devi  ;  then  one  should  perform 
^raddha.  If,  out  of  vanity,  a  Brahmin  performs  l^rSdh  without  fir*t 
worshipping  Svadha  Davi  then  he  will  never  get  the  fruits  of  Tar- 
panain  or  ^radh.  "  0  Devi  Svadhe  !  Thou  art  the  mind-born  daughter 
of  Brahma,  always  young  and  worshipped  by  the  Pitris.  Thou 
bestowest  the  fruits  of  Sraddh.  So  1  meditate  on  Thee.  Thus  medi- 
tating, the  Brahmin  is  to  pronounce  the  motto  (mula  mantra)  and 
otfer  the  Padyam,  etc.,  on  the  balagram^stane  or  on  the  auspicious  earthen 
jar.  This  is  the  ruling  of  the  Vedas.  The  motto  is  "' Om  Hrim,  Srim, 
Klim,  Svadha  Devyai  Svaha.  She  should  be  worshipped  with  this 
Mantra.  After  reciting  hymns  to  the  Devi,  one  is  to  bow  down  to  the 
Svadha  Devi.  O  Son  of  Brahma  I  O  Best  of  Munis  I  O  Skilled  in  hear- 
ing 1  I  now  describe  the  stotra  which  Brahma  composed  at  the  begin- 
ning for  the  bestowal  of  the  desired  fruits  to  mankind.  Listen. 
Narayana  said  : — '•  The  instnut  the  Mantra  Svadha  is  pronounced,  men 
get  at  once  the  fruits  of  bathing  in  the  holy  places  of  pilgrimages.  No 
trace  of  sin  exists  in  him  at  tha!"  time  ;  rather  the  religious  merits  of 
performing  the    Vajapeya   sacrifice    accrue   to    him. 

28-36.  .  "Svadha,"  "Svadha,"  "Svadh4,"  thrioe  this  word  if  one 
calls  to  mind,  one  gets  the  fruits  of  Sradh,  Tarpanam,  and  Bali  (offer- 
inf^  sacrifices).  So  much  sc,  if  one  hears  with  devotion  during  the  Sradh  time 
the  recitation  of  the  hymn  to  Svadha,  one  gets,  no  doubt,  thefruit  of  Sradh. 
If  one  recites  the  Svadhil  mantra  thrice  every  time  in  the  morning,  midday 
and  evening)  every  day,  one  gets  an  obedient,  chaste  wife  begetting  sons. 
The  following  is  the  hymn  (Stotra)  to  Svadha  : —  "  0  Devi  Svadhe  !  Thou 
art  dear  to  the  Pitris  as  their  vitil  breaths  and  thou  art  the  lives  of  the 
Brahmanas.  Thou  art  the  Presiding  Dcfity  the  of  Sradh  ceremonies  and 
bestowest  the  fruits  thereof.  "  0  Thou  of  good  vows  !  Thou  art  eternal,  true, 
and  of  the  nature  of  religiou3  meritji.  Thou  appearsst  in  creition  and  dis- 
appearest  in  dissolution.  And  this  appearing  and  disappearing  go  on  for 
ever.  Thou  art  Oiu,  thou  art  Svasfci,  Thou  art  Namas  Kara  (saluta- 
tion) ;  Thou  art  SvadhS,  Thou  art  Daksinti,  Thou  art  the  various 
Woks,,  as  ddiiguitel    iu    the    VeJas.     Ihejo    the  Lord    of  the  world    hat; 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTEE  XLV.  979 

created  for  the  supcess  of  actions.  *'  No  Sooner  Brahtna,  seated  in  His 
assembly  in  the  Brahma  Loka,  reciting  this  stotra  remained  silent,  than 
Savdh3.  Davi  appeared  thera  all  at  once.  When  Brahma  handed  over  the 
lotus-faced  Svadha  Devi  over  to  the  han  Is  of  the  Pitris,  and  they  gladly 
took  Her  to  their  own  abodes.  He  who  hears  with  devotion  and 
attention  this  stotri  of  Svadha,  gets  all  sorts  of  rich  fruits  that  are 
desired    and  the  fruits  of  bithing  in  all  the  Tirthas, 

Here  ends  the  Forty-fourth  Ciiapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  story  o( 
Svadha  Devi  in  the  discourse  bstween  Ndrada  and  Ndrayana  in  the  Maha 
Purfinam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses  bv  Maharsi  Veila  Vyasu 

CHAPTER  XLV\ 

1-63.  NSr^yana  said  i^The  excellent,  most  sweet  stories  of  Svaha  and 
Svadha  are  told  ;  now  I  will  tell  you  the  story  of  Daksina  ;  hear  attentively. 
In  eirly  days,  in  the  region  of  Goloka,  there  was  a  good-natured  Gopi 
named  Sus'il'^,  beautiful,  Radha's  companion  and  very  dear  to  Sti  Ilari. 
She  was  fortunate,  respected,  beautiful,  lovely,  prosperous;,  with  good 
teeth,  learned,  well  qualified  and  of  exquisitely  handsome  form.  Her 
whole  body  was  tender  and  lovely  like  Kaluvati  (one  versed  iu  0 1.  art-; 
moon  )  She  wa>  beautiful  and  her  eyes  were  like  water  lilies.  Her  hips 
were  good  and  spacious  ;  Her  bi'easts  were  full;  she  was  Sl.yamu  (a  kind 
of  women  having  colour  like  melted  gold  ;  body  being  hut  in  cold  and 
cool  in  summer;  of  youthful  beauty) ;  as  well  She  was  of  the  Nyagrodha 
class  of  womeu  (an  e^eellent  , woman.  Stanau  Sukathinau  Yasya  Nitambo 
cha  Vis'alata.  Madhye  Ksinri  bhavedya  Sunyagrodha  parimandaluj. 
Always  a  smile  sweetened  Her  face  ;  and  that  looked  always  gracious.  Her 
.hole  body  was  covered  with  jewel  ornament...  Her  colour  was  white 
like  the  white  champakas.  Her  lips  were  red  like  the  B.mba  fruits;  Her 
eves  were  like  those  of  a  deer. 

Sus'iia  was  very  clever  in  amDrous  sciences.  Her  gait  was  lik.  a  swan. 
She  was  specially  versed  in  wh.it  is  called  Prema  Bhakti  (love  towards  God) 
So  She  was  the  dearest  lady  of  6ri  Krisna.  And  She  was  of  Intense 
emotional  feelings.  She  knows  all  th.  sentiments  of-  love  ;  she  was  witty 
humorous,  and  ardent  for  the  love  of  5ri  Krisna,  the  Lord  of  theJlSsa 
circle  She  sat  by  the  left  side  of  Sri  Krisna  in  the  presence  of  Radha. 
gri  Krisna,  then  est  His  glance  on  Radhi,  the  Chief  of  the  Gopis  and 
hun.^  down  His  head  through  fear.  Radh  Vs  face  turned  red  ;  the  two  eyes 
look°ed  like  red  Idies  ;  all  Her  bodies  began  to  quiver  oat  of  anger  and 
Her  lips  began  to  shake.  Seing  that  state  of  Radha,  Bhagv^n  Sri  Krisna 
dissappearel  fexrin,.  that  a  quarrel  might  ensue.  Sus'iU  and  other 
Gopis  seeing  that  the  peaceful  Krisna  of  Sattva  Guna  and  of  lovely 
form  had  disappeared,  began  to  tremble  with  fear.     Then    one   lakh    Kot. 


I 


980  §r1  mad  DEVt  BHiOAVATAM.  •     .   ' 

G-opis  seeing  Krisna  absent  and  Radha  angry,  became    very     much   afraid 
and  bowing    their   heads     down    with    devotion     and    with    folded    palnis 
bef»an  to  say  frequently.     "Radhe  !  Protect  us,  protect    uss,  and    they  took 
shelter  at    Her    feet.     O   Nilrada  !     Three     lakh    Gopa"?     also     ineludiog 
Siidama    and  others  took  shelter  at  the  lotus  feet   of  Sri    Radh^    out   of 
fear.     Seeing,  then,  Krisna  absent  and    Her    companion    Sus  ila    running 
away,  R^dha  cursed  her. thus: — ''IfSnsiia"   comes  again  to   thi?    Goloka, 
she  will  be  reduced   to    ashes."     Thus     cursing     Her   companion     Sus'ili 
out  of  anger,  RSdh^,  the  Darling   of  the    Dava    of    the    Devas,    and    the 
Lady  of  the  Rasa  circle    went,  to  the    Kksk    circle    and    called   on    Krisna, 
the  Lord  of  the  same.     Not  beiivg  able  to    find    out  Sri    Krisna,  a   miuute 
appeared  a  yuga    to    Her    and  she    began  to   say  : — *'0  Lord  of  Pranas  I 
O  Dearer  than  My  life  !    O   Presiding   Deity  of  my    iife  i    O    Krisna  !  My 
life  seems  to  depart  from  Thy  absence  !    Gome   quickly    and  shew  Thyself 
to  me.     0  Lord  !  It   is    through   the    favour    of  one's  husband    that  the 
pride    of    women    gets    increased    day  by  day.      Women's    safeguards    of 
iiappiness    are    their    husbands.     Therefore     women,    who     are    helpless 
creatures,  ought   always    to   serve  their  husbands   aocordino:    to    Dharma. 
The  husband  is  the    wife's  friend,    presiding    deity    and  the    sole    refuge 
and  the  chief  wealth.     It  is    through     husbands    that  women  derive   their 
pleasures,    enjoyments.  Dharma,    happiness,  peace    ^ind    contentment.     If 
husbands    are    respected,    wives    are      respected    and    if    husbands      are 
dishonoured,    women   are  dishonoured    too.     The  husband    is    the  highest 
thing   to   a   woman.     He    is   the    highest    friend.     There     is      no     better 
friend   than    him.     The    husband    is    called    Bharta   because    he    supports 
his    wife  ;  he  is  called  Pati,    because  he  preserves  her  ;  lie  is    e.iUed    Svimi, 
because    he   is    the    master  of  her    body  ;  he  is   called   Kantu    because    he 
bestows    the   desired   things   to    her  ;    he  is   called     Handhu,    because    he 
increases  her  happiness  ;  he  is    called  Priya,  because  he    gives     pleasure  to 
her  ;  he  is  called  Is'a,   because     he    bestows  prosperity  on  her  ;  he  is   called 
Pranes'vara,    because    he    is    the  lord  of     her     Prana  ;     and  he    is   called 
Ramana,     because   he   gives    enjoyment   to    her.     There  is   no  other  thing 
dearer   than  husband.       The    eon    is    born    of  the     husband ;     hence     the 
son   is   so   dear.     The  husband  is     dearer   to    a    family    woman    than    one 
hundred    sons.     Those    who   are    born    in    impure   families,    cannot    know 
what     substance  a  husband  is  made  up  of.  Taking  Baths  in  all  the  Tirthag^ 
giving    DaksnSs    in    all   tie    Yajnas    (saciifice).   circumambulating  round 
the    whole    earth,  performing    all   austerities,  observing    all  vows,  making 
all   great    gifts,    holy    fastings,  all    that    are    dictated     in     the     ^Sstras, 
serving  the  Guru,  the  Br&hmanas  and  the    Devas   all    cannot     compare     to 
even  one  sixteenth  part  with  serving  faithfully   the    feet    of  the    husband. 
The  husband  is  the  highest ;  higher  than  tho   Spiritual    Teacher    (Guur), 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLV.        ^  981 

higher   thau   the    Brahtnanas,    higher    than    all  the    Devae.     As    to  rnau, 
the   Spiritual    Teacher    who  i  nparts  the  Spiritual  Knowledge  {■?     the  Best 
and    Supreme,   so   to    the  women  their  husbands  are  the  best    of  all.     Oh! 
I   am    not    able    to    realise    the    glory   of  mj    Deare^it,    by    Whose  favour 
I   am    the    Sole    Euler    of  one    lakh  Koti    Gopis,    ( ne    lakh  Koti  Gopas, 
innumerable  Brahmanda?,  and  all  the  things  thereof,    and    all    the     lokas 
(regions)    from    Bhu    (earth)    to   Goloka.     Oh  !   The    womanly     nature  is 
insurmountable.     Thus    saying,  Radhika  began   to  meditate  with  devotion 
on    Sri    Krisna,    Tears    began   to    tiow    incessantly    from   Her    eyes.     She 
exclaimed  "O  Lord!   O  Lord  !    O  Ran. ana!  Shew  Thyself  to  me."     I    am 
very  much  weak  and  dibtiessed  irom  Thy  bereavement."  Now  the  Ddksia^ 
Devi,  driven  out  from  Goloka,   practised    Tapasj  a    for   a   long    time    when 
She    entered    into    the    body    of  Kamalt^.     The   Devas,  on  the  other  hand, 
performe;]    a    very    difficult   Yajfia;    but     they     could     not     derive     any 
fruit  therefrom.     So  they  wtnt  to    Brahma,    becoming     very   sad.     Hear- 
ing   them,  Brahm^l  meditated  on  Visnu  for    a    long    time     with     devotion. 
At    last    Visciu    gave    Him    a    reply.     Visau    got    out    of     the     body    of 
Mah3,    Laksiui    a    Martya    Laksmi  (Laksmi  of  the    earth)    and    gave  Her 
Daksina    to    Brahma,     Then  with  a  view  to  yield    to  the    Dovas    the  as   a 
fruits    of    thfir    Ivarmas,    Brahran   made    over    to    the    Yajfin    Deva    (the 
Deva  presiding  the  sacrifice]  the     Devi    Daksiua,     offered     by     xsarayana. 
Yajna   Deva,    then,    worshipped    Her   duly   and    recited     hymns     to    Her 
with   great    joy.      Her  colour    was   like    melted   gold  ;  her   lustre  equalled 
koti    Moons  ;    very   lovely,    beautiful,   fiscin  itiog  ;    fac^  resembling   water 
lilies,   of  a  gentle    body;    with    eyes    like    Pddmi    Pal&s^,     born    of     the 
bodv    of  Laksmi,   worshippad    by       Brahma,      wearing      celestial     silken 
(Garments,    her    lips   resembling    like    Bimba    fruits,     chaste,     handsome  ; 
her  braid    of    hair  surrounded    by    Malati  garlands  ;    with  a  sweet  smiling 
face,    ornaraentel    with    jewel    ornaments,    well    dressed,  bathed,    enchant- 
ing   the    minds    of  the    Munis,   below    the    hair     of     her     forehead  the 
dot    of   musk    and    Sindura   scented    with       sandalpaste,       of        spacious 
hips,    with   full    breasts,    smitten     by  the    arrow's    of     K3ma     Deva    (the 
God  of  Love.)     Such  was  the  Daksina  Devi.  Seeing  Her,  the  Yajna  Deva 
fainted.     At    last    he    married    her  according  to  due  rites  and  ceremonies. 
Taking    her    to    a    solitary   place,    he     enjoyed    her    for   full   divine   one 
hundred   years    with    great      joy     like      Laksmi     Nar^yana.     Gradually 
then   Daksina    became     pregnant.     She    remained    so    for    twelve    divine 
vears.     Then     she     duly     delivered  a  nice   son   as    the   fruit   of    Karma. 
When   anv    Karma   becomes   complete,   this     son    delivers     the    fruits   of 
that    Karma.     Yajna  Deva  with  His  wife  Daksina    and    the  above    named 
Karmaphala,  the  bestower  of  the  fruits  of  actions,  gives  the  desired  fruits  to 


982  SRt  MAD  DEV^t  BliiGAVATAM. 

all  their   sacrificial  aots  anclKarmas.     So  the  Pundits,    the  knowers    of  the 
Vecas,  say.     Keally   he,  henceforth,  began  to  give  fruits  to  all  the  persons 
of  their  acts,  with  his  wife  DaksiaS,  and  son,  the  bes tower  of  the    fruits    of 
the    actions.     Ths    Devas    were   all    satisfied    at     this     and     went     awav 
respsetively   to   their  own    abodes.     Therefore,     the     man    who   perform s< 
Karmas,   generally   known   as    Karma    IvartAs,   should    pay  the    DaksinTi 
(the    Sacrificial  fee)  and  so  ho  completes  at  once  his  actions.     It  is     stated 
in    the    Vedas,   that   no   sooner    the    Karma   Karta    paj-s     the     Daksina, 
than    he   obtains    the    fruits    of  his     Karmas     at     once.     In     case     the 
.  Karma    Kart^,   after   he    has    completed    his     acts,    does    not    pay    either 
through  bad  luck  or  through  ignorance,  any    Daksina   to    the    13rahman»s, 
its   amount  is  doubled    if  a  Muhurta,  passes  away  and  if  one  night  elapses, 
its   amount   is    increased,    to  one    hundred   times.     If  three    nights    pass 
away,  and  the  Daksina  not  paid,  the   amount    last      brought     forward,    is 
increased   again    to    hundred   times  ;    if  a    week  passes,  the   last   amount 
is   doubled,  and   if  one    month    passes   away,  the     Daksina    is    multiplied 
to  one   lakh    times.     Tf  one    year   passe?    away,     that    is     increased     to 
ten    millions    of  times    and    the    Karma,   also,     bears     no    fruit.       Such 
a    Karma   Kart^    is    bnown   as    taking    away     unfairly     a     Brahnaana's 
property  and  is  regarded  as  impure.  He  has  no  right  to  any  further  actions. 
For  that  sin,  he  becomes  a  pauper  and   diseased.     Liksmi   Devi  goes  a'.vay 
from   his  house,  leaves  him,  cursing  him  severely.     So    much    so  that    the 
Pitris  do  not  accept  the    Sradh,  I'arpanam  offered  by  that  wretched  fellow. 
So  the  Devas  do  not  accept  his  worship,  nor    the  Fire  accepts  the  oblations 
poured  by    him.     If  the   per?on    that    performs  sacrifices   does    not    pay 
the   sacrificial  fee    that   he    resolves    to    pay   and    he     who     accepts   the 
ofifer   does   not   demand  the  sura,    both    of  them     go    to     hell.      But    if 
the   performer  of  the   sacrifices    does    not   pay  when   the  priests  demand 
the  fee,    then    the   Yajamana   (the      performer     of     the     saerilices)    only 
falls  down    to    hell   as  the  jar,   severed    from    the  rope,  falls  down.     The 
Yajamana     (pupil)     is      denominated     as  a     Brahmasv^pahari     (one  who 
robs  a   Br^hmana's    property)  ;   he    goes  ultimately   to   the  Kumbhipaka 
hell.     There    he    remains   for   one   lakh    years    punished    and    threatened 
by   Yama'a    messengers.     lie    is    then    reborn    as  a  Chanddla,    poor     and 
diseased.     So  much    so   that    his   seven  generations    above  and    his  seven 
generations  below  go  to   hell. 

04-65.  O  Narada  !  Thus  I  have  narrated .  to  you  the  story  of 
Daksina.  What  more  do  you  want  to  hear  ?  Say.  NSrada  said  : — "  O 
Best  of  Munis!  "Who  bears  the  fruits  of  that  Karma  where  no  Daksina 
is  paid.  Describe  the  method  of  worship  thit  was  offered  to  Daksina  by 
Yajna  Deva."  N&rayana  said  : — Whore  do  you  find  the  fruit  of  any 
»a<3rifiQ3     wltlioit    Dikjin^  ?       (i.e.  n^vhora.)      That    Karoia    only    gatj 


Boos  IX.j  CHAPTER  XLV.  98fl 

fruits  where  Daksinas  are  paid.  And  the  fruits  ot  the  acts  void  of  auy 
DaksinS,  Bali  who  lives  in  the  Patala  only  enjoys  ;  and  no  one  else. 
67-71.  For,  in  olden  times,  it  was  ordained  by  VSoiana  Deva 
that  those  fruits  would  go  to  the  king  V-ali.  All  those  that  pertain  to 
^radh  not  sanctioned  by  the  Yedas,  the  charities  made  without  any 
regard  or  faith,  the  worship  offered  by  a  Brahmin  who  is  the  husband 
of  a  Vrisila  (an  unmarried  girl  twelve  years  in  whom  menstruation 
ha"?  commenced),  the  fruits  of  sacrifices  done  by  an  impure  Brahmana 
(a  Brahman  who  fails  in  his  duties),  the  worship  offered  by  impure 
persons,  and  the  acts  of  a  man  devoid  of  any  devotion  to  his  Guru, 
all  these  are  reserved  for  the  king  Bali.  He  enjoys  the  fruits  of 
all  these.  O  Child  !  1  am  now  telling  you  the  Dhy^n,  Stotra,  and  the 
method  of  worship  as  per  Kanva  fcsakhu.  of  Dakaia^  Devi.  Hear. 
When  Yajna  Deva,  in  ancient  times  got  Daksind,  skilful  in  action, 
he  was  very  much  fascinated  by  her  appearance  and  being  love- 
stricken,  began  to  praise  her  :~"  O  Beautiful  One  !  You  were  before  the 
chief  of  the  Gopis  iu  Goloka.  You  were  like  Radhd  ;  you  were  Her  com. 
panion ;    and  you  were  loved  by  Sri  Radha,  the  beloved  of  Sri  Krifcna. 

72-97.     In  the  Rasa  circle,  on  the  B'ull  Moon    night   in  the    month  of 
Kartik,    in   the     great      festival   ot     Radha,     you    appeared     from     the 
right   shoulder   of  Laksmi  ;    hence  you  were  named  Daksina.     O  Beauti- 
ful  One !     Y'ou     were   of  good    nature    before  ;     hence    your      name  was 
Sus'ila.     Next  you  turned   due  to  RuJha's    curse,  into  Daksina,     it,    is    to 
my    great   good    luck    that     y^m     were      dislo:lged    from     Goloka     and 
have    come    here.     0    highly    fortunate    One  !     Now  have    mercy    on   me 
and   accept  me  as    your   husband.     O   Devi  !     You      give     to     all     the 
doers   of  actions,    the   fruits    of  their  works.     Without  you,  their  Karmas 
bear    no    fruit.     So    much  so,    if  you    be    not    present    in     their     actions 
the   works   never   shine  forth  in  brilliant  glory.     Without   Thee,   neither, 
Brahma,    nor  Visnu  nor    Mahes'a  nor   the    Regents    of  the  quarters,  the 
ten   Dikpalas,    can     award   the   fruits  of    actions.     Brahma    is    the    in- 
carnate of   Karma.       Mahes'vara    is     the     incarnate    of     the     fruits     of 
Karmas;  and  I  Visnu  myself  is   the  incarnate  ot    Yajfias.     But  Thou   art 
the   Essence  of  all.     Thou  art  the  Par§,  Prakriti,    without   any   attributes, 
the    Para  Brahma    incarnate,    the     bestower   of    the     fruits     of    actions. 
BhagavSn    Sri   Krisna   carnot  award   the  fruits    of  actions  without  Thee. 
O    Beloved  !    In    every    birth    let   Thou    be     my    Sakti.     O     Thou     jvith 
excellent   face  !    Without  Thee,    I  am  unable    to   finish    well   any  Karma. 
O    Narada!     Thus    praising    Daksina   Devi,   Yajiia    Deva    stood    before 
Her.     She,    born   from     the    shoulder    of  Lalismi,   became   pleased    with 
His   Stotra   and   accepted   Him    for    Her  bridegroom.     If  anybody  recites 
Ibis   Daksina   stotra   during    sacrifice,   he   gets    all   the   results    thereof, 


984  SRI  mad  DEVt  BHiGAVATAM. 

if  anybody  recifces  this  scotrci  iu  tlio  ilijisdya  sacrifice,  Vajapaya, 
(lOtnedha  (cow  sacrifice"!  NArameJha  (mm  sacrifice),  As'vamodba  (horse 
sacrifice),  Langal*  Sacrifice,  Vi§nu  Yajna  tending  to  increase  one's  fame, 
iri  the  act  of  i»iving  over  wealth  or  pieces  of  lands,  digging  tanlis  or  wel  s, 
or  giving  fruits,  in  Gaja  me'^ha  (elephant  sacrifice),  in  Loha  Yajn-i  (iron 
sacrifice),  Svarna  Yajna  (gold  sacrifice),  Ratna  Yajni  (making  over  jewels  in 
sacrifices),  Tarara  YajBa  (eOpper),  oiva  Yajna,  Rudra  Yajna,  Sak'-a 
Yajni,  Ifindhuka  Yajna,  V^runa  Yajna  (for  rains),  Kandaka  Yajna, 
for  crushing  the  enemies,  Snehi  Yajna,  Dharma  Yajna,  Papa  moehana 
YajSi,  Brahmani  Karma  Yajna,  the  auspicious  Prakriti  Yiiga,  sacri 
fiees,  his  work  is  achieved  then  without  any  hitch  or  obstacle.  There  is 
no  doubt  in  this.  The  stotra,  thus,  is  mentioned  now  ;  hear  about 
the  Dhyanam  and  the  method  of  wjrship.  First  of  all,  one  should 
worship  in  the  iiala^n'Sma  stone,  or  in  an  earthen  jar  (Ghata)  Daksinsi 
Devi.  The  Dhyanam  runs  thus  : — "  O  Daksina  !  Thou  art  sprung 
from  the  right  shoulder  of  Lakami  ;  Thou  aro  a  part  of  Kamala  ; 
Thou  art  clever  (Dak§i)  in  all  the  actions  and  Thou  bestowest  the 
fruits  of  all  the  actions."  Thou  art  the  Sakti  of  Visnu,  Thou  art 
revered,  worshipped.  Thou  bestowest  all  that  is  auspicious;  Thou  art 
purity  ;  Thou  bestowest  purity,  Thou  art  good  natured.  So  1  meditate 
on  Thee.  Thus  meditiving,  the  intelligent  one  should  worship  DaksinS 
with  the  principal  manr.ra.  Then  with  the  Vedic  Mantras,  pSdyas, 
etc.  (oiTerings  of  vnricus  sorts)  are  to  be  offered.  Now  the  mantra 
as  stated  in  the  Veda?,  runs  thus  : — *'  Ora  Srim,  Klim,  Hrim, 
Daksinayai  Svaha."  "With  this  mantra,  all  the  offerings,  such  as  pidyas, 
arghyas,  etc,  are  to  be  given,  and  ooe  should  worship,  as  per  rules, 
Daksin^  Devi  with  devotion.  O  Narada  !  Thus  1  have  stated  to 
you  the  anecdote  of  Daksinl.  Happiness,  pleasure,  and  the  fruits  of 
all  karinas  are  obtained  by  this.  Being  eng'gad  in  sacrificial  acts, 
in  this  Bhtiratavarsj,  if  one  hears  attentively  this  Dhyanam  of  Daksin^, 
his  sacrifice  becomes  defectless.  So  much  so  that  the  man  who  has 
got  no  sons  gets  undoubtedly  good  and  qualified  sons  ;  if  he  has  no 
wife,  he  gets  a  best  wile,  good  nitured,  beautiful,  of  slender  waist, 
capable  to  give  many  sous,  sweet  speaking,  humblo,  chaste,  pure, 
and  Kulina;  it  he  be  void  of  learning,  he  gets  leariug  ;  it  he  be  poor 
he  gets  wealth;  if  he  be  vithoutany  land,  he  gets  land  and  if  he 
has  no  attendants,  he  gees  atttendauts.  If  a  man  hears  fjr  one  mouth 
this  stotra  of  Diksiui  Devi,  he  gets  over  all  difficultis  and  dangers, 
bereavements  from  friends,  troubles,  inpnsonments,  and  all  other  calamities. 


I 


fioot  IX.]  CriAPTER  XLVI.  9^5 

Here  ends  the  Forbj-fifth  Chapter  of  the  Niuth  Book  ou  the 
anecilote  of  Dakaina  ia  the  Maha  Pur^naiu  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bh^j^avatam 
of  18,000    vevses  by     Maharsi    Veda  Vyasa, 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

1.  Narada  said: — "  O  Thou,  the  foremost  of  the  Knowers  of  the  Vedas  ! 
I  have  heard  from  you  the  anecdotes  of  ratay  Do  vis.  Now  I  want 
to    hear    the    lives    of   other    Devis  also.     Kindly   describe. 

"2.  Nar^yana  said;— "O  Best  of  the  Brahinanas  !  The  lives  and 
glorious  de.-ds  of  all  the  Devis  are  described  separately.  Now  say, 
which    lives    you    want    to    hear. 

'^.  Narada  said:—"  O  Lord  I  SaSyhi,  Mangala  Chandi,  and  Manasa, 
arc   the    parts    of   Prakriti.      Now    I    want    to    hear  the    lives    of  them. 

4-22.  Narayana  said: — "  O  Child  1  The  sixth  part  of  Prakriti  is 
named  as  Sasthi.  The  Devi  SiSthi  is  the  Presiding  Deity  of  infants 
and  children  ;  She  is  the  May^  of  Visnu  and  She  bestows  sons  to 
all.  She  is  one  of  the  sixteen  Matrikas.  She  is  known  by  the  name 
of  Devasenu.  She  performs  Vratas  (vo.vs)  ;  She  is  the  chas^^e  and 
dearest  wife  of  Skanda.  She  decides  on  the  longevity  of  children  and 
is  always  engaged  in  their  preservatiou.  So  much  so,  that  this  Siddha 
Yogini    always   keeps    the    children   on    her    side. 

O  Best  of  Brahmanas  !  I  will  now  talk  about  the  method  of  worship* 
ping  this  Devi  and  the  history  about  Her  bestowing  children  that  I  heard 
from  Dhirma  Deva.  Hear.  Svayambhuva  Manu  had  one  son  Priyavrata. 
He  was  a  great  Yogindra  and  remained  in  practising  austerities.  So  he 
was  not  inclined  to  have  any  wife.  At  last  by  the  effort  and  request 
of  Brahma,  he  got  himself  married.  But  many  days  passed,  and  ho  could 
not  see  the  face  of  a  son.  Then  Maharsi  Kas'yapa  became  his  priest 
in  the  Putresti  Sacrifice  (to  get  a  son)  ;  and  when  the  sacrifice  was  over,  he 
gave  the  sacrificial  offering  clled  charu  to  his  wife  Malini.  On  eating 
the  charu,  the  queen  Malini  become  pregnant.  For  t»velve  Deva  years  she 
held  the  womb.  After  twelve  years  she  delivered  a  full  developed  sori, 
of  a  golden  colour ;  but  the  son  was  lifeless  and  his  two  eyeballs  were 
upset.  At  this,  the  friends'  wives  became  very  sorry  and  began  to  weep. 
The  mother  of  the  child  became  so  very  sorrowful  that  she  became 
senseless.  O  Muni  !  The  King  himself  took  the  son  on  his  breast  and 
wont  to  the  burning  ground.  There  with  his  child  on  his  breast 
he  began  to  cry    aloud.     Rather    he    got    himself  ready   to    quit  his  own 

124. 


986  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAGAVATAM. 

life  than  leave  the  son  from  aw.iy  his  breasfc.  At  this  time  ha  saw 
in  the  space  overhead  an  aerial  car,  white  as  crystal,  ma ie  of  excellent 
jewels,  coming  towards  him.  The  car  was  shining  with  its  own 
lustre,  encircled  with  woven  silken  cloth,  which  added  to  its  beauty. 
Innumerable  garlands  of  variegatei  colours  gave  it  a  very  nice  and 
charming  appearance.  On  that  car  was  seated  a  Siddha  Yogini,  very 
beautiful,  of  a  lovely  appearance  of  a  colour  like  that  of  white  charapakiis, 
always  youthful,  smiling,  adorned  with  jewel  ornaments,  ever  gracious  to 
show  favour  to  the  devotees.  On  seeing  Her,  the  King  Priyavrata 
placed  the  child  from  his  breast  on  the  ground  and  began  to  wor- 
ship Her  and  chant  hymns  to  Her  with  great  love  and  devotion. 
And  he  then  asked  that  peaceful  lady,  the  wife  of  Skanda,  Who 
was  shinning  like  a  summer  sun  : — "  O  Beautiful  1  Who  art  Thou  ? 
Whose  wife  art  Thou  and  whose  daughter  art  Thou  ?  From  Thy  appearance 
it  seems  that  Thou  art  fortunate  and  respacted    amongst  the      female  sex. 

23-24.  O  Narada  I  In  ancient  times,  when  the  Daityas  dispossessed 
the  Devas  of  their  positions,  this  Lady  was  elected  as  a  general  and  got 
victory  for  the  Devas;  hence  She  was  named  Devasena.  Hearing  the  words 
of  the  King  Priyavrata,  Devasena,  who  fought  for  the  Devas  and  was 
all  good  to  the  whole  world,  said: — 

25-35.  O  Kihg !  I  am  the  mind-born  daughter  of  BrahmS.  My 
name  is  Devasena.  The  Creator  before  created  Me  out  of  His  mind  and  made 
Me  over  to  the  hands  of  Skanda.  Amongst  the  MatrikSs,  I  am  known 
as  §a8thi,  the  wife  of  Skanda.  I  am  the  sixth  part  of  Prakriti  ;  hence 
I  am  named  Sasthi.  I  give  sons  to  those  who  have  no  sons,  wives  to 
those  who  have  no  wives,  wealth  to  the  poor,  and  I  give  works  to  those 
who  are  workers  (karmis.) 

Happiness,    pain,   fear,   sorrow,  joy,  good,   and  wealth  and  adversity  all 
are  the  fruits  of  Karmas.     As  the  result  of  one's  Karmas,   people   get   lots 
of  sons  and  it  is  due    to  the  result  of    one's  Karma    again  that   people    are 
denuded  of  all  the  issues  of  their  family.  As  the  result  of  Karma,  the  people 
get  dead  sons;  and  as  the  result  of  Karma   the  people   get   long  lives.     All 
enjoy  the. fruits  of  their  Karmas,  whether  they  be  well  qualified, or  deformed 
or  whether  they  have  many  wives,  or    whether   they  have  no  wife,  whether 
they    be    beautiful,    religious,    diseased,  it  is  all  through  Karmas,    Karmas. 
Disease  comes    out   of    their     Karmas.     Again  they  get    cured  by    their 
Karmas.     So,      O    King  !     It    is     stated    in    the     Vedas       that     Karma 
is    the     most     powerful    of   all.      Thus    saying,    Devasena  took    the  dead 
child    on    her     lap  ;   and,    by    the    wisdom,  esrly    made    the    child    a!ive. 
The  King    saw,     the     child,    of  a    golden    colour  got   back    his   life  and 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLVI.  98? 

began  to  sLoile.  Thus  bidding  goodbye  to  the  King,  Devasena  took 
the  child  and  became  ready  to  depart,  At  this  the  King's  palate  and 
throat  gjt  dry  and  he  bsg.iu  again  to  chant  hymns  to  Her.  The  Devi 
Sasthi  became  pleased  at  the  stotra  made  by  the  King.  The  Devi  then 
addressed  the  King  and  said  : — "  O  King  !  All  that  is  stated  in  the 
Vedas,  is  made  up  of  Kavmas.  You  are  the  son  of  Sv^yambhuva  Manu,  and 
the  Lord  of  the  three  worlds.  You  better  promulgate  My  worship  in  the 
three  worlds  and  you  yourself  worship  Me.  Then  I  will  give  you  your 
beautiful  son,  the  lotus  of  your  family.  Your  son,  born  in  part  of  Nara- 
y;ina,  will  be  famous  by  the  name  of  Suvrata.  He  will  be  well-quali- 
fied, a  great  literary  man,  able  to  remember  his  conditions  in  his  former 
lives,  the  best  of  Yogis,  performer  of  one  hundred  Yajnas,  the  best  of  &1I, 
bowed  down  by  the  Ksattriyas,  strong  as  one  lakh  powerful  elephants, 
wealth}',  fortunate,  pure,  favourite  of  literary  persons,  lefirned  and 
bestower  of  the  fruits  of  the  ascetics,  renowned  and  bestower  of  wealth 
and  piosperity  to  the  three  worlds.  Thus  saying  Devasena  gave  the 
the  child  to  the  king.  When  the  king  promised  that  he  would  promul- 
gate  Her  worship,  the  Devi  granted  him  boons  and  went  i.p  to  the 
Heavens. 

43.  The  king,  too,  becoming  very  glad  and  tui rounded  by  bis 
ministers,  returned  to  Ms  own  abode  and  informed  all  about  the  son. 
The  lidies  of  the  house,  become  highly  delighted  when^they  heard  every- 
thing. On  the  occasion  of  the  son's  getting  back  his  life,  the  king  per- 
formed everywhere  auspicious  ceremonies.  The  worship  of  Sasthi  Devi 
commenced.  Wealth  was  bestowed  to  the  Brahmins.  Since,  then  on 
every  sixth  day  of  the  bright  fortnight  in  every  month,  great  festivals  in 
honour  of  S  i?thi  Devi  began  to  be  celebrated.  Sinee-then,  throughout  the 
kingdom,  on  every  sixth  day  after  the  birth  of  a  child  in  the  lyino'-in- 
chamber,  Sasthi  Devi  began  to  be  worshipped.  On  the  twenty-first-day,  the 
auspicious  moment,  at  the  ceremoney  of  giving  rice  to  a  child  for  the  firss 
time,  when  sixth  months  old,  and  on  all  other  auspicious  ceremonies  of  the 
children,  Sasthi  Devi's  worship  was  made  extant  and  the  king  himself 
performed  those  worships  with  great  care  and  according  to  due  rules 
Now  I  will  tell  you  about  the  DhySnam  and  method  of  worship  and 
stotra  as  I  heard  from  Dharma  Deva,  and  as  stated  in  Kauthuma  1^4  khS 
Hear.  He  has  said :— In  a  Salagrama  stone,  in  a  jar,  on  the  root  of  a 
Bata  tree,  or  drawing  the  figure  on  the  floor  of  the  rooms,  or  making  an 
image  of  Sasthi  Devi,  the  sixth  part  of  Prakriti  and  installing  it,  one 
should  worship  the  Devi.  The  Dhyanam  is  this  :— <'  0  DevasenH ; 
Thou  art  the  bestower  of  good  sons,  the  giver  of  good  luck  ;  Thou  art 
mercy  and   kindness    and    the    progenitor    of    the    world  ;    Tby  colour  i« 


988  5Rt  MA.D  DEVt  BHAGAVATAM.  :*     <    - 

bright  like  that  of  the  white  Champaka  flowers.  Thou  art  decked  with  jewel 
ornaments.  Thou  art  pure,  and  the  highest  and  best  Devi.  Obieiance  to  The 
I  mediate  on  Thea.  "  Thus  meditating,  the  worshipper  should  place 
flower  on  his  own  head.  Then  again  meditating  and  utterin"  the 
principal  mantra  one  is  to  offer  the  Pudya  (water  for  washing  feet),  Ar^hva 
Achamaniya,  scents^  flowers,  dhup,  li^^hts,  offerings  of  food  and  best 
roots  and  fruits  and  one  should  worship  thus  with  varioui?  things  Sasthi 
Devi  "Om  Hrim  Saathi  Devyai  Svah;a  is  the  principal  Mantra  of  Saslhij 
Devi.  This  great  Mantra  of  eight  letters  a  man  should  repeat  as  his 
strength  allows.  After  the  Japim,  the  worshipper  should  chant 
hymns  with  devotion  and  undivided  attention  and  then  bow  do^vn.. 
The  Stotra  (hymn)  of  Sasthi  Devi  as  per  S:\ma  Veia  i?  very  beautifal 
and  son-bestowing.  The  lotus-born  Brahm4  has  said  : — If  one  repeats 
(makes  Japam)  this  eight  lettered  mantra  one  lakh  of  times,  one 
gets  certainly  a  good  son.  O  Best  of  Munis  !  Xow  I  am  going  to  sav 
the  auspicious    stotra   of  Sisthi    Devi    as  composed  by  Priyavrata.    Flear, 

58-73.     One's  desires  are  fulfilled  when  one  reads  this  very  secret  4otra 
Thus  the  King  Priyavrata  said  :-"0    Devi,    Devasenu  !     Tbo.v    down    to 
Thee.     O    Great  Devi  !  Obeisance    to  Thee  !  Thou  art     the     bestower    of 
Siddhis  ;    Thou     art   peaceful  ;    ob-iisance   to     Thee  !     Thou    art    the    b^^ 
stoker  of  good  ;    Thou  art    Deva-ena  ;    Thou    art   SiSthi     Devi,    I     bow 
down  to   Thee  !    Thou  grantest  boons   to  persons  ;    Thou  bestowest    sons 
and    wealth    to    men.     So  obeisance  to  Thee  !     Thon  givest  happiness    and 
raoksa;  Thou    art   SiSthi     Devi;  I   bow   do  vn     to    Thee.     Thou  thyself 
art  Siddha  ;  so  I   bow   down    to    Thee.     O    Sisthi     Devt  !     Thou    art  the 
sixth  part  of  this  creation;  Thou  art  Siddha  Yogini,  so  I  bow  down  to  Thee 
Thou  art  the  essence,    Thou  art    Sarada  ;   Thou  art  the  Highest  D.vi.  So 
I  bow   down    again    and   again    to    Thee.     Thou  art    the  Presiding   Deity 
Sastht  Devi  of  the  children  ;  I  bow  down  to  Thee.     Thou  grantest   -ood 
Thou  Thyself  art  good  and  Thou  bestowest  the  fruits  of  all  Karmas.  0  Thou' 
O  Sastht  Devi !  Thou  shewest  thy  form  to  thy  devotees  ;  I   bow   down   to 
Thee  !     Thou  art  Suddha  Sattva  and  respected  by   all   the    persons    in   dl 
their   actions.  Thou  art  the  wife  of  Skanda.     All  worship    Thee      O  Sasthi 
Devi  !  Thou  hadst  saved  the  Devas.  So  obeisance  to    Thee  0  Sasthf    Devi  f 
Thou  hast-no  envy,  no  anger  ;   so  obeisance  to  Thee.     O  Sures'vari  r    Give 
me  wealth,  give  me  dear    things,  give  me  sons.     Give  me  respect  f;om  all 
persons;  give     me    victory  ;  slay    my    enemies.  O  Mahesvari  !   Give  m 
Dharma;  give  me  name  and  fame  ;  I  bow  down  again  again  to  Sasthi  Devi 
O^ashiDevilworshpiped    reverentially    by  all  !  Give  me   lands,  ^ive  me 
sub3ects.  give  me  learning;  have  welfare  for   me;    I  bow   down   alrio   and 


r 

I 

Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLVII.  989 

again  to  Sastbi  Devi,  0  Narada  !  Thus  praising  the  Devi,  Prijavrata 
got  a  son,  renowned  and  ruling  over  a  great  kingdom  through  the 
favour  of  Sasthi  De.'i.  If  any  man  that  has  no  son,  hears  this  «totra 
of  Sisthi  Devi  for  one  year  with  undivided  attention,  he  gets  easily  an 
excellent  son,  having  a  long  life.  Tf  one  worships  for  one  year  with 
devotion  this  Davasena  and  hears  this  stotra,  even  the  most  barren 
woman  becomes  freed  from  all  her  sins  and  gets  a  son.  Through  the 
grace  of  Sasthi  D'ivi,  tint  son  bi^comes  a  hero,  well  qualified,  literate, 
renowned  and  loag-lived.  If  any  woman  who  b^ar.s  only  a  single  chihl 
or  delivers  dead  children  hears  with  devotion  for  one  year  this  stotra, 
she  gets  easily,  thiough  the  Devi's  grace,  a  good  son.  If  the  father  and 
mother  both  hear  with  devotion,  this  story  during  the  period  of  their  child's 
illness,  then  the  eiiilJ  becomes    cured  by    the  Grace  of   the    Devi. 

Here  ends  the  Forty-sixth  chapter  of  the  Ninth  Rook  on  the  anecdote 
(.f  Sisthi  Devi  in  the  MahS.  Puranam  Sri  ^fad  Devi  Bhagvatam  of 
18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda   Vyasa. 


OHAPTER  XLVII. 

1-55      Narayana  said  : — "O  Narada  !    1  have   now  narrated    the    anec- 
dote of  SiSthias  stated  in  the  V'eda.s.     Now  hear  tha  anecdote    of  Mangala 
Chand:,  approved  of  by  the  Vedas  and  respected    by    the    literary    persons. 
The  Chandi,  that  is  very  skilled  in  all  auspicious  works    and     who    is    the 
most  auspicious  of  all  good  things,  is    Mangal    Chandika.     Or    the  Chandi 
who  is  an  object    of  worship    of   Mangala    (Mars),  the    son   of  earth    and 
the  bestover  of  desires    id    ]Nranf;ala    Chaiuliku.     Or    the    Chandi     who  i^; 
an  object  of   worship    of    Mangala    of   the    family    of  Manu    who   was    the 
ruler  of  the  whole  worid    composed    of   saven   islands   and     the    bestower 
of  all  desires  is  ]Mangala  Chandi.     Or  it  may  be  that   the    Milla    Prakriti, 
the  (loverness,  the  Ever    (Iracious    DurgS  assumed    the    form    of  Man-->la 
Chandi  and  has  become  the    lata    Devat^    of    womer.     When  there    was 
the  fight  with  Tripur^sura,  this  Mangala  Chandi,  higher  than  the   highest 
was  first  worshipped    by    Mahadeva,    stimulated   by    Visnu,    on  a  critical 
moment).     O    Brahmin  !     While   the    fighting   was  going     on,    a    Daitya 
threw  out  of  anger  one  car  on  Mahadeva     and    as    that   car    was    about  to 
fall  on  Him,   Brahm^  and    VisQu    gave  a  good    advice    when     Mahlideva 
began  to  praise  Durga  Davi"  at    once.     Durga    Devi  that    time   assuming 
the  form  of  Mangala  Chandi  appeared  and  said  "no  fear  no  fear"  BhagavAn 
Visnu  will  be  Thy  Carrier  bnffalo.     I  will  be  also  Thy  Sakti  in    the    action 
and  Hari,  full  of  M^yi,  will  also  help  Thee.    Thou  better  slayest  the  enemy 
that  dispossessed  the  Davas.     0  Child  !  Thus  saying,  the    Devi     Mangala 


900  ^Rt  MAD    DEV!  BHiGAVATAM. 

Chandi  disappeared  and  She  became  the  ^akti  of  Maha  Deva.  Then  wiib 
the  help  of  the  weapon  given  by  Visnu,  the  Lord  of  Uaia  killed  the  Asura. 
When  the  Daitya  fell,  the  Devaa  and  Ri§is  began  to  chant  hymns  to 
Mahadeva  with  devotion  and  with  their  heids  bent  low.  From  the  sky, 
a  shower  of  flowers  fell  instantaneously  on  Mahft  Dava's  head.  Brahm^  and 
Visnu  b^-came  glad  and  gave  their  best  wishes  to  Him.  Then  ordered 
by  BrahmS,  and  Visnu,  ^ankara  bathed  joyously.  Then  He  began  to 
worship  with  devotion  the  Devi  Mangala  Chandi  with  padya, 
Aro'hya,  Achamaniya  and  various  clothings.  Flowers,  sandal  paste,  various 
goats,  sheep,  butfaloe?,  bisons,  birds,  garments,  ornament?,  garlands,  P^ya&'i 
(a  proparation  of  rice,  ghee,  milk  and  sugar),  Pistakx,  honey,  winr, 
and  various  fruits  were  offered  in  the  worship.  Dancing,  music,  with 
instrumeiits  andthe  chanting  of  Her  name  and  o:,her  festivals  commeueeJ. 
Reciting  the  Dhyan  as  in  Madhyindina,  Mah'^deva  offered  everythinij, 
pronouncing  the  principal  Radical  Mantra.  ""Om  Hrim  Srim  Klim  Sarvji- 
pujye  Devi  Mangala  Chindike  Hum  Fhat  Svaha"  is  the  twenty-one  lettered 
Mantra  of  Mangala  Chandi.  During  worship,  the  Kalpa  Vriksa,  the  tree 
yielding  all  desires,  must  be  worshipped.  O  Narada  !  By  repeating  the 
Mantra  ten  lakhs  of  time-s,  the  Mantra  Siddhi  (success  in  realising  the 
Deity  inherent  in  the  Mantra)  comes.  Now  I  am  spying  about  the 
DhyRnam  of  Mangal  Chvndi  a?  stated  in  the  Vedas  and  as  approved  by 
all.  Listen.  "0  Devi  Mangala  Chan  dike  !  Thau  art  sixteen  years  old  ; 
Thou  art  evcr  youthful;  Thy  lips  are  like  Bimbi  fruits,  Thou  art  of  goo<l 
teeth  and  pure.  Thy  face  looks  like  autumnal  lotus;  Thy  colour  is 
like  white  champakas;  Thy  eyes  resemble  blue  lilies;  Thou  art  the  Preserver 
of  the  world  and  thou  bestowest  all  sorts  of  prosperity.  Thou  art  the  Light 
in  this  dark  ocean'  of  the  world.  So  I  meditate  on  Thee."  This  is  the 
Dhyanam.  Now  hear  the  stotra,  which  Mahadeva  recited  before  Her. 
2(5-37.  Mahadeva  said : — Protect  me,  Protect  me.  "O  Mother  ! 
O  Devi  Mangal  Chandi ke  !  Thou,  the  Destroyer  of  difficulties  !  Thou 
givest  joy  and  good.  Thou  art  clever  in  giving  delight  and  fortune.  Thou 
the  bestower  of  all  bliss  and  prosperity!  Thou,  the  auspicious,  Thou  art 
Mangala  Chandik^.  Thou  art  Mangala,  worthy  of  all  good.  Thou  art 
the  auspicious  of  all  auspicious  ;  Thou  bostowest  good  to  the  good  persons. 
Thou  art  worthy  to  be  worshipped  on  Tuesday  (the  Mangala  day);  Thou 
art  the  Deity,  desired  by  all.  The  King  Mangala,  born  of  IManu 
family  always  worships  Thee.  Thou,  the  presiding  Devi  of  Mangala  ;  Thou 
art  the  repository  of  all  the  good  that  are  in  this  world.  Tliou,  the  Bestower 
of  the  auspicious  Moksa.  Thou,  the  best  of  all  ;  Thou,  the  respository 
of  all  good  ;  Thou  makest  one  cross  all  the  Karraas  ;  the  people  worship 
Thee  on  every  Tuesday  ;  Thou  bestowest  abundance  of  Bliss  to  all."  Thus 
praising  Mangal  i  Chandika   with    this    stotra,    and    worshipping    on    every 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLVII.  991 

Tuesday,  Saiubhu  departed.  The  Devi  Sarva  MacgaU  was  first  worshipped 
by  Mahadeva.  Next  she  was  worth ipfed  by  the  planet  Mars  ;  then 
by  the  King  Mangala  ;  then  on  every  Tuesday  by  the  ladies  of  every 
household.  Fifthly  she  was  worshipped  by  all  men,  desirous  of  their 
welfare.  So  in  every  universe  Manga!  Chandika,  first  worshipped  by 
Mahadeva,  cama  to  be  worshipped  by  all.  Next  she  came  to  be  wor- 
shipped everywhere,  by  the  Devas,  Munis,  Miinavas,  Manus.  O  Muni  ! 
He  who  hears  with  undivided  attention  this  stotra  of  the  Devi  Mangala 
Chandika,  finds  no  evils  anywhere.  Rather  all  good  comes  to  him. 
Day  afcer  day  he  gets  sons  and  grandsons  and  so  his  prosperity  gets 
increased,  yea,  verily  increased  ! 

3^5-58,  Narayana  said: — O  Narada  !  Thus  1  narrated  to  you  the  stories 
of  Sa§thi  and  Mangla  Chandika,  according  to  the  Vedas.  Now  hear 
the  story  of  Manasa  that  I  heard  from  the  mouth  of  Dharama    Deva. 

Manasa  is  the  mind-born  daughter  of  Maharsi  Kas'yapa;  hence  she  is 
named  Manasa;  or  it  may  be  She  who  plays  with  the  mind  is  Manasa.  Or  it 
may  be  She  who  meditates  on  God  with  her  mind  and  gets  rapture  in  Her 
meditation  of  God  is  named  jNLanasa.  She  find?  pleasure  in  Her  Own 
Self,  the  great  devotee  of  Visnu,  a  Siddha  Yogint.  For  three  Yugas 
She  worshipped  Sri  Krisna  and  then  She  became  a  Siddha  Yogini.  Sri 
Krisna,  the  Lord  of  the  Gopis,  seeing  the  body  of  Manas^  lean  and 
thin  due  to  austerities,  or  seeing  her  worn  out  like  the  Muni  Jarat  K5,ru 
Called  her  by  the  name  of  Jarat  K^ru.  Henae  Her  name  has  come 
also  to  be  Jr.rat  Karu,  Krisna,  the  Ocean  of  Mercy,  gave  her  out 
of  kindness.  Her  desired  boon  ;  She  worshipped  Him  and  Sri  Krisna 
also  worshipped  Her.  Devi  ManasH  is  known  in  the  Heavens,  in  the 
abode  of  the  Nagas  (serpents),  in  earth,  in  Brahmaloka,  in  all  the  worlds 
£S  ot  very  fair  colour,  beautiful  and  charming,  She  is  named  Jagad 
Gauri  as  she  is  of  a  very  fair  colour  in  the  world.  Her  other 
name  is  Saivi  and  she  is  the  disciple  of  Siva.  She  is  named  Vai|navi  as 
she  is  greatly  devoted  to  Visnu.  She  saved  the  Nagas  in  the  Snake  Sacri- 
fice performed  by  Pariksifc,  she  is  named  Nages'vari  and  Naga  Bhagini  and 
She  is  capable  to  destroy  the  eflr^cts  of  poison.  She  is  called  Vi§ahari. 
She  got  the  Siddha  yoga  from  Mahadeva;  hence  She  is  named  Siddha 
Yogini  ;  She  got  from  Him  the  great  knowledege,  so  she  is  called  Maha 
Jnanayuta,  and  as  she  got  Mritasamjivani  (making  alive  the  dead)  she 
is  known  by  the  name  ot  ^Irifcasanjivani.  As  the  great  ascetic  is  the 
mother  of  the  great  Muni  Astik,  she  is  known  in  the  world  aa 
Astika  mata.  As  She  is  tbe  deal  wife  of  the  great  bigh-souled  Yogi 
Muni  Jarat  Karu,  worihipped  by  all,  she  is  called  as  Jarat 
Karupriya.       Jaratkuru,    Jygadgauvi,    Manasa,  Siddha    Y'ogiui.  Vaisiiavi, 


992  ^r1  mau  devI  bhAgavatam. 

Naga  Bhagiui.  ^aivi,  Nages'vari,  JaratkarupriyS,  Astikam^ta,  Visa- 
bari,  auJ  Mabft  JSauayuta  these  are  the  twelve  names  of  Manasa, 
worshipped  everywhere  in  the  Universe.  He  who  recites  these 
t\VelvG  Dames  while  worshipping  Manasa  Devi,  he  or  any  of 
his  family  has  no  fear  of  snakes.  If  there  be  any  fear  of  snakes  in 
one's  bed,  if  the  house  be  infested  with  snakes,  or  if  one  goes  to 
a  place  difficult  for  fear  of  snakes  or  if  one's  body  be  encircled 
with  snakes,  all  the  fears  are  dispelled,  if  one  reads  this  stotra  of 
Manasa.  There  ia  no  doubt  in  this.  The  snakes  run  away  out  of  fear  from 
the  sight  of  him  who  daily  recites  the  Manasa  stotra.  Ten  lakhs  of 
times  repeating  the  Manasa  mantra  give  one  man  success  in  the 
stotra.  He  can  easily  drink  poison  who  attains  success  in  this  stotra. 
The  snakes  become  bis  ornaments  ;  they  carry  him  even  on  their 
backs.  He  who  is  a  great  Siddha  can  sit  on  a  seat  of  snakes  and 
can  sleep  on  a  bed  of  snakes.  In  the  end  he  sports  day  and  night 
■with   Visnu. 

Here   ends   the  Forty'.seventh  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  Manas&'a 
story  in  the  Maha  Puriinam  Sri    Mad   Devi  BhSgavatam  of  18,000  verses  • 
by  Maharsi  Veda  Vaysa. 

CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

1-30.  Narayaiia  said  : — "  O  Narada  !  I  will  now  speak  of  the 
DhySnam  and  the  method  of  worship  of  Sri  Devi  ^ManasA,  as  stated  in  the 
Sama  Veda.  Hear.  "  I  meditate  on  the  Devi  Manasa,  Whose  colour 
is  fair  like  that  of  Lhe  white  ohuupaka  flowor,  whose  body  is  decked  all 
over  with  jewel  ornaments,  whose  clothing  is  purified  by  fire,  whose  sacred 
thread  is  the  Nagas  (serpent),  who  is  full  of  wisdom,  who  is  the 
foremost  of  great  Jnanius,  who  is  the  Presiding  deity  of  the 
Siddhas,  Who  Herself  is  a  Siddha  and  who  bestows  Siddis  to  all.  " 
O  Muni  !  Thus  meditating  on  Her,  one  should  present  Her 
flowers,  scents,  ornaments,  offerings  of  food  and  various  other 
articles,  pronouncing  the  principal  Seed  Mantra.  O  Narada  !  The  twelve 
lettered  Siddha  Mantra,  to  be  mentioned  below,  yields  to  the  Bhaktas 
their  desires  like  the  Kalpa  Tree.  Now  the  lladical  mantra  as  stated 
in  the  Vedas  is  '•  Om  Hrim  Srim  Klim  Aim  Manasa  Devyai  Sv^ha  '' 
Kepetitioa  of  this,  five  lakhs  of  times,  yields  success  to  one  who  repeats. 
He  who  attains  success  in  this  mantra  gets  unbounded  name  and 
fame  in  this  world.  Poison  becomes  nectar  to  him  and  he  himself 
becomes  famous  like  Dhanvantari.  O  NArada!  If  anybody  bathes 
on  any  Samkrinti  day  (when  the  sun  enters  from  one  sign  to  an- 
other)  and   going    to    a    private    room    (hidden   room),    invokes  the    Devi 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLVIII.  99?? 

Manisa  Is'ana  an  1  worships  Her  with  devotion,  or  makes  sacrifices 
of  animals  before  the  Djvt  on  the  fifth  clay  ot  the  fortnight,  he  becomes 
certainly  wealthy,  endowed  with  sons  and  name  and  fame.  Thus  I 
have  described  to  you  the  method  of  worship  of  Manasa  Oevi.  Now 
hear  the  anecdote  of  the  Di^vi  as  I  heard  from  Dharma.  In  oklen 
day9,  men  became  ijre  itly  terrified  on  earth  from  snakes  and  took  rofufje  of 
Kas'yapa,  the  supreme  amongst  the  Muois.  'i'he  Maharsi  Kas'yapn  became 
very  afraid.  He  then  with  Hrahrn^,  and  by  His  commind  composed  a  mantra 
following  the  principal  m  )tto  of  the  Vedas,  While  composing  this 
mantra,  he  intensely  thought  of  the  Uavi,  the  Presiding  Deity  o(  that 
Mantra,  through  the  power  of  his  TapasyS  and  through  the  mental  power, 
the  Devi  Manasa  appeared  and  was  named  so,  as  She  was  produced  from  the 
sheer  influence  of  mind.  On  being  born,  the  girl  went  to  the  abode  of  Sankara 
in  Kailasa  and  began  to  worship  Him  and  chant  hymns  to  Him  with  devotion. 
For  one  tLousand  Divine  years,  the  daughter  of  Kas'yapa  served 
Mahadeva  when  He  became  pleased.  He  gave  her  the  Great  Knowledge, 
made  Her  recite  the  Sama  Veda  and  bestowed  to  her  the  eight- 
lettered  Krisna  mantra  which  is  like  the  Kalpa  Tree.  Srim,  Hrim  Kltm 
Krisnaya  Naraah  was  the  eight  lettered  Mantra.  She  got  from  Him 
the  Kavaeha  (amulet)  auspicious  to  the  three  worlds,  the  method  of 
worship  and  all  the  rules  of  Puraseharana  (repetition  of  the  name  of 
a  deity  attended  with  burnt  offerings,  oblations,  etc.)  and  went  by 
His  command  to  perform  in  Puskara  very  hard  austerities,  Tliere  she 
worshipped  Krisna  for  the  three  Yugas.  Sri  Krisna  then  appeared  before 
Her."  On  seeing  Krisna,  immediately  the  girl,  worn  out  by  austeri- 
ties, worshipped  Him,  and  she  was  also  worshipped  by  Sri  Krisna. 
Krisna  granted  her  the  boon  "  Let  you  be  worshipped  throughout  the 
world  "  and  departed.  O  N^rada  !  She  was  thus  first  worshipped  by  the 
Supreme  Spirit,  the  Devi  Krisna  ;  secondly  by  Sankara  ;  thirdly  by  the  • 
Maharsi  Kas'yapa  and  the  Devas.  Then  she  was  worshipped  by  the  Munis, 
Maous,  Nagas,  and  men  ;  and  She  became  widely  renowned  in  the 
three  worlds.  Kas'yapa  gave  Her  ever  to  the  hands  of  JaratkSru 
Muni.  At  the  request  of  the  Brahmin  Kas'yapa,  the  Muni  Jurat  Karu 
married  Her.  After  the  marriage,  one  day,  being  tired  with  his 
long  work  of  Tapasytl,  Jarat  Karu  laid  his  head  on  the  hip  and  loins  of 
his  married  wife  and  fell  fast  asleep.  Gradually  the  evening  came  in. 
The  sun  set.  Then  Manasa  thought  "  If  my  husband  fails  to  per- 
form the  Sandhya,  the  daily  duty  of  the  Brahmanas,  he  would  be 
involved  in  the  sin  of  Brahmahaty^."  It  is  definitely  stated  in  the 
SSsbras,  that  if  any  Brahmana  does  not  perform  his  Sandhy^l  in  the  morn- 
ing and  in  the  evening,     he     becomes     wholly      impure     and      the      sins 

125 


I 


994  SRt  MAD  DEVl  BHIGAVATAM. 

Brahmahattyl  and  other  crimes  come  down  on  his  head."  Arguing  thus, 
these  thoughts  in  her  mind,  as  commanded  by  the  Vedas,  at  last  she  a\\aken 
ed  her  husband,  who  then  got  up  from  his  sleep. 

31-39.  The  Muni  Jarat  Oru  said :— "  O  Chaste  One  !  I  was 
sleeping  happily.  Why  have  you  thus  interrupted  my  sleep  ?  All 
his  vows  turn  out  useless  who  injures  her  husband.  "  Her  tapas,  fastings, 
»ifts,  and  other  meritorious  works  all  come  to  vaii  who  do  things 
unpleasant  to  her  husband.  If  she  worships  her  husband,  she  is  said 
to  have  worshipped  Sri  Krisna.  For  the  sake  of  fulfilling  the  vows  of 
the  chaste  women,  Hari  himself  becomes  their  husbands.  All  sorts 
of  charities,  gifts,  all  sacrifices,  fastings,  practising  all  the  virtues, 
keeping  to  truth,  worshipping  all  the  Devas,  nothing  can  turn  out  equal 
to  even  one-oixteenth  part  of  serving  one's  husband.  She  ultimately  goes 
with  her  husband  to  the  region  of  Vaikuntha,  who  serves  her  husband 
in  this  holy  land  Bhdrata.  She  comes  certainly  of  a  bad  family  who 
does  unpleasant  acts  to  her  husbind  or  who  uses  unpleasant  words  to 
her  husband.  She  goes  to  the  Kumbhipdka  hell  as  long  as  the  Sun  and  ^foon 
last  and  then  she  becomes  born  as  a  Chandali,  without  husband  and  son. 
Speaking  thus,  Jarat  Karu,  the  bast  of  the  Munis,  became  angry  and 
his  lips  began  to  tremble.  Seeing  this,  the  best  Manasil,  shivering 
with    fear,    addressed    her    husband  :  — 

I  have  broken  your  sleep  and  awakened  you,  fearing  you  might  miss  your 
time  of  SandhyS.  I  have  committed  an'oflfence.    Punish  me  as  you   think.      I 
know  that  a  man  goes  to  the   K^lasutra  hell  as  long  as  the  Sun  and  Moon 
last  in  this  world,  who  throws  an  obstacle  when   any  man   eats,    sleeps     or 
enjoys  with  the  opposite  sex.  O  NSrada  !     Thus  saying,  the  Devi    ManasH 
fell  down  at  the  feet   of  her  husband  and  cried  again  and    again.     On    the 
other  hand,  knowing   the  Muni  angry,   and    ready  to  curse    her,    the    Sun 
came  there  with  Sandhy^  Devi.  And  He  humbly  spoke  to  him  with  fear  : — 
"  O  Bhagavan  1     Seeing  Me  going    to  set,  and  fearing  that  you'raay  miss 
Dharma,  your  chaste  wife  has  awakened  you.     0  Brahmin!  Now  1  am  also 
under   your  refuge;  forgive   me.     0    Bhagavan!     You  should    not  curee 
Me.     The  more  so,   a  Brahmana's    heart  is  as    tender  as  the   fresh  butter. 
The  anger  of  a  Brahman  lasts  only    half  the  twinkling   of  an  eye    (Ksan). 
When  a  Brslhmana  becomes  angry,    he  can  burn    all    this    world    and    can 
make  a  new  creation.     So    who   can  possess  an  influence  like  a  Brahmana 
A  Brahmin  is  a  part  of  Brahmsl  ;  he  is  shining  day  and  night  with  the  Tejas 
of  Brahma.     A  Br^hoj^na    meditates    always    on  the     Eternal     Light    of 
Brahma.     O    Narada  I     "  Hearing  the    words   of  the    Sun,  the  Brahmin 
became   satisfied   and  blessed    Him.     The  Sun  also  vvent  to  His  own  place, 
thus  blessed  d^aly.     To  keep  his  proaiisa,  the    Brahmin  Jaratk^ru    quitted 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLVIII.  995 

Manasa.     She  became    very   sorry  and  began   to  cry   aloud  with  pain  and 
anguish.     Being  very  much  distressed  by   the    then   danger,    she  remem 
bered    Her    Ista   Deva,   Mahadeva,  Brahmel,  Hari  and  Her  father  Maharfi 
Kas'yapa.  On  the  very  instant  when  Manasa  remembered,  Sri  Krisna,    the 
L:)rd  of  the  Gopis,  MahSdeva,  Brahma  and  Mahar§i  Kas'yapa  appeared  there. 
Then  seeing  his  own  desired  Deity  Sri  Krisna,  superior  to  Prakriti,   beyond 
the  attributes,  JaratkSru  began  to  praise  Him  and  bowed   down   to    Him 
repeatedly.     Then  bowing    down    to    Mahadeva,    Brahma    and    Kas'yapa, 
he  enquired   why  they  had   come  there.     Brahma,   then,  instantly    bowed 
down  at  the  lotus  feet  of  Hrisikes'a  and  spoke    in    befitting    words   at  that 
time  if  the  BrShmin  Jaratkaru  leaves  at  all    his  legal    wife,   devoted  to  her 
own  Dharma,   he  should  first  of  all  have    a  son   born    of  her   to   fulfil   his 
Dharma.     O  Muni  !     Any  man   can   quit  his   wife,   after  he   has    impreg- 
nated her  and  got   a  son.     But   if    without   having  a   son,  he    leaves    his 
wife,  ihen  all  his    merits   are  lost   as  all  water     leaks  out   of  a   sieve   or 
a  strainer.     O  N^rada  !     Hearing   thus  the  words   of  Brahma,    the  Muni 
Jaratkaru    by  his   Yogic  power  recited  a  Mantra   and    touching   the  navel 
of  Manas^  spoke  to  her  : — "  O  Manasa  !  A  son  will  be  born   in  your  womb 
self-controlled,  religious,  and  best  of  the  Br^hmanas. 

61-77.     That   son    will  be    fiery,    energetic,  renowned,   well-qualified, 
the  foremost   of  the    Kuowers    of  the  Vedas,  a  great  Jnanin   and  the  best 
of  the  Yogis.     That    son   is   a    true   son,    indeed,   who  uplifts  his   family 
who  is  religious    and  devoted   to  Hari.     At  his  birth  all   the  Pitris    danoe 
with  great  joy.     And  the  wife  is  a  true  wife  who  is  devoted  to  her  husbandi 
good-natured   and  sweet-speaking  and  she  is  religious,   she  is  the   mother 
of  sons,  she  is'  the  woman  of   the  family   and  she  is  the    preserver   of    the 
family.     He  is  the  true   friend,  indeed,   the  giver  of   one's   desired    fruits, 
who  imparts  devotion]to  Hari.     That  father  is  a  true  father  who  shows  the 
way  to  devotion  to  Hari.  And  She  is  the  True  Mother,  through  whom  this 
entering  into  wombs  ceases  for  ever,  yea,  for  ever  !  That   sister  is  the  true 
kind  sister  from  whom  the  fear  of  Death  vanishes.     That  Guru  is  the  Guru 
who  gives  the  Visnu  Mantra   and  the  true  devotion  to  Visnu.     That  Guru 
is  the  real  b^stower  of  knowledge  who  gives  the  Jnanam  by  which  5ri  Krisna 
13  meditated   in  whom   this  whole  universe,  moving  and    non-moving  from 
the    Hrahm^  down    to  a  blade    of  grass,   is  appea-ing    and    disappearing. 
There  is  no  doubt  in  this.     What     knowledge  can  be    superior    to  that    of 
Sri  Krisna.     The  knowledge  derived  from  the  Vedas,  or  from  the  sacrifices, 
or  from  any  other  source  is  not  superior  to  the  service  to    ^ri  Krisna.  The 
devotion  and  knowledge  of  5ri  Hari  is  the  Essence  of  all  knowledge;  all  else 
is  vain  and  mockery.  It  is  through  this  Real  Knowledge;  that  this  bondage 
from  this  world  is  severed.  But  tho  Guru  who  does  not  impart  this  devotion 


996  SRt  MAD  DEVi  BHiOAVATAM. 

and  koowledga  of  Sri  Hari  is  uot  the  real  Guru  ;    rather    he  is    an    enemy 
that  leads  one  to  bondage.   Verily  ha  kills  his  disciple  when  ha  does  not  free 
him.     He  can  never  be  called  a  Guru,  father  or  friend  who  does  not  free  his 
disciple  from  the   pains  in  the  various  wombs  and  from  the  pains    of    death. 
Verily  he  can  never  be    ciUed  a    friend  who  does  not  show  the  way    to    the 
Undecayin<j  Sri  Krisna,  the  Source  of  the  Highest  Bliss.  So,  O  Chaste  One  ! 
You  better  worship  that    Undeeaying   Para  Brahma    Sri    Krisna,    Who  is 
beyond  the  attributes.     O  Beloved  !     I  have    left  you    out   of   a  pretence; 
please  excuse  me  for  this.  The  chaste  women  are  always  forgiving  ;  never  they 
become  angry  because  they  are  born  of  Sattvagunas.     Now  I  go  to  Puskara 
for  TapasyS  ;  you  better  go  wherever  you   like.     Those  who  have  no    desire 
have    their    minds    always    attached  to  the    lotus    feet  of    Sri    Krisna.     O 
NSrada  !     Hearing  the  words  of  Jaratkaru,  the  Devi  Manasa  became    verj^H 
much  distressed   and  bewildered  with  great    sorrow.     Tears  began   to    How 
from  her  eyes.     She  then    humbly    spoke    to    her   dearest    husband  : — "  O 
Lord  !     I  have  not   committed  any  such    ofifence,    as   you   leave    me  alto- 
gether   when  I  have  thus  broken   your  sleep. 

73-115.     However  kindly   show  Thyself    to  me    when    I  will  recollect 
you.     The  bereavement   of  one's  friend    is  painful  ;    more  than  that  is  the 
bfeavement  of  a  son.    Again    one's    husband     is    dearer   than    one  hundred 
sons;  so    the    breavement   of  one's    husband    is    the    heaviest  of  all.     To 
women,  the  husband    is  the    most    beloved  of     all      earthly   things  ;   hence 
he  is  called  Priya,  i.  e.,   dear.     As  the  heart  of   one  who    has    only    one  son 
is  attached  to  that  sou,  as  the  heart  of  a  Vaisnava  is    attached  to  i^ri  Hari  ; 
as  the  mind    of  one-eyed  man  to  his    one  eye,  as  the    mind    of  the    thirsty 
is  attached  to  water,    as    the    mind   of   the     hungry  is    attached  to   food, 
as  the  mind  of   the    passionate    is  attached    to  lust,    as  the  mind  of    a  thief 
is  attached  to  the  properties    of  others,     as  the    mind  of  alewd  man  to   his 
prostitute,  as  the    mind  of  the  learned     is  attached    to  the    ^as'tras,    as  the 
mind   of  a    trader  is    attached     to      his     trade,    so    the    minds    of  chaste 
women  are  attached  to  their  husbands.      Thus  saying,  Manas^  fell  down    at 
the  feet   of  her  husband.     Jaratkaru,  the  ocean  of     mercy,  then,    took    her 
for  a  moment  on    his    Up   and   drenched    her     body    with    tears    from    his 
eyes.     The    Devi  Manasa,  too,  distressed  at   the  breavement    of  her   hus- 
band also  drenched  the  lap    of  the    Muni  with  tears  from    her  eyes.     Some 
time  after,  the  true  knowledge  arose  in  them  and    they  both  became  free  from 
fear.     Jaratkaru  then  enlightened    his  wife   and  asked  her  to    meditate    on 
the  lotus    feet    of   5ri    Krisna^the  Supreme   Spirit  repeatedly  ;  thus    saying 
he  went  away    for    his    T^pasya.     Manasa,    distressed     with    sorrow,    went 
to  his  Ista  Deva  MahruLn-a  on  Kailas'a.     The  auspicious    l§iva  uud  Parvati 
both    consoled    her     with    knowledge     and    advice.  Some  days  after,  on  an 


Book  IX.]  ClIAPTERXLVIIl.  997 

auspicious   day  and  on  au    auspicioiH    mD,ii3tit  shj    gave   birbh    to    a    son 
born   in    p-irfe    of  N^rayana,    and    as  the  Guru     of  tlie  Yogis    and  as    the 
Preceptor  ot  the  J fianins.     When   the    child      was   in    mother's    womb,    he 
heard  the  highest  knowledge  from  the  mouth  of    Mahadeva  ;     therefore  he 
was  born      as  a  Yogindra   and   the  Spiritual   Teacher  of  the  Jnanins.     Cn 
his  birth,    Bhagavan  Sankara    performed    his    natal       ceremonies    and   per- 
formed    various    auspicious   eereuionies.      The     Brahmanas     chanted    the 
Vedas    for  the    welfare  of  the  child  ;  various    wealth  and  J3wels    and    Kiri- 
tas  and  invaluable    gems  were  distributpd  by  Sankara  to   the    Brahmanas  ; 
and  Parvati    gave    ono    lakh    ov-i    and    virioas   jewels  t^j    others.        After 
some  days,  Mabadeva   taught  him  the    four  Vedas  with    their  Angas    (six 
limbs)  and  gave  him,  at  last,  the  Mrityumjaya  Mantra.  As  in    Manas^'s  mind 
there  reigned  the  devotion  to    her  husband,   the  devotion  to    her    lata  Deva 
and  Guru,  the  child's  name  was  kept    Astika. 

Astika  then  got  the  Mahl,  Mantra  from  Sankara    and    by     his     com- 
mand   went    to    Puskara    to    worship    Visnu,    the    Supreme  Spirit,  There 
he   practised    tapasya    for   three    lakh  divine  years.    And    then  he  returned 
to  Kailasa,  to      bow  down    to  the  great    Yogi    and    the    Lord    Sankara, 
Then,   bowing    down    to  Sankara,     he    remained    there    for    some    time 
when    Manasa    with    her   sou    Astika  went  to  the  hermitage  of  Kas'yapa, 
his    father.     Seeing  Mauasa   with  son,  the  Maharsi's  gladness     knew    no 
bounds.     He    fed  innumerable  Brahmanas    for    the   welfare    ol    the  child, 
and    distributed    lakhs    and   lakhs     of    jewels.     The      joy     of     Aditi    and 
Diti    (the    wives    of     Kas'yapaj     knew     no     bounds  ;  Manasa     remained 
there    for   a   long,   long    time    with    hi-^   sou.     O    Child  !    Hear    now  an 
anecdote   on   this.     One    day    due   to  a  bad    Karma,    a  Brahmana  cursed 
the   king     Pariksit,    the    son     of     Abhimanyu  ;    one    Ri§i's     son     named 
bringi,  sipping  the  water  of  the  river  Kaus'iki    cursed    thus  : — "  When  a 
week  expires,  the  snake  Taksaka  will  bite  you,  and  you  will  be  burnt  with  the 
poison  of  that  snake  Taksaka.  "4iearing  this,  the  King  Pariksit,  to  preserve 
his  life,  went  to  a  place,  solitary  where  wind  ^even  can    have  no   access    and 
he  lived  there.  When  the    week  was   over,    Dhanvantari    saw,  while  he  was 
going  on  the  voacl,  the  snake  Taksaka  who  was  also  going  to  bite  the    king. 
A  conversation    and   a   great     friendship    arose    between    them  ;    Taksaka 
gave     him  voluntarily   a    gem  ;  and     Dhanvantari,     getting     it,,    became 
pleased    and    went    back    gladly    to  his    house.      The    king    Pariksit    was 
lying    on    his    bed-stead    when    Taksaka    bib   the   king.     The    king   died 
soon    and    went     to    the    next    world.     The  king    Janamejaya    then     per- 
formed   the    funeral     obsequies    of     his     father     and     commenced     after- 
wards   the    Sarpa     Yajfia    (a   sacrifice  where    the  snakes   are  the    victims). 
In    that   sacriliec,    iuunmerable    snakes     gave     up    their     lives     by     the 
Brahma    Teja     (the  fire   of   the  Brahmins).     At     thie,    Takgaka   became 


998  ^Rt  MAD  BEvt  BHAgAVATAM 

terrified  auJ  took  refuge  of  Itidra.  The  Brahmins,  then,  in  a  body,  became, 
ready  to  burn  Taksaka  along  with  Indra,  when,  Indra  and  the  other  Devas 
went  to  Manasa.  Mahendra,  bewildered  with  fear,  began  to  chant 
hvmna  to  Manasa.  Manasa  calleJ  his  own  son  Astika  who  then  went  to 
the  sacrificial  assembly  of  the  king  Janamejaya  and  begged  thai  the 
lives  of  Indra  and  Taksaka  be  spared.  The  king,  then,  at  the  com- 
mand ot  the  Brahmanas,  granted  their  lives.  The  king,  then,  com- 
pleted his  sacrifice  and  gladly  gave  the  Daksinas  to  the  Brahmins.  The 
Brahmanas,  Munis,  and  Devas  collected  and  went  to  Manasa  and 
worshipped  Her  separately  and  chanted  hymns  to  Her.  Indra  went 
there  with  the  various  articles  and  He  worshipped  MinasS  with  devotion 
and  with  great  love  and  care  ;  and  He  chanted  hymns  to  Her.  Then  bowin^ 
down  before  Her,  and  under  the  instructions  of  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahes'a,! 
offered  her  sixteen  articles,  sacrifices  and  various  other  good  and 
pleasant  things.  O  Narada  !  Thus  worshipping  Her,  they  all  went 
to  their  respective  places.  Thus  1  have  told  you  the  anecdote  of 
Manas^.     What    more    do   you    want    to  hear.     Say. 

Narada  said  :— ''  O  Lord  !    How    did    Indra  praise  Her  and  what    was 
the  method   of  His  worshipping    Her  ;  I  want    to  hear   all    this. 

117-124.  NArayana  said  :~Indra  first  took  his  bath;  and,  performing 
Achamana  and  becoming  pure,  He  put  on  a  fresh  and  clean  clothinf»  and 
placed  ManasS  Devi  on  a  jewel  throne.  Then  recitiuo-  the  Vedio 
mantras  he  made  Her  perform  [[er  bath  by  the  water  of  the  Mand4kint 
the  celestial  river  Ganges,  poured  from  a  jewel  jar  and  then  He  made 
Her  pat  on  the  b>autitul  clothing,  uninflammable  by  fire.  Then  He 
caused  sandalpaste  to  be  applied  to  Her  body  all  over  with  devo- 
tion and  offered  water  for  washing  Her  feet  and  Arghya,  an  offerino- 
of  grass  and  flowers  and  rice,  etc.,  as  a  token  of  preliminary  worship. 
First  of  all  the  six  Devatas  Ganes'a,  Sun,  Fire,  Visnu,  ^iva,  and 
5iva  were  wor.^hipped.  Then  with  the  ten  lettered  mantra  "  Om 
Hrlm  Srim  Manasa  Devyai  Sv^ha  "  offered  all  the  offerings  to  Her. 
Stimulated  by  the  God  Visnu,  Indra  worshipped  with  great  joy  the  Devi 
with  sixteen  articles  so  very  rare  to  any  other  person.  Drums  and 
instruments  were  sounded.  From  the  celestial  heavens,  a  shower  of 
flowers  was  thrown  on  the  head  of  Manasa.  Then,  at  the  advice  of 
Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahes'a,  the  Devas  and  the  Brahmanas,  Indra, 
with  tears  in  his  eyes,  began  to  chant  hymns  to  Manisa,  when  his 
whole   body    was    thrilled    with    joy    and    hairs    stood    on    their  ends. 

125-145.  Indra  t,aid  :■--"  O    Devi  Manase  !     Thou  staudest  the  highest 
amongst   the   chable    women.    Therefore    1     want    to     chant     hymns   to 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLVIII.  99 

Thee.  Thou  arfc  higher  than  the  highest.  Thus  art  most  supreme.  What 
1  now  praise  Thae  ?  Chanting  hymns  is  characterised  by  the  des- 
can  eription  of  one's  nature  ;  so  it  is  said  in  the  Vedas.  But,  O  Prakriti  !  I 
am  unable  to  ascer.ain  and  describe  Thy  qualities.  Thou  art  of  the  nature 
of  Suddha  Sittva  (higher  than  the  pure  sattva  unmixed  with  any  other 
Gunae)  ;  Thou  art  free  from  anger  and  malice.  The  Muni  Jaratk^iru 
could  not  forsake  Thee  ;  therefore  it  was  that  he  prayed  for  Thy 
separatio  n  before.  O  Chaste  One  !  1  have  now  worshipped  Thee.  Thou 
art  an  object  ot  worship  as  my  mother  Aditi  is.  Thou  art  my 
sister  full  of  mercy  ;  Thou  art  the  mother  full  of  forgiveness.  O  Sures'vari  ! 
It  is  through  Thee  that  ray  wife,  sons  and  my  life  are  saved.  1  am 
worshipping  Thee.  Let  Thy  love  le  increased.  O  World-Mother  ! 
Thou  art  eternal  ;  though  Thy  worship  is  extant  everywhere  in  the  universe, 
yet  I  worship  Thee  to  have  it  exteaded  further  and  further.  O  Mother  ! 
Those  who  worship  Thee  with  devotion  on  the  Sankr^nti  day  of  the 
month  of  Asadha,  or  on  the  Naga  Pafieharai  day,  or  on  the 
Sankr^nti  day  of  every  month  or  on  every  day,  thay  get  their  sons  and 
grandsons,  wealth  ani  grains  increased  and  become  themselves  famous, 
well  gratified,  learned  and  renowned.  If  anybody  do  not  worship 
Thee  oit  of  ignorance,  rather  if  he  censures  Thee,  he  will  be  bereft  of 
Laksmi  and  he  will  ])e  always  afraid  of  snikes-  Thou  art  the  Griha  Laksmi 
of  all  the  householders  and  the  IlSja  Laksmi  of  Vaikuntha,  Bhagavan  Jarat 
Karu,  the  great  Muni,  boru  in  part  of  NSrayana,  is  Thy  husband.  Father 
Ka'syapa  has  creited  Thee  mentally  by  his  power  of  Tapas  and  fire  to 
preserve  us  ;  Thou  art  his  mental  creation  i  hence  thy  name  is  Manasa. 
Thou  Thyself  hast  become  Siddhft  Yogini  in  this  world  by  thy 
mental  power  hence  thou  art  widely  known  as  ManasS  Devi  in 
this  world  and  worshipped  by  all.  The  Devas  always  worship  Thee 
mentally  with  devotion  ;  hence  the  Pundits  call  Thee  by  the  name 
of  Manas^.  O  Devi  !  Thou  always  servest  Truth,  hence  Tho-i  art 
of  the  nature  of  Truth.  He  certainly  gets  Thee  who  always  thinks  of  The:) 
verily  as  of  the  nature  of  truth.  O  Nurada  !  Thus  praising  his  sister  Manasft 
and  receiving  from  her  the  desired  boon,  Indra  went  back,  dressei  in  his 
own  proper  dress,  to  his  own  abode.  The  Devi  Manasa,  then,  honored 
and  worshipped  everywhere,  and  thus  worshipped  by'her  brother,  lono- 
lived  in  Her  father's   house,  with  Her  son. 

One  day  Surabhi  (the  heavenly  cow)  came  from  the  Goloka  and  bathed 
ManasS,  with  milk  and  worshipped  Her  with  great  devotion  and  revealed 
to  Her  all  the  Tattva  J  Fionas,  to  be  kept  very  secret.  (This  is  now  made  the 
current  story  wherever  any  Lingam  suddenly  becomes  visible.)  O  Ndrada  ! 
Thus  worshipped  by  the  Davas  and  Surabhi,  the  Devi  Manasft  went  to  the 
Heavenly  re Jiona.    O    Mial.'On   getj  nj   fear  from  snakes    who    recites 


1000  5r1  mad  DEVt  bhIgavatam. 

this  holy-  Stotra  eompoaed  by  Indra  and  worships  Manas a;hia  family  descen- 
dants  are  freed  from  the  fear  due  to  snakes.  If  anybody  becomes  Siddha  in 
this  Stotra,  poison  becomes  nectar  to  him.  Reciting  the  stotra  five  lakhs  of 
times  makes  a  man  Siddha  in  this  Stotra.  So  much  so  that  he  can 
sleep  on  a  bed  of  snakes  and  he  can  ride  on  snakes. 

Here  ends  the  Forty-eighth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  anec- 
dote of  Manas^  in  the  Mahi  PurSaam  5ri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of 
18,000  verses  by  Mahar?i  Veda  Vydsa. 


CHAPTER  XLIX 

1.     Narada   said    :  — "  O    Bhagavan  !     Who      wa=i      that        SiiraK 
who   came   down   from  the    region   of   Goloka.     I  want  to  hear  Her  life.  , 
Kindly  describe.  | 

2-23.     Nar3,yana  spoke  : — "  O  Devarsi  I     The     Devi    Surabhi    sprang 

in  the  Goloka.     She  was  the  first  in  the  creation  of  cows  ;  and,   from  Her, 

all  the  other  eo.vs   have  come.     She  is  the  Presiding  Deity  of  the  cows.     I 

will   now  speak  Her  history  from  the  very    beginning.    Hear.    Before,  She 

appeared  in  the  holy  Brindaban.     One  day  the  Lord  of  Rldhu,    snrrounded 

by  the  Gopis,  was  going  gladly  with  Radh^  to  the  Holy  Vrind^van.    There 

he  began  to  enjoy  in  a  solitary  place  with   great  pleasure.     Ha  is  All    "Will 

and  suddenly  a  desire  arose  in  His  mind  that  He   would  drink  milk,    Then 

He  created  eis'ly  the  Davi  Surabhi,  full  of  milk,  with    Her  calf,  from    His 

own  left  side.     The  calf  of  Surabhi  is  nothing  else  but  Her  wish  personified. 

Seeing  Surabhi,    Sridama    milked    tfer  in  a  new  earthen  jar.     The  milk  is 

mora  sweet  than  even  the  nectar  and  it  prevents  birth  and  death  !  The  Lord 

of  the  Gopis  drank  the  milk.     What  milk  droppel  out  of  the  jar,  created  a 

big  tank  !  The  tank  measured  one  hundred  Yojanas  in  length  and  in  breadth 

and  is  known  in  Goloka   by   the    name  of.Rsirasigara,     The  Gopikas*    and 

Ridha  play  therein.     At  the  will  of  ^ri  Krisna,  Whose  Nature  is  All  Will, 

that    tink   become   full    of  exoelient  gems  end   jewels.     Then,    from  every 

pjre   of  Surabhi,    there  appeared    suddenly    one    lakh    koti    Kimadhenus 

(cows  who  yield  accoriing    to  oue's.desires).     So  much    so  that  eve-ry  Gopa 

who   used   to  live   there    in  Goloka      had   one       K4m^dhenu    and    each 

house  had  one  such.   Their  calves    again    became    so    many    that    no   limit 

can  be  put  to  them.     Thus,  by  degrees,  the  whole  universe  was  filled    wit^ 

cows.  This  is  the  origin  of  the  Cow  Creation.  O  Narada  !    Surabhi  was  first 

worshipped  by    Bhagavan  Srt  Krisna.    Therefore  She  is  so  much  honoured 

everywhere.     On    the   day    next   the    Dewali    night   (new    moon     in  the 

month    of  October),    Surabhi    w.is    worshipped    by    the    command    of  Sri 

Krisna.     This  is  heard  from  the  mouth  of  Dharma  Dova,     O  Child  I  Now 

hear   the    Dhyanam,  Stotra,  and    the    mathol  of    worship  of    Surabhi     ai 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  XLTX.  1001 

mentioned  in  tba  Vedas.  I  will  no^  speak  on  this."  "  Om  Sarabhyai 
namah,"  is  the  principal  six-lettered  mantra  of  Snrabhi.  If 
anybody  repeats  this  mantra  one  lakh  times,  he  becomes  Siddha 
in  this  mantra.  This  is  like  Kalpa  Vriksa  (a  tree  yielding  all 
desires)  to  the  devotees.  The  Dhyanam  of  Sarabhi  is  mentioned  in 
the  Yajur  Vedaa.  Success,  prosperity,  increase  and  freedom  come  as 
the  result  of  worshipping  Surabhi.  The  Dhyanam  runs  as  follows  : — "  O 
Devi  Surabhi  !  Thou  art  Laksmi,  Thou  art  best,  Thou  art  R^dha  ; 
Thou  art  the  chief  companion  of  ?ri  RSdha,  Thou  art  the  first  and  the 
source  of  the  cow-creation  Thou  art  holy  and  Thou  sanctifiest  the  persons  ; 
Thou  fufiUest  the  desires  of  the  devotees  and  Thou  purifiest  the  whole 
universe.  Therefore  I  meditate  on  Thee."  Reciting  this  Dhyanam,  the 
Brahmanas  worship  the  Devi  Surabhi  in  jars,  on  the  heads  of  cows,  or  on 
the  pegs  where  cows  are  fastened  or  on  S&lagrSma  stone  or  in  water  or  in 
fire.  O  Muni  !  He  who  worships  with  devotion  on  the  next  day 
morning  after  Div^li  night,  becomes  also  worshipped  in '  this  world. 
Once  a  day  in  the  V4r4hakalpa  Surabhi  did  not  yield  milk,  by  the 
influence  of  Vi^nu  M4ya.  The  Devas  became  very  anxoious.  Then  they 
want  to  the  Brahmaloka  and  began  to  praise  Brahma.  At  His  advice, 
Indra  began  to  chant  hymns  (Stotra)  to  Surabhi  : — 

24-33.  The  Derendra  said  :— "  O  World-Mother  !  O  Devi  !  O  MahA 
Devi  !  O  Surabhi !  Thou  art  the  source  of  the  cow  creation.  Obeisance 
to  Thee  !  Thou  art  the  dear  companion  of  R^dha  ;  Thou  art  the  part 
of  Kamali  ;  Thou  art  dear  to  Sri  Krisna  ;  Thou  art  the  mother  of  cows, 
I  bow  down  to  Thee.  Thou  art  like  the  Kalpa  Vriksa  (a  tree  yielding  all 
desires),  Thou  art  the  Chief  of  all  ;  Thou  yieldest  milk,  wealth  and  pros- 
perity and  increasfl  thereof.  So  I  dow  down  to  Thee.  Thou  art  aus- 
picious, Thou  art  good.  Thou  bestowesfc  cows.  Obeisance  to  Thee  I  Thou 
givest  fame,  name  and  Dharma.  So  I  bow  down  to  Thee."  O  NArada  1 
Thus  hearing  the  praise  sung  by  Indra,  the  eternal  Surabhi,  the  origin- 
ator of  the  world,  became  very  glad  and  appeared  in  the  Brahmaloka, 
Granting  boon  to  Maheodra,  so  very  rare  to  others  and  desired  by  hira» 
Subrabhi  went  to  the  Goloka.  The  Devas,  also,  went  back  to  their  own 
abodes.  The  whole  world  was  now  full  of  milk  ;  clarified  butter  came  out 
of  the  milk  ;  and  from  clarified  buttar  sacrifices  began  to  be  performed  and 
the  Devas  were  fed  and  they  became  pleased,  O  Child  !  He  who  recites 
this  holy  Stotr.i  of  Surabhi  with  devotioa,  gets  cows,  other  wealth,  name, 
fxme  and  t^ons.  The  reciting  of  this  Stotra  qualifies  one  as  if  he  had 
bathed  in  all  the  eaorad  placet-  of  pilgrimages  and  he  had  acquired  the 
fruits  of  all  the  sacrifices.     Enjoying  happiness  in  this    world,  he   goes   in 

126 


1002  ^Rt  MAD  DEVl  BHA.GAVATAM  . 

the  end  fc3  tha  Temple    of  ^i-i  Krisia      Th-ji-a  liviag  long  in    the  service  of 
Krisna,  he  bacomes  able  to  ba  a  son  of  Brahma. 

Here  ends  the  Forfcy-ninth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  tljr> 
anecdote  of  Surabhi  in  the  Maha  Puranam  5ri  Mad  Devi  Bhugavatim  ut 
18,000  verses   by  Mahargi     Veda  Vyasa. 

CHAPTER  L.  « 

1-4,     N4rada   said  :— "  O    Bhagavan  !     I    have    heard    all    the    anecB' 
dotes   of  Prakriti,   as   according    to  the    ^astras,  that  lead  to  the  freedom 
from   birth  and   death  in    tHs  world.     Now    I    \rant    to   hear    the    verjfll 
secret    history    of    Sri    Radh^    and    D.irga   as    described    in    the   Veda?. 
Though  you  have  told  me  about  their  glories,  yet  I  am  not  satisfied.  Verily^ 
where  is  he  whose  heart  does  not  melt  away  on  hearing  the  glories  of  both  d^ 
them  I    This  world  is  originated  from  their  parts  and  is  being   controUeds 
by  them.     The  devotion  towards  them  frees    one    easily  from  the  bonds  of 
Samsftra  (rounds    of    birth  and  death).    O    Muui  !     Kindly  describe  now 
about  them. 

6-44r.  Nar^yana  said  :— "  O  Narada  !  I  am  now  describing  the 
characters  of  Radha  and  Durg^,  as  described  in  tha  Vedas  :  listen.  I  did 
not  describe  to  anybody  this  Secret  which  is  the  Essence  of  all  essences 
and  Higher  than  the  highest.  This  is  to  be  kept  very  secret.  Hearing 
this,  one  ought  not  to  divulge  it  to  any  other  body.  Radha  presides  over 
the  Prlna  and  Durga  presides  over  the  Buddhi.  From  these  two,  the 
Mulaprakriti  has  originated  this  world.  These  two  Saktis  guide  the 
whole  world.  From  the  Mahavirat,  to  the  small  insect,  all,  moving  or 
non-moving,  are  under  the  Mulaprakriti.  One  must  satisfy  them.  Unles 
these  two  be  satisfied,  Mukti  cannot   be    obtained. 

Therefore  one  ought  to  serve  Mula  Prakriti  for  Her  satisfaction.  Now 
of  the  two  in  MuU  Prakriti,  I  will  describe  fully  the  RIdhS  Mantra. 
Listen.  Brahm^,  Visnu,  and  others  always  worship  this  mantra.  The 
principal  mautra  is  "  ori  Radhayai  Svah3."  By  this  six  lettered  mantra 
Dharma  and  other  fruits  all  are  obtained  with  ease.  If  to  this  six 
lettered  Mula  mantra  Hrim  be  ad  led,  it  yields  gems  and  jewels 
as  desired.  So  much  so,  if  thou?and  ko{i  mouths  and  one  hundred 
koti  tongues  are  obtained,  the  glory  of  this  mantra  cannot  be  des- 
cribed. When  the  incorporeal  wo'v.'.o  cf  Mula  Prakriti  was  heard  in 
the  Heaveu?,  this  mantra  was  obtained,  first  by  lirisna  in  the  Rasa 
Mandalam  in  the  region  of  Golaka  whfjre  all  love  sentiments  are 
played :  (The  Vedas  declare  him  as  Raso  vai  Sah).  From  Krisna, 
Vifnu     got   the      Mantra;    from    Visnu,     Brahnca   got  ;   from     Brahmft 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER    L.  1003 

Virilt  got,  from  Virc^t,  Dharma,  and  from  Dharraa  I  have  got  this 
Mmtra,  Repaatiog  that  Mantra,  I  am  known  by  the  nama  of  Ri^i. 
Brahin^  and  the  other  Davas  meditate  always  on  the  Mdia  Prakriti 
with  greatest  joy  and  eestaey,  "Without  the  worship  of  of  RadhS, 
never  can  the  worship  of  ^ri  Krisna  be  done.  Sj  men,  devoted  to 
Visnu,  should  first  of  all  worship  RSdhS.  by  all  means.  Rsidha  is  the 
Presiding  Daity  of  the  Prana  of  Sri  Krisna.  Hence  Sri  Krisna  is  so 
much  subject  to  RaJhJi.  The  Lidy  of  the  RIsa  Mandaiam  remains 
always  close  to  Him.  "Without  Her  Sri  Krisna  could  not  live  even 
for  a  mDmeut.  The  name  Ridha  is  derived  from  "Rridhnoti"  or  ful- 
fills all  desires.  Hence  Mdla.  Prakriti  is  termed  Radha.  I  am  the 
Risi  of  all  the  mmtras  but  the  Darg^  Mantra  mentioned  in  this 
Ninth  Skandha.  Gayatri  is  the  chhanda  (mantra)  of  those  mantras 
and  Radhika  is  the  Devata  of  them.  Really,  Nart^yana  is  the  Risi 
of  all  the  mantras  ;  Gdyatri  is  the  chhanda  ;  Pranav.i  (om)  is  the 
Vija  (seed)  and  Bhuvanes'vari  (the  Directrix  of  the  world)  is  the 
Sdkti.  Fir^t  of  all  the  principal  mantra  is  to  be  repeited  sir  times  ; 
then  meditation  of  the  great  Devi  Raihika,  the  Sakti  of  the  R^sa 
is  to  be  done,  as  mentioned  in  the  Sama  Veda.  The  meditation  of 
RMha  is  as  follows:— 0  Devi  Radhike  !  Thy  colour  is  like  white 
Champaka  flower  ;  Thy  face  is  like  the  autumnal  Full  Moon  ;  Thy 
body  shines  with  the  splendour  of  ten  million  moons,  Thy  eyes  look 
beautiful  like  autumnal  lotus ;  Thy  lips  are  red  like  Bimba  fruits, 
Thy  loins  are  very  heavy  and  decked  with  the  girdle  (K^nchi)  orna- 
ment ;  Thy  face  is  always  gracious  with  sweet  smiles  ;  Thy  breasts 
defy  the  frontal  globe  of  an  elephant.  Thou  art  ever  youthful  as 
if  twelve  years  old ;  Thy  body  is  adorned  all  over  with  ornaments  f 
Thou  art  the  waves  of  the  ocean  of  SringSra  (love  sentiments.)  Thou 
art  ever  ready  to  shew  Thy  grace  to  the  devotees;  on  Thy  braid  of 
hair  garlands  of  Mallika  and  Mftlati  are  shining  ;  Thy  body  is  like  a 
creeping  plant,  very  gentle  and  tender  ;  Thou  art  seated  in  the  middle  of 
RSsa  Mandaiam  as  the  Chief  Directrix  ;  Thy  one  hand  is  ready  to 
grant  boons  and  another  hand  expresses  "Have  no  fear."  Thou  art  of 
a  peaceful  appearance ;  Thou  art  ever  youthful  ;  Thou  art  seated  on  a 
jewel  throne;  Thou  art  the  foremost  guide  of  the  Gopik^s  ;  Thou  art 
dearer  to  Krisna  than  even  His  life;  O  Parame'svari  !  The  Vedas  reveal 
Thy  nature.  Meditating  thus,  one  is  to  bathe  the  Devi  on  a  S^lagrama 
stone,  jar,  yantra  or  the  eight  petalled  lotus  and  then  worship  Her  duly. 
First  the  Devi  is  to  be  invokf.d  ;  then  P4dya  anl  Asana,  etc.,  are  to  be 
offered,  the  principal  Mantra  being  pronounced   at  every  time  an  offering 


i 


1004  5r1  mad  DEVl  BHAgaVATAM 

is  given.  After  giving  water  for  washing  both  the  feet,  Arghya  is  to  be 
placed  on  the  head  and  Aohanianiyam  water  to  be  offered  three  times  on  the 
face.  Madhuparka  (an  oblation  ol'  honey,  milk  etc.)  and  a  cow  giving  a 
<»ood  quantity  of  milk  are  next  to  be  offered.  Tijen  ■  the  yantra  is  to  be 
thought  of  as  the  bathing  place  where  the  Devt  is  to  be  bathed.  Then  ller 
body  is  to  be  wiped  and  a  fresh  cloth  given  for  putting  on.  Sandal  paste 
and  various  other  ornaiuents  are  next  to  be  given.  Various  garlands  of 
flowers  with  Tulasi  Manjari  (flower  stalks)  Parijata  flower  and  Safcapatra 
etc.,  then,  are  to  be  offered.  Then  within  the  eight  petal?,  the  family 
members  of  tho  Devi  are  to  be  thought  of ;  worship  is  next  to  be  offered  in 
the  right  hand  direction  (with  the  hands  of  the  watch).  First  of  all,  Malil- 
vati  on  the  petal  in  front  of  (on  the  east)  the  Devi,  then  Madhavi  on  th 
southeast  corner,  then  Ratnamala  on  the  south,  Sus'ilS  on  the  south-wea 
Sas'ikaU  on  the  west,  Pi\rijAta  on  the  north-west,  Pardvati  on  the  north 
and  the  benefactions  Sundari  en  the  north-east  corner  are  to  be  worshipped 
in  order.  Outside  this,  BrUhmt  and  the  other  Mat-ikas  are  to  be  woi shipped 
and  on  the  Bhupuras  (the  entrances  of  the  yantra,)  the  Regents  of  the 
quarters,  the  DikpSlas  and  the  weapons  of  the  Devi,  thunderbolt,  etc.,  are  to 
be  worshipped .  Then  all  the  attendant  Deities  of  the  Devi  are  to  be 
worshipped  with  scents  and  various  other  articles.  Thus  fini=hin'>  the  wor- 
ship, one  should  chant  the  §totra  (hymns)  named  Sabasra-nama  (thousand 
names)  §totra  with  care  and  devotion.  O  Narada  !  The  intellicrent  man 
who  worships  thus  the  R^ses'vari  Devi  Radha,  becomes  like  Visnu  and 
goes  to  the  Go-loka. 

He  who  performs  the  brith— day  anniversary  of  5ri  Rgidha  on  the  Pull- 
Moon  day  of  the  month  of  K^rtik,  gets  the  blessings  of  6ri  Radh4  who 
remains  near  to  him.  For  some  reason  Radha,  the  dweller  in  Goloka  was  born 
in  Brindaban  as  the  daughter  of  Vrisavauu.  However,  according  to  the 
number  of  letters  of  the  mantras  that  are  mentioned  in  this  chapter, 
Purascharana  is  to  be  made  and  Homa,  one-tenth  of  Purascharana,  is 
to  be  then  performed.  The  Homa  is  to  be  done  with  ghee,  honey,  and  milk 
the  three  sweet  things  mixed  with  Til  and  with  devotion. 

45.  N&rada  said :— "  O  Bhagavan  ;  Now  describe  the  Stotra  (hymn) 
Mantra  by  which  the  Devi  is  pleased. 

46.100.  Nlrayanasaid:— "O  NSrada !"  Now  I  am  saying  the 
R§idh&  Stotra.  Listen.  "  0  Thou,  the  Highest  Deity!  the  Dweller  in  RSsa 
Mandalam  1  I  bow  down  to  Thee  ;  O  Thou,  the  Chief  Directrix  of  the  Rdsa 
Mtnialvn;  O  Thou  dearer  to  Krifna  than  His  life  even,  I  bow  down 
to  Thee.    0  Thou,  the   Mother  of  the  three   Lokas  I  0  Thou  tho  Ooean  of 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  L.  1005 

meroy!  Be  pleased.     Brahuiii,  Vigau  and  the  other   Devas  bow  down  before 
Thy  lotus  feet.     Thou  art  Sarasvati  ;  Thou  art  S^vitri  ;  Thou  art  Sankari 
I  bow  down  to  Thee  ;  Thou  art   Ganga  ;  Thou    art    Paduiavati  ;  Thou  art 
Saethi  ;  Thou  art  Mangala  Chandiki;  Thou  art  Manasa  ;  Thou  art  Tulasi; 
Thou  art  Darga;  Thou  art  Bhagavati  ;  Thou  art  Laksmi  ;  Thou   art   all,   I 
bow  down  to  Thee,  Thou  art  the  Mula  Prakriti  ;  Thou   art   the   Ocean   of 
mercy.  Obesiancc  to  Thee!  Be  merciful  to  us  and  save  us  from  this  ocean  of 
Sams^ra  (round  of  brith  and  death).     O  Narada  !  Anybody  who  remembers 
Radha  and  reads  this  Stotra  three  times    a   day   does  not  feel   the  want  of 
any  thing  in  this  world.     He    will    ultimately   go   to  Goloka   and  remain 
in   the    Rasa  Mandalam.     O  Child  !  This  great  secret  aught  never    to  be 
given  out  to  any.     Now   I  am   telling  you  the  method  of    worship   of  the 
Dufg^    Devi.  Hear.     When    any    one    remembers    Durg^    in  this  world, 
all  his  difficulties  and  troubles  are  removed.     It  is  not  seen  that  anybody 
does       not       remember     Durga.  She  is      the      object     of      worship   of 
all.  She  is    the   Mother  of  all   and  the   Wonderful    Sakti    of  MabMeva. 
She   is   the    Presiding  Deity    of  the   intellect  (Buddhi)    of    all    and    She 
controls    the     hearts    of    all    and    She  removts  the  great  difficulties  and 
dangers      oi  all.     Therefore      She      is  named     Durga      in       the    world. 
She  ia  worshipped    by   all,    whether  a  Saiva  or   a   Vaianava.     She   is    the 
MAlil  Prakriti  and  from  Her  the  creation,    preservation  and    destruction  of 
the  universe  proceed.     O  Narada  !  Now  I    am    eaying    the    principal    nine 
lettered  Durga  Mantra,  the  best  of  «11  the  Mantra?.     "Aim    Hrim    Klim 
Ch&mundayai  Vichehe  "  is  the  nine  lettered    Vija    mant.'-a  of   ^ri  Durga  ; 
it  is  like  a  Kalpa  Vriksa    yielding    all   desires.     One    fhould    worship  this 
mantra  by    all  means.     Brahma  Visnu,  and  Mahes'a  are    the  Risis  of  this 
mantra  ;  Gayatri,   Usnik  and    Anusthubha    are  the   chhandas;  Mahakali, 
Maha  Laksmi  and    Sarasvati   are   the    Devatas  ;  Rakta  Dantikii,    Durga. 
and  Bhramari  are  the    Vijas.     Nanda,    S^kambbari,    and   Bhlma    are  the 
Saktis  and  Dharma  (Virtue),  Artha  (wealth)  and  Kama  {desires\»are    the 
places     of  application    (Viniyoga).     Assign  the    head    to  the  Ri?i   of  the 
mantra    (Ny^sa) ;  assign    the    chhandas    to    the   mouth  and    assign    the 
Devat^  to  the  heart.     Then  assign  the  Sakti    to  the    right    breast    for  the 
Buceess  and  assign  the  Vija  to  the  left  breast. 

Than  perform  the  Sadamga  Nyasa  as  follows  r*— Aim  HridaySya  namah, 
Hrim  Si'rase  Sv^ha,  Klim  Sikh^y^m  Va§at,  Chamund^yai  Kavach^ya 
Hum,  Vichehe  Netr^bhyam  Vausat,  "Aim  Hrim  Klim  Chamupdayai 
Viohche  "  Karatalapriajhabhyam  Phat.  Next  say  touching  the  corres- 
ponding parts  of  the  body: — "  Aim  namah  Sikhayam,  Hrim  Namah" 
OQ  the  right  eye  ;  "  Klira  Nim\h  "   on  the  daft  eye,  Chtm   Nimih   *'  on 


lOOfl  ^k!  mad  DEVt  13HACtAVATAM. 

the  right  ear,    '   Mum    namah  "   on  the    lefb  ear,   ndam  Namah  "  on   the 
nostrils;   Vim  Namah    oa   the    fac3  ;    "  Cbchem  Namih  "    on   the    anus 
and    finally    "  Aim   Hrim    Klim    Chumuudayai   Viebcho  "    on    the    whole 
body.     Then  do  the  meditation  (dhydn)  thus  :— "  O  ChSmunde  !     Thou  art 
holding  in  Thy    ten    hands  ten  weapons  viz  ,  Kh^d^a  (axe)  Chakra  (disc) 
Gad^  (club),    Vana  (arrows),  Chapa  (bow),  Parigha,  Sula  (spear\  Bhus'undi 
Kapala,  and  Khadga.     Thou  art  Mahu  Kali  ;  Thou  art  three-eyed ;    Thou 
art     decked     with    various      ornaments.      Thou   shinest    like    Lilanjan  (a 
kind  of  black  pigment).    Thou  hast  ten  faces  and  ten  feet.     The  Lotus  born 
Brahmll  chanted  hymns  to  Thee   for    the  destruction    of  Madhu  Kaitabha 
I  bow  down  to    Thee."     Thus  one   should    meditate  on  Mah^  Kill,  of  the 
nature  of  Kamavija  (the  source   whence  will  comes).     Then  the    Dhyinam 
of  Maha  Laksmi  runs   as  follows  :— "  O    Mah^  Laksmi,   the  destroyer  of 
Mahisa?ura  1     Thou  boldest   the  garland  of  Aksi  (a  kind  of  seed),    Paras'u 
(a    kind   of  axe),    Gada    (club),    I?u    (arrows),    Kulis'a    (the  thunderbolt) 
Padma   (Lotus),    Dhauu  (bow),    Kundika  (a    student's    waterpot,  Kaman- 
dalu),    Danda  (rod  for  p'lnishmenfcj,    Sakti  (a  kind  of  weapon),  Asi  (sword\ 
Charma  (shield)    Padma  (a  kind  of  waterlily),  Ghanti    (bell,)    ^urapStra) 
(a  pot  to  hold  liquor),  Sula  (pickaxe)    Pas'a  (noose)  and  Sadarsana  (a   kind 
of  weapon.  Thy  colour  is  of  the  Rising  Sun.     Thou  art  seated  oa    the    red 
Lotus.  Thou  art    of  the     nature     May^vija   (the    source   whence  female 
energy   comes).      So  Obeisance  to  Thee  !  (The   Vija  and  the  Devi  are  one 
and  identical).     Next  comes  the  Dhydiian  of  Mahil  Sarasvati  as  follows  ; — 
0  Maha   Sarasvati  !     Thou   boldest  bell,    pickaxe,   plough  (Hala),    Conch 
shell,  Musala  (a  kind  of   club),   Sudars'aua,    bow  and    arrows.     Thy    colour 
is  like  Kunda   flower  ;    Thou  art  the  destroyer  of  Sumbha   and   the    otliet 
Daityas  ;   Thou  art  of  the  nature  of  Vanivija    (the  source    whence   know- 
ledge, speech  comes).     Thy  body    is    filled  with  everlasting  existence,  in- 
telligence and  bliss.     Obeisance   tp  Thea  !     O  Narada  !     Now   I  am  going 
to  say  on  the  Yantra  of  Maha  Sarasvati.     Listen.     First    draw  a   triangle. 
Draw  inside  the  triangle  eight  petalled   lotus    having  twenty-four    leaves. 
Within  this  draw  the  house.     Then   on  the  Yantra  thus    drawn,  or  in   the 
Salagr^ma  stone,  or  in  the  jar,  or    in    image,  or    in   the    Vanalingam,    or 
on  the  Sun,    one  should  worship   the  Devi    with    oneness    of  heart.     Then 
worship  the  Pitha,  the  deities  seated  also  on    the  dais,    i.  e.,  Jaya,  Vijaya, 
Ajita,  Aghora,  Mangala  and  other  Pitha    Saktis.     Then  wor.«hip    the    at- 
tendant  deities  edled  Avarana  Puja  : — Brahnijl  with  Sarasvati  on  the  east, 
NSr&yana  with  Laksmi  on  the  Nairirit  corner,  ^ankara  with  Parvati  o.i  the 
VAyu  earner,  the  Lion  on  the  north    of  the    Devi,  and    MahSsura  on  the 
left  side  of  th?  Dovi  ;    fiially    worship    M^hi^a    (buffalo).     Next    worship 


booK  iX.]  CHAPTER  L.  1007 

Ndudija,  Uik'oiimta,  Sikitnbhari,  SivH,  Darg^,  BhimS,  and  Bhramart. 
Thea  on  the  eight  peials  worihip  Br^hmi,  Mahos'vari,  Kaumslri,  Vaiflnavi, 
Varahl,  Naca  Siinht,  Aiudii,  and  Ch^mund^.  Next  commencing  from 
the  leaf  in  front  of  the  Devi,  worship  on  the  twenty 'four  leaves  Visnu 
Miya,  ChstanS,  Bakliii,  Nidri  (sleep),  hunger,  shadow,  5akti,  thirst,  peace, 
specief!  (Jabi),  molesty,  faith,  fame,  Laksiui  (wealth),  fortitude,  Vriti,  ^ruti 
memory,  mercy,  Tusti,  Pusti  (nourishment),  Bhrdnti  (error)  and  other  Mat- 
rikas.  Next  on  the  corners  of  the  Bhiipura  (gates  of  the  Yantra),  Ganes'a 
Ksettrapalas,  Vatuka  and  Yoginis  are  to  be  worshipped.  Then  on  the 
outsida  of  thit  Indra  and  tha  other  D.^vas  furnished  with  weapons  are 
to  be  worshippsd  as  par  the  aforesaid  rules.  For  the  satisfaction  of  the 
World-Mother  various  nice  offerings  and  articles  like  those  given  by  the 
royal  personages  are  to  be  presented  to  the  Mother;  then  the  mantra  is  to  be 
repeated,  understanding  its  exoteric  and  esoteric  meanings.  Then  Saptas'ati 
stilra  (Chandi  patha)  is  to  be  repsated  before  the  Devi.  There  is  no  other 
stotra  like  this  ia  the  thres  worlJ.-.  Thus  Durga,  the  Deity  of  the  Devas,  is  to 
be  appeased  every  day.  He  who  does  this  gets  within  his  easy  reach  Dharma, 
Artha,  Kama,  and  Moksv,  the  four  main  objects  of  human  pursuits  (virtue, 
wealth,  enjoyment  and  final  beatitude).  0  Narada  I  Thus  I  have  des- 
cribed to  you  the  method  of  worship  of  the  Devi  Durga.  People  get  by 
this  whit  they  want.  Hari,  Brahma,  an  1  all  the  Devas,  Manus,  Munis, 
the  Y"ogis  full  of  knowledge,  the  As'ramis,  and  Laksmi  and  the  other 
Davas  all  meditate  on  Sivaii.  Ona'a  birth  is  attained  with  success  at  the 
remembrance  of  Durga.  The  fourteen  M»nus  have  got  their  Manuship 
and  the  Devas  their  own  rights  by  meditating  on  the  lotus  feet  of  Durga.  O 
NSrada  !  Thus  I  hive  describsd  to  you  the  very  hidden  histories  of  the 
Five  Prakritis  and  thair  parts.  Tnen,  verily,  the  four  objects  of  hnraan 
pursuits  Dharma,  Artha,  Kama  and  Moksa  are  obtained  by  hearing  this. 
He  who  has  no  sons  gets  sons,  who  has  no  learning  gets  learning  and 
whoever  wants  any  thing  g^ts  that  if  he  hears  this.  The  Devi  Jagad- 
dhatri  becomes  certainly  pleased  with  him  who  reads  with  his  mind  con- 
centrated on  this  for  nine  nights  before  the  Devi.  The  Devi  becomes  obe- 
dient to  him  who  daily  reads  one  ehipter  of  this  Ninth  Skandha  and  the 
reader  also  does  what  is  acceptable  to  the  Devi.  To  ascertain  before- 
hand  what  effects,  merits  or  demerit=i,  would  accrue  from  reading  this 
■Bh^gavata,  it  is  necessary  by  examining  through  the  hands  of  a  virgin 
girl  or  a  Brahmin  child,  the  auspicious  or  inauspicious  signs.  First 
make  a  Sauk-ilap  (resolve)  and  worship  the  book.  Then  bow  down  again 
and  again  to  the  Devi  Durga.  Then  bring  there  a  virgin  girl,  bathed 
well  and  worship  her  duly  and    have    a    golden   pencil  fixed  duly  in     her 


1008  5r1  mad  DEVI  BHAQAVATA.M. 

baud  and  placad  in  the  middle  on  th.^  bod3\  Then  calculate  the  auspicious 
or  inauspicious  effects,  as  the  case  may  be,  from  the  curves  made  by 
that  pencil.  So  the  effects  of  reading  this  Bha^avata  would  be. 
If  the  virgin  girl  be  indifferent  in  fixiug  the  pencil  within  the  area  drawn, 
know  the  result  of  reading  the  Bh'^gavata  would  be  similar.  There  is 
no   doubt  in  this. 

Here  ends  the  Fiftieth  Chapter  of  the  Ninth  Book  on  the  Glory  of 
oakti  in  the  Mahapuranam  Srimat  Davi  Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses 
by  Mahargi  Veda  Vy^sa. 

Here  ends  the  Ninth  Book. 


The  Ninth    Book  Completed. 

Extracts  from  the  C.dcutta,  Rivlew-N'o.  X.LVIL,  M'lrck  1855. 
The  oikfcas. — Thsir  charictiaristics  and  Pricbisil  inflieiiea  in  soaiety. 
In  the  Mirkindqya  Parinim,      Nitura  (Prakriti)    is    said   "  to  have 
assumed    thr>)e    transcanient    for  ns,    aC2ording   to    her   three    Gunas  or 
qualities,   and   in    each    of   th3m  to    have    proiaG:)d    a  pair  of   divinities, 
Brahma  aaJ  Sarasvati,    Mihjs'a   aal    Kali,   Visnu    and    Laksml,    after 
whose  intermarriage,  Bi'ahma  ani  Sirasvati    formad     the    mundane  ^gg^ 
which  Mahes'a  aud  Kali  divided    into  halves;    and    Visau,    together  with 
Lakfmi,  preserved  from  destruction. 

The  Tantras,  which  are  full  of  mysteries  and  mystical  symbols,  while 
they  admit  the  three  first  forms  of  the  female  principle  to  be  severally 
the  representatives  of  the  three  primary  Gunas,  derive  their  origin  from 
the  conjunction  of  Bindu,  or  the  sound  called  AnusvS,ra,  and  marked  (*) 
with  the  Bija  or  roots  of  mantras  or  inoantationi.  Every  speoifio 
mantra,  or  a  mantra,  pecaliar  or  exclusively  belonging  to  any  divinity, 
consists  of  Bija  or  root,  and  the  Anu3v3,ra,  which  together  from 
what  is  called  a  Nada  ;  and  it-  is  from  the  N4da,  or  thsi  combination 
of  the  two  symbols,  that  the  Three  forms  of  oakti  are  said  to  have 
had  their  origin.  But  this  symbolical  representation,  the  Tantras,  _ 
which  exalt  oiva  and  his  bride,  above  all  other  divinities,  mean,  ^ 
that  Bindu  and  Bjja  severally  represent  Siva  and  Sakti,  the  parents 
of  all  other  gods  and  goddesses.  Thus: — '♦  The  Bindu,  which  is  the 
soul  of  biva,  and  the  Bija  which  is  the  soul  of  Sakti,  together 
form  the  N4da,  from  which  the  three  Saktis  are  born  (Kriy4 
Sira  Tantra).  Here  is  another  attempt  of  the  worshippers  of  Siva 
and  his  S  akti  to  identify  their  guardian  divinities  with  the  Supreme 
Brahma . 


fiooK  tX.]  CHAPTER    L.  1009 

In  the  Goraks.i  SAtnhlfca,  we  real  a^  follows,  '^irUl,  astion,  ^ndiuteUi' 
(jen^e  are  in  ofJer  the  sourcas  of  Gauri,  tbs  wife  of  Siva,  Br^hmi,  the  wife 
of  Brahma  and  Vai3nivi,  the  wife  of  Visnu.  The  theory  dismisses  alto- 
jjethor  the  notion  of  the  three  Gunas,  ond  substitutes  will,  action,  and 
intelligence  in    their  place. 

Again  the  Sistras,  it  appears,  have  increased  the  number  of  the  female 
divinities,  according  as  thev  have  increased  the  number  of  the  male  deities 
or  their  incarnaiions.  The  Kurma  PurSnam  gives  five  forms  of  the  origi- 
nal Sakti  :  "And  she  (Mula  Prakriti)  became  iu  the  act  of  creation  five- 
fold by  the  will  of  the  supreme."  And  the  forms  which,  according  to  tbis 
authority  the  original  Prakriti  is  said  to  have  assumed,  are: — 1st,  DurgS, 
the  bride,  Sakti,  or  Miya  of  Siva;  2nd,  Laksmi,  the  bride,  Sakti,  or 
yihyk  of  Visnu;  3rd  Sarasvati,  the  same  of  Brahma,  or  in  the  Brahma 
Vaivartta  PariQam  of  Hari,  whilst  the  fourth,  Savitri  is  the  bride  of 
Brahma.  The  fifth  division,  KadhS,,  is  unquestionably,  as  Dr.  Wilson 
very  justly  remarks,  "a  modern  intruder  into  the  Hindu  pantheon." 

In  every  successive  creation  of  t  le  universe,  the  MiiU  Prakriti  is  said 
"to  assume  the  different  gradations  of  'A-nsa-rupini,  Kal^-riipini,  and 
KaUmsa-rupini,  or  manifests  herself  in  portions,  p»rts  and  portions  of 
parts  and  further  subdivisions.  Thus  the  writers  of  the  PufSnas  state: — 
"In  every  creation  of  the  world,  the  Devi,  through  Divine  Yoga  assumes 
divine  forms  and  becomes  Amsa-rupa,  KaU-riip^,  and  Kalirasa-rupa,  or 
Ams'amsa-rapi.  The  A.m3as  form  the  class  in  which  all  the  more  impor- 
tant manifestations  of  the  Sikti  ara  conprehended,  the  Kalas  include  all 
the  secondary  Goddesses,  and  the  Kalamsas  and  Ams'slms'aa  are  sub- 
divisions of  the  latter,  and  embrace  all  womankind,  who  are  distinguished 
as  good,  middling  or  bad,  according  as  they  derive  their  being  from  the 
parts  of  their  great  original,  in  which  the  Sattva,  Rijo  and  Tamo  Guna 
predominates.  At  the  same  time,  being  regarded  as  manifestations  of  the 
one  Supreme  Spirit,  they  are  all  entitled  not  only  to  respect  but  to  venera- 
tion. *  Whoever,"  says  the  Brahma  Vaivartta  Puranam,  offends  or  insults 
a  female'  incurs  the  wrath  of  Prakriti,  whilst  he  who  propitiates  a  female, 
particularly  the  youthful  daughter  of  a  Brahmin,  with  clothes,  ornaments 
and  perfumes,  offers  worship  to  Prakriti    Herself." 

We  shall  next  determine  the  questions, —What  is  a  oakta,  and  what  is 
the  complexion  of  bis  faith?  By  S5ktas  are  understood  the  worshippers 
of  Sikti.  This  is  tnu;  only  when  vt;  tiki  the  term  oakti  in  its  restricted 
san^e.  Tuid  term,  which  hid  ui.i-inilly  hit  uue  primary  signification, 
has  in  the  course  of  tine  cj.uo  to  be  usad  in  two  different  senses,  a  general 
and  a  limited  orn.*.  When  taken  in  its  widest  sense,  it  means  the  allegori- 
cal representation   of  the   active    energy  of   God  and  is  synonymous  with 

127 


lOlO  ^RtMAD  DI^Vl  liHAGAVATA^M. 

Mul&  Praki'iti,  the  primitive  source  of  (rols  and  men.  lii  its  limited 
sense,  it  is  confined  to  Siva  Sakti,  the  Tamasi,  the  offspring  of  darkue??, 
aad  the  ]ast  of  the  first  three  forms  cf  the  oriu;inal  Prakriti.  It  is  Sakti  in 
this  latter  sense,  the  bride  of  oiva,  whom,  in  her  manifold  forms,  the  Saktas 
worship.     'Ihe  followers  of  the  Siva  Sakti  then  are  alone  called  S'aktas. 

Every  Hindu  may  pay  his  adoration  to  all  the  thirty-three  Kotis  t  f 
(rods  and  Goddesses  composiui;  the  Hindu  paatheon,  but  one  and  one  oi  Iv 
of  the  five  divinities,  Visau.  S'iva,  Surya,  Ganapati  and  S'akti  mut-t 
be  his  Ista  Devat'^  or  tutelir  divinity.  Here  is  the  marked  distinction 
between  general  worshippers  and  special  followers.  To  render  this  dis« 
tinction  more  clear,  we  observe,  that  there  are  certain  general  formulas 
and  prayers  forming  th^  ritual  of  worship  of  every  particular  divinity. 
These  may  be  learnt  by  any  Hindu  from  the  Sastras,  or  from  the  mouth 
of  a  Brahman  and  used  in  the  adoration  of  any  God  or  Goddess,  according 
to  choice  or  necessit}'.  But  besides  these  general  mantras,  which  may  be 
made  use  of  by  any  Hindu,  vvithout  any  distiuctioa  cf  sect,  there  are  the 
Biia  or  specific  formulas,  which  are  received  only  from  the  hallowed  lips 
of  the  Guru  or  spiritual  guide.  These  are  kept  in  great  secrecy  and 
repeated  mentally  every  day,  as  a  matter  of  highest  religious  duty.  The 
God  or  Goddess,  whose  Bija  or  Miila  mantra  i?:  received  in  the  prescribed 
manner,  by  any  devotee,  bec:)mes  his  guardian  divinity  ;  and  the  person, 
thus  initiated,  becomes  the  i^peeial  follower  of  that  divinity.  The  S'aktas, 
then,  are  the  special  followers  of  the  Sakti  of  Siva.  They  may  in  general 
worship  any  other  God  or  Goddess,  but  the  bride  of  Siva,  in  one  or  other 
of  her  horrid  manifestations,  musb  be  their  guardian  deity.  The  following 
pissage,  qUDted  from  the  work^;  of  Mr,  Col^brooke,  will  much  elucidate 
the  subject. 

That  the    Hindus  belong  to  various  sects,  is  universally  known.     Five 
great  sects,  exclusively  worship  a    single  deity.     One  recognises   the   five 
divinities,    which    are    adore  1    by    the    other    sects    respectively;    but    the 
followers    of   this    mo^t    comprehensive    scheme  mostly  select  one  object  of 
daily  devotion  and  pay  adoration  to   other  deities    on    particular    occasions 
onlv.     'T'he    Hindu    r.heobgi-ts    have    entered   into    vain    disputes    on  the 
question,    which,    among  the  attribites  of   God,    shall    be    deemed    charac- 
teristic  and     pre-eminent      bank<raeharya,  the    celebrated    commentator 
outheVedis,    contended  for  tho  attributes  of  S'iva;    and  founded    or    con- 
firmed the  sect  of  S'aivas,    who  worship  Mahadeva  as  the    supreme    beiug, 
and  deny  the  independent  existence  of  Visnu  and  other   Deities.     Madhava 
Acharya  and    Vallava  Achacya  have,  in  like  manner,    established  the    sect 
of  Vaisnavas  who  adore  Visnu  as  GoJ.     The     Sauras    (less    numerous  than 
the  two   sects   above    mentioned^    wcrthip    the    Sun,    and    acknowledge  no 


booK  IX.]  CHAPTER  L.  1011 

other  diviiiity.  The  G^napaty^s  adore  Ganes'a,  as  tmiting  in  his  person  all 
the  attributes  of  the  Deity.  Before  I  nofcioe  the  fifth  sect,  I  must  remind 
the  reader,  tl»at  the  Hindu  Mythology  has  personified  the  abstract  and 
active  powers  of  the  divinity;  and  has  ascribed  sexes  to  these  mythologi- 
eil  personages.  The  S'akti,  or  enargy  of  an  attribute  of  -(rod,  is^female 
and  is  fabled  as  the  consort  ot  that  personified  attribute,  *  ■^^  ^  Th^ 
exclusive  adorers  of  the  oakfci  of  Siva,  are  the  SAbtas.  (.Asiatic  HesCarche?, 
Vol.    VII,  pv-  279). 

The  S3ktas,  who  adopt  the  female  principle  in  tiie  last  of  her  thre*; 
principle  niodiHc-it'on-!,  as  tlieir  special  divinity, — instead  of  deriving  her 
origin  from  the  supreme  Brahm,  use  to  her  t.he  language  which  is  invari- 
ably applied  to  the  preferential  object  of  worship  in  every  sect,  and  contem- 
plate her  as  the  only  source  of  life  and  existence.  She  is  declared  to  b'^ 
equally  in  all  things,  and  that  all  things  are  in  her,  and  that  besides  her 
there  i^  nothing.  In  short,  she  is  identified  with  the  Supreme  Being. 
Thus  it  is  written  in  tho  Kas'i  Khanda: — "Thou  art  predicated  in  every 
prayer — Brahml  and  the  rest  arc  all  born  from  Thee.  Thou  art  one  with 
the  four  objects  of  life,  and  from  Thee  they  come  to  fruit.  From  Thef 
this  whole  universe  proceeds,  and  in  Thee,  asylum  of  the  world,  all  is-, 
whether  visible  or  invisible,  gross  or  subtle  in  its  nature:  what  is,  Thou 
art  in  the  Sakti  form  and  except  Thee  nothing  has  ever  been.  ''The  Sakti 
of  Siva  being  indentified  with  Saktiman,  the  Deity,  i>  d'^clared  to  be  not  onl;. 
superior  to  Her  Lord,  but  ihe  Cause  of  Him.  Of  ti.e  two  objects  (Siva  and 
Srtkti)  which  are  eternal,  the  greater  is  the  Sakti."  Again  Sakti  givet^ 
strength  to  Siva  ;  without  Her  he  eould  not  stir  a  straw.  She  i> 
therefore    the    Cause  of      Siva.     iSankaia    Vijaya) 

-Mthough  'the    Puraiias     do,       to    a     certain     extent,    authorize      tho 
adoration    of     Sakti,  yet  tho    [irincipal   rites  and     incantations  are  derived 
from    a     different    tource.     Of    the    Puranas,    those    which    in     particular 
inculcate     the    worship    of   the  female  principle,  ate  the  Brahma  Vaivartta 
the    Skanda,    and    the    Kalika.      But    neither     in       ti'em,     nor     in      any 
other     Puranam,    do    we    find    the     Bija    or    radical     mantras     which    the 
Snktas     receive    from    their    spiritual  guides.     These,      as     well     as     the 
greater     portion    ol   the    formulas   intended    for    general     worshippers,    are 
received   from  an   independent   series    of  works,     known    by  the  collective 
name   of  Tantras.     The    fabulous    origin    of  the   Tantrns  is  derived    from 
revelations    of   Siva    to    Parvati,    and    connnned    bv    Visuu.     It  is  there- 
fore   called     Agacna,    from    the    initials   of    the    three    words    in     a  verse 
of  tho    Sadala   Tantra.       Con^ming    from    the    mouth    of  l^iva,    heard  bv 


1012  ^RtMAP  D'EVt  BHAoaVATAM. 

the   mouutaiu    born    God«iesp,   admitterl    hy    the    e^oii    of   Vasiideva,    it  is 
thence   called    Agaraa. 

In  the  Siva  Tantra,  Siva  is  made  to  say:  — *' The  five  scriptures 
(the  four  Vedas  and  the  Puranas)  issued  from  my  Hvo  mouths,  are 
the  East,  West,  South,  North,  and  Upper.  The  five  are  known  as 
the  paths  to  final  liberation.  Tiiere  are  many  scriptures,  but  none 
are   equal    to    the   upper    scripture    (meaniui^    the     Tantr.iv)" 

Accordingly,  the  observances  an  1  ceremonies  they  prejcfibe,  hav<? 
indeed,  in  Bengal,  superseded  "  the  original  or  the  Vaidik  ritual. 
They  appear  also,  says  Dr.  Wilson,  to  have  been  written 
chiefly  in  Bengal  and  the  eastern  districts,  many  of  them  being  un- 
known in  the  West  and  -'oath-Tndia  and  the  rites  they  teach 
having  there  failed  to  set  aside  the  ceremonies  of  the  Vedas,  although 
thjy  are  not  without  an  important  influence  upon  the  bflief  and 
the    practices    of  the    people." 

The   Sakti    of   oivi,    whom    the    Saktis    mtke    the     particular  object 
of  their   devotion,    in    preference    to  and   exclusion   of     all    other     gods 
and    goddesses,   is    said    to    have   first    assumed  sixty  (fiO)  different  forms, 
each     of   which    is  believed    to    hive  a    great    miny  modifications.      Each 
of  these    secondary    manifestations   of   the    Sakti    is   again    said  to    have 
taken   a    variety    of   forms,    and    so    on    almost   without   end.     Even  the 
cow    and    the    jackals    are    dee' ired    to  hd  pirts  of  Bhagivati     and  vener- 
ated   by    the    benighted  natives    of  the  country.     Of    the    sixty  primary 
forms    ot    the     Siva    Sakti,    tea    are    held   to      be    the    chief  being  distin- 
guished  by    the    name   of    Das'ii    Maha  Vid)'a    or      ten     great    VidySs. 
Their  names   are   as   follows:— (1)  Kali,   (2)  TarA,  (3)  ^odasi,  (^4;  Bhu - 
vanes' vari,  (5)  BagalS.    (6)  Chhinnaraasta,  (7)  Dhumavati,  (5)  Bhairavi, 
(9)  Matangi   and    (lO)  Kamaldtmika.     These    are   the     forms    in    which 
the   SSktas  generally   adore   the     bride      of     Sivi    as      their      guardiin 
divinity.       The    Saktas   are  divided     into    two     leading     branches,      ihe 
DaksinSoh^ris    and  the    V^mach^ris  ;    or    the      followers   of     the      ri^lit 
Land   and   left    hand    ritual.     With     the    former,    the    chief    authorities, 
among    the    Tantras,     which    are    too    numerous   to   be      enumerated     io 
this   place    are    the  Mantra    Mahodadhi,    iSarada   Tilaka,    Kalika  Tantra, 
etc.,   While    the   impure     ritual   adopted    by     the     latter     is     contained 
chiefly  in  the    Kulachud&mani,   Rudra    Yamala,    SyamS     Rahasya,  Yoni 
Tantra,  and   similar    works. 

The  Vamis  or  the  left-hand  worshippers,  adopt  a  form  of  worship 
contrary,  to  that  which  is  usual,  and  they  not  only  worship  the 
Sakti  of  Siva  in  all  her  terrific  forms,  but  pay  adoration  to  her 
auoaeroua  fiend-like  atb^QJaatj,   the  Yogiais,    Ddkinis,  and    the  S4kiQi8, 


J 


Book   IX.]  CHAPTKH  L.  101  n 

In  common  with  the  other  branch  of  the  S'aktas,  S'iva  is  also 
admitted  to  a  share  of  their  worshipful  homage,  especially  in  the 
form  of  Bhairava,  as  it  is  with  this  moJifieafcion  of  the  deity,  that 
the  VSma  worishipper  is  required  to  conceive  himself  te  be  identi- 
fied, jasfc  before  he  engages  himself  in  the  orgies  peealiir  to  his 
s^Gt.  Thus,  '•  I  am  Bhairava,  I  am  the  omniscient,  endowed  with 
qualities.  The  object  presented  to  the  follower3  of  the  left-hand  ritual, 
is  nothing  less  than  an  identification  with  SivA  and  his  Sakti  after 
death,  and  the  possession  of  supernatural  powers  in  this  life.  It  has 
no  precedent  either  in  the  Purdnas  or  in  the  Vedas.  It  is 
quite  peenliir  in  itself,  and  perfectly  distinct  from  every  other  form 
of  worship.  The  Kularuava  Tan*ra  declares: — ■"  The  Vedas  are  pre- 
eminent  over  all  works,  the  Vaisnava  sect  excels  the  Veda?,  the 
^aiva  sect  is  preferable  to  that  of  V^isnu  and  the  right-hand  Sakta 
to  that  of  Siva — the  left  hand  is  better  than  the  right-hand  division, 
and  the  Siddhanta  is  better  still,  the  Kauli  is  better  than  the  Sid- 
dhanta,  and  there  is  none  better  than  it.  The  ^^Amach^ris  in 
nfeneral,  and  the  Kaula?,  in  particular,  make  a  great  secret  of  their 
friith,  not  because  they  are  in  any  way  ashamed  to  avow  the  impure 
rites  they  perform,  but  because,  by  being  made  public,  the  rites  are 
gaid  to  lose  their  efficacy,  and  beoome  abjrtive.  "  InwarJly  S^ktas, 
outwardly  Saivas,  and  in  society  nominally  Vaisnavas,  the  Kaulas 
assuming    various   forms    traverse    the     earth. 

The  form  of  ^^orship  varies  according  to  the  end  proposed  bv 
the  worshippers :  but  in  all  the  furra^,  the  five  Makaras  are 
indispensably  neees-ary.  These  are  M^msya,  Mafcsya,  Madya,  Maithuna, 
and  AluJra  (flesh,  fish,  (spirituous  liquor,  women  and  certain  mysti- 
cal gestieulatiuns).  They  are  called  Makara,  because  they  all  begin 
with  the  letters  m  (t),  Thus  we  read  in  Sy^ma  Rahasya: — "  Wine, 
flesh,  fish,  Mudra,  and  Maithuna,  are  the  five-fold  Makara,  which 
takes  away  all  sin."  Appropriate  m%ntras  are  also  indispensable, 
according  to  the  immediate  object  of  the  adorer.  These  incantations  are 
no  more  intelligible  to  us  than  Egyptian  hieroglyphias,  and  consist 
of  meaningless  monosyllabic  combinations  of  letters.  They  are  verv 
great  in  numbor  and  are  all  declar^^d  to  b3  highly  eflicaoions,  if 
properly  used  according  to  the  dictates  of  the  Tantras.  Take  the 
Prasada  mantra.  It  is  composed  of  two  letters,  H  and  S,  and  is  one 
of  the  very  few  to  which  any  meaning  is  attempted  to  be  attached. 
The  Kularnava  says: — The  letter  11  :is  the  expirated  and  S  the 
inspirated  letter,  and  as  these  two  acts  constitute  life,  the  mantra 
tliay   express   is  th^  sam^    with    Ufa,    th?    animitsl   w.)rli    would     not 


lOU  ^nX  MAD  DRVt  nilAr.WAT.VM. 

have    been    fyriueJ   without    it,  aud    exists   but    ai5    Ijujj  a^?    itdsists,  aul 
it    is    an    intetrral  part    of   the    universe,    without  bein<?   distincfe    from  it, 

a?    the    fragrance  of   flowers,    and    sweetnos;?    of  susfar,    oil     oi-  se^aranm 

seed,    and    ^akti    of  Siva. 

He  who  knows  it,  needs  no   other   :nowledge,  he    who    repeats  it,  need^ 

practice    no    other   act   of    adoration.     The   authority     here  cited    is  very 

elaborate  u[)on  the  subject. 

The  rites  practised  by  the  Vamieharis  are  so  crossly  obscene,  as  to 
c^st  into  shade  the  worst  inventions  whic'i  the  most  impure  imii»ination 
can  conceive  i.anbridlei  debauchery   with  wine  anl  women  i. 

Solitude  and  secrecy  bein<>  strictly  enjoined  to  the  V:inns  they 
invariably  e.lebrate  their  rites  at  midnight  and  in  most  unfrequented  and 
private  plicas".  Those,  whose  immediite  object  is  the  attainment  of 
super-human  powers,  or  whose  en  1  is  spacific,  aiming  at  some  particular 
boon  or  gift,  are  more  strict  on  the  point,  lest  they  reap  no  fruits  of  their 
devotion.  They  never  admit  a  companion,  not  even  of  their  own 
fraternitv,  into  ths  place  of  their  worship.  Even  svhen  they  are  believed 
nv  the  credulous  Hindus  to  h.*va  become  Siddhas,  that  i?,  possessed  of 
gupernitural  powers  ;  or,  in  other  words,  when  they  have  acquired  sulli- 
cient  art  to  impose  upon  their  ignorant  and  superstitious  countrymen, 
and  have  establishel  their  reputttion  as  men  cipible  of  working  miracles, 
they  take  every  cara  not  to  disclose  the  means  through  which  they  haro 
attained  the  object  of  their  wish,  unless  revealed  by  some  aceidenta\ 
occurrence  or  unlooked  for  circuJistance.  Those  whose  object  is  of  a 
general  chir.icter,  bold  a  sort  of  convivial  party,  eating  and  drinking 
together  in  large  numbers,  without  any  great  fear  of  detection.  But  yet 
they  always;  take  caro  to  choose  such  secluded  spots  for  the  scenes  of  their 
devotion  as  lie  quite  concealed  from  the  public  view.  They  generally  pass 
unnoticed  and  are  traced  out  only  when  we  mak^  it  our  aim  to  detect 
them  by  watching  over  their  movements  like  a  spy.  At  prpsent,  as  their 
chief  desire  appears  to  be  only  the  gratification  of  sensual  appetites,  they 
are  at  all  times  found  to  be  more  attentive  to  points  which  have  direei 
reference  to  the  indulgence  of  their  favourite  passions,  than  those  minor 
injunctions  which  require  of  thorn  secrecy  and  solitude. 

We  shall  now  enumerate  some  of  the  leading  rites  observed  bv 
the  V&maeh^rie  of  this  country.  The  drinking  of  spirituous  liquors, 
more  or  less,  is  with  them  no  less  a  habit  than  a  religious 
practice.  Here  it  should  be  observed  that  the  orthodox  Vamis  will  never 
touch  any  foreign  liquor  or  wine,  but  use  only  the  country  doasta,  which 
they  drink  out  of  a  cap  formed  either  of  ths   nut  of  a  cooa.  or  of  $    human 


Book  iX.]  CHAPTER  t.  iol5 

skull.  They  bold  the  bowl  on  the  three  ends  of  the  three  fingers  of  the  left 
hand,  vis ,  the  thumb,  the  little  fin(,'er,  and  the  one  next  to  the  thumb, 
elosins:  the  two  other  fingers.  The  liquor  \s  first  offered  to  their  especial 
divinity  in  quart  bottles  or  pints  but  more  frequently  in  ehaupilas  and 
earthen  jars,  and  then  dii^tributed  round  the  company,  each  member 
havini;  a  oup  exclusively  his  own.  If  there  bi  no  company,  the  wor- 
shipper pours  the  iiquot  into  his  own  cup,  and  after  holding  it  in  the 
manner  j'lst  described,  repeats  his  Bija  Mantr.i,  while  covering  it  with 
his  right  hand.  The  VamSchari,  then,  whether  he  be  a  sole  worshipper 
or  a  member  of  a  party,  brings  the  cup  filled  with  the  haart-stirring  liquid 
in  contact  with  his  forehead,  as  a  mark  of  homage  paid,  and  then  empties 
it  at  a  single  sip.  No  symptom  of  nausea  must  be  shewn,  and  no 
spittle  must  be  thrown,  indicating  dis-relish  of  the  celestial  nectar  to 
■which  the  liquor  is  said  to  be  converted  by  the  repetition  of  the  holy 
text.  Three  times  the  cup  must  go  round  over  and  over,  before  any 
food  can  be  put  to  the  mouth.  There  are  certain  technicalities  in  vogue 
among  these,  which  they  use  in  their  parties.  For  instance,  when  boiled 
rice  is  to  be  served,  they  say  distribute  the  flowers  ;  the  drinking  cup  is 
called  pattra  ;  onions,  nutmegs  ;  the  bottles,  jantras,  etc.  They  call 
themselves  and  all  other  men  that  drink  wine,  birs  or  heroes,  and  those 
that  abstain  from  drinking,  p-xs'us,  i  e.,  beasts.  At  the  time  of  the 
principal  initiation,  or  mantra  grahana,  that  is,  when  the  specific  of 
Bija  mantra  is  received  from  the  Guru,  he  and  his  new  disciple  drink 
together,  the  former  at  intervals  giving  instructions  to  the  latter  as  to 
the  proper  mode  of  drinking. 

Many  ludicrous  anecdotes  are  told  of  Kaula  gurus  and- 
disciples,  when  heated  with  the  intoxicating  drug  ;  when  their  brains 
are  excited  by  drinking  copiously,  their  conduct  towards  each  other 
does  little  agree  with  the  relation  which  subsists  between  them.  Some 
times  the  relation  is  quite  inverted  and  the  disciple  acts  the  part  of  the 
Guru,  and  puts  his  feet  on  bis  heul  which  the  latter  quietly  submits 
to  this  height  of  profanation  on  the  part  of  the  tormer. 

There  is  still  another  variety  of  the  Vamis  who  substitute  certain 
mixtures  in  the  place  of  wine.  Thesa  mixtures  are  declared  in  the 
Tantras  to  be  equivalent  to  wine,  and  to  possess  all  its  intrinsic  virtues 
without  the  power  of  intoxicition;  such  as  the  juice  of  the  cocoanut 
received  in  a  vessel  made  of  Kansa,  the  juice  of  the  water  lemon  mixed 
with  sugar,  and  exposed  to  the  Sun;  molasses  dissolved  in  water,  and 
contained  in  a  copper  vessel;  the  juieo  of  the  pJaot  called  oomalatl, 
etc.   etc. 

lu    ail    the  eeremoiiies,   whieh    not  only    comprehend    the  worship   of 
the  Sakti,    but  are  performed  fur  the  altaiument  of  some     proposed  object, 


1016  ^vA  MAD  DEVi  BHAgAVATAM 

the  presoiice  ot  a  female,  ms  t.he  livintr  repi'esentative,  and  the  \ype 
of  the  iijoiMess,  is  iniispensahly  necCv-sary,  Such  ceremouies  are 
specific  in  tlioir  nature,  an^l  are  oilled  Siidhanas.  Some  who  are 
more  dfOi^iit  than  the  rost  of  Lhi;  sect,  j)in  with  their  wives  in  the 
celebration  of  the  gloomy  rites  of  Kali.  Others  make  their  beloved 
mi3tre.»r:es  partners  in  the  joint  devotion.  Hero  the  rite  assumes  a 
blacker  aspect.  The  fivourite  concubine  is  disrobed,  and  placed  by 
the  side  or  en  the  thijjjh  of  her  naked  paramour.  In  (his  situation,  the 
usual  calmness  of  the  mind  must  he  jireserved  and  no  evil  lodged  in 
it.  Such  is  the  the  requisition  of  the  S.lstr.i-,  say  the  Vamis, 
when  reproached  for  their  brutal  prictiees.  But  here  we  first  remind 
thorn  of  the  fivefold  Makara,  and  then  ask  them  the  plain  question, 
how  manv  auioai^  tliaui  ciQ  really  boisb  of  ever  attainini?  to  such 
a  state  of  perfection,  and  such  thorough  control  over  the  passions, 
as  to  keep  thorn  unrulfllrd,  or  from  bein^^  iuftamed  in  the  midst  of 
such    exciting  causes. 

In  this  way  u  performed  the  rite  cdled  the  Mantra  Sadhana. 
It  is,  as  mu:jt  be  expected,  carried  on  in  great  secrecy,  and  is  said 
to  lead  to  the  possession  of  supernatural  posvQrs.  The  religious  part 
of  it  is  very  simple,  consisting  merely  of  the  repetition  of  the  Mula 
Mantra  which  miy  or  may  not  be  preceded  by  the  usual  mode  of 
oakta  worship.  Ileacj  it  is  called  the  Mantra  Sadhana,  to  distinguish 
it  from  other  sorts  of  S^dhaaisi,  which  we  s  ball  presently  notice. 
Afier  ten  p.  m.  the  devotee  under  pretence  of  going  to  bed,  retires 
into  a  private  ch  amber,  where,  calling  in  his  wife  or  mistress,  and 
procuring  all  the  necessary  articles  of  worship,  such  as  wine,  grains, 
water,  a  striu^;  of  beads,  etc.,  he  shuts  the  doors  and  the  windows  of 
the  room,  and  sitting  before  a  lighted  lan>p,  joins  with  his  fair 
partner   in   drinking    upto     one,    two,   or    three   o'clock   in    the  morning. 

One  of  our  neighbours,  a  rich  and  respectable  man  in  the  native 
community,  was  in  the  habit  of  holding  private  meetings  with  his 
mietress  every  night,  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  SSdhanS.  He 
had  a  string  of  baads  made  of  chandal's  teeth,  which  is  yet  preserved 
in  his  family,  as  a  precious  relic.  The  beads  are  believed  to  be 
endowed  with  a  sort  of  animation,  to  drirk  or  absorb  milk,  and  t" 
show  the  a  ppearatce  of  giim  lauyhttr  when  wine  is  sprinkled  ovei 
it.  We  have  ourselves  seen  the  rotary  -.iV.C.  tried  its  alleged  virtues,  but 
found    nothing    in    it    verifying  the    above  stateraenls. 

Tnere  is  another  sort  of  devotion,    called   the    "  6ava    SiidhanS,  "    the 
object    of  which   is    to    acquire   an    interview    with     and    command    over 


feooK  IX.]  CHAPTER  L.  1017 

the  impure  spirits,  such  as  the  Dan^s,  T41as,  Bobsllas,  BhAtas,  Pretas, 
bakinis,  Dakinis,  and  other  male  and  female  goblins,  so  that  they 
may  be  ready  at  command  to  do  whatever  task  the  worshipper  shall 
be  pleased  to  commit  to  their  charge.  In  this  horrible  ceremony,  a 
dead  body  is  necessary.  The  corpse  of  a  ch^nd^la  is  preferable  to 
any  other,  But  that  which  is  declared  to  be  the  most  meritorious, 
forming  the  shortest  path  to  the  acquisition  of  dominion,  is  the 
body  of  a  chslndala,  having  died  a  violent  death,  on  Tuesday  or  Saturday, 
days  sacred  to  Oli  and  on  the  day  of  the  total  wane  of  the  moon. 
Such  a  conjunction  of  circumstances  can  rarely  take  place,  and  conse- 
quently any  dead  body  serves  the  purpose.  The  rite  assumes  different 
forms.  According  to  some  authorities,  the  adept  is  to  be  alone  at 
midnight  in  a  s'mas^na,  or  a.  place  where  dead  bodies  are  either 
buried  or  burned,  and  there  to  perform  the  prescribed  rights,  seated 
on  the  corpse.  According  to  others,  he  must  procure  in  the  dead 
of  night,  four  lifeless  bodies,  cut  off  their  heads,  and  then  bring 
them  home.  Placing  these  at  the  four  corners  of  a  square  board,  he 
should  take  his  seat  upon  it,  which  with  the  worshipper  upon  it, 
must  be  supported  by  the  four  heads.  In  this  latter  method,  the 
Guru  is  sometimes  seated  in  the  front,  for  giving  necessary  directions, 
as  well  as  for  the  purpose  of  encouraging  the  novice  and  to  prevent 
his  sinking  down  under  fear.  But  whatever  be  this  preliminary  step, 
the  leading  features  in  either  case  are  the  same.  The  worshipper 
must  be  furnished  with  spirituous  liquors,  and  fried  rice,  and  grain. 
Thus  supplied,  he,  after  worshipping  the  Sakti  ia  the  usual  manner* 
must  continue  repeating  his  Mala  Mantra  without  interruption.  This 
sort  of  prayer  is  called  Japam.  Ere  long,  he  is  said  to  be  troubled 
with  a  hundred  fears  and  assailed  by  a  thousand  hideous  appearances. 
Infernal  beings,  some  skeleton-like,  and  others  pale  as  death,  some 
one-legged  and  others  with  feet  turned  backwords,  some  with  flaming 
brands  taken  from  funeral  piles  in  their  hands,  and  others  tall  as 
palm  trees,  emaciated,  »vith  hideous  faces,  and  worms  hanging  from 
every  part  of  their  bodies,  no.v  dance  round  him,  now  terrify  him 
with  frowning  countenances,  and  now  threaten  him  with  destruction. 
The  corpse  itself,  upon  which  he  has  taken  his  seat,  seems  suddenly 
to  revive,  its  pale  eyes  begin  to  sparkle  and  wear  a  furious  look,  now 
it  laughs  and  then  opens  wide  its  mouth,  as  if  to  devour  him,  who 
is  thus  oppressing  it  with  his  burden,  and,  Oh !  dreadful  to  mention, 
now  it  attempts  to  rise  and  mount  in  the  air.  The  heads  also  are 
said  to  show  the  same  fearful  appearances,  In  the  midst  of  these 
terrors,   the  devotee  is  required  to    persevere,  to  keep  steadily  in  view 

128 


1018  &nt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM 

the  object  of  bis  devotion,  to  fix  bis  raitia;  firmly  on  big  tutelar 
godde.^s  anJ  to  pay  no  regard  to  the  fiend-liko  phantoms.  To  the 
re'viving  corpse  and  heads,  he  is  directed  to  present  wine  and  food, 
with  the  view  of  pacifying  them.  If  by  giving  way  to  fear,  he  tries 
to  escape  by  flight,  ho  instantly  falls  down  insensible  on  the  ground, 
and  either  dies  on  the  spot  or  turns  mad  for  life.  But  if,  in  spite 
of  such  apalling  dangers,  he  can  continually  maintain  his  ground, 
the  evil  spirits  gradually  caase  to  frighteu  him,  and  are  at  last 
enslaved  to  bis  absolute  will,  like  the  genii  represented  in  the  sfcory 
of  Aladdin's  Wonderful  Lamp. 

We  now«come  to  the  blackest  part  of  the  Vam4  worship.  The 
ceremony  is  entitle  1  ^ri  Chakra,  Purnibhiseka,  the  ring  or  full 
initiation.  This  worship  is  mostly  celebrated  in  mixed  societies 
composed  of  motely  groups  of  persons  of  various  castes,  though  not 
of  creeds.  This  is  quite  extraordinary,  since,  according  to  the  estab- 
lished laws  of  the  caste  system,  no  Hindu  is  permitted  to  eat  with 
an  inferior.  But  here  the  law  is  at  once  done  away  with,  and  persons 
of  high  caste,  low  caste,  and  no  caste,  sit,  eat,  and  drink  together. 
This  is  authorised  by  the  Sastras  in  the  following  text: — "Whilst  the 
Bhairavi  Tantra  (the  ceremony  of  the  Chakra)  is  proceeding,  all  castes 
are  Brahmanas — .vhen  it  is  concluded  they  are  again  distinct.  (SySrn^ 
Rahasya).  Thus,  while  the  votaries  of  Sakti  observe  all  the  distinc- 
tions of  caste  in  public,  they  neglect  them  altogether  in  the  per- 
formance of  her    orgies. 

The  principal  part  of  the  rite  called  the  Chakra  is  the  Sakti 
Sadhan^,  or  the  purification  of  the  female  representing  the  Sakti. 
In  the  ceremony  termed  the  Mantra  SadhanS,  we  have  already 
noticed  the  introduction  of  a  female,  the  devotee  always  making  his 
wife  or  mistress  partner  in  the  devotion.  This  cannot  be  done  in  a 
mixed  society.  For  although  the  Vamis  are  so  far  degenerated  as  to 
perform  rites  such  as  human  nature,  corrupt  as  it  is,  revolts  from 
with  detestation,  yet  they  have  not  sunk  to  that  depth  of  depravity 
as  to  give  up  their  wives  to  the  licentiousness  of  men  of  beastly 
conduct.  Neither  is  it  the  ordination  of  the  Sastras.  For  this  purpose, 
they  prescribe  females  of  various  descriptions,  partic  ilarly,  **a  dancing 
girl,  a  femile  devotee,  a  harlot,  a  washervvoman,  or  barber's  wife,  a 
female  of  the  Brahmanioal  or  oudra  tribe,  a  flower  girl  or  a  milk-maid 
vDevi  Rahasya).  Some  of  the  Tantras  aid  a  fow  more  to  the  list, 
such  as,  "a  princes?,  the  wife  of  a  Kapali  or  of  a  chand&la,  of  a  Kulftla 
or  of  a    conch-seller"     (Hebiti     Tantra).     Others    increase      the    number 


Book  IX.]  CHAPTER  L.  1019 

to  fcwentj.six,    and  a  few  even  to   sixty. four.     These    females    aro   distin- 
guished by  the  name   of  Kula   ^akti.     Selecting   and   procuring    females 
from  the  precediug  chsses,   tke  Vamacharis  are  to   assemble  at   midnight 
in   some   sequestered   spot   in   eight,    nim    or    eleven    couples,   the    men 
representing  Bhairavas  or  Viras,  and    the  woman    Bhairavis  or  NayikSs. 
In  some  cases  a  single  female  representing  the    S'akti    is    to    be   procured. 
For  this   purpose  a  woman  of  a  black   complexion    is  always  preferred,     in 
all   eiS3s,    the  Kula    bakti  is  placed  disrobed,     but    richly  adorned    with 
ornaments   on    the    left   of  a   eircb   (chakra)   describad    for    the  purpose, 
whence  the  ceremony  derives   its  name.     Sometimes  she  is  made  to  stand 
stark    naked,    with    protuberant     tongue    and   dishevelled    hair.     She    is 
th^n  purifieJ    by    the    reeitatijn    of  many    mantras  and  t3xt?,   and  by  the 
performance  of  the  mudra  or  gesticulations.     Finally  she    is    sprinkled  over 
with  wine,  and    if  not    previouily    initiated,    the    Bija    mantra   is   thrice 
repeatel  in  her  ear.     To  this  succeeds  the  worship  of  the  guardian  divinity; 
and  after  this,    that  of  the  femile  t)  whom    are    no.v    offered   broiled   fish, 
flash,    fried  peas,    rice,     spirituous  liqu)rs,   swaetmjats,    flovers  and    other 
offerings,    which  are  all     purified    by    the   rep^atiog    of  incantations  and 
the  sprinkling   of   wine.     It   is    now   left   to    her  i-ihoice  to  partike  of  the 
offerings,   or  to  rest   contended    simply    with   verbil    worship.     Most    fre- 
i\  lently  she  eats  and  drinks  till  sha   is   perfectly  salisfied,   and    the    refuse 
is  shared   by  the   persons   present.     If,    in  any  cx-e,    she  refuses  to  touch 
or  try  either  meat   or    wine,     bar    worshipp3rs    pour  wine  on   her   tongue 
while  standing,   and  raeeive  it  as  it   runs  down    her  body    in  a    vessel  held 
bdlow.     This  wine  is   sprinkled  over  all  the   dishes  which    are  now  served 
among  the  votaries. 

Such  is   the    preliminary  called   the    purification   of  S'akti.     To    this 
succeeds  the  devotional  part  of  the   ceremony.     The   devotees   are    now  to 
repeat  their  ridicil  mantra,    but  in  a  mannar  unutterably    obscene.     Then 
follow  things  tco  abominable  to  enter  the  ears  of  men,    or    to    be  borne  by 
the   feelings   of  an   enlightend   community  ;  things   of   which  a  Tiberius 
would  be   ashamed,   and   from    which    the    rudest  savage  would  turn  away 
his   face    with    disgust.     And   these    very    things   are    contained    in    the 
directions   of  the   S'astras,     "Dharm^    dharma    Havirdipte  Sv^tmagnau 
manas^s'rucha,   Su3umn4    Varfcmaua    NItya  Mjksivrittim   juhomyaham. 
Sv^hantam    mantra   muchharya    Mulam    smaram    pvram.     *     *     *     *  . 
Tara     dvayantaragatam     Paramananda     Karanam.      Om    Prakas'aka/a 
Hasl^bhyam  avalambya  Unmani  5rueh^,  Dharm^  dharma  Kal^steha  Piirna 
Vahnaa     juhomyaham.     ^    *     *     *  ,     Sampujya     K^ntSm      santarpya 
•tatv^    nattv^   parasparam,   Samhslra     Mudray&     Mantrt     Sakti     Vir^n 


1020  SRI  mad  DEVl  BHA.GAVATAM. 

viearjjayet."  Those  who  abide  by  the  rules  of  the  Sa.tras  are  compara- 
tively few;  the  generality  confine  themselves  chiefly  to  those  parts  that 
belong  to  gluttony,  drunkenness  and  whoredom,  without  acquainting 
themselves  with  all  the  minute  rules  and  incantations  of  the  Sastras. 
The  chakra  is  nothing  more  than  a  convivial  party,  consisting  of  the 
members  of  a  single  family,  or  at  which  men  are  assembled  and  the  com- 
pany are  glad  to  eat  flesh  and  drink  spirits  under  the  pretence  of  a  reli- 
gious observance. 

The  Siktas  delineate  on  their  foreheads  three  horizontal  and  semi- 
eirculfir  lines,  with  ashes,  obtained,  if  possible,  from  the  hearth  on 
which  a  consecrated  fire  is  perpetually  maintained.  But  as  such  ash*  s 
are  not  always  procarible,  they  generally  draw  lines  of  red  sandal  or 
Vermillion.  They  sometimes  add  a  red  streak  up  the  middle  of  the  fore- 
head, with  a  red  circlet  at  the  root  of  the  nose.  The  circular  spot,  they 
mark,  when  they  avow* themselves,  either  with  saflfron  or  with  turmeric 
and  borax,  but  most  frequently  with  red  sandal,  which,  however,  properly 
belongs  to  the    Saiva  sect. 

The  beads  are  made  either  of  coral,  or  of  a  certain  species  of  stone 
called  sphatic,  or  of  human  bone,  or  the  teeth  of  a  Chand^la.  This  last 
sort  is  said  to  be  replete  with  mir,<cles,  and  is  much  valued  by  the  Vama- 
chiiris.  The  seeds  of  the  Rndraksa  and  more  specially  what  they  call 
the  Sunkhya    Gutik4  are  highly  prized  by  the  Dakfinas 

There  is  another  set  of  impostors  who  pretend  to  have  obtained  domi- 
nion over  the  impure  spirits.  These  go  about  doing  miracles  among  the 
ignorant  Hindus,  by  whom  they  are  called  in  for  various  purposes, 
generally  for  curing  diseases,  barrenness,  etc.  They  invariably  come  at 
night,  in  a  body  of  two,  three  or  four  persons,  one  of  whom  is  always 
a  ventriloquist.  They  require  to  be  broughtjyava  flowers,  whioh  are  sacred 
to  Oil,*  sweetmeats,  curds,  etc.,  which  being  placed  on  the  floor  of  a 
room,  they  and  the  visitors  enter  the  room.  The  worship  of  the  ^akti, 
is  now  porformed  and  then  the  lights  are  extinguished.  The  chief  actor 
then  begins  to  call  his  vassal  goblin  by  name,  saying,  "Arambaraye, 
Arambaraye,"  and  a  hollo vv  voice  answers  from  a  distance.  "Here  1  am 
coming."  Soon  after  a  variety  of  sounds  are  heard  as  if  some  one  knocking 
at  the  door,  windows,  roof,  etc.,  or  if  it  be  a  cot,  the  thatches  shake, 
the  bamboos  crack,  etc.,  in  short,  the  room  is  filled  with  the  presence 
of  the  spirit.  Now  the  head  inpostor  asks  him  a  number  of  questions  as  to 
.  the  nature  of  the  disease  to  be  cured,  and  then  begs  some  medicine  to  be 
given,  on  which  a  sound  is  heard,  as  if  something  were  thrown  on  the 
floor.    The  lights  being  then  brought   in,   roots  of  plants   or   some  suoh 


Book  IX]  CHAPTER  L.  1021 

things  are  discovered.  In  this  way,  the  commanders  of  ghosts  impose 
upon  the  creduloas  Hindus.  The  process  is  called  Chandujagana,  or 
awakening  the  ghosfc.  The  impostors  alwdys  fail  before  men  of  sense  in 
their  attempt  to  call  in  the  ghost. 

The  tenets  of  the  Saktas  open  the  way  for  the  gratification  of  all  the 
sensual  appetites,  they  hold  out  encouragem?nt  to  drunkards,  thieves  ahd 
dacoits;  they  present  the  means  of  satisfying  every  lustful  desire  ;  they 
blunt    the     feelings    by    authorising    the    mo^t    cruel    practices,   and  bad 

man  to  commit  abominations  which  place  them  on  a  level  worse  than  tl  e 
beasts.  The  Saktya  worship  is  impure  in  itself,  obscene  in  its  practices, 
and  highly  injurious  to  tbe  life  and  character  of  men." 

Extracts    from    the    Calcutta    Review  No  XLVil,  March  1855. 

Pages  31-67. 

By  H.  H.  Wilson,    L.  L,  D.,  and  F.  U.  S.  Calcutta,  184G 


Book  X.]  ^  CHAPTER  1.  2Q22 


TJKJEI  TErOTTH  fibOOZC. 


CHAPTER  I. 

1-6.  NiraJa  said:— '"0  M^r^yana  !  0  Thou,  the  Supporter  of  this 
whole  world  !  The  Preserver  of  all  !  Thou  h»st  described  the  olorious 
charaeterg  of  the  Devi,  that  take  away  all  the  sins.  Kindly  describe 
now  to  me  the  several  forms -thriti  the  Ddvi  assumed  in  every  Mauvau- 
tara  in  this  world  as  well  as  Her  Divine  Greatness.  O  Thou,  full  of  mercy  ! 
Describe  also  ho>v  and  by  wI.om  She  was  worshipped  and  praised  . 
how  She,  so  kind  to  the  devotees,  havicg  teen  thus  pleased,  fulfilhd 
their  desires.  I  am  very  eager  to  hear  these,  the  very  best  and 
blissful  characters  of  the  Devi.  Sri  Nar&yana  said: — '*  Hear,  O 
Maharsi  !  The  glories  and  greatness  of  the  Devi  Biiagavati  leading  to 
the  devotion  of  the  devotees,  capable  of  giving  all  sorts  of  wealth 
and  destroying  all  sin?.  "  From  the  navel  lotus  of  Vigiju,  the 
holder  of  the  Chakra  (discus),  was  born  Brahmil,  the  Creator  of  this 
universe,   tha    great    Eoergetie  One,  and    the  Grand  Siie  of  all  the  s\orki.-. 

7-14.  The  four  faced  Brahma,  on  being  bcrn,  proilueed  from  llir? 
mind  SvHyambhuv*  Manu  and  hii  wife  Satarup^,  the  embodimeiit 
of  all  virtues.  For  this  very  reason,  Svayambhuva  Manu  has  bet-n 
known  as  the  mind-born  son  of  Brahma.  Svayambhuva  Manu  goi 
.from  Brahmsl  the  ta-k  to  create  and  multiply  ;  he  made  an  earthen 
image  of  the  Devi  Bhagavati,  the  Bestower  of  all  fortunes,  on  the  beach 
of  the  sanctifying  Ksira  Samudra  (ocean  of  milk)  and  he  engaged  himself  iii 
worshipping  Her  and  began  to  repeat  the  principal  mystic  mantra  of  V^g- 
bhava  (the  Deity  of  Sp.eech;.  Thus  engaged  in  worship,  Svayambhuva 
Manu  conquered  by  and  by  his  breath  and  food  and  observed  Yam  a. 
Niyama  and  other  vows  and  bacanie  lean  and  thin.  For  one  hundred 
years  he  remained  standing  always  on  one  leg  and  became  successful 
in  controlling  his  six  passions  lust,  anger  etc.  He  meditated  on  the 
feet  of  that  Adya  Sakti  (the  Primordial  iSakti)  so  uuieh  that  hf 
became  inert  like  a  vegetable  or  mineral  matter.  By  his  'J'apas  the  Devt, 
the  World  Mother  appeared  before  him  and  said  : — "  O  King  !  Ask 
divine  boons  from  Me."  Hearing  these  joyous  word-*,  the  King  wanted 
his    long     cherished   and  heart-felt  boon,   so    very  rare    to   the  Devas. 

15-22.  Manu  said:—"  O  Large  eyed  Devi  !  Victciy  to  Thee, 
residing  in  the  h9art^  of  alt  I  O  Thou  honoured,  worshipped  !  O  Thou  •' 
the    Uphoidresa     of  the  world  I    O  Thou,    the  Aadpioioud  of  ail  auspioioAi  ' 


1023  ^Rl  MAD  DEVl  BHAoAVAtAM. 

By  Thy  Graciona  Look,  it  is  that  the  Lotus  born  has  been  able  to  create 
the  worlds  ;  Visnu  is  perserving  and  Rudra  Deva  is  destroying  in  a  minute. 
Hy  Thy  command  it  is  that  ludra,  the  Lord  of  oacht,  has  got  the 
charge  of  controlling  the  three  Lokas  ;  and  Yam  a,  the  Lord  of  the 
depirted.  is  awarding  fruits  and  punishing  according,  to  their  merits 
or  demerits,  the'deceased  ones.  O  ^fother  !  By  Thy  Gracf,  Varuna,  the 
holder  of  the  noose,  has  become  the  lord  of  all  aquatic  creatures  and 
is  preserving  them  ;  and  Kuvera,  the  lord  of  the  Yaksas,  has  become 
the  lord  of  wealth.  Agni  (fire),  Nairrit,  V^yu  (wind),  Is'ana  and 
Ananta  Deva  are  Thy  parts  and  have  grown  by  Thy  power.  Then,  O 
Devi  !  If  Thou  desirest  to  grant  me  my  desired  boon,  then,  O  Thou  !  the 
Auspicious  One  !  Let  all  the  great  obstacles  to  my  work  of  procreating  in 
this  universe  and  iocr'^asing  my  domiaiong  die  away.  And  if  any  body  wor- 
ships this  great  V^gbhava  Mantra  or  any  body  hears  with  devotion  this  his. 
t.)ry  or  makes  others  hear  this,  they  all  shall  be  crowned  with  success  and 
enjoyment  and  Mukti  be  easy  to  them. 

23-24.  Specially  they  would  get  tha  power  to  remember  tbeir  past  lives, 
acquire  eloquence  in  speaking,  all  round  beauty,  success  in  obtaining  know 
ledge,  success  in  their  deeds  and  especially  in  the  increase  of  their  posterity 
and  children.  O  Bhagavati  !    This  is  what  I    want  most. 

Here  ends  the  First  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  story  of 
Svayambhuva  Manu  in  the  Mahapuranam  ^ri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavataoi 
of   18,000    verses   by   Maharsi    Veda    Vyasa. 


CHAPTER    IL 

1-6.  The  Devi  said:—"  O  King  !  O  Mighfcyarmed  One  !  All  these  I 
grant  unto  you.  Whatever  you  have  asked  for,  I  gire  them  to  you. 
1  am  very  much  pleased  with  your  hard  'lapasya  and  with  your 
Japam  of  the  Vagbhava  Mantra.  Know  Me  that  My  power  is  infallible 
in  killing  the  Lords  of  the  Daityas.  O  Child  !  Let  your  kingdom 
be  free  from  enemies  and  let  your  prosperity  be  increased.  Let  your 
devotion  be  fixed  on  Me  and  in  ihe  end  you  will  verily  get  Nirvana 
Mukti.  O  Narada  !  Thus  granting  the  boon  to  the  highsouled  Manu, 
the  Great  Devi  disappeared  before  him  and  went  to  the  Bindhya 
Range.  O  Devar^i  !  This  Bindhya  mountain  increased  in  height  so 
tnucb  so  that  it  was  well  nigh  on  the  way  to  prevent  the  course 
of  the  Sun  when  it  was  arrested  by  Mahargi  Agastya,  born  of 
a  kumbha  (water  jar).  The  younger  sister  of  V"i?nu,  Varades'vari,  is 
staying  here  aa  Bindhyavasioi.  O  Best  of  the  Munis  I  This  Devi 
ie    an    object    of    worship   of    all. 


1024  ^r1  mad    DEvt  BHAGAVATAM. 

7-8.  Saunaka  and  tho  other  Risis  said  : — O  Suta  !  Who  is  that  Bindhya 
Mountiin  ?  And  why  did  He  intend  to  soar  high  up  to  the  Heavens  to 
resist  the  Sun's  course  ?  And  why  was  it  that  Agastya,  the  son  of 
Mitr^varuna  quietened  that  rising  mountain  ?  Kindly  describe  all  these  in 
detail. 

9-15.  O  Saint  !  AVe  are  not  as  yet  satisfied  with  hearing  the  Glories 
of  the  Devi,  the  ambrosial  nectar,  that  have  come  out  of  your  mouth. 
Rather  our  thirst  has  been  increased.  Suta  said  : — "  O  Risis  !  There 
was  the  Bindhya  Mountain,  highly  honoured  and  reckoned  as  the 
chief  of  the  mountains  on  the  earth.  It  was  covered  with  big  forests 
and  big  trees.  Creeping  plants  and  shrubs  flowered  these  and  it  looked 
very  beautiful.  On  it  were  roaming  deer,  wild  boars,  buffaloes,  monkeys 
hares,  foxes,  tigers  and  bears,  stout  and  cheerful,  with  full  vigour  and 
all  very  merrily.  The  Devas,  Gandharbbas,  Apsaras,  and  Kinnaras  come 
here  and  bathe  in  its  rivers  ;  all  sorts  of  fruit  trees  can  be  seen  here. 
On  such  a  beautiful  Bindhya  Mountain,  came  there  one  day  the  ever 
joyful  Devarsi  Narada  on  his  voluntary  tour  round  the  world.  Seeing 
the  Maharsi  NSrada,  the  Bindhya  Moantaio  got  up  and  worshipped  him 
with  pudya  and  arghya  and  gave  him  a  very  good  Asana  to  sit.  When 
the  Muni  took  his  seat  and  found  himself  happy,  the  Mountain  began  to 
speak. 

16-17.  Bindhya  said  : — "  O  Devarsi  !  Now  be  pleased  to  say  whence 
you  are  coming  ;  your  coming  here  is  so  very  auspicious!  My  house  is  sanctified 
today  by  your  coming.  O  Deva  !  Your  wandering  is,  like  the  Sun,  the  cause 
of  inspiring  the  beings  with  freedom  from  fear.  So,  0  NUrada  1  Kindly 
give  out  your  intention  as  to  your  coming  here  which  seems  rather  wonder- 
ful. 

18-28.     Narada  said  !     "  O   Bindhya  !     O    Enemy  of     Indra  !     (Once 

the  mountains  had  a  very  great  influence.  Indra  cut  off  their  wings 
and  so  destroyed  their  influence.  Hence  the  mountains  are  enemies  of 
Indra).  I  am  coming  from  the  Sumeru  Mountain.  There  1  saw  the 
nice  abodes  of  Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  and  Varuna.  There  I  saw  the  houses 
of  these  Dikpalas  (the  Regents  of  the  several  quarters),  which  abound  in 
objects  of  all  sorts  of  enjoyments.  Thus  saying,  Narada  gave  out  a 
heavy  sigh.  Bindhya,  the  king  of  mountains,  seeing  the  Muni  heaving 
a  long  sigh,  asked  him  again  with  great  eagerness.  "  O  Devarsi  !  Why 
have  you  heaved  such  a  long  sigh  ?  Kindly  say."  Hearing  this,  Narada 
said  : — "  O  Child  !  Hear  the  cause  why  I  sighed.  See  !  The  Himalaya 
Mountain  is  the  father  of  Gauri  and  the  father-in-law  of  Mahddeva  ; 
therefore  he  is  the  most  worshipped  of  all  the  mountain?.  The  Kailas'a 
Mountaio    again,  is  the  residence   of    Mah^deva  ;   hence   that    is   also 


Book  X,]  CHAPTER  II.  1025 

worshipped  and  chanted  as  evpable  of  destroying  all  the  sins.  So  the 
Nisadha,  Nila,  and  Gaudhamadaua  and  other  mountains  are  worshipped  at 
their  own  places.  What  more  than  this,  that  the  Sumeru  Mountain,  round 
whom  the  thousandrayed  S^m,  the  Saul  of  the  universe,  circumambulates 
along  with  the  planets  and  stars,  thinks  himself  the  supreme  and  greatest 
amongst  the  mountains  "  I  am  the  supreme  ;  there  is  none  like  me  in 
the  three  worlls."  Remembering  this  self-conceit  of  Sumeru,  I  sighed  so 
heavily.  O  iBindhya  !  We  are  ascetics  and  though  we  have  no  need  to 
discuss  theie  things,  yet  by  way  of  conversation  1  have  told  this  to  you. 
Now  I  go  to  my    own  abode." 

Here  ends  the  Second  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  conversation 
between  Naradi  and.  the  Bindhya  Mountain  in  the  Mah^  Puranam  Sri 
Mad  Devi    Bbagavatam    of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  III. 

l-l6.     Suta  said  : — "  0  Risis  !     Thus  advising,  the  Devarsi,  the  great 
JnSni  and    Muni    going    wherever    he    likes,  went    to   the    Brahmaloka. 
After  the  Muoi  had  gone,   the  Bindhya  became  immersed  in  great  anxiety 
and,    becoming    always   very    sorrowful,    could    not   get  peace.       "  What 
shall  I  do  now  so  as  to   overthrow    Meru  ?     Until  I  do  that,    I    won't   be 
able    to  get  the  peace  of  my  mind  or  my  health.     The  highsouled    persons 
always  praised  me  for  my  enthusiasm  and  energy.  Fie  to  my  energy,  honour, 
fame  and  family  !     Fie  to  my  strength  and  heroism  !     O  Risis  !     With  all 
these    cogitations  in    his  mind,    Bindhya     came    finally   to   this    crooked 
conclusion  : — *'  Daily  the  Sun,  stars  and  planets  circumambulate  round  the 
Sumeru  ;    hence  Sumeru  is  always  so  arrogant  ;  now  if  I   can    resist    the 
Sun's  course    in  the  heavens  by  my  peaks.    He  will    not  be  able  to  circum- 
ambulate round  the  Sumeru.     If  I  can  do  this,    certainlv  I  will  be  able  to 
curb  the  Sumeru    in  his    pride.     Thus  coming  to    a    conclusion,    Bindhya 
r7»ised  his   arms  that  were  the    peaks  high  up  to  the  heavens    and  blocking 
the  passage  in  the  Heavens  remained  so  and  passed  thjit  night  with    great 
unea?iness  and  difficulty,  thinking  when  the  Sun  would  rise  and  lie    would 
obstruct  His  passage.  At  last,  when  the  morning  broke  out,  all  the  quarters 
were  clear.     The  Sud,  destroying  the  darkness,  rose  in    Udaya  Giri.     The 
sky  looked  clear  with  His  rays  ;  the  lotus,  seeing  Him,  blew  out  with    joy;' 
while  the  excellent  white  water-lilies,  at  the    bereavement  of   the    Moon, 
contracted    their  leaves    and  closed  as  if  at  the    separation  of   one's  lover, 
gone  to  a  distant  place.     The  people  b-gan  to  do  their  own  works   on   the 
appearance  of  the  day  j  the  worship  of  the  gcds,  the  offerings  to  the  Goas, 

129.    • 


1026  SRt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

the  Homas  and  the  offerings  to  the  Pitris  were  set  a  going  on  (in  the 
morning,  afternoon  and  evening  respectively).  The  Sun  marched  on  in 
His  course.  He  divided  the  day  into  three  parts,  morning,  mid-day,  and 
after-noon.  First  of  all  he  consoled  the  eastern  quarter  which  seemed  like 
a  woman  sufferinji;  from  the  bereavement  of  her  lover  ;  then  he  consoled 
the  south  eartern  corner  ;  then  as  He  wanted  to  go  quickly  towards 
the  south,  His  horses  could  not  go  further.  The  charioteer  Aruna,  seeing 
this,  infomed  the  Sun    what  had  happened. 

17.  Aruna  spoke  : — "  0  Sun  !  The  Bindhya  has  become  very 
jealous  of  the  Sumeru  as  You  circumambulate  round  the  Sumeru  Mountain 
daily.  He  has  risen  very  high  and  obstructed  your  course  in  the 
Heavens,  hoping  that  you  would  circumambulate  round  him.  He  is  thus 
vying    with   the    Sumeru    Mountain. 

18-26.  Suta  said: — "O  Risis  !  Hearing  the  words  of  Aruna,  the 
charioteer,  the  Sun  began  to  think  thus  : — "  Oh  !  The  Bindhya  is 
going  to  obstruct  My  course  !  What  can  a  great  hero  not  do,  when 
he  is  in  the  wrong  path  ?  Oh !  My  hoises'  motions  are  stjpped 
to-day!  The  fate  is  the  strongest  of  all  (Secause  Bindhya  is  strong 
to-day  by  Daiva,  therefore  he  is  doing  this).  Even  when  eclipsed  by 
Rahu  (the  ascending  node)  I  do  not  stop  for  a  moment  even  ;  and 
now  obstructed  in  My  passage,  1  am  w.iiting  here  for  a  long  time. 
The  Daiva  is  powerful  ;  what  can  I  do  ?  The  Sun's  course  having 
been  thus  obstructed,  all  from  the  Gods  to  the  lowest  became  helpless 
and  could  not  make  out  what  to  do.  Chitragupta  and  others 
ascertain  their  time  through  the  Sun's  course  ;  and  that  Sun  is  now 
rendered  motionless  by  the  Bindhya  mountain  !  What  a  great  adverse 
fate  is  this !  When  the  Sun  was  thus  obstructed  by  the  Bindhya  out 
of  his  arrogance,  the  sacrifices  to  the  Davasi,  the  offerings  to  the 
Pitris  allj  wore  stopped  ;  the  world  was  going  to  rack  and  ruin.  The 
people  that  lived  on  the  west  and  south  had  their  nights  prolonged 
and  they  remained  asleep.  The  people  of  the  east  and  the  north  were 
scorched  by  the  strong  rays  of  the  Sun  and  some  of  them  died  ;  some 
of  them  lost  their  health  and  so  forth.  The  whole  earth  beeame 
devoid  of  Sraddhas  and  worships  and  a  cry  of  universal  distress 
arose  on  all  sides.  Indra  and  the  other  Ddvas  became  very  anxious 
and    began  to     think   what   they  should  do   at    that  moment. 

Here  ends  the  Third  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  obstruction 
of  the  Sun's  course  by  the  Bindhya  Mountain  in  the  Maha  Puranam 
5ri     Mad   Devi    BhSgavatam    of  18000  verses  by  Maharsi    Veda    Vydsa. 


PooK  X.]  CHAPTER  III.  1027 

CHAPTER  IV. 


1-2,  SuLa  saiJ: — 0  Rials  !  Then  Indi-a  and  all  the  other  Devas, 
taking  Brahna^  along  with  them  and  placing  Hirn  at  the  front,  went  to 
M^hadeva  and  took  His  refuge.  They  bowed  down  to  Him  and  chanted 
sweet  and  great  hymns  to  Him,  Who  holds  Moon  on  His  forehead,  the 
Deva  of  the  Devas,  thu?: — 

3-1.  0  Thou,  the  Leader  of  the  host  of  Gods!  Victory  to  Thee!  O  Thou, 
Whose  lotiia  feet  are  served  by  Um^,  Victory  to  Thee  !  O  Thou,  the  Giver 
of  the  eight  Siddhis  and  Vibhutis  (extraordinary  powers)  to  Thy  devotees 
Victory  to  Thee  !  O  Thou,  the  Background  of  this  Great  Theatrical  Dance 
of  this  Insurmountable,  May&  !  Thou  art  the  Supreme  Spirit  in  Thy  True 
Nature  1  Thou  rilest  on  Thy  vehicle,  the  Bull,  and  residest  in  Kail^s'a  ; 
yet  Thou  art  the  Lord  of  all  the  Devas.  O  Thou,  Whose  ornament  is 
snakes.  Who  art  the  Honoured  and  the  Giver  of  honours  to  persons  !  O 
Thou  !  the  Jnborn,yet  comprising  all  forms,  O  Thou  Sambhu  I  That  findest 
pleasure  in  this  Thy  O.vn  Self  !     Victory  toThee  ! 

6-9.  O  Thou,  the  Lord  of  Thy  attendants  !  O  Thou,  Giris'a !  The 
Giver  oi  the  great  powers,  praised  by  Maha  Visnu  !  O  Thou,  That  livest  in 
the  heart  lotus  of  Visnu,  and  deeply  absorbed  in  Maha  Yoga  !  Obeisance  to 
Thee  1  O  Thou  that  can'st  be  known  through  Yoga,  and  nothing  but 
the  Yoga  itself  ;  Thou,  the  Lord  of  the  Yoga  !  We  bow  down  to  Thee. 
Thou  awardest  the  fruits  of  yoga  to  the  Yogins.  O  Thou,  the  Lord  of  the 
helpless  1  The  Incarnate  of  the  ocean  of  mercy  !  The  Relief  of  the  diseased 
and  the  most  pawerful !  O  Thou,  whose  forms  are  the  three  gunas,  Sattva, 
Rajo,  Tamas !  O  Thou  !  Whose  Emblem  (carrier)  is  the  Bull  (Dharma);  Thou 
art  verily  the  Great  Kala ;  yet  Thou  art  the  Lord  of  KSla  !  Obeisance  to 
Thee  1  (The  Bull    represents  the    Dharma  or    Speech). 

10.  Thus  praised  by  the  Devas,  who  take  the  offerings  in  sacrifices 
the  Lord  of  the  Devas,  whose  emblem  is  Bull,  smilingly  told  the  Devas  in 
a  deep  voice: — 

11.  O  Thou,  the  excellent  Devas  !  The  residents  of  the  Heavens  I  I 
am  pleased  with  the  praises  that  you  have  sung  of  Me.  I  will  fulfil  the 
desires  of  you,  all  the  Devas. 

12-15.  The  Devas  said:— "0  Lord  of  all  the  Devas  !  O  Giris'a  I  O 
Thou  whose  forehead  is  adorned  with  Moon  !  O  Thou,  the  Doer  of  o-ood 
to  the  distressed.  O  Thou,  the  Powerful  !  Dost  Thou  do  good  to  us.  O 
Thou,  the  Sinless  One  !  The  Bindhya  Mountain  has  become  jealous  of  the 
Sumaru  Mouutain,  and  has  risen  very  high  up  in  the  Heavens  and  he  has 
obstructed   the   Sun's   course,   thereby   causing  great    troubles   to   all.     O 


1028  I§RI  mad  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

Thou,  the  Doer  of  good  to  all !  O  Is'dna  !  Dost  Thon  check  the  mountain's 
abnormal  rise.  How  can  we  fix  time  if  the  Sun's  course  be  obstructed ! 
And  when  there  is  no  knowledge,  what  is  now  the  time,  the  sacrifices  to  the 
Devas  and  the  offerings  to  the  Pitris  are  now  almost  dead  and  gone.  O 
Deva  !  Who  will  now  protect  us  ?  We  see  Thee  as  the  Destroyer  of  the 
fear  of  us  and  of  those  who  are  terrifieJ.  O  Deva!  O  Lord  of  Giris'a  !  ]3o  . 
pleased    with  us. 

16-18.  Sri  Bhagavftn  said: — "O  Devas  !  I  have  no  power  to  curb 
the  Bindhya  Mountain.  Let  us  go  to  the  Lord  of  Ruiid  and  pay  our  res- 
pects to  Him.  He  is  our  Lord,  fit  to  be  worshipped.  He  is  Gobinda, 
Bhagavan  Visnu,  the  Cause  of  all  causes.  We  will  go  to  Him  and  tell 
Him    all  our  sorrows.      He  will  remove  theni: 

19.     Hearing  thus  the  words  of  Giris'a,  Indraand  the  other  Devas  with 
Brahma      placed    MahSdeva    at     their    front   and    went  to    the    region    of 
Vaikuntha,  trembling  with  fear. 

Here  ends  the  Fourth  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  going  of  the 
Devas  to  Mahadeva  in  the  MahaPurHnam  Srimad  Devi  BhSguvatam  of 
IS.OCO  verses  by    Maharsi    Veda  Vyasa. 

CHAPTER  V. 

1-5.  Suta  said: — Then  the  Devas,  on  arriving  at  Vaikun  th  i,  saw 
the  Lord  of  Laksmi,  the  Deva  of  the  Deva«,  the  World-Teacher 
with  his  eyes  beautiful  like  Padmr.  Paldsa  (lotus-leaves),  shinin"'  with 
brilliance  and  began  to  praise  Him  in  a  voice  choked  with  intense 
feelings  of  devotion,  thus:— "  Victory  to  Visnu!  O  Lord  of  Rama! 
Thou  art  prior  to  the  Virat  Purusa."  0  Enemy  of  the  Daityas  !  0 
Thou,  the  Generator  of  desires  in  all  and  the  Bestower  of  the  fruits 
of  those  desires  to  all  !  O  Gobinda  !  Thou  art  the  Great  Boar  and 
Thou  art  of  the  nature  of  Great  Sacrifices  !  0  Maha  Visnu  I  O  Lord 
of  Dharma  !  Thou  art  the  Cause  of  the  origin  of  this  world  !  Thou 
didst  support  the  eanh  in  Thy  Fish  Incarnation  for  (he  deliverance 
of  the  Vedas  !  O  Thou  Satyavrata  of  the  form  of  a  Fish  !  We  bcw 
down  to  Thee.  0  Thou  !  The  Enemy  of  the  Daityas  !  The  Ocean  of 
mercy  1  Thou  dost  do  the  aeiions  of  the  Devas  out  of  morcv  O 
Thou  I  the  Tortoise  Incarnation  !  That  grantest  Mukti  to  others! 
Obeisance    to  Thee  I  < 

6-18.  O  Thou  1  That  didst  as.sume  the  form  of  a  i^oar  for  the 
destruction  of  the  Daityas  J&ya  and  others  and  for  raisino-  the  earth 
from  the  waters  !  Obeisance  to  Thee  !  Thou  didst  assume  that  form- 
Half  man   and   half   Lion— of  the    Nrisimha  Mdrti    and     tore     asunder 


Book  X.]  CHAPTER  V.  1029 

lliranya  Kas'ipu,  proud  of  his  boons,  by  Thy  nails.  We  bow  clown 
to  Thee  !  Obeisance  to  Thee  !  That  in  Thy  Dwarf  Incarnation, 
didst  deceive  Bali,  whose  head  got  crazed  by  the  acquisition  of  tbg 
kingdom  over  the  three  Lokas.  We  bow  down  to  Thee,  that  in  Thy 
Pi.ras'u  RS,aia  Incarnation,  didst  slay  Karta  Viryaryuna,  the  thousand 
handed,  and  the  other  wicked  Ksattr  iyas  !  Obeisance  to  Thee  !  That 
wert  born  of  the  womb  of  Renuka  as  the  son  of  Jamadagni. 
Obeisance  to  Thoe,  of  great  prowess  and  valour,  ihat  in  Thy  Kama 
Incarnation  as  the  son  of  Das'aratha,  didst  cut  off  the  heads  of 
the  wicked  llaksasa,  the  son  of  Pula&tya  !  We  bow  down  again  and 
agjiin  to  Thee,  the  Great  Lord,  that  in  Thy  Krifna  incarnation,  didst 
deliver  this  earth  from  the  clutches  of  the  wicked  King  Duryodhana, 
Kamsa  and  othcs  and  didst  establish  the  religion  by  reraovinf  the  then 
prevailing  vicious  ideas  and  doctrine?.  We  bow  down  to  Thy  Buddha 
Incarnation,  that  Great  Deva  who  didst  come  down  here  to  put  a 
stop  to  the  slaughtering  of  the  innocent  animals  and  to  the  per- 
formance of  the  wicked  sacrificial  ceremonies  !  Obeisance  to  the  Deva  ! 
When  almost  all  the  perse  ns  in  this  world  will  turn  out  in  future 
as  Mlechchas  and  when  the  wickttd  Kings  will  oppress  them,  right  and 
left,  Thou  wilt  then  incarnate  Thyself  again  as  Kalki  and  redress  all  the 
grievances  !  We  bow  down  to  Thy  Kalki  Form  !  O  Deva  !  These  are  Thy 
'I'en  Incarnations,  for  the  preservation  of  Thy  devotees,  for  the  kilhno  of 
the  wicked  Dait;yas,  Therefore  Thou  art  called  as  the  Great  Ueliever 
of  all  our  troubles.  0  Thou  !  Victory  to  Thee  !  The  Deva  Who 
assum-s3  the  forms  of  women  and  water  tor  destroying  the  ailings  of 
the  devotees!  Who  else  can  be  so  kind  !  O  Thou,  the  Ocean  of  mercy  ! 
0  Risis  !  Thus  praising  the  yellow  robed  Visnu,  the  Lord  of  all  the 
Devas,  the  whole  host;  of  the  Devas  bowed  down  to  Him  and  irade 
Shasta mgas.  Then  Visnu  Gadadhara,  hearing  their  hymns,  gladdened 
them  and  spoke  :  — 

19-27.  ^ri  Bhagavana  said:  — "  O  Devas  !  I  am  pleased  with  your 
stotra.  You  need  not  be  sorrowful.  1  will  remove  all  your  troubles 
that  ha\re  become  unbearable  to  you.  O  Devas  !  I  am  very 
glad  bo  hear  the  praises  that  you  have  offered  on  Me.  Better  ask 
boons  from  Me.  I  will  grant  them  though  very  rare  even  and  obtained 
with  difliculty.  Any  person  who  rises  early  in  the  morning  and  recites 
with  devotion  this  stotra  sung  by  you,  will  never  experience  any 
sorrow.  O  Devas  I  No  poverty,  no  bad  symptoms,  no  Vetalas  nor 
planets  nor  Brahma  Raksasas  nor  any  misfortunes  will  overtake  him. 
No  disease,  due  to  Vata  (windy  temperament),  Pitta  (bile)  and  Kapha 
(phlegm)    nor   untimely    death     will  visit    him,     His    family    will   not 


10  30  sr!  mad  DEvl  bhAgavatam. 

be  extinct  and  happiness  will  always  reign  there.  O  Devas  !  This 
stotra  can  give  every  thing.  Both  the  enjoyment  and  freedom  will  come 
within  any  one's  easy  access.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  No.v  what  is  your 
difficulty  ?  Give  out.  I  will  remove  it;  at  once  There  is  not  a  bit 
of  doubt  in  this.  Hearing  these  words  of  Sri  Bhagavan,  the  Devas 
became    glad   and    spoke    to    Visiiu. 

Here  ends  the  Fifth  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  Devas' 
soins  to  Vianu,  in  the  Mahu  Purunam  Sri  Mad  Devt  Bhugavatam  of 
18,000    ver^^es    by    Maharsi    Veda    Vyasa. 


CHAPTER    VI. 

1-6.  Suta  said: — "  0  Risis  !  Hearing  the  word^  of  the  Lord  of 
Laksmi,  all  the  Devas  became  pleased  and  they  spoke:— The  Devas 
said:— '•  O  Deva  of  the  Devas!  OMiha  Visnu  !  0  Thou,  the  Creator, 
Preserver  and  the  Destroyer  of  the  Universe!  O  Visnu  !  The  Bindhya 
mountain  has  risen  very  high  and  it  has  stopped  the  Sun's  course. 
Therefore  all  the  workd  on  earth  are  suspended.  We  are  not 
receiving  our  share  of  YajSas.  Now  where  we  will  go,  what  we 
will  do,  we  do  not  know.  5ri  Bhagavan  said;—"  O  Devas  !  There 
is  now  in  Benares  the  Muni  Agastya  of  indomitable  power,  in 
devoted  service  of  that  Primordial  Sakti  Bhagavati,  the  Creatrix 
of  this  Universe.  This  Muni  alone  can  put  a  stop  to  this  abnormal 
Bindhya  Range.  Therefore  it  behoves  you  all  to  go  to  that  fiery  Dvija 
Agastya  at  Benares  where  the  people  get  NirvSn^;  the  Highe-^t 
Place    and    pray    to    him    (to    kindly    fulfil    your     object). 

7-19.  Suta  said:— "O  Risis  !  Thus  ordered  by  Visnu,  the  gods 
felt  themselves  comforted  and,  saluting  Him,  went  to  the  city  of 
Bflnares. 

In  a  moment  they  went  to  the  Holy  City  of  Banares,  and  bathing  there 
at  the  Manikarnika  ghSt,  worshipped  the  Devas  with  devotion  and 
offered  Tarpanas  to  the  Pitris  and  duly  made  their  charities.  Then 
they  went  to  the  excellent  As'rama  of  the  Muni  Agastya.  The 
hermitage  was  full  ot  quiet  quadruped  animals  ;  adorned  with  various 
trees,  peacocks,  herons,  geese  and  ChakravSkas  and  various  oth.^r  birds 
tigers,  wolves,  deer,  the  wild  boars,  rhinoceros,  young  elephants,  Ruru 
deer  and  others.  Though  there  were  the  ferocious  animals,  yet  the  place 
was  free  from  fear  and  it  looked  exceedingly  beautiful.  On  arriving 
before  the  Muni,  the  gods  fell  prostrate  before  him  and  bowed  down 
again  and  again  to  him.  They  then  chanted  hymns  to  him  and  said  :— 
O  Lord  of  Dvijas  I  O  Thou  honoured  and  most  worshipf.il  !  Victory 
to  Thee.     Thou  art  sprung   from  a  water  jar.     Thou  art   the   destroyer    of 


JooK  X.]  CHAPTER  XLIV,  105i 

Vfitap',  the  Asura.     Obeisanea    to  Thac  !     O  Thou,  full  of  ^ri,  th  e  son  of 
Mitravaruna  I     Thou    art    the    husband   of    Loparaudra.       Thou    art    the 
store  house    of  all  knowledge.     Thon    art   the    source    of    all    the    ^astras. 
Obaisance  to  Thee  1    At  Thy   rise,  the Vaters  of  the  ocean    becorae  bright 
and  clear  ;  so  obeismce  to  Thee  !     At  Thy  rise  (Cauopus)  the   Kas'a   flower 
blossoms.  Thou  art  adorned  with  clots  of  matted  hair  on  Thy  heed  and  Thou 
always  livest  with  Thy  disciples.     5ri  Rama  Chandra   is  one  of  Thy  chief 
disciples.     O  great  Muni  !     Thou  art  entitled  to  praise  from  all  the  Devas  ! 
0  Best  !     The  Storehouse  of  all    qualities  !     O   great    Muci  !     We    now 
bow  down  to  Thee  and  Thy  wife  Lopamudr^  !  O  Lord  !     O    very  Energe- 
tic !    We  all  are  very   much  tormented  by  an  unbearable  pain   inflicted  on 
us   by    the    Bindhya    R^mge    and  we  therefore   take  refuge  of    Thee.     Be 
gracious    unto  us.     Thus  praised  by  the  gods,  the  highly   religious    Muni 
Agastya,  the  twice  born,  smiled  and  graciously  said  : — 

20-27.  O  Devas  !  You  are  the  lords  of  the  three  worlds,  superior 
to  all,  highsouled,  and  the  preserver  of  the  Lokas.  If  you  wish,  you  can 
favour,  disfavour,  do  anything.  Especially  He  who  is  the  Lord  of  heavens, 
whose  weapon  is  the  thunderbolt,  and  the  eight  Siddhis  are  ever  at  his 
service  is  your  Indra,  the^Lord  of  the  Devas.  What  is  there  that  he 
cannot  do  ?  Then  there  is  Agni,  Who  burns  everything  and  always 
carries  oblations  to  the  gods  and  the  Pitris,  Who  is  the  mouth  piece  of 
the  Devas.  Is  there  anything  impracticable  with  him  !  O  Devas  !  Then 
again  Yama  is  there  amongst  you,  the  Lord  of  the  Raksasas,  the  Witness 
of  all  actions,  and  always  quick  in  giving  punishment  to  the  offenders, 
that  terrible  looking  Yama  Raja.  What  is  there  that  he  can  not  accom- 
plish ? 

20-27.  Still,  O  Devas  !  if  there  bean}thing  required  by  you  that 
awaits  my  co-operation,  give  out  at  once  and  I  will  do  it  undoubtedly. 
Hearing  these  words  of  the  Muni,  the  Devas  became  very  glad  and  joyfully 
began  to  say  what  they  wanted.  O  Maharsi  !  The  Bindhya  mountain 
has  risen  very  high  and  thwarted  the  Sun's  course  in  the  Heavens.  A 
cry  of  universal  distress  and  consternation  has  arisen  and  the  three  worlds 
are  now  verging  to  the  ruins.  O  Muni  !  Now  what  we  want  is  this 
that  Thou,  by  Thy  power  of  Tapas,  curbest  the  rise  of  this  Bindhya 
Mountain.  O  Agastya  !  Certainly,  by  Thy  fire  and  austerities,  that 
mountain  will  be  brought  down  and  humiliated.  This  is  what  we 
want.  ' 

Here  ends  the  Sixth  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  Devas'   praying 
to  the  Muni    Agastya   for  checking    the    abnormal  rise  of    the    Bindhya 
Range    in    the    Maha    Puranam   Jjri   Mad    Devi    Bhagavatan    of   1^,000 
verses  by  Mahar§i  Veda  VySsa. 


1032  Sr!  mad  dev!  bh^gavatam. 


CHAPTER  Va. 


1-21.     Suta  said  :— tiearing    the    words    of   the    Devus,    Agastya,  the 
Best  of  the  Brahmins   promised   that    he    would   carry    out    their    works. 
"  O  Ri§is  !     All  the  Devas  then  became  very  glad    when  the    Muui,    born 
of  the  water  jar,  promised  thus.     They  then    bade   good-bye    to    him   and 
went  back    gladly  to  their  own    abodes.     The  Muni    then  spoke  to  his  wife 
thus  : — "  0    daughter  of  tne  King  !     The  Bindhya   Mountain    has    baffled 
the  progress  of  the  Sun's    course    and   has  thus  ciused    a    great  mischief. 
What  the  Munis,    the  Seers  of  truths   said    before    referring   to    KSsi,    all 
are  now  coming    to  my   mind    when  I  am  thinking  why    this    disturbance 
has    overtaken  me.     They  said    that    various    hindrances    would   come   to 
him  at  every    step,   who  is   a    Sadhu    intending   to  settle    at  K4s'i.     Let 
him  who  wants  Mukti,  nevir  quit  Kas'i,  the  Avimukta  place,  in  any  case. 
But,  0  Dear  !     To-day    I   have    got    one    hindrance    during    my   stay   at 
K?.s'i.     Thus  talking  with  much  regret  on   various  subjects  with  his    wife, 
the  Muni  bathed    in  the    Manikarnika    ghat,    saw  the  Lord    Vis'ves'vara 
worshipped  Dandaplni  and  went  to  the    K^la    Bhairava.     He  said    in  the 
following  terms  : — "O  Mighty  armed  Kalabhai'rava!  Thou  destroyest  the 
fear  of  the  Bhaktas  ;   Thou  art  the  God  of  this  Kas'i  City.     Then  why  art 
Thou   driving  me    away  from  this  Kas'idham.     O  Lord  !     Thou  removest 
all    the  obstacles    of  the  devotees    and  Thou  preservest    them.     Then  why, 
O    Destroyer   of  the    sorrows  of  the  Bhaktas  !     Art   Thou    remDving  ma 
from    here  ?     Never    I    blamed  others  ;   nor   did   T    practis3  any  hypocrisy 
with  any  person  nor  did  I   lie  ;    then   under     what  sin,    Thou    art  driving 
me  away  from  Kas*i.     O  Risis  !    Thus  praying  to  Kala  Bhairava,  the  Muni 
Agastya,     born     of    water  j  ir  and  the  husband  of     Lopamudra,     went   to 
Saksi    Ganes'a,    the   Destroyer  of  all  evils    and    seeing   and     worshipping 
Him,     went    out    of   Kas'i   and     proceeded     to     the    south.     The    Muni 
the    ocean    of  ^reat  fortune,  left  Kas'i  ;  but  he  became  very  much  distressed 
to  leave  it  and   he    remembered    it    always,     He     began     to     march     on 
with    his    wife.     xVs    if   riding    on    his     car    of     aaceticism    he    arrived    at 
the   Bindhya     mountain    in    the     tiwnkling    of   an  eye  and  saw    that    the 
Mountain    had    risen    very  high    and  obstructed  the    passage    of    the  Sun 
in    the    Heavens.     The  Bindhya  Mountain,    seeing  the    Muni     Agastya  in 
fron^,    began  to   tremble     and    as    if    desirous     to     speak     something;    to 
the    earth   in    a     whisper   became    low    and    dwarfish     and    bowed   down 
to    the  Muni  and   fell   down    with  devotion     in     s-§stangas   with  devotion 
just   like     a   stick     dropped      flat    on    the     ground      before    the     Muni. 


Book  X.]  CHAPTER  VIII.  Ifj^S 

Seeing  the  Bindhya  thus  low,  the  Muni  Agast^a  became  pleased  and 
spoke  with  a  gracious  look  : — "O  Child!  Better  remain  in  this  state 
until  I  come  back.  For,  O  Child!  I  am  quite  unable  to  ascend  to 
your  lofty  heights.  Thus  saying,  the  Muni  became  eager  t^p  go  to  the 
sDuth  ;  and,  crossing  the  peaks  of  the  Bindhya,  alighted  gradually  again  to 
the  plains.  He  went  on  further  to  the  south  and  saw  the  Sri  Saila  Mountain 
and  at  last  went  to  the  MalaySchala  and  there,  building  his  As'rama 
(hermitage),  settled  himself.  O  Saunka  !  The  Devi  Bhagavati,  worshipped 
by  the  Muni  went  to  the  Bindhya  Mountain  and  settled  there  and 
became    known,    in  the    three    worlds,    by    the    name  of    Bindhyavasini. 

22-26.  Suta  said  : — Any  body  who  hears  this  highly  pure  narrative 
of  the  Muni  Agastya  and  Bindhya,  becomes  freed  of  all  his  sins. 
All  his  enemies  are  destroyed  in  no  time.  This  hearing  gives  knowledge 
to  the  Brihmanas,  victory  to  the  Ksattriyas,  wealth  and  corn  to 
the  Vais'yas  and  happiness    to    the    Siidras. 

If  any  body  once  hears  this  narrative,  he  gets  Dharma  if  be  wants 
Dharma,  gets  unbounded  wealth  if  he  wants  wealth  and  gets  all  desires  if 
ho  wants  his  desires  fulfilled.  In  ancient  times  Sv^yam  bhuva  Manu 
worshipped  this  Devi  with  devotion  and  got  his  kingdom  for  his  own 
Manvantara  period.  O  Saunaka  !  Thus  I  have  described  to  you  the  holy 
character  of  the  Devi  in  this  Manvantara.  What  more  shall  I  say  ?  Men- 
tion please. 

Here  ends  the  Seventh  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  checking 
of  the  rise  of  the  Bindhyi  Range  in  the  MahS  Puranam  5ri  Mad  Devi 
BhSgavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi    Veda  Vy^sa. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

1.  Saunaka  said:  — "0  Suta!  You  have  described  the  beautiful 
narrative  of  the  first  Manu  Svayambhuba.  Now  kindly  describe  to  us  the 
narratives  of  other  highly  energetic  Deva-like  Manus. 

2-3.  Suta  said:— "O  Ri§is  !  The  very  wise  Narada,  well  versed  in  the 
knowledge  of  5ri  Devi,  hera-ing  the  glorious  character  of  the  first  Sv^yam 
bhuba  Manu,  became  desirous  to  hear  of  the  other  Manus  and  asked  the 
Eternal  Narayana:—"0  Deva  !  Now  favour  me  by  reciting  the  origins 
and  narratives  of  the  other  Manus. 

4.  N^rdyanv  said: — *'0  Devarsi  !  I  have  already  spoken  to  you  every- 
thing regarding  the  first  Manu.  He  had  worshipped  the  Devi  Bhagavati, 
and  thus  he  got  his  foeless  kingdom.     You  know  that  then. 

5'>24  Manu  had -two  sons  of  gre  it  prowess,  PriyaviMta  and  Utt4nap4da. 
They  governed  their    kingdoms  with  fame.     The  son   of  this    Priyavrata, 

130 


1034  ^Rt  MADDEVt  BHAgAVATAM 

of  indomitable  valour,  is  known  by  the  wise  as  the  second  Sv^roehisa  Manu. 
Dear  to  all  the  beings,  this  Svaroehi§a  Manu  built  his  hermitage  near  the 
banks  of  the  K&lindi  (the  Jumnft)  and  there  making  an  earthen  image  of  thg 
Devi  Bhagavati,  worshipped  the  Devi  with  devotion,  subsisting  on  dry 
leaves  and  thus  practaieed  severe  austerities.  Thus  he  passed  his  twelve  \ears 
in  that  forest;  when,  at  last,  the  Devi  Bhagavati,  resplendent  with  brilliance 
of  the  thousand  Suns,  became  visible  to  him.  She  got  very  much  pleased 
with  his  devotional  stotrams.  The  Devi,  the  Saviour  of  the  Devas,  and 
Who  was  of  good  vows,  granted  to  him  the  sovereignty  for  one  Manvantara. 
Thus  the  Devi  became  famous  by  the  name  Tarini  Jagaddhatri.  0  Narada  ! 
Thus,  by  worshipping  the  Devi  Tarini,  Svarochisa  obtained  safely  the 
foeless  kingdom.  Then  establishing  the  Dharma  duly,  he  enjoyed  his  king- 
dom with  his  sons;  and,  when  the  period  of  his  manvantara  expired,  he  went 
to  the  Heavens.  Priyavrata's  son  named  Uttama  became  the  third  Manu, 
On  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  he  practised  tapasya  and  repeated  the  Vija 
Mantra  of  V&gbhaba,  in  a  solitary  place  for  three  years  and  became  bl<3ssed 
with  the  favour  of  the  Devi,  With  rapt  devotion  he  sang  hymns  wholly  to 
the  Devi  with  his  mind  full  ;  and,  by  Her  boon,  got  the  foeless  kingdom 
and  a  continual  sucaession  of  sons  and  grandsons.  Thus,  enjoying  the 
pleasures  of  his  kingdom  and  the  gifts  of  the  Yuga  Dharma,  got  in  the 
end,  the  excellent  place,  obtained  by  tha  bestRajarsis.  A  very  happy  result. 
Priyavarata's  another  son  named  Tamasa  became  the  fourth  Manu.  Ho 
practised  austerities  and  repeated  the  Kama  Vija  Mantra,  the  Spiritual 
Password  of  KHma  on  the  southern  banks  of  the  NarmadS  river  and 
worshipped  the  World  Mother.  In  the  spring  and  in  the  autumn  he 
observed  the  nine  nights'  vow  (  the  Navar&tri  )  and  worshipped  the 
excellent  lotus  eyed  Daves'i  and  pleased  Her.  On  obtaining  the  Devi's 
favour,  he  chanted  excellent  hymns  to  Her  and  made  pranams.  There 
he  enjoyed  the  extensive  kingdom  without  any  fear  from  any  foe  or  from 
any  other  source  of  danger.  He  gene  rated,  in  the  womb  of  his  wife,  ten 
sons,  all  very  powerful  and  mighty,  and  then  he  departed  to  the  excellent 
region  in  the    Heavens. 

The  young  brother  of  Tamasa,  Raivata  became  the  Fifth  Manu  and 
practised  austerities  on  the  banka  of  the  Kalindi  (the  Jumna)  and  repeated 
the  K4ma  Vija  Mantra,  the  spiritual  password  of  Kama,  the  resort 
of  the  S^dhakas,  capable  to  give  the  highest  power  of  speech  and  to  yield 
all  the  Siddhis,  and  thus  he  worshipped  the  Devi.  He  obtained  excellent 
heavens,  in-domitable  po.ver,  unhampered  and  capable  of  all  success  and 
a  continual  line  of  sons,  grandsons,  etc.  Then  the  unrivalled  excelKnt 
hero  Raivata  Manu  established  the  several  divisions  of  Dharma  and 
pJ>JoyiDg  all  the  worldly  pleasures,  went  to  the  excellent  region  of  Indra. 


Book  X.]                           CHAFER  IX.  1035 

Here  ends    the    Eighth    Chapter  of   the  Tenth    Book    oa    the   origin 

of  Mann  in    the    Mah&puranara    S'ri    Mad  Devi    Bhagvatam  of    18,000 
t^erses  by  Maharsi  Veda   Vvasa. 


CHAPTAR   IX. 

1-7.  Narayana  said: — "O  Narada  I  I  will  now  narrate  the  supreme 
glories  of  the  Devi  and  the  anecdote  how  Manu,  the  son  of  Anga,  obtained 
excellent  kingdom  by  worshipping  the  Devi  Bhagavati.  The  son  of  the 
king  Anga,  named  Chaksusa  became  the  Sixth  Manu.  One  day  he  went 
to  the  Brahmaisi  Pulaha  Risi  and  taking  his  refuge  said  : — "0  Brahmarai  ! 
Thou  removesfc  all  tlie  sorrows  and  attiictions  of  those  that  come  uuder 
Thy  refuge  ;  I  now  take  Thy  refuge.  Kindly  advise  Thy  servant  how 
he  may  become  the  Lord  of  an  endles?  amount  of  wealth.  O  Muni  ! 
What  can  I  do  so  that  I  may  get  the  sole  undisputed  sway  over  the 
world  ?  How  my  arms  can  weild  the  weapons  und  manipulate  thorn  eo 
that  they  may  not  be  b\tfl)l  ?  Ho-.v  ray  race  and  line  be  constant  aud  my 
youth  remain  ever  the  same,  undeciyed  V  And  how  can  I,  in  the  end, 
attain  Mukti  ?  O  Muui  !  Kindly  dost  Thoi  give  instructions  to  me 
on  these  points  and  oblige.  Hearing  thus,  the  Muni  wanted  him  to 
worship  the  Devi  and  said  : — "  O  King  !  Listen  attentively  to  what  I 
say  you  to-day.  AVorship  to-day  the  all  auspicious  Sakti  ;  by  Her  grace,  all 
your   desires  will  be  fulfilled. 

S.     Chaksusa  said  :— "O    Muni  !     What  is  that  very  holy  worship  of 
Sri  Bhagavati  ?  How  to  d )  it  ?  Kindly  describe  all  these  in  detail. 

9-20.  The  Muni  said  : — "O  King  !  I  will  now  disclose  all  about 
the  excellent  Puja  of  the  Devi  Bhagavati.  Hear.  You  recite  (mentally) 
always  the  seed  maubra  of  VaVbhiva  (Speech)  (The  Deity  being  MahS 
Sarasvati).  If  any  one  makes  japam  (reciter  slowly)  of  the  VAkbhava  Vija 
thrice  a  day,  one  gets  both  the  highest  enjoyment  here  and,  in  the  end  , 
release  (Mukti)  0  Son  of  a  Ksattriya!  There  is  no  other  Vija  Mantra  (word) 
better  than  this  of  Vak  (the  Word).  Through  the  Japam  of  this  Vija 
Mantra  comes  the  increase  of  strength  and  prowess  and  all  successes.  By 
the  Japam  of  this,  Brahma  is  so  powerful  and  has  become  the  Creator  ; 
Visnu  preserves  the  Universe  and  Mahes'vara  has  become  the  Destroyer  of 
the  Universe.  The  other  Dikpalas  (the  Regents  of  the  quarters)  and  the 
other  Siddhas  have  become  very  powerful  by  the  power  of  this  Mantra, 
and  are  capable  of  favouring  or  disfavouring  others.  So,  O  King!  Yovi, 
too,  worship  the  Devi  of  the  Devas,  the  World  Mother  and  ere  long 
you  will  become  the  Lord    af  unbounded    we-ilth.     There    is    no   doubt  in 


1036  6Et  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

this.  O  Narada  !  Thus  advised  by  I'ulaha  Hisi,  the  son  of  the  King 
Aoga  went  to  the  banks  of  the  Viraja  river  to  practise  austerities.  There 
the  king  Chaksufa  remained  absorbed  in  making  Japam  of  the  Vagbhava 
Vija  Mantra  and  took  for  his  food  the  leaves  of  the  trees  that  dropped  on 
the  ground  and  thus    practised  severe  austerities. 

The  first  year  he  ate  leaves  ;  the  second  year  he  drunk  water  and  in 
the  third  year  he  sustained  his  life  by  breathing  air  simply  and  thus 
remained  steady  like  a  pillar.  Thus  he  rimained  without  food  for  twelve 
years.  He  went  on  making  Japara  of  the  Vagbhava  Mantra  and  his  heart 
and  mind  became  purified.  While  he  was  sitting  alone,  absorbed  in  the 
meditation  of  the  Devi  Man<?ra,  there  appeared  before  him  suddenly  the 
Parames'vari,  the  World  Mother,  the  Incarnate  of  Laksmi.  The  High- 
est Deity,  full  of  dauntless  fire  and  the  Embodiment  of  all  the  Deva', 
spoke  graciously  in  sweet  words  to  Chaksusa,   the  son  of  Anga. 

21-29.  O  Regent  of  the  earth!  I  am  pleased  with  your  TapasyS. 
Now  ask  any  boon  that  you  want.  I  will  give  that  to  you.  Chaksusa 
said:— '^  Thou,  worshipped  by  the  Devas  !  O  Sovereign  of  the  Deva 
of  the  Devas  !  Thou  art  the  Controller  Inside  ;  Thou  art  the  Controller 
Outside.  Thou  knowest  everything  what  I  desire  in  my  mind.  Still, 
O  Devi  !  When  I  am  so  fortunate  as  to  see  Thee,  I  say  "Thou  grantest 
me  the  kingdom  for  the  Manvantara  period."  The  Devi  said: — "0  Best 
of  the  Ksattriyas  !  I  grant  unto  you  the  kingdom  of  the  whole  world  for 
one  manvantara.  You  will  have  many  sons,  very  powerful,  indeed,  and 
well  qualified.  Your  kingdom  will  be  free  from  any  danger  till  at  last 
you  will  certainly  get  Mukti.  Thus  granting  the  excellent  boon  to 
Manu,  She  disappeared  then  and  there,  after  being  praised  by  Manu,  with 
deep  devotion.  The  Sixth  Manu,  then  favoured  by  the  Devi,  enjoyed 
the  sd'Vereignty  of  the  earth  and  other  pleasures  and  became  the  best  of 
the  Manus.  His  sons  became  tha  devotees  of  the  Devi,  very  powerful 
and  expert  and  became  respected  by  all  and  enjoyed  the  pleasures  of  the 
kingdom.  Thus  getting  the  supremacy  by  the  worship  of  the  Devi, 
the  Ch&ksnga  Manu  became  merged  in  the  end  in  the  Holy  Feet  of  the  Devi. 

Here  ends  the  Ninth  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  narrative 
of  Chaksusa  Manu  in  the  MahapurSnam  ^rimad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of 
18,000  verses  by    Miaharsi    Veda    VySsa. 


Book  X.]  CHAPTER    X.  1037 


CHA.PTER  X, 

1-4.  NarSyana  said: — Now  the  Seventh  M;iau  is  the  Right  Hou'bh 
Ills  Excellency  the  Lord  Vaivasvata  Manu  ^rSddha  Deva,  honoured  by  all 
the  kings,  and  the  Enjoyer  of  the  Highest  lili-ss,  Brahmananda.  I  will  now 
ppeak  of  this  seventh  Manu.  lie,  too,  practiced  austerities  before  the 
Highest  Devi  and  by  Her  Grace,  got  the  sovereignty  of  the  earth  for  one 
Manvantara. 

The  Eighth  Manu  is  the  Sun's  son,  known  as  Sivarni.  This  per- 
sonage, a  devotee  of  the  Devi,  honoured  by  the  kings,  gentle,  patient, 
and  powerful  king  S4varni  worshippec  the  Devi  in  his  previous  births  ■ 
and,  by    Her  boon,  beoama  the  Lord  of  the  Manvantara. 

5.  Narada  said:— "O  Bhagavan  !  How  did  this  Savarni  Manu 
worship  in  his  previous  birth  the  earthen  image  of  the  Devi.  KiuUy  Je^- 
eribe  this  to  me. 

6-13,  N4-ayana  said  :  "O  Narada  !  This  E  ghth  Manu  had  b-en, 
before,  in  the  time  of  Svarochisa  Manu  (the  second  Manu) ,  a  f  imous 
king,  known  by  the  name  of  Suratha,  born  of  the  family  of  Chaitn, 
and  very  powerful.  He  could  well  appreciate  merits,  clever  in  the  science 
(  f  archery,  amassed  abandonee  of  wealth,  a  generous  donor,  a  very  liberal 
man  and  he  was  a  celebrated  po-t  and  honoureJ  by  all.  He  was  skilled 
in  all  arts  of  warfare  with  weapons  and  indomitable  in  crushing  his 
foes.  Once  on  a  time,  some  of  his  powerful  enemies  destroyed  the  city 
of  Kola,  belonging  to  the  revered  king  ard  succeeded  in  beseiging  his 
capital  wherein  he  remained.  Then  the  king  Suratha,  the  conqueror  of 
all  his  foes  went  out  to  fight  with  the  enemies  but  he  was  defeated  by 
them.  Taking  advantage  of  this  opportunity,  the  king's  ministers  robbed 
him  of  all  his  wealth.  'he'  illustrious  king  then  went  out  of  the  cir.y 
and  with  a  sorrowful  h-^art  rode  alone  on  his  horse  on  the  plea  of  having 
a  game  and  walked  to  and  fro,  as  if,  absent-minded. 

14-25.  The  king,  then,  went  to  the  hermi'age  of  the  Muni  Samedh4, 
who  could  see  far-reaching  things  (a  Man  of  the  Fourth  Dimensions), 
It  was  a  nice,  quiet  As'rama,  surruunded  by  quiet  and  peaceful  animals 
and  filled  with  disciples.  There  in  that  very  sacred  As'rama,  his  heart 
became  relieved   and  he  went  on  living  there. 

One  day,  when  the  Muni  finished  his  worship,  etc.,  the  king  went  to  him 
and  saluted  him  duly  and  humbly  asked  him  the  following  : — "O  Muni  !  1 
am  sufifering  terribly  from  my  mental  pain.  O  Deva  on  the  earth  !  Why  I 
am  sufifering  So  much  though  1  know  everything,  as  if  I  am  quite  an  igno- 
rant man.  After  mj  defeat  from  my  enemies,  why  does  my  mind  become  now 


1038  ^nt  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM 

compassionate  towards  thoae  who  stole  away  my  kingdom.  O  Best  of  the 
knowers  of  the  Ve  las  !  What  am  I  to  do  uow  ?  Where  to  go  ?  How 
can  I  make  ma  happy  ?  Please  spaak  on  these.  O  Muni  !  Now  I  am 
in  want  of  your  good  graoa.  The  Muni  siid  : — ''O  Lord  of  the  earth  !  Hear 
th.^  extremely  wonderful  glories  of  the  Devi  that  have  no  equal  and  that 
can  fructify  all  desires.  She,  the  M  iha  Maya,  Who  is  all  this  world, 
is  the  Mother  of  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahes'a.  0  King  !  Know  verily  that 
it  is  She  and  She  alone,  that  can  forcibly  attract  the  hearts  of  all  the  Jivas 
and  throw  them  in  dire  utter  delusion.  She  is  always  the  Creatrix,  Preservrix 
anJ  Destructfix  of  the  Universe  in  the  form  of  Hara.  This  MahaMaya 
fulfills  the  desires  of  all  the  Jivas  and  She  is  known  as  the  insurmountable 
KAlarSbri.  She  ia  Kali,  the  Destruetrix  of  all  this  universe  and  She  is 
Kamala  residing  in  the  lotus.  Know  that  this  "vhole  world  rests  on  Her 
and  it  will  become  dissolved  in  Her.  She  is  therefore,  the  Highest  and 
Best.  O  King  !  Know,  verily,  that  he  alone  can  cross  the  delusion 
(Mjha)  on  whom  the  Graca  of  the  Devi  falls  and  otherwise  no  one  can 
escape  from    this  An&di  Moha. 

Here  en  Is  the  Tjnjh  Chipjer  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  anecdote  oi  the 
King  Surithi  in  the  Mahi  Paranam  Sri  Mad  Devi  BhSgavatam  of 
18,000   versei  by    Miliar?!    Vedi  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER    Xr. 

1-2.  The  king  Suratha  spoko  :  — "0  Best  of  the  twice  born  !  Who  is 
that  Devi  that  you  spoke  just  now?  Why  the  Devi  deludes  all  these 
beings?  Whot  for  does  She  do  so  ?  Whence  is  the  Devi  born?  Whut 
is  Her  Form  ?  and  what  ate  Her  qualities  ?  O  Brtlhmin  !  Kindly  describe 
all  these    to   me. 

3-9.  The  Muni  spoke  : — *'0  King  !  I  will  now  describe  the  nature 
of  the  Devi  Bhagavabi  and  why  doas  She  bake  Her  Form  in  due  time. 
Listen.  In  ancient  days,  when  Bhi^gavan  Narayana,  the'  king  of  the 
Yogis,  was  lying  in  deep  sleep  on  the  ocean  on  the  bed  of  Ananta,  after  He 
had  destroyed  the  Uuiverie,  there  came  out  of  the  wax  of  his  ear  the  two, 
D^navas,  Madhu  and  Kaitabha,  of  monstrous  appearances.  They  wanted 
to  kill  Brahm^,  who  was  lying  on  the  lotus  coming  out  of  the  navel  of 
Bhagavan.  Seeing  the  two  Daityas  Madhu  and  Kaitabha  and  seeing  also 
Hari  asleep  the  Lotus-born  Brahma  became  very  anxious  and  thought : — 
Now    Bhagav&n  is  asleep  ;   and  these    two   indomitable     Daitya=  are  ready 


Book  X.]  CHAPTER  XL  1039 

to  kill  me.  Now  what  am  1  to  do  ?  Where  to  go  ?  How  shall  I  get 
ease  ?  ''O  Chill  !  Thus  thinking,  the  high  souled  Lotus  born  suddenly 
came  to  a  practical  conclusion,  tie  said  : — "Let  me  now  take  refuge  to 
the  Goddess  Sleep,  Nidrd,  the  Mother  of  all  and  under  Whose  power 
Bhagavdn  Hari  is  now  asleep. 

10-21.     Brahma    then    began    to   praise    Her  thus  : — "0    Devi    of  ihe 
DavHs  !     O    Upholdress    of    the  world  !     Thou     grantest    desires    of    Thy 
devotees.     O  Thou  auspicious  !     Thou   art    Para  Brahma  !     By    Thy  Com- 
mand all  are  doing  respectively  their  works  in  their  proper    spheres  I    Thou 
art  the  Night  of  Destruction  (Ola  Ratri);  Thou  art  the  Great  Night  (Maha 
Ratri).     Thou    art  the  greatly  terrible  Night   of   Delusion    (Moha  Rdtri)  • 
Thou  art  omnipresent  ;  omniscient;  of  the  nature  of  the  Sujjreme  Bliss.     Thou 
ai  t  regarded  as  the  Great.  Thou  art  highly  worshipped  ;     Thou  art  alone  in 
this     world    as    highly     intoxicated  ;     Thou     art    subr^iissive  to     Bhakti 
only  ;     Thou  art  the    Best     of  all    the     things  ;     Thou  art    sung  as   the 
Highest;     Thou  art    modesty;     Thou    art    Pusti    (nourishment);     Thou 
art     forgiveness    (Ksaraa) ;     Thou  art    Beauty    (Kdnti) ;     Thou     art  the 
embodiment  of  mercy;     Thou  art  liked    by  all;     Thou  art  adorned  by  the 
whole    world  ;     Thou  art  of  the   nature   of  wakefulness,    dream  and   deep 
sleep;     Thou  art  the  Highest ;     Thou     art      alone    Highest  Deity ;     Thou 
art  highly    attached    to    the     Supreme     Bliss.     There   is    no  other  thino- 
than  Thee.      There  is  One  only  and   that  is  Thee.    Henco  Thou  art  dcLo- 
mioated  as  Oae  ;     Thou    becomest  again      the    two  by  contact  with  Thy 
M3-ya.     Thou  art  the  refuge  of  Dharma,  Artha  and  Kdma  ;  hence     Thou 
Thou  art  Three  ;     Thou  art  the  Turiya  (the  fourLh  state  of  consciousness) 
hence  Thou  art  Four.     Thou  art  the  God  of    the  five    elements  •     hence 
Thou  art  Panchami  (fi\e);     Thou  president    ever  the  six  passions  Kama 
anger  etc.;  hence  Thou  artStSthi  ;     Thou  presidest  over  the  seven  davs  of 
the  week  and  Thou     grantest     boons  seven    by    seven ;     hence    Thou   art 
Seven.     Thou     art  the      God     of  the  eight    Vasus ;     hence    Thou      ;irt 
A§tami  ;     Thou  art  full  of  the  nine  Ragas  and  nine  parts  and  Thou  art  the 
Goddess  of  nine  planets;     hence   Thou     art     Navami.     Thou      pervado=^ 
tlie    ten    quarters  and  Thou  art    worshipped  by  the  ten  quarters  •  hence 
Thou  art    named  Das'ara'i     (the  tenth  day  of  the  fortnight) ;     Thou    art 
terved  by  the  Eleven  Rudr.is,  the  Goddeses  of  eleven  GanaS  and  Thou  art 
fond  of  EkSdas'i  Tithi ;     hence  Thou  art  denominated  EkSdas'i ;     Thou  a'-fc 
twelve  armed    and  the  Mother  of  the   twelve   Adityas  ;  hence   Thou   art 
Dvadas'i  ;  Thou    art    dear   to  the   thirteen  Ganas  ;  Thou  art  the  presiding- 
Deity  of  Visve    DevSs  and  Thou  art  the   thirteen     months  ineludino-     tl" 
Malas   M^sa  (dirty    month),    hence   Thou     art    Trayodas'i,     Thou     didst 


1040  ^Rt  MAT)  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

grant  boons  to  the  fourteen  InJras  and  Thou  gavest  birth  to  the  fourteen 
Manus  ;  hence  Thou  art  ChaturJas'i.  Thou  art  knowable  by  tho 
Panf^baais'i,  Thou  art  sixteen  arms  1  and  on  Thy  forehead  the  sixteen 
digits  of  the  Moon  are  always  shirdng  ;  Thou  art  the  sixteantlj  digit 
(ray)  of  the  Moon  natned  Ainu  ;  hence  Thou  art  Sodas'i.  O  Daves'!  ! 
Thou,  tiiough  attributeless  and  formless,  appeareat  in  these  forms  and 
attributes.  Thou  hasb  now  enveloped  in  Moha  and  Dirkness  the  L?rd 
of  Rsim^,  tha  Bhagavan,  tho  Deva  of  the  Devas,  These  Daityas.  Madhu 
and  Kaitabha  are  indomitable  and  very  powerful.  So  to  kill  them, 
Thou  better  dost  awake  the  Lord    of   the     Devas. 

25-34.  The  Muni  said: — Thus  praised  by  the  Lotus-born,  the 
Tclmasi  Bhagavati  (the  Goddess  ot  sleep  and  ignorance),  the  Beloved  of 
Bhagavan,    left    Visnu    and    enchanted    the    two    Daityas. 

On  being  awakened,  the  Supreme  Spirit  Visnu,  the  Lurd  of 
the  world,  the  Bhagavan,  the  Deva  of  the  Devas,  saw  the  two 
Daityas.  Those  two  monstrous  Danavas,  beholding  Madhu  Sudana, 
came  up  before  Him,  ready  to  fight.  The  hand-to-haad  tight  lasted 
amongst  them  for  five  thousand  years.  Then  the  two  Danavas,  mad- 
dened by  their  great  strength,  were  enchanted  by  the  Mdy^  of 
Bhagavati  and  told  the  Supreme  Deity  "Ask  boon  from  us"  Hearing 
this,  the  Bhagavtln  Adi  Purusi  (the  Prime  Man)  asked  the  boon 
that  both  of  them  would  be  killed  that  day  by  Him.  Those  two 
very  powerful  Danavas  spoke  to  Hari  again  "  Very  Well.  Kill  us  on 
ihat  part  of  the  earth  which  is  not  under  water."  O  King  1  BhagavSn 
Visnu,  the  Holder  of  the  conch  and  club,  spoke: — "All  right.  Indeed  ! 
Let  that  be  so. 

Saying  this  He  placed  their  heads  on  His  thigh  and  severed 
them  with  His  disc  (chakra).  O  King  !  Thus  Maha  Kali,  the  Queen 
of  all  the  Yogas  arose  on  this  occasion  when  the  praise  was  offered  Her 
by  Brahma.  O  King  !  Now  I  will  describe  another  account  how  this 
Maha    Laksmi    appeared    on    another   occasion.     Listen. 

Here  ends  the  Eleventh  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the 
killing  of  Mailhu  Kaitabha  in  the  iVJaha  Puranam  Sri  Mad  Devi 
BhAgavatam    of    13,000    verses    by    Maharsi   Veda  Viyasa. 


CHAFn^Ei^    XII. 

l«fi.  The  xMuni  said: — '•  O  King  !  The  powerful  A.Mira  Mahi?a, 
liorn  of  a  She-buffalo,  defeated  all  the  Devas  and  became  the  Lord 
cf  the    whole   uuiveree.     That      indomitable    D^nava   seized     forcibly    all 


Book  X.]  CHAPTER  XII.  l041 

the  rights  of  the  Devas  and  began  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  the 
kingdom  over  the  three  worlds.  The  Devas,  thus  defeated,  were 
expelled  from  their  abodes  in  Heavens.  They  took  Brahma  as  their 
Leader  and  went  to  the  excellent  regions  where  Mah4  Deva  and 
Visnu  resided  and  informed  them  of  all  that  had  been  done  by  that 
vicious  Asura  Mahi§a.  They  said: — "  O  Deva  of  the  Devas!  The 
insolent  M;ihisasura  has  become  unbearable  and  he  has  taken  posses- 
sions of  the  rights  and  properties  of  the  whole  ^ost  of.  the  Devas 
and  he  is  no^v  enjoying  them.  Both  of  you  are  quite  capable  to 
destroy  the  Asura.  So  why  do  you  not  devise  means  to  annihilate 
him    in    no    time  !" 

7-10.  Hearing  these  pitiful  words  of  the  Devas,  BhagavSn 
Visnu  became  quite  indignant.  Sankara,  Brahmft  and  the  other 
Devas  all  were  inflamed  with  anger.  O  King  !  From  the  face  of 
the  angry  Hari,  then  emanated  an  Unusual  Fire,  brilliant  like  thousand 
Suns.  Then  by  and  by  emanated  fires  also  from  the  bodies  of  all  the 
Devas  who  were  filled  then  with  joy.  From  the  mass  of  fire  thus 
emanated  there  came  out  a  beautiful  Female  Figure.  The  face  of  this 
figure  was  formed  out  of  the  fire  that  emanated  from  the  body  of 
Mnha  Deva.  Her  hairs  were  formed  out  of  the  firo  of  Yama  and 
Her  arms  were   formed   out   of  the    fire    that   emanated    from    Visnu. 

11-21.  O  King  I  From  the  fire  of  the  Moon  came  out  two 
breasts ;  from  the  fire  of  Indra  came  out  Her  middle  portion  ;  from 
the  fire  of  Varuna,  appeared  Her  loins  and  thighs ;  from  the  fire 
of  Earth,  Her  hips  were  formed;  from  the  fire  of  BrahmS,  Her  feet 
were  formed ;  from  the  fire  of  the  Sun,  Her  toes  were  formed ;  from 
the  fire  of  the  Vasus,  Her  fingers  were  formed ;  from  Kuvera's  fire, 
Her  nose  came  out;  from  the  excellent  tejas  of  PrajApati,  teeth  J 
from  the  fire  of  Agni,  Her  three  eyes ;  from  the  fire  of  the 
twilights.    Her    eye-brows  and  from  the  fire  of  V^yu,  Her  ears     appeared. 

11-21.  0  Lord  of  men  I  Thus  Bhagavati  Mahisamardini  was  born 
of  the  Tejas  (fiery  substances)  of  the  Devas.  Next  Siva  gave  Her  the 
^lila  (weapon  spear);  Visnu  gave  Sudars'ana  (Chakra ;  )  Varuna  gave 
the  conohshell ;  Fire  gave  Sakti  (\veapou)  ;  Vi\yu  gave  Her  bows  and 
arrows ;  Indra  gave  Her  thundor  bolt  and  the  boll  of  the  elephant 
Airavata  ;  Yama  gave  Her  tha  Dedtnictiou  Staff  (Kala  Dauda);  Br^m^ 
I  gave  Her  the  Rulraksa,  rosary  and  Kamandalu ;  the  Sun  gave  Her, 
'~  in  every  pore  the  wonderful  rays  ;  the  Time  (Ktlla)  gave  Her  sharp  axe 
and  shield  ;  the  oceans  gave  Her  the  beautiful  necklace  and  new  clothes 
two  in    number) ;  Vi/vakarm^  gladly  gave     Her     the    crown,     ear-rings, 

131 


J042,  3k1  mad  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

kataka,   Angada,    ChandrArdha,    tioklets ;    and    the  Hiraalajis   gave  Iler 
the    Lion  as   Her  Vehicle    and   various  gems  and   jewels. 

22-30.  Kuvera,  the  Lord  of  wealth  gave  Her  the  cup  filled  with 
the  drink ;  Bhagavau  Ananta  Deva  gave  Her  a  necklace  of  snakes 
(NSghdra).  Thus  the  World  Mother,  the  Devi,  became  honoured'  by 
all  the  Devas.  The  Devas,  very  much  oppressed  by  Mahisa  sura,  then, 
chanted  various  hymns  of  praise  to  the  World  Mother  MahesVari 
Maha     Devi. 

22-30.  Hearing  their  Stotras,  the  Deves'j,  worshipped  by  the  Devas, 
shouted  aloud  the  War-Cry.  O  King  !  MahisSsura,  startled  at  that 
War-Cry,  oame  to  Bhagavati  with  all  his  army  corps.  Then  that  great 
Asura  Mahisa  hurled  various  weapons  in  the  air  and  overcast  the  sky 
with  them  and  began  to  fight  with  great  akill.  The  several  generals 
Chikfura,  Durdhara,  Durmukha,  Vaskala,  T^mraka,  Vidalaksa  and 
various  other  innumerable  generals  as  if  Death  incarnate,  accompanied 
Mahiga,  the  chief  Danava.  A  fierce  fight  then  ensued.  Then  the 
Devi  Who  enchants  all  the  beings,  became  redeyed  with  anger  and 
began  to  kill  the  generals  of  the  against  party.  When  the  generals 
Were  killed  one  by  one  Mahisisura,  skilled  in  the  science  of  magic,  came 
up  quickly   to  the  front  of  the  Devi. 

31-40.  The  Lord  of  the  Danavas,  then,  by  his  magic  power, 
began  to  assume  various  forms.  Bhagavati,  too,  begun  to  destroy 
his  those  forms.  Then  the  Daifcya,  the  crusher  of  the  Devas,  assumed 
the  form  of  a  buffalo  and  began  to  fight.  The  Devi  then  fastened 
the  anima^  the.  Asura,  the  Death  of  the  Devas,  tightly  and 
cut  off  his  head  by  Her  axe.  The  remainder  of  his 
forces,  then,  fled  away  in  terror  and  disorder  with  a  loud  cry. 
The  Devas  became  very  glad  and  began  to  chant  hymns  to  the 
Devi.  O  King !  Thus  the  Lak§mi  Devi  appeared  to  kill  MahisSsura. 
Now  I  will  describe  bow  Sarasvati  appeared.  Listen  Once  on  a 
time  the  two  very  powerful  Daityas  Sumbha  and  Nis'umbha  were 
born.  They  attacked  the  Devas,  oppressed  them  and  siezed  their 
houses  and  rights.  The  Devas  became  dispossesseil  of  their  kingdoms 
and  went  to  the  Himalay&s  and  offered  stotras  to  the  Devi  with  the  greatest 
devotion: — *' O  Deves'i  !  O  Thou,  skilled  in  removing  the  difficulties 
of  the  Bhaktas  !  Victory  to  Thee  !  O  Thon,  the  Sinless  One  !  Old 
age  and  death  cannot  touch  Thee.  O  Thou !  Death  incarnate  to  the 
Danavas  !  O  Deves'i !  O  Thou,  of  mighty  valour  and  prowess  !  O 
Thou,  the  embodiment  of  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahe'ea  !  Unbounded 
is   Thy   might  ;   Thou   caust   be  easily    reached    by    the   power   of  devo- 


^ooK  X.]  CHAPTER  Xir.  1043 

tion.  O  Thou,  the  Creator,  Preserver  and  Destroyer!  O  Madhavi !  O 
Thou,  the  Giver  of  P.liss  ?  Thou  dancest  with  great  joylafc  the  time  of 
the   dissolution  of  all  the  things  (Pralaya). 

41-50.  0  Thou,  full  of  mercy!  O  Deva  Deve'di !  Be  gracious  unto 
ug.  O  Thou,  the  Ilomover  of  the  sufferings  of  the  refugees  !  We  now 
eomo  unto  Thy  protection.  The  terror  of  Kumbha  and  Nis'umbha  is  liko 
an  endless  ocean  unto  u?.  Save,  save  us  from  their  fast  clutches.  O  Devi  ! 
save  ud  O  King!  verily.  When  the  Devas  praised  thus,  the  daughter  of  the 
Ilim^Mayas,  Bhagavati  became  pleased  and  asked  "  What  is  tha  matter  ?" 
In  the  meanwhils,  there  eaiit'ed  from  the  physical  sheath  of  the  Devi, 
another  Devi  Kaus'iki  who  gladly  spoke  to  the  Devas:— "O  Suras  I  I  am 
pleased  with  'J'hy  Stotra.  Now  ask  the  boon  that  you  desire.  The 
Devas  then  asked  fov  the  following  boon:— •' O  Devi  !  The  two  famous 
Daityas  bumbhi  and  Xis'umbha  have  attacked  forcibly  the  three 
worlds.  The  wicked  Lord  of  the  Danavas,  Sumbha,  has  overcome  us 
by     the  power    of   his    arm    and   is  now     tormenting     us    without    any 

break.     Kindly    devise    some    means    to   kill    him."     The     Devi     said: 

"  O  Deva?  !  Be  patient.  I  will  kill  these  two  Daityas,  Kumbha  and 
Nis'urabha  and  ihn^  remove  the  thorn  on  your  way.  At  an  earlv 
date  I  will  do  g:)o  i  to  you  "  Thus  saying  to  Indra  and  the  other  Devas, 
the  merciful  Devi  disappeared  at  once  before  their  eyes.  The  Devas 
with  their  hearts  delighted  went  to  the  beautiful  Sumeru  Mountain 
and  dwelt  there  in  the   caves  thereof. 

41-50.  Here  the  servants  of  Sumbha  and  Nis'umbha  Chauda  and 
Munda,  while  thfy  were  making  their  circuits,  saw  the  exquisitely 
beautiful  Devi,  the  Enchantress  of  the  world,  and  came  back  to  Sumbha, 
their    King    and     said: — 

51-60.     "■  O  Destroyer    of  enemies!     O  Giver     of    honour!     O  Great 
King  I   You   are    the    Lord    of  all   the    Daityas    and   are     fib    to     enjoy 
all   the   gems   and   jewels.     To-day  we  have  seen  an  extraordinary  beauti- 
ful   woman   jewel.     She    is    fit  to    be    enjoyed    by   you.     So     now   you 
would   better   bring   that    perfectly   beautiful     woman     and     enjoy.     No 
such   enchanting    women   can     be     seen      amongst    the    Asura     women 
N&ga  Kany^s    Gandharbba    women,    Dftnavis    or   men.'     Hearing     thu8 
the    words     of   the   servant,     Sumbha ,   the   tormentor    of    the   foes,   sent 
a   Daitya      named   Sugriva  as    a     messenger     to    Her.     The      messenger 
went    to    the    Devi    as   early    as    possible  and     spoke     to    Her   all    that 
Kumbha  had  told  him.     "  O  Devi  !    The  Asura  bumbha  is    now     the   oon- 
(^ueror    of    the   three    worlds  and    rpspeoted    by     the     Devas.     O  Devi  ! 


1044  iSrImAD  DEVl  BlIAQAVATA-M. 

1I«  ia  now  enjoying  all  that  ia  best,  the  gems  and  jewels.  O  Devi  ! 
1  am  his  messenger  sent  here  to  convoy  to  yon  his  message  us 
follows  :• — "  O  Devi  I  1  am  the  sole  enjoyer  of  all  the  jewels.  O 
Beautiful-eyed  1  You  arc  a  gem  ;  ao  yoa  would  worship  me.  O  Fair 
One  !  All  the  gems  and  jewels  that  are  in  the  Deva  loka,  in  the  Daitya 
loka,  or  amongst  the  regions  of  men,  are  under  my  control.  So  you 
would  lovingly  worship  me.''  The  Devi  said: — "O  Messanger  !  True 
that  you  are  speaking  for  your  King;  but  I  made  a  promise  before- 
How  can   I   act    against    it  ?    O  Messenger  !    Hear  what    I    promised. 

Cl-70.  VAHioever  in  the  three  worlds  will  conquer  Me  by  sheer 
force  and  thus  crush  My  vanity,  whoever  will  be  as  etoog  as  My- 
self, He  can  enjoy  Me.  So  the  King  of  Daityas  can  prove  My 
promise  true  and  by  sheer  force  can  marry  Me.  What  is  there  with 
him  that  he  cannot  do  ?  So,  Messenger  !  Go  back  to  your  master 
and  tell  him  all  this  so  that  the  powerful  isumbha  may  fulfil  My 
promise.  Hearing  thus  the  words  ot  the  Great  Devi,  the  messenger 
went  back  to  Sumbha  and  informed  him  everything  regarding  the 
Devi's  sayings.  The  very  powerful  Lord  of  the  Daityas,  oumbha 
became  very  angry  at  the  unpleasant  words  of  the  messenger  and 
commanded  the  Daitya  named  DhumrAk§a: — "  O  Dhumrfiksa  !  Listen 
to  my  words  with  gre  it  attention.  Go  and  cat:;h  hold  of  that  wicked 
woman  by  her  hairs  and  bring  her  to  me.  Gq  quickly  ;  do  not 
delay.  Thus  commanded,  the  very  powerful  and  the  best  of  the 
Daityas,  Dhumr£lk§a,  went  at  once  to  the  Devi  with  sixty  thousand 
Daityas   and   cried    aloud    to    Her: — 

"O  Auspicious  One  !  You  would  better  worship  quickly  our  Lord 
oumbha,  who  is  very  powerful  and  mighty  ;  you  will  then  acquire  all 
sorts  of  pleasures ;  else  I  will  hold  you  by  your  hairs  and  take  you  to  the 
Lord  of  the   Daityas. 

71-80.  Thus  addressd  by  DhurarSksa  Daitya,  the  enemy  of  the  Devas, 
the  Devi  said : — "O  Powerful  One  !  O  Daitya  !  What  rou  have  spoken 
is  perfectly  right,  but  tell  me  first  what  you  or  your  king  Sumbha  can  do 
to  Me  ?  When  the  Devi  said  thus,  the  Daitya  Dhiimralochana  rushed 
on  Her  at  once  with  arms  and  weapons.  With  one  loud  noise,  MShes'vari 
burnt  him  immediately  to  ashes.  O  King !  The  other  forces  were 
partly  crushed  by  the  Lion,  the  vehicle  of  the  Devi  and  partly  fled 
away  in  disorder  to  all  the  quarters  ;  some  became  senseless  out  of  fear. 
Sumbha  ,  the  Lord  of  the  Daityas,  became  very  angry  to  hear  this.  Uii 
face  assumed  a  terrible  form  with  eyebrows  contracted.  Tlien  he  became 
impatient  with  anger  and  sent  iu   order   Chanda,    Munda  and    Baktabija. 


BookX.]  chapter  XII.  1045 

The  three  powerful  Daityas  wetjfc  to  the  battle  and  tried  their  might  to 
capture  the  Devi.  The  Devi  Jagaddhatri,  of  violent  provvesB, 
seeing  that  these  three  Daityas  \v ere  coining  to  Her,  killed  them  by  Her 
trident  and  laid  them  prostrate  on  the  ground,  Hearing  their  death  with 
all  their  army,  Suinbha  and  Nis'umbha  came  in  their  own  persons 
arrogantly  to  the  battlafieU.  Sumbha  and  Nis'umbha  fought  for  a  time 
with  the  Devi  a  terrible  fight  uu  I  became  tired,  when  the  Devi  killed 
them  outright.  When  the  Bhagavati,  Who  is  all  this  world,  killed 
Kumbha  and  Nis'urabha,  the  Devas  began  to  praise  Bhagavati'i,  the 
Supreme    Deity    of  Vak  (Word)    inearr.ate. 

81-93.     O  King  !     Thus  I  have  spoken  to  yon  in  due  order  the  manner 
in  which    the   boautifal    Kali,     M  iha    Lak?  ni    and     Sarasvati    incarnated 
themtelves    on     the   earth.      That    Supreme    Deity,  the    Devi    Parames'- 
varl    thu^   creates,    preserves,    and    destroys    the     Universe.     You    better 
take  refuge  of  that  highly  adored   Devi,    that    causes    the    distinction   and 
the    delusion    of    this      Universe.     Then    only    you    will    attain    succes.'.-. 
Ndriyaoa  said  :  —The    kin:»    Suratha,    heuring   these    beautiful    words  of 
the    Muni,    took    refuge   of  the     Devi,      thai    yields   all    desired   objects. 
He  built  an  earthen  iinaj;e  of  the    Devi  and,    with   concentrated  attention, 
thought  wholly  of  the     Djvi  und    began    ti    worship    Her  with  devotion. 
When  the  worship  wa^  over,    ho  offered  sacrifices  of  the  blood   of  his  body 
to  the   Devi.     Then  the  World-Mother,    the  Deity  of  the    Devas,  became 
pleased  and  appeared  before  him  and  asked    him  -.—Accept    the    boon  that 
you  desire.     W^hen  the    Divi  sai  1  thus,    the  king  asked  from  the  Mahes'- 
vari    that  excellent   knowledge    whereby    th^   ignirance   is  destroyed  and 
as  well    the  kingdom    free    frjm    any    dangers    or  ditliculties.     The   Devi 
said: — "O  King  1     By    My   boon,   you  will    get  your  foeless  kingdom  in 
this  very   birth  as  well  as  the  JiiSnam  that  removes  ignorance.  O  King  !     I 
will  tell  you  also  what  you  will  be  in  the  next  birth.    Hear.      In  your  next 
birth,  you    will  be  the  son  of  the    Sun  and   be    famous   as  SSvarni  Manu. 
By  My  boon  you  will    be  the  Lord  of  the  Manvantara,  become  very  power- 
ful and    ycu  will  get  good  many  sons.     Thus  granting  him  this  boon,    the 
Devi   disappeared.     By  the  Grace  of  the  Devi,  Suratha  became  the  Lord  of 
the     Manvantara.     O    Sadhu  I     Thus  I  have  described   to  you  the  birth 
and  deeds  of  S^varni.      fie  who  hear.^  or  reads  this  anecdote  with  devotion, 
will  be  a  favourite    of  the   Devi. 

Here  ends  the  Twelfth  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  on  the  anecdote 
of  Saivarni  Manu  in  the  Mahdpurdnam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhtlgavatam 
of  18,000  verses  by  Mahar^i  Veda  VySsa, 


1046  ^Rt  MAD    DEVi  BHilGAVATAM. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

1-10.     5ri    N^rayana    spoke  :— "  O    Child    Narada  !     Hear    now    the 
wonderful  anecdotes  of  the  births  of  the  remaining  other  Manus.     The  mere 
remembrance  of  these  birth  anecdotes  causes  Bhakti  to  grow, and  well  up  to- 
wards the  Devi.    Vaivasvata  Manu  had  six  sons  :— viz.,  Ivarusa,  Prisadhra, 
Nabh^ga,  Di§ta,  Sary^ti,  and  Tri.s'ankii.  All  of  them  were  stout  and  strong. 
Once  they  all  united  went  to  the  excellent   banks  of  the  JumnI  and  began 
to    practise    Pr&nSyania    without   taking    any  food  and  became  engaged  in 
worshipping   the    Devi.     Each    of   them  built  separataly  an  eirthen  image 
of  the  Devi  and  worshipped  Her  with  devotion   and  with  various  offeiiogs. 
In  the    beginning.they   took   the    dry    leaves    of   the  trees  that  dropped  of 
themselves  for  their  food  ,  then  they  drank  water   only,  then    breathed   air 
only;  then  the  smoke  from  the  fire  of  the  Homa;  then  they  depended  on  the 
Solar  Rays.    Thus  they  practised  tapasya  with  great  difficulties.     The  con- 
tinual wor.-hip  of  the  Devi  with  the   greatest  devotion  made  them  conscious 
of  their     clear    intellect,  destructive    of    all  sorts    of    vanities    and    delu- 
sions, and  the  Manu's  sons  thought  only  of  the  Hallowed  Feet  of  the  Devi  : 
their  intellects  were  purified  and   they  were  greatly  wondered  to  see  within 
their  Self  the    whole    Universe.     Thus    they    practised  their    Tapasya  full 
twelve    years    when    Bhagavati,    the    Ruling   Principle  of     this   U.iivars 
resplendent  wiih  the  brillianc  ■  of  the  thousand  Suns,  appeared  before  them. 
The  princes  with  their  intelligences  thus  purified   saw    Her,    bowed   downt 
and,  with  their  lowly  hearts,  began  to    chant    hymns    to    Her  with  greates 
devotion.     "  O    Is'ani  !    0  Merciful  !     Thou  art  the  Devi    presiding   over 
all.    Thou  art  the  Best.     So    Victory  to  Thee  !     Thou  art   known    by  the 
V^gbhava    Mantra.    Thou    gettest  pleased  when  the  Vagbhava   Mantra  is 
repeated.      O    Devi  !     Thou    art    of    the    nature    of  Klim    Kara    'of  the 
form  of  Klim).     Thou  gettest  pleased  with  the  repetition  of  Klim  Mantra, 
O  Thou,  that  gladdenest  the  Lord  !     Thou    bestowest  joy  and  pleasure    in 
the  heart  of   the    King  of  Kama.     0    Maha     Mkyh  !       When   Thou    art 
jdeased,  Thou  givest  that  Unequalled  Kingdom.  O  Thou  that  inereasest  the 
enjoyments  !      Thou  art  Visnu,  Surya,  Hara,  Indra  and  the  other  Devas." 
When  the  higbsouled  princes  praised  Her  thus,   Bhagavati  became   pleased 
and  spoke  to  them  the  following  sweet  words  : — "  O  Highsouled  Princes  ! 
You  all  have  worshipped  Me  and  practised,  indeed,  very  hard  tapasyas  and 
thus   you   have   become     sinless    and     your   intellects   and  hearts     have 
become  thoroughly  purged  and   thus    purified.     Now  aalc  boons   that   you 


Book  X.]  CHAPTER  XtU.  1047 

desire.  I  will  grant  them  ere  long  to  you.  The  Princes  said  : 
"  O  Devi !  We  want  unrivalled  Kingdoms,  many  sons  of  long 
longevity,  continual  enjoyment  of  pleasures,  fame,  energy,  freedom  in  all 
notions,  and  as  well  the  good  and  keen  intelligence.  These  will  be  beni- 
ficial  to  U9.  The  Devi  said  : — Whatever  you  have  desired,  I  grant  them 
to  you  all.  Beside?  I  give  you  another  boon.  Listen  attentively.  By  My 
Grace  you  all  will  b  e  the  Lords  of  the  Manvantaras  and  acquire  strength 
that  will  experience  no  defeat,  and  you  will  get  prosperity,  fame,  energ>, 
powers,  and  a  continual  line  of  descent  and  abundant  full  enjoyments. 

22-32.  N^rSyana  said  : — ^After  the  World  Mother  Bhrarairi  Devi 
granted  them  these  boons,  the  princes  chanted  hymns  to  Her  and  then 
She  instantly  vanished.  The  very  energetic  prioce.s  acquired  in  that 
birth  excellent  kingdoms  and  abundance  of  wealth .  They  all  had  sons 
and  thus  established  their  families,  and  became  the  Lords  of  Manvantara 
in  their  next  births.  By  the  Grace  of  the  Devi,  the  first  of  the  princes 
Karusa  became  the  Ninth  Manu,  the  exceedingly  powerful  Daksa 
Savarni';  the  second  prince  Prifadhra  became  the  Tenth  Manu,  name  i 
Meru  Savarni ;  the  third  prince,  the  highly  enthusiastic  Ndbha^a 
became  the  Eleventh  Manu,  named  Surya  Savarni  ;  the  fourth  prince 
Uista  became  the  Twelfth  Manu,  named  Chandra  Sdvarni ;  the  powerfu  1 
fifth  prince  Sary4ti  became  the  Thirteentii  Manu  named  Rudra  Savarni 
and  the  sixth  prince  Tris'anku  became  the  Fourteenth  Manu  named  Visnu 
Siivarni  and  became  the  celebrated  Lord  of  the  world. 

33-41.  Narada  questioned: — "  O  Wise  One!  Who  is  that  Bhramari 
Devi?  What  is  Her  Nature?  What  for  She  takes  birth?  Kindly 
describe  all  this  beautiful  and  pain  destroying  anecdotes  to  me.  I 
am  not  satiated  with  the  drinking  of  the  nectar  of  the  Glories  of  the  Devi  ; 
my  desire  to  hear  further  more  is  as  strong  as  ever.  As  the  drink 
of  the  nectar  takes  away  death,  so  the  drink  of  this  anecdote  of  the  Devi 
takes  away  the  fear  of  death.  NSr^yana  said  : — "  0  Is'arada  !  I  will  now 
narrate  thf-  wonderful  glories  of  that  unthinkable,  unmanifested  World- 
Mother,  leading  to  Mukti.  Hear,  as  a  Mother  behaves  towards  Her 
child  kindly  and  without  any  hypocrisy,  so  the  World-Mother  in  all 
Her  lives  manifests  Her  merciful  sincere  dealings  for  the  welfare  of  the 
humanity.  In  days  gone  by,  in  the  nethei  regions,  in  the  city  of  the 
Daityas,  there  lived  a  powerful  Daitya  named  Arana.  He  was  a  fu'ious 
Deva  Hater  and  a  pakka  hyprocrite.  With  a  view  to  conquer  the  Devas, 
he  went  to  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  in  the  Himalayas,  practised  a  very  hard 
Tapasya,  to  Brahma,  taking  Hira  to  be  the  Protector  of  the  Daityas. 
First    influenced  bv   Tamo   Guna,  ho  withheld  in   his  body  the  five  Vayus 


]■:! 


1048  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM 

and  partook  only  the  dry  leaves  and  repeated  the  G^yattri  Mantra  and 
practis-ed  austerities.  Thus  he  practised  for  full  ten  thousand  years.  Then 
for  aruther  ten  thousand  years  the  Daitya  lived  drinking  some  drops  of 
Witer  only  ;  then  for  another  ten  thousand  years  he  remained  by  inhaling 
air  only  ;  and  then  for  another  ten  thousand  years  he  did  not  take  any 
thing  an]  thus  practiced  he  his  wonderful  TapasyS. 

42-t9.  Thus  practising  his  Tapasya,  a  sort  of  wanderful  halo  of 
ii^^ht  emitted  from  his  body  and  basran  to  burn  the  whole  world.  This 
thing  then  appeared  a  great  wonder.  All  the  Devas  then  exclaimed.  "Oh  ! 
What  is  this  !  Oh!  What  is  this  !  And  they  trembled.  411  were  very 
much  terrified  and  took  refuge  of  Brahma.  Hearing  all  the  news  from 
the  Devas,  the  four  faced  Bhagavdn  rode  on  His  vehicle,  the  Swan,  and 
with  ihe  Gayatri  went  very  gladly  to  where  the  Daitya  was  practising 
his  aisterities  and  saw  that  the  Daitya  was  immersed  in  meditation 
with  his  eyes  closed;  and  he  looked,  as  it  were,  blazing  with  fire,  as  if  a 
second  Fire  himself.  His  belly  had  become  dried  up,  body  withered  and 
the  nerves  of  the  bodies,  too,  became  almost  visible  ;  only  the  life  breath 
WAS  lingering  there.  Brj.bm^  then  spoke  to  him  : — "O  Child  !  Auspices 
to  you  !  Now  ask  the  boon  that  you  desire.  Hearing  these  gladdening 
nectar-like  words  from  the  mouth  of  Brahma,  Aruna,  the  chief  of  the 
Daityas  opened  his  eyes  and  saw  BrahmA  in  his  fro  nt.  Seeing  Brahma 
before  him  with  a  rosary  of  beads  and  Kamandalu  in  his  hand  and 
attended  by  G^yatr?  and  the  four  Vedas,  muttering  the  name  of  the 
Eterurl  Bi-ahma,  the  Daitya  rose  up  and  bowed  down  to  Him  and  sano* 
to  Him  various  Stotras. 

50-59.  Then  the  intelligent  Daitya  asked  from  Brahm^  the  following 
boon  that  ''I  shall  not  die.  Grant  this."  Brahmi  then  gently  explained 
tio  him  :  — "O  Best  of  the  D^navas  !  See  that  Brahma,  Visnu,  Mahes*. 
vara  and  others  are  not  free  from  this  limitation  of  death  !  What  to  speak 
then  for  others!  I  cannot  grant  you  a  boon  that  is  an  impossibility. 
A?k  what  is  possible  and  just.  The  intelligent  persons  never  show  an 
eagerness  to  an  impossibility."  Hearing  the  above  wcrds  of  Brahma, 
Aruna  again  said  with  devotion  ;-  "O  Deva  !  If  Thou  art  unwilling  to  "-rant 
me  the  above  boon,  then,  O  Lord  !  Giant  me  such  a  boon,  as  is  practicable 
th.^t  my  death  shall  not  be  caused  by  any  war,  nor  by  any  arms  or  weapon?, 
nir  by  any  man  or  any  woman,  by  any  biped  or  quadruped  or  any  combir  a- 
tions  of  two  and  grant  me  such  a  boon,  such  a  large  army  as  I  can  conquer 
ih'i  Deva?."  Hearing  the  words  o""  the  Daitya,  Brahma  ^aid  "Let  that 
ho"  so  aud  went  back  instantly  to  His  own  abode.  Then,  puffed  up  with 
that  boon,  the  Daitya  Aruna  called    on  all  the  other  Daityas  that  lived  in 


Book  X.]  CHAPTE14  XIII.  1049 

the  nether  regions.  The  Daityas,  that  were  undef  his  shelter,  came  and 
saluted  him,  as  their  kinf^  and,  by  his  command,  they  sent  messengers  to 
the  Heavens  to  fight  with  the  Devas.  Hearing  from  the  messenger  that  the 
Daityas  were  willing  to  fight  with  the  Devas,  Indra  trembled  with  fear  and 
went  instantly  with  the  Devas  to  the  abode  of  Brahma.  Taking  BrahmS, 
too,  along  with  them  from  there,  they  went  to  the  Visnu  Loka  and  took 
Vignu  with  them    and  all  went    to  the  Siva  Loka. 

60-7^^.  There  they  all  held  a  eoference  how  to  kill  the  Daitya,  the 
enemy  of  the  Gods,  While,  on  the  other  hand,  Aruna,  the  king  of  the 
Daityas  surrounrled  by  his  army,  went  ere  long  to  the  Heavens. 

O  Muni !  The  Daitya,  then,  through  the  power  of  his  Tapas,  assumed 
various  forms  and  seized  the  rights  and  possessions  of  the  Moon,  the  Sun 
Yama,  Agni  and  all  the  othors.  All  the  Davas,  then,  dislodged  from  their 
stations  went  to  the  region  of  Kiilas'a  and  represented  to  Sankara  about 
their  own  troubles  and  dangers  respectively.  Then,  what  was  to  be  done  on 
this  subject,  on  this,  great  discussions  cropped  up.  When  BrahraS  said,  that 
the  death  of  the  Daitya  would  not  ensue  from  any  fight,  with  any  arms  or 
weapons,  from  any  man  or  woman,  biped,  quadruped  or  from  any  combination 
of  the  above  two.  Then  the  Devas  became  all  anxious  and  could  not  find 
out  any  solution  at  that  instant,  when  the  Incorporeal  Voice  was  clearly 
heard  in  the  Heavens  : — Let  you  all  worship  the  Queen  of  the  Universe. 
She  will  carry  out  your  work  to  succees.  If  the  king  of  the  Daityas, 
always  engaged  in  mutering  the  G^yattri,  forsakes  the  Glyattri  any  how, 
then  his  death  will  occur.  Hearing  this  gladdening  Celestial  Voice,  the 
Devas  held  the  council  with  great  caution.  When  it  was  settled  what 
ought  to  be  done,  Indra  asked  Brihaspati  and  said: — "0  Guru  Deva  ! 
You  would  better  go  to  the  Daitya  for  the  carrying  out  of  the  Devas' 
ends  and  do  so  that  he  forsakes  the  Devi  Gayattri  Parames'vari.  We  will 
ail  now  go  and  meditate  on  Her.  When  She  will  be  pleased,  She  will  help  us. 

71-77.  Thus  commanding  Brihaspati  and  thinking  ihat  the  beautiful 
Protectress  of  Jarabu  Nada  would  protect  them  the  Devas  all  started 
to  worship  Her  and,  going  there,  began  the  Devi  Y^ajna  and  with 
great  devotion  muttered  the  May§,  Vija  and  practised  asceticism.  On  the 
other  hand,  Brihaspati  went  ere  long  in  the  garb  of  a  Muni  to  the  Daitya 
Aruna.  The  king  of  the  Daityas  then  asked  him  : — "O  Best  of  Munis  I 
Whence  and  why  have  you  come  here.  Say,  O  Muni  !  Where  have  you 
come  ?  I  am  not  one  of  your  party.  Rather  I  am  your  enemy.  Hearing 
the  above  words,  Brihaspati  said  : — When  you  are  worshipping  incessantly 
the  Devi  whom  we  too  worihip,  then  say  how  you  are  not  a  one  on  our  side  1 
"O   Saint  !     The  vicious    Daitya,   hearing  the  above   words    and   deluded 

132 


1050  SRt  MAD  DEvt  BHAgAVATAM. 

by  the    Mayd  of  the    Davas,   forsook  the    GSyatbri    Mantra  out  of    vanity 
and  therefore  he  became    weak,  bereft  of  the  Holy  Fire. 

78-85.  Then  Bribaspati,  having  succeeded  in  his  work  there,  went  to  the 
lieavens  and  saw  Indra  and  told  hiui  everything  in  detail.  The  Devas  became 
satisfied  and  worshipped  the  Highest  Deity.  O  Muni  !  Thus  a  long 
interval  passed,  when  one  day  the  World  Mother,  the  Ausi'icious  Devi 
appeared  before  them.  She  was  re:?plended  with  the  brilliance  of  ten 
million  suns  an  1  looked  beautiful  like  ten  millions  of  Kandarpas  (Gods  of 
love).  Her  body  was  anointed  with  vaiiegated  colours,  etc.;  She  wore 
a  pair  of  clothing?;  a  wonderful  garland  suspended  from  Her 
neck  ;  Her  body  was  decked  with  various  ornaments  and  in  the  fists 
of  Her  ban  ds  there  were  worderful  rows  of  hornets  (  large  black 
bees).  Her  one  hand  was  ready  to  grant;  boons  and  Her  other  hand 
was  ready  to  hold  out  •'  no  fear."  On  the  neck  of  Bhagavati,  the 
Ocean  of  Mercy,  and  peaceful,  were  seen  the  variegated  garlands  with 
large  black  bees  all  round.  Those  male  and  female  bees  singing 
incessantly  all  round  Her  the  Hrimkara  Mantra  (the  First  Vibra- 
tion of  Force),  kotis  of  black  bees  surrounded  Her.  '1  he  All-auspicious 
Bhagavati,  praised  by  all  the  Vedas,  Who  is  all  in  all,  composed 
of  all,  Who  is  all  good,  the  Mother  of  all.  Omniscient,  the  Protec- 
tress   of    all,  was  adorned    fully    with  diess. 

86-96.     Seeing  suddenly  the  Devi,  in  their  front  Brahm^  and  the    other 

Devas  became  surprised  and  by  and  by  they  got  lelieved  and  gladly  began  to 

chant  hymns  of  praise  to  Bhagavati,  Whose  Glories  have  bsen  written  in  the 
Vedag. 

The   Deras   said: — "  0    Devi  1   Obeisance   to   Thee  !       Thou      art   the 
Highest    Knowledge  and  the    Creatrix,     Preservrix  and  the  Destruetrix    of 
the  Universe.      O  Thou,   the      Lotus-ejed  !     Thou     art     the     Refuge    of 
all !   So   we   bow   down    to    Thee.     O     Devi  I    Thou    art     collectively   and 
individually    Vis'va,     Taijasa,   Prajfia,    Virat     and    Sutra tma.  O    Bhaga- 
vati.    Thou  art  differentiated  and  undifferentiated  ;  Thou  art  the   Kiitastha 
Chaitanya  (the  Unraoveable,  Utchangeable   Consciousness). 
So   we   bow    down    \o    Thee.      O    Durge  !  Thou    art      unconcerned     with 
the    creation,    preservation   and  destruction  ;    yet      Thou     punishest    the 
wicked   and   art     easily     available     by      the     sincere    devotion     of     Thy 
Bhaktas.     O  Devi  !  Thou  scorchest  and  destroyest  the  ignorance    and  sin  of 
the  embodied   souls.      Hence  Thou     art  named  BhargS.     So  we  bow   down 
to   Thee.    O    Mother  !    Thou    art  Kalika,    Nila    Sarasvati,     Ugra     TarS. 
Mahogra  ;  Thou  assumest  many  other  forms.     So     we    always     bow  down 
to  Thee.     O  Devi  !  Thou  art  Tripura  Sundri,  Bhaiarabi,  MtLtangi,  Dhuma- 1 
vati,    ClihinnamastA,     Sakambhnri  and    Rakta    Dantika.     Obeisance     to 
Thee!  O  Bhagavati  !     It   is   Thou    that   didst  appear   as  Laksmi     out   of 


Book  X.]  CHAPTER  XIII.  1051 

the  milk  ocean  (Kalra.  Saraudi-a).  Thoa  hadst  destroyed  VritnUura, 
Cbanda,  Munda,  Dhumralocbana,  Uikta  Bija,  Sumbha,  Nis'umbha  and  the 
Exterraiaator  of  the  Danavas  and  thus,  Thou  didst  do  great  favours  to  the 
Devas.  So,  O  Gracious  Countenced  I  Thou  art  Vijayu  au J  Gangd  ; 
O  Sarade  !  We  bow  down  to  Thee.  O  Devi !  Thou  art  the  earth,  fire, 
PrSua  and  other  VSyus  and  other  substances.  O  Merciful  !  Thou  art 
of  the  form  of  this  Univeroe  ;  the  Deva  form,  and  the  Moon,  Sun  and 
other   Luminons   forms    and  of  the   Knowledge    Form. 

97-109.     O    Devi  I      Thou     art       Savitrt ;      Thou       art       Gayatri  ;  - 
Thou    art  Sarasvati  ;      Thou    art      Svadh^,        Svaha,        and       DaksinS. 
So    we   bow     down        to     The3.       Thou      art,     in     the       Vedas,       the 
Agimas,   '*  Not  this  "  "  Not  this  ''  Thou  art  whit   is  left  after  the    nega- 
tion  of  all    this.     This    all    the  Vedas  declare  of  Thy  True    Nature    thus 
as   the   Absolute  Consciousness     in      all.     Thus    Thou  art     the     Highest 
Deity      So   we    worship  Thee.     As    Thou    art   surrounded  by  large  black 
bees,    Thou    art    named    Bhramarl.     We  always  make    obeisance    to  Tliee ! 
Obeisance    to    Thee !    Obeisance    to   Thy    sides  !    Obeisance   to  Thy  back  ! 
Obeisance      to     Thy      front  !    O    Mother  1    Obeisance    to        Thy     above ! 
Obeisance      to    Thy     below!    Obeisance      to  everywhere    round  of  Thee ! 
O  Thou,    the    Dweller   in  Mani    Dvtpa  !    O  Maba  Devi  !     Thou  art     the 
Guide   of   the    innumerable  Brahraandas  !      O  World  Mother!   Let    Thou 
be    merciful    to    us.     O  Devi !  Thou    art    higher    than     the     highest.     0 
World  Mother  !  Victory  be  to  Thee  !  All  Hail  !  O  Goddess  of  the  universe  / 
Thou   art    the    Best    in   the      whole       universe  ;     Victory    to     Thee  !    O 
Lady    of   the   world  !    Thou    art   the  mine    of  all  the  gems    of  qualities. 
O  Parames'vari  !  0  Wjrld  Mother!  Let  Tho.i    ba  pleased  unto  us."   NarS- 
yana   said:— Hearing    those    sweet,    realy     and  confident    words     of     the 
Devas,   the  World    Mother  said  in  the  sweet  tone  of  at  Mad  Cuckoo: — ■  '•  O 
Devas  !    As   far   as  granting    boons    to    others  is    concerned,    I  am     ever 
ready.    I    am    always  pleased    with  you.     So,    O    Devas  I    Say     what   you 
want."     Hearing    the  words  of  the    Devi,  the  Djvas  began  to  express    the 
cause   of  their   sorrows.     They    informed    Her    of  the   wicked     nature  of 
the    vicious  Daitya,   the    neglect   of  the  Devas,  the  Brahmanas   and     the 
Vedas   and   the   ruins  thereof,  and  the   dispossession  of  the   Devas  of  their 
abodes   and   the    receiving   by    the    Daitya    of   the   boon     from    BrabmH  ; 
in    fact,   everything    what     they     had   to    say,      duly     and      vigorously. 
Then   the    Bhagavati    BhrS,marr  Devi    sent  out   all    sorts    of  blick    beee, 
hornets,  etc.,       from    Her     sides,    front    and    forepart. 


1052  SrI  mad  dev!  bhAgavatam. 

110-120.     Innumerable    lines   of    black   bees    then     were     generated 
and   they   joined   themselves    with    those    that   got     out     of  the     Devi's 
hands      and   thus    they     covered  the    whole   earth.     Thus   countless   bees 
bewan   to   emit  from   all     sides  like    locusts.       The    sky  was  overcast  with 
the   bees;   and     the     earth     was        covered     with     darkness.     The      sky, 
mountain  peaks,    trees,   forests   all      became    filled    with     bees     and     the 
spectacle  presented  a  grand  dismal   sight.  Then  the  bl  .ck   bees  began  to  tear 
asunder   the   breasts    of   the      Daityas     as     the      bees     bite      those     who 
destroy    their   beehi  ves.     Thus    the    Daityas   could  not   use  their   weapon^ 
uor  could   they  fight  nor   exchange  any  wor.ls.       Nothing    they    could   do ; 
they  had   no    help    but    to   die.         The    Daityas    remained     in    the  same 
state    where   they    were  and    in    that  state       they     wondered     aud     died. 
No   one   could     talk    with    another.      Thus     the     principal     Daityas    died 
within    an    instant.     Thus  completing  their     destruction,   the     bees   came 
back   to  the   Devi.     All    the    people   then    spoke     to    one   another  "  Oh  ! 
What   a    wonder  ! "    "  Oh  !    What  a    wonder  !  Or   like       this:—'  Whose. 
Maya    is    this!    Whit   a    wonder  that    She    will  do    like       this!"     Thus 
BrahmS.,     V:snu   and    Mahes'a  became  merged  in  the      ocean    of  joy  and 
worshipped    the    Dcvi    Bhagavati    with    various     offerings    and    shoutings 
of  chants  "  Victory  to    the  Devi  "  and     showered  flowers    all  around.     The 
Munis   began    to    recite   the    Vedaa.     The    Gandharbas      began    to     sin<'. 

121-127.     The    various  musical   instrument?.    Mridangao,  Murajas    tl 
Indian    lutes,  Dhakkas,  Damariis,     Sankhap,  bell?,  etc.,  all  sounded  and  the 
three    worlds    were    filled    with    their   echoes.     All      with       folded     palms 
chanted    various    hymns      of   praise    to   the    Devi    and   said    "  O  Mother  ' 
Lani  I    Victory    to   Thee  !  "   The  Maha    Devi    became        glad    and     .rave 
to   each   separate   boons    and    when   they    asked     "  for     unsbakeable  devo- 
tion   to   Thy    lotus   feet, "    She   granted    them    that  also    and  disappeared 
before    them.     Thus  I    have  described   to    you     the    glorious       character 
of  the   Bhramari  Devi.      If  anybody  hears    this    very      wonderful    anec- 
dote,  he   crosses   at   once   this  ocean   of  the     world.       Alon^     with    th 
gloriess  and     greatness    of  the      Devi,   if    one     hears     the     accounts     of 
Manas,   then   all     auspiciousness     comes     to     him.     He     who     hears     or 
recites   daily   this  Greatneej  of  the    Devi,    becomes      freed     from  all  hi 
sins   and   he   gets     himself   absorbed    in     the      thoughts     of     the     D    * 
(Sajuya).      A^o^e.— The    Mantra    is       here     not     merely    the     Seed     the 
Spiritual   Password,   but   it   connote?,    besides    the   idea  of  the   password 
the  Adi  First  vibration   and     it    exhibits     the     FItsI     Spiritual    Form 
endowed  with     the    highest    feelings    of   Faith,  Wisdom,  Bliss     and  Joy,' 
displayed    with  the    grandest   colours,     startling  thrills,  rapt     ench»ntior! 


le 


Book  X.]  CHAPTER  XIII.  1058 

signs,  gestures,  and  postures,  the  shooting  forth  of  all  powers,  the  sources 
of  Siddhis,  that  cannot  be  ordinarily  conceived  in  the  worldly 
concerns.  Their  f^int  echoes  govern  this  mighty  world.  The  Mantras 
are  seated  in  ihe  six  chakras  or  plexuses  or  the  six  Laya  centres  in  the 
spinal  cord.  Within  these  chakras,  the  transformations  of  the  Tattvas 
take  place.  Some  vanish.  Some  appear  and  so  on.  Remark  : — In  this 
chapter  we  find  clearly  the  mention  of  the  several  names  of  the  ten  Das'a 
MahU  Vidyas. 

Here  ends  the  Thirteenth  Chapter  of  the  Tenth  Book  of  the 
account  of  Brahmari  Devi  in  the  Mahapur^nam  Sri  Mad  Deyi 
Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyilsa  and  here  ende 
as    well  the    Tenth    Book. 

[The    Tenth   Book  completed.] 


1054  fet  MAD  DEV!  BHAgaVATAM. 


tjhe:  iEijLL:EVEii\rTn:  ^oox^. 


-*'" — ~-— — 


CHAPTEH    I. 

1-13.     Narada  saiJ:— "  O  Bha^avan  !     O  Thou,    the      Etaraal    One  I 
O  Narlyana  !   O  Lord  of  the  past  and  the  future  !    Thou   art    the  Creator 
arid     the    Lord  of*  all  the    beings    that  lived  in  the  past     and     that      will 
come    into    existence    in    the    future.   Thou    hast    doscribed     to     me    the 
highly    wonderful    and    excellent    anecdote    of   the    Exalted     Devi.      How 
She    did   assume    the    forms    of  Mahakali,    MahS    Laksmi,  Maha  Saras- 
vati   and    Bhramari,    for   the    fulfilment  of   the    Devas'  purposes  and  how 
the    Devas    got    back   their     possessions   by    the     Grace     of    the    Devi. 
All   you   have    described.     O    Lord  !    Now    I    want    to    hear     the      rules 
of  Sadachara   (right    way   of  living),  the   due   obsarvanca    of     which  by 
the     devotees      pleases      the    World-Mother.     Kindly      desariba      them. 
Nardyana   said: — "  O  Knower   cf  Truth!    No^v    I    am    telling    you  those 
rules    of  the    right  way    of     living,      which      rightly     observed,     always 
please    Bhagavtt.     Listen    first,    I    will  talk  of  the   Brahmins,  how  their 
welfare   is    secured,    what   the   Brahmanas    ought    to    do    on    getting  up 
early    in    the   morning  from    their   bed.     From  the  sunrise    to  the  sunset 
the   Brahmanas   should   do  all    the   daily    and   occasional    duties    (Nitya 
and    Naimittik   Karmas)  and  they    are    to  perform  the   optional    works  for 
some  particular  object  such  as  Puttresti    Yajna   and  other  good  works  (not 
acts  of  black  majic    as  killing,    causing  pain  and  inconveniences  to    others, 
etc.     It  is  the  Self  alone  and    not  tha  Father,    Mother,  etc.,  nor  any  other 
body  th'it  helps  u^  on  our  way  to  that  happiness    in  the  next  world.    Father, 
Mother,   wife,  sons  and  others  are  helps  merely  to  our  happiness  in  this  world. 
None  of  them  are  helpful  to  us  in  bettering    our  states  in   the  next  world. 

1-13.  Deliverance  of  one's  Self  depends  verily  on  his  own  Self.  There- 
fore  one  should  always  earn  and  store  dharma  (religion)  and  observe  always 
there  the  riii;ht  conduct  to  help  one  in  the  next  world.  If  Dharma  be  on 
our  side,  this  endless  sea  of  troubles  can  be  safely  crossed.  The  rules  of 
right  living  as  ordained  by  Mauu  in  Srutis  and  Manu  Smritis  are 
the  principal  Dharmas.  The  Brahmanas  should  always  be  observant 
to  their  Dharma  as  ordained  in  the  Sastras,  Sruti  and  Smriti. 
Follow  the  right  conduct  and  then  you  will  get  life,  posterity  and  increase 
of  happiness  easily  here  and  hereafcer.  By  right  conduct,  food  is  obtained 
and  sins  are  easily  destroyed  j  the  right  conduct  is    the  auspicious  principal 


fiooK  Xi.]  CHAPTER  1.  1055 

Dharma  of  men.  Persons  of  right  living  enjoy  happiness  in  this  world 
as  well  as  in  the  next.  Those,  who  are  veiled  in  darkness  by  Ignorance 
and  thus  wildly  enchanted,  can  verily  see  their  way  to  Mukti  if  they  follow 
the  Great  Light  revealed  to  them  by  Dharma  and  the  right  conduct.  It  is 
by  Sadachara,  that  superiority  is  attained.  Men  of  right  conduct  always 
do  good  deeds.  From  good  deeds,  knowledge  comes.  This  is  the  advice 
of   Manu. 

14-24.  Right  way  of  living  is  the  best  of  all  the  Dharmas  and  is  a 
great  Tapasya  (asceticism).  The  knowledge  comes  from  this  Right  Living. 
Everything  is  attained  thereby.  He  who  is  devoid  of  Sadachslra,  is 
like  a  Sudra,  even  if  he  comes  of  a  Brahmin  family.  There  is  no 
distinction  whatsoever  betwen  him  and  a  Sudra:  Right  conduct  is  of  two 
kind"  : — (1)  as  dictated  by  the  oastras,  (2)  as  dictated  by  the  popular  cus- 
tom, Laukika).  Both  these  methods  should  be  observed  by  him  who  wants 
welfare  for  his  Self.  He  is  not  to  forsake  one  of  them.  O  Muni  !  The  village 
Dharma,  the  Dharma  of  ono's  own  caste,  the  Dharma  of  one's  own  family, 
and  the  Dharma  of  one's  own  country  all  should  be  observed  by  men. 
Never,  Never  he  is  to  do  anything  otherwise.  With  great  loving  devotion 
that  is  to  be  preserved.  Men  who  practise  wrong  ways  of  living,  are  cen- 
sured by  the  public  ;  they  always  suffer  from  diseases.  Avoid  wealth  and 
desires  that  have  no  Dharma  in  them.  Why  ?  If  in  the  name  of 
Dharma,  painful  acts  (g.  g.  killing  animals  in  sacrifices)  are  to  be 
Committed,  those  are  blamed  by  the  people  ;  so  never  commit  them.  Avoid 
them  by  all  means.  Narada  said  : — "  O  Mnni  !  The  oastras  are  not  one, 
they  are  many  and  they  lay  down  different  rules  and  contradictory 
opinions,  How  then  Dharma  is  to  be  followed  ?  And  according  to 
what  Dharma  Sastra  ?  NarSyana  said: — Sruti  and  iSmriti  are  *he  two 
eyes  of  God  ;  the  Puranam  is  His  Heart.  Whatever  is  stated  in  the 
Sruti,  the  Smriti  and  the  Purilnams  is  Dharma  ;  whatever  else  is  written 
in  other  oastras  is  not  Dharma.  Where  you  will  find  differences  between 
Sruti,  Smriti  and  Puranas,  accept  the  words  of  the  Sruits  as  final 
proofs.  Wherever  Smriti  disagrees  with  the  Purjlnas,  know  the  Smritis 
more  authoritative. 

And  where  differences  will  crop  up  in  the  Srutis  themselves,  know  that 
Dharma,  too,  is  of  two  kiuds.  And  where  the  differences  will  crop  up  in 
the  Smritis  themselves,  consider,  then,  that  different  things  are  aimed 
at.  In  some  Puranas,  the  Dharma  of  the  Tantras  is  duly  described  ; 
bub  of  these,  which  go  against  the  Vedas,  they  are  not  to  be  accepted  by 
any  meand, 


1056  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

25-37.  Tanbra  is  accepted  as  the  authoritative  proof  then  and  th^n 
only  when  it  contradicts  not  the  Vedas.  Whatever  goes  clearly  against  the 
Vedas  can  in  no  way  be  accepted  as  ;i  proof.  In  matters  concerning  Dhar- 
ina,  the  Vedas  is  the  Sole  Proof.  Therefore  that  which  is  not  against  the 
Vedas  can  bo  taken  as  proof ;  otherwise  not.  Whoever  acts  Dharma 
accarJing  to  other  proofs  than  what  is  ordained  in  the  Vedas,  goes  to  the 
hell  in  the  abode  of  Yami  to  got  his  lesson.  So  the  Dharma  that  is 
by  all  meana  to  be  accepted  as  such,  is  what  is  stated  in  the  Vedas. 
Th<)  Smrits,  the  PurSnas,  or  the  Tantra  SSstras  can  ^e  taken  also  as 
authoritative  when  they  aro  not  conflicting  to  Vedas.  Any  other  S^stras  can 
be  taken  as  authoritative  when  it  is  fundamentally  coincident  with  the 
Vedas.  Else  it  can  never  be  accepted. 

25-37.  Those  who  do  injury  to  others  even  by  the  blade  of  a  Kus'a 
i^rasg  used  as  a  weapon,  go  to  hell  with  their  heads  downwards  and 
their  feet  upwards.  Those  that  follow  their  own  sweet  free  will,  that 
take  up  any  sort  of  dress  (c.  g.  Bauddhas),  those  that  follow  the  philo- 
sophical doctrines  called  Pas'upatas,  and  the  other  hermits  and  saints 
and  persons  that  take  up  other  vows  contrary  to  the  religions  of  the 
Vedas,  for  example,  the  Vaikhanasa  follower:?,  those  who  brand  theii 
bodies  by  the  hot  Mudras,  at  the  places  of  pilgrimages,  e.  g.  DvarkA,,  etc., 
they  go  to  hell  with  their  bodies  scorched  by  red  hot  brands  (Tapta 
Mudr^s).  So  psrsons  should  act  according  to  the  excellent  religions 
commanded  by  the  Vedas.  Everyday  he  should  get  up  from  his  bed 
early  in  the  morning  and  think  thus  :  — "  What  good  acts  have  I  done, 
what  have  I  given  as  charities  ?  Or  what  1  advised  others  to  do  charities 
what  greater  sins  (MahapjLtakasj  and  what  smaller  sins  have  I  committed? 
At  the  last  quarter  of  the  night  he  should  think  of  Para  Brahma.  He 
should  place  bis  right  leg  on  his  left  thigh  and  his  left  on  his  right  thigh 
crosswise  keepinsr  his  head  straight  up  and  touching  the  breast  with 
his  chin,  and  closing  his  eyes,  he  should  sit  steadily  so  that  the  upper 
teeth  should  not    touch  the  lower  jaw. 

He  should  join  hi"  tongue  with  his  palate  and  he  should  sit  quiet, 
restraining  bis  senses.  He  should  be  Buddha  Sattva.  His  seat  should 
not  be  very  low.  First  of  all  he  should  practice  Pranayama  tvice  or  thrice; 
and  within  his  heart  he  should  meditate  the  Self  of  the  shape  of  the  Holy 
Flamo  or  the    Holy  Light.     (Om  Mani  Padmi  Hum.) 

38-49.  He  should  fix  his  heart  for  a  certain  time  to  that  Lumi- 
nous Self  whose  Eyes  are  everywhere.  So  the  intelligent  man  should 
practise  Dharanl.  Pr^nayama  is  of  six  kinds: — (1)  Sadhuma  (when 
the  breaths   are   not  steady),    (2)  Njrdhuma   (better  than  the  Sadhiima), 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  1.  1057 

(3)  Sagarbha    (when    united    with    one's    mantra),    (4)  Ai^arhha  (when  the 
practice    is    without   the  thought   of  any    mantra),    (5)    Salaksya    (whon 
the    heart   is    ilxeJ  on    one's    Deity)  and  (6)  Alakdya    (when  the     heart  is 
not  fixed  on  one's  Deity).  No  yoga  exn  be    compared  with  Pranayfima.  This 
is  equal  to  itself.     Nothing  can  be  it^  equal.     This    Prjlnly4  na  is    of  three 
kinds,     called    Kechaka,    Puraka     and        Kumbhaka.     The     Pranayuma 
consists  of  three  leUers,  A,    U,  M,    i.  e.  of   the  nature    of     "  Om  ".   Or,  in 
other  words  the  letter  A,  of  the  Pranava   Om    iudieates    Puraka,  the  letter 
"IJ''    denotes      Kumbhaka      and    the     letter     "M"     denotes     Rcchaka. 
By  the  Ida  Nadi  (by  the  left    nostril)    inhale    as    long   as    you  count  "  A  " 
(Visnu)    thirty-two  times  ;    then    withold    breath,   i.  e.y  do    Kumbhaka  as 
long  as  you      count   "  U  "    (Siva)   sixtyfour   times   and    by   the    Pingala 
N&di  (the  right  nostril)   do   the  Rechaka,  i.  e.,   exhale  the   breath   as    long 
as   you  count  "  M  "  (Brahma)  for  sixteen  times.     O    Muni  !     Thus  I  have 
spoken  to  you    of  the  Sadhuma  Priinayama.     After   doing  the    Prunayama 
as    stated  above,    pierce  the  Six  Chakras  {i.  e.,  plexuses)    (called  Sitchakra 
bheda)   and  carry  the  Kula  Kundalini    to    the    Brahma    Randhra,   the  brain 
aperture,  or  to  the  thousind  petalied  lotus    in  the  head  and  meditate    in    the 
heart  the  Self  like  a  Steady  Flame.  (The  Nadis  are  not  those  which  are  known 
to  the  Vaidya    or    the    Medical  Suslras.  The  latter  are  the    gross  physical 
nerves.  The  Nadis  here  are  the  Yoga  Nddis,  the    subtle  channels    (Vivaras) 
along  which  the  Prunik    currents  flow.     Now  the    process    of  piercing   the 
six    Chakras    (or    nerve   centres   or   centres     of  moving    Pranik    forces)  is 
being  described.       Within  this  body,    the  six  nerve  centres    called    Padraas 
(Lotuses)  exist,     'i  hey  are    respectively  situated  at  the   (1)  Muladhara  (half 
way  between    Anus  and  Linga  Miila),    called    the  Sacral  Plexus  ;  (2)  Linga 
Mula  (the  root  of  the  genital  organs),  ;  called  postatic  plexus  ;    (this  is  also 
called  Svadhisthana)  (3)  Navel,  the    Solar    Plexus  (4)  Heart,    the   cardiac 
Plexus,  (3)  Throat  (G)  Forehead,    between  the  eye  brows   there-the  lotus  in 
the    forehead,   c-iUed     the    cavernous    plexus    (Ajna     Chakra)    has     two 
petals  ;  in  these  two  petals,  the  two  letters  "  Ham  "  "  K§am  "    exist  in  the 
right  hand  direction   (with   the    hands  of    the  watch  ;   going  round    from 
left   to  right  keeping   the    right     side  towards  one   circumambulated   as  a 
mark  of  respect).     I  bow  down  to  these  which  are  the  t>vo-lettered  Brahma. 
The  lotus    that  exists  in  the    throat   laryngeal    or  pharyngeal    plexus   has 
sixteen   petals    (vis'uJdha  ch;ikra)  ;    in    these    are    in   due    order    in   right 
ihand  direction  the  sixteen  letters  (vowels)  a,  a,  i,  i,  u,  ii,  ri,  ri,  Iri,  Ir?,  e,  ai, 
p,  au,  am,  ah  ;  I  bow  down  to  these  which  are  the  sixteen  lettered  Brahma. 
The  lotus  that  exists  in  the    heart,   the      cardiac  plexus  ^anah-ita  chakra), 
has    twelve     petals  ;    wherein    are    the  twelve   letters  k,  kh,  g,  gh,  n,  eh, 
ihb,    j,  jh,  n,  t,  th  ;  1  bow  to  to  these  twelve  lettered  Brahma.     The  Solar 

133 


1058  SBf  MAD  DEVl  BHAgaVATAM. 

plexiiP  forms  tbe  Great  Junction  of  the  Right  and  Left  sympathetic  chains 
Ida  and  PinwaU  with  the  Cerebro  spinal  Axis.  The  lotus  that  exists  in 
the  navel,  called  the  Solar  Plexus,  or  Epigastric  plexus  (Manipura 
Chakra)  has  ten  petals  wherein  are  tbe  ten  letters  d,  dh,  n,  t,  th,  d,  dh, 
n,  p,  ph,  counting  in  the  right  hand  direction  (that  is  clockwise)  (and 
the  action  of  this  clock  is  vertical  in  the  plane  of  the  spinal  cord  ;  also  it 
mav  be  horizontal).  The  lotug  that  exists  at  the  root  of  the  genitil 
organ,  the  genital  plexus  or  postatic  plexus  has  six  petals.  The  petals 
are  the  configurations  made  by  the  position  of  Nddis  at  any  particular 
cjutce.  Svadhisthana  chakra  or  Svayambhu  Linga,  wherein  are  situated 
the  six  letters,  b,  bh,  m,  y,  r,  1 ;  I  bow  down  to  this  six-lettered 
Brihma,  (These  are  the  Laya  Centre8\  The  lotus  that  exists  in  the  MulS- 
dh^Vi,  called  th3  sacral  or  sacrococcygeal  plexus  has  four  petal?,  wherein 
sire  the  four  letters  v,  s',  s,  s,  1  bow  down  to  these  four-lettered  Brahma. 
In  the  above  six  nerve  centres  or  Laya  Centres,  or  lotuses,  all  the  letters 
are  situated  in  the  right  hand  direction  (clockwise).  {Note. — All  the 
nerves  of  the  body  combine  themselves  in  these  six  nerve  centres  or  Liya 
Centres,  Each  of  these  centres  is  spheroidal  and  is  of  the  Fourth  Dimen- 
sion. At  each  centre  many  transitions  tiike  place,  many  visions  take  place, 
many  forces  are  perceived  and  wonderful  varieties  of  knowledge  are 
experienced.  These  are  called  the  Laya  Centres.  For  many  things  vanish 
into  non-existence  and  miny  new  Tattvas  are  experienced.)  Thus  medita- 
ting on  the  Six  Chakras  or  plexuses,  meditate  on  the  Kula  Kundalini, 
the  Serpent  Fire.  She  resides  on  the  four  petalled  lotus  (Centre  of 
S.ikti)  called  MulildhSra  Chakra  (Coccygeal  plexus)  ;  She  is  of  R;jjo 
Guna  ;  She  is  of  a  blood  red  colour,  and  She  is  expressed  by  the  mantra 
"Hrim,"  which  is  the  M^ySvija  ;  she  is  subtle  as  the  thread  of  the  fibrous 
stock  of  the  water  lily.  The  Sun  is  Her  face  ;  Fire  is  Her  breasts;  he  attain=r 
Jivan  mukti  (liberation  while  living)  within  whose  heart  such  a  Ku!a 
Kundalini  arises  and  awakens  even  once.  Thus  meditating  on  Kula  Kunda- 
lini, one  should  pray  to  Her  : — Her  sitting,  coming,  going,  remaining,  the 
thought  on  Her,  the  realisation  of  Her  and  chanting  hymns  to  Her,  etc  , 
all  are  Mine,  Who  is  of  the  nature  of  all  in  all  ;  I  am  that  Bhagavati  ; 
O  Bhagavati  !  All  my  acts  are  Thy  worship  ;  I  am  the  Devi  ;  I  am 
Brahma,  I  am  free  from  sorrow.  I  am  of  the  nature  of  Everlasting  Exis- 
tence, Intelligence  and  Bliss.  Thus  one  should  meditate  of  one's  own- 
self.  I  take  refuge  of  that  Kula  Kundalini,  who  appears  like  lightning  and 
who  holds  the  current  thereof,  when  going  to  Brahmarandhra,  in  the  brain,- 
who  appears  like  nectar  when  coming  back  from  the  brain  to  the  MuladhSra 
and  who  travels  in  the  SusumnS  Nadi  in  the  spinal  cord.  Then  one  is  to 
meditate  on  one's  own  Guru,  who  is  thought  of  as  one  with  God,  as    seated 


fioOK  Xi.]  CHAPTER  11.  l059 

in  one's  braia  auJ  then  worship  iluu  mentally.  Theu  the  S^dhaka,  con- 
trolling himself  is  to  recite  the  following  Mantra  "The  Guru  is  Brahmft, 
the  Guru  is  Visnu,  it  is  the  Guru  again  that  is  the  Deva  Mahes'vara  :  it  is 
Guru  that  is  Para  Brahma.  I  bow  down  to  that  Sri  Guru. 

Hero  ends  the  First  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  what  is  to  be 
thought  of  in  the  morning  in  the  Maha  Piirinam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bh4ga- 
vatam  of  18,000    verses    by    Maharsi    Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  ir. 

1-42.  Nar3,yaua  said  : — Even  if  a  man  studies  the  Vedas  with  six 
Amgas  (limbs  of  the  Vedas),  he  cannot  bo  pure  if  he  be  devoid  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  right  living  (Sadachdra)  and  if  he  does  not  practise  it.  All  that  is 
in  vain.  As  Foon  as  the  two  wings  of  the  young  ones  of  birds  appear, 
they  leave  their  nests,  so  the  chhandas  {the  Vedas)  leave  such  a  man  devoid 
of  Sadacharaa^  tliQ  time  of  his  death.  The  intelligent  man  should  get  up 
from  his  bed  at  the  Brahma  muhurta  and  should  observe  all  the  principles  of 
Sadachara.  In  the  last  quarter  of  night,  he  should  practise  in  reciting 
and  studying  the  Vedas,  Then  for  some  time  he  should  meditate  on  his 
Ista  Deva  (his  Presiding  Deity\  The  Yogi  should  meditate  on  Brahma 
according  to  the  method  stated  before.  O  NSrada  I  If  meditation  be 
done  as  above,  the  identity  of  Jiva  and  Brahma  is  at  once  realised  and  the 
man  becomes  liberated  while  living.  After  the  fifty-fifth  D.indi  (from  the 
preceding  sunrise  i.  e,  2  hours  before  the  sunrise  comes  the  Usakala;  after 
the  fifty  seventh  danda  oomes  the  Arunodayakala  ;  after  fifty  eic^hth 
Danda  comes  the  morning  time  ;  then  the  Sun  rises.  One 
should  get  up  from  one's  bed  in  the  morning  time.  He  should  go  then  to  a 
distance  where  an  arrow  shot  at  one  stretch  goes.  There  in  the  south-west 
corner  he  i-  to  void  his  urines  and  faccos.  Then  the  man,  if  ho  be  a  Brah- 
machlri,  should  place  his  holy  thread  on  his  right  ear  and  the  householder 
should  suspend  it  on  his  neck  only.  That  is,  the  Brahmaihari,  in 
the  first  stage  of  of  his  life  should  place  the  holy  thread  over  his  right  ear  ; 
the  householder  and  the  Vanaprasfchis  should  suspend  ihe  holy  thread 
from  the  neck  towards  the  back  and  then  void  their  faeces,  etc.  He  is  to 
tie  a  piece  of  cloth  round  his  head  ;  and  spread  earth  or  leaves  on  the 
place  where  he  will  evacuate  himself.  He  is  not  to  talk  then  nor  spit 
nor  inhale  hnrd.  One  is  not  to  eva3uata  oneself  in  cultivated  lands,  that 
have  been  tilleJ,  in  water,  over  thj  burning  pyre,  on  the  mountain,  in 
the  broken  and  ruined  temples,  on  the  ant-hills,  on  places  covered  with 
grass,  on  road  side,  or  on  hoU  s  where    living  beings  exist.     One  ought  not 


1060  srI  mad  i>Ev!  buAgavatam. 

to  do  the  same  aUo  while  walkitjj^.  One  ojgbt  to  kiep  silence  Juruij^  both 
the  twilights,  while  one  is  pas=iag  urine  or  voiding  one's  taeces,  or 
while  one  is  holding  sexual  intercourse,  or  before  the  presence  of  one'-i 
Guru,  during  the  time  of  sacrifice,  or  while  making  gifts,  or  while  doing 
Brahma  Yajna.  One  ought  to  pray  before  evacuating,  thus: — "0  Uevas  ! 
O  Rifis  !  O  Pis'&chas  !  O  Uragas  I  O  Raksasas  !  You  all  who  might 
be  existing  here  unseen  by  me,  are  requested  to  leave  this  placp.  I  am 
going  to  ease  myself  here  duly."  Never  one  is  bo  void  oneself  while  one 
looks  at  Vayu  (wind),  Agui  (6re),  a  Brahmana,  the  Sun,  water  or  cow, 
At  the  day  time  one  is  to  turn  one's  fac^  northward  and  at  the  night  tim? 
southward,  while  easing  oneself  and  then  one  is  to  cover  the  faeces,  etc., 
with  stones,  pebbles,  leaves  or  grass,  etc.  Then  he  i-^  to  hold  his  genital 
organ  with  his  hand  and  go  to  a  river  or  any  other  watery  place  ;  he  is  to 
fill  his  vessel    with  water  then    and  go   to  some  other    place. 

The  Brahraana  is  to  use  the  white  earth,  the  Ksattriya  is  to  take  the 
red  earth,  the  Vais'ya  is  to  use  the  yellow  earth  and  the  SQdra  is  to  apply 
the  black  earth  and  with  that  he  is  to  cleanse  himself.  The  earth  under  water, 
the  earth  of  any  temple,  the  earth  of  an  anthill,  the  earth  of  a  mouse  hole, 
and  the  remmant  of  the  earth  used  by  another  body  for  washing  are  not  to 
bo  used  for  cleansing  purposes.  The  earth  for  cleansing  faeces  is  twice 
as  much  as  that  used  in  case  of  urine  clearance  ;  in  the  cleansing  after 
sexual  intercourse  thrice  as  much.  In  urine  cleansing  the  earth  is  to 
applied  in  the  organ  of  generation  once,  thrice  in  the  hand.  And  in  diit 
clearing,  twice  in  the  organ  of  generation,  fiee  timei  in  anus,  ten  tiinjs 
in  the  left  hand  and  seven  times  in  both  the  hands.  Then  apply  earth 
four  times  first  in  the  left  feet  and  then  on  the  right  feet.  The  house 
holder  should  clear  thus  :  the  Brdhmachclri  is  to  do  twice  and  the  Yatis 
tour  times.  At  every  time  the  quantity  of  wet  earth  that  is  to  bo 
taken  is  to  be  of  the  size  of  an  Amalaki  fruit  ;  never  it  is  to  be  less 
than  that.  This  is  for  the  clearance  in  the  day  time.  Half  of  these  can 
be  used  in  the  night  time.  For  the  invalids,  one-fourth  the  above 
measurements  ;  for  the  passers-by,  one-eighth  the  above  dimensions  are 
to  be  observed.  In  case  of  women,  Sudras,  and  incapable  children,  clearings 
are  to  be  done  till  then  when  the  offensive  smell  vanishes.  No  number-* 
are  to  be  observed.  BhagvSn  Minu  says —for  all  the  Varnas  the  clearing  i? 
to  be  done  till  then  when  the  olTensive  smell  vanishes.  The  clearing 
is  to  be  performed  by  the  left  hand.  The  right  hand  is  never  to  bo 
used.  Below  the  navel,  the  left  hand  is  to  be  used  ;  and  above  the  navel 
the  right  hand  is  to  be  used  for  clearing.  The  wise  man  should  never 
hold  his  water  pot  while  evacuating  himself.  If  by  mistake  he  catchoa 
hold   of   his   waterpot,  he  will  have  to    perform  the  pcuauce  (prayafchitta). 


1 


^ooK  XI.]  CHAPTER  lit.  .  i06l 

If,  out  of  vanity  or  sloth,  clearing  be  not  done,  for  three  nights,  one  is  to  fast, 
drinking  water  only,  and  then  to  repeat    the  Gayatri    Mantra  and    thus  be 
purified.     In    every  matter,  in    view  of  the  place,  time  and  materials,  one's 
ability  and  power  are  to  be  considered  and  steps  are  to  be  taken  accordingly. 
Knowing  all  this,  one  should  clear  oneself  according  to  rule.     Never  be  lazy 
here.     After   evacuating  oneself  of  faeces,  one  is  to  rinse  one's  mouth  twelve 
times  ;   and    after   passing  urine    and    clearing,   one  is  to  rinse  four    times. 
Never    lass    than    that    is   to    be    done.     The    water  after    rinsing  is  to  be 
thrown  away  slowly   downwards  on  one's  left.     Next  performing  Achaman 
one    is    to    wash    one's   taeth.     Us  is  to  take  a  tiny  piece,  twelve  Angulas 
(fingers)  long  (about  one  foot)    from  a  tree    which  is     thorny  and    gummy. 
The  cleansing  twig  (for  teeth)   is    thick     like    one's     little    finger.     He   is 
to  chew    the  one    end  of   it  to    form    a    tooth   brush.     Karanja,  Udumbara 
(figtree),   Mango,    Kadamba,     Lodha,     Champaka   and    Vadari  trees    are 
used    for    cleansing    teeth.      While  cleansing  teeth,- one    is    to    recite   the 
following    m  intra  : — '"O    Tree!      Wherein   resides  the     Deity     Moon    for 
giving  food  to    the  beings    and  for    killing  the  enemies  !     Let    Him  wash 
my    mouth    to    increase    my    fame    and    honour!     O   Tiee!     Dobt    Thou 
please     give     me     long    lif*,   power,    fame,    energy,    heauty,  sons,    cattle, 
wealth,     intellect,     and     the    knowledge    of    Brahma."     If  the  cleansing 
twig    be  not  available    and    if   there    be    any    prchibition   to   brush    one's 
teeth  that   day    (say    Pratipad    day,    Am§vas,    Sasthi  and   Navami),   take 
mouthfuls  of  water,  gargle  twelve  times  and  thus  cleanse  the  teeth.    If  one 
brushes  one's  teeth  with  a  twig  on  the  new  moon  day,  the  first,  sixth,  ninth 
and  eleventh  day  afoer  the  Full  or  New  Moon  or  on  Sunday,  one  eats  the  Sun 
(is  it  were,    by  making    Him    lose  his  fire),    makes  his  family   line   extinct 
and   brings    his  seven  generations   down    into   the  hell.     Next    he  should 
wash  his   feat    and   sip    pure   clean    water  thrice,   touch  his  lips  twice  with 
his  thumb,    and    then    clear    the   nostrils    by   his    thumb  and    fore  finger. 
Then  he  is  to  touch   his  eyes  and  ears    with  his    thumb    and    ring  finger, 
touch    his  navel  with  his    thumb  and  little  finger,  touch  his  breast  with  his 
palm  and  touch  his  head  with  all  his  fingers. 

Here  ends  the  Second  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  cleansing 
the  several  parts  of  the  body  in  the  Mahapirslnam  Sri  Mad  Devi 
Bhagvatam  of  18,000    verses  by  Maharsi    Veda    Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  111. 

1-21.  ^ri  Narayana  said:-"0  Narada  !  'There  are  the  six  kinds  of 
Achamana:—(1)  Buddha,  (2)  Sm^rta,  (3)  Pauranik,  (4)  Vaidik,  (5)  Tdntrik 
aiid(())  "5rauta.  The  act  of  cleaning  »fter  evacuating  oneself  of  urine  and 
faeceo  is   known  as  Suddha  Saucha,     After  cleaning,  the  Achaman,  that  if^ 


i062  ^RI  MAT)  DEvt  BHAGAVtAM, 

performed  acoorJing  to  rules,  is  uained  as  Smlrta  and  Pdur^oik.  Ia 
phces  where  the  Brahma  Yajna  is  performed,  the  Vaidik  and  ^rauta 
Ach  imanas  are  doae.  Anl  where  acts  e.  g.  the  knowledge  of  warfare 
are  being  executed,  thi  Tantrik  Achaman  is  done.  Then  he  is  to  remem- 
ber the  Gayatri  Mantra  with  Pranava  (om)  aud  fasten  the  lock  of 
hair  on  the  crown  of  his  head,  thus  controlling  all  the  hindrances 
(Bighna  Bandhanara).  Sipping  again,  he  is  to  touch  bis  heart, 
two  arms,  and  his  two  shoulder.-.  After  sneezing,  spitting,  touching 
the  lower  lip  with  teeth,  accidentallj  telling  a  lie,  and  talking  with  a 
very  sinful  man,  he  is  to  touch  his  right  ear  (Where  the  several  Devas 
reside).  On  the  right  ear  of  the  BrS,hmanas  reside  Fire,  Water,  the 
Vedas,  the  Moon,  the  Sm,  and  the  Vayu  (wind).  Then  one  is  to  go  to  a 
river  or  any  other  reservoir  of  water,  and  there  to  perform  one's  morning 
ablutions  and  to  cleanse  his  body  thoroughly.  For  the  body  is  always  unclean 
and  dirty  and  various  dirts  are  being  excreted  out  of  the  nine  holes  (doors) 
in  the  body.  The  morning  bath  removes  all  these  impurities.  Therefore  the 
morning  bath  is  essentially  necessary.  The  sins  that  arise  from  going  to 
those  who  are  not  fit  for  such  purposes,  from  accepting  gifts  from  impure 
persons  or  from  the  practice  of  any  other  secret  vices  all  ar<3  removed  by  the 
morning  ablutions.  Without  t'lis  bath,  no  acts  betr  any  fruit.  There- 
fore every  dny,  this  morning  bath  is  very  netessa-y.  Taking  the  K.us'a 
grass  in  hand,  one  is  to  perform  one's  bath  and  SandhyS.  If  for  seven 
days,  the  morning  ablutions  are  not  taken,  and  if  for  three  days,  the 
Sandhyas  are  not  performed,  if  for  twelve  days,  the  daily  Homas  be  not 
performed,  the  Bi^hmanas  become  Sudras.  The  time  for  making  the  Homa 
in  the  morning  is  very  little  ;  therefore  lest  ablutions  be  done  fully  which 
would  take  a  long  time  and  hence  the  time  for  the  Homa  might  elapse, 
the  morninj,'  bath  should  be  performed  quickly.  After  the  bath  the 
Vranay&ma  is  to  be  done.  Then  the  full  effects  of  bath  are  attained. 
There  is  nothing  holier  in  this  world  or  in  the  next  than  reciting  the  Ga- 
yatri. It  saves  the  singer  who  sings  the  Gavatri  ;  hence  it  is  called  Gayatri. 
During  the  time  of  PrSnAyama,  one  must  control  one's  Prana  aud  Ajfiria 
Vayus  /.  e.  make  them  equal.  The  Brahmin,  knowing  the  Vrdas  and 
devoted  to  his  Dharma,  must  practise  Pranayama  three  times  with  the 
repetition  of  Gayatri  and  Pranava  and  the  three  Vyarhitis  (Om  Bhu,  Om 
Bhuvar,  Om  Svah^. 

While  practisingj'the  mu'teringof  G&yatri  is  to  be  done  thiee  times.  In 
Pranayama,  the  Vaidik  mar.tra  is  to  be  repeated,  never  a  Laukika  Mantra 
is  to  be  utteredt  At  the  time  of  PranayAma,  if  any  body's  mind  be  not 
fixed,  even  for  a  short  while,  like  a  mustard  seed  on  the  apex  of  a  cow- 
born,   he   cannot  save   even   one   hundred  and  one   persons  in  his  father's 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  III.  1063 

or  in  his  mothor's  line.  Pranayaraa  is  called  Sagarbha  when  per- 
formed with  the  repetition  of  some  mantra;  it  are  called  A^arbha  when 
it  is  done  simply  with  mere  meditition,  without  repeating  any  mantra.  After 
the  bathing,  the  Tarpanara  with  its  accompaniments,  is  to  be  done ;  i.  e. 
the  peace  otferiugs  are  made  with  reference  to  the  Devas,  the  llisis,  and 
the  Pitris  (whereby  we  invoke  the  blessings  from  the  subtle  plmes  where 
the  highsouled  persons  dwell.)  After  this,  a  clean  pair  of  clothes  is 
to  be  worn  and  then  he  should  get  up  and  come  out  of  the  water. 
The  next  things  preparatory  to  pr  ictise  Japim  are  to  wear  the  Tilaka  marks 
of  ashbs  and  to  put  on  the  Kudrakaa  beads.  He  who  holds  thirty-two 
liudraksa  beads  on  his  neck,  forty  on  his  head,  six  on  each  ear  (12  on  two 
ears),  twenty  four  beads  on  two  hands  (twelve  on  each  hand)  thirty - 
two  beads  oa  two  arms  (sixteen  on  each),  one  bead  on  each  eye  and 
one  bead  on  the  hair  on  the  crown,  and  one  hundred  and  eight  beads 
o;i  the  breast,  (251  in  all;  becomes  himiseif  Mah^  Deva.  One  is  expected 
to  use  them  as  suoh.  O  Muni  !  You  can  use  the  Rudrakaas  after 
lieing,  stringing  together  with  gold  or  silver  always  on  your  SikhS, 
the  tuft  of  hail-  on  the  head  or  on  your  ears.  On  the  holy  thread,  on 
the  hands,  on  the  neck,  or  on  the  bally  (abdomen)  one  can  keep  the 
Hudr^ksa  after  one  has  repeated  sincerely  and  with  devotion  the  five 
lettered  mantra  of  Siva,  or  one  has  repeated  the  Praniva  (Om). 
Holding  the  Rudruksi  implies  that  the  man  has  realised  the  knowledge 
of  Siva-Tattva.  O  Brahman !  The  Rudraksa  bead  that  is  placed  on 
the  tuft  or  on  the  crown  hair  represents  the  Tara  tattva  i.  e.,  Om 
Ivdra ;  the  Rudraksa  beads  that  are  held  on  the  two  ears  are  to 
be    thought    of    as    Deva   and    Devi,  (v)iva   and    Siv^). 

22-iJ7.  The  one  hundrtd  and  eight  Rudraks^  beads  on  the  sacrifi- 
cial thread  are  considered  as  the  one  hundred  and  eight  Vedas  (signifying 
the  Full  Knowledge,  as  sixteen  digits  of  the  Moon  completed  ;  on  the 
arms,  are  considered  as  the  Dik  (quarters);  on  the  neck,  are  con- 
sidered as  the  Devi  Sarasvati  and  Agni  (fire).  The  liudraksa  beads 
ought  to  be  taken  by  men  of  all  colours  and  casies.  The  Brahmanas, 
Ksattriyas  and  Vais'yas  should  hold  them  after  purifying  them  with 
Mantras  «.  e.  knowingly;  whereas  the  Sudras  can  take  them  without  any 
fcuch  purification  by  the  Mantras,  i.  e.  unknowingly.  By  hoi  .ing  or  putting 
on  the  Rudriksa  beads,  persons  become  the  Rudras  iucarnate  in  ileph  and 
boJy.  Tiiere  is  no  doubt  in  this,  \iy  this  all  the  sins  arising  from  seeing, 
hearing}  remembering,  smelling,  eating  prohibited  things,  talking  incohe- 
rently, doing  prohibited  things,  etc.,  are  entirely  removed  with  the  Rudraksa 
beads  on  the  body;  whatever  act",  eating,  drinking,  smelling,  etc.,  are  doce, 
are,  as  it  were,  done  by  Rudra  Deva  Plimself.  O  Great  Muni  I  He  who  feels 


1064  ^RI  MAD  DEVt  BHAgHVATAM. 

shami  in  holJing  aaJ  pufct-ing  on  the  R'i'irak3a  beals,  can  never  bfl  free.l 
tVorn  this  Samsara  even  after  the  Koti  births.  He  who  blames  another  person 
hildiniif  R'llt-aksi,  baacls  has  defects  in  his  birth  (is  a  bastard).  There 
is  no  doubt  in  this.  It  is  by  holding  on  Rudraksa  that  Brahtull  has 
remained  steady  in  His  Hrahm^hood  untainted  and  the  Munis  have  been 
true  to  their  re-'olves.  So  there  is  no  act  better  and  hiii:her  tiiaii 
holding  the  lUidrSkst  beads.  He  who  gives  clothing  and  food  to  a 
person  holdinL'  Ividraksi  beads  with  devotion  is  freed  of  all  sins  and 
1,'oep  to  the  Siva  Loka.  He  who  feasts  gladly  any  hold'^r  of  such 
beads  at  the  time  of  Sradh,  goes  undoubtedly  to  the  Pitri  Loka. 
He  who  washes  the  feet  of  a  holder  of  Rudraksa  and  drinks  that 
water,  is  freed  of  all  sins  and  resides  with  honour  in  the  oiva  Loka, 
l^  a  Brilhmana  holds  uilh  devotion  the  Rudraksa  beads  witn  a  necklace 
and  gold,  he  attains  the  Rudrahood.  O  Intelligent  One  !  Wherever  whoever 
holds  with  Of  without  faith  and  devotion  the  Rudraksa  beadsvvith  or  with- 
out any  m&ntra,  is  freed  of  all  sins  and  is  entitled  to  the  Tattvajnan^.  Lam 
iinabla  to  describe  fullf  the  greatness  of  the  Rudr&ksa  beads.  In  fact, 
all  should  by  all    mean-  hold  the    Rudraksa  beads    on    their  boJies. 

Xote.~The  Number  one  hundred  and  eight  (108)  signifies  the 
One  Hundred  an  1  Eight  Vedas,  the  Brahman,  the  Source  of  all  Wisdom 
an]    Joy. 

Here  ends  the  Third  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Bock  on  the  glories 
of  the  Rudraksx  beads  in  the  MahS  Puranam  ^ri  Mad  Davi  Bhaga- 
vatana  of   18,000    verses   by    Maharsi    Veda      V\aia. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1-11.  Narada  said  :— "0  Sinless  one  !  The  greatness  of  the  Rudraksa 
seed  that  you  have  deseibed  is  verily  such.  Now  I  ask  why  is  this  Rudr^k- 
fam  so  much  entitled  to  worship  by  the  people.  Please  speak  elcrtrly  on 
this  point.  Narayana  spoke  :— "O  Child  !  This  is  the  very  question 
that  was  asked^onee  by  Kartika,  the  sixfaced  One,  to  Bhagavin  Rudra, 
dwelling  in  Kailas'a.  What  He  replied,  I  say  now.  Listen.  IJudra 
Deva  spoke  :—"0  Child  Sad^uana.  I  wiil  dwell  briefly  on  the  secret 
cause  of  the  greatness  of  the  Rudraksa  seed.  Hear.  In  days  of  yoie,  there 
was  a  Daitya  called  Tripura  who  could  not  be  conquered  bv  any  body. 
Brahma,  Visnu  and  the  other  Devas  were  defe  ited  by  him.  They  then 
came  to  Me  and  requested  Me  to  kill  the  Asura.  At  their  request,  T  called 
in  my  mind  the  Divine  Great  weapon,  named  Aghora,  beautiful  and  terrible 
and  containing  the  strength  of  all  the  Deva',  to  kill  him.  H  was  incon- 
ceivable  and  it  was  blazing  with  fire. 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  IV.  1065 

For  full  divine  one  thousaud  years  I  remained  awake  with  eyelids 
wide  open  in  thitikinfj  of  the  Aghora  weapon,  the  destroyer  of  all  obstacles, 
whereby  the  killinL'  of  Tripurisun  might  be  effected  and  the  troubles 
of  the  Davas  be  removed.  Not  for  a  moment  ray  eyelids  dropped.  There 
by  my  evds  were  affected  and  drops  of  water  came  out  of  any  eyes. — Note 
here.  How  enemies  are  to  be  killed.  Ifc  requires  j^reat  thought,  great 
concentration,  great  yoga  and  great  powers.)  O  Mahisena  !  From  those 
drops  of  water  coming  out  of  my  eyas,  the  great  tree  of  Rudraksam  did 
ppring  for  the  welfare  of  all.  This  Rudraksa  seed  is  of  thirty-eight 
varieties.  From  My  Surya  Netra.  i.  e.,  My  right  eye,  symbolizing  the 
Sun,  twelve  yellow  coloured  (Pingala  colour)  varieties  have  come  ;  and 
from  my  left  eye  representing  the  Moon,  the  Soma  Netra,  sixteen  varie- 
ties of  white  colour  and  from  my  third  eye  on  the  top,  representing  Firet.e. 
the  Agni  Netra,  ten  varieties  of  black  colour  have  come  out.  Of  these  the 
white  Rudraksams  are  Brahmins  and  they  are  used  by  the  Brahmanas  ;  the 
red  coloured  ones  are  the  Ksattriyas  and  should  be  used  by  the  Ksattriyas 
and  the  black  ones  are  Sddras  and  should  be  used  by  the  Vai^yas  and 
the  Sudras. 

12-19.  One  faced  Rudraksa  seed  is  the  Siva  Himself,  made  manifest 
and  rendered  vivid;  even  the  sin  incurred  in  killing  a  Brahmana  is  destroyed 
thereby.  Two  faced  or  two  headed  Rudraksam  is  like  the  Deva  and  the  Devi. 
Two  sorbs  of  sins  are  destroyed  thereby.  The  three  faced  Rudrak§am  is 
like  fire  ;  the  sin  incurred  in  killing  a  woman  is  destroyed  in  a  moment. 
The  four  faced  Rudraksa  seed  is  like  Brahma  and  removes  the  sin  of 
killing  persons.  Tha  fire  faced  Rudraksam  is  verily  an  image  of  Rudra; 
all  sorts  of  sins,  e,  g.  eating  prohibited  food,  going  to  the  ungoables,  etc., 
are  destroyed  thereby.  The  six  faced  Rudraksam  is  Kartikeya.  It  is 
to  be  worn  on  the  right  hand.  One  bocames  freed  of  the  Brahmahatya  sin. 
There  is  no  manner  of  doubt  in  this.  The  seven  faced  Rudraksam  is 
n.imed  Ananga.  Holding  this  "rees  one  from  the  sin  of  stealing  gold,  etc., 
O  Mahasen;*!  The  eight  faced  RudrSksa  is  Vinayaka.  Holding  this  frees  one 
from  the  sin  of  holding  an  illicit  contact  with  a  woman  of  a  bad  family  and 
with  the  wife  of  one's  Guru,  etc.,  and  other  sins  as  well.  It  enables  one 
to  acquire  heaps  of  food,  cotton,  and  gold ;  and  in  the  end  the 
Hif^hest    Place    is  attained. 

20-35.  The  fruit  of  holding  the  eight  faced  Rudraksa  seed  has 
been  said.  Now  I  will  ta!k  ot  the  nine-faced  RudrSksam.  It  is  verily  the 
Bhairava  made  rainifest.  On  the  left  hand  it  should  be  worn.  Bv 
this,   the    people    get    both  Bhoga  (enjoyment)     and    Mok§a     (liberation) 

134. 


1066  §Rt  MAt)  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

and  they  become  powerful  like  Me  and  get  themselves  freed  at  once,  without 
the  least  delay,  of  the  sins  incurred  by  committing  thousands  of  abortions, 
hundreds  of  BrahmahattySs  (killing  the  Brahman^is).  Holding  the  ten- 
faced  Rudraksa  is  verily  wearing  Janardana,  the  Deva  of  the  Devas. 
The  holding  of  which  pacifies  the  evils  caused  by  planets,  Pis'Hchas,  Vetala-? 
Brahma  R^ksasas,  and  Pannagas.  The  eleven-faced  Rudraksam  is 
like  the  Eleven  Rudras.  The  fruits,  the  efficacy  of  which  I  now  describa. 
Hear.  The  fruits  obtiined  through  the  performance  of  one  thousaod 
horse  sacrifices,  one  hundred  Vajapeya  sacrifices,  and  making  gifcs 
of  one   hundred   thousand   cows   are    obtained    thereby. 

If  one  wears  the  twelve-headed  Rudr^ksasm  on  one's  ear,  the  Adityas 
get  satisfied.  The  fruits  of  performing  Gomedha  and  As'vamedha  sacrifices 
are  obtained  thereby.  No  fear  comes  from  horned  buffaloes,  armed  enemies 
and  wolves  and  tigers  and  other  murderous  animals.  Also  the  several 
diseases  of  the  body  never  come  to  him.  The  holder  of  the  twelve-faced 
RudrSkfa  seed  feels  always  happy  and  he  is  the  master  of  some  kingdoms, 
He  becomes  freed  of  the  sins  incurred  in  killing  elephants,  horses,  dear, 
cats,     snakes,     mice,  frogs,   asses,   foxes   and   various   other   animals. 

O  Child  !  The  thirteen  faced  Rudr^ksam  is  very  rare  ;  if  anybody  gets 
it,  he  becomes  like  Karti  Keya  and  gets  all  desires  fulfilled  ;  and  the 
eight  siddhis  are  under  his  grasp.  He  learns  how  to  make  gold,  silver 
and  other  metals  ;  he  attains  all  sorts  of  enjoyments.  There  is  no 
manner  of  doubt  in  this.  O  Sadsinana  !  If  anybody  holds  the  thirteen 
faced  Rudrakfam,  he  becomes  freed  from  the  sins  incurred  in  killiug 
mother,    father  and    brothers. 

O  Son !  If  one  holds  on  one's  head  the  fourteen- faced  Rudrakjam 
always,  one  becomes  like  Siva.  O  Muni  !  What  more  shall  I  speak 
to  you  !  The  Devas  pay  their  respects  to  one  holding  the  fourteen 
faced  Rudraksas  and  he  in  the  end  attains  the  Highest  Goal,  the  state 
of  Siva.  His    body    becomes    verily   the     body    of  Siva. 

36-40.  The  Devas  always  worship  the  Rudraksa  seed;  the  highest 
goal  is  attained  hy  wearing  the  Rudraksam.  The  Br'ahmanas  should  bold 
on  their  heads  at  least  one  Rudrdksam  with  devotien.  A  rosary  of  twenty-six 
RudrSksams  is  to  be  made  and  tied  on  the  head.  Similarly  u  rosary  of  fifty 
seeds  is  to  be  worn  and  suspended  on  the  breast ;  sixteen  each  on  each  of 
the  two  arms;  twenty-four  Rudrak§ams  to  be  worn  on  the  wrist", 
twelve  on  each.  O  ^adSnana  !  If  a  rotary  be  made  of  one  hundred 
and  eight,  fifty  or  twenty-seven  Rudraksams  and  if  japam  be  done 
with  that,  iaimeasurable  merits  are  obtained.  If  anybody  wears  a 
rosary    of  one    hundred    and   eight   seeds,    he     gets     at     every    moment 


Book  XI.J  CHAPTER  V.  1067 

the  fruit  of  performino^  the  As'vajaedha  sacrifices  and  uplifts  his  twenty-one 
generations  and  finally  he  resides  in  the  ^iva  Loka. 

Here  ends  the  Fourth  Chapcer  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
Greatness  of  the  Rudraksara  in  the  Mahapuranam  5ri  Mad  Devi 
B'lagavatam    of  18,000    verses    by    Maharsi    Veda    Vyasa. 


CHAPTER    V. 

1-14.  Is'vara  said:-—"  O  Kdrtikeya  !  Now  I  will  speak  how  to  count 
the  Japam  (repetition  of  the  mantra)  with  the  rosary.  Hear.  The 
fac3  of  Rudraksam  is    BrahmS  ;  the  upper  summit    point     is    »^iva  and  the 

tail  end  of  Radr^ksam  is  Visnu.     The  RudrUksam  has  two-fold  powers; 

It  can   give  Bhoga  (Enjoyntent)  as  well  as  Mok8a  (Liberation).  Then  string 
or  tie  together,  like  a  cow's  tail,  and  like  the  snake's  coiling  a    body,  twenty- 
five  five  faced  Rudraksa  seeds,  thorny  and  of  red,  white,  mixed  colours  bored 
through    and    through.     The  rosary    is   to    taper   as    a  cow's   tail   tapers 
down.     In  stringing  the  beads  into  a  rosary,  it  should  be  seen  that  the  flat 
face  of  one  Rudraksam  is  in  front  of  the  flat  face  of  another  Rudrdksam  •  so 
the  tail,  the  pointed  end  of  one,  must  come  in  front  of  the  tail  or  the  narrower 
end  of  another.     The  Meru  or  the  topmost  bead  of   the  string   must     have 
its  face  turned  upwards  and  the  knot   should    be     given    over    that.     The 
rosary,   thus   strung,  yields     success     of    the      M intra     (mantra-siddhi) 
When  the  rosary  is  strung,  it  is  to  be  bathed  with  clear  and  scented    water 
and  afterwards  with  the  Pafiahagavya  (cow-dung,  cow  urine,  curd,  milk,  and 
ghee);  then  wash    it  with  clear  water    and   sanctify  it    with    the  condensed 
electrical  charge    of  the    Mantra.  Then    recite  the    Mantra    of    biva    (Six 
limbed,  with     "  Hum  "  added  and  collect  the  rosaries.     Then  repeat  over 
them  the  Mantra  "  Sadyoj^ta,  etc.,  and  sprinkle   water  over  it  one  hundred 
and  eight   times.     Then    utter  the   principal   mantra    and     place     them 
on  a  holy  ground  and  perform  Ny^sa  over  it,  i.   e.,  think  that     the  Great 
Cause    6iva   and  the  World-Mother    Bhagavati     have     come     on     them. 
Thus   make   the     Samskara   of  the  rosary   (i.    e.,  purify  it)  and   you  will 
find    then   that     your     desired      end      will      be     attained      successfully. 
Worship  the    rosary    with    the  Mantra    of    that    Devat^    for  which  it  is 
intended.     One    is    to    wear   the    Radruksa    rosary   on    one's     head,    neck 
or    ear   and  controlling  one  self,  one  should  make  japam    with   the    rosary 
Oq  the  neck,    head,    breast,  or    the  ears   or   on   the     arms,     the     rosary 
should   he    held    with     the   g»'eatest    devotion.     What     is     the     use     in 
saying  about   it    so   often  ?   It  is   highly   meritorious   and  commendable 


1068  &nl  MAD  DEVi  BHAgAVATAM. 

to  holds  always  the  Rudraksam.  Espeeiall)  on  such  occasions  as  taking 
baths  making  gifts,  making  japams,  performing  the  Homas,  or  sacrifices 
to  Visve  Devas,  in  performing  the  Poojas  of  the  Devas,  in  making 
PrUyasehittams  (penances),  in  the  time  of  Sralb  an  1  in  the  time  (f 
initiation,  it  is  highly  necessary  to  hold  RudrSksira.  A  Brahmin  is 
sure  to  go  to  hell  if  he  performs  any  Vaidik  act  without  wearing 
any   Rudraksam.     Note  : — It  would  be  offering  an  insult  to   Siva  ! 

15-29,  It  is  advisable  to  use  the  true  Rudraksam  with  gold  and 
jewel,  on  tife  head,  neck  or  on  one's  hand.  Never  use  ihe  Rudraksam 
worn  by  another.  Use  Rudraksam  always  with  devotion  ;  never  use 
it  while  you  are  impure.  Even  the  grass  that  grows  with  the  air 
in  contact  with  the  Rudrak^a  tiee,  goes  verily  to  a  holy  region  for 
ever.  Jabala  Muni  says  in  the  Sruti: — If  a  man  wearing  Rudraksun 
commits  a  sin,  he  gets  deliverance  from  that  sin.  Even  if  anira-ils  hold 
Rudraksam,  they  become  Siva  ;  wha*;  of  men  !  The  devotees  of  Sri  Rudra 
should  always  use  at  least  one  Rudraksv  on  the  head.  Those  grext  devotees, 
who  with  RudrSksim  on  take  the  name  of  the  Highest  Self  Sambhc, 
get  themselves  freed  of  all  sorts  of  sins  and  pains.  Those  who  aie  oru;i- 
mented  with  Rudraksam  are  the  best  devotees.  It  is  highly  incumbent 
on  those  who  want  their  welfare  to  wear  Rudraksam.  Those  who  hold 
Rudraksa-n  on  their  ears,  crown  hair,  neck,  hands,  and  breast,  <2et 
Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Mahes'vara  under  them  as  their  Vihhiatis  (mani- 
festations, powers).  The  Devas  and  all  those  Risis  that  sttrted  the 
Gotra,  the  Adipuru§as  (the  first  chief  men  in  several  fanllie-),  held 
with  reverence  the  Rudraksams.  All  the  other  ]M  niis,  th--\i  descenufd 
from  their  families,  the  ardent  followers  of  ^rauta  Dharma,  the  pure 
souled,  held  the  Rudraksams.  It  may  be,  that  many  might  not  like 
at  first  to  hold  this  Rudraksam,  the  visibiie  giver  of  liberation  and 
so  well  written  in  the  Vedas  ;  but  afoer  many  births,  out  of  the 
Graoa  of  Mahaleva,  many  become  eager  to  take  the  Rudraksams.  Tl)e 
Munis'  that  are  the  Jdbala  Sakhis  are  famous  in  expounding  the 
inestimable   greatness    of   Rudraksams. 

The  effect  of  holding  Rudraksams  is  well  known  in  the  three  worlds. 
Punyam  (great  merit)  arises  from  the  mere  sight  of  Rudraksams  ; 
ten  million  times  that  merit  arises  by  it^  touch  ;  and  by  wearing  it, 
one  hundred  Koti  times  the  fruit  arises  and  if  one  mak*»s  Japam 
every  day,  then  one  lakh  koti  times  the  punyam  arises'  There  is  no 
manner    of  questionings  in  this. 


Book  XI.]  CHAPER  VI.  1069 

30-33.  He  who  holds  in  his  hand,  breast,  neck,  ears,  heal,  , 
the  RudrVksams,  becomes  an  image  of  Rudra.  There  is  co  manner  of 
doubt  in  this.  By  holding  Rudraksam-,  men  become  invulnerable  of 
all  the  beings,  become  respected,  like  Miha  Oeva,  by  th3  Djvas  anl 
Asuras  and  they  roam  oa  the  eirth  lika  It'idra.  Even  if  a  man  be 
adii'jted  to  evil  deeds  and  commits  all  sorts  of  sins,  he  becomes  respected 
by  all,  on  holding  Radraksarns.  By  this  men  are  freed  of  the  sin 
of  taking  Uchhista  and  of  all  the  other  sins.  Even  if  you  suspend  a 
Rulraksira  rosary  on  the  neck  of  a  dog  and  if  that  dog  dies  in 
that  state,  he  gets  liberation  !  Then  whit  to  speak  of  others  !  By 
holding  Rndraksams,  men  even  if  they  be  devoid  of  Japam  and  Dhyanam, 
become  freed  of  all  sins  and  attain  the  highest  state.  Even  if  one  holds 
merely  one  RadrAksa  seed  purified  and  sueharged  with  Mantra  Sakti,  he 
uplifts  his  twentyone  generatians,  gets  to  Heaven  and  resides  there  wiih 
re-ipect.      I  am  speaking  now  further  of  the  Greatness  of  KudraUsam. 

Here  ends  the  Fifth  Chapter  of  the    Eleventh  Book  on  the  Kudrak  fam 
rosaries  in    the    Maha  Purdnara  bri    Mad    Devi    Bha  gavatam    of    1.^,0  0 
verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

1-21.  ts'vara  sail: — "O  K?.rtikeya  !  Kns'agranthi,  JIvapattrt  and 
other  rosaries  cannot  compare  to  one-sixteenth  part  of  the  Rudr^ksa 
rosary.  As  Visnu  is  the  best  of  all  the  Purusas,  the  Ganga  is  the  best 
of  all  the  rivers,  Kas'yapi,  amongst  the  !Muni?,  Uchchaihsrava  amongst 
the  horse?.  Malm  Deva  amongst  the  Devas,  Bhagavati  amongst  the  Davis, 
so  thcRudraksam  rosary  is  the  Best  of  all  the  rosaries.  All  the  fruits  that 
occur  by  reading  the  stotras  and  holding  all  the  Vratas,  are  obtained  by 
wearing  the  Rudraksam  bead.  At  the  time  of  making  theAksaya  gift, 
the  Rudtdksam  bead  is  capable  of  giving  high  merits.  The  merit  that 
accrues  by  giving  Rudraksam  to  a  p3ac«ful  devotee  of  Siva,  cannot 
be  expressed  in  words.  If  anybody  gives  food  to  a  man  holdin* 
the  Ridraksam  rosary,  his  twenty  one  generations  are  uplifted  and 
he  ultimately  becomes  able  to  live  in  the  Rudrd  Loka.  He  who 
does  no"^  *PP'y  ashes  on  his  forehead  and  who  does  not  hold  Rudrdk^am 
and  is  averse  to  the  worship  of  oiva  is  inferior  to  a  chandaja.  If 
Rulrdksam  be  pi  iced  on  the  head  then  the  flesh-eaters,  drunkards, 
and     the    associates     with    the       vicious    become     freed   of     their     sins. 

Whatever   fruits   are    obtained   by    performing    various   sacrifices,      asce- 
ticism   and    the     study    of  the    Vedas     are   easily     attained   by    simply 

holding  the   Rudraksam   rosary.     Whatever  merits   are   obtained  jby  read- 


1070  Sr!  mad  dev  bhAgavatam 

ing  the  four  Vedas  and  all  the  Puranas  and  bathing  in  all  the  Tirthas  an 
the  results  that  are  obtained  by  immense  practise  in  learning  all  are, 
obtained  by  wearing  Rudr^ksam.  If  at  the  time  of  death,  one  wears 
Rudraksam  and  d|es,  one  attains  Rudrahood.  One  has  not  to  take 
again  one's  birth.  If  anybody  dies  by  holding  Rudraksam  on  his 
neck  or  on  his  two  arms,  he  uplifts  his  twenty-one  generations  and 
lives  in  the  Rudra  Loka.  Be  he  a  Brahman  or  a  Chandfila,  be  he 
with  qualities  or  without  qualities,  if  he  applies  ashes  to  his  body 
and  holds  Rudiaksim,  he  surely  attains  Sivahood.  Be  he  pure  cr 
impure  ;  whether  he  eats  uneatables  or  be  he  a  Mleehha  or  a 
Cbindaia  or  a  Great  Sinner,  any  body  if  he  holds  RuOrSksam  is 
surely    equal   to     Rudra.     There  is  no   doubt  in    this. 

If  any  body  holds  Rudraksam  on  his  head  he  gats  Koti  time.,  the  fruit ; 
on  his  ears,  ten  Koti  times  the  fruit,    on  his  neck,  one   hundred  Koti  times 
the  fruit;  on  his  holy    thread,  ayuta  times  the    fruit ;  on   his  arm,  one  lakh 
Koti    times  the   fruit  and   if   one    wears  Rudraksam    on   one's    wrist,  one 
attains  MokjA.      Whatever  acts,   mentioned   in    the   Vedas  be    performed 
with  Rudraksam  on,  the  fruits  obtained    are    unbounded.     Even  if  a  man 
be  without  any  Bhakti  and  if  he  wears  on  his    neck    the    Radraksa    rosary 
though    he  does  always    vicious   acts,    he   becomes    freed    of  the  bondage  of 
this  worU.     Even  if  a  man  does  not  hold   Rudr4ksa    bit   if   he    be    always 
full  of  devotion  towards  the  Rudraksam,  he  attains  the  fruit  that  is  got  by 
wearing  the  Rudrllksam   and  he  attains  the  Siva  Loka  and  is  honoured  like 
Siva.     A'^  in  the  country  of  Kikata,  an  ass  wh'eh  used  to  carry  Rudraksim 
seed  "ot  Sivahood  after    his  death,  ?o  any    man,    whether    he    be    a    Jnani 
(wise)  or  Ainini  (unwise),  gets    Sivahool  if  he    bolls    lltidriksatu.     There 
is  no  doubt  in   this. 

2%28.  Skinda  said  :—"  0  God  !  How  is  it  that  in  the  country  of 
Kikftta  (Bihar),  an  ass  had  to  carry  RudrSksa  ;  who  gave  bim  the 
RudrSkBams  !   -Vnd  what  for  did  he  hold  that  ? 

Bha^^av^n  ts'vara  said  :  —  "  0  Son!  Now  hear  the  history  of  the  case. 
In  the  Bindhya  mountain  one  ass  used  to  carry  the  load  of  Rudraksam  of  a 
traveller.  Once  the  ass  felt  tired  and  became  unable  to  carry  the  load  and 
fell  down  on  the  road  and  died.  After  his  death  the  ass  came  to  Me  by 
My  Grace,  becoming  Mahes'vara  with  trident  in  his  hand  and  with  three 
eyes.  O  Ka.rtikeya  !  As  many  faces  as  there  are  in  the  Rudr^ksim,  for 
■0  many  thousand  Yugas  the  holder  resides  with  honour  in  the  Siva  Loka. 
One  should  declare  the  greatness  of  Rudraksam  to  one's  own  disciple  J 
never  to  disclose  its  glories  to  one  who  is  not  a  disciple  nor  a  devotee  of 
BadrS^kfam  nor  to  bim  who  is  an  illiterate  brute.     Be  he  a  Bhakta  or  not  a 


Book  Xt.]  CHAPTER   VI.  1071 

Bhakta,  be  he  low  or  very  low,  if  he  holds  RudrUkfam,  then  he  is  freed  from 
all  sins.     No  equal  can  be  to  the  merit  of  him  who  holds  the  Rudr4kBams. 

29-39.  The  Munis,  the  Seers  of  truth,  des  eribe  this  holding  on  of 
ttudrakyam  as  a  ver}'  great  vow.  He  who  makes  a  vow  to  hold  one 
thojsand  Ru  Irakfams,  beaoraes  like  Ruira  ;  the  Devas  bow  down  before 
him.  If  thoisand  Rudrak§ams  be  not  obtained,  one  should  hold  at  least 
sixteen  Rudrakgams  on  each  arm,  one  Rudrak§am  on  the  crown  hair  ; 
on  the  two  hands,  twelve  on  each  ;  thirty-two  on  the  neck  ;  forty  on  the 
head;  six  on  each  ear  and  one  hundred  and  eight  RudrSksams  on  the  breast  ; 
and  then  he  becomes  entitled  to  worship  like  Rudra.  If  any  body  holds 
R.idr^ksim  together  with  pearls,  Prabala,  crystal,  silver,  gold  and  gem 
(lapis  lazuli),  he  becomes  a  manifestation  of  S'iva.  If  a  body,  through  laziness 
even,  holds  RuJr^ksam,  the  sin  cannot  touch  him  as  darkness  cannot  come 
near  light.  If  any  body  makes  japara  of  a  mantram  with  a  Rudraksa  rosary, 
he  gets  unbounded  results.  Such  a  merit  giving  Rudraksam,  if  one  such 
Rudraksam  be  not  found  in  aiy  one's  body,  his  life  becomes  useless,  like 
a  man  who  is  void  of  Tripundrak  (three  curved  horizontal  marks  made  on 
the  forehead  by  the  worshippers  of  S'iva).  If  any  body  simply  washes 
his  head  all  over  with  Rudraksam  on,  ho  gets  the  fruit  of  bathing  in  the 
Ganges.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  One  faced  Rudraksam,  the  five  faced, 
eleven  faced  and  fourteen  faced  Rud'-ksams  are  highly  meritorious  and 
untitled  to  worship  by  all.  The  Rairiksara  is  S'ankara  made  manifest ;  so  it 
is  always  worshipped  with  devotion.  The  greatness  of  Rudraksam  is  such 
as  it  can  make  a  king  out  of  a  poor  man.  On  this  point,  I  will  tell  you  an 
excellent  Puranic  anecdote. 

40-49.  There  was  a  Brahmin,  named  Girinatha  in  the'country  of  Kosala. 
He    was    proficient   in    the  Vedas  and  Vedamgas,  religious  and  very  rich  . 
He  used  to  perform  sacrifices.  He  had  a  beautiful  son  named  Gunanidhi.  The 
son  gradually  entered  into  his  youth  and  looked  beautiful  like  Kandarpa,  the 
God    of   Love.    While   he     was      studying    at      his     Guru      Sudhi^ana's 
house,    he,  by    his    beauty  and   youth      captivated     the      mind     of     his 
Guru's    wife    named   Muktavali.     The    Guru's     wife     became     so     much 
enchanted    by    his     extraordinary    beauty     that     she,     being     unable     to 
ontrol   herself,    mixed    with    him    and     for   some     time     remained     with 
hi:a    in    secret    enjoyment.     Then     feeling  inconveniences,     due     to    the 
fear  of  his    Guru,    to    enjoy    her   freely,      used      poison     to     the     Guru, 
killed    him    and  then  he  began    to    live    freely  with  her.     Next  when  hia 
father,   mother   came    to    know    about  this,    he    put   to  death    instantly 
his  father  and    mother,     administering     poison    to      them.     He   became 


1072  ^RI  mad  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM 

addicted  to  various  pleasures  and  his  wealth  was  exhausted  gradually. 
lie  be^an  to  steal  in  Brahmans'  houses  and  became  addicted  very 
much  to  drinking.  His  relatives  outcasted  him  from  the  society  for 
his  bad  behaviour  and  banished  him  outside  the  town,  He  it  en 
went  into  a  dense  forest  with  Muktavali ;  and  he  began  to  kill  the 
Brahmins  for  their  wealth.  Thus  a  long  time  passed  away ;  when 
at    last   he    fell    into   the   jaus    of  death. 

50-54.     Then  to  take  him  to  the    region    of    Death,     thousands   of  the 

Yama's   messengers  came  ;  at  the    same  time    the  Siva's    messengers  came 

from    ^iva-Loka.     O  K&rtikeya  !    A    quarrel    then  ensued     between   both 

the    parties    of  Yaraa  and  Siva,"     The    Yaira's  messengers,  then,  said: — 

♦'  O  Servers    of    Sambhu  !    What    are    the    merits    of     this      man     that 

you    have    come    to     take    him  ?  First    sp^ak    to      us    of     his     merits." 

.  Siva's     messengers    spoke — "Fifteen    feet    below    the    ground   where   this 

;man    died,  there  exists  the    Rudraksam.     O  Yama's  messengers  !     By    the 

influence  of  that    Rudraksam,    all  his    sins    are     destroyed;    and  we  have 

come    to    take    him    to    oiva."     Then     the    Brahmin    Gunanidhi   assumed 

a   divine   form   and,     getting     on      an      aerial     car    went     with      Shiva's 

■  messengers  before  S'iva.     "  0  One  of   good  vows  !    Thus    I  have  described 

briefly    to   you   the     greatness     of     Rudraksam.     This     is      capable     to 

remove   all   sorts  of  sins    and   yield    great    merits. 

Here  ends  the  Sixth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
Greatness  of  Rudrdk^ams  in  the  MahapurSnam  S'ri  Mad  Devj 
BhSgavatam   of   18,000    verses    by  Maharsi    Veda    Vyasa. 


CHAPTER     VII. 

1-4.     S'ri   NArayana  said  : — "O  Naradi  !  When  Giris'a  thus  explained 
to    KSrtikeya    the    greatness    of    Riidraksun,    h^    b3eam3  satisfied.      Now 
1   have   spoken    to  you  of  the    glories     of  the  Rudraksams     as    far   as     I 
know.     Now,    as   to    our    subject    of  right    way    of   acting,    I    will     now 
speak    on    other    things  that;  ou^ht    to    be   known.     Listen.     The  seeing 
of   Rudraksam  briiigs  in  a   lakh    time;    of     Punyam  and  koti      times    the 
merit    arises   from    touching   th  it  ;    holding    it    brings     in     koti      times 
merit  ;    again    if  one    makes     the    j^pam    of   a    Mantra    with     that  Rud- 
raksam,    one    obtains    merit  one    hundred      lakh     koti     times     and    one 
thousand    lakh  koti  times  the  merit.     The  merit  in  holding  the  Rudraksain 
is    far    superior    to    that    in    holding   Bhadraksam.     The    Rudraksam  seed 
that  is   of  the  size  of  an  Amalaki  is  the  best ;  which  is  the  of  the    size     of 
a  plum,   is  middling  ;   and  which  is   of  the  siza  of   a    gram    is  the  worst. 


Sooi  Xt.]  CHAPTER  Vlt.  1073 

this     is    my     wori    and  promise.     The     Rudr&kaam     tree     is     of     four 
kinds  : — Brahmina,  K^if-jti'iya,  Vais'ya,    aad    S'udra.      The    white    colour 
is    BrahmaQi ;    the  red  colour  is  Ksittriya  ;    the  yellow    colour   is  Vais'ya 
and     the    black   coloured    Rudraksam    seed   is    Sadra.     The     Brahmanas 
are  to  use  the  white  coloured  Rudraksams;  the  Ksattriyas,  the  red  coloured 
ones,  the  Vais'yas,  the  yellowcoloured  ones  ;  and  the  Sudras,  the  black  ones. 
Those  Rudrak§a  seeds  that  are  nicely  circular,  smooth,     hard,    and  whose 
thorns  or  points  are  distinctly  visible,  are  the  best.     Those  that  are  pierced 
by  insects,  broken  in  parts,  whose  thorns  are  not  clearly  visible,  with  swells 
and  hoIe3  and  those  that  are  coated  over,  these  six  varieties  of  Rudr^kfams 
are  faulty.  Those  Rudrakg^ms  that  have  their  holes  by  nature  running  through 
and  through  are  best  ;  and  those  that  ha.ve  their  holes  pierced  by    men   are 
middling.  The   Rudrak|»  seeds  that  are  all  of  uniform  shape,  bright,    hard, 
and  beautifully  circular  should  be   strung  together     by    a     silken    thread. 
H  )w   to    test    the     Uudrflksi    seed?    As  gold    is  tested    by  a  touch  stone ; 
so  the  RudrSk§am  is  tested  by  drawing    lines    on     it ;     those     on     which 
the  lines  are  most  uniform,  bright  and  beautifal  are  the  bestani  they  should 
be    worn    by    the    Saivas.     One    should   hold     one     Rudr&ksam     on     the 
erown    h  lir,    thirty    on    the   head,  thirty  six   o&    the     neck ;     sixteen    on 
each  arm,  twelve  on  each  wrist,  fifty    on    the     shoulders,    one  hundred  and 
el<'ht  Rudraksams  in  the  place  of  the  sacrificial  thread;  and  the  devotee  should 
have  two  or  three  rounds  on    the   neck.     On  the  earrings,  on  the  crown   of 
the  head,  the  head,  on  bracalets,  on  armlets,  on  necklace,  on  the    ornament 
wo'n    on   th3   loins     one    should    holl    Rudraksam   always,    whether    one 
sleeps    or   eats.     Holding    three    hundred     R.idraksams     is     the    lowest ; 
holdin<^     five    hundred    is     middling  ;   holding   one  thousand  Rudr^kaams 
is    the    best  ;    so    one  ought   to    wear     one     thousand     Rudraksams.     At 
the  time  of  taking  Rudraksam,  on  one's  head,   one  should  utter  the  Mantra 
of  ts£lua;  the  mantra  of  Tat  Purusa  while    holding    on   one's    ears;    Aghora 
mantra  on  ona's  forehead  and  heart;    and    the    vija  of  Aghora  mantra  i.   e. 
"  hasau  "  while  holding  on  one's  hands.  One  should  wear  the  rosary  of  fifty 
Uudraksa  seeds,  suspended  up  to  the  billy,  uttering  the  V^madeva  mantra, 
i.  e.,  Sadyojat^di,  ttc,  the  five  Brahma  mantras,  and  the  six-limbed     5iva 
mantra.     One  is  to   string  ever}'  Rudraksa  seed,  uttering  the     root  mantra 
and  then  hold  it   One-faced  HudrSksa  reveals  Paratattva  (the  highest  Tattva); 
when  worn,  the  knowledge  of  the  highest  Tattva  arises;  the  Brahma  is  seen 
tb  ;u.     Th3  t  vo-faaed  Rudraksam  is  ArdhanSrisVara,  the  Lord  of  the  other 
half   which    represents    woman    (in   the    same  person)  ;    if  worn,  Ardhaua. 
risvara  Siva  is  always  pleased  with  that  man    who  holds  it.      The    three- 
%oed    Rudr^k§am    is    Fire    made     manifest;    it     destroys   in     a  moment 
the    sin     of    killing    a  woman. 

'       135 


1074  ^RtviAt)  DEVi  BHAGAVATA.^i, 

Tho  threa-faced  Rudrakfam  is  the  three  Agnis,  Dakein^gni,  G&rhapatvfi, 
and  Ahavaniya  ;  Bhagavan  Agiii  is  always  pleased  with  that  man  who 
wears  the  three-faced  Rudraksani.  The  four-faced  Rudrakeam  in  Brahni& 
Himself.  The  wearer  gets  his  prosperity  enhanced,  his  diseases  destroyed, 
the  divine  kuowledge  springs  in  him  and  his  heart  is  always  pleased.  The 
five- faced  Rudraksam  is  tho  five  faced  Siva  Himself;  Mabadeva  gets  pleased 
with  him  who  holds  it.  The  Presiding  Deity  of  the  six  faced  Rudraksam  ia 
Ortikeya.  Some  Pundits  take  Ganapati  to  be  the  Presiding  Deity  of  the 
six-faced  Rudr^lksam.  The  presiding  Deity  of  the  seven-faced  Rndrakfam  is 
the  seven  Matrik^s,  the  Sua  and  the  seven  Ri§is.  By  putting  on  this,  the 
prosperity  is  increased,  health  and  the  pure  knowledge  are  established. 
It  should  be  put  on  when  one  becomes  pure.  The  Presiding  Deity  of  the 
ei'^ht-faced  Rudraksam  is  Brahmi,  the  eighc  MStrikas.  By  holding  this, 
the  eight  Vasus  are  pleased  and  the  river  Ganges  is  also  pleased.  The 
putting  on  of  this  makes  the  Jivaa  truthful  and  pleasant-minded.  The 
Devata  of  the  nine-faced  Rudraksam  is  Yama  ;  holding  this  puts  off  the 
fears  of  Death.  The  Devala  of  the  eleven-faced  Rudraksam  is  ten  quarters 
the  ten  quarters  are  pleased  with  him  who  wears  the  ten-faced  Rudi^- 
kfam.  The  Devata  of  the  eleven  mouthed  Rudraksam  is  the  eleven  Rudras 
and  Indra.  Holding  this  enhances  happiness.  The  twelve-faced  Rudrakfam 
is  Visnu  made  manifast  ;  its  Devatas  are  the  twelve  Adityas  ;  the 
devotees  of  ^iva  should  hold  this.  The  thirteen- faced  Rudrak?am,  if  worn, 
enables  one  td  secure  one's  desire?;  he  does  nowhere  experience  failures.  The 
Kama  Deva  becomes  pleased  with  him  who  wears  this.  The  fourteen-faced 
Rudraksam  destroys  all  diseases  and  gives  eternal  health.  While  holding 
this,  one  ought  not  to  take  wine,  flesh,  onion,  garlic,  Sajn4  fruit,  Chalta 
fruit  and  the  llesh  of  the  boar  which  eats  excrements,  etc.,  During  tha 
Lunar  and  Solar  eclipses,  during  the  UttarSyana  bamkrauti  or  the  Daksinti- 
yana  Samkr^nti,  during  the  full  Moon  or  the  New  Moon  day,  if  Rud- 
rlksim   be  worn,    one  becomes  instantly    freed    of  all  one's    sins. 

Here  ends,  the  Seventh  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the  great- 
ness of  one  faced  etc.,  RudrAksam  in  the  Malia  Puranam  Sri  Mtd  Devi 
Bha^avatam  of  18.000  verses  by   Mabarsi  Veda   VySga. 


CHAPTl^i  VIII 

1-21.     NarSyana    said  : — "  O    Grent     Muni  !     Now    I  shall    tell    you 
the  rules  of  Bhuta   Suddhi  i.  e.     the  purification    of   the    elements    of  the 
body  (by  respiratory  attraction   and  replacement,  etc.)     Firstly,     think    of 
ihe  Highest  Deity  Kaudalini  (the  Serpent  Fire)  as  rising  up  in  the  hollow 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  VIII.  1075 

canal    Susumn^    in     the    Spinal    Cord  from     the  Mul^dhlra  (the     sacral 
plexus)  to  the  Brahmarandhra   (the  aperture  supposed  to  be  at   the  crown 
of  the  head).     Next,  the  devotee   is  to  meditate  on  the  Mantra    "  Harasa  " 
and  consider  his  Jivatma    (the  embodied    soul)    united  with  Para  Biahma. 
Then  think  from  leg  to  the  knees  in  the  form  of  a   square  Yantra  (diagram 
as  furnished   with    Vajra    thanderbolt)      (represented    by    63  lines    at  the 
four    corners)  ;  consider  this  square  as  the  earth,     of   a  golden   colour   and 
represented  by  the  letter   "  Lam,''    representing  the  Seed  Mantra  of  earth. 
Next  from  the  knee  to  the  navel  consider  the  semi-moon  and  at  its  two  ends 
consider  that  the  two  Ltuses  are    situated.     Consider  this    as  the  circle    of 
water,  of  white  colour,  represented  by  the  letter  "  Vam  "  the  Seed  Mantra 
of  water.     Then   again  from  the   navel   to  the    heart    consider   it   as    of  a 
triangular  form  and  the  Svastik     mark   at  its  three   angles  and     think    it 
as  of   fire  and  represented  by  the  letter    "  Ram  "    its    root  Mantra,  of  red 
colour.     Next   from  the  heart  to  the  centra    of  the    eyebrows,    consider    as 
marked    with   six   dots,    with  the    Seed   Mantra    "  Yam  "    of    a   smoke- 
coloured  colour  (dark-red)   and  of  a   circular   appearance    and    consider    it 
as  air.     Then   again    from  the  centre    of   the   eyebrows    to    the    crown    of 
the  head   consider   as    AkSs'a  Mandalam  (a  region   of  ether)  beautiful   and 
clear  and  with  "Ham"  as  its  vija  letter.  Thus  thinking  consider  firstly  the 
earthy   principle      originated  from    watery    principle,   dissolved    in    water. 
Then  think    water  as   dissolved    in  fire,    its   cause ;    fire  dissolved    in    air, 
it?  cause  ;   and  air   dissolved    in    Akisa,   ether,   its    cause;    then    consider 
A  kaaa  dissolved  in    its  cause    Ahamkara,  egoism  ;    then   again    Ahamkara 
dissolved   in  the    Great    Principle    (Mahattatva)  ;   and    Mahattatva  again 
in  its  oau=3e    Prakriti    and  consider    Prakriti   again     diluted    in    its   cause, 
the  Supreme    Self.     Then  c?onsider  your  ownselfasthe  Highest  Knowledge 
and  only  that.     Think,    then,    of   the    Papa    Purusa,   the  Sinful    Man    in 
your  body.     The  size  of  thii    Man  is  that  of    a  thumb    and    it    is    situated 
in  the    left   abdomen.     The  head    of  him    is    repres3nted  by  Brahmahatya 
(murdering  a   Brahman)  ;    his  arm  as  stealing  gold;  his    heart  as  drinking 
wine  ;   his  loins  as  going    to  the    wife    of   his    Guru,    hia    legs    as   mixing 
with  people  who  go  to   their    Guru's  wives,    and    his    toes    as    representing 
other  sins  and  venial    offences.     The  Sinful    Man    holds    axes    and    shield 
in  his  hands  ;    he  is    always     angry,    with    his    head   bent    down   and   his 
appearance      is   very     horrible.       Inhale    air    through     the      left   nostril 
thinking^of  '*  Vam  "  the  Root  Mantra  of  air  and  make  Kumbhaka  i.  e.,  fill 
the  whole  body  with  that  air,  and  hold  it   inside,  purifying  the  sinful  man  ; 
Ihen  repeating   "  Ram,"   the  seed  Mantra   of  fire,    think  the   sinful    man 
with  hi?  own  body  burnt  down  to  ashes.     Then  exhale  outside  through  the 
ri  j-ht   nostril    those    ashes  of  the   Sinful    Man.  Next   consider   the    ash  es 


I 


107G  5Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAGAVATAM 

due  to  the  burning  of  the  Sinful  Man,  as  rolled    and  turned  into  a  round  ball 
with  Iha  nectar  seed  of  the  Moon.     Think  steadily  this  ball  as  trantfciired 
into   a  golden   egg  by    the  Seed  Mantra   *'  Lam  "    of   the    earth.     Repeat 
Then,    "  Ham  "    the  seed    Mantra    of  Akas'a    and    thiuk    yourself  as    an 
ideal  beiu^'  puz-e  and  clear,  and  shape  thus  your    body  and  the  several  limbs. 

Create,  then,  fresh  in  an  inverse  order  from  the  Brahma  the  elements 
Akas  a,  air,  fire,  water,  earth  and  locate  them  in  their  respective  positions. 
Tbea  by  the  Mantra  "  Soham  "  separate  the  Jivatma  from  the  Para- 
matmS  and  locate  the  JIvutma  in  the  heart.  Think  also  that  the  Kucda- 
liui  haa  come  to  the  Sacral  Plexus,  after  locating  the  Jivatma,  turned 
into  nectar  by  contact  with  the  Highest  Self,  in  the  heart.  Next 
meiitate  on  the  vital  forca,  the  Prani  Sik-i,  thus  located  as  follows  :  — 
There  is  a  red  lotus  on  a  wide  boat  in  a  vast  ocean  of  a  red  colour  ;  on 
this  lotus  is  scited  the  Prana  S  akti.  She  has  eix  hands  holding,  in  due 
ord^r,  the  trident,  the  arrows  made  of  sugarcane,  noose,  goad,  five 
arrows  and  a  skull  filled  with  blood.  She  is  three-eyed.  Her  high  breasts 
are  decorated  ;  the  colour  of  Her  body  is  like  the  Rising  Sun.  Mty  She 
oraot  us  happiness.  Thus  meditating  on  the  Prana  Sakti.  Who  is  tf 
ihe  nature  of  the  Highest  Self,  one  ought  to  apply  ashes  on  his  body  lu 
order  to  attain  success  in  all  actions.  Great  merit  arises  from  the 
application  of  ashes  (besmearing  ashes)  on  the  body.  1  will  now  dwell 
on  this  sabjecb  in  detail.  Listen.  This  point  of  holding  ashes  on  to 
the  body    is    particularly    proved  in  the  Vedas  and  Smritis. 

Here  ends  the  Eighth  Chapter  in  the  Eleventh  Bjuk  ou  Bhuta 
S'uddhi  (purification  of  elements  in  the  body)  in  the  Mahapuranam  Si  I 
Mad  Devi    Bhagavatam    of    LS,000  verses    by  Mahaisi    Veda  V\4sa. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

1-43.  Sii  NlrSyana  said  : — The  Brahraana?  that  will  perform 
duly  the  Sirovrata,  to  be  described  in  the  following,  are  the  onlv  ones 
who  will  attain  very  easily  the  highest  knowledge,  de-troying  all  AvidyS 
or  Ignorance.  So  much  so  that  the  rules  of  right  living  and  ri»ht  conduct 
as  ordained  in  the  Srutis  and  Smritis  are  not  necessary  to  be  observed  bv 
these  who  duly  and  devotedly  perform  the  6irovrata  {i.  e.  vow  of  the 
head  ;  i.  e.  vow  to  apply  ashes  on  the  forehead).  O  Learned  One  ! 
It  is  through  this  Sirovrata  that  Brahma  and  the  other  Devas  have 
been  able  to  gee  their  Brahmahood  and  the  Devahood.  The  ancient  sagee 
glorified  highly  this  Sirovrata.  Brahma,  Vi§Qu,  Rudra  and  the  other 
De?fts   all    performed   this  ^irovrati.     O  Wise  Qua  !  Tooae  that  performed 


Book  XI]  CHAPTER  IX.  1077 

duly  tbis  S'irovr^ta,  all  became  sinless  though  they  were  sinful 
ill  ©very  way.  Its  name  is  S'irovi'ALa,  inasmuch  as  it  is  mentioned  in 
the  first  part  of  the  Atharva  Veda.  Only  this  vrata  (vow)  is  called  S'irovrata  ; 
no  other  thing  is  denominated  by  this  name.  By  no  other  merit  can 
this  be  acquired.  O  Muni  !  Different  namet)  are  assigned  to  this  vrata 
in  different  SAkhas  ;  in  fact,  they  are  all  one  and  the    same. 

iV.  B. — Pasupata  vrata,  S'ivavrata,  etc.,  are  the  different  names  assigned 
to  it.     In  all    the    S'^kh^s,    the  One    Substance,     Intelligence   solidified 
named    S'iva      and    the      knowledge       thereof    is    mentioned.     This     is 
^'S'irovrati."     He      who   does    not    perform    thip  Sirovrata,  is  irreligious 
and  he  is  banished  from  all  religious  acts,  though  he  is  well-qualified  in  all 
branches  of  learning.     There  is  no  m  inner  of  doubt  in  this.  This  S'irovrata 
ii  like  the  blazing  fire  in  destroying  wholly  the  forest  of  sins.  All  knowledge 
flishes    before    him     who    performs  this     Sirovrata.     The    At'iarva    Sruti 
expounds  the  subtle  and  particularly  incomprehensible  thinors  ;  this     ^ruti 
declares  the  above    S'irovrata  as  daily  to  be    done  ;  so    it    is    one     of    the 
daily  observances.     "Fire  is    ashes,"    "water    is  ashes"    "earth    is    ashe-!," 
"air    is    ashas,"     '"ether  or  Ak^s'a    is    ashes,"  "all  this  mainfdst  Universe 
is    ashes.''  These  six  mantras  stated  iu  the  Atharva  Veia  are  to  be  recited; 
after  this,  ashes  are  to  be  besme.ired    all    over  the  body.     This    is    namoi 
the  S'irovrata.     The  devotee  is  to  put  on    these    ashes  name!    S'irovrata 
during    his     Sandhyopasana    (pr<vctising  Sandhya    bhricr)  a    day)  so    Ion-' 
as  the  Brahma  Vidya  (the    knowledge    of     Brahma)    do  is    not    arise    in 
him.     One    is  to  mike  a     ankalap  (resolve)    of    twelve  years     before  one 
starts    with    this    Vrata.     In    cises    of   incapability,  a  period    of  one  year 
or    six  months,  or    three  months  or  at  least  t^velve  days  are  to  be  adopted. 
That    Guru    is    considered    very    cruel    and  his    knoA-ledge   will  come  to 
an  end  who  hesitates  and  do3s  not  impart  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  and 
other   things    to    him    who  is  purified  by  observing   this  Sirovrata.   Know 
him  certainly  as  a  very  merciful    Guru  who  illumines  the  heart  by  Brahma 
Vidy^    just  as    God    is  very  merciful  and  compassionate  to  all  the  livino' 
beings.     One  who    performs  one's    own  Dharmas  for  many  births  acquires 
particular    faith    in    this  Sirovrata  ;  others  can     have    no    faith    in    this. 
Rather    he    gets    animosity    for  this    vrata,    because  of  the  abundance  of 
ignorance  in  him.     So  one  ought  never  to    advise    on    spiritual    knowledge 
to  an  enemy    who  has     no    faith,  rather  who    has    hatred  for    any    such 
thing.     Those    only    that    are  purified  by    the    observance  of  S'irovrata 
arj    entitled    to    Brahma    Vidy^  ;  and     none  others.     So  the  Vedas  com- 
mand :— Those    are    to  be  advised  on  Brahma  Vidya  who  have    performed 
S'irovrata.     Even    the    animal    becomes    freed  of    his    animalism,    as   a 
result  of    tbis  vrata  ;  no    sin    occurs    in    killing    that     animal  ;  this    ig 


1078  SrI  mad  BEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

the  decision  of  the  VedSnta.  It  has  been  repeatedly  uttered  by  J4v&la 
Risi  that  the  Dharmi  of  the  Bra'.imaaas  is  to  put  on  the  Tripundra  (three 
curved  lines  of  asheg  on  the  forehead).  The  householders  are  instructed 
to  put  on  this  Tripundra  by  repeating  the  mantra  *triyamvaki'' with 
Ora  prefixed.  Those  that  are  in  the  stage  of  the  Bhiksus  (SannySsis,  etc.,) 
are  to  put  on  this  Tripundra  uttering  thrice  the  mantra  "Om  Ha?ah" 
Such  is  regularly  stated  in  Javala  Sruti.  The  house  holders  and  the  Vana{)riis 
this  (forester^s)  are  to  put  on  this  Tripundra,  uttering  Triyamvak^ 
mantra  purified  with    "Haum"  the    pranava  of  biva  prefixed. 

Those  that  are  the  BrahraachAris  are  to  usediily  this  Tripundra  uttering 
the  mantra  "Modhavi,"  etc.  The  Brahminas  are  to  apply  the  ashes  in 
three  curved  lines  on  the  fore  head.  The  God  Siva  is  always  hidden  under 
the  cover  of  ashes  ;  so  the  Siivis,  the  devotees  of  biva  are  to  use  the  Tripun- 
dra. The  Brahmanas  ar^  to  u«e  daily  this  IVipuudra.  Brahma  is  the 
Prime  Brahmin.  When  He  used  Tripund.a  on  His  forehead,  what  need  to 
tell,  then,  that  every  Brahman  ought  always  to  use  it!  Never  fail,  out  of 
error,  to  besmear  your  body  with  the  ashes  as  prescribed  in  the  Vedas  and 
worship  the  S'iva  Lingam.  The  Sannyasins  are  to  apply  Tripundra  on 
their  forehead,  arms,  chest,  uttering  the  Triyamvaka  mxntra  with  Om' 
prefixed  and  also  the  five  lettered  mar.tra  of  S'iva  "  Om  Namah  S'ivava.' 
The  BrahmachSris  should  use  Tripundra  of  ashes,  obtained  from  their  own 
fire,  uttering  the  mantra  '•  Triyayusim  Jamadagneh,  etc.,  or  the  mantra 
"  Medh^vi,  etc.  The  S'ii  Iras  in  the  service  of  the  Brahmins  are  to  use  the 
ashes  with  devotion,  with  the  mantra  "'Namah  SivSya."  The  other  ordinirv 
persons  can  use  the  Tripundra  without  any  mantra.  To  besmear  the 
body  all  o\er  with  ashes  and  to  put  on  the  Tripundra  is  the  essence  of 
all  Dharma  ;  therefore  this  shoald  be  used  always.  The  ashes  from  the 
Agaihotra  Sacrifice  or  from  Virajagni  (Viraja  fire)  are  to  be  carefully  placed 
on  a  clean  and  pure  basin.  Cleansing  hands  and  feet,  one  is  to  sip  (per- 
form Achamana)  twic^,  and  then,  taking  the  ashes  in  the  hand,  utter  the 
five  Brahma  mantras  "  Sadyoy^tam  prapady&mi,  etc.,  and  perform  short 
Pr^nayama  thrice  ;  he  is,  then,  to  utter  the  ?even  mantras  "  Fire  is  ashefe" 
"  water  is  ashes,"  "  earth  is  ashes"  "  Teja  is  ashes,"  "  wind  is  at-he?,' 
"  ether  is  ashes,"  "  All  this  whatsoever  is  ashes"  and  purify  and  impreg- 
nate the  ashes  with  the  mantra  by  blowing  out  air  through  the  mouth. 
Then  one  is  to  think  of  MahS  Deva,  repeating  the  mantra  "Om  Apojyoti,  etc.? 
and  apply  dry  ashes  of  white  colour  all  over  the  body  and  become  sinless. 
After  this  he  is  to  meditate  on  the  Maha  Visnu,  the  Lord  of  the  univert^e 
and  on  the  Lord  of  the  wafers  and  repsat  again  the  mantras  "Fire  is  ashes  " 
and  mix  water  with  the  nshes.  He  is,  then,  to  think  of  S'iva  and  apply 
-  asbes  on  hia  forehead.     He  is  to  think  of  the    ashes  as    S'iva    Himself   and 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  X.  l07^ 

then,  with  mankras  appropriate  to  his  own    As'rama     (stages  of    life)  use 
the  Tripundra  on  his  forehead,  chest  and    shouldere. 

By  the  middle  finger  and  ringfinger  he  is    to  draw    the  two  lines    of  the 
ashes  from    the  left      to  the  right    and  by    his  thumb  draw  a  third  line  of 
ashes  from  the    right  to  the    left.     Theee    Tripundras    are    to  be  used  in 
thn  morning,  midday  and  in  the  evening. 

Here  ends  the  Ninth  chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the  rules 
of  S'irovrafa,  in  the  Mahapuranam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bb&gavatam  of 
18,000,  verses'  by  Maharsi  V^eda   Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1-33.     Nar4yana  >aid  :— '*  0  Knower  of      Brahma!     0  NSrada  t  Tbe 

ashes  prepared  from  ordinary  fire  are  secondary  (Gauna).  The  greatness 
of  this  secon  dary  ashes  is  to  be  considered  by  no  means  trifling;  this  also 
destroys  the  darkest  ignorance  and  reveals  the  highest  knowledge.  It  is 
of  various  kinds.  Amongst  the  secondary  ashes,  that  prepared  from 
Virajagni  is  the  best  ;  it  is  equivalent  to  that  obtainei  from  Agnihotra 
Yajna  and  it  is  as  glorious.  The  ashes  obtained  from  the  marriage  sacrificial 
fire,  that  obtained  from  the  burning  of  the  Samidh  fuel,  what  is  obtained 
from  the  conflagration  of  fire  are  known  as  the  secondary  ashes.  The 
Brahmanas,  Ksittriyas  and  Vais'yas  should  use  the  ashes  from 
the  Agnihotra  and  the  Viraj^  Fire,  For  the  householders,  the  ashes  from 
the  marriage  sacrificial  fire  are  good.  For  t  he  Brabmacharis,  the  asbe 
from  the  Samid  fuel  are  good  and  for  the  Siidras  the  fire  of  the  cook 
ing  place  of  the  Veda  knowing  Brahmanas  is  good.  For  the  other 
parsons,  the  ashes  obtained  from  the  conflagration  of  fire  are  good.  Now 
I  will  talk  of  the  origin  of  the  ashes  obtained  from  the  Viraj^  fire.  The 
chiet  season  of  the  Viraja  fire  sacrifice  is  the  Full-moon  night  with  Chitrft 
asterism  >7ith  the  Moon.  If  this  does  not  take  place,  the  sacrifice  may  be 
performed  at  other  seasons  ;  and  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  fit  place 
is  where  one  adopts  a*  one's  dwelling  place.  The  auspicious  field,  garden  or 
forest  is  also  commendable  for  the  above  sacrifice.  On  the  Trayodas'i  Tithi, 
the  thirteenth  night  preceding  the  full-moon  night,  one  is  to  complete 
one's  bathing  and  SandhyA ;  then  one  is  to  worship  one's  Guru  aEd 
bow  down  before  Ilim  Then, ^receiving  his  permission,  the  eacrificer 
\i  to  put  on  pure  clothing  and  perform  the  special  Puj^.  Then  with  his 
white  sacrificial  threal,  white  girlaiuls,  and  white  sandalpaste  one  is  to 
sit  on  the  Kus'a  seat  with  sacrificial  (Ivus'a)  grass  in  one's  hands.  With 
his  faee   towards    the   east   or   north  he   is  to   perform  Prana\4ma   thrice. 


bio  i§R.t  MAD    DEV!  BHiGA.VATA^i. 

Then  he  is  to  meditate  on  oiva  and  Bhagavati  aud  get  tneatally  their 
permissions.  O  Deva  Bhagavan  !  O  Mother  Bhagavati  !  "  I  will 
perform  this  vow  for  my  life-time  "  Thus  making  the  resolve,  he 
tihould  start  with  this  sacritice.  But  this  is  to  be  known  that  this 
Vrata  caL  be  performed  for  twelve  years,  for  six  years,  for  three  years, 
for  one  year,  for  six  months,  for  twelve  days,  for  six  days,  for  three  days, 
even  at  least  for  one  day.  But  in  every  case,  he  must  take  mentally 
the  permission  of  the  Deva  aud  the  Devi.  Now,  to  perform  the  Viraja 
Homa,  one  is  to  light  the  fire  according  to  one's  Grihya  Sutras  and  then 
perform  Homa  with  ghee,  Samidh  (fuel)  or  with  charu  (an  oblatoin  of  rice, 
milk,  and  sugar  boiled  together).  Then  on  the  fourteenth  lunar  day 
(Chaturdas'i)  one  is  to  pray  "  Let  the  tattvas  (principles)  in  me  be 
purified  "  and  then  perform  the  Homa  ceremony  with  Samidh,  etc.,  as  above- 
mentioned.  Now  recollecting  that  "  My  principles  in  my  body  are 
purified,"  he  is  to  ofiFer  oblations  to  the  fire.  In  other  words,  uttering 
*'  Priththitattvas  me  sudhyatSm  jyotiraham  viraj^  vipapma  bbuySsam 
SvSh&"  one  is  to  ofifer  oblations  to  the  Fire.  Thus  uttering  the  five  element 
(Mahftbhutas),  five  tanm^tras,  fiv^  Karmendriyas  (organs  of  action),  five 
Jnanendriyas  (organs  of  perception),  five  Pranas,  seven  dh&tus  Tvak,  etc., 
mind,  buddhi  (intellect),  Ahamkara  (egoism),  Satlva,  Raja,  Tamah  gunas, 
Prakrit i,  Puru^a,  Raga,  Vidyi,  Kala  (arts  etc,)  Daiva  (Fate),  KSla 
(time),  M^ya  Suddhavidya,  Mahes'vara,  Sad^  Siva,  Sakti  Sivatattva,  etc, 
respectively  by  its  own  name,  one  is  to  offer  oblations  to  the  fire  by  the 
five-lettered  Viraja  Mantra  ;  then  the  sacrificer  will  become  pure.  Then 
form  a  round  ball  of  fresh  cowdung  and  purifying  it  by  Mantram  place 
it  on  fire  and  carefully  watch  it.  On  that  day,  the  devotee  is  to  take 
Havi^yanna  (a  sacred  food  of  boiled  rice  with  ghee).  On  the  morning 
of  the  Chaturdas'i,  he  is  to  perform  his  daily  duties  as  above  and  then 
to  perform  Homa  on  that  fire,  uttering  the  five  lettered  Mantra.  He  is 
not  to  take  any  food  the  rest  of  the  time.  On  the  next  day,  that  is,  on 
the  full-moon  day,  after  performing  the  morning  dvities,  he  is  to  do  the 
Homa  ceremony,  uttering  the  Five  lettered  Mantra  and  then  take  leave 
of  the  Fire  (invoked  for  worship).  He  is,  then,  to  raife  up  the  ashes. 
Then  the  dovotee  is  to  keep  Jata  (matted  hair)  or  to  shave  clean  his 
head  or  to  keep  only  one  lock  of  hair  on  the  crown  of  the  head.  He  is  to 
take  his  bath,  then  ;  aud  if  he  can,  then  he  should  be  naked  or  put  on 
a  red  coloured  cloth,  hide,  or  one  piece  of  rag  or  bark  ;  he  is  to  t^ike  a 
staff  aud  a  belt.  "Washing  his  hands  aud  feet  aud  sipping  twice  he  by 
bis  two  hands,  is  to  pulverise  the  ashes''  and,  uttering  the  six  Atharvan 
Mantras,  "  Fire  is  ashes  and  so  forth"  apply  ashes  from  his  head  to  foot, 
;lhen,  as  before,   be  is  to  apply   ashes,  gradually    to    his  arms,  etc.,  and  all 


Book  XL]  CHAPTER  XT.  1081 

over  tho  body  uttering  the  Pranava  of  Siva,  "  Vam,  Vam."  He  is  to 
put  on  the  TriySyusa  Tripundra  on  his  forehead."  After  he  has  done, 
this,  the  Jiva  (the  eoabodied  self)  becomes  Siva  (the  Free  Self)  and  he  should 
behave  him  self  like  Siva.  O  NSrada  !  Thus,  at  the  three  Sandhyil-periods, 
he  is  to  do  like  this.  This  Pds'apata  vrita  is  the  source  of  enjoyment 
as  well  as  liberation  and  as  well  as  of  the  cessation  of  all  brutal  desires. 
By  the  performance  of  tliis  vrata  the  devotee  is  to  free  himself  gradually 
of  his  animal  feelings  and  then  to  v/orship  Bhagavan  Sada  Siva  in  the  forni 
of  a  phallic  symbol.  The  above  bath  ashes  is  highly  meritorious  and 
it  is  the  source  of  all  happiness.  By  holdins:  the  ashes,- one's  longevity  is 
prolonged,  one  gets  even  great  bodily  strength,  becomes  healthy  and  his 
beauty  increases  and  he  gets  nourishment.  This  using  of  ashes  is  for  the 
preservation  of  one's  own  self  ;  it  is  the  source  of  one's  good  and  of  all  sorts 
of  happiness  and  prosperity.  Those  who  use  ashes  (Bhas'ma)  are  free 
from  the  danger  of  plague  and  other  epidemic  diseases  ;  this  bhasma  i? 
of  three  sorts  as  it  leads  to  the  attainment  of  peace,  nourishment,  or  to  the 
fufilment  of  all   desires. 

Here  ends  the  Tenth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the  subject 
Gauna  Bhasma  (secondary  ashes)  in  the  MahapurSnam  Srimad  Devi 
Bhagavatam  of  1S,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  VySsa. 

CHAPTER    XI. 

Narada  asked  : — "  O  Bhagavan  I  Plow  is  the  above  Bhasma  cf  three 
kinds  ?  I  am  eager  to  hear  this.  Kindly  describe  this  to  me."  Narayana 
said  : — "  O  Ntlrada  !  1  am  now  talking  of  the  three  kinds  of  ashes  ; 
hearing  this  even  destroys  one's  sins  and  brings  in  good  fame.  When 
a  cow  evacuates  her  dunij,  just  as  the  cow  dang  leaves  her  and  is  far  from 
reaching  the  ground,  one  should  catch  it  with  one's  hand  and  this  cow- 
dung  burnt  with  "  Sadyojatadi  i.  e.,  Brahma  Mantra  "  becomes  ashea 
which  are  called  *'  Santika  Bhasma,"  i.  <?.,  ashes  producing  peace.  Before 
the  cowdung  is  about  to  reach  the  ground,  the  devotee  should  take  it  with 
his  hand  and  uttering  the  six  lettered  Mantra,  he  is  to  burn  the  cowdung. 
The  ashes  from  this  are  called  PauBtik  Bhasma,  i.  .?,,  ashes  leading  to 
nourishment. 

If  the  cowdung  be  burned  with  the  Mantra  "  Haum,"  the  ashes  of 
this  are  Cilled  '•  Kaniada  Bhasma  i.e.,  ashes  leading  to  the  granting 
of  desires.  O  Narada  !  On  tho  full  moon  diy,  new  moon  day  or  on  the 
eighth  lunar  d;iy.  a  man  is  to  got  up  from  his  bed  early  in  the  morning  and 
be  pure  and  go  the  cow  enclosure.  He  is  to  salute  the  cows  and  lake  the 
cowdunf?,  uttering  the  Mantra  Haum.  If  he  be  a  Brahmin,  he  is  to  collect 
tho  white    co■^■   dung  ;  if   he  be  a  Ksattriya,    he  would  take    the  red   cow- 

136 


1082  Sill  MAD  DEVt  BHAgaVATAM. 

dung  ;  a  Vais'ya,  yellow  eowdung  and  if  ha  be  a  Sadra,  ha  wrild  take  the 
black  cowdun^.  Then  by  the  mantra  "Namah"  he  is  to  form  that  into  a  ball 
and  cover  it  with  the  husk  of  rice  or  t^onie  other  grain  and  dry  it  in  a    sacred 
place,  repeating  the  mantra  ''Haum".      Bring  fire  from  a  forest  or  from  the 
house   of  a    Veda-knowing     Brahmin    and    reduce  the  cowdung  to    ashes 
by   this    mantra,    uttering    the    mantra    Ilaura.     Next  take  out  the  ashes 
eirefully    from  the    fire   place  (Agni    Kunda^     and  place  it    in    anew  jir 
or  pot, again  remembering  the  mntra    "Ilaum".       Mix  with  the  ashes  the 
Ketaki  dust,  the  Patala  (iower  dust,  the  root  of  the     fragrant    grass     called 
khas  khas,    saffron     and    other  sweet    scented    things     with    the    mantra 
"Sadyojdtam  prapadyami,"  etc.     First  perform  the  water    bath,    then    the 
bath  of  the  ashes.     In  ease     one    cannot    have    the     water  bath,  one  is  to 
have      the      ash       bath.     Washing       the     hands,    feet    and     head     with 
the    mantra     "Is'inah    Sarvavidyan^m,"    etc.,  and  uttering  "Tatpurusa" 
one      is      to      besmear    one's     face     with      ashes   and      by    the  mantra 
"Aghora"    apply  ashes    on    one's     chest  ;    with    the  mantra   Vamadeva." 
he  is   to    use   ashes    on    his    navel;      and    with      the     mantra     "  Sadyo 
Jata,   etc., "    all    over    his     body;    he    is    to   quit    his    former    cloth    and 
put     on  another    fresh   cloth.     Wash    your     hands     and     feet      and     sip 
(do    Achamar»).     It  will    serve    the    purpose   if  one    simply   uses  Tripun- 
drak  and   if  one  does    not   besmear   the    whole  body    with  ashes.     Before 
the   midday   one    is    to    use    Bhasma    with    water  ;     "bub   after   the    mid- 
day with  dry  ashes    one  is   to  draw    the   Tripundra  lines    of  ashes  with  the 
forefinger,  middlefinger  and  ringfinger.    The  head,  forehead,  ears,  neck,  heart, 
and  the  arms  are  the  places  whereon  the  Tripundras  are    used.  On  the  head 
the  ashes  are  applied  with  five  fingers    and    with    the     mantra     "  Haum  "; 
on  the  forehead,  the  Tripundra  is  applied  with      mantra     Svahi     by     the 
forefinger,    mindlefinger  and    ringfinger ;    on    the  right   ear,    it  is  applied 
with    "  Sadyojata    "    mantra  ;  on  the  left  ear,  with  "  Vamadeva  "  Mantra  i 
on   the   neck   with    Aghora    mantra   by    the     middlefinger ;    on    the  chest 
with    "  Namah  "    mantra   by    the   forafingn-,  middle^ingar  and  ringfinger  ; 
on    the    right   arm    with    vasat   mantra    by     the  three  fingers  ;     on     the 
left  arm    with  "  Hum  "    mantra  by  the    three  fingers  ;    and    on  the  navel, 
the  ashes  are  to  be  applied    with    the    mantra    Is'ana^    sarva  dev3.nam    by 
the   middlefinger.     The   first   line    in    every    Tripundra    is     Brahmi  ;  the 
second  line    is    Visnu ;    and    the    third,    the    topmost   line    is  MahS,  Deva. 
The   line   of  ashes    that   is    marked    by    one    finger  is   Is' vara.     The  head 
is   the   place    of   BrahmS  ;    the     forehead    is    the     site     of     ts'vara  ;     the 
two   ears    are    the    seats    of  the    two    As'vlns   and    the      neck    is     where 
Ganes'a   resides.     The    Ksattriyas,    Vais'yas,     and     Sddras     arc    to     use 
Tripundrasi    without  any   mantra  ;   they   are   al?o  not  bo  use    the  ashes  on 


^^^^  ^1-3  CHAPTER  XII.                               1083 

th3    v.hoIo    of  the    holy.     The  lowest  cksses    (..   ^.  the  ehaudulas,  etc.,) 

and    lh«    uninitiated     persons  are    to     use  the  Tripundraks  Without    anv 

ti  ant  ra.  J 


Here  ends  the  Eleventh  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
de.eMpt.0M  of  the  greatness  of  the  three  kinds  of  Bhasmas  in  the 
Mahapura^am     ^ri      Mad      Devi      Bhagavatam   of     18,000    verses     by 


Maharsi    Veda    Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XII. 


1-20.     ^ri    Narajana  said  :-"  0  Devarsi  Narada  !  Hear  now  the  ^reat 
secret   and  the  fruits  of  besmearing  one's  body     with    ashes,     yielJin-   all 
desires.     The   pure    cowdung    of  the    Kapila   (brown)   cow   is   to  be  t°akea 
up  by  the  hand   before    it  reaches    the   ground.     It     should   not     be    like 
nwre   i.  e.,    not    like  a  liquid  ;  it  should  not    be  also   very  hard   nor   should 
it  emit  a  bad  stanch.     And  in  case  if  the  cowdung   that    has  already  fallen 
on    the  earth,  has    to    be    taken,  it    should   be    scraped    o£E     from   the  top 
and    bottom  ;    make   it    into   a    ball    and    then    burn    it    in     a    pure    fire 
repeating   the    principal    mantra.     Take    the    ash      and    tie    it   in  a  piece 
of  cloth    and    keep    it   in    a    pot.     The    pot  in      which     the    ashes     are 
to   be    kept    should  be    nice   and   good,    hard,     clean  and    sprinkled  over 
for    purification.     Uttering    the    principal     mantra,    one    is    to     keep    the 
ashps    in    the  pot.     The  pot   may    be    of  metal,    wood,  earth,     or  cloth  • 
or    it   can    be    kept    in   any    other    nice   pot.     The   ashes   can     be     kept 
in    a   silken  bag  where  the  mchurs  are  kept,     In  going  to  a   distant  land, 
the  devotee    cm   take    the    ashes    himself  or  kept  with  bis  accompanyino" 
servant.       When    it    is   to   be    given    to    somebody,    it   is     to    be     given 
with  both    the    hands  ;  never    with     one     hand,     Never  keep     it    in   an 
unholy  place.     Never  apply  feet  to  the    ashes,  nor  throw  it   in  an  ordinary 
{)lace    nor   ever   cross    it  by    your   legs.     Use     always     the     ashes     after 
purifying     it   with    mantra.     These   rules    of    holding    the    Bhasma    are 
according    to   the    Smritis.     By     holding     Bhasma     in      this     way,     the 
devotee   becomes,    no    doubt,    like    Siva.     The     ashes,   that     the     Vaidik 
devotees  of  S'iva  prepare  are  to  be  taken  with  devotion.  All  can  ask  for  that. 
But    the    ashes   that     the    followers    of  the   Tantra     cult      prepare,     are 
taken   by   the   Tantriks    only;    it   is    pohibited    to     the     Vaidiks.     The 
Sudras,    Kap^likas,   and  other   heretics     {e,    (/,,     Jains,     Buddhists)    can 
use  the  Tripundras.   Never  do  they  conceive  in    their     minds     that      they 
would  not  t\ke  the  Tripundra.     The  holding  |^on     of     Bhasma     (ashes)  is 


1084  SrI  mad  DEVt  BHAQAVATAM. 

aoeorJiui;  to  the  Vedas.  Therefore  one  who  does  not  apply  it  falls 
down.  The  Brahmanas  must  use  the  Tripundras,  repeatingr  the  mantra  ; 
and  they  are  to  besmear  their  whole  body  with  ashes  ;  if  they  don'fc  do 
so,  they  are  surely  fallen.  He  can  never  expect  to  get  liberation  even 
after  koti  birth?  who  dues  not  besmear  his  body  with  as^lies  devotedly  and 
who  does  not  hold  the  Tripundras.  O  Narada  !  The  vile  man  who  dees 
not  hold  Bhasma  duly,  know  the  birth  of  that  man  as  fiitiln  as  i^ 
thebirlhofa  hog.  Consider  that  body  as  a  burning  ground  which  does 
cot  bear  the  Tripundra  marks.  The  virtuous  man  should  not  east  a  glance 
nt  him  even.  Fie  on  that  forehead  which  does  not  carry  the  Tripundra  ! 
Fie  on  that  village  which  has  not  a  single  temple  of  Siva  !  Fie  on 
that  birth  which  is  void  of  the  worjliip  of  3iva!  Fie  on  that 
knowledt^e  which  is  void  of  the  knowledge  of  Siva.  Know  them  to 
be  the  slanderers  of  ^iva  who  mock  at  Tripundra.  Those  that  put 
on  the  Tripundras,  bear  ^iva  in  their  forehead.  The  Brahmin  who  is 
iViragnik  (without  the  holy  lire)  is  not  nice  in  every  way.  So  if 
Ihe  wdjship  of  Siva  be  nob  done  with  any  Tripundra  is  not  praise- 
uonliv,  even  it  be  attended  wiih  abundai.ce  of  other  offerings. 
Thoee  who  do  not  besmear  their  Lcdies  with  ashes  or  who  do  not 
use  the  Tripundras,  get  their  previous  good  deeds  converted   into  bad  ones. 

21-42.  Unless  the  Tripundra  mark  is  takon  upacoorijing  to  the  Sdstras, 
the  Vaidik  Karmas  (works)  or  those  perfoimed  according  to  the 
Smritis  prove  injurious  ;  the  good  works  whatsoever  done  by  any 
man  count  for  nothing ;  the  holy  words  heard  seem  as  if  unheard  and 
the  study    of  the  Vedas   counted   as    if   not  studied. 

The  study  of  the  Vedas,  Sacrifices,  Charities,  asceticisms,  vows  and  fast- 
ings of  that  man,  who  does  not  use  the  Tripundra,  all  become  fruitless. 
Without  using  Bhasma  (ashes)  if  one  wants  liberation,  then  that  desire  is 
equivalent  to  live  after  taking  poison.  There  is  no  doubt  ia  this.  The  Creator 
has  not  made  the  forehead  vertically  high  nor  round  ;  but  he  has  made 
it  slightly  slanting  and  curved  fit  to  have  the  Tripundra.  Making  thus 
the  forehead,  the  Creator  wants,  as  it  were,  to  inform  everyone  that  every  one 
ought  to  use  Tripundra  marks  ;  the  curved  lines  also  are  made  visible  for  this 
purpose.  Still  the  igorant  illiterate  man  does  not  put  up  the  Tripundra. 
Unless  the  Brahmanas  use  the  curved  Tripundras,  their  meditation 
won't  be  successful  ;  they  will  not  have  liberation,  knowledge,  nor  their 
asceticism  would  bear  any  fruit.  As  the  oudras  have  no  right  in 
the  study  of  the  Vedas,  so  the  Brahmans  have  not  any  right  to  perform 
the  worship  of  aiva,  etc.,  unless  they  use  the  Tripundras.  First  of  all, 
facing   eastward,   and  washing  hands   and  feet,  he  ought  to  make  a  resolve 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  XIII.  U85 

an'l  theu  fc)  take  a  bath  of  bha  ashes  mantally,  controlling  his  breath.  Then 
taking  the  ashes  of  tha  Agaihotra  saeritice  he  is  to  put  some  ashes  on 
his  own  head,  uttering  "  Is'ana  "  mantra.  Then  he  is  to  recite  the  Purufa 
Sakta  Mantra  and  apply  ashes  on  his  face  ;  with  the  Aghora  mantra  on 
his  chost;  with  the  Varaadeva  mantra,  on  his  anus  ;  with  Sadyoj&ta  mantra 
on  his  legs  ;  and  with  the  mantra  Om,  he  is  to  besmear  his  whole 
body  with  ashes.  This  is  called  the  bath  of  fire  by  the  Munis.  So 
bring  all  the  actions  to  a  successful  issue  one  is  to  take  first  of  all  this 
bath  of  fire.  Washiiig  his  hands,  then,  he  is  to  make  Aehamin  duly  ; 
and,  according  to  the  above-mentioned  rules,  he  is  to  apply  ashes  on  his  fore 
head,  hear  t,  and  all  round  the  ceck  with  the  five  mantras  above  mentioned  ' 
or  with  each  mantra  he  is  to  apply  the  Tripundras.  Thus  all  works  are 
fructified  and  he  gets  the  right  to  do  all  the  Vaidik  actions.  The  Sudras, 
even,  are  not  to  use  the  ashes  touclied  by  the  lowest  classes.  All  the  actiong 
ordained  by  the  S'astras  are  to  be  done  after  being  befmeared  with  ashes 
of  the  cVgnihotra  sacrifice  ;  otherwise  no  action  will  tear  any  fruit.  All 
his  truth,  purity,  Japara,  offering,  oblations  to  the  sacrifice,  bathino*  in  the 
holy  p!aG3  of  pilgrimage,  and  worshipping  the  gods  become  useless,  who 
does  not  hold  Tripundra.  No  fear  of  disaace,  sine,  famine,  or  robbers 
comes  to  the  Brah:niiis  who  use  Tripundra  and  ros:iry  of  Rudraksa 
^ud  tlius  remain  always  pure.  In  the  end,  they  get  the  Is'irvAna 
liberation.  During  the  time  of  SrAddluis  (solemn  obsequies  performed 
in  honour  of  the  manes  of  deceased  ancestors)  the  Hrahmins  purify  the 
rows  whn-e  persons  are  fed ;  so  much  so  that  the  Devas  glorify  them. 
One  mu-t  use  the  Tripundra  marks  before  one  perform  ;  any  SrUddha,  Japam 
sacrifice,  offering  oblations  or  worshipping  the  Visvedevas  ;  then 
one  gets  deliverance  from  the  jaws  of  death.  O  Narada  !  I  am  now 
speaking  further    of  the  greatness  in  holding  the  Bhasma  ;  listen, 

Here  ends  the  Twelfth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
greatness  in  holding  the  Tripundra  and  Bhasma  in  the  MahSpur^Qan  S'ri 
Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vydsa. 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

1-20.  Nar^yana  said  : — 0  Best  of  Munis  !  What  shall  I  describe  to 
you  the  effects  of  using  the  Bhasma  !  Only  applying  the  ashes  talfes  aways 
the  Mahap'Haks  (great  sins)  as  well  as  other  minor  sins  of  the  devotee. 
I  speak  this  truly,  very  truly  unto  you.  Now  hear  the  fruits  of  using 
simply  the  ashes.  By  using  Bhasma,  the  knowledge  of  Brahma  comes 
tp  the  Yatis ;  the  desires  of  eqjoy meats  are  eradicated  ;  the  improvement 


108G  l§Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

is  felt   in  all    the   virtuons  actio;is  of  the  iionsehoKlers  and  the  studies  of  th^ 
Vd^las  and    other     SSstras    of  the     Brahmacharis  get  their  increase.      The 
Siidras  get  naerits  in  usins;  Bhasmas  and  the  sins  of  others  are  destoyed.     To 
besmear    the    body    with  ashes    and  to    apply  the    curved    Tripundras    ig 
the      source       of  good   to    all    beings.     The    ^rufci    says    so.     That    this 
implies    the    performance  of  sacrifies    by  all,    is  also  asserted  in  the  SrutiS' 
To  apply  ashes  to  the  svhole  of  th^    boly  and  to  use    Tripuadra  is  common 
to    all    the  religions  ;  it  his  nothing,    id    principle,  coatr.idictory  to  others. 
So    the    S'niti   says.     This    Tripundra  and    the  besmearing    with  ashes  is 
the  special  mark  of  the  devotees  of  S'iva  ;  this  again  is  assorted  in  the  S'ruti 
This  Bhasma  and  the  Tripundra  are  the  special  marks  by  which  one  is  cha- 
racterised ;  it  is    said  so  in  the  Vaidik  Sruti.  S'iva,  Visnu,    Brahma,  ludra, 
Hiranyagarbha,  and  their  Avataras,   Varuna    and    the    whole    hose    of  the 
Devag    all    gladly  used  this  Tripundra    and  ashes,      Darga,  Laksmi,  and 
Sarasvati,    etc.,  all  the    wives  of   the  gods    daily  anoint  their    bodies     with 
ashes  and  use  the  Tripundras.     So  even  the  Yaksas,  llaksasas,  Gandharbhas 
Sidhao,    Vidyadharas,  and  the  Munis  haveapj)liei    Bhasma  and  Tripundra 
This  holding  on  of  ashes    is    not  prohibited    to  anybody  ;  the    Brahmanus, 
Ksattriyas,  Vais'yas,  S'udjas,  mixed  Cistes,  and  the    vile    classes   all   e  in 
use  this   Bhasma   and  Tripundra.     0    NSrada  !  In  my    opiniom  they  only 
are  the  Sadhus  (saints)    who  use  this  Tripundra   and  besmear  their  bodies 
with    ashes.     In    seducing    this  Lady    Mukti  (liberation    is    persionfined 
here    as    a    lady)    one  is  to  have  this  gem  of  S'iva  Liagam,  the  five  lettered 
]\Iantra    Namah  Sivaya    as   the  loving    principle,  and  holding  on   the  ashes 
as    the    charning    medicine,   (as    In    seduoing  any  ordinary    woman,    gems, 
jewels  and  ornaments,    love    and   charming     medicines    are    necessary).     O 
N4rada  !  Know  the  place  where  the  person,  who  has  besmeared  the  boly  with 
ashes  and  who  has  used  Tripundra  takes  his    food  as    where  S'ankara    and 
Sankari  have  taken  their  food  together.  Even     if  anybody  himself  not  using 
the  Bhasma,    follows  another  who  has    used  the   Bhasma,    he    will  be    soon 
honoured  in  the  society  even  if  he  a  sinner.     What  more  than  this,  if    any- 
body himself  not  using  the  ashes,    praises  another    who    uses  the    Bhasma, 
he  is  freed    from    all    his    sins    and    gets    soon  honour  and  respect  in  the 
society.     All  the  studies  of  the    Vedas    come    to    him    though  he  has  not 
studied  the  Vedas,  all  the  fruits  of  hearing  the  Srutis  and  the  Purftnas  come 
to  him,  though  he  has    not  heard  them,  all   the   fruits    of  practised  Dharma 
come  to  him  though  he  has  not  practised  any,  if  he  always  uses  this  Tripundra 
on  his  forehead  and  gives  food  to  a  beggar  who  uses  Tripundra  on  his  forehead. 
Even    in    countries    as    Bihar    (Kikata,   etc ,  that  have  got  a  bad  name) 
if  there  be  a  single  man  in  the  whole  country  whose  body  is  besmeared  with 
ashes  and  who  uses  this  Tripundra,  that  is  considered  then  as  K^s'i  (Benares 


Book  XL]  CHAPTER  XIII.  1087 

city).  Any  boJy,  of  a  bad  or  of  a  good  character,  ba  he  a  Yogi  or  a  sinner, 
using    Bhasma,    is      worshipped     like     my     son,     BrahmH.     O  NSrada  f 
Even      if  an      hypociite     uses    Bhasma,      he    will   have    a   good     future, 
which   cannot    be    attained   even    by    performing     hundreds      of   sacrifices. 
If  any    body    uses     Bhasma   daily    either    throagh     good     companion     or 
through    neglect,  he    will  be   entitled,    like    me,    to    the   highest  worship. 
O  N^radi  !    BrahmS,    Visnu,    Mahes' vara,     Parvati,     Laksmi,     Sarasvati 
and  all    the    other  Devas      become      satisfied     with    simply     holding     on 
this   Bhasma.     The    merits    that      are     obtained     by     using      only      the 
Tripundra,   cannot    be    obtained    by    gifts,  sacrifices,      severe    austerities, 
and    going    to  sacred    places    of   pilgrimages.     They    cannot     give     one- 
sixteenth   part   of  the    result    that  accrues    from    holding     the  Tripundra, 
As   a      King    recognises    a    person     as    his    own,    whom     he    has      given 
some    object   of  recognition,   ao    BhagavS^n    oankara  knows    the  man  who 
uses    Tripundras    as    His    own  person.     They  that  hold  Tripundras    with 
devotion  can  have  Bhol4  NItha  under  their  control  ;  no  distinction    is  made 
here  between    the    Brabmanas   and    ChandSlas.     Even     if  any    boJy    be 
fallen  from  the  state  of  observing    all  the  Acharas    or    rules   of     conduct 
proper  to    his  As'rama    and  if  he    be   faulty   in    not    attending   to   all  his 
duties,    he  will  be  Mukta  (freed)  if  he    has    used  even    once    this  Bhasma 
Tripundra.     Never  bother  yourself  with    the    caste    or  the  family  of     the 
holder    of  the  Tripundras.     Only  see  whether  the  sign  Tripundra   exists  in 
his    forehead.    If    so,      consider     him     entitled    to     respect.     O  Narada ! 
There  is  no  mantra  higher  than  this  Siva    Mantra  ;     there    is     no     Deity 
higher  than  Siva  ;  there  is  no  worship  of  greater   merit-giving  powers  than 
the    worship    of  biva  ;    so  there    is    no    Tirtha    superior      to  this  Bhasma, 
This    Bhasma    is   not    an    ordinary    thing ;    it    is    the      excellent     energy 
(semen    virile)   of  fire   of   the    nature    of    Rudra.     All     sorts    of  troubles 
vanish,    all  Sorts   of  sins    are   destroyed   by    this  Bhasma.     The  country 
where    the   lowest   castes   reside    with    their  bodies    besmeared  with  ashes 
isjinbabited  always  by    BhagavSn  Sankara,  Bhagavati  UmS,  the  Pramathas 
(the   attendants    of   Siva)  and   by    all    the  Tirthas.     Bhao-avan    S'ankara 
first   of  all,    held   this    Bhasma    as   an    ornament    to    his   body  by  purify- 
ing   it  first    with   "  Sadyo  Jjlta,"  etc.,  the  five  mantras.     Therefore  if  any 
body   uses  the  Bhasma  Tripundra    according    to    rules   on    his      forehead 
the   writings    written   at  the    lime    of  his    birth     by     Vidh^tS,     Brahma 
will    all   ba    cancelled,    if    they    had    been    bad.     There  is  no  doubt  in  this. 

Here  ends  the  Thirteenth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
greatness  of  Bhasma  in  the  Mahapuranara  ^ri  Mad  Devi  Bha^'avatam 
of  18,000   versos    by    Maharsi    Veda     Vy^sa. 


1086  ^r!  m.\d  dev!  bh^Igavatam. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


1-17.     Nai-^yana   saiiJ:  — "  O     Narada!  Whatever    is    given  as  charities 
to  any  man  besineare  i  with  the  h^lv  ashe?,  tike^    awiy  instantly     all  the 
sins    of  the   donor.     The   SrutirJ,    Smrits,    and    all     the       Puranas   declare 
the    greatness    of   this    Bhasma.     So    the    twice-born        must     accept  this 
Whoever    holds    this    Tripundra,     of        this      holy     ashes     at      the    three 
Sandhya   times,    is    freed    from  ail  his  sins   and  goes    to     the       region     of 
Siva.     The  Yogi    who    takes  a     bath     of     ashes       throughout    his    body 
during  the  three     Sandhyae,   gets    his    Yoga      developed    soon.     By    this 
bath    of    ashes,    many     generations     are     lifted         up.     O   Narada !    This 
ash  bath    is    many    times  superior    to    the    water         bath.     To    take    once 
a  bath    of  ashes    secures  to  one  all    the     merits      acquired  by     bathing    in 
all    the    sacred   places   of  pilgrimages.     There    is  no   doubt     in  this.     By 
this    bath    of  ashes,    all    the     Mahapataks     (great     heinous        sins)     and 
other  minor  sins  as  well  are  instantly  destroyed  as  heaps  of  wood    are  brought 
down   to    ashes    in    a    moment   by   the   fire.       No   bath    is     holier     than 
this   one.     This   is    first  mentioned    by      biva      and    He        took     Himself 
this    bath.     Since    then    this    bath    of    ashes    has  been      taken  with  great 
care  by  Brahma  and  the   other    Devas    and  the  Munis  for      their  own  good 
in   all    the    virtuous   actions.     This    bath  of  ashes   is  termed      the   bath  of 
fire.     So  he  who  applies    oshes  on  his    head,      gets    the     state     of    Rudra 
while    he   is   in   this    body   of    five   elements.     Those    who      are  delighted 
to  see   persons    with    this    ashes    on    their    bodies    are       respected  by  the 
Devas,   Asuras,    and  Munis.     He   who    honours     and     gets      up   on  seeing 
a    man    besmeared    with     ashes    is    respected  even    by    Indra,       the    Lord 
of    Heavens.     Even    if  any   body    eats    any     uneatables,     then        the    sin 
incurred   thereby    wo'nfc    touch   him,    if  his      body     be     then        besmeared 
with   ashes.     He   who   first    takes    a    water  bath    and  th^n      an    ash-bath 
be    he    a    Brahmachari    or    an   house-holder  or    an     anchorite    (Vdnapras- 
thi)  is    freed   of  all  sins  and  gets   in  the  end  the  highest  state.       Specially 
for  the  X.atis  (ascetics),  this  asb  bath  is    very  necessary.     This     ash  hath    is 
Superior   to    the    water    bath.    For    the    bonds  of       Nature,     this     pleat^ura 
and  p.iin,    are   cut     asunvler    by    this    ash     bath.     The    Munis      hcow  this 
Prakriti    as    moist    and    wet  ;  and    therefore    Prakriti  binds   men.       If  any 
body   desires    to     cat     asunder    this    bondage    of  the     body,   he      will    iinl 
no   other    remedy    for  th'a    in    the  throe  N^orlds    than  this    Holy     Bath    of 
ashes. 


Book  XL]  CHAPTER  XIV.  1089 

18-54.    Ill   ancient  days  the  ashes  were  first  offer.id  to  the  Devi  gladly 
by  the  Davas  for  their  protection,  their  good     and  purification,  when    they 
first  saw  the  ashes.     Therefore  any  body    who  bakes  this  bath  of  fire,    gets 
all  his  sins  destroyed   and  ha  goes  to   S'iva  Loka.     He  who  daily  uses  this 
ashes  has  not  to  suffer  from  the  ODuression  of  the  Raksasas,  Pis'^ehas,    Puta- 
n£i.3  and  the  other  Bhdtas  or  irom  naeaae,  leprosy,  the  chronic  enlargement  of 
spleen,  all  sorts  of  fistulae,  from  eighty  sorts  of  rheumatism,  sixty  four  kinds 
of  bilious   diseases,   twenty    two    varieties  of  phlegmatic  diseases  and    from 
fcifyerSj   thieves,    and   other  vicious  planetary  influences.     Rather    he   gets 
the     power  to    sappress   all    these  as  a  lion  kills  easily   a  mad     elephant. 
Any  body   who  first   mixes  the    ashes   with     pure  cold    water   and   then 
besmears  his  body  with  that  and  puts  on  the  Tripundras,  attains  soon  the 
Highest   Brahma.     He  who  holds  the  Trlpundra  of  ashes  becomes  sinless 
and  goes  to  the  Brahma   loka.     He  can  even    wipe  off  the  ordnances  of  the 
fate  on  his  forehead  to  go  to  the  jaws  of  Death,  if  he  uses,  according  to  the 
S'astras,  the  Tiipundras  on  his  forehead.     If  the  ashes  be  used  on  the  neck, 
then  the  sin,  incurred  through  the  neck,  is  completely  destroyed.  If  the  ashes 
be  used  on  the  neck,  then  the  sin  incurred  by  the  neck,  in  eating  uneatable 
things  is  entirely  destroyed.    If  the  ashes  be  held  on  the  arms,  then  the  sin 
incurred   by  the    urms   is   destroyed.     If  it   be   held   on   the  breast,    the 
sin  done   mentally    is  destroyed.     If   it  be    held    on    the    navel,    the    sin 
incurred   by  the  generative    organ  is   destroyed.     If    it    be    held   on    the 
anus,' then  the  sin   incurred   by  the    anus  is  destroyed.     And  if  it  be  held 
on  the  sides,  then  the  sin  incurred  in  embracing  other's  wives  is  destroyed. 
So,  know  fully,  to  use  ashes    is    highly  commendable.     Everywhere    three 
curved  lines    of  ashes    are     to    be    used.        Know   these    three    lines   as 
BrahmS.,  Vi§nu  and    Mahes'a  ;   Daksin^gni,  GArhapatya   fire  and    Ahava- 
niva   fire  j  the  Sattva,     Rajas   and    Tamas  qualities.     Heaven,  earth    and 
Patala  (nether  region?).     If  the  wise  Brahmin    holds    properly    the  ashes 
his  Mahapatakas  are  destroyed.     He  is  not   involved  in    any  sin.     Rather 
he,  without  any  questionings,   gets    his  liberation.     All    the    sins,    in   the 
body  besmeared   with  ashe^,  are  burnt   down    by  the    ashes,    which    is  of 
the  nature    of  fire,    into    ashes.      He    is    o  tiled    Bhasmanistha    (a   devotee 
of  Bhasma  i.  e.    ashes)  who    tabes   a    bath    of  ashes,    who   besmears    his 
boly   with    ashes,   who     u^e       the    Tripundras    of  ashes,    who  sleeps   in 
ashes?:        He    is   called  also    Atmanlstha    (a  devotee  of  Atman  (Self).     At 
the  approach    of    such  a   man,    the    Demons,  Pis'&cbas,   and    very  serious 
diseases  run  away  to  a  distance.     There  is  no  doubt  in  this.    In  as  much  as 
these  ashes  reveal  the   knowledge    of  Brahma,   it    is    called    Bhasita   from 
Bhasma,  to  shine  ;  because  it  eats  up  the  sins,  it  is  called  Bhasma  ;  because 
it  iocreases  the   eight    supernatural       power;?    AnimEi,  etc.,  it   is  called 

137 


1090  ^RI  MA.D  DEVt   BHAgHVATAM. 


i 


Bhuti  ;  b3cius3  it  proteeis  the  man  who  uses  it,  it  is  called  "  Rak§a." 
As  thg  siQS  are  all  destroyed  by  the  mere  remembrance  of  Bhagavan 
Rudra,  so  seeing  the  person  using  the  Tripundra,  the  demons,  bad  spirits 
and  other  vicious  hosts  of  spirits  fly  away  quickly,  trembling  with  fear. 
As  a  fire  burns  a  great  forest  by  its  own  strength,  S3  this  bath  of  ashes 
burns  the  sins  of  those  who  are  incessantly  addicted  to  sins.  Even  if 
at  the  time  of  death  one  takes  a  bath  of  ashes,  though  he  has  com- 
mitted an  inordinate  amount  of  vices,  all  his  sins  are  soon  destroyed.  By 
this  bath  ashes,  the  Self  is  purified,  the  anger  is  destroyed  ;  the  senses 
are  calmed  down.  The  man  who  uses  even  once  this  Bhasma  comes  to  Me; 
he  has  not  to  take  any  more  births  in  future.  On  Monday  AmSvasycl  (also 
on  the  full  moon  day)  if  one  sees  the  S'iva  Lingam,  with  his  body 
besmeared  all  over  with  ashes,  one's  sins  will  all  be  destroyed.  (All  the 
sins  are  not  seen  ;  hence  the  tithi  is  called  Amavas.)  If  people  use 
Bhasma  daily,  all  their  desires  will  be  fructified  whether  they  want 
longevity,  or  prosperity  or  Mukti.  The  Tripundra  that  represents 
Brahma,  Visnu  and  S'iva  is  very  sacred.  Seeing  the  man  with  Tripundra 
on.  the  fierce  R^ksasas  or  mischievous  creatures  flee  to  a  distance.  There 
is  no  doubt  in  this.  After  doing  the  S'aucha  (necessary  cleanliness)  and 
other  necessary  things,  one  bathes  in  pure  cold  water  and  besmears  his 
body  with  ashes  from  head  to  foot.  By  taking  the  water  bath  only,  the 
outward  unclean  things  are  destroyed.  But  the  ash  bath  not  only  cleanse 
thq  outer  external  uncleanliness  but  cleanse  also  all  the  internal 
uneleanliness.  So  even  if  one  does  not  take  t^e  water  bath,  one 
ought  to  take  this  ash  bath,  There  is  to  be  no  manner  of  doubt  in 
this. 

44-47.  All  the  religious  actions  performad  without  this  ash  bath 
seem  as  if  no  actions  are  done  at  all.  This  ash  bath  is  stated  in  the 
Vedas.  Its  another  name  is  the  Fire  Bath.  By  this  ash  bath  both 
outside  and  inside  are  purified.  So  a  man  who  uses  ashes  gets  the 
entire  fruit  of  worshipping  S'iva.  By  the  water  Bath  only  the  outside 
dirt  is  removed ;  but  by  this  bath  of  ashes,  outside  dirts  and  inside  dirt?, 
both  are  fully  removed.  If  this  water  bath  be  taken  many  times  daily, 
still  without  an  ash  bath,  one's  heart  is  not  purified.  What  more  shall 
I  speak  of  the  greatness  of  ashes,  the  Vedas  only  appreciate  its  glories 
rightly  !  Yea,  very  rightly  I 

43-50.     Or  Mahcl  Deva,   the  Gem  of  all  the  Devas,  knows    the   great 
nes3  of  this  Bhasma.       Those   who   perform   rites   and    works-  prescrib3d 


Book  Xi.J  CHAPTER  XV.  1091 

by  the  Vedas,  without  taking  this  bath  of  ashes,  do  not  get  even  a 
tithe  of  the  fruits  of  their  works  done.  Only  that  man  will  be  entitled  to 
the  entir*  fruits  of  the  Vedas  who  perform  this  bath  of  ashes  duly.  Thia 
IS  the  opinion  of  the  Vedas.  This  bath  of  ashes  purifies  more  the  things 
that  are  already  pure  ;  thus  the  l^ruti  says.  That  wretch  who  does  not 
take  the  bath  of  ashes  as  aforesaid  is  a  Great  Sinner.  There  is  no  doubt 
in  this.  By  this  bath  greater  interminable  merits  accrue  than  what 
is  obtained  by  innumerable  baths  taken  by  the  Brahmanas  on  the 
Varuni  momentous  occasion.  So  take  this  bath  carefully  in  the  morning, 
mid-day  and  evening.  This  bath  of  ashes  is  ordained  in  the  Vedas. 
So  know  those  who  are  against  this  bath  mentioned  in  the  Vedas,  are 
verily  fallen!  After  evacuating  oneself  of  one's  urine  and  faeces,  one 
ought  to  take  this  bath  of  nshes.  Otherwise  men  will  not  be  purified. 
Even  if  one  performs  duly  the  water  bath  and  if  one  does  not  take  this 
bath  of  ashes,  that  man  will  not  be  purified.  So  he  cannot  get  any 
right  to  do  any  religious  actions.  After  evacuating  one's  abdomen 
of  the  outgoing  air,  after  yawning,  after  holding  sexual  intercourses, 
after  spitting  and  sneezing,  and  after  easinsr  oneself  of  phlegm,  one  ought 
to  take  this  bith  of  ashes.  O  Narada  !  Thus  I  have  described  to  you 
here  the  greatness  of  Sri  Bhasma.  I  am  again  telling  you  more  of  it 
specially.     Listen  attentively. 

Here  ends  the  Fourteenth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
greatness  in  holding  the  Bibhuti  (ashes)  in  the  Mahapuranam  Sri  Mad 
Pevi    Bhagavatam  of   18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vy^sa. 


CHAPTER    XV. 

1-10.  Nar^yana  said  : — Only  the  twice  born  are  to  take  this  Tripun- 
dra  on  the  forehead  and  the  other  parts  of  the  body  after  .carefully  purifying 
the  ashes  by  the  mantra  Agniriti  Bhasma,  etc.  The  Brahmans,  Ksattriyas, 
and  Vaia  yas  are  known  as  the  twiceborn,  (the  Dvijas).  So  the  Dvijas  ought 
to  take  daily  this  Tripundra  with  great  care.  O  Br^hmana  !  Those  who  are 
purified  with  the  ceremony  of  the  holy  thread,  are  called  the  Dvijas.  For 
these  the  taking  of  Tripundra  as  per  5ruti  is  very  necessary.  V^Tthout  taking 
this  Vibhuti,  any  good  work  done  is  as  it  were  not  done.  There  is 
no  doubt  in  this.  Even  the  japam  of  Oayatri  is  not  well  performed  if 
this  Bhasma  be  not  used.  O  Best  of  Munis  I  The  GSyatri  is  the  most 
important  and  the  chief  thing  of  the  Brahmanhood.  But  that  is  not 
advised  if  the   Tripundra  be  not  taken.     O  Munis  !     As   long   as  the  ashes 


^1 


1092  ^RI  MAD  DEVt  BHAGAVTAM, 

born  of  Agni  are  not  applied  on  the  forehead,  one  Is  not  entitled  to  be  iDitiated 
in  the  GSyatri  Mantra.  O  Brahman  !  Unless  ashes  be  applied  on  the 
forehead,  no  one  will  recognise  you  as  a  Bruhmaua.  For  this  reason 
I  take  this  holding  of  the  merit-giving  Tripundra  as  the  cause  of  the 
i?>rahmanhood.  I  speak  this  verily  unto  you,  that  he  is  recognised 
as  a  Biahmana  and  literary  on  whose  forehead  there  is  seen  the  white 
ashes  purified  by  the  mantra.  He  is  entitled  to  the  state  of  a  Bi-ahm.xna 
who  is  naturally  very  eager  to  collect  the  ashes  as  he  collects  the  invaluable 
gemg  and  jewels. 

11-20.  Those  who  are  not  naturally  eager  to  collect  the  Bhasma 
as  they  are  naturally  eager  to  collect  gems  and  jewels,  are  to  be 
known  as  Chandalas  in  some  of  their  previous  birth?.  Those  who  are 
not  naturally  joyous  in  holding  Tripundra,  were  verily  Chandahs  in 
their  previous     births.  ;  This    I    tell   you   truly  very  truly. 

Those  who  eat  roots  and  fruits  without  holding  ashes  go  to  the 
terrible  helb.  '•  He  who  worships  ^iva  without  having'  Bibhuti'^on 
his  forehead,  that  wretch  is  a  S  iva  hater  and  goes  to  hell  after  his 
death.  He  who  does  not  hold  Bibhuti  is  not  entitled  to  any 
religious  act." 

Without  taking  Bibhuti,  if  you  make  a  gift  of  Tula  Purusa  made 
of  gold,  you  won't  get  any  fruits.  Rather  you  will  have  to  go 
to    hell! 

As  the  Br^hmanas  are  not  to  perform  their  Sandhy^s  without  their 
holy  threads,  so  without  this  Bibhuti,  one  ought  not  also  to  perform  one's 
SandhyS. 

If  at  times  a  man  by  chance  has  no  holy  thread,  he  can  do  his  Sandhyi 
by  muttering  the  Gdyatri  or  by  fasting.  But  there  is  no  such  rule  in 
holding  Bhasma. 

If  one  performs  SandhyS,  without  having  any  Vibhuti,  he  is 
liable  to  incur  a  sin  ;  as  without  holding  this  Bhasma,  no  right  can  come 
to   him  to  perform  his   SandhyS. 

As  a  man  oi  a  lowest  caste  acts  contrary  and  incurs  ft  sin  if  he 
hears  the  Veda  mantra,  so  a  twice-born  incurs  a  sin  if  he  performs 
Sandhy^  without  having  his  Tripundra.  The  twiceborn  must  therefore  collect 
his  thoughts  with  his  heart  intent  on  this  Tripundra  whether  it  be  according 
to  Srauta  or  SmSrta  method — or  in  absence  thereof  the  Laukika  Bhasma. 
Of  whatsoever  sort  is  the  Bhasma,  it  is  always  pure.  In  the  San- 
dhyft  and  other  actions  of  worship,  the  twiceborn  ought  to  be  very  pareful 
and  panobilious  in   asing  this  Bbasmai 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  XV.  1093 

21-31.  No  siQ  can  enter  into  the  body  of  one  besmeared  with  ashes. 
For  this  reason,  the  Br^hnaina^  ought  always  to  use  ashes  with 
great  care.  Oiia  is  to  hold  the  Tripundra,  six  Angulas  high  or  greater 
by  the  fore,  miJdb  aud  ring  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  If  any 
body  uses  Tripaadra,  shining  and  brilliant,  and  extending  from  eye  to 
eye,  he  bseoma',  no  doubt,  a  Rudra.  The  ring-finger  is-  the  letter 
'*  A,  "  the  middle  finger  is  "  U  "  and  the  fiorefinger  is  '•  M  ";  so  the 
Tripundra  marks  drawn  by  the  above  three  fingers  is  of  the  nature 
of  the  three  gaiiis.  The  Tripundra  should  be  drawn  by  the  middle, 
fore,  and  ring  fingers  in  a  reverse  way  (from  the  left  of  the  forehead 
to  its  right).  I  will  now  tell  you  an  anecdote,  very  ancient.  Listen. 
Once  Durv^sl,  the  heid  of  the  ascitic-^,  with  his  body  besmeared 
with  ashes  and  with  lludislksam,  all  over,  on  his  body  went  to  the 
region  of  the  Pitris,  uttering  loudly  '^  O  S'ankira,  of  the  Form  of  All  !  O 
S'iva  1  O  Mother  Jagadambe,  the  Source  of  all  auspiciousnesa  I  The 
Pitris  Kavya-VaUs,  etc ,  (Kavya  V^lanalah  Somali  Yamah  sehaiva- 
ryam^^  Tath^,  Agnisvslstva,  Varhisadah,  Somapah  Pitri  Devat^h)  got 
up,  received  him  heartily  and  gave  hitn  seats  and  shewed  him  groat 
honours  and  respect  and  held  many  pure  conversations  with  the  Muni. 
During  their  talk,  the  sinners  of  the  Kumbhipaka  hell  were  crying 
"  Oh  !  Alas  I  We  are  killed,  we  are  being  killed  "  Oh  !  We  are 
being  burnt ! ;  some  othevs  cried  "  Oh  !  Oh  !  Wo  are  cut  down." 
Thus    various   cries  and   lamentations    reached    their  ears. 

32-4(0.  Hearing  their  piteous  cries,  Durv^sS,  the  prince  of  the 
Risis,  asked  with  a  grievous  heart  the  Pitris  "  Who  are  those  crying?" 
The  Pitris  replied  : — There  is  a  city  close  to  our  place  called  "  Sam- 
yamani  Puri "  of  the  King  Yama  where  the  sinners  are  punished, 
Yama  gives  punishment  to  the  sinners  there.  O  Sinless  One  !  In  that 
city  the  King  Yama  lives  with  his  terrible  black-coloured  messengers, 
the  personifications  of  Kala  (the  Destruction).  For  the  punishment 
of  the  sinners,  eighty- six  hells  exist  there.  The  place  is  being 
guarded  always  by  the  horrible  messengers  of  Yama,  Out  of  those 
hells,  the  hell  named  Knmbhipaka  is  very  big  and  that  is  the  chief 
of  the  hells.  The  ailings  and  torments  of  the  sinners  in  the  Kumbhipaka 
hell  cannot  be  described  in  hundred  years.  O  Muni  !  The  Siva-haters, 
tho  Visnu-haters,  the  Devi-haters  are  made  to  fall  to  this  Kunda. 
Those  who  find  fault  with  the  Vedas,  and  blame  the  Sun,  Ganes'a  and 
tyrannise  the  Brtthmanas  fall  down  to  thii  hell.  Those  who  blame  their 
mothers,  fathers,  Gurus,  elder  brothers,  the  Smritis  and  PurSnas  and  those 
w  well  who  take  tho  Tapta  Mudr&s  (hot  marks    on  their  bodies)  and 


1094  SRt  MAD  DEVi  BHAgAVATAM. 

Tapfca   ^lilas  (/'.    e.^    those    who   being    Saivas    act   as   they    like)    those 
who  blame  the  religion    (Dharma)  go   down    to  that  hell. 

41-50.  We  hear  constantly  their  loud  piteous  cries,  very  painful 
te  hear ;  hearing  which  naturally  gives  rise  to  feelings  of  indifference 
(Vairlgyatn)."  Hearing  the  above  words  of  the  Pitris,  Dirrv^sa,  the 
prince  of  the  Munis,  went  to  the  hell  to  see  the  sinners.  O  Muni! 
Going  there,  the  Muni  bent  his  head  downwards  and  saw  thesmneis 
when,  instantly  the  sinners  began  to  enjoy  pleasures  more  than  those  who 
enjoy  in  the  Heavens.  The  sinners  became  exceedingly  glad.  Some  began  to 
sing,  some  began  to  dance,  some  began  to  huigh  some  sinners  began  to 
play  one  with  o^e  another  in  great  ecstacy.  The  musical  instruments 
Mridanga,  Muraji,  lute,  Dh:kka,  Dundubhis,  etc.,  resounded  with 
s.voet  sonorous  tones  (in  accordance  with  five  resonints).  The  sweet 
fragrant  smell  of  the  flowerj  of  Vasanti  creepsers  spread  ail  round. 
Durvasa  Muni  became  surprised  to  see  all  this.  The  messengers  of 
Yaraa  were  startled  and  immeliately  went  to  their  King  Yama  and 
said  :— '■  O  Lord  !  Our  King  1  A  wondrous  event  ofjcurred  lately.  The 
sinners  in  the  Kumbhip&ka  hell  are  now  enjoying  pleasures  more  than 
those  in  the  Heavens.  O  Bibhu  !  How  can  this  take  place  !  Wo 
cannot  make  out  the  ciuse  of  this.  O  Deva  !  We  all  have  become 
terrified  and  have  coma  to  you.  Hearing  the  words  of  the  messengers, 
DharmarSji,  mDunting  on  his  great  bufflao,  came  there  instantly  and 
seeing  the  state  of  the  sinners  sent  news  immediately  to  the 
Heavens. 

51-60.  Hearing  the  news  Indra  came  there  with  all  the  Devas 
Brahma  came  there  from  His  Brahmaloka ;  and  Narayana  came  there 
from  Vaikuntha.  Heariug  this,  the  regents  of  the  quarters,  the 
Dikp^las  came  there  with  all  their  attendants  from  their  respective 
abodes.  They  all  came  there  to  the  Kumbhipaka  hell  and  saw  that 
all  the  beings  there  are  enjoying  greater  pleasures  than  those  in  the 
Heavens.  They  all  were  astonished  to  see  this ;  acd  they  could  not 
make  out  why  this  had  happened.  "What  a  wonder  is  this  ! This 
Kunda  has  been  built  for  the  punishment  of  the  sinners.  When 
Bueb  a  pleasure  is  now  being  felt  here,  the  people  wo'nt  fear  any- 
thing henceforth  to  commit  sins.  Why  is  this  order  of  the  Vedaa 
created  by  God  reversed  ?  Why  has  God  undone  His  own  doing  ? 
What  a  wonder  is  this !  Now  a  great  miracle  is  before  our  sight^ 
"Thus  speaking,  they  remained  at  a  fix.  They  could  not  make  out 
the  cause  of  this.  In  the  meanwhile  Bhagavan  N^r^yana  after 
oonsulting   with  the  other  Devas  went   with  sonje  Peyas   to   the  abode  of 


Book  XL]  CHAPTER  XV.  1095 

Sankara  in  Kailas'a.  They  saw  there  that  Sri  Bhagavan  S'ankara  (with 
crescent  of  the  Moon  on  His  forehead)  was  playing  there  attended  always 
by  the  Pramathas  and  adorned  with  various  ornaments  like  a  youth,  sixteen 
years  old.  His  parts  of  the  body  were  very  beautiful  as  if  the  mine 
of  loveliness.  He  was  conversing  on  various  delightful  subjects  with 
His  consort-  Pslrvati  and  pleasing  Her  mind.  The  four  Vedas  were 
there  personified.  Seeing  Him,  N^rayana  bowed  down  and  informed 
him   clearly   of  all   the    wonderful   events.     He    said : — 

61-75.  "  0  Djva !  What  is  the  cause  of  all  this?  M''e  cannot 
make  out  anything  !  O  Lord  !  Thou  art  omniscient.  Thou  knowest  every- 
thing. So  kindly  mention  how  is  this  brought  about  I"  Hearing  Visnu's 
words.  Bhagav&n  S'ankara  spoke  graciously  in  sweet  words,  grave  as  the 
rumbling  of  a  rain-cloud  :  "  O  Visnu  !  Hear  the  cause  of  this.  What 
wonder  is  there  ?  This  is  all  due  to  the  greatness  of  Bhasma  (ashes)  ! 
"What  cannot  be  brought  about  by  Bhasma  I  The  great  S'aiva  Durv^s^ 
went  to  see  the  Kumlbipaka  hell,  bes.neariug  his  whole  body  with 
Bhasma  and  looked  downwards  while  he  was  looking  at  the  sinners. 
At  that  time,  accidentally  a  particle  of  Bhasma  from  his  forehead 
was  blown  by  air  to  the  bodies  of  the  sinners  in  the  hell.  Thereby 
they  were  freed  of  their  sins  and  they  got  so  much  pleasure  I 
Such  is  the  greatness  of  Bhasma  I  Henceforth  the  Kumbhjpaka  will 
no  more  be  a  hell.  It  will  be  a  Tiitha  (holy  place  of  pilgrimage) 
of  tha  residents  of  the  Pitrilokas.  Whoever  will  bathe  there  will  be 
very  happy.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  Its  name  will  be  henceforth 
the  Pitri  Tivtha. 

O  Sattama  !  My  Lingam  and  the  form  of  Bhagavati  ought  to  be 
placed  there.  The  inhabitants  of  the  Pitri  Loka  would  worship  them.  This 
will  be  the  best  of  all  the  Tirthas  extant  in  the  three  Lokas.  And 
if  the  Pitris'vafi  there  be  worshipped,  know  that  the  worship  of  the  Triloki 
is  done.  Narjiyana  said: — Hearing  thus  the  words  of  Sankara, 
the  Deva  of  the  Devas,  He  thanked  Him  and,  taking  His  permission 
came  to  the  Devas  and  informed  them  of  everything  what  Sankara 
had  said.  Hearing  this,  the  Devas  nodded  their  heads  and  said  "Sadhu 
(well,  very  well))"  and  began  to  glorify  the  greatness  of  Bhasma.  O 
Tormenter  of  the  enemies  !  Hari,  Brahm3  and  the  other  Devas  began 
to  eulogise  the  glories  of  ashes.  The  Pitris  became  very  glad  to  get 
a  new  Tirtha.  The  Devas  planted  a  S'iva  Lingam  and  the  forna 
of  the  Devi  on  the  banks  of  the  new  Tirtha,  and  began  to  worship 
them  regularly  day  by  day.  The  sinners  that  were  there  suffering,  all 
ascended  on  the  celestial  chariot  and  got  up  to  Kailaaa.  Even  to»day  they  are 


1098  SRt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

all  dwelling  in  Kail^sa  and  are  known  by  the  name    of  the  Bhadras.     The 
hell  Kumbhipaka  came  to  be  built  afterwards  in  another  place. 

76-84.     Since   that   day    the    Davas  did   not  allow    any  other  devotee 
of    Siva    to    go   to   the    newly    created  hell    Kumbhipaka.    Thus    I   have 
described   to  you    the  excellent  greatness  of  the  Bhasma.    O  Muni  !  What 
more  can  there  be  than  the  glories  of  the  Bhasma  !  O  Best  of  Munis  !  Now 
1  am  telling  you  of  the  usage  of  Urdhapundra  (the  vertical  marks)  according 
to  the   proper    province  of  the     devotees.     Listen.       I    will    now     speak 
what    I    have  ascertained    from    the   study    of  the    Vaisnava    oastras,  the 
measure  of   Urdhapundra,   according     to     the  Anguli    measurements,  the 
colour,  mantra,  Devat^  and  the  fr'iits  thereof.     Hear.     The  earth  required 
is   to   be   secured   from    the   crests  of  hills,    the  banks    of  the  river3,  thg 
place    of  i^iva    (Siva  KjeUram),   the  ocean  beaches,    the  ant-hill,  or  from 
the   roots    of  the  Tulasi   plants.    The  earth    is   not    to     be  had  from  any 
other   places.     The  black  coloured    earth  brings    in  peace,    the  red-colour 
earth   brings   in    powers  to  bring  another    to  one's   control  ;  the   yellow- 
coloured    earth     increases   prosperity ;     and     the      white-coloured   earth 
gives    Dharma    (religion).     If    the       Urdhapundra     be    drawn    by    the 
thumb,    nourishment   is    obtained  ;  if  it   he   drawn    by  the  middle  finger, 
longevity    is   increased  ;  if  it    be   drawn   by  nameless  or   ring  finger,  food 
is   obtained  and  if  it  be  drawn  by  the  fore  finger,  liberation  is  attained.  So 
the  l)^rdhapundras  ought  to    be  drawn  by  these  fingers,    only    be    careful 
to    see    that    the    nails    do    not  touch   at  the  time  of  making  the  markt 
The    shape    of    the  Urdhapundra  (the   vertical  mark  or  sign  on  the  fore- 
head) is  like  a  flame  or  like    the    opening    bud    of  a    lotus,    or    like    the 
leaf  of  a  bamboo,  or  like  a  fish,  or  like  a  tortoise  or  like  a    conch-shell. 

85-95.  The  Urdhapundra,  ten  Angulis  high  is  the  super  best; 
nine  Angulis  high,  is  best ;  eight  Angulis  high,  is  good ;  the 
middling  Urdhapundra  is  of  three  kinds  as  it  is  of  seven  Angulas, 
six  Angulas,  or  five  Angulas.  The  lowest  Urdhapurdra  is  again  of 
three  kinds  as  it  is  four  Angulas,  three  Angulas  or  two  Angulas  high. 
On  the  Urdhapundra  of  the  forehead,  you  must  meditate  Kes'ava, 
on  the  belly  you  must  think  of  Narjyana  ;  on  the  heart,  you  must 
meditate  on  Madhava ;  and  on  the  neck,  you  mush  meditate  on 
Govinda.  So  on  the  right  side  of  the  bally,  you  must  meditate 
on  Madhusudana  ;  on  the  roots  of  the  ears,  on  Trivikrama  ;  on  the  left 
belly,  on  VSmana  ;  on  the  arms,  on  ^ridhara  ;  on  the  ears,  Hrisikes'a;  on 
the  back,  Pailmandbha ;  on  the  shoulders  Dfimcdara ;  and  on  the 
head    Brahmarandhra  you  must  meditate  on   Vasudeva      Thus  the  twelve 


Book  Xt.]  CHAPTER  IV.  1097 

names  are  to  be  meditated,  la  the  morning  or  in  the  evening  time  when 
you  are  going  to  make  the  Puj^L  or  Homa,  you  are  to  take  duly, 
sin^le-in-intent,  the  above  names  and  make  the  marks  of  urdhapundras. 
Any  man,  with  tFrdhapundra  on  his  head,  is  always  pure,  whether 
ho  be  impure,  or  of  unrighteous  conduct  or  whether  he  commits  a  sin 
mentally.  Wherever  he  dies,  he  comes  to  My  Abode  even  if  he  be 
of  a  Chandali  caste.  My  devotees  (  Vira  Vaisnavas  or  MahSvira 
Vaisnavas)  who  know  My  Nature  must  keep  an  empty  space  between 
the  two  lines  of  "Grdhapundra  of  the  form  of  the  Visnupada  (the  feet 
of  Visnu)  and  those  who  are  my  best  devotees  are  to  use  nice 
t^rdhapundras,  made  of  turmeric  powder,  of  the  size  of  a  spear  (Sula), 
of  the   form   of  the  feet  of   Visnu   (Visgu  padah). 

96.  The  ordinary  Vaisnavas  are  to  use  with  Bhakti,  the 
Ordhapundras  without  any  empty  space,  but  the  form  of  it  is  to  be 
like  a  flame,  the  blosson  of  a  lily  or  like  a  bamboo  leaf. 

97-110.  Those  who  are  Vaisnavas  in  name  only  can  use  Urdhapundra 
of  both  the  kinds,  with  or  without  any  empty  space.  They  incur 
no  sin  if  they  use  one  without  an  empty  space.  But  those  who  are 
My  good  devotees,  incur  sin  it  they  do  not  keep  an  empty  space  between 
the  two  vertical  lines  {in  the  Urdhapundra  three  vertical  lines  are 
used).  The  Vaisnavas  who  use  excellent  vertical  rod  like  Urdhapundras 
keeping  an  empty  space  in  the  middle  and  uttering  the  mantra  "Kesv&ya 
Namal^"  build  My  Temple  there.  In  the  beautiful  middle  space  of 
Urdhapundra,  the  Undeeaying  Visnu  is  playing  with  Laksmi.  That 
wretch,  the  twioe-born  who  uses  Undhapundra  without  any  empty 
space  kills  Visnu  and  Laksmi,  seated  there.  The  stupid  who  uses 
Urdhapundra  without  a  vacant  space  goes  successively  to  twenty-one 
hells.  The  Urdhapundra  should  be  of  the  size  of  a  clear  straight  rod, 
lotus,  flame,  a  fish  with  sharp  straight  edges  and  with  vacant  spaces 
between  them.  O  Great  Muni  !  The  Brahmana  should  always  use 
the  Tripundra  like  the  lock  of  hair  on  the  crown  of  his  head  and  like 
his  SacriScal  tharead ;  otherwise  all  his  actions  will  be  fruitless.  Therefore 
in  all  ceremonies  and  actions  the  Brahmanas  ought  to  use  Urdhapundras  of 
the  form  of  a  trident,  a  circle  or  of  a  square  form.  The  Brahmana  who 
knows  the  Vedas  is  never  to  use  the  semi-moonlike  mark  (Tilak)  on 
his  head.  The  man  who  is  of  the  Brahmin  caste  and  follows  the  path 
of  the  Vedas  should  not  even  by  mistake  use  any  other  mark  than  those 
above-mentioned.  Other  sorts  of  pundras  (marks)  that  are  mentioned  in 
other  Vaisnava  Sastras  for  the  attainment  of  fame,  beauty,  etc.,  the 
Veda-knowing  BrShmanas  should  not  use  them.  The  Vaidik  Br&hmanas 
should  not  use  even  in  error  any  other  Tilaks  than  the  ourved^Tripundras. 

138 


1098  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BhAgAVATAM. 

If,  out   of  delusion,   the  man,  following  the  path  of  the  Vedas,  uses  other 
sorts  of  Tripundras,  he  would  certainly  go  down  to  hell. 

111-118.  The  Veda-knowing  Brahmanas  would  certainly  go  down 
to  hell  if  they  use  other  sorts  of  Tripundras  on  their  bodies.  Only 
the  Tilakas,  prescribed  in  the  Vedaa  ought  to  be  used  by  those  who  are 
devoted  to  the  Vedas.  Those  who  do  not  observe  the  duties  of  the 
Vedas  would  use  Tilaks  approved  of  by  other  Sastras.  Those  should 
use  marks  approved  of  by  the  Vedas  whose  Deity  is  that  of  the  Vedas. 
Those  who  follow  the  Tantra  oastras  different  from  the  Vedas,  should  use 
marks  approved  of  by  the  Tantras. 

Mah4  Deva  is  the  Veda's  Deity — anl,  ready  to  deliver  from  the 
bondages  of  the  world.  He  has  prescribed  the  Tilakas  prescibed  in  the  Vedas 
for  the  benefit  of  the  devotees.  The  marks  prescribed  by  Vi§nu,  also 
a  Deity  of  the  Vedas,  are  also  those  of  the  Vedas.  His  other  Avataras  also 
use  marks  approved  of  by  the  Vedas.  The  Tripundras  and  the  besmearing 
of  the  body  with  ashes  are  according  to  the  Vedas.  In  the  Tantra  S'astra 
different  from  the  Vedas,  there  is  the  usage  of  Tripundra  and  other  marks. 
But  they  are  not  to  be    used  by  the  Vaidiks.  No  never. 

Those  who  follow  the  path  of  the  Vedas  should  use  the  curved  Tripundras 
and  Bhasma  on  their  foreheads  according  to  the  rules  prescribed  in 
the   Vedas. 

He  who  has  obtained  the  highest  state  of  Narayana  i.  <?.,  who  has 
realised  My  Nature,  ought  to  use  always  on  their  foreheads  iSfila 
marks   scented     with   fragrant  sandalpaste. 

Here  ends  the  Fifteenth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
rules  of  using  the  Tripundra  and  Urdhapundra  marks  in  the  Mahapuranam 
^ri  Mad  Devi    BhSgavatam  of  18,000    verses    by  Maharsi  Veda   VySsa. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

1-24.  Narayana  said: — Now  I  am  speaking  of  the  very  holy  Sandhyo- 
p^san^  (method  of  Sandhya  worship  of  Gayatri,  the  Presiding  Deity  of  the 
morning,  mid-day  and  evening,  and  of  the  twice- born.  Listen.  The  greatness 
of  using  Bhasma  has  been  described  in  detail.  No  further  need  be  stated  on 
the  subject.  I  shall  talk,  first  of  all,  of  the  morning  Sandhyft.  The 
mornins:  Sandhy^  is  to  be  done  early  in  the  morning  while  the  stars 
are  visible.  When  the  Sun  is  in  the  meridian,  the  mid-day  Sandhy& 
is   to   be    performed  ;   and    while    the  Sun   is    visibly    going     down,   the 


Book  XL]  CHAPTER  XVI.  1099 

evening  Sandhy^  is  to  ba  recited  over  .  Now  again,  the  distinctions  are 
made  in  the  above  three  Sandby^s: — The  morning  SandhyS  with  stars  seen 
is  the  best ;  with  stars  disappeared,  middling ;  and  with  the  Sun 
risen  above  the  horizon-inferior.  So  the  evening  Sandhya,  again,  i^ 
of  three  kinds:  — best,  middling,  and  inferior.  When  the  Sun  is  visibly 
disappearing,  the  evening  Sandhya  is  the  best ;  when  the  Sun  has 
gone  down  the  horizon,  it  is  middling  and  when  the  stars  are 
visible,  it  is  inferior.  The  BrShmanas  are  the  root  of  the  Tree,  the 
SandhyS,  Vandanam  ;  the  Vedas  are  the  branches ;  the  religious  actions 
are  the  leaves.  Therefore  its  root  should  be  carefully  preserved.  If 
the  root  be  cut,  no  branches  or  leaves  of  the  tree  will  remain.  That 
BrShmana  who  knows  not;his  SandhyS  or  who  does  not  perform  the  Sandh- 
yas  is  a  living  Sudra.  That  BrShmana  after  his  death  verily  becomes  a 
dog.  Therefore  the  Sandhy^s  must  be  observed  every  day.  Otherwise 
no  right  comes  at  all  to  do  any  action.  At  the  sanrise  and  the  sunset  the 
time  for  SacdhyA  is  two  Dacdas  (48  minutes)  and  if  Sandhy^  be 
not  done  or  rather  neglected  in  the  interval,  the  Pr^yaa'chitta  (penance)  is 
to  be  paid  daly  (performed  duly).  If  the  proper  time  for  Sandhya, 
expire?,  one  more  offering  of  Arghya  is  to  be  made  in  addition  to 
the  three  Arghayas  daily  made  *.  or  the  Gayatri  is  to  be  repeated 
one  hundred  and  eight  times  before  the  Sandhy^  is  commenced.  In  which- 
ever time  any  action  ought  to  be  done,  worship,  first  of  all,  the  SandhyTi 
Devi,  the  Presiding  Deity  of  that  time  and  do  the  actions  proper 
to  that  time  afterwards.  The  Sandhyd  performed  in  dwelling  houses 
is  ordinary;  the  Sandhyd  done  in  enclosures  of  c^ws  is  middling  and 
on  the  banks  of  the  rivers  is  good  and  the  Sandhyil  performed  before 
the  Devi's  temple  or  the  Devi's  seat  is  very  excellent.  The  SandhyopS.- 
sana  ought  to  be  done  before  the  Devi,  because  that  is  the  worship 
of  the  very  Devi.  The  three  Sandhyas  done  befora  the  Devi  give 
infinitely  excellent  fruits.  There  is  no  other  work  of  the  Brahmanas 
better  than  this  SandhyS.  One  can  rather  avoid  worshipping  Siva  or 
Visnu  ;  because  that  is  not  daily  done  as  obligatory  ;  but  the  Sandhyo- 
pfisanS.  ought  to  be  done  daily.  The  G&yatri  of  the  Great  Devi  is 
the  Essence  of  all  the  mantras  in  the  Vedas.  In  the  Veda  SSstras, 
the  worship  of  Gayatri  is  most  definitely  pronounced.  BrahmS,  and 
the  other  Devas  meditate  in  the  Sandhy^  times  on  this  Devi  G3yatrt  and 
make  a  japam  of  that.  The  Vedas  ahvays  make  japams  of  Her. 
For  this  reason  the  Gayatri  has  been  mentioned  as  the  object  of  worship 
by  the  Vedas.  The  Brahmanas  are  called  S^ktas  inasmuch  as 
they  worship  the  Primal  Sakti  (Force)  GSyatri,  the  Mother  of  the 
Vedas.     They   are   not   Saivaa  nor  Vai?navas. 


1100  SrI  mad  devI  bhAgavatam. 

Firstly  make  the  ordinary  Achaman  three  time?,  and,  while  inhaling, 
drink  a  little  of  the  water  of  Achaman,  repeating  "  Om  Kes'avava 
Svaha,  Ooi  NSrayanaya  Sv^hS,  Om  Madhavaya  Svah§.  Then  wash 
yoar  two  hands,  repeating  "  Om  Gobindaya  Nauiah,  Om  Visnave 
Namah."  Then  by  the  root  of  the  thumb  rub  the  lips  repeating 
*' Om  Madhu  sudanaya  Numah,  Om  Trivikraraaya  Namah."  So  rub 
the  mouth,  repeating  "  Om  Vamamaya  Namsih,  Oju  SridharSya 
Namah."  Then  sprinkle  water  on  the  left  hand,  saying  "  Om  Hrisi- 
ke8'ava  Namah."  Sprinkle  water  on  the  legs,  saying  Om  PadraanS- 
bhaya  Namah."  Sprinkle  water  on  the  bead,  saying  "  Om  Damodar^ya 
Namah."  Touch  the  mouth  with  the  three  fingers  of  the  right 
hand,  saying  "  Om  Samkarsanaya  Namah.''  'loueh  the  nostrils  with 
the  thumb  and  forefinger  saying  "  Om  VasudevSya  Namah,  Om 
PradyumnSya  Namah."  Touch  the  eyes  with  the  thumb  and  ring- 
iinger,  saying  "  Om  Aniruddhaya  Namah,  Om  Purusottamaya  Namah. 
Touch  the  ears  with  the  thumb  and  ringfinger  saying  "  Om  Adhoksa 
jaya  Namah,  Om  Narasimh&ya  Namah."  Touch  the  navel  with  the 
thumb  and  little  finger  sa}'ing  "  Om  Ach}utuya  Namah."  Touch  the 
breast  with  the  palm,  sayiug  "  Om  Janardanaya  Namah."  Touch 
the  head  saying  "  Om  Upendraya  Namah."  Touch  the  roots  of  the  two 
arms    saying   "  Om     Haraye     Namah,    Om      Krisnaya    Namah." 

25-50.  While  sipping  the  Achaman  water  on  the  right  hand,  touch 
the  right  hand  with  your  left  hand  ;  otherwise  the  water  does  not 
become  pure.  While  doing  Achaman,  make  the  palm  and  the  fingers 
all  united  and  close,  of  the  form  of  a  Gokarna  (the  ear  of  a  cow'*  and 
spreading  the  thumb  and  the  little  finger,  drink  the  water  of  the  measure 
of  a  pea.  If  a  greater  or  less  quantity  be  sipped,  then  that  would 
amount  to  drinking  liquor.  Then  thinking  of  the  Pranava,  make  the 
Pr^nayaraa^  and  repeat  mentally  the  GSyatri  with  her  head  and  the  Turiva 
pada  «.  e.  Apojyotih  rasomritam  B  rahma  Bhurbhuvah  svarom.  Inhale  the 
air  by  the  left  nostril  (Purak),  close  both  the  nostrils  (kumbhak)  and 
exhale  the  air,  by  the  right  nostril  (rechak).  Thus  PranaySma  is 
effected.  While  doing  Purak,  Kumbhak  and  Rechak  repeat  the  Giyatri  every 
time  ;  hold  the  right  noetrial  with  the  right  thumb  and  hold  the  left 
nostril  with  the  ringfinger  and  little  finger  {i.  e.,  do'nt  use  forefinger  and 
middle  finger). 

The.Yogis  who  have  controlled  their  minds  say  that  Pranayama  is 
effected  by  the  three  processes  Puraka,  Kumbhaka  and  RechaJ^a.  The 
external  air  is  inhaled  in  Puraka  ;  air  is  not  exhaled  nor  inhaled  (it  is 
retained  inside)   in  Kumbhaka  ;   and  air    is   exhaled  in    rechaka.     Whjie 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  XVI.  1101 

doing  Puraka,  meditate,  on  the  navel,  the  four-armed  high-souled  Visnu,  of 
the  blue  colour  (SySma)  like  the  blue  lotus.  While  doing  Kumbhaka,  meditata 
in  the  heart  lotus  the  four-faeed  grandsire  Brahra^   Prajapati,    the  Creator 
peated    on    the    lotus    and    while    doing    Rechaka   meditate,  on  the  fore- 
head,   on  the  white    sindestroyiog    Sankara.  pure  as  crystal.     In  Puraka, 
the     union    with  Visnu    is    obtained  ;    in    Kumbhaka,    the    knowledge 
of  Brahma  is  attained  and  in    Rechaka,    the    highest    position  of     Is' vara 
(Siva)  is  attained.     This    is    the    method    of   Aehaman    according  to    the 
Puranas.     Now    I  am  speaking   of  the  all  sin-destroying     Vaidik  Aeha- 
man.    Listen.     Reciting  the  GSyatri    mantra   "  Om  Bhurbhuvah.  "   Sip 
«,   little  water  ;  this  is  11*5  Vaidik  Aehaman  after  repeating  the  seven  great 
Vyahritis    Om  Bhuh;  Om  Bhuvah,  Om  Svah    Om     Mahajb,  Om     Janah, 
Om  Tapah,    Om  Satyam,    repeat  Gayatri     and    the  head    of  the  Gayatrl 
Apojyoti    Rasomritam     Brahma    Bhurbhuvah  svarom)    and    practise  Pr4 
naySma  three    times.     Hereby    all  sins  are  destroyed  and  all  virtues  spring 
Now  another  sort  of   PranAyama  Mudiflis    described  .-—The    VSnaprasthis 
and  Grihasthas  would  do  PranaySma  with  five  fingers,  holding  the  tip  of  the 
nose;  the  Brahmaeharis  and  Yatis  would  do  Pr^nayama  with  the    thumbs 
little  finger,  and  ring  finger  (avoiding  middle  and  fore).  Now  I  am  speaking 
of   the    Agham-irSiua     Marjana    mantra.     Li:ten.     The    Mantra   of  this 
Marjana     is     "  Apohistha    Mayobhuvah,    etc.    There    are    three   mantras 
in  this.     There     are    three   Padas    in  every    mantra,   prefix  Om    to   every 
padas  (thus    ninetimes   Om  is  to  be   prefixed)  ;  at  the  end    cf  every  pada 
sprinkle    water  on  the    head    with    the    sacrificial   thread   and    the   Kus'a 
grass.     Or    at  the  end  of    every    mantra   do  so.     By    the   above    Marjana 
(cleaning)^  the  sins    ofonehundied    years  are    instantly  destroyed.      Then 
making   Aehaman    (taking   a    sip   of   water    to    rinse    the    mouth    before 
worship),    repeat   the    three    Mantras    "  Om  Suryas'cha    m^    manyus'chft, 
etc.    By  this  act,    the    mental    sins   are    destroyed.     As    marjana   is   done 
with  Pranava,   Vyarhitis,  and    Gayatri,    so  make  Marjana    by  the   three 
mantras   '•  Apohiaiha,  etc."     Make  your   right  palm   of    the  shape    of  a 
cow's  ear  ;  take    water    in    it   and    carry^   it    before  your   nose  and  think 
thus  :— "  There  is  a    terrible  sinful    person  in    my  left  abdomen,   his  colour 
is    dark    black    and    he    is    horrible    looking.     Recite,  then,   the    mantras 
"  Om    ritamcha  satyamchabhidhyat,    etc."    and    "    Drupadadiva    Mumu- 
chana,   etc."   and   bring   that     Sinful    Person    through  your  right  nostril 
to   the    water  in     the    palm.      Do'nfc     look     at  that     water  ;     throw    it 
away     on     a    bit   of  stone    to  your  left.     And   think   that  you  are   now 
sinless.     Next,  rising   from   the   seat,    keep  your  two  feet  horizontal   and 
with  the  fingars  save   forefinger   and   thumb,   take   a   palmful     of    water 
and  with   your   face    towards   the    Sun,     recite  the   Gayatri   three  times 


1102  I§r1  mad  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM 

fttid  oSer  watei'   to  the   San   threo  times.     Thus,  0  Muni  !      The   method 
of  offering   the  Arghya^  has  been  rflenCioDed    to   yoU. 

51-80.  Then  eircumarabulate,  repeating  the  Surya  Mdntra.  The 
one  thing  to  be  noted  in  offering  Arghyas  is  this: —Offer  once  in  thfi 
midday,  and  three  times  ia  the  morning  and  three  times  in  the  evening. 
While  offering  the  Arghya  in  the  morning,  bend  yourself  a  litte  low  ;  in 
offering  the  arghya  in  the  midday,  stand  up  ;  and  while  offering  the  arghya 
in  the  evening,  it  can  be  done  while  sitting.  Now  I  will  tell  you  why 
the  Arghya  is  offered  to  the  Sun.  Hear.  Thirty  Koti  llaksasas  known 
a§  the  Mandehas,  always  roam  on  the  path  of  the  Sun  (the  mental  Sun  also). 
They  ate  great  heroes^  treacherous  and  ferocious.  They  always 
try  to  devour  the  Sun,  while  they  assume  terrible  forms.  For  this  reason 
the  Devas  and  the  Ri?is  combined  offer  the  water  with  their  folded 
hands  to  the  Sun,  while  they  perform  the  great  SandhyS  Upflsanft. 
The  water  thus  offered,  becomes  transformed  into  the  thunderbolt  and 
burns  the  heads  of  the  cruel  demons  (and  throws  them  on  the  island  Mande- 
hSruna)  Therefore  the  Br3hmanas  daily  do  their  SandhyopSsana. 
Infinite  merits  accue  from  this  Sandhya  Upasana.  O  Narada  !  Now  I  am 
speaking  to  you  of  the  Mantras  pertaining  to  the  Arghya.  No  sooner  they 
are  pronounced  the  full  effects  of  performing  the  Sandhyas  are  obtained. 
I  am  That  Sun  ;  I  am  That  Light  ;  I  am  That  Atman  (Self) ;  I  am  Siva  ; 
I  am  the  Light  of  Atman  ;  I  am  clear  ;  and  transparently  white;  I  am  of  the 
nature  of  all  energy  ;  and  I  am  of  the  nature  of  Rasa  (the 
sweetness,  all  the  sweet  sentiments.)  O  Devi !  O  G^yatri  !  O  Thou  ! 
Who  art  of  the  nature  of  Brahma  I  Let  Thee  come  and  preside  in  my 
heart  to  grant  me  success  in  this  Japa  Kirraa.  O  Devi  !  O  G&yatri  ! 
Entering  into  my  heart,  go  out  again  with  this  water.  But  Thou 
wouldst  have  to  come  again."  Sit  thus  on  a  pure  seat  and  witli  a  single 
intent  repeat  the  GS.yatrl,  the  Mother  of  the  VeJas.  O  Muni  I  In  this 
Sahdhyopasana,  the  Khhechari  MudrA,  ought  to  be  done  after  practising 
the  PrSnydmA,,  Hear  now  the  meaning  of  the  Khechari  MudrS.  When  the 
soul  of  a  being  leaves  the  objects  of  senses,  it  roams  in  the  Ak&s'a  *.  <? , 
it  becomes  aimless  when  the  tongue  also  goes  to  the  Akas'a  and 
roams  there  ;  and  then  the  sight  is  fixed  between  the  eyebrows ;  this  is 
called  the  Khhechari  Mudr^.  There  is  no  Asana  (seat)  equal  to  Siddh^sana 
and  there  is  no  Vayu  (air)  equal  to  the  Khumbaka  Vaya  (suspension 
of  air   in   the  body). 

O  Narada  !  There  is  no  MudrS,  equal  to  the  Khechari  Mudri.  One  is 
to  pronounce  Pranava  in  Pluta  (protracted)  accents  like  the  sound  of  a 
bell  and,  suspending  his  breath,  sit  quiet  motionless  in  Sthir&sana 
without   any     Ahamk^ra     (egoisin).     O  Narada!     I   am  ngw  talking   of 


SooK  XL]  CHAPER  XVI.  1103 

Siddhasana     and     its     characteristic     qualities.      Hear.     Keep    one   heel 
below  the  root   of  the  genital  and  the  other  heel  below  the  scrotum  ;  keep 
the    whole    body    and   brejst   «traight     and    motionless  ;     withdraw     the 
senses  from  their  objects  and  look  at  the  point,  the  pituitary  body,  between 
the  eyebrows.    This  posture  is  called    the  Siddha-san  and  is  pleasant  to  the 
yogis.  After  taking  this  seat,  invoke  the  Gayatri  "  O  Mother  of  the  Vedas  I 
O    Gayatri  !     Thou   art     the    Devi    granting     boons     to     the     Bhaktas- 
Thou  art   of  the   nature    of   Brahma.     Be    gracious    unto   Me.   O    Devi  ! 
Whoever   worships    Thee  in     the     day    gets   his   day    sins    destoyed    and 
in     the     night,    night     sins     destroyed     O     Thou  1     Who     art     all   the 
letters  of  the  alptabet  !     O    Devi  !     O  Sandhye  !     O  Thou  who  art    of  the 
nature  of  Vidya  !  O  Sarasvati  !     O  Ajaye  !     O  Thou  immortal  !  Free  from 
disease  and  decay.  0  Mother  !  Who  art  all  the  Devas !   I  bow  down  to  Thee. 
In  voke  the  Devi  again  by  the  mantra  "  Ojosi,  etc ,"  and  then  pray: — "  O 
Mothei  I     Let  my  japam  and  other  acts  in  Thy  worship    be    fulfilled    with 
success  by  Thy  Grace."  Next  for  the  freedom  of     the   curse    of  G&yatri,  do 
the  things  properly.  Brahma  gave  a  curse  to  Gayatri  ;  Vis'v^mitra  gave  a 
curse  to  Her  and  Vas'istha  also  cursed  Her.  These  are  the  three  curses  ;  they 
are  removed  in  due  oder  by  recollecting  Brabm^,  Vis'v&mitra  and  Vas'istha, 
Before  doing  Ny^sa,  oneought  to  collect  oneself  and    remember  the  Highest 
Self;  think  in   the  lotus  of  the  heart  that   Purus  a  (Person)    who  is   Truth, 
who   is  all  this  Universe,  who  is   the     Hghest    Self  and  who  is  All  know- 
ledge and  who  cannot  be  comprehended  bywords.     Now  I     am   speaking  of 

the  Amganyasa  of  Sandhya;  Hear.  First  utter  Om  and  then  utter  the  mantra. 
Touch  the  two     leg?,  saying   "  Om  BhuhpadabhySm  namah  " 

Touch  the  Knees,  saying  "  Om  Bhuva  J4nubhyam  namah  " 
Touch  the  hip,  saying   "  Om  Svah  Katibhyam    namah  " 
Touch  the  navel,  saying   "  Om  Maharn^bhyai  nama^  " 
Touch  the  heart,    saying  "  Om   Janah    Hriday^ya   namah  " 
Touch    the  throat,  saying  "  Om  Tapal^  Kanthaya  namah  " 
Touch  the   forehead,   saying   "  Om  Satyam  Lalataya  nama^i  " 

Thus  perform  the   Vyarhiti  nyasa. 
Next  perform  the  KaramganySsa  thus  : — Om  Tat  savituh  ramgusthabhyam 

namah  (referring  to  the  thumb)  ;  "  Om  Varenyam  Tarjanibhyam  nama^  " 
referring  to  the  forefinger)  ;  Om  bhargo  devasya  madhyam^  bhyam 
namah  (referring  to  the  middle  finger)  ;  "  Om  Dhimahi  anaraikabhyam 
Damah  (referring  to  the  ringfinger)  ;  Om  dhiyo  yonah,  Kanisthabyllm 
namah  (referring  to  the  little  finger)  ;  "  Om  pracbcdajat  kara  tala 
pristhabhyam  namah  "  referring  to  the  upper  part  and  lower  part 
of  the  palm  and  all  over  the  dody). 

81-106.     Now  I  am    speaking     of    the    AmganySsa.     Hear.     "  Om 
tart  savitur  brahma    tmane   hridayaya    nama|?    "(referring   to  the   heart.) 


1104  ^rI  mad  DEVt  BhAgAVATAM 

'•  On  Varenvim  VijrivS  ttnane  Sirase  namali  "  (referring  to  the  head)  j 
"  Ona  bhargo  devagya  Rudratinane  Sikhayai  namah.  "  (referring  to  the- 
crown  of  the  head);  ''Om  dhimahi  SaktyStmane  Kavach^ya  nama^  " 
referring  to  the  Kavacha  ;  *'  Om  dhiyoyonah  KaUtraane  netratrayftya 
namah  "  referring  to  the  three  eyes;  "  Om  prajhoday&t  sarvatmane 
astraya  namah  "  (referring  to  the  Astra  or  armour,  protecting  the  body.) 
Now  I  am  speaking  of  the  Varnanyasa.  O  Great  Muni  !  Hear.  This 
Varnanyasa  is  performed  by  the  letters  in  the  Gayatri  mantra.  If  anybody 
does  this,  he  becomes  freed  of  sins. 

"  Om  Tat  namah  "    on  the  two  toes  ;  (touching  them). 

"  Om  Sa  nama^  "   on  the  two  heels  ;    (touching  them). 
,     ;  ^  ,"  Om  Vi  namah  "  on  the  legs  ; 

"  Om  Tu  namah  "   on  the  two  knees  ; 

"  Om  Va  namah  "    on    the  two  thighs  ; 

"  Om  re  namah  "  on  the  anus. 

"  Om  ni  namah  ''    on  the  generative  organ  ; 

"  Om  ya  namal^  "    on  the  hip  ; 

*'  Om  bha  nama^  "  on  the  navel  ; 

"  Om  Rgo  namah  "  on  the  heart ; 

"  Om  De  namaht  "  on  the  breasts  ; 

"  Om  va  nama^i  "   on  the  heart  ; 

"  Om  sya  namah  "   on  the  throat ; 

"  Om  dhi  namah  "   on  the  mouth  ; 

"  Om  ma  namah  '    on  the  palate  ; 

"  Om  hi  namah  "    on  the  tip  of  the  nose  ; 

"  Om  dhi  namah  "    on  the  two  eyes  ; 

*'  Om  yo  nama^^  "  on  the  space  between  the  eye-brows  ; 

"  Om  yo  namah  "   on  the  forehead  ; 

*'  Om  nah  namah  "    to   the  east  ; 

"  Om  pra  namah  "    to  the  south 

"  Om  cho  namat  "   on  the  west  ; 

"  Om  da  nama^i  "    on  the  north  ; 

"  Om  ya  namah  "    on  the  head  ; 

"  Om  ta  namah  "  on  the  whole  body  from  head  to  foot. 
Some  JSpakas  (those  who  do  the  Japam)  do  not  approve  of  the  above 
nyasa.  Thus  the  Nyasa  is  to  be  done.  Then  meditate  on  the  GSyatri  or  the 
World-Mother.  The  beauty  of  the  body  of  the  Gayatri  Devi  is  like  that  of 
the  full  blown  Java  flower.  She  is  seated  on  the  big  red  lotus  on  the  back 
of  the  Han8a.(Flamingo)  ;  She  is  holding  the  red  coloured  garland  on  Her 
neck  and    anointed   with   red  coloured   ungument.     She  has  four  faces  : 


Book  XI.]  OHAPTER  XVI.  1105 

■every  face  has  two  eyes.  On  her  four  hands  are  a  wreath  of  flowers,  a 
6acri6ciai  ladle,  a  bead,  aud  a  Katnandalu.  Sba  is  blazing  with  all 
sorts  of  ornaments.  From  the  Devi  Giyatri  has  originated  first  the  Rig, 
veda.  Brahm^  worships  the  virgin  GSyatrt  on  the  idea  of  §ri  Parames'vart 
OAyatri  has  four  feet  j  The  Rig  Veda  is  one  ;  the  Yajnrveda  is  the 
second,  the  Simaveda  is  the  third  and  the  Atharva  veda  is  the 
fourth  foot.  The  Gr3,/atri  his  eight  bellies  i  the  east  side^is  the  one;  the 
south  is  the  second  ;  the  west  is  the  third  ;  the  north  is  the  fourth  j 
the  zenith  is  the  fifth  ;  the  nadir  is  the  sixth  ;  the  intermediate  space 
is  the  seventh  and  all  the  corners  are  the  eighth  belly.  G^yatri  has 
seven   $iras    (heads)  j     Vy^karanam     (Grammar)    is   one  ;    Sik§4    is    the 

second  (that  Amga  of  the  Veda,  the  science  which  teaclies  the  proper 
pronunciation  of  words  and  laws  of  euphony)  ;  Kalpa  is  the  third 
{the  Ved^nga  which  lays  down  the  ritual  and  prescribes  rules  for  eerbmo- 
nial  and  sacrificial  acts)  ;  Nirukfca  is  the  fourth  (the  Ved^nga  that  contains 
glossarial  explanation  of  obscu  e  words,  espaeially  those  occurring  in  the 
Vedas)  ;  Jyotish  or  astronomy  is  the  fifth  j  Itah^sa  (history)  and  PurSnas 
is  the  sixth  head  j  and  Upan'§adas  is  the  seventh  head.  Agni  (fire)  ig 
the  mouth  of  G^yatri  ;  Rudra  is  the  Sikh^  ^tbe  chief  part)  ;  Her 
gotra  (lineage)  is  SllmkhySyana  ;  Vignu  is  the  heart  of  G^yatrf  and 
Brahm&  is  the  armour  of  GSyatri.  Think  of  this  Mahes'vari  G^yatrl 
in  th«  middle  of  the  Solar  Orb.  Meditating  on  the  GSyatri  Devi  as 
above,  the  devotee  should  shew  the  following  twenty-four  Mudras 
(signs  by  the  fingers,  etc.,  in  religious  worship)  for  the  satisfaction  of 
the  Devi  :— (1)  Sanmukh  ;  (2)  Sampiit  ;  (3)  Vitata  (4)  Vistrita  ;  (5)  Dvi- 
mukha  ;  (6)  Trimukha  ;  (7)  Chaturmukha  ;  (8)  Panchamukha  ;  (9)  ^aa- 
mnkha;  (10)  Aihoraukha  ;  (U)  Vy&paka  ;  (12)  Anjali  ;  (13)  ^akafa 
(14)  Yamap^s'a;  (15)  fingers  intertwined  end  to  end  ;  (l6)Vilamba  (17) 
Mustika;  (18)  Matsya  ;  (19)  Kurma  ;  (20)  VarAha  ;  (21)  SimhSkr^nta  ; 
(22)  Mah&kr^.nta  ;  (23)  Mudgara  ;  (24)  Pallava.  Next  make  japam  once 
only  of  one  hundred  syllabled  G^yatri.  Thus  twenty- four  syllabled  SsJvitrt, 
*'  J&tavedase  sunav^ma,  etc.  forty-four  syllabled  mantra  ;  and  the  thirty 
two  syllabled  mantra  "  Tryamvakam  Jajamahe  etc.,  These  three  mantras 
united  make  up  one  hundred  lettered  G^yatri.  (The  full  context  of  the 
last  Mantra  is  this  :— Om  Haum  Om  yum  sah — Trayamvakam  yaj&mahe 
Sugandhim  Pu§ti  Vardhanam.  Urbb&rukamiva  bandhanlln  mrityo  muksiya 
ma  mritat  Bhur  Bhhuvah.  Svarom  Yum  Svah  Bhurbbuvah  Svarom  Haum 
Next  make  japam  of  Bhurbhuvah  Svah,  twenty  four  lettered  G^yatrt 
with  Om.  O  Narada  !  The  Br^hmanas  are  to  perform  daily  the  Sandhyo 
pis^na  repeating  GSyatri,  completely  adopting  the  rules  above  prescribed 
and  then  he  will  be  able  to  enjoy  completely  pleasures,  hftppiaees  and  bliw. 

139 


1106  i§Rt  MAD  DEVl  BHAGAVATAM. 

Here  ends  the  Sixteenth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the  ilcscrip- 
tion  of  Sandh}'^  Upflsana  in  the  MahSpuram  bri  Mad  Devi  BhSgvat^na  of 
18,000  verses  bj  Maharei   VedaVjasai. 


CHA.PTEKXVII, 

1-5.     N&'&yana    said  :  —  If  one    divides   or   separatrs  the  pedas  ^vhite 
reciting  or  making   Japam  of  the  GSyatri,  one  rs  freed    from   the    BrShiBin 
icide,     the    sin    of    Brahraahatya.     BiTt    if   one    does  so  without  breaking 
the  pada?,  i.e.,  repeats  at  one  breath,    then  one  incurs  the    sin    of  Biahraa- 
haty§.     Those    Brdhmauas    who    do    the    Japam    of   the  G&yatri  without 
giving    due    pause   to    the     padas,   suffer    pains    in    bells    with  tbeir  heaOs 
downwards    for    one     hundred    Kalpas.       (O  G&yatri  1      Thou    art  of  onB 
foot,    of  two    feet,     of    three    feet    and    of   four   feet.    Thou  art    without 
foot,  because  Thou  art  not    obtained.  Salntation  to  Thy  Fcuith  Foot  beauti- 
ful   and    which     is  above  the    Triloki      (Rajas).     This  cannot    obtain    that. 
Firstly,    GSyatri   is    of    three     kinds  i — "  Samputa''  ;    *'  Ekomkara",    and 
*'  Sadomkara."     There  is  also  tha  Gayatri,     with  five  Pranavas,    according 
to  the  Dharma  S^stras  and  Pur^naf!.     There  is  something  to  be  noted  while 
muttering    or    making    the     japara     of   the    Gayatri  : — Note    how    many 
lettered  Gayatri  you  are  going  to  repeat  (make   japam).     When  you   have 
repeated  one-eighth  of  that,  repaat  (make  japam)  the  Turiya    pSda   of  Ga- 
yatri {i.e,  the  fourth  P^da,  the  mautram  parorajase    S4vadoma  pr&pat)   etc., 
(see  the  daily  practises,  page  107.)    once  and  then    complete    repeating  the 
Gayatri.     If    the    Brahma  na    makes    the  Japam    (the  silent  muttering)  i,i 
the    above    way     he     gets    himself    uninted   with  Bral  n  a.      Other  modes 
of   making    the    Japam    do     not  bear  any  fruit.     Cm  Gayatryasye  kapadi 
dvipapi    Tripadi  chatus    padafi  nahi  padyase  namaste  TuryAya  dars'ataya- 
padaya  paro  Rajase    Sabado  ma    piSpac.      Gayatri   is    cne-footed    in    the 
form     of    Triloki,     two-footed,    the    Trayi    Vid}^    from    thy   second  foot ' 
tripadi    (all    Pranas    are  thy  third    foot,    chatnspadi,  as  the  Purusa   apadi 
without  any   foot,  Parorajase  above  tbe  R  i jas,  the   dust  ;    asau-tbat  •  adah 
this  not    prapat        mpy    cbtain.     Iha     Yogis    who    are    Uidharetas    (hold 
Brahma  charyam,  continence)  are  to  make  Japam  of  the  Sampnl4  GSyatri 
(i.  e.y    with  Om;    Gayatri  with    one  pranava  and  as  well  the  Gayatri  with 
six  pranavas.     The  householder  Brahmachari  or    those    who    want    mokfa 
are  to  make  Japim  of  Gayatri  with  Om  prefixed. 

6.      Those  householders  who  affix  Om  to  the  GSyatri  do  not  got    tha 
imjrBase  cf  their  families. 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  XVII.  HOI 

7-8,     The    Turtya    pada    (foot)    of  GSyatri  i*  th«  matvfcra  "Parorajase 
S^vofioma      prApa,t".     (Brihad.     up.  v.      14.      7).     Salutation        to  Thy 
beautiful  Fourth  Foot     which  is  abave  the  Trilokt    (Rajas).     This    cannot, 
obtain     that.     The    presiding    dei;y    of    this    mantra    is    Brahma.     I  ana 
now  speaking    of  the    fall    LVhyauani  (meditation)  of  this  Brahma    so    that, 
the    full  fruit    of  the   Japam    (recitrition)     may     be    obtained.      There   is 
a    full    blown  lotus    in    the  heart  ;  its  form  is  like  the  Moon,  Sun,  and  tha^ 
Spark  of   Fire  ;  i.  <?.,    of   the  nature    of  prauava    aod  nothing'  else.     Tiiia 
is     the    seat    of    the  iuconoeivuble    Brahma.     Think  thus.     Now  on  that, 
seat    is    seated   well    the    steady     constant    subtle    Light^  the  essence  of 
Akas'a,  the    everUsbing    existeDC?,    inbelligence  and    bliss,    the    Brahma.. 
May    He    increase    my    happiness-,     (see    page    107  the      daily  practice  of. 
the    Hindus   by    It.    B.   Sris   Chandra    Basu,   on     the    Invocation   of  the 
G^yatri). 

Note. — Aum  !  Gaya^ryasyekapadi  dvipadi,  tripadi,  chatuspadasi,  nahi 
padyase  namaste  turyftya  dars'atSya  padaya  parorajnsa,  sa^'ado  m^prapafc 
0  Gayatri  !  Thou  art  of  one  foot  (in  the  form  of  IViloki),  of  two  feet, 
(the  Trayi  viiyS.  from  Thy  secarid  foot)  of  bhree  feet  (all  Pr^na,  etc., 
are  Thy  third  foot  and  of  four  fe^t  (as  the  Parusa).  Thou  art  without 
foot  because  Thou  art  not  obtained.  Salutation  to  Thy  beautiful  fourth 
foot  which  is  above  the  Triloki  (Hajas).  This  can  not  obtain  thab. 
9.  Now  I  am  speaking  of  the  Mudra  of  the  Turiyd  Gayatri  ; — 
(1)  Tris'ula,  (2)  Yoni,  (3)  Sarabhi,  (4)  Aksimai^,  (5)  Linga,  (6)  Padma 
and  (7)  Mah^mudr4.     Those  seven    Madrid  xre  to   be  shewn. 

10-14.  What  is  Sandhya,  that  is  Gayabrt ;  there  ia  no  difference 
whatsoever  between  the  two.  Tha  two  are  one  and  the  same.  Both 
are  of  the  nature  of  Esistaaoe,  Intelligence  and  Bliss.  Thn  Brahma  uaa 
would  daily  worship  Her  and  bow  down  before  Her  with  greata^b  devo- 
tion and  reverence.  After  the  DhyAnam,'first  worship  Her  with  five 
upacharaa  or  offerings.     Thus  : — 

Om  lam  prithivyatmane  gandham,  arpayarai  namo  namah."  "  Om 
Ham  ak^s'i.tmana  puspam  arpayami  namo  namih,"  '•  Om  ram  Yahn- 
yStmane  dipam  arpayckmi  namo  namaj^."  "  Aum  vara  amritSbraane 
naivedyam  arpay^mi  namo  namah."  Om  yam  ram  lam  vam  ham  pus- 
pSinjalim  arpay^mi  namo  namalj."  Thus  worshipping  with  five  cipa- 
eh&ras,   you  must  shew  Mudras  to  the  Devi. 

15-16.  Then  meditate  on  the  Form  of  the  Gayatri  mentally  and 
slowly  repeat  the  Gtlyatri.  Do  not  shake  head,  neck  ajid  while  making;^ 
j^apam,  do  not  shew  your  teeth.  According  to  due  rules  repeat 
the  Gayatri  one  hundred  and  eight  times,  or  twenty-eight  times.  VVhea 
unable  I  repeat  ten  times  ;   not  less  than  thab. 


.1108  9r1  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

17-20.  Then  raise  the  GSyatri  placed  before  on  the  heart  (seat)  by 
the  mantra  "  Gillyatra^yai  kapadt  Dvipadi,  etc.,  and  then  bid  farewell 
to  Her  after  bowing  down  to  Her  and  repeatinj>  the  mantra  "  Omuttame 
Sikhare  Devi  bbiimy&m  parvata  mQrdbani  Brfthmana  ebhyobhya  anujnftta 
Gachcha  Devi  yatbSsukham  "  (on  the  highest  top  of  the  mountain 
summit  in  earth  (t.  e.  on  the  Mera  mountain)  dwells  the  goddeee 
Gllyatri.  Being  pleased  with  Thy  worshippers  go  back,  O  Devi  I  to 
Thy  abode  as  it  pleaseth  Thee."  (See  page  110,  The  Daily  Praeticea 
of  the  Hindus.) 

The  wise  men  never  matter  nor  recite  the  Gftyatri  mantra  within 
the  water.  For  the  Mahar^is  say  that  the  Giyatri  is  fire-faced  (agni- 
mukhi).  After  the  farewell  -shew  again  the  following  madrl!»  : — 
Surabhi  Jn^n,  Siirpa,  Kurma,  Yoni,  Padma,  Linga  and  Nirvana  Mud- 
rfts. 

Then  address  thus  : — "  O  Devi  !"  "  O  Thou  who  speakest  pleasant 
to  Kas'yapa  "  O  G^yatri  !  Whatever  syllables  I  have  missed  to  utter 
in  making  Japam,  whatever  vowels  and  consonants  are  incorrectly 
pronounced,  I  ask  Thy  pardon  for  all  my  above  faults.'*  O  NSrada  1 
Next  one    ought   to  give   peace  offerings  to  the    G&yatri    Devt. 

21-83.  The  Chchhanda  of  G^yafcri  Tarpanam  (peace  offerings  to 
Gftyatri)  is  Gfiyatri  ;  the  Rigi  is  Vis'vSmitra  ;  Savit&  is  the  Devatft  ; 
its  application  (Niyoga)  is  in  the  peace  offerings. 

"Om   Bhuhrigvedapurusam    tarpayami." 

♦*  Om  Bhuvah    Yajurvedapnrufam     tarpaySmi.'* 

•'  Otn  Svah  SS.maveda  puru§arn  tarpayAmi." 

"  Om  Mahah   Atharvaveda  puru?am  tarpay&mi." 

"  Cm  Janftb  ItibftsaparSna  puru§ara  tarpay&mi.'* 

"  Om  Tapah  Surv^gama  puruaam  tarpay&mi." 

*•  Om  Satyam   Satyaloka  puru§am    tarpayami." 

"  Om  Bhiih  bhiirloka  puru9am  tarpayfimi." 

'*  Om  Bhuba^i  bhuvoloka  puruaam  tarpay&mi." 

"  Om  Svah  evarloka  puruaam  tarpay&mi." 

•*  Om  Bhuh    rekapad^m  GS.yatrIm    tarpay&rai.^' 

"  Om  Bhuvo  dvitiyapadim    G&yatrim  tarpaySmi." 

"  Om  Svastripad^m    G^yat'-im  tarpayami" 

♦♦  Om  Bhurbhuvah  Svaa'chatuspad^m  Ga.yatrim   tarpaySmi." 

Pronouncing  these,  offer  the  Tarpanams.  Next  add  the  word  Tarpayimi 
to  each  of  the  following  worda  "  tr^jasim,  Glyatrim,  SAvitrim,  Sarasvatim 
Vedamataram,  Prithvim,  Aj^m,  Kaus'ikim,  Samkritim,  Savajitim, 
etc.,"  and  offer  Tarpanams.  After  the  Tarpanam  is  over,  offer  the  peaee- 
ohantings,  (Santivftri)  repeating  the  following  mantra*, 


Book  XI  ]  CHAPTER  XVII.  110« 

♦'  Om  Jata  vedase  sunav&ma  aomam,  etc.** 
*'  Om  Mdnastoka,    etc." 
**  Ora  Ttyamvakara    Yajiimahe,  etc."^ 
"  Oin  racbchliamyoh,  etc." 

Then  touch  all  the  parts  of  yoar  bodies,  repeating  the  two  mantras 
"  0.n  atodeva,  etc."  And  reeitiog  the  mantrana  "  Svon£l  Prithivi,"  bow 
down   to  the  earth,    after  repeating  one's    name,  Gotra,    etc, 

34-45.     O  Nirada  !      Thus    the    rales   of  the    morning    SandhyS    are- 
prescribed.     Doing    works    so    far,  bid    farevvell   to   the    above-menDioned 
CT^vabri.     Nexc  finishing    the  ^.ijnihotra  Homa  sacrifice,  worship    the  five- 
DjvasSs,  ^ivtl,    Siva,  Ganes'a,    Sarya  and  Vi^nu.    Worship  by  the  Purusa 
Sdkta  mantra,  or  by  Hrim  ramtra,  or  by  Vyahriti  mantra  or  by    Srisehite 
Likfmis'oha,  etc,"  place  Bhavani  in  the  centre  ;  Visnu  in    the    north  east 
corner,  Siva  in  the  south-east  corner  ;  Ganesa  in  the  south-west  corner,  and 
the  Sun  in  the  north-west  corner  ;  and  then  worship  them,    While    offering 
worship    with    the  sixteen  offerings,  worship  by  repeating  sixteen  mautras. 
As   there   is    no   other    act   more    merit-giving   than    the  worship  of  the 
Devi,    so   the  Devi    should    first  of  all     be    worshipped.     Then    worship 
in    due     order    the    five     Devat^s     placed    in    five     positions.     As     the- 
■worship    of  the    Devi    is    the   chief  object,     so   in   the    three     Sandhyds^ 
the    worship  of  the  Saodhya  Devi  is   approved  of    by  the     iSiutis.     Never 
■worship    Vi§na    with    rice;     Ganes'a     with     Tulasi     leaves;     the     Devi 
Durga    with    Durba  grass    and    Siva    with     Ket-iki      flower.     The  under- 
mentioned   flowers   are    pleasing   to    the    Dev): — MallikA,      Jati,    Kutaja, 
P.inasa,    PaUsa,    VakiU,    Lodba,     Karavira,  Sins'apa,  Aparajitd,  Bandhu- 
ku,  Vaka,    Madaiita,     Siudhuvara,     Paia/a,     Durbba,  Salliki,    MadhavT, 
Arki,    Mandfl-rj,     Ketaki,     Karnikftra,     Kadamba,      Lotus,      Champaka, 
Yathika,    Tagara,    etc. 

46-47.  Offer  incenses  Guggul,  Dhupa  and  the  light  of  the  Til 
oil  and  finish  the  worship.  Then  repeat  the  principal  (mQla)  mantra 
(mtke  Japam).  Thus  finishing  the  work,  study  the  Vedvs  in  the 
second  quarter  of  the  next  day  ;  and  in  the  third  quarter  of  that  day 
feed  father,  mother  and  other  dependent  relatives,  with  money 
earnf-d  by  one's  ov\n  self  according  to  the  traditions  of  one's  family. 
Here  ends  the  Seventeenth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on 
the  description  of  Sandhy^  and  other  daily  practices  in  the  MahSpuranam 
Srt    Mad  Devi  Bh&gvatam  of  18,000    verses   by    Maharfi  Veda  Vyasa. 


jll(»  SrI  mad    DEVl  bhAgavatam. 

« 

CHAPTER.  XVilL 


1.  NArada  spoke:—  "  O  Bhagavau  !  1  ana  now  very  eager  to  near 
the  special  Paja  of  ^ri  ETevi.  The  people  get  their  deairos  falfii  jd  if 
they    worship   Her. 

2-23.  NSrayana  said: — "  0  Devar^i  1  I  shall  now  specially  speak 
to  you  how  the  World  Mother  Bhagvati  is  worshipped  ;  by 
worhippiug  Whom  one  easily  gets  objects  of  enjoyments,  liberatioa 
and  the  destracuon  of  all  evils.  Controlling  one's  speech  and  making 
Achaman,  one  must  make  one's  sankalap  and  perform  Bbutas'uddriij 
Matrikaayasa,  sadangaayasa,  placing  couchshell  and  doing  other  neetssjiry 
acts,  Olfering  the  ordinary  Arghya,  one  should  give  special  Arghya 
and  with  the  mantra  "  Astraya  Phat  sprinkle  over  all  the  articles- 
brought  for  worship:  Taking  the  Guru's  permission,  he  is  to  go  on 
with  his  Puj^.  First  worship  the  pitha  or  seat  whereon  the  Devi 
would  be  placed  ;  thea  perform  dhyan  (meditation  of  the  Devt.)  Then 
with  great  devotion,  offer  to  the  Deva,  the  seatj  (Asana)  and  other 
articles  of  worship  ;  then  perform  the  bath  of  the  Devi  by  the 
watei  of  the  PanchSmrita  (the  five  nectars).  If  anybody  performs  the 
bath  cerenony  of  Sri  Devi  with  one  hundred  jars  of  sugarcane  juice,  he 
will    not    have    to    incur  any    future    birth. 

lie  who  performs  this  bath,  and  reaites  the  Veda  Mantras,  with  mango 
jiiicj  or  sugarcane  juice  gets  for  ever  Laksm?  ever  and  ever  and 
Sj,rasvati  bound  at  hid  dojr.^.  tie  who  gets  this  sacred  bath  of  the 
Devi  with  grape  juice,  along^  with  his  relatives  and  acquaintances 
dwells  in  the  Devi-loka  for  as  many  years  as  there  are  atoms  in 
the  juice.  He  who  bathes  the  Devi  with  the  Vedic  mantras,  and 
with  water  scented  with  camphor,  the  fragrant  aloe  wood  (aguru), 
satfron,  and  musk,  becomes  freed  at  once  of  the  sins  acquired  in 
his  hundred  births.  He  who  bathes  the  Devi  with  jars  of  milk, 
lives  in  the  ocean  of  milk  (ksira  samudra)  for  one  Kalpa.  So  he 
who  does  this  bathing  ceremony  with  jars  of  curd,  becomes  the 
lord  of  Dadhikunda  ^^the  reservoir  of  curd).  He  who  performs  the 
Sn&naras  of  the  Devi  with  honey,  ghee  and  sugar  becomes  the  lord 
of  these  things.  He  whobattes  the  Devi  with  one  thousand  jarj,  become* 
happy  in  this  world  as  in  the  next.  A^o?e  :— Make  the  liquid  current 
flow  pure  in  your  body  is  the  esoteric  meaning  of  the  bath.  If  you  giva 
Her  a  pair  of  silken  clothes,  you  will  go  to  the  V^yu-Loka.  If  you  give  Her 


Book  XL]  CHAPTER  XVIU.  llll 

ihe  jewel  ornaments,  roii  will  become  the  L'^rd  of  gems  and  jewels.  (Make  your 
mind  like  the  gem)  If  anybody  gives  saffron,  sandalpaste,  musk,  SindAra 
and  Alaktak  (red  things),  he  will  go  to  the  Heavens  and  become  there  the 
Indra,  the  Lord  of  the  Devas,.in  the  next  birth.  Various  flowers  ought  to 
be  offered  in  ori  Bhagavati's  worship  ;  or  the  flowers  of  the  season  offered 
to  the  Devi  wMl  lead  the  devotee  to  Kailas'a.  The  devotee  that 
offers  the  beautiful  Bel  leaves  to  the  Devi  never  experiences  anywhere 
pains  and  difficulties.  The  devotee  who  writes  the  Vija  mantra  of 
May&  •'  Hrim  Bhuvanes'varyai  NamaU  "  with  red  sandalpaste  thrice 
on  the  tti-leaves  of  the  Vilva  tree  leaf  and  offers  this  to  the  lotua 
feet  of  the  Devi,  becomes  Manu  by  the  merit  of  this  virtuous  act  I  The 
devotee  becomes  the  Lord  of  the  whole  universe  who  worships 
the  Devi  Bhagavati  with  ten  millions  of  entire  Vilva  leaves  fresh 
green    and    spotless. 

24-40,  If  any  devotee  worships  with  ten  millions  of  entire  fre^h 
green  Kunda  flowers,  with  eight  scents,  he  gets  surely  the  PrajApati- 
hcod.  The  worship  of  the  Devi  with  ten  millions  of  Mallik^  and 
Mdlati  flowers  besmeared  with  eight  scents  makes  a  man  the  four  faced 
(Brahma);  and  one  hundred  millions  of  such  flowers  will  make  the 
devotee  a  VisQu.  In  days  of  yore,  Vi§nu  worshipped  the  Devi  in 
the  aforesaid  way  and  so  got  His  Visnuhood.  If  any  devotee 
worships  the  Davi  with  one  hundred  Kotis  of  Mallik^  or  M^latJ 
flowers,  the  man  becomes  certaiiily  SutratmH  Hiranyagarbha.  In 
ancient  days  Hiranyagarbha  worshipped  thus  the  Devi  with  great 
devotion  and  so  he  became  Hiranyagarbha  !  (These  Hiranyagarbha, 
Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahes^a  were  mere  ordinary  men  before.  See 
the  Brihadaranyaka  Upanisada).  Note. — The  eight  scents  refer  to  Jat^ 
mamfei  Kapiyut^  SakterganJhas  takam  !  So  will  be  the  results  if 
Java,  Vandhuka  and  Dadimi  flowers  be  offered  in  the  worship. 
Various  other  beautiful  flowers  can  be  offered  duly  to  the  Devi  by  the 
devotee.  The  merits  accruing  from  such  offers  are  not  known 
even  to  the  God  Is'vara.  The  flowers  that  spring  in  their  proper  seasons  are 
to  be  offered  every  year  to  the  Devi,  repeating  Her  thousand  nameg 
enumerated  in  the  Twelfth  Book  or  in  the  Kurma  PurSna.  If  the 
above  worship  be  offered  to  the  Devi,  then  that  man,  whether  be  be  a 
sinner  or  a  great  sinner,  will  be  freed  from  all  the  sins  and  after 
leaving  his  mortal  coil,  he  will  get,  no  doubt,  the  lotus  feet  of  the  ^ri 
Devi  Bhagavati.  Offer  Dhupa  made  of  black  Aguru,  camphor, 
sandalpaste,  red  sandalpaste,  Sihlaka  and  Guggula,  saturated  with  ghee 
in   such   a   way   as    the     whole     room  of  Sri  Bhagavati  scents  with  pure 


1112  Sr!  mad  DEVt  BHAGAVATAM 

fra<>rant  einell.  The  Devi  Bhagavati  becjmea  pleased  with  this  and 
otfsrs  the  lordship  of  the  three  Lokas  to  the  devotee.  The  devotee, 
who  offers  daily  the  lli^ht  of  eimphor  to  the  Devi,  goes  to  the  Surya 
Loka.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  With  one's  whole  heart,  one 
should  giye  one  hundred  or  one  thousand  lights  to  the  Devi.  The  devotee 
should  offer  heaps  of  food  consisting  of  six  Rasas,  the  plates  and 
dishes  for  chewing,  sucking,  licking  and  drinking,  that  is,  all  kinds 
of  focd  solid,  and  liquid,  mountain-like  high.  Always  give  food  on 
eolden  flat  plates  and  cups  and  various  delicious  sweet  juicy  nice 
heuvenly  fiuits,  nicely  arranged  on  trays,  cups  and  saucers.  When 
f^rt  Mahadevi  Bhuvane'svari  gets  pleased,  the  whole  universe  gets 
pleased.  For  the  whole  Universe  is  all  Devi  ;  as  a  rope  is  mistaken 
for   a   snakd,   so   this    Mahadevi    is    mistaken    for   the     universe. 

4,1.59.  Offer  a  jar  of  drinking  Ganges  water,  cool  and  nice, 
scented  with  camphor  to  the  Devi  ;  then  offer  betels  with  camphor, 
pftrdamum  cloves,  and  various  delicioua  scents.  These  all  are  to  be 
offered  with  i^reat  devotion  so  that  the  Devi  may  be  pleased.  Next 
have  music  with  lovely  mridangas,  flutes,  murajas,  Dhahk4s  and 
dundubhis  and  so  please  Her.  Th-e  Veda  mantras  are  to  be  recited, 
the  Pur^nas  are  to  be  read  and  the  hymns  to  be  chanted.  With 
whole  head  and  heart  offer  to  the  Davi  the  umbrella  and  chftmara, 
the  two  kingly  offerings.  Then  circumambulate  round  Her  and  prostrate 
before  Her  and  ask  Her  kindness  and  pray  to  Her  to  forgive  all 
faults  and  shortcomings.  The  Devi  is  pleased  with  anybody  who 
remembers  Her  even  once  !  What  wonder  then  that  She  will  be  pleased 
with  all  these  offerings !  The  Mother  is  natually  merciful  to  her 
child.  When  She  is  loved  with  derotioo,  then  She  becomes  very 
merciful.  There  is  nothing  strange  here  1  On  this  point  I  will 
recite  to  you  the  history  of  Vrihadratha  E&jaisi.  Hearing  which 
gives   rise    to    Bhakti  and    Love. 

Once  in  a  certain  region  in  the  Himalayas  there  lived  a  bird 
callei  Chakravak.  It  flew  over  many  countries  and  went  onc3  to 
Klis'idham.  As  a  fruit  of  his  Prfirabdha  Karma,  that  bird,  desirous 
to  find  some  rice  beans,  voluntarily  went  like  an  orphan  round 
abont  the  temple  of  5ri  Annapurna  Devi.  There  eircumambulatiog 
rcund  the  Devi  Bhagavati  the  bird  left  the  city  K^s'i,  that  grants 
liberation  and  flew  away  to  another  country.  In  time  the  bird  left  his 
body  and  went  to  Heavens.  There  he  assumed  a  heavenly  form  of  a  youth 
and  began  to  enjoy  various  pleasures.  Thus  he  enjoyed  for  two  Kalpas. 
Then  he  got  back  to  the  earth  and  took  bis  birth  as  the  best  in  the 
Kgattriya   family.     He  became   celebrated    as    the    King  Vrihadratha   in 


Book    XL]  CHAPTER  XVIll.  1U3 

this  world.  Th  it  Iviii;^  wis  fcrathfal,  controlled  his  senses,  and  practised 
Samjama  and  deep  coaeanfcration  and  knew  everything  of  the  past,  the 
present  and  the  future.  He  conquered  all  the  eaoniies  and  performed  various 
sacrifices  and  became  the  Emperor  of  the  sea-girt  earth  and  acquired 
the  very  rare  faculty  in  the  knowledge  of  everything  of  his  previous  births* 
The  Munis  came  to  knov  of  this  from  various  rumours  and  came 
to  the  King.  The  King  Vrihadratha  duly  entertained  those  guests. 
The  Munis  took  their  seats  and  asked: — "O  King!  We  hear  that 
all  the  event3  of  previous  births  ara  vividly  reflected  in  your  memory. 
On  this  point  great  doubts  have  come  upon  us.  Kindly  describe  in 
detail — By  what  Punyatn  (merits,)  you  have  come  to  know  all  about 
previous  births  and  the  knowledge  of  the  past,  the  present  and  the  future. 
We  have  come  to  you  to  kuo  v  how  you  got  this  wonderful  supersensual 
knowledge.  Kindly  say  to  us  sincerely  everything  about  this  and  oblige. 

60-71.     N^rayana     said: — "  0    Brahman  !     The    very    religious    King 
Vrihadratha     heard     thpm     and     began    to     speak     out    all    the   seUret 
causes    tor    his    knowledge  of  the  past,  the  present   and  the  future,  thus:  — 
"O  Munis!      Hear  how  I  acquired  this  knowledge.     In  my  previous  birth  I 
was  a  very  low  bird  chakravak.  Once,  out  of  ray    ignorance,   I  circumam- 
bulated round  the  temple  of  the  Devi    Bhagavati  Annapurna  at  Kas'j.  And, 
as  the  result  of  that,  I  lived  in  the  Heavens  for  a  period    of  two  Kalpas  and 
I  have  got   this      birth  and  I      have     got   the  knowlege    of    the  past,  the 
present  and  the  future.     O  You  of  good  vows  !     Who    can   ascertain   what 
amount  of  merits  accrues  from  remembering  the  Feet  of  the  World-Mother, 
llememberiof  Her  glories,  I  always  shed  tears  of  joy.     Those  who   do    not 
worship  the  adorable  Deity  Jagadambtl  are  the  Great  Sinners  and  they  are 
treacherous.    Fie    on  their  births  !     The  worship  of  Siva  or    Visnu    is  not 
eternal.     Only   the     Jagadamba's    worship    is   eternal.     Thus  it  is    stated 
in   the   ^rutis.   What  more  shall    I   speak  on  this  worship  of  the    World- 
Mother,   which    is   void  of  the    bosfc  trace  of  any  doubt.     Everyone    ought 
to   serve   devotedly  the    lotus   feet   of  the  Devi    Bhagavati.     There    is  no 
other  act  more  glorious  in  this  world  thin  serving  the  feet    ot     JagadambS. 
It  is   highly  nece=sary  to  ."^erve  the  Highest  Deity,  whether  iu  Her  Saguna. 
or   in    Her  Nirguna  aspect.     (Eat  the  siigarcandy,  holding  it  in  any  way. 
It  makes   no  difference).     Narayana    said:— Hearing  the    aforesaid  words 
of  the     virtuous    Rajarsi   Vrihadratha,  the    Munis    went    back     to   their 
respective    abodes.     Such   is  the    power    of  the    Devi    Jagadambika!     So 
who    can    question  about   the  certainty    of  the  high    merits     arising  from 
the    Jagadamvika's    worship  and  who    will  not  reply,  when  so  questioned? 
Their   births   are    really   fruitful    who    possess  faith  in  the  Devi   worship; 

UO 


1114  SRt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

but  of  those  who  have  no  such  faith,  there  is  some  wrong  mixture,  no  doubt, 
in  their  births. 

Here  enjs  the  Eighteenth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Boob  on  the 
Greatness  of  the  Devi  Puja  in  the  Mahapuranam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhilgava- 
tam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharei  Veda  VySsa. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

1-24.  Narayaca  said: — "O  NUrada  !  Now  I  am  speaking  of  the  auspici- 
ous midday  Sandby^l,  the  practice  of  which  leads  to  the  wonderfully  excel- 
lent results.  Listen.  Here  the  Achamana  and  other  things  are  similar  to 
those  of  the  moFning  Sandhya.  Only  in  meditation  (Dhyanam)  there  is  some 
difference.  I  will  now  speak  of  that.  The  name  of  the  midday  Gayatri  is 
SSvitri.  She  is  ever  a  youthful  maiden,  of  uhite  colour,  three-eyed  ;  She 
holds  in  Her  one  hand  h  rosary,  in  Her  other  hand  a  trident  and  with  Her 
two  other  hands  She  makes  signs  to  Her  Bhaktas  to  dispel  fear  and  to  orant 
boons.  Biding  on  the  bull.  She  recites  the  Yayur  Vedas  ;  She  is  the  Rudra 
Sakti  with  Tamo  gunas  and  She  resides  in  Brahmaloka.  She  daily  tra- 
verses in  the  path  of  the  Sun.  She  is  Maya  Devi,  beginningless  ;  I  bow 
down  to  Her.  After  meditating  on  the  Adya  Devi  Bhagavati  perform  acha- 
manas  and  other  things  as  in  the  morning  Sandhy^.  Now,  about  the  offering 
of  Arghya  (an  offer  of  green  grass,  rice,  etc.,  made  in  worshipping  a 
God  or  Brahman).  Collect  flowers  for  Arghya;  in  the  absence  of  flowers, 
the  Bael  leaves  and  water  will  serve  the  purpose.  Facing  the  Sun, 
and  looking  upwards,  offer  the  Arghya  to  the  Sun  upwards.  Then  peifcrm 
other  acts  as  in  the  morning  Sandhya.  In  midday,  some  offer  Arghya 
to  the  Sun,  only  with  the  recitation  of  the  G&yatri  mantra.  But  that 
is  not  approved  of  by  the  tradition  and  community  ;  there  is  the  likelihood 
of  the  whole  work  being  thwarted  or  rendered  fruitless.  For,  in  the  mor- 
ning and  evening  Sandhyas,  the  RSksashas  named  the  Mandehas  become 
ready  to  devour  the  Sun.  This  is  stated  in  the  Srutis.  Therefore  the 
midday  offering  of  the  Argbya  is  not  for  the  destruction  of  the  Daityas  but 
for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Devi;  so  with  the  mantra  "Akrisnena,  etc.,"  the 
offering  of  Arghya  can  be  effected  ;  and  the  reciting  of  the  infallible 
Gayatri  mantra  is  only  to  create  disturbance  in  the  shape  of  thwaiting 
the  action.  So  in  the  morning  and  evening,  the  .Brahmana  is  to  offer  the 
Suryarghya,  repeating  the  G^iyatri  and  Pranava;  and  in  the  midday  to  offer 
flowers  and  water  with  the  mantra  "Akri§nene,  rajasa  etc  ,  else  it  will  go 
against  the  Sruti.  In  the  absence  of  flowers,  the  Durba  grass,  etc.,  can 
be   offtied  carefully  as  the  Arghya;  and  the   full     fruits     of  the   Sandl\-  & 


^OOK  XL]  CHAPTER    XIX.  1115 

will  bo  secured.     0  Best  of   Devarsis  !     Now  bear    the   impoitant  points 
in  the  Tarpanam  (peace  oflFeriogs).  Thus  :— 

"Oin    Bhuvah   purusam  tarpayami  namo   namah." 
"Om   Yajafvedam    tarpayami  namo    naraab." 
"Om    Mandalam   tarpayami    namo    naraab." 
'•Om    Hiianyagarbham    tarpayami     namo    namab." 
"Om    antaratraanam    tarapaySmi      namo  namah." 
"Om    Savitrim    tarapaySmi    namo    namah." 
''Om    Devamacaram    tarpaydmi    namo  namah." 
"Om  Samkritim    tarpayami  namo  namah." 
"Om    Yuvatun    sandbyAm    tarpayami    namo    namah." 
"Om    Radranim    tarpayami    namo    nam^h." 
"Om    Nimrijam    tarpayami    namo    namah." 
"Om  Bhurbhuvah    Svah    purusam    tarpayami  namo    namah." 
Th-is   finish   the    midday  Saudhyl  m^^a    Tarpanam."     Now*  with  your 
bands    raised    hi^'h    up     towards    the     Sun,    worship    Him    by    the  "two 
mantras  -.—praiiing    thus:— "Om    Udutyam     Jatavedasam,     eto'.,"     "Om 
Chitram    Devaaam\    etc."     Nex^.    rep3at  the    Gayatri.    Hear  its    method, 
lu  the  morning,    repeat  the    Gayatri    at  the    proper  moment    with    hands 
raised  ;    in  the  evening  time  with  hands  lowered  and  in  the    midday    with 
hands  oyer   the  breast.     Begin    with    the    middle    phalanx    (joint)    of  the 
nameless  finger,    then  the   phalanx  at    its  root,    then  the    phalanx    at    the 
root  of   the  little  finger,    its  midd'e    phalanx  and    its  top,    then  the  tops  of 
the  nameless,    fore    and  ring  fingers,    then  the  middle   and  finally  the  root 
of  the  ring  finger    (in  the  direction  of  the  hands   of  the    watch;   avoidino- 
tbe  middle  and  root  phalanx    of  the    middle  finger).     Thus  ten    times  it  is 
repeated.     In  this    way  if  the  Gayatri  be  repeated  one  thousand  time?    the 
sins  arising  from  killing  a  cow,  father,  mother,  from  causing  abortions  goin» 
to    the  wife  of  one's  Guru,  stealing  a  Brahmana's    property,   a  BrShman's 
field,    drinking    wine,   etc.,    all   are   destroyed.     Also    the  sios  acquired  in 
three   births    by  mind,   word,    or  by  the  enjoyments  of  sensual  objects  are 
thereby  then  and    there  instantly  destroyed.     All  the  labours  of  him    who 
works  bard  in  the  study  of  the    Vedas  without  knowing  the    Gayatri    are 
useless.     Therefore  if  you  compare   on  the   one  hand  the  study    of  the  four 
Vedas    with    the  reciting  of  the  Gayatri,  then  the    Gayatri  Japam    stands 
higher.     Thus  I  have  spoken  to  you  of  the  rules  of  the    mid-day    Sandhya, 
Now  I  am  speaking  of  Brahma   Yajna,    Hear. 

Here  ends  the  Nineteenth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
midday  Sandhy^  in  the  MahSpuranara  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bhdgavatam  of 
18,000  verses  by   Maharsi  Veda  Vyas*. 


1116  ^b1  mad  DEVl   BHiGAVATAM. 


CHAPTER  XX. 


1-25.  The  twice  born  (Brabmana)  is  firstly  to  sip  three  times  (make 
Achamana)  ;  then  to  make  the  marjana  (sprinkle  water)  twice  ;  he  is  to 
touch  the  water  by  the  right  hand  a  nd  sprinkle  water  on  his  two  feet.  Next, 
he  is  to  sprinkle  with  water  his  head,  eyes,  nose,  ears,  heart,  and  head 
thoroughly.  Then  speaking  oat  the  Des'a  and  Kala  (place  and  time)  he 
should  commence  the  Brahma  Yajna.  Next  for  the  destruction  of  all  the 
sins  and  for  getting  liberation,  he  should  have  the  Darbha  (sacrificial  grass, 
and  the  Kusa  grasses,)  two  on  his  right  han-.l,  three  on  his  loft  hand,  one 
grjiss  each  on  his  seat,  saerifieial  thread,  his  tuft,  and  his  heels.  No  sin  can 
now  remain  in  his  body. 

"  I  am  performing  this  Brahma  Yajna  for  the  satisfaction  of-the  Devata 
according  to  the  Sutra"  thus  thinking,  ha  is  to  repeat  the  G%atri  thrice. 
Then  he  is  to  recite  the  following  mantras  : — "  Agnimile  parohitam,  etc.," 
"  Yadamgeti"  "  Agnirvai,"  "  Mahavratanchaiva  panth^,"  "  AthStah 
Samhitayag'cha  vid^maghavat,"  "  Mahavratasya,"  tsetvorjet\ra,"  Agna 
Syahi"  Sanno  i)evi  rabbistaye,"  Tasya  "  Saraamuayo"  Briddhir§daieh" 
"  ^iksam  pravaksyami,"  "  Pancha  Samvatsareti,"  "Mayarnsataja- 
bhetyeva,"  "  Gaurgma,"  also  he  is  to  recite  the  two  following  Sutras  :— 
"Athato  Dharraa  Jijnisa,"  "Athato  Brahma  Jijn^sa."  Next  he  is  to  recite 
the  mantra  Tachhamyoh"  and  also  the  mantra  "Namo  Brahmane 
namo  stvagnaye  namah  prithivyai  nama  Osadhibhyoh  namah".  (These 
mantras  are  the  famous  mantras  of  the  Rig  Veda).  Next  perform  the 
Deva-tarpanam,  thus: — "Om  Praj&pati  stripyatu",  "Ona  Brahm^  tripyatu", 
"Om  Vedas  tripyantu,"  "Om  Risayastvi  pyantu",  "  Om  Devastrip_.  antu," 
"Om  Sarvani  chhandamsi  tripyantu",  "Om  Om  Kara  stripyatu",  "Om  Vasat 
Kara  stripyatu",  "Om  Vyarhit*yas  tripyantu",  Om  Savitri  tripyatu",  "Om 
G^yatri  tripyatu"',  Om  Yajna  stripyantu,  Om  Dyava  prithivyau  tripyatam. 
Om  antariksam  tripyatu,  Om  AhorStrani  tripyantu,  Om  Samkkya 
stripyantu,  Om  Siddh^  stripyantn,  Om  Samudra  stripyantu,  Om 
Nadyas  tripyantu,  Om  girayas  tripyantu,  Om  Ksettraus  adhivana  spati 
gandharva  Psarasas  tripyantu,  Om  nagH  vaydmsi  g^vascha  sadhy^ 
viprasta  thaiva  cha,  yaks^  raksausi  bhutani  tyeva  mant^ni  tripyantu. 
Next,  suspending  the  sacrificial  thread  from  the  neck  perform  the  Ri^i 
tarpauam,    thus: — Om   batarchinas  tripyantu,   Om  madhyamSs  tripyantu, 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  XX.  1117 

Om  Gritsaraada  stripyatu,  Oin  Vis  vSl  aitra  stripjata,  Om  VAmadeva 
etripyatu,  Om  Atri  stripyatu 

Om    BharaJvajastripyatu. 

Om     Vas'iBthastripyatu. 

Om  Pragfithastripyatu, —  P^vamSnyastripyantu.  Next,  holding  the 
sacrificial  thread  over  the  right  shoulder  and  an  ler  the  left  arm, 
perform  the  Tar  pa  nam,  thus  :  — 

Om    Ksudrasuktu  stripyantu. 

Om  MahcKsukt^jtripyantu,  Om  Sanaka  stripyatu, 

Om    Sanauda    stripyatu. 

Om     San^tana    stripyatu. 

Om    Sanat    Kumara     stripyatu. 

Om    Kapila   etripyatu. 

Oin    Asuristripyatu, 

Om    Vohalistripyatu. 

Om    Panehas'ikha  stripyntu. 

Om  Sumantu  Jaimini  \'aih'an"ipaya!  a  Paila  Sutra  lihSsya  Lh^rata 
Maha  Bharata    Dharmachary5.b  stripyantu. 

Om  Janantivah^i  vig^rgya  Gautama  Sakulya  v^bhravya  ^landavya 
Manduke}a    stripyantu. 

Om    Gargi    Vachaknuvi  tripyaUi. 

Om     Vadava     pralltheyi  tripyatu. 

Om    Sulabba     uiailreyi     tripyatu. 

Om    Kahola  stripyatu. 

Om   Ivau§itaka   stripyatu. 

Om    Maha   Kausitaka  stripyatu. 

Om    Ebaradviija  6tiip}alu. 

Om    Paimga    stripyatu. 

Om  Mahapairaga  stripyatu. 

Om   Sujajna    stripyatu. 

Om    Samkbyilyana  stripyatu. 

Om    Aitareya     stripyatu. 

Om  ^Mahaitareya  stripyatu. 

Om    Yaskala    stripyatu. 

Om  SSkala  stripyatu. 

Om    Sujata  vaktra  stripyatu. 

Om  Audavahi  stripyatu. 

Om    Saujami    stripyatu, 

Om    Saunaka     stripyatu, 

Om   As'valilyana  stripyatu. 


1118  SRt  MAD  DEYI  BHAgaVATAM 

26-54.  Let  all  the  other  Achlryas  be  satisfied.  Om  Ye  Ke 
chSsmat  kule  Jitta  aputr4  gotrino  mritElh.  ta  gnhuantu  may^  dattam 
vastranispidi  to  dakam."  Saying  thus  offer  water  squeezed  ont  of  a 
cloth.  O  Narada  !  Thus  I  have  spoken  to  you  of  the  rules  of  Brahma 
Yajfla.  Whoever  perform3  thus  the  Brahma  Yajni  gets  the  fruits 
of  studying  all  the  Vedas.  Then  performing,  in  due  order,  tha  Vais'va 
deva,  Homa,  ^rtiddha,  serving  the  guests,  and  feeding  the  eows,  the 
devotee  is  to  take  his  meals  during  the  filth  part  of  the  diy  along 
with  the  other  Brahmanas.  Then  the  sixth  and  the  seventh  parts  of  the 
day  he  is  to  spend  in  reading  histories  and  the  Puranas.  Then  the 
eighth  part  of  the  day  he  is  to  devote  in  seeing  the  relatives,  talking 
Avith  them  and  receiving  visits  from  other  persons ;  then  he  will  be 
prepared  to  perform  the  evening  Sandhya.  O  Narada  !  I  am  now 
talking  of  the  evening  Sandhya,  Listen.  Sri  Bhagavati  is  pleased  very 
quickly  with  him  who  performs  the  evening  Sandhya.  First  make 
the  Achaman  and  make  the  Vayu  (air)  in  the  body  steady.  With 
heart  tranquilled  and  with  the  seat  Baddha  Padmasana,  be  calm  and 
quiet  while  engaged  in  performing  the  Sandhya.  At  the  commence- 
meut  of  all  actions  prescribed  in  the  Srutis  and  Smritis,  fir;t  perform  the 
Sagarbha  Pran^yma.  In  other  words  recite  the  mautra  mentally  for  the  due 
number  of  moments  and  mike  the  Pranayama.  Simply  meditating 
is  called  Agarbha  Pranayama.  Here  no  mantra  is  necessary  to  be 
recited.  Then  have  the  Bhutas'uddhi  (have  the  purifications  of  the 
elements)  and  make  the  Sankalap.  First  of  all,  the  purification  of 
elements,  etc.,  are  to  be  done  first  ;  one  becomes,  then,  entitled  to 
do  other  actions.  While  doing  Puraka  (inhaling),  Kumbhaka  (retaining) 
and  Rechaka  (exhaling)  in  Pran^y^ma,  meditate  on  the  Deity  ytatod 
duly.  In  the  evening  time  meditate  on  the  Bhagavati  Sandhya  Devi 
thus: — The  name  of  the  then  Gayatri  Devi  is  Sarasvati,  She  is  old, 
of  black  colour,  wearing  ordinary  clothes  ;  in  her  hands  are  seen  conch 
shell,  disc,  club  and  lotus.  On  Her  feet  the  anklets  are  making 
sweet  tinkling  sounds  ;  on  Her  loins  there  is  the  golden  thread  • 
decked  with  various  ornaments.  She  is  sitting  on  Garuda.  On  Her  head 
the  invaluable  jewel  crown  is  seen  ;  on  Her  neck,  the  necklaces  of  stars  • 
Her  forehead  is  shining  with  a  brilliant  lustre  emitting  from  the 
pearl  and  jewel  Tatamka  ornaments.  She  has  put  on  yellow  clothes ; 
Her  nature  is  eternal  knowledge  and  ever-bliss.  She  is  uttering 
SSnia  Veda.  She  resides  in  the  Heavens  and  daily  She  goes  in  the 
path  of  the  Sun.  I  invoke  the  Devi  from  the  Solar  Orb.  O  Narada  ! 
Meditate  on  the  Devi  thus  and  perform  the  Sandhyd.  Then  perform 
the   Mftrjanam   by   the  mantra   "  Apohisth^   and   naxt   by     ths    miatra 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  XK  lll9 

"Agnis'cha  mk  minyus'eha."  The  remaining  actions  afe  the  same  as 
before.  Next,  repeat  the  Gayatri  and  offer,  with  a  pure  heart,  the 
offering  of  Arghya  to  the  Sun  for  the  satisfaction  ofNarayana.  While 
offering  this  Arghya,  keep  the  two  legs  level  and  similar  and  take  water 
in  folded  palms  and  meditating  on  the  Dovata  within  the  Solar  Orb, 
throw  it  towards  Him.  The  fool  that  offers  Sdryarghya  in  the  water, 
out  of  ignorance,  disregarding  the  injunctions  of  the  Srutis,  will 
have  to  perform  Brayas'ehitta  for  that  sin.  Next,  worship  the  Sun 
by  the  Surya  mantra.  Then  taking  one's  seat,  meditate  on  the  Devi 
and  repeat  the  Gayatri.  One  thousand  times  or  five  hundred  times 
the  Gdyatri  is  to  be  repeated.  The  worship,  etc.,  in  the  evening  is  the 
same  as  in  the  morning.  Now  I  am  speaking  of  the  Tarpanam  in 
the  Evening  Sandhya.  Hoar.  Vas'^istha  is  the  Ri§i  of  the  aforesaid 
Sarasvati.  Visnu  in  the  form  of  Saras vati  is  the  Devata  ;  Gayatri  is 
the  Chhanda;its  application  is  in  the  Evening  Sandhya  Tarpanam.  Now 
the  Tarpanam  of  the  Sandhyanga  (the  adjunct  of  Sandhya)  runs  as 
follows: — 

"  Om    Svahi   Purusam    Tarpayami." 
"  Om    S^mavedam   tarpayami." 
"Om    Saryamandalam   tarpayami." 
"  Om    Hiranyagarbham    tarpayami." 
"  Om    Paramatmanam  tarpayami." 
"  Om    Sarasvatim    tarpayami." 
"  Om    Devamataram    tarpayami." 
"  Om    Samkritim    tarpayami." 
"  Om    Vriddbam    Sandhyam  tarpayami." 
"  Om    Visnu  rupinim  Usasim  tarpayami." 
"OmNirmrijim    tarpayami." 
"  Om  Sarvasiddhi  karinim  tarpayami." 
"  Om    Sarvamautra  dhipatikSm  tarpayami." 
"Om    Bhurbhuvah   Svah  Parufam  tarpayami." 

Thus  perform  the  ;Vaidik  Tarpanam.  O  Narada !  Thus  have  been 
described  the  rules  of  the  sin  destroying  evening  Sandhya.  By  this 
evening  Sandhya,  all  sorts  of  pains  and  afflictions  and  diseases  are 
remove"d.  i^nd  ultimately  the  Moksa  is  obtained.  What  more  than  this 
that  you  should  know  this  Sandhy^  Bandanam  as  the  principal  thing 
amongst  the  good  conduct  and  right  ways  of  living.  Therefore 
Sii  Bhagavati  fructifies  all  the  desires  of  the  Bbaktas  who  perform  this 
Saudbva  Van-Janam. 


ii20  srI  mad  DEvt  bhAgavatam. 

Here  ends  the  Twentieth  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
description  of  Brahma  Yajni,  Sandhy^g,  etc.,  in  the  Mah^puranaia  5ri 
Mad  Devi    Bh^gavatara   of   18,000   verses   by    Maharsi    Veda  Vydsa. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

1-55.  N4rdyana  said: — Now  I  shall  -speak  of  the  Gayatri-puras'ch 
aranara.  Hear.  By  its  performance  all  the  desires  are  obtained  and 
all  the  sins  are  destroyed.  On  the  tops  of  mountain?,  on  the  banks 
of  the  rivers,  on  the  roots  of  Bel  tree?,  on  the  edges  of  tanks, 
within  the  enclosures  of  the  cows  (cow-stalls),  in  temples,  on  the  root 
of  Aa'vattha  trees,  in  gardens,  in  the  Tulasi  grove?,  in  the  Punya 
Ksetrams  (holy  places),  before  one's  Guru,  or  wherever  the  mind 
feels  exalted  and  cheerful,  and  gets  strength,  the  Puras'charanamse 
if  performed,  lead  to  a  speedy  success.  Before  commencing, 
the  Puras'charanam  of  a  mantra  (the  Puras'charanam  means 
repetition  of  the  name  of  a  deity  or  of  a  mantra  attended  with 
burnt  offerings,  oblations,  etc.,)  first  Prdyas'chitta  (penance)  is  done  in 
the  shape  of  repeating  one  million  times  the  GSyatri  with  the  Vyalrhitis. 
In  any  Vaidic  Karma  or  in  making  Puras'charanam  of  the  mantra 
of  the  Devatas  Nrisinha,  Surya,  Varaha,  etc.,  the  first  thing  done  ie 
to  repeat  the  G^yatri.  Without  the  japam  of  GA,yatri,  no  action  is 
attended  with  success.  The  reason  is  this  : —Every  Brihmana  is  a  Sakta 
(a  follower  of  ^akti) ;  he  cannot  be  a  Vai§nava  or  Saiva  ;  for  he  is 
the  worshipper  of  the  Prime  Force  Vedamata  GSyatri.  Therefore  obtain 
first  the  Grace  of  one's  own  Ifta  Devat^  Gilyatri  by  Her  Japam.  Then 
worship  the  other  Deities. 

Thus  one  should  purify  one's  japya  mantra  (the  mantra  that  is  to  fee 
repeated)  by  first  repeating  one  million  times  the  G^lyatri  j  then  one  is  to 
commence  Puras'chara'iana.  Again  before  purifying  the  mantra,  one  is  to 
purify  one's  Atman  (Self).  In  this  purification  of  one's  Atman  three 
likh  times,  in  cise  of  inability,  one  lakh  times  Gayatri  is  to  be  repeated 
Without  one's  Atman's  purification,  the  Japam,  Homa  and  other  actions 
all  become  usaless.  This  is  specially  noted  in  the  Vedas.  By  Tapas  (e.  g. 
Japam,  Chandrayana  and  Vrata,  (asceticism)  mortify  your  body.  By  offering 
Tarpanara  (peace-offerings)  to  the  Fathers  and  the  Devas,  one  can  get 
self  purification.  It  you  want  to  get  the  Heavens  and  if  you  want  to  become 
gn^at,  practise  Tapasya.  There  is  no  other  way.  (Tapasy^  is  the  intent 
Calling  of  the  ^lother.  That  Call  which  penetrates  through  and  through  the 


I 


Book  XL]  CHA.PTER  XXL  1121 

BrahmAnda.  The  Ksattriyas  should  cross  difficulties  and  dangers  by  force  of 
arm? ;  the  Vais'yas,  by  wealth  ;  the  Sudras,  by  serving  the  twice  born  ;    and 
t'le  lJfihinin\s  should  eros^  ditliaalties    and  dangers,    by    Tapasy^,    Homa, 
Japam,  etc.   So  the  Br^hraanas  should  always  be  cheerful  and  in  prompt  rea- 
diness to  do  Tapasya.  Of  all  sorts  of  tapasyas,  mortifying  the  body  by  observ- 
ing vows  and  fastings  is  the  best.  So  say  the  Risis.    (This  mortification  of  the 
body  gives  self-reliance  and  self  intuition  more    surely   and  speedily  than    all 
the  other  studies  and  other  practices.)   The  Brahmaaas    should  purify  them- 
selves by  following  duly  Krichhra    Chandrdyana    vratas,  etc,.    O    Narada  ! 
Now  I  am  speaking  of   ihe  purification  of  food.    Hear.     The  following  four 
occupations  of  the    Brahmanas   are  the  best  : — Ayachita,  (without  begging 
or  asking  for  anything),  Unchha,  (the  gathering  in  of  handfuls   of   the    corn 
left  by  the  reapers),    Sukla  (the  maintenance  derived  by  a    Brahma na  from 
other  Brahmanas  ;  a  pure  mode  of  life);     And  Bhiksu  (begging).     Whether 
according  to  the  Tantras  or  according  to  the  Vedas,  the  food  obtained  by  the 
above  four  means  is  pure.    What  is  earned  by    Bhiksa   (begging)    is  divided 
into  four    parts: — one  part  is  given  to  the  Brahmanas  ;  the   second  part  is 
given    to    the   cows;  the  third  part  is  given    to  the  guests,  the  fourth  part 
is    to   be    taken    by    him    and    his    wife.        Whatever    is    fixed    for  taking 
(swallowing)   mouthfuls   of  food,  that  is  to  be  taken  on  a  tray  or  a  platter. 
First    throw   a   little    cow-urine  over  that  and  count   duly  the    number    of 
mouthfuls.     The   mouthfuls    are    to    be  of  the  size  of  an    egg;    the    house- 
holders are    to    take    eight   such    mouthfuls  and  the    Vdnaprasthts  are  to 
take    four    such    mouthfuls.     The    Brahmacharins    can    sprinkle  fcheir  food 
with    cow- urine    nine  times,    sis   times,  or  three  times  as  they  like;  while 
sprinkling,    the    fingers   are   to    remain    intact.       The     Gayatri    is    to    be 
repeated    also.      The    food   offered    by    a   thief,    Ch^nddla,     Ksattriya   or 
Vais'ya  is  very  inferior.  The  food  of  a  Siidra,  or  the  companion  with  a  oudra 
or    taking    food    in  the    same    line    with  a   Siidra    leads    one  to  suffer  in 
the    terrible  hells  as  long  as  there   are    the    Sun  and    Moon.     The    Puras' 
charanam    of   GSyatri    is    repeating  this    twenty    four   lakh  times  (i.  e.  as 
many    lakh    times    as  there  are  syllables    iu  the    Gayatri).     But,  according 
to    Vis'vamitra,    repeating  thirty  two  lakh  times  is  the  Pura3"charanam    of 
GAyatri.     As    the  body   becomes  useless  when  the   soul  leaves  the  body,  so 
the    mantra  without  Puras'charanam    is     useless.        The  Puras'charuam  is 
prohibited    in  the    months    of  Jyaistha,  A«adha,  Pausi  and    Mala    (dirtj) 
months.  Also  on  Tuesday,  Saturday  ;  in  the  Vyatip3ta  and  Vaidhriti  Yogas; 
also  in  Astami  (eighth),  Navami  (ninth),  S^sthi  (sixth),  Chaturthi  (fourth) 
Trayodos'i  (thirteenth),  Chaturdasi  (fourteenth)  and  Am^vAsy^  (New  Moon), 
Ti'-his    (lunar   days);    in    the    evening  t^vilight  and  in    the    night);    while 

141 


1122  ^RI  MAD  DEvt  BHAgAVTAM, 

the  star  Bharanj,    Krittika,  Ardra,  As'lesa,    Jye§tb&,  Dhanistha,  ^ravann, 
or  the  Janma  naksatra   (Birth  time  star)  is  with  the  Mooa  ;  while  the  sii^ns 
Mesa,    Karkata,    Tul4,  Kumbha,  and  Makara  are  tlie  Lagnas  (sif^ns  in  the 
ascendant).     When  the  moon  and  the  stars  are  auspicious,  especially  in  the 
bright   fortnight,    the  Puras'charanara  perforraecl,  aives  tlie  Mantra  Siddhi. 
First  of  all  repeat  Svasti  v^chan  and  perform  duly  the  Nandi  raukha  Sraddhi 
and  give  food  and  clothing  to  tha  Brahmanas.     Take    the  pRrraission  of  the 
Brahmanas  aad  begin  the  Puras'charanam.  Where  the  Siva  Lingam  exists, 
facing    west,  or  in  any  Siva  temple,  commence  repeating  the  mantra.    Tiie 
other    Siva  Ksettrams  are  : — Kas'i,  Ked^ra,  Mah3,  Kula,  Sri  lv§ettra,  and 
Tryamvakam.       These    five    are    the     Great    Ksettrams,    known    widely 
on    this  earth,    for   the      fructification  and  the     siddhis    of   the    Mantras. 
At  all  other  places  than  these,  the  Karma    Chakra  is  to  ba  drawn   accord- 
ing   to    the    principles  of  the  Tantra.     And     then    they    will    be  fit    for 
Puras'charanam.         The       number     of     times     that     the       Puras'chara- 
nam    (the    repeating    of  the    mantra)    is    done    on  the  first  day,  the  same 
number  is  to  be  continued  every  day  until  completion  j    not  greater  nor  less 
than   that    and    also    no    intermission  or   stoppage    should   occur    in     the 
interval. 

The  repeating  of  the  Mantra  is  to  be  commenced  in  the  morning 
and  should  be  done  up  to  mid-day.  While  doing  this,  the  mind  is  to  be 
kept  free  from  other  subjects,  and  it  is  to  be  kept  pure  ;  one  is  to  meditate 
on  one's  own  Deity  and  on  the  meaning  of  the  manfcra  and  one  should 
be  particularly  careful  that  no  inaccuracies  nor  omissions  should  occur  in 
the  G4yatri,  Chhandas  and  in  the  repetition  of  the  Mantra.  One 
tenth  of  the  total  number  of  Pur^s'charanams  that  are 
repeated  is  to  be  used  for  the  Homa  purpose.  The  Chiru  is  to  be 
prepared  with  ghee,  til,  the  Eel  leaves,  flowers,  Java  grain, 
honey  and  sugar  ;  all  mixed,  are  to  be  offered  as  oblations  to  the 
fire  in  the  Homa.  Then  the  success  in  the  Mantra  comes,  {i.  e., 
mantra  siddhi  is  obtained  or  the  Mantri  becim^s  mmifeste:!).  Aftsr  tlie 
Puras'charanam  one  should  do  prop?rly  the  daily  and  occasional 
dutis  and  worship  the  Gtlyatri  that  brings  in  dharma,  weilth,  oSjects  of 
desire  and  liberation.  There  is  nothing  suparior  an  object  of  worship 
to  this  Giyatri,  whether  in  this  world  or  in  the  next.  The  devofcae, 
engaged  in  the  Puras'charanam,  should  eit  moderately,  observe  silence, 
bathe  thrice  in  the  three  Sandhya  times,  shouM  be  engaged  in 
worshipping  one's  Djity,  should  not  be  unmindful  and  should  not 
do  any  other  work.  He  is  to  remain,  whib  in  water,  to  repeat 
the  G&yatri   three  lakhs   of   times.     In   case     the     devotee     repeats     the 


Book  "XL]  CHAPTER  XXI.  1123 

mantra  for  achieving  success  in  any  other  desired  work  (k^mya  karma), 
then  he  should  willingly  stick  to  it  until  the  desired  success  is 
attained.  No.v  is  being  told  how  to  get  success  in  ordrinary 
Kamya  karma-?.  When  the  sun  is  rising,  repeat  the  Puras^charanara 
mantra  daily  thousand  times.  Than  one's  life  will  be  lengthened,  no 
disease  will  occ;ir,  and  weaUh  and  prosperity  will  be  obtained.  If  it  be 
done  this  way,  success  is  surely  attained  within  three  month?,  six  months 
or  at  the  eu  1  of  one  year.  If  the  Iloma  (offering  oblations  to  the  fire)  be 
offerel  one  lakh  time^  with  locuses  besmeared  with  ghee  (clarified  butter), 
Mokfa  ^liberation)  is  attained.  If,  before  the  Mantra-Siddhi,  or  the 
tuceess  in  reah"sing  the  Mantra,  is  attained,  one  performs  Japam  or 
Homam  for  Kamya  Sidlhi  (to  get  certain  desires)  or  moksa,  then  all  his 
actions  become  useless.  If  any  body  performs  t>venty-five  lakh  Homaa 
by  curd  and  milk,  he  gets  success  (Siddhi)  in  this  very  birth.  So  all  the 
^Nlaharsis  say.  By  this  the  same  result  is  attained  that  is  got  by  the 
aforesaid  means,  (/'.  e.  by  the  eight-limbed  Voga,  whereby  the  Yogis 
become  perfect. 

He  will  attciiu  Siddhi  if  he  bo  devoted  to  his  Guru  i-nl  keep  himself 
under  restraint  for  six  months  only  (  i.  e.  practise  Samyama)  as  regards 
taking  food  etc.,  whether  he  be  incapable  or  his  mind  be  attached  to  other 
sjnsual  objects.  One  should  drink  Paficha  gavya  (cDW-:irine,  cow-dung, 
milk,  curd,  ghee)  one  day,  fast  one-day,  take  B.ahmana's  food  one 
d  vy  ani  b.^jminlful  in  repeating  the  Gayatrt.  First  bathe  in  the  Ganges 
or  in  other  sacred  places  an!  while  in  water  repeat  one  hundred 
Gayatris.  If  one  drinks  water  on  which  one  hundred  Giyatris  are 
repeated,  one  is  freed  from  all  one's  sins.  He  gets  the  fruit  of  per- 
forming the  Krichhra  vrata,  the  ChSndrayana  vrata  and  others.  Be  he  a 
Ks'altriya  King,  or  a  Brahmana,  if  he  is  to  remain  in  his  own  house,  hold 
As'rama  and  ba  engaged  in  pet  forming  Tapasya  then  he  will  be  certainly 
freed  of  all  his  sins.  Be  he  a  house  holder  or  a  Brahmachari  or  VSnaprasfchi, 
he  should  perform  sacrifices,  etc.,  according  to  his  Adhikara  (or  his  rights) 
and  he  will  get  fruits  according  to  his  desire?.  The  S^gnik  man 
(who  keeps  the  Holy  Fire)  and  other  persons  of  good  conduct  and 
of  learning  and  of  good  education  should  perform  actions  as  prescribed  in 
the  Vedas  and  Smritis  with  a  desire  to  attain  Moksa.  Thus  one 
should  eat  fruits  and  vegetables  and  water  or  take  eight  mouth- 
fals  of  Bhiksanna(the  food  gotby  begging).  If  the  Puras'charanam  be 
performed  this  way,  then  the  Mantra  Siddhi  is  obtained.  O  Narada  !  If 
the  Puras'charanam  be  done  with  the  mantra  thus,  his  poverty  is  removed 
entirely.  What  more  shall  I  say  than  this  that  if  any  body  hears  this 
simply,  his    merits    get   increased    and     he    attains  great  success. 


1124  5ri  mad  dev!  bhAghvatam. 

Here  ends  the  Twenty  First  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on 
Gayatri  Puras'charanarn  in  the  Mahapuranam  5ri  Mad  Devi  BhSga 
vatam    of   18,000    verses    by  Maharsi    Yeda    Vyasa. 


CPIAPTER  XXII. 

1-45.  N^-rayana  said  : — "O  Narada  !  la  connection  with  this 
Piiras'charanam  it  comes  now  to  ray  mfttnory  ab).it  the  rules  eon- 
cernino-  the  Vais'va  Deva  worship.  )lear.  *  (An  offering  made  to  the 
yis'vadev^s;  an  offering  to  all  deities  (made  by  presenting  oblations  to 
fire  before  meals).  The  five  yajnas  are  the  following  :  — (1)  The  Devayajfia, 
(2)  Brahma  yajna,  (3)  Bhuta  yajna,  (4)  Pitri  yajoi,  and  (5)  Mannsya 
yajfia.  Fireplace,  the  pair  of  stone  pestles,  brooms  (for  sweeping, 
etc.,>,  sieves  and  other  house-hold  things  of  the  sort,  wooden  mortars 
(used  for  cleansing  grains  from  husk)  and  water-jars,  these  five  are 
the  sources  of  evils  ^inasmuch  as  they  are  the  means  of  killing. 
So  to  free  one's  self  from  the  above  sins,  one  is  to  sacrifice  before  the 
Vais'vadeva.  Never  offer  oblations  of  Vais'vadeva  on  hearth«,  on  any 
iron  vessel,  on  the  ground  or  on  broken  tiles.  They  are  to  be  offered 
in  any  sacrificial  pit  (Kunda)  or  on  any  sacrificial  altar.  Do  not  fire 
the  hearth  by  fanning  with  hands,  with  winnowing  ba^ket-,  or  with 
holy  deer  skin,  etc.,  but  you  can  do  so  by  blowing  by  your  mouth. 
For  the  moutb  is  the  origin  of  fire.  If  the  fire  be  ignited  by  c'othes, 
one  in  liable  to  get  desease  ;  if  by  winnowing  baskets,  then  less  of 
wealth  comes  ;  if  by  hands,  one's  death  ensues.  But  if  it  be  done  by 
blowing,  then  one's  success  eoraos.  (There  is  the  danger  of  catching 
fire,) 

One  should  sacrifice  wtth  curd,  ghee  fruits,  roots  and  vegetables,  and 
water  and  in  their  absence  with  fuel,  grass,  etc.,  or  with  any  other 
substances  soaked  with  ghee,  curd,  Payasa  or  lastly  with  water. 
l)ut  never  with  oil  or  with  salty  substances.  If  one  performs  the  Homa 
with  dry  or  stale  substances,  one  is  attacked  with  leprosy  ;  if  any 
body  performs  Homa  with  leavings  of  other  food  he  becomes  subdued 
by  his  enemy;  if  one  does  so  wit'h  rude  and  harsh  substances,  he 
becomes  poor  and  if  one  does  with  salty  substances,  he  meets  with 
a  downward  course,  gets  degraded  in  position  and  honour.  You  can 
offer  oblations  to  Vais'vadeva  with  burning  coals  and  ashes  from  the 
north  side  of  the  fire  of  the  hearth  after  the  preparation  of  the 
meals.     But   you   should    never    offer    sacrifices  with    salty    things.     The 


Book  XT.]  CHAPTER  XXTI.  1125 

illiterate    Brahraana       who    eats      before    offering      oblati(ns    lo   Vais'va- 
Deva    goes    headioog   downwards    into   the     Kala    Sutra    hell.      V\'batever 
f.  od   that    you    are    iatendiiig    to    prepare,     whether    they  be     vegetabler, 
Ipaves,    roots    or    fruits,    offer    oLlations    to     Vais'vadeva     with      that.     If, 
before    the    Homa    be  performed    of  Vais'vadeva,    any  Brahmaehari  ecines, 
then    take    off,    for    tiie    Honia,    first  something  ;    acd     then    give    to    the 
beggar    and    satisfy    him    and    tell  him  to  be    c  ff.     For     the    Bralmachaii 
niendicant    can    remove    any    defects  that   may    ooenr    to    Vais'vadeva  but 
Vais'vadeva  is  unable  to    remove  any  dtfrctsthat   may    cccur  rtgniding  the 
mendicant  BrahmachSri.  Both  the  Paiarnahansa  or  ljrahm:.ehari  mendicant 
are  the    masters    of  the  prepared  food    (Pakkanna)  ;    so    when    any      body 
takes   one's    foud    without   giving   to   any   of  these    two,    if     they     happen 
to    come    there,    he    will    have    to  make  the   Chandiayana  (rel'gicus  or  ex- 
piatory   penance    regulated     by     ihe    moon's    age,     that      is,    waxing    or 
waning).  O  iS^rada  I  After  the  offering  gi\en  to  A'aib'vcnara,  ci  e  is  to  offer 
Go-giasa,    that    is,    mouihfuls    of   food    to   the    tows.     Mear  uow  how  that 
is    done,     Tlie    mother    Surabhi,    the    beloved  of  Visnu,  is  always  station- 
ed   in    the    region    of    Visnu    (Visnu-pa.'a)  ;    so  O  t^urabhi  !   I    am  offering 
you    mouthfuls    of   food.     Accept    it.       "Salutation    to    the    cows  "saying 
"this,    one    is  to  worship    the     cawa    and    offer     food      to      them.     Hereby 
Surabhi,  the    Mother    of  the    cows,    becomes  pleased.      After     thi?,    one   is 
to   wait   outside    for    a    j>eiiod      that    is    taken    to    milch    a    ccw,    wheth.er 
any  guosts  are  coming.      For  if  any  guest  uoes  back  disjippointed    from    any 
house  wit  1  out   any    food,    he    takei    away  all  the  punyams  (merits)    of   the 
house-holder    and    gives    him     back    his    own     sin.     The     house-holder     is 
to    support     mother,    father,    Guru,    brother,    son,     servants,     dependants, 
guests,    those    that    have   come,    and   Agni  (Fire\     Knowing     all     these, 
he   who    does  not    perform    the    functions    of   the    house-hold     is  rcckoued 
as   fallen    from     his    Dharma    both    in    this   world    and   in  the    next.     The 
poor  house-holder  gets  the   same    fruit     by    performing    these     five    MahS 
jajuas    that    a    rich    Brahmaua       gets   by    performing    the    Soma    Yajna. 
O     Best  oftheManis!    Now    1    am    talking   of     the     PrSnAgni    Hotra    or 
about   taking    fcod,     knowing    the    rules   of    which     makes   a     man    free 
from   birth,    old    age   and    death    ai:d    from    all     sorts    of    sins.     He  who 
takes    his     food    according    to    proper   rules,     is     freed    of     the     threefold 
debts,  delivers  his  tvventyone    generations  from  the  hells,    obta'ns  the  fruits 
of  all  the  Yajnas  and  goes  unhampered    to  all  the   regions  of  the  righteous. 
Think   of  the   belly    as  Arani  or  the    piece    of  wood    for  kindling  the    fire 
(by   attrition),    think     of  the    mind    as        the    churning    rod,    and     think 
of  the  wind  as  the  rope,  and  then    kindle     the  fire,    residing   in  the  belly  : 
the      eyes      lare       to      be      considered         as      the        shcrificer,        (the 


1126  ^e!  mad  DEVl  BHAGAVATAM. 

A'ddharya),  and  consider  fire  in  the  belly  as  the  rf  suit  of  churning,  In 
this  fire  of  the  belly,  one  is  to  offer  oblations  for  the  satisfaction  of 
Prdna,  etc.,  the  five  deities.  First  of  all  offer  oblations  to  the 
Pr^na  Vayu  with  foci  taken  by  the  forefinger,  middlefinger  and 
thumb;  next  offer  oblations  to  the  Apana  Ycxyu  with  the  thumb, 
midllefinger  and  the  nameles  (an  mil)  finger;  next  offer  oblations  to 
the  Vy^na  Vayu  (breath)  with  the  thumb,  nameless  finger  and  the 
little  finger;  next  offer  oblations  to  tha  Udana  Vayu  with  the  thumb, 
forefinger  and  the  little  finger  and  lastly  offer  oblation?  to  the  Sam  Ana 
Vayu  with  food  taken  by  all  the  fingers.  At  the  sa  ne  time  repra^ 
respectively    the    mantras: — 

"Om  Pranaya    Svaha," 

"  Om    Aplnaya    Svaha." 

"Om    SaraanSya    Svahil," 

"  Om    Udanlya  Svaha," 

"  Om    Vyaaaya  Svaha," 

Within  the  mouth,  there  is  the  Ahavaniya  fire;  within  the 
heart,  there  ii  the  G^rhapatya  fire  ;  in  the  navel,  there  is  the 
Dhaksinagni  fire;  belo^  th^  nivel,  there  is  the  SibhySgni  fire  and  belo  v 
that  there  is  the  AvasathyS.gni  fire.  Think  thus.  Next  consider 
the  Speech  as  the  Hot^,  the  Prtlna  as  the  Udgatha,  the  eyes  as  the 
Addharyu,  the  mind  as  the  BrahraS,  the  ears  as  the  Hot4  and  the 
keeper  of  the  Agni,  the  AhamkSra  (egoism)  as  beast  (Pas'u),  Om 
Kara  as  water,  the  Buddhi  (intellect)  of  the  house-holder  as  the  legal 
wife,  the  heart  as  the  sacrificial  altar,  the  hairs  and  pores  as  the 
Kus'a  grass,  and  the  two  hands  as  the  sacrificial  ladles  and  spoons 
(Sruk  and  Sruva.)  Then  think  of  the  colour  of  the  Prana  mantra  as  golden 
the  fire  of  hunger  as  the  Risi  (seer),  Surya  (the  sun;  as  Devata,  the 
chhandas  as  G&yatri  and  Pranaya  Svahl  as  the  Mantra  uttered;  also  repeat 
"  Idam&dityadevaya  namah  "  and  offer  oblations  to  the  Prilna.  The 
colour  of  the  Apfina  mantra  is  railkwhito.  ^raddh^gni  is  the  Risi,  the  Moon 
is  the  Devata,  Usnik  is  the  chhandas,  and  "  Ap^mtya  Svaha,  "  "  Idam 
Somaya  na  namah  "  are  the  mantras.  The  colour  of  the  Vyana  mantra 
ip  red  like  red  lotuses;  the  fire  Deity  Hutasana  is  the  Risi,  the  fire 
is  the  Devata  ;  Anustup  is  the  chhandas,  "  Vyanaya  Svaha  and 
Idamagnaye  na  namah ''  are  the  mantras.  The  colour  of  the  Udana 
mantra  is  like  that  of  the  worm  Indra  Gopi ;  fire  is  the  Risi  ;  Vayu 
is  the  Devata,  Brihati  is  the  chhandas  ;  ''  Udanaya  SvSha "  and 
"Idam  Vayave  na  namah"  are  the  mantras.  The  colour  cf  the 
Samana  mantra  is  like  lightning  ;  Agni  is  the  Risi  ;  Parjanya  (the 
rains,  water)    is  the   Devata  ;   Pankti      is   the      cbhanda ;     "  Samanaya 


Book  XI.J  CHAPTER  XXIII.  1127 

Svaha  "  and  "  Idam  Parjanyclya  na  oamah "  are  the  mantras.  O 
Narada!  Thus  offering  the  five  oblations  to  the  five  hreaths,  next 
o!Ter  oblations  to  the  itinanj  the  J3hisana  Vahni  is  the  Risi  ;  the  Gllyatri 
is  the  chhandaj  the  Self  is  the  Devata  ;  "Atmane  Svaha,  "  and 
"Idamatmane  na  namah "  arw  the  mantras.  ()  Narada!  He  who 
knows  tliis  Homa  of  PranAgnihotra  attains  the  state  of  Brahma. 
Ihus  1  have  sj-oken  to  }ou  in  brief  the  rules  of  the  Pranagni  hotra 
Iloma. 

Here  ends  the  Twcnly-Second  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on 
the  rules  of  Vais  vadcva  in  the  MahApurSnam  5ri  Mad  Devi  BhSga- 
vatam    of    l^jCOO     verses    by     Mabarsi    Veda    Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

1-20.  Narayana  said: — "  The  best  Sadhakn,  then  uttering 
after  his  meal?,  the  mantra  "  Amritapidhanamasi.  "  O  Water-nectar  !  Let 
Thou  be  the  covering  to  the  food  that  I  have  taken),  should  make  Achaman 
(sip  om  Gandusa  water)  and  distribute  the  remnant  food  (the  leavings) 
to  those  who  take  the  leavings.  "Let  the  servants  ^and  maid-servants 
of  our  family  that  expect  the  leavings  of  food  be  satisfied  with  what 
leavings  I  give  to  tham"  "  Let  those  inhabitants  of  the  Raurava  hell  or 
other  unholy  places  who  have  remained  there  for  a  Padma  or  Arbuda  years 
and  want  to  drink  water,  besatifcfied  with  this  water  that  I  offer  to  them  and 
let  this  water  bring  unending  happiness  to  them  ".  Repeating  the  above 
two  mantras  let  the  house-holder  distribute  the  leavings  of  food  to  the  ser- 
vants and  the  water  to  those  who  want  water  respectively.  Then  opening 
the  knot  of  the  Pavitra  (a  ring  of  Kus'a  grass  worn  on  the  fourth  finger  on 
certain  religious  occasions),  let  him  throw  this  on  the  square  mandalara  on 
the  ground.  The  Brahmana  that  throws  this  Kus'a  grass  on  the  vessel 
(PAtra)  is  said  to  defile  the  row  of  Brahmanis,  taking  their  food.  The 
Brihmana  that  has  not  yet  washed  his  face  after  taking  the  food,  on 
touching  another  such  Brahmana  or  a  dog  or  a  Sudra,  should  fast  one  day 
and  then  drink  Paiicbagabya  and  thus  purify  himself.  And  in  case  the 
Uchchista  Brahmin  (whfi  has  not  washed  his  raohth  and  hands  after 
meals)  be  touched  by  another  Brahmin,  (who  is  not  Uchchista,  then  simply 
bathing  will  purify  him.  By  otfering  this  Ek^huti  ^^oblation  once) 
according  to  rulos  mentioned  above,  cno  obtains  the  fruit  of  performing 
teti   million    suciiiices;  and  qv  offering  thit-  obiatiou  five  times  one  gets  the 


Il28  l^Rt  MAD  DEV!  BHAgAVATAM. 

eiulless    fr.iiL  of  performiri<^    fifty  million  saerlfiaes,  an'^    if  one  feeds  such  a 
man  who  knows    well  how  to  do  (his     Pranao;nihoma,  then  he  as  well  as  he 
whom    he    feed-;     both  derive  fall  benefits  and  they  ultimatelv  go  to  heav;^n. 
The    Brahmana     acquire?    while  taking  each    of  his    mouthful  of  food    the 
fruit  of  eating  Pancha<Tav}a,  who  tf.kes  his  food  duly  with  the  holy  Pavitra 
Kus'a   grass    ^.ied    on    his    finger.       During  the    three  times  of  worship,  the 
devotee    is    to     do    his    daily    Japam,    Tarpanam    and  Homa  and  he  should 
feed    the      Br^hmin^.     Thus    t!ie    five    limbed    Puras'charana  is  completelvr 
done.     The  re-igious  man  should  sleep  on  a  low  bedding  (lie  on  the  ground); 
he  is  to  control  his  senses  and  anger;  he  is  to  eat  moderately,  the  things  that 
are  light,    sweet    and    good;    he  is  to  be  humble,    peaceful  and  cilra.      Ho 
is  to  bathe  thrica  daily  and  not  to  hold  any    unholy    conversation  with    any 
woman,    a   Siidra,    one  who    is  fallen,  without  any  initiation,  and  who  is  an 
atheist ;  as  well  he    should  not  speak  in  a  language  spoken  by  the  chandalas. 
One  is  to  bow  down  before  him    who  is  in  the  act  of  performing  the  Japam, 
Homa  and  worship,   etc  ;    one  is  not  to  talk  with  him.  Never  by  deed,  mind 
or  word,   on  all  occasions  never  speak  about    sexual    intercourses  ;    nor  hold 
any  contact  with  such  people.     For  the    relinquishment  of  this   subject   is 
ealled    Brahmacharyam  (continence)  of   the  kings   as  well  as  of  the  house- 
holders.    But  one  should  go  to  one's  legal  wifrt    during  the  night   time  after 
her  menstruation  duly  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Sastras  ;    the    Brahma- 
charyam  is   not  thereby  destroyed.     Man     can   not  repay   the    three    fold 
debts    and  he   cannot   aspire    for    mokaa       without     procreating    sons     or 
without  doing    the   duties    of  the   house- holders,    as       prescribed   by   the 
Sastras.     An    attempt      to    do     so    becomes    entirely      fruitless    like     the 
breast  on  the   neck    of    a    goat.     Rather  it    drags  one  downward''.     So  the 
^rutis  sav.     So  let  yourself  be  free   first    from  the  debts  due    to    the   Devas, 
the  debts  due  to  the  llisis  and  the  debts  due  to  the      Pitris      Make  sacrifices 
first  and    then    be    free  from  the     Deva's   d*  bt.     Hold    Brahmacharyam  and 
be    free    from    the      Bisis' debt.    Offer  til    and   water;   that  i?,  do  Sreoddh' s 
and    tarpanams    and    be    fr.^e   from    the   c'ebt   due  to     (he    Pitris.     Then  do 
rralily    practise   your  ovn    Varn's'rain;i  Dharui-i. 

21-33.  One  is  to  praet's  ^  KrichcSri  ehanlrsi  yma  Vrata  and  to 
take  for  his  food,  rtiilk,  fruits,  roots  and  vegetabb?,  Hibifyannam  and  foo,l 
obtained  by  begging  so  that  on'i  m  ly  b^c  nn^f  sinlci^s.  One  is  to  make  japam 
for  Puras'charanam.  One  is  to  avoid  salt,  salty  or  alkaline  substance?,  acid, 
garlic,  turnips,  eating  in  Kamsa  vessels,  chewing  betels,  eating  twice, 
putting  on  impure  clothings,  the  intoxicating  things  and  the  nnsastric 
nocturnal   japam  ;   also   one   is    nut    to     waste  one's  time  over  blaming  and 


BooxXT.]  CHAPTER  XXIII.  1129 

trying    to   find    faults   with   the   relatives,    playing    at  dice,  or  talking  at 
random   with    one's   wife   (so  that    evil   effects    may    arise).      One    is    to 
spend   one's   time  in      worshipping     the     Devas,     reciting      the     hymns 
of    praise,  and  studying  the    6astras.     One   is    to    sleep     on   the    ground? 
practise     Brahmacharyam,  and   the    vow   of    silence,    bathe     thrice,     not 
practise     anything   which   befits   the    Sudras      only.  One   is    to    worship 
everyday  make     charities  duly  and  be   always     happy,     reoitestotras  daily 
do    occasional        Deva    worships,     have     faith     in      one's       Gruru       and 
Deva.      These    twelve    rules   are    to    ensure    success    to    the  devotee  who 
does  Puras'charanam.  One  is  to  daily  praise  the  San,  with  one's  face  turned 
towards  Him,  do  japam  before  Him  ;  or  one  is    to  worship  one's  own  Deity 
in  front  of  fire   or   the  image  of  any  god,    and  do   japam   simultaneously. 
The  devotee  who  practises  Puns' charanam  is  to  bathe,  worship,    do  japam, 
meditate,  practise  Homa,  Tarpinam,  is  to  have  no  desires   and  to  surrender 
all    fruits  to   one's   own   desired    Deity,    etc.  These   are  necessarily  to   be 
oDserved  by  him.     Therefore  while  doing  japam,    Homa,  etc.,  the  devotee's 
mind   is   to  remain  always  pleasant   and  satisfied.     One  should  be  ready  to 
practise   tapasya,    to   see    the  S-dlstras    and  be  merciful    to  all  the    beings. 
As   asceticism   leads    one   to  to    heaven    and  to   the    attainment   of  one's 
desires,  therefore  know  this  that  all  the  powers  come  to  an  ascetic.  An  asce- 
tic can   cause  another's   death  (ra4ran) ;  he  can  injure  others,  cure  diseases 
and  kill  all.  Whatever  the  several  llisis  wanted  from  the  Devi  G^yatri  and 
to  that  end  made  Puras'charanam  and  worshipped  Her,  they  obtained  from 
Her  all  those  things.     O    N^radi !     I  will  speak  of  Santi  Karmas  etc.,  in  a 
future    chapter.     Here   I  will   speak    of  those    rules,  etc.,   that  are  to  be 
observed    in     Puras'charanam  in  as  much  as  they  play  the  principal    part 
to  success. 

First  of  all  shave  yourself  and  have  your  hairs  and  nails,  etc.,  cut  off  and 
bathe  and  be  pure.  Then  perform  the  PrAjapatya  prSyas'chitta  for  one's  peace 
and  purification  and  next  do  the  puras'charanam  of  the  GrSyatri.  Do  not  speak 
the  whole  day  and  night.  Keep  your  thoughts  pure.  If  words  are 
to  be  spoken,  speak  only  what  you  take  as  true.  First  recite  Mahavya- 
rhitiand  then  the  Sdvitri  mantra  with  Pranava  prefixed.  Then  recite  the 
sin-destroying  mantra  "Apohisth^,  etc  ,"  and  Svasti  mati  Suktaand  "Pava- 
ra4ni  Sukta."  In  every  action,  in  its  beginning  and  at  its  end  one  is  to  under- 
stand the  necessity  of  doing  the  Japam,  why  and  what  for  one  is  doing  that. 

One  is  to  repeat  the  Praoava,  the  three  Vy^rhitis  and  S^vitri  ayuta 
times  or  one  thousand  times  or  one  hundred  times  or  ten  times.  Then  offer 
with  water,  the  peace  offerings  (tarpanam)  to  the  Achdrya,  Rif  i,  Chhandas 
and  the  Devas.  Being  engaged  in  action,  do  not  speak  any  impure  lan^^^ua-^e 

142  °    ° 


1130  SRI  xMAD  DEVf  BHGAVATAM. 

of  the  Mlecjhehhas  or  talk  with  any  Sadra  or  auy  bad  person.  Do  uot  talk 
with  wife  iu  the  period  of  meustruatiou,  with  one  who  has  fallen,  with  tiie 
low-elass  person,  with  any  hater  of  the  Devas  and  ihe  Brdhiuanas,  Achar.  as 
and  Grurus,  with  tho-6  who  blame  the  fathers  and  mothers  ;  nor  shew  anv 
disrespect  to  anybody.  Thus  i  have  spoken  in  due  order  about  all  the 
rules  of  Krichchhra  vrata.  Now  I  will  speak  of  the  rules  of  the  Pra jSpatya 
Krichchhra,  S^ntapana,    Paraka  Krichchhra.  and  Chaudrayana. 

43-54.  One  becomes  freed  of  all  the  sins,  if  one  performs  the  above  five 
Chandrdyanas.  By  the  performance  of  the  Tapta  Krichchhra,  all  sins  are 
burnt  off  in  an  instant.  By  the  performance  of  the  three  ChandrSyanas 
the  people  get  purified  and  go  to  the  Brahma  Loka.  By  doing  eight 
Ch^ndrSyanas,  one  sees  face  to  face  one's  Devata,  ready  to  grant  boons. 
With  ten  Chandr^yanas,  one  gets  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedis  and  one 
acquires  all    what  one  wants. 

In  the  observance  of  the  Krichciihra  Praj^pafcya  Vrata,  one  has  to  take 
food  once  in  midday  for  three  days,  once  in  the  evening  for  three  days,  and 
for  the  next  three  days  whatever  one  gets  without  asking  anything 
from  any  body.  For  the  next  three  days  one  is  not  to  take  any  thing  at  all 
and  go  on  with  one's  work.  These  twelve  day's  work  constitutes  the 
PrSjapatya  Vrata. 

Now  about  the  rules  of  the  S^ntapana  Vrata.  On  the  preceding  day  one 
has  got  to  eat  food  consisting  of  the  mixture  of  cow  urine,  cow-dung 
milk,  curd,  ghee  and  the  water  of  the  Kus'a  grass  ;  the  day  following 
he  is  to  fafet.  These  two  days'  work  constitutes  the  Sflntapina 
Vrata. 

Now  about  the  Ati  Krichchhra  vrata.  For  the  first  three  diys,  one  is  to 
eat  one  mouthful  of  food  a  day  and  for  the  next  three  days  one  is  to 
fast.  This  is  the  AtiKrichchhra  vrata.  This  vrata  repeated  three  times  is 
called  Maha  Sslntapana  vrata.  Note, —  According  to  the  opinion  of  Yama, 
the  fifteen  days'  work  constitutes  Mah^  Santapana.  For  the  three  day.-!  one 
has  to  eat  cow-urine  ;  for  the  next  three  days,  cow-dung,  for  the  next 
three  days,  curd  ;  for  the  u';xt  three  days  milk  ;  and  for  the  next  three 
days  one  has  to  take  ghee.  Then  one  becomes  pure.  This  is  called  the 
all  sin-destroying  Maha  bantapan  Vrata.  Now  I  am  speaking  of  the 
nature  of  the  Tapta  Krichchhra  Vrata. 

The  Tapta  Krichchhra  vrata  is  carried  cut  for  ihe  twelve  days.  For  the 
first  three  days,  one  has  to  drink  hot  water  ;  for  the  next  three  days, 
hot  milk  ;  lor  the  next  three  days,  the  hot  ghee  and  for  the  nest  three 
days,  air  only.     Everyday  one  has  tj  bathe  ouca    only  under  the   ttboTf  rules, 


Book  XL]  CHAPER  XXIII.  1131 

and  remain  self-controlled.  If  one  drinks  water  simply   everyday    under   the 
above  couditioos,    that  is  called  the  Prajapatya  vrata. 

To  remain  without  any  food  for  twelve  days  according  to  rules  is 
called  the  Paraka  Krichehhra  vrata.  By  this  vrata,  all  sins  are  des- 
troyed. 

Now  about  the  rules  of  taking  food  in  the  ChandrSyana  vrata.  In  the 
daik  fortnight  one  will  have  to  decraase  one  mouthful  of  food  everv  day  and 
in  the  brio;ht  fortni^dii  one  will  have  to  increase  one  mouthful  every 
day  and  one  has  to  fast  completely  on  the  Amavasya  (new  moon)  dav.  Onw 
ha-^  to  bathe  thriea  daily  durini]^  every  Sandhya  time,  Thi;^  is  known  as  the 
Chaadrfiyi^na     Vra'a. 

In  tho  Sis'u  Chandrayaua  Vrata  one  will  have  to  take  four  monbhnils 
of  food  in  the  mid-day  an;l  four  mouthfuls  in  the  evaning.  In  the  Yati  ChA,n- 
(Irayana  one  has  to  take  eight  mouthfuls  in  the  mid-day  and  to  control 
his  passions. 

55.  These  abovemanfcioae  1  vratas  are  observed  by  the  Rudras,  Adityas' 
Vasus,  and  Marnts  ;  and  they  are  enjoyiiig  thereby  their  full  safety. 

Each  of  the  above  vratas  purifies  the  seven  Dhdtus  of  the  body  in 
seven  nights  simply!  Fir-t  skin,  then  blood,  then  flesh,  bones,  sinews,  marrows 
and  semen  are  purified.  There  is^  no  doubt  in  this.  Thus  purifying 
tlie  Atman  by  the  above  vratas,  one  is  to  do  religious  actions.  'J'he 
work  done  by  such  a  purified  man  is  sure  to  be  met  with  sueeees.  First 
control  the  senses,  be  pure  and  do  good  actions.  Then  all  your  desires 
will  be  undoubtedly  fructified.  Fast  for  three  nights,  without  doing  any 
actions  and  see  the  result.  (You  will  not  do  anything  and  you  want 
self  control  !  Is  this  a  child's  play  ?)  Perform  for  three  days  the  nocturnal 
vratas.  Then  proceed  with  your  desired  duties.  If  one  works  according 
to  these  methods,  one  gets  the  fruits  of  Pursa'charanam.  O  N^rada  !  By  the 
Puras'charanam  of  ori  Gayatri  Devi  all  desires  are  fulfilled  and  all  sins 
are  destroyed.  Before  doing  Puras'charanam  purify  your  b^dy  by  per- 
forming the  above  vratas  Then  you  will  get  all  your  desires  completely 
fulfilled.  O  Narada  !  Thus  1  have  spoken  to  you  of  the  secret  rules 
of  Puras'charanam.  Never  disclose  this  to  any  other  body.  Fcr  it  is 
reeofnised  equivalent  to    the  Vedas. 

Here  ends  the  Twenty. third  Chapter  of  the  Eleventh  Book  on  the 
Tapta  Krichehhra  vrata  and  others  in  the  Maha  Puranam  Sri  Mitd  Devi 
Bb^o-avatam  of  18.000  verses  by   Maharsi  Veda   Vyasa. 


1132  SrI  mad  deyI  bhAgavatam, 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 


1.  NSrada  said: — "  0  Bhagavan  !  Thod  art  the  ocean  of  mercy  ;  kindly 
speak  out  to  me  in  brief  all  the  things  and  the  duties  to  be  observed  and 
applied  in  the  S&nti  Karmas  (the  peace  bringing  acts)  of  G^yatri. 

2-20.     NSr^yana  said  : — "  0  N^rada  !     The  question     asked  by  you  is 
esoteric.  Never  divulge  this  to  a   wicked  person  or   any    hypocrite.  It  is  to 
be  kept  secret.  While  doing  this  Santi  Karma,  the  BrShmanas  are  to  perform 
the  Homas  with  fuel  soaked  in  milk  (Payah).  If  the  fuel  of  the    S'amt   tree 
be    offered    in    Homa    ceremony,   then    diseases  caused    by     planets    are 
cured.     If      the    Homa  be  performed  with  wet  As'vaththa    or    Uduuibara 
or  other    ksira  trees,   the   diseases     caused    by     demons  and    hob-goblins 
are    cured.     If   one   offers  Tarpanam  with  one  palmfal  of   water,  repeating 
the    mantra    "Suryam     Tarpaymi   namah",    the    pending  evils     are   also 
averted   and   troubles  are    ceased.     The  repetition  of  the    Gayatri   mantra 
with  knees  immersed  in  water  averts  all  evils.     The    repetition  of  GSyrtri 
with  body  immersed  in  water  upto  the  throat,  averts  the    danger    of    life  ; 
and    the     same     with     whole     body     immersed  grants  all  success.     This 
is   the    best    of    all    the  SSnti  karmas,  the  acts  that  bring  health,  wealth 
happiness     and    peace,     While  performing  Homa,  light    with     the  fuel  of 
Ksiravriksa  (the  trees  that  emit    milky    juice);    place    Panchagavya     in  a 
vessel  made  of  gold,   silver,    copper  or    wood    of    ksira    trees,     or    in   the 
vessels  made  of  earth,  without  any  knot  or  crack  ;  utter  the  Gdyatri  mantra 
and    offer    one    thousand    homas.    Sprinkle    with  water  at  every  offering, 
touching    the     PaSchagavya    with    Kus'a    grass,  thousand  times.     Then 
offer      the    sacrifices     there     where      calamities       or       nuisances      are 
seen     and     meditate     on   the    Highest    Devatl.     Thus     all     the     ma»ic 
spells  used   by   other  persons     'for   a   malevolent  purpose  will  be   rendered 
nugatory.      Bring      under     your     control    any    Deva  yoni,  Bhute     Yoni, 
or    Pis'^cha   Yoni     that   causes  you   troubles  ;   then  they    will    quit   the 
house,  village,     city,    way,   even  that  kingdom.     Now  hear     how  they  are 
brought  under   control.     Prepare  a   sacrilieial     altar     with  sand,   draw   a 
square  on  it,  place  a  Sula  ^spear)  in  its  centre  and  plaster  with  Astagandha. 
Per  the  sake  of  converting  all  the  evils,  repeat   Gayatri     mantra     thousand 
times   and   impregnate    it  with    the    mantra,   dig  the    ground   tnd     place 
cr  bury  the  Sula  under  it.    Place  on  the  level  ground  or  sthandila  a  jar  or 
Navaphala,  a   fruit     made  of  gold,    silver,   or   copper     or  a  newly     made 
earther  jar  and  enclose  it   with    thread.     Then    have    the     sacred    waters 
brought    from    the    several    Tirthas    by    the    Brahmins    and  fill  the  jar, 
repeating     the     Gayatri      Mantra.     Put    withia    this    jar     the     twigs, 


Book  XI.]  CHAPTER  XXIV.  llbS 

then  of  Cardamom  tree,  sandal  tree,  karpura  tree,  jati,  aparajita. 
S'dhix  Devi,  Patala  ,MalIika  flower,  Bel  leaves,  riee,  barley.  Til,  mustard,  as'- 
vattha,  and  udumbara  trees  and  throw  them  within  the  jar.  (The  Ksira  trees 
are  As'vaththa,  Udumbara,  Plaksa,  and  Nyagrodha)  Doing  all  these,  prepare 
one  Kus'a  Kurcha  made  ol  twenty  seven  Kus'a  grass  in  the  form  of  a  braid 
of  hair,  roucd  one  «nd  of  a  straight  rod  and  tied  in  a  knot  and  place  it  there. 
Then  take  your  bath  and  repeat  the  GSyatri  mantra  over  it  one  thousand 
times  with  your  whole  mind  fully  concentrated.  Tien  the  Veda  knowing 
I'rahmanas  would  recite  the  Saura  mantra  and  sprinkle  the  man  attacked  by 
the  demon  with  water  and  make  him  drink  also  the  water  saturated  with 
the  mantra  and  bathe  him  also  with  that.  Then  that  person  will  be  dispos- 
sessed of  ihe  devil  and  hs  liappy.  Even  when  the  man,  (possessed  by  a  devil) 
is  tToing  to  die,  he  gets  his  life  again  if  he  be  made  to  drink  this  water  satu- 
rated with  thisraiiitrci  itni  hive  his  bitli  with  chat.  Sj  a  wise  King  must 
do  ihip,  with  a  desire  to  have  a  long  life;  and  afier  he  is  sprinkled  with  tnis 
mantra-charged  water  he  is  to  give  one  hundred  cows  to  the  Brahmanas  as 
the  DaksinS. 

21-4i4..  The  Daksina  is  to  be  given  according  to  one's  might  ;  and  spe- 
cially what  gives  satisfaciion  to  the  Biahmanas.  If  one  be  terrilied  by  a  De- 
vil or  so  or  by  the  mischievous  magic  spells  of  others,  one  is  to  ^it  on  Satur- 
day under  an  As'vattha  tree  and  repeat  one  hundred  CTayatri>;.  For  the  cure 
of  all  diseases,  if  one  has  to  perform  the  Mrityunjaya  Iloma.  one  will  have 
to  do  Uoma  \^ith  the  Gulancha  creeper,  soake]  in  milk  an  I  deducting  the 
knots  thereof,  For  the  pacification  of  fever,  mango  leaves  soaked  with  milk 
ought  to  be  used  in  the  Homi  ceremony.  The  wasting  diseases  are  cured  if 
Uoma  be  performed  with  the  leaves  of  the  Vacha  (9"8rj  soaked  in  milk  ;  phthisis 
or  consumption  is  cured  if  Uoma  be  performed  with  curd,  milk  and  ghee 
Again,  if  offerings  be  given  to  the  Solar  Deity  and  if  Payasannam  be  given 
to  Him  and  if  this  be  given  to  the  consumptive  patient,  his  disease  will  be 
cured.  Again,  on  the  Amavasya  tithi  (new  moon  day)  if  Homa  be  performed 
with  Soma  creeper  (excluding  the  knot  joints)  soaked  io  milk,  then  con- 
sumption will  be  cured.  If  Homa  he  made  with  the  flowers  of  the 
Samkhya  tree,  then  leprosy  is  cured  ;  if  the  Homa  be  done  with  the  seed  of 
Apam^rga,  the  Mrigis  or  the  hysteric  and  epileptic  fits  are  cured.  So  if 
Homa  be  performed  with  the  fuel  of  Ksira  trees,  lunacy  is  cured  ;  if,  with  the 
fuel  of  udumbara,  meha  (spermatorrhea)  is  cured  ;  if  with  sugarcane  juice, 
gonorrhea  is  cured;  if  with  curd,  milk  and  ghee  or  with  the  ghee  of 
Kapila  cow,  the  homa  be  performed,  the  Masurikd  disease  or  smallpox 
will  be  cured,  and  if  Homa  be  performed  with  the  fuels  of  Udumba- 
ra, V.ita,  and  As'vatha  be  performed,  then    the  dipeases    of  cows,  elephants 


1134  ^Rt  MADDEV!  BH^GAVATAM 

and  horses  are  cured.     If  the  trouble  be  c-iuseJ  by  in  luy  ants  auJ    uut-hills 
(MaJhu    Valmika)    then    perform    the  Homa   careinony    with  the   fuel   of 
SamT  tree  one  hundred  times  and  with  the  food  prepared  of  ghne  one  hundred 
times  and  offer  saerifiees  with  the  rest  of   the  food  ;  th^u  the  above  troubles 
will  cease.    If  there  be  a  earth  quake  or  if  there  be  seen  flashes  of  lightnings, 
then  homa  is  to  be  performed  with  the  fuel  of   Vaua  Vetasa  and  the    whole 
kingdom  will   ba  happy!     If  you  surehar^^e  any  piec^  of  iron     with  Oayatri 
m\iitri  repeated  hundred  times  an  1  if  you  throw  it  in  any  direction  then  no 
fej,r  will  arise  from  that  ([uartar  out  of  tire,  air,  or  any  otlier  enemy.     If  one 
be  imprisoned,  E^ni  if  he   repeats  the    Giyatri  mentally,  he  will  be  liberate'' 
from  the  prison.    If  vou  touch  the  man  possessed  by  a  devil,  disease  or  mor- 
tifiiition  an!  sorrow  with  the    Kis'a  i^ris?  and    repeat  the  Gayatrt   mantr.i, 
ftnd  thus  charge  him  with  Divine  electricity,  that  man  will  be  liberated  from 
the  fear  caused  thereby.   If  you  make  the  man  possessed  by  devils,  etc.,  drink 
the  water  charged  with  the  Giyatri  miitra    or  if  you  cast  on  his    body  the 
ash?s  chirged  wit'i  hundred   Giyatris  or  tie  those  ashes  on  his  head  repeat- 
ing the  Gayatrt  manlra,  he  will  be  instantly  fread  of  all  diseases  and  will  live 
for  one  hundred  years  in  happiness.     In  cise  a  man  is  unable  to  do  fully  all 
these  himself,   he  ein    get    all    these    done    by    other    Brahmanas    and  pav 
Diskini  (fees)    to  them  duly  fur  the  same. 

O  Narada  !  Now  I  will  tell  you  how  nourishment  and  we  vlfch  are  attained' 
AVealth    is  atbiin^d  if  the    Homa  b3  performed  with    red    lotus  or  fresh 

JatJ  flower    or    with    the    l^lli    rice    or  wit!(  the  fu^l  of  B3I    tree=,,      leaves 

flowers,   fruits    or    roots    or    with    any    portions  thereof. 

if    for    one     week    the  oblations  be  offered  with  fael  of    Bel  tree    mixed 

with    Payasa  or  with    ghae    one    hundrel  times,  then    Laksmi    D^vi   will 

surely  be  attaine  1. 

If  the  Homa  be  performed  with  Laja  (fried  rice)  mixed  with  curd, 
milk,    and  ghee,   the   daughter   will  be  obtained. 

If  for  one  week,  the  Homa  be  performed  with  red  lotus,  then  o-old 
is  obtained.  If  the  Tarpanam  (peace  offering)  be  offered  to  the  S;iu,  then 
the  treasures,  gold  hidden  under  the  water,  are  obtained.  If  the  Homa 
be  performed  with  food  (Anna)  tlien  Anna  is  obtained  ;  if  Homa  be 
perfomed    with    rice,     then  rice    is  obtained. 

45-5.  If  Homa  be  performed  with  calfdung,  dried  and  powdered, 
then  animals  are  obtained.  If  Hoaia  be  performed  with  Priyanou, 
Payasa    or    ghee    then  the  progeny  is  obtained. 

If  the  oblations  of  Payasanna  be  offered  to  the  Solar  Deity  and  if  the 
Prasadam  (romnant)  be  given  to  one's  wife  under  menstruation  to  eat,  then 


I 


Bj'JK  XL]  OUAPER  XXIV.  il35 

excellent  sons  will  be  obtained.  If  the  Homa  be  performed  with  the  fuel  of  wet 
pointed  Ksira  trees,  then  longevity  is  attained.  If  Homa  be  performed  with  the 
fuel  of  the  Pal^s'a-tree,  pointed  and  wet  and  mixed  with  curd,  milk,  and  ghee 
lor  one  hundred  times  eonsecutiveh^  then  longevity  and  gold  are  attained.  If 
the  iloMia  be  performed  with  Durba  grass,  railk^  honey  or  ghee,  one  hu  dred 
time?,  then  longevity  and  golden  lotus  are  obtained.  If  for  one  sveek  the 
Homa  ceremony  be  performed  with  fthe  fuel  of  Sami  tree  mixed  with  food 
milk  or  ghee  one  hundred  times  of  each  or  if  for  one  week  the  Homa  be 
performed  with  the  fuel  of  Nyagrodha  tree  and  afterwards  one  hundred 
Homas  be  made  with  Payasfinna,  the  fear  of  unnatural  death -is  removed. 

52 -GO.  That  man  can  conquer  death  who  can  remain  for  one  week 
living  on  milk  only  and  who  performs  during  tha^  time  hundred:!, 
and  hundreds  of  Homas  and  rep^at^  the  'Tayatri,  controlling  his  speech. 
If  auybody  can  fast  three  nights  and  control  his  speech  and  repeat  Gilyatri 
he  gets  himself  fread  from  the  hinds  of  Daath  ;  or  totally  immersed  in  water 
if  he  repeats  Gayatri,  he  will  be  saved  from  the  impending  danger  of  deith. 
J  f  anybody  repeats  the  Gayatri  mantra  for  one  month,  taking  his  seat  under 
a  Bel  tree  or  performs  Homa  '^ith  Bel  fruit,  root  or  leaves,  he  gets  king- 
doms. (Know  all  the  Mantrams  are  electric  in  their  effects).  Similarly  if 
anybody  performs  Homa  with  one  hundred  lotuses,  he  gets  a  foeless  king- 
dom. So  one  becomes  the  lord  of  a  village  if  one  performs  Homa  with 
YavScru  (barley  gruel)  and  Salidhanya.  If  the  Homa  be  performed 
with  the  fuel  of  Asvaththa  tree,  victory  in  battle  is  ensured 
and  if  the  Homa  be  performed  with  the  fuel  of  Akanda  tree,  then 
victorv  everywhere  is  ensured.  If  one  hundred  Jomas  be  performed 
extending  a  weak  with  Vetasa  tree's  leaves  or  fruits,  dipped  in  milk  and 
mixed  with  Payasa,  the  rainfall  is  ensured.  Similarly  if  anybody  repeats 
Gayatri  for  one  week  with  his  body  upto  navel  immersed  in  water,  the  rain 
fall  is  ensured ;  on  the  contary  if  the  Homa  be  performed  with  ashes  in 
water,  then  the  cessation  of  heavy  rainfall  is  ensured.  The  Homa  with 
the  fuel  of  PaUsa  gives  Brahmateja;  Homa  with  the  flowers  of  Paliisa 
gives  everything  desired.  Homa  with  milk  or  drinking  Brahmarasa, 
charged  with  mantra,  increases  the  intellect  ;  and  ihe  Homa  with  ghee 
gives  Buddhi    (medha)  (intelligence). 

61-69.  Hcma  with  flowers  gives  good  snibll ;  Homa  with  thread 
gives  cloth  ;  Homa  with  salt  and  honey  mixed  or  Bel  fliwera 
gives  one  power  to  coatrul  anything  and  everything  that  is 
desired.  If  anybody  bithes  everyday  Mmmeised  completely  within 
water  and  dprinkL-s  water  oa  uia  bxly,  hd  hiQo  a'^i   oaroi     of  dise'i^eb     and 


1136  §Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgaVATAM. 

he  becomes  very  healthy.  If  any  Brahtnana  does  these  things  for  others, 
he  becomes  also  no  doubt  healthy.  If  anybody  wants  to  increase  hh 
life  period  he  should  practise  good  deeds  and  repeat  Gayatrl  thousand  times 
daily  for  one  month.  Vhus  his  longevity  will  be  increased.  Two  months' 
such  practice  gives  long  life  and  p3rpetual  health  ;  three  month's  such 
practice  will  give  life,  health,  and  wealth,  foar  months  such  practice  gives 
longevity,  wealth,  fame,  women,  sons,  etc.,  five  months  such  practice  gives 
longevity,  health,  wealth,  wife,  sons  and  learning,  So  one  should  repeal 
this  a?  many  months  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  his  desires  and  he 
would  get  them.  Again  any  BrShmana  who  stands  on  one  leg  without  holding 
any  other  thing  and  r.iises  both  his  ban  Is  and  daily  repeats  three  hundred 
Gayatris  for  one  month,  gets  all  his  desires  fulfilled.  And  if  he  repeita 
one  thou-and  one  hundred  GSyatris,  there  is  nothing  in  this  world  that  is 
not  met  and  attained  with  success.  Controlling  the  Prana  (inhaling)  and 
Apana  (exhaling)  Vayu  (breath),  he  who  repeats  daily  three  hundred 
Giyatris  to  the  Devi,  his  highest  desires  are  satisfied. 

70  77.  Vis'vamitra  Risi  says  : — Standing  (m  one  lej,  with  both  hands 
raised  and  controlling  Vayu  he  who  repeats  daily  one  hundred  Gayatris  for 
one  month,  gets  all  his  desires  fulfilled.  Similarly  with  three  hundred  or 
thousand  repeatings,  all  things  are  attained.  Submerged  under  water,  if 
one  repeats  G&yatris  as  many  times  as  mentioned  above,  he  gets  every 
thing.  If,  for  one  year,  with  hands  uplifted  and  without  holding  any  thing, 
anvone  stands  on  one  leg,  controls  one's  breath  and  repeats"  Gay^tri  mantra 
three  hundred  times  or  thousand  times,  eating  Havisyannam  only  in  the 
night  time,  he  becomes  a  Ri§i  (Seer).  This  thing  repeated  two  years  gives 
infallible  speech ;  three  years  gives  knowledge  of  the  present,  past  and 
future  ;  four  years  will  enable  one  to  see  face  to  fcce  the  Solar  God  ;  five 
years  will  give  the  eight  Siddhis,  lightness,  etc.,  six  years  will  enable  one  to 
assume  forms  as  he  desires  ;  seven  years  gives  inmort^lity;  nine  years 
gives  Manuhood  '  ten  years  gives  Indrahood  ;  eleven  ye'irs  gives  Brahtni- 
hood  ;  and  twelve  years  gives  the  state  of  Parama  Brahma. 

78-90.  O  N&rada  !  By  these  practices  of  Tapasyas  you  and  othar 
Risis  have  been  able  to  conquer  the  three  Lokas  (regions).  Some  ate  onlv 
vegetables  ;  some  fruits  ;  some,  roots  ;  some  simply  water  ;  some,  ghee  ; 
some,  Somarasa  ;  whereas  some  others  ate  only  eharu  and  did  tapasyS. 
Some  Risis  practised  this  great  Tapasya  by  eiting  very  little  for  a 
fortnight  only.  Some  ate  food,  only  what  they  got  by  begging  during 
the  day  ;  and  some  ate  only  Havisyanna.  Narada  !  Now  hear  the  rules  for 
the  purification  and  expiation  of  sins.  For  the  expiation  of  the  sin  incurred 
iu  stealing   gold,  one  is  to  repeat  ibree  thousand    uayatiis   (diily)   tor   quo 


teooK  Xt.l  CHAPTER  XXIV.  1137 

monfch  ;  then  the  sin  will  be  destroyed.  By  this  act  also  the  sins  incurred  by 
drinking  or  by  going  to  one's  Guru's  wife  are  destroyed.  Vis'vSmitra  Ri§i 
says: — The  sin  incurred  by  killing  a  Brahmana  (Brahmahatya)  is  destroyed 
if  one  erects  a  shed  in  a  forest  and,  living  there,  repeats  three  thousand  G§," 
yatris  daily  for  one  month.  Those  Brahmanas  that  have  committed  the 
Great  Sins  (i.  e.  MahS,patakas),  become  free,  if  they  repeat  one  thousand  G&- 
yatris  daily,  submerged  under  water,  tor  twelve  successive  days.  By  controll- 
ing speech  and  by  practising  Pr&nslyama,  if  one  repeats  three  thouf?and  Gft- 
yatrls  daily  for  one  month,  one  will  be  free  from  the  MahSp&takas.  If  one 
practises  one  thousand  PrAnHySmas  repeating  the  G&yatri,  one  becomes 
freei.  also  of  Brahmahatya.  If  one  draws  upwards  the  PraSa  and  Apana 
VSyus  six  times,  repeating  the  Gayatri  with  collected  mind,  this  destroys  all 
the  sins  and  it  is  called  all-sin  destroying  Pr^nay&na.  If  one  practises  this 
Pri^payama  one  thousand  times  for  one  month,  the  lord  of  the  earth  becomeg 
freed  of  all  sins.  If  any  Brahmana  incurs  the  sin  of  killing  a  cow,  for  twelve 
days  he  is  to  repeat  three  thousand  Gdyatris  daily  for  expiation.  Similarly 
the  repetition  of  ten  thousand  G&yatris  removes  the  sin  of  going  to  those 
not  fit  to  be  gone  into,  eating  the  uneatables,  stealing  and  killing  and  this 
act  brings  in  peace.  AH  sins  are  destroysd  by  performing  one  hundred  Pr^- 
nayftmas  with  Gayatri.  Again  if  there  be  a  mixture  of  various  sini ,  one  will 
have  to  live  in  the  forest  for  one  month  and  repeat  one  thousand  Gayatrrs  or 
practise  fasting  and  repeat  three  thousand  Gdyatris  ;  thus  all  sins  will  be 
destroyed. 

91-100.  To  repeat  Gayatri  twenty-four  thousand  times  is  equal  to 
performing  the  Krichchhra  vrata  and  to  repeat  sixty  four  thousand  G&yatris 
duly  is  equal  to  performing  the  ChUndr^na.  If  anybody  repeats,  in 
the  morning  and  evening  Sandhyd  times,  the  merit  giving  Gayatri  one 
hundred  times,  with  Pr^nilyama,  all  his  sins  are  destroyed.  So, 
submerged  under  water,  if  one  repeats  the  GSyatri  Devi,  meditat- 
ing Her  in  the  Sun,  one  hundred  times  daily,  one's  all  the  sins  are  fully 
destroyed.  O  Narada  !  Thus  I  have  described  to  you  all  about  avert- 
ing or  destroying  the  evils  and  the  purification  of  various  sins.  All  this  is 
secret.  Keep  it  c^irefuUy  concealed.  Never  divulge  this.  Whoever  divulges 
this  will  bring  his  own  ruin.  I  have  spoken  to  you,  in  brief,  all  about  Sada- 
chara  (right  way  of  living).  If  anybody  practises  this  duly,  according 
to  rules,  Sri  MahamayjL  Durga  Devi  becomes  pleased  with  him.  If  any- 
body wants  to  have  both  enjoyment  and  liberation,  he  is  to  practise 
all  theie  daily,  as  well  as  the  occasional,  and  KSmya  (desired)  duties  duly 
according  to  rules.  It  is  stated  in  all  the  oastras,  that  this  AchSra  (right 
way  of  living)  is  the  foremost  and  the  chief  Dharmaj  the  Deity  of  which  is 

143 


iis8  §r1  mad  DEvt  bhAgavataM 

the  Supreme  Mother  Herself.  O  N3,rada  !  That  man  who  practiBes  duly  this 
Aehara  is,  in  this  world,  holj,  happy  and  blessed.  This  I  speak  to  you  truly. 
If  anybody  desires  to  get  the:  Devi  Bhagavati's  Grace,  he  should  first 
of  all  set  himself  at  once  to  practis**  this  Sadach£lra.  He  who 
bears  this  gets  wealth  and  great  happiness.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this. 
Now   speak   what   more  you    want   to    hear. 

Here    ends   the    Twenty  fourth      Chapter  of  the  Eleventh     Book     on 
Sadich&ra   in   the    Mahaparanam    5ri   Mad   Devi   BhSgavatam  of  l8,00J 
verses    by   Maharsi    Veda   Vyasa.     The  Eleventh  Book  Completed. 
[Here   ends   the    Eleventh    Book.] 


Book  XU.]  CHAPTER  I,  .  im 


THEL  ^rHATlEIX^If^TJaC  jsooxi:. 


CHAPTER   I. 

1-7.  Ndrada  said:— "O  Deva  !  The  rules  of  SaJachara  (right  waya 
of  living)  and  the  all-sia-deslrjying  unaq'ialled  Glories  of  the  Devi 
Bhagavati  have  been  described  by  Thee.  And  I,  too,  have  heard 
the  nectar  of  the  Glories  of  the  Devi  from  Thy  lotus  mouth.  The 
ChfindrSyana  and  other  Vratas.  described  by  Thee,  are  very  difficult 
to  practise.  So  they  aie  impracticible  with  the  ordinary  persons.  There- 
fore, 0  Lord  !  Kindly  describe  those  actions  which  c;in  easily  be  carried 
out  by  common  persons,  at  the  same  time,  the  Devi's  Grace  and 
Siddhis  can  be  obtained  by  those  practices.  Again  what  thou  hast 
described  about  the  Gayatrt  in  ccnnectiori  with  Sidachara,  kindly 
say  which  are  the  chief  and  foremost  as  well  as  those  thic  are  more 
meritorious.  O  Best  of  the  Munis  I  Thou  hast  told  that  there  are  the 
twenty -four  syllables  in  the  Guyatri,  Kindly  describe  now  their  liisis, 
Chhandas,  Devat&s  and  other  things  that  should  be  krio>vn  regard- 
ing   them   and    thus   satisfy  my   longings. 

8-27.  5»i  N^rayana  said:  — "O  Narada  !  The  twioe-born  would  have 
done  what  they  ought  to  do  if  they  be  engaged  in  repeating  their  Gayatri 
only,  whether  they  be  able  or  not  able  to  practise  the  Chandrayana  and 
the  other  vratas.  Whichever  Brahmin  repeats  the  GSy  atri  three  thousand 
times  and  offers  Arghya  to  the  Sun  in  the  three  Sandhya  times,  the  Devas 
worship  him  ;  what  to  speak  of  other  ordinary  persons  !  Whether  he  prac- 
tises Nylsa  or  not,  if  anybody  sincerely  repeats  the  GSyatri  Devi,  Whose 
Nature  is  Existence,  Intelligence,  and  Bliss  and  meditates  on  Her,  even  if 
he  attains  siddhi  in  one  syllable  even,  then,  as  a  result  of  that,  he  can 
vie  with  the  best  of  the  Brahmanas,  the  Moon,  and  the  Sun  ;  nay,  with 
Brahm^,  Vi§nu,  and  Mahes'vara  even  !  O  N^rada  !  Now  I  will  tell 
in  due  order  the  Risis,  Chhandas,  and  the  Devatas  of  the  twenty-four 
syllables  of  the  Gayatri.  The  Risi.s,  in  due  order,  are  (1)  Vllma- 
Deva,  (2)  Attri,  (3)  Vas'istha,  (4)  6ukra,  (5)  Kanva,  (6)  Paras'ara,  (7) 
the  very  fiery  Yis'vamitra,  (8)  Kapila,  (9)  Saunaka,  (10)  Yajnavalkya,  (H) 
Bharadvaja,  (12)  the  ascetic  Jamadigni,  (13)  Gautama,  (14)  Mudgala, 
(15)  Vedavyasa,  (16)  Lomas'a,  (17)  Agastya,  (IS)  Kaus'ika,  (19) 
Vatsya,  (20)  PuUstya,  (21)  Mandaki,  (2Z)  the  Ascetic  in  chief  Durvftia 
(23)  Narada  and  (24)  Kas'yapa. 


1140  SrI  mad  DEVl  bhAgavatam. 

Now  about  the  chhandas: — (1)  G^atri,  (2)  U§nik,  (3)  Anusjup,  (4) 
Brihati,  (5)  Pankti,  (6)  Trignup,  (7)  Jagati,  (8)  Atijagati,  (9)  i^akkari,  (10) 
Ati  Sakkari,  (ll)  Dhriti,  (12  Ati^Dhriti,  (13)  Virat,  (14)  Prastarapankti, 
(15)  Kriti,  (16)  Prakriti,  (17)  Akrifei,  (18)  Vikriti,  (19)  Samkriti,  (20) 
Akaarapankti,  (21)  Bhuh,  (22)  Bhuvah,  (23)  Svah  (24)  and  Jyoti§mati.  The 
DevatSs  of  the  several  letters  in  due  order,  are:--(l)  Agni,  (2)  Prajapati,  (3) 
Soma,  (4)  Is'Sna,  (5)  Savita,  (6)  Aditya,  (7)  Brihnspati,  (8)  Maitr^varuna, 
(9)  Bhagadeva,  (10)  Aryaml,  (1.)  Ganes'a,  (12)  Tva^trS,  (i3  Pu§a, 
(14)  Indragni,  (Ir)  V^yu,  (16)  VAmadeva,  (17)  Maitra  varuni  (18) 
Vis'vadeva,  (19)  Matrika,  (20)  Visnu,  (21)  Vasu,  (22)  Rudra  Deva^  (23) 
Kuvera,  and  (24)  the  twin  As'vini  Kumaras.  0  Narada  !  Thus  I  have 
described  to  you  about  the  the  Devatis  of  the  twenty-four  syllables.  The 
hearing  of  thi^  destroys  all  sins  and  yialds  the  full  results  of  repeating 
the  mantra  Gayatri.  {Note: — The  Devatas,  mentioned  in  the  Gayatri 
Brahma  Kalpa  are  different  from  those  mentioned  here.) 

Here  ends  the  first  Chapter  of  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the  descrip- 
tion of  Gayatri  in  the  Mahapuranara  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bha»avabam 
of    iSjOCO   verses   by   Maharsi    Veda   Vyasa. 


CHPATER   11. 

1-18.  Narayana  said: — "  0  Narada  !  O  Groat  Muni!  Now  hear 
which  are  the  Saktis  in  due  order  of  the  twenty-four  syllables  of  the 
Gayatri    Devi:  — 

(1)  Vama  Devi,  (2)  Priya,  (3)  SatyS,  (4)  Vis'va,  (.-i)  Bhadraviiasini, 
(G)  PrabhaVati,  (7)  Jaya,  (8)  Santa,  (9)  Kanta,  (1)  Durga,  (1 1)  Saras- 
vati,  (12)  Vidruma,  (13)  Vis'aie'sa,  (14)  Vyapini,  (15)  Vimaia,  (16) 
Tamopaharini,  (17)  Suksma,  (18)  Vis'vayoni,  (19)  Jaya,  (20)  Vas'a, 
(21)  Padmaiaya,  (22)  Paras'obha,    (23)  Bhadra,    (24)  and   Tripada. 

Now  hear  the  respective  colours  of  the  several  syllables  of  the 
Gayatri  Devi:— (1)  like  Champaka  and  Atasi  flowers,  (2)  like  Vidruma, 
(3)  like  crystal,  (4^  like  lotus ;  (5)  like  the  Rising  Sun  ;  (f?)  whife 
like  conchshell ;  (7)  white  like  Kunda  flower;  (8)  like  Prabaia  and 
lotus  leaves  ;  (9)  like  Padmaraga,  (10)  like  Indranilamani;  (11)  like  pearls  ; 
(12)  like  Safifron  ;  (13)  like  the  black  collyrium  of  the  eye  ;  (14)  red  ;  (15) 
like  the  Vaidiirya  m^ni;  (16)  like  K§audra;  (Champaka  tree,  honey,  water.) 
(17)  like  turmeric  j  (18)  like  Kunda  flower ;  and  the  milk  (19)  like  the  rays 
of  the  Sun  ;  (20)  like  the  tail  of  the  bird  Suka  ;  (21)  like  Satapatra  ;  (22) 
like  Ketaki  flower  ;  (23)  like  Mallika  flower ;  (24)  like  Karavira  flower. 
Now  about  their  Tattvas  :— (I)  earth;  (2J  water;  (3)  fij-e  ;  (4)  air; 
(5)  Akas'a.     (ether) ;   (6)  smell ;  (7)  taste ;    (8)form ;    (9)  sound  ;    (10) 


Book  XIL]  CHAPTER  III.  Il4l 

touch  ;  (11)  male  generative  organ  ;  (12)  anus  ;  (13)  legs,  (14)  hands;  (15) 
speech  ;  (16)  Prana  (vital  breath)  ;  (17)  tongue  ;  (18)  eyes  ;  (19)  skin  ;  (20) 
ears  ;  (21)  Prana  (up  going  breath) ;  (22)  Apana  ;  ,23)  VySua,  (24)  Samana. 

Now  about  the  Mudras  of  the  syllables: — (1)  Sammukha  ;  (2)  Samputa; 
(3)  Vitata  ;  ^4)  Vistrita  ;  (5)  Dvimukha,  (6)  Trimukha;(7)  Chaturmukha  ; 
(8)  Panchamukha ;  (9)  Sanmukha  ;  (10)  Adhomukha  ;  (11)  Vyapakanjali  ; 
(12)  tSakata;  (13)  YamapSs'a  ;  (l4)  Grathita  ;  (15)  Sanmukhon  mukha  ; 
(16;  Vilamba;  (17)  Mustika;  (18)  Matsya;  (19)  Kurma;  (20)Varahaka; 
(21)  Simhakrdnta,  (22)  MahSkranta;   (23)  Mudgara,  and  (24)  Pallava. 

The  Mahamudras  of  the  fourth  foot  of  Gdyatri  are  (1)  Trisulayoni  ; 
(2)  Surabhi  ;  (3)  Ak§a  m41a;  (4)  Linga;  and  ,5)  Ambuja.  O  NSrada  !  Thus 
I  have  described  to  you  all  about  the  MudrSs,  etc.,  of  the  several  syllables 
of  the  GSyatri.  If  during  Japam,  one  thinks  all  these  and  at  the  same  time 
repeats,  all  his  sins  are  destroyed  and  his  wealth  gets  increase  and  the  fame 
attends  on  him. 

Here  ends  the  Second  Chapter  of  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the  description 
of  the  odktis,  etc.,  of  the  syllables  of  G4yatri  in  the  Mahapur^nam  Sri 
Mad  Devi  BhSgavatam  of  18,000  Verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  III. 

1-3.  N^rada  spoke  :-•-"  O  Bhagavan  !  Thou  art  the  Lord  of  this 
world  ;  Thou  canst  shew  favour  and  disfavour  both  ;  Thou  art  specially 
versed  in  the  sixty-four  Kalas  (arts  of  learning)  ;  Thou  art  the  chief  of  the 
Yogis.  I  therefore  ask  Thee  to  solve  a  doubt  of  mine.  By  what  Pun- 
yam  a  man  can  become  free  from  all  his  sins  and  limitations  and  he  can 
realise  and  become  of  the  nature  of  Brahma.  O  Lord  !  And  what  are  duly 
the  Risis,  Chhandas,  DevatSs,  Dhy^n,  and  NySsa,  etc.,  of  this  meritorious 
act  ?     I  want  to  hear. 

4-25.  Narayana  said  : — "  O  NSrada  !  There  is  but  one  and  the 
only  one  way  to  this  and  though  that  is  very  secret,  I  will  disclose 
that  to  you.  It  is  the  G^yatri-Kavacha.  It  can  destroy  all  sins. 
Therefore  to  recite  or  to  hold  it  on  one's  body  enables  the  man  to 
become  free  from  all  his  sins  and  to  get  all  his  desires  fulfilled  and  he  gets 
the  Slyuya  Mukti  with  the  Devi  (be  merged  in  the  Devi-Body).  Now 
hear  the  Risis,  Chhandas,  etc.,  of  this  Kavaeha  : — BrahmS,  Visnu  and 
Mahes'vara  are  the'Risis  ;  the  Rik,  Yajus,  SUma  and  Atharna  Vedas  are 
the  Chhandas  ;  the  Param^  Kaia  GSyatri  of  the  nature  of  Brahma  is 
the  Devata ;  "  Tat "  in  Gayatri  is  the  Vija  ;  "  Bharga  "  is  the  Sakti ;  and 
"  Dhiyah  '*  is  the  Kilaka  ;  and  its  viniyoga  (application)  is  in  getting 
the  Moksa  (liberation).     With  the  first  four  syllables  touch  the  heart  j  with 


1142  SRt  MAD  DEV!  BHAQAVATAM. 

the  next  three  letters  touch  the  head  ;  with  the  next  four  letters  touch 
the  tuft  on  the  crown  of  the  head  ;  with  the  next  three  letters  on  the 
Kavacha  ;  with  the  next  four  letters  on  the  eyes  and  with  the  last 
four  letters  make  the  Nyasa,  all  over  the  body  repeating  "  Astr&ya 
Phat."  O  NSrada  !  Hear  now  the  Dhyauam  of  Gayatrt,  that  grants 
all  desires.  The  G^yatri  Devi  has  five  faces  :  one  of  which  is  of  white 
colour  ;  and  the  other  four  is  of  pearl,  Vidruma,  golden,  and 
Nilakautamani  c«^loor  respectively.  Each  face  has  got  three  eyes  ;  on  the 
hpad  there  is  a  crown  of  jewels  and  the  digit  of  the  Moon  is  shining 
there.  Her  body  is  composed  of  the  twenty-four  tattvas.  She  has  ten 
hands  : —  On  the  top  right  and  left  hands  there  are  two  lotuses  ;  lower 
down,  there  are  disc  and  conch  shell  ;  lower  down,  there  are  rope  and 
skull  ;  lower  down,  there  are  noose  and  goad  ;  and  on  the  bottom  hands 
ri»ht  and  left  she  is  making  signs  of  "  No  fear  "  and  "  ready  to  grant 
boons."  Thus  meditating  on  orj  G^yatri,  one  is  to  recite  the  Kavacha 
thus :— Let  the  G^yatri  Devt  protect  my  front ;  Savitri  Devi  protect 
my  right  ;  the  Sandhy^  Devi,  my  back  and  the  Devi  Sarasvati,  my  left. 
Let  my  Mother  Farvati  Devi  protect  my  quarters.  Let  Jalas'Syini  protect 
the  southeast  ;  Y^tudhlLna  Bhayankari  protect  my  South-west  ;  Pavamlna- 
vilSsini  my  north-west  ;  Rudrarapini  Rudrani  protect  my  north-east. 
Let  Brahmani  protect  my  top  and  Vaisnavi  protect  my  nether 
regions.  Let  the  word  "  Tat  "  in  the  Gaj'-atri  protect  my  legs  ; 
"  Savituh  "  protect  my  Knees  ;  "  Varenyam,*'  protect  my  loins  i 
"  Bhargah,"  my  navel.  Let  "  Devasya  "  protect  my  heart ;  "  Dhimahi  " 
protect  my  neck  j  "  Dhiyah,"  protect  my  eyes ;  "  Yah,"  protect  my 
forehead  ;  '*  Nah  "  protect  my  head ;  and  "  Prachodayat  "  protect  the 
tuft  on   the  crown  of  my  head. 

Again  let  the  "  Tat  "  of  the  twenty-four  syllabled  GSyatri  pro- 
tect my  head  ;  "  Sa,"  protect  my  forehead  ;  "  Vi  "  protect  my  eyes  ; 
*'  Tu  "  my  cheeks  ;  "  Va,"  protect  my  nostrils  ;  ''  Re;"  my  mouth  ; 
"ni"  protect  my  upper  lip;  "Yah"  protect  my  lower  lip;  '•  Bha  " 
within  my  face  j  "  rgo,"  protect  my  cheeks  ;  "  De,"  my  throat  ;  "  Va  " 
my  shoulders ;  "  Sya  "  my  right  hand  ;  "  Dhi  "  my  navel  ;  '*  ma," 
my  heart,  "  Hi,''  my  belly  ;  "  Dhi,"  my  navel  ;  "  Yo  "  my  loins  ; 
Yo,  my  anus  ;  "  nah,"  my  thighs,  "  Prv. '  my  Knees  •.  "  Cho  "  my  shanks 
"  Da  "  my  heels  ;  "  Yk  "  my  legs  ;  and  let  "  at "  protect  all  my  sides. 
O  NSrada  1  This  divine  Kavacha  of  the  Devi  G^yatri  can  bafHe  hundreds 
and  thousands  of  obstructions  and  evils  ;  can  grant  sixty-four  Kilas  and 
liberation.  By  the  glory  of  this  Kavacha,  man  can  become  free  from  all 
evils  and  can  attain  the  state  of  Brahma.  Moreover  whoever  reads  or  hears 
this  acquires  the  fruits   of  making  a  gift  of  a  thousand  cowe. 


Book  XII.]  CHAPTER  IV.  U-^ 

Here  ends  the  Third  Chapter  of  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  Kavacha  of  ^ri  Gayatri  Devi  in  the  Mahapuranam  ^ri  Mad 
Devi  Bhagavatam   of  18,000    verses  by   Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

1-2.  Narada  said: — '' O  Bhigavan  !  I  have  heard  from  you  all 
about  the  Kavacha  and  the  Mantra  of  Sri  Gayatri.  O  Deva  Deva !  O  Thou, 
the  KnoNver  of  the  present,  the  past,  and  the  future  !  Now  tell  about  the 
Ilridaya,  the  highest,  the  interior  or  esoteric  Essence  of  the  Gayatri,  holding 
which,  if  one  repeats  the  Gayatri,  he  acquires  all  the  punyam  (merits). 
I  am  desirous  to  hear  this. 

3«8.  Narayana  said  : — "  O  Narada  !  This  subject  on  the  Hridaya  of 
Gayatri  is  explicitly  written  in  the  Atharva  Veda.  'Now  I  will  speak 
on  that,  the  great  secret,  in  detail.  Listen.  First,  consider  the  GSyatri, 
the  Devi,  the  Mother  of  the  Vedas  as  of  a  Cosmic  l^rm  (Vira  trup^)  and 
meditate  all  the  Devas  as  residing  on  Her  Body.  Now  in  as  much  as  the 
Pinda  and  Brahmanda  are  similar,  consider  yourself  as  of  the  form  of 
the  Devi  and  meditate  within  yourself  on  the  Devat^s,  thus  : — The 
Pundits,  the  Knowers  of  the  Vedas,  say  this  : — He  is  not  yet  fit  to 
>vorship  the  Deva  and  he  is  not  an  Adhik^ri  as  yet  who  has  not  beea 
able  to  make  himself  a  Deva  ;  therefore  to  establish  the  knowledge  of  the 
oneness  of  the  Deva  and  himself,  he  is  to  meditate  the  Devas  within 
his  body,  thus  ; — 

O  Narada  !  Now  I  will  speak  on  the  Hridaya  of  Gayatri,  knowing 
which  every  man  becomes  able  to  become  all  the  Devas.  Listen.  The  Risi 
of  this  Gayatri  Hridaya  is  Nllrayana  ;  the  Chhandas  is  Gayatri  ;  and  ori 
Parames'vari  Gayatri  is  ihe  Devata.  Perform  the  Nyslsa  of  this  as  men- 
tioned before  and  taking  your  seat  in  a  lonely  place,  meditate  intently  on 
the  Devi  with  your  heart  and  bead  well  collected.  Now  I  am  speaking 
of  the  Arthanylsa.  Hear.  Meditate  on  the  Devata  Dyau  on  your  head  ; 
the  twin  As'vins  on  the  rows  of  the  teeth  ;  the  two  Sandhyas  on  your 
upper  and  lower  lips  ;  the  Agni,  Fire,  within  your  mouth  ;  Sarasvati,  on 
the  tongue  ;  Briha&pati  on  the 'neck;  the  eight  Vasus  on  the  two  breasts; 
the  Vayus,  on  the  two  arms  ;  the  Paryanya  Deva  on  the  heart;  Akas'a, 
on  the  belly ;  Antariksam  (the  miJdle  space)  on  the  navel;  Indra  and 
Agni,  on  the  loins  ;  Prajapati,  the  condensed  form,  as  it  were,  of  Vijn&na, 
on  the  hip  joints ;  the  Kailas'a  and  the  Malaya  mountains  on  the  two 
thighs  ;  the  Visvedev^s  on  the  two  knees  ;  Vis'vamitra  on  the  shanks  ; 
the    Sun's  northern  and  southern  paths,   the  Uttarayana  and   Dak§inlyana 


il44  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAGAVATAM 

on  the  anus;  the  Pitris  on  the  thighs ;  the  Earth  on  the  legs  ;  the 
Vanaspati  on  the  fingers  and  toes  ;  the  Rigis  on  the  hairs  of 
the  body;  the  Muharbas  on  the  nails;  the  planets  on  the  bones; 
the  Ritus  (seasons)  on  the  blood  and  flesh  ;  the  Samvatsaras  on  the 
Nitnisa  (twinkling  of  eye)  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  on  the  day  and 
nif'ht  respectively.  Thinking  thus,  repeat  "I  take  refuge  of  <|ie 
Divine  Holy  Gilyatri,  the  Chief  and  most  Excellent  One,  the  Thousand 
eyed"    and  I   take   refuge   wholly   unto     Her, 

Then  repeat  "  I  bow  down  to  Tat  savitur  varenyam,  "  "  I  bow 
down  to  the  Rising  Sun  on  the  East,  "  "  I  bow  down  to  the  Morning 
Aditya,  "  "  I  bow  down  to  the  GSyatri,  residing  in  the  Morning 
Sun  "  and  I  bow  down  to  all.  "  O  Narada  !  Whoever  recites  this 
G3.yatri  Hridaya  in  the  morning  finds  all  the  sins  committed  in  the 
night  all  destroyed  !  Whoever  recites  this  in  the  evening  gets  his 
sins  of  the  day  all  destroyed!  Whoever  recites  this  in  the  evening 
and  in  the  morning  can  rest  assured  to  have  become  free  of  sins  ; 
he  gets  the  fruits  of  all  the  Tirthas  ;  he  is  acquainted  with  all  the 
Devas  ;  he  is  saved  if  he  has  spoken  anything  that  ought  not  to  have  been 
spoken ;  if  he  has  eaten  anything  that  is  not  fit  to  be  eaten  ;  if 
he  has  chewn  and  sucked  anything  that  ought  not  to  have  been  chewn 
and  sucked  ;  if  he  has  done  any  thing  that  ought  not  to  have  been  done 
and  if  he  has  accepted  hundreds  and  thousands  of  gifts  that  ought  never 
to   have  been     accepted. 

The  sins  incurred  by  eating  with  the  others  in  a  line  cannot 
touch  him.  If  he  speaks  lies,  he  will  not  be  touched  by  the  sins 
thereof ;  even  if  a  non-BrahmachSri  recites  this,  he  will  become  a 
Brahmachari.  O  NSrada  !  What  more  shall  I  say  to  you  of  the 
results  of  G^yatrl  Hridaya  than  this: — that  whoever  will  study  this, 
will  acquire  the  fruits  of  performing  thousand  sacrifices  and  repeating 
the  Gayatri  sixty  thousand  times.  In  fact,  he  will  get  Siddhi  by  this. 
The  Brahmana,  who  daily  reads  this  in  the  morning  will  be  freed 
of  all  the  sins  and  go  upwards  to  the  Brahma  (Loka)  and  is  glorified  there. 
This  has  been  uttered   by  Bhagavan  Narftyana     Himself, 

Here  ends  the  Fourth  Chapter  of  the  Twe!ith«  Book  on  Gayatri 
Hridaya  in  the  Mahapuranam  Sri  mad  Devi  BhSgavatam  of  18,000 
verses   by  Maharfi   Veda  Vyasa. 


Boox  XII.J  CHAPTER    V.  1145 

CHAPTER  V. 


1.  N^rada  said  :— "0  All  knowing  One  !  Thou  showest  Thv  grace  to 
Tby  devotees!  Thou  hast  described  this  sin-destroying  Gayatri  Hridaya. 
Now  describe  Her  Stava  (hymn  of  praise), 

2-29.     Narayana  said  :—"0  World-Mother  I     O  Thou,  favouring  Thy 
devotees  !     O  Thou,   the     Prime  Force,  O  Omnipresent  !     Infinite  !     ^r£ 
Sandhye;     I  bow  down  to  Thee.     Thou  art    the    Sandhya  ;    Thou  art   the 
Gayatri,    Savitri  and  Sarasvati  ;    Thou  art  Brahmi,  Vaisnavi  and  Raudri 
and  Thou  art  red,   white,    and  black  (the  colours   of   Gayatri,    Savitri  and 
Sarasvati    that    Thou   assumest  respectively.     O    Bhagavati  !     Thou    art 
always  me'ditated  by  the  Munis  as  joung  in  the  morning,    full  of  youth  in 
the  mid-day,   and  aged    in   the  evening.     I  bow  down  to  Thee.     Thou  art 
seen  by  the  Tapasvis  (ascetics)  as  Brahman i,  riding  on  Hamsa  (swan),  Saras- 
vati riding  on  Garuda,  and  S£lvitri  riding  on  Bull.      Thou  art    seen    within 
by  the  ascetics  as  manifesting  the  Rigveda  (in  the  form  of  SSvitri)     in  this 
world,  as  manifesting   Yayurveda  in  the  middle  space    (antariksam)    and  as 
manifesting    Samaveda     everywhere    in    the    Rudra  loka,  thus  roaming  in 
the  three  worlds.  1  bow  down  to  Thee.  O  Devi  I     Thou  art  RudrSni  in  the 
Rudra  loka,  Vaisnavi  in  the  Visnu  loka,  andBrahm^ni  in  the  Brahma  loka  ; 
thus  Thou  shewest  Thy    favour   to   the    Immortals.     O   Devi  !     Thou  art 
the    Mother   delighting   the  seven  Risis   (of  the  Great  Bear) ;    Thou   art 
MavS..  Thou  grantest  great  many  boons  to  Thy  Bhaktas.     Thou  art  sprung 
from  the  eves  and  hands,  tears  and  perspiration  of  Siva  and  SivS.  Thou  art 
the  Mother  of  delight?,  Durgii  Devi,  recited  by  the  following  ten  names: — 
Varenya,     Varada,  Varistha,     Varavarnini,  GaristhS,  Var^hS,  Vara,roh5, 
KilagangS,  Sandhya  and     Bhoga    Moksada.     Thou    art    the    Bh^girathi 
(the  river    Ganges)  in    this  world  ;    the   Bhogavati  in  the  Pataia  ;  and  the 
Mandakini    (the   milky  way)    in    the    Heavens.     Thou    art    in    this   world 
(Bhur  loka)  the  all-enduring  Prithvi  (earth) ;     Thou  art  the    VSyu    Sakti 
(air  power)  in    the   middle   space   (Bhubhar  loka);    Thou  art  the  energy 
(the  ocean  of  Tejas)  in  the  Heavens  (Svar  loka) ;    Thou  art  the  Great  Siddhi 
in  the  Mahar  loka  ;  Thou  art  Jana  in  the  Janar  loka  ;    Thou  art  Tapasvini 
in  the  Tapar  loka  ;    Thou  art    Truth   (True    Speech)  in    the    Satya  lokam. 
Thou  art    Kamala  in  Visnu  loka  ;  Gayatri  in  Brahma  loka  ;  and  the  other 
half  of  Hara  as  Gauri  in  the  Rudra  loka.     O  Devi  1     Thou  art  sung  as  Pra- 
^i.iti,_-"Aham"-"Om-Mahafc"  tattva  and  beyoud  that  the     Highest   Sarva. 

144 


J146  §r1  mad  devI  bhIgavatam. 

Brahma  rupini  and  SaraySvastha  Prakriti.  Thou  art  the  Par^  Sakti  ;Tho'.i 
art  the  ParamS^  Sakti;  O  Devi  !  Thou  art  the  Tri-Oxkti : — the  IchchhH  Sakti 
(the  will  power),  the  Kriy4  5akti  (power  of  action)  and  the  J  nana  Sakti  (tin; 
force  of  knowledge).  Thou  art  the  Ganga,  YamunS,  Vipas'a,  Sarasvati, 
Sarayu,  DevikH,  SinJhu  ;  Narmad^,  Iravati,  Godavar?,  Satadru  ;  Kareri, 
Kaus'iki,  Chandra  BhigH,  Vitasta,  Gandaki,  Tapini,  Kavatoya,  Gomati,  ard 
Vetravatiand  other  rivers;  Thou  art  the  Ida,  PingalS,  and  Susumna  nerve?  ; 
Thou  art  Gandhari,  Hastajihva,  Pufta,  Apusa,  Alambnsa,  Kuhu,  ^ankhini, 
Pranavahini  and  other  nerves  in  the  body  ;  O  Devi  !  Thou  art  the  vital 
power  in  the  lotas  of  the  heart;  Thou  art  Svapna  naika  in  the  throat; 
Thou  art  SadSdhlira  in  the  palate  ;  and  Thou  art  the  Vindumalini  oakti 
in  the  pituitari  space    between  the  eyebrows. 

Thou  art  the  Kundalini  in  the  MuladhSra  (sacral  plexus),  the  Vyapini 
exuendino-iupto  the  roots  of  the  hairs  ;  Thou  art  Madhyasana  on  the  crown 
of  the  head,  and  Thou  art  Manonmani  in  the  Brahmarandhra.  O  Devi  !  What 
need  there  is  in  stating  these  ?  Suffice  it  to  say  that  whatever  there  is  seen  i)i 
this  universe,  all  art  Thou  ;  therefore,  O  Sri  Sandhya  Devi  !  I  bow  down  to 
Thee.  O  Narada  !  Thus  I  have  spoken  to  you  about  the  Gayatri-Stotra 
that  o-ives  all  successes,  destroys  all  sins,  and  yields  all  merits.  He  who 
reads  this  in  the  Sandhysl  times,  with  all  attention,  will  get  sons  if  he 
has  no  sons,  will  get  wealth  if  he  has  no  wealth.  There  is  no  doubt  in 
this.  Whoever  reads  this  Stotra.  gets  the  fruits  of  all  Tirthas,  all  Tapasyas, 
all  frifts,  all  sacrifices  and  all  Yogas.  He  enjoys  happiness  in  this  world 
and  finally  gets  the  Moksa.  The  Munis  who  are  engaped  in  Tapasyas  read 
this  Stotra.  While  bathing,  if  one  reads  this,  merged  under  water, 
acquires  the  fruits  of  his  being  merged  in  the  Sandhya.  O  Narada  !  I 
speak  this  verily,  verily,  verily,  unto  you  that  there  is  no  trace  of  any  doubt 
in  this  statement.  Whoever  will  hear  with  devotion  this  Sandhya  stotra, 
the   nectar-like  thing,  will  be  freed  from  all  sins. 

Here  ends  the  Fifth  Chapter  of  tho  Twelfth  Book  on  the  GSyatri  Stotra 
in  the  Maha.puranam  Sri  Mad  Devi  BhSgavatam  of  1S,000  verses  by 
Maharsi  Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

1-3.  Narada  said  :— "0  Bhagavan  !  O  All-knowing  One  !  O  Thou 
versed  in  all  the  Sastras  !  I  have  heard  from  Thy  mouth  all  tho 
secrets  of  Srutis  and  Smritis.  Now  I  ask  Thee,  O  Deva  I  How  can 
the  knowledge  of  that  Veda  Vidya  (Learning)  be  obtained  by  vhieh  all 
sins  are  rooted  out  and  destroyed,  how  is  Brahmajnanam  obtained  and  how 
can    Moksa    be    obtained  ?     How    can    death    be    conquered    and    how  cin 


Book  XII.]  CHAPTER  VI.  1147 

the    best  results    be    obtained   in   this   world  and    in    the  next.       O  Lotus- 
eyed  One !     Thou    ought'st   to   describe  fully   all   these  to   me. 

4-9.  NarSyana  said  :— "O  N^rada  !  O  Highly  Learned  One!  Sadbu  I 
Sadhu  !  You  have  now  put  a  nice  question  indeed  !  Now  I  will  describe 
one  thousand  and  eight  namas  of  the  Gayatri  Devi,  Listen  attentively 
These  all  sin-destroying  auspicious  namea  were  composed  by  Brahm^  and 
first  recited  by  Him.  Its  Risi  is  RrahmS  ;  the  Chhandas  is  Anustup; 
the  Devat^  is  GSyabri  ;  its  Vija  is  Halavarna  (consonants)  and  its 
Sakti  u  Svaravarna  (vowels).  Perform  the  Anga  Nyasa  and  the  Kara  Nyasa 
by  the  Matrika  varnas  (that  is,  by  the  fifty  syllables),  Now  hear  its  DhyS- 
nam,  that  will  do  good  to  the  Sadhakas  (the  praetisers).  [N.  B. — Amga 
Nyasa — Touching  the  limbs  of  the  body  with  the  hand  accompanied  by 
appropriate  jSIantras.  Kara  NySsa — assignment  of  the  various  parts  of 
fingers  and  hand  to  different  deities  which  is  usually  aeaompanied  with  pray- 
ers and  corresponding  gesticulations.]  I  worship  the  Kumslri  (virgiu) 
Gayatri  Devi,  the  Lotus-eyed  One,  riding  on  the  Swan  (the  Pranas), 
and  seated  on  a  lotus  (creation) ;  Who  is  three-eyed  and  of  a  red  colour- 
and  Who  is  bright  and  decorated  with  gems  and  jewels  of  red,  white* 
green,  blue,  yellow  and  other  '.vaviegated  colours  ;  Who  is  holdino-  in  Her 
hands  Kuudika,  the  rosary,  lotus  and  makino^  signs  as  if  ready  to  o- rant 
the  ddsired  boons  and  on  whose  neck  is  suspended  the  garland  of  red 
flowers.  I  worship  the  Devi  G&yatri.  Note. — The  colours  are  the  vaiious 
emotions  and  feelings,  ' 

IC-16,  Now  I  will  recite  the  one  thousand  and  eight  names  of  the 
Oayatri,  beginning  with  the  syllable  "a"  and  going  en  a,  a,  i,  i,  etc.,  in  due 
order  of  the  alphabets.  Listen  !  Her  way^  and  actions  cannot  be  compre- 
hended by  intellect  (Buddhi) ;  She  is  theiefore  Aehiutya  Laksana  ;  She 
is  Avyakt4  (unmanifested ;  unspeakable);  She  is  Arthamatrimahes'vari» 
(because  She  is  the  Controller  of  Brahma,  etc.);  She  is  Amritarnav- 
madhyastha,  AjitS,  and  Apar^jita.  Thou  art  AnimSdigunadhara,  Arka 
mandalasamsohita,  AjarH,  Aja,  A  para,  Adharma  (she  has  no  dharma, 
^aste,  etc.),  Aksasutvadhara,  Adhara  ;  AkaradfksaklrSntS  (bee inning  wjth 
the  syllable  ':ft"  ana  ending  with  the  syllable  "ksa",  thus  ccmprising 
the  fifty  syllables),  Arisadvargabhedini  (destroying  the  five  passions), 
Anjan^dripratik^s'a.  Anjanadrinivasini,  Aditi,  AjapS,  AvidyS,  Aravindani- 
:bheksana,  Antarvahihsthita,  Avidyadhvamsini,  and  Antar^tmika.  Thou  art 
Aja,  Ajamukhavasd  (residing  in  the  mouth  of  Brahma),  Aravindanibhanana, 
(VyanjanavarnatmikH,  therefore  called)  Ardhamatra,  Arthadanajna  (because 
She    grants  all  the  Purusarthas. 

Arimand-ilamarddini,  Asuraghni,  AmavSsyS,    Alaksighni,  Antyajarehita. 
Thus   end    Her     rames    beginning   with    "A".'    Now    the      names     with 


1143  ^iil  MAD    DEVi  BHiftAVATAM. 

"A"  Thou  arb  Adi  Laksmi,  Adi  Sakfci,  Akriti,  AyatananS,  Aditya- 
pada.'ichara,  AdityaparisevitS,  AchSrya,  Avarfcana  ;  Achara,  and 
Adi  Miirti  nivasmi. 

17-18.  Thou  arb  Agneyi,  Amari,  Ady^,  ArSdhya,  Asauasthita, 
AdMra  nilaya  (seated  in  the  Muladhara),  Adhlra  (the  Refui^e  of 
all),  and  Akas'tinta  nivasini  (of  the  nature  of  Aham  tattva  ;  Thou 
art  Ady^ksara  sani^yukta,  Antar^k&s'ariipini,  Adityaraandalagata, 
Antaradhv&ntands'iui,  (i.  e.  destroyer  of  the  Moha  of  Jivas).  Then 
come   the    names    beginning    with    "  I." 

19-25.  Thou  art  IndirS,  Istada,  IsU  Indivaraniveksan^,  Iravati,  Indra- 
pada,  Indraui,  Indurupini,  IksukodandasamyuktA,  Isiisandhanakariui, 
Indranilasama.kara,  Id^pingalarupini,  Indraksi,  is^vari,  Devi  Ihatrayavi- 
varjitii.  Thou  art  UmS,  Vs\,  Udunibha,  Urv9rukapha!4aaua,  Udupra- 
bha,  UdumatT,  IJdupa,  Udumadhyag^,  Urdha,  Urdhakes-T,  UrdhS- 
dhogatibhedini,  l&rdhavahupriya,  UrQiim.^lavaggranthaddyini,  Thou  art 
Rita,  Risi,  Ritumati,  (the  Creatiix  of  the  work])  Risidevanama- 
krita,  Rigveda,  Rinahartri,  Risimandala  eharini,  Riddhida,  RijuraSr- 
gastha,  Rijudharma,  Rijuprada,  Rigvedanilaya,  Rijvi,  Lupta  dharuia 
pravartini,  Lutarivarasam  bhuta,    Lutadivisaharini. 

26-:J0.  Thou  art  Ek&ksirA,  Ekam^trtl,  Eka,  Ekaikanisihit^,  Aindri,. 
Airavatarudha,  Aihikamusmikapra.da,  Omkara,  Osadhii,  Ota,  Otapro- 
tanivSsiui,  Aurbb^;  AusadhasampaunS,  Aupilsanaphalaprad^,  Anda- 
madhyasthita,    Ahkaramanurupini.    (Visargarvipini). 

Thus   end    the  names    beginning  with   vowels. 

"Now   begin  the  names   beginning    with  consonants. 

Thou  arb  Katy^yani,  Kalaratri,  KImlksi.  Kamasandart,  Karaala, 
Kamini,  Kanta,  Karaada,  Kalakanthini,  Karikumhha  stana  bhara^ 
Karavira  Suvasini,  Kalyani,  Kundalavati,  KuruksetranivSsini,  Kuruviiula, 
dalakara,    Kundali,    and     Kuraudalay^. 

31-32.  Thou  art  Kalajhibha,  JvaralasyS,  Kalika,  K^larupint, 
Ivamaniyaguna,  K^lnti,  Kaladhara,  Kumudvati,  Kaus'ikT,  Kamal4 
kslra,  Kamach&raprabhanjini.  Thou  art  Kaumari,  KarunSpangi, 
Kakubauta    (as   presiding    over   all   the   quarters),   aud    Karipriya. 

33-37.  Thou  art  Kes'ari,  Kes'avanutsl.  Kadamb.i  Kus'umapriya, 
Kaiindl  Kaiika,  KanchT,  Kalas'odbhavasamstuta.  Thou  art  Kamamata, 
Kraturaati,  Kamarupa,  Kripavati,  Kumari,  Kunda  nilayS,  Kirati, 
Kiravahaua,  Kaikeyi,  Kokilaiapa,  Ketaki  KusumapriyS,  Kamanda- 
ludharS,  Kali,  KarmanirmulakarinT,  Kalahansagati,  KaksS,  Kriiij, 
Kautukamangala,  Kasturitilaka,  KamrS,  Karindra  GamanS,  Kuhfi, 
Karpuralepana,  Kri?Da,  Kapibs  Kuharas'rayS,  Kutasth^,  Kudharft, 
Karara,  Kuksisthakbilaviftap^. 


Book    XII.]  CHAPTER  VI.  1151 

dhidevata,  Niipur4  Kraatachatana,  Naraehitta  pratnodiQi,  NimagQi 
rakta  navana,  Nirghata-satna-aisvan^,  NaadaaoJyannilaja,  Nirvya 
hoparicbarini. 

90-107.  P^rvati.  Paramodara,  Parabrahmatjmika,  Para,  Padchkos'a- 
vinirmukta,  Panchapataka-naj'iai,  Para  chitta  vidhanajBa,  Paachika, 
PaScharupiai,  Piirnima,  Parama  Priti,  Parateja^  praka/iai,  Puraoi. 
Paurusi,  Puaya,  Pandari  kaaibhekyana,  Pabala  tala  nirmmagna,  Prita, 
Pritivivardhini,  Pavani,  P^da  sahita,  Pes'ilS,  Pavanas'ini  Prajapati 
Paris'ranta,  Parvatastaoa  mandala,  Padmapriya,  Padmasamstha,  Pad- 
maksi,  Padmasambhava,  Padmapatra,  Padmapada,  Padmini,  Priyabfaasini, 
Pas'upas'a  vinirmukta,  Purandhri,  PuravasinJ,  Paakala,  Purusa,  Parb,ba, 
Parijata  Kusamapriya,  Pativrata,  Pativrata,  Pavitrangi,  Puapahasa 
parayana,  Prajnavatisuta,  Pautri,  Patrapujya,  Payasvini,  Pattipas'adhara, 
Pankti,  Pitrilokapradayini,  PuraaT,  Punyas'ila,  Pranatarti  vinas'ini, 
Pradyaainajaaaai,  Pusta,  Pitaaiahapirigraha,  Puadarikaparavasa,  Paa- 
darikasamaaana,  Prithujaogha,  Prithubhuja,,  Prithupada,  Prithudari, 
Pravalas'obha,  Pingaksi,  Pitavasah,  Praohapala,  Prasava,  Pascida, 
Punya,  Pratistha,  Pranava,  Pati,  Panehavarna,  Patichavaai,  Panchika, 
Panjarasthita,  Paramaya,  Parajyotih,  Parapriti,  Paragati,  Parakastha, 
Pares' ani,  Pavani,  Pavaka  Dyuti,  Punyabhadra,  Parichehhedya,  Puspa- 
hasa,  Prithudara,  Pitangi,  Pitavasana  Pitas'aja,  Pisachini,  Pitakriya, 
Pis'achaghni,  Pataiaksi,  Patukriya,  Panchabhaksaprijaohara,  Putana 
praaaghatini,  Punnagavanamadhyastha,  Punyatirthanisevita,  Panehangf, 
Paras'akti,  Paramaihada  karini,  Puspakaadasthita,  Pdsa,  Po^itakhila- 
vi^tapa,  Paa^priya,  PaSehas'ikha,  Paanagoparis^ayiai,  Panchamatrat- 
mika,  Prithvi,  Patbika,  Prithudohini,  Paraaanyayamimaasa,  Pa  tali, 
Pu^pagandhini,  Punyapraja,  Paradatri,  Paramargaikagoehara,  Pravaia- 
B'obba,  Purnas'a,    Pranava,  Pallabodari. 

108-149.  Phalini,  Phalada,  Phalga,  Phutkari,  Pbalakakriti,  Phanin. 
dra  bhogas'ayaaa,  Phaaimaodalamaadita,  Balabaia,  Bahumata,  BaU- 
tapanibham/uka,  Balabbadrapriya,  Vandya,  Badavd,  Buddhisamstot§, 
Baudidevi,  Bilavafci,  Badis'agbini,  Balipriya,  Bandhavi,  Bodhita,  Buddhir- 
baadbiikakusumapnya,  Bala  bhaouprabbakara,  Brabmi,  Brabmana  devat3, 
Bribaspatistata,  Britida,  Briad^vana  viharini,  BSiakini,  Bilabara,  Bilavasa 
Bahudaka,  Babunetra,  Bahup^da,  Bahukarnavatamsika,  Bababahuyuta, 
Bijarupini,  Baburupioi,  Biaduaadakaiatita,  Biaduuadasvariipiai,  Bad- 
dhagodbangulitrana,  Bddaryas'raiaavasini,  Brindaraka,  Bri^atakandha, 
Brihati,  Banapatini,  Brindadbyak§a,  Babunuta,  Vanita,  Babuvikrama, 
Baddbapadmasauasina,  Bilvapatratalastflita,  Bodhidrumanijavasa,  Badis- 
tb&,  Bindu  darpana,  Bala,  Vaaasauavati,    B  xdavanalavegioi,    Brabmanda 


1152  SEI  mad  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

bahirantasthS,  BrahmakankanasGtrini,  Bhavani,  Bhisanavati,  Bh&vinT, 
Bhayaharini,  Bhadrakaii,  Bhujangaksi,  Bharati,  Bbaratas'aya,  Bhairavi, 
Bh)§anakara,  BhutidS,  Bhutimalini,  Bbamini,  BhoganiiaU,  Bhadrada, 
Bhurivikrama,  BhutavaeS,  Bhrigulat^,  Bhargavi,  Bhusurarchita,  Bhagi- 
rathi,  Bhogavati,  Bhavanastha,  Bhisagvara,  Bhamini,  Bhogini,  BhSs^, 
Bbav&ni,  Bhuridaksina,  Bhargatmika,  Bhimavati,  BhavabHndhavimo- 
chini,  Bbajaui}^,  Bbutadhatri-ranjitl,  Bbuvanes'vari,  Bbujangavalay^, 
Bhim&,  Bherunda,  Bbagadheyini ;  Thou  art  Mata,  Maja,  M-idhumati, 
Madbujihava,  Manuprija,  Mabadevi,  Mababh^gi^,  Maliri,  Minalochan^, 
Majatita,  Madhuraati,  Madbumansa,  Madhudrava,  Manavi,  Madhu- 
fiambbut&,  Mitbilapuravasini,  Madhukaitabbasamhartri,  Medini,  Megha- 
malini,  Mandodari,  Maba  Maya,  Maithili,  Masrinapriya,  Maha  Laksmi, 
Maba  Kali,  Maha  Kanya,  Mahes'vari,  Mabendri,  Merutana}a  Man- 
daiakusumarchita,  Manjumanjiraebarana,  Moksada,  Manjnbbasini, 
Madhuradravinl,  Mudra,  Malay^,,  Malajanvita,  Medba,  Marakatas  yama, 
MagadbT,  Menakatmaja,  Mahamari,  Mabavira,  Mahas'yama,  Manuetuta, 
Matrika,  Mihirabhasa,        Mukundapada    Vikrama,     Muladbarastbita, 

Mugdba,    Manipuranivasini,     Mrigaksi,     Mabiearudla,     Mahieasuramar- 
dini,       Thou      art      YogasanS,,      Yogagamja,     Yoga,       Yauvanakas'raya, 
Yauvani,     Yuddbamadhyastba,    Yamuna,      Yugadbarini,    Yaksini,  Yoga- 
yukta,    Yaksarajaprasiitini,    Yatia,  Yaiia    bidbauajna,    Yaduvans'asamud- 
bhava,    Yakaradi-Ha  Kaianta,      (all      antahstha  varnas),    Yajusi,      Yajna 
rupini,    Yamini,   Yoganirata.j  Yatudbana,  bhayamkari,  Rnkmini,  llamaof, 
Bam^,    Revati,    Renuka,    Rati,     Raudri,      Raudraprijakaia    Rama  mata, 
Ratipriya,    Rohini,      Rajyada,      Reva,      Riiea,      Rajivalocbana,     Fakes'i, 
Rupasampaniia,     RatnasimbasanastbitS,     Raktamaljambaradbara,    Rakta- 
gandbanu      lepana,      Raja      hamsa      eamarudba,      Rambba,      Raktavali- 
priya,        Raraaniyayugadbaia,        R&jitakhilabbutala,        Rurueharmapari- 
dbaca,       Rathini,       Ratnamalika,       Roges'i,        Rogas'amani,         Ravini, 
Romabarsini,       Ramaehandra      pada    Kranta,        Ravanacbcbbedakarini, 
Ratnavastra  parichcbhinva,  Ratha&tha,    Rukma  bbusaca,    Lajjadhidevata, 
LoU,    Lalita,    Lingadbarini.     Laksmi,    Lola,     Luptaviea,  Lokini,  Loka- 
vis'ruta,    Lajja,     Lambodari,    Lalana,      Lokadbarini     Varada,    Vandiia, 
Vidya,    Vaisnavi,    Vimalakriti,    Varahi,      Viraja,    Varga,     Varalaksmi, 
Vilasini,      Vinata,       Vyomamadbyasth^,     Varijasanasamethita,     VarunT, 
Venusambhuta,  VitihotrS,  Virupini,  Vayumandalamadbyastha,  Visnuruf  a, 
Vidhikriya,    Visnupatni,    Visnumati,    Vis'alaksi,   Vasundbara,  Vamade- 
vapriya,    Vela,   Vajrini,     Vasudohini,      VedakBaraparitamgi,    VSjapeya- 
phalaprada,     Vasavi,    Vamajanani,  Vaikunthanilaya,    Vara,    Vyasapriy4, 
Varmadhara,  Valmikiparieevita, 


Book  XII.]  CHAPTER  VI.  114^ 

Thus   eud   the   names    with    Ka. 
Now    come    those     with   Kha. 

38-62.  Thou  art  Khadga  Khetadhar4,  Kharbba,  Khechari,  Khaga- 
vekhan^,  Khattanga  dharinT,  Khy^tS,  Khagarajoparisthita,  KhalaghnJ, 
Khanditajara,    KhadSksyanapradayini,    Khandendu  tilak^. 

Thou  art  Gangll,  Ganes'a  guhapujita,  G^yatri,  Gomati,  GitS, 
GAndhari,  GSnalolupa,  Gautami,  GAmini,  GadhsL,  Gandharv^psara- 
sevita,  Govinda  charan^  krSgitS,  Gunatraya  vibhdbitS,  Gandharvi, 
Gahvari,  Gotra,  Giris'a,  Gahana,  Garni,  Guhav^sa,  Gunavati  (of 
good  qualities),  Gurupapapran^s'ini,  Gurbbi,  Gunavati  (of  the  three 
gnnas),  Guhy^,  Goptavya,  Gunad^yini,  Girij£l,  Guhyam^tangi,  Garu- 
dadhvajavalhbha,  Garv^paharini",  Godi  (grating  Heaven),  Gokulas- 
thl,  Gadadharll,  Gokarnanilay^  sakt^,  and  Guhyamandala  vartint, 
Kow  the  names  With  "  Gha  ".  Thou  art  Gharmadtl,  Ghanada,  Ghant^, 
Ghora  Danava  marddini,  Ghrini  mantra  mayi  (of  the  Surya 
mantru,  Ghrigii  is  to  shine j.  Ghoa^,  Ghanasamp^tad&yini,  GhantS,ra- 
vapriyS,  Ghran§,  Ghrinisantustikarini.  ^giving  pleasure  to  the  Sunj,  Gha- 
n:\rimandala,  Ghiirna,  Ghritachi,  Ghanavegini,  G54nadh  Stumayi,  Thou  art 
Charcha,  Charchita,  Ch^ruhasini,  ChatuU,  Chandik^,  ChitrS,  Chitram^l- 
yavi  bhusit^,  Chaturbhuja.  Charu  dant^,  (/haturi,  Charltaprad^,  ChuUkS, 
Chitravastr;int&,  Chandram^^h  Karna  Kundala,  ChandrahasS,  ChSru 
datri,  Chakori,  Ghandrahasini,  Chandrika,  Chandradh^tri,  Chaurf, 
Chora,  Chandika,  Chanchadvagv^dini,  Chaudrachuda,  Cboravin4s'inf, 
ChSruchandani  lipt^ngi,  Chancbachchamaravijit^,  CharumadbyA, 
Charugati,  Chandil^,  Cbandrariipini,  Charuhoma  priyS,  Charva,  CharitA, 
Chakrab^huka,  ChandramandHlamadhyasthS,  Chandramandala  DarpanS, 
ChakravAkastani,  Chesta,  Chitra,  Charuviiasir:i,  Chitsvarfipa;  Chand- 
avati,  Chdndrama,  Chandanapriy§,  Chodayitri  (as  impellmg  the  Jlvaa 
always  to  action?^.  Chiraprajna,  Chataka,  CharuhetukT,  Thou  art 
Chhatrayaia,  Chhatradhara,  ChhSya,  Chhandha^parichchhada,  ChhayS 
Devi,  Chhidranakha,  Chhannondriyavisarpinj,  Chhandonustupprati§- 
thanta,  Chhidropadiava  bhedmi,  Chheda,  Chhatres'varJ,  Chhinna, 
Chburika,  and  ChheJanpriya.  Thcu  ait  Janani,  Janmrarahita, 
Jataveda,  Jaganmayi,  Jahnavi,  Jatiia.  Jatri,  (Jetri)  JarSmarana  varjrt3, 
Jambu  dvipa  vati,  JvSia,  Jayanti,  Jalas'aiini,  Jitendriya,  Jitakrodha, 
Jitamitra,  Jagatpriya,  jatarupamayi,  Jihva,  Janaki,  Jagati,  Jaia  (Jaya) 
Janitri,  Jahnutanaya,  Jagattrayahitaisini,  Jvaiamuli,  Japavati,  Jvara 
ghni,  Jitavistapa,  Jitakrantamayi,  JvAlA,  jagrati,  Jvaradevata.  Jva- 
lanti  Jalada,  Jyesthft,  Jyagho8c\  sphota  dinmukhi,  Jambhini,  Jrimbhana, 
Jrimbha.Jvalanmanikya    Kundala.    Jhinjhika,     Jhananirgho^a,     Jhanjhft 

145 


1150  SRI  mad  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

MSrata  veginf,  Jhallakivftdya  kus'aU,  NrupA,  Nbhuja,  Tanka  bhedinf, 
TaDka  b&nasam&yuktS,  Tankini,  Tanka  bhedini,  Tankiganakrit&ghoBft, 
Tankaniya  mah  orassl,  TankSra  K^riai,  Tha  tha  s'avdaninSdini. 

63-80.  Now  come  the  names  beginning  with  "  Da  "  They  are  : — 
**  P&mari,  Dakini,  Dimbha,  Dundamaraikanirjita,  pamaritantramSr- 
gasthft,  Damdadamarunlldini,  DindiravasahS,  Dimbhalasat  krid&pa- 
r&yan^  (dancing  with  joy  in  battles).  Then  Dhundhi  vighnes'a  janani, 
Dhakk&  basta,  Dhilivrajl  (followed  by  ^iva  ganas),  Nityajnan^,  Niru- 
pama,  Nirguna  and  Narmad&  river.  Now:  — Trigun§,  Tripad^,  TantrT, 
Tulasi,  Tarun^,  Tara,  Trivikramapada  krSnt^,  Tariyapadag^mini, 
Tj»run^  ditya  samkas'S,  TSmasi,  TuhinS,  Turft,  Trik41ajnana  Sampann^, 
Trivali,  Trilochana,  Tri  iSakti,  TripurA,  Tungd,  Turangavadan^,  Tim- 
ingilagilA,  TibrS,  TrisrotS,  T&masSdini,  Tantra  mantravig'egajsa, 
TanumadhyS,  TrivigtapS,  Trisandhya,  Tristani,  To?asara8th4,  TSla- 
pratSpini,  Ta tankini,  Tu^arabha,  Tuhioachala  v£lsini,  Tantujalasam^. 
yukta,  TSrahSra  valipriyS,  Tilahomapriya,  Tirthft,  Tamala  kusum^  kriti, 
TftrakS,  Triyuta,  Tanvi,  Tris'am  kuparivaritS,  Talodart,  Tirobhasa, 
Tatamka  priyavSdini,  Trijata,  Tittiri,  TriBn§,  Tribidba,  Taruna  kriti, 
Tapta  kanchanasamkas'a,  Tapta  kanchana  bhd^ana,  Traiyambaki, 
Tiivarga,  Trikalajnanadajini,  Tarpaiia,  Triptida,  Tripta,  Tamasf, 
Tumvarustuta,  Tarksyastha,  Trigunakara,  Tribhangi,  Tanuv<illarJ, 
Thatkari,  Tharava,  Thanta,  Dohini,  Dinavatsala,  Danavanta  kari, 
Durgli,  Durgasuranivahrini,  Devariti,  Divaratri,  Draupadi,  Dundu 
bhisvana,  Devayant,  Duiavasa,  Daridrya  bhedini,  Diva,  Damodarapriya, 
Dipta,  Digva^a,  Digvimohinf,  Danda  karanya  nilaya,  Dandini, 
Deva  pujita,  Deva  vandja,  Divisada,  Dvesini,  Danava  kriti,  Dinan4 
fehastuta,  Dik§a,  Daivata  disvarupini,  Dhatri,  Dhanurdhara 

Dhenur  Dharini,  Dharmacharini,  Dhurandhar&,  Dharadhara,  Dbanadfi, 
DhSnya  dohint,  Dharmas'iia,  DhanadhyakB§,  Dhanurvedavis'arada, 
Dhriti,  DhanyS,  Dhritapada,  Dharmarajapriyft,  Dhruva,  Dhumavatt, 
Dhiimakes'i   Dharmaa'astraprakasmi. 

81-98.  Nanda,  Nandapriya,  Nidra,  Nrinuta,  Nandanatmika,  NarmmadA 
Nalini,  Niia,  Nilakanthafcamas'raya,  Kudrani,  Narayanapriya,  Nityft, 
Nirmmaia,  Nirguna,  Nidhi,  Niradhara,  Nirupama,  Nityas'uddha, 
NiraSjana,  Nadabindu  Kalatita,  Nadavindu  KaUtmika,  Nrisimhinf, 
Nagadhara,  Nripaniga  vibhu§ita,  Naraka  Kles'anas'ini,  Narayanapado 
dbhava,  Niravadya,  Nirakara,  Naradapriyakarini,  Nanajyotih,  Nidhid3, 
Nirmaiatmika,  Navasfitradhara,  Niti,  Nirupa  drava  karini,  NandajA, 
Navaratnadhj&,  Naimisaranya  vasini,  Navanitapriya,  NAri,  Nila 
jimtita  nisvana,  Nimefini,  Nadirupa,  Nilagriva,  Njs'is'varJ,  Namavali, 
Mie'umbbaghDS,  Na^aloka  mvaeiDi,  Nayajambii  nadaprakbyA,   NAgalokft 


Book  XIL]  CMAPTER   VI.  1153 

Thou  art  ^akambhari,  5ivi,  ^aata.  ^aradd,  ^aranagati,  Satodari, 
Subhaehara,  ^umbhasuraraardini,  ^obhabati,  ^ivikara,  ^amkarlrdha- 
s'aririni,  ^ona,  (red),  J^ubhas'aya,  Subhra,  ^irahsandhanakarini, 
^aravati,  ^arananda,  ^arajjyotsna,  iSubhanaaa,  ^arabha,  ^ulini,  Buddha, 
^abari.  fiukavahxna,  Sriinati,  ^ridharaaandS,  ^ravaaanandadayini , 
Sarvani,  Sarbbarivandya,  Sadbhusa,  Sadritupriya,  SadadharasthitadevT, 
^anmukhapriyakariai,    Sadamgarupasumati,    Surasuranamaskrita. 

150-155.  Thou  art  Sarasvati,  Sadadhara,  Sarvamangalakarini, 
Samaganapriya,  Sdksma,  Savitri,  Samasambhava,  Sarvavasa,  Sadananda, 
Sustani,  Sagarambara,  Sarvais'yaryapriya,  Siddhi,  SadhubandhuparA- 
krama,  Saptarsimaadalagata,  Soraamandalavasim,  Sarvajna,  Sandra- 
karuna,  Samanadhikavarjita,  SarvottuQga,  Saagahina,  Sadguna,  Saka- 
lestada,  Saragha  (bee),  Siiryataaaya,  Sukes'i,  Somasamhati,  Hiranyavarna, 
Harini,  Hrimkari,  Hamsavahiui,  Ksaumavastraparitangi,  Ksirabdhi- 
taaaya,  K§ama,  Gayatri,  Savitri,  P^rvati,  Sarasvati,  Vedagarbha, 
Vararoha,  Sri  Gayatri,   and  Paramvika. 

156-159.  O  NaradalThusI  have  described  to  you  one  thousand 
(and  eight)  names  of  Gayatri.  ;  the  hearing  of  which  yields  merits  and 
destroys  all  sins  and  gives  all  prosperity  and  wealth.  Specially  in 
the  Astamitithi  (eighth  lunar  day)  if  after  one's  meditation  (dhyanam) 
worship,  Homa,  and  japam,  one  recites  this  in  company  with  the 
Brahmanas,  one  gets  all  sorts  of  satisfactions.  These  one  thousand  and 
eight  names  of  the  Gayatri  ought  not  to  be  given  to  anybody 
indiscriminately.  Speak  this  out  to  him  only  who  is  very  devoted,  who 
is  a  Brahmana,  and  who  is  an  obedient  disciple.  Even  if  any  devotee,  fallen 
from  the  observances  of  Achara  (right  way  of  living),  be  a  great 
friend,   still  do   not   disclose    this   to    him. 

160-165.  In  whatever  house,  these  names  are  kept  written,  no 
cause  of  fear  can  creep  in  there  and  Laksmi,  the  Goddess  of  wealth, 
though    unsteady,    remains    steady  in  that    house. 

This  great  secret  yields  merits  to  persons,  gives  wealth  to  the  poor 
yields  raoksa  to  those  who  are  desirous  of  it,  and  grants  all  desires. 
If  anybody  roads  this,  he  gets  cured  of  his  diseases,  and  beconias 
freed  from  bondages  and  impasoument.  AH  the  Great  Sins,  for  example, 
murdering  Brahmanas,  drinking  wine,  stealing  gold,  going  to  the 
wife  of  one's  Guru,  taking  gifts  from  bad  persons,  and  eating  the 
uneatables,  all  are  destroyed,  yea,  verily  destroyed  I  O  Narada  !  Thus 
I  have  recited  to  you  this  Great  Secret.  All  persons  get,  indeed 
united  with  Brahma  (Brahama  sayujya)  by  this.  True,  True.  True.  There  is 
not   the  least    trace   of    doubt  here. 

U6 


1154  SRI  mad  DEVl  BHAGAVATA\t 

Here  ends  the  Sixth  Chapter  of  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the  one  thous- 
sand  and  eight  names  of  the  Gayatri  in  the  Mahapuranam  6ri  Mad  DevJ 
Bhagavatam   of   18,000    verses    by    Maharri    VeJa  Vjasa. 


CHAPTEK  VII. 

1-3.  Nai-rada  said  : — I  have  heard  the  one  thousand  names  or 
nama  stotras  equivalent  in  its  fruits  to  S'ri  Gay  air  i,  highly  potent  in 
making  a  good  fortune  and  tending  to  a  splerdid  increase  of  the  wealth 
and  prosperity.  Now  I  want  to  hear  about  how  initiations  in  Mantrnms  a;e 
performed,  without  which  nobody,  be  he  a  Brahmin,  a  Kgattriya,  a  Vais'ya 
or  a  Slidra,  is  entitled  to  have  the  Devi  Ma  ntra.  O  Lord !  Kindly 
describe  the  ordinary  (Samauya)  and  the   speeisl     (vis'esa)  rules  thereof. 

4-41,  N&r^y&na  said  : — "  O  NSrada  !  Listen.  lam  now  telling  you 
about  the  rules  of  initiation  (Dik?l)  of  the  disciples,  pure  in  heart.  When 
they  are  initiated,  they  become  entitled  then  an  d  not  before  that,  to 
worship  the  Devas,  the  Fire  and  "the  Guru.  That  method  of  instruc. 
tion,  and  religious  act  and  ceremony  is  called  the  Diks^  (initia- 
tion) by  which  the  Divine  Knowledge  is  imparted  ;  and  at  once  flashes 
in  the  heart  and  mind  of  the  ini  tiated  that  Knowledge  and  all  his 
sins  are  then  destroyed.  So  the  Pun  dits  of  the  Vedas  and  the  Tantras  say. 
(The  Divine  Knowledge  is  like  lightning,  fire,  arising  and  permeating  the 
body,  mind,  and  spirit.)  This  Dik§a  ought  to  be  taken  by  all  means. 
This  gives  excellent  merits  and  pure  result  s.  Both  the  Guru  and  the  iSijya 
(disciple)  ought  to  be  very  pure  aud  true.  (This  is  the  tirst  essential  requi. 
site.  Then  the  results  are  instantaneous).  First  of  of  all,  the  Guru  i^ 
to  perform  all  the  morning  duties,  he  is  to  take  bis  bath  and  perform 
his  Sandhy^  Vandanams.  He  is  to  return  home  from  the  banks  of  the  rivfr 
with  his  Kamandalu  and  observe  maun.ira  (silence).  Then,  in  order 
to  give  DiksS,  he  is  to  euter  into  t  he  assigned  room  (Yaga  Mandapa'j 
and  take  his  seat  on  an  Asana  that  is  excellent  ard  calculated  to  pleafe 
all.  He  is  to  perform  Achanara  and  do  PranSySma.  Then  he  shoulj* 
take  water  in  his  Arghya  vessel  and  putting  scents  and  flowers  in  that, 
charge  that  water  with  Phatkara  mantra  (that  is,  condense  electricit> ' 
Spirit  in  that).  Then  uttering  the  Phat  mantra,  he  is  to  sprinkle  the  water 
on  the  doorways  of  the  worshiproom  and  begin  his  Pooja.  Firstly,  on 
the  top  of  the  dojr  at  one  ead  invoke  the  Deity  Gananatha  by  His  mantra 
at  the  other  end  invoke  Sara^vati  by  Her  mantra,  and  at  the  middle, 
invoke  Lak?;ni  Davi  by  E[?r  mantra  duly  and  worship  them  with  flowers. 
Then,  on  the  right  side  worship  GangS.  and  Bighnes'a ;  and  on  the 
left  side  worship  K§etfcrapala  and  Yamuna,  the  daughter  of  the  Sun. 
Similarly,  ou  the  bottom  of  the   door,  worship   the   Astra   Devata    by   the 


BooF  XII.]  CHAPTER  VII.  II55 

Phat  mantra.  Then  consider  the  whole  Mandapa  as  insgired  with  the  pre- 
3enoeo/"th9  Devi,  and  see  tha  whole  place  aa  pervaded  by  Her  through  and 
throu^'h.  Then,  repaat  the  Phat  mantra  and  destroy  the  Celestial  obstacles 
as  well  as  those  from  the  middle  space  (Antariksa);  strike  che  ground 
thrice  with  the  left  heel  and  thus  destroy  the  Terrene  obstacles.  Then 
touching  the  left  branch  on  the  left  sidd  ot  ths  choukat,  pat  the  right 
foot  forward  and  enter  into  the  Mandapa.  Then  instal  the  ^iiiti  Kumbha 
(the  peace  jir)  and  offer  the  ordinary  -Vrghya  (Saminyar^ha).  Next  wor- 
ship the  Vdstunathi  and  Padmayoni  with  flowers  and  Atapa  rice  and  the 
Arghya  waiter,  on  the  south-west  and  then  purify  the  Pancha  Gavya.  Next 
sprinkle  all  the  Mandapa  and  the  entrance  gate  with  that  Arghya  water. 
And,  while  sprinkling  with  Arghya  water,  consider  the  whole  space  ricrht 
through  as  inspired  with  the  presence  of  the  Davi  and  repeat  the  Mula 
Mantra  with  devotion  and  sprinkle  with  Phat  mantra.  The  Kart&,  then, 
uttering  the  mantra  "Phat,"  is  to  drive  away  all  the  evils  from  the  Mandapa 
and  uttering  the  mantra  "Ham"  sprinkle  water,  all  around,  thus 
pacifying  the  atmosphere  and  bringing  peace  into  tte  hearts  of  all  present 

Then    burn    the     Dhupa    incense    inside     and    fccit^er    Vikira     (water, 
sandal-paste,     yava,    ashes,    Durba    grass  with    roots,    and     Atapa    rice). 
Then  collect  all  these  rice,  etc.,  again  with  a  broom    made  of  Kus'a  grass  to 
the  north  east  corner  of   the  Mandapa  ;  making  the  Sankalap  and  uttering 
Svasti    vachana    (invocation   of   good\  distribute    and  satisfy  the  poor  and 
or;  bans  wich  fooding,  clothing    and    money.     Then    lie   should    bow    down 
to  his  own  Guru  and  take  his  seat    humbly    on    the    soft    Asanam    allotted 
to  him  with  his  face  eastwards  and  moditite  on  the    Deity    (Ista    Deva)    of 
the    mantra    that    is    to  be    imparted    to    the    disciple.     After  meditating 
thus,  he   is  to  do  the  Bhuta  s'uddhi  (purification  of  elements)  and   perform 
NySsa,   etc.,    of    the    Deya   mantra  (the    mantra  that    is  to  be  imparted  to 
the  disciple)  according  to  the  rules  stated  below  : — i.  e.  the  Risi  on  the  head  ; 
the  chhandas  in  the  mouth,  the  Ista  DevatS  in  the  heart,  Bija  on  the  anus 
and    5akti   Nyasa   on  the    two  legs.     Then  he   is  to  make    sound   thric« 
by  the  clap  of  bis    palm    and    thus    thwart  off  all  the  evils  of  the  earth  and 
the  middle  space  and  then  make  digbandhan  (tieing  up  the  quarters)  by  the 
mudra  chhutiki  three  times  (snanpi'ng  the  thumb  and  forefinger  together  ). 
Then  perform  the  PrSnayAma  with  the  Mula    mantra  o'f  the  would-be-Ista- 
Devata    and  do  the  Ma^^rika  NySsa    in  one's   own  body,  thus:— "Om  Am 
namab  e'irasi,    Om    Am    naraah   on  the  face,  Ora   Im  namah  on  the  right 
eye,    Om    Imnamah    on  the  left   eye,    and  so  on,  assign  all  the  letters  duly 
to   their   respective   places.      Then    perform   the    Karanga  ny^sa   on    the 
fingers     and  the  Sadanga  nyis^  thus  -.—Speak  :— Om  Hridayiya    namah, 
touohint'    on   the    heart,    utter  Om  ^irase  svahS,   touching  the  head  ;  Om 


1156  ^Rt  MAD  DEVi   BHAgAVATAM. 

S'ikhS,yai  Vasat,  touching  the  tuft  ;  Om  KavachSya  Hum,  touching  on 
the  Kavacha,  "Om  netratrayaya  Vausat,  touching  the  eye,  and  "  Om 
Astr&ya  Pbat  "  touching  both  the  sides  of  the  hand,  the  palm  and  its 
back.  Then  finish  the  NaySsa  by  doing  the  Varnanyasa  of  the 
Mula  mantra  in  those  places  that  are  aaid  in  the  cognate  kalpas.  (i  e. 
throat,  heart,  arms,  legs,  etc). 

O  Narada  !  Nexb  consider  within   your  body    the     seat  of  an  auspicious 
Asana  (a  seat)  and  make  the  Nyau  of  Dh^irm'i  on  the  right  side,    Jnanam 
on  the  left  side,  of  Vairagyam  (dispassion)  on  the  left  thigh,  prosperity   and 
wealth  on  the  right  thigh,  of  non-Dharma  in     the  mouth  and  ofNon-JnSnara 
on  the  left  side,  Avairagyam  (passion)  on  the  navel,  and  poverty  on  the  right 
side,     Then  think  of  the  feet  of  the  Asana  (the  body)  as  Dharma,  etc  ,  and 
all  the  limbs  as    Adharna    (non-D  harma.)     In    the   middle    of  the    Asana 
(body)  i.e.,  in  the  heart  consider  Ananta  Deva  as  a  gentle  bed  and  on  that  a 
pure  lotus  representing   this    universe   of     five     elements.       Then     make 
Ny^sa   of  the    Sun,  Moon,    and  Pire   on    this    lotus  and  think  the  Sun  as 
composed    of    twelve     Kalas      (digits,)    the    Moon     composed    of    sixteen 
Kal^s    (digits)   and   the    Fire    as  composed  of  ten  Kalas.     Over  this  make 
Nyasa  of  Sattva,  llaja  and  Tamo    Gunas,  Atm§,    Antaratma,    Paramatm^ 
and  JSanatm&  and  then  think  of  this  as  his  I§ta's  altar  where  the  devotee  is 
to  meditate    on  his    Ista  DevatS,  the  Highest  Mother.     Nyasi-assignment 
of  the  various    parts   of  the  body    to  different    deities    which  is    usually 
accompanied    with    prayers    and    corresponding  gesticulations.     Next    the 
devotee    is    to  perfoim    the    mental   worship   of  the  Deya  Mantra  DevatSL 
according   to  the    rules    of  his     own    Kalpa ;    next  he    is    to  show  all  the 
MudrSs    stated  in  the  Kalpa  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Deva.     The  Devas 
become     very  pleased  when  all  these  MudrSs  are  shown  to  them. 

42-46.  O  N&rada  !  Now,  on  one's  left  side,  erect  an  heotagon ; 
inside  it  a  circular  figure  ;  inside  this  again  a  square  and  then  draw 
within  that  square  a  triangle  and  over  it  show  the  oankha  MudrS. 

After  finishing  the  Poojl  of  the  Six  Deities  at  the  six  corners  of  the 
hectagon.  Fire,  etc.,  take  the  tripod  of  the  oankha  (conoh-shell)  and 
sprinkling  it  with  Phat  mantra,   place  it  within  the  triangle. 

Utter,  then,  the  Mantra  "  Mam  Vahniman  dalSya  Das 'a  KaUtmane 
Amuka  Devy^  Arghyapatrasth^nSya  namal^"  and  thus  worshipping  the 
•Sankhya  vessel  place  it  within  the  mandala.  Then  worship  in  the 
!§ankha  pittra,  the  ten  Kalas  of  Fire,  beginning  from  the  East,.then  south- 
east and  so  on.  Sprinkle  the  Sankha,  eonchshell,  with  the  Mula  Mantra 
and  meditating  on  it,  place  the  Sankha  (conch  shell)  on  the  tripod.  Repeat- 
ing the  mantra  "  Am  Surya  mandalaya    Dvadas'akalatmane  Amukodevyft 


Book  XII.]  CHAPTER  VII. 


1157 


Arghyapatraya  nam  ah"  worship  in  the  Arghyapatra  ^ankha,  sprinkle 
water  in  the  5ankba  with  the  Mantra  Sara  :^ankhya  namah."  Worship 
ip  due  order  the  twelve  KaUs  of  the  Sua  Tapini,  TSpini,  Dhurnra,  etc..  utter 
the  fifty  syllables  of  the  Mitrika  in  an  inverse  order  {le.,  beginning  (See 
theSarada  Tilaka)  with  Ksain,  Ham,  Sim,  Sam,  ^am  etc.,)  and  repeating 
the  Mula  Mantra  also  in  an  inverse  order,  fill  the  ^ankha,  three-fourths,  with 
water.  Next  perform  in  it  the  Nyasa  of  Chandrakala  an^  uttering  the 
ManVra  "  Um  Soma  raaiidalaya  Sjtlas'akalatmane  Ara-ikadevataya  ArghyS- 
mritaya  namah,  worship  in  this  eonchshell.  Next  with  Ankus'a  mudra, 
invoke  all  the  tirthas  there,  repeating  the  Mantia  "  Gange  Cha  Yaraune 
ehaiva,  etc.,  and  repeat  eight  times  the  Mula  Mantra  (the  basic  Mantra) 
Then  perform  the  Sadumga  Nyasa  in  the  water  and  with  the  Mantra. 
"  Hrida  namah,  etc.,  worship  and,  repeating  eight  times  the  Mula  Mantra, 
cover  it  with  Matsyamundra, 

Next  place  on  the  right  side  of  the  Sankha,  the  Proksani  Patra  (the 
Kos'a  vessel  from  which  water  is  taken  for  sprinkling)  and  put  a  little  water 
in  it.  By  this  water  sprinkle  and  purify  all  the  articles  of  worship  as  well  as 
one's  own  body  and  consider  one's  Atman  as  pure  and  holy. 

57-81.  After  doing  works  thus  far  the  until  Vis'esarghya  is  placed,  the 
devotee  should  erect  Sarvato  bhadra  mandala  within  the  altar  and  put 
the  Sali  rice  within  its  pericarp,  Next  spread  Kas'a  grass  on  that  Mandala 
and  put  on  one  Kurcha,  looking  well  and  auspicious  within  it,  made  of 
twenty-seven  Kus'a  grass  knotted  with  Venyagra  granthi.  Worship  here 
the  Adhara  Sakti,  Prakriti,  Kunna,  oesa,  Ksama,  Sudha^indhu,  Maniman- 
dala,  Kalpa  vriksa  and  Tsta  devata  and  the  Pitha.  (Durga  Devi  yoga 
pithaya  namah).  Then  have  an  entire  kumbha  (waterjar)  having  no  defect, 
wash  it  inside  with  Phat  mantra,  and  encircle  it  with  the  red  thread  thrice 
as  symbolising     the    three   Gunas. 

Place  within  this  jar  the  Nava  ratna  (nine  jewels)  with  Kuicha  and  wor- 
shipping it  with  scents  and  flowers  put  them  in  the  jar  repeating  the  Pranava, 
and  place  that  on  the  Pitha  (seat).  Next  consider  the  Pitha  and  Kumbha 
(waterjar)  as  one  and  the  same  and  pour  waters  from  the  Tirthas,  repeating 
in  an  inverse  order  the  Matrika  Vavnas  (from  Ksa  to  Ka)  and  fill 
it,  thinking  of  the  lata  Deva  and  repeating  the  basic  mantra,  put  the  new 
and  fresh  twigs  (Pallavas)  of  As'vattha,  Panasa  and  mango  trees,  etc., 
in  the  jar  and  cover  its  mouth  and  place  over  it  fruits,  rice,  and 
chagaka  (honey)  and  wrap  it  with  two  red  clothes.  Then  perform  the 
Prana-Prati^tha  and  invoke  the  Spirit  of  the  Qevi  by  the  Prana- 
sthSpana  Mantra  and  show  the  Mudras,  Avahana,  etc.,  and  thus  satisfy 
the    Devi.     Then  do   the   ^odas'opachara   Puja  of    the   Devi    after   me- 


1158  ^Rt  MA.D  DEVt  BHJIgAVATAM. 

difcating  on  the  Parames'vari  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Kalpa. 
First  offer  "welcome"  in  front  of  the  Devi  and  tben^duly  offer  the  P^dya, 
Ar»hva,  Achamanrya  water,  Madhuparka,  and  oils,  etc.,  for  the  bath. 
Then  offer  nice  red  silken  clothes  and  various  jewels,  ornaments  ; 
repeating  the  MatrikS  syllables  electrified  with  the  Deya  Mantra,  worship 
the  whole  boJy  of  the  Devi  with  scents  and  flowers.  Next  offer  to  the 
Devi  the  sweet  scent  of  K^laguru  mixed  with  camphor  and  the 
Kas'iniri  sandalpaste  mixed  with  Kasturi  and  various  nice  scented 
flowers,  for  example,  the  Kunda  flowers,  etc..  Then  offer  the  Dhiipji  prepared 
from  Agaru,  Guggula,  Us'ira,  sandalpaste,  sugar,  and  honey  and  know 
that  the  Dhupa  is  very  pleasing  to  the  Devi.  Next  offer  various  lights 
and  offerings  of  fruits,  vegetables  and  fooding.  Be  particular  to  sp.'-inkle 
everything  with  the  water  of  the  Ko^S,  thus  purifying,  before  it  is  offered  to 
the  Devi.  Then  complete  the  Anga  Puja  and  the  Avarana-paj4  of  the 
Devi,  then  perform  the  duty  of  Vais'vadeva.  On  the  right  side  of 
the  Dev  i  erect  an  altar  (sthandilaj  six  feet  square  and  instal  Agni 
(Eire)  there.  Invoke  there  the  Deity,  thinking  of  Her  Form  and  worship 
Her  with  scents  and  flowers.  Then  with  the  Vyahriti  Mantra  with  Sv^ha 
prefixed  and  Mula  (Deya)  Mantra  perform  the  Homa  ceremony  with  oblat- 
ions, eharu  and  ghee,  twenty  five  times.  Next  perform  Homi  again  with 
VySrhiti.  Next  worship  the  Devi  with  scents,  etc.,  and  consider  the 
Devi  and  Pitha  Devatlas.one  and  the  same.  Then  take  leave  of 
(visarjana)  the  Agni  (Fire).  Offer  valis  (sacrifices)  all  round  to  the 
Pars'vadas   of  the    Devi  with   the    remnant  oharu    of  the  Homa. 

Now  again  worship  the  Devi  with  five  offerings  and  offer  betel, 
umbrella,  ch^mara  and  others  and  repeat  the  Mula  mantra  thousand  times. 
After  finishing  the  Japam,  place  Karkari  (a  water-jar  with  small 
holes  at  the  bottom,  as  in  a  sieve)  on  the  rice  in  the  north-eastern 
corner  and  invoke  the  Devi  there  and  worship  Her.  Uttering  the 
mantra  "  Raksa  Rakfa "  moisten  the  place  with  water  coming  out 
of  Karkari,  and  repeat  the  Phat  mantra.  After  re-worshipping  the 
Devi,  place  Karkari  in  due  position.  Thus  the  Guru  finishes  the 
AdhivSsa  (toregoing)  ceremony  and  takes  his  meals  with  the  disciple  and 
sleeps  that    night    on     that    altar. 

82-106.  O  NSrada  !  Now  I  am  describing  briefly  about  the  Homa 
Kunda  (a  round  hole  in  the  ground  consecrated  to  the  Deity)  and  the 
SamskSra  ceremony  of  the  Sthandila  (the  sacrificial  altar).  Uttering, 
first,  the  Mula  Mantra,  see,  fix  your  gaze  on  the  Kunda ;  then  sprinkle  it 
with  water  and  the  Phat  mantra  and  drive  away  the  evil-spirits  from 
there.     Then   with    mantra  "  Hum  "     again     sprinkle  "  it     with     water. 


Book  Xlt.]  CHAPTER  Vtl.  1159 

Then  draw  within  it  three  lines  Pragagra  and  Udagagra  (on  the 
eastern  and  northern  sides).  Sprinkling  it  with  water  and  the 
Pranava,  worship  within  the  Pitha,  utterriug  the  mantras  from  Adh4ra 
Saktaye  namah  to  Amuka  Devt  Yoga  Pith&ya  nama^.  Invoke,  in 
that  Pitha,  the  Highest  One,  Who  is  ^iva  ^ivA  with  all  one-ness  of 
heart  and  worship  Her  with  scents  and  offerings.  Then  think  for 
a  moment  the  Devi  as  having  taken  bath  and  as  one  with  Sankara, 
Bring  then  fire  in  a  vessel  and  taking  a  flaming  piece  thereof  throw  that 
in  the  south-west  corner.  Then  purifying  it  by  the  gaze  and  quitting  the 
portions  of  KravySda^j  impart  the  Chaitanya  by  "  Ram,"  the  Vahnivija 
repeat  "  Om  "  over  it  seven  times.  Shew,  then,  the  Dhenumudra 
and  protect  it  by  Phat  KSra  and  cover,  veil,  it  with  the  mantra 
"  Hum."  Then  turn  the  fire,  thus  worshipped  with  sandalpaste,  etc., 
thrice  over  the  Kunda  and  with  both  the  knees  on  the  ground  and 
repeating  the  Pranava,  consider  the  Agni  as  the  Virya  of  Siva  and  throw 
it  on  the  yoni  of  the  Devi  in  the  Pitha.  Then  offer  Achamana, 
etc.,  to  the  Deva  and  the  Devi  and  worship.  Then  light  the  flame  with 
ihe  mantra  "  Chit  Pingala  Hana  Hana  Daha  Daha  Pacha  Pacha 
Sarvajn^  JSapaya  Svaha  "  Then  utter  the  stotra  to  the  Agni  Deva  with 
great  love,  repeating  the  mantra  "  Agnim  Prajvalitam  vande  Jata- 
vedam  HutSs'anam  suvarna  varnamamalam  samiddham  Visvatomukham." 
Then  perform  the  Sadaraganyasa  to  the  Agni  Deva  "  Om  Sahasrarchchiae 
namah,  Om  Svasti  Purnaya  SvahS,"  Om  Uttistha  purusslya  vafat," 
"  Om  Dhuma  vy^pine  Hum  Orn  Sapta  Jihv&ya  vaugat '' "  Om  Dhanur 
dharaya  Phat."  Repeating  the  above  six  mantras,  perform  the  Nyasa  on 
the  heart,  etc.,  the  six  places.  Now  meditate  on  the  Agni  as  of 
a  golden  colour,  three-eyed,  seated  on  a  lotus  and  holding  in  His  four 
hands  signs  of  granting  boons,  Sakti,  Svastika  and  sign  of  "  no 
fear";  also  meditate  on  Agni,  as  the  seat  of  the  greatest  auspiciousness. 
Then  moisten  the  Kunda  on  the  top  of  the  belt  (mekhalA)  with 
water.  Next  spread  the  Kus'a  grass  all  around  and  draw  the  Agni 
yantra  over  it,  i.  e.,  triangle,  bectagon,  circle,  eight-petalled  figure  and 
Bhupura ;  rather  have  this  drawing  before  the  Agnisthapana.  Now 
meditate  this  only.  Then,  within  the  Yantra,  recite  "  Vais'vSnara 
Jataveda  LohitaksA  sarvakarmani  Sr»dhaya  Sv4ha"anl  worship  Ao-ni. 
Then  worship  in  the  centre  and  in  the  bectagon  at  the  corners 
worship  the  Saptajihvii  (seven  tongues  Hiranya,  GaganS,  Rakta 
Krisnl,  Suprabha,  Bahurupa,  Abiraktik^  and  nexh  worship  within  the 
pericarp  of  .the  lotu3  the  Anga  Devatas.  Then  recite  the  following 
mantras  within  the  eight  petah:— "  Om  Agnaye  JAtavedase  namai»  *' 
"  Om   Agnaye    Saptajihvaya  numalj,"   "    Oiu   Agnaye     HavyavShauaya 


Il60  ^Rt  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM. 

namah,"  Ora  Agnaje  AsVodaraj^ya  namah,"  "  Ora  Agnaye  Vais'v4na- 
raya  namah,"  "  Om  Ai^naye  Kaum^ra  tejase  namah,"  "  Ora  Agnaye 
VisVamukholya  namih,"  "  Ora  Agnaye  Devamakhaya  namah  "  and 
considering  the  forms  to  hold  Sakti  and  Svastik,  worship  them.  Then 
consider  In  Ira  and  the  other  Lokapalas  (Regents  of  the  several 
quarters)  situated  in  the  _east,  south-east,  and  so-on  together  with 
their  weapon^,  the  thunderbolt  and  the  other  weapons,  and  thus  worship 
them. 

107-134.     O  N^rada  !    Next  purify   the    sacrificial    ladles,    etc.,    sruk, 
sruva,   etc.,   and    ghee ;    then,    taking   ghee    by   sruva,   go    on    with    the 
Homa   ceremony.     Divide   the    ghee    of  the    Ajyasthlli     (the     vessel    in 
which    the   ghee   for    the    Homa     purposes    is     kept)     in     thrae     parts  : 
take   ghee    from    the    right    side      and     saying     "  Ora     Agnaye     SvihS  " 
offer    oblations   on    the    right   eye   of    the    Agni  ;    take     ghee    from     the 
left   side    and  saying   "Ora    Som^yj   Svi,ha    offer     oblations    on   the  left 
eye  of  the  Agni  ;    take  ghee     from     the     centre     and       saying,      "  Om 
Agnisomabhyara  Sv^hS,  ofifer  oblations    on    the  central   eye    of  the  A<yni. 
Take   ghee    again    from     the     right     side      and      saying     "  Ora    Ao-naye 
Svistakrite   Svaha"    offer    oblations    to   the    mouth    of  the   Ao'ui.     Then 
the  devotee    is    to    repeat    "  Ora  Bhuh  Sv^ha,"   "  Om    Bhuvah      SvUha." 
"  Ora  Svah  Sv^hS  "    and  offer -thrice  the  oblations  ;    next  he    is     to     offer 
oblations  thrice  with  the  Agni  mantra.     After  this,   O  Muni  !   for  imprec- 
nation    and   each    of  the    ten    Samiskaras,    natal-ceremony,   tonsure,   etc. 
he    is   to    repeat  the    Pranava    Mantra   and  offer  the  eight   oblations     of 
ghee    on   each    occasion.     Now     hear     of     the      tenfold     Samskaras:— (1) 
Inpregnation,    (2)  Pumsavan   (a     ceremony     performed     as     soon     as     a 
woman   perceives    the    foetus     to     be     quick),     (3)  Simantonnayana      (a 
ceremony    observed   by    women    in    the  fourth,  sixth  or  the  eighth  month 
of  pregnancy),   (4)  J^ta  Karma    (ceremony   at   the  birth    of  a  child),     (5) 
NSlmakarana,    (naming   the  child),   (6)  NisktA,mana  (a  cereraony  performed 
when   a    new-born    child    is    first   taken    out    of   the    house    into  the  open 
air   (usually    in   the  fourth    month),  (7)  AnnaprS,s'ana     (when    the  rice  is 
put    in    the    mouth  of  the  child),    (8)  Chuclakarana    (the  ceremony  of  the 
first    tonsure,    (9)  Upanayana      (holding      the       sacrificial     thread  ;      (10) 
God^na    and    Udvaha    (gift    of  cows    and   marriage).     These    are   stated 
in  the    Vedas.     Next   worship  Siva  Parvatl,  the  Father   and   the  Mother 
of   Agni   and    take    leave    of    them.     Next    in    the    name   of   Agni,  offer 
five    Samidhas  (fuel)    soaked    in    ghee    and   offer    one    oblation     of    ghee 
to  each    of  the    Avarana   Devatas. 

Then  take  the  ghee  by  the  Sruk  and  covering  it  with    the   Sruva,    offer 
ten  oblations  to  Agni,    and  MahS  Ganes'a  with    mantras  anding  in  Vaugat, 


Book  Xlt.]  CHAPTER  VII.  Il61 

(The  Maha  Ganes'a  mantras  mti  as  follows  ; — (1)  Om,  Om  Sv^ha  (^) 
Om  5rim  SvaLa,  (3)  Om  l§rim  Hrim  Svaha,  (4)  Ora  Srim,  Hrim 
Klim  Svaha,  (5)  Om  ^rim  Hrim  Klira  Glaum  Svaha,  (6)  Orn  ^rim  Hrim 
Klim  Glaum  Gam  Svaha,  (7)  Om  l5rim  Hrim  Klim,  Glauin  ityantah  Gam 
Ganapataye  Svaha,  (8)  Om  Vara  Varada  ityantah  Svaha,  (9)  Sarvajanam 
me  Vas'am  ityanto  Svaha  and  (10)  Anaya  Svaha  ityantah. 

Next  perform  in  the  Agni  the  Pitha  Puja  and  meditate  on  the  Deya 
Iftadeva  and  worship  him.  Next  offer  twenty-five  oblations  to  his 
face,  repeating  the  Mula  Mantra.  Then  think  of  that  and  Agni  Deva  as 
one  and  the  same,  and  then  again  as  one  with  Atman,  Then  offer  oblations 
to  each  of  the  Sadainga  Devatas  separately.  Then  search  for  the  Nadis 
(veins)  of  Vahni  and  Igta  Devata  and  offer  twenty  one  oblations.  Then 
offer  oblations  to  each  of  the  two  Devatas  separately.  Nest  offer  one 
thousand  and  eight  oblations  to  the  Ista  Deva  with  Til  soaked  in  ghee 
or  with  the  materfals  enumerated  in  the  Kalpa.  O  Muni  !  Thus  finish- 
ing the  Homa  ceremony,  consider  that  the  Ista  Deva  (the  Devi),  Agni 
and  the  Avarana  Deities  are  all  satisfied.  Then,  by  the  command  of 
the  Guru,  the  disciple  is  to  take  his  bath  and  perform  his  Sandhya,  etc., 
and  put  on  new  clothes  (cloth  and  'chadar)  and  golden  ornaments. 
Ha  is  to  come  then,  to  the  Kunda  with  Kamandalu  in  his  hand  and 
with  a  pure  heart.  He  is  to  bow  down  to  the  elders  and  superiors 
seated  in  the  assembly  and  take  his  seat  in  his  Asana.  Sri  Guru  Deva 
then  would  look  at  the  disciple  with  kind  eyes  and  think  the  Chaitanya 
of  the  disciple  within  his  own  (the  Guru's)  body.  Then  the  Guru 
Deva  would  perform  the  Homa  and  look  at  the  disciple  with  a  divine  gaze, 
so  that  the  disciple  becomes  pure- hearted  and  able  to  get  the  favours  of 
the  Devas.  Thus  the  Guru  must  purify  all  the  Adhvas  (the  passages) 
of  the  body   of  the  disciple. 

Then  the  Guru  is  to  touch  respectively  the  feet,  generative  organ, 
navel,  heart,  forehead,  and  the  head  of  the  disciple  with  Kurcha  (a  bundle 
of  Kus'a  grass)  and  til  soaked  in  ghee,  in  bis  lefo  hand  and  offer  at 
each  touch  eight  oblations,  repeating  the  mantra  "  Om  adya  Sisyasya 
Kaladhvanam  Sodhayami  Svaha,"  "  etc.,  Thus  the  Guru  would  purify 
Kaiadhva  (in  the  feet)  Tattvadhva  (in  the  generative  organ",  Bhuva- 
radhva  (in  the  navel),  Varnadhva  (in  the  heart),  Padadhva  (in  the  fore- 
head) and  Mantradhva  (on  the  head),  the  six  Adhvas  and  think  these 
all    to  be    dissolved  in  Brahma  (Brahmalina). 

135-155.  Then,  again,  the  Guru  would  think  all  these  to  be  re-born 
from  Brahma  and  trausfer  the  Chaitanya  of  the  disciple  that  was  in 
him    to    the  disciple.     Then  the  Guru  must  offer  Purnahuti  and    considet 


il62  ^RI  j^AB  DEVt  BHAgHVATAM. 

the  Igta     Devata,     placed    in    the  fire   by    the    visarjana    mantra     for   the 

Horna    purposes,  as  entered  into  the  water-jar.      Ho    is    to    perform   a^ain 

the  Vvarhiti    Homa  and    offer   all  tha    Am^ahutis      (oblations     to   all   the 

limbs)   of  the    fire   and    take    leave  of  the   fire      with:lrawin<,'       the   Deity 

from  the   jar,  into    his   own  body.     Uttering     then    the      Vausat     Manira 

he  would  tie   the    syes  of  the    disciple  with    a  piece     of    cloth    and    would 

bring    him    from    the   Kunda   to   the      mandala    and    make    the   disciple 

offer  pus^anjali  (flowers  in  his  palm)  to  the  Ista     deva.     Then  be  would  take 

away  the  bandage  or  piece  of  cloth  from  his  eyes  and  ask  him  to  take  his  seat 

in  the  seat  Kusagana.     Thus  the  Guru,    after  havi  ng  purified  the  elements 

of  the  body  of  the  disciple  and  performed  the   Nyasa    of  the    Deya  Mantra, 

would  make  the  disciple  sit  in    another   mandala.     Than     he    would  touch 

the  head  of  the   disciple   with   the   twigs  (Pallavas)     of  the   Kunda      and 

repeat  the  MjltrikS.    Mantra  and  make  him  have  his  bath   with      the   water 

of  the  jar     which   is   considered   as    the     seat  of  the   I§ta  Deva.     Then, 

for  the  protection    of  the    disciple,  he   would    sprinkle  (abhiseka)  him    with 

the  water   of    the     Vardhani     vessel     placed  already  in       the    north-east 

corner.     Then  the  disciple  would  get   up    and   put    on     the    pair    of  new 

clothes    and  besmear  hia   whole  body   wtth    ashes    and    sit    clcse   by  the 

Guru.     When   the    merciful    Guru   woull   consider  that     the    oiva    rakti 

has  now  passed  out  of  his  own  body  and  that  Divine  Force,  the    Devi,    has 

entered  into    the   body   of    the   disciple  i.   e,    charged     the  disciple     with 

the      pass.      Thinking      now      the       dit^eiple      and      the      Devat&       <o 

be   one  and  the   same,    the    Guru   would    now      worship  the  disciple   with 

flowers  and   scents.       The    Guru    would    then     place    his   right   hard  on 

the  head  of  the  disciple  and    repeat  clearly    in    his    right    ear   the    MahA 

Mantra   of  the    Maha    Devi.     The  disciple  is    to    repeat  also   the  Mah& 

Mantra   one  hundred  and  eight    times  and    fall   prostrate    on     the    ground 

before  the  Guru    and    thus  bow   down    to    the    Guru,    whom    the    disciple 

now  thinks  as   the  incarnate    of  the  Deva. 

The  disciple,   the  devotee  of  the  Guru,    would  now  give  as     a  Dak§inll 

all  his  wealth  and  property  for  his  whole  life  to  the  Guru.  Then  he 
would  give  Daksina  to  the  priests  and  make  charities  to  the  virgins. the 
Brahmanas,  the  poor  and  the  destitute  and  the  orphans.  Here  he  is  not  to 
be  miserly  in  any  way  in  the  expenditure.  O  N&rada  !  Thus  the  dis- 
ciple would  consider  himself  blessed  and  he  would  daily  remain  engaged 
in  repeating  the  Maha  Mantra,  Thus  I  have  described  to  you  above 
the  most  excellent  Diksa.  Thinking  all  these.  you  are 
to  remain  ever  engaged  in  worshipping  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Great  Devi. 
There  is  no  Dharma  higher  than  this  in  this  world  for  the  Brahmanas. 
The  followers  of  the  Vedas  would  impart  this  Mantra  according  to  the 
rules  stated  respectively  in  their  own   Grihya    Sytres  ;    and  the  T^utrikas 


B.)OK  XII.]  CHAPTER  Vllt.  1163 

would  also^do  the  siaie  acoordiii^  to  their  own  Tantras.  The  Vaidikg 
should  not  follo.v  the  Tantra  rules  and  the  Tantriks  are  nob  to  follow  the 
VaiJik  ruin.  Thus  all  the  Lauras  say.  And  this  is  the  Sanatan  Creed. 
Narayana  said  :— *'  O  Narada  !  I  hive  describbd  all  about  the  ordinary 
Ulksi  that  you  questioned  m-*.  Now  the  essence  in  brief  is  this  that  you 
would  remain  always  merged  in  worshipping  the  Pard  Sakti,  the  Highest 
Force,  the  Maha  Devi.  "\Vhat  more  shall  X  say  than  this  that  I  have 
got  the  highest  pleasure  and  the  NirvJlua,  the  peace,  that  passeth 
all  understanding,  from  my  daily  worshipping  That  Lotus  Feet  duly. 
Vedavyasa  said  : — '•  O  Maharaja  !  O  Janamejayan  !  After  having  said  this 
Diksafcattva,  the  highest  Yogi  Bhagavan  Narayana,  meditated  by  the 
Yogis,  closed  his  eyes  and  remained  merged  in  Simadhi,  in  the  medita- 
tion of  the  Lotus  Feet  of  the  Devi. 

Knowing  this  Highest  Tattvn,  NSrada,  the  chief  of  the  Risis,  bowed 
down  at  the  feet  of  the  Great  Guru  K^rayanaand  went  away  immediately 
to  perform  the  tapa^^yA  so  that  he  also  might  see  the  Maha    Devi. 

Here  ends  the  Seventh  Chapter  of  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the  DiksSvidhi 
or  on  the  rules  of  Initiation  in  the  Mahapurinam  SrT  Mad  Devi 
BhAgavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi  Veda  Vy§.sa. 


CHAPTER.   VIII. 

1-8.  Janamejya  spoke  to  Veda  Vyasa: — 0  Bhagavaq  !  Thou  art 
the  knower  of  all  the  Dharmas  and  Thou  art  the  chief,  the  orown  of 
the  Pundits,  knowing  all  the  aastras.  Now  I  ask  Thee  how  is  it  that 
the  twice-born  have  ceased  to  worship  the  Highest  S'akti,  the 
Gjlyatriand  they  now  worship  the  other  Devatus,  on  the 
face  of  the  distinct  command  in  the  S'rutis  that  the  worship  of  the 
G'lyatri"  is  nitya,  that  is,  daily  to  be  done  at  all  times,  especially 
during  the   three    Sandhy^  times,    by    all     those    that   are     twice-born  "r 

In  this  world  some  are  the  devotees  of  Visnu,  sonae,  the  iollowei's 
'^f  Ganapabi,  some  are  Kapalikas,  some  follow  the  doctrines  prev^je.ftt 
in  China  ;  some  are  the  followers  of  Buddha  or  Charv^ka  ;  some  of  them 
again  wear  the  barks  of  trees  and  others  roam  naked.  So  various 
persons   are    seen   having   no    trace   of   faith  in    the    Vedas. 

O  Brahmana  !  What  is  the  real  cause  underlying  secretly  here  in  this  ! 
Kindly  mention  this  to  me.  Again  there  are  seen  many  men,  well  versed 
in  various  metaphysics  and  logic,  our  B.  A's  and  M.  A'sbut  then,  again,  tl^^j 
ha.ve  no  faith  in  the  Vedas.  How  is  thi^  ?  No  body  wants  anything  on^in- 
ous  to  him  consciously.     But  ho»v  is  it  that  thes  so-cilled   learned    men  are 


1164  ^RI  MAD  DEVl  BHAGAVTAM, 

fully  aware  and  yet  they  are  wonderfully''void  of  any  trace  of  faith  in  the 
Vedas  ?  Kindly  mention  the  cause  underlying  this,  O  Thou  !  The  foremost 
of  the  knowers  of  the   Vedas  ! 

There  is,  again,  another  question: — Thou  hadsfc  descrihed  before  the 
glories  of  Manidvipa,  the  highest  and  the  best  place  of  the  Dev*.  Now  I 
want  to  hear  how  is  that  DvTpa  greater  than  the  great.  Satisfy  this 
servant  of  thine  by  describing  these.  If  the  Guru  be  pleased,  he 
reveals  even  the  greatest  and  the  highest  esoteric  secret  to  his  disciple. 

9-10.  Suta  spoke: — Hearing  the  words  of  the  King  Janamejaya, 
the  Bhagavdn  Veda  VyS,sa  began  to  answer  the  questions  in  due  order. 
The  hearing  of  this  increases  the  faith  of  the  twice-born  in  the  Vedas. 

11-30.     Vyasa   said: — Well    has   this  been  asked    by   you,    O    King! 

in   due    tine    and    ia    an    appropriate    moment.     You    are  intelligent    and 

it  seems  that  you  have    gob  the  faith   in  the  Vedas.     I  now  answer.  Listen, 

In  ancient   days,   the   Asuras,     maddened    with  pride,   fought  against  the 

Devas   for   one    hundred     years.     The    war  was  very     extraordinary     and 

remarkable.      In    this    great   war   various   weapons  were  used,     variegated 

with    numerous   M&ylls   or   ingenious   devices.       It   tended   to  destroy  the 

whole    world.     By    the  mercy  of  the    Highest  and  the  Most    Exalted  Sakti, 

the    Daityas    were     overcome   by   the   Devas    in   that  Great    War.     And 

they  quitted    the  Heavens  and    the   Earth  and  went   to  the  nether  regions, 

the  Patala.     The    Devas  were   all   delighted    and  began  to  dwell  on    their 

own    prowesses     and    became  proud.     They      began    to   say  : — "  Why  shall 

not    victory   be    ours.     Why    are    not    our     glories     great  ?     We    are   by 

far   the     be.st  !     Where    are     the     Daityas  ?     They   are    devils,    powerless. 

We   are   the   causes    of  creation,    preservation   and    destruction.     We    all 

are  glorious, !    Oh  !     What   can  be   said  before    us  in  favour  of  the  Asuras, 

the   devils  ?     Thus,      not   knowing  the    Highest    Sakti,     the   Devas    were 

deluded.     At    this    moment,   seeing  this  plight    of  the  Devas,  the    World 

Mother  took  pity  on  the  Devas  and,    to  favour  them,  O  king!  She  appeared 

before  them  in    the  form  of  the    Most  Worshipful,  the    Great  Holy  Light. 

It  was    resplendent   like  ten     million   Suns,    and   cool   as    well  like    ten 

million    Moons.     It  was  brilliant  and    dazzling  like   ten    million   lightning 

flashes,   without   hands   and    feet,   and  exceedingly    beautiful  !     Never  was 

this   witnessed   before  !     Seing  this  Extraordinary  Beautiful    Lovely  Light, 

the   Devas   were  taken   aback ;  they   spoke     amongst  themselves,    thus: — 

"What   is   this  I     What   is   this!"     Is    this    the    work    of  the    Daityas  or 

some    other  great    M&y^    (Magic)     played    by     them     or     is  it   the    work 

of  another  ior  creating   the  surprise     of  the   Devas  I     O  King  !     Then  they 

all   assembled  together     and  decided   to  approach   towards    that  Adorable 


Book  XFT.]  CHAPTER  VITT.  1165 

Light  and  to  ask  It  what  It  was.  They,  'then,  wonkl  determine  its 
strength  and  decide  what  to  do  afterwards.  Thup,  coming  to  this 
ultimate  conclusion,  Indra  called  Agni  and  said  :—"  0  Agni  !  You  are 
the  mouth-piece  of  the  Devas.  Therefore  do  you  go  firs-t  and  asceitain 
distinctly  what  this  L'ght  is.  Hearing  thus  the  words  of  Indra,  Agni' 
elated  by  his  own  prowess,  set  out  immediately  from  tl.e  place 
and  went  to  that  Light.  Seeing  Agni  coming,  the  Light  addresseJ 
him  thus:— "  Who  are  you?  What  is  your  strength?  State  this 
before  Me.  "  At  this  Agni  replied: — "  I  am  Agni.  All  the  vajiiaF, 
ordained  in  the  Vedns  are  performed  throngh  me.  The  power  of 
burning  everything  in  this  universe  resides  in  me."  Then  that  adcrable 
Light  took  up  a  straw  of  grass  and  said: — "  O  Aeni  !  If  you  can 
burn  everything  in  this  universe,  then  do  you  burn  tins  triflirg 
straw."  Agni  tried  his  best  to  burn  the  straw  but  be  could  not 
burn  it  .  He  got  ashamed  and  fast  went  back  to  the  Devas.  A&ked  by 
the  Devas,  Agni  told  ihem  everything  and  said: — O  Devas  !  Know 
verily  that  the  pride  cherished  by  us  that  we  are  s^npreme,  is  entirely 
false." 

81-50  Indra  then  asked  Vavu  (wind)  and  said: — "0  Y&yu  i 
You  are  dwelling  in  this  universe,  through  and  through  :  by  your 
eflfort?,  all  are  moving  ;  therefore  you  are  the  PrSna  of  all  ;  it  is 
possible  that  all  forces  are  concentrated  within  you.  Go  and  ascertain 
wh'it  is  this  Light?  Verily  I  do  not  see  anj^  other  person  here  than 
yTU  who  can  ascertain  this  great  adorable  Light.  Hearing  these 
commendable  words  of  Indra,  Vdyu  felt  himself  elated  and  went  at 
once  to  that  place  where  was  that  Light.  Seeing  ths  V^yu,  the 
Light,  the  Yaksa,  (the  demi-god,  the  Spirit  asked  in  a  gentle  language 
Who  are  you  ?  W  hat  strength  is  there  in  you  ?  Speak  out  all  these 
to  me."  At  this,  V^yu  spoka  arrogantly  "  I  am  MStarisvan,  I  am 
Vayu  ;  about  my  strength,  I  can  move  anything  and  T  hold  every 
thing.  It  is  through  the  strength  of  mine,  that  this  universe  is,  and  is 
alive  and  brisk  with  movements  and  works.  That  Highest  Mass  of 
Light  then  replied: — "  O  Vayu  !  Move  this  straw  that  lies  before  you, 
and  if  you  cannot,  quit  your  pride  and  go  back  to  Indra 
ashamed,"  At  this  VSyu  tried  all  his  might  but,  alas  !  He  could  not 
move  the  straw    a  bit  from  that  place  ! 

VSyu  then  gave  up -his  pride    and   returned   to   the    Devas     and    spoke 
to    them    all    about    the   Yaksa  (a  sort  of  demi-god  ;   a  ghost)    O    Devas  j 
Our   pride  is    vain,     In   no    way    can    we   be  able  to  ascertain    the    nature 
of  that    Light.    It  seems   that    that  Holy    Light,     adorable    by    all,    is 
extraordinarv.     Then  all   the  Devas  spoke   with  •ne    voice     to    ladra: — 


1160  5r!  mad  devT  bhAgavataat. 

"When  You' are  the  Kinj;  of^  the  Dava-?,  batter  go  yourself '-"and 
asoer^aia  the  reality  of  Its  Nature."  Indra,  then,  with  great  priJe, 
went  hi-nself  to  the  Ligrht  ;  the  Li<<ht,  too,  began  to  disappear  gradually 
frj-a  the  pUae,  and  ultimately  vanished  from  Indra's  sight.  When 
lodra  found  that  he  could  not  even  speak  to  That  Light,  he  became 
greatly  ashamed  and  began  to  conceive  of  his  own  nothing-ness.  He 
thought  thus; — "I  wo'ut  go  back  to  the  Devas.  What  shall  I  say 
to  them?  Never  will  I  disclose  to  them  my  inferiority  ;  one  is  better 
to  die  than  do  this.  One's  self-honour  is  the  only  treasure  of  the  great  and 
honourable.  If  honour  is  gone,  what  use,  then,  is  there  in  living  ? 
O  King  !  Then  Indra,  the  Lorl  of  Deva?,  quitted  his  pride  and  took 
refuge  unto  That  Great  Light  which  exhibited,  ere  long,  such  a  glorious 
character.  At  this  moment,  a  cslastial  voice  was  h^ard  from  the 
Heavens: — "O  Indra  !  Go  on  nov  and  do  the  jap\m,  •  the  reciting  of 
the  Maya  Vija  Mantra,  the  basic  Mantra  of  Maya.  All  your  trouble? 
will,  then,  be  over."  Hearing  this  celestial  voice,  Indra  began  to 
repeat  the  Maya  Vija,  the  Seed  Mantra'of  MAy^,  with  rapt  concentra- 
tion "and    without    any    food. 

51-61.  Then  on  the  ninth  lunar  day  of  the  month  of  Chaitra 
when  the  Sun  entered  the  meridian,  suddenly  there  appeared  in  that 
place  a  Great  Mass  of  Light  as  was  seen  before.  Indra  saw, 
then,  within  that  Mass  of  Light,  a  Virgin  Form  in  full  youth.  The  lustre 
from  Her  bcdy  was  like  that  of  ten  million  Rising  Suns ;  and  the 
colour  was  rosy  red  like  a  full-blown  Java  flower.  On  Her  forehead 
was  shining  the  digit  of  the  Moon  ;  Her  breasts  were  full,  and, 
though  veiled  under  the  cloth,  they  looked  very  beautiful.  She  was  boldinf 
noose  and  a  goad  in  Her  two  hands  and  Her  other  two  hands  indicated 
signs   of  favour    and  fearlessness. 

Her  body  was  deckel  with  varioui  ornaments  and  it  looked  auspicious  acd 
excaedingly  lovely  ;  nowhere  can  be  seen  a  woman  beautiful  like  Her. 
She  was  like  a  Kalpa  V'-iksa  (ealestial  tree  yielding  all  desires) ;  she  was 
three  eyed  and  Her  braid  of  hair  was  encircled  with  Miilati  garlands. 
She  was  praised  on  Her  four  sides  by  the  Four  Vedas,  Incarnate,  in  their 
respective  Forms.  The  brilliancy  of  Her  teeth  shed  lustre  on  the  ground  as 
if  ornamented  with  PadmarSga  jewels.  Her  face  looked  smiling.  Her  clothing 
was  red  and  Her  body  was  covered  with  saLdalpaste.  She  was  the 
Cause  of  all  causes.  Oh!  She  was  all  Full  of  Mercy.  O  King  Janamejaya! 
Thus  Indra  saw,  then,  the  IJma  Parvati  Mahes'vari  Bhagavati  and  the 
hairs  of  his  body  stood  on  ends  with  ecstacy.  His  eyes  were  tilled  with 
tears  of  love  and  deep   devotion    and    he -immediately   fell   prostrate   before 


Book  XII.]  CHAPER  VIII.  1167 

the  feet  of  the  Bevi.  Indra  sang  various  hymns  to  Her  and  praised  Her. 
He  became  very  o^lad  and  lisked  Her  "  0  Fair  One  !  A  rt  Thou  that 
Great  Mass  of  Light  ?  if  this  be,  kindly  state  the  cause  of  Thy  appear- 
ance." 0  Kin<^  !     Hearing  this,  the  Bhagavati  replied. 

62-83.  This  My  Form  is  Brahma,  the  Cause  of  all  causes,  the  Seat 
of  MayS,  the  Witness  of  all,  infallible  aud  free  from  all  defects  or  blemi- 
hes.  What  all  the  Vedas  and  Upanisadas  try  to  establish,  what  ought 
to  be  obtained,  as  deelired  by  all  the  rules  of  austerity,  and  fcr  which 
the  Br^hraanas  praatise  Brahmacharyam,  I  am  all  that.  I  have  told 
you  about  that  Brahma,  of  the  nature  of  the  Great  Holy  Light.  The 
sages  declare  that  That  Brahman  is  revealed  by  "  Om  "  and"Hrim", 
the  two  Vijas  (mystic  syllables)  that  are  My  two  first  and  foremost  Mantras 
wherein  I  remain  hidden.  I  create  this  uaiverse  with  My  two  parts  (in  My 
two  aspects);  therefore  My  Vija  mantra  is  two.  "Om  "  Vija  is  denominated 
as  Sachchidauanda  (everlasting  existence,  intelligence  and  bliss)  and 
"  Hrim "  Vija  is  M^ya  Prakriti,  the  Undifferentiated  Consciousness^ 
made  manifest.  Know,  then,  That  MSy^  as  the  Highest  Sakti  and  know 
Me  as  that  Omnipotent  Goddess  at  present  revealed  before  your  eyes. 
As  moon-light  is  not  different  from  the  Moon,  so  this  Mly^  S'akti  in  the 
state  of  equilibrium  is  not  different  from  Me  (The  powerful  man  and 
the  power  he  wields  are  not  different.  They  are  verily  one  and  the  same.) 
During  Pra/aya  (the  Great  Latency  period),  this  MSya  lies  latent  in  Me> 
without  there  being  any  difference.  Again  at  the  time  of  creation,  this 
M^ya  appears  as  the  fructification  of  the  Karroas  of  the  Jivas.  When 
this  Maya  is  potential  and  exists  latent  in  Me,  when  Maya  is  Antarmukhi, 
it  is  called  Unman'fested  ,:and  when  the  M^ya  becomes  Kinetic,  irhen 
the  Maya  is  Bahirmukhi,  when  She  is  in  an  active  Kinetic  state,  it  is  said 
to  be  Manifested.  There  is  no  origin  or  beginning  of  this  M^yS.  May&  ia 
of  the  nature  of  Brahma  in  a  state  of  equilibrium.  But,  during  the 
beginning  of  the  creation,  Her  form  consisting  of  the  several  Gunas 
appears,  when  M^y?,  is  Bahir  Mukhi,  She  becomes  Tamas,  in  Her  Unmani- 
ftisted  state.  O  Indra!  For  this  reason  Her  state  of  abstraction,  and 
becoming  introspective,  this  is  Her  Antarraukhi  state  ;  it  is  known  as 
Maya  and  Her  looking  outward  is  Her  Bahirmukhi  state  ;  it  is  denominate^ 
by  Tamas  and  the  other  gunas.  From  this  comes  Sattva  and  then  Rajas 
and  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Mahes'a  are  of  the  nature  of  the  three  gunas. 
Brahma  ha?  the  Rijo  gina  in  Him  preponderating  ;  in  Visnu,  the  Sattva 
guna  prepond  er  ates  and  in  Mahes'a,  the  Cause  of  all  Causes,  is  said  to  reside 
the  Tamo  guna.  Brahma  is  known  as  of  the  Gross  Body  ;  Visnu  is  known- 
as  of  the  Subtle  Body  ;  and  Rudra  is  known  a?;  of  the  Causal  .Body  and 
1  am  knov.n  as  Turi}a,  transcending  the  Gunas. 


1168  ^Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHlaWATAM 

This    Turiya  Form    of  Mine  is  called  the    state  of  equilibrium  of  the  Gunas. 
Ic    is    thG    Inner    Controller    of   all.     Beynd    this  there    is  another    state 
of   Mine    which    is    called    the    Formless    Brahma     (Brahman    hiving     no 
Forms).     Know,   verily,    that    my    Forms  are    two,  (2)  as  they    are  with  or 
without  attribut3s  (Saguna    or  Nirguua).        That    which  is    beyond    Maya 
and  the  M3,yic  quJilities  is  called  Nircunsl  (without  Piaktitic  attxibutes)  and 
that    which    is    within    Maya  is  called    Saguna.     O    Indra  !  After  creating 
this    universe,    I  enter    within    that    as    the  Inner    Controller  of    all  and  it 
is   I   that    impel    all    the    Jivas    always    to    their  due    efforts    and   actions. 
Know,    verily,    that    lb    is    I   that    engage    Brahm&,  Visnu  and  Rudra,  the 
Causes    of  the  several  works  of  creation,  preservation  and  destruction  of  this 
univers'j ;    (they   are     performing     their     functions     by     My     Command). 
Throagh    the   terror   from  Me  the  wind  blows  ;  through  my  terror,  the  Sun 
moves  in  the  sky ;  through    My   terror,   Indra,   Agni,   end    Yama   do   their 
respective    duties.       I    am    the   Best   and  Superior    to   all.      All   fear   Me. 
Through    My   Grace    you    have  obtained     victory    in    the    battle.      Know, 
verily,  that  it  is  I  that    make  you  all  dance  like  inert    wooden   dolls    as    My 
mere  instruments.  You  are  merely  My  functions.    I  am  the  Integral  Whole. 
I  give  sometimes    victory   to  you  and  sometimes     victory  to  the   Daityas ; 
Yea,  I  do   everything  as  I  will,  keeping  My  independence  duly  and,  accord- 
ing to  the    Karmas,  justly  Oh  1     You,  all,  have    forgotten  me    though  youj. 
pride  aad  sheer  non-sense.    You  have  been  carried  deep  into  dire  delusion  by 
your  vain  egoism.     And  know  now  that  to  favour  you,     this    My    Adorable 
Light  has  issued  suddenly.       Hence  forth    banish   ever  from     your  heart   all 
your   vain   boastings  and  idle  pratings.     Take    refuge  wholly  unto  Me  with 
all  y-our    head,    heart   and    soul,    unto     My    Sachchidananda    Form  and  be 
safe.     (At  times  the  Devas  forget  and  so  fall  into    troubles). 

84-93.  Vy^sa  said  : — Thus  saying,  the  Mula  Pakriti,  the  Great  Devi, 
the  Goddess  of  the  Universf,  vani:=hed  from  their  sight.  The  Devas  on 
the  oiher  hand,  began  to  praise  Her  then  and  there,  with  rapt  devotion. 
Since  that  day,  all  the  Devas  quitted  their  pride  and  enga<^ed  themselves 
in  worshipping  the  Devi  devotedly.  They  worshipped  the  Gayatri  Devi 
daily  during  the  three  Sandhya  times  and  performed  various  Yajnas  and 
thus  they  worshipped  Bhagavati  daily.  Thus,  in  the  Satya  Yuga,  every  body 
engaged  themselves  in  repeating  the  Mantra  Gayarri  and  worshipped  the 
Goddess  indwellin^r  iu  the  Pra^nava  and  Hrink^ra.  So,  See  now  for  yourself, 
that  the  worship  of  Visnu  or  Siva  or  initiation  in  the  Visnu  Mantra  or  in 
the  ^iva  Mantra  are  not  menti  )ned  anywhere  in  the  Vedes  as  to  be  done 
always  and  for  ever.  (They  nre  done  for  a  uhile  and  not  required  any  moie 
when  the  objects  are  fulfilled  only  the  worship  of  Gayatri  is  always  compul- 


B  oox  XTi.]  CHAPTER  IX.  1169 

sory,  to  be  done  at  all  times,  as  mentioned  in  the  Vedas.  O  Kiuj^ !  If  a  Br&h 
manadoes  not  worship  the  G^yatr),  know,  then,  for  eertaio,  that  in  every  way, 
he  is  sara  to  go  d)\vu  lower  anl  lower.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  A  Brihmin 
is  not  to  wait,  no  never,  to  do  any  other  thing  ;  he  will  have  all  his  desires 
fulfilled  if  he  worships  only  the  Devi  Gayatri.  Bhagav^n  Manu  says  that  a 
Brahmin,  whether  he  does  any  other  thing  or  not,  can  be  saved  if  he  wor- 
ships only  the  Divine  Mother  Gayatri.  (This  worshipping  the  G&vatri 
is  the  highest,  greatest,  and  most  difficult  of  all  the  works  in  this  universe). 
If  any  devotee  of  Siva  or  Vianu  or  of  any  other  Deity  worships  his  de- 
sired Daity  without  repeating  the  Gayatri,  he  is  sure  to  suffer  the  torments 
of  hell.  (Buo  this  age  of  Kali  deludes  the  people  and  draws  away  their 
minds  from  reciting  this  GAyatri  save  a  few  of  them.)  O  King  I  For 
this  reason,  in  the  Safeya  Yuga,  all  the  Brahmanas  kept  themselves 
fully  engaged  in  worshipping  the  Glyatri  and  the  lotus  feet  of  the  Devi 
Bhagavati. 

Here  ends  the  Eighth  Chapter  in  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the  appearance 
of  the  Highest  ^akti  in  the  Mahftpuranam  Sri  Mad  Devi  Bh^gavatam 
of  18,000  verses  by  Mahargi  Veda  VyHsa. 

CHAPTER    IX. 


1-20.  Vy»sa  said  :  -*'  O  King  Janamejaya !  Once  on  a  time,  on 
account  of  an  evil  turn  of  Fate,  (Karma)  of  the  human  beings,  Indra  did 
notriin  on  this  earth  for  fifteen  years.  Owing  to  want  of  rain,  the  famine 
appeared  horribly  ;  and  almost  all  the  beings  lost  their  lives.  No  one  could 
count  in  every  house  the  number  of  the  dead  persons.  Out  of  hunger  the 
p3ople  began  to  eat  horse*;  some  began  to  eat  bears  and  pigs,  some  began 
to  eat  the  dead  bodies  while  some  others  carried  on  any  how  their  lives.  The 
people  were  so  much  distressed  wish  hunger  thfit  the  mother  did  not  refrain 
from  eating  her  baby  child  and  the  husband  did  not  refrain  from  eating  his 
wife.  O  King !  The  Brahmanas  then  united  and  after  due  discussion, 
cime  to  the  ejnclasiori  that  that  they  would  go  to  the  hermit  Gautama 
who  would  be  able  to  remove  their  distress.  So  all  of  them  wanted  to  go 
(uiiokly  to  the  hermitige  of  the  Muni  Gautama.  They  began  to  say  »— 
"We  hear  that  there  is  no  famine  in  the  hermitage  of  Gautama.  Various 
persons  are  running  there  from  various  quarters."  Thus  coming  to  a 
coaelusion,  the  Brahmanas  went  to  the  Gautama's  As'raraa  with  their 
cows  servants  and  relations.  Some  went  from  the  east ;  some  from  the 
south  ,   some,    from  the  west,  and  some  from  the  north.     Thus  from  various 

147 


il70  ^Rt  MAD  DEvt  BHAaiVATA.\I. 

quarters  the  people  flocke  i  th  n-e.  Seeing  the  Brahtnanas  coming  there, 
the  Ri§i  Gautami  bowed  down  to  them  and  gave  them  a  cordial  welcome 
and  served  thetn  with  seats,  etc.  When  all  took  theii-  seats  and  became 
calm  and  quiet,  Grautaraa  enquired  about  their  welfare  and  the  cause  uf 
their  arrival.  They  described  everything  about  the  dire  famine  and  their  own 
states  and  expressed  their  deep  regret.  Seeing  them  very  much  distressed, 
the  Muni  gave  them  word  not  to  have  any  fear  ;  he  said  : — "  1  am  to-day 
become  blessed  by  the  arrival  of  the  great  ascetics  and  honourable  persons 
lika  you.  I  am  your  servant.  You  consider  all  my  houses  as  yours. 
Be  quite  comfortable.  Bear  no  uneasiness.  When  your  servant  is  alive, 
what  fear  do  your  entertain  and  whom  do  you  fear?  TVhen  the  demerits  are 
transformed  into  good  merits  by  your  mere  sight,  and  when  you  have  bieesed 
my  house  with  the  dust  of  your  holy  feet,  then  who  is  more  blessed  than 
me  'f  O  Vipras  I  Kindly  perform  your  Sandhyas,  aLd  JnpamiS  and  rest 
here  at  ease.  Vyasa  said  : — "  0  King  Janamejaya  1  Thus  consoling  the 
Brahmanae,  the  Risi  Gautama  bfgan  to  worship  the  Gayatri  Devi  with 
rapt  devotional  trance.  "O  D.vi  Gayatri!  Obeisance  to  Thee  !  Thou 
art  the  Great  Vidy a,  the  Mother  of  the  Vedas,  Higher  than  the  Highest; 
Thou  art  Vyarhiti  represented  by  the  Mantra  '•  Cm  Bhur  Bhuval^  Sva^i  ;" 
O  Mother  I  Thou  art  the  state  of  equilibrium  t,  e.,  the  Turiya  ;  Thou  art  of 
of  the  Form  of  Hrim ;  Thou  art  Svah^  and  Svadha ;  Thou  grantest  the 
desires  of  the  Bhaktas.  Thou  art  the  Witness  of  the  three  states, 
Jagrat  (waking),  Svapna  (dreaming)  and  Susupti  (deep  sleep).  Thou  ar^ 
the  Turiya  and  Saehchidanan  la  Brahma.  0  Djvi  !  Thou  residest  in  the 
Solar  Orb  and  appearest  as  a  ruddy  girl  in  the  morning,  an  youthful 
maiden  at  noon  and  a  black  old  woman  in  the  evening.  O  Devi  I 
Obeisance  to  Thee  !  Now  shew  favour  on  us  at  this  severe  famine  time 
when  all  the  beings   are  well  nigh  on  the  way  to  destruction. 

21-40.  Thus  praised  and  worshipped,  the  World-Mother  appeared  and 
gave  to  the  Risi  one  vessel  (cup)«full  to  the  brim  by  which  every  one  can  be 
fed  and  nourished.  The  Mother  told  the  Muni  :  — "  This  full  vessel, 
given  by  me  to  you  will  yield  whatever  you  wish.  * 

Thus  saying,  the  Devi  Gayatri,  Higher  than  the  Highest,  vanished. 
Then,  according  to  the  wish  of  the  Muni,  came  out  frcm  that  cup, 
mountains  of  cooked  rice,  Various  curries  and  sweetmeats,  lots  of  grass 
and  fodder,  silken  clothings,  varrioas  ornaments  an  1  various  articles 
and  vessels  for  sacriBcial  purposes.  In  fact  whatever  the  Muni  Gaufcanja 
wished,  that  came  out  of  the  brimful  cup,  given  by  the  Devi  Gayatri. 
Then  the  Muni  Gautama  calle  I  t'le  other  Munis  that  came  there  and 
gave  them  wealth,  j^i-dins,  clothings*  ornament^,  and  the  sacriiicial  ladles 
ftod   spoons  and   cows    and   buffaloes    for    the    sacrificial  purposes.     The 


Book  XII.]  CHAPER IX.  1171 

Manis  then  assembled  »nd  performed  various  yajnas.  The  place  all  round, 
then  flourished  and  became  so  much  prosperous  that  it  looked  like  a 
second  heaven.  In  fact  whatever  fair  and  beautiful  there  exist  in  the 
Trilokas,  all  came  from  the  brimful  cup  given  by  the  Devi  Gayatri.  At 
this  time  tbe  Munis,  with  sandalpaste  all  over  on  their  bodies,  and  deco- 
rated with  very  bright  ornaments  looked  like  the  gods  and  their  wives  looked 
likegoddesSds.  Daily  utsabs  began  to  be  held  in  in  the  As'rama  of  Gautamu 
Nowhere  were  soeo  auy  diseases  or  daeoities  and  there  was  no  fear  from  any 
such  things.  Gradually  the  As'rama's  boundary  extended  t)  one  hundred 
Yojanas  (4  hundred  miles)  Hearing  this  greatness  ot  Gautama,  many  per- 
sons came  thsre  from  various  quarters.  And  the  ^Nluni  Gautama,  too,  gave 
them  words  "  east  away  fear  "  and  fed  them.  The  Devas,  on  the 
oiher  hand,  bac.itne  very  much  satisfied  by  the  various  Yajnas  ar^d 
extolled  the  Muni's  greatness.  So  much  so,  that  the  famous  lnc'.i» 
tlie  Lord  of  the  Devas,  came  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly  and  extolh  d 
liis  greatness,  thus  : — "  This  Gautama  has  fuKiUel  all  our  wishes  and 
has  verily  become  a  Kilp.i  Vriks.i  (  celestial  tree  yielding  all  desires). 
If  this  man  had  not  done  such  things,  in  this  hard  famine  time,  v\e 
would  not  have  got  the  Havih  offered  in  eacrifiees  and  the  prospect  ol 
cur  lives  would  have  been  at  stake."  O  King  Janamejiya  I  Thus  the  Muni 
(Jiutima  fed  and  nourished  for  twelve  years  all  the  Munis  like  hia  sous 
ar.d  that  place  came  to  be  recognised  as  the  chief  cent.rd  (the  Head 
Quarters)  of  the  dayatri  Devi.  Even  to-day,  all  the  Munis  perform 
with  devotion  the  Purasacharanams  and  worship  thrice  the  Bha»avatr 
Gayatri  Devi  Even  to-day  the  Devi  is  there  seen  as  a  girl  in  the  mornino- 
as  a  youthful  maiden  at  noon,  as  an  old  woman  in  the  evening.  Then 
once  on  a  time,  Narada,  of  best  canduet,  came  there  playing  on  his 
great  lute  and  singing  in  tuna  the  highest  glories  of  Gayatri  and  took 
his  seat  in  the  assembly  of  the    Munis. 

42-62.  Seeing  the  tranquil  hearted  Narada  coming  there,  Gautama 
and  the  other  Munis  received  him  duly  and  worshipped  him  with  the  Padva 
and  Arghya.  In  course  of  conversation  he  began  to  describe  the  o-lorjes 
of  Gautama  and  said  :— "  O  Best  of  Munis  !  I  have  heard  from  the 
mouth  of  Indra,  in  the  assembly  of  the  Devas,  your  glories  as  lo  vour 
supporting  and  feeding  the  pure-hearted  Munis  and  I  have  come  to  see 
y&u.  By  the  Grace  of  ^ri  Bhagavati  Gayatri  Devi,  you  have  now  become 
blessed.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this.  Thus  saying,  the  Devarsi  Narada 
entered  into  the  temple  of  the  Devi  Gayatri  and  with  eyes,  gladdened 
by  love,  saw  the  Devi  there  and  offered  due  hymn*  in  praise  of  Her  and 
then  ascended  to  the  Heavens.  Here,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Brahmanas 
th»t  were  fed    by  Gautama,  became    jealous    at    so    much    honour    offered 


1172  srI  mad  devI  bhgavAtam. 

to  Gautama    and  tried  their  best    so  that  no  further    honour    be    paid   to 
him.     They  further   settled  not  to  stay  any  longer   in  his    As'rama,  when 
the  next  good  harvest  season   comes.     (Thus    his    glories  will     wane).     0 
Kirg  !  Some    days  passed  when  good  rains  fell  and  there  was  an  abundance 
cf  crops   everywhere  and  the   famine    ended.     Hearing  this,  all  the   Brah- 
mins united,  Alas  !  O  King  !  to  curse  the  Risi  Gautama.  Oh  !  Their  fathers 
and  mothers    are  blessed   in  whom  do  not  arise  such  feelings    of  jealousy  ! 
This  all   ifl  the  wonderful  play  of  the  powerful  Time  ;    it  cannot  be  expresse^j 
by  any  person.  O  King!  These  Brahmins  created,  by  MA/S,  an  aged  cow,  who 
was  to  die  and  pushed  her  in  the  sacrificial  hall  of  the  Muni  Gautama  at  the 
time  of  the  Homa  ceremony.     Seeing  that   cow  entering  into  the  enclosure 
where    the  Homa  was  being  performed,  Gautama  cried  out  "  Hoom  Hoom  " 
when  the  cow  fell  there  and  died.  And  the  other  Brahmanas  instantly  cried 
out   "  Look  !     Look  !     The   wicked  Gautama  has  killed  the  cow."     Seeing 
this  inconceivable  event,   Gautama  was  greatly  nonplussed  and,  completing 
his   Homa    ceremony,  entered    into    Samadhi      and    began    to  think   the 
cause  of  it.     Then,  coming  to  know   that  this  has    been  conccetfd    by  the 
MayS.   of    the  Brahmins,  he    became    angry   like     Rudra    at    the  time  of 
dissolution  ;  his  eyes    were  reddened  and  he   cursed  the    Risis,    thus  :— Oh 
vile  Brahmins  1     When  yon  are  ready  to  cause  mischief    to    me    unjustly 
then  let  you  be  averse  to  meditate  and  do  the  japam    of  the  Devi   Gayatri, 
the  Mother  of  the  Vedas.     "  For  your  this  act,  never  you  will    be    eager  to 
perform  any     Vedic     sacrificial    acts   or    any     action  concerning  thereof. 
There  is  no  doubt  in  this.     You  will  be    always    averse   to    the   mantra   of 
iSiva  or  the  Tantra  of  Siva.     You  will  be    always  averse  to    Mula    Prakriti 
^ri  Devi,   to    Her  Dhyanam,    mantra,    to    any     conversation      regarding 
Her;    to  the  visiting  of  Her  place  or  Temple,  to  do  worship  and  other  cere, 
monies  to  Her,  to  see  the  Grand  Festivals  of  the  Devi,  to  singing  the  names 
and  glories  of  the  Devi,  to  sit  before  the  Devi  and  to  adore  Her. 

61-81.  0  vile  Brahmanas  !  You  will  be  always  averse  to  see  the 
festivals  of  Siv*,  to  worship  oiva,  to  Rudrlksa,  to  the  Bel  leaves,  and  lo  the 
holy  Bhasma  (ashes).  You  will  bo  wholly  indifferent  to  practise  the  right 
ways  of  living  as  presented  in  the  Vedas  and  Smritis,  to  preserve  your  con- 
duct good  and  to  observe  the  path  of  knowledge  to  Advaita  Jnlnam,  to  prac- 
tise restraint  of  senses  and  continence,  to  the  daily  practices  of  Sandhy^ 
Bandanam,  to  performing  the  Agnihotra  ceremonies,  to  the  study  of  the 
Vedas  according  to  one's  own  Sakh^  or  to  the  daily  studies  thereof  as  to 
teach  those  things  or  to  give,  as  gifts,  cows,  etc.,  or  to  perform  the  Sraddhas 
of  the  fathers,  etc., ;0r  to  perform  Krichchra  Ch&ndrayana  and  other  penances. 
O  Vile  Br&hmanas  I  As  you  are  ready  to  do  these  mean  things,  you  will 
have  to   suffer  for  this  that  you   will    desist  from    worshipping    the   Mosb 


Book  XII.]  CHAPTER  IX.  1173 

Adorable  Sri    Bhagavati  Devi  and  that  you  will   worship   ^^e  other  Devas 
with  faith  and  devotion  and  hold  on   youv   bodies    S'amkha,    Chakra   and 
other  signs.     You  will  follow  the  Kapalikas,    Bauddha    ojistras  and    other 
heretics.  You  will  sell  your    father,     mother,     brothers,  sisters,    sons    and 
daughters  and  even  your  wives  too ! 

You  will  sell  the  Vedas,  Tir.has,  and  your  Dharraa.  You  will  not  feel 
ashamed  in  any  way  to  sell  all  these.  You  will  certainly  have  faith 
in  Kapaiika  and  Bauddha  opinions,  P^ncharatras  and  Kama  S'astras. 
O  vile  BrShmans !  You  will  not  hesitate  to  go  to  your  mother, 
daughters  or  sisters  and  you  will  always  be  licentious  with  others' 
wives  and  spend  your  time  in  that.  This  is  not  to  you  only  hut 
to  the  women  and  men  all  that  will  come  in  your  families.  Let  the  Gayatri 
Davi  be  always  indignanti  with  you  and  let  you  all  go  in  the  end 
tj  the  Andha  Kupa  hell?,  etc.  Vyasa  said; — '' 0  Janamejaya !  Thus 
taking  the  water  symbolising  the  true  rules  and  laws  of  creation,  and  cursing 
the  Brahmanas,  the  Muni  Gautama  went  hastily  to  see  the  G&yatri  Devi 
and,  on  arriving  at  the  teniple  there  bowed  down  to  Her.  The  Davi,  too, 
became  surprised  to  see  their  actions.  O  King  !  Even  to  day  Her  Lotus 
Face  looks  similarly  astonished  ! 

82-90.  Then  the  Gayatri  Devi  told  Gautama  with  amazement: — • 
"  O  Gautama  1  The  venom  of  the  snake  does  nob  become  less  if  you 
feed  the  serpents  with  milk  ;  so  never  mind  all  the»e  things;  the  Karmas 
take  their  peculiar  turns  ;  it  is  hard  to  say  when  will  happen  what  things. 
Now  be  peaceful.  Do  not  be  sorry.  Hearing  these  words  of  the 
Devi,  Gautama  bowed  down  to  Her  and  went  thence  to  his  own 
as'rama.  Here,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Brahmanas  forgot  everything 
due  to  the  curse  of  Gautama,  of  the  Vedas  and  the  Gayatri  Mantra. 
They  then  began  to  look  at  this  event  with  wonder  as  unique  and 
extraordinary.  All  united  they  afterwards  repented  and  going  before 
Gautama,  fell  prostrate  at  bis  feet.  But  they  could  not  speak  any 
word  out  of  shame.  Only  they  said  frequently:—"  Be  pleased,  be 
pleased  with  us."  When  all  the  assembly  of  the  Brahmanas  prayed 
to  him  for  favour  and  grace,  the  Muni  Gautama  took  pity  on  them 
and  replied.  My  word  will  never  turn  out-  false.  You  will  have  to 
remain  in  Kiimbhip&ka  hell  upto  the  time  when  S'ri  Krifna  will  take  hia 
incarnation.  Then  you  will  be  born  in  the  earth  in  the  Kali  age 
and  whatever  I  have  uttered  will  exactly  come  unto  you.  And  if 
you  are  in  earnest  to  avert  my  ourse  then  go  and  worship  the  Lotus 
Feet  of  S'ri  GSyatrj  Devi.    The  is  no   other  remedy. 


1174  §Rt  MAD  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

91-100-  VySsa  said: — Thus  dismissing  the  Brahmanas,  Gautama 
Muni  thought  that  all  these  occurred  as  a  result  of  Prarabdha 
Karma  and  he  became  calm  and  qaiot.  For  this  reason,  after  Sri  Krisna 
Maharaja  ascended  to  the  Heavens,  when  the  Kali  age  came,  those 
cursed  BrShmanas  got  out  of  the  Kumbhipaka  hell  and  took  their 
births  in  this  earth  as  Brahmins,  devoid  of  the  three  Sandhyas,  devoid 
of  the  devotion  to  Gayatri,  devoid  of  fiith  in  the  Vedas,  advocating 
the  heretics'  opinion  and  unwilling  to  perform  Agnihotra  anl  other 
relegious  sacrifices  and  duties  and  they  were  devoid  of  SvadhS,  aud 
SvahS.  They  forgot  entirely  the  Unmanifested  Mdla  Praknti 
Bhagavati.  Some  of  them  began  to  mark  on  their  bodies  various 
heretical  signs  e.  g.,  TaptamudrS,  etc.;  some  became  Kapa  likas  ;  some 
became  Kaulas  ;  some  Bauddhas  and  some  Jainas.  Many  of  them,  though 
learned,  became  lewd  and  addicted  to  other's  wives  and  engaged 
themselves  in  vain  and  bad  disputations.  For  these,  they  will  have 
to  go  again  surely  to  the  Kumbhip^ka  hell.  So  O  King !  Worship 
with  your  heart  and  soul  Sri  Bhagavati  Parames'var)  Davi.  The  worship 
of  Visnu  or  Siva  is  not  constant  (to  be  d-^no  everyday)  ;  only  the 
worship  of  Sakti  is  to  be  constantly  performed.  For  this  reason 
whoever  does  not  worship  Sakti  is  sure  to  fall.  Thus  I  have 
answered  all  your  questions.  Now  I  shall  describe  the  highest  and 
most  bpautiful  place,  Manidvipa  of  the  Primal  Force  Bhagav  iti,  the 
Deliverer   from    this  bondage  of  world.     Listen. 

Here  ends  the  Ninth  Chapter  of  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the  cause 
of  Sraddhu  in  other  Devas  than  the  Devi  Gayatri  in  the  Mihslpuranam 
Sri  Mad    Devi    Bh^gavatara    of   18,00t)    verses   by  M-iharsi  Veda  Vya^a.^. 


CHAPTER    X. 

1-20.  Vy^sa  said: — "  O  King  Janamejaya  I  What  is  known  in  the 
Srutis,  in  the  SubSla  Upanisada,  as  the  Sarvaloka  over. the  Brahmaloka,  that 
is  Manidvipa.  Here  the  Devi  resides.  This  region  is  superior  to  all  the  other 
regions.  Hence  it  is  named  "  Sarvaloka."  The  Devi  built  this  place  of 
yore  according  to  Her  will.  In  the  very  beginning,  the  Devi  Muia  Prakriti 
Bhagavati  built  this  place  for  Her  residence,  superior  to  Kailas'a,  Vaikun- 
tha  and  Goloka.  Verily  no  other  place  in  this  universe  can  stand  before 
it.  Hence  it  is  called  Manidvipa  or  Sarvaloka  as  superior  to  all  the 
Lokas,       This    Manidvipa   is   situated   at   the  top     of  all     the    regions, 


Book  Xtl.]  CHAPTER  X.  1175 

and  resembles  au  utnbreUa.  Its  sbilow  falls  ou  tbe  Brabmaada  and 
destroys  the  pains  ani  aufferiugs  of  this  world.  Surrounding  this 
Manidvipa  exists  an  oaaaa  cilled  the  SuJba  Samudra,  many  yojanas  wide 
and  many  joj  mas  deep.  Many  waves  arise  in  it  due  to  winds. 
Various  fishes  and  concbes  and  otber  aquatic  animals  play  and  here 
the  beach  is  full  of  clear  sand  like  gems.  The  sea-sbores  are  kept  always 
cool  by  the  splashes  of  the  waves  of  water  striking  tbe  beach. 
Various  ships  decked  with  various  nice  flags  are  plying  to  and  fro. 
Various  trees  bearing  gems  are  adorning  tbe  beach.  Across  this 
ocean,  there  is  an  iron  enclosure,  very  long  and  seven  yojanas  wide, 
very  high  so  as  to  block  the  Heavens.  Within  this  enclosure  wall 
the  military  guards  skilled  in  war  and  furnished  with  various  weapons 
are  running  gladly  to  and  fro.  There  are  four  gateways  or  entrances ;  at 
every  gate  there  are  hundreds  of  guards  and  various  hosts  of  the  devotees 
of  the  Devi.  Whenever  any  Deva  comes  to  pay  a  visit  to  tbe 
Jagadis^'vari,  their  Vahanas  (carriars)  and  retinue  are  stopped  here. 
O  King  1  This  place  is  being  resounded  with  the  chimings  of  tbe 
bells  of  hundreds  of  chariots  of  the  Devas  and  the  neighings  of  their 
horses  and  the  sounds  of  their  hoofs.  The  Devis  walk  here  and 
there  with  canes  in  their  hands  and  they  are  chiding  at  intervals 
the  attendants  of  the  Devas.  This  place  is  so  noisy  that  no  one 
can  hear  clearly  another's  word.  Here  are  seen  thousands  of  houses  adorned 
vith  trees  of  gems  and  jewels  and  tanks  filled  with  plenty  of  tasteful 
good  sweet  waters.  O  King  !  After  this  there  is  a  second  enclosure 
wall,  very  big  and  built  of  while  copper  metal  (an  amalgam  of  zinc 
or  tin  and  copper) ;  it  is  eo  very  high  that  it  almost  touches  the 
Heavens.  It  is  hundred  times  more  brilliant  than  the  preceding 
enclosure  wall  ;  there  are  many  principal  entrance  gates  and  various 
trees  here.  What  to  speak  of  tbe  trees  there  more  than  this  that  all  tbe 
trees  that  are  found  in  this  universe  are  found  there  and  they  bear 
always  flowers,  fruits  and  new  leaves  !  All  the  quarters  are  scented 
with  their  sweet  fragrance  ! 

21-43.  O  King  !  Now  hear,  in  brief,  the  names  cf  some  of  the 
trees  that  are  found  in  abundance  there:— Panasa,  Vakula,  Lodbra, 
Karnikara,  6ins'apa,  Deodara,  Kanchanara,  mango,  Suraeru,  Likucha, 
Hingula,  ElS,  Labanga,  Kat  fruit  tree,  ratala,  Muchukunda,  T&la, 
Tam'aia,  Saia.  Kankola,  NSgabhdra,  Punnaga,  Pilu,  Saivaka,  Karpura, 
As'vakarna,  Hastikarna,  Talaparna,  Pomegranate,  Ganikd,  Baudhujiva, 
Jamvira,'Kurandaka,  Cha^npoya,  Bandbujiva,  Kanakavrik§a,  Ka- 
Uguru,  (usually  coiled  all  over  with  cobras,  very  black  poisonous  snakes) 
Sa'ndaltree,      Datetree,    YutbikS,     T^lapar?',      Sugercane,     K?ira4ree. 


1176  ^Rt  MA.D    DEVt  BHJLGAVATAM. 

Khidira,  BhilUVjaka,  Ruchaka,    Kutaja,      Bel  tree  and    others,  the   Talasi 
and    Mallika  and    other     forest    plants.     The    place    is   interspersed    with 
vorious  forests    and    o-ardens.     At    intervals   there    are  wells,    tanks,    etc., 
adding   very    much     to    the     beauty    of     the     place.     The     cuckoos    are 
perching  on  every    tree   and  they    are     cooing     sweetly,    the     bees     are 
drinking   the    honey    and    humming    all    around,    the     trees   are    emitting 
juices   and  sxveet  fragrance    all    around.     The    trees  are    are    casting   cool 
nice   shadows.     The   trees   of  all  seasons   are    seen    here;    on     the       tops 
of  these   are    sitting     pigeons,     parrots,     female     birds     of    the  Mayan& 
species   and    other    birds   of  various    other   species.     There  are    seen  rivers 
flowing  at  intervals  carrying  many  juicy   liquids.     The  Flamingoes,  swans' 
and  other  aquatic  animals  are  playing  in  them.     The  breeze  is  stealing  away 
the   perfumes   of  flowers   and    carrying     it   <*11     around.     The      deer     are 
following  thi^    breeze,     Tbe     wild     mad     peacocks      are     dancing     with 
madness  and  the  whole  place  looks  very  nice,    lovely   and  charming.     Next 
this    Kamsya   enclosure    comes    the    third   enclosure   wall     of    copper.     It 
is  square   shaped   and   seven   yojanas  high.     Wthin  this     are      forests    cf 
Kalpavriksas,  bearing   golden    leaves  and    flowers    and    fruits    like    gems 
Their   perfumes   spread    ten     yojanas   and     gladden     things    all     around. 
The    king     of    the     seasons      preserves    always    this    place.     The   kings' 
seat   is  made   of  flowers  ;    his    umbrella    is    of  flowers  ;  ornaments  made 
of  flowers  ;   he   drinks  the  honey    of  the    flowers ;  and,    with  rolling  eyes, 
he  lives  here  always  with  his  two  wives  named   Madhu    Sri   and   Midhava 
Sri.  The  two  wives  of  Spring  have  their   faces    always  smiling.    They    play 
with  bunches  of  flowers.     This  forest  is  very  pleasant.     Oh  !    The    honey  of 
the   flowers  is     seen     here     in    abundance.     The    perfumes    of     the    full 
blown     flowers   spread   to   a  distance    of  ten  yojanas.      The  Gandharbbas, 
the   musicians,   live    here  with    their  wives. 

41-60.  The  places  round  this  are  filled  with  the  beauties  of 
tbe  spring  and  with  the  cooing  of  cuckoos.  No  doubt  this  place 
intensifies  the  desires  of  the  amorous  persons  I  O  Kinw  I  Next 
comes  the  enclosure  wall,  made  of  lead.  Its  height  is  eeven  yojanas. 
Within  this  enclosure  there  is  the  garden  of  the  Santdnaka  tree.  The 
fragrance  of  its  flowers  extends  to  ten  yojanas.  the  flowers  look 
like  gold  and  are  alw  ays  in  full  bloom.  Its  fruits  are  very  sweet. 
They  seem  to  be  imbued  with  nectar  drops.  In  this  garden  resides 
always  the  Summer  Season  with  his  two  wives  Sukra  ^ri  and  l^uchi 
ori.  The  inhabitants  of  this  place  always  remain  under  trees  • 
otherwise  they  will  be  scorched  by  summer  rays.  "Various  Siddhas 
and  Devas  inhabit  this  place.  The  female  sensualists  here  get  their 
bodies   all  Ruoiuted   with   sandal   paste    and    all     decked    with    flowers 


Book  XII.]  CHAPTER  X.  1177 

g  irlaads  and  they  stalk  to  and  fro  with  fans  in  their  hands.  There 
ia  watar  to  bs  found  here  very  cool  and  refreshing.  And  owing  to 
hait  all  the  people  here  use  this  water.  Next  to  this  lead  enclosure 
corner  the  wall  made  of  brass,  the  fifth  enclosure  wall.  It  is  seven 
yojanas  long.  In  ^he  centre  is  situated  the  garden  of  Hari  Chandana 
trees.     Its    ruler    is    the   Rainy    Season. 

The  lightnings  are  his  auburn  eyes  ;  the  clouds  are  his  armour,  the 
thunder  is  his  voice  and  the  rainbow  is  his  arrow.  Surrounded  by  his 
hosts  he  rains  incessantly.  He  has  twelve  wives  :— (1)  Nabhah  5ri,  (2)  Na- 
bhahsya  ^rt,  (3)  Svarasya,  (4)  Rasyasalinf,  (5)  Amba,  (6)  Dala,  (7)  Niratni, 
(8)  Abhramanti,  (9)  Megha  Yantika,  (10)  Varsayanti,  (11)  Chivunika,  and 
(12)  Varidhar4  (some  say  Madamatta.  All  the  trees  here  are  always  seen  with 
new  leaves  and  entwined  with  new  creepers.  The  whole  site  is  covered  all 
over  with  fresh  green  leaves  and  twigs.  The  rivers  here  always  flow 
full  and  the  current  is  strong,  tideed  !  The  tanks  here  are  very  dirty  like 
the  minds  of  worldly  persons  attached  to  worldly  things.  The  devotees 
of  the  Devi,  the  SidJhis  and  the  Devas  and  those  that  consecrated 
in  their  life  times  tinks,  •^elis,  and  reservoirs  for  the  satisfaction  of  the 
Devas  dwell  here  with  their  wives.  O  King  !  Next  to  this  brass 
enclosure  comes,  the  sixth  enclosure  wall  made  of  five  fold  irons.  It  is 
seven  yojanas  long.  In  the  centre  is  situated  the  Garden  of  Mandarri 
trees.  This  garden  is  beautified  by  various  creepers,  fljwers  and  leaves. 
The  Autumn  season  lives  here  with  his  two  wives  Isalak^mt  and  t)rj*- 
laksmi  and  he  is  the  ruler.  Various  Siddha  persons  dwell  here  with 
their  wives,  well  clothed.  O  King  !  Next  to  this  comes  the  seventh 
enclosure  wall,  seven   yojanas  long  and  built  of  silver. 

61-80.  In  the  centre  is  situate  J  the  garden  of  Pdrijata  trees. 
They  are  filled  with  bunches  of  flowers.  The  fragrance  of  these  Parijatas 
extend  upto  the  ten  Yojanas  and  gladden  all  the  things  all  around.  Those 
who  are  the  Devi  Bhaktas  and  who  do  the  works  of  the  Devi  are  delighted 
with  this  fragrance.  The  Hemanta  (Dewy)  season  is  the  Regent  of  this 
plice.  He  lives  here  with  his  two  wives  Saha  Sri  and  Sahasya  Sri  and 
with  his  hosts.  Those  who  are  of  a  loving  nature  are  pleased  hereby. 
Those  who  have  become  perfect  by  performing  the  Vratas  of  the  Devi 
live  here  also.  O  King  1  Next  to  this  silver,  there  comes  the  eighth 
enclosure  wall  built  of  molten  gold.  It  is  seven  Yojanas  long.  In 
theoentre  there  is  the  garden  of  the  Kadaraba  tree.  The  trees  are  always 
covered  with  fruits  and  flowers  and  the  honey  is  coming  out  always  from 
the  trees  from  all  the  sides.  The  devotees  of  the  Devi  drink  this  honey 
l^lways  an<l  ^eol  intense  delight }  the  Dewy   Season  is  the   Regent  of  this 

148 


1178  SRI  mad  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

place.  He  resides  here  with  his  two  wives  Tapah  bri  and  Tapasyi  Sri 
and  his  various  hosts,  and  enjoys  gladly  various  objects  of  enjoymeuts. 
Those  who  haJ  made  various  gifts  for  the  Devi's  satisfaction,  those  great 
Siddha  Purusas  live  here  with  their  wives  and  relatives  very  gladly  in 
various  enjoyments.  O  King  !  Next  to  this  golden  enclosure  wall 
comes  the  ninth  enclosure  made  of  red  Kum  Kura  like  (saffron)  Puspa- 
raga  gems.  The  ground  inside  this  enclosure,  the  ditches  or  the  basins 
for  water  dug  round  their  roots  are  all  built  of  Pasparaga  o-enis.  Next 
to  this  wall  there  are  other  enclosure  walls  built  of  various  other  gems 
and  jewtils  ;  the  sites,  forests,  trees,  flowers  birds,  rivers,  tank*,  lotuses, 
mandapas  (halls)  and  their  pillars  are  all  built  respectively  of  those 
gems.  Only  this  is  to  be  remembered  that  those  coming  nearer  and 
nearer  to  the  centre  are  one  lakh  times  mjre  brilliant  than  the  ones 
receding  from  them.  This  is  the  general  rule  observed  in  the  construction 
of  these  enclosures  and  the  articles  contained  therein.  Here  the  tteoents 
of  the  several  quarters,  the  Dikpalas,  representing  the  sum  total  of 
the  several  Dikpalas  of  every  Brahm^nda  and  their  guardians  reside.  On 
the  eastern  quarter  is  situated  the  Amaravati  city.  Here  the  hit»"h- 
peaked  mountains  exist  and  various  trees  are  seen.  Indra,  the  Lord 
of  the  Devas,  dwells  here.  Whatever  beauty  exists  in  the  separate 
Heavens  in  the  several  places,  one  thousand  times,  rather  more  than 
that,  exists  in  the  Heaven  of  this  cosmic  Indra,  thd  ttiousand-eyeJ,  hjr<i. 
Here  Indra  mounting  on  the  elephant  Airavata,  with  thunderbolt  in 
his  hand,  lives  with  Sachi  Devi  and  other  immortal  "  ladies  and  with 
the  hosts  of  the  Deva  forces. 

On  the  Agni  (south-eastern)  corner  is  the  city  oi  Agni.  This  repre- 
sents the  sum  total  of  the  several  cities  of  Agni  indifferent  Brahman- 
das. 

81-100.  Here  resides  the  Agni  Deva  very  gladly  with  his  two  wives 
SvahS  and  SvadhS  and  with  his  V^hana  and  the  other  Devas.  On  the 
south  is  situated  the  city  of  Yama,  the  God  of  Death.  Here  lives 
Dharma  RSja  with  rod  in  his  hand  and  with  Chitragupta  and  several 
other  hosts.  On  the  south-westen  corner  is  the  place  of  tha  liriksasis. 
Here  resides  Nirriti  with  his  axe  in  his  hand  and  with  his  wife  and  other 
Raksasas.  On  the  west  is  th«  city  of  Varuna.  Here  Varuna  rllj>i 
resides  with  his  wife  Varuni  and  intoxicated  with  the  drink  of  Varuni 
honey  ;  his  weapon  is  the  noose,  his  V^hana  is  the  King  of  fishes  and  his 
subjects  are  the  aquatic  animals.  On  the  north-western  corner  dwells 
V^yudeva.  Here  Pavana  Deva  lives  with  his  wife  and  with  the  Yogis 
perfect   in   the  practice    of   Pr^lnayama.       He  holds  a   flag    in    his    hand- 


Book  XII.]  CHAPTER  XI.  1179 

His  V^hana  is  dear  and  his  family  consists  of  the.fortynine  Vayus.  On 
the  north  resides  the  Yak§as.  The  corpulent  King  of  the  Yaksas, 
Kuvera,  lives  here  with  his  Saktis  Vriddhi  and  Riddhi,  and  in  posses- 
sion of  various  gems  and  jewels.  His  generals  Manibhadra,  Purna 
bhadra,  Maniman,  Manikandhara,  Manibhusa,  Manisragvi,  Manikar- 
mukadh&ri,  etc,  live  here.  On  the  north  eastern  corner  is  situated  the 
Rudra  loka,  decked  with  invaluable  gems.  Here  dwells  the  Rudra  Deva^ 
On  His  back  is  kept  the  arrow-case  and  he  holds  a  bow  in  his  left  hand. 
He  looks  very  angry  and  his  eyes  are  red  with  anger.  There  are  other 
Rudras  like  him  with  bows  and  spears  and  other  weapons,  surrounding 
him.  The  faces  of  some  of  them  are  distorted;  some  are  very  horrible 
in  leed  !  fire  is  coming  out  from  the  mouths  of  some  others.  Some  have  ten 
hands  ;  some  have  hundred  hands  and  some  have  thousand  hands  ;  some 
have  ten  feeb  ;  soma  have  ten  heads  whareis  soma  others  have  three  eyes. 
Those  who  roam  in  the  intermediate  spaces  between  the  heaven  and 
earth,  those  who  move  on  the  earth,  or  the  Rudras  mentioned  in  the 
Iludralhyaya  all  live  here.  O  King  !  Isana,  the  Regent  of  the  north 
eastern  quarter  lives  here  with  BhadrakMi  and  other  M^triganas,  with 
Kotis  and  Kotis  of  Rudranis  and  with  Damaris  and  Vha  Bhadras 
and  various  other  Saktis.  On  his  neck  there  is  a  garland  of  skulls, 
on  his  hand  there  is  a  ring  of  snakes  ;  he  wears  a  tiger  skin  ;  his  upper 
clothing  is  a  tiger  skin  and  his  body  is  smeared  with  the  ashes  of 
the  dead.  He  sounds  frequently  his  Damaru  ;  this  sound  reverberates 
on  all  sides,  he  makes  big  laughs  called  Attahasya,  reverberating  through 
the  heavens.  He  remains  always  surrounded  with  Pramathas  and  Bhiitas  ; 
they  live  here. 

Here  ends  the  Tenth  Chapter  of  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the 
description  of  Mani  Dvipa  in  the  Mahapuranara  Sri  Mad  Devi 
Bhaaavatam    ot    18,000   verses    by     Mahar§i    Veda     Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  KI. 

1-30.  Vyasa  said: — *'  O  King  Janamejaya  I  Nest  to  this  Pusparglga 
mani  enclosure  wall  comes  the  tenth  enclosure  wall,  made  of  PadmarSga 
man!,  red  like  the  red  Kunkuma  and  the  Rising  Sun.  It  is  ten  yojanas 
hi'Th.  AH  its  ground,  entrance  gates  and  temples  and  arbours  are  all  made 
of  Padmaraga  mani.  Within  this  reside  the  sixtyfour  Kala-?  or  Sub-Saktis 
adorned  with  various  ornaments  and  holding  weapons  in  their  hands. 
Each  of  them  has  a  separate  Loka  (region)  allotted  and  within  this 
Loka  he  has  get  hie  own  formidable  wc^ipons,  V^hanas,   families   and  their 


liSO  SrI  mad  DE  Vl  BHilGAVATA.M. 

leaders  or   Governors.     O  King  !  No^   hear   the    names  of  the  sixtyfour 
Kalas:— They  are:— PingaUksi,   Vis'aUkft,    Samriddhi,  Vriddhi,  SraddhS, 
Svaha,  SvadhS,     Mftya,    SangS^,      Vasundhara,    Trilokadh^tri,    Savitri, 
Gdyatri,   Tridas'es'vari,   Suriipa,  Bahuriipa,  Skandamata,     Achyutapriya, 
Vimala,    Amala,    Arunt,   Aruni,  Prakriti,  Vikriti,  Srigti,  Sthiti,  Samrhiti, 
SandhyS,     Matd,    Satt,    Hamsi,     Mardik^,    VajrikI,     Para,     Devam^t^, 
Bhagavat),     Deraki,     Kamalasana,     Trimukhi,    Saptamukhi,      Suriisura 
vimardin  i,   Lambo§thi,    Urdhakes'i,  Bahusir§l,  Vrikodari     Ratharekbah- 
vayS,   Sae'ireka,  GaganavegS,  PavanavegS,     Bhuvanap^la,      MadanaturA, 
Ananga,     Anangamathana,   Anangamekhala,    Anangakusumsl,   Visvarupl, 
Suradik&i   K§ayamkari,   Aksyobhy&,   Satyav&dini,   BahuriipS,  SuchivratS, 
UdSr^  and  V%if'i,     These   are  the  sixtyfour    Kal&s.     All    of  them  have 
got   luminoas  faces  and  long  Lolling  tongues.    Fire  is  always    coming  out 
from  the  faces   of  all   of  them.     The  eyes  of  all  of    them    are    red     with 
ftnger.     They  are   uttering: — We    will   drink    all  the  water  and    thus  dry 
up   the    oceans;     we     will  annihilate    fire,   we  will     stop     the     flow     of 
air   and    control   it,    To-day    we   will  devour  the   whole  universe  and  so 
forth.     All  of  them  have   got    bows  and   arrows   in     their    hands;     all 
are   eager    to   fight,     The    four     quarterd    are    being     reverberated    with 
the    clashing   of   their   teeth.     The  hairs  on  their    heads   are  all   tawny 
and  they  stand  upwards.     Each  o^  them  has  one  hundred  Akgauhini  forces 
under  them.     O  King !   What    more   to   say    than    this    that    each   of 
them  ias   got  power  to    destroy    one    lakh     Brahmandas ;    and    their 
one   hundred   Akgauhini   forces   also  can  do   the     same.     There   is    no. 
thing     that   is   not  impracticable   with  them.     What     they     cannot    do 
cannot   be      conceived  by  mind  nor  can  be  uttered     in    speech.    All    the 
war  materials  exist  within  their  enclosures.     Chariots,   horses,  elephants, 
weapons,  and   forces  all  are    unlimited.     All    the    war     materials     are 
ready  at  all  times  and  in  abundance.     Next  comes  the  eleventh  enclosure 
wall  built  of  Gomedamani.     It  is  ten  Yojanas  high.     Itp  colour  is   like  the 
newly  blown  Java  flower.    A.11  the  ground,  trees,  tanks,  houses,  pillars,  birds 
and  all  other   things   are  all  red   and  built   of  Gomedamani.     Here  dwell 
the  thirty-two    Maha  Saktis   adorned   with  various     ornaments   made  of 
Gomedamani   and     furnished    with    various   weapons.     They   are  always 
eager   to   fight.     Their   eyes   are   always   red     with     anger ;    their   faces 
are  like  Pis'Schas  and  their  hands  are  like  chakras  (discs).     "  Pierce  him  " 
"  Beat   him,  "   *'  Cut   him,  "    "  Tear    him  asunder,  "   »  Burn  him  down,  " 
are  the  words   constantly   uttered   by   them,     The      inhabitants    of  the 
place   always  worship   them.     Each    of  them  has   ten     Aksauhini  forces. 
These   are   inordinately     powerful.   It   is     impossible  to     describe     that. 
It  seems  that  each   S'akti   can   6as:ily   destroy    one    l^kh   Brahm&ndas. 


Book  XII.  1  CHAPTER  XI.  ll§i 

Innumerable  ohuiots,  ebphants,  horses,  etc.,  and  other  v^hanas  are  here. 
Verily  all  the  war  materials  of  the  Devi  Bhagavati  are  seen  in  this 
Go-meda-mani   enclosure. 

31-51.  Now  I  am  mentioning  the  auspicious,  sindestroying  names  of 
these  iSaktis: — Vidya,  Hri,  Pusti,  Prajna,  Sini  vali,  Kuhu,  Rudra,  Virya, 
Prabha,  Nanda,  Posani,  Riddhida,  5ubha,  Ksilaratri,  Maharatri,  Bhadra 
Kail,  Kaparddini,  Vikriti,  Dandi,,  Mundini,  Sendukhanda,  Sikhandini 
Nis*umbha  s'umbha  mathani,  Mahi§asura  marddini,  Indian i,  lludrani 
Sankarardha  saririni,  Nari,  Narayani  Tris'ulini,  Palini,  Ambika,  and 
Hladini.     (See    the  Dak§ina  Murti  Samhita  and  other   Tantras.) 

35.  Never  there  is  any  chance  that  they  will  be  defeated  any 
where.  Hence  if  all  those  Saktis  get  angry  at  any  time,  this  Brahmanda 
ceases  to  exist.  Next  to  this  Go-meda  enclosure  comes  the  enclosure  made 
of  diamonds.  It  is  ten  yojanas  high  ;  on  all  sides  there  are  the  entrance 
gates;  the  doors  are  hinged  there  with  nice  mechanisms.  Nice  new 
diamond  trees  exist  here.  All  the  roads,  royal  roads,  trees,  and  the 
spaces  for  watering  their  roots,  tanks,  wells,  reservoirs,  SSranga  and 
other  musical  instruments  are  all  made  of  diamonds.  Here  dwells 
5ri  Bhuvanes'vari  Devi  with  Her  attendants.  O  King  I  Each  of 
them  has  a  lakh  attendants.  All  of  them  are  proud  of  their  beaufe 
Some  of  them  are  holding  fans  in  their  hands ;  some  are  holding 
cups  for  drinking  water;  some,  betelunts  ;  some  are  holding  umbrellas ; 
some  chowries ;  some  are  holding  various  clothings ;  ^  some  flowers ; 
some,  looking  glasses ;  some,  saffrons ;  some  collyrium,  whereas  some 
others  are  holding  Sindura  (red  lead).  Some  are  ready  to  do  the  painting 
works ;  some  are  anxious  to  champoo  the  feet ;  some  are  eager  to 
make  Her  wear  ornaments ;  some  are  anxious  to  put  garlands  o^ 
flowers  on  Her  neck.  All  of  them  are  skilled  in  various  arts  of  enjoy- 
ments and  they  are  all  young.  To  gain  the  Grace  of  the  Devi, 
they  consider  the  whole  universe  a»  trifling.  Now  I  shall  mention 
to  you  the  names  of  the  attendants  of  the  Devi,  proud  of  their 
possessing  lots  of  amorous  gestures  and  postures.  Listen.  They  are: — 
Anangarlipa,  AnangamadanS,  Madan^tura,  Bhuvanaveg^,  Bhuvana- 
palika,  Sarvas'is'ira^  Anangavedana,  Anangamek.hala,  these  are  the 
Eight  Sakhis.  Each  of  them  is  as  fair  as  Vidyullata.  Each  is 
adorned  with,  various  ornaments  and  skilled  in  all  actions,  When 
they  walk  to  and  fro  with  canes  and  rods  in  their  hauUds  in  the  service  of 
the  Devi,   they  look  as  if  the  lightning  flashes    glimmer  on  all     aides. 

52-71  On  the  outer  portion  of  the  enclosure  wall  on  the  eight  sides  are 
situated  the  dwelling-houses  of  these  eight  Sakhis  and  they  are  always  full 
of  various  yahanas  and  weapons,    Next   to    this    enclosure     of    diamond 


1182  Sr!  mad  DEVt  BHAgAVATAM. 

comes  the  thirteenth  enclosure  wall  made  of  Vaidurya  mani,  Its 
height  is  ten  yojanas.  There  are  entrance  gates  and  doorways  oa  the 
four  sides.  The  court  inside,  the  houses,  ihe  bigroads,  wells,  tanks, 
ponds,  rivers  and  even  the  sands  are  all  made  of  Vaidurya  mani. 
On  the  eight  sides  reside  the  eight  Matrikas  Biahmi,  etc,,  with  their 
hosts.  These  Matrik^s  represent  the  sum-total  of  the  individual 
MatrikS,s  in  every  Brahmand*  Novv  hear  their  names: — (1)  Br^hmi, 
(2)  Mahes'vari,  (3j  Kaumari,  (4)  Vaisriavi,  (5)  Varahi,  (6)  Indrani, 
(7)Chamunda,  and    (8)  MabaLaksmi. 

Their  forms  are  like  those  of  Brahra^  and  Rudra  and  others.  They  are 
always  engaged  in  doing  good  to  the  Universe  and  reside  here  with  their 
own  Vahanas  and  weapons. 

60-61.  iit  the  four  gates, the  various  Vahaavs  of  Bhagavati  remain 
always  fully  equipped.  Somewhere  there  are  Rotis  and  Kotis  of  elephants. 
At  some  places  there  are  Kotis  and  Kotis  of  horses  ;  at  others  there  are 
camps,  houses,  at  others  there  are  swans,  lions;  at  others  there  are  Garudas; 
at  other  places  there  are  peacocks,  bulls  and  various  other  beings  all 
fully  equipped  and  arranged  indue  order.  Similarly  the  above  mentioned 
animals  are  yoked  to  Kotis  and  Kotis  of  chariots  ;  there  are  coachmen 
(syces)  ;  at  some  places  flags  are  fluttering  high  on  them  so  as  to  reach 
the  heavens  and  thus  they  are  adding  beauty.  At  other  places  the  aerial 
cars  are  arranged  in  rows,  countless,  with  various  sounding  instruments  in 
them  with  flags  soaring  high  in  the  Heavens  and  endowed  with  various 
ensi»ns  and  emblem?.  O  King  I  Next  to  this  Vaidurya  enclosure,  comes  the 
fourteenth  enclosure  wall  built  of  Indranilamani;  its  height  is  ten  Yojanas. 
The  court  inside,  houses,  roads,  wells,  tanks  and  reservoirs,  etc.,  all  arebuilt 
of  Indranilamani.  There  is  here  a  lotus  consisting  of  sixteen  petals  extending 
to  many  Yojanas  in  width  and  shining  like  a  second  Svdars'ana  Chakra. 
On  these  sixteen  petals  reside  the  sixteen  Saktis  of  Bhagavati,  with  their 
ho«t9.  Now  I  am  mentioning  the  names  of  these.  Hear  : — Karali 
Vikaraii.  Uma,  Sarasvati,  ^'rJ,  DurgS,  Us^,  LaksmT,  ^ruti,  Smriti, 
Dhriti,  ^raddha,  Medha,  Mati,  Kanti,  and  Arya.  These  are  the  16  Saktis^ 
They  all  are  dark  blue,  of  the  colour  of  the  fresh  rain-cloud  ;  They  wield  in 
their  hands  axes  and  shields.  It  seems  they  are  ever  eager  to  fight.  O 
Kino-  !  These  Saktis  are  the  Rulers  of  all  the  separate  Saktis  of  the  other 
Brahmanda?.    These  are  the  forces  of  Sri  Devi. 

72-90.  Being  strengthened  by  the  Davi's  strength  ,  these  are  always 
surrounded  by  various  chariots  and  forces,  various  other  Saktis  follow 
them.  If  they  like,  they  can  cause  great  agitation  in  the  whole  universe, 
ilad  I  thousand  faces,  I  would  not  have   been   able   to   describe   what   an 


Book  XII.]  CHAPTER  XI.  1183 

amount  of  strength  they  weild.  Now  I  describe  the  fifteenth  enclosure 
wall  : — Listen.  Next  to  this  Indranilmani  enclosure,  oomes  the  en- 
closure made  of  pearls!(mukta),'very  wide  and  ten  Yojanas  high.  The  court 
inside,  its  space,  trees,  all  are  built  of  pearls.  Within  this  enclosure  there 
is  a  lotus  with  eight  petals,  all  of  pearls.  On  these  petals  reside  the  eight 
haktis,  the  advisers  and  ministers  of  the  Dfcvi.  Their  appearances,  weapons, 
dresses,  enjoyments,  everything  is  like  those  of  ^rijDevi.  Their  duty  is  to 
inform  the  Devi  of  what  is  going  on  in  the  BrahmUndas.  They  are  skilled  in 
all  sciences  and  arts  and  clever  in  all  actions.  They  are  vei*y  clever,  skilful 
and  clever  in  knowing  beforehand  the  desires  and  intentions  of  Sri  Devi 
and  they  perform  those  things  accordingly.  Each  one  of  them  has  many 
other  Saktis  who  also  live  here.  By  their  Jnana  Sakti  they  know  all  th^ 
news  concerning  the  Jivas  in  every  Brahmanda.  Now  1  mention  the 
names  of  these  eight  Sakhis.  Listen.  Anangakusumd,  Anangakusuma- 
tur^,  Anangamadana,  Ananga  madan^ur^,  Bhuvanapala  Gaganavega, 
Sas'irekha,  and  Gaganarekha.  These  are  the  eight  Sakhis.  They  look  red 
like  the  Rising  Sun  ;  and  in  their  four  hands  they  hold  noose,  goad,  and 
signs  of  granting  boons  and  "no  fear."  At  every  instant  they  inform  Sri  Devi 
of  All  the  Events  of  the  Brahmanda.  Next  to  this  comes  the  sixteenth 
enclosure  wall  made  of  emerald  (marakata)  ;  it  is  ten  Yojanas  high  ; 
the  court  inside,  its  space,  and  houses  and  everything  are  built  of 
emeralds  (marakata  mani).  Here  exist  all  the  good  objects  of  enjoyments. 
This  is  hexagonal,  of  the  Yantra  shape.  And  at  every  corner  reside  the 
Devas.  On  the  eastern  corner  resides  the  four-faced  Brahma  ;  he  lives 
with  Gayatri  Devi;  he  holds  Kamandalu,  rosary,  signs  indicating  "  no 
fear"  and  Danda  (rod).  The  Devi  Gayatri  is  also  decorated  with  these.  Here 
all  the  Vedas,  Smritis,  the  PurHnas,  and  various  weapons  exist  incarnate 
in  their  respective  forms.  All  the  Avataras  of  Brahma.,  Gajatri,  and  Vya- 
hritis  that  exist  in  this  Brahmanda,  all  live  here.  On  the  south-west  corner 
Maha  Visiu  lives  with  Savitri  ;  He  holds  couch  shell,  disc,  club,  and  lotuy. 
Savitri  has  got  also  all  these.  The  Avataras  of  Via nu  that  exist  in  ever}' 
Brahmanda  Matsya,  Kurma,  etc.,  and  all  the  Avataras  of  Savitri  that 
exist  in  every  universe,  all  dwell  in  this  place.  On  the  north  western 
corner  exists  Maha  Rudra  with  Saras vati.  Both  of  them  hold  in  their 
hands  Paras'u,  rosary,  signs  granting  boons  and  "  no  fear." 

91-110.  AH  the  Avataras  of  Rudra  and  Parvati  (Gauri,  etc.)  facing 
south  that  exist  in  all  the    Brahmandas,  dwell  here. 

All  the  chief  Agamas,  sixtyfour  in  number  and  all  the  other  Tantras 
reside  here,  incarnate  in  their  due  forms.  On  the  south-eastern 
corner,   the  Lord  of    wealth,   Kuvera,  of  Bhagavati,   surrounded    by  roads 


1184  l§Rt  MAD  DEVl  BHAGAVATAM 

and  shops     resides  here    with    MahS,  Laksmi   and  hi  s   hosts   holding  Ute 
jar   of  jewels  (Mani  Karandika).     On  the   western      corner  exists  always 
Madana  wioh   Rati,   holding   noose,    goad,     bow     and      arrow,     All    his 
amorous   attendants     reside    here,    incarnate     in     their     forms.     On     the 
north-eastern    corner   resides      always      the     great     hero     Ganes'a,     the 
Remover   of    obstacles,    holding   noose     and    goad     and    with      bis    Pugti 
Devi.     O  King  !    All   the    Vibhutis    (manifestations)  of  Ganes'a  that  exist 
in   all   the    universes   reside    here,     What   more  to  say     than    this,  that 
Brahm4   and    the    other    Devas   and     Devis  here    represent  the  sum-total 
of  al!    the   Brahmas    and    the     Devas    and     the   Devis    that  exist   in   all 
the  Brahm^ndas.     These  all  worship     Sri     Bhagavati,  remaining  in     their 
own  spheres    respectively.       O  King  !    Next   come    the  seventeenth  enclo- 
sure  wall  made  of  Prabala.     It    is     red    like     saffron       and      it     is     one 
hundred   Yojanas  high.     As    before,  the      court    inside,    the    ground   and 
the    houses    all   are    made    of      Prabfi.la.       The      goddesses     of    the     five, 
elements,  Ifrillekha,     Gagaca,  Rakta,        Karalika,    and    Mahochchhusm^ 
reside  [  here.     The     colours  ai.d  lusires   of  the  bodies   of    the   goddessses 
resemble    those  of  the   elements   over   which    they      preside    reepeetively 
All    of   them    are    proud   of   their   youth  and     hold   in     their    four   hands 
noose,    goad    and   signs     granting      boon  s  and   "  no     fear."     They      are 
dressed    like   S'ri    Devi  and    reside    he  re  always.     Next   to     this     comes 
the    eighteenth   enclosure    wall    built    of  Navaratna     (the     nine    jewels). 
It    is     many  yojanas  wide.     This    enclosure    wall   is  superior   to  all  others 
and      It  is  higher  also.     On  the  four  sides  there    exist    innumerable  houses, 
tanks,  reservorirs,  all     built  of  Navaratna  ;  these  belong  to  the  Devis,    the 
presiding    Deities  of      A  mn&yas  (that  which    is  to  be  studied  or   learnt   by 
heart ;  the  Vedas).  The  ten  Maha  Vidya  s  Kali,  Taia,  etc.,  of  S'ri  Devi  and 
the  MahabhedSs,  that  is,  their  all    the    Avat^ras    all  dwell  here  with  their 
respective    Avaranas,    V§,hanas  and     ornaments.     All     the     Avataras    of 
S'ri   Devi   for    the    killing    of  the  Daityas    and     for     showing     favour  to 
the   devotees    live     here.     They   are      Pas'amkus'es'vari,     Bhuvanes'vari, 
Bhairavi,      Kapala     Bhuvanes'vari,     Amkus'a    Bhuvanes'vari,      Pramftda 
bhuvanes'vari,  S'ri  Krodha  Bhuvanes'vari,  Triputas'variidha,  Nityaklinna, 
Annapurna,    Tvarita,   and   the    other  avataras  of  Bhuvanes'vari,  and  Kfili, 
TSr^   and   the   other   MahAvidyas   are  known  as  Mah^vidySs.      They  live 
here   with   their    Avarana    DevatS,s,   Vahanas,  and  ornaments  respectively. 
(i^o«.?:— -The    Avarana    Deities  are    the    attendant      Deities).      Here  live 
also    the   seven   Kotis   of  Devis    presiding    over  the    Maha  Mantras,  all 
brilliant   and   fair    like    the  Koti  Suns.     O  King  !      Next  to  this  enclosure 
wall   comes    the   chief  and    crowning     palace   of    S'ri     Devi,     built    o 


Book  XII.]  CHAPTER  Xll.  1185 

Chiotamani  gems.  A.1I  the  articles  within  this  are  built  of  Chintamani 
gems.  "Within  this  palace  are  seen  hundreds  and  thousands  of  pillars. 
Some  of  these  pillars  are  built  of  SuryakSntamani,  some  are  built  of 
Chandrakanta  man?,  and  some  are  built  of  Vidyutk^nta  mani.  O 
King!  The  lustre  and  brilliance  of  these  pillars  is  so  strong  that  no 
articles  within  this  palace  are  \isible  to  the  eye.  (iVoie:— The  face 
of  the  Goddes  Kali  is  so  bright  that  it  appair^  like  a  shalow,  i.e.  black). 
Here  ends  the  Eleventh  Chapter  on  the  description  of  the  enclosure 
walls  built  of  PadmarSga  mani,  etc..  of  the  Mani  Dvipa  in  the 
Mahdpuranam  8'ri  Mad  Devi  Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses  by 
Maharsi   Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER    XII. 

1-17.  Vyasa  said: — "O  King  Janamejaya  !  The  Ratnagriha,  above  men- 
tioned, ig  the  Central,  the  Chief  and  the  Crowning  Place  of  Mula  Prakriti. 
(The    nine   jewels     ara:— (1)  Mukta,     (2)  MSnikya,     (3)     Vaidurya,    (4) 
Gomeda,    (5)  Vajra,     (6)  Vidruma,     (7)  Padmar%a,      (8)  Marakata,  and 
(9)  Niia).     This    is  situated   in    the  centre    of  all  the  enclosures.     Within 
this  there  are  the  four  Mandapas  i.  e.,  halls  built  of  one  thousand  (i.e.,  inn- 
umerable) pillars.  These  are  the  S'ringjlra  Mandapa,  Mukti  Mandapa,  JnHna 
Mandapaand   Ek^nta  Mandapa  ;  en  the    top  there  are  canopies  of  various 
colours;  within  ara  many  scented  articles  scented  by  tho  Dhupas,  etc.    The 
brilliance  of  each  of  these  is  like  that  of  one  Koti  Suns.     On  all   sides     of 
these  four  Mandapas  there  are  nice  groups  of  gardens  of  K4s'mira,  Mallika, 
and  Kunda  flowers.  Various  scents,  and  sco'uted  articles,  for  example,  of  musk, 
etc.,  are  fully  arranged  in  due  order.     There  is  a  very  big  lotus  tank   here; 
the    steps    leading    to    it   are  built   of  jewels.     Its    water   is    nectar,   on 
it    are    innumerable     full-blown     lotuses   and     the     bees    are     humming 
always    over   them.     Many   birds,  swans,  Orandavas,  etc.,  are  swimming 
to  and  fro.     The    swaet    scents  of  lotuses   are    playing     all     round.     In 
fact,    the    whole    Manidvipa   is    perfumed    with     various    scented    things. 
Within   the    Sringara    Mvndapa,   the    Devi  Bhagavati  is  situated  in  the 
centre    on   an  Asana  (seat)  and  She  hears  the   songs   sung     in    4iune     by 
the  other   Davis    along    with  the    other     Devas.     Similarly    sitting     on 
the    Mukti    Mandapa,  Sli3    frees    the    JivAS    from   the      bondages    of   the 
world.     Sitting   on    the   Jnaua     Mandapa,     She    gives     instructions     on 
Jnana,   and    sitting    on    the   fourth    Ek\nta    Mandapa,  She  consults  with 
Her  ministers,  the  Sakhis,  Auanga  Kusuma,  etc  ,  on  the  creation,  preserva- 
tion, etc.,  cf  the    universe.     O  King  !   Now  I     shall      describe     about  the 
main,  Khas,  room  of  S'ri  Devi.  Listen.    The  Khas  Mahal  palace  of  the  Devi 
Bhagavati  is  named  5ri  ChintAmani  Griha.  Within  this  is  placed  the  raised 

1^9 


1186  ^Rt  xMAD  DEVt  BHAGAVATilM 

platform,  the  dais  and  sofa  whereon  the  Devi  taketh  Her  Qonourabla  seat. 
The  ten  S'akti-tattvaa  form  the  staircases.  The  four  legs  are  (1)  Brahma,  (2) 
Vi§nu,  (3)  Rudra,  and  (4)  Mahes'vara.  Sadaj'iva  forms  the  upper  covering 
plank.  Over  this  Sri  Bhuvanes'vara  Mahtl  Deva  or  the  Supreme  Architect 
of  the  Universe  is  reigning.  Now  hear  something  about  this  Bhuvanes'vara. 
Before  creation  while  intending  to  spcrfc,  the  Davi  Bhagavatt  divided  Her 
Body  into  two  parts  and  from  the  right  part  created  Bhuvanes'vara. 
He  has  five  faces  and  each  face  has  three  eyes.  He  has  four  hands 
and  He  is  holding  in  each  hand  deer,  signs  indicating  do  not  fear,  axe, 
and  signs  granting  boons.  He  looks  sixteen  years  old.  The  lustre  of 
of  His  Body  is  more  beautiful  then  Koti  Kandarpas  and  more  fiery 
than  thousand  Suns;  and  at  the  same-time  cool  like  Koti  Suns. 
His  colour  is  crystal  white,  and  on  His  left  lap  S'ri  Bhuvanes'vari 
Devi  is  always    sitting. 

18-29.  On  the  hip  of  Sri  BhuvanesVari,  is  shining  the  girdle  with 
small  tinkling  bells,  built  of  various  jewels  ;  the  ornaments  on  the  arms  are 
made  of  burnished  gold  studded  with  Vaiduryaraanis  j  the  Tatanka  orna- 
menis  on  Her  eara  are  very  baautiful  like  Srichakra  and  they  enhance 
very  much  the  beauty  of  Her  lotus  face.  The  beauty  of  Her  forehead 
vies  with,  or  defies  the  Moon  of  the  eighth  bright  lunar  day.  Her  lips  chal- 
lenge the  fully  ripened  Bimba  fruits.  Her  face  is  shiuing  with  the  Tilaka 
mark  made  of  musk  and  saffron.  The  divine  crown  on  Her  head  is  beau- 
tiSed  with  the  Sun  and  Moon  made  of  jewels;  the  nose  ornaments  are  like 
the  star  Venus  and  built  of  transparent  gems,  looking  exceedingly  beau- 
tiful and  shedding  charming  lustre  all  around.  The  neok  is  decorated 
with  necklaces  built  of  gems  and  jewels.  Her  breasts  are  nicely  decora- 
ted with  camphor  and  safifron.  Her  neck  is  shining  like  a  conchshell 
decorated  with  artistic  designs.  Her  teeth  look  like  fully  ripe  pomegra- 
nate fruits.  On  Her  head  is  shining  the  jewel  crown.  Her  lotus  face  is 
beautified  with  alaka  as  if  these  are  mad  bees.  Her  navel  is  beautiful  like 
the  whirls  in  the  river  Bhagirathi;  Her  fingers  are  decorated  with  jewel  rings; 
She  has  three  eyes  like  lotus  leaves  ;  the  lustre  of  Her  body  is  bright  like 
Padmaragamani  cut  and  carved  and  sharpened  on  stone.  The  bracelets  are 
adorned  with  jewel  tinkling  bells;  Her  neck  ornaments  and  medals  are 
studded  with  gems  and  jewels.  Her  hands  are  resplendent  with  the  lustre  of 
the  jewels  on  the  fingers  ;  the  braid  of  hair  on  Her  head  is  wreathed  with 
a  garland  of  Mallik^  flowers;  Her  bodice  (short  jacket)  is  studded  with 
various  jewels. 

30-45.  O  King  !  Sri  Devi  is  slightly  bent  down  with  the  weight  of  Her 
very  high  hard  breasts.  She  has  four  hands  and  She  is  holding  noose,  goad 
and  signs  granting  boons  and  "  fear,  do  not."  The  all-beautiful  all  mer- 
ciful Devi  is  full  of  love  gestures  and  beauties.  Her  voice  is  sweeter  than 
that   of   lute;  the  lustre   of  Her  body  ts  like  ^Kotis  and  Kotis  of  Suna  anl 


Book  XII.]  CIIAPrER  XII,  1187 

Moons  if  fchey  rise  siinuItaQeousIy  on  the  sky.  The  Sakhis,  attendants,  the 
Devas  and  the  Devis  surround  Her  on  all  side3.  lehoha  Sakbi,  Jnana  Sakti, 
and  Kriya  Sakti  all  are  present  always  before  the  Devi.  Lajja,  Tusti,  Pusti, 
Kirti,  Kanti,  Ksam^,  Daya,  Buddhi,  Medha,  Smriti,  and  Laksmi  are 
always  seen  here  incarnate  in  their  due  Forms.  The  nine  Pitha  Sakti?, 
Jnya,  Vijaya,  Ajita,  Aparajita,  NityS,  Vilasini,  DogdhrT,  Aghora,  and 
Mangala  reside  here  always  and  are  in  the  service  of  the  Devi  Bhuva- 
nes'vari.  On  the  side  of  the  Devi  are  the  two  oceans  of  treasures;  from 
these  streams  of  Navaratna,  gold,  and  seven  Dhatus  (elements)  go  out 
and  assume  the  forms  of  rivers  and  fall  into  the  ocean  Sudha  Sindhu. 
Because  such  a  Devi  BhavanesVari,  resplendent  with  all  powers  and 
prosperities,  sits  on  the  left  lap  of  Bhuvanes'vara,  that  He  has,  no  doubt 
acquired  His  omnipotence.  O  King!  Now  I  wiU  describe  the  dimensions 
of  the  Chintamani  Griha.  Listen.  It  is  one  thousand  Yojanas  wide; 
its  centre  is  very  big;  the  rooms  situated  further  and  further  are  twice 
those  preceding  them.  It  lies  in  Antariksa  (the  intervening  space) 
without  anv  support.  At  the  times  of  dissolution  and  creation  it  con- 
tracts and  expands  like  a  cloth.  The  lustre  of  this  Chintamani  Griha  is 
comparatively  far  more  bright  and  beautiful  than  that  of  other  enclosure 
walls.  Sri  Devi  Bhagavati  dwells  always  in  this  place.  O  King  !  All 
the  great  Bhaktas  of  the  Devi  in  every  Brahmanda,  in  the  Devaloka,  in 
Ka-'aloka,  in  the  world  of  men  or  in  any  other  loka,  all  those  that  were 
enc'aged  in  the  meditation  of  the  Devi  in  the  sabred  places  of  the  Devt 
and  died  there,  they  all  oome  here  and  reside  with  the  Devi  in  great  joy 
and  festivity. 

46-59.  On  all  sides  rivers  are  flowing;  some  of  ghee,  some  of  milk, 
curd,  honey,  nectar,  pomegranate  juice,  jambu  juice,  and  some  of  mango 
juice,  sugarcane  juices  are  flowing  on  all  sides.  The  trees  here  yield 
fruits  according  to  one's  desires  and  the  wells  and  tanks  yield  water  also 
as  people  desire.  Never  is  there  any  want  felt  hf.re  of  anything.  Never 
are  seen  here  diseases,  sorrow,  old  age,  decripitude,  anxiety,  anger 
jealousy,  and  envy  and  other  lower  ideas.  All  the  inhabitants  of  this 
place  are  full  of  youth  and  look  like  one  thousand  Suns.  All  enjoy  with  their 
wives  and  they  worship  Sri  Bhuvanes'vari.  Some  have  attained  SSIokya, 
some  SImipya,  some  Sarupya  and  some  have  attained  Sarsti  and  paes 
their  days  in  highest  comfort.  The  Devaa  that  are  in  every  Brahmanda 
all  live  here  and  worship  ^ri  Devi.  The  seven  Koti  Maha  Mantras  and 
Maha  Vidyas  here  assume  forms  and  worship  the  Maha  Maya  ia'ri  Bhaga- 
vati,Who  is  of  the  nature  of  Brahma.  O  King!  Thus  I  have  described 
to  vou  all  about  this  Manidvipa.  The  lustre  of  Sun,  Moon  and  Kotis  and 
Kotis  of  lio-htnings  cannot  bo  one  Kotieth  cf  one  Kiti  part  of  Its  lustre. 
At  some  places  the  lustre  is  like  Vidrumaraani ;  some  places  are  illumined 
like  the   lustre  of  Marakata  Mani;  some,  like  Sarya   Kanta  mani  and  eome 


li88  Silt  MAD  DEYI  BHAgAVATAM 

places  are  rendered  brilliant  like  Kotis  and  Kotls  of  ligbtcings.  The  ligbt 
at  some  places  is  like  Sindiira;  at  some  places  like  Indranilamani ;  at 
some  places,  like  Manikya,  and  at  some  places  like  diamond. 
Soma  places  are  blazing  like  the  conflag-ation  of  fire;  and  some 
places  look  like  molten  gold ;  some  places  seem  filled  with  the  lustre 
of  Chandrakantamani,  and  some  places  Icok  brilliant  like  Surya- 
kantamani. 

GO-73.     The    mountains    here     are    all    built    of   gems   and  jewels ;  the 
entrance   gates   and    enclosures   ara     built     of     gems      and    jewels  ;     the 
trees     and   their   leaves    all  are     of    gems ;   in    fact  all     that    exist   here 
are   all   of    gems    and    jewels      At   eome     places     numbers     of     peacocks 
are   dancin^ ;       at    eome   places   cuckoos    are    captivating    the     minds     of 
persons   by      cooing  in    the   fifth    tune    and    at    others   doves   and  pigeons 
and  parrots  are  making  sweet  cackling  sounds.       Lakhs  and  lakhs    of  tanks 
are  there    with   their   pure    crystal -like    waters.— The    Red   lotutes   have 
blewn   fu'ly    and   enhanced    tha    beauty    of    the    place.     The    captivating 
scents    of  these    lotuses    extend    to     a   distance     one     hundred     Yojanas 
all   round     and    gladden    the    minds    of   people.     The   leaves  are    rustling 
with    centle    breeze.     The    whole    sky     overhead     is      radiant    with     the 
lustre   of    Chintamani    gems    and  jewels.      All    the     sides    are  illuminated 
with  the   brilliancy    of   the    gems    and     jewels.     0  King  !     These  jewels 
act   like   lamps.     And   the    sweet  scented  trees  emit  their    fiagrance  and  it 
is  transmitted  by   breeze  all  around.     Thus  these  trees  serve  the  purpose  of 
dhup  (scent>.     The  rays  of   these  gems  pierce  th  rough    the' openings  of  the 
jewel     screens    on   the    houses    and    fall       on     the     mirrors     inside,    thus 
causing   a    nice     brilliant    appearance    that      captivates     the     mind     and 
causes    confusion.     O  King  !    And    what    shall  I    say     of    this   place,  more 
than   this,      that   all    the    powers,    and    wealth,    all    the   love  sentiments, 
all   the   dress   suited    to  amorous    interviews,    all    the      splendours,    fire 
energy,  beauty  and  brilliance,  the  omniscience,  the  indomitable  strength,  all 
the    excellent    qualities    and   all    mercy   and    kindness    are    present    here  ! 
The    All    Comprehending     Bliss    and    the    BrahmSnanda    can    always  be 
witnessed   here  !     O  King !   Thus    I    have    described    to    you     about     the 
Manidvipa,    the   most   exalted    place    of  the   Devi     Bhagavati.     At  Her 
remembrance  all  the  sins  are  instantly  destroyed.     The  more  so,    if   a  nan 
remembers   the    Devi    and     about    this    place  at   the   time  of  death.  He 
surely   goes   there.     O  King  1    He    who     daily    reads  the     five     Chapters 
t.   e.,   from    the    eighth    to    this    t  ^velfth  chapter,    is    surely     untouched 
by  any   obstacles   due    to    the    Bhutas,    Pretas    and  Pis^aehas.     Especia- 
lly,    the  recitation    of  this    at  the    time    of   building  a    new    house    and 
at   the   time   of  V^stuySga    ensures   all  good  and  auspiciousness. 


BcCK  Xll.]  CHAPTER  XIIT.  ]189 

Here  ends  the  Twelfth  Chapter  of  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the 
description  of  ManiDvipa  in  the  Mah^paranam  S'ri  Mad  Devi 
Bhagavatam    of   18,000    verses   dy   Mahar§i   Veda  Vyasa. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 
l-l.  Vyasa  said.' — "  O  King  Janamejaya  !  Thus  I  have  answered 
all  your  nice  querries ;  also  what  Narayana  spoke  to  the  highsouled 
Narada  is  also  said  by  me.  He  who  hears  this  greatly  wonderful 
Paraaam  S'ri  Devi  Bhagavatam  certainly  becomes  dear  to  the  Devi 
and  all  his  actions  become  fructified  with  success.  Now  as  regards  your 
mental  distress,  how  you  prevent  any  evil  falling  to  your  late  father  in  his 
future  life,  I  advice  you  to  do  the  Yajna  in  the  name  of  Bhagavati  ;  and  eer 
tainly  your  father  will  be  saved.  And  you  also  better  take  the  Most  Excellent 
Mantra  of  the  Mahfi  Devi  duly,  according  to  rules  ;  and  your  human  life 
will  then  be  crovs-ned  with  success  ;  (your  life  will  be  saved  ;  thus  you 
as  well  as   your  father  will   be  saved). 

5-12.  Suta  said:—"  O  Risis  !  Hearing  thus,  tlie  King  asked 
Vy4sa  Deva  to  initiate  in  the  Great  Devi  Mantra  and  thus  to  become 
his  Guru.  He  was  then  initiated  duly  according  to  rules  with  the 
Great  Mantra  of  Bhagavati  united  with  Pranava.  Whfn  the  Navaratra 
period  arrived,  he  called  Dhaumya  and  other  Brahmana?  and  perform- 
ed the  Navar5,tra  A^'rata  so  very  dear  to  the  Devi,  according  to  his 
state.  At  this  time  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Devi,  he  caused  this 
Devi  Bhagavata  Purana  to  be  read  by  the  Brahmanas  and  fed 
innumerable  Brahmanas  and  Ku maris  (virgins)  and  gave  in  charity  lots 
of  things  to  the  poor,  orphans,  and  the  Biahmin  boys  and  thus 
finished  the  Vrata.  O  Risis  !  Thus  completing  the  Devijajna,  while 
the  Kin»  was  sitting  on  his  seat,  the  fiery  Devarsi  Narada  came 
there  from  above  playing  with  his  lute.  Seeing  him  there,  all  on  a  sudden, 
the  King  got  up,  and  paid  due  respects  to  him  by  asking  him  to 
take  bis  seat,  with  other  necessary  things.  When  the  Devarsi  became 
relieved  of  his  labour  of  journey,  the  King  asked  him  about  his 
welfare   and   then    enquired   into  the   cause   of  his    coming   there. 

13-19.  O  Devar§i !  "Whence  and  what  for  are  you  now  coming  ? 
By  your  arrival  here  I  am  become  blessed  and  feel  that  my  Lord 
has  come  to  me  ;  now  what  can  I  serve  to  you  ;  kindly  command 
and  oblige.  Hearing  this,  the  Devarsi  Narada  said: — "  O  King  !  To- 
day I  saw  in  the  Devaloka  a  very  wonderful  event.  1  wanted  eagerly 
to  inform  that  to  you.  Hence  I  have  come  here.  Your  father  met 
with  a  bad  turn  of  fate  for  his  bad  action.  I  saw  to-day  he  assum- 
ed a  divine  form  and  he  was  going  on  a  chariot.  The  Devas  were 
praising  him  and  the   Apsar&s   were     encircliDg  him.     It     seemed     he 


1190  ^Rt  MAD  DEVl  BHAgAVATAM 

was  going  in  that  dress  to  the  Mani  Dvipa.  0  King  !  You  performed 
the  Navaratra  Vrata  and  read  the  Devi  Bhagavata  ;  it  seems,  as  a  result 
of  that,  your  father  has  now  been  rewarded  with  such  a  noble  and 
good  turn  of  fate.  Now  you  have  become  blessed  and  your  actiona 
have  borne  fruits.  You  have  delivered  your  fither  from  the  hell 
and  so  you  have  become  an  ornament  in  your  family.  To-day  your  name 
and  fame   have   extended   to    the   Devaloka. 

20-30.  Suta  said  : — 0  Risi-?  !  Hearing  these  words  from  the  mouth 
of  N§rada,  the  King  Janamejaya  became  very  much  happy  and  delighted 
and  fell  prostrate  at  the  feet  of  Vyasa  Dava  of  glorious  deeds  and  said  : — 
O  Best  of  Munis  1  By  Thy  Grace,  to-day  I  have  become  blessed.  Now  what 
return  can  I  pay  to  Thee  save  bowing  down  to  Thee.  I  pray  that  Thou 
dost  shew  such  favours  to  me  ever  and  anon.  ''  O  Riyis  !  Hearing 
these  words  of  the  King  Janamajiya,  VadarSyana  Veda  Vy^^a  blessed 
him  and  spoke  to  him  in  sweet  words  : — "  O  King  !  Now  leave  all  other 
actions.  Read  always  the  Devi  Bhagavata  and  worship  the  Lotus  Feet 
of  S'ri  Devi.  Leave  off  all  laziness  and  now  perform  the  Devi  Jajna  with 
great  ecl^t.  And  you  will  surely  be  able  to  cross  this  bondage  of  the 
world.  True  there  are  various  Puri\nas,  the  Visnu  Puran^,  the  S'iva 
PurSna,  but  those  cannot  compare  with  one  sixteenth  of  this  Devi 
Bh^gavatam.  In  fact,  this  Purina  is  the  Essence  of  all  the  Puranas 
How  can  ihe  other  PurSnas  be  compared  with  this,  wherein  is  establish 
ed  the  Devi  Mul&  Prakriti  ?  Reading  this  Purclna  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end  yields  the  result  of  reading  the  Veda?.  So  the  wise  persons 
should  try  their  best  to  study  it  always.  Thus  saying  to  Janamejaya, 
Veda  VySsa  departed.  Theu  the  pure  minded  Dhaumya  and  the  other 
Brahmanas  highly  praised  the  Devi  Bhagavatam  and  went  to  their 
desired  places.  And  the  King  Janamejaya,  on  the  other  hand,  began 
to  read  and  hear  always  the  Devi  Bhagavatam  and  spent  his  days 
happily  in  governing  his   kingdom. 

Here  end  the  Thirteenth  Chapter  of  the  Twelfth  Book  on  the  des- 
cription of  Janamejaya's  Devi  Yajna  in  the  Mah^  Purinam  S'ri  Mad 
Devi  Bhilgavatam   of   18000    verses  by  Maharsi    Veda  VySsa. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1-17.  Suta  p'^id  : — "  O  Risis  !  In  days  of  yore,  from  the  Lotus 
Face  of  the  Devi  Bhagavati  came  out  S'ri  Mad  Bhagavatam  in  the  form 
of  half  a  Sloka,  as  the  decided  conclusion  of  the  Vedas.  About  what  She 
gave  instructions  to  Visnu,  sleeping  on  a  leaf  ot  a  Banyan  tree,  that  same 
thing,  the  seed  of  the  S'ri  Mad  Bhagavata,  Brahma  Himself  expanded  into 


Boos  XII.]  CHAPTER  XIV  Uol 

oae  huodrei  Koti  s'loka?.     Than,  VeJa  Vya^i,   in  order  to  teach    his   own 
soa  oaka  Dava,  ojodeased  them  into  eighteen  thousand  s'lokas,   in  Twelve 
Books  and  named  it  S'ri    Mad   Devi   Bh^gavatam,    the  present   volume. 
That    voluminous    book  comprising    one   hundred     Koti  s'lokas    compiled 
by  Brahma   are    still    extant   in    the   Dava    loka.     There  is    no     Purana 
like  the  Devi    Bh^gavatam,  so  merit-giving,  holy   and  capUble  to  destroy 
all  the  sins.     The  reading  of  every  line  yields    the   fruits    of  performing 
many  AsVamedha  sacrifices.  Human  beings  addicted  to  vsrordly  affairs  will 
get  the  merit  of  giving  lands  to  the  Brahmanas  and    they   will   enjoy   also 
all   the  pleasuresfof  the  world  and  in  the  end  will  go  to   the  region  of  the 
Devi,  if  they  can  hear,    after  they  have  fasted    and  controlled   their  pas- 
sions,  the  recitation    of  this    Puranam    from    the    mouth  of  a   Pauranik 
Br^hmana,    who  has  been  worshipped  and  given  clothings  and  ornaments 
and  is  considered  as  a  second  Veda    Vyasa.     Or,   if  any   body    writes   the 
whole   of  the    Devi  Bhagavatam    with  his  own   hand    or  gets  it  written 
by  a  writer   from   the   beginning   to   the  end   and   gives    to   a  Pauranik 
Brahmin  the    book  placed  in  a  box  of  the  form  of  a   lion  made  up  of  gold 
and  a  cow  yielding    milk  with  her    calf  with   gold   as  his    sacrificial  fee  ; 
or  if  he  feeds  as  many   Brahmanas  as  there  are  the   number   of  chapters 
of  the  Devi  Bh^gavatam   and  worship    as    many  Kum^ris    (virgin    girls) 
with    saffron,  sa^dalpaste    and  ornaments    and  feeds  them    with  Paysinna, 
he  gets  the    merits    of  giving  lauds  end    enjoys   all  the    pleasures  of  tho 
world  and  goes  in    the   end  to    the     region    of  the   Devi.     He    has    no 
want  of  any    thing    who     daily     hears     with   rapt   devotion   this    Devi 
Bhacavatam.    One  who  has  no  wealth  gets  abundance  of  wealth,  those  who 
are  students  get  knowledge,  one  who  has  no  sons,  gets  sons  if  one  hears  this 
Devi  Bhao-avatam  with  true  devotion.     A  barren  woman,  or  one  who  bears 
still-born  children  or  whose  offsprings    never  live  long  or  who  bears    only 
a  single   child,  gets   all   her   defects     removed,    if   she    hears    this   Devi 
Bhagavatam.     with  a. steadfast   devotion.     The    house  where  this  PurSna 
is  worshipped,  Laksmi  and  Sarasvati  dwell  there,  leaving  their  animosities 
towards   each     other.       By     the     influence    of    this    Devi    Bhagavat:im 
the  Dakinis,  Vetalas,  Rakgases,  and  other     ghosts  can  not   cast   a   glance 
even  on   its  devotee.     If  any  body  gets  fever  and  if  the  ^ri  Devi    Bhaga- 
vatam  be  read  touching  him  with  a  concentrated  attention,    all    the   com- 
plaints  disappear.     By  reading  this  Bhagavatam,  one    hundred  times  even 
more  difficult  than  the  severe  disease  pthisis     is  cured. 

18-20-  Tf  after  performing  theSandhyst,  one  reads  only  one  chapter  of  this 
abagavatam  with  a  collected  mind,  he  soon  acquires  the  Real  Knowledge. 
O  Muni  ^aunaka !  While  going  to  read  this  Bhlgavatam,  first  examine 
omens  and  th-^n  read.  I  have  spoken  already  on  this  subject.  If 
durin^  the      S'^radiya    Puja    (the     autumnal    Durg^    Pfija),    at    the 


Il92  ^Elt  MVD  DEVt  B[iIg.VVATAM  . 

Navar^tra  period,  one  reads  with  devotion  this  Bhagavatam,  the  Devi 
Bhagvati  bccames  greatly  pleased  and  awards  him  results  more  than 
his  desires. 

21-31.      During  the  Navaratri  period  all  can  read  well  this  book   for  the 

satisfaction    of  Jiis    Ista  Deva  (his    own  deity)   whether  he  be  a    Vaisnava, 

S'aiva,  Saura,  GSnapatya  or  a  S'akta.  All  can  read  this  for  the  satisfaction 

of  Lakstnt,  Uma    and    other    Saktis.     The     Vaidik      Br^hmanas     are  to 

recite   this  daily   for  the  satisfaction  of  the    Devi  G^yatri.    This  Puranam 

is  not  contradictory  to  any    sectarian  balief.     The     reason    of     this    being 

that  to    whatever    deity    he   pays  his    worship,    he    must     worship  some 

S'akti   or      other,  this   is    stated    every  where.     So    for     the     satisfaction 

of  one's     own   S'akti,    all    cau    read    this,     without     contradicting     each 

other.     Never    any    woman  nor    any  S'udra    is    to    read     this    herself  or 

himself,    even     out    of    ignorance  ;    rather  they     should     hear   this     from 

the    mouth       of      a     Brahmana.     This    is    the        rule      of  the      S'^stras. 

(The  vibrations  aud  thG  consaqiient  results  would  be  truer  then.)     0  Risis  ! 

What  more  to  say      on    this     book       than      this,  that  this  Puranam      is 

the  most  excellent  of  all  and  yields  great  merits.      It  is  the    essence    of  the 

Vedas.      This    I   tell   you  with  great  certainty.      There  is    not     the    least 

doubt   in   this.    Reading  or   hearing    this    yields      results     equivalent     to 

reading  or    hearing  the  Vedas.     I  now  bow  to  the  Devi     of    the  nature  of 

tlrim  and  established  by  Gayatri,  of  the    nature  of  Everlasting  Existence, 

Intelligence  and    Bliss,  Who  stimulates  our   activities  to  the  understanding 

of   various   subjects.     Thus   hearing  the    excellent     words    of      Sufca,    the 

great     Pauranik,     all     the     Munis    of      Naimisaranya     worshipped    him 

specially  and  as  the  result  of   hearing    this     Puranam      glady  became  the 

servants  of  the  Lotus  Feet)  of  the  Devi  and  they  attained  the  Highest  Rest. 

The    Munis   expressed   their    humility   and  gratitude    to    Suta   frequantly 

and  bowed  down    to    him   again  and  again.     And    they   said: — ^"  O  Suta  ! 

It  is   you    that    have    saved   us    from  this    oeean     of  world."     Thus    (the 

great    Bhigavata)  Suta,    the  bee   drinking  the    honey    of  the    Lotus  Feet 

of  the  Devi,    recited    before  the    assemblage    of     the    best    of     the    Munis 

this    Puranam  from  the  beginning    to    the     end,     the    Secret   of  aU    the 

Nigamas    and   full  of   the    Glories    of  the  Devi      Bhagavati.     After     this 

the    Risis     bowed   down    to    him   and    he     blessed    and     honoured   them. 

Then  he  went  away  io  his  desired  place.     Here  the  Devi  Bhagavatam 

ends  and  is  fully  completed. 

The    End. 
Here   ends    the    Fourteenth   Chapter    of     the     Twelfth  Book    on     the 
recitation   of  the    fruits    of     this     Purslnara     in   the  Maha  Puranam    ^ri 
Mad    Devi  Bhagavatam  of  18,000  verses  by  Maharsi    Veda  VyAsa. 

Here   ends  as  well   the     Full     Treatise,   ^ri    Mad   Devi   Bhagavatam, 
Ora.  Ora.   Om.   Om  Tat   Sat.     Om.  Hari   Oni, 


¥m  3    mi. 


BL  Pursnas.      Devibhagevata 

1135  S rimed  Devi  Bhagsvatam 

P723A1S 
pt.3 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


