===== Internet Archive OCR: Ekanath.Bhaktalilamrita_djvu.txt =====

The Poet-Saints of Maharashtra 


No. 2 


EKNATH 


A TRANSLATION 


FROM THE BHAKTALILAMRITA 


BY 


JUSTIN E. ABBOTT 


Coenen aan yereanceneneenmeenerd 
ernest 


WENT HAAATATST 
wiftea ¥. steamer gas “Arata 
a. 2 
CETy 
WHATS, BeaTT 22 TF Ww 


CEEOL 
Printed and published by the Scottish Mission Industries Co., Ltd., 
(J. R. Eason, Manager), at the Orphanage Press, 

East Street., Poona—1927 


SDAA RARE RRR PTCA COCR 


DEDICATED 


TO THE MEMORY OF MY BELOVED WIFE, 
CAMILLA, 


who died at Miraj June 26th, 1921 
who shared with me interest in the 
Poet-saints of Maharashtra; who 
visited with me the shrines of Dnya- 
neSvara, Namdeva, Janardan, Eknath, 
Tukaram and Ramdas, at Alandi, 
Pandharpur, Devagiri, Paithan Dehu, 
Parali, and other places dear to the 
Indian heart; who, wherever she 
went, left a kindly memory; whose 
last conscious words were. 


* We must do more to make this 
a better and a happier world.” 


PREFACE. 


In my volume on Bhanudas, the first in the Poet- 
saints of Maharashtra Series, I indulged in a rather lengthy 
Preface, covering the whole ground of my purpose and 
plans regarding the Series. A resumé of that Preface is 
all that seems necessary here. 


In that Preface I called attention to the fact that I 
felt there was moral value in the stories of the Maratha 
Saints, and that that fact had influenced me to make these 
translations. For these translations I had chosen the 
oldest original sources, or at least those that were the best 
expression of tradition. I paid my respects to Mahipati, who 
collected the old stories, and rewrote them in his own 
graphic style. I briefly discussed the question of the his- 
toric character of these stories, and the confused subject 
of chronology. I confessed to difficulties in the path of 
these translations, and of their production in India. But 
I expressed my confidence in the generosity and courtesy 
of my Indian readers, to whom I was offering these flowers, 
if I may be permitted so to call them. I made my 
namaskar to those Marathi scholars who have done so 
much for the old Marathi literature, and expressed my 
thanks to Dr. Nicol Macnicol for his extreme kindness 
in seeing these translations through the press. 


ii EKNATH 


As a special preface to this volume on Eknath the 
following points may be referred to. 


The reader may ask why I translated Mahipati’s 
account in the Bhaktalilamrita, when that account is but 
the same story as that told by KeSavaswami, only rewritten 
in Mahipati’s own words. The truthful answer is that I 
had already translated it before I was properly aware of 
KeSavaswami’s version, and the relation of Mahipati’s 
Bhaktalilamrta to it. However, Mahipati’s version has 
this advantage that the story of Eknath is more interestingly 
told. And moreover the slight differences between his 
account and that of Kesava may possibly be accounted for; 
because of access to other traditions, such as he used when 
twelve years before he wrote the short and incomplete 
account of Eknath in his Bhaktavijaya. To this may be 
added the advantage of using Mahipati’s Bhaktalilamrita 
account as it is the popular version for all modern 
references to Eknath. The two modern Eknéth charitras 
by Sahasrabuddhe and Pangarkar and Ajgaonkar in 
Marathi are but resumés of this Bhaktalilamrita account. 


A few words regarding Mahipati, the author of the 
Bhaktalilamrita will not be out of place. He was born 
at Taharabad in the Rahuri Taluka of the Ahmednagar 
District in the year 1715. He was early inclined to the 
religious life, but the death of his father necessitated his 
engaging in secular affairs. He was for a time a Govern- 
ment servant, but finding his worldly duties interfering 
with his religious inclinations he gave up the former. His 
interest centered on the lives of the Maratha Saints, and 
his writings are nearly all on that subject. He is the 
author of many works, but the two for which he is especially 


EKNATH tik: 


known are the Bhaktavijaya, completed in 1762, and the: 
Bhaktalilamrita completed in 1774. (See Maharashtra 
Sarasvata by Mr. V. L. Bhave, first edition, page 372, on: 
Mahipati.) 


It would have been possible to add to my translation 
any number of references and footnotes. They would 
have interested scholars, but would be a burden to the 
ordinary reader, and certainly a burden to the writer, who 
feels his time and strength can be better employed. 


I am aware of many defects connected with these 
translations and accompanying notes. The reader will, 
however, bear in mind that hitherto little has been done 
to give to English readers a knowledge of the lives of the 
Maratha saints. A pioneer has always difficulties that do 
not beset the path of those who follow. Edwards’ Life 
of Tukdram, and the Poems of Tukdradm, translated by 
Fraser and Marathe, are the only attempts hitherto made 
that give a full account of a Maratha saint, and his works. 
Short resumés of the lives of the most prominent of the- 
Maratha saints appear in many works, and in many his- 
tories of the Maratha people. Tales of the Saints of 
Pandharpur by C. A. Kincaid is a condensation of stories 
from the Bhaktavijaya (the story of Eknath is strangely 
omitted.) Dr. Nicol Macnicol has very effectively put 
into English verse many of the lines of the Maratha poets. 
But so far as I am aware no English writer has taken up: 
an exhaustive study of the whole field of the Maratha. 
saints. In therefore leading the way by means of transla- 
tions of the original sources I have met with difficulties of | 
many kinds, and I am only too well aware of the imperfec- 
tions of my work. But, if my efforts bring about a better - 


‘iv EKNATH 


acquaintance with the Maratha saints, my real object will 
“have been accomplished, and the path will be easier for 
‘those who follow me. 


My own feeling regarding Eknath is that, although 
he does not enjoy the popularity of Tukaradm as to his 
writings, in character, in ideals, in learning, in the consis- 
tency and nobleness of his life, he is the greatest of the 
Maratha poet-saints. I have already expressed the opinion 
that these traditional stories, told by Mahipati and others, 
are not necessarily exact history, but rather history plus 
the variations that have come about as they were handed 
down from mouth to mouth, and yet that are in keeping 
with the impression which the man made on his generation. 
That impression is after all the important thing, and there 
Eknath excels. 


Justin E. Assort, 

Summit, N. J., 
U.S. A. 

April 1926. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE. 
PREFACE ose oes wee we 
Lire oF EXNATH ... ase eve . I 


GLOSSARY eos ase wae o. 271 


SRI EKNATH CHARITRA. 
THE LIVE OF EKNATH. 


As told by the poet Mahipati in his Bhaktalilamrita, 


Chapters thirteen to twentyfour. 
CHAPTER 13. 
MAHIPATY’S INVOCATION. 


1. Obesiance to Sri Ganesa! Victory, Victory to the 
Brother-of-the-Helpiess, Husband-of-Rukmini, Tender- 
lover-of-Bhaktas, Ocean-of-Mercy, Sea-of-Compassion, 
Deliverer-of-the-lowly, Lord  of-All, Pandurang. 2. 
All-Auspicious, Supreme-lord-of-the-Auspicious, Beyond- 
all-Evil, | Lord-of-the-Senses, Saviour-of-the-Universe, 
Lord-all-Supreme, Indivisible One, Guru-of-the-World. 
3. Victory to Thee, Thou, who-makest-the-intellect-to 
act, Pure-Intelligence, Internal-Light, Slayer-of-Madhu, 
Thou, who-art-beyond-Maya, Thou, in-whom-the-ginas- 
exist. Thou, both-nirguna-and saguua, Ocean-of-Jov, 
4, Thou takest great delight in the deeds of the bhaktas. 
In their distresses Thou comest in person to their relief. 
Thou doest miraculous deeds in the sight of men. And 
these deeds become beautiful subjects of thy praise. 5 Plac- 
ing therefore, the trust of my heart in Thee, I have begun 


2 EKNATH 


this Bhaktalilamrita. Do thou carry the whole work to 
completion, enabling it to escape the many possible disasters. 
6. I indeed lack intellect, Iam dull of understanding; I 
do not know the right meaning of words, and their gram- 
matical relations. I am ignorant of how to use proper 
language for a book. 7. But if the Almighty takes one by 
the hand, who will show him slight. Just as when the 
iron is touched by the touchstone (parisa) its value becomes 
great. 8. So by Thy favour, O Husband-of-Rukmini, my 
uncouth language will become acceptable, for I, a humble 
man, am dull of understanding, as all men know. 
9, Thou, in reality, art the holder of the guiding string, 
as I know most certainly in my heart. So now giving me 
the assurance that I need not fear, cause me to relate the 
hife of thy bhaktas. 


THE CHILDHOOD OF EKNATH. 


10. In the last chapter there was related the delight- 
ful story of the discussion which took place between Kabir, 
a worshipper of Ram, and Rohidas, a worshipper of 
Krishna. 11. Now, you good people, reverently listen to 
the delectable tale of Eknath of Partishthana, who appeared 
among men as an avatdra of Vishnu. 


12. Sri Bhanudas, chief jewel of bhaktas, who 
brought back the image of Panduranga, had a son of noble 
character. His name was Chakrapani. 13. Chakrapani’s 
son was Suryanarayana, lustrous through the brilliancy of 
his knowledge. His wife, of noble character, had the name 
of Rukmini. 14. To Rukmini was born in the Kali Yuga, 
for the good of the Universe, Eknath, image of the supreme 


EKNATH 3 


Brahma, the Guru-of-the-World in visible form, 15. 
While Eknath was still a child, both his father and his 
mother died, and he was cared for by his grandfather 
Chakrapani. 16. And they being grandfather and grand- 
mother, they fondled him and seeing that the child had 
many noble qualities they were both very happy. 


17. Eknath did not enjoy the ordinary games of 
children. Instead, he would so arrange his marbles as to 
represent gods, and would offer them flowers. 18. He 
would place on his shoulder a ladle, and pretend it was a 
lute. Then in his lisping words he would invoke the King- 
of-Heaven. 19. Sometimes the Haridis would come, 
performing kirtans. Eknath would listen attentively, then 
repeating the same words, he would dance in ecstasy. 20. 
And God, seeing his simple faith, would reveal himself in 
the marbles. The Husband-of-Rama, hungry for the 
worship of men, took his abode in the marbles, 21. He 
was always repeating the names of God “Ram, Krishna, 
Hari, Govinda, Achyiita, Ananta, Aanadakanda, Sri 
Govinda, Guru-of-the-World.” 22. He used to take a 
little stick in his hand, and with an old rag make it into 
a banner. He would then carry it on his shoulder, saying, 
“I am off for Pandhari.” 23. Seeing these signs of piety 
while in his childhood, his grandparents took great com- 
fort in him. He was always repeating the names “ Ram, 
Ram,” never ceasing for a moment. 24, Eknath was not 
at all like other children, who were always complaining, 
even when there was no reason for doing so. 25. He was 
ever happily content with whatever sweetmeat was given 
him. Thus those signs appeared in him now, which were 
to be characteristic of him in the future. 26. Chakrapani 


4 EKNATH 


once said to his wife, “My father, Bhanudas, was once 
worshipping before the image of Pandurang, and the Glori- 
ous-lord showed him his favor. 27. Vithoba said to him, 
“Bhanudas, ask some boon of me.” Bhanudas replied, 
“Become an avatéra in my family. I have no other 
desire.” 28. The Husband-of-Rukmini, hearing this 
request, said, “It shall be so.” And now it seems to me, 
that it is really He who has become an avatéra in Eknath, 
29. His wife replied, “Your surmise is true. This child, 
of such noble character, is not a mere human being. If 
his father and mother were but living, they would look 
upon him with contended eyes.” 30. And as she thus 
spoke, the memory of her own son came back 
to her. She became choked with emotion, and tears 
flowed from her eyes. 31. But at the same time the 
grandmother took courage, and exclaimed, “If only 
this remnant of our family line lives, he will be 
the saviour of our family, and bring us safely to 
the Hereafter.” 32. Thus comforting herself, she 
tenderly cared for her grandson. When he was six years 
of age they lovingly invested him with the sacred thread. 
33. Eknath conducted thimself exactly as the family 
Guru instructed him. He regularly performed the thrice- 
a-day devotions, with the prescribed ceremonies. 34. He 
attended regularly to his morning toilet, to the use of the 
clay, and the washing of his feet. Before bathing he 
would not so much as drink water. While eating he would 
not utter a single word. 35. If his Brahmana guru told 
him to commit something to memory, he would quietly 
take up the Pavamana stotrau. It was no painful effort 
for him to commit it to memory. 36. His grandfather 
taught him at home the cursive handwriting (pishacha lipt, 


EKNATH 5 


modi.) He acquired that knowledge also without any 
difficulty. 37. In all his conduct Eknath was remarkable. 
He had no liking for the ordinary worldly life. He acted 
as one would, when born in a Vaishnava family. 38. One 
of noble character is born only in a noble family. All 
praise such. All honor such. The times are propitious to 
such an honoured one. Such an onc has no restlessness of 
soul even in his dreams. 39. And he who is free from rest- 
lessness of soul is one to be recognized as a bhakta of 
Vishnu. It is to such that Bhakti comes to serve, and all the 
Siddhis become his slaves. 40. Well, enough of such general 
remarks. Eknith’s life was beyond compare. He loved 
the worship of Sri Ram. People wondered at him. 41. 
They would exclaim. ‘In years he is so young, and yet 
his heart seems always indifferent to the things of this 
world. He will not listen to funny stories and jests. He 
would rather listen to the reading of the Puranas. 42. 
In repeating slokas, and in explaining their meaning, he 
never makes the least mistake. And as he eagerly repeats 
them, even the distinguished Twice-born listen to him with 
delight. 43. They say he is a yogabhrashta. He has 
thorough knowledge of the Vedanta philosophy. He has 
become an avatdra in human form, to bring full salvation 
to the world.” 44. Whenever Eknath had an opportunity 
of being alone with his pandit he would ask questions. © And 
as the Brahmana pandit listened to the questions he became 
dumbfounded, and would exclaim “Our knowledge has 
beer. taught us. 45. By study we have acquired our 
conversancy with the contents of the Puranas, for the 
purpose of gaining a livelihood. His expressions do not 
come within our experience. Eknath, your questions are 
most extraordinary. 46. A little pond looks like a great 


6 EKNATH 


lake, so long as the ocean is not seen. So our knowledge, 
in fact, is insignificant before yours, Eknath. 47. As 
the light of the fire fly at once and naturally vanishes before 
the glare of a Jamp, so I listen to your questions, but cannot 
comprehend their full meaning. 48. The stars are beauti- 
ful only so long as the Husband-of-Rohini (the moon) has 
not arisen. So in the presence of your questions my 
mental activities cease. 49. So long as one has not seen 
the nectar of the gods, one places the marvels of medical 
remedies first. So, as I listen to your questions I am too 
confused to reply. 50. Or as when the sun rises, the 
moon looks as pale as a cloud. So my words pale before 
your knowledge.” 51. When thus lauded by the Purdmir, 
Eknath would make a namaskar and say, “ My words are 
but those of a child. Do not be angry with me.” 52. The 
Purdnik would then eagerly arise, and tenderly caress his 
face, saying, “ One should wave the salted imb leaves over 
your noble character. 53. You look like the statue of 
the Supreme Brahma, and yet you manifest the acts of a 
child. It is my good fortune to see you with my own eyes, 
and my worldly existence has thereby become a fruitful 
one.” 54, Eknath replied, “If I should have doubts in 
my mind, to whom should I go for an answer? Tell me 
at once now.” 55, The Pundit answered, “In this life 
below one should have the intimacy of a Sadguru. Only 
thus can the snare of this life be truly broken, and the 
coming and going through birth and death be avoided.” 
56. No sooner did Eknath hear these words, than his 
heart was pierced by them, and he exclaimed, “With un- 
divided devotion I must go to the feet of a sadguru. 57. 
The Sadguru pervades the entire Universe. No space 
is seen empty of him. Yet one should seek for him in a 


EKNATH 7 


visible sagun form, and serve him day and night.” 58. 
With this fixed purpose in mind Eknath was ever thinking, 
“When will such a Svami greet my sight!” And this was 
his great concern day and night. He now cared for nothing 
else. 


EKNATH MEETS JANARDANPANT. 


59. Now it happened one day that Eknath had gone 
into the temple of Siva. It was during one of the watches 
ef the night, and there all alone he was lovingly worship- 
ping. 60. In his heart was the great longing that a 
Sadguru might appear to his sight. When suddenly he 
heard a divine voice, saying to him, 61. “In Fort 
Devagiri there is one named Janardanpant, who has 
received the favor of discipleship from Sri Datta. Go 
and see him.” 62. When Eknath heard this heavenly 
voice, he was filled with joy, and at once started off alone, 
and without even taking the leave of his grandparents. 63. 
As one in the heat of Summer, overcome with thirst, goes 
searching for water, and plunges in it, so Eknath longed 
to meet his Sadguru. He no longer had the least bodily 
consciousness. 64, Or as a hungry child goes searching 
for its mother, so Eknath longed; saying, “I must mect 
Janardanpant.” 


EKNATH HEARS A HEAVENLY VOICE. 


65. Devagiri was five yojanas from Paithan. Walk- 
ing that distance eagerly, he arrived at the home of the 
Sadguru. 66. The door keeper stopped him, and would 
not allow him to enter, but going within said to Janardan, 


EKNATH 


“Some one has come, who claims to be a disciple of yours. 
67. He wishes to see you. His name is Ekoba.” Janar- 
dan now bethought himself of certain signs, and said to 
himself, “To day’s omens have been very good. 68. My 
right eyelid has been drooping to-day. My arm twitches 
every now and then. Some good man must have come 
here to see me.” ‘With this he at once arose. 69. And 
hurrying to the door saw the heroic Vaishnava. Janardan 
embraced him and his eyes filled with tears. 70. Eknath 
seeing the Sadguru, made him a sashtdig namaskér, and 
said, “Let me ever remain here in your service, and give 
me the assuring blessing that I need not fear.” 71. Then 
putting palm to palm, he added, “O Sadguru, you whi are 
pure Intelligence, care for the honour of your bhaktas, 
receive me into your care. I have come as one who has 
no cther refuge. 72. Desires, longings, troublesome 
thoughts grow excessively within me. The six foes of the 
soul are tormenting me greatly. Oh save my soul.” 73. 
As the Sadguru recognized these evidences of penitence, 
he deeply rejoiced, and drawing Eknath closely to his 
heart, lovingly embraced him, 74. Exclaiming, “ By 
association with you my own life will attain its true pur- 
pose.” This exclamation made Eknath rejoice. He felt 
the kind of happiness that accompanies love. 75. As the 
child Dhruva, who had sulked, and was wandering alone 
in the forest, rejoiced when the Muni Narada met him, 
76. So it happened to Eknath when he met Janardana. 
He lost thought of body, home, and self, in the happiness 
of his soul. 77. The Sadguru, then taking Eknath by 
the hand led him inside the house, and immediately gave 


EKNATH 9 


him something to eat. 78. Janardan said to himself, 
“This Eknath is truly a divine avatéra, not a human 
being. My good fortune is most extraordinary.” 


EKNATH SERVES JANARDAN. 


79. Eknath, intent on serving his sadguru ministered 
to him in every kind of service, high and low. He allowed 
himself to fail in nothing whatever. 80. He became one 
who looked upon all the animate and inanimate creation 
from the standpoint of being Atma. This being his state 
of mind, hear now in detail how Eknath served his sadguru. 
81. He used to arise while the night still lacked four 
ghattkas, for his morning’s repetition of the names of God. 
After performing his toilet, and rinsing out his mouth, he 
began the house-worship. 82. He took the broom eagerly 
in his hands, and with his own hands swept the house. 
Gathering the sweepings in a basket he would throw them 
far away, all the while most happy. 83. While the men 
servants and maid servants were fast asleep he would be 
smearing the floors, bringing out the vessels used in worship, 
and polishing them with his own hands. 8&4. When 
Janardan awoke, Eknath would bring him the water for 
his toilet, and place the bath board for the washing of his 
feet. 85. He never failed in having ready the clay, the 
tooth stick, the warm water for his bath, and the cold 
water for rinsing out his mouth. 86. He would also 
place in readiness the materials used in the worship of 
God, the flowers and the tulsi. After doing this Eknath 
would take his own bath, and plait his guru’s dhotar. 87. 
Eknath would then hand to Janardan the water for his 


10 EKNATH 


bath, and stand ready at hand with dhoter and scarf. 88. 
He would wring out the wet cloth, used for wiping, and 
eagerly place his shoes before him, All this he did in the 
fulness of his love. 89. The Sadguru had an abundance 
of servants, but Eknath thought of himself as Janardan’s 
one and only servant. He wanted to do all there was to 
‘be done, and he did it with a joy that was accompanied 
with love. 90. When the Svdémi sat down for his Vishnu 
worship, Eknath would lovingly prepare the fragrant 
pigments, and place near at hand the offerings to be made, 
the incense, the lights, the five-light platter. 91. When 
Eknath saw his sadguru sitting in the act of meditation, 
what did this good disciple do, but go and sweep his Guru’s 
bedroom and deftly arrange his bed. 92. He would spread 
out the bedding carefully. He prepared the Vide and 
placed it on the tray. Lovingly he washed out Janardan’s 
spitoon, and placed it near him. 93. While the Sadguru 
‘sat at his meals, Eknath would drive away the flies. He 
would then eat with supreme happiness what his Guru 
had left on his plate, 94. Remarking, “If I eat a great 
deal I shall become lazy, and so fail in my duties to my 
Svdmi.” He therefore ate very sparingly. 95. He 
would himself pass the Vida to his Svami, and stand before 
him with palm joined to palm. If the Svdémi went to his 
bed for rest, Eknath would massage his feet. 96. He 
was ready on every occasion. He failed in nothing. In 
this service months and years went by, but he never wearied. 
97. In his great joy of service Eknath felt that the 
authority to serve his Guru was his alone, and that so long 
as he lived he should have no partner in that service. 98. 


EKNATH 11 


He kept all the domestic accounts in an account bock, 
and he never made an error. In years he was young, it is 
true, but in intelligence he was great. 99. In thus devot- 
ing himself with enthusiasm to his Sadguru’s service he 
made worldly cares, and the Supreme purpose of life, one. 
The act of worship and himself as worshipper, he made one. 
All difference absolutely vanished. 100. When Janardan 
once questioned Eknath, saying, “You have left your 
mother and father, and are living here with me, but how 
are they faring?” 101. Eknath replied, “My mother and 
father are both dead. My Grandfather and grandmother 
are living at Paithan. I left them to come here. ' 102. 
There is no duty more important than the service of a 
Svami.”_Eknath did not permit in his thought the memo- 
ries of the past. In his loving emotions he was whole- 
heartedly his Guru’s. 103. The service of a Sadguru, 
that is Japa. The service of a Sadguru, that is tapa. 
And increase of wrong conception here, one should feel to 
be sin. 104. Eknath, the loving bhakta, so longed for his 
Sadguru’s blessing that in his love he regularly drank the 
contents of Janardan’s spitoon. 105. He would rechew 
the témbal that Janardan had chewed, and he regarded the 
nectar of Brahma as inferior to it. But what his feelings 
were on these occasions he told no one. 106. While 
Janardan would be reading aloud the Amritanubhava and 
the Dnyaneshvari, Eknath would listen with delight and 
with fixed attention. 107. It was Janardan’s habit to 
‘complete his regular morning’s duties and then to visit the 
king. After finishing his various official duties he would 
return home. 


12 EKNATH 


EKNATH SUBSTITUTES HIMSELF FOR 
JANARDAN. 


108. Now it happened one day, when it was about 
the fourth ghatika, that a great invading army suddenly 
arrived to capture Devagiri. 109. Spies announced that a 
certain enemy of the king was approaching with an army. 
The king fell into a great fright. 110. The mace-bearers 
hurried to the house of Janardan, to tell him that a great 
invading army had arrived, and that he should come at 
once. 111. Now Janardan had just completed his ablu- 
tions and devotions, and was sitting in meditation. To 
convey to him the news at such a time would be overstep- 
ping the grounds of propriety. 112. Eknath, an avatar 
able for miraculuos deeds, now performed a miracle. He 
assumed the form of Janardan, but no one, other than 
himself, was aware of the fact. 113. He hurriedly put 
on the garments of his Svdémi, and changed his own form 
to that of his. He took his dagger in hand and sat in his 
palanguin. 114. In his talk and carriage he differed not 
in the least from his guru. He went to the king’s council 
and learned all the news. 115. The royal patron was in 
great perplexity. “A great invading army has arrived,” 
he said. “Now what plan shall we adopt?” Eknath 
listened and replied. 116. “By the might of your good’ 
deeds I will conquer the enemy in no time.” So saying 
he gave his command to the generals, “Be ready imme- 
diately.” 117. And with this order he had the kettle- 
drums beaten. Instruments of music gave out their 
various sounds, and the army marched forward out of 
the city. 118. Eknath, an avatdr able for miraculous 
deeds, now showed to the enemy his wonderful power. 


EKNATH 13 


His own army was very small, but to the enemy it seemed 
very great. 119. The arrows now flew sana sana. The 
weapons clashed khana khana. The spirit of heroism rose 
high. Slaughter raged violently. 120. The struggle 
lasted four ghatikas. The sky became clouded with dust, 
and still the Vaishnava hero had not ended his assault. 
But now the whole invading army began to flee. 121. 
The foe was panic stricken. “We see no good before us,” 
they exclaimed. And in their dire straits they sent a 
superior officer to the Commander of the army, who said, 
“I have come for an interview.” 122. When the. 
messenger of the enemy proposed a parley, Eknath, 
bhakta of the Sadguru, felt pity for him. He did not 
show him harshness but met him in a playful manner. 123. 
He brought this enemy into the city, introduced him to 
his royal patron, gave him garments and ornaments, and 
said, ‘‘ Now return to your place.” 124, Having thus 
gained the victory, Eknath returned to his home. He 
changed his form back again, and stood ready to serve. 


JANARDAN DISCOVERS EKNATH’S 
MIRACULOUS DEED. 


125. During all this while Janardan had been alone 
in the god-room in meditation. Finally completing his 
mind-worship he came back to bodily consciousness. 126. 
He had not heard the news of what had occurred outside. 
So as usual he made his offering to the idol, and to the 
fire, and finished his meal. 127. He then took his four 
ghatikas of sleep, after which he called for his palanquin 


14 EKNATH 


and quickly went to the Hall of Administration. 128. 
When his royal patron saw him coming he affectionately 
arose to receive him. He gave him a seat by his side, and 
thus addressed him, 129. ‘“ The invading army that came 
to-day was very great. Yet you went against them, con- 
quered the enemy, gaining a notable victory.” 130. After the 
royal patron had thus lauded him, the chief members of 
the Council did the same, and ordered fresh garments to 
be brought immediately. 131. The royal patron then 
presented these to Janardan, saying, “‘ You took but a small 
army with you, you brought back victory.” 132. The 
crowd around then shouted, “ Victory, Victory (to Janar- 
dan) ” and the minstrels began to sing aloud of his disting- 
uished deeds. Janardan was utterly confused by all this, 
thinking it most strange. 133. “I was at home in 
meditation,” he said to himself. “ How could all these 
things have happened?’ Then suddenly he understood it 
all and exclaimed, “It must have been Eknath, an avatar 
able for miraculous deeds. 134. He must surely have 
taken my form, and accomplished this deed. Yet I had 
better not reveal this fact, or it will become notorious.” 135. 
Settling the matter thus in his mind Janardan returned to 
his home, and taking Eknath aside lovingly embraced him. 
136. Caressingly patting him on the back, he exclaimed, 
“ Blessed are you, bhakta of the Sadguru. You have per- 
formed a most marvellous deed. I divined it in my own 
mind.” 137. Hearing these nectar-words Eknath fell at 
his feet in sincere devotion, saying, “You, Svdmi, you are 
the holder of the guiding string. The deed was not 
mine.” 


EKNATH 15 


JANARDAN TESTS EKNATH. 


138. The days thus passing it happened once that 
Janardan said to Eknath, “You have written up the 
accounts in your book, bring them now to me.” 139. “TI 
will do so,” responded the bhakta of the sadguru, and went 
off by himself to balance the account. He found in it an 
error of one adhelé. This greatly distressed his mind. 
140. He added oil to the lamp, and went over the account 
again and again. Two and a half watches of the night 
thus passed, he conquering his drowsiness and keeping 
awake. 141. Not willing that his Gurw should suffer any 
loss, he kept up his search for the missing adhela. Sud- 
denly the account balanced to his great joy. 142. He 
burst out laughing and slapped his thigh. Just then 
Janardan happened to come and watch him from behind. 
“What good thing have you found,” said he. 143. 
“What are you so happy about that you should be now 
laughing?”” Hearing his Sadguru’s voice Eknith touched 
his forehead to the feet of his Guru. 144. “In looking 
over the account,” he replied, “there was an error of 
one adicla. Y have just discovered it and am feeling very 
happy.” 145. “Now,” said Jandrdan, “I want you to 
concentrate your mind in the same way on Krishna. Only 
by so doing can you attain your highest well being in this 
life below.” This is all the comment Janirdan made. 
146. Eknath then placed his pen at his sadguru’s feet and 
cried, “ What you have said is what I have been longing 
for, and now that you have told me what to do, your word 
will not go in vain.” 147. So saying he broke out into 
an Abhang. Listen to it, ye pious bhaktas. They are 


16 EKNATH 


sweet words of his experience. I gladly quote them in 


this book. 


1. Janardan is the Lord of the three worlds. 
He opened an account with me. 


2. The account was for large amounts. 
And always in the name of Ram. 


3. He gave me “I am He” as his bond. 
I reverently accepted it. 


4. He gave me garments of love. 
I received from him the leaves of Salvation. 


5. I quickly built the city of Absorption-into- 
Brahma. 


I went and sat in the bastion of Chaitanya. 


6. IJ will collect the revenue of Self-knowledge and I 
will send it to my Svami. 


7. By the hands of the saints will I send the balance 
of accounts. 
Bhakti will be the beautiful receipt. 
8. Such are the business relations I acquired 
through punya in a former birth. 
IT am fully satisfied in Janardan. 


148. After repeating this Abhang, he put the Modi 


account book aside. Now hear how he served his Guru 
with true devotion. 


EKNATH 17 
EKNATH’S SPECIAL ACTS OF SERVICE. 


149. He cleaned with his own hands the place where 
Janardan performed his toilet. He smeared the place with 
cow dung and decorated it with coloured powders. 150. 
After some days had passed the Sadguru questioned him. 
“Who is it that sweeps out the privy, tell me. 151. I see 
the place smeared with cowdung, and always decorated 
with the coloured powders. The Halalkhor surely does not 
do this. I am wondering who does it.” 152. Eknath 
replied, “ Am I an ungrateful wretch? I have offered my 
whole body to my Svami to serve him in every way.” 
153. When Janardan heard this reply, he was deeply 
moved, and said to himself, “I should not let him serve me. 
Eknath is not a mere man. 154. I must see to it that he 
has a visible manifestation of Sri Dattatreya, Guru-of-the- 
world. And what an intellect Dattatreya will see,” 
thought he. 


JANARDAN’S WORSHIP OF DATTATREYA. 


155. Janardan’s royal patron, the king, issued an 
order to his secretaries, that none need come to visit him 
on Fridays. 156. In accordance with this order of the 
king, instead of going to the Council Hall on that day, 
Janardan made it his habit to devote the day to his own 
most important private duties. 157. There was a very 
extensive lake on the plateau of the near by mountain, the 
water of which was very pure. There was no passing by 
of people there. 158. There was also a dense forest, 
beautiful with flowers and fruit. Simply viewing the 
scene brought rest to the mind. It seemed as though one 

2 


18 EKNATH 


could not leave the spot. 159. If one searched over all 
that country one could not find so charming a spot. One 
had only to look at that clear and pure water to experience 
a sense of peaceful rest. 160. Sri Dattatreya was 
accustomed to come to that spot, and any good man who 
performed anushthdna here could have a visible manifesta- 
tion of him. 161. So Janardan every Friday used to 
climb the mountain, take his bath in the lake and perform 
his accustomed rites. 162. He would then make a 
thousand lingas of clay, and worship them with proper 
ceremony. At the completion of his worship Sri Datta 
would give him a visible manifestation of himself. 163. 
As each met the other, each was filled with joy. They 
would converse together on the Happiness of the soul. 
They experienced a shower of joy. 164. Janairdan was 
one day thinking to himself, “ Eknath is a Sadguru Bhakta. 
He very faithfully serves me. 165. I must now arrange 
for him a visible manifestation of Sri Deattatreya. He 
will recognize Eknath’s intellect and in mercy will give 
him a special boon.” 


JANARDAN TAKES EKNATH TO MEET 
DATTATREYA. 


166. With this idea in mind, on a Friday, 
as he was about to go to the mountain, he 
asked Eknath to go up with him. 167. Filled 
with joy at this request, Eknath worshipped the 
lotus feet of his Guru, and started with him at once 
carrying the prayer-mat and the idol-bag. 168. As when 
a father prepares to go to a feast, and calls his child to go 


EKNATH 19 


with him, the child feels overjoyed, so it was in this case. 
169. Sri Janardan took Eknath by the hand and led him 
up the mountain. There alone by themselves he told 
Eknath how Sri Datta was accustomed to manifest himself 
at that place. 170. “In a Maya body he lovingly mani- 
fests himself in any odd form. So when you see him let 
no suspicious doubt fill your mind. 171. Aside from him 
no human being will come to this mountain spot.” 
Such were his words of instruction. 172. Janardanpant 
then bathed in the water of the lake, said his usual prayers, 
made his offerings, and began the linga worship. 173. 
Eknath collected the clay, and brought it to Janardan, who 
made of it a thousand Jingas, and worshipped them with 
appropriate rites. 174. Having finished all his worship 
he began his meditation of the Guru-of-the-World. Sud- 
denly the Son-of-Anusuya appeared, but in the guise of a 
Muhammadan. 175. His body was clothed in a leather 
garment. His eyes looked large and blood-red. Counting 
prayers on a rosary, he sat contemplating the Being- 
without-Qualities. 176. He had brought with him a 
Wish-cow, but to one’s sight she appeared a_ bitch. 
Janardan recognized him through his inner sight, and 
reverently made him a namaskar. 177. Just as there is 
no recognizable difference between the Sagun and the 
Nirgun, so Dattatreya and Janardan lovingly embraced one 
another, as one. 178. Or indeed as light and the sun are 
conjoined to one another, or as the flower and its honey 
do not differ, so was the love of the two. 179. Or again 
just as there is no difference whatever between a musical 
instrument and its sound, or as nectar and its sweetness 
are alike. 180. Or as the body and the soul are united 
in love, so Janardan and Avadhiia appeared as one. 


20 EKNATH 


181. Sitting close together they conversed on Soul- 
happiness. Eknath listened attentively with great joy of 
heart. 182. Dattaétreya now drew out an earthen bowl 
from under his folds and asked Janardan to go at once and 
milk the bitch, sitting near by. 183. Instantly obeying, 
Janardan took the bowl in his hands and quickly milked 
the bitch, filling the vessel full of milk. 184. He fetched 
it back to where Avadhiita was sitting and placed it before 
him, who taking out some dry pieces of bread, crumbled 
them into the milk. 185. This was in reality divine food, 
but to one’s sight it seemed like stale bread, such as the 
begging student gathers as he wanders from house to house. 
186. It was to test the faith of his bhakia that Dattatreya 
performed in their sight this strange act. Eknath under- 
stood it, yet not without a suspicious doubt in his mind. 
187. Avadhiita now said to Janardan, “Sit down now 
beside me and let us eat together.” At this invitation 
Janardan overflowed with joy. 188. Janardan and 
Dattatreya, in his visible form, ate together out of the one 
vessel. When their appetite was satisfied by this nectar 
of joy, they prepared to wash their hands. 189. They 
washed their hands in the earthen bowl, rinsed out their 
mouths, and to purify their mouths they took the Vida, 
and each withdrew to his seat. 190. Then Eknath was 
told to go to the lake, wash the vessel and bring it back. 
“T will do so surely,” he said. 191. Sitting at the edge 
of the lake, he thought to himself, “This great loving gift 
has come to me. Let me lovingly drink it.” 192. This 
food left in it by the Sadguru is Ganga Bhdgirathi itself. 
All the many means of acquiring what I need are to be 
found right here in this. This will be the way of salvation 
for my soul. 193. With this thought in mind, he put the 


EKNATH 21 


earthen bowl to his lips saying to himself, “ There can be 
no one in the whole universe as fortunate as I am.” 194. 
When Janardan saw this act of Eknath’s he made this 
request to Dattatreya, “Call to your side this servant of 
mine, and give him a vision of yourself, O Svdmi. 
195. He did not make obeisance to you because you have 
assumed the form of a Muhammadan. So reveal to him 
your own true form.” With these words Janardan 
touched his feet. 196. Dattatreya replied, “ One should 
not call Eknath a lad. He is an avafdr of Vitthal, in order 
to save the Universe. 197. Men will listen to his Kirtans, 
and very many will turn to Bhakti. Through his eloquence, 
his poetic power he will speak inspired words. 198. Vyasa 
having churned the Vedas produced the cream of Sri 
Bhagavat, and Eknath in his own words will make its 
meaning very clear. 199. Of the Ramayana of Valmiki 
he will make a Prakrit version. Whoever shall read all 
his poetic works, his soul will have a direct revelation from 
God. 200. In his Kirtans he will compose many padas 
and other poems. His fame will endure as long as the 
moon and the sun endure.” 201. While thus speaking 
these words of blessing, his form now changed and the 
bitch that was lying beside him now appeared to the eye 
as the Wish-cow. 202. Casting aside his Muhammadan 
guise, he assumed the beautiful Sagun form six armed, of 
elongated eyes, his face the ornament of the universe. 203. 
Revealing himself in this form, he called Eknath to him. 
Eknath touched his feet with his forehead, and then 
lovingly embraced them. 204. Dattatreya stretching out 
his six arms embraced Eknath and caressed his face. He 
then became invisible. 205. Thus through the favor of 


22 EKNATH 


Janardan Eknath had the visible manifestation of Sri Datta. 
Then taking Eknath by the hand the two returned to their 
home. 


206. And now, pious folk, listen to the interesting 
story to follow. And just as a miser’s thought does not 
wander even for a moment while counting his money, so 
let not your minds wander. 207. It is the Husband-of- 
Rukmini merciful to the humble, who is recalling the 
story to my memory, for know that otherwise Mahipati 
is one dull of understanding. Mahipati and Dullness are 
equivalent terms. 208. Swasti. This book, is the Sri 
Bhaktalilamrita. By merely listening to it one’s desires 
are fulfilled. Listen then to it, ye loving pious bhektas. 
This is the thirteenth interesting chapter. Verses 208. 


CHAPTER 14. 
MAHIPATI’S INVOCATION. 


Obeisaince to Ganesa. 


1. Men who seek the highest attainment desire to acquire 
God. What is the supreme method of acquiring God? It 
is by associating oneself with the good. 2. All the 
tirthas, small and great, formed in the Puranas, the well 
known and honored, these all are in the possession of the 
saints, along with the regularly occurring holy times and 
seasons. 3. In the Kali Yuga the Yoga exercises, rites, and 
ceremonies are not means for acquiring God. By their means 
one cannot meditate on the Supreme Vishnu. One cannot 
by them hold in restraint the fickle mind. 4. In order, 
therefore, that one may easily cross over the Sea-of-life, 


EKNATH 23 


God has prepared a ship, namely, His Name. The wise 
Vaishnava knows that there is no other supreme way. 5. 
Sri Krishna has said in the Bhagavata that the acquirement 
of man’s highest state is assuredly through the Namc. So also 
is the saying of the Vedas in the Vishnusukta. 6. If one 
therefore feels the desire in his heart that his faith should 
rest on the Name, he should seek association with the Good, 
for thereby the mind becomes easily enlightened. 7. 
Association with Sddhus naturally leads to hearing. 
Hearing leads to thinking, and thinking leads at once to 
tense contemplation of God. 8. In the last chapter we 
had the beautiful story of how Janardan looked upon 
Eknath with the eye of deep interest, and brought about 


the meeting with Sri Datta, revealing that wonder to his 
sight. 


JANARDAN INSTRUCTS EKNATH. 


9. The Sadguru, feeling deep love for Eknath led 
him by the hand until they reached their home. And now 
what further happened, listen. 10. Through the favor of 
the Svdmi, Eknath’s mind by full enlightenment attained 
peace, and even though he was the recipient of the boon 
by Datta, yet in his service to Janardan he failed in no 
point whatever. 11. More punctilious than before, with 
special love for ministcring to his Sva@mi, and freed from 
the seductions of all temptations, he worshipped Sri 
Purushottama. 12. Just as the wind pervades the 
Universe and yet does not lose its mobility, or as the 
Ganges while mingling with the ocean, yet upstream its 
flow does not cease. 13. Or again as the bhakta, when 


Qt EKNATH 


worshipping Sri Hari, is changed into His very form, and 
yet does not overstep the proper duties of a Bhakta, just 
so was it with Eknath. 14. Through the enlightenment 
of his soul he had perfect peace within, and in addition 
had received the boon from the Sadguru, yet for all 
that he was always standing ready for service, with never 
the least bit of laziness. 15. The thought now came to 
Janardan, “ Truly, truly in all the three worlds there is no 
Bhakta of the Sadquru like him. His love is simply 
marvellous. 16. In order to save the world Sri 
Pandurang has become an avatar. If I hold him longer 
in my service, I shall not at all be keeping within my bounds 
of duty towards him.” 17. As he thus thought within 
himself he went into the house in search of Eknath. He 
found him sitting alone, singing the praises of Sri Datta. 
18. When Eknath saw Janardan he arose and reverently 
bowed to him. The Sadguru then sat in his accustomed 
place, and thus instructed Eknath, 19. “Through the 
favor of the Sadguru you have acquired atma-knowledge. 
Nevertheless, keep in mind not to do away with sagun 
Bhakti. 20. Yogis, by restraining their organs of sense, 
forget sensual objects, but without bhakti they cannot have 
the visual manifestation of the sagun God. 21. By the 
power.of yoga they exhibit marvellous deeds and powers, 
but unless there is bhakti with love there can be no meeting 
with Sri Pati. 22. He may regard all humanity as him- 
self. He may even forget himself in bodily unconsciousness, 
and yet with all this he may not have the visual manifesta- 
tion of the sagun God. This manifestation, Eknath, is 
difficult to obtain. 23. So long, indeed, as one has life, 
one should love the sagun God. And now I will tell you 
the right thing to do. Listen to it with attention.” 


EKNATH 25 
JANARDAN SENDS EKNATH TO MOUNT 
SULABHA. 


24. “In the region back of Devagiri there is a moun- 
tain called Sulabha and there is a tirtha called Siiryakunda. 
It is a beautiful quiet spot. 25. Sdadhakas are accustomed 
to go to this place and perform their rites. Here God 
appears to them in fully bodily form. The place is holy 
and purifying. 26. Therefore, now listen, you who 
are so dear to my heart. Go at once to that spot, 
bathe in the Siiryakunda, repeating the name of 
Sti Paindurahgaraya. 27. Concentrating your mind, 
contemplate the Supreme Vishnu. Do not talk with anyone. 
My command is your authority. 28. Whatever you may 
obtain by chance, that be content to eat. Do not have 
anxious thought about me, for I am near you. 29, That 
was once the abode of the Rishi Markandeya, so the 
Purana clearly states. So with loving heart fix your mind 
on Sri Krishna. 30. If you should there see any thing 
strange, come back here to tell me.” As Eknath listened 
to these words of his sadguru, he was moved 
within with joy. 31. To begin with, Eknath was a true 
and loving discipline, and farthermore his guru had prescrib- 
ed a definite act of worship. He felt, therefore, supremely 
happy, and worshipping the feet of his guru he started off. 
32. Other gurus instruct in knowledge, but neglect to 
teach the bhakti of the sagun God. Janardan was never 
such an one. 33. Knowledge, without bhakti, is like 
the babbling of a babbler. Listen, good people, to one 
of Eknath Svami’s own sayings. 


26 EKNATH 
Knowledge was born from the womb of Bhakii. 


pend 
. 


The glory of Knowledge is through Bhakti. 


2. Bhakti has given Knowledge its glory. 


Bhakti is the root of Knowledge and 
Vairagya. 


3. Without Bhakti one is seized by Darkness. 


Tf there is no root, how can there be any 
fruit? 


4. He who does deeds that are united to Bhakti for 
Janadan only, Brahma-knowledge falls at 
his feet. 


34. Therefore listen, good people; he who, discarding 
Bhakti, preaches the doctrine of knowledge, or he who 
argues against the communion of God and his bhekta, there 
is no one as vile as he. 35. Blessed is this noble sadguru, 
Janardan! It appears to me he is Janardan Himself become 
sagun in order to save the world. 36. But let me now 
pass on, and let not the listener grow weary, because while 
relating the story of the guru and his bhakta, I interrupted 
it by a digression. Only for a moment have I thus spoken 
by way of illustration. 


EKNATH’S WORSHIP ON MOUNT SULABHA. 


37. As soon, then, as the sadguru gave his command, 
Eknath made a namaskéar. I now turn to what the Vaishnava 
hero did on reaching Mount Sulabha. 38. As he viewed 
the beautiful spot, he felt a sense of supreme rest. He 


EKNATH 27 


bathed in the Stiryakunda and completed the prescribed 
rites, 39, He then sat down, looking to the East, and concen- 
trated his mind, bringing to his imagination the image of 
Pandurang, accompanied with a feeling of love. 40. 
While thus repeating his name, and while in this aot of 
contemplation the Husband-of-Indira revealed Himself to 
him. Eknath’s vritti (soul) assumed His form, and he 
Jost all bodily consciousness. 41. Now on that mountain 
there lived a great serpent, and as it saw Eknath sitting 
in contemplation it ran to bite him. 42. But as it began 
to coil itself around Eknath its evil nature left its body, 
and now full of affection, he protected him, and how, let us 
see, 43. Lest Eknath suffer from cold or heat it coiled 
all around him, with the end of its tail at Eknath’s navel, 
and its wide spread hood over Eknith’s head. 44. The 
serpent had lost his evil nature, and gained a good nature. 
The moment it touched the saint this complete change of 
disposition took place. 45. As Eknath came back to 
consciousness, and his body slightly moved, the serpent 
glided away and was no longer in sight. 46. Because 
Eknath’s soul was united with the Name and Form, 
(sagun God) he had therefore been without bodily con- 
sciousness, and did not know of the serpents’s coiling 
around him. 


THE PIOUS FARMER ON MOUNT SULABHA 
AND HIS WIFE. 


47. Now at the foot of the mountain there was a 
miserable hamlet. In it a Vaishnava lived, a pious farmer. 
48. In a former birth his austerities had been 


28 EKNATH 


interrupted (yoga bhrashta), he was therefore one of 
pure conduct. At his door was the tulsi altar, and 
he performed regularly his ablutions and worship. 
49. He kept his clothes and dishes clean. He 
never ate without first bathing. While carrying on 
his daily occupation, he was always repeating the names. 
of God. 50. His wife also was supremely dutiful, 
and lived as he did. She knew to what her lord’s mind’ 
inclined, and so reverenced Sddhus and Saints. 51. She 
fed the hungry, she gave water to the thirsty. She had a 
heart for doing good to others. She never told a lie. 52. 
If she eyer saw an ascetic performing his rite on Mount 
Sulabha she would bring him milk to drink with expressions 
of love. 53. Near by on a level spot on the mountain 
side the farmer had sown a field of grain. While the rich 
crop was ripening he was accustomed to stay there for its 
protection. 54. So when Eknath went by to perform his 
rites the farmer saw him, and taking fresh milk, heated 
at his house, he went to where Eknath was. 55. Eknath 
had finished his love-accompanied contemplation, and was 
just sitting about, when the farmer prostrated himself be- 
fore him and made the following request. 56. “I have 
brought this heated milk. The Svami must please 
drink it.” Eknath granted the man’s request and 
thanked him. 57. “The enjoyer of this milk is 
Sri Krishna.” So saying, Eknath put the vessel to his 
lips. The farmer felt great satisfacion and returned to- 
his place. 58. His wife, as instructed by him, brought milk 
every day to the field. They first gave of this to Eknath,. 
and then took their own food. 59. Only if there is a 
store of good deeds laid up in a previous birth does there 


EKNATH 29 


come about such an opportunity of serving a saint. This 
places obligation on God, and He then delivers the server 
of the saint from the ocean-of-this-life. 60. The Life-of- 


the-world is pleased with him who serves a Saint, and there 
is no higher way to please Him. 61. This farmer 


was fortunate, and so there was born in him a 
good heart. While carrying on his wordly pursuits, 
he at the same time acquired the supreme purpose of life. 
His goodness had no limit. 62. One day his wife arose 
at midnight to grind. She sang verses in praise of God, 
and quickly her grinding was finished. 63. The moon 
was then shining so brightly that she thought it was dawn. 
So she milked the cow and put the milk in separate vessels. 
64. Although it was not time for so large a yield, she 
milked a very large amount. She heated the milk in brass 
vessels carefully, and placed a dung-cake over it. 65. Then 
performing her toilet, bathing with cold water, and complet- 
ing her cooking well, just then the sun arose. 66. She 
said to herself, “I must have arisen very early to do my 
grinding, when it was still long before daylight. If I delay 
going up to the field the food will surely become cold. 67. 
Thus talking to herself, the beautiful one took the bread 
basket on her head, and the milk vessel in her hand and 
hurried along. 68. As the beloved wife came to the hedge 
of the field her husband saw her, relieved her of the milk 
vessel, and went to perform his bath. 69. After perform- 
ing his usual rites and repetition of God’s names he said 
to his wife, “You have brought the food very early this 
morning. What is the reason? Tell me. 70. I am not 
yet hungry, it is not a festival day, nor the twelfth of the 
month. The ascetic is now sitting performing his rites. 
We cannot eat until he has eaten.” 71. The wife replied, 


30 EKNATH 


““T became awake while it was still very early, and so lest 
the food should become cold I have come thus early. 72. 
But,” said she, “go up the mountain side and give the milk 
to the Brahmana, and then eat your breakfast.” 73. So 
taking the vessel he climbed up the mountain side, when 
to his vision a most remarkable sight appeared. Listen, 
ye wise ones, with reverence. 


THE FARMER SEES A SERPENT COILED 
AROUND EKNATH. 


74. Eknath had finished his ablution and prayers, 
and the performing of his rites, and his mind was now in 
contemplation on Sri Krishna. He was now absolutely 
without bodily consciousness. 75. A serpent had come 
and coiled itself around Eknath’s body, with the end of its 
tail at his navel, and its hood over his head. 76. When 
the farmer saw this, great terror was aroused in his mind, 
exclaiming, ‘““The Brahmana is performing his rites, and the 
serpent is holding him in its coil. 77. O Lord Pandhari, 
hasten quickly. Do thou save him. I can render no help 
at all. My strength and mind are both in vain. 78. The 
ascetic’s body is not moving. The serpent has probably 
bitten him. All the results of my service have now become 
fruitless.” The farmer became violently agitated. 79. 
He shouted, he loudly called for help, but the serpent 
would not move away. “The Brahmana is dead, is dead,” 
he exclaimed. 80, The spot was a lonely one on the moun- 
tain. Men did not pass by there. Who then could there 


EKNATH 3t 


be there to listen to his cry? Still he made the attempt to 
save Eknath’s life. 81. At last he knew he must do 
something at the moment. So from his mouth went out a 
loud piercing cry. “O Chakrapani, Lord-of-the-Helpless, 
hasten and come to the rescue.” 82. While the farmer 
was making this great outcry Eknath became gradually 
conscious of the noise, and as his body began to move, the 
serpent glided quickly away. 83. When he became fully 
conscious, he applied water to his eyes, and said to the 
farmer, “ What has happened. Tell me quickly.” 84. 
The farmer was all in a tremor of body because of the 
sight of the serpent, but gradually coming to his senses, 
he approached Eknath. 85. With reverence he made his 
nanaskdar, and replied, saying, “ A great serpent had just 
now coiled itself around your body.” 86. And as I saw 
this sight a great terror seized me, and I made a loud out- 
cry, at which the serpent fled. 87. The Svdmui’s confi- 
dence is at the feet of God, therefore your life has been 
saved at this time. Death came, but it was not the time 
for him, so it appears to me.” 88. Hearing this explana- 
tion of the farmer Eknath replied in an Abhang. I quote 
it in this book with affection. So listen to it, ye pious folk. 


ABHANG. 


1. Death came to sting me. 
But he changed to a Merciful one. 


2. Now I know him well. 
For heart has met heart. 


32 EKNATH 


3. Though in the body, my bodily consciousness 
disappeared ; 


So Death himself lost his power. 


4, Eka Janardan now dances on his feet. 
To the tune of, “ No flavor to life or death.” 


89. With these verses recited in love, Eknath closed his 
eyes, and in his mind contemplated the image of 
Pandurang, his heart being full of love. 


EKNATH HAS A VISION OF GOD. 


90. And exlaimed, ‘“ Dweller-in-the-Ocean-of-Milk, 
(QO Thou-who-dost-rest-on-the-serpent, O Husband-of- 
Indira, Enchanter-of-the-heart, Internal witness, Mass-of- 
Intelligence, Life-of-the-World, Sri Hari. 91. Victory, 
Victory, Lord of-Vaikunth; infinite and boundless is Thy 
fame. In describing Thy glory even the Srutis have 
exhausted themselves. The minds of all reach their limit 
here. 92. Thou the Unborn, the unconquered, the Un- 
changeable, Unaffected by Maya, Tranquil, when reason 
seeks to comprehend Thee it cannot reach Thy depths, 93. 
Thus art Thou the Supreme-God-of-Gods. Siva, in repeat- 
ing Thy names became calmed. Thou dost pervade the 
whole Universe, yet there is no way of comprehending Thy 
depths. 94. Still, in order to come to the assistance of 
thy Bhaktas, Thou becamest the Four-armed avatdr. My 
eyes are hungry to see Thee in that form.” 95. Hearing 
these words of praise, the Husband-of-Kukmini revealed 
Himself in that form, four-armed, dark of complexion, and 
adorned with the conch-shell and the disk in his hands. 


EKNATH 33 


96. His glorious, adorned face, enchanted the heart. In 
his ears were carrings in the form of crocodiles. On his 
neck the beautiful Kaustubh jewel sparkled. His divine 
yellow garment was translucent. 97. The brilliant 
Vaijayanti necklace, and the frivali sparkled on his breast. 
The little bells on his feet tinkled. The sight brings rest 
to the soul. 98. His whole body was smeared with 
sandal-wood paste. A saffron tilak well marked his fore- 
head. He wore a garland of the tender Tulsi stems. On 
his breast was the Svi vaisa mark. 99, So bright was his 
appearance, that the light of the sun’s orb seemed inferior. 
As Sri Eknath opened his eyes there stood before him the 
Supreme Grahma, in his beauty. 100. Wsh feel- 
ings of love in his heart, and with reverence eknath 
embraced his feet. The Supreme-lord-of-the-universe 
then embraced Eknath drawing him close to his heart. 
101. Having seated God heside him he worshipped Him 
in mental adoration, exclaiming, “ He has placed over me 
the shadow of his mercy, and fulfilled the desire of my 
heart. 102. This meeting together of God and Bhakte 
was clearly seen by the farmer, and feeling a sense of 
supreme joy he exclaimed, ‘I am the special child of For- 
tune.” 103. And so exclaiming he again and again made 
Eknath a wamaskar. Suddenly Sri Hari took leave of 
Eknath and vanished from sight. 104. The farmer 
recognizing that The-lord-of-life had made, as his happy 
resting place, the heart of his bhakfa, he bowed to Eknath 
with reverence. 105. And said to him, “By my being 
in company with the Svd@mi I have seen with my own eyes 
the lord-of-heaven. Otherwise I should not have done so, 
for I am of inferior caste and dull of mind. 106. To 


save the world He has become an eavatdr in this saint. 
3 


84 EKNATH 


This miracle has come into my experience this day.” Again 
and again he repeated words of praise. 107. He then 
took up the vessel of milk and offered it to Sri Eknath 
earnestly pleading, “It is my earnest desire that you par- 
take of this, O Sadguru, in bodily form.” 108. 
Recognizing the sincerity of the farmer’s feelings Eknath 
drank the milk, and by a motion of the eye signified to him 
that he should now return to his home. 109. The farmer 
made a pradakshind, prostrated himself on the ground before 
him, and went back to his home with joy in his heart. 
110. He was pierced with the conviction that Sri Eknath 
was the Supreme Brahma in bodily form, Returning to 
his home he related to his wife all the events that had 
occurred. 


EKNATH RETURNS TO TELL JANARDAN. 


111. Now as to Eknath. The sun had reached 
noontide, and the heat had become fierce. Soa 
he withdrew to the shade of a banyan tree, and 
there rested for a few hours. 112. And _ here 
while being relieved from the intense heat he 
suddenly remembered Janardan’s command, that if he saw 
anything very unusual, he was to return back to him. 113. 
It was truly by the Sadguru’s favor that he had seen the 
visible appearance of the Sagun God. There could be 
nothing more marvellous than this. A great blessing had 
come to him. 114. Thus thinking to himself he worship- 
ped, and returning to Devagiri he met the Sadgurumurti. 
115. He bowed prostrate before him, and _ lovingly 
embraced him. Janardan recognized by his appearance 
that something had happened, and said to himself, “I see 


EKNATH 35 


signs of a changed appearance.” 116. The Sedguru asked 
what had happened. Eknath in reply, told him of all the 
mysterious occurrences, and exclaimed. “It is truly by the 
Svami’s favor that the otherwise unattainable had been 
attained.” 


JANARDAN AND EKNATH GO ON PILGRIMAGE. 


117. It happened one day that Janardan said to. 
Eknath, “A great desire has come to me to bathe in the: 
Ganga, [Godavari] 118. I want to see with my own eyes: 
Nasik, Panchavati, and Sri Trimbakraj.” Hearing this in-. 
tention of the Sadguru, Eknath was overjoyed. 119. Choos-- 
ing an auspicious day Janardan prepared to start on his 
pilgrimage to the Tirthas. He assigned to Eknath a mare. 
to ride on. 120. A horse for their things, and one for him- 
self. He appointed a Brahmana cook, and all promptly 
started. 121. Whenever they found a beautiful spot there 
they rested for the night. Here they would discuss between. 
themselves in happy mood of questions about the soul. 122. 
They especially loved those places where sddhus and saints 
congregated. There they would spend the night very 
happily, saying, “A blessed, happy day is this!” 


*THE PILGRIMS MEET CHANDRABHAT. 


123. <As they thus journeyed far they came to a 
large town. At this place there lived a Brahmana, named 
Chandrabhat, a distinguished Vaishnava. 124. Hearing 
of his good fame, the Guru and his disciple were delighted, 


*Compare Chatusloki Bhagavata 1028—1035; Keésa- 
vasvami Krit Eknath Charitra 5, 1—57. 


36 EKNATH 


and as the sun was setting they put up for the night at 
his house. 125. Chandrabhat, seeing his distinguished 
Vaishnava guest, welcomed him with respect. Bowing to 
one another they mutually embraced. 126. Chandrabhat 
was an ascetic Brahmana. Though he had a family his 
mind was free from desires. Living on what came to him 
unasked, he maintained himself without hindrance. 127. 
He was ever performing austerities of body, specch and 
mind. The defilement from the filth of an untruth never 
so much as touched his lips. 128. In his ablutions and 
prayers, in his worship of God, and in good deeds to others, 
he spent his life. He looked on all men as himself, and 
was all kindliness to every creature. 129. In order to 
break the snares of savsdr, he always sought association 
with the good, saying to himself, ‘“ When will these entang- 
lement of sasisd@r cease!” The ascetic idea had entered his 
heart like an arrow. 130. It was such a Chandrabhat, a 
Brahmana free from desires, indifferent to worldly things, 
and of an ascetic mind, whom FEknath and Janardan 
lovingly met. 131. After performing their evening 
devotions, they partook of their simple meal. As soon as 
it was finished the Brahmana withdrew by himself and un- 
wrapped a book. 132. He turned to that portion of the 
Chatusloki Bhagavata, where Sri Hari discoursed ta 
Brahmadeva. Chandrabhat began to comment on it, and 
unfold its meaning in detail. 133. Eknath and Janardan 
then came and sat near him, exclaiming, “ Blessed is this 
happy day in which we have met this saint.” 134. As he 
thus found listeners loving, all-wise and expert, his heart 


EKNATH 37 


rejoiced. And as he explained the meaning of the text, 
the minds of the listeners were deeply pierced. 135. As 
he related things out of his own experience, his voice was 
choked with emotion. Tears of love flowed from the eyes 
of all, and all three reached the state of bodily unconscious- 
ness. 136. It truly seems to me as though the three Gods, 
Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesvara had come together. This 
thought impresses me. 137. If not that figure, then one 
might say, that as the three rivers Ganga, Yamuna, and 
Sarasvati join together and flow on as one, so the love of 
the three united. And thus they spent the night. 138. 
When the reading of the book was finished they honored 
the night a little (with sleep). Both felt the desire that 
they might always be in Chandrabhat’s company. 139. 
Eknath and Janardan said to one another, ‘“ Chandra- 
bhat is deeply versed in the three Sastras, Karma, Updsané 
and Dydna.” 140, Thus the night was spent. They 
arose in the morning and were about to start, when 
Chandrabhat made an earnest plea. “ Hear my request,” 
he cried. 141. “ After you finish your ablutions and devo- 
tions please sanctify my dsrama.” “TI will do so,” replied 
Janardan, as he recognized his sincerity. 142. Food was 
cooked in the house, all the appointed rites were performed, 
offerings were made to the idols and to the fire, ard they 
then sat down to eat. 143. Eknath, Janardan and the 
host, Chandrabhat sat in one line, After them 
the food was passed to others. 144. After the rinsing 
out of the mouth, and the passing of the pdn supany, 
Chandrabhat made another request. Said he, “A desire 
has arisen in my heart to be with you night and day.” 145. 
To this Janardan replied, “ That is exactly what is in our 
mind. Without any hesitation come along with us.” 146, 


88 EKNATH 


Chandrabhat, happy at heart, exclaimed, “ Happily have I 
fallen into the company of the good, living the peaceful 
and the ascetic life.” 


THE PILGRIMS CONTINUE THEIR JOURNEY. 


147. With worshipful spirit full of love, and of his 
own accord, he began the journey with them. He continued 
to interpret the Chatusloka (Bhagavat) and was full of joy. 
148. Whenever he met on the way sddhu, sant or yogt 
he felt great love for them, and conversed with them on 
questions concerning the soul. 149. ‘As they journeyed 
along in this manner they soon arrived at Panchavati, and 
bathed in the Ramakunda with penitent hearts. 150. 
After the due performance of the tirtha rites they went to 
their place of lodging, and later went to obtain 
the sight of Sri Ramchandra, with undivided love. 151. 
‘They worshipped with due ceremonials; they sang many 
‘songs of praise. They gave a feast and made the 
_Brahmans happy. 


JANARDAN URGES EKNATH TO COMPOSE 
MARATHI BOOKS. 


152. Janardan then said to Eknath, “I am going to 

‘tell you something, listen. On your head is the boon 
‘of Sri Datta, which by your good fortune you unexpectedly 
‘received. 153. Chandrabhat has brought with him the 
Chatusloki Bhagavata. Prepare a commentary on it in Pra- 

-krit, (Marathi) in an extensive form.” 154. Hearing his Sad- 
:guru’s words, Eknath became supremely happy, and began to 


EKNATH 39 


write the book and continued to do so with Iove. 155. He 
first wrote the (Sanskrit) Sloka and then gave its meaning. 
When the work was completed he showed it to his Sri 
Guru. 156. Chandrabhat, Jandrdan, and the learned 
Brahmans of that holy place listened to the reading of the 
book and were greatly pleased. 157. As his first book 
Eknath produced this Prakrit Commentary on the Chatu- 
Sloki Bhagavata. The Sadguru then said to him, 158. 
“Let your lips produce a  Prakrit version of the Sri 
Ekadasa skandha (of the Rhagavata Purana). Sri Krishna 
will be your helper, and cause you to express its complete 
meaning.” 159, When Janardan had thus spoken Eknath 
bowed. Chandrabhat now took Eknath’s commentary on 
the Chatusloki (Bhagavata) and gave readings from it. 
160. Chandrabhat was versed in the Karma, Bhakti and 
Dydna Sastras; still he adopted the practice of reading 
aloud the Prakrit [Marathi] version made by Fknath. 161. 
The reverential feclings of Chandrabhat were great. Said he, 
“This guru and his disciple are avataras of Hari and 
Sankar for the salvation of the world. 162. Janardan is 
Lord-of-Kailas, Fknath is Vishnu in visible form.” With 
this feeling of reverence in his heart, he continually sang 
their praise. 163. And as the Brahmans of that sacred 
place heard it, all exclaimed, “ Blessed, Blessed!” The 
three now journeyed on to Tryambakesvara, and bathed 
in the KuSavarta. 164. Keeping Brahmagiri on the right 
they visited Tripurari. Here they performed their tirtha 
rites, and remained there for three nights. 165. With 
this visit they completed their pilgrimage and returned to 
Devagiri. The mind of Chandrabhata, indifferent to 
worldly things, had abandoned the desire of home. 166. 
His mind had already wearied of wife, son, home and 


40 EKNATH 


wealth, therefore he could not leave the company of 
Janardan and Eknath, and so came with them to Devagiri. 
167. After Janirdan reached his home, the very next day 
he fed Brahmans. His tongue revelled in the repe- 
tition of the names of God, and his heart was full of 
love. 168. Chandrabhat with feelings of sincere reve- 
rence would exclaim, “Eknath is an avatéra in humar 
form. In age and stature he is little, but his intellect is 
great in its power of expressing thought. 169. I must 
not leave his company as long as I live.” With this strong 
determination he continued to remain there. 170. After 
he had passed many days there he attained bodily uncons- 
ciousness. The whole universe including himself appeared! 
to him in the form of Janardan. 171. He lost all cons- 
ciousness of the concept. “I [God] and my body.” He 
performed good deeds automatically. He viewed the whole 
world as his own soul. 172. He became fully enlightened, 
and so his name became changed. Everywhere people 
began to call him Chand Bodhala. 


CHANDRABHAT DESIRES TO BE ENTOMBED 
ALIVE. 


173. After some days were passed in this way he 
approached Janardan in person and said, “ The desire has 
arisen in me to be entombed alive.” 174. Janardar 
appreciated the desire of his heart, and arranged for his 
being entombed alive, while in his state of bodily uncons- 
ciouness. But lest the Mahomedans should cause trouble 
they devised a special plan. 175. They built a structure 
just like a Mahomedan tomb, and thus both Hindus and 


EKNATH 41 


Mahomedans were satisfied. 176. *That structure is still 
there to-day on Devagiri mountain, and many miracles 
take place there, seen and recognized universally. 


JANARDAN SENDS EKNATH ON DISTANT 
PILGRIMAGES. 


177. It now happened one day that Janardan thought 
to himself, “I must send Ekoba on a pilgrimage to the 
sacred watering places. This earth will be made holy 
thereby.” 178. Calling Eknath aside he said to him, 
“Listen to my proposal.” Eknath humbly placed his head 
at his guru’s feet, and with his lips uttered words of praise. 
179. “ Victory, Victory to Thee, Janirdan. Thou who art 
untouched by Maya, Spotless-one, Nirgun. I am merely 
your darling, your infant. What can I know of Thy 
marvellous glory! 180. The Srutis and Sdstras praise 
Thee, but their power of expression fails them. All the 
Purdnas and all knowledge are insufficient to declare Thy 
full praise. 181. When the serpent attempted to praise 
Thee, O God of Gods, he became confounded. His 
tongue was split in two. Of what value then is my 
desire to praise. 182. The Lord-of-serpents, who forms 


*Note—The samadhi, or tomb of Chandrabhat, or Chand 
Bodhala as he is also called, is still to be seen at Daulatabad, 
formerly called Devagiri. It is situated to the East of 
the fort, and is worshipped both by Hindus and Muham- 
madans. A fair in his honor takes place on the 5th of the 
lunar half of the Hindus month of Chaitra (April). The 
samadhi is near the Hammam Khana, or Hammam Bada 
as it is called. The place was recently visited Mr. N. R. 
Godbole of Poona, from whom I have this information. 


42 EKNATH 


Thy couch, causing thee to lie upon him, enjoys love 
accompanied by happiness. 183. The Creator-of-the- 
woild, the Four-faced-one, even He did not comprehend 
Thy power. When he stole away the calves, Thou, didst 
show a wonderful miracle. 184. Thou didst in fact create 
other cows and calves. Then with his four mouths, 
the Brahma, praised Thee, and came as a_ suppli- 
ant to Thee. 185. By Thy power the senses perform their 
regular functions in the body. How am I to compensate 
Thee! I who possess nothing at all. 186. In the animate 
and the inanimate, which appear to my sight, I see only 
‘Thee in all. And through this my mind has truly reached 
abiding rest.” 187. With these words of praise, Eknath, 
with sincere reverence touched his head to Janardan’s feet, 
and exclaimed, ‘‘ Whatever you now command me, I will, 
in every particular, take it to heart.” 188. Hearing 
Eknath’s nectar words, Janardan replied with a satisfied 
mind. “Go and visit at least once all the sacred watering 
places that this earth possesses. 189. Make a three nights’ 
rest in some places, a five nights’ rest in others. Whenever 
you meet with what is related to God you should make a 
nanaskara. 190, Though you go for the purpose of a 
pilgrimage, you will at the same time meet with Saints. 
Sri Krishna Himself will provide for all your daily needs. 
191. Go as far as Badrinath, and view that northern lake, 
Manas, with your eyes. To the south, visit Rameévara, 
and then return to me here.” 192. As Eknath heard 
these words of his Sadguru, there came to him both joy 
-and sorrow. If you ask how this could come about, listen 
to the reason. 193. His heart was happy, because he 
would meet with Saints. He was sad, because he would 
‘lose the sight of his Sadguru. 194. Food was cooked in 


EKNATH 43 


‘tthe house and the two ate together sitting in a line. They 
rinsed out their mouths, they took the pan supdri, and 
‘were happy together. 


EKNATH STARTS ON HIS LONG PILGRIMAGE. 


195. When Sri Nath started on his pilgrimage, 
Janardan saw him on his way. Just as it happens when a 
“woman is going back to her father-in-law these two were 
choked with emotion. 196. The way first led through a 
forest, and Eknath placed his head on his Sadguru’s breast 
exclaiming, “ Now let your favor rest upon me. I place 
‘myself in your affection.” 197. He was choked with 
emotion and tears of love flowed. The same happened to 
‘the Sadguru, who could not at all restrain the expression 
of his love. 198. Janardan now said to him, “I shall 
always be in your heart. Hold this thought in your remem- 
‘brance, that you and I are not separated. 199. You are 
as dear to me as my own life, and I am your very soul. 
Now let go the delusion of duality, and be not sad over 
‘this separation,, 200. With this, Janardan placed on 
Ekniath’s head his own turban. And as this great blessing 
‘so wonderfully came to him, Eknath overflowed with love- 
-acompanied joy. 201. Sri Eknath then made a request, 
‘“ Again give me a darsan of yourself.” The Sadguru 
‘understood the inner mystic meaning of this request and 
replied, “I will do so.” 202. Eknath made a pradakshind 
‘around Janardan, making namaskdrs with expressions of 
‘love, and so carrying in his mind the visible form of 
_Janardan, he started on his way. 203. He walked away 
‘quickly, but every few paces he turned back to look at his 
‘Guru, and so long as he could see Jandrdan again and 


44 EKNATH 


again prostrated himself on the ground towards him. 204. 
Exclaiming, “Victory, Victory to Thee, Janardan,” he 
went on his way in haste. The Sadguru, having thus seen 
Eknath on his way, returned to his abode. 205. But very 
often there would come to his mind the noble character 
of Eknath, and the Sadguru felt very sad, and his mind 
was not at rest. 


206. Saints are in fact Pandurang in human form. 
Who then can adequately describe them? I, dull of mind,. 
can only babble, and this seems like a sin. 207. But 
because they are dear to me, I speak of them, though in 
foolish uncouth words. The real author of this book is 
the Husband-of-Sri Rukmini, He who abides on the bank 
of the Bhima river. 208. That Pandurang, performer of 
wonderful things through Maya, is the one who is relating 
His own deeds. He is making me, Mahipati, only a pre- 
text. I am neither a poct nor an author. 209. Swasti. 
This is the Sri Bhaktalilimrita. By merely listening to 
it one’s desires are fulfilled. Listen then to it, ye, loving 
pious Bhaktas. This is the fourteenth delightful chapter. 


CHAPTER 15. 
MAHIPATI’S INVOCATION. 


1. Obeisance to Sri Ganega. In singing the infinite 
praise of the Limitless-One the power of expression of even: 
the greatest minds has failed, how then can my common- 
place mind be equal to the task? 2. To use a simile, over 
the immense store of sea water ships sail across the sea, 
but how can my little broken checkerboard raft cross to 
the opposite shore? 3. The moon, together with all the- 


EKNATH 45 


constellations, disappear as the sun arises. So it is impos- 
sible to think that before the rising sun the light of the firefly 
can be great. 4. There is no balance so immense that 
with it one can readily weigh this world. It is evident 
that one cannot cover the etherial space with one’s hand. 
5. Where is the light so brilhant that with it one can see 
the entire disk of the sun? So in attempting to describe the 
attributes of the Supreme Vishnu the mind with its intellect 
goes insane. 6. But just as when a little infant sees its 
mother it prattles all kinds of meaningless words, and she 
through the power of her love laughingly supplies its little 
desires. 7, So the Saits should accept my foolish words, 
considering me, Mahipati, but an ignorant child. 


THE DISTRESS OF EKNATH'S GRANDPARENTS. 


& The last chapter contained the noteworthy story 
of Eknath’s stariing cn his pilerimage, and of Jandrdan’s 
feeling sad at heart, as there constantly came to his mind 
Eknath’s noble character. 


9, Let us now turn back to  Pratishthana, 
where Eknath’s grandfather and = grandmother lived. 
Eknath (it will be remembered) had slipped away 
to Devagiri without asking their permission. 10. Busy in 
the service of his sadguru he had not returned to them. 
Thereby the aged couple were in distress of mind, and they 
began to search for him from house to house. 11. Now 
of this one, now of that one they began to enquire, “Have 
you seen our Eknath?’’ When they replied, “We do not 
know where he is,” they both would weep. 12. Both 
wandered about the sacred city enquiring from house to 


46 EKNATH 


house. They had no rest of mind day or night. Eknath 
filled their hearts. 13. Food and drink tasted good no 
longer. Their nights seemed as long as years, as there 
came to their minds the goodness of the boy. And no one 
was able to help them in their search. 14. They used to 
say to themselves in their distress, “ His father and mother 
died when he was an infant. Only this family twig has 
survived. With his support we had hoped to drag out 
our days. 15. On what island has this blind folk’s staff 
got caught? When shall we ever see him again?” And 
so saying they deeply sorrowed. 16. Of the three kinds 
of people in the city there were some with evil surmisings. 
Some remarked, “ Perhaps the grandparents had spoken 
harshly to the boy, so that he ran away. 17. The grand- 
father and grandmother are attached to him, but they can- 
not have feelings similar to those of a mother or father. 
He whose the child is will accept the burden. To 
others he is a trouble.” 18. Others said, ‘That 
is a false idea. They have coddled and pampered 
him too much. Boys are boys, cruel by nature. He 
simply left them and ran away. 19. We have been watch- 
ing coincidences connected with him from his infancy. 
First his mother and father died, then poverty came quickly. 
20. His grandfather and grandmother remain, but he has 
brought them distress, and now in their old age there is 
no one even to give them water to drink.” 21. Well, to 
continue, these three classes of people had their various 
says, but the aged couple could find no rest of mind. They 
made many efforts. 22. Pilgrims to sacred places, tra- 
velling merchants, and cloth peddlers were approached with 
the question, “Have you seen our Eknath?’ 23. They 
asked even crows, and sélonkis, and parrots “Have you 


EKNATH 47 


seen our Eknath?’ They went to the river sand bed, 
and prostrated themselves to the Ganga [Godavari] 
river, 24. Exclaiming, “Our eyes do not behold our 
child. Perhaps you have drowned him in your water. 
Tell us truly and quickly.” Thus they were accustomed 
to plead with the Ganga river. 25. Through Eknath’s 
going to meet with his Sadguru the aged couple were sunk 
in the sea of distress, and as they mourned day and night 
their eyes were weakened by their weeping. 26. Kindred, 
near relations, even the slanderers, close friends and other 
good people used to come to their home and seek to comfort 
them. 27. They would say, “He is young in years, but 
in character he is noble. His mind was always in the 
attitude of worshipping God. He was always listening ta 
the reading of the Purdns. 28. He was strongly attached 
to sddhus and sants, and distinguished Vaishnavas. On 
his lips there was unceasingly the worshipful praise ofSri 
Rim. 29. As we with pleasure watched his mental 
ability, we used to feel supreme wonder. The Lord-of- 
Vaikuntha is surely his protector. Mourn no longer. 30. 
He had a strong attraction to listening to philosophical 
books. We certainly think that he must have attached 
himself somewhere to some good man.” 31. One 
suggested that as Eknath was accustomed to sit with the 
Pandit listening to his reading of the Purdns, the Pandit 
may have enticed the boy away, and taken him away with 
him to the army. 32. This suggestion, made by one of 
them, was approved by all, that the Purdnik had made the 
child his disciple, and enticed him away. 33. Thinking 
of this possibility the aged couple were moved with both 
joy and sorrow. They proceeded to the Pandit’s house 
and there enquired. How they enquired, listen. 34. 


48 EKNATH 


“The Purdnik has gone away to the army. He has 
deceived the child and enticed him away. We are in great 
sorrow, and are mourning night and day.” 35. The 
people of the house replied to this, “The master of the house 
has gone to the army, it is true, but whether he took the 
child with him we do not know.” 36. The people of the city, 
however, continued to suspect that Eknath did go away 
with him, and the sorrowing grandfather and grandmother 
watched for his return. 37. They expected the Purdnik 
would soon return from the army, and would bring the 
child back with him, so they kept watching day and night. 
Four years thus passed. 38, Suddenly the army returned, 
and the couple went again to thePurdnik’s house, and said, 
“The Purdnik has seduced our boy and taken him away. 
The Purdwik is a vallain hero indeed! 39, He has 
deceived our child in some way, made him his disciple, 
and taken him far away. If he does not bring him back 
safely, we shall commit suicide here at his door.” 40. The 
people of the house hearing this threat were alarmed and 
sent a letter to the Purdnik, saying, “Have you deccived 
Eka and enticed him away, or has a false charge come upon 
vour” 41. When the Brahman received the letter from 
his home folk he was greatly distressed, and exclaimed. “I 
have truly committed no wrong, and yet this false charge 
has come upon me.” 42. The Pandit acquainted his 
employer with the matter, took his pay, and started home, 
saying to himself, “I wonder where Eknath has gone to. 
Suspicion has fallen on me. 43. Eknath did give me an 
intimation of his intense desire to go to Devagiri t. meet 
with the Sri Guru Janardan.” 44. As this recollection 
Suddenly came to him he said to himself, “I will go there in 
search of Eknath, and if he is there, I will bring him back 


EKNATH 49 


with me.” 45. With this thought in mind, the Puranik 
came to Devagiri, and meeting Janardanpant related the 
whole matter to him. 46. The Sadguru replied, “ Eknath 
was here up to the present. By his faithful service he 
gratified me. 47. And now at my command indeed he 
has gone on a distant pilgrimage.” Janardan then sent a. 
letter by the Purdnik to the grandparents that they should 
not be in the least concerned about Eknath. 48. The: 
Purdnik on his return to Pratishthana went to Eknath’s 
home where he found the aged couple sitting and told them. 
the news. 49. “ Your Eknath went to Devagiri to visit. 
Janardan. Here is a letter in Janardan’s own handwrit- 
ing.” And he showed it to them. 50. Hearing the news. 
of the finding of their lost son, they were overjoyed, excla- 
iming, ‘We were dying, but life has returned. We had. 
no one to care for us.” 51. When they were certain that the 
news was truce they could hardly believe their ears. They: 
brought sugar and put it into the Purdnik’s mouth. 52.. 
The Purdyik further added, “If you do not believe me, 
go yourselves to Devagiri and enquire of Janardan.” 
53. And with this remark the Brahman returned 
to his home. The aged couple, however, were greatly 
troubled in their minds as to what to do. 54. “If we 
should send a man to Devagiri,” they said to one another, 
“we have no money to give him. So let us go ourselves ta 
that place and see Janardan.” 


THE GRANDPARENTS VISIT JANARDAN. 


55. And so deciding, and slowly, slowly trudging 
along the path, they came to Devagiri, and met Janardan. 
56. They related to him their story from beginning to 


50 EKNATH 


end, with eyes filled with tears. “ Nath has cast us off, 
and has not returned home.” 57. Janardan arose to 
receive them, welcomed them with affection, and told them 
in loving words of the noble character of Eknath. 58. 
“In order to save the Universe, Sri Vishnu has become in 
him an avatér. Blessed is your holy family line. Salva- 
tion has come to your whole lineage. 59. He seems to 
your minds to be merely a child, but in reality he is 
Pandurang in human form. You will in the future observe 
the course of his life, and then your doubts will vanish.” 
60. With these assurances of Janirdan they were comfor- 
ted, and said, “ Full six months must pass, and then Nath 
will return.” 61. Janardan made them stay in his home 
for a month, and with affection he gave them to eat always 
fresh and daintily cooked food. 62. He gave them clothes, 
adornments, ornaments and an abundance of money to 
spend, and finally with his own hand he wrote a letter 
to be given to Eknath. 63. The substance of the letter 
was this, “ As soon as you see this letter cease your wander- 
ings to sacred places, and make your abode there at 
Pratishthana.” 64. The Sadguru wrote this letter with 
His own hand, and gave it to them. He provided horses 
and men to accompany them, and he personally saw them 
on their way. 65. Janardan also further said to 
them, “After visiting the sacred watering places on 
the North and the Manas Lake, Eknath will on his 
return pass through Paithan, and you must be 
on the watch to recognize him. 66. After you 
show him my letter he will not go on any further. Do 
not be troubled any longer in your minds.” Such were 
his assurances. 67. The couple were made happy by 
these words of Janardan, and returning to Paithan related 


EKNATH 51 


their whole story. 68. To every one they praised the 
nobleness of Janardan. The letter they preserved very 
carefully, and told every one about it, 69. saying, “If 
Eknath should suddenly arrive, perhaps in the next six 
months, and you should recognize him, so plan that he 
remain.” 


EKNATH’S WANDERINGS. 


70. To turn now to Eknath. By the command of 
his Sadguru he had gone on this pilgrimage. His thought 
and mind were filled with Janardan. He saw only him in 
all the animate and the inanimate of the three worlds. 71. 
He visited many sacred watering places and shrines to set 
an example to the people. Wherever he found a restful 
place he tarried a three-night. 72. In some places finding a 
company of saints he would remain a five-night. He would 
worship and bathe at such places, and leave whenever it so 
pleased him. 73. He visited the great river watering places, 
the Pirna, Payoshni, Tapati, Narmada. The sight of 
Mahakalesvara at Avanti brought peace to his mind. 74. 
He visited also Mathura, Gokul and Vrindavana with great 
delight, where loving Vaishnavas wag their heads as they 
sing the praises of God. 75. At such places he found 
pious Bhaktas. We saw their cermonious worship of 
Vishnu. He Jooked upon them with great delight. His 
heart was charmed with that place. 76. It made him 
exclaim, “Blessed, blessed is this holy _ place. 
Here Chakrapani performed his miraculous deeds.” In 
meeting the Vaishnavas who lived at the place he was very 
happy. 77. The performance of rds, the //ari-kitans, the 
people all intent on worship, Krishna being in their thoughts 


5 EKNATH 


and minds, all this deeply impressed him. 78. Sri Eknath 
spent many days at this Vishnu holy place. Then making 
his namaskéra to God he started on his further journey. 
79. He soon arrived at Banares (Varanasi,) the supreme 
holy place. He bathed in the Manikarnikad, and worshipped 
before Visvesvara. 80. He remained there a five-night, 
and then hastened on with the idea that through the power 
of Sri Janardan he might visit that place again. 81. He 
continued his way to Prayadg, and bathed at the junction 
of the three rivers. The sight of Madhava brought peace 
to his soul. 82. He journeyed on to Gaya, where with 
love he bowed before the feet of Sri Vishnu, and as he 
worshipped in reverence he experienced joy. 83. Those who 
with an undivided devotional spirit place body, speech and 
mind at the feet of Vishnu, by that very fact perform the 
ceremonies at Gaya. Who can count their uncountable good 
deeds that give them this opportunity? 84. Those who are 
wholly devoted to the feet of Sri Hari, are by that very fact 
performers of all good deeds. And as their feet touch 
the tirthas these watering places become purified. 85. 
The rivers Yamuna, Godavari, Rhagirthi, Krishna, Venyd, 
Sarasvati, Narmada, Tapi, Bhimarathi, all long for the 
coming of the saints. 86. Janardan had known of their 
desire and had compassion on them. He therefore had 
commanded [knath to visit all the sacred watering places. 
87. And Sri Nath, filled completely with the thought that 
Janardan pervaded mankind, wandered from tirtha to 
tirtha, the principal ones of which I have already mentioned, 
88. After visiting Gaya, Prayaig and Kasi, he journeyed on 
to Ayodhya. The people living at this Kshetra (holy place) 
are devoted to the name of Ram. 89. He worshipped 
before the images of Rim, Sita, Lakshmana, Bharata and 


EKNATH 53 


Satrughna, which brought a feeling of peace to his mind. 
90. To Eknath all Vishnu kshetras were especially attrac- 
tive, for, there, loving Vaishnavas live, and in their 
love wag their heads in singing Vishnu’s _ praise. 
91. After seeing Ayodhya, he went to Badrinath, 
visited the tirtha of Adipushkara, bathing in its water. 92. 
‘At the mere sight of Pushkara all filth of the Kali yuga is 
immediately destroyed. This place also was purified by 
the coming there of Eknath. 93. Then he went into the 
Himalayas, to where the water of the Bhagirathi starts to 
flow, where there is a very profound gorge, which the eye 
can hardly bear look down into. 94. He had to sit in 
the sling (of the rope bridge) in order to cross to the other 
side, but Eknath did not experience the slightest fear. 95. 
With superlative delight he viewed that spot, and seeing 
Badri Narayana he made his sashtaiga namaskar before 
him. 96. Just as in Nar-Narayana there is no idea of 
difference between them, so God and a Bhokta, one in 
nature, mutually increase the glory of one another. 97. 
All the dwellers at that Kshetra, with loving devotion praise 
the miraculous deeds of Sri Hari. Because Udhava 
had been sent to this hermitage of Badrika, he there 
inaugurated this custom. 98. Whatever examples the 
saints set, the pious follow accordingly, and all doubts 
vanishing they become Jivanmuktas (liberated though alive) 
99. Taking leave of Badrinath, Eknath came to Dvarka. 
And seeing a lonely place in a forest he began there to 
worship Sri Hari. 100. His mind became absorbed 
in his name and form and in this contemplation he lost all 
bodily consciousness. The whole universe seemed to be 
Janardan, including himself. 101. With that thought in 
mind he went to Dvarakapuri, and as he bathed on the banks 


54 EKNATH 


of the Gomati he felt joy in his heart. 102. He then 
proceeded to the temple, and with love made a sdshtang 
namaskar. Seeing the image of Sri Krishna he was made 
happy. 103.  Eknath remained here a whole month, 
observing the morning, noon and evening offerings and 
worship, and listening to the praise services. 104. And 
now to see with his own eves the southern sacred watering 
places, he turned southward from there. Journeying, the 
first place to greet his sight was Junagad, the place where 
Narsi Mehta had lived. 105. Eknath also visited the place 
where the ancient idol of Dvarak4 seeing the devotion of 
his bhakta came to Dakur in love. 106. Thus having 
visited the northern tirthas thoroughly, and having seen the 
twelve chief Siva shrines, and the seven chief cities, he 
danced in the fulness of his joy. 


EKNATH RETURNS TO PRATISHTHANA. 


107. Then gradually making his way he arrived at 
the holy city of Pratishthana. He bathed by the bank of 
the Goda river, and made his namaskaér to Pimpalesvar. 
108. Lest any of the people of the town should recognize 
him, and so embarrass him here, he kept himself hidden in 
the temple from early morning on. 109. But as he needed 
food, at noon time he had to wander into the town, and 
whenever and whatever he received of food he contentedly 
ate. 110. He had conquered his appetite in restraining 
his senses. He was no longer conscious of what was sweet 
to the taste. Whether he was honored or dishonored was 
alike to him, for enemy or friend seemed to be Janardan 
himself. 111. It was with this thought that Eknath had 
visited the tirthas and now had arrived here at Pratishthana. 


EKNATH 55 


As he one day entered the town his grandparents suddenly 
saw him. 112. Sri Nath recognized them at once, 
and made a mental xamaskdr to them. “If I should make 
myself known to them,” he thought, “they will entangle 
me in the worldly life. 113. The worldly life is a difficult 
position io be in. I shall fail in obedience to the command 
of my Sadguru. The southern sacred watering places are 
still to be visited, and I must hasten away.” 114. With 
this thought in mind he did not make himself known to 
them, but his grandfather and grandmother looking intently 
at him suddenly recognized the marks of his identity. 115. 
“Tt is a long time,” they said, “since as a child he left us and 
went away. His body has reached adulthood. We are in 
doubt.” 116. Reasoning thus they both said to him on a 
chance, “ Bapa, you cast us off. How could you have 
made your heart so cruel,” and with this their 
eyes were filled with tears. 117. While the grandparents 
were thus talking to him a crowd of men and women 
collected, and they declared, ‘He is surely Nath.” 118. 
While one, however, said, ‘“ He is he most certainly,” 
another remarked, “I have my doubts. The Fates are 
against the aged couple. One cannot understand the ways 
of Fate.” 119. But Eknath would not reply, either by 
saying he was or was not Eknath, and as he arose to go 
away his grandparents seized hold of him. 120. And 
bringing out the letter of command which they had already 
procured from Sri Janardan, in his own handwriting, they 
showed it to him. 121. Sri Nath recognized it at once, 
and affectionately touched his forehead to it in’ worship. 
And taking in its meaning he sat down on the very spot 
where he then was. 122. Just as the Vindhya range of 
mountains fell to the earth as it bowed its head worshipfully 


36 EKNATH 


to the command of the rishi Agasti, so as soon as Eknath 
had read the letter of Janardan he sat down on the ground 
on the very spot where he then was. 123. The people 
said to him, “There is no habitation here. Come along 
to your home.” But this Videhi would listen to none of 
them. He kept dumb. He would not utter a word. 124. The 
animate and the inanimate world seemed to him as Méyé. 
It appeared to him as Janirdan. His body therefore knew 
neither cold nor heat. Though possessing a body he was 
unconscious of a body. 125. There were present pious 
people who suggested that food should be brought and 
served to him at once, and at that very spot. 126. What 
these all-wise suggested was listened to as an acceptable 
plan by the grandparents. They served him food at that 
place and Sri Nath ate it lovingly. 127. For three days 
he did not rise at all from that spot. His Grandfather and 
grandmother had to come there, seeing how determined he 
was. 128. He had no protection from the cold, heat or 
wind, and so some of the pious people of the town built 
-a thatched roof over him. 129. Here Eknath adorned 
with sdivik signs performed his Bhajans with enthusiasm, 
.and the people hearing him were astonished. 130. And 
-exclaimed, “He is still in his youth, and yet possesses com- 
‘plete vairdgya. One should not call him a human being. 
He seems a divine avatar.” 


EKNATH PERFORMS KIRTANS. 


131. Thus praising him, people began to come to see 
‘him morning, noon, and night, and seeing their loving 
-bhokti, he would perform services of praise. 132. Without 
‘any previous study he would by inspiration expound them, 


EKNATH 57 


and compose with ease verses in which he described the 
wonderful deeds of Sri Hari. 133. He had no one to 
take the leading part in the chorus, and so God Pandurang 
felt concern and himself took the form of a Brahman and 
aided him in his kirtans. 134. As the words flowed 
from Eknith’s lips the Brahman would reutter them 
with ease and thus with the cymbals in his hand he 
would accompany Eknath in the flow of sweet music. 
135. The Divinity of every form of song, the God-of-Gods, 
the Husband-of-Rukmini, dwelling within Eknath’s soul 
brought to his recollection the words of his song. 136. 
And at the same time outwardly Sri Hari took the leading 
part in the chorus (dhruvapad). Yet no one knew this, 
even though they were looking at him directly with their 
eyes. 


EKNATH’S INFLUENCE FOR GOOD. 


137. Hearers, as_ they listened to Eknath’s ktrtans 
lost all bodily consciousness. And if his words fell on 
the ears of evil minded men they were changed into good 
men. 138. The dwellers in that sacred city, both men 
and women, discussed him among themselves, saying, “ Sri 
Eknath has become an avatdr to save the world. 139. No 
one can sing such loving songs and give such kirians, as 
he can. In the mere listening to them the minds of all are 
deeply impressed. Thus people praised him. 140. As 
he continued giving these kirtans, the influential and 
wealthy citizens of the town took notice of them, and finally 
- erected for him a building on which they spent much money. 
141. They also gave to Eknath a piece of land, a house, 
-and a little open square. They held a house warming, and 


58 EKNATH 


offerings of food were made to Brahmans, to their entire- 
satisfaction. 142. His grandfather and grandmother comfort- 
ed at last, brought their household gods with them and lived” 
with him in this house. 143. Pious people gave them: 
food and raiment of their free will, The goddess-of- 
plenty is always found serving him who is a friend to the 
Lord-of-Vaikuntha. 144. On the Eleventh of the months 
Eknath began to hold watch-night kirtans in praise of 
Hari that lasted all night long. Crowds of people attended‘ 
to listen and to repeat in chorus the names and attributes 


of God. 


EKNATH CELEBRATES KRISHNA’S BIRTHDAY. 


145. One day Sri Eknath suddenly announced that: 
on Krishna’s birthday in the month of Sravana, a festival 
of love would be held. The idea was approved by all. 
146. Rich merchants brought the things needed for the cele- 
bration in great abundance. The temple was whitewashed 
and decorated and a light bamboo structure was erected 
for the idol. 147. Some Brahmans went to Devagiri and met 
Janardan. They told him all about Eknath. Janardan heard 
their story with great joy. 148. Just as a father feels satis- 
faction when he hears of his son's success, or as a mother 
feels keen delight in her soul when she sees the cunning 
ways of her child. 149. Just so the soul of the Sadguru could 
not contain his supreme joy. ‘And with all his retinue he - 
started on his journey to visit Eknath. 150. He had made - 
many preparations for assisting at the Krishna festival, 
and taking them along the journey began. 151. With 
musical instruments, flags and numerous eagle banners the - 
procession marched along the way with great enthusiasm: 


EKNATH 59 


to the accompaniment of stirring music. 152. In order 
to feed the Brahmans he took provisions along with 
him, made into bundles and carried on pack bullocks, and 
which he sent on ahead of him. 153. When Janardan 
arrived at Pratishthana he went to Eknath’s house. As he 
approached it a marvel greeted his eyes. 154. At the 
main door Sri Dattatreya stood in the form of a door keeper. 
He had in his hands the trident, and looked just like 
Siva (Tripurari). 155. As Janadan’s eyes fell upon 
him he recognized the Jagadguru at once, and making a 
sdshtanga namaskar he embraced him affectionately. 156. 
Sri Datta then explained to Janardan, “Eknath is in reality 
Pandurang in human form; therefore out of love for him 
I have taken my abode here at his main door.” 157. 
With this explanation, a marvel occurred. Datta suddenly 
took human form and went inside to announce to Eknath 
Janardan’s arrival. 158. “ Janardan has come from 
Devagiri with all his retinue to meet you,” he announced. 
Eknath hearing this announcement was overjoyed. 159. 
And when he heard the coming of his Sadguru, 
he prostrated himself, affectionately embraced him, and 
clasped his feet. 160. TEknath took Janardan by the hand 
and led him within the house, he seated his sadguru, and 
washed his feet with his own hands. 161. And as he 
drank the water with which the feet had been washed, his 
soul felt supreme joy. He then brought forward the 
materials for worship and offered them to his Sadguru. 162. 
He smeared on his person the pulp of the Chandan wood. 
He placed a garland of flowers around his neck, 
and he waved over the Sadguru in human form the 
incense, the lights and the five-lamptray. 163. After 
Eknath had thus worshipped him he told him all his story 


60 EKNATH 


from beginning to end. Although Janardan was possessed 
with inner sight, yet he listened, manifesting loving interest. 
164. The festival of the birth of Krishna was held in 
Eknath’s house. Musical instruments gave out their sweet 
sounds, The anointing and worship of the idol was 
followed by its installation in the bamboo structure. 165. 
‘All the inhabitants of the sacred city came in an uninter- 
rupted flow for a darsana of the idol. They brought with 
them varieties of daintily prepared food, and fed the 
Brahmans. 166. Sri Janardan sat on a seat facing the 
audience. Eknath performed the kirtan before him. To 
describe the greatness of joy that was felt all language fails. 
167. Pandurang, taking the form of a Brahman, led the 
chorus. He danced with little bells on his feet. God has 
great love for his Bhaktas. 168. As words of 
inspiration fell from the lips of Eknath the Brah- 
man took up the same in chorus, repeating them as if he 
already knew them by heart. 169. To this the men and 
women of the sacred city listened and marvelled, exclaim- 
ing ‘“‘ This distinguished Brahman, leader of the chorus, is 
able to repeat the whole story. 170. The two (Eknath 
and the Brahman) are but one body. The debt of love 
they owe one another belongs to a former birth. Supreme 
good fortune has come to us. It is for this that the two 
have come together.” 171. During the daytime offer- 
ings of food were made to the Brahmans. At 
night Hori Kirtans were performed and by all this 
the minds of the pious folk of Paithan were 
deeply impressed. 172. On the ninth of the 
month, a great quantity of dainty food was prepared, 
and the partaking crowd was large. The distinguished 
Vaishnavas, always of loving hearts, ended the fasting. 


EKNATH 61 


173. Then followed the relating of the childish pranks 
of the infant Krishna, and the ceremony of the Gopalkala 
was begun. The parts of Vadaje, Vankude and Pendhe 
were taken. Many other characters were also assumed. 174. 
There was wrestling and the games of lavi, hamama, hum- 
bari lapandiiva. Sri Nath played the part of Yasoda im 
churning, and Hari ate the butter. 175. They performed 
with gesticulations the games of ball, of phugadi, pinga and 
other kinds of amusements. Indeed whatever sports were. 
related in the Bhagavata, they imitated here. 176. 
Eknath went through a dramatic performance and’ 
appeared in many different guises. He _ repeated 
poems of inspiration. The occasion was one of unusual in- 
terest. 177. Chakrapani, who had assumed the form of 
chorus leader, repeated his words after him. The hearers 
marvelled and laughed heartily. 178. The six varieties 
of darsanas, the thirty six special heresies, and the Siddhanta. 
were explained by Eknith according to established truths, 
and excellently uttered. 179. The surface meaning was 
made plain. The ignorant were thereby made joyous, and 
the wise realized the Siddhaénta. They called his words 
inspired. 180. Thus dancing and singing, the idol of Sri 
Krishna was placed finally on the swinging cot. Then an 
auspicious 4rati was performed and sweetmeats were dis- 
tributed. 181.  Janardan now asked Eknath, “Who 
is the Brahman who leads the chorus. Where 
is he from, and who is he? Ask him his name. 
182. We leads the chorus in a most unusual 
way. In acting and supporting your acting and in various. 
brilliant ways, you and he appear as if you were one body. 
It does not seem to me as though you were two persons. 
183. You have laid up a store of good deeds, therefore 


62 EKNATH 


you have this association with him. He puts life into the 
kirtans. Hearers find rest of soul in listening to him. 
184. You and he should be joined together in this way 
for life. If this could be, the salvation of the world would 
be greatly promoted as men listen to the music of the 
Rirtans.” 185. Eknath then asked him, ‘ You are a Brah- 
man, from what place, and who are you? Where is your 
home, what is your name. Tell us.” 186. The Husband- 
of-Rukmini listened and replied, ‘““I have no fixed abode. 
Where I discover loving pious men, I spend my time in 
their company. 187. Vithoba is the name of this body of 
mine. I have not the snare of wife or son. In kirtans 
I lead the chorus. I am _ expert only in this. 
488. I have no other desire in my fheart but 
to live always in your company, being content 
with a morsel of food.” This is all he told them of what 
might identify him. 189. Janardan listened to this 
reply, and was greatly delighted, but it did not 
Suggest itself to him that he was in reality the 
Husband-of-Indira. 190. For fourteen days there 
had continued this giving of food to Brahmans and 
when all these provisions were distributed, Janardan said. 


JANARDAN INSTRUCTS EKNATH TO MARRY. 


191. “I am now going back to Devagiri.” As he 
was taking leave of the aged couple, they touched their 
heads to his feet and said, ‘‘ We have one request to make 
of you, your lordship. 192. Of the descendants of 
Bhanudas, Nath is the only surviving member. Ly your 
command he has remained here, but his mind is unattached 
to things of this world. 193. He has no wish to become 


EKNATH 63 


a householder. So we plead at your feet that the Svdmi 
amay give him a command to marry. 194, If you bring 
about his marriage we shall be comforted. The fasting 
of our eyes will cease, and the Svdmi will gain glory.” 
195. Janardan was deeply moved, hearing this pitiful 
plea of the aged couple. He called Eknath to him and 
spoke to him nectar words. 196. “If a bride comes to 
you of her own free choice, then without hesitation enter 
the marriage bond. There is no objection to your living 
the houscholder’s life, and thus freeing yourself from the 
possibility of public scandal. 197. Of all the superior 
Aésrams the Grihasthasram is the noblest. Here you can con- 
trol the organs of sense, and can in happiness carry on all 
your special duties. 198, Such as kindness to all crea- 
tures, wearing away your body in deeds of benevolence to 
others, giving food to Brahmans, guests and the hungry, 
199. The worship of Vishnu with due ceremonials, 
Kirtans performed in love, and the continued repeating of 
the names and attributes of God with the feeling of love.” 
200. Lknath quietly accepted this command of his 
Sadguru. In silence he touched his forehead to Janardan’s 
feet, and then replied, “If this is in my fate, it will take 
place.” 201. Leaving this command with Eknath that he 
should give happiness to his grandparents by marry- 
ing, Janardan returned to Devagiri with all his retinue. 
202. Eknath saw his Sadguru on his way. He kept the 
memory of him in the recesses of his heart. There was 
no separation from his Guru even for a moment, for all 
within him and without him was in the form of his Guru. 
203. And Janardan, having left his friendship, his affec- 
tion and love with Eknath, arrived at Devagiri with his 
retinue. 


64 EKNATH 


204. The narrator of the delightful story in the next 
chapter is Sri Rukminipati himself. I  Mahipati, am 
merely the pretext. You wise people, realize this by 
experience. 205. This is the Sri Bhaktalilimrita. By 
merely listening to it one’s desires are fulfilled. Listen 
then to it, ye loving pious Bhaktas. This is the fifteenth 
delightful chapter. 


CHAPTER 16. 
Of the Bhaktalilamrita. 
MAHIPATI’S INVOCATION. 


1. Obeisance to Sri GaneSa. Victory to Thee 
Recumbent on the serpent, Immeasurable-One, Li- 
mitless, Without-name, Uncomposed-of-the-three-Gunas, 
Adorable-deity of the-God-that-burned-the-God-of-Love, 
Protector-of-true-bhakias. 2. Lord of the Serpent- 
Enemy (Garuda,) Destroyer-of-Sorrow, Thou-who-lovest- 
as-his-own-soul-the-daughter-of-the-Ocean. Dweller-in- 
the-Ocean, Recliner-on-the-Serpent, Saviour-of-the-Sinner, 
Ocean-of-mercy. 3. Dweller-in-Vaikuntha, Infinitely- 
generous-One, Thou-whose-abode-is-the | whole-of-the-uni- 
verse. Brahma is thy name, Supreme God, Thou art 
Brahma, everlastingly good. 4. Holder-up-of mount- 
Govardhan, Lord-of-the-cows, Beloved-of-Gopis, Madana- 
in-visible-form, Thou dwellest in the organs of beings, and 
hence thou art called Gosavi. 5. Do thou now, who art 
constantly seated in my heart, give my mind power of 
recollection. Recite through me this Sri Bhaktalilamrita, 
whereby the love of the hearers may well up and overflow. 


EKNATH 65 


6. At the close of the last chapter, the story was that of 
Janardan instructing Eknath to live as a householder, and 
preach the Bhakti marga. 7. Having thus instructed him 
he prepared to return to Devagiri. And now good folk 
and pious, listen to the further recital full of deep 
meaning. 


THE GRANDPARENTS SEARCH FOR A 
BRIDE. 


8. The aged grandfather and grandmother now be- 
came worried night and day, thinking, “Oh if we could 
but find a bride for Eknath, he might be married before 
our eyes.” 9. As they thus conversed with one another, 
Pious people remarked to them, “God is your helper in 
this matter. Let not your heart be in the least troubled. 
10. Sri Nath’s mind is entirely disattached from the world,. 
it is true, and we are troubled as to whether he will be 
willing to marry or not, hut Pandurang has fulfilled our 
longings. 11. Eknath will not at all transgress the com- 
mand of Janirdan. When the season for marriages 
arrives, we shall make great effort.” 12. Hearing these 
reassuring words of the pious folk, the grandparents were 
comforted. Time passed by, and now the season for 
marriages arrived. 


HOW THE BRIDE WAS FOUND. 


13. Now there was in a certain town a Brahman, 
whose daughter had reached the marriagable age. He had 


been looking for a husband for her, but as yet the horoscope 
5 


66 EKNATH 


would not agree with that of anyone. 14. While in this great- 
ly troubled state of mind, he was asleep at night, and Pan- 
durang came to him in a dream, and told him in the vision 
as follows. 15. “At Pratishthdana, on the bank of the Ganga, 
[Godavari] there is living a Vishnu bhakta, named Eknath, 
a man of beautiful character. Go and place your daughter 
in that family, well adorned.” 16. This vision, given by 
the Husband-of-Rukmini was by night. The Brahman 
suddenly awoke, and marvelled in his mind over the vision. 
17. He told his wife of this vision, and himself coming 
to Pratishthana enquired of the people where Eknath lived. 
18. They pointed out his house, and the Brahman went 
‘to see him, and related what the Husband-of-Rukmini had 
‘told him in the vision. 19. He bowed in reverence to 
the grandfather and grandmother, and said, “I give my 
daughter to your grandson.” 20. The offer made to 
them was acceptable to the grandparents. They called in 
the Joshi astrologers, and handed to them the astral birth 
records. 21. As the astrologer read the signs of the 
Zodiac and the constellations he found the combination that 
revealed the future relation of bride and bridegroom to be 
thirty-six. So the day for the marriage was deter- 
mined to the satisfaction of both parties. 22. The 
Brahman gave a promise to the father of the bridgroom, 
saying, “I will begin to make preparations, and will come 
to Pratishthana with my daughter, wife and attendants. 23. 
To give my daughter, well adorned, into your family, will 
mean for me an especially good deed.” And with this 
promise the father of the bride returned to his home, 24. 
saying to his wife, “I have found a most unusual husband 
‘for our daughter, a most pious, and most distinguished 
‘Vaishnava. He seems to me to be a divine avatdra.” 


EKNATH 67 


25. Happy in mind they began preparing at their home 
things (needful for the marriage.) Now let us turn to 
the city of Pratishthina. Listen to what took place 
there. 


WEDDING PREPARATIONS. 


26. The grandparents marvelled at the growing great 
fame of Eknath, an avatdra in the family line of Chakra- 
pani, and light of that line. 27. Yet as they sat in their 
home, they expressed their thoughts to one another thus, 
“The ceremony is going to be performed at our house, but 
our relatives are far away. 28. The province of Vijapur, is, 
as a matter of fact, seventeen Yojanas distant. Our relatives 
and dear friends are there. Let us send a letter of invita- 
tion to them.” 29. There lived there a son of a brother, 
a most pious man, a Vaishnava, named Uddhava. A letter, 
accordingly, was written to his address, inviting him to 
the wedding. 30. Other letters of invitation were also written 
to the address of other dear friends, relatives and connec- 
tions, beautifully adorned with saffron figures, and the 
contents were in the politest terms, as follows :—31. “We 
are, in fact, aged. This is the last ceremony we can 
undertake (in our life). Come with all your retinue. 
We shall be eagerly watching for you.” 32. A hired 
servant was engaged as a carrier, and the letters were 
sent by him. (In the mean time) the pious people of 
Pratishthana were wrestling hard over the preparations for 
the wedding. 33. The Universe is kind to him, to whom 
Sri Hari is associated as a close friend. Prosperity comes 
to serve him at his home, and there is no lack in worldly 
things. 34. The letters of invitation were sent 
to the distant and near relatives in the province of Vijapur. 


68 EKNATH 


‘As soon as the letters were read to them they felt very 
pleased. 35. Uddhava, the wise, the perfect Vaishnava, 
carried with him all his wedding preparations, and with 
his wife arrived at Pratishthina. 36. He met the aged 
couple with the greatest joy. Uddhava fell at Eknath’s 
feet, and embraced him lifting up his hands. 37. And 
as they thus lovingly embraced, their minds experienced 
a sense of supreme rest. Their eyes filled with tears, as 
they realized the unusual circumstance of their meeting. 
38. As to the father of the bride, who lived at a distance 
from Pratishthana, he made preparations for food on a 
large scale. The packs were placed on bullocks and were 
sent ahead. 39. He provided garments, and ornaments 
for both parties. Taking the marriage party with him, 
he arrived at Pratishthina. 40. He found a spacious 
wéada@ and he and his wife lodged there. Invitations were 
sent to people in the city, announcing that the marriage 
would take place on the morrow. 


THE WEDDING CEREMONIES. 


41. The preliminary ceremonies began, the honouring 
of God, feasting the Brahmans, gifts of clothing were ziven 
by Brahmans and others, playing of wedding music, the tur- 
meric ceremony on bride and briterracm, 42. Divinely 
dainty food of many varieties was cocked in the mondaps 
of each party. The feasting of the Brahmans was 
worthy of the occasion, as ale tiv dining of «thers. 
43. On the part of the father of the bridcyroom, 
Uddhava was chief director. All the preparations 
he took upon himself, and he did it with the 
greatest joy. 44. The pious people of the sacred 


EKNATH 69 


city paid respect to his suggestions. Whatever plan 
Uddhava proposed, they acted accordingly. 45. Accom- 
panied by the relatives, by the citizens, by the Brahmans, 
to the loud sound of the wedding music, they moved in 
procession to pay honor to the bridegroom. 46. With 
baskets full of the wedding meats, the bride’s party of 
women joined the procession, and having given garments 
and ornaments to the bridegroom, they brought him to their 
wedding mandap in gay procession. 47. The bridegroom 
was duly honoured on arrival, the Brahmans held the 
marriage curtain between bride and bridegroom. The 
solemn words were intuned, “ Sdvadhdnam, Sdvadhadnam, 
Think of Sri Krishna.” 48. Repeating the Ashtakas, the 
Brahmans completed the marriage ceremony, and 
the ultimate aim was accomplished. |The wedding music 
sounded loud and continuous. 49. As this union of Prakrtt 
and Purusha took place all rejoiced. The offering of parched 
rice was then made, and gifts were distributed 
to all present. 50. The ceremonics of Sunmukh 
and Telvan, the worshipping of the baskets, the 
Dhendé dance, the entry of the bride into the 
bridegroom’s house, the worship of Lakshmi, all these 
were duly performed. 51. For five days the wedding 
festivities were continued with the proper ceremonies. 
Gifts of garments were distributed to all. There was no 
Jack of anything. 52. After the bride’s father had thus 
given away his daughter in marriage, he returned to his 
home. The grandparents seeing with their own eyes their 
grand-daughter-in-law, were comforted. 53. The friends who 
had come in marriage procession from the Province of 
Vijapura, they also, supremely delighted at the events, 
returend to their homes. 54. Uddhava alone remained 


70 EKNATH 


behind, filled with the desire to serve Eknath, and in body, 
speech and mind he was ever present, ready to render 
service. 55. And knowing Eknath’s thoughts, Uddhava, 
without being told, knew what to do and what not to do. 
Eknath thus had no worries of any kind, and his heart 
was filled with love. 


EKNATH AND HIS WIFE GIRJABAI. 


56. His wife, Girjabai by name, supremely noble in 
character, was always at hand ready to serve Sri Eknath. 
57. She was young in years, a mere child, but she knew 
well all customary household duties, and paid respect to 
the wishes of the grandparents, obeying whatever was told 
her. 58. Thus, as these aged grandparents saw the noble 
character of their grand-daughter-in-law, they were 
comforted, and said, “By the favor of Janardan 
the longing of our eyes has been fulfilled.” 59. The new 
couple adopted the method of life of living on whatever 
was given to them, yet clothing and food came to them 
in abundance. So that Brahmans received offerings and 
the hungry were fed. 60. In giving out food, no question 
of caste was raised. To Eknath Janardan filled the uni- 
verse, and so he was all kindness to every creature. 61. 
Formerly Bhanudas had installed an idol of Pandurang ia 
a shrine. Eknath worshipped this idol with loving devo- 
tion. 62. Immediately after the second praher of each 
day Eknath gave offerings to the Brahmans, at the third 
prahar he gave a reading of the Purdnas, at night there 
was always a kirtan. 63. Men and women, dwellers im 
that sacred city, came with love and reverence to listen, and 
day by day Eknath’s fame greatly increased. 


EKNATH 71 
THE DEATH OF THE GRANDPARENTS. 


64. The grandparents saw before their very eyes, for 
many days, this mode of life. Then their bodily life came 
to an end, and they went to the Vaikuntha world. 65. Sri 
Eknath, with his own hands, performed the funeral rites, 
and helped them on to their good ending. Although him- 
self not under the law of karma or akarma, yet for the 
instruction of the crowd he performed the customary 
funeral rites. 66. Sri Vitthal, in the guise of a Brahman, 
continued to sing in his kirtans. He whom even Brahma 
and the other Gods cannot apprehend, even He 
remained there as leader in the chorus. 67. Yogis per- 
form their eight modes in contemplation, but that does 
not give them the sight of the sagun God. But because 
of Eknath’s bhakti, he was there playing on the cymbal and 
singing with him. 


THE DEATH OF JANARDAN AND CELEBRATION 
OF THE SIXTH. 


68. Suddenly some one came from Devagiri bringing 
the news that Janardan Swami had left his body behind, 
and gone to the Vaikuntha world. 69. Eknath heard the 
news of his Sadgurw’s departure, and yet felt no sorrow 
whatever, for Janardan, the Indestructible-one, the Un- 
manifested, the All-perfect was pervading all beings. 70: 
‘Yet taking Uddhava aside he instructed him to celebrate 
the Sixth of the month, and lovingly make preparations. 
71. Uddhava touched his forehead to Eknath’s feet, and 
said, “ Tell me what is the reason for celebrating the Sixth 
of the month.” 72. Observing his purpose, Eknath 


72 EKNATH 


told the whole reason. ‘“ The Sixth of the month, Uddhava, 
is the birthday of Janardan. 73. On the sixth of 
Phalgun, during the dark half of the moon, Janardan had 
the vision of Dattatreya given him, and on the same date 
Dattatreya gave me his full blessing. 74. On this same 
date also Janardan left his body behind, and became nirgun. 
These, then, are the four events that have occurred, and 
what is to take place in the future you will soon see. 
75. So make great preparations for offerings to the 
Brahmans.” Uddhava replied, “T will do so,’ and made a 
namaskdr. 76. In the preparations some things were 
received unasked. Others were bought on credit. Seven 
hundred rupees in coin were borrowed from Vanis and a 
note was given for them. 77. Uddhava wrote the pro. 
missory note in Eknath’s name, having agreed on the time 
for repayment, and explaining the purpose of the loan. 
78. Having thus made full preparations they began with 
love this festival of the Sixth. The whole sacred city was 
invited, and food was cooked sufficient for all. 79. Pious 
‘and loving persons laboured hard with their own hands. No 
‘one felt it a burden. All worked with loving hearts. 80. 
Accompanied by the players on the dindi they went first in 
procession down to the banks of the Ganga, and here with 
the sweet sound of cymbals, the vind, and the drum a 
Kirtan was performed with great eclat. 81. Eagle 
banners were flying, the kettledrum sounding, musical ins~ 
truments were playing festal music. The Vaishnavas were 
shouting “ victory, victory,” and the din of the sound filled 
to overflowing all etherial space. 82. At noon, led in the 
‘procession by the players on the dindi they returned to 
Ekniath’s abode. The Brahmans then bathed, were then 
seated crowded in lines. 83. Sri Eknath, with his own 


EKNATH 78 


hands washed the feet of the Brahmans, and as he drank the 
‘water with which their feet were washed he felt gieat joy. 
84. He was a bhakta of Brahmans, wholly devoted to 
them. He touched his own eves with his thumb. His 
strong conviction was that there is no deity superior 
to the Brahman. 85. With his own hands he 
rubbed sandal wood paste and buka on their bodies. He 
gave them the tulsi leaf, and flowers. And _ having 
thus worshipped the Brahmans he served them dainty 
food. 86. Having prepared the melted butter, and other 
‘sauces, they were served with the cooked food on the leaf- 
plates. In his love he repeated the mantra that the enjoyer 
of this food was Janardan himself, who pervades every 
creature. 87. The Brahmans then sipped water from the 
palms of their hands, and sat down to eat, all shouting 
together the name of Vitthal. 88. Whatever pleased the 
taste of any one, that was brought in dishes and served to 
him, Sri Eknath, the while, requesting them to eat very 
leisurely. 89. After all were fully satisfied, they got up 
to wash their hands with expressions of love. He gave to 
-all of them the vida, and gifts of money. They then went 
to their homes. 90. Vitthal, Uddhava and Eknath, and 
the citizens who had assisted so joyfully then sat down to 
their meal in the very last line of diners. 91. As night 
came on Eknath performed a kirtan. Many people came 
to listen to it. His words of inspiration being marked with 
love, what lack could there then be of delight. 92. Thus the 
night passed. The same kind of festivities were held on 
the Seventh of the month, and on the Eighth the Gopalkala 
“was celebrated. 93. Led by the dindi players, the proces- 
sion arrived at the bank of the Ganga. Here a great crowd 
of pilgrims had assembled who were shouting the names 


74 EKNATH 


of God and “Victory, Victory.” 94. When the ceremony 
of the Gopalkala was completed prasdd was distributed 
to all. As night came on dramatic representations took 
place, and all were deeply impressed thereby. 95. After 
these dramatic representations were completed the Hus- 
band-of-Rukmini was put to rest. And as dawn came on 
they honoured sddhus and saints. 96. In this way 
the festival of the Sixth was celebrated. All felt 
happy and exclaimed, “To save the world this noble 
Eknath has come down to earth, an avatdra. 97. Pratish- 
thina is a sacred city full of Brahmans. All the Brahmans 
are scrupulously orthodox. To show them the perfect way 
of Bhakti, he has become an avatdra in human form 
(sagun.)” 


THE MERCHANT WANTS BACK THE 
BORROWED MONEY. 


98. Now the merchant, from whom things had been 
bought on credit, and for which Uddhava had written a 
Promissory note, the note now being due, began to ask for 
his money. 99. Uddhava replied to him, “ As soon as 
a note is received, we shall bring the amount to your 
house. Feel confident of this.” 100. Although thus 
assured, the scoundrel would not listen. “ You are con- 
tinually receiving unasked for money,” he declared, “and 
you spend it in feeding Brahmans. 101. Eknath 
has cast aside the ordinary human life, and dances wildly 
in his kirtans. He has made every one crazy. I 
will not permit this!’ 102. Not content with saying 
things to Uddhava, this evil minded man came to Eknath’s 


EKNATH | 15 


house. Eknath was at his bath and prayers. Yet 
he uttered a curse on him. 103. “If you eat any 
food before you have paid me my money, then I swear by 
Pandurang,” uttering this curse he went away. 104. 
Eknath, however, gave offerings to the gods and to the 
fire, and feasted the Brahmans as usual, but he himself 
would not eat, because of the oath sworn by the Vani. 105. 
Neither would Uddhava or the good Girjabai eat. The- 
sun had set, and as yet no money had been received. 106. 
Uddhava laboured hard, but could not secure money any- 
where. One prahar of the night passed and still they 
fasted. 107. Seeing their troubled condition Pandharinath 
was distressed. The Husband-of-Rukmini could not 
endure that his abheda Bhakta should remain fasting. 108. 
So Sri Hari took the form of Uddhava and went to the 
house of the vani, and called him to the door. “ Come- 
quickly outside,” he said. 109. The merchant opened the 
door, and called out to him saying, “ Why have you come- 
here at this late hour of the night.” 110. Uddhava 
replied, “ Bring me the promissory note at once, and here 
count out all this money, which includes the interest due.’ 
111. The merchant answered, ‘“ How can I make out the 
account at night? My account book and the promissory: 
note are at my store. 112. Come early in the morning,. 
and take away the note.” Listen now, ye, his devoted 
Bhaktas, to what the Lord Vaikuntha replied. 113. “If 
you are so patient, then why did you put Eknath under 
that oath. I am deeply distressed by his having to fast. 
I am in a fainting condition.” 114. When the Vani 
heard this charge he became repentant at heart, and went 
to his store and there examined the account. 115. And 
as he counted out the money, which was the exact amount 


76 EKNATH 


due him, he was astonished to see that every coin had on 
it the same superscription. 116. The Vani returned the 
note, which Hari tore up with his hands, but brought the 
pieces back with him to his house, and placed them in 
his account book. 117. The Vani now became greatly 
distressed in mind. Sleep would not come to him. “T 
laid Eknath under an oath not to eat,” he said to himself, 
“‘and I myself came home and ate.” 118. Seized by the 
desire for the perishable, I have persecuted a_ saint.” 
While thus greatly disturbed in mind the sun arose. 119. 
He hastily washed his face, and went to Eknath’s waédé. 
He made him a sdshtdiig namaskér, and cried out, “I have 
truly, wronged you.” 120. Sri Nath replied, “It is a 
rule of business ethics that until one has paid one’s dues, 
one should not eat.” 121. When the Vani heard this 
tremark,he was overcome with astonishment, and turning 
to Uddhava said, ‘‘ You paid me the money, and took away 
the promissory note. 122. You should have told your 
Svami of this. Why have you still kept him fasting.” 
Uddhava answered, “One must never tell an untruth.” 
123. The vani then immediately swore that what he said 
‘was true. And Uddhava (after making search) came and 
told Eknath, ‘ The cancelled note is indeed in our account 
‘book, and I now understand what has occured.” 124. 
Uddhava turning to the Vani said, “ Blessed is your loving 
bhakti. Through having business relations with Eknath 
you have met the Husband-of-Rukmini. 125. Do not, how- 
ever, speak of this mysterious event to any one soever.” The 
merchant prostrated himself before Uddhava and hastened 
back to his home. 126. Sri Nath then made offerings to 
God, ate in line with the Brahmans. Girjabai and Uddhava 
did also the same, ending their fasting that day. 127. 


EKNATH 717 


Pandurang, in the guise of a Brahman, continued to be 
the leader of the chorus. The kirtans continued ta be 
full of delight. All were deeply impressed, as they listened! 
to them. 128. It pleased Purushottama thus to increase: 
ttre glory of Eknath. In the guise of a Brahman, the Soul- 
of-the-World used the kirtens to inspire love. 129. 
Twelve years passed in this way, making an epoch in his: 
life. Let the saints now listen to what took place later 
on. 


THE IDENTITY OF VITHOBA IS 
DISCOVERED. 


130. A Vaishnava bhakta, living in the sacred city of 
Pandhari used to sit in contemplation. He desired a 
visible manifestation of Pandurang. Many days passed’ 
in this way. 131. His lips repeated aloud the names of 
God. His heart had no other desire. Suddenly one night 
the Husband-of-Rukmini appeared to him in a dream, 
saying, 132, “ You wish for a visible manifestation of 
myself, but I am under an engagement at Pratishthana, 
where I*knith, the abheda bhakta is wholly absorbed in 
kirtans in my praise. 133. I, Pandurang, have taken the 
guise of a Brahman there, and Iead the chorus. The world 
calls me Vithoba by name. Go quickly to the place. 134. 
Go to the home of Eknath in Pratishthana, and there you 
will sce me.’ As he saw this vision of the night he was. 
overcome with astonishment. 135. He started at once for 
Pratishthana, and arrived at Eknath’s house. He enquired: 
for the Brihman Vithoba, and rushed forward to embrace 
him. 136. And as he made a sdshtaiga namaskar, 
suddenly the Husband-of-Rukmini changed his form. He- 


78 EKNATH 


took the sagun form of the four-armed, with sparkling 
jewels in his crown. 137. His face was glorious, his 
form lovely. Divine earrings flashed in his ears. On 
his neck was the vaijayanti necklace and the kaustubhe 
jewel. His yellow garment was dazzlingly bright. 138. 
The shape of his body was beautiful and graceful. His 
two hands looked charming, placed on his sides. This 
lovely form, with his two feet placed together, was beauti- 
ful. All this the Brahman actually saw. 139. With him 
some Vaishnava bhaktas had also come. They also saw 
this visible manifestation at that time. 140. After giving 
them this visible manifestation, God became invisible, and 
all who had come from Pandhari glorified Eknath, 141. 
saying, ‘Blessed art thou, Vaishnava bhakta, visible 
avatéra of Vishnu. Pandurang, in the guise of a Brahman, 
himself led your chorus.” 142. When the Brahman 
Vithoba became invisible, Eknath’s mind became overcome 
with astonishment. He said to himself, “ The Life-of-the- 
world has wearied himself for my sake. He has let nothing 
Jower his reputation of greatness. 143. It is his nature 
to care tenderly for his slaves. He, whose limits even the 
Vedas do not know, even He has become the helper of 
his bhaktas.” 144. That Pandurang had in this way 
paid his debt of gratitude to Eknath, people now heard. 
The deed became noised abroad, that for twelve years he 
had been the leader of the chorus. 145. As the honey 
in the flower-buds sends out its fragrance when the breeze 
is in motion so does the fame of the deeds of the saints, as 
they relate them to one another. 146. The qualities of 
humility and sincerity are their imperishable garments. By 
these their good fame is manifested to the world, and great 
poets sing their praise. 


EKNATH 79 


147, Amongst all great books the supremely great 
are those containing the Acts of the Saints. Only to those 
who are fortunate, is this a pleasing thought. 148. 
Continual doubters and haters, are ever enveloped in 
the darkness of Ignorance. They have never any leisure. 
All their time is spent in the occupations of their worldly 
life. 149, But you good people are not such. As I read, 
explain, and comment you listen to my crude words, and 
make them sweet to you. 150. By your support my 
soul is filled with love, otherwise I am but Mahipati, the 
dull minded, the sinner, and truly not a poet or author. 
151. Svasti. This is the Sri Bhaktalilamrita. By 
merely listening to it one’s desires are fulfilled. Listen 
then to it, ye loving, pious, bhaktas. This is the sixteenth 
delightful chapter. 


‘ 


CHAPTER 17. 
Sri Bhaktalilamrita. 


MAHIPATI’S PREFACE TO CHAPTER 17. 


Obeisance to Sri Panduraig. 


1. If there are interested listeners present, a speaker 
has a feeling of great joy. When opposition and doubts 
are far absent, the words of a story flow easily. 2. Just 
as the lotus in the lake opens its petals to the rising of the 
sun, so when one is before interested listeners, love wells 
up in the heart. 3. Or as the peacock dances in various 
steps, when it hears the thunder in the clouds. Or as the 
infant frolics, when its mother is before it. 4. Or as 
when Ganpati goes through dancing motions, when in the 
presence of Mridanipati. Or as when Sarasvati broke out 


80 EKNATH 


into song when she, with love in her heart, saw before 
her, her father Brahmadeva. 5. Just so, before you, 
saints, I utter in a familiar way my crude sentences. The 
Husband-of-Rukmini knows whatever is lacking and 
whatever is complete in them. 


EKNATH GIVES READINGS FROM THE 
BHAGAVATA. 


6. At the close of the last chapter there was the story 
of how Pandharinath, in the guise of a Brahman, lovingly led 
the chorus in the kirtans performed by Eknath. 7. And 
how twelve years thus passing, suddenly a Brahman arrived 
from Pandhari, who recognized the Husband-of-Rukmini, 
and had a visual manifestation of him. 8 And how 
Purushottama, the Giver-of-the-bliss-of-Absorption became 
immediately invisible, lest being recognized by people 
generally it would lead to trouble in Pratishthana. 


9, One day Uddhava, the sadguru bhakta made this re- 
quest of Sri Nath, “A desire has arisen in my heart to listen 
to the reading of the Sri Bhagavata Purana from your 
lips.” 10. Responding to this lovingly expressed desire 
Eknath began reading aloud the Great Purana, and pious 
hearers, having performed thcir worldy engagements, came 
to listen. 11. Simple minded people, women, Sédras, 
merchants, and great and distiiguished citizens as well, came 
there with reverence to listen. 12. According to custom 
the loving bhaktas sat close to him, and listened to his 
reading of the Purana, Eknath translated the text, explained 
its meaning in full, and thereby the snares of doubt were 
broken. 


EKNATH 81 


GOD APPEARS IN THE GUISE OF A 
BRAHMAN, KESAVA. 


13. Suddenly one day Pandharinath, in the guise of 
a Brahman, appeared, and Eknath, seeing him, made him a 
reverent namaskér. 14. “Whence have you come, sir, 
he asked, “ What is your name?” The Life-of-the World 
listened to Eknath’s questioning, and_ replied, 15. 
“Kesava is my name. Know me as one indifferent to 
worldly things, and I am alone. I have come here that I 
may listen to the reading of the Bhagavata from your lips. 
16. If your lips will give me assurance I shall always 
remain here with you. I have heard great praise of you, 
and I have therefore come here.” 17. Eknath listened 
and answered, “ My own desire is also the same, that I may 
always have your company. So fulfil the desire of my 
heart. 18. It occurs to me that the Lord-of-Vaikuntha 
has many forms. He takes many guises, but he, 
Sripati, does not make these miraculous deeds 
openly evident. 19. He lately took the guise of 
a Brahman, and for twelve years led my _ chorus. 
He it is, who now in the form of KeSava has come 
to my home, but no one is able to recognize him.” 20. 
The Husband-of-Rukmini now spent many years in the 
company of his ablhicda bhakta. With longing desire to 
hear the Bhagavata read he would sit close in front of 
Eknath, listening to him. 21. If Eknath failed to bring 
out all the meaning of the words or sentences he would 
express a doubt and raise a question, and Eknath would 
clear away the doubts. The occasions were of unusual 
interest. 22. Uddhava also, his close friend, and full 
of reverence, sat close in front of Eknath listening to him. 


82 EKNATH 


These two were the chief listeners. The others sat all 
around them. 23. The inhabitants of that sacred city, 
who came to listen, all became bhaktas of Vishnu, and 
forgiveness, mercy, peace, and detachment from the world, 
dwelt in them. 24. Through Eknath’s preaching they 
put away all dishonest business. Zeal for religion filled 
their minds, and great enthusiasm for repeating the names 
and attributes of God. 25. The sandalwood trees of Mount 
Maila have close to them the common babul and khaire 
trees. The fragrance of the former pervades the wood 
of the latter, and no difference then exists between them. 
26. Just as by virtue of association with the good, one’s 
pitiful state of ignorance is changed and immediately one 
gains the experimental knowledge of demonstrated truth; 
27. Just as in the Dvdpdra vyuga to Sri Krishna, in his 
historic form, Uddhava was very dear; so in the present 
instance the same bond of love existed. 28. To love, 
ever new, ever developing and growing, is to be given 
the name Bhakti. By means of it the hearts of the listeners 
were deeply impressed, and the illusions of this world 
disappeared. 29. As a rule every day at the third 
prohara, the reverent people came to listen. The Vadt 
would become crowded, and the extatic love shown was 
extraordinary. 


THE BRAHMANS ARE ENVIOUS OF 
EKNATH. 


30. As the loving hearers saw Eknath’s emotion, 
they were pleased, but the Vedic Brahman pandits were 
moved to hatred. 31. Many of them indeed sitting idly on 
the little hillside, reviled Eknath, saying “He has set up 


EKNATH 83 


his shop in this sacred city, and is seducing all the pious 
people. 32. As to oratory he does not excel, but in his 
kirtans he seems to cast a spell over the minds of men. 
Explaining word by word, one after the other, and gives 
them a prakrit [Marathi] version of the Sanskrit 
text. 33. He leaves aside the many other Puranas, 
and has chosen the Bhagavat. He explains its mean- 
ing in full, and by it the hearts of all are 
deeply impressed. 34. By listening to the religious 
teachings of the Bhagavata, all have become desireless of 
worldly things. No one now carries on business simply to 
fulfil worldly desires. All are absorbed in gaining philo- 
sophic knowledge. 35. Our patrons used to carry on 
worldly business, and projects for livelihood, but now all 
of them have been seduced by Ekniath, through his reading 
to them Prakrit books. 36. He casts aside the com- 
mentary of Sridhar (on the Bhagavata) and constantly 
reads the DnydneSsvari, explaining in melodious language 
the excellence of Bhakti. 37. By listening to Eknath’s 
preaching the whole universe will be absorbed into its own 
self, then what will the creator do? ‘This is what 
troubles us greatly. 38. We, Vedic Brahman pandits, 
learned in the Four Vedas, have none to pay attention to 
us, Eknath having so deeply impressed the people. 39. 
As to his knowledge, it is merely that of the Prakrit, and 
yet abundance of money and grain flow to his house. He 
feeds hundreds and hundreds of Brahmans, and lacks 
nothing at all. 40. We are all learned Shiastris, but Truth 
does not work, if one sits still, We have always to act so 
as to please our patrons. 41. It is true that people say 
that Eknath is an avatdr of Vishnu, but we think he has a 
grudge against us. He has ruined all business that has 


84 EKNATH 


Desire as its end. 42. Our patrons used to carry on many 
worldly businesses, but now they also are associating with 
Eknath, and listening to his reading of Prdkrit books.” 
43. In these words the Vedic pandits, who dwelt in the 
sacred city, reviled Eknath, adding also, ‘He has put a 
stop to the Way of karma, and propounds the way of 
Bhakti as the only way. 44. Let alone the state of others, 
the wives of us Brahmans of the mendicant order, learning 
that the worldly life is false, is indeed Mdyd, spend their 
time at Eknath’s feet. 45. Just as in the Duvadpara Yuga 
the wives of us, Brahmans of the mendicant order, learning 
so these, our wives, stealthily steal away to listen to 
Eknath’s kirtans. 46. Eknath preaches the religious 
teachings of the Bhagavata to our patrons, and thereby 
they have become desireless of worldly things. No one 
now performs those rites that look for the fulfilment of 
worldly desires, and so our profits are gone.” 47. With 
such words the Brahmans, dwellers in the sacred city, all 
flung their insults, but they did not think of Govind in their 
hearts and experience loving delight. 48. Eknath 
was a respecter of Brahmans, and so with rever- 
ence for them he continued to serve them with 
feelings of love. 49. Whether any one reviled him or 
praised him, he looked upon every one as Janirdan in 
visible form. So while some honored him, and others 
dishonored him, he paid no attention to the joy of the one 
or the pain of the other. 50. “ Janardan fills mankind,” 
he said. “It is He who causes both the insults and the 
praise.” Enlightened by this conception all his feelings 
disappeared. 51. All the Brahmans, dwellers in the secred 
city, began now to persecute him in many ways. If they 
saw anything of his that they wanted, they asked him for 


EKNATH 85 


it, and Eknath never refused them. 52. If the Brahmans 
saw any specially fine garment or vessel, and asked for it, 
he at once gave it to them. If unexpected guests appeared 
in town, they were told, ‘There is one Eknath here, a 
generous giver. 53. Though thousands of guests come, 
he gives them food to their full satisfaction. The Siddhis 
are favorable to him. So hasten there.” 54, At their 
own homes there was an abundance of wealth, but these 
Brahmans never gave food to others. With a hateful 
mind they would point out to the hungry the house of 
Ekniath. 


HOSPITALITY OF EKNATH AND GIRJABAI 
TO FOUR BRAHMANS. 


55. Now it happened one day that rain began falling 
in torrents. For seven days, day and night, it rained slabs 
of stone. 56. Houses became soaked, and leaked every- 
where. No dry spot could be seen on the face of the 
earth. No one could collect kindling wood, and so no 
cooking could take place. 57. Although there might be 
plenty of money and grain in their houses, still no 
kindling wood could be collected. Suddenly, as the night 
passed into the second prahar, four Brahmans appeared 
in town. 58. They wished for a full meal, and to obtain 
it they were wandering from house to house. The Brah- 
mans of the town informed them, saying, ‘‘ There is a 
man here of courageous integrity. 59. His name is 
Eknath,” and from a distance pointed out to them his 
house. The travellers went there, and said to Eknath, 60. 
“ We four are in the pangs of hunger. We have come to 


86 EKNATH 


you, because we have heard of your fame. So cook us a 
meal in your house, and appease our hunger.’ 61. Hear- 
ing what they had to say, Eknath pitied them from his 
heart, and ordered Girjabai to cook a meal for them. 
62. She replied, “There is no fuel whatever.” Eknath 
answered, “ This house has wooden sides.” He then called 
to Uddhava, 63. “Rip up a section of the house, and 
give her plenty of these lathes.” Uddhava replied, “ It 
will take too long a time to do so.” 64. Nath then him- 
self ripped off the tape from his bed, and broke up 
immediately the frame work of the straw rick. In this 
way he supplied the needed fuel and the cooking was done. 
65. He heated water, and gave it to the Brahmans hot 
for their bath. And because of the cold he kindled for 
them the hand-warmer. 66. Girjabai, with her own 
hands, served the food on their plates. When their hunger 
was Satisfied, they uttered words of thanks. 67. By 
the favor of Pandurang may your heart keep its 
beautiful character.” Eknath then gave them pan supari 
for the cleansing of their mouths, and said, “‘ Now go and 
rest.” 


EKNATH’S HOSPITALITY TO THREE 
MAHOMEDANS. 


68. After some days had passed, the day for the 
worship of his Ancestors arrived. Brahmans had been 
invited to the feast, and the viands were being prepared at 
the house. 69. The day dawned. It was now a prahar 
and a half. The Brahmans had been invited to go and 
take their baths. The cooked viands were ready, but the 
Brahmans were late in returning. 70. Eknath finished 


EKNATH 87 


his own religious observances, and then fixed his gaze on 
the path by which the Brahmans were to return. 
Just then the three Gods felt a desire to test his goodness 
of heart. 71. So Brahmadeva, Vishnu and MaheSvara 
appeared in the form of Mahomedan fakirs, with heavy 
beards, bloodshot eyes, and anklets with bells and crystals. 
72. They had rosaries in their hands. Their bodies were 
enveloped in skins. They had long matted hair on their 
heads. Appearing in this disguise 73. they said to 
Eknath, “We three are hungry. We want food 
to fill our stomachs” This is all they — said. 
74. Sri Nath listened to their request and at 
once replied, “Surely,” and brought in a dish of food that 
had already been prepared in the house, and served it to 
them. 75. He sat down close to these Mahomedans, 
and filled their plates. And when they had washed their 
hands after the meal, he passed the pan supari to them. 
76. In this way they definitely tested Eknath’s conviction 
of God being in every creature, and his love for them. 
The three Gods then took their visible divine form, and 
gave Eknath a visual manifestation of themselves. 77. 
And as Eknath saw their sagun form he exclaimed, “ You 
have made me sandth, one protected.” The Gods then retook 
their Mahomedan guise of fakirs, and started to leave. 
78. Just then the Earth-gods (Brahmans,) having finished 
their ablutions returned to FEknath’s vddi. The fakirs, 
seeing them, let them hear the belchings of their loaded 
stomachs. 79. And in their Mahomedan language they 
bestowed their blessing on Eknath, saying, “You have 
satished our hunger. May God bless you.” 80. With 
these words the Mahomedan fakirs passed outside. 


88 EKNATH 
THE BRAHMANS PERSECUTE EKNATH. 


The Brahmans began now murmuring among them- 
selves. “ This mingling of different castes has grown to 
an extreme.” 81. And so they said to Eknath, “This is 
the anniversary day in honour of your ancestors, and you 
have feasted those Mahomedans_ with the oblation food 
before you have feasted us.” 82. One of the Brahmans 
added ironically, “‘ The good deeds of his ancestors must 
have been many, and hence these hungry fakirs have come 
here for their midday meal. 83. The anniversary cere- 
monials having now been fully completed there is 
no longer need of us here.’’ With these words they all 
turned to go away. 84. Eknath came forward before 
them, and made them a namaskér explaining, “The fakirs 
were famished with hunger. I therefore fed them. 85. But 
we have brought fresh uripolluted water and a second cook- 
ing has been prepared in the kitchen. So forgive my fault I 
beseech you svamis, and perform the ancestral worship 
ceremonies.” 86. Eknath pled hard with them, and 
besought them again and again, but those Brahmans would 
not listen. They exclaimed, “ You are a violator of the 
prescribed rituals.” 87. The Brahmans then went to 
their religious head who lived in the sacred city, and 
acquainted him with the affair, telling him how Eknath had 
fested the Mohamedans before first performing the 
ancestral anniversary ceremonials. 88. The Religious Head 
together with the leading Brahmans arrived at Eknath’s 
house in haste. The family priest (seeing them coming) 
said to Eknath, “They are coming to excommunicate you.” 
89. The Brahmans gibed Eknath, “To day is your ances- 
tor’s worship anniversary day. Were they Mahomedans 


EKNATH 89 


by caste, that you should have feasted these Mahom- 
edans?” 90. Thus with many insults the Brahmans 
mocked him. But Sri Nath was a great ocean of calmness. 
He did not feel the least bit of anger. 91. The surging 
billows of man’s insults came rolling over him, but to this 
ocean-of-calmness these billows were no more than 
a mouthful of water. He had destroyed the very path of 
Desire and Passion, an act extraordinary and unequalled. 
92, But. Eknath regarded these Brahmans as forms of Janar- 
dan, so he made them a sashtang namaskér, and exclaimed, 
“Be gracious to me, O Svami and perform the ancestral 
worship ceremony.” 93. The Religious Head replied, 
“Your good deeds seem so many, your fathers in heaven 
will surely come down and themselves partake of the feast. 
94. Sri Nath answered in a very novel way. “A Brah- 
man’s word is a marvel. Your word cannot fall to the 
ground. Eeven seemingly impossible things can take 
place. It is not so very difficult. 95. In the 
Great Sacrifice, God, together with Indra, has his hunger 
satishied when the Svami utters the ejaculation, Svdhd, 
Svadhaé. 96. A Brahman’s word is a marvel indeed. By 
a word of his, God becomes manifest in a stone idol. Ma- 
dhava clasped Sri vatsa to his heart. What might not happen 
to a mere human wretch like myself.” 97. To this the 
Brahmans replied, “No more of your long-winded oratory. 
If your heavenly fathers do not descend to the feast, we 
shall excommunicate you.” 98. So saying they placed 
three seats on the floor. Then, as Eknath uttered the 
word, “Come,” suddenly the heavenly fathers descended. 
99, They appeared to the Brahmans in a form supremely 
glorious and radiant. The Brahminical thread shone upon 
their necks. They wore golden rings on their hands. 


90 EKNATH 


All this the Brahmans saw. 100. The heavenly fathers 
took their seats, and began loudly to repeat from the 
Vedas. The Brahmans marvelled as they saw this sight. 
101. They realized that this extraordinary event was due 
to Eknath, and filled with shame, they hung their heads 
and sat down with their faces between their knees. 102. 
Then together with the Religious Head, these Brahmans 
arose, and in silence departed. Those Brahmans, however, 
who had been invited to the feast, and who had purified 
themselves, they remained. 103. The ceremony of the 
ancestral worship having been duly performed, they all 
dined with the heavenly fathers, who after receiving the 
vida and gifts, departed on their way back to heaven. 104. 
‘The Brahmans, seeing this miracle, were supremely asto- 
nished, and going to the Religious Head, related what had 
happened. 105. How that the heavenly fathers had eaten 
in their presence and then departed upwards to Heaven. 
‘The Religious Head became much ashamed, and exclaimed, 
““We have made ourselves of no account. 106. We have 
persecuted Eknath in many ways, but God has been his 
helper. We have suffered defeat. What plan shall we 
now adopt? 107. When Durvasa was attacking Amba- 
rish, he was himself pursued by the chakra. So 
today history has repeated itself, and we feel much 
ashamed.” 108. While on the one side the Brahmans 
were talking thus among themselves, on the other nothing 
could awaken either joy or pain in Eknath. 109. He did 
not feel troubled in mind that the Brahmans thus persecuted 
him, nor did he even keep in his memory the miracle of 
his heavenly fathers having come down to dine. 
110. The conviction that God filled mankind, so impres- 
sed his mind that when he heard himself insulted or praised, 


EKNATH _ 91 


to both he was indifferent. 111. At the third watch of 
the day, the listening to the reading of the Purans was con- 
tinued. At night Hari kirtans took place, and the hearts 
of the pious men of Paithan were deeply impressed. 


BRAHMAN ENVY STILL CONTINUES. 


112. By day and by night crowds constantly gathered 
at Eknath’s house, but the Brahmans seeing his glorifica- 
tion, burned with envy. 113. Saying among themselves, 
“The people of Paithan, listening to Eknath’s kirtans have 
become deeply impressed. All are worshipping Sri Ram. 
All have become Vaishnavas. 114. No one now spends 
money on religious rites for the attaining of their desires. 
So our means of livelihood are cut off. The people are 
living according to the teachings of the Bhagavata.” Such 
was their complaint to one another. 115. Just as when 
a thief becomes enraged when he sees the moon shining 
bright, so the spread of Eknath’s glory fanned the fire cf 
the Brahmans’ wrath. 


BRAHMANS TEMPT EKNATH 
UNSUCCESSFULLY. 


116. As day and night they watched for some weakness 
in him, they soon saw an opportunity to tempt him to a 
fault. There lived there a Brahman named Krishnadas. 
He was a special worshipper of Bhavani. 117. The 
goddess seeing his painful austerities, visibly revealed her- 
self to him, He asked of her the boon of poetic power, 
and began his great work. 118. He wrote a Prakrit 


92 EKNATH 


version of the Yuddha kand of the Ramayana, delightful 
in its similes. The Brahmans were delighted. 119. 
They remarked, “ Eknath produces a great deal of poetry,. 
but his style is crude. It passes, however, with women, 
Sudras and other simple folk.” 120. They even came and 
sat down by Eknath and talked in his presence in the same 
way. Listen now to how they praised Krishnadas Lolya. 
121. “Eknath, listen,” they would say, “Many people write 
poetry, but Krishnadis has composed the Ramayana, and’ 
its style appears most delightful. 122. The Goddess has 
favored him. No single verse is written without careful 
thought. Neither the past nor the future has such a poet. 
123. Hearing this praise of Krishnadaés, Eknath felt 
greatly pleased and exclaimed, ‘Oh the infiniteness of 
God’s glory! Truly one cannot know its limits!” 124. 
The Brahmans thus attempted to arouse in him a feeling 
of hatred, but such a feeling could not enter his heart. 
Astonished at this those earth-gods returned to their homes. 


KRISHNADAS WARNED THAT HE MUST DIE. 


125. Now I ask your attention to another event. As 
Krishnadas was composing his version of the Ramayana, 
and had not quite completed the Yuddha Kand, suddenly 
the Goddess appeared to him. 126. Bhavani said, “At 
exactly the third watch to-morrow you will surely die. 
Let your mind therefore be on its guard.” 127. As he 
came back to consciousness he felt exceedingly sad, saying,. 
“The book is not yet finished. What shall I do?” 128. 
Taking with him as much of the book as was written, he 
went to Eknath’s house. As soon as Sri Eknath saw him, 


EKNATH 93 


he arose and went forward to greet him. 129. Krishna- 
das, in great humility touched his forehead to Eknath’s 
lotus feet. Eknith, seating him, said, “It is very gracious 
of you to visit me this day.” 130. Krishnadids, with 
expressions of affection, related his story from beginning 
to end, adding, “ Tomorrow death will come to my body. 
From this there is no escape. 131. I am preparing a 
Prakrit version of the Yuddha Kand of the Ramayana. 
Some of it remains to be done. I ask you to complete it” 
132. Thus affectionately pleading, he placed the book be- 
fore Eknath. Loving thoughts filled Eknath’s mind, and 
he began to consider what to reply, 133. He read a 
chapter of the book, and was greatly pleased with it. “It 
is beyond my power,” he said, “to complete these verses. 
134. You have begun the book well. Finish it yourself.” 
Krishnadas replied. ‘But I have before me fear of 
tomorrow.” 135. Sri Eknath then asked him how many 
days it would require to complete the book, and added, 
“ Until then Death will not so much as touch you, Saint.” 
136. As Krishnadas heard this assurance of Eknath’s, he 
felt a sense of trust, and exclaimed, “ Right here will I 
sit day and night. The book will then be completed.” 
137. Eknath answered, “Go rather to your own home. 
If there should be the slightest sign of Death’s approach, I 
will hasten to visit you.” 138. Krishnadas listened to 
this reply, and his heart was filled with joy. He made a 
reverent mamaskdr and returned to his home. 139. There 
he 1elated to his people the assurance given him by Eknath. 
The night passed, and the sun began to rise. 140. Krish- 
nadas duly performed his bath, and his customary, 
devotions. As the appointed hour for his death approached, 
he became deeply depressed. 141. Just at that moment 


o4 EKNATH 


Eknath appeared, and reassured him. He passed his 
hand over him, and then gave a command to Death, 
142. “For eleven days from to-day do not touch his body.” 
‘All wondered as they heard this command. 143. And 
Death, respecting Eknath’s command hastily turned away. 
Krishnadas came to himself and began composing the 
Ramayana. 144. The people were all astonished at this 
miracle. The report of it reached the ears of the chief 
Brahmans of Pratishthana. 145. And they discussing 
the matter among themselves said, “If Krishnadas dies 
on the eleventh day, then only shall we regard the miracle 
as true, otherwise as false.” 


KRISHNADAS COMPLETES HIS BOOK AND 
THEN DIES. 


146. Thus, these evil minded ones, were watching for 
some defect. In the meantime, on the tenth day the book 
was completed. 147. And the moment this Yuddha Kand 
was completed,* Krishnadis gave gifts to Brahmans, 
worshipped Sarasvati, and exalted the greatness of Eknath. 
148. On the eleventh day Krishnadas performed his bath, 
and observed all his customary devotions. And Eknath, 
realizing that the time for Krishnadas’ departure had 
arrived, went to visit him. 149. With fragrant powders, 
flowers, and garlands Krishnadas worshipped Eknath, and 


* Note.—There seems to be some doubt at present as 
to whether this Yuddhakanda by Krishnadas Lolya is 
extant. (See Mr. Bhave’s notes in Maharashtra Sarasvat, 
pages 136, 137, first Edition and 274 in second Edition.) 
A Yuddhakanda by Krishnadas Mudgal is known, but his 
identification with Krishnadas Lolya is not yet proved. 


EKNATH 95 


made him a namaskar. Then without the least distress of 
mind, he arrived at the life-Beyond. 150. The Brahmans 
now said among themselves, “After all our extolling of 
Krishnadis Lolya, in the end it is we who have truly 
suffered defeat. What plan shall we now adopt? 
151. The more we devise evil against him, the more his 
fame spreads among the people. Eknath’s deeds are 
miraculous. Our hatred only adds to them.” 152. 
Others said, “In his former birth he was great. Hence, 
God being his helper, he has now increased greatly his 
fame. 153. Superstitious believers fall at his feet, but 
we do not like his deeds.” Thus the Maya of Vaishnava 
yoga prevented their understanding Eknath. 


A RICH MERCHANT HAS AN IDOL OF 
PANDURANG MADE. 


154. It now happened that in the Province of 
Karnatak, there was a rich merchant. He was constant 
in his worship of Sri Pandurang. He was pious, generous, 
and of good report. 155. A desire having come to him 
to make a metal image of Vitthal, he did so, and its pose, 
and smiling countenance, created a sense of peace in those 
who looked upon it. 156. Now let us take note of what 
he did, with his smiling face, the Giver-of-boons-to 
Pundalik, the Husband-of-Rukmini, with his feet 
placed together, and his hands on his hips. 157. 
The merchant had made all preparations, and was 
waiting for a good and auspicious day for the 
ceremony of bringing life into the image, and for feasting 
the Brahmans. 158. When fast asleep at night, the life- 
of-the-World appeared to him in a dream, and said, “On 


96 EKNATH 


the bank of the Ganga, in the sacred city of Pratishthina, 
there lives one, called Eka Janardan. 159. Bhakti, 
knowledge, and absence of worldly desires are characteris- 
tics that are deeply impressed upon him and adorn his 
personality. Take this image of God in sagun form, which 
you have made, and give it to Eknath there. 160. I£ you 
do not obey my command, and if you should perform the 
dedicatory rite here, you will suffer many evils. You will 
not escape thereby the ills of this life, difficult to) overcome.” 
161. This vision, in the dream of the night, caused him 
deep distress. He could no longer sleep. And now the sun 
arose. 162. He immediately told of the vision to Pandits, 
Brahmans, Sdédhus and Sants, and as these omniscient ones 
deliberated on the meaning of the vision, they also were 
in doubt. 163. The Purdniks and priests finally gave 
their opinion, that he should have patience for a few days. 
If the vision was repeated, then the image should be at 
once taken to Pratishthana. 164. The merchant acqui- 
esced to the suggestion of these omniscient ones. For 
three nights in succession he had the very same dream. 
165. Accordingly the Brahman came to Pratishthana, 
bringing with him the image of Pandurang. He rested 
awhile on the bank of the Ganga, to bathe. 166. He had 
come richly clothed and adorned. He had with him a large 
retinue of men and horses. The chief Brahmans of the 
sacred city were highly pleased when they saw him. 
167. “He must undoubtedly patronize us,” they said, as 
they came bringing the record books. “Who is your 
priest?’ they enquired. The merchant replied, 168. 
“There is one Eka Janardan here in this city, who is a 
Vaishnava bhakta. God revealed this to me in a dream, 
and I have therefore come to see him.” 169. On hearing 


EKNATH 97 


this there arose in their minds deep disquietude, and 
murmuring they said, ‘“ Eknath has bewitched the whole 
universe.” 170. Deeply irritated, they exchkimed, 
“Eknath has bewitched the people of this town, and to 
those elsewhere he gives dreams,’ They changed their 
speech in order. to secure gifts of money. 171. They there- 
fore said to the merchant, “If you have this earnest desire 
to meet Eknath, then you surely are our patron”. And 
with this hope in mind, they began to repeat the word of the 
bath ritual. 172. The rich merchant, finding them crowd- 
ing around him in their officious intermeddling, gave them 
some money gifts, and then entered into the town. 173. 
He enquired of the people where Eknath lived, and soom 
arrived at his house. Here he saw Sri Eknath seated on 
his mat and Uddhava before him. 174. With reverence, 
love and respect the merchant made him a sdshténg 
namaskdr. Eknath at once arose and greeted him. 175. 
“From whence have you come?” he asked. “Kindly tell me 
the reason. Inform me what country and city you are 
from.” 176. The merchant replied to the Svami, “I 
have made an image of Sri Vitthal. I was about to have per- 
formed the ceremony for bringing the divine life into it, 
when I had a dream by night. 177. The vision said to me, 
“There lives in Pratishthana one Eka Janardan. Go and 
give this image to him.” I had this same dream for three 
nights. 178. Therefore, with this purpose in mind, I 
have come to see you, Svdmi. I must have laid up in a 
former birth many good deeds, which now at last are bear- 
ing fruit.” 179. So saying, the merchant produced the 
image of Pandurang with its smiling, gentle face, to look on 
which created in him a sense of peace. 180. Eknath took up 


98 EKNATH 


‘the image, and pressed it to his heart, exclaiming, “ Con- 
-troller-of-the-Universe, | Giver-of-absorption-into-Brahma, 
this is Thy miraculous doing.” 181. As Uddhava, also 
«saw the lovely face of the image, he too felt a sense 
of peace. Eknath then requested him to begin at once the 
-preparations for the rite. 182. The astrologers were 
-called immediately, and an auspicious day for the ceremony 
for bringing the divine life into the image was named. 
Uddhava undertook all the preparations, and caused the 
.ceremony to become known in the city. 183. The inhabi- 
-tants of the city exclaimed, “ Seeing the devotion of Sri 
Ekniath the image of Vitthal has indeed come here from the 
country of Karnatak.” 184. Eknath continued the read- 
ing of the Purain during the third prahar of each day, and 
‘the kirtons in the evenings. The merchant listened and 
felt a sense of peace. 185. Remarking to himself, “ All 
minds are deeply stirred by Eknath’s eloquence. He is 
surely Pandurang himself, descended to save the world.” 
186. The preparations for the ceremony were completed. 
On the morrow was the auspicious day. So during the 
last prahar of the night the cooking for the expected multi- 
tude was begun. 187. Skilled women cooks, whose husbands 
‘were living, cooked the feast with their own hands. Food, 
in abundance, and of great variety, was prepared, 188. As 
soon as the morning dawned, the worship of the image 
‘was begun. The Vedic priests came and duly performed 
the rites and ceremonies. 189. The image was bathed 
with the five nectarous substances, and the mantras were 
‘repeated for bringing the divine life into the image. It 
was then duly anointed, and clothed in golden 
‘brocade. _ 190. It was adorned with pearls, diamonds 
aand rubies, and then with garlands of flowers and the 


EKNATH 99 


tulsi leaves, this Ruler-of-the-World was worshipped. 191. 
Incense, lamps and the five lamp tray were waved over it; 
festal music was played at the door of the shrine. The 
Vaishnavas loudly uttered God’s names and. attributes, and 
sang verses of praise. 192. Food cooked in ghee 
and dainty food were lovingly presented as offerings to it. 
Vedic mantras were recited, and handfuls of flowers were 
offered. 193. Eknath then took a lump of butter on the 
palm of his hand, and placed it to the mouth of the idol, 
saying, “O Vitthal, eat this now. 194. As Krishna 
avatdr you stole butter, and ate it greedily. Our eyes are 
ravenously hungry to see you do so again. 195. If you 
will show so wonderful a miracle, your glory will greatly 
increase in this place.” Hearing these words of Eknath 
the image smiled. 196. And putting out its tongue licked 
up the butter in Eknath’s hand. The Vaishnava bhekias, 
seeing this miracle, gave shouts of “ Victory Victory.” 
197. They then walked around the image, and lovingly 
made before it sdshtdng namaskdrs. The sun had now 
reached the noon hour, and the Brahmans sat down in 
lines to eat. 198. Sri Eknath respectfully worshipped 
them. With his own hands he washed their feet. He 
anointed them with sandal-wood oil and other fragrant 
perfumes, and waved the incense and lamps before them. 
199. He served many dainty dishes, impartially, on their 
leaf plates, at the same time uttering the mantra 
that the real enjoyer of the feast was Janardan in each of 
them. 200. Thus the Brahmans of the city were all well 
feasted, and receiving the pan supdri and gifts, were highly 
pleased. 201. The merchant seeing the success of the 


100 EKNATH 


festal occasion was much gratified, and said to himself, 
“TI must plan some way of getting Sri Eknath to come ta 
my home.” 


THE MARRIAGE CEREMONY OF PANDURANG 
AND RUKMINI IS PERFORMED. 


202. So making his obeisance to Eknath he said, 
“After I now return to my country, I am going to make 
a beautiful image of Rukmini. 203. Bring all your 
retinue with you. I invite you to perform the marriage 
ceremony of Sri Pandurang with Rukmini.” Eknath was 
greatly pleased at this invitation. 204. And after con- 
ferring with Uddhava accepted the invitation. The 
merchant, after presenting rich gifts, took leave and 
departed. 205. On returning to his home he had an 
image of Rukmini made, and completing preparations for 
the wedding, appointed the marriage day. 206. Then 
writing a letter of invitation, embellished with saffron, he 
sent it to Eknath at Paithan, in which he said, “I ask you 
to come soon, bringing the bridegroom and the bridegroom’s 
mother in marriage procession.” 207. Eknath had 
already received a hint of this invitation, and had made 
his preparations for going. He invited the blind, the lame, 
and the poor to go with him to the marriage. 208. He 
furnished them with new wedding garments, and, urging 
them to accompany him, the bridegroom marriage proces- 
sion started on its way, led by the din of festal music. 209. 
The Bridegroom, namely the idol of Vitthal, was carried 
in a palanquin. Girjabdi (as mother of the bridegroom) 
rode in a carriage. The others rode on horses, all acclaim- 
ing the praise of Eknath. 210. The men and women of 


EKNATH 101 


the towns they passed through exclaimed, “God had be- 
come the son of his bhakia, and as bridegroom, He is going 
to a far distant place for His marriage.” 211. Thus 
pleasantly Eknath journeyed along, and the people along 
the way seeing the marvellous splendour of the procession, 
flocked to see him. 212. When the marriage procession 
arrived at the outskirts of the merchant’s town, they 
encamped. And as soon as he received word of their 
arrival, he hastened to welcome them. 213. All the inhabit- 
ants of the town also hurried out to join in the welcome, 
and reverently and affectionately touched their foreheads 
to Eknath’s feet. 214. Uddhava, and all the other guests 
were also greeted, and clothing and adorning the idol 
bridegroom, all rejoiced. 215. They gave gifts of 
raiment to the priest, and then worshipped Sri Pandurang. 
From there with great eclat the procession wended its way 
to the lodgings prepared for the guests. 216. After the 
ceremony of installing the household gods and 
the feasting of the Brahmans, the marriage 
of Vitthal and Rukmini took place. The Brahmans held 
the marriage curtain between the two, and intoned the 
words “ Sdvadhdnam, sdvadhdnam” (Attention, Attention.) 
217. As they ended the marriage formula with “Om 
Punyaha” (May it be a day of Happiness) the din of 
musical instruments began. The bhaktas shouted, 
“Victory, Victory,” and the day was made a great festal 
occasion. 218. Then they sought to honor the mother 
of the bridegroom, all of which was received by Girjabai. 
The merchant touched his forehead to Eknath’s feet, and 
then said. 219. ‘May we now hear, to our heart’s 
content a kirtan from your lips.” Sri Eknath accepted the 
invitation, he having brought with him all that was needed. 


102 EKNATH 


220. The sound of cymbal, lute, and drum was swelled 
with the acclamations of the audience. The kirtan aroused 
the passion of love. The hearts of the hearers were deeply 
moved. 221. He lovingly sang of the deeds of God in 
his visible form (sagun) and related the Paurdnik stories, 
every now and then causing them to repeat 
aloud with heartfelt love the names and 
attributes of God. 222. Eknath remained there 
a month, and turned every one to the worship of 
Vishnu. Finally he began taking leave of the merchant 
that he might hasten back to his own country. 223. The 
merchant, highly gratified by the visit, gave many marriage 
gifts to the bridegroom. He spent a large amount of 
money in gifts of garments to the wedding guests. 224. 
Eknath, having thus accomplished the purpose of his visit, 
returned to Pratishthina. When the inhabitants of the 
sacred city saw him, they flocked to his feet. 225. And 
when night came they carried the Husband-of-Rukmini 
in festal procession. And here, I, Mahipati, a servant of 
servants, sing the praiscs of His goodness. 226. Svasti. 
This book is the Sri Bhaktalilamrita. By merely listening 
to it one’s desires are fulfilled. Listen then to it ye loving 
pious bhaktas. This is the seventeenth delightful 
chapter. 


CHAPTER 18. 
MAHIPATI’S INVOCATION. 


Obeisance to Sri Ganesa.  Obeisance to Sri 
Rama Krishna. 


1. This is the Supreme Brahma, standing on the brick 
‘at whose sight bodily consciousness disappears, and to obtain: 
whom the Husband-of-Mridani sits in the cemetery. 


EKNATH 103 


2. Blessed are those citizens who out of the love 
of their hearts live in the sacred city of Pandhari. 
They, in their love, see there the Supreme Brahma 
actually manifested in visible form. 3. Those who 
look upon the river Chandrabhaga, acquire, in so doing, 
all that other sacred waters can bestow. The 
greatest of sins even are washed away. Such is its glory, 
the Purdns declare. 4. Those who, with supreme affec- 
tion in their hearts, feel drawn to visit Pandhari, return 
not hither (after death) through birth, but there comes to 
them Deliverance through absorption (into Brahma.) 5. 
Blessed indeed are those Vaishnavas who go on pilgrimages 
to Pandhari, for at the temple door of Pundalik they arrive 
at the pleasures of Heaven. 6. As is the glory of 
Pandhari, so is the glory of the sacred city of 
Pratishthina. Here, because of the perfect bhakti of Sri 
Eknath, the Husband-of-Rukmini came. 


EKNATH PLANS A PILGRIMAGE TO 
PANDHARPUR. 


7. In the last chapter there was related the interesting 
stories of how the Brahmans persecuted Eknath, and also 
how his heavenly fathers in visible forms came down from 
heaven. 8. Further on, how the image of Pandurang 
came from the Karnatak, and how, later, after celebrating 
his marriage returned to his own town. 9. How, with 
exceeding joy and pomp, the Lord-of-Pandhari was carried’ 
in procession. That indeed was a most auspicious day. 
when the Soul-of-the-World was placed on His throne. 10. 


104 EKNATH 


‘And Eknath, having invited all the Brahmans of the sacred 
city, feasted them with many kinds of savoury food. 11. 
After the above events Sri Eknath told Uddhava in private, 
of a secret wish. He said, “ Although we have rendered 
Him no service, yet Pandurang in his idol form has come 
to our house. 12. In all my life, I have never visited 
Pandhari, and yet even without my rendering him any form 
of service, this Recliner-on-the Serpent (Vishnu) has come 
to our house. 13. Just as the clouds in the sky thunder, 
even though the chdfaka has not opened its mouth (to the 
rain). Just as the moon rises, even though the chakor may 
be yet wholly unawake. 14. Just as the sun reveals him- 
self in the sky, even though the lotus may not be thinking 
of him. Just as a mother cares for her child while it is 
playing in the yard (unconscious of her.) 15. So 
although I have not been to Pandhari (to render service), 
the Husband-of-Rukmini has felt kindly towards me, and 
suddenly came here to my home from the Karnatak 
country. 16. So now this thought has come to me, that 
I must see Pandhari with my own eyes, that Vaikuntha 
upon earth, that home of the saints.” 17. As 
Sri Eknath thus spoke, Uddhava bowed low. And as this 
was to be Eknath’s first pilgrimage (to that place) a good 
auspicious day was chosen for starting. 18. With dindi 
and flags woven with gold and silver thread, with the 
sweet sounding cymbal, lute and drum, Sri Eknath, and 
other pilgrims prepared to start on their journey. 19. 
Because of the effect of association with his goodness, in- 
habitants of the sacred city prepared to accompany him, 
‘with supreme joy in their hearts, enthusiastically shouting 
the names and attributes of God. 


EKNATH 105 


EKNATH STARTS ON HIS PILGRIMAGE 
TO PANDHARPUR. 


20. This assemblage of Vaishnavas, singing and 
dancing, started on their pilgrimage, clapping their hands 
to their shouts of, “ Victory, Victory,” and the sounds they 
made filled the very heavens. 21. Singing God’s praise 
$ri Eknath journeyed on foot. A great crowd of people 
from the city accompanied them a part of way. 22. Eknath 
instructed Uddhava how to care for affairs at home. And 
Uddhava, solemnly promising to do so, prostrated himself 
at Eknath’s feet. 23. After Eknath was out of sight 
Uddhava returned home. The other citizens also returned 
to the city. 24. Uddhava carried on all the affairs at 
Eknath’s home just as he had established the custom. In 
the afternoons at the third prahar there was the reading 
.aloud of the Purdns. At night kirtans were performed. 
25. The worship of Vishnu, and the feeding of the 
poor that Eknath was accustomed to perform, Uddhava 
followed. ‘Blessed, Blessed,” cried the dwellers of the 
‘sacred city. “Nothing whatever is lacking (from the 
- customary usage.)” 


THE JOURNEY TO PANDHARPUR. 


26. But now as to the pilgrimage. Eknath, and the 
many who were accompanying him, were on their way to 
Pandhari. They journeyed along the path joyously. At 
-every stage in the journey kirtans were held. 27. On 
account of being in the company of Sri Eknath no one 
felt weary or exhausted. In the excess of joy they 
. repeated the names of Hari. 28. The weak and the 


106 EKNATH 


needy, both in the front and the rear (of the procession, 
were assisted. Every now and then there were bursts of 
song with feelings of love in praise of the Husband-of- 
Rukmini. 29. Sri Eknath himself was an avatar of 
Pandurang, come to save the world, yet for the sake of 
mankind, he at no point overstepped human limitations. 
30. For whatever example saints set, that the pious follow. 
In this way the latter become free from faults, and no 
longer are in bondage to this world. 31. Whenever 
Eknath met distinguished Vaishnavas he made them a 
namaskér. He was a man of great humility. He had 
not the least pride. 32. He was like the sun that rises in 
the sky, and pours his brightness over the earth, yet feels 
no pride of his own glory. 33. With feelings of deep 
love, these simple minded Vaishnavas, journeyed along the 
path, praising God in song. 34. As they approached the 
city of Pandhari, and saw the pinnacle of the temple their 
hearts rejoiced, and they lost all bodily consciousness. 
35. That very night Pandharinath appeared to the officiat- 
ing priests (of the temple) in a dream and said, “Tomorrow 
there is coming here on a pilgrimage Eka Janardan, the 
abheda bhakta. 36. Therefore, taking along with you 
dindis and banners go out to meet him, and on the four- 
teenth day of the moon let Eknath perform a kirtan at the 
chief door of the temple.” 37. It soon became known in the 
sacred city that such a vision had been seen, and all the 
people hurried to the Chandrabhaga (river) for an ovation 
(of welcome.) 38. Saints, mahants, and distinguished 
Vaishnavas, sang praise to God with rejoicing, so that the 
whole etherial space was filled with the shoutings of God's 
names, and cries of Victory! Victory! 


EKNATH 107 
EKNATH ARRIVES AT PANDHARPUR 


39. When Sri Nath saw before him the city of. 
Pandhari, he fell prostrate on the ground. Tears of joy 
flowed from his eyes. All embraced one another, 40- 
Saying, “ Blessed is this cream of all days, in which we 
have seen PPandharpur, truly very Vaikuntha 
on earth, the mother-home of the saints. 41. Thus. 
extolling the glory of the city, they waved incense to (God) 
the Being-of-Supreme-Goodness, Being-of-Infinite-attri- 
butes, Selfjoyous, to whom ‘no limits can be ascribed. 42. 
The whole crowd of pilgrims now crossed the Bhimarathi 
(river). And no sooner had they crossed, than the saints 
and mahants approaching, welcomed them. With affection 
they embraced one another. 43. “Blessed is this day,” 
they cried, “in which we have met Eknath.” After bathing: 
in the Chandrabhaga, Eknath went through all his usual. 
devotions. 44. Sri Eknath then went to view the tomb of 
the Muni Pundalik, that chief of all bhaktas, and lovingly 
worshipped him. 45. The temple priests then suggested: 
that he should next go to the chief entrance of the temple, 
there first to meet the Husband-of-Rukmini, and then be- 
free to go to his lodgings. 46. Eknath had absolute 
confidence that the voice of the Brahman was the voice of 
God, so with their dindis and banners they marched along 
(to the temple.) 47. At the Eagle-platform they pros- 
trated themselves to the ground with love. And while the- 
saints and mahants were singing the praises of God, they 
bowed at their feet also. 48. Pandhari is the city of 
Sri Vishnu. It is Vaikuntha itself on earth. It is where 
men and women live, who are four-armed and who have: 
no differences or distinctions between themselves. 49. 


108 EKNATH 


There are truly very many sacred watering places on this 
earth, but those who visit them become filled only with 
greater pride. 50. Not so with Mother Pandhari. At 
the mere sight of her one’s evil nature and pride pass away. 
Bringing repentance to the heart of the wicked, she starts 
him on the way to the chief end of man. 51. He who can 
‘destroy the evil pride of the heart, which is the real root 
of birth and death, he is to be recognized as the Supreme. 
‘Yogi. 52. Yogis direct their sight to the tip of their noses. 
And such is the appearance of (this image of) the Supreme- 
Being. He stands on the bank of the Bhima (river), with 
both hands on his hips. 53. The Yogis conquer 
their egotism and obtain the highest place. So 
is not the Husband-of-Rukmini. He delivers all 
ignorant beings. 54. This God-of-Gods, this Giver- 
of-Absorption-into-Brahma, Eknath saw with his 
own eyes. With a heart full of joy, he embraced him 
with love. 55. Graceful in his posture, lovely in his 
appearance, his beautiful hands on his hips, his face fasci- 
nating, alligator-shaped earrings in his ears. 56. A divine 
yellow silk garment fastened at his waist, his 
neck with a garland of tulsi and manjari, His feet together 
on a brick. Merely to look at him is to have all conscious- 
ness of body dissolve away. 57. Eknath gazed at him with 
feelings of love, and touched his forehead to his feet. 
Then with his lips he sang hymns of praise, and worshipped 
this Lord-of-Heaven. 58. And this sagun form, which he 
saw with his eyes, he treasured in his memory. He then 
went to worship Satyabhimad, Rahi and Rukmini. 59. 
After making a pradakshina of the sacred city, the while 
singing songs of praise to Pandurang, he made his way ta 
his lodging. 


EKNATH 109 


EKNATH MEETS WITH THE BHAKTAS AT 
PANDHARPUR. 


60. Let us now turn to what was in the heart of the 
bhakta. All the Brahmans of the scared city were given 
an invitation (to a feast). Savoury dishes were prepared, andi 
the next day they sat down toa breakfast. 61. Then on the: 
fourteenth day of the moon the Husband-of-Rukmini (im 
a vision) made known his wish to all the saints, saying,. 
“Tam very fond of Eknath’s kirtans.” 62. As soon as: 
this wish was revealed in the vision to the priests, they: 
said very respectfully to Eknath, “ We request you, Great 
Svami, to perform a kirtan at the Eagle-platform. 63. 
It is Sri Pandurang’s wish. You have been honored for- 
this purpose. ‘When Eknath heard of this gracious: 
honor, he made great preparations for the occasion. 64. 
Flags and streamers, and the seven colored banners, the. 
cymbal, vind, and drum, all were ready. 65. 
Saints, mahants, saddhus, rishis, Vedic pandits, and the- 
people of the sacred city sat down with reverence to listen. 
Their hearts were filled with delight. 66. They had 
already heard of Eknath’s wide-spread fame, and all were 
anxious to listen to his eloquence. 67. Among them there 
was also a great number of pilgrims, those brave, loving, 
heroic Vaishnavas, and other men and women pilgrims, 
making a dense crowd. 68. Eknath now stood up, and’ 
began with a hymn of invocation (to God,) and declaring 
that both listeners and speaker were Janardan, bowed in 
worship. 69. As he thus spoke, there was clapping of 
hands to the name of Vitthal, and with the tumultuous. 
noise of these shouts of praise the etherial space was filled 
to overflowing. 70.. “Krishna, Vishnu, Hari, Govinda,. 


110 EKNATH 


-Achyuta, Infinite-one, Source-of-Happiness, Supreme-Being 
Sachchidananda, Sri Mukunda, Guru-of-the-World, 71. 
Kesava, Narayana, Madhava, Lover-of-Bhaktas, Ocean-of- 
Mercy, Lord-of-the-Cowherdesses, God of Gods Thou dost 
«juenchi the entire fire of this life’s delusion. 72. For the 
‘sake of the dull, the stupid, the ignorant, Thou standest 
dere on the bank of the Bhima. Here thou dost welcome 
sincere bhakitas, and dost protect them with thy pitying 
glance.” 73. Thus they sang the names (and attributes of 
God) with hearts full of love, and dancing to his praise 
‘the whole audience lost all consciousness of body. Ecstasy 
-arose to its highest pitch. 


EKNATH RELATES A STORY OF HIS 
_ GREAT GRANDFATHER, BHANUDAS. 


74, At this moment some one made Eknath a request. 
“The life of your great-grand-father, Bhanudas, is exceed- 
angly interesting. Let us hear it told in song.” 75. Sri 
Eknath was greatly pleased on hearing this suggestion, and 
said, “I had that very thing in mind, when you, Svami, 
‘gave the command,” (and he sang the story of Bhanudas, 
‘as follows.) 


76, King Rama, with his followers, was ruling in 
Vidyanagara. Travelling in state, he came one day to 
this sacred city of Pandhari. 77. While looking at the 
beautiful image of Pandurang, a strong desire filled his 
heart. Said he to himself, “I want to take the Husband- 
of-Rukmini to my city of Vidyanagara.” 78. With this 
thought in mind he fasted for seven days. Krishna then 
appeared to him in a dream, and bid him as follows; 79. 


EKNATH 111 


“Because I saw the extraordinary devotion of Pundalik (to 
his parents) I took up my abode here at Pandhari, and 
according to the promise I made him, I here meet men of 
piety. 80. I enjoy this place. There is no place of rest 
like this. My abode in the Ocean-of-Milk and Heaven 
itself seem inferior places to this. 81. Here pious and 
loving bhaktas are constantly coming on pilgrimage. Here, 
free from all worry, I, Krishna, live in their company. 
82. This being so, King Rama, you make your persistent 
request in vain. Still I will tell you, how I may be carried 
to Vidyanagara, and what you must do. 83. I will only 
go there on condition that Brahmans, making themselves 
ceremonially pure, carry me along in their hands, and no- 
where on the journey place me on the ground.” 84. 
Seeing this vision of the night, the king was overjoyed in 
his heart. He called his ministers together and conferred 
with them in private. “ Advise me,” he said, “ what plan 
I can adopt?” 85. The ministers replied, “Give the 
Brahmanns of our country large gifts, and station them 
along the route. 86. Then passing the image from hand 
to hand we can quickly bring it to our city.” The king 
listened to this proposal, and it pleased him greatly. 87. 
He wrote humbly-worded letters to the Twice-born of the 
various villages, and soon collected a multitude of Brahmans 
along the route. 88. At certain regular distances he 
made arrangements for water and food, and the Brahmans 
seeing in all this a service rendered to God, were glad. 89. 
The king then made his namaskdr to the God, and thus 
_besought Him, “Do me now this favor, O Pandurang, 
and come with me immediately.” 


90. Thus besought by the king, the image was lifted 
‘to be passed from hand to hand. Against this act the 


112 EKNATH 


special servants and priests of the idol protested violently, 
but the king would not listen to them. 91. The monarch 
had authority and no one had the strength to prevail against 
him. Men and women (of the city) watched what was 
going on, and tears filled their eyes. 92. The king had 
no sooner taken the image away, than Pandharpur seemed 
like a deserted city. It looked like a body without 
life. 


93. We turn now to King Rama. Causing the image 
to be passed from hand to hand, he arrived at his city. 
94. He collected all the distinguished Vaishnavas together, 
and had a kirtan performed. There were dindis and 
banners in profusion, and beautiful garlands of flowers. 
95. With affection they worshipped and anointed the 
image of Pandurang, and placed it on a throne. The king 
proclaimed a great festival. He could not contain himself 
for joy. 96. The king honored the distinguished Vaish- 
navas with rich gifts of garments and ornaments, and 
distributing money lavishly he made the Brahmans happy. 
97. <Adorning the Husband-of-Rukmini with ormaments 
set with jewels, costly raiment and strings of pearls, he 
worshipped Him, and the etherial space overflowed with joy. 
98. Now while the king was asleep in his palace the image 
of Pandurang appeared to him in a dream, and said, 
“You have brought me to this place. I will tell you the 
conditions on which I shall stay here. Listen. 99. In 
accordance with the laws of justice and equity you must 
carry on a kingdom of righteousness. If the least injustice 
takes place, I shall remain here no longer. 100. I delight 
in loving bhaktas, and if you should persecute any of them, 
when innocent, I shall return to Pandharpur, my former 


EKNATH 113 


abode.” 101. The king having received this vision by 
night from Pandharinath, he was greatly alarmed, and: 
was continually on the watch. 


102. The priests came in the early mornings and 
affectionately worshipped the idol. The king first per- 
formed his bath, and then came to watch the worship of 
the idol and listen to the songs of praise. 103. Because: 
the idol was adorned with priceless ornaments, there was. 
great fear of thieves. Locks, therefore, were placed on: 
the doors of the temple, during all the eight watches of 
the day, even from morning to night. 104. Until the 
king came to the temple no one in the city could obtain. 
a sight of the idol, so carefully was it guarded. 105. The 
king regularly worshipped it, using the sixteen rites. Thrice 
a day savoury food, with a dressing of melted butter was 
offered to it. 106. Around it burned constantly rows of 
camphor lights. Flowers, musk, and many other fragrant 
materials were placed upon it. 107. But separation from 
Pandhari pierced the heart of the God like an arrow, and 
he was ill at ease. ‘I am imprisoned here,” he said “to 
himself. ‘“ When shall I be delivered from here?” 


108. Now let us turn to Pandhari, where in the 
month of Ashadh a crowd of pilgrims had gathered. The 
saints, mahants, siddhas and rishis were in great distress. 
109, Only the most courageous Vaishnavas had gathered 
here. The others, worldly minded, ‘said to themselves, 
(Why go there?) Pandharinath has gone away. 110. 
And thus minded they all remained at home. The saints, 


mahanis, however, made Pandhari beautiful by their 
8 


114 EKNATH 


presence. 111. Just as when it rains heavily on the earth, 
one mistakes side gullies for rivers. But when the hot 
season comes, there is not a drop of water left in them. 
112. That crystal which alone endures the blow of the 
hammer, is considered a priceless diamond. Experts know 
that other crystals would be smashed to powder. 113. 
When tested by intense heat, that which appears brilliant, is 
recognized as gold. Brass appears dull. Such is the 
method of testing them. 114. If the gem [taken from a 
cobra’s head,] is wound around by a cotton thread and then 
thrown into the fire, and the thread does not burn, then 
the gem is a sure antidote to snake poison. 115. So in 
times of adversity, amid the many whirlpools of fiery trials, 
he whose determination in no wise fails, he alone deserves 
the name of saint. 116. He whose love does not weaken 
in times of distress, but who with tenacity of purpose per- 
forms accustomed duties, such a bhekta is dear to the 
Good-Being, as one loves one’s own soul. 


117. Well, enough of these long drawn out remarks, 
but the composing of similes is a poet’s business. No 
sooner had King Rama taken Pandharinath away, than 
there arrived pilgrim saints. 118. Not seeing the 
Husband-of-Rukmini on his throne, Pandharpur seemed to 
them like a deserted city, like the ceasing of the functions 
of the senses, when the body is without life. 119. Like 
an army without a king, like the night without the moon, 
like the poetic inspiration without the grace of God. 120. 
Or, again, like a house without the master of the house, so 
Pandharpur appeared. All were troubled, but no one was 
able to suggest any remedy at all. 


EKNATH 115 


121. Just then * Nivritti, Dnydnadeva, Sopana, 
Nama, Sanvat, all Vaishnavas, Muktabai storehouse of 
goodness, arrived on their pilgrimage. 122. Also Kabir, 
Rohidasa, Gora the potter, Gonabai, Jani, the servant of 
Nama, and Rajai, all noble bhaktas. 123. This company 
of pilgrims was seated by the Eagle-platform, and Nama- 
deva was performing a kirian, when Bhanudasa suddenly 
approached. 124 On this shoulder he carried the 
Brahma lute, and he came along playing the lute, singing, 
dwelling on the Husband-of-Rukmini in his heart, and 
repeating his names (and attributes). 125. In this manner 
Bhanudas arrived at the LEagle-platform. He at once 
saluted the saints and mahants and reverently made them a 
namaskaér. 126. He found all these distinguished Vaish- 
navas greatly troubled in their hearts, thinking over how 
the Hushand-of-Rukmini had been taken away to Vidya- 
Magara. 127. Some argued that the God-ofGods, seeing 
the devotion of King Rama, had gone from Pandhari. One 
said, “Then why should not we, who are many Vaishnava 
bhakias, go and bring KeSava back.” 128. To this pro- 
posal of Dnyanaraj, no one responded. Some said, 


* Note.—Neither Vitthal Kavi, nor Mahipati in his 
Bhaktavijaya 43, 136-147 name the bhaktas present at 
Pandharpur. Kesavasvami, in his Ekndth charitra 14, 75- 
78, and followed by Mahipati here, makes Bhanudas a 
contemporary of DhydnesSvara and the group of saints that 
tradition usually associates with him. This anachronism 
may perhaps be best explained by the probable fact, that 
neither Kesavasvami, nor the author from whom KeSava- 
svamj obtained his information, knew the dates of 
Bhanudas or Dnyanesvara, and therefore had no difficulty 
in making them contemporaries to him, all belonging to the 
distant past. 


116 EKNATH 


“ There is no way of going against the will of God.” 129. 
Another spoke from the non-dualistic point of view. “ God 
is within us. God fills all animate and inanimate things. 
There is no place empty of Him.” 130. Another said, “ If 
we go there, the king will be angry with us, and put us, in 
prison. Then what would we do?” 131. The cowardly 
minded remarked, “That is none of our business.” Just 
then Bhanudas bowed prostrate before those saints. 132. 
“If you will command me,” he said, “I will speedily bring 
Pandharinath back. You may put away all anxiety. I 
bid you to remain here. 


133. With these words to them, Bhanudas departed. 
And just as Maruti rejoiced in going to search for Siti, 
so Bhanudas rejoiced. 134. In his heart he dwelt on the 
image of Pandurang. With his lips he sang the fame of 
His name. Day and night he repeated his name (and 
attributes) with peace of heart accompanied with love. 
135. Under the influence of the wonderful thought of 
bringing God back, his heart was joyous. He lost the 
consciousness of body. He forgot thirst and hunger. 136, 
He asked for no food, but if anyone happened to give it to 
him, he ate it with contentment and continued his journey. 
137. Travelling in this way along the route, Bhanudas 
finally approached Vidyanagara, and enquired of the people, 
whether it was here that Pandurang had been brought. 
‘138. For fear of the king, he found, no one would reply 
to him. But finally he met a good man, a Brahman, wha 
told him every thing. 139. “King Rima,” he said, 
“brought the image of Pandurang here, and has installed it 
in the temple, but no one is allowed to see it. It is cons- 
tantly kept under lock and key.” 140. Bhanudas thought 


EKNATH 117 


to himself, “‘ Then I must see the God privately. I will go 
there after the hymns of praise are sung, that put him to 
rest for the night.” 141. That evening the king came to 
the temple as usual, hurried through the evening hymns of 
praise, and returned to his palace. 


142.  Bhanudas, the distinguished Vaishnava, now 
came to the door of the temple. He found the priests out- 
side, overcome with sleep. 143. To the rooms within 
rooms there were four doors. Each door was fastened 
with heavy locks. But the Hushand-of-Rukmini per- 
formed a miracle, and caused the locks to fall. 144. 
Seeing all the doors unlocked, Bhanudas was happy indeed, 
“My desire is fulfilled,’ he thought to himself, and at 
once entered. 145. There stood the Lord-of-the-World, 
His feet close together on the brick, both hands on his 
hips, his eyes fastened on the tip of his nose. 146. 
Bhanudis saw its beautiful face, and was filled with 
rapture. But pretending outwardly that he was angry, he 
began to scold the God. 


147. “ Husband-of-Rukmini, Lord-of-Pandhari, what 
is the meaning of these badges fastened to your feet? 
Your deeds do not correspond with your promises. I 
realize this now from experience. 148. You gave Pund- 
alik a promise that you would for ever remain at Pandhar- 
pur, to save the dull minded and the ignorant. Apparently 
you have not the slightest recollection of that promise. 
149. You have chosen for yourself a very fine private 
place in the king’s palace, and adorned yourself with fine 
Yaiment, and many ornaments. You are receiving offer- 
ings of savoury food. 150. It is for this that you are 
Staying here in enjoyment. You have forgotten us in 


118 EKNATH 


your heart.” Bhanudas then immediately composed an 
abhang to which I ask this wise audience to listen. 


The Abhang of Bhanudas. 


1. On the bank of the Bhima river, standing on the 
brick, Vithoba was ruling in Pandhari. 

2. Riddhi and Siddhi wait upon Him with their retinue. 
Thou art not obtainable even to Brahmadeva and other 


Gods. 


3. Yet leaving all that you have come here. Who 
has beguiled you, Kanadiya? 


4. The conchshell, the kettle drum, the hand drum, 
and the horn sound, and keep you, O God, awake. 


5. You are sprinkled with champaka oil, smeared 
with fragrant oils, rivulets of Bhivara sandal wood oil are 
flowing on you. 

6. Rambha, Tilottama, Urvasi, and Menika, and 
many other heavenly damsels have come with you. 


7. On golden paryeli jewelled lamps are waved over 
your beautiful and glorious face. 


8. But Mother Rakhumdi has naturally become 
depressed and how silent has Pundalik become. 


9. Bhaktas and Bhagavatas are displeased, and with- 
out you, have become speechless. 


10. Blessed is Pandharpur, the mother-home of the 
Universe. Blessed is the sand-bed on the bank of the 
Bhima. 


EKNATH 119 


11. Come along with me, says Bhanudas. Let the God 
remember the debt he owes through the promise He made. 
151. With this pleading request, Bhanudas fell at the 
God’s feet. “ Tell me now,” he cried, “ Who has beguiled 
you, O king God?” 152. As Chakrapani listened to this 
pleading, He was deeply moved. He embraced Bhianudas, 
and drew him close to his heart. 153. “Iam confined in a 
prison here,” Pandharinath exclaimed, ‘‘ and you also have 
hardened your heart, and have not taken me back to my 
home. 154. O loving Bhakta, do not desert me here, and 
go away. I truly cannot endure a single moment without 
you.” 155. Thus speaking, this Being of Mercy, gave 
Bhanudas a love-token. He put around Bhanudas’ 
neck his own garland of tu/st leaves and flowers. 
156. ‘ Tomorrow,” He said, “come and take me along 
with you.” At this request of the Husband-of-Rukmini, 
Bhanudas was overjoyed. 157. Along with the garland 
of flowers, however, there came the string of nine jewels. 
But Bhanudas was not aware of this, as he quickly passed 
out. 158. The moment Bhanudas left, the Life-of-the- 
World miraculously relocked the doors. Now as soon as 
it was dawn the king hastened to the temple. 


159. As he was waving the lights before the God, 
he failed to see the string of nine jewels on His neck. “A 
thief must have been here,” he thought, and he poured 
out his rage on the priests. 160. Detectives rushed in 
every direction to discover the thief. Suddenly they saw 
Bhanudis, the distinguished Vaishnava. 161. He had 
bathed in the Ganga, and was sitting repeating the names 
and attributes of Vitthal. On his neck the servants of the 
king noticed the radiant string of divine jewels. 162. 


120 EKNATH 


They seized this distinguished Vaishnava, and brought him 
quickly before the king. Showing him the string of jewels, 
they said, “ We have caught the thief and have brought 
him here.” 163. The king became furious with rage, 
and angrily addressed him. Then to his officers he said, 
“You have caught the thief, and have brought him here. 
Now impale him.” 164. Without proper consideration, 
and without justice, he gave this order to his officers. He 
was not aware of what was to take place. His mind was 
enveloped by the illusions of Maya. 165. So they gave 
Bhanudas, the distinguished Vaislinava, a severe beating; 
placed the stake on his shoulder, and Sendur on his fore- 
head. 166. But Bhanudas, with love in his heart, held 
in his mind the image of Pandurang, exclaiming, ‘“ God-of- 
Gods, Husband-of-Rukmini, how nobly you are treating 
me. 167. Because I have come to carry you back, you put 
this necklace around my neck, and now you are giving me 
up to be impaled. You have not the slightest love. 168. 
Well, since it thus lies in your mind, death will come to my 
body, but never, never will I forget Thee.” And with this 
he broke out into the following abhang. 


1. Though the heavens should roar with thunder; 
though the sphere of the universe should crash into pieces; 
though fire devour the three worlds, yet will I wait on 
Thee, O Vithoba. 


2. Though the seven oceans should flow into one; 
though the five elements be dissolved, yet, Thou wilt be 
with me, O Vithoba. 


3. Though any disaster whatever, may fall heavily 
upon me, yet may my repeating of Thy name never cease, 


EKNATH 121 


just as a devoted wife does to the Lord of her life. Says 
Bhanudas, Hear me, O Vithoba. 


169. Thus expressing his purpose, he became choked with 
emotion. When suddenly Pandha.-inath manifested his 
‘presence. Listen how he did it, ye pious bhaktas of His. 


170. The sharp stake that had been fastened upright 
in the ground, suddenly burst into branches and leaves, 
beautiful flowers and fruit, to the astonishment of all. 171. 
The king was informed by his servants that the impaling 
stake had become a living tree. The king heard the report 
and was startled. 172. Repentant, the king hastened to 
see the sight. And there he saw Bhanudias with his eyes 
closed, repeating the names and attributes of the King-of- 
Pandhari. 173. Seeing him in this attitude, the king, 
prostrated himself on the ground before him, exclaiming, 
“You fearless Vaishnava, I sinful and dull of understand- 
ing, did not recognize you.” 174, Bhanudais now opened 
his eyes and looked about, and beheld the stake had become 
a great tree. “ The Husband-of-Rukmini has manifested 
His presence for me,” he exclaimed. “A miracle has taken 
place.” 175. The king now took Bhanudas by the hand, 
and led him to the temple. And there they saw the image 
-of Pandurang with dejected countenance, and tears stream- 
ing from his eyes. 176. Seeing him so, the king made a 
sdshténg namaskar, and then with palm to palm before the 
God, he pled with him in tender words. 177. “I have 
-done wrong in many ways,” he exclaimed. “I have per- 
secuted your bhakta.” Hearing King Rama’s plea for 
‘mercy, the Lord-of-Pandhari replied. 178. “Remain 
here in peace, but ever bringing my form to your remem- 
“‘brance. I am going back with Bhanudas to behold 


122 EKNATH 


Pandhari. 179. If you use any pressure to prevent this,. 
great calamity will befall you here.” Accepting this reply~ 
of Sarangadhara, the king, ceased to speak further. 


180. Bhanudis now said, ‘“ Husband-of-Rukmini, 
what means shall I employ (in carrying you back?). Mine- 
is not a kingly power, that I can collect a multitude of 
people to carry you.” 181. The Husband-of-Rukmini 
listened to his question, and then a miracle followed. 
Suddenly the image became small in size, to the amazment 
of the king. 182. Bhanudas was delighted, and placed 
the King-of-Pandhari in a little bamboo basket. Then 
exclaiming, “ Victory to Sri Vitthal!’” he carried along 
the Husband-of-Rukmini. 183. Enclosed within the 
basket, the Supreme Being, told Bhanudis his deep inner 
thoughts. ‘“ The universe is filled with joy to-day, for I 
shall see the saints.” 184. Thus, journeying along the 
route, Bhanudas, arrived near the city of Pandhari, and 
this Vaishnava bhakta descended into the Padmatirtha to - 
bathe. 185. He washed his dhotar, and spread it out to 
dry on the stone wall of the tank. Suddenly the God ' 
assumed again his large form. 186. The cover of the 
basket above his head, and the side at his feet were broken 
to bits. Bhanudis was amazed. The Husband-of- 
Rukmini then said. 187. ‘“ The saints and mahants have 
been waiting for me unceasingly at the Eagle platform. 
Go quickly, and tell them (I am here). They will come 
immediately to welcome me.” 188. At this request of | 
the Lord-of-the-World, Bhanudis, glad of heart, hastened’ 
to the Eagle-platform, and with smiling countenance made 
the announcement. 189. “TI thave bought back truly the 
image of Vitthal as far as the Padmatirtha.” As they 
heard this announcement, all rejoiced at heart. 


EKNATH 123 


190. And all went out to welcome him, carrying with 
them a palanquin. They had with them dindis and banners 
in profusion, and the festal musical instruments were 
played. 191. The Vaishnavas sang the praise of Hari, 
singing and dancing in their love. All the inhabitants of 
the sacred city, great and small, followed in the procession, 
192. Exclaiming as they went along, “ How can we ever 
repay our obligation to Bhanudas. Blessed is this fearless 
Vaishnava hero. He has brought back our Sdirangadhar.” 
193. The whole crowd now approached the Padmatirtha. 
As soon as they saw the image of Pandurang, they pros- 
trated themselves to the ground. 194. Bhanudas gave a 
helping hand, and Pandarinath was placed in a palanquin. 
The bhakias shouted, “ Victory, Victory,” and scattered 
fragrant powders in the air. 195. Thus in pomp the 
Husband-of-Rukmini was brought to the Chandrabhaga 
river. Here they bathed him, and then brought him to 
the temple. 196. On a happy auspicious day, the image 
was replaced on its throne. Immediately the God, Giver- 
of-bliss-of-Absorption, spoke to Bhanudas a word of pro- 
mise. 197. “I cannot repay your kindness. You have 
again brought Pandharpur to my sight. I shall assuredly 
become an avatar in your family line.” 198. At this 
promise of the Saviour-of-the-World, the bhaktas shouted 
“Victory, Victory,” and to all the inhabitants of the sacred 
city there came great joy. 199. As rain from a cloud 
in the time of a drought, as life returning to a body at 
the point of death, so feeling this to be a joyous time, gifts 
were given to the people. 200. Men and women of their 
own accord distributed sweets from house to house. The 
Vaishnavas at the Eagle-platform nodded their heads in uni- 
son to the loud music of praise. 


124 EKNATH 


201. Thus Eka Janardan sang the story of Bhanudas, 
‘and the saints and mahants listened to the kirtan with rapt 
attention. 202. He thus sang the interesting story of his 
ancestor, Bhanudas. The sound of Brahma was incarnate 
there. Loud were the strains in which the Rirtan was sung. 
203. Finally the last hymns of praise were sung and lights 
waved before the Husband-of-Rukmini. I, Mahipati, the 
servant of servants, now distribute the sweetmeats. 204. 
Svasti. This book is the Sri Bhaktalilamrit. By merely 
listening to it, one’s desires are fulfilled. Listen then to it, 
ye loving, pious bhaktas. This is the eighteenth delightful 
chapter. 


CHAPTER 19. 
BHAKTALILAMRITA. 


Mahipati’s Invocation. 


1. Obeisance to Sri Ganega. Victory, Victory to the 
Merciful, to the Everlasting-Sleeper-(on-the-Serpent,) 
Bumble-bee-in-the lotus-heart-of-his-Bhaktas, Pervader-of~ 
the-Universe, Ocean-of-Goodness, Supreme-over-All. Sa- 
viour-of-the World. 2. Thou thyself, O Thou-with-the-eyes- 
of-a-lotus, hast caused the beautiful life of Thy slave to be 
related. I am not an independent relater. I am dependent 
on Thee, subject to Thee. 3. Just as the wind sways the 
hay scare-crow, so the inspiration to my mind comes from 
Thy power, O Pandurang. 4. The pipe plays many tunes, 
so the ignorant say. With undiscriminating mind, they 
fail to recognize the player. 5. The earth supports the 
tree. According to the soil there springs up the tender 
shoots. So, whether my narration lacks, or is perfect, the 


EKNATH 125 


cause is to be found entirely in Thee. 6. The soil that 
produces a tree does not always produce a cypress tree. So at 
the beginning or at the end, whatever it be, Thou Sarang- 
apani, art He upon whom we rest. 7. Thou art both 
speaker and hearer, both in one. There is nothing else 
but Thee. So, now, looking upon us with eyes of favor, 
may God cause us to cross safely the ocean of life. 


EKNATH RETURNS TO PAITHAN. 


8. In the last chapter there was related the remark- 
able story of how Eknath went to Pandhari, and in a 
kirtan lovingly sang the wonderful life history of Bhanudas. 
9. The saints, Mahants, and other pious folk had listened 
with great joy of heart, and exclaimed, “ Blessed is the 
sacred city of Pratishthina, for it enjoys the sight of Sri 
Nath. 10. Eknath is not a human avatar. He is, in 
very fact, Pandurang himself, descended as avatar.” No 
sooner did Eknath’s ear catch this praise of himself, than. 
he arose and went out. 11. He proceeded to the temple, 
and lovingly met there Pandurang. Here he made gift 
offerings to the Brahmans, and taking God’s leave departed. 
12. Night and day Eknath thought upon the extraordinary 
greatness of Pandhari, and proclaimed to the people the 
noble fame of the city. He then started to return to 
Pratishthana, 


13. As he was approaching the city, Uddhava heard 
the news of his coming, and all the inhabitants of that 
sacred city hastened out to welcome Him. 14. Regarding 
Eknath as the image of Pandurang, they reverently made 
him namaskar. They embraced him with loving emotions, 


126 EKNATH 


and could not contain themselves for joy. 15. All lifted 
aloft emblems and banners, and marched along, while 
Eknath sang the praises of God. On the route booths 
joined booths. An extraordinary crowd had gathered. 
16. Thus accompanied with shouts of joy, [Eknath 
entered his home. Here also singing sweet songs of praise, 
he waved lights before the Husband-of-Rukmini. 17. 
‘Thus successfully ended the pilgrimage to Pandhari. 
Vith Uddhava, the loving disciple, always sitting beside him, 
18. The customary worship of Vishnu, the listening to 
the reading of the Purdns, the feeding of the poor, the song 
service in praise of Hari, all this went on as before. There 
‘was no failure in anything. 


THE GREAT SANYASI, SRIPAD. 


19. Now there was in the sacred city of Pratishthana 
a great sannydsi, named Sripad. He had conquered the 
‘six enemies of the soul, and had become a Paramahansa. 
20. He recognized God in every creature. He recognized 
no distinctions of less and more. To him beggar and king 
were alike. 21. A mosquito and an elephant, a four- 
legged or a two legged animal were all alike to him. What- 
ever creature he happened to see, he prostrated himself 
‘before it. 22. The Brahmans of the city said among 
themselves, “ Although Sripad is a great man, he has not 
the least pride. He makes namaskdr to everyone. 23. 
An outcaste or a Brahman, a cow, a cat, a dog, a pig, or a 
bird, if he sees any of these he reverently bows to them. 
24. Whether one is of low caste or high, does not at all come 
into his thoughts. Truly he is out of his head, through the 
influence of some mantra. He is certainly possessed.” 


EKNATH 127 


25. Some said, “ Each one knows himself only. He is no 
concern of ours. A Paramhansa does not have to consider 
in the least the differences of caste.” 26. Thus of the 
inhabitants of the sacred city, some reviled him, some 
praised him, but from this he experienced in his heart, 
neither pleasure nor pain. His state was that of one un- 
conscious of a body (conscious only of soul.) 27. He had 
adopted a regular habit of visiting Eknath, and with fixed 
attention, lovingly listening to his kirtans. 28. Thus bow- 
ing prostrate before every creature, and constantly visiting 
Sri Nath, his heart was ever at peace, and filled with joy. 


SRIPAD WORSHIPS A DEAD DONKEY. 


29. Many days thus passed, when a most extraor- 
dinary event occurred. The prostrating Svdmu, making 
his obeisances (namaskdr) as he went along, arrived at 
the banks of the Ganga (the Godavari) for his bath. 30. 
A donkey had drowned in the river. The dead animal had 
floated down, and when the freshet had spent its force, 
the bloated carcass lay on the sand. 31. The prostrating 
Svdmi arriving at the spot made his namaskéar to the car- 
cass of the donkey. The Brahmans all laughed to see this 
prostration, for it was to a lifeless thing. 32. “O Svami,” 
they exclaimed, ‘“‘All-knowing-one. Who is it, to whom 
you have made this obeisance?” Hearing this question of 
the Brahmans, he looked to see what it really was. 33. 
It was indeed the carcass of an animal greatly bloated. 
The Brahmans added, “If you will bring this 
carcas to life, then indeed your feelings of reverence 
are justified. 34: Regarding this world, as if 


128 EKNATH 


it were but soul (Atma), you make obeisance to every creat- 
ture. If you raise this donkey to life, then we are ready 
to acknowledge that your belief is proved true.” 35. The 
Paramhansa listened to the proposition of the Brahmans, 
and replied, ‘“ The soul (Atma) pervades all animate beings.” 
Then to the Atma he prayed. 36. “ God-of-Gods, King 
of Pandhari. You have disappeared out of this thing. 
And so long as the body of this donkey appears in the 
form of a carcass, so long prostration before it seems in 
vain.” 


THE DONKEY IS BROUGHT TO LIFE. 


37. He had no sooner thus spoken, when an extra- 
ordinary miracle took place. The carcass of the donkey, 
lying there, suddenly came to life. 38. Shaking itself, 
it snorted, flapped its ears, and in a moment was on its 
feet. The sight amazed the Brahnrans, and they exclaimed, 
“This is an extraordinary miracle.” 39. Putting aside 
their pride, the Bramans, made him a mamaskdr. Great 
crowds of people gathered to see what had happened, filling 
with their numbers the whole sand-bed of the river. 40, 
Men and women were astonished at the great acquired 
power of the prostrating Svami, and exlaimed, “So great 
a saint is not to be seen elsewhere on the earth.” 41, The 
Brahmans said to one another, “ This is indeed so. - This 
Eknath of our town is ever performing kirtans in the 
prakrit, and beguiling all the people. 42. But he has no 
power to raise a carcass to life. It is only empty know- 
ledge which he is constantly preaching with his lips to the 
pious people.” 43. While the Brahmans were thus 
reviling him, Sri Nath happened to approach. He just 


EKNATH 129 


happened to be coming to the bed of the river for the 
purpose of reciting the Vedas (Brahmayadnya.) 44. 
When the Brahmans saw him they let loose hateful words 
at him, and praising the prostrating Svimi, said “Blessed, 
Blessed is he. 45. It is foolish to call anyone a saint 
who cannot perform a miracle, and indeed it does not 
seem commendable to endure such a so-called saint among 
men.” 46. With these remarks all the Brahmans returned 
to their homes. Suddenly the prostrating Svami approa- 
ched Sri Nath, and prostrated himself before him. 


EKNATH REBUKES SRIPAD FOR HIS MIRACLE. 


47. Eknath looked at this superior ascetic, and made 
him a namaskér. Then he thus addressed him. “You 
have created to-day a serious predicament. 48. To 
begin with this is the evil Kaliyuga. Mankind is filled with 
suspicions and hate. In addition to this the king is a 
Mahomedan. Onc sees therefore difficulties in the way 
of practising Yoga. 49. If the king hears of your powers, 
he will confine you in prison, so that if any of his household 
should die, he might cause them through you to come to 
life. 50. And every where there are men with selfish 
desires. They will be asking you continually of the past 
and the future. Through this you will be interrupted in 
your manner of life. What is the remedy for this?” 


SRIPAD IS BURIED ALIVE BY EKNATH. 


51. The Prostrating svdmi accepted Eknath’s nectar- 
words, humbly besought him that he would give him a 
burial alive. 52. Sri Nath replied, “ That you should 


130 EKNATH 


receive a burial-alive seems the best suggestion.” Some 
Kimatis, therefore, were quickly called, and a hole was 
dug by them. 53. In this hole the bodily-unconscious 
ascetic sat. There was a moment of worship, and then 
the sand was filled in over him. Sri Eknath then bathed 
and returned to his home. 54, The affair soon became 
known in the sacred city, that the Prostrating Svdmi had 
received a burial alive. On this the Brahmans all assembled 
and took counsel together. 55. The Pandits, and the 
Vedic religious heads summoned Eknath to Pimpales- 
vara, saying, “ You have performed this most unusual deed 
without informing us. 56. You had a hole dug in the 
Ganga river, and you buried the distinguished Yogi alive. 
Who repeated the mantras there? You performed the deed 
without the prescribed rites. 57. Using pressure, you 
told him to take this burial alive. This Paramhansa is 
now buried, and the charge of murder most certainly hangs 
ever your head. Therefore you must be encommunicated. 
58. In what Séstra is it written that one should force a 
sannyasi to be buried alive. If there is such a Séstra, 
show it to us.” All the Brahmans then exclaimed. 


BRAHMANS ACCUSE EKNATH OF AN 
UNLAWFUL ACT. 


59. “The sannydsi easily raised the dead donkey to 
life. You could not endure the sight of such miraculous 
power in him. Therefore you killed the sannyadsi. We 
know your secret inner motive.” 60. One added, “A 
brave man indeed! A very great expert indeed, in the 
Bhagavata religion! Turning aside from the path of right- 
eousness, he has set up a market for selling his doctrines.” 


EKNATH 181 


61. Another said, “ By some hocus pocus he knows some 
bewitching mantras. He, only in mere form, sings the 
names of God, while really seducing the pious and robbing 
them.” 62. One very impudent man openly declared, 
“This fellow is assuredly a violator of our religious laws. 
He violates the path laid down in the Vedic commands, 
and commits unlawful and eccentric deeds. 63. In killing 
this sannyési he has committed murder, yet his mind is 
not disquieted thereby. He still carries on his worship 
with a joyous heart. His heart is as hard as a stone. 64. 
Without possessing it himself he preaches knowledge to 
others. There was no pity aroused in his heart when he 
murdered the sannyési.” 


THE BRAHMANS DEMAND A MIRACLE 
OF EKNATH. 


65. The Brahmans then said to Eknath, “ The charge 
of murder falls on your head. Perform now a miracle, 
and thus save yourself from excommunication. 66. If 
this stone bull here before our eyes shall eat kadabé stalks 
from your hands, then you are without the least blame, 
and we will withdraw our purpose of excommunicating 
you.” 67, Eknath listened to the words of these chief 
Brahmans, and placed his forehead at their feet, saying, 
“That which passes your lips, Svamis, can never prove 
unture. 68. Formerly by the pitying glance of 
Vasistha’s eye his cane became heated to brilliancy 
equal to that of the sun. The Supreme being never 
lets a Brahmans’ word come false.” 69. The 


139 EKNATH 


Brahmans exclaimed in reply, “You are talking 
a lot of longwinded stuff. If you show us a miracle, then 
only we shall regard your statements as true.” 70. 
At this they ran, and brought some sheaves of kadabd stalks, 
and placed them before Eknath. Eknath, seeing their 
persistence, said to the stone bull, 71. “To-day, of my own 
accord I seated the sannydsi in his grave. If there is no 
fault whatever in this act of mine, then eat these hadabd 
stalks.” 72. As these words escaped Ekniath’s lips, a 
most strange thing happened. The stone bull ran out its 
tongue, 73. And drawing a sheaf of kadaba stalks into 
its mouth rapidly devoured it. All the Brahmans saw this 
sight, and were filled with amazement. 74. And said, 
“Eknath, Sir, you have performed a miracle. Therefore, 
you are free from the penalty of excommunication which 
we had intended to inflict upon you.” 75. Eknath listened 
to these words of the chief Brahmans, and made them a 
namaskér, saying, ‘I am indeed dull of understanding. I 
am not acquainted with the Vedic Sastras. 76. By drink- 
ing the water with which your feet are washed I am purified. 
And in your feet are all the firthas, vratas 
and siddhis.” 77. The Brahmans, however, re- 
marked among themselves, “This miraculous deed per 
formed by Eknath is an act that cannot be acquired through 
the practice of Yoga. This astonishing deed comes from 
Bhakti. 78. Because of his former devotion to his Guru, 
his service to saints, and his loving worship of Sri Hari, 
Pandurang has become pleased with him, and protects him 
moment by moment.” 79. Thus conversing among them- 
selves, all the chief Brahmans returned to their homes. As 
the affair became known in the sacred city, the people 


EKNATH 133 


marvelled. 80. The loving pious ones sang Eknath’s 
praises. ‘The Lord-of-Heaven has descended to save the 
universe,” they said. 


SOME BRAHMANS DISBELIEVE THE 
MIRACLE. 


81. But some of the suspicious and spiteful people 
of the town declared the affair false. Among them the 
chief Brahmans who lad remained behind in the sacred 
city; they now hurried to PimpaleSvara. 82. They 
examined carefully the stone bull, but it was a stone just 
as before. “How could he have eaten the Kadabd stalk 7” 
they exclaimed. “The story does not impress us.” 83. 
Then calling Eknath, they said, ‘“Linless you show us the 
same miracle you performed yesterday, you are excom- 
municated. Not all of us saw the miracle, 84. You 
were here yesterday certainly but we were not, and we are 
unwilling to listen to the story. They then put some sheaves 
before Icknath saying, “Feed this to the Stone bull 
(Nandi.) 85. lf you do not show us this miracle, then 
the authority of the Sastras will be employed in this conten- 
tion, and the curse will surely be visited upon you for 
having buried the Sannydsi alive.’ 86. As Eknath 
listened to this demand of the Brahmans, his thoughts be- 
came troubled, and turning to the Nandi (stone bull) he 
prayed. Listen, O hearers, to his prayer. 87. “How long 
wilt Thou be willing to be constantly eating Kadabda? 
There are a great many more Brahmans remained in the 
city. 88. Tomorrow they will come and demand the same 
thing of me, so I must quickly devise some way by which 
the doubts of all may be removed.” 


134 EKNATH 
THE STONE BULL LEAPS INTO THE RIVER. 


89. Eknath had no more than uttered this prayer, 
when a remarkable event took place before the sight of 
those Brahmans, and other men and women. 90. The 
stone bull rose up, and running jumped into a deep hole 
in the Ganga river. It is there to this day. 91. As the 
Brahmans saw this great wonder they marvelled and said, 
“Eknath’s greatness is beyond our comprehension. It is 
a deed that does not belong to man. 92. Formerly in this 
town of our ancestors Dnyaneévara made a buffalo repeat 
the whole of the Vedas. 93. And when Changadeva, the 
Siddha, came to visit him, he made the lifeless wall move 
forward. In like manner Eknath has performed now an 
extraordinary deed.” 94. Thus conversing among them- 
selves, they then said to Eknath, “There is now no excom- 
munication for you. You may return to your home. 95. 
Blessed is your loving devotion. You have brought life 
to a stone Nandi (stone bull). The God-of-Gods is pleased 
with you. We now recognize the real meaning of what 
has happened.” 96. Sri Eknath heard this praise, and 
reverently bowed at their feet, saying, “This that has 
happened is through the power of your favor. As the 
humblest of all I come to your protection.” 97. With 
these words of Janardan’s Eknath, the Brahmans were 
gratified, and the people of Paithan, great and small, came 
to see the Nandi. 98. At that spot the Nandzi is still there, 
and when the sand gets removed the Nandi is plainly visible 
to the sight. Let no one doubt this in his heart. 99. 
Sri Nath returned to his home. The pious folk were 
filled with joy, and day by day Eknath’s good fame became 
known further far and wide. 


EKNATH 135 
EKNATH GOES TO ALANDI. 


100. It now happened at a certain time that Sri Nath 
was about to go to Alankapuri. He left his faithful dis- 
ciple, Uddhava, at home, and started with his retinue of 
followers. 101. Influenced by the thought of such good 
company, a great crowd started with him on this pilgrimage. 
They journeyed along the road listening the while lovingly 
to loud songs of praise. 102. Arriving at Alankapuri, 
they rested on the bank of the Indrayani. Here Dnydna- 
deva, appearing to him in a dream by night, said to him, 
103. ‘The roots of the Ajana tree have reached my 
neck. Dig into my tomb and push the root aside.” 104. 
Sri Nath did so, and there beheld Dnyanadeva. He made 
a prostrate namaskaér before him, and pushed aside the 
root. 105. He then closed up the tomb again, and per- 
formed a kirtan. Also on the eleventh of the moon there 
was an all night praise service, participated in by all the 
pilgrims. 


GOD MIRACULOUSLY PROVIDES FOOD 
FOR THE PILGRIMS. 


106. At that time Alankdpuri was a depopulated town. 
There was no rice and other food materials to be obtained 
there. God Pandarinath performed a miraculous thing. 
Listen, O, ye pious bhaktas, to what he did. 107. The 
Husband-of-Rukmini, compassionate to the needy, became 
a Kanada Lingayat. He erected a booth, and sat there 
with all the needed articles of food. 108. He would say 
to the pilgrims, ‘‘ Take away with you all the articles you 
need. I do not ask for any money now. I am well 
acquainted with Eknath.” 109 Thus remarking, the 


136 EKNATH 


Husband-of-Rukmini would measure out all the needed 
articles of food, wheat, flour, dal, rice, ghi, vegetables and 
salt. 110, After four days had passed, he, suddenly, there 
and then, became invisible. This Merciful-One would not 
let his servant lack in the very least thing. 111. The 
pilgrims came immediately to Eknath, and told him that they 
had bought their food materials on credit, but that the 
merchant was now nowhere to be seen. 112. As they 
thus naively related this story. Eknath understood its 
secret, Inner meaning, and exclaimed, “What has God of 
the Eagle-banner wrought, He who protects his bhakias 
from mortification!’ 113. Thus completing their pilgri- 
mage they started to return home. As they came back 
near to the sacred city of DPratishthana, Uddhava 
came forward to welcome them. 114. Also a 
great crowd of pious inhabitants of ‘the sacred 
city, beth men and women, came to welcome them, 
and filled with love, made their namaskér to Sri 
Nath. 115. All carried aloft cagle banners, emblems, 
and flags, and sang aloud songs of praise, relating the 
story of Dnyanesvara. 116. The clang of the cymbal, 
the vind, and drum swelled in harmony with the acclama- 
tions of the crowd. The sound of Brahma was incarnate 
there. The servants of Hari danced as they went along. 
That day was a blessed, happy day. 117. Thus singing, 
they returned home. Then they sang dGrati, and 
reverently waved lights before Sri Hari. 118. On the 
next day there was the giving of gifts to Brahmans, and a 
feast of many kinds of dainties was provided for them. 
119, With the vidé and the generous gifts all were satis- 
fied. Then Eknath, with his own lips, described the 
greatness of Alankdpuri. 


EKNATH 137 


*#EKNATH CORRECTS THE TEXT OF THE 
DNYANESVARI. 


120. It happened one day that Sri Nath, with affection 
and joy for his task, sat down to correct the text of the book, 
Dnydne<vari. 121. Although existing copies had been 
made with loving care, still mistakes had been made by 
copyists, until finally the meaning and grammatical relations 
becoming unintelligible, the book had ceased to be com- 
monly known. 122. It was for this reason that Sri 
Dnyanesvara became an avatdr in the form of Eknath at 
Pratishthana, and corrected the text of the whole book, 
123. Then looking with loving eye upon Uddhava, Sri 
Nath told him the unfamiliar fact that Dnyanesvara, with 
deep insight, had made a Marathi translation of the Gita. 
124. And that, “Through the mercy of Janardan I have 
corected the text of the book. The pious minded people 
should, therefore, assemble together, and hear the book 


* Nole.—There is very strong documentary evidence 
that the statement here made, that Eknath corrected the 
text of the Dnydnesvari, is a historic fact. Nearly all A/ss 
of the Dnyanesvari contain a colophon, stating that Eknath 
made the corrections in Saka 1506 (A.D. 1584.) A very 
eld manuscript of the Dnyanesvari in the Tanjor Library 
was written in Saka 1515 (A.D. 1593), and contains the 
colophon regarding Eknath. As this copy was actually 
made during the life time of Eknath, and only nine years. 
after the date assigned for the correction, the evidence it 
affords is exceedingly strong. The copy was made by one 
Parasarimatmaja at Ahmednagar. The exemplar from 
which he made his copy was of course older, and therefore 
it is possible that that colophon was written by Eknath 
himself. 


138 EKNATH 


read.” 125. Hearing these words from Ekniath’s lips, 
Uddhava was greatly delighted, and the Husband-of- 
Rukmini, in the form of KeSava, was one of the attentive 
listeners. 126. Before these two, Sri Nath constantly read 
the Dnyanesvari. But in addition to these there were also 
present pious men and women who came to listen. 127. 
Sri Nath would clearly explain the deep meaning of the 
Dnyanesvari, so that no question remaining unanswered, 
the whole became intelligible to all, from child to adult. 
128. Every day at the third watch he began to read aloud 
this work of Dnydnesvara. Kesava and Uddhava were 
the two principal listeners, and there was great enthusiasm. 
129. When the reading of the book was finished they 
worshipped Sarasvati, waved auspicious lamps, and distri- 
buted sweets. 


GOD IN THE FORM OF KESAVA ASKS 
PERMISSION TO DEPART. 


130. And with this ending of the reading of the 
Dnyanesvari, the Lord-of-Pandhari, who had been there in 
the form of KeSava, asked Eknath’s permission to depart. 
131. “I have spent twelve years happily with you here,” 
he said, “but I am now homesick, and JI ask you to give me 
permission to go away.” 132. To this request of the 
Life-of-the-World, Eknath assented, but added, “I hope 
you will be pleased to let me see you again here.” 133. 
KeSava-in-visible-form listened to this request, and then 
suddenly became, invisible. But the Lord-of-Heaven said to 
himself, “I must come here again sometime.” 134. The 
thought came into the mind of the Husband-of-Kamala, 
“Eknath has served me in many ways. I must in some 


EKNATH 139 


‘way repay his kindness.” This thought pleased the God 
greatly. 135. Thus thinking to himself, the Lord-of- 
Dvaraka, immediately became invisible. The bhekia, 
Uddhava, now said to Eknath, “I will always remain with 
you.” 136. And so when the kirtans were performed, 
with love and enthusiasm he would follow in the refrains, 
keeping time with the cymbals, and thus bringing extraor- 
dinary animation to the music. 137. And from the 
child to the aged, men and women were constant listeners 
to these lively kirtans. 


THE PIOUS OUTCASTE, RANYA MAHAR, 
AND HIS WIFE. 


Now there was in that sacred city a very pious man, 
an outcaste. 


138. This Yogabhrashta in a former birth had been a 
distinguished Vaishnava. Through some fault he had been 
born a Mahar, an outcaste. 139. His wife was supremely 
virtuous. She loved the image of Sri Krishna, and both, 
performing loving acts of worship, would repeat his names. 
140. As Sri Nath performed his nightly kirtans, both of 
them used to come, but sat outside. They listened with 
fixed attention, lost to all bodily consciousness, 141. 
When the kirtans closed, and the people had left the wddd, 
they would bow to Eknath and then go back to their home. 
142. And now as to how they used to serve Eknath. 
They would always sweep the path which he used to use 
when going down to the bank of the Ganga to bathe. 143. 


140 EKNATH 


And when Sri Nath was taking his bath they were accus- 
tomed to look towards him and make him a prostrate namas- 
kar from afar, regarding him as Vishnu-in-visible-form. 

144. It now happened one day, a Hari day, that 
Eknath, with great joy, was performing a kirfen, and was. 
relating how Sri Krishna showed himself to Arjun in the 
form of the Universe. 145. As the distinguished Vaish- 
nava was expressing in song that event, he repeated the 
‘beautiful verses of Dnyanesvara, used in his commentary. 
146. At that juncture Ranya Mahar propounded with his. 
own lips this question to Eknath, “When Sri Hari, who 
pervades all animate and inanimate things, assumed the 
form of the universe, 147. Where was I, at that time,. 
outcaste as T am now.” Sri Nath replied, “You 
were wholly attached to Krishna”. 148. Hearing 
these nectar words from the lips of Eknath, he became lost 
in contemplation. His ideas of difference and non-differ- 
ence passed away. The conception of duality vanished. 
149. Whatever animate or inanimate things he now saw, 
he became one with them. He now knew no longer any 
differences of color or caste. 150. He became convinced’ 
in his mind that Eknath was the supreme Brahma-in-visible 
form. Then freeing themselves from all their domestic 
entanglements, both of them went and took up their abode in 
the kdsané. 151. It was their thought that by doing so, 
when Sri Nath came there to bathe in the Lakshmi tirtha, 
the opportunity of seeing him would come to them without 
effort. 152. It was for this opportunity that they aband- 
oned their own place, and now came to live near the bank of 
the Ganga river. 


EKNATH 141 


RANYA MAHAR’S WIFE WISHES TO INVITE 
EKNATH TO DINE. 


It happened one day that the wife of the Unmentionable 
said to the Lord of her life, 153.“ Eknath is in very truth 
Pandurang, who has become sagun to save the universe, 
nevertheless my mind has conceived the purpose of inviting 
him here to eat in our home. 154. If you will go and 
invite the Svdmi, I will make the needed preparations,” 
Ranya Mahar listened and replied to his wife, “I will 
go.” 155. Finding Eknath alone, Rany& told him the 
secret of his heart, ‘‘ My wife has conceived the purpose,” 
he said, “of serving you at a feast. 156. If you will give 
me permission, I will make the needed prepartions at my 
home.” Recognizing his kindly feelings, Eknath did not 
refuse. 157. And said, “Through the grace of Janardan, 
the wish of your heart will be fulfilled.” Ranya listened to 
these assuring words, and received from them a sense of 
peace. 158. He informed his wife of the encouragement 
Sri Nath had given him. In worldly goods they were 
exceedingly poor, yet they collected together the materials 
necessary fora feast. 159. Dy the side of their door they 
placed the tulst altar. They washed their garments, and 
cleaned their vessels. Doth of them regularly performed 
their daily baths, and the names of God were ever on their 
lips. 160. They laid in a store of wheat, flour, dal, rice, 
ghi, and vegetables, and fasting on Hari days, 
they hecame regular listeners at Eknath’s éirtans. 
161. When there was an all night Hari praise service, 
they spent all that time in listening to the kirtan. Only 
when it was dawn would they return to their home. 


142 EKNATH 


EKNATH IS INVITED BY RANYA MAHAR 
AND HIS WIFE. 


162. The Unmentionable’s wife was an exceedingly 
pious and virtuous woman. She said to the lord 
of her life, “Let us now invite the Svami to a feast.” 
163. I will do the cooking here at home. Hasten, and sit 
by the bank of the Ganga, awaiting the coming of Eknath. 
164. When the Svami comes there for his bath, seek an 
opportunity when he is alone, and very humbly give him 
our invitation. 165. “I will do so,” said Ranya, and at 
once went and sat down on the bank of the Gafga. Sri 
Nath soon arrived, and Ranya reverently made him a 
namaskér. 166. Eknath acknowledged his loving bhakti. 
After he was seated for a moment the Unmentionable 
affectionately addressed him. ‘I have a special request,” 
he said. 167. “ But I am one without caste. I have no 
right to invite you, and I hesitate to do so, yet will you 
come and take a meal at my house?” and with this he fell 
at Eknath’s feet. 168.To this request Sri Nath replied, 
“You are a loving Vaishnava bhakte. Sri Krishna has 
seen your sincerity and is pleased. 169. A Brahman may 
be thoroughly conversant with the Vedas and Sastras, and 
yet be without devotion to Sri Hari. Though he may be 
adorned with the twelve noble qualities, yet an out-caste can 
be superior to him. 170. Although he is an out-caste, he 
may be very acceptable to God.” And here Eknath 
repeated a Sanskrit Sloka from the Mahabhagavata. 


Bhagavata Purana VII. 9. 10. 
Translation. 


A dog-eating outcaste who has made an offering to 
God of his mind, his words, his actions, his property and his 


EKNATH 143 


very life, is to be considered far superior to a Brahman, 
who, although gifted with the twelve charateristics of a 
Brahman, has turned away from the feet of God. The 
former purfies his whole family, not so the latter puffed up 
with pride. 


EKNATH RECITING A SLOKA TO RANYA 
EXCITES THE ANGER OF THE BRAHMANS. 


171. Eknath had repeated only this one sloka in the 
presence of ithe Unmentionable, but there were some 
Brahmans near by, who became greatly enraged. 172. 
Then all the Brahmans came about Eknath, and loudly 
vociferating, closed around the loving bhakte. 173. 
The chief Brahmans said to Eknath, “ That sloke was not 
from the Bhagavata, but from the Vedas. Why did you 
repeat a sloka from it to this unmentionable? 174. An 
outcaste has no right to that potent philosophic knowledge. 
This being so, you have done a very improper thing. 175. 
Your deed appears like that of serving dogs with spiced 
custard, like rubbing sandalwood oil on an ass, or presenting 
a miror to a blind man. 176. The Brahmans further 
said to Eknath, “In repeating that Jloke to this outcaste 
a great sin rests on your head. The performing of a 
penance is therefore your due.” 177. Sri Nath listened 
to these words of the Brahmans, and placing palm to palm, 
he made a namaskar to them, replying in conciliatory 
words. 178. “ Ranya Mahar,” he said, “is a Vaishnava 
bhakta. He is fondly attached to the worship of Sri Hari. 
He has conquered all the six enemies of the soul. One 
should not, therefore, call him an outcaste. 179. When 


144 EKNATH 


one looks at the character of this Unmentionable, not one 
good quality is lacking in him. One sees in him all that 
the Bhagavata religion enjoins. 180. I am convinced 
that he has the right to the philosophic knowledge. By his 
reverent devotion he has made the Supreme Brahma, exist- 
ing in the form of Sri Hari, subject to him. 181. Seeing 
his earnest desire I repeated merely a short line. T ask 
your Greatnesses to forgive me my trasgression.” With 
these words, he prostrated himself before them. 182. To 
this the Brahmans replied, ‘ You are very impudent, you 
stiffnecked fellow. You have openly preached to one without 
the right to listen, thus departing from right doing. 183. 
If you refuse to perform a penance for removing your 
fault, we shall excommunicate you.” So said all the chief 
Brahmans. 184. Sri Nath, the Supreme-Brahma-in- 
visible-form, did not in the least resist. He assented to the 
demand of the Brahmans, and said, ‘Prescribe the 
penance.” 185. So saying, he stepped into a deep pool in 
the river, and remained standing. The Brahmans 
brought cowdung and ashes and repeated over thim 
a mantra, 186. The Unmentionable saw all this, 
and in silence returned to his home. His wife was 
engaged in cooking. Quickly she enquired of him the 
result of his errand. 187. “Did you invite Sri Nath?” 
When she said this he replied, “Ours is broken 
fortune. 188. Because Eknath spoke to me, all 
the Brahmans are enraged. They have made him 
stand in a pool of the Ganga, and are giving him a 
penance. 189. The good we have laid up in a former 
birth is not sufficient to bring about the service of saints.” 
The wife sobbed with emotion saying, ‘‘ We might as well 
give up life.” 190. Thus exclaiming, she threw herself 


EKNATH 145 


on to the ground and her tears flowed so copiously that 
the earth was wet with them. 191. Seeing her in this 
condition, her husband called her to himself by the motion 
of his hand, and said, “ Eknath is an ocean of mercy. He 
will not pay disrespect to the poor. 192. I will go to 
him again, and give him again our invitation. If he refuses 
to come, then indeed there is no use in living, and we may 
then give up our lives.” 193. With this determination of 
mind, he hastened to the bank of the Ganga. He made a 
prostrate namaskdr before Eknath, and said, “TI ask you 
to come to-day and eat at my house.” 


EKNATH ACCEPTS RANYA’S INVITATION 
TO DINE. 


194, Seeing his carnestness, Fknath, who had volun- 
tarily assumed this human body, replied to him, even 
though there were Brahmans standing near by, “I will 
come.” 195. ‘As soon as your cooking is ready, I will 
come, about noon time.” The Unmentionable returned 
delighted to his home. 196. The Brahmans now mur- 
mured among themselves. ‘He is laying a course of 
defilement. Through him there will now come about the 
mixture of castes. 197. Because he repeated the sloka 
to the Unmentionable, we had to give him penance, and now 
he has accepted the invitation of the unmentionable and is 
going to eat at his house. What is it that we can do!” 
198. The Brahmans then assembled secretly, and planned 
among themselves to set spies and catch him in the act (of 
eating at the Mahar’s). 199. The whole circle of Brah- 
mans therefore, set itself to watching here and there. They 


made a study of his form (so as to recognize him.) 200. 
10 


146 EKNATH 


Some stood in the lanes, others sat by his door, talking to 
each other under some pretence or other. 201. Some sat 
down on the bank of the Ganga river repeating mantras, 
with rosaries in their hands. Others went to the house of 
the Unmentionable, and concealed themselves near the door. 
202. Thus putting aside their usual private business, all 
these Brahmans turned their attention to spying. But 
they failed to perceive that Eknath was the avatar of 
Maharaj Vishnu. 203. The Brahmans said to one 
another, “Let us give no hint to Eknath. The unmentionable 
will come to call him, and we can then catch him in the 
very act of eating at his house.” 


GOD IN EKNATH’S FORM EATS AT THE 
MAHAR’S HOUSE. 


204. Now as to Eknath. After he had duly per- 
formed divine worship, he had a reading aloud of the 
Purina at his house. The sun had now reached the zenith. 
205. Uddhava, in the mean while, was rendering worship- 
ful service to the Brahmans, and religious mendicants. 
Having offered holy water and fragrant unguents, he began 
to serve the various dishes. 


206. Turning now to the house of the Unmen- 
tionable, after all the cooking had been finished, his 
wife requested him to hasten and bring Eknath back with 
him. 207. This yogabhrashta, but a true Vaishnava, had 
smeared the floor, and thoroughly cleaned the house, and 
with his own hands had beautifully marked the floor with 
designs with coloured powders. 208. He had provided 
fragrant unguents, rice, garlands and the materials for 


EKNATH 147 


worship, and was now waiting expectantly with a heart 
full of joy. 209. The Unmentionable came to Eknath’s 
door and humbly besought him, “Will the Svami now 
come with me to eat?” Eknath replied to him. 210. 
“You go on, and I will follow you quickly.” At this 
the Brahmans began to make signs to one another by the 
motions of the eye. 211. Now what did God Pandurang 
do, but take the form of Eknath, and appeared at the house 
of the Unmentionable, to his surprise. 212. He exclaimed 
to his wife, “ Sri Nath has come to our house.” She, full 
of pleasure, reverently made him a namaskdr. 213. She 
felt like one, who about to die, drinks the nectar of immor- 
tality. She gave him the board seat to sit on, and lovingly 
washed his feet. 214. Then promptly with loving devotion 
she touched her own eyelids with her thumb, applying the 
sandalwood pigment, and placed a garland of tulsi around 
his neck. 215. On his forehead she drew the filek, and 
on it rubbed the fragrant powder. All this the Brahmans, 
who were sitting as spies, distinctly saw. 216. Some of 
them remained sitting there, others ran to Eknath’s house. 
Those who had been in the street exclaimed, “ Coming by 
what street did he escape our observation?” 217. One of the 
Brahmans replied, “ He must have changed his guise, and 
moving stealthily like a thief, escaped our observation, and 
knowledge.” 218. Another said, “He has bewitched our 
eyes. From early dawn we have been sitting here, closing 
the street.” 219. Those who had been in the Maharwada 
went to Eknath’s house, and lo! there was Eknidth on his 
board seat, with the rosary in his hands. 220. When the 
Brahmans saw this uncanny sight, they were overcome with 
astonishment, and informed those in the house of their 
wonderful tale. 221. “The marvels done by this defiled 


148 EKNATH 


one,” they exclaimed, “are most extraordinary. He is 
here and he is there; he is in both places.” Then they all 
rushed together to the Maharwada to look. 222. And 
there sat Eknath on the board seat with all the materials 
for worship in profusion before him. The Brahmans 
rushed back and forth, and lo! in both places they saw him. 
223. Just as there does not appear the least difference 
between an object and its reflection, so was it between 
Pandurang and Eknath. There was no difference what- 
ever. 224. As holy water and common water are two in 
name, but there is no difference as to their oneness. And 
who is there who can chose between the sun and its bright- 
ness? 225. As the blue of the sky and the sky itself, as the 
flower and the honey in it, are one, so knath and Pandu- 
rang in human form were secn to be of the very same 
shape. 226. That Eknath had become a sagun avatar in order 
to save the world; this, those Brahmans, failing to recognize, 
were lost in perplexity. 227. This made them exclaim, 
“ How is it that at the same time he is seen here and there 
in both places?” Until the third watch they vainly rushed 
back and forth. 228. But they could see no difference 
between the two, of less or more. He was seated in both 
places. The Unmentionable had worshipped Eknath, and 
was arranging the food on the dishes -before him. 229. 
His wife with affection served Eknath with all kinds of 
savoury food, regarding God Janardan as the partaker of 
the food. Eknath then sipped water. 230. Sri Hari, 
who is hungry for devotion, was fully satisfied. Whatever 
his taste craved, he would ask for, and received on his 
plate. 231. In this way the meal passed. She then with 
love gave him water to cleanse his hands, and making the 
vida with her own hands gave it to him. In doing this 


EKNATH 149 


she experienced a sense of great satisfaction. 232. The 
couple then made Eknath a pradakshind, and a prostrate 
namaskar, exclaiming, “ You have fulfilled our earnest 
desire. Blessed art Thou Mighty-one, Guru-of-the-World. 
233. We were without devotion, without Bhakti, without 
intelligence, without caste, but you have fulfilled our earnest 
desire, and purified us in this present life.” 234. Sri Nath 
reassured them, and then suddenly vanished from their 
sight. The man and woman then ate what was left on his 
plate as his gracious gift. 235. The Brahmans utterly 
astonished in their minds, went down to the brink of the 
Ganga to hathe, and then going to Eknath’s house watched 
him there. 236. While these events were taking place (at the 
Unmentionable’s house) Eknath with Uddhava was also 
eating at his own house. And the Brahmans exclaimed, 
“We are not able to fathom this defiled man. 237. We have 
wearied ourselves rushing back and forth in vain. In both 
places he is the same.” Listen now to what one, with an 
evil imagination, suggested. 238. “Learning magical 
mantras, he has gained the favor of the king of the demons, 
and putting this mighty demon forward, he has made 
this extraordinary miracle to appear.” 239. Thus 
remarking the Brahmans returned to their homes. 


Mahipati, the true bard of the saints, herewith 
proclaims, as a public crier, Eknath’s great fame. 240. 
Svasti. This book is the Sri Bhaktalilimrita. By merely 
listening to it one’s desires are fulfilled. Listen then to 
it, ye loving, pious bhaktas. This is the nineteenth 
delightful chapter. 


Chapter 19. Ovis 240. Sloka 1. 


EKNATH 


CHAPTER 20. 
BHAKTALILAMRITA. 
Mahipaii's  Tatocation. 
Obeisance to Sri Ganeéa. 


1. Victory to Thee, Sri Hari; Everlasting-recliner 
(on the serpent.) At Thy door I come as a beggar. I 
have conceived a desire within me. What it is I will tell 
Thee. Listen O Pandurang. 2. I desire O Husband-of- 
Rukmini, constant association with Thy Bhaktas. This is 
the longing of my heart. So fulfil this desire of my heart, 
O glorious Lord. 3. I would be a beast in the homes of 
those who go on pilgrimages to Pandhari, for I would then 
carry on my back their provisions, and they would bring 
me to Thy door. 4. I would be the stone pavings in the 
sacred city of Pandhari. The feet of the saints would 
then touch me with their purifying touch. 5. If Thou 
puttest me into a human body, place me there, but make me 
craze for Thee, so that without hindrance I may remember 
for ever in my soul Thy feet. 6. I want not metalphysi- 
cal knowledge, nor learnedness in the Sastras, Give me not 
the homage of men. Give this to me, O Pandharinath, 
that my affections may be centered in Thee. 7. I am 
fond of the lives of the Bhaktas, dear to Thee, to whom the 
universal soul and self are one. So, Thou Eagle-bannered— 
One, give to me to recollect their lives. Give me an appre- 
hending mind. 


EKNATH 151 


BRAHMANS ACCUSE EKNATH OF WORKING 
THROUGH DEMONS. 


8. In the last chapter there was related the miraculous 
story of the loving feelings and piety of the Unmentionable ; 
how God dined at his house, and how the Brahmans did 
not understand the Maya aspect cf it. 9. Fknath was a 
deedful avaidr. He manifested many kinds of deeds, but 
the Brahmans conceived in their hearts evil surmisings. 
“He has learned magical mantras,” they said. 10. “ By 
gaining the favor of the chief goblin, he has made his one 
form to appear as two. He has taken us by craft. We 
can catch him in nothing.” 


EKNATH AND TOUCHSTONE. 


11, There was a Brahman living in the city of 
Pratishthana a very pious man. He used to perform re- 
gularly his morning and evening devotions, his purifications, 
and abounded in good deeds. 12. Ry good fortune, 
acquired in a former birth, he had found a touchstone 
(parisa.) By its means he enjoyed happiness of mind, and 
every form of wealth. 13. No one in the world seemed as 
happy and as favored by every circumstance as he. As 
people watched him, good thoughts were aroused in them. 
14. Day after day thus passed when suddenly his son and 
wife died. He was greatly depressed by this, and found 
no relief whatever, 15. Where a household lacks food, 
there will be found an abundant progeny. Where painful 
vows are made for the purpose of having a child, there a 
sickly infant is born. 16. One gains a beautiful wife, 
but the husband is very ugly. A young man may be very 


152 EKNATH 


noble, and yet his wife may die. 17. One possesses sons, 
a wife and wealth, but a horrible disease developes in his 
body. The generous minded possess no wealth. There 
are the wealthy, but they are misers. 18. If a man 
acquires a beautiful body, still it is short lived, a righte- 
ous king he may he, but he lives but a few days. 19. There 
is the desire in the mind of one to bestow gifts, but he 
meets no one worthy, or noble enough to receive them. 
Such are the strange experiences in this life. All know 
this from personal experience. 20. Thus it was that by 
fate and fortune the man had no sooner obtained his touch- 
stone than he lost his wife and those belonging to him, 
and he became greatly distressed in mind. 21. 
Seeing how this worldly life deceives one, he 
became depressed in mind, and thought to himself, 
“I must go on a pilgrimage to a sacred watering 
place,” and this desire seized him. 22. Then he thought 
to himself, “ With whom shall I entrust this touchstone? 
I see no one who is trustworthy.” He then went to 
Eknath’s house. 23. Finding an opportunity of being 
alone with him, he reverently made him a prostrate namas- 
kar, and said, “I have conceived the purpose of going on 
the great pilgrimage. 24. I have been wondering who 
will care for this invaluable object which I have with me. 
You are a true bhakta, and a great ascetic. You seem ta 
me the one only honest man.” 25. When Eknath heard 
this remark, he replied. ‘“ Wherever your trust is, that 
is the place for your object.” 26. Receiving this 
assurance, the man placed the touchstone in Eknath’s hands. 
Looking at it Fknath was surprised and said to him. 27. 
“This appears to be but a stone, and yet you call it a price- 
less object. Tell me quickly what is the good quality it 


EKNATH 153 


possesses?”” 28. The man took a bit of iron in his 
hands, and at once applied it to the touchstone, when 
suddenly it turned into gold. “ This is a touchstone,” he 
explained, 29. “After I return from the Great Pilgri- 
mage give me this back again. The Eagle-bannered-one 
is favourable to you. You will have no use for this.” 
30. Sri Nath tossed it under his seat, and the man having 
made his namaskar, started immediately on his pilgrimage. 
31. But it passed from FEknath’s recollection that he 
should carefully guard the priceless object. The cloud 
may rain upon the ocean, but the ocean pays no regard to 
it. 32. Or again, the sun, complete in his brightness, does 
not so much as cast a look at the light of a lamp. One 
who has obtained nectar, pays no attention to a medicinal 
plant. 33. And so to Eknath, who had attained his soul 
consciousness, gold and cowdung were alike. He, therefore, 
did not remember carefully to guard the touchstone. 34. 
After a year had gone by the man returned from his 
pirgrimage. The first thing he did was to make obeisance 
to Sri Nath, and lovingly embrace him. 35. Eknath asked 
him all the particulars of his successful pilgrimage. The 
man thought to himself, “He will give me back the touch- 
stone without my asking for it.” 36. With this idea the 
distinguished Brahman sat quietly for an hour or two, but 
Sri Nath had not the slightest recollection about the 
touchstone. 37. The man then said to himself, “To-day 
is our first meeting together. For that reason doubtless 
he passes the subject by. I will come to-morrow and see 
to it.” 38. Thus thinking to himself, the Brahman went 
back to his home. But his mind was not at ease. “TI see 
no good outcome to this,” he said. 39. “TI gave the 
object to him, because he seemed one without worldly 


154 EKNATH 


desires and affections. Why is it that he hesitates to give 
me back my own.” 40. Bringing such thoughts into his 
mind he was troubled the whole of the night. As the sun 
was rising the finished his early morning bathing. 41. 
While Sri Nath was performing his worsihp of God, the 
man came and bowed to him, and in answer to his ques- 
tioning about the journey related it from its beginning to 
its end. 42. But Eknath still made no reference what- 
ever to the return of his touchstone. Finally the man 
becoming bold, recalled the matter to Eknath’s mind. 43. 
Then Sri Nath remembered it, and asked where he had 
placed it. The man replied, “You tossed it under your 
seat,” and pointed there with his hand. 44. Both of 
them hunted diligently, but the touchstone pebble was not 
there. It was customary for the offerings of flowers to 
collect for a fortnight, and then on Hari day to be thrown 
away. 45. Eknath said to the Brahman, “The touch- 
stone must have gone with the stale flowers.” At this 
suggestion of Eknath’s the man’s heart beat violently. 46. 
“I have only returned home, because of the desire to have 
the touchstone back again,” he said. “I had no tie of 
wife or son, and my mind is now greatly distressed.” 
47. Sri Nath started with him for the Ganga river, 
saying, “Let us go quickly, and see whether it may not 
have been thrown in there.” 48. Sri Nath comforted him 
as they went along saying, “The withered flowers were 
thrown into the Ganga.” Eknath stepped into the 
water, and took up five or seven pebbles. 49. He then 
said to the man, “Choose from these your touchstone.” The 
man took a piece of iron from his pocket and applied it to 
the pebbles to see what would happen. 50. And Lo, every 
one of the pebbles had become a touchstone, to his great 


EKNATH 155 


astonishment. And the greedy desire arose in his heart 
to possess them all. 51. But Sri Nath said to him, 
“Recognize one of these as yours and take it. The 
remaining I will offer to the Ganga. They will be well 
cared for there.” 52. The man selected one from them. 
The rest Eknath tossed back into the Ganga. Eknath then 
bathed and returned to his home. 53. The poet’s mind 
is unequal to the task of extolling the glory of Sri Nath, 
‘Where the Veda itself says, ‘‘ Not that, Not that,” what 
is the mosquito Mahipati there! 54. Sri Vishnu became 
‘an avatadr to save the universe, and as Eknath he lived a 
life of good deeds in truth, with devotion for the sake of 
‘mankind. 


EKNATH’S DAILY LIFE. 


55. Eknath was accustomed to rise at a very early 
hour at dawn, to perform his toilet, to wash his face and 
teeth, and then to go down to the Ganga to bathe and offer 
oblation to he sun. 56. After performing these regular 
duties he used to include the worship of the image of 
Pandurang, before whom he waved the platter with in- 
cense and lights with sweet songs of praise. 57. After 
this there was the listening to the reading of the Purana, 
explanation of its meaning, and grammatical constructions. 
Then came again a visit to the Ganga, to make loving 
offerings to ancestors. 58. At the house there was the 
practice of good deeds. There was infinite love in his 
worship of the Brahmans. He drank with pleasure the 
‘water touched by their feet. And in all this he experienced 
great satisfaction. 59. After the Brahmans had been 
feasted he would himself partake of a scanty meal. At 


156 EKNATH 


the fourth watch of the day he would himself read aloud 
Sridhar’s commentary on the Bhagavata. 60. As the sum 
was setting he would go to the Ganga for his evening 
devotions. On returning to his home he would perform 
the waving of incense. 61. At night there would be the 
spirited services of song. A crowd of pious people would 
be present to sit and listen with reverence. 62. Eknath’s 
lips would describe the many acts of Ram and Krishna 
in the joy of love. And the pious folk, from the child 
to the aged would wag their heads in approval with joy. 


GOD COMES TO SERVE SRI EKNATH AS 
SRI KHANDYA 


63. Thus with due rites Hari kirtans took place at 
night, and at all times there was the repeating of God’s 
names. Because of all this the Life-of-the-World was deeply 
pleased. 64. And as He saw this service of Eknath’s 
he felt the immense weight of a debt, and said to Himself, 
“T can never repay Eknath’s kindness.” KeSava loved 
Eknath greatly. 65. So Krishna, taking the form of a 
Brahman, immediately started from Dvaraka, and arriving 
at Pratishthana bathed in the river bed of the Ganga. 66. 
Hari then went and stood before the door of Eka Janar- 
dana. There he reverently made his namaskdra, and said, 
“TI have come with the fixed purpose of serving you. 67. 
Because of your worship of Vishnu, your service to Brah- 
mans, and your devotion to Vaishnavas I have a longing 
desire to have constant association with you. 68. My life 
long I have given loving service to the saints. I ask no 
wages from you. All I care for is enough to eat. 69. I have 


EKNATH 157 


no further wants than a blanket, a garment, and mainten- 
ance sufficient for my stomach, and your constant good 
company.” Thus the glorious-Lord spoke. 70. But 
because of a divine Maya outside of Eknath’s control, he 
did not recognize the Husband-of-Indira, and so asked 
him “ What is your city? Have you wife and dependants?” 
71. What is your family line? What is the name of this 
body of yours? Hearing these questions of Eknath the 
Life-of-the-World replied. 72. ‘I am absolutely alone. 
I have no snare of wife or son. This body of mine has 
the name of Krishna Sri Khandya. I wander everywhere 
over the country. 73. I am a Rigvedi Brahman. My home 
is wherever my mind is pleased. I have conceived the desire 
of serving you.” Thus spoke the Husband-of-Rukmini. 
74. And Fknath replied, “I have no desire to ask that 
you serve me. Accept food and raiment here, and in 
peace seek the supreme attainment.” 75, Hearing 
Eknath’s nectar words, the  Giver-of-supreme-Bliss 
responded,” I will accept food earned by toil, and remain 
in your home. 76. By your grace I have abundant 
strength in my body, and I have this purpose in mind to 
serve saints. 77. I might sit and eat, but that would be 
only for this’ perishable body. I want to do kindness to 
others, for thereby it would be put to the highest purpose.” 
78. Thus saying the Soul-of-the-world briskly took up the 
kaévadi on his shoulder, and filling its vessels with the 
water of the Ganga, poured it into the great earthen jar. 
79. He, whom Brahmadeva and the other Gods regard as 
worthy of worship. He, whose feet are praised by Siva 
and the other Gods, even He, the Life-of-the-World, a 
deedful actor in this drama, became a Brahman. 80. In 
attempting to extol whose fame the Vedas and Purdns are 


168 EKNATH 


frantic, even He collected what remained on the plates of 
the Brahmans for he had a marvellous liking for service. 
81. In the Ocean of milk there lies the Island of the Sun. 
Here the Recliner-on-the-Serpent has his heavenly abode. 
Yet He it was who used to arise as soon as it was early 
dawn, and who thought lightly of his hard physical toil. 
82. He, for whom, in acquiring the eight branches of the 
Yoga, the yogi wears himself out, even He used to rise 
early and brightly polish the vessels used in the worship 
of God. 83. The Dark-complexioned, fine-featured 
Husband-of-Rukmini, Giver-of-union-with-Brahma, and 
World-renowned, even He with his own hands joyously 
performed every needed work. 84. He, from whose feet 
the river Bhagirathi flows, even He, the glorious Lord, 
would lovingly fill the jars with the clear water of the 
first dip, for the worship of God. 85. He, whom the 
eighty-eight thousand Rishis worship, even He would 
reduce to paste the sandal-wood on the stone slab, and fill 
the ointment box. 86, He, whose night-and-day slaves 
are the eight Powers, along with Lakshmi, even He, 
Hrishikeshi, would weave garlands of flowers, and place 
them ready for the worship of God. 87. He, through 
whom the moon and the king of the constellations, the sun, 
become a mass of brilliancy, even He, Adhokshaja, would 
bring forward the lamps, and feel no shame in his heart 
for doing so. 88. If Eknath ever called out to him, 
“Ixrishna”, he immediately appeared before him. He 
failed in nothing whatever, and was always on the alert. 
89. Because he made the sandal-wood paste the Brah- 
mans called him Sri Khandya. All the inhabitants of the 
town marvelled at him. 90. Saying, “There is a 
Brahman serving at Eknath’s house. He takes no wages, 


EKNATH 159 


and yet does every thing with zeal.” 91. Unknown to 
Eknath the Lord-of-Dvarka was accustomed to enter the 
kitchen and lovingly and joyfully render domestic service 
to his wife. 92. The Dark-complexioned One was in- 
fatuated by Eknath’s spirit of bhakti. Forgetful of all 
his divine glory, the Tender-hearted-one, stood before 
Eknath, ever ready to serve. 93. In this way the Lord- 
of-the-World spent twelve years there, when suddenly a 
wonderful thing happened. Listen to it, ye pious devotees 
of his. 


THE DIVINE IDENTITY OF SRI KHANDYA 
REVEALED. 


94. There was a Brahman in Dvarka, who lovingly 
practised his religious ceremonies. That he might have a 
direct revelation of God he was always repeating His 
names. 95. Twelve years thus rolled along, but he had 
no direct revelation of Him. Finally one day, he, after 
fasting, to an extreme limit 96. Mother Rukmini in- 
formed him in a dream, “ You are fasting to the extreme 
limit, but Krishna is not here. 97. In the city of Pratish- 
thina there is an abheda bhakta. The Lord-of-Vaikuntha 
has gone there and is serving him. 98. Chakrapdani 
Krishna, as Sri Khandya brings water for him in a 
kavadi; makes, and gives him, the fragrant pigments, and 
is ever ready to render service to Brahmans. 99. There- 
fore, you should go at once to Pratishthana. There you 
will find Sri Lord Krishna.” Having seen this vision, 
the Brahmana awoke. 100. And as he thought over the 
miatter in his mind, he said, ‘““Rukmini has given me the 
sign by which I may recognize him.” So he hastened to 


160 EKNATH 


Pratishthana, and bathed in the Ganga. 101. Just then 
Sri Khandya came down to the bank of the Goda (Goda- 
vari), bearing the kavadi on his shoulders. He at once 
recognized the Brahman, and said to himself, “ Why has 
this creditor of mine come here! 102. I had chosen 
a worthy place here, and have been spending my time 
happily. It is Rukmini who has made this public, and 
sent him here.” 103. Thus thinking to himself the 
Lord-of-Dvarka felt extreme chagrin. He fiiled his jars, 
however, with water, and went home. 104. He entered 
the god-room and sat making the fragrant pigment, when 
suddenly the Brahman, enquiring his way along, entered 
Eknath’s wad@. 105. Sri Nath saw the Brahman and 
reverently made him a namaskar. They at once embraced 
one another. 106. Eknath gave him a seat, and thus 
questioned him. “Tell me, where have you come from? 
What is your occupation?” 107. The Brahman made an 
affectionate namaskdr, and told him his story. He said, 
“T went to Dvaraka, and there worshipped before the 
image of Sri Krishna. 108, I performed there the rites 
whereby I might have a direct revelation of Him in bodily 
form. Suddenly Rukmini appeared to me in a dream, 
saying, ‘Sri Krishna has gone to Paitthan. 109. There, 
at the house of the loving bhakta Eknath, he is acting as a 
servant.’ On seeing this vision I have hastened here. 
110. Now let me see him at once.” And with this he 
fell at Eknath’s feet. Sri Nath was amazed, and replied. 
111. “Down to the smallest atom Sri Krishna ever per- 
vades every thing. Answer me, what space is empty of 
Him?” 112, The Brahman replied, “ Eknath, I have no 
liking whatever for this philosophy about Brahma. Let 
me now see Krishna, Sri Khandya, the Brahman. 113. 


EKNATH 162 


Recognizing your affection, O Vaishnava bhakta, God felt 
Himself under a very heavy burden of debt, and for 
twelve years has been serving you here. There is no 


limit to the Divine.’ 114. Hearing the Brahman’s. 
remark, Eknath was amazed, and lovingly said to Uddhava,. 
“Summon Krishna, the Brahman.” 115. When 


Uddhava called out, Sri Hari was in the god-room. At once 
he assumed his four-armed form, equipped with the shell 
and disk. 116. He had on him his resplendent crowm 
before whose brilliancy the sun seemed pale. Dark— 
complexioned, beautiful, King-of-Heaven, whom but to 
look upon is rest for the weary soul. 117. His brilliant. 
earrings flashed. Around his neck was the jewel-necklace 
with the Kaustubha stone. One’s eyelids closed at the 
dazzling light of his yellow raiment. 118. On his feet 
were ornaments, the nepur, the vanki and todar. Both 
hands were anointed with fragrant oil. As the Brahman 
saw the Lord-of-the-World standing at the door of the 
god-room he sprang towards Him. 119. He lovingly 
greeted Him, embracing His feet. As to Eknath, he was 
filled with remorse, saying, “I have been the cause of 
weariness to the Recliner-on-the-Serpent.” 120. Embrac- 
ing God, he said, “Sri Hari, was this a right thing 
for you to do? You, yourself, became a Brahman and 
unstintingly wearied yourself for me. 121. In describing 
Thy glory, O Lord, the four Vedas themselves became 
weary in the attempt. Brahmadeva became amazed. What 
greatness have I? 122. Thou, Purifyer of the Sinful, 
hast fastened the fodar to thy feet. May this not prove 
false to the end of Time! This comes as an experience to 


my soul,” 123. As Eknath thus praised Him, and again 
WW 


162 EKNATH 


and again made Him a namaskér, the Husband-of- 
Rukmini exclaimed to him, “ Blessed is your pure bhakti.” 
124. Once before this I took the form of Vitthal and for 
twelve years led your choruses. Then in the form of 
KeSava, I listened to the whole of the Bhagavata Puran 
from your lips. 125. Thus I have already spent twenty- 
four years laboring here for you, but you did not know it.” 
Thus spoke the Soul-of-the-World. 126. Eknath replied, 
“OQ Life-of-the-World, O  Pervader-of-the-Universe, 
O thou Ornament-of-the-bhaktas, O, Bewitcher--of-the- 
mind, through Thy deeds, Thou whose nature even Virinchi 
does not know.” 127. The conversation having proceeded 
thus far, Sri Hari suddenly vanished from sight. The 
Brahmana embraced Eknath’s feet and exclaimed, 
“You are the only blessed one, in the world.” 
128. Eknath replied to the Brahman, “ Although 
Krishna was actually near me, I did not recognize 
him. It was you who to-day have caused me to see 
Him.” 129. The ascetic, with his soul full of joy, dined 
with Eknath, and remained there with him a number of 
days, listening to the Hari Kirtans. 130. The worship of 
Vishnu, listening to the Purana, and bathing in the Ganga, 
were his regular habits, and with deep reverence he became 
convinced that Sri Eknath was in reality Krishna 
Himself. 


EKNATH AND THE FOUR THIEVES. 


131. And now pious folk, listen with respect to ano- 
ther delightful story. As Sri Eknath was once performing 
a kirtan, an audience of good people had assembled. 132. 
There were many men and women who had come together, 


164 EKNATH 


They now began to whisper to one another, “ What shall 
we now do?” 144, They could not make out where the 
doors were, the lintels or the steps. They bumped their 
heads against the posts. “ This is all unpropitious. We 
see in this the wrath of God,” they exclaimed. 145. 
Repentant in heart, they said to one another, “Eknath is a 
Vishnu bhakta. This misfortune has come upon us, be- 
cause we have come here to steal. 146. Life is useless 
without eyes. We had better give up life at once. In 
doing harm to this servant of Vishnu, we have angered 
the Husband-of-Rukmini.” 147. Thus conversing — to- 
gether the thieves wandered about the wddi, when 
suddenly they found themselves in the god-room, and stand- 
ing before Eknath. 148. Then again another miracle 
took place. The sight of the thieves was restored. And 
now deeply repentant, they bowed in reverence before 
Eknath. 149. Because of Eknath’s goodness their evil 
hearts left them, and joining palm to palm, the four thieves 
stood lovingly before him, praising him. 150. “ We, evil 
minded ones, not knowing you to be the image of Sri 
Pandurang, came here to injure you. Because you are a 
saint, forgive us this wrong.” 151. Eknath replied to 
them, “Who are you? Why are you praising me? Tell 
me what are the desires of your hearts?” 152. They 
answered, “ We are thieves. We came here to steal. As 
we were looking for booty, we suddenly lost our sight. 
153. All of us, crazed by this loss, have been wandering 
about the wddi, and now we have been brought to this 
conviction that we have committed a great sin.” 154. As 
the thieves thus spoke, the heart of Eknath, that Ocean of 
peace, and mercy, melted within him, and he exclaimed, 
“You have suffered much. 155. You came into my 


EKNATH 165 


house with high hopes. Do not go away now with averted 
faces.” Thus pleading with them. 156. He took them 
into his treasure room and showed them everything ; remar- 
king, “Take away with you whatever may please you.” 
157. Give to your life peace and forgiveness. It is in 
living a life of good deeds, that you will be without blame. 
This is my injuction.” 158. As the thieves saw Eknath’s 
calmness, his word of instruction sank deep into their 
hearts. They coveted his property no longer. They 
expressed a desire only for a blessing of food to satisfy 
their hunger. 159. Eknath immediately awoke Uddhava 
and Girjabai, and said, “ Prepare a meal quickly.” 160. 
Thus requested by Eknath, they very quickly cooked a 
meal. He served the thieves with his own hands, affec- 
tionately and kindly helping them to eat. 161. Just as 
people of the world honor their sons-in-law, and the 
parents of their sons-in-law with respect, so he treated 
these thieves, pressing them to eat. 162. Eknath prepared 
the vidé with his own hands, and passed it to them, He 
then saw them on their way, making them gestures of 
respect. 163. From that day the thieves gave up all 
their habits of stealing, and with supreme reverence gave 
themselves to the worship of Hari. 164. This shows 
Eknath’s state of mind. He thought of the universe as 
himself. His feelings towards enemy and friend were 
alike. His actions, therefore, were out of the ordinary, and 
not to be compared with those of others. 165. The man 
who acts as he, talks as he, is, indeed, an avatdr of God. By 
the very sight of him souls are saved. 166. In even 
listening to his praise the greatest of sins are destroyed, 
and one gains the Ultimate Release, and no longer has 
rebirths. 167. Blessed is the scared city of Pratishthana, 


166 EKNATH 


where Eknath came down as an _ awvatdr. Blessed- 
are its people for they saw his deeds with their own 
eyes. 


EKNATH’S MERCY TO AN OUTCASTE THIEF. 


168. There was a certain outcaste who stole for a 
living. After many days, he was, on a certain occasion, 
caught in the act of thieving. 169. The owner of the 
house at once seized him, and took him before a court of 
justice. He was roughly beaten and his feet were placed 
in stocks. 170. He paid out money until stripped of all 
he had, but found no one who would release him. Many 
days thus passed, and finally he was unable to obtain food. 
171. His body consequently became emaciated. He 
appeared to people like a bundle of sticks. Finally think- 
ing that he would die in a few davs, the prisoner was 
released. 172. By the hand of a carpenter the nails of 
the stocks were extracted and the outcaste was set free. 
As he had no strength to run away no guard was placed 
over him. 173. As night came on, the unmentiorrable 
thought to himself, “ While the stocks are in this broken 
condition, I had better quietly steal away. 174. And yet 
I have no strength. How can I run away.” ‘Then he 
remembered God, and cried, ““O Merciful One, save me 
from this place. 175. I am helpless. I am altogether a 
sinner. I have lain here many days in imprisonment. O 
Dark-complexioned One, in Thy mercy take me at once 
from here.” 176. As he was thus thinking to himself, 
he suddenly heard the distant sound of a kirtan. He 
immediately began to crawl away, yet fearful of his life. 
177. He went along staggering in the direction of the 


EKNATH 167 


‘Hari kirtan. As he heard it he suddenly saw the open 
door of Eknith’s wddi. 178. He entered the wddi and 
sat quietly in a corner. And as he attentively listened to 
the music of the kirtan, his soul felt peace. 179. Both 
body and soul of the audience were pierced to the quick 
as they listened to the words of Eknath. “ Blessed, 
Blessed,” all exclaimed. “ This is, indeed, the place of rest 
for the weary.” 180. Two watches of the night thus 
passed, and now the lamps for the wave offering were 
lighted. “Victory, Victory,” shouted the bhaktas, and 
then made their final namaskdér to Eknath. 181. He 
distributed sweetmeats and all the people returned 
to their homes. Uddhava locked the outer door, 
not seeing the Unmentionable. 182. The helpful, true 
disciple Girjabai now retired to sleep. Eknath, however, 
continued sitting on his seat, and happened to cast his 
glance towards where the outcaste was sitting. 183. 
When he came near to look, he beheld a person like a corpse, 
but still alive. There was no strength left in his body. 
Such was the sight that met his eye in the wddi. 184. 
The compassionate Eknath felt his heart melt with pity. 
He sought to question him, but the man made no reply other 
than that of a sign, by putting his hand to his mouth. 
185. Sri Nath understood its meaning. ‘“ This fellow is 
suffering from hunger,” he said, and at once going into the 
house, awoke his wife. 186. Girjabai reverently touched 
her forehead to his feet, exclaiming “ Tell me your wish.” 
The videhi replied. 187. “A sick and starving man is 
sitting out in the yard, so whatever you can prepare in a 
moment’s time, and suitable for him, get it ready at once.” 
188. No sooner was the command given, than she quickly 
lighted the fire in the chul. She had some wheat flour at 


168 EKNATH 


hand and this she cooked. 189. She added sugar 
and milk to it, and came out with it into the yard. Sri 
Nath then with his own hands served it to the man from 
his dish. 190. And lest the man, having been starving 
for so many days, should die from eating too freely he 
lovingly fed him small quantity at a time. 191. He gave 
him water in an earthen dish, causing him to drink every 
mow and then. Finally the man’s life, that has its origin 
in food, came back to him, and what were the prisoner’s 
first words? 192. ‘“O merciful one to the poor, O friend 
of the helpless. Blessed, Blessed one. I have experienced 
your kindness. You have taken me, a helpless one, to 
yourself, and have quickly relieved me of my distress. 
193. I am an outcaste, a Mahar. I became a thief for 
my stomach’s sake. When my deed became known in the 
court of justice I was severely beaten. 194. Mv body 
‘became emaciated. They then released me from the stocks. 
Hearing the sound of your kirlan, I ran away here.” 195. 
‘Eknath listened to the Unmentionable’s reply and quickly 
assured him that he might remain there until his strength 
returned. 196. He then gave him clothes, and a place 
to sleep in the manger. Eknath then reentered the house 
and sat repeating the names of God. 197. For a very 
short time he paid his respects to Sleep, and awoke very 
early in the morning. He returned from his bath in the 
Ganga, and performed all his customary rites. 198. He 
then at once sent information to the mayor of the town, 
saying, “ Your prisoner came to my house last night.” 
199. The mayor replied, “Your Greatness, you have 
accepted him. It is not now for us to punish him.” Such 
was his only reply. 200. After the Brahmans had dined 
Sri Nath served the prisoner with food. At night the 


EKNATH 169 


prisoner lovingly listened to the kirton. Finally full 
‘strength came back to his body. 201. He ate the food of 
Eknath. His evil mind left his body. He began to 


worship Sri Hari with affection. 


202. The narrator of the beautiful story in the next 
chapter is the glorious Husband-of-Rukmini. | Mahipati 
has recorded in this book his words of comforting assu- 
rance and grace. 203. This book is the Sri Bhaktali- 
lamrita. By merely listening to it one’s desires are ful- 
filled. Listen then to it, ye loving pious bhaktas. This 
is the twenticth delightful chapter. Chapter 20, verses 
.203. 


CHAPTER 21. 


BHAKTALILAMRITA. 
Mahipati’s Invocation. 


Obeisance to Ganeéga. 


1. As the giver is the support of the asker, or as the 
seer is the refuge of the blind, so Pandurang is the light 
‘of the Mind. I have no other refuge but Him. 2. He 
is fond of the stories of bhakias. He has, therefore, adopt- 
-ed a subterfuge. He fondly occupies my heart, and 
permits no difficulties to my mind. 3. If it is sleeping, 
He awakens it. He gives me memory in my dreams. 
Sri Hari is fond of the stories of the saints. Without 
‘question He has entered into the depths of my heart. 4. 
In order, assuredly to save the world, Pandharinath Him-~- 
:self became a bhakta of God, doing those things that make 


170 EKNATH 


the good manifest among men. 5. “ The Life-of-the- 
World, skilled in the use of Maya, is both the author and’ 
the destroyer of fear,’ So says Dvaipayana in the 
Vishnusahasranama. 


BRAHMANS FIND FAULT WITH EKNATH’S 
KINDNESS. 


6. In the last chapter there was narrated the delight- 
ful story of how Eknath tenderly cared for the Unmention- 
able. His kindness was praised by those free from 
worldly desires, pious and loving. 7. But the greatest of 
the Brahman pandits, religious rulers, and learned sastris, 
talked disparagingly. “ Eknath has done what is impro- 
per,” they said. 8. He has kept the Unmentionable thief 
in his wédi for many days. By such action caste pollution 
takes place. He has added defilement to his other faults. 
9. If there is need for benevolent acts, are there not other 
castes? What is the value of nourishing a thief. One 
only: increases evil thereby. 10. You may caress a 
scorpion, but that will not change its habit. You may feed 
a serpent with milk, still it will not cease to bite. 11. So 
if one nourishes a thief in one’s own house, he will later 
steal all the more.” Such were the disparaging remarks 
used by the religious rulers. 


EKNATH AND THE BRAHMAN GHOST. 


12, Bearing the above event in mind, some one 
approached Eknath and spoke to him. When suddenly 
an extraordinary event took place. Let good people listen. 


EKNATH 171 


to the story. 13. Along the path that Sri Nath was accus- 
tomed to take when going to his bath there was a banyan 
tree. Out of this tree a ghost of a Brahman suddenly 
appeared. 14. And as Sri Nath was going down to his 
bath the ghost stood before him joining palm to palm, and 
said, “By the sight of you, I, a sinful being, have been 
saved. 15. Through hating a Brahman I came to this 
birth. I have no further desire but to make one request 
of you. 16. For a long time you have been feeding 
Brahmans. And the othtr night you fed the Unmention- 
able prisoner. Both of these good deeds are in your 
possession. 17. If you will place in my hand one of the 
two, symbolized in the form of water, I shall at once be 
saved. 18. You have indeed become an avatar in order 
to save the world.” When Eknath heard this humble 
supplication he replied. 19. “I see no such thing as sin or 
righteousness, Whatever you wish for ask from me.” The 
Brahman ghost comprehended his meaning, and lovingly 
asked. 20. “ You protected that prisoner. Bestow on 
me that deed of benevolence.” Sri Nath took water in his 
hand and presented it to him. 21. The moment the 
water touched the palm of his hand the malevolent crea- 
ture attained deliverance. The Brahmans of tht sacred 
city witnessed the scene and were amazed. 22. 
Receiving a celestial body, the malevolent creature went 
up the path to heaven. All the people shouted aloud the 
names of Hari, and praised the greatness of Eknath. 
23. Those who had been speaking disparagingly of him 
had their mouths stopped. “ Victory, Victory,” cried the 
people as they saw this extraordinary event. 24. All 
experienced the very great goodness of benevolence. The 
Unmentionable, whom he had cared for, was now a loving 


172 EKNATH 


worshipper of God. 25. After strength had come back 
to his body he returned to his home. Such was Eknath, 
the benevolent, the saviour of the world, who had become 
an avatar. 


EKNATH’S PILGRIMAGES TO PANDHARPUR. 


26. Inthe month of Ashadha, Eknath was accustomed 
to go on a pilgrimage to Pandhari, and after bathing in the 
Chandrabhaga, to go to meet Sri Pandurang. 27. Along 
with Sri Nath a great crowd of pilgrims would make their 
way listening as they went, with affection and love to 
Eknath’s Hari kirtans. 28. It was Bhanudas, who had 
established this custom of annual pilgrimages to Pandhari, 
and Eknath continued that practice without any failure. 
29. The inhabitants of the sacred city of Pratishthana 
listened constantly to his Hari kértens, to his gracious 
words, and his remarkable parables. 


EKNATH’S LITERARY WORKS. 


30. Sri Nath wrote commentaries on Sanskrit works. 
Listen lovingly to their names, you fortunate people. 31. 
By the command of the sadguru, Eknath was the first to 
make the Chatusloki Bhagavata to be easily understood, 
the meaning of which is exceedingly difficult. 32. Be- 
sides this, he wrote many verses as padas, and in other 
meters. In his abhangs are amusing compositions. 
Furthermore, he wrote the most excelltnt Prakrit commen- 
tary on the Hastimalaka. 33. Then there is the Sukash- 
taka, and after that the Svatmasukha, with its wonderful 


EKNATH 173 


expression of his personal experiences, which the pious 
listeners thoroughly enjoy. 34. Furthermore, the saints, 
the good and pious people, reverently and earnestly besought 
Eknath to write a commentary on the Bhagavata, because 
of its dealing so largely with the mysteries of bhakti. 35. 
They said, “the Bhagavata is the greatest of the Puranas. 
If from your lips we can have the Uddhavagita in Prakrit, 
it will be of great use to many.” 36, Eknath listened to 
this request, and was truly glad, and began his Prakrit 
commentary on the eleventh chapter of the Bhagavata 
Purana. 


A BRAHMAN TAKES A COPY TO BENARES. 


37. In a few days he had finished two chapters. 
There was in that city a man, a noble twice-born, who, 
when he saw it, was highly pleased. 38. He made a 
copy of it, and began to read it regularly. After a while 
he conceived the idea of going on the Great Pilgrimage, 
to Benares. 39. He chose an auspicious occasion, and 
taking leave of Sri Nath, he, with his family, started on 
their way. 40. They journeyed along the road with 
other pilgrims, and finally reached the great sacred city of 
Benares. They bathed in the Bhagirathi and worshipped 
the Lord-of-the-Universe. (ViSveSvara.) 41. He 
performed fully all the prescribed rites of the holy place, 
and remained there four months, during which he was 
accustomed to read aloud from the two chapters of the 
Bhagavata, composed by Eknath. 42. He bathed in the 
Manikarnika, and placed his seat on its bank, himself 
adorned with the twelve adornments, of gopichandan 
tulsi, etcetera. 43. He had with him the two 


174 EKNATH 


chapters of the Bhagavata, and these he there lovingly 
read aloud. When suddenly there arrived on the scene 
the cause of trouble. 


THE BRAHMAN IS ATTACKED FOR READING 
PRAKRIT TRANSLATION. 


44. On the same bank there resided a great sannyasi, 
engaged in the study of the Sastras. Two of his disciples 
came down to the water to bathe. 45. To their surprise 
‘they saw there this man from Pratishthana, who had placed 
his seat there. Seeing his noble appearance, they said to 
one another, ‘“ He must be a Brahman pandit. 46. Let us 
find out at once what sdstra, what book, he is reading.” 
Thus saying, they came near the man and sat down beside 
him. 47, They used the Sanskrit language in conversing with 
him. “Tell us,” they said, “ what Sastra are you reading 
aloud?” 48. The man replied to them, “It is a prakrit 
‘commentary on the eleventh chapter of the Bhagavata, 
that I am reading.” 49. The pandits replied, “ Read it 
aloud to us.” The man was pleased to receive this request, 
and began to read it with delight. 50. To begin with, 
Eknath’s style was pleasing, and the man’s voice was most 
excellent. There were no faults in the translation, 
nor in the exposition of its meaning. 51. The 
pandits therefore, exclaimed, “Blessed is the power 
of utterancy of that good man, but if this book 
becomes widely known, no one will care to 
read the Bhagavata in its original Sanskrit.” 52. The 
two disciples then said to one another in Sanskrit, “ We 
hhad better report the matter to the Svdmi, and have this 


EKNATH 175 


thing forbidden.” 53. They made signs to one another, 
and one remained on guard, while the other hastened to 
the monastery and related the news to the Sv@mi. 54. 
“On the ghdt of the Manikarnika,” he said “a Brahman 
is sitting reading lovingly a Prakrit version of the Bhaga- 
vata. 55. You, Svdmi, are the chief authority among 
the inhabitants of this sacred city. Therefore, it is for 
you to punish him, If his Prakrit version is acceptable to 
all, who will respect us Purdniks. 56. As he listened to 
the words of his disciple, the sannyasi became enraged, 
and said, ‘Bring him here, and whatever punishment 
should be given him, I will give it.’ 57. This command 
was no sooner given, than five or seven disciples started 
on a run and angrily spoke to the man, who was sitting 
reading the book. 58. ‘Come, bring your book along 
with you,” they cried, “and come along quickly to the 
monastary of the Svdmi.” The man was greatly fright- 
ented, but bethought himself of Eknath’s feet. 59. He 
enfolded the book in its cloth, and hastened along. He 
entered the monastary of the Svdmi, bowed to him, and 
stood before him. 


THE BRAHMAN APPEARS BEFORE THE 
SANNYASI 


60. With a motion of his eye the sannydsi invited 
him to be seated. The Pandit spoke to him in the Sans- 
krit, but he was unable to understand him. 61. Regard- 
ing him, therefore, as a fool, he addressed him in the 
Prakrit, “Where lives the great poet, the author of this 
commentary? 62, Or perchance it is your own intellect 


176 EKNATH 


that has produced this Prakrit version. Tell the whole 
truth without holding anything back.” 63. The man 
replied in turn. “On the bank of the Ganga, in the sacred 
city of Pratishthama there lives a great and good man by 
name of Nath. 64. He is constant in the worship of 
Vishnu, in his Hari kirtans, and offerings. He lovingly 
worships Brahmans and drinks the holy water of their 
feet. 65. By the means of the gift of his Guru’s blessing 
he has received the poetic inspiration and he has lovingly 
begun a commentary on the eleventh chapter of the 
Bhagavata. 66. Two chapters were finished. These, I, 
an ignorant man, hastened to copy, because of my rever- 
ence for it, and I am reading it, comparing it with the 
Sanskrit text. 67. The sannydsi then declared, “ This 
man is altogether blameless. We must call Eknath here 
and punish him. 


EKNATH IS SUMMONED TO BENARES BY THE 
CHIEF SANNYASI. 


68. In the sacred city of Pratishthana, on the bank 
of the Goda, there must be pandits and religious rulers. 
How is it that they have permitted a Prakrit commentary 
on the Bhagavata.” 69. With this declaration the 
Sannydsi commanded his disciples to write a letter to the 
Brahmans at Pratishthana. 70. As follows. “ Vyasa, 
out of the churning of the Vedas, extracted the Sri Bhaga- 
vata. And this Uddhvagita consists of the very essence 
of the Upnishads. 71. One, Eknath by name, a great 
poet, an inhabitant of your town, has written a Prdkrit 
commentary upon it. This seems to us exceedingly 


EKNATH 177 


improper. 72. You, the all-knowing, and chief Brah- 
mans, should all become of one mind, and after punishing 
him, send him immediately here. 73. I have sent here- 
with two of my disciples. Give them your support. They 
are to vanquish him in discussion.” 74, Such were the 
contents of the letter written to the religious rulers, 
requesting them to send their town’s Commentator to him 
at Benares. 75. He also sent a letter to Eknath saying, 
“Come here immediately, and bring with you your Prakrit 
manuscript of the Bhagavata.” 76. Such were the con- 
tents of the two letters he wrote. He then commanded 
two of his disciples to go to the Deccan, and bring Eknath, 
77. Further more he snatched from the hands of the 
man the two chapters. The two disciples journeyed along 
merrily and arrived at Paithan. 


THE TWO DISCIPLES ARRIVE AT 
PRATISHTHANA WITH SUMMONS. 


78. They duly performed their morning devotions, 
and then met the religious rulers. The Brahmans were 
hastily assembied and duly informed of the events. 79. 
The disciples presented the letter and as it was read aloud, 
all the Brahmans listened. They then discussed the 
matter among themselves. 80. “This defiled man lives 
in our city,” they said, “and performs eccentric deeds. 
But the chief religious ruler here openly praises him. 81. 
Eknath has thrown a spell over the influential and moneyed 
men of the city, and over other piously inclined castes. 
He has made them subservient to him. 82. For this 
reason we have no influence whatever. Therefore 


178 EKNATH 


vanquish him in discussion. All of us, dwellers in this 
city, will render you assistance on that occasion.” 83. 
One proposed that Eknath should be called immediately 
and vanquished in discussion. Another remarked, “He 
must go to the sacred watering place and suffer punish- 
ment. 84. He has undertaken the composition of 
this Prakrit version of the Bhagavata for his own glory. 
At the great sacred city (Renares) he will certainly be 
ignominiously disgraced.” 85. The disciples from 
Benares showed their pride in many ways. They said, 
“We can vanquish him. What an evil minded man he 
is.” 86. And so, accompanied by the Brahmans of the 
town, they came to Eknath’s wédi. As Eknath saw them 
coming, he arose to receive them, and made them a namas- 
kar. 87. They embraced one another, and in a gracious 
manner he caused them to be seated. “Tell me, you image of 
mercy,” he said, “In what city do you live.” 88. The 
disciples in reply, delivered into Eknath’s hands the letter 
of the sannyaési. Eknath affectionately bowed his head, 
and read the letter aloud. 89. Eknath then became filled 
with joy, and looking towards the Brahmans said, “ The 
Lord-of-the-universe has remembered me, and therefore, 
he has summoned me.” 90, Eknath determined at once 
to hasten to Benares, and calling Uddhav, requested him to 
manage all his affairs in his absence. 91. To carry on 
the worship of Vishnu, the reading of the Puranas, hospi- 
tality to guests, worship of Brahmans, and the nightly 
Hari kirtans. ‘‘ All these things I leave in your keeping,” 
he said. 92. Uddhava assenting, made a_ reverential 
obeisance. Eknath was filled with joy at the thought of 
going on the Great Pilgrimage. 93. Eknath urged upon 
the disciples of the sannydsi that they sit down at once to 


EKNATH 179 


eat. ‘“ You are wearied by your many days of travel,” 
he said. 94. “It is because of me that you have had this 
wearisome journey here and now back.” The two Brah- 
man disciples listened and replied. 95. ‘‘We have just 
dined at the house of the religious ruler, but we have our 
full satisfaction in seeing you.” Thus thy replied. 96. 
And the purpose they had conceived in their minds of 
addressing him impudently, that evil purpose passed away 
the moment they looked upon Eknath. 97. “Blessed, 
blessed in his bhakti. Blessed, blessed is his character,” 
so whispered these disciples to one another. 98. There 
wert present there some secret spies of the religious rulers 
and they hastened away to report all the happenings. 99. 
“At the very sight of Eknath” they reported, “the Brah- 
mans from Beneras became humble. While we were 
looking on, they became meek. He has thrown a spell upon 
them.” 100. When the religious rulers heard them they 
were amazed, and said, “ Eknath has evidently discovered 
the method of killmg an enemy by means of courtesy. 
101. The God Vishnu received all the glory by patiently en- 
during the mighty kick of Bhrigu. So Eknath has discovered 
the art. He ever possesses the spirit of gentleness. 102. 
Whoever comes to persecute him ends by falling at his 
feet. Thus wrath departs, through his acts of kindness, 
103. If some mischief is devised against him, it turns out 
to his advantage. If dishonour is planned, it turns out to 
his praise. God is his helper.” 104. Thus the Brahman 
inhabitants of the city murmured in their hearts. Let the 
good people now listen to the events that later took 
place. 


180 EKNATH 
EKNATH GOES TO BENARES. 


105. Eknath started on his journey along with the 
Brahman disciples, who had been sent to bring him. 
He took with him the manuscript of five chapters of the 
Bhagavata. 106. He had, neither horse nor baggages 
with him, because he had started immediately on his 
journey. But Uddhava sent after him two Brahmans to 
serve him. 107. By his own choice he journeyed along 
the way with the men from Benares. Finally, one day, 
they arrived at Anandavana. 108. After bathing in 
the Bhagirthi Sri Nath naturally sat down, and the two 
disciples went to the Sannydsi and made him a namaskdar. 
109. And said, “ Through your might indeed, we have 
been to Pratishthina and have brought back with us the 
Commentator. What is your further wish?” 110. The 
Svdmi replied to this question, “I am just starting out to 
beg. Seat him within the monastary (until my return).” 
Such was his command. 111. Having thus instructed 
them, he started out to beg. Accompanied by his three 
hundred disciples, he took his departure. 112. The two 
disciples went to the bank of the Ganga and brought 
Eknath back with them. “Be seated in the monastary 
until the svdmi returns,” they said. 113. “Assuredly,” 
was Sri Nath’s reply, and so saying, quietly sat down, even 
he in whom there was absolutely and eternally neither 
exaltation nor inquietude. 


EKNATH BEFORE THE SANNYASI. 


114. Now let us turn to what happened after the 
begging was over. The Mahant gave instructions to his 
three hundred disciples to go within the monastery, and 


EKNATH 181 


“Listen to my strict command,” he said. 115. “The 
great poet of Paithan, author of the Prakrit Bhagavata, has 
been brought here by my two disciples. I wish you to 
chastize him. 116. You are three hundred disciples. 
Each of you is to give him five blows. If he survives 
this, I will further consider what to do.” 117. Bowing 
their heads to their sadguru’s command, the disciples 
hastened away, but as they went along the way, they 
bethought themselves thus. 118. “The Svami is 
powerful and worthy of respect and has commanded us. 
But if in beating the Brahman he should die, our penance 
will be most severe. 119. We had better take into con- 
sideration what Eknath’s methods are, what his standing 
is, what his worship is, and how he has acquired his know- 
ledge.” 120. Thus discussing, they stood near the door 
of the monastery. Finally they said, “ Let us, one by one, 
go to the door, and look at him.” 121. That being 
determined, one by one the sannydsis entered the monastery. 
There they saw Eknath sitting quietly, and appearing to 
them in the form of Krishna. 122. Reverently they 
bowed to him, and stood with their hands palm to palm, 
exclaiming, “He is the sagun avatdr of the totality of 
Satchidinanda.” 123. To all the three hundred sansydsis 
he thus manifested himself in the monastery. They fur- 
ther exclaimed, “This is truly the image of Narayana, 
manifested to save the world. 124. Janadrdan has taken 
possession of man. For our sakes He has taken His 
abode in the human heart. If we had listened to the 
command of our Svami, an awful calamity would have 
taken place.” 125. With ithese exclamations all the 
Sannyasis bowed low to Eknath, and standing before him 


182 EKNATH 


with hands palm to palm, said, “ Truly he is the Lord-of- 
Heaven. 126. Then one of the disciples went and said 
to the Svami, “ You have sent the sannydsis to beat Eknath 
with clubs. 127. But they have broken your command. 
They are all bowing to him, and standing before him with 
hands palm to palm. This seems to us very extraordinary.” 
128. When the Mahant heard the news, he became hot 
with rage, just as Hiranyakasipu became furious in heart 
when Pralhad came as a suppliant to Sri Hari. 129. Or 
as Ravan trembled with rage and violently crunched his 
teeth, when Bibhishana, seeing the might of Rama, came 
as a suppliant to him. 130. Just such was the Svamt’s 
state of mind, and he exclaimed, “ These sannydsis are of 
my own sect, and yet have broken my command and have 
gone as suppliants to him. 131. What science of magic 
has Eknath so fully learned that the moment he is seen 
he casts a spell.” He then gave a command to his disciple. 
The substance of it I will tell you, Listen. 132. ‘‘ Where 
my usual seat is hang there a curtain. I do not wish the 
sight of one who composes a Prékrit book.” 133. With 
this command of the Svdmi, the disciple hastened ahead 
and hung a curtain opposite the Svdnu’s seat. The 
Svdmi entered by another door. 134. He spread his 
skin mat and seated himself. The three hundred disciples 
were still standing by the door with eyes fastened on 
Eknath’s form. 135. And as they viewed his four armed 
form their consciousness of body vanished. They no 
longer thought of I and Thou. All were gazing intently 
at Eknath. 136. And in love were crying out, “ Eknath, 
Eknath.” All were praising him with their lips, he was 
that Lord-of-Heaven for whom a great penance is required. 
137. They had received the kind favor of their Svami, 


EKNATH 183 


hence they could see this sagun appearance. Just as 
Sigupala and Vakradanta were saved by their very hate. 
138. As the Svdmi listened to the exclamations of his 
disciples he was astonished. ‘ He has cast a spell upon all, 
but how I cannot understand,” He said. 139. The 
Svdmi then moved his seat close to Eknath, with only 
the curtain between them. The chief Mahant of the 
sannydsis then addressed Eknath. 140, “ Among all the 
great debaters among the Sannydsis I am the most distin- 
guished. I will crush your deccit and have you at once 
publicly punished.” 141. Sri Eknath, ocean of tranqui- 
lity and kindness, listened to these conceited words, but 
was not in the least troubled thereby, and returned a soft 
answer. 142. “O Svami, great and powerful, I reve- 
rently place my head at your feet. Do me, a helpless one, 
the kindness of permitting me to see you. 143. You 
have conceived the desire to see me, a mere child, and 
have summoned me here to see you. I have come here by a 
long journey. Why have you drawn this curtain? 144. 
If I have committed any wrong, forgive me now. If 
you will examine my intelligence, you will find that it does 
not comprehend the Sanskrit. 145. I am_ without 
devotion, without bhakti, without knowledge, without in- 
difference to this worldly life. I have ‘not read the 
Sastras. I have not studied the Vedas. 146. It is 
through serving you that I have received even this slight 
poetic inspiration, through which I have composed verses 
as best I could, beginning with the Bhagavata. 147. I 
have prepared only five chapters of the Eleventh Chapter 
of the Bhagavata. Will the Svd@mi kindly look it over 
carefully and take into consideration its meaning? 148. 
If you find in the manuscript, as far as I have gone, any 


184 EKNATH 


fault in its interpretation of the Bhagavata, then sink it 
in the Manikarnika, for then there would be no reason 
for its existence. 149. You are Narayana in visible form 
in this great sacred city, and rich in knowledge. If you 
do not approve of this idea, how will others approve? 150. 
So now show me kindness and put your anger far away. 
Save me a helpless one, by the sight of you.” 151. These 
nectar words of Eknath were no sooner heard by the 
Sannydsi than his anger left him, and the quality of good- 
ness manifested itself in his soul. 152. The darkness of 
the night of Ignorance had densely filled his soul. But 
when the sun appeared, giving him knowledge, the darkness 
faded away. 153. The light penetrated his soul. The 
Sannydasi said to himself “Sri Nath is not man, but the 
Supreme Brahma in visible form. 154. That which is 
the complete content of the Vedanta, the totality of 
Satchidananda, the qualityless and changeless. He appears 
evident to the senses as Narayana. 155. And for the 
Salvation of the world, this Dweller-in-heaven has 
descended as an avatar, and coming to this monastery in 
visible form, unsought by us, has given us a sight of him- 
self. 156. He is truly not man but a deedful avatar. 
Remove now at once the curtain and let me see this divine 
being.” 157. Thus the Svdmi listened to the word of 
his good disciples, and his heart melted within him. He 
had the curtain at once removed, and Lo, to his eyes Krishna 
appeared. 


THE SANNYASI IS CONVERTED. 


158. And as he saw the sagun form before him, the 
same as the form for contemplation, which the great poet, 


EKNATH 185 


of loving bhakti had described in the Bhagavata, he became 
repentant in heart. 159. “Save, me,” he now cried, and 
overflowed with the eight emotions, he Icst all conscious- 
ness of body, and made Eknath a séshtdnga namaskér. 
160. Sri Nath now reassumed human form, and lifted 
the sannydsi up while he was shouting aloud, “ Victory, 
Victory, I am saved to-day.’ 161. But Eknath on the 
other hand exclaiming, “ Obeisance to Narayana” made a 
namaskdr to the Sannydsi, saying “Svami, this seems 
wrong. You are the superior in this monastery.” 162. 
The sannydsi listened to Eknath’s words and was overcome 
with amazement, exclaiming, ‘“‘He has shown marvellous 
deeds before our eyes. He shows reverence in the inter- 
pretation of scripture.” 163. Thus enjoying ecstacy of 
soul the Svdami took his accustomed seat and seating 
Eknath close to him had him unfold the cloth containing 
the book. 164. The meaning of one Sloka he read in 
the five chapters, and exclaimed, ‘‘ What irresistable 
knowledge!” And as he listened he felt a sense of peace. 
165. Then all, in conjunction with the sadguru con- 
sulted together, and standing before Eknath with hands 
palm to palm, made him this request. 166. “ You have 
already composed five chapters of the Bhagavata. We ask 
you to complete the Eleventh skandha here, in Benares. 
167. Until you have finished the commentary we wish 
you would joyfully remain here with us.” Thus the 
sannydsis pled with Eknath. 168. “I will do so,” said 
Eknath, bowing his head to their request. He then started 
to finish the book, rejoicing in his heart. 169. As much 
of the commentary as he composed each day, the Sannyast 
would examine it, bearing in mind the meaning of the 
Sanskrit original, but he found not the slightest inaccuracy. 


186 EKNATH 


170. Six months passed and the book was finished, and 
because it was replete with the mystery of bheku, all 
listeners were made joyous. 171. All were accustomed 
to take their seats and the head of the monastery would 
have the book read aloud again and again. At night when 
it was read, joy and satisfaction would come with a rush. 
The hearts of all became full of happiness. 172. As 
soon as the book was completed the thought came into 
the Mahant’s mind to make a great celebration in the 
monastery, and worship Sarasvati. 173. With this happy 
inspiration he made ail needed preparations, and hastened 
to send invitations to the other pandits who were in the 
sacred city. 174. He said, “Eknath has written a 
Prékrit commentary on the Eleventh chapter of the 
Bhagavata. I have examined carefully its contents and 
have experienced loving joy. 175. The book is at last 
finished. To-morrow there will be a celebration of the 
event at the monastery. I invite all of you Brahmans, 
great and small to come.” 


THE BRAHMANS REVILE EKNATH. 


176. When the earth-gods heard this invitation they 
all began to revile, “What! A Prdakrit commentary on 
the Bhagavata. This is an impossible idea! 177. In 
this beginning of the Kali Yuga heresy has spread to a 
marvellous degree. How is it that the Svdmi has been 
deluded! Why did he not at once stop his attempt! 178. 
In this great sacred city he is giving his cordial approval 
to this Prakrit version. This is one of the wonders of the 
Vaishnava Maya. The Svami has evidently fallen under 
Eknath’s spell. 179. Let us, however, hasten to go and 


EKNATH 187 


acquaint him with the injunction of the séstras. We must 
certainly sink his book (in the river).” Such was the 
fixed determination of the Pandits. 180. Thus all the 
Brahman Pandits, learned in the Vedic Sdstras, and all the 
Vedanta propagandists, arrived at the monastery of the 
Svimi, and made him a sashtanga namaskér. 181. 
Then taking the sannydsi aside, they said to him, “ Svami, 
you are the chief of all. All of us Brahmans are your 
disciples in every respect. 182. You are the chief seat 
of all wisdom. You are our Sadguru, worshipful and 
great. Over and above this you belong to the noblest of 
all the four dsramas. As to worthiness of reverence 
you are supreme over all. 183. This being so, it scems 
to us altogether wrong that you, Svdmi, have given your 
approval to the Prakrit commentary on the Bhagavata 
made by Eknath of Pratishthina. 184. That which has 
been evolved out of the churning of the Vedic Sdstras is 
the Bhagavata. On it Eknath has made a Prakrit com- 
mentary. It deserves to be sunk in the Manikarnika. 185. 
Just as long ago Dvaipayana sank the Bharata, composed 
by Jaimini, and received renown thereby. 186. Or as 
the Acharva threw into the water the great book of the 
Jains, so the Prakrit Bhagavata should be sunk in Mani- 
karnikaé. 187. By doing this all the Brahmans will be 
made happy, and the fame of this sacred city will increase.” 
Thus all the Pandits pled with the Svdmi. 188. The 
Sannydsi replied, “I persecuted Eknath severely, but he 
is not a human being. He is an avatdr of Vishnu in visible 
form. 189. All of you should indeed worship his book 
with mantric rites.” Although thus exhorted by the 
sannydst, the Pandits would not at all listen. 


188 EKNATH 


THE BRAHMANS THROW EKNATH’S 
MANUSCRIPT INTO THE RIVER. 


190. The Pandits asked Sri Eknath for his Bhaga- 
vata, and taking it from him, hastily rising, they went and 
tossed it into the Manikarnika. 191. Suddenly a mira- 
culous event took place. Listen to it ye fortunate hearers. 
The Bhagirathi river lifted up both her arms and caught the 
book in her hands. 192. On her arms were jewelled 
bracelets, beautiful, divinely marked. And as she held the 
book up in her hands all were amazed at the sight. 193. 
With cries of, “Victory, Victory,’ the assembled crowd 
clapped their hands and rejoiced. The sannydst 
exclaimed, “Chandramauli (Siva) has manifested him- 
self to me.” 194. The chief of all the sannydsis then 
leaped into the Manikarnika, and, grasping the book with 
his hands, lovingly held it on his head. 195. He brought 
it to the Pandits, and they looked at it with downcast 
countenance. The sannydsi said to them, “ Take warning, 
and go now as suppliants to Eknath.” 196. They listened 
and then placed their foreheads at the Svami’s feet. 
“We are in every way at fault in not listening to you,” 
they said. 197. ‘“ Eknath is God visible. The truth we 
now know.” All the Pandits then entered the Monastery 
and reverently greeted Eknath. 198. They placed the 
book before him and said, “This is your gracious voice. 
Sri Bhagirathi put forth her hands and lovingly protected 
it.” 199. And Sri Nath, as he saw the Pandits and the 
sannydst before him, made them a namaskaér. The Svami 
then requested the Brahmans that they should lovingly 
worship Eknath. 200. “Allow us,” they said to him, 
“some service to a saint, that we may be saved from the 


EKNATH 189 


sea of this worldly life.” And Sri Nath, on his side, 
bowed at their feet and said, “I beg you not to do anything 
so unseemly.” 


201. In the next chapter is a delightful story by the 
mere hearing of which the pious become freed from worldly 
desires. 202. Svasti. This book is the Sri Bhaktalila- 
mrita. By merely listening to it one’s desires are fulfilled. 
Listen then to it, ye pious loving bhaktas. This is the 
twenty-first delightful chapter. Chapter 21, verses 202. 


CHAPTER 22. 
BHAKTALILAMRITA. 
Mahipati’s Invocation. 


Obeisance to GaneSa. 


1. Victory to Thee, Guru-of-the-World, Lord-of- 
Pandhari. (Your Vaishnava Mdyad is unfathomable, 
impossible even for Brahmadeva and the other 
gods to understand. These are matters of experience. 
2. If I should attempt to describe Thy greatness, 
why! even the Vedas do not know Thy extent! 
And what am I but one of little intellect, a 
mere servant, of humble life, a sinner, and stupid-minded. 
3. I cannot use words correctly. The Sanskrit language 
with its abundant forms has not made itself intelligible 
to my mind. I speak at random and irrelevantly. 4. 
O Thou Merciful-to-the-lowly, Husband-of-Rukmini, this 
is the witness of my own soul, and I do not know what 
this my poetic composition will finally be like. 5. But 


190 EKNATH 


Thou, Internal-witness and Intelligence, hast caused my 
mind to remember, and hast committed to my keeping the 
secret store of Thy deeds. 6. Of all ignorant men I, 
stupid-minded, am the most ignorant, and that Thou, O 
Pandurang, shouldst relate to me Thy deeds is most strange. 
7. Formerly, in order to take away the pride of Narada 
Thou didst cause a bear to sing. The impossible takes 
place through Thy will, O Sri Hari. 


THE MIRACULOUSLY RESCUED MANUSCRIPT 
IS WORSHIPPED. 


8. In the last Chapter it was related how the Pandits 
threw into the water the Bhagavata, composed by Sri Nath, 
and how the Bhiagirathi river held it aloft in her hands. 
9. And then how the chief santydsi sprang into the Ganga 
and seized the book in his hands; and how, when all came 
back to the monastery, Sri Nath came to meet them. 10. 
And how reverently he bowed to the Sannyasi 
and Brahmana Pandits, and how the Svami, abashed, 
exclaimed, “By your nobleness you have sunk our 
pride.” 11. The sannydsi then quickly collected 
all the materials for worship, and commanded the 
Pandits to worship Sri Nath, as he ought to be, 
with reverence in their hearts, 12. The Pandits 
did not have real reverence in their hearts, but they fell 
at his feet because of the miracle they had seen. Eknath 
begged of them that they should not do anything so impro- 
per. 13. “TI am but a servant of the servants of Brah- 
mans, holding the hope of your favor. Rather by 
reverently worshipping this book you will give me joy.” 


EKNATH 191 


14. They listened to Eknath’s proposal and all approved. 
The sannydsis had an elephant brought with a canopied seat. 
15. The elephant was caperisoned with cloth studded 
with gems, and marked with sendur. And over all were 
spread embroideries in gold and silver thread, and other 
adornments. Thus beautifully adorned the elephant was 
quickly brought. 16. The sannydasi begged Eknath to sit 
on the canopied seat with the book. Sri Nath replied, “I 
will not do so wrong a thing.” 17. The only right thing 
is to! place the book on the canopied seat, and take it 
around in procession. I am in every way but a suppliant, 
desiring only the dust of your feet.” 18. There were 
seven rich pandits, and the sannyadsi commanded 
them to make all the necessary preparations for feasting, 
each one providing for one day. 19. What the svami 
proposed was acceptable to all, for who could slight his 
wish? All the Brahmans of Benares were his suppliants. 
20. So worshipping the book with due rites they placed it 
on the canopied seat, and a great crowd assembling marched 
in enthusiastic procession. 21. There were emblems and 
banners. The cymbal and drum gave sweet music. The 
Vaishnavas sang lovingly and reverently, and with shouts 
of “ Victory, Victory,” they repeated aloud the names of 
God. 22. By the sound of the drum, and the kettle- 
drum the air was dense with sound. In great crowds men 
and women watched the novel sight. 23. Thus the 
procession marched until night, and then there were let off 
many kinds of fireworks, rockets, and moon-lights were 
fired off each step of the way. 24. Fragrant powders, 
many kinds of flowers, and perfumed substances were 
thrown into the air. A great festival was celebrated in 
the city of Benares. 25. Wherever the procession halted, 


192 EKNATH 


there the Pandits made preparations and fed the sannydsis 
and Brahmans who had assembled in great crowds. 26. 
For seven days the festival was joyfully celebrated. By 
day and by night the book procession marched, and ail 
praised the greatness of Eknath. 27. On the eighth day 
the procession came back to its starting point. Here a 
great celebration was carried on, and observed with joy. 
28. ‘The sannydsi then commanded the pandits, saying, 
“Collect all the chief Brahmans and lovingly listen to a 
Kirtan from Eknath’s lips.” 29. Thus enjoined by the 
chief sannydasi all were naturally gratified. “Call to day,” 
he said, “an assembly of Brahmans, and listen to the 
Kirtan.” 30. The learned pandits, the Vaishnava 
bhakias, the Vedic Brahmans, the saints and mahanis, and 
all the pious men and women assembled in the monastery. 
31. With the loud noise of the cymbal, the drum and the 
vind, the sound took the very form of Brahma, and as 
Eknath performed the kirtan his heart rejoiced exceedingly. 
32. The people shouted aloud the names of Vitthal and 
clapped their hands. The air became dense with the 
sound as they cried, “ Victory, Victory.” 33. Eknath 
strung together stories, whose contents were replete with 
bhakti. Among them were some that were philosophic, 
yet such as increased the glory of bhakti. 34. In this 
Kali Yuga it is the name of God that has saving power. 
Illustrative proofs are found in the slokas of the Bhaga- 
vata. Besides this, the Sadguru praised with his own lips 
the glory of bhakti. 35. As Sri Nath’s words of grace 
were listened to, the assembled people became transfixed. 
The Pandits lost all consciousness of body. They became 
lost in contemplation. 36. The Brahmans said to one 
another, “ There are many who perform Hori kirtans, but 


EKNATH 193° 


truly there is no one who performs them with such extra- 
ordinary love.’ 37. And all the men and women 
declared, “What philosophic knowledge, and gracious 
poetry, and yet withal with what deep humility! Blessed 
are his mother and father.” 38. The performance of 
the kirtans lasted for four days. On the fifth day was 
celebrated the Gopalkala4. The playful acts of Sri Hari 
were acted, and sweetmeats were distributed, to all. 39. All 
the twice-born of the city of Benares, from the child to 
the, aged, great and small, cried, “Blessed, Blessed. He 
is an avatar in visible form.’ 40. The sannydsis also 
exclaimed, “ The deeds of Sri Krishna at the time of his 
being an avatdér we have seen with our eyes. Blessed are 
today’s festive rites.” 41. The Sannydsi now said to 
all the pandits, “Let all of you assemble together and 
with your own hands make a copy of Eknath’s book, the 
Eleventh chapter of the Bhagavata.” 42. “We will 
certainly do so,” they said, and they took a chapter at a 
time to copy. In the mean time Eknath began composing 
the Rukmini Svayamvara. 43. Sitting on the bank of 
the Manikarnika the pandits, with minds fixed on the 
object, completed fully the book, on Ram’s birthday. 44. 
When the copy of the Eleventh Chapter was completed, the 
Pandits lovingly brought it to the monastery, where the 
Svami Ievingly read it each day. 


EKNATH STARTS TO RETURN TO 
PRATISHTHANA. 


45. Eknath now took leave of the sannydsi and 
started to return to his own country. All the sannydsis 


and pandits assembled and saw him off. 46. Sri Nath 
13 


194 EKNATH 


reverently made a séshtang namaskadr to the citizens of that 
sacred city. They embraced each other and said loving 
farewell. 47. After accompanying Eknath for a short 
distance the citizens returned to the city, and always, day 
and night, held in memory the noble character of Eknath. 


EKNATH MEETS DASOPANT IN HIS WAY. 


48. As Eknath journeyed on, his heart always full 
of joy, he unexpectedly met Dasopant* in his path. 49. 
From childhood Dasopant had cherished the desire for a 
visible manifestation of Sri Dattatreya. He had, therefore, 
undertaken severe austerities in this loving service. 50. 
You may ask how he performed them. Listen, ye fortu- 
nate hearers. He abandoned all his friends and went 
alone into the forest. 51. He lived on fallen leaves. 
He took not the least care of his body. He slept on the 
bare rock, enduring cold and heat. 52. If any human 
being unexpectedly appeared, he would run away from 
him. Without ceasing he kept Sri Dattatreya in his mind. 
53. From these austerities lovingly carried on, he finally 
lost all consciousness of body, and because he slept on 


* Note-——Dasopant Digambar was born in 1551 and 
died in 1615. His tomb is at Amba Jogai, also known as 
Mominabad in the Haidarabad State. The interesting 
story of his youth, how God took the form of a Mahar 
and brought the necessary ransom for his deliverance from 
the tyranny of the Mahomedan king is one well known. 
For a translation of this story, together with a collection of 
all the information available, regarding this poet-saint, who 
was a voluminous writer, see an article in the Journal of 
the American Oriental Society, Vol 42, pages 251-279, by 
Justin E, Abbott. 


EKNATH 195 


rocks his body was covered with sores. 54. For twenty, 
years he carried on austerities in this way. Then finally, 
Dattitreya gave him a visible manifestation of Himself. 
55. As Dattatreya embraced him, his body became divine, 
and through the blessing bestowed upon him he became a 
prolific poet. 56. And through the grace of the sadguru,. 
and his good fortune, there came to him great wealth, and. 
the respect of great men, as they recognized his great in- 
telligence. 57. Dasopant had placed his abode in Amba. 
Jogai. He had heard of Sri Eknath’s good fame from. 
every one’s lips. 58. As Eknath was returning from the- 
great Pilgrimage the two unexpectedly met. They - 
embraced one another with great joy in their hearts. 59.. 
They embraced one another’s feet. They conversed to- 
gether about their joy and happiness. Eknath, full of 
joy, said to Dasopant, “‘ This is a fortunate meeting.” 60.. 
After much solicitation Dasopant took Eknath to his home. 
Waves of joy and happiness arose in his soul, and with: 
pure reverence he paid him respect. 61. They dined on: 
daintily cooked food. Then came the listening to the read-- 
ing of the Bhagavata, and at night Hari kirtans took 
place, that deeply moved all, as they listened. 62. A 
month thus passed, and then Eknath asked leave to go on. 
Dasopant pleaded with him to accept horses and money 
for the journey and its expenses. 63. Sri Eknath, how- 
ever, had a mind indifferent to worldly things, and would 
take none of Dasopant’s wealth. Nor would he even take 
a horse, “ because,” said he, “the way is difficult.” 64. 
In leaving, Eknath said to Dasopant: “I am to celebrate 
at my home the festival of the birthday of Krishna. Come 
to the sacred city of Pratishthana at that time.” 65. “I 
certainly will come,” he replied. They made one another 


196 EKNATH 


namaskdr, and Sri Eknath then hastened on his journey, 
and arrived at the sacred city of Pratishthana. 


EKNATH WELCOMED BACK TO 
PRATISHTHANA. 


66. As he approached the city the news reached 
Uddhava. He felt supreme joy, just as the earth does 
at the approach of the rain in time of drought. 67. He 
took with him emblems and banners, cymbals, vinds, and 
‘drums, fragrant powders, the tulsi, garlands of flowers, 
and all other needed things. 68. And the people of the 
sacred city, men and women, and the pious loving disting- 
uished Vaishnavas, singing and dancing with shouts of 
loving welcome, went out to meet Eknath.69. And as they 
saw Sri Nath’s form with their eyes, all were filled with 
joy. With shoutings of the name of Vitthal, they fell 
prostrate before him. 70. Uddhava, with overflowing 
love, touched his forehead to his feet. Eknath embraced 
him with both arms, wnable to contain his love. 71. And 
so the other inhabitants of the sacred city greeted Eknath. 
Uddhava then offered him the fragrant powder and the 
tulsi, and put on him the garland of flowers. 72. And, 
shouting aloud the name of Vitthal, the Vaishnavas sang 
with joy, exclaiming, “ Blessed is this day on which the 
people have come to welcome you back.” 73. Singing 
of the goodness of Sri Hari, and dancing, Sri Nath entered 
the city. Sweet sounding instruments were played before 
him, The air overflowed with the sound. 74. They 
filled their hands with fragrant powders and flowers, and 
threw them over him. Thus honoured, he entered his 


EKNATH 197 


house, and at once his eyes fell on Pandurang. 75. Sri 
Nath made a sdshténg namaskar before the God and sing- 
ing sweet songs of invocation waved offerings before the 
Husband-of-Rukmini. 76. He gave everyone favors of 
sweetmeats to their great satisfaction. They asked him 
about his welfare on his journey. He told them of it 
lovingly as he sat on his accustomed seat. 77. It was 
now the fourth ghatika of the night when all the people 
returned to their homes, and Girjabai then with her own 
hands gave Eknath a light refreshment. 78. After thus 
performing a kirtan he paid his respects to Sleep. Then 
began the usual worship of Vishnu, and the distribution 
of food to the hungry. 


CELEBRATION OF KRISHNA’S BIRTHDAY, 
AND ARRIVAL OF DASOPANT. 


79. Two months passed in this way, and then came 
the festival of Krishna’s birth. Uddhava, according to 
his custom, began to make all the necessary preparations. 
80. He collected in the house an abundance of things 
needed for the dinner. He besmeared the walls 
within and without, and painted pictures upon them. 81. 
Suddenly, on the day of the full moon, Dasopant arrived 
for the festival. Eknath had not heard that he had arrived, 
when unexpectedly he appeared at the main door. 82. A 
strange sight was now seen. Sri Datta, with his trident in 
his hands, stood watching at the entrance, as a doorkeeper. 
83. Dasopant saw him, and was supremely amazed. He 
leaped from his palanquin and made him a sdshtaénge 
namaskar. 84. He embraced Datta and exclaimed, 


198 EKNATH 


“Why have you come here?” The Son-of-Anasuya 
listened to the question, and replied. 85. “ Eknath is 
not a human bhakta, but a visible avatdr of Sri Pandurang. 
For the salvation of the world he has become an avatar 
in this Kali Yuga. 86. Only if by good fortune there 
exists the richness of a punyea, performed in a former birth, 
can one have the opportunity of serving him. Know this 
fact for a truth. 87. I hold this trident in my hand, and 
guard securely the door. I will go in and inform Eknath 
of your presence. Until then do not enter in.” 88. As 
Avadhuta thus spoke, Dasopant was overcome with asto- 
nishment, and extolling Eknath’s glory, said, “I did not 
recognize his extraordinary greatness.” 89. Sri Datta 
informed Eknath that Dasopant had come to see him, and 
Eknath with Uddhava came out to welcome him and 
lovingly made him a mamaskar. 90. They fell at one 
another’s feet, and embraced one another. Eknath took 
Dasopant by the hand and led him into the house. 91. 
Uddhava made the needed arrangements for Dasopant’s 
palanquins and carriages. He gave his men the materials 
and the necessary equipment for cooking. Nothing was 
lacking. 92. Formerly in the time of Sri Krishna’s 
.avatarship, Uddhava was greatly loved by God. The desire 
of Uddhava to serve God was not then fully satisfied. 93. 
In the former birth they were friends and sod now 
the opportunity arrived for the unselfish service 
of Eknath. 94, Dasopant performed his bath, and 
finished his meal with Eknath. All night he sat listening 
to the Hari kirtan, until the sun began to rise. 95. He 
then performed the image of Pandurang, anointing him and 
worshipping him with the various ceremonies, experiencing 
the while loving joy. 96. Festal instruments were 


EKNATH 199 


played at the door. Festal invocations were sung. The 
Brahmans recited aloud from the Vedas, and finally hands- 
ful of flowers were offered. 97. The days were spent in 
feeding the Brahmans, the nights in Hari kirtans. 
From the first day of the fortnight to the ninth, the festival 
was at its full, 98. On the tenth the Gopalkala was 
excellently dramatised. Dasopant saw it all with joy in 
his heart. 99. And exclaimed, “I have seen with my own 
eyes Sri Eknath with his unprecedented gracious voice, 
his make up, his dramatic power, and his mine of philoso- 
phic knowledge. 100. I thought myself to be a worship- 
per of Datta in visible form, but since seeing the glory 
of Eknath with my own eyes, I have become one who 
recognizes no duality. 101. The great festival being 
ended, there was feasting on the twelfth day. Dasopant 
then took leave and returned to his own home. 


EKNATH’S INFLUENCE FOR GOOD. 


102. There are many good men who give salvation 
to pious men, and send the impious, and haters of good, 
to Hell. 103. Not so in truth is the story of Eknath’s 
life as a deedful avatar. He saved very many haters of 
the good, and many evil minded. For this reason he is the 
great Jagadguru. 104. The sannydsi and pandits who 
persecuted him at Benares, he turned to bhakti by showing 
them a miracle. 105. Knowledge and humility, with 
compassion for every creature characterized him to a degree 
extraordinarily strange. 106. Eknath’s pity for every 
creature, and his great zeal at the feet of Brahmans became 
a burden to Lord Sri Krishna. He became in fact a 
debtor of Eknath’s because of that service. 107. And 


200 EKNATH 


so Chakrapani became a Brahman, (as we have already 
seen) and used to fill the vessels of the Kavadi with the 
water of the Ganga and bring it to Eknath, no one recog- 
nizing his miraculous deed. 


EKNATH FORGIVES INSOLENT MAHOMEDAN. 


108. There are still other interesting and deeply sug- 
gestive stories about Eknath. Listen to them, ye pious 
people. Eknath had finished his bath in the Ganga and 
was returning to his home. 109. There was an insolent 
Mahommedan sitting by the city gate. Just as he was 
about to spit on the ground, Fknath came by on the 
street. 110. As the Mahommedan spat toward the ground 
the spittle fell on Eknath’s person, but this did not excite 
him to the least anger. His feelings could not be hurt. 
111. Just as the Earth is absolutely forgiving, so was 
Sri Nath in his character. There are some who worship 
the Earth, others throw the vilest filth upon it. 112. Just 
as the Earth keeps her joy or pain to herself, and has the 
characteristic of neither showing her affection nor her 
anger. 113. So when this ignorant man unwittingly 
spat on Eknath’s person he did not burst into rage, but 
rather greatly pitied the man. 114. “This fellow has 
certainly committed a wrong,” he said, “ and will go to Hell. 
I must therefore now think of some means by which he 
will repent.” 115.,With this thought in mind he again 
bathed in the Ganga, and, returning to his home, worship- 
ped Vishnu. 116. First offering the food to the gods and 
fire, the dinner with the Brahmans was continued and 
(finished. He then placed in a vessel food enough for two 


EKNATH 201 


men. 117. He took it to he house of the 
Mahommedan, who had _ spitten on him. And 
bowing reverently to the man Eknath said, “ Kindly 
accept this favor.” 118. As the Mohammedan 
removed the cover he saw that it was divine food, and 
remembering his fault he repented, 119, “I, an insolent 
fellow, a supreme villain, a hater of Brahmans, the lowest 
of the vile, spat upon you without giving the least thought 
to what I was doing. 120. You are in this city a man 
of goodness, honored by all. Your Greatness, forgive 
me the wrong.” And with this he prostrated himself on 
the ground. 121. Sri Nath lifted him up and lovingly 
embraced him, and said, “If I had watched my steps more 
carefully, you would not have been guilty of this fault. 
122. This fault committed unwittingly and suddenly be- 
longs to you only in the slightest degree. And now that 
you have repented of it in your heart, there is no other 
penance needed other than this repentance. 123. And 
now remember that the offense of having spitten upon 
me no longer exists.” With this Eknath returned to his 
home. 


EKNATH’S KINDNESS TO A MAHAR BOY. 


124. One day at the time of noon Eknath came down 
to the Ganga. After finishing the Brahmayadnya he was 
about to hurry home. 125. It was in the month of 
Vaisikha, when the sun was scorching’ hot, and the sand 
bank of the Ganga was intensely heated. On the sand 
a little boy was crying loudly. 126. When Eknath saw 
the sight his heart melted with pity. ‘He will lose his 
life at once,” thought he, and so lifted him up, carrying him 


202 EKNATH 


on his hip. 127. Eknath wiped the boy’s eyes with his 
garment, and spoke comfortingly to him. “ Tell me where 
your home is,” he said. 128. The small child was unable 
to speak, but with its hand pointed to where it lived. As 
they came near the hovel the child’s mother approached. 
129. When the child saw her, it cried out, ‘“ Mother, 
Mother,” Eknath then realized the situation. “She 
appears to be a Mahar woman,” he said to himself. 130. 
The moment Eknath put the boy down he ran quickly to 
his mother. Eknath returned to the Ganga, and bathed 
with all his clothes on. 131. This Mercy-in-visible-form 
‘dried his dhotar, and marked his forehead with Dvarka 
earth. Then returning to his home finished his meal with 
joy. 132. That Eknath had placed the child of the Mahar 
‘woman on his shoulder was absolutely unknown to the 
Brahman inhabitants of the city. 133. But it was 
Pandurang’s wish to make the fame of Eknath widely 
known. So the God laid a plan. Let the hearers listen 
Teverently to it. 


EKNATH CLEANSES A LEPER. 


134. There was a learned Brahman who was afflicted 
with a wasting leprosy. He was repentant in heart, and 
‘was performing’ austerities before TryambakeSvara. 135. 
It was because he had committed a great sin that this hor- 
tible disease had attacked his body. In order to regain 
health he was performing austerities that had this desire 
for its purpose. 136. He refused all cooked food and 
dived on bulbs and roots. According to prescribed rules 
Ane performed these austerities for twelve years. 137. 
Suddenly TryambakeSvara appeared to him in a dream, 


EKNATH 203 


and said to him, “Go at once to Pratishthana on 
the bank of the Godavari. 138. There lives there 
one Eknath, a Vaishnava bhakta devoted to the 
service of Brahmans and compassionate to all 
creatures. He has performed a special act of good- 
ness. 139. Once when the sand was scorching to 
the feet, a little Unmentionable boy was lying on it. Eknath 
soothed him, and taking him on his shoulder, 140. 
Carried him to his mother. This is the great deed that 
he performed. If he will give you that good deed, you 
will at once become whole.” 141. After seeing the vision 
the Brahman awakened with astonishment in his heart. 
He came to Pratishthina and began enquiring of the 
people. 142. “There is one Fknath here, a Vaishnava 
bhakta. Where does he live?” Eknath was just then 
bathing in the Ganga, and the people pointed him out to 
the man. 143. The Brahman plunged at once into the 
water and told Eknath his story, adding, “ You took an 
Unmentionable boy on your shoulder. That good deed is 
in your possession. 144. Sri Tryambakaraja, the Husband- 
of-Uma has told me of it.” With a smile on his face 
Eknath replied. 145. “TI will give you all the good deeds 
I have ever performed from my birth until now.” The 
Brahman replied, “I am not worthy of so much. 146. 
Give me only as much as Tryambakesvara has informed me 
of.” Eknath then took water and placed it in the leper’s 
hand. 147. The wasting leprosy immediately left him 
and his body became beautiful. He made a namaskdr to 
Eknath, and all the people witnessed the event. 148. The 
men and women of the sacred city then made their namas- 
kdr, so also did the great and distinguished twice-born, 
remarking to themselves. 149. “ Eknath’s manner of 


204 EKNATH 


doing things is most extraordinary. He turns the evil of 
evil men into righteousness.” Thus speaking all the Twice- 
born became amazed in their hearts. 


THE GODDESS OF THE RIVER. 


150. One day the pious bhaktas, together with Uddhava 
made a request of Eknath. “You Svdami, have made a 
prakrit commentary on the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhaga- 
vata, 151. We have the earnest desire to listen to it 
from your lips.” Eknath saw the mind of his hearers 
and assented. 152. Choosing a good auspicious day he 
began the reading of the Bhagavata. All the pious and 
loving inhabitants of the city came to listen. 153. He 
began to read the Purana at the third watch of each 
day. In the steady flow of Eknath’s voice the hearers 
were lost in attention. 154. But a very strange event 
now occured. Listen to it reverently, ye pious, and wise. 
The Ganga river taking the form of a beautiful woman 
cam to listen. 155. Lovely, charming, delicate in feature, 
adorned with garments and ornaments. So lovely and 
beautiful a woman had never before been seen there. 156. 
Possessed with this form this daughter of Vishnu began to 
come and sit before Eknath, listening. There were other 
women present, but none equalled her. 157. She listened 
intently to the delightful words from Eknath’s lips. She 
did not allow her mind to wander in the least, and in the 
meantime she lost all consciousness of body. 158. When- 
ever he came to a story, illustrating the mystery of bhakti, 
feelings of intense love filled her. Tears would flow from 
her eyes, all the people looking on. 159. There were - 
among the listeners some of evil mind, and a suspicion. 


EKNATH 205 


came into their thoughts. ‘Where does this beautiful 
young woman come from? We do not understand. 160. 
We never saw her before in this sacred city of Pratish- 
thana. Yet, she is coming regularly at the time for the 
reading and listens with ardor in her soul. 161. She 
avoids the crowd of other women, and places her seat 
away from them. She appears to be a married woman, 
young in years, but she speaks with no one. 162. She 
looks steadily at Eknath, and gives loving attention.” 
These evil minded men, thus suspecting her, spread the 
story of her in the town. 163. There were some, whi 
wanting to see her wih their own eyes, what sort of a 
beautiful woman she might be, came with the pretext of 
being listeners. 164. Thus many days passed, and the 
reading of the book came near its end. It then came into 
the minds of these persons to find out where she lived. 165. 
They said, “As soon as the Purana is finished, Ict us follow 
her, and from a distance find out where she belongs. 166. 
Is she mistress of her own home, or is this young woman 
at her mother’s home, or is she living at her mother-in- 
law’s, that she comes here without asking the leave of 
anyone.” 167. While these evil minded men were decid- 
ing what to do, the reading of the Purina was completed. 
The Ganga then made a loving affectionate namaskar to 
Eknath. 168. She impressed upon her mind the form of 
Sri Nath, and immediately left. The evil minded men 
followed her, winking at one another. 169. Some walked 
before her, some behind, taking in her strange conduct. 
In the meantime this daughter of Vishnu, of beautiful form, 
and character, arrived happily at the bank of the Ganga. 
170. She stood for a moment where the water was up to 
her ankles. She took up some water in her hand, sipped 


306 EKNATH 


it, and immediately became invisible. 171. Just as 
the lightening flashes among the clouds and 
vanishes in a moment, in the same manner. she 
manifested her lustre and disappeared. 172. The evil 
minded men now understood and exclaimed, “ The Goda, 
flowing to the ocean, has been taking the visible form of 
a woman, and has been coming to listen to the Bhagavata. 
173. We truly have been dull of understanding. Our 
hearts have been defiled by suspicion. Sri Nath is an 
evatar of Vishnu. We certainly must not call him human. 
174. Imagine nectar in a glass bottle, and one looking 
carefully at it mistakes it for an intoxicating liquor. That 
is what has happened to us.” 175. Thus repentant, they 
performed their devotions and worship and astonished in 
mind, returned to their several homes. 176. On the next 
day at the third watch they came again to Eknath’s house 
to listen. They made their namaskdr to the Svdmi at once 
and took their seat. 177. Eknath undid the book from its 
cloth and waited for a moment, saying, “ One of our liste- 
ners has not yet come. She is very late.” 178. Those 
who had been suspicious now came forward and fell at 
Eknath’s feet. Repentant in heart, they confessed the 
whole affair. 179. “ The river, beautiful and lovely, has 
been coming here regularly to listen. Entertaining suspi- 
cions in our heart, we followed her out of curiosity. 180. 
She stepped into the Ganga, and then and there became 
invisible, and we then understood that she was actually 
the Ganga. 181. We have been of evil mind, and lacking 
in good, therefore, we were suspicious in our hearts. In 
this we have committed a great sin. Forgive us our 
wrong.” 182. Sri Nath, full of joy in his heart, replied, 
“In your possession now is a full righteousness. You saw 


EKNATH 207 


Goda in visible form. By this your sin is shattered to 
pieces. 183. And now without doubt in your hearts 
listen to the Bhagavata. I cannot now praise enough your 
greatness, for you have seen a miracle.” 184, Thus: 
reassuring them, he began reading the Purana. And the 
people who saw the miraculous deeds of Eknith 
rejoiced, 


185. In this book I, Mahipati, am writing of the good. 
renown of him, to listen to whom, the Goda, in visible 
form, came to Eknath with a desire to hear the Bhagavata. 
186. Svasti. This book is the Sri Bhaktalilamrita. By 
merely listening to it one’s desires are fulfilled. Listen 
then to it, ye pious, loving bhaktas. This is the twenty- 
second delightful chapter. Chapter 22. Verses 186. 


CHAPTER 23. 


BHAKTALILAMRITA. 
Mahipati’s Invocation. 
Obeisance to Sri Ganeéa. 


1. Great sins are washed away by listening to the 
lives of the saints. Blessed are the jivanmukta (released 
while living) who sit down to listen with fixed attention. 
2. One who listens in truth to the story of one’s own 
special bhakta, attains to great righteousness. He will 
continue to enjoy the fruit of his righteousness in many 
ways, and it will never pass away. 3. There are austrities and 
rites belonging to the system of Works (karma). If these 
are performed one also attains righteousness (punya) but 


208 EKNATH 


after enjoying its fruit of happiness it passes away in a 
moment. 4. If one listens with fondness to the stories of 
the Bhagavata, that good act never passes away. That 
person finally enjoys Séyujyaté. (Final absorption in 
Brahma.) 5. He, who, having great fondness for the 
stories of the saints, listens with all his ears, even if he 
should fall into some great calamity, God will protect him. 
6. In the last chapter, you fortunate ones, you listened 
to the story of how the Ganga, assuming the form of a 
‘woman, listened attentively to the Bhagavata. 7. How 
there were men of suspicion and hatred by whom the 
miracle was seen, and how their souls melted with repen- 
tance, and how they made their namaskar to Eknath. 


CONVERSION OF THE IMPIOUS MERCHANT. 


8. Now let the wise listen to another story. There 
‘was a merchant living near to Eknath, who was impious 
and wicked. He never went to Eknath’s house. 9. He 
would never listen anywhere to the reading of the Puranas. 
He would never go to hear Hari kirtans, and although the 
river Ganga was near him, he preferred to bathe at home 
with hot water. 10. He never performed morning and 
evening devotions, nor gave offerings to ancestors. He 
dined twice in the day, and cared only for his own family. 
Il. When Eknath saw the manner of his life, great pity 
for him was aroused in his heart. ‘“ This man,” he said 
to himself, “has acquired a human birth, but he will need- 
lessly go to Hell. 12. I must adopt some means whereby, 
through being my neighbour, good desires may spring up 
in his heart and he may seek after the Supreme attainment.” 
13. Thus thinking, he went out into the street, and sought 


EKNATH 209 


to meet him. They exchanged salutations by word of 
mouth. 14. Out of respect for Eknath, the man stood 
still for a moment, and Sri Eknath began to question him. 
“Who are your dependents? 15. What business are you 
engaged in? How do you care for your family.” The 
merchant listened and then replied. 16. “I have sons 
and wife at home. I live near you. I am in the service 
of a business man who lends money. 17. He pays me 
wages, and on it I spend my days.” To this Sri Nath 
replied, “I have now a request to make of you.” 18: 
Great fear sprang into the mind of the man, blinded by 
his attachment to objects of sense, and a great miser withal,. 
and so he made no answer. Eknath, however, understood! 
his mind and said. 19. “I have no desire to obtain from: 
you any money, or any substance of any kind. I ask you: 
only to take a moment’s time to come to my house for the: 
kirtans.” 20. The man replied, “I have no leisure time, 
because of my concern for our daily necessities.” Eknath 
responded to this, ‘‘ Listen to what I tell you. 21. I will 
repeat to you a sloka from Sri Vishnu sahasranima. 
Commit that much to memory. That will fully satisfy me.” 
22. As he listened to Eknath’s voice a reverential feeling 
filled his mind. Eknath wrote the words on a bit of paper 
and had him read them. 23. And as Eknath gently caressed 
him with his lotus hand his heart was at once changed. 
He took the words of the Sloka to heart, and quickly com- 
mitted them to memory. 24. On the next day he came 
and asked Eknath for another Sloka. After a few days 
had passed he had committed to memory the whole of the 
Sahasrandma. 25. Sri Nath then told him still further, 
that after his bath he should sit in fixed contemplation. 
26. Speaking to no one, and repeating the Sahasrandma. 
14 


210 EKNATH 


The man listened and assented. He now began to do that. 
27. His heart now somewhat changed by all this, he 
began to come to Eknath’s house to see God. At the same 
time he would bow at Eknath’s feet, and then hasten back 
to his home to attend to his business affairs. 28. Many 
days thus passed, when suddenly he was taken with a nine- 
day fever. As his life was passing away the servants of 
Yama came to take him to Hell. 29. His voice was 
already choked and so the relatives gave him the penance. 
And as they were giving him the bath he suddenly remem- 
bered. 30. And began to repeat loudly the Vishnu 
sahasranima. All were greatly pleased and exclaimed, 
“ Blessed is his fortune.” 31. The angels of Yama, as 
they heard the sound of his voice repeating the names of 
Vishnu, ran away. The angels of Vishnu then came and 
paying their respects to him took him with them to Heaven 
(Vaikuntha). 32. If Sri Nath had not taken pity on him, 
he would have gone to Hell. It is for this purpose that 
the saint became an avatar in this Kah Yuga. 33. The 
men and women of the sacred city said to one another, 
“Tt is because this man lived as a neighbour near to the 
Saint, that he received the visible manifestation of God. 
34. Saints are indeed God of Gods. They are 
in no way different from Him. For a short time 
they take the guise of men, and manifest them- 
selves through extraordinary miraculous deeds. 35. Sri 
Eknath has turned many men to bhakti, both, those co-opera- 
ting with him, and those opposing him. He has thereby 
driven heretical beliefs away and increased the glory of the 
Name of God.” 


EKNATH 211 
EKNATH AND GIRJABAI’S CHILDREN. 


36. Girjabai, Eknath’s good wife, at first gave birth 
to a jewel of a daughter. She was named Godibai. 37. 
After her a son was born. He was named Hari. As his 
years increased he was invested with the sacred thread, 
and began studying in a Brahmana school. 38. Atter him 
there was another daughter born, and she was named 
Gangabai. Listen also tu the story relating to whom they 
were given in marriage. 39. There was a gentleman in 
the sacred city of Pratishthana by name of Chintopant. 
Godubai, the eldest daughter, was given in marriage into 
his family. 40. In the Karnatak country, there lived one 
who was an old relative of his. To his son Gangabai was 
betrothed, and soon married. 41. Gangabdi had a son 
by name of Pundaji. He also became a loving worshipper 
of Vishnu. 


EKNATH’S SON, HARI, BECOMES A LEARNED 
PANDIT. 


42. As to Eknath’s son, Hari, he was very intelligent. 
He studied all the sciences. 43. He became proficient in 
the six sdsiras, The highest Brahmans paid him respect, 
and called him Hari Pandit. 44. The Brahmans of dis- 
tinction in Pratishthana continually praised him. ‘His 
intelligence is greater even than that of his father,” they 
said. 45.  “Eknath, becoming a saint, sings his songs 
in the Marathi language. Women and Sudras, listening with 
all their hearts, become wholly absorbed in them. 46. 
Eknath, by singing in the Prakrit has captivated all the 
pious people, and thereby the reading of the Purana in 


919 EKNATH 


the Sanskrit has disappeared. Haripant has resuscitated 
its reading. 47. Gold comes out of the earth, and the 
rich make of it ornaments. So Haripandit, be it known, 
has become a greater man than his father. 48. Or just 
as a lustrous diamond comes out of a rock, so it is true of 
Hari Pandit. Our minds realize this now. 49. Viewed 
from the point of depth a large body of water is called 
an ocean, but its water is salty. The son of the ocean, 
the brilliant moon, sprays nectar. 50. So from Eknath’s 
loins there has come forth this jewel, Haripandit, a Brah- 
man, proficient in the six sdstras, and he is in every way 
acceptable to us.” 51. Thus these distinguished Twice- 
born, using high sounding similes frequently insulted 
Eknath in praising his son. 


HARIPANT’S CONCEIT, ASHAMED OF HIS 
FATHER, GOES TO BENARES. 


52. To begin with, Haripant’s heart was filled with 
the pride of knowledge, and in addition to this there was 
his association with scoffers. Thus his heart was defiled 
with wrong thoughts, and he said to himself, “ How long 
shall I continue to listen to my father?” 53. “I ama 
pandit, proficient in the six Sdstras, but my father reads 
aloud the books in Prakrit. I feel ashamed among the 
distinguished Brahmans of this city.” 54. Thus thinking 
in his mind, he said to himself, “I will abandon at once 
my country, and go and live in the city of Kasi (Benares).” 
And this he decided to do. 55. Haripandit had three 
sons. Two of them he took with him, along with his wife, 
and arrived at Kasi. 


EKNATH 213 
EKNATH’S GRANDSON RAGHOBA. 


56. The youngest son, of beautiful character, by name 
of Raghoba, remained lovingly with Eknath. 57. He did 
not sorrow for his mother and father. He remained with 
his grandparents day and night, lovingly performing his 
little acts, his heart full of happiness. 58. When a kirtan 
was being performed at Eknath’s house, he would take the 
cymbals in his hands, and sing with all his might to the 
astonishment of all the people. 59. At the Gopal festival 
he would act out the scenes with gestures and movements, 
and repeat aloud without hesitating the words sung by 
Eknath. 60. One day, watching for a time when Eknath 
was alone, he humbly placed his forehead on Eknath’s feet 
and thus in his very childhood he received in his ear 
Eknath’s anugraha (mystic formula). 61. Seeing his 
good qualities, shown in these ways, people praised him, 
saying, “ Ife certainly will draw to himself the greatness 
of Sri Nath. 62. He is worthy of taking Eknath’s place. 
His character appears so noble. His father, because of 
his pride of knowledge, devotes himself to a pandit’s pro- 
fession.” 63. Thus the pious discussed the matter among 
themselves. Now as to Hari pandit. He, with all his 
dependents, continued to live at Kasipuri (Benares). 64. 
As Hari pandit was proficient in the six sastras, and had 
the gift of speech, he amassed great wealth. He built a 
residence in the great sacred city, and made Kasi his 
permanent abode. 


EKNATH LONGS FOR HIS SON HARI. 


65. On the other hand in the sacred city of Pratish- 
thana Eknath continued performing regularly the Hari 


214 EKNATH 


kirtans, turning every one to Bhakti, and to the praising of 
his teachings. 66. One day Eknath sat alone and thought 
thus, “In this sacred city all its inhabitants now worship Sri 
Krishna. 67. But my son Hari still takes great pride in 
his scrupulous observance of rites and ceremonies. The 
adage is true of him, “Under the lamp the darkness is 
greatest.” 68. So. I will go to Benares personally, and 
bring him back. It is my fixed purpose to complete with 
this act my life as an avatar. 69. Just as if a hail stone 
should remain solid in water, so I think of my son. I must 
show him some miracle to turn mv son to bhakti. 70. 
Thus determined in mind, Sri Nath went to Kasipuri. 
(Benares.) First he bathed in the Manikarnika, and then 
went to meet Viévésvara (Lord-of-Universe). 71. As 
he was walking along to Haripandit’s house, his son came 
forward to greet him. He made him a namaskar, and 
embraced him with exceeding love. 72. He prepared a 
seat for his father, and seated him upon it. He performed 
all the rites of worship, and his heart was full of happiness, 
73. He enquired of his father all the news. They then 
finished their meal. And because Eknath had made this 
journey to his home, the son was greatly gratified. 74. 
Eknath remained there many days, during which his son 
ministered to him. And people everywhere related the 
story of how formerly the praékrit Bhagavata had been 
written there by Eknath. 75. The mahant, and the 
Sannyasis of the monastery exhorted Hari pandit thus, 
“Conduct vourself without fail according to the injunctions 
of Sri Nath. 76. Know this that he is not a human being, 
but the visible avatar of Vishnu. I also persecuted him 
greatly, but his miraculous deeds are limitless.” 77. To 
this Hari pandit replied, ‘What! Do you mean to say 


EKNATH 215 


that I act outside of his wishes.” And with this remark, 
Haripandit hastened back to his home. 78. After many 
days spent there Sri Nath said aside to his son, “ My declin- 
ing age nears its completion. The time of my departure is 
at hand. 79. The wish of my heart is to spend the rest 
of my life with you. I cannot bear to live without you. 
Mv heart pines for you. 80. You are my good son, my 
only begotten. I have no other close relation. If you 
will come now to Pratishthana, your fame will greatly in- 
crease thereby. 81. You have built here in this sacred 
city a great residence. Leave here your two sons, and take 
to yourself permanently my place at Pratishthana.” 


EKNATH ACCEPTS HART PANDIT’S TWO 
CONDITIONS FOR HIS RETURN. 


82. Hari pandit listened to the words of Sri Nath 
and then replied as follows, “I have one request to make 
of you, my Svdnu, but you will not be willing to grant 
it. 83. Do not eat food prepared by others outside of 
our home, and do not read the Purana in the Prakrit. If 
you will accept these two conditions, I will go back with 
you.” 84. Sri Nath, now filled with joy, made no protest 
whatever against this and replied, “I will conduct myself 
as you may desire.” 85. With this promise his son was 
satisfied, and the two lovingly started to return. 86, 
They journeyed along as it pleased their fancy, and finally 
reached the sacred city of Pratishthana. The people were 
very glad, and went out from the city to greet them. 87. 
Eknath’s returning was to the lotus eyes of the pious like 
the festival of lights. They made namaskdr to him, and 
embraced him joyfully. 


216 EKNATH 


EKNATH’S KIRTANS CEASE AND HARI 
PERFORMS. 


88. Thus Eknath entered his home. The pious 
cherished a hope in their hearts. ‘“ To-day there will be 
a kirtan,” they thought, but Eknath sat still on his accus- 
tomed seat. 89. On the next day Hari pandit read aloud 
the Purana in Sanskrit. On the day he began it many of 
the intelligent people assembled. 90. Sri Nath quietly 
placed his seat and sat lovingly listening, but all the people 
had the desire to listen to words from Eknath’s lips. 91. 
The news now spread in the city that Eknath had aband- 
oned the reading of the prdkrit books, and the Hari kirtans, 
and had brought back Hari pandit to conduct the sirtans. 
And also that he had agreed to eat no longer at another’s 
house. 92. The pious took this very seriously to heart. 
“Our good fortune is broken and lost,” they said, “and 
therefore Eknath has given up reading the Prakrit books, 
and he himself listens to the Purdns in Sanskrit.” 93. 
The women, sudras and those of other castes could not 
understand the Sanskrit, and so while the Purana was 
being read they would get up and leave, abandoning the 
habit of regularly listening. 94. When Sri Nath used to read 
the Purina the widé (house) was more than filled. Five 
or ten had to remain outside regularly. The place simply 
swarmed with men. 95. Eknath understood the inner 
feelings of all, and said to himself, ‘“ There has been a great 
falling off in bhakti”’ There now occurred another event. 
Listen to it, ye pious bhaktas. 


EKNATH 217 


HARIPANT’S CONVERSION THROUGH A 
MIRACLE. 


96. There lived in the sacred city of Pratishthina a 
rich Twice-born. His wife made a vow to the Husband- 
of-Rukmini. 97. “If Thou, O Life-of-the-World, wilt 
grant my request, I will feast a thousand (Brahmans). She 
had no sooner expressed this thought, when the King-of- 
Heaven granted her request. 98. Later through destiny 
because of decds in a former birth, his wealth was scattered. 
Her husband also died, and she became poverty stricken. 
‘99. Of course to care for her body she needed daily food 
and clothing, so by carrying water from house to house 
she earned a few pice each day. 100. In this way this 
Brahman woman of Pratishthama passed her days. She 
was accustomed to come regularly to Nath’s house to listen 
to the Purana. 101. It now happened that she mentioned 
to a wise and pious Brahman the matter nearest to her 
heart. “I made a vow once,” she said, “that I would 
feed a thousand (Brahmans). 102. But through the 
strange vagaries of destiny all my wealth has been scat- 
tered, and on top of this finally came widowhood, and I 
have been unable to earn sufficiently for food and clothing. 
103. By delivering water from house to house I have 
thus far been able to pass my days, but I continually 
remember my debt to God. How can I pay it?” 104, 
Listening to her words, the Twice-born replied, “If one 
gives a meal to one who is absorbed in Brahma, there is 
no limit to the result of that good deed. 105. To feast a 
hundred Brahmans who cannot read the Vedas, and who 
have merely learned to repeat the Gayatri mantra, and to 
feast one Brahman who reads the Vedas, is the same in 


218 EKNATH 


value. 106. To feast a hundred Brahmans whose 
knowledge comprises merely the three Vedic books, 
and to feast one great pandit, who understands 
the Vedanta philosophy, is of the same _ value. 
107. And to feast one who in_ his practice 
of life acts as he talks, at the sight of whom guilt disap- 
pears, has a hundred times more value than to feast a 
Vedantic scholar. 108. To worship one who has his 
passions under control, who uses the means that produce 
the subjugation and the guiding of the organs of sense, 
and always pure in heart, has a hundred times more value 
than the worship of a Vedantic scholar. 109. The good 
deed of feeding at one’s home a hundred of such who 
control their passions, is equal to feasting one Vishnu 
Bhakta, who is without envy and hate. 110. He, who, 
therefore, serves a meal to Eknath, to whom enemy and 
friend are alike, and who appears to be Janardan in visible 
form, feeds a hundred thousand Brahmans.” 111. With 
these loving words of the gentleman, the Brahman widow 
experienced joy of heart, and going to her home began 
collecting materials for a feast. 112. She entertained 
the desire of bringing Eknath, the deedful avatar, to her 
home for a feast, and of serving him with many kinds of 
daintily cooked food. 113. Poor in worldly things was 
this poor Brahman widow. No money or grain was to 
be found in her house. Only by carrying water to the 
houses of people could she daily save up some money. 
114. She began to purchase, and store in her house wheat, 
rice, dal and git. And with her own hands she prepared! 
vade, papad, and valavate. 115. She also collected such 
materials as vegetables, greens and sugar. Then taking 


EKNATH 219 


the gentleman along with her she went to give her invita- 
tion to Fknath. 116. At that moment Hari Pandit was 
reading the Purana, and Sri Nath was listening to him. 
So they sat quietly until the reading was ended. 117. 
When the reading of the Purina was completed, Hariba 
arose and went into the house, and the gentleman, along 
with the Brahman widow made their request to Sri Nath. 
118. Her story was told from beginning to end. “ Her: 
feasting a thousand (Brahmans) still remains to be done. 
If you will so much as eat a mere handful, a hundred: 
thousand Brahmans will have been fed.” 119. | Appre- 
ciating the reason why she felt as she did, Sri Nath 
replied with a request, “ Hariba has just gone into the 
house. Go and ask him.” 120. Thev listened to this request 
and beth went in, but in great fear. Wari Pandit was 
sitting in the house, and they told him their story. 121. 
Hari Pandit became enraged, and turned on the Brahman 
widow with scorn. “Eknath has been on the Great 
Pilgrimage,”’ he said, “and since then has given up taking 
food at another’s house.” 122. As the widow listened to. 
these harsh words, she felt helpless, and coming back to 
Finath, she stood before him with hands palm to palm. 
123. She murmurred, “ Hari Pandit does not approve, 
but my desire is still very great,” and tears of love flowed,. 
and her voice became choked with emotion. 124. Sri 
Nath was greatly troubled, and the widow’s desire was so 
full of love, that he hastened within to his son and said, 
“Fulfil ber wish.’ 125. Hari pandit replied, “ Father, 
keep the promise you gave me. T have followed you back 
to this sacred city, because I know how your heart works.’” 
126. Sri Nath then proposed to his son, “ You prepare: 
the cooked food with your own hands, and then both of 


220 EKNATH 


us will go and dine there. This will meet her desire. 127. 
In this way the promise I gave you will not be broken, and 
at the same time her vow will be fulfilled, the poor, help- 
less, old widow!” 128. Out of respect for his father 
Haripandit consented, and Eknath came outside and 
sat down. The Brahman widow continued to plead. 129. 
“The vade, the papad and the valvate, which I have pre- 
pared with my own hands, and which I have been keeping 
for the last six months will be in vain, after all the pains I 
have taken. 130. You are indeed one who hungers for 
devotion, you a deedful avatdr. Propose O svami, some plan 
whereby my wish may be fulfilled.” 131. Hearing her 
loving pleading Eknath rejoiced in heart and said, “ You 
have with love prepared the valavate. Now fry it with 
your own hand. 132. After I have taken the morsel 
addressed to the five vital airs, then you may serve what- 
ever you have prepared at home.” When she heard Sri 
Nath’s reply she was exceedingly happy. 133. Eknath 
added also, “‘ Whatever you yourself are fond of that will 
seem delicious to me. I have no other craving.” 134. 
Listening to his nectar voice, her heart became full of 
happiness, and returning to her home she began to prepare 
the vegetables. 135. She arose at dawn the next day, 
swept and garnished her house, cleansed and polished the 
vessels, and then bathed by the bank of the Ganga. 136. 
This poor old woman fetched water and placed it in her 
house pulling the door after her. Then she went 
to Eknath’s house. 137. She bowed to Hari pandit, and 
said, “I have collected all the necessary materials, now 
come to my house, and fulfil the desire of my heart.” 138. 
Sri Nath then requested his son, saying “ Go and cook the 
food, I will soon follow.” 139. Hari pandit then went 


EKNATH 221 


with the Brahman widow. He first bathed, and then 
cooked the meal. 140. The widow lovingly brought him 
whatever materials he needed, for whatever he knew how 
to cook. 141. After giving him what he required for his 
purpose she left him to do her own cooking. Now Eknath, 
who understood the widow’s inner feelings, said to himself. 
“She has no one to send and summon me.” 142. So 
just as Sri Hari went to the house of Vidur without being 
called, so on this occasion Eknath arrived at her home un- 
summoned. 143. She gave him water for his bath. Hari- 
pandit then made the offering to fire, and with his own 
hands served two dishes. 144. And as Sri Nath was 
served freshly heated git he called to the Brahman widow 
and said, “ Janardan is the enjoyer of this,” and with this. 
mantra poured water on her hands. 145. Then bring- 
ing the image of Pandurang into his mind, he lovingly 
made an offering to Him. Ekniath then took a sip of water, 
and morsels of food in the name of the vital airs. 146. 
Father and son then sat down to eat, and the old woman 
went back and forth into the kitchen, and brought out the 
food. 147. She brought a tray full of food, and placed it 
before Sri Nath, and served with her own hands light puran- 
polis. 148. With her own hands she served the vade, the 
cakes fried in oil and the nine preparations of milk and su- 
gar. Sri Nath refused nothing. He ate rapidly and eagerly. 
149. Seeing this strange sight she was greatly pleased. The 
same was happening now as when Rama ate the bor fruit 
belonging to the Bhil woman. 150. But when Haripandit 
saw the strange sight he was angry. He rolled his red eyes, 
and gnashed with his teeth. 151. The old woman, how- 
ever, stood before Eknath with hands palm to palm, saying, 
“You have had mercy on a helpless one and fulfilled my: 


222 EKNATH 


desire.” 152. Haripandit, on the other hand, thought to 
himself, “If such was his intention, why did he let my 
hands be scorched (in cooking),” and he was unable to 
control his rage. 153. He stared at the old woman, rolling 
his reddened eyes, savagely biting his lips, and his whole 
body trembling. 154. God is fond of the sweet food of 
bhakti, and the bhakta is closely bound to God through love. 
The desires of each are sweet, but who cares? 155. Anger 
is a mad elephant, whom you would control, but cannot. 
The pandit, however, used his reason as his elephant goad, 
and restrained himself. 156. He thought to himself, “If 
I treat my father with disrespect a great sin will rest on my 
head.” With this consideration in mind, he joined in the 
meal with loving thoughts. 157. Eknath enjoyed to the 
full the juices of happiness. He then drank Ganga 
water and washed hands and mouth. 158. The old 
woman had already provided a special seat for Eknath, and 
had prepared two vidds, tulsi leaves and Vishnu water. 
159. After Eknath had rinsed out his mouth, he said to 
his son, ‘“‘ Take away now at once our two used leaf plates. 
160. This old woman is entirely alone here. She has no 
one with her. Unhelped, it will be very difficult for her 
later to take her bath.” 161. Sri Nath made this request 
and Haripandit paid respect to his father’s suggestion. He 
tucked up his dhotar, and began taking up the leaf plates. 
162. He took up Eknath’s plate and put it on his own 
plate, when behold, to his great amazement he saw another 
plate. 163. He thought to himself, ‘The old 
woman must have brought him another from the kitchen 
with food.” So he took that plate away also. 164. When 
behold, he saw a third leaf plate, and so one after the 
other. His lotus heart, full of astonishment, he excitedly 


EKNATH 223 


took them up. 165. He took up more than a thousand, but 
still they did not end, and Haripandit, now full of repen- 
tance, made a sashtaénga namaskdr to Eknath. 166. He 
stood before him with hands palm to palm. Tears rushed 
to his lotus eyes, and the eight emotions filled him. 167. 
He exclaimed, “Victory, Victory to Thee, Thou Eternal be- 
ing, Unmanifested, Void-of-darkness, Imperishable, deedful 
avaidr, Lord-of-all, King-of-Heaven, Guru-of-the-World. 
168. I, a sinner, was ignorant of your greatness. I have 
greatly transgressed. You are a visible Vishnu avafar. 
This conviction has now permeated my soul. 169. Cease 
your miraculous deeds now, and have mercy upon me, 
father.” Thus repenting in heart, he placed his head at 
Eknath's feet. 170. Sri Nath, in great pity comforted 
his son, caressing him with his hand. ‘You have been put 
to much trouble darling,” he said, “but there will be no 
more leaf-plates to be takcn up.” 171. With this assu- 
rance of Eknath’s Haripandit removed all the plates. He 
had taken up and collected a thousand plates. He then 
said to the Brahman widow. 172. “ Your good fortune 
is extraordinary. In inviting Sri Nath you have truly fed 
a hundred thousand Brahmans. I am convinced of this 
now by experience to the full.” 173. The eight emotions 
now crowded the old woman’s heart. She reverently made 
her namaskér to Eknath. “ You have had pity on me, a 
helpless one,” she cried, “and have saved me.” 174. 
Haripandit said to his father, ‘““I have become proficient in 
the six sdstras. On account of my pride of that knowledge 
I did not recognize your greatness. 175. Now, O Svami, 
wherever thy purpose is a pure one, there eat, and also 
read aloud the praékrit books.” 176. Thus conversing, the 
two returned to their home, and the old woman took the 


924 EKNATH 


food left on Ekmnath’s plate and sat down ta 
eat. 177. Blessed, Blessed was her bhakti, where 
Eknath ate and was satisfied. It is what Eknath 
left on his plate that Mahipati herewith lovingly 
Serves (to you listeners). 178. Svasti. This 
book is the Sri Bhaktalilamrita. By merely listening to 
it one’s desires are fulfilled. Listen then, ye, pious, loving 
bhakias. This is the twenty-third delightful chapter. 
Chapter 23, verses 178. 


CHAPTER 24. 
BHAKTALILAMRITA. 
Mahipati’s Invocation. 
Obeisance to Sri Ganesa. 


1. Victory to Thee Lilavigrahi, Noblest-being, Sagus 
being, dark-complexioned-one, Glorious-Guru-of-the- 
World, Atmarama. Thy greatness is unknowable. 2. In 
the family of Bhanudas at Pratishthana Thou didst become 
an avatdr. Thou didst manifest Thyself in many acts and 
show miracles to the wicked. 3. Thou Thyself didst be- 
come a bhakia of God, and wonderfully magnified Thine 
own name. Both by the hatred of some, and by the devo- 
tion of others, Thou hast saved many. 4. O King-of- 
Heaven, Thy incomparable miraculous acts cannot be 
described, and where the Serpent’s tongue split in its effort 
to describe Thee, where am I a mere mosquito. 5. Prais- 
ing Thee with uncouth words, somehow or other, I write 
them in this book. Accept them in Thy mercy, and in 
Thy supreme pity. 6. I speak of my gift of speech, but 


EKNATH 225 


this is my transgression. O Pandharinath, Thou art the 
true mover of the mind. No one else has that power. 7. 
Tf my mind is the least disturbed, I cannot think of a single 
word, but Thou dost give me remembrance, and therefore 
this length to this book. 8. Using me as a pretext, O 
glorious-Lord, Thou dost publish Thine own good fame. 
This conviction has impressed my mind, I have no other 
thought. 9. Among’ all versifiers I am the one and only 
ignorant one, and every one knows this. But Thou 
Pandurang dost perform strange thing. 10. When an 
infant speaks with a lisping tongue its mother regards it 
happily. So Thou, giver of absorption into Brahma, com- 
fort and ¢lenify me. 


EKNATH RESUMES HIS KIRTANS. 


11. In the last chapter was the extraordinary story, 
how the knowledge-proud Haripandit began removing Sri 
Nath’s leaf-plates, until more than a thousand were 
removed. 12. How he became supremcly ashamed, how 
perspiration covered his body and how becoming humble, 
he made Eknath a sdshtang namaskér. 13. With hands 
palm to palm he pleaded with Eknath, “ You are an avatér 
of Vishnu in visible form. Wherever you have a purpose, 
that is pure, go there and dine, O Svadmi. 14. And the 
prakrit books, which you have yourself written, and have 
read aloud, continue to read them each day.” And with 
this he fell at Eknath’s feet. 15. While his son was thus 
speaking to him, Eknath reached his home. Aside from 
these two, no third person knew of the above events. 16. 
In the meantime the Brahman widow ate her meal in her 


kitchen, and then fastening together the thousand and more 
15 


996 EKNATH 


used leaf-plates, she placed them on her head, and came 
to the bank of the Ganga. 17. And there to the people 
of Pratishthana she related the events. With her own 
hands she committed the leaf-plates to the flowing stream 
of the Gangd. 18. And the pious bhaktas, to whose 
hearts came great joy, said to themselves “ Now Eknath 
will give readings of the Purana, and we shall listen to his 
kirtans to our heart’s content. 19. Thus people spoke to 
one another, and the story spread in the city. Haripandit 
changed to one of reverent spirit, became a bhakta of his 
father’s 20. And with fixed attention would sit listening 
to the reading of the Purana from the lips of Sri Nath. 
Many pious people now gathered to listen to the Hari 
kirtans. 21. With shouts of “ Victory, Victory” the 
assembled bhaktas clapped their hands and rejoiced. Tears 
filled Hariba’s lotus eyes. 22. The loud noise of the 
cymbals, the vind, and drum, came in reverberating waves. 
Especially did they proclaim the greatness of God’s name. 
The mere listening to His names made their minds happy. 
23. Haripandit thought in his heart, “ When the former 
events happened in Paithan, I was in the ignorance of 
childhood, but the Svdmi has today had pity on me. 24. 
I did not recognize Sri Nath’s great glory. I was greatly 
misled by my pride of knowledge. I deserted this Guru- 
of-the-world and went to live in Kasi. 25. As in the 
Dvaparayuga the bhakia Arjuna was accustomed to regard 
Sri Krishna as a close relative, but after he had manifested 
himself in the form of the universe, he seemed to him to 
be the soul of the universe.” 26. So in fact did it happen 
to Hariba. He ‘now sat attentively at the kirtans, and 
understanding Eknath’s wishes served him for his own 
good. 


EKNATH 237 


EKNATH CARES FOR AN IDIOT BOY, GAVABA. 


27. There are other stories, delightful and deeply 
suggestive. Listen reverently to them, ye pious folk. On 
the bank of the Ganga there was a very humble village. 
In it there was a Brahman. 28. His occupation was that 
of town-clerk, but he was very poor in every respect. He 
was, however, father to a large number of children, but 
with no food for them to eat. 29. The last to be born 
was a boy, an idiot, and dumb. The women called 
him Gavaba. But listen to his story. 30. Gradually he 
grew to be a big boy, and was always playing with little 
boys. He became eight years of age and still could not 
speak distinctly. 31. His father regarded him as of no 
account, but the ceremony of the sacred thread, however, 
was performed. The boy could not even say, “Keéava 
Narayan,” much less repeat the Gayatri mantra. 32. The 
father said, “ This is indeed destiny, from deeds laid up in 
a former birth, that my last son should be dumb. He eats 
a stomach full, but speaks not a word. 33. I must have 
in my possession ten million sins, as a consequence of which 
I have had born to me this demon. Who will in the end 
care for him?” Thus the father and mother were troubled 
about him. 34. Because of sin in a former birth a 
foolish son is born. How can he give happiness to 
his parents? He is a giver of pain. 35. It happened 
that on a certain day the Brahman celebrated a festival at 
his home. The boy was given some puranpoli, of which 
he ate a stomach full. 36. On the next day, at the same 
time of day Gavaji asked his mother for some more puran- 
poli, She had laid some stale puranpoli aside. She 
brought it out and gave it to him. 37. After that night 


228 EKNATH 


had passed, Gavaji would not eat the usual bread and greens. 
With his hand he made a sign that said, “ Give me some 
more puranpoh.” 38, The mother became angry, and 
slapped her son. “ You wretch,” she cried, “Is this why 
you have been born, to ask for dainty food?” 39. Gavaji 
cried and rolled on the ground. He then got up and again 
running to his mother with signs asked for puranpolt. 40. 
His mother now felt pity for him, “ What shall I do with 
this craving of his”, she thought. Then taking him by the 
hand she led him quickly to Paithan. 41. She went to 
Eknith’s house, and reverently made samaskér to the 
Svami. She placed Gavaji at his feet, and said, “ Merciful 
One, accept him. 42. He is nine years old, as you see, 
but he cannot speak one single word. Yet he asks for 
dainty food. What am I to do? 43. We are weak and 
helpless Brahmans. We live in a humble village, but here 
with you, there daily takes place a feast where Brahmans 
eat dainty food. 44. My ears have heard of your com- 
passion, and so I have brought him here.” Sri Nath 
replied with these nectar words, “ Let him remain here in 
my home.” 45. Eknath then spoke to Girjabai, and 
asked her to care regularly for the boy with feelings of 
love. 46. In accordance with Sri Nath’s request she 
gave Gavaji water to bathe with, a serving dish, and seated 
him to eat. 47. Gavaji’s mother was now filled with joy. 
She took her leave of Eknath and hastened back to her 
village. 48. She told her husband that she had come 
back from committing her dumb boy to Eknath’s keeping. 
“ Now let us put aside feelings of affection for him, and 
empty love. 49. It was evidently well with hin in a 
former birth, and therefore he has now found an 
excellent home.” Thus father and mother felt 


EKNATH 229 


great satisfaction. 50. Now as to Gavaji, Eknath, 
with his own hands supplied him with clothes. He 
ate both the morning and evening meals, and was always 
playing with other boys. 51. He no longer remembered 
his parents. His heart was full of happiness here. He 
received daintily cooked food, such as he had not received 
before, and his physical frame became well nourished. 52. 
It happened that one day Eknath was sitting alone in the 
God-room. Eknath called Gavaji to him there, and tried 
to have him repeat a formula with the name of Rama. 53. 
But that dumb boy was very stupid and could not repeat 
a single syllable. Eknath then questioned him. “ What 
is my name?” 54. Suddenly the power of speech develo- 
ped. “ Eknath,” he cried. Then Eknath, in his kindness, 
gave him that name as a formula for continual repeating. 
55. He took a cord and with his hands tied many {nots 
in it, saying to the boy “I want you to constantly repeat 
my name on this rosary.” 56. From that time Gavaji 
met his dear sadguru. He became deeply interested. 
He forgot to play, and enjoyed the happiness that comes 
from love. 57. He would not repeat any other word. 
To all others he was dumb, but affection for Eknith touched 
the depths of his heart. 58. He conquered his craving 
for sweet things. Taking but little food, day and night 
he spent in worship. 59. When the people of the town 
saw the manner of his life, they were amazed, and said, 
“No sooner did he experience Eknath’s compassion than 
his conduct changed. 60.  Giavayji's father and mother 
once came to visit him, but he showed no love or affection 
for them. He would not even look at them. 


230 EKNATH 


GOD RAM TELLS EKNATH TO COMPOSE 
A PRAKRIT RAMAYANA. 


61. After some days passed in this way a notable 
event took place. Eknath was in deep contemplation in 
his God-room. 62. Sri Rama revealed himself there to 
him, and taking Eknath by the hand awoke him. As 
Eknath opened his eyes he beheld the Husband-of-Janaki. 
63. Eknath overflowed with the eight emotions. With 
love he embraced his feet. Raghupati drew Eknath to 
his heart in his embrace, full of love. 64. Raghunandana 
then gave this command, “ Compose with your own lips 
a Prakrit commentary on the Ramayana by Sri Valmiki.” 
65. Thus commanded by the Lord-of-Ayodhya, Eknath 
made this answer, “My mind cannot comprehend the 
seven chapters that describe your good fame. 66. And 
though I attempted it in my uncouth words, yet there is 
little left of the limit of my life. I doubt in my mind 
whether the book can be completed. 67. Raghunandana 
replied to this, ‘‘ Perform your devotions and your regular 
religious duties moderately and to a less extent, and give 
all your time to the composing of the Ramayana. 68. 
‘Your noble emotions and love are wonderful. I am truly 
fond of your writings, and so I wish you to name the book 
the Bhavartha Ramayana. 69. I, the Dark- 
complexioned one, will abide in your heart, and 
at all times give you remembrance. The Kaliyuga 
and Death are under your sway; do not be in 
the least troubled.” 70. Thus spoke Raghunandana, 
and Eknath worshipping his feet said, “ Your command 
is my authority. I can plan nothing otherwise.” 71. 


EKNATH 231 


Thus much spoke the Lord-of-Ayodhya, and at once be- 
came invisible, or rather Ramchandra took up his abode 
jn Eknath’s heart. 


EKNATH COMPOSES THE BHAVARTHA 
RAMAYANA. 


72. After this Eknath chose a very auspicious day 
and began the Ramayana in Prakrit. Because of this the 
loving pious bhakias felt great joy. 73. Each day they 
listened to as much of the book as he composed. From it 
sprang sweetness, sweeter than nectar. As men listened 
to it they lost all consciousness of body. 74. On the 
Slokas of the book composed by Valmiki, Eknath wrote a 
Maharashtra commentary. As men listened to it they 
became absorbed in contemplation, and the dull and stupid 
became full of love. 75. Eknath began with the 
Balakanda, and completed it. He then began the 
Ayodhyakanda, and brought that also to completion. 76. 
After this the Aranyakanda where Raghunandan went in- 
to the forest. Then he completed the whole chapter of the 
Kishkindhakanda. 77. Then came the Sundarakdnda, 
where Hanumant performed wonderful deeds accomplish- 
ing the search for Sita, and in which Raghupati goes to 
Lanka. 78. Then Eknath began the Yuddhakanda and 
himself completed forty-four chapters of it. But the time 
of his departure was now near at hand. 79. And when 
the pious heard Eknath say, “The time of my departure is 
now truly near at hand,” they became greatly troubled. 
80. They said “We hoped that from the Svami’s own 
lips the whole of the RamA4yana would be completed. He 


233 EKNATH 


has not yet fully completed the Yuddhakinda. 81. The 
whole of the Uttarakanda yet remains to be done. Vhere- 
fore we are very anxious. First bring the book to full 
completion and then name the time of your departure.” 
82. To this plea of the good bhaktas Sri Nath made a 
reply, “ If Death has appointed his abode in any particular 
body, he cannot be avoided.” 83. The hearers returned 
answer, “ When Krishnadas Lolya came supplicating you, 
you caused him to escape Death for eleven days, and let 
him finish the whole of the Yuddhakanda. 84. So now 
stop Death, and let us see the joyous occasion of the com- 
pletion of the book. As we shall listen to the Svami's 
loving poetic skill we shall all rejoice.” 85. Sri Nath 
replied, “ Listen to my words. To punish Death so as to 
bring my poetry to completion seems to me unworthy. 


EKNATH ASSIGNS GAVAJI THE TASK OF 
FINISHING THE RAMAYANA. 


86.  Géavji will now bring the Yuddhakinda to its 
completion, and also the Uttarakinda. There is no other 
way.” 87. As Sri Nath made this statement the people 
were astonished, ‘‘ What Gavaji,” they cried,” that lifelong 
mute, who speaks to no one! 88. How can he compose 
the Ramayana! This seems untrue to us.’ But Sri 
Nath called Gavaji to him and bestowed his grace upon 
him. 89. He lovingly placed his hand on Gavaji’s head, 
and gave him his pen, saying, “May the poetic inspiration 
in-me pass to you.” 90. With this boon of Eknath’s grace 
Gavji’s mind immediately expanded and taking the paper 
in his hand began writing in the book. 91. His composi- 
tion was exactly like that of Eknath’s ovis. When one 


EKNATH 233 


chapter was finished the pious people listened to it. 92. 
They remarked, “ Through the kindness of Eknath this 
mute has become gifted with the power of speech. His 
language is also exceedingly sweet. He will complete the 
whole book. 93. In the presence of Eknath he wrote 
one chapter. The remainder of the book he carried to 
full completion hater. 


EKNATH ANNOUNCES HIS DEPARTURE 
FROM THIS LIFE. 


94. In the month of Phalgun, on the night of the 
fifth day of the dark fortnight, Sri Nath performed a 
kirtan. After distributing sweetmeats, he said, “Listen 
to my request. 95. To-morrow I am to depart. All of 
you, after bathing come as far as the Ganga to see me off. 
And then return to your homes. 96. As the pious folk 
heard this request of Eknath’s they became very sorrowful, 
and said, “The life of this avatér now ends,” and their 
hearts were in great distress. 97. On the next day, early 
in the morning, all his circle of friends gathered in his 
wddd. Sri Nath’s relatives were in a fainting conditions. 
98. When the pious people saw this state of affairs they 
became exceeding sorrowful. Their eyes filled with tears, 
as they looked at Sri Nath. 99. The revilers, the per- 
verse, and the evil minded, however, made adverse remarks. 
They said, “He exhibited many wonderful acts, but the 
path of death is the same for him as for others. 100. He 
has shown in the past many miracles, but now Death has 
him in his mighty grasp. At the end Eknath’s body will 
be carried along on the shoulders of men.” 101. As the 


234 EKNATH 


pious folk heard these remarks of the revilers, they were 
sad, but they recalled to mind the fame of Ekniath’s deeds. 
102. They said, “In order to save the world you, Eknath, 
became an avoter with human qualities. We wish that 
your death could be different from that of ordinary men.” 
103. When Sri Nath heard this desire of the pious, he 
became conscious and sat up, like one awakened out of 
sleep. 104. At this sight all clapped their hands with 
shouts of, “Victory, Victory.” The pious folk then 
shouted the name of Vitthal and rejoiced. 105. Eknath 
then asked Uddhava to bring water quickly for his bath, 
After bathing with the repetition of mantras, he with his 
own hands put on clean clothes. 106. Then taking his 
seat he made the twelve marks with clay, and lovingly 
placed the tulsi garland around his neck. 107. 
He then repeated the names of Janardan, and pronounced 
the tdraka mantra. He meditated, and then loudly repeated 
the names of Vitthal. 108. [Eknath took his vind on his 
shoulder, and praising the attributes of Sri Hari, and mak- 
ing namaskar to Pandurang, he held his form in his mind. 


EKNATH GOES INTO THE RIVER AND ENDS 
HIS LIFE. 


109. Loudly repeating God’s names he left his wada. 
The people lovingly worshipped him. “ Blessed and holy 
is this earth,” they cried. 110. Every step of the way 
men and women worshipped him, offering such things as 
fragrant powders, flowers and tulsi garlands. They sang 
various invocatory songs. 111. As they impressed Sri 
Nath’s form on their minds, tears came to their eyes. 


EKNATH 235 


Thinking that they would never see him again, great num- 
bers of people came from afar. 112. There was a great 
collection of banners and flags. Every now and then there 
was the shouting of God’s names. The path became 
densely crowded. The dome of heaven was filled to over- 
flowing with sounds. 113. People from the little hamlets 
outside the city came with their specially chosen forms of 
procession. Before and behind Eknath there was a dense 
crowd, so that the sight of him was obstructed. 114. All 
marched in procession to a place in the Ganga called 
Lakshmitirtha. The gods now came riding on their sky 
automobiles, and showered flowers on Eknath. 115. In- 
numerable water lilies fell to the ground. These the 
people saw with their own eyes and clapped their hands 
shouting the names of Hari. 116. Blessed were the 
people of that time, who saw that wondrous scene. The 
Gods also unseen by men, viewed the scene. 117. As the 
crowd reached the sand bed of the Ganga Sri Nath told 
all the people to quiet their minds, and listen to the attri- 
butes of Hari. 118. Listening to the request of Sri Nath, 
all felt great joy. All the men and women then seated 
themselves, looking intently at the form before them. 


EKNATH’S FINAL MESSAGE. 


119. With loud repeating of Vitthal’s names the 
Hari kirtan was commenced, Eknath wondrously descri- 
bed the greatness of bhakti, and the power of repeating 
God’s names. 120. “In this Kaliyuga there is no means 
of salvation other than that of His Name. Be kind to 
every creature. Keep this truth in your hearts. 121. I 
had to come here into this world of mortals for your good. 


236 EKNATH 


Otherwise I am above Maya, the absolutely perfect, pure 
spirit.” 122. As they were listening to Eknath’s kirton, 
a good man put this question to him. ‘You, Svami, will 
have to become an avatar again sometime in the future, 
will you not? 123. Such is the hope of all. O image-of- 
compassion, tell this.” Sri Nath listened to this ques- 
tion and replied in an abhang verse. 124. I will quote 
this in this book. Reverently listen ye, wise bhaktas, to 
these gracious words, to hear which bestows enlightenment 
on the soul. 


1. ‘When the path of righteousness is destroyed, and 
unrighteousness has lifted up its head, then ,I must return 
to this worldly existence. 2. Many, many kinds of be- 
liefs, heresies, and scrupulous observance of rites, and cer- 
emonies have risen in revolt, their faces must be smashed 
by the worship of Hari. 3. Whatever was Hari's deedful 
life that is also mine independently. But God and his 
bhakta are united. There is no difference between them. 
4, Whatever avatar Hari assumes that I also assume. 
T proclaim aloud Hari’s names, for the salvation of the 
world. 5. That in all creatures there may be the thought 
of God and that the blessing of Dharma may increase, is 
the real object of Bhakt. 6. It is the injunction of the 
Vedas that toward all creatures one should preserve pity 
and friendliness. It is this indeed that I came to do. 7. 
God when assuming a deedful body is called the ever-free. 
Am T indeed different from that? 8. Krishna she»wed 
Arjuna Himself in the form of the universe. One should 
never therefore so much as speak of various differences. 
9. The story of his taking away the calves. Here the 
calves and herdsmen were different, but He Himself became 


EKNATH 237 


the musical instrument, the shoes and the waist cord. 10. 
Ekajanardan says, “I regard Govinda in the form of the 
Universe. He who considers there is a difference is more 
contemptible than the most contemtible.” 


125. This abhang of Sri Nath, containing his graci- 
ous message on the occasion of his departure, Uddhava, 
taking paper in his hand, wrote it down at that very time. 
126. Then under Vitthal’s name there was the shouting of 
the praise of Hari, and all clapped their hands. Invocatory 
hymns were sung. Listen to them all of you. 


1. As one looks at men one sees Janardan. Where 
there are differences there appears identity. Where there 
are many there appears perfect unity. Where the 
mind and intellect are insufficient to describe, how 
can there be such a thing as attributes and non- 
attributes? Chorus. Victory to God, Victory, Victory 
to Janardan. This Invocatory Hymn we sing of 
wonderful meaning. 2. This drati has been made 
brilliant by the light of the lights. As one looks at it, the 
state of difference, and the consciousness of body no longer 
remains. 3. When that light is lighted one experiences 
the fact that there is no state of difference. When the 
body is offered to body, quickly the difference of Jiva and 
Siva vanishes. 4. No back and no front, all one dense 
mass. The one who sees is the one over all. Neither 
desired nor undesired, neither secret nor disclosed. The 
I fills all space. 5. Always seen but never comprehended 
by the mind. Whatever is seen is not kown by the sight. 
Non-existence has swallowed existence. This drati is a 
Strange one, O Ekajanardana. 


238 EKNATH 


EKNATH’S DEATH. 


127. This invocation Sri Nath sang with his own 
voice. He loudly repeated the names of God, and made a 
namaskar, prostrating himself on the ground. 128. After 
Sri Nath had thus prostrated himself he made a request 
of the people with his hands palm to palm. “Let the 
kindly thought of you all rest upon me,” he said to them, 
and again bowed low to them. 129. As they thus listened 
to his voice tears came to their eyes, and crying, “ Victory, 
Victory to Nath, Victory to Eknath,” they made him a 
namaskar. 130. Eknath then waded into the water of 
the Ganga. When the water reached his navel he stood 
still. 131. He caused all to repeat aloud the names of 
Hari, during which his soul left its abode, the Gods show- 
ering flowers upon him. 132. All the people who had 
come to see the sight now mourned in their love. They 
then committed his body to the fire, according to the com- 
mon practic. 133. After seeing the departure of 
Eknath the people returned to their homes. All were on 
that occasion agitated by their sorrow. 


THE MIRACULOUS ASVATTHA TREE 
SPRINGS FROM HIS ASHES. 


134. On the next day along with his son they came 
to collect Eknath’s ashes, when lo, they saw the Krishna 
tulst plant sprouting out of the ashes, and also a young 
asvattha tree. 135. When the people saw its tender and 
brilliant green leaves they rejoiced and cried out “ He has 
indeed manifested himself in the form of the asvattha tree. 
Sri Nath has already become an avatdr in advance. 136. 


EKNATH 239 


Then keeping the asvattha tree in the centre they built a 
stone platform around it, and in the shrine they installed 
Sri Nath’s paduka. To this day the place fulfils one’s 
desires, 137. Many men and women, inhabitants of the 
sacred city, continually serve at that place, and the compas- 
sionate Sri Nath fulfils the desires of their hearts. 138. 
According to the faith of each one he obtains from the 
God-of-Gods. On the shashthi there takes place at 
Paithan a festival of great grandeur. 139. Sri Eknath 
gives a visible manifestation of himself in the form of the 
asvattha tree. Many orther wonderful things take place 
there. Listen to them, ye pious bhaktas. 140. Lest the 
stone platform should be broken the afvattha tree remains 
just as small as it has always been. Even Brahmadeva 
and the other Gods cannot know fully the miraculous deeds 
of Sri Nath. 141. Blessed are the inhabitants of the 
sacred city, who can always see this manifestation of Sri 
Nath. Innumerable sinners have been saved by the sight 
of his paduka (sculptured foot prints.) 142. Those who 
hear ot the death of Eknath will have no agony at their 
death. Giving them happiness the King-of-Heaven takes 
them to his abode. 


143. I have written this book in uncouth language but 
by the command of Sri Pandurang. Otherwise, I, a sinful 
stupid man, could never have completed the story of the 
saints. 144. In the next chapter is a pleasant story of 
the Vaishnava bhakta Tukdram. His story is exceedingly 
long, but listen all of you to it. 145. He, who is merciful 
to the poor, the Husband-of-Rukmini, Brother-of-the-help- 


240 EKNATH 


less, Ocean-of-mercy, He has given me, Mahipati, assu- 
rance; and causes me to write of these visible manifesta- 
tions of Himself. 146. This book is the Sri Bhaktalila- 
mrita. By merely listening to it one’s desires are fulfilled 
Listen then, ye pious loving Bhaktas. This is the twenty- 
fourth delightful chapter. Chapter 24, verses 146. 


THE WRITINGS OF EKNATH. 


In his Maharashtra Sadrasvata (History of Marathi 
Literature) first Edition page 553 Mr. V. L. Bhave gives 
a long list of works ascribed to Eknath. Some of those 
listed as separate works are, however, but chapters or por- 
tions of his works under another title. I am acquainted 
with but ten of his works, as follows :— 


Chatusloki Bhagavata. 
Abhangs. 
Hastamalaka. 
Sukashtaka. 
Svatmasukha. 
Anandalahari. 
Anubhavananda or. 
Anandanubhava. 
Rukmini Svayamvara. 
Bhagavata. 
Bhavartha Ramayana. 


Of the remaining in Mr. Bhave’s list which are chap- 
ters or portions of the above. 


EKNATH 241 


Bhikshugita is the 23rd chapter of the Eknathi 
Bhagavata. The following are titles of abhangs to be 
found in the collection of his Abhangs. 


Ekadasi Mahatmya. 
Krishnadanavrata. 
Gitamahatmya. 
Govardhanoddharana. 
Chiranjivapada. 

Pralhad Charitra. 
Bharud. 

Sitimandodari Samvada. 
Svatmabodh. 

Pade. 


The following in his list I have no knowledge of; 
Ashtavakra. 
Kaliyamardana. 
Kausalya Svayamvara. 
Gajendramoksha. 
Ganeshavilisa. 
Gitarthasara. 
Guhyapanchaka, 
Namasara. 
Mudravilasa. 
Vedantanirupana. 


The following brief summaries of ten of his works 


will, I trust, be of suggestive value to the student of 
Eknath. 
16 


242 EKNATH 


THE WRITINGS OF EKNATH. 
CHATUSLOKI BHAGAVATA 


The ChatuSloki Bhagavata is a commentary on the 
Sanskrit text of the Bhagavata Purana the ninth chapter of 
the second skandha, consisting of 44 verses in the original 
text, but appearing as 45 in the commentary. 


Near the close of the work Eknath adds an interesting 
historical note, explaining why he was led to its composi- 
tion, and when this took place (verses 1016-1032). 
“ Listen attentively. I will tell you how I came in posses- 
sion of the Chatusloki Bhagavata, and the reason for my 
producing this commentary. On the Godavari river, on its 
north bank, four yojanas away, is Mount Chandragiri. 
Sri Janardan in his pilgrimage naturally went there. It 
is a very long climb to the top of Mount Chandragiri, but 
at its base is the town of Chandravati. A distinguished 
Brahman named Chandra (Chandrabhat) lived here, and 
it happened that we put up at his house. He was in the 
habit of expounding the Chatusloki Bhagavata and praised 
it highly. Janardan was greatly pleased with Chandra- 
bhat’s exposition, and with loud exclamations of pleasure 
he told me to put the mystic teachings of the book into the 
common language of the people (the Marathi), My 
education was mediocre. I did not know Sanskrit, its 
words, nor their meanings, but, because of the supremacy 
of his strict command I was inspired to carry out his wish.” 
After citing examples of the wonders accomplished by 
obedience to the commands of a guru, and his own intense 
absorption in the work of composing the commentary, 
he ends by saying, “Thus this Chatusloki Bhagavata, 


EKNATH 243 


compounded of knowledge, by the power, might and glory 
of my guru's command ‘has been rendered in a Prakrit 
version,” 


This historical note should be compared with the tradi- 
tional account of the meeting of Eknath and Janardan with 
Chandrabhat, the reasons leading to Eknath’s writing the 
commentary on the Chatusloki Bhagavata in Marathi. 
(Bhaktalilamrita 14,123-176, and KeSavasvami’s Eknath 
charitra 5,1-57.. A comparison of texts gives no suggestion 
that Kesava Svami followed by Mahipati in the Bhaktalila- 
mrita, obtained his information about Chandrabhat and the 
writing of the commentary on the Chatusloki Bhagavata, 
from this work of Eknath’s. The fact that this is an in- 
dependant historical account, and that Kasava’s and Mahi- 
pati’s Bhaktalilamrita accounts agree with it, naturally 
leads one to stronger confidence in KeSava’s and the 
Bhaktalilamrita account, as truer to fact than the Bhakta- 
vijaya account, and the unknown source from which 
Mahipati obtained it. 


Contents of the Chatusloki Bhagavata. As Eknath’s 
work is a commentary of the Sanskrit text of the ninth 
chapter of the second skandha of the Bhagavata Purina, 
he naturally follows the contents of the original text. It 
is a philosophic work, and strictly Vedantic in all its con- 
ceptions. But while following the text in his explanations, 
he goes outside of the text in constantly emphasizing 
several points to which he seems to ascribe great 
importance. 


1. The need of a guru, without whom the mysteries 
of true knowledge cannot be known. The characteristics 


944 EKNATH 


of a true guru, a sadguru, and a true disciple are 
emphasized. 

2. The importance of gurusevd, or the faithful service 
to be rendered to a guru is emphaszed. A sadguru is really 
God manifest in human flesh, and reverence, obedience, 
and service should be rendered to him. 


3. As fundamental to all benefits from Knowledge, 
religious acts, and devotion to God (bhakti) there must be 
a pure and sincere ethical life. There can be no such 
thing as true fafa (the outward religious life,) or true 
bhakti (the inner worship of the heart) without purity of 
life and heart. To this practical, ethical side Eknath, again 
and again, calls attention with emphasis. 


4. While Eknath is willing to concede the Way of 
Knowledge (dnyanamarga,) the Way of Works (karma- 
madrga), as ways of salvation (mukti); they are, however, 
difficult ways for the ordinary man. In their very success 
there is the danger of pride. The Way of Bhakti, has no 
such danger. Sincerity is needed, after that God himself 
comes to the rescue of the feeble and the sinful and saves 
them. 


From verse 390 God Himself is represented as 
speaking and explaining the fundamentals of the Vedantic 
philosophy and the ways of Salvation, Knowledge, Works 
and Bhakti, in all of which ethical purity is represented 
as essential. 


THE ABHANGS OF EKNATH. 


There are two easily available collections of the 
abhangs of Eknath, one the Tukaérim Tatya edition of 


EKNATH 245 


1903, containing 2754 abhangs, including 47 by Bhanudas; 
another, and a more recent edition by Tryambak Hari 
Avate in 1924, and consisting of 4001 abhangs. All my 
references to the Abhangs of Eknath will be from this 
Avate’s edition. These two collections differ in their 
arrangement of the abhangs, as well as in their number. 
1 um unaware as to the original manuscripts on which they 
be based. There are questions of textual criticism, and 
doubts connected with the authorship of some of the 
ubhangs. A discussion of this subject belongs however, to 
another place. 


Contents of the 4001 abhangs. 


These abhavigs cover a great variety of subjects, mostly 
of course, of a strictly religious nature, but others are 
especially suited for use in worship, at festivals, and even 
games. A detailed analysis would be out of place here. 
In general, however, they are not philosophic, but have to 
do with the practical religious life, of relationship to God 
and man. 


God, under whatever name, or manifestation, is a 
being very near to man. He is frequently addressed as, 


“Father and Mother.” “His mercy is to all creatures.” 
“He does not regard caste.” “To him high and low are 


the same.” “ All castes can be saved.” 


“In man’s relation to God he must be free from hypo- 
crisy.” “He must have true love for Gad.” “Without love 
no one can meet with God.” “ Why go on pilgrimages to 
sacred places? One’s mind should first be pure. Can one’s 
mind be made pure by going to sacred places? Retire 
rather to some quiet spot. If the heart is pure, God is 


246 EKNATH 


there in your own home. You can see Him where you are 
sitting, if your trust is in Him.” 


The need of a sadguru is, of course, frequently empha- 
sized. To Eknath the human guru, was a manifestation 
of God, “Guru is the Supreme Brahma.” “Salvation 
comes through the favor of the Sadguru, all sins are 
destroyed through him.” “In this life happiness is the 
gift of the Sadguru. O my soul, put all your trust in 
Him.” 


The abhanigs contain frequent references to the saints 
of Maharashtra, from Dnyanesvar to his own saintly 
guru, Janardan. In his various lists 59 names appear, in- 
cluding a few outside of Maharashtra, such as Kabir and 
Rohidas. Connected with some are extended historical 
notes, such as those on Dnyanesvar and Namdev. These 
notes show that many of the traditional stories recorded 
by later authors, such as Mahipati and others, existed at 
the time of Eknath, and therefore have much historical 
value. 


These abhangs of Eknath, are well worth careful study, 
for they pertain to the many sides of man’s relationship 
toward God and man, and if they can be trusted as really 
the work of Eknath, they are through the light of his own 
personal life and character. 


HASTAMALAKA. 


The Hastamalaka is a philosophic work consisting of 
674 verses. It is in the nature of a commentary on four- 
teen Slokas. On the Sanskrit original see Indian Antiquary 


EKNATH 247 


Vol. IX page 25, article by Professor E. B. Cowell M.A., 
Cambridge. 


The story underlying the Sanskrit text and its com- 
mentary is that to a certain Brahman there was born a 
son (32). The child exhibited unusual characteristics. 
It did not cry when born. So inactive did it appear that 
the neighbours, who gathered to see it, remarked, “ One 
would call it a corpse, were it not for the signs of life.” 
If it fell out of its cradle it would not cry, nor when bitten 
by ants. It refused to take nourishment from its mother. 
Up to eight years of age the boy seemed absolutely dumb. 
The parents tried to have him repeat the Gayatri mantra, 
with no success. As at least that amount of knowledge 
was necessary for the investment of the sacred thread, 
they tried to force him even by depriving him of food. 
They were not successful, and he on the contrary, showed 
no resentful feelings towards them. It now happened that 
Shankaracharya, came to that house on his begging errand. 
The dcharya at once understood the boy, as the parents 
had not, and began to question him. ‘“ Who are you? 
To whom do you belong? Where are you from? What is 
your name? What is your caste? Whence have you 
come, and whither are you going? To my friendly question 
you should give a friendly answer.” To this the boy 
replied,” I am not man, God, nor any other creature. I 
am not Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaigya or Sudra. I am pure 
Intelligence.” To the acharya’s further questions the boy 
answers to the effect that he is pure dima, that all 
differences appearing in the universe, are but the forms 
in which the 4tma appears with names to those forms, just 
as the one sun has many reflections in the little pool rippled 


248 EKNATH 


by the wind. In these answers the boy brings out the vari- 
ous catagories and definitions of the Vedantic philosophy. 
The Acharya, being highly pleased with the wise answers 
of the boy, whose apparent Jack of intelligence, was merely 
a cover to his profound wisdom, recognized his worthiness 
to be invested with the sacred thread. 


The Hastamalaka is a purely philosophic work, with 
the design of explaining the fundamental conception of 
the Vedantic philosophy of the absolute oneness of the 
atma, the one substance of which all apparent differences 
are but that one substance in various forms,. To under- 
stand these mysteries the need of a guru is stated; but 
that need is not emphasised. The work being purely philo- 
sophic, the practical side, namely, the ways of salvation, 
dnyana, karma and bhakti are not emphasised, indeed the 
word bhakti even does not once occur. 


The frequent quotations in the commentary from the 
Bhagavadgita and the Upanishads show that Eknath was a 
student of those sacred books. 


SUKASHTAKA* 
The Sukdshtaka is a commentary on eight Sanskrit 
§loks. They are the words of Suka, hence Sukashtaka, the 


Eight sayings of Suka. This short commentary of 
Elmith’s consists of 447 verses. 


In brief the contents are as follows. 


1-9 Invocation. 


eset ae ee teeta eerie em et pete tecinntnertn cthamatlinn Slemtante Pte canoe ane nee MRF my 


*For text see Laghukavyamala ‘Part four page 90. 


EKNATH 249 


10-19 References to Suka and the eight Sanskrit 
verses. 


20-129 Explanation of “Bheda” and “ abheda,” as 
applied to the idea of Atma, and how he, who experi- 
mentally reaches that condition of recognizing no 
differences, is outside of the law of vidhi and nishedha, 
(laws, prescribing, or forbidding). 


130-156 The atma as one substance pervading all. 
Many illustrations are used to make the idea clear, as for 
example, as the waves of the sea are to the sea, so indivi- 
dual souls are to the 4tma4. Waves gain form and name 
hut the substance of the waves is the same as the ocean. 


157-197 How the one substance, atma is seen from 
the point of view of name and form. One of the illustra- 
tions being that of the one substance gold, but, appearing 
in many ornamental forms. 


198-220 The five elements, apparently showing variety, 
but really one substance. 


221-256 When a soul realizes his oneness with the 
atma, it is like that of a river flowing into the sea. The 
form differs but the substance, water, is the same. 


257-295 A jivanmukta, is one, who, while alive in 
this world, has gained the supreme knowledge. To such, 
there is consequently no prescribing ur forbidding laws. No 
vidhi, no nishedha. 


296-324 The life of a Jivanmukia. To him there are 
no differences, no high, no low, nothing desired, nothing 


250 EKNATH 


undesired, ‘hence he is not under prescribing or forbidding 
laws. 


325-365 The idea of , “1,” and “Thou,” disappears 
in the one universal substance. To him, who realizes this, 
there are no prescribing or forbidding laws. 


366-447 The fruit to be obtained from the study of 
this work. Life is likened to a forest in which the sensual 
appetites are the ferocious animals. The reading of these 
eight verses is a fire that burns up the forest, and with it, 
of necessity, the animals, the sensual appetites. 


As in all of Eknath’s writings this work is full of 
illustrations and similes drawn from nature and human 
life. 


In this work also mention is made of his Great grand- 
father Bhanudas (438). 


SVATMASUKH. 


The Svatmasukh is a philosophic poem of 511 verses. 
After an Invocation it begins with the usual Vedantic 
formulae and definitions, copiously illustrated by similes 
drawn from nature and human experiences. Eknath then 
calls attention to the need of a Guru, a qualified teacher, 
to enable one to understand what would otherwise be un- 
knowable. The favor of a Guru is essential. Hence the 
importance of a worshipful attitude towards a Guru. With 
the enlightenment obtained from a sadguru, comes joy, 
hence the name of this work, svdtmasukh, or, The Joy of 
the Soul. It is to be noted that bhakti is not referred to, 


EKNATH 251 


indeed the word bhakti does not once appear. It may, 
therefore, be called a treatise on the Dnydnamiarga, the 
Way-of-Knowledge, thus differing from the Anandalahari, 
a treatise on the Way-of-Bhakti. 


The contents in the main are as follows. 1-16 Invoca- 
tion. 17-103 Definition of Atma. Atma being defined as 
sat, chit, ananda, these three phases are defined. Fknath 
is careful to state that this trinity does not imply three 
substances, but is one only. Here he introduces the need 
of a Guru to enable one to grasp the mystery of the above 
(103). The terms Kala (destruction), and Maya are ex- 
plained, and here again Eknath pleads with the reader to 
seek a sadguru, that the evil effects of these may be over- 
come (142-218). From verse 230 dimasukh, the joy of 
the soul, is dwelt upon. He gives his own personal experi- 
ence, as he, through his sadguru, Janardan, acquired the 
knowledge of the atma and felt the resultant joy. This 
joy is attainable by all (419), hence Eknath again pleads 
for all to seek a sadguru, who holds the “key to the attain- 
ment of Brahma” (421). From 432 to 450 The impor- 
tance of bhéva, or trust in one’s sadguru, is stressed, and 
his own personal experience emphasized. ‘ Without 
bhava there cannot be attained the supreme end of exis- 
tence” (445). Of himself he says, “ (450-51) By holding 
to the feet of one’s guru all ignorance entirely disappears. 
This praise of bhava is not a matter for discussion; it is 
my personal experience. I have not performed cruel 
austerities, I have not depended on continual repetitions of 
God names, I have not taken the trouble to practise yoga 
-or perform sacrifices, nor have I wandered to sacred places. 
For me the means of all means is the feet of my glorious 


252 EKNATH 


sadguru.” In closing Eknath calls attention to this work 
of his as “hard (472) for the superficial reader, but sweet 
for those who get its inner meaning.” He closes with 
saying, ‘I have written this book for the soul’s good. 
Merely by listening to it joy is aroused” “ May the nectar 
of this book forever give happiness to reader and listener, 
as with one mouth they drink it in.” 


In 505 Eknath pays tribute to his Great grandfather 
Bhanudas, as a poet likened to a vine, which has now in 
the form of his great grandson developed into flower and 
fruit, for the happiness of the saints. 


ANANDALAHART. 


The Anandalahari is a small work consisting of 154 
verses. In the concluding verses Eknath explains why he 
calls the poem, Anandalahari “Wave of Joy.” Because 
when one has received salvation through the Sadguru there 
is happiness in the soul, and, “ waves of joy.” 


In philosophy it is Vedantic, but concerns itself with 
the practical side of salvation through the way of bhekn, 
devotion to God. It begins with an invocation to God, 
using such epithets as Supreme being, Nirgun Life-of-the 
World, Primal-Cause, All-Pervader, Thou who carest for 
all, Invisible, Supreme-Brahma, Abode-of-Joy, The-Ruler 
of-all, Ocean-of-Knowledge, The Home-of-Salvation, The 
Sustainer-of-the-Universe. ‘‘The sight of Thee produces 
a joy that the Universe even cannot contain. It breaks 
the chain of births and deaths, and makes me fearless in 
heart.” 


EKNATH 953 


79 I) 


Under the epithet of Sadguru, God is the Saviour of 
all who turn to Him in devotion, in true bhakti. ‘“ There 
is no salvation except through the Sadguru.” “There is 
no necessity for Yoga, sacrifices, sacred places, austerities, 
abandoning the world, special religious acts, giving away 
of property. The one essential is the worship of the Sad- 
guru,” “The worship of the Sadguru is the supreme 
means of salvation.” 


Eknath mentions two notable examples of historic 
interest, king Bhartrihari (95) and Namadeva (119) who 
gave up all to devote themselves to bhakti. 


This small work is well worth close study as showing 
the emphasis that Eknath placed on the duty and joy of 
intense, and true devotion to God. 


ANUBHAVANANDA. 


The Anubhavananda is also known as Anandanubhava. 
It has been published in the Kavya-sangraha-Granth-Mala 
series, Part 4, page 122, in 1903. 


It consists of a dialogue between a guru and his dis- 
ciple. The disciple asks, Who am I? The Guru answers 
his question, quoting first the Bhagavadgita, and following 
it with explanations of the Vedantic idea of the oneness of 
the Parabrahma and the individual ego. The guru makes 
full use of a play on words, and as the mystery of the 
philosophy deepens he has to remind the disciple frequentty 
of the need of a guru to understand it. Near the close 
the guru speaks of the joy that comes through the know- 
ledge of recognizing one’s oneness with Brahma. The 


254 EKNATH 


disciple asks the Guru, how he can repay him for the 
enlightenment that he has given him, since all earthly gifts 
are pertshable things. The guru replies that the only 
recompense he wants is that the disciple should recognize 
that his oneness with Brahma means his own oneness with 
all creatures, and so that with enmity towards none he 
should live rightly and kindly with all (220, 221). 


RUKMINISVAYAMVARA. 


The Rukminisvayamvara by Eknath is based 
on the story as told in the Bhagavata Purana, 
in the Uttarfirdha the 10th skandha and 52nd 
chapter. The Story is one that has attracted many 
Marathi poets. In brief, it is that of Rukmini, a king’s 
daughter, hearing of the virtues and charms of Krishna, 
herself choses him to be her husband. 


A very interesting historical note, supposedly by 
Eknath himself, appears at the close of the work. “ This 
book was completed in the great city of Benares, on the 
banks of the Manikarnikaé, during the celebration of the 
birth of Ramra in the Saka era, fourteen hundred and 
ninety-three (A.D. 1571), in the samvatsara Prajapati, 
in the month of Chaitra, during the festival of the Ram- 
navami, the Rukminisvayamvara was completed.” 


THE EKNATHI BHAGAVATA. 


The Eknathi Bhagavata is the commentary made by 
Eknath in the Marathi language on the 31 chapters of the 
llth skandha of the Bhagavata Purina, This and his 


EKNATH 255 


Ramayana are his largest works. This is his most impor- 
tant work, At the close of this work he tells us where 
and when it was completed. “At Varanasi ((Benares), 
the great sacred place for salvation, in the Vikrama era in 
the varsha sanvatsara 1630 (A.D. 1573) this commentary 
was completed through the favor of Janardan. It was in 
the auspicious month of Kartika in the fortnight of the 
bright half of the moon, on the day of the full moon, on a 
Monday, this commentary of the eleventh skandha was 
completed. But listen to the date in the era and san— 
vatsara used in my own land at Pratishthana, on the bank 
of the Godavari river, in the Sri Rama kshetra, and 
Dandaka forest. In the Salivahana era 1495 (A.D. 1573) 
in the Srimukha sanvatsara his commentary was com- 


pleted” Chapter 31,552-555. 


The full account of the writing of this commentary, 
and the persecution which it brought upon him, with how- 
ever ultimate triumph, is found in the 22, 23, and 24th 
chapters of KeSavasvami’s F-knatha charitra, and the same 
in the Bhaktalilimrita Chapter 21, 37 to Chapter 22, 44. 
The Bhatavijaya and Bhimasvami’s account are silent on 
the history of this commentary. According to the above 
accounts five chapters were written at Paithan and the 
remaining twenty-six at Benares. 


Contents of the Eknéthi Bhégavata. 


As the Eknathi Bhagavata is a commentary, it, of 
course, follows the original Sanskrit text. No particular 
system seems to govern the original text, and therefore 
none is to be found in the commentary. It, however, 
embraces almost every conceivable subject. connected with 


256 EKNATH 


the Vedintic philosophy, with practical religion, theology, 
social relations, eschatology, soteriology, indeed the whole 
range of man’s religious, social and ethical life. 


In Mr. Pangarkar’s edition (Nirnayasagar Press 
1915) Mr. Pangarkar has inserted a very detailed table of 
contents. If Eknath’s point of view is desired on any 
particular subject it will not be found difficult to go through 
the Table of Contents with the subject in mind, noting 
the references for after study. 


In studying the contents of the Eknathi Bhagavata, 
it is necessary to bear in mind that Eknath was a firm be- 
liever in the divine inspiration of the Vedas, the Upnishads, 
the Mahabharata, the Ramayana, and Purans. His philo- 
sophy was that of the Vedanta. He believed in the Indian 
social system of Caste, placing the Brahman first. The 
ordinary social customs of the time in which he lived were 
the accepted customs of his own life. He was an idolater. 
He was a strict monotheist, however, in that the whole 
universe was but the manifestation of the One Supreme 
God, all Gods being manifestations or avatars of the Supre- 
me sagun God, and God in all creatures, Janijanardan, is a 
conception that pervades his thought. Eknath was not a 
Reformer, he had no new doctrines to preach, but what 
especially marks his Bhagavata, and makes it unique in 
Marathi literature is its emphasis on universal moral truths. 
Did he believe in Knowledge as a way of salvation? Yes, 
but it must be sincere, without hypocrisy. Did he believe 
in Bhakti as a way of salvation? ‘Yes, but it must mean 
true love of God, and sincere. Did he believe the Brahman 
held the first place in the social system? Yes, but a Brahnran, 
without true devotion to God, would go to Hell, and the 


EKNATH 257 


Sudra with true devotion would be found in Heaven. Did 
he believe in Caste? Yes, but his firm conception that God 
was in all men, Brahmana or Sudra, and even Mlenchha: 
(foreigners) made him, if the traditional stories of him can 
be believed, disregard the rules of caste when the needs 
of humanity demanded it; as for example, the carrying of 
a suffering Mahar boy on his shoulder, giving refuge to a. 
starving Mahar thief, feeding Mahars at his own home, 
and even dining at the house of a pious Mahar couple, to: 
whom he had preached the oneness of mankind, God being: 
in all. His Comments on the Bhikshugita, the life of a 
converted miser, brings out very strongly how Eknath was: 
impressed by high moral ideals. 


While the thoughts that Eknath brings out in the 
Bhagavata are based on his belief in the Scriptures, the 
Vedantic philosophy, the three ways of salvation, and the 
then current religious and social hfe and customs, it is 
not a book with the purpose of teaching those doctrines. 
It is rather the thought of sincerity, absence of hypocrisy, 
true love of God and man, moral ideals of truth and 
honesty, purity of life, sacredness of marriage, condemna- 
tion of immorality, selfishness, avarice, drunkenness, and 
other forms of vice, in all phases of life, that runs through 
the book and gives it its distinction. In brief, Eknath uses 
his opportunity of commenting on this passage in the 
Bhagavata Purana for impressing on his readers and 
hearers the absolute importance of high moral ideals and 
sincerity, in all their divine and human relationships. 


The work is too large, the subjects too varied, for any 
detailed analysis here. But it is in Marathi literature a 


unique book and worthy of study, for its presentation of 
17 , 


958 EKNATH 


moral ideals, as they appealed to that great religious 
teacher, to whom the trueness of the inner spirit was more 
than any outer form. 


The edition of the Eknathi Bhagavata most useful 
to the student is that edited by Lakshmana Ramchandra 
Pangarkar, and published by the Nirnaya Sagara Press, 
Bombay 1915. It contains a valuable table of contents 
and in foot notes a useful glossary of difficult words, and 
various readings. 


BHAVARTHA RAMAYANA. 


According to tradition Eknath’s Marathi version of 
the Valmiki Ramayana was his final work. Tradition as- 
cribes the final chapters to a_ disciple, Gavabaé, Eknath 
being an old man when he began the work, and his death 
prevented his completing it. This and the Eknathi Bhaga- 
vata, are Eknath’s great works. 


As is well known to scholars, there are in India at 
least three recensions of the Sanskrit text of the Ramayana, 
commonly known as the Bengal recension, the Bombay 
recension, and the Western recension. These differ consi- 
derably from one another. The sanskrit text that is imbed- 
ded in Eknath’s Ramayana, as published at Pandharpur by 
GaneSa Supekar in 1914, follows, neither the Bengal nor 
the Bombay recension. The Western recension has only 
lately become available for scholars. I have not as yet 
had the opportunity of examining it, and hence cannot 
pronounce on the text which Eknath presumably followed 
in composing his version of the Ramayana. That he did 
not have before him, either the Bengal or the Bombay 


EKNATH 259 


recension is perfectly evident. I have no means of know- 
ing the history of the Sanskrit text, that is printed in 
Eknath’s Ramayana, presumably, however, it has come 
down from Eknath’s time in the various copies of manu- 
scripts. 


Eknath’s Ramayana is a complete work, covering all 
the seven great divisions (Kanda). So far as the story 
of Rama is concerned, Eknath follows closely the Sanskrit 
text before him, but in details Eknath uses his poetic liberty 
in expanding scenes, in adding vividness by skilful 
rhetorical touches, and thus creating a very readable 
Marathi version of the great Indian epic. 


For the traditional story of the inception of the work, 
and its completion by his disciple Gavaba, see KeSava- 
svami’s Eknath charitra the 29th and 30th chapters, and the 
same only told in different words by Mahipati in the 24th 
chapter of the Bhaktalilamrita. Eknath is said to have 
cared for an apparently idiot boy, whose parents knew not 
what to do with him. Eknath with his characteristic 
sympathy for any one in distress, received Gavaba into his 
home, and little by little accomplished the miracle of stimu- 
lating his intelligence, and developing his moral character, 
so that he could complete the great work of his guru, when 
the guru from age, sickness and death had to lay down his 
pen. Eknath is said to have composed his Ramayana as 
far as the forty-fourth chapter of the Yuddhakanda. The 
remaining chapters of the Yuddhakanda, and the final 
Uttarakanda are ascribed to Gavaba. (Bh. L. 24, 78) also 
(Ke. Ek. Ch. 29, 105). 


260 EKNATH 


NOTES ON THE LIFE OF EKNATH. 


Sources of Information. 


1. In Ekniath’s own writings there are occasional 
references to himself and his family line from his Great- 
grandfather, Bhanudas. These references are very brief, 
and give us very little information, but their historic value 
is,of course, great. 


2. Muktesvara, grandson of Eknath and in many 
ways considered the greatest poet of Maharashtra, whose 
generally accepted dates are, born 1599 and died 1649, 
(M. S. page 145) is the author of Sri Khandyakhyan, a 
story in the life of Eknath, where Krishna, in the form 
of a Brahmana, serves Eknath for twelve years, and his 
identity is finally revealed by the coming of a Brahman 
from Dvarakéa. (Ke. Ek. Ch. Chapter 19 and Bh. L. 
Chapter 20, 61-150.) 


3. KeSavasvami, whose date is uncertain, whose 
death is placed by Mr. Bhave about 1684, is the author of 
an Eknathcharitra. A comparison of this life of Eknath, 
in its chapter on Sri Khandya, with the same story as told 
by Muktesvara, makes it perfectly evident that the two 
accounts are related to one another. The impression the 
comparison makes is very strong that KeSavasvami had 
Muktesvara’s version before his eyes when he wrote his 
own account, or that both drew from another account. 


4. Mahipati, born 1715, died 1790, in his Bhaktavi- 
jaya, has a short and incomplete account of Eknath, chap- 
ters 45 and 46. When compared with Mukteévar’s 


EKNATH 261 


chapter on Srikhandya, and the same in Kesava’s account, 
it would almost seem as though Mahapati had both before 
him as he wrote that story in his Bhaktavijaya, but as a 
whole the Bhaktavijaya differs in so many important points 
from KeSava’s charitra, that one is rather forced to think 
that Mahipati depended on some other account than that 
of KeSava’s. I cannot but ask the question whether there 
may not have been a complete life of Eknath written by 
Muktesvara, which is lost, only one chapter being now pre- 
served, entitled the *Srikhandyakhyana, this fragment 
usually bears the name of Eknath charitra. If not, such 
ai account by Muktesvara, there would appear to be such 
an one by some other author, but who could it be? The 
Bhaktavijaya was completed in 1762. 


5. Mahipati, born 1715 died 1790, completed his 
Bhaktalilamrita in 1774. It is a full account of Eknath 
from his birth to his death. It is not an independent 
account, but is a reproduction of Kesavasvami’s account 
only in Mahipati’s own words. When placed side by side, 
this dependence on KeSav’s account is clearly evident, not 
only in the details of the stories, told in the same order, 
but in parallelisms of words and phrases. There can be 
no doubt that when writing the Bhaktalilamrita Mahipati 
had before his eyes a copy of KeSavasvami’s Eknath 
charitra. That Eknath had not fogotten that he wrote an 
Eknath charitra in his Bhaktavijaya, twelve years previ- 
ously, is also evident, because certain portions from the 
Bhaktavijaya are bodily copied in his Bhaktalilamrita 
(Compare Bh. Lil. 20, 79-87 with Bh. Vij. 46, 24-33). It 
would seem as though when Mahipati wrote his account of 
Eknath in his Bhaktalilamrita, he felt that KeSavasvami’s 


262 EKNATH 


complete account of Eknath, was a better authority than 
the one he possessed when he wrote the short and incom- 
plete account in his Bhaktavijaya. He, therefore, com- 
pletely discarded his former authority and closely followed 
KeSava. 


6. Bhimasvami Shirgavkar wrote a Bhaktalilamrita 
in 1797, in which is included a Life of Eknath. It is 
rather apparent that when he wrote this he brad before him 
the Bhaktavijaya of Mahipati not the Bhaktalilamrita. 
He includes, however, many stories not told by Mahipati 
in either of his works. These additional stories would 
seem to have come to him through oral tradition, in circula- 
tion among the followers of Eknath, for at the close of his 
Eknath account he says, “I have in my slight knowledge 
sung the life of Eknathsvami. I have heard the stories 
from the lips of the saints, and only those have I written 
in my devotion to him.” Some of the stories in Mahipati’s 
Bhaktavijaya differ in very important matters from those 
told in his Bhaktalilamrita, and when these are compared 
with Bhimasvami’s account, it is clear that Bhimasvami 
follows the Bhaktavijaya account, rather than the Bhakta- 
lilamrita version of the same story. While Bhimasvami’s 
account may not seem to have much value, nevertheless it 
preserves traditional stories current in 1779, and cannot be 
entirely neglected in a study of Eknath’s life. It may be 
that those same stories may yet be found in some now 
unknown manuscript, in some collection at present 
unavailable. 


7. Eknath’s name and fame have made a deep impres- 
Sion on the religious teachers of Maharashtra, and many 
of the poets, though in brief words, sing his praise. 


EKNATH 263 


Among those previous to Mahipati, who thus hunoured 
Eknath in their writings, may be mentioned, Uddhava- 
chidghana, Ranganath, Sivaramasvami, Ramavallabhadas, 
Siddhachaitanya, Mukund, Jayaramasuta, Uddhavasuta, 
Khanderaya, MukteSvara, Dasopant, Tukaram, Niloba, 
Krishnadayarnava, Sridhar, Devadas, Ekeshvaravadhuta, 
Amritaraya, Atmarim Ramdasi, and Moropant, the latter 
in his well known Sanmanimala. None of these admiring 
poets add, however, to our knowledge of the life of Eknath. 
They do, however, emphasize the strong influence that 
Eknath left behind him. It appears from the life of 
Tukaram that he owed much of his inspiration, and his 
ideas to the great Eknath. 


The Relation of these Original Sources to One another. 


The problem of determining the written source or 
sources from which MukteSvara, Kesava and Mahipati, in 
his Bhaktavijaya, obtained their information, can only be 
stated in the form of a theory, which future discoveries 
may confirm or disaffirm. My present belief is that after 
the death of Eknath in 1609, oral tradition preserved the 
stories of his life until about 1640, when some one, or 
several, reduced those stories to writing. One collection 
of traditions, which I shall call, Tradition A, was reduced 
to writing somewhere about 1640. From this written 
account Muktesvara drew his Sri Khandya story, unless 
it may prove true that he himself was the author, who first 
reduced to writing the traditions of his distinguished grand- 
father Eknath. From this same source Kesavasvami 
drew his account sometime before 1684. KeSavasvami’s 
account was almost slavishly followed by Mahipati in his 
Bhaktalilimrita completed in 1774. 


264 EKNATH 


Another collection of traditions, which I shall call, 
Tradition B, was also reduced to writing and became the 
authority from which Mahipati drew his information, when 
writing his Bhaktavijaya, completed in 1762, later followed 
by Bhimasvami. This unknown hypothetical writer may 
however, be identical with the one who reduced Tradition 
A to writing, possibly Muktesvara himself, and in that case 
the difference in the two lines of accounts would have to 
be explained on the principle of selection, two differing 
streams from one source. A double authorship seems, 
however, the more probable; for the writing of the lives 
of the saints was at that period a frequent undertaking by 
the poet-saints of Maharashtra. If this relationship of the 
original sources to one another should seem to some to be 
too hypothetical, and lacking sufficient evidence, I trust 
that at any rate it will be a stimulous to a more thorough 
‘study of the subject than I have been able to give it, and 
that some scholar will more accurately settle the problem 
of their relationship. In the meanwhile my own concep- 
tion of their relationship is that as described above, which 
may be graphically represented as follows. 


EKNATH Varying Oral Traditions Tradition A 
‘Tradition B Unknown Redactor of Tradition A 
About 1640 Unknown Redactor of Tradition B 
About 1640 MukteSvara, c. 1649 One chapter Sri 
Khandyakhyana KeSavasvami, Eknathcharitra, c. 1684 
Mahipati’s Bhaktavijaya c. 1762 

Bhimasvami Shirgavkar § Bhaktalilimrita c. 1797 
Mahipati’s Bhaktalilamrita c. 1774, 


EKNATH 265 
Dates of Ekndath’s Birth and Death. 


The whole subject of the dates of the Maharashtra 
poet-saints needs more research work, and more scientific 
handling than it has yet received. I do not propose to 
weary the reader with a discussion of the subject here. 
It is sufficient to say that Mr. Pangarkar, in his Eknath 
charitra gives the birth of Eknath as in 1528, and his 
death in 1599. In this he depends on an inscription over 
the building containing the samddhi of Elmnath, the verse 
being, he says by KeSava (died about 1684). Also on a 
verse by Krishnadayarnava, (born 1696), which he found 
at Paithan in an old bad; a collection of poetry in manus- 
cript. Raghava also gives the same date for the death of 
Ekniath, 1599. The distance between the death of Eknath and 
these poets, cited as authorities is considerable, and their 
‘evidence is not altogether convincing. Mr. Bhave in his 
Maharashtra Sarasvata, (Virst Mdition, Page 113, note.) 
accepts Mr. Pangarkar’s opinion, and decided for 1599, 
-as against the commonly held date of 1609. In his Second 
Edition, however, Mr. Bhave (page 245 note) accepts, 
without question, 1609 as the date of Eknath’s death. His 
birth he places in 1648. As I donot think Mr. Pangarkar’s 
-evidence is conclusive, I shall follow for convenience sake 
the commonly accepted dates, 1548 for the birth, and 1609 
for the death of Eknath. 


EKNATH’S LIFE. 


As the story of Eknith’s life, told in the Bhaktalila- 
‘mrita, is practically all we know of him, the translation 


266 EKNATH 


which follows this makes a resumé of his life unnecessary. 
It is well, however, to remember the law that governs 
tradition. A man makes a certain impression on his gene- 
ration. The stories of his life are handed down from 
mouth to mouth. They may in time vary from the actual 
facts of his life, but that variation will be in the line of 
the impression that man made. Whether the stories told 
and handed down about Eknath are the exact truth, it 
matters little, compared with the undisputed fact of the 
great and noble impression which Eknath made on his 
generation. It is interesting also to observe that the 
literary works of Eknath show him to be a man of the 
highest ethical standard, besides being a man of intense 
religious devotion. And this impression from his actual 
works corresponds, one might say, exactly with the impres- 
sion gained from the stories, tradition has handed down. 


Putting together, then, the impression made upon one 
by the reading of Eknath’s works, and the impression made 
by the traditional stories of his life, it is evident that he 
was a man of very high and noble character, with high 
ideals of life. Of necessity his birth, his education, his 
environment, his intellectual beliefs, his forms of worship, 
his Brahmanhood, his caste ideas, all made themselves felt 
in the outer mranifestations of his life. But it is not to 
these outer manifestations to which we should especially 
look, but to the spirit behind them, which shines out with 
marvellous purity. No one can read the life of Eknath 
without receiving an inspiration for a higher and better 
life. 


EKNATH 267 


EKNATH’S FAMILY LINE. 


The first ancestor of Eknath was Bhanudis, 
his great grandfather. Presumably he was born at 
Paithan. The interesting story of his life is found in the 
Bhaktavijaya, told by Mahipati. Vitthalkavi, KeSava- 
svami, and Mahipati in the Bhaktalilamrita, tell the story 
of his bringing back to Pandharpur the idol of Vitthal, 
that had been taken away by the king of Vidyanagara. 
Bhimasvami Shirgavkar covers practically the same ground 
as the Bhaktavijaya. It is however, to the Bhaktavijaya 
of Mahipati that we owe the fuller story of Bhanudas, 
though, nothing is told of his death. (See the translation 
of the Bhaktavijaya account by Justin E. Abbott in the 
Pout-Saints of Maharashtra Series, No. 1, on Bhanudas, 
and the Introduction to his life.) 


His story in brief is an early inclination to the religious 
life. Family necessities made him yield to pressure from 
friends, and he became a petty cloth merchant. He in- 
sisted on telling the truth in his selling of goods, he was 
the world’s first merchant to adopt the system of fixed 
prices, and he deserves to be remembered and honored as 
the father of that system. He prospered, but his heart 
was not on worldly goods. He gave up his merchant life, 
and devoted it entirely to the religious life. The story 
that has, however, made him especially famous is his bring- 
ing back of the idol of Vitthal from Vidyanagara. On 
the authority of Eknath himself (Eknathi Bhagavata 1,33) 
Bhanudas lived until the birth of his grandson, whom he. 
named Surya, and then died. 


268 EKNATH 


Chakrapani, son of Bhanudis and grandfather to 
Elnath, together with his good wife, had the sorrow of 
losing their son Surya after the birth of Eknath. To them 
therefore fell the care of Eknath, whom they dearly loved 
during his infancy and boyhood. These loving grand 
parents recognized Eknath’s inclination to serious things, 
and provided accordingly for his religious and intellectual 
training. They provided a pandit to teach him Sanskrit. 
and were proud of his attainments. It was a great blow 
to them to have Eknath suddenly disappear, without taking 
leave of them. (See Bh. Lil. 13, 62 and 15, 8-54). They 
knew not what had become of the boy, nor where he had 
gone. When at last they recognized their lost Eknath in 
the youthful ascetic, their joy was great. Again they 
cared for him and had the joy of bringing about his mar- 
riage to a very helpful wife. They lived to an old age, 
with the happiness of seeing their beloved grandson 
honored and loved. Such is the story told by Kegavasvami 
and repeated in the Bhaktalilamrita. 


Surya, also called Suryandrayana, and his wife Ruk- 
mini were the parents of Eknath. The Bhaktavijaya 
differs in its story of the childhood of Eknath, from that 
told in the Bhaktalilamrita. In the Bhaktavijaya it is the 
parents who brought up their son, mourned over his loss, 
and rejoiced at finding him again. Bhimasvami following 
the Bhaktavijaya also narrates the same version of the 
story of Eknath’s parental relations. (See Bhaktavijaya 
45, 10-19; 45, 68, 69). The fact that Mahipati in his 
Bhaktalilamrita follows so closely the story, as told by KeSa- 
vasvami, and discards many particulars, he, twelve years 
before, related in his Bhaktavijaya, it may perhaps be 


EKNATH 269 


temporarily accepted as evidence that to Mahipati KeSsava 
svami was a better authority for the details of Eknath’'s 
life. We may, therefore, with Mahipati think of Eknath 
as having been brought up by his grandparents after the 
death of his parents. 


EKNATH’S BIRTHPLACE. 


Paithan, called in ancient times by its Sanskrit title, Pra- 
tishthana, was Eknath’s birthplace, the scene of his life’s 
carcer, and the place of his death. Pratishthana has had 
a long and distinguished history. It is mentioned by 
Ptolemy, the Greek geographer. It has figured as the 
capital of the Salivahana dynasty. It was long’ an important 
industrial centre for cotten and silk goods. It is still well 
known for the skill of her weavers. (Those who may wish: 
to acquaint themselves with discussions connected with! the 
very ancient history of Paithan, may consult the Early 
History of the Deccan by the late Sir Ramkrishna Gopal 
Bhandarkar, Bombay Gazetteer Vol. 1 Part 11, The 
Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
Vol. VIII page 239, and the Indian Antiquary Vol. XX pp. 
240-248). 


Paithan, or Pratishthana, is situated on the left bank 
of the Godavari. This river is often called the Ganga. 
It is in the Hyderabad State, about 56 miles easterly of 
Ahmednagar. A good motor road extends from Ahmed- 
nagar to Paithan. A good motor road extends also from 
Paithan to Daulatabad, some 40 miles to the north 
the old Devagiri, where Eknath’s Guru, Janardan, 
lived, and where Eknath spent the early years. 


270 EKNATH 


‘of his discipleship with his beloved Guru. Ekniath’s 
house and mandir are still there, renewed, however, 
-and his samddhi by the river side. The annual 
pilgrimage to Paithan, in honor of Eknath takes place on 
the sixth of the month of Phalgun (February and March) 
Vadya. 


EKNATH 271 


GLOSSARY OF MARATHI WORDS USED IN THE 
TRANSLATIONS AND OF WORDS WHOSE 
TRANSLATION PRESENTS DIFFICULTIES. 


It might have been possible to have used fewer 
Marathi words in these translations but where there is no 
English word that exactly expresses the Marathi word, 
or where it requires a whole English phrase to express 
the meaning of a simple Marathi word, it has seemed to 
me better to keep the Marathi word, so familiar to India, 
and let the English reader learn its meaning’ by its context, 
or by the following glossary. English literature is already 
enriched by many Marathi words, I see no reason why 
it should not still further enrich itself. 


There are certain words, that are untranslatable except 
by a long explanation; others, where even the English 
word conveys only a part of the Marathi meaning. I have 
translated these words and expressions as best I could, 
but it seems worth while to include some of these words, 
in a glossary in order that the reader, familiar with both 
languages, may understand why I have used and the special 
English word or words, sometimes in opposition to Diction- 
ary authorities, even Molesworth. Usage has to be consi- 
dered, as well as etymological meaning. The glossary will 
furnish the examples that have suggested the above 
remarks, I have used Molesworth’s definitions freely, as 
carrying authority. 


272 EKNATH 
A 


Abhang. “A particular metrical composition in praise of 
the Deity.” It is the popular meter of the poet-saints 
in their hymns of praise; the abhangs of Eknath, the 
abhongs of Tukaram etc. 


Abheda-bhakta. A bhakta who has the conception of no- 
difference (abheda) between the paramdtmd and the 
individual atma. Abheda-bhakti is the worship of 
God in harmony with the conception of the identity of 
the paramdtma and the soul (atmd) of the worship- 


per. 


Acharya. Head of a religious order or sect. 
Adhelé. A copper coin worth half a pice. 
Agnihotri. The priest who maintains the Sacrificial fire. 


Anushthana. “Performance of certain ceremonies and 
works in propitiation of a god.” 


Arati. “The ceremony of (waving around an idol, guru 
etc.,) a platter containing a burning lamp. 2 The 
platter and lamp waved.” 3 The piece of poetry 
chanted on the occasion of the ceremony of waving 
expressing praise or worship. 


Asrama, 1. The abode of saints and rishis. 2. The word 
is also applied to four conditions of living, the 
Brahmacharya, or the period of chaste youth, and 
study; The grahastha, the householder in his married 
and secular life; The vdnaprastha, who as age comes 
on passes his worldly cares over to others, and goes 


EKNATH 278 


into the forest for meditation, and the fourth the 
Sannyasi, who entirely abandons all worldly cares, 
delights and passions, and is wholly absorbed in con- 
templation or the worship of God. These four 
a§ramas are considered the ideal life for a Brahman. 


Atma. The soul, the soul of the universe, the human soul, 
the vivifying principle, the self, the ego. For clear- 
ness the soul of the universe is spoken of as parame 
(supreme) dimd, to distinguish it from the individual 
Gimd, the two, however, in Vedantic philosophy being 
identical. Brahma, or the Parama-dtmd, partially 
defined as satchidaénanda (Existence, intelligence, joy) 
is the sole existing substance. The universe, as it 
appears in animate and inanimate forms, with their 
special names, is but the form in which the dtmd, the 
paramétmé, or Brahma manifests itself. The huntan 
soul, or dtmd, is, therefore, only a form in which the 
paramdima appears. The “great sentence” aham- 
bramhdsmi, I am Brahma, is the conscious acceptance 
of the philosophic postulate of the oneness of the soul 
of the universe with the individual soul. 


Avatéra. Etymologically it means “one who has descen- 
ded.” A divine avatdra is the coming down to earth 
of such a divine being, as for example, Vishnu in the 
form of Krishna, or Rama. In Indian mythology, as 
well as in all popular conceptions, these avatars are for 
the sake of combating some evil condition or condi- 
tions in this world, or, ‘‘to save the world from its sin 
and misery.” 

18 


274 EKNATH 


Human avatars are also recognized (mdnava avatdra), 
that is, a good man who has died, reappears later in 
some other good man, to carry on, or to complete, the 
work of the former. Eknath is spoken of as an avatér 
of Dnyanadeva, and Tukarém as an avatara of 
Namadeva. Or Eknath, for example, is spoken of as 
an avatar of God, making him, therefore, both divine 
and human. 


Bachndég. Poisonous root of the Gloriosa Superba. 


B 


Bhajan. Adoration or worship. 2 Repeating the names 
of God as an act of worship. 3 A hymn, or verses 
sung in the worship of God. 


Bhakta. “A worshipper, votary, or follower of; one 
devoted or attached to.” While the above definition is 
etymologically correct, in usage, by the poet-saints, 
there is connected with it a moral idea. <A bhakta 
implies a really pious man. A hypocrite is not a 
bhakia, though technically and outwardly he might 
appear to be one. 2. A special religious class devoted 
to the religious life. 


As the different manifestation of God, and the various 
avatdrs appeal differently to different minds, there is 
a personal choice as well as the traditional, or family 
choice of the special manifestation of God. There is 
thtrefore, a Vishnubhakta, a Sivabhakta, a Hari- 
bhakta, a Rambhakta, a Vitthal bhakta, and so forth. 


Bhakti. Literally, worship or adoration. It is the attitude 
of the bhakia towards God. It always implies a 


EKNATH 275 


moral idea of sincerity and purity of worship, accom- 
panied with love. Again and again the poet-saints 
affirm that there can be no bhakti without sincerity 
and love. Bhakti is, therefore, more than mere 
worship, which can be so easily a mere outward form. 
Bhakti must be the true feeling of the heart, of reve- 
rence, and love of God, whether expressed in outer 
forms of worship, or in the mental worship (Madnas 


- puja) 


Bhaktimarga. Bhakti-marga, the way of Bhakti. Three 
ways are recognized for the deliverance of man from 
the succession of births and deaths, with their sins and 
sorrows, and with their good deeds and joys, as well. 
The Dnyanamdrga (The Way of Knowledge) holds the 
highest place in the minds of philosophers, because, 
when by true Knowledge Ignorance disappears, all 
causes of sin and sorrow disappear. The Karma- 
mérga or Way of Works is recognized by the poet- 
saints as a way, but a very hard way, and a very 
dangerous way. In the case of both, of the above 
ways the danger is pride, and with pride comes a fall. 
The safe way, the sure way, the easy way, for all 
high or low, is the bhakti-marga, in which a man 
throws himself on the mercy of God, bhakti on man’s 
part, and mercy, forgiveness, and salvation, on God’s 
part. With bhakti sincere, and the consequent gift 
from God of moksha (salvation, deliverance), a return 
to this earth is avoided, and there is eternal life in the 
presence of God. Because it is a sure and easy 
way for all, the poet-saints give the Bhakti-marga the 
highest preference. Although, the word etymologically 


876 EKNATH 


does not imply it, the usage of the poet-saints in 
strongest terms emphasizes the moral side of Bhakéi, 
not only sincerity in Bhokti, but a pure ethical life 
is essential to the very idea of Bhakti. Eknith’s 
writings are especially emphatic on this importance of 
internal and external moral purity. 


Brahma, The One substance of which all existing things 
consist. Brahma is the substance of which all things 
exist. Existing things have forms and names ("dme 
and rupa). That they exist and have forms and 
names is as real as is the real substance Brahma. To 
consider these forms however, as different from 
Brahma, making a duality, is due to ignorance, that 
Ignorance personified being called maya. (which see.) 


Brahmachari. A Brahmana who observes the strictest 
chastity for a time or for life from a religious motive. 


Cc 


Chakor. A bird that is said to cubsist on moonbeams, 
This idea is very frequently used in poetic figures and 
illustrations. 


Chataka. A bird said to drink only from the clouds, hence 
always eager for the rain. The idea is very frequently 
used in poetic figures and illustrations. 


Chil. A fireplace. In its simplicity it may be three stones 
so arranged as to have the fire between them, and the 
pot or pan resting on them, or a semicircular erection 
of earth to contain the fire in its cavity, and support 
the cooking vessel on its rim. 


EKNATH Q7T 
D 


Darsana. Literally, sight, seeing, looking. In the religious 
usage of the word there is, however, much more than 
the physical sight, seeing or looking. There is an 
implication of respect, reverence and worship. There 
is no English word corresponding with this use of 
dar§ana. 


Dasarad. A festival commemorating the period of the year 
when the Maratha Kings started out on their campaigns, 


Dhotar. The garment worn by men, consisting of a long 
piece of cloth wound around the body, tucked in front 
at the waist and also behind taking the place of the 
European trousers. 


Divéli. The annual festival of lights. 


Dnyana, 1 Knowledge in general. 2 Knowledge of a 
specific and religious kind.—that which is derived from 
meditation and the study of philosophy; which teaches 
man the divine origin and nature of his immaterial 
portion, and the unreality of corporal enjoyments, 
sufferings and experiences, and the illusoriness of the 
external and objective universe; and which sanctifying 
him during life from earthly attachments and fleshly 
affections, accomplishes for him after death emancipa- 
tion from individual existence and reunion with the 
universal spirit. In some parts of India the word 
is pronounced gydna. 


Dnydnamarga. The Way of knowledge. (See Dnyana). 


278 EKNATH 
G 


Gayatri. A scared verse from the Vedas, repeated by 
Brahmans at their morning and evening devotions. 


Ghatika, A period of twenty-four minutes. 


Ghat. 1 A mountainous range dividing countries. 2 A pass 
or difficult passage over a hill. 3 quay, wharf, stairs, 
landing place (on banks of rivers or tanks). Hence 
applied by washermen, tanners, dyers, Brahmans, etc., 
to their respective places of resort. 


Ghi. Clarified butter, also known as tap. The butter is 
melted, thus removing the water that may be in it, 
and then preserved in jars. 


Gund. 1 A quality, attribute, affection, or property whether 
of matter or mind; a power, faculty, excellence, virtue; 
a property inherent or an affection supervenient in 
the most comprehensive sense. 2 The constitution 
of created things, as comprised in three gunas; satva 
(existence truth, goodness, brightness etc.) raje 
(energy, passion, action etc.,) fama (evil) darkness, 
ignorance etc.) All created things are a mixture of 
the three, Satvaguna, rajoguna, and tamoguna, and 
therefore, are spoken of as Saguna (possessing these 
gunas), and Brahma, the paramatma is nirguna (un- 
possessed by these qualities). In God, in good men, 
in good thing's the satva predominates. In evil men 
or spirits or demons the tama predominates. The 
rajoguna is in all as the activity of either the good 
or the evil, or both. In God all is satva, because it is 


EKNATH 279 


the satva that is in activity (rajoguna). In man 
there is a mixture of the satva and tama, and the 
activity (rajoguna) makes man a mixture of good and 
evil, sometimes the good predominating, sometimes the 
evil. 


Guru. A religious teacher; one who instructs in the 
Sastras. 


H 


Harbaré. A vetch, gram. Cicer arrentinum. 


J 


Japa. The repeating of mantras or the names of God. A 
rosary may be used so as to know the number of times 
the mantra or names have been used. As this outer 
form requires an inner reality, japa stands also for 
meditation, for worship, for prayer, indeed for the 
true spiritual life of a man. The correlative of japa 
is tapa (which see). Tapa, literally religious austerity, 
is also extended in meaning to comprise the outer 
religious life of a man. Japa, his inner religious life 
and tapa his outer religious life. 


Jiva, Siva. When Jiva and Siva are thus used together 
Jiva stands for the individual a4tma, and Siva for the 


Universal atma. 


Jondhalé. A cereal plant or its grain. Hulcus sorghum. 


K 
Kadaba. The stalks with their leaves of the jondheld, or 
jvari, Hulcus sorghum, used for fodder. 


880 EKNATH 
Kékini. A weight of shells equal to 20 cowries. 


Kaliyuga. The present, fourth age of the world, the evil 
age. Its duration is considered to be 432,000 years, 
after which the world is to be destroyed. The present 
year A.D. 1926 corresponds with the Aaliyuga 5027. 
The initial year is 3101 B.C. The four yugas are the 
Kritayuga, Tretayuga, Dvdparayuga and the Kaltyuga. 
The four yugas together make a Mahdyuga (Great 
yuga, 4,320,000 years. It is this evil kaliyuga that 
has necessitated the frequent avatars to check evil 
and to save mankind from its effects. 


Karma. 1 An act or a deed. 2 Religious action, as sacri- 
fice, ablution etc., 3 Destiny; destiny, being only thie 
allotment, to be enjoyed or suffered in the present life 
of the fruit of good and evil actions performed in 
former lives. 4 Deed or action. As all actions 
through the laws of cause and effect determine the 
actions in the next life. Karma is equivalent also to 
fate. 


Karmamdérga. The law of works; the road to heaven 
through observance of rites and ceremonies and per- 
formance of virtuous deeds. (See Dnyadnamarga, 
Way of Knowledge, and Bhaktimarga, Way of Devo- 
tion). “The way of deeds”. One of the three ways 
of Deliveranc:—Dnyanamarga, Karmamarga, and 
Bhaktimarga. 


Kavad. A bamboo lath provided with slings at each end 
in order to contain baskets, jars etc. and carried on 
the shoulder. Used for carrying water, vegetables 
etc. 


EKNATH 2st 


Kavadi. A cawrie. A shell used in making small change. 


Kirtan. Celebrating the praises of a god with music and 
singing. Reciting the names of the deity. In prac- 
tice, however, it is a religious service of song. The 
leader has a topic which he delivers in song. He is 
accompanied with a chorus leader, and musical ins- 
truments. Following their leader the audience may 
break out in ecstatic repetitions of the names of God, 
or of the lines of a chorus. 


Kshetra. A sacred spot, a sacred city, a place of pilgri- 
mage; also the human form. 


M 


Mahant. 1. The chief or head of an order of Gosavis, 
Bairagis etc., a religious superior. 2 Applied to the 
head or leading man among pandits, devotees etc. 


Mandap. An open temporary structure, made with 
bamboo or other poles, with cloth roof and sides, 
erected for festal occasions, for marriages, kirtans 
etc. 


Mana. Mind. According to Western psychology the mind 
is the soul itself viewed as thinking or imagining. Mana, 
however, is regarded as an organ (indriya) of thinking 
and imagining and not a part of the pure Atma (Soul). 


Maya. This word is usually translated “Illusion,” but 
this is not 4 satisfactory translation. Vedantic philo- 
sophy postulates that there is but one substance, called 
Brahma, or peramdimé, or atma. This substance 
appears in the form of the universe, and to the various 


282 


EKNATH 


forms there are names (nama-rupa). These forms are 
temporary and changeable, and with the change of 
form the name disappears. It is due to Ignorance 
that these forms are supposed to be distinct from the 
One Substance. The reality of these forms is not 
denied, but that they are distinct from the One sub- 
stance is denied. That they are distinct 1.e., that there is 
a duality, is the particular form of illusion which is 
indicated by the word Maydé. In usage Maya becomes 
personified as the cause of the Ignorance (adnydna) 
which sees duality where is unity. One of the stock 
illustrations is that of gold in the form of various 
ornaments, each with its own name. That the gold 
appears in the form of various ornaments is not denied, 
but that those ornamental forms are permanent and’ 
distinct from the gold is denied. The ornaments can 
be melted; they disappear as ornaments, but the gold 
remains unchanged. To think the ornaments were 
distinct from the gold would be through Ignorance: 
(adnyina), and the cause of the ignorance, by a sort 
of personification is mdyd. 


Modi. Is the cursive writing of the Marathi. The old’ 


ASoka alphabet of the inscriptions, 250 B.C., gradually 
developed in time into the Devanagari, used in transcrib- 
ing Sanskrit literature, as also Marathi literature. In 
business writing however, haste being important, and 
the pen being lifted from the paper as little as possi- 
ble, it led to a change in the form of the Devandgari 
letters, which to the casual observer seem a different 
character, but which can be most easily traced back: 
to the Devandgari origin. The tradition that Modi 


EKNATH 283 


was brought from the south, or that it was the inven- 
tion of Hemachandra in the 13th century, may be due 
to the character of the southern cursive writing, and it 
could well be that Hemachandra adopted it as the 
form for official documents. There is no doubt, how- 
ever, that the Modi has developed from the Deva- 
nagari simply by rapid writing, with the lifting of the 
pen from the paper as little as possible. 


Mukti. Exemption of the spirit from further migration 
and the reabsorption of it into its source, the divine 
monad, Brahina, the substratum and substance of un- 
iversal being. This deliverance from births and deaths, 
must be understood to include in the idea the delive- 
rance from the sins and sorrows, even from the good 
deeds and joys of life, for cach life is made up of 
these. The four forms of mukti are sdyujyatd, 
salokata, samipata and sarupatd, (see sayujyata). 


N 


Namaskdra. Worship, obeisance, reverential or respect- 
ful address or salutation. It is performed by joining 
the palms, inclining the head and pronouncing the word 
namaskéra. A sdshténga namaskér is the prostration 
on the ground, so that eight parts (ashta) of the body 
touch the ground, and is the most profound method 
of showing reverence to God or man. 


Nirguna. Nir-guna, Literally without a quality. Brahma, 
or dimd, paramdimd the one substance which appears to 
us as the wniverse, cannot be described in human words. 
It is indescribable (avdchya.) While the one substance 


264 


EKNATH 


cannot be described the forms in which it appears can 
be described, and their qualities determined. The 
forms with their names are, therefore, saguna, 
(Sa-guna) with quality. God, as a personal being, 
creator of the special form, in which the universe 
appears, is recognized as one of the forms in which 
the One eternal substance appears. God, therefore, is 
saguna, that is, he has qualities which can be described 
in human understandable words. Brahma is nirguna; 
God (ifvara) is saguna. The gods, all avatars, idols, 
and the visions of God, are all saguna manifestations 
of the Nirgun Brahma, or nirquna dtma. The saguna 
iSvara, being but the one of the many forms in which 
the nirguna isvara appears, are, of course, to be identi- 
fied as the golden bracelet is identified with the gold 
of which it consists. The poet-saints therefore in 
their hymns of praise, their invocations, their worship, 
and their prayers, make no distinction. They are 
addressed as well to the nirguna God as to the saguna 
God. This identity of the saguwna and the nirguna is 
often asserted very definitely. 


Nivritti. Cessation from worldly concerns and engage- 


Ovi. 


ments; also Absorption into Brahma. 


O 


A stanza of a particular metre of Marathi verse. 


P 


Pada. A variety of metrical compositions, used in hymns 


or anthems. Very many of the poet-saints have written 


EKNATH 285 


in this metre. (See the Padasangraha in the Kavyas- 
angraha Series for examples). 


Paduka. An impression of a foot on stone, worshipped 
as the trace of some god or guru.‘ 


Pap. Sin in the abstract, or an evil deed. It is the exact 
negative correlative of the word punya, goodness or 
holiness in the abstract, or a good or holy deed. That 
pap and punya, evil and good deeds must receive a 
future reward of suffering or happiness is a part of 
Hindu philosophy, but this idea does not belong to 
the words themselves. Molesworth’s Marathi English 
Dictionary of 1831, founded on the Marathi-Marathi 
Dictionary of 1829, rightly defines these words. I 
differ absolutely from the Notes on these words in 
Molesworth’s Second Edition of 1857, and from its 
definition of the word punya as “ merit,” a meaning 
it never has had in Sanskrit, or in the whole course of 
Marathi literature, until influenced by Molesworth’s 
second edition. See further discussion under punya. 


Pansupaéri. A roll of the Piper-betel leaf with Areca nut, 
cloves, lime etc. (See Vida). 


Pradakshind. Circumabulation of an object, keeping the 
right side towards it These objects may be idols, 
sacred trees, the tulsi plant, a temple, even a sacred 
city. Keeping the object to the left would imply 
irreverence. 


Prahar. An eighth part of the day of 24 hours. A 
praher is therefore a period of three hours. The 


286 EKNATH 


prahars begin at sunrise, at six, hence Donprahar (two- 
praharas) is noon. 


Prakriti. In philosophy prokriti and purusha are words 
that denote the material and the immaterial universe. 
Prakntt (Nature, matter phenomenon) conceived as 
female, and Purusha (male, the soul, life, activity) 
by their-union makes the whole universe, an anthro- 
pomorphic expression of the idea expressed in English 
as “matter and mind.” 


Prékrit. In the usage of the Maratha poet-saints the 
Prékrit language means the Marathi language. As 
distinguished from the Sanskrit (the polished langu- 
age), it means the common vernacular of the people. 
As may be seen from the lives of the poet-saints and 
their works, they had to encounter a certain amount 
of opposition against their Marathi, or Praknt ver- 
sions of the sacred Sanskrit texts. (See Eknath’s 
life, Bhaktalilamrita Chapter 21). 


Prérabdha. Deeds in former births determined the course 
of one’s life in the birth previous to this. Deeds in 
the previous life have determined the course of one’s 
present life. Deeds in the present life will determine 
the life in the next birth. This is the law of prarabdha. 


Praséd. 1 Favor, graciousness, propitiousness. 2 Any 
thing (a fruit, flower, rice etc.) given by an idol, a 
guru, a saint, as a blessing or a mark of favor.” 3 
Food etc. presented to an idol or a holy person to be 
distributed, thus honored, among worshippers etc. 4 


EKNATH 287 


The sweetmeats and fruit distributed among the 
audience at the conclusion of a kathd, kirtan, or 
puranic reading. 


Punya. Goodness or holiness in the abstract, or a good 
or holy deed. Its negative is pap, or sin in the abstract, 
or an evil deed. In the definition of this word as also 
in the definition of the word pap I differ absolutely 
from Molesworth’s Marathi and English Dictionary, 
second edition of 1857. In a note it says, “ The word 
bears not the feeblest implication of holiness, godliness 
or purity of spirit.” On the contrary it implies all 
three. And by its using the definition of “ merit” 
(not found in the edition of 1831) an idea foreign to 
the word has since then been attached to this noble 
word. “ Merit,” meaning a future reward of a good 
deed, is no part of the meaning of the word Punya, 
which is simply goodness or holiness in the abstract 
or a holy or good deed. The idea of merit belongs to 
Indian philosophy, but not to the word punya. Every 
punya will have its reward in the future, as will every 
pap, but this idea is not in the word itself. 


The first edition of Molesworth of 1831, founded on the 
pandit’s Marathi-Marathi edition of 1829 has the 
correct definition. See also Monier-Williams Sanskrit 
dictionary under punya and pép. The word punya, 
twice used in the Rigveda, many times used in the 
Upanishads, and Bhagavadgitaé, and all through old 
Marathi literature, is the exact negative of pap. It, 
in no single instance, means “merit” as implying a 
future reward. 


388 EKNATH 


Puraxpok. A wheaten cake with stuffing of coarse sugar, 
pea flour etc." 


Purina. A particular class of Hindu sacred literature, 
generally regarded as eighteen in number. They deal 
with stories of the creation of the world, its destruc- 
tion, its renewal, of gods, goddesses, and heroes. The 
eighteen are Brahma, Padma, Vishnu, Siva, Linga, 
Garuda, Narada, Bhagavata, Agni, Skanda, Bhavishya, 
Brahmavaivarta, Markandeya, Vamana, Varaha, 
Matsya, Karma and Vayu, but there are other lists 
of 18, slightly varying from this. Of the Purans the 
Bhagavata, giving the life and teachings of Krishna, 
has had the greatest influence on the thought and life 
of the Maratha poet-saints. 


Purdnik. “ A Brahman well read in the Purans. <A public 
expounder of them.” On account of the vast extent 
of Sanskrit literature those who expound the sacred 
books have to specialize. There are those whc make 
a speciality of expounding some Puran and are known 
as Puraniks. 


Purusha. See Prakriti. 


Ss 


Sadguru. Literally a true, or good guru (see Guru). 
While primarily the word applies to human teachers, 

or gurus, the poet-saints even applied it to god, for a 
sadguru is regarded as a manifestation of God. The 

- Maratha Poet-saints frequently refer to the high moral 


EKNATH 289 


qualities, the sincerity, the unselfishness, the unhypocri- 
tical spirit, that marks a sadguru, as distinguished from. 
a false guru. 


Sddhana. The means employed to obtain deliverance from: 
births and deaths and all that life implies in its sins. 
and sorrows and even joys. 


Saguna. See Nirguna. 


Santa. A saint, practically synonymous with sdédhu (which: 
see). He is one who has lost worldly desires and’ 
devotes himself to the worship of God. But whatever: 
he may appear outwardly, no one is a santa without 
purity of heart and life. The appellation Kavi-santa, 
or poet-saints, designate those saints who were poets.. 
The Maratha poet-saints begin with Dnydanesvara, 
about A.D. 1290, so far as their works are known, and 
continue to the present day. 


Sansdéra. 1 The world, mundane existence, human life, 
man’s mortal state. 2 The affairs of life; worldly 
business ; the vocations and engagements, the cares and 
troubles of secularity. 


Sannydési. | One who has cast off all worldly possessions, 
and carnal or natural affections, an ascetic. The 
poet-saints distinguish between the hypocritical, formal 
Sannydsi, who outwardly appears only to have given 
up all, and the true and sincere sannydsi, whose giving 
up of the world is genuine. 


Satchidananda. Existence-intelligence-joy. Although 


Brahma, or the paramdtma cannot be described in 
19 , 


290 EKNATH 


human words (avachya), yet because, it is believed 
to exist, to be that which takes the form of intelligent 
beings, and to express itself in beings feeling joy— 
Brahma being the substrate of these—this definition of 
Brahma is very frequently employed. It should be 
noted that these three words, existence, intelligence 
and joy are not adjectives, but nouns. They do not 
connote that Brahma exists, is inteligent and happy, 


but that the One substance, Brahma in taking form, 
appears in the form of existing things, in the form 


of intelligent beings, and those possessing joy and 
goodness. 


Sadhu. A holy man; a saint or sage; one of subdued 
passions and of contemplative habits. The poet- 
saints give the word a moral emphasis, hence a sddhu 
is a man of pure character, one truly devoted to God, 
a spiritually minded man; a good man. A man can 
appear hypocritically a sddhu, and not be a sddhu, for 
a sédhu must be pure in heart and life. The wandering 
professional sdédhu, called such, may or may ‘not be 
sincere, but he is not considered a true sddhu without 
purity of heart and life. 


Sdshtdnga-namaskdra. See Namaskara. 


Sayujyaid. The fourth of the four states in which 
mukii (final deliverance) is distinguished, viz., absorp- 
tion into the essence of Brahma. The four are 
Sayujyata (absorption into the essence of Brahma;) 
Salokata (residence in the heaven of a particular 
deity) ; Samipataé (Nearness to the Deity); and Saru- 
pata (Bearing the likeness of God). 


EKNATH 291 


Sdvadhaéna. Literally “attention,” “heed.” At the 
moment of marriage, the priests in solemn tone repeat 
the words “ Sdvadhdnam, sdvadhdénam”’ and at that 
moment the curtain between the bride and bridegroom 
is removed, and the marriage is complete. 


Siddi. “ A supernatural power or faculty supposed to 
be acquirable through the performance of certain 
magical, mystical, or alchemical rites or processes. 
Eight are enumerated, viz., anima, mahimd, garimd, 
laghima, prapti, prakémya, ishitva, and vasitva.” The 
powers or siddhis are personified as female beings, or 
siddhis, who come and serve those who by their austeri- 
ties or otherwise gain those powers. 


Sréddha. A kind of funeral rite or ceremony in honor of 
the departed spirits of dead relatives, observed with 
great strictness at various fixed periods, especial honor 
being given to paternal and maternal ancestors. 


Sudra. The fourth grand division of the Hindu body; 
also an individual of it. The four grand divisions 
are Brahmana, (the priestly caste); Kshatriya, (the 
warrior, military, governing class); Vaisya (agricul- 
tural and mercantile class) and Sudra (the servile class, 
whose duty is to serve the upper three). The atisudra, 
also called andmik, antyaja, are those still lower than 
the Sudra, and outside of the four grand divisions. 
Hence they are asprisya (Untouchable) or andmika 
Unmentionable). 


Santi. Peace. Unruffled mind. 


292 EKNATH 


Sloka. A verse, a stanza, a quantity of four lines. A 
particular metre; praise. In the Marathi commen- 
taries the Sloka commented on is the Sanskrit text. 


Sruti, The Vedas severally or collectively. The word 
is from the Sanskrit, meaning “ hearing.” 


Skandha. A section of a book, a book, a chapter. 


Stotra. 1 Praise, panegyric, eulogium. 2 A book or writing 
in celebration of the praises; also a hymn. 


Svdmi. A master or lord, the master or lord of, also 
the proprictcr or owner of. Applied to the Deity, a 
god, a king, or prince, a spiritual preceptor, a husband, 
a holy personage, a learned Brahman, a Gosavi, 
Sannyasi etc. It is used also as a title, as Kesava- 
svami. 


T 


Tapa. Religious austerity, pious mortification of the 
body. It is especially connected with the yoga 
system, and the yogis carry it to its extreme limit. But 
it also has less austere usage, meaning the duties of 
life, the special duties of Brahmans, Kashatriyas, 
Vaisyas and Sudras. It is, therefore, the correla- 
tive of Japé. Japa signifying the inner spiritual life, 
and tapa the outer religious life. (See Japa). 


Tilak. The spot or line made with coloured earths or 
unguents upon the forehead. It is considered either 
as an ornament or as a sectarial distinction. 


EKNATH 293 


Tirtha. 1 A holy or sacred place, any place of pilgrimage, 
but especially particular spots along the course of 
sacred streams or in the vicinity of sacred springs. 
2 A holy stream, or water brought from one. Water 
in which a Brahman, sannydasi etc., has dipped his 
foot, which has been poured over an idol; holy 
water.” 


‘Tulsi. A plant venerated by the Hindus, Holy Basil, 
Ocymum sanctum. It is usually grown in an earthen 
altar before the door of the house, or in the garden 
behind the house. Its leaf is used in offerings, in 
garlands, and its stalks also have sacred uses. Those 
worshipping the plant go around it, keeping it to the 
right (pradakshina) with palm to palm, repeating a 
mantra, or prayer. 


U 


Upasand. Worship or religious service. 


V 


Vida. A roll of the leaf of Piper-betel with Areca-nut, 
cloves, lime etc. It is usually chewed after a meal. 
It is distributed to an audience after a kirtan, or any 
public assembly, and is the final act. It is believed to 
be a digestive, and also as purifying the mouth. It 
is generally called pan-supari (leaf supari nut). Many 
have the habit of chewing it constantly. 


Videhi. Literally, one without a body (vi-deha). In usage 
however, it implies a temporary or permanent absorp- 
tion of the mind in a way to make one unconscious of 


294 


EKNATH 


the possession of a body, as when one is intensely 
listening to a kirtan, he is for the time being a videhi. 
Or when through a life of constant contemplation of 
the dtmd, or of God, the ascetic cr devotee loses all 
thought of his body, of cold or heat, hunger or thirst, 
desires or passions, he is a videhi. A man is a videhi 
when the spiritual completely dominates the physical. 


Vatrdgi. An ascetic or devotee; one who has subdued 


his worldly desires and passions. The word is also 
applied to a class of religious mendicants. The word 
is also pronounced bairdgi. The poet-saints disting- 
uish between the true and the hypocritical vairdgi. 


Vairdgya. 1 Absence of worldly desire or passion. 2 


Popularly, Renunciation of all sensuous delight 
or gratification. 
Ww 


Wadé. 1 A stately or large edifice, a mansion or palace. 


.2 A division of a town, a quarter, a ward, as Brahman- 
wada, Maharwada.” 


Wada. 1 An enclosed piece of meadow-field, or garden 
ground; anenclosuere. 2 A cluster of huts of agricul- 
turists, a hamlet.” 


Y 


Yama. The god who rules over the spirits of the dead. 


Yoga. Spiritual or abstract devotion; union with Brahma 


through abstract meditation, or contemplation ; also the 
practice or exercise of this sort of worship. 


EKNATH 295 


Yogabhrashta, One who was interrupted in his preced- 
ing birth during <he performance of Yoga (abstract 
meditation upon Brahma).’ As an example, a pious 
outcaste, devoted to Eknath, is called a Yogabhrashta. 
In the Autobiography of Bahinabai, a calf, because of 
its peculiar pious actions, is called a yogabhrashta. 
Indeed any pious person can be described as a yoga- 
bhrashta, as one whose pious life in a former birth 
was accidentally interrupted and has now a further 
opportunity. 


Yogi. 1 A performer of the abstract meditation called 
yoga. 2 An ascetic or devotee in general. Popularly 
a yogi is supposed to be able to gain extraordinary 
powers through his practice of yoga, called siddhis 
(which see), and the ash-covered yogi is able to instil 
much fear in the minds of the ignorant. The poet- 
saints, of course, distinguish between the hypocritical 
yogi and the true yogi whose heart and life must be 
pure. 


Yojana. A measure of distance equal to four Kos 
roughly about eight miles. 


