===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.459780.Elements-Of-Hindu-Iconography-Vol-2-Part-2_djvu.txt =====

CLEMENTS OC HINpU 1CONOORAPMY 




ELEMENTS 


HINDU ICONOGRAPHY 


BY 

T. A. GOPINATHA RAO, MA. 

EUPKttNTEMDENT Or MCHJBOLOOY, TSAVAKCOtg STATE 



THE LAW PRINTING HOUSE 
MOUNT ROAD :: :: MADRAS 
1916 


All Righto Reserved. 



FRJKTKD A*3 TH b 1 AW PRINTING HOUSE 
MOUH7 ROAD, MADRAS. 



SUBRAHMANYA. 




SUBRAHMANYA. 

S UBRAHMANYA is almost exclusively aSouth 
Indian deity. There is not a village, how- 
ever small, which does not possess a shrine for 
Subrahmanya. In fact tho popularity of this deity 
with the South Indian is so great as to induoe him 
to build shrines for him in all places such as towns, 
villages, gardens, mountain tops and other odd 
places. Strangely enough Subrahmanya is less 
known and less worshipped in Northern India ; thore 
are not many temples of this god in Northern India. 
In Bengal it is stated that he is worshipped by 
disreputable women on certain occasions, while in 
the Bombay Presidency no sumangali (a woman 
whose husband is alive) would visit the temple of 
Karttikeyasvamin (Subrahmanya). 

The birth of Karttikgya or Subrahmanya is 
given at some length in the B&lak&nda of the 
R&m&yana. Siva, after he was married to Umfi, 
began to indulge in gratifying his love towards 
her; a thousand years of the gods passed thus 
but no issue was born. The gods in the meanwhile 


416 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 

becoming alarmed that the offspring which might 
be born to Mahadeva would be of an extraordinary 
character, entreated him to practise austerity. 
6iva acceded to their prayer but inquired what 
would become of the seed which he had already 
discharged. The gods replied that this should be 
received by the earth and Agni and V&yu should 
enter it. Agni accordingly entered it and pro- 
duced a white mountain, where Karttikeya was 
born. Out of gratitude, the gods worshipped 6iva ; 
tho consort of &iva cursed the gods that their wives 
should become barren, because she was denied the 
pleasure of becoming a mother. 

In another place in tho same work the birth of 
Karttikeya is described differently. While 6iva, the 
lord of the gods, was performing penance, the other 
gods went to Brahma and asked him to provide them 
with a general in the place of 6iva, their former 
commander, who had since taken to austerities. 
To this Brahui^ replied that in consequence of 
the curse of UmA no sons could be born to the gods : 
but he suggested that Agni could beget a son on 
G&hga and that the offspring might become the 
general of tho gods. In obedience to the advice of 
Brahma, the gods went to the mount Kailasa and 
appointed Agni to carry out their wish. Agni accord- 
ingly consortod with Gahgi and begot Karttikeya. 


416 



SUBRAHMANYA. 


The Vana-parvan of the Mahtiblihrata has 
another aooount of the birth of Karttikgya. Indra, 
whose army (devasena) was defeated by the d&navas, 
was meditating upon his reverses, when he heard 
the ory of a female calling for help and invoking a 
husband to afford her protection. 1 ndra seeing that 
she had been seized by the demon KCfiin remon- 
strated with him. But the a$uru did not need it 
but hurled his club against Indra. Indra cut it 
off with his vajra and Kdsin was finally doieated 
and driven away. Indra then learnt from the 
woman he had rescued that she was called Devasena 
(the army of the gods) and that she had a sister 
namod Daityasena (the army of the demons) and 
that they both were the daughters of Prajapati. 
She added that her sister liked Ke6in, but she 
herself did not ; therefore she requested Indra to 
secure for her a proper husband who would be able 
to overcome all the enemies of the gods. Indra 
took Devasena to Brahma and dcBircd him to 
provide her with a valorous husband ; Brahma 
promised that the help-mate of Devasena would 
soon be born, under the circumstances desoribed 
below. 

Vasishtha and other rishis performed an 
y&jna to which the gods headed by Indra went to 


68 


417 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


reoeive oblations. Agni, being invoked, descended 
from the sun, entered the fire, received oblations of 
tho risk is and presented them to the gods. Then 
he behold tho wives of the rUhts and became per- 
turbed by dosircs. His heart felt distressed because 
ho failed to obtain the wives of these br&hmanas ; 
he therefore resolved to abandon his corporeal form 
and went away to tho forest. Meanwhile, Sv§h5, 
tho daughter of Daksha, who was loving Agni 
from her youth, discovering the cause of Agni’s 
discomfiture resolved to take the forms of the 
wives of the rts/uv and to present herself to 
Agni. Assuming first the form of Siva, the wife 
of Aiigirasa, SvahA addressed Agni thus : “ Agni, 

you ought to love me, who am troubled with love 
for you. I am the wife of tho rishi Angirasa. If 
you will not do so, look upon me as dead ”. Agni 
embraced her with ]oy and delighted her. Assum- 
ing tho form of a (Sarudi bird to avoid detection, 
Svaha issued from the forest and beholding a white 
mountain surrounded by palisadts of arrows, guard- 
ed by seven- hooded snakes and r&kshasas and 
others, went <|Uiokly to its summit which was 
difficult of access antf threw the seed into a golden 
receptacle. Thus did this goddess enjoy the com- 
pany of Agni by assuming successively the forms 
of the wives of the rishis. But she could not take 


418 



8UBBAHMANYA. 


the divine form of Arundiytfii, the wife of Vasishtha, 
owing to the power of the latter’s austerity and her 
obedience to her husband. Six times was the seed 
of Agni thrown by the enamoured Sv&hft into the 
receptacle from the pratipada day (tho first day of 
a fortnight). The ooi looted seed which was dis- 
charged (skantia) by Agni gem. rated a son and gavo 
to the child tho character of Bkanda. liu.siara was 
born with six beads, twelve arms, ears, eyes and feet, 
one neck and one holly. He wa j maclo the com- 
mander of the army of the gods and Devasgna was 
married to him. 

The wiveH of tho six rishis who wore discarded 
on suspicion by their husbands repaired to Skanda 
and oomplamod to him that they wore unjustly 
abandoned by their husbands and consequently 
became degraded from their former position 
and entreated him to secure for them heaven 
( s varga ). Skanda granted them thoir desire and 
kept them with him. Svihi then approaohed 
Skanda and informed him that Bhe was his genuine 
mother and then told him that from her childhood 
she loved Agni but that her love was unrequited by 
him and desired that sho should somehow bo made 
to live perpetually with Agni. Skanda conferred 
this boon upon her saying that whatever oblations 
of br&hmanas was introduced by hymns, they 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


should always lift it and throw it in the fire saying 
‘ Svihi ’ and that Agni should dwell oontinually 
with her. 

Then Praj&pati asked Skauda to go to Mahi- 
deva, the vexcr of Tripura. Addressing Skanda as 
the uncouquered, Prajapati informed him that he 
had been produced lor the good of the gods and of 
all the world by Hudra who had entered Agni and 
Uma who had entered into Svaha. Skanda was 
received with due honour by the bull-bannered 
liudra with his consort Uma. 

It is stated about Skanda that because he was 
honoured by Rudra he was the son of Rudra. 
Again the brahtnanas tall Agni Rudra; conse- 
quently Karttikev a is the son of Rudra; the seed 
which was discharged by Rudra became a white 
mountain and this seed of Agin was formed by the 
Krittikas on the white mountain. Skanda, that 
most eminent deity, being born of Agni, who was 
Rudra and fiom S\aha and the six wives of the 
r's/n.s was the son of Rudra. Thus then it will be 
seen a sort of confusion ayose about the real parent- 
age of Skanda and attempts are made to establish 
the identity of Agni with Rudra. This identity is 
based upon the Vedic assertions that Agni is the 
same as Rudra. 


120 



BUBRAHMANYA. 


Almost the same account is given in all the 
later works such as the K/ulk&rasamb’hava, etc. 

The dgamas state that the temple for Subrah 
many a may be constructed on all sides of a town 
except the oast and it might face any direction. 
Those temples may be built in capital cities, in 
towns, villages, on the tops ot mountains, on the 
banks of rivers, in garden fnresi. '»r under large 
trees. They may stand separately as a. sx'ayampra- 
dhana temple or be attached to some otlu rs, such as 
that of &iva. Different kinds of central shrines 
are prescribed for the temple of Bubrahmanya ; 
these may contain from one to seven talas (storeys) 
and may be surrounded by praharas or circuits and 
adorned with manfapas or pavilions, and other 
adjuncts. As usual the size of the shrine of this 
god is also determined with reference to the height 
of the imago to be set up in it. The temples of 
Subrahmanya are to be adorned with either pea- 
cocks or elephants placed in the corners of the vi- 
mdna, where generally Garuda or Nandi is seen in 
the temple of Vishnu or 6iva respectively. 

In a svayampradh&na temple of Bubrahmanya 
there are required to be set up eight parivUra- 
devatas , namely, Yaksbendra, Kakshasendra, Pisi- 
chendra, Bhutarat, Gandharva, Kinnara, Daityana- 
yaka and Danavadhipa. The figures of these are to 


421 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 

be placod on the eight cardinal points of the prdk&ra; 
Yakshendra being on the oast, Rakshasendra on 
the south-east and so on. These Parivara-dovat&s 
are to be sculptured as having two or four arms and 
they should be of dark complexion and terrific look. 
If they have four arms, two of the hands are to be 
held in the varada and the ahhatja poses, while the 
remaining two should carry the khadqa and the 
khetaha. But if they have only two arms, the hands 
should keep the Kliadqa and the Khetaha. 

Besides the pat team d? raids mentioned above, 
the tempi*- of Suhtahmanva is required to have 
eight harlrtt- patakas or body-guards. They are 
named Shanmukha, Saktipam, Karttikeya, Guha, 
Skanda, Mayuravalntn, Seuani and Saktihastavan. 
They are also, like the pant ara-devatas, required to 
he represented with four or two arms; if they have 
four arms, two hands out of the four should be held 
on the chest m the ah) alt posp and the remaining 
two are to keep in them the rajra and the padma. 
The iarlta pill a Las may have one or six faces and 
must be located on the eight cardinal points begin- 
ning from the east as iu the case of the parivara- 
dcvatds. but perhaps in a second avarana. If they 
cannot he represented regularly by sculptured 
figures, at least pf^luis representing them must be 


122 



SUBBAHMANYA. 


set up, with a peacock or a^elephant kept in front 
of them. 

The Kum&ra-tantra mentions a much larger 
number of parivhra-dnmtas ; eight, twelve, sixteen 
or thirty-two devatas are prescribed in it. If eight 
devatas arc to be set up, wo aio told that on the 
east, facing the deity, should be the figure of an 
elephant that on the south-east. S&sta ; in the south, 
Brahmi; on the south-west, the Saptn-matrikas ; on 
the west, JyesbthS ; on the north-west Durga; on 
the north, Kshetrapa and on the north-east, 
Suwitraka. The names of the )xirt viira-iUvatax * of 
the groups of twelve, etc., are given in the foot-note 
below. 


* The names of the twelve panvara-divatas are, the 
elephant, Surya, Sasta, Brahma, Yama, Sapta-matrikas. 
Varuna, Agastya, Durga, Narada, Siisa and Sumitra. The 
following are the names of the sixtoou parivaro-devatas : — the 
elephant, Brahma, Agastya, Narada, Sumitraka, Bukra, Bfl- 
baspati, Durga, Dili, Aditl, Chandra, Surya, SAsta, Maha- 
lakshml and Bharati and the Sapta-mAtrikas. 

To make up the thirty-three parivara-devatas, the follow- 
ing are added to the above mentioned sixteen deities, namely, 
the Ashta-dikpAlakas, Sudeha, Suresa, Sumukha, Bhfingi, 
VAsuki, Ashtavara (vakra ?) Bbringi (Bhijigu ?) Daksha- 
PrajApati, Vlrabbadra, S$ukra,.Bhu. JyAehfcha and two others. 


433 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


In the north-east corner of the temple of 
Subrahmanya should be sot np either the image of 
Skanda-Chanda or the famous Sak&lya-pltha. 
Skanda-Chanda might have four or two arms ; in 
the first case, the two frout hands are to be held 
in the nbhaya and tho carada poses respectively, 
while the back ones should carry the vajr&yudka 
and a lotus flower. 

The image of Subrahmanya is seen sculptured 
in different ways. We have instances of standing 
and seated figures of this deity ; some have six 
faces while others onlv one , some have two arms 
while others have from four to twelve arms ; some- 
times the image of Subrahmanya is seen with that 
of one Sakti (goddess) and often with two. He is 
further represented as a boy who has not undergone 
the upanayaua (or the initiation) ceremony or as 
one who has undergone it. Then again he appears 
as a youth of resplendent beauty. The seated 
figure is either on a padmasana or on a peacock. 
It is laid down as a rulo that if the figure is 
a soated one, 'it should have only two arms ; if a 
standing one, four ; and lastly, if it is seated upon 
a peacock, it may have six, eight or twelve arms. 
The sitting posture is recommended for repre- 
senting the yoga (d hr lira) bera, the standing posture 


424 



SUBBAHMAYNA. 


for the bhdga (utsava) 6?ra^ and the figure seated 
on vehicles for dhy&na beras (images meant for 
fixing one’s thoughts upon and meditating). The 
image with two arms is said to he stltrik, one with 
four arms rajasik and one with more arms than 
four iamaaik in nature. 

Subrahmauya with two ari: . may be sculptur- 
ed in any one oi the fivt iol 'owing maunon - 

(i) in the first mode the mayo might keep 

in the right hand a [Hid ia and tho loft 
hand may be resting upon the hip 
( hatijaralamhtta ) ; 

(ii) in the second mode the right hand may 
be held in the nbhaya pose and the left 
in the lah/aialainbita pose; 

(iii) in the third mode the right hand may 
carry a danda and the loft hand may be 
in the kahjavalambita poso; 

(iv) in the fourth mode tho right hand may 
carry the saktyayudha and the left the 
vajra, and 

(v) in the fifth mode the right hand may 

carry a iaktyayudha and the left a 
kukkuta <si fowl). 

In the oase of the figure of Subrahmanya with 
four arms the hands are required to be kept in any 

435 

(4 



HINDU ICONOGBAPHY. 


one of the seven poses and to carry articles as given 
in the following table 


No. 


Bight Hands. 
I. II. 


Left Hands. 

I. II. 


a. lAhhaya ... 

b. lAhhaya .. 
o |Ahhft\a .. 
d. i Abbay a ... 
o. | Ahim\a ... 

f. |Abha\a ... 

g. 'Kbadga .. 


i ' 

ISikti ... Vnrrida ... Vajra. 

1 ‘tkahamala... Varada ... Kamafldalu. 

Akshauiaia... KnUavalatnbita Kamaridalu. 
tfak'i ... Knt\avalnmbita Kukkufca. 

Snkti .. Akbhaniala ... Kukkuta. 

Sukti ... Kutvavalambita | Kamnndalu« 

Siikti ... KhtUka ... t Kukkuta. 


Subruliinanyn with two or fonr arms is said to 
bo capablo of giving sidd/u to bis worshippers. 

Tbo figure of Kubrahmanya with six arms 
should have m its right bauds abhaya , khadya and 
kih I i ; and in tbo loft bands h hot aka, a l sham ill a and 
kukkuta. The imago of Sahrabtuanya with eight 
arms should be roprew riled as carrying in its bauds 
tbo vaj)a, &ahft, abhaya, i a rad a , Mi tidy a, klictaka, 
buna and dhanus ; or. thrj may keep tlie padma, 
vajra, iakti, abhaya , varada, khadya, khetaka and 
p&ka. 

Subrabmanya mtti twelve arms may be 
sculptured in six different ways; the following 
tfible furnishes the information regarding the poses 
of the bauds and the objects carried in them : — 




Ill 


8UBBAHMANYA. 



m 




. 

3 

•a 

*T 

. 


> 

j -w : o$ 

►>, In '"J 

«3 ,fi 9 dS aJ lai -S- 

-i: eg s a U to 

JO “ J 'aJ as ~ 

<P*<«OW | 


HH 

W 

«s «’ 

ns * *G . . . 

« * 0 o o o 

Ss"a 

► tn> 

> 

^ 'BQ 5 
'* tr , {« a a 

tf'SSx a -3 

_ oph **<« a 


t— 1 
* 

_ *T -i O C _ 

■2 #-ao N 

'dr. £ < 

! IV - 

* S . * « 

g jtf 5 £J * as 

t 2 ^ TT 'W -a 

£ -C stf 'tf -£5 

Oa ou, a- < j 

1 

X 

, »A 

9 3 ( 

a a j<3 -t3 6 * 

ns 2 *2 fl a 

eg £ r 08 ^ las 

PP^fl Pm 

j hi. 

. . . • • • i 

i 

J> o o 6 * “ 1 
TiOCQlS^ 1 

-C n -C 

W OW 

1 

1 

i 

W 

1— t 

« * * 

IS 13 2 w ^ « 

WWW Ph o 

»-* 

tft 

c) o id 9 « 
fl 5 > Q G- 

1(5 W J3 ^ a* itS 

n Q >a 

1 

1 

> 

oo eg CD «S 

3 „3 P £ 3 

gS 5 « tH 

* -fl VOO -G '5 

-C 3 -C ,3 -O S 

O'OT O PLh <j w 

»— i 

5 6 6 6 6 6 

■»gr} Q Q P Pi fi 


HH 

> 

CS (Bo- 

>_ >_'W H 

No. 

as *G o TJ © 


6 

55 

« ja ©ns 6 «•* 


427 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


The Ugamas mentioned the appropriate forms 
of the image of Subrahmanya that should be set up 
in temples erected for that deity in towns of differ- 
ent kinds * the image that must grace a temple 

* According to the Kdmtkagama towns are divided into 
the following classes according to its residents, etc.: — 

The village resided in hy learned br&hmanas is called a 
mahgala or an agrahdra. The place whioh has a mixed popula- 
tion of brahiuanas and other cantos is said to be grama. The 
place where a rich landlord lives with only bis tenants and 
dependants is called a hutiha or an ekabhoga ; ( kuttka is a Tamil 
word, ku(h, rendered thus in Sanskrit), That portion of a 
pura (town) whioh is inhabitod by br&hmaoas and surrounded 
by their gardens is called a kharva{a . A place full of trading 
population of all classes an 1 is visited by maritime people of 
other nations and is situated on the be i-ooast is called a paftana. 
The suburb in a vana (forest) or rdjya solely inhabited by 
Sudr&B is called either a Linfaka, khetaka or grama. The 
capital of a subordinate chief is oalled a iibira and 
the town where the elephants and horses of the king are 
stationed is a acnasthdna and that w here tbe(king lives and has 
a large population of all classes, and is provided with many 
secret passages is oalled a stnamukha. That portion of a 
town whore travellers and sannydsms are fed and lodged is 
oalled a ma{ha. The town where large military forces are 
stationed is a vulydithdna , if the lattsr has in it the palaoe of 
the king also, it goes by the name of rdjadhdm . Those places 
which adjoin gramas, etc , arc known by the names of kubja 
(Tam, kuppavi) and chenka (Tam. chert). The quarters 
oocupied by weavers in a grama, etc., is a nagari. 


428 




8UBEAHMANYA. 


constructed for this deity yt the rhjadh&ni (the 
capital oity) of a reigning sovereign is to be one 
with six faces, six amiB, twelve eyes and twelve or 
six ears. It should keep in its hands the iakti, 
khafiga, aksham&In, abhaya , kukkuta and khefyika. 
The image that should be set up in a g-dma 
or a pr&s&da (palace) should have twelve arms ; the 
right hands of this image should carry the iakti, 
musala , kha$ga, chakra, pft&a attd abhuya , and 
the left hands, the vajta , dhanus, Ihtaka, iikhi - 
dhvaja (a banner made of peacock leathers), ankvia 
and varada. (Sec PI. CXXV11I.) This figure should 
be of the colour of the rising sun and bo draped in 
red clothes and bo adorned with a karant}a-makut,a, 
and the yajhdpavlta and be seated on a peacock with, 
on either side, a figure of a devl. Though different 
types of images of Subrahmanya are prescribed for 
consecration in different kinds of villages there is 
no positive objection to any of the five types of the 
image of this deity, namely, those with two, four, 
six, eight or twelve arms, being set up in any kind 
of town. 

Subrahmanya is known by several names, the 
chief among them are Karttikeya, Shanmukha, or 
Shadanana, Saravanabhava or Sarajanman, Sen&ni, 
Tarakajit, Kraunchabhetta, GangAputra, Guha, 
Agnibhu, Skanda and Svamin&tha. Most of his 


439 



HINDU ICONOGEAPHY. 

epithets have reference to the circumstances of his 
birth. 6iva cast his seed into Agni who being 
unable to bear it cast it into the river Ganges ; 
bonce Skanda is called Agnibhu and GahgSputra. 
The seed was then transferred to the six Krit- 
tikas when they went to bathe in the Ganges, eaoh 
of whom therefore conceived and begot a son ; all 
those children afterwards became combined in one 
being having six lu ads and twelve arms and eyes. 
Hence ho became know n by the names of Kartti- 
keya, Shanmukba and Khadanana. According to 
another account the seed of Siva was cast by the 
river Ganges into a thicket of reeds (& ara) and the 
boy who came out ol the thu ket of grass came to 
be known as tin* Sar.ijanman. Subrahmanya 
pierced the Ivrauneha mountain and hence he was 
called Kraunchabhotta. He commanded the army 
of tho devati against the asura Taraka whom ho 
vanquished and killed. Therefore he got the names 
Devasenapati and Tarakari. He is called Guha 
because he lived in a receptacle for six days before 
he was fully formed. Because he was born from 
the discharged seed (si anna) Of 6iva ho was known 
as Skanda. 

The most characteristic weapon of Subrahmanya 
is the iaktt ; the Marluu<fei/a-purdna gives a short 
account of the origin of this weapon thus : Surya 


430 



SUBBAHMANYA. 


(the sun) was onoe so powerful that his heat was 
oausing damage to the world. 'ViSvakarman, the 
celestial mechanic, contriv'd to abstract a portion of 
the solar gloiy and rendered him innocuous. ‘ From 
the power taken a'vay In in tv ry>, \ -vaknrman fas- 
hioned’ the kaldipajudha foi im n ; S dir.ihaianja. 
It is worth notun; timt i p< *tioj »/ *>.e solar 
glory was ti.uislimd to Submhnmnyn, who. accord 
ing to the fihar.dii/at-piiiand, toon hi*- at near 
Surya whin tlu* (huh/us utiu< ted him \ ml when tho 
gods rallied round lum for l h support The same 
pmii’ja informs usll .it tl < It Hi o pa nil, a \ of Subrah- 
manyaare Surva under the name of Hajuaand Aiva 
nndi r the name ol Siausha. Those facts coupled 
with the information regarding the origin of Bubrah- 
manya distinctly point to its origin to the sun- 
myth. We saw in the first instance that Agni was 
invoked by the rishis for receiving the oblations in 
their j jajna and that he descended from the sun ; 
the Mahabharata states that on the day the risliis 
began their i/ajha the sun and the moon were 
together, that is, the day was a new-moonday; 
beginning from the pratipada day the seed of Agni 
was gathered for six dayB and on the shashtfii tithi 
Snbrahmanya of tho colour of the rising sun came 
into existence. His di'drapdlakas, we saw above, are 
Surya and Aiva (who is the same as Agni or Budra). 


431 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


A dhy&na-UOka current in some parts of 8. India 
actually describes him as Bury)*. AU these facts 
clearly point to the sun-mytw as the origin of 
Bubrahmanya ; his six heads perhaps represent the 
six ritui or seasons, the twelve arms, the twelve* 
months ; the kukkufa or the fowl the harbinger of 
the rising sun and the peacock whose feathers 
display a marvellous blending of all oolonrs repre- 
sents the luminous glory of the sun; the kakbyd- 
yudha is also of solar origin. 

Corresponding to the various names of Subrah- 
manya are images whose descriptions are found in 
almost all the agavias. The following are some of 
the important aspects of Bubrahmanya dealt with 
in the Kumara-tantra, viz., 

i. Saktidhara, ix. Shanmukha, 

ii. Skanda, x. Tarak&ri, 

iii. Senapati, xi. Senani, 

iv. Bubrahmanya, xii. Brahma-sSsta, 

v. Gajavahana, xiii. Yalli-kalySna- 

snndaramurti, 

vi. Saravanabhava, xiv. BSlasvSmi, 

vii. KftrttikSya, xv Kraunchabhetta and 

«' viii. Kumftra, xvi. Sikhivfthana. 

To this list are added a few more by the 
vanidhi ; the descriptions of these are given briefly 
below. 


m 



SUBRAHMANYA. 


&aktidhara : This aspect oftlubrahmanya should 
have a single face and only two arms. The left 
hand should bear a vajru and the right one the 
ialeii; the latter woapon is said to represent the 
ichchhH, jhana and IrujA kaklis The following 
description of JfiiinaSakti Huhra > "in>a is found 
in the &ntatv* nulla this f< uu of the deny should 
have only one face and four aims uud his head 
adorned with a jatdmaluin ornamented with rubies, 
he should wear a garland of cactus tlowors, and 
his body should la smeared with a pa do of sandal 
and there must be on his < host a white i/ajTiopavUa. 
In three out of the lour hands theie should be the 
kali/. lulLuta and utjia and the fourth hand 
should be held m the (ibhayn pose. It is therein 
stated that this aspect of Subrahruagya is the 
embodiment of jTiUua-iahti. 

Skanda, : According to the Kumdra-tantra 
this aspect should be represented vrithone face and 
two arms and should bo of tbe colour of the lotus. 
The loins are to bo bound by a broad bolt and the 
only clothing which this figure should possess is the 
kaujnna. The right hand should keep a dan$a 
while the left one should test upon the hip (ftaf 
yavalambita). This aspect of Subrahmanya ic 
popularly known as tbe Palaniyftndavar. This it 

483 

6B 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 


the description which is given in the &rUatvanidki 
for VelSyudha-Subrahmanya. This latter work, 
however, gives quite a different description of Skanda 
which is as follows. This aspect of Subrahmanya 
is roquired to possess, as in the previous one, one 
face sot with two eyes, and four arms. He should 
be seated upon a lotus flower ( padm&sana ). His 
head is to be surrounded by a prabha-man^ala ; 
on the head there should be the usual karanfia- 
mahita adorned with a wreath of flowers ; there 
must also bo ornaments made of rubies and on the 
waist a broad girdle of fine workmanship. The 
front two hands should be kept in the varada and 
the abhaya poses while the back hands should 
carry the kukkuta and the vajra. The colour of 
this aspeot of the deity is said to be that of smoke. 

Benapati : This aspect should have the 
brilliance of the sun and should possess six faces and 
twolvo eyes. One of the arms of SenSpati should 
pass round the waist of his devl, who should be 
seated upon bis left lap ; the corresponding right 
hand should keop a lotus. The other hands should 
hold the following objects in them : 6ula, khetaka, 
vajra , dhanus , gada, ghanta, kukkuta and abhaya. 

Under the name Devasenfcpati, the ferltatvanidhi 
gives the following description: He should have 


434 



SUBBAHMANYA. 


one face, two eyes and four arifis : two of the hands 
should be held in the abhaya and varada poses res- 
pectively and tho remaining two should carry the 
iahkha and the chakra ; the oolonr of this aspect of 
Subrahmanya is said to be blacK He should be 
adorned with all ornaments and 1 cuH ha’, »; a white 
yajnopai'lta and his body si uiid b.<\ e *> ( Dating of 
finely smelling sandal paste. The face must bo 
very pretty and a smile must be playing .bout his 
lips. 

Subrahmanya : This aspect ol Ki.anda should 
be of the colour of huhhnna (saffron'; and be adorned 
with keyura , hftra and other ornaments. Ono of 
the right hands should be held in the nbhaya and 
in the rest must be the iakli, kukku^a, and a padma. 
The colour of this aspect of tho deity should be that 
of the rising sun and that of the sandal paste and 
the clothing red. Or, tho figure may have only two 
arms of which one should rest upon the hip 
(katyavalambita) and the other hand bo held in the 
abhaya poBe. 

Gajavahana has also only ono face, two eyes and 
four arms ; in one of tho left hands he should hold 
the kukkuta while the other should be kept in the 
varada pobo ; in one of the right hands there should 
be the sakti and the other should be held in the 
abhaya pose. 


436 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


fearavaiyabhava should have six heads, twelve 
oyes and twelve arms. Two of his hands are to be 
in the abhaya and the varada poses while the 
remaining ones should carry in them the iaJcti, 
fjhantu, dhva ja, fiadina, kuklcuta, p&6a t danda, tanka , 
bilna and dhanns. The complexion of this aspect is 
yellow; the face should resemble a full-blown lotus. 

The Sntalvanidhi, as usual, gives an entirely 
different description of fiaravanabhava. According 
to this authority Aaravanabhava should have only 
one face, three eyes and six arms, be of the colour 
of the rising sun ami he seated upon a lion. The 
body should be covered with ashes ( bhasma or 
vibhuti). There should be in the hands flowery 
arrows, a bow made of sugar-cane, khadga, khetaka, 
rajra and the kukkuta. 

Kiirtlikeya should have six faces and six arms 
and he of the colour of the rising sun. Two of his 
front hands should be kept in the abhaya and the 
varada poses, while the rest should carry vajra, 
Hi? taka, ink ft and Lkadija. 

According to the Sntatvaaidlii Karttikeya 
should have ouo lace with three eyes, ten 
arms and the complexion of the rising sun. There 
should be a fruit (or leaf) of the bitua tree on 


436 



8UBRAHMANYA. 


the head and in (he right bands the kula, the 
chakra , the ahkuia, and abhaija ; in the left hands 
the tdmara, the p&ia, the iahkha, and the vajra and 
varada. He should have lus peacock vehicle by 
his side. Tho complexion of this aspect of 
Rubrahmanya should also he tha ot the rising . uu. 

Kum&ra should hold in his right hands the 
iakti and the hhadga aud m the left ones kukkata 
and the klietaka. The Rritatvamdln substitutes 
the abhaya and varada in the place ol lhadyn aud 
klietaka in the above description. 

Shanmukha : The colour ol Shanmukha should 
be that of kitiikuma (saffron) and he. should be 
se ated on the peacock. As his name indicates he 
should have six faces, twelve eyes and twelve arms ; 
in the right hands he should have the sakti, buna, 
tho kliacjga, dhvaja, gada and abhaya ; and in the 
left ones dhanus, vajra , padnia, kataka-hastx and 
varada (and one more object which is perhaps the 
klietaka). Shanmukha is here mentioned as the 
nephew of Vishnu. The Srltatvanidhi mentions the 
iahkha, chakra, kukkuta, paha and hala as among 
the objects held by the hands of Shanmukha. It 
also states that on either side of Shanmukha there 
should be standing two dec is called Jaya and 
Vijaya. 


437 



HINDU IOONOQBAPHY. 


Tirakztri : The figure of T&rak&ri is required 
to be sculptured with twelve arms, in the hands of 
which there should be the ankuia, dhvaja , kha$ga, 
kataka-hasta, abhaya, j>a&a, chakra , musala , Sakti 
vajra, varada and khetaka. The colour of T&rakari, 
is described as equal to a crore of Arunas shining 
at tho same time. According to the farltatvanidhi , 
Tirakari should have only one face and three eyes 
and he should be seated upon an elephant carrying 
in two of tho right hands the kha^ga and th e Sakti 
and one of them held in tho abhaya pose ; one .of 
the left hands should be in the varada pose and 
the remaining hands should keep the khetaka and 
the akuhamald. 

KrauhchabhTdtci : This aspect of Subrahmanya 
should have six faces and eight arms. In the right 
hands there should bo the khar^ga, Sakti, abhaya 
and bana; and in the left ones varada, vajra, 
dhavux and kliMaka. His complexion is to be that 
of tho lotus flower. 

Kraufiehabhettii according to the Srliatvanidhi 
should be represented with a angle face and four 
arms and three eyes. Two of the hands should be 
kept in the varada and abhaya poses and the re- 
maining hands should carry flowery arrows and a 
bow made of sugarcane ; or, the front two hands 


438 



SUBRAHMANYA. 


should be showu as breaking "Che Krau&cha moun- 
tain. There should bo near him his peaooek 
vehicle. 

Senam should also possess twolvo arms and 
twelve eyes ; the hands should have tn them hha^ga^ 
chakra, ahkuia, iakti, abhaya , 4u.'<i rarada, paama, 
dantfa and gad a. 

Brahma-faun : This is the aBpeot of Hubrikh- 
manya in which ho put down tho pride oi Brahma 
by expooiug his ignorance of the Vedas, lie should 
bo represented with a single face and four arms ; 
he si ou’d have only two eyes In tho back hands 
there should be the alcshamala and tho kamandalu 
and tho fiont hands should bo hold in the varada 
and abhaya poses. The colour of Brahraa-£&gta 
should be the red of tho lotus flower. 

B&lasv&mi is the aspect of Subrahmanya as a 
child. If he is sculptured as standing by the side 
of his parents, as in the Sdm&skanda aspect of 
&iva, he should be represented as a child carrying 
a lotus in each hand ; if, however, ho is shown 
separately, he may be sculptured with a padma in 
his right hand and with the left hand resting 
upon the hip ( katyavalambita ). The colour of this 
aspect is also red. 

£ikhiv&hana is to be of the colour of coral and 
to have a single face and four arms. In one of 


439 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


the hands there should he held the iakti and in the 
other the vajra, while the remaining ones should 
be held in the abhaya and the varada poses respec- 
tively. He is said to he the destroyer of the 
enemies of the gods. 

ValJ'ikahjanasundara : In this aspect Subrah- 
manya is sculptured as being married to Vajli. He 
should he represented in this case as carrying in 
the back right hand the alshaniala and the front 
hand should he held in the abhaya pose ; the front 
left hand should rest upon the hip and the back, 
hand should carry a hamandaln. Brahma with a 
srui'a in Ins hand should he shown as officiating in 
the ceremonies in front of the fire that should 
ho sculptured as burning in a Jainda. Vishnu 
should keep in his hands a water-vesBel ready to 
pour water iu the act of giving the girl in marriage 
to the bridegroom. A host of gods and goddesses 
should be shown as offering praises to the married 
oouplo. Both the bride and the groom should be 
adorned with ail ornaments appropriate to the 
oocasion. The colour of Subrahmanya in this 
aspect also is red. 

The &rUatranid/n adds the description of the 
following aspects of Subrahmanya, namely, Agni- 
j&ta-Subrahmnnya, Saurabheya-S., Gangeya-S. 
Guba-S., Br&hmachari-S., and Desika-S. 


410 



SUBRAHMANYA 

Agnij&ta- Subrahmanya should have two (aces, 
eight arms and a white complexion ; his neck should 
be of black colour ; he should carry in throe out of 
the four right hands tho sruva, an aksham&lti. and 
a khaclga and the remaining hand si ould be kept 
in the svastika pose ; in three of the It ' It 'nds taere 
should be the vcijra, kukk it a, Ur?, taka and an 
a jya-patra (vessel of ghee or clarified butter/ fie 
should be sculptured as engaged m the act of 
offering fire sacrifice. 

Saitrabheya-Sit brahna nija should have four 
faces, eight eyes and night arms and should he seated 
upon a kamalasana ; in the, m-lit h inds tb ( ro should 
be the kakti, a lotus, flowery arrows and abhaya ; and 
in the left hands vajrn , a bow made of sugar-cane, 
a kola, and varada. He should he standing with 
his right leg kept firmly on the ground and the left 
leg somewhat bent. His colour should bo that of 
the lotus flower. 

Gahgeya-Subr&limariya is required to be 
represented with a single face, three eyes and four 
arms. The head must bo adorned with a karan^a- 
malcuta; he should bo standing upon a makara (a 
kind of fish) and should be carrying a flag on which 
is painted a kukku(a, and should bo adorned with 
riildtpala flowers. In his right hands should be a 
paraiu and a purna-Jcumbha (a vessel filled with 


441 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY 


water) ; m the left hands he should keep an arant 
(a pieco of wood which is used in generating fire 
by friction) and a huUiiita. The colour of this 
aspect of Kubralnn.niy.il is that of gold. 

It might be noticed that in all these aspects 
the descriptions are such as to suit the nature of 
the aspect ; for example Subrahmanya, the son of 
Agni, is said to have two faces, the same number 
as possessed by Agni ; he carries an ftjya-pHtra 
truva and other objects necessary for making fire- 
offerings Similarly, in the case of the Gahgeya- 
Subrahmanya, or Subrahmanya the son of fclangi, 
ho is r< 'uired, like Gahga, to ho standing upon a 
makara , carry a pTmuilumblia and adorned with 
nl lutpala or water-lilies, objects characteristic of 
rivers. 

Guha-Subrahmanya should have one face, 
three eyes and four arms. His head should be 
adorned with a lulta made of gold set with rubies. 
In the right hands there should be the vajra and 
the 6ula and the left hands should be held in the 
varada and the ah ho yu poses. Tho colour of Guha 
is black and that ot his clothes white. His Devi 
should be by htb side and they Bhould look like 
a newly marrit d couple. 

Brahmach&ri- Subrahmanya : Subrahmanya in 
this aspeot should have two eyes, two arms and be 


443 



SUBBAHMANYA 


Handing upon a padma Ho must have a tuft of 
hair on hifl head, a i/ajndpaiuta , mavttji (grass 
girdle) and kauplna. The i ght leg should be 
firmly placed upon the padma and tho left one 
slightly bent and n>ted upon d. In tb 1 right 
hand there should bo a dantfa < 11 . i « > tho loft a 
vajra. His complexion should be rod 

DUika-Subralimanya This is the asoect in 
which Subrahmanya tan Jit ftivi, his owr iatber, 
the significance of the sac ted syllabi'' Asa 

teacher he should be upiesi Ted us possessing one 
face, six arms and as ‘va'id upon the peacock. 
His head slionld he adoimd with a 4u?a«<fa- 
maJcuta , two of his hands should earry the iahti, 
one an ahhamCiIa and two others kept in the 
varada and the abhaya poses , tho remaining hand 
should perhaps bo held in the ihinmudrii pose. 
6iva in the aspect of a disciple is called the 6ishya- 
bh5va-murti. The Mcmaiara gives a description 
of the form of Sishyabhavamurti fiiva should be 
seated in front of his teacher Subrahmanya cross- 
legged, with one of his right hands kept closing 
his mouth and another kept on the chest in the 
jn&na-mudrd. pose ; the other two hands should 
carry the tflhka and the mrxga. Ho should have a 
White complexion and his face should resemble the 
full-moon. His head should be adorned with a 


448 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHT. 

crescent moon. Parvatl, bis consort, should also 
be standing by bis side. 

Pis. CXXI-CXXIX illustrate the various 
aspects of Subrahmanya. Fig. 1, PI. CXXI, belongs 
to the collection of the late Mr. M. K. Narayana- 
Bvarai Ayyar and represents Skanda or Velayudha- 
Subrabmunya. In the right hand of the image is a 
danda and a iakti is kept resting on his right arm. 
The left hand rests upon the hip. The image is 
olothed with only a Ttauplna and wears the orna- 
ments generally worn by boys. This is a modern 
piece of work. 

Fig. 2 on the same plate is the photograph of 
the image of Kuinura belonging to the 6iva temple 
at Tiruppalatturai. The image has four arms ; in 
the right hand at the back there is the kakti and in 
the back left hand the oajra ; the front right and 
the loft hands are kept in the abhaya and the 
varada poses respectively. A kaktyayudha rests 
upon the right front arm. 

PI. CXXI1 is the reproduction of the photo- 
graph of Subrahmanya with his two consorts 
Devasena and Valli to be found in the NSge&vara- 
svftmin temple at Kumbhakonam. It is precisely 
similar to the figure of the Tiruppalatturai temp le. 
Herein, Subrahmanya has behind him his peaoook. 







Valli. bubiabumM>a Dovasfina 

Subrahmanya with bis consorts Dfivasena and Valh 
Stone Kumbhako^am. 


t To face page 444} 




PLATt: CXXIV 



Subiabmauya. btone Ellora. 


[To face page 415 j 





Mali iv all i 


s » i!u J ltfinva 


Suhmlunama with hi, consorts DovasSoa and VaHi 
Bron/o Tiruvorriyur. 


DSvasSna. 


[To face page 445] 



8UBRAHMANYA 


The description of the Devls of Subrahmanya is 
givefi As follows in tho Ku mara-tantra : Mahavalli 
should be of black complexion and should have a 
smiling face. She should stand with her right leg 
kept firmly on the ground and tho Vft log 1 opt 
somewhat bent and placed on it She should bo 
holding in her loft hand a padma ^ lotus) and kei 
right hand should be hanging by her :>ido. I he 
complexion of Devasena is red and sho should also 
have a smiling face and standing with her loft log 
kept firmly on the ground and the right one some- 
what bent. She should carry m her right hand a 
rtildtpala flower, and the left one should be hanging. 
These descriptions are rigidly observed in tho sculp- 
ture of the Nagesvarasvamin temple. 

PI. CXXIII is exactly similar to tho previous 
one. The original of this sculpture is in the Siva 
temple at Tiruvorriyur and is executed very skil- 
fully. 

The photograph reproduced on PI. CXXTV is 
that of a piece of sculpture belonging to one of the 
rook temples at Ellora. The central figure, Subrah- 
manya, has four arms and a single face. The front 
right hand which is broken seems to have held the 
iahti, whose head is visible near the figures of a 
Diva and his Devi sculptured on the upper left 
comer. The back right hand rests upon the hip ; 


445 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHT. 

the front left hand carries a kukkuta and the back 
left hand embraces the peacock which standi* Withe 
left of Subrahmanya. There are on either side a 
goat-headed attendant of Subrahmanya ; one of 
these must be Daksha-Prajiipati, who is said to be 
one of the parivata-devatas of Subrahmanya. The 
figure on the left has its left arm crossed against its 
chest and keeps its right one as if going to close 
his mouth, — attitudes which show a great deal of 
reverence. The figure on the left of Subrahmanya 
has its loft hand resting upon its hip and keeps 
something in its right hand. On either side of the 
figure of Subrahmanya and soring in the air are 
two Pevas with their Devis praising him. The 
central figure of Subrahmanya has an yajhdpavlta, 
a udarabandha and a fine liara ; the ears are 
adorned with two different kinds of kunflalas and the 
head is surmounted with a karaijcla-makula, round 
which there is a prabhu-mandala. 

PI. CXXV is the photograph of Subrahmanya 
with his consorts and resembles the other two 
photographs described above. The only difference 
consists in that the figure of Subrahmanya in thin 
instance bears the iaJ.ti and the kukkuta in its 
book right and left hands respectively, while, as in 
the other instances, the front right and left 
are kept in the abhaya and the varada poses 


446 



PLATE CXXV. 



Subrahmapya with his consorlB Dovasona and Vallt 
Stone Kumbhakonam. 


[To face page 446] 









8UBBAHMANYA * 


respectively. Tbe person of Subrahmanya is 
elaborately adorned with all sorts of ornaments. 

Fig. 1, PI. CXXVT is a pure of ivoiv carving 
executed in the School of Arts a i 1’iirandiam and 
closely resembles the previous scu’^tmc. f. H . 2 on 
the same plate represents Subrahm iijya as seated 
upon the peaoook ; the right leg is banging while 
the left one is bent and rested upon the peaoook. 
llhe front hands are in the abhaya and the t>mada 
poses, and the back hinds kerp m them too iakti 
and the vajra. Fig. 3 on the b.itno plate portrays 
Subrahmanya as seated upon the peacock, 
embracing his consort with his right arm and keep- 
ing in his left hand a bow ; whereas the Devi 
embraces her lord with her left arm and carries in 
her right hand an arrow. Fig. 2 may be taken as 
Sikhlvahana and fig. 3 as Senapati. 

PI. CXXVI1 illustrates the description of 
Shanmukha. This beautifully carved figure belongs 
to the Siva temple at Pattlsvaram. It has twelve 
arms of which two are hold in the abhaya and the 
varada poses and the remaining ones carry the 
iakti, tanka, chakra, lhadga and musala (orpaia?) 
and vajra, dlianus, bana, khetaha and iahhha. The 
figure has six heads of which three are visible in 
‘fthe photograph. Behind the figure of Snbrah- 
mapya is his peaoook. 

UT 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


PI. CXXVIII is almost similar to the previotia 
one*; in addition to the weapons mentioned^rT' She 
last plate, there is in this a iaktynyudha made 
separately and kept leaning on the back arms. 
The padmZlsana upon which this image stands is 
hexagonal, specially so made to agree with the 
six faced nature of the deity for whom it serves as 
a pedestal. 

PI. CXXVIIIa is a piece of sculpture which 
ip to be found m the temple at Aihole and repre- 
sents Tarak&ri Tn this Subrahmanya is seen 
riding a peacock and spiritedly attacking the 
fallen Tgrakasura with his kaltyayudha which he 
wields with Ins right hand. The left hand carries 
the vnjra On either side of Subrahmapya are 
two Dovas in the &tidh&sana posture, flying in the 
air and praising him. Above and on either side of 
the central figure are two persons carrying offerings 
and flower garlands. 

PI. CXXIX is a fine piece of sculpture to be 
seen in the front mandapa of the temple of Siva at 
Tirupparankuuram near Madura. It represents 
the scene of the marriage of Subrahmanya with 
Devasena. Subrahmanya is standing on the right 
with his right hand stretched out to receive the' 1 
water which Indr a is ready to pour from a •ww. tamjf . 
vessel, standing behind Devasena on the left. 



PLATE CXXVIII. 







8UBBAHMANYA, ' 


Subrahmanya has in the front left hand a lotus 
and in the baek left one the iakti , it is not appa- 
rent from the photograph what other object is held 
in the back right hand. 

Indra is seen keeping in the right hand the 
tanka and in the left the rajra and with his right 
hand he is pouring water into the hand of 
Subrahmanya. 

Brahm§. is seated in a countersunk surface 
below doing libma (fire offerings) in connection 
with the marriage of Subrahmanya. 

The modesty of the bride is very well portray- 
ed in this piece of sculpture. 

The Kiimara-tantia gives tho description of 
the d varapalaJta.s of the shrine of Subrahmanya. 
They aro called Sudelia and Sumukha ; both of 
those aro said to be brahmanas. They should be 
represented with one face and two or four arms. 
If they possess two arms only, the right hand 
should be held in the abhaya pose and the left hand 
should keep a gada. If they have four arms, the 
back hands should keep in them the vajra and 
the iakti and the front hands as in the oase of 
the two-armed figure. One of these should be of 
red complexion and the other black ; they must be 
adorned with all ornaments and should have side- 
tusks. Their head must have the karan^a-mahu <a j. 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Sudgba should be to the right and Sumukha to the 
left of the entrance. 1 ‘ 

Another attendant of Subrahmanya is called 
Sumitra. His story is given thus in the Kum&ra- 
tantra. There once lived a good brahmana 
named Svarnaksba in Ka6i ; he had ai son named 
Sumitra who had been worshipping Skanda in due 
form during his three consecutive births. Subrah- 
manya was pleased with his devotion to himself 
(Subrahmanya) and gave him the name Sumitra 
(a good friend) and made him the head of the 
gnnas and gave linn a place near him. Then fol- 
lows a description of the image of Sumitra; Sumitra 
Bhould be sculptured according to the utiama-nava- 
tTda measure, wil h t\\ o eyes, two arms and a 
red complexion. lie should have a fine looking 
face aud should he youthful possessing Bide-tusks. 
Tho head should he covered with a karavda-ma- 
kuta hiding his tuft of hair or a jati-makuta. The 
right hand should carry tho kakti and the left 
hand should he kept on Ihe hip ( katyavalambita ). 
Or, the hands may be kept in the anjali pose on the 
chest. He may be sculptured either as seated or 
as stauding on a padm&xana. 

PI. CXXX is the reproduction of the photo- 
graph of Sumukha the left gate-keeper of the shrine - 
of Subrahmanya in the great Siva temple at 


450 



PLATE CXX*. 



Dvarapal&ka of tbe Subrabmapya sbrine ; Stone ; Taojore, 


[To lace page 450) 



SUBRAHMANYA. 


Tanjore. The front right hand of the image bears 
a short sword, while the front left hand carries a 
shield ; the back right hand is in the stir hi pose and 
the baok left hand in the vismai/a pose. The right 
leg of the figure of Sumukha rests upon the head of 
a lion, and the left foot of tho iuup ■ stands upon n 
padm&sana. It is one of the finest pieces of 
sculpture to be found in the Brikadisvara ten pie at 
Tanjore. 


151 




NAND1KESVARA OR 'ADHIKA 
RANANDI. 




nandikeSvara or adhikArakandix. 

A T the entrance into many an important temple 
of §iva in Southern India one meets with a 
pair of images, of which one is a male figure and 
the other a female one, the consort of the former. 
The male figure is shaped exactly like that of Siva 
in the aspect of Chandrasekharamurti. It is seen 
standing upon a padmasana and carrying in its 
back hands the para&u and the mriga ; but, unliko 
the figure of Chandrasekharamurti, which keeps its 
front hands in the varada and the abhaya poses, 
that of Adhikaranandin has them folded on the 
chest in the anjali pose. The figure of Adhikara* 
nandin is sometimes mistaken by the less informed 
persons for that of f'Siva. 

Three different accounts are found of the origin 
of Adhikaranandin. According to the &iva-mah&- 
purina, he was the son of the rislii Salahkayana ; 
thflt following account is given of him by this 
authority : Salahkayana, who was long without a 


456 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


son, was doing penance under a sala tree in a place, 
called SslagrSina. Appreciating his austerities, 
Vishnu appeared before him and asked him to 
request for any boon he desired. The rishi prayed 
that he may be blessed with a son of great virtue. 
Immediately after this request was made, a person 
sprang from the right of Vishnu, who resembled 
6iva in every way. He was given the name 
Nandikefivara. The purava adds that this was the 
forty-ninth birth of Nandikesvara. 

A second account of the birth of Nandikesvara 
runs as follows : m the Treta-yuga, a rishi named 
Nandi was performing a severe penance on the 
peak called Muiijavan on the Mandara mountain. 
&iva pleased with the devotion of Nandi presented 
himself before the rishi. The latter requested Siva 
to grant him the boons that he should have un- 
shakeable faith in and love for Siva, as also that he 
should bo made the head of the ganas. 6iva 
granted him the boons with pleasure and dis- 
appeared. Indra and the other gods were overjoyed 
to see the bliss that befell the rishi Nandi and 
praisod him for his good fortune. 

The Lihga-purana has a third account of the 
origin of Nandikesvara. A blind rishi named 
Silada was practising penance with a desire to 
obtain an immortal son, not born of human beings. 


456 



NANDIKESVARA OB ADHI£5«ANANDL 

Indra becoming pleased with the austerities of this 
rishi resolved to fulfil the rishi’s desire and app- 
roached him and told him that no oue but Siva 
could grant him what he wanted and directed him 
to addrfess his penanoes to that deity. lie did as 
advised by Indra, and Siva pleased with him, 
promised that he would himself be born to the rishi 
as his son ; thereby he intended to satisfy Brahmft 
also who was desirous of Siva taking a human 
incarnation. After somo time, SilAda was ongaged 
in a sacrifice (yaga) ; a lad proceeded from the room 
in which the rishi Silada was performing the yaga, 
he looked precisely like Siva, with a jata-maku{a 
on his head, three eyes and four arms. He was 
carrying in his hands the &ula, the tanka , the gada 
and the vajra. Because Silada became pleased 
with the fulfilment of his desire by the appearanoe 
of this, his son born not by human agenoy, 6iva 
gave the lad the name Nandi and disappeared. 

Then Silada and his son Nandi repaired to the 
former’s fi&rama. There the boy lost his super- 
human form and became quite like any ordinary 
mortal. Though feeling sorry for the change, 
Silada performed on his son the usual ceremony 
such as upanayana, when the boy attained the 
seventh year of age ; he soon became well versed in 
the Vedas. Some time after, two rishis named Mitra 


68 


457 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

and Vnruna cauie to the airama of the rishi Sil&da 
as his guests ; those gazed intently at Nandi and 
perceived through their mental vision that the life 
of the boy was to come to an end in one year more. 
They informed this sad news to the father of the 
boy. The rishi and his father S&lankayana sank in 
despair on hearing the prognostication of their 
guests, and swooned. But, Nandikesvara, though 
internally perturbed, began to meditate upon 
Siva so intently that the latter appeared to him and 
took hold of him m his arms and threw round his 
neck the flower garland an Inch was hanging round 
his own neck. Foithwith the boy was changed 
into a being endowed with three eyes, ten arms 
and appoaranee which exactly resembled Aiva. The 
latter blessed this metamorphosed Nandi to bo free 
from old age and death and also anointed him 
as the head of Ins ijanas and married him to 
Suyaia, the daughter of the Maruts. 

The name Nandikesvara, ‘ the tawny coloured 
dwarf and a follow ei of Aiva occurs in the Itamd- 
yana (V. 17, Sec. 10 of the IJttara-kiinda). There 
he is stated to be another manifestation of Aiva 
(apara tanuh ) and that when he was keeping guard 
over the Kailasa, Havana, the lord of Lanka and of 
the Bakshasas, came driving iu his ferial car and 
wanted to cross the abode of Aiva. But he was 


458 



NANDIKESVARA OR ADHIilftBANANDI. 

promptly stopped by Nandi keSvara. Upon thiB 
Havana made contemptuous tem arks concerning 
the monkey-face of Nandikesvara, Incensed at the 
insult offered to him, he cursed Havana that beings 
possessing the same shape as himself a <4 of similar 
energy (that is, monkeys) would destroy the race of 
Havana. 

Nandikesvara is mentioned also in the Bhbgavata- 
purana. During the yaga that Daksha-prajSpati 
was performing, he spoke tauntingly of Siva. 
Nandi grew angry at the insult offered to his lord 
Siva and pronounced maledictions again bt Daksha 
and the other revilers of Siva. 

The Vishnudharmottara gives the following 
description of Nandikesvara. Ho should have three 
eyes and four arms and a red complexion. His 
garments should be made of tiger’s skin ; in one of 
his hands there should be the tri&ula and in another 
the bhindi ; a third hand should be held over his 
head and the fourth held as though he is command- 
ing a host of people. His gaze should suggest that 
he is seeing objects at a great distance and regulat- 
ing the large crowd of devotees resorting to offer 
worship to Siva. 

Nandikesvara is more often represented as a 
bull than as a bull-faced human being or as a 


459 



HINDU IOONO GRAPH Y. 

duplicate of Siva. The former is kept lying in 
front of the central shrine of all Siva temples. 

An illustration of AdhikSra-Nandin is given on 
FI. CXXXI. The original of the photograph there- 
in reproduced is in the temple of Siva at Valuvflr. 
It iB sculptured precisely like Siva in the aspect of 
Chandraiekharamurti, carrying the parafoi and the 
mriga in tho back right and left hands respectively, 
and standing upon a padmasana ; but unlike 
ChandraSekharamurti who keeps the front right and 
loft hands in the abliaija and the varada poses, 
Nandike&vara has them folded on the chest in the 
anjali pose. The body has throe slight bends in it 
( tnbhanga ). On hib head aro the jatH,-mdku\a and 
the Gangs and the crescent moon. 

PI. CXXXII is tho photograph of the bronze 
Nandi in the Siva temple at Panchanadikkujam ; 
it is an ordinary bull couchant and is placed in the 
Utahn inangapa of tho Siva teinpleB generally. 


460 





PLATE CXXXll. 




C HAN Ots VARA. 




chandESvaka. 

f | 'HE story of ChandeSvara, how ho worshipped 
* Siva and attained to the position of the 
leader of the bhutaganas of Siva, has been given 
already under Chandesanugrahamurti. The image 
of Chandesvara is essential in a Siva tomple and 
should be set up in the north-east corner with 
reference to the central shrine of the tomple. 

The image of Chandesvara may bo set up in a 
shrine unattached to any temple, or as one of the 
parivara-devatas or attendant deities in a Siva 
temple. In the first instance, the shrine of Chan- 
de&vara is said to be svatantra and in the second 
paratantra. The svatantra temple of Chandesvara 
may be situated in any of the eight directions 
(north, north-east, etc.) or in the centre of towns 
and villages. The temple of ChandeSvara may range 
in size from a mere shrine of one cubit cube to a 
ma g nifi cent temple with a base of thirty cubits 
square, surmounted by a vim&na of one to seven 
talas or Btoreys in height, ornamented with the 


163 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

figures of ChandSBvara or any other deity on the 
corners of each tala (storey) ; or, there might be in 
these corners figuros of Nandi, the bull couchant. 
In the case of the temple of svatantra Chande&vara, 
it is required to face any one of the directions 
except the north ; this temple should have pr&k&ras, 
mantfapas, etc., in proportion to the dimensions of 
the oentral shrine. 

Surrounding the central shrine there should be 
eight parivara-murtis , named Rudrabhakta, Rudra- 
Chanda, Chandama, Mah&bala, Virya, Tankapani, 
I4asevaka and Rudrakopaja. They should all be of 
white complexion, big-bodied aud with the pair of 
front hands hold in the dhjah pose and the baok 
pair carrying in them tankas. They may be repre- 
sented eithor as standing or seated in the vlr&sana 
attitude and draped in elephant skins ; they Bhould 
have terrific countenances. Instoad of Rudra- 
bhakta and othors, Indra and tho other Dikpilakas 
may bo made the pariv&ras of the temple of 
Oha?d§£vara. They may be represented as actual 
anthropomorphic figures or with simple pltfias 
(as in the case of the Sapta-Mstrikis, see 
Yol. I, FI. CXX). In front of the temple of 
ChandeSvara there should be, as in Siva’s temples, 
a Nandi or couchant bull, and at the main entrance 
of the temple there should be two gate-keepers 


464 



CHANpfiSVABA. 

named Chand&nuga and Chandabhritya. These 
two should be sculptured with two arms and carry* 
ing clubs in their bands , sometimes they may be 
dispensed with also. 

The figure of Chande&vara should be fashioned 
according to the madliyama or adha ma-daia -t&la 
vidhi as is given in Prattm&laksluina or instrun 
tions given for the making of images ; different 
descriptions are found m the Ugamas for making 
the image of Chandesvara. In the first instance, 
we see it stated that it might he sculptured as 
seated upon a padmasana , its look should bo 
terrific, as if fire would burst out of its face ; the 
colour of Chandebvara should be jet black and there 
must be a <,aipai/aj7iojtari/a on its body. The 
head should be adorned w ith a jatH-makuta, in 
which there should be the crescent of the moon, as 
in the case of &iva. Chandebvara, according to 
this description, should have four faces, four arms 
and twelve eyes. In the right hands there should 
be the aksham&la and the tn&ula and in the left 
hands the tanka and the kaman^alu. 

A second description of the image of ChandS- 
svara is as follows. The complexion of this deity 
should be conch-white ; there should be three eyes 
and four arms and in the ja\ti-makut t a the crescent 

465 

M 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

moon. The figure of the deity should be seated in 
the vlrdsana posture and should carry in its back 
hands the dhanus called the Pinaka and the bdna 
called tho A nifty ha, while the front hands should 
be kept in the vurada and abhaya poses. 

According to the third description, Chande- 
Svara may be represented as either standing or 
sitting, with only a pair of arms but with three 
eyes. The colour of the body is here also required 
to be inky-black. As in the other cases there should 
bo the jatd-viakuta on the head. If the figure is 
made a seated one, the right leg should bo hanging 
below the seat and the left leg should be bent and 
rested upon the seat. The left hand may either be 
placed on the loft thigh or hold in the varada pose. 
In tho right hand there may be a tanka ; or both 
hands may carry tanka*; or both hands may be 
folded on the chest in the ahjali poso. Or, the figure 
may be sculptured as seated in the utkutikdsana 
posture with the head slightly bowed down as in 
deep sorrow, but with a face fuli of peaCe. 

In the fourth mode of representing Change- 
6vara, he must be sculptured as having four arms 
three of which should be carrying the tanka, the 
piia and the iula and the remaining one held in 
the abhaya pose. 


466 



OHAN£>£^VARA. 

“ In the descriptions found in the works of the 
Simhaladesa (Ceylon) * it is stated ”, so says the 
K&mikagama, “ that Chandesvara should be repre- 
sented in the Kritayuga with eight arms, m the 
Tretiyuga with six, in the Dvftparayuga with four 
and in the Kaliyuga with two oiu> But”, the 
same authority adds, “no such thing i«i mentioned 
in the works of the other countries 

Again, Chandesvara may ho shown singly or 
with his consort Dharirunlfci. If his Devi is 
also sculptured, she should ho adorned with all 
ornaments and should carry a 71V at pal a in her 
hands. Her colour is also to be black. 

The Karaij,agama states thatPrachandachanda, 
Vikrantachanda, Vibhuchanda, Virachanda and 
another whose name is not given came from the 
Panchabrahmas. The stewardship of the house of 
diva was bestowed in the Kritayuga upon Prachanda- 
chanda, in the Tretayuga upon Vikrantachanda, in 

* This is olear evidence that there existed in Geylon the 
worship not only of Buddha but of the various deities of ths 
Hindu cults and that there existed text-books in that oountry 
also containing descriptions of images, whioh sometimes 
differed from the readings of those on the continent of India. 
Evidently some of those Buddha agatnat quoted by Dr. Ananda* 
kumfirasami in his “ Singhalese Art ” belong to the category of 
works referred to in the K&mikigama, 


467 




HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


the Dviparayuga upon Vibbuchanda and m the 
Kahyuga upon Vlrachanda 

In tho case of paratantra Chandeivara hie 
shrine should be facing the south and, as has been 
already mentioned, be situated on the north-east 
corner of the first pr&kara of the Siva temple. 
According to the Kai anagtuna the paratantra 
ChandeSvara may have three eyes and four arms 
or only two eyes and two arms, be terrific in 
appearance, and have a jata-malcuta on the head. 
Of the four hands two aro to bo kept in the abhaya 
and varada poses and the remaining two should 
oarry the paka and the paiaiu. If however there 
aro only two hands, one of them should be m the 
varada pose and tho other should carry a tanka. 
There should bo a white ya/Tiopai Ha on the body 
which should be adorned with all ornaments also. 
Tho figure of Chandebvaia may be either standing 
or sitting. 

Two illustrations aro given on PI. CXXXIII. 
The very well-executed original stone sculpture is 
plaoed in a vory dark corner of the man^apa in 
front of the central shrine of the Siva temple at 
Tiruvornyur. It is seatod in the vlrabana posture 
and it carries a paraiu in its right hand, the left 
one resting upon the left lap. There is a figure of 
Chan<|e£vara carved on the north of the oentral 


46a 



PLATE CXXXItl. 



Fig. 1. Chapdemra (seated) : 
Stone: Tiruvorriyur. 




! 



Fig. 2. Cbandesvara (standing) : 
Bronze ; Marudantanallur. 


[To face page 468] 



OHANpfi^VABA. 

shrine o! the daiva cave oalled Dhumar Lena 
in Ellora ; it haa been mistaken by Dr. Bargees (or 
“ diva as a yQgi or asoetio, with a club in his left 
hand, and seated on a lotus. ” 

The seoond illustration is of the standing Chan- 
de&vara: it belongs to the temple at Marud&ntaaallQr. 
The figure has only two arms and the ’hands are 
held in the argali pose. A tanka rests on the left 
arm. 




BllAKTAS. 




BHAKTAS. 

B HAKTAS or devotees whose images are also 
enjoined to be set up for worship in temples 
may belong to the Br&hmana, Kshatnya, Vaiiya 
or the 6iidra caste ; or of mixed castes , males or 
females; they may be ach&njas or crowned monarchs; 
living or dead. All that is wanted to apotheosize 
them is that they should be bhaktas or acknowledg- 
ed devotees. Such devotees should be worshipped 
in images. These images may be set up either 
in separate temples ( suayam-pradhana ) or in the 
temples of some deity whose devotee the bhakta 
happens to be, as a dependent on that deity (an 
anga). As instances of the former may be pointed 
out the temple of Kannappa Nayanar, the hunter 
saint, on the hill at Kalahasti ; and of KulaAekhara 
Alvar at MannarkSyil near Ambasamudram. The 
attendant or anga class of images are found in all 
important temples of S. India. The well-known 
sixty-three (Aruvattu-muvar) Saiva saints and the 
twelve Alvars or Vaishnava saints of Dravida are 
seen invariably in &aiva and Vaishnava temples in 
S. India. 


eo 


473 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHI. 

A 8vayam-pradhHna or independent temple of 
a bhakta may be constructed on the top of a hill, 
on the bank of a river, in vanas (gardens) and in 
grnmaa (towns). The ahga or dependent class of 
bhaktas are required by the Ugamas to be set up 
near the plaoe where flower-garlands for the use of 
the temple are made. The first class of images 
may have pariv&ras or attendants, while the latter 
Bhould not possess any for the obvious reason, 
namely, that they are themselves depending upon 
others. 

Bhaktas may be represented by anthro- 
pomorphic figures, or, in the case of §aiva bhaktas, 
as Sivalingas, or occasionally also in the form of 
&iva himself. But in the case of Vaishnava 
bhaktas they aro generally represented as actual 
human beings just as they appeared when they 
were living. The images may bo made of stone, 
clay, metal, wood or gems. They may be 
carved in half relief or in the round ( ardha - 
chitra or chiirdibhasa). They should be sculp- 
tured according to the a&hta-tala measure, 
either as standing or as seated on a padmasana or 
a simhasana. They may be sculptured with or 
without a tuft of hair on their head ; if they 
are shown with a tuft it should be neatly 
done up in a knot on the top of the head; 


474 




PLATE CXXXV 



i 

Kadavarkon. Sirulan. Sirutboridar. Queen of Kadavarkon. 

A low of the Saiva Saints : Bronze : Tiruohchenga^angudi. 


[To face page 475] 


BHAKTAS. 


if they sure not to possess a tnft of hair, 
their head should bo shown as dean shavon. If 
the devotee is a crowned monarch or a ruling chief 
he should be soulptured with a hirlta or karav$a- 
makufa on his head. The bhaktas may be made to 
oarry in their hands any objeot which is generally 
associated with them or they may have their hand's 
held in the anjali pose, or the attitude of worship. 
They may be soulptured as singing, dancing or doing 
pujA. They should be adorned with all ornaments 
and if the bhakta is a female, she should be decked 
with such ornaments as arc appropriate to her sex. 

The following are the lists of the daiva and 
Yaishnava saints of S. India : — 

I. SAIVA SAINTS. 


No. 

Name. 

Caste. 

Occupation. 

1 

TinijfianaBamban- 

Brah* 

Templo 


dha. 

mapa. 

priest. 

2 

Tillai Brahmapas ... 

Do. 

Do. 

3 

Kalaya-nayanar ... 

Do. 

Do. 

4 

Muruga-nayanar ... 

Do. 


5 

Rudra-Pafiupati ... 

Do. 


6 

Sirappnliyar 

Do. 


7 

Gapanathar 

Do. 


8 

Pusalar 

Do. 


9 

OhapdSsar 

Do. 


10 

SdmJtfimaranfir .. 

Do. 


11 

Namlaandiyar 

Do. 



Place of birth 


Shiyali (Tan- 
jore). 

Chidambaram 

Tirukkadavui 

Tiruppugolur. 

Talaiyur. 


Seynalur. 

Emapporur. 


475 



HINDU ICONOGBAPHY. 


No. 

Name. 

Caste. 

1 

jOooupation. 

Native plaoe. 

ia 

Appudiyadiga) 

Brah- 


TiAgaJur. 



m&pa. 



13 

Nllanakkar 

Do. 


Tiruohobatba- 





mangai. 

14 

Sundaramurfei 

Do. 


Tiruveppai- 





nallur. 

15 

Pugalttupaiyar 

Amatya. 



16 

f^irufctopdar 

Do. 


Tiruohohen- 





gatfcangudi. 

17 

Ko -Chohehgappan . 

Crowned 





monarch. 



18 

Pugalohoholar 

Do. 



19 

Arupmaniyar 

Do. 



20 

Iqlahgaliyar 

Do. 



21 

Nedumai;an 

Do. 



22 

Bfiramanperuma} ... 

Do. 


Tiruvanjaik- 





kajam. 

23 

N arasin gamunaiy a- 

Baling 


Buling with 


raiyar. 

Chief. 

i 

Tirukkova- 



(Ksha- 

i 

lur as his 



triya). 


capital. 

24 

Kujrruvar 

Do. 



25 

Kalay-chiugar 

Do. j 



26 

Meypporular 

Do. 1 



27 

Aiyadigal 

Do. ] 



28 

Karaikkalatnmaiyar 

Vaisya. 


Karaikkal. 

29 

Murtinayanar 

Do. 


Madurai. 

30 

Kalikkamanar 

Do. 



31 

Amarnldiyar 

Do. 

• 

Palaiyarai*. 

32 

lyarpagai 

Do. 


Kavirippum- 





pattinam. 

S3 

Murkkanayanar ... 

Veljala. 



34 

SJeruttupaiyar 

Do. 



35 

Vayilar 

Do. 



36 

Kotpuliyar 

Do. 



37 

j^aktiyar 

Do. 



38 

Ariva^ayanar 

Do. 


Eapamahgai. 

39 

IJaiy angudi m a ranar 

Do. 


Ilaiyangu^i. 


476 








BHAKTAS. 


i 


No. 

. 

Name. 

Caste. J< 

Occupation. 

10 

ESakkiyar 

Vojlija. 

i 

i 

41 

Manakkanjarar ... 

Do 


42 

Viija^-mipdar 

Do 


43 

Munaiyaduvar 

Do 


44 

fiyarkon-Kalikka- , 
manar. 1 

Do 


45 

Tirunavukkarasu 

(Appar). 

Do 


46 

Tirumular 

Cowherd. 


47 

Anayar . . 

Do 


48 

Tirunllakapdar 

Potter. 


49 

i 

Tirunllakandattu 

Papan. 

Pa nan. 


50 

Afcibattanayanar . . 

Fitsher- 
| man. 


51 

Kappappa-na,} anar. 

j Vedan 
^hunter). 


52 

Enadmayanar 

Shftnan 

(Toddy- 

drawer). 


53 

Nesanayanar 

Saliyar, 

(weaver). 


54 

Tirunalaippov a r 

Paraij an. 

Field 


(Nandanar). | 

labour. 

55 

Tirukkuripput to p- 
dar. 

Washer- 

man. 


56 

Kaliyanar 

Oil- 

monger. 


57 

Kulaohobii;aiyar ... 

Prime- 
minister 
to the 
Pandya 
king. 


68 

MUalaikkugumbar ... 

(Kurum- 

ban.) 



Native p*aoe. 


^ahiapur. 

Tiruohobeug- 

Porumauga- 

lam 

Ttrnvamnr. 

Sattanur. 

Maugalavur. 

Chidambaram 

(Tillai). 


Nagapatapam 

Kalahasti 

(TJduppur). 

Eymanur. 


Kampili. 
Art anur. 


Ranchi. 


Mavamef* 

kudi. 


Milal&i. 


477 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


No. 

Name. 

Caste. 

Occupation, 

1 

Native place. 

fi9 

Daptjliyacjiga! 

1 


Tiruvarur. 

60 

KapampuLlar 

1 



61 

Eribattar 

1 



62 

Kariyar 




63 

Sundaramurti 

Brah- 


Tinmavalur. 



maQft. 

i 




YAISHNAVA BHAKTAS. 


No. 

Name. 

! 

Caste. 

Occupation 

Native place. 

1 

Periyalvar (Vishpu- 
ohitta). 

Brah- 

man 

Making 

flower 

garlands. 

Srivillipufatur. 

2 

Apdal (Goda) 

Do. 

(woman). 

Do. 

Do 

3 

Poygaiyalvar 

Brah- 1 
mapa. 1 

Yogi. 

Oonjeevaram. 

4 

Pftyalvar 

Do. 1 

Do. 

Mylapore. 

6 

Bhufcattftlvar 

Do. 

Do. 

Mahab&li- 

puram. 

6 

Nammalvar (Sa(a- 
kopa). 

Sudra. 

Do. 

Alvar-Tiruna- 

gari. 

7 

Tirumangaiyalvar . 

1 

i 

i 

Kallar 

(Robber). 

1 

i 

(1) Waylay- 
ing and 
robbing. 

(2) Service 
bo temples. 

Tiruv&li. 

8 

Topdaradippodiyal- 

var. 

Biah- 

man. 

Making 
flower gar- 
lands. 

Mapdangudi 

9 

Tiruppapalvar 

Panan. 

Singing. 

Uraiyur. 

10 

Madurakaviy al var 

Brah- 

mana. 

Serving. 

Nammalvar 

Tirukkojur. 

11 

Tirumalisaiyalvar . 

Do. 

Yogi. 

Tirumalifoi. 

12 

Kulasekh&raivar ... 

Kshafcri- 

ya. 

Crowned 

monaroh. 

Tiruvanjaik- 

kajam. 


478 




BHAKTAS, 


Besides the 6aiva saints above enumerated, 
there are oounted many more at the present time ; 
that is, after that list of sixty-three was drawn up by 
Sundaramurti-N ayan&r, many other* of saintly 
nature came into being and though they could not 
be placed in the older list, are still held in as muoh 
esteem as the older saints. Such are, for instance, 
Minikkavachakar, Karuvurttevar, Kandirndiltar, 
Tirum&ligaittevar, ^endanar, Chediyarayar, Puru- 
shottamanambi, Tiruvaliyamudanar, Pundurutti- 
kidanambi, Meykandadevar and others. Images 
are set up for these persons also, along with the 
sixty- three; that is why we see in many Siva 
temples not sixty-three, but about seventy-three 
images of bhaktas. The number of bhaktas cannot 
be limited, since any number of these might be 
added at any time. 

Similarly, in Vaishnava temples of S. India, 
which are almost always under the management 
of the Srivaishnavas, are seen often moro than 
twelve figures of saints. The additional ones are 
of subsequent acharyas, like Ramanuja, Manavala- 
mSmunigal, Venkatan&tha Desika, etc. 

It might be observed that KulaAekharalvar, a 
crowned monarch, has a makuta on his head, 
according to the rules laid down above (see PI. 
CXXXVI). We see also that Kannappa-nayan&r 


479 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 


has his hair tied up in a fine knot on the crown oi 
the head (see PI. CXXXIV), and certain br&hmana 
saints, with a small tuft of hair on the crown, as 
in the case of Vishnuchitta (Periy&lv&r), Tondara- 
dippodi and Madurakavi, in our illustrations (PI. 
OXXXVI). 

Again, certain characteristic features mark 
particular saints ; for instance, Apparsv&migal is at 
once recognised by a staff, with a triangular metal- 
lic piece, at its end, intended for removing grass 
grown in temples ; for, he had undertaken to do 
that service in all temples he visited (see PI. 
CXXXVII, fig. 3). Tirujnanasambandha among the 
§aiva (See fig., PI. CXXXVII) and Tiruppapalvar 
among the Vaishnava saints (PI. CXXXVI) would 
easily bo recognised by the cymbals they have in 
their hands. Tirumahgai, by the sword and shield ; 
and M&nikkavacliakar, by the book m his hands, 
(fig. 2, PI. CXXXVII and PI. CXXXVlII). 

For the history of these Saiva and Vaish- 
nava saints, the readers are referred to the Periya- 
fur&tiam in Tamil , — for, this has not as yet been 
rendered in English by any one, — and Mr. A. 
GSvindScharya’s ‘ Lives of Dr&vi^a Saints ’ in 
English, respectively. 

We learn from the writings of the §rl- 
vaishnavas that in the days of Ramanuia and later. 


A An 



PLATE CXXXIV. 



Ka gga ppa Nayanar : Bronze ; Madras Museum. 


[To lace page 480] 




Poygaiyalvar. Peyalvar. Bhutattalvar. Penyalvar Kulasakba- Tonrtaradip Tirumaugai- 

ralvAr podiyilvar. yaWar. 


[To (ace page 480] 








BHAKTAS. 


people were owning slaves and that the latter had 
their names tattooed on their ohests in token of 
their condition. Some sold themselves to others 
as slaves in times of famine. When* ease they 
became slaves, they were bound to serve their 
masters with the utmost fidelity ; m short, they 
had to become practically members of the family 
of their masters and personally interest themselves 
in the welfare of their families ; in other words the 
elaves became the bhaktas of their masters. As a 
oonorete instance of this custom might be pointed 
out the life-size images of the Vijayanagara kings 
Krishnadevaraya and Vehkatapatidevaraya and the 
queens of the former, ChmnSdevl and Tirumala- 
devl, which are set np in the temple of Venkatefia 
on the Tirumalai hill at Tirupati. These were 
apparently set up in their life-time as the paleo- 
graphy of the writing on their chests indicates. 
These devotees of "VenkateSa inscribed them- 
selves as the slaves of the Lord of Tirumala and 
thereby bound themselves to do everything for the 
welfare of the temple and in testimony whereof 
they seem to have caused their images being set 
up in the temple with their names engraved on 
their ohests, so that the images might be ever 
worshipping their own favourite god Venkat&a (see 
VUoakarma). 


ei 


481 




ARYA OR HARIHARAPUTRA. 




AKYA OR HARIHARAPUTRA. 

T HE deity X.rya, Sasta or Hariharaputra, jo 
well known to the Gravidas is not familiar 
to the inhabitants of Northern India, even in the 
Dravida country he is the favourite only of the 
Malayalam people. The country of the latter 
possesses as large a number of temples of &asta as 
the Tamil country has of Subrakmanya and it is 
an invariable rule in the Malayalam country that in 
every temple, be it of Siva or of Vishnu, there 
must be in its south-west corner a shrine for 
Sasta. He is considered by them as the guardian 
of the land and as such eight mountain tops along 
the Western Ghats are surmounted by eight 
temples in which are set up eight images of Sasta 
to protect the country on the west of the mountain 
ranges, inhabited by the Malayalis, from all external 
evils and misfortunes. In this country he is better 
known as Sasta than as Hariharaputra or irya. 
In the Tamil country he is known by the name 
Hariharaputra or more frequently Ayyan&r (a 


465 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

modification of Ary a). That 6&sta should have 
been a very common name and the deity was 
perhaps onoe better known by that name in the 
Tamil country is deducible from the fact that in 
all examples in Grammars of declension, inflexion, 
etc., the subject of a sentence is Rattan (§5sta), 
just as the Sanskrit Grammarians usually employ 
the name of Devadatta. The name §&sta or its 
corruption is not borne by men in the Tamil 
country, but one can meet with persons of that 
name by soores in the Malayalam country. 

This deity which is very peculiar to the 
DrSvida country does not appear to have been 
known to the region north of the Godavari. In no 
early Sanskrit work is the deity mentioned. Even 
the dictionaries do not record this name and give 
its origin. In the Vislmupurana wc hear that, 
Vishnu, seeing that there ensued a quarrel between 
the Devas and Asuras over the distribution of the 
amrita (ambrosia) obtained by churning the ocean 
of milk, assumed the form of a charming damsel, 
distributed tho preoious article among the Devas, 
the Asuras being all the while dazed by the enchan- 
ting beauty of the maiden and oblivious of the 
cause of their quarrel. It is in the &ri Bh&gavata 
that we learn, for the first time that Hara fell in 
love with Vishnu in his form of Mdhini. From 


486 



XBYA OR HARIHARAPTTTRA. 

the union between Hara and Flari, Xrya, S&sta or 
Hariharaputra is said to have been born. Ine 
Suprabliedagama very distinctly mentions that 
S&sta was born of Mohinl, tho form Resumed by 
Vishnu for the purpose of distributing tho amrita 
among tho gods when it was churned from the milk- 
ocean, by the union with her of Ilara. That tbirt 
is a deity peculiarly Dro vidian and has been taken 
into the fold of the Aryan pantheon at a later period 
goes without contradiction. At present Harihata- 
putra is treated in the Tamil country as a village 
deity and is mostly worshipped by the lower classes 
and the pvja in the temple of Hariharaputra or 
Ayyanar (or Ayyanarappan) is performed by a 
Sudra. The Pd.dmasa?hftita states that tho pvja in 
the temple of Arya should he performed by a 
Parasava ; we know from other sources that a 
P&raSava is an armldma born of a Brabmana father 
and a Sudra mother. But somehow AyyanSr, like 
the more tamasic forms of Devi such as Kali, 
which are worshipped by the lower classes in 
the Tamil country, is made pvja to by the 
Brahmanas in Malabar. 

This deity is called 6&sta because he is able 
to control and rule over the whole world ; etymo- 
logically therefore, the word means a ruler of a 
country, and is sometimes applied to teachers and 


487 



HINDU ICONOGBAPHY. 

fathers. The Amarakdka applies the name to 
Buddha also. The Tamil Nighantus call him by 
the additional names Satavfithana, the rider of the 
white elephant, K5ri, the wielder of the weapon 
known as ienQu, the consort of Purana and Push- 
kalS, the protector of Dharma and Yogi ; they also 
state that the vehicle of Casta is the elephant 
and the crest of his banner a cock. The names, 
rider of the white elephant, Y5gi, the protector of 
Dharma coupled with the significance of Buddha 
applied to C&9ta in the Amarakoka incline one to 
conclude that Buddha as conceived and worshipped 
in the Tamil country was ultimately included in 
the Hindu Pantheon and a Puranic story invented 
for his origin at a later period of the history of 
Hindu Iconology. The name Catavahana is also 
very noteworthy as it has been assumed by a 
dynasty of powerful kings of Ihe earlier centuries of 
the Christian era. 

The descriptions of the image of Casta or 
Aryaare found given in the AmkumadbJied&gavia, 
the Svprabhedagama and the K&ran&gama. The 
figure of Casta should have four arms and three 
eyes, and a peaceful countenance ; its colour should 
be golden yellow and it should be draped in silk 
garments. It must be seated upon a padm&sana. 
The front right and left hands should be held in the 


488 



iRYA OB SABIHABAFDfB?. 

abhaya and varada poses respectively and the back 
right and left hands should carry a khafyga and a 
khetaJca respectively. This is tho description 
given in the Am&umadbliedllgama. The RuprabhU- 
ddgama has a very different description altogether ; 
it states that tho figure of S&sta should have only two 
arms and two eyes and a dark oomplexion. It should 
be adorned with all ornaments and a white yajnbpa- 
vita. The arms and legs should bo kept folded : in 
the right hand there should'be a crooked stick (known 
in Tamil as the (tenclu) and in the left fruits and 
tender leaves of plantB ( pallava ). The body of this 
deity should be like that of a bhuta, with a big belly. 
The hair on his head should be jet black in colour. 
6&sta should be represented as playing with dogs, 
sheep and fowls. He has two wives named Madani 
and Varnani; the figures of these should be 
sculptured one on either side of that of &5sta, with 
large breasts and adorned with all ornaments. To 
the left of &asta there should be the figure of 
Damanaka — who he is, is not mentioned — of ill- 
looking features. 

The K&ranagama agrees with the Amiumad- 
bhedagama in taking Sasta as the son of Mohinl by 
Hara, but states, with Svprahhedagama, that Sasta 
should have only two arms and two eyes, and a 
dark complexion. 6&sta should be seated on a pUha, 

489 

es 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 

with his left leg hanging down the seat and the 
right one folded and rested upon the seat vertically 
On the knee of this latter leg Bhould rest the elbov 
of the stretched left arm. In the right hand there 
should be a vajradanQa, which is a crooked sticl 
(note the vajra a characteristic weapon of the 
Bauddha Bodhisatva). The figure of §&sta should 
be of youthful and peaceful appearance. The hair ol 
his head should be like blue-black ink and be spread 
out. His vehicle is the elephant as also is the crest 
on his banner. He should have by his side a blitheful 
damsel. At the end of the description, it is men- 
tioned that the colour of §56ta might be blue, white 
or dark, his vehicle the bull, that he might have fout 
arms and that the crest on his banner a cook. 

The same authority states that if Arya is to 
be represented as a Yogi he should be sculptured as 
seated in yogasana ; if as a student of the Vedas, 
he should wear a pavitra (a ring made of Ttuia grass) 
on his fingers, and wear his upper cloth on his 
shoulder in the upavlia fashion and be seated in the 
vlrUsana posture. If Sasta is to be shown as seated 
in the sukhd,sana fashion, the poBture should be 
what is known as sukhUsana , the right foot of the 
bent right leg resting upon the thigh of the left leg 
which should be hanging. The“gaze of[Sukh&sana- 
Arya Bhould be fixed on his right foot. 



PLATE CXXXIX. 



Fig. 2. Sasfca : Stone: Tirapparaivaru. 





Fig. 1 Gajarudba Rasta Bronze Valuvur. Fig. 2. Saata Bronze Tiruppalatturai. 


IBYA OB HABIHABAFUTBA. 

Four photographs are given in illustration of 
the images of Sfista. Fig. 2, PL CXXXIX is the 
photograph of au image to be found in the Siva 
temple at TirupparaiySru in N. Travanoore Phis 
image is seated with its right lop bent and rested 
in a vertical position and the left leg bent 
and rested in a horizontal position on the 
seat. The right hand of Ine figure is in the 
varada pose and rests upon the right thigh , the 
left arm which is slightly bent is made to rest upon 
the left thigh. The image is adorned with all kinds 
of ornaments. This is the Virasana-Arya. The 
second photograph fig. 2, FI. CXL is of a bronze 
image belonging to the temple at Tiruppalatturai 
in the Tanjore district. This image is also seated 
in the vlrasana posture, with his left arm, which is 
stretched out, resting upon the knee of the left leg 
which is bent and kept resting vertically on the 
seat. The right leg is hanging down the seat 
which is a padmasana. The right hand is held in 
the leatalca pose, to receive in it a kendu stick. The 
hair on the head of this image is spread out fan- 
wise in a circle. The third photograph fig. 1, 
Pl. CXL, is of another bronze image to be found in 
the temple at Valuvur also in the Tanjore district. 
It represents 6§>sta as seated upon an elephant which 
has on each side a double tusk unlike the mundane 


491 



HINDU ICON OGEAPHT. 

elephant. The figure of 6&sta in this instance is 
sonlptured exactly like the image of TiruppSlat- 
turai. The fourth illustration fig. 1, FI. CXXX1X, 
the original of which is enshrined in the temple at 
S&stfinkOttai in Travancore is of a standing figure 
of &&sta. Hero, he iB represented with a pair of 
arms, which oarry the dhanus and bana respectively 
and as standing erect. On the two upright posts 
of the highly ornamented prabhavali are sculptured 
the two devis of S&sta, the right one of them carry- 
ing, as usual in the case of an image attended by 
two dSvls, a padma and the left one a nlloipala 
flower. 


493 



KSHfeTRAPALA. 




KSHETRAPALA. 

P'OR the protection of the towns and villages 
from evil deities aud from bad men, the 
shrine of the Kshetrapala should be m the north- 
east corner of the town or village, the image of the 
Kshetrapala being set up and puja offered to it 
systematically. It is best ( uttama ) for the Bhrine 
to face the west ; it may face the south, but it is not 
very good to do so ( madhyama ) and to make it 
face the east is the worst ( adhama ). 

The image of the Kshetrapala should be always 
a nude standing one with three eyes ; it may possess 
two, four, six or eight arms. The satvlka image 
has either two or four arms ; the rajasa six arms and 
the tomasa eight. In the satvlka form alone, the 
image, though it might possess side tusks should 
be of pacific look, whereas, in the other cases, it 
should be of terrific look only. Similarly, the 
oolour of the body differs in different aspects of the 
KshStrapala ; it is white if the image is a satvlka 


495 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 

one ; it is red if it is rajasa and black if it is 
timasa. 

In the case of the s&tvlka-murti, if the image 
of Kshetrapala has only two arms, there should be 
the triiula in itR right hand and a kapala in its 
left. On the other hand, if there are four arms, 
there must be the khadga in the back right hand, 
and the ghanta in the back left hand, or kula and 
kapala or lid a and ghanta respectively. The two 
front hands should be held in the varada and 
abhaya poses. 

In the case of the r&jasamurti the image of 
Kshetrapala should carry in its three right hands 
the triiida, the ltha^ga and the ghanta and in its 
three left hands the khetaka, tho kapala and the 
nd,ga-pata. And, in the case of the tamasamurti , 
there should be, in addition to the artioles men- 
tioned above, the dhanus in the additional fourth 
right hand and the b&na in the additional fourth 
left hand. 

All the three aspects of the Kshetrap&la should 
have the hair on the bead standing erect all round 
the head and of blazing red oolour ; the figure must 
be standing erect (samabhanga) on &padmapltha&nd. 
be adorned with different kinds of snake ornaments. 
As has been observed above, nudity is the most 
characteristic feature in all these images. Suoh is 


196 



khhEtrapAla. 

the description contained in the AmiumadbhSda- 
gama. 

The Suprabliedagamu and the Ed.taifd.gama 
have eaoh some Blight variations in fbpir dusonp- 
tion of Kshetrap&la. The former mfcbority 
mentions that the image of Kshctrap&la should be 
adorned with a ndga-yajhdpavlta on its body ami a 
garland of skulls on the head , that the eyes should 
be circular in shape and that if the image has (our 
arms, there should bo the tnkula and the khadqa 
in the right hands and the kapala and the Uietaka 
in the left hands ; if there are six arms, m the 
additional right hand there should be a nd.gapd.6a 
and in the additional left hand the tdmara (a 
weapon) ; and if there are eight arms, together with 
the articles mentioned above, the additional right 
hand should oarry a #amaru and the additional left 
one the khatv&nga. 

The Edranligama agrees with the above de- 
scriptions in all details except in regard to the 
articles held by the image which has eight arms; 
in this case, according to this authority, there 
should be in seven out of the eight hands the 
kapala, the iula, the ghantJL, the p&ia, agni, the 
\<aika and the khafo&nga and the remaining hand 
should be held in the abhaya pose. 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


AghOrativ&ch&rya in his Vighrieivarcflfpratuh- 
(h&vidhi, gives a dhyUna-ildka in which the dog is 
said to be the vehiole of KshStrap&la.^) The Tamil 
Nigha^a agree with this authority in this respeot ; 
the Pingala-nighanfa distinctly mentions that 
K&fichuka, Kiri, Mukta, Nirv&ni, Siddha, Kapali, 
Va$uka and Bhairava are the other names of Kshet- 
rap&la. From this it will be evident that the 
so-called KshetrapSla is no other than Bhairava 
described elsewhere and therefore need not have 
been treated here in a separate chapter , but since 
the Ugamas deal with this aspect of Siva, which is 
said to be his one-ten-thousandth part, under a 
separate head and in a separate chapter, the 
arrangement of the a gamas is here followed strictly 
(See figs. 1 and 2, FI. CXLI). 


(1) qnfiftirfom , > 

vrorni «rit u 


498 




Fig. 1. Kahetrapala : Stone 
A] mere . Merwara. 


Fig. 2. Kahetrapala Stone 
IIa|ebfflu. 


[To face page 498] 




"Brahma. 




brahma. 

T HE history of Brahma has incidentally been 
given here and there in the first volume of 
this work aB also in a previous portion of the present 
one. It haB already been stated that Brahma was 
born in a golden egg and was therefore known as 
Hiranyagarbha ; that he sprang from the waters 
and the ether ; that he took the form of a boar and 
lifted up the earth from the ocean ; that he took 
the aval&r of a fish ; that he was born from the 
lotuB that issued from the navel of Vishnu ; that 
he was the father of Daksha and other Praj&patis 
(patriarchs), that he disputed the superiority of 
Vishnu over himself and that when, in connection 
with the dispute, Siva appeared between them in 
the form of a pillar of fire, he (Brahma) went up 
to searoh for its upper end and failed to do so ; 
that he was born to the rishi Atri and his wife 
An&siiya as one of the aspects of Dattatreya ; that 
he served as a charioteer of Siva when the latter 


501 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

attaoked the Tripurasuras ; and that he acted as 
purdhita (officiating priest) in the marriage of 
diva and also of Subrahmanya ; and many other 
things have also been mentioned about him. 

It is well-known that Brahma (who is to be 
carefully distinguished from Brahma in the neuter 
gender) is a member of the later Hindu Trinity ; 
but he is not held now in such great importance aB 
the other two members of the Trinity. No temples 
are dedicated for his exclusive worship, nor is there 
any sect or class owing special and exclusive 
allegiance to him ; in other words, there is no 
Brahma cult as we hare the Vaishnava and the 
daiva cults with a large number of adherents, over 
quarrelling over the superiority of their own parti- 
cular sect or god. Hence it is believed by some 
people that Brahma is offered no puja> on earth 
now, and is not worshipped at all. This opinion 
is far from the truth. As has been elsewhere 
remarked, there exists (and should exist), no 
temple which has not got all the three members of 
the Trinity, be it a Siva’s temple or Vishnu’s. 
The niche on the northern wall of the central 
shrine of the Vishnu’s or diva’s temple should 
oontain an image of Brahma and must receive 
daily pujd,. He is one of the most important of 
the parivira-devatas of the first pr&Jc&ra of a Vishnu 


502 



BRAHMA. 


or Siva temple. Nor are instances* of a separate 
temple dedicated exclusively to BrahmS wanting in 
India, though they are very iev> and far between. 
Even such a very late production on images and 
temples like the Uupamaydana k** got it ••omplete 
description of a temple of Brahma and mentions 
its pariv&ra-tlevatatt, the dvarap&lakas etc., facts 
which clearly indicate that the building of separate 
temples for Brahma had not yet become unknown. 
Elaborate descriptions ot the images of BrahmS are 
found in almost all works of authority. 

Tho Rupamnndana says that the four peaceful 
looking faces of Brahma are symbolic of the four 
Vedas, the four Yugas, and the four Varnas. For- 
merly Brahma had five heads, but one of them was 
cut off by Siva. The four heads should be respec- 
tively facing the four quarters. Brahma should 
have four arms; he may be standing, seated on 
either a padmasana or a liavisa (swan). The 
&ilparatna mentions another seat called the lamba - 
Tcurchasana for Brahma ; the phrase literally rnoanB 
a seat composed of long grass ; it perhaps is meant 
to indicate a seat or mat made of grass. If 
he is to be represented as seated, he should be shown 
in the yogasana posture ; if standing, then on a 
padma-pUha. The complexion of Brahma should 
be chrome-yellow and the colour of his eyes a 


503 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


mixture of red and yellow (orange). On his head 
should be & jata-makuta and he should be adorned 
with all ornaments , there should be on his chest 
a white yajnopavlta. His body should be covered 
with a coat of white sandal paste and he should be 
wearing a garland of white flowers. A katisutra 
(or waist-band) should go round the loinB. The 
undergarments should consist of white clothes and 
the upper portion of the body should be covered 
with a doer's skin worn in the upavVa fashion. 
There should be golden or ruby kundalas in the 
ears. The Siiprabhedagania states that tho colour 
of jat&s on his head should be of red colour and the 
failparatna and the V isJinnpu rana would have the 
colour of Brahma white and crimson respec- 
tively. The hands of BrahmA may carry the 
following articles or may be held in the following 
poses : — 

(1) There may be the akshamalo, and the 
kurcha (a handful of kvsa grass) in the right hands 
and ku&a and kamandalu m the left hands ; or 

(2) the sruk and the sruva in the right hands 
and the ajya-sthah (ghee-pot) and ku&a grass in 
the left ones , or 

(3) the front two hands may be held in the 
abhaya and varada poses the back hands carrying 


504 



plate cxlii. 



Brahma Bron/e Madras Museum 


[To face page 504] 




plate: cxliu 



Fig. 1. Brahma Stono 
Tiruvornjur. 


[To face page 505] 


Fig. 2. Brahma : Stone 
Madras Museum. 




BRAHMS. 

the aJcshamUlQ, and the kamanfalu (See FI. 

CXLII) ; or 

(4) the front right hand may be placed with 
its palm facing below on the palm of front left 
hand whioh is facing ahove and . >oth re&ting upon 
the crossed legs ; and the back lnnds carrying, as 
in the formor case, an aksham&la and a haiuaif- 
flalu, ; or 

(5) the front right band may be in the varada 
pose, the back right hand carrying a smva and the 
back left hand a sruk and the front left hand a 
kaman^alu (See fig. 2, PI. CXLIII) ; or 

(6) the front right hand should keep an 
akshhmala, the back right hand a srulc, the back 
left hand a pustaka (book) and the front left hand 
a kamanQalu. 

The Vishnupvr&na requires that Brahma’s 
eyes should be closed as in the attitude of dhy&na 
or meditation and the Rupamandana prescribes a 
beard for him. The former authority also adds 
that he should be seated in a chariot drawn by 
seven swans. To the right and left of Brahms 
should be his consorts Sarasvatl and Savitri 
respectively. Their persons should be adorned 
with all ornaments and they must be naturally 
also very beautiful ; or, it is enough to represent 


Si 


605 ; 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


SSvitrl alone with Brahms seated on his left side 
or on his left lap. According to the &ilparatna 
there ought to be four Vedas and the ajya-sth&li 
placed in front of Brahma and he should be 
surrounded on all sides by rislds. 

The Rupamanclana gives the following de- 
scription of Sivitri ; she should have four faces and 
four arms; in the hands she should carry an 
aksham&li, a book, a padma and a kamanQalu. 
She is a deity who is meant to bestow all good to 
the SrCtriya BrShmanas. 

In a temple exclusively dedicated to Brahma, 
there should be set up in the central shrine that 
aspect of his, named Vi6vakarma. In this form 
BrahmS has, as usual, four heads and four arms ; 
in his hands there should be the akshamala, a book, 
a bundle of kuka grass (?) and a kamanQalu ; and 
he should be seated upon a swan (See PI. CXL1Y). 
The following parivitra-devatas are required to be 
set up in the eight quarters beginning* from the 
east and going round clookwise, namely, Adi£§sha, 
GaneSa, the M&trik&s, Indra, Jalasayi, P&rvatl and 
Budra, the Kavagfahas and Lakshml respectively. 
Below is given a table mentioning the names of 
the DvBrapalakas of the temple of BrahmS And the 
articles held by them in their hands : — 



PLATE CXLIV. 



CTo (ace page fiOO] 


Brahma Stone Aihole 



BRAHMA. 


£ 

Name. 

Objoote held in the 

55 

i 

Right hands. J Left bands* 


1 Batya 

Padma 

^ 8ruk 

Pnstaka ! 

Dap<Ja 

2 Sadharma | 

Pustaka 

Dapda 

Padma 

Bruk 

3 

Prlyodbhava 

Aksharnala Padma , 

i . 

Again* 
(Punt aka) 

Dacia 

4 

Yajna 

Dap<Ja 

i Agama j 

Bruk 

Kavaoba 

fi 

jVijaya 

Aksharnala Gada i 

Kbetak* 

1 Daoia 

6 

Yajinbhadra 

Do. 

Do. 

I 

Do. 

7 

Sarvakamika 

Do. 

| Pasa 

Ankuia 

Do. 

8 

Vibhava 



Dap<Ja 

l Ankuda 

Pasa 

Padma 


All these eight Dva.rapalaka3 should be represented 
as of terrific nature and with beards. There should 
be makutas on their heads. A large number of 
rishis also with moustaches and jatas, carrying in 
their hands the aksharnala and the kaman^alu, 
should be seated in the temple of Brahmi and 
be meditating upon him. 

Nine photographs are given in illustration of 
the images of Brahms. ; the originals belong to the 
various parts of India and are of different varieties; 
they exhibit the general natural characteristics 
of the country to which each belongs. Of these, 
the picture on FI. GXLIV, is that of BrahmS. 
found in the Siva temple at Aihole in the Bij&pGr 
dis trict of the Bombay Presidency. Brahms is 
here seated upon a padmdsana with his left leg 


607 




HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

hanging and the right one kept bent and supported 
on the seat. He has in his front right hand an 
alcsliamd,lS,, in the back right hand a pd.ka (?), in 
the back left hand a kaman^alu and the front left 
band is kept in the varada pose. He wears jatjU- 
makutas on his heads and has an yajnopavita , 
katisutra and other ornaments. To the right and 
left are two women (whose arms alone are visible 
in the photograph) carrying flower garlands held 
over the head of Brahma ; probably they represent 
the goddesses Sarasvatl and Savitri. At the base 
of the seat and on the left is seated a rishi with his 
hands held in the anjali pose (these alone are 
visible in the picture) and correspondingly on the 
right is a h&msa (whose tail, one wing and one leg 
alone are visible in the photograph). 

The second photograph, (PI. CXL "V), is that of 
a sculpture to be found in Sopara in the Thana 
district of the same Presidency. It is a standing 
figure of BrahmS. As in other pieces of sculpture, 
this one also has a pointed beard for'V.he middle 
face only. On the head are jat&maku^as and a 
yajTidpavlta graces his body ; there are also the 
katisutra and other ornaments. In the right front 
hand of the image is held apparently a lotus ; in 
the back right hand, is the sruJc, in the back 
left hand a kurcha and in the front left hand 


608 



H.4TE CXCV. 



Brahma : Stone : Sopara, Jhapa District. 


(To face page 608] 



PLATE CXLVI, 



Brahma: Stone: Aihole. 


tTo (ace page 0081 







PLATE CXLVII, 



Brahma: Stone: Kumbhakonam. Brahma: Stone* Halebidu. 




BBAHMA 


a Jcamayfialu. On either side of the figure of 
Brahma stands a female figure, apparently carrying 
in their hands bundles of kuka grass. To the left 
of BrahmS is his vehicle, the swan, and u> the right 
a brahmach&rin boy. Here, the figure of BrahmS 
has a big belly, which is bound up, with a udara- 
bandha. Fig. 2, PI. CXLIII is exactly similar to 
the Sopara sculpture, but belongs to the Ch&lukya- 
Hoysala style. 

The illustration, fig. 1, (PI. CXLVII), comes 
from theNagesvarasvSmin temple atKumbhakOnam. 
It is almost like the SopSra figure ; the points of 
difference being that the central face has not got a 
beard ; the front right hand is in the abhaya pose 
and the back right carries ana ksham&ld. ; the back 
left hand has a kamandalu and the front loft hand 
is resting upon the thigh ( katyavalambita htiLsta). 
The workmanship is excellent and the effect is very 
pleasing. 

The next plate, (PI. CXLVII1) oontains the 
photographs of the front, back and the side views 
of a very beautiful figure of Brahma ; they were 
supplied to me by the Superintendent of Archaeology 
of the Western Cirole. This figure of BrahmS is 
peculiar in that it has only two arms instead of four 
as required by the agamas : the right one of these 
is held bent with the palm turned inwards. What 


609 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


this hand-pose indicates is not plain. The other 
arm is also bent and is carrying a kaman^alu, 
whose neok alone now remains in the sculpture. 
On the heads are jatjimakutas and the underwear is 
a fine cloth whose folds and creases are beautifully 
arranged by the artist. On the left shoulder is 
thrown in an artistic manner a deer-skin, the head 
and forelegs of the deer being well visible in the 
side view. On the whole this piece of old sculp- 
ture is an excellent specimen of the art of India. 

The next illustration (PI. CXLIV) is also from 
Aihole. Brahma, is seated in the centre on 
a swan. Ho has in his hands an aksliamula, a 
lotus (?), the Jcurcha and a hamandalu. Surround- 
ing him are rishis, three on either side, a young boy 
is taking lotus flowers in his hands to Brahma and 
another is seen on the top right hand corner of the 
panol. The rishis are here represented as being 
very emaciated presumably by reason of their austeri- 
ties. The photograph next reproduced is that of an 
image of Brahma, to be found in t&c Madras 
Museum. It belongs to the Chalukya-Hoysala 
School and is a standing image, carrying in its 
hands an akshavi&ld, sruva, paia and hamandalu. 
Here all the faces of Brahma have pointed beards. 

The original of the next photograph, fig. 2, PI. 
CXLVII, is in the Hoysale6vara temple at Hajebl^u 


510 



PLATE CXLVIII 



Bight view. Front view. Back view Left view. 

Brahma Bronze . Karachi Museum. Sind. 





BRAHMA. 


and is of the later Hoysala period. It is also a 
standing figure, under a very artistically and deli* 
oately carved umbrella and prabhUvah and orna- 
mented with beautifully executed tmaments. It 
carries in its hands an aJcshmciia, a p&in the sruk 
and the sruva and a kamandalu. On, either side of 
Brahma stands a woman carrying a ch&mara 
(chauri) ; perhaps they represent Sarasvatl and 
Savitri. 

In the Madras Museum is preserved a beautiful 
bronze image of Brahma seated under a,prabh&valt , 
whose photograph is reproduced in PI. CXL1I ; this 
image has kirltamakutas instead of jatamalutas on 
the heads. The front right hand is held in the 
abhaya pose and the front left hand in the varada 
pose ; while the back right hand carries an aJcsha- 
mald. and the back left hand a kamandalu. Bronze 
images of Brahma are very rare and especially the 
one like the Madras Museum image, which is an 
utsava-vigraha, is met with very rarely, if at all. 
This image clearly points to the existence of 
BrahmS worship, even with grand festivals and 
processions, as would appear to be unmistakably 
evidenced by this uttava-vigraha. t 

The next illustration, fig. 1, FI. CXLIII, is 
from the temple at Tiruvorriyur. The original is 
found in the niche in the north wall of the shrine 


611 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

of Gaul§6vara in the Siva temple at that place. It 
belongs to the latter part of the oleventh century 
A. D. and does not differ from the KumbhakSnam 
image. 

Tho last illustration, PI. CXLIX, is the re- 
production of the photograph of the figure of 
Brahm& found in the north niche of the central 
shrine of the §iva temple at Tiruvadi. In its back 
right hand, is the akshamAld, ; the front right one 
seems to have been held in the ahhaya pose ; the 
back left hand and the front left one are carrying the 
kamarj<falu and a book respectively. It is one of 
the finest pieces of sculpture of Southern India. 


519 



PLATE CXLIX 



Brahma : Stone : Tiruvadi. 


[To (ace page 512} 



THE DIKPALAKAS. 




THE DIKPALAKAS. 

A CCORDING to Hindu mythology, the eight 
quarters of the universe are governed by the 
eight guardian deities beginning with Indra and 
hence these eight deities are known by the name of 
Dikpalakas. These deities are • — 


1. Indra, the lord of the east, 

2. Agni, the Lord of the south-east, 

3. Yama, of the south, 

4. Nirruti, of the south-west, 

5. Varuna, of the west, 

6. Vayu, of the north-west, 

7. Kubera, of the north and 

8. Ifiana, of the north-east. 


It might be noticed that all these eight deities 
held prominent positions in the Vedic period, long 
before Vishnu and &iva of the modem Trinity, 
became supreme in Hindu mythology; and the 
former are now obliged to be content with the more 
modest situation of the guardianship of the 


515 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


quarters of the universe. It therefore becomes 
necessary to trace the history of the degradation, 
so to speak, of these deities from the exalted 
positions held by them during the Vedic times. 

INDRA. 

The word Indra, is derived from Indha, meaning 
kindler says the &atapatha-Brahmana. In the Big- 
veda he is distinctly mentioned as one born without 
a fellow : ( tvam anapir Indra janushasanadasi) and 
as one without a rival [aSatrur Indra jajninJie). In 
the Taittiriya samhita Indra is seen contesting his 
supremacy with Vishnu, the Yajnapurusha. The 
same fentapatha-Brahmawa mentions that Indra, 
Agni and Surya strove hard to secure the supreme 
positions among the gods and succeeded : this state- 
ment gives us an insight into the origin of the 
Trimurtis of the later times. In the Big-veda Indra 
is described as the wielder of the vajra (or iron 
thunderbolt), encompassing the sky and the waters, 
and reaching up to heaven and is saidto have fixed 
the earth, the luminaries, propped up the sky and 
so on, and that theso acts were all done under the 
exhilarating influence of the drink quaffed off from 
three cups. Though praised as unequalled by other 
gods or mortals, Indra is not a self-existent being but 
was born of a mother [Big-veda. x 134, l). 


616 



THE DIKPXLAKAB. 


It has already been Btated that the vajra was 
shaped for Indra by Tvashtri from the bones of 
Dadhicha. With the vajra he killed the «u«ra 
named Vritra. While he, as the chief of the gods, 
churned the ooean of milk in company with the 
asuras, the white elephant named Airavata, came 
out of it and this was taken for himself bv fndra. 
The name -of the wife of Indra is Indram or Sachi. 
In the Mahabharata , Indra is said to bo the father 
of Arjuna and to have a thousand eyes (or yon is) 
spread all over his body because he seduced Ahalya, 
the wife of the rishi Gautama, lie is also classed, 
as we know, as one of the twelve Adityas. 

It is thus seen how Indra, one of the supreme 
gods of the Vodic period, deteriorated into the chief 
of the minor gods, tho leader of the army of the 
gods and finally into one of the guardian deities of 
the eight regions. He was receiving from the 
human beings Borne sort of worship on earth, but 
Krishna was the first to put a stop to it. It was 
on this occasion that Indra caused havoc in Gdkula 
by sending down torrents of rain and it was also 
then that Krishna protected the cowherds and 
their belongings by lifting up the GQvardhana 
mountain. In spite of Krishna’s protest against 
the worship of Indra, it was still existing in the 
7th to the 10th centuries of the Christian era. 


517 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


The &ilappadiqbram, that remarkable gem of 
dramatic epic of the Tamil language, has a chapter 
describing how the annual festival of Indra was 
celebrated in Ksvirippum-pattinam, the metropolis 
of the ChOlas : it states that the festival began on 
the Paurnima of the solar month VaiSakha and 
was continued for twenty-eight days. The date 
of this work has been determined to be the middle 
of the eighth century A.D. In an inscription 
belonging to the reign of Parantaka Chola I to be 
found in Tondamanarriir near Kalahasti, mention 
is made of the details of the arrangements made for 
celobrating the fostival for Indra. The custom of 
offering puja, and a fortiori of celobrating festivals, 
to Indra does not obtain at the present day. 

The Vedic deity Indra plays also an important 
part in the Buddhist and Jaina religious lore. The 
description of &akra, as given on p. 78 of Beal’s 
Catena of Buddhist Scriptures is almost exactly the 
same as that given in Hindn works. 

As has been already stated, Indrff is the lord 
of the eastern direction and therefore the image of 
the deity is to be placed on the eastern side, when 
a group of the Dikpalakas is set up. The places 
where such a group is generally placed in a Hindu 
temple are the ceiling of the front man^apa, the 
eight corners of one of the upper-storeys of the 


618 



THE DIKPXLAKAS. 


vim&na if it has more storeys than one, and, if the 
temple has more than one prakara, in one oi them. 

The description of the image of Indra, as also 
of the other Dikpalakas is contain d in almost all 
the tlgamas and in the Brihat wmhi\<t and Vishnu- 
dhamiottara. It is stated in the Arhkumaiibhedd- 
gama that the colour of the imago of Indra should 
be dark and that it should have two e\os and two 
arms ; the image should possess very handsome 
features and be adorned with the kirlta, kundalas, 
h&ra , keyura and other ornaments and be draped in 
red garments (delicate textured Chinese cloths ?). 
Indra should carry in his right hand the iakti and 
in the left the ankuia. The neck of the figure of 
Indra should be thick and the belly rather big ; the 
image might be sitting or standing upon a simha- 
sana or be seated upon his elephant, the Air&vata. 

To the left of the figure of Indra should be 
seated that of his consort Indr&ni, decorated with 
all ornaments and carrying an utpala flower in the 
hand, and the features should be those of a gay 
and joyful young woman. On either side of this 
oelestial pair should be represented two Gandharva 
women waving multicoloured chamaras. 

Some of the other authorities have practically 
the same description but differ in stating that 
the articles held in the hand by Indra are the vajra 


519 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


and ahkuia or a nlldtpala flower ; while the others 
state that the oolour of Indra should be white and 
that he should have a third eye lying horizontally 
in the middle of the forehead and four arms, — one 
of the right hands of which is to carry the vajra, 
the other right hand a padma, while one of the 
left arms should be passed round the figure of 
Indranl as in embracing and the remaining loft 
hand should carry the ahkuia. 

Indrftni should bo of the colour of gold and be 
clad in blue garments. She should have two arms 
of which one should be embracing Indra and the 
other hand should carry a aantana-mahjari. The 
Vi&hnudharmotiara adds that she should be seat- 
ed upon the left lap of herlord. 

The elephant Airavata should have four tusks, 
two on either side. 

Two photographs are reproduced in illustra- 
tion of the description of the figure of Indra. The 
first figure PL CL, is to be found in Chidambaram. 
Indra is seated upon his Air&vata and has four 
arms, the front two hands are in the abhaya and 
oarada poses and the back hands carry the ahkuia 
and the vajra. The second one, fig. 1, PI. CLI, is 
seated on a bhadrapipia and has four arms. The 
front right hand is kept in the varada pose and 
holds in it an aksham&l& ; the front left hand 


520 



Plate cl. 



Indra Stone Chidambaram. 


[To face page 530] 



PLATE CL1 



Fig. 1. Indra- Stone 


[To face page 5 20] 


W 



Fig. 2. Vfiyu Stone. Chidambaram, 



THE DIKPlLffKAS. 

carries a kamaitfalu and the back right and left 
hands hold the ankuia and the vajra respectively. 
The head is adorned with a ja&makuta and a 
number of necklaces and an yajn&pavita ado* ns 
the chest. 

AGNI 

Agni was also a very important deity in the 
Vedio age and with Indra and Surya formed the 
Triad of that period. As with Indra this prroci- 
pal 'deity came, in course of time, to occupy a very 
minor place in the Hindu Pantheon. He was 
the most adorable to all hdiris, he it was who 
knew the proper seasons to worship the gods with 
oblations, he was the medium through whom the 
gods received their share of offerings and he was 
believed to be concealing himself in waters or 
plants. He was the lord of the house, the res- 
plendent guest of the house and is friendly to man. 
He was also a terror to the rakshasas and y&tu- 
dhdnas , whom he crushed between his iron teeth. 
His birth is accounted for in various ways. He is 
said to have been brought down from the Bky, 
generated by Indra between two clouds, by Dyaus 
and in the waters. He has a triple existence, 
namely, as fire on earth, as lightning in the atmos- 
phere and as the sun in the sky and that the sun 
entered into him at night and emerged out of him 

621 


M 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

at dawn. Agni was actually generated in the 
VSdio age by the rubbing of one piece of wood with 
another vigorously: the lower pioce was called 
the arani and the child thus born, that is, the fire, 
was found to consume its own mother, the wood. 
The description of Agni as he was conoeived by 
the Vedic bards is that he had two heads, four 
horns, three feet and soven arms. 

Later on Agni is identified definitely with 
Rudra and Siva and is therefore considered to be 
the fathor of Karttikeya. He becomes the destroyer 
among the later trinity and he is also considered to 
be capable of conferring blessings upon humanity ; 
truly does Agni (fire) destroy everything if not hand- 
led properly and is therefore a source of damage to 
man ; also he is an excellent friend of man confer- 
ring the boon of removing all obnoxious matter, 
perishing or decaying matter by burning them down 
and rendering the surroundings of human dwellings 
clean and healthy. At present Agni occupies a 
minor position as the medium or agency for convey- 
ing the offerings, made through him, to gods. His 
wife is SvSha. 

We have a fine description of Agni of the later 
period given in the Harivamia. There he is re- 
presented as draped in black clothes, has the smoke 
for his standard and head-gear and oarries a flaming 


522 



THIS DIKPALAKAS. 


spear. His chariot is drawn by horses of red oolour 
and the winds are the wheels of his chariot. He 
has a ram aB his pet animal and he is moro often 
shown as riding this animal instead of in a chariot 
aB described above. The following is the 2<jamic 
description of Agni : 

Agni should be of red colour, u itb four arms 
and three eyes and the hair or jnfa of the head 
which should also be of red colour, standing on end 
and forming a sort of prabhaniantfala. He should 
be seated upon a ram. The front two hands should 
be held in the varada and abhai/a poses, while in 
the back right hand there should be the sruk and 
in the back left hand the iakti. If he is represented 
as having only two arms, they should carry the 
sruk and iakti respectively. According to another 
authority, Agni should be of the colour of molten 
gold or the red colour of the rising sun and be clad 
in red garments ; he should have also moustaches 
and a yajndpavlta. In his hands he should keep 
the akshamuld, and the kaman^alu. Where he is 
represented as possessing four arms, the Vishnu - 
dharmQttara states, he should carry in his right 
hands the flames of fire (jvUlas ) and the triiula and 
in one of the left hands the aksham5,l&, while the 
remaining left hand should be embracing his wife 
Sv&ha. It alBO adds that Agni should have four 


523 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


sharp tasks and that his chariot should be drawn 
by four parrots and that the banner on it should be 
the smoke (< dhumaketu ). The driver of the ohariot 
of Agni is V&yu. His consort Sv&hA should be 
clothed in red garments, be smeared with kunkuma 
(saffron paste) and be adorned with matra (?) and 
be carrying a ratna-p&tra in her hand (that is, a 
vessel containing gems or one set with gems). 

Aooording to a third authority the colour of 
Agni should be yellow like that of Brahma and he 
should also be represented like Brahma with golden 
ooloured jafos and eyeB of yellow colour: he is to 
be oarrying in his bands the akshamalA and the 
iaktiy&yudha and be seated upon a seat known as 
the arddha-chandrasana. 

Two illustrations of the figure of Agni are given 
on Pis. CLII and figure 2, CLIII. The first figure 
is found in the Siva temple at Kandiyur in 
Travancore. It has two heads which are of the 
goat, seven arms and three legs. Of the seven 
arms four are on the right side andf three on the 
left. The second figure belongs to the Siva temple 
at Chidambaram and is almost similar to the first 
figure. Instead of the faces being those of goats, 
as in the first figure, they are human in this oaBe 
and a bull (not a ram as required by the Agamas) is 
sculptured behind Agni as his vehicle. 


584 



PLATE CLII 


& 



Agm . Stono liaiuliyur (Travancore) 


[To face page 534 J 



IM All cl III 






THE DIKPit&KAS. 

YAMA OR VAIVA8VATA 

Tama is also a deity of souio celebrity of the 
Vedic period. In the Jiigveda he is mentioned as 
the son of Vivasvat and of 6aranyu, lh" daughter 
of Tvashtri, with a twin bister named Yami This 
sister of his importuned him to become her 
husband, but he successfully resided the mcostuouB 
offer. Ho was the lira' man who du d, reached the 
other world and showed others tin path to that 
world. Ho guides othoi men thitlx r , and assembles 
them in a house which is secured to them for ever. 
He is, however, nowhere in the Vedic period, 
represented as a punisher of sins , nevertheless he 
is still an object of terror. He has two dogs each 
with four eyes and wide nostrils which guard the 
road to this last abode of the mortals. In one place 
he is actually identified with death. 

In the later day mythology he is reduced to 
the situation of the guardian of the region of the 
deceased, and, as the presiding deity of the place, 
he is invested with the powers of appraising the 
quality and quantity of the sin committed by each 
soul and meting out proportioned punishments : as 
the dispenser of justice he is also known as 
Dharmar&ja. He is said to be the father of 
Dharma, the eldest of the five Pandavas. Ths 


036 



HINDU IOON OGBAPHT. 

following description of the image of Yama ooonrs 
in the Sanskrit authorities : 

Yama should be of dark colour, resembling the 
rain-cloud, with two arms, fire-coloured eyes and 
Bharp side-tusks. He should be adorned with a 
kirlta-makuta and other ornaments, a red flower 
garland and be covered over with red sandal-paste 
and draped in red garments. He may be seated 
either on a simh&sana or on a he-buffalo. His 
hands should bear a kliacjga and a klietaka or a 
fruit and tender leaves or dancla and pa&a. 

On either side of Yama should be standing 
Mrityu and Saihhita, with torrific faces and of 
dazzling blue and red colours respectively. Besides 
these there should be also two women waving 
ch&maras on either side of Yama. In front of Yama 
should be standing two Brahmanas called Dharma 
and Adharma, as also at the door, Chitragupta and 
Kali, all clothed in red garments. Yama should be 
surrounded by the devas, asuras, dharmis (those 
who have done good acts) and pa-pis (sinners) ever 
worshipping him. 

The Vishnu dharmdttara states that the colour 
of Yama’s garments is golden yellow and that, 
seated on his left lap, there should be his oonsort 
Dhumfirnd, whose complexion is that of the rilldt- 
pala flower. Yama has four arms, while his consort 



THE DIKPllAKAS. 

has only two. In his right hand Yama keeps the 
daij4a and the khadga and in the left hand a flam- 
ing triiula and the aksham&la. The right arm of 
Dhumdrni is to be passed behind Yama in eu braoe 
with the left hand bearing a pomegranate fruit. On 
the right side stands Ckitragupta dressed list* the 
Westerners ( apiclujaveslia ) ; he is to he of tine looks 
and to carry in his right hand a stile and in the 
left a palm leaf for recording the acts of the mortals. 
To the left of Yama stands Kala oi terrific appear- 
ance and armed with the />a&a. 

The figure of Yama whose photograph k given 
on PI. CLIII is found in the Siva temple at Chidam- 
baram. It has two arms ; the right hand carries a 
p&ia and the left a gada. There is a small karanda- 
makuta on the head and a number of ornaments on 
the person. His vehicle, a bull, is standing behind 
him. 

N1RRUTI. 

Nirruti is also a deity of the Vedio period ; 
though mention is made of this deity in the 
Rigveda, neither the Yedic nor later literatnre 
throws much light on it. In the dictionaries 
Nirjruti is said to be Alakshmi, (Jyeshth&devi), a 
rdkshasa, etc. In later mythology Nirruti is made 
the guardian of the south-western region of the 
universe and an elaborate description of this 


527 



HINDU XOONOGBAPHT. 

divinity is given in the d gamas and other authori- 
tative works. 

Nirruti is said to be of blue colour, with a 
large body draped in yellow garments and seated 
either on a bhadrapltha, a lion or riding on the 
shoulders of a man. (1 > The Vishnu dharmottar a 
states that he must be seated on an ass, bearing a 
dan^a in his hand. He should have a terrific 
appearanoe with ill-looking eyes, gaping mouth, 
exposing teeth and side tusks, and the hair on the 
head standing on end. However, he should be 
adorned with all ornaments and with garlands 
composed of all flowers and be surrounded by 
B&kshasas and seven Apsaras women. He should 
have two arms ; in the right hand there should be 
a sword and in the left one a shield. According to 
the Vishnudharmottara Nirruti has four consorts 
named Devi, Krishnahgl, Krishnavadana and 
Krishnapfifia and these should also be with him. 
The Apsaras ladies surrounding Ninruti should be 
clothed with Bilk garments, and should be of hand- 
some looks, with smiling countenances, large 
breasts and glutials, thick thighs and slender waists ; 
they should smear different kinds of sweet smelling 
soents on their bodies. 

(I) Nara-vahana is the characteristic vehicle of KaMra. 




[To face page 628 J 



THE DIKPiLAKAS. 

One illustration of Nirruti is given in fig. 2, 
on PI. CLIV. Herein Nirruti is seen rid ng upon 
the shoulders of a uian and carrying a dant^a in 
his right hand. 

VARl'NA 

Vanina was no doubt an important deity ot the 
Vedic period; he belonged to the trial, Lndra, 
Varuna and Agm. He jb praised often ju company 
with lndra or Mitra as the possessor of illimitable 
resources and as upholding the heaven and the 
earth. He is the lord of the rain, the waLer and 
the sea Except for the fact th it he is the guardian 
of the west, he is pra< tic illy overlooked in modern 
mythology. At the present when the ram fails he 
is invoked by mantia s and )>uja and prayed to send 
down showers. 

Varuna is of white colour, is draped in 
yellow garments and possesses a pacific look. His 
head should be adorned with a karavda-maku^a 
and all other ornaments and should be wearing on 
his person an yajribpavita. He Bbould be repre- 
sented as of strong constitution and as seated or 
standing upon a fish or makara (a kind of aquatio 
animal, more mythical than real) or a crocodile. 
He may be represented as possessing two or four 
arms ; if shown with two arms only, one hand 
should be in the varada pose and the other should 


er 


539 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 


be carrying a p&ia ; if with four, one of the hands 
should be in the varada pose, while the remaining 
ones should carry the paia, a snake and a 
kamanfialu. 

As usual, the Vishnudharmuttara has a differ- 
ent description from those found in the agamas. It 
states that Varuna should be seated in a ohariot 
drawn by seven haihsas ; his colour is like the 
vai$urya (a precious gem) and he must be draped 
in white garments and adorned with ornaments 
set with pearls and necklaces composed of the 
Bame material. He should have a slightly hanging 
belly and four arms. Over his head there should 
be a white umbrella and on his left the fish banner. 
In the right hands of Varuna there should be the 
padma and the paia and in the left hands the 
iankha and the ratna-patra. A very good looking 
consort of his should be seated on his left lap with 
a nllotpala in her left hand and her right arm 
embracing Varuna, her lord. 

To the right and left respectively of Varuna 
should be standing the river goddesses GaAga and 
Yamuna. Gangs, of moon-like white oolour and 
possessing a pretty face should be standing on a 
matsya or makara y with a ch&mara in one hand 
and a padma in the other, and Yamuna, also 
possessing good looks and having the oolour of the 


5S0 




Fig. 1. Ganga Stone Fig. 2. Yamuna Stone 

Tigova Jabulpur District. Central Provinces. 


* 


[To face page 691] 




PLATB CI.VI. 



Gate of a Temple with Ganga and Yamuna on the jambs 
Stone . Kh&rod, Bilaspur District, Central Provinces. 


[To face page 6$1] 





THE DIKPiLAKAS. 


nl Ifitpala flower, should be standing on a tortoise 
with a ckamara in one hand and a n&totpala in the 
other. 

Varuna being the lord of the ocean he is 
represented in the descriptions an keeping with 
him the padma, the kaiikha and a vessel containing 
ratnas (or geuis) — the sea being believed by the 
Hindus to be the repository of gems— and as being 
attended upon by the river goddesses. 

Illustrations of the river goddesses, Gangs and 
Yamuna are given on Pis. ULV and CLYI. Fig. 1, 
PI. CLY represents GahgS ; she is standing upon 
a makara under the shado of a tree. Her right 
elbow rests upon the shoulder of a female attend* 
ant, while the left hand carries some objeot which 
is not quite clear in the photograph. Two more 
dwarfish attendants are on her left side. YamunS 
is represented in fig. 2 on the same plate. She 
also stands under a tree one of whose branohes she 
holds by her left hand. The right hand is held in 
the suchi poBe. She is standing upon a kurma 
(tortoise). On either side of her is an attendant. 
PI. CL VI is a very finely carved gate-way of a 
ruined temple of Siva at Kharod, in the BilSspQr 
district of the Central Province. On the jambs of 
this gate are soulptured Gangs and YamunS ; 
Gangft stands on the proper right and YamunS on 


681 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

the proper left. They both carry purita-kumbha 
or pots fall of water. 

VAYU. 

Vayu Is also a Vedic, elemental deity. His 
place is in the air. He is said to have Indra 
as his charioteer or his companion in his chariot ; 
however, he does not occupy any vory prominent 
place in the Vedas. He is called the son-in-law of 
Tvashfri and is reputed to be handsome looking in 
appearance. Maruts or winds are not associated 
somehow with Vayu, though in one instance he is 
said to have given birth to them by the rivers of 
heaven. 

In the later mythology he is assigned the 
guardianship of the north-west region of the 
univorse. He is said, in tho Mahabharata, to be 
the father of Bhiina ; as also of Hanuman. The 
Mftdhvas believe that their Acharya, Anandatlrtha, 
is an incarnation of Vayu. 

Vayu should be a youthful person of powerful 
constitution, of black colour and possessing two or 
four arms. His eyes must be of red colour and Mb 
garments, white. He should have a wavy-curved 
brow and be adorned with all ornaments. In his 
right hand it is stated, there should be a dhvaja 
(b ann er) and in the left a danda. It might also 
m ean that the right hand should be held in the 



THE DIKPiLAKAS. 


pat&ka-hasta pose. Some authorities prescribe the 
ankuia in the right hand of this deity His hair 
should be dishevelled and ho mav be seated either 
on a sirnhasana or on a dec the latter is more 
often met with in soulptures the vehicle of 
VSyu. Ho should also appear to be in a basto 
to move very quickly. The \'idinu.<Ih'irmdttara 
states that the colour both ol the uod\ and of the 
garment of Vayu should bo skj-bluo and l hat he 
should carry in his hands the chahia and a dhvaja. 
Viyu should have his mouth opeu. To his left 
should be seated his consort. 

DHANADA OE KUBfiRA. 

The words Dhanada or Kubera literally mean 
the giver of wealth or a person with a deformed 
body. The story of Kubera who is also known by the 
name of Vaisravana is givon in the Uttar a-kantfa 
of the liamayana thus : —Brahma begot a mind- 
born son named Pulastya ; the latter had a son 
named Gaviputra- Vaisravana. This Vaisravana 
left his father and joined Brahma, who granted him, 
in return for his devotion to himself, immortality 
and lordship over riches and installed him in Lanka 
as his capital. Pulastya, incensed at the faithless- 
ness of his first son, made one portion of his self 
be born as Vi&ravas, who looked with disdain npon 
his ungrateful brother VaiSrava^a. VaiAr&vana 


533 



HINDU ICONOQEAPHY. 


wishing to pacify his father presented him with 
three good looking Bakshasis named PusbpOtkata, 
Mftlinl and Bak&. By Pushp5tkata Fulastya had 
two sons Bivana and Kumbhakarna ; by M&linl, 
Vibhlshana ; by Baku, Kbara and SurpanakhS. 
These later born sons of Fulastya being envious of 
VaiSravana’s prosperity practised austerities ; 
pleased with them Brahma conferred upon B&vana 
the boon of possessing at will any number of heads 
and shapes, and of being invincible except by men. 
Having obtained these powers Havana came to 
Lanka, expelled Vaisravana and made himself the 
master of the place. Kubera retired to the hill 
Gandham&dana. Elsewhere Yaisravana, Bavapa 
and others arc said to be the sons of V iSravas and also 
that Kailasa became the abode of Kubera and thpt 
his wife was Biddhi. It is somewhat strange to 
hear in the liamayana that Mahadeva went to the 
Kailasa to pay a visit to Kubora, when it is 
remembered that the Kailasa is Relieved to be the 
abode especially of Mahadeva. 

Another account of the origin of Dhanada is 
to be found in the V arahapurana. When Brahma 
entertained the desire to create the universe, a 
shower of lime-stones began to pour forth from his 
face attended with a hurricane. After sometime 
the fury of the storm broke down and everything 


634 



THE DIKPALAKAB. 


became oalm by the wish of Brahma. He asked 
the mass of stones which thus fell from him to 
assume the form of a divine person of peaceful 
countenance and appointed him as the Lord of 
Wealth and commanded him to be also the guar- 
dian of the riches of the gods. 

In the Buddhist literature and mythology also 
Kubera is the god of riches and the guardian deity 
of the northern region of the universe. He is also 
the lord over the Yakshas and is the husband of 
Hariti. He has also the name Vai6ruvana (whose 
Prakrit form Yassavana., is current in Ceylon) and 
Jambhala. 

The agamas also recognise him as the master 
of the Yakshas and describe his figure as follows : — 
The colour of Kubera according to one authority 
should be golden yellow and according to another 
crimson ; the colour of his underwear is to be red, 
and the upper garment, white. His person should 
be adorned with all ornaments, including a kirlta, 
or a karan^a-makuta, kundalas and necklaces 
oompoBed of a series of golden coins. He should 
be good looking, or even terrific looking and posses- 
sing either two or four arms : if the arms are only 
two, the hands may be kept in the varada and 
abhaya poses or the left hand may keep in it a 


686 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

gain : if, on the contrary, he has four arms one of 
them should be embracing his consort Vibhava and 
another one embracing Vriddhl, seated on the left 
and right laps respectively of Kubera ; the remain- 
ing hands should carry the gadd, and the iakti. 
The Vishnudharmdttara states that his left eye 
should be of yellowish browu colour ( pingala ), that 
he should be dressed in the fashion of the westerners 
(npichyavesha), that his body should be protected 
with an armour, that he should have a pair of 
moustaches and that there should also be side- 
tusks in his mouth. All the authorities are uniform 
in asserting that Kubera should have a rather big 
and slightly pendant belly. He may bo seated on 
a padmapUha or be driving in a chariot drawn by 
men or even directly seated on the shoulders of a 
man. The Ain&nmadbliGdilqama states that the 
vehicle of Kubera is a ram. To the right and left 
of Kubera there should bo respectively the &ankha- 
nidhi and the Padmanidhi whoge descriptions are 
as follows : these two personifications should 
resemble in shape the bhutas, that is, with short 
limbs attaohed to a large trunk and surmounted by 
a large face, carrying in their hands lotus flowers. 
They should be draped in white clothes, adorned 
with karan^,a~mdlcu{as and placed upon padrna- 
pl^has. In another place it is stated that he should 


636 



THE DIKPliiAKAS. 


be surrounded by the eight kinds oi wealth and 
by a number of Yakshas. 

The two goddesses Vibhaviand Vriddbl should 
in their turn be embracing Bhanada each b j one 
arm and carrying in the other hand a ratna-p&tra. 

The Bupamaiidana prescribes the elephant as 
the v&hana of Kubera and states that his lour hands 
should carry the gadu, a purse containing money, 
a pomegranate fruit and a kamanda/u. 

In the Buddhist mythology, Kubera is sculp- 
tured exactly as in the Hindu representation ; but 
he is immediately recognised as Kubera by a 
mongoose which is generally also shown either as 
sitting upon his left lap or placed on his left side. 
(See Figs. 196 and 199* in V. A. Smith’s History 
of Fine Art in India and Ceylon). 

Is'Ana. 

The lord of the north-east region of the 
universe is ISana. From the description given of 
him, we know he is the same as Mahadeva or Siva. 
|&&na should have three eyes, a pacific appearance, 
white complexion and should be draped in white 

* Mr. Y.A. Smith oalls this male figure ' Sarasvati 
enthroned ' evidently through oversight. The mangoose in the 
left hand of the figure, and the three ornamented pots of 
treasure pl&oed under its feet clearly show that the soulpture 
represents KubAra. 


587 




HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 


garments and in tiger’s skin. His head should be 
adorned with a jatH-makuta, his ohest should bear 
an ordinary white yajhdpavlta or a n&ga-yajndpavlta 
and otherwise also adorned with all ornaments. 
There should be the crescent moon on the jafa- 
makuia. He may be seated either on a padmasana 
or better upon a white bull. If he is represented 
with only two arms, his hands must carry a triiula 
and a kapula or one of the hands (the left one 
generally) might be in the varada pose ; if, 
however, he has four hands, the two front ones 
should be sculptured as playing upon a vln& and 
the others are to be held in the varada and abhaya 
poses. This description seems to be incorrect ; for 
the vlna, must be held only by the hands of the 
front pair of arms, whioh are also the very hands 
that are necessarily to be in the varada and 
abhaya poses. 


5S8 



THE AS^INl-DEVATAS. 




THE a6v1NT-DKVAT\S 

T HE twin-gods, the Asvini-d-'vat&s, were 
playing an important part in the Vedic period. 
Ygska says in his NiruUa that these gods A6vins 
were so-called because they pervaded everything 
(vyaimuHte), one of them with moisture and the 
other with light ; but Anrnavabha derives the name 
from a&va, a horse. Who these gods were the 
commentators of the Vedas themselves are not 
able to answer ; some say tke 80 'u ore personifica- 
tions of heaven and earth ; others of day and night 
and yet others, the sun and moon. Prof. Roth 
thinks that they represent Indra and Aditya and 
that they are the harbingers of the Dawn to usher 
whose existence they hurry on in their chariot. In 
the Bigveda they are said to be the sons of Vivas- 
vat and §aranyu in one place, of the sky in another 
and of the ocean in a third. The Taittirlya- 
samhita calls them the youngest of the gods and 
the brothers of Ushas. They are also associated 
with Suryft, the daughter of the sun, and are held 


541 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 

to be young, beautiful, bright and agile and as 
wearing lotus garlands; they were possessed of 
wonderful therapeutic power and are said to have 
helped many with this power of theirs. We have 
already seen that they restored the head of Yajfia- 
N&r&yana which was accidentally severed. They 
are described as always riding in a chariot drawn 
by fleet horses. Nothing very definite about these 
gods or their position in the Vedic mythology is 
known and yet it is a well-known fact that they 
are very often invoked in the Vedic literature. 

In the Puranic period different stories are 
given for the origin of the Asvins. For example, the 
Varahapnrana gives the following account of the 
birth of the ASvins. Surya (the sun) married the 
girl named SaihjnS who was offered by Tvashta and 
begot through her Yam a and Yamuna. SamjnS, 
however, was able to bear no more the heat of Surya 
and resolved to run away from him. Leaving behind 
her her shadow ( chliaya ) and assuming the form 
of a horse ( baclaba ) repaired to U^tarakuru. By Chh5- 
y5, Surya had two children named Sani and Tapati. 
AH the children of Surya were ill-treated by ChhayS 
and Yama and &ani complained against her to their 
father. For this they were cursed by Chhaya. as 
the effect of which Yama had become the lord of 
the pretas, but the hard lot was mitigated by the 


542 



THE AgVINI-D^ATJg. 

intercession of the father who made him even in 
this accursed state to be the god of Dh.«r>na and 
be also one of the Lokapiilas, guarding the southern 
quarter of the Universe ; end 8a n obtained pi.*ver 
fully evil eyes through the curse o» UuhSvii. After 
all those events were over. Surya learnt teat 
SaihjnS was living as a mare m UH oakum, went 
there in the form of a stallion, joined ner and begot 
the twin children named the A&vm:., who are, in 
this account, held to he the pei 'unifications of 
praim and apana, the two vital airs which sustain 
animal life. In the coiinic evolution, these gods 
carno into existence on the r Imtlya hthi. With 
the help of their lather Surya they obtained a placo 
among the gods and became the custodians of the 
amrita and physicians to the c elesttals. The 
Alvins are known by the name of Nasatyas. 
Curiousi v enough those deities, little understood 
by even the Vedic commentators, have received a 
great deal of consideration in the hands of the 
authors of the various Agamas. In fact, a number 
of Agamas contain a description of the images of 
the A^vini-devatas. It is highly doubtful if ever 
they were sculptured and set up iu temples, for 
at the present time we do not hear of the existence 
of such images anywhere in India, as svayampra- 
dhina deities. No doubt they are carved on the 


513 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 

same block of stone as was used for the sculpturing 
of the image of the sun, as attendants of this latter 
deity. The following description of the images of 
the Alvins is found in the Ath&umadbJied&gama. 
These gods should be represented as horse-faced 
and be seated together upon a simhasana. They 
should be adorned with a jata-makuta on the head, 
the yajndpavlta, garlands of yellow flowers, and 
with all other ornaments. The colour of their 
body is to be red, like the flower of the pomegranate 
tree. The A6vins should have lotus-like beautiful 
eyes and each only a pair of anus ; in the left hand 
they should keep each a book, while their right 
hands should be held in the ahliaya pose. The 
right legs of the gods should bo hanging below the 
seat, while the left ono must be folded and rosted 
upon it. The names of these gods are given as 
Na&atya and Dasra. On either side of the Asvins 
should be the figures of the females called Mrita- 
sanjivinl and Visalyakarani waving chauris (eliAma- 
ras ). The colour of these goddesses is said to be 
brown. 

On the left of the ASvins there should be the 
figures of Danvantari and Atreya, adorned with all 
ornaments, draped in black garments and carrying 
in their hands a cword and a shield each. Their 
colour should be yellow and red respectively. 


644 



THE ASVINI-DBVATAS. 


In the SuprabhUddgama it is stated that the 
eolonrs of the Aivins are white and yellow respect- 
ively and that they ought to he clothed in white 
garments and should have turb&m on their heads. 
The Purvak&raiUlgama which also contains their 
description does not differ materially from the 
above two authorities. But the Yinhnv-dharmdt- 
tara gives a somewhat different description. It 
substitutes instead of the abhaya pose required by 
the jLgamas a vessel containing drugs ( dshadhis ) 
in their right hands. On the right and left of these 
gods are to be standing, according to this authority, 
two goddesses named Rupa-sampat and Akritl of 
great beauty and of white (?) and grass green 
colours respectively, bearing in their hands vessels 
set with gems ; and these must be dressed in white 
garments. 

Illustrations of the Aivini-devat&s might be 
seen on the sculpture of Surya reproduced on PI. 
XC, fig. 3, of Volume I of this work. 




DEMI -GODS 




DEMI-GODS. 


H INDU mythology includes in its fold a number 
of minor gods snoh as the ruhis, pitrta and 
n&gas. A brief account and the description of the 
images of these will be given xn the following 
paragraphs. The figures of rzahis, apsara&as and 
others are, according to the Ugamas, required to be 
placed in Hindu temples, and as such are not mere 
mythological curiosities having theoretical exist- 
ences and possessing imaginary descriptions. 
We meet with their representations here and there 
in temples and the description of these is not to be 
considered out of place in a work of this kind. 
Besides, the present compilation being a close 
following of the Ugamas both in arrangement and 
description, the existence of the descriptions of 
these demi-gods in the agamas necessitates the 
incorporation of such descriptions in the present 
publication also. Among the heading the demi-gods 
are included in this chapter the following : — 

1. Yasus, 

2. Nagadeva and the Nagas, 

3. SSdhyas, 

4. Asuras, 

5. Apsarasas, 


540 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 


6. Pifoohas, 

7. Vetalas, 

8. Pityis, 

9. Rishis, 

10. Gandharvas and 

11. Marutganas. 

Ci) VASUS. 

In the Rigveda, the number of gods is said to be 
thirty-three which is oomposedof the eight Vasus, 
eleven Budras, twelve Adityas and the heaven and 
the earth. According to the R&m&yana all the 
thirty-three gods were the sons of Aditi, while 
aooording to the Mahabharata they were the 
attendants upon the sun and were worshipping him. 

We learn from the Bri Bhagavata that in the 
sixth Manvantara, Daksha had by his wife Asikni 
sixty daughters. He married them to the Prajapatis. 
Dharma obtained thus ten daughters of Daksha, of 
whom one, Vasu, begot the eight Vasus. Once upon 
a time, says the DevUbhagavata the Vasus with their 
respective wives went out enjoying pleasure and rea- 
ched the &irama (hermitage) of Vasishtha. The wife 
of Dyau one of the Vasus seeing the celestial cow 
named Nandini in the abode of Vasishtha, asked her 
husband about the nature of the cow and who her 
owner was. He informed her that it belonged to 
Vasishtha and had the rare quality of giving milk 


560 



DEMIGODS. 


which was able to make those that drank it live 
eternally youDg and of sound health. The wife 
of Dyau requested her husband to carry away 
the cow to their residence, for she wanted her 
human friend, the daughter of the king TJ Sinara, 
to drink the milk of Nandinl and to live long 
in unfading youth and sound health. The Vasu 
robbed Yasishtha of bis cow and was conduct- 
ing her to his home ; the rtshi peroeiving through 
his mental eye the misohief perpetrated by 
the Yasu, cursed all the Yasus to become human 
beings. Thereupon the Vabus hurried tt the 
tLirama of Vasishtha to beg for his pardon and to 
request him to restore them once again to the state 
of gods. He promised that the other Yasus except 
Dyau would regain their celestial condition after 
the lapse of a year ; Dyau alone should continue 
to be a human being for a long time. Disgusted 
with the human existence that was soon to come 
upon them and to divest themselves of it in an 
honourable way, they requested the river goddesB 
Gangs to be temporarily born on the earth as a 
woman, to become the wife of the king Santanu 
and beget them as her children, whom, they request- 
ed, she should throw away into the river one after 
another as they were bom. To this GangS agreed 
and the Yasus were bom to her and being disposed 


S61 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


of as requested by them, they then reached their 
former position in heaven. 

The names of the eight Vasus are given in a 
majority of the authorities as follows: — Dhara, 
Dhruva, Soma, Apa, Anala, Anila, Pratyusha and 
Prabhftsa. In one work the name of Savityi is 
snbstituted for Apa in the above list. The general 
features of the images of the Vasus are that they 
should have eaoh two arms, two eyes, and be of red 
colour ; they should be clothed in yellow garments 
and be adorned with ]carai}4a-maJcutas. They 
should have side tusks, terrific look, sinuous brows 
and fine hair. As in the case of all other images 
these should also be adorned with all ornaments. 
They may either be seated or standing and should 
be carrying in their hands the kha#ga and the 
khiHaka respectively. The Suprabted&gama, among 
the SaivSgamas, and the ViivaJcarma-i&stra agree 
in stating that the colour of the Vasus is golden 
yellow and the latter prescribes beautifully 
embroidered red garments for the images of their 
demi>gods. The Vihakarma-fastra gives detailed 
descriptions of eaoh one of the Vasus. According 
to this authority the images of the Vasus ought to 
possess four arms. In the following table are given 
the various articles earned in their hands by the 
eight Vasus. 


653 



Bight bands. Ijoffc hands. 

Names of the — ~ j REMARKS. 


DBMI-GOBS. 


2 

PQ 


a 

o 

& 


ofi 

CQ 


0 

O 


£ 


iF a ti*i 

►‘jo $2 s 
w .* :§ * 5 i J? 

V.UiM 

=8553 a -So s S 

K 


■ 

• 

• 

: 

J 

: 


2 

0 

'00 

15 

44 

0 

'00 

'•5 

0 

'CO 

13 

■9 

'CD 

5 

a. 

p 

4» 

44 

0 

\o 

■8 2 
•5 ^ 

'CO 'CO 


ra 

0 

- 

•a 1 

n w 


o 

J*a 

•0 

< 


'OJ 

0 

-M 

•0 

< 


J5 

l(fl 5h 


0 

'00 


a 

efi 

M 


f 3 


•0 

◄ 


12 

13 

a 

ad 

<J3 

CD 

44 

<1 


aS 

a 

HD 

0 

CM 


-ad 

CB 

J3 

o 


cJ 

43 


•cB . 
*!2 

11 

M 


<2 
00 M 
O 09 

* & 

< 


c3 

a 

'0 

od 

CM 


44 

a3 

'CO 


w 


i2 

10 

a 

-0 

J 


0 

'xn 

£ 

•0 


0 

► 

B 

CO 


* « 

'CB JZ 

s ; 

a & 


3 W> 0 

-0 ■§; 

s * f 

< M O 


e 

0 

43 

P 


0 

► 

2 

jq 

P 


a 


0 

a 

h*J 


0 

< 



70 


553 



HINDU ICONOGEAPHT. 

(ii) NAGADEVA AND THE NAGAB. 

The Nagas are, according to the puranic 
authorities, a race of serpents who inhabited the 
Pat&la-ldfta or the nether regions. The Mahci- 
bh&rata and the Varahapuruna give the origin of 
the Nagas. By Dakshayani, the daughter of 
Daksha, KaSyapa begot the seven serpents begin- 
ning with Vasuki. Their progeny increased and the 
world was flooded with serpents to the great detri- 
ment of man. The latter complained to Brahma 
about the hardship caused to them by the serpents. 
Brahma summoned the serpents to his presence 
and cursed them to be ruined by the imprecations 
of their mother which she uttered in the Svayam 
bhuva-manvantara and banished them to the 
Patttla-loka with the command that they should 
not bite any human beings, except those who were 
predestined to die a premature death and those that 
were really bad. We learn from the Mahabharata 
that the Nagas wore the sons of Kadru and 
Kaiyapa, that they induced their step-brother 
Vainateya (Garu<Ja) to fetch for them the amrita 
(ambrosia) preserved in the kingdom of Indra, that 
they were made to grant freedom to Yinata and her 
sons from the voluntary bondage they had entered 
into under Kadru, that they were deprived of 
the amrita brought down by Garuda, that Indra 


554 



demi-gods. 


carried it away once again to hie abode, that by 
licking the ku&a grass on which the vesst ! of amrifa 
was placed they had their tonguu. split in twain 
and other accounts. In histon 'al tiiutf. poi'ions 
of India were inhabited by a raoo <> 4 men who went 
by the Dame of the Nig as and they :uo hii i>i to have 
formed the majority of persons v.'m, .ned the 
newly started Buddhistic icligiOD. ; * n o scholars 
of Malabar are inclined to believe unit the modem 
Nayars (Sudras) of Malabar might oe descendants 
of the early Nagas, a name which, m niodirr times 
might have been corrupted into Nayars. The 
hypothesis is more fictitious and fanciful, than real 
and tenable. 

The Nagas arc believed to have been born on 
the Pancliami htlii of the bright half of the month 
&ravana and the W’hole of India offers pujas to the 
Nagas on this day, except the Dravida brahmanas ', 
in Southern India the Mali rata and the Kannada 
women observe the previous day, the chatutthi, 
also as sacred to the Nagas, a custom which is 
nowhere seen to be observed. It is a common 
sight all over India to meet with the Naga 
images set up under big pipal trees by scores and 
worshipped occasionally. Childless people take a 
vow to set up the images of Nagas in anticipation of 


656 



HINDU IOONOGRAPHY. 


being blessed with children and celebrate the 
N&gapratishtba ceremony with great pomp and 
at great expenditure. 

A description is found in the Am6u?nadbked&- 
gama of Nagadeva, which appears to be that of 
the chief of the Nagas., It states that the image 
of N&gadeva should have three eyes, four arms, a 
beautiful countenance and bo of red colour. The 
image Bhould be adorned with a karan^a-mahu^a 
on itB head and all other ornaments on its person 
and should be standing upon a padma-pltha. The 
hands of the front arms should be kept in the 
varada and abhatja poses, while the back hands 
should be keeping each a snake m it. Over 
the head of N&garaja should be a hood of a five 
headed cobra and he must be draped in white 
clothes. 

The &ilparatna adds that the Nagas should 
be half human and half serpentine in shape, the 
lower part, below the navel being that of a snake. 
Their heads must be covered with hoods having 
one, three, five or seven heads and they should 
have split tongues like those of snakes. In their 
hands they must carry a sword and a shield reB- 
peotiyely. The Maya-tilpa gives the detailed 
descriptions of the seven great Nagas, V&suki, 


556 




PLATE CLVII. 



[To face page 56t] 






DEMI-G0D8. 


Takshaka, K&rkStaka, Padrna, Mahapadma, &au~ 
khap&la and Kujika as follows . - 

The colour of Vasuki'is pearl- white , that of 
Takshaka glistening red and he must have on bis 
hood, the mark of the soastila . The colour of 
KSrkStaka is black and on his hood there should be 
three white stripes ; Padma is of the rosy hue of 
the lotus flower, with a white streak and adorned 
with coral ornaments. The eolour ol Mah&padma 
is white with the mark of tri&ula on his hood , whero- 
as that of Sahkbapala, is yellow w r ith awhile streak 
on his hood ; the colour of Kulika is also red and 
his hood bears the mark of the crescent moon. All 
these seven great serpents should have two tongues 
and two arms and a hood with seven heads held 
over their human heads bearing on them gems. 
They must all be clad in one or three coats and 
carry in their hands an alcshamala and a 
kamanclalii. 

Two photographs are roproduced in illustra- 
tion of the descriptions given above. Fig. 1, 
Pl.CLYII, is the photograph of the Naga and Naginl 
to be found in the HoysaleSvara temple at Halebldu. 
The lower parts of these are in the form of snakeB 
and are entwined with each other. The head of the 
Nfiga has over it a hood of cobra with seven heads, 
whereas that of the NSginl one of three heads. The 


657 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Naga bears in his right hand a sword and is em- 
bracing with his left arm his consort. The Nagini 
bears a lotus flower in her left hand and embraces 
with her right arm her consort. The human head 
of the Naga is adorned with a karanda-makuta 
and that of the Nagini with a knot of hair. 

Fig. 2 on the same plate is that of a piece of 
sculpture of a Nagini preserved in the Madras 
Museum. As in the previous instance the Nagini 
has her lower half that of the snake. She has on 
her head a karanda-makuta which is covered by a 
cobra hood with three heads in it. She carries a 
sword and a shield in her right and left hands 
respectively. 

(iii) sAdhyas. 

According to the NiritUa the word Sadhya 
means a ray of light. The gods who abide in the 
sky and absorb water and other liquids are said to 
be the Sadhyas. They arc said to bo adorable oven 
by the gods. 

The Sadhyas are twelve in number and are 
named, according to the Agnipuraiia, Mana, Manta, 
PrAna, Nara, Apiina, Viryavan, Vinirbhaya, Naya, 
DamSa, Narayana, Vrisha and Prabhi. These are 
said to be the sons of Dkarma and were great souls 
(: mahAtmas ). The images of Sadhyas should be 
represented as seated upon padmasanas and as 


558 



DEMI-GODB. 


carrying in their hands the aksham&lS, and the 
kamandalu. 

(iv) ASURAS. 

The Asuras and R&kshasas are very old demi gods. 
They are often mentioned in the Yodic pen >d. 
The Nirukta says that the word asuia implies a 
cloud that sprinkles water. The dark muss of 
cloud was evidently personified into awiehi d being 
which required to be chastened byludra topourdown 
rain. The asuras are included in the Pauchujana 
which, according to the Nirukta was composed of 
the Gandharvas, the Pitris, the DevaB, the Asuras 
and the Bakshasas ; but Havana enumerates them 
as the gods, men, serpents, Gandharvas including 
the Apsarasas and the Pitris. From the Taittifi- 
yasamhita we learn that the eartli once belonged to 
the asuras and the gods had only a very small 
plaoe on it. The gods asked the asuras for more, 
upon which the asuras desired to know how much 
of the land they would require. The Devas replied 
“ as muoh as this she-jackal can go round in three 
steps.” The asuras consented to grant this request 
of the Devas and Indra assumed for the occasion the 
form of a she-jackal and stepped round the whole of 
the earth in three strides. Then again we learn 
from the &atapathaBr&hmana that the gods became 
distinguished from the asuras under „the following 


559 



HINDU ICONOGBAPHY. 


circumstances : being the descendants of Praj&pati, 
they both obtained their father’s inheritance, 
namely, speech,— true and false; they both spoke 
truth and falsehood. The gods then abandoned 
falsehood and took exclusively to truth. As a 
consequence, the gods became weaker and poorer. 
The poet admits naivoly that truth certainly 
reduces people at first to the conditions mentioned 
above, but that the gods ultimately became pros- 
perous. The asuras, on the other hand, took to 
falsehood and indulged solely in it. Truth became 
in after-times the triple science ( trayividya .). In 
other ways also the asuras sank lower in status 
than their brothers the devas. In striving to 
attain higher positions, the asuras did not know 
to whom they should offer their oblations and 
through presumption went on taking them into 
their own mouths, whereas the gods offered the 
oblations to each other. Because of their pre- 
sumption, the asuras were overcome by the devas. 
In the Aitih&sic period the Bakshasas are often 
described as dark, ugly, impure people, addioted to 
man-eating. 

The images of asuras are required to be made 
in a variety of forms with terrific appearanoes, 
having fearful side tuBks, ugly eyes surmounted 
with curling ^wkward brows, and carrying several 


560 





1 ip 1. DvarapalaU of the Siva Temple Stone 
KaveripiikUni. 



Fig. 2 Apaarae Stone 
Snnivasanallur 


[To face page 561] 


DBMI-GOD8. 


kinds of weapons. They should be adorned with 
all ornaments, including the kitf\a and the 
kuncfalas . 

(v) APS ABA BAS. 

The Apsarasas are so called because they are 
said to have sprung from the waters when the 
ocean was churned for obtaining ambrosia (amrita). 
They are believed to be celestial nymphB with no 
one as their particular husbands and that they Were 
courting human heroes as they ascended the heaven* 
In .the Uttar a-kBLn<$a of the R&m&yana we are 
told that Havana considered the apsarasas as mere 
courtezans, without any husbands and with this 
conviction he ravished against her protestations 
Rambha, the moBb beautiful of all the apsarasas , 
even though she pointed to him that she being the 
wife of Nalakuvera, the son of his (Havanas) 
brother Kubera. The apsarasas are said to be 
seven in number and the names of the most impor~ 
tant of these are given as Rambha, Vipula, Urvasl, 
and Tildttama. 

In sculpturing the images of the apsarasas 
they should be represented as having slender waists, 
large gluteals and well developed busts. They 
should all look very pretty with a smiling counten- 
ance and adorned with all ornaments and draped in 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 

silk garments. They must be standing ereot (tama- 
bhanga) on bhadra-plfias. 

(yi) PlgAOHAS. 

Who this class of beings are is not clearly 
known ; but that they are known to have been 
referred to from very early times is evident from 
literature. Their images are required to be re- 
presented as of extremely emaciated appear- 
ance, with the knobs of the bones jutting out and 
the veins visible under the surface of the skins ; 
they must be composed of the bones, tendons and 
skin only. The hair on their head should be stiff 
and spread out. 

(vii) VETALAS. 

Another obscure class of beings are the Vetajas, 
whose descriptions in the agamas are not very 
different from those of the Pisachas. The only 
difference betweon them is that the latter should be 
tall in stature, with parched up belly and projecting 
cheek-bones. 

(viii) PITRIS. 

Hiranyagarbha Manu had Maflchi and other 
sons; the sons of these latter are known as the 
Pitris or Pitriganas. Mention is made of seven 
such gaitas and they are as follows : — 

(a) VirSt’s sons were the Pitfis of the S&dh- 
yas and were called the 85masad. 


562 



DBMI-G0D8. 


(6) Marlchi’s sons, tbose of the Devatas and 
were called the Agmshvatta. 

(c) Atri’s sons, those of the Daityas, Dana* 
vas, Yakshas, G-andhurvas, Uragas and 
the Bakshasas and were called the 
Barhishad. 

(d) Kavi’s (§ukr&ch5rya’s) sons, those of 
the BrShmanas and were railed the 
Sbmapa. 

(e) Angiras’ sons, those of Kshatriyas and 

were called the Havirbhuja. 

(J) Pulastya’s sons, those of the Vaisyas and 
were called the Ajyapa, and 

(g) Vasishtha’s sons, those of the Madras and 
were called the Sukalins. 

In giving the description of the Pitris, the 
S-gamas state that they are three in number and 
that they must be seated either on the same wooden 
seat or on a bhad ra-pltha ; the three pitris are the 
father, the grandfather and the great grandfather. 
These must be sculptured as old but good looking 
and strong people of yellow colour, draped in 
yellow garments and wearing each an yajnopavlta. 
On their head must be the ke&a-bandha and they 
should be adorned with all ornaments : their body 
should be smeared with asheB ( bhasma ). They 
should have nioe teeth and have with them a 


568 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


walking stick and an umbrella. Tbe pitris should 
have only two arms of which the left one should 
be kept stretched out on the knee of the bent left 
leg; the light hand should be held in the suchi- 
haata pose. The Vishnudharmottara states that 
the pitris should be seated upon ku&asana (mat 
made of kuia or on spread out kuia grass) and 
that they should carry the pindap&tra or the vessel 
to receive the rice-balls offered to them by their 
living descendants. 

(ix) RISHIS. 

The word rtshi, according to the Nirukta, 
means the rays of the sun and these are said to be 
seven in number. By an extension of meaning the 
term came to be applied to the rishis, the seers ; 
just as the Bun’s rays spread everywhere and dis- 
olose the existence of all things, the seers or the 
rishis are able to perceive everything. Again, 
the &atapatha Brahmana considers the rishis as 
breaths and derives the word rishi thus : “ In as 
much as before ail this Universe, they, desiring 
this Universe, were worn out ( arishan ) with toil 
and austerity therefore they ar e rishis.” Later on, 
the rishis were regarded as those who had reached 
the other end (p&ragas) of jn&na and samara. 
The origin of the rishis according to tbe Nirukta 
is as follows : — Brahma took some dirt from his 


664 



DEMIGODS. 


body and sacrificed it to the fire. From the flames 
there emanated the rishi Bhrigu (= fried m the 
fire). After the fire subsided, another rishi arose 
from the live charcoal (angara) ami was therefore 
called Ahgiras. A third rishi was produ ted to bo 
born after the two former from the same lire and 
was called Atri ; the name Atri is also oap&ble of 
meaning not-three and honce that the number of 
rishis was not going to stop with three and that 
some more were to be born from the kunda (fire- 
pit). When the agni was removed and the kunfia 
dug out a rishi came into existence from the plaoe 
where the kunda stood. He was known as 
Vaikhanasa. The Brahmandapurana gives a 
slightly different account of the birth of the rishis. 
Marichi was born first ; at the time of the yaga 
was born Kratu. A third came into existence 
saying aham tritiya , I am the third, and was hence 
known as Atri. Then again a fourth with thick 
hair was born and was called Fulastya ; a fifth 
with flowing hair and called Pulaha was next 
born. From the heap of coins and other dakshiiias 
(presents) placed in the yti,ga-£al& (sacrificial 
ground) was born another rishi and he was 
oalled Vasishtha. All these were the mind-begotten 
sons of Brahma and it is from these all other beings 
including the Pitris were generated. 


565 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

The rishis are grouped into seven classes. 
Vyasa and others are called the Maharishis ; Bhela 
and others, the Paramarishis ; Kanva and others, 
the Devarishis ; Vasishtha and others, the Brahma- 
rishis ; &usruta and others, the &rutarishis ; Ritu- 
parna and others, the Rajarishis and Jaimini and 
others, the Kandarishis. 

The names of the Beven rishis differ from 
manvantara to manvaniara. 

Jnana or opinion is of two kinds, vidyS, (true) 
and avidyS, (false) ; the former of these arises from 
perception, inference and recollection and the 
infallible intuition peculiar to the rishis. The rishis 
possessed an intuition which was peculiarly their 
own and was shared slightly by the ordinary mortals. 
We learn that the rishis who lived of old and who 
conversed about sacred truths with the gods direct- 
ly, led a conjugal life ; whenever they wanted any- 
thing they approached straight the gods with 
metrical composition in praise of these gods ; thus 
supernatural powers came to be attributed to these 
sages. The rishis seem also to be divided into the 
ancient and the modern, the former being Bhrigu, 
Ahgiras and others. It is worth noting that the 
rishis were called also Jcavis (poets) niedh&vim (wise 
men), vipra (learned men) vipatehit, vedhas , (words 


566 



DEMIGODS. 


meaning also the learned men), muni (the 

thoughtful), etc. 

The Ugamas give the names of the seven rUhia 
differently ; thus, the Ariduntadbhfdagnma, has 
Manu, Agastya, Vasishtha, Gautama, Augiras, 
Yi6v5mitra and Bharadvaja ; wherear the Supra- 
bked&gama enumerates them as Bhrigii VWishtha, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Kasyapa, Kausika and 
Angiras ; and the I’urvalaranaqama , Agastya, 
Pulastya, Visvamitra, Parasara, Jamad’igni, 
Yalmiki and Sanatkumara. We have perhaps to 
understand that each of these authorities gives the 
names as they obtained in different Manvantaras. 

The images of the rishis should be sculptured 
as either seated or standing on a padma-pitha ; 
they must be shown as peaceful old people with 
flowing beards reaching up to the chest, with 
jatamakutas on their heads, yajuupavltas, and with 
their foreheads marked with three streaks of vibhuti 
( bhasma or ashes). They may have in their hands 
a walking stick and an umbrella or they may keep 
the right hands in the jhana-mndrH pose and rest 
the left arms on the knee of the left leg which 
must be bent and resting upon the seat. They 
should be clothed in garments made of barks of 
trees, which should be held in position by ka{i- 
suir&s ; their upper wear should be white clothes. 


567 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

(i) GANDHARVA8. 

Another class of semi-divine beings are the 
Gandharvas. In the Atharvana Veda they are 
Baid to be a class of gods, hairy, like monkeys or 
dogs ; they assume at will handsome appearances to 
seduce the females of this earth. Therefore they 
are invoked so that they may not indulge in this 
sort of wrong act but live with their own wives. 
The Gandharvas are believed to be deities who know 
the Becrets of the divine truths and reveal them to 
the world. As we have already seen they are 
included in the class of Pahchajauas and 6 Ay ana 
links them with Apsarasas : according to him they 
are the males of a class of divine beings whose 
fomales were the Apsarasas. In the Atharvana 
Veda the Gandharvas are said to be G333 in 
numbor. Of tho eight different systems of marriage, 
aooording to tho classification of the Aryas, one 
is the Gandharva system. This corresponds practi- 
oally to tho European and other similar systems, 
namely, a man and a woman falling in love with 
each other and entering into the life of man and 
wife until by mutual consent they separate or till 
the lifetime of one of the contracting parties, in 
other words the alliance is not a religious sacrament 
but a sort of contraot. Henoe the repudiation by 
Havana of the protests of Bambha whom he 


668 



DEMI GODgr 


seduced and who w&b not willing to consort with 
him. The description of the images of Gandharvas 
is not met with in the agarnas and is, therefore, not 
possible to be given authoritatively. 

(zi) THE MARUT-GANA8. 

In the Vedic period the Maruts are said 
variously to be-the children of the earth under the 
name of Prilnl and Rudra and as children of the 
ocean : they are said to behave like sons to Indra. 
Rudra and Prisni are said to have begotten these 
in their assumed forms of a bull and a cow. 
Generally they were very friendly to Indra and 
with their help strengthened him against Vri tri- 
sura. Only in a very few instances they are 
described as having abandoned Indra and left 
him to kill Vritra single-handed. The Maruts are 
the gods of the tempest and as such are sometimes 
included in the thirty-three gods and sometimes 
counted as outside this number ; in some places they 
are said to be thrice sixty and in others as only 
twenty -seven in number. They were the favourite 
deities of some rishis who have sung high praises 
about them. In these they are extolled as having 
spears resting upon their shoulders wearing 
anklet6, golden ornaments and helmets, seated 
upon resplendent cars drawn by spotted deer and 
carrying light in their hands ; they are ever engaged 


73 


569 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 

in gathering rain-clouds and compelling them to 
discharge their contents. Divested of the poetic 
element and viewed in the ordinary sense, the 
Maruts are gusts of wind personified ; they are aB 
fleet as deer and are really ever busy in gathering 
rain-clouds and helping Iudra the god of the 
atmosphere. 

The Amiumadblied&gama contains a descrip- 
tion of the images of these Maruts. They should 
all be of handsome looks, dark in complexion and 
possessing two arms and standing upon padmapi- 
thas. They should be draped in white silk 
garments, adorned with all ornaments and flowers 
and should have luxuriantly growing hair on their 
heads. 


570 



APPENDIX A. 






APPENDIX A. 

The detailed measurements of the distances of 
the various limbs from the madhyaxutra , of the 
dancing &iva-Natar&ja are given in the Kamikd- 
gama and the K&ranagama. The texts i pertaining 
to this portion are not free from errors ; therefore 
it is apprehended that some of tho measure- 
ments may perhaps be incorrect. However, they 
are given below in the accompanying table. 


According to the 


Distances measured. 


Karanagama 

Kamikagama 

The madhya-sutra should pasB 
from a distance 84 yavas remov- 
ed from the centre of the 
forehead, through a position 
tangential to the right wing 
of the nose and the centre of 
the projecting ankle bone of 
the right leg which is planted 
upon the figure of the Apas - 
rndra-puruaha. This rule is 
according to the Kardnagama . 
The Kdmthdgama says: The 

i 



678 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Aooordiog to the 

Distances measured. ~_ 


Karapftgama i Kamikag&ma, 


madhya-sutra shall pass 
through the head, the forehead, 
the side of the right wing of the 
nose, the right side of the navel 
and the oentra of the project- 
ing hone of the ankle. 

The horizontal distance of the 
centre of the forehead from 
this sutra. 

The distance between this sutra 
and tbe/ii/cfcd sutra (measured 
along the line of Bight of tho 
observer, t.c., vertically to tho 
piano of the paper). 

The distance of the right arm-pit j 
from this sutra. , 


18 angulas.(?) 


2 angulas. 


3 


n 


The distanoo of tho left arm -pit. 

The width of tho neck on the loft 
of this sutra. 

Tho width of the neck on tho 
right 

The beginning (from the shoulder) 
of the left arm held in the 
gajahasta pose should be situ- 
ated from this sutra at a 
distance of 

The left hand bearing agni should 
be lifted as high as the hikka- 
sutra. 

The right hand carrying the 
damaru and held in the suchi 
pose should be at the height of 
the karna-sutra. 


8 


5 


•t 


4 




3 


»i 


This hand is 
required to 
be one 
angula above 
tbe karna • 

sutra. 


574 



ADDPWmV 4 


Diet&noes measured. 


According to the 


Karaua^;aioft Kamikagatna 


The distance between the wrists 
of the bands bearing agnx and 
the damaru respectively from 
the shoulder. 

The distance between the middle 
of the forearm of the hand held 
in the abhaya pose and the 
forearm of the danda- hasta I 
(i gaja-hasta ). j 

There should be, according to the 
Karandgama , the sarpavahya 
round the middle of the fore 
arm, the hand of whioh is hd 
in the abhaya pose ; and there 
must be an upper-garment of 
tiger's skin thrown on the i 
shoulder between the two left 
arms. I 

The distance between the t.ip of | 
the thumb of the abhaya-hasta i 
and the nipple of the right 1 , 
breast. 

The shortest distance between the 
wriBt of the abhaya-hasta and 
the danda hasta . 

The width of the portion of the 
abdomen on the right of the 
madhyasutra . 

Do. on the left. 

The distance (measured on the 
right side) of the navel from 
the madhya-sutra . 

The root of the penis is situated 
on the left of this sutra at a 
distance of 


24 augulas. 


17 angulas. 


angulas. 


8 

12 


14 



V 


HINDU ICONOGBAPHY. 

According to the 

Di a tan oea measured. i 

Karanagama | Kamikagama 

The baok side of the buttooks is 
situated on the left side of this 

antra at a distance of 7 angulas 17 angulas 

The madhyasutra Bhould touch 
the iron* and the left thigh and 
divide its width into two por- 
tions : the length of the portion 

on the right, 17 lt (7?) 

Do. on the left. 9 ,, 

The knee of the raised leg should 
reach the height of the navel, 
according to the Karanagama 
and sroni , according to the 
Kamikagama. 

The sole of the lifted leg should 
be just above the knee of the 
standing leg, according to the 
Karanagama and up to the 

level of the knee, according to 
the Kamikagama. 

The distance between the sole of 
the lifted leg and the knee of 
the standing leg. 34 „(‘>) 24 ,, 

The distanoe between the wrist of 
the danda hasta and the knee 
of the lifted leg. 1 yava (?) 14 „ 

The distanoe between the middle 
of the thigh of the left leg and 
the navel. 9 •• 

The distance from the madhya * 
sutra of the knee of the bent, 

standing right log. 10 angulas. 12, 10 or 9 

angulas. 

From the fact that the madhyasutra is required 
to touch the middle, practically, of the head, the 


576 



APPENDIX^. 


ir&ni, the right thigh and the centre of the ankle, 
we see that the line drawn from the centre of 
gravity of the heavy figures of Aiva-Nataraja is 
made to fall exactly in the centre of the banc, 
which is generally a broad padmapltha, mounted 
upon a bhadrapltha. The perfect stability <>f the 
image is thus secured. The projecting limbs such 
as the two out-stretched arms, the uplifted log and 
the back of the body aro so symmetrically arranged 
with reference to this line as to counterpoise oaoli 
other and n'ot interfere in any way with the stabi- 
lity. Now, if the image wore to stand upon only 
one leg without any other support, there would be 
the danger of the superincumbent weight acting 
detrimentally to the strength of tho statue; the 
frail leg may break at tho ankle, if the image sus- 
tains any accident. To avert such a possibility, 
the presence of the prablici-mandala is insisted 
upon ; the out-stretched arms, the large number of 
jatfis issuing from the head, a long, flowing strip 
of cloth which is tied round the middle of tho body 
and the crown of the head are mado to touch the 
prabliUman^ala and are attached to it, thus 
affording perfect protection from the danger of 
breaking at the ankle. It might also be noticed 
that, as a general rule, (a more or less perfeot one), 
the two out-stretched hands and the foot of the 


78 


577 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY, 

b tending leg are made to lie on the three apices of an 
inverted equilateral triangle and are practically also 
on the same plane as that of the prabtomanQala. 
The height of mathematical calculation as regards 
distances and masses in the making of perfectly 
stable and strong images is, it might be stated, 
attained in the casting of the often bulky and 
large images of Siva-Natar&ja. 



II yfrlHk^UIlP || 




APPENDIX B. 


feff wr^^ip?n^ifir??Tr s^r g 3# g^: 

arcrerfa ^ *rcrei ^ 5 rt: g^r 

ritr' *rrg^% wnpfrtpfag II 

sqr-fcff %lPi 1 

— 

ir^fcr *jjn/?r SffR qrT: 1 

crwifeifgiTiscin II # II 

3?r%f wm %3Tfw wi:, 

f^r rwr, ^rr w ^fpifoirt fgftsw 1 
g<gtK «hl<J| — 

3 ^t: vi mmfo fojf^eFrgrP^ 1 
wntf ^ff4 %^r f^fg^ 11 
ftrewr g qscR^Qwa^^^ 1 
g#§tK wret fejfg^ ll 
%srn*i*nt% ««frf3r *npr fewg^ 1 ffrt 11 



# y/rtolcJyuilA | 

fefoprft <J?T: esl^VT^I^HRT: 

«r^r^ l 

ajftorfoffg I 

ct>M gg^ — 

efffoii rr*rr i 

tr^ %g fcsfcr 1 ^jfg^r^ n 
/stem g rewarf^g^tcR, i 
faff $wZ§ir; vmt fejfg^ II 

$rq[oq;q|/% H'ff/oT ^^4 fcfJfm I ^ It 

%mft • tenfa %fe , i st^-srst^:, «rMt 
it arimn, 3?R«iE*kr:, *mr wmr:, smr 

^ *wrag: i ?T*Tr =<?itk gg*fc — 

83^ £R^T qi#l fe/^T 3?T: I 

=gmr jftewwr els^r II 
«Hvrr {R^r %g ttesr g ^gf^Vg 1 

^5T sr^sr %* ^oTfes tg?rg n 

%33T tTI^ alrF ?m rngr i 

<$gi sajof <tte ^ifa gg*& — 

srfoFHT gte tteg tfsrctfaoTR. I 

aU|^ f^^[«fl%R5nT5HR II 


*}. Jjjs arifa t<? writ i 



«# 

^srf^R wnffaq diRrere**. i 
«\ 

qsrffa ^faj fri^'-fa^ ii 
rN ehrr^^qi gq?qf«faf *3^3 i 
STigsqepfo jsq || 

§g jfgg^ EflTR aifi'at^IJTt I 

<^gt %=r f&JfRT 3 SROT *\ 3 ft«rfrt: II 

II] 

3^nq tF&iT&i q3]qfra*R;q;3 i 

ir<W5T ^ gin 9*TPTI»r II 

$cfr 3?qfo3 RtrR q^rqfiftsl-q^ I 

qnft% — 

^tt 3 s^r qq$^fa3^3 i 

qqrflqq^ =q qqifSJRWqqR II 
fqq^q 33^3 ^piVqr^i3q 533^1 i 
jfitsqr <mr 3*333^1: 11 
qa^R%«3rTO«T 1 

q^qi Rfqqr 3^ 3s 3^ta ll 

91^— 

33^1 HRPTOifar rt«TT I 

^sfarcrefgTfi qiR fejf sw^ ll 


1. ‘qqm’ftrlcr ga^qis: 1 



*i] 

rrt — 

<ttr qterqr^ ?r«rr i 
arm %q srg^ || 

[ 55fcsn§jp«5»l *1] 
sffrR STtfR tf'iRT *r5*?%fifcR. I 
cti^t gsriR; %q siRqqq ^ ll 
arrcfs <r*-Ttgre yqiKwmn: i 
slrenr frij^oi II 

<^T g 55|^ J^tR <t 3[ <cJTlfg^T% I 

[T^fefq ‘|] 

4fi%^ =q qqi^ ^ %rq ^er q«rr n 
3«f JRtf^T sfla ffqsi qu4f&rq. | 

11 

qraisreiroiota qqf^rr^ifq ^r^ I 
qj&qj f5Rn%>q <tfj$c&r || 

qqFTrqg^R^i^n- g^Rcr *ggr i 
^Rif^ *mR«r 3TT n 

^t?3T l%f^qif^^wr?[ROT fqsrr i 



i r] 


q«rr — 

cftq =R | 

& %r g%ir it 



^ ^rfir: q«rr — 

*srf^«F3?TC*TTcJ| *RT: | 

fosf: ftrgqi || 

^flltofr IrKWZtf-. | 

% f«jr: qq^pq g rrsqqi: n ?fcr u 


[ferfoifU l] 

=q RrsMf^gtofrg^'R =Rgl%**. I 
5R^ — 

=q gf%n snft^Rql'^tfgii 
%crr trKT ?r«Tr qtar ^«m %Rt =Rgf&rr ll 
^(^PRTfqoiW snSMRT irt^ i 
^rqi^f^gwrwr ^qr<qi rI^r surt^ ii 
% 3 RRf g Rsrsqft l 
*nwg^^i?Tf sr^piri g ii 
* 3*t g $rr i^Ti *r$terq?RPft I 

*TI rfHT =RT%FT II 


i. ‘ ^rrfrrvKqft^: ’ 51% ^Tftrapqq; 1 



c 




W qStfrTt I II 

HcT*reiSter«i qreft<?raRsqq*q>ra^oT 

stest q«rr l 
gji^ — 

fcq «ra*>pf <J=? ffrq iTm cPTr i 
sngt ^ «n^ w <rar II 
qrorfe# =q fej- qq&q i 

<^tai «r«rr — 

’Terror sf^rarcr ^rsrru/^q =q i 
3 tr 4 «n 113^4 qr qiqii^Tfar$ft: 11 
srrrfi r%ir *qrqwjq*q q i 
l^q tqrqwjq ^grPrfaqrtq -q li 

tqq qpqq $\w> qsq^rwlq =q i 
arigt §{(&# q «tp$ %q!qqraqn n 
qrgq q«fij cqqq *rtq; i 

qpjTf%iftq %qiq; wi q || 

*&— 

qrlq; %q qpqq *igq q*rr i 
«^r qq$q <%# |it% ssjot *fs II 

tfqiqnt ^nw^wl^ra^ i 


II 





«r#T 5 R!g% wr Jjffrarfe^rfffe i 
ITSTewfe^ft ^ |fe£ FffccNrf II 
^RF<J¥R 'TRFRlt WFtRIFTRFfrfe I 

VMfcfsl || 

wf^wROT* *TroT7 fewg^cr i 
#^533 hM^if ^nfe^^Tsfe 11 
feiFflmnT*RF^ 1 

5 F* 51 nfol 5 5 F t?R*IRR«jrft 5 F II 
ten^TWF^Foi 3^*1. i 

TT 3 RF 5 ft II 


?iiM — 

Rrq»p &ri<Jifei If%r fafe 1 

*TT"TT 5135 few qzxnfirt II 

tF^tlfeffi fe# SWg^IffR. | 
ftr %5 wm *ra 3 FFaTfewg 5 F& 3 H: 11 
t%sr **ni%i ^m^rfq^rr^ 1 
*Totw?*Trfar few JTroiq 355155^ u 
*TTg* ^rrf^t ^fs^r. 1 n 

Hig^fefc ( 51 ) S 3 fe 5 T *f*TF — 

fejfft'fa 

*Wfef 5 $ 5 R twifaft =5 I 

siSftftnfifeiF ^ tfFifl^^^R. n 


9 


9 







fotfl — 



Wrf^TW qffift: | 


qtqr wfarcqrfa ^rft r foicr n 

RR^S: S*Ff> ^ I 


smai: q^IPT Rre%q qqpfo: || 


*n^i%q>fe*wjor q«n ^Rot — 

Rpfeffcfifeipfa nfo r?t: i 

jiiwi^r 3 qs% faftrcw. 11 

sRT$r qsgfofcq vrq^T qj^TRR. I 
?RWRR^*T W3T«Tlft qj 3 ^: II 
cRRTI^qr^T ?Tq^RTciPT[orqFR. I 

faraSr ^ jft wrm ^ n 

^K5T[(i^«r wsfort i 

qeq> ql|RRm ?F#ffRq*3 Sf II 
qi g jrrt fsqr qr I 

am itfqrci qi f^RPT a^3. II 

JTaftSBfa*TT?F 3 I 

ref^gwmrft foipfa qjfamft =q n 


10 




5r^TO^nrt»t i 

«mf i 

*thw 14 q^fawrc i *rr h 
S^q«R srtfT 5R%5nRf^T ft i 
wr %q$rc || 
*R5^RRnm^ *tpt i 

11 

iritaM ^rrwnt *ftg. i 

3^qF*RT4 fcHi sPTft^klRIU|'W{ v II 

ftjfrcft ftqrosr ^gfctfft^ i 

*m> 4% g ftjfit q^fMt g ftsrc: i 
emreK^ftr g iwito^ ii 
=^JTlS«RI fowftRrc: qfaffe i 
& fRi w^?nf^mPR: n 

forTTC: gf^ffqr: I i 

5RFIRTl^S|q *TR f^f *P^RR II 

(^orterc^ i) 
f^IRRlORR m fejf fT S«faHcT: II \$ II 
*tW 4 Sf qws^fffa *TT l 
wiq^f^if^T g arosrta ftw. II II 

1 ‘ <W*ifer Vi ’ fafrt srt^rsqq; | 


11 




JrtftWTfMEroiTfr I 


tr> i 

«k^T N^Stl'h ^ qR 5# 5 zrftwi *q II II 
5T«j5m> sfaqr g i 

MKIIH’ i U$'33R ?Kgq II II 

?PTl$qqq qsqsq^r ftrqrqqj*. | 
qqi% 5TW *TRf/% erq|^S5*ni%% II tfo II 

Srs*rKrerf%grft qrfa f| i 

qrq> JrmrFTlTE *rr=r II » ? o 

ftq>rcf$r s^ptr gjrqfjri'Hfrtsrcq. i 

qN%qr qrlqrrfoqi qrq*: ii » ^ u 

f5ftTH*nit g 5!5rf5r ^rf%%sqq^ i 
3Tq|^lUl-=h h E JT^SBl^ g «J#srg; II V\ II 

srqsrfcf^rpj* ric^q\rf%T qqq, u ## ii 
wrerist Wiqft ftqrq% i 
qqf^?Tt?T% ^l?r «r£ tqig; qtesrrerqi^ n » ^ || 
g qqfefflft ^qq^ I 
MsmaateMi qfp?rg*qrer% II n 
sqrq q^qsrq^ii^qj^ I 
faqjrcqfcft gqsqrer: qftftq: ii »v# ii 

q$qrqft«c qfrK ^crqTq g q^r^q. I 
9TR*^Nwt II V<2 || 






f&lW qftf&TT: | 




II II 


5Rf§RR*tf«n arot i 

%l%^ 5q£c3?^r g ^Rfrf^Rr: || || 

3TmrferwT5:m4 AMr^RffaraiRig, i 
ni<pflfff*Tra5q r& II ^ n 


S5*n l%wr«m ^ s^% n ^ n 

g^i5<WEqi?l^g5«?W3^rr sr^ i 

f^TRR sfiftssfig II ^ II 

g gftgamfc^ I 

rT^swr wfc tg^Tf: || II 

snntffcs e)^3 sfirRsqRTT^ | 

srai^f^*fl*rcg«Tfagrc*?rc%: II ^ II 

%»/%5Kl% gw: jpiTOfcn^t TO: I 


$ {BJ&ut9i(TLMT<5m pprrQffd eB lcht orr la Q&n eyr^^Aj jy&w 
A 9<k(£& eSunresTLA (LppuL-&&*BHAu9si> eQiLir&n uiSm-Ati Gs?>> p 

pirGlsv eSik&uiSln laitssstla Q&iretrwn m. (36) 

sirLJuQqspjDjBjiiGi) LDiuiupfieti &/£& 

jytl&pemp jy Qpp e8 ® ispmpiur pen eivpiri^uLJfi sot 
jyihjg jyLD&LA QG/refr^iiuif-. (37) 


13 





offco/r ear p^lM ^leu/ru sQ&vpn a pemp ®}Q5 u pj&£pQFj 
jy*b&ih Qtr uj^j toQdBsti jyib& pomp ^pib&ib 

Qvlljjp jjg^su LbtuujpfiZsc&jFlmjpiLh ^jeQi^p mp ^jsrsm 
L~ib& pdnp cQlLQ jy/ 5 fill &p ^ eo (j^ty.sBso jpirSso 3tp($LD 

wit sot 'girstiir&o'msj Qpsor eui (d^/ToOT jpirevirjieiju) ^y jSeurrssT' 

j& TfSso l c i au)Ld^3^J Qla&t p fix. §£)ihp jtirevprrGair 
9&i &v~T a j£cTLLrLL tirsBrpjflv. ^su^p^liQiasar pgp fQia&p 
pS& LniLnuQiAejr puty- ; t&iB&u t9{ru>/roomb OstTerr^ihuiy.. 

(89) 


sitlju © 0 ^a/D sBwpirv pffieo Q&ihu<rfiii i9mnfresorui 
Q&ire&TL-eQtEJjijfiSsir ffisnih jy pi oul9 Plait smr lot ib, Siruu 
ffi0ja/D <&8mp rrupenp jy^3r jyib&ib Q&ili gp {§)@lw 

(tfl6or ptb&tb Q& Triton 6$tEJ&u i9pLDPriforprinp e_ p plaGIlasst 

pfSeuirek ^.ppLAui9n ll(t * xn pjg)&(9jib jsy ptAuiB Plapsost p 
gp&(&)LD /Simpotnp (oTlLQ Q&uj&i e^esru jp eff/EJ# 

LD/TLX). (40) 


gpfiBTL/^} G& [B&U&tTLLfrmrLb Q P P STT (S^LLU ly, 

P-ppQLnirppLLihy 2-ppLTL&pj£tULC)ib : ^ppLappuaih 6Tsirp 

Qpesr JpiUi) IT* <p tuQi Lti (T p piALJb^ Lap ^iULDLDp jSlULLLC) LOp^UJ 
LDfi punby vi&rr p Qpsorjp'Lh jy p^oldt p p ll L b )n jy piump ^ iulaut^ 
jy ptLir pLLib oimarjpjLh (Lpear jpitl) iSmDirmnb epmuptrs 

jy/fisup&r. (40J) 


KtT&DLairm l9p irewn ppfibso KPPSPeBijapffia^ 
l9p la Prior un Q&netiaiLJUiLu.&. (41) 

jyttp 6&iEi&p ffigp/sg)i__<L/ $srrpeo>p uj&^p)jp) j v/ll&lo 
Q& ujjp jy^&ib&uatrm dS&vpinrp&np gg ujpQtLsir 

pj$su trek. iGireoLA&tb 0<s/raarL- sQ&vppppanp Quetr<&iy.s 
Qtasar pj&eutrek. (yjmpib&ibQ&trssxL- sQ&vprppanp mirir 
vanBaQiL&rpfSeuirtir. (42) 


14 



0 

srftt*m«srcTft i 

filintriBi—u&arcTGtvppfiQGO GiruDB^eun oRmp utrp 

anp J§)0£_/^^)g>0 jyii^LD Q&iu& Lippis&ib Q&,i6mu^£j 

^ pLbLb^ufi&ffZLpan pib&Lb QmonrL-gj &_ppLbib. ^.pp ru 
iBffLDireMi <5jp&(VjLh jypLbu&a LDir&yr pjfj&Qth «5W*v tS^-rp 
mp gtlLl-ld&ld Q&iujp epearujpJ i9jTLbcrmTih tdih&ir 
uj it ld ib Qa/rorr^#. ^jckpinBj Lbfressrib epsiru&npujii Qf an ty 
(ourrQei) Q_ppLbLap{ULDirpLrLbir&& Q<x(t eir^&jfreir. (^44) 

g)uuif«0^Q^ff«ar«ar eff Ad^L/Tu^an^ j|g)0i sp/StpQ^ 
SjLb&ib (d&dj'gp ^pLb&Lbiresr Seuptro pmp E&tup 

QlL&TT jpilh Jty^&Uh&lbQ&tTvttTl-. eB&vp iru ps Sip Glj&t 
Q iA&rjpnb mirsOLb&LbQatrasnL— eB&ops J p<omp etvmi snamEm 

Quick jpiLb jy /fieuiTSBT pun *8i— $9 iw&uiBn Lbirmrib Q&n 6\> 

svljljlL l. ^;. (44) 

(Ssu&v O’er Tear eQu^rrssr p p?e\) ^rTLiuS^p^eB srvp /r n pemp 
{j^QTjupuGLh Q&u jjp $)p'6V upth QpGBn-pLb&LLQ&trmiL^ 
eSia<siraj/TLbLb jy pebth, u$g8)pLb&LbQ x/rami— *3 cbj a /r uj/nbih 
tUppLblb. P^ppLDUlSlIrLbiriomp ffipj(&jLD J&j pLLU&CTLbirsSto p 
&JS(QjLL {§)®JU—USl6Vl})& pStop bTL-t—LL&Lb Q&IUJ& QGfTUgQ 
iStTLLtram LbiTLb, §£}$&> &-p pusrr pLbLbp^BhuLD/EjaSsrr (Lpesr 

(SurQeo (45£) 

§£}&p (Sw&V(re9fEJ&p$j§g)i°B>L- iu flsrrpaop ®0 U ^ 
J3j (CJdP- jytb&Lb Q&IU&) 61 LLl—LD&Lb <5J LpU)& Lb S&D& «0 WD 

piraib Q&a’eir(Gfi}&- (46£) 

&p{D6rrQsu u £?$&)£)] (ufihgyjpi ?) Q&iu&i ^<0 

&ih&ibQ&tujsp Jfy&&>Lbir& erevedrre&t—p figpiLo jsyp8$. (47) 

gfyuuif. £/Tuu£lQFjfijF) t9 crib frum ib Q&n gvgvliulLl^&j. 
j§)^P«0 QuoA puDmpi9cTLLfr6mLlb Q*creosvuu®Bp&}. (47£) 

gp0 Qfitfiib ^7 u-iej 3 Gpttrujp (Lptfiib jyjpi^iuirs 

eBffGeopp Qpuup JP(Lparr jpi i3ffLb/i6mLbirib. $)dp 


15 



aft m a qw r ft i 

(LpuupgsQptbrjpi i9iTLDirem(ipu) «9<a &ut3 mjbtremth Q&irso 
60UUL.I—&. (48 J) 

(LptpiA iQ IT Lnrrosm Lnrrsvr iShnrGtvtr pis\ gjji—t&Q 

u&r<safiir*ow(3 iSietiLc.jpi^tufrttr iStriT6tDtrpp@>lp(8j Q&ireostiu 

UL-l—J£l ; ptfDGtflpu&D LDl iSSST LI> J)l ^ UJ (T & pLJ l9 (T Lh fT&SST LD 

(^uup £(ipoztr jp’LL Q&iT6irjsif)thuu}. . (Lpipubirarr 

i9o irewn g £>0 QpLpLfl/rsjr cShbath i9ir ^atyiy-uuiresr. 
GTQJP (LpipLbfT svT t9n iretvirp &<Sp(&) gpsarCJ pQp&streo (iptpiA 
l9 Plait oar lc it ear e6l/b&<£&) pu i9n ^SL^upuu/rsk. epsorujp 
(ippubtrair l9p ir&V(rpp^p(^ epmpsmr (LpipiAtSpLnPsmLAPatr 
eQtB*pGj><$ &vpiri9uuiT€ir. ( tpipth i9otApessr 

iD/rs ar i9 pp&vn p f &fBlp(9j gp 0 Qptpii> i9o LLirvmrLAirGar e^dus 

pGtojB l9[T fillup l‘)U IT vifT. <aT(Lp (IP LpLMT GST l9 J IT CXU /T f& j£l p 0 

6p69 rQp&rfV (LpLputBu <$ sb> ^itl9uu /r«jr. 

up3g)0 QpipLA i9(ruitra-musir6sr iQmr&vrrp &&&(&) speirGp 

Qpi&irs)) (LpLpih Q&rratoTL- tMiEj&pesip etvpPiBuuPear. 

ujSesrQpeorjpi (Lpipis* i9u ld tram lap ear l9p tr&vir ppj$}£(8j 
^DsssrGh (tp/pth iSliriA/rotti Lorresr Sik<s ( io^fi tSropmB ju/reir 

f§)uuqL epevrujp QpipuL^pLiur^TUijoi^lujps tSia&p&np 
etoptrdiuuirein. (49j) 

g^0 (LpipiD giL-ibSl epsarugi i9o lAtrasirLbjpipjnuirs 

QpihQpGarjpi GSpGOfrQac&ir j$] Sm(t Q&ir<sosoir ($68r(Trj>ir&6ir. 
(Lpih(tp68r jp} isBlTSVfrgplLC gj ppeon LD (50) 

^ILKT^I 

Q&iu*to&as(4j €^0 *Bp<sv 0sm/r/5r^7 Qspeir^pdo g^0 eBffSO 

GTppih QsP6fT(0f^/3S^> Q&iUolUToBT. QjSP^lBsoSsO 

Qiuear/Ss. (51) 

g)0u^^jyg5‘dF *8 it 6\> jp L-(hSl epshuf! i9jnL/r&ar 

u>jpij£iufT& gtiL® JirQ 6 opp$&Q*(Teir^r 2 &. Q-ppinu i9jrr 


16 





mtrppfipQ &m&ut9vuMT6Ssnji Sl(3 u PP<Q^- eQuic 
epssru&) i9(TL£)rrsBsrLc>jp} ^hj/t® ufigyjpt aBffeotr 

Geop fiSsQa irskfer^s. ( 52 }) 

GuirapjSjgu&nt—iu e_ pG &vp pG p /rO u./ri? <*i(<2<*/r«&r£_ 
iBmj&ui3 Plait s&rp&np G.p ^ldOldcbt pjflia* £0* wrGmrp 
G&vpppeo Qp&r fi$Q&irmjp (Vjsnpiu&Q&iretort— tSisu 

iSffunremr psnp jty piLQiDGn p f$m, (53) 

auric Ssirpanp ep&rujpi Q&tu&i eriptb^ih Q&trmrL- 
d&ii&U&trLbfranr panp Q~p pmOubevr p/$&j rssr % jygj#L d#ld 
QGtrmrt— iSouwm psnp jbj pu>Qus>m pfieuirmr* ( 53 }) 

&iruu& (typiDULQirLJb'TGto pfilic Q^itmssruGupG<so jpimir 

JUl 9 jLGfT&BT pfilgHih Q&TG5T6ST ^ pUbUl3 IT IMITSSST p gp&QjUl 

£/pU)Ut9lTLLrarsrpg)&(9jtb /Sj rrpanp ctlL® Q&iuiu 

cpcsrujp L^tr ll tr sssr ll(t ld . ^pptMLDp £3LDirpLD(E]&3orT siruu 
Q'lfjpi D t9ju>mmrpj3eo Q&trsbrairuGu/rGeo jpeurrtru&jr 
uurmrp^^nh ewpcb u tShruurmrpfil&tLb Q&ir&frgtpu 
GuirGec jtyjfls. 

^emrffu&trL&irsmpprgpiLL $ iB5ui$mi>tr6mppir£piLb 

Q&trmru- e&mmiriUfruipgai^iQ&trassrt-- <sB eh> pirp pstn p 
BirsjiLj&jfrcfvrrpLb oppsopesreup^Stsc QaurQWtt—eQfBairiu 

lUiriDp pirioQair&BT t— cQ&vptnTLbGurGffO Q«s/r<rrr«. (54J) 

& Bit stcpp (ks^wnL-iu ^ ^^l^tsttud S<smh SQgpjp 

eh>g) ftS j^jeupqrf&iib airuuQtypQUi9 plait mrihGuirGec Sm 

sutScruurmriJb Q^tretr^euirm *rmjpi jy&mvfilltuuGajir&r 
(Lppsvirarr &€0 fieifl &srr Q& frec^eu a ftserr. ^ pec trie 
L-ir&r i9t?u>irmppir£pi£b &Q£pp$gp]stou.iu dip ld/t sssr ppir 
£pL& <$tBpp£p&(8) l9pLLfT6551lb Qs(T6ir «* ( 55 }) 

(*ra^ 5pr8ren«ift n) 


17 







f«f ^r3j3r^/^5ra-5rr^5ef5T%- 

flWRrergfererfoqlr i%^ f^i^i^K. n 

l&JFFTft i 

?n%4Tf^l%^?3 5 t^TRraq-% fiNl: 1 II 
«rra*r ftftrg qifs*ftt&R. I 

%qf *F*rsq^se% u^4> ?mr *r^ II 

f&m&wqd^ ||) 

i 

fefrcft iWt 3 <*qter ^g*srqp*. i 
*r^ sqtir 3 q^«r [r* ‘qp^fi*] *fcrq^ II 

KHfc fffofo *&m l 

(srSprjRFfa ^wwnra^ ||) 

srr^t 3 *f$vx£ l^5fW «r$RRq;^ I 

ftmfrqi tpftf WW34 ^ n 




WK*K|U|| 

gwrafornt i 

tretfirs fort % 5T»pTiTnM *r- 

*n$r«p q^gqfa || 

f^Wt ^ ^rftr 5 r^it | 

f?r 3^ «%: ^wfflTTT fifenorf *tjn<M swmh, tl 


Qppeo ewireuQprL ip(re 8 &i&LQ(rLA. ffijtranrL-ircufl 
euirp puurssi eS/ijaLb. QpmqrfGu j$i &6ij/rj$asQ/Ei&LA. (e/reoir 
cvjp &V6uav^se9tB3iQLn€srpj£l^. (70j) 


t9{rmiiLb6!StnQF)a{8j ervir&jQ p/ru paeQfk&Lcunh • jyeutr 
4rap*B)j$ QjUrQ&QfjLA D IT ^fT# *{&£&(&) tolTjifl 

la (rear eS/B&LAiTiA • jyeuira ^*(5 p^&niudQxirQai^iA. 
aneuSiiuir &(&$&(&) Swires' e&fk&umj) • syeurra^s ;0 

pen pempm Q&irQa(&jLA. (<&><£ ]$d &vev&vfi)& 

eQfBJ&LA/nb • jy«vi<®(C*;<350 eSQfjfi Z3smiu<& QsirQa^iA 

erearp/As. (71 J) 


en)ireu(p piruptriAireBT e9/£j&p @ gguov>L~uj $<su pss>p (Lpu 
ujp Qfiii&j „*y tf~u93&) upjpd) n(B<i82&> up&LL p&oa 92e» 

Uji&LA ^jlA&Q-p^/r&d, Q&tT&fT&J (T&JT . jytBp G@ (EJ & LL fT 6BT JP 
jyq m9G«tf i8 sir jp pctsVUJffrreyLA $8q2ppLAiru9qijuu£B. §>** 
t&miedD iSarmetarira^i^th mrsiirda(e^d(^ih Qeirwwu 

(72$) 

<*PW% 3R%?n«TT^ H) 


19 



JifrWr«$p»[iA r 


3^4 frfaq ^[|%*TFT II 

qlrfi q&TR*T5T: I 

^f^RTrs^ II) 

^■UMlS^H. I 

*T!35*ret cT«TFTT^ SHTCT I 

«rer«RKWtJT ?T^f5r frTg^Rt || 

resfrawR qT [*n»rq;<] | 

qgwjsgqitf qy j4jth || 

0*3*rt?Fft II) 


griqngftq^:q^ i 

qsqjuflqgwTqT <rt: H^RFT^rq wi ||(\s^) 

q^prgl^i =^4^ q^iq^Tfaq i 

^sq^qq^q? qqiitsfa^ II 


euir j&jSLbir&sr <s® m & m & gpi ssu—iu fisrr psnp u^8sar^Sh 

Q&IU'&J iStflfjUbLDUfT&LD fb/r&)U>&(lpih s£ 6LfijZp> U fT &LL 
&LD&’(LptA Q^pfilTUfT&Lii <$Jpi JD/ LD& (LpLbIT&& Qs fTSU^dS, 
jy6BTj83uj e9 6J&pfijgDJSa>L-.lU /fsYT p&onp U$Q&JTlL($& 3k.Jp 
G&iujp iSlrrfjLnLDutr&ub jy^&Lh&Qpui eQd^ ® *mi u rsth 

^pib&Qpih QTjpfijrurr&Ljb gj tpui&fipuci Q&tr&i (grja/crdr. 

[^yca tj$'3iu vQ/B&jipdgpistnL—uj $ err pstn p $)q$Uj£fiQiu&0 


k .jp Q&iu&j i9^LdLLuiraLL jfrpLbeQpu* gficL & gpmufMih 


20 



rftwi^rrft i 


CT tfiib&Qput {dtruir&riQ & LLu-ih& (Lpu> Ostrsh^sofrar #^j 
jy«W/iS3<u *9iBGji@jgpismL-(U rSerr^jm^ 

Q&IU&J l9iT LLLLU r 3LL & LQLL& (LplA eBeL^gfpiU !T Stb 6Ul~L-Ub 

0(iptb 0^ J u/r&ih epsirru pLb&QfLn Q&nen (Gfjjzurr&a 
tutr/Bpuiire8rpffi&(j9) Kir&iuy. GfffreoeouuLli—jp. 
dj&&L£>ir€BT&J iT/r gg/r A <5 <etfj<£0 Qev p jflofrtUlLjLD 
motif to moLbu pen piL\Lb QsnQ&^QLDmr p jjS& (74 J) 

(nqn!t sr^stpri*! ||) 


'qgiq^qisr 3 qarassfRTfofR. i 

[^JTHreRT^ SH*TRISqqWTqR ||*] 

RR 5 fqutfiqRgqRig. l 

(i^ROIFft II) 


■qgffoft mm ^stsjr i 
« rei 5 Rs*niR qqftr^q tw *. 11 
q^Rfos (%f frqiftqRq: q^ 1 

(fSR^Ril qqfa^iRtf ||) 


trqrftqRfe^R l 
^ri$r g gamr ^«rr. I 
q?qw %q cra^q g^rrer RrfefqreiqR, 11 
trqrftqqfo^ wqqqqiRcjRircq: | 
qr q^q^q^wi. (I 



qq Rg^Rj 


<^qsrerqa& 11 ) 


ai 



SftmTW'TTft’ I 


%q%qqr*»TRqr q*q[qR*] gfwreq T 3 *: || 
f| w =qg$q fli%qifWnqrftmrfr%: 1 
i%sn*R n 


Sleurr S)g; e& fib g; & & Qpum 1— tu $vrrp<H>p p^2ssbr 

C-LC^LD Q&IUJP iB 2 UU-DU (T &>U) QJLfiLb&LA (Q&UJ ^ j «&6U &pll 
LJfT <55 ib <5J Lpli'&QpLb Qfjj£ 2 U(r&L£> 6TU- L. LA^Q^LL QsfT6tT 
suffear. j^ssr fS2iu *9 ftD3>p j£l jggysm—iu 1 $ srrp&np uppih^LA 

Q&lU J$} iBtTU LDUfT <2» L£) QpStfT pil<£F CLpLA c8 Gl£ Gg pl U tT «g LA {Lp&TpUi 

&(LpLA QF)p{£>(T ijirsiA n iroVLD<9 : QpLD(r&& Q&ireiraj/rsor. 

S'Ql]frfiil3iG&. , E]&lh ^ )uuii i Q&rrS\)»\)LJLJLl-t^&J' 
tiW/SJaLD 50) oil Shu 0 &(&) LA JUj lb p 6iJlAd=p^50 p>U &vdi 

Q&(T5))a\'LJLlL-L__gfl, $) Jfi) 5U SW iT hV QJbh)^jd 

&3afTU-/Ui Q&fj®J>(&jQLi>6crrpj£&. 

ircf%qn«qfr n) 


sssHrsvung i 

^ssrcrer g gqRsmrerqR. II 
qq itiqiM qtrfi q^r^ i 

(S^qjrconnS ||) 

3TFTPT SW f^qr ^«T f^TPR: | 

«rm ■q I^fr ■qq^rq yqqR II 
l%qrfthp^r^: 5 ir #fcg£toqq^i 

(gsftqiq** 5R%qrra# II) 



g ^«f drumr | 

^fw 3 ?PT%?r t^rg*q% ll 

II) 

3tFtci% *«n%% *ri»t r$ arer *rawiit ?FTter^ I 

^rnr^t ^igfci 5R^i ^ ^ stem* n 

&v€U6n) f Sds&9iEJS<sSl 0 )i sjni^iu ffierr p>str>& ep&sru^is^isj 

Q&IU& l3j LLLLUIT &Ln ^ ^L u9 5 6\) ^ ffvJjrL-LL&QpLb eBsi^^Jj 
LJ IT <%L£) ft(& J>GU ^Lp 6ST pLD&(Lp L b ^J> ££iT<oh (B&ih ft (T GOLL&QJMA 

Qa>n eheu/rsir. e$ lEi&Ln b^*Vfl- 0 & 0 Lb 

BGFr<SB)USGmiLJ& G)<SG/r®#0U). 

(*r^ 5 R%fn«qri| ||) 

*m\ sw i\3t jprrcr^ i 

S^T gJTfcpfi ^S<2raw SSTcT II 

tetetf ll) 

«tto#sk I 

srcrfeff m 

*rer*r *rr ^r«r gsi«T^ I 
tgorcmrc 
ste swrpi ll 


as 





(ifimrLj Q&t6V&quulLi— 69/b&ib&&R jpiiji pirmreBAaLD 
Q&iLHuev/TLXi. jytkp pirn /re9 (ej&ll 

u/r&LD jysL^L-ir&o la upjgpjpi jyLL&pptreo & jftn& 

ruM i3(njuujp . i9q^i}jld uir&pfi!)60 jy^/r^^Sei) g)/n-L(y. 
jy&truxru9(TF)ULJ&J «fla> jspi u/r&tA. eQetp ggputr&p fie* 
jy+tr/bfilGO ^ulLu). m $/&n'LA/rii9(7rjuu f &] Qrjpfi!ljju<rmui. 
jj \jkp D/EiSsrr sfr^nWaj rru9<(r^LJU^3 e& m&p&np 

ptrcr ireQ/Ej* Qiasbi p j$ ai it g&t . jytip eSirk&ib Gisveo/r &irj$ 
•*iS5®0LO (TLL tol&rjpj Q&ir&)cVLJtJLLL—gp. (80j) 

(w^t aq(§rcir«n*t II) 

qn:rf%ffjrqt «ro?rt g srp^t I | 

<7rc:r^rqrafoT qrcrfef u 

9rq| t^rsrfi f^fra^ xqgwrcqr | 

3 ^ qfssrerow ll 

! sfaraM«WH*v. 1 

(’j^MTJrnFl II) 

q^srrcrereprrcr qq(qRT) 1 

'Trcr®Tte5ifow f^grqrsf^^: 11 

srafSranwnil 11 ) 

S-torqfclp =q wRifeiF 1 

f&gr*r qj^qq^ ll 

%*opit$r (g) =q tta% tu<iMgoflc% 1 

fafrcf *m. 11 


34 



ij^sktw *r ^r«r 31TTW cT^r^r qrcni 

qq 3ffNr§f> (r) sitrK wn%fdctir[§q 11 

(ftreq*& q'&rcfoneqtf u) 

awfeJK 1 

«£srnrpT tsrrcrfef q^q^^oj 1 

#s*qRW =tiqftswsr fefgr^ 11 

mvQ/n&yj $$©<3slo j§D® i(5^L/ip. Qjzm i-j Qsireosu iulL l- 
avircuGlpiTLJjiirGQfB&pfiloV ysztruir&ifiljv 
ptrasunu mu @pl g>0 pjoan^k^ phtiju^ Ga»to&uiT j 
(SimCoO) (pLgCsD & j$ ^uHo S [B&ttMTlL. $(B) l hU\ <oYV(l <SU 

airLBtufEj&SsrriLiU' G)«s/r©<^0 QiLearpfiei/trssr. (81^) 

(qqq^ ^qf%r^n«Ti^ 11) 
«*RT: *g: qaiftifrft: I 

»$«hwi 3 'qrcrcf ^rfarcsrci^qqr I 
frfremrft f^rft wrafe|fflfw»^ II 

(fo?q^ 11) 

foqrqfa 1 

^f^qjSR^r 11 

ad 

4 



siftwramrnift * 


%*arn^rfe|fRt swrpf^w «n i 

(^wt^ <W?nr? 2 % ii) 

tfciferefara . i 

wgftsg^Kt r?i%ser«i#»s*% 
qfti%r«r fnii^r fef<T# g i 

f^f^r jpmrfa frftrcpprR 

srsi^ftswrr ^rf(^) %*rftrai II 

lQ(JT)L£>LDUlTa(jb ^pLA&(Lpib [ €& <SL£ G Stni UU <35 LI) & LpLL& 

(jpu>#J 0ptruir&ui 67 LlL_u^[(7/)#jL£>/r«ar eShaapfiSlfO €tp 
perr&neu ep&TupLh&ib Q&iu&} l9j ldlluh &ud (xpeirpLb&QpLb 
<sS&± Gitni utr&Lh (tp&r piA&Qpib (gpSPufr&Lh Qpckptb&Qp 
llits '5FQ*iu€uirm . j3sa>jrirfr8& eShsjs § Qixdrrp/S 

euireir. ( 82 $) 

(*pr% ?rcf 5 nm«n*t 11) 

«rir =tr i?«r ^ srpjt i 

9trr jr«tt iwr ?tt *vwig*<a || 

SfnTPmTBT* gqf& | 

tofirafafa Ira n 

(SfaKOTPft «WW2% ||) 



MftWHHp il ft I 

«r%sr w w w i ftiflNma t i 

srnft wf^3 se-Hir^ || 

Vrfcffifa? fe# ?I$Rt flUTOWfc I 

5 ^W^5»TT»T%: I 

HMfewft smPTHt JCTrarer: sniffifai: II 
f&jf %trf$n£ *m g ^ 1 

(Rr?q*£r ^frf3RTi«snir 11) 

*R*T 5 WRT fejft# ^^prorfcpR* 1 
qsjiHre^n^ g s%ssi§r gmsr% 11 

tKT R rerft^ stt% 1 

(^rf^FFt 11) 

S^^fR. I 

gjafejf wiVh«% I 

fonfc 35% * f$ 11 
thrift fern g >fr *n*T 1 
*nR iw»iww wituiRt ^nfira^nR 11 


27 



sfa*n^r>rri% 


*raT qr 4 rrqpqrt ^g^qig. i 
q^q =g q^rrq qlfqqrqcqqT^fq. II 

(^qqo¥^ ||) 

jprfe# qqf q# gtqirqpforqqg i 
^rrqrq qq*q g feqzqsr *r%?q;qr^ n 
qq'ftsrrippJ g g^qitqr qqflpfaq, 1 
qrcrqq =qg 4 qr i^qq* Tfq»q^fiqpg 11 
=qgf% =gg 4 qr ftq^ gq?tfqqrg 1 
3 q^qqi^q gfeqgj 11 
qf£qi 4 qq> 3 qqr^rqrg^q 3 I 
rflqigsjjg ^rqi^q wr^faqr qqrcsr 11 
?qqgqrqRrqrqg q»R$? f^girrpqgg. 1 
5 ffqqi^ 8 joTT#:q qftotq ^qr^q^ II 
qrq f&jfqgrqni qrrcqsspmPqag. 1 
qqii%lfJTqroT 3 st:#; tfsqqr *jg 11 

(qigong^ qqqqs% 11) 
f^S#dq 3 qg 1 

qqqqgqr i%ffrci qqq% qwqr: 1 
qgqw gffsq.io^^^reqrnrr: 11 11 


28 





qtrtrffer qfoi i 
sqr% qte?mr4 n ^ i n 

#3^r^wn«pT!Tftft qntqt: sfot?t. i 
^rrqrft fttfft ^ ^ifr? iptS^ iti^r n *,vu 

q«rt \ trqri%^i%jf% g<tfq *qrg. i 
■srg^ q^Tfi cTc^ItK q4»TRI3 II II 

qr gvrr wrstfsrRi =q | 
5qtrq>reT^?P>sfa*n u 

gg^ssn *ti4 >w sqwss^nJt g i 

Irnwwi^r qforcg II u 

i5mq<far*r»qfN; =qrfa?i«r ftsrgif i 
fef[Tqrqg% %qt *nqgg %q snfog: n 

S^sfaftgnwFiT: q|Tfqw4«qfa qjqqr: i 
srq't *rRw%^ ^ Mror^ II 

feffrct %**tfi%cTfcrg*Tqt: ^* 5 q qr%qf: 

*cqi *mg4 cT^qragrf^qfi'g^gsqt: i 
<rcqTOqDq*]^gi§4r%q<rc fcgqqiqq 3 *tt 
q>&q qiqforcqfofm ^tqrqiften/^T^ n 


29 





6Q !&!&&& ^*(8) 6U<T ppQSTUi Q&ITeOGtiUuQSpffl. 

(90) 

0ew£— uLjirts^ufr^eotu/rpso ^nL^^isfSuir^SediuirSQ^a 
(t^peo (San ^(tpiL mL-Qu/rSev §$)q$&(9)P&> ^irpp^ii^lir 
Sssru2uir(Sei) j§}fff)&(Vjpti) /Si flee (^LS^(ourr(Seo 
^a S(San SVtTpjSmLb jy(GT}0rUUp Q&rT'SV'SVULJLl-L—gJ. (91) 

tS/BaiB&erf} gpiotoL— iu eSmpnn panp upl^pisath 

Qaiiig] epmn&L/j ^jarsm l~ll& ld Qp&rpLn&Lh itnetiLbaur'* 

SirtaveuSlsar 3Sp j§) 0 s m(D unna^eup^j^il renpfia 
aniuuunein. apsrnannLbirm SSan euiippevis xn^pt 

uhf Q&n sV'SDljljlLl— (92^) 

etVii eu Spntjpo eQisi xpgpa^&j epiTibaQpih ^}o~ u-Lb 

&(Lpib Qaneb Gurrarr. Sevn^xeS/Ejap^jd^ Qpasr piiau* 
Q xn sir ^gu near . eu/r ppu>narrM/Bap <gD<®0 nsneeihauj Qa/reh 
(Gr^QJTesr GTsnrjpi Q&nd)Gtiuut— L_^p. (93 J) 

^jdpd£[TLnih ^eiriSdoa f^jiGpjyih&iEJXsir epehrjpid 
Qanearjp) xstia-isnun &Je jymp S^SnnGunpp arris anpp/r 
6 i/<® 0 lj Qi jitgvsm Qan (Sd^Qissirr jpi Qa neoeeuuL- 

t—&J. (94) 

0d50i_^r^t_.iD/T63r SSn nanfppasr panp ^lUJTp^eo 
uriip&id Qaireri (&ff)<sij trQssrsor jpi jynpp ad^hnsnarr &(Snn 
exjii p parr pan p t^parr ppQpnarr jpi Qa/rerri&^GUirOesreirjfii 
Q& n-SVGVUUL-L—g}. (94J) 

fin# (OjL&ifiSu/rSev ^) 0 « 0 ld GKSmrGuirppanp&i 
«0 e$ mmeB wopn a pomp e n ' / /h^/p Qauuffi Qparr pan if 
^ls&ls Qair&ngipeunQamsirjp) QaneOGduuL-L-Jp. (95) 


30 





trcurrpipeBrp&np Qpmjpi G®iia*in& l ibi2&(8jLb 
mHTLDrT&rtLiQLLgkjpi Odr tr svsouuC-u.jp}. (95 J) 

& ( 3jFirsuirpp^0)U)'9 : a) Qpest Q otirssr jp «® /s/s? *it p 

Q 9Mp p$€0 <£T p$&Q&(T&T{;Sft)&l(T&n* 60® Ji fTdJtT U>fl5 «u/y_ 

SBrfilgplLL ^ JplU(T&U> «Lif 63r^^/LD <57 £>lL®<36 <ff iLQ oW 7 60T . 
<£pPLn&Ln gfta&ML LS\&LD £Lf) S5T p LD& LD hrMJOfl sflflgg, JK Jp ifWjLR 

QiTLbfi Gd&irJtistiuuLLL^jp, jy pmS [b&h 

/J^I/JLCfafl/atf^^dSQLD flU>6§ifG]X& S3 ff /TLbfrGfT 

^Lbp^SdQ^fTob-^fjjLt LIU}- JJji-JS&J Q^fr^iTi'UUL-L-.^. (97 j) 

GShwsrB&^&ni—tu &is>Jfr<oiur ppsaTLLn && Q&rm ear 

jffth^F ^snjb Ljirir&ijUiEuaeTr ^irmris^^iub SHip fi(rp£>l 
/£,7*83r(Bui <affS iSsSTfE! ■B^oSiL-.IU (LpJifB £3 JtpILTi a/76® 

gplLb LjpULJL-L— j^JT^O £g)/7 JSjr®&<offjl)Gi) 3h-l—Ly_ £Lp6BT Jp\ 

i9ii jfp jiifruj. jjy jihMsii cQ 3 m Q3>trrr6iiiTpp6vr p&np &\&uutr 

Qeareir jpt &eugajl>fO Q&d ^jsouulLl^^i . (98i) 

(*PW5T srqfercrrsqft n) 


qidmftSSzranCT I 

ct<3% ^t: ^ u 

«stt awrar fNri«i qfteir ^qjfestafcrqiT^ i 


31 



jrffUrrasronft i 


^R[qfo?>fiqRgqftei^l^ 5 l% || 

^l%JTHT?T«Tr ft*T% 
qm fofta i 

stRri^t^bt qf^q qprr- 

f%qfpq^R[r II 

mw qgqrcw $qf jnjsftq ciqr i 
•p^jsrar =qrq qeqw 3 n 

sWft ftffRf i%wf q&rq>q^ | 
fesFqRn^ q^mtoft^qi^rcR n 

3 T^%q' | w^q fosreq'Rw&ql: i 
q&Fflq =q?qrft «©5lRlfa ft II 

sm =q ftrfcr ^ *n## ftqfa^ i 

frqrfr% ?j<ftq 3 ^ qforc% II 

q&r ^ ^q gritgqgir *rt: i 
q£st fir^aftrq q£q^ || 


i ‘ 3 fR>q q?q;’ W 5 . 


sa 



sftmpHfrTTfJr i 




f^ipn^sw *r% srefe wrefo i g . I 
feffFT to^T"# #tRH. II 



aw&nt: 


ffcfRt 

rrwki^ ^ nqfttfftnnr l^gqqiqn qqi 
nrfpqj^ftqsqqq qfm ntqin n 


qtfiRftsnsqft n) 


toqfcwiit g s ng2r err qisr % n 
qqi sq ^4 qsn^sraniiiTRjqoT g i 
%rfq^qwRq >n5T <j*ri5T^rqft u 

fejFrqnfsqqto q^rnt g i 
<^i5T ql^^fkr^ gtfqr g q«r^ u 

fanngsfo foif qt^?r fotiTrcr: ! i 
^R5 WT l%ftR5R^rfl«T n 

ton ftto nni qt^torewn ^ i 
trari g n«RRignq|: qi'&frfog, ti 


o 


33 


srE m re qu u ift c 


♦<««« i 

<rq few fefoffer || 

(wmfeRR^ i£foi&rnqa& n) 

fe y <fte^ i 

f^^rjrl I ^tTTfrg^F-cTqr *ftg^RRTW055nW^ || 

(«*R3R*l«WlFjfc II) 

feipr feafawrc ftapn^r i 

tfl5l%cTRg^cT n 

f^sgvrfiTPT tfstcfer | 

9TW *HHH|flW ^IKfeH ^Ttrf^cTH. II 

qqpfte ^(fts %^>r qRnoi^g. | 

<fts ’wgf^Nr iffa ^ II 

sjw =#r#-T a?rePr “sf ?r qf|q>r I 

c >» 

qSWTJT ^«qfs*r II 


34 



afrT»TT3«J’JTTfSr I 

fo*TPT (?) | 

g ^rnt5ft«lql?^r i 
g 5 rt: fcwrfan li 

^6tfRf^ n»t ^ gj*fra*ri^ i 

cMRFT rT^^nTf^^ II 

flgtf f^T ^JTRRH. | 

fa^r<FT ^gwferr^'Mwft m ll 

(%vn^K ftftri5r ffim: i 
?? r g wfte wffcw JJ3 II 

^¥ 5 rHr g fT^&f f^TRrT: I 
^TRt^tqrfr^T ^gf$r§RRft*ftg. ll 

qwt g g 'rft^ i 

5 q^r 11 

q?fq^r 5«m g ^ ^rrl^ofi 1 
*T^5 flqpjqm WtewNre? ll 

'ftslc^r g f|*$rc g qftqn 1 
qioigft g a^Ml^qflqir 11 


35 





f 3 «*F 5 TW 3 fST^ I 
qqr^rq II 

ft i# witst qRqo^j^ i 
^sqiqiftrqq qrfa ftqfc qr§*rq qr ll 
qftsrjfRT q%?T =q qqr ftrfqq gq: | 
qqiqrqt r fejfiqr qrqpq tfsstaoig. h 

(§Sft<U*T^ 3fqf^5iq3% IIX 

sfltei g qftqrsr >tfs g:«frfttrqq: i 
feu#^r^qi^R fltgoT <fteftqa;qg II 
q» 05 ^gar%q qr ftg<q tfsfasiriq. i 
qjos^q ttgon^ qr 3 qr 11 

JT$frt q^q qr?Tq> l 

i^jfqFTq f«f *qr^ fejfqr^q ftifrsqq 11 
^qfeft 4 qr qqr fq'lfgq: gq: 1 
qpqrartctf q»^sqr t?qr ^q^qrRr^ft n 
%5rsnBr«rqiq 3 ftq^sqr gq: 1 
gorqrqqqqq^r qpqRr 'ftfoqt^qq. ll 
qra^qqqqiq 3 qtesri^rq ^1^3. 1 
qHqiqqql g^T * 5 fcr ^l^s'hl '^3 H 


86 





tfstc&r 5 *TR^ | 

q$frcr q^qjr $Kw qpqfcr q^ri^R^ u 

siqnfaq i 

?iwh^ qflqrr apqiq^r <wqrRofl li 

^ S c TRf^T^ qreftfrog*qcr i 
cWR HjsfaWR II 

^ wraitaqrfagg *r>^ i 
*r^ gw fWH> sR*mr i^wr n 


qq g qqrfts i 

i^qg; qteqrftrc <ft5ft%q *%qw: 11 

sqmrer qi^rf^w %^iqr ^Trft I 
3T**reT ?rTf^3rfj g qf|q>T || 


goiRr w*t%q g qf|qrr i 

qsrqftsqitrq qqqrft cwreiqrc, II 

qq g ^f^fi q|*qq^ l 

qqrf^qrl%w>rq <ftstr%q frvnft^ n 

«rtw qr$q>i q^fwgqf i 

qvfcq qqi^qiftr^q =q n 


37 



sfitqresqrorfSr i 


qqjSrqjftrirq q l 

qj*f&%q q^q q q$#%q qroqjq. ll 

q»*qft%q qrfcq qqpl%q qrrc'q^ i 
qsrqft feqrqi«ii q«Ftq»fefaq q n 

qqrl^ qf|#!%q qqqift qqrerqrq, i 
i%^q ?nq <?te g q^rrFqq* 11 

fan3tfftTfrpfa%q a*BRqrft*nrrcT: I 
qj^qjt fqfc^ qFrqqqt: ll 

wi€\ qgtqr ^qr?qf%%q qqqrq. i 
q^ q^q^qjw ?r«ii I qftqii || 

q*qSrq»q qjqsqq^q ’jqqrftoTr I 
tqrc*gqftft jtItk qt^q q>qqr^ n 

ftq»rcf$rq ^q^i?mtqrqg^q^ i 
qqrfW itqptq q^q^q q>rc3^ ll 

qqfrr qrafagr* sr«it t q»*qqfj*t I 
arsq^fq q?rq£ qwfq qirc^ || 

qs*qq^q qvfcqq^q ?qqift&rr i 

*?i5 <j(*rpi. ll 


36 





*trt$ Ffrrqr^ wt *r qr I 

H^kkNh# 3 FTi<wft3% II 


tffofiiwr ^ qiMtefaft *2°j n 



q«Rq3% ii) 


fi^^ Rt 3 !%jfri ^^R«n^n i 

frf^r f^gf^R qe^st ’terrapin; li \ n 

3ffiWir l%^I?RT I 

3fT|^r^ s*i A\i q^sqroq^ II R II 

qf&rt%jfiqi <£i?3trt 3 ^ffeqR. 1 

3TRR Sftf*T55T F«FR ^3 fo FI ftf&R. II 3 II 


iSiel^<S€OLa!T€sr e9 (kaiei&iGjTsa^LA i9{rj2>l®nLL&i5fya(gy}i 
etvtnjMGsnu eS^tu/rQ^c t9 1— &)&*$> smih Q&frdiX5V<£&i— { Gay«jr.(l) 

i9u.]£eo>0 SiBSfBgj&Q&trpp 8ifrj3tU(r&&Q&freir^rFi 
ewreir. eprirjpiaQ&rreirjpj &0Vfi&j QsiuiLXSvir&ir&i. (lj) 

SSsOujfr&iemL-irctfr 6®(&&pj£jpiui eB^&ty&ixir ear 
fffl ShSp^JplLD l£t l~pStoj$&3rLLL-.Q& : {EJ&<5ti(rQ>&) «l 1®Q//T 
Q«r«r jp; Q&irGQgpiajirira&r* (2) 

etvui^su) (Lpps'Otr&sr ubsmfle® Qeofrftfo gg 
Lo/rer 60 lasta a^d^ti) iSi^/aasSsfr Qstitr enMqLhiraQeu Q&treir 
(gjfiu/rdr. (2J) 

SeOfruuuLnrrm’ 60 >ei & pjpd 0 &v@!? SSsotuirQso i9i—p 

f&iriBuutrA, (8) 


39 





^ror *T«wr ^n%fa3sr: nqftf&rr: i 
wi foifgfftf qicfMi sr^ || ^ || 

r^i^sK>nit g *rrft sjfog; ( 

%jpi =rr»-r JT^g^rfon^n. it $ \\ 


y>m 


(Ji — ty jy^LDLn. epm T(rr?6ttr cvtsi 


?df rr jiQerv <$U) s^^^inth. mp ft-<£pLn 


i9 o Lair sa?n ps (^(S^au 

l9lJ LAlT6lftTLniTLCi. $1— 

Q&rr€He\)LJULLi-.'£i. 


LDdTLD Q&UJIU ep&fTU&J 

;(T(TfEi 3 err epehru&i uiy- 


WL.ppfi>L£rr ppix>L£\ e_ p, ^huLDiJb ?»_ p, pLDfrpLmh* 

LfljSlU^Lbr flpLDLl) LLj$lULOLb$lULbL}\ LtifilULL/T p,LLU> } Jfy p 

{ J>u\/rp t &uuh jty i&ujLL>f£$iLjL£>U) punr jbllll ^<35 epeirujp 
iQn UifTsajT pen p\L\Lnj£l glut 6sr. 

60/E7 3&(rpQerv<g j&$&) urr $ jypibLb. 

Qmjpfbfiiti (tpiareo £. dpis iSfTrrrrsmui. 

gj)p&nr(& /VirLA/rtiojr&'gjdQ} mQei/ st lLi—ld& ld Q&iueuff&r, 
Upjp iQl^dll&Vptrn’ p)Jfrl&(3j iQrrLbfTvBN LQirLT) ; to- <£pLMA. 
gjJ/5^ /9ff LhljampfSld) LDjBlULLirpLDlEi&SsfT (Lp6N L-J 

(Sutr<J&> ^^Qz/rsBr. (5J) 

jyeir^iCJ^ Sik&dieivpfrv (LpLbiDL- ®0 

€0/ej# p> m p pcmnj l-qQ ®rv p it P la /r& Q&freoiou 

UL-L-&. (6) 


40 





'ftefowi^fta wgrefm%qft II o 11 

*#rwft <fteRt 11 1 11 

arasqw i 

ftwpTprcrafiiN *rgn£ *rr$fa «ri 11 % 11 

^ST =g 5 R«r«T <IS«T SKSTfWI. | 

fSssnw giri =* farfarccTPTfa 11 mi 


eS/H^fifilisyj^/riJ^^a) peureofiGi) JD/izp 


<anTGXtrfi$l<sv ^{nLu^iLurjuev Jj)tf omtsorti luii p«ki Qptrin l-e/0 
&i),£(r Quasar jpi Q&rrj\)souuLl L-gp, $}rk puiSiSen) 

pirmw&tfflei) GuLiy-Q&titrearjpi i*j i—<£ jp&igj (Sld o'V 0 feW^/ 5 / ®0 

uu& 7 . ( 7 ) 


jp/6i)iB5iT0 pfiflebr Qu/rq^iL® (LpeiffLjO^frearsjrcServpiT 
npfiheo biL-isf. Qs\)frear jpi <sj pjfi) /9 l-gQ &v p trtnh Q&/r<srr&- 
<67ei)60/Ti£lirLDirasariE]& { GfF)ii! Q&fresreBT eServptrn i9o LGfr&aTQpm/ra 
S-UiTsor Q&irebeufr&r. ( 8 ) 


jty&ffd)mvp/rirt£)irLbirGBTpso>]$ LAomru lL qLfig ? &uj piS 
Qairerreutrm Gresrjpi ji/LpSiupra Q^its\)S))uulLl^^ . 
i9GujrfiQ«>fi lb eQ<sLz <api uir& & Sear '2 llQgv spear jpi& mb) 
spear pamruj it pm> \9i—p&h »0 V-pQGtvpit, Qa/rerr ^surreal 
Grmjp. Q& (reviwuu L l- JP • ( 9 ) 


6 


41 



srftrarcwsnuTftr i 


*rcrft «nft ^if: <to * si^uttll 


(to^Hi 1 i 


flWlqqS^ i ^ li u II 


¥TiFfr5 ^ tR? ^ 5Wfl3 *r?r*f^ i 

sftet (fort) q*rfte ^ =et ?fate»u W \( 
«ftewr§finci liter ?rr^te m 'fhSw: l 
^TRitrftpsif 3 il II 


&ffi[T&ini)) jyQ^Lt— /TtfF^tij ^tu pLDirm 

jqGLf.L—ir&irLhy ^(upinnsir d^i — & irih^ jp6uir 

p&ir&ous j ^tupiLtrear &J6urrp&ir<3T(rui Ga^/rt-^/r^irtii 
^UJpLLfim QoLftfTL-m &!T'9 : irt}) tiQ(lf}p<!BUb 'Qiup&qSFpti 
(tpear jp?3&(r65STLb jy/f pp&fcf&vm uj£go)j§piutq- 

iQt—p&ii 50 <SUU^6ij Q&/T6 )l)<o)}UUlLi__j$1. (H) 

fierr Lurresr i^L^/asSsrr iS&f.xstiLLir&ir StBaiija^i^ 
^ewsoi Qlh&bt jpi Q&irsvjpi&Jirii &eir. r3 o^asrrpjad^ £3ifl 
(oaaessiiQ &&6TT p&}&(^ jyirppfisjshrgpiLo Q&ir&rQJtr 
Qmskjpi Q&rr<sV6\)uuL-u.&!' (12) 

upirdfL-th) UfiLDUD) l&pmirLbLf&USi mfstru), UfiLA 

<L?u_Lbj LoptDtreu&irus) Qerverriiuuaui, y$&/rii)tULb ^sui9i—p 

£i&(8) Q&treoGi>uuC-u.jp. (13|) 

jBtfiQs/r&toTpfil&nii jpjipp&fifftnG&gpiLii pfBrgpismL-tu 
tiiUDfi&j&S L~tr& O^/re^az/rdr. (14) 


42 



MfawayoilA l 


JPJRTt q*FKTSgJTT I 

^%%sRrctemta ^ ii \\ ii 
aW3r ; srt grri^t qqw'M 



11 U II 


afar q? ?ghrp$ vr^frs m&l. i 

( WfftyHM l q^rt sfa^qrcta^qsrfo n m u 



q *q rs =q & n q? wi^nrfrs ^qrf^rT^ii * ^ 


i£l&&ii9fi ^&Qef>r<^L-usvuu}-iuiT€8r e-p(£en)p iSplap 
mrppfrQev jymL-Qsu iSl-iLu 55^*0 jyediwwo la Q&/rev 
eouuQQp&i* (16) 

L$l—ji@lj@p}5toL-.lU e^lUPpotnp U$60rq5$Gr Jpjifi&LA 
Q&tUjP &-UP16LA f§)P&hf(3) fffTGtilA&tA , gp £TZ_b<9=ti) 

(^(Lpp&iii) ji ysBiinuLb&us &iALj) ££)P<omL~ la&ia (VjQppaiA) 


jyanp ujla&la &lalj ^ epsitr pesar ^/la&la &&nn l—la. iulapfla 

6 SLALj $irmrL—LA&lA U lL LSf.'StAP? 6^65 T pmiTlULA&LA MvOifijSlID 
ewrifi ^65 Jif LA&LA U^lssr^&r. § D^f U<£J& uptn9l—p 

&)<&(&} .gyaoiB&n pla. i9l~la i9mrLAmr(T^a(^iA 

mr&ir&&(Gi2&(j8jLA ) Q^LL^^i^ih QGueir^r ppp(i^^qla 
yj£&T)UJiL\LA Q&v^rrup^SiupistnpiLfiA ^Qmr&Stu l]l'd 
Quir&vu pstopmA Q&irQa(9jQLA6hrjpi Q&/reOGOuuLLL-.&i.( 17) 
upLA&uJtiLAisirQp i9u.pfi>lgpisB)L-Uj ^^(d 6W p pmp 

UplgB)piA&LA Q&UJJ$J £§)pffO ^jPSmi—LA^LA 9L. UP ft LA J)j (SJ 


&LA&LA ®Q£p&LA L^LA&LA Ui^U^mS G^PLA&LA &QFjp 

QiTlfl jyLA&LA U$gf)Jp). (18) 


43 





tarft gornJ ftft qyst *csfft°r i 
qf ftft g vrpf qw ft** q**qqi i^Wf^lUSII 
5q?f qtt ft***$ *^f srwrafarr qfeqii sqp fa rm i 
<**ctfte «nmr ft *f*t *mpq *<3li%ts 5r^ ii ^o h 

OTf'rofafai^'WM ^i ft** qf* tl R ? II 

ft** qf qf sftqf *?fts*rc 9ftoT i 

^ **qg*; *?r=qr i=Mt qt^ 'qi^sft irrii 


euggff upuJSlLPem jp' (Sutfnff iqnni—iu e_^(?«y 

3i<ij6!npi uf5l{53)o$lh'FLI Q^UJ^J £g) ^A) Gp63T J) )&f) 0 lUUjffUj ®_L//T 

fit}, juf^nuit ew ifaunsanb. poni iuuj&i-h t>rQgp>&Lb ir 

'Xilgv jyi>mQtiJtr>ftLr) iL/Lbjru) (Sibesmb epotl&ih 

ev%%!Jir jyuvo iimi i r ii* /Suioifi 1 t< jtyotolTjjih'frLi) & U)L/ Qpsarpu &u. 
vT(t^^i&ur. jyonirujihsir (S/'fiLn gp«ir p&nmu la# ll uil-iy-6B)JS 
jBj«s)n tutffrib Qq^peu ir,P t . {§)&'£ 

6ifggiri3 > L-<iG0) t & <sr wj\'i j i® Jj wffgig ld G&ir&rGutrQGirreirjpi 

Q&its?v$liljlLl-j£). (20) 


LnprDirupqQiAGjr jni ft inO'iQSpfrG&i.uf-tu i^Cdl—t p p 
etnp u^GejrLLi_iJb^!Jn Q&uj&i ^J^eo epear psnir iulp & ld 

<oT(ipfi&L£>. Qpsfr pLS&LD (^LbpSLb. jymfflUlJb&Ub (STQgfi&UD- 
jysmDiuiii&LJb <$Lo/_y. jysmirujih&u) upLbih, epeir pamrujiM^th 
UlLi^< 5V)& &(Tf}j£6Ufrif) lUGMT IULD& LA ^/ih^Lb U^Qs^lLQ 

LDpJDfTU fiLD L? L—LD ^ITSLptiS 1 f£}& fijp Lb IT J£J GLf>6® fEJ 

apgj0&(3jli> ^GlLbGfTJpl Q&iTGV&QLJUlL t—Jp}. (22) 


44 



sflwreqroifa » 

qqi qqrgf g*rtVH. I 

tSiirtf afa ya qjT$ qqi 5 # qf|q;r ^nbrinT n ^ II 
wrter crf^n^iRT areamr 5 #r st gjTteR, i 
«u*«qw ftfa a[*q*]5qtf qtfnn* tim sftat ^ u R« n 
3T^?'^a^r?{^r§f; q«ffpNt§: *|t | 

qf ft** qyq®* g fa*4 q i ftR 4teq*i ^ri$r n ^ n 
Br:*wttr v&rgjf & =q^swWr i 

q$*q ^Nr qp& II ^ n 


atrQuiejrjpi rt>/ri/^®n,®iL|Q»£_t/j L^QL^tr^Qetvppsnp 
U$gB)pLX)&LL Q &lU£d §£}f£l(oQC)ITnLb&Lb gLU/T/^/C, 637 pLD&Lb 
LnGSpm trutrisL h p> irsoiMfT m u p uild ? *2y<snrnLJLha- ll> &,i }) £§) rs m 

L LDc^LD fi&0^^LO Jij oWT \Uli>& LL 3>l})l-f Qp>6BT pi) &LD UpUbLto. 

€£637 pv3)$lULb&Lb UL-U)-<oV>5> JjjmiT A. Ui&lh &(TF)<&GU /Tffi, ^«S 

'jyub&Lh ujSgpjpi- £(7F} ( $JHfrifUi9'gp]<>mi_uj pr LpspShi^Lb 
lULb&iii. $i^i8 &v&irirpfillGi) (Lpebr jfiQztitreifr jpi tbirSQ^ir^r^pi 
n(TGfre8®v<$tnnh Q&tTGrrQvgP • mrGfraaLppfil iSi^isQ&vprja p 
filev Qpsk ^SQ gvt sorjp) QareirG. firairp^lffO eQ&vpiririh 
ft < t err t & Zfh ggiem — uj QpeoeQmipiTir Qpssr j£Q5tifrsir(7r?&& 

Q%jr<sfr&. GTearjQ) Q&iretiJduuiLi—&i. Jj )&i Girppi raj<®0 


& 


/& /TlaCd 


1—UpLDLD 


(24) 

p&irih&i}) 


VT6Srp&). 


&1IQ&UJ jp 

iQthssrih 


piupsmpu^<stni^ p pj Tear 


i3 L-U ( &LbQLb<65r jpi 

uppub 


'®® eparp&iinuih&ih g>-/ i irrmY. jyetnirujLh&Lis 
lUth&lh UpLLLL. JfyGWriULD&lX) &LLLj 


46 



HlSWraiffornft t 


^*1 ?TS3! $% (cI^^PI 0 ! q>5PJ®f | 

qj ft** ^qfrqirg^ II ^v» II 

«nr s* gjprrerr sfcr eta <fte e^rg^ta i 

eta$: enfota$q>T§: || || 

ortatefte Pth 3 ta ft** q*r <£*** ?**»**_ i 

g*q*i a?#Rrft*rqf sffata tata*. II rs, ll \ 


jty GBimum&u* (Qihesru'. jysiniriULn&ih ulLl-la ^jirsm t—.ih&LB 
Uj£lqu> ^jQniTiULb&Lr' rBLAsarui eptril&Lh uLLiy.<sir>& jo/onir 
tuii,&LL S^p&utrfi jD/ii>&Lh upjp. 


inpmir ^j^nOiL&sr jdj (ou^mriLjsjyi^uj p prr car i5*G?£_/r# 
Q&VpP<ofr ( & U$6tf(^&Lh&L£)Q&tLJ i &] $)$&> ep&SrpGtoffUJLL&ih 
e-UfnsLA jyGSiinuLb&LD rSihesTLD, mir&dLD&Lz u^ldld, jy stair 

UJIA&LL UlLl—LD. 6pmii&Lh <3>653T £_LD. 6p6BT p<55i IHU LQ& Lb 

epDLb&Lb dBszrar l ld jyftnff lUib&Ln tSUbLj ^(Tsssri^ih^Lb uptbiJb, 

6p6srp&r)ir jyGMnuih&tii SQ^peumP jyLMFtb uS«r@0F 

Ln pjn freusQir iQi—ih Q&ireti<svuuL-u-&]. (27) 


$)ibp Lppjptreij&ir&L-ji fileo QjgzjnicS pubtrs Qetverr 

LhlLllS > L-J3LDekjpl 1$ IT LLLblT Lb* 0 eiUGfT LblUl9 t-UUTOST & 

as/f^^/ra/ag 6rvireuavu>upmp& Qa/rSagti. Q etoerriLiuitfL— 

(jpih Q&rr 6 $gouljlL. L—gp. 


mfafruMjQiAeirjpi fssribQ piupan p iLj&nL^ppireor 

iSQi—rrpQ&vpF&ip u&r&Rjre&rQQ&tujp f§)f3co fpJTih&u* 


46 



SjRlUHMJuilA 



wiw® q*ng1rfc I 

f¥rt s&flsHi sTjffJft qftfi5q3<0 n \o \\ 


d KpropQmruriGLA. $)r6mL-.Ln&th gg afi. jystnnuLh&Lb 

(§LL65TL£>. €£(T LQ&LD U^LLU). €^&5T pGinSTlU LXl&LLi UlL.bj.<&>& 

jy&niriuLb&us Sqrjpeurrifl jyLo^ix ueheafiir&BrQ. {gfiuuup. 
^M§&/rthiUL$ U.U) Q&tr<si)6i)ui 


LQpireitVfrpra&<stfl^Qan‘'offl L-. jy @l<sL£t—fT earth soiflGV jDjevh 
ds (rtf tiiQuireo t?t— ©<3?(Cifj^0U3 Q Jiiimi <n$ (rQu^evr jpi Q&treoetiu 

ulLu-jp. 


I§)r<& t^u^(re\>(h<£fnnhs^mt^tu jyLh&tha&fleo s-jpiu 

Lf5&(G1IjLL i9pUUir(Sm ^JuGU/hl&rh&iGffjotoL—UJ U6\)figp£$L-lT 

^s6i)Lb G^/rfiB)L/«ff^/r<a;6i(L£) tLj^^^ff^rdssijLD Q&rrerreutreir. 
jyij&daaSstT ujybSiupn & astiiSluuirebr. 


(WRt II) 


■4 jjcMitHMJpft: 

tl || 




47 







f^iVr i 

fclfi^rw *r$ g u 

f^t qpCTriNrot, i 
snsnft t^>°i ^ % ^urqr%% n 

^i%ofs$r ?remcT: | 
f%xgtf%°NT^ g ^rmi^ ffores: II 

f^ssr&ugtftr l^rfl fe# *nfaq ^ | 
<Tf>^m^ o q PTT n 

<jpi W*4 ^ ?5ERrff5°r ?rer: I 

(®>3*t3KI*T^ q<dUafcRWR& ||) 


g &rcjjfiw*r^ i 


51 




f^qr^rt ggt g*qrg$^ n 
fil4«Kigqi^ %r gqfaqqg^^l i 

qFSFI^Wqftqi^T: n 


rafawgfa^qt qi ?gq«fi*g<id: i 

qsiRiwr^ u) 


l%jf frr#rc|dl qsn cr*te =q i 

qg^qqi g qq^q^g; II 

5 i 5 rfa«>i; =q qr^qt: 1 
felfq^F g qi<fcq g<§q^$nsF^ 11 


ere^TF g*q qF^F^r g^q q js q«TF 1 


(iq^rn% 



ID 


«rq feifaq* q^ f^trqu^ n^qg: 1 
g^q^ qrg*q g^ fetF ?i^gqi^gn. II 
^^y^i^qcgq q»rw«g^<i5mqc 1 
qsFF g fgg^or g^fr qiqqi^g: 11 


Rwg^iw^N ^rqttt <qqtw. 1 
fq^ssrfesgrft <g$qiqftMl q^ II 


63 



stftlKUiqwift 


ffrftfiqsfc U) 


«n*n*r w ifFT garter f%q%rT<T: i 

Kffcsrr %q ?fti h 

«T5rAwi. feqr^ qq^qrgf^ h 


qqfar f^r^f^w ^rcterg^qi^qt: i 
felfl^f ii 

1^3 «^q^ffqr?n^r qrffoq, i 
f^FT ??r^q g q»r^ ll 

«FOnq^grR SfiTC^fc^sTtg. II 
arqlwl - 3 *tfFt g q i 
*?r ^qt^'^nq^g^qrT ii 


(«bHVTM^ W 5 P 13 ^ ll) 


I%HT^rfi 3 i 

q®qnqfe«rcT qi^ II 

ftftfafer^qr c ti' 4 *ft srrqqn 5 % i 
^r q*i*^qw qftorrefrmt 5 ft: II 


63 





/afaKWiqqrfsr®^ f^rt: qt 11 
qq ^IffSRT rt 5 eforforq* ^r i 

tfpqfoq || 

(stfdrqft'lt ||) 


g qqq ^s^ffqrr^ i 
arrqr?r =q to#* %: 35: II 

=Wjnt^Tinra *PiqR*rR$ to: 1 
q^^fEt^topw: 11 
zri qrq?pr *qrto ?(% 5 r q$ 1 
q^ qft ?r f^qpTf&rcqrftfrqj: II 
3^5q>tr qrft q^ qr f^to 1 
qqs^qprq^qt cfttopq sqqto* 11 
3 qsofNr* qprftoqfto* 1 
q?:r¥g#s%g| qr rtb^: q*r*ipr: 11 
*prqton q?ft srfqtonfa qr 1 
qraqfoqrcr qrft tftfar qrcqtoi. II 


54 





$85T: quftqfccT II 

qr4«M|^Tf 'Jl<ilM|W|i I 

rRTT iRtffcqifoffq, II 

waawr^ g*rr: ^£wg?rr: i 



II 


grT^nn^5rf«j 5 ^ qf&pjqorg. i 

q^m *R2^«n5«4t griforlSvai: II 



II 


qr^snsyEFtfrgcT: i 

g«r wit^r ^ srfoit ®r qr n 
snflfifasnfteT qr i 

qr 3T5^rTf%%cRg qr 11 
«rifelprg^ qr wnftrcrfeiflsqqr **: i 

'JTSRr^I^SErTWqS^ ll) 


•ffsqpra g a g* qis^nfors. i 
*w*isi ^ «R^5q qRlttekq. II 

(gqinjF^ ’qgf^rercmqs^ ||) 


65 





q q fort i 

(^srrotft^ qqrsw^ ||) 
*rqqqtfr5*q stasjjFrcqrq 
fogsjq^pr ^it«Trer#rf^ i 

f ftwgqrf^r qqrftstqftwq. n 

<WT[W^i | 

wmi fajtri f^Tjft ^qiq?nqftqqq;f%qrf|pi> I 
«s^ 3 sfr&qsqreswi ^q*q qrqftqqqqrftepui 

(«ftq<qfrlt II) 

5fesR«jf<?: i 

«roq ^f&q m mi qrqgsq>r i 
mi qiqfw 3 qqlgq qq>5q^ II 
qfog g trsrapq 3 ^ i 
g^qrR 3 q*t ss qif^qlfq^ II 
qr^q trqq *rq q»?q^ftq^rqq ! i 
*ht! q*s$ It sf I ^ H 

sfNt q qwqr* qpq=?rcgqr § qr i 
qgHfrmjE* U 


66 





frSfci wfav*i*i*WT\ II 

«/tai«K ?wr 5i^BF?nft i 

qr <$«WfrwH{ c gF ram^ li 

ftq fea« rc g& II) 

jflftfclfcpilfefi ^ f^T I 
?wtr 3 wr [«r qft:*] *u*q^ n 
«nr*f 5 i%ot «r^ armg’sq^ i 

ffsf 1 5d%o* ^ || 

^rsw^^tR 3Ad|3 > '$d<6iiH k i 
*rr*T srw^twh; ii 
f^rar ■Hl«i«i<*i i 

>flclNW ^T JT^P^JT)- || 

3?T$t: 'TT^ft'i *TKRr«it<R«*lJT^ I 

(%5q^t 5TftW% II) 


MI&MtWijS: I 

«w sq^r fatifoor qi$q«w ^egr^ i 
sreqrct wr^ wur^S i mqfttedi II 


67 



8TVPT 5T^5T 1 g ^37RL It 

mi =*rmret ^ «n*qr# +umh. I 

IRI^CWf ^R^fcRfrcR^ || 
f^»f%cSI$(%dl*HH > I 

ftsTlRPTPT f%R clR*TFPF eTRR jj ^T || 

(ar^JT^RT^ ^^TH^cmq^ ||) 

3T«r 'TrgTrT Sflft | 

mi ^ i 

^WTJT^RtR. II 

(Rr'rt^ srf^rqs%) II 


srfevri-. nfctsr 3 *wfr rreaFi 5 % 1 

m?n%Tm^% ^pt ofaroriftaft 1 

?r^s ^ f%$mR: 11 

(gTOirt^ 5 Fi% frw%raw<sd 11) 


58 





dfr r rf fo w qtfr gfeg^H. i 
?ftaFRBRnrigrH «qr4*tflq4)ffcra(, ll 




9iwi f%=rr sj&tjg: g dtsf^ i 

g<sm sr^fa gir ii 


stfSrft ^ =*r «tth% i 

*br qigqd %df|fcfet g || 

^^T^^fiRrcr?roL | 
3 srf^rt g ?r sfirc^ ii 


(arg^RH 



n) 


•T*TRTRH^rfo QTWI^TR S*R^ I 
^g^5f f^m ^ f$rai^ig35RJ^ || 

WW«5l ^#3 ^i^R^dWR. | 
tolSJMd $R *1%^*# d«Tt^ || 


(gSl^Rt 



ID 


59 





MTljqdl«4^: || 

«*rt 4 g^?s t sjf^snfc it 

I • 


*rnj qf§jqer 5i^r *r^ ww^t (f±ta*^ i 


(sftacqfNV li) 


60 






for&rn# g ?wi i 

g *u swr sfari ’stfrsfer % || 

a frMT g?iwtt ^i^ifir^rR^ i 
?rq^ 3n%rr% srr^T cr«rr n 

«nre*nt ^ q^sj ssrra sR: i 
g *?i*ft*fonrisn w ufa || 

'TFT $4 ^ M<,^i Vlftd Hmi | 

qT?owKqwt qRrft fcrcSrqft n 

fti*«Hl4t ?RT ?^T 5Tl4 *PIT I 

agaj *r?4 , J5^f *w fjfa*M ^ 11 

q£M$»i 4fanf $nat <pwc. i 
^3«q 3 TCrR W Srtswjf^ || 

*WFI*FWffar ufilqMt ftsrea: | 
fo44 t qg§4 4t*4 qi^fid^H^KHs II 


63 



II 






gjffrf si^TRf g 



«t?t: spruit sapretsgsrr I 

«TW% g qrftasnflftipul 


si%^r *rras*?r% i 

sr ^t g^rcfkgHre*;^ ^ ^cR. || 

*& g^rem sTlTRgHi^^g^cl I 




err&r I 

smis® ?%on^ <t II 

\ v S9 ’ 


^rpm(r) g g^srrcftr wn&qzmwn 
WNI g STTOFT ^75T II 



^fot qrc^f *n*r «wt sg^erg. 11 

«m4 ^f^rSt gfa *k33& I 

sfaft *wrM «rr fo^ ^re^r *t II 


64 


f^TSRT: I 

WRI || 

nzrc^grR i 

qfiqtftaflgrR fl'Ktsffi^iiPreH. II 
*$ gpsrrcr^ 3 (tr i 

(l%?qrc% 8}l^?nwir^ ||) 

«*3§st n srsm^gcni. i 

«pw ^ met TORcrot II 

i>«J||q<4iegrR STHR;f%or^q|: | 

5 RiT ^fyoT mt TOTC 3 || 

(a$'w<<Jim% Kq»i*wn3& u) 

wi#|l^ : I 
^RRi^qra *rft aftfr^r*rrgrni. I 
fl£rtta%T ipns ftqcfldfft* *n n 

ft®rf&WTS$ II) 

^wci ^wwn «ti% i 

ftwffe f^Rr 11 

(f^q^r atfMrafe 11) 


9 


66 





3rrf^5prfif: i 

q«q*^ i 

SI^^TJT ^afr I . . .q*r$RT^ n 
...JSFnwpat arnrqfi^tnj^^ «p i 
qp§*iqR3*l qrqqifqrfcifq 3 srr n 

*w 3®7 qRqft qqr II 
arqqr m^Wr sqqrcg ^i%5t ?&t I 
{flfrq® qftqrsi qmp?t ireffcr?n II 

=q faqwftoT | 

tfqfciqrcPjTT; qqRO^q/nScT^ II 

^$r^n?qicT tqi^qq ^ I 

(ar^q^^rq^r ftqfttaqqafc u) 

%qr qr^^q ^tt q<qr%qrfaqp*. i 
wqrwreft qwqr^qf^r fw II 
qr^^^r qmff q#?* 3 qr I 
^r 5:l%or^q 5r^^aTqr^eT: 11 
•tffoj^rqft qqT qft gsqqqr *r* 1 
WWT W»q^^ Mt ^WI!%«T || 


66 



«^(%JP5^ g ftsri *n^or qisqq^ n 
qq q*faw alrF i 

(%*q^£r wftroft ii) 


sqWRfRS: | 

qeeqifa ^RroreFF^g^Rvnqq i 
rTfsetPwqrsrF: alrcR'T srai«R n 
5RRgPR|0¥?T: | 
*nhflC«TOgjKt q^Rq^iqr: n 
^RJiTq^qrRt^qRfr^fpqcT: l 
er«5q?r5q^^«Tqi%qtRqff,D¥®: u 
#^?T: JR5TTRI STftcTRsqqRR: I 
HT^TWTT^R ifWf “q *PR: || 

'a 

^T^^Fraqffjwql^nTJT^cf: i 
*n^ ^s?n q^r3^^«rrc*TF%5qr 11 
^rcrta^R q;q i 

^q,^ 5 i^n^¥rrfRT ?7 fi;*Tr*R: il 

fr^rrfafr 35: 1 

q^qg I2T1^T: 11 


07 





jfa^Hi+^psr: iRnfa^Rrsq*: II 

^f«T -jTl^'^dtSW | 

=T[f^ f^q^5R»tt5«WT it 
«rrcfto7 qr fwrr qrft xr4?rf&T: | 

sqr^tarcfscTFtq <^4 vtttt n 

*q =q g%ft 5?8?of i 

(3rr^ir*miTii SHqrqiftSTrRq^ II) 

srsrcr^ sputfl g«t«rq^TmoJr^ I 
/fcrsrf q*r^t g qg^prrmfoqiqjl 
qisqfr^q^t qft JwrfaiirqTft *rr I 
OTiwifefrprT m *n 4 % qogqrer 3 11 

5I^PTig?R 1 

11 

*rrcR ^tr 4? *rft mz 1 

*srr sfsttcr qs^ 11 

^rcq jff s w^ffc q 1%%^ *tffi 3 q>rc^ 1 

(ggfrgmfr ^*g%sra*w8fc 11) 

ot 





SP«trr q*rr am foftq?t n 
^q*q qrqqr$ 3 qr&ft ^ I 
qn q^ f ^ pn qr$ qramci sr3*q^ u 
q*q qr* 5 «t g =#[?# qi* i 
■jqRqRftw eqWjpjJ^m ii 

qrotqqiir <?fe g it 

snjfq^grFmqttq qrctg m i 
^ft^qrqtf«r TOTqSnqqrquffo^ n 
%qTF% qrfr^far qfto^Tf! slssr^ | 

s^rqr&qqt: g«T qft q^q qr ii 
qssqf qr»r q^t fa^qtfmrft qr i 
«mr g*qqi ?rerf^ 91% gd^qq. || 

q^5?3<i 9H qisr?^’#^ i 
«rrcftq qr ftmr qw T9 qr ra#|, ii 
T 9 qsgqy q^aqjqq *jf%qPT I 
wrqr qR?w 3 rqqrqr ii 
flFnnq^n^q ^qp^Tq <thm^ i 

(ftwA uPtawgft II) 


69 



g ft nrrwt sr mift i 


w?wjri 3^ il 

ftwrrq^^p; qwftsft =? i 

q* g qroqjof g 5%dt fpss ^ n 

%q 5T*re qnrqrOT. i 
?i%<jt iii qr*t jfl^qrjcrn; n 

cPftfcq WfliRqr^'feejOIHJW: | 

qsrfrn. flqratoi Mi«ri g^pre^ n 

^«q qTpftqr^ ^qj^rqiqg^r^ i 
fesngqn ^ 5RD¥Pfsr^rm n 

sqfaowgtfir gspreHrfam i 
5PR SI%JT <7T? ^PTOK 3 55fa^ n 

q;sqi <$t®t m ^ qpwqpj. I 
^rpt 3 f^rswr %q *rrfrqpi; ll 

!%>rpf qr gsm qr§0? ?)^t I 
ftgsrer ftftsns sqfpw^for: n 

qssqi q%6t 5# H3fa?PJL i 
•rreftfr «tt fad qrft qifaw g? o?n il 


70 



WffRTWqWW I 


*rqtfterft?r ?fq fqsrrssrg^T^ II 

(^=hR«JlFT^ II) 

'JfTTOl^ I 

g»* 5fty?q f^q^fatft i 

•req?K g n 

i^qrfa gqcqf gqqftro^ I 

qrfrqrfSi g ^q*q ^5qre*q?% ftqt^f^ II 
?^ror g q>t fagJSftr^ i 

^sqrcg 51%0T qrf^r ^q*q q><F&g; II 

qmqpjff rr*rr ^sqr ?rfot ajrq^^n^ i 

(^3^=^ ii) 

suraM q£r sw e? I 
qrgfejf =q w% ^%ot qit ll 
arrf^jpqTqf^ fttffa q^ I 
gqrf wr ^®ir qs>; u 
wrear^w =q | 

’ififftft ?ptt gpftfrprte ^?q«ft«RPH. i 

(«WPV?t II) 

T1 



aft mwy rrft i 

fr s g qi 3^3 fw: q«rr?g^?cT^r 
^irR* qr^^rtafarf^fas n i 

*nfr ^R^M^FT^iFRqp^fi^Tr 

SFg w% mufwji 

(sftn?qf%>?0 


73 




10 





syfarift 5rrfcft srfqoft li 


*nR"ftfr srt: qt i 

q^qqt ftqgtRt qr q^r %qrefaT g u 

Os^^iftqrM < reqg rcra*iqd3 n) 


dfl^q g qjwift qr$ qqq wfcKm. i 
qq^r qnqftj irq q^s£ qn^iRR^ n 

(yfirorfo ’qg^RRRqs^ 11 ) 


7fi 



sifitoiayoiifii i 


OTSlt?wr3TT;*isr*n^i^«r^ |) 

5 t ffiT3»T ^ wnr???T 3 ^pkt i 
g 5 r «iw*TR»rtfat II 

t^qurwrenw f^rrit *rwq^ i 
q?3Wt <TI ^ 5TT qjR: II 


^jj^opr^ ^ ftsq^rcru^&RT^ i 
g^&q ^ q^sq^ (?) II 

WPTq^^ ^rap^gregcT^ I 
?irM fq*qq)f|jft || 


qrfcft *tr i^^gr^q q^rcr ?ft i 

qn§q> qw^ 3 qror 3 II 
^Fnfvrg^ gtfr?qiiq^q srrrf&R, 1 




I 


swfr fa$r^T n5T5l*lf^55«JOT^ I 
wrNwwgth' qnj^tere ^ qj ti 


76 





qrer ^ ^ I 

qq’jff qr ■*& qraqi^ qireft ii 

^ qrer TT 3 rq 4 ^ q& 6 t II 
'rsr^ qrci^ ‘q qsrq^ =q fa*qq^ i 
qq qi^ 3 ^Rl s^itq qq^q^ II 
5 r**frqfm^qq*qra g srcgq^. i 

qf^qfqftsrf qgg^ qqj*q^q; n 
qr^raTfrqqr^rcg qqigq?ri g q^fag. i 
sprrqo^rq^q q^=q4 qq?q3g II 
5q[frqqf*qd^g <£$gqgqifergg i 
gqfe^iwggwfcRqigqqqg || 
qq g qg?rq{$ qqq g fMqlt i 
w iqf gqi =q4 ‘q qfsr&f u 

qjqre %jqt wt Jnrqfi =q qw% 1 
gf&g qrqqrq g qqrcq q^rorqft (I 
g'qq qf^nq qr£ i^4jpF^ *r%g i 
qq f|f 5 |q<t?qT g ggsTgf^q^ u 
^Cisdi^qr^sft qr^rtq'tft wfogr i 

C^jq^rgq gnfcigqqs^ II) 


77 



srt%*nw$r»n1St i 


qrer ^ jtit^ 4 =q TOwfoRK*)' II 

iT3Rq 9 £% =q4 ■q qreqi^ qsrj^ I 
3r*r^ qrer q^rqS =q ^(%ot u 


q>qi® ^ qra - ^ ^iHn: i 
smfrrafa 5q(w*r ’T^rens^ i$ ll 

*»3*«q|qftsra tr*^ spfi?q3g; I 
qnJqVrs^?)^ 3 *wr s^qr g qjiOic^ II 
smrqo^q^q jt^ 4 sjwiSr^ i 
sqi^rNrclfaT (I 


ni ;s qcn^ i 
gffcm qrqqrc g JT^tfktq 11 


?i%ot qrc q?^r?j?ig( ? ?T?)qr^ \ 
»trtf «g«fq 3 p*M*» wf^r ll 

«mr =q irsns^i *q ^ ^ i 

^f%oT qpRTJ fqK &sqj g 5 ^ H 

qtJSf «q q^4 . .«TT*RT: i 


78 


((3 i w& wPtarqH^ ll) 



« El «3 i Rgffo 

an? q£r fttfor i 

3[i%ot qnt q*r<fr£rqf<tf&?T^ n 

sfsroRqciqifqg. i 
«n*rqi3 ags?* ffect treggqg. n 

*TfB5f ?rr^3 qji^FT 5^ H7%^ l 
5STW <7 (%^T ‘q || 

qrg$3r^grr;qBf*<m*nft qr i 

gif *?r g ^ sRor^cig^R. li 

q^f^r g q^g <t*tt i 

«n*r glq* qnsrcftqt^ II 

«n?f fqq*fw g flwl qf^q^q^^ i 
Itsfrejsrem zwM n 

3^of}qprt srg^jq i%^sqifaq>mqi*^ i 
qjufrrT q/^rq^l'd *l<afWtWI'*l<t»H. II 

^ ^ II 

fiwfr qnjr g qre% i 

ftjjprcq f^nqjR qra^Ronj^rg. li 


79 



g fo r rag n ft i 


fepr /tqrt ^ *t£ qrerqi fi re q, tl 
^orq^si^^R-if^f^rcR; i 
nsrwsrorsrK ii 

fNftfprrei *?r ®gr 3 1 1^^3^ ; ^ i 

g SltR cTcT: II 



MdWHRldMMdd ||) 


^fydMHotiqr^^ sqig^n^Trf^d: | 



qr qra^wiRrqi: i 
5etrf^«TqO?iWqr5fls«T^T ^rr: II 


qidretmt^q qq^^qqfcqd: i 
^ srwrg*q stItf qrr^(irr)o^T^ 3T li 

qqsr g qf^ «p4^r(5?)f^rT^f g jt&ct**. i 
QSft n 5T«TT ^rtlcR^R II 

^raqi5I5Rt %q |%^l<?M<u||p^d*l» 1 
^rTWWvsNlH. I) 

^ •v. 

cwirfegs sift ^rc*M»i«*iKii^ u 


80 


aT«WT«T ^T%|fIlWri?T^Rf I 

<T ?) feftMMiq <%jfr^rK«r^^ 

faqfpr fiqwrpqtsqtaqt wRtr?: i 
srefH'qrarfe: qr$ m^^T: femt q*: u 
qj&ai: <RR<f) ^(*ft ?)fr^r^ q sfcq 5 1 

^rFt 37 qf$rT*g «CT II 
^3 ¥TIT^RT<W^u 1?T 3?Tt ^T 3T I 


^«TP?T3» 


(<JrT^7fJl3iin% *7773^1^3*73^ ||) 


atffoot 3 ^ ^ qft 1 

qr^ ^isw ^ «refN(#q ?) qTacqf&Riq. 11 
q>R5?TRrftcj qtrH feftcqf%T7rT: q*^ I 

(gsftqmSt =qgf^iTiqqs% n) 


qn^rft qfR^RT qrnjf qnrcft qqnK 1 
gf^RT ^%of qn* q^tft% s^ rq f%q>^ 11 

^f§p*t 3,%^ 3 ?j^ q>°fr^fg5d*i. 1 
qrs^r 3 qrg «ro 3 37 II 
qft 'i®i < T><. •nf^Rjjqi s % 1 

qn* 3 q^ 3 f^qq q fare3<^ II 


11 


81 



affr mg y wft i 


3«jflqRT i 

*r W ^OTf«T% II 
%7=Fi qrtf =q qrq% i 

*rafa*orcig?Pi ll 


®TNtaic«hKi|c«hl« fs^J^T q|{jl^W«hH, I 
qJWTfsfar ST^K faf^RPT**. II 


sT^^RT^rgrT; q^PTqpqfcm. i 
5^wf^3rR [t^qrr^q- tpr: n 


(l%?qp% s;rf^r75% II) 


t?sj?!N faN 1 ■sr srerqf^g^ni. i 
3^ <rf%ur qr^ mwni g grf^n*. || 
sqiwrfRtl^t cfl^T^wm^sqrq; i 
^%ot 5 ^ sjfasw g qrq#? n 


q^ *R* 5TPIW g qRT% i 
ai^qlg^ det q»r^?% n 

«rq* § g q^q»r^i% i 
£fe*ro q;sq*m g aFctf g *nr ii 



^K^rqsd ||) 


82 





| (0 

s/$rt g$i<T qit wrcis 5 fi%^ ii 

snfii ^pnwH^ i 

%*f4 5 ?ts[pt ^fopr«i g tftfarg. n 
SOW* g 3 cTOf 3 3 fofacT I 
ftftfitorctfqTS «fwt g ll 


*fg#ir <rc^#R^ I 
g^rg/i^g JTFf ^rtc^^r ii 

wmtf^mr fd ^S'iftfafrcTg. | 
srnrofWfcR g ^jti ii 

tRl^CTin g flFTTCT | 

^nflfong^ g vr^^g^if^ ll 


«rw sfr^^'tfWR ^r i 
qgtitiftift win: r g *r n 

Ht^wt g i 

*TW(af 0 g g 4 <pm, ll 


srSTOfSWSrfi gjfaqgtffcl* i 
JWIWIWlM ®rft 


83 





im i 




3^rf^«7I>75T ^ cRr^t ^fSFr =q I | 
^§5n%^«r srcrqfstfgtT: n 

*T*miq(*Tf ?)3^W«T^ WR%5T WTl%cf: | 
*Rl^TcT: II 



II 


qr*T ^^rf^3TRT^: I 
fqfarsspq qpq qpmi*t g qTltfta, 11 


qq sfcqT g*rft 5 qfasi qn^m^: 1 
(srrcqjrfofirfm 


qg^roiHHTgrK q^gqrfapu 
3W ^T IJc^r crf%3TF?Tq^ 11 


(§R?KFrit 


awrsqr qqwfo fag*F?rqpj|<f?R, 1 
^%ot qr? qwqr? g frt%5P^ II 


?1%ot 3 ^nfa^iquuqi 1 

(%iqjof g cra^g qiqw^qf^fife^ n 


af ta ri «snin fr i 


sg^cF i 

*&tt M<dwl it 2iOTi*Tf^r(rnl%^ o 


g ^I%af ®®OTHRjpra | 
fR II 

«n% ’tufamgag. i 

f? UWTrWcT g CRT: <T^ || 

(f^TCc^ 5rf^N^% ||) 



^g?N faifr xr sremfOTg^tg. I 
a^wg* f^rr^^swiga^ n 
q^r g qF^qrof g ?i%iq gra^rfacPi. • 
wg^oRWT^rR $®oiFq*sj*iq*f< n 


*n*ift*Tiqqi |>q 
f’T^W^T qTTC^g ^yoi: 



wqsrq^ n) 


(*) 

<^q qmrt 3 arqFrrdqftF^m. i 
^rq jtfPr q^s*i fofcf *j$roj *r^ ii 

(srerRtwt flflq|%?iqqs% II) 


85 



I 


irvwp? ft II 

(ftprcft 5fforq3$ 11 ) 

ftgT i sTO^ : I (\) 
gi^rn wrmrft g jfod 1 
^ srrffa ^krt ftrarqptfrT^ n 

gsfa eejq ^ ^g4 w >m i 

*OT#*WT3% II) 

gferi ^mqr? g sftror f fei ^ | 

W siiffa =^4 g <tch, II 

siftw$ ||) 

f^FcRnjp: I («) 

rftq qmi? 5 ^qwftrqfti^m. 1 
nrftfcr g ^g4 sepr ^ II 

(«rgn$SR% ?wqfeRqs^ II) 


cftq qroqft 



I 


jflfhrafr II) 



sf%qrcHjp»nf»r r 


| (<«,) 

^ ft qrs^fit tftqjft i 

qroq%°iswt tr qjqi^q^rgtqq. n 

qFig^ct ^sq qm qrarraqr qqg, i 
'ft' 3 5(%ft zt qg^airq?^ II 

g sft qrq qfa qftteqrgq**. i 
srq^qit l%rr qrq qq qrf»Tq u 

*$ ^ftqfoq Jjft qsqfrq | 

(sr^q^nr^ qqqtaqj^ h) 

q^q irt qjs^l gfe tfiqifr i 

qrq sRqr^qqrg^ 11 

qfiqq^rt ?Rj 3T=qqfqq|5qq; (?) | 

'ft q%0i% z% qgq qrq^qrqj 11 

g g*t qrq qft qftfaqrgcm j 
«Tq?qft forr mA qarq qg^i^qq. n 

(fcrsqtfq sn^rqsftn) 

ft3<W«hgj?f: I ft) 
qrf^^lpr^qqgg ^ qP^d^ 1 
qi«t t q^ <st£ q*i % ^rut ^ h 


87 



Mft mre q rn i ft i 


qgB <^d*h '*vi 4 h 3 3T | 

HJIfW qi”TWIt4i<W«hH. II 

*wrat*w<i gw qiFT^rc jfrforgdg. | 

(aqgq^r^ SHTCqafc II) 

•refts =q srror =q qrsr *3* =q ^%ot I 
qgq frwr qm^r% ii 

q*rrefr*r d«rr ^rrsr^ *ftftemrgdg. i 

( ftreq^ srf^rq^ n) 


fta<i'dH»gp?: I (y) 

B5*T ^fJn^TRT efW <*l<l£d^ | 
qrof ^ a^f # af # q ^l%3t || 

cT*IT f%WT 5T«rr I 

(eiSPllKPT5» *mf&T»N2^ ||) 


hft^t ?%6t 5 tpjt ^ 53 ? qr^ i 

«nr wr ^ II 

iA ^r^l, i 


88 



sftl*nwjP>nA t 


i (<:) 

zfa srrg atftOst?)qft i 

?Tc^ m? g *«srr it 

w 3 gfsfar gfos ^qr «cr^ i 
ggaspareft hot qgfqwigfe n 
^f&OTSWt t\ I 

f#SOT qqTTRT *q 5TTq?^3:qls5?T^ II 
cw 2^o5iqwijqq ^rqifrqi^ i 
W qqqqpfoT «U5q^fi*qf%qq: || 


fit^raql I 
qqicHHSsr ttfrUHq ftfSmq, n 

5TFT srfaS'gqfcft Sjrgqrf^faqr ^5 II 
OTqpq^OTq q°^ ftgflqrqiqtf^q: i 

(^T^q^iq^ ?remq3% u) 


^ftqreq i 

^ot^hsot OT3 qiqqr^ gq; || 

fa*q%g q*?rf%qq. i 

wr 5 ggwftg qmr(^ !)qiggg. || 

89 

IS 





qsrr i 

?req ^fernT^ft 5t cfiqosgJ^ || 

TW^t ^ I 

g^nrerrgqq u 

(%*q*£r 5rf^rq2% u) 


3K+^i : | 

SRJrmfosrf g q$^ i 

qqqrqfrc g^?4 qsas^^ri^cr^ n 
a^fqiwrrg#; CTF^nr^qr^g i 

q&f^qsrqfrtsrgfife ^qpqqg. u 

g^q^qwg^^&^qqr^f: i 



qp^N^Krqrrt i^^f^mrgcr^ i 
fosrcq tfMe =q tfwfatRqqg^ II 


5*^r ?rRt 5 g 
g dT s r feg g ft cr ft^f&msRTg^ II 
?rg«^N4 ft*3 qqiq^ajop*. I 
qi < i *qiq*q<w n«Tt ftonwit q^nii 

qqq r fi rg ^ a ^q q»rc$r^*forcg. i 

^g:qwiwr?3^ II) 


90 






*wwt infant, II 

TOproq ^ srift 3T^f|f^ a*n i 

^«r gflS ^lfa ^R 3 $: | 

*ni qrerse r iT?t sn<n«^ a«rr n 
*P^ ^Rsnfl R % j R^T =q qf^T^ I 
q»qi<5 g^qs wz II 

& qft ^R =q tfiqoT q*q^§h | 

^frerc n 

(«tafNt II) 

’fWS > ■q qrctftfaf^r^R. i 

wst 3 ^ BSRWfqte || 

WhImW R 3 & 3 TCRfa?R. | 

«w «K 3 n?ki wft ii 


91 


sflunwpirf* » 


II) 

$TCS: | 

writ drafts? Wr 3 | 

®riw g cafoifwtwg. ii 

ygfrraigj wr i 

ws*i(tn ?)f&T fa ii 

sjji&t wrari •? riririMK i 

fSSTEJSrifoffawr rffarrisTC#: II 

arte/fa w Stow sreftriw; I 

(l%«srrif^ II) 


?re^for: i 

M) 

<371**!^ *t tp ^ 5W ?t: I 

zm ^ wri *r *n£ gw wt 11 



||) 


93 



gft wwmmft I 

qrere w *r *m w q$: II 
jnsn^s ^RHs qnfl lftm i 

'WMi^i ^ (Sfefoi ^^g* $m *1% ii 

ii) 


^TxftgS^f^ReT: | 
^ 3 ?rtf 'fraqra^ i 


9 TOT^?r^Rl^mt £t*KF 5 ^ I 

Sr# II 


qq *F«itr: i 

(«fta<qfNl II) 


qt RWlfit {RRRtafl: I 

•TWBqrfi^ 3^ 3 rcqn>rrc*ftaq*ui 
3 w «Sf : i 


98 





«n«ire% gqqfa w ?t«tt ii 

qrer •qn% ^tr ^ i 

«T«r «lM8itJTRR«TnRR > | 

a^T^r effort s%tRfapiw^ II 

<KTRf 5r(% *T^t fRT ^R ^RWtfN;^ 

«ii3ratflrc gw ii 

<at qiH ^ <tcr q^r <r*rr i 
*pq»fRfW sqr^s?fitn^T^ \\ 

T^TRTSq^ I 

^RT =q qf^T fafo^qR =5T | 

q w gq fa rfe 3 r II 

qwnwre^nH^iA i 
^ dmg^^q gq =q | 

qwrreq^rfe %cf ^n?g*T%?^ n 
f^rrf^R ?r ^ q^R^ngqRRR. i 


94 


g ft mi tsym i P i i 

«r%5njfr <%n^F8jr urafo^r i 

w«g^ temg: %=5R: rot : it 

to* shrugs* ci^ ^ i 

f^q^qt f^TT^t iTRIWR: 'R: II 
q^sjwt iT5r^w«roi-«r j^srr^^f: i 

sffaqsosf f^qr^^i: ii 

gn5w: qircqre: % f^ifi^T: i 

arwrt sRrqi^: q;l^t fRRnqq;: n 

S3 

q^nqqj: i 

qq^: q^qrqrcr: qrrr^: qrf$r»jqaT: i 
qWteft qsraesrcr: n 

iflqoiKpMt vrq^: *T^§r<?qw%q =q II 

*5Rfc[t ^l%OTt S^Rtsf^: I 
^R«m%ftrKIlf: q^rfft«S[ II 

^K*n£l forrerajl 4rifhdt ^swftqcr: i 


95 



I 

^srpft * qf*t =qrq qqf ^ II 
qeirqrcreqqq *ftf ^rcqrTf^rqq. I 

*r qi5^%ft«m^ll 
q>* re sft /fcrcf^ l 

qajJW^qq: I 

«ffaq ^nn*t 3 ^flsnumn^Tcni. i 
3Rq^ fcFR JjjfgFTf^nfcre. II 

sp^RKIS# ftq fiiWWKRiW. i 

(«fre?qftv?l n) 



erq q& fasftw tffarit’ut ^} i 
qtfqw^H ^HHtafftqrcor* II 
mm wmst q*q. i 
ftoft ■q wrrerStf fqi^pr^ n 


gqg w re w t Sit firtfqrerf^ft^ 1 
sfoswri %q 


qgi fa*re ?rc?qrfr qijqiiJ^ l 

*fteqro qr 5iRjr ^ u 


96 



I 



«TIc^T srf^fgt ^rSrrT: | 

(iTtwnrnt u) 

^r*T3iFm^T fitgsr ^ i 

qi^T: <TI^I3 tH JT*T5^f3^ I 

f^rar *tt% sjJNwjs^ || 

fi3£sr ** ^ 1 

5 RF*TCW JJtrJ^ 11 

(^tcTc^^V ||) 







u 


97 



*T3$d5II$lcl4:W^ 

•Gflnwffofe: sJ^rai^T^ll 
Ay<M«wVi 



^r^Wr^wnr ^r^frtot 

=ftfir ll 

(sfsrftn^ ll) 
ars^i^n^k^f: i 

WT I 

«§33^R ^ IRT^r^IRR^ II 


98 




^ ^WcT^RilH. II 

q**r8cift*rc* 5 P*. I 

f^TT5^3T I 

qjI®5fETCPT II 

«Nl^l3&l'H*II^Th «T5TI5^q?r§^^ | 
sr^hPOTfa J^islqR^rlfSra^ II 
*pnwrt f^fsrar =q i 

^ qsqrer ^r %sq» *3 ^r ^ ll 
^Kg^w^Rrac. i 

jjhW o m gtK ll 

l?tTfai^rf3*T®T ^ JTFTqffrq^ftfo 5 ^ I 

^l^=hlH<U| sfiife || 

<*q writer q^iwH srf^rssrorrf 5 *^ i 
q^Fftefaftw ^ *nft> ?wt ll 
q?T 9CR«cq qf^gt qjR^RRI: I 



99 





: I 

srsrtffs^ II 

«W7 r ^ sq# a«rr i 

5qi?mf&qrq)' =q to to jRqr^R. n 

trRg^f ^?r?^pr ^rscrcrr&RPi. I 
^3 3 [wr ^V. II 

«rc ^ *k^ %-? qrcr =q 1 

JTPmffi wt qjj?s || 

tfsr ? wi 5^ 3^ mr i 

^qrsrft^ftcT^ 11 

*fif g g ° st q frcfo ferf qzUwzk 1 

(Ite^reS: II) 




1 


TH5 Sjpsltf WTOfHff I 
qiqreiraqqft II 

tfraonw jftenf ^qraRPi. 1 
«#j^[<t*]*tc?sf ^Rstogriwl 11 

(qroft 11) 


100 


« r gre>ret «R*qra: i 

«* || 
TOF*T3pr% gpfr ftsr^wfrer^ i 
JT5TO# qTOIHItHifljfiwiltqs^ II 
srurtfr*: i 




101 









«n^ R>f^*Hdl*HH> II 
^f%ut fcnrq Sf4 rT^T^T 5R5 vfa?^ | 

*1*1 g ^3^ qsq- ^ || 

3tF:«nii^fr i 

srrcfta: qqrffe 3 ^uisawrfisRm: 11 

3^T: 1 I 

=* ^5 11 33% W* *tf%0TP3j%^q% II 

(argpoteprt q^frtorqs^ ll) 

OTI «^W«I q^lW#r: | 

*T*t *r *rfa *jrc^fcr^ra*i: 11 

q*(*N ?) qn^^i*q^??T^^PT^WT^ 1 

g«5TT^n=r *rfo scnsrfegsrfcRn* 11 


u 


105 



sfinnwipnft 


g^T?<-ehftfe^aicid: || 

w&m %w*n% ?iz&mtoT 3 1 


(vdTKeh|f^ch|J|*l 


II) 


str(^?) f%l%5TcT =qr^T ?^rot e^pto f^u 11 


*n.i qq4 qr^ 3 ?) f^n 1 

ft*TFT rTgFT ^in%^ || 


5T^f3?r: 


«TRR7^^(0^r^^ ^rirCTFI^ FT'forfcPT: II 


(ftrsq^ II) 


^TT 3^ • 

f^tsfer 3 ^ fl^TT: ! II 


^FT ^<*IHI 3 3 SWRFFlf^ II 


<qw qr^rr^T 


^rcfar JT^qr^qr^ II 


106 





^sngqf Rt^f g<s#jf 3^Tf>«rc^ II 

(3$m*lFfo n) 

frsasngJT$: II 

^^Nrrgq^W asISftgprcn^sq; i 
ft^r ?Fafi^ agfl^nfNsg,, || 

sraqsisrl^a ^ 5Tfr=^rq^^ i 
sRR^q <?T ^TOjijf^T: || 

qq<^qfiqpTSRTT^fag*sT i 

(^TR^ifJrsRTTrH qwq^raxrqqs^ u) 

f^^forg*:f$qaTSfrj%qRl: 

wwr^rf%sRT?gqRqqPrer i 

q* qgqffi q*naj i^rr^rqr 
^ 3Foigrr q* ^r to <r *r% n 

935qtR f&m =q q rg iHggqigag . I 
^°T =q tR^J q* =q %q qFT% || 


107 





^q*q qrwFt g sprnr^q gsffcjcP* n 

^T^RTJT^^ q^^^rrTC?^^ f 

snE^tfjrr^TKijfi}: =q^ u 

(sfanqfN) ii) 

«mrrrwsH^TrPr =q i 

3 *£?} (®q) 5T*qoffcgq ! || 

/^t^t =qg§^r ^tfct ^srqi^qffcsrR. I 
qmt^ g srqq ^rsqqr^TO n 
2^ =q q^(^) ^oi^q <rqr i 

qft /^wyyqi^Th trcnsrfeqsrPq^ II 

qfa jfhftewigTtiijTft I 

^qfqqq^rgrE *T#555ramg^ II 
q^gsq snr«rs$ 5^orr %5rg^Trr*^ 1 
iPTmo^HTwrei l^Ksjqrcwgcr^ 11 
«*# qn*q f%fi%or qf^st ^ q°g^ ! 1 

(gwRrconn^ II) 

108 



sfaqraqrnTf** \ 
wwffqrigq*: I 


3 fr$R: qrfSrft«q% I 
fiftq 5TF^ ^m«#52[{^5i\ || 

gfrqftfprdlfo ^dR$dqtff%cR. i 
aTRJf-Bf&i II 

g ^R^g^RRq: I 



qVWRTTW^ II) 


I^FT =q STdRffdflqcR. I 
f^!Tl% *req qiRfFT% II 


fttrefr 5^9r f^m: 


srr zM^i qra; qq qR g sffcRR, u 


Fq'rwmgrR ?qRq^ g^iftcR, i 
^q qRqr^ g ^ff qfi ^q rqqr q , || 


gfq^nftofru. i 
qfa q<^grht fegsri =q fe’frqq r R. n 


qf^r&T qrfaq qi^ qq qft 3 ^f*qcrq 1 





u 


109 




*rf iqof ^ fttfsqfZrfSraH. I 
jm^pasrfeq* qrcrrf srero^Rra; li 

^ajaRi^K flqftfteqwTJT^ l 

forcrcrRfaqrE (I 

(sftoqftq'l ||) 


wr^^aprift fa?rcrrgqt q^ i 
goq JEncftteErcraq^ n 
^f^f^TRTF^ ^r^\f^RR: i 
/¥*£ 5TPfi n 


=q *cr% 
srqjqsRmrgrE || 


«TR^rer^r %q w^jt qft§^ i 
3Tf5T cq^RRSf =q H%ct wzi mi li 


q|% jftffcWigrK ^T^TR^ I 

n^TF'RFT 35i% 3 vfaz «rr$ qrf&rm 11 
R°qnM*wg TK gqfsprag 5 ^ i 
*$ wsm frfcqsrfrrat qfi^m?!; n 


no 


(3TORon^ ii) 



jrftroittwiifa i 


?T^WW3tR fcar ra<«H f WH> II 


vh 



I 


sq^^reroigrE ^ T*r qj f d!d $5 H 
qftr JTtfaroigrR ^%ot <q#T I 



I 


<^pk ^rarnfa-H^ci^ i 

*HfarcarcTgrR f^nsTfega: u 





• I 

(sfareqfjfcft il) 


m 



TfPIjfc: I 


15 






I (t) 

spepnesRT %«rr^ ^ t 1 

3^TO 4Udld«| ^sifjf ll 



ere u ^fo ^r s n Rj ergf^ ^n^ 3 ®rr 11 


fewrcj?ra%£?q ?ra^ hwrw% i 

*TT HWH^ I *W<^> II 
flW|q$S«£|4tap« 5^*^ MIM^^H. I 
qnf ft*TTS<CTT wftfr waiKi *^< 1 ^ 11 

sn^w 1 

— — — 1 1 — * w 

1 ' ^rrmmi %ptt ^*rr^l =nrg^r% ’ *fcr wisi-^khli 


116 



sfRituwgiuiilti i 


areffofainsr fi gre fgfrq *r i 
g[l?«T 3 aw 4 li 

d-H^mripw 3 ftwnjsrcmfc^F*. i 
er*£r Jr^re^ vpnq^i n 
SI^m^TKRTfFT STOK ?TFT I 


T^T 


?THI|^^RI7^ 3 33 %^I|^ 3^ I 
g*ffc*RF?T*fte*T 3 frfrSTTCRf^cR. || 

*prgs^5*i gR cf^qilr^q^TR; | 

3 f?n%)g 3^3; ii 

^1%^0T^RR ^ 33 ^ 3T I 

^ffrmi i%jt ! s^Rt: qr t §qft33r ii 
■jidiflit Ritiqd; i 

3r»t =tqp£gsq =3 5%(g^jJ Of^ wot II 

"» %5f Sftff# 333^33**. | 

3 qfaqr 3 qg£ II 

«RR^?Rnftf II 


1 ‘53ft ftroftVfafr w^^fRRqrs: 11 


116 



aftq r wmfa i 


qi 4 t <i 4 ?«T<oi^<it i 

*WMKif«ai«$ r^qr»^qq>r: ll 

t^q3*fNg $IM!W gfitWJT^RTT: | 
s;f$pq qi^wrctqft ftwi; 11 

Mqqi^s ^q^qr 3% ^qpqtw: 1 
qroqT^Ttesn ft* 4 q; ^f&ungiT^ 11 

tr^cwqiqc 4 rqqFTRq 4 i^q% 1 
5 t* 4 irt 54 f$K: **n«r qfa qrfr MW 11 

3 Rgs^q sqi^tercprf^rPi. 1 
5qT^ % qRf^r 5 q%4 g*qT || 
ctft ^mMq»rc*Tqwt fesftrRr ! 1 
ircq qr 3 fs*wM sTrgrFfqftqr $3 ll 

stisrrt &r R^fqjfenq^g. | 

(STUART** q^qeq^ h) 

^ptffefcrsf g q«pr craTOPqcn^ 1 
=qg§^%r%q^ RM^SIgd: II 

1 ‘ qwnq qqtf^i 'fir q re reuq 1 
H7 




ssm: qr^Jwr^q: q^ra%q»ifoT: n 




?)^^^3 BC T3^fW^3T^ : M 

qpsq^r «3rfir qiqqi^fc-r^q q n 
g^r qf^qr^rf^FTKrfl'RiTi^r: i 
sqiWtftHPSTCt cftHwfwqPjfta: II 

i^sqpsrcrf^ qrfa imf^j^rsf^qr u 
qw^^PTr^r ?TRig«^s^: i 
'pqrcr^O? rj^^ssnfssraqre'T: II 
sTl^wr^rr %fc *&<*• I 
fern r q%<qqrl;q qwqrqfcrfifor 11 



i ‘arft qrq’ftft qtf^ictql ^ £req ?f<r q*n*Rf 1 

^ ‘^m: ’ ?l% TOFcRq; i 


118 




^*n ^t%*r g n 

OTTgrTi 63^: | 

»Tl^r^Wf ^f^rgsvrjfffi 11 

«Efft ssis^m ?it II 

g*w^ ^ rstc^ l 
s 5 T 3 h«t 9^5 fijRraftft 4 $?^ 11 
ftnisfafcr qftffoq; 1 
sfrftr^testsg <^p%; # 7^11 

^1% 5 RTJTPRT || 

ai^iOTSi^^fftr^rgs^ (?) 11 
gjn^pjra: f^reigs zzmi 1 


^rra Mgs 11 

^tfl^RcRfJjf SWff^fi^ITgS^ I 

9 ?rra?!wt g 11 

9 ?n$ qR^os^g q^igs 35153: 1 
SjHf mu || 


119 





gam * 4 iwn«d I 

«rniwira»far q^rngtsfoW 11 

^■flft^FcT Q^.'tirai^dl’TKi: I 

?wr forcnffcKiwig. II 

3KT JTcq^cT ^ I 

qsTORg^ qsr[*ir*]# ^ fcrr^g; n 
5 TH% ftfajTW WR^r* g WPI. I 
*r«qt^ss^ wig; =g n 

wrcwg gferngg;: i 
ggtiM wr<qi*u<M ^gjffr*]^ II 
tlHI^ %g 'Fi'^wr^wng^iq; | 

g forig ?wi^ fowled I 

gw^ wr^mpi. i 

swt ■g %?*Tnr WFSfrgrsij^ «t#e^ ii 

<Ktf wft* f|i wrr^g; | 
terersngwT ^nxl^nfwga^ 11 

«>f)gg^i gwsn% 5 wt *tm. II 
g^wwrapfai 9^ wnn^i 
gsn^i^f^w *#R**Rit «gj 11 


130 



sritoWPTTft I 


aw ^ifSHjirwRwarapRR *rag || 
ant(qt?)w* a^f# wrajiftfwaigg: i 
araifjj foji^ww ^foOfag. II 
ga^a grfJrsaN' atfit: q^rfii^q; i 
fttaR: ?Rt^iWW II 

'jai^q^Rt q>oftgr^|3tsftq;: | 
gift s^wiRt grgg ii 


qwrfltcTR: i 



n 


afaawRT ggf^Riw'gg i 
wrawiti^ gig^g^rOTia%: n 

saw TORI^R wr^wiwragg | 
iw&i wtrw qgqqaqgrggg, ll 


awu^TRfsqr g awnagsreag. i 
gggtr&r qjfcraqwrct &3rewr:! ll 


«w|l«iKMWvS*d qsm fagn3&g i 

a ?R|^ *fr$ag || 


wag, 1 

aa*wff® qtagw$: q?*r ll 


M 


121 





TOfs* STlxft ffh»>rfc£<5;qF<T<T: | 
tTWI5TFWp(T || 

dwij l 

g^r^R g *rerrer fefrrw: n 


STfRPTCJ WTT5T: R$[c%v^ ftflRqf: I 
ll^prai grs^^c^g^: || 

ap t Pt <J cTW Jjvtf 3 ^1%^r I 
3TTSR^¥?Tr fljft tfsqqHjftRtgcT: II 
3=1*4 =T^Rr% ; T ^TI^°4RnT g^lrf I 

itgsrr ^ f%(feO*faT ^ =h<u^H4.5if^Rir u 

g^vRxrggrRr fRistfeggrf^nr i 
gi^TPTF^WR dtqpfifar qirc^ 11 
qjfr^Rqr 3qwgrET qr f%qf$q: i 
s Ri=tq > i{ti ^Tif^sRT^rfSR. n 

v > =hi^^q^m%^ifa 5 fiifa qi ii 
anpre i p aft g qr^^tg gem i 
gssrfcqr'&R 33T ^^Trfevrnm: n 
fwfrSjfRfc ?) WW M*=M5fR«nfr *n I 

STflfSTRTt g^H'sIcs^Wd: II 


122 





ft I 

H^cTFT ^5 f^f&qrF3TF£fo: SPUR*, II 

fifara «rr qr ^g?rt^r«nft qr | 
ipTf^fed: WcT^r^ tl 

3«|jpil*Wc«4 f%tr^T5f =^£t I 
sip ^fot qi^ qmq^ <j qr 11 
^ qr^t ^q«qw ^qR^ri^cr: | 

«T 

=qg&qtssfwf qr qrqrftsqM^cT; u 
fiteqfop*RRiro 3^1tq i 

0 ?Trcqjrftqriq*i qa/qcqrr%rrw& ||) 


qTmfcTqren^rg qrfSrcmtfssRTi^ i 
qi^i^B^qt ^13 ^rpqffs^qfecT^ tl 

srcn*r qro^w =q s^q ^rqft i 
«wi ?i%ot $rq sqqqqf^qq^ tl 


qrcrefm qqreq^ i 
mfM qro^q g qTftffaTqrg^q^ II 

qr^rcmqRR: sfoftercRfcm^ t 
qjttfS =* q^qqifrs^qR. n 


123 





1%er: q^irarrwH iwr4 'fqjq'Rq^T: i 
^ wr qfa <lFrrfs^T?-^3^r: ti 
sr?T I tft5TR*T*$g^ l 




g^WERra/^ 5T5Tr^ q5«T?T I 
^rr^^Tivr qr gif ^prt II 

ftstrewregsRT I 

<rs*qcn?q^ m q«rqrgfeqiro% n 

^«rqt»T err%r qf| qisgra 5 qr I 
qr^ fqqmr gfqr^q* ®*rj <r*rr n 

5T%$T cq^T^ PTRW <#5^^ i 
< 3T*fr 5rq>jgq^ g gsTgq^q ? q^ II 

itelTOR t^R^cT 5?lfe«f|l%cr*^ i 
^Tcrn%^R'tqfqn%^rg j frq qr^rip^ n 
§f%q»tfr qrsrw qRRmfafafacP*. i 
qi^f^RTfir|%(3^5?)f^«J iS^f: II 
^jfq^ qgi j ffsfts i 


124 





sqra^tRdNRR. II 
fjf^r qtfRTOrrcfaft \ 

=^n^T ^sqqqRrt JFTO: || 

5F*rW3q*T<T cTR $R: I 

qrtr ?) ^rr«ii sqr^^igsArR. n 

sp % sir g^iT^R. i 

swrruft* fpfkqsrrc f%$r^cr: n 
q«rfl«*R: f^q^rg^p^q, I 
^Tjjprf^TR qvrrqo^^^TfrTH || 
tffooS55f^ 3 5RfHWf^IR 3 I 
qf^S^f^ff HTnrRf^f^n f* II 
<^?ri?si*r ^ ^R[qj%Tfq^L I 

(f^Rq?c% s;[f%w% II) 

flfSm =q i 

f^^(?)^3tR || 

3 i 

5 i%$r g srsi^r 3 n 

i • gfc sfcr $§5 ^ *R»jRriT ^5 sqpr srg^tT \ 


125 





5*nsrn*RRrdfci ^i%%l%TlfaT** > i 
3PTsi(^5T?)w^r h 

zm 5 <*% 1 f i 

1 * 5 3$T°T 'TI^HWfRl'Tft II 

3^f 5 Trere ^%orrg^ i 

wizw ^ 5 l%c5rr srcrFR || 

<wra ^rcTTSSFcFfir^ i 

S^ft howi^t qrfatPi || 

dr^^PT^ ^^TS3f ^ | 
cTr^^r%^T^»Ttd%ITr3f^ II 
dcfj5rr^f%or sfNT *F§i<sfafcr i 
^wrjnr^ Jfar gaiifagsw II 
^rr^riRK I 

a^i^^i^iwrfafcr ll 

^*n footer ^hhrih|^ ^ i 

fF^fSWR^ 5TI3^ ^ 55TT || 

?i%5f ^ftoRitfawrcijiw i 

(wi^g^ ||) 


126 





f|wm®r *RK«T d^Tl'fT § qm% || 
«raw^rrgrK ^r^iiffa I 
qr^%"T% qmftfa Fjqq. it 


sn^rsfiJr g gaf|- ^ <ttc i 

start %Rt II 


win* qrq*£rtaq g 1 

^Rr^rfirwHiqffi qjrttaresqart n 


qrfrtr qf^R^iw =qgf%rens§^ | 
g ll 

cTc^f^cT^^rl4 5fiOTfct*rog^m i 
srrlr^ qf^M^N =qgi%Sf<* rtr?S || 
SRitflrt srtag *w*pr% i 
smith sifanfipra ssHirt^rqit ll 

•n /\ 

?T?*rt fafct fttfq tfqpofcfigqiRRT: | 


*rgf§Rtf?rtrt 5 3 srr %% sfrftcPi n 
Hfi>N't|^M|n%^ 3RTC g qq qqg; I 
st<i«Kurt %s erqqrt qqfti<rtq. 11 
qf&jsp^qjfr«r arrR g qq q%g^ 1 
g sqta cT%q fcqqg; || 


127 



srfajrreysPHTPt i 


qrftqfRcq srr 4 * 3 qq(q?)*R3. 1 
*rsq?q vra^wr q»rrt qr^^MSRT: II 
qrqqrp?ftfc2r ^rr^rf^rfr^ i 
(^sfswqfntrr^T ^rq^rc <r?r: $5 ll 

^jj^TT^Jrepjfa q»r^3, 1 

q^fq qiw^ 3 <3'r q^W^nq^ || 

gsfifqr^q 3 f^r^r^qqq ^ 1 

(^R<qRT^ 11 ) 


=^#- 1 00 

q^q ^|%at qi^ sreft ^r^fr 1 

^Frqi^TtRrjj^^r II 

qq 3 Ti?f%^R qxrf|rftqqRL 1 

(ar^r^R^ q«qfiqqqs% (l) 

cT^q ^l% 5 t q$r srcfa 1 

*F*flw$^%q qfe^if^gqRTR. 11 

tfm^Hun'fiijpifi f^rss^ggcTT 1 
qq f^rgr* fcftqqrR II 

(f $ i ?q ^ % ajftviqs^ 11) 



*?m. i 


128 





I 


I ( 3 ) 

zimZ g srqwiftqft fei?p^ i 
3®5f qrt qprnjTjf Jmrc^g, ii 

sfq mftq qj^sq *m . i 

q^q^qqq 3 % ll) 

l (*) 

gt^SrqrsPTrt qrcmqiaqf&g-ag. i 
*jaiq$a(qo3^ ?)*fgqr ^rq qqqqrrqg, n 



sraiqo^grR qr 'qg^s^qi^qq, ll 

(/qT*q^ ll) 


^tW ig: i (<\) 

^oflq|4qF5ftqRT ^rsqqrc i 

gq^ w? g qrq^tfiqft n 



«wq 5i^qi5r ^ to s^ft q^: ll 


17 


129 




^TfirrrsT ^ wf s%q*tqq^ i 
»ropqrq4 ^ jrcrr*4 ^ongJTg. II 

qrTcW^rrFT <7^ STSTC^ I 
qsw *7!W7B II 

aTUH^ft qaiMfe!qd& II 


^softt?i^qwr?rprT i 

?rqqi qprqrc; q^qwrctqftftira^ li 


0 ?q) girr^H [®rr 
awi ?jjjqRrl =q zm sr&ot c^ n 


q»qr^ ^rrffrrr^r =q gush ?farq*tqHg. i 

(ftn?q^ gr^rqj% li) 


I 00 

^tfSfaqtesrft^TR qft *raigqg. i 

tfsq^SflrS#: II 

^^rqq^Fqi 5 *ng«H«fi 5 iiePC 1 
qq >tW 11 

<1 ‘rTTfe^<m ’fitfcT TT5PcT7H.il 7 ‘jWl^liffT W 
TcR cTTT JTCTrftcTU’ TT5PcT7H. I ' frflW %’ fit filWHTcTT- 
^JT TPPPcTTfefcM Hfacpqfofa TfaHTlcT I 


130 



sn%*n5Mj®TTfa » 


snro %q sir cltfa ^ I 

qrer z£ ?rer z?i ^pt % qfeq: ^ n 

sm ^p7Rf =q I 

%cTT^j ^ 5:i%0tSS^' 443. (l 

?T5«TI3*r^ ^ qfa %T TT^qq^ I 
«R^ i%4 %q ^4 4*^r ^ ii 
tnsr tesqr^ =q qmr^ss?^ i 
sRsb iT^rrr4 ^q; faw4 q«rr ii 

Epjsf %q q»w ^ §rf^f>r ^fafaq =q | 
qfa <qgg4 WcT 4fa q^q^rq?^ ii 

qrft q^q^xT *qr 3 qTras;i , i;4rqfa i 
qs*i ImPiqfa *refa >g^J gq?T ! II 

(^q^pfq q^4feiqq3% II) 

qfa t 

*qp4t Wcqtfrwrr 3 qrg: *?Hi4faU3 11 
faster qr qp^qt 3 qmnft«qi5#3 1 
qq «ftd 4i3nfa*qffapTqi3 11 

1 ‘ qtf4«ffaqif4§ , q> ’ fa fa qfaqsqq, 1 

1S1 






am<T % 5 T em JJi? ^ i 

qrer z£ cT?rr zpt ^[jf t ^i%iff ^ n 
?raig*Tq»i qrc iT^r^Oqq^ I 
«rj(* ?)£ %q q^q ^ n 
wi %q qrqre =q qrqqrc^sg^#i i 
qr<Ct q^*r?TRq II 

(fosq^ ?rn? 5 rq 5 # ll) 

I (vs) 

fir^sr =qr 5 ^ci ^ gfrtfuT'src rgcr^ 1 
gn%<i qrqqr? g arqwrctqft l^TrT^ 11 

3 -sd ^^rot qr^ 1 

ar*rq ^reqrer =q ®*re 51%^ q»> 11 

qrqre* =qrfaqrq *q <r s -rr i%rq?*qqf*i. I 
iT^r^qq f?cT ^qr^sqrgq ?i«ir li 
<s*rrer *qr^ qft 1 

*TH* ^qr^TIcT vjFT^r^STRT^ II 

(aigiifcpft qsqgqs^ ||) 

132 



I (<S) 

^ ?wr i 

sjj£ g qrrre f^rq ?r*n it 

jm^wKw mrareRB^ i 

q^TFT i <ts*tw ^ ... ^r II 

sfaCTto W^r ^noit g ftorSv'*. I 

(^3JH.fteiiTt qarcg q g^ II) 

I (H) 

■^g^r tor ^ i 

3WT ^ || 

«rq^nt to *renW i 

gn%rT JpFtqr gjpqT g ^«to | 

*m njfwcHy *sg u 

(ar^*ton% ws^ n) 


188 










qrq qnrrt^Rwqi^ 11 
s=qT$it ftqrasq qmK 3 srm^ i 
qqqwntiri* wiwgsbrcmfcfiPi n 
5®Ft i^RT 3 inirg^T g qr^rg. i 
^fT q*p^ 3 mwmi n 
qm^cr wi**^wqqifa qr i 

qiM^Hl^RyW q^ d«’ife=h*t. II 
e ii*i'*ii*iyKfera < u « | 

qft g qrcs# g qi% qr sqr^tq qr li 
wrq^rqqn ^ql y rt ^q i 

faqfrfajIsT qjfo ^rsRtr^q qr n 
i « «raMqqq ’ firspfcq ‘ ar ^qqq^q i yqq qr FRft^prqq.’ 

qiAi«TK«jL i 


18 


137 





an cfT I 

^9^f%ifarcsJ || 

%%qtqT*?WIRt ^r JRfrt^cTJ I 
5<wW qifa *n II 

^t)qs^^g»qtiq4taqf : i 

qrft srzrcfs o^r qr n 
4/i«hN' - >=l«il qifa g<f: | 

trf^r: || 

qsBgsrcwfort qjfrftffcferasw: I 
9TWT£2?$rcq %^t^ 4 fsm: gq: II 

5qf5TWflfq|?gIf f**RTt | 

®f^r ^(%ot <nq tfffcreraL ii 

3 9CT I 
^R5^iW3^: II 

3T*RT *Tf J W^Thl <=l lH§w^*tfl^T: I 


q^r s wrists'* sngtfferan i 



1 ‘ qS[T S WT^' *1% 4141'tHH 1 


138 





qtf qr ^q*r qrfa s*ntf g q«q^ 11 
qq^wfr SV^TfKUTVhR: I 

qre r w^fea^wg gr l qr wngg^f- ll 



VW^I^RRfTr: | 

^rf$rq>: q>rcqqwrqf$q<rd II 


<Tf>qofl w:3T5Tt i 

qqi*rq»5FT qrfa wt qr qr*§qi^%^ II 
swiHHj^q qci: i 



g?fe?rcter: 
qrc: qmri 


*r*ftq f^rcFq qrwq g 5rrq^\ l 
a^r 3 ifRgjri g ll 

qfeot q*5# g qfR^eaq[feq5(^ I 
qros^t g zpz qr qftq&f&rn, u 
qw^igqRai^ q*s- i 

qfa q^ a* qft: qr a*T*rq ®it n 


139 



Hftrffrwsroirft i 


ifrg^nr «nRr I 

^reTftqsjtfM ^Rqjssrtftqq, II 

3j«??rfeqR^rer I 

qft stjGiSffOa®* * «n*f =q i%ti% nm. ii 

^%oT^f7cJ75#; l 

=q II 

5qra^*rf*^l^T 1 %^ i 

^rej qjoswf ^ g^ref =q (tqrq^i; n 
fTR^r qfasr ^qr4% i 

*rr^5i5T«f fpRcSR^ qrw£% u 
qi%$: ]%5Tcrtr^3 Sfor *rftirag%: | 
ercwilqfterf ^*qqrc^ ll 

wPNrqs^ ll) 

^%ur g^r srf^qi^T f^rw^r =q ^^vrrJt i 
qft =q g^rrfrl%^rrrqrarf i^forg^ gqrc* ^ H 

f&erqofater l%crr i «Ki^M»ift*-5 ) 4li^ : *i. i 
hr gf^Fq; sT^qr^q'rf ^roi*i$g*i€*fti m 

(fcgprifa* ID 


140 



srfJfan^FTTfir i 


qfgfrsr ^ i 

amcn^FcTr *r?f} qr*q%g;gqifN?R. II 

?)^ q%°T srt g*cPR qm5W*> I 

*rsq% qr sqi® % qmsw% n 

qrqft citqRT g i 

ssfarq ^%t>T qrq rrcqr&rcq =tiqft II 

qmqr^q a^qi qnft^Fft: 1 
fliimsq rurwi q»a% q^^qiT^ 11 

*F?lt f%qq qtrfi^ffo f^R l iqR . 1 
«iwre g<jR?q «5 f^faqlsf^iwqr 11 

qq sqiwq^ 3 »tqqffi *23*^ 1 

(q&fircorm^ qtfii^qs^ 11) 

Snqqf^FIPjf^f: 1 

?T^q sfhqi^T 5 I 

qrc vmtz qRqr pgj^ ^ 11 
^ ?qq^ =qr«qRq qiJrss^gcq^ 1 
fF*%aft*T q 4 $rq s^rq^ 11 
wd ^^qjRorqjRDR. 1 

(qfgq^FT^ q g aafitoqqa& h) 

141 



gfl W T «q p» nfl l i 


amr ^Frg^nrqt | 

qw qqrfor qrq qrm^r^^ II 
arq* ^i%oT fqsF*rrerg?q^q«RT: i 
SRJjftftfcl ^TFcT ^^Rar^ROT^ II 

(to^r snf^Tq3% n) 
4l»Tqfejuiwftf: | 

aNl^rflr^ ftir 1 f^ftquqrq: i 

ifRg^t w\*t qRR. II 

qmssi g i 

arq* <?%ot stR5W^ II 

rrttjt g snffcqracrcratq I 

arft g q*R. II 

qRmf^ftfir qqrer «n^r I 

qr£ qmgfffeqirCf^qrr?)^ 5 ^ H 

qliTqHq»RR«T =qTffrfeqn(^qn *)fy*6*{ 1 

swr*$ qrq^ g qprsrpjjnt ftsr 1 11 
qrft%q ®ct $rq Hts^rq qRnjf$ % 1 
g^gfSr eurf^Rq a^qRq qi^qrPW It 


143 





qtiTqftqrafaa 1 1 

JWl4 3^?^ d ^TFjqft || 

erq> 5 ;f^T ■snswr^T «rfa i 

*ZPI 0 V 9 «$£ || 

JiMforereigsi I 

3Tift STFT^ej II 

?Rr ssnfc^P i 

qq <q%q>^r n 

(«rg*it^riT^ q^THfcr^iq 3 % 11) 


sq[W*ra%R^q s^rer «*WR 3 ^ l 
5Ril%qiMtTR i9ra#q?r: ll 
^r qR$w**qi^m»#cq *t?t: i 



3 f?r 3 TI^ 5 ® 3 qjfcfjRigsR I 
fl&r(*F^r ?)sfeqRT«j QTFrjf %q 3^ n 


STRl^t^ tfqtfof STFTPRI%*c| ^T: | 



ii 


i ‘ «n}qiqj) qtft qrqrepffc>jf^T: i fRT^r q'farmwnr fcifc 

II ’ MldiSrtuH, l 


143 





Tiffed. I 
Cfcqr^ q3I$TC3 5H5®: II 
<K®5rnllq^Mi^ir qrqrqfersrqrgq: i 
?F«j^ ^f 0 t wFTrf^roor: ^(fr ?)qqr gq: 1 1 


^qqfrf^r <?fe sqrq^TR^ i 
eTRft^i g^rf^T«r^ II 

f$rqfcqf^tqri%»jltag qftqfaq^: I 



: q^trq <??l%%: II 


qq 5 S^Ff^TF: I 

aiRfl^r qr qrfa qsfrfiraTiqt =t «rr n 


qsi^i^^rt qr ^r^Ft^r qq qr i 
^rw^qqid qr <s;%^rw4rfcr: u 



5 *T«rqi fafl%r<RTq: qq*q^ | 
frrqg^t si^ *qr% cqwr^g# q*^ II 


q*<c qrq^r 3 »^<ft2iqft 1 
ant *qtcq£ =qr$rwi ^q^pqt^ 11 
qrwir *q srtfteq *qqr^q ^rrqt^ 1 
g^Srqrsr^tK qrnqf^ftfr 11 


144 



^Rg?ffe(J«R5 !) q>K FT ^ I 
qtqqtq ?)^%*^ ii 

ircn$ qnw § f$q^ i 

q?rw qfr*iffo*rr*lfcq i^rq^ ii 

tfRT&cq ^TsqlKTR^qTfSjRtJ^ | 
fa^RT: II 

jwt 4 It ^rniqft i 

«Tq* ww ^R(*l?j^o^J^ || 

q^ar^f-^i <^<h. I 

jft^sn^migrE li 

^n^fWSrwr ^ srrffR qu^c*. i 

srf’Srerqs^ n) 


II 


g^^sqWforr^ s^tt 1 || 
5r4 mfitq ^sq^d^onqt I 
(argqt^nt qw 


3*lhqta«TO3^t cTFrt I 

tffon 3 s%dt q&(5fer<JTt%)stf&5t «fisq>(^?)fl«i5T:|i 


19 


146 



jrflirrasriTTft i 

(TriT^rf^frrn^ ^qjq^reTrnTqs^ II) 

rf^q qmqr^ffifeqiraq*Tgq^ i 

E fl°TT ^fr^0TP*t II 

0%§q*f% sif^rqs^ II) 

q%°t ^TJT v Jrg^ cT^q^ i 
qrq^ 3 q^qj^q^ II 

f^qrq^^qirjr | 

qR?*q*q q^ qqfqft II 

3 ^q^t frqrq 5 qr^r^ ^usf^H. I 
^onqmftfq /qprrc: g %qraq>^ II 
qr(^rf)gq*f; g qoqrqg<%q 3 rT^qr^ l 
^q fqstq 3 $rq gqfxprsqg, 11 
^feoTPjf^q TFqqfqq^. 1 

(g?h>rcarmft ^qiR?rqs% II) 


M 6 







qr^ 3 qr*£fa^ qrqqr^ 3 gfeiqg. 11 
JTW^ajqr qsqqi^jfcfcirg^qg. 1 
q^ tfqw^ftqg, 11 
iCrRER^qiqSI^ ^RqiSqfD^TK I 
g^g*qqr»T =q qft n 

qq^qr^ gjtqiwwfqqg. 1 



qqj^qq^ I 

q^ qft qra?^j g qr 11 

s^cTsqVFF ^qf(5r^r?)qj^ q?i*q^ 1 
^j%of f|4 q^5qi3(f^nftq% sqrf^r?) 


qm^r g ffc# ^ cR^nsrfei q qr^ I 
q^qrfrft foite %qi^ feqwAci^ 11 


149 



Hictaraqrwirft i 


?<J¥ qs^reqr^r d *Fqq£q: || 

% 3 l%%frqqpqi g qr i 

<fcM»jfe'icHP?[T g qroq^qlqR *q%q, II 
3T%qr^frqrft#fqq struts i 
qfcqiqgq vrar qfasif jrqqrfoqq. II 
go?fr fqq g qcq^ fqqrqrfffrqrqqi i 
fofecSHiii&r qrftqgqqqqqrcrqr ll 
WRr*Frcffq?n ^Rrwqr^q^r: i 
sq&retfNrcfaT |^jq*RrfR<iqii 
sf&oT q»fsq$ g f§Rqq %q ipqq^ i 
^•rT: qp§qr£*q qrqRrqft^fqqq II 

ll 

anRnftq^qRpq h g^rqq. I 
^ft(«ft?)wqr^r§[i3: q^rt q^rarajl 
g*qifsf*Tt 3qr wr: tfitaqrsqfr: i 
sR*q^wrniqfo *gi% fiqpq^q? ll 
q&pq q^q q>^q §fo* qqr I 
5i «qft?rcf3^ qq^r q^r^q ll 


150 



wk ^FimTCTfesqqffiff: II 

(srsptonSr f^ri^4<rT3% H) 

qfc 'TFp^rfr i 

^rFd r TO^gCTftPRqc. n 

3TI5T5§jfa> «t«T I 

aftfTFSR' !%<=r fRTcgp^ q ftwqi^ ii 

^Tf 71 %RI ^l%WT ^3.03^ I 
^%OT p%ri mt qraqrc: jj gfrqcT^ II 
*T*wfF3<i qrfa ^rPcTStKr^i^^ 1 
mt <*r%$t 5Fcf zm qrir 3 <2^qt: 11 

tfsqqv-qTipfq <T ^OIlfa^PT | 

qfa qf* q> fq^^o^qi qu&^oeqrat n 
^rq'l^Diqt^ ^q^rqft f^r^ 1 
5 THmuRWTg?K 11 

^*i$tqsrfeqi><q ^g?T^| 
^Ri^q^Sr^lf: qfoifer^ 11 

qtto^qqsjrsfqr q^reaiq^Rtfl^TT: II 


151 





qi^qrq^ggjpqT: I 

arisfWkrfertfr: qirl^rfejpflgprr: ll 

qn^rfr ^qq^rw^rqqFq^crcfrqqfr : i 

C3rRqirftq;rjfq fetnqrerrmqa^ II) 
q^Rsgftfq qs% qr^qr: qr^qrr^qg^ i 
gfeiq qmqrq g qqqpterqrq*?*. u 
qr^ftqcfTJfjpq qRrcqfaqfg^g. I 
=qr$ Rq^RUT^farig. || 

^q^q^iw ^arqf arqffeqg i 
g^jgwf qnf =q qifa || 

f^fa^ifoqi^RqsqrqT^jfq^fag^ i 
3 :%ot sftofiqqr sqifaq $r?q.<frqg n 
qws^ =q z.v£ g q^rerftq =q qR*rg I 
q^qsqrg^qi^ft?) fqqrer f|qi£ flqRrPqgg. ll 
^jRqRi%Rr^r?T7qrq ^q^rqg. l 
qs^rcsqrlV #r *^qr ll 

qq^qi sfat g qr i 
qq q^R*^ g qrq*qRqrqft -q^g n 

qr^qragg gg qfas^f gqgn%gg i 
q%ots^ g g?qr$ fqqiq frg^rrqqr ll 


152 



\ 


5TFTResrW%^r: it 




l 


5:i%ot g SFqftct II 


^jf^RT tTT#trm ^q^VTOflf^dl | 
qf^RT gqq. It 
•^int<^'i?r«lt sft/^RT R5Pgfq%: | 
ero^Fii gf^Tcri^ g || 

g «rrac qr^Rrftq: i 

(/$i«q*£t srftqrq^ u) 

=qg^^ t%%q =q qjq^T^rf^RTu i 
qi^ qr^qrgqrR i%i%t rr*HRgqp^ II 


^^HoiwgrR qf*£TmftfvmHL i 
srf 5 qrq^ot g s;%<jN =q n 

sfttmwzi ^q'Tqfaj&r i 

s*n5 qrc^t 5 si^r ^ II 

I '»< u 'S *j<!i g fas^TTg^q | 

qi% cqq^^T *T^|g g q*q^ u 
3Hqt&^q>m g sraqrtqft: f% ? q%g > i 
i^iT3»si»TcT ?rt ^f^rsq^wq^t. II 


so 


153 



a ft areqm r fl i 


’?5^T qft g || 



i 


snsrpjjrcnngTK II 


<s»wg«F>*w 3 qftf&rg. I 


qjir^rrfaT =tfa qftfei i 

qrejgFT g rfFTW ®r*r ^tff&Rwqh it 


faww f%5^ qrfa qr | 

^FfR^^Trf&r qSJdl^«T g/%*TR[. II 


arr qjsjfa qr i 

\: || 


($«hK«IHI?t «3^5R3% II) 


f^ayis^gRf: I 


aw q^ f%$faoj fowsqq^q^ I 
qr^r qr^RTgr^ « 5 gfererct, J| 
fqgfjsr fw g qiq g Jm^cg^g. i 


*wn& qr qqpfft 11 


154 


uftnKunwift i 


qrtt qigqsrcft^ g m t 

gfaqftfnrcprrc q ra w g wfl u q qy u 


fxT<^tj^ qpq qji^q •IflWHH, I 

^isq^gtR 11 


sraforcnregtK 



I 


gs^Rr^T sn?r qrqrqpTf^rfam. u 

•v, 

g ^fwiwif^w *r%g. i 
qft 3 3 ^*cT g II 

q*^t ^ ^ ^ 1 1 

qr*r g i%i%i^# ^ qrM cerffoifa^. n 

l%cTqwlT^I 4 =q strr i 

%crqtfMftr g ?flaq>u6 f^rgo^^n 
qqrflStqftera stq qr^re^qq^ i 





ID 


qq qq qft sm: qn^qf^q: i 
ftq?l'JTfwir , §W : 3 ldl«q»(^^cT: II 

qrf^st stq^sq: qrfSi^rq %fesr: i 
*wraw ^ q^ qm?«i g qreq^ 11 
ftstrejutimyTh qnreniqt qq^ | 
frfefWwt f^ficesqwrqt qro. ll 


156 





*T*q ^toRjtnsrKR^T || 

q.qRCW'is 3 qrfa^R spraq^ I 
3 ERofF^r aswqfaq^qqr^ || 
shorter qrqfr*fr%: \rk i 

fasns^r star: sqfa*33?rr q qr n 


qnrn? 3 f^rffa^: q^q*^ i 
si^qr^rE sspfftqqi^cPi 1 

qi^lqft qrct =q q^qqqnqq, u 
qq fStarsq q?q ! qnqqrerqer ^3 1 


(§ST** 5 PP* 



ID 


3pt ftsrreq qs£r qrlt qi^qrcrgqt 1 
qwm<( 3 ipq ^i%orgf5ro: 11 
gftqtf<fh*raPTrc: sreiqoq^q qr 1 
fc!*T(3rT O^r^r qpq ^qR?f|3 3 qr 11 




siqfacomgxR *&!(*»? 



166 





5%ot g sTOremfow n 

qft g y§wi g g * 

?3%5t q*s# g «*rt , q*fcrferac > ii 
* n*l g ftrfefW 5 fora^RFfaqR. i 
%?FT#i<tfter g 5 tt>r %fe?R u 

wf|y«hui ftgosissi q*tfl§rqft f$RR i 
q>ti0Hf& i *g q fttrq?r: it 

IT^RR2% II) 


■qg^H 



«nwi®f«raifr qft qrgqisg?R n 
^%5r g qara g sfarrengtf i 
^m^5t g ti 


qft qiw^r g srq* r^srrfaR | 

grl%ci ^%jt qi^ wr g *q[$reR (gffcirR?) ll 

?nsi|fWH^ g^ qqqfoprei q qR I 



SB ^RR || 


tW «$ f^t^T «tlU44hM.|ft<i > I 

(q»Ron^ k+wwmzS 11) 


157 








\ nffT^ri:: i 
qspr s$rq!*^g gsm ! i 
gR*m «7i^ wrois g ii 

^t%ot <s£c«t g *re ^o^TFRrf^mq: i 
*n*t g ^^fan%iR ^ n 

5$Ft qT^T g «r3T3THf^5cT^ i 
3®ofafF?T SflSST qft fWI^i || 

«rnprr^ g »ftft foft^rcsri i 
gfam smqR g frf^r <s^sot n 

srtt^ 5&®r ^ ww g g®g^ i 
erw ^%°T EFT q^tg *ftg. n 

sHmuwiyw v*&t *rer ^qPtaigfl : i 
*tpftaft mftPr: II 

«TlfPTO»filiH <s^r % ftaw'fcH, i 

(<H3J*&SHT> qzwqdd (I) 


si 


161 





RifPWTirtef ^ q<pr qsjsronferflrR i 
=qg^i%R5r«r ^Rg^rfferT: n 
^i%<JTPrq?rwF4rs^T?r qra^rg^q: i 
t& ?*qq -#^i *rzi uifw*rf^rcTR.il 
Rfcr?Rg jra*narr fTBorrq^egd: | 
g qT<faqr«fa4 *r%^ 11 

cT?^R g j'g’g^FVTffJT *W/=^RT^ l 
^ 5 T»qr-T%q q^q g^gipn: 1 11 
*fq*q qR*TRT g q^ter^ajon^ 1 
g;qk *Ffkq ii RFqr^tqq^reR^tfRjTR. 11 
TT^FcT qFSdT^T fq^fercr^sipqq^ | 
qs^^tiq^grE SRFTq>?><TT5rfcR. || 

fSRR =q f£q[f d~qq *TjpT*r *rq^ I 

(^TR^rf^^r^ i%qf£d*m?^ 11) 

*wft R^qfgonq^ I 
qn? qrqqrc: g $fe?TR. 11 
fal%«q sqrsrsRFR qm FftqsRFHR. 1 
gj^r g mi <$crqR(srfcr ?) g II 


1G2 



ufcmMSprrTi'ir i 


^stsnwi nsfi qf^rq i 

^q*q qmqr^ g f%*f^r?Ri II 
gferd qreq[£ g ^%dt *r%^ i 
swf* ^/§r®i f^cT qr^ir^r g 3 « ttt , ii 
^qW a i^qTht 1 

*r*ffcq q qr^T g^rqrr^qqq; 11 

(%<?q*cit STf^qssr 11) 

=qq§^ f^^rq =q qjq^qq;sn%rT^ 1 
w r 5 :%ot wtt qm^qq;^ II 

qiq^q^j cHT JJ^fT I 

qm^%oi^^ 3 ^^nqpgeqqq: u 

wrq g^qsflTR q>q^rqrTs:^^ I 
rT^q qft *rqtff g qTrcq^qnpqqrg 11 


qrRF% qrfa ^[«rt *rrift?^TR3 qiqqj^ 1 

q ^(gwfiqn^ ?)^q»g. 11 


fegqr s q =q qsq^Fq^g^ 1 

qq JTWiq^ =q^rrgnt ^ 11 

(g^RTJTPT^ 



ID 


163 



srtonvqraift i 
«frgnt n re : i 
g qafrss ^ gqq ! 1 
^§§3r qr ftg^r ftft* qfa&fxRi^ ti 

gfom <si%ur qrqfitat ffor ^ 1 
qfts$ qfofteq 11 

®nrq q^g flsq^ ?m ftqfcrqrqj 
?q*jf£r ^ ^ qro*?w 3 i 11 

d<«w*^??r g qrs^ gwrp^rqr^ 1 
ft# qqq <s$ q^?T g g«q^R 11 
f^RFTFRof *T^T qft *RPl. I 

3^r qr$ qft qrfrqqte^ II 
ewr ff%cT ssq qwrrq g gffcrer^ 1 
ssq 5^ qtf 3*^ qj^ 11 
qqq qfttoir 5^ fq^ g sf?fa*0 1 
qrcn? ^i%$r qfn^ swifts II 

(tasfesqi^ qiqqi^f g */)«<*< I 

5^5 -^ T W^ rer «sq g« q q *i w II 


1 

\ 


‘ qiq qf^pr ’ ftftr qisrs?^ 1 

‘<ST»r 'TTSFrTC^ I 


164 






^4 WRR: qR. I 

(sffgqtsmSi m) 


s*tt4 ^fwht g ?;f^t qg: i 
ecej ?R?n4rf^T*Tir?.r: ! 11 
c h< u ^^^>i wi«4ri i 

W\Z vn3t ^Rf^T || 

q^r g qprqfft tqrs7%4Rrrfa l 
?T^T 4 f%RT =TT*T || 


^ qw?t qft i 

^qrwrt ^Rt^r I 

wsqqre: 


it 

li 


qprgR TT f ^on«Rf^ i 
®rnr *r^i4 rk%°t q^raf%^ n 


qj^sq ft g^ftercr: i 

('drUchifq^T^ qf&iw% ||) 


*t %q qrqi^f qr4rft <rt i 
^pjt fJ%4 qr4 'rmro f$q?R ii 
5*W ^ ?q% f$RR | 


166 





qft q> 3 q><&w q ^rot <q*rq | 

*qRqotg*qi ^4T wiqof qqr ii 

sin^qfcr* ^4 qr 44 f >^Rqrftoft**. I 

(gsRsm ^f^RTxiqq^ u) 
er^rrfte* qsfr g%r 4 qfiSpqrf^qR. i 
f f %4 qRqr 4 g srfwopjj^r^ 11 

qRi 4 qitcft^q 1 

awr q^g qwnct 11 

ywq ijf&r i^t«t^ -qre w^l 1 
gwpfraqi =qg§^fa 4 II 

(/$r*q*£r srf4?rq3% 11 ) 


ar^rrtl'qd ^q: qf«qcr ^ejPmfSqq: 1 
?^pjt gwqqt qR qrf^Rq qg: 11 
qf&fi qnr^r =q i 
3 R# qr q$ 4 fa %g^q^qrPq% 11 
qsof 3 qrif qi^r q^r g g^sR. I 
qranntr 11 

5^ 3 t^reqi$ (^qjpf qqr<?qq^ II 


166 



fra# sefroi «rejt qnr i 

S&frq$q{faR 3 [^R || 


qft ^*qqtfqR ^ifrEjjppnfrRTH. i 

q# qqreqmft q«q^ II 
?RqpJ "q WT q# 5J3<l«f<i I 

(i%«q^c?T?Nti%^ q#*frq n) 


srI ^qtq q# 3 q>fcq r gH^urr 1 
bt$ 3 gqq: qn^w^nq^q: 11 
5 TST 3 S 3 q^sq =^ 3 ^^ I 

fojsqf fpftq; tftqsqq^ q«rr 11 
q^Tt^i%qq# 3 f^tpjfrq^ 1 

qrqtq^f?# =qiWf 11 

qreref 3 «w ** ^ 1 

3 nq^sq gq%OT =q %friq. || 

^RRT q^%S^»ifrTT^ | 
grs^frif q|qrnl fHsP3qfcs<P^ || 

q# =q ^fr*w swq^Tqft 1 
?rr®tf# qrqq^q(«T 5 ft^r?) frjfrrq^ 11 


167 




^for ^fcq^ «fi^ ggw K^^oqqt : ll 

(fasgqrafaX ll) 

g ^ffc^Pi. I 

s*n$ ^nr^JFt 3 tfta-dffl'Mii&wi 11 
jfrpJ g ^ 3 tr ^i%oif 5 r% 1 

^ «rr*Pffaf g q^jj^ II 
qrf^qq qft S^TfRt =q qf^FT I 
’ 3 t < 7 ^ g 11 

g ^r f*frg, *%(*n&?)*m?(i g st i 

5F^|oq^=q%?nrq^ || 

^tpJ sifojjTFcT 1 

^Rj^cf qfr a^wg; g f II 

arra^ ^rr ^3: 1 

( , i^'hK u n j i^ 11) 

II 

arforf^ &*r £&$ >s 3 ?t fcan I 1 

JJPTOJBfT R»wq^f+I^<M *q || 


168 



STf^hiMiW* #TrT: I 

«^ort3?th: ii 
5^^ Jwr^rrrf %4 *smr^ i 

fa®g i 

%sr I 

j*trp tas^r: q*H. II 

(§H^FF* ^%5TTRqS% II) 

am ^ gfejifr | 

a[f%ot «rft ^3ct*i II 
q^g ?f%5r qm ?Tf 3 q*stff% i 
«rr*M f^W^qnfoperfc*. it 
tp*r^Ti*wqf®r»rg>T4if^cT^qiir^ i 
sgq?f%«*Trsfa ii 

ftfatswrRrarsqW ®<sji£$ i 

^R^RWI 3 rK cTW SlSfOig^ II 

g asrcfcr «ra si^(?) i 
TOKFg qmsffanfr *r ll 


89 


169 



sftraraqmfSr i 


STCT»ll?|qi*llRl<h^ | 

Rrshuft srr^pr tone q R q flEfan . II 

^RTR^nTFThlT ^SRI^RTT^S^tH^ | 

«rtn?5«r<iqsw Rrwrc*r hi^h. ii 


g°n*$ g q»^wf i 

S *PRT\ 4jU|hm|4«^T gsqqr^l 5 JTWPTR^ || 

^qrct i 

(Rreq<^ irf^nrs^ ll) 


xRfci *r$qrcrqiqrerq*j, i 
^1%°t sr^sqHfal f^Tte qm?r: n 
«il^* , 5 ( «j ( l^d : *hi4f STZpn^g ^o) | 
STRT^mq ^q- fttfj ^TO: l| 


qtfitpJT ST^I^ST gfacf «h<J|Hlfe*sl<t. I 

%q «§0£c5 qpn*?fa: || 

sir^r xwl 1 

q»&4t qpmi*t g qrf^SRJT^I^d II 

xW TO*f *ra$ tffrqfoq sw i 

<fl?rw*re sraq swmn^g, ll 

W?R: SW&4I qi'«Tlfcqfagfa?T: I 

3rfSr&Tr%: swfcrt g^xf^r^a: || 


170 





«T5RTf3«reRirnT wwuHmT f4<«id it 

(ftnpjwsqlOu* q»R**fa^ u) 


*RT$ 5ft**Firfa i 

qi*w4 JlRTf^ || 


sri^: sfWlcj; | 

^ fw: trS *nwnt ii 

u) 


q$j i 

«nJr g II 

FTT5T*h$05« wfr I 

«HHtar«rffrcT n 

^ *w»w f 5W i 

5^r^r5: vfa g^Kww ^sg n 

(a*i*fiKoiin^r <^ric*w% ii) 


^rmui^c i^ 

«w arapr fi^oi <m: I 

gffere *raqR g $fo?i ll 


171 





mi qm^^r 3 q^sqterer: n 
qi%of Trg qft qq $«urwt q^ i 
srai^wsTK flqfaropjfap^ II 
qqiaquifa ^%5T*q fa&qcT: | 
sqRfaR Jn***rrcrftfl3m n 
&ms 3 ^ i 

3srrs»srr;T5rr|SRTr n 

qrl^giTrTr «ft%^rwqr^r i 
f^rrwrf ntokrcg qrff fra! II 

^qft q?rc^f <& ffaqiS srqiqfa: i 
5T«rrt qSftreqteq ii 

^3^>T ^3^ Sq?VRT*/^l^ I 
gtffew 'qrsRRr =q qR^Mrcr: q> ii 

^q^qt <jq?^ tr ?<rt qntaft *rt3. i 
^TRTP^Rflfr: qqtffifc qsnqfa: II 

JTFT^r \i\ ^FT | 

qf§Rrftg*qt n 


172 



HfiWlwtSJuilPl I 


•Tri%?ft*n s 5T 3lS «T W^PtRR^O 

wroq*! *nmt W** <ft qft li 

Rw«h<l5onq: I 

sfrer q^ ii 


WI^5W«JrTW %q: I 

arrf^TTqrftqt ft# ^wr^i*q?^ n 


q^ 5^ #: 1 

«ref^tRr#R5rr%«q^w?q: 11 


mqq%q qrawFq^qqr. 1 


*F*FTFrc^^Trw^ qRctfe«mi: 1 
qq q^Tior^^ li 

(%q|^sBqsqj% 11) 



1 


foeq. ‘qg&srtSrq qq*hqq*Ts^ 11 


swjjgqt ^q: ^nqqf?q; qqftRta: 1 


*1 ‘ 5iwf|tf Jrn%*ftqFq ^gtqjq fafa t n5T»cFq 

qqqq 5 ^ ' qq|*h^ssqmrs4 qqqra: %qrqlqqq ’ q# 

* ‘ qq^kqqftq ’ qreKrcq 1 


178 






qr stot: iwspft: i 
# fdfifad ^TT *TR fofrcwr feqg l| 

d^qq^THTW sfftsft || 

3rKT *rgd! I 

^t^T¥rit|chn ij i itaiTOnft II 


^m+H«i;jo: Sdld: Rii'Id^JdlF^ld: I 
q$d*lf-i|SMJ PcTPRli dddlft *n II 

rfaftoqftdt f^g^r zzmi I 
^ 5# HTRTqTrTTir q#Td*l. I 


ff^TfSPTPJfa s>l«|u|+ifa 


f|#gi3 JRTO d I 

dteffog^ffad «tq«fid>d^q^vn || 


« t h*t u 'S<!d8imK*hl I 

dro^l s^f wdt df^rd^r n 


<\ ‘ ?ddrPr d ’ tfd i 


174 




*if^qKfo 4 l(^qfq<ii*h<it ?)^n^T g q g q ng^ i 
TO^qfofrT q*TTcT 5 WT qui^wf&ra^ II 



inatqq^ $m 5 && gft a s qr: 1 1 
S.K?iif«RwK^ m ^rf^rfqj: n 
qsrfaiigat qrfo; 1 

(yg<«w^q;iim areqarcrewqs^ 11) 


3 t*t q^nopjjRg ^$pjt 1 

gfaw « g ^Rpjt 11 

ar^ wf g q^?T5^ mi ll 


q*g qft rr«rr q^ 1 
^rsR^Ksgrfi u 


qqT^qWt^ ^qr*q Rtfq?i: 1 
m ^rq^jfrr ^ m^nf^f(*THrft?)sgcrr 11 
g^q® g ^ ^0^^^ 1 
qi*^tt#5r ^*^nT<«w^r 11 


f%fcr qrr^FcT^ 1 


176 





qrtafagjTr l 

fwrwri »frCmfa ^*5% it 

qjR^ffot <Tq JTsnqf^: | 
sT3Rr^*T cT«n 11 
qjE§q qrg^qt sr^RKujgjSjci*^ i 
HF rot ^q*q qi%6t u 


sr«Tt«f qrfJRftqpd $re 


3v*rt(h?) g qqt^ g-fostqqr ?g<ni. I 
?qRqotR*rrgfF q> ^ u 

f^oq^qtairq: g^^tfTstfq § | 

sw qsrr^g^^ u 

ars^%?rf%^r)?R^q^rqoTr5q: i 
qmlte *pqqf qrcR^r^qcn: ll 
rTTR^frfKwftqr sqqTsrf%Rg?n: i 
^^qq*rftqi«tefteq qfiftffcsmr: u 

(%5<rcc% siiRsm^ ii) 


^Fqr^3rcRti%^t«f srqqqtqqg. i 
=qq§<q =q fR^q^forg. II 


176 





'r i 

qrgft: $053 <mt ?rcg«R^ ii 

ft ^ ^ sto g fferaj 

q*t qm^ g ll 

^fFT zxsfr g ^qffoq g *qq^ l 
qrcq^ qift w faRjjrcra a q? 11 
<ftrft:qtoRqi ('tow) *r «ftsrerira*iNnH. 
fcqpi flfoi =q « 4 wPFj^n^ ll 
4 ^«*KHt fq'fcqqq 1 

^rcqrqrqqfq % 05*133* 11 

qr qqftr qr q^q'qr %K5faqi* 1 
straw rItr q*q qrgsql 1 ^* 11 

qr«r ^F^FTiq qqftf&r* 1 
f^sf^qsq qrft OTftastoqi* 11 
gflwta$?r qr «rttrq^tofi* 1 
qRiqrefo? rTW =qcWt^Tirrqi 11 

VO 

arfjRqr#^ rRk ?rcqi$ ter l 
srwqr«r *m ll 
TOwyifl qrg I 

qrlwq^qqif %fr ^ fr^r m 11 


SB 


177 





«Mtaron?iRTr || 

fa»to$afacT i 

%*7 || 


sffacri srca% ferem ii 


srfperare* $<*§ 5 *?t3$st ^rrRoH. i 
f%fqg,^ol^ II 

R“j^ *RP**rn=r srww«r ^ I 
^g$3r(§&) ^srwrfora. II 


g 3J3Rf!2«5cr^ I 

*i«T^sesrcrei ^ ?tr^ 5jwo^^ u 
^ g t rerrc>r i 



5TSTM tmtfjpR. II 


<$ t^rergRsg^^r *tR?t 1 

(3#*fiKOTI*Fl V*hl<J3N^ II) 


^^S^JTT | 

^Rp>i gf^Tcr *> <7i^ erwqR: g n 
i * wferV firfar maiTKH, i 


178 



Srfcf*TT^PJTrf*r I 


for ! 35^ «ff II 

cWRRWEfl^ f^FTt^f *FTR1»0 I 

qsjqteqrqfsr qr q?r afa^Siirt u 
q<Kre rg E r qv?q^[ ^rwh i 

II 

qi^r qm qqs^qqnRg, n 
q^^rasl^q i 

q%w^ g qrcs# ?»i ^ n 
qrciq§s*igf& srswi g ^fcrrR. i 
qrsnpqftret qifa q^fasiq^F^g. II 

^T^R'TO^tR *tRPT ^tR^RRR, | 

qmr^ i(f O 1 ^ ^T qi ffim'. n 

gfera qrq qraq^: g ffera^ I 
3^ ^\^m swiRa^ n 

i ‘ qro^'Rawiwi i mti 

qiWH>tfldi$3H i ’ qrs re rc q , i 



179 




aflW ig qmift i 


^r^ff g «rt?^ i 

! argwrBqa% 11) 

f^sjrfcigi g TOOTifNaPt i 
^gt^rf%r^^ 3rero$awg«: n 

sn*w gjfr | 
g^<n%nrew*g ii 

3TFT WM rT I 

NO <1 

*r f^rt fsrqejl err qtrorsffjpreg «tt n 
?Riwnn^®iSior 5nfirg?rcpi ^ i 
cretar stf'r w^wojif^graL II 
3t*t ^i%ot ^Ig^r err i 

*n gqrestd* gfoir^J I 

f«w: sfifwjf II 

fr ^ re r i *nft^mpa^ g i 

(^TOJrftwr^ II) 

nqr^sqqt r 

3wl f^r «srr ^it«ww<l u 


180 



*FT qcgwgrK fqqisHH . i 

(giftqr»ft ti) 

arfSnir sfog qrq qwqrg 3 i 

fqw *m£\^ 3 w?^t «rrqq»rfaq. n 
g*q g qq^org^g^ i 

q»ftBif®mfau? q^q qqrsprrfogg. li 
qresr qrfa qq^*£ i 

q<^ws«n%q &% m 

qrdm^aarH «n g csfergg. i 

gift qs3^r(q>§f^r?)3srcg: li 
w ^qr^rcrg i 

qwqi^ i qi g%»T «n f%$rqg: n 
§T$qg g%or qpt qmqig § frf^gg. I 
^q^s qf§r$t owsw q^qqg. ii 

(f$l<?M<c% II) 

1%rgi yw ssgf«qgg. i 
f^rq %q ^rjr^sggg^ II 

°\ 

<vm gi%*t qi% cwtohI^rp^ ii 


181 





qR5# sr^rg g gf«*n^ II 


5rrwr>r g gi«frfl^6frai: 1 


irra> fag?rft 11 

(^4ll<U||J|% 



ID 


^l^rt r?jt 11 


583^ IR ^cqr qiJTfR^^^TR. 1 

qr? sm^r g 1 1 


qRqreW g %q g q>rc^ 1 
?qmi ftg^rt %*fff 
^rqesqferriftf^fTrf^ 1 




•ftcrq^rf fsH^ni qrf^rr^iwjrel I 

(stern'll 11) 


sRiictwqq^qrfir f^rrq^'iRR. 1 
=*rg$pr =q &i§<sqR(5R^(qf ?) II 


183 





fftg? »Tf^ft %q ifNsofiit^ it 
qrcns qro?# =q «n% jfttrcwTg^ < 

SW?!^ g Wtt ®I^?T esqqR^j^ l| 
qfrearer q^rvfifl qsi^sf^qRr^. i 
q?r^r^Tfq«r »ftftqr^r u 
sqmTpfpq^ | 

q# «TFcen qfrlHi STf^TW: I 

(^TK'hRWIFFl II) 


183 









f) || 

SPTJT ^ JTOF? ^ W 5Tfo I 

^rjF ^eeWriT^S^cT II 

^TSjrui^} =*r i 

^NTgjr(3fr3T9?: ?) ^ *n*rc?r#5^ gsro^g u 



jiMxi^ch^i gxt; ^rqqfq^f^rfg. i 

*fn*4 g^r: uf^Htf^rg. u 
saalSr*: *n*rf *r%=g*rr ctr!N?t: i 

(3raWlfa*>l»li* f5^cqiffctWl2% u) 


187 



srfimroprrft i 


srerer 

g^HHcftecfot «h>ii«3.U'S^n^dH v I 
'HIH^IlPqcT 

g^Ufjjjfor qt JT5RT^r%q^ II 

(JTRtfft II) 


fen«iivi: I 

&IWcyWlwU«ll*Mld=h*lu| 3 I 



: JRStf&rr: II 


^rfo^forr: i 




I 

(frwjv-pifcft II) 


f^lR: I 

srzr^it^faT: i 

||) 


^R%rfw^rs^qrw^retr^?i?qrf^r: i 

qsag^sqRRnfarR 3^4 Mcwrenr: II 

(ffa WRTT*T% II) 


166 




'flcFTft'Tsftasl^ I 

tngfeij ^ «n5rs«tRi^r ct«tt ti 

ii) 



f^rq^fafOTCqTfar: | 
m*if ^3 tTP rasra . 11 

(ffa ^RTJTRT^ ||) 


3T^fk: I 

^^u^cin/o^n^ || 

4r q# qtf&jsr =q it% si%q?m§q;r^ n 


3TatfT3«TOf*m. i 
ftffrej ftsf^rfej *rcnf$fl$terc^ II 


?T8cPfi: gflq»$N qi^qtt^r ^t l 

fttaw ^ II 

qrar® ^ #sqt qrer ^ i 
*!N*«i3 (I 


189 



suftww i f ft I 


q*g: «§nfl l 

=qcqift 5^13 qfts ^ it 

( ^ qqoy ^ ) 



I 


■« q§ 4 ft sflw^W^w: qmi^ffd ftftr 11 

(%> qn^rr*^ It) 


<f1+feq: I 

^ttjfsrsr: ^r ^rirrqsftcta^ 1 
wtwfiq 11 

STJR^hr; eptf ftftq §|pTrftpfi^ 1 
q^iwri II 


f^Sti^STTf^OT^ 1 


(^qqo^r II) 


*tt qr^^qf 11 

(qft <hK«im*t 11) 

H^5n?n 1 

gsr^iwt & siwwi^n^. 1 
qraPTR3?r ^4iV$ptNtaTC3. II 


.190 



^u«^|u<mc4|tcT^ i 

(^RB^) 

*^r4< r fW > fe»WW» »l ^ l ^efRI^RSPTOIlf: I 

g^swTTOi^tsl^sn^s^ *rt s ^H i h . it 

(tfr ^Roiin% ii) 

*I^T: i 

qsff*ijt =5*3%^ %#aferf*r§5Pi. i 
=qg*rc4 'qgsfr^ft ^[os% \\ 

?r^T%qrc: ft *ngtq s^rarpn*. i 
^Jpfirf&Hnwi. II 
=qntf gftqqfar ■w i 

tq gsqttqtftffcT**. u 

«nr4 ?l«q<5i ** ^ sf%ot | 

$sqnf*iqi«ii ^ «R3«rra% II 

fpfM 3 qrctag shstot | 

'qg’Nt f^qf ^ ^W^Ry's^i^ ii 

^HridA^flufl irssraamt w^iwih, i 
%q®|^rt m*$$t 5f3T || 


191 





<r *rm% n 

%?RRT% 3rKt ttcMMIHUtid f^TcTPJ. I 

•^j[ra»rtefN»Rif ^iwFfh^K^m . II 

*Krc$^ta<lTfcr srroefaf ^ST 81 ^ I 

^TT: I 

^§5n%^5rr«r Mtaw$d*ifad r: i 
gsqvft: JT^^err: II 
tfqr^rarcquw^ q^rflsfaft f&m: i 
fl^wrogw: trig^fee^rrs n 
wra t>«oT qre% | 

*TfF^W^T^ 5F^T sft^l^T: || 

^TT5ft frsrel tfWT I 

f%rr ^r ^r^rr: (?) to: m 

9T3T: I 

era srerarfa 9TS$J'S*l«*>lP*dl^ I 
er^rami w% ?i^t«tt^t^ II 





ms gs I 
wERjjnwt *& a*n qft *Rug% i) 
5rSr5ft^reT5( ?r^:^ 1 
iRj ^ qft?T wt 5rl%W^f^T: II 


wtr; 1 

#ffR: WI5?^ I 
*Ri ^ 5^ <R<ft ^ t| 
*8WTCt qft ?sRfff =tr%tT% 1 

qgfost w ^ 4g^f <r&ft ^ 11 


<R$ WTR% 5RHffFfg% fs# I 
9l%Wr#TfrI f# «T3R|c?T3[f II 

(fotrerisnir 11) 
fom tftatgrrjfret 

5f^T iRPTO qi%3TR | 





rra^wi^: qftia 11 

sreno^q^ qsnosq'sqfwr 

Ir 3W3(i to qfcpijff?^ 1 

qroftfrl *?TRT ?tR^: I ^T- 

qtfrsfo qfos;: I 

(sftcmftwt II) 


u 


193 



5?f^TT^r°Tn% 


^ qrRr i 

^ijSTiejqpjJisj qsNfaiq^: 5^ II 

at*rc qfttf ?ntsff ^ i 

STfa q*gqi qfo ^rsnsrcq^Rrq. || 
fsMraj: | 

IWrreiRM: «srjf ^ I 

S9 

^ iremsji fc«rcq*iB% II 
qrfrft mj} cl4»ff | 
qojrqjqr^ %fcf qrMftqweqi II 

fcra: i 

^ qrq istfpj^ *kr!H 1 
wfsrrsiwr^i qrc*F£%for: n 
«*3(wg: ?)%j =q STDJRT^f^f rfcT: | 

q*$ qfttf qri qmqff[B’]%s$q^ n 
^%qq^rq (^q^t Irq ?) qrrc?* 

5*: I 

^r^qt §iR %q ^ sjsqpni. i 
qwffej^rrfo ll 

qft^T #rt srfifc q^t rr^nff sreq; i 
qiji* qftqjf %frr qmfsqfftqftqr g II 


191 





i 

«4 %q #g<t tofI^to ii 

yudmi^frif frSrff jfifiteqjt q*J: | 
q^j qfttf %q *iWftrai®ft II 

5*n*rc>: I 

5q**#sfa ZS&i TO I 

^r^if^ncq ^ ft 11 

>9 

^r^rjfqi^nSt q»#K i 

qqr qf|?r %q qR>qrftqtfre% u 

i 

ft snt ^ii srrqfa i 

m =q =qrq wifs% II 
q^r q^ wf qfitf wg: | 

3<pif qiRtcqm qftssTO# n 
SRI^T: | 

3rq*<Tt ^frs^qf *rq>pd i 
^rftsqt WF^m^ II 

TSraffiTO qjqi^ 5lfrR 5 t3*H I 


195 



sflwrwj°nf% i 


ermcri^ I 

>a 

^pif^TSR^WHeilWt i^SfiJTT^ || 

*n% &£ Tract qra qff?r ^sp*. i 
go2igrrc?T«rr«T siT^5i«#inf^T: n 
9T^r^n^%t«Ti ^rt: i 

5*«? STf^iJ 5*T*3RR«? || 

W STJtRT ^SRT^^TTTn^RT: I 

(frepfifontr li) 

^3^5RT: I 

EFTTr^rf^t %<r 5Rnp#^q; i 
s^TST^fat ^3^4 JTFT^J^cT^ 1 1 
f^pwrrer ^ ^^r*. i 

3tw gjfS^t srr^r 3feTg3i*fiaFJ: li 


fa»<u(n£: | 

gRT^rw^Tts^t f%*on«ff%^rc: II 

*T^I7?T || 

^3# trffcsf N^fltrai I 
«rg: ?r *ls stofiro fasra g§: li 

(wm*$ 11 ) 


196 



sfo rre d T u i ft i 

I 


ft&iwNraw. 


arJRW fapfa Q8R: sfiefra ^ ^ I 
<*TOsr % ?wr^ a 


(f^roT^ ||) 


eR%?remr | 

<W%*#sf *fta°s** %*#s?r: || 


srefttpra tier i 

^^rfafgf^rotcror || 

jfti? 'far $«jt =? i 
ftraiiFra^T stmf&Wrc^ u 


^swfsspii ^q^Rnr^?n: i 



: II 


(^Roim =^w% ii) 


3T5RT: I 

^fa^f^TRiR; 3)<ueMfrilPiM : || 


197 





faqq^R: 5TFcT%^q: qjraf&rq: I 
WWB *T|fr(^ II 

I 

%q qfR^ | 

^rwRrq^ n) 


^STVPTf^T^: I 

frwJir^g^T^ 3r2w^fl[%?r: || 
5R^niTciw^%R qqfcqrfa *nr£qq: i 
^f%otfrrc4r%R qr%q^*nrftft u 


g ^rRPMi^nig^ I 
tfurspRwriM' sra'fa'oqrtg qp?q^ II 

erw faqfejf^q qr^qfcnWl iMt n 


9PM ^ '&*% ^t«rr%qiteiTrr^mt l 
9PM f^ff sqjTreqtfffcrer^ || 

<rcq ^s«rt^ =q srerfa®^ ^ ir^r | 
5«jT«rn7f^rm qr f^q: u 


^rftenqgrRr m srafosgjftrqr *qn: l 
jSd&qr: qfaqrcqi qr qftqncrfa^gsr: II 


198 





*tt wqsftqt^ fr«r^ it 
<** ^effORT^B l 





^FT: I 

*j$qt tqq^rc;: q*: i 

cmltRorqfta: II 



^q^rerqrgrK: q*nft£iqft f^r: n 
sftara ^qqrifqi^ 5im^qq*Tbq^ i 


f^ratrnr: i 

%qlrR: ^rqtfr^jg^rf^Rf^RT: | 


SEl&aUKBBitai^Elt5»BEi5E3 



qstfiSiqftsra 



i 


199 


sftliiiwyuiiA i 



qwftsrcftfcm: II 

I 

<^PT^3^5^NnPT?r*T^r?T: | 
eftnq^ftr^FciT q^rospr: || 



i^Sfc: I 

WSTCTStf ff^fs^RT: | 



ii) 


«i<& 8 *k i 

qrqt Tff^r *T^q> l&'. qgqfifo: I 
3* &TR JJ^q^T^Tf%RT: II 





200 


( R «3 »^fe ft »D 



5Hct*rres§t u iiPi i 



I 





srswfrarenftor: | 
swwilcl IKf'5'SJ PTO^rrr: II 


IrRejftaTCT ?*t I 

5T# *r* =* f^T JTt^ft^l%*T^ || 


f^s4 sfte *r^r<Rt g «r^ i 


^re^rfefcrtr# ^ II 

(a^NiKon^ 



ID 


?rt: | 

^r^g^T^rr^w^wiTiJ^T: i 



: II 




vfttr: I 

^PTf^JrKt 5q^?K(grf^ET; ?)*TOW II 

anrq to %5r qrer =*r «rrc^ i 


86 


201 





i 

*PT: | 

*WJsR§3TOrF^t : 3RTTrfCTf^T: I 

ewrsn^faci: ^qrensrft *T«T: I 

i ^I?witoI II) 


309 









q»np?r: i 

are f^oi 3 1 

g^RJlTTl^P fsqrf^PTcT: II 

ft>pr 3T ^§f^T ^Tigf^T^ 1 

jn-fosrrai ^ qrcr srcnfcnc n 

*t^t qm 3 ffc# ^ ^rs#r *§*$£ ct^rr 1 
tjg^og- ^s %sr Hig^rpir^s^JC 11 

sm <3$ qr%£f%orqHr% 1 
%h^ =ar 3:^2 ll 

^3§%sh 4 5T%^r%4r 3 q>*s;qg .(4 ?) 1 
f j =ar qm^f 4 P^ II 

jpfK qfa qrfrfitf^R?^ l 
«T^igr 4 3 II 

(«rg^pr% ^^taqssroqst ||) 

1 ; 3^rra?n%stcq4; 1 x ‘ srf% ^ ?gsi =q ^ srer 
srarf^rg’ 5% qiai^uni \ ‘tng^nf^fttmn’ 



SlftHT3$JwilA I 


{TO ^ | 

*rmt *w err *t«r cftt: || 

^’na ^ot 5rts*RT I 

erosw ^i %reT**wnr sit || 
q^nrft: i 

q^TF#d% efffa JT^nsTTfrfiSSM II 
ttshtput^ ^r«r »it* ^r I 
JTrcnsn^tfRt ^r go^rarq- li 


gRTCF^T |HW?n5R5y^q^i%ci: | 


^trt q^rl4 f^nd fg^rr: 1 | 
ft^WWFWWW: %«re*i eti dgT^T: ii 


TF5T^tot(r ?>S%T^T ^f II 


'^RTff^^FrT^f^rS^T^ri^T: | 
Rf^lTfiH|^ft«<|<T??IB^J?Tn%?l! II 
n 8«hi**rftol%srwri ?rprt: i 


: snsri^^JTr m n 


yijjThHU'SMltr^ JTRiRltr^ flffed: | 
#t*T: qf^*TR4r eiT *T || 


206 





qftqRR^rfi: wet q srap. i 
q$M asrtM* ffan^sr :i 


Wr: foqrcl tMflq^ qrqqrfaq: i 
^ =qq£qi: ii 


q^mq«3rKi: *q|f%2sqfMT: i 
^^OTqfqqii ftjpi «rrmswr: || 


tftasqrcg5n ? qr qi qi&srrcg qr mv. i 
srjjft 3;^ %q Mr Mgqqr n 

qqqqifeft ^tfctt 3 ;qiMq: i 

°\ 

qwp^nrfcqffrsr q;#%qr 3^: 11 


*qr£f 

^ qr ^qifw $m$#3zrlMr; 11 


qsrqqjVRrei? ^rr^TEI I 

teir qr qpqf^qjqqqqjr: 11 

<^t qi qftrcwror: qRTPjqrftqM: 1 
rsRMiB'fts qi qgj qroat rR 3 . 11 

%qq *rrg wfte qq;M^ 1 
qfe'fte =q qrqfaprfarci^ qr 11 

1 ' qqsq^ft ^pqt =q ’ qisreraq, 1 


207 



afajrresrorrft i 


srfotfs (3?) q&w: I 

5R^ sit ^mTfTn^Hi wrr^ II 

?wral srcr? i|g^ «rr =«r^ I 
« 3 irls^ q^gsrftwra# 11 
^TRl 4 r err facTf^lt *r«r^ 1 

5 Frneqfrii*wrt fr srcqi 11 

j*5TT% %?^TT | 

«wt 5r?rq% r ^=ri g qr 11 
^TT^T^IWr *FTR ^ R I 

<TR fgRRTTW: ! || 

ftfRqfaqRejOTfftt: I 
Sff&TTOir JTtrR frOTFT g?FT 3 II 

qiRiftq fl^r iT^srctfT^rri&Tg^ i 
&rr«t fi^pro gssmtgg^: II 

sn^ft qfcrsRrr JTrc&nftisft u 



jM^sfWTsqqrftr: qjarrfsrdsqr: II 


WRtsq- *PK««"g: q$*s i 


.^rsfi^rai qjomr: q^rftosgqni 


206 





*r «rr u 

*i 4 *^<hq T g^t qT ^frqH$eeFTS«i% i 

ft^r fitg^ ^t=% qqfcqssqraS u 
y^iH^P r^r *fsqsrmr3fr ^qqf^Rt | 
jftfteSFrag#: q^q^^ f$iqiq% n 
ji%/cT »T 3 rq#fa ^f^tt ®ri% ?)^g^ I 

fc«f ^cPJTgqj wi c *t: g* qr qrftsfa qr u 


qsRqsr 


ttirct: i 


q^qn^nsq^fq ? 1 ]oit qr i^fira^RT : u 

^rqrfrR«ir*TqwT%WT^RRwq^a:: 1 
fl^d'h^qq wpqt *r^qrfr% 11 
fTR i *q<^qiqT^ qR^^qsnr: 1 
qj^q^di^dl ^rqqqwf^qs 11 
srfrk =q g*F? ^IT <qqf qrwr^ q^ 1 
q^r qrr§^ qqr 11 


qgj =q «r 3 r 
<ilM«ftfil *TTC 


q*? q?^ 1 


*nqr^ wrq^ftqirsq nrarci^ =q ftra^r 1 
^q q^rf^vr: reFgfS fawmqH+tefl : II 


87 


209 


h(?WI«WW||A 


qpra qr i 

(SW+lft+Hfo 



II) 


3T*TraWiWFTlfo **nql i 

tiwta* *rorcFr si ifstr^ ! ll 

5lf m ^JTIT^TWT^ I 
?Tfft ^TJf JpFMT ftHTOWn II 
ciq: ^f cicg^rr qrlcft qqt^ i 
«rrqlrwfq(: ?) <T3r ttesrrf&rr *ft: ii 

qft*g sqm faqq r ^ g i 

?TR ^rfl qfif&T: II 

qatifofiiqf PTq*(*eFqqrcT<i;?) qwprcc«rfWfq?r | 

^ q>Tf^rcg srrettaf ft %if^ vrtg;?) 1 1 

HTCH^ cT^JRl^ i 

ftrerwwrVr ?rq?ir^r ii 

qr i 

fopr cro^r g ^ 5rfrR <rarq* u 


i errcrerbtft qcrqJFrR '^ftewcwiqiii 
i qn ffifrarcg *rsptt ftcr?^^’ *1% t * 3 ‘ f*«ft- 

TT# <TT: ?r% ’ II 


210 







amq qqq ^ qgqrfftfr *qqq> I 
^sfff^R^W g qrar q>q qqieq»q. II 


BTTCR WIJRi qifa qjq % f^frq q*n l 
sqiqq flgq irfek *qrqq; *qTqg§qq. II 


*TR*TBg% wnrsr qRqrcq* I 


qrMg'qq^rar qqtq^qr^faqq. i 
«^® 8 d u W 3 ^ gqf%q i%qiqq: u 


R^n^rr q qf%!t u^qrqRr^r q«n i 
qqfe^rc;qg% f£g% qqrerRqJ II 

(gsr^pri* qg^qrRjjrqqq;^ u) 


qg§q feqrf q strt Rrf&qs; *qqq. I 
ftgqs* -q^tf^f^rseq^T: gq: || 

feqqTjq: qsq Srcr q?tqr 558 jFT JS 3 I 
qsa^sRq qrfensrqq g qui 
qqpfSR qqf(r)q« qi qo^q qriSspsqiq. I 
qrtrfcqqqi; qrfa sritfcfiqpiq q u 
qgfrqwH^rq qq*Tfq;q<rqqq. i 
erqq q?q q«nqgqT®iq»qo«f q. ll 


211 



qifSq^raqifocPU 
qsrMtfaq*?: *n%ff$3S3?i^ || 

^fls*R =q 5 TI% =q $?fS =Wttr^FRL I 

^iRr qra^s qstrq: qntqsm g qril 
qqrra; fqfqq/^-qFqfq^zqqrgqq. 1 
qsg^r fwt qjf srlrfc ?]%qqrf ^2 11 
■qrejwf =q jq $5 qmqrfotj 1 
^gqrf qqf q«& qqtflqsreRRq: 11 

=qrq ffcqrgqqq *m 1 
ftqg^rfeKfo ?)q 3 ^ cralR q^Fisq. II 
q^r srfoq* ^f« 3 T 3 f tq n^roqq. 1 
qft qw qg: %j qqi ^ qt gq: 11 
tffrfc qpq q *qg =q ^ qrer srarftq^ 1 
qfasfa *q ?if % q^fj qq: 11 
qg£°£ 5® %q ^fqqq^rgq ! 1 
sifrR q g?# ^ qqi qref qqmg 11 
w* qgctsr %qqpf q*q g qri 
srfife ’sit «q^r qqj jqfj jtrr 0 ^ 11 
qwrqgq'r’q sf*tf$q g qr 1 
qw q ^ q qrcrrftf mu. 11 


21a 





^ ^ qfr ^ i 

5TfrR xrfofa 5R frft^TRf<T5fiI§3R II 

^ qrer ^ 5R^ | 

^TR «pjg^ *TRT Srft<T«R II 

1J$ fa^TR | 

$f*TPT sr^rrej n 

QTRR RR^fi ®Trfa «TR^(«TR^?) R?R I 

3TRR %3^T StrR g =erg§3R II 

^rs^ri q^if «TR(qR?)^FR i 
qfrT *Tl*T ^ *TR ^ %t g fefrtT g^: II 
3TRR RR RR?R RrT%^FR I 

«TI(R?)^ iTRM: RTvTTiKTfcfR cRf II 

?rrt^ Rrag§^R I 

rlHR 5I^T^5R4 RP^rfMt II 
«TT *rT3ot ^T 5*TR5pjR«irfa 3T I 

qrow m jr-crs-^t r ii 

n^RRR^ 5T[f^ 5T5R^^reffd g «TT 1 

srfrR fonfa 35 &q Rqsftci g^ta^R n 

5R(^T?;^RgrR qT^jgWg^R I 

W%T ^RT g *r II 


213 



srfcWP 5 sn»nf 3 r i 


5 fr»T 5 TTff I 

q^eroragqq. n 

srf^sqgci qrfa ?T^tqi?rf|rT 3 qr i 
5 TftK faqrfa q&sq qTqqt || 

<£«*J 1 *$qq 3 )rq ^ ^frq> gqq 1 I 
^sofrsxT qrc(qreq qiiqffqiq. 11 

/t3»RT qr ?cRFct qr q 1 

»TKnfc 5 rm%JT ^ ^ 11 

q^M^qnrf^ qaft ^rqq^trqrqqq. 1 
ferir t qsqqrs 5 qmrc 3 f %qq. II 

^ ?T 5 q^d I 

^qlrqrsrffi qsfr *?k q^forqnTqq, 11 

i$qq t qreqrc: 3 zwui 3 g;%cT**. i 

3 tq^ ^q^T =q qp^ ST^f^cT^ II 

(fqnccf?3n»T^ =q3/^r(%qqq3% (|) 

qog*q ^q q^q^qi^q. I 
qqoiiftcq^fiVi qr^jqoT^qq: 11 

1 

wtffa %3% qrft qwrct fa&tr *rer 1 
gsn^ ki^t qfffcr <§fe *gd gsn^ II 


314 



Mfti*ii«4<uiif£r i 


(l%?q^ qg flrc i q^ ii) 
*q>^: $qiw;q«iGhsrcr qff%g«r i 

(l^T^prwgqw i qt ^wimi^ ti) 

jpTHT5qujjT3 : qj^r%T is(U'S«hf^*Tqoi: | 

<jKPqW*: qqqf II 

5352^ ct*TT ETnjT ?T*q | 

qmqn ^ qrfrR: qfrc't ^ qpret: 11 

11) 

WKI«RHS^;(gCT? ?) ^iqjSTpSt ^I^f%VT: | 
%^OTJrf&r^ iflRRRT^: fsrq^R-: II 


qrfrta§ l%cJ*n*srsr^qrercrenft?r: 1 

sfer&rssf&at 11 

qmq>r ftf^qngfswlpft =w swn%r 1 
3ft s:R^^ii«qffg(t^3q5qTt% 11 

qvcffifcflg^ qRq*q^. 1 

^I%W^q(?fRTq: ?) WI^?tr85qi^W5^ : II 





II 


*T3?id^5i «rro?i5rf|^ifqf: (0 I 



216 





si^r^Wdd II) 

$l|rk*TT: I 

ft^sr qft w% sf&orst ^ I 
S^^rcfaRreifrEstf wfrfiwt *r% II 


fetfraqs^ ||) 


5T*T: | 

^ s re rc f aqga^ I 
5 ^rr$3«qw *®r I 


f^nT^i^f^HTjf gaR^rf^TH. li 
gHq r lrfcmsq^ | 

^Wr: || 

(sft?nqf^ ||) 
I 

q»R??T sronrat qwgwj |i * T 


qnsnqisftgwi' qjfenc^T^T’*- 

* ( ynwmwft flWfaqa& n) 


i r *mn^f w* sfr tftaft r fW i «TO i ‘qnr’ftnft nffwmng» « 


916 



sl%*TRnjr>ntSr i 


s sig*pT fift* * i 

fi^dm^rawf&T ^irT ^ II 

Jrwr^^T r^wi^ui 
q 5 M«in 4 !WA° 3 WH/D^flH. i 

PR^qfo? StrfFl.. II I 

(«ffcl<qft'lt II) 

Irn^: I 

qwpr wsm 

qmr| §r&aiqrwfaq^rf*%nqr: fifawr: i 
<dTj£n*w?fr5l fqfecr i q^sstfiftfisi^ fei^- 

(qrorccreiift fe^qqs^ II) 
fH^re ^if^Rq^nrqi^ i 
greWrogr r; ftajjpqig^qsm II 
sqmof ng %q 3$q?iqsftfore. i 
gi%ra «ro?5r ^q%?riqft *t3 ii 
wreqoh i 

(«fta?qftift n) 

i ’fir *n*ren.qrs: i h ‘ %g i ftt^m i <lHi< l 

fihn^s « ^3 sfar fqaarwrCT gur ’ qfa nmnqis: t 


as 


917 



gfl*naqm i p i i 


§**nnr: | 





?tKISfTPTfg«R 

gwRigqrwl wral tfrftraorreftwi. II 


flst^ I 

gjramsqreit II 

(^n^rforr^ /lsftaq2% II) 


irsi^r: I 

i^&fr ^ 

31^3$ ft%rT5Pfcq*R5*T ‘W I 


f^*r®r#ii*g?T ^RT^m 

f%fq JTinf^ JF3RT5?rft5%^ || 

(^r^T=% II) 


5iWTOcr:*i i 

srfrK wf enwd^r gyffs qi^it 

3^ 3(01 3<<S.h 34 thl^«h I 

tfcf 3[5wt^qiw 

?TI^: gp4 5R30T33 W3 II 

(Sjwwripp* fecftaqa^ u) 

V fTR^ ^JSf qmqKf^rerPTT, «TRTWI^ SRTC3 ** I 


218 





«TS] 3 ^ I 

3W?WF33tK *r3r It 

*rfadl«a gwr^rg^i^mc. i 
«su(- %s ^ ^ ^ ii 

SK^ff ?TWTTd (| IrF^Jt: i 

(sffacqf^ II) 


qjrf^n I 

q^$& 3 r&z ^ 

^wn^rerfo; ^*r«ra^ =«c I 

rTrofowpi *ngft: g^urre 
«RH^?re3^ 5Rlf%#iq •TRlfa II 

($*nwF*i»r*l ||) 

9tk% ^ fo^reifarn. i 

5Tf% ^«TT =WT^5fTT*rqq : *T% || 

>a 

*&£ sm* qrer ^ em =q qw#; i 
wkoi^i^ni. ii 

qi^mtftarer q»i$%q ftrctcqsrc. i 
i 

(«fl 5 Tcqf% 4 t II) 


219 





I 

qTqsfcftqqqjqf^qi HTPO | 
qeffai3 ftgrota'jdtai 
q*?qR?rqfo<T q ^4 n 

(Spmrwfo foftqqs% ||) 

^qjq^ ‘Ru^fisTfo^ i 
srfo ’qrcq? ^ ^ q^q*r% II 
qqrjpq M qjtfc ^4 qr^q^qq^ 1 
^qtf: 1 

(sflffiqftqt 11) 
q°pr: 1 

q^ fo^tqqftr srcftftqirq «fiq^rR^ 
qf «K ^qtlFq qf^qqfq^H K^TO* I 

5rfe qptf sqm sq^rcfq =q q?i ^i*rq ssq?^ 

=qrq q* *tcr qssqrqfa qc q&t&faftn. 11 

f^flqqs^ 11) 

qrfft qrt =q m 1 to qrerw^ <rcr 1 
§q$j =q qjj: 5Tf ^ q% & q^ H 

1 ‘ ?ftc[fqf 2 # 3 «c % ’r% qrsrcrrcqra: 1 * qRqft ^rs- 
qfcsqft ffeqnfqrql: to - - ??q^ 1 


320 



MfctHit&cguiiffi t 


spin ^ ftsnTT %5f ^w^f^w^4r: ii 


<*wj^ 


II 


IrE^tJ I 




diVfeiR: I 



*F3RT VRf%^F^n;OT^ II 


qwj4 ^pr4 *sJf| *lfrR qftcft II 

^ Wf$Z I 

<TR^fTft ¥T% qaTRT^. || 

**CT<fc | 

(sfac^fMt ||) 


1 , <I'»ii*hm« =q ?TwJTT %’fct *TR^TICT15: I 


231 


sr^rRj^rrf^r i 
| 

^55/^TTRf *T?t ^ I 

?q<Tg^^jre3rraR?$- 

^ftF'Pflt’ || 

mmm | 

^ form. i 

SR^T 5^T 

skrI sR^RRsmf&m II 




5*?rs^sejRrepwmfa w ftet ^rfoR^ 
m g«mi%?r 3m 1 

«^fefR3rK fog?rr =tor 

s^gR%K?i5*iH ifol ll 

*JI3Rl4t 1 

«wro«w > l&f3ra w q*^fofoiJft»g*ir ^ 1 
sn^RT^sf ipjffitsfa ll 

1 ' 3}f^¥JW&W1liiirct 

<T*Rl II 




fS«T<R WIWqRSTR 1 
foqfaqqR vfK 5fi^q TfasRR || 

^r^r^T i 
wrcftrTOqpjfh 5n%Rioft ■q 

SWWKtaHPRi ^iswrf 

jftwSRTR*fiT || 

(f^R^RR** i%#rq^ II) 

‘qg’fcr i%44 =q fern ftsRHlqft i 

?3j<m ; 5psR > i 

5&«ir^FR5?i: n 

<ttau|: I 

(sfiacirf^ft ll) 

faf^RT^: | 

f44 qsR^^RRqifrra. i 

^)qj^35RI^5R firlSsRICTJI 

^rf%jftqsq^fT5T rmn § f qifrf^ i 

q^5^#r ^4 stctt^t ii 

*1 ‘ qfaqw ’ fofcT qtJRTT^rS: I ^ 

3**’ tfcT qUOKMI* : I 


223 





*Ri%^*i?Tre*r ^(^r ?)8ftamrg^ i 
TTC^iWHrK S9fro*p*faraui 

fl^JOTtfgrK fWK ^T^Tc^JT^ | 

*T?I^^TJTrgrK g^njfrq^ || 

^g§5T qi^r ftfri «R5TER?TJTVr^ || 

5T^iffSf^T ^ | 

^frKSR^JTOq'EqaTJRt =q | 
r%^5^^%swwsTO qwfsr! ?TTOt ii 

®rpR r%T*sPn^r f^FR 

CTRT $4$£<l$*i =5T TO5 5T«7f 

«TrMtefaf&s 5ri%>*t wi gwifoi**. n 

*3j^#gi^tR*FRfa m ^roRF«tani. i 

S^part %cr*p=qf g eiw srfifrptfrcsragr 
qqfe^rcg ^s *tjr srg^rTf^ u 

($*rc<F5mT*r fe?ffaq2$ u) 


224 



nftwNiWfrnift i 

%q 3^j^»5rf$rgo«vRn || 

■«a&iiR*w«i 11 

otJt: i 



i 


f£g<3 ^TS^II ^ %T ^T i 

SWretPWT ^ ^l%Ot eft* || 

5^3 %3^ ^wrrsronr 5 qr*t% i 
srfitCfrfrift ^ffoicrc^qq^ 11 
jftWh 1 (?) 


^te*ta§?rcnwi: 1 

ff^r *wqr3 *r §f&a ^%ot q^ 11 
3WHfoiw4 1 

w ^ *ro% ^ 11 

q^3®qPlfl % ^R^ra^qqiq; 1 
qrs®^: 1 


S9 


226 



ultaiWiiA i 
wiHij'iiw: I 

qqnro fcpR i 

sfl'ril^'^T ^ *mi^s*i«>HH*i k I 

<rcg gj%«T ^ g fcnfapi. || 

qf*T iTlfaPKKWi* l 

qiSSPflJf: I 

35§35PRI: I 

=^5f fift* Tf ^IRSTftitf I 
qra q^r wt ^ w*rwFq% n 

\i *&ri *t9#pn*. i 
^rmr qraqrif g ^rr%?rsrftJF^ n 
wg* sft gs$<? I 
spnWr: i 

iWMiitjgaiw: l 
r %q aiRRjjht up. I 
5[8pTPf <JU^(JW q'SqR)<j^W'hH > II 

g f^m qr gifor g qr 1 



uftnwjiife i 


fcaisw ^ II 

WW^h I 


<ift*{yni'HI: I 
%qjq^T ^osqfZffa^ I 
^rftonpr % ^PR^wt || 

5$«r tqi^W^W || 
I 

(tflfflflNfr II) 



gfcgpft M gw i 
fang * *iw*n»^ ^ II 

^3^ %' m | 
3WI<I84°M flqfaapjJ^ II 

g£fl ^ ^U'SHJidl^lcsl I 

*fa*r g g^5 * m® i wWt n 


(gmwnmii qwnsS n) 


227 



sr£mres$p>m% i 


gftrar: I 

gftawpR sr^r ^rf$r«R g^r ! i 
srjnt ^f(4 ?) nGtet =q ?rt: ll 

qfaOTta: ^'qrejrsfsr: qireftg* I 
i^^qg a*r w&i *R«r4 ll 


gffo ^ ^PTpqr STttK: Jftffa I 
gsr«oqR *rr*ft<^ rn<w*rqqTwqr^ it 
^rW^crr^T gftq c hl<4j^ jfq: | 
/iftsr /tig** *tk gsro =q gqtsRg. n 


^%ot =er qw =q qjfe^rJT^ i 

ar^qr s^ifrregrR ^(|ot n 


q>*o^*r*h£ qrfa ^rereq^ita arr i 

v® S3 

SRfa^W&VhHISR *«TRq> g «TT | 
qr^rqsft^^grR qqrftsrqft /**t?r. II 


^ ^T gf^5Rq g^T f%i%ct 5U | 

( qr^5iR% It^Tfarems^ ll) 


228 



re iK*l : [ 






»f^0 i 

fa^Ruw ic rcft suisr^q^^^: n 

fa<Nm gtfro g ^«rrq^ n 
ari^^ir^r ^r^Fnf^T ^sfp*. i 

(f^tn^xR ||) 


f^TM <TCS giT sfi*<T% &IM«l|U||gn& 


•■fTWtefe^qro^T 



si«t*t^: $rg *iul3P<^ 

«frTf^#Rr *r3r || 


: | 

*^*is«nq5T b«ft afsooigwit'c 1 

^^T^Vt^iT crar n 

3<l^ *req^ BTSf^SJ ^13%-Jq^T^q-; | 
WI^TT%S«I ^wt BT ^$P^F5fts«T^T || 


231 



^Fl/^P3«P5i ^tfiRPTCR^RTi II 
^Rlfw^iw'^ ^g*rfo?r: i 
f^rf^rat *r qr iitI^t: II 

umThRf^n^nRl^K'h^i gir: i 
^g^raRi^: ^ftwrqiRT^: II 
^OTSIW^: ! I 

WRWR ^r$qf$R%5pf: II 
f^PRcTR^q^WTf »R^r =* i 
STPTfffafaJTr II 
m3WT^*?Rra SRTRrTR. I 
uiqrRwqt^ci: qftcr: qfarcgqf II 
wraf^rl <?«,-qu^«jD¥q qq =q i 

^tq^r |RB#q: qft*re*Tr: I 
q£r %rr usurer ; SRTafespTfrem II 

1 * are t & og gqft ’ TTgRRH I * ‘lT?TWr^WT faST ’ 

^ r i 

292 





^ftwratS^RJT ^n*WWR3 *ff H 
^t ?M($?)g *r a^tt yr: i 
^(% t f)4iR4teRT «rr || 

HTplf 5R^ fifotf | 

M0¥|^4[^¥[cqt<»(^r ?) %0t ^fiftiTiRi : ! \\ 
^r#: a^gqrf^ra: \ 

*r^5T ^?Rll§R ^Rn«l^«f *1 II 

^Wr^R^DTJTTSTT II 

^i^s^nTTHt ^rfewj^pjn;: n 


3^ e hHO®Q ^1*1 *IT3 ^tKI^N»T: II 
8Wf ^Tf^uil 4rej3.fi : | 

®(%wrcrr sfkrasrf^rer: u 


swrrfcra^STT: i 


«rawwu«ii«ii*MM n 

> ‘ Trsi^cRu i x ‘ jn^rmf^crs ’ sfa 

< iiaw<H. i 


80 


288 




srf^r^pnTft i 


srcrofsgfft m g 55 *fi$qjifo:(?) n 
qraqeqt «rr srfoqwsqqrrre: i 
flWiwjqRsg qm^g(?g ?) 3 rrgjT: II 

q*5^s*rqr s sqrforce^gq: i 
qiJta^efg^ssrfogztesjqr || 
5n^8JU|'H4^n«h*iy%^f^ 3T I 

5Tf^T || 

^ 3T •qu-s^l 5 ^ ^T^f^SRTiTlI^T: | 
arsrewrs^rwri qrercpsfo 3 II 
■qgfcreg *n qnSwfgiigqraqi: 1 
& qjfe^rffcftq^ n 

^<nqr($foq O^^^qi^rqi'i q^g^r m: 1 
siq> ^ =qgt^: q>sr 3 fcwr 11 

«pqt^ g ^ fomti qptfifcr: 1 
«rqqr =q^fq*g ^qr g sfeqr ^ qr 11 

m ?qr*M » W^J^rr 1 

qfcfteriwTT wn 'jqjfoftq^r q*r 11 

1 ‘ fqqn% ’ 1% qrsRRq 1 


234 





Rqqiqisi 3 *T3ftR*TrqR i 

q«R^swq^ u) 

^<TRfaqfRrft =^5TWm CR*t i 
3^ cm rTFT ftcfa WR (| 

3 55RT RRlI ^o^rfrtT: | 

JloRn^ot f^TcRI ?^Ti$RT3>R 3 II 

SF=ru^|^f%^jf^t qapjfSffwH5T: I 
5RO¥=RO¥: 5T*TH rRTt f%3RFrr=qO¥q;: II 

3c?IRT ^3=RD^3 ^=RO^«rg^cR: | 
qq % cpff^o^n: q^^TRg^cfr: || 

fTcrgmfaqst 3 irqu^RKg^lt 1 
fNrRrqo^TRT g %qrqmfaqR^ II 

sjq* ^rf^rq^r ft ftgsjotqr 3^r% 1 
qj^T 3 aftrqo^*qr(*qr?)i%q3T jt^fct^ 11 
qq [% ] q^Rt^ ^TO^RR | 

arreq^qrf^wr fl*?H n 

s q3^f qrfa ft%q fag^ 3 *r l 

tffa 3RTRIRI3 tK R^rVRCll^cT*!. 11 


235 



5TRT^£(?) qRT % <RS ?WT I 

f^r qft H 

gaRS’M'Irr ■q ?wr i 

WRi , ^RR STIrR SpfrKf^f^n ?RT: II 

ii) 


■sru^rci *rK%?rfn*ra frsR: i 



: <=h - o r |^ o gg ; || 


vjrT^q^T^ SJSPSRW^gRr: I 

ST II 



I 


Wisngfci n 


(g^RWRTl flqlmzd II) 


&i«t«fTi»i: | 

qsnrfa ftreurKHt nfagt i 

gMSWI 8ir^*TT *N*TR3ISCT gT wtHItaMl: II 

%4t nr g^trernfafarnr ^rs«mi i 
ftpnrfitaprfan sfrpxrt m an i| 

?tat nfigft g^r n f^fgRT i 

^STCM «RIJf ^ WFR ^ II 


a36 





ni*nCf qr gHftmiwlsfo *r i 
^ 3rqq% qrft q$t qr jr^ ii 

WT% 5 «T 5 | ^ q&q FtSWRFT qfa^ I 

^qreqRrwisrft qq qjdqqqf^ u 

qftqnEPiftq wpqiq qqftrfaq: i 
rftisqrct sfo q#qrRDiqif^3 n 

qRqrcf^iq q?qrf£qq <qjff*t«i% | 
gq$ ftq&* qr qftqr qr frqtq g 11 

sq^q^rf^q qr 3 qi i 

f^qrf^^R ftnsrtterRq^ft: li 

tpj rT«TI q|$ ^qq qfoq § qr | 
q^f^wqmra qzrftqftqjflqqq, 11 

feff %rrfcqRfqcqr qftqi q^iqqi 
qpiqrair^n qi^sq *qrc fl^qr: ! u 

3?ritft$ft %;iqg?ii^q qrrcSrg. i 
arrcflq wrqq* qrfa qrsqr^q qi u 

9 tw^ wrq% m qqrRr^qq g qr i 
aiwra^teiigqq qr fofiqqT^ ll 
1 ‘ cRTRqre^’^r qrcRrcq, r 


237 


err^I^P*TRf^TRRR cf^ssirtct^ II 
JTfcT^ThilchRui STRJrKftftJTT ?T^ | 
ftr# m 5 r?[%tfr err gffeflT 5 rf^s*Tsrr II 


^rg^rKr 3 T ;m^R3?frs«Rr n 
*tt*w>t 3^3^ err r^ftt «tt ^sw: II 



1 ^oN'rtffarr: | 


3«r seprarorra Eff^erg f?Rrer% u 


<rcsrfthreqz% II) 


3 n=^j i 

9 Tr^«^& 3 R 5 rRT%^ 5 r: i 

^ 5 ^RT!%cT: II 

g£*ra: qtrfft 5 arr^Stf g3»*q^ II 

(®r^T^RT^ II) 


) ftnr^gi^wswfRft *rrfcr i 


238 




sttrtf stow awsgrerft =#r^i n 

*rgjcw% qn*s qftqsn3% a*n l 
%$$*& ^qr qtttjfcrw jtirt: ii 
at alitjfw^ cfi aaatsfa q^r=5R i 
STTaRRT q^RTRcrr ^'sqi^iwqcfl^u: II 
lt%^ itg^ *c5tt i 

sqrWiqa %<tt gspTflqqfl^jj. n 
^jHfffCTiqitr: qfl^r i 

aarwragr^#;?) <n%#NlrcRi: I 
aft ^T^cSTT a%q fq?ra ^ja**. n 


flg^t ^t&r s# *rawwft*w**. i 

^aq^a^^a =a ffearfl^OTPi. u 


qm§$j jrta; wraa ^ a<aa: II 





n) 


i ‘ ^ toi^rij: i \ * am$ W5?roi ’ 

51 % TORRI^ 1 


239 



srfStaT«s«iP»nf% i 


<tfsr^fa?renfa?ft *Ri?l%uiqi^ ii 


g ®rw5*5T | 

w**tgjr3[o^n?l gwr n 

: (srT^rgcTgj^: ?) | 
*rsprr??r%g*wrf6^rr*ft n 


sfte^gpgsqw^ qr i 
Sift *T«br qRqftf&T: II 


irrsft jrrirrcprra'ijft qf^q>: i 



: II 


sftssn^ftrwpft ?)*rtfr §*srre^r: i 

qr*rf^qft ? )^T*rqr^%^oi: II 

sTT^Tref^ ^ I 

(gt^qjreormSr 5^r^rqs% II) 


i 

^ qfg tg Slf?*# U5RR5R: i 

^tfwt iM ^rf^rf^joT ^ci; 11 

qT =5^1 5iF^ mf^RFrg^ i 

q^rrg wnrrsra || 

N « 


240 



sfflwwnrorfa i 


... RT •^ISWTl ^ % anqiW: I 

wpri <7*rfl% 3 *nrft% 3 *r *mr n 
SI® 3^»i5^ 5 ^TT^rfft l 

5lwra "g gtswqN ft n 
*k$< 3 g *r«^ g ^ gozt i 
«mr 3,%^ § ?m en^rfMi ti 
jWn^t it crust *rr i 

tfrRN; ^rnn^Rt jjoj gsrer 1 ii 
91 ^ ^ crust ^ ^ 6 t [g»] i 

^ ^7rar ^ STPT *T Tr9RR% (I 

<tr% g crgafiur 5 cf&ote^tft ^ i 

9ft tfSTCTWffiT ?r^^qo?<3^ || 
s*rc/ifmrg?K JTi^RRT^rf^i^ i 
cure?? ^ ^wrr^ jj^t^ II 

<?fitaq*m3§r ||) 

«TCJRT«hRWfH ftfolRH. i 

^wigaitR «&(& ?)^n^ ?wr n 

RJrr^rf^TFt etror^RRoni. i 

nwi5 nfitat as ijrfttf^Rr ssr n 

#* 


81 


241 


5rf*Wfss«3«i!ft \ 


5 K 3 qfefa g?p 4 i 

qir*ref %^R*7j§CR q^TT^Sjat 5RT: II 

*n «rs*r* i 

g^E V^rwt $*Wf ii 

sfasMfa =q ftrcfwrqidlSq^ i 
gpslfor girir^r ^PTHT^op^f^i^ n 

**m& qjqi^R^ i 

^ ^ qms*?r g ^sqnj: || 

qq ‘qg^sr <re*FT ?rt: | 

qpt =q g;^ qpft qwsiw^ II 
sn3tKig'#3rK qftfifcrK i 

S& 5n%^t qRTfRT% II 

qqqsj^r jtItk I 

(gn^rn^ q*RRreq2% u) 


^RKl^For: qn^raorf qrfo *r?iq^ i 

ftwgq r qi n 


«hM | g^ fe^Tt gosiqRRRTS?!: I 
■qgsfti: flsmt^srqr^ qjJr ^ n 


242 



sflcWwyunPr i 


erfStZ# ^ SfRR^ | 

re >q * T l*HHS<g : ^fqqoTtq ^q q i : II 

(^t«Riwn*r y f l ^ q g^ n) 


wwr i 

cRorampr: i 



: f^JfracT^^JWi: II 


«MJIlPi^Ixl(R^ qfRJjRRfcfiT: I 
SjaM^TO5rF<T: qsf^srcfcra: li 


H3RlFTr3%q«f qi%o^5nf^T: | 

^ScRi^r ^ ^ %q g ^r:^ n 

*rco^fT5r(sT ?) ^%ot 3^g*t ^5: (!) i 

ensqw^f f*rt%«r(3R ?) g «tr^ || 
arviwsfa^ ! | 

STTCRt gjRTf^H «mft$ ?R: II 


+i<l*ipiMRsim I 

««i*w =q 5reW ^ qsr^ n 


243 





H qT»T^t | 

sw?fl ^wr»t tfrfasfr «tt*tvit»t% n 


arrcfrrr *t ff^r *nfa TO'fishqft fer?r: i 


•srgafri qreo^qspqrftop^ ( 
f^T || 


snfaff arprqrSf 5 i 

^ *** 35 ^ || 


(gn^riT% 



H) 


X* ^afrg ^goi^ i 
< M f.o gg <HgTft ^ap^qft II 

»trc f *r«r<f^rf^r?i^ i 

5ft°T **X 5«t TOFqt^vr (=3^*?) wrfaq^ u 

*wx®x t «tpt wi«t sgtf SC^)^ l 
f^woi ■erad a^r^rw ftww^ II 

qft qT^ 3 aTfMr g% 5 | 3 i 

*n^ TF rr^ g^hiFT qftq'ta(q**ffa ?) wwi ii 


344 





5tei t «n®r qftq^qSR n 

(Rr?q^Rr u) 

tof «h^va'n^3^<a: q^rrenrow i 

ft pqft<iwwa i miwqm «qT<> n) 

Wl^’l ^ 'qg^R t 

ivtokm gs 5f«rr «roJTfl%qT*qR n 

qrsrat ^g^rs RTtR*Tl%T?R i 
qft w T ^ rsr ^i r«N» 5$£jt *r^R ii 

<*?r(qi?)f$R ^i%ot qpjnarsrereT <t«tt ^rar i 
fstffa * ^rothtiRor n 

«^wjoi3tKW suftroqR qrftq 1 i 
qvqsi^rJTPT sqM*nftfe^nR ll 

«nfmt «hl<^^M f%% «TT I 

(fr*33*^ ll) 

qinaraRW tot wterg^: i 
fW ?tr qj^sqr qiHlwipmr 5T«n ii 

(«nf^T3^ ii) 



srfcwi«v , iiPi 1 


*67%^ H^T^iT IRrf^T^T: I 

ii 

stf&orn*: ^i^er ^rw^i cr«rr gran I 

3*5i «fRo^ «r% *Ffr£r:<fraercR: || 

3T«RJ^ 3^N> R »*% TO sjRO^f^ I 

^3%r 3 *rrRsfr srifrqruit f|crr n 

n) 

3T^F: *JT?pr: 5TF5TT «TRftsTT ««IR5I5TO: I 
*h*|U^8fRJ^r«Tf ^3tT7r m^55^5Tr: II 
Rgsfrs^Rret r 3*5i^rl i 
*r(g?) «h*wg «r% f^rar f5T^rrc^: li 
ari^Tf 3 '1^5TWF*TRT5«TTJT R zfevt I 
3 *r^rraj li 

^RS^r 'TT^cfte^t 5T5t%^rrft I 

srr^rf g trjtfte*?*. li 
totwcmh,. I 

WSRft^RJ: I 

TO^rS#! JTcflflTR. I 

3(<T ?HMI«hK<|nfftT: *T^T |l 


246 





TO Scqt 5TT%S«T ?%6t | 


wngr wvi*i4V zpi q>^r% fsiqts*: i 

g?h t| 


9T^RJ^TT^2^^3PI5TT^: I 


«raj: TOf^l *qr^TT^fr^: I 



: II 


^Icl M ^1 ^.1^1* I 


(^qqo^ ||) 


247 









I 

fttofsfar ^sfrflRori^n^ ii 
^t{tK|i%ot 5# g i 

fNn3tw(t4 ^ sNtaHfcrer^ u 
^EI^T faSTCPTtqft I^TvTH. I 
wrrcfrr ^t jnBTpq iFsn^swrft «rr II 

pgiN - onraqRPiftpft *r ussier i 

(3rgH^[Ti% ^narRrqs# tl) 

3 nfitoTfer^f «nrr^torcR£» | 

^trut g TT3ri^flm<)iTDr€rg5R II 

g^FRwfN^ n 
i ‘«rwflpfl gfir <nsrercqt i 


361 






qjufr ?T»Tlcq^HL I 

(^T'fcTfg^dH. || 

%4t q$i i 

^pff qPTfRdW ^%5cq^=nftof I 



II 



q#rf^^«r II) 


g®«jdf^fair feqlr *?|^t «p^qif&ic4 ■*r l 
tjcfcnrfa f%^ || 

(l5.dH^dFTFIHmaiM‘dHI«qi^ ||) 


JT^r *rf: ^t: i 

*tl4teWK !I ^r 5TW *TRt 5P^r ^7 I || 

gsroimr *refa*oj*fc5PTT i 
(^§^r2^WMr4:(WT«ff: ?) qifcm f^fon II 

tmragfa: ft^rr ^ d«n srcft(^t ?) I 

^ *PI5$[<JI$*crah II 

qr»T itfcfW ®raragfl«*. i 

sn*rr: ^ ^ ^ ^rifpwO 11 

353 





(f^g^T^ ti) 

q*qrftT^tfrcf^^^sq^t^^ l 



*wq**§# i 

II 

Sgftrclqqn^l ^T^r^rqf^: i 
qTqrcqmf^q g =qo%wrrf# >jg II 

(g^RRoinfir qqresrqs^ ||) 


qt qropfl %q q% q*Ng q: i 
JNKMi ^^TT8if ^fonfaq: II 

(^qq«*5% ||) 


qt^: I 

q^ffe qf^q g *tfiqo| ^g^brq. I 

q^pqq^r * II 

qft g to. l 
^rqjT fq^q =q itK%qf^q =q it 
qflpsq ^nwiRi^q qrqf% it^relg, i 

(gu^pfa ^qrqtqr%^qq2% II) 


268 





RRsrrft^*Trft«* gf%(TK ?)5rfosrq *tr n 

(gsr^nT^ II) 

qt«*R5q qqqrfa l 

•Krqssraspra ^wr^rfaul^RR n 

vtfkfi qr J^sffcT qrsrnfcm^RR i 
3 tji qifiq^sr srtfrR 11 

St^SB^RT ^q ^fqesrerqRsreR | 
q%*t 'qrTO* wr qR qfa ^01^: IL 
srtt qpf ^f^Fr f%^farn l 
9T^R*^^sqi qra (?) f^fan II 

3»o^«Tr qr qqj^sqf ssqqrft ft=qe#: | 
sqr^iRiwH^n^ui ^frwJTT n^r^Rt: ii 

(fiferosraqhSft q^) 

ws^rerq* qf| qq^TKwqRw^ i 
Wll^iq i^l ^ r^jRor ii 

^rgsrri ‘qgSe ^r qrgtfrcfSR i 

R*rr n 


254 




M^WI4Aq{U||£t I 

*Tmtc^Tffir^rr tot *r«ft i 

CTW q^fePTOFTf: II 
»Wlfa3I5£ *R^«l ^e[RR4 ^ qr*tq> I 

(fa«gq*fi^ ii) 

SWTT f 5TRR: I 
\: fq|fS: fqjRSRR: II 

dwf^roqrar cT^rg^fr^n. n 
ar^PTT^r =q 5ri%«r ^r^sq 1 %<?rsfo ■q i 

^ qHh*TFq(**r sr Os* 10 ^^ U 
Sros =q f^qt qtirq|^ erfl^ I 
^ot 3 i^rtt Frrfr u 

QT^Rrarfci^ W1^|g ^qRdJSlS**. i 

l|) 

^Fsigsrf^rr %qt s^rr: ii 

(^qqtrg-% ||) 

^qRdt i 

fe^pr: ®«DTq^Rg ^sripirsqrarfaft I 
TOUK'IIgd'H: II 


265 





ft»ta$dl|£w: I 
«£lmflw€*iw q^rqftqqi^q: ii 


qq*etq ft qpfoff crf*^r =trqqqq^ I 

f^qjJET: 5 RqT^ ?J || 

qf =q ItKTOfaTTOro ?) fq) 1 

qfteqr£fi*R?r 53 O*^ 3 ^ II 


ti =qrq*i% %qf l 
5^T: sfemr faft qqfaft qqifqh n 


qftqrcTft<rcq qr i 
qq^mq^ra dfttfteaepq *sg u 

(^gqt^PT^ <^fiH'H 3 *l 5 T'T 3 ^ ||) 


qq fjqoSW g qltqRTVRTf^RTq, I 
qjresqtf -q q^q^qqri%rq. 11 


(§n^rq^ 


f^rq q^^rr/^ sfhyTsrqsq^f^ i 
qrer qg^fcft q^HTiW^faqq. u 

q^iqft^Hi^s Rifmqqqrft qi i 
jpgqi frqgSrc qpSqteqtfTfapi. II 
i ‘ mfor 4 qqifqr ’ rtf% <nsF?rcq. i 


266 





q*i%: foqrtsN i 

qiftfa&r ^rsqjiR \\ 

qifWSi^qs^ ii) 


ti'Ji<j5|*^^ti‘ e ^i A i^id^r^'h<IH< : | 

iflt'rws qi&sq^^wFTT^ qq: n 

^irt(^iff?) qrotart ^ q»R^ i 
^rofrOuitofr?) i§?pn qu*fr m: qq$«fc$^r: n 
qq4f \ 

3sri^i fSfcjjsyr ?q«{rwi ^ qra% n 
qwftqft g*q qn$ ^reqqrerfagqoreL I 
g^WlCgTTtoit qqss*rat II 

qft 3*qr: qf* q»i$ qig^jf gsqfqg I 
qi$ g ?rcq g n 
errtl*q%q *qiqiTC fegsr ^t«i^Tqg I 
qf^pit g*q qfa qq g qq<3g ll 
qfa qrare*: qq$: qqst ft qrofa : i 

II) 

q^qifM^I^lH: q qg|5Wq qs g fr: | 


qfmf^faqqwr 


( ffiER oi mfr •qg&nre^ II) 


ss 


967 




gw*R fffs ij;o^«r m | 

JR: frwnn fl^T: || 

ii) 


ftsilft: i 

WfilWPsMrfg fifcjsra *t$rt 3 : i 

mi *r^t II 

<R?» T R i qgT K 5TRT3^^f?T^ II 
5$prcRTRWr: cftifl^preRr: I 
WajTRTf^lRW frfettT£f%fiFRT: II 


^rRip^igfefrrip wfrsrqft fami: i 

«*R|f*W JJfKfttl FRf : n 

9Rfa* *RigrHt f^PR: | 

5T TOTOTO ^9FT% || 


ftgft faR mqdNR' I 
f%fRTi^)R f^rsiW ii 

(gjr^m% e?K^wiR5TTurq3% II) 


368 



StftlTTWTfft I 

*T«jTCT WTORTfa faRR. I 

*KR^sreWT*n# | 

<ftT«rwq<teH w$pj?if^far^ ii 

(%5q^^frf%% *f#rPSi^^ to 

fa^qrat f^?rTr(??n?)^T: qTg(ufej i 

g ; »$3ftf r ?sRW«r fi^TS^ff^Tr^R: n 
q£fa fjwRtfirff: $wrr*5Rvrc*5T*n I 

*Tr*ft«R^T: ^sqr ^ ( 

*wTI|ft q(^[ g ^RrT: II 

(fa®SPRfaft II) 

U^r^ft farTOT: tf<TW?TqrcH: | 
ft’fcfcregfamrcfta: *3j[SRr *rfr*^: n 
«ujoiwi?rf^ j« 3 i 

ftforcorpiSr •qg&rqs^ u) 

^ =q %sq» qjfrfqrt i 

55 «w?»i *Risa«r K\m> ii 

(*qqorwt ||) 


259 



Srt fr » TT gW »tT ft 


TOn: i 

qsurcgawuitsi fat*pr: <rrero?ra»: I 

9qf*RTOTgrR: II 

'ftfT^rW^5TRfl | 

*nrgjrcmrg?Rt jrcrcwRqjRR: ii 

(M^q^ni+l ^frWRT'T^ II) 

qw qrers^i g ^rssrof ^nrinm. i 
3RT5^far mi n 

(spft^pfo ere^RTfikrwis^ II) 

zm\ mmn qfo: i 
fcro^raqiraT: %ap5cw*?w u 

g^rsRfag^: i 
qfr^rgjtsr: II 

wrawna ^;g *rr ?fFT q?rc^ I 
0* g gfitf gf$r *trT *r*tf|fg^ ll 

«ii4htnwd i qircr ^ g fegsrr gq ! i 
qsrc^srft ?) n 

qqiqreft qj* q>r4T ^fiSpq^qf: i 
*1 S umrm r qmtereq qn^g. n 


260 



%%% 




3 nfi qqwrr *rqr*w i 
wmi siptf =^trtr ^fjpri ii 
3 *T3?rr wft ^forwr mi I 
5ft^!<q^q*T star sfrjRffaFifaqi It 

II' 

*it$^N«w : qrw^r \ 

9?Rft^r srr *t^: i 

(a^RuiPT^ II) 

sr< qrcft sq^ q: i 

^T ^^sq| q^or: qfewrf&T: II 

(^qqo^% ||) 


^13: I 

feiprer *r^NMwisnejl i 

«*5T % *PT^ 3 II 


5ft?W3?ff *13: I 

«IMI4KU|ii^: ^n«r: %&3 S^ife: II 


ffrfRRtqftsfj sforcrafes*: fare: i 


«n^q ^nn^rat 55®ejorg^ \\ 



U) 


261 



sTftHnatsmrft I 


®t^ 5 wfi?[ 3 ?)wnrn • 

3*TR RTFUR II 

(gST^rrft T E WHIlfifaW 


tnfrcor n«RF*rrft sjrcfaTRT*!^ i 
<fan**rcwr ^r II 

mi ^ *tpt5«t *r?n^n^(«rT ?) i 

(^'TTcJWqt^ r>PW^ Jpd II) 

*rrR*«R3rfa3 ^f^Kr^r *r%^ i 
RiiBRfdrRRftg itg^r srcdgcr: II 

nR^Fgf&TRr vrrct <rr R*r*ft ^ rr5t: i 
R nqf rfprI rrr* fe^r: II 

cT%R ^aft Ri^sRI J%STT R*R?p5d I 
wrrOTrererarr R»raf ^Rt sqrfcs^sr: u 

(faw^Whft u) 

$far?r*jRr Rig^rrasR i 

«r^5T Rid aft^FR?T«rc*R*T: II 

H«r ^i»rfdw#5iirq^sR *r»faor: ll 

(i^'fiKOTi^id ■Rg^rqsd 11 ) 


362 



^Tr^Sl ?) qw«Tt || 

1 1) 


*ra*i I 

«T5Tq^q$ferwqfaiai *jfor: i 


it 


q^prq5^«r »T^t % srms^T#? i 


5«^Tf*t ?rf ftfaqfo TOftfa^r i 
5 qft g n 

qinfte'faftBHs ft^r frqqr^r: i 
*TfrPTO^^Tfq*rf^§rT: II 

^Tfqwf^ft gt n «3jnq>rd q^rq^T i 
«rrcft^ q*r?fe 5 qqi^t f£3raq ! h 


Rtarqrcftatfq^ i 
w dwrra sn»qff 5 [t« q«q^ u 


q%?r n qqw sqro^q *rqrq*^ i 
feqrf ^totww ^qrf^r^ u 

(gsi^mtl mgqgqiRqw^a n) 


368 





swift i 



JKgfKftsww ir^rqifSt tow. i 
Slfot S^RTf *h7$<H. II 


arefafsffafajrfi ^Ru|o^iiinfD|f5j: | 

*T*F?Tr^ 35T^jrR ftrasftf&T II 

( ft req ^ w Ntf^ ft srffcrfa? w§ ll) 


wJsq: qWsiMTt I 

■srTtfraftnrr wwfa^onrftcf: n 

®\ 

«TPfl**ftS: 3R=5ft ?!W(f II 

B: r «jt g^r w wgsrrftor: i 
sft* ft*Rr siftr ! u 

arr^?npT?Tr *Rpft i 

^r?g^ qrftr fsSprpmg etfejop^ ll 
^prft ftfteni ^5f%^r I i 
J l$.l5Tftfl R ?TFT ^ju|fc*d4l: II 
l%5nferacfor %g <trsI: (?) | 

. a ^ ^*v fv . ^ fv _._m_ . 

*n^wm«rr wr ?t^tt ftnraiwn 11 


364 





srv^rorarfejRFa qp$$T: (?) | 

(fogsriWfc H) 


*rf£r fwsft stfr sRqrs?n i 
*rarr»r: 5 %tts 4 tiH'hiaH*rf*R: u 

*iwsrq*rMgrRr i 

■ qg & i qaa ii) 


*KTf5WWl«l , iJ*h*|U'«Sj»R: 3^: I 
*HHMt »*h^: ^«wt (O^rpr: ii 

(^qqo^ll) 


fcr: I 


fcfl % 



I 


5T3R$S5T3rRgSFrercfa: f&TO: II 


Sr gqgl q gfo ra $$q^tqft f&z: i 
3 q»qi£ u 


(ar^pte*!^ ^rwrerq^ ||) 


&tft g ^gsrti flftq g stztto | 
5j3qiOi m\*&<2 «RwiPi^ n 
(jqStSFT*! 


N 


866 



5* rnro II 


3Tdmo«<a*i^i3sr i 

fa^TT^T q*? 5qr^qq?»5TO15R.ll 

fo&qftq ^q (%5^ fo?n£rf^: II 



q»Rqfa\ II) 


rn^t »wil qq^: ftjf^qpq*. i 

SlqWET^*: II 

(Sjfqfrcorrq*t n) 


qt ?t«tt q *T[?^(r)5fr3npq^ i 
faqpJTt SWI^q sNnql qq^wjfa: u 


II) 











^^Ktcq^raat •sr 'far^sRrerRort i 
gTRTgft ^^fq lrKl ^TOTfs^rRofy [| 
TOsn-wi^rfr ^rwir=r»3^tr i 
snr4 5%ui ^ g^ ii 


^Rt ^ ii 


qi^tlf n 1 <?%tfs^r 3 t I 

%R (| 

S& fareqsiftoft % i 

«*fa «r*FciRlfa tfaw ^ ii 

«snrto^| ^ it 

1 ‘siregi^RWHT ’ f%fa <TI5RTCH. I 


269 



•rfasnftfr *rft: ft i 

(*TO«4tei*ft ^hrwroqz^ u) 

*ns3T$*r sw srf%^r ire&f^r i 
g*wrcfa»fl'fl g^i^niwf&nff ii 

g*tfl ^ |r»t*T^r ci«n i 

(gn*r<un^ ||) 

5ife*tfg"ra^reng^ <ft ll 

$g5*Ttfic<j<3rcjf ^ i 

^5*T5mi3rRf sfhffrorft^^ n 

9WT ^ftrof ^RfW% i 

effeRi ^%°r ^mgffjfe(^5?)«Kra!|Ji II 

(f$rw?% <wft*rq 2 % u) 

JR^sqt II 

fi$r'rrarc^r«ft i 

rretftWT: Sfinfi ft»ir ?^R?w4f: (| 

«rprfr: g^ ?t«it ^r 1 i 

qj5J ^ *tr*t 1 II 


270 



srnnft ^ ^TO<ra«nsift: u 
fl^3«w^i5rr ^rawftf^cn i 
errerft: *fif*RTT ?3t% srcq>i<Js(5mr ?rei II 
R?r»7ro^ ^ ct«rr i 

(ft 6 3*rof?ft ii) 

or qf?)*frqoft^ I 

g TO K fr qgBft ^ || 

«Tftpn$fa>* g *2*[«q*T I 

(Sfkrcond dtesrc^li) 


ssw: i 

*rel gw hI*wj 3rras5R3 vp ^ i 
«rfste: R^gqlte sr*n^«r a&r ^ ll 

spERra re fil Kia ^rfiqorl | 

arrcfcfl ^t /tdisfa m (i 


*3if%2*R5Wlfcl 

(*r3FC&Td ^wroqs^ II) 


m 





Hcgro IRfESJ g^ET »ft*T^T^I: || 







FKESRU: ^CTT: ^TtRr tEFTElRtEf | 

(gsn^RE ars^rR^raqqe^ ll) 


«r«iRTwq^i^ srg^rn% % ^r«r ! i 

toneriM 5tft EejER^s^ ll 

eerIse trcn?qr qg^ifeE: » 

*n^t g^^i^rr =e 4» ?n% q>E°3g^ ll 

^rmRRi^(?) eft *rt: i 

grfra^n jpi q^^r wlRipir: n 

f «rg: Eflrf^El er 1 fRet*^ % gtr: i 
FSEER^lft EFI SRt ll 

tf?Ff5TH^ 'ER: F E^TEFfEi: | 
«T^RI^|q4l5^ gta%'*nEE: II 
EFT FTFrlSpItfl^EFEr^E^: E5EEt Eg: | 
5 % Eft 5rteqr^T^ ll 
FSEl^f^PEI^SFt EFREtg Eggg?l: i 
<3^r(5T !)PTO^ Elfti<Sfc*M^E«: U 


279 



srtSmnMjrorft i 


*n** ^«hqi^ 5 et qr*r 3 ^f&rcrfte II 
g^: qft/^rarq snrrcrt qgiCT: 1 
q^ wf stoupiru qqqr^raftFtT: 11 
«rct vpt«r 3 t*ns*rr(«ji ?)q^qtf% 3 >s^: 1 
smrcre qsqtest qqfrfd^r: 11 

11) 

*Rt 1 

jjt^w spnw q^qqis qq =q 11 

(i&qre (Iqqra ^% 3 ^e^rr: 1 
^tKqofl tfaq^TCR^Rn: 11 

i*Nq^Pijqi itkI >515 u 

(^qjRoiFi^ qgfqqs^ 11) 

FFI^q: i 

sW *trw RfcrqrFFH, 1 
awFRCi^ci q*^!t g sti^^r 11 

qjF^^si^cT Juq q^qqifcra^ 1 
mWoiosot qqrfisiqft II 

(qgqs^pft qqfaqwrarqa^ 11) 


to 


273 



sfirnwurPr i 


HFTT: | 

JH>TRt srcnrfr: i 

srqfarc*ret*rrTT u 

^ qrqm qrfa q^ qr kb qr sw I 

(sfalTCct f^'qrasqf: ^J^frfi^cTT: II 

(fttsq^ q3?I%5n«n^ ||) 

c*or: qjr^fsqj: q;°5 gi^qnrorf^sRT: i 
TWroft*: q?T: ftreSflRafa^l: II 

sr^qwf ^T^rq^if i 

tjnwf qr^«*n^ ftRrfcsrrad ii 

*rK^g ^i^s^m^rqr: i 

■nsRpreroS $ffeqfTg^g?m i 
^KliTi%^liTr qr irasnmwcir^T: ll 

(*PT: 11) 

i 

?n«rr: <roww*rai: i 

^35TT q^RTTI^r SJ^TTIR^^TcTT: II 

(aranosja^ ii) 


274 



srfcrtrosprnft I 


I 

SPTFRIT: ! 

•iMWW^T: tsTRSP^nmlft: It 

^FT^T l 

5sft*t*r(!) ^ $S3R JIl^nW^rTTOFT; II 

igpm&Ksi r f^rfid^gjqT: i 
flimom wqqqr ^rererenrcrea’-ir u 

(i?Rq^ q&ftwqft II) 


3TOTH: | 

*«TT ^ f^pn %q =3 I^ItWI | 
q'FTi^sFTtfFtt: II 
(gwmft 3Tg=^riR5ra*iq3% u) 


^Nfasrasrercr: I 
^ ^ifequfa(?)fttFqisj f^f%ciT5^rcTR?n: tl 


5THI3^nCe3?KT Vr^^SlqR- F«TcT[: | 

q^forqs^ 11) 


farr^n: | 

3?q$$5nKPm!* | 


275 



HlcT l TT g^ If fr I 
%5TT9TT: I 

q>q&: g^^Jrsr ii 

q^fltarr«qfc 11) 


fan:: i 

farc: isrct qlsrcfcrar: i 

feg^n: *tercrer: II 


STFnWTCTS^KT *T 


^qwFqrajd^r: ii 


vrstfis err farrcg h5r*t^:(?) i 


g tesrq 3^(?) | 
far*^ SWTRfr: *Z3 || 

^l*ww«n»J> II) 


fan f^5rp»€V 4 K(c^t !) ufaim* qq ^ i 

51*1 % ^etfOT *03 II 

gssr <ftaqj(* ?)ofr^ i 

*rs*#h qft*^rr: qfr%r: fan^m; n 

(gsftqqft *reqtqrfifsraroq2^ ll) 


276 



s ftmr agoHfa i 

farc: tflciquiW finspn: i 

«K®% *J 5R^ q fta r «W f:(*ETr: !) | 

fair. f^nBr^r: i 

(frsg^nikft u) 

TO&T: l 

*m*. ^TRRof i f^m^T : i 

S5W fl^srwrRn n 

f%5^r f^TFcTT^ SqsfarcmforTTJ I 

STWTT /^303IWIWR'bT ^RRI^ «TI || 

SFZ 3 ®IR^ ^CTHL I 

mzpi fcrr ^ ^ u 

ggwww jfterocraT II 

«rfj^iwnf^^lf^: *TCR *$5TT: I 

«^T % *TCT 5Rqq: ffim: || 

(^i^nq^rn^ ^«htawrcrc^ ll) 


277 



3 &WJ: 3555: I 

^R*TT: jjqq&q* II 

gq**K^T '-idliiThlt^goi 5 I 

ran < q qf 5 ar a r q n ^>^ r g^^q<i^gqf : 11 
gSrsrra qfrl 3 <rr: 1 

(gqfa^rni* u) 

erww g^cq« f^Jlffo: 1 

3 R zfaa qi 5 *ftq^ *mc$«ikv *th =q 11 

gapreprereaf srsqt^aqir: 1 
g*q5rmflqra qrsRsratfgqr: u 

qwoggqqraEcrre sfHkrweqfocrr: 1 
i rtlmimttfi : $m «rf^qr®%q®i!r 11 

(^kRonn^ srafcsrqs^ u) 

1 

«rrreqqkrf$k * mi'jjfewi'Nttau: 1 
TO 1 



378 



sftnmnpunrfsr i 


wm tout mfa (i 


*T*53T°TT: I 

*Wr<ni f^?pTI?Fc(g^T: 1 


STPIfH^C^n: I 


wi«ni: W'frs 2 sgs^ora^spn: i 




979 




INDEX. 






PAGfrB 

Abhaya-hasta 108, 10S 

1, 110, 

111, 

115, 

118, 

121, 

122, 

124, 

125, 

129, 

134, 

135, 

136, 

173, 

177, 

199. 

200, 

214, 

224, 

247, 

254, 

256, 

257, 

265, 

266, 

269, 

281, 

264, 

287, 

316, 

317, 

324, 

328, 

335, 

344, 

355, 

356, 

365, 

366, 

369, 

374, 

378, 

379, 

380, 

381, 

384, 

887, 

391, 

397, 

398. 

402, 

403, 

406, 

407, 

422, 

424, 

425, 

426, 

427, 

429, 

433, 

434, 

435, 

436, 

437 

to 

444, 

446, 

447. 

449. 

455, 

460, 

466, 

468, 

489, 

496, 

497, 

504, 

509, 

511, 

612, 

520, 

523, 

535, 

538, 

544, 

645, 





556 

,575 

Abhaya 

,-mudra 


63 

,237 

Abhioharika 



... 

76 

Abbioavaguptaoh&rya 

34, 35, 


228, 259, 260, 265 

,267 

Abblra 




... 

29 

Abhrarupa 



... 

181 

Aohala- 

linga 

(same 

as 



Sbh&vara liftga) 75, 79, 80, 86 
Aoharyas 15, 473, 479, 532 
Aohd&ana Prapanoha ... 239 
Ada^ur ... 477 

Adham* (class of images) 

123, 343, 343, 495 
Adhama-dala-tfila ... 208 
Adhama-dala-tfilayidhi ... 465 
Adhiraehakra ... 24 

Adhama 526 


Adhikaraaandla 460 

Adhya HAga go, $$ 

Adiiakti 369, 833, 334 

idilftaba 235, 296. 606 

Adl « *23 680 

idity. 66, 617, 641, 660 

Advaitins Mt j 

Agaohohamayams 17 

Agamanta or ijaddha £$atva 


4, 6, 7, 8. 9. 13, 17, 81 
Agamantins 7, g, 9 

Agamas 155, 158, 252, 279, 888, 
382, 383, 390, *21, 128, *82, *65, 
*67 fn. 474, 498.607, 609, 619, 
524, 528, 530, 535, 6*3, 645, 
649, 668. 667, 669 
Agaram Setfcur ... 128 

Agasbya 276, *23 /.n., 667 

Aghora 40, 64, 97, 198, 199, 
366 f.n , 368 876, 876, 877, 

878, 889, 40* 
Agboramurbi 197, 199, 200, 884, 
886, 887 

Aghoraaivaoharya 6, 6, 69, 498 
Agboristranrarti ... 199 

Agni 40. 41, *2, *4, 46, 64, 66, 166, 
166, 173, 174, 180, 184, 200, 
224, 229, 254, 262, 274, SSI, 288, 
287, 866, 416, 418, 419, 420, 481, 
442. 497, 616, 516, 621, 622, 
623, |24, 629, 666, 674, 676 
Agnibtra 429, 480 

Agni-iata-Bobrahmagya 440,441 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 



Page 

Agnipatra 

... 256 

Agnipurana 

... 658 

Afinishvitta 

... 663 

Agrahara 

428 f.n. 

Ahalya 

... 617 

AhaAkfira 

394, 404 

Ahirbudhnya 

387, 388, 389 

Aihole 186, 448, 607, 610 

Aindra 

... 394 

Alrfivafca 

517, 619, 520 

Aitareyfrbr&hmana 

48, 166 

Aitihasio 

... 660 

Aja 

387, 388, 394 

Ajitagam 

367 f n. 

Ajogandha 

88 f.n. 

Ajyapa 

... 563 

Ajya*pflfcra 

441, 442 

Ajya-fltbali 

... 504 

AkaSa 241, 

375, 395, 404 

Ak^ifea 

... 394 

Akrifci 

... 546 

Akshamalfi 109. 115, 124. 125, 137, 

149, 162, 173, 180. 200. 274, 278, 

279, 280, 283, 284, 286, 287, 308, 

324, 332, 336, 342, 348, 376, 378, 

379, 380, 382, 384, 386, 388, 389, 

390, 391, 426, 429, 438, 439, 440, 

441, 443, 466, 604, 605, 506, 607, 

508, 509, 510, 611, 612, 520, 528, 

524, 627.553, 557 

Akshua 

... 248 

Alakshml (JyfiabthSdevf) ... 627 

Alapallava 

... 267 

Alexandria 

... 82 

Allflh&aana 

171,270, 448 

Allagana*Obaadra6§kbaramurti 


123, 124 

Alla-nd-dio Khilji 

81 /.*. 


PlOB 


Alvars 

... 473 

Amarakoia 7 f.n. 85 f.n, 233, 488 

Amarasimba 

7 

Amarddaka matfia 

4, 5, 176 

Amardia 

... 995 

Ambasamudram 

... 473 

Ambika 

85 f.n. 

Amogha 

... 466 

Amra (mango) 

... 408 

Amrataka 

... 395 

Amrita 366, 486, 487, 543, 554, 


555, 561 

Am^ifca-ghaja 

... 279 

Amritapura 

162, 156 

Am^ifceSvara 

... 152 

Amsumadbhedagama 107, 117, 

125, 151, 162,169, 166, 207, 224, 

226, 227, 253, 

258, 276, 289, 

303, 315, 323, 343, 367 f.n. 386, 

397, 398, 405, 

406, 407, 488, 

489, 499,619, 

536, 544, 556, 


667, 570 

Amsamafc (son of Asamanjasa) 314 

Amurtfca-sadakbya 

364, 366 

Anadhya linga 

89,90 

Anadi-jnana 

... 14 

Anala 

86 f.n. 652, 553 

Analagama 

368 f.n. 

Ananda 

241, 245 

Anandakumaraavami, Dr. 24 f n. t 


231, 467 f.n. 

Anandanubhava 

... 60 

Aoandatirtha 

... 632 

Ananta 

393, 394, 398 

Anantanandagiri 

... 191 

Ananfeeaa 

... 397 

Anasrifea 

... 393 

Anaauya 

... 601 



INDEX. 


Page 

An&tba ... 393 

Angtmakamdksba ... 21 

Apava ... 245 

Anohita 267, 268 

Andhak&gnra 192, 193 

AndhakSsura-vadha-murti. 192 
AAga 473, 474 

AngSra ... 565 


Adgirasa 276,418,563,565,566, 

567 

A&gnla, a measure 253, 266, 260 
290, 307, 342, 574, 675, 676 
Angur 124, 188 

A&gaahtbamatra ... 393 

Anlla 552, 553 

AnjaU-hasta 111, 159, 163, 173 
182, 186, 191, 207. 208, 211, 214, 
216,226, 227, 253, 255, 269, 
282, 289, 305, 317, 318, 319, 
320, 328, 339, 346, 350, 397, 
399, 408, 422, 455. 460, 464, 
466, 469, 475, 508 
Anograha 238, 239 

Anugrahamurti 145, 146, 205, 356 
Anuloin* ... 487 

Apa 552, 553 

Apana 543, 558 

Aparajita 387, 390 

Apara-sakti ... 15 

Aparatanuh ... 458 

Apasmfiraporusba 67, 113, 114, 
136,168, 224, 225, 227, 229, 
253, 254, 256, 257, 265, 266, 
274, 277, 281, 291, 318, 673 


ApiohyavSsha 527, 536 

Apparevfimigal ... 480 

Appayya-DikBbita ... 9,60 

Appudiyadiga) ... 476 


Pmb 

Apearasas 60, 190, 233, 628, 549, 
569, 631, 568 
ArAdhyaa ... 38 

Arapia 58. 442. 622 

Arddbaebaodta 27, 260 

Arddba-ehandrtftkitt (StoS* 
vartlana) 93, 94 

ArddLa-ohandcAsaaa ... 524 
Arddbaka (-Andhaka) ... 40 

Arddhan&rtsvaramurfci 54, 58, 59, 
117, 321, 322, 323, 824, 325. 
326, 327, 328, 880, 331, 332, 
333, 370, 383 

Ardha-ohitra (or) Ohibra- 


bhasa 

... 474 

Ardhamatra 

... 248 

Ariahan 

... 564 

Arivattayanar 

... 476 

Arjuna 

53, 517 

Arka 

225, 226 

Arsha (linga) 

79, 80, 86 

Arunaohal&svara temple at 

Tiruvanpamalai 

81 /.n. 

Arupae 

... 438 

Arundbati 

... 419 

Aruvattu-muvar 

... 473 

Arya and Anarya-aampra* 

dayas 8, 232,298, 299, 301,302, 

485. 486, 487, 490 

Aryadesa 

6 

Aaamanjaaa 

... 313 

Aaana 

... 288 

Aaani 

... 44 

Aaanfca 

... 40 

Ashta-dik-palas 

135,153,339, 


423 /.ft. 

Aabfcmurtiivaraa 

45,405 

A8bta4ala measure 

317, 474 


8 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY, 



PlOl 

Aahfiyara (vakra ?) 

428/.*. 

Aaht6tbara*lata-lifiga 

95, 96 

Aaikni 

... 650 

AaitiAga 

98, 180 

Atframa 49, 467, 468, 660, 661 

Aathira 

... 181 

A jaddba bhuvanas 

... 892 

Afuddba tatraa 

... 394 

Amra (libga) 

79, 80 

Aauraa 146, 147, 149, 164, 166, 

166, 171, 189, 910, 

914, 915, 

916, 934, 937, 337, 

417, 486, 

617, 696, 649, 669, 660 

Ain 

... 541 

Afalnl-dSvataa 641, 643, 646 

Afvina 641, 649. 643, 644, 545 

Atkarvanaveda 39, 40, 57, 568 

4tAam4»ra«6paJMsftod 

... 4, 19 

AtibhaAga 

... 169 

AMrfktanga 

... 181 

Atma-tatvas 

396 /.». 

Atma-vidya 

... 978 

AtrSya 

... 544 

Atrl 976, 977, 501, 565 

Affabfiaa 

83 f.rt. 395 

Anma 

... 394 

AurpavSbba 

... 541 

Avaidika 

3, 9, 31 

Avarapa 

... 422 

Avatiraa 

190, 501 

Avidy* 

245, 666 

Avimukta 

... 395 

Arur 

... 981 

Ayudhapnraahaa 

... 367 

Ayyanir 

... 485 

Ayyanoro 

33 

Ba^abfi 

... 642 

Bafrbdmnkha 

. 86 /.n. 


PAGI 

B&dtai 368, 837, 884 

Badari ... 49 

Bafrvanala ... 178 

Bagaji ... 185 

Babikaa ... 40 

Bahurupa 387, 888, 889 

Baindavapuraa ... 393 

B&lak&tfa ... 415 

Balapramathani 893, 403 

Balavikarapi 393, 403 

Baligami ... 401 

Bfilaavamin 432, 439 

Bapa 116, 156, 169, 171, 178, 186, 
187, 198, 199, 200, 216. 304, 
876, 388, 390, 391, 397, 426, 
427, 436, 437, 438, 447, 466, 


492, 496 

Bapa (lingaa) ...79, 80 

BaDerji, D.B., ...64, 65 

Barhishad ... 563 

Baeava ... 32 

Bauddha Bodhiaatva ... 490 

Beal ... 518 

Belgaum District ... 382 

Bellary 135, 188 

Belur 218, 219 

Bengal 244, 415 

Bhadra ...84 /.n. 

BhadrakfiJI 183, 166, 227. 395 
Bhadrakarpa 84 /.n., 395 

Bhadrapltha 129, 262. 288, 520, 
528, 562, 563. 573 
Bhadr&sana 136, 137, 212 

Bbadravafc ...84 An. 

Bbaga ... 62 

Bbag&aana ... 25 


Bh&gavata*pur&iia 61 /.ft. 185, 816, 

459 



INDEX. 


Pam 

Bhagavatf ... 122 

Bhagtratha 811, 315, 816, 317, 
318, 319, 320 
Bbairava 27, 28, 81 f.n. 115, 176, 
177, 178, 179, 180, 182, 231. 
265, 295, 296, 297, 307, 328, 
391, 395, 198 


Bbairava lifiga 

... 79 /.n. 

Bhakta 213, 250, 171, 173, 171, 


175. 179, 181 

Bh&radvaja 

276, 277, 567 

Bbarava 

... 176 

Bharata-Nfyya-iiutrai 223, 228, 


258, 260, 267 

Bharatavarsba 

1 

Bharat! 

423 /.n. 

Bhasmakaya 

...84 /.». 

Bbatfcas 

... 35 

Bbautiki (same as 

LokadbarmiQl) 


...15, 16 

Bhava 40, 11, 46, 51, 375, 393, 


394, 403. 407 

Bbavabhuti 

... 50 

Bhavishyatpurana 

... 431 

Bbavodbhava 

... 386 

Bbayahara 

... 181 

Bbela 

... 566 

Bhikshatanamurti 

44, 117, 302, 

80S, 306, 307 f 808, 309, 369 

Bbixna 40, 46, 65 375, 386, 

394, 403, 406, 407, 532 

Bhimesvara 

... 395 

Bhindi 

... 159 

Bbi^dipala 

... 181 

Bhlshava 

176, 180, 181 

Bbtshma 

... 28 

Bhita 

... 1,63 


Bb5ga ... 896 


PAM 

Bhogabftraa ... 125 

Bbtfga 52, 276, 128 /.*, 6C5. 566, 

567 

Bbringi 133. 185. 186, 138. US. 
227, 322. 328, 898, 128 f.n. 


Bhruw 297, 298, 800, SOI 

Bhrupaghna . . SOI 

Bhu 123 f.*. 

Bbuiang&-lftlitia ... 227 

Bhujangatrisa 227, 228, 252, 257 
Bhujabgavalaya ... 221 

Bhuai ... 339 

Bhumikampa ... iso 

Bhurbhava . . .86 f.n. 

Bhu-aparlamudrl (pose) ... 280 
Bhutagapaa 305, 163 

Bhutara^ ... 421 

Bhutaa 287, 291, 296, 306, 189, 

536 

Bhuta-vetala ... 181 

Bhuvanaa 392, 392 f.n., 893, 391, 
395, 396 f.n. 
Bhuvana Sarfraa ... 392 

BhuvanSavara ... 231 

Bijapur Dt. ... 507 

Bijjapa or Bijjala of the 
Kajaohuri dynasty ... 32 

Biliapur 315, 531 

Bilva (trao) ... 136 

Binda ... 371 

Bombay Presidency 138, 192, 115, 

507 

Bodhisatvaa 61, 868, f.n. 


Brahmi 28, 18, 15. 16, 17, 51, 
57, 105, 106, 107, 108, 110, 

111,138, 153, 161, 165, 171, 

171,176, 176, 181, 186, 201. 

210.288. 287, 288, 261, 266, 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHT. 


Page 

280.281. 296. 296. 297. 301. 
802.807. 317. 821. 822. 836. 
839.341. 342. 346. 346, 364, 
370.376, 382, 383. 386, 386, 
394,399. 400, 401, 404, 416, 
417, 423, 423, /.n., 439. 440, 
449, 467, 601 — 612, 624, 633, 
534, 635, 664, 664, 666 
Brahmabhaga79, 87, 88, 89. 90, 99 
Brahmaeh&ri-Subr&hm&pya 440, 

442 

Brahmahatya 199, 296, 301 
Brahmagaa 160, 167, 166, 169, 
192, 201, 206, 206, 297, 298, 
300, 301, 337, 338, 339, 418, 
419, 420, 428 /.n., 449, 460, 
473, 475, 476, 487, 490, 626, 
563 

Br&hm&oda ... 201 

BrabmapcUb-Purana ... 565 

Brahma-mimaiMa'bhashya 404 
Brabmar&kahaaa ... 181 

Brahma-r&ndbra ... 15 

BrahmarBhia ... 566 

Brabma-sSsta 432, 439 

Brahma airalohohbedakamurti 

... 176 

Brabma-autraa (same aa Parsvasut- 
raa), 86, 87 

B{ibadi£vara (temple) 5, 451 
Bribaspati 423 /.n. 

B;ibaapatiaava ... 185 

Bfihal' Pratyabhijnar vimarsanl 

... 34 

Brihat-Samhita ... 519 

Brioda 188, 190 

Budbuda-sadriaa (airovarfctana) 

... 93 


Page 

Buddha 30/140. 279, 467 /.n., 488 


Buddbi 394, 404 

Budha ... 375 

Burgees, Dr., ... 469 

Oaloutta ... 179 

Gave templeB 192, 346, 352, 383 
Oeutral Provinces 345, 531 

Ceylon 467 /.n., 535, 537 

Obaitianya ... 14 


Ohakra 109, 111, 115, 138, 146, 
153, 169, 173, 183, 199, 209, 
210, 211, 212, 333, 334, 343, 
388, 389, 390, 399, 427, 429, 
435,437, 438, 439,447,533, 553 
Ohakradauamurti ... 210 

Cbakshus ... 394 

Ohaia-linga 75, 76, 77 

Obalukya 178, 336 

Chalukya-Hoyaala 188, 401, 509 

510 

Cbamara 139, 179, 511, 519, 526, 
530, 531, 544 


Qhapda 28, 180 

Obandama 464 

Obandanuga 465 

Oband&bhritya 466 


Ghandesa 84 /.n„ 207,208,209,475 
ChapdesAnugrahamurti 145, 205, 
209, 370, 463 
Chapddsv&ra 145, 207, 208, 209, 
461, 463. 464, 465, 466, 467 
468, 469 

Ohandra 28, 184, 305, 423 f.n. 
Ohandrajndnagama 368 /.«. 

Cb&ndrakalA ... 109 

Obandrasekharamurti 28, 107i 

113, 117, 119, 120, 121, 125. 

208, 369, 455,460 


6 



INDEX. 


PlQB 


PiOH 


-Kerala 117. 121, 122 
-Umaaabita 117, 120, 122 
-Alipgana 117, 120, 121 
Ohary&pada and Kriyapftda 


of frgamat 12, 13, 16 

Ohatura 267, 268, 270 

OhatuBtala 227, 229 

Ohafcurtam 248, 267 

Obabnrthi ... 563 

Ohediyarayar ... 479 

Chengunnur ... 269 

Obennakesavasramin ... 219 

Chennittalai ...69 /.« 

Cberika (Tam. Cberi) 428 f.n. 


Ghetana ... 239 

Chhakalapda ... 394 

Ohbannavira 119, 131,281 
Ohhatrakara (airovarbtana)... 93 
Chbaya 542, 543 

Chidambaram 223, 229, 230, 
235, 236, 240, 248, 249, 475, 
477, 520, 524, 527 
Chidambara Mummani R6va,i 239 


Dadhlehamaharishi 193, 617 

Dai by an ay ska ' 421 

Daibyaa 431, 663 

Daifcyartna ... 417 

Dai v aba (linga), mm at Dairika 

ltaga 79, 80. 88, 86 

Dakthi 48, 49, 60, 61*182, 189 
184, 186. 186, 187, 188, 337, 
418, 459, 501,650. 664 
Dakaha Praj&pati 188, 423 /.ft, 
446, 459 

DakahaBamatbiba ... 161 

Dakshav&m or Sabi 147, 554 
Dakshipa 181,277, 665 

Daks binakedarSs vara ... 401 

Daksbipamurbi 117, 146, 271, 273, 
274, 275, 277, 278, 279, 282, 
284, 285. 287, 288, 289, 290, 
291, 370 

Dakshinamurtt-Upanishad. 277 
Pakipie 156, 193 

Damanaka ... 489 

Paroaru 35, 115, 11G, 124, 135, 


Ohin-mudra same as Vvakh- 
yanamudra and Bandar* 
fianamudra 280, 281, 282, 286, 
289, 308, 350, 443 
Ghinnadevi ... 481 

Chintyagama 367 /.n. 

Chitorgarh ... 385 

Cbitragupta 526, 527 

Ohitrarastra ... 391 

Chitra-yajnopavffca ... 391 

Obdla 155, 178, 205, 208, 230, 
281, 286, 329, 345, 518 

Ohd)amagdala ... 6 

Conjeev&ram 170, 209, 211, 265, 
269, 287, 308, 330, 409, 478 


137, 151, 154, 155, 156, 177, 
180, 192, 193, 194, 198, 199, 
201, 224, 237 252, 254, 256, 
257, 261, 263, 265, 266, 306, 
307, 345, 356, 381, 382, 388, 
389, 390,497, 674, 575 
Damsa ... 668 


Danavari 85 f.n. 

DSnavadbipa ... 421 

Danavas 356, 417, 563 

Dapda 115, 173, 198, 274, 284, 
335, 377, 400, 425, 427, 486, 
439, 443, 444, 507, 526, 527, 
528, 529, 632, 653 
Dapda-hasta 224,254, 675,576 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 


Paoi 


Pam 


Dapdaka 

1 

Deo# 

...84/.»a 

Danta 186, 187, 152 

Dbanvanfcarl 

... 644 

Dftrnja (lifiga) 

76, 77 

Dftr&Buram 

154, 155 

D&ruvana 

... 302 

Daara 

... 544 

Dai&vat&ra 161 

, 170, 218 

Daf Avat&ra Gave 

... 193 

Daiabhaja-Aghoramurfci 

... 200 

D&Bamarga 

18. 16 

DattAtrftya 

... 501 

DSba'labdha-adgula 

... 342 

Deogarh 

... 278 

DSiika-Bubrahmagya 

440, 443 

D8va 139, 140, 184, 189, 277, 280, 

281, 805, 318, 319, 822, 328, 337, 

349, 366, 430. 445, < 

146, 448, 

486, 626, 559, 560 

Dftvabhaga 

... 148 

Devadaruvana 

...84/.». 

Devadatta 

... 486 

Bevadeva 

... 386 


Dhvlbhagavata 

... 560 

Phakka 

304, 378 

Dhanus 166, 168, 

169, 173, 187, 

198, 200, 216, 

376, 388, 389, 

390, 391, 426, 

427, 429, 434, 

436, 437, 438, 

447, 466, 492, 


496 

Dhammilla 

... 328 

Dhgri 

552, 553 

DhSrfilfcga 

95, 96, 97 

DharSpSla 

... 181 

Dharma 276, 278, 279, 288, 404, 

488, 525, 526, 543, 550, 656 

Dharmanfbi 

... 467 

Dbarmarftja 

... 625 

DharmarAjaratha 

... 328 

Dharma-BftBtraB 297, 299, 300, 


301 

Dbarmia 

... 626 

Dhatura 

... 275 

Dbruva 

552, 558 

DhruvabSras 

... 66 

DbumakSfcu 

... 524 

Dhumar Lena Gave 219, 347, 449 


DevadSveaa 

Devalaa 

DSvariahia 


.83 /.». 
7 

.. 566 


Deyas6afi 417, 419, 444, 445, 448 


Divae&nftpatl 430, 434 

Dfivatfis 423, 663 

Dftyl 61, 62, 117, 130. 121, 123, 
124. 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 
136, 136, 138, 139, 145, 152, 
163, 155, 167, 168, 169, 170, 
193, 234, 252, 255, 256, 281, 
332, 833, 336. 358. 354, 429, 
484, 437, 442, 445, 446, 447, 
467, 487, 492, 528 


Dhumorna 526, 527 

Dhurdhura (flowers) s.a. datura 

114, 225, 226, 252 

Dhurjatf ... 47 

Dhvaja (pataki-haata) 173, 254, 
255, 266, 427, 436, 437, 438, 
682, 633 

Dhvani ...84/.n. 

Dhyina 22, 505 

Dhyana-bSraa ... 426 

Dhyana-floka 432, 498 

Digambaras 24, 26, 29 

Dikp&la 137, 261, 262, 264, 464, 
515, 518, 519 


8 



INDEX. 


Facto 

Dflufafi 8, 9, 10, 14. 16, 24, 30, 376 
Dfkfiha-n&ma ... 12 

Dilipa ... 314 

Dipdi ... 395 

Dipika ... 393 

Dipta 84 /.*. 

Diptfyama 367 f.n . 

Disa ... 375 

Diti 423 f.n . 

DiVya-llnga a.a. Mulaabambha 364, 


pola-hasba 

365 

... 228 

Drftvida (country) 

5 

Dravi<Ja (type of central^ 

91,99/.*., 

shrine) | 

473 

„ of linga { 

485, 

,, of pltba J 

486 

Dravida-Brfthmapas 

... 555 

Dravipda 

... 394 

Drftvini 

... 148 


Dvarapalakas 140, 431, 449, 503, 
506, 507 
... 344 
... 543 
154, 276, 303 
173, 332, 423, 423 f.n 
... 201 


Dvibhanga 
Dvitlya tibbi 
Durddhura 
Durga 
Dushapa 


Dvaparayuga 467, 468 

DyauB 521, 550, 551 

Ekadafo-Budras 46, 359, 386, 407 
fikagrima 84 f.n. 

Ekfcmra .■• 410 

EkamrenabhaBVftmin of 
Kanohi 408, 409 

EkanOtra 393, 397, 398, 402, 403 
Ekapadamutti 370, 383, 387, 386 
Ekapada-Trimurtri 398, 400 
Ekapingala 8 


F AIM 

fikarodra 397, 398, 401 

EkaiWa 394 

Ekavira 393, 394 

Ekttsbapa 398 

Elephanba 194, 934, 317. 319, 
346, 347, 373, m 386 
Ellon 140, 161, 182, 194, 218, 
234, 264, 319, 847, 385, 445, 469 
fimappernr 476 

Epigraphia Camatioa 401 
Eros Probogonoa of Lucian 282 
Freemasons 12, 32 

Freemasonry 12, 17, 82 

Gad* 115, 138, 153, 166, 173, 180, 
186, 199, 334, 336, 888, 389, 890, 
427, 434, 437, 439, 449, 457, 507, 
527, 585. 637 
G&jadbyaksha ...85 /.n. 

Gajahtaurti or Gajftsura- 
sambaramurbi 145, 160, 152, 165 
Gaja-haBta same as dapfla-haata 
224, 254, 255, 266. 257, 262, 263 
264, 268, 270, 674, 575 
Gajapriya 85 f.n* 

Gajftrimurti ... 369 

Gajasura 115. 154 

Gajavfthana 432, 435 

Gana-Dakahipamurti ... 289 

Gapadbipa 85 f.n. 

Gapanatbar 

Gapapati 40, 125, 136 

Gapapatya (linga) same aa 
G&papa linga 79, 80, 86 

Gapan 139, 140, 154, 183, 184, 189 
907, 212, 213, 219, 264, 270,318 
328, 835, 349, 350, 851, 450, 456 
408,562 

Gandha 394, 404 


9 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Gandham&dana 86 /.«., 694 
G&ndbfira (School of Sculp- 
ture) ... 64 

Gandharvas 60, 190, 233, 280, 
306, 339, 394, 421, 619, 
650, 559, 563, 568, 669 
Gatffa 133, 135, 136, 137, 138, 
139, 153, 213, 262, 
268, 349, 370. 506 
Gadgft, same as the Ganges 2, 3, 
42, 176, 191,212,226, 227, 236, 
237, 252. 253, 269, 275,314, 315, 
316,318,319, 320,321,416,430, 
442, 460, 530, 531, 551 
Gang&dhara 85 /.n., 383 

Gangadharamurti 313, 315, 316 
Ga&g&dv&ra ... 183 

Gadgaikon^iatelapuram 208, 209 


Ghata 

Ghoranada 

Gibson and Burgess 

Girlsa 

Godavari 

Gokak Falls 

Gokarpa 8S 

Gokula 

Gopura 

Govardhana 

Govindaohfirya, A 


PAG1 

388, 989, 390 
... 181 
ss ... 68 

... 40 

9, 4, 486 
... 382 
83 f.n., 358, 395 
... 617 
209, 223 
... 617 
... 480 


Grama 

G?ihasbha 

Grihyasutras 

Grunwedel 

Gudimallam 


428 f.n. 429, 474 
... 8, 9 
8 

... 68 
4, 65, 68, 69 


Ga&gaputra 429, 430 

Gaiigfis&gara 84 f.n. 

Gadga-visarjanamurti 316, 317 

G&Agdya-Subrahmapya ... 440, 

441, 442 

Garbha-gpba ... 105 

Garuda 184, 916, 334, 335, 336, 
400, 421, 554 

Garudi ... 418 

Gaudaddla ... 6 

Gaujilvara 286, 512 

Gautama (rishi)l, 2, 3, 276, 277, 
617, 567 

Gaurf 185, 216 

Gavipufcra-Vatfravapa ... 533 

Gay& 83 395 

Gfiyatrf 45, 84 f.n . 

Ghaptfi 159, 156, 194, 199, 200, 
254,256,366, 366,373,376,379, 
388, 389, 390, 434, 436, 496, 497 


Guha-Subrabmapya 440, 442 

Guha 422, 429, 430, 442 

Gubya ... 60 

Guru ... 289 

Gurupara ... 242 

Hala 173, 427, 437, 553 

Edldsyamdhatmya ... 408 

Halfibldu 156, 356, 401, 510, 557 
Hamsa 400, 503, 508, 530 

Hanum&n ... 532 

Hara 387, 389, 486, 467, 489 

H&ra 114,131,155, 191,264, 

283, 286, 326, 340, 
344, 377, 381, 435, 
446, 519 


Hamsa 

Hanumftn 

Hara 

H&ra 


Hari 

Harihara 

Hari-Rudra 

Harilchandra 

H&ritf 

Earivaihia 

Harsbaka 


174, 487 
333, 334, 335 
... 63 

86 396 

... 635 
64, 522 
88/ft. 


10 



INDEX. 


PAGE PAGE 

Haryarddha (tnurtl) or Hari- Indrapi or Saohf 517, 619, 630 
baramurti 69, 117, 332, 333, 334 Isa ... 394 

Haaaao (Diatriot) ... 401 Isanal2,40, 44,46,64, 88/n„97, 

Haatioharm&mharadhara ... 181 364, 866, S67, 368 /.a , 375, 378, 

Hatak«4vara ...85/.». 386, 388, 893, 3<>4, 408, 404, 

Haven ... 137 filfl, 637 

Havirbhaja ... 663 Iaasevaka ... 464 

Hfimakiita ...85 f.n. Ishfca . <*79 

Hikkft-sutra 119, 158, 353, 574 Iahfadftvafcas ... 31 

Himalayas 49, Q3 f.n, 147, 215, Ishfikapura (in Lanka) .. 85/.n, 

233,274,315 lsvara ...83/,w. 

Himasthana . . .85 / n. 404, 405 

Himavan 147, 182, 337 Tsvara-pada ... 13 

Hirauyagarbha 57, 501, 562 Is'vara-fcatva ... 393 

Qira^yakasipu ... 172 ItihaBas . . 407 

Qomas 8, 10, 198, 339, 341, Jaimini ... 566 

342, 346, 349, 449 Jaina ... 518 

Homa-kumJa ... 342 Jala ... 395 

Hotris ... 521 Jalalinga ...85/.n. 

Hoysaja Sobool (of soulp- Jalasayi ... 506 

tare) 156,219,356,511 Jalpfisa ... 395 

Hoysalesv&ra (temple) 156, 510, Jaleavara ...85 f.n. 

557 Jalandbara 188, 189, 

Htnjukk&ra ...23, 32 190, 191 

lohobba ... 404 Jalandharaharamurti 188, 190 

Iobohha-tfakti 362, 363, 433 J&landharamurti ... 369 

Iobohbft-lakti-tatva ... 405 Jamba (tree) ... 408 

lham ... 245 Jambunadi ... 213 

IJaiyangutjU ... 476 Jamadagni 276,567 

ladba ... 516 Jambhala ... 685 

Indbika ... 393 Jambukesvaram 400, 407 

India 407.503,507,510,555 Janardbana ... 52 

Indian Museum ... 179 Jangamas (-Libgavantas, 

Indra 5, 28, 164, 166, 173, 184, Lingay&ta or Vlra daivaa) 

214, 233, 261, 313, 417,448, 36,77 

449, 466, 457, 464, 506, 615, Japa ' ... 32 

516, 517, 618, 619, 620, 521, Japyeavara ... 213 

529, 632, 541, 664, 569, 569, 570 JarAaandha ... 60 


11 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Pah* 

Jat*. 108. 186. 219, 225. 226, 252, 
253. 269, 275, 279, 281, 282, 
284, 286, 806, 816, 817, 818, 
S19, 821, 877, 884, 004, 507, 
598, 524, 677 
Jat*-bendha 276, 278, 863, 400 
Jatibhira 191, 253. 261, 275, 
283, 306, 363 
latidbara ... 180 

Jati-makuta 67, 114, 118, 122, 
180, 139, 149, 163, 154, 158, 
167, 175, 176, 178, 188, 192, 
199, 210, 213, 216, 225, 226, 
258, 257, 261, 264, 268, 269, 
975, 276, 280, 282, 286, 303, 
808, 324, 327, 335, 340, 342, 
844. 348, 353, 357, 366, 369, 
872, 373, 374, 377, 380, 382, 
883, 384, 365, 386, 397, 398, 
402, 405, 406, 433, 450, 457, 
460, 465, 466, 468, 504, 508, 
510, 511, 521, 538,544, 567 
Jatimatfala 2. 154, 156, 193, 
253, 256, 275, 285, 306 


Jatfla ..M/m. 

Jafodaka ... 212 

Jaya ... 437 

Jayada (linga) 91, 92, 93 

Jayanta 84 f.n., 387, 390 

Jib* ... 394 

Jlnfdidh&ra-daiakam 6, 81/.W., 82 
Jtvttman (■pain) 22,34,35 


Jfiana 248,273,277,370,404, 
564,566 

Jfiioa-DakBbipamurti 283, 284, 

286 

J&Snamndra 199, 274, 284, 350, 
378. 443. 567 


Pass 

Jnfinamuril ... 284 

Jnanapada ... 16 

J&toafakti 21, 22, 362, 363, 966, 
405, 483 

Jnanaaakti-Subrahm&Qya ... 433 
Jnanasambandha ... 230 

Jnanis ... 242 

Jvalas 342, 528 

JySsbtha 393, 403, 423, 423 f.n. 
Jy5ti ... 393 

Jyotirlmga ... 201 

Kadrn ... 554 

Kailasa 3, 85 f.n., 171, 175, 185, 
194. 218, 219, 233, 297, 319, 
322, 416, 458, 534 
Kailaaaobala 84 f.n. 

Kailasanathasvamin temple 109, 

170, 209, 211, 265, 266, 269, 

287, 308, 320, 330 
Kaitabha ... 47 

Kala 14, 361, 392, 392/.*., 393, 
394, 395, 396 f.n. 
Kala 145, 156, 159, 160, 173, 176, 
200, 202, 377, 393, 527 
K&labhairva ... 176 

Kalagni 173, 181, 395 

Kalagni-Maharaudra ... 181 

Kalahaeti 473, 477, 518 

Kalamukbalinga ... 79 f.n, 

Kalamakbas 17, 19, 20. 25, 26. 

29. 30, 81 

K&lanemi ... 188 

Ktlanjara 84 f.n., 394 

Kalantakamnrti ... 369 

Kfilarimurti 145, 156, 158, 159, 

161 

Kalayikarapl 393, 403 

Kalaya-niyanar • a* 475 


12 



INDEX. 


page Page 

KiJI 178, 182, 244, 248, 398, 403, Kankun* 130, 191, 326, 827, 334, 
467, 52C 348 

••• 28 Kannada ... 306 

Kaliyuga 467, 468 Kannappa-cuyacAr 473, 479 

Kalpa 40, 100, 106, 243, 277 Kapbaka 429/,rt. 

Kalyapasupdaramurti 369, 383 Kapva ... 066 

Kama 147, 148, 337 Kapala 17 28, 120, 101, 152 


Kimadahanamurti ... 369 134, 153. 106, 163 178, 177, 

KamalAksba ... 211 178, 179, 180, 181, 193, 198. 

Kamalakshamala ... 553 1'jJ, 200. 201, 204, 235, 256, 

Kamala-loohana ... 210 265, 275. 286, 306, 307, 324, 

Kamalaeana 278. 441 332, 373, 376, 377, 378, 381, 

Katnapdala HI, 153, 170, 190, 385, 388, 389, 390, 391, 496, 


281, 285, 342, 376, 388, 390, 497. 538, 553 

391, 399, 426, 439, 440, 465, Kapali 174, 498 

504, 500, 506, 507, 508, 010, Kapalikas 20, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 
511, 512, 521, 523, 530, 537, 30, 31, 175 

553, 557 Kapaliaa ... 386 

Eamftntakamurti 117, 145, 147, Kapardin ... 40 

148 Kapila 313, 314 


Kamapala ... 180 

Kdmikdgama 62, 76, 77, 80, 88, 
89, 90, 97, 108, 159, 160, 172, 
276. 277, 289, 290, 303, 315, 
316, 323, 367 /.n., 428 f.n., 467, 

467 f.n., 573, 574, 575, 57G 

Kanakasabha ... 230 

Kanakhala ...84/.w. 

Kappamangai ... 476 

K&nohi ... 477 

Kanohuka ... 498 

Kapdar&dittar ... 479 

KApdafishis ... 666 

Kanfliyur ... 524 

Kankala-dapda 304, 306, 308 
Kanka)a (murti) 117, 295, 297, 
303, 304, 306, 307, 308, 309, 
370 


Kaiaikkal ... 476 

Karaikkalammaivar ... 476 

Kari 488, 498 

Karma 14, 22, 239, 245, 363, 395 

Karma- mala ... 371 

Karmaaadakhya 365, 366 

Karmesa ... 368 

Karapa 21, 22, 396 

Earandgama 88, 96, 107, 108, 
117, 149, 161, 186, 199, 276, 
289, 303. 315, 316, 323, 357, 
367 f.n, 467, 468, 488,489, 497, 
573, 574, 575, 576 
Karanda-makuta 130, 131, 159, 
227, 325, 327, 345. 380, 398, 
402, 429, 434, 441, 443, 446, 
449, 460. 475, 627, 529, 635, 
536, 552, 556, 558 


13 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Page 

Karavlra 8d f.n. 

K&rkofcaka ... 657 

Karnaparvan ... 164 

Karpa-flufera 119, 674 

IUrnatio ... 360 

KarpikAra 85, f.n. 

Karohapa 85, f.n. 

Kartart-hasta (pose) 118, 119, 
167, 321 

Kartfria&d&kbya ... 365 

K&rbtikdya 217, 349, 415, 416, 
417, 420, 422, 429, 430, 432, 
436, 522 

Karuvurfctfivar ... 479 

Karya ... 22 

K&si (Benares) 150, 175, 177, 

450 

K&4mlra ...84/ n 

Kaaburl ... 406 

Kasyapa 276, 277, 554 

Kasyapagokra ... 205 


Kanaka- hasta 119, 155, 161, 169, 
212, 252, 260, 261, 289, 290, 
291 /.*., 292, 304, 308, 316, 
325, 330, 334, 344, 345. 354, 
355, 437, 438, 491 
Kathd Sarit S agar a ... 233 

Katibandha ... 344 

Ka$isama 259, 260 

Hati-sutraa 114, 178, 261, 264, 
377, 504, 508, 567 
Katyavalamfaijta (basfca) 109, 110, 
119, 162, 200, 346, 425, 426, 
433, 435, 439, 450, 509 
Kaumara ... 394 

Kaumudl (ardha- chandra) 388, 389 
Kanplna 438, 443, 444 

Kaoravaa 4 ... 214 


PAG8 

Kauthitaki-brdhmana ... 45 

Kausika 276, 277 

Kaastnbha ... 211 

Kay, Mr. , . 283 

Kayardhapa, Karopa 18, 19 
Kavaoba 200, 389, 507 

Kavfirl ... 408 

Kaveripakkam 282, 380 

Kavirippumpat$inam 476, 518 

Kedara 83/.n. f 395 

Kedardsvara (temple) 356, 401 

Kesabandha ... 563 

Kfisava ... 54 

K&4in ... 417 

Kesini ... 313 

Kfitaki (flower) ... 107 

KSvalamurbi ... 124 


Kdyura 114, 119, 155, 286, 326, 
327, 334, 340, 343, 344, 377, 
435, 519 

Khadga 115, 154, 156, 159, 169, 
173, 179, 180, 181, 186,187, 

192, 193, 198, 199, 200, 201, 

217, 254, 255. 332, 365,366, 

373, 376, 377, 379, 389, 390, 

391, 402, 406, 422, 426,427, 

429, 436, 437, 438, 439.441, 

447, 489, 496, 497, 526, 527, 

552, 553 

Khadgamala ... 199 

Khajahuti ... 64 

Kb&ra ... 534 

Kharod ... 531 

Kharva^a 428 /.n., 

Kbatvafiga 115, 156, 173. 177 
200, 298, 377, 381, 388, 389, 
390, 406, 497 
Khdehara ... 180 



INDEX. 


PACHB 

116, 154, 169, 169, 181, 
187, 200, 266, 873, 876. 377, 
379, 381, 389, 390, 391, 402, 
406, 422, 426, 427, 429, 434, 
436, 437, 438, 441, 447,469, 
496, 497, 607, 626, 662. 653 
Kinnara 266, 277, 291, 421 

Kiranagama 86, 90, 368/.n. 
Kir&D&ksha 388, 391 

Eirafca 84 /.n., 215, 216, 370 
Kiratarjunamurti 214, 216 

Kirlfr 191, 263, 334, 442, 519, 

661 

Eirlfc-makuta 173, 214, 336, 
343, 383, 399, 475, 511, 526, 
535 

Eo^itirfcba ...85 /.n, 

Kdftapp&$i ... 252 

Kovilur . . . 124 

Kdyil’Puranam ... 235 

Kratra ... 565 

Kraunoha (mountain) 429, 439 
EraunobabbStta 429, 430, 432, 

438 

Efisbpa 50, 53, 406, 517 

KriBhnapgi ... 528 

Kfishpadevaraya ... 481 

Kfishp&jina ... 279 

Erisbpamisra ...26, 29 

Kfisboam^iga same as Mriga 109, 
111, 113, 119, 121, 122, 123, 
129, 163, 164, 167, 200, 208, 
210, 214, 216, 292. 317, 319, 
321, 340, 353, 356 
E*lah£ap&iia ... 528 

Kriabnavadana ... 528 

K?tta ... 394 

EfifiallAga ...64/.n. 



Pam 

Krltayuga 

... 467 

K*it3mra 

... 34 f,n. 

Efittikaa 

420, 490 

Krittivtaai 

...84 /•». 

Krittivaafoivara 

... 160 

K*iyS 

... 404 

Kfiyapada 

.. u> 

Krty a kramadyfitini 


Krivawkti 21, 22, 960, 3H3. 96S, 


405, 433 

KT5dha 28 1 18O, 

181, 894 

Firoda-damahtra 

... 180 

Kahapika (lingaa) 

...76, 77 

Kehapanakas 

... 24 

Kahefcrapa 

... 423 

KehSbrapala 495. 496, 497, 498 

Kubera or (Dhanada) 

217, 616, 

528 fn„ 533, 534, 

535, 536, 

537, 537 561 

Kubja (Tam. Kuppam) 

428 /.». 

Kuladevatas 

... 31 

Kulapalaka 

... 180 

Kula^Skhara Alvar 473, 478, 479 

Kulika 

... 557 


Kulofctungaoholadfiva III ... 6 

Kukkuta 349, 425, 426, 427, 429, 
432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 
441, 442, 446 

Kukkutapflakara 03irovart- 
tana) ... 93 

Kumara 42, 44, 133, 135, 136, 
137, 138, 139, 147, 419, 432, 
437,444 

Kumdrasambhava ... 421 

Kumdra-tantra 423, 432, 438, 
445, 449,450 
Kumftrilabhafta — ? 

Knmbbakarpa ... 684 


16 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Page Page 

Kumbhakopam 19, 829, 444, Lal&ta-tiilakam 264 

609. 512 Lalifca 202, 262. 263, 265, 266 
Kombhaa 10,11 Lahtdgama 368 /.n. 

Kupdalaa 114, 115, 155, 191, Lamba-Kurohaa&na 603 

192,264,275,286, 303,324, LambinI ... 148 

325, 329, 374, 398, 446, 504, Lanohhana 179, 289 

519, 535, 561 Lanka 218, 458, 533, 534 

Kupdaa 10, 180, 181, 197, 198, Laya ... 368 

200, 341, 342, 345, 440, 565 Lila 246, 369, 408 

Kupdika ... 170 Lllamurfcis 369, 383 

Kubkuma (saffron) 435,437,524 Linga 33,56,57,58.59,60, 
Kurarl ... 229 61 /.n., 62, 62 /.n., 63, 64, 65, 66, 


Kuroha 279, 504, 508, 510 68. 69, 70, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 

Kurma ... 531 82, 83, 86, 87, 88, 86, 90, 91, 

Kurmapurdna 20/. n., 105, 150, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 

175,182,297 100,101, 102, 105, 106, 107, 

Kuruobandra ...85/.«, 108, 109. 110, 111, 150, 157, 

Kurujafigala ...84/.n. 160, 161, 162, 163, 206, 289, 

KurukshStra 83 /.»., 895 302, 322, 332, 364, 365, 366, 


Kuaa, 279. 504, 506, 509, 555, 399, 400, 401, 408, 410 

564 Lmga-purdna 59, 61 /.n., 105, 147, 
Kuaaaana ... 561 197, 302, 403, 404, 456 

Knthara ... 378 Lingesvara ...85 f.n. 

Kutika or ekabhbga 428 f.n. Lingayafc 33, 289 

Kutila ... 181 Lingin ... 59 

Kuftita (pose) 263, 267, 268 Lingddbhavamurti, 105, 107, 109, 
Kuvalaydnanda ... 60 110, 111, 160, 370 

Laghu - Pratyabhijnavimar- Lohaja (linga) ... 76 

auti ... 34 Lobitanga ... 375 

Lakahmapa ... 161 Ldkadharmipi ... 15 

Lakahmi 189, 233, 335, 336, Lokapalas ... 543 

339, 343, 346, 349, 506 Lnoknow Museum ... 63 

Lakujas ... 24 Mada ... 149 

Lakoji ...8 5/,w. Madana ... 489 

Lakulfia, or Lakulisvara ... 17 Madeour 123, 134 

18,19,395 Madhu 47 

Lakulrfvara-pap^ita 17, 18 Madhusudana Sarasvatl ... 19 

Lal&ta-paft& 281, 282 Madhvaa MS 


16 





paob 

Madbyama 348, 495 

Madbyama-dasa-t alavidhi ... 465 

Madhyad&ia ... 6 

Madhyamftja ... 895 

Madhya Sutra 956, 573, 574, 

575, 576 

Madras ... 283 

Madras Museum 179, 187, 252, 

292, 830, 510, 611, 558 

Madras Presidency ... 320 

Madura, 163, 171, 209, 212, 230. 
331, 351, 356, 408, 409, 411, 
448, 476 

Madurakavi ... 480 

Mababala 83 /, 464 

Mahabalipuram 328, 331, 355, 

478 

Mahabharata 42, 48, 50, 53, 60, 
164, 210, 214, 417, 431, 517, 
532, 550, 554 
Mahadeva 40, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 
60. 83 /. n., 165, 185, 217, 218, 
220, 237, 375, 386, 403, 407, 
416, 420, 534, 537 
Mahadevf (Umft) ... 59 

Mahadyuti ... 393 

Mahakala 83/.n.,201, 202, 244, 395 
Mabakali 201, 202 

Mahakaya ... 180 

Mahakotf 83 /. w. 

Mahalakshmf 423 /. n. 

Mabalaya ... 395 

Mabalipgastihala 83 f . n. 

Mabamap<Japa ... 460 

Mab&m&y& ... 240 

Mah&n&da 83 /. n. 

Mahaniaika ... 152 

Mahandftya ... 44 


PAQS 

Mab&padma 557 

Mah arietta ... 568 

Mah&aadajiy&murti . 359, 

361 4 378, 37 1 
Mahafcejas 83/. « 

Mahatmas 658 

Mah&tmyas 408 

Mahftvalll . . U5 

Mabavayu 174 

Mahavlra 30 

Mahavratas 39, 63 f. n. 

Mahay ana 'Bauddha plulo 
sophy) 369 f. H, 

Mahayofii 23 f. n. 

Mahendra 83 / 395 

Mabendragiri ... 175 

Mahuudravarmau (Pallava 
king) ... 319 

Mahfiaamurti 359, 361, 368, 

369, 370, 379, 380, 382, 383 
Mahoavaraa 33, 47, 53, 83 /. n , 
84/. n„ 85/. w., 107, 238, 297, 
321, 322,405 
Mahotk&ta 83 /. n. 

Mahobaav&a ... 333 

Mahratfca ... 555 

Makara ... 348, 

441, 442, 529, 530, 531 
Makara-kundala ... 119. 

130, 134, 168, 303, 334, 384 
Makara-torapa ... 110 

Makofc ... 394 

Mcfku(agama 60, 83, 368 /. n. 
Makutaa ... 131, 

151,172, 213, 380, 479.507 
M akufcesvara 84 /. n, t 85 t . 
Mala 14, 245, 247, 362, 863, 
394, 895, 396 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Malabar 

Pagi 

487. 565 

Malik* Kafar 

81/. n. 

Malta 

... 191 

Mallari 

191, 192 

Mallari’M&hatmya 

... 192 

M&lati-madhava 

...28, 50 

Milava 

... 29 

Mftli&f 

... 534 

Mina 

... 558 

Manakkanjarar 

... 477 

MapamSrkudi 

... 477 

Manas 

... 394 

Uamtara 79/.».,99/.n., 374,443 

Manas-tatva 

... 404 

ManasvinI 

... 157 

Mauavalamamunigal 

... 479 

Masala 

10, 163, 179 

M&pdaleavara 

... 394 

Mapdangudi 

oo 

r*- 

''tfi 

Matfapa 209, 320, 361, 401, 

491, 448, 464, 468, 618 

Mandara (mountain) 

... 466 

Mangala 

428/. «. 

Mangalavur 

... 477 

Mapikkavaohaka 

230, 479, 480 

Manmatha 

148, 149 

Mannannar-krishpa 

... 363 

Mannarkoyil 

... 473 

Mappi 

... 206 

Manojava 

... 375 

Manonmapi 

... 393 

Manta 

... 668 

Mantraktfefaara 

4 

Manirak&ll 

4 

Manfcranayaka 

... 181 

Mantras 

... 197, 

392 / '» Bn 

396/. n., 629 

Mantrtfvaras 

... 396 



Page 

Mantra-siddhi 29, 197, 198, 367 

Manu 

662, 667 

Manusha (liriga) 

... 79, 

80. 86, 87, 88, 96, 97, 98 

Manvantara 

550, 666, 567 

Marddana 

... 176 

Marloha 

2 

Marfohi 

562, 563, 566 

Marini 

... 148 

Markapdeya 

... 54, 

58. 167, 158, 160, 161, 163 

Markandeyapurana 

- 45, 58, 430 

Martfcapda 

... 180 

Marudapi 

... 326 

Marud&ntanallur 

124, 469 

Marub-gapaB 

213, 550, 569 

Marufcs 41, 458, 532, 569, 570 

M&rwar 

... 385 

Mafcha 

428, /.n. 

Mafcra 

... 524 

Matrikas 

339, 506 

Mabujunga 133, 135, 376, 384,385 

Maunif (Grass girdle) ... 443 

Maya 14, 164, 

189. 240, 245, 

278, 302, 363, 393, 394, 395, 


396 /.n., 404 

M&ya-garbha 

... 18 

Mayamata 88, 89,90, 91, 93, 


94 f. n. 96 

Maya-ixlpb 

... 556 

MayurSnathasvSmin temple 

at Mayavaram 

... 123 

Mayuravahana 

... 422 

M&dhavins 

... 566 

Medbramula sufcra 

... 118 

Mekhal&s 

327, 842, 845 

MfilohSri 

... 380 

Mem (mountain) 

118.996 


18 



INDEX. 


Paqb 

Members of a ptyha: — npAna, 
jagatf, kumuda, padma, 
kampa, kapfcha, pa$$ik&, 


nimna and gb$itavAri . . . 101 

Meykapdadftvar ... 479 

Mllalal ... 477 

Mimamaa ... 235 

Mimamsakas ... 7 

Mln&kshl-Sundarfiivara 209, 212 
Mithuna ... 254 

Mitra 457. 529 

Mdohikft ... 393 

Modaka 136, 137 

Modaka-priya ... 180 

Mohinf 486, 487, 489 

Moksha 10, 22, 30 

Mriga ... 134, 


136, 163,164. 168, 174. 200, 


Mtmaiyadnyfcr . . 477 

Mupflapak ... 180 

Mupiji ... 395 

Munis 890, 567 

Munja ... 342 

Murti 361 f m , 370, 

389, 400, 405, 406 
Mtirtinayanar 476 

Murttasadakhya 364, 366 

Murtyashtaka 359, 403, 407 
Muruga*nayanar ... 475 

Muaala 173, 187, 200. 9S2, 373, 
376, 429, 438, 447 
Mufisalmans ... 3b0 

Muyalaka (Apasmarapnru- 
sba), 235, 237, 241, 247 

Mylaporo ... 478 

Mysore (State) 61, 152, 218, 288 


208, 214, 216. 292, 316, 317, 

319, 321, 340, 

344, 353, 356, 

357, 369, 387, 

399, 410, 443, 
455, 460 

Mfiamaya (Libga) 

... 76 

Mritak&svara 

...84/,w 

Mritasanjlvini 

... 544 

M^ityu 

173, 202, 526 

Mrityunjaya 

388, 391 

Mrifcyunjayamanfcra 

... 409 

Mudgara 173, 200, 217. 388, 

389, 390 

Madras 

...25. 26 

Mukhabimbagama 

368 f.n. 

Mukbalipga 

64,95, 97,98 

Mukhara 

... 181 

Mukta 

... 498 

Mnkt&hiras 

... 119 

Mokti 

239, 245 

Mukuja 

169, 170 


Nabhi-Butra 

118, 167, 225 

Nabobship 

... 380 

Nidordhva-bhuvanas .. 393 

Nadania 

234, 238 

Nagadeva 

549, 664, 556 

Naga-mudra 

... 225 

N&gapasa 

160, 496, 497 

N&gapattanam 

19, 477 

NSgapratisbtha 

... 556 

Nagara, type of 

oentral 

shrine 

91, 99/.». 

Nagara, type of linga 91, 99/.«. 
Nagara, type of pitha 91, 99 /.n. 

Nagara] a 

... 556 

Nagaresvara 

...85/.n. 

Nagari 

428/.I*. 

Nagaa 549, 554, 

555, 556, 657, 


55S 

Nftgasiri 

... 64 

Naga-yainopavlta 

325, 497, 588 


19 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Pagb 

NAgSsvarasvftmin 308, 309, 929, 
330, 444, 445, 509 
Nfigitf 557, 558 

Naimila 83 f.n, t 395 

Naimittika (ceremonies) ... 15 


Naisb^ika 
Naiebthikl (same 
dharmiijl 
Nfikala 

Nakra-kumjala 

22b 

Nakujlavara 


... 8, 16 
&s Riva- 
ls, 16 

... 395 
131, 176, 227, 

■ 281, 324, 335 
... 20 

Nala (same as Ghrifcavari). 101, 
102, 395 

Na[akuvera ... 561 

Nallasvami Piljai, Mr. ... 248 

NaminandiyAr ... 475 

Nanfirupadbara ... 180 

Nanda ... 230 

Nandi 136, 137, 153, 212, 213, 
264, 265, 266, 334, 335, 336, 421, 
456, 457, 458, 459, 460, 464 
NandinI 550, 551 

Nandisanugrahamurtii ... 212 

Nandiketfvara or Adhikara- 
Nandi 212, 217, 455, 456, 458, 
459, 460 

Nandfsvara 53, 268 

Nandivarman, (Son of Danti- 
varman) ... 382 

NafijaAgddu ... 288 

Nara 49, 556 

Narada 189, 276, 305, 423 f.n. 
Naraeimha 173, 174 

Ncvra$tmhdgama 368 /.n. 

Narasingamunaiyaraiyar ... 476 
Nara-vabana 528 f,n. 

NSr&ya&afefimi Ayyar, MX 444 


Nar&yaga 
Nasatyas 
Nasi 
Nafanamurfcis 


Paoi 
49 , 54 , 558 
643 , 544 
... 394 
258 


Nafana-sabha or SabhA ... 229 
NafarAja 44, 223, 224, 225, 227, 
229, 230, 231, 234, 237, 244, 
251, 252, 257, 573 
NaHukot(;ai (artisans) ... 356 
Nattukkotfciohettis ... 230 
Natvafpose) ... 269 

Nafyasdstras 146, 223, 227, 257, 
258, 259, 262, 263, 269 
Nd{ya*vedoi‘Vivriti 228, 260, 263, 

269 

Navagrahas ... 506 

Nava-tAia ... 160 

Nay a ... 558 

Nallore ... 134 

Nepala 84/.«. 

Nigamajnanadfiva, son of 
VAmadevasivaoharya of 
Vyaghrapura 5, 81 f.n., 82 
Nikuttifcam ... 263 

Nllagrlva ... 40 

Nilakaptha 48, 84 /.it, 180 
Nllalohifca ... 386 

Nilanakkar ... 476 

Nlldtpala, same as Ufcpala... 121, 
123, 131, 133, 275, 325, 327, 
330, 341, 377, 380, 441, 
442, 445, 467, 492 , 
520, 526, 530, 531 
Nimittakfir&oa 892, 404 

Niryaga ... 25 

Nirvaga-dfksbfi ... 14, 15 

Nirv&Qi ... 498 

Nirfuti 161 , 515 , 527 , 528. 529 


20 



INDEX. 


PAGE PAOl 

Nlrakta 541, 558, 559, 564 434, 448, 450. 451, 455. *60, 465, 

Nishkala 240, 361, 362, 364, 375 474, 488 A 91, 50$, 507, 538, 558 

Nishkala-Siva ... 392 Pa\aiyAnw 47J 

Niivdadgama 368 fn Palaniv&trfawr , fc 1^*1 

NifcyGshtf (mantras) ... 9 PaUava 2 1 *. 319 382, 489 

Nivritti •• 393 Pafioha biabmas, »amu \* 

Nivfitti, Kala ... 395 fsan&dayah ... 352, 

Nivfitti-sakti ... 363 375.378,391,404,467 

Niyati . . 394 Pauohajana ^69, 568 

North Aroot District ... 380 Panobakfitva 238, 940 

Northern India 178, 407, 415, 485 Pancbakflhara ** 9, 246, 947 
Nrisimbavat&ra ... 172 Panoharm ... 555 

Nritta (murfci) 117, 146, 223, Panchanndikkulam 460 

228, 229, 253, 256, 257. Panchanfcaka 893 

258, 273, 369, 400 Panoharatraa ... 7 

Omkara 85 /.w, 248 Panoha-tala ... 305 

Opakkur ... 122 ' Pandaramn ... 13 

Oahadhls ... 545 | Pandyaa 230, 256, 408, 409 

Pada 392 f.n , 394, 396 fn. . Pant ... 394 

Padakas . . 119 J Papigrabapa 341 

Paflampakkanayinar ... 285 | PApabhakebapa ... 176 

Padma 153,376,390,422,425, Papia ... 526 

426, 427, 435, 436, 437, 439. Parahhuti ... 395 

443,445,492,506,507,520, Parabrabman ... 59 

530,531,553,557 Paragas ... 564 

Padmanidhi ... 536 Param **■ 245 

Padma-papi 369 f.n. Paramarishis ... 566 

Padma- pasa ... 170 Paramaliva 392, 403 

Padma- patra ... 119 Paramatman (-Pati) 22, 34, 35 

Padma- pifha, same as pad- ParameBvara 59, 404, 405 

masana 121, 123, 168, 325, Pdrameivardgama 368 f. w. 

369, 387, 398, 399, 402, Parantaka Ohoja I 230, 519 

406, 496, 503, 536, Parasakti 362, 363, 364 

556, 567, 570, 577 Parasara - 567 

Padmapurdna ... 375 Parttfava ••• 487 

Padmasamhitd ... 487 Parasa 109,110,111,113, 


Padmasana 193, 207, 217, 274, 114, 121, 122, 129, 134, 136, 

280, 317, 826, 341, 345, 424, 158, 159, 160. 163, 164, 169, 


21 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 


Pmi 

173, 174, 176, 181, 187, 200, 
208, 311, 214, 216, 263, 268, 
270, 292, 317, 319, 324, 327, 
328, 329. 330, 836, 340, 344, 
363, 366, 867, 366, 369, 373, 
377, 378, 379, 381, 887, 388, 
389, 390, 410, 441, 465, 460, 


468 

ParasurSmesvara 65, 66 

Paratanbra 463, 468 

Paripakva ... 396 

Parivara 464, 474 


Pag* 

Paau 7, 392 

PadupAmpati ... 40 

PiiupataliAga 79 /. n. 

Padapatamurtf 135, 126 

Pasupataa 17. 18, 19, 36, 29, 

32, 36, same aa Laknllla, pp., 17, 
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 
PAfapata (f&sira) 3. 4, 7 

PAsupatAstra 214, 216, 216, 217 

Pasupati 18, 26, 40. 44 , 46, 

60, 84 /. »., 376, 403,407 
Patagas ... 233 


ParivaradSvataB 421,422,429, PatAka-haata 149,228,264,265, 

423 /.»., 446. 463, 502, 503, 506 266, 269, 270, 354, 633 

Parivfira-murlis ... 464 PAtAla-loka 85 /.n., 313, 314,564 


Pareva-subras 95, 120, 124 Patanjali ... 256 

Parrataraja ... 347 Patra 389, 390 

Parvatavasa ... 181 Patra-knndala 119, 130, 134, 

PSrvati 49, 51, 141, 147, 177, 176, 227, 229, 281, 329 

182, 183. 189, 190, 207, 208, Patta ... 306 

210, 212. 214, 216, 218, 219, Pat$a-bandha ... 275 

220, 261, 264, 269, 270, 322. Pattapa 428 f.n. 

323, 324, 325, 326, 332, 335, PaftikA ... 989 

336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, PatflSa 388, 389, 390 

343, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, Patttfraram 124, 162, 163, 178, 
349, 360, 351, 352, 356, 357, 200, 253, 447 

358, 408, 409, 410, 444, 506 PaurApio ... 382 

Parigba ... 181 PaurpimA ... 518 

Pafa (same as Naga-pasa) 11, Paush^ika (linga) 92, 93 

14, 136, 137, 151, 152, 154, Pavitra ... 490 

156, 159, 162, 173, 174, 177, PAyu 394/.*. 

178, 179, 180, 188, 198, 200, PeriyAlvAr (Viehnnehitta)... 478 
214, 254, 266, 332, 366, 366, Periyapurancm 230, 480 

373. 876, 377, 378, 379, 381, Perumaftgalam ... 477 

402, 406, 426, 427, 429, 486, Pballio (emblem) ... 98 

437, 438, 447, 466, 468, 497, Phallus ...65,68 

507. 608, 510, 511, 526, 527, Pijlaie or Pifyaimart ... 141 

630 PinAka 106. 466 


22 



INDEX. 


Ptafcp&tra 


821, 403, 417, 420* 601, 550, 660 


Pipflika (time as Pftbae) 66 , 66 , Prajfoa ... 894 

79.98,99,100,101,102 Prikira 981, 286, 880, 421. 429. 
Pinga ... 393 4U, 468, 502, 519 

Pifigala ... 536 Prakrit) ... 535 

Plngalekshapa ... 181 Prakyifcl 39,69,348.249,332 394 

PiSfcohas 179,394,550,562 PrakyHiiHabVfi .. 333 

PiB&obendra ... 421 Pra(ayakala« 393 396 

Pit&maba ... 181 Pralav&ntaka 180 

Pltambara 118, 211 Prarnabhagapat 51 

Pltha, 62, 62 /.n„ Bbadra Prapa 543, 338 

#t Mabambuja 101, Prapava 248, 295 

„ Srikara Frapayama ... 35 

„ Vikara j^g* Prapifcamaba ...83/.n. 

, ( Mab&vajra > 357 , Praaada (-palace) ... 4?fi 

l( Saumya 291, Prasarita-hasba ... 421 

„ Srlk&mya *22, Prasthanabheda ... 15 

„ Obandra Pratilomas ... £ 

H Vajra Prafcimalakshapa ... 46/ 

Pitria 549, 550, 559, 562, Pratipada ... 41! 

563, 564, 565 Pratisb^ha 62, 39i 

Prabha-mapflala, same as Pratishthakila 394, 39J 

Prabhavall 121, 123, 131, Prafciahthasakti ... 36: 

135, 137,’ 138, 151, 152, 193, Prabyabhijna 32, 33, 34, 3 


393 4U, 468, 502, 519 

536 FrakfUi 533 

181 Prakyifci 39,69,348.249,882 394 

562 PrakyH44abVB .. 382 

421 Pralayakalaa 393 395 

181 Prafav&ntaka 180 

211 Praruabhagapat 51 

Prapa 543, 558 

101, Prapava 248, 295 

Frapayama ... 35 

j^g* Prapitamaba ...83/.rt. 

257 , Prasada (-palace) ... 4”9 

291, Prasariba-hasba ... 427 

422, Prasthanabheda ... 19 

^489 ^ ra ^° ma8 ... 8 

Prafcimalakahapa ... 465 

... 419 
62, 393 
394, 395 
... 363 
32, 33, 34, 35 


201, 210, 229, 252, 261, 268, Pratyabhijna-sutras of Ub- 
289, 328, 331, 336, 356, 374, palaoharya 
380, 399, 434, 446, 492, 511, Prafcvuaha 552 

623, 577, 678 Pravartita 262, 

'rabh&sft 83/.n., 395, 552. 553 Pravritti-marga 

'rabhava 361 /.n. Prayaga ... / 

’rahhi ... 558 Prefcas 


Prabb&sa 83 /.w., 395 

Prabbava 

Prabbi 

Prabddhaohandrddayam 

Prachapfla 

Praohapqlaohapija 

PraohStas 

Pradb&na 

Pradhyumna 


51 /.n. Prayaga 
558 Prefcas 
20, 26 Priaptio (cults) 

394 Priapus or f asoinum 
467 Pyishpi 
183 Pyithvf 
59 Priyankara 
148 Priyodbbava 


Praj&pafci 44, 56, 57, 166, 184, | Prddgitdgama 


... 34 

552, 553 
262, 263 
... 302 
... 88/, n. 
... 542 
... 32 

...71Aw. 
40, 569 
395, 396/.n. 
... 181 
... 607 
368 An. 


23 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 



Page 

Padnkottah State 

... 283 

Pndu-mapdapa 

... 351 

Pugalttupaiyar 

... 476 

Puj&*bbaga 79, 94, 

95, 96, 97, 


100, 101 

Palaha 

... 565 

Polastya 976, CSS, 634, 663, 665, 


567 

Pundurntti-kfiflanambi 

... 479 

Puranaa 141, 156, 301, 407, 456, 


488 

Purapio 

642, 554 

Parapapuruaha 

... 57 

Purpa-kamatva 

... 14 

Purpa-kumbba 441 

442, 532 

Purparupa 

... 176 

Purohita 

... 502 

Purva (or Purapa linga) 

i ... 79 

Purva-karaipagama 

117, 130 

131, 132, 148, 149, 

208, 229, 

341, 343, 397, 405, 406, 545 

Purusba, 58, 69, 249, 

332, 394, 


405 

Puruahobtamanambi 

... 479 

Pdlalar 

... 475 

PushkalA 

... 488 

Pushkara 83/.n 

340, 395 

Pushpaka 

... 217 

Puahpotkata 

... 534 

Paabtika 

... 377 

Pnataka 173, 180. 900, 606, 507 

Putrak&a 

13, 14, 16 

Putra-marga 

... 16 

Pythogoraa 

... 39 

Bfiga 149, 960, 394 

Rihu 

... 188 

Bfijadhanf 428/.»., 499 

B&jaraja t0b5[a) 

...6, 908 1 


Page 


R&jariahia ... 666 

Rajan&r&yapa- Sambuvariyar 



81 /.n. 

Rajaaa 

495, 496 

Bajaaa-gupa 

... 118 

Rajaaamurti 

... 496 

Rajaaik 

... 425 

Rajaaimba, Pallava king ... 209 

Rajata-aabha 

... 230 

RajSndraobola 

4, 6, 208 

Rajna 

... 431 

Rajogupa 

129. 170 

Rajya 

428 /.«. 

Raka 

... 534 

RakBhaaaa 47, 394, 418, 458, 

521, 527, 528, 534, 559, 560, 


. 563 

Rakahasa (linga) 

... 79 

Rakahaaendra 

421, 422 

Rama 

... 161 

Ramanujaoharya 

17, 19, 25, 


. 479,480 

Ramnyana 78 /.»., 316, 416, 468, 

533, 534, 560, 661 

Rambha 

661, 668 

Ramesvaram 

262, 347 

Rasa 

394,404 

Ratanpur 

... 345 

Rathaa 

... 366 

Rati 

... 148 

Ratnab&ras 

... 119 

Ratnaja (lingaa) 

... 76 

Ratna-kup^aia 

... 119 

Rabnapapl 

369 /.ft. 

Ratna-p&tra 524, 530, 537 

Ratnas 

200,631 

Raudraa 

...8, 36 

RaudrapSiupatamurti 

128.126 



INDEX. 





Paoa 

Baodrl 



398,403 

Bauravaoama 



868 /.*. 

Ravapa, king 

of La&ka 

217, 218, 

219, 220 

,458 

459, 

534, 561, 




668 

Ravapanugrahamiirti 

217, 383 

Be vat* 



387, 389 

Biddbi 



... 534 

Big -Vida 


39, 55, 58. 516, 


525, 527 

541, 550 

Biehabba 



... 354 

Bisbia 164, 

185, 

215, 

235, 236, 

266, 273, 

276. 

277, 

278. 279, 

282, 284, 

287, 

289, 

291, 295, 

301, 302. 

305, 

313, 

314, 316, 

319, 320, 

322, 

323, 

328, 332, 

339, 349, 

350. 

417, 

418, 419, 

429, 431. 

455. 

456, 

457, 458, 

501, 506, 

507, 

508, 

510, 517, 

549, 550, 

551, 

564, 

565, 566, 




567, 569 

Riabi Mrikapdu 


... 156 

Rituparpa 



... 566 

Ritus 



... 432 

RoohikS 



... 393 

Rdhipi 



... 375 

Roth, Prof. 



... 541 

Rudra 28, 

99, 40, 42, 

44, 45, 46, 

47, 48 An. 

.54. 

58, 84 166, 

174, 175, 

181, 

184, 

185, 238, 

314, 375, 

386, 

387, 

889, 391, 

392, 403, 

404, 

420, 

431, 506, 



522 

560, 569 

Radrabhaga 


79, 

87. 94, 97 

Rudrabhakta 


... 464 

Rpdia-Ohap<Ja 


... 464 

Rudiadfiva 



... 370 

Bodrakbpaja 


... 464 



PMI 

Budrakdti 

83 f.n., 396 

Rodr&kahas 

276. 281. 988 

Rodra*Fa«upati 

... 475 

Budrarndr* 

83/*. 

Budrayamala 

.. 180 

Rupa 

394, 404 

Rupamandam 

132, 183, 17f 

87f>, 376, 3W, 

891, 503. 505. 


506 6S7 

Rupa-aampat 

545 

Ruru 

28, 180 

S&bda 

394, 404 

Sabha 280, 231, 234, 241 

S&bbapati 

... w 

Saoharaohara 

... ISO 

Badakhyaa 

... 370 

Sadasiva 84 f.n., 238, 369, 361, 

366 f.n., 367, 371, 372, 373, 


o 

§ 

Sadasiva-bhuvanas ... 393 

Sadaaiva-tafcvaa 

363, 364, 


393. 396 /.n. 

S&dhakas 

... 16 

Sadhazma 

... 607 

Sad by as 233, 649, 668, 562 

Sadyojftta (Brahma) 64, 97, 98, 

366 f.n., 367 f.n., 875, 376, 377, 

378, 379, 384, 888, 404 

S&gara 

313, 314, 320 

Sftgara-pntra 

... 320 

Sahcurdgama 

361 f.n. 

Saha-m&rga 

... 16 

Sahasrab&hu 

... 40 

Sahasr&kBha 

...83/.*. 

Sahasralidga 

...95,96 

E$*ilaja (linga), 

...76,77 

^aivkobkryaa 

6 

daivalinga 

... 79/ n. 



HINDU IOONOGBAPHY. 


PAOB 

gaiyftdhikallAgaB ... 88 

fjairaB 24, 25, 29, 224, 229, 
230, 288, 246, 273, 333, 
334, 836, 469, 602 
galya-Sainte 473, 474, 475, 

479, 480 

gaiyfigamafl 6, 24. 29. 45, 151, 
216, 223, 224, 303, 367, 
379, 552 

flaiva-B&BtraB 392 /.n. 

Saiva Siddbanba 230, 370 

Efaivesbtyali&ga ... 95 

Saka}a 240. 241, 361, 369, 
393, 396 

Sakala-nishkala 361, 371 

Sakalya-pl$ha ... 424 

fj&kra ... 518 

S&kba 234, 244 

Sakta-bbuvanaa . . 393 

^lakbi 10, 11, 13, 14, 46, 59. 
60, 62, 69. 136, 165, 173, 180, 
217, 241, 247, 379, 388, 389, 
390, 403, 405, 424, 426, 427, 
429, 430, 433, 435-441, 443- 
447,449, 450, 519, 523, 536, 
553 

Sakti-dhara 432, 433 

^akti-garbba ... 13 

£$akbibastavan ... 422 

^aktimaya-vyuba 368 f.n . 

Sakbipa^i ... 422 

^akti-pafeam ... 10 

Sakti-tatva 393, 396 /.». 

Bakfcyayudba 115, 425, 431, 

432, 444, 448, 524 
S&la (tree) ... 456 

Salagrama ... 456 

Salankayana 455, 458 


PAOB 

Salem Dlstrlet ... 320 

Samabbafiga 118, 125, 166, 216, 
*387, 398, 402, 496, 562 
Samantabhadra 369 /.«. 

Samaya-dlksba 11, 12 

Samayls 12, 14, 16 

^ambbu 40, 47 

Sambara 180, 238, 362 

Sambara-Bhairava 28, 181 

Samharamurtis 143, 145, 146 

Sambibas 165, 526 

Samjna 542, 543 

Samsara 278, 371, 404, 564 
Samsari ... 405 

Samvarta ... 394 

iWaisobara ... 375 

Sanaka ... 276 

Sanatkumara ... 567 

Sanobi ... 68 

Sandarsanamudrfi 274, 290 

Sandhya ... 16 

Sandhyanrifcta (dance) 355 /.». 
Sangba ... 33 

gani 512. 613 

fWkara 19, 27, 28, 10, 51, 62, 
85/.»., 176, 181, 386 
Bankaraob&rya 18, 60, 191, 

273, 286 

Sankara-Narayapamurti ... 370 
&ankaravijay<t of Ananfca- 
nandagiri 27,28,35,191 
gankha 109. 111. 115, 116, 138, 
153, 169, 183, 211, 217, 333, 
331, 885, 886, 313, 399, 106, 
127, 136, 137, 117, 530, 631 
gaftkhanidhi ... 536 

gafikhapfila ... 657 

iafikha-patea 119,275,304,384 


26 



INDEX. 



Paoa | 

£aftkha-p*tn<ka93Blw ... 138 

Siokbyn and X5ga Bohools. 8 

S&nkhyayana-br&hmana ... 45 

Sankukarpa 

83 /.n., 394 

Sanm&rga 

... 16 

Sannyaains 

428 An. 

d&ntamurlis 

... 116 

Santfina 

... 376 

Santanagama 

368 /.n. 

Sant&na-manjari 

... 620 

^antatama 

... 40 

jJSnti 

... 393 

ffanti-kala 

... 393 

$anti-sakti 

... 362 

^antyatffea 

... 393 

Santy&tlbakala 

... 393 

Santyatfta-£akti 

362, 363 

Saptagodavara 

85 f.n. 

Sapba-mafcribas 192, 197, 423, 


423 /.«., 464 

Sara 

174, 430 

Sarabha 

171, 172, 174 

Sarabheaa 

172, 173, 174 

Sarabhopanishad 

... 174 

Sarapyu 

525, 541 

Saraevati 233, 318, 505, 508, 511, 


537 f.n. 

Sarvafcamika 

92, 93, 507 

Saravapa 

... 217 

&aravapabhava or 

Sarajan- 

man 429, 430, 432, 436 

Sarga 

... 375 

^arfra-palakas 

... 422 

Sarpa 274, 261, 282, 365 

Sarpa-ka&kapas 

... 130 

Sarpakara 

... 290 


8»rp».kuQckIa 324. 327, 335,840, 

384 



Vabm 

Sarpiiapkara 

.. 374 

SarpamAkbala 

... 325 

Sarpa-mudtft 

977, 884, 38ft 

9arpa-v*la?a 

294, 327, 57ft 

Sarpa-yajSdpavit* 

... 465 

8am 40,44, 46 f 

378, «0Jt, 406, 


40. 

SarvaohufcadwnaBf 

393 403 

Sam-bhufcahridi-Bthiti .. J 03 

Sarvadarfiana-Saiigraha .. 9l 

S&rvadMikalMgas 

. . hi 

Sarva-dcvesa 

... 181 

Sarvajna 

... 181 

Sarvajnatva 

... 14 

Sarvaaama liriga 

88, 90, 97 

Sarvasiva-Papditaoharya ... 6 i 

Sarvatobhadralinga 

... 88 

^asibhuehana 

83/.«., 181 

Saat& 353, 423, 423 f.n.. 

485, 486, 487, 488, 

489, 490, 491, 492 

Saefcankottai 

... 492 

Sftstraa 192, 223, 

273, 274, 276, 


301 

Satapatha-Brahmana 40, 44, 57, 

166, 516, 559, 564 

Satarudriya 

... 40 

Satavahana 

... 488 

Bat-chit- ananda-svarupa ... 363 

Satl 

182, 185, 357 

Satmakamokaha 

... 21 

Sattanur 

... 477 

SatvagupaB 

... 170 

Satvik 

... 425 

Satvikamurti 

... 496 

Satya 

... 507 

Saumya 

... 394 

Saundaryalahari 

... 60 


27 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Pam 

SaurabhSya-Bubrahmapya. . . 440, 

441 

Saairuti 86 f.n. 

SSytarl, 165. 605, 606. 608, 611, 

663 

Styapa 66 f.n., 669, 668 

Bobool of Art* 136, 253, 44T 

tfekkijar ... 230 

Sdnimukba 428 f.n. 

Stafiai 40, 422. 429, 432, 439 
Sdnftpati 432, 434, 447 

SSnisthaca 428 f.n. 

Efoodaoar ... 479 

gerfa 488, 489, 491 

Eferam&nperumal ... 476 

gfcynalur 205, 475 

Shadadhv&s ... 8 

Sbapmukha or Shad&nana 370, 

422, 429, 430, 432, 437, 447 
ShiyAli (Tanjore) ... 475 

&bira~ 428 f.n. 

SiddhaQama 368 f.n. , 

Siddhanta-Dipika, ... 231 | 

Siddhantataravali 5, 6 f.n., 62, 
62 88, 89,90, 93, 396 f.n. 

Biddhas 233, 291, 305, 339, 498 
Siddhesvara . . . 84/.n. 

Siddhi ... 426 

gikhaitfi 393. 397, 402 

&kb«aa ... 393 

l&kbi-dbyaja ... 429 

ijikhi-pinebba ... 308 

iikhivabaoa 432, 439, 447 

fjilAda 456, 467, 458 

Silappadigaram ... 518 

kilparatna 108, 114, 125, 129, 132, 
151, 208, 228, 276, 303, 323, 
886, 60S, 504, 506, 556 


Pam 

SfmAobari ... 175 

Bfahhaghnamarti 172 

Slmhakarpa (pom) 119. 123, 130, 
132, 134, 167, 911 
Blinha-karfala 119, 130 

Bitnhaladtia (Ceylon) ... 467 
SimbalsM Art 467 f.n. 

BitbhAsana 202, 474, 619, 526, 
533.544 

Blndba ... 188 

&i;appaliyar ... 475 

^irasabakra 210, 334, 335 

t&rorarttana . . .87, 93 

f&rnttop^ar ... 476 

Siahy&bhAvamurti ... 443 
^ilirarita ... 149 

^iana 55. 56 f.n. 

Sianadflya 55 f.n., 58 

Sitikaptba 40, 48, 49 

giva 1. 2. 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14. 17, 18, 23. 29, 30. 31, 39, 
44, 47, 48. 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 
54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 
62, 64, 66, 67, 68. 69, 70, 71. 
75. 97, 98, 105, 106, 107, 108, 
109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 
115, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121. 
122, 123, 124. 126. 129, 130, 
131, 132, 139, 134, 135, 136, 
187, 138, 139, 141, 146-164, 
167-172, 174 176, 182-194, 

197 f.n., 200,201, 205-220,223, 
227, 229, 281-288, 240, 248- 
249. 261-258, 261-270, 278, 
280, 281, 283-286, 287-989, 291- 
295,297, 301-308, 313-325,327, 
328, 330-335, 837-369, 361-368, 
366, 868/-W., 878, 375, 377. 879, 


98 



INDEX. 


Pag* 

380, 383, 383, 386, 386, 399, 
400, 401, 409, 404, 406. 406, 
407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 416, 
416, 418, 421, 430. 431, 439, 
448, 444, 446, 447, 448. 460. 
455, 456, 457, 458, 469, 460, 
463, 464, 465. 467, 468, 469, 
474. 479, 485, 491, 498, 501, 
602, 603, 507, 512, 515, 522, 
524, 627, 631, 537 
£iva-Ohandra£ekh&ra 109, 119 
E$ivadharmlgl ... 16 

fiivadvijas (&aiva BrAh- 
mapaa) ... 291 

&ivadri$hti iastta of Soma- 
nand&nfttha ... 34 

&vAgni ... 13 

&yajnAna ... 9 

6ivajnana Siddhiydr ... 245 

&ivalildrnava ... 408 

fjira-liftg&s ... 474 

Siva-linga-pratishthd-vidhi, 62 
3iva-NafarAja 227, 573, 577, 578 

Siva-Praddsha Stdtra ... 233 

&iva-purana 21 /.n., 105, 176, 
188, 201, 209, 321, 455 

Siva-Budra ... 40 

fjivaeAd&khya . . . 363 

Siva-l3akti ... 240 

SSivasastras ... 13 

t$iva*tatva 362, 393, 396/.W., 404 
Sivatatvaratnakara ... 199 

Sivayanama ... 246 

&Ydttama 393, 397, 402 

SkambhA of the Atharv&oa- 
veda 56, 57, 111 

Skaada 42, 132, 134, 152, 256, 
261, 264, 419, 420, 422, 429, 


PAOS 

430, 432, 433, 434, 436, 444, 
450 

Skanda*Cb»o4a 424 

Sooratsa 32 

S5ma *65, 16b, 5^3 

Sdtnanifchapur* 401 

86maf»a 5t>'* 

Sdmaaad 562 

Stmanddh&nta ... ) 20 

Sotnaftiddh&afciafi . . 24 

SomaiSimftranar ... 475 

Somaekandaraurti 127, 129, 131, 
134, 970, 439 
Sopara 608, 509 

Southern India 200, 229, 252, 
303, 307, 351, 352, 400, 415, 
432, 455, 473, 475, 479, 512, 
555 

South Travanoore ... 282 
Sparse 394. 404 

Sphatfka 27, 29, 275 

Srausha ... 431 

Sjravapa ... 555 

Sri Bhdgavata 52, 59, 486, 550 
Srika^tha 84 /.n., 388, 391, 393, 
394, 397, 402 
Srlk&^ha Sivaoharya 9, 404 
ill Nafaraja 286, 243, 248. 252 
^rirangam ... 408 

$risa 423 /.a. 

Srisail&m 216, 395 

Srishfi 238, 368 

&ritatvamdh% 121, 173, 176, 186, 
210, 211, 878, 432, 433, 434. 
436, 437, 438, 440 
(Srfvaishpavas 479, 480 

fSrlvilliputtur ... 478 

grooi 676, 577 


29 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


PAOB 

Ardfcra ... 394 

$rotriy* Brahmapaa ... 506 

Sink 153, 342. 399, 504, 505, 
507, 508, 611, 523 
&uftarfahia ... 666 

Srnva 153,342,440,441 442, 


504, 505, 510, 611, 553 


Stana-subra 

... 98 

SftbalamahStmyas 

407, 408 

Stbal&£vara 

... 394 

Sfah&pu 60, 69, 83 /.ft., 395 

Sthfipunathaev&min ... 209 

Sfchapati 

... 309 

Sthiti 

238, 368 

Sfchula 

... 361 

Stbula-Bukshma 

... 361 

Stbulesvara 

... 394 

Sfconey, B.F. 

... 163 

Subrahmapya 125, 155, 350, 415, 

421, 422, 424, 

426, 426, 428, 

429, 430, 431, 

432, 433, 436, 

437. 438, 439, 

440, 442, 443, 

444, 446, 447, 

448, 449, 460, 


486, 602 

Suobi (pose) 132, 

141, 149, 166, 

159, 160, 254, 

255, 264, 451, 


531, 564, 674 

Suobtndram 

209, 282, 308 

Suflalaiyafli 

... 243 

Sudarsanaohakra 

190, 191, 388 

tSuddha^bhuvanaa 

362, 392, 403 

^uddha^aivaiam 

... 361 

{Wdhaluddba-tafcva ... 393 

^addbktanu 

396, 449, 450 

fWdha-vidya 

396 /.ft.i 405 

Buddha- vidya-tatva ... 893 

Sad&ha 

423 f.n. 

Bokaline - 

... 663 


PAOB 


Sufchasaoa (murfci), 117, 127, 129, 
130, 134, 370, 490 
Snkh&sana-Arya ... 490 

Sukla-pada ... 391 

tfukra 375, 423 f.n„ 563 

Sukahma 84 /.n., 361, 393, 397, 
401, 402 

Sukshmagama 367 /.». 

Sukshma-sarlraa ... 392 

Sula same as fcriSula 86, 106, 109, 
115, 137, 150, 155, 168, 159, 
160, 162, 163, 169, 176, 177, 
178, 179, 198, 199, 200, 254, 
256, 265, 268, 270, 286, 306, 
324, 345, 356, 358, 365, 366, 
373, 378, 379, 382, 388, 389, 
390, 397, 398, 402, 403, 406, 
427, 434, 437, 439, 441, 442, 
457, 466, 496, 497 
l^ulapapi ... 233 

Sumati ... 313 


Sumitra 423 /.ft. 

Sumitraka 423, 423 f.n. 

Sumukha 423 449, 450, 451 

Sunda 375 

Sundaramurti N&yanar 476, 478, 

479 

Sundarelvara 171, 351, 356, 408 
Supaksba 245 

Suprabhedag<vm 79, 90, 96, 113, 


148, 150, 307. 323, 364, 367 /.ft,, 
379, 487, 488, 489, 497, 504, 
545, 552, 567 
Sura (lifiga) 79, 80, 393 

Suras 16* 


Sur&dbyalioga 88* 90, 95 

Surefa 428 1 % 

Surfcavara 887, 890 


80 



INDEX. 


Page 

Sdrpaoakha ... 453 

Surya 28, 183, 213, 305, 389, 

423 /.n., 430, 431, 432, 516, 
521, 541, 542, 543, 545 
Suirufca ... 566 

Sftta-iariifettft 7, 30, 277, 404 
Butra 245, 574, 575, 576 

Buvarahala ... 375 

Suyasft 213, 458 

STaohohanda ... 180 1 

Bvadhinafeva ... 15 

Svaha 375, 418, 419, 420, 522, 

523, 524 

Syamidevar ... 6 

Svaminabha . . 429 

Svaras ... 9 

Svarga ... 419 

Bvarnakarshapa-bhairava 177, 179 
Svarpaksha 83 /.n., 395, 450 
Svarpodaka ... 213 

Svartha-ohala-linga ... 8 

Svastika (pose) 260, 441, 557 

Svastikapasritam 259, 260, 261 

Svastikasana 284, 286 

Svatanfcra 463, 464 

Svayambhu 85 /.n. 

Svayambhuva (linga) 79, 80, 81, 
82, 86 

Svayambhuvagama 361 /.n, 

Svayumbhuvamanvantara. . . 554 
Svayampradhana 421, 473, 

474, 543 

Tadras (Darlas) ... 14 

TaiUmya-samhita 166, 516, 

541, 559 

Takaha ... 377 

Takshaka 340, 557 

Talaiyat ... 475 


page 

268, 269 
495, 496 
.. 496 

... 425 

234 


T&Umtna 
TalaaamsphdtitECD 
T&maaa 
T&matttmurtt 
Tfimaaik 
Tftpdav* 

Tanjow 148 , 150, 154, 

174,281.292,101,880 461 
491 

Tanka 86, 118, 154, 15-1, 167, 
168, 169, 200, 210, 211, 254, 
324, 353, 378, 397, 898, 402, 
405, 436, 443, 447, 449 457. 
464, 465, 466, 468, 469, 417 
Jankapapi 464 

Tanbra ... 240 

Tantrika 7, 9, 10 

Tapati ... 642 

Tapini ... 148 

Tar&ka or Tarakasura 147, 164, 
235, 337. 430, 448 
Tar aka jit ... 129 

Tarakari 430, 432, 438, 448 

Taramangalam 266, 320, 321, 
354, 355 

TarjanI 193, 264, 386, 389, 390 
Tatpnrusha ( = Tsana) 12, 64, 97, 
98, 366 367, 368 f.n. t 375, 

376, 378. 387, 404 
Tatvae 978, 361, 364, 365, 366, 
370, 374, 392 /.n, 393, 394, 
395, 396 403 

Tfijas ••• 395 

Tonkasi 187, 255 

Thana District ... 508 

Tilaka 965, 325 

Tillai 

Tillai Brahmapaa 475 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Tildttama 

PAGl 

.. 561 

TiAgaJur 

... 476 

Tir&bhava 

238, 247 

Ttru-ArulrPayan 

... 248 

Tiruohohattamangai 

... 476 

Tiruohohedg&ttangudi 

165, 163 

216, 267, 266, 308, 330, 476 

Tiruabobeftgupgur 

... 477 

TirujfiSnasambandha 

229, 475, 

Tirukk&davur 6, 157, 

480 
158, 475 

Tirukkaiukkanram 

... 200 

Tirukkojur 

... 478 

Tirukkovaiur 

... 476 

Tirukkurukkai 

... 148 

Tirukuttu Darlanam 

... 239 

Tirumala 

... 481 

Tirumaladevi 

i-H 

QO 

Tirumala Nay aka 

331, 351 

Tirumajigaifctevar 

... 479 

Tirumalisaiyalvar 

... 478 

Tirumangaiyalvar 

478, 480 

Tirumantram 

... 240 

Tirnmular 240, 242, 246 

Tirunfivalur 

... 478 

Tirupati 

66, 481 

Tiruppalatturai 121, 

124, 444, 

Tirupparaiyaju 

491, 492 
... 491 

Tirupparankunjam 

411, 448 

Tirupp&palvar 

... 480 

Tiruppugalur 

... 475 

Tiruvaohagam 

... 281 

Tiruvadi 

... 512 

TiruvSlanga<Ju 

... 252 

Tiruyali 

... 478 

Tiruvfiliyamudanar 

... 479 

Tiruvallftm 

... 401 


89 


Tiravimftttur 81 /.ft. 

Tiruvamar ... 477 

Tiruvanjaikkalam 476, 478 

Tiruv&rur ... 478 

Tiruv&ii 237. 247. 248 

TiruveAgavalal ... 283 

Tiruvepk&da ... 309 

Tiruvewainallur ... 476 

Tiruvojriyiir 122, 261, 283. 286, 
400, 445, 468, 511 
Tomara 179, 389, 390, 437 
Tojrfaimaitfala ... 6 

To^damanarrur ... 518 

Topdaradippodi ... 480 

Tr&ira£ika same as Traibha- 

gikalinga ... 89 


gikalinga ... 89 

Travanoore 69 /.n., 269, 401, 
492, 524 

Trayfvidya ... 560 

Treta-yuga 456, 467 

Tribhatiga 121, 124, 252, 340, 

357, 460 

Tribhuvan&m ... 174 

Triohinopoly ... 318 

Triloobaoa . . .84 f.n . 

Trildobanalivaoharya ... 5 

TrikSpas ... 24 

Trimurti (Ekapada) 382, 383, 

384, 385, 393, 397, 398, 399, 
401, 516 

Trinfttra ... 181 

Tripataka 261, 263, 264 

Tripupflra ... 306 

Tripura 420 

Tripura-dahana ... 116 

Tripur aot&ka (murti) 85 f.n. 164, 
166, 168, 169, 170, 171, 181, 



INDEX. 



PAOB | 


mi 

Tripuraburas 

1H8. 502 

Um&pati 

85 fn., 394 

Tripuehakara (Sirovarttana) 93 

Um&’PftrraU 

.. 1ST 

Trisaadhi 

^4 f.n. 

Uma-Suhay* 

... 210 

Trisrotas 

... 213 

XI ma*B&hifca-Chawb 

•isilkhsia 

Trisula 35, 124, 125,133,135, 

muni 

122, 12a 'u:> 

151, 152, 154, 

164, 180, 193, ! 

Uma-sahitamuyti 

120, 130 

199, 200, 330, 

331, 336, 377, ' 

183. 134, 207 369 

381, 391, 397, 

406, 459, 465, 

Unmat Fifa&JwM 

989, 242 246, 

496, 497, 523, 627, 538, 557 


246, <47 

Trisuli 

..85/.n. 

Unmat-ta Bhatrava 

28, 180, 181 

Trivandram 136, 253, 401, 447 1 

Upad&nakiraQa 

.. 404 

Tryambaka 

41, 84/ti., 387, 

Upaaayana 

424, 457 


388, 390 

IJpaWta 279, 2«0, 281, 300, 

Tuluabkas same as Turukkar) 91, i 


490, 504, 553 


91/rt. 

llpondra 

51, 54 

Tumburu 

.. 305 

Uragas 

233, 563 

Turiyam 

... 248 

Urniyur 

... 478 

Tvak 

.. 391 

Ordhvagftmini 

... 393 

Tvashta 

.. 542 

UrdhvarotaR 

84 /,n. 

TvaBhtri 

517, 525, 532 

IJrasaufcra 

... 225 

"Udaipur (State) 

. 385 

IJrvaai 

... 561 

TJdarabandha 

155, 261, 2G4, 

| Ushas 

44, 375. 541 

281, 340, 344, 381, 44G, 509 

1 Ushnisha 

159, 316, 373 

Udarabandhana 

... 119 

Usiuara 

... 551 

Udbbava 

... 393 

Ulkutikasana 

152, 155, 288, 

Udvahita 

259, 2G0 

284, 288, 289, 466 

Udukkai 

... 237 

Utpala (same as Nil5tpal&). 214, 

Ufiras 35, 40, 44, 46, 85 


284 ,353, 519 

357, 369, 373, 375, 382, 394, 

Utsava-vigraba 

... 611 


403, 407 

Uttama 

342, 343, 496 


Ujjayim 27, 83/.n., 191, 201 Utlamadbama ... 843 

Umu, 42, 51, G2, 120, 122, 124, Uttama-dasa-tala ... 224 

131, 133, 135, 136, 137, 138, Uttama-madhyama ... 843 

139, 140, 141, 208, 217, 218, Uttama-nava-tala (measure) 460 

288, 241, 315, 316, 317, 318, UHam5ttama ... 343 

320, 321, 332, 415, 416, 420 Uttara-Kamikagama, 19/.n., 119, 
Uma-Mahesvaramurti 127, 129, 132, 148, 167, 208, 226, 843, 

132, 135, 137 371, 396, 899 


33 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Page 

Uttara-k&nda 458, 533, 561 
Uttara*Karapagama 173,210, 398 
Utfcarakuru 542, 543 

Vadarangam ... 292 

Vagitfvara ... 13 

Vfiglivarl ... 13 

Vfibana ... 537 

Vaidika 7, 8, 9, 15, 30, 31. 

53, 54 

Vaidika or Smarta Brah- 
mapas ... 31 

Vaiflurya ... 530 

Vaidyelvarapkoyil 321, 374 
VaikhaoaBa ... 565 

Vaikuptha ... 172 

Vainateya (Garuda) ... 554 
Vaifiakha ... 518 

VaivaBvata ... 525 

Vatehpava 273, 333, 334, 336, 
394, 473, 474, 475, 479, 480, 502 
Vaiehpava Bhaktas ... 478 

Vaishpavaathanam ... 260 
Vaisravapa 533. 534, 535 

Vaisya 473, 563 

Vajra 156, 159, 164, 169, 173, 
176, 180, 254, 366, 379, 417, 
422, 424, 425, 426, 427, 429. 
433, 434, 436, 437, 438, 440, 
441, 442, 443, 444, 447, 448, 
457, 516. 517, 519, 520, 521 


Vajradapda ... 490 

Vajasaneyi-Samhita 39, 165 
Vak ... 394 

Vakra-dapflfiyudha ... 353 

Vaku|a ... 226 

Valaya 254, 265 

Vfijika ... 325 

Valll 440, 444 


Paqb 

VaUf-Kaly&Qasandaramurti. 432, 

440 

Valmfki ... 567 

Valiyaohalai, (temple) ... 401 
Valuvur 160, 153, 155, 309, 460, 

491 

Vama 393, 394, 403 

Vamaoharas 29, 30 

Vamadfiva (" Isa) 64, 97, 98, 
366 367 f.n., 375, 376, 377, 

378, 388, 393, 404 
Vftmalinga 79 /.». 

Vamadfivasivacharya ... 5 

Vamana-purana ... 332 

Vam&svara 85 /.n. 

Vana 428 /.n„ 474 

Vanaparvan 214, 417 

Varada-hasta 85 /.w., 109, 

115, 118, 121, 122, 123, 125, 
130, 131, 132, 134, 136, 158, 

173, 181, 200, 207, 209, 210, 
214, 274, 324, 340, 356, 357, 
365, 369, 374, 378, 379, 380, 
387, 388, 397, 398, 402, 403, 
406, 407, 422, 424, 426, 427, 
429, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 
439, 440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 
446, 447, 455, 460, 466, 468, 
489, 491, 496, 604, 505, 508, 
511, 520, 523, 529, 530, 535, 

538, 556 

Varaha 85 111 

Varahaputana 1, 30, 150, 

174, 184, 837, 348, 534, 542, 

... 654 

Varpanl ... 489 

Varanasi (Krai) 83/.»., 175.297 
Varddham&naliAga ••• 88 


84 



INDEX. 


PAGE 

Variahta 85 /.». 

Var pa 392 /.n., 396 f.n. t 503 

Varupa 305, 423 /. «., 458, 515, 
529, 530, 531 
Vaaanta 148, 149 

V&aethi ... 64 

Vasisbta 276, 417. 419, 550, 551, 
563, 565, 566. 567 
Vaesavapa ... 535 

Vastrapada . . 395 

VftBudeva 375 

Vaauki 340, 423 /.n., 564, 556. 

557 

Vaaus 549, 550, 551, 622, 553 1 
Vatoka ••• *98 j 

Va$uka-bhairva 177, 178 | 

Vajukanayaka INI 1 

Vatulagama 368 f «., 

Vatulaiuddhagama 61 /.w. ( 361 
Vayu 305, 395, 416, 515, 524, 
532, 533 

VdyU’purdna • 105 

VedabAhyas .-.3, 183 

Vodanta 243 

Vedarapyam 309, 354 

Vodas 165, 175, 278, 295, 301, 
305, 378, 379. 439, 457, 490, 
503, 506. 532, 541 
Vedintine 8*9 

Vedio 515, 516, 517, 518, 521, I 
522, 625. 527, 529, 532, 541, | 
542, 543. 559 I 

Vttdini 148 

Vegavatf 409,410 

VSlayudha-Subrahmapya, 434,444 
Vftnkatauafaha-D&sika ... 479 I 

Venkatapatidovaraya ... 481 

Vttkat&la - 481 


Page 


91, 29 An, 


Vdsara, (type of oen- 
tral ahrioe 
type of lingae) | 
type oi pitha 
Vettja m. 254, 550 6651 

Vibbava T7 586, 537 

Vibhtebapa 633 

Vibhuobanda 467, 16b 

Vibhuti or bbasma 276, 436, ^53, 

667 

205, 20f, 207 
22, 395 
37*. 393, 566 
233, 991, 305 
398, 394 
... 18 


Vioharasartnan 

Vidhi 

Vuva 

Vidyddharae 
Vtdya-kala 
Vidyarapya 
Vidya-sakti 
Vidyastbana 
Vidya tatvHB 
ViOyesvaras 


428 /.». 
396 f.n. 
339, 359, 392, 396, 
397, 398, 408, 407 
Vitfhoab&ntushta .. 180 

Vidimus vara 213,214 

Viubnesvaranugraharnurbi... 218. 

370 

Vighnesvara-Prait6ht : hd- 

vidhi ... 498 

Vi]aya 84 /.*&., 386, 487, 607 
Vijaydgama 368/.». 

Vijayaoagara (king) ... 481 

Vijfianakalaa 393, 894, 396 


Vikftsi 
Vikrantachapda 
VimaleBa 
Vimaleavara 
'Vim&naa 

Vimal&gatna 


... 875 
... 467 
... 895 
83 f.n.* 84 f.n, 

99^,217,421, 468. 

519 

868 /.*. 


86 



HINDU ICONOGRAPHY. 


Page 

VlpS 146, 159, 180, 233. 273, 289, 
290, 292, 327, 331, 538 
Vlpa-dapfla ... 290 

Vfpa-dhara 288, 289 

Vlp&dhara-DakBbipfimurti... 146. 

161, 289, 291 
Vinata ... 554 

Vincent, A. Smith 355 537, 
537 f.n. 

Vindhyaparvata 85 f.n. 

Vinirbhaya ... 558 

Vipa£ohit ... 566 


Vipra ... 566 

VipulA ... 561 

Virabhadra 182, 183, 184, 186, 
187. 188, 234, 370. 423 f.n. 
Vlraohapfla 467, 468 

Vtrdgama 368 f.n . 

Viraja 84 f.n. 

Vfrarajendradeva . . . 286 

Viraaaivas ... 32 

Vfrasana 274, 282, 464, 466, 468, 
490, 491 

Vfr&sana-Arya ... 491 

Virat ... 562 


Virupaksha 66, 85 f.n., 180, 387, 
388, 389 


Virya ... 464 

Vlryavan . . . 558 

Vii&laksha 180, 181 

Vlialyakarapi ... 544 

Vi&isha- dfkeha ... 13 


Viaha (water, pofeou) ... 48 

Viahapaharapamurti ... 356 

Vismaya 151, 155, 159, 162, 169, 
209, 211, 256, 348, 451 
Vishpu 28, 43, 47, 53, 54, 57, 69, 
105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 


Page 

111, 138, 146, 153, 165, 166, 
170, 172, 180, 183, 184, 189, 
190, 209, 210, 211, 212, 283, 
236, 238, 266, 296, 297, 307, 
313, 318, 332, 333, 334, 335, 
339, 341, 342, 343, 346, 349, 
351, 352, 370, 382, 383, 385, 
386, 399, 400, 401, 404, 427, 
437, 440, 456, 485, 487, 501, 
502, 515, 516 
Vishpubhaga 79, 87, 99, 101 

Vishpuohitta (Periyalvar)... 480 
Vishnudharmbttara 132, 133, 177, 
279, 334, 375, 376, 397, 405, 
459, 519, 520, 523, 526, 528, 
530, 533, 536, 545, 564 
Vtshnupurana 45, 46, 59, 315, 

486, 504, 505 


Vishpvanugrahamurfci or 


OhakradaDamurti 146,209, 211 

Vishvaksana 

296, 297, 307, 308 

Visravas 

533, 534 

Visva 

83 f.n* 

Vibvakarma 

24 f.n , 354, 431, 


481,506 

Vtbvakarma-Silpa 387,388,552 

Visvamadhya 

...83/.n. 

Visvamifcra 

276, 567 

Visvapapi 

369 fn. 

Visvarupa 

... ISO 

Visvfisa 

83 f.n . 

Vis vefl vara 

... 175 

Vivjisvafc 

.. 541 

Vriddhi 

536, 537 

Vrikodaiaa 

... 351 

Vrisohika 

265, 358, 877 

Vrteha 

... 558 

V?mhabha 

133, 278 


36 



INDEX, 



Page 





PADS 

Vriflbabhadhv&ja 

. 88 /.«. 

897, 

402, 

439, 

499, 

486, 448, 

Vrishadhvani 

... 213 

446, 

468, 

469, 

604, 

508, 631, 

Vfiahabtafiiuflhamurti 

... 369 

533, 

629a 

533, 

544, 

563. 687 

V^ishasthana 

...84/.n, 

Yat'urveda 



... 165 

Vriabavabanamurii 

(or 

y«i»h(M 95(3 

>, 239. 

W, 

585, 587, 

V rishabbar u<Jham u rfci) 

309, 352, 





583 

353, 

364, 965 

Yakabtadr* 



•:9t. « >1 

Vfitra 

517, 569 | 

Yam, 36. 157 156 

i, 159, 

if'j 161 

Vritrasura 

... 569| 

163, 

165, 

261, 

433 

813, 

Vntta-kupdala 

130, 283 ! 

i 


535, 52(i 

, 33? 343 

Vyakhyana 

288, 289 l 

i Yamaimga 



. 64 f.n. 


Vyakliyana Dakahi^arnurfei, lift, 
273, 271, 2HO t 284, 2H9 
Vyakbyana triudh a (po^o) ... 283 


255 
393 
660 
393 
485 
70 Ah. 


Vyaghrap&dft 
Vyapim 
Vy&sa 

Vyorn&rupipi 
Wostwii Ghauts 
Wcatrop, H.M. 

Yaga 183, 185, 457, 459, 565 
Yagasala ... 565 

Yajna 182, 417, 431, 507 

Yajnabbadja 507 

Yajn&datta 205, 206, 207 

Yajna-kkanda of the Suta- 
samhita 363 f.n. 

Yajna- N drays pa ... 542 

Yajna Furusha ... 516 

Yajndpavita 43, 67, 106, 114, 
119, 130, 175, 186, 216, 225, 
261, 264, 275,276, 281, 283, 
286, 304, 306, 327, 342, 344, 
373, 376, 377, 379, 381, 391, 


Yarn) ... 628 

Yamuna 318. 550, 531, 642 

Yasddfiarak&vya of Vadiraja* 
suri . . 99 

Yaska 56 f.n.% 641 

Yafaudh&nas ... 621 

Yavas ... 673 

Yoga (system) 16,22, 176, 273, 
288, 367 

Ydga-D&kshiQamurti 148, 149, 
280, 284, 288 
Yoga (dbruva) bera ... 424 

Yogajdgama 367 Ah. 

Yogamudra 284, 287, 350, 391 
Yoga-Narasimha ... 285 

Yoga pada ... 16 

Yoga-paHa 286, 287, 288, 320 

Yogaeana, 138, 286,382, 490, 509 
YogSswt or Kfi|I ... 193 
Yogi, 146 147, 181,287, 288,243, 
362,400, 469, 478,488, 490 
Yoni 66,68. 69, 70,382,617 
Yugaa *•' 603 


87 



