===== Internet Archive OCR: indiansongofsong00jayarich_djvu.txt =====

THE 


INDIAN  SONG   OF   SONGS. 


FROM  THE  SANSKRIT  OF  THE  GIT  A  COVIN  DA 
OF  JAYADEVA. 


HEitlj  fltljcr  ©rimtal   Poems. 


BY 

EDWIN   AENOLD,   M.A.,  F.R.G.S. 

(of  university  coll.  oxford), 

formerly  principal  of  the  poona  college,  and  fellow  of  the 

university  of  bombay  j 

A  uthor  of  ' '  Griselda  and  other  Poems"  "  Dalhousie's  Advtiiiisiration  of  India, 
"  The  Book  of  Good  Counsels,"  "Hero  and  Leander,"  &>€.  &-•€. 


LONDON: 
TRUBNER  &  CO.,  LUDGATE  HILL. 

1875. 
[All  rights  reserved.  ] 


LOAN  STACK 


PRINTED    BY   BALLANTYNE   AND    COMPANY 
EDINBURGH    AND   LONDON 


4 


TO 


MY   MANY   HINDOO    FRIENDS 


IN    TOKEN    OF 


AFFECTIONATE     RECOLLECTION. 


c\CiC\ 


PREFACE. 


Beautiful  flowers  please,  whatever  their  name  and 
country ;  and  so  far  as  any  brightness  or  fragrance 
may  have  been  preserved  from  the  Aryan  original  in 
this  paraphrase,  it  will  no  doubt  be  recognised  by  the 
reader  of  intelligence.  Yet  being  so  exotic,  the  poem 
demands  a  word  or  two  of  introduction. 

The  "  Gita  Govinda,"  then,  or  "  Song  of  Govind,"  is 
a  Sanskrit  idyll,  or  little  pastoral  drama,  in  which — 
under  the  form  of  Krishna,  an  incarnation  of  the  god 
Vi.shnoo — the  human  soul  is  displayed  in  its  relations 
alternately  with  earthly  and  celestial  beauty.  Krishna 
— at  once  human  and  divine — is  first  seen  attracted  by 
the  pleasures  of  the  senses  (personified  by  the  shep- 
herdesses in  the  wood),  and  wasting  his  affections  upon 
the  delights  of  their  illusory  world.  Eadha,  the  spirit 
of  intellectual   and   moral  beauty,    comes  to  free  him 


VI  PREFACE. 

from  this  error  by  enkindling  in  his  heart  a  desire  for 
her  own  surpassing  loveliness  of  form  and  character ; 
and  under  the  parable  of  a  human  passion — too  glow- 
ingly depicted  by  the  Indian  poet  for  exact  transcription 
— the  gradual  emancipation  of  Krishna  from  sensuous 
distractions,  and  his  union  with  Eadha  in  a  high  and 
spiritualised  happiness,  are  portrayed.  This  general 
interpretation,  at  any  rate,  though  disjiuted  by  certain 
authorities,  is  maintained  by  Jones,  Lassen,  and  others ; 
and  has  been  followed,  not  without  occasional  difficulty, 
in  the  subjoined  version. 

Lassen  thus  writes  in  his  Latin  prolegomena :  "  To 
speak  my  opinion  in  one  word,  Krishna  is  here  the 
divinely-given  soul  manifested  in  humanity.  .  .  .  The 
recollection  of  this  celestial  origin  abides  deep  in  the 
mind,  and  even  when  it  seems  to  slumber — drugged  as 
it  were  by  the  fair  shows  of  the  world,  the  pleasures 
of  visible  things,  and  the  intoxication  of  the  senses — it 
now  and  again  awakes,  .  .  .  full  of  yearning  to  recover 
the  sweet  serenity  of  its  pristine  condition.  Then  the 
soul  begins  to  discriminate  and  to  perceive  that  the  love, 
which  was  its  inmost  principle,  has  been  lavished  on 
empty  and  futile  objects  ;  it  grows  a-wearied  of  things 
sensual,  false,  and  unenduring ;  it  longs  to  fix  its  affec- 


PREFACE.  VU 

tion  on  that  which  shall  be  stable,  and  the  source  of 
true  and  eternal  delight.  Krishna — to  use  the  imagery 
of  this  poem — thrones  Eadha  in  his  heart,  as  the  sole  and 
only  one  who  can  really  satisfy  his  aspirations.  .  .  . 

"  Radha  is  supreme  in  beauty,  with  a  loveliness  which 
is  at  once  celestial,  and  yet  enshrined  in  earthly  mould. 
Her  charms  lift  the  mind  to  heavenly  contemplations, 
and  the  God  of  Love,  Kama,  borrows  his  best  weapons 
from  them.  She  is  forgiving  and  pitiful  even  towards 
her  erring  and  lingering  lover  ;  she  would  meet  him  in 
returning  if  she  could ;  she  grieves  more  than  she 
blames  ;  and  once  reconciled,  is  beyond  measure  tender. 
.  .  .  The  remedy  for  the  illusions  of  sense  —  sansdra 
— is  placed  by  all  Hindoo  philosophers  in  the  under- 
standing of  true  existence,  and  Eadha,  in  my  judgment, 
represents  this  remedy — being  the  personified  contem- 
plation of  the  divine  beauty  and  goodness.  .  .  .  Such 
contemplation  flies  from  and  disowns  the  mind  possessed 
by  sensual  objects,  but  goes  to  meet  and  gladly  inhabits 
that  which  consecrates  itself,  as  Krishna's  does,  to  the 
higher  love.  ...  It  bewails  its  separation  from  the 
soul,  as  that  which  was  its  natural  dwelling-place  before 
the  changeful  shows  of  mortal  life  banished  it ;  and  this 
is  the  mystery  of  mutual  attraction  between  the  mind 


Vlll '  PREFACE. 

aud  mental  beauty,  that  the  memory  of  the  divine  happi- 
ness does  not  die,  but  is  revived  by  the  recognition  of 
truth,  and  returns  to  the  perception  of  what  things  in 
love  are  worthless,  and  what  are  real  and  worthy.     The 
affection  of  Eadha  is  jealous,  and  grants  not  the  full 
sight  of  her  charms,  until  the  soul  of  its  own  accord 
abandons  its  preoccuj)ations,  and  becomes  filled  with  the 
desire  of  the  true  love.    But  upon  the  soul  thus  returning 
she  lavishes  her  utmost  tenderness ;  whereof  to  be  the  re- 
cipient is  to  have  all  wishes  fulfilled  and  nothing  lacking 
- — to  be  tripta — '  well-contented.'     Such,  in  my  opinion, 
is  the  recondite  significance  of  this  poem,  hidden  under 
imagery  but  too  luxuriant.     The  Indian  poet  seems,  in- 
deed, to  have  spent  rather  more  labour  in  depicting 
the  phases  of  earthly  passion  than  of  that  intellectual 
yearning  by  which  the  mind  is  lifted  to  the  contempla- 
tion of  divine  things ;  .  .  .  but  the  fable  of  the  loves  of 
Govinda  and  Radha  existing  from  antiquity,  and  being 
universally  accepted,  philosophy  had  to  affix  its  doc- 
trines to  the  story  in  such  a  way  as  that  the  vulgar 
amours  of  those  popular  deities  might  present  them- 
selves in  a  nobler  aspect." 

Nothing  in  the  Avay  of  exposition  needs  to  be  added 
to  these  words. 


PREFACE.  IX 

The  great  variety  of  measure  in  the  original  has  been 
indicated  by  frequently  varying  the  metre  of  this  para- 
phrase, without  meanwhile  attempting  to  imitate  the 
many  very  fanciful  alliterations,  assonances,  and  recur- 
ring choruses ;  of  which  last,  however,  two  examples 
have  been  introduced.  The  "  Gita  Govinda,"  with  these 
refrains  and  the  musical  accompaniments  named  and 
prescribed  by  the  directions  embodied  in  the  text,  must 
have  been  a  species  of  Oriental  opera.  This  raises  the 
difficult  and  little-studied  subject  of  ancient  Hindoo 
music,  upon  which  a  passing  word  or  two  may  not 
appear  impertinent.  Sir  William  Jones  says,  "  When 
I  first  read  the  songs  of  Jayadeva,  who  has  prefixed 
to  each  the  name  of  the  mode  in  which  it  was  to  be 
sung,  I  had  hopes  of  procuring  the  original  music ;  but 
the  Pundits  of  the  South  referred  me  to  those  of  the 
West,  and  the  Brahmans  of  the  West  would  have  sent 
me  to  those  of  the  North,  while  they  of  Nepal  and 
Cashmere  declared  that  they  had  no  ancient  music, 
but  imagined  that  the  notes  of  the  "  Gita  Govinda  "  must 
exist,  if  anywhere,  where  the  poet  was  born "  (Sir  W. 
Jones,  vol.  i.  p.  440). 

Now  the  reason  why  this  illustrious  scholar  could  not 
find  the  score  of  the  "  Gita,"  was  that  music  was  always 


X  PREFACE. 

taught  orally  by  the  Hindoos,  and  therefore  did  not 
pass  down  from  the  old  minstrels  in  any  noted  form. 
Yet  there  existed  an  elaborate  science  of  melody  among 
the  ancient  Indians ;  although,  like  the  Greeks,  they 
understood  little  or  nothing  of  harmony.    The  distin- 
guishing feature  of  Hindoo  airs  was,  and  still  is,  an 
extremely  fine  gradation  of  notes  ;  the  semitone  could 
be  accurately  divided  into  demi-semitones  by  the  ear 
and  voice  of  a   practised   "  Gundharb "  or   "  Goonee." 
This   even   now   imparts  a   delicacy  to    the  otherwise 
monotonous  temple-singing,  which  all  musicians  would 
recognise ;  and  they  might  find  in  such  treatises  as  the 
"  Sungeet  Durpun,"  "  Eagavibodha,"   and  "  Eag-mala," 
or  "  Chaplet  of  Melodies,"  complete  and  curious  expla- 
nations of  the    Hindoo    orchestra.     In    that   fantastic 
system  the  old  Aryan  composers  established  six  ragas, 
or   divine   fundamental   airs,   having    each   five  wives 
or  rciginees,   and   each  of  these  producing  eight  melo- 
dious   children;   so  that  the   orthodox   repertory   con- 
tained two  hundred  and  forty  sej^arate  songs.     These 
songs  had  their  fixed  occasion,  subject,  and  season ;  all 
to  be  reverently  observed  ;  otherwise  the  deity  presiding 
over  each  was  not  thought  likely  to  attend  and  give  per- 
fect eff"ect  to  the  music.     These  lyric  divinities  are  per- 


PREFACE.  XI 

sonified  and  described  in  sucli  works  as  the  "Eatnamala:" 
thus  "  Gurjjari " — a  melody  frequently  indicated  here 
by  Jayadeva — is  represented  as  a  feminine  minstrel  of 
engaging  mien,  dressed  in  yellow  bodice  and  red 
saree,  richly  bedecked  with  jewels  and  enthroned  in 
a  golden  swing,  as  the  third  wife  of  the  Raffa  Megh. 
Musical  science  was  divided  into  seven  branches  — 
Surudhyaya  or  sol-fa-ing,  rag  or  melody,  tal  or  time, 
nrit  or  rhythmical  dancing,  mirth  or  poetry,  hhav  or 
expression,  and  hust,  answering  to  method,  "touch." 
The  gamut  contained  seven  notes  singularly  named — 
Su  was  suruj,  the  scream  of  the  peacock;  ri  was 
rikhub,  the  cry  of  the  parrot ;  gu  was  guncUmr,  the 
bleat  of  the  sheep ;  mu  was  muddhun,  the  call  of  the 
crane ;  pu  stood  for  2}unchiim,  and  the  note  of  the  Koil ; 
dim  for  dhyvut,  the  neigh  of  the  horse ;  and  ni  for 
nikhad,  the  trumpeting  of  the  elephant.  Endless 
subtleties  characterised  their  musical  terms — thus  tal, 
or  "  time,"  is  a  word  made  up  of  the  first  letters  from 
tand,  the  dance  of  Mahadeo,  and  las,  the  dance  of 
Parvati,  his  consort;  but  these  are  mere  etymological 
niceties,  characteristic  of  the  hard  language  in  which 
one  single  word  may  be  written  in  a  hundred  and  eight 
ways.     Enough  has  been  said  to  show,  from  sources 


XU  PREFACE. 

which  are  perhaps  somewhat  out  of  general  reach,  that  a 
special  accompaniment  of  music  was  prescribed  for  the 
"  Gita  Govinda "  when  composed,  which,  could  it  be 
recovered,  would  add  immensely  to  the  interest  of  the 
Sanskrit  Canticle ;  and  indeed,  even  at  present,  any 
competent  inquirer  into  the  existing  melodies  of  India, 
popular  and  sacred,  might  be  rewarded  by  many  ex- 
quisite airs  worth  the  ear  of  European  maestri  them- 
selves. The  Indians  of  to-day  have  still  their  dhoorpuds, 
or  heroic  ballads ;  their  hheals,  ghimds,  and  rehhtahs, 
love-songs  of  Mogul  derivation ;  their  dadras  and  nuktas, 
serenades  of  Hindoo  origin;  the  tuppah,  hummed  by 
Hindi  and  Punjabi  camel-drivers  ;  the  terana,  or  "  song 
without  words ; "  the  ^j>a^;ia,  of  cradle-song ;  the  sohla, 
or  marriage-strain ;  the  stooti,  or  eulogistic  chants ;  and 
the  zih'i,  which  are  hymns  of  morality.  Probably  among 
these  some  echoes  of  the  antique  melodies  of  Jayadeva 
may  be  preserved ;  at  any  rate,  such  a  list — and  it  might 
be  largely  extended — shows  that  Indian  music  well 
merits  professional  study. 

Jayadeva,  a  native  of  Kinduvilva  or  Kendoli,  in  Burd- 
wan  or  Tirhoot  (for  the  locality  is  doubtful),  wrote, 
according  to  Lassen,  about  1150  a.d.  The  theme  of 
the  Indian  poet's  musical  mystery-play  is  found  in  the 


PREFACE.  XIU 

tenth  section  of  the  Bhagavata,  but  Hindoo  literature 
and  daily  talk  are  full  of  this  half-divine,  half-human 
Krishna ;  and  in  turning  into  a  religious  canticle  the 
loves  of  "  Govinda  "  and  Eadha,  Jayadeva  might  be  sure 
that  every  native  audience,  present  and  to  come,  would 
understand  his  matter.    The  "  Gita"  is  to  this  hour  very 
popular  in  India;  but  more  so,  doubtless,  because  of 
its  melodious  versification  and  its  ardent  love-pictures 
than  the  profound  and  earnest  meanings,  for  the  sake 
of  which  this  imperfect  attempt  has  been  hazarded.    Ex- 
tremely imperfect  it  is,  and  for  exact  Sanskrit  scholars 
(among  whose  honourable  number  the  Author  has  very 
slender  claims  to  rank)  of  no  account  at  all;  yet  some- 
thing, however  slight,  may  perhaps  be  done  towards  the 
closer  acquaintance  of  England  and  India — an  object 
always  dear  to  the  present  writer — by  this  his  second 
effort  to  popularise  Indian  classics.     With  the  aid  of 
Lassen  (to  whose  labours  and  erudite  guidance  every 
grateful  acknowledgment  is  here   due)  this    '*  Song  of 
Songs  "   goes,   for  the  most  part,  fairly  pace  for  pace 
with  the  Sanskrit  text;  although  much  has  had  to  be 
modified,    and   the    last    Sarga   omitted,   in   order   to 
comply  with   the  canons   of  Western  propriety.      An 
English  dress  cannot — alas  ! — fail  to  destroy  something 


XIV  PREFACE. 

of  the  Asiatic  grace  of  Radha  ;  but  in  her  own  she  is 
radiant,  fascinating,  and  angelic,  and  seemed  to  teach 
a  lesson  so  well  worth  repeating,  that  this  imitation 
of  Jayadeva  has  been  ventured  upon. 

London,  August  1875. 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

PAOK 
REVERENCE  TO  GANESHA  .....  1 

HYMN  TO  VISHNU  ......  3 

SARGA  THE  FIRST. 

THE  SPORTS  OF  KRISHNA  .  .  .  .  .10 

SARGA  THE  SECOND. 

THE  PENITENCE  OF  KRISHNA         .  .  .  .  .24 

SARGA  THE  THIRD. 

KRISHNA  TROUBLED         .  .  .  .  .  .33 

SARGA  THE  FOURTH. 

KRISHNA  CHEEKED  .  .  .  .  .  .40 

SARGA  THE  FIFTH. 

THE  LONGINGS  OF  KRISHNA  .  .  .         •        .  .47 


XVI 


CONTENTS. 


SARGA  THE  SIXTH. 

KRISHNA  MADE  BOLDER 

SARGA  THE  SEVENTH. 

KRISHNA  SUPPOSED  FALSE 

SARGA  THE  EIGHTH. 

THE  REBUKING  OF  KRISHNA 

SARGA  THE  NINTH 

THE  END  OF  KRISHNA'S  TRIAL     . 

SARGA  THE  TENTH 

KRISHNA  IN  PARADISE 


PAGE 

58 


79 


83 


87 


SARGA  THE  ELEVENTH. 

THE  UNION  OF  RADHA  AND  KRISHNA 


93 


THE  RAJPOOT  WIFE 
KING  SALADIN  . 
THE  rajah's  RIDE 
THE  caliph's   DRAUGHT 


103 
115 
135 
140 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

OM! 

REVERENCE  TO  GANESHA! 

•' The  sky  is  clouded;  and  the  wood  resembles 

The  sky,  thick  arched  with  black  Tamala  boughs 
0  Radha,  Radha  !  take  this  Soul,  that  trembles 

In  life's  deep  midnight,  to  Thy  golden  house." 
So  Nanda  spoke, — and,  led  by  Radha's  spirit, 

The  feet  of  Krishna  found  the  road  aright ; 
Wherefore  in  bliss  which  all  high  hearts  inherit 

Together  taste  they  Love's  divine  delight. 


THE   INDIAN   SONG   OF   SONGS. 

He  who  wrote  these  things  for  thee, 
Of  the  Son  of  Wassoodee, 
Was  the  poet  Jayadeva ; 
Him  Saraswati  gave  ever 
Fancies  fair  his  mind  to  throng, 
Like  pictures  palace- walls  along ; 
Ever  to  his  notes  of  love 
Lakshmi's  mystic  dancers  move. 
If  thy  spirit  seeks  to  brood 
On  Hari  glorious,  Hari  good ; 
If  it  feeds  on  solemn  numbers 
Dim  as  dreams  and  soft  as  slumbers, 
Lend  thine  ear  to  Jayadev, 
Lord  of  all  the  spells  that  save. 
Umapatidhara's  strain 
Glows  like  roses  after  rain ; 
Sharan's  stream-like  song  is  grand, 
If  its  tide  ye  understand ; 
Bard  more  wise  beneath  the  sun 
Is  not  found  than  Govardhuu ; 
Dhoyi  holds  the  listener  still 
With  his  shlokes  of  subtle  skill ; 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF   SONGS. 

But  for  sweet  words  suited  well 
Jayadeva  doth  excel. 

( What  follows  is  to  the  Music  MaLAVA  and  the  Mode 

EUPAKA.) 

HYMN  TO  VISHNU. 

0  THOU  that  held'st  the  blessed  Veda  dry- 
When  all  things  else  beneath  the  floods  were  hurled 

Strong  Fish-God  !  Ark  of  Men !  Jai !  Hari,  jai  ! 
Hail,  Keshav,  hail !  thou  Master  of  the  world  ! 

The  round  world  rested  on  thy  spacious  nape  ; 

Upon  thy  neck,  like  a  mere  mole,  it  stood  : 
0  thou  that  took'st  for  us  the  Tortoise-shape, 

Hail,  Keshav,  hail !  Euler  of  wave  and  wood  ! 

The  world  upon  thy  curving  tusk  sate  sure, 

Like  the  Moon's  dark  disc  in  her  crescent  pale ; 

0  thou  who  didst  for  us  assume  the  Boar, 
Immortal  Conqueror  !  hail,  Keshav,  hail ! 


4  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

When  thou  thy  Giant-Foe  didst  seize  and  rend, 
Fierce,  fearful,  long,  and  sharp  were  fang  and  nail ; 

Thou  who  the  Lion  and  the  Man  didst  blend, 
Lord  of  the  Universe  !  hail,  Narsingh,  hail ! 

Wonderful  Dwarf! — who  with  a  threefold  stride 
Cheated  King  Bali — where  thy  footsteps  fall 

Men's  sins,  0  Warauna !  are  set  aside. 

0  Keshev,  hail !  thou  Help  and  Hope  of  all ! 

The  sins  of  this  sad  earth  thou  didst  assoil. 
The  anguish  of  its  creatures  thou  didst  heal ; 

Freed  are  we  from  all  terrors  by  thy  toil : 

Hail,  Purshurani,  hail !     Lord  of  the  biting  steel ! 

To  thee  the  fell  Ten-Headed  yielded  life, 

Thou  in  dread  battle  laid'st  the  monster  low  ! 

Ah,  Eama  !  dear  to  Gods  and  men  that  strife; 
We  praise  thee.  Master  of  the  matchless  bow  ! 

With  clouds  for  garments  glorious  thou  dost  fare, 
Veiling  thy  dazzling  majesty  and  might, 

As  when  Yamuna  saw  thee  with  the  share, 
A  peasant — yet  the  King  of  Day  and  Night. 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF   SONGS.  £ 

Merciful-hearted  !  when  thou  earnest  as  Boodh — 
Albeit  'twas  written  in  the  Scriptures  so — 

Thou  bad'st  our  altars  be  no  more  imbrued 
With  blood  of  victims  :  Keshav  !  bending  low 

We  praise  thee,  Wielder  of  the  sweeping  sword, 
Brilliant  as  curving  comets  in  the  gloom, 

Whose  keen  edge  smote  the  fierce  barbarian  horde ; 
Hail  to  thee,  Keshav  !  hail,  and  hear,  and  come, 

And  fill  this  song  of  Jayadev  with  thee, 

And  make  it  wise  to  teach,  strong  to  redeem, 

And  sweet  to  living  souls.     Thou  Mystery  ! 

Thou  Light  of  Life  !  Thou  Dawn  beyond  the  dream  ! 

Fish  !  that  didst  outswim  the  flood  ; 
Tortoise  !  whereon  earth  hath  stood ; 
Boar !  who  with  thy  tush  held'st  high 
The  world,  that  mortals  might  not  die ; 
Lion  !  who  hast  giants  torn  ; 
Dwarf  !  who  laugh'dst  a  king  to  scorn  ; 
Sole  Subduer  of  the  Dreaded  ! 
Slayer  of  the  many-headed ! 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Mighty  Ploughman  !    Teacher  tender  ! 
Of  thine  own  the  sure  Defender  ! 
Under  all  thy  ten  disguises 
Endless  praise  to  thee  arises. 

{What  follows  is  to  the  Music  GURJJARi  and  the  Mode 

NiHSARA.) 

Endless  praise  arises, 
0  thou  God  that  liest 
Rapt,  on  Kumla's  breast, 
Happiest,  holiest,  highest ! 
Planets  are  thy  jewels. 
Stars  thy  forehead-gems, 
Set  like  sapphires  gleaming 
In  kingliest  anadems ; 
Even  the  great  gold  Sun-God, 
Blazing  through  the  sky. 
Serves  thee  but  for  crest-stone, 
Jai,  j'ai  !   Hari,  jai  ! 
As  that  Lord  of  day 
After  night  brings  morrow, 
Thou  dost  charm  away 
Life's  long  dream  of  sorrow. 


THE  INDIAN   SONG   OF  SONGS. 

As  on  Mansa's  water 

Brood  the  swans  at  rest, 

So  thy  laws  sit  stately 

On  a  holy  breast. 

0,  Drinker  of  the  poison  ! 

Ah,  high  Delight  of  earth  ! 

What  light  is  to  the  lotus-buds. 

What  singing  is  to  mirth, 

Art  thou — art  thou  that  slayedst 

Madhou  and  Narak  grim  ; 

That  ridest  on  the  King  of  Birds, 

Making  all  glories  dim. 

With  eyes  like  open  lotus-flowers, 

Bright  in  the  morning  rain, 

Freeing  by  one  swift  piteous  glance 

The  spirit  from  Life's  pain  : 

Of  all  the  three  Worlds  Treasure  ! 

Of  sin  the  Putter-by  ! 

Of  the  Ten-Headed  Victor  ! 

Jai  Hari !     Hari !  jai  I 

Thou  Shaker  of  the  Mountain  ! 

Thou  Shadow  of  the  Storm ! 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Thou  Cloud  that  unto  Lakshmi's  face 

Comes  welcome,  white,  and  warm  ! 

0  thou, — who  to  great  Lakshmi 

Art  like  the  silvery  beam    . 

Which  moon-sick  chakors  feed  upon 

By  Jumna's  silent  stream, — 

To  thee  this  hymn  ascendeth, 

That  Jayadev  doth  sing, 

Of  worship,  love,  and  mystery  ; 

High  Lord  and  heavenly  King  ! 

And  unto  whoso  hears  it 

Do  thou  a  blessing  bring — 

Whose  neck  is  gilt  with  yellow  dust 

From  lilies  that  did  cling 

Beneath  the  breasts  of  Lakshmi, 

A  girdle  soft  and  sweet, 

When  in  divine  embracing 

The  lips  of  Gods  did  meet ; 

And  the  beating  heart  above 

Of  thee — Dread  Lord  of  Heaven  ! — 

She  left  that  stamp  of  love — 

By  such  deep  sign  be  given 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Prays  Jayadev,  the  glory 
And  the  secret  and  the  spells 
Which  close-hid  in  this  story 
Unto  wise  ears  he  tells. 


END   OF  INTRODUCTION. 


SARGA   THE  FIRST. 


SAMODADAMODARO. 

THE  SPORTS  OF  KRISHNA. 

Beautiful  Radha,  jasmine-bosomed  Radha, 
All  in  the  spring-time  waited  by  the  wood 
For  Krishna  fair,  Krishna  the  all-forgetful, — 
Krishna  with  earthly  love's  false  fire  consuming — 
And  some  one  of  her  maidens  sang  this  song  : — 

(  What  follows  is  to  the  Mtisic  Vasanta  and  the  Mode 

Yati.) 

I  know  where  Krishna  tarries  in  these  early  days  of     j 

Spring, 
When  every  wind  from  warm  Malay  brings  fragrance 

on  its  wing ; 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  11 

Brings  fragrance  stolen  far  away  from  thickets  of  the 

clove, 
In  jungles  where  the  bees  hum  and  the  Koil  flutes  her 

love  ; 
He    dances    with    the    dancers,   of    a  merry  morrice 

one, 
All  in  the  budding  Spring-time,   for   'tis  sad  to  be 

alone. 


1  know  how  Krishna  passes  these  hours  of  blue  and 

gold, 
When  parted  lovers  sigh  to  meet  and  greet  and  closely 

hold 
Hand  fast  in  hand ;  and  every  branch  upon  the  Vakul- 

tree 
Droops  downward  with   a  hundred  blooms,  in  every 

bloom  a  bee ; 
He  is  dancing  with  the  dancers  to  a  laughter-moving 

tone, 
In  the  soft  awakening  Spring-time,  when  'tis  hard  to 

live  alone. 


12  THE   INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Where  Kroona-flowers,  that  open  at  a  lover's  lightest 

tread, 
Break,  and,  for  shame  at  what  they  hear,  from  white 

blush  modest  red ; 
And  all  the  spears  on  all  the  boughs  of  all  the  Ketuk- 

glades 
Seem  ready  darts  to  pierce  the  hearts   of  wandering 

youths  and  maids ; 
'Tis  there  thy  Krishna  dances  till  the  merry  drum  is  done, 
All  in  the  sunny  Spring-time,  when  who  can  live  alone  1 

Where  the  breaking-forth  of  blossom   on   the   yellow 

Keshra-sprays 
Dazzles  like  Kama's  sceptre,  whom  all  the  world  obeys ; 
And  Fatal -buds  fill  drowsy  bees  from  pink   delicious 

bowls, 
As  Kama's  nectared  goblet  steeps  in  languor  human 

souls ; 
There  he  dances  with  the  dancers,  and  of  Eadha  thinketh 

none, 
All  in  the  warm  new  Spring-tide,  when  none  will  live 

alone. 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  13 

Where   the   breath  of  waving  Madhvi   pours   incense 

through  the  grove, 
And  silken   Mogras   lull   the   sense   with    essences    of 

love, — 
The  silken-soft  pale  Mogra,  whose  perfume  fine   and 

faint 
Can  melt  the  coldness  of  a  maid,  the  sternness  of  a 

saint — 
There  dances  with  those  dancers  thine  other  self,  thine 

Own, 
All  in  the  languorous  Spring-time,  when  none  will  live 

alone. 


Where — as  if  warm  lips  touched  sealed  eyes  and  waked 

them — all  the  bloom 
Opens    upon     the     mangoes     to     feel     the     sunshine 


come ; 


And    Atimuktas    wind    their    arms    of    softest    green 

about, 
Clasping  the  stems,  while  calm  and  clear  great  Jumna 

spreadeth  out ; 


14  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF   SONGS, 

There  dances  and  there  laughs  thy  Love,  with  damsels 

many  an  one, 
In  the  rosy  days  of  Spring-time,  for  he  will  not  live  alone. 

Mark  this  song  of  Jayadev  ! 
Deep  as  pearl  in  ocean-wave 
Lurketh  in  its  lines  a  wonder 
Which  the  wise  alone  will  ponder: 
Though  it  seemeth  of  the  earth, 
Heavenly  is  the  music's  birth  ; 
Telling  darkly  of  delights 
In  the  wood,  of  wasted  nights. 
Of  witless  days,  and  fruitless  love, 
And  false  pleasures  of  the  grove, 
And  rash  passions  of  the  prime, 
And  those  dances  of  Spring-time  ; 
Time,  which  seems  so  subtle-sweet, 
Time,  which  pipes  to  dancing-feet, 
Ah  !  so  softly — ah !  so  sweetly — 
That  among  those  wood-maids  featly 
Krishna  cannot  choose  but  dance, 
Letting  pass  life's  greater  chance. 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  15 

Yet  the  winds  tliat  sigh  so 

As  they  stir  the  rose, 
Wake  a  sigh  from  Krishna 

Wistfuller  than  those ; 
All  their  faint  breaths  swinging 

The  creepers  to  and  fro 
Pass  like  rustling  arrows 

Shot  from  Kama's  bow  : 
Thus  among  the  dancers 

What  those  zephyrs  bring 
Strikes  to  Krishna's  spirit 

Like  a  darted  sting. 


And  all  as  if — far  wandered — 

The  traveller  should  hear 
The  bird  of  home,  the  Koil, 

With  nest-notes  rich  and  clear  ; 
And  there  should  come  one  moment 

A  blessed  fleeting  dream 
Of  the  bees  among  the  mangoes 

Beside  his  native  stream  ; 


16  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS, 

So  flash  those  sudden  yearnings, 
That  sense  of  a  dearer  thing, 

The  love  and  lack  of  Radha 
Upon  his  soul  in  Spring. 

Then  she,  the  maid  of  Eadha,  spake  again  ; 
And  pointing  far  away  between  the  leaves 
Guided  her  lovely  Mistress  where  to  look, 
And  note  how  Krishna  wantoned  in  the  wood 
Now  with  this  one,  now  that ;  his  heart,  her  prize, 
Panting  with  foolish  passions,  and  his  eyes 
Beaming  with  too  much  love  for  those  fair  girls — 
Fair,  but  not  so  as  Radha ;  and  she  sang 


{What follows  is  to  the  Music  RaMAGIRi  and  the  3fode 

Yati.) 

See,    Lady !     how     thy     Krishna     passes     these    idle 

hours 
Decked  forth  in  fold  of  woven  gold,  and  crowned  with 

forest-flowers ; 


\ 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  17 

And  scented  with  the  sandal,  and  gay  with  gems  of 

price — 
Rubies  to  mate  his  laughing  lips,  and  diamonds  like  his 

eyes  ;— 
In  the  company  of  damsels,*  who  dance  and  sing  and 

play, 
Lies  Krishna  laughing,  toying,  dreaming  his  Spring  away. 

One,  with  star-blossomed  champak  wreathed,  woos  him 

to  rest  his  head 
On  the  dark  pillow  of  her  breast  so  tenderly  outspread ; 
And  o'er  his  brow  with  roses  blown  she  fans  a  fragrance 

rare, 
That  falls  on  the  enchanted  sense  like  rain  in  thirsty 

air, 
While  the  company  of  damsels  wave  many  an  odorous 

spray. 
And  Krishna  laughing,  toying,  sighs  the  soft  Spring 

away. 


*  It  will  be  observed  that  the  "  Gopis  "  here  personify  the  five 

senses.     Lassen    says,    "  Manifest um    est   puellis    istis    nil    aliud 

significari  quam  res  sensUes. " 

B 


18  THE   INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Another,  gazing  in  his  face,  sits  wistfully  apart. 
Searching  it  with  those  looks  of  love  that  leap  from 

heart  to  heart ; 
Her  eyes — afire  with  shy  desire,  veiled  by  their  lashes 

black — 
Speak  so  that  Krishna  cannot  choose  but  send  the 

message  back, 
In   the    company  of  damsels  whose  bright  eyes  in  a 

ring 
Shine  round  him  with  soft  meanings  in  the  merry  light 

of  Spring.  ' 

The  third  one  of  that  dazzling  band  of  dwellers  in  the 

wood — 
Body  and  bosom  panting  with  the  pulse  of  youthful 

blood — 
Leans   over  him,  as  in  his  ear  a  lightsome  thing  to 

speak. 
And  then  with  leaf-soft  lip  imprints  a  kiss  below  his 

cheek ; 
A  kiss  that  thrills,  and  Krishna  turns  at  the  silken  touch 
To  give  it  back — ah,  Radha  !  forgetting  thee  too  much. 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  19 

And  one  with  arch  smile  beckons  him  away  from 
Jumna's  banks, 

Where  the  tall  bamboos  bristle  like  spears  in  battle- 
ranks, 

And  plucks  his  cloth  to  make  him  come  into  the  mango- 
shade. 

Where  the  fruit  is  ripe  and  golden,  and  the  milk  and 
cakes  are  laid : 

Oh  !  golden-red  the  mangoes,  and  glad  the  feasts  of 
Spring, 

And  fair  the  flowers  to  lie  upon,  and  sweet  the  dancers 
sing. 


Sweetest  of  all  that  Temptress  who   dances  for  him 

now 
With  subtle  feet  which  part  and  meet  in   the  Ras- 

measure  slow, 
To  the  chime  of  silver  bangles  and  the  beat  of  rose-leaf 

hands. 
And  pipe  and  lute  and  cymbal  played  by  the  woodland 

bands ; 


20  THE   INDIAN    SONG   OF   SONGS. 

So    that    wholly    passion-laden — eye,    ear,    sense,    soul 

o'ercome — 
Krishna  is  theirs  in  the  forest ;  his  heart  forgets  its 

home. 

Krishna,  made  for  heavenly  things, 
'Midst  those  woodland  singers  sings ; 
With  those  dancers  dances  featly, 
Gives  back  soft  embraces  sweetly; 
Smiles  on  that  one,  toys  with  this, 
Glance  for  glance  and  kiss  for  kiss ; 
Meets  the  merry  damsels  fairly, 
Plays  the  round  of  folly  rarely, 
Lapped  in  milk-warm  spring-time  weather. 
He  and  those  brown  girls  together. 

And  this  shadowed  earthly  love 
In  the  twilight  of  the  grove, 
Dance  and  song  and  soft  caresses, 
Meeting  looks  and  tangled  tresses, 
Jayadev  the  same  hath  writ, 
That  ye  might  have  gain  of  it. 


THE   INDIAN    SONG    OF   SONGS.  21 

Sagely  its  deep  sense  conceiving 

And  its  inner  light  believing  ; 

How  that  Love — the  mighty  Master, 

Lord  of  all  the  stars  that  cluster 

In  the  sky,  swiftest  and  slowest, 

Lord  of  highest,  Lord  of  lowest — 

Manifests  himself  to  mortals, 

Winning  them  toward  the  portals 

Of  his  secret  House,  the  gates 

Of  that  bright  Paradise  which  waits 

The  wise  in  love.    Ah,  human  creatures ! 

Even  your  phantasies  are  teachers. 

flighty  Love  makes  sweet  in  seeming 

Even  Krishna's  woodland  dreaming  : 

Mighty  love  sways  all  alike 

From  self  to  selflessness.    Oh !  strike 

From  your  eyes  the  veil,  and  see 

What  Love  willeth  him  to  be 

Who  in  error,  but  in  grace, 

Sitteth  with  that  lotus-face, 

And  those  eyes  whose  rays  of  heaven 

Unto  phantom-eyes  are  given  : 


22  THE   INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Holding  feasts  of  foolish  mirth 
With  these  Visions  of  the  earth ; 
Learning  love,  and  love  imparting  ; 
Yet  with  sense  of  loss  upstarting,  — 


For  the  cloud  that  veils  the  fountains 
Underneath  the  Sandal  mountains, 
How — as  if  the  sunshine  drew 
All  its  being  to  the  blue — 
It  takes  flight,  and  seeks  to  rise 
High  into  the  purer  skies, 
High  into  the  snow  and  frost, 
On  the  shining  summits  lost ! 
Ah  !  and  how  the  Koils'  strain 
Smites  the  traveller  with  pain, — 
When  the  mango  blooms  in  spring, 
And  "  Koohoo,"  "  Koohoo,"  they  sing- 
Pain  of  pleasures  not  yet  won. 
Pain  of  journeys  not  yet  done. 
Pain  of  toiling  without  gaining. 
Pain,  'mid  gladness,  of  still  paining. 


THE   INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  23 

But  may  He  guide  us  all  to  glory  high 
Who  laughed  when  Radha  glided,  hidden,  by. 
And  all  among  those  damsels  free  and  bold 
Touched  Krishna  with  a  soft  mouth,  kind  and  cold  ;. 
And  like  the  others,  leaning  on  his  breast. 
Unlike  the  others,  left  there  Love's  unrest ; 
And  like  the  others,  joining  in  his  song, 
Unlike  the  others,  made  him  silent  long. 

{Here  ends  that  Sarga  of  the  Gtta  Govinda  entitled 
Samodadamodaro.  ) 


SARGA    THE  SECOND. 


KLESHAKESHAVO. 

THE    PENITENCE    OF    KRISHNA. 

Thus  lingered  Krishna  in  the  deep,  green  wood, 
And  gave  himself,  too  prodigal,  to  those ; 
But  Radha,  heart-sick  at  his  falling-off. 
Seeing  her  heavenly  beauty  slighted  so. 
Withdrew ;  and,  in  a  bower  of  Paradise — 
Where  nectarous  blossoms  wove  a  shrine  of  shade, 
Haunted  by  birds  and  bees  of  unknown  skies — 
She  sate  deep-sorrowful,  and  sang  this  strain, 

{Wliat follows  is  to  the  Music  GURJJARi  and  the  Mode 

Yati.) 

Ah,  my  Beloved  !  taken  with  those  glances, 
Ah,  my  Beloved  !  dancing  those  rash  dances. 
Ah,  Minstrel !  playing  wrongful  strains  so  well ; 


THE   INDIAN    SONG   OF   SONGS.  25 

All,  Krishna !  Krishna,  with  the  honeyed  lip  ! 
Ah,  Wanderer  into  foolish  fellowship  ! 

My  Dancer,  my  Delight ! — I  love  thee  still. 

0  Dancer  !  strip  thy  peacock-crown  away, 

Rise  !  thou  whose  forehead  is  the  star  of  day, 
With  beauty  for  its  silver  halo  set ; 

Come  !   thou  whose  greatness  gleams  beneath  its 
shroud 

Like  Indra's  rainbow  shining  through  the  cloud- 
Come,  for  I  love  thee,  my  Beloved !  yet. 

Must  love  thee — cannot  choose  but  love  thee  ever, 
My  best  Beloved — set  on  this  endeavour. 

To  win  thy  tender  heart  and  earnest  eye 
From  lips  but  sadly  sweet,  from  restless  bosoms, 
To  mine,  0  Krishna  with  the  mouth  of  blossoms  ! 

To  mine,  thou  soul  of  Krishna  !  yet  I  sigh 

Half  hopeless,  thinking  of  myself  forsaken, 
And  thee,  dear  Loiterer,  in  the  wood  o'ertaken 
With  passion  for  those  bold  and  wanton  ones. 


26  THE   INDIAN   SONG   OF  SONGS. 

Who  knit  thine  arms  as  poison-plants  gripe  trees 
With  twining  cords — their  flowers  the  braveries 
That  flash  in  the  green  gloom,  sparkling  gauds  and 
stones. 

My  Prince !  my  Lotus-faced !  my  woe  !  my  love  ! 
Whose  broad  brow,  with  the  tilka-mark  above. 

Shames  the  bright  moon  at  full  with  fleck  of  cloud ; 
Thou  to  mistake  so  little  for  so  much  ! 
Thou,  Krishna,  to  be  palm  to  palm  with  such  ! 

0  Soul  made  for  my  joys,  pure,  perfect,  proud  ! 

Ah,  my  Beloved !  in  thy  darkness  dear ; 
Ah,  Dancer !  with  the  jewels  in  thine  ear, 
Swinging  to  music  of  a  loveless  love ; 

0  my  Beloved  !  in  thy  fall  so  high 
That  angels,  sages,  spirits  of  the  sky 

Linger  about  thee,  watching  in  the  grove. 

1  will  be  patient  still,  and  draw  thee  ever, 
My  one  Beloved,  sitting  by  the  river 

Under  the  thick  Kadambas  with  that  throng  : 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF   SONGS.  27 

Will  there  not  come  an  end  to  earthly  madness  1 
Shall  I  not,  past  the  sorrow,  have  the  gladness  1 
Must  not  the  love-light  shine  for  him  ere  long  ? 

Shine,  thou  Light  by  Radha  given, 
Shine,  thou  splendid  star  of  heaven  ! 
Be  a  lamp  to  Krishna's  feet, 
Show  to  all  hearts  secrets  sweet, 
Of  the  wonder  and  the  love 
Jayadev  hath  writ  above. 
Be  the  quick  Interpreter 
Unto  wisest  ears  of  her 
Who  always  sings  to  all,  "  1  wait, 
He  loveth  still  who  loveth  late." 

For  (sang  on  that  high  Lady  in  the  shade) 
My  soul  for  tenderness,  not  blame,  was  made  ; 

Mine  eyes  look  through  his  evil  to  his  good ; 
]My  heart  coins  pleas  for  him ;  my  fervent  thought 
Prevents  what  he  will  say  when  these  are  naught, 

And  that  which  I  am  shall  be  understood. 

Then  spake  she  to  her  maiden  wistfully — 


28  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

( What  folloivs  is  to  the  Music  MaLAVAGAUDA  cmd  the 
Mode  Ekatali.) 

Go  to  him, — win  him  hither, — whisper  low 
How  he  may  find  me  if  he  searches  well ; 

Say,  if  he  will — ^joys  past  his  hope  to  know 
Await  him  here ;  go  now  to  him,  and  tell 

Where  Eadha  is,  and  that  henceforth  she  charms 
His  spirit  to  her  arms. 

Yes,  go  !  say,  if  he  will,  that  he  may  come — 
May  come,  my  love,  my  longing,  my  desire ; 

May  come  forgiven,  shriven,  to  me  his  home. 
And  make  his  happy  peace ;  nay,  and  aspire 

To  uplift  Radha's  veil,  and  learn  at  length 

What  love  is  in  its  strensrth. 


'^o^ 


Lead  him ;  say  softly  I  shall  chide  his  blindness. 
And  vex  him  with  my  angers ;  yet  add  this, 

He  shall  not  vainly  sue  for  loving-kindness. 
Nor  miss  to  see  me  close,  nor  lose  the  bliss 

That  lives  upon  my  lip,  nor  be  denied 

The  rose-throne  at  my  side. 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  29 

Say  that  I — Eadlia — in  my  bower  languish 
All  widowed,  till  he  find  the  way  to  me ; 

Say  that  mine  eyes  are  dim,  my  breast  all  anguish, 
Until  with  gentle  murmured  shame  I  see 

His  steps  come  near,  his  anxious  pleading  face 

Bend  for  my  pardoning  grace. 


While  I — what,  did  he  deem  light  loves  so  tender, 
To  tarry  for  them  when  the  vow  was  made. 

To  yield  him  up  my  bosom's  maiden  splendour, 
And  fold  him  in  my  fragrance,  and  unbraid 

My  shining  hair  for  him,  and  clasp  him  close 

To  the  gold  heart  of  his  Rose, 


And  sing  him  strains  which  only  spirits  know. 
And  make  him  captive  with  the  silk-soft  chain 

Of  twinned-wings  brooding  round  him,  and  bestow 
Kisses  of  Paradise,  as  pure  as  rain ; 

My  gems,  my  moonlight-pearls,  my  girdle-gold. 

Cymbaling  music  bold  1 


30  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

While  gained  for  ever,  I  shall  dare  to  grow 
Life  to  life  with  him,  in  the  realms  divine  ; 

And — Love's  large  cup  at  happy  overflow, 
Yet  ever  to  be  filled — his  eyes  and  mine 

Shall  meet  in  that  glad  look,  when  Time's  great  gate 

Closes  and  shuts  out  Fate. 


Listen  to  the  unsaid  things 
Of  the  song  which  Radha  sings, 
For  the  soul  draws  near  to  bliss, 
As  it  comprehendeth  this. 
I  am  Jayadev,  who  write 
All  this  subtle-rich  delight 
For  your  teaching.     Ponder,  then. 
What  it  tells  to  Gods  and  men. 
Err  not,  watching  Krishna  gay, 
With  those  brown  girls  all  at  play  : 
Understand  how  Radha  charms 
Her  wandering  lover  to  her  arms, 
Waiting  with  divinest  love 
Till  his  dream  ends  in  the  grove. 


THE  INDIAN  SONG   OF  SONGS.  31 

For  even  now  (she  sang)  I  see  him  pause. 

Heart-stricken  with  the  waste  of  heart  he  makes 

Amid  them  ; — all  the  bows  of  their  bent  brows 
Wound  him  no  more  :  no  more  for  all  their  sakes 

Plays  he  one  note  upon  his  amorous  lute, 

But  lets  the  strings  lie  mute. 

Pensive,  as  if  his  parted  lips  should  say — 

"  My  feet  with  the  dances  are  weary, 

The  music  has  dropped  from  the  song, 
There  is  no  more  delight  in  the  lute-strings, 

Sweet  Shadows  !  what  thing  has  gone  wrong  1 
The  wings  of  the  wind  have  left  fanning 

The  palms  of  the  glade ; 
They  are  dead,  and  the  blossoms  seem  dying 

In  the  place  where  we  played. 

"  We  will  play  no  more,  beautiful  Shadows  ! 
A  fancy  came  solemn  and  sad, 
More  sweet,  with  unspeakable  longings, 
Than  the  best  of  the  pleasures  we  had  : 


32  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

I  am  not  now  the  Krishna  who  kissed  you  ; 

That  exquisite  dream, — 
The  Vision  I  saw  in  my  dancing — 

Has  spoiled  what  you  seem. 

"Ah  !  delicate  phantoms  that  cheated 

With  eyes  that  looked  lasting  and  true, 
I  awake, — I  have  seen  her, — my  angel — 

Farewell  to  the  wood  and  to  you  ! 
Oh,  whisper  of  wonderful  pity ! 

Oh,  fair  face  that  shone ! 
Though  thou  be  a  vision,  Divinest ! 

This  vision  is  done." 

(Here  eiids  that  Sarga  of  the  Gita  Govinda  entitled 
Kleshakesh  AVO. ) 


SARGA    THE   THIRD. 


MUGDHAMADHUSUDANO. 

KRISHNA  TROUBLED. 

Thereat, — as  one  who  welcomes  to  her  throne 

A  new-made  Queen,  and  brings  before  it  bound 

Her  enemies, — so  Krishna  in  his  heart 

Throned  Radha ;  and — all  treasonous  follies  chained- 

He  played  no  more  with  those  first  play-fellows  : 

But,  searching  through  the  shadows  of  the  grove 

For  loveliest  Radha, — when  he  found  her  not. 

Faint  Avith  the  quest,  despairing,  lonely,  lorn, 

And  pierced  with  shame  for  wasted  love  and  days, 

0 


34  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 


He  sate  by  Jumna,  where  the  canes  are  thick, 
And  sang  to  the  wood-echoes  words  like  these 


{What  follows  is  to  the  Music  GuRJJARi  and  the  Mode 

Yati.) 

Radha,  Enchantress  !  Radha,  queen  of  all ! 

Gone' — lost,  because  she  found  me  sinning  here  ; 
And  I  so  stricken  with  my  foolish  fall, 

I  could  not  stay  her  out  of  shame  and  fear ; 

She  will  not  hear  ; 
In  her  disdain  and  grief  vainly  I  call. 

And  if  she  heard,  what  would  she  do  1  what  say  1 
How  could  I  make  it  good  that  I  forgot  1 

What  profit  was  it  to  me,  night  and  day. 

To  live,  love,  dance,  and  dream,  having  her  not  1 

Soul  without  spot ! 

I  wronged  thy  patience,  till  it  sighed  away. 

Sadly  I  see  the  truth.     Ah  !  even  now 

Remembering  that  one  look  beside  the  river. 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  35 

Softer  the  vexed  eyes  seem,  and  the  proud  brow 
Than  lotus-leaves  when  the  bees  make  them  quiver. 

My  love  for  ever ! 
Too  late  is  Krishna  wise — too  far  art  thou  ! 

Yet  all  day  long  in  my  deep  heart  I  woo  thee, 
And  all  night  long  with  thee  my  dreams  are  sweet ; 

Why,  then,  so  vainly  must  my  steps  pursue  thee  1 
Why  can  I  never  reach  thee  to  entreat, 

Low  at  thy  feet, 

Dear  vanished  Splendour !  till  my  tears  subdue  thee  ? 

Surpassing  One  !  I  knew  thou  didst  not  brook 
Half-hearted  worship,  and  a  love  that  wavers ; 

Haho  !  there  is  the  wisdom  I  mistook. 

Therefore  I  seek  with  desperate  endeavours ; 

That  fault  dissevers 

Me  from  my  heaven,  astray — condemned — forsook  ! 

And  yet  I  seem  to  feel,  to  know,  thee  near  me  ; 
Thy  steps  make  music,  measured  music,  near ; 


36  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Radha  !  my  Eadha  !  will  not  sorrow  clear  me  1 
Shine  once  !  speak  one  word  pitiful  and  dear  ! 

Wilt  thou  not  hear  ] 
Canst  thou — because  I  did  forget — forsake  me  ? 

Forgive  !  the  sin  is  sinned,  is  past,  is  over  ; 

No  thought  I  think  shall  do  thee  wrong  again 
Turn  thy  dark  eyes  again  upon  thy  lover, 

Bright  Spirit !  or  I  perish  of  this  pain. 

Loving  again  ! 
In  dread  of  doom  to  love,  but  not  recover. 

So  did  Krishna  sing  and  sigh 

By  the  river-bank ;  and  I, 

Jayadev  of  Kinduvilva, 

Resting— as  the  moon  of  silver 

Sits  upon  the  solemn  ocean — 

On  full  faith  in  deep  devotion  ; 

Tell  it  that  ye  may  perceive 

How  the  heart  must  fret  and  grieve  ; 

How  the  soul  doth  tire  of  earth, 

When  the  love  from  Heav'n  hath  birth.     " 


THE   INDIAN   SONG  OF   SONGS.  37 

For  (sang  he  on)  I  am  no  foe  of  thine, 

There  is  no  black  snake,  Kama  !  in  my  hair  ; 

Blue  lotus- leaves,  and  not  the  poisoned  brine. 
Shadow  my  neck  ;  what  stains  my  bosom  bare, 

Thou  God  unfair  ! 

Is  sandal-dust,  not  ashes  ;  nought  of  mine 

Makes  me  like  Shiva  that  thou,  Lord  of  Love  ! 

Shouldst  strain  thy  string  at  me  and  fit  thy  dart ; 
This  world  is  thine — let  be  one  breast  thereof 

Which  bleeds  already,  wounded  to  the  heart 

With  lasting  smart, 
Shot  from  those  brows  that  did  my  sin  reprove. 


Thou  gavest  her  those  black  brows  for  a  bow 

Arched  like   thine  own,   whose  pointed  arrows 
seem 
Her  glances,  and  the  underlids  that  go — 

So  firm  and  fine — its  string  ?     Ah,  fleeting  gleam 

Beautiful  dream ! 
Small  need  of  Kama's  help  hast  thou,  I  trow. 


38  THE   INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

To  smite  me  to  the  soul  with  love ; — but  set 
Those  arrows  to  their  silken  cord  !  enchain 

My  thoughts  in  that  loose  hair  !  let  thy  lips,  wet 
With  dew  of  heaven  as  bimba-buds  with  rain, 

Bloom  precious  pain 

Of  longing  in  my  heart ;  and,  keener  yet, 

The  heaving  of  thy  lovely,  angry  bosom. 
Pant  to  my  spirit  things  unseen,  unsaid ; 

But  if  thy  touch,  thy  tones,  if  the  dark  blossom 
Of  thy  dear  face,  thy  jasmine-odours  shed 

From  feet  to  head, 

If  these  be  all  with  me,  canst  thou  be  far — be  fled  1 

So  sang  he,  and  I  pray  that  whoso  hears 
The  music  of  his  burning  hopes  and  fears, 
That  whoso  sees  this  vision  by  the  Elver 
Of  Krishna,  Hari,  (can  we  name  him  ever  1) 
And  marks  his  ear-ring  rubies  swinging  slow. 
As  he  sits  still,  unheedful,  bending  low 
To  play  this  tune  upon  his  lute,  while  all 
Listen  to  catch  the  sadness  musical  ; 


THE   INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  39 

And  Ki'ishna  wotteth  nought,  but  with  set  face. 
Turned  full  toward  Eadha's  plays  on  in  that  place  ; 
May  all  such  souls — prays  Jayadev — be  wise 
To  learn  the  wisdom  which  hereunder  lies. 

{Here  ends  that  Sarga  of  the  Gita  Govinda  eiititled- 
MUGDHAMADHUSUDANO, ) 


SARGA   THE  FOURTH. 


SNIGD  HAMAD  HUSUD  AN  0. 

KRISHNA  CHEERED. 

Then  she  whom  Radha  sent  came  to  the  canes — 
The  canes  beside  the  river  where  he  lay 
With  listless  limbs  and  spirit  weak  from  love ; — 
And  she  sang  this  to  Krishna  wistfully. 

( What  folloivs  is  to  the  Music  KarnaTA  and  the  3Iode 

EkaijLlI) 

Art  thou  sick  for  Radha  1  she  is  sad  in  turn, 

Heaven  foregoes  its  blessings,  if  it  holds  not  thee ; 

All  the  cooling  fragrance  of  sandal  she  doth  spurn, 
Moonlight  makes  her  mournful  with  radiance  silvery 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  41 

Even  the  southern  breeze  blown  fresh  from  pearly  seas, 

Seems  to  her  but  tainted  by  a  dolorous  brine  ; 
And  for  thy  sake  discontented,  with  a  great  love  over- 
laden, 
Her  soul  comes  here  beside  thee,  and  sitteth  down 
with  thine. 

Her  soul  comes  here  beside  thee,  and  tenderly  and  true 
It  weaves  a  subtle  mail  of  proof  to  ward  off  sin  and 
pain; 
A  breastplate  soft   as   lotus-leaf,  with   holy  tears   for 
dew. 
To  guard  thee  from  the  things  that  hurt ;  and  then 
'tis  gone  again 
To  strew  a  blissful  place  with  the  richest  buds  that 
grace 
Kama's  sweet  world,   a  meeting-spot  with  rose  and 
jasmine  fair. 
For  the   hour  when,  well-contented,   with   a  love   no 
longer  troubled. 
Thou  shalt  find  the  way  to  Radha,  and  finish  sorrows 
there. 


42  THE   INDIAN   SONG   OF   SONGS. 

But  now  her  lovely  face  is  shadowed  by  her  fears  ; 
Her  glorious  eyes  are  veiled  and  dim  like  moonlight 
in  eclipse 
By  breaking  rain-clouds,  Krishna!  yet  she  paints  you 
in  her  tears 
With  tender  thoughts — not  Krishna,  but  brow  and 
breast  and  lips 
And  form  and  mien  a  King,  a  great  and  god-like  thing ; 
And  then  with  bended  head  she  asks  grace  from  the 
Love  Divine, 
To   keep   thee   discontented   with  the   phantoms  thou 
forswearest, 
Till  she  may  win  her  glorj^  and  thou  be  raised  to  thine. 

Softly  now  she  sayeth, 

'*  Krishna,  Krishna,  come  !  " 
Lovingly  she  prayeth, 

"Fair  moon,  light  him  home." 
Yet  if  Hari  helps  not, 

Moonlight  cannot  aid ; 
Ah  !  the  woeful  Eadha  ! 

Ah  !  the  forest  shade  ! 


THE   INDIAN    SONG   OF   SONGS.  43 

Ah  !  if  Hari  guide  not, 

Moonlight  is  as  gloom  ; 
Ah  !  if  moonlight  help  not, 

How  shall  Krishna  come  ? 
Sad  for  Krishna  grieving 

In  the  darkened  grove  ; 
Sad  for  Radha  weaving 

Dreams  of  fruitless  love  ! 


Strike  soft  strings  to  this  soft  measure, 
If  thine  ear  would  catch  its  treasure  ; 
Slowly  dance  to  this  deep  song, 
Let  its  meaning  float  along 
With  grave  paces,  since  it  tells 
Of  a  love  that  sweetly  dwells 
In  a  tender  distant  glory, 
Past  all  faults  of  mortal  story. 


44  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

{What follows  is  to  the  Music  DeshAga  and  the  Mode 

EkatalI.) 

Krishna,  till  thou  come  unto  her,  faint  she  lies  with  love 

and  fear ; 
Even  the  jewels  of  her  necklet  seem  a  load  too  great  to 

bear, 

Krishna,  till  thou  come  unto  her,  all  the  sandal  and  the 

flowers 
Vex  her  with  their  pure  perfection  though  they  grow  in 

heavenly  bowers. 

Krishna,    till   thou    come   unto   her,   fair   albeit   those 

bowers  may  be. 
Passion  burns  her,  and  love's  fire  fevers  her  for  lack 

of  thee. 

Krishna,  till  thou  come  unto  her,  those  divine  lids,  dark 

and  tender, 
Droop  like  lotus-leaves  in  rain-storms,  dashed  and  heavy 

in  their  splendour. 


THE  INDIAN  SONG   OF   SONGS.  45 

Krishna,  till  thou  come  unto  her,  that  rose-couch  which 

she  hath  spread 
Saddens  with  its  empty  place,  its  double  pillow  for  one 

head. 

Krishna,  till  thou  come  unto  her,  from  her  palms  she 

will  not  lift 
The  dark  face  hidden  deep  within  them  like  the  moon 

in  cloudy  rift. 

Krishna,  till  thou  come  unto  her,  angel  though  she  be, 

thy  Love 
Sighs  and  suffers,  waits  and  watches — ^joyless  'mid  those 

joys  above. 

Krishna,  till  thou  come  unto  her,  with  the  comfort  of 

thy  kiss 
Deeper  than   thy  loss,   0   Krishna !    must  be   loss  of 

Radha's  bliss. 

Krishna,  while  thou  didst  forget  her — her,  thy  life,  thy 

gentle  fate — 

Wonderful     her    waiting  was,    her     pity    sweet,    her 

patience  great. 


46  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Krishna,  come  !  'tis  grief  untold  to  grieve  her — shame  to 

let  her  sigh  ; 
Come,  for  she  is  sick  with   love,  and  thou  her  only 

remedy. 


So  she  sang,  and  Jayadeva 

Prays  for  all,  and  prays  for  ever, 

That  Great  Hari  may  bestow 

Utmost  bliss  of  loving  so 

On  us  all ; — that  one  who  wore 

The  herdsman's  form,  and  heretofore, 

To  save  the  shepherd's  threatened  flock, 

Up  from  the  earth  reared  the  huge  rock — 

Bestow  it  with  a  gracious  hand. 

Albeit,  amid  the  woodland  band. 

Clinging  close  in  fond  caresses 

Krishna  gave  them  ardent  kisses, 

Taking  on  his  lips  divine 

Earthly  stamp  and  woodland  sign. 

{Here  ends  t/iat  Sarga  of  the  Gita  Govinda  e7ititled 
Snigdhamadhusudano.) 


SARGA   THE  FIFTH. 


SAKANDKSHAPUNDARIKAKSHO. 

THE  LONGINGS  OF  KRISHNA. 

"  Say  I  am  here  !  oh,  if  she  pardons  me, 
Say  where  I  am,  and  win  her  softly  hither," 
So  Krislma  to  the  maid  ;  and  Avillingly 
She  came  again  to  Radha,  and  she  sang 

{What  follows  is  to  the  Music  DeshivaradI  a7id  the  Mode 

RUPAKA.) 

Low  whispers  the  wind  from  Malaya 

O'erladen  with  love ; 
On  the  hills  all  the  grass  is  burned  yellow ; 

And  the  trees  in  the  grove 


48  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Droop  with  tendrils  that  melt  by  their  sweetness 

The  thoughts  of  the  parted ; 
And  there  lies,  sore-sighing  for  thee, 

Thy  love,  altered-hearted. 

To  him  the  moon's  icy-chill  silver 

Is  a  sun  at  midday ; 
The  fever  he  burns  with  is  deeper 

Than  starlight  can  stay  : 
Like  one  who  falls  stricken  by  arrows, 

With  the  colour  departed 
From  all  but  his  red  wounds,  so  lies 

Thy  love,  bleeding-hearted. 

To  the  music  the  banded  bees  make  him 

He  closeth  his  ear ; 
In  the  blossoms  their  small  horns  are  blowing 

The  honey-song  clear ; 
But  as  if  every  sting  to  his  bosom 

Its  smart  had  imparted, 
Low  lies  by  the  edge  of  the  river, 

Thy  love,  aching-hearted. 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  49 

By  the  edge  of  the  river,  far  wandered 

From  his  once  beloved  bowers, 
And  the  haunts  of  his  beautiful  playmates, 

And  the  beds  strewn  with  flowers ; 
Now  thy  name  is  his  playmate — that  only  ! — 

And  the  hard  rocks  upstarted 
From  the  sand  make  the  couch  where  he  lies, 

Thy  Krishna,  sad-hearted. 

Oh  may  Hari  fill  each  soul. 
As  these  gentle  verses  roll 
Telling  of  the  anguish  borne 
By  kindred  ones  asunder  torn  ! 
Oh  may  Hari  unto  each 
All  the  lore  of  loving  teach, 
All  the  pain  and  all  the  bliss ; 
Jayadeva  prayeth  this ! 

Yea,  Lady  !  in  the  self-same  spot  he  waits 
Where  with  thy  kiss  thou  taught'st  him  utmost  love, 
And  drew  him,  as  none  else  draws,  with  thy  look ; 
And  all  day  long,  and  all  night  long,  his  cry 

D 


50  THE   INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Is  "  Eadha,  Radlia,"  like  a  spell  said  o'er ; 
And  in  his  heart  there  lives  no  wish  nor  hope 
Save  only  this,  to  slake  his  spirit's  thirst 
For  Radha's  love  on  Radha's  lips ;  and  find 
Peace  in  the  immortal  beauty  of  thy  brow. 

( What  follows  is  to  the  Music  GURJJARi  a?id  the  Mode 

EkatalI.) 

Mistress,  sweet  and  bright  and  holy  ! 

Meet  him  in  that  place  ; 
Change  his  cheerless  melancholy 

Into  joy  and  grace ; 
If  thou  hast  forgiven,  vex  not ; 

If  thou  lovest,  go ; 
Watching  ever  by  the  river, 

Krishna  listens  low  : 

Listens  low,  and  on  his  reed  there 

Softly  sounds  thy  name. 
Making  even  mute  things  plead  there 

For  his  hope  :  'tis  shame 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  51 

That,  while  winds  are  welcome  to  him. 

If  from  thee  they  blow, 
Mournful  ever  by  the  river 

Krishna  waits  thee  so  ! 

When  a  bird's  wing  stirs  the  roses, 

When  a  leaf  falls  dead, 
Twenty  times  he  recomposes 

The  flower-seat  he  has  spread : 
Twenty  times,  with  anxious  glances 

Seeking  thee  in  vain, 
Sighing  ever  by  the  river, 

Krishna  droops  again. 

Loosen  from  thy  foot  the  bangle, 

Lest  its  golden  bell. 
With  a  tiny,  tattling  jangle, 

Any  false  tale  tell ; 
If  thou  fearest  that  the  moonlight 

Will  thy  glad  face  know. 
Draw  those  dark  braids  lower,  Lady  I 

But  to  Krishna  go. 


52  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Swift  and  still  as  lightning's  splendour 

Let  thy  beauty  come, 
Sudden,  gracious,  dazzling,  tender, 

To  his  arms — its  home  : 
Swift  as  Indra's  yellow  lightning, 

Shining  through  the  night, 
Glide  to  Krishna's  lonely  bosom. 

Take  him  love  and  light. 

Grant  at  last  love's  utmost  measure, 

Giving,  give  the  whole ; 
Keep  back  nothing  of  the  treasure 

Of  thy  priceless  soul : 
Hold  with  both  hands  out  unto  him 

Thy  chalice,  let  him  drain 
The  nectar  of  its  dearest  draught, 

Till  not  a  wish  remain. 

Only  go — the  stars  are  setting, 
And  thy  Krishna  grieves  ; 

Doubt  and  anger  quite  forgetting, 
Hasten  through  the  leaves  : 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  53 

Wherefore  didst  thou  lead  him  heav'nward 

But  for  this  thing's  sake  ? 
Comfort  him  with  pity,  Radha  ! 

Or  his  heart  must  break. 

But  while  Jayadeya  writes 
This  rare  tale  of  deep  delights — 
Jayadev,  whose  heart  is  given 
Unto  Hari,  Lord  in  Heaven — 
See  that  ye  too,  as  ye  read, 
With  a  glad  and  humble  heed. 
Bend  your  brows  before  His  face, 
That  ye  may  have  bliss  and  grace. 

And  then  the  Maid,  compassionate,  sang  on — 

Lady,  most  sweet ! 

For  thy  coming  feet 
He  listens  in  the  wood,  with  love  sore-tried ; 

Faintly  sighing. 

Like  one  a-dying, 
He  sends  his  thoughts  afoot  to  meet  his  bride. 


54  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Ah,  silent  one ! 

Sunk  is  the  sun, 
The  darkness  falls  as  deep  as  Krishna's  sorrow  ; 

The  chakor's  strain 

Is  not  more  vain 
Than  mine,  and  soon  grey  dawn  will  bring  white 
morrow. 

And  thine  own  bliss 

Delays  by  this ; 
The  utmost  of  thy  heaven  comes  only  so 

When,  with  hearts  beating 

And  passionate  greeting, 
Parting  is  over,  and  the  parted  grow 

One — one  for  ever  ! 

And  the  old  endeavour 
To  be  so  blended  is  assuaged  at  last ; 

And  the  glad  tears  raining 

Have  nought  remaining 
Of  doubt  or  'plaining ;  and  the  dread  has  passed 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  55 

Out  of  each  face, 

In  the  close  embrace, 
That  by-and-by  embracing  will  be  over  ; 

The  ache  that  causes 

Those  mournful  pauses 
In  bowers  of  earth  between  lover  and  lover  : 


To  be  no  more  felt, 

To  fade,  to  melt 
In  the  strong  certainty  of  joys  immortal ; 

In  the  glad  meeting, 

And  quick  sweet  greeting 
Of  lips  that  close  beyond  Time's  shadowy  portal. 


And  to  thee  is  given. 

Angel  of  Heaven  ! 
This  glory  and  this  joy  with  Krishna.     Go  ! 

Let  him  attain. 

For  his  long  pain. 
The  prize  it  promised, — see  thee  coming  slow 


56  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

A  vision  first,  but  then — 

By  glade  and  glen — 
A  lovely,  loving  soul,  true  to  its  home ; 

His  Queen — his  Crown — his  All, 

Hast'ning  at  last  to  fall 
Upon  his  breast,  and  live  there.     Radha,  come  ! 


Come  !  and  come  thou,  Lord  of  all, 
Unto  whom  the  Three  Worlds  call ; 
Thou,  that  didst  in  angry  might. 
Kansa,  like  a  comet,  smite  : 
Thou,  that  in  thy  passion  tender, 
An  incarnate  spell  and  splendour, 
Hung  on  Eadha's  glorious  face- 
In  the  garb  of  Krishna's  grace — 
As  above  the  bloom  the  bee. 
When  the  honeyed  revelry 
Is  too  subtle-sweet  an  one 
Not  to  hang  and  dally  on  ; 
Thou  that  art  the  Three  Worlds'  glory 
Of  life  the  light,  of  every  story 


THE   INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  57 

The  meaning  and  the  mark,  of  love 
The  root  and  flower,  o'  the  sky  aboVe 
The  bhie,  of  bliss  the  heart,  of  those 
The  lovers,  that  which  did  impose 
The  gentle  law,  that  each  should  be 
The  other's  Heav'n  and  harmony. 

{Here  ends  tliat  Sarga  of  the  Gtta  Govinda  entitled 
SAKANDKSHAPUNDARIK  AKSHO. ) 


SARGA    THE  SIXTH. 


DHRISHTAVAIKUNTO. 

KEISHNA  MADE  BOLDER 

But  seeing  that,  for  all  her  loving  will, 
The  flower-soft  feet  of  Radha  had  not  power 
To  leave  their  place  and  go,  she  sped  again — 
That  maiden — and  to  Krishna's  eager  ears 
Told  how  it  fared  with  his  sweet  mistress  there. 

( What  follows  is  to  the  Ihisic  GoNDAKIRi  and  the  Mode 

RUPAKA.) 

Krishna !  'tis  thou  must  come,  (she  sang) 
Ever  she  waits  thee  in  heavenly  bower ; 

The  lotus  seeks  not  the  wandering  bee, 
The  bee  must  find  the  flower. 


THE   INDIAN   SONG   OF   SONGS,  59 

All  the  wood  over  her  deep  eyes  roam, 
Marvelling  sore  where  tarries  the  bee, 

Who  leaves  such  lips  of  nectar  unsought 
As  those  that  blossom  for  thee. 

Her  steps  would  fail  if  she  tried  to  come, 
Would  falter  and  fail,  with  yearning  weak ; 

At  the  first  of  the  road  they  would  falter  and  pause, 
And  the  way  is  strange  to  seek. 

Find  her  where  she  is  sitting,  then. 

With  lotus-blossom  on  ankle  and  arm 
Wearing  thine  emblems,  and  musing  of  nought 

But  the  meeting  to  be — glad,  warm. 

To  be — "  but  wherefore  tarrieth  he  1 " 

"  What  can  stay  or  delay  him  1 — go  ! 
See  if  the  soul  of  Krishna  comes," 

Ten  times  she  sayeth  to  me  so ; 

Ten  times  lost  in  a  languorous  swoon, 
"  Now  he  cometli — he  cometh,"  she  cries  ; 


60  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

And  a  love-look  lights  her  eyes  in  the  gloom, 
And  the  darkness  is  sweet  with  her  sighs. 

Till,  watching  in  vain,  she  sinks  again 
Under  the  shade  of  the  whispering  leaves, 

With  a  heart  too  full  of  its  love  at  last 
To  heed  how  her  bosom  heaves. 

Shall  not  these  fair  verses  swell 
The  number  of  the  wise  who  dwell 
In  the  realm  of  Kama's  bliss  1 
Jayadeva  prayeth  this, 
Jayadev,  the  bard  of  Love. 
Servant  of  the  Gods  above. 

For  all  so  strong  in  Heaven  itself 

Is  Love,  that  Radha  sits  drooping  there, 

Her  beautiful  bosoms  panting  with  thought, 
And  the  braids  drawn  back  from  her  ear. 

And — angel  albeit — her  rich  lips  breathe 
Sighs,  if  sighs  were  ever  so  sweet  ; 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  61 

And — if  spirits  can  tremble — she  trembles  now 
From  forehead  to  jewelled  feet. 

And  her  voice  of  music  sinks  to  a  sob, 
And  her  eyes,  like  eyes  of  a  mated  roe, 

Are  tender  with  looks  of  yielded  love, 
With  dreams  dreamed  long  ago  ; 

Long — long  ago,  but  soon  to  grow  real. 

To  end,  and  be  waking  and  certain  and  true  ; 

Of  which  dear  surety  murmur  her  lips, 
As  the  lips  of  sleepers  do  : 

And,  dreaming,  she  loosens  her  girdle-pearls, 
And  opens  her  arms  to  the  empty  air, 

Then  starts  if  a  leaf  of  the  champak  falls. 
Sighing,  "  0  leaf !  is  he  there  ? " 

Wliy  dost  thou  linger  in  tliis  dull  spot. 
Haunted  by  serpents  and  evil  for  thee  1 

Why  not  hasten  to  Nauda's  House  1 
It  is  plain,  if  thine  eyes  could  see. 


63  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

May  these  words  of  high  endeavour — 

Full  of  grace  and  gentle  favour — 

Find  out  those  whose  hearts  can  feel 

What  the  message  did  reveal, 

Words  that  Radha's  messenger 

Unto  Krishna  took  from  her, 

Slowly  guiding  him  to  come 

Through  the  forest  to  his  home, 

Guiding  him  to  find  the  road 

Which  led — though  long — to  Love's  abode. 

{Here  ends  that  Sarga  of  the  Gtta  Govinda  entitled 

DhRISHTAV  AIKUNTO, ) 


SARGA   THE  SEVENTH. 


VIPRALABDHAVARNANE 
NAGARANARAYANO. 

KRISHNA    SUPPOSED    FALSE. 

Meantime  the  moon,  the  rolHng  moon,  clomb  high, 
And  over  all  Vrinddvana  it  shone ; 
The  moon  which  on  the  front  of  gentle  night 
Gleams  like  the  chundun-mark  on  beauty's  brow ; 
The  conscious  moon  which  hath  its  silver  face 
Marred  with  the  shame  of  lighting  earthly  loves  : 

And  while  the  round  white  lamp  of  earth  rose  higher, 
And  still  he  tarried,  Eadha,  petulant, 
Sang  soft  impatience  and  half-earnest  fears. 


64  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

( What  follows  is  to  the  Music  MlLAVA  a7id  the  Mode 

Yati.) 

'Tis  time ! — he  comes  not ! — will  he  come  1 

Can  he  leave  me  thus  to  pine  ? 
Yami  he  Team  sharanam  ! 

Ah  !  what  refuge  then  is  mine  ? 

For  his  sake  I  sought  the  wood, 
Threaded  dark  and  devious  ways ; 

Yami  he  ham  sharanam  ! 
Can  it  be  Krishna  betrays  ? 

Let  me  die  then,  and  forget 

Anguish,  patience,  hope,  and  fear ; 

Yami  he  Team  sharanam  !  , 
Ah,  why  have  I  held  him  dear  1 

Ah,  this  soft  night  torments  me, 
Thinking  that  his  faithless  arms — 

Yami  he  ham  sharanam  ! — 
Clasp  some  shadow  of  my  charms. 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  65 

Fatal  shadow — foolish  mock  ! 

When  the  great  love  shone  confessed ; — 
Yami  he  Team  slmranam  ! 

Krishna's  lotus  loads  my  breast ; 

'Tis  too  heavy,  lacking  him ; 

Like  a  broken  flower  I  am — 
Necklets,  jewels,  what  are  ye  % 

Yami  he  Team  sharanam  / 

Yami  he  Team  sharanam  ! 

The  sky  is  still,  the  forest  sleeps ; 
Krishna  forgets — he  loves  no  more  ; 

He  fails  in  faith,  and  Radha  weeps. 


But  the  poet  Jayadev — 
He  who  is  great  Hari's  slave, 
He  who  finds  asylum  sweet 
Only  at  great  Hari's  feet ; 
He  who  for  your  comfort  sings 
All  this  to  the  Viua's  strings — 

E 


66  THE  INDIAN  SONG   OF  SONGS. 

Prays  that  Radha'a  tender  moan 
In  your  hearts  be  thought  upon, 
And  that  all  her  holy  grace 
Live  there  like  the  loved  one's  face. 


Yet,  if  I  wrong  him  (sang  she) — can  he  fail  ? 

Could  any  in  the  wood  win  back  his  kisses  1 
Could  any  softest  lips  of  earth  prevail 

To  hold  him  from  my  arms  ?  any  love-blisses 

Blind  him  once  more  to  mine  1     O  Soul,  my  prize  ! 

Art  thou  not  merely  hindered  at  this  hour  ? 
Sore-wearied,  wandering,  lost  ?  how  otherwise 

Shouldst  thou  not  hasten  to  the  bridal-bower  ? 


But  seeing  far  away  that  Maiden  come 

Alone,  with  eyes  cast  down  and  lingering  steps, 

Again  a  little  v/hile  she  feared  to  hear 

Of  Krishna  false  ;  and  her  quick  thoughts  took  shape 

In  a  fine  jealousy,  with  words  like  these — 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Something  then  of  earth  has  held  him 

From  his  home  above, 
Some  one  of  those  slight  deceivers —  ' 

Ah,  my  foolish  love  ! 

Some  new  face,  some  winsome  playmate, 

With  her  hair  untied, 
And  the  blossoms  tangled  in  it, 

Woos  him  to  her  side. 

On  the  dark  orbs  of  her  bosom — 

Passionately  heaved — 
Sink  and  rise  the  warm,  white  pearl-strings, 

Oh,  my  love  deceived  ! 

Fair  1  yes,  yes  !  the  rippled  shadow 

Of  that  midnight  hair 
Shows  above  her  brow — as  clouds  do 

O'er  the  moon — most  fair  : 

And  she  knows,  with  wilful  paces, 

How  to  make  her  zone 
Gleam  and  please  him ;  and  her  ear-rings 

Tinlde  love ;  and  grown 


68  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Coy  as  he  grows  fond,  she  meets  him 

With  a  modest  show ; 
Shaming  truth  with  truthful  seeming, 

While  her  laugh — light,  low — 

And  her  subtle  mouth  that  murmurs, 

And  her  silken  cheek, 
And  her  eyes,  say  she  dissembles 

Plain  as  speech  could  speak. 

Till  at  length,  a  fatal  victress, 

Of  her  triumph  vain. 
On  his  neck  she  lies  and  smiles  there  : 

Ah,  my  Joy ! — my  Pain  ! 


But  may  Eadha's  fond  annoy, 
And  may  Krishna's  dawning  joy, 
Warm  and  waken  love  more  fit — 
Jayadeva  prayeth  it — 
And  the  griefs  and  sins  assuage 
Of  this  blind  and  evil  age. 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  69 

0  Moon  !  (she  sang)  that  art  so  pure  and  pale, 
Is  Krishna  wan  like  thee  with  lonely  waiting  ? 

O  lamp  of  love  !  art  thou  the  lover's  friend, 

And  wilt  not  bring  him,  my  long  pain  abating  1 

0  fruitless  moon  !  thou  dost  increase  my  pain  ; 

O  faithless  Krishna  !  I  have  striven  in  vain. 

And  then,  lost  in  her  fancies  sad,  she  moaned— 

(  What  follows  is  to  the  Jihisic  GuRJJARi  and  the  Mode 

EkatalI.) 

In  vain,  in  vain  ! 
Earth  will  of  earth  !  I  mourn  more  than  I  blame  ; 

If  he  had  known,  he  would  not  sit  and  paint 
The  tilka  on  her  smooth  black  brow,  nor  claim 

Quick  kisses  from  her  yielded  lips — false,  faint — 
False,  fragrant,  fatal !     Krishna's  quest  is  o'er 
By  Jumna's  shore  ! 

Vain — it  was  vain  ! 
The  temptress  was  too  near,  the  heav'n  too  far ; 


70  THE   INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

I  can  but  weep  because  he  sits  and  ties 
Garlands  of  fire-flowers  for  her  loosened  hair, 

And  in  its  silken  shadow  veils  his  eyes 
And  buries  his  fond  face.  Yet  I  forgave 
By  Jumna's  wave  I 

Vainly  !  all  vain  ! 
Make  then  the  most  of  that  whereto  thou'rt  given, 

Feign  her  thy  Paradise — thy  Love  of  loves ; 
Say  that  her  eyes  are  stars,  her  face  the  heaven, 

Her  bosoms  the  two  worlds,  with  sandal-groves 
Faint-scented,  and  the  kiss-marks — ah,  thy  dream 
By  Jumna's  stream  ! 

It  shall  be  vain  ! 
And  vain  to  string  the  emeralds  on  her  arm 

And  hang  the  milky  pearls  upon  her  neck, 
Saying  they  are  not  jewels,  but  a  swarm 

Of  crowded,  glossy  bees,  come  there  to  suck 
The  rosebuds  of  her  breast,  the  sweetest  flowers 
Of  Jumna's  bowers. 


THE   INDIAN    SONG   OF   SONGS.  71 

That  shall  be  vain  ! 
Nor  wilt  thou  so  believe  thine  own  blind  wooing, 
Nor  slake  thy  heart's  thirst  even  with  the  cup 
Which  at  the  last  she  brims  for  thee,  undoing 
Her  girdle  of  carved  gold,  and  yielding  up, 
Love's  uttermost :  brief  the  poor  gain  and  pride 
By  Jumna's  tide. 

Because  still  vain 
Is  love  that  feeds  on  shadow ;  vain,  as  thou  dost. 

To  look  so  deep  into  the  phantom  eyes 
For  that  which  lives  not  there ;  and  vain,  as  thou  must. 

To  marvel  why  the  painted  pleasure  flies, 
When  the  fair,  false  wings  seemed  folded  for  ever 
By  Jumna's  river. 

And  vain  !  yes,  vain  ! 
For  me  too  is  it,  having  so  much  striven, 

To  see  this  fine  snare  take  thee,  and  thy  soul 
Which  should  have  climbed  to  vaine,  and  shared  my 
heaven. 
Spent  on  a  lower  loveliness,  whose  whole 


72  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Passion  of  love  were  but  a  parody 
Of  that  kept  here  for  thee. 

Ahaha !  vain ! 
For  on  some  isle  of  Jumna's  silver  stream 

He  gives  all  that  they  ask  to  those  dull  eyes, 
While  mine  which  are  his  angel's,  mine  which  gleam 
With  light  that  might  have  led  him  to  the  skies — 
That  almost  led  him — are  eclipsed  with  tears 
Wailing  my  fruitless  prayers. 

But  thou,  good  Friend, 
Hang  not  thy  head  for  shame,  nor  come  so  slowly, 

As  one  whose  message  is  too  hard  to  tell ; 
If  thou  must  say  Krishna  is  forfeit  Avholly — 

Wholly  forsworn  and  lost — let  the  grief  dwell 
Where  the  sin  doth, — except  in  this  sad  heart. 
Which  cannot  shun  its  part. 

0  great  Hari !  purge  from  wrong 
The  soul  of  him  who  writes  this  song ; 
Purge  the  souls  of  those  that  read 
From  every  fault  of  thought  and  deed  ; 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  73 

With  thy  blessed  light  assuage 
The  darkness  of  this  evil  age ! 
Jayadev  the  bard  of  love, 
Servant  of  the  Gods  above, 
Prays  it  for  himself  and  you — 
Gentle  hearts  who  listen  ! — too. 

Then  in  this  other  strain  she  wailed  his  loss — 

( What  follows  is  to  the  Mtisic  DESHAVARlDt  mid  the  Mode 

EUPAKA.) 

She,  not  Eadha,  wins  the  crown 

Whose  false  lips  were  dearest ; 
What  was  distant  gain  to  him 

When  sweet  loss  seemed  nearest  ? 
Love  her,  therefore,  lulled  to  loss 

On  her  fatal  bosom ; 
Love  her  with  such  love  as  she 

Can  give  back  in  the  blossom. 

Love  her,  0  thou  rash  lost  soul ! 

With  thy  thousand  graces ; 
Coin  rare  thoughts  into  fair  words 

For  her  face  of  faces ; 


74  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Praise  it,  fling  away  for  it 

Life's  purpose  in  a  sigh, 
All  for  those  lips  like  flower-leaves, 

And  lotus-dark  deep  eye. 

Nay,  and  thou  shalt  be  happy  too 

Till  the  fond  dream  is  over ; 
And  she  shall  taste  delight  to  hear 

The  wooing  of  her  lover  ; 
The  breeze  that  brings  the  sandal  up 

From  distant  green  Malay, 
Shall  seem  all  fragrance  in  the  night, 

All  coolness  in  the  day. 

The  crescent  moon  shall  seem  to  swim 

Only  that  she  may  see 
The  glad  eyes  of  my  Krishna  gleam, 

And  her  soft  glances  he  : 
It  shall  be  as  a  silver  lamj:) 

Set  in  the  sky  to  show 
The  rose-leaf  palms  that  cling  and  clasp, 

And  the  breast  that  beats  below. 


THE   INDIAN    SONG   OF   SONGS.  75 

The  thought  of  parting  shall  not  lie 

Cold  on  their  throbbing  lives, 
The  dread  of  ending  shall  not  chill 

The  glow  beginning  gives ; 
She  in  her  beauty  dark  shall  look — 

As  long  as  clouds  can  be — 
As  gracious  as  the  rain-time  cloud 

Kissing  the  shining  sea. 

And  he,  amid  his  playmates  old, 

At  least  a  little  while. 
Shall  not  breathe  forth  again  the  sigh 

That  spoils  the  song  and  smile ; 
Shall  be  left  wholly  to  his  choice, 

Free  for  his  pleasant  sin, 
With  the  golden-girdled  damsels 

Of  the  bowers  I  found  him  in. 

For  me,  his  Angel,  only 

The  sorrow  and  the  smart, 
The  pale  grief  sitting  on  the  brow 

The  dead  hope  in  the  heart ; 


76  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF   SONGS. 

For  me  the  loss  of  losing, 

For  me  the  ache  and  dearth ; 
My  king  crowned  with  the  wood-flowers  ! 

My  fairest  upon  earth  ! 

Hari,  Lord  and  King  of  love  : 
From  thy  throne  of  light  above 
Stoop  to  help  us,  deign  to  take 
Our  spirits  to  thee  for  the  sake 
Of  this  song,  which  spe^s  the  fears 
Of  all  who  weep  with  Eadha's  tears. 

But  love  is  strong  to  pardon,  slow  to  part, 
And  still  the  Lady,  in  her  fancies,  sang — 

Wind  of  the  Indian  stream  ! 
A  little — oh  !  a  little — breathe  once  more 
The  fragrance  like  his  mouth's  !  blow  from  thy  shore 
A  last  word  as  he  fades  into  a  dream  ; 

Bodiless  Lord  of  love  ! 
Show  him  once  more  to  me  a  minute's  space, 
My  Krishna,  with  the  love-look  in  his  face. 
And  then  I  come  to  my  own  place  above ; 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  77 

I  will  depart  and  give 
All  back  to  Fate  and  her :  I  will  submit 
To  thy  stern  will,  and  bow  myself  to  it, 
Enduring  still,  though  desolate,  to  live ; 

If  it  indeed  be  life. 
Even  so  resigning,  to  sit  patience-mad, 
To  feel  the  zej)hyrs  burn,  the  sunlight  sad, 
The  peace  of  holy  heaven,  a  restless  strife. 

Haho  !  what  words  are  these  1 
How  can  I  live  and  lose  him  1  how  not  go 
Whither  love  draws  me  for  a  soul  loved  so  ? 
How  yet  endure  such  sorrow  ? — or  how  cease  1 

Wind  of  the  Indian  wave  ! 
If  that  thou  canst,  blow  poison  here,  not  nard  ; 
God  of  the  five  shafts  !  shoot  thy  sharpest  hard, 
And  kill  me,  Eadha, — Eadha  who  forgave  ! 

Or,  bitter  Kiver, 
Yamun  !  be  Yama's  sister  !  be  Death's  kin  I 
Swell  thy  wave  up  to  me  and  gulf  me  in, 
Cooling  this  cruel,  burning  pain  for  ever. 


78  THE   INDIAN   SONG   OF   SONGS. 

Ah  !  if  only  visions  stir 

Grief  so  passionate  in  her. 

What  divine  grief  will  not  take, 

Spirits  in  heaven  for  the  sake 

Of  those  who  miss  love  1    Oh,  be  wise  ! 

Mark  this  story  of  the  skies, 

Meditate  Govinda  ever. 

Sitting  by  the  sacred  river, 

The  mystic  stream  which  o'er  his  feet 

Glides  slow,  with  murmurs  low  and  sweet, 

Till  none  can  tell  whether  those  be 

Blue  lotus-blooms,  seen  veiledly 

Under  the  wave,  or  mirrored  gems 

Reflected  from  the  diadems 

Bound  on  the  brows  of  mighty  Gods, 

Who  lean  from  out  their  pure  abodes, 

And  leave  their  bright  felicities 

To  guide  great  Krishna  to  his  skies. 

[Here  ends  that  Sarga  of  the  Gtta  Govinda  entitled 
ViPRALABDHAVARNANE  NaGARANARAYANO.  ) 


SARGA    THE  EIGHTH. 


KHANDITAYARNANE 
VILAKSHALAKSHMIPATI. 

THE  REBUKING  OF  KKISHNA. 

For  when  the  weary  night  had  worn  away 
In  these  vain  fears,  and  the  clear  morning  broke, 
Lo,  Krishna  !  lo,  the  longed-for  of  her  soul 
Came  too  ! — in  the  glad  light  he  came  and  bent 
His  knees  and  clasped  his  hands  ;  on  his  dumb  lips 
Fear,  wonder,  joy,  passion,  and  reverence 
Strove  for  the  trembling  words,  and  Radha  knew 
Joy  won  for  him  and  her ;  yet  none  the  less 
A  little  time  she  chided  him,  and  sang, 


80  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

{What  follows  is  to  the  Music  BHAiRAvi  and  the  Mode 

Yati.) 

Krishna  ! — then  thou  hast  found  me  ! — and  thine  eyes 

Heavy  and  sad  and  stained  as  if  with  weeping  ! 
Ah  !  is  it  not  that  those  which  were  thy  prize 

So  radiant  seemed  that  all  night  thou  wert  keeping 
Vigils  of  tender  wooing  1 — have  thy  Love  ! 

Here  is  no  place  for  vows  broken  in  making ; 
Thou  Lotus-eyed  I  thou  soul  for  whom  I  strove  ! 

Go  !   ere  I  listen,  my  just  mind  forsaking. 

Krishna !  my  Krishna  with  the  woodland-wreath  ! 

Return,  or  I  shall  soften  as  I  blame ; 
The  while  thy  very  lips  are  dark  to  the  teeth 

With  dye  that  from  her  lids  and  lashes  came. 
Left  on  the  mouth  I  touched.     Fair  traitor !  go  ! 

Say  not  they  darkened,  lacking  food  and  sleep 
Long  waiting  for  my  face  ;  I  turn  it — so — 

Go  !  ere  I  half  beHeve  thee,  pleading  deep  ; 


THE   INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  81 

But  wilt  thou  plead,  when,  like  a  love-verse  printed 

On  the  smooth  polish  of  an  emerald, 
I  see  the  marks  she  stamped,  the  kisses  dinted 

Large-lettered,  by  her  lips  1  thy  speech  withheld 
Speaks  all  too  plainly ;  go, — abide  thy  choice ! 

If  thou  dost  stay,  I  shall  more  greatly  grieve  thee  ; 
Not  records  of  her  victory  ? — peace,  dear  voice  ! 

Hence  with  that  godlike  brow,  lest  I  believe  thee. 

For  dar'st  thou  feign  the  saffron  on  thy  bosom 
Was  not  implanted  in  disloyal  embrace  1 

Or  that  this  many-coloured  love-tree  blossom 
Shone  not,  but  yesternight,  above  her  face  1 

Comest  thou  here,  so  late,  to  be  forgiven 

0  thou,  in  whose  eyes  Truth  was  made  to  live  ? 

0  thou,  so  worthy  else  of  grace  and  heaven  ? 

0  thou,  so  nearly  won  1     Ere  I  forgive. 

Go,  Krishna  !  go  ! — lest  I  should  think,  unwise. 

Thy  heart  not  false,  as  thy  long  lingering  seems, 
Lest,  seeing  myself  so  imaged  in  thine  eyes, 

1  shame  the  name  of  Pity — turn  to  dreams 

F 


82  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF    SONGS. 

The  sacred  sound  of  vows  ;  make  Virtue  grudge 
Her  praise  to  Mercy,  calling  thy  sin  slight  ; 

Go  therefore,  dear  offender  !  go  !  thy  Judge 
Had  best  not  see  thee  to  give  sentence  right.* 

But  may  he  grant  us  peace  at  last  and  bliss 
Who  heard  and  smiled  to  hear  delays  like  this, 
Delays  that  dallied  with  a  dream  come  true, 
Fond  wilful  angers ;  for  the  maid  smiled  too 
To  see,  as  Eadha  ended,  her  hand  take 
His  dark  robe  for  her  veil,  and  Krishna  make 
The  word  she  spoke  for  parting  kindliest  sign 
He  should  not  go,  but  staj^     0  grace  divine, 
Be  ours  too  !     Jayadev,  the  Poet  of  love, 
Prays  it  from  Hari,  lordliest  above. 

{Here  ends  that  Sarga  of  the  Gtta  Govinda  entitled 
Khanditavarnane  Vilakshalakshmipati.) 

*  The  text  here  is  not  closely  followed. 


SARGA    THE  NINTH. 


KALAHANTARITAVARNANE 
MUGDHAMUKUNDO. 

THE  END   OF   KRISHNA'S   TRIAL. 

Yet  not  quite  did  the  doubts  of  Radha  die, 

Nor  her  sweet  brows  unbend ;  but  she,  the  Maid — 

Knowing  her  heart  so  tender,  her  soft  arms 

Aching  to  take  him  in,  her  rich  mouth  sad 

For  the  comfort  of  his  kiss,  and  these  fears  false — 

Spake  yet  a  Httle  in  fair  words  like  these, 

(  What  follows  is  to  the  Music  GURJJARf  and  the  Mode 

Yati.) 

The  lesson  that  thy  faithful  love  has  taught  him 

He  has  heard ; 
The  wind  of  spring  obeying  thee  hath  brought  him 

At  thy  word ; 


84  THE   INDIAN  SONG  OF   SONGS. 

What  joy  in  all  the  three  worlds  was  so  precious 

To  thy  mind  ? 
Md  kooroo  rtidnini  mdnamaye* 

Ah,  be  kind  ! 

No  longer  from  his  earnest  eyes  conceal 

Thy  delights ; 
Lift  thy  face,  and  let  the  jealous  veil  reveal 

All  his  rights  ; 
The  glory  of  thy  beauty  was  but  given 

For  content ; 
Md  kooroo  mdnini  mdnamaye, 

Oh,  relent ! 

Remember,  being  distant,  how  he  bore  thee 

In  his  heart ; 
Look  on  him  sadly  turning  from  before  thee 

To  depart ; 
Is  he  not  the  soul  thou  lovedst,  sitting  lonely 

In  the  wood? 
Md  kooroo  mdnini  mdnamaye, 

'Tis  not  good  ! 

*  My  proud  one  !  do  not  indulge  in  scorn. 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  85 

He  who  grants  thee  high  delight  in  bridal-bower 

Pardons  long ; 
What  the  gods  do  love  may  do  at  such  an  hour 

Without  wrong ; 
Why  weepest  thou  ?  why  keepest  thou  in  anger 

Thy  lashes  down  ? 
Ifd  kooroo  mdnini  mdnamaye 

Do  not  frown  ! 

Lift  thine  eyes  now,  and  look  on  him,  bestowing, 

Without  speech ; 
Let  him  pluck  at  last  the  flower  so  sweetly  growing 

In  his  reach ; 
The  fruit  of  lips,  of  loving  tones,  of  glances 

That  forgive  ; 
Md  kooroo  mdnini  mdnamaye 

Let  him  live ! 

Let  him  speak  with  thee,  and  pray  to  thee,  and  prove 
thee 

All  his  truth ; 
Let  his  silent  loving  lamentation  move  thee 

Asking  ruth ; 


86  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

How  knowest  thou  1    Ah,  listen,  dearest  Lady, 

He  is  there ; 
Md  looroo  mdnini  mdnamaye 

Thou  must  hear  ! 

0  rare  voice,  which  is  a  spell 
Unto  all  on  earth  who  dwell ! 
0  rich  voice  of  rapturous  love, 
Making  melody  above ! 
Krishna's,  Hari's — one  in  two, 
Sound  these  mortal  verses  through  ! 
Sound  like  that  soft  flute  which  made 
Such  a  magic  in  the  shade — 
Calling  deer-eyed  maidens  nigh, 
Waking  wish  and  stirring  sigh, 
Whirling  heads  and  melting  breasts. 
Whispering  love's  divine  unrests, 
Winning  blessings  to  descend, 
Bringing  earthly  ills  to  end ; — 
Be  thou  heard  in  this  song  now 
Thou,  the  great  Enchantment,  thou  ! 

(Here  ends  that  Sarga  of  the  Gita  Govinda  entitled 
Kalahantaritavarnane  Mugdhamukundo.) 


SARGA    THE    TENTH. 


MANINIVARNANE 
CHATURACHATURBHUJO. 

KRISHNA  IN  PARADISE. 

But  she,  abasing  still  her  glorious  eyes, 

And  still  not  yielding  all  her  face  to  him. 

Relented,  till  with  softer  upturned  look 

She  smiled  while  the  Maid  pleaded ;  so  thereat 

Came  Krishna  nearer,  and  his  eager  lips 

Mixed  sighs  with  words  in  this  fond  song  he  sang, 

[What  follows  is  to  the  Music  DeshiyavaradI  and  the 
Mode  AshtatalI.) 

O  angel  of  my  hope  !  0  my  heart's  home  ! 

My  fear  is  lost  in  love,  my  love  in  fear ; 
This  bids  me  trust  my  burning  wish,  and  come, 

That  checks  me  with  its  memories,  drawing  near  : 


88  THE   INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Lift  up  thy  look,  and  let  the  thing  it  saith 
End  fear  with  grace,  or  darken  love  to  death. 

Or  only  speak  once  more,  for  though  thou  slay  me, 
Thy  heavenly  mouth  must  move,  and  I  shall  hear 

Dulcet  delights  of  perfect  music  sway  me 
Again — again  that  voice  so  blest  and  dear  ; 

Sweet  Judge  !  the  prisoner  prayeth  for  his  doom 

That  he  may  hear  his  fate  divinely  come. 

Speak  once  more  !  then  thou  canst  not  choose  but  show 
Thy  mouth's  unparalleled  and  honeyed  wonder 

AVhere,  like  pearls  hid  in  red-lipped  shells,  the  row 
Of  pearly  teeth  thy  rose-red  lips  lie  under ; 

Ah  me  !  I  am  that  bird  that  woos  the  moon, 

And  pipes — poor  fool !  to  make  it  glitter  soon. 

Yet  hear  me  on — because  I  cannot  stay 

The  passion  of  my  soul,  because  my  gladness 

Will  pour  forth  from  my  heart, — from  that  far  day 
When  through  the  mist  of  all  my  sin  and  sadness 


THE   INDIAN   SONG   OF   SONGS.  89 

Thou  didst  vouclisafe — Surpassing  One  ! — to  break, 
All  else  I  slighted  for  thy  noblest  sake. 

Thou,  thou  hast  been  my  blood,  my  breath,  my  being ; 

The  pearl  to  plunge  for  in  the  sea  of  life ; 
The  sight  to  strain  for,  past  the  bounds  of  seeing  ; 

The  "sactory  to  win  through  longest  strife ; 
My  Queen !  my  crowned  Mistress  !  my  sphered  bride  ! 
Take  this  for  truth,  that  what  I  say  beside 

Of  bold  love — grown  full-orbed  at  sight  of  thee — 
May  be  forgiven  with  a  quick  remission ; 

For,  thou  divine  fulfilment  of  all  hope. 

Thou  all-undreamed  completion  of  the  vision  ! 

I  gaze  upon  thy  beauty,  and  my  fear 

Passes  as  clouds  do,  when  the  moon  shines  clear. 

So  if  thou'rt  angry  still,  this  shall  avail, 

Look  straight  at  me,  and  let  thy  bright  glance  wound 
me; 
Fetter  me  !  gyve  me  !  lock  me  in  the  gaol 

Of  thy  delicious  arms ;  make  fast  around  me 


90  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

The  silk-soft  manacles  of  wrists  and  hands, 
Then  kill  me  !  I  shall  never  break  those  bands. 


The  starlight  jewels  flashing  on  thy  breast 
Have  not  my  right  to  hear  thy  beating  heart ; 

The  happy  flower-buds  that  clasp  thy  waist 
Are  soft  usurpers  of  my  place  and  part ; 

If  that  fair  girdle  only  there  must  shine, 

Give  me  the  girdle's  life — the  girdle  mine  ! 

Thy  brow  like  smooth  Bandhuka-leaves ;  thy  cheek 
Which  the  dark-tinted  Madhuk's  velvet  shows  ; 

Thy  long-lashed  Lotus  eyes,  lustrous  and  meek ; 
Thy  nose  a  Tila-bud ;  thy  teeth  like  rows 

Of  Kunda-petals !  he  who  pierceth  hearts 

Points  with  thy  lovelinesses  all  five  darts. 

But  Eadiant,  Perfect,  Sweet,  Supreme,  forgive  ! 

My  heart  is  wise — my  tongue  is  foolish  still : 
I  know  where  I  am  come — I  know  I  live — 

I  know  that  thou  art  Eadha — that  this  will 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  91 

Last  and  be  heaven  :  that  I  have  leave  to  rise 
Up  from  thy  feet,  and  look  into  thine  eyes  ! 


And,  nearer  coming,  I  ask  for  grace 

Now  that  the  blest  eyes  turn  to  mine ; 
Faithful  I  stand  in  this  sacred  place 

Since  first  I  saw  them  shine  : 
Dearest  glory  that  stills  my  voice, 

Beauty  unseen,  unknown,  unthought ! 
Splendour  of  love,  in  whose  sweet  light 

Darkness  is  past  and  nought ; 
Ah,  beyond  words  that  sound  on  earth 

Golden  bloom  of  the  garden  of  heaven  ! 
Radha,  enchantress  !  Radha,  the  queen  ! 

Be  this  trespass  forgiven — 
In  that  I  dare,  with  courage  too  much 

And  a  heart  afraid, — so  bold  it  is  grown — 
To  hold  thy  hand  with  a  bridegroom's  touch, 

And  take  thee  for  mine,  mine  own.* 

*  Much  here  also  is  necessarily  paraphrased. 


92  THE   INDIAN   SONG  OF   SONGS. 

So  they  met  and  so  they  ended 
Pain  and  parting,  being  blended 
Life  with  life — made  one  for  ever 
In  high  love ;  and  Jayadeya 
Hasteneth  on  to  close  the  story 
Of  their  bridal  grace  and  glory. 

{Here  ends  that  Sarga  of  the  Gita  Govinda  entitled 
Maninivarnane  Chaturachaturbhujo.  ) 


SARGA    THE  ELEVENTH. 


RADHIKAMILANE 
SANANDADAMODARO. 

THE  UNION  OF  EADHA  AND  KRISHNA. 

Thus  followed  soft  and  lasting  peace,  and  griefs 

Died  while  she  listened  to  his  tender  tongue, 

Her  eyes  of  antelope  alight  with  love ; 

And  while  he  led  the  way  to  the  bride-bower 

The  maidens  of  her  train  adorned  her  fair 

With  golden  marriage- cloths,  and  sang  this  song, 

( What  folloivs  is  to  the  Music  Vasanta  and  the  Mode 

Yati.) 

Follow,  happy  Radha  !  follow, — 

In  the  quiet  falling  twilight — 
The  steps  of  him  who  followed  thee 

So  steadfastly  and  far ; 


94  THE  INDIAN   SONG   OF  SONGS. 

Let  us  bring  thee  where  the  Banjulas 

Have  spread  a  roof  of  crimson, 
Lit  up  by  many  a  marriage-lamp 

Of  planet,  sun,  and  star  : 
For  the  hours  of  doubt  are  over, 

And  thy  glad  and  faithful  lover 
Hath  found  the  road  by  tears  and  prayers 

To  thy  divinest  side ; 
And  thou  wilt  not  now  deny  him 

One  delight  of  all  thy  beauty, 
But  yield  up  open-hearted 

His  desire,  his  prize,  his  bride. 


Oh,  follow  !  while  we  fill  the  air 

With  songs  and  softest  music  ; 
Lauding  thy  wedded  loveliness. 

Dear  Mistress  past  compare  ! 
For  there  is  not  any  splendour 

Of  Apsarasas  immortal — 
No  glory  of  their  beauty  rich — 

But  Radha  has  a  share  ; 


THE   INDIAN    SONG   OF   SONGS.  95 

Oh,  follow  !  while  we  sing  the  song 

That  fills  the  worlds  with  longing, 
The  music  of  the  Lord  of  love 

Who  melts  all  hearts  with  bliss ; 
For  now  is  born  the  gladness 

That  springs  from  mortal  sadness, 
And  all  soft  thoughts  and  things  and  hopes 

Were  presages  of  this. 


Then,  follow,  happiest  Lady  ! 

Follow  him  thou  lovest  wholly  ; 
The  hour  is  come  to  follow  now 

The  soul  thy  spells  have  led  ; 
His  are  thy  breasts  like  jasper-cups, 

And  his  thine  eyes  like  planets ; 
Thy  fragrant  hair,  thy  stately  neck. 

Thy  queenly  sumptuous  head  ; 
Thy  soft  small  feet,  thy  perfect  lips. 

Thy  teeth  like  jasmine  petals, 
Thy  gleaming  rounded  shoulders. 

And  long  caressing  arms, 


96  THE  INDIAN   SONG   OF  SONGS. 

Being  thine  to  give,  are  his  ;  and  his 
The  twin  strings  of  thy  girdle, 

And  his  the  priceless  treasure 
Of  thine  utter-sweetest  charms. 


So  follow !  while  the  flowers  break  forth 

In  white  and  amber  clusters, 
At  the  breath  of  thy  pure  presence, 

And  the  radiance  on  thy  brow ; 
Oh,  follow  where  the  Asokas  wave 

Their  sprays  of  gold  and  purple. 
As  if  to  beckon  thee  the  way 

That  Krishna  passed  but  now ; 
He  is  gone  a  little  forward  ! 

Though  thy  steps  are  faint  for  pleasure, 
Let  him  hear  the  tattling  ripple 

Of  the  bangles  round  thy  feet ; 
Moving  slowly  o'er  the  blossoms 

On  the  path  which  he  has  shown  thee, 
That  when  he  turns  to  listen 

It  may  make  his  fond  heart  beat. 


THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS.  97 

And  loose  thy  jewelled  girdle 

A  little,  that  its  rubies 
May  tinkle  softest  music  too, 

And  whisper  thou  art  near ; 
Though  now,  if  in  the  forest 

Thou  should'st  bend  one  blade  of  Kusha 
With  silken  touch  of  passing  foot, 

His  heart  would  know  and  hear ; 
Would  hear  the  wood-buds  saying, 

"  It  is  Eadha's  foot  that  passes ; " 
Would  hear  the  wind  sigh  love-sick, 

"  It  is  Eadha's  fragrance,  this ; " 
Would  hear  thine  own  heart  beating 

Within  thy  panting  bosom, 
And  know  thee  coming,  coming, 

His — ever, — ever — his ! 


"  Mine  /" — hark  !  we  are  near  enough  for  hearini?- 

o  CD 

"  Soon  she  will  come — she  will  smile — she  will  say 

Honey-sweet  tvords  of  heavenly  endearing; 

0  soul  /  listen  ;  my  Bride  is  on  her  way  !  " 

G 


98  THE  INDIAN   SONG   OF  SONGS. 

Hear'st  him  not,  my  Radha  t 

Lo,  night  bendeth  o'er  thee — 
Darker  than  dark  Tamala-leaves — 

To  list  thy  marriage-song ; 
Dark  as  the  touchstone  that  tries  gold, 

And  see  now — on  before  thee — 
Those  lines  of  tender  light  that  creep 

The  clouded  sky  along  : 
O  night !  that  trieth  gold  of  love, 

This  love  is  proven  perfect  ! 
0  lines  that  streak  the  touchstone  sky. 

Flash  forth  true  shining  gold  ! 
O  rose-leaf  feet,  go  boldly  ! 

0  night ! — that  lovest  lovers — 
Thy  softest  robe  of  silence 

About  these  bridals  fold  ! 


See'st  thou  not,  my  Radlia  ? 

Lo,  the  night,  thy  bridesmaid. 
Comes  ! — her  eyes  thick-painted 

With  soorma  of  the  gloom — 


THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS.  99 

The  night  that  binds  the  planet-worlds 

For  jewels  on  her  forehead, 
And  for  emblem  and  for  garland 

Loves  the  blue-black  lotus-bloom  ; 
The  night  that  scents  her  breath  so  sweet 

With  cool  and  musky  odours, 
That  joys  to  spread  her  veil  of  shade 

Over  the  limbs  of  love ; 
And  when,  with  loving  weary. 

Yet  dreaming  love,  they  slumber, 
Sets  the  far  stars  for  silver  lamps 

To  light  them  from  above. 

So  came  she  where  he  stood,  awaiting  her 

At  the  bower's  entry,  like  a  god  to  see, 

With  marriage-gladness  and  the  grace  of  heaven. 

The  great  pearl  set  upon  his  glorious  head 

Shone  like  a  moon  among  the  leaves,  and  shone 

Like  stars  the  gems  that  kept  her  gold  gown  close  : 

But  still  a  little  while  she  paused — abashed 

At  her  delight,  of  her  deep  joy  afraid — 

And  they  that  tended  her  sang  once  more  this, 


100  THE  INDIAN   SONG  OF  SONGS. 

( What  follows  is  to  the  Music  Vae  ADI  and  the  Mode 

RUPAKA.) 

Enter,  thrice-happy  !  enter,  thrice-desired  ! 
And  let  the  gates  of  Hari  shut  thee  in 
With  the  soul  destined  to  thee  from  of  old. 

Tremble  not !  lay  thy  lovely  shame  aside ; 

Lay  it  aside  with  thine  unfastened  zone, 

And  love  him  with  the  love  that  knows  not  fear ; 

Because  it  fears  not  change ;  enter  thou  in, 
Flower  of  all  sweet  and  stainless  womanhood  ! 
For  ever  to  grow  bright,  for  ever  new ; 

Enter  beneath  the  flowers,  0  flower-fair  ! 
Beneath  these  tendrils,  Loveliest !  that  entwine 
And.  clasp,  and  wreathe  and  cling,  with  kissing  stems; 

Enter,  with  tender-blowing  airs  of  heaven 
Soft  as  love's  breath  and  gentle  as  the  tones 
Of  lover's  whispers,  when  the  lips  come  close : 

Enter  the  house  of  Love,  0  loveliest ! 
Enter  the  marriage-bower,  most  beautiful ! 
And  take  and  give  the  joy  that  Hari  grants. 


THE   INDIAN   SONG   OF   SONGS.  101 

Thy  heart  has  entered,  let  thy  feet  go  too  ! 
Lo,  Krishna  !  lo,  the  one  that  thirsts  for  thee  ! 
Give  him  the  drink  of  amrit  from  thy  lips. 

Then  she,  no  more  delaying,  entered  straight ; 
Her  step  a  little  faltered,  but  her  face 
Shone  with  unutterable  quick  love  ;  and — while 
The  music  of  her  bangles  passed  the  porch — 
Shame,  which  had  lingered  in  her  downcast  eyes. 
Departed  shamed  *  .  .  .  and  like  the  mighty  deep, 
Which  sees  the  moon  and  rises,  all  his  life 
Uprose  to  drink  her  beams. 

{Here  ends  that  Sarga  of  the  GUa  Govinda  entitled 
Radhikamilane  Sanandadamodaro,  ) 


Hari  keep  you  !     He  whose  might, 
On  the  King  of  Serpents  seated. 


*  This  complete  anticipation  {salajjd  lajjdpi)  of  the  line — 
"  Upon  whose  brow  shame  is  ashamed  to  sit  " 

— occurs  at  the  close  of  the  Sarga,  part  of  which  is  here  perforce 
omitted,  along  with  the  whole  of  the  last  one. 


102  THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 

Flashes  forth  in  dazzling  light 

From  the  Great  Snake's  gems  repeated 
Hari  keep  you  !    He  whose  graces, 

Manifold  in  majesty, — 
Multiplied  in  heavenly  places — 

Multiply  on  earth — to  see 
Better  with  a  hundred  eyes 

Her  bright  charms  who  by  him  lies. 


What  skill  may  be  in  singing, 

What  worship  sound  in  song, 
What  lore  be  taught  in  loving, 

What  right  divined  from  ^vrong 
Such  things  hath  Jayadeva — 

In  this  his  Hymn  of  Love, 
Which  lauds  Govinda  ever, — 

Displayed ;  may  all  approve  ! 


THE  END   or    THE  INDIAN  SONG  OF  SONGS. 


THE    RAJPOOT    WIFE. 


Sing  something,  Jymul  Rao  !  for  the  goats  are  gathered 
now, 

And  no  more  water  is  to  bring ; 
The  village-gates  are  set,  and  the  night  is  grey  as  yet, 

God  hath  given  wondrous  fancies  to  thee  : — sing  ! 

Then  Jymul's  supple  fingers,  with  a  touch  that  doubts 
and  lingers, 
Sets  athrill  the  saddest  wire  of  all  the  six ; 
And  the  girls  sit  in  a  tangle,  and  hush  the  tinkling 
bangle, 
While  the  boys  pile  the  flame  with  store  of  sticks. 

And  vain  of  village  praise,  but  full  of  ancient  days, 
He  begins  with  a  smile  and  with  a  sigh — 

"  ^^^lo  knows  the  babul-tree  by  the  bend  of  the  Ravee  ? 
Quoth  Gunesh,  "  I ! "  and  twenty  voices,  "  I !  " 


104  THE   RAJPOOT   WIFE. 

"  Well — listen  !  there  below,  in  the  shade  of  bloom  and 
bough, 

Is  a  musjid  of  carved  and  coloured  stone  ; 
And  Abdool  Shureef  Khan — I  spit,  to  name  that  man  ! — 

Lieth  there,  underneath,  all  alone. 

"  He  was  Sultan  Mahmood's  vassal,  and  wore  an  Amir's 
tassel 

In  his  green  hadj-turban,  at  Kurnul. 
Yet  the  head  which  went  so  proud,  it  is  not  in  his  shroud ; 

There  are  bones  in  that  grave, — but  not  a  skull ! 

"  And  deep  drove  in  his  breast  there  moulders  with  the 
rest 

A  dagger,  brighter  once  than  Chundra's  ray ; 
A  Rajpoot  lobar  whet  it,  and  a  Rajpoot  woman  set  it 

Past  the  power  of  any  hand  to  tear  away. 

"  'Twas  the  Ranee  Neila  true,  the  wife  of  Soorj  Dehu, 

Lord  of  the  Rajpoots  of  Nourpoor ; 
You  shall  hear  the  mournful  story,  with  its  sorrow  and 
its  glory, 

And  curse  Shureef  Khan, — the  soor ! " 


THE   RAJPOOT   WIFE.  105 

All  in  the  wide  Five- Waters  was  none  like  Soorj  Deliu, 
To  foeman  who  so  dreadful,  to  friend  what  heart  so  true  ? 

Like   Indus,   through   the   mountains   came   down  the 

Muslim  ranks, 
And  town-walls  fell  before  them  as  flooded  river-banks  ; 

But  Soorj  Dehu  the  Rajpoot  owned  neither  town  nor 

wall; 
His  house  the  camp,  his  roof-tree  the  sky  that  covers 

all; 

His  seat  of  state  the  saddle ;  his  robe  a  shirt  of  mail ; 
His  court  a  thousand  Rajpoots  close  at  his  stallion's  tail. 

Not  less  was  Soorj  a  Rajah  because  no  crown  he  wore 
Save  the  grim  helm  of  iron  with  sword-marks  dinted  o'er ; 

Because  he  grasped  no  sceptre  save  the  sharp  tulwar, 

made 
Of  steel  that  fell  from  heaven, — for  'twas  Indra  forged 

that  blade  ! 

And  many  a  starless  midnight  the  shout  of  "  Soorj  Dehu" 
Broke  up  with  spear  and  matchlock  the  Muslim's  "lUahu." 


106  THE   RAJPOOT   WIFE. 

And  many  a  day  of  battle  upon  the  Muslim  proud 
Fell  Soorj,  as   India's  lightning  falls  from  the    silent 
cloud.  • 

Nor  ever  shot  nor  arrow,  nor  spear  nor  slinger's  stone, 
Could  pierce  the  mail  that  Neila  the  Ranee  buckled  on  : 

But  traitor's  subtle  tongue-thrust  through  fence  of  steel 

can  break ; 
And  Soorj  was  taken  sleeping,  whom  none  had   ta'en 

awake. 

Then   at  the  noon,  in   durbar,  swore   fiercely  Shureef 

Khan 
That  Soorj  should  die  in  torment,  or  live  a  Mussulman. 

But  Soorj  laughed  lightly  at  him,  and  answered,  "Work 

your  will ! 
The  last  breath  of  my  body  shall  curse  your  Prophet 

still." 

With  words  of  insult  shameful,  and  deeds  of  cruel  kind. 
They  vexed  that  Rajpoot's  body,  but  never  moved  his 
mind. 


THE   RAJPOOT   WIFE.  107 

And  one  is  come  who  sayeth,  "  Ho  !  Rajpoots  !  Soorj  is 

bound ; 
Your  lord  is  caged  and  baited  by  Shureef  Khan,  the 

hound. 

"  The  Khan  hath  caught  and  chained  him,  like  a  beast, 

in  iron  cage, 
And  all  the  camp  of  Islam  spends  on  him  spite  and  rage ; 

"  All  day  the  coward  Muslims  spend  on  him  rage  and 
spite ; 

If  ye  have  thought  to  help  him,  'twere  good  ye  go  to- 
night." 

Up  sprang  a  hundred  horsemen,  flashed  in  each  hand  a 

sword ; 
In  each  heart  burned  the  gladness  of  dying  for  their  lord ; 

Up  rose  each  Eajpoot  rider,  and  buckled  on  with  speed 
The  bridle-chain  and  breast-cord,  and  the  saddle  of  his 
steed. 

But  unto  none  sad  Neila  gave  word  to  mount  and  ride  ; 
Only  she  called  the  brothers  of  Soorj  unto  her  side, 


108  THE  RAJPOOT  WIFE. 

And  said,  "Take  order  straightway  to  seek  this  camp 

with  me  ; 
If  love  and  craft  can  conquer,  a  thousand  is  as  three. 

"If  love  be  weak  to   save  him,  Soorj   dies — and  ye 

return. 
For  where  a  Eajpoot  dieth,  the  Eajpoot  widows  burn." 

Thereat  the  Eanee  Neila  unbraided  from  her  hair 
The  pearls  as  great  as  Kashmir  grapes  Soorj  gave  his 
wife  to  wear, 

And  all  across  her  bosoms — like  lotus-buds  to  see — 
She  wrapped  the  tinselled  sari  of  a  dancing  Kunchenee  ; 


And  fastened  on  her  ankles  the  hundred  silver  bells, 
ose  ligh 
dwells. 


To  whose  light  laugh  of  music  the  Nautch-girl  darts  and 


And   all   in   dress  a   Nautch-girl,  but   all   in   heart   a 

queen, 
She   set  her  foot  to   stirrup  with  a  sad  and   settled 

mien. 


THE  RAJPOOT  WIFE.  109 


Only  one  tiling  she  carried  no  Kunchenee  should  bear, 
The  knife  between  her  bosomfe; — ho,  Shureef !  have  a  care ! 


Thereat,  with  running  ditty  of  mingled  pride  and  pity, 

Jymul  Eao  makes  the  six  wkes  sigh ; 
And  the  girls  Avith  tearful  eyes  note  the  music's  fall 
and  rise, 

And  the  boys  let  the  fire  fade  and  die. 


All  day  lay  Soorj  the  Eajpoot  in  Shureef 's  iron  cage. 
All  day  the  coward  Muslims  spent  on  him  spite  and  rage. 

With  bitter  cruel  torments,  and  deeds  of  shameful  kind, 
They  racked  and  broke  his  body,  but  could  not  shake 
his  mind. 

And  only  at  the  Azan,  when  all  their  worst  was  vain, 
1  They  left  him,  like  dogs,  slinking  from  a  lion  in  his  pain. 

No  meat  nor  drink  they  gave  him  through  all   that 

burning  day. 
And  done  to  death,  but  scornful,  at  twilight-time  he  lay. 


110  THE   RAJPOOT    WIFE. 

So  when  the  gem  of  Shiva  uprose,  the  shining  moon, 
Soorj   spake   unto  his    spirit,    "The    end    is    coming 
soon. 

"  I   would   the   end   might   hasten,    could   Neila    only 

know — 
What  is  that  Nautch-girl  singing  with  voice  so  known 

and  low  1 

"  Singing  beneath  the  cage-bars  the  song  of  love  and 

fear 
My  Neila  sang  at  parting  ! — what  doth  that  Nautch-girl 

here? 

"  Whence  comes  she  by  the  music  of  Neila's  tender 

strain, 
She,  in   that    shameless   tinseU — 0,   Nautch-girl,    sing 


again 


t  » 


"Ah,  Soorj!" — so  followed  answer — "here  thine  own 

Neila  stands, 
Faithful  in  life  and  death  alike, — look  up,  and  take  my 

hands : 


THE  RAJPOOT  WIFE.  Ill 

"  Speak  low,  lest  the  guard  hear  us ; — to-uight,  if  thou 
must  die, 

Shureef  shall  have  no  triumph,  but  bear  thee  com- 
pany." 

So  sang  she  like  the  Koil  that  dies  beside  its  mate ; 
With  eye  as  black  and  fearless,  and  love  as  hot  and 
great. 

Then  the  Chief  laid  his  pale  lips  upon  the  little  palm. 
And  sank  down  with  a  smile  of  love,  his  face  all  glad 
and  calm ; 

And  through  the  cage-bars  Neila  felt  the  brave  heart 

stop  fast, 
"  0  Soorj  !  " — she  cried — "  I  follow  !   have  patience  to 

the  last." 

She  turned  and  went,     "  Who  passes  1  "  challenged  the 

Mussulman  ; 
"A   Nautch-girl,   I."—"  What   seek'st    thou  1"—"  The 

presence  of  the  Khan ; 


112  THE  RAJPOOT  WIFE. 

"  Ask  if  the  high  chief-captain  be  pleased  to  hear  me 


sing;" 


And  Shureef,  full  of  feasting,  the  Kunchenee  bade  bring. 

Then  all  before  the  Muslims,  aflame  with  lawless  wine, 
Entered  the  Eanee  Neila,  in  grace  and  face  divine  ; 

And  all  before  the  Muslims,  wagging  their  goatish  chins, 
The  Rajpoot  Princess  set  her  to  the  "  bee-dance "  that 
begins, 

"  If  my  love  loved  me,  he  should  be  a  bee, 
I  the  yellow  cliampaTc,  love  the  honey  of  me." 

All  the  wreathed  movements  danced  she  of  that  dance ; 
Not  a  step  she  slighted,  not  a  wanton  glance  ; 

In  her  unveiled  bosom  chased  th'  intruding  bee, 
To  her  waist — and  lower — she  !  a  Rajpoot,  she  ! 

Sang  the  melting  music,  swayed  the  languorous  limb  : 
Shureefs  drunken  heart  beat — Shureef 's  eyes  waxed  dim. 

From  his  finger  Shureef  loosed  an  Ormuz  pearl — 
"By  the  Prophet,"  quoth  he,  "'tis  a  winsome  girl! 


THE   RAJPOOT   WIFE.  113 

"  Take  this  ring ;  and  'prithee,  come  and  have  thy  pay, 
I  would  hear  at  leisure  more  of  such  a  lay." 

Glared  his  eyes  on  her  eyes,  passing  o'er  the  plain, 
Glared  at  the  tent-purdah — never  glared  again  ! 

Never  opened  after  unto  gaze  or  glance, 

Eyes  that  saw  a  Rajpoot  dance  a  shameful  dance  ; 

For  the  kiss  she  gave  him  was  his  first  and  last — 
Kiss  of  dagger,  driven  to  his  heart,  and  past. 

At  her  feet  he  wallowed,  choked  with  Avicked  blood  ; 
In  his  breast  the  katar  quivered  where  it  stood. 

At  the  hilt  his  fingers  vainly — wildly — try, 
Then  they  stifi"en  feeble  ; — die  !  thou  slayer,  die  ! 

From  his  jewelled  scabbard  drew  she  Shureef 's  sword. 
Cut  atwain  the  neck-bone  of  the  Muslim  lord. 

Underneath  the  starlight,  sooth,  a  sight  of  dread  ! 
Like  the  Goddess  Kali,  comes  she  with  the  head. 

Comes  to  where  her  brothers  guard  their  murdered  chief ; 
All  the  camp  is  silent,  but  the  night  is  brief. 


114  THE  RAJPOOT  WIFE, 

At  his  feet  she  flings  it,  flings  her  burden  vile  ; 

"  Soorj !  I  keep  my  promise !    Brothers,  build  the  pile !  " 

I     They  have  built  it,  set  it,  all  as  Rajpoots  do, 
From  the  cage  of  iron  taken  Soorj  Dehu  ; 

In  the  lap  of  Neila,  seated  on  the  pile, 

Laid  his  head — she  radiant,  like  a  queen  the  while. 

Tlien  the  lamp  is  lighted,  and  the  ghee  is  poured — 
"  Soorj,  we  burn  together ;  0  my  love,  my  lord  !  " 

In  the  flame  and  crackle  dies  her  tender  tongue. 
Dies  the  Ranee  truest,  all  true  wives  among. 

At  the  morn  a  clamour  runs  from  tent  to  tent. 
Like  the  wild  geese  cackling  when  the  night  is  spent. 

'•  Shureef  Khan  lies  headless !  gone  is  Soorj  Dehu  ! 
And  the  wandering  Nautch-girl,  who  has  seen  her,  who  ? " 

This  but  know  the  sentries,  at  the  "breath  of  dawn" 
Forth  there  fared  two  horsemen,  by  the  first  was  borne 

The  urn  of  clay,  the  vessel  that  Rajpoots  use  to  bring 
The  ashes  of  dead  kinsmen  to  Gungas'  holy  spring. 


I 


KING    SALADIK 


Long  years  ago — so  tells  Boccaccio 
In  such  Italian  gentleness  of  speech 
As  finds  no  echo  in  this  northern  air 
To  counterpart  its  music — long  ago, 
When  Saladin  was  Soldan  of  the  East, 
The  kings  let  cry  a  general  crusade  ; 
And  to  the  trysting-plains  of  Lombardy 
The  idle  lances  of  the  North  and  West 
Rode  all  that  spring,  as  all  the  spring  runs  down 
Into  a  lake,  from  all  its  hanging  hills, 
The  clash  and  glitter  of  a  hundred  streams. 
Whereof  the  rumour  reached  to  Saladin, 
And  that  swart  king — as  royal  in  his  heart 
As  any  crowned  champion  of  the  Cross — 
That  he  might  fully,  of  his  knowledge,  learn 


116  KING   SALADIN. 

The  purpose  of  the  lords  of  Christendom, 
And  when  their  war  and  what  their  armament, 
Took  thought  to  cross  the  seas  to  Lombardy. 
Wherefore,  with  wise  and  trustful  Amirs  twain, 
All  habited  in  garbs  that  merchants  use; 
With  trader's  band  and  gipsire  on  the  breast 
That  best  loved  mail  and  dagger,  Saladin 
Set  forth  upon  his  journey  perilous. 

In  that  day,  fairest  land  was  Lombardy  ! 
A  sea  of  country -plenty,  islanded 
With  cities  rich ;  nor  richer  one  than  thee, 
Marble  Milano  !  from  whose  gate  at  dawn — 
With  ear  that  little  recked  the  matin-bell. 
But  a  keen  eye  to  measure  wall  and  foss — 
The  Soldan  rode  ;  and  all  day  long  he  rode 
For  Pavia ;  passing  basilic,  and  shrine, 
And  gaze  of  vineyard-workers,  wotting  not 
Yon  trader  was  the  Lord  of  Heathenesse. 
All  day  he  rode  ;  yet  at  the  wane  of  day 
No  gleam  of  gate,  or  ramp,  or  rising  spire, 
Nor  Tessin's  sparkle  underneath  the  stars 
Promised  him  Pavia ;  but  he  was  'ware 


KING   SALADIN.  117 

Of  a  gay  company  upon  the  way, 
Ladies  and  lords,  with  horses,  hawks,  and  hounds  : 
Cap-plumes  and  tresses  fluttered  by  the  wind 
Of  merry  race  for  home.     "  Go  !  "  said  the  king 
To  him  that  rode  upon  his  better  hand, 
"  And  pray  these  gentles  of  their  courtesy 
How  many  leagues  to  Pavia,  and  the  gates 
What  hour  they  close  them  ?  "     Then  the  Saracen 
Set  spur,  and  being  joined  to  one  that  seemed 
First  of  the  hunt,  he  told  the  message — they 
Checking  the  jangling  bits,  and  chiding  down 
The  unfinished  laugh  to  listen — but  by  this 
Came  up  the  king,  his  bonnet  in  his  hand. 
Theirs  doffed  to  him  :  "  Sir  Trader,"  Torel  said 
(Messer  Torello  'twas,  of  Istria), 
"  They  shut  the  Pavian  gate  at  even-song, 
And  even-song  is  sung."     Then  turning  half, 
Muttered,  "  Pardie,  the  man  is  worshipful, 
A  stranger  too  !  "     "  Fair  lord  !  "  quoth  Saladin, 
"  Please  you  to  stead  some  weary  travellers, 
Saying  where  we  may  lodge,  the  town  so  far 
And  night  so  near."     "  Of  my  heart,  willingly," 


118  KING  SALADIN. 

Made  answer  Torel,  "  I  did  think  but  now 
To  send  my  knave  an  errand — he  shall  ride 
And  bring  you  unto  lodgment — oh  !  no  thanks, 
Our  Lady  keep  you  !  "  then  with  whispered  hest 
He   called   their  guide   and   sped    them.      Being 

gone, 
Torello  told  his  purpose,  and  the  band, 
With  ready  zeal  and  loosened  bridle-chains, 
IJode  for  his  hunting-palace,  where  they  set 
A  goodly  banquet  underneath  the  planes. 
And  hung  the  house  with  guest-lights,  and  anon 
Welcomed  the  wondering  strangers,  thereto  led 
Unwitting,  by  a  world  of  winding  paths  ; 
Messer  Torello,  at  the  inner  gate. 
Waiting  to  take  them  in — a  goodly  host, 
Stamped  current  with  God's  image  for  a  man 
Chief  among  men,  truthful,  and  just,  and  free. 

Then  he,  "  Well  met  again,  fair  sirs  !    Our  knave 
Hath  found  you  shelter  better  than  the  worst  : 
Please  you  to  leave  your  selles,  and  being  bathed, 
Grace  our  poor  supper  here."     Then  Saladin, 
Whose  sword  had  yielded  ere  his  courtesy, 


KING   SALADIN.  119 

Answered,  "  Great  thanks,  Sir  Knight,  and  this 

much  blame, 
You  spoil  us  for  our  trade !  two  bonnets  doffed, 
And  travellers'  questions  holding  you  afield, 
For  those  you  give  us  this."     ''  Sir  !  not  your  meed, 
Nor  worthy  of  your  breeding  ;  but  in  sooth 
That  is  not  out  of  Pavia."     Therewithal 
He  led  them  to  fair  chambers  decked  with  all 
Makes  tired  men  glad ;  lights,  and  the  marble  bath. 
And  flasks  that  sparkled,  liquid  amethyst. 
And  grapes,  not  dry  as  yet  from  evening  dew. 

Thereafter  at  the  supper-board  they  sat ; 
Nor  lacked  it,  though  its  guest  was  reared  a  king, 
Worthy  provend  in  crafts  of  cookery, 
Pastel,  pasticcio — all  set  forth  on  gold ; 
And  gracious  talk  and  pleasant  courtesies, 
Spoken  in  stately  Latin,  cheated  time 
Till  there  was  none  but  held  the  stranger-sir. 
For  all  his  chapman's  dress  of  cramasie. 
Goodlier  than  silks  could  make  him.    Presently 
Talk  rose  upon  the  Holy  Sepulchre : 
"  I  go  myself,"  said  Torel,  "  with  a  score 


120  KING   SALADIN. 

Of  better  knights — the  flower  of  Pavia — 
To  try  our  steel  against  King  Saladin's. 
Sirs  !  ye  have  seen  the  countries  of  the  Sun, 
Know  you  the  Soldan  1 "    Answer  gave  the  king, 
"  The  Soldan  we  have  seen — 'twill  push  him  hard 
If,  which  I  nothing  doubt,  you  Pavian  lords 
Are  valorous  as  gentle  ; — we,  alas  ! 
Are  Cyprus  merchants  making  trade  to  France — 
Dull  sons  of  Peace."     "  By  Mary ! "  Torel  cried, 
"  But  for  thy  word,  I  ne'er  heard  speech  so  fit 
To  lead  the  war,  nor  saw  a  hand  that  sat 
Liker  a  soldier's  in  the  sabre's  place  ; 
But  sure  I  hold  you  sleepless  !  "     Then  himself 
Playing  the  chamberlain,  with  torches  borne, 
Led  them  to  restful  beds,  commending  them 
To  sleep  and  God,  who  hears — Allah  or  God — 
When  good  men  do  his  creatures  charities. 

At  dawn  the  cock,  and  neigh  of  saddled  steeds. 
Broke  the  king's  dreams  of  battle — not  their  own, 
But  goodly  jennets  from  Torello's  stalls, 
Caparisoned  to  bear  them ;  he  their  host 
Up,  with  a  gracious  radiance  like  the  sun, 


KING  SALADIN.  121 

To  bid  them  speed.     Beside  him  in  the  court 

Stood  Dame  Adalieta ;  comely  she, 

And  of  her  port  as  stately,  and  serene 

As  if  the  braided  gold  about  her  brows 

Had  been  a  crown.     Mutual  good-morrow  given. 

Thanks  said  and  stayed,  the  lady  prayed  her  guest 

To  take  a  token  of  his  sojourn  there, 

Marking  her  good-Avill,  not  his  worthiness  ; 

"  A  gown  of  miniver — these  furbelows 

Are  silk  I  spun — my  lord  wears  ever  such — 

A  housewife's  gift !  but  those  ye  love  are  far  ; 

Wear  it  as  given  for  them."     Then  Saladin — 

"  A  queenly  gift,  Madonna,  past  my  thanks  ; 

And — but  thou  shalt  not  hear  a  '  no  '  from  me  — 

Past  my  receiving  ;  yet  I  take  it ;  we 

Were  debtors  to  your  noble  courtesy 

Out  of  redemption — this  but  bankrupts  us." 

"  Nay,  sir, — God  shield  you !  "  said  the  knight  and 

dame. 
And  Saladin,  with  phrase  of  gentilesse 
Returned,  or  ever  that  he  rode  alone. 
Swore  a  great  oath  in  guttural  Arabic, 


122  KING  SALADIN. 

An  oath  by  Allah — startling  ujd  the  ears 
Of  those  three  Christian  cattle  they  bestrode- 
Tliat  never  yet  was  nobler-natured  man, 
Nor  gentler  lady  ; — and  that  time  should  see 
For  a  king's  lodging  quittance  royal  repaid. 


It  was  the  day  of  the  Passaggio  : 

Ashore  the  war-steeds  champed  the  burnished  bit ; 

Afloat  the  galleys  tugged  the  mooring-chain : 

The  town  was  out ;  the  Lombard  armourers — 

Red-hot  with  riveting  the  helmets  up, 

And  whetting  axes  for  the  heathen  heads — 

Cooled  in  the  crowd  that  filled  the  squares  and 

streets 
To  speed  God's  soldiers.     At  the  none  that  day 
Messer  Torello  to  the  gate  came  down, 
Leading  his  lady ; — sorrow's  hueless  rose 
Grew  on  her  cheek,  and  thrice  the  destrier 
Struck  fire,  impatient,  from  the  pavement-squares, 
Or  ere  she  spoke,  tears  in  her  lifted  eyes, 
"  Goest  thou,  lord  of  mine? "     "  Madonna,  yes  ! " 


KING  SALADIN.  123 

Said  Torel,  "  for  my  soul's  weal  and  the  Lord 

Eide  I  to-day  :  my  good  name  and  my  house 

Reliant  I  entrust  thee,  and — because 

It  may  be  they  shall  slay  me,  and  because, 

Being  so  young,  so  fair,  and  so  reputed. 

The  noblest  will  entreat  thee — wait  for  me, 

Widow  or  wife,  a  year,  and  month,  and  day ; 

Then  if  thy  kinsmen  press  thee  to  a  choice, 

And  if  I  be  not  come,  hold  me  for  dead  ; 

Nor  link  thy  blooming  beauty  with  the  grave 

Against  thine  heart."     "  Good  my  lord  !  "  answered 

she, 
"  Hardly  my  heart  sustains  to  let  thee  go  ; 
Thy  memory  it  can  keep,  and  keep  it  will, 
Though  my  one  lord,  Torel  of  Istria,- 
Live,  or "     "  Sweet,  comfort  thee !     San  Pietro 

speed  ! 
I  shall  come  home  :  if  not,  and  worthy  knees 
Bend  for  this  hand,  whereof  none  worthy  lives, 
Least  he  who  lays  his  last  kiss  thus  upon  it, 

Look  thee,  I  free  it "     "  Nay  ! "  she  said,  "  but  I, 

A  petulant  slave  that  hugs  her  golden  chain, 


124  KING  SALADIN. 

Give  that  gift  back,  and  with  it  this  poor  ring : 

Set  it  upon  thy  sword-hand,  and  in  fight 

Be  merciful  and  win,  thinking  of  me." 

Then  she,  with  pretty  action,  drawing  on 

Her  ruby,  buckled  over  it  his  glove — 

The  great  steel  glove — and  through  the  helmet  bars 

Took  her  last  kiss ; — then  let  the  chafing  steed 

Have  its  hot  will  and  go. 

But  Saladin, 
Safe  back  among  his  lords  at  Lebanon, 
Well  wotting  of  their  quest,  awaited  it, 
And  held  the  Crescent  up  against  the  Cross. 
In  many  a  doughty  fight  Ferrara  blades 
Clashed  with  keen  Daniasc,  many  a  weary  month 
Wasted  afield  ;  but  yet  the  Cliristians 
Won  nothing  nearer  to  Christ's  sepulchre  ; 
Nay,  but  gave  ground.     At  last,  in  Acre  pent. 
On  their  loose  files,  enfeebled  by  the  war. 
Came  stronger  smiter  than  the  Saracen — 
The  deadly  Pest :  day  after  day  they  died, 
Pikeman  and  knight-at-arms ;  day  after  day 
A  thinner  line  upon  the  leaguered  wall 


KING  SALADIN.  125 

Held  off  the  heathen  : — held  them  off  a  space  ; 
Then,  over-weakened,  yielded,  and  gave  up 
The  city  and  the  stricken  garrison. 

So  to  sad  chains  and  hateful  servitude 
Fell  all  those  purple  lords — Christendom's  stars, 
Once  high  in  hope  as  soaring  Lucifer, 
Now  low  as  sinking  Hesper :  with  them  fell 
Messer  Torello — never  one  so  poor 
Of  all  the  hundreds  that  his  bounty  fed 
As  he  in  prison — ill-entreated^  bound, 
Starved  of  sweet  light,  and  set  to  shameful  tasks  ; 
And  that  great  load  at  heart  to  know  the  days 
Fast  flying,  and  to  live  accounted  dead. 
One  joy  his  gaolers  left  him, — his  good  hawk  ; 
The  brave,  gay  bird  that  crossed  the  seas  with  him  : 
And  often,  in  the  mindful  hour  of  eve, 
With  tameless  eye  and  spirit  masterful, 
In  a  feigned  anger  checking  at  his  hand, 
The  good  grey  falcon  made  his  master  cheer. 

One  day  it  chanced  Saladin  rode  afield 

With  shawled  and  turbaned  Amirs,  and  his  hawks — 


126  KING  SALADIN. 

Lebanon-bred,  and  mewed  as  princes  lodge — 

Flew  foul,  forgot  their  feather,  hung  at  wrist, 

And  slighted  call.     The  Soldan,  quick  in  wrath, 

Bade  slay  the  cravens,  scourge  the  falconer, 

And  seek  some  wight  who  knew  the  heart  of  hawks. 

To  keep  it  hot  and  true.     Then  spake  a  Sheikh — 

"  There  is  a  Frank  in  prison  by  the  sea, 

Far-seen  herein."     "  Give  word  that  he  be  brought," 

Quoth  Saladin,  "  and  bid  him  set  a  cast : 

If  he  hath  skill,  it  shall  go  well  for  him." 

Thus  by  the  winding  path  of  circumstance 

One  palace  held,  as  prisoner  and  prince, 

Torello  and  his  guest :  unwitting  each. 

Nay  and  unwitting,  though  they  met  and  spake 

Of  that  goshawk  and  this — signors  in  serge, 

And  chapmen  crowned,  who  knows  ? — till  on  a  time 

Some  trick  of  face,  the  manner  of  some  smile, 

Some  gleam  of  sunset  from  the  glad  day  gone. 

Caught  the  king's  eye,  and  held  it.     *'  Nazarene ! 

What  native  art  thou  ?  "  asked  he.     "  Lombard  I, 

A  man  of  Pavia."     "  And  thy  name  1  "     "  Torel, 


KING   SALADIN.  127 

Messer  Torello  known  in  happier  times, 

Now  best  unknown."     "  Come  hither,  Christian  !  " 

The  Soldan  said,  and  led  the  way,  by  court 

And  hall  and  fountain,  to  an  inner  room 

Rich  with  king's  robes  :  therefrom  he  reached  a  gown. 

And  "  Know'st  thou  this  1 "  he  asked.     "  High  lord  ! 

I  might 
Elsewhere,"  quoth  Torel,  "  here  'twere  mad  to  say 
Yon  gown  my  wife  unto  a  trader  gave 
That  shared  our  board."     "  Nay,  but  that  gown  is  this, 
And  she  the  giver,  and  the  trader  I," 
Quoth  Saladin  ;  "  I !  twice  a  king  to-day, 
Owing  a  royal  debt  and  paying  it." 
Then  Torel,  sore  amazed,  "  Great  lord,  I  blush, 
Remembering  how  the  Master  of  the  East 
Lodged  sorrily."     "  It's  Master's  Master  thou  !  " 
Gave  answer  Saladin,  "  come  in  and  see 
What  wares  the  Cyprus  traders  keep  at  home  ; 
Come  forth  and  take  thy  place,  Saladin's  friend." 
Therewith  into  the  circle  of  his  lords, 
With  gracious  mien  the  Soldan  led  his  slave ; 
And  while  the  dark  eyes  glittered,  seated  him 


128  KING  SALADIN. 

First  of  the  full  divan.     "  Orient  lords," 

So  spake  he, — "  let  the  one  who  loves  his  king 

Honour  this  Frank,  whose  house  sheltered  your  king ; 

He  is  my  brother : "  then  the  night-black  beards 

Swept  the  stone  floor  in  ready  reverence, 

Agas  and  Amirs  welcoming  Torel : 

And  a  great  feast  was  set,  the  Soldan's  friend 

Royally  garbed,  upon  the  Soldan's  hand. 

Shining  the  bright  star  of  the  banqueters. 


All  which,  and  the  abounding  grace  and  love 
Shown  him  by  Saladin,  a  little  held 
The  heart  of  Torel  from  its  Lombard  home 
With  Dame  Adalieta :  but  it  chanced 
He  sat  beside  the  king  in  audience. 
And  there  came  one  who  said,  "  Oh,  Lord  of  lords, 
That  galley  of  the  Genovese  which  sailed 
With  Frankish  prisoners  is  gone  down  at  sea." 
"  Gone  down  ! "  cried  Torel.     "  Ay  !  what  recks  it, 
friend, 


\ 


KING  SALADIN.  129 

To  fall  thy  visage  for  ] "  quoth  Saladin  ; 

"  One  galley  less  to  ship-stufFed  Genoa  !  " 

"  Good  my  liege  ! "  Torel  said,  "  it  bore  a  scroll 

Inscribed  to  Pavia,  saying  that  I  lived ; 

For  in  a  year,  a  month,  and  day,  not  come, 

I  bade  them  hold  me  dead ;  and  dead  I  am. 

Albeit  living,  if  my  lady  wed, 

Perchance  constrained."     "  Certes,"  spake  Saladin, 

"A  noble  dame — the  like  not  won,  once  lost — 

How  many  days  remain? "     "  Ten  days,  my  prince, 

And    twelvescore   leagues   between    my   heart   and 

me : 
Alas  !  how  to  be  passed  ?  "    Then  Saladin — 
"  Lo  !  I  am  loath  to  lose  thee — wilt  thou  swear 
To  come  again  if  all  go  well  with  thee, 
Or  come  ill  speeding  1"     "  Yea,  I  swear,  my  king, 
Out  of  true  love,"  quoth  Torel,  "  heartfully." 
Then  Saladin,  "  Take  here  my  signet-seal ; 
My  admiral  will  loose  his  swiftest  sail 
Upon  its  sight ;  and  cleave  the  seas,  and  go 
And  clip  thy  dame,  and  say  the  Trader  sends 
A  gift,  remindful  of  her  coarteoies." 


130  KING  SALADIN. 

Passed  were  the  year,  and  month,  and  day ;  and 
passed 
Out  of  all  hearts  but  one  Sir  Torel's  name. 
Long  given  for  dead  by  ransomed  Pavians  : 
For  Pa  via,  thoughtless  of  her  Eastern  graves, 
A  lovely  widow,  much  too  gay  for  grief, 
Made  peals  from  half  a  hundred  campaniles 
To  ring  a  wedding  in.     The  seven  bells 
Of  San  Pietro,  from  the  nones  to  noon. 
Boomed  with  bronze  throats  the  happy  tidings  out ; 
Till  the  great  tenor,  overswelled  with  sound, 
Cracked  himself  dumb.     Thereat  the  sacristan, 
Leading  his  swinked  ringers  down  the  stairs, 
Came  blinking  into  sunlight — all  his  keys 
Jingling  their  little  peal  about  his  belt — 
"Whom,  as  he  tarried,  locking  up  the  porch, 
A  foreign  signor,  browned  with  southern  suns, 
Turbaned  and  slippered,  as  the  Muslims  use. 
Plucked  by  the  cope.      "  Friend,"  quoth  he — 'twas  a 

tongue 
Itahan  true,  but  in  a  Muslim  mouth — 
*'  Why  are  your  belfries  busy — is  it  peace 


•      KING   SALADIN.  131 

Or  victory,  that  so  ye  din  the  ears 

Of  Pavian  lieges  1"     "  Truly,  no  liege  thou  !  " 

Grunted  the  sacristan,  "  who  knowest  not 

That  Dame  Adalieta  weds  to-night 

Her  fore-betrothed, — Sir  Torel's  widow  she, 

That  died  i'  the  chain  V     "  To-night !  "  the  stranger 

said. 
"  Ay,  sir,  to-night ! — why  not  to-night  1 — to-night ! 
And  you  shall  see  a  goodly  Christian  feast 
If  so  you  pass  their  gates  at  even-song. 
For  all  are  asked." 

No  more  the  questioner, 
But  folded  o'er  his  face  the  Eastern  hood. 
Lest  idle  eyes  should  mark  how  idle  words 
Had  struck  him  home.      "  So  quite  forgot ! — so 

soon ! — 
And  this  the  square  wherein  I  gave  the  joust, 
And  that  the  loggia,  where  I  fed  the  poor ; 
And  yon  my  palace,  where — oh,  fair !  oh,  false  ! — 
They  robe  her  for  a  bridal.     Can  it  be  ? 
Clean  out  of  heart,  with  twice  six  flying  moons, 
The  heart  that  beat  on  mine  as  it  would  break. 


132  KING  SALADIN, 

That  faltered  forty  oaths.  Forced !  forced ! — not  false — 
Well !  I  Avill  sit,  wife,  at  thy  wedding-feast, 
And  let  mine  eyes  give  my  fond  faith  the  lie." 

So  in  the  stream  of  gallant  guests  that  flowed 
Feastward  at  eve,  went  Torel ;  passed  with  them 
The  outer  gates,  crossed  the  great  courts  with  them, 
A  stranger  in  the  walls  that  called  him  lord. 
Cressets  and  coloured  lamps  made  the  way  bright. 
And  rose-leaves  strewed  to  where  within  the  doors 
The  master  of  the  feast,  the  bridegroom,  stood, 
A-glitter  from  his  forehead  to  his  foot, 
Speaking  fair  welcomes.     He,  a  courtly  lord. 
Marking  the  Eastern  guest,  bespoke  him  fair. 
Prayed  place  for  him,  and  bade  them  set  his  seat 
Upon  the  dais.     Then  the  feast  began. 
And  wine  went  free  as  wit,  and  music  died — 
Outdone  by  merrier  laughter  : — only  one 
Nor  ate  nor  drank,  nor  spoke  nor  smiled ;  but  gazed 
On  the  pale  bride,  pale  as  her  crown  of  pearls, 
Who  sate  so  cold  and  still,  and  sad  of  cheer. 
At  the  bride-feast. 

But  of  a  truth,  Torel 


KING  SALADIN.  133 

Read  the  tlioughts  right  that  held  her  eyelids  down, 

And  knew  her  loyal  to  her  memories. 

Then  to  a  little  page  who  bore  the  wine, 

He  spake,  "  G-o  tell  thy  lady  thus  from  me  : 

In  mine  own  land,  if  any  stranger  sit 

A  wedding-guest,  the  bride,  out  of  her  grace. 

In  token  that  she  knows  her  guest's  good-will. 

In  token  she  repays  it,  brims  a  cup, 

Wherefrom  he  drinking  she  in  turn  doth  drink  ; 

So  is  our  use."     The  little  page  made  speed 

And  told  the  message.     Then  that  lady  pale — 

Ever  a  gentle  and  a  courteous  heart — 

Lifted  her  troubled  eyes  and  smiled  consent 

On  the  swart  stranger.     By  her  side,  untouched. 

Stood  the   brimmed  gold;    "Bear  this,"  she   said, 

"  and  pray 
He  hold  a  Christian  lady  apt  to  learn 
A  kindly  lesson."     But  Sir  Torel  loosed 
From  off  his  finger — never  loosed  before — 
The  ring  she  gave  him  on  the  parting  day ; 
And  ere  he  drank,  behind  his  veil  of  beard 
Dropped  in  the  cup  the  ruby,  quaffed,  and  sent. — 


134  KING   SALADIN. 

Then  she,  with  sad  smile,  set  her  lips  to  drink, 
And — something  in  the  Cyprus  touching  them, 
Glanced — gazed — the  ring  ! — her  ring ! — Jove  !  how 

she  eyes 
The  wistful  eyes  of  Torel ! — how,  heartsure, 
Under  all  guise  knowing  her  lord  returned, 
She  springs  to  meet  him  coming  ! — telling  all 
In  one  great  cry  of  joy. 

0  me  !  the  rout, 
The  storm  of  questions  !  stilled,  when  Torel  spake 
His  name,  and,  known  of  all,  claimed  the  Bride  Wife, 
Maugre  the  wasted  feast,  and  woful  groom. 
All  hearts  but  his  were  light  to  see  Torel ; 
But  Adalieta's  lightest,  as  she  plucked 
The  bridal-veil  away.     Something  therein — 
A  lady's  dagger — small,  and  bright,  and  fine — 
Clashed  out  upon  the  marble.     "  Wherefore  that  ?  " 
Asked  Torel ;  answered  she,  "  I  knew  you  true ; 
And  I  could  live,  so  long  as  I  might  wait ; 
But  they — they  pressed  me  hard  !  my  days  of  grace 
Ended  to-night — and  I  had  ended  too, 
Faithful  to  death,  if  so  thou  hadst  not  come." 


THE    RAJAH'S    RIDE. 


A  PUNJAB  SONG. 

Now  is  the  Devil-horse  come  to  Sindh  ! 

Wah  !  wah  !  gooroo  ! — that  is  true  ! 
His  belly  is  stuffed  with  the  fire  and  the  wind, 

But  a  fleeter  steed  had  Runjeet  Dehu  ! 

It's  forty  koss  from  Lahore  to  the  ford, 

Forty  and  more  to  far  Jummoo ; 
Fast  may  go  the  Feringhee  lord, 

But  never  so  fast  as  Runjeet  Dehu  ! 

Runjeet  Dehu  was  King  of  the  Hill, 

Lord  and  eagle  of  every  crest ; 
Now  the  swords  and  the  spears  are  still, 

God  will  have  it — and  God  knows  best ! 


136  THE   RAJAH'S   RIDE, 

Eajah  Runjeet  sate  in  the  sky, 

Watching  the  loaded  Kafilas  in ; 
Affghan,  Kashmeree,  passing  by, 

Paid  him  pushm  to  save  their  skin. 

Once  he  caracoled  into  the  plain,  I 

Wah  !  the  sparkle  of  steel  on  steel ! 
And  up  the  pass  came  singing  again 

With  a  lakh  of  silver  borne  at  his  heel. 

Once  he  trusted  the  Mussulman's  word, 

Wah  !  wah  !  trust  a  liar  to  lie  !  ' 

Down  from  his  eyrie  they  tempted  my  Bird, 
And  clipped  his  wings  that  he  could  not  fly. 

Fettered  him  fast  in  far  Lahore, 

Fast  by  the  gate  at  the  Runchenee  Pul ; 

Sad  was  the  soul  of  Chunda  Kour, 
Glad  the  merchants  of  fat  Kurnool. 

Ten  months  Runjeet  lay  in  Lahore — 

Wah  !  a  hero's  heart  is  brass  ! 
Ten  months  never  did  Chunda  Kour 

Braid  her  hair  at  the  tiring-glass. 


THE   rajah's   ride.  131 

There  came  a  steed  from  Toorkistan, 

Wah  !  God  made  him  to  match  the  hawk  ! 

Fast  beside  him  the  four  grooms  ran, 
To  keep  abreast  of  the  Toorkman's  walk. 

Black  as  the  bear  on  Iskardoo ; 

Savage  at  heart  as  a  tiger  chained  ; 
Fleeter  than  hawk  that  ever  flew, 

Never  a  Muslim  could  ride  him  reined. 

"  Runjeet  Dehu  !  come  forth  from  thy  hold  " — 
Wah !  ten  months  had  rusted  his  chain  ! 

"  Ride  this  Sheitan's  liver  cold  " — 
Runjeet  twisted  his  hand  in  the  mane. 

Runjeet  sprang  to  the  Toorkman's  back, 
Wah  !  a  king  on  a  kingly  throne  ! 

Snort,  black  Sheitan  !  till  nostrils  crack, 
Rajah  Runjeet  sits,  a  stone. 

Three  times  round  the  Maidan  he  rode, 
Touched  its  neck  at  the  Kashmiree  wall, 

Struck  the  spurs  till  they  spirted  blood, 
Leapt  the  rampart  before  them  all ! 


138  THE   rajah's   ride. 

Breasted  the  waves  of  the  blue  Ravee, 
Forty  horsemen  mounting  behind, 

Forty  bridle-chains  flung  free, — 
Wall  !  wah  !  better  chase  the  wind  ! 

Chunda  Kour  sate  sad  in  Jummoo  : — 
Hark  !  what  horse-hoof  echoes  without  ? 

"  Rise  !  and  welcome  Runjeet  Dehu — 
Wash  the  Toorkman's  nostrils  out ! 

"  Forty  koss  he  has  come,  my  life  ! 

Forty  koss  back  he  must  carry  me  ; 
Rajah  Runjeet  visits  his  wife, 

He  steals  no  steed  like  an  Afreedee. 

"  They  bade  me  teach  them  how  to  ride  — 
Wah  !  wall !  now  I  have  taught  them  well !" 

Chunda  Kour  sank  low  at  his  side  ! 
Rajah  Runjeet  rode  the  hill. 

When  he  came  back  to  far  Lahore — 
Long  or  ever  the  night  began — 

Spake  he,  "  Take  your  horse  once  more, 
He  carries  well — when  he  bears  a  man." 


THE  rajah's  ride.  139 

Then  they  gave  him  a  khillut  and  gold, 
All  for  his  honour  and  grace  and  truth  ; 

Sent  him  back  to  his  mountain-hold — 
Muslim  manners  have  touch  of  ruth. 

Sent  him  back,  with  dances  and  drum — 

Wah  !  my  Eajah  Eunjeet  Dehu  ! 
To  Chunda  Kour  and  his  Jummoo  home — 

Wah  !  wah  !  futtee  ! — wah,  gooroo  ! 


THE    CALIPH'S    DRAUGHT. 


Upon  a  day  in  Eamadan — 

When  sunset  brought  an  end  of  fast, 
And  in  his  station  every  man 

Prepared  to  share  the  glad  repast — 
Sate  Mohtasim  in  royal  state, 

The  pillaw  smoked  upon  the  gold  ; 
The  fairest  slave  of  those  that  wait 

Mohtasim's  jewelled  cup  did  hold. 

Of  crystal  carven  was  the  cup, 

With  turquoise  set  along  the  brim, 
A  lid  of  amber  closed  it  up ; 

'Twas  a  great  king  that  gave  it  him. 
The  slave  poured  sherbet  to  the  brink, 

Stirred  in  wild  honey  and  pomegranate, 
With  snow  and  rose-leaves  cooled  the  drink. 

And  bore  it  where  the  Caliph  sate. 


THE  caliph's   draught.  141 

The  Caliph's  mouth  was  dry  as  bone, 

He  swept  his  beard  aside  to  quaff : — 
The  news-reader  beneath  the  throne, 

Went  droning  on  with  ghain  and  kaf. — 
The  Caliph  drew  a  mighty  breath. 

Just  then  the  reader  read  a  word — 
And  Mohtasim,  as  grim  as  death. 

Set  down  the  cup  and  snatched  his  sword. 

"  Ann  amratan  shureefatee  !  " 

"  Speak  clear  ! "  cries  angry  Mohtasim  ; 
"  Fe  lasr  incC  ilj  min  ulji" — 

Trembling  the  newsman  read  to  him 
How  in  Ammoria,  far  from  home. 

An  Arab  girl  of  noble  race 
Was  captive  to  a  lord  of  Eoum ; 

And  how  he  smote  her  on  the  face, 

And  how  she  cried,  for  life  afraid, 
"  Ya,  Mohtasim  !  help,  0  my  king  ! " 

And  how  the  Kafir  mocked  the  maid. 
And  laughed,  and  spake  a  bitter  thing, 


142  THE  caliph's  draught. 

"  Call  louder,  fool !     Mohtasim's  ears 
Are  long  as  Barak's — if  he  heed — 

Your  prophet's  ass ;  and  when  he  hears, 
He'll  come  upon  a  spotted  steed  ! " 

The  Caliph's  face  was  stern  and  red. 

He  snapped  the  lid  upon  the  cup  ; 
"  Keep  this  same  sherbet,  slave,"  he  said, . 

"  Till  such  time  as  I  drink  it  up. 
Wallah  !  the  stream  my  drink  shall  be, 

I\Iy  hollowed  palm  my  only  bowl, 
Till  I  have  set  this  lady  free, 

And  seen  that  Eoumi  dog's  head  roll." 

At  dawn  the  drums  of  war  were  beat, 

Proclaiming,  "  Thus  saith  Mohtasim, 
'  Let  all  my  valiant  horsemen  meet. 

And  every  soldier  bring  with  him 
A  spotted  steed.' "     So  rode  they  forth, 

A  sight  of  marvel  and  of  fear ; 
Pied  horses  prancing  fiercely  north, 

Three  lakhs — the  cup  borne  in  the  rear  ! 


THE   CALIPH'S   DRAUGHT.  143 

When  to  Ammoria  he  did  win, 

He  smote  and  drove  the  dogs  of  Koum, 
And  rode  his  spotted  stallion  in, 

Crying,  ^^  Labhayki  !  I  am  come  !  " 
Then  downward  from  her  prison-place 

Joyful  the  Arab  lady  came  ; 
She  held  her  hair  before  her  face. 

She  kissed  his  feet,  she  called  his  name. 

She  pointed  where  that  lord  was  laid  : 

They  drew  him  forth,  he  whined  for  grace  : 
Then  with  fierce  eyes  Mohtasim  said — 

"  She  whom  thou  smotest  on  the  face 
Had  scorn,  because  she  called  her  king  : 

Lo  !  he  is  come  !  and  dost  thou  think 
To  live,  who  didst  this  bitter  thing 

While  Mohtasim  at  peace  did  drink  ? " 

Flashed  the  fierce  sword — rolled  the  lord's  head ; 

The  Avicked  blood  smoked  in  the  sand. 
"  Now  bring  my  cup  ! "  the  CaHph  said. 

Lightly  he  took  it  in  his  hand, 


144  THE  caliph's  draught. 

As  down  his  throat  the  sweet  drink  ran 
Mohtasim  in  his  saddle  laughed, 

And  cried,  "  T'aha  asshrab  alan  / 
Wallah  !  delicious  is  this  draught !  " 


THE   END. 


PRINTED  BY   BALLANTYNE  AND  COMPANY 
EDINBURGH  AND  LONDON 


«  o     <^   c    c\    ^ 


I 


ETURN  TO:       CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 

198  Main  Stacks 


)AN  PERIOD     1 
Home  Use 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

-L  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS. 

inewals  and  Recharges  may  be  made  4  days  prior  to  the  due  date, 
oks  may  be  renewed  by  calling  642-3405. 

JE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW. 

JEMT  CM  ILL 

AR  3  1  2003 

.  C.  BERr^ELEY 

RM  NO.  DD6 
\/l    5-02 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  BERKELEY 
Berkeley,  California  94720-6000 


"C-  BEBKELEY 


'■'BBAB/Es 


<^0a^  631,1177 


