===== Internet Archive OCR: handbookofsanskr00smal_djvu.txt =====

dass___ 


3 


Book 


HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKKIT  LITEKATUEE. 


?*    /£ 


A    itAJN±>i>o<  'v 


SANSKRIT  LITERATURE: 


APPENDICES  DESCRIPTIVE  OF  THE  MYTHOLOGY,  CASTES, 
AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS  OF  THE  HINDUS. 


INTENDED    ESPECIALLY    FOR 


CANDIDATES  FOR  THE  INDIA  CIVIL  SERVICE,  AND 
MISSIONARIES    TO    INDIA. 


GEORGE   SMALL,  M.A., 

YN 
TEACHER    OF    OMENTAL   LANGUAGES;     FORMERLY  MISSIONARY  AT  CALCUTTA  AN))  UENAKE3  j 
MKMBEE    OF   THE   PHILOLOGICAL   SOCIETY   OF   LONDON, 
ETC. 


SI 


WILLIAMS   AND   NOHGATE, 

14,   HENRIETTA  STREET,    COVENT   GARDEN,    LONDON 

AND  20,  SOUTH  FREDERICK  STREET,  EDINBURGH. 


18GG. 


a" 


HERTFORD: 

TKINTKD   BY   STEBHKN   AUSTIN. 


PEEFACE, 


In  the  composition  of  this  Handbook  the  Editor  disclaims 
all  originality.  "  Composition/ '  indeed,  is  hardly  an 
applicable  term  in  the  case,  except  in  the  literal  sense 
of  the  word,  that  is,  inasmuch  as  it  has  consisted  in  a 
"  placing  together "  of  materials  already  in  existence, 
products  of  the  genius  and  researches  of  other  and  far 
abler  men.  The  work  may  more  properly  be  designated 
a  compilation;  and  the  only  merit  that  the  author  can 
rightfully  lay  claim  to  is  that  of  care  and  diligence  in 
the  selection  and  arrangement  of  the  subject-matter : 
the  only  merit  that  complimentary  critics  can  attribute 
(if  deemed  due)  being  that  of  judiciousness,  exhibited  in 
the  manner  in  which  this  has  been  done. 

He  does  not  profess  to  be  a  manufacturer,  but  simply 
a  merchant  (or  retailer)  of  literature,  who  knowing  from 
experience  the  state  of  the  market  as  regards  "demand," 

b 


Yi  PREFACE. 

endeavours,  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  to  provide  the 
proper  "supply."  Contrary,  however,  to  mercantile  custom 
in  general,  instead  of  "buying  at  the  cheapest  market 
and  selling  at  the  dearest,"  the  Editor  has  sought  for 
"profit"  (the  reader's,  if  not  his  own)  by  getting  his 
materials  from  the  most  authentic  sources  available — 
even  though  the  most  expensive — in  order  that  he  may 
retail  them  on  far  cheaper  terms,  as  well  as  in  a  much 
more  handy  form,  to  his  reading  customers. 

The  principal  of  these  authorities — some  of  which  works 
are  now  difficult  to  be  procured  from  being  out  of  print — 
may  here  be  mentioned,  though  generally  acknowledged 
in  the  body  of  the  treatise.  The  book  to  which  the 
Editor  has,  perhaps,  been  most  largely  indebted,  is  the 
learned  and  voluminous  work  "  On  the  History,  Litera- 
ture, etc.,  of  the  Hindoos,"  by  the  late  Rev.  W.  Ward, 
of  Serampore.  Next  to  that  he  would  mention  the  more 
modern,  but  equally  learned  work,  by  Professor  Max 
Miiller,  the  "  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature." 
His  chief  other  authorities  have  been  Sir  William  Jones, 
H.  T.  Colebrooke,  Esq.,  and  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson, 
from  whose  valuable  contributions  to  the  "  Journal  of  the 
Asiatic  Society,"  as  well  as  separately  published  works, 
he  has  freely  and  largely  quoted.     To  these  he  would 


PREFACE.  yjj 

add  the  "  Historical  Sketch  of  Sanskrit  Literature, "  by- 
Professor  Adelung,  as  translated  from  the  German  by- 
Mr.  Talboys ;  the  prize  essay,  by  the  late  Dr.  Ballantyne, 
on  "  Christianity  as  contrasted  with  Hindu  Philosophy," 
and  various  other  treatises,  by  the  same  author,  on  the 
"  Philosophical  Systems  of  the  Hindus ;  "  Lectures  on 
Indian  Epic  Poetry,"  and  other  works,  by  Professor 
Monier  Williams,  of  Oxford;  " India  and  the  Hindoos," 
by  the  Rev.  F.  de  W.  Ward,  Missionary  at  Madras ;  and 
lastly,  but  very  especially,  the  editor  would  acknowledge 
his  indebtedness  to  the  valuable  little  work  of  a  very 
similar  character  with  the  present,  but  now  out  of  print, 
entitled  the  "  Missionary's  Yade  Mecum,"  by  the  Rev. 
T.  Phillips,  formerly  missionary  at  Muttra. 

The  Editor's  principal  object  in  the  preparation  of  this 
Handbook  has  been  the  supply  of  a  desideratum,  long 
felt  both  by  himself  and  his  pupils — those  of  them, 
especially,  who  were  candidates  for  H.M.  Civil  Service 
in  India — viz.,  a  work  in  a  condensed  form,  and  at  a 
moderate  price,  from  which  might  be  obtained  such  a 
general  acquaintance  with  Sanskrit  Literature  as  would 
enable  them  to  answer  the  questions  on  that  subject 
likely  to  be  set  at  the  competitive  and  subsequent 
examinations. 


yiii  PREFACE. 

The  importance  of  the  study  of  Sanskrit,  even  on 
merely  philological  grounds,  as  the  parent  of  the  other 
classical  languages  (of  the  Aryan  family),  as  well  as  on 
account  of  the  richness  and  variety  of  its  own  literature, 
is  now  becoming  increasingly  felt  and  acknowledged,  not 
only  on  the  European  continent  (where  so  much  more 
attention  has  hitherto  been  paid  to  it),  but  even  in 
England ;  which  forms  an  additional  reason  for  hoping  that 
a  volume  like  the  present  will  be  hailed,  in  spite  of  all  its 
imperfections,  as  a  useful  work  of  reference,  or  text-book. 

If,  in  any  humble  degree,  it  should  prove  an  incentive 
to  the  study  of  that  venerable  and  highly  polished  lan- 
guage, and  a  handy- guide  to  those  entering  on  its  study, 
the  Editor  will  feel  that  the  trouble  he  has  taken  in  the 
preparation  of  this  little  volume  has  not  been  in  vain. 

24,  "Wellington  Street,  Strand, 
June,  1866. 


For  the  assistance  of  those  readers  who  may  not  be 
already  familiar  with  the  Sanskrit  character,  though,  in 
general,  the  Roman  equivalents  have  been  used  through- 
out the  work,  the  Deva  Nagari  Alphabet,  and  most 
useful  compound  letters,  are  here  appended : 


PEEFACE. 


IX 


Cs. 


ii 


VOWELS 

^  a,  W  T  d,  \  fi,  \?\l,  ^  v 

^  08^  ^  o^'   ^  e'  ^  ai>  ^"^  °*  ^^  *"' 

Nasal  symbol,  called  Anusvdra,  *  m.     Symbol  for  the  final  aspi 
rate,  called  Visarga,  \  h. 

CONSONANTS. 


Gutturals, 

efi& 

T§kh 

?lg 

*gh 

t$n. 

Palatals, 

^ch 

$|>  chh 

*ij 

^Jh 

of  n 

Cerebrals, 

Z  t 

-Z  th 

vgd 

^  dh 

J^n 

Dentals, 

fT* 

Hfth 

** 

T$dh 

«f  n 

Labials, 

-qp 

T$ph 

*tb 

Vfbk 

J{  m 

Semivowels, 

^y 

Xr 

*M 

?v 

Sibilants, 

!{  s 

^sh 

Is 

Aspirate 

,  f  h 

THE  MORE    COMMON    OF  THE   COMPOUND   OR   CONJUNCT   CONSONANTS. 

§£  kk,  yfi  kt,   9p  kr,  ^  kl,  ^  kv,  ^  ksh,  I^J  khy,  J*\  gn, 
^  gr,  l^gh  H  ghr,  *g  n-k,  ^  n.g,  1J  chch,  ^  chchh,  ^  chy, 

^T  jj>  ^  jn>  ^  Jv>  W  nch>  ^  ncM>  ^  %'>  f  &  ^T  ?#>  ^  #> 
^T  $/>  "^  *??>  W  *?£*»  ^s  nd,  ^  %w,  *!£  ny,  tJ  W,  <ST  W#,  <^  £w, 
gj  *m,  3J  ty,  ^  fr,  ^  *y,  (^  ts,  TB9f  i%,  "^  dg,  ^  ddh,  ^  dbh, 
^f  dm,  3J  dy,  ^  dr,  ^  dv,  "Sf  dhy,  tcf  dim,  nf  nt,  «^  w<7,  ^  wra,  •Zf  wy, 
"g  j»#,  T?f  p#,  Tf  pr,  ^  pZ,  ^5T  6/,  ^  '  ,  <3T  %  W  br,  ^  M#,  ^  Mr, 
3U  mM,  ifff  mm,  ?2J  my,  J^  ml,  ?S[  yy,  cjj  rk,  ^  rm,  ^  Ip,  ^  11, 
3f  vy,  ?T  vr,  ^  sc#,  ^  sy,  ^f  *V,  "^  «7,  ^  *y,  "5  57^^,  "^  shth,  ^  shn, 
TIH  s%>  ^lf  s^>  ^  s^^>  "^T  st,  Tg  sth,  ^  5w,  ^  sm,  ^J  5^,  ^  sr, 
^  sy,  ^g*  55,  ^f  hm,  "U  7«y,  ^  hi,  ^  A;^,  ^T  **r,  W  ktv>  ^T  ^5^w, 
^  kshm,  ^f  fe%,  TZfgny,  "TOf  §"*%»  T&  gry,  ^  »•&#,  ^J  w.%, 
'c^J  chcJihy,  ^"  chchhr,  TFgJ  wr/z/,  (^  ^sw,  (i^f  £my,  "^Sf  ^ry,  ^  ^sy, 
^  ^r,  ^Sf  Wy,  ^1  ddhy,  ^Q*  rf67«y,  51  ^r^»  *3T  w^y,  T^T  miy,  "^  rc?r, 
^S  ^2/»  ^  »•»»,  U  *^^>  ^  *^*w,  ^[  sty,  ^  s^r,  (^  r%. 


CONTENTS 


:p.A.:e/r  i. 

RELIGIOUS    LITERATURE. 


CHAPTER  I. 
INTRODUCTORY  AND  ON  THE  VEDAS. 

Preface 

§  I.  General  Division  of  the  Sastras,  or  Sacred  "Writings  of  the  Hindus 

§  2.  Origin  and  Antiquity  of  the  Vedas     

§  3.  On  the  Theology  of  the  Vedas     

§  4.  General  Divisions  of  the  Vedas    

§  5.  Special  Divisions  and  Contents  of  the  several  Vedas 

1.— Of  the  Rig-Veda       

(a.)  Its  Sanhita        

(b.)  Its  Brahmana    

(c.)  Its  A'ranyaka  and  Upanishads 

2. — Of  the  Yajur-Veda,  or  Adhvaryu     

(a.)  Its  Sanhita 

(b.)  Its  Brahmana,  Upanishads,  and  Aranyak 

3.— Of  the  Sama-Veda    

4. — Of  the  Atharva-Veda        


PAGE 

v — ix 
1 
2 
5 
G 
7 
7 
7 
n 
12 

14 
15 
16 
17 
L8 


xii  CONTENTS. 


PAGB 


§6.  Concluding  Remarks  on  the  Vedas     19 

$7.  Periodical  Distribution  of  Vedic  Literature       21 

1. — Literature  of  the  Chhandas  Period 22 

2. — Productions  of  the  Mantra  Period 24 

3. — Works  of  the  Brahmana  Period      25 

(a.)  Of  the  Brahmanas    25 

(b.)  Of  the  Brahmana- Charanas  and  Sutra-Charanas 29 

(c.)  Of  the  Aranyakas  and  Upanishads 34 

4.—  Literature  of  the  Sutra  Period 36 

The  Meaning  of  Sutra     36 

The  Laws  of  Anuvritti  and  Nirvritti      37 

The  terms  Sutra,  S'ruti,  and  Smriti  defined 39 

5. — The  Paris'istas.     (Inserted,  by  mistake,  at  end  of  Chap.  II.)  .  55 


CHAPTEE    II. 

ON    THE    DHARMA    SASTRAS,    OR    SACRED    SCRIPTURES, 
SUPPLEMENTARY  TO   THE  VEDAS. 

§  1.  Generally  Described     41 

1.— The  Vedanta.  The  Vedanta  Sutra  and  Brahma  Sutra  ...  41 
2. — The  Upa-Vedas,  viz.  The  Ayus,  Gandharva,  Dhanus,  and 

Sthapatya  Vedas 42 

3. — The  Vcdangas,  viz. :   I.  S'iksha.  2.  Chhandas.  3.  Vyakarana. 

4.  Nirukta,   5.  Kalpa.   6.  Jyotisha     43 

4. — The  Upangas,  viz.  The  Turana,  Nyiya,  Mimansa,  and  Dharma 

S'astra     43 

$  2.  Particular  Description  of  the  Vcdangas     43 

1.— The  S'iksha  (or  Phonetics)        43 


CONTENTS. 


xm 


(a.)  The  Pratis'akhyas 

(b.)  The  S'akhas       ... 

(c.)  The  Charanas     ... 

(d.)  TheParshadas  ... 

(e.)  The  Kula-dharmas 
2. — Chhandas,  or  Prosody 
3. — Vyakarana,  or  Grammar 
4. — Nirukta,  or  Etymology 
5. — Kalpa,  or  the  Ceremonial 
6. — Jyotisha,  or  Astronomy 


PAOK 

43 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
54 


ZP-A_IR,T   II. 

PHILOSOPHICAL    LITERATURE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ON    THE    SIX    DARSANAS    IN    GENERAL,    AND    THE    NYAYA 
AND  VAIS'ESHIKA  IN  PARTICULAR. 


§  1.  The  Schools  Enumerated  and  Analysed      

§  2.  As  to  the  Founder  of  the  Nyaya  School  (Gautama)  ... 

§  3.  Of  the  Doctrines  of  the  Nyaya  School       

§  4.  Of  the  Vais'eshika  School  and  its  Author  (Kanada)  ... 

§  5.  Outline  of  the  Vais'eshika  System       

§  6.  The  Vais'eshika- Sutras 

§  7.  Extracts  from  the  Sutra-Pushkara      


57 

59 
no 
(.1 
66 
60 
06 


xiv  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER   II. 

OF  THE  SANKHYA  AND  YOGA  SCHOOLS. 

I. — The  Sankhya  System. 

PAGE 

§  1.  As  to  its  Author  (Kapila) ...     73 

§  2.  Outline  of  the  Sankhya  System 73 

II. — The  Yoga  (or  Patanjala)  System. 

§  3.  Of  its  Author  (Patanjali)      76 

§4.  Brief  Summary  of  his  Doctrines 76 

§5.  Fuller  Account  of  the  System       77 

CHAPTER  III. 

ON  THE  VEDANTA  AND  MIMANSA  DARSANAS,  Etc. 

1. — The  Vedanta  System. 

§  I.  Of  its  Origin  and  Author  (Veda- Vyasa)     87 

§  2.  Outline  of  the  System 88 

§  3.  Concluding  Remarks  on  the  System 94 

2. — The  M£mans'a  Dars'ana. 

§4.  Of  its  Author  (Jaimini)  and  his  Writings 96 

§5.  Outline  of  the  System 97 

3. — Other  Philosophical  Systems. 

§  6.  The  Satwata  Sect 103 

$  7.  The  Tauraniks       104 

§  8.  The  Bauddhas,  or  Buddhists       105 

§9.  The  Jains    ' 106 

5  10.  The  Khandauas 107 


CONTENTS. 


XV 


:p.a.:r,t   hi. 
poetical  and  miscellaneous  literature. 


CHAPTER  I. 
ON  THE  EPIC  POETRY  OF  THE  HINDUS. 


PAGE 

108 
109 
112 
116 
117 


§  1.  Introductory  Remarks  ... 

$  2.  The  Ramayana    

§  3.  The  Mahabharata 

§  4.  The  Bhagavad  Gita  ... 
§  5.  The  Nalopakhyanam  ... 
§6.  The  Harivans'a ;  the  Deluge,  etc 119 

CHAPTER  II. 

ON  THE  PURANAS  AND  DRAMATIC  WORKS. 

§  1.  The  Pur  anas  generally  described        121 

§2.  The  Cosmogony  and  Thcogony  of  the  Puranas 122 

§  3.  As  to  their  Dates 123 

§  4.  As  to  their  Style 124 

§5.  The  Puranas  Enumerated 124 

§  6.  The  Puranas  Classified  and  Described       125 

§  7.  Of  the  Skanda  and  Padma  Puranas 126 

§  8.  Of  the  Vishnu  Purana 126 

§  9.  Of  the  Sri  Bhagavata  Purana    127 

$  10.  On  the  Dramatic  and  Miscellaneous  Poetical  "Works      128 

§  11.  Of  Kalidasa  and  his  Works       129 

612.  The  Sakuntala    130 


XVI 


CONTENTS. 


§  13.  The  Raghu-Vansa      

§  14.  The  Mega-Dtita 

§  15.  The  Nalodaya     

§16.  The  Vikramorvasi      ,     

§  1 7.  Miscellaneous  Works  of  Kalidasa    

§  18.  Of  the  other  Epic  Sanskrit  Poets      

§  19.  On  the  Fables  and  Nitikatha  (or  Ethical  works) 


PAGE 

...  131 

...  131 

...  131 

...  132 

...  133 

...  133 

...  134 


APPENDIX  I. 

BRIEF   OUTLINE   OF   HINDU\ MYTHOLOGY. 

Introductory  Remarks 135 

1.  Of  Brahma     136 

2.  Vishnu    137 

3.  S'iva        139 

4.  Kali        140 

5.  Durga     140 

6.  Indra       141 

7.  Siirya      142 

8.  Ganes'a    143 

9.  Kartikeya      144 

10.  Sabr.'imanman        ; 145 

11.  Yaraa 146 

12.  Agni  (Fire)     147 

13.  Pavana  (Wind)      148 

14.  Varuna  (the  Ocean)       148 

15.  The  Planets  and  other  Heavenly  Bodies     149 


CONTENTS.  xvii 

PAGE 

16.  Lakshmi 150 

17-  Saraswati        150 


II.— On  the  Inferior  Celestial  Beings. 

1.  The  Asuras,  or  Giants 150 

2.  The  Pakshasas      151 

3.  The  Celestial  Dancers  and  Musicians  .. ,     152 

4.  TheNayikas 152 

5.  TheYakshas 153 

6.  The  Pistechas 153 

7.  The  other  Servants  of  the  Gods 153 

III. — On  the  Avataras  and  Terrestrial  Deities. 

1.  Krishna 154 

2.  Gopala  and  Gopinatha 155 

3.  Jaggannatha  (or  Juggernath)       156 

4.  Rama      157 

5.  Vis'vakarma    158 

6.  Kama-der,  a  the  Indian  Cupid     159 

IV. — Op  the  Principal  Female  Terrestrial  Deities. 

1.  Site 159 

2.  Radha    159 

3.  Pukmini  and  Satya-bhama 159 

4.  Subhadra        160 

V. — Of  Deified  Pivers. 

1.  Ganga  (the  Ganges)      160 

2.  Other  Deified  Pivers     161 


xviii  CONTENTS. 

VI.— Other  Objects  of  Divine  "Worship. 

PA«B 

1.  The  Cow 162 

2.  The  Monkey  (Hanuman)      1G2 

3.  The  Dog 163 

4.  The  S'rigala  (or  Jackal)        163 

5.  The  Garuda  (or  Garura)       163 

6.  Aruna     163 

7.  The  Sankara-chilla  (or  Brahmani-kite)      163 

8.  The  Kanjana  (or  Water-wagtail) 163 

9.  The  Peacock,  the  Goose,  and  the  Owl ,     163 

10.  Fishes  Worshipped        164 

11.  Trees  Worshipped 164 

12.  The  Salagrama  Stone 164 


APPENDIX  II. 

ON  THE  HINDU  CASTES  AND  BELIGIOTJS  SECTS. 

I. — Of  the  Four  Castes 165 

II. — Of  the  Religious  Sects 168 

(a.)  Divisions  and  Doctrines  of  the  Vaislmava  Sects       ...  170 

1.  Of  the  S'ri  Sampradayfs,  or  Riimanujas 170 

2.  The  Iliimanandis,  or  R&m&wats 175 

3.  The  Kabir  Panthis      179 

4.  The  Khakis 186 

5.  The  Maluk  Dasis 186 

6.  The  Dadu  Panthis ...187 

7.  The  Kudra  Sampradayis,  or  Vallabhacharis     188 


CONTENTS.  xix 

PAGE 

(b.)  Of  the  S'aiva  Sects        191 

1.  The  Dandis  and  Das'n ami's 193 

2.  The  Yogis,  or  Jogis     197 

3.  The  Jangamas  or  Lingayats       199 

4.  The  Paramhansas        199 

5.  TheAghoris         2C0 

6.  The  Urddhabahus        201 

7.  The  Akas  Mukhis       201 

8.  TheNakhis 201 

9.  The  Gudaras 202 

10.  The  Sukharas       202 

11.  The  Kukharas     202 

12.  The  Ukharas       203 

13.  The  Karalingis    203 

14.  The  Sannyasis      203 

15.  The  Vairagis        203 

16.  The  Avadhutas 203 

17.  TheNagas 204 

(c.)  Of  the  S'akta  Sects       204 

1.  The  Dakshinas,  or  Bhaktas 205 

2.  The  Vamis,  or  Vamacharis       205 

(d.)  Other  (Miscellaneous)  Sects 206 

1.  The  Saurapatas,  or  Sauras 206 

2.  The  Ganapatyas 206 

3.  The  Sikhs,  or  Nanak  Shahis      207 

4.  The  Udasis,  Govind  Sinhis,  etc 207 

5.  The  Jains     207 


' 


■m 


^ 


EEEATA 


The  following  mistakes  have  been  only  discovered  by  the  Editor 
when  preparing  the  Table  of  Contents,  after  the  body  of  the  work 
had  left  the  press.  He  regrets  much  that  they  had  escaped  his 
observation  when  correcting  the  proofs  (sometimes  rather  hastily) 
in  the  short  intervals  of  professional  engagements.  The  Reader  is 
requested  to  notify  them  in  his  copy  ;  and  also  to  observe  that  some 
words  have  two,  or  even  more,  different  forms  or  orthographies, 
and  he  therefore  must  not  always  conclude,  when  he  finds  the  same 
term  spelt  differently  in  different  places,  that  either  word  is  a  mis- 
print : 


Page    1, 

2, 
5, 
12, 
29, 
47, 
55, 


76, 

76, 

77, 

82, 

89, 

96, 

107, 

120, 

126, 

139, 

113, 

159, 

174, 


ne  17,  for  "Silpa,"  read  "S'ilpa." 

7,    ,,    "  Mimdnsa,"  read  "  Mimdnsd." 
9,    ,,    "Vaisampaydna,"  read  "Vaisampdyana." 
28,    ,,    "Aranyalca"  read  "Aranyakas." 
30,    ,,    "  Parisishta,"  read  "Paris'ishta." 
11,    ,,    "  Pdrshada,"  read  "  Pdrshadas." 
21,     (5.)  The  Paris' ishtas,   etc.,   to  the  end  of 
Chap.  II.  should  have  been  printed  at 
the  end  of  Chap.  I. 
"Patanjali,"  read  "Patanjala." 
"  Pdtanjali"  read  "  Patanjali. ," 

Ditto  „  Ditto. 

"Patanjala,"  read  Patanjala." 
^TTfiT  read   ^'fiwf 
"Jaimini"  read  "Jaimini." 
"  Marwar,"  read  "Manviir." 
"4,  5,  6,  7,"  read  "1,  2,  3,  4." 
"Skdnda"  read  "Skanda." 
"charming,"  read  "churning." 
"Gancsa"  read  "Gancsa." 
"Sita"  read  "Situ." 
" JDandavat,"  read  " Bandavat" 


3,  . 

fa 

5, 

>> 

10,16 

» 

8; 

>> 

5, 

55 

15,24 

,, 

19, 

)> 

4,  etc. 

)) 

1,3, 

It 

14, 

)> 

21,etc. 

>> 

15, 

>> 

14, 

>> 

HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 


PAET   I. 
RELIGIOUS      LITERATURE. 

CHAPTER  I. 
INTRODUCTORY  AND  ON  THE  YEDAS. 

§  1.  General  Division  of  the  Sdstrds,  or  Sacred  Writings  of 
the  Hindus. 

The  Hindus  arrange  their  sacred  works  under  eighteen 
heads,  or  separate  books,  in  which  every  sort  of  know- 
ledge, religious,  philosophical,  scientific,  and  ethical,  is 
considered  to  be  fully  taught,  as  follows  : — 

1.  The  four  Yedas,  namely,  the  Big,  the  Tajur}  the 
Sdma,  and  the  Atharva. 

2.  The  four  Up  a- Yedas,  comprising  the  Ayus  (on  the 
science  of  medicine),  drawn  from  the  Rig-veda;  the  Gdn- 
dltarva  (on  music),  from  the  Sama-veda;  the  Dhanu 
(on  military  tactics),  from  the  Yajus;  and  the  Silpa  or 
Sthdpatya  (on  mechanics),  from  the  Atharva. 

1  The  original  words  arc  respectively  Rich  (^x^)  and  Yajus  ("^<JltO 
but  when  prefixed  to  the  word  Veda,  the  euphonic  rules  of  Sanskrit  grammar 
require  them  to  he  pronounced  Rig  and  Yey'w,  with  which  forms  therefore 
the  European  reader  is  likely  to  he  most  familiar.  Rich  (the  root  and  "  crude 
base")  however  becomes,  by  the  same  rules,  in  the  nominative  singular,  Rik 

WW). 


&  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

3.  The  six  Angas,1  viz.,  the  Sikshd,  on  pronunciation ; 
the  Kalpa,  on  ceremonies  ;  the  Vydkarana,  on  grammar  ; 
the  Chhandas,  on  prosody  and  Terse ;  the  Jyotisha,  on 
astronomy;  and  the  Nirukta,  an  explanation  of  difficult 
words,  etc.,  in  the  Yedas. 

4.  The  four  Upangas,  viz.,  the  Purdnas,  or  poetical 
histories  ;  the  Nydya,  on  ethics  ;  the  Mimdma,  on  divine 
wisdom  and  religious  ceremonies  ;  and  the  Dharma  Sdstra, 
or  the  civil  and  canon  laws. 

§  2.   Origin  and  Antiquity  of  the  Vedas. 

The  difficulties  attending  the  first  attempts  to  obtain 
from  the  Brahmans  a  knowledge  of  their  Sastras,  were 
very  great.  This  is  accounted  for  from  the  fact  that  the 
Sastras  denounce  the  heaviest  penalties  on  a  Brahman 
who  shall  teach  the  knowledge  of  the  sacred  books  to 
infidels  or  persons  of  low  caste.  This  reserve,  however,  has 
at  length  been  so  overcome  by  the  perseverance,  influence, 
and  gold  of  Europeans  (pioneered  by  such  men  as  Sir 
William  Jones,  Mr.  Colebrooke,  etc.),  that  the  Brahmans 
will  now,  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  sell  or  translate 
the  most  sacred  of  their  books,  or  communicate  all  they 
enow  of  their  contents.  The  difficulty  now  lies  more  in 
the  scarcity  and  obscurity  of  these  works  than  in  the 
scrupulosity  of  the  Brahmans,  their  guardians. 

Though  probably  no  person  living  has  ever  seen  the 
whole  Veda,  yet  distinct  portions  of  each  of  the  four  parts 
— the  Rig,  the  Yajur,  the  Sdma,  and  the  Atharva — have 
long  been  in  the  hands  of  learned  Europeans,  by  whom 
they  have  been  identified,  and  their  contents  examined 
1  That  is,  "limbs"  or  "parts." 


ANTIQUITY    OF    THE    VEDAS.  6 

and  translated.  The  JRig,  the  Yqjur,  and  the  Sdma  are 
considered  to  be  the  principal  portions  of  the  Yeda,  but 
the  Atharvana  is  generally  admitted  as  a  fourth  part. 
And  divers  mythological  poems,  entitled  Itihdsas  and 
Purdnas,  are  reckoned  a  supplement,  and  as  such  con- 
stitute a  fifth  Veda. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  Brahmans  have  more 
reverence  for  the  Veclas  than  for  any  other  of  the  Sastras. 
Several  causes  may  be  assigned  for  this  ;  they  are  at  present 
but  little  known,  and  ignorance,  in  this  case,  is  doubtless 
the  mother  of  devotion ;  they  are  declared  to  be  the 
peculiar  inheritance  of  the  Brahmans,  and  are  kept  from 
the  lower  castes,  so  that  a  Sudra  cannot  hear  any  part 
of  them  repeated  without  incurring  guilt ;  they  are  sup- 
posed to  be  the  source  of  all  the  Sastras — everything,  it  is 
said,  is  to  be  found  in  the  Yedas.  They  claim  an  inscru- 
table antiquity.  Many  believe  them  to  have  proceeded 
immediately  from  the  mouth  of  God ;  thus  the  Yedanta 
writers  say,  "  The  self-evident  word  proceeding  out  of 
the  mouth  of  God,  this  is  the  Veda."1  But,  perhaps  (as 
one  writer  remarks)  we  may  consider  the  word  "  Veda" 
as  signifying  "  knowledge,"  or  true  ideas,  or  philosophy 
in  general,  and  not  merely  the  books  so  called,  and  thus 
account  for  the  veneration  in  which  it  is  held  by  Hindus 
generally,  and  especially  by  the  Brahmans. 

1  The  date  of  the  Vedas  (undoubtedly  the  most  ancient  compositions  in 
the  whole  range  of  Sanskrit  literature)  is  fixed  by  Sir  W.  Jones  at  1500  n.c. 
Ritter  supposes  they  were  collected  or  composed  about  1400  or  1G00  n.c. 
Their  great  age  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  of  their  being  mentioned  in  all 
ancient,  Indian  works,  and  from  the  ancient  iambic  metre  of  eight  syllables, 
in  which  they  are  written,  and  not  in  the  common  iloka  of  modern  works. 
But  it  is  impossible  to  fix  the  precise  period  of  their  composition  from  any  data 
now  procurable. 


4  HANDBOOK   OF    SANSKRIT   LITERATURE. 

Notwithstanding  the  directly  divine  origin  ascribed  by 
the  Yedantists  and  others  to  the  Yedas,  on  consulting  the 
works  themselves,  we  find  the  names  of  the  respective 
authors  of  each  passage  preserved  in  the  Annkramanikd, 
or  explanatory  table  of  contents,  which  has  been  handed 
down  with  the  Yeda  itself,  and  of  which  the  authority  is 
unquestioned.  The  acknowledged  author  of  the  index  to 
the  white  Yajus,  and  also  that  prefixed  to  the  JRig-veda, 
was  Katydyana,  the  pupil  of  Shaunaka. 

According  to  said  "  Anukramanika,"  Visvdmitra  is"  the 
author  of  all  the  hymns  contained  in  the  third  book  of 
the  Eig-veda ;  as  Bharadvdja  is,  with  rare  exceptions,  the 
composer  of  those  collected  in  the  sixth  book ;  Vasishtha, 
of  those  in  the  seventh;  Gritsamada,  of  those  in  the  second  ; 
Vdmadcva,  of  those  in  the  fourth ;  and  Buddha,1  and  other 
descendants  of  Atri,  of  those  in  the  fifth.  B  at  in  the  remain- 
ing books  of  the  Rig- Yeda,  the  authors  are  more  various, 
such  as  Jamaclagni,  son  of  Bhrigu  ;  Parasara,  father  of 
Yyasa ;  Gotama,  and  his  son  Nodhas  ;  Kasyapa,  son  of 
Marichi ;  Angiras,  Yrihaspati,  Narada,  and  other  celebrated 
Indian  sages,  along  with  many  of  their  lineal  descendants. 
Several  personages  of  roj^al  birth  (as  the  five  sons  of 
Yrihangir,  and  the  Rajas  Trayarima,  and  Trasadasya) 
are  mentioned  among:  the  authors  of  some  of  the  hymns 
in  the  Big-veda.  Many  of  the  hymns  are  in  praise  of 
the  liberality  and  other  virtues  of  various  celebrated  kings 
and  heroes,  as  of  Swanaya,  Chitra,  Yibhandu,  etc. 

Some  parts  of  the  Yeda  are  ascribed  to  divine  persons, 

1  First  of  the  name,  and  progenitor  of  the  race  of  kings  called  "  children 
the  Moon,"  or  "  the  Lunar  Dynasty." 


AUTHORS   OF    THE    VEDAS.  0 

and  even  to  Brahma  himself,  under  different  names. 
"Where  the  author  was  unknown,  the  compiler  probably 
gave  to  that  hymn  or  section  a  divine  origin,  but  it  is 
probable  that  the  greater  portion,  if  not  the  whole,  of  the 
Yeda  was  written  by  devotees  called  Munis.  Dwaipayana, 
surnamed  Vyasa  (or,  "  the  compiler"),  having  compiled 
and  arranged  the  Scriptures,  theogonies  and  mythological 
poems,  taught  the  several  Yedas  to  as  many  disciples,  viz. 
the  Rik  to  Paila ;  the  Yajus  to  Vaisampaydna ;  the  Sdma 
to  Jaimini  ;  the  Atharva  to  Samantu ;  and  the  Itihdsas 
and  Pur  anas  to  Siita.  These  disciples  instructed  their 
respective  pupils,  who,  becoming  teachers  in  their  turn, 
communicated  the  knowledge  to  their  own  disciples ;  until 
at  length,  in  the  progress  of  successive  instruction,  so 
great  varieties  crept  into  the  text,  or  into  the  manner  of 
reading  or  reciting  it,  and  into  the  no  less  sacred  precepts 
for  its  use  and  applications,  that  no  fewer  than  1,100 
different  schools  arose. 

§  3.  Of  the  Theology  of  the  Vedas. 

The  religious  system  of  the  Yedas  may  be  described  as 
a  rude,  non-idolatrous  deism — though  in  some  aspects  it 
presents  a  polytheistical  appearance,  in  as  far  as  the  sun, 
moon,  fire,  etc.,  are  regarded  as  proper  objects  of  adora- 
tion. "  The  real  doctrine  of  the  Indian  Scripture,"  says 
Colebrooke,  "  is  the  unity  of  the  Deity,  in  whom  the 
universe  is  comprehended ;  and  the  seeming  potytheism 
which  it  exhibits,  offers  the  elements  and  the  stars  and 
planets  as  God.     The  three  principal   manifestations  of 


()  HANDBOOK    OF    SANSKRIT   LITERATURE. 

the  divinity,1  with  other  personified  attributes  and 
energies,  and  most  of  the  other  gods  of  Hindu  my- 
thology are  indeed  mentioned,  or  at  least  indicated,  in 
the  Yeda.  But  the  worship  of  deified  heroes  is  no  part  of 
the  system ;  nor  are  the  incarnations  of  deities  suggested 
in  any  portions  of  the  text  which  I  have  seen,  though 
such  are  sometimes  hinted  at  by  the  commentators.  "2 

"  Some  of  these  statements,"  however,  remarks  Prof. 
Wilson,3  "ruay  perhaps  require  modification;  for  without 
a  careful  examination  of  all  the  prayers  of  the  Yedas,  it 
would  be  hazardous  to  assert  that  they  contain  no  indica- 
tion whatever  of  hero-worship  ;  and  certainly  they  do 
appear  to  allude  occasionally  to  the  Avatars  or  incarna- 
tions of  Vishnu.  It  is  also  true  that  the  worship  of  the 
Yedas  is  for  the  most  part  domestic  worship,  consisting  of 
prayers  and  oblations  offered — in  their  own  houses,  not  in 
temples — by  individuals  for  individual  good,  and  addressed 
to  unreal  presences,  not  to  visible  types.  In  a  word,  the 
religion  of  the  Yedas  was  not  idolatry." 

§  4.   General  Divisions  of  the  Vedas. 

The  whole  Yeda  is  divided  into  three  parts,  viz.,  the 
Mantras  or  Gdnas — prayers,  hymns,  etc.,  which  collectively 
are  called  the  Sanhita  of  each  Yeda ;  the  Brdhmanas  or 
theological  part ;  and  the  Jndna  or  Upanishads,  the  philo- 
sophical portion  ;  besides  which  many  selections  have 
been  made  from  fclie  Veda  hy  different  sages. 

1  Viz.,  the  Sim  hinder  the  various  names  of  Surya,  Mitra,  etc.),  Somd  (the 
moon),  and  Agni  (lire).  To  which  are  to  be  added  Indira  (the  firmament, 
especially  as  Been  at  night),  and  Vdyu  (the  wind). 

Res.  vol.  viii.,  p.  478.  3  Introduction  to  the  Vishnu  Parana. 


DIVISIONS    OF   THE   VEDAS.  i 

The  first  of  these  divisions  comprises  about  thirtjr  dif- 
ferent treatises,  or  collections  of  prayers  and  hymns,  with 
comments,  as  the  Rig-veda  Sanhitd,  the  A' r  any  a  Panchaka, 
the  Yajur-veda  Sanhitd,  the  Taittiriya  Sanhitd,  etc.,  etc. 

The  Brdhmanas  include  between  sixty  and  seventy 
separate  works  and  comments  ;  and  the  Upanishads  are 
sixty-two  in  number,  though  many  are  comprised  in  a 
few  leaves,  and  only  ten  of  them  are  much  studied  now-a- 
days,  as  containing  matters  of  dispute  between  the  sects 
who  follow  the  six  Darshanas,  or  philosophical  schools. 
The  proper  meaning  of  Upanishad  is  said  to  be  "  divine 
science,"  or  the  "  knowledge  of  God,"  and  is  equally  ap- 
plied to  the  theology  itself,  and  to  a  book  in  which  thib 
science  is  taught. 

The  whole  of  the  Indian  theology  is  professedly  founded 
on  the  Upanishads. 

The  several  Sanhitds,  or  collections  of  Mantras  in  each 
Yeda,  constitute  the  Sdkhas  (^JWT)  or  "  branches"  of  each 
Yeda.  Tradition,  preserved  in  the  Pur  anas,  reckons  the 
Sanhitds  of  the  Rig-veda  as  16  in  number ;  of  the  Tajur, 
86, — or,  including  those  which  branched  from  a  second 
revelation  of  this  Yeda,  101.  Those  of  the  Sdma-vcda  are 
reckoned  as  no  fewer  than  1,000,  and  of  the  Atharvana 
nine.  But  treatises  on  the  study  of  the  Yeda  reduce  the 
Sdkhas  of  the  Big  to  five ;  and  those  of  the  Yajus,  in- 
cluding both  revelations  of  it,  to  86. 

§  5.  We  proceed  now  to  give  a  brief  account  of  the 
Special  Divisions  and  Contents  of  the  several  Vedas. 
I. — Of  the  Rig-Veda. 
(a).  The  Sanhitd. — The  collection  of  prayers  in  the  Rig- 


8  HANDBOOK    OF    SANSKRIT    LITERATURE. 

veda  is  divided  into  eight  parts  (klianda  or  kanda),  each  of 
which  is  subdivided  into  as  many  lectures  (adhyaya). 
Another  mode  of  division  also  runs  through  the  volume, 
distinguishing  ten  books  (mandala),  which  are  subdivided 
into  more  than  100  chapters  (enure  uka),  and  comprise 
1,000  hymns  or  invocations  (siikta). 

A  further  subdivision  of  more  than  2,000  sections 
(varga)  is  common  to  both  methods,  and  the  whole  con- 
tains above  10,000  verses,  or  stanzas  (slokas)  of  various 
measures. 

"  The  Sanhita  of  the  first  Veda,"  says  Mr.  Colebrooke, 
'  'contains  mantras  or  prayers,  which  for  the  most  part 
are  encomiastic,  as  the  name,  Rig- veda,  implies.1  .  .  .  On 
examining  this  voluminous  compilation,  a  systematic  ar- 
rangement is  readily  perceived.  Successive  chapters,  and 
even  entire  books,  comprise  hymns  of  a  single  author  ; 
invocations,  too,  addressed  to  the  same  deities,  hymns 
relating  to  like  subjects  and  prayers  intended  for  similar 
occasions,  are  frequently  classed  together.  The  Rishi  or 
speaker  is  of  course  rarely  mentioned  in  the  Mantra  itself, 
but  in  some  instances  he  does  name  himself.  A  few 
passages,  too,  among  the  Mantras  of  the  Veda  are  in  the 
form  of  a  dialogue,  and,  in  such  cases,  the  discoursers  were 
alternately  considered  as  Rishi  and  Devata.  In  general 
the  person  to  whom  it  was  revealed,  or  by  whom  its  use 
and  application  was  first  discovered,  is  called  the  Rishi  of 


1  Derived  from  the  veil)  rich  (^J^)  "to  praise."  The  term  sanities 
any  prayer  or  hymn  in  which  the  deity  is  praised  ;  and  as  those  are  mostly  in 
ferae,  the  term  becomes  also  applicable  in  such  passages  of  any  Veda  as  are 
redueible  to  measures  by  the  rules  of  prosody.    The  Ptig-yeda,  containing 

most  of  these,  derives  its  name  from  them. 


THE    SANHITA   OF   THE    RIG- VEDA.  9 

that  Mantra.  He  is  evidently,  then,  the  author  of  that 
prayer,  notwithstanding  the  assertion  of  the  Hindus,  with 
whom  it  is  an  article  of  their  creed,  that  the  Yedas  were 
composed  by  no  human  author. 

"  The  deities  invoked  appear  to  be  as  various  as  the 
authors  of  the  prayers  addressed  to  them ;  but,  according 
to  the  most  ancient  annotations  on  the  Indian  Scripture, 
those  numerous  names  of  persons  and  things  are  all  re- 
solvable into  different  titles  of  three  deities,  and  ulti- 
mately of  one  God.  The  Nighantu,1  or  glossary  of  the 
Yedas,  concludes  with  three  lists  of  names  of  deities  ;  the 
first  comprising  such  as  are  deemed  synonymous  with 
fire ;  the  second,  with  air ;  and  the  third,  with  the  sun. 
In  the  last  part  of  the  JSTirukta,  which  entirely  relates  to 
deities,  it  is  twice  asserted  that  there  are  but  three  gods — 
1  Tisra  eva  devatah.'  The  further  evidence  that  these 
intend  but  one  deity  is  supported  by  many  passages  in  the 
Yeda ;  and  it  is  very  clearly  and  concisely  stated  in  the 
beginning  of  the  Index  to  the  Rig-veda,  on  the  authority 
of  the  Nirukta  and  of  the  Yeda  itself. 

"  The  deities,"  it  is  there  stated,  "  are  only  three,  whose 
places  are  the  earth,  the  intermediate  region,  and  heaven ; 
fire,  air,  and  the  sun.  They  are  pronounced  to  be  (the 
deities)  of  the  mysterious  names  severally;''  and  Prajdpati 
(the  lord  of  creatures)  is  (the  deity)  of  them  collectively. 


1  The  Nighantu  is  the  first  part  of  the  Niruhta,  one  of  the  Vcdangas,  or 
works  supplementary  to  and  connected  with  the  Vedas.  It  is  a  glosaarial 
explanation  of  obscure  terms. 

2  Bhuv,  Bhuvah,  and  Swar,  called  Vydhriti  (  cdH^dr)  a  mystical  word 
or  sound,  as  0m}  etc.     These  commence  the  daily  prayers  of  the  liiulimans. 


-— - 


10  HANDBOOK    OF    SANSKRIT    LITERATURE. 

The  syllable  Om l  intends  every  deity ;  it  belongs  to 
(Parameshthi)  Him  who  dwells  in  the  supreme  abode ;  it 
appertains  to  (Brahma)  the  vast  one ;  to  (Deva)  God ;  to 
(Adhydtma)  the  superintending  soul.  Other  deities  be- 
longing to  those  several  regions  are  portions  of  the  (three) 
gods ;  for  they  are  variously  named  and  described,  on 
account  of  their  different  operations,  but  (in  fact)  there  is 
only  one  deity,  the  great  soul  (Mah&n  A' Una).  He  is  called 
the  sun ;  for  he  is  the  soul  of  all  beings ;  and  that  is 
declared  by  the  sage — '  The  sun  is  the  soul  of  (jagat) 
what  moves,  and  of  (tasthush)  that  which  is  fixed.  Other 
deities  are  portions  of  him  ;  and  that  is  expressly  declared 
by  the  text.  The  wise  call  fire  Indra,  Mitra,  and  Ta- 
mil a,"  etc.2 

"The  subjects  and  uses  of  the  prayers  contained  in  the 
Yeda  differ  more  than  the  deities  which  are  invoked,  or 
the  titles  by  which  they  are  addressed.  Every  line  is 
replete  with  allusions  to  mythology  and  to  the  Indian 
notions  of  the  divine  nature  and  the  celestial  spirits.  For 
the  innumerable  ceremonies  to  be  performed  by  a  house- 
holder, and  still  more  for  those  endless  rites  enjoined  on 
hermits  and  ascetics,  a  choice  of  prayers  is  offered  in 
every  stage  of  the  celebration.  The  various  and  repeated 
sacrifices  with  fire,  and  drinking  of  the  milky  juice  of  the 
Moon  plant,   or  acid  asclepias  (soma-lata),  furnish  abun- 

1  "'^ffaTj  the  mystic  name  of  the  deity,  prefacing  all  the  prayers  and  most 
of  the  writings  of  the  Hindus.     It  is  composed  of  three  letters,  viz.  "^n 
a  name  of  \ "ishmi,  ^  of  S'iva,  and  ^  of  Brahma.     It  therefore  implies  the 
Indian  Triad,  and  expresses  three  in  one. 

2  This  passage  of  the  Anukramml  is  partly  abridged  from  the  Nirukta,  and 
partly  taken  from  the  l>rahmana  of  the  Vedas. 


THE  BRAHMANA  OF  THE  RIG- VEDA.         11 

dant  occasion  for  numerous  prayers,  adapted  to  the  many 
stages  of  those  religious  rites/' x 

The  third  book  of  the  Big-veda  (distributed  into  five 
chapters)  contains  invocations  by  Yisvamitra.  The  last 
hymn  in  this  book  consists  of  six  prayers,  one  of  which 
contains  the  celebrated  Gayatri  (or  verse  consisting  of 
eight  syllables),  as  follows  :  "This  new  and  excellent 
praise  of  thee,  0  splendid  playful  sun,  is  offered  by  us  to 
thee.  Be  gratified  by  this  my  speech.  Approach  this 
craving  mind,  as  a  fond  man  seeks  a  woman.  May  that 
sun  (Pushan),  who  contemplates  and  looks  into  all  worlds, 
be  our  protection.  Let  us  meditate  on  the  adorable  light 
of  the  divine  rules  {Savitra)  ;  may  it  guide  our  intellects. 
Desirous  of  food,  we  solicit  the  gift  of  the  splendid  sun 
(Savitri),  who  should  be  studiously  worshipped.  Vene- 
rable men,  guided  by  the  understanding,  salute  the  divine 
sun  with  oblations  and  praise."2 

(b.)  The  Brahmana  of  the  Big-veda. — The  second  part 
of  the  Big-veda  consists  of  the  Brahmana  (or  precepts). 
The  Aitereya  Brahmana  is  divided  into  eight  books 
(Panjikd)  each  containing  five  chapters  or  lectures 
(Adhyaya)  and  subdivided  into  an  unequal  number  of  sec- 
tions {Khandas),  amounting  in  the  whole  to  285.  The  work 
is  partly  in  prose,  but  for  most  part  in  verse.  It  treats 
chiefly  of  sacrifices  to  be  performed  by  kings,  and  of  the 
consecration  of  kings,  etc.     This  latter  ceremony  was  per* 

1  Colebrookc's  Essay  on  the  Vcdas.     As.  Res.  vol.  viii. 

2  There  arc  four  (nh/atrls,  according  to  the  four  Vedns,  intended  for  the 
exclusive  use  of  Brahmans,  Avho  believe  that  no  S'udra  can  repeat  them  \\  itlmut 
drawing  on  himself  signal  punishment  from  heaven.  The  most  common  in 
use  is  in  these  words.  "  0m,  earth,  sky,  heavens !  We  meditate  on  that 
adorable  light  of  the  resplendent  sun;  may  it  direct  our  intellects !" 


12  HANDBOOK   OF   SANSKRIT   LITERATURE. 

formed  by  pouring  on  their  heads,  while  seated  on  a  throne 
prepared  for  the  purpose,  water  mixed  with  honey,  clari- 
fied butter  {ghiita),  and  spirituous  liquors  (madhu),  as  well  as 
two  sorts  of  grass,  and  the  sprouts  of  corn.  This  ceremony, 
called  abhisheka  (^fHefcfi)  "  sprinkling,"  or  "  anointing," 
is  also  celebrated  on  divers  occasions  as  parts  of  the 
rites  belonging  to  certain  solemn  sacrifices.  The  mode 
of  its  celebration  forms  the  subject  of  the  second  chapter 
of  the  eighth  book,  which  contains  an  instance  (not 
singular  in  the  Yedas)  of  a  disquisition,  or  a  difference 
of  opinion  among  inspired  authors. 

The  thirty-eighth  chapter  describes  a  supposed  con- 
secration of  Indra,  when  elected  hy  the  gods  to  be  their 
king.  It  consists  of  similar,  but  more  solemn  rites, 
including,  among  other  peculiarities,  a  fanciful  construc- 
tion of  his  throne  with  texts  of  the  Veda ;  besides  a  re- 
petition of  the  ceremony  in  various  regions,  to  ensure 
universal  dominion.  This  last  part  contains  many  geo- 
graphical allusions. 

The  fortieth,  and  last  chapter  of  the  Aitereya  Brahmana, 
relates  to  the  benefit  of  entertaining  a  Purohita,  or  ap- 
pointed priest ;  the  selection  of  a  proper  person  for  that 
office,  and  the  mode  of  his  appointment  by  the  king,  together 
with  the  functions  to  be  discharged  hj  him.  The  last 
chapter  describes  rites  to  be  performed,  under  the  direc- 
tion of  such  a  priest,  for  the  destruction  of  the  king's 
enemies. 

(c.)  The  Aranyaka  and  Upanishads  of  the  Rig-veda. — 
The  Upanishads  are  the  argumentative  sections  of  the 
Veda,  sometimes  entitled  the  Vedcinta.     Some  of  these 


THE  UPAXISHADS  OF  THE  RIG- VEDA.         13 

tracts  are  portions  of  the  Brahmana,  properly  so  called, 
others  are  found  only  in  detached  forms,  and  one  is  part 
of  a  Sanhita  itself. 

These  constitute  the  third  part  of  the  Kig-veda.  The 
Aitereya  Aranyaka  comprises  eighteen  chapters  or  lectures, 
unequally  distributed  in  five  books.  The  second,  which  is 
the  longest,  for  it  contains  seven  lectures,  forms,  with  the 
third,  an  Upanishad  of  this  Yeda,  entitled  the  Bahvrich 
Brahmana  Upanishad,  or  more  commonly  the  Aitereya, 
as  the  composition  or  revelation  made  to  a  sage  so  named. 
The  four  last  lectures  of  that  second  Aranyaka  are  par- 
ticularly consonant  with  the  theological  doctrines  of  the 
Yedantists,  and  are  accordingly  considered  by  theologians 
of  that  school  as  the  proper  Aitereya  Upanishad. 

This  work  speaks  of  the  creation  of  the  universe  by 
the  self-existent  and  all  pervading  soul  (Paramatma)  or 
Brahma.  First,  the  regions  above  the  visible  heavens, 
the  atmosphere,  the  earth,  and  waters  are  created.  Then 
God,  to  rule  these  various  regions.  Then  food  for  all 
beings.  The  efforts  of  the  primeval  man  to  seize  food, 
which  was  embodied  in  form,  are  described.  After  this  is 
explained  the  mode  in  which  the  universal  soul  penetrated 
the  man.  Pro-creation  is  then  described,  and  the  whole 
is  concluded  by  a  disquisition  on  the  nature  of  the  soul. 

The  Kaushitika  Brahmana  is  another  Upanishad.  This 
contains  two  dialogues ;  one  in  which  Indra  instructs 
Pratardana  in  theology,  and  another  in  which  Ajatasatru, 
king  of  Kasi  (Benares),  communicates  divine  knowledge 
to  a  priest  named  Balaki. 


14  HANDBOOK    OF    SANSKRIT    LITERATURE. 

2. — Of  the  Yajtjr-Veda,  or  Adhvaryu. 

The  Yajus,  or  Adhvaryu,  consists  of  two  different 
Yedas,  the  white  and  the  black,  which  have  each  sepa- 
rately branched  out  into  various  Sakhas.1 

To  explain  the  names  by  which  both  are  distinguished, 
it  is  necessary  to  notice  a  legend  which  is  gravely  related 
in  the  Puranas,  and  the  commentaries  on  the  Yedas. 

The  Yajus,  in  its  original  form,  was  at  first  taught  by 
Yaisampayana  to  twenty- seven  pupils.  At  this  time, 
having  instructed  Yajnavalkya,  he  appointed  him  to 
teach  the  Yeda  to  other  disciples.  But  being  afterwards 
offended  with  him,  the  resentful  preceptor  made  him 
disgorge  the  science  he  had  learned  in  a  tangible  form. 
The  rest  of  Yaisampayana's  disciples,  receiving  his  com- 
mand to  pick  up  the  disgorged  Yeda,  assumed  the  form 
of  partridges,  and  swallowed  these  texts,  which  were 
soiled  and  for  this  reason  termed  "  black"  (grsij,  krishna). 
This  Yeda  is  also,  and  more  commonly,  called  the  Taitti- 
riya,  from  tittiri  (frTf^ff^)  "  a  partridge,"  and  it  contains 
twenty-seven  Sakhas  according  to  the  number  of  Yaisam- 
payana's pupils.  Yajnavalkya,  overwhelmed  with  sorrow, 
had  recourse  to  the  sun,  from  which  he  received  a  new 
revelation  of  the  Yajus,  which  is  called  "  white"  (^r|ff 
sukla).  There  is,  however,  a  more  rational  account  of  the 
origin  of  these  two  Vedas,  given  in  the  Anukramani,  or 
Index,  to  the  black  Yajus. 

The  Yajur-veda  relates  chiefly  to  oblations  and  sacri- 
fices, as  the  name  itself  implies,  which  is  derived  from  yaj 

1  ^M'T^IT  U;l  branch." 


THE    SANHITA    OF    THE    YAJUR-VEDA.  15 

(^T5f)>  "  to  worship/'  It  contains  instructions  respecting 
religious  exercises,  the  castes,  feasts,  purifications,  expia- 
tions, pilgrimages,  gifts,  various  sacrifices,  the  requisite 
qualifications  in  animals  to  be  offered,  the  building  of 
temples,  the  usual  ceremonies  at  the  births,  marriages,  and 
deaths,  of  men  of  all  ranks,  etc.  Many  of  the  hymns  and 
detached  portions  of  the  Yeda  have  been  translated  by 
Mr.  Colebrooke,  Sir  William  Jones,  Dr.  Carey,  and  others. 

The  Yajasaneyi,  or  white  Yajus,  is  the  shortest  of  the 
Vedas,  so  far  as  respects  the  first  and  principal  part,  viz., 
the  mantras. 

(a)  The  Sanhitd  of  the  Yajur. — The  Sanhitd  of  this 
Yeda  is  comprised  in  forty  lecturs  (adhydya),  unequally 
divided  into  numerous  short  sections  (khandaka  or 
kdndikd),  each  of  which,  in  general,  constitutes  a  prayer 
or  Mantra.  It  is  also  divided,  like  the  Eig-veda  into 
anuvdkas  (chapters).  The  number  of  these  appears  to 
be  286 ;  the  number  of  sections  or  verses  is  nearly  two 
thousand  (1987)  ;  but  this  includes  many  repetitions  of 
the  same  text  in  divers  places.  The  Adhydyds  are  very 
unequal,  containing  from  13  to  117  sections  {kdndikd). 

The  black  Yajxs  is  more  copious  as  regards  the  Mantras, 
than  the  white,  but  less  so  than  the  Big-veda. 

Its  Sanhitd  is  arranged  in  seven  books  (Ashtaka  or 
kdnda)  containing  from  five  to  eight  lectures  or  chapters 
(Adhydya,  Prasna,  or  Prapdthaka).  Each  of  these  is  sub 
divided  into  sections  (Anuvdka),  which  are  equally  dis- 
tributed in  the  third  and  sixth  books,  but  unequally  in  the 
rest.  The  whole  number  exceeds  G50.  No  admittedly 
human  authors  were  noticed  by  Colebrooke  in  this  Yeda. 


16  HANDBOOK   OF    SANSKRIT    LITERATURE. 

Nine  entire  Kandas  are  ascribed  to  Prajapati  (the  lord  of 
creatures) ;  as  many  to  the  moon,  seven  to  Agni  (or  fire), 
and  sixteen  to  all  the  gods.  Many  of  the  topics  are  the 
same  as  those  of  the  white  Yajus,  but  differently  placed 
and  differently  treated. 

(b)  The  Brahmana  and  Upanishads  of  the  Yajus. — The 
fortieth  and  last  chapter  of  this  Yeda  is  an  Upanishad, 
called  Isavasyam,  which  has  been  translated  by  Sir  William 
Jones.  A  part  of  this  Upanishad,  the  Ukada  Aranyaka, 
together  with  a  commentary  on  the  same  by  Sankara 
Acharya,  is  now  in  the  library  of  the  Asiatic  Society 
of  London. 

The  Satapatha  Brahmana  is  more  copious  than  the  col- 
lection of  prayers  (the  Sanhitd)',  but  the  same  order  is 
followed  in  both. 

The  Yrihadaranyaka,  which  constitutes  the  fourteenth 
book,  is  the  conclusion  of  the  white  Yajus.  This  forms 
the  Yrihad  Upanishad.  In  it  we  have  an  account  of 
Yiraj  (f%^T*r)>  the  first  cause,  dividing  his  own  substance 
into  male  and  female  of  every  creature,  from  man  to  the 
lowest  animal. 

In  the  second  part  of  the  Brahmana  of  the  black  Yeda, 
religious  observances  are  described.  Its  Upanishads  are 
two,  the  Taittiriyaka  and  the  Nar&yana.  Other  Sakhas 
have  other  Upanishads,  as  the  Maitrayani,  Katha,  and 
Swet&svatara. 

The  Jesuits  forged  a  modern  imitation  of  this  Yeda, 
called  the  Ezur  Ycdam.  Copies  of  three  other  Yedas  in 
Sanskrit,  written  in  the  Roman  character  and  in  French, 
were  found  among  the  manuscripts  of  the  Catholic  mis- 


DIVISIONS    OF    THE    SAMA-VEDA.  17 

sionary  at  Pondicherry  (M.  Barthelmy)  where  the  one  hi 
question  was  discovered.  A  copy  of  the  Ezur  Yedam  was 
brought  from  India,  and  presented  to  Voltaire,  who  sent 
it,  in  1761,  to  the  Royal  Library  of  France.  The  forgery 
which  had  been  manufactured  at  the  instigation  of  the 
Jesuits  (it  is  said  by  Father  Roberto  de  JNobili,  in  the 
seventeenth  century),  has  been  ably  exposed  in  an  article 
by  the  late  F.  Ellis,  Esq.,  contained  in  the  Transactions  of 
the  Literary  Society  of  Bombay. 

3. — Of  the  Sama-Veda. 

This  Yeda,  so  called  from  Sdman,  a  prayer  arranged  for 
singing,  consists  of  more  than  1,000  Sanhitds.  A  peculiar 
degree  of  holiness  seems  to  be  attached  to  it  by  the  Hindus, 
it  being  supposed  that  the  perusal  of  it  is  destructive  of 
sin. 

The  prayers  {Mantras)  belonging  to  it  are  composed  in 
metre,  and  intended  to  be  chanted. 

The  principal,  if  not  the  first  part  of  the  Sama-veda,  is 
that  entitled  A'rchika.  It  comprises  prayers  arranged  in 
six  chapters  (Prapathaka)  subdivided  into  half- chapters, 
and  into  sections  (dasati),  ten  in  each  chapter,  and 
usually  containing  exactly  ten  verses  each.  The  same 
collection  of  prayers,  in  the  same  order,  but  prepared  for 
chanting,  is  distributed  in  seventeen  chapters,  under  the 
title  of  Grdmageya-gdna. 

Another  portion  of  the  Sama-Veda,  arranged  for  chant- 
ing, bears  the  title  of  A'ranya-gdna,  and  is  subdivided  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  A'rchika. 

2 


18  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

There  are  four  Brdhmanas  of  this  Yeda,  received  by 
four  different  schools.  One  is  denominated  S/iadvinsa, 
probably  from  its  containing  twenty-six  chapters.  An- 
other is  called  the  Adbhuta-Brdhmana.  But  the  best  known 
is  that  entitled  the  Tdndya,  and  an  exposition  of  it  by 
Sdyandchdrya.  Its  principal  Upanishad  is  the  Chhan- 
dogya,  divided  into  eight  chapters.  Another  is  called  the 
Kena  Upanishad.  These  works  are  disquisitions  on  ab- 
struse and  mystical  theology.  The  Kena  has  been  trans- 
lated by  Pammohan  Ray. 

4. — Of  the  Atharva-Veda. 

Several  scholars,  learned  in  Indian  literature,  have  sup- 
posed the  fourth  Yeda,  from  its  more  modern  dialect,  to 
be  of  less  authority  than  the  others,  and  will  only  acknow- 
ledge the  first  three  to  be  genuine.  "Passages  of  the 
Indian  Scripture  itself,"  says  Colebrooke,  "  seem  to  support 
the  inference,  for  the  fourth  Yeda  is  not  mentiened  in  the 
enumeration  given  in  the  white  Yajush,  nor  in  the  follow- 
ing text  quoted  from  the  Sastras  by  the  commentator  on 
the  Rich.  "  The  Pig-veda  originated  from  fire,  the  Yajur- 
Yeda  from  air,  and  the  Saina-Yeda  from  the  sun."  Hence 
some  hold  the  At h art an  to  be  only  a  supplement  to  the 
others.  The  popular  dictionary,  Amara  Singha,  notices 
only  three  Yedas,  and  mentions  the  Atharvan  without 
calling  it  one. 

The  Sanhitd,  or  collection  of  prayers  and  invocations, 
belonging  to  the  Atharvana,  is  comprised  in  twenty  books 
(kdnda)  subdivided  into  sections  (anuvdka),  hymns  (sukta), 
and  verses   (rich).      The  number  of  verses  is  stated  as 


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  19 

6015 ;  of  sections,  above  100  ;  and  the  hymns  amount  to 
more  than  760. 

The  Atharvan  contains  many  forms  of  imprecations  for 
the  destruction  of  enemies.  But  it  also  comprises  a  num- 
ber of  prayers  for  safety  and  for  averting  calamities,  as 
well  as  hymns  to  the  gods  with  prayers  to  be  used  at 
solemn  rites  and  religious  exercises,  excepting  such  as  are 
named  Yajna.  The  most  remarkable  part  of  the  Atharvan 
consists  of  theological  treatises,  entitled  Upanishads,  which 
are  appendant  on  it.  They  are  computed  as  fifty- two  in 
number,  but  in  this  reckoning  different  parts  of  a  single 
tract  are  considered  as  distinct  Upanishads.  Four  of  such 
treatises,  comprising  eight  Upanishads,  together  with  six 
of  those  before  described  as  appertaining  to  other  Vedas, 
are  perpetually  cited  in  dissertations  on  the  Vedanta, 
Others  are  more  sparingly,  or  not  at  all,  quoted. 

The  Gopatha  Brdhmana  appears  to  belong  to  the  second 
part  of  this  Veda.  The  first  chapter  traces  the  origin 
of  the  universe  from  Brahma;  and  it  appears  from  the 
fourth  section  of  this  chapter  that  Atharvan  is  considered 
as  a  Prajapati  (or  king)  appointed  by  Brahma  to  create 
and  protect  subordinate  beings. 

In  the  fifth  chapter  several  remarkable  passages,  identi- 
fying the  primeval  person  (Purusha)  with  the  year 
(Samvatsara),  convey  marked  allusions  to  the  calendar. 

§  6.   Concluding  Remarks  on  the  Vedas. 

The  genuineness  of  the  Yedas  in  general  has  been  full}' 
proved  by  Colebrooke  and  others ;  that  is,  that  they  are 


20  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

the  same  compositions,  which  under  the  title  of  Yeda, 
have  been  revered  by  Hindus  for  hundreds,  if  not  for 
thousands  of  years.  From  this  opinion,  however,  are 
excepted  the  detached  Upanishads,  which  are  not  received 
into  the  best  collections  of  fifty-two  theological  tracts, 
belonging  to  the  Atharva-veda  ;  and  even  some  of  those 
which  are  there  inserted.  Two  of  these  Upanishads  are 
particularly  suspicious,  viz.,  the  Rama  Tapaniya  and  the 
Gopal  Tapaniya,  from  the  well-known  comparatively 
recent  data  of  the  worship  of  Rama  and  Krishna.  So  also 
every  Upanishad  that  strongly  favours  the  doctrines  of 
these  sects,  may  be  rejected  as  liable  to  much  suspicion. 

The  Puranas  relate  multitudes  of  stories,  which  show 
what  holy  men  these  Yedic  authors  were.  Thus  Vyasa 
himself  was  illegitimate,  and  lived  with  his  brother's  wife, 
by  whom  he  had  two  children.  Vasishtha  cursed  his 
hundred  children  and  degraded  them  to  the  rank  of 
C/ianddlas.  In  the  Rig-veda  is  given  a  hymn  repeated  by 
the  sage  to  stop  the  barking  of  a  dog  while  he  was  break- 
ing into  a  house  to  steal  grain.  Gautama  cursed  his  wife 
for  a  criminal  intrigue  with  Indra,  and  afterwards  received 
her  again  ;  and  Bhrigu  murdered  his  own  mother  by 
cutting  off  her  head. 

The  writers  of  the  Vedas,  too,  disagree  among  them- 
selves, while  the  mythology  there  taught  is  no  better 
than  that  of  the  Pur&nas.  The  natural  philosophy  of  the 
Vedas  is  also  ridiculous,  and  in  speaking  of  the  origin 
of  things,  they  equal  the  Puranas  in  indelicacy  and 
absurdity. 

The  killing  the  inhabitants  of  the  "three  worlds"  and 


PERIODS  OF  VEDIC  LITERATURE.         21 

eating  food  with  a  person  of  inferior  caste,  are  esteemed  of 
equal  magnitude  by  Manu,  "  the  great  grandson  of 
Brahma,  the  first  created  of  beings,  and  the  holiest  of 
legislators." 

§  7.  Periodical  Distribution  of  Vedic  Literature. 

Professor  Max  Miiller1  divides  what  he  calls  the  Vedic  age 
into  four  periods,  viz.,  (1)  the  Chhandas,  (2)  the  Mantra,  (3) 
the  Brdhmana,  and  (4)  the  Sutra  periods  ;  the  last-named 
forming  the  connecting  link  between  the  Yedic  and  the 
later  Sanskrit.  He  excludes  from  the  Vedic  age  such 
works  as  the  Mahabharata,  Hamayana,  Manu's  Dharma 
Sastra,  the  Puranas,  and  all  the  Darsanas  and  Sastras 
generally,  as  later  productions. 

"Another  important  division  of  Yedic  works  must  be 
always  borne  in  mind,  viz.,  Sruti2  (revelation)  and  Smriti3 
(tradition).  To  the  Sruti  belong  the  Mantras  and  Brah- 
manas.  The  Smriti  includes  not  only  Sutras,  but  also 
Sloka  works,  such  as  the  laws  of  Manu,  Yajnavalkya,  and 
Parasara,  which  sometimes  are  called  the  Smritis,  in  the 
plural.  Most  of  these,  if  not  all,  are  founded  on  Sutras, 
but  the  texts  of  the  Sutras  have  been  mostly  superseded 
by  these  later  metrical  paraphrases. 

"The  Smriti  has  no  independent  authority,  but  derives 

1  In  his  "History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,"  from  which  valuable 
and  erudite  work  the  contents  of  this  section  have  been  extracted,  though  in  a 
condensed  form,  mostly  in  the  very  words  of  the  learned  author. 

"^TkT  "  that  which  has  been  heard." 

*34Kf  "  that  which  has  been  remembered." 


22       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

its  sanction  from  its  intimate  connection  with  the  Sruti. 
For,  as  Kumarila  remarks,  '  Recollection  is  knowledge, 
the  object  of  which  is  some  previous  knowledge ;  and  if 
Manu  and  other  authors  of  Smritis  had  not  originally 
been  in  possession  of  authoritative  knowledge,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  appeal  to  their  recollection  as  an  authority.' 
Accordingly,  there  is  no  passage  in  the  Yeda  to  warrant 
the  authority  of  Smriti." 

1. — Literature  of  the  Chhaxdas  Period. 

"The  Sutra,  Brahmana,  and  Mantra  periods  of  Yedic 
literature,  all  point  to  some  earlier  age  which  gave  birth 
to  the  poetry  of  the  early  Bishis.  There  was  a  time, 
doubtless,  when  the  songs  which  were  collected  with  such 
careful  zeal  in  the  Mantra  period,  commented  on  with 
such  elaborate  pedantry  during  the  Brahmana  period,  and 
examined  and  analysed  with  such  minute  exactness  during 
the  Sutra  period,  lived  and  were  understood  without  any 
effort  by  a  simple  and  pious  race.  There  was  a  time  when 
the  sacrifices,  which  afterwards  became  so  bewildering  a 
system  of  ceremonies,  were  dictated  by  the  free  impulse  of 
the  human  heart,  by  a  yearning  to  render  thanks  to  some 
Unknown  Being,  and  to  repay  in  words  and  deeds  a  debt 
of  gratitude,  accumulated  from  the  first  breath  of  life — a 
time  when  the  poet  was  the  leader,  the  king  and  priest  of 
his  family  or  tribe ;  listened  to  and  looked  up  to  as  better, 
nobler  and  wiser  than  the  rest,  and  as  a  being  nearer  to 
the  gods  in  proportion  as  he  was  raised  above  the  common 
level  of  mankind."    Such  men  were  at  once  teachers,  law- 


THE  CHHANDAS  PERIOD.  23 

givers,  poets  and  priests.  Their  teaching,  poetry,  and 
religion,  simple  and  crude  as  they  are,  possess  a  peculiar 
charm,  as  spontaneous,  original  and  truthful . 

"  The  greater  portion  of  what  we  now  possess  of  Yedic 
poetry  must  be  ascribed  to  the  Mantra  (or  Secondary) 
period  ;  but  there  still  remains  enough  to  give  us  an  idea 
of  an  earlier  race  of  Yedic  poets.  Even  those  earliest 
specimens  of  Yedic  composition,  however,  belong  clearly, 
as  Bunsen  remarks,  to  the  modern  history  of  the  human 
race.  Ages  must  have  passed  before  the  grammatical 
texture  of  the  Yedic  Sanskrit  could  have  assumed  the  con- 
sistency and  regularity  which  it  shows  throughout.  The 
same  applies  to  the  religion  of  the  Yeda.  The  earliest 
periods  of  its  historic  growth  must  have  passed  away  long 
before  the  Bishis  of  India  could  have  worshipped  their 
Devas,  or  '  bright  beings/  with  sacred  hyinns  and  invoca- 
tions. But  we  should  look  in  vain  in  the  literature  of 
Greece  or  Rome,  or  of  any  other  Aryan  nation,  for  docu- 
ments from  which  to  study  that  interesting  chapter  in  the 
history  of  mankind — the  transition  from  a  natural  into  an 
artificial  religion — so  full  and  valuable  as  we  possess  them 
in  the  Yeda." 

The  Chhandas  period,  interesting  as  it  is  in  a  philo- 
sophical point  of  view,  is  represented  by  a  very  limited 
literature.  Several  specimens  of  hymns  to  the  gods,  etc., 
are  given  by  Max  Midler,  such  as  to  Yaruua  (ovpavos), 
Agni  (fire),  Indra  (the  king  of  the  gods),  the  horse 
(Aswa),  the  dawn  (Ushas),  etc.,  and  one  to  the  Vis've 
Devas,  or  "  all  the  gods."  But,  in  more  than  one  of  these 
hymns,  a  belief  in  only  one  Supreme  Divine  Being  (Mono- 


24  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE.  ■ 

theism),  though,  worshipped  under  various  names,  is  clearly 
expressed  in  verses  which  the  Yedantists  frequently  quote, 
and  indeed  have  incorporated  in  their  Upanishads.  Some 
of  the  hymns  (especially  those  of  a  philosophical  cast)  are 
doubtless  comparatively  modern  and  may  be  assigned  to 
the  Mantra  period,  at  latest  ;  but  those  which  belong 
clearly  to  an  earlier  date  were  probably  composed  between 
1000  and  1200  B.C.,  which  Max  Miiller  thinks  should  be 
assigned  to  the  Chhandas  period. 

2. — Productions  of  the  Mantba  Period. 

"  The  only  document  we  have  in  which  we  can  study  the 
character  of  the  times  previous  to  the  Brahmana  period  is 
the  Rig-veda  Sanhitd.  The  other  two  Sanhitas  (viz.  of  the 
Yajur-veda  and  the  Sama-veda)  were  in  truth,  what  they 
have  been  called,  the  ' attendants  of  the  Rig-veda.'  The 
Brahmanas  presuppose  the  Trayi-  Vidyd,  the  '  threefold 
knowledge,'  or  the  threefold  Yeda ;  but  that  again  pre- 
supposes one  Yeda,  and  that  the  Rig-veda.  It  belongs  to 
a  period  previous  to  the  complete  ascendancy  of  the  Brah- 
manas, and  before  the  threefold  ceremonial  had  been  worked 
out  in  all  its  details.  And  yet  there  is  some  system,  some 
priestly  influence,  clearly  distinguishable  in  that  collection 
also.  The  ten  books  of  the  Rig-veda  stand  before  us  as 
separate  collections,  each  belonging  to  one  of  the  ancient 
families  of  India,  but  there  are  traces  in  them  of  one  super- 
intending spirit.  Eight  out  of  the  ten  Mandalas  begin  with 
hymns  addressed  to  Agni,  and  these,  with  one  exception, 
are  invariably  followed   by  hymns   addressed   to  Indra. 


THE  MANTRA  AND  BRAHMANA  PERIODS.  25 

This  cannot  be  the  result  of  mere  accident,  but  must  have 
been  from  previous  agreement,  and  it  leads  us  to  conclude 
that  the  Mandalas  were  not  made  independently  by  dif- 
ferent families,  but  were  collections  carried  out  simul- 
taneously in  different  localities  under  the  supervision  of  one 
central  authority." 

Max  Miiller  fixes  the  probable  chronological  limits  of 
the  Mantra  period  between  800  and  1000  B.C. 

3. — Works  of  the  Brahmana  Period. 

(a.)  Of  the  Brdhmanas. — It  is  difficult  to  give  an  ex- 
haustive definition  of  what  a  Brahmana  is.  "  They  were 
Brahmanic  (i.e.  theological)  tracts,  comprising  the  know- 
ledge most  valued  by  the  Brahmans,  bearing  partly 
on  their  sacred  hymns,  partly  on  the  traditions  and  cus- 
toms of  the  people.  They  profess  to  teach  the  perform- 
ance of  the  sacrifice,  but  for  the  greater  part  are 
occupied  with  additional  matter  "  chiefly  connected  with 
the  Hindu  faith  and  ceremonials.  "A  Brahmana,"  says 
Sayana  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Big- Veda,  "is  two- 
fold, containing  either  commandments  (vidhi)  or  additional 
explanations  (arthavdda) ."  The  Yeda  consists  of  only  two 
parts,  the  Mantras  and  the  Brahmanas ;  but  the  only  par- 
ticular in  which  the  former  can  be  distinguished  from 
the  latter  is  in  their  more  peculiarly  sacrificial  character. 
Whatever  part  of  the  Veda  is  not  a  Mantra,  therefore,  is  a 
Brahmana,  whatever  be  its  subject-matter.  Although 
different  portions  of  the  Yeda  are  often  referred  to  under 
the  designation  of  Ifihdsas  (epic  stories),  Pur  anas  (cosmo- 


26  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

gonic  stories),  Kalpas  (ceremonial  rules),  Gdthas  (songs), 
JYdrdsansis  (heroic  poems),  etc. — all  these  titles  apply  only 
to  subdivisions  of  the  Brahmanas. 

The  number  of  the  Brahmanas,  such  as  we  possess  them 
in  MSS.,  is  much  smaller  than  we  should  have  expected 
from  the  definition  thus  given  above  by  Sayana.  "  If  every 
Sakha  consisted  of  a  Sanhita  and  a  Brahmana,  the  number 
of  the  old  Brahmanas  must  have  been  very  considerable. 
It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  Brahmanas 
which  belonged  to  the  different  Sakhas  were  works  com- 
posed independently  by  different  authors.  On  the  con- 
trary, as  the  Sanhitas  of  different  Sakhas1  were  only  dif- 
ferent recensions  of  one  and  the  same  original  collection 
of  hymns,  so  the  Brahmanas,  which  were  adopted  by 
different  Charanas2  of  the  same  Veda,  must  be  considered 
not  as  so  many  independent  works,  but  in  most  instances 
as  merely  different  editions  of  the  same  common  original." 

•  '  There  was  originally  but  one  body  of  Brahmanas  for 
each  of  the  three  Yedas  :  for  the  Big-veda,  the  Brahmanas 
of  the  Bahvrichas ;  for  the  Sama-Yeda,  those  of  the 
Chhandogas  ;  and  for  the  Yajur-Yeda,  in  its  two  forms, 
those  of  the  Taittiriyas  and  the  Satapat ha -brahmana. 
These  works  were  not  composed  in  metre,  like  the  San- 
hitas, and  were  therefore  more  exposed  to  alteration  in 
the  course  of  a  long-continued  oral  tradition." 

The  Brahmana  of  the  Bahvrichas  is  contained  in  the 

1  "STT^T  I'1-  "a  branch"  (•'.«.  of  the  Veda  considered  as  a  tree)  means 
sometimes  "a  division  or  part,"  sometimes  "an  edition  or  recension." 

2  ^P^I  (tit-  a  '"0,<  ,nt'  r"°'  °f  a  ^ree>  a  feunily  or  race);  is  sometimes  used 
as  synonymous  with  TH^T,  ;it  others  as  a  particular  Brahmauical  family 
or  sect. 


BEAHMANAS  OF  THE  CHHANDOGAS.        27 

Sakhas  of  the  Aitareyins  and  the  Kaushitakins,  which  are 
still  extant.  It  is  evident  however  that,  though  we  do  not 
now  possess  them,  there  were  other  Sakhas  of  the  Bahvri- 
chas  which  differed  but  little  in  the  wording  of  their 
Brahmanas.  The  Aitareya  and  Kaushitaki  Brahmanas 
differ  from  one  another  considerably  in  their  arrangement, 
but  not  to  any  extent  otherwise. 

"  In  the  Brahmanas  of  the  Chhandogas  it  is  evident  that, 
after  the  principal  collection  was  made  (called  the  Praudha 
or  Panchavinsa-brdhmana,  i.e.  consisting  of  twenty-five 
sections)  a  twenty- sixth  was  added,  known  by  the  name  of 
the  Shadvinsa-brdhmana.  This  however,  together  with  the 
Adbhuta-brahmana,  must  be  of  very  modern  date.  It 
mentions  not  only  temples,  but  images  of  gods  which  are 
said  to  laugh,  to  cry,  to  sing,  to  dance,  to  sweat,  and  to 
twinkle.  These  two  (the  Praudha  and  Shadvinsa)  have 
long  been  supposed  to  be  the  only  Brahmanas  of  the 
Chhandogas  ;  but  it  is  a  curious  fact  that  whenever  the 
Chhandoga- brahmanas  are  quoted,  their  number  is  in- 
variably fixed  at  eight,  which  are  expressly  named  by 
Sayana."  But  besides  the  Sama-vidh ana-brahman  a,  which 
is  well-known,  we  have  only  one  MS.  (now  in  the  Bodleian 
Library)  containing  four  small  tracts  with  the  titles  of  so 
many  others  mentioned  by  Sayana,  making  seven  in  all. 
The  eighth  was  the  Chhandoga- Upanishad.  "  With  the 
exception  of  this  and  the  Sama-vidhana,  which  contains 
most  important  information  on  questions  connected  with 
A'chara,  or  customs,  all  the  other  tracts  are  of  comparatively 
small  importance. " 

"It  is  in  the Satapatha-brdhmana  that  we  can  best  observe 


28  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

the  gradual  accumulation  of  various  theological  and  cere- 
monial tracts  which  were  to  form  the  sacred  code  of  a  new 
Charana.  According  to  Indian  traditions,  Yajnavalkya 
Yajasaneya,  the  founder  of  the  Charana  of  the  Yajasaneyins, 
was,  if  not  the  author,  at  least  the  first  promulgator  of  the 
Sanhita  and  Brahmana  of  the  Charana  so  called."  He  and 
his  adherents  were  seceders  from  the  followers  of  the 
Adhvarya  or  Yajur-veda,  the  sacred  text  of  which  school 
we  possess  in  the  Taittiriya-veda. 

"  The  general  name  of  the  ancient  Sakhas  of  the  Yajur- 
veda  is  Charaka ;  and  the  Taittiriyas,  therefore,  together 
with  the  Kathas  and  others,  are  called  by  the  common 
title  of  Charaka-  sakhas.  This  name  (Charaka)  is  used  in 
one  of  the  Khilas  (or  'supplements')  of  the  Yajasaneyi- 
Sanhita  as  a  term  of  reproach,"  evidently  from  a  feeling 
of  animosity  against  the  ancient  schools  of  the  Adhvaryus. 

The  chief  difference  between  the  Sanhita  and  Brahmana 
of  the  Yajasaneyins  and  those  of  the  Charakas  consists  in 
the  division  of  Mantras  and  Brahmanas,  which  is  carried 
out  more  strictly  in  the  works  of  the  former  school.  "  This 
was  most  likely  the  reason  why  the  text  of  Yajnavalkya 
was  called  Sukla  Yajur-veda,  which  is  generally  translated 
by  the  'White  Yajur-veda.'  But  some  commentators 
explain  Sukla  more  correctly  by  suddlia  ('cleared'),  be- 
cause in  this  new  text  the  Mantras  had  been  cleared  and 
separated  from  the  Brahmanas,  and  thus  the  whole  been 
rendered  more  lucid  and  intelligible.  In  opposition  to 
this  they  suppose  that  the  old  text  was  called  Krishna,  or 
'dark,'  because  in  it  the  verses  and  rules  are  mixed 
together  and  less  intelligible  ;  or  because  the  rules  of  the 


BRAHMANA-  AND  SUTRA-CHARANAS.  29 

Hotri-,  as  well  as  of  the  Adhvaryu-priests,  were  con- 
tained in  it,  which,  thus  bewildered  the  mind  of  the  stu- 
dent. 

"  In  the  new  code  of  the  Yajasaneyins  the  most  important 
part  was  the  Brahmana,  the  Sanhita  (which  was  probably 
a  later  production)  being  a  mere  collection  of  verses  ex- 
tracted and  collected  for  the  convenience  of  the  officiating 
priest."  In  the  code  of  the  Bahvrichas,  the  very  opposite 
was  the  case.  Here  the  Sanhita  existed  long  before  the 
Brahmanas,  and  it  had  diverged  into  Sakhas  before  the 
Brahmana  of  the  Aitareyins  was  composed. 

(b.)  Of  the  Brahmana-  and  Sutra- Char  anas. — "  That 
different  Brahmanas  existed  before  the  great  collective 
Brahmanas  were  composed,  is  proved  not  only  by  the 
testimony  of  Panini,  but  by  quotations  in  the  Brah- 
manas themselves.  The  original  Charanas  were  not  all 
rival  s"6cts,  and  it  was  natural  that  one  Charana  should  be 
ready  to  accept  the  Brahmanas  of  another,  if  they  con- 
tained additional  traditions  or  precepts  which  seemed 
valuable.  Thus  we  find  the  Brahmanas  of  the  Kathas 
added  to  those  of  the  Taittiriyas. 

"  What  became  of  those  numerous  Brahmana-charanas 
which  are  quoted  in  the  Brahmanas  and  in  the  Sutras  is 
not  quite  clear.  Most  likely  they  were  absorbed  or  re- 
placed by  the  more  modern  works,  the  Sutra-charanas. 
When  the  Sutras  once  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  part  of 
the  sacred  canon,  they  gave  rise  to  a  large  number  of  new 
Charanas."  Most  of  the  old  Charanas  were  extinct  shorty 
after  the  Sutra-period,  and  their  works,  as  well  as  names, 
forgotten.    In  the  Charanyaka  Parisishta  (a  comparatively 


30  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

late  production)  the  names  of  the  Charanas  of  the  different 
Vedas  are  given. 

Of  the  Rig-veda,  five  Charanas  are  mentioned.  But 
while  the  names  of  several  old  Sakhas  (such  as  the 
Aitareyins,  the  Kaushitakins,  etc.)  are  omitted,  the  Asva- 
layanas,  who  are  mentioned,  must  be  considered  as  the 
founders  of  one  of  the  latest  Sakhas  of  that  Veda. 

The  number  of  Sakhas  of  the  Tajur-veda  is  stated  as 
eighty-six.  We  have,  first,  the  twelve  Charanas  compre- 
hended under  the  common  name  of  Charakas,  including 
the  Maitrayaniyas,  which  are  subdivided  into  seven  Cha- 
ranas ;  next  the  Taittiriyas,  subdivided  into  Aukhiyas  and 
Khandikiyas  ;  these  last  comprise  five  Charanas — making 
twenty-seven  in  all.  Then  follow  the  fifteen  Sakhas  of  the 
Vdjasaneyins.  This  brings  the  number  only  up  to  fortj^- 
two,  or  including  the  Vajasaneyins,  forty-three,  exactly 
half  the  stated  number,  eighty- six.  Of  even  the  names 
of  the  remaining  Sakhas  we  have  now  no  record. 

The  largest  number  of  Sakhas  is  ascribed  to  the  Sdma- 
veda.  It  is  said  to  have  been  one  thousand ;  but  the 
greater  part  of  them  no  longer  exist.  Of  the  Atharra- 
veda  nine  divisions  are  mentioned,  but  the  names  given 
are  incomplete  and  corrupt. 

It  is  impossible  now  to  determine  which  of  the  Charanas 
owe  their  origin  to  Sutras,  and  which  to  Brahmanas  or 
Sanhitas.  Some  of  them  certainly  existed  previously  to 
the  Sutra-period,  whilst  others  as  evidently  must  be  re- 
ferred to  the  Brahmana-period,  such,  e.g.,  as  those  ascribed 
to  Yajnavalkya.  Most  likely  the  Sanhita-charanas  are 
restricted  to  the  Eig-veda.     It  is  certain,  at  least,  that 


DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  CHARANAS  AND  GOTRAS.        31 

no  Brahmanas  belonging  to  anj^  Yeda  were  composed 
before  the  division  of  priests  into  Hotris,  Udgatris  and 
Adhvaryas  bad  taken  place.  Before  then  there  was  but 
one  collection  of  hymns,  that  of  the  Bahvrichas  ;  and  it  is 
among  the  Bahvrichas  only  that  we  have  any  distinct 
traces  of  Sanhita-charanas. 

It  is  difficult  to  assign  a  distinctive  meaning  to  the 
terms  Char  ana  and  Sdkhd.  By  the  latter,  however,  we 
may  understand  a  particular  book  or  recension  of  a  work, 
while  we  should  reserve  the  name  of  Char  ana  for  those 
ideal  successions,  or  fellowships,  to  which  all  belonged  who 
read  and  received  as  their  standard  the  same  Sakha. 

We  must  distinguish,  however,  between  a  Charana  and 
a  Gotra.  "A  Gotra,  or  Kula,  means  a  family ;  and  the 
number  of  families  that  had  a  right  to  figure  in  the 
Brahmanic  peerage  of  India  was  very  considerable.  The 
Brahmans  were  proud  of  their  ancestors,  and  preserved 
their  memory  with  the  most  scrupulous  care.  Gfotras 
existed  among  Kshatriyas  and  Vaisyas,  as  well  as  among 
Brahmans ;  but  Charanas  were  confined  to  the  priestlv 
caste.  Gotras  depended  on  a  real  or  imaginary  com- 
munity of  blood  ;  Charanas  on  the  community  of  sacred 
texts.  They  were  ideal  fellowships,  held  together  by  ties 
more  sacred  in  the  eyes  of  a  Brahman  than  the  mere  ties 
of  blood.  Members  of  different  Gotras  might  belong  to 
the  same  Charana.  When  the  member  of  a  Gotra  became 
the  founder  of  a  new  Charana,  that  Charana  might  bear 
the  name  of  its  founder  and  thus  become  synonymous,  but 
not  identical,  with  a  Gotra. 

"All  Brahmanic  families  who  keep  the  sacred  fire  are 


32  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

supposed  to  descend  from  the  seven  Bis  Ms  (or  saints). 
These  are :  Bkrigu,  Angiras,  Visvdmitra,  Vasisktka,  Kds- 
yapa,  Atri,  and  Agasti. 

"The  real  ancestors,  however,  are  eight  in  number,  viz. 
Jamadagni,  Gautama,  and  Bharadi'dja,  Visvdmitra,  Va- 
sisktka, Kdsyapa,  Atri,  and  Agastya. 

"'The  eight  Grotras  which  descend  from  these  Rishis  are 
again  sub-divided  into  forty-nine  Gotras,  and  these  forty- 
nine  branch  off  into  a  still  larger  number  of  families.  The 
names  gotra,  vansa,  varga,  paksha,  and  gana  are  all  used 
in  the  same  sense,  to  express  the  larger  as  well  as  smaller 
families,  descended  from  the  eight  ancestral  Rishis. 

"A  Brahman,  who  keeps  the  sacrificial  fire,  is  obliged 
hj  law  to  know  to  which  of  the  forty-nine  Gotras  his  own 
family  belongs,  and  in  consecrating  his  own  fire  he  must 
invoke  the  ancestors  who  founded  the  Gotra  of  his  family. 
Each  of  the  Gotras  claims  one,  two,  three  or  five  ancestors, 
and  the  names  of  these  ancestors  constitute  the  distinctive 
character  of  each  Gotra.  A  list  of  these  forms  part  of 
most  of  the  Kalpa-sutras." 

These  lists  had  a  practical  bearing  on  two  most  im- 
portant acts  of  ancient  Brahmanic  society,  viz.  the  con- 
secrating of  the  sacrifcialjire,  and  marriage. 

"When  the  fire  is  to  be  consecrated,  Agni  Haryardkana, 
the  god  who  carries  the  libations  to  heaven,  must  be  in- 
voked. This  invocation  is  called  pravara  (T&X),"  i.e. 
"family,"  because  when  making  it  the  consecrating  priest 
had  then  to  repeat  the  name  of  his  ancestors.  "Agni  him- 
self, or  the  fire,  is  called  A'rskeya  ("the  offspring  of  the 
Rishis"),  because  the  Rishis  first  lighted  him  at  their 


THE  GOPATHA  BRAHMANA.  33 

sacrifices.  He  is  the  Hotri  as  well  as  Adhvaryu  among 
the  gods,  and  is  supposed  to  invite  the  gods  to  the  sacri- 
fice, and  to  carry  himself  the  oblation  to  the  seat  of  the 
immortals. 

"To  marry  a  woman  belonging  to  the  same  Gotra,  or 
having  the  same  Pravara,  was  considered  incest,  and 
visited  with  severe  penance.  There  are  exceptions,  how- 
ever, to  this  rule  among  the  Bhrigus  and  Angirasas." 
Three  out  of  the  thirteen  Gotras  of  the  Bhrigus  may 
intermarry. 

The  Brahmanas  represent  a  most  interesting  phase  in 
the  history  of  the  Indian  mind  ;  but,  judged  by  themselves 
as  literary  productions,  they  cannot  be  matched  anywhere 
for  pedantry  and  downright  absurdity.  Their  general 
character  is  marked  by  shallow  and  insipid  grandiloquence, 
by  priestly  conceit  and  antiquarian  pedantry.  They  are 
not  the  work  of  only  a  few  individuals.  The  most  modern 
differ  very  little  in  style  from  the  most  ancient ;  but  Max 
Miiller  considers  that  the  Brahmana  period  extended  over 
at  least  200  years,  viz.,  from  about  600  to  about  800  B.C. 

"  There  is  one  work  connected  with  the  Brahmana  period 
which  deserves  special  mention,  viz.,  the  Gopatha  Brdlt^ 
mana.  This  is  the  Brahmana  of  the  Brahma-veda,  the  Veda 
of  the  Artharvdngiras' f  or  the  Bhrigu-Angiras'.  This  Veda 
does  not  belong  properly  to  the  sacred  literature  of  the 
Brahmans,  and  though  in  later  times  it  obtained  the  title 
of  the  Fourth  Veda,  there  was  originally  a  broad  distinc- 
tion between  the  magic  formulas  contained  in  it  and  the 
hymns  of  the  Bahvrichas,  the  Chhandogas,  and  the 
Adhvaryus."     The  Veda  is  generally  spoken  of  by  the 


34  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

Brahmans  either  as  one,  or  as  threefold,  viz.,  the  Rich, 
the  Yajush,  and  the  Saman.  "The  duties  of  the  Hotri 
priests  are  described  in  the  Rig-veda,  those  of  the  Adhvaryu 
in  the  Yajur,  and  those  of  the  Udgdtri  in  the  Sdma-veda. 
The  duties  of  the  Brahman  and  the  sacrifices  are  contained 
in  all  three.  The  Atharva-veda,  on  the  contrary,  is  not 
used  for  the  sacrifice,  but  only  teaches  how  to  appease,  to 
bless,  to  curse,  etc.  But  though  the  hymns  of  the  Atharvans 
were  not  from  the  first  looked  upon  as  part  of  the  sacred 
literature  of  the  Brahmans,  the  Brahmana  of  the  Athar- 
vans belongs  clearly  to  the  same  literary  period  with  the 
other  Brahmanas,  and  though  it  does  not  share  the  same 
authority  with  those  of  the  three  great  Yedas,  it  is  written 
in  the  same  language  and  breathes  the  same  spirit." 

(c.)  Of  the  A'ranyakas  and  Upanishads.  The  Brah- 
manas differ  in  style  both  from  the  Sutras  and  from 
the  Mantras,  and  are  supposed  to  have  come  into  ex- 
istence at  a  period  intermediate  between  them.  But 
as  between  the  Sutras  and  the  later  Sanskrit  literature 
we  shall  find  a  connecting  link  in  the  writings  known 
under  the  name  of  Parisisthas,  so,  between  the  Brah- 
mana and  the  Sutra  periods,  we  meet  with  a  class  of 
works  of  intermediate  dates,  viz.  :  the  Aranyakas,  or 
"  Treatises  of  the  Forests."  These  were  so  called,  as  Sayana 
informs  us,  because  they  had  to  be  read  in  the  forest.  "  It 
might  almost  seem  as  if  they  were  intended  for  the  Vana- 
prasthas  only,  people  who,  after  having  performed  all  the 
duties  of  a  student  and  a  householder,  retire  from  the 
world  to  the  forest  to  end  their  days  in  the  contemplation 
of  the  Deity.     In  several  instances  the  Aranyakas  form 


THE  ARANYAKAS  AND  UPANISHADS.  35 

part  of  the  Brahmanas,  and  they  are  thus  made  to  share 
the  authority  of  Sruti,  or  revelation.  The  most  important 
Upanishads,  which  are  full  of  philosophy  and  theology, 
form  part  of  the  ^ranyakas,  and  (particularly  in  later 
times)  the  i^ranyaka  was  considered  the  quintessence  of 
the  Vedas." 

The  Xranyakas  pre-suppose  the  existence  of  the  Brah- 
manas, and  may  be  considered  as  enlargements  upon 
them.  "  The  philosophical  chapters,  known  by  the 
name  of  Upanishads,  are  almost  the  only  portion  of  Yedic 
literature  which  is  extensively  read  to  this  day.  They  are 
supposed  to  contain  the  highest  authority  on  which  the 
various  systems  of  philosophy  in  India  rest.  The  founders 
of  the  various  systems,  if  they  have  any  pretensions  to 
orthodoxy,  invariably  appeal  to  some  passage  in  the 
Upanishads  in  order  to  substantiate  their  own  reasonings." 
However,  when  none  of  the  ancient  Upanishads  could  be 
found  to  suit  their  purpose  (liberal  and  conflicting  as  they 
often  are),  the  founders  of  new  sects  had  no  scruple  and 
no  difficulty  in  composing  new  Upanishads  of  their  own. 
This  accounts  for  the  large  and  ever  increasing  number  of 
these  treatises,  the  most  modern  of  which  seem  now  to 
enjoy  the  same  authority  as  the  really  ancient  and  genuine. 
The  original  Upanishads  had  their  places  in  the  Brah- 
marias  and  Aranyakas,  but  chiefly  in  the  latter. 

The  etymology  of  the  word  TJpankliad  is  doubtful.     It 

seems,  however,  to  signify  sitting  dozen  near  somebody,  in 

order  to  listen,  or  to  meditate  and  worship  (from  vpa  +  ni 

-\-sad). 

The  names  of  the  authors  of  the  principal  Upanishads 


36  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

are  unknown.  There  are  but  ten  which  are  now  generally- 
studied  in  Bengal,  viz.,  the  Brihadaranyaka,  the  Aitareya, 
Chhandogya,  Taittiriya,  Isa,  Kena,  Katha,  Prasna,  Mun- 
daka,  and  Mandukya  ;  which  have  all  been  printed. 
Panxmohan  Pay  published  several  of  them  with  notes 
and  translations ;  and,  more  recently,  an  excellent  edition 
of  them  all  (both  text  and  commentary),  by  Dr.  Poer,  has 
appeared  in  the  volumes  of  the  Bibliotheca  Indica. 

4. — Literature  of  the  Sutra  Period. 

"The  period  of  the  Sutra  literature  of  India  extends 
from  600  to  200  B.C.,  during  which  the  Yedangas,  Anu- 
krumanis,  etc.,  were  composed.  This  was  posterior  to  the 
Mantra  and  Brahmana  periods,  and  to  that  of  the  Yedas 
generally. 

"  The  productions  of  the  Sutra  period  form  the  connecting 
link  between  the  Yedic  and  the  later  Sanskrit  literature. 
But  whilst,  on  the  one  hand,  we  must  place  several  works 
written  in  Sutras  under  the  head  of  the  post- Yedic  or 
modern  Sanskrit,  we  also  find  others  which  must  be  con- 
sidered as  the  last  productions  of  the  Yedic  age,  trespassing 
in  a  certain  degree  upon  the  frontiers  of  the  later  Sanskrit. 

"The  word  Sutra  {w%)  literally  means  'a  string;'  and 
all  the  works  written  in  this  style,  on  subjects  the  most 
various,  are  nothing  but  one  uninterrupted  string  of  short 
sentences,  twisted  together  into  the  most  concise  form. 
Shortness  is  the  great  object  of  this  style  of  composition, 
and  it  is  a  proverbial  saying  (taken  from  the  Maha- 
bhashya)  amongst  the  Pandits,  that  'an  author  rejoiceth 
in  the  economizing  of  half  a  short  vowel  as  much  as  in  the 


ANUYRITTI  AND  NIRVRITTI.  37 

birth  of  a  son.'    Every  doctrine  thus  propounded,  whether 
grammar,  metre,  law,  or  philosophy,  is  reduced  to  a  mere 
skeleton.     All  the  important  points  and  joints  of  a  system 
are  laid  open  with  the  greatest  precision  and  clearness, 
but  there  is  nothing  in  these  works  like  connection  or 
development  of  ideas.     '  Even  the  apparent  simplicity  of 
the   design/    as   Colebrooke    remarks,    '  vanishes    in   the 
perplexity  of  the  structure.     The  endless  pursuit  of  ex- 
ceptions and  limitations  so  disjoins  the  general  precepts, 
that  the  reader  cannot  keep  in  view  their  intended  con- 
nection and  mutual  relation.     He  wanders  in  an  intricate 
maze,  and  the  clew  of  the  labyrinth  is  continually  slipping 
from  his  hands."     There  is  no  life  or  meaning  in  these 
Sutras,  except  what  either   a  teacher  or  running  com- 
mentary, by  which  these  works  are  usually  accompanied, 
may  impart  to  them.     Many  of  these  works  go  even  fur- 
ther :  they  not  only  express  their  fundamental  doctrines 
in  this  concise  form  of  language,  but  they  coin  a  new  kind 
of  language,  by  which  they  succeed  in  reducing  the  whole 
system  of  their  tenets  to  mere  algebraical  formulas.     The 
key  to  this  system  is  generally  given  in  separate  Sutras, 
called  Paribhdshd,  which  a  pupil  must  know  by  heart,  or 
have  always  present  before  his  eyes,  if  he  is  to  advance 
one  step  in  the  reading  of  such  works.     But  even  then  it 
would  be  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  real  understanding 
of  the  subject,  without  being  also  in  possession  of  the  laws 
of  the  so-called  Anuvritti  and  Nirvritti. 

"  To  explain  the  meaning  of  these  technical  words,  we 
must  remember  that  the  Sutras  generally  begin  by  putting 
forward  one  proposition  (Adhikara)  which  is  never  after- 


38       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

wards  repeated,  but  always  to  be  understood,  till  a  new 
subject  of  the  same  kind  is  introduced.  After  the  state- 
ment of  a  subject,  the  author  goes  on  by  giving  a  first 
rule,  which  may  extend  its  influence  over  the  next  follow- 
ing rules,  whether  these  be  restrictions  or  amplifications 
of  it.  These  restrictive  rules  again  exercise  their  influence 
to  a  certain  extent  over  other  rules,  so  that  the  whole 
becomes  one  continuous  chain,  each  link  of  which  is  held 
and  modified  by  others,  itself  holding  to  and  modifying 
the  rest.  The  influence  of  one  rule  over  the  others  is 
called  Anuvritti,  its  cessation  Nirvritti.  Without  knowing 
the  working  of  these  two  laws,  which  can  only  be  learned 
from  commentaries,  the  Sutras  appear  very  much  confused. 
This  is  particularly  the  case  in  those  works  where  the  so- 
called  Mimansa  method  of  Piirva-paksha  (reasons  contra), 
Uttara-paksha  (reasons  pro)  and  Siddhimta  (conclusion)  is 
adopted.  Here  the  concatenation  of  pros  and  cons  is  often 
so  complicated,  and  the  reasons  on  both  sides  defended  by 
the  same  author  with  such  seriousness,  that  we  sometimes 
remain  doubtful  to  which  side  the  author  himself  leans, 
till  we  arrive  at  the  end  of  the  whole  chapter. 

"  To  introduce  and  to  maintain  such  a  species  of  literature 
was  only  possible  with  the  Indian  system  of  education, 
which  consisted  in  little  else  except  implanting  these 
Sutras  and  other  works  into  the  tender  memory  of  chil- 
dren, and  afterwards  explaining  them  by  commentaries 
and  glosses.  An  Indian  pupil  learns  these  Sutras  of 
grammar,  philosophy,  or  theology,  by  the  same  mechanical 
method  which  fixes  in  our  minds  the  alphabet  and  the 
multiplication-table;   and  those  who  enter  on  a  learned 


THE  SUTRAS,  S'RUTI  AND  SMRITI.  39 

career  spend  half  their  life  in  acquiring  and  practising 
them,  until  their  memory  is  strengthened  to  such  an  un- 
natural degree,  that  they  know  by  heart  not  only  these 
Sutras,  but  also  their  commentaries,  and  commentaries 
upon  commentaries.  Instances  of  this  are  found  among 
the  learned  in  India  up  to  the  present  day. 

"  The  numerous  Sutra  works  which  we  still  possess,  con- 
tain the  quintessence  of  all  the  knowledge  which  the 
Brahmans  had  accumulated  during  many  centuries  of 
study  and  meditation.  Though  they  are  the  works  of 
individuals,  they  owe  to  their  authors  little  more  than 
their  form ;  and  even  that  form  was,  most  likely,  the 
result  of  a  long- continued  system  of  traditional  teaching, 
and  not  the  invention  of  a  few  individuals. 

"  There  is  a  great  difference,  according  to  the  Hindus 
themselves,  between  a  work  composed  previously  to  the 
Sutra  period  and  a  Sutra  composition.  The  difference  of 
style  between  a  Brahmana  and  a  Sutra  work  (with  the 
exception  of  some  Kalpa-Sutras)  is  most  striking,  though, 
as  regards  the  grammatical  forms,  Yedic  irregularities  are, 
according  to  Sanskrit  grammarians,  allowed  in  Sutras 
also.  But  there  is  a  still  more  important  difference  besides 
that  of  style.  Literary  works  belonging  to  the  preceding 
periods,  the  Brahmanas  as  well  as  the  Mantras,  are  con- 
sidered by  Indian  theologians  as  forming  the  Sruti,  or 
divine  revelation,  in  contradistinction  to  the  Sutras  and 
all  the  rest  of  their  literature.  In  the  dogmatical  language 
of  orthodox  Hindus,  the  works  which  contain  the  Sruti 
have  not  been  composed,  but  have  only  been  seen  or  per- 
ceived by  men,   i.e.    they  have  been  revealed  to  them. 


40  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

The  Sutras,  on  the  contrary,  although  based  on  the  Sruti, 
and  therefore  in  some  instances  also  called  Srauta  Sutras, 
are  yet  avowedly  composed  by  human  authors.  Whenever 
they  appear  to  be  in  contradiction  with  the  Sruti,  their 
authority  is  at  once  overruled,  and  only  in  cases  where 
anterior  evidence  is  wanting  from  the  Sruti,  can  they  have 
any  claim  to  independent  authority. 

"This  distinction  has  ever  been  the  stronghold  of  the 
hierarchical  pretensions  of  the  Brahmans.  We  can  easily 
understand  how  a  nation  might  be  led  to  ascribe  a  super- 
human origin  to  their  ancient  national  poetry,  particularly 
if  consisting  chiefly  of  prayers  and  hymns  addressed  to  their 
gods.  But  the  reason  why  the  prose  compositions  of  the 
Brahmanas,  which  are  evidently  so  much  more  modern 
than  the  Mantras,  were  allowed  to  participate  in  the  name 
of  Sruti,  could  only  have  been  because  it  was  from  these 
theological  compositions,  and  not  from  the  simple  old 
poetry  of  the  hymns,  that  a  supposed  divine  authority 
could  be  derived  for  the  greater  number  of  the  ambitious 
claims  of  the  Brahmans.  We  can  find  no  reason  why  the 
Sutras  should  not  also  have  been  ranked  as  Sruti,  except 
the  lateness  of  their  date,  if  compared  with  the  Brah- 
manas, and  still  more  with  the  Mantras." 

The  distinction  between  Sruti  ("revelation")  and  Smriti 
("tradition")  had  been  established  by  the  Brahmans  pre- 
viously to  the  rise  of  Buddhism,  and  it  was  their  claiming 
a  divine  origin  for  the  Brahmanas  that  mainly  led  to  the 
schism  and  successful  opposition  of  Buddha. 


41 


CHAPTER  II. 

Otf  THE  DHAEMA  SASTEAS,  OE  SACEED  SCEIPTUEES, 
SUPPLEMEKTAEY  TO  THE  VEDAS. 

§  1.  Generally  Described. 

These  belong  partly  to  the  Brahmana  and  partly  to  the 
Sutra  periods  of  Sanskrit  literature,  and  consist  of : 

1. — The  Vedanta  (c(<»'"i"  ^"d?  "end,  object,  or  scope.") 

Under  this  name  there  is  an  ancient  work  in  Sanskrit, 
by  Vydsa,  or  Jaimini,  said  to  have  been  composed  above 
two  thousand  years  ago,  and  to  contain  an  abstract,  or 
quintessence,  of  all  the  Yedas  united.  This  work  is  also 
known  as  the  Purvvd  Mimdnsd,  that  is,  the  first  or  most 
ancient  enquiry,  in  opposition  to  the  Uttard  or  Brahma 
Mimdnsd,  one  of  the  Philosophical  systems.  The  great 
authorities  for  its  doctrine  are  the  works  called  the  Vedanta 
Sutra  and  the  Brahma  Sutra.  The  commentary  on  these 
by  Sankara  i^chiirya1  is  the  best.  Rammohan  Ray  pub- 
lished a  translation  of  the  Yedanta  into  Bengali,  with  an 
interesting  preface,  in  1815.  For  further  remarks  on  the 
Vedanta  and  Mimansa  doctrines,  see  the  account  of  these 
Darsanas  under  the  "  Philosophical  systems." 

1  Placed  by  Colcbrooke  at  the  beginning  of  the  9th  century. 


42       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

2.— The  Upa- Yedas  ( "^XJ,  "near,  or  joined  to,"  -f-^?). 

These  supplementary  Yedas  are  said  to  be  immediately 
deduced  from  the  Yedas  themselves.  They  are  four  in 
number. 

The  first,  called  the  Xjus  (W^TEC  or  ^T^t  "age"),  is  said 
to  have  been  delivered  by  Brahma,  Indra,  Dhanvantari  and 
five  other  deities,  and  comprises  the  theory  of  diseases  and 
medicines,  with  the  practical  methods  of  treating  bodily 
disorders. 

The  second,  viz.,  the  Gandharvva  (^F^nf  "a  celestial  min- 
strel") a  treatise  on  music,  was  composed  by  Bharata. 

The  third,  called  the  Bhanus  (^T«J^or  ^I«J  "a  bow"),  on 
the  fabrication  and  use  of  arms  and  implements  employed 
by  the  Kshatriya  caste,  was  written  by  Yisvamitra. 

The  fourth,  called  the  Sthdpatya  (^TOST  "guard  of  the 
women's  apartments"),  or  the  Silpa  (fl^T  "a  mechanical 
art"),  was  revealed  by  Yisvamitra  also,  in  various  trea- 
tises on  sixty-four  mechanical  arts,  for  the  improvement 
of  such  as  exercise  them. 

'Of  the  more  minute  contents  of  the  above  works,  we 
have  as  yet  no  accurate  information.  Indeed  it  is  believed 
that  they  are  now  lost. 

Upon  Music,  as  forming  part  of  the  religion  of  the 
Hindus,  there  is  a  treatise  by  Sir  William  Jones. 

3. — Tiie  Vedangas  (<f<S  \^'y  "member  of  the  Veda.") 

These  are  considered  as  in  some  sense  a  subordinate 
part  of  the  Yedas.  Six  sciences  are  treated  of  in  them, 
viz. : — 


THE  VEDANGAS.  43 

1.  Sikshd    (fui^O,1  or  the  science  of  pronunciation  and 

articulation. 

2.  Chhandas  (g^*0>  prosody,  by  the  Muni  Pingala. 

3.  Vydkarana  (<*n«HVU'),  or  grammar,  by  three  Rishis. 

4.  Nirukta  (f^H£3f),  or  the  explanation  of  difficult  or 

obscure  words  and  phrases  that  occur  in  the  Yedas. 

5.  Kalpa  («B^T),  an  account  of  religious  ceremonies. 

6.  Jyotisha    (33ftf?R),    on   astronomy  or  astrology,  by 

Surya. 

4.— The  Upangas  (\Jm^  "additional  limbs"). 

These  are  four  in  number,  viz.,  the  Pur  ana,  or  history ; 
the  Nydya,  or  logic ;  the  Mimdnsd,  or  moral  philosophy ; 
and  the  Dharma  Sdstra,  or  jurisprudence. 

§  2.  Particular  Description  of  the  Veddngas. 

The  Siksha  and  Chhandas  are  considered  necessary  for 
reading  the  Veda ;  the  Yyakarana  and  Nirukta  for  under- 
standing it;  and  the  Jyotisha  and  Kalpa  for  employing 
it  at  sacrifices. 

1.  The  Sikshd. — Max  Midler  thinks  that  the  rules  of 
Sikshd  were  formerly  embodied  in  the  work  called  the 
Taittinya  Aranyaka,  and  perhaps  also  in  the  Brahmanas, 
though  they  afterwards  lost  their  place  there.  This  he 
accounts  for  by  the  appearance,  subsequently,  of  more 
scientific  treatises  on  the  same  subjects,  treated  more 
systematically,  viz. : 

(a)   The  Prdtisdkhyas.      The   origin   of  these   he  thus 

1  A  desiderative  from  ^j  ('Ho  be  able"),  meaning  literally  a  "desire  to 
know."     Hence  also,  IJTrfi;  "a  teacber." 


44  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

describes  :  "  During  the  Brahmana  period  the  songs  of  the 
Veda  were  preserved  by  oral  tradition  only :  and  as  the 
spoken  language  of  India  had  advanced  and  left  the  idiom 
of  the  Yeda  behind  as  a  sort  of  antique  and  sacred  utterance, 
it  was  difficult  to  preserve  the  proper  pronunciation  of  the 
sacred  hymns  without  laying  down  certain  rules  on  metre, 
accent,  and  pronunciation  in  general.  The  necessity,  how- 
ever, of  such  a  provision  could  hardly  have  been  felt 
until  certain  differences  had  actually  arisen  in  different 
seats  of  Brahmanic  learning.  Thus,  when  the  attempt 
was  made  to  prevent  a  further  corruption,  a  certain  num- 
ber of  local  varieties  in  accent  and  pronunciation,  and  in 
the  recital  of  the  hymns,  had  actually  crept  in  and  become 
sanctioned  by  the  tradition  of  different  families  and  schools. 
We  find  in  the  Brahmanas  occasional  mention  of  verses 
which,  if  improperly  pronounced,  become  changed  in 
meaning." 

"  In  the  Pratisakhyas,  the  rules  and  exceptions  of  the 
old  sacred  dialect  were  first  reduced  to  a  system.  The 
real  object  of  the  Pratisakhyas  was  not  to  teach  the 
grammar  of  the  old  sacred  language;  they  are  never 
called  Vydkaranas  (grammars),  and  it  is  only  incidentally 
that  they  allude  to  strictly  grammatical  questions.  The 
perfect  phonetic  system  on  which  Panini's  Grammar  is 
built  is  no  doubt  taken  from  the  Pratisakhyas ;  but  the 
source  of  Panini's  strictly  grammatical  doctrines  must  be 
looked  for  elsewhere."  This  work,  though  ascribed  to  one 
author,  must  have  required  ages  of  observation  and  collec- 
tion before  its  plan  could  be  conceived  or  carried  out  by 
one  individual. 


THE  SAKHAS  AND  PRATISAKHYAS.  45 

(b.)  The  Sdkhds  were  recensions  of  the  different  Yedas,  and 
originally  there  appear  to  have  been  several  of  each  Yeda ; 
but  these  differed  from  one  another,  not  in  the  general 
arrangement  of  the  Sanhitd,  or  collection  of  hymns,  but 
merely  in  single  words  or  phrases.  In  a  few  cases  only, 
one  Sakha  contains  some  hymns  more  than  another.  Only 
in  a  few  instances  have  different  Sakhas  of  the  same  Yeda 
been  preserved  in  manuscripts.  Of  the  Rig-veda,  for  in- 
stance, only  one  MS.  Sakha  is  now  extant,  viz.,  the  Sdkala- 
Sdkhd.  Each  Sakha  had  probably  its  Prdtisdkhya.  Sau- 
naka's  Pratisakhya  of  the  Sakala,  being  one  of  the  latest 
compositions  of  the  kind,  was  probabfy  also  the  most 
perfect.  Though  only  one  Pratisakhya  belonging  to  each 
Yeda  has  been  found  in  MS.,  yet  they  all  belong,  not  to 
one  of  the  four  Yedas  in  general,  but  to  one  Sakha  of  each 
of  them.  Panini's  Sikshd  (rules  of  pronunciation)  applies 
to  all  the  Yedas  in  general.  The  Pratisakhyas  give  these 
rules  as  applied  to  each  Sakha. 

The  term  Sakha  (literally  "  branch")  has  been  erro- 
neously used  by  some  writers  in  the  sense  of  a  "school," 
or  of  a  "portion  of  the  Yeda."  The  proper  meaning, 
however,  says  Max  Muller,  is  "  Traditional  text  (recension) 
of  the  Yeda."  "  The  word  is  sometimes  applied  to  the 
three  original  Sanhltds,  the  Eig-veda,  the  Yajur-veda, 
and  the  Sama-veda  Sanhita,  in  their  relation  to  one 
another,  and  without  any  reference  to  subordinate  Sakhas 
belonging  to  each  of  them.  They  may  be  called  the 
original  branches  or  the  three  stems  of  the  Yeda-tree,  each 
of  them  branching  off  again  in  a  number  of  other  Sdkhds. 
The  '  branches,'  as  Kumarila  says,  have  all  the  same  root, 


46       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

revelation  (Sruti),  and  they  bear  all  the  same  fruit,  the 
sacrifice  (kannan).     If  otherwise,  they  would  be  different 

trees,   not  different  branches More   frequently, 

however,  Sakha  is  used  to  signify  the  various  editions,  or, 
more  properly,  the  various  traditions,  that  branched  off 
from  each  of  the  three  original  branches  of  the  Yeda.  In 
this  latter  sense,  Sdkhd  seems  sometimes  synonymous  with 
Charana.  But  there  was  originally  an  important  difference 
in  the  meaning  of  these  two  terms." 

(c.)  The  Char  anas.  Sakha  means  originally  a  literary 
work ;  Charana,  a  school  or  collection  of  readers.  Accord- 
ingly we  meet  with  such  expressions  as  Sdkhdm  adhite 
(\m<Sl^  ^nft^),  "he  reads  a  certain  edition  of  the  Yeda," 
but  never  Charanam  adhite  (^TTJTI  ^>41d),  "  he  reads  a 
Charana" 

"  If  Sakha  is  sometimes  used  in  the  sense  of  Charana  or 
sect,  this  is  because  in  India  the  Sakhas  existed,  in  reality, 
not  as  written  books,  but  only  in  the  tradition  of  the 
Charanas,  each  member  of  a  Charana  representing  and 
embodying  what,  in  our  modern  times,  we  should  call  the 
copy  of  a  book.  Women,  even,  are  mentioned  as  belonging 
to  a  Charana.  A  Sakha,  which  is  always  a  portion  of  the 
Sruti,  cannot  properly  include  law  books.  But  followers  of 
certain  Sakhas  might  well,  in  the  course  of  time,  adopt  a 
code  of  laws  which,  as  it  was  binding  on  their  Charana 
only,  would  naturally  go  by  the  name  of  their  Charana. 
Thus  the  Pratisakkjras  also  were  called  by  the  name  of  the 
Charanas,  because  they  were  the  exclusive  property  of  the 
readers  of  certain  Sakhas,  and  even  more  so  than  the 
Kuladharmas,  or  family  laws. 


THE  CHARANAS  AND  PARISHADS.  47 

"As  a  Sakha  consisted  of  a  Sanhita  as  well  as  a  Brah- 
mana,  differences  in  the  text  of  the  hymns,  as  well  as  in 
the  Brahmanas,  might  lead  to  the  establishment  of  new 
Charanas,  founded  as  they  were  on  sacred  texts  peculiar  to 
themselves.  But,  although  we  cannot  doubt  that  there 
was  an  original  difference  between  Sakha  and  Charana,  it 
is  certain  that  these  two  words  were  frequently  used 
synonymously,  just  as  we  may  speak  of  the  Jews  when  we 
mean  the  Old  Testament,  or  of  the  Koran  when  we  mean 
the  Mahommedans." 

(d.)  The  Parshada  and  Parishads.  As  the  terms  Sakha 
and  Charana  are  frequently  confounded,  so  also  are  those 
of  Parshada  and  Pratisakhya. 

"  Though  every  Pratisakhya  may  be  called  a  Parshada 
(i.e.  a  word  belonging  to  a  Parishad)  not  every  Parshada 
can  be  called  a  Pratisakhya.  Amara  (the  great  Hindu 
lexicographer)  explains  Parishad  by  Sabhd  or  Goshthi,  "an 
assembly."  But  in  Manu's  code  of  laws,  and  elsewhere, 
we  have  the  more  definite  application  of  the  term.  Ac- 
cording to  these  writers,  a  Parishad  ought  to  consist  of 
twenty-one  Brahmans  well  versed  in  philosophy,  theology, 
and  law.  It  was  such  an  assembly  as  should  be  competent 
to  give  decisions  on  all  points  on  which  the  people  generally 
might  demand  advice.  That  such  Parishads  or  Brahmanic 
settlements  existed  in  olden  times,  is  certain  from  our 
reading  in  the  Vrihadaranyaka,  for  instance,  that  "Swe- 
taketu  went  to  the  Parishad  of  the  Panchalas,"  and  many 
similar  passages.  Parasara  says,  "Pour,  or  even  three 
able  men  from  among  the  Brahmans  in  a  village,  who  know 
the  Yeda  and  keep  the  sacrificial  fire,  form  a  Parishad" 


48  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

"  The  real  difference  between  a  Charana  and  a  Parishad 
seems  to  be  that  the  former  signifies  an  ideal  succession  of 
teachers  and  pupils  who  learn  and  teach  a  certain  branch 
of  the  Yeda ;  while  the  latter  means  a  settlement  of  Brah- 
mans,  a  community  or  college,  to  which  members  of  any 
Charana  might  belong.  Thus  the  members  of  the  same 
Charana  might  belong  to  different  Parishads,  and  of  the 
same  Parishad  to  different  Charanas. 

(e.)  The  Kula-dharmas,  or  Law  Books,  could  not  be 
called  Pratisakhyas,  but  they  might  claim  the  title  of 
Charanas  or  Parshadas.  "  These  Dharma  Sdstras,  as  we  now 
possess  them,  betray  their  comparatively  modern  origin 
by  their  form  and  metre,  and  occasionally  by  their  matter 
also.  They  were  probably  made  up  only  in  order  to  fill 
up  the  gap  which  had  been  occasioned  by  the  loss  of 
ancient  law  books.  This  loss  was  felt  the  more  severely 
because  the  names  of  the  old  authors  retained  their  cele- 
brity, and  were  still  quoted  in  common  practice  and  courts 
of  law.  Large  portions  of  the  Kula-dharmas  are  written 
in  Sutras,  as  might  be  expected  in  works  contemporaneous 
with  the  Pratisakhyas.  It  has  been  thought  that  the 
sources  of  Manu's,  and  other  Dharma  Sastras,  must  be 
looked  for  in  the  Grihya-Sutras.  This  is  not  quite  correct. 
The  Grihya-Sutras  are  concerned  chiefly  with  the  Sa?iskdras, 
or  domestic  sacraments,  extending  from  the  birth  to  the 
marriage  of  a  man ;  and  in  so  far  only  as  these  sacraments 
form  a  portion  of  the  subjects  treated  of  in  the  Dharma 
Sastras,  the  Grihya-Sutras  might  be  considered  as  their 
original  sources.  By  far  the  greater  portion  of  these 
Dharma-Sastras,  or  codes  of  law,  is  taken  up  with  i^chara, 


MANU.     THE  CHHANDAS.  49 

i.e.  laws,  manners  and  customs,  and  especially  the  duties 
to  be  performed  by  an  individual  on  bis  own  behalf.  They 
are  of  great  importance  for  forming  a  correct  view  of  the 
old  state  of  society  in  India,  and  the  loss  of  the  larger 
number  of  them  is  greatly  to  be  regretted." 

"  The  Manava-dharma-S&stra,  the  law  book  of  the  Ma- 
navas,  a  subdivision  of  the  sect  of  the  Taittirij^as,  or,  as  it  is 
commonly  called,  the  '  Laws  of  Manu/  l  is  almost  the  only 
work  in  Sanskrit  literature,"  observes  Max  Midler,  "  which, 
as  yet,  has  not  been  assailed  by  those  who  doubt  the  an- 
tiquity of  everything  Indian.  No  historian  has  disproved 
its  claim  to  that  early  date  which  had  from  the  first  been 
assigned  to  it  by  Sir  William  Jones.  It  must  be  confessed, 
however,  that  his  proofs  of  the  antiquity  of  this  code 
cannot  be  considered  as  conclusive,  and  no  sufficient  argu- 
ments have  been  brought  forward  to  substantiate  any  of 
the  different  dates  ascribed  to  Manu,  as  the  author  of  our 
Law-Book,  which  vary,  according  to  different  writers, 
from  880  to  1280  B.C." 

2.  The  Chliandas,  or  Prosody,  which  is  reckoned  the 
second  part  of  the  Vedangas,  stands  very  much  in  the 
same  position  as  the  Siksha.  Some  names  which  have 
been  afterwards  adopted  as  the  technical  designations  of 
metres,  occur  in  some  of  the  Mantras  of  the  Rig-veda, 
and  there  are  frequent  allusions  to  metres  in  the  Brah- 
ma i;.as.     What  is  said  in  the  Brahmanas,  however,  on  this 

1  Ma inu  called  also  Swayambhdva  (or  the  "self-existent")  is  affirmed  in  the 
jhtrdnas  to  have  been  the  son  of  Brahma,  and  one  of  the  earliest  progenitors 
of  mankind.  Ee  is  said  also  to  have  been  the  preserver  of  the  Vedaa  at  the 
time  of  the  Hindu  deluge,  and  to  have  given  an  abstract  of  the  contents  of 
those  books  in  the  famous  work  known  as  the  Institutes  of  Manu,  first  trans- 
lated into  English  by  Sir  William  Jones. 


50  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

subject  is  in  general  so  full  of  dogmatic  and  mystical 
ingredients  as  to  be  of  scarcely  any  practical  use.  In  the 
Aranyakas  and  Upanishads  whole  chapters  are  devoted  to 
prosody.  But  it  is  in  the  Sutras  of  the  Chhandas  only 
that  a  real  attempt  has  been  made  to  arrange  these  archaic 
metres  systematically. 

"  The  work  of  Pingalanaga  on  Chhandas,  which  is  most 
frequently  quoted  under  the  title  of  Yedanga,  does  not 
pretend  to  be  of  greater  antiquity  than  the  Mahdbhdshya, 
if  it  be  admitted  that  Patanjali,  the  author  of  this  famous 
commentary  on  Panini,  was  the  same  as  Pingala."  This 
work  is  one  of  the  latest  that  could  possibly  be  included 
in  the  Sutra  period,  and  to  that  it  probably  belonged. 
Pingala,  at  any  rate,  is  quoted  as  an  authority  in  the  Pari- 
sishtas,  a  class  of  literature  which  does  not  seem  to  be 
separated  from  that  period  by  a  long  interval. 

Two  other  works  on  Chhandas  (also,  like  Pingala's,  not 
restricted  to  certain  Sakhas,  but  intended  for  the  Yeda  in 
general)  are  referred  to  by  the  commentator  on  the  Sdkala- 
Prdtisdkhya,  the  one  ascribed  to  Ydska  and  the  other  to 
Saitava.     But  neither  work  appears  to  be  extant  now. 

3.  VydJcarana,  or  Grammar,  forms  the  third  Yedanga. 
According  to  Indian  authors,  this  branch  of  Ycdic  learning 
would  be  represented  by  the  grammar  of  Panini.  But  in 
that  celebrated  work  "the  rules  which  refer  to  Yedic  gram- 
mar in  particular,  form  only  the  exceptions  to  those  which 
are  applicable  to  the  regular  or  classical  language.  In- 
stead, therefore,  of  considering  the  third  Yedanga  doctrine 
as  represented  by  grammarians  beginning  with  Panini 
("TT'fiin'Sn^r),  as  Indian  writers   do,   it  would   be  more 


PANINI.     THE  NIRUKTA.  51 

correct  to  say  that  it  is  represented  by  the  grammarians 
ending  with  Panini  (tTTftpftrn)-  Panini's  work,  however, 
by  its  merits,  acquired  such  a  celebrity  as  to  supersede 
almost  all  that  had  been  written  on  the  subject  before  him  ; 
so  that,  except  the  names  and  some  particular  rules  of 
former  grammarians,  we  have  little  left  of  this  branch  of 
literature,  except  what  occurs  occasionally  in  the  Prati- 
sakkyas.  And,  by  a  comparison  of  Panini's  Sutras  with 
those  of  the  Pratisakkyas,  it  is  evident  that  he  largely 
availed  himself  of  the  works  of  his  predecessors,  frequently 
adopting  their  very  expressions,  though  he  quotes  their 
names  but  rarely,  and  only  as  authorities  for  special  rules. 
There  are  two  separate  treatises  on  grammatical  subjects 
which  belong  to  a  period  anterior  to  Panini,  viz.  the  Sutras 
on  the  Undcli  (^*mfc^)  affixes,  and  the  Sutras  of  Sdntan- 
dchdrya  on  accents.  The  Unadi  affixes  are  those  by  which 
nouns  are  formed  from  roots.  They  are  so  called  because 
in  the  Sutras,  as  we  now  possess  them,  un  (^^)  is  the 
first  mentioned  affix."  We  do  not  know  by  whom  those 
Sutras  were  first  composed.  They  seem  to  have  been 
originally  intended  for  the  Yeda  only,  but  afterwards 
enlarged  by  the  addition  of  rules  for  the  formation  of  non- 
Veda  (Bhasha)  words.  It  is  uncertain  to  what  exact 
period  the  Phitsiitras  of  Sunt  ana  belong." 

4.  Nirukta,  or  Etymology,  is  the  fourth  Yedanga.  This, 
like  the  Yyakarana,  is  represented  by  but  one  work, 
generally  known  by  the  name,  Ydskas  Nirukta.  lie  seems 
to  have  been  one  of  the  last  authors  who  embodied  the 
etymological  lexicograph)^  of  Vedic  terms  (to  which  it 
exclusively  refers)  in  one  separate  work.     Other  previous 


HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITEEATURE. 

Niruktaras  (or  authors  of  Niruktas)  are  mentioned  by 
Faska,  some  of  whom  must  have  been  as  famous  as 
himself,  and  are  likewise  referred  to  in  the  Puranas.  The 
Brahmanas  contain  very  rich  materials  for  etymologies 
and  synonymous  expressions;  and,  with  the  exception  of 
the  Kalpa,  no  oilier  Vedanga  has  a  better  claim  than  the 
Nirukta  to  be  considered  as  founded  on  the  Brahmanas. 
Ydska's  Nirukta  (which  is  commonly  distinguished  by  the 
name  of  Nighantu)  and  Ydska's  Commentary  on  the  Nirukta 
were  two  separate  works,  though  often  confounded.  The 
Nirukta  consists  of  three  parts,  viz.,  the  Naighantuka,  the 
Naigama,  and  the  Baivata. 

The  word  Nighantu  applies  to  works  where,  for  most 

part,  synonymous  terms  are  taught.     Ten  Nighantus  are 

usually  mentioned,  including  the  works  of  Amara-Sinha, 

Vaipiyaiiti,    llalayudha,    etc.       Hence   the    first    part    of 

Nirukta   is   called  Naighantuka,  comprising  the 

oral  thnc  Adhy&yaB.     Nigama  means  Yeda,  and,  as  in  the 

Beoond  part,  words  are  taught  which  usually  occur  in  the 

v« d;i  only,  the  title  of  Naigama  (the  fourth  Adhyaya)  is 

given  to  it.     The  Daivata  (the  fifth  Adhyaya)  is  so  named 

from  its  treating  of  the  gods  l^TT),  viz.,  of  the  earth,  of 

tli"  aii,  and  of  the  sky.     The  whole  work,  consisting  of 

Ldhyayas   (or  chapters)   and   three  parts,  is  called 

Nirukta   fawifi  ,  because  the  meaning  of  words  is  given  there 

ctive  of  anything  else  :  from  wreath,  "to  explain." 

Kaipa,  or        i       woroa/.— This  is  the  fifth  and  most 

complete  of  the  Vedangas,  lor  which  we  have  not  only  the 

the  (lilleivni  Vedas,  hut,  also  their  respective 

•N|'!i  "The  Sutras  contain  the  rules  referring-  to  the 


THE  KALPA  SUTRAS.  5^ 

Sacrifices,  with,  the  omission  of  all  things  which  are  not 
immediately  connected  with  the  performance  of  the  cere- 
monial. They  are  more  practical  than  the  Brahmanas, 
which,  for  most  part,  are  taken  up  with  mystical,  historical, 
mythological,  etymological,  and  theological  discussions." 
Orthodox  Brahmans  do  not  admit  that  Brahmanas  and 
Sutras  belong  to  the  same  class  of  literature.  The  former 
was  Sruti,  the  latter  Smriti.  Originally  a  Brahmana  was  a 
theological  tract,  and  was  called  so,  not  because  it  treated  of 
the  Brahman,  the  Supreme  Spirit,  or  of  sacrificial  prayers, 
but  because  it  was  composed  by  and  for  Brahmans.  These 
Brahmanas  were  gradually  collected  in  different  families, 
or  Pari  shads,  and  gave  rise  to  greater  works,  which  were 
equally  called  Brahmanas.  The  Sutras  were  later  compo- 
sitions, in  which  the  Brahmanas  were  more  systematically 
arranged. 

"  The  Kalpa  Sutras  follow  the  same  system  as  the  Brah- 
manas. They  pre- suppose,  however,  not  only  the  existence 
of  three  distinct  collections  of  Brahmanas,  but  of  different 
Sakhas,  or  recensions,  which  in  the  course  of  time  had 
branched  off  from  each  of  them."  The  Kalpa  Sutras  were 
composed  contemporaneously  with  Panini,  and  even  after 
his  time.  They  form  a  kind  of  grammar  of  the  Yedic  cere- 
monials, useful  for  the  members  of  all  Charanas,  recording 
the  duties  of  the  different  orders  of  priests,  viz.  the  Hotri, 
Adhvarya,  and  Udgdtri. 

There  were  two  other  classes  of  Sutras,  forming  a  sort 
of  appendices  to  the  Kalpa  Sutras,  and  belonging  to  the 
same  branch  of  literature  with  the  Srauta  Sutras,  but  in 
distinction  from  them  included  under  the  title  of  Smarta 


54       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

Sutras,  as  deriving  their  authority  from  Smriti,  or  im- 
memorial tradition,  the  others  being  founded  on  the  Sruti, 
i.e.  the  Mantras  and  Brahmanas.  These  additional  Sutras 
were  called  the  Grihya  and  the  Samayacharika.  The 
orrihya  Sutras  describe  the  ceremonies  to  be  performed  by 
the  married  householder,  chiefly  for  the  benefit  of  his 
family.  The  Samayacharika  rules  were  those  to  be  ob- 
served by  the  rising  generation,  and  which  should  regulate 
the  various  relations  of  every-day  life.  It  is  chiefly  in  the 
Samayacharika,  or,  as  they  are  sometimes  called,  Dliarma 
Sutras,  that  we  have  to  look  for  the  originals  of  the  later 
metrical  law  books,  such  as  Manu,  Ydjnavalkya,  Pardsara, 
and  the  rest. 

Grihya  probably  meant  originally  "the  house,"  or  "the 
family  hearth,"  from  griha,  "a  house"  (which,  however, 
some  Hindu  commentators  say  means  also  "a  wife") ;  and 
it  was  in  opposition  to  the  great  sacrifices,  for  which  several 
hearths  were  required  (and  therefore  called  Vaitdnika), 
that  the  domestic  ceremonies  were  called  Grihya,  as  per- 
formed hj  means  of  the  one  domestic  fire. 

The  Sdmaydcharika  Sutras  are  interesting  on  accoimt  of 
the  light  which  they  throw  on  the  every-day  life  of  early 
Brahmans. 

G.  Jyotisha,  or  Astronomy. — This  was  the  sixth  and  last 
of  the  Vedangas.  Its  literature  is  very  scanty,  and  the 
small  treatise,  usually  quoted  as  "  the  Jyotisha,"  belongs 
to  the  same  class  of  works  as  the  Sikshd.  Colebrooke 
speaks  of  different  Jyotishas  for  each  Yeda,  and  he  calls 
one,  which  has  a  commentary,  the  Jyotisha  of  the  Eig- 
veda.      Among   his   MSS.,   however   (at  the  East  India 


THE  JYOTISHA.    THE  PAEIS'ISHTAS.  5g 

House),  there  is  but  one  work  of  this  kind.  This  tract  is 
later  than  the  Sutra  period,  and  we  possess  as  yet  no  work 
on  ancient  astronomy  composed  in  the  style  of  the  early 
Sutras.  The  doctrines  it  propounds  represent  the  earliest 
stage  of  Hindu  astronomy.  Its  object,  however,  is  not  to 
teach  that  science,  but  merely  to  convey  such  knowledge 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  as  was  necessary  for  fixing  the  days 
and  hours  of  the  Yedic  sacrifices.  It  was  the  establish- 
ment of  a  sacred  calendar  which,  in  India,  as  elsewhere, 
gave  the  first  impulse  to  astronomical  studies. 

"  The  fact,"  as  Max  Midler  observes,  "  that  the  name 
of  the  moon  is  the  same  in  Sanskrit,  Greek,  and  German, 
and  that  it  is  derived  from  a  root  which  originally  means 
"to  measure,"  shows  that  even  before  the  separation  of 
the  Indo-European  family,  the  moon  had  been  looked 
upon  as  the  chief  means  of  measuring  time.  And  the  closi 
connexion  between  the  names  of  moon  and  month  pi 
that  a  certain  knowledge  of  lunar  chronology  existed 
during  the  same  early  period."  In  the  Rig-veda  allusion 
is  even  made  to  a  thirteenth  or  intercalary  month. 

5.— The  Pauis'ishtas. 

This  is  a  class  of  works  intimately  connected  with  the 
Sutra  period,  although  evidently  of  a  somewhat  later  date 
than  the  Sutras,  and,  as  the  very  name [  implies,  of  S( •<•«  >n<larv 
importance.  They  have,  however,  a  character  of  their 
own,  and  they  represent  a  distinct  period  of  Hindu  litera- 
ture, which,  though  it  shows  clear  traces  of  intellectual 

"*rPCf^'5>  "  B  supplement,"  trapa\cnr6fji(va. 


56  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

and  literary  degeneracy,  is  not  to  be  altogether  overlooked 
in  a  work  like  this. 

Some  of  the  Parisishtas  profess  to  be  composed  by 
authors  whose  names,  doubtless,  belong  to  the  Stitra 
period.  Thus,  Saunaka  is  said  to  have  been  the  author  of 
the  Ckaranavy  aha,  Katyayana  of  the  Chhandoga-parisishta, 
and  Kusika,  known  as  the  writer  of  the  Atharvana  Sutras, 
is  the  reputed  author  of  the  Atharvana-parisishtas  also. 
The  style  of  these  compositions  is  less  concise  than  that  of 
the  Sutras,  resembling  more  that  of  the  Barhaddaivata 
and  Rig-vidhana,  works  originally  composed  by  Saunaka, 
but  handed  down  to  us  apparently  in  a  more  modern  form. 
They  do  not,  however,  exhibit  that  monotonous  uniformity 
which  we  find  in  the  Dharma  Sastra  of  Manu,  or  in  the 
later  Puranas.  The  simple  Anushtubh  Sloka  preponderates 
in  them,  and  the  metre  is  more  regular  than  that  of  the 
Anushtubh  compositions  of  Saunaka,  the  genuineness  of 
which  is  less  doubtful.  The  Parisishtas,  therefore,  seem 
to  belong  to  the  Yedic  age,  but  may  be  considered  as  the 
very  last  outskirts  of  Yedic  literature.  There  is  a  collec- 
tion of  Parisishtas  for  each  Yeda,  eighteen  being  attributed 
to  the  Yajur-Yeda,  and  seventy-four  to  the  Atharvana. 
The  Pig-  and  Sama-Yedas  seem  not  to  have  had  so  many, 
but  their  number  is  uncertain.  They  are  said  to  have  been 
written  in  the  form  of  dialogues,  in  a  style  similar  to  that 
of  the  Puranas.  It  is  remarkable  that  Panini  seems  not  to 
have  known  the  Parisishtas  even  by  name. 


PAET   II. 
PHILOSOPHICAL    LITERATURE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ON  THE   SIX    DARSANAS    IjS"    GENERAL,   AND   THE 
NYXYA.  AM)  YAIS'ESHIKA  IN  PARTICULAR1 

§  1.  The  Schools  Enumerated  and  Analysed. 

The  Hindus  have  six  schools  or  systems  of  Philosophy 
(^r«r),  viz.,  the  Nydya,  Vaiseshika,  Sdnkhya,  Yoga,  Ve- 
ddnta,  and  Mimdnsd  Darsana.2 

The  Yaiseshika  being  in  some  sort  supplementary  to 
the  Nyaya,  the  two  are  familiarly  spoken  of  as  one  col- 
lective system  under  the  name  of  Nydya ;  and  as  the  case  is 

1  The  authorities  chiefly  quoted  from,  in  this  and  two  subsequent  chapti  rs, 
are  "Ward  on  the  Hindoos,"  and  Dr.  Ballantyne's  prize  essay  "Christianity 
contrasted  with  Hindu  Philosophy." 

2  It  is  the  professed  design  of  all  the  schools  of  Indian  Philosophy  to 

the  method  by  which  eternal  beatitude  (the  supreme  good)  may  be  attained, 
either  after  death  or  before  it.  The  path  by  which  the  soul  is  to  arrive  ai 
this  supreme  felicity  is  science,  or  knowledge.  The  discovery,  and  the  Betting 
forth  of  the  means  by  which  this  knowledge  may  be  obtained,  is  the  objecl  of 
the  various  treatises  and  commentaries  which  Hindu  Philosophy  has  produced. 
M.  Cousin  (in  his  "  Cours  de  l'Histoire  de  la  Philosophic " )  endeavours  to 
trace  among  the  Hindu  Philosophers,  the  Sensualism,  the  [dealism,  the 
Scepticism,  the  Fatalism,  and  the  Mysticism  of  the  ancient  Grecian  am;  i 
European  Schools. 


58  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

somewhat  similar  with  the  two  other  pairs,  it  is  customary 
to  speak  of  Hindu  Philosophy  as  being  divisible  into  the 
Nydya,  the  Sdnkhya,  and  the  Veddnta  Schools.  These 
three  systems,  if  we  follow  the  commentators,  differ  more 
in  appearance  than  in  reality,  and  hence  they  are,  each  in 
its  degree,  viewed  with  a  certain  amount  of  favour  by 
orthodox  Hindus.  Their  common  bond  of  union  is  their 
implicit  acceptance  of  the  Vedas — as  among  Christians 
the  Bible — which,  however,  they  explain  differently.  In 
this  respect,  and  on  this  ground,  they  unite  in  opposing 
Buddhism,  which  denies  the  authority  of  the  Yedas. 

These  three  systems  differ  from  one  another  in  the 
several  points  of  view  from  which  they  regard  the  universe, 
— or  things  in  general, — as  standing  in  relation  severally 
to  sensation,  emotion,  and  intellection. 

"  The  Naiyayika,  founding  on  the  fact  that  we  have 
various  sensations,  enquires  what,  and  how  many,  are  the 
channels  through  which  such  varied  knowledge  flows  in  ? 
Finding  that  there  are  five  very  different  channels,  he 
imagines  five  different  externals  adapted  to  these.  Hence, 
his  theory  of  the  five  elements — the  aggregate  of  what 
the  Nyaya  regards  as  the  causes  of  affliction. 

"  The  Sdnkhya,  struck  with  the  fact  that  we  have 
emotions — with  an  eye  to  the  question  whence  our  impres- 
sions come — enquires  their  quality.  Are  they  pleasing, 
displeasing,  or  indifferent  ?  These  three  qualities  constitute, 
for  him,  the  external ;  and  to  their  aggregate  he  gives  the 
name  of  Nature  (TTlffTf). 

"  With  the  Naiyayika  he  agrees  in  wishing  that  we 
were  well  rid  of  all  three,  holding  that  things  pleasing, 


THE  NYA'YA.     GAUTAMA.  .,.1 

and  things  indifferent,  are  not  less  incompatible  with 
man's  chief  end  than  things  positively  displeasing. 

"  Thus,  while  the  Nydya  .allows  to  the  external  a  sub- 
stantial existence,  the  Sankhya  admits  its  existence  only 
as  an  aggregate  of  qualities.  While  both  allow  that  it 
really  (eternally  and  necessarily)  exists. 

"  The  Veddntin,  rising  above  the  question  as  to  what  is 
pleasing,  displeasing,  or  indifferent,  asks  simply  what  is 
and  what  is  not.  The  categories  are  here  reduced  to  two 
— the  Real  and  the  Unreal.  The  categories  of  the  Ny&ya 
and  the  Sankhya  were  merely  scaffolding  for  reaching  this 
pinnacle  of  Philosophy.  The  implied  foundation  was  in 
all  respects  the  same,  viz.,  the  Veda."  1 

Thus  the  Ny&ya  is  conveniently  introductory  to  the 
Sankhya,  and  the  Sankhya  to  the  Vedanta.  And  it  is  in 
this  order  that  in  Hindu  schools,  where  all  three  are  taught, 
the  learner  usually  takes  them  up.  The  Nyaya  is  the 
exoteric  doctrine,  the  Sankhya  a  step  nearer  what  is  held 
as  truth,  and  the  Yedanta  the  esoteric  doctrine,  or  the 
naked  truth. 

§  2.  As  to  the  Founder  of  the  Nydya  School. 

The  Nyaya  system  was  originally  concocted  by  Gau- 
tama, of  whose  personal  history,  however,  but  very  lit  th- 
is known.  From  the  Ramiiyana  and  the  Pur&nas  we  I  eun 
that  he  was  born  at  Himalaya,  about  the  same  time  as 
Rama,  i.e.,  at  the  commencement  of  the  Tretd  \  \x% 
second  age  of  the  world);  that  he  married  Ahalya,  the 

1  Ballantyne'e  Essay. 


60  IIANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

daughter  of  Brahma,  and  afterwards  cursed  her  on  account 
of  criminal  intercourse  with  Indra,  the  king  of  the  gods. 
He  is  said  to  have  lived  as  a  very  austere  ascetic,  first  at 
Pryaga  (now  Allahabad),  then  in  a  forest  at  Mithila 
(Muttra),  and  latterly  (after  the  repudiation  of  his  wife) 
in  the  Himalayan  mountains.  His  son,  Satananda,  was 
priest  to  Janaka,  King  of  Mithila,  the  father  of  Sita,  the 
wife  of  Rama.  From  the  above  statements  we  may  see  how 
little  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  historical  veracity  of  the 
Puranas.  These  works  assure  us  that  Gautama,  though 
he  lived  in  the  second  or  silver  age,  married  a  daughter  of 
Brahma  ;  but  they  meet  the  anachronism  by  affirming 
that  all  the  sages  live  through  the  four  Yugas(the  Satya, 
Treta,  Dwapas,  and  Kali),  into  which  the  Hindus  divide 
the  whole  course  of  the  world's  existence.1 

§  3.  Of  the  Doctrines  of  the  Nydya  School. 

"  The  Nydya  offers  the  sensational  aspect  of  Hindu. 
Philosophy.  In  saying  this,  it  is  not  meant  that  the 
Nyaya  confines  itself  to  sensation,  excluding  emotion  and 
intellection ;  nor  that  the  other  systems  ignore  the  fact  of 
sensation  ;  but  that  the  arrangement  of  this  system  has  a 
more  pointed  regard  to  the  fact  of  the  five  senses  than  the 
others  have,  and  treats  the  external  more  frankly  as  a 
solid  reality. 

"  The  word  Nyaya  means  'propriety  or  fitness/  and  the 
s}rstem  undertakes  to  declare  the  proper  method  of  arriving 
at  that  knowledge  of  the   truth,  the  fruit  of  which,   it 

1  Ward  on  the  Hindus. 


THE  NYAYA  SYSTEM.  ,;] 

promises,  is  the  chief  end  of  man.  The  name  is  also  used, 
in  a  more  limited  application,  to  denominate  the  proper 
method  of  setting  forth  argument.  This  has  led  to  the 
practice  of  calling  the  Nyaya  the  '  Hindu  Logic,'  a  name 
which  suggests  a  very  inadequate  conception  of  the  scope 
of  the  system.  The  Nyaya  system  was  delivered  by 
Gautama  in  a  set  of  ajmorisms,  so  very  concise,  that  they 
must,  from  the  first,  have  been  accompanied  by  a  com- 
mentary, oral  or  written.  The  aphorisms  of  the  several 
Hindu  systems,  in  fact,  appear  designed,  not  so  much  to 
communicate  the  doctrine  of  the  particular  schools,  as  to  aid, 
by  the  briefest  possible  suggestions,  the  memory  of  him 
to  whom  the  doctrine  shall  have  been  already  communi- 
cated. To  this  end  they  are  in  general  admirably  adapted. 
The  sixty  aphorisms,  for  example,  which  constitute  the 
first  of  Gautama's  Five  Lectures,  present  a  methodical  sum- 
mary of  the  whole  system,  while  the  first  aphorism,  again, 
of  the  sixty,  presents  a  summary  of  these  sixty.  The  first 
aphorism  is  as  follows: — From  knowledge  of  the  truth 
in  regard  to  evidence,  the  ascertainable,  doubt,  motive, 
example,  dogma,  confutation,  ascertainment,  disquisition, 
controversy,  cavil,  fallacy,  perversion,  futility,  and  occasion 
for  rebuke, — there  is  the  attainment  of  the  Summwn 
Bonum. 

"In  the  next  aphorism,  it  is  declared  how  knowledge 
operates  mediately  in  producing  this  result.  '  Pain,  birth, 
activity,  fault,  false  notions, — since,  on  the  successive 
departure  of  these  in  turn,  there  is  the  departure  of  tin- 
antecedent  one,  there  is  Beatitude.'  Thai  i-  to  Bay,  when 
knowledge  of  the  truth  is  attained  to,  'fake  notions  '  depart  ; 


HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

on  their  departure,  the  'fault'  of  concerning  one's-self 
aboul  any  external  object  ceases ;  thereupon  the  enlightened 
ceases  to  '  act ;'  then,  there  being  no  actions  that  call 
tor  either  reward  or  punishment,  there  is  no  occasion,  after 
lii-  death,  for  his  being  bom  again  to  receive  reward  or 
punishment ;  then,  not  being  born  again,  so  as  to  be  liable 
to  pain,  there  is  no  room  for  'pain'  and  the  absence  oi 
pain  is  the  Nyaya  conception  of  the  Summum  Bonnm" 

Ajb  fco  ilio  instruments  adapted  to  the  acquisition  of  a 

knowledge  of  the  truth,  Gautama  teaches  that  "  proofs  " 

iTT^RTTTTTf^,  i.e.,  instruments  of  right  knowledge),  "are  the 

senses,  the  recognition  of  signs,  the  recognition  of  like- 

3,  and  speech  (or  testimony.)" 

The  objects  in  regard  to  which  we  have  to  obtain  right 
knowledge,  by  means  of  the  appropriate  instruments,  he 
enumerates  as  follows: — "Soul,  body,  sense,  sense-object, 
knowledge,  the  mind,  activity,  fault,  transmigration,  fruit, 
pain,  and  beatitude, — these  arc  the  objects  regarding 
which  we  are  to  seek  for  right  knowledge."  Here  it 
is  to  be  carefully  observed  that  the  soul  is  spoken  of 
a-  an  entirely  different  entity  from  the  mind.1  Dugald 
ii  tells  US  that  the  mind  ean  attend  to  only  one 
thought  at  a  time.  Gautama,  recognising  the  same  fact, 
but  speaking  of  the  known  invariably  as  the  soul,  accounts 
far  the   Tact    in  question    by  assuming  that   there  is  an 

'  in  the  Hindi'!  system,  the  soul  (-audf^O  is  the  self,  and  the  mind 

(JT^HT  )  ii  the  oi  MJiy.  which,  standing  between  the  self  and  the 

aeliverances  of  the  senses— (as  s  minister  between  the  monarch  and  the 

l  simnltani  m*  on  bis  attention)— prevents  the  latter  from 

crowding  in  confusedly,  bj  presenting  one  thing  al  a  time. 


THE  NYAYA  SYSTEM.  63 

instrument,  or  internal  organ,  termed  the  mind,  through 
which  alone  knowledge  can  reach  the  soul,  and  which, 
admitting  only  one  thought  at  a  time,  the  Naiyayika  in- 
ferred must  be  no  larger  than  an  atom. 

"Pleasure,  pain,  desire,  aversion,  volition,  and  know- 
ledge,5' says  Gautama,  "  are  that  whereby  we  recognise 
soul  (dtman) ; "  and,  again,  "  the  sign  "  (whereby  we  infer 
the  existence)  "  of  the  mind  "  (manas)  "  is  the  not  arising 
of  cognitions  "  (in  the  soul)  "simultaneously."  Thus  the 
soul  may  be  practically  regarded  as  corresponding  to  the 
thinking  principle,  and  the  mind  (manas)  to  the  faculty  of 
attending  to  one,  and  only  one,  thing  at  a  time ;  it  being 
further  to  be  kept  in  remembrance  that  the  Naiyayika 
reckons  the  mind  to  be  a  substance  and  not  a  faculty. x 

"In  the  list  of  the  objects  regarding  which  right  know- 
ledge is  to  be  obtained,  the  next,  after  mind,  is  activity 
(m^Iti).  This  is  defined  as  'that  which  originates  the 
[utterance  of  the]  voice,  the  [cognitions  of  the]  under- 
standing, and  the  [gestures  of  the]  body.'  This  activity, 
we  have  seen  under  Aph.  II.,  Gautama  regards  with  an 
evil  eye,  as  the  cause  of  birth,  which  is  the  cause  of  pain, 
which  it  is  the  summum  bonum  to  get  permanently  rid  of. 

"  He  further  holds  that  it  is  through  our  own  'fault ' 
(cffaT)  that  we  are  active  ;  and  he  tells  us  that  faults  (or 

1  The  "Substances"  (j^lfiU  dravydni),  according  to  the  "  Tarha- 
Sariffraha,"  are  just  nine,  viz.  "  Earth  "  ("Crf^M  prithwi) ;  "  water,"  ("^T^ 
ap);  "light"  (ifa^  tcjas) ;  "air"  (^T^J  vdyu) ',  "ether"  (^cRT^T 
dkdsa)',  "time"  ( cJH*T  Jcdla) ;  "place"  (f^ll  disa)  ;  "soul"  (^UgH«1 
dtman) ;  and  "mind"  (n*\f{  manas). 


61       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

failings)  have  this  characteristic,  that  they  cause  '  activity.' 
These  faults  are  classed  under  the  heads  of  affection  (TR)> 
aversion  (^),  and  stolidity  or  delusion  (*fftf),  each  of 
which  he  regards  as  a  fault  or  defect,  inasmuch  as  it  leads 
to  actions,  the  recompense  of  which,  whether  good  or  evil, 
must  be  received  in  some  birth,  or  state  of  mundane  ex- 
istence, to  the  postponement  of  the  great  end  of  entire 
emancipation." 

The  immediate  obstacle  to  "  emancipation "  (*?Wt 
moksha,  or  ^R^l,  apacarga),  namely,  "  transmigration  " 
(iTcSJW^)  pretyabhava,  he  next  defines  as  "  the  arising  again"1 
(TpT^rf^T)  punarutpatti.  "Pain  "  (^^)  duhkha,  he  de- 
fines as  "  that  which  is  characterised  by  uneasiness,"  and 
absolute  deliverance  therefrom  is  (?mqi\)  "  emancipation." 
This  summum  bonum  is  to  be  obtained  by  an  abnegation  of 
all  action,  good  or  bad. 

§  4.   Of  the  Vaiseshika  and  its  Author? 

The  founder  of  this  school  was  Kanada,  a  sage  who  is 
supposed  to  have  lived  at  about  the  same  period  with 
Gautama.  He  is  said  to  have  resided,  as  a  most  austere 
ascetic,  on  Mount  Nila,  sustaining  himself  merely  by  almost 
invisible  particles  of  grain.  When  his  severe  devotions  had 
drawn  down  Vishnu  from  Heaven  to  ask  him  to  solicit 
some  special  blessing,  he  informed  the  god  (so  says  the 


1  The  term  "Pretyabhava"   ("transmigration")  is  derived   from  (TT(€I 

pretya)  "having  died,"  and  (V^m  bhdva)  "the  becoming  (born  into   the 
world  again.)" 

2  Chiefly  from  Ward. 


KANADA.    THE  VAIS'ESHIKA.  65 

Padma  Purdna)  tliat  lie  had  only  one  favour  to  ask,  viz., 
that  he  might  have  eyes  in  his  feet,  that  he  might  not 
stumble  on  the  road,  but  that,  even  in  his  pilgrimages, 
with  his  eyes  closed,  he  might  continue  to  meditate  on 
Vishnu.  According  to  the  Big- Veda,  he  was  a  tall  man, 
with  a  grey  beard,  his  hair  tied  round  his  head  like  a 
turban,  and  his  whole  body  withered  with  age  and  re- 
ligious austerities. 

Yery  little  is  known  authentically  about  him  personally, 
but  the  following  is  a  brief  summary  of  his  doctrines  : — 

§  5.  Outline  of  the  System. 

Kanada  taught  that  the  visible  form  of  God  was  light ; 
that  when  the  desire  of  creation  arose  in  the  divine  mind, 
he  first  gave  existence  to  water,  and  then  to  innumerable 
worlds,  floating  on  the  waters  like  the  Mundane  egg  ;  that 
in  these  primaeval  eggs  water  was  contained,  on  which  lay 
Vishnu,  and  from  whose  navel  issued  a  lotus,  in  which 
Brahma  was  born ;  that  Brahma,  receiving  instructions 
from  God,  created  the  world,  first  from  his  mind,  and  then 
with  the  primary  atoms  ;  that  spirit  and  animal  life  were 
separate  substances. 

§  6.  The  Vaiseshika- Sutras* 

To  him  are  attributed  the  Vaiseshika-  Sutras,  which 
contain  about  550  aphorisms,  or  sentences.  These  relate 
to  seven  subjects  (padarthas),  under  the  following  distinct 
heads,  viz. — 1.  Things;  2.  Qualities;  3.  Actions;  4.  Genus; 

5 


66       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

5.  Species;  6.  The  inseparable  Connection  of  Constituent 
Parts;  and  7.  Non-entity. 

After  a  long  discussion  of  the  different  subjects  included 
in  this  arrangement,  Kamida  discourses  on  religion,  riches, 
happiness,  and  final  liberation.  Having  first  explained 
the  nature  of  religion,  he  then  arranges  the  component 
parts  of  the  universe,  and,  lastly,  gives  a  discourse  on  the 
divine  nature,  which  he  divides  into  three  heads  :  (1)  that 
God  is  essentially  possessed  of  wisdom  (which,  however, 
does  not  comprise  the  whole  of  his  nature  or  character)  ; 

(2)  that  He  is  the  ever  blessed  and  supremely  happy;  and 

(3)  that  in  all  His  works  and  His  will  He  is  irresistible 
and  omnipotent.  Emancipation  from  matter  he  held  to 
be  inseparably  connected  with  complete  deliverance  from 
sorrow,  and  the  enjoyment  of  final  bliss. 

eral  commentaries  have  been  written,  and  are  extant 
on  the  Sutras  of  Kanada,  of  which  the  principal  are  a  large 
one  called  the  Bhdshya,  and  a  smaller  one  entitled  the 
VaiSeshika  Sutra-pushkara;  but  the  only  work  now  read 
in  Bengal  which  has  any  •relation  to  the  Yaiseshika 
Philosophy  is  that  of  Visva  Natha  Siddhanta,  which 
merely  treats  of  the  logical  terms  of  this  s}Tstem,  and  of 
the  Ny&ya  school.  In  the  Nyaya  Colleges  of  Bengal  the 
.students  road  that  part  of  this  work  which  relates  to  the 
Yaiseshika  system,  and  then  proceed  to  study  the  Nyaya 
in  itself. 

|  7.  Extracts  from  the  Sidra-Puslikara. 

The  following  account  of  the  system  is  taken  from  the 
Sutra-Pushkara   commentary  : — fi  On   a  certain   occasion, 


THE  VAIS'ESHIKA  SYSTEM.  67 

some  of  the  disciples  of  Kanada  waited  on  the  sage  and 
enquired  of  him  how  they  might  obtain  a  knowledge  of 
spirit.  The  sage  resolved  that  he  should  first,  in  reply, 
give  some  instructions  on  religion,  and  then  on  those 
subjects  or  things  connected  with  the  practice  of  religion." 

Kanada  defines  religion  thus — "  Those  ceremonies  by 
the  practice  of  which  Brahma-jndna  (or  the  knowledge  of 
the  divine  nature)  is  obtained,  and  that  by  which  all  evil 
is  for  ever  removed,  we  call  religion. " 

"Without  a  firm  belief,  the  duties  of  religion  can  never 
be  practised ;  and  this  belief  must  have  something  better 
than  human  testimony  to  rest  on ;  and,  therefore,  for  the 
establishment  of  religion  in  the  earth,  Grod  has  given  the 
holy  writings,  and  as  these  have  a  divine  origin,  the  faith 
of  men  may  properly  rest  on  their  testimony.  For  the 
Deity  himself  has  no  need  of  these  writings, — they  were 
designed  for  man,  and  it  therefore  becomes  him  to  receive, 
with  thankfulness,  so  important  a  gift. 

But,  in  order  to  the  practice  of  this  religion,  instruments 
are  wanting,  and  this  leads  to  the  discussion  of  things 
(5^1  dravija),  under  which  head  are  comprised  precisely 
nine  divisions,  viz.,  earth,  water,  light,  air,  space,  time,  the 
points  of  the  compass,  spirit,  and  mind. 

The  sage  next  brings  forward  qualities  (^pn  guna)  as 
being  inherent  in  things,  and  made  known  by  them,  and 
these  he  makes  to  amount  to  twenty-four. 

Out  of  "things"  and  "qualities"  arise  actions  (^W 
karmma),  and  by  the  union  of  things  and  qualities,  actions 
become  known,  and,  accordingly,  these  are  next  disci 

By  the  knowledge  of  the  excellent  fruits  of  good  ad 


68       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

(as  those  are  connected  with  sacrifices,  ablutions,  gifts, 
etc.),  when  performed  with  a  fixed  and  ardent  mind,  men 
are  drawn  to  practise  the  duties  of  religion  ;  and  by  a 
knowledge  of  the  future  evil  consequences  of  certain 
actions  (such  as  visiting  forbidden  places,  committing 
injuries,  eating  forbidden  fruit,  etc.),  men  are  deterred 
from  those  actions. 

To  things,  qualities,  and  actions  belong  existence  and 
instability.  Cause  and  effect  are  then  discussed,  and  proofs 
adduced  of  the  existence  of  God,  and  of  spirit  in  man 
distinct  from  the  corporeal  frame.  An  objector  is  adduced 
as  urging  that  the  body  is  a  collection  of  atoms  which 
contain  a  living  principle,  and  that  this  living  principle  is 
not  something  separate  from  the  body,  but  inherent  in 
atoms,  and  therefore  diffused  through  the  whole  body. 

To  this  Kanada  replies, — "  By  this  argument  you  deny 
the  existence  of  inanimate  matter,  for,  if  atoms  be  animate, 
and  this  be  an  atom-formed  world,  then  all  matter  must 
be  life  ;  for  this  is  a  settled  maxim,  that  the  nature  of  the 
cause  is  always  seen  in  the  effect.  Why,  then,  do  we  not 
see  matter  possessed  of  life  P"  The  objector  says, — "The 
animating  principle  is  there,  but  it  remains  in  a  concealed 
and  Intent  state."  Kanada  says, — "This  proposition  can 
never  be  established,  since  all  mankind  allow  this  distinc- 
tion, that  motion  is  an  essential  property  of  that  which  is 
animated;  but  in  senseless  matter  motion  is  not  found. " 
The  opponent  refuses  to  admit  the  testimony  of  the  multi- 
tude, that  is,  of  "all  mankind,"  who,  he  says,  "are  not 
capable  of  comprehending  subtile  essences."  Kanada 
replies, — "If  you  refuse  assent  to  universal  opinion,  the 


THE  VAIS'ESHIKA  SYSTEM.  69 

common  proverb  must  be  false  that  '  a  bare  has  no  borns, 
for  it  may  bave  borns  in  a  latent  or  concealed  state." 

Kanada  next  attempts  to  prove,  from  tbe  existence  of 
anxiety  arising  from  desire  and  aversion,  tbe  existence  of 
a  spirit  separate  from  body  or  matter,  since  tbese  emotions 
are  excited  by  a  perception  of  tbe  good  or  evil  arising 
from  certain  tbings,  so  tbat  good  is  sought  and  evil  is 
avoided.  But  this  perception  of  the  good  and  bad  results 
of  different  actions,  and  tbe  anxiety  occasioned  by  this 
perception,  to  embrace  that  which  produces  good  and  avoid 
that  which  produces  evil,  are  attributes  of  spirit.  And  as 
we  find  these  perceptions  and  this  anxiety  existing  in  our- 
selves, we  infer  that  they  must  exist  in  others,  since  they 
possess  with  us  a  common  nature,  and  from  thence  we 
ascend  up  to  a  First  Cause  distinct  from  Matter. 

The  mode  of  matter  and  Spirit  becoming  united  is  next 
discussed.  "  When  an  animal  soul,  through  having  the 
consequences  of  good  and  evil  actions  attached  to  it,  is 
about  to  assume  human  birth,  it  is  united  to  a  single  atom, 
and  to  this  others  are  added,  till  a  regular  body  is  formed. 
In  cases  where  merit  preponderates,  an  excellent  body  is 
constructed,  and  where  demerit  abounds  an  inferior  body." 

Atoms  are  globular,  and  they  exist  in  a  most  subtile 
state.  Their  union,  retaining  their  independence,  is  very 
wonderful..  Their  extension,  as  the  consequence  of  union, 
is  to  be  attributed  to  the  effects  of  merit  and  demerit. 
Their  bulk  arises  from  accessions  of  atoms.  One  atom  is 
invisible,  and  so  are  two ;  but  when  a  third  is  added,  the 
substance  formed  resembles  a  mote  in  the  sun.  In  this 
congregated  and  dependent  state,  atoms  are  not  eternal. 


70  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

Atoms  are  uncreated,  and  are  of  four  kinds,  from  which, 
arise  earth,  water,  light,  and  air.  These  remain  "distinct" l 
till  substances  become  visible.  When  the  animal  soul  is 
to  be  united  to  a  body,  the  atom  to  which  it  is  to  be  united 
begins  to  be  agitated,2  till  at  length  it  becomes  unfixed 
and  separated  from  its  former  union,  and  then  unites  itself 
to  the  soul. 

Objects  too  minute  to  be  visible,  are  placed  under  the 
class  of  atoms,  and  everything  diffused  is  called  ma  hat 
(Tfc^°)  i.e.,  "  great."  Atoms  and  thought  belong  to  the 
former,  and  the  division  of  the  points,  time,  space,  and 
spirit  are  all  denominated  mahat.  He  who  is  possessed  of 
the  qualities  belonging  to  mahat  enjoys  an  affectionate 
relation  to  all  things. 

Some  Hindu  philosophers  plead  for  the  existence  of 
innumerable  minds  in  one  individual.  Others  endeavour 
to  establish  the  doctrine  of  five  minds  to  agree  with  the 
senses.  Kanada  contends  for  one  reasoning  faculty  in 
each  individual.  The  multitude  of  forms  assumed  by  this 
mind,  says  the  sage,  arises  from  its  union  with  visible 
objects.  Fire  is  one,  but  it  assumes  various  colours  from 
its  connection  with  the  varied  properties  of  the  com- 
bustibles which  it  consumes. 

In  the  production  of  thought,  the  senses  are  the  inferior 

'  fcf^m  (\'i*t ska).  This  opinion  as  to  the  distinctness  of  the  different 
kinds  of  atoms  gave  rise  to  the  name  of  the  sect,  Vaiseshika. 

2  The    agitation    in    this   case   is    attributed   to   the    divine    Viseshasaktj 
(t^M^TSjfrR)  /.<.,  the  separate  (special,  distinct)  energy  of  God,  as  opposed 
mmon  (or  ordinarirj  exercised)  energy. 
Prom  *T??  "  to  increase." 


THE  VAIS'ESHIKA  SYSTEM.  71 

helpers  to  spirit  in  the  acquisition  of  knowledge ;  but 
mind  is  the  chief  helper.  It  is  a  single  power,  but  is 
possessed  of  five  faculties  corresponding  with  the  senses, 
by  which  its  capacities  are  multiplied;  but  the  opinion 
that  each  sense  has  a  distinct  power,  called  mind,  is  a 
mistake.  When  the  mind  retires  to  the  tubular  vessel 
called  medhya  (W%)  sleep  ensues.  When  it  retires  into 
a  particular  part  of  this  vessel  called  puritati  (jp^tfRft) 
profound  sleep  follows. 

As  to  the  body,  Kanada  teaches  (in  opposition  to  various 
other  theories  which  he  combats)  that  it  is  composed  of 
but  one  element,  earth,  and  that  water,  air,  light,  and 
vacuum  are  mere  adjuncts.  To  confirm  this  idea,  he 
adds  thfct  scent  is  evidently  the  prevailing  and  only  abiding 
quality  of  bodies.  The  other  properties  form,  taste,  sound, 
and  touch,  are  subject  to  decay ;  but  scent  never  leaves 
either  a  living  or  a  dead  body.  Bodies  are  formed  in  the 
womb,  in  eggs,  from  seeds,  and  are  raised  by  fermentation. 

Desire  Is  exacted  by  the  hope  of  pleasure,  and  aversion 
by  the  fear  of  misfortune.  They  are  ascribed  to  the  in- 
fluences oi  the  actions  of  a  former  birth  upon  the  present 
birth,  for  a  child  knows  nothing  of  unchaste  desires ;  he 
does  not  leirn  them  of  others  ;  still,  at  a  certain  age,  they 
rise  in  his  :nind.  From  whence,  then,  can  they  come,  but 
from  the  baneful  influences  of  the  actions  of  former  births. 

Kanada  then  decides  a  number  of  points  respecting 
religious  drties.  In  the  pursuit  of  secular  concerns,  a 
person  is  rot  to  expect  the  benefits  peculiar  to  a  future 
state.  Noi  in  the  duties  connected  with  the  invisible 
world  are  /isible  fruits  to  be  sought.     Invisible  benefits 


72       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

refer  to  the  pleasures  of  heaven,  and  absorption  in  Brahma. 
The  duties  that  procure  invisible  benefits  are  such  as 
bathing  at  holy  places,  fasting  on  holy  days,  the  abstinence 
from  sexual  intercourse,  the  study  of  the  Veda  in  the 
house  of  a  divine  teacher ;  after  having  given  birth  to  a 
son,  and  passed  the  age  of  50,  becoming  a  hermit  and 
practising  asceticism  in  a  forest ;  offering  appointed  sacri- 
fices, etc.  Actions  are  religious  or  otherwise,  according  to 
the  motives  which  inspire  the  performers. 

Liberation  (*ft^T  moksha)  is  to  be  obtained  by  listening 
to  the  description  of  spirit  contained  in  the  Sdstrd,  by 
meditation,  by  the  acquisition  of  the  knowledge  of  yoga 
(asceticism),  by  perfect  fixedness  of  mind  and  correct 
posture  during  the  performance  of  yoga,  by  restraining 
the  breath,  by  retaining  in  subjection  the  powers  of  the 
body  and  mind,  and  by  the  vision  of  spirit  in  the  animal 
soul.  Hence,  future  birth  is  wholly  prevented,  and  all 
sorrow  annihilated  ;  and  this  is  what  is  called  liberation. 


73 


CHAPTEE  II. 

OF    THE    SA'KKHYA    AND    YOGA    SCHOOLS. 
I. — The    Sankhya   System. 
•     $  I.  Of  its  Author. 

The  originator  of  this  system  was  Kapila.  He  was  a 
grandson  of  the  renowned  Sage  Manu  (through  his  mother 
Deva  Huti),  his  father,  Karmada,  being  reputed  as  one  of 
the  progenitors  of  mankind.  He  was  born  at  Pushkdra, 
and  lived  at  Ganga  Sdgar,  where  he  became  greatly  re- 
nowned as  a  sage  and  ascetic,  being  said  to  know  all 
things,  past,  present,  and  to  come,  and  to  be  able  to 
accomplish  whatever  he  wished.  In  the  Bhagavat-Gita 
he  is  spoken  of  as  an  incarnation  of  the  Grod  Vishnu,  for 
the  express  purpose  of  teaching  the  doctrines  of  the 
Sankhya  School  as  the  means  of  enabling  mankind  to 
attain  to  eternal  happiness  in  the  future  world. 

Several  works  are  attributed  to  him,  including  the 
"  Kapila  Sanghita,"  the  "  Sankhya  Sutras,"  the  "  Sankhya 
Puranas,"  etc. 

§  2.  Outline  of  the  Sankhya  System.1 

The  Sankhya  makes  a  step  in  advance  of  the  Nyaya  by 
reducing  the  external  from  the  category  of  substance  to 
1  From  Ballantyne's  Essay. 


74       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

that  of  quality.  Souls  alone  are,  in  the  Sankhya,  regarded 
as  substances;  whatever  affects  the  soul  being  arranged 
under  the  head  of  a  quality — 1.  pleasing  ;  2.  displeasing  ; 
or  3.  indifferent.  This  mode  of  viewing  the  universe  may 
be  designated  the  emotional  view  of  things. 

The  word  Sankhya  means  "  numeral,  rational,  or  dis- 
criminative." The  system  promises  beatitude  as  the 
reward  of  that  discrimination  which  rightly  distinguishes 
between  soul  and  nature.  The  meaning  to  be  attached  to 
these  two  words  will  be  explained  presently. 

The  Sankhya  System  was  delivered  by  Kapila  in  a  set  of 
aphorisms  no  less  concise  than  those  of  the  Nydya.  He 
begins  by  defining  the  chief  end  of  Man.  His  first  aphor- 
ism is  as  follows  : — "  Now  the  complete  cessation  of  pain, 
of  three  kinds,  is  the  complete  (or  highest)  end  of  man." 
By  the  three  kinds  of  pain  are  meant — 1.  diseases, 
griefs,  etc.,  which  are  intrinsic  or  inherent  in  the  sufferer  ; 
2.  injuries  from  ordinary  external  things ;  and  3.  injuries 
from  things  supernatural  or  meteorological.  In  his 
nineteenth  aphorism,  he  declares  that  the  bondage  (^T 
bandha)  under  which  the  soul,  or  individual  man  (*J^f 
purusha),  groans  is  due  to  its  conjunction  with  nature 
wafa  prakriti)  ;  and  this  bondage  is  merely  seeming,  be- 
cause  soul  is  "  ever  essentially  a  pure  and  free  intelligence." 

Tn  his  fifty-ninth  aphorism,  he  says  again  of  the  soul's 
bondage — "  It  is  merely  verbal,  and  not  a  reality,  since 
it  resides  in  [the  soid's  organ]  the  mind  [and  not  in  the 
soul  or  self] ;"  on  which  the  Hindu  commentator  remarks, 
— "  That  is  to  say,  since  bondage,  etc.,  resides  only  in  the 
mind  (fa"rt  cJiitta),  all  this,  as  far  as  concerns  the  soul 


THE  SANKHYA  SYSTEM.  75 

[purusha],  is  merely  verbal,  because  it  is  merely  a  reflexion, 
like  the  redness  of  a  [pellucid]  crystal  [when  a  China  rose 
is  near  it],  but  not  a  reality,  with  no  false  imputation  like 
the  redness  of  the  China  rose  itself."1 

Of  nature,  which  thus,  by  conjunction,  makes  the  soul 
seem  to  be  in  bondage  when  it  is  really  not,  he  gives,  in  his 
sixty-second  aphorism,  the  following  account : — "  Nature 
(TT^fH  prakriti)  is  the  state  of  equipoise  of  goodness  (w& 
sattiva),  passion  (T^C  rajas),  and  darkness  (cT^H^  tames)  ; 
from  nature  [proceeds]  intellect  (^FHfc^  mahat),  from  in- 
tellect self- consciousness  (^IHfTT  ahankdra),  from  self- 
consciousness  the  five  subtile  elements  (cp3TR  tanmdtra), 
and  both  sets  [external  and  internal]  of  organs  (Tf^^f 
■indriya),  and  from  the  subtile  elements  the  gross  elements 
(^Rnjff  sthula-bhuta),  [then,  besides,  there  is]  soul  (J^^ 
purusha)  ;  such  is  the  class  of  twenty- five." 

We  may  add  further,  that,  in  aphorism  105,  we  are  told 
that  "  experience  (^ftT  bhocja)  [whether  of  pleasure  or  pain, 
liberation  from  both  of  which  is  desiderated] ,  ends  with  [the 
discrimination  of]  thought  [i.e.,  soul  as  contra- distinguished 
from  nature];"  that  a  plurality'  of  souls  is  asserted  (in 
opposition  to  the  Veddnta)  in  another  aphorism  (150), 
viz.,  "  From  the  diverse  allotment  of  birth,  etc.,  the 
plurality  of  souls  [is  to  be  inferred];"  and,  finally,  that 
the  Sdnkhya  system  explicitly  repudiates  the  charge  of 
annihilation,  aphorism  47  declaring  that,  "  In  neither  way 

1  This  paradoxical  conception  of  the  soul  in  "bondage,  whilst  not  really  so, 
may  he  illustrated  hy  the  case  of  Don  Quixote  hanging  in  the  dark  from  the 
ledge  of  a  supposed  enormous  precipice,  and  hound  to  hold  on  for  his  life  till 
day-break,  from  not  knowing  that  his  toes  were  really  within  six  inches  of  the 
ground. 


76  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

[whether  as  a  means  or  as  an  end]  is  this  [viz.,  annihila- 
tion,] the  soul's  aim." 

II. — The  Yoga  (or  Patanjali)  System. 

§3.   Of  its  Author. 

The  sage  Patanjali  founded  this  school  of  philosophy. 
Little  is  known  of  his  personal  history.  He  is  said  to 
have  been  born  in  Ilavrita-Varsha,  where  his  father  (An- 
giro)  and  mother  (Sati)  resided;  and  after  his  marriage 
with  Lolupd,  whom  he  found  on  the  north  of  Mount 
Sumeru,  in  the  hollow  of  a  rata  (or  Indian  fig)  tree,  he  is 
said  to  have  lived  as  a  mendicant  devotee  to  a  great  age. 
Being  insulted  on  one  occasion  by  the  inhabitants  of  Bhoga- 
bhdnddra,  while  engaged  in  his  religious  austerities,  he  is 
said  to  have  reduced  them  to  ashes  by  fire  from  his  mouth. 

§  4.  Brief  Summary  of  his  Doctrines. 

He  taught  that  the  Divine  Spirit  and  the  soul  of  man 
are  distinct :  that  the  former  is  free  from  passion,  but  not 
the  latter  :  that  God  is  possessed  of  form  [dfozr],  and 
capable  of  being  seen  by  the  true  Yogi  (i.e.,  practiser  of 
the  Yoga  rites  and  duties)  :  that  He  is  placable,  glorious, 
the  creator,  the  preserver,  and  the  regenerator  of  all 
things:  that  the  universe  first  arose  from  His  will  or 
command,  and  that  He  infused  into  the  system  a  power 
of  perpetual  progression  :  that  the  truth  of  things  was 
discoverable  by  the  senses,  by  experience,  comparison,  and 
revelation  :  that  some  material  things  are  unchanged  and 
others  changeable,  and  that  the  latter  pass  through  six 


PATANJALI'.     THE  YOGA.  77 

changes,  as  birth,  increase,  etc.  :  that  everything  origi- 
nates in  the  five  elements,  fire,  water,  etc. :  that  knowledge 
is  of  five  sorts,  certain,  uncertain,  etc.  :  that  there  are  five 
kinds  of  men,  viz.,  those  who  are  governed  by  their 
passions,  the  wrathful,  the  benevolent,  the  pious,  and  those 
who  are  freed  from  worldly  attachments :  and,  finally, 
that  "  emancipation  "  is  to  be  obtained  by  the  practise  of 
Yoga,  or  perfect  abstraction  of  mind. 

Many  of  the  doctrines  of  Pythagoras  seem  to  bear  a 
considerable  resemblance  with  those  of  Patanjali. 

The  Sutras,  entitled  the  Pdtanjala  Darsana,  comprise 
198  lines.  The  sage  Veda  Vydsa  wrote  a  comment  on 
this  work,  on  which  Vdchaspdti-Mishra  has  given  an  ex- 
planatory treatise.  A  commentary  on  Pdnini's  Grammar, 
and  a  medical  work  called  Bdja-Mriganka  are  also  at- 
tributed to  Patanjali. 

§  5.  Fuller  Account  of  the  System. 

Bhoja-JDeva,  King  of  Dharu,  wrote  a  comment  on  the 
original  Pdtanjala  Darsana,  from  a  translation  of  which 
we  make  the  following  extracts  : — 

The  restraining  of  the  mind,  and  confining  it  to  internal 
meditations,  is  called  Yoga.  When  the  mind  is  thus 
confined  within,  it  becomes  assimilated  to  the  Being  whom 
it  seeks  to  know ;  but  when  the  mind  is  secularised,  this 
Being  takes  the  form  of  secularity  (f%^3).  In  the  first 
case,  the  mind  is  singly  and  irrevocably  fixed  on  God ;  in 
the  second,  it  is  restless,  injurious,  and  voluptuous.  In 
the  former  state,  there  is  no  sorrow ;  in  the  latter,  there 
are  five  k^nds  of  sorrow,  arising,  severalty,  from  the  labour 


78       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

of  seeking  proofs  of  the  reality  of  things,  from  error,  from 
the  pursuit  of  shadows,  from  heavy  sleep,  and  from  recollection. 

The  three  evils,  restlessness,  injuriousness,  and  volup- 
tuousness, may  be  prevented  by  fixing  God  in  the  mind, 
and  by  destroying  desire. 

This  restraining  and  freeing  the  mind  is  called  Yoga,  of 
which  there  are  two  kinds,  sampragndta  and  asampragndta.1 

Sampr agitata  is  meditation  on  an  object  till  the  ideas 
connected  with  it  are  imprinted  on  the  mind,  and  occupy 
all  its  powers.  The  proper  objects  of  meditation  are  two — 
Matter  and  Spirit.  (1).  Matter  assumes  twenty- four  forms 
(or  is  divided  into  twenty-four  parts),  viz.,  crude  matter, 
the  understanding,  consciousness  of  personal  identity,  the 
qualities  of  the  five  primary  elements,  the  eleven  organs 
of  sense,  and  the  five  primary  elements.  In  these,  either 
as  the  attribute  or  subject,  are  included  quality,  action, 
and  kind  (guna,  karma,  vishesha).  (2).  Spirit  is  one 
{purusha,  i.e.,  the  masculine  power.) 

Sampragndta  is  of  four  kinds, — 1.  Meditation  on  the 
distinction  between  sound  and  substance  until  the  Yogi 
arrives  at  the  conviction  of  the  non-distinction  between 
these  two  in  reference  to  the  Deity  as  a  visible  being. 
2.  Meditation  on  the  Supreme  Being  in  reference  to  form, 
as  well  as  to  time  and  place,  till  the  Yogi  is  able  to  fix  his 
meditations,  without  regard  to  form,  time,  or  place.  3. 
Meditation  on  the  Deity  till  the  mind,  in  which  sattica  guna 
prevails,  is  filled  with  joy,  and  till  the  powers  of  the 
understanding  become  abstracted,  so  that  the  distinction 

'  The  first  \\<>nl  Intimates  that  the  Togihas  obtained the  knowledge  of  the 
Deity ;  and  the  second,  that  the  Yogi  is  lost  in  the  divine  manifestation. 


THE  YOGA  SYSTEM.  79 

between  matter  and  spirit  is  no  longer  recognised,  and 
spirit  alone  is  seen.1  4.  Meditation  till  the  Yogi  becomes 
so  far  delivered  from  pride,  that  it  exists  only  as  a  shadow 
in  his  mind,  and  the  divine  principle  receives  the  strongest 
manifestation.  This  last  state  is  called  kaivalya,  i.e.,  absorp- 
tion in  (or  though  the  person  is  not  separated  from)  matter. 

At  length  the  Yogi  attains  what  is  called  asampragndta, 
in  which,  if  he  be  perfect  in  his  abstraction,  the  very 
shadow  of  separate  existence  will  be  destroyed,  visible 
objects  will  be  completely  extinguished,  and  spirit  alone 
become  manifest. 

He  who  has  attained  the  states  called  videha  and  kaivalya, 
after  transmigration,  finds  himself  in  the  same  state  of 
advancement  towards  abstraction,  as  when  he  quitted  his 
former  body.  Those  who  die,  without  having  attained  to 
the  state  of  videha,  must,  entering  a  new  body,  labour 
after  a  prepared  mind,  resolution,  remembrance,  and  dis- 
crimination, which  acquisitions  (naturally  succeeding  and 
assisting  one  another)  will  be  followed  by  the  meditation 
called  Yoga  (^ftr),  for  which  they  have  all  been  preparatory. 

There  are  three  kinds  of  Yogas,  distinguished  by  the 
rapidity  or  slowness  of  their  progress  towards  perfection, 
which  is  affected  by  the  actions  of  preceding  and  present 
births. 

Yoga  and  its  blessedness  are  to  be  secured  by  the  re- 
linquishment of  all  hope  of  happiness 2  in  secular  things, 

1  In  this  state,  the  Yogi  is  said  to  he  videha  (fq<^)  (i.e.,  incorporeal), 
that  is,  he  is  emancipated  from  that  pride  of  separate  existence  which  is  con- 
nected with  a  secular  or  bodily  state. 

8  See  Hitopades'a,  hook  i.,  line  666,  Johnson's  edition,  1847. 


80       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

and  by  that  meditation  which  identifies  every  religious 
formula,  every  sacred  utensil,  and  every  offering,  with  the 
object  of  worship.  This  object  is  the  Supreme  Being, 
called  l'kcara  ( v^  \),1  represented  as  being  free  from  the 
fruit  of  works,  i.e.,  exempt  from  birth  among  any  of  the 
forms  of  matter,  from  increase  or  decrease  of  Jife,  and  from 
enjoyment  or  suffering  as  the  consequence  of  actions. 
To  his  will  all  creatures  owe  their  preservation.  He  is 
omnipotent,  eternal,  the  omniscient  fountain  of  knowledge, 
who  presides  over  all  events. 

This  Being  the  Yogi  must  intensely  and  continuously 
meditate  on,  while  repeating  constantly  his  sacred  name. 
Thus  he  gradually  loses  his  worldly  attachment ;  the 
sattwa  gmia  (or  virtue  of  goodness)  obtains  a  clearer  mani- 
festation in  him,  and  he  is  brought  to  resemble  God,  and 
thus  he  obtains  also  deliverance  from  the  effects  of  birth 
(viz.,  sickness,  incapacity,  proneness  to  error,  fickleness, 
etc.),  and  final  emancipation. 

In  the  next  place,  the  Yogi  must  (for  the  fixing  of  his 
mind)  attend  to  prdnaydma,  that  is,  to  the  gradual  sup- 
pression of  breathing,  since  the  animal  soul  and  the  mind 
ad  in  conjunction.  In  this  work  he  must  first  endeavour 
to  fix  the  understanding  by  some  act  of  the  senses,  e.g.,  he 
in usl  place  his  sight  and  thoughts  on  the  tip  of  his  nose, 
by  which  he  will  perceive  smell;  then  bring  his  mind  to 
the  tip  of  his  tongue,  when  taste  will  be  realised;  and 
afterwards  ii\  his  thoughts  on  the  root  of  his  tongue,  by 
which  sound  will  be  suggested.     After  this,  if  the  mind 

1  From  i^I  "  to  rule." 


DUTIES  OF  THE  YOGI.  81 

be  full  of  the  sattwa  gunct,  and  free  from  every  degree  of 
the  raja  and  tama  gunas,  it  will  escape  the  waves  of 
passion  and  become  truly  fixed.  Freedom  from  secular 
desires  will  be  followed  by  freedom  from  sorrow,  and  the 
mind  will  in  consequence  become  fixed.  His  mind  will  be 
fixed  whose  intercourse  with  secular  objects  is  like  that  of 
a  person  in  a  deep  sleep,  who,  without  the  active  union  of 
the  senses,  partakes  of  perfect  happiness.  He  who  medi- 
tates on  God,  placing  his  mind  on  the  sun,  moon,  fire,  or 
any  other  luminous  body,  or  within  his  heart,  or  at  the 
bottom  of  his  throat,  or  in  the  centre  of  his  skull,  will,  by 
afterwards  ascending  from  these  gross  images  of  the  Deity 
to  the  glorious  original,  secure  fixedness  of  mind. 

The  Yogi  will,  by  these  means,  deliver  himself  from  all 
error,  or  pr oneness  to  error,  and  be  filled  with  the  effects 
of  the  sattwa  guna.  He  thus  becomes  identified  with  the 
Deity  :  that  is,  visible  objects,  the  operations  of  the  under- 
standing, and  personal  identity,  become  absorbed  in  the 
Being  contemplated,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  crystal 
receives  the  image  of  whatever  is  reflected  upon  it. 

That  he  may  not  fall  from  the  elevation  he  has  attained, 
the  Yogi  still  seeks  God  by  meditation  on  his  names,  or  on 
the  import  of  these  names,  or  on  his  existence,  after  which 
he  loses  all  remembrance  of  the  names  of  the  Deity,  and 
of  their  import,  and  God  is  realised  in  the  mind  as  pure 
light,  and  to  this  succeeds  a  state  of  mind  similar  to  self- 
annihilation. 

Still,  however,  he  is  not  wholly  delivered  from  subtle 
illusion,  though  his  ideas  have  received  the  impress  of  the 
Deity  ;    but,  if  he  succeed  in  perfecting  his  abstraction, 

6 


82       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

God  will  shine  forth  in  complete  splendour,  the  mind  of  the 
Yogi  will  become  completely  absorbed  in  LTim,  and  he  will 
acquire  universal  prescience.  He  whose  abstraction  con- 
tinues imperfect,  obtains  complete  knowledge  by  the 
assistance  of  reflection,  etc.,  and  by  degrees  ascends  to  the 
unassisted  knowledge  of  universal  nature  and  identity  with 
the  spirituality  and  perfection  of  God. 

Thus  ends  the  first  chapter  of  the  Patanjala,  showing 
the  method  by  which  a  person  of  perfect  mind  acquires 
Yoga.  In  the  second  chapter  is  pointed  out  the  means  by 
which  a  secular  person  should  perform  Yoga  ;  in  which 
are  included  the  practise  of  austerities,  and  the  repetition 
of  the  names  of  God,  or  of  incantations  without  the  desire 
of  benefit,  referring  all  to  the  will  of  God.  By  this  kind 
of  Yoga,  the  person  practising  it  will  be  assisted  in  per- 
forming the  more  perfect  Yoga,  and  in  victory  over  pain — 
or  the  cause  of  pain — which  is  of  five  kinds,  viz.,  illusion, 
consciousness  of  self-existence,  passion,  religious  disgust,  and 
love  of  life.  The  four  last  spring  from  the  first ;  and  each 
of  these  four  includes  inability  as  well  as  inefficient,  weak, 
and  suppressed  desire. 

The  last  mentioned  source  of  pain  (love  of  life)  is  to  be 
overcome  by  turning  the  thoughts  inward,  which  will 
infallibly  secure  meditation  on  God.  The  other  causes  of 
pain  arc  to  be  overcome  by  fixing  the  mind  on  God,  and 
by  cultivating  benevolent  Peelings  towards  men  in  every 
condition  of  life. 

The  impress1  of  actions  is  to  be  attributed  to  illusion 

1  All  actions  are  said  to  leave  a  mark  on  tin;  mind,  which  is  never  ob- 
Literated  till  the  effects  of  these  actions  have  been  experienced. 


RESULT'S  OF  MAYA'.  83 

(*J1<M(),  and  is  discovered  either  in  this  or  in  a  future 
birth.  Actions  performed  under  the  influence  of  illusion 
are  followed  by  eight  millions  of  births  in  connection  with 
some  caste,  with  an  appointed  period  of  life,  and  subjec- 
tion to  the  fruit  of  actions.  From  works  of  merit  result 
superior  caste,  long  life,  and  many  enjoyments ;  from  evil 
actions  arise  degraded  caste  and  short  and  miserable  life. 

To  secular  persons  (f^f^T«n),  these  consequences  of 
illusion  do  not  produce  sorrow  as  they  do  to  the  Yogi. 
The  former  are  likened  to  those  members  of  the  body  which 
remain  at  ease,  while  the  visual  faculty,  from  some  acci- 
dent, suffers  excruciating  pain  :  the  Yogi  is  the  eye  of  the 
body. 

This  illusion,  from  whence  arise  the  effects  of  actions,  is 
to  be  destroyed  by  discriminating  wisdom  in  reference  to 
the  Divine  nature,  leading  to  the  reception  of  truth  (God), 
and  deliverance  from  the  sorrows  of  transmigration. 

The  progress  of  creation  is  thus  described  :  first  illusion, 
then  the  elements,  then  the  senses,  and  lastly  the  under- 
standing. The  origin  of  birth  is  the  union  (or  vicinity)  of 
spirit  with  the  understanding,  in  which  the  former  is  the 
partaker,  and  the  latter  the  thing  enjoyed ;  or,  in  other 
words,  the  one  displays,  and  the  other  is  the  thing 
displayed. 

The  union  of  spirit  and  matter,  as  the  receiver  and 
received,  is  without  beginning.  The  origin  of  this  union 
is  illusion.  The  perfection  of  spirit  is  to  be  attributed  to 
liberation  from  this  union,  and  this  is  to  be  sought  in  the 
acquisition  of  discriminating  wisdom.  Illusion  being  re- 
moved, all  the  effects  resulting  from  the  union  of  spirit 


84 


HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 


with  illusion  will  necessarily  cease.  This  separation  con- 
stitutes the  liberation  of  the  Yogi,  who  is  hereafter  known 
as  the  "everlastingly  free." 

Imperfect  discrimination,  however,  which  leaves  the 
mind  wavering  in  its  choice  between  objects  and  spirits, 
will  not  accomplish  the  work  of  liberation.  Perfect  dis- 
crimination is  obtained  by  acquiring  the  eight  parts  of 
Yoga,  which  acquisition  secures  the  removal  of  the  darkness 
and  ignorance  arising  from  the  raja  and  tama  gunas,  and  the 
perfect  subjection  of  the  mind  to  the  sattica  guna.  These 
eight  parts  are  called  yama,  niydma,  dsana,  prdndydma, 
pratydhdra,  dhdrana,  dhydna,  and  samddhi.  The  first  five 
serve  the  purpose  of  subduing  the  passions,  and  of  thus 
assisting  the  Yogi.  The  last  three  are  assistants  to  the 
Yogi,  without  any  medium. 

In  "yama"  (restraint)  are  five  divisions:  (1)  Freedom 
from  desire  of  injuring  others ;  (2)  truth,  verbal  and 
mental ;  (3)  freedom  from  covetousness,  or  the  appropria- 
tion of  the  property  of  another,  by  thought,  word,  or  act ; 
(4)  subjection  of  the  members  for  the  extirpating  of  desire; 
and  (5),  the  renunciation  of  all  pleamre.  He  who  has  fully 
accomplished  all  these  duties,  is  said  to  have  performed 
the  great  vow  (+^i3<i). 

Niydma  also  includes  five  divisions,  viz. :  (1)  Purity  of 
body  (by  earth,  water,  etc.,  after  certain  functions),  and 
purity  of  mind,  through  the  exercise  of  friendly  and  be- 
nevolent affections;  (2)  cheerfulness  in  every  condition; 
(3)  religious  austeril  Lea  ;  (4)  the  repetition  of  incantations  ; 
and  (;">),  the  causing  all  the  formularies  of  worship  and  all 
its  benefits  to  terminate  in  God. 


THE  EIGHT  PARTS  OF  YOGA.  85 

Amna  consists  in  eight3r-four  modes  of  sitting  at  Yoga. 
To  be  complete,  the  posture  (however  at  first  and  naturally 
painful)  must  have  become  quite  easy  to  the  Yogi,  and 
unattended  with  agitation.  The  mind  must  be  raised  to 
the  wonders  of  the  heavens,  and  not  confined  to  the  body  ; 
and  thus  the  Yogi  will  at  last  cease  to  feel  the  inconveni- 
ences of  heat  and  cold,  hunger  and  thirst,  etc. 

The  accomplishment  of  the  dsana  prepares  for  the  prd- 
ndt/dma,  or  the  suppression  of  the  breath.  The  Yogi  must 
begin  by  restraining  his  breath  for  twenty- six  seconds, 
and  enlarge  this  period  till  he  is  perfect.  He  should 
confine  the  exhalation  of  his  breath,  at  the  utmost,  to 
twelve  finger  breadths  from  his  nose. 

The  JPratydhdra  is  the  withholding  the  mind  from 
wandering,  that  the  organs,  turned  from  their  accustomed 
objects,  inwards,  may  become  thoroughly  subject  to  the 
Yogi. 

The  fixing  of  the  mind,  so  that  it  may  not  wander 
beyond  the  nose,  nor  descend  inwardly  beyond  the  level 
of  the  navel,  is  called  dhdrana,  in  which  the  Yogi  purifies 
his  mind  by  benevolence,  practises  all  the  previous  duties 
(//a  ma,  etc.),  and  fixing  his  eyes  on  the  tip  of  his  nose, 
subdues  all  his  members  and  all  the  powers  of  the  elements 
over  him. 

Dhydna  (or  meditation)  implies  that  the  practiser  of  it 
endeavours  to  fix  his  mind  on  the  Deity,  according  to  the 
forms  of  dhdrana,  so  as  to  secure  a  constant  stream  of 
thought  towards  him,  and  exclude  all  worldly  tendencies. 

In  Samddhi  (the  understanding),  carried  along  by  an 
uninterrupted  current  of  thought  towards  the  Deity,  or 


86  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

towards  that  winch  is  the  reflection  of  spirit  upon  the 
understanding,  becomes  nearly  extinguished. 

Dhdrana,  dhydna,  and  samddhi,  are,  for  the  sake  of 
brevity,  often  distinguished  by  one  name,  sanyama,  i.e., 
the  restraining  the  mind  from  all  visible  objects.  To  the 
person  who  is  able  to  perfect  himself  in  Sanyama,  the 
infinitely  abstracted  God,  discovered  by  perfect  discrimina- 
tion and  identified  by  light,  becomes  manifest.  It  is  to  be 
attained  by  degrees,  by  meditation  on  God,  first  through 
more  gross,  and  then  through  more  refined,  media. 

After  the  Yogi  has  fixed  his  mind  on  the  Deity,  it 
occasionally  wanders  ;  but  at  length  he  contemplates  God 
only  in  himself,  so  that  the  divine  spirit  is  seen  equally  in 
the  mind  and  in  visible  objects.  The  Yogi,  who  has 
perfected  himself  in  the  three  parts  of  Sanyama,  obtains  a 
knowledge  of  the  past  and  of  the  future ;  if  he  apply 
Sanyama  to  sounds,  to  their  meaning,  and  the  consequent 
results,  he  will  acquire  universal  knowledge.  If  he  apply 
it  to  discriminate  between  sattica  guna  and  spirit,  he  ex- 
terminates the  very  root  of  error  (the  cause  of  birth),  and 
obtains  liberation. 

All  perfect  ascetics  (siddhis)  attained  perfection  in  the 
jamadhi  in  a  preceding  birth, — some  were  perfect  at  their 
birth,  as  was  the  case  with  Kapila. 


87 


CHAPTER  III. 

OX   THE  VEDA'NTA  AND   MfMA'NSA  DARSANAS,  Etc. 
1. — The  Vedanta  System. 

§  1.   Of  its  Author  and  Origin. 

Veda-  Vydsa,  the  founder  of  the  Yedanta  School,  is  said 
to  have  been  born  on  an  island,  or  rather  sand-bank,  of 
the  river  Jamna  (or  Yamuna),  and  to  have  received  the 
name  of  Dwaipayana  originally  ;  but,  from  having  resided 
in  a  forest  of  the  Yadaris,  he  was  also  called  Yadarayana, 
and  as  the  arranger  of  the  Yedas,  Yeda-Yyasa  (or  Yasa), 
by  which  title  he  is  most  commonly  known.  He  is  de- 
scribed in  Hindu  writings  as  a  very  tall  man,  of  a  dark 
complexion,  wearing  a  tiger's  skin,  and  having  his  hair 
tied  round  his  head  like  a  turban,  which  was  said  to  have 
been  changed  to  the  colour  of  gold  by  the  rays  of  the  sun. 
Besides  compiling  and  arranging  the  Vedas,  he  is  held  to 
have  written  the  18  Pur  anas,  the  18  Upa- Pur  anas,  the 
Kalpa-Purdna,  the  Mahd-Bhdgavata,  the  Devi- B hag avata, 
the  Ekdmra-Purdna,  the  Veddnta  Barsana,  and  the 
Mahd-Bhdrata.  It  is  said  that  he  obtained  his  know- 
ledge of  the  Yedas  and  Puranas  by  the  favour  of  Yishnu, 
without  study,  and  that  he  wrote  the  Bhdgavata  from  the 
instructions  of  Narada. 


88  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

The  system  of  philosophy  set  forth  in  the  Yeddnta- 
Darsana  he  is  said  to  have  derived  from  the  discourses 
addressed  by  Krishna  to  Arjuna,  recorded  in  the  Bhagavad 
Gita,  a  part  of  the  Bhishma  chapter  of  the  Mahdbhdrata. 
The  Vcddnta  Sutras  consists  of  595  verses,  which  are 
divided  into  four  parts.  In  the  first,  the  author  maintains 
that  the  whole  contents  of  the  Yeda  refer  to  the  Divine 
nature ;  in  the  second  part,  he  confutes  the  opinions  of 
other  sects  ;  the  third  part  is  a  discourse  on  devotion  ;  and 
in  the  fourth  he  enlarges  on  the  doctrine  of  the  divine 
nature. 

§  2.  Outline  of  the  System. 

Yeda  Yyasa  taught  that  the  best  idea  we  can  form  of 
God  is  that  he  is  light,  or  glory.  At  the  same  time,  he 
maintained  that  God  is  a  spirit,  without  passions,  separate 
from  matter  :  that  he  is  pure  wisdom  and  happiness  ;  one 
without  a  second,  everlasting,  incomprehensible,  and  un- 
ci umgeablc ;  and  that,  after  describing  all  modes  of 
existence,  he  is  that  which  is  none  of  these. 

The  Universe,  he  taught,  was  formed  of  the  five  ele- 
ments, \i/.,  air,  lire,  water,  earth,  and  aether  (or  vacuum)  : 
that  the  world,  being  destitute  of  life,  was  liable  to  dis- 
solution  :  that  God  himself  was  the  sole  possessor  of  life, 
and  thai  one  divine  spirit  pervaded  the  whole  animated 
creation. 

When  the  desire  to  produce  creatures  arose  in  the 
divine  mind,  God  united  himself  to  what  is  called  Sakti 
(?rfW),  or  energy,  in  which  reside  three  qualities  con- 
ducing to  di\  ine  wisdom,  lo  activity,  and  to  sensualit}^,  viz., 
Salt  tea  (W&),  Rajas  0^0,  and  Tamas  (rW^O,  which 


THE  VEDANTA  SYSTEM.  89 

may  be  translated,  pure  cognition,  lively  emotion,  and  in- 
ertness; or  "goodness/'  "passion,"  and  "darkness."  The 
first  thing  created  was  vacuum  (3j«*l),  from  which  arose 
wind  (^Tfif),  from  windjfrtf  (Wf^T),  from  fire  water  (WTft)3 
and  from  water  earth  (^f^V). 

All  these,  at  the  first  creation,  were  produced  in  an 
atomic  form.  Dividing  each  of  them  into  four  parts,  the 
Creator  caused  the  first  forms  of  things  to  arise. 

Yeda  Yyasa  further  taught  that  deliverance  from  matter, 
or  return  to  God  (re- absorption  in  the  Divine  Spirit1)  was 
to  be  obtained  in  the  following  manner  : — First,  the 
devotee  must  read  through  the  Yedas.  He  must  suffer 
no  desire  of  advantage  to  mix  with  his  religious  services ; 
must  renounce  everything  forbidden  in  the  Sastras  ;  must 
render  himself  pure  by  the  performance  of  daily  devotions, 
duties  for  the  good  of  others,  atonements,  and  divine 
contemplation  ;  must  acquaint  himself  with  the  unprofit- 
ableness of  that  which  is  fleeting  and  transitory,  and  the 
value  of  that  which  is  unchangeable  and  eternal ;  must 
renounce  all  hope  of  present  or  future  rewards,  gain  the 
complete  mastery  over  all  his  sensual  organs,  and  medi- 
tate on  God  in  all  the  forms  and  media  by  which  he  is 
made  known  to  his  creatures.  By  the  power  of  these 
meditations  and  austerities,  the  soul  will  leave  the  body 
through  the  basilar  suture,  and  ascend  to  the  heaven  of 
Agni  (god  of  fire),  from  thence,  in  succession,  to  various 
other  heavens  till,  having  obtained,  in  the  heaven  of 
Yaruna  an  aerial  body,  called  A'tivd/iika,  the  devotee  will 

1  f^£cra,  f*[f[%  ?*  ft^fir. 


90  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

then  ascend  to  the  heaven  of  Brahma,  and  after  the  ex- 
piration of  one  hundred  years  of  Brahma  and  this  god's 
absorption  into  the  divine  spirit,  the  devotee,  likewise,  will 
obtain  the  same  state  of  felicity. 

Such,  Vyasa  taught,  was  the  method  of  obtaining 
gradual  emancipation.  Immediate  emancipation  (?fNrT) 
was  to  be  secured  only  by  divine  wisdom,  which  wisdom 
could  not  exist  in  the  mind  without  the  entire  extinguish- 
ment of  all  consciousness  of  outward  things,  by  meditation 
on  the  one  supreme  spirit,  Brahma  :  that  when  this  had 
been  attained  to,  the  soul  would  then  obtain  emancipation 
even  in  a  bodily  state.1 

Thus,  while  the  Ny&ya  allows  to  the  external  world  a 
substantial  existence,  and  the  Sankhya  admits  its  existence, 
but  only  as  an  aggregate  of  qualities,  the  Vedantin,  ad- 
vancing beyond  both,  arrives  at  the  limit  of  simplification 
by  deciding  that  nothing  really  exists  besides  one,  and 
and  that  this  one  real  being  is  absolutely  simple. 

This  one  simple  being,  according  to  the  Yedanta,  is 
knowledge  ("WT«T  jnc'tna) — not  the  knowledge  of  anything, 
for  this  would  imply  a  contradiction  to  the  dogma  that 
nothing  exists  except  knowledge  simply.  Among  us 
knowledge  is  regarded  as  the  synthesis  of  subject  and 
object ;  but,  according  to  the  Yedanta,  there  is  no  object, 
mid  hence  the  term  subject  is  not  strictly  applicable  under 
a  theory  which,  denying  duality,  does  not  admit  the  con- 
ditions of  a  relation. 

Soul,  the  ono  reality,  is  accordingly  spoken  of  in  the 
Vedanta,  not  as  a  substance  (sf^j  dravya)  as  it  is  reckoned 

1  Ward. 


THE  VEDA  XT  A  SYSTEM.  91 

in  the  Nyaya,  but  as  the  thing  (^*sf  vastu),  or,  literally, 
"  that  which  abides." 

This  sole-existence,  soul,  according  to  the  Yedantin,  is 
God.  To  the  objection  that  the  soul  does  not  spon- 
taneously recognise  itself  as  God,  he  replies  that  this  is 
because  it  is  "  ignorant,"  i.e.,  obstructed  by  ignorance 
(^njT«T  aj'ndna.)  Were  it  not  for  this  aj'ndna,  he  argues, 
the  soul  would  know  itself  to  be  God — there  would  be 
nothing  but  God — there  would  be  no  world.  It  is  this 
ajndna,  then,  that  makes  the  world,  and  this  being  the 
case,  it  ought  to  have  a  name  suggestive  of  the  fact. 
Shall  it  be  called  Prakriii  (TRTfif),  or  "  energy,"  then,  the 
name  by  which  the  Sankhyas  speak  of  their  unconscious 
maker  of  worlds  ?  But  then  this  Prakriti  can  be  nothing 
else  than  the  All -Powerful ;  for  we  can  admit  the  inde- 
pendent existence  of  God  alone ;  so  that  the  aj'ndna,'  under 
discussion,  may  be  even  more  accurately  denoted  by  the 
word  Sakti  (^rfW),  God's  "power,"  by  an  exertion  of 
which  power  alone  the  fact  can  be  accounted  for,  that  souls 
which  are  God  do  not  know  that  they  are  so.  The  term 
Sakti  is  therefore  enrolled  among  the  synonymes  of  ajndna. 
But  then  comes  the  mytkologist,  who  argues,  if  this  world 
would  not  even  appear  to  be  real,  but  for  ignorance,  then 
this  apparent  reality  is  "illusion"  (*\\m  Maya).  This 
being  admitted,  Maya  is  made  a  goddess,  and  called  the 
wife  of  Brahma,  the  Creator. 

The  definition  of  "  ignorance  "  in  the  Yedanta  requires 
notice.  Ignorance,  we  are  informed,  is  "  a  somewhat  that  is 
not  to  be  called  positively  either  real  or  unreal,"  [not  a  mere 
negation,  but]  in  the  shape  of  an  entity,  the  opponent  of 


92       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

knowledge,  consisting  of  the  three  fetters.  According  to 
the  Naiydyikas,  ajndna  is  merely  the  privation  or  non- 
existence (^HT^  abhdva)  of  jndna.  To  exclude  such  a 
meaning  here,  it  is  asserted  to  be  "  in  the  shape  of  an 
entity "  (^TR"^  bhara-rupa).  The  description  of  it  as 
something  "not  to  be  called  positively  either  real  or 
unreal,"  corresponds  with  Plato's  bv  kol  firj  bv,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  6Ww?  bv.  The  distinction  is  that  of  the 
phenomenal  and  the  real.  The  universe  being  held  to  be  the 
joint  result  of  soul  and  ignorance  (  ^ cU I  and  ^TtjT«T) ,  and 
the  soul  being  the  onty  substance,  or  "  substratum  of  all," 
it  follows  that  ignorance  is  equivalent  to,  and  identical 
with,  the  sum  total  of  qualities.  These,  as  in  the  Sdnkhya 
system,  are  held  to  be  three  ;  so  that  ignorance  is  spoken 
of  as  "consisting  of  the  three  qualities"  (f^JTSTnUSR 
trigundtmaka),  or,  as  it  may  also  be  rendered,  consisting 
of  the  three  cords  [or  fetters],  the  word  for  "  quality  " 
(^P^  f/una),  meaning  originally  a  "fetter,"  and  these  two 
senses,  in  Hindu  philosophy,  being  closely  related. 

Let  us  see  what  can  have  led  to  this  division  of  quality 
into  three.  The  one  reality — the  universal  substratum — 
being  veiled  by  the  garh  of  the  Phenomenal  world,  cer- 
tain marked  distinctions  of  character  among  the  phe- 
nomena present  themselves.  We  have  phenomena  of  pure 
cognition,  of  Lively  emotion,  and,  finally,  of  inertness.  To 
one  or  oilier  of  these  three  heads,  every  phenomenon  may, 
with  a  little  ingenuity,  be  referred.  The  three  heads  are 
named  respectively,  in  Sanskrit,  sattwa,  rajas,  and  tamas 
(^r^T?  T*^  <T*reO-  According  to  the  commentators,  the 
firsl   of  the  qualities,   whilst   endlessly  subdivisible  into 


THE  VEDANTA  SYSTEM.  93 

calmness,  complacency,  patience,  rejoicings,  etc.,  consists 
summarily  of  happiness.  The  second,  on  the  other  hand, 
consists  summarily  of  pain.  To  these  categories  belong 
almost  all  the  sensations  and  thoughts  of  thinking  beings, 
scarcely  any  feeling,  viewed  strictly,  being  one  of  sheer 
indifference.  This  indifference,  the  third  of  the  qualities, 
is  exemplified  in  its  highest  potency  in  such  things  as 
stocks  and  stones,  where  the  soul,  the  substratum  of  these, 
as  of  all  else,  is  altogether  "immersed  in  matter,"  or 
obfuscated  by  the  quality  of  darkness,  as  the  word  tamas 
literally  signifies.  In  its  lower  potencies,  this  third  of  the 
qualities  exemplifies  itself  in  sloth,  drowsiness,  etc. 

These  three  qualities,  separately  or  commingled,  more 
or  less  obscure  the  soul,  which  is  held  to  be  simple 
knowledge  (jndna);  and  as  the  aggregate  of  them  is  the 
opposite  of  soul,  or,  in  other  words,  not-sovl,  therefore  the 
aggregate,  as  we  have  seen,  takes  the  name  of  a-jndna, 
i.e.,  not- knowledge,  or  ignorance.  The  soul  is  often  spoken 
of  as  a  light.  JSTow,  suppose  a  lamp  to  be  enclosed  in  a 
lamp-shade ;  the  glass  may  be  either  so  pure  that  the 
light  passes  through  scarcely  diminished ;  or  it  may  be 
stained,  so  that  the  light  is  tinged,  or  partly  dimmed ;  or 
the  lamp-shade  may  be  of  opaque  materials,  so  that  the 
light  within  is  altogether  obstructed.  These  three  cases 
may  perhaps  illustrate  the  supposed  operation  of  the  three 
qualities,  as  well  as  account  for  the  names  by  which  they 
are  spoken  of  as  "  purity/'  "  foulness,"  and  "  darkness  " 
(sattwa,  rajas,  and  tamas.) 

"Ignorance"  (qjndna),  according  to  the  Veddnta,  has 
two  powers  :  that  by  which  it  envelopes  the  soul,  giving 


94  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

rise  to  tlic  conceit  of  personality  or  conscious  individualit}7, 
and  that  by  which  it  projects  the  phantasmagoria  of  a 
world  which  the  individual  regards  as  external  to  himself. 
Soul  thus  invested  is  what  the  universe  consists  of. 

The  supposed  root  of  all  evil — the  belief  that  aught 
exists  besides  the  "  one  " — is  to  be  got  rid  of,  we  are  told, 
by  a  right  understanding  of  the  great  sentence,  "  That 
art  thou"  (<Tt3"),  i.e.,  "  Thou — whosoever  thou  art — art 
the  one."  When  this  dictum  has  been  rightly  understood 
and  accepted,  the  accepter  of  it,  changing  the  "  thou"  to 
the  first  person,  reflects  thus — "  /am  the  one  "  (cT^^).  This 
is  so  far  well ;  but  he  must  finally  get  rid  of  the  habit  of 
making  even  himself  an  object  of  thought.  There  must 
be  no  object.  What  was  previously  the  subject  must  now 
remain  alone — an  entity,  a  thought,  a  joy  ;  but  these  three 
being  one  only — the  "  existent  joy- thought."  l 

%  3.   Concluding  Remarks  on  the  System. 

The  treatises  written  in  exposition  and  defence  of  the 
Vedanta  System  are  very  numerous,  the  original  work  of 
Veda  Vyasa,  of  course,  being  the  principal  authority,  upon 
which  most  other  works  are  merely  commentaries.  The 
Vedanta  Sdra  (or  essence  of  the  Vedanta)  contains,  per- 
haps, the  besl  summary  of  the  system,  from  the  introduc- 
tion to  which  we  give  the  following  extract : — "Veda  Vyasa 
obtained,  by  religious  austerities,  the  discourse  which 
Krishna  held  with  Arjuna,  and  from  this  discourse  com- 
posed the  Veddnta  for  the  following  reasons,  viz.,  to 
humble  Kakutstha,  a  king  of  the  Solar  race,  who  was 

1  Ballantyne. 


THE  VEDANTA  SYSTEM.  95 

intoxicated  with  an  idea  of  his  own  wisdom ;  to  point 
out  that  the  knowledge  of  Brahma  is  the  only  certain  way 
of  obtaining  liberation  (*ftf%  mokshi),  instead  of  the 
severe  mortification  of  former  yugas  (ages)  which  man- 
kind at  present  are  incapable  of  performing ;  and  to 
destroy,  among  men,  attachment  to  works  of  merit,  since, 
so  long  as  the  desire  of  reward  remaineth,  men  can  never 
be  delivered  from  liability  to  future  birth. 

"  As  the  primary  object  of  a  person  in  planting  a  tree 
is  the  fruit,  and  the  secondary  one  is  sitting  under  its 
shade,  so,  the  chief  fruit  of  devotion  is  a  fixed  mind  on 
Brahma;  the  inferior  fruit,  a  temporary  enjoyment  of 
happiness  with  the  Gfods.  He  who  has  obtained  emancipa- 
tion does  not  desire  this  inferior  fruit. 

"  Those  things  which  perfect  the  knowledge  of  Brahma 
are— (1)  Discriminating  wisdom,  which  distinguishes  be- 
tween what  is  changeable  and  what  is  unchangeable ;  (2) 
a  distaste  for  all  worldly  pleasure,  and  even  for  the  happi- 
ness enjoyed  by  the  Gods  ;  (3)  an  unruffled  mind,  the 
subjugation  of  the  passions,  unrepenting  generosity,  con- 
tempt of  the  world,  the  absence  of  whatever  obstructs  the 
knowledge  of  Brahma,  and  unwavering  faith  in  the 
Yeda  ;  (4)  the  desire  of  emancipation.  Brahma,  the  ever- 
lasting, the  ever-living,  is  one.  He  is  the  first  cause.  But 
the  world,  which  is  his  work,  is  finite,  inanimate,  and 
divisible.  Devotedness  to  Brahma  secures  real  and  per- 
manent happiness. 

"  Sankara  Ackdrya  wrote  a  comment  on  the  Yedanta; 
and  a  disciple  of  Adwaita  Nanda  Paramhansa,  a  Sunydsl, 
composed  from  this  comment  the  Vedanta  Sara." 


96  HIND  BOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

The  chief  upholders  of  the  Yedanta  System  used  to  be 
the  two  classes  of  Hindu  ascetics  called  the  Dandis  and 
Ihe  Sunydsis ;  but  of  late  years  the  principles  of  the 
S3rsteni  have  been  very  widely  adopted  and  advocated  by 
educated  natives  (especially  the  alumni  of  Government 
Colleges)  at  Calcutta  and  the  other  principal  towns  of 
British  India.  The  late  talented  Ranunohan-rlay  was 
one  of  its  ablest  modern  supporters.  The  doctrines  of  the 
school  have  been  fully  discussed  and  confuted  by  the  Rev. 
Dr.  Duff,  in  a  series  of  lectures  on  Yedantism,  delivered 
some  years  ago  at  Calcutta  ;  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Wilson,  of 
Bombay,  and  others. 

2.— The  Mimansa  Dars'ana. 
§  4.  Of  the  Author  of  the  System  and  his  Writings. 

The  founder  of  the  Mimansa  School  was  Jaimini,  of 
whose  history  very  little  is  known.  He  is  described  as  a 
short  young  man,  of  light  complexion,  wearing  the  dress 
of  a  mendicant,  and  living  at  Nilavata-Mula.  He  was 
born  at  Dwaita-vana.  His  father,  Shakatayana,  was  author 
of  a  Sanskrit  dictionary,  and  his  son,  Kriti,  wrote  certain 
eerses  in  the  Devf-Bhagavata. 

There  are  about  twenty-six  works  extant,  illustrating 
the  Mimansa  System,  the  chief  of  which  are  the  Sutras  of 
Jaimini  ;  the  Bhashya,  by  Shavara  (and  comments  thereon 
by  Bhatta,  Vachaspati-Mishra  and  Kanaka);  the  Satika- 
Sastra-Dipika,  by  Soma-Natha;  the  Dharma-Dipika ;  the 
Mimansa-Sara ;  and  the  Mimansa  Sangraha. 


THE  MOIANSA'  DARS'ANA.  97 

§  5.  Outline  of  the  System. 

From  the  three  last-named  works  chiefly  we  gather  the 
following  abridgment  of  the  system  of  Jaimini.  He 
taught  that  God  is  to  be  worshipped  only  through  the 
incantations  of  the  Yedas  :  that  the  Yedas  were  uncreated, 
and  contained  in  themselves  the  proofs  of  their  own  di- 
vinity, the  very  words  of  which  were  unchangeable.  His 
reasonings  on  the  nature  of  material  things  were  similar 
to  those  of  Gautama,  insisting  that  truth  is  capable  of  the 
clearest  demonstration,  without  the  possibility  of  mistake. 
Creation,  preservation,  and  destruction,  he  represented  as 
regulated  by  the  merit  and  demerit  of  works  ;  while  he 
rejected  the  doctrine  of  the  total  destruction  of  the  uni- 
verse. He  maintained  that  the  images  of  the  Gods  were 
not  real  representations  of  these  beings,  but  only  given  to 
assist  the  mind  of  the  worshipper  ;  that  the  mere  forms  of 
worship  had  neither  merit  nor  demerit  in  them ;  and  that 
the  promises  of  the  Sastra  to  persons  who  presented  so 
many  offerings,  so  many  prayers,  etc.,  were  only  given  as 
allurements  to  duty. 

He  directed  the  person,  who  sought  final  emancipation, 
to  cherish  a  firm  belief  in  the  Yedas,  as  well  as  persuasion 
of  the  benefits  of  religion,  and  the  desire  of  being  engaged 
in  the  service  of  the  Gods  ;  and  then,  by  entering  upon 
the  duties  of  religion,  and  by  degrees  ascending  through 
the  states  of  a  student,  a  secular,  and  a  hermit,  he  would 
be  sure  to  obtain  final  absorption  in  Brahma. 

Of  the  three  divisions  of  the  Yeda,  the  first,  called  the 
Karma  Kdnda,  or  "practical  part,"  relates  to  religious 

7 


98       HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

ceremonies  (including  moral  and  religious  obligations). 
This  portion  Jaimini  has  attempted  to  explain  in  his 
Sutras,  and  in  the  Pw/Ta-Mimansa  (i.e.,  "/orwer-Mimansa," 
which  is  commonly  referred  to  when  the  term  "  Mimdnsd  " 
simply  is  used),  so  called  in  distinction  from  the  Uttara 
(or  latter)  Mimansa  ascribed  to  Yyasa,  which  is  the  same 
as  the  Vedanta,  and  is  founded  on  the  Jndna  Kdnda  (or 
theological  part)  of  the  Yedas,  treating  of  the  spiritual 
worship  of  the  Supreme  Being  or  Soul  of  the  Universe.1 

Sound  (T&Q  says  Jaimini,  in  opposition  to  the  Nyaiyikas, 
who  deny  this,  is  uncreated  and  eternal,  and  is  of  two  kinds, 
viz.,  simple  sound,  or  that  which  is  produced  by  an  im- 
pression on  the  air  without  requiring  an  agent,  as  the 
name  of  God ;  and  compound  (symbolized  or  audible)  sound. 
Thus,  the  state  of  the  sea,  in  a  perfect  calm,  represents 
simple,  uncreated  sound ;  but  the  sea,  in  a  state  of  agita- 
tion, illustrates  sound  as  made  known  by  an  agent. 

Symbols  of  sounds,  or  letters  (^TTT0>  are  eternal  and 
uncreated ;  as  is  also  the  meaning  of  sounds.  For  instance, 
when  a  person  has  pronounced  ka  (3i),  however  long  he 
may  continue  to  utter  ha,  ka,  it  is  the  same  sound,  some- 
1  imes  present  and  sometimes  absent;  but  sound  is  never 
new.  Its  manifestation  alone  is  new  by  an  impression 
made  upon  the  air.  Therefore  sound  is  God  (Brahma),  and 
the  world  is  nothing  but  name. 

The  Veda  has  no  human  origin,  but  contains  in  itself 


1  The  term  Mimdnsd  is  derived  from  tndna  (TT*TJ  "to  seek  knowledge," 
"In  decide,"  the  derivation  tajring  the  augment  of  the  reduplicated  verb 
(Wilson),  and  imports  that  the  writer  has  rendered  the  meaning  of  the  Veda 

certain. 


THE  MIMANSA  DARS'ANA.  99 

the  evidence  of  divine  authorship,  and  comes  forth  as 
the  command  of  a  monarch.  It  is  incumbent  on  men 
to  receive  also.,  as  divine,  those  works  (of  the  sages)  which 
are  found  to  agree  with  the  Yeda,  to  contain  clear  defini- 
tions of  duty,  and  to  be  free  from  contradictions. 

What  is  religion  ?  That  which  secures  happiness.  And 
it  is  the  duty  of  man  to  attend  to  the  duties  of  religion, 
not  only  on  this  account,  but  in  obedience  to  the  commands 
of  God.     The  divine  law  is  called  Vidhi  (ftfa). 

Should  any  one  say,  then  I  have  nothing  to  do  with 
other  kinds  of  instruction,  since  this  alone  is  divine.  To 
this  it  is  replied,  that  forms  of  praise,  motives  to  duty,  and 
religious  observances,  are  auxiliaries  to  the  divine  law, 
and  have,  therefore,  a  relative  sanctity  and  obligation. 

There  are  five  modes  of  ascertaining  the  commands  of 
God,  viz. :  (1)  The  subject  to  be  discussed  is  brought  for- 
ward ;  (2)  questions  respecting  it  are  stated  ;  (3)  objections 
are  started ;  (4)  replies  to  these  objections  are  given ;  and 
(5),  the  question  is  decided.  He  who  acts  in  religion 
according  to  the  decision  thus  come  to,  does  well ;  and  so 
does  he  who  rejects  what  will  not  bear  this  examination  ; 
but  he  who  follows  rules  which  have  been  hereby  con- 
demned, labours  in  vain. 

Those  actions  from  which  future  happiness  will  arise 
are  called  religious,  or  good,  because  productive  of  happi- 
ness ;  and  those  which  tend  to  future  misery  are  called 
evil,  on  account  of  their  evil  fruits.  Hence,  according  to 
Jaimini,  actions  of  themselves  have  in  them  neither  good 
nor  evil.  Their  nature  can  only  be  inferred  from  the 
declarations  of  the  Yeda  respecting  them,  or  from  future 


100  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

consequences.  The  Hindus  appear  to  have  no  just  idea  of 
moral  evil. 

Of  all  the  works  on  the  Civil  and  Canon  Law,  that  of 
Ma nu  is  to  be  held  in  the  greatest  reverence,  for  Manu 
composed  his  work  after  a  personal  study  of  the  Yeda. 
Other  sages  have  composed  theirs  from  mere  comments. 

From  the  evidence  of  things  which  God  has  afforded, 
especially  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  mistakes  cannot  arise 
either  respecting  secular  or  religious  affairs.  When  there 
may  exist  error  in  this  evidence,  it  will  diminish,  but 
cannot  destroy  the  nature  of  things.  If  there  be  an  im- 
perfection in  seed,  the  production  may  be  imperfect,  but 
its  nature  will  not  be  changed.  The  seat  of  error  and 
inattention  is  to  be  found  in  this  reasoning  faculty,  and 
not  in  the  senses ;  error  arising  from  the  confused  union 
of  present  ideas  (anubhava)  with  recollection. 

Some  affirm  that  ideas  are  received  into  the  understand- 
ing separately,  and  never  two  at  the  same  instant.  This 
is  incorrect ;  for  it  must  be  admitted,  that  while  one  idea 
is  retained,  there  is  an  opening  left  in  the  understanding 
for  the  admission  of  another.  Thus,  in  arithmetical 
calculations,  "  one  added  to  one  makes  two." 

The  Veda  has,  in  some  parts,  forbidden  all  injury  to 
sentient  beings,  and  in  others  has  prescribed  the  offering 
of  bloody  sacrifices.  Jaimini  explains  this  apparent  con- 
tradiction by  observing  that  some  commands  are  general, 
and  others  particular  :  that  the  former  must  give  way  to 
the  latter,  as  a  second  knot  always  loosens,  in  a  degree,  the 
first.  So,  when  it  is  said  that  Saraswati  is  altogether 
white,  it  is  to  be  understood,  not  literally,  but  generally, 


THE   MTMA'NSA'  DARS'ANA.  101 

for  the  hair  and  eyebrows  of  the  goddess  are  not  white. 
Therefore,  in  cases  where  general  commands  are  given, 
they  must  be  observed  with  those  limitations  which  are 
found  in  the  Sdstra. 

The  promises  of  reward  contained  in  the  Sdstra  upon 
a  minute  attention  to  the  different  parts  of  duty,  have  been 
given  rather  as  an  incitement  to  its  performance  than  with 
the  intention  of  entire  fulfilment.  He  who  has  begun  a 
ceremony,  but  has,  by  circumstances,  been  unable  to  finish 
it,  shall  yet  not  be  unrewarded. 

The  benefits  resulting  from  the  due  performance  of  civil 
and  social  duties  are  confined  to  this  life.  Those  con- 
nected with  the  performance  of  religious  duties  are  to  be 
enjoj^ed  in  a  future  state,  while  some  meritorious  actions, 
or  virtues,  reap  their  reward  both  in  the  present  and  the 
future  life. 

Works  give  birth  to  invisible  consequences — either  pro- 
pitious or  otherwise — according  to  their  nature ;  and, 
besides  works,  there  is  no  other  sovereign  or  judge. 
These  consequences,  ever  accompanying  the  individual, 
as  the  shadow  the  body,  appear  in  the  next  birth,  in 
accordance  with  the  time  and  manner  in  which  those 
actions  were  performed  in  the  preceding  birth.  "  Works 
rule,  and  men  by  them  are  led  or  driven,  as  the  ox  with  a 
hook  in  its  nose." 

The  progress  of  all  actions,  whether  they  originate  in 
the  commands  of  the  Sastras,  or  in  the  customs  of  a 
country,  are  as  follows : — First,  the  act  is  considered  and 
resolved  on  in  the  mind ;  then  it  is  pursued  by  means  of 
words ;   and,  lastly,  it  is  accomplished  by  executing  the 


102  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

different  constituent  parts  of  the  action.  Hence  it  follows 
that  religion  and  irreligion  refer  to  thoughts,  words,  and 
actions.  Some  actions,  however,  are  purely  those  of  the 
mind,  or  of  the  voice,  or  of  the  body.  The  virtue  or  vice 
of  all  actions  depend  on  the  state  of  the  heart. 

The  doctrine  that,  at  a  certain  period,  the  whole  uni- 
verse will  be  destroyed  at  once,  is  incorrect.  The  world 
had  no  beginning,  and  will  have  no  end.  As  long  as 
there  are  works,  there  must  be  birth,  as  well  as  a  world 
like  the  present,  to  form  a  theatre  on  which  they  may  be  per- 
formed, and  their  consequences  either  enjoyed  or  endured. 

One  of  the  sages  of  the  Mimansa  school  thus  expresses 
himself: — "  God  is  simple  sound.  To  assist  the  pious  in 
their  forms  of  meditation  (or  incantations l )  He  is  repre- 
sented as  light ;  but  the  power  of  liberation  lies  in  the 
sound  'God — God/2  When  the  repeater  is  perfect,  the 
incantation,  or  name  repeated,  appears  to  him  in  the  form 
of  simple  light  or  glory. 

"  The  objects  of  worship,  which  are  within  the  cognisance 
of  the  senses,  are  to  be  received ;  for  without  faith  religious 
actions  are  destitute  of  fruit.  Therefore,  let  no  one  treat 
an  incantation  as  a  mere  form  of  alphabetic  signs,  nor 
an  image  as  composed  of  the  inanimate  material,  lest  he 
should  be  guilty  of  a  serious  crime." 

3. — Other  Systems  of  Hindu  Philosophy. 

Though  the  Hindu  Philosophy  is  commonly  said  to  be 
comprised  in  the  six  Darsanas  already  described,  yet  it 
is  proper  to  add  that  there  have  existed  in  India  several 
1  Mantras.  2  Brahm. 


THE  SATWATAS.  103 

other  sects,  such  as  the  Sdtwata,  the  regular  Paurdniks, 
the  Bauddhas,  the  Jains,  etc. 

§  6.  The  Sdhvata  Sect. 

Previously  to  the  time  of  Ramanuja-Charya,  the  Sat- 
wata1  sect  had  sunk  into  oblivion  ;  but  since  that  period, 
a  body  of  persons,  distinguished  by  this  title,  has  always 
been  found  in  different  parts  of  India.  Latterly  'they 
have  been  most  numerous  in  the  Karnata  country.  They 
study  the  works  of  the  reviver  of  the  sect,  Ramanuja,  and 
a  comment  by  Tata- Chary  a,  along  with  a  few  other  treatises. 

This  creed  is,  in  substance,  as  follows  : — God  is  possessed 
of  form.  The  terms  government,  effort,  desire,  etc.,  are 
wholly  inapplicable  to  a  being  destitute  of  form.  Those 
who  have  spoken  of  God  as  pure  spirit,  meant  only  that 
he  was  not  clothed  with  a  body  derived  from  primary 
elements.  The  mind  regulates,  through  actions,  the  future 
destiny ;  but  mind  is  an  appendage  to  body,  and  not  a 
part  of  abstract  spirit.  From  the  divine  form  proceed 
rays  of  glory,  so  that  God  appears  as  a  body  of  light. 
The  Deity  is  perfect  joy.  Creation  arose  from  His  will, 
and  the  desire  to  create  from  that  energetic  joy  which  is 
essential  to  the  Divine  nature.  As  soon  as  the  mundane 
system  was  formed,  God  entered  it,  and  began  to  display 
all  the  operations  seen  in  the  visible  universe. 

In  obtaining  liberation,  devotion  is  more  efficacious  than 
wisdom  or  ceremonies.  A  future  state  of  bliss  is  connected 
with  a  residence  near  the  Deity  in  the  unchangeable  abode 
of  the  Divine  Being. 

1  Or  Shatwata,  according  to  Ward. 


104      HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

This  sect  rejects  the  idea  of  absorption,  pleading  that  it 
is  far  more  pleasant  to  drink  the  sweet  and  cooling  draught 
than  to  be  lost  in  the  ocean ;  and  that  the  highest  happi- 
ness of  which  we  are  capable  is  to  be  near  the  Deity, 
partaking  of  His  overflowing  blessedness. 

§  7.  The  Paurdnihs. 

Although  the  Purdnas  appear  to  have  led  the  people  to 
the  popular  mythology,  rather  than  to  philosophic  en- 
quiries, they  still  abound  with  speculations  from  which 
many  -systems  of  philosophy  might  be  formed.  One  sys- 
tem was  taught  by  Loma  Harshana,  who  attracted  around 
him  many  disciples,  and  formed  a  distinct  sect  under  the 
name  of  Pauranics,  though,  in  Bengal,  at  present,  those 
are  called  so  who  have  merely  read  one  or  more  of  the 
Puranas. 

The  doctrines  which  Loma  Harshana  appears  to  have 
taught,  comprised,  among  others,  the  following : — JNTara- 
yana,  the  supreme  cause,  possesses  a  visible  form.  For 
the  purposes  of  creation,  etc.,  he  assumed  the  names  of 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva,  under  each  of  which  names  some 
one  of  the  three  qualities  prevails.  For  the  good  of  man- 
kind, Narayana  lias  been  frequently  incarnate,  either  as  a 
divine  teacher,  or  as  a  leader  or  guide,  or  as  a  hero.  In 
the  different  forms  of  the  Gods,  to  meet  the  immediate  and 
private  wants  of  mankind,  as  to  remove  diseases,  etc.,  he 
assumes  various  shapes.  The  worship  of  God  is  to  be 
performed  by  bodily  services,  such  as  bowing  to  his  image, 
doing  menial  service  in  a  temple,  etc. ;  by  words,  i.e.,  by 


THE  BAUDDHAS.     .  105 

reading,  singing,  repeating  his  name,  etc. ;    and  by  the 
mind,  as  in  meditating  on  the  various  forms  he  assumes. 

§  8.  The  Bauddhas,  or  Buddhists. 

Among  these  there  were  six  sects  of  philosophy,  some 
of  which  agreed  in  doctrine  generally  with  the  orthodox 
sects ;  but  all  of  them  deny  an  intelligent  separate  first 
cause.  The  founder  of  Buddhism  was  Buddha  Sakya 
Muni,  called  also  Gautama1  Sakya-sinha,  as  to  the  period 
of  whose  existence  historical  data  are  exceedingly  con- 
tradictory. The  Chinese  records  fix  his  death  at  about 
1000  B.C.,  while  those  of  Ceylon  place  it  in  543  b.c.  The 
political  triumph  of  Buddhism  in  India  dates  from  the 
sera  of  Asoka,  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century  B.C. 
It  was  definitively  introduced  into  China  in  a.d.  61,  and 
into  Ceylon  probably  during  the  third  century  B.c.  The 
chronology  of  Buddhism  is  discussed  at  great  length 
by  Max  Miiller  in  his  aAncient  Sanskrit  Literature." 
Buddhists  were  the  great  opponents  of  the  Brahmans. 
Buddha  himself  was  a  Kshatriya,  but  of  princely  origin. 
He  was  not  the  first  of  his  caste  who  sternly  opposed  the 
ambitions  of  the  Brahmans.  Visvamitra,  among  others, 
who  was  also  of  the  royal  caste,  had  several  centuries 
before  struggled,  with  some  success,  against  the  exclusive- 
ness  of  the  priests.  The  Brahmans,  however,  were  ulti- 
mately victorious,  and  succeeded  in  driving  Buddhism 
almost  entirely  out  of  India,  which  found  a  successful 
footing  in  Burmah,  Ceylon,  and  China. 

1  He  must  not  be  confounded  with  Gautama,  the  founder  of  the  Nyaya 
School. 


106  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

§  9.  The  Jains. 

Though  these,  like  the  Buddhists,  may  be  regarded  as 
rather  a  religious  than  a  purely  philosophical  sect,  yet  as, 
in  all  the  schools  and  systems,  religion  and  philosophy  are 
inseparably  united,  perhaps  this  may  be  the  most  befitting 
place  to  notice  their  peculiar  tenets. 

The  founder  of  this  system  was  Eishabha-deva,  a  Hindu, 
who  is  said  to  have  been  incarnate  thirteen  times,  each  of 
which  avatars  is  distinguished  by  the  epithet  Jina.1  This 
term  is  also  applied  to  the  twenty-four  Tirthanharas,  or 
saints,  who  are  supposed  to  flourish  in  an  Avasarpini,  or 
Jaina  age,  the  last  of  whom  was  Mahavira. 

The  leading  tenets  of  the  Jains,  and  those  which  chiefly 
distinguish  them  from  the  rest  of  the  Hindus,  are — first, 
the  denial  of  the  divine  origin  and  infallible  authority 
of  the  Yedas  ;  secondly,  the  reverence  of  certain  holy 
mortals,  who  acquired  by  practises  of  self-denial  and  morti- 
fication a  station  superior  to  that  of  the  gods  ;  and  thirdly, 
extreme  and  even  ludicrous  tenderness  for  animal  life. 

The  disregard  of  the  authority  of  the  Yedas  is  common 
to  the  Jains  and  the  Bauddhas,  and  involves  a  neglect  of 
the  rites  which  they  prescribe ;  in  fact,  it  is  in  a  great 
degree  from  those  rites  that  an  inference  unfavourable  to 
the  sanctity  of  the  Vcdas  is  drawn ;  and,  not  to  speak  of 
the  sacrifices  of  animals,  which  the  Yedas  occasionally 
enjoin,  the  Homa,  or  burnt-offering,  which  forms  a  part  of 
every  ceremonial  in  those  works,  is  an  abomination  ;  as 

f^J«T  from  f^f  "  to  conquer,"  i.e.  be  who  has  overcome  the  "eight  great 
crimes." 


THE  JAINS.  107 

insects  crawling  among  the  fuel,  bred  in  the  ghi,  or  falling 
into  the  flame,  may  be  destroyed  by  every  oblation.  As 
far,  however,  as  the  doctrines  they  teach  are  conformable 
to  the  Jain  tenets,  the  Yedas  are  admitted  as  of  divine 
authority. 

The  Jains  are  divided  into  religious  and  lay  orders, 
Yatis  and  Sravakas.  Having  no  priests  of  their  own, 
Brahmans  officiate  in  their  temples.  The  Jains  are  divided 
into  Digambaras  and  Swetambaras ;  the  former  sky-clad, 
i.e.  naked,  the  latter  white- robed.  In  the  present  day, 
however,  the  Digambaras  in  general  are  only  entirely 
divested  of  covering  at  meals. 

The  literature  of  the  Jains  is  very  extensive,  including 
Puranas  of  their  own,  writers  on  astronomy,  astrology, 
medicine,  mathematical  sciences,  etc. 

The  followers  of  this  sect  were  formerly  very  popular  in 
Hindustan,  and  are  still  very  numerous,  especially  in  the 
Doab,  about  Mainpiiri,  and  also  in  Guzerat.  The  pro- 
vinces of  Me  war  and  Marwar  are  the  cradle  of  the  Jain 
system. 

The  only  other  philosophical  or  religious  sect  we  shall 
mention  here  is  that  of 

§  10.  The  Khdndanas. 

The  founder  of  this  sect  was  Sri  Marsha,1  who  in  a  work 
called  the  Khandana  taught  a  system  different  from  all 
the  Darsanas,  from  which  circumstance  he  received  the 
title  of  the  Khandana  kdra,  or  the  destroyer. 

1  He  was  the  author  of  a  poem  called  the  Naishada. 


PART   III. 

POETICAL  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  LITERATURE. 


CHAPTER  I. 
ON  THE  EPIC  POETRY  OF  THE  HINDUS. 

§  1.  Introductory  Remarks. 

That  Epic  poetry,  traditional  as  well  as  improvised,  on 
the  spur  of  the  moment,  existed  during  the  Yedic  age, 
though  it  was  lost  afterwards,  is  a  fact  clearly  established 
hy  passages  and  references  in  the  Brahmanas  and  other 
works  of  the  Sutra  age.  In  the  collection  of  the  Yedic 
hymns,  there  are  some  which  may  be  called  epic,  and  may 
be  compared  with  the  short  hymns  ascribed  to  Homer. 
In  the  Brahmanas  passages  occur,  in  prose  and  verse, 
celebrating  the  actions  of  old  kings  ;  and  on  certain  public 
occasions,  such  as  at  the  Horse  Sacrifice  (as  we  learn  from 
the  S&nkhyana  Sutras,  as  quoted  by  Max  Midler),  the 
priest,  on  each  of  tin-  ten  days  which  it  occupied,  had  to 
recite  a  story  for  the  instruction  and  entertainment  of  the 
people,  doubtless  mostly  or  all  in  metre,  and  of  a  decidedly 
epical  character.  Many  compositions  of  this  kind,  there- 
fore, must  have  existed  in  Yedic  times,  though  they  are 


THE  RAMA'YANA.  109 

now  lost ;  and  songs  in  celebration  of  great  heroes  were, 
doubtless,  current  in  India  quite  as  early  as  the  Homeric 
poems  in  Greece,  and  perhaps  earlier. 

The  two  great  Epic  poems  of  the  Hindus  are  the 
Rdmdyana  and  the  Mahd-bhdrata.  To  fix  the  exact  period 
at  which  either  of  them  was  composed  is  now  impossible, 
though,  from  internal  evidence,  they  must  both  have  been 
the  productions  of  a  post-vedic  age. 

§  2.  The  Rdmdyana 

was,  no  doubt,  the  more  ancient  of  the  two  Indian  Epics. 
Neither  it  nor  the  Maha-bharata,  nor  any  of  the  produc- 
tions of  antecedent  ages,  was  committed  to  writing  till 
many  centuries  after  their  original  composition.  In  the 
fourth  chapter  of  the  first  book  of  the  Ramayana,  we  meet 
with  special  reference  to  the  minstrels  and  reciters,  by 
whom,  like  the  Greek  pa^aSol,  the  ancient  Hindu  poems, 
previous  to  the  invention  of  writing  in  India,  were  pre- 
served and  transmitted  from  age  to  age.1 

1  Max  Miiller,  who  discusses  at  some  length,  (in  his  work  on  Ancient 
Sanskrit  Literature)  the  interesting  question,  -when  writing  was  first  introduced 
into  India,  considers  that  it  was  practised  there  hefore  the  time  of  Alexander's 
conquests,  and  that  "  though  it  may  not  have  been  used  for  literary  purposes, 
we  can  hardly  doubt  that  a  written  alphabet  was  known  during  the  greater 
part  of  the  Sutra  period."  Megasthenes  declared  that  the  Indians  did  not 
know  letters,  and  that  their  laws  were  not  written,  and  that  they  administered 
justice  from  memory ;  and  Nearchus,  though  he  ascribes  to  the  Indians  the 
art  of  making  paper  of  cotton,  states  that  their  laws  were  not  reduced  to 
writing.  Both  these  Greek  writers,  however,  mention  that  the  Indians  used 
letters  for  inscriptions  on  mile-stones,  etc.  In  the  Lalita-Vistara,  a  work  con- 
taining the  life  of  Buddha  (which  was  translated  into  Chinese  A.D.  76)  the 
young  S'akya  {i.e.,  Buddha)  is  represented  as  learning  to  write.  And  the 
first  authenticated  inscription  in  India  is  of  Buddhist  origin,  and  belongs  to 
the  third  century  before  Christ.  Written  Sanskrit  books  were  certainly  known 
in  Panini's  time,  who  was  probably  contemporaneous  with  Alexander,  if  not 
before. 


HO  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

The  word  Earn  ay  ana  (THT+^U*l«l)  means  the  adven- 
tures of  Rama,  who  was  one  of  the  incarnations  of  Vishnu, 
the  Preserver,  and  is  still  a  favourite  deity  in  most  parts  of 
India,  more  especially  in  the  districts  of  Oude  and  Bahar, 
where  Krishna  has  not  supplanted  him.  There  were  three 
Rainas  in  Hindu  mythology,  viz.,  Parasu-Rama,  Rania- 
Chandra,  and  Bala-Rama,  all  avatars  (or  incarnations)  of 
Vishnu.  The  last  is  the  Indian  Hercules,  and  as  the 
elder  brother  of  Krishna,  appears  frequently  in  the  Maha- 
bharata.  Parasu-Rama,  as  the  son  of  the  sage  Jamadagni, 
is  the  type  of  Brahmanism,  arrayed  in  opposition  to  the 
Kshatriyas,  or  military  caste.  He  is  introduced  once  into 
the  Rarnayana,  but  only  to  exhibit  his  inferiority  to  the 
real  hero  of  the  work,  viz.,  Rania- Chandra,  who,  as  the 
son  of  Dasaratha,  a  prince  of  the  solar  dynasty,  typifies 
the  conquering  Kshatriyas,  advancing  towards  the  south, 
and  subjugating  the  barbarous  aborigines,  who  are  repre- 
sented by  Ravana  and  his  followers. 

There  are  many  poems  bearing  the  name  of  Ramayana 
— all  relating  to  the  same  hero — but  by  far  the  most  com- 
plete and  famous  is  the  lengthy  epic,  the  authorship  of 
which  is  attributed  to  Vdlmiki. 

It  narrates  the  banishment  of  Rama,  under  the  surname 
of  Chandra  (the  moon),  a  prince  belonging  to  the  dynasty 
of  the  kings  of  Ayodhyd  ;  his  wanderings  through  the 
southern  peninsula;  the  seizure  of  his  wife,  Sita,  by  the 
giant  ruler  of  Ceylon  (Ravana) ;  the  miraculous  conquest 
of  lli is  island  by  Rama,  aided  by  Sugriva,  king  of  the 
monkeys  (or  foresters — the  word  bandar  meaning  both),  or 
J!a/t.s/iasas  as  they  are  also  called,  and  by  Vibhishana,  the 


THE  KAMATANA.  HI 

brother  of  Havana ;  the  slaying  of  the  ravishing  demon 
by  Kama,  and  recovering  of  Sit  a ;  and  the  restoration  of 
Chandra  to  the  empire  of  his  ancestors  at  Ayodhya. 

No  mention  is  made  of  Rama  in  the  Yeda,  but  he  may 
be  regarded  as  the  first  real  Kshatriya  hero  of  the  post- 
vedic  age  ;  and  looking  to  the  great  simplicity  of  the  style 
of  the  Ramayana,  the  absence  of  any  reliable  allusion  to 
Buddhism  as  an  established  fact,  and  to  the  practices 
known  to  have  prevailed  in  India  as  early  as  the  fourth 
century  before  Christ,  as  well  as  from  other  considerations, 
"we  cannot/'  says  Monier  Williams  (Essay  on  Indian 
Epic  Poetry),  "  be  far  wrong  in  asserting  that  a  great 
portion,  if  not  the  whole,  of  the  Ramayana,  as  we  now 
have  it,  must  have  been  current  in  India  as  early  as  the 
fifth  century  before  Christ." 

Yalmiki's  work  consists  of  24,000  slokas  (or  distichs), 
divided  into  seven  books,  which  are  again  subdivided  into 
chapters.     It  may  be  divided  into  three  principal  parts,  or 
periods,  corresponding  to  the  three  chief  epochs  in  the  life 
of  Rama.      (I.)  The  account  of  his  youthful  days  ;    his 
education  and  residence  at  the  court  of  his  father  Dasa- 
ratha,  king  of  Ayodhya  ;  his  happy  marriage  to  Sita ;  and 
his  inauguration  as  heir- apparent  or  Crown  Prince.     (II.) 
The  circumstances  that  led  to  his  banishment ;    the  de- 
scription  of   his   exile  and   residence   in   the   forests   of 
Central  India.     (III.)  His  war  with  the  giants  or  demons 
of  the  south  for  the  recovery  of  his  wife  Sita,  who  had 
been  carried  off  by  their  chief  Ravana ;  his  conquest  and 
destruction  of  Ravana,  and  his  restoration  to  the  throne 
of  his  father. 


112  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

In  the  first  two  sections  of  the  poem,  there  is  little  of 
extravagant  fiction;  but  in  the  third,  the  poet  mars  the 
beauty  of  the  descriptions  by  the  wildest  exaggeration  and 
hyperbole. 

The  poem  seems  to  be  founded  on  historical  fact ;  and 
the  traditions  of  the  south  of  India  uniformly  ascribe  its 
civilization,  the  subjugation,  or  dispersion  of  its  forest 
tribes  of  barbarians,  and  the  settlement  of  civilised  Hindus, 
to  the  conquest  of  Lanka  (Ceylon)  by  Rama. 

A  part  of  the  Raniayana  was  published,  with  a  transla- 
tion, by  Messrs  Carey  and  Marshman,  some  forty  years 
ago,  and  a  Latin  translation  of  the  first  book  has  been 
more  recently  published  by  Professor  Schlegel.  The  entire 
last  book,  in  which  Rama  receives  adoration  as  a  Grod,  and 
is  identified  with  the  supreme,  is,  doubtless,  a  modern 
appendage. 

§  3.  The  Mahd'bkdrata. 

This  huge  epic,  which  is  in  all  probability  later  in  date 
than  the  Ramayana,  and  consists  of  about  220,000  long 
lines,  is  rather  a  cyclopaedia  of  Hindu  mythology, 
legendary  history,  and  philosophy,  than  a  poem  with  a 
single  subject.  It  is  divided  into  eighteen  books,  nearly 
every  one  of  which  would  form  a  large  volume ;  and  the 
whole  is  a  vast  thesaurus  of  national  legends,  said  to  have 
been  collected  and  arranged  by  Vydsa  (the  supposed  com- 
piler of  the  Yedas  and  Puranas),  a  name  derived  from  a 
Sanskrit  verb,  meaning  "  to  fit  together/'  or  "  arrange." 

The  following  is  an  outline  of  the  leading  story,  though 
this  occupies  little  more  than  a  fifth  of  the  whole  work, 


THE  MAHABHARATA.  113 

numerous   episodes   and    digressions   on   all  varieties    of 
subjects  being  interspersed  throughout  the  poem  : — 

According  to  the  legendary  history  of  India,  two 
dynasties  were  originally  dominant  in  the  north — called 
Solar  and  Lunar,  under  whom  numerous  petty  princes  held 
authority,  and  to  whom  they  acknowledged  fealty.  The 
most  celebrated  of  the  Solar  line,  which  commenced  in 
Ikskwdku,  and  reigned  in  Oude,  was  the  Rama  of  the 
Ramayana.  Under  this  dynasty  the  Brahmanieal  system 
gained  ascendancy  more  rapidly  and  completely  than 
under  the  Lunar  kings  in  the  more  northern  districts, 
where  fresh  arrivals  of  martial  tribes  preserved  an  inde- 
pendent spirit  among  the  population  already  settled  in 
those  parts.  , 

The  most  famous  of  the  Lunar  race,  who  reigned  in 
Hastinapur,  or  ancient  Delhi,  was  Bharata,  whose  au- 
thority is  said  to  have  extended  over  a  great  part  of  India, 
and  from  whom  India  is  to  this  day  called  by  the  natives 
Bharat-varsha  (the  country  or  domain  of  Bharata).  This 
Bharata  was  an  ancestor  of  Kuru,  the  twenty-third  in 
descent  from  whom  was  the  Brahman  Krishna  Dwaipdyana 
Vydsa  (the  supposed  author  of  the  Mahabharata),  who  had 
two  sons,  Dhritardshtra  and  Pdndu.  The  former,  though 
blind,  consented  to  assume  the  government  when  resigned 
by  his  younger  brother  Pandu,  and  undertook  to  educate, 
with  his  own  hundred  sons,  the  five  reputed  sons  of  his 
brother.  These  five  sons  were, — 1st,  Yudhishthira  (i.e., 
"firm  in  battle");  2nd,  Bhima  (i.e.,  "terrible");  3rd, 
Arjuna  (i.e.,  "upright");  4th,  Nakula  (i.e.,  "a  mun- 
goose  ") ;  5th,  Sahadeva  (i.e.,  " a  twining  plant"). 

8 


114  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

The  three  first  were  born  from  Pandu's  wife,  Pritha,  or 
Kunti,  but  were  really  her  children  by  three  gods,  viz., 
Dharma,1  Vayu,2  and  Indra  3  respectively.  The  two  last 
were  children  of  his  wife  Madri,  by  the  Aswini-Kumaras, 
or  "  twin  sons,"  i.e.,  of  the  Sun.  As,  however,  Pandu  had 
acknowledged  these  princes  as  his  sons,  the  objection  to 
their  birth  was  overruled  by  his  example.  Pandu  (i.e., 
"the  pule")  was  probably  a  leper,  and  so  incapable  of 
succession. 

The  characters  of  the  five  Pandavas  are  drawn  with 
much  artistic  delicacy,  and  maintained  consistently  through- 
out the  poem.  The  eldest,  Yudhishthira,  is  a  pattern  of 
justice,  integrity,  and  chivalrous  honour  and  firmness. 
Bhima  is  a  type  of  brute  courage  and  strength,  of  gigantic 
stature,  impetuous  and  irascible  ;  he  is  capable,  however, 
of  warm,  unselfish  love,  and  shows  devoted  affection  for 
his  mother  and  brothers.  Arjuna,  who  is  the  chief  hero 
of  the  poem,  is  represented  as  a  man  of  undaunted  courage, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  generous,  modest,  and  tender- 
hearted ;  of  super-human  strength,  withal,  and  matchless 
in  arms  and  athletic  exercises.  Nakula  and  Sahadeva  are 
amiable,  noble-minded,  and  spirited.  All  five  are  as 
unlike  as  possible  to  the  hundred  sons  of  Dhritarashtra, 
commonly  called  the  Ivuru  princes,  or  Kauravas,  who 
arc  represented  as  mean,  spiteful,  dishonourable,  and 
vicious.  The  cousins,  though  so  uncongenial  in  character, 
were  educated  together  at  Hastinapur  by  a  Brahman 
named  Drona,   who  found  in    the  Pandu    princes    apt 

1  The  God  of  Justice,  the  Hindu  Pluto.  ~  God  of  the  Wind  (iEolus.) 

3  (Jod  of  the  Firmament  (Jupiter  tonaus.) 


THE  MAHABHARATA.  115 

scholars.  Their  education  finished,  a  grand  tournament 
is  held,  at  which  the  cousins  display  their  skill  in  archery, 
the  management  of  chariots,  horses,  etc.  Arjuna  especially 
distinguishes  himself  by  prodigies  of  strength  and  skill; 
but  suddenly  a  stranger  enters  the  lists,  named  Karna, 
who,  after  performing  the  same  feats,  challenges  Arjuna 
to  single  combat.  But  each  champion  is  obliged  to  tell 
his  name  and  pedigree,  and  Kama's  parentage  being 
doubtful  (he  was  really  the  illegitimate  son  of  Pritha,  by 
Surya  (the  sun),  and,  therefore,  half-brother  of  Arjuna), 
he  is  obliged  to  retire  ignominously  from  the  arena.  Thus 
publicly  humiliated,  Karna  joins  the  party  of  their  enemies, 
the  Kurus,  to  whom  he  renders  important  service.  En- 
raged at  the  result  of  this  contest,  the  Kurus  endeavour  to 
destroy  the  Pandavas  by  setting  fire  to  their  house ;  but 
they,  warned  of  their  intention,  escape  by  an  underground 
passage  to  the  woods.  Soon  after,  in  the  disguise  of 
mendicant  Brahmans,  they  repair  to  the  S-ivayamvara  (the 
public  choice  of  a  husband),  by  Draupadi,  daughter  of 
Drupada,  king  of  Panchala.  Arjuna,  by  the  exhibition 
of  his  gymnastic  skill,  wins  the  favour  of  the  lovely 
princess,  who  becomes  his  bride.  Strengthened  by  Dru- 
pada's  alliance,  the  Pandu  princes  throw  off  their  disguise, 
and  the  king,  Dhritarashtra,  is  induced  to  settle  all 
differences  by  dividing  his  kingdom  between  them  and  his 
own  sons,  the  Kurus.  Yudhishthira,  however,  afterwards 
stakes  and  loses  his  whole  territory  at  dice.  His  brothers 
then  pass  twelve  years  in  the  woods,  in  disguise,  after  which 
the  war  is  again  renewed.  Krishna,  King  of  Dwaraka,  in 
Guzerat  (an  incarnation  of  Vishnu),  joins  the  Pandavas, 


116  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

as  charioteer  to  Arjuna.  The  rival  armies  meet  near  Delhi. 
The  battle,  which  lasts  for  eighteen  days,  terminates  in 
favour  of  the  Pandavas,  who  recover  their  possession,  and 
the  elder  brother  is  elevated  to  the  throne,  Duryodhana  and 
all  the  Kurus  being  slain  in  the  conflict. 

Thus  the  undivided  kingdom  of  Hastinapur  became  the 
possession  of  the  sons  of  Pandu  ;  but  they  were  so  grieved 
by  the  dreadful  slaughter  which  their  ambition  had  occa- 
sioned, that  they  resigned  their  power.  Their  famous 
ally,  Krishna — who  previous  to  his  founding  the  city  of 
Dwaraka,  had  been  expelled  from  Mathura  (Muttra),  the 
seat  of  his  family — was  accidentally  killed  in  a  thicket,  and 
his  sons,  driven  from  their  paternal  possessions,  sought 
refuge  beyond  the  Indus. 

Such  is  a  very  brief  outline  of  the  leading  story  of  the 
Maha-bharata ;  but  the  episodes,  which  occupy  more  than 
three-fourths  of  the  whole  poem,  deserve  a  passing  notice. 

§  4.   The  Bhagavad-  Gita. 

This  is  a  divine  song,  in  the  form  of  a  discourse,  be- 
tween the  Avatar  Krishna  and  his  pupil  Arjuna,  held  in 
the  midst  of  an  undecided  battle.  It  gives  a  full  and 
most  curious  exposition  of  the  half-mythological,  half- 
philosophical  pantheism  of  the  Brahmans,  and  a  general 
view  of  the  whole  mystic  theology  of  the  Hindus.  Schlegel 
calls  this  episode  the  most  beautiful,  and,  perhaps,  the 
only  truly  philosophical  poem  in  the  whole  range  of  litera- 
ture known  to  us.  There  is  something  striking  and 
magnificent  in  the  introduction  of  this  solemn  discussion 


BHAGAVAD-GrTA  AND  NALOPAKHYANAM.  117 

on  the  nature  of  the  Gfodhead  and  the  destiny  of  man  in 
the  midst  of  the  fury  and  tumult,  of  civil  war  in  which 
it  occurs.  It  consists  of  eighteen  lectures  on  so  many 
different  subjects.  Numerous  translations  have  been  made 
of  it  into  various  languages. 

§  5.   The  Nalopdkhydnam. 

This  episode  forms  part  of  the  third  book  of  the  great 
Epic.  It  is  of  entirely  a  different  cast  from  the  last,  and 
is  said  to  partake  more  of  the  manner  of  our  own  Spenser 
than  of  the  philosophic  tone  of  the  Gita. 

The  gist  of  the  story  is  briefly  as  follows  : — 
Yudhishthira,  the  eldest  of  the  Pandus,  is  in  exile  in 
the  wilderness,  where  he  and  his  four  brothers  are  doomed 
to  pass  twelve  years,  according  to  an  engagement  he  had 
entered  into  with  his  opponent  Duryodhana,  with  whom 
he  had  lost  in  dice.  The  sage,  Vrihadasva,  bears  him 
company;  and  to  amuse  and  console  him,  relates  the 
history  of  King  Nala,  who,  like  himself,  had  lost  his 
empire  and  wealth  by  playing  at  dice,  but  in  the  end 
became  fortunate  and  happy.  Nala,  king  of  Nishada, 
possessed  all  the  noble  qualities  and  acquirements  that 
could  distinguish  an  Indian  monarch.  Bhima,  king  of 
Vidarbha  (Berar)  had  an  only  daughter,  the  most  beauti- 
ful and  accomplished  of  her  sex — the  gentle  Damyanti. 
Nala  and  Damyanti  became  mutually  enamoured  from  the 
mere  fame  of  each  others  virtues.  The  Swayamvara  of 
the  princess  is  about  to  take  place.  Nala  repairs  as  a 
suitor   to  Vidarbha ;    but   Indra   and   three   other   gods 


118  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

become  incarnate  for  the  same  purpose,  and,  meeting  Nala 
in  the  way,  they  beg  him  to  be  the  bearer  of  their  message 
of  love.  He  remonstrates,  but  at  last  consents.  He 
delivers  it,  but  Damyanti  declares  that,  even  in  the 
presence  of  the  gods,  she  shall  select  the  noble  Nala. 
The  assembly  meets,  and  all  the  royal  suitors  are  in 
array ;  but  Damyanti  discovers,  to  her  dismay,  five  Nalas, 
each  of  the  deities  having  assumed  the  form,  features,  and 
dress  of  the  king  of  Nishada.  She  utters  a  supplicatory 
prayer  to  the  gods  to  reveal  to  her  the  true  object  of  her 
choice.  They  are  moved  with  compassion,  and  stand  con- 
fess* (1,  their  spiritual  bodies  being  distinguished  from  that 
of  the  human  hero  by  their  casting  no  shadow,  nor  touching 
the  ground,  and  otherwise.  Damyanti  throws  the  wreath 
of  flowers  around  the  neck  of  the  real  Nala  in  token  of  her 
choice.  The  assembly  breaks  up  amid  the  applause  of  the 
gods,  and  t  lie  lamentations  of  the  disappointed  suitors. 
The  nuptials  arc  celebrated,  and  Nala  and  his  bride  are 
blessed  with  two  lovely  children. 

Nala,  the  model  of  virtue,  and  piety,  and  learning,  at 
length  performs  the  Aswameda,  or  sacrifice  of  a  horse,  the 
height  of  Indian  devotion.  In  the  course  of  time,  how- 
9Ver,  Nala  is  induced  by  an  evil  spirit,  to  play  at  dice  with 
his  brother,  Pu&hkara,  and  loses  his  kingdom,  his  wealth, 
ln's  very  clothes.  One  stake  only  remains, — Damyanti 
herself.  Tins  Pnshkara  proposes,  but  Nala  refuses.  The 
Ql-fated  pair  are  driven  together  into  the  wilderness  all 
but  naked.  Nala  persuades  ln's  wife  to  leave  him,  and  re- 
turn to  her  father's  court,  but  she  will  not  forsake  him.  The 
frantic  man,  however,  resolves  to  abandon  her  while  asleep. 


NALOPAKHYANAM  AND  HARIVANS'A.  H9 

He  does  so.  Each,  passes  through  a  series  of  strange  and 
stormy  adventures,  ending  in  Nala  becoming  master  of  the 
horse  to  the  King  of  Ayodhya  (Oude),  and  Damyanti  return- 
ing to  her  father's  house.  After  some  time,  Damyanti,  in 
order  to  discover  the  retreat  of  Nala,  proclaims  her  inten- 
tion to  hold  another  Swayamvara,  and  to  form  a  second 
marriage,  though  forbidden  by  the  laws  of  Manu.  Bitu- 
parna,  the  King  of  Oude,  resolves  to  become  a  suitor,  and 
sets  forth  with  his  charioteer — the  disguised  Nala.  As 
they  enter  the  city  of  Bhima,  Damyanti  recognises  the 
sound  of  her  husband's  trampling  steeds — his  driving 
could  not  be  mistaken  by  her  ear.  She  employs  every 
artifice  to  discover  her  lord  ;  she  suspects  the  charioteer ; 
she  procures  some  of  his  food,  and  recognises  the  flavour 
of  her  husband's  cookery  ;  she  sends  her  children  to  him. 
Nala  can  conceal  himself  no  longer ;  but  the  jealous 
thought  that  his  wife  was  about  to  take  a  second  husband, 
rankles  in  his  heart,  and  he  rebukes  her  with  sternness. 
Damyanti  solemnly  denies  any  such  design,  declaring  that 
she  had  only  employed  the  artifice  to  win  back  her  lord. 
Nala  re-assumes  his  proper  form  and  character — wins  back 
his  wife  and  all  that  he  had  lost  to  his  unprincipled 
brother,  and,  re-ascending  his  ancestral  throne,  recom- 
mences a  reign  of  piety,  justice,  and  felicity. 

§  6.   The  Harivansa  {i.e.,  family  of  Vishnu),  etc. 

This  forms  a  sort  of  appendix  to  the  Maha-bharata, 
consisting  of  25,000  verses.  It  recounts  the  adventures  of 
Krishna,  and  subsequent  fate  of  his  family;  but  commences 


120  II  \XD BOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

with  an  account  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  of  the 
patriarchal  and  regal  dynasties.1  The  principal  other 
episodes  are — 

4.  "  The  Deluge'2 — an  Indian  tradition  of  the  deluge  of 
Noah. — This  has  been  translated  by  Bopp  and  Milnian. 

5.  "  The  Rape  of  Draupadi"  and  the  combat  of  her  five 
husbands  to  revenge  it. 

6.  "  The  Death  of Si&updla,"  and  an  account  of  Krishna's 
war  with  him. 

7.  "  The  Brahman's  Lament "  over  the  orgies  of  the 
cannibal-giant  Baka.  The  Baka-badka  (as  it  is  called  in 
the  original),  or  Brahmanavitapa,  has  been  translated,  in 
verse,  by  Dean  Milman. 

1  An  English  translation  of  the  Harivans'a,  with  a  critique  on  the  French 
version  of  M.  Langlois,  is  given  in  the  Asiat.  Journ.,  Fob.,  1828. 

*  This  episode  occurs  in  the  Vana-parva  of  the  Mahabharata.  The  hero  of 
it  is  Maim,  the  Noah  of  the  Hindus,  not  the  grandson  of  Brahma,  and  reputed 
author  of  the  Code,  but  the  seventh  Mann,  or  Manu  of  the  Kali  Yug  (or  pre- 
sent period),  called  Vaivaswata,  and  regarded  as  one  of  the  progenitors  of  the 
human  race.  _  He  is  represented  as  conciliating  the  favour  of  the  Supreme  by 
his  penance  in  an  age  of  universal  depravity.  The  earliest  account  of  him 
is  in  the  S'atapatha  Brahmana,  attached  to  the  Vajasaneyi  Sanhitu  of  the 
Yajur-veda. 


121 


CHAPTEE  II. 

Otf  THE  PTJRABTAS  AJSTD  DRAMATIC  WORKS. 

§  1.   The  Purdnas  Generally  Described.1 

The  different  works  known  by  the  name  of  Pur  an  as  are 
evidently  derived  from  the  same  religious  system  as  the 
Painayana  and  Mahabharata,  or  from  the  mytho-heroic 
stage  of  Hindu  belief.  They  present,  however,  peculi- 
arities which  designate  their  belonging  to  a  later  period, 
and  to  an  important  modification  in  the  progress  of  opinion. 
They  repeat  the  theoretical  cosmogony  of  the  two  great 
poems  ;  they  expand  and  systematise  the  chronological 
computations  ;  and  they  give  a  more  definite  and  con- 
nected representation  of  the  mythological  fictions  and 
historical  traditions.  But,  besides  these,  and  other  par- 
ticulars, they  offer  characteristic  peculiarities  in  the  para- 
mount importance  they  assign  to  individual  deities,  in  the 
variety  and  purport  of  the  rites  and  observances  addressed 
to  them,  and  in  the  invention  of  new  legends  illustrative 
of  the  power  and  graciousness  of  those  divinities,  and  of 
the  efficacy  of  implicit  devotion  to  them.  Siva  and 
Vishnu,  under  one  or  other  form,   are   almost  the  sole 

1  Abridged  from  Professor  "Wilson's  Preface  to  Translation  of  tlic  Vishnu 
Purana. 


122  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

objects  that  claim  the  homage  of  the  Hindus  in  the 
Puranas :  departing  from  the  domestic  and  elemental 
ritual  of  the  Vcdas,  and  exhibiting  a  sectarial  favour  and 
exclusiveness  not  traceable  in  the  Rama^ana,  and  only  to 
a  qualified  extent  in  the  Mahabharata.  They  are  no 
longer  authorities  for  Hindu  belief  as  a  whole,  but  were 
evidently  compiled  for  the  purposes  of  promoting  the 
special  worship  of  Vishnu  and  Siva. 

It  is  probable,  however,  that  there  may  have  been  an 
earlier  class  of  Puranas,  of  which  those  we  now  have  are 
but  the  partial  and  adulterated  representatives.  The  name 
itself,  Purdna  ("old")  indicates  the  object  of  the  com- 
pilation to  be  the  preservation  of  ancient  traditions ,  a 
purpose,  in  the  present  condition  of  the  Puranas,  but  very 
imperfectly  fulfilled.  "  I  cannot  discover  in  them,"  says 
Col.  Vans  Kennedy,  "  any  other  object  than  that  of  re- 
ligious instruction.  The  descriptions  of  the  earth  and 
planetary  systems,  and  the  lists  of  royal  races  which  occur 
in  tl lorn,  are  evidently  extraneous." 

<;  2.   The  Cosmogony  and  Tltcogony  of  the  Puranas. 

These  may  both,  probably,  be  traced  to  the  Vedas.  The 
scheme  of  primary  or  elemental  creation  they  borrow 
from  the  Sankhya  philosophy,  which  is,  probably,  one  of 
the  oldest  forma  of  speculation  on  man  and  nature  amongst 
II  Indus. 

Thr  Pantheism  (or,  \  iewed  in  one  light,  the  Polytheism) 
of  tin*  Puranas  is  one  of  their  invariable  characteristics, 
although  tlit-  particular  divinity — who  is  all  things,  from 


THE  PUKANAS.  123 

whom  all  things  proceed,  and  to  whom  all  things  return — 
be  diversified  according  to  their  individual  sectarial  bias. 
They  seem  to  have  derived  the  notion  from  the  Yedas ; 
but  in  them  the  one  universal  Being  is  of  a  higher  order 
than  a  personification  of  attributes  and  elements,  and — 
however  imperfectly  conceived  or  unworthily  described — 
is  God.  In  the  Puranas,  the  one  only  Supreme  Being  is 
supposed  to  be  manifest  in  the  person  of  Siva  or  Yishnu, 
either  in  the  way  of  illusion  (^lillj,  or  in  sport ;  and  one 
or  other  of  these  divinities  is,  therefore,  the  cause  of  all 
that  is — is  himself  all  that  exists. 

§  3.  As  to  Date. 

The  Puranas  are  evidently  works  of  different  ages,  and 
have  been  compiled  under  different  circumstances.  It  is 
highly  probable  that,  of  the  present  popular  forms  of  the 
Hindu  religion,  none  assumed  their  actual  state  earlier 
than  the  time  of  Sankara  Acharya,  the  great  Saiva 
reformer,  who  flourished,  in  all  likelihood,  in  the  eighth 
or  ninth  century.  Of  tlie  Vaishnava  teachers,  Ramanuja 
dates  in  the  12th  century,  Madhvacharya  in  the  13th,  and 
Yallabha  in  the  16th  ;  and  the  Puranas  seem  to  have 
accompanied  or  followed  their  innovations,  being  evidently 
intended  to  advocate  the  doctrines  they  taught. 

§  4.  Their  Style. 

The  invariable  form  of  the  Puranas  is  that  of  dialogue, 
in  which  some  person  relates  their  contents  in  reply  to  the 


124  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

enquiries  of  another.  The  immediate  narrator  is  com- 
monly, though  not  constantly,  Loma-harshana,  a  disciple 
of  the  famous  Krishna  Dwaipayana  Vyasa,  the  son  of 
Parasara,  who  is  said  to  have  taught  the  Ycdas  and 
Puranas  to  various  disciples,  but  who  appears  to  have 
been  the  head  of  a  college  or  school,  under  whom  various 
learned  men  gave  to  the  sacred  literature  of  the  Hindus 
the  form  in  which  it  now  presents  itself,  Yydsa  being  a 
generic  term,  meaning  "  an  arranger  or  compiler." 

Loma-harshana  was  a  Siita,  i.e.  a  bard  or  panegyrist,  who 
was  created,  according  to  the  Vishnu  Purana,  to  celebrate 
the  exploits  of  princes  ;  and  hence,  perhaps,  the  appropria- 
tion, in  a  great  measure,  of  the  Puranas  to  the  genealogies 
of  regal  dynasties  and  descriptions  of  the  universe. 

§  5.   The  Pitrdnas  enumerated. 

The  Puranas  arc  uniformly  stated  to  be  eighteen  in 
number.  Their  mimes  are  as  follows  : — (1)  The  Brahma 
Purana;  (2)  the  Padma ;  (3)  the  Vaishnava;  (4)  the 
:  (5)  the  Bhdgavata ;  (6)  the  Ndrada ;  (7)  the 
Mdrkandeya ;  (8)  the  A'gneya;  (9)  the  Bhaviskya;  (10) 
the  Brdhma-vaivartta  ;  (11)  the Lainga ;  (12)  the  Ydrdha; 
(13)  the  Skdnda\  (11)  the  Vdmana;  (15)  the  Kaurma\ 
(16)  the  MaUya  ;  (17)  the  Gdruda  ;  (18)  the  Brahmdnda. 

This  list  is  according  to  the  Bhdgavata.  In  other  au- 
thorities there  are  a  few  variations  in  the  titles,  but  not 
in  the  number. 

It  is  said  that  there  are  also  eighteen  Upa-puranas,  or 
minor  Puranas;  but  the  names  of  these  are  specified  in 


THE  PURANAS.  125 

the  least  receivable  authorities,  and  the  greater  number  of 
the  works  are  not  procurable. 

§  6.   Classified  and  Described. 

The  Puranas  are,  in  the  Padma,  divided  into  three 
classes,  according  to  the  qualities  which  characterise  or 
prevail  in  them,  viz.,  the  Satwika,  the  Tdmasa,  and  the 
Rdjasa,  from  the  predominence,  respectively,  of  the  quali- 
ties of  satwa  (goodness  or  purity),  tamas  (gloom  or 
ignorance),  or  rajas  (passion),  which  distinguishes  each. 
Those  in  which  the  mahdtmya  (greatness)  of  Hari,  or 
Vishnu,  prevails,  are  Satwika  ;  those  in  which  the  legends 
of  Agni,  or  Siva,  predominates,  are  Tdmasa;  and  those 
wnich  dwell  most  on  the  stories  of  Brahma,  are  Rdjasa. 
These  last  are  special  favourites  with  the  sdktas,  or  wor- 
shippers of  soldi,  or  the  female  principle.  It  is  in  the 
Puranas  included  in  the  Pajasa  class  that  such  legends 
occur  as  the  Durga  Mahatmya  (an  episode  of  the  Mar- 
kandeya),  on  which  the  worship  of  Durga,  or  Kali,  is 
especially  founded.  The  Brahma-vaivartta  (another  of  the 
same  class)  devotes  a  great  portion  of  its  contents  to  the 
celebration  of  Padha,  the  mistress  of  Krishna,  and  other 
female  divinities.  Indeed,  the  principal  subject  of  the 
Pajasa  class  seems  to  be  the  worship  of  Krishna,  and  the 
account  of  his  amours,  and  as  the  sojourner  in  Yrindavan, 
under  the  title  of  Gopdla,  and  Bdl-  Gopdla,  the  companion 
of  the  cowherds  and  milkmaids,  the  lover  of  Padha,  or  as 
the  juvenile  master  of  the  universe,  Jaganndtlia. 

The  aggregate  number  of  Slokas  in  the  Puranas  is  stated 
to  be  400,000  or  1,600,000  lines. 


126  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

§  7.   Of  the  Skdnda  and  Padma  Puranas. 

The  longest  of  the  Puranas  seems  to  have  been  the 
Skdnda,  which  is  said  to  have  contained  81,000  stanzas, 
but  in  a  collected  form  it  is  no  longer  in  existence.  Only 
fragments  of  it  are  met  with  in  the  shape  of  Sanhitas, 
Kandas,  and  Mahatmyas.  The  most  celebrated  of  these 
portions  is  the  Kdsi-Kdnda,  which  gives  a  minute  de- 
scription of  the  temples  of  Siva  in  or  near  Benares 
(Kasi),  mixed  with  directions  for  worshipping  Mahesh- 
wara  (Siva).  The  greater  part,  at  least,  of  this  Kanda 
was  most  probably  written  before  the  first  attack  on 
Benares  by  Mahmiid  of  Ghazni.  The  story  of  Agastya 
records,  in  a  legendary  style,  the  propagation  of  Hinduism 
in  the  south  of  India. 

The  Padma  Parana,  which  is  the  next  longest,  contains 
55,000  stanzas,  and  gives  an  account  of  the  period  when 
i he  world  wns  a  golden  lotus  (padma),  Brahma  assuming 
that  form  at  creation. 

§  8.  Of  the  Vishnu  Parana. 

I  Jut  the  best  known  of  all  is  the  Vishnu  Parana,  on 
account  of  the  translation  of  it,  with  a  long  preface  and 
numerous  notes,  by  Professor  II.  II.  Wilson,  who  gives, 
i,i  lii-  preface,  a  lull  analysis  of  all  the  other  Puranas,  so 
far  as  their  contents  arc  ascertainable.  It  contains  23,000 
stanzas,  In  this  work,  Parasara,  beginning  with  the 
events  of  the  Vardha  Kalpa,  expounds  all  duties,  especially 
in  connection  with  the  worship  of  Vishnu  (as  Krishna). 


THE  PURA'NAS.  127 

The  fourth  book,  which  contains  the  genealogies  of  the 
royal  family,  commencing  with  the  Solar  and  Lunar 
dynasties,  until  a  comparatively  modern  period,  may  be 
regarded  as  a  valuable  epitome  of  Hindu  history. 

Another  of  the  Puranas  deserves  special  notice  here,  as 
one  of  great  celebrity  in  India,  and  as  exercising  a  more 
direct  and  powerful  influence  on  the  opinions  and  feelings 
of  the  people  than  perhaps  any  other  of  the  Puranas,  viz. — 

§  9.   The  Sri  Bhagavata. 

This  is  placed  fifth  in  all  the  lists,  except  in  that  of  the 
Padma  Purana,  which  ranks  it  as  the  18th,  as  being  the 
extracted  substance  of  all  the  rest.  It  is  so  named  from 
being  dedicated  to  the  glorification  of  Bhagavat  or  Vishnu. 

It  consists  of  18,000  verses.  The  Bhagavata  was  com- 
municated to  the  Eishis  at  Naimisharanya  by  the  Suta  (or 
bard)  Loma-harshana ;  but  he  only  repeats  what  was  re- 
lated to  him  by  Suka,  the  son  of  Vyasa,  to  Parikshit,  the 
king  of  Hastinapura,  grandson  of  Arjuna.  Having  in- 
curred the  imprecation  of  a  hermit,  by  which  he  was 
sentenced  to  die  of  the  bite  of  a  venomous  serpent  at 
the  expiration  of  seven  days,  the  king,  in  preparation 
for  this  event,  repairs  to  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  whither 
also  come  the  gods  and  sages,  to  witness  his  death. 
Among  the  latter  is  Suka ;  and  it  is  in  reply  to  Parik- 
shit's  question,  what  a  man  should  do  who  is  about  to  die, 
that  he  narrates  the  Bhagavata,  as  he  had  heard  it  from 
Vyasa,  for  nothing  secures  final  happiness  so  certainly  as  to 
die  whilst  the  thoughts  are  wholly  engrossed  by  Vishnu. 


128  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

The  narrative  opens  with  a  cosmogony,  which,  though 
in  most  respects  similar  to  that  of  the  other  Puranas,  is 
more  largely  mixed  up  with  allegory  and  mysticism,  and 
derives  its  tone  more  from  the  Yedanta  than  the  Sankhya 
philosophy. 

The  fourth  Skanda  contains  the  Manwantara  of  Swa- 
yambhuva,  and  describes  the  multiplication  of  the  patri- 
archial  families.  The  tenth  book  is  the  characteristic 
part  of  this  Purina,  and  the  portion  on  which  its  popu- 
larity is  founded.  It  is  appropriated  to  the  history  of 
Krishna  more  in  detail  than  in  the  Vishnu  Pur  ana.  It 
his  been  translated  into  nearly  all  the  languages  of  India. 
The  Prem  Sdr/ar  is  the  Hindi  version  of  it. 

Colcbrookc  thinks  the  Bhagavata  to  be  the  work  of  the 
grammarian  Vopadeva,  six  hundred  years  ago.  Its  au- 
thenticity  is  doubtful.  It  would  be  tedious  and  super- 
fluous to  dwell  longer  on  the  Puranas,  by  giving  even  the 
briefest  analysis  of  the  contents  and  characteristics  of  the 
remaining  works  so  called.  We  proceed,  therefore,  to 
notice  the 

§  10.  Dramatic  and  other  Poetical  Comjiositions, 

to  which  reference  has  not  already  been  made. 

The  classical  poetry  of  ancient  India  is  divided  into 
three  periods.  The  first  is  thai  of  the  Vedas,  the  second 
dial  dl'  the  great  Epics,  the  third  that  of  the  Drama.  A 
fourth  is  mentioned,  but  as  it  is  of  later  date  (since  the 
birth  of  Christ),  it  is  not  considered  as  belonging  to  the 
(lassie  age.      The  difference  of  style  alone  between  the 


KALIDA'SA.  129 

Yedas  and  the  great  Epic  poems  already  noticed,  is  so 
great  as  to  prove  that  centuries  must  have  elapsed  between 
their  respective  composition.  The  language  of  the  former 
is  visibly  softened  and  polished  in  the  Epic,  nearly  as 
much  as  that  of  the  Iliad  in  the  hands  of  the  Grecian 
dramatists.  The  bards  of  India  have  given  to  poetry 
nearly  every  form  which  it  has  assumed  in  the  western 
world ;  and  in  each  and  all  they  have  excelled.  Its 
heroic  poets  have  been  likened  to  Homer  ;  Vyasa  is  not 
unworthy  of  comparison  with  Milton  —  his  JSTala  and 
Damyanti  with  the  "  Eaerie  Queen  "  of  Spenser.  In  the 
Drama,  Kalidasa  has  been  designated  the  Indian  Shake- 
speare. Under  the  present  head,  therefore,  we  shall  com- 
mence with  some  account  of  that  great  poet  and  his  works. 

§11.  Kaliddsa. 

Kalidasa  is  reputed  to  have  been  one  of  the  ornaments 
(or  "  gems ")  of  the  court  of  Yikramaditya,  king  of 
Ujayin,  whose  reign,  used  as  a  chronological  epoch  by 
the  Hindus,  is  placed  fifty- six  years  before  the  Christian 
era.  His  poems,  undoubtedly,  belong  to  a  classical  period 
of  Hindu  literature,  and  "that  period,  there  is  reason  to 
believe  (says  Professor  Wilson),  did  not  long  survive  the 
first  centuries  of  Christianity.  The  poets  of  later  date 
were  men  of  more  scholarship  than  imagination,  and 
substituted  an  artificial  display  of  the  powers  of  lan- 
guage for  the  enforced  utterance  of  the  feeling  or  the 
fancy." 

The  most  celebrated,  perhaps,  of  the  works  of  Kalidasa 

9 


130  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

is  his  Sakuntald,  or  "the  Fatal  Ring,"  a  drama,  in  seven 
acts,  the  plot  of  which  is  taken  from  an  episode  of  the 
Mahabharata. 

§  12,  The  Sakuntald. 

It  was  the  publication  of  a  translation  of  this  play,  by- 
Sir  William  Jones,  full  seventy  years  ago,  which  Max 
Muller  thinks  "may  fairly  be  considered  as  the  starting 
point  of  Sanskrit  philology."  "The  first  appearance  of 
this  beautiful  specimen  of  dramatic  art,"  he  continues, 
"  created,  at  the  time,  a  sensation  throughout  Europe,  and 
the  most  rapturous  praise  was  bestowed  upon  it  by  men  of 
high  authority  in  matters  of  taste."  It  has  since  been 
translated  into  French,  with  elaborate  notes,  b}TM.  Chez}- 
and,  more  recently,  a  beautiful  edition  of  a  new,  partly 
poetical,  translation  has  been  published  (in  English)  by 
Professor  Monier  Williams.  Dr.  Gilchrist  also  (in  1827) 
edited  a  translation  of  it  into  "elegant  Ilindoostanee," 
which  had  been  made  long  before  his  time. 

The  Hindu  drama  possesses  one  striking  peculiarity 
which  should  alone  secure  it  general  favour.  "It  is 
impossible,"  says  Professor  Wilson,  "that  the  dramatic 
compositions  of  India  should  have  been  borrowed  from  any 
other  people,  either  of  ancient  or  modern  times;  besides 
which,  they  present  characteristic  features  in  their  conduct 
and  construction  which  plainly  evince  their  original  design 
and  national  development." 

In  I  he  Saknntala,  as  in  nio-t  other  Hindu  dramas,  the 
common  people  are  represented  as  speaking  the  Prakrit, 
or  vulgarised  Sanskrit,  while  the  language  of  the  higher 


THE  WORKS  OF  KA'LIDASA.  131 

and  more  educated  classes  is  the  classical  Sanskrit  of  the 
present  type. 

§  13.   The  Baghu  -  Vansa 

is  another  poem  by  Kalidasa,  in  nineteen  cantos,  and  is 
considered  one  of  the  most  admirable  compositions  in  the 
Sanskrit  language.  It  contains  a  history  of  the  ancestors 
of  Rama,  commencing  with  Dilipi,  the  father  of  Paghu, 
one  of  the  kings  of  Ayodhya  (Oude) — who  was  the  grand- 
father of  Rama-chandra — and  carrying  down  the  history 
of  his  descendants  to  Agnivira,  giving  a  genealogical  table 
of  twent}r-nine  princes  in  all.  Nearly  one-half  of  the 
work  relates  to  the  history  of  Haghu,  and  as  much  to  that 
of  Rama  and  other  intermediate  princes  of  the  line. 

§  14.  The  Megha-Duta,  or  "  Cloud  Messenger," 

is,  next  to  the  Sakuntala,  perhaps  the  most  celebrated  of 
the  poems  of  Kalidasa.  Editions  of  this  work  were  pub- 
lished at  Calcutta  in  1813,  and  in  London  in  1815,  by 
Professor  H.  H.Wilson,  with  a  translation  in  English  verse, 
and  notes  and  illustrations ;  and  again  reprinted  with  a 
vocabulary,  etc.,  by  Professor  Johnson,  of  Haileybury,  in 
1843.     It  consists  of  only  116  strophes  or  stanzas. 

%  15.  The  Nalodaya 

is  a  poem  in  four  cantos,  comprising  220  slokas,  or  couplets, 
on  the  adventures  of  Nala  and  Damyanti.  One  edition  of 
this  is  accompanied  by  the  comments  of  six  learned  pan- 
dits, and  designated  the  Subodhini.     This  work  has  been 


132  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

carefully  edited  by  the  late  Eev.  Dr.  Yates,  of  Calcutta 
(1844) — accompanied  by  a  metrical  English  translation, 
an  essay  on  alliteration,  a  grammatical  analysis,  and  an 
account  of  other  similar  works.  In  this  singular  poem 
rhyme  and  alliteration  are  combined  in  the  terminations 
of  the  verses  :  for  the  three  or  four  last  syllables  of  each 
hemistich  within  the  stanza  are  the  same  in  sound,  though 
different  in  sense.  It  is  a  series  of  puns  on  a  pathetic  sub- 
ject. It  is  supposed  to  have  been  written  as  a  counterfeit 
of  a  short  poem  (of  22  stanzas)  similarly  constructed,  but 
with  less  repetition  of  each  rhyme  ;  and  entitled,  from  the 
words  of  the  challenge  with  which  it  concludes,  Ghata- 
karpara  ("an  elephant's  skull"). 

§  16.  The  Vikramorvasi 

is  a  drama  by  the  same  elegant  hand,  doubtless,  that  wrote 
Sakuntala,  tradition  as  well  as  internal  evidences  attesting 
the  identity  of  authorship.  "In  each  we  see  the  same 
exquisite  polish  of  style,  the  same  light  touch  in  painting 
scenery  and  character;  and  yet  the  dramas  are  'like  in 
difference/  and  each  has  the  separate  personality,  as  well 
as  the  mutual  Likeness,  which  characterises  the  twin  off- 
spring  of  the  same  creating  mind."1  An  edition  of  the 
text  was  printed  a1  Eertford  (1849), under  the  auspices  of 
Professor  M.  Williams,  and  an  English  translation,  in 
1851,  by  Professor  E.  B.  Cowell.  The  text  has  also  been 
edited  in  Germany  by  Professors  Lenz  and  Bochtlingk; 

1  Preface  to  Oowell's  translation.     Both  dramas  are  founded  on  ancient 
A  t'i  w  meagre  hints  in  the  Afah&bh&rata  appear  to  have  furnished 
the  firsl  idea  of  the  amplified  Btory  of  the  Vikramorvasi.    The  Pauranic  ver- 
sion appears  in  the  Hanrans'a. 


OTHEE  EPIC  POEMS.  133 

and  Professor  Wilson  has  given  a  translation,  in  elegant 
verse,  in  his  "  Specimens  of  the  Theatre  of  the  Hindus." 

§  17.  Miscellaneous. 

The  other  works  attributed  to  Kalidasa  are :  (1)  The 
Ritu-Sanhdra  (or  "  assemblage  of  the  seasons"),  a  de- 
scriptive poem,  which  was  the  first  book  ever  printed  in 
Sanskrit :  Wilson  gives  sixteen  verses  of  it  in  his  edition 
of  the  Megha-Duta.  (2)  The  Srusha-Bodha,  a  poem  on 
Sanskrit  prosody,  founded  on  Pingala's  aphorisms,  or  rules 
of  prosody,  especially-  applicable  to  Prakrit  poetry.  (3) 
The  Kumar  a-  Sambhava,  or  Birth  of  Kartikeya,  the  God  of 
War,  a  long  poem,  originally  in  twenty -two  books,  but  of 
which  only  fragments  are  now  extant.  Three  or  four 
other  works  have  been  attributed  to  him,  but  their  au- 
thenticity is  doubtful,  viz.,  the  Sringara-Tilaka,  and  Pras- 
nottara-Mala  (two  lyric  poems),  etc. 

§  18.  The  other  Epic  Poets 

are  Bharavi,  Sri-Harsha,  and  Magna,  who,  with  Kalidasa, 
have  been  dignified  by  the  titles  of  Mahd-havya,  or  the  great 
poets.  Bharavi  is  the  author  of  the  Kirdtdrjunbja,  which 
contains  an  account  of  the  wars  carried  on  by  Arjuna 
against  savage  nations.  Sri-Harsha's  principal  work  is 
the  Naishadha-Charita,  or  the  Adventures  of  ISTala,  Paja 
of  Nishadha,  in  twenty-two  cantos,  which  the  Hindus  rank 
as  one  of  the  six  great  poems  regarded  as  the  masterpieces 
of  their  profuse  literature. 

Magna* s  epic  poem,  entitled  Bisupala  Badha  (or  the 
death  of  Sisupala)  is  a  work  of  much  merit.  An  edition 
of  it  was  published  at  Calcutta  (1815),  in  royal  8vo. 


134  HANDBOOK  OF  SANSKRIT  LITERATURE. 

Soma-Deva,  another  epic  poet,  is  the  author  of  the 
Vr'that-katha,  which  Sir  William  Jones  compares  with  the 
poems  of  Ariosto,  and  of  a  poem  on  the  death  of  Nanda 
and  the  accession  of  Chandragupta  to  the  throne. 

§  19.  Fables  and  Ethical  works  (Nitikatha). 

The  most  celebrated  work  of  this  class  is  the  Pancha- 
Tantra,  so  called  from  its  being  divided  into  five  Tantras, 
or  sections,  but  also  known  by  the  name  of  Panchopdkh- 
ydnam,  or  five  (collections  of)  stories.  It  is  the  parent  stock 
of  the  Hitopadesa,  Pilpay's  Fables,  and  other  similar 
collections.  Its  authorship  is  attributed  to  Yishnu-Sarma, 
who  is  said  to  have  extracted  the  essence  of  all  the  most 
celebrated  works  of  this  class.  "Whoever  reads  this 
work/'  it  is  said,  "  acquires  the  whole  Mti-Sdstra,  and 
and  will  never  be  overthrown  by  Indra  himself." 

The  oldest  collection  of  fables  and  tales  that  is  known, 
is  thai  which,  goes  under  the  name  of  Bidpai,  or  Pilpay ; 
and  there  is  no  book,  except  the  Bible,  which  has  been 
tran -laud  into  so  many  languages,  though  its  origin  is 
involved  in  mystery.  The  Arabic  and  Persian  versions  of 
this  work  are  known  by  the  name  of  the  Kalila-wa-Dimna. 
The  Sanskrit  version  is  tin*  celebrated  Hitopadesa,  or 
"  Friendly  [nstructor,"  which  is  divided  into  four  books, 
entitled  respectively,  the  Mitra-Ldbha  (or  Acquisition  of 
Friends),  the  Mxtra-Bheda  (or  Separation  of  Friends), 
Sandhi  (Peace),  and  Vigraha  (War).  This  work  is  too 
well  known  by  mere  tyros  in  Sanskrit  lore  to  require  a 
further  description  here. 


APPENDIX  I. 

BRIEF  OUTLINE  OF  HINDU"  MYTHOLOGY. 

As  intimately  connected  with  the  literature  of  the  Hindus,  and 
tending  greatly  to  its  elucidation,  the  editor  has  deemed  it  de- 
sirable to  subjoin  a  short  account  of  their  religious  systems.  For 
the  following  concise  outline  thereof  he  has  been  indebted  chiefly 
to  a  valuable  and  interesting  volume,  entitled  "  India  and  the 
Hindoos,"  by  the  Rev.  F.  de  "W".  "Ward,  formerly  missionary  at 
Madras,  along  with  the  larger  work  already  referred  to,  by  the 
Eev.  W.  Ward,  of  Serampore. 

The  Yedas  and  S'astras,  which  claim  to  communicate  all  that 
need  be  known  regarding  the  character  of  the  Supreme,  with  the 
modes  of  performing  acceptable  worship,  and  of  securing  the 
divine  blessing,  teach  the  existence  of  one  universal  spirit,  the 
fount  and  origin  of  all  other  beings,  animate  or  inanimate, 
material  or  immaterial.  To  this  supreme  divinity  is  given  the 
incommunicable  name  of  Brahma :  a  noun,  in  the  neuter  gender, 
as  indicating  the  negative  mode  of  his  existence :  and  to  be 
distinguished  from  Brahma,  the  distinctive  title  of  the  first  of 
the  Hindu  Triad.  Of  this  great  self-existent,  independent,  and 
eternal  One,  we  are  told  in  the  S'astras  that  he  resides  in  per- 
petual silence,  takes  no  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  universe, 
finding  his  happiness  in  undisturbed  repose.  They  add,  that 
though  all  spirit  and  without  form,  he  is  devoid  of  qualities 
(f^T3TWT)>  without  will  (f*T^l?),  without  consciousness  of  his 
own  existence,  immersed  in  an  abyss  of  unrelieved  darkness  and 
gloom.  He  is  the  One,  say  they,  not  gencricalhj,  as  possessed  of  a 
divine  nature  ;  not  hypostatically,  as  simple  and  uncompounded  ; 


13G  appendix  I. 

not  numerically,  as  the  only  actual  deity, — but  the  sole  entity, 
whether  created  or  uncreated.  "His  oneness  is  so  absolute,  that 
it  not  only  excludes  the  possibility  of  any  other  God,  co-ordinate 
or  subordinate,  but  excludes  the  possibility  of  aught  else,  human 
or  angelic,  material  or  immaterial."  He  is  thus,  as  one  well 
says,  "  an  infinite  negative,  an  infinite  nothing" 

This  is  the  supreme  deity  of  the  Hindus,  mysterious,  unap- 
proachable, indescribable, — in  fact  unintelligible. 

The  Hindus  are  not  Atheists  in  the  sense  of  a  chance  creation 
of  all  beings  and  things.  Their  system,  generally,  is  rather,  in 
its  original  state,  refined  and  sublimated  Pantheism,  all  visible 
things  being  regarded  as  but  manifestations  of  his  (Brahma's) 
essence.  With  a  verbal  change,  we  may  adopt  the  poet's  cou- 
plet as  descriptive  of  the  Hindu  faith, — 

"  All  arc  but  parts  of  this  mysterious  whole, 
"Whose  body  nature  is,  and  Brahm  the  soul." 

The  authors  of  the  Hindu  system,  like  the  Greek  philosophers, 
found  a  difficulty  in  conceiving  how  pure  spirit  could  exert  any 
energy,  and  especially  an  energy  sufficient  to  create  a  world. 
When,  therefore,  the  supreme  Brahma  willed  to  create  the  world, 
he  drew  forth  from  himself  three  hypostases,  to  which  were  given 
the  names  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  S'iva.  These  constitute  the 
celebrated  Hindu  Triad,  of  whom  the  sacred  books  declare  that 
"They  were  originally  united  in  one  essence,  and  from  one 
ace  were  derived,  and  that  tne  great  One,  became  distinctly 
known  as  three  Gods,  being  one  person  and  three  gods" 

Of  each  of  these   divine  personages,   we  shall  give  a  short, 
description. 

1.  Brdhmd. 

This  deity  is  OBually  represented  as  a  man  with  four  faces, 
riding  on  a  swan,  and  holding  In  one  of  his  four  hands  a  portion 
of  the  Vedasj  in  tin1  Becond  a  po1  of  Mater;  while  the  third  is 
raised  upward  to  Indicate  protection  ;  and  the  fourth  declined 
downward,    as    bestowing   a    gilt.      He   is    variously  styled  the 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  137 

"self-existent"  (^gp^) — though  falsely,  since  he  sprung  from 
Brahma — the  ''great  father"  (ftfTITF^*)  the  "Lord  of  creatures," 
(^ff^chTil),  and,  more  appropriately,  the  "  Creator  "  (^TS  or  M  ^  \). 
He  is  reputed  to  have  had  originally  four  heads,  having  lost 
one,  for  a  reason  upon  which  his  biographers  are  divided  in 
opinion.  That  given  in  the  Skanda  Purana  is  as  follows: — 
"The  Linga  (or  sacred  symbol)  of  S'iva  fell,  by  the  curse  of 
a  Rishi,  from  heaven,  and  increased  in  such  height  that  it  filled 
heaven  and  hell.  In  order  to  see  it,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  the 
other  gods,  assembled,  and  in  the  midst  of  their  wonder  they 
called  out,  i  Who  can  reach  its  extremity  ? '  Vishnu  descended 
to  hell,  and  Brahma  went  upwards ;  but  neither  search  proved 
successful.  Brahma,  under  the  influence  of  shame,  hired  the 
cow,  Kama,1  and  the  tree,  hetaka,2  as  false  witnesses,  and  asserted 
three  times  that  he  had  seen  the  end.  The  gods,  knowing  the 
falsehood  of  his  declaration,  deprived  him,  by  their  curse,  of  all 
worship,  and  S'iva  cut  off  one  of  his  heads."  Be  the  cause  what 
it  may,  there  is  but  one  temple  to  his  honour  erected  in  the  land, 
and  he  receives  less  direct  reverence  than  almost  any  of  the 
celestials. 

2.    Vishnu. 

This  second  of  the  Trimurtti,3  or  Triad,  appears  as  a  blue  man 
wearing  yellow  garments,  and  riding  on  a  skate  (I!!?);4  and 
holding  in  his  four  hands  a  war-club,  a  conch  shell,  a  weapon 
called  a  chafer  a  (or  discus),  and  a  water  lily.  He  has  numerous 
other  names,5  as  JSarayana,  Viswambhara,  Kesava,  Govinda,  Ma- 
dhava,  etc.,  and  is  worshipped  as  the  Pervader,  or  the  personifica- 
tion of  the  preserving  principle. 

1  Kama-dhenu,  i.e.  the  cow  which  yields  everything  desired. 

2  The  "Pandaxras  odoratissimus." 

3  f^Hfrj  Kt.  " three  forms." 

4  Or  more  generally  on  a  Garuda  (jpfgg)  or  garura,  an  animal  half-bird 
and  half  man.  5  The  Sastras  say  1,000. 


138  APPENDIX  I. 

The  Puninas  mention  ten  Avatars  (descents  or  incarnations) 
of  this  God,  nine  of  which  have  already  taken  place,  viz., 
(1)  As  a  fish  (the  Matsya  avatara) ;  (2)  as  a  tortoise,  or  turtle 
(Kachliapa)\  (3)  as  a  boar  (Varaha)  ;  (4)  as  a  inan-monster 
(Nara-Singha)  ;  (5)  as  a  dwarf  (Vdmana)  ;  (6)  as  a  giant 
[Para&iHrdma)  ;  (7)  as  Rama  (the  hero  of  the  Ramayana); 
(8)  as  Krishna  ;  (9)  as  Buddha.  The  tenth,  which  is  still 
expected,  will  be  (according  to  the  S'astras)  as  a  white  horse, 
called  the  Kalki-avatdra.  The  first  six  are  said  to  have  taken 
place  during  the  Satija  Yuga,  i.e.,  the  first  or  golden  age  of 
the  world's  history,  and  of  these  there  are  no  images  made  for 
worship.  The  following  three  occurred  during  the  Treta  and 
Dwapara  Yugas,  and  the  tenth  is  assigned  to  the  present  and  last 
age,  the  Kali  Yuga. 

Each  incarnation  was  eifected  for  the  accomplishment  of  some 
special  purpose  of  more  or  less  importance,  and  distinguished 
by  the  performance  of  wonderful  exploits.  Thus,  in  the  first, 
Vishnu  took  the  form  of  a  fish  (some  say  of  one  kind  and  some 
another)  in  order  to  bring  up  the  Yedas  from  the  bottom  of 
the  ocean,  for  the  instruction  of  Brahma  on  his  entering  on 
the  work  of  creation.  In  the  Kachhapa,  he  assumed  the  form 
of  a  tortoise,  in  order  to  take  upon  his  back  the  newly  created 
earth,  and  secure  its  stability.  The  Hindus  still  believe  that 
the  earth  is  supported  on  the  back  of  this  tortoise  or  turtle. 
The  Varaha  happened  at  one  of  the  periodical  destructions  of  the 
world,  when  the  earth  sunk  into  the  waters.  Vishnu,  the 
presi  rver,  appearing  in  the  form  of  a  boar,  then  descended  into 
the  waters,  and,  with  his  tusks,  drew  up  the  earth.  The  fourth 
and  fifth  avatars  took  place  for  the  destruction  of  certain  giants 
and  tyrants.  The  sixth  (Parasn  '-Rama),  for  the  overthrow  and 
extinction  of  the  Cshatriyas,  who  had  become  very  corrupt  and 
tyrannical.  As  Rama-ohandra,  in  the  seventh,  he  conquered  and 
lulled  the  giant  Etavana,  the  king  of  Ceylon;  and  as  Balarama, 
in  the  eighth,  he  destroyed  Pralamba  and  other  giants.      The 

1  Paraiu  ip  the  name  of  an  instrument  of  war. 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU"  MYTHOLOGY.  ]39 

ninth  had  for  its  object  also  the  destruction  of  certain  giants. 
For  this  purpose,  in  the  form  of  Euddha,  Vishnu  produced 
among  mankind,  by  his  preaching,  etc.,  a  disposition  to  universal 
scepticism;  that,  having  no  longer  any  faith  in  the  gods,  the 
giants  might  cease  to  apply  to  them  for  those  powers  by  which 
they  had  become  such  dreadful  scourges  to  mankind.  In  this 
appearance,  the  object  of  Yishnu  was  accomplished  by  art, 
without  the  necessity  of  war ;  but  the  dreadful  alternative 
adopted  affords  a  proof  of  how  wretchedly  the  world  would  be 
governed  if  everything  depended  on  the  wisdom  of  man. 

Some  idea  of  the  moral  character  attributed  to  Vishnu  may  be 
gathered  from  the  following  incident  recorded  in  the  Sastras: — 
When  the  sea  was  churned  to  recover  the  ambrosia  (Mount 
Mandra  being  the  charming  stick,  a  five-headed  snake,  Yaisuka, 
the  rope,  and  the  demons  called  Asuras,  the  workmen),  Akabai 
and  Lakshmi,  two  maiden  sisters,  arose  at  the  same  time. 
Yishnu,  perceiving  Lakshmi  to  be  the  more  beautiful,  wished  to 
marry  her;  but  not  being  able  to  accomplish  the  object  until  the 
elder  was  disposed  of,  he  deceived  the  Eishi  Uddakala  as  to 
Akabai' s  beauty  and  excellences,  which  induced  him  to  marry 
her,  while  Yishnu  espoused  the  woman  of  his  choice. 

The  followers  of  this  god,  in  particular,  form  one  of  the  three- 
fold divisions  of  Hindu  society,  viz.,  the  Vaishnavas,  the  S'aivas, 
and  the  S'aktas. 

3.  S'iva. 

is  the  reputed  destroyer  of  mankind,  as  Yishnu  is  the  preserver. 
He  is  commonly  represented  as  a  silver-coloured  man,  with  five 
heads  and  eight  hands,  in  six  of  which  are,  severally,  a  skull,  a 
deer,  fire,  an  axe,  a  rosary,  and  an  elephant  rod;  while  the 
seventh  is  open,  in  the  attitude  of  blessing,  and  the  last  in  that 
of  protecting.  He  has  a  third  eye  in  his  forehead  with  perpen- 
dicular corners,  ear-rings  of  snakes,  and  a  collar  of  skulls.  At 
the  end  of  each  series  of  the  four  Yugas,  S'iva  submerges  and 
destroys  the  earth,  and  then  remodels  it :  his  name  being  more 
properly  the  new-modeller  or  reproducer.     One  form  in  which 


140  APPENDIX  I. 

this  deity  is  worshipped  is  the  linga  (or  lingam),  answering  to 
the  phalli  of  the  Greeks.  It  is  exposed  to  view  all  the  country 
over,  and  especially  worshipped  by  the  women. 

S'iva  has  an  immense  number  of  devotees,  some  of  whom 
consider  him  superior  to  Brahma  himself.  One  of  his  consorts  is 
the  sanguinary  Kali,  another  (for  he  was  a  polygamist)  was  the 
more  pacific  Durga,  of  each  of  whom  we  shall  give  a  short 
account. 

4.  Kali 

is  the  Moloch  of  India.  Her  appearance  indicates  her  character. 
She  is  represented  as  standing  with  one  foot  upon  the  chest  of  her 
husband,  S'iva,  whom  she  has  thrown  down  in  a  fit  of  anger;  her 
tongue,  dyed  with  blood,  is  protruding  from  her  mouth ;  she  is 
adorned  with  skulls,  and  the  hands  of  her  slain  enemies  are 
suspended  from  her  girdle.  The  blood  of  a  tiger  delights  her  for 
ten  years ;  of  a  human  being,  for  one  thousand  years.  If  any  of 
her  worshippers  draw  the  blood  from  his  own  person,  and  offer 
it  her,  she  will  be  in  raptures  of  joy ;  but  if  he  cut  out  a  piece  of 
his  own  flesh  for  a  burnt  offering,  her  delight  is  beyond  bounds. 
But,  though  thus  sanguinary  and  malevolent,  Kali  is  one  of  the 
favourite  deities  of  the  Hindus.  The  Swinging  Festival,  and 
other  observances  equally  atrocious,  are  in  her  honour,  being 
designed  to  avert  her  wrath,  or  secure  her  blessing.  She  is  the 
eial  friend  of  thieves  and  murderers,  who  invoke  her  blessing 
before  entering  upon  their  deeds  of  violence,  fraud,  or  death. 

5.  Durga 

combines  the  characteristics  of  Minerva,  Pallas,  and  Juno.  Her 
final  name  was  lYuvati,  but  having,  by  a  display  of  extra- 
ordinary valour,  defeated  a  giant  named  Durga,  she  was  thence- 
forth dignified  with  the  name  of  her  conquered  foe.  This 
monster  La  by  Borne  supposed  to  be  a  personification  of  vice,  and 
Durgd  of  virtue,  while  the  struggle  typified  the  action  and 
reaction  of  good  and  evil  in  the  world.     The  festival  in  honour 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  141 

of  this  goddess  (the  Durga  Puja),  observed  in  the  month  of 
September,  has  no  superior  for  magnificence  of  entertainment 
and  imposing  appearance  in  the  country.  At  the  celebration  of 
one  festival,  a  wealthy  Hindu  has  been  known  to  give  80,0001bs. 
of  sweetmeats,  80,000lbs.  of  sugar,  1,000  suits  of  cloth  garments, 
1,000  suits  of  silk,  and  1,000  offerings  of  rice,  plantains,  and  other 
fruits.  In  the  single  city  of  Calcutta,  it  is  supposed  that  half  a 
million  pounds  sterling  are  annually  expended  on  the  Durga 
festival  alone. 

6.  Indra. 

He  is  called  the  king  of  Heaven,  and  his  reign  is  said  to 
continue  one  hundred  years  of  the  gods,  after  which  another 
individual  from  among  the  gods,  the  giants,  or  men,  by  his  own 
merit,  raises  himself  to  this  eminence.  The  sacrifice  of  a  horse 
{asvamedha)  one  hundred  times  will  raise  a  person,  it  is  said,  to 
the  rank  of  Indra.  He  is  represented  as  a  white  man,  sitting  on 
an  elephant,  with  a  thunderbolt  in  his  right  hand,  and  a  bow  in 
his  left.     He  has  1,000  eyes. 

The  Puranas  and  other  S'astras  contain  many  stories  regarding 
Indra,  who  is  represented  as  particularly  jealous  lest  any  per- 
son should,  by  sacred  austerities  or  sacrifices,  out-do  him  in 
religious  merit,  and  thus  obtain  his  kingdom.  To  prevent 
these  devotees  from  succeeding  in  their  object,  he  generally  sends 
a  captivating  female  to  draw  away  their  minds,  and  thus  luring 
them  from  their  religious  austerities,  induce  them  to  return  to  a 
life  of  sensual  gratification.  He  was  once  guilty  of  stealing  a 
horse  consecrated  by  king  Sagara,  who  was  about  to  perform  for 
the  hundredth  time  the  sacrifice  of  that  animal.  But  that  which 
entails  the  greatest  infamy  on  the  character  of  this  god  is  his 
seducing  the  wife  of  his  religious  guide  {guru)  Gautama.  This 
he  effected  (like  Jupiter  in  the  seduction  of  Alcmena)  by  assum- 
ing the  appearance  of  her  absent  husband.  Ahalya,  the  guru's 
wife,  discovered  her  celestial  seducer;  but,  through  wantonness, 
and  he  being  king  of  the  gods,  consented  to  his  importunities. 
Gautama,  however,  met  him  as  he  was  leaving  the  hermitage, 


142  APPENDIX  I. 

and  discovering  the  crime  he  had  committed,  pronounced  upon 
him  a  curse  by  which  the  god  instantly  became  a  eunuch. 

Amaravati,  the  capital  (or  heaven)  of  Indra,  was  made  by 
Yisvakarma,  the  architect  of  the  gods,  a  son  of  Brahma.  It  is 
described  as  eight  hundred  miles  in  circumference,  and  forty 
miles  high.  Its  pillars  are  composed  of  diamonds ;  all  its  thrones, 
beds,  etc.,  of  pure  gold,  as  also  its  palaces.  It  is  surrounded  by 
beauteous  gardens  and  pleasure  grounds,  interspersed  with  pools, 
fountains,  etc.,  while  music  and  dancing,  and  every  sort  of 
festivity,  entertain  the  celestial  inhabitants.  Indra  is  supposed  to 
preside  over  the  elements,  and  is  by  some  considered  the  deified 
impersonation  of  the  heavens.  His  annual  festival  takes  place 
on  the  14th  of  the  month  Bhadra  (August-September). 

7.  Surya — the  Sun. 

This  god  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Kasyapa,  the  progenitor  of 
gods  and  men.  He  is  represented  as  a  dark-red  man,  with  three 
eyes  and  four  arms.  In  two  hands  he  holds  the  lotus,  or  water- 
lily,  with  another  he  signifies  the  bestowment  of  a  blessing,  and 
with  the  fourth  the  forbidding  of  fear.  He  sits  on  a  red  water- 
lily,  while  rays  of  glory  issue  from  his  body.  The  Brahmans 
consider  him  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  gods,  resembling  Brahma 
in  glory.  The  celebrated  incantation  called  the  gdyatri,  and 
many  other  forms  of  prayer  and  praise  used  in  the  daily  cere- 
monies of  the  Brahmans,  arc  addressed  to  him.  Every  Sunday, 
but  i  specially  on  the  first  in  the  month  Magna  (January-February), 
\\\-  worship  is  performed,  especially  by  women,  who  beg  of  him 
the  blessings  of  a  son,  riches,  health,  etc. 

Those  who  adopt  this  god  ;is  their  particular  guardian  deity, 
are  called  Sauras.  They  never  eat  till  they  have  worshipped  the 
ran,  and  when  it  is  entirely  covered  with  clouds  they  fast.  On 
Sundays  (JRavibdr),  other  Hindus  as  well  as  they  perform  special 
worship  to  his  idol,  and  sonic  of  them  also  fast. 

Surya  has  two  wives,  named  Savarnd (i.e. "like,"  or  "coloured," 
or  "golden")  and  Chaya  j'.e.  "shade"  or  "shadow").    Savarna, 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  143 

it  is  said,  after  her  marriage  to  the  sun,  unable  to  bear  the  power 
of  his  rays,  made  an  image  of  herself,  and  imparting  life  to  it, 
named  it  Chaya,  and  left  it  with  Surya.  She  then  returned  to 
her  father,  Visvakarma's  house ;  but  on  his  refusing  to  receive  her, 
she  assumed  the  form  of  a  mare  and  fled  into  the  forest  Dandaka. 
Surya  went  after  her  to  his  father-in-law's  house,  who  received 
him  with  respect,  but,  unperceived,  gave  him  a  seat  formed  of 
different  sharp  weapons,  by  which  he  became  divided  into  twelve 
round  parts  (the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  ?).  His  rage  was  great,  but 
he  was  pacified  on  learning  that  Yisvakarma  had  sent  his  daughter 
back  to  him.  By  the  power  of  dhydna  (meditation),  Surya  ascer- 
tained that  Savarna  had  become  a  mare  and  gone  to  the  forest. 
On  which  he  assumed  the  form  of  a  horse,  joined  her,  and  in  these 
forms  two  children  were  born  to  them,  viz.,  Aswini  ("horse- 
born")  and  Kumara  ("  prince")  who  became  physicians  to  the 
gods. 

There  are  no  temples  dedicated  to  Surya  in  Bengal.  A  race  of 
kings,  distinguished  as  the  descendants  of  the  sun,  once  reigned 
in  India,  of  which  dynasty  Ikshvaku  was  the  first  king,  and 
Rama  the  sixty -sixth. 

8.   Ganesa 

is  the  elder  son  of  S'iva  and  Parvati  (alias  Durga).  With  his 
elephant  face,  big  belly,  and  four  hands,1  and  sitting  on  a  rat,  he 
presents  a  strange  and  repulsive  appearance.  But  for  all  this 
no  deity  is  more  often  named  than  he.  Being  esteemed  the 
ivork-perfecter,  or  one  who  can  place  or  remove  obstacles,  he  is 
always  invoked  at  the  commencement  of  every  religious  service, 
enterprise,  or  composition.  Before  undertaking  a  journey,  writing 
a  letter,  studying  a  book,  and  the  like,  Ganesa  is  on  the  lips  of 
the  traveller  or  student.     This  eminent  position  was  assigned  him 

1  Holding,  respectively,  a  shell,  a  chahra  (or  discus),  a  club,  and  a  loins  (or 
water-lily).  Instead  of  two  tusks,  as  elephants  have,  he  has  only  one,  the 
other  having  been  torn  out  by  Vishnu,  when,  on  one  occasion,  lie  wished  to 
have  an  interview  with  S'iva,  Ganesa,  as  door-keeper,  refusing  him  admittance. 
Vishnu  had  assumed  the  form  of  Paras'u- llama. 


144  APPENDIX   I. 

as  a  compensation  for  the  strange  head  he  wears,  which  was  put 
upon  his  shoulders  when  he  lost  his  own,  in  infancy,  by  a  look 
of  the  celestial  S'ani— the  Hindu  Saturn.1  The  goddess,  seeing 
her  child  headless,  was  overwhelmed  with  grief,  and  would  have 
destroyed  S'ani,  but  Brahma  prevented  her,  telling  S'ani  to  bring 
the  head  of  the  first  animal  he  should  find  lying  with  its  head 
northwards.2  He  found  an  elephant  in  this  position,  cut  off  its 
head,  and  fixed  it  on  Ganesa,  who  then  assumed  the  shape  he  at 
present  wears.  Durga  was  but  little  soothed  when  she  saw  her 
son  with  an  elephant's  head  ;  but,  to  pacify  her,  Brahma  said  that, 
amongst  the  worship  of  all  the  gods,  that  of  Ganesa  should  for 
ever  have  the  preference.  Shop-keepers  and  others  paint  the 
name  or  image  of  this  god  over  the  doors  of  their  shops  or  houses, 
expecting  from  his  favours  protection  and  success.  He  is  wor- 
shipped especially  at  the  commencement  of  a  wedding,  as  well  as 
when  the  bride  is  presented  to  her  bridegroom.  Xo  public 
festivals,  however,  in  honour  of  Ganesa  are  held,  nor  any  temples 
dedicated  to  him  in  Bengal,  though  stone  images  of  the  god  are 
worshipped  in  the  temples  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  at  Benares. 
Sir  William  Jones  calls  Ganesa  the  god  of  wisdom,  referring, 
as  a  proof,  to  his  having  an  elephant's  head.  The  Hindus,  how- 
ever,  in  general,  consider  the  elephant  a  stupid  animal;  and  to 
be  called  "  as  stupid  as  an  elephant"  is  a  bitter  taunt.  He 
corn  aponds  rather  to  the  Roman  Janus. 

9.  Kurtilceya, 

the  elder,  and  only  other  son  of  Durga,  by  S'iva,  is  the  god  of 
war.      II'-  i ;  n  presented  sometimes  with  one,  and  at  others  with 

1  Do  •  n  this  occasion,  to  have  cursed  the  gods,  so  that  they  have 

ever  since  been  childless,  except  by  criminal  am. mis  with  females  not  their 
own  v. 

-'  Durga  had  laid  her  child  to  Bleep  with  its  head  to  the  north,  which  is 
forbidden  by  the  Sustra.  It  is  Buperstitiously  believed  that  if  a  person  Bleep 
with  tiis  head  to  the  east  he  will  be  rich,  if  to  the  south  he  will  have  long  life, 
if  to  the  north  he  will  die,  and  if  to  the  west  (except  when  on  a  journey)  he 
will  have  misfortune. 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  145 

six  faces  ;  is  of  a  yellow  colour ;  rides  on  a  peacock,  and  holds  in 
his  right  hand  an  arrow,  and  in  his  left  a  bow.  The  express 
object  of  his  birth  is  said  to  have  been  the  overthrow  and  de- 
struction of  the  giant  Taraka,  who,  having  by  the  performance  of 
religious  austerities  obtained  the  special  blessing  of  Brahma, 
afterwards  oppressed  both  Brahmans  and  gods.  Indra  (the  king 
of  the  celestials)  then  called  a  council  in  heaven,  when  the  gods 
applied  to  Brahma,  who  declared  that  he  could  not  reverse  his 
blessing  on  Taraka,  but  that  Kartikeya,  who  should  be  the  son  of 
S'iva,  would  destroy  the  giant.  Durga,  the  daughter  of  Hima- 
laya, partly  by  the  intervention  of  Kandarpa,  the  god  of  love,  and 
partly  by  the  power  of  religious  austerities,  prevailed  on  the 
ascetic  S'iva  to  marry  her,  and  Kartikeya  was  the  first  fruit  of 
their  union. 

On  the  last  evening  in  the  month  Kartika  (October-November), 
a  clay  image  of  this  god  is  worshipped,  and  next  day  thrown 
into  the  water.  These  images  are  sometimes  not  less  than 
twenty-five  cubits  high,  so  that  the  offerings  have  to  be  pre- 
sented at  the  end  of  a  long  bamboo  to  reach  the  mouth  of  the 
god.  His  image  is  also  made  and  set  up  by  the  side  of  his 
mother,  Durga,  at  the  great  festival  of  this  goddess  in  the  month 
Aswina  (September-October),  and  in  the  month  Chaitra  (March- 
April),  when  each  day  the  worship  of  the  son  is  performed  after 
that  of  his  mother. 

There  are  no  temples  in  Bengal,  however,  to  this  god,  nor  any 
images  of  him  kept  in  the  houses  of  the  Hindus  except  during  a 
festival.  Women  worship  and  make  special  vows  to  Kartikeya, 
in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a  male  child. 

10.  Sahrdmanmdn, 

who  is  likewise  styled  the  Hindu  Mars,  seems  to  be  merely 
another  form  of  Kartikeya,  and  is  regarded  as  the  special  guardian 
of  the  Brahmanical  order.  He  is  represented  with  six  faces  and 
twelve  arms,  riding  on  a  peacock,  and  holding  in  his  several 
hands  a  bow,  an  arrow,  a  conch,  a  discus,  a  sword,  a  rope,  a 

10 


14G  APPENDIX  I. 

trident,  a  diamond  weapon,  fire,  a  dart,  a  drum,  and  a  crescent 
shaped  weapon.  He  is  worshipped  chiefly  in  the  Madras 
Presidency. 

1 1 .   Yama, 

called  also  Kala  ("time"),  Dharraa-raja  ("the  holy  king"), 
Kritanta  ("  the  destroyer"),  Preta-rat  ("  the  lord  of  the  dead"), 
etc.,  is  the  Pluto  of  the  Hindus.  The  name  Yama  itself  means 
"restraint,"  "penance,"  or,  according  to  "Ward,  "he  who  takes 
out  of  the  world."  He  is  the  judge  of  the  dead.  His  image  is 
that  of  a  green  man,  with  red  garments  and  inflamed  eyes, 
having  a  crown  on  his  head,  and  a  flower  stuck  in  his  hair,  with 
a  club  in  his  right  hand,  and  sitting  on  a  buffalo.  His  dreadful 
teeth,  grim  aspect,  and  terrific  shape,  fill  the  inhabitants  of  the 
three  worlds  with  dismay.  Yama  is  said  to  hold  a  court,  in 
which  he  presides  as  judge,  being  assisted  by  a  person  named 
Chitra-gupta,1  who  keeps  an  account  of  the  actions  of  men.  A 
number  of  officers  are  also  attached  to  the  court,  who  bring  the 
dead  to  be  judged.  If  the  deceased  persons  have  been  wicked, 
Yama  sends  them  to  their  particular  hell ;  if  good,  to  some  place 
of  happiness.  The  poor  Hindus,  at  the  hour  of  death,  sometimes 
fancy  they  see  Yama's  officers  (Kritanta-duta)  iu  a  frightful 
shape,  coming  to  fetch  them  away,2  Yama  is  said  to  reside  at 
Vain.ihiya,  on  the  south  side  of  the  earth.  All  souls,  wherever 
the  person  die,  are  supposed  to  go  to  Yama  in  four  hours  and 
forty  minutes,  and  a  dead  body  cannot  be  buried  till  that  time 
has  elapsed. 

An  annual  festival  is  held  iu  honour  of  Yama  on  the  second 
day  of  the  moon's  increase  in  the  month  Kartika  (October- 
Nbvember),  when  an  image  of  clay  is  made  and  worshipped  with 
the  usual  ceremonies  for  one  day,  and  thru  thrown  into  the  river. 

1  Thai  is,  "he  who  paints"  (or  writes  tin-  fate  of  men)  "in  secret." 
Th    Purines  teach  thai  after  death  the  bou]  becomes  united  to  an  aerial 
body,  and  passes  to  the  seal  of  judgmenl  to  be  tried  by  Yama.    It,  however, 
remains  in  this  aerial  vehicle  till  tie'  Last  S'raddha  (funeral-rite)  is  performed, 

tw(  l\>  months  after  death,  when  it  passes  into  happiness  or  misery,  according 
to  the  sentence  that  may  ha\e  been  passed  upon  it  by  Yama. 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  147 

No  bloody  sacrifices  are  offered  to  this  god.  He  is  also  wor- 
shipped at  the  commencement  of  other  festivals  as  one  of  the  ten 
guardian  deities  of  the  earth.  Every  day  the  Hindus  offer  water 
to  Yama  in  the  ceremony  called  tarpana.  Some  Hindus,  reject- 
ing the  worship  of  other  gods,  worship  only  Yama,  alleging  that, 
as  their  future  destiny  is  to  be  determined  by  him  only,  they  have 
nothing  to  fear  from  any  besides  him. 

"We  learn  from  the  Mahabharata,  that,  after  Brahma  had 
created  the  three  worlds — heaven,  earth,  and  patala — he  recol- 
lected that  a  place  for  judgment  and  the  punishment  of  the 
wicked  was  wanting.  He,  therefore,  ordered  Yisvakarma  to 
prepare  a  superb  palace  for  the  purpose,  the  hall  of  judgment 
being  surrounded  by  a  river  of  boiling  water,  which  each  one, 
after  death,  is  obliged  to  swim  across.  But  the  offering  of  a  cow 
to  a  Brahman  cools  the  river,  and  renders  the  passage  easy. 

12.  Agni  (Fire). 

This  god  is  represented  as  a  red,  corpulent  man,  with  eyes, 
eye-brows,  and  hair  of  a  tawny  colour.  He  rides  on  a  goat,  wears 
a  paitd  l  and  a  necklace  of  a  certain  fruit.  Prom  his  body  issue 
seven  streams  of  glory,  and  in  his  right  hand  he  holds  a  spear. 
He  is  the  son  of  the  sage  Kasyapa  and  Aditi,  called  the  mother 
of  the  gods. 

Agni  is  especially  worshipped  under  different  names,  at  the 
time  of  a  burnt  offering,  when  clarified  butter  (gin  or  ghritaj  is 
presented  to  him.  The  gods  are  said  to  have  two  mouths,  viz., 
those  of  the  Brahman  and  of  Agni  (fire).  As  one  of  the  guardian 
deities  of  the  earth,  he  is  worshipped  at  the  commencement  of 
every  festival. 

At  the  full  moon  in  the  month  Magna  (January-February), 
when  danger  from  fire  is  considerable,  he  is  sometimes  worshipped 
before  the  image  of  Bramha,  for  three  consecutive  days;    and 

1  The  Paild  (a  corruption  of  Tf^"^  "holy"),  or  Upavila,  is  the  sacred 
thread  worn  hy  the  three  first  castes  of  the  Hindus  over  the  left  shoulder  and 
falliug  on  the  right  hip. 


148  APPENDIX  I. 

when  any  particular  work  is  to  be  done  by  the  agency  of  fire, 
lie  burning  of  bricks,  etc.,  his  worship  is  performed,  or  when 
a  trial  by  ordeal  is  about  to  take  place.  Some  Brahmans  are 
distinguished  by  the  name  of  Sdgniha)  because  they  use  sacred 
fire  in  all  the  ceremonies  in  which  this  element  is  to  be  used, 
from  the  time  of  birth  to  the  burning  of  the  body  after  death. 
Swaha,  the  daughter  of  Kasyapa,  was  married  to  Agni.  His 
name  is  repeated  at  the  end  of  every  incantation  used  at  a  burnt 
offering. 

13.  Pai 'ana  (Wind). 

He  is  the  god  of  the  winds  and  messenger  of  the  gods.  His 
mother,  Aditi,  it  is  said,  prayed  to  her  husband  that  this  son 
might  be  more  powerful  than  Indra.  Her  request  was  granted  ; 
but  Indra  hearing  of  this,  entered  the  womb  of  Aditi,  and  cut 
the  fectus,  first  into  seven,  and  then  each  part  into  seven  others. 
Thus  Pavana  assumed  forty-nine  forms 2  (the  points  of  the 
compass).  He  is  represented  as  a  white  man,  sitting  on  a  deer, 
with  a  flag  on  his  right  hand. 

Pavana  has  no  separate  public  festival,  neither  image  nor 
temple.  As  one  of  the  ten  guardian  deities  of  the  earth,  he  is 
worshipped,  however,  at  the  commencement  of  every  festival. 
Water  is  also  offered  to  him  in  the  daily  ceremonies  of  the 
Brdhmans;  and  whenever  a  goat  is  offered  to  any  deity,  a  service 
is  paid  to  him  under  the  name  of  Ytiyu.  He  presides  in  the 
north-west,  as  Agni  in  the  south-east  region  of  the  earth. 

14.    Varum  (the  Ocean) 

is  the  god  of  tin;  waters.     His  image  is  painted  white,  and  he 
■  Mi  a  marine  monster  called  Jlakara,  with  a  rope3  in  his  right 

1  Prom  ^T  "  with  "  -f  ^5rfr*T  "fire." 

:  The  Iliinlus  hare  forty-nine,  instead  of  thirty-two  points;  and  the 
Puranas  Live  the  above  fable  to  acoonnl  lor  the  number. 

"chain."     This  weapon,  called  pdsa  ("QT^l)  has  this  property,  that 
whomsoever  il  catches  it  binds  so  Bast  that  lie  can  never  got  loose.    All  the 
rdkihataSf  etc.,  Irani  the  use  of  this  weapon. 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  149 

hand.  Varuna's  name1  is  repeated  daily  in  the  service  of  the 
Brahmans ;  but  his  image  is  never  made  for  worship,  nor  has  he 
any  public  service  or  temple.  He  is  worshipped,  however,  as 
one  of  the  guardian  deities  of  the  earth,  and  also  by  those  who 
farm  the  lakes  in  Bengal  before  they  go  out  a-fishing;  and  in 
times  of  drought  people  repeat  his  name  and  praises  to  obtain 
rain.  It  is  common,  at  such  seasons,  for  Brahmans  to  sit  in 
crowds  on  the  banks  of  the  Granges,  or  any  other  river,  and 
address  their  prayers  to  this  god,  receiving  presents  from  rich 
natives  for  doing  so.  His  heaven,  called  Varuna-loka,  is  800 
miles  in  circumference,  and  was  formed  by  Visvakarma,  the 
divine  architect.  In  the  centre  is  a  grand  canal  of  pure  water. 
Varuna,  and  his  queen  Varum,  sit  on  a  throne  of  diamonds, 
surrounded  by  Samudra  (the  sea),  Gunga  (the  Ganges),  and  other 
river  gods  and  goddesses,  as  well  as  other  deities.  Every  means 
of  sensual  gratification  is  to  be  met  with  there. 

15.  The  Planets  and  other  Heavenly  Bodies. 

These  are  all  regarded  as  the  objects  of  divine  worship  by  the 
Hindus,  and  are  the  subjects  of  adoration  under  various  sym- 
oolical  forms.  Thus,  Bavi,  the  sun,  is  represented  by  a  figure 
painted  red,  holding  in  each  hand  a  water-lily,  and  riding  in  a 
chariot  drawn  by  seven  yellow  horses.  As  one  of  the  planets,  he 
is  worshipped  only  at  great  festivals.  He  may  be  regarded  as 
simply  another  form  of  Surya.  Bavi,  along  with  Soma,  or 
Chandra  (the  moon),  Mangala  (Mars),  Buddha  (Mercury),  Vri- 
haspati  (Jupiter),  Sukra  (Venus),  S'ani  (Saturn),  give  names  to 
the  different  days  of  the  week  among  the  Hindus  (viz.  Bavibar, 
Sombar,  Mangalbar,  etc.),  and  are  respectively  the  special  objects 
of  worship  on  each  of  those  days.  The  only  other  celestial  di- 
vinities we  need  mention  are — 

1  The  name  Yaruna  signifies  "he  who  (or  that  which)  surrounds."  From 
the  root  ^  or  ^. 


150  APPENDIX  I. 

16.  ZalsJimi, 

the  goddess  of  prosperity,  who  is  said  to  have  been  obtained  by 
Vishnu  at  the  churning  of  the  sea,  and  with  whom,  like  Venus, 
the  gods  were  all  enamoured,  especially  S'iva.  She  is  worshipped 
in  every  Hindu  family  four  times  a  year.     And, 

17.  Saraswati, 

the  goddess  of  learning,  the  daughter  of  Brahma,  and  wife  of 
Vishnu.  Every  Hindu  who  is  able  to  read  and  write  celebrates 
her  worship,  especially  on  the  5th  day  of  the  moon  in  Magha 
(Jan.-Feb.). 


II.— OX  THE  INFERIOR  CELESTIAL  BEINGS. 

Intermediate,  as  it  were,  between  gods  and  men,  and  either 
the  enemies,  or  the  companions  and  friends,  of  both,  are  certain 
beings  which,  occupying,  as  they  do,  an  important  place  in  the 
legends  and  poems  of  both  the  classical  and  more  vulgar  and 
modern  Hindu  writers,  deserve  a  passing  notice  in  connection 
with  Sanskrit  Literature.     These  arc, 

1.   The  Asuras,  or  Giants. 

They  were  the  offspring  of  Kasyapa,  the  progenitor  alike  of 
gods  and  men,  by  his  different  wives.  They  bear  a  resemblance 
to  the  Titans  of  Grecian  mythology,  and  stories  of  their  wars 
with  the  gods  abound  in  (he  Puranas.  Indra,  Vishnu,  Kartika, 
and  Durg&are  distinguished  among  the  Hindu  deities  for  their 
conflicts  with  these  beings.  As  Jupiter  was  represented  as 
aiming  the  thunderbolt  in  bis  right  hand  against  a  giant  under 
bis  feet,  bo  Durga*,  in  her  images,  appears  aiming  the  spear  in 
her  righi  hand  against  an  Asura  under  her  feet.  A  story  is  told 
it  Length,  in  the  Biahdbhdrata,  of  the  churning  of  a  sea  of  milk 
by  the  gods  and   Asiuas.     Mount  Mandara  was  taken  as  the 


OUTLINE -OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.        151 

churning-stick,  round  which  the  serpent  Vasuka  was  wrapped  to 
whirl  it  with.  The  gods  then  took  hold  of  the  head,  and  the 
Asuras  of  the  tail  of  the  surpent,  but  Vishnu  prevailed  on  the 
latter  to  change  places  with  the  gods.  As  the  result  of  their 
churning,  there  arose  from  the  sea,  first,  the  elephant  Airavata ; 
afterwards,  in  succession,  the  gem  Kanstubha,  the  horse  TTchaish- 
rava,  the  tree  Parijata,  many  jewels,  the  goddess  Lakshmi,  and, 
lastly,  poison.  Full  of  alarm  at  this,  the  gods  applied  to  S'iva, 
who,  to  save  the  world  from  destruction,  drank  up  the  poison, 
receiving  no  other  injury  than  a  blue  mark  on  his  throat,  from  which 
circumstance  is  derived  one  of  his  favourite  epithets,  Nilkanta. 
i.e.  "the  blue-throated."  Then  came  up  the  water  of  immortality. 
The  gods  (330  millions  in  number)  and  the  countless  Asuras  each 
claimed  the  boon;  but  while  the  latter  went  to  bathe  in  the 
sacred  stream,  to  prepare  themselves  for  the  holy  draught,  the 
gods  drank  up  nearly  the  whole  of  the  nectar.  One  Asura, 
however,  contrived  by  trickery  to  get  a  little,  and  became  im- 
mortal, but  Yishnu  cut  off  his  head.  Afterwards  the  immortalized 
head  and  trunk  became  the  ascending  and  descending  nodes, 
under  the  names  of  Eahu  and  Ketu. 


2.  The  Rdhhasas. 

Many  stories,  respecting  the  wars  of  the  Eakshasas,  or  Canni- 
bal-giants, with  the  gods,  are  contained  in  the  Puranas  and  other 
S'astras.  They  are  represented  as  assuming,  at  pleasure,  the 
different  shapes  of  horses,  tigers,  buffaloes,  etc.,  some  having 
100  heads,  and  others  as  many  arms.  As  soon  as  born,  these 
giant-demons  are  said  to  arrive  at  maturity.  They  devour  their 
enemies.  The  Eakshasas  are  all  Brahmans,  and  are  said  to 
dwell  in  the  south-west  corner  of  the  earth.  Nairita,  a  Eakshas, 
is  one  of  the  guardian  deities  of  the  earth,  presiding  in  the  south 
west  and  in  this  character  he  is  worshipped  at  all  great  festivals. 
He  is  represented  as  a  black  man  in  the  posture  of  meditation 
adopted  by  the  Brahmans,  and  having  in  his  right  hand  a 
scimitar.     One  of  the   most   celebrated  of  the  Eakshasas,  was 


#  ■h^-'i- 


152  APPENDIX  I. 

Ravana,  the  tyrant-ruler  of  Lanka  (Ceylon),  whom  Kama 
Chandra  (of  the  Th'iniayana)  dethroned  and  destroyed.  His 
brother,  Kumbha-Karna,  was  a  still  more  enormous  monster, 
devouring  thousands  of  cows,  sheep,  buffaloes,  etc.,  at  one  meal, 
and  washing  them  down  with  4000  hogsheads  of  spirits.  His 
house  was  20  or  30  thousand  miles  long,  and  his  bed  the  length 
of  the  house ! ! ! 

3.   Celestial  Dancers  and  Musicians. 

The  Gandharvas  and  Kinnaras  are  the  choristers  of  heaven, 
male  and  female  ;  the  latter  have  horses'  heads ! 

The  Vidya-dharas  are  male  and  female  dancers.  The  Apsaras 
are  also  female  dancers,  greatly  celebrated  for  their  beauty ;  they 
have  been  frequently  sent  down  to  earth  to  captivate  the  minds 
of  religious  devotees,  and  entice  them  from  those  works  of  merit 
which  were  likely  to  procure  them  the  thrones  of  the  gods. 
Eight  of  the  Apsaras  are  celebrated  as  beautiful  beyond  all 
others,  viz.,  Urvasi  (whence  the  title  of  Kalidasa's  drama  Vikra- 
inorvasi)  Mcnaka,  llambha,  Pancha-chara,  Trilottama,  etc. 
These  five  are  the  mistresses  of  the  gods,  and  keep  houses  of  ill 
fame  in  Indra's  heaven.  "When  any  one  of  the  gods  visits  the 
king  of  heaven,  he  generally  spends  some  time  with  one  or  more 
of  these  courtezans. 

4.   The  jydyikds. 

These  arc  female  companions  of  Durga,  and  are  worshipped  at 
the  festivals  of  this  goddess.  Eight  of  them  have  a  pre- 
eminence over  the  rest.  The  Tantra-sastras  declare  that  these 
females  visit  the  worshippers  either  as  their  wives  or  as  their 
mothers,  and  show  them  how  they  may  obtain  heaven;  or,  as 
F8,  bring  them  to  any  female  they  choose,  and  reveal  what- 
they  desire  to  know  of  tho  present  or  future.  He  who 
wishes  to  obtain  the  company  of  a  Niiyika  must  worship  her 
thrice  a  day,  and  repeat  her  namo  at  night  in  a  cemetery  for 
7,  15,  or  30  days.     On  the  last  night  he  must  continue  to  repeat 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  153 

her  name  till  she  appears  to  him,  and  asks  what  he  wishes  for. 
She  remains  with  him  during  the  night,  and  departs  next  morn- 
ing, leaving  with  him  presents  to  a  large  amount,  which, 
however,  he  must  expend  next  day,  or  they  will  all  evaporate. 
If  the  worshipper  wishes  to  go  to  any  place  in  the  three  worlds, 
the  Nayika  takes  him  there  in  a  moment.  If,  after  cohabiting 
with  a  Nayika,  he  cohabit  with  any  other  female,  the  Nayika 
immediately  destroys  him. 

5.  The  Yahshas 

are  the  servants  of  Kuvera,  the  god  of  riches,  and  fly  through 
the  world  preserving  the  wealth  of  men.  Kuvera  is  worshipped 
at  the  festival  of  Lakshmi,  and  at  all  other  great  festivals  ;  but 
he  has  no  separate  feast,  image,  or  temple.  The  Eamayana 
relates  that  Kuvera,  by  prayer  to  Brahma,  along  with  religious 
austerities,  obtained  Lanka  (Ceylon),  the  very  mire  of  whose 
streets  is  gold.  Here  he  reigned  till  Rama  dispossessed  him. 
Brahma  also  gave  him  the  chariot  Pushpaka,  which  had  the 
property  of  expansion  and  of  going  wherever  the  charioteer 
wished.  From  Lanka,  Kuvera  went  to  Mount  Kailasa,  where 
he  is  supposed  still  to  remain. 

6.   The  Pisdchas 

are  goblins,  messengers  of  the  gods,  who  guard  the  sacred 
places,  the  resorts  of  pilgrims;  sixty  thousand  guard  the 
Ganges  from  the  approach  of  the  profane. 

7.   The  other  Servants  of  the  Gods, 

of  inferior  order,  are  the  Gudghakas,  the  Siddas,  the  Bhiitas, 
and  the  Charanas.  Besides  which,  there  are  several  orders 
of  female  attendants,  especially  on  Durga  and  S'iva,  as,  the  Yo- 
ginis,  Dakinis,  Kakinis,  Sakinis,  Bhutinis,  and  Pretinis. 


1  5  1  AITEXDIX  I. 


III.— OX  TEE  AVATARAS  AXD  TERRESTRIAL  DEITIES. 

Some  of  these  are  worshipped  with  more  show  than  any  of 
the  celestial  deities,  while  the  records  of  their  exploits  constitute 
the  principal  themes  of  the  more  popular  Hindu  literature. 

1.  Krishna. 

He  was  one  of  the  incarnations  of  Vishnn,  the  object  of 
which  was  the  destruction  of  the  kings  S'isupala  and  Kansa,  and 
a  number  of  giants.  His  birth-place  was  Hathura.  His  father 
was  Yasu-deva,  a  Kshatriya ;  his  mother  Devaki.  Kansa 
seeking  to  destroy  him  when  an  infant,  his  father  fled  to  the 
Forest  Yrinda-vana,  and  concealed  him  in  the  house  of  Xanda ; 
hence  he  is  sometimes  called  the  son  of  XTanda. 

The  images  of  Krishna  represent  him  as  a  black  man,  holding 
a  flute  to  his  mouth  with  both  his  hands, ;  his  mistress  Radha 
standing  on  his  left.  Many  stories  are  recorded  of  Krishna  in 
the  Puranas  ;  but  his  history  and  character  are  best  known,  both 
to  Hindus  and  Europeans,  from  their  being  set  forth  so  fully  in 
the  celebrated  work — written  in  the  Braj  Bhaka  (a  dialect  of  the 
Hindi  language) — the  Prem  Sagar,  by  S'ri  Lallu  Lall  Kab,  which 
lias  been  translated  into  English  by  Captain  Hollings  and  Pro- 
r  Eastwick. 

In  his  infancy  he  is  said  to  have  deprived  a  giantess  of  her 
breath,  who  had  poisoned  her  breast  before  giving  him  to  suck. 
Nanda's  wife,  one  day,  when  looking  into  his  mouth,  had  a  view 
there  of  the  three  worlds,  with  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  S'iva 
Bitting  nn  their  thrones.  At  eight  years  of  age  he  took  up 
Mount  (lovardhana  in  his  arms  and  held  it  as  an  umbrella  over 
the  heads  of  the  villagers  and  their  cattle  during  a  dreadful 
Btorm,  with  whioh  the  angry  king  of  heaven  was  overwhelming 
them  ;  lie  created  a  number  of  cattle,  and  also  of  children,  to  re- 
those  whioh  Brahms'  had  stolen  from  V-rindavana;  he 
1  a  large  hydra  which  had  poisoned  the  waters  of  the 
Yamuna   (Jamna)j    he   seduced    the   wife  of   A'yana-ghosha,   a 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  155 

Vaisya,  and  sported  with  16,000  milkmaids  in  the  wilderness  of 
Vrinda.  He  next  assumed  four  arms  and  destroyed  Kansa, 
whose  father  he  placed  on  the  throne  instead  of  him.  After 
this  he  was  engaged  in  various  quarrels,  and  had  to  combat  with 
many  formidable  enemies,  which  induced  him  to  build  a  fort  at 
Dwaraka  in  Guzerat,  where  he  took  up  his  abode  and  married 
two  wives.  He  next  joined  the  family  of  Yudhishthira  in  their 
war  with  the  race  of  Duryodhana  (the  subject  of  the  Mahabha- 
rata) ;  and,  lastly,  destroyed  S'isupala.  He  closed  his  life  with 
an  act  worthy  of  such  a  character,  by  destroying  his  whole 
progeny,  and  was  at  length  himself  accidentally  killed  by  an 
arrow,  while  sitting  under  a  tree. 

It  is  very  possible  that,  if  any  authentic  Hindu  history  could 
be  discovered,  many  of  these  facts  would  be  found  recorded  in 
the  life  of  a  Hindu  king  of  the  name,  which  facts  have  been 
embellished  and  distorted  by  the  Asiatic  poets  till  they  have 
elevated  the  hero  into  a  god. 

The  temples  dedicated  to  Krishna  are  very  numerous,  and  it  is 
a  scandalous  fact,  that  the  image  of  Eadha,  his  mistress,  and  not 
those  of  his  wives,  Eukmini  and  Satyabhama,  always  accom- 
panies that  of  Krishna.  Pantomimic  entertainments  are  fre- 
quently held,  at  which  the  lewd  actions  of  this  god  are  exhibited. 
Six  parts  out  of  ten  of  the  whole  Hindu  population  of  Bengal 
are  supposed  to  be  disciples  of  this  god  in  particular,  and 
numerous  festivals  are  annually  kept  in  his  honour. 

2.   Gopdld 1  and  Gqpmdtha.2 

These  are  both  images  of  Krishna  in  his  childhood.  In  the 
former  the  infant  god  is  represented  as  resting  on  one  knee,  and, 
with  his  right  hand  extended,  craving  sweetmeats  from  his 
mother.  A  celebrated  image  of  Gopinatha  is  set  up  at  A'gra- 
dwipa,  where  an  annual  festival  is  held  in  the  month  Chaitra. 
Multitudes  of  lewd  women  are  always  present  at  these  festivals, 
and  the  most  abominable  indecencies  are  perpetrated. 

2  i.  e.  "  The  Lord  of  the  Milk-maids." 


15  6  APPENDIX  I. 

3.  Jaggannatha1  (vulg.  "Juggemath"). 

This  is  another,  and  perhaps  the  most  famous  form  of  Krishna. 
The  image  has  no  legs,  and  only  stumps  of  arms.  The  head  and 
legs  are  very  large.  At  the  festivals,  the  Brahmans  adorn  him 
with  silver  or  golden  hands. 

Krishna  having  been  accidentally  killed  by  Angada,  a  hunter, 
he  left  the  body  to  rot  under  a  tree.  Some  pious  persons,  how- 
ever, collected  the  bones  of  Krishna  and  placed  them  in  a  box. 
There  they  remained  till  King  Indra-dhumna  (a  great  ascetic) 
was  directed  by  Yishnu  to  form  the  image  of  Jaggannatha,  and 
put  into  its  belly  these  bones  of  Krishna.  Yisvakarma  (the 
architect  of  the  gods)  undertook  to  prepare  it,  on  condition  that 
he  should  be  left  undisturbed  till  its  completion.  The  impatient 
king,  however,  after  fifteen  days,  went  to  the  spot ;  on  which  Yisva- 
karma desisted  from  his  work,  and  left  the  god  without  hands  or 
feet.  The  King  was  much  disconcerted,  but  on  praying  to 
Brahma,  he  promised  to  make  the  image  famous  in  its  present 
shape.  Indra-dhumna  then  invited  all  the  gods  to  be  present  at 
the  setting  up  of  this  image.  Brahma  himself  acted  as  high 
priest,  and  gave  eyes  and  a  soul  to  the  god,  which  completely 
established  the  fame  of  Jaggannatha.  This  image  is  said  to  lie 
in  a  pool,  near  the  famous  temple  at  Jaggannatha-kshetra  (i.e. 
Jaggan&th's  field),  near  the  town  of  Puri  in  Orissa,  commonly 
called  by  the  English,  Juggernath's  Pagoda. 

There  are  many  other  temples  to  Jaggannatha  in  Bengal  and 
other  part  of  India,  besides  that  in  Orissa,  built  by  rich  men  as 
works  of  merit,  and  endowed  with  lands,  villages,  and  money,  at 
which  the  worship  of  the  god  is  performed  every  morning  and 
evening. 

There  are  two  great  annual  festivals  in  honour  of  the  god,  viz., 
the  Sii,'m-\,itia  -  in  the  month  Jyaistha  (May-June)  and  the 
Jiath-y.itr.t  ■  in  the  following  month,  A'sarha.  These  arc  every- 
where  most  numerously  attended)  but  especially  those  celebrated 

1  i.r.  "The  Lord  of  the  World."  2  Orjfctra. 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  157 

at  the  great  temple  at  Puri.  Thither  pilgrims  from  the  remotest 
corners  of  India  flock  to  pay  their  adoration  at  the  unhallowed 
shrine.  Between  two  and  three  thousand  persons,  it  is  computed, 
used  to  lose  their  lives  on  the  annual  pilgrimages  to  this  temple, 
and  not  less  than  200,000  worshippers  were  present  at  the  fes- 
tivals, from  which  the  Brahmans  draw  an  immense  revenue. 
Since  the  withdrawment  of  the  large  annual  grant,  however, 
which  the  British  Christian  Government  of  India,  till  very 
recently,  made  to  the  Orissa  Temple,  the  numbers  attending 
these  festivals  have  very  greatly  diminished.  All  the  land  within 
twenty  miles  round  the  "  Pagoda"  is  considered  holy;  but  the 
most  sacred  spot  is  an  area  of  about  650  feet  square,  which 
contains  fifty  temples,  the  most  conspicuous  of  which  is  a  lofty 
tower,  about  184  feet  in  height,  and  about  28  feet  square  inside, 
in  which  the  idol,  with  his  brother  Bala-Bama,  and  his  sister 
Subhadra,  is  lodged. 

At  the  Snan-yatra  (or  bathing  festival)  the  god  is  bathed  by 
pouring  water  on  his  head  during  the  reading  of  incantations. 
At  the  Bath-yatra  (or  car  festival)  the  carriage,  containing  the 
three  images  (which  has  sixteen  wheels  and  two  wooden  horses) 
is  drawn  by  the  devotees,  by  means  of  a  hawser,  for  some  distance, 
On  this  occasion  many  cast  themselves  beneath  the  ponderous 
wheels  and  are  crushed  to  death. 


4.  Rama, 

that  is,  Bama-Chandra — and  who  must  not  be  confounded  with 
either  Bala-Bama,  the  brother  of  Jaggannatha  {i.e.  Krishna), 
or  with  Parasu-Bama,  another  of  the  incarnations  of  Vishnu — 
is  the  hero  of  the  celebrated  Epic  of  Valrniki,  the  Bamayana. 
But  as  a  brief  outline  of  that  work,  containing  a  history  of  the- 
adventures  of  this  deified  hero,  has  already  been  given  in  the 
body  of  this  work,  it  will  be  unnecessary  to  add  much  further 
under  the  present  head. 

The  image  of  Bam  a  is  painted  green.     He  is  represented  as 
sitting  on  a  throne,  or  on  Hanuman,  the  monkey,  with  a  crown 


158  APPENDIX  I. 

on  his  head.  He  holds  in  one  hand  a  bow,  in  the  other  an 
arrow,  and  has  a  bundle  of  arrows  slung  at  his  back. 

The  birth  of  llama  forms  the  seventh  of  the  Hindu  incarna- 
tions. On  the  birth-day  of  this  god  the  Hindu  merchants  begin 
their  new  year's  accounts,  i.e.  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  increase 
of  the  moon  in  Chaitra  (March- April.)  At  the  time  of  death 
many  Hindus  write  the  name  of  Kama  on  the  breast  and  fore- 
head of  the  dying  person,  with  earth  taken  from  the  banks  of 
the  Ganges;  and  as  they  follow  the  corpse  to  the  Smascin,  or 
L)lace  of  burning,  they  repeat  the  formula,  Ram  nam  haclidta  Jiai, 
(i.e.,  "the  name  of  Earn  saves")  believing  that,  through  the 
efficacy  of  this  name,  the  deceased,  instead  of  being  dragged 
to  Yama  to  be  judged,  will  immediately  ascend  to  heaven.  The 
tilalc,  or  mark,  put  on  the  forehead  by  the  disciples  of  Eama 
resembles  a  trident.  The  Eamahuts,  a  class  of  mendicants,  im- 
press likewise,  on  different  parts  of  their  bodies,  Eama's  name 
and  the  figure  of  his  foot. 

The  worship  paid  to  him  is  much  the  same  as  that  to  Krishna. 
An  annual  festival  is  held  on  his  birth-day.  The  Dolyatra  (or 
Bwinging  festival)  is  also  celebrated  on  that  day,  and  kept  as  a 
,  hen  his  three  brothers,  Bharata,  Lakshmana,  and  Sha- 
tranga,  tire  also  worshipped.  Many  small  temples  are  erected  to 
his  honour. 

5.    Vihakarma 

was  the  son  of  Brahma,  and  the  architect  of  the  gods.     His 
is  painted  white,  has  three  eyes,  holds  a  club  in  his  right 
hand,    wears  a  crown,    a  necklace  of   gold,    and  rings   on   his 
wrists.     He  presides  over  the  arts,  manufactures,  etc. 

Tlu'  worship  of  Vis'vakarma  is  celebrated  four  times  a  year 
by  all  artificers,  to  obtain  success  in  their  business.  The  cere- 
monies may  be  performed  either  by  night  or  by  day,  before  any 
implement  of  trade.  On  these  occasions  the  worshippers  make 
a  feasl  1')  their  neighbours  on  as  liberal  a  scale  as  their  means 
will  allow. 


OUTLIKE  OF  HINDI/  MYTHOLOGY.  159 

6.   Kdmal-deva — the  Indian  Cupid. 

He  was  the  son  of  Brahma,  and  is  represented  as  a  beautiful 
youth,  holding  in  his  hand  a  bow  and  arrow  of  flowers.  He  is 
always  supposed  to  be  accompanied  by  his  wife  Eati,2  by  spring 
personified,  the  cuckoo,  the  humming  bee,  and  gentle  breezes ; 
and  is  represented  as  wandering  through  the  three  worlds.  The 
image  of  this  god  is  never  made  in  Bengal ;  but  on  the  13th  day 
of  the  moon's  increase  in  Chaitra,  an  annual  festival  is  held, 
when  the  ceremonies  are  performed  before  the  Salgrama,  an 
ammonite  stone,  considered  as  the  emblem  of  Vishnu.  "When  a 
bride  leaves  her  father's  house  to  go  to  her  husband  for  the  first 
time,  petitions  are  addressed  to  this  god  for  children,  and  for 
happiness  in  the  married  state. 


IV.— PRINCIPAL  FEMALE  TERRESTRIAL  DEITIES. 

1.  Sita, 

the  daughter  of  Janaka,  Xing  of  Mithila,  and  the  wife  of 
Rama,  who  is  always  worshipped  along  with  her  husband.  She 
is  represented  as  a  yellow  woman,  covered  with  jewels. 

2.  Rddhd, 

who  was  the  wife  of  A'yana-ghosha,  a  cow-herd  of  Gokula, 
where  Krishna  resided  in  his  youth.  Through  Yaraf,  a  procuress, 
he  seduced  Radha,  and  took  her  to  a  forest,  near  the  Yamuna, 
where  they  continued  till  Krishna  left  her  to  make  war  against 
Kansa. 

3.  Rukmini  and  Satya-hhamd. 

These  were  the  most  distinguished  wives  of  Krishna.  He 
had  six  others,  but  is  always  associated  with  his  mistress, 
Radha,  and  not  with  his  lawful  wives. 

1  «GTT  "desire,"  "love."  2  "^f^  "passion." 


1G0  APPENDIX  I. 

4.   Sulhadrd 

was  the  sister  of  Jaggamitha,  and  is  always  worshipped  with 
her  brother,  and  placed  with  him  in  his  temples. 


V.— DEIFIED  MYERS. 

Among  the  objects  of  Hindu  worship,  certain  rivers  occupied 
a  very  important  place,  both  as  male  and  female  divinities — (Nada 
and  Nadi.)  The  worship  of  these  rivers  is  performed  at  certain 
auspicious  seasons,  as  declared  in  the  S'astra,  and  at  some  of  the 
great  festivals.  Certain  particular  parts  of  these  rivers  are  held 
peculiarly  sacred,  and  draw  great  numbers  of  devotees  :  as  the 
sources  of  the  Ganges ;  the  union  of  the  Ganges,  the  Yamuna 
and  the  Saras wati,  at  Prayaga  (Allahabad) ;  the  branching  of 
this  united  river  into  three  streams  at  Triveni,  the  embouchure 
of  the  Ganges,  etc.  These  waters  are  used  for  food,  medicine, 
bathing,  religious  ceremonies,  etc.;  and,  formerly,  when  a 
Hindu  king  was  crowned,  they  were  poured  upon  his  head  as  a 
part  of  the  ceremonial  of  his   consecration. 

1.   Gangd  {the  Ganges)-. 

'lii is  goddess  is  represented  as  a  white  woman,  wearing  a 
crown,  sitting  on  the  sea  animal  makwa,  and  having  in  her 
right  hand  a  lotus,  and  in  her  left  the  lute.  She  is  called  the 
daughter  of  Himavat,  though  some  Puranas  declare  that  she  was 
produced  from  the  sweat  of  Vishnu's  foot,  which  Brahmd  caught 
and  preserved  in  his  alms'  dish. 

The  Etamayana,  Mahahharata,  and  Skanda-Purana  give  long 
accounts  of  the  descent  of  Ganga  from  heaven.  When  Ganga 
•  from  h<  aven,  the  gods,  conscious  that  their  sins  also 
needed  washing  away,  and  of  the  peculiar  efficacy  of  its  waters 
for  the  purpose,  petitioned  Brahma  on  the  subject,  who  soothed 
them  by  promising  that  Gangd  should  remain  in  heaven  and 
<l   to  the  earth  also.     The  goddess,  therefore,  was  called 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  161 

Mandakim  in  heaven,  and  Ganga  on  earth,  and  Bhogavati  in 
pdtdla.  The  Hindus  particularly  choose  the  banks  of  this  river 
for  their  worship,  as  the  merit  of  works  performed  here,  accord- 
ing to  the  S'astras,  is  greatly  augmented.  In  the  months  of 
Yaisaka,  Jyaishtha,  Kartika,  and  Magna,  the  merit  is  greater 
than  in  other  months ;  as  at  the  full  moon  in  these  months  it  is 
still  more  enhanced.  The  Puranas  declare  that  the  sight,  the 
name,  or  the  touch  of  Ganga,  takes  away  all  sin,  however 
heinous ;  that  thinking  of  Ganga,  at  a  distance,  is  sufficient  to 
remove  the  taint  of  sin ;  but  bathing  in  it  has  blessings  surpass- 
ing all  imagination. 

The  Hindus  are,  consequently,  very  anxious  to  die  in  sight  of 
the  Ganges,  that  their  sins  may  be  washed  away  at  the  last 
moments.  A  person  in  his  last  agonies  is  frequently  dragged 
from  his  bed  and  friends,  and  carried,  in  the  hottest  or  the  coldest 
weather,  from  whatever  distance,  to  the  river  side,  where  he 
lies,  if  a  poor  man,  without  covering  day  and  night  till  he 
expires.  "With  the  pangs  of  death  upon  him  he  is  placed  up  to 
the  middle  in  the  water  and  drenched  with  it.  Leaves  of  the 
tulasi  plant  are  also  put  into  his  mouth,  while  his  relations  call 
upon  him  to  repeat,  and  repeat  for  him,  the  names  of  Rama, 
Hari,  ISTarayana,  Brahma,  Ganga,  etc.  For  a  person  to  die  in 
the  house,  and  not  on  the  river  side,  is  considered,  not  only  a 
great  misfortune,  but  a  cause  of  infamy.  Dead  bodies  are 
brought  by  relations  to  be  burnt  near  the  river ;  and  when  they 
cannot  bring  the  whole  body,  it  is  not  uncommon  to  bring  a 
single  bone  and  throw  it  into  the  river,  in  the  hope  that  it  will 
help  to  save  the  soul  of  the  deceased.  Some  persons  even  drown 
themselves  in  the  Ganges,  in  the  sure  and  certain  hope  of 
ascension  to  heaven. 

On  account  of  the  veneration  in  which  the  water  of  this 
river  is  held,  it  is  used  in  English  Courts  of  Justice  to  swear 
upon,  as  the  Koran  in  the  case  of  the  Musalmans  and  the  Bible 
in  that  of  Christians  ;  but  many  respectable  Hindus  refuse  to  be 
sworn  in  this  way,  alleging  that  the  S'astras  forbid  them  in  these 
cases  to  touch  the  water  of  the  Ganges ;  and  some  have  even 

11 


162  APPENDIX  I. 

refused  to  contest  causes,  in  which  large  sums  were  at  stake, 
from  fear  of  being  obliged  to  take  this  oath. 

2.   Other  Deified  Rivers. 

Many  of  the  Indian  rivers,  besides  the  Ganges,  are  esteemed 
sacred,  and  receive  religious  worship,  though  none  to  such  an 
extent  as  it.  We  may  mention  especially  the  Brahmaputtra, 
Godavari,  Narmada  (or  Narbada),  and  the  Yaitarani  (in  Orissa), 
the  bathing  in  which,  at  certain  stated  seasons,  is  esteemed  an 
act  of  great  religious  merit. 


VI.— OTHER  OBJECTS  OF  DIVINE  WORSHIP. 

But  not  only  are  certain  rivers  esteemed  holy  and  deified 
by  the  Hindus;  numerous  animals,  plants,  and  even  stones,  etc., 
are  held  in  reverence  by  them,  and  receive  divine  honours; 
especially  (among  animals) 

1.  The  Cow. 

Brahma,  it  is  said,  created  Brahmans  and  the  cow  at  the 
same  time;  the  former  to  read  the  formulas,  and  the  latter 
to  afford  milk,  and  hence  ghi  (clarified  butter)  for  the  burnt 
oil  dings.  The  gods,  by  partaking  of  the  burnt-offerings,  are 
said  to  enjoy  exquisite  pleasure,  and  men,  by  eating  ghi,  destroy 
their  sins.  The  cow  is  called  the  mother  of  the  gods,  and  is 
declared  by  Brahma  to  be  a  proper  object  of  worship. 

2.   The  Monkey. 

The  black-faced  monkey  Hanuman,  the  son  of  Pavana,  by 
Anjana,  a  female  monkey,  is  believed  to  be  an  incarnation  of 
Siva.  He  is  especially  worshipped  on  their  birth-days  by 
Hindus,  in  order  to  obtain  long  life.  In  some  temples  his 
Image  is  set  up  alone,  and  in  others  with  that  of  Kama  and 
Si!;i,  and  worshipped  daily;  the  worship  of  llama  being  always 
preceded  by  a  few  ceremonies  in  honour  of  Hanuman. 


OUTLINE  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY.  163 

3.   The  Bog. 

Though  mentioned  in  the  Mahabharata  as  an  unclean  animal, 
yet,  as  carrying  Kala  Bhairava,  a  form  of  S'iva,  the  dog,  too,  re- 
ceives worship  along  with  his  master. 

4.  The  S'rigdla 

(Shakal  or  "jackal")  is  especially  adored  by  all  the  worship- 
pers of  Durga,  this  goddess  having  assumed  the  form  of  that 
animal  when  she  carried  the  child  Krishna  over  the  Yamuna  in 
his  flight  from  king  Kansa. 

5.  The  Garuda  (or  Garura) 

is  a  fabulous  animal,  with  the  head  and  wings  of  a  bird,  and  the 
body  of  a  man.  He  is  the  carrier  of  Vishnu,  and  was  the 
offspring  of  Kasyapa  (progenitor  of  gods  and  men),  by  his  wife 
Vinata.  He  is  worshipped  at  the  great  festivals  before  the 
images  of  Vishnu. 

6.  Aruna, 

the  elder  brother  of  Garuda,  is  the  charioteer  of  Surya,  and 
worshipped  with  his  master.  His  image  is  that  of  a  man 
without  thighs. 

7.  The  S'ankara-chilla, 

or  "eagle  of  Coromandel" — commonly  called  the  Brahmani  kite — 
is  considered  as  an  incarnation  of  Durga,  and  therefore  worship- 
ped by  the  Hindus,  who  bow  to  it  whenever  it  passes  them. 

8.  The  Khanjana, 

or  water-wag-tail,  is  esteemed  as  a  form  of  S'iva,  on  account  of 
the  mark  on  its  throat,  supposed  to  resemble  the  sacred  Salgrdma. 

9.   The  Peacock,  the  Goose,. and  the  Owl 

are  worshipped  at  the  festivals  of  Kartika,  Brahma,  and  Lakshmi 
respectively. 


164  APPENDIX  I. 

10.  Fishes  worshipped. 

Vishnu  having  been  incarnate  in  the  form  of  a  fish,  is  wor- 
shipped under  that  image  on  certain  occasions.  And  at  the 
festivals  in  honour  of  Ganga,  the  fishes  of  that  river  are  the 
objects  of  worship  too.  The  Ilisha  fish  is  specially  worshipped 
in  the  Padma  river,  at  the  time  of  its  first  periodical  arrival. 

11.   Trees. 

Certain  trees  are  worshipped  as  the  forms  of  particular  gods,1 
and  planted  near  the  houses  of  Hindus  for  this  purpose :  but 
the  most  sacred  of  plants  is  the  Tulas'i.2  They  have  no  public 
festival  in  honour  of  it,  but  occasionally  prostrate  themselves 
before  it,  repeating  a  form  of  prayer  or  praise.  They  have  great 
faith  also  in  the  power  of  its  leaves  to  cure  diseases,  and  for  ex- 
pelling the  poison  of  serpents.  The  Vishnu  Purana  tells  us  that 
Tulasi  was  originally  a  devout  female,  who,  wishing  to  become 
the  wife  of  Vishnu,  was  changed  by  Lakshmi  (his  wife)  into  the 
plant :  but  Vishnu  promised  to  assume  the  form  of  the  Salgrama 
and  always  to  continue  near  her. 

12.  The  Salagrama*  stone, 

a  species  of  ammonite,  is  held  peculiarly  sacred  by  Hindus,  on 
account  of  the  circumstance  just  mentioned,  or  because  of  a  dif- 
ferent version  of  its  origin  given  in  the  S'ri  Bhagavata,  where  it 
is  stated  that  Vishnu  on  a  certain  occasion  became  assimilated 
with  mount  (Jandaki,  in  Nepal  (from  which  the  stone  is  brought), 
and  afterwards  commanded  (hat  the  stones  of  that  mountain  should 
be  worshipped  as  representatives  of  himself.  The  Salagrama  is  a 
black,  hollow  stone,  nearly  round,  and  about  the  size  of  a  watch. 
2000  mpees  are  sometimes  given  for  a  singlo  stone. 

1  The  Aiwattha  ("Ficus  religiose  ")  and  the  Vata  ("  Ficus  Indica,"  or 
battydn  tic.)  arc  worshipped  as  representatives  of  Vishnu;  and  the  Vilva 
("  JEple  mamelos,"  or  lui  tree)  as  that  of  S'iva. 

2  Holy  basil  ('*  Ocyniuin  sanctum  ")  ;  rulgo  "  toolscc." 

;t  Or  vuhjo  "  Shalgram,"  the  ostites  or  eagle  stone. 


165 


APPENDIX   II, 


ON  THE  HINDI/  CASTES  AND  EELIGIOHS  SECTS. 

Such  frequent  allusion  is  made  in  all  Sanskrit  works  to  the 
Castes  and  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  that  the  editor  has 
deemed  it  advisable  to  append  a  few  remarks  on  each  of  these 
subjects. 

I.— OF   THE  FOUR  CASTES. 

The  word  caste,  a  corruption  of  the  Portuguese  casta  ("a 
breed"),  is  a  term  which  has  been  adopted  to  denote  the  dif- 
ferent divisions  of  Hindu  society.  It  corresponds  to  the  Sanskrit 
and  Hindi  terms  Jdti  (*rrf?|)  or  Jut  (^TTcf),  meaning  "  birth,"  or 
"  race,"  and  Varna  (^0"),  or  varn  (^Uj),  or  bar  an  («p^«f),  denoting 
"  colour,"  or  "tribe."  The  distinction  of  Hindus  into  castes  is 
nowhere  referred  to  in  the  early  Yedic  writings,  and  is  evidently 
the  invention  of  the  Brahmans  of  a  comparatively  later  period. 
The  four  great  castes  are  the  Brahmans,1  the  Kshatriyas,2  the 
Vaisyas,z  and  the  S'udras,4,  but  each  of  these  includes  many  sub- 
divisions. 

1  From  "^f  "  to  increase,"  or  "  be  great ; "  incarnations,  as  it  were,  of 
Brahma.,  the  great  first  cause. 

2  From  f^T  "wasting,"  "  destruction,"  +  "^T  "  to  preserve,"  i.e.,  he  who 
saves  the  oppressed. 

3  From  T^ni  "  to  enter,"  i.e.,  he  who  enters  fields  (Wilson),  or  on  business 
(Ward). 

4  From  "^^  "  to  purify  "  (Wilson),  or  from  5p^  "to  go  to,"  or  "  take 
refuge  in,"  viz.,  the  Brahman  (Ward). 


166  APPENDIX  II. 

The  Sama  Veda  and  the  Puranas  affirm  that  the  Brahmans 
were  produced  from  the  mouth  of  Brahma  at  the  same  time  that 
the  Vedas  dropped  from  it  (and  hence,  perhaps,  the  same  word 
fc(^[5^  nom.  W^n,  means  either  " Brahma,"  a  "Brahman,"  or 
"  scripture  knowledge,"  i.e.,  the  Veda),  indicating  thereby  that 
their  position  in  the  community  was  to  be  pre-eminent  in  sacred- 
ness  and  honour,  and  that  their  duties  were  to  concern  religious 
doctrine  and  ceremony.  The  Kshatriyas,  the  same  authorities 
tell  us,  sprang  from  the  arm  of  the  Creator,  their  duty  being  to 
protect  the  earth,  the  cattle,  and  Brahmans.  The  Vaisyas,  again, 
had  their  origin  in  the  thighs  of  the  Supreme,  and  have  as  their 
assigned  vocation  to  provide  the  necessaries  of  life  by  agriculture 
and  trade;  while,  lastly,  the  Sudras  were  the  offspring  of  the 
feet  of  the  deity,  as  denoting  the  servile  offices  and  pursuits  to 
which  they  were  to  devote  themselves. 

In  addition,  however,  to  these  Castes,  there  are  the  Pdridrs 1 — 
the  excommunicated — those  who  are  esteemed  the  outcasts  of 
society,  the  refuse  of  mankind,  the  men  of  infamy  and  degrada- 
tion, with  whom  the  lowest  of  any  of  the  castes  will  have  no 
intercourse,  being  subjected  to  ignominy  and  subjection  for  ever. 

The  Smritis  assign  to  Brahmans  the  offering  of  sacrifices,  the 
offices  of  the  priesthood,  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and  explaining 
of  the  Sastras  (all  of  which  are  forbidden  to  the  other  castes), 
the  giving  of  alms,  and  the  receiving  of  presents.  Such  is  their 
exalted  position,  that  to  injure  a  Brahman  is  the  most  unpardonable 
offence.  Whatever  part  of  the  body  was  used  in  harming  one  of 
the  privileged  class  was  at  once  to  be  removed  ;  while  to  do  a 
beneficent  act  to  this  deified  personage  would  atone  for  almost 
any  sin,  and  secure  the  highest  commendation  and  merit.  The 
wearing  of  the  pa itd,  or  sacred  thread  (a  corruption  of  pavitra 
(trf^"^  "  holy  "  ),  is  one  of  the  privileges  and  marks  of  a  Brahman, 
but  not  peculiarly  so,  as  those  of  the  Kshatriya  and  Vaisya  castes 
likewise  share  the  honour,  the  only  distinction  being  the  length, 

1  "Or  IViriabs,  as  often  ipelt.  Probably,  tbc  editor  supposes,  a  corruption 
of  the  Sanskrit  Paribara  (^rf^Hj,  "disrespect,"  "  an  objectionable  thing," 
or  of  Paribarya  (MiM?!^)  "  that  sbould  be  avoided." 


HINDIT  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  167 

or  numbers  of  plies,  of  the  thread.  It  is  worn  over  the  left 
shoulder,  next  the  skin,  and  extending  half  way  down  the  right 
thigh.  The  investiture  generally  takes  place  among  the  Brahmans 
at  about  eight  years  of  age,  among  the  Kshatriyas  at  eleven,  and 
among  the  Yaisyas  at  twelve,  and  must,  in  any  case,  be  performed 
before  fifteen.  The  ceremony  is  considered  the  "  second  birth" 
of  the  Hindu  (whence  the  term  "  twice  born"  applied  especially 
to  the  Brahmans),  and  a  boy  cannot  be  married  till  it  takes 
place.  » 

Kings,  governors,  and  all  intrusted  with  civil  and  military 
affairs,  in  general  belong  to  the  Kshatriya  caste;  while  the 
Vaisyas  are  properly  the  farmers  and  merchants  of  the  land.  Of 
late  years,  however,  Brahmans  are  often  to  be  met  with  occupying 
all  these  situations,  as  well  as  those  which  more  peculiarly  belong 
to  them. 

There  has  been  a  wonderful  lowering  of  Brahmanical  pride 
and  dignity  since  the  conquest  of  the  country  by  Europeans. 
While  thousands  are  still  attached  to  the  temples,  and  subsist  on 
the  revenues  of  ecclesiastical  lands,  great  numbers  are  employed 
in  courts  of  justice,  as  clerks,  interpreters,  etc.,  or,  as  pandits,  in 
assisting  foreigners  in  the  study  of  the  languages,  and  many  also 
are  to  be  met  with  as  merchants,  accountants,  and  even  as 
farmers  and  soldiers.  But  still,  as  a  class,  they  stand,  by  uni- 
versal acknowledgment,  the  first  in  Hindu  society. 

The  question  has  often  been  asked — Is  Caste  a  civil  or  religious 
institution?  Practically,  at  any  rate,  it  is  both,  but  eminently 
the  latter.  The  distinctions  it  establishes  are  of  divine  decree, 
and  the  subjects  of  sacred  record.  Its  effects  upon  all  social 
relations  are  immediate  and  direct;  but  without  the  religious 
element  it  could  not  have  retained  its  vitality  so  long,  and 
produced  such  results  as  we  now  witness. 

Innumerable  instances  of  the  power  of  caste  prejudices  and 
laws  might  be  quoted.  We  shall  give  only  two.  On  one 
occasion,  a  Sipahi  (sepoy,  or  native  soldier)  of  high  caste,  falling 
down  in  a  faint,  the  military  surgeon  ordered  one  of  the  Pariah 
attendants  of  the  hospital  to  throw  some  water  on  him,  in  conse- 


168  APPENDIX  II. 

qucnce  of  which  none  of  his  class  would  afterwards  associate  with 
him,  because  he  had  thereby  forfeited  the  privileges  of  his  caste. 
The  result  was  that  soon  after  he  put  the  muzzle  of  a  musket  to 
his  head  and  blew  out  his  brains. — Several  buildings  were  on  fire 
at  one  time,  at  Madras,  and  threatened  a  general  conflagration 
of  the  city.  There  were  several  wells  near  at  hand,  but  the 
Brahmans  forbade  the  use  of  water,  lest  a  person  of  lower  caste 
than  themselves  should  approach,  and  thus  pollute  them. 

If  a  Brahman  breaks  caste,  it  may  be  regained^by  him,  but  at 
enormous  expense,  and  by  the  performance  of  the  most  disgusting 
ceremonials  and  penances.  These  depend,  however,  very  much 
on  the  rank  and  wealth  of  the  out-caste.  From  twenty  to  thirty 
thousand  pounds  have  again  and  again  been  paid  in  order  to 
obtain  restoration  to  Erahmanic  caste.  And  often,  of  course,  it 
is  quite  impracticable. 


II.— OF   THE  RELIGIOUS   SECTS.1 

There  are  five  great  sects,  esteemed  orthodox,  to  one  or  other 
of  which  every  Hindu  belongs,  unless  he  is  a  professed  dissenter. 
These  are  the  Vaishnava,  the  Saiva,  the  S'akta,  the  Saura,  and 
napatya.  Of  these,  however,  only  the  three  first  are  now 
popular,  prevailing,  respectively,  in  the  north-west  (with  Hattra 
and^Lueknow  as  centres)  in  and  about  Benares,  and  in  Bengal.2 
These  scots  were  probably  originally  defined  by  Sankara  A'charya 
about  eight  or  nine  centuries  ago.  This  great  reformer,  after 
overthrowing  all  the  sects  he  deemed  heretical,  allowed  his  fol- 
lowers to  be  divided  into  the  live  modern  sects  above  specified. 

The  worshippers  of  Vishnu,  S'iva,  and  S'akti  (i.e ,  Devi,  alias 
Parvati),  viewed  as  the  adherents  of  the  respective  sects  thence 

'  abridged  from  Prof  ll.  n.  Wilson's  Learned  "Sketch  of  the  Religious 
of  the  Hindus,"  in  vols,  wi.  ami  wii.  of  the  "Asiatic  Researches." 

-  The  women,  however,  all  over  the  north-west,  as  well  as  in  the  more 
southern  and  easterly  provinces,  arc  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Devi  (the 
■peciaJ  object  of  iSakta  adoration),  and  her  temples  ahound  in  all  the  rural 
districts. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  169 

named,1  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  orthodox  adorers  of 
those  divinities.  Few  Brahmans  of  learning,  if  they  have  any 
religion  at  all,  will  acknowledge  themselves  to  belong  to  any  of 
the  popular  divisions  of  the  Hindu  faith,  although,  as  a  matter  of 
simple  preference,  they  more  especially  worship  some  individual 
deity,  as  their  Ishta  (or  chosen)  Devata.  They  refer  to  the 
Vedas,  Dharma  S'astras,  Puranas,  and  Tantras,  as  the  only  ritual 
they  recognize,  and  regard  all  practices  not  derived  from  those 
sources  as  irregular  and  profane.  On  the  other  hand,  many  of 
the  sects  seem  to  have  originated,  in  a  great  measure,  out  of 
opposition  to  the  Brahmanical  order.  Teachers  and  disciples  are 
chosen  from  any  class,  and  the  distinction  of  castes  is,  in  a  great 
measure,  sunk  in  the  new  one  of  similarity  of  schism.  The 
ascetics  and  mendicants  also,  in  many  instances,  affect  to  treat 
the  Brahmans  with  great  contempt,  and  this  is  generally  repaid 
by  them  with  interest.  Most  of  the  followers  even  of  the  sects, 
however,  pay  the  ordinary  deference  to  the  Brahmanical  order. 

Most  of  the  religious  sects  comprise  two  classes  of  individuals, 
which  may  be  called  clerical  and  lay.  The  bulk  of  the  votaries 
are  generally,  but  not  always,  of  the  latter  order,  whilst  the 
clerical  class  are  sometimes  monastic,  sometimes  secular.  Often 
the  Gosdins  (or  religious  preceptors)  are  men  of  business  and 
family.  The  preference,  however,  is  usually  given  to  teachers 
of  an  ascetic,  or  ccenobitic  life,  whose  pious  meditations  are  not 
distracted  by  the  affections  of  kindred,  or  the  cares  of  the  world; 
the  doctrine  that  introduced  similar  unsocial  institutions  into  the 
Christian  Church,  in  the  fourth  century,  being  still  triumphantly 
prevalent  in  the  east,  the  land  of  its  nativity. 

Of  the  ccenobitic  members  of  the  different  communities,  most 
pursue  an  erratic  and  mendicant  life.  They  have,  however,  their 
fixed  rallying  points,  and  are  sure  of  finding  every  here  and  there 
establishments  of  their  own,  or  some  friendly  fraternity,  where 
they  are,   for  a   reasonably  moderate  period,   lodged   and   fed. 


1  Of  the  other  two  sects  specified  above,  the  Saura  is  named  from  Surya 
(the  sun)  and  the  Ganapatya,  from  Ganapati  (or  Ganpat,  in  yulgur  Hindi) 
an  epithet  of  Ganes'a. 


170  APPENDIX  II. 

/ 
When  old  and  infirm,  they  settle  down  in  some  previously  existing 
Math,  or  establish  one  of  their  own. 

The  Maths,  Asthals,  or  Akdras,  as  the  monastic  residences  are 
called,  are  scattered  over  the  whole  country.  They  vary  in 
structure  and  size,  according  to  the  property  or  wealth  of  the 
owners ;  but  they  generally  comprehend  a  set  of  huts  or  chambers 
for  the  Mahant,  or  superior,  and  his  permanent  pupils ;  a  temple, 
sacred  to  the  deity  whom  they  worship,  or  the  Samddhi,  or  shrine 
of  the  founder  of  the  sect,  or  some  eminent  teacher;  and  a 
Dharma  S'dld,  one  or  more  sheds  or  buildings  for  the  accommoda- 
tion of  the  mendicants  or  travellers  who  may  visit  the  Math. 
Ingress  and  egress  is  free  to  all :  indeed  a  restraint  upon  personal 
liberty,  as  in  the  monasteries  and  convents  of  the  Christian  Church, 
seems  never  to  have  entered  into  the  conception  of  any  of  the 
religious  legislators  of  the  Hindus.  The  number  of  resident 
chelas,  or  disciples,  under  the  control  of  a  Mahant,  varies  from 
three  or  four  to  thirty  or  forty,  but  there  are  always,  besides,  a 
number  of  vagrant  or  out  members  of  the  community.  The 
Mahant  is  usually  selected  from  among  the  senior  or  more  pro- 
ficient chelas. 


(a.)  Divisions  and  Doctrines  of  the  Vaishnava  Sects.1 

Of  the  Vaishnavas,  Professor  Wilson  enumerates  upwards  of 
twenty  Sampraddyas,  or  sects,  each  of  which  he  treats  of  at 
considerable  length.  Of  these,  however,  there  are  but  four, 
which,  being  generally  regarded  as  the  principal  and  most 
popular,  need  here  be  particularly  described.  These  are  the 
Ramannjls,  the  R&manandis,  the  Kahfr  Panthfs,  and  the  Khakis. 

1.    Of  the  K'ri.  (i.e.  Lahhmi)  Sampraddyas  or  Rdmdnujas. 
This  sect  was  founded  about  the  middle  of  the  12th  century 

1  Thia  account  <1<>.s  not  refer  to  tho  strictly  orthodox  worshippers  of  Vishnu, 
Inn  t<.  the  sectaries  and  dissenters  who  are  not  entirely  guided  by  the  Vedas, 
S  BStras,  ami  Parana*,  but  by  curtain  parts  of  them  only. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  171 

by  the  Vaishnava  reformer  Bamanuja  Acharya.1  He  was  a 
native  of  Perambar,  in  southern  India,  and  spent  the  early  part 
of  his  life  at  Kanchi,  or  Conjeveram,  where,  after  many  years  of 
study,  he  first  promulgated  his  peculiar  doctrines.  He  after- 
wards resided  at  S'ri  Eanga,  on  the  Kaverf,  and  there  composed 
his  principal  works.  He  then  visited  various  parts  of  India, 
disputing  with  the  professors  of  different  creeds,  and  reclaiming 
various  shrines  then  in  possession  of  the  S'aivas  for  the  wor- 
shippers of  Vishnu,  particularly  the  celebrated  temple  of  Tripeti. 
Being  afterwards  persecuted  by  a  S'aiva  king  in  those  parts,  he 
found  a  refuge  for  some  years  in  the  Mysore  country,  but  finally, 
on  the  death  of  his  persecutor,  returned  to  S'ri  Banga,  where  he 
ended  his  days.  The  establishments  of  the  Bainanujas  are 
numerous  in  the  Dakhin  (or  Deccan)  still,  and  the  same  country 
contains  the  site  of  the  Gadd'i  (the  pillow  or  seat)  of  the  primitive 
teacher,  his  spiritual  throne,  in  fact,  to  which  his  disciples  are 
successively  elevated.  This  circumstance  gives  a  superiority  to 
the  A'charyas  of  the  south  over  those  of  the  north,  into  which  they 
are  at  present  divided. 

Most  of  the  Vaishnavas  follow  the  doctrines  of  the  Eamanujas, 
the  chief  tenet  of  whom  is  the  assertion  that  Vishnu  is  Brahma : 
that  he  was  before  all  worlds,  and  was  the  cause  and  creator  of 
all.  Though  they  maintain  that  Vishnu  and  the  universe  are 
one,  yet,  in  opposition  to  the  Vedanta  doctrines,  they  deny  that 
the  deity  is  void  of  form  or  quality,  and  regard  him  as  endowed 
with  all  good  qualities,  and  with  a  two-fold  form — the  supreme 
spirit  {Paramdtma),  or  cause,  and  the  gross  one,  or  effect,  i.e., 
the  universe  or  matter.  The  doctrine  is  hence  called  the 
Visishthddwaita,  or  doctrine  of  unity  with  attributes.  In  these 
assertions  they  are  followed  by  most  of  the  Vaishnava  sects. 
Creation  originated  in  the  wish  of  Vishnu  (who  was  alone, 
without  a  second)  to  multiply  himself.  He  said,  "I  will  become 
many,"  and  he  was  individually  embodied  as  visible  and  aetherial 

1  His  history  is  recorded  in  various  legendary  tracts  and  traditionary  narra- 
tives, much  of  it  of  the  most  fabulous  description.  Thus,  one  work  represents 
him  as  an  incarnation  of  the  serpent  Sesha,  his  chief  companions  and  disciples 
being  the  discus,  mace,  and  lotus,  and  other  insignia  of  Vishnu. 


172  APPENDIX  II. 

light.  After  that,  as  a  ball  of  clay  may  be  moulded  into  various 
forms,  so  the  grosser  substances  of  the  deity  became  manifest  in 
the  elements  and  their  combinations.  The  forms  into  which  the 
divine  matter  is  thus  divided,  are  pervaded  by  a  portion  of  the 
same  vitality  which  belongs  to  the  great  cause  of  all,  but  which 
is  distinct  from  his  spiritual  or  astherial  essence.  Here  then, 
again,  the  Ramanujas  oppose  the  Yedantikas,  who  identify  the 
Paramdtmd  and  Jivdlmd,  or  aetherial  and  vital  spirit,  This 
vitality,  though  endlessly  diffusible,  is  imperishable  and  eternal, 
and  the  matter  of  the  universe,  as  being  the  same  in  substance 
with  the  Supreme  Being,  is  alike  without  beginning  or  end. 
Purmhottama,  or  Narayana,  having  created  man  and  animals 
through  the  instrumentality  of  those  subordinate  agents  whom 
he  willed  into  existence  for  that  purpose,  still  retained  the 
supreme  authority  of  the  universe  :  so  that  the  Ramanujas  assert 
three  predicates  of  the  universe,  comprehending  the  deity.  It 
consists  of  Chit,  or  spirit ;  Achit,  or  matter ;  and  Isvara,  or  God : 
or  the  enjoyer,  the  thing  enjoyed,  and  the  ruler  and  controller 
of  both. 

Besides  his  primary  and  secondary  form  as  the  Creator  and 
creation,  the  deity  has  assumed,  at  different  times,  particular 
forms  and  appearances  for  the  benefit  of  his  creatures.  He  is, 
or  has  been,  visibly  present  amongst  men  in  five  modifications, — in 
his  A  i  cha,  objects  of  worship,  as  images,  etc.  ;  in  the  Yibhavas,  or 
Avataras,  as  the  fish,  boar,  etc. ;  in  certain  forms  called  Yyiihas, 
of  which  four  are  enumerated,  viz.  :  Yasudeva  or  Krishna, 
Balarama,  Pradyumna,  and  Aniruddha;  fourthly,  in  the  Sukshma 
form,  which,  when  perfect,  comprises  six  qualities,  viz.:  viraja, 
absence  of  human  passion  ;  rimritiju,  immortality;  visohi,  exemp- 
tion from  care  or  pain  ;  V%j\ghaUd}  absence  of  natural  wants;  satya- 
kdma,  an&satyasankalpa,  the  love  and  practise  of  truth;  and  fifthly, 
as  the  antardtmdj  or  antarjdmi,  the  human  soul  or  individualised 
spirit.  These  are  t<>  be  worshipped  seriatim  as  the  miuistrant 
ascends  in  the  Bcale  of  perfection; — adoration  is,  therefore,  five- 
fold, viz. :  abhigamanam,  cleansing  and  purifying  the  temples, 
images,  etc. ;   updddnam,  providing  ilowers  and  perfumes  for  reli- 


HINDI/  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  173 

gious  rites;  tjija,  the  presentation  of  such  offerings, — (Mood-offer- 
ings, it  may  be  observed,  being  uniformly  prohibited  by  all  the 
Vaishnavas) ;  swddhydya,  counting  the  rosary  and  repeating  the 
names  of  the  divinity  or  any  of  his  forms  ;  and  yoga,  the  effort  to 
unite  with  the  deity.  The  reward  of  these  acts  is  elevation  to 
the  seat  of  Vishnu,  and  enjoyment  of  like  state  with  his  own, 
interpreted  to  be  perpetual  residence  in  Vaikuntha,  or  Vishnu's 
heaven,  in  a  condition  of  pure  ecstacy  and  eternal  rapture. 

The  worship  of  the  followers  of  Ramanuja  is  addressed  to 
Vishnu  and  Lakshmi,  and  to  their  respective  incarnations,  either 
singly  or  conjointly.  The  Sri  Vaishnava  worship,  in  the  north 
of  India,  is  not  very  popular,  and  the  sect  is  rather  of  a  specula- 
tive than  practical  nature.  The  teachers  are  usually  Brahmans, 
but  the  disciples  may  be  of  any  caste. 

Besides  the  temples  appropriated  to  Vishnu  and  his  consort 
and  their  several  forms,  including  those  of  Krishna  and  Rama 
and  those  which  are  celebrated  as  objects  of  pilgrimage,  images 
of  metal  or  stone  are  usually  set  up  in  the  houses  of  the  private 
members  of  this  sect,  which  are  daily  worshipped,  and  the 
temples  and  dwellings  are  all  decorated  with  the  Salagrdma 
stone  and  Tulasi  plant. 

The  most  striking  peculiarities  in  the  practices  of  this  sect, 
are  the  individual  preparation,  and  scrupulous  privacy  of  their 
meals  :  they  must  not  eat  in  cotton  garments,  but,  having  bathed, 
must  put  on  woollen  or  silk  ;  the  teachers  allow  their  select 
pupils  to  assist  them,  but  in  general,  all  the  Ramanujas  cook  for 
themselves,  and  should  the  meal,  during  this  process,  or  whilst 
they  are  eating,  attract  even  the  looks  of  a  stranger,  the  opera- 
tion is  instantly  stopped  and  the  viands  buried  in  the  ground. 
A  similar  delicacy  in  this  respect  prevails  amongst  some  other 
classes  of  Hindus,  especially  the  Rajput  families,  but  is  not 
carried  to  so  preposterous  an  extent. 

The  chief  ceremony  of  initiation  in  all  Hindu  sects  is  the 
communication  by  the  teacher  to  the  disciple  of  the  Mantra? 

1  The  Mantra,  and  Tilak  (or  mark  on  the  forehead)  are  never  bestowed  on 
any  person  of  impure  birth. 


174  APPENDIX  II. 

which  generally  consists  of  the  name  of  some  deity,  or  a  short 
address  to  him  ;  it  is  communicated  in  a  whisper,  and  never  lightly 
made  known  by  the  adept  to  profane  ears.  The  Mantra  of  the 
Ramanuja  sect  is  said  to  be  the  six  syllable  Mantra — Om  Rd- 
mdya  namah ;  or  "Om,  salutation  to  Rarna  " 

Another  distinction  amongst  sects,  but  merely  of  a  civil  cha- 
racter, is  the  term  or  terms  with  which  the  religious  members 
salute  each  other  when  they  meet,  or  in  which  they  are  ad- 
dressed by  the  lay  members.  This  among  the  Ramanujas  is  the 
phrase  Ddsosmi  (^ nflf*^)  or  Ddsoham  (rfUfl^);  "I  am  your 
slave;"  accompanied  with  the  Pranam,  or  slight  inclination  of 
the  head,  and  the  application  of  the  joined  hands  to  the  forehead. 
To  the  A'chdryas,  or  supreme  teachers  of  this  sect,  the  rest  per- 
form the  Ashtanga  Dandavat,  or  "prostration  of  the  body,  with 
the  application  of  eight  parts"  (the  forehead,  breast,  hands, 
knees  and  insteps  of  the  feet)  to  the  ground. 

The  Hindu  sects  are  usually  discriminated  by  various  fantas- 
tical streaks  on  their  faces,  breasts  and  arms :  for  this  purpose, 
all  the  Vaishnavas  employ  especially  a  white  earth  called  Gop'i- 
chandana,  which,  to  be  of  the  purest  description,  should  be 
brought  from  Dwaraka,1  being  said  to  be  the  soil  of  a  pool  at 
that  place,  in  which  the  Gopis  drowned  themselves  when  they 
heard  of  Krishna's  death.  The  common  Gopi'chandana,  however, 
is  nothing  but  a  magnesian  or  calcareous  clay.  The  marks  of 
the  Ramanujas  are  two  perpendicular  white  lines  drawn  from 
the  root  of  the  hair  to  the  commencement  of  each  eye-brow,  and 
a  transverse  streak  connecting  them  across  the  root  of  the  nose: 
in  the  cent  re  is  a  perpendicular  streak  of  red,  made  with  red 
Sanders,  or  Rait,  a  preparation  of  rice,  turmeric,  and  lime  (or 
alum)  with  acid;  they  have  also  patches  of  Gopi'chandana,  with 
a  central  red  streak,  on  the  breast  and  each  upper  arm:  the 
marks  air  supposed  to  represent  the  S'ankh,  Chakra,  Gadd,  and 
Padma  (or  shell,  discus,  club  and  lotus),  which  Vishnu  bears  in 
ln>   foor  hands,    whilst  the  central   streak  is  Sri  or  Lakshmi.2 

1  On  the  West  coast  <>f  Guierat. 

1  The  efficacy  of  these  marks  is  gpeat ;  from  the  Kasi  Khand  we  learn  that 
Yuma  or  l'lulo  spares  those  who  wear  thorn,  for  iu  them  no  sin  exists. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  175 

Some  have  these  objects  carved  on  wooden  stamps  with  which 
they  impress  the  emblems  on  their  bodies,  and  others  carry  their 
doctrines  so  far  as  to  have  the  parts  cicatrized  with  heated  me- 
tallic models  of  the  objects  they  propose  to  represent,  bnt  this  is 
not  regarded  as  a  creditable  practice :  besides  these  marks,  they 
wear  a  necklace  of  the  wood  of  the  Tulasf,  and  carry  a  rosary  of 
the  seeds  of  the  same  plant  or  of  the  Lotus. 

The  Ramanujas  are  not  very  numerous  in  the  north  of  India, 
where  they  are  better  known  as  Sri  Vaishnavas ;  they  are  de- 
cidedly hostile  to  the  S'aiva  sect,  and  are  not  on  very  friendly 
terms  with  the  modern  votaries  of  Krishna,  although  they  re- 
cognise that  deity  as  an  incarnation  of  Vishnu. 

2.  Rdmdnandis  or  Rdmdwats. 

The  followers  of  Ramanand  are  much  better  known  than 
those  of  Ramanuja  in  upper  Hindustan ;  they  are  usually  con- 
sidered as  a  branch  of  the  Ramanuja  sect,  and  address  their 
devotions  peculiarly  to  Rama- Chandra,  and  the  divine  mani- 
festations connected  with  Vishnu  in  that  incarnation,  as  Sita, 
Lakshmana  and  Hanuman. 

The  schism  of  Ramanand  originated  in  the  resentment  of  an 
affront  offered  him  by  his  fellow-disciples  and  sanctioned  by 
his  teacher. 

The  residence  of  Ramanand  was  at  Benares,  at  the  Pancha 
Gangd  ghat,  where  a  Math  or  monastery  of  his  followers  is  said 
to  have  existed,  but  to  have  been  destroyed  by  some  of  the  Mu- 
salman  princes :  at  present  there  is  merely  a  stone  platform  in 
the  vicinity,  bearing  the  supposed  impression  of  his  feet,  but 
there  are  many  Maths  of  his  followers,  of  celebrity,  at  Benares, 
the  Panchdyat,  or  council,  at  which  city  is  the  chief  authority 
amongst  the  Ramawats  in  upper  India. 

As  they  maintain  the  superiority  of  Rama,  in  the  present  or 
Kali  Yug,  they  are  collectively  known  as  Ramawats,  although 
the  same  variety  prevails  amongst  them,  as  amongst  the  Rama- 
nujas, as  to  the  exclusive  or  collective  worship  of  the  male  and 


176  APPENDIX  II. 

female  members  of  this  incarnation,  i.e.  of  Rama  and  Sita,  singly, 
or  jointly,  as  Sita-Rama. 

Individuals  of  them  pay  particular  veneration  to  some  of  the 
other  forms  of  Vishnu,  and  they  hold  in  like  estimation  as  the 
Rarnanujas  and  every  Vaishnava  sect  the  S diagram  stone  and 
Tuls'i  plant ;  their  forms  of  worship  correspond  with  those  of  the 
Hindus  generally,  but  some  of  the  mendicant  members  of  the  sect, 
who  are  very  numerous,  and  are  usually  known  as  Vairdgis,  or 
Viraktas,  consider  all  forms  of  adoration  superfluous,  beyond  the 
incessant  invocation  of  the  name  Krishna  and  Rama. 

The  practices  of  this  sect  are  of  a  less  precise  nature  than 
those  of  the  Rarnanujas,  it  being  the  avowed  object  of  the 
founder  to  release  his  disciples  from  those  fetters  which  he  had 
found  so  inconvenient ;  in  allusion  to  this,  indeed,  he  gave,  it  is 
said,  the  appellation  Avadhuta,  or  "  Liberated,"  to  his  scholars, 
and  they  admit  no  particular  observances  with  respect  to  eating 
or  bathing,  but  follow  their  own  inclination,  or  comply  with  the 
common  practice  in  these  respects.  The  initiatory  Mantra  is  said 
to  be  S'ri  Rama — the  salutation  is  Jay  a  S'r'i  llama,  Jag  a  Rama 
or  SUd  Ram:  their  marks  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  preceding, 
except  that  the  red  perpendicular  streak  on  the  forehead  is  varied 
in  shape  and  extent,  at  the  pleasure  of  the  individual,  and  is 
generally  narrower  than  that  of  the  Rarnanujas. 

Various  sects  are  considered  to  be  but  branches  of  the  Rd- 
mdnandi  Faishnavas,  and  their  founders  are  asserted  to  have  been 
amongst,  his  disciples :  of  these  disciples,  twelve  are  particularised 
as  the  most  eminent,  some  of  whom  have  given  origin  to  reli- 
gious distinctions  of  great  celebrity  ;  and,  although  their  doctrines 
arc  often  \<  it  dill!  rent  from  those  of  Ramanand,  yet  the  popular 
tradition  is  so  far  corroborated,  that  they  maintain  an  amiable 
intercourse  with  the  followers  of  Ramanand  and  with  each 
other. 

There  are  three  different  lists  of  these  twelve  disciples  which 
do  not  agree.  One  is  found  in  Price's  Selections,  a  second  in  the 
Bhakta  Mala,  and  Dr.  Wilson  gives  a  third.  All  agree,  however, 
in  naming  Kab'ir,  the  weaver ;  Raidas,  flic  chamar,  or  currier ; 


HINDI/  CASTES  AND  BELIGIOUS  SECTS.  177 

P'zpa,  the  Rajput ;  Dharma,  the  Jat ;  Sena,  or  Seva,  the  barber, 
and  some  others,  a  list  which  shows  that  the  school  of  Ramanand 
admitted  disciples  of  every  caste.  It  is  in  fact  asserted  in  the 
Bhakta  Mala  that  the  distinction  of  caste  is  inadmissible  accord- 
ing to  the  tenets  of  the  Ramanandis.  There  is  no  difference, 
they  say,  between  the  Bhagavdn  and  the  Bhaht  (or  the  deity  and 
his  worshipper).  But  Bhagavan  appeared  in  inferior  forms,  as  a 
fish,  a  boar,  a  tortoise,  etc. ;  so  the  Bhakta  likewise  may  be 
born  as  a  Chamar,  a  Korhi,  a  Chhipi,  or  any  other  degraded  caste. 

When  we  consider  the  character  of  the  reputed  disciples  of 
Ramanand,  and  the  tenets  of  those  sects  which  they  founded,  we 
are  led  to  the  conclusion  that  this  individual,  if  he  did  not  invent, 
at  least  gave  fresh  force  to  a  very  important  encroachment  upon 
the  orthodox  system.  He  in  fact  abrogated  the  distinction  of 
caste  amongst  the  religious  orders,  and  taught  that  the  holy 
character  who  quitted  the  ties  of  nature  and  society,  " shook  off," 
at  the  same  time,  all  personal  distinction.  This  seems  to  be  the 
proper  import  of  the  term  Avadhiita,,  and  the  popular  character 
of  the  works  of  this  school  corroborates  this  view  of  Ramananda's 
innovation.  Sankara  and  Ramanuja,  writing  to  and  for  the 
brahmanical  order  alone,  composed  chiefly,  if  not  solely,  Sanskrit 
commentaries  on  the  texts  of  the  Yedas,  or  Sanskrit  expositions 
of  their  peculiar  doctrines ;  and  the  teachers  of  these  opinions, 
whether  monastic  or  secular,  are  indispensably  of  the  brahman- 
ical caste.  It  does  not  appear  that  arjy  works  exist  which  are 
attributed  to  Ramanand  himself,  but  those  of  his  followers  are 
written  in  the  provincial  dialects,  and  addressed  to  the  capacity, 
as  well  as  placed  within  the  reach,  of  every  class  of  readers,  and 
every  one  of  those  may  become  a  Yairagi  and  rise  in  time  to  be  a 
Guru  or  Mahant. 

We  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  again  particularly  of  such  of 
the  above  mentioned  disciples  of  Ramanand,  as  instituted  separate 
sects,  but  there  are  several  who  did  not  aspire  to  that  distinction, 
and  whose  celebrity  is  nevertheless  still  very  widely  spread 
throughout  Hindustan.  "We  shall  here  simply  remark  that  the 
four  most  famous  authors  in  this  sect  are  Nabhaji  (the  author  of 

12 


178  APPENDIX   II. 

the  "  Bhakta  Mala"),  Sur  Das1  and  Tulasi  Das  (to  whose  poetical 
talents  the  late  version  of  it  is  largely  indebted),  and  Jayadeva, 
whose  songs  have  been  translated  by  Sir  W.  Jones. 

Besides  the  legendary  tales  of  the  celebrated  writer  Tulasi 
Das,  whose  works  exercise  more  influence  upon  the  great  body 
of  the  Hindu  population  than  the  whole  voluminous  series  of 
Sanskrit  compositions,  we  have  other  notices  of  him  collected  from 
his  own  works,  or  preserved  by  tradition,  that  differ  from  them 
in  some  respects.  From  these  it  appears  that  Tulasi  Das  was  a 
brahman  of  the  Sarvariah  branch,  and  a  native  of  Hajipur,  near 
Chitrakuta ;  when  arrived  at  maturity  he  settled  at  Benares,  and 
held  the  office  of  Dewan  to  the  Raja  of  that  city.  His  spiritual 
perceptor  was  Jagannath  Das ;  he  followed  his  teacher  to  Go- 
vardhan,  but  afterwards  returned  to  Benares  and  there  com- 
menced his  Hindi  version  of  the  Ramayana  in  the  year  of  Samvat 
1631,  when  he  was  thirty-one  years  of  age.  Besides  this  work, 
which  is  highly  popular,  Tulasi  Das  is  the  author  of  a  Sat  sayd, 
or  collection  of  100  stanzas  on  various  subjects,  and  of  a  great 
variety  of  hymns,  as  Ragas,  Kavits  and  Padas,  in  honour  of 
Rama  and  Sita.  Tulasi  Das  continued  to  reside  at  Benares, 
where  he  built  a  temple  to  Sita  Rama  and  founded  a  Math  ad- 
joining, both  of  which  are  still  in  existence ;  he  died  in  the  year 
of  the  Samvat  era  1680,  or  a.d.  1624,  in  the  reign  of  Jehangir; 
— the  legendary  story,  therefore,  of  his  intercourse  with  Shah 
Jehan  is  consequently  an  anachronism. 

The  ascetic  and  mendicant  followers  of  Ramanand,  known  indis- 
criminately as  Ramanandis  or  Ramawats,  are  by  far  the  most 
numerous  class  of  sectaries  in  Gangctic  India ;  in  Bengal  they 
are  comparatively  few ;  beyond  that  province  and  as  far  as  Alla- 
habad, although  perhaps  the  most  numerous,  they  yield  in  in- 
fluenoe  and  wealth  to  the  S'aiva  branches,  especially  to  th.e  At'its; 
from  that  place,  however,  they  predominate,  and  either  by  them- 

1  This  popular  Hindi  poet  and  ringer  was  blind.  Hence  any  blind  men- 
dicant musician  is,  oompfimentarily,  called  a  Stir-dee  by  the  Hindus.  N&- 
lihiiji  was  also  dor*  blind,  hut  is  Baid  t<>  have  obtained  his  sight  when  about 
&?e  years  "Id.  The  praises  of  Vishnu  were  the  chief  subject  of  the  composi- 
tions of  all  these  poets. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  179 

selves  or  their  kindred  divisions  almost  engross  the  whole  of  the 
country  along  the  Ganges  and  Jamuna ;  in  the  district  of  Agra 
they  alone  constitute  seven-tenths  of  the  ascetic  population.  The 
Ramanandis  have  very  numerous  votaries,  but  they  are  chiefly 
from  the  poorer  and  inferior  classes,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Rajputs  and  military  Brahmans,  amongst  whom  the  poetical 
works  of  Sur  Das  and  Tulasi  Das  maintain  the  pre-eminence  of 
Ram  and  his  Bhakts. 

3.     Kabir  Panthis. 

Amongst  the  twelve  disciples  of  Ramanand,  the  most  cele- 
brated of  all  and  one  who  seems  to  have  produced,  directly  or 
indirectly,  a  greater  effect  on  the  state  of  popular  belief  than  any 
other,  was  Kabir.  With  an  unprecedented  boldness  he  assailed 
the  whole  system  of  idolatrous  worship,  and  ridiculed  the  learning 
of  the  Pandits  and  doctrines  of  the  S'astras,  in  a  style  peculiarly 
well  suited  to  the  genius  of  his  countrymen,  to  whom  he  ad- 
dressed himself,  whilst  he  also  directed  his  compositions  to  the 
Musalman,  as  well  as  to  the  Hindu  faith,  and  with  equal  severity 
attacked  the  Mulla,  and  the  Quran.  The  effect  of  his  lessons,  as 
confined  to  his  immediate  followers,  will  be  shown  to  have  been 
considerable,  but  their  indirect  effect  has  been  still  greater; 
several  of  the  popular  sects  being  little  more  than  ramifications 
from  his  stock,  whilst  Nanak  Shah,  the  only  Hindu  reformer 
who  has  established  a  national  faith,  appears  to  have  been  chiefly 
indebted  for  his  religious  notions  to  his  predecessor  Kabir.  This 
sect  therefore  claims  particular  attention. 

The  account  of  his  birth  and  life  are  found  in  the  Bhalcta 
Mala.  All  traditions  concur  in  making  Kabir  the  disciple  of 
Ramanand,  although  various  stories  are  narrated  of  the  method 
by  which  he  obtained  that  distinction  and  overcame  the  objec- 
tions started  to  him  as  a  man  of  low  caste,  or  according  to  very 
general  belief,  of  the  Muhammadan  persuasion.1 

1  The  Musalmans  (though  on  very  untenable  ground)  claimed  him  as  one 
of  their  faith.     This  occasioned  a  contest  at  the  death  of  Kabir — the  Hindus 


1£0  APPENDIX  II. 

It  is  exceedingly  probable  that  Kabir  flourished  about  the  be- 
ginning of  the  15  th  century  :  and  it  is  also  not  unlikely  that  his 
innovations  were  connected  with  the  previous  exertions  of  Ra- 
miinand ;  consequently  that  teacher  must  have  lived  about  the 
end  of  the  14th. 

The  Kabir  Panthis,  in  consequence  of  their  master  having  been 
the  reputed  disciple  of  Raman  and,  and  of  their  paying  more 
respect  to  Vishnu,  than  the  other  members  of  the  Hindu  triad,  are 
always  included  amongst  the  Yaishnava  sects,  and  maintain  with 
most  of  them,  the  Ramawats  especially,  a  friendly  intercourse 
and  political  alliance.  It  is  no  part  of  their  faith,  however,  to 
worship  any  Hindii  deity,  or  to  observe  any  of  the  rites  or  cere- 
monials of  the  Hindus,  whether  orthodox  or  schismatical ;  such 
of  their  members  as  are  living  in  the  world  conform  outwardly 
to  all  the  usages  of  their  tribe  and  caste,  and  some  of  them  even 
pretend  to  worship  the  usual  divinities,  though  this  is  considered 
as  going  rather  farther  than  is  justifiable.  Those,  however,  who 
have  abandoned  the  fetters  of  society,  abstain  from  all  the  ordi- 
nary practices,  and  address  their  homage,  chiefly  in  chanting 
hymns,  exclusively  to  the  invisible  Kabir :  they  use  no  llantra 
nor  fixed  form  of  salutation;  they  have  no  peculiar  mode  of 
dress,  and  some  of  them  go  nearly  naked,  without  objecting, 
however,  to  clothe  themselves,  in  order  to  appear  dressed  where 
clothing  is  considered  decent  or  respectful.  The  Mahants  wear 
a  small  silk  cap  :  the  frontal  marks,  if  worn,  are  usually  those  of 
the  Yaishnava  sects,  or  they  make  a  streak  with  Sandal  or  Go- 
pichandan  along  the  ridge  of  the  nose  ;  a  necklace  and  rosary  of 
Iktlasi  arc  also  worn  by  them,  but  all  these  outward  signs  are 
considered  of  no  importance,  and  the  inward  man  is  the  only 

insisting  on  burning  his  corpse,  the  Afuhammadanfi  on  burying  it.  To  end  the 
dispute  (bo  runs  tradition)  Etabir  himself  appeared  and  desired  them  to  look 

miller  the  doth  that  covered  his  remains.     On  doing  so  nothing  Mas  found  but 

a  heap  of  dowers.  One  half  of  these  the  then  Raja  of  Benares  removed  to 
t li.it  city  where  thej  were  burnt,  and  where  he  appropriated  a  spot  now  called 
the  Kabir  Chaurd  for  the  reception  of  their  ashes,  while  the  Muhammadan 
chief  BijU  Khan  erected  a  tomb  over  the  other  portion  at  Magar,  near  Go- 
rakhpur,  where  Kabii  had  died,  Both  are  now  places  of  pilgrimage  with  the 
followers  of  this  sect. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  181 

essential  part  to  be  attended  to.  To  avoid  persecution,  however, 
Kabir  said, 

*R%  fff%$  *R%  faf%i*  TER  ^fiT  ^tf^  TT3  I 

ft  #t  ft  ^t  *r%  sftf^  ^f%$  wfi  ?nit  II 

Associate  and  mix  with  all,  and  take  the  names  of  all ; 

Say  to  every  one,  Yes  Sir,  Yes  Sir ;  abide  in  your  own  village} 

That  is,  if  they  are  addressed  "Ram  Ram,"  etc.,  they  must 
answer  with  the  same  salutation. 

The  doctrines  of  Kabir  are  taught  in  a  great  variety  of  works 
in  different  dialects  of  Hindi ;  they  are  the  acknowledged  com- 
positions of  his  disciples  and  successors,  but  they  are  mostly  in 
the  form  of  dialogues,  and  profess  to  be  of  his  utterance,  either 
in  his  own  words  with  the  phrase,  "Kabir  verily  says,"  or 
"  Kabir  has  said,"  or  they  are  given  in  the  language  of  his  fol- 
lowers, when  the  expression,  "the  slave  of  Kabir,"  is  used.  The 
style  of  all  their  works  is  very  peculiar ;  they  are  written  in  the 
usual  forms  of  Hindi  verse,  the  Doha,  Chaupdi  and  Samdi;  and 
are  very  voluminous,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  collection  pre- 
served in  the  Khas  Grantha,  or  the  book  at  the  Chaura.  There 
are  twenty  in  all,  but  the  principal  are  the  Sukh  ISTidhan,  Go- 
rakhnathki  Goshthi,  Kabir  Panji  and  the  Yijek  (or  Bijek). 

There  are  also  a  variety  of  stanzas,  called  Agams,  Banis,  etc., 
composing  a  very  formidable  course  of  study  to  those  who  wish 
to  go  deep  into  the  doctrine  of  this  school,  and  one  in  which  the 
greatest  proficients  amongst  the  Kabir  Panthis  are  but  imperfectly 
versed  ;  a  few  sdlchas,  shabdas  and  relchtas,  with  the  greater  portion 
of  the  Yijek,  constituting  their  acquirements;  these,  however, 
they  commit  to  memory  and  quote  in  argument  with  singular 
readiness  and  happiness  of  application. 

The  Goshthis,  or  disputations  of  Kabir,  are  not  read  till  more 
advanced;  whilst  the  Sukh  Nidhan,  which  is  the  key  to  the 
whole,  and  which  has  the  singularity  of  being  quite  clear  and 

1  Or  more  freely — 

Unite  with  all,  commune  with  all,  acknowledge  every  God ; 
"  Yes,  yes,  sir,"  say  to  every  one  ;  but  change  not  your  abode. 


182  APPENDIX  II. 

intelligible,  is  only  imparted  to  those  pupils  whose  studies  are 
considered  to  approach  perfection.  This  great  authority  amongst 
the  Kabir  Panthis  is  written  in  very  harmonious  verse  ;  it  rather 
inveighs  against  other  systems  than  explains  its  own,  and  it  is 
perhaps  impossible  to  derive  from  it  any  satisfactory  conclusion 
as  to  the  real  doctrines  of  Kabir. 

"We  shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  doctrines  of  Kabir  according 
to  the  authority  of  the  Su/ch  Nidhdn.  The  Sukh  Nidhan  is  sup- 
posed to  be  addressed  by  Kabir  himself  to  Dharmadas,  his  chief 
pupil,  and  follower  of  Ramanand's  doctrines ;  it  is  said  to  be  the 
work  of  S'rutgopal,  the  first  of  Kabir's  disciples. 

From  this  authority  it  appears,  that  although  the  Kabir  Pan- 
this have  withdrawn,  in  such  a  very  essential  point  as  worship, 
from  the  Hindu  communion,  they  still  preserve  abundant  vestiges 
of  their  primitive  source ;  and  that  their  notions  are  in  substance 
the  same  as  those  of  the  Pauranic  sects,  especially  of  the  Vaish- 
nava  division.  They  admit  of  but  one  God,  the  creator  of  the 
world ;  and  in  opposition  to  the  Yedanta  notions  of  the  absence 
of  every  quality  and  form,  they  assert  that  he  has  body,  formed 
of  the  five  elements  of  matter ;  and  that  he  has  mind,  endowed 
with  the  three  Gunas,  or  qualities  of  being,  of  course  of  ineffable 
purity  and  irresistible  power;  he  is  free  from  the  defects  of 
human  nature,  and  can  assume  what  particular  shape  he  will ; 
in  all  other  respects  he  does  not  differ  from  man,  and  the  pure 
man,  the  Sddh  of  the  Kabir  sect,  is  his  living  resemblance,  and 
after  death  is  his  associate  and  equal ;  he  is  eternal  without  end 
or  beginning,  as  in  fact  are  the  material  elements  of  which  he 
consists  and  of  wrhich  all  things  are  made,  residing  in  him  before 
they  took  their  present  form,  as  the  parts  of  the  tree  abide  in  the 
i  ;  or  as  flesh,  blood  and  bone  may  be  considered  to  be  present 
in  the  seminal  fluid.  From  the  latter  circumstance  and  the  iden- 
tity of  their  essential  nature,  proceeds  the  doctrine  that  God  and 
man  arc  not  only  the  same,  but  that  they  are  both  in  the  same 
manner,  everything  that  lives  and  moves  and  has  its  being. 
Other  Beetfl  have  adopted  these  phrases  literally,  but  the  followers 
of  Kabir  do  not  mean  by  them  to  deny  the  individuality  of  being, 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  183 

and  only  intend  these  texts  as  assertions  of  all  nature  originally 
participating  in  common  elementary  principles. 

The  Parama-purusha  was  alone  for  seventy-two  ages,  for,  after 
the  Pauraniks,  the  Kabir  Panthis  maintain  successive  and  endless 
creations ;  he  then  felt  a  desire  to  renew  the  world,  which  desire 
became  manifest  in  a  female  form,  being  the  Maya,1  from  whom 
all  the  mistaken  notions  current  amongst  mankind  originate : 
with  this  female  (the  Adi  Bhavam,  Prakriti  or  S'akti)  the  Param- 
purusha  (or  first  male)  cohabits  and  begets  the  Hindii  triad, 
Brahma,  Vishnu  and  S'iva.  He  then  disappears,  and  the  lady  makes 
advances  to  her  own  sons :  the  result  of  this  is  the  birth  of  Saras- 
wati,  Lakshmi  and  Uma,  whom  she  weds  to  the  three  deities, 
and  then  establishing  herself  at  Jwalamukhi,  leaves  the  three 
wedded  pairs  to  frame  the  universe  and  give  currency  to  the 
different  errors  of  practice  and  belief  which  they  have  learnt  from 
her.  It  is  to  the  falsehood  of  Maya  and  her  criminal  conduct 
that  the  Kabir  Panthis  perpetually  allude  in  their  works,  and  in 
consequence  of  the  deities  pinning  their  faith  upon  her  sleeve, 
that  they  refuse  them  any  sort  of  reverential  homage.  The 
essence  of  all  religion  is  to  know  Kabir  in  his  real  form,  a  know- 
ledge which  those  deities  and  their  worshippers,  as  well  as  the 
followers  of  Muhammad,  are  all  equally  strange  to,  although  the 
object  of  their  religion  and  of  all  religion  is  the  same.  Life  is 
the  same  in  all  beings,  and  when  free  from  the  vices  and  defects 
of  humanity,  assumes  any  material  form  it  pleases.  As  long  as 
it  is  ignorant  of  its  source  and  parent,  however,  it  is  doomed  to 
transmigration  through  various  forms;  and,  amongst  others,  we 
have  a  new  class  of  them,  for  it  animates  the  planetary  bodies, 
undergoing  a  fresh  transfer,  it  is  supposed,  whenever  a  star  or 
meteor  falls.  As  to  heaven  and  hell,  they  are  the  inventions  of 
Maya,  and  are  therefore  both  imaginary,  except  that  the  Swarga 
of  the  Hindus  and  Bihisht  of  the  Musalmans  imply  worldly 
luxury  and  sensual  enjoyment,  whilst  Narak  and  Jahannam  are 
those  cares  and  pains  which  make  a  hell  upon  earth. 

The  moral  code  of  the  Kabir  Panthis  is  short,  but  if  observed 

1  A  notion  common  to  all  Hindu  sects. 


184  AITENDIX  II. 

faithfully,  is  of  a  rather  favourable  tendency.  Life  is  the  gift 
of  God,  and  must  not  therefore  be  violated  by  his  creatures. 
Humanity  is  consequently  a  cardinal  virtue,  and  the  shedding  of 
blood,  whether  of  man  or  animal,  a  heinous  crime. 

Truth  is  the  other  great  principle  of  their  code,  as  all  the  ills 
of  the  world  and  ignorance  of  God  are  attributable  to  original 
falsehood. 

Retirement  from  the  world  is  desirable,  because  the  passions 
and  desires,  the  hopes  and  fears,  which  the  social  state  engenders, 
are  all  hostile  to  tranquillity  and  purity  of  spirit,  and  prevent 
that  undisturbed  meditation  on  man  and  God  which  is  necessary 
to  their  comprehension. 

The  lastt  great  duty  is  the  usual  sum  and  substance  of  every 
sect  amongst  the  Hindus,  implicit  devotion,  in  word,  act,  and 
thought,  to  the  Guru  or  spiritual  guide  :  in  this,  however,  the 
characteristic  spirit  of  the  Kabir  Panthis  appears,  and  the  pupil 
is  enjoined  to  scrutinize  his  teacher's  doctrines  and  acts,  and  to 
be  first  satisfied  that  he  is  the  sage  he  pretends  to  be,  before  he 
resigns  himself  to  his  control. 

Irregular  conduct  is  visited  by  reproof  and  admonition  :  if  the 
offender  does  not  reform,  the  Guru  refuses  to  receive  his  salu- 
tation ;  if  still  incurable,  the  only  further  infliction  is  expulsion 
from  the  fraternity. 

The  doctrine  of  outward  conformity  and  the  absence  of  visible 
objects  of  worship  have  prevented  this  sect  from  spreading  very 
generally  throughout  India:  it  is,  however,  very  widely  diffused, 
and  lias  given  rise  to  many  others  that  have  borrowed  its  phrase- 
ology and  caught  a  considerable  portion  of  its  spirit;  the  sect 
Itself  is  split  into  a  variety  of  subdivisions,  and  there  are  no 
fewer  than  twelve  branches  of  it  traced  up  to  the  founder,  be- 
tween which  a  difference  of  opinion  as  well  as  descent  prevails. 
The  founders  of  these  twelve  blanches  and  the  position  of  their 
descendants  arc  the  following:  — 

1.  S'rutgopul  l);is,  the  author  of  the  Sukh  Mdhan:  his  suc- 
cessors preside  over  the  Chaura*  at  Benares,  the  Samadh  atMagar, 
-tii  establishment  at  Jagannath,  and  one  at  Dwaraka. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  185 

2.  Bhago  Das,  the  author  of  the  Bijek;  his  successors  reside 
at  Dhanauti. 

3.  Narayan  Das,  and 

4.  Churaman  Das  :  these  two  were  the  sons  of  Dharma  Das,  a 
merchant  of  the  Kasaundhya  tribe,  of  the  S'ri  Yaishnava  sect,  and 
one  of  Kabir' s  first  and  most  important  converts ;  his  residence 
was  at  Bandho,  near  Jabbalpur,  where  the  maths  of  his  posterity 
long  remained.  The  Mahants  were  family  men,  thence  termed 
Bans-gurus.  The  line  of  Narayan  Das  is  extinct,  and  the  present 
successor  of  Churaman  being  the  son  of  a  concubine,  is  not 
acknowledged  as  a  Mahant  by  all  the  other  branches. 

5.  Jaggo  Das ;  the  Gaddi,  or  pillow  at  Kattak. 

6.  Jivan  Das,  the  founder  of  the  Setnanri  sect,  to  whom  we 
shall  again  have  occasion  to  advert. 

7.  Kamal, — Bombay:  the  followers  of  this  teacher  practise 
the  Yoga. 

8.  Tak  Sali,— Baroda. 

9.  Gyani, — Majjhni,  near  Sahasram. 

10.  Saheb  Das, — Kattak  :  his  followers  are  called  Mala  Panthis. 

11.  NTityanand. 

12.  Kamal  Nad :  these  two  settled  somewhere  in  the  Dekhan. 
There  are  also   some  popular  and  perhaps  local  distinctions 

of  the   sect,  a3   Hansa   Kabiris,   Dana   Kabiris,  and  Hangrela 
Kabiris. 

Of  these  establishments,  the  Kabir  Chaura  at  Benares  is  pre- 
eminent in  dignity,  and  constantly  visited  by  wandering  members 
of  the  sect.  At  a  grand  meeting  there  35,000  Kabir  Panthis  of 
the  monastic  and  mendicant  class  are  said  to  have  collected. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Kabir  Panthis,  both  clerical  and  lay, 
are  very  numerous  in  all  the  provinces  of  upper  and  central 
India,  except  perhaps  in  Bengal  itself.  The  quaker-like  spirit  of 
the  sect,  their  abhorrence  of  all  violence,  their  regard  for  truth, 
and  the  unobtrusiveness  of  their  opinions,  render  them  very  in- 
offensive members  of  the  state ;  their  mendicants  also  never  solicit 
alms,  and  in  this  capacity  even  they  are  less  obnoxious  than  the 
many  religious  vagrants,  whom  the  rank  soil  of  Hindu  super- 


186  APPENDIX  II. 

stition  and  the   enervating  operation  of  an  Indian   climate  so 
plentifully  engender. 

4.  KJidlis. 

This  division  of  the  Yaishnavas  is  generally  derived,  though 
not  immediately,  from  Ramanand,  and  is  undoubtedly  connected 
in  its  polity  and  practice  with  his  peculiar  followers.  The  re- 
puted founder  is  Kil,  a  disciple  of  Krishnadas,  whom  some  accounts 
make  the  disciple  of  Asiinand  (or  Tahtanand),  the  disciple  of 
Hamanand. 

They  are  generally  confounded  with  Bairagis.  They  are  dis- 
tinguished from  other  Yaishnavas,  by  the  application  of  clay  and 
ashes  to  their  dress  or  persons  ;  those  who  reside  in  fixed  estab- 
lishments generally  dress  like  other  Yaishnavas,  but  those  who 
lead  a  wandering  life,  go  either  naked  or  nearly  so,  smearing 
their  bodies  with  the  pale  grey  mixture  of  ashes  and  earth,  and 
making  in  this  state  an  appearance  very  incompatible  with  the 
mild  and  decent  character  of  the  Yaishnava  sect  in  general ;  the 
Khakis  also  frequently  wear  the  Jatd  or  braided  hair. 

Many  Khakis  are  established  about  Farakabad,  but  their  prin- 
cipal seat  in  this  part  of  India  is  at  Hanuman-garh,  near  Ayod- 
hva,  in  Oude ;  the  Samadhi,  or  spiritual  throne  of  the  founder,  is 
said  to  be  at  Jaipur;  the  term  Samadhi1  applied  to  it,  however, 
would  seem  to  indicate  that  they  bury  their  dead. 

5.  Malhk  Deists. 

M;iluk  Pas  was  fifth  in  descent  from  llamauand,  being  the 
immediate  disciple  of  Kfl  baba.  The  modifications  of  the  Yaish- 
nava doctrines  introduced  by  Maliik  Das,  appear  to  have  been 
little  more  than  (lie  name  of  the  teacher  and  a  shorter  streak  of 
red  in  the  forehead;  in  one  respect  indeed  there  is  an  impor- 
tant distinction  between  these  and  the  Bamanandf  ascetics;  the 
teachers  of  the  Malwk  Dasis  appear  to  be  of  the  secular  order, 

1  A  Samddhi  ifl  properly  the  tomb  of  a  Jogi,  who,  from  religious  motives, 
has  submitted  to  be  buried  alive. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  187 

Grihasthas  or  house-holders,  whilst  the  others  are  all  coenobites  ; 
the  doctrines,  however,  are  essentially  the  same.  Their  chief  au- 
thority is  the  Bhagavad  Gita ;  they  have  also  some  Hindi  S'dkhds 
and  Vishnu  Facias  attributed  to  their  founder,  as  also  a  work  in 
the  same  language  entitled  the  Das  Ratan.  The  followers  of  this 
sect  are  said  to  be  numerous  in  particular  districts,  especially 
among  the  trading  and  servile  classes,  to  the  former  of  which  the 
founder  belonged.  The  principal  establishment  of  the  MaMk 
Dasis  is  at  Kara  Manikpur,  the  birth-place  of  the  founder,  and 
still  occupied  by  his  descendants.  Besides  this  there  are  six  other 
Maths  belonging  to  this  sect,  at  Allahabad,  Benares,  Brindaban, 
Ayodhya,  Lucknow  and  Jagannath,  which  last  is  of  great  repute, 
as  rendered  sacred  by  the  death  of  Maluk  Das.1 

6.  Dadu  PantMs. 

This  class  is  one  of  the  indirect  ramifications  of  the  Eamanandi 
stock,  and  is  always  included  in  the  Yaishnava  schisms.  Its 
founder  is  said  to  have  been  a  pupil  of  one  of  the  Kabir  Panthi 
teachers,  and  to  be  fifth  in  descent  from  Bamanand. 

The  worship  is  addressed  to  Kama,  but  it  is  restricted  to  the 
Japa,  or  repetition  of  his  name,  and  the  Rama  intended  is  the 
deity  negatively  described  in  the  Yedanta  theology  :  temples  and 
images  are  prohibited.  Dadu  flourished,  if  the  list  of  his  reli- 
gious descent  be  accurate,  about  the  year  a.d.  1600,  at  the  end  of 
Akbar's  reign,  or  in  the  beginning  of  that  of  Jehangir.  His 
followers  wear  no  peculiar  frontal  mark  nor  mala,  but  carry  a 
rosary,  and  are  further  distinguished  by  a  peculiar  sort  of  cap, 
a  round  white  cap  according  to  some,  but  according  to  others, 
one  with  four  corners,  and  a  flap  hanging  down  behind,  which 
it  is  essential  that  each  man  should  manufacture  for  himself. 

The  Dadu  Panthis  are  of  three  classes, — the  Virahtas,  who  are 
religious  characters,  go  bare-headed,  and  have  but  one  garment 
and  one  water-pot ;  the  Nag  as,  who  carry  arms,  which  they  are 

1  Maluk  Das  is  supposed  to  have  lived  during  the  latter  part  of  the  reign 
of  Akhar  and  down  to  the  commencement  of  that  of  Aurangzeh — or  from  200 
to  250  years  ago. 


188  APPENDIX  II. 

willing  to  exercise  for  hire,  and  amongst  the  Hindu  princes  they 
have  been  considered  as  good  soldiers ;  the  third  class  is  that  of 
the  Bistar  Dlidris,  who  follow  the  occupations  of  ordinary  life. 
A  further  subdivision  exists  in  this  sect,  and  the  chief  branches 
again  form  fifty-two  divisions  or  Thambas,  the  peculiarities  of 
which  have  not  been  ascertained.  The  Dadu  Panthis  burn  their 
dead  at  dawn,  but  their  religious  members  not  unfrequently  enjoin 
that  their  bodies,  after  death,  shall  be  thrown  into  some  field  or 
some  wilderness,  to  be  devoured  by  the  beasts  and  birds  of  prey, 
as  they  say  that  in  a  funeral  pile  insect  life  is  apt  to  be  destroyed. 

The  Dadu  Panthis  are  said  to  be  very  numerous  in  Marwar  and 
Ajmir.  Of  the  Naga  class  alone,  the  Eaja  of  Jaipur  is  reported 
to  entertain  as  soldiers  more  than  ten  thousand.  The  chief  place 
of  worship  is  at  jSTaraina,  where  the  veda  of  Dadu,  and  the 
collection  of  the  texts  of  the  sect,  are  preserved  and  worshipped, 
and  where  a  Mela  (or  religious  fair)  is  held  annually,  for  fifteen 
days,  in  the  month  of  Phalgun  (February-March). 

The  tenets  of  the  sect  are  contained  in  several  BJidshd  works, 
in  which  it  is  said  a  vast  number  of  passages  from  the  Kabir 
writings  are  inserted,  and  the  general  character  of  which  is 
certainly  of  a  similar  nature.1 

Professor  Wilson,  in  his  sketch,  next  notices  the  Rai  Dasis,  a 
currier  ( Chamdr)  sect,  and  the  Sena  Panthis,  the  existence  of 
both  of  which,  at  present,  is  a  matter  of  doubt. 

7.  Rudra  Sainjjraddi/is,  or  Vallabhdchdris. 

These  worship  Bala  Gopala,  the  infant  Krishna.  This  sect 
embraces  all  ranks  of  Hindu  society,  and  is  widely  spread.  The 
founder  of  it  Mas  Vallabha  AYharya.  This  sect  is  better  known 
from  t  lie  title  of  its  teachers,  as  Oohilastha  Gosdihs. 

Tin-  original  teacher  of  the  philosophical  tenets  of  this  sect  is 
Baid  to  have  been  Vishnu  Swaini,  a  commentator  on  the  texts  of 

1  Pot  a  \< tv  lull  account  of  their  doctrines,  in  a  translation  of  one  of  their 
wmks,  see  :i  paper  by  Lieutenant  Siddons,  in  the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic 
Society,  June,  1S37. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  189 

the  Vedas,  who,  however,  admitted  disciples  from  the  Brah- 
manical  caste  only,  and  considered  the  state  of  the  Sannyasi,  or 
ascetic,  as  essential  to  the  commnnication  of  his  doctrines. 
Vallabha  Acharya  was  a  successor  of  the  above.  He  was  a 
Sannyasi,  and  taught  early  in  the  sixteenth  century.  He  resided 
originally  at  Gokul,  a  village  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Yamuna, 
about  three  coss  to  the  east  of  Mathura.  After  remaining  there 
some  time,  he  travelled  through  India  as  a  pilgrim.  There  is  a 
Baithak  (or  station)  of  his  amongst  the  Ghats  of  Muttra,  and 
about  two  miles  from  the  fort  of  Chunar  is  a  place  called  his  well. 
After  this  peregrination,  Yallabha  returned  to  Brindaban.  The 
Mahabharat  and  Bhagavat  do  not  recommend  the  special  worship 
of  Krishna  as  distinct  from  Vishnu ;  but  the  Brahma  Yaivartta 
Purana  claims  supremacy  for  Krishna.  This,  then,  is  their  text 
book. 

Amongst  other  articles  of  the  new  creed,  Yallabha  introduced 
one  which  is  rather  singular  for  a  Hindu  religious  innovator  or 
reformer.  He  taught  that  privation  formed  no  part  of  sanctity, 
and  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  teacher  and  his  disciples  to 
worship  their  deity,  not  in  nudity  and  hunger,  but  in  costly 
apparel  and  choice  food ;  not  in  solitude  and  mortification,  but  in 
the  pleasures  of  society  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  world.  The 
Gosaihs,  or  teachers,  are  almost  always  family  men,  as  was  the 
founder  Yallabha. 

The  followers  of  the  order  are  especially  numerous  amongst  the 
mercantile  community,  and  the  Gosaihs  themselves  are  often  largely 
engaged  also  in  maintaining  a  connection  amongst  the  commercial 
establishments  of  remote  parts  of  the  country,  as  they  are  con- 
stantly travelling  over  India,  under  pretence  of  pilgrimage,  and 
thus  reconcile  the  profits  of  trade  with  the  benefits  of  devotion. 

The  practices  of  the  sect  are  of  a  similar  character  with  those 
of  other  regular  worshippers.  Eight  times  a  day  the  image  of  the 
boy  Krishna,  either  in  the  house  or  temple,  is  worshipped. 

The  mark  on  the  forehead  consists  of  two  red  perpendicular 
lines,  meeting  in  a  semicircle  on  the  top  of  the  nose,  and  having 
a  round  spot  of  red  between  them.     The  Bhaktas  have  the  same 


190  APPENDIX  II. 

marks  as  the  S'ri  Yaishnavas  on  the  breasts  and  arms,  and  some 
also  make  the  central  spot  on  the  forehead  with  a  black  earth 
called  S'yamabandi,  or  any  black  metallic  substance ;  the  necklace 
and  rosary  are  made  of  the  stalk  of  the  Tulasi.  The  salutations 
amongst  them  are  Sri  Krishna  and  Jaya  Gopdl. 

The  great  authority  of  the  sect  is  the  Bhagavat,  as  explained 
iu  the  Subodhini,  or  commentary  of  Yallabhaeharya.  He  is  the 
author  also  of  a  Bhdshyd1  on  part  of  Yyasa's  Sutras,  and  of  other 
Sanskrit  works,  as  the  Siddhdnta  Rahasya,  Bhdgavad  Lild 
Rahasya,  and  Ekdnta  Rahasya.  Amongst  the  votaries  in  general, 
various  works  upon  the  history  of  Krishna  are  current,  but  the 
most  popular  are  the  Vishnu  Padas,  stanzas  in  Bhasha,2  in  praise 
of  Yishnu,  attributed  to  Yallabha  himself;  the  Brij  Bilas,  a 
Bhasha  poem  of  some  length ;  the  Ashtachhap,  an  account  of 
Vallabha's  eight  disciples ;  and  the  Barta,  a  collection  of  insipid 
anecdotes. 

The  worshippers  of  this  sect  are  very  numerous  and  opulent, 
the  merchants  and  bankers,  especially  those  of  Gujeratand  Malwa, 
belonging  to  it.  Their  temples  and  establishments  are  numerous 
all  over  India,  but  particularly  at  Mathura  and  Brindaban,  the 
latter  of  which  alone  is  said  to  contain  many  hundreds,  amongst 
which  are  three  of  great  opulence. 

In  Benares  are  two  temples  of  great  repute  and  wealth,  one 
sacred  to  Sat  Ji,  and  the  other  to  Purushottama  Ji.  Jagannath  and 
Pwarika  are  also  particularly  venerated  by  this  sect,  but  the  most 
celebrated  of  all  the  Gosaiii  establishments  is  at  Sri  jSTath  Dwar, 
in  Ajini'r. 

Having  thus  noticed  the  chief  of  the  Yaishnava  sects,  we  must 
refer  the  student,  who  wishes  for  further  information  on  the 
subject,  for  many  others,  whose  names  only  we  can  give,  to 
Wilson's  sketch. 

He  notices  the  Mfra  Bafs  as  a  subdivision  of  the  preceding;  the 
Brahma  Sampradayfe,  or  Madhvachiiryas  as  peculiar  to  the  south 

1  Or  commentary  on  technical  terms. 

>  Or  the  vernacular  dialect,  especially  that  of  liraj,  in  the  country  around 
Mathura,  Brindaban,  etc. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.      191 

of  India ;  the  Sanakadi  Sampradayis,  or  Nimawats,  one  of  the 
primary  Yaishnava  divisions  ;  the  Yaishnavas  of  Bengal,  followers 
of  Chaitanya,  many  of  whom  are  settled  at  Brindaban  ;  the  Badha 
Vallabhis,  adorers  of  Badha  exclusively  ;  the  Sakhi  Bhavas,  who 
wear  women's  clothes,  etc. ;  the  Charan  Dasi's,  Harischandis, 
Sadhna  Panthis,  and  Madhavis. 

Dr.  Wilson  concludes  by  describing  the  real  meanings  of  the 
words  Sannyasi,  Yairagi,  and  Naga.1  He  also  speaks  of  sects  which 
are  half  Muhammadan,  as  the  followers  of  Sheikh  Madar,  who, 
although  they  credit  the  divine  mission  of  Muhammad,  disregard 
the  established  forms  of  the  Musalman  faith,  chew  bhang,  and  go 
naked,  smearing  their  bodies  with  ashes  and  twisting  the  hair 
into  the  Jata,2  etc.  The  naked  sectaries  are  always  the  most  de- 
graded and  violent  in  their  manners. 

(b.)  Or  the  S'aiva  Sects. 

The  principal  of  these  were  founded  or  confirmed  by  the  cele- 
brated commentator  on  the  Vedas,  Sankara  Acharya,  who  con- 
tended that  S'iva  was  pre-eminent  among  the  gods.  The  S'aivas, 
therefore,  worship  Mahadev  as  the  Supreme  Being,  and  deny  the 
independent  existence  of  Vishnu  and  other  deities. 

The  S'aivas  are  all  worshippers  of  S'iva  and  Bhavani  con- 
jointly, and  they  adore  the  LiDga  or  compound  type  of  the  god 
and  goddess.  There  are  no  exclusive  worshippers  of  S'iva  besides 
the  sect  of  naked  gymnosophists  called  Lingis  ;  and  the  exclusive 
adorers  of  the  goddess  are  the  S'aktas. 

The  adoration  of  S'iva  is  not  so  popular  in  upper  India  as  it  is 
in  the  south.  "Wilson  conjectures  that  this  may  arise  from  the 
rude  and  unattractive  emblem  in  which  he  generally  appears,  the 
mystic  purpose  of  which  is  little  understood  or  regarded  by  the 
uninitiated  and  vulgar,  and  which  offers  nothing  to  interest  the 

1  Though  often  confounded  or  used  indiscriminately,  these  terms  properly 
describe  different  classes  of  religious  mendicants.  The  Sannyasis  are  more 
peculiarly  the  followers  of  S'iva,  the  Vairagis  those  of  Vishnu.  The  Nagas 
are  those  who  go  naked,  and  are  the  most  profligate  and  worthless  of  the 
mendicant  devotees. 

2  i.e.  The  hair  matted  or  clotted  together,  sometimes  like  a  horn. 


192  APPENDIX  II. 

feelings  or  excite  the  imagination.  ~No  legends  are  recorded  of 
this  deity  of  a  poetic  and  pleasing  character ;  and,  above  all,  such 
legends  as  are  narrated  in  the  Puranas  and  Tantras,  have  not 
been  presented  to  the  Hindus  in  any  accessible  shape.  The 
S'ivas  have  no  works,  as  the  Vaishnavas,  in  any  of  the  common 
dialects,  in  which  the  actions  of  S'iva,  in  any  of  his  forms,  are 
celebrated.  Corresponding  to  the  absence  of  multiplied  forms 
of  this  divinity  as  objects  of  worship,  and  to  the  want  of  works 
which  attach  importance  to  particular  manifestations  of  the 
favourite  god,  the  people  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  divided  into 
different  sects,  any  farther  than  as  they  may  have  certain  religious 
mendicants  for  their  spiritual  guides.  Actual  divisions  of  the 
worshippers  of  S'iva  are  almost  restricted  to  these  religious  per- 
sonages, collected  sometimes  in  opulent  and  numerous  associations  ; 
but,  for  the  greater  part,  detached,  few,  and  indigent.  There 
are  no  teachers  of  ancient  repute  but  Sankara  Acharya,  and  his 
doctrines  are  too  philosophical  and  speculative  to  have  made  him 
popular. 

"  The  worship  of  S'iva  continues,  in  fact,  to  be  what  it  appears 
to  have  been  from  a  remote  period,  the  religion  of  the  Brahmanas. 
Sambhu  (Mahadev)  is  declared  by  Manu  to  be  the  presiding  deity 
of  the  Brahmanical  order;  and  the  greater  number  of  them, 
particularly  those  who  practise  the  rites  of  the  Vedas,  or  who 
profess  the  study  of  the  S'astras,  receive  S'iva  as  their  tutelary 
deity,  wear  his  insignia,  and  worship  the  Linga,  either  in  temples, 
in  their  houses,  or  on  the  side  of  a  sacred  stream,  providing,  in 
the  latter  case,  extempore  emblems  kneaded  out  of  the  mud  or 
clay  of  the  river's  bed.  The  example  of  the  Brahmans,  and  the 
practices  of  ages,  maintain  the  veneration  universally  offered  to 
the  type  of  S'iva,  but  it  is  not  the  prevailing  nor  the  popular 
condition  of  the  Hindu  faith  along  the  banks  of  the  Ganges."  l 

1  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xvii.,  p.  170.  The  above  opinion  is  true  in 
gi  Q<  i  ;il.  and  i  sp<  cially  as  to  the  Ling  worship  ;  but  as  it  respects  the  worship 
of  S'iva  al  Bhuteswar,  or  at  Babe  Adam,  it  requires  modification.  A  large 
temple  at  Muttia,  dedicated  to  this  form,  we  are  told  hy  the  llev.  J.  Philips, 
i-  constantly  frequented;  and  though  Muttra  is  pre-eminently  a  Vaishnava 
town,  yet  the  temple  of  Babe  Adam  attracts  two  or  three  melds  in  the  year. 
A  very  large  lair  is  also  yearly  held  at  the  town  and  temple  of  Bhuteswar,  on 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  193 

The  following  are  the  principal  sects  belonging  to  the  S'aiva 
class : 

1.    The  Dandis  and  Dasndmis. 

It  is  customary  to  consider  these  two  orders  as  forming  but 
one  division.  The  classification  is  not  in  every  instance  correct, 
but  the  practices  of  the  two  are,  in  many  instances,  blended,  and 
both  denominations  are  accurately  applicable  to  the  same  indi- 
vidual. It  will  not  be  necessary,  therefore,  to  deviate  from  the 
ordinary  enumeration.  The  Dandis,  properly  so  called,  and  the 
Tridandis  of  the  Vaishnavas,  are  the  only  legitimate  representa- 
tives of  the  fourth  Asrama  ("^TT^RT)  or  mendicant  life,  into 
which  the  Hindu  is  to  enter  after  passing  through  the  previous 
stages  of  student,  householder,  and  hermit.  It  is  not  necessary, 
however,  to  have  gone  through  the  whole  of  the  previous  career, 
as  the  Brahman  may  pass  from  any  one  of  the  first  orders  to  the 
last  at  once.  He  is  then  to  take  up  his  staff  and  waterpot,  to 
derive  from  begging  such  a  portion  of  food  as  is  sufficient  for  his 
mere  sustenance,  and  to  devote  the  remainder  of  his  days  to  holy 
study  and  pious  meditation. 

Adopting,  as  a  general  guide,  the  rules  of  original  works,  the 
Dandi  is  distinguished  by  carrying  a  small  dand  (^US"),  or  wand, 
with  several  processes  or  projections  from  it,  and  a  piece  of  cloth 
dyed  with  red  ochre,,  in  which  the  Brahmanical  cord  is  supposed 
to  be  enshrined,  attached  to  it.  He  shaves  his  hair  and  beard,  wears 
only  a  cloth  round  his  loins,  and  subsists  upon  food  obtained  ready 
dressed  from  the  houses  of  the  Brahmans  once  a  day  only,  which 
he  deposits  in  the  small  clay  pot  that  he  carries  always  with  him. 
He  should  live  alone,  and  near  to,  but  not  within  a  city ;  but 
this  rule  is  rarely  observed,  and,  in  general,  the  Dandis  are 
found  in  cities,  collected,  like  other  mendicants,  in  Maths.  The 
Dandi  has  no  particular  time  or  mode  of  worship,  but  spends  his 
time  in  meditation,  or  in  practices  corresponding  with  those  of 

the  Jumna,  between  Agra  and  Etaych.  Hundreds  of  thousands  of  every  caste, 
besides  the  Brahmans,  then  rush  to  pay  their  adorations  in  the  great  temple. 
Vis'es'wara  temple,  in  Benares,  the  domes  of  which  arc  beautifully  gilt,  is  much 
frequented  by  pilgrims  of  every  caste. 

13 


194  APPENDIX  II. 

the  Toga,  and  in  the  study  of  the  Yedanta  works,  especially 
according  to  the  comments  of  Sankaracharya.  As  that  teacher 
was  an  incarnation  of  S'iva,  the  Dandis  reverence  that  deity  and 
his  incarnations  in  preference  to  the  other  members  of  the  Triad, 
whence  they  are  included  among  his  votaries ;  and  they  so  far 
admit  the  distinction  as  not  unfrequently  to  bear  the  S'aiva  mark 
upon  the  forehead,  smearing  it  with  the  Tripundra  (f^MU^) 
triple  tranverse  line  (g),  made  with  the  Vibhuti  (f^fRf),  or 
ashes  which  should  be  taken  from  the  fire  of  an  Agnihotra  Brah- 
man, or  they  may  be  the  ashes  of  burnt  cow-dung  from  an 
oblation  offered  to  the  god.  They  also  adopt  the  initiating  Mantra 
of  all  the  Suiva  classes,  either  the  five  or  six  syllable  Mantra, 
Namah,  or  Om  Namah,  Sii'dya  (^if^JJj or^J^*\wf^c(\'Z(). 
The  genuine  Dandi,  however,  is  not  necessarily  of  the  S'aiva  or 
any  other  sect,  and  in  their  establishments  it  will  be  usually 
found  that  they  profess  to  adore  Nirguna  (fiT^UST)  or  Niranjana 
(f^n^HT)*  the  deity  devoid  of  attribute  or  passion. 

The  Dandis,  who  are  rather  practical  than  speculative,  and  who 
have  little  pretence  to  the  appellation  beyond  the  epithet  and 
outward  signs  of  the  order,  are  those  most  correctly  included 
among  the  S'aiva  sects.  Amongst  these,  the  worship  of  S'iva,  as 
Bhairava,  is  the  prevailing  form,  and,  in  that  case,  part  of  the 
ceremony  of  initiation  consists  in  inflicting  a  small  incision  on  the 
inner  part  of  the  knee,  and  drawing  the  blood  of  the  novice  as  an 
acceptiblc  offering  to  the  god.  The  Dandis,  of  every  description, 
have  also  a  peculiar  mode  of  disposing  of  their  dead,  putting  them 
into  coffins  and  burying  them,  or,  when  practicable,  committing 
them  to  some  sacred  stream.  The  reason  of  this  is  their  being 
prohibited  the  use  of  fire  on  any  account. 

Any  Hindu  of  the  three  first  classes  may  become  Sannyasi  or 
Dandi,  or  in  these  degenerate  days,  a  Hindu  of  any  caste  may 
adopt  the  life  and  emblems  of  this  order.  Such  are  sometimes 
met  with,  as  also  are  Brahmaus,  who.  without  connecting  them- 
selves with  any  community,  assume  the  character  of  this  class  of 
mendicants.  These  constitute  the  Dandis  simply  so  termed,  and 
are  regarded  us  distinct  from  the  primitive  members  of  the  order, 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS. 

to  whom  the  appellation  of  Dasnami's  is  also  applied,  and  who 
admit  none  but  Brahnians  into  their  fraternity. 

The  Dasnami  Dandis,  who  are  regarded  as  the  descendants  of 
the  original  members  of  the  fraternity,  are  said  to  refer  their 
origin  to  Sankara  Acharya,  an  individual  who  appears  to  have 
performed  a  part  of  some  importance  in  the  religious  history  of 
Hindustan. 

All  accounts  concur  in  representing  Sankara  as  leading  an 
erratic  life,  and  engaging  in  successful  controversy  with  various 
sects,  whether  of  the  S'aiva,  Vaishnava,  or  less  orthodox  per- 
suasions. Towards  the  close  of  his  life,  he  repaired  as  far  as 
Kashmir,  and  seated  himself,  after  triumphing  over  various 
opponents,  on  the  throne  of  Saraswati.  He  next  went  to 
Badarikasrama,  and  finally  to  Kedarnath,  in  the  Himalaya, 
where  he  died  at  the  early  age  of  thirty-two.1 

The  spiritual  descendants  of  Sankara,  in  the  first  degree,  are 
variously  named  by  different  authorities,  but  usually  agree  in 
the  number.  He  is  said  to  have  had  four  principal  disciples, 
who,  in  the  popular  tradition,  are  called  Padmapada,  Hasti- 
malaka,  Sureswara  or  bandana,  and  Trotaka.  Of  these,  the 
first  had  two  pupils,  T'irtha  and  A'srama ;  the  second,  Tana  and 
Aranya ;  the  third  had  three,  Saraswati,  Pari,  and  Bharati ; 
and  the  fourth  had  also  three,  Giri  or  Gir,  Parvata,  and  Sdgara. 
These,  which  being  all-significant  terms,  were  no  doubt  adopted 
names,  constitute  collectively  the  appellation  Dasnami,  or  the 
ten-named;  and  when  a  Brahman  enters  into  either  class,  he 
attaches  to  his  own  denomination  that  of  the  class  of  which  he 
becomes  a  member,  as  Tirtha,  Puri,  Gir,  etc.  The  greater  portion 
of  the  ten  classes  of  mendicants  thus  descended  from  Sankara 
A'charya,  have  failed  to  retain  their  purity  of  character,  and  arc 
only  known  by  their  epithets  as  members  of  the  original  order. 
There  are  but  three,  and  part  of  a  fourth,  mendicant  classes,  or 
those  called  Tirtha,  or  Indra,  Asrama,  Saraswati,  and  Bharati, 

1  See  a  fuller  account  of  kirn  in  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xvii.,  p.  177,  and 
vol.  xii.,  p.  536.  Also,  Wilson's  Preface  to  his  Sanskrit  Dictionary,  for  the 
age  in  which  he  lived. 


190  APPENDIX   II. 

who  are  still  regarded  as  really  Sankara's  Dandis.  These  are 
sufficiently  numerous,  especially  in  and  about  Benares.  They 
coraprehend  a  variety  of  characters ;  but  amongst  the  most  re- 
spectable of  them  are  to  be  found  very  able  expounders  of  Yedanta 
works.  Other  branches  of  Sanskrit  literature  owe  important 
obligations  to  this  religious  sect.  The  most  sturdy  beggars  are 
also  members  of  this  order,  although  their  contributions  are  levied 
particularly  upon  the  Brahmanical  class,  as  whenever  a  feast  is 
given  to  the  Brahnians,  the  Dandis  of  this  description  present 
themselves  as  unbidden  guests,  and  can  only  be  got  rid  of  by 
bestowing  on  them  a  due  share  of  the  good  things  provided  for 
their  more  worldly-minded  brethren.  Many  of  them  practice  the 
Yoga,  and  profess  to  work  miracles. 

The  remaining  six  and  a  half  members  of  the  Dasnami  class, 
although  considered  as  having  fallen  from  the  purity  of  practice 
necessary  to  the  Dandf,  are  still,  in  general,  religious  characters, 
and  arc  usually  denominated  Atits.1  The  chief  points  of  differ- 
ence between  them  and  the  preceding  are  their  abandonment  of 
the  staff,  their  use  of  clothes,  money,  and  ornaments,  their  pre- 
paring their  own  food,  and  their  admission  of  members  from  any 
orders  of  Hindus.  They  are  often  collected  in  Maths  as  well  as 
the  Dandis,  but  they  mix  freely  in  the  business  of  the  world; 
they  carry  on  trade  and  often  accumulate  property,  and  they 
frequently  officiate  as  priests  at  the  shrines  of  some  of  the  deities. 
Some  of  them  even  marry,  but,  in  that  case,  they  are  distinguished 
by  the  term  Sanyogi  from  the  other  Atits. 

The  philosophical  tenets  of  the  Dandis,  in  the  main,  are  those 
of  the  Yedanta  system  ;  but  they  generally  supersede  the  practice 
of  the  Yoga  as  taught  by  the  followers  of  Patanjali,  and  many  of 
them  have  latterly  adopted  the  doctrine  of  the  Tantras. 

Sankara  and  the  Muni  Dattatrcya  arc  both  held  in  high 
veneration  by  the  Dandis. 

1  From  "^mf^T,  ""  y«cst,"  =»  temporary  dweller  upon  earth,  or  "^rHd, 
itoay,"  liberated  from  worldly  cares  and  feelings. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  197 

2.   The  Yogis,  or  Jogis  (^pft). 

The  Dandis  are  to  the  S'aiva  sects  what  the  followers  of 
Ramanuja  are  to  those  of  the  Vaishnava  faith,  and  a  like  parallel 
may  be  drawn  between  the  disciples  of  Ramanand  and  those 
of  Goraknath,  or  the  Kanphata  Jogis  ;  the  first  pair  being  properly 
restricted  to  the  Brahmanical  order,  intended  chiefly  for  men  of 
learning  ;  the  two  latter  admitting  members  from  every  descrip- 
tion of  people,  and  possessing  a  more  attractive  popular  character. 
The  term  Jogi  is  properly  applicable  to  the  followers  of  the  Yoga 
or  Pantanjala  school  of  philosophy,  which,  amongst  other  tenets, 
maintained  the  practicability  of  acquiring,  even  in  life,  entire 
command  over  elementary  matter,  by  means  of  certain  ascetic 
practices.1  In  the  present  day,  none  lay  claim  to  perfection,  and 
their  pretensions  are  usually  confined  to  a  partial  command  over 
their  own  physical  and  mental  faculties.  These  are  evinced  in 
the  performance  of  low  mummeries,  or  juggling  tricks,  which 
cheat  the  vulgar  into  a  belief  of  their  powers.2 

The  principal  mode  in  which  the  Yoga  takes  a  popular  shape 
in  upper  India  is  probably  of  comparatively  recent  origin.  This 
is  the  sect  of  Kanphata  Jogis,  who  acknowledge  as  their  founder 
a  teacher  named  Gorakhnath,  traces  of  whom  are  found  in  Gorakh- 
kshetra,  at  Peshawar,  and  in  the  district  and  town  of  Gorakhpur, 
where  also  exists  a  temple  and  religious  establishment  of  his 
followers.  They  hold  also  in  veneration  a  plain  near  Dwaraka, 
named  Gorakhkhetr,  and  a  cavern  or  subterraneous  passage  at 
Haridwar. 

According  to  the  authorities  of  this  sect,  Gorakh  is  but  one  of 
nine  eminent  teachers,  or  Naths.  Of  the  perfect  Yogis,  or  Siddhas, 
eighty-four  are  enumerated. 

The  Yogis  of  Gorakhnath  are  usually  called  Kanphatas,  from 
having  their  ears  bored  and  rings  inserted  in  them  at  the  time  of 

1  See  Ward  on  the  Hindus,  and  Colebrooke's  Essays  in  vol.  i.  of  the  Asiatic 
Researches. 

2  See  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xvii.,  p.  186,  for  illustrations.  The  origin 
of  the  Yoga  is  there  proved  to  be  ancient,  from  hooks,  from  the  cavern 
temples,  etc. 


198  APPENDIX  II. 

their  initiation.  They  may  be  of  any  caste  ;  they  live  as  ascetics, 
either  singly  or  in  Maths.  S'iva  is  the  object  of  their  worship  : 
they  officiate,  indeed,  as  the  priests  of  that  deity  in  some  places, 
especially  at  the  celebrated  Lat,  or  staff,  of  Bhairava,  at  Benares. 
They  mark  the  forehead  with  a  transverse  line  of  ashes,  and 
smear  the  body  with  the  same ;  they  dress  in  various  styles,  but 
in  travelling  usually  wear  a  cap  of  patch-work  and  garment  dyed 
with  red  ochre.  Some  wear  a  simple  Dhoti,  or  cloth  round  the 
loins. 

The  term  Jogi,  in  popular  acceptation,  is  of  almost  as  general 
application  as  Sannyasi  and  Yairagi,  and  it  is  difficult  to  fix  its 
import  upon  any  individual  class,  besides  the  Kanphata,  the 
vagrants,  so  called,  following  usually  the  dictates  of  their  own 
caprice  as  to  worship  and  belief,  and  often,  it  may  be  conceived, 
employing  the  character  as  a  mere  plea  for  lazy  livelihood.  The 
Jogis  are,  indeed,  particularly  distinguished  amongst  the  different 
mendicant  characters,  by  adding  to  their  religious  personification 
more  of  the  mountebank  than  any  others.  Most  of  the  religious 
mendicants,  it  is  true,  deal  in  fortune  telling,  interpretation  of 
dreams,  and  palmistry.  They  are  often  empirics,  and  profess  to 
cure  diseases  with  specific  drugs,  or  with  charms  and  spells. 
But,  besides  these  accomplishments,  the  Jogi  is  frequently  musical, 
and  plays  and  sings ;  he  also  initiates  animals  into  his  business, 
and  often  travels  about  with  a  small  bullock,  a  goat,  or  a  monkey, 
whom  he  has  taught  to  obey  his  commands,  and  to  exhibit 
amusing  gesticulations.  The  dress  of  this  class  of  Jogis  is 
generally  a  cap  and  coat,  or  frock,  of  many  colours.  They  profess 
to  worship  S'iva,  and  often  carry  the  ling  a,  like  the  Jangamas,  in 
the  cap.  All  classes  and  sects  assume  the  character,  and  Musalman 
Jogia  me  not  uncommon.  One  class  of  tho  Hindu  Jogis  are  called 
S&raDgfh&r,  from  their  carrying  a  Sdrangi,  or  small  fiddle,  or  lute, 
with  which  they  accompany  their  songs.  They  beg  iu  the  name 
of  Bhairava.  Another  sect  of  them,  also  followers  of  that  deity, 
arc  termed  Dorihars,  from  their  trafficking  in  small  pedlery, 
especially  the  sale  of  thread  (don)  and  silk.  Another  class  adopt 
the  name  of  Matsvendris  ;  and  a  fourth  set  are  Bhartriharis.    The 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  199 

varieties  of  this  class  of  mendicants,  however,  cannot  be  specified ; 
they  are  all  errants ;  fixed  residences,  or  Maths,  of  any  Jogi's, 
except  the  Kanphatas,  rarely  occurring. 

3.  The  Jangamas  or  Lingayats — (5|^p7T,  "locomotive.''') 

One  of  the  forms  in  which  the  Linga  worship  appears,  is  that  of 
the  Lingayats,  Lingawants,  or  Jangamas,  the  essential  characteristic 
of  which  is  wearing  the  emblem  on  some  part  of  the  dress  or  person. 
The  type  is  of  a  small  size,  made  of  copper  or  silver,  and  is  com- 
monly worn,  suspended  in  a  case,  round  the  neck,  or  sometimes 
tied  in  the  turban.  In  common  with  the  S'aivas  generally,  the 
Jangamas  smear  their  foreheads  with  Vibmiti,  wear  necklaces, 
and  carry  rosaries  made  of  the  Eudraksha  seed.  The  clerical 
members  of  the  sect  usually  stain  their  garments  with  red  ochre. 
They  are  not  numerous  in  upper  India,  and  are  rarely  encountered 
except  as  mendicants,  leading  about  a  bull,  the  living  type  of 
!Nandi,  the  bull  of  S'iva,  decorated  with  housings  of  various 
colours  and  strings  of  kauri  shells.  The  conductor  carries  a  bell 
in  his  hand,  and,  thus  accompanied,  goes  about  from  place  to 
place,  subsisting  upon  alms. l 

In  upper  India  there  are  no  popular  works  current  of  this  sect, 
and  the  only  authority  is  a  learned  Bhashya,  or  comment  by 
Nilkantha,  on  the  Sutras  of  Vyasa,  a  work  not  often  met  with,  and 
being  in  Sanskrit,  unintelligible  to  the  multitude. 

Besides  the  Jangama  priest  of  Kedarnath,  an  opulent  establish- 
ment of  them  exists  at  Benares.  Its  wealth  arises  from  a  number 
of  houses,  occupying  a  considerable  space,  called  the  Jangani 
Bari.  The  title  to  the  property  is  said  to  be  a  grant  to  the 
Jangamas,  regularly  executed  by  Man  Singh,  and  preserved  on  a 
copper  plate. 

4.  The  Paramhansas — (M"<*{  "the  best,"   ^pj  "devotee"). 

According  to  the  introduction  to  the  Dwadasa  Mahavakya,  by 

1  See,  for  a  fuller  account  of  this  sect  in  the  South  of  India,  Asiatic  Re- 
searches, vol.  xvii.,  p.  198. 


200  APPENDIX   II. 

a  Dandi  author,  Vaikuntha  Puri,  the  Sannyasi  is  of  four  kinds 
— the  Kutichara  (cjrR^T,1  "tortoise"),  Bahuddka,  Hansa,  and 
Paramhansa —  the  difference  between  whom,  however,  is  only 
the  graduated  intensity  of  their  self-mortification  and  profound 
abstraction.  The  Paramhansa  is  the  most  eminent  of  these 
gradations,  and  is  the  ascetic  who  is  solely  occupied  with  the 
investigation  of  Brahma,  or  spirit,  and  who  is  equally  indifferent 
to  pleasure  or  pain,  insensible  of  heat  or  cold,  and  incapable  of 
satiety  or  want. 

Agreeably  to  this  definition,  individuals  are  sometimes  met 
with,  who  pretend  to  have  attained  such  a  degree  of  perfection. 
In  proof  of  it  they  go  naked  in  all  weathers,  never  speak,  and 
never  indicate  any  natural  want.  What  is  brought  to  them  as 
alms  or  food,  by  any  person,  is  received  by  the  attendants,  whom 
their  supposed  sanctity,  or  a  confederation  of  interest,  attaches  to 
them,  and  by  these  attendants  they  are  fed  and  served  on  all 
occasions,  as  if  they  were  as  helpless  as  infants.  It  may  be 
supposed  that  not  unfrequently  there  is  much  knavery  in  this 
helplessness ;  but  there  are  many  Hindus  whose  simple  enthusiasm 
induces  them  honestly  to  practise  such  self-denial ;  and  there  is 
little  risk  in  the  attempt,  as  the  credulity  of  their  countrymen,  or 
rather  countrywomen,  will,  in  most  places,  take  care  that  their 
wants  are  amply  supplied.  These  devotees  are  usually  included 
amongst  the  tt'iva  ascetics ;  but  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the 
classification  is  correct. 

5.  The  Agltoris  (^fW'). 

The  same  profession  of  indifference  to  the  world  characterises 
the  Aghoii  as  the  Paramhansa;  but  he  seeks  occasion  for  its 
display,  and  demands  alms  as  a  reward  for  its  exhibition. 

The  original  Aghorf  worship  seems  to  have  been  that  of  Devi 
in  some  of  her  terrific  forms,  and  to  have  required  even  human 
victims  for  its  performance.  In  imitation  of  the  formidable 
aspect  under  which  the  goddess  was  worshipped,  the  appearance 

Perhaps  so  called  because  he  retires  into  himself. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  201 

of  her  votary  was  rendered  as  hideous  as  possible,  and  his  wand 
and  waterpot  were  a  staff  set  with  bones,  and  the  upper  half  of  a 
skull.  The  practices  were  of  a  similar  nature,  and  flesh  and 
spirituous  liquors  constituted  at  will  the  diet  of  the  adept. 

The  regular  worship  of  this  sect  has  long  since  been  suppressed, 
and  the  only  traces  of  it  now  left  are  presented  by  a  few  disgust- 
ing wretches,  who,  whilst  they  profess  to  have  adopted  its  tenets, 
make  them  a  mere  plea  for  extorting  alms.  In  proof  of  their 
indifference  to  worldly  objects,  they  eat  and  drink  whatever  is 
given  to  them,  even  ordure  and  carrion.  They  smear  their  bodies 
also  with  excrement,  and  carry  it  about  with  them  in  a  wooden 
cup  or  skull,  either  to  swallow  it,  if  by  so  doing  they  can  get  a 
few  pice,  or  to  throw  it  upon  the  persons,  or  into  the  houses,  of 
those  who  refuse  to  comply  with  their  demands.  They  also,  for 
the  same  purpose,  inflict  gashes  on  their  limbs,  that  the  crime  of 
blood  may  rest  upon  the  head  of  the  recusant ;  and  they  have  a 
variety  of  similar  disgusting  devices  to  extort  money  from  the 
timid  and  credulous  Hindus.  They  are,  fortunately  not  numerous, 
and  are  universally  detested  and  feared. 

6.  Urddhvabdhus  (^aTTF)- 

7.  A' Ms  Miclchis  (H[db\m$*^\). 

8.  NahJus  {?F§t). 

The  Urddhvabahus  extend  one  or  both  arms  above  the  head  till 
they  remain  of  themselves  thus  elevated.  They  also  close  the 
fist,  and  the  nails  being  necessarily  suffered  to  grow,  make  their 
way  between  the  metacarpal  bones,  and  completely  perforate  the 
hand.  They  are  solitary  mendicants,  as  are  all  of  this  descrip- 
tion, and  never  have  any  fixed  abode.  They  subsist  upon  alms. 
Many  of  them  go  naked,  but  some  wear  a  wrapper  stained  with 
ochre.  They  usually  assume  the  S'aiva  marks,  and  twist  their 
hair  so  as  to  project  from  the  forehead,  in  imitation  of  the  Jata  of 
S'iva.1 

1  The  Rev.  T.  Phillips  states  that  he  met  with  one  man  in  a  village  who 
had  once  been  an  ascetic  of  this  kind  for  years,  but  at  last  brought  down  his 
ith  ghi. 


202  APPENDIX  II. 

The  A'kiismukhis  hold  up  their  faces  to  the  sky,  till  the  muscles 
of  the  back  of  the  neck  become  contracted,  and  retain  it  in  that 
position.  They  wear  the  Jata,  and  allow  the  beard  and  whiskers 
to  grow,  smearing  the  body  with  ashes ;  some  wear  coloured 
garments.     The  Nakhi's  never  cut  their  finger  nails. 

9.  The  Giidaras  (T^IT). 

These  are  so  named  from  a  pan  of  metal  which  they  carry 
about  with  them,  and  in  which  they  have  a  small  fire,  for  the 
purpose  of  burning  scented  woods  at  the  houses  of  the  persons 
from  whom  they  receive  alms.  These  alms  they  do  not  solicit 
further  than  by  repeating  the  word  Alakh  ("^1^  or  ^J^f,  i.e. 
" invisible"),  expressive  of  the  indescribable  nature  of  the  deity. 
They  have  a  peculiar  garb,  wearing  a  large  round  cap  and  a  long 
frock  or  coat,  stained  with  ochre  clay.  Some  also  wear  rings, 
like  the  Kanphata  Jogis,  or  a  cylinder  of  wood  passed  through 
the  lobe  of  the  ear,  which  they  term  the  Khechari  Mudra,  the 
seal  or  symbol  of  the  deity,  of  him  who  moves  in  the  heavens. 

10.   The  Suhharas  (fRspf). 

These  are  distinguished  by  carrying  a  stick  three  spans  in 
length.  They  dress  in  a  cap  and  sort  of  petticoat  stained  with 
ochrey  earth,  smearing  their  bodies  with  ashes,  and  wear  earrings 
of  the  Kudraksha  seed.  They  also  wear  over  the  left  shoulder  a 
narrow  piece  of  cloth  dyed  with  ochre  and  twisted,  in  place  of 
the  Jane  a,  or  Brahmanieal  thread. 

11.   The  liiikharas  (T$3§r3). 

These  tire  of  similar  habits  and  appearance,  but  they  do  not 
rariy  the  stick,  nor  wear  the  lvudniksha  earrings,  but  in  their 
place  metallic  ones.  These  two  classes  agree  with  the  preceding 
in  the  watchword,  exclaiming  Alakh  as  they  pass  along.  The 
term  is,  however,  used  by  other  mendicants. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  203 

12.   The  Ukharas  {^W€)- 

These  are  said  to  be  members  of  either  of  the  preceding  classes, 
who  drink  spirituous  liquors  and  eat  meat.  They  appear  to  be 
the  refuse  of  the  three  preceding  mendicant  classes,  who,  in 
general  are  said  to  be  of  mild  and  inoffensive  manners. 

13.  The  Karalingis  (^^rf^ft). 

These  are  vagabonds  of  little  credit,  except  sometimes  amongst 
the  most  ignorant  portions  of  the  community.  They  are  not 
often  met  with ;  they  go  naked,  and  to  mark  their  triumph  over 
sensual  desires,  affix  an  iron  ring  and  chain  on  the  male  organ ; 
they  are  professedly  worshippers  of  S'iva. 

14.  The  Sannyasis  (^sETT^T)- 

15.  The  Vairagis  (^T'ft)- 

16.  The  Avadhutas  (^R^TrT). 

Although  the  terms  Sannyasi  and  Vairagi  are  in  a  great  measure 
restricted  amongst  the  Vaishnavas  to  peculiar  classes,  the  same 
limit  can  scarcely  be  adopted  with  regard  to  the  S'aivas.  All  the 
sects,  except  the  Sanyogi  At'its,  are,  so  far,  Sannyasis,  or  excluded 
from  the  world,  as  not  to  admit  of  married  teachers,  a  circumstance 
far  from  being  uncommon,  as  we  have  seen,  amongst  the  more 
refined  followers  of  Vishnu.  Most  of  the  S'aiva  sects,  indeed,  are 
of  a  very  inferior  description  to  those  of  the  Vaishnavas. 

Besides  the  individuals  who  adopt  the  Dandagrahana  ("holding 
the  staff"),  and  are  unconnected  with  the  Dasnamis,  there  is  a 
sect  of  devotees  who  remain  through  life  members  of  the  condi- 
tion of  the  Brahmachari,  or  student.  These  are  also  regarded  as 
Sannyasis,  and  where  the  term  is  used  in  a  definite  sense,  these 
twelve  kinds,  viz.  the  Dandis,  Brahmachdris,  and  ten  Dahiumi 
orders,  are  implied.  In  general,  however,  the  term  Sannyasi,  as 
well  as  Avadhuta  and  Alakhniimi,  expresses  all  the  S'aiva  class 
of  mendicants,  except,  perhaps,  the  Jogis. 


204  APPENDIX  II. 

17.   The  ISdgas  (^TTT  "naked"). 

The  S'aiva  Sannyasis,  who  go  naked,  are  distinguished  by  this 
term.  They  smear  their  bodies  with  ashes,  allow  their  hair, 
beards,  and  whiskers  to  grow,  and  wear  the  projecting  braid  of 
hair  called  the  Jata.  Like  the  Vairagi  Nagas  they  carry  arms, 
and  wander  about  in  troops  soliciting  alms,  or  levying  contribu- 
tions. The  S'aiva  Xagas  are  generally  the  refuse  of  the  Dandi  and 
Atit  orders,  or  men  who  have  no  inclination  for  a  life  of  study  or 
business.  "When  weary  of  the  vagrant  and  violent  habits  of  the 
]Saga,  they  re-enter  the  better  disposed  classes,  which  they  had 
first  quitted.  The  S'aiva  Nagas  are  very  numerous  in  many 
parts  of  India,  though  less  so  in  the  British  provinces  than  in 
any  other.  These  JSagas  are  the  particular  opponents  of  the 
Vairagi  Nagas,  and  were,  no  doubt,  the  leading  actors  in  the  bloody 
fray  at  Haridwar,  which  had  excluded  the  Vaishnavas  from  the 
great  fair  there  from  1760  till  the  British  acquired  the  country.1 

(c.)  Of  the  S'aktas. 

The  worshippers  of  the  S'akti  (the  power  or  energy  of  the 
divine  nature  in  action)  are  exceedingly  numerous  amongst  all 
classes  of  Hindus.  The  wife  of  Vishnu  is  Lakshmi;  of  S'iva, 
Parvati ;  of  Brahma,  Saraswatf.  The  wife  of  S'iva  is  by  far  the 
most  popular,  not  only  in  Bengal,  but  also  in  the  other  Gangetic 
provinces.2 

Although  the  adoration  of  Prakriti,  or  S'akti,  is  to  a  certain 
extent  authorised  by  the  Puranas,  particularly  the  Brahma 
Vaivartta,  the  Skanda,  and  the  Kalika,  yet  the  principal  rites  and 
formulae  are  derived  from  an  independent  series  of  works  known 
by  the  collective  term  of  Tantras.  The  followers  of  the  Tantras 
profess  to  consider  them  as  a  fifth  Veda,  aid  attribute  to  them 
equal  antiquity  and  superior  authority. 

1  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xvii. 

-  For  a  lull  account  of  the  origin  and  nature  of  this  worship,  see  Wilson's 
Sketch,  and  Ward  on  the  Hindus. 


HINDU'  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.      205 

Any  of  the  female  deities  may  be  the  object  of  the  S'akta 
worship,  and  the  term  S'akti  comprehends  them  all ;  but  the 
homage  of  the  S'aktas  is  almost  restricted  to  the  wife  of  S'iva  and 
to  S'iva  himself  as  identical  with  his  consort.  The  worship  of 
Devi  is  of  considerable  antiquity  and  popularity.  The  adoration 
of  Vindhyavdsini,  near  Mirzapur,  has  existed  for  more  than  seven 
centuries,  and  that  of  Jwalamukhi,  at  JNagarkot,  very  early 
attracted  Muhammadan  persecution.  These  places  still  retain 
their  reputation,  and  are  objects  of  pilgrimage  to  devout  Hindus, 
especially  on  the  8th  of  the  months  of  Chaitra  and  Kartik. 

Her  great  festival,  the  Dasahra,  is  in  the  west  of  India  marked 
by  no  particular  honour,  whilst  its  celebration  in  Bengal,  under 
the  name  of  Durga  Puja,  occupies  ten  days  of  prodigal  expenditure. 

There  is  a  mela  every  year  at  the  temple  of  Devi,  in  Etawah, 
a  village  near  Agra,  when  buffaloes,  goats,  fruits,  etc.,  are  offered, 
the  former  being  mostly  slain.  Every  village  almost  has  a  little 
mound  of  earth  or  very  small  temple,  containing  a  shapeless  stone, 
daubed  red,  which  they  call  Ban  Khandi  Devi.  This,  however, 
is  chiefly  worshipped  by  the  women.  In  fact,  the  women  are  the 
chief,  if  not  the  only,  worshippers  of  Devi  in  the  North-west 
Provinces. 

The  chief  of  the  S'akta  sects  are — 

1,  The  Dakshinas  or  Bhaktas. 

When  the  worship  of  any  goddess  is  performed  in  a  public 
manner,  and  agreeably  to  the  Vaidik  or  Pauranik  ritual,  it  does 
not  comprehend  the  impure  practices  which  are  attributed  to  the 
Yamis.  In  this  form,  it  is  called  the  Dakshina  or  right  hand  form 
of  worship.  The  pure  lali,  or  offering,  presented  by  these  consists 
of  grain,  milk,  and  sugar,  but  kids  are  often  offered  to  Devi  in  her 
terrific  forms.     This  is,  however,  considered  rather  heterodox. 

2.  The  Yamis  or  VdmacMris. 

The  Vami's  mean  the  left-hand  worshippers,  or  those  who 
adopt  a  ritual  contrary  to  what  is  usual,  and  to  what,  indeed, 


■■n 


206  APPENDIX  II. 

they  dare  publicly  avow.  The  object  of  the  worship  is,  by  the 
reverence  of  Devi,  who  is  one  with  S'iva,  to  obtain  supernatural 
powers  in  this  life,  and  to  be  identified  after  death  with  S'iva  and 
Sakti.  According  to  the  immediate  object  of  the  worshipper  is 
the  -particular  form  of  worship ;  but  all  the  forms  require  the  use 
of  some  or  all  of  the  five  Makaras  or  words  whose  first  letter  is  m 

"Wine,  flesh,  fish,  mystical  gesticulations,  and  coition  are  the 
fivefold  Alakara  which  takes  away  all  sin." 

This  worship  is  celebrated  by  men  and  women  in  the  dead  of 
night.1 

(d.)  Miscellaneous  Sects. 

1.  The  Saarapdtas,  or  Sauras. 

These  worship  Surya-pati,  the  Sun-god,  only.  There  are  but 
few  of  them,  and  they  scarcely  differ  from  the  rest  of  the  Hindus 
in  their  general  observances.  The  Tilaka  is  made  in  a  particular 
manner,  with  red  sandal,  and  the  necklace  should  be  of  crystal. 
These  arc  their  chief  peculiarities,  besides  which  they  eat  one 
meal  without  salt  on  every  Sunday  and  each  Sankranti,  or  the 
sun's  entrance  into  a  sign  of  the  zodiac :  they  cannot  eat  either 
until  they  have  beheld  the  sun,  so  that  it  is  fortunate  that  they 
inhabit  his  native  regions. 


o' 


2.   The  Ganapatyas. 

These  are  worshippers  of  (Janesa,  or  Ganapati,  and  can  scarcely 
l)c  considered  as  a  distinct  sect.  All  the  Hindus  in  fact  worship 
this  deity  as  the  obviator  of  difficulties  ami  impediments,  and 
never  oommence  any  work,  or  set  off  on  a  journey,  without 
invoking  his  protection.     Some,   however,  pay  him  more  par- 

1  Bee  a  lull  account  of  these  orgies  in  the  works  of  Ward  and  Wilson. 


HINDU  CASTES  AND  RELIGIOUS  SECTS.  207 

tiicular  devotion  than  the  rest,  and  these  are  the  only  persons  to 
whom  the  classification  may  be  considered  applicable.  Ganesa, 
however,  it  is  believed,  is  never  exclusively  venerated,  and  the 
worship,  when  it  is  paid,  is  addressed  to  some  of  his  forms." 
This  image  is  placed  over  many  door- ways,  and  every  book 
in  Hindi  commences  with  ^T^i^h^TO  TT  "  Adoration  to  the 
blessed  Ganesa." 

3.   The  Sikhs,  or  Ndnak  ShdMs,  are  classed  under  seven 
distinctions. 

1 .  TJdasis ;  religious  characters,  who  live  in  convents. 

2.  Ganj  Bakhshis  ;  not  numerous,  or  of  any  note. 

3.  Ramrayis;  not  common  in  Hindustan. 

4.  Suthra  Shahis ;  great  gamblers,  drunkards,  and  thieves. 

5.  Govind  Sinhis.  This  is  the  most  important  division  of  the 
Sikhs,  being  in  fact,  the  political  association  to  which,  or  to  the 
nation  generally,  the  name  Sikh  is  applied.  Their  faith  is  widely 
different  from  the  quietism  of  INanak,  and  wholly  of  a  worldly 
and  warlike  spirit.  The  sword  is  used  by  them  both  against 
Muhammadans  and  Hindus. 

6.  Nirmalas;  these,  like  the  TJdasis,  go  nearly  naked. 

7.  Nagas ;  naked  beggars,  who  abstain  from  the  use  of  arms. 

4.  The  Jains. 

The  history  and  doctrines  of  this  sect  are  set  forth  at  consider- 
able length  by  Professor  Wilson,  in  his  "Sketch."  But  as  they 
have  already  been  noticed  in  the  body  of  this  work  (p.  10G),  wc 
content  ourselves  with  merely  mentioning  them  here  among  the 
Religious  sects ;  and  for  further  information  regarding  them,  as 
well  as  several  other  sects  of  minor  importance  (as  the  Baba 
Lalis,  Sadhs,  etc.),  must  refer  the  curious  reader  to  the  learned 
work  from  which  we  have  already  so  largely  quoted. 


/, 


Lou 


HERTFORD: 

PE1KTBD    BY    STEPHEN    AUSTIN. 


L-.-*D 


