===== Internet Archive OCR: samhitaoriginalt00duttuoft_djvu.txt =====

SHASTRI INDO-CANADIAN  INSTITUTE 

156  Golf  Links, 
New  Delhi-3,  India 


MAHITA  SAMEtrjLA. 


WITH    A 

LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION, 


EDITED    AND    PUBLISHED    BY 

MANMATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  MA,  BI.R.A.S. 

Rector,  Keshub  Academy, 

Author  of  the  English  Translations  of  The  Rdmdyana,  Maha- 

Bhdrata,  S'rimadbh&gavatam,  Mahdnirvdna-Tantram, 

Harivams'a,  Agni  Purdnam,  Mdrkandeya 

Purdnam,  &c.,  &c> 


PRINTED  BY  H.  C.  DAS,  ELYSIUM  PRESS, 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DUTT'S  STREET. 

1906. 


PK 


A  PREFATORY  NOTE  ON  HA'RITA 
SAMHITA'. 


originally   wrote   his    Law-Treatise   in    Prose, 
ut  the  original   work  is  not  available  and  the  one,  now 
utant,  is  a  metrical  abridgment  of  the  same.  The  metri- 
il  work  is  also  regarded  by  the  Hindus  as  an  authority 
i    Achdra   or   duties   in  general.     What   is   popularly 
called  positive  law  is   not  to  be  found  in  this  Treatise. 
The  work  consists  of  Seven  Chapters    and  contains  a 
hundred  and  ninety-four  S'tokas  or  couplets. 

The  king  Amvarisha  asks  the  "Rishi  Markandeya 
about  the  duties  of  various  castes  and  orders.  In  reply 
to  his  question  the  "Rishi  describes  the  conversation 
that  took  place  between  Harita  and  the  "Riskis  in  days 
of  yore. 

It  is  evident  from  this  statement  occuring  at  the 
commencement  of  the  book  that  Harita  delivered 
his  discourse  on  Law  in  Prose  and  the  Rzski 
Markandeya  subsequently  put  the  substance  in  verse. 
The  work,  that  passes  under  the  appellation  of  Harita 
Samhita,  is  really  a  treatise  written  in  verse  by 
Markandeya  embodying  the  substance  of  the  original 
<*  coition  of  Harita, 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

*  Hdrit*  SamhitS. 

CHAPTER  I« 

Subject.  S'loka,  Page. 

Creation  of  the  universe,  etc.          ...  1—14  165 

The  duties  of  a  Brahmana             ...  15—32  167 
The  dutjfs  of  the  Kshatriyas,  Vais'yai 

and  the  S'udras       ...               ...  —15  169 

Religious  studentship    ...               ...  —16  171 

The  domestic  mode  of  life            ...  — 17  173 

The  Vanaprastha  mode  of  life       ...  —  *o  181 

Saanyasa                                      ...  —23  183 

Essence  of  Yoga                         ...  —-21  185 


HA'JRITA  SAM  HIT  A5. 

CHAPTER  I. 

THE  DUTIES  OF  BRA'HMA.VA. 

[THB  KING  AMBARISHA  PUTS  THE  QUESTION  TO  THE  RISHI 
MA'RKANDEYA.] 

IT  has,  before,  been  said  by  thee  that  the  for^nost  of 
the  twice-born  ones, — residing  on  the  earth,  the  atmos- 
pheric-and  the  celestial  regions,  performing  the  duties 
laid  down  [in  the  ordinances]  for  the  various  castes  and 
orders, — are  [said  to  be]  devoted  to  Kes'ava.  (i) 

O  foremost  of  the  good,  do  thou  describe  unto  us 
the  duties  of  castes  and  orders  by  which  the  eternal 
Deity  Nara-Simha  (Man-Lion)  is  gratified.  (2) 

MA'RKANDEYA  said  : — I  shall  here  recount  the  an- 
cient and  the  most  excellent  conversation  that  took  place 
between  the  high-souled  Harita  and  the  ^?ishis.  (3) 

Having  saluted  H£rita,  conversant  with  all  forms  of 
religion  and  effulgent  like  fire,  all  the  ascetics,  desirous 
of  questioning  about  religion,  said  :  (4) 

"  O  thou  endued  with  lordly  powers,  0  thou  con- 
versant with  all  [forms  of]  religion  and  the  institutor  of 
all  religions,  do  thou,  O  son  of  Bhrigu,  describe  unto  us 
the  duties  of  various  castes  and  orders.  (5) 

O   thou    endued   with   lordly   powers,  do    thou    des- 
cribe unto  us,  in  brief,  the  Yvga-S'dstra  and  every  thing 
else  that  goes  to  create  firm  faith  in  Vishnu.     Thou  art 
our  great  preceptor."   (6) 
22 


iGG  Hdrita  Safahita. 

Having  been  thus  accosted  by  them,  the  ascetic 
Harita  said  to  them  : — Hear,  O  ye  all  ascetics,  I  shall 
describe  the  eternal  duties.  (7) 

O  foremost*  ones,  by  following  the  duties  of  castes 
and  orders,  as  well  as  [the  precepts  of]  the  Yoga- 
S'dstra,  a  mortal  is  freed  from  the  fetters  of  birth  and 
Samsdra](munda.Y\z  existence.)  (8) 

Formerly  (i.e.,  before  the  creation)  the  Divine  Creator 
of  the  Universe,  the  Great  Soul  [Vishnu],  was  laying 
asleep  with  [hfs  Consort]  S'ree  (the  Goddess  of  Pros- 
perity) on  a  bed  of  serpent  in  water,  (o/) 

Ff§m  the  navel  of  that  Deity,  lying  asleep,  originated 
a  huge  Lotus.  Within  that  Lotus  sprang  into  existence1 
Brahma  having  the  Vedas  and  the  VSdangds'  foif  his 
ornaments.  (10) 

He  (i.e.)  Brahma)  was,  again  and  again,  asked  by  the 
god  of  gods,  saying, — "  Create  the  universe."  He,  too, 
having  created  the  entire  universe  consisting  of  the 
Celestials,  Asurds  and  the  human  beings,  brought  out 
from  his  mouth  the  sinless  Brahmanas  for  successfully 
performing  sacrifices ;  the  .Kshatriyds,  from  his  arms  ; 
and  the  VaiJyas,  from  his  thighs,  (n — 12) 

Hear,  O  ye  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  I  shall 
describe  the  words, — capable  of  giving  wealth,  fame,  long 
life,  the  celestial  region  and  the  fruit  of  emancipation, — 
which  the  Divine  Grand  Father  Brahma  addressed  to 
them  all,  in  order  of  succession,  after  having  created 
the  S'udrds.  (13—14) 

Those   begotten   by   the  Brahmanas  on  Brahmana- 
women  are  known  in  the  Smritis  as  the   Brahm  anas.     I 
shall  describe   their   duties   and   the  country   w  orthy  of 
inhabited  by  them.  (15) 


Hdrita  Samhitd.  167 

O  ye  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  [a  Brdhmana] 
should  live  in  a  country  where  the  antelope  moves  about 
freely  by  nature,  [for  there  only]  religious  practices 
become  successful.  (16) 

Sixfold  works  have  been  laid  down  for  a  high-souled 
Brdhmana.  He,  who  always  lives  with  them  (i.e.,  per- 
forms them)  attains  to  happiness.  (17) 

Teaching,  religious  study,  officiating  as  a  priest  at 
sacrifices,  celebrating  sacrifices,  making  gifts,  and  accept- 
ing gifts  are  mentioned  as  the  sixfold  duties  of  a 
Brdhmana.  (18) 

Teaching  is  threefold,  [namely,]  for  virtue  or  wealth, 
and  service  is  described  as  the  third  [object.]  (19) 

In  the  absence,  of  at  least  one,  of  these  works,  a 
Brdhmana  becomes  a  Vrishdchdra,  (i.e.,  one  acting  like 
a  bull).  Learning  should  not  be  bestowed,  by  a  person, 
on  him  who  seeks  [only]  his  [own]  advancement.  (20) 

One  should  teach  a  worthy  disciple  and  discard  an 
unworthy  one.  For  successfully  performing  a  religious 
rite,  one  should  accept  a  gift  from  a  householder  who 
is  known  as  being  freed  from  sins.  (21) 

One  should,  in  a  purified  place,  daily  attentively  study 
any  V£da,  Dharma-S'dstrds  should  be  [similarly] 
studied  by  the  pure-minded  Brdhmands.  (22) 

They  should  be  daily  and  nightly  studied  and  listened 
to  like  the  Vtdds.  To  make  a  gift  and  offer  food  unto  a 
Brdhmana  who  is  ignorant  of  the  S'rufi  and  the  Smriti, 
encompasses  the  destruction  of  the  giver's  family. 
Therefore  a  Brdhmana,  with  all  care,  should  study  the 
Dharma-S'dstrds.  (23—24) 

The  S}ruti  and  the  Smriti  are  the  two  eyes  of 
the  Brdhmands  created  by  God?  If  deprived  [of'  the 


1 68  Hdrita  Scuhhitfi. 

knowledge]  of  the  one,  [a  person]  is  called  one-eyed ; 
and  if  of  the  two,  a  blind.  (25) 

A  good  Brakmana  should  zealously  attend  upon 
his  preceptor  and  worship  the  Fm^tf-Fire,  morning 
and  evening.  (26) 

Having  bathed  properly,  he  should  offer,  every  day, 
•oblations  to  the  Vishwadevds,  and  adore  the  in-coming, 
guests,  to  the  best  of  his  power,  and  without  any  dis- 
tinction. (27) 

A  person,  leading  the  domestic  mode  of  life,  who 
is  always  devoted  to  his  wife,  and  shuns  other  peoples' 
wives,  should,  also,  adore  other  in-coming  Brahmana- 
guests  to  the  best  of  his  power.  (28) 

An  intelligent  person  should  take  his  meal  in  the 
evening,  after  having  performed  the  Homa.  He  shoulcj 
be  truthful,  have  control  over  his  passion,  and  never  fix 
his  mind  on  irreljgion.  (29) 

Having  undertaken  the  performance  of  his  own  duty, 
he  should  not  neglect  it  from  carelessness.  He  should 
always  speak  truthful  words  conducive  to  the  well- 
being  of  all,  and  in  the  next  world.  (30) 

This  is  the  duty  of  a  Brahmana  described  in  brief. 
He,  who  performs  this  duty,  attains  to  the  station  of 
Brahman^  (i.e.,  emancipation).  (3-1-) 

O  ye  foremost  of  the  Brdhmands,  as  accosted  by 
yo^  thus  the  Cods  of  Religious  Regulations,  which 
dissipates  the  entire  multitude  of  sins,  has  been  described? 
by  me.  Hear,  I  shall  now  describe  the  duties  of  the^ 
Kshatriyds  and  severally  o|  other  castes.  (32). 


CHAPTER  II. 

[THE  DUTIES  OF  THE  KSHATRIYA'S,  VAISHYA'S  AND  S'UDRA'S  } 
I  SHALL   describe,   in  order,  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end,   [the  duties    of]    the    Kshatriyds  and   others,   by 
following  which  regulations  all  come  by   most  excellent 
condition,  (i) 

When  placed  in  [charge  of]  a  kingdom,  a  Kshatriya 
should  protect  his  subjects  righteously,  be  devoted  ta 
study,  and  should  duly  celebrate  sacrifices.  (2) 

A  king,  endued  with  a  righteous  understanding^ 
should  always  make  gifts  unto  the  twice-born,  (i.e., 
the  Brdhmands\  be  always  devoted  unto  his  own  wife 
and  take  a  sixth  part  [of  the  income  of  his  subjects  as 
revenue.]  (3) 

He  should  be  proficient  in  the  Laws  of  Polity,  well- 
informed  in  the  true  spirit  of  making  peace  and  dissen- 
sion, devoted  to  the  Deities  and  the  Brahmanas,  and 
be  intent  on  performing  rites  for  the,  Pitris  (the 
departed  manes).  (4) 

He  should  perform  sacrifices  righteously  'and  shun 
irreligious  works.  By  acting  thus  a  Kshatriya  attains 
to  the  n>ost  excellent  condition  [in  after  life].  (5) 

A  Vaishya  should  duly  tend  cattle,  drive  trade  and 
agriculture,  make  charities  and  feed  the  Brahmanas, 
according  to  his  power.  (6) 

He  should  be  shorn  of  pride  and  stupefaction,  [and] 
even  by  words  he  should  not  injure  others,  be  devoted 
to  his  own  wife  and  self -restrained,  and  avoid  other 
people's  wives.  (7) 

Having  fed  with  his  money,  the  Brahmanas,  an3 
the  priests  at  the  time  of  sacrifice,  hr  should  live,  with- 
out lording  over,  in  religious  matters  till  the  fall  o| 
hisbady  (i.e.}  till  his  death).  ($) 


IF/O  Hdrita  Samhitd. 

He  should  zealously  celebrate  sacrifices,  study  reli- 
gious books,  make  charities,  perform  the  rite  for  the 
Pitris  and  worship  the  Man-Lion,  (i.e.,  Vishnu.)  (9) 

This  is  the  duty  of  a  Vaishya.  He,  who  follows 
the  duty  of  his  own  caste,  and  acts  thus,  forsooth, 
repairs  to  the  celestial  region.  (10) 

A  S'udra  should,  with  care,  serve  the  three  Varnas 
and  particularly  act  like  a  servant  unto  the  Brdh- 
mauds,  (u) 

He  should  make  gifts  without  being  solicited,  earn 
his  livelihood  by  hardship,  and  zealously  worship  the 
Deity  according  to  the  rules  of  Paka-  Yajna,  (a  simple 
or  domestic  sacrifice).  (12) 

Furthermore  he  should  adore  the  S'Adrds,  who 
wend  righteous  and  just  ways.  He  should  put  on  a 
tattered  cloth,  eat  the  remnant  of  a  Brahmana*s  food, 
find  pleasure  only  in  his  own  wife  and  avoid  another's 
wife.  (13) 

A  S'ddra  should  always  do  this  with  his  mind,  words 
and  deeds.  Having  performed  righteous  deeds  and 
having  his  sins  dissipated  [thereby],  he  attains  to  the 
dignity  of  Indra.  (14) 

The  duties  of  the  various  Varnas  have,  thus,  been 
described  by  me,  as  they  formerly  emitted  from  the 
mouth  of  Brahma.  O  ye  lords  of  ascetics,  listen  now 
to  the  duties  of  the  first  A's'rama  (i.e.,  the  order  of 
religious  students)  as  I  go  on  narrating  them  one  after 
£he  other.  (15) 


CHAPTER  lit.     * 

[BRAHMACHARYYA,  OR  RELIGIOUS  STUDENTSHIP.] 
HAVING  been  invested  with  the   sacred  thread,  a  person 
(i.e.,   one   of  the  three  castes)  should  live  in  the  family 
of  his  preceptor  and  do  good  unto  it  by  deeds,  mind  and 
words,  (i) 

[He  should]  lead  a  life  of  celibacy,  sleep  on  [the' 
bare]  earth,  adore  the  Fire,  and  offer,  unto  his  preceptor, 
pitchers  full  of  water,  sacrificial  fuels  and  go-ghrdshd 
(i.e.,  morsels  of  grass  for  his  cow).  (2) 

A  Brahniackariri  should  study  [the  Vedds]  with 
propriety  jwithout  which  he  does  not  attain!  the  fruit  of 
Vedic  studies.  (3) 

A  wicked-souled  person,  divorced  from  regulations, 
even  when  he  performs  righteous  deeds,  disregarding, 
the  proper  rules,  does  not  attain  the  fruits  thereof.  (4) 

Therefore  far  attaining  success  in  his  Vedic  study, 
he  should  perform  the  rites  laid  dawn  in  the  Vedds. 
He  should  learn,  from  his  preceptor,  the  many  a'nd  varied 
rules  [for  attaining]  purification.  (5) 

Being  careful  and  attentive,  a  Brahmacharin  should 
use  a  deer-skin  [for  his  waist  cloth]  a  piece  of  wood  for 
cleansing  the  teethy  mekkald,  (i.e.,  the  triple  girdle  worn' 
by  the  first  three  castes),  and  the  sacrificial  thread.  (6) 

For  procuring  food,  he  should,  having  restrained5 
his  senses,  beg  alms  in  the  morning  and  evening.. 
Rinsing  Jiis  mauth  carefully  every  day,  he  should  not 
cleanse  his  teeth.*  (7) 


•      *  I.e.,  He  should  not  rub  his  teeth  with  wood,  after  having  rinsed  hi 
mouth  at  the^time  of  bathing. 


Hdnta  Savihitd. 

He  should  renounce  umbrella,  shoes,  scents  arid 
garlands  ;  and  q^ist,  also,  abstain  from  dancing  and  sing- 
ing, useless  conversation  and  sexual  intercourse.  ^8) 

Having  restrained  his  senses,  he  should  abstain  front 
tiding  on  elephants  and  horses.  Observing  his  vow,  a 
Brahmachariti  should  perform  his  evening  adora- 
tion. (9) 

After  the  termination  of  the  evening  adoration,  he 
should  salute  the  feet  of  his  preceptor  and  reveren- 
tially meditate  upon  his  parents  (i.e.,  addre  them  men- 
tally). (10) 

These  three  (i.e.,  the  preceptor,  the  father  and  the 
mother)  being  lost  (becoming  displeased),  all  the  Deities 
are  displeased.  Shorn  of  pride  a  Brahmacharin  should 
abide  by  the  commands  of  all  these,  (ii) 

Having  studied  either  the  one,  two  or  the  three 
V$dds}  from  the  preceptor,  he  should  make  the  usual 
present  to  him,  and  then  being  self-controlled,  [he  should] 
live  in  his  village.  (12) 

A  Brahmna,  whose  tongue,  generative  organ,  belly 
and  hands,  have  all  been  controlled,  should,  resorting 
to  Sannydsa  (renunciation),  lead  a  celibate  life  near  the 
same  preceptor,  as  long  as  he  lives  ;  in  his  absence^ 
near  his  (preceptor's)  son  ;  [in  the  latter' s  absence,] 
near  his  disciple  or  in  his  family.  Neither  marriage 
nor  [absolute]  renunciation  is  laid  down  for  the  Naish- 
thika*  (13—14) 

A  Brahmacharin,  of  firm  vows,  who,  carefully  follow- 
ing this  regulation,  renounces  his  body,  is  not  borri  again 
in  this  World.  (15) 

*  A  perpetual  religions  student,  who  continues  with  his  spiritual 
preceptor  even  after  the  prescribed  period,  and  vows  life-long  abstinence 
and  chastity. 


Uariia  Samhita. 

A  Brahmacharin}  who,  being  'self-controlled  and 
devoted  to  the  service  of  his  preceptor,  moves  about 
'on  this  earth,  acquires  an  auspicious  learning,  so  difficult 
of  attainment,  and  comes  by  its  fruit  (i.e.,  virtue,  world- 
ly profit,  desire  and  emancipation)  so  easily  attainable 
[by  such  a  person].  (16) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

[GA'RHASTYA,  OR  THE  DOMESTIC  MODE  OP  LIFE.] 
AFTER  having  completed  his  Vedic  studies  and  being 
acquainted  with  the  true  import  of  Dharma-S'dstras,  a 
person  should  wed  a  maiden  of  a  different  family, 
having  a  brother,  endued  with  auspicious  marks,  perfect 
limbs  and  a  good  character,  That  foremost  of  the  twice- 
born  must  do  so  according  to  the  most  excellent  rite  of 
Brahma.  (1—2) 

Various  other  forms  of  marriage,  according  to  caste 
and  order,  have  been  spoken  of.  Having  duly  collected 
sacrificial  fuels,  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  being 
all  the  while  wide  awake,  should  offer  oblations  [to  the 
Fire]  in  the  morning  and  evening.  Thereupon  [he] 
should  daily  bathe  after  having  previously  cleansed  his 
teeth.  (3—4) 

Having  got  up  from  bed  at  dawn  he  should  duly 
perform  [all]  the  purifying  operations.  The  mouth  re- 
maining stale  (i.e.,  not  washed)  every  day,  a  person  loses 
control  over  his  own  self.  (5) 

Therefore  one  should  eat  (use)  a  piece  of  wood,  dry 
or  wet,  for  cleansing  the  teeth.  Karanja*  Khadira, 
Kadamva,  Kurava,  Saptaparni,  Pjisniparni)  Jdmva, 

*  Name  of  a  tree  used  in  medicinal  preparations. 
23 


174  Harita  Saihhitd. 

Apdmdrga,  Vilwa}  Arka,  Udumvara, — these  af6 
mentioned  as  the  most  suitable  woods  in  the  operation 
of  tooth  rubbing.  Thus  is  described,  in  brief,  the  wood 
which  should  be  used  for  rubbing  the  tooth.  (6 — 8) 

Ail  thorny  woods  yield  virtue  ;  and  milky  ones,  fame. 
It  is  said  that  the  wood,  for  rubbing  the  tooth,  should  be 
of  the  measure  of  eight  fingers.  Or  it  should  be  of  the 
size  of  a  span,  measured  from  the  tip  of  the  thumb  to 
that  of  the  forefinger.  With  such  [a  piece  of  wood], 
one  should  cleanse  one's  teeth.  ^9) 

If  the  teeth  are,  touched  with  a  twig  on  the  first  day 
of  a  lunar  fortnight,  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  dark  fort- 
night, the  fullmoon  day,  the  sixth  and  the  ninth  lunar 
day,  one's  seven  generations  are  consumed.  (10) 

On  the  interdicted  days,  the  mouth  should  be  rinsed 
with  twelve  handfuls  of  water  instead  of  a  twig,  (n) 

Having  rinsed,  the  mouth,  as  laid  down  in  the  Man- 
tram,  one  should  again  rinse  it.  Then  sprinkling  one's 
own  self  with  water,  as  described  in  the  Mantram,  one 
should  throw  palmfuls  of  water.  (12) 

By  virtue  of  the  boon  conferred  by  Brahma,  whose 
birth  is  not  known,  the  Rakshasas  Mdndeha  fight  every 
morning  with  the  Sun.  (13) 

The  handfuls  of  water,  thrown  by  the  Brahmanas 
and  inspired  with  the  mystic  verse  Gdyatri,  destroy 
all  the  Rakshasas  passing  under  the  appellation  of 
Mdndeha.  (14) 

Thereupon  protected  by  the  Brdhmands,  the  Sun 
proceeds  along  with  the  Yogins  headed  by  the  great 
Marichi  and  Sanaka.  (15) 

Therefore  one "  should  not  studiously  neglect  the 
morning  and  evening  adorations.  One,  who  neglects 


Harita  Samhitd.  175 

the    same    out    of  stupefaction,    forsooth,    goes   to    [the 
infernal  region  of]  hell.  (16) 

Having  rinsed  one's  mouth,  sprinkled  one's  own  self 
with  water,  according  to  the  Mantram,  and  offered 
handfuls  of  water  in  honour  of  the  Sun,  one  should 
perform  the  rite  of  circumambulation  and  then  purify 
one's  self  by  touching  water.  (17) 

Even  when  the  stars  are  visible,  one  should  duly 
perform  the  first  Sandhyd  adoration  and  recite  the 
Gdyatri  till  the  Sun  is  not  seen.  (18) 

Then  having  duly  performed  the  evening  Sandhyd, 
even  when  the  Sun  remains  visible,  one  should  recite 
the  Gdyatri  till  the  stars  are  not  seen.  (19) 

Thereupon  reaching  the  house  and  performing 
the  Homa,  a  learned  and  sage  person  should  think 
of  measures  for  supporting  those  who  depend  on 
him.  (20) 

Thereupon,  for  the  behoof  of  his  disciples,  he  should 
conduct  Vedic  studies  for  a  little  while ;  then  a  good 
Brdhmana  should  approach  his  king  for  business.  (21) 

Then  repairing  to  a  distant  place,  he  should  fetch 
Kus'a,  flowers  and  sacrificial  fuels.  Then  he  should 
perform  the  midday  adoration  at  a  holy  and  charm- 
ing place.  (22) 

I  shall  [now]  describe,  in  brief,  the  regulations,  des- 
tructive of  sins,  [of  that  form  of  bath]  by  bathing  ac- 
cording to  which,  one  is  freed  from  all  sins.  (23) 

Having  brought,  for  bathing,  earth,  together  with 
pure  rice  and  sesame,  one  should  then,  with  a  careful 
mind,  go  to  a  river  having,  profuse  pure  water.  (24) 

A  river  existing,  one  should  not  bathe  in  another 
water.  One  should  not  bathe  in  little  water  while  there 
exists  a  profusion  of  it.  (25) 


176  Hdrita  Sariihitd. 

'The  water  of  a  river  is  the  best.  One  should  bathe 
in  the  river,  standing  against  the  current.  In  its  absence, 
one  should  bathe  in  a  tank  or  in  other  pools.  (26) 

Sprinkling  a  pure  spot  with  water,  one  should  place 
one's  all  clothes  there.  Then  carefully  washing  one's, 
own  body,  one  should  rub  it  with  earth  and  water.  (27) 

Just  before  bathing,  a  learned  person  should  rinse 
his  mouth.  Then  entering  into  water,  controlling  his 
speech  duly,  and  mentally  thinking  of  Hari,  he  should 
immerse  himself  in  thigh-deep  water.  (28) 

Then  returning  to  the  bank  and  rinsing  his  mouth 
according  to  the  Mantram,  he  should  sprinkle  his  body 
with  water  [reciting]  the  Varuna- Mantram  and  the 
Pavamani  ~R.tk.  (29) 

Then  having  carefully  sprinkled  his  own  body,  with 
the  water  taken  by  the  tips  of  /fo^'tf-grass,  [and  reciting 
the  Mantram, — ]  "  Syona  prithivi,"  the  twice-born 
should  rub  it  [his  body]  with  earth  [reciting  the  Man- 
tram, — ]  "  I  dam  Vishnu''  (30) 

Then,  when  immersing  in  water  again,  he  should 
meditate  on  the  divine  Narayana.  Then  entering  into 
water  properly,  he  should  recite  [the  Mantram} — ] 
"Aghamarshanam"  (31) 

Having  bathed,  he  should  offer,  as  usual,  oblations,  of 
water  with  rice  and  sesame,  to  the  celestial  saints  and 
the  departed  manes  ;  then  pressing  out  water  [from  his 
cloth]  and  reaching  the  bank,  being  self-controlled,  he 
should  put  on  two  pieces  of  white  cloth  and  Uttariya 
(cloth  to  cover  the  body).  He  should  not  shake  his 
hairs.  (32—33) 

A  dark-blue  or  a  blue  cloth  is  not  preferable.  A 
learned  person  should  always  avoid  a  dirty  cloth  [and 
one]  that  does  not  emit  a  good  smell,  (34) 


H'lrita  Saihhita.  177 

Thereupon  a  learned  person  should  wash  his  feet 
svith  clay  water.  Then,  again  converting  the  right  palm 
into  the  shape  of  a  cow's  ear,  he  should  see  the  water 
inside,  drink  it  thrice  and  rinse  the  mouth  twice  there- 
with. Then  sprinkling  his  head  and  feet  with  water, 
he  should  touch  his  mouth  with  three  fingers.  (35 — 36; 

With  the  thumb  and  nameless  ringer,  he  should  touch 
the  two  eyes.  Then  being  self-restrained,  he  should 
touch  his  head  with  five  fingers.  (37). 

Having  rinsed  his  mouth,  according  to  this  regulation* 
a  pure-minded  Brdhmanat  shorn  of  idleness,  should,, 
with  Kus'a  in  hands  and  his  face  directed  towards  the 
east  or  the  north,  perform  the  Pranaydma  thrice,  and 
thereafter  perform  the  sacrifice  of  the  recitation  of  the 
Gayatri,  the  mother  of  the  Vedds.  (38 — 39) 

There  are  three  kinds  of  Japa-  Yajna  ;  understand 
their  secret. meaning.  Vdchika,  Upams'u  and  Manasa 
are  the  three  forms.  (40) 

Of  these  three  forms  of  Yajna,  each  succeeding  one 
is  superior  to  the  preceding  one.  (41) 

What  is  performed  by  reciting  the  Mantrams,  the 
various  parts  and  letters  being  distinctly  sounded  either 
high  or  low,  is  called  Vachika  Japa-Yajna.  (42) 

That,  in  which  the  Mantrams  are  recited  slowly,  the 
lips  quiver  a  little,  and  the  sound  becomes  audible  to 
a  slight  extent,  is  known  as  UpamJu-Japa.  (43) 

That,  in  which  the  words  and  letters  [of  the  Man- 
trams}  are  comprehensible  by  the  intellect,  [though  the 
words' and  letters  are  not  audible,  and  the  meaning  of 
the  words  is  meditated  on,  is  called  Manasa.  (44) 

Being  daily  lauded  with  the  recitation,  the  Deities 
become  propitiated.  They  being  pleased,  the  sages  ac- 
quire a  large  family.  (45) 


178  Harita  Samhitti. 

When  the  recitation  is  performed,  the  Rakshasds> 
Pis'dchas,  and  the  dreadful  huge  serpents  do  not  come 
near  but  fly  away  from  a  distance.  (46) 

Knowing  the  metre  and  the  Rishi  (saintly  author), 
one  should  zealously  recite  the  Mantrams.  And  know- 
ing their  meaning,  a  twice-born  one  should  mentally 
recite  the  Gdyatri,  day  and  night.  (47) 

He, — who  daily  recites  the  Divine  Gdyatri^  the  high- 
est [form  of  recitation]  being  a  thousand  times  ;  the  mid- 
dling, a  hundred  times  ;  and  the  lowest,  ten  times-; — is 
not  sullied  by  sin.  (48) 

Then  offering,  with  upraised  arms,  handfuls  of 
flowers  to  the  Sun,  he  should  recite  the  Sukta, — Udu- 
tyan  etc.,  and  then  Tatachakshu.  '49' 

Performing  the  rite  of  circumambulation  and  cover- 
ing [his  face]  with  hands,  a  twice-born  one  should  bow 
unto  the  Sun  and  then  propitiate  the  other  Deities  with 
the  Tirtha- Water.  (50) 

Then  pressing  water  out  of  the  cloth  with  which  he 
had  bathed,  he  should  rinse  his  mouth  again.  Bathing 
and  making  gift  by  a  devout  follower  has  been  described 
here  like  that  (i.e.,  they  should  be  accompanied  with 
the  rinsing  of  mouth.)  (51) 

Seated  on  AW  # -grass,  with  Kus'd-gmss  in  hands 
and  with  his  face  directed  towards  the  east,  a  person 
should  reverentially  perform  Brahma-Yajna}  according 
to  the  rites  thereof.  (52) 

Thereupon  having  got  up  and  placed  his  joined  hands 
on  his  head,  he  should,  reciting  the  Rik, — S'uchiskadi, 
offer  Arghya  of  sesame,  flowers  and  rice  to  the 
Sun.  (53) 

Thereupon  having  saluted  the  Sun-God  he  should 
again  return  to  his  house,  And,  going  there,  he  should 


Hdrita   Samkitd. 

adore  Vishnu,   according  to   the   rite   laid   down    in  the 
Purusha-Sukta..   (54) 

Thereafter  he  should  offer  Pa#  (offerings  of  food)  to 
the  Vis'wadevds  according  to  the  rite  thereof.  A  house- 
holder should  wait  for  a  guest  till  the  hour  of  milching 
the  cow.  (55) 

If  a  guest,  not  seen  or  known  before,  comes,  he 
should,  rising  up,  adore  him  with  a  welcome,  offer  of 
water  and  a  seat.  (56) 

[On  a  guest]  being  welcomed,  the  Fires  of  a  house- 
holder become  gratified,  On  a  seat  being  offered,  the 
King  of  the  Celestials  becomes  pleased.  (57) 

Water,  for  washing  'the  feet,  being  offered,  the 
departed  manes  attain*  to  gratification  which  it  is  so 
difficult  to  secure.  On  food  being  offered,  Prajapati  is 
pleased.  (58)  . 

Therefore,  after  the  adoration  of  Vishnu,  the  guests 
should  be  daily  worshipped  by  a  householder  with  res- 
pect and  according  to  his  might.  (59) 

He  should  give  unto  the  beggars  and  the  mendicant 
Brahmachdrins  alms  consisting  of  undedicated  curry 
and  rice.  (60) 

If  a  mendicant  arrives  at  a  house  before  food  is 
offered  to  the  Vis?wad6vds}  then  keeping  a  part  thereof 
for  them,  one  should  dismiss  him  by  giving  him  alms.  (6l) 

A  mendicant,  being  fed,  can  remove  the  mischief 
done  by  the  Visfwadfods.  But  the  Vis'wadevas  can 
never  remove  the  mischief  done  by  the  mendicants.  (62) 

Therefore  when  Yatins  arrive  at  a  house,  one  should 
respectfully  offer  them  alms,  for  he  should  think  without 
a  shadow  of  doubt  that  Vishnu  is  himself  a  Yatin.  (63) 

After  having  fed  well-dressed  maidens,  aged  persons 


*8o  Harita  Samhitd. 

and  children,  a  householder  should  then  take  his 
meal.  (64) 

With  his  face  directed  either  towards  the  east  or 
the  north,  abstaining  entirely  from  speaking  or  controll- 
ing his  speech,  he  should,  with  a  delighted  heart,  salute 
the  boiled  rice  in  the  beginning.  (65) 

Then  offering  oblations  to  the  vital  airs  with  different 
Mantrdms,  he  should,  being  self-restrained,  take  sweet 
food.  (66) 

Then  rinsing  his  mouth  and  remembering  his  Tutelary 
Deity,  he  should  touch  his  belly.  Then  a  wise  person 
should  spend  his  time  in  the  study  of  history  and 
the  Purdnds.  (67) 

Then  going  out,  he  should  duly  perform  the  evening 
adoration.  Then  performing  the  Homa  and  feeding  the 
guests,  he  should  take  his  meal  in  the  night,  (68) 

Eating  in  the  morning  and  evening'has  been  sanc- 
tioned by  the  Sruti  for  the  twice-'born.  But  they  cannot 
take  any  intermediate  meal.  The  rule '  for  the  Agni- 
hotrins  is  [to  take  meals  only  in]  the  evening.  (69) 

A  Brdhmana  should  teach  his  disciples  but  dismiss 
them  on  those  days  on  which  no  religious  studies  are  to 
be  prosecuted.  All  the  days  mentioned  in  the  Smritis 
and  the  Purdnds  [are  to  be  accepted].  (70) 

On  the  Mahdnavami  (the  ninth  day  in  the  bright  half 
of  the  month  of-A's'win,  sacred  to  the  worship  of  Durga), 
the  twelfth  day  of  the  fortnight,  .Bharani,  the  Parva- 
days  (Fuilmoon,  and  the  last  day  of  the  dark  fortnight, 
and  the  third  day  of  the  bright  half  of  VaiJakha,  a 
Brdhmana  should  not  teach  his  disciples.  (71) 

On  the  seventh  day  of  the  fortnight  in  the  month  of 
Mdgha,  on  Rathya  Saptami,  while  rubbing  oil,  and  at 
the  time  of  bathing,  one  should  avoid  teaching.  (72) 


Harita  Savhkita.  181 

Seeing  a  dead  body  carried  or  placed  on  earth  and 
tearing  the  sound  of  weeping  in  the  evening,  the  fore- 
most of  the  twice-born  should  not  study  [the  Vtdds].  (73) 

O  ye  the  leading  twice-born  ones,  charities  must  be 
made  by  a  householder — the  gift  of  gold,  cow  and 
tearth.  (74) 

'  This  is  the  essence  of  the  duties  of  a  householder 
described  [by  me].  He,  who  satisfies  them  with  rever- 
ence, attains  to  the  dignity  of  Brahma.  (75) 

By   the   favour   of  the    Man-Lion,    he   acquires    the' 
most   excellent  knowledge.     And,   by  it,   a    Brahmana 
attains  emancipation,  O  ye  twice-born  ones.   (76) 

O  ye  Viprds,  thus  the  eternal  Code  of  Duties  has 
been  described,  in  brief  by  me,  to  you.  If  a  householder 
carefully  performs  the  duties  laid  down  for  the  domestic 
mode  of  life,  he  becomes  united  with  [the  God]  Hari.  (77) 


CHAPTER  V. 

[THE  DUTIES  OF  THE  VA'NAPRASTHA  MODE  OP  LIFE.] 

O  YE  great  and  most  excellent  Rhkts,  hear,  I  shall; 
hereafter,  describe  the  duties  of  'a  Vanaprastha  or  a 
hermit.  o(i) 

Having  seen  sons  and  grandsons  and  his  hairs  grow 
grey,  a  householder,  consigning  the  care  of  his  wife  to 
his  sons  or  with  her,  should  enter  into  a  forest.  (2) 

Having    nails,   hairs   of    the   body   and   white    skin 
covering   the  body,    a   hermit,   living  in  a  forest,  should 
duly  offer  oblations  to  Fire.  (3) 
24 


p82  Hdrita  Saihhifa. 

He  should  carefully  daily  offer  oblations  with  paddy 
grown  in  the  forest,  unimpeachable  rice  growing  without 
cultivation,  leaves,  roots  and  fruits.  (4) 

Having  bathed  thrice,  he  should  practise  austere 
penances.  Either  after  a  fortnight  or  a  month,  he  should 
take  his  meals,  cooking  the  food  himself.  (5) 

Or  he  should  take  his  meals  at  the  fourth,  eighth, 
or  the  sixth,  period •;*  or  he  should  sustain  himself  with 
air.  (6) 

Stationed  in  the  midst  of  five  fires  in  the  summer, 
living  without  shelter  in  the  rainy  season  and  remaining 
inside  the  water  in  the  dewy  season,  he  should  spend 
his  time  practising  penances.  (7) 

That  person  of  well-formed  religious  understanding, 
who  performs  these  rites  in  order,  shall,  taking  his  own 
Fire,  repair  to  the  northern  quarter.  (8) 

An  ascetic,  going  to  a  forest,  who;  abstaining  from 
speech,  meditates  on  Brahman — who  is  beyond  the 
ken  of  senses— till  the  destruction  of  his  body,  becomes 
glorified  in  the  region  of  Brahma.  (9) 

He, — who,  living  in  a  forest  and  being  endued  with 
mental  abstraction  and  self-restraint,  practises  penances, 
— goes,  freed  from  sins,  purified  and  endued  with  a 
quiet  mind,  to  the  ancient,  divine  Purusha.  (10) 

*  The  fourth  period  is  the  evening  of  the  second  day,  aftft  fasting 
for  a  day ;  the  eighth  period  is  the  evening  of  the  fourth  day,  afterf 
fasting  for  three  days  ;  and  so  forth. 


CHARIER  VI. 

[THE  DUTIES  OF  THE  FOURTH  ORDER,  SANNYA'SA  ] 
I    SHALL,  hereafter,    describe    the  most  excellent  fourth 
A's'rama  or  order,  by  following  which  with   feverence, 
one  is  released  from  the  fetters  [of  worldly  existence],  (i) 

Living  in  the  Vanaprastha  A's'rama  as  mentioned 
before  and  dissipating  all  his  sins,  a  twice-born  one 
should  enter  upon  the  fourth  order  according  to  the 
rul.es  of  Sannyasa  (renunciation).  (2) 

Having  carefully  made  gifts  unto  the  departed 
manes,  the  celestials  and  the  human  beings,  performed 
S'raddha  for  the  departed  manes  and  the  human  rela- 
tions and  performed  the  funeral  rites  of  his  own  self,  and 
taking  the  Sacred  Fire  with  his  own  self,  one,  knowing 
the  Mantram,  should  again  enter  upon  the  life  of 
mendicancy.  (3 — 4) 

Since  then  he  should  desist  from  cherishing  attach- 
ment for  sons  and  conversing  with  them.  He  should 
give  assurance  of  safety  unto  his  kinsmen  and  all 
creatures.  (5) 

A  triple  staff,  made  of  bamboo,  of  equal  knots, 
measuring  four  ringers  and  covered  with  the  down  of 
a  black  calf,  has  been  highly  spoken  of  by  the  ascetics 
for  physical  and  mental  purification.  A  small  strip  of 
clotr£[is  allowed]  for  covering  the  body  and  a  wallet  for 
protection  against  cold.  (6 — 7) 

He  should  also  take  a  pair  of  sandals  and  must  not 
collect  any  thing  else.  These  all,  that  have  been  des- 
cribed, are  always  his  marks.  (8) 

Collecting  all  these,  leading  a  life  of  renunciation 
and  going  to  a  most  excellent  shrine,  [he  shoulft]  bathe 


184  Hdrita  SartihM. 

there   and    rinse    his    mouth  with   water   inspired    with 
the  Mantrams.  (9) 

Then  offering  oblations  to  the  Deities,  he  should  bow 
unto  the  Sun  according  to  the  Mantram.  Then  with 
his  face  directed  towards  the  east  and  abstaining  from 
speech,  he  should  perform  the  prandydma  thrice.  (10) 

Having  recited  the  Gayatri  according  to  his  might, 
he  should  meditate  on  the  Para-Brahman.  And,  for 
supporting  his  own  self,  he  should  daily  go  out  for  re- 
ceiving alms,  (i  i) 

Having  arrived  in  the  evening  at  the  residence  of  the 
Brdhmands,  he  should,  with  his  right  hand,  beg  for  a; 
mouthful  of  food.  (12) 

Having  taken  up  the  bowl  with  his  left  hand,  he- 
should  collect  alms  with  his  right  one.  He  should  receive 
alms  so  long  as  food,  capable  of  gratifying  him,  is  not 
secured.  (13) 

Then  returning,  the  self-controlled  [mendicant] 
should  place  the  bowl  elsewhere.  Then  being  self- 
controlled,  he  should  take  rice,  containing  all  sorts  of 
curries  with  four  fingers  and  keep  it  in  another  vesseh 
Then  sprinkling  it  with  water  and  offering  it  to  the 
elemental  Deities  headed  by  the  Sun,  the  Yatin  should 
take  his  meal  either  in  two  vessels  or  in  one.  He  shoufd 
never  eat  from  a  vessel  made  of  fig-leaves,  or  one 
made  of  Kumbhi,  Tainduka,  Koviddra  and  Kadamva. 
The  Yatins,  who  eat  from  vessels  made  of  belmetal, 
are  all  described  as  being  covered  with  dirt.  (14 — 17) 

The  Yatins,  [who  take  their  meals  from  a  belmetal 
vessel],  are  visited  by  the  sins  of  the  householder, 
who  cooks  food  in  a  belmetal  vessel,  as  well  as  of 
all  those  [persons]  who  make  others  eat  from  the- 
(18) 


Hdrita  Safahitd.  185 

A  Yatin  should  daily  wash  the  vessel,  with  Mantrams, 
in  which  he  takes  his  meal.  Like  the  chamasa-vessel 
(ladle),  of  sacrifice  that  vessel  is  never  sullied.  (19) 

Thereupon  having  rinsed  his  mouth  and  performed 
deep  meditation^  he  should  adore  the  Sun.  A  sage  man 
should  then  spend  his  day  in  recitation,  meditation,  and 
the  study  of  history.  (20) 

Then  performing  the  evening  adoration,  he  should 
spend  the  night  in  a  temple  and  meditate  on  the  eternal 
Brahman  in  the  lotus  of  his  heart.  (21) 

If  [a  Sannydsin]  be  thus  religiously  bent,  be  of  a, 
quiescent  soul,  impartial  unto  all  creatures  and  self- 
restrained,  he  attains  to  the  highest  station  from  which 
he  does  not  return.  (22) 

The  holder  of  the  triple  staff, — who,  withholding  the 
senses  from  the  external  objects,  gradually  acts  thus,— 
attains  to  the  most  exalted  station  of  Vishnu,  freed  from, 
the  fetters  of  worldly  existence.  <  23) 


CHAPTER    VH.  • 

[ESSENCE  OE  YOGA.] 

I  HAVE  described  the  duties  of  various  Varnas.  and 
A} dramas,  by  following  which  men  attain  to  emancU 
pation  and  the  celestial  region,  (i) 

I  shall  now  describe,  in  brief,  the  most  essential  and 
excellent  Yoga-S*  dstra  by  listening  to  which,  persons, 
desirous  of  acquiring  emancipatio.n,  attain  to  it.  (2) 

All  the  sins  are  dissipated  by  the  practice  of  Yoga. 
Therefore,  resorting  to  Yoga  and  performing  all  religious 
rites,  one  should  ddtly  perform  meditation.  (3) 

Having  brought  first  the  mind,  difficult  of  being 
restrained,  under  control,  by  dharand  (steady  abstraction), 


1 86  Hdrita  Sariihita, 


one  should  control  one's  speech  by  prati  dyama ;  and 
the  senses,  by  withholding  them  from  their  objects.  (4) 

Considering  the  individual  soul  as  identical  with  the 
Great  Soul,  he  should  meditate  on  Brahman,  that  is 
all  knowledge,  freed  from  diseases,  subtler  than  the 
subtle  and  described  as  the  stay  of  the  universe.  (5) 

Seated  in  a  solitary  place  with  a  concentrated  mind, 
he  should,  till  death,  meditate  on  the  atman,  that  is 
situated  both  in  the  mind  and  the  external  world,  and 
effulgent  like  gold.  (6) 

He  should  think, — "  I  am  that  which  is  the  heart  of 
all  creatures,  which  is  situated  in  the  hearts  of  all  and 
which  is  worthy  of  being  known  by  all."  (7) 

So  long  one  enjoys  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  atman} 
he  should  not  act  against  the  religious  practices  men- 
tioned in  the  S^ruti  and  the  Smriti  (such  as  penances, 
meditation,  etc.)-  (8) 

As  a  car  without  a  horse  and  a  horse  without  a 
charioteer  [are  of  no  use],  so  is  penance  and  learning. 
They  become  useful  when  [they  are]  united.  (9) 

As  food  united  with  sweet  juice,  and  sweet  juice 
united  with  food,  [are  useful]  ;  as  birds,  with  two  wings, 
fly  in  the  sky;  so  one,  by  jndna  (knowledge)  and  karma 
(action),  attains  to  the  eternal  Brahman*  A  Brahmana 
— endued  with  learniug  and  penance  and  given  to  the 
practice  of  yoga — having  cast  off  the  two  bodies  (the 
material  and  the  subtle),  becomes  freed  from  fetters. 
There  is  no  destruction  of  the  soul  when  the  material 
body  is  destroyed.  (10 — 12) 

O  ye  foremost  of  the  twice-born  ones,  all  the 
divisions  of  castes  and  orders  and  their  duties  have  been 
described  unto  you,  in  brief,  by  me.  (13) 


Hat-it  a  Samhitd.  t%7 

Hearing  of  religious  duties,  which  yield,  as  fruits/ 
the  celestial  region  and  emancipation,  the  ascetics,  salu- 
ted the  Riski,  and,  delighted,  repaired  to  their  respec- 
tive habitations.  (14) 

MA'RKANDEYA  said  : 

Having  studied  this  Religious  Code,  in  full,  emanating 
from  the  mouth  of  Harita,  he,  who  follows  its  religious- 
teachings,  conies  by  the  moet  excellent  state.  (15) 

By  acting  against  the  duties  laid  down  for  the  Brah- 
manas,  those  laid  down  for  the  Kshatriyas  (sprung, 
from  the  arms  of  Brahma),  those  laid  down  for  the 
Vais'yas  (thigh-begotten),  and  those  laid  down  for  the 
S^udrds  (foot-sprung),  one  is  immediately  degraded  from 
his  caste.  Every  one  should  perform  the  duty  laid  down 
for  him  (i.e.,  for  his  caste).  The  twice-born  should,  theiC"- 
fore,  carefully  satisfy  their  respective  duties.  (16 — 17) 

Thus,  O  king,  there  are  four  Varnds,  and  four 
A  'dramas.  Those,  who  abide  by  their  own  duties,  come 
by  the  most  excellent  condition.  (*8) 

The  slayer  of  Madhu  is  not  so  much  pleased  with' 
any  other  work,  as  the  Man-Lion  is  gratified  with  the 
discharge  of  their  respective  duties  by  men.  (19) 

Therefore  performing  one's  own  duty  in  proper 
time  and  vigilantly,  a  person  acquires  habitation  with 
the  thousand-eyed  King  of  the  Colestials  and  the  Man- 
Lion  (Vishnu).  (20) 

By  the  power  of  the  spirit  of  disassociation  sprung 
in  him,  a  Yogin,  always  performing  feligious  rites,  should 
meditate  on  Para-Brahman.  Then  casting  off  his  body, 
he  shall  attain  to  the  eternal  and  the  ever-blissful  station1 
of  Vishnu,  which  isjvithout  beginning  or  end.  (21) 

FINIS. 


WITH    A 


LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION. 


EDITED   AND    PUBLISHED    BY 

MANMATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  W.A.,  W.R.A.S., 

Rector,  Keshub  Academy, 

Author  of  the  English  Translations  of  the  Rdmdyana,  Maha- 
Bhdrata,  Srimadbhagavatam,   Mahdnirvdna-Tantram, 
ffarivams'a,  Agni  Purdnam,   Mdrkandeya 
Purdnam,  &c.,  &c. 


PRINTED  BY  H.  C.  DAS,  ELYSIUM  PRESS, 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DUTT'S  STREET. 

'   1906. 


TABLE  OF  CONTEXTS. 

Us* ana  Samhitd. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Subject.                                   Sloka.  Page, 

introduction                  ...                ...            1—3  189 

The  commencement  of  Vedic  Study  4  189 
Dress  and  the  use  of  the  Sacred 

Thread  for  a  Religious  Student  ...           5 — 14  189 

The  mode  of  adoration                   ...  16 — 1£  190 

The  mode  of  salutation  and  address  19—28  191 

The  five  elders               ...                 ...                 30  192 

The  five  Curtis              ...                 ...  31—32  191 

Duties  towards  parents...                 ...  33 — 38  193 

Duties  towards  the  eldest  brother  ...  39 — 40  193 

Duties  towards  the  protector  ...  41  193 

Persons  worthy  of  salutation  ...  42 — 50  193 

The  mode  of  begging  alms  ...  51—57  .  \^ 

The  mode  of  taking  meals  ...  58 — 64  196 
Rules  for  rinsing  the  mouth  and 

keeping  the  body  pure  ...  i — 47  197 

The  conduct  of  a  Religious  Student  i — 26  202 
How  a  Religious  Student  should  treat 

the  woman  kind       ...                 ...  27 — 34  205 

Qualified  persons  for  instruction     ...  35 — 37  2o& 

\  Rules  about  Vedic  study                    ...  38 — 44  2o^ 

The  superiority  of  the  Gayairi          ...  45 — 53  207 

The  time  fitted  for  study                   ...  54—86  209 

The  real  Vedic  study    ...                 ...  81 — 82  212 

A.  perpetual  Religious  Student  ...  83 — 92  212 
Regulations  about  a  Student's  taking 

*ood                         .-..                ...  93—94  21$ 


Subject.  Sloka.  Page. 
Regulations    about  a  Householder's 

taking  food              ...                ...  95  —  105  214 

Regulations  about  S'raddha            „.  106  —  108  215 

Tlie  proper  lime  for  a  S'raddha       ...  109  —  1 12  216 

ICamya  S'-addha          ...                ...  113  216 

Persons  to  be  invited  at  a  S'raddha  114  — 118  216 

Various  forms  of  S'raddha              ...  iro — 132  216 

Offerings  at  a  S'raddha...                  ...•  1-33 —  ^44  219 

Persons  who  ought  to  be  invited  at 

a  S'raddha               ...                ...  i — 36  220 

Rules  of  S'raddha'         ...                 ...  *— 99  226 

Various  forms  of  impurity                ...  i  — 61  238 
Persons   qualified   to    perform    the 

S'raddha                   ...                 ..,  r— 2j  2*47 

Penance  for  Brahmanicide                ..,  i  —  n  250 
Penance    for    drinking    spirituous 

liquor                        ...                 ...  1^2-14  252 

Penance  for  the  theft  of  gold           ...  15  —  22  252 
Penance  for  knowing  a  step. mother  23  -29  255 
Penance   for   mixing   with    the    de- 
graded                     ...  30— 35  254 
Penance  for  knowing  various  female 

relations                     ...                  ...  i  —  5  25  j 

Penance    for  knowing   a   Kshatriya. 

woman                       ...                 ...  6  255 

Penance  for  killing  various  animals...  7 — 15  255 

Penance  for  theft            ...                  ...  if)  — 21  256- 

Penance  for  eating  meat  of  sorts   and 

other  articles,  and  drinking         .,.  22  —  55  257 
Penance    for   unworthy     deeds    and 

negligence  to  perform  various  rites  56  —69  26.0- 

Puriftcatiou  of  the  offspring  of  sinners  70  262 

Penance  for  various  miuur  sins  71  —  no  262 


9  SAM  BEIT  A*. 


CHAPTER  I. 

[GENERAL  DUTIES..] 

HAVING  bowed  unto  the  ascetic  Us'ana's  son,  born  in 
the  race  of  Bhrigu,  the  hermits,  headed  by  S'ounaka, 
asked  of  him  [an  account  of]  the  divisions  of  all  the 
Religious  Codes,  (i) 

"  Hear  ye  all  attentively,  I  shall  rehearse  [the  Reli- 
gious Code] — -the  instrument  of  virtue,  worldly  profit, 
pleasure  and  emancipation,  and  the  destroyer  of  sins  — 
which  formerly  Us'ana  conversant  with  the  secrets  of 
the  science  of  religion,  [described]  in  the  auditory  of 
the  Rishis." 

Then  saluting  his  father  Us'ana  born  in  the  family  of 
Bhrigu,  he  began  to  discourse  on  religious  duties.  (2 — -3) 
Being  invested  with  the  sacred  thread  in  the  eighth 
year,  either  counting  from  the  period  of  conception 
•or  from  the  [date  of]  birth,  according  to  the  regulation 
laid  down  in  one's  own  Family  Code  of  Rites,  the  fore- 
most of  the  twice-born  should  study  the  V^dds.  (4) 

A  religious  student  should  carry  a  staff,  put  on  a 
girdle  and  the  skin  of  a  black  antelope)  live  on  what  is 
got  by  begging,  do  good  unto  his  preceptor  and  look  at 
the  preceptor's  face.  (5) 

Formerly,  cotton-made  sacred  thread  was  insti- 
tuted by  Brahma.  Strings  of  three  threads  are  for  the 
Brdhmands.  A  hempen  cord  [is  for  a  Kshatriya] ;  and 
a  woolen  one,  [for  a  Vais'ya\.  (6) 

A   twice-born    one    should    always  wear   the  sacred 
thread  and   tie    up    the   tuft  of  hair   on  his  crown.     He 
25 


i go  Us' etna  Satfihita. 

should  put  on  a  most  excellent  white  piece  of  cottolD 
or  silk  cloth  without  any  hole,  but  quite  different  from* 
the  one  used  before.  (7) 

The  sacred  skin  of  a  black  antelope  has  been  des- 
cribed as  the  cloth  for  covering  the  upper  part  of  the 
body.  In  its  absence  the  skin  of  a  Ruru-deer  is 
allowed  to  be  used.  (8) 

The  sacred  thread  should  extend  from  the  left 
shoulder  to  the  bottom  of  the  right  arm.  One  should 
always  wear  the  sacred  thread.  Nivita  is  the  sacred 
thread  lying  round  the  neck  [and  hanging  down  like  a 
garland],  (g) 

O  ye  twice-born  ones,  the  sacred  thread,  worn  over 
the  right  shoulder  and  passing  under  the  left  arm,  is 
called  Prdchinavita,  It  should  be  worn  at  the  rite 
for  the  departed  manes.  (lo) 

In  a  room  where  the  Sacred  Fire  is  kept,  in  a  cowpeny 
[while  offering]  ablations  to  the  Fire,  [while  making] 
recitations,  while  feeding  after  Vedic  studies,  near  the 
Brahmanas,  while  the  preceptor  makes  his  adoration 
and  at  the  two  periods  of  junction,  one  should  always 
wear  the  sacred  thread.  This  is  the  eternal  regulation, 
(n  — 12) 

The  triple  girdle  of  a  Brahmana  should  be  made  o§ 
the  Murl/a-grass,  have  three  equal  folds,  and  be  plain. 
Munja  not  being  available,  Km' a- grass  is  [next]  spoken1 
of,  making  either  one-,  or  three-,  folds.  (13) 

A  twice-born  one  should  carry  a  staff,  measuring  up1 
to  the  tips  of  hairs  in  length,  made  of  the  Bel,  the 
PataJia,  the  sacrificial  fig,  or  of  the  Udumvara 
wood.  (1-4) 

Being  self-restrained,  a  twice-born  one  should  make 
the  Sandhya  or  adoration,  [both]  in  th«  morning  and 


Us  ana  Samhita.  19* 

evening.  He  should  never  fail,  out  of  lustful  desire, 
avarice,  fear  or  stupefaction.  (15) 

Thereupon,  with  a  delighted  mind,  he  should  adore 
the  Sacred  Fire,  [both]  in  the  morning  and  evening. 
Having  bathed,  he  should  offer  oblations  to  the  Deities, 
Rishis  and  all  the  classes  of  Pitris.  (16' 

He  should,  then,  perform  the  adoration  of  the  Deities 
with  flowers,  leaves  and  water.  Saying  with  proper 
humility, — "  I,  such  and  such  person,  salute  thee,"  he 
should,  every  day,  religiously  bow  unto  his  elders.  [By 
this,]  one  acquires  long  life,  health,  wealth  and  pros- 
perity. (17—18) 

If  another  Brdhmana  salutes  [him],  he  [the  other 
Brdhmana']  should  be  [greeted  in  return],  saying, — "  Be 
long-lived,  O  gentle  one."  These  words  should  be 
uttered  after  addressing  him  by  his  name.  (19) 

A  Brdhmana,  who  does  not  know  how  to  return  a 
salutation,  on  being  saluted  [by  another],  should  never 
be  bowed  unto  by  a  learned  person.  He  is  like  a 
S'udra.  (20) 

[At  the  time  of  salutation,]  the  feet  of  an  elder 
should  not  be  touched  by  the  left  hand.  His  left  foot 
should  be  touched  by  the  left  hand  ;  and  the  right,  by 
the  right  one.  (21) 

One  should,  first  of  all,  bow  unto  him  from  whom  one 
acquires  temporal,  Vedic,  and  spiritual  knowledge.  (22) 

One  should  not  [at  the  time  of  saluting]  touch  water, 
food  acquired  by  begging,  flowers,  [and]  sacrificial  fuels, 
as  also  other  articles  that  may  have  been  dedicated  to  a 
Deity.  (23) 

The  preceptor,  the  father,  the  eldest  brother,  or  the 
king,  after  approaching  him,  shall  accost  a  Brdhmana  of 
his  well-being ;  a  Kshatriya>  of  his  health  ;  a  Vais'ya,  of 


192'  UJana  Saihhitd. 

peace  ;•  and  a  S'&dra,  of  freedom  from'  diseases,  A 
maternal  uncle,  the  father-in-law,  the  eldest  brother,  the 
maternal  grandfather,  the  paternal  grandfather,  the  headi 
of  the  castes  and  a  paternal  uncle,  are  known'  as-  the 
seven  Pit r is  or  fathers.  (2-4—25) 

The  mother,  the  maternal  grandmother,  the  pre-- 
ceptor's  wife,  paternal  and  maternal  aunts,  the  mother- 
in-law,  the  paternal  grandmother  and  the  eldest  sister,, 
are  to  be  known  as  elderly  women.  (26) 

All  of  them  are  spoken  of  as  the  fern-ale  and  male 
elders :  one  should  follow  them,  with  mind,,  words  and; 
deeds.  (27) 

Seeing  an.  elderly  person^  one  should;  get  up  andi 
salute  him  or  her  with  folded,  palms.  One  should,  not  sit 
with  the  elders,  nor  should  one  quarrel,  with  them.  ont 
any  account.  (20) 

Even  for  preserving  his  own  life,  one  should  not 
injure  or  speak  ill  of  elderly  persons.  Even  when, 
endued  with  other  accomplishments,,  a  person,  injuring 
elders,  goes  downwards.  (291 

Of  all  elderly  persons,  five  are  to  be  particularly 
[adored],  viz.,  the  father,  the  mother,  the  spiritual  guide,, 
the  teacher  and  the  priest ;  of  them  the  first  three  are 
the  foremost ;.  and  of  them  a  mother  is  to  be  particularly 
adored.  (30) 

One  who  gives  habitation  even  for  a  day,  one  who 
gives  instructions  even  for  a  moment,  the  eldest  brother 
and  the  protector  [or  the  husband  in  case  of  a  woman], 
are  the  five  Gurus,  (elderly  persons  worthy  of  res- 
pect).  (3.1) 

These  five  should  be  adored  by  one,  seeking  one's- 
own  well-being,  with  one's  best  personal  exertion  or, 
even  with  the  renou  ncem  ent  of  one's,  own  life.  (32 


Us  ana  Samhita.  193 

With  disinterestedness  and  renouncing  all,  a  son 
should,  devotedly,  serve  them  both,  so  long  as  the  father 
and  the  mother  live.  (33) 

The  father  and  the  mother  being  pleased  with  their 
son's  accomplishments,  the  son,  by  this  deed,  attains 
to  [the  fruition  of]  all  [his]  works.  (34) 

There  is  no  Deity  equal  to  mother  ;  there  is  no  Guru 
(elder)  equal  to  father ;  there  exists  no  return  of  their 
good  offices.  (35* 

One  should — by  deeds,  thoughts  and  words — do  unto 
them  what  they  like.  Without  being  commanded  by 
them,  one  should  not  perform  any  religious  rite,  exclud- 
ing those  which  yield  emancipation  and  the  daily  and 
obligatory  rites.  [To  serve  the  parents]  is  laid  down 
as  the  cream  of  religion,  yielding  delightful  fruits  in  the 
next  world.  (36 — 37) 

With  his  permission,  taking  leave  of  the  preceptor 
who  properly  instructs  him  about  good  conduct,  makes  a 
disciple  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  learning  [in  this  world], 
as  well  as  in  the  celestial  region  after  death.  (38) 

The  silly  wight,  who  disrespectfully  treats  his  eldest 
brother  who  is  like  unto  his  father,  goes,  by  that  sin, 
into  hell.  (39) 

[One  should  keep  an  eye  on]  the  good  services  and 
honour  of  a  giver  in  this  world.  It  is  admitted  that  a 
protector  should  be  adored  by  all  men  with  mental  con- 
centration.  (40) 

The  most  exalted  regions  are  for  those  men  who 
renounce  their  own  lives  for  procuring  food  for  their 
protector.  The  divine  Bhrigu  has  said  so.  (41) 

One,  younger  in  years,  should  get  up  [on  seeing} 
maternal  uncles,  paternal  uncles,  father-in-law,  priests 
and  preceptors,  and  say, — "  I  am  here." 


194  Us  and  Samhita. 

A  person,  younger  in  years,  if  he  is  initiated  in  a 
sacrifice,  must  not  be  called  by  name.  A  person, 
conversant  with  religious  laws,  should  address  him  with 
the  word,—"  Bhos"  ^43) 

Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas  and  others,  seeking  their 
prosperity,  should  respectfully  bow  down  their  heads 
unto  [their  elders].  This  destroys  all  sins.  (44) 

Even  if  they  are  endued  with  knowledge,  good  works 
and  other  accomplishments,  and  be  sufficiently  well- 
read  in  the  S'ruti,  the  Kshatriyas  and  other  castes  are 
never  to  be  saluted  by  the  Brdhmands.  (45) 

The  rule  is  that  a  Brahmana  should  bless  all  the 
other  castes  and  a  younger  person  of  his  own  caste, 
and  salute  the  elderly  persons  [of  his  own  caste].  (46). 

Fire  is  adorable  unto  the  twice-born  ;  a  Brahmana^ 
unto  all  the  castes  ;  the  husband  also  is  adorable  unto 
wives,  and  a  guest  is  adorable  unto  all,  (47) 

[He  is  to  be  reverenced,]  who  has  learning,  [pious] 
action,  age,  friend  and  wealth ;  these  five  are  called 
objects  of  honour,  each  preceding  one  being  more  im- 
portant [than  the  succeeding  one].  (48) 

He  is  a  qualified  person  amongst  the  three  Varnas> 
who  [at  least]  possesses  one  of  these  five  [accom- 
plishments]. Even  if  he  happens  to  be  inferior  in  any 
other  respect,  he  is  worthy  of  homage.  (49) 

[Respect  should  be  offered*]  unto  the  Brahmanas^ 
who  help  in  the  offering  of  pindas,.unto  the  womankind, 
the  king,  his  eye  (i.e.,  his  emissary),  aged  persons,  those, 
pressed  down  by  a  heavy  load,  the  diseased  and  the 
weak.  (50) 

*  The   sense   of  the    Text    is,    that    if  one  of  the  persons,  described 
therein,  appears,  one  should  give  him  way  out  of  respect, 


collected  daily,  in  a  devout  spirit,   alms   from 
the  house?  of  good  people,  one  should  dedicate  them   to 
the  preceptor,  and,    then,  with  his  permission,  take  one's 
meal,  abstaining  [all  the  while]  from  speech.   (51) 

A  BrahmanA)  who  has  been  irivested  with  the  sacred 
thread,  should  beg  alms;  using  before  [the  word]  Bhavat ; 
a  Kshatriya  [should  use  the  word]  Bhavat  in  the' 
middle ;  a  Vats' ya  [should  use  the  word]  Bhaiiat  in 
the  end.*  (52) 

One  should  first  beg  alms  from  his  mother,  sister,  of 
mother's  sister,  and  should  approach  such  [a  woman] 
as  does  not  insult  him.  (53- 

It  is  said  that  one  may  receive  alms  from  all  of  his 
own  caste  or  from  all  castes  ;  but  he  should  shun  the 
outcastes.  (54) 

A  BrahniachariH  should  daily,  in  a  devout  spirit, 
collect  alms  from  those  who  are  given  to  the  study  of 
the  Vedas^  the  celebration  of  sacrifices,  and  be  intent 
upon  the  performance  of  his  own  works  (i.e ,  those  laid 
down  far  their  respective  castes  and  orders).  (55) 

One  should  not  beg  alms  from  the  family  of  hi?? 
preceptor,  from  his  kinsmen  and  from1  relatives-  made 
by  marriage.  In  the  absence  of  a  house  [from  which 
alms  may  be  collected],  every  preceding  party  should, 
in  order,  be  avoided. t  (56') 

Persons,  mentioned  before,  being  not  available,  one, 
controlling  his  ownself  and  speech  and  without  looking 

*  This  refers  to  the  various  forms  of  expressions  used  while  begging 
alms.  A  Brdhmana  should  say, — "'Bk'avati  bhikshdm  dehi  ;"  a  Kshatriyd 
should  say, — "Bkikskfan  bhavati  dehi ;"  and  a  Vais'ya, — "Bhikskatn 
dehi  bhavati." 

|-  The  meaning  is,  that  if  there  is  not  any  other  family  available,  one 
could  receive  alms  from  relations  by  marriage  ;  in  their  absence,  from 
his  own  kinsmen  j  and  in  their  absence,  from  the  preceptor's  family. 


196  Us'attd  Samkitd. 

towards  any  direction,  should  approach  every  one  of  the 
village.  (57) 

Having  collected  food  by  begging,  he  should,  every 
day  with  [the  preceptor's]  permission,  devoutly,  atten- 
tively and  abstaining  from  speech,  take  a  portion  capable 
of  keeping  him  alive.  (58) 

A  Brahmacharin  should  daily  support  himself  with 
food  acquired  by  begging  and  suppress  his  passions. 
It  is  said  in  the  Sm?iti  that  a  Brahtttackdrin's  sup- 
porting himself  with  alms  is  tantamount  to  fasting.  (59) 

He  should  daily  adore  his  food  and  take  it  without 
speaking  ill  of  it ;  on  seeing  it,  he  should  be  delighted 
and  happy,  and  should  welcome  it  with  laudation.  (60) 

Taking    too    much   or    bad    food   is    destructive    of 

O 

health,  longevity,  attainment  of  the  celestial  region  and 
virtue,  and  is  condemned  by  the  community.  Therefore, 
it  should  be  avoided.  (61) 

With  his  face  directed  towards  the  east  or  the  south, 
he  should  daily  take  his  meals,  according  to  the  eternal 
regulation.  But  he  should  never  eat  facing  the 
north.  (62) 

Having  washed  his  hands  and  feet  and  been  seated 
in  a  purified  place,  he  should  rinse  his  mouth  twice 
after  it.  (63) 

Having  drawn  a  circular  figure  first,  he  should  place 
the  vessel  on  it,  and  eat  till  the  recitation  of  the  formulae 
amritopidhan,  etc.,  at  the  end  of  his  meal.  He  should 
abstain  from  speech  [all  the  while].  (64) 


'CHAPTER  II. 

[RUCKS    FOR   RINSING    THE    MOUTH    AND    KBKPING    THE    BODY    PURE.] 

AFTER  eating,  drinking,  bathing,  walking,  touching  that 
part  of  a  lip  where  there  is  no  hair,  changing  clothes, 
passing  semen,  urine  and  excreta,  conversing  with 
degraded  castes,  at  the  commencement  of  study,  after 
coughing  or  heavy  sighing,  after  going  to  a  cremation 
ground  or  to. a  crossing  of  many  roads,  and  at  the  two 
Sandhyas  or  adorations,  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born 
ones  should  rinse  his  mouth  again,  (i — 3; 

After  conversing  with  a  Chanddla  or  a  Mlechchha, 
after  talking  with  abandoned  women  or  with  S'tidrds, 
after  touching  an  abandoned  man  or  leavings  of  food, 
after  shedding  tears,  after  speaking  an  untruth,  after 
taking  meals  at  the  two  Sandkyds,  after  bathing,  drink- 
ing or  touching  urine  and  excreta,  one  should  rinse  his 
'mouth  again,  even  if  he  has  rinsed  it  once.  Elsewhere 
[he  should]  rinse  [it]  once  only.  [Water  for  rinsing  the 
mouth  not  being  available,  one,  being  self-restrained, 
can  attain  purification]  by  touching  fire,  kine  or  the 
right  ear.  (4 — 6) 

By  touching  men,  stones,  or  tying  again  Nivi*  one 
should  touch  pure  water,  grass  or  earth.  By  touch- 
ing one's  own  hair  or  washing  water,  one  should, 
seated  at  ease  with  his  face  directed  towards  the  east  or 
'the  north,  [rinse  his  mouth]  with  pure  water,  which  is 
neither  hot,  nor  frothy  nor  sullied.  (7 — 8) 


*  A  cloth    worn    round  a  woman's    waist,  or  more   properly  the  ends 
of  the  cloth  tied  into  a  knot  in  front. 
26 


198  Us  ana  Samhifa. 

By  keeping  the  head  or  the  ear  covered,  having  the 
Kdchha*  or  the  Syikh&\  untied,  or  by  not  washing  the 
feet,  one  remains  impure,  even  if  he  has  rinsed  his 
mouth.  (9) 

A  learned  man  should  never  rinse  his  mouth  with 
his  shoes  or  with  his  headgear  on,  or  while  stationed  in 
water.  [Nor  should  he  do  it]  with  rain  water,  or  with 
water  mixed  with  clarified  butter  or  while  standing.  (10) 
[He  should  not  rinse  his  mouth]  with  water  placed 
in  one  palm,  [and  should  rinse  it]  again  [with  water 
brought  by  all  castes],  excepting  a  S^tidra.  [He  should 
not  rinse  it  while]  seated,  with  his  sandals  on,  or  keeping 
his  hand  outside  the  knee,  (n) 

He  should  not  talk,  laugh,  cast  his  looks  here  and 
there,  nor  bend  his  body  [while  rinsing  his  mouth.] 
[He  should  not  rinse  his  mouth]  without  seeing  water 
or  with  water  that  is  hot  or  frothy.  (12) 

[Nor  should  he  do  it]  with  water  served  by  the  hands 
of  a  S'udra  or  of  a  dirty  person,  or  with  alkaline  water, 
[or  with  water]  taken  up  by  the  -fingers.  He  should 
not  make  any  sound  and  must  be  self-centered  [at  the 
time  of  his  rinsing].  (13) 

[Nor  should  he  do  it]  with  discoloured  and  distasteful 
water,  or  with  the  water  passing  through  a  crevice  or 
[through  the  pores]  of  animals  (such  as  drops  of 
perspiration),  and  at  a  time  beyond  the  appointed 
hour.  (14) 

A  Brahmana  is  purified  by  water  going  to  his  heart, 
a  Kshatriya  by  a  drop  [going  to  his  throat],  a  Vais'ya 
by  that  entering  into  his  mouth,  while  a  S'udra  and 
a  woman  by  merely  touching  [the  water  with  lips].  (15) 

*  The  hem  of  the  lower  garment  tucked  into  the  waistband, 
f  A  lock  of  hair  on  the  crown  of  the  head. 


Us  ana  Samhita.  199 

Rrahmatt  is  said  [to  reside]  in  the  lin?  at  the 
root  of  the  thumb.  The  space  between  the  thumb  and 
the  forefinger,  is  the  most  excellent  Tirtham  (holy  plac  :) 
for  the  departed  manes.  (16) 

The  base  of  the  smallest  finger  is  called  [the  holy 
place]  for  Prajapati  or  the  Kaya-Tirtham.  The  tops 
of  all  the  fingers  are  described  as  [forming  the  holy 
place]  for  the  Deities  ;  and  the  roots,  for  the  RtsJiis. 
[These  are]  Daiva-,  and  A'rsha-,  Tirthams.  The  middle 
part  is  described  as  that  of  Agni.  It  is  also  [called] 
Soumika  (i.e.,  belonging  to  Soma  or  the  Moon].  Know- 
ing all  these  holy  places,  one  is  not  possessed  by  stupe- 
faction. (17—18) 

A  Brdhmana  should  daily  rinse  his  mouth  with  the 
Brahma-,  or  with  the  Kdya-,  or  with  the  Daiva-,  Tirtham, 
but  not  with  the  Pitri-[Tirtham~\,  O  ye  twice-born 
ones.*  (19) 

It  is  laid  down  in  the  Smriti  that  a  Brdhmana,  being 
self-restrained,  should  first  drink  water  thrice.  Closing 
the  lips  of  the  mouth,  he  should  touch  it  with  the  root 
of  the  thumb.  (20) 

Then  with  the  thumb  and  the  nameless  finger,  he 
should  touch  the  two  eyes.  Then  with  the  thumb  and 
forefinger,  he  should  touch  the  tip  of  the  nose.  (21) 

With  the  smallest  finger  and  the  thumb,  he  should 
touch  the  two  ears.  With  them  all  (i.e.,  all  the  fingers) 
or  with  the  palm,  he  should  touch  the  breast.  (22) 

Similarly  he  should  touch  the  head  with  the  thumb, 
[once]  or  twice.  He  should  sip  water  thrice,  the  Deities 
are  gratified  by  this  [method].  (23) 

*  These  are  described  as  holy  places,  and  a  Brdhmana  should  drink 
water  at  the  time  of  the  dchamanam  or  rinsing,  with  these  parts  of 
the  fingers. 


2oo  Us  ana 


We  have  heard  that  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Mahes'wara? 
become  pleased  [with  him  who  performs  achamanam}. 
The  Ganges  and  the  Yamuna  are  pleased  with  sprinkling 
[the  lips  of  water].  (24) 

The  Sun  and  the  Moon  are  pleased  with  touching  the 
two  eyes;  and  the  A'swins  are  gratified  with  touching 
the  tip  of  the  nose.  (25) 

When  the  two  ears  are  touched  similarly,  the  Wind' 
and  the  Fire  become  pleased  ;  and  all  the  Deities  become 
gratified  when  the  breast  is  touched.  (26) 

The  Purusha  (atman)  becomes  pleased  when  the 
head  is  touched.  The  drops  that  fall  from  the  mouth  om 
the  limbs,  do  not  make  leavings  [of  a  drink].  (27) 

When    [any   particle    of  food,]  fixed  to  a  tooth,  drops 

down    at   the   touch   of  the  tongue,  the  person  remains 

impure  [so   long   he    does    not   rinse   his  mouth].     The 

drops   of    water,    which    fall   at   the   feet   [of  a  person 

offering  water]    to    another  for  performing  achamanam 

(rinsing),  are    known    as    equal  to    [water]    placed    on  a 

[pure]  spot.     By   them,    one    does   not   beconre  sullied. 

There  is  no  impurity  in  Madhuparka*  Soma^   in  chew- 

ing  betel-leaves^    fruits,    roots   and   the  sugarcane    rod. 

Us'ana  has  said  so.     If  while   moving  about  in  a  place 

of  eating  and  drinking,  a  Brdhmana  touches   any   leav- 

ings,  he  should  keep  on  the  ground  [all  the  articles  in 

his  hands],   rinse   his   mouth  and  sprinkle  those  articles 

with   water.      If    while   carrying   metallic    vessels    [for 

adoration],    he   touches  any  leavings,  he  should  rinse  his 

mouth   without   placing  those  articles  on  earth  and  shall 

thereby   attain    purification.     Similarly   one    should    do, 

on  touching  [any  leavings,  while  carrying  clothes]  :  there 

*  A  respectful  offering  of  five  ingredients,  such  as  honey,  etc. 
f  The  juice  of  the  Moon-Piant. 


Us'and  Savihita, 

feeing    no    difference     between     clothes     [and    metallic 
vessels].  (28 — 32) 

In  the  night,  when  there  is  fear  of  thieves  and  tigers 
on  the  way,  if  one  passes  urine  and  excreta  without 
washing  himself  with  water,  [he  does  not  become  impure] 
nor  the  article  in  his  hand  becomes  sullied.  (33) 

Placing  his  sacrificial  thread  on  his  right  ear  and. 
facing  the  north,  one  should  pass  urine  and  excreta.  Irh 
the  night,  he  should  face  the  south.  (34) 

Covering  the  ground  with  [pieces  of]  wood,  leaves,, 
clods  of  earth,  or  grass  and  bending  his  head  -low,  one 
should  pass  urine  and  excreta  there.  (35) 

One  should  not  pass  urine  or  excreta  Under  a  shade, 
in,  a  well,  in,  a  river,  in  a  cowpen,  on  a  road,  on* 
a  sacrificial  ground,  in  water,  fire,  ashes  or  on  the 
cremation  ground.  (36) 

[One  should  not  pass  urine  or  excreta]  on  .cowdung,. 
on  a  foundation,  in  a  cowshed,  on  a  place  covered  with 
green  grass;  nor  while  standing,  nor  being  naked,  nor 
on  the  summit  of  a  mountain.  (37) 

[Nor  one  should]  do  so  in  a  dilapidated  temple,  or 
on  an  anthill,  or  in  holes  containing  living  animals,  or 
while  walking.  (38) 

[One  should  not  do  so]  on  husk,  charcoal  and  skull, 
as  well  as  on  a  public  road,  on  a  field  of  cultivation, 
in  a  hole,  in  water  and  at  the  crossing  of  four  roads.  (39) 

^  [One  should  never  ease  oneself]  near  a  garden,  on 
a  barren  land,  on  another's  excreta,  with  the  shoes 
on,  with  an  umbrella  overhead,  or  having  the  atmospheric 
region  in  view.  (40) 

[One  should  not  do  so]  before  women,  elderly  persons, 
Brdhmands  and  kine,  or  before  [the  image  of  a]  Deity, 
a  temple  and  a  water.  (41) 


2O2  Us? ana   Samhit,i 

[One  should  not  do  soj  casting  his  looks  on  a  river 
or  on  luminous  bodies,  or  facing  them,  or  in  an  open  space 
or  looking  towards  the  Sun,  Fire  or  the  Moon.  (42) 

Having  brought  [a  clod  of]  earth,  with  it  and  pure 
water  [already]  brought,  one  should  zealously  wash 
oneself  for  purification  till  the  bad  smell  is  entirely 
removed.  (43) 

One  should  not  bring  earth  filled  profusely  with  the 
dust  of  a  Br&hmands  [feet],  nor  from  clay,  nor  from  a 
road,  nor  from  a  barren  ground,  nor  from  what  has  been 
left  by  another  person  after  purifying  oneself.  (44) 

What  one  drinks,  by  inspiring  it  with  Mantrams. 
and  reciting  all  the  letters  of  the  Pranava,  Gayatri,  and 
the  Vyarhriti,  is  called  Mantrachamanam*  (46) 

Thus  by  Gayatryachamanft  S' rutyackamanam\  is 
described.  (47) 


CHAPTER  MI. 

[LIFE  AND  CONDUCT  OF  A  BRAHMACHA'RIN,  O-R  A  RELIGIOUS  STUDENT.] 
HAVING  thus  purified  his  own  body  and  restrained  [the 
operation  of]  the  body  and  others  (speech,  senses,  etc.,) 
and  casting  his  looks  at  the  preceptor's  face,  [a 
religious  student]  should  attentively  prosecute  his 
studies,  (i) 

Always  keeping  [the  right  hand]  uplifted,  performing 
the   Sandhyd-3.dorations   and  observing   good   conduct, 

*  Rinsing  the  mouth  with  water  accompanied  with  the  recitation 
of  the  Mystic  Syllables. 

\  The  same  as  above.     Gayatri  is  the  most  sacred  Vedic  Mantram. 

\  A'chamanam  accompanied  with  the  recitation  of  the  Vedic 
Mantram. 


Us  una  Saiiihtld.  203 

[and]  when  ordered  by  his  preceptor  with  the  saying, — 
'Sit,'  should  he  sit  before  him.  (2) 

While  accepting  the  order  [of  his  preceptor]  or 
conversing  with  him,  he  should  not  lie  down  on  his  bed, 
be  seated,  eat  and  stand  with  his  face  against  him 
(i.e.,  the.  preceptor).  (3) 

Near  the  preceptor,  [a  disciple's]  bed  and  seat  should 
always  be  lower  [than  the  preceptor's] .  He  should 
not  take  his  seat  of  his  own  accord  at  a  place  which  is 
within  the  range  of  his  preceptor's  vision.  (4) 

He  should  not,  even  in  his  absence,  take  merely 
the  name  of  his  preceptor.*  Nor  should  he  imitate 
his  (preceptor's)  movements  and  speech.  (5) 

Where  any  accusation  of  the  preceptor,  real  or  false, 
takes  place,  [the  disciple]  should  close  his  ears  [with 
the  fingers] ;  or  he  should  leave  that  place  and  go 
elsewhere.  (6) 

He  should  not  adore  him  (preceptor)  living  at  a 
distance,  nor  being  irate,  nor  near  women.  He  should 
not  cut  words  with  him  ;  nor  should  he  remain  seated 
in  his  presence.  (7) 

He  sh6uld  daily  bring  pitchers  full  of  water,  Kus'a, 
flowers,  and  sacrificial  fuels,  and  should  daily  wash  his 
limbs  and  paste  them  with  earth.  (8) 

He  should  never  go  over  the  flowers  used  by  him,  of 
his  (preceptor's)  bed,  sandals,  shoes,  seat  and  shadow.  (9) 

Having  received  wood  for  rubbing  the  tooth,  he 
should  not  dedicate  it  to  him.  He  should  never  go 
[anywhere]  without  obtaining  leave  from  him ;  nor 
should  he  be  engaged  in  a  work  calculated  to  incur 
his  displeasure  or  do  him  any  harm.  (10) 

*  While  taking  the  name  of  his    preceptor,  a  disciple   should  always 
use  such  epithets  as  dchdryat  up&dhydya^  etc. 


Us  ana  Samhita. 


Near     him,    he    should    never     place    his  feet, 
avoid  yawning,  laughing,  sneezing  and  using    an    upper 
garment,   (n) 

He  should  always  avoid  cracking  fingers  in  his  pre- 
sence. He  should  study  at  the  appointed  hour  till  the 
preceptor  does  not  draw  his  mind  [from  teaching].  (12) 

He  should  never  sit  on  [his  preceptor's]  seat,  bed 
and  conveyance.  He  should  run  after  him  when  going 
'quickly,  and  follow  him  when  going  [slowly].  (13) 

He  is  allowed  to  sit  with  his  preceptor  on  aft 
'elephant,  on  a  camel,  on  a  conveyance  [drawn  by 
bullocks],  in  a  royal  palace,  on  a  rock,  on  a  chariot, 
on  a  seat  rnade  of  stone,  or  on  one  made  of  a  big  piece 
•of  wood.  (14) 

He  should  always  have  control  over  his  senses  and 
mind,  be  shorn  of  anger  and  pure,  and  should  always 
give  utterance  to  sweet  and  beneficial  words.  (15) 

He  should  studiously  avoid  scented  garlands,  [sweet] 
'juice,  maidens,  the  destruction  of  small  animals,  smear- 
ing the  body  with  oil,  collyrium,  shoes,  the  holding  of 
umbrella,  lustful  desires,  anger,  fear,  sleep  '{i.e.,  too  much 
sleeping),  singing  [bad  songs],  playing  on  musical  in- 
struments, dancing,  gambling,  detracting  other  people, 
looking  at  and  conversing  with  women,  injuring  other 
people  and  wickedness.  With  a  delighted  mind  he 
should  bring  pitchers  full  of  water,  flowers,  cowdung,  L 
earth  and  Kus>a  as  much  as  is  necessary  for  his  own 
use.  He  should  daily  collect  food  [which  a  Brahma- 
charin  may  take],  except  salt  and  what  is  stale.  (16  —  19) 

He  should  always  be  impartial,  have  no  attachment 
for  singing,  etc.,  should  not  see  his  face  in  a  mirror, 
-should  not  rub  his  teeth,  should  not  converse  with 


ana   Samhitfc  £05 

Notorious  impure  persons,  women  and  Syudrds}  and 
'should  not  take  the  residue  of  his  preceptor's  food  wil- 
lingly for  n^edicinal  purposes.  (.20 — 21) 

He  should  never  take  such  a  bath  as  would  remove 
the  filth  of  his  body,*  and  should  not,  without  being 
permitted  by  his  preceptor,  salute  his  own  elders.  (22) 

He  should  similarly  behave  towards  those  of  his 
elders  who  confer  learning,  and  towards  those  who  are 
born  o|  the  same  stock,  who  suppress  irreligion  and 
'deliver  wholesome  instructions.  (23) 

Towards  persons  most  prominent  [in  education  and 
piety],  preceptor's  wives,  sons  and  kinsmen,— ^-he  should 
daily  so  behave  himself  as  he  does  towards  his  pre- 
teptor.  (24) 

Whether  a  disciple  be  younger  in*  years  or  of  the  same 
age  [with  him],  the  son  of  the  preceptor  teaching  him, 
deserves  respect,  like  unto  the  preceptor  himself)  in  all 
sacrificial  rites.  (25) 

He  should  not  besmear  the  body  of  the  preceptor's 
son  with  turmeric,  make  him  bathe,  take  the  leavings 
of  his  food  and  wash  his  feet.  (26) 

All  the  wives  of  the  preceptor  should  be  adored  like 
the  preceptor  himself.  All  his  other  caste-wives  should 
be  reverenced  with  salutation  and  rising  up.  (2j) 

Rubbing  oil  [on  the  person],  bathing,  cleansing  with 
perfumes  the  body,  and  decorating  the  hairs,  of  the 
preceptor's  wife  should  never  be  done.  (28) 

The  youthful  wife  of  the  preceptor  should  never  be 
saluted  by  the  feet.  [The  disciple]  should  salute  her 

*  The  Author  here  means  that  a  religious  student  should  not  be  over- 
2fcalous  in  bathing  so  as  to  beautify  his  person.  Students  should  not 
spend  too  much  of  their  time  in  bathing  in  order  to  look  handsome.  They 
shouldj-.ave  no  eye  on  personal  charms. 

27 


2o6  Us* and  S ambit  d* 

[placing   his   head   on   the  ground]  and  saying, — "  \ 
such  and  such  a  person."  (29) 

Remembering  always  [the  tenets  of]  religion,  a 
(religious  student)  should  touch  the  feet  and  salute  the 
wives,  of  the  preceptor.  (30) 

The  mother's  sister,  maternal  uncle's  wife,  motheiv 
in-law,  father's  sister,  and  the  wives  of  all  the  elders, 
should  be  adored  like  unto  the  preceptor's  wife.  (31) 

The  wife  of  an  elder  brother,  those  of  kinsman  and 
relatives,  mother's  sisters  and  father's  sisters,  and  elder 
sisters,  should  be  saluted  by  touching  the  feet.  (32) 

One  should  treat  them  all  like  his  mother,  but  the 
latter  is  superior  to' them  all.  The  preceptor  should  duly 
instruct  the  disciple, — living  for  a  year  [in  his  house], 
behaving  '.himself  in  the  [aforesaid]  manner,  [who  is} 
intelligent  and  always-doing  good  unto  all, — in  the  Vedas^ 
Dharma-S'dstras,  and  the  Puran&s,  and  [impart  him] 
the  knowledge  of  the  TattwUs  (principles).  (3.3^ — 34) 

The  preceptor  removes  the  sins  of  his  disciple 
within  a  year.  An  A'ckdryd's  son,  one  who  wishes  to 
hear  attentively,  one  who  has  given  knowledge  [in  any 
other  subject],  a  virtuous  person,  a  person  pure  [in- 
body  and  mind],  a  relative,  one  who  is  capable  of  under- 
standing the  scriptures,  one  who  gives  away  moneyy 
a  good  man  and  a  kinsman, — these  ten  should  be  taught 
according  to  the  rules  of  religious  teaching.  A  Kskatriya, 
[who  is]  grateful,  shorn  of  malice,  intelligent  and 
always  doing  good ;  a  Vais'yay  endued  with  similar  ac-- 
eomplishments ;  a  grateful  Brdhmana,  a  non-injuring 
Brdhmanar  an  intelligent  Brd/imanasn\d  a  Brd/imana,- 
doing  good  unto  all, — these  six  should  [also]  be  taught 
by  the  leading  twice-born  ones.  Even  though  it  be 
quite  contrary  to  the  established  rules  [of  religious' 


Us' ana  Safahita.  207 


instruction],  when  a  Vipra,  invested  with  the  sacred 
thread  by  another,  comes,  [he  should  be  taught.] 
Instruction  in  the  V&das  should  be  given  to  these  only, 
and  not  to  any  one  else;  so  it  is  said.  (35 — 37) 

Having  rinsed  his  mouth,  controlled  his  mind,  and 
with  his  face  directed  towards  the  north,  [a  student] 
should  daily  study.  He  should  look  towards  the  face 
of  his  preceptor  and  touch  his  feet  [before  commencing 
the  study].  (38) 

[When  the  preceptor]  would  Wf^Adhishyabho  (Oh, 
study),  [the  student  should  begin  his  study ;  and  when  he 
would  say, — ]  Viramostu,  (stop),  [he  should  close  it.] 
Seated  on  a  AW0-seat  with  their  tops  facing  the  east, 
being  purified  by  holding  the  Kus'd-reed  [in  his  hand] 
and  first  performing  the  Prdndydma  thrice,  he  should 
recite  Om.  At  the  close  of  the  study,  a  twice-born  Bra- 
hmana  should  also  duly  recite  the  Pranava.  (39 — 40) 

Seated  with  folded  palms,  he  should  daily  study 
[the  Vedas\.  The  Veda  is  the  eternal  eye  of  all 
persons.  (41) 

He  should  duly  study  [the  Vedas\  every  day,  or 
else  he  will  fall  off  from  the  dignity  of  a  Brdhmana. 
He,  who  daily  reads  the  Rick,  propitiates  the  Deities 
with  the  oblations  of  thickened  milk.  (42) 

The  Deities,  also,  gratified,  please  him  by  granting 
him  all  desired-for  articles.  He,  who  always  studies 
the  Yajush)  propitiates  the  Deities  with  curd.  (43) 

He,  who  daily  studies  the  Saman,  propitiates  the 
Deities  with  the  oblations  of  clarified  butter.  The  Deities 
are  also  propitiated  by  the  daily  study  of  Ahgirasa's 
Atharvan,  (44) 

The  Deities  are  also  gratified  by  the  study  of  the 
Dhartna-S'dstras,  .Angas  (auxiliary  subjects  of  the 


208  Us  ana  Safahita. 

» 

Vedas,  such  as,  Grammar,  Astronomy,  etc.),  Pur  anas  arrrl 
Mimdmsd.  [If  unable  to  read  any  of  these,]  he  should, 
daily,  with  a  concentrated  mind  and  following  the  pres- 
cribed rules,  study  the  Gdyatri,  either  near  water  or 
going  into  a  forest.  A  thousand  times  form  the  highest 
recitation  of  the  divine  \Gayatri\  ;  a  hundred  times,, 
the  middling  ;  and  ten  times,  the  lowest.  He  should 
daily  recite  the  Gayatri.  It  is  laid  down  that  recitation 
must  be  made  thrice  [in  a  day.]  The  Lord  [Brahma}, 
weighing,  in  a  balance,  the  Gayatri  and  the  Vedas  ^ 
[placed]  the  four  Vedas  on  one  [scale],  and  the  Gayatri 
on  the  other.  First  reciting  Om,  he  should  then 
[recite]  the  Vydhriti  (Bhur,  Bkuvah,  Swak).  He  should 
then  attentively  study  the  Gdyatri.  [One]  becomes 
possessed  of  great  prosperity  [by  the  study  of  the 
Gdyatri].  [The  preceptor]  with  his  understanding 
(i.e.,  mind)  fixed  on  the  Gdyatri,  should  teach  [his 
disciples].  (45— 49) 

In  the  former  Kalpa,  were  produced  the  three  Mahd*. 
Vydhritis,  named  Bhur,  Bhuvah  and  Swah,  destructive 
of  all  inauspiciousness.  (50) 

The  three  Vydhritis  [represent]  Pradhdna  (Prakriti 
or  Nature),  Puruska  (the  soul),  and  Kdla  (time),  or 
Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Mahes'wara,  or  Sattwa,  Rajas  and 
Tamas,  or  Present,  Future  and  Past.  (51) 

Om  is  Para-Brahman  and  the  Gdyatri  is  eternal. 
This  Mantram  (namely  the  Gdyatri}  has  been  des- 
cribed as  the  means  of  witnessing  the  Maha~Yoga> 
(great  union).  (52) 

The  Brahmachdrin,  who,  understanding  its  meaning 
daily  reads  the  Gdyatri,  the  mother  of  the  Vedas,  comes 
by  the  most  excellent  condition.  (53) 

Of  all    (Mantrams)    to    be  recited,    there    is9  none 


Us  ana  Sffmhita.  209 

superior  to  the  Gdyatri.  It  has  been  described,  in  the 
Smriti-S'dstra*  as  the  [means  of  the  acquisition  of  the] 
knowledge  of  the  Real.  O  ye,  leading  twice-born  ones, 
the  commencement  [of  Vedic  study]  must  take  place 
on  the  Full- Moon  day  either  of  the  months  of  A'shdda, 
S'rdvana,  or  Bhddra.  Going  away  from  a  village  or  a 
city,  a  Brakmackarin,  being  self-controtled,  should 
study  [the  Vedas]  for  four-months-and-a-haflf  in  a  holy 
place.  Under  the  constellation  of  Pushya,  the  twice-born 
ones  should  perform  the  dedicatory  rite  of  the  Vedas* 

(54-56) 

[Or,  he  should  do  it]  in  the  first  part  of  the  first  day 
of  the  month  of  Mdgha.  After  this,  the  twice-born 
ones  should  study  the  Veda?  in  the  light  fortnight.  (57) 

In  the  dark  fortnight,  a  person  should  study  the 
Vedangas  and  the  Pur  anas.  Both  the  teacher  and  the 
pupil  should  carefully  avoid  the  [following]  periods,, 
when  no  Vedic  studies  should  be  prosecuted  : — viz.,  the 
night  when  a  roaring  wind  blows,  the  day  when  a  dusty 
wind  blows,  when  a  down-pour  of  rain  takes  place 
accompanied  with  the  flashing  of  lightning  and  roaring 
of  clouds,  and  when  huge  fire-brands  drop  down.  Prajd- 
fati  has  laid  down  these  periods  as  being  unworthy 
of  Vedic  (studies).  (58— -60) 

When  one  shall  see  all  these  (thunder,  lightning,  etc.) 
rise  in  the  morning  and  evening  when  the  Sacred  Fire  is 
lighted  up,  he  should  not  study  the  Vedas ;  and  in  other 
seasons,  except  the  rainy,  on  seeing  a  cloud.*  (61) 

Appearance  of  a  portendous  sound  in  the  sky,  earth- 


*  This  means  that  in  the  rainy  season  when  thunder  and  lightning 
appear  in  the  morning  and  evening  when  the  Sacred  Fire  is  lighted,  na 
study  should  be  prosecuted.  It  may  be  done  at  any  other  time  ia  the 
rainy  season,  even  if  these  inauspicious  signs  appear. 


2io  Us  ana  Samhita. 

quake  and  the  fall  of  luminous  bodies,  form,  also  the 
periods  when  religious  study  should  not  be  prosecuted 
even  in  the  rainy  season.  (62) 

In  any  other  season,  except  the  rainy,  if  the  roaring  of 
thunder  and  cloud  appear  in  the  ^morning  and  evening 
when  the  Sacred  Fire  is  lighted  up,  the  study  should  be 
stopped  at  once.  So  the  Muni  has  said.  (63) 

Those,  who  wish  for  cleverness  in  actions,  should 
never  prosecute  [religious]  studies  in  villages  or  cities. 
And  every  day  [the  study  must  be  stopped]  when  any 
bad  smell  [comes  in].  (64) 

No  study  [is  allowed]  in  a  village  inhabited  by  low- 
caste  people,*  near  an  irreligious  person,  when  cries 
are  heard  and  where  there  is  a  multitude  of  men.  (65) 

In  water,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  when  one  passes 
urine  and  excreta,  while  touching  the  leavings  of  food 
and  after  eating  articles  offered  at  a  S'raddha^  a  twice- 
born  one  should  not  even  think  [of  the  Vedas\  with  the 
mind.  (66) 

Having  accepted  an  invitation  for  the  Ekoddhista- 
S'raddha^  on  the  birth  of  the  king's  son  and  on  solar 
and  lunar  eclipses,  a  learned  Brahmana  should  not 
study  the  Vedas  for  three  days.  (67) 

As  long  as  the  scent  and  paste,  dedicated  at  the 
Ekoddhista  (S'rdddha)  exist  on  the  person  of  a  learned 
Brahmana,  he  should  not  study  the  Vedas.  (68) 

Lying  down,  seated  by  placing  the  soles  of  the  feet 
on  the  seat,  sitting  with  a  cloth  girt  round  the  legs  and 

*  Another  reading  is  antargate  s'ave,  i.e.,  where  there  is  a  dead 
body. 

f  The  meaning  is  that  after  taking  food  oflered  at  a  S'rdddka  one 
should  not  even  think  of  the  Vedas  for  full  twenty-four  hours  from  that 
timr. 

£  A  funeral  rite  performed  for  a  definite  individual  deceased. 


Us* ana  Satiihitd  21  i 

knees,  taking  fish  or  meat,  or  food  rendered  impure  by 
birth   or   death,    a  twice-born  one  should  not  study  [the 

Vtdas\  (69) 

On  a  day  coveted  with  mist,  on  hearing  the  sound 
of  an  arrow,  at  the  two  Sandhyas,  on  the  last  day  of 
the  dark  fortnight,  on  the  fourteenth-,  and  the  eighth-, 
day  of  the  two  fortnights,  and  on  the  Full-Moon  day, 

[a  twice-born  one  should  not  study  the  Vedas\  (70) 

Before  the  commencement  of  Vedic  study  and  aftef 
the  performance  of  the  dedicatory  rite,  [the  study] 
must  be  put  a  stop  to,  as  laid  down  in  the  Smritij  for* 
three  nights.  One  should  not  prosecute  Vedic  studies 
on  Ashtdkas,  at  the  termination  of  the  seasons  and  in 
the  nights.  (71) 

The  three  eight  days  in  the  dark  fortnight,  in  the 
months,  of  Agrahayana^  Pouska  and  Mdgha,  have  been 
designated  by  the  sages  as  Asktakas.  (72) 

A  twice-born  one  should  never  study  under  the  shade 
of  S'lesmatakdi  S'dlmali,  Madhuka,  Kcrvidara,  and 
Kapithitia  trees.  (73) 

On  the  demise  of  a  person  studying  the  same  branch, 
Or  that  of  a  fellow-religious-student,  or  that  of  the 
preceptor,  [abstention  from  study]  for  three  nights  is* 
prescribed  in  the  Sniriti.  (74) 

On  all  these  faulty  occasions,  abstention  from  study 
is  laid  down  for  the  Brdhmands.  The  Rdkskasds  do- 
mischief  unto  them  who  study  [on  these  interdicted 
occasions] ;  therefore  one  should  avoid  them  (zV.,  these 
occasions).  (75) 

There  is  no  stoppage  of  study  in  the  daily  rites  of  the 
•SVzw^Ayfl-adorations,  in  the  preliminary  and  dedicatory 
rites  of  Vedic  study  and  in  the  Homa-Mantrams.  (76) 


Us' and  SamhiH 

On  art  Ashtaka-fay,  when  a  high  wind  blows  Of 
in  [any  other]  calamity,  a  twice-born  one  should  study- 
one  RzVA-,  or  one  Yajus-,  or  one  Sdnia-,  Mantram.  (77) 

There  is  no  prohibition  in  the  study  of  the  Veddngas^ 
or  of  the  Itihasas  (History)  and  the  Pur  anas ;  or 
of  the  Dharnia-S'astras  and  other  [works]  ;  but  a 
twice-born  one  should  abstain  from  studying  all  these 

on  flarva-d&ys.  (78) 

• 
I    have   thus    described^    in    brief;   the   duties  of  the 

Religious    Students.     Formerly   Brahma  described  them 
before  the  Rishis  gifted  with  the  knowledge  of  self.  (79) 

A  twice-born  person,  who  without  studying  the  S'rtiti 
devotes  his  care  elsewhere,  (i.e.,  to  any  other  subject)  isj 
indeed,  a  foolish  wight  opposed  to  the  study  of  the  Veda^ 
He  should  not  be  accosted  by  the  twice-born.  (80) 

The  foremost  of  the  twice-born  ones  should  hot  be 
satisfied  with  merely  reading  the  Vedas.  The  mere 
recitation  of  the  Vedds  becomes  useless  like  a  cow  in 
mire.  (81) 

He,  who  studying  duly  the  Veda  (Samhitd]  does 
not  discuss  (i.e.,  master)  the  V&ddnta,  becomes  like  a 
Sudra  with  his  entire  family.  And  he  is  not  entitled 
to  have  water  for  washing  his  feet.  (82) 

If  a  twice-born  person  wishes  to  lead  the  life  of  a 
perpetual  religious  student  at  the  house  of  his  pre- 
ceptor, he  should  serve  him  diligently  and  assiduously 
till  the  destruction  of  his  body.  (83) 

Or  (t.e.i  in  the  absence  of  his  preceptor),  going  to  a 
forest  he  should  duly  offer  oblations  to  Fire.  And 
being  self-restrainedj  he  should  ever  and  anon  study 
the  Spiritual  Science.  (84) 

Having  bathed  and  besmeared  his  body   with   ashes. 


Us1  and  S  a  Mi  id  213 

he  should,  always,  study  the  Vedas,  and  especially  the 
Sdvitri  and  Satarudra  (verses)  of  the  Vedas.  (85) 

O  ye  twice-born  ones,  having  studied  [either]  one, 
or  two,  or  three,  of  the  Vedas,  or  the  [entire]  four  Vedas 
and  understood  their  meaning  properly,  the  foremost  of 
the  twice-born  should  [celebrate  the  occasion  with  the 
terminating]  bath.  (86) 

He  should  zealously  perform,  every  day,  his  own 
duties  as  laid  down  in  the  Veda.  Not  doing'.them,  he 
immediately  falls  down  on  dreadful  hells.  (87) 

Being  self-controlled,  he  should  practise  [the  recita- 
tion of]  the  Vedas  and  never  give  up  the  [celebration  of] 
great  sacrifices.  He  should  do  all  domestic  works  and 
the  Sandkya-zdoTations.  (88) 

He  should,  daily,  study  the  Vedas  and  put  on  his 
sacred  thread.  He  should  speak  the  truth  and  control 
his  passion.  [Such  conduct]  leads  to  the  attainment  of 
emancipation.  (89) 

Bathing,  performing  the  Sand/zyd-zdorations  and  the 
Brahma-Yajna  every  day,  being  shorn  of  malice,  mild 
and  self-controlled,  a  householder  succeeds  in  getting 
over  worldliness.  (90) 

A  twice-born  man,  who  being  self-restrained,  reads 
religious  books,  discourses  [on  them],  becomes  glorified 
in  the  region  of  Brahma.  (91) 

Having  meditated  completely  on  dtman  and  there- 
after performed  the  morning  rites  before  making  offer- 
ing to  all  the  Deities  (made  by  presenting  oblations  to 
Fire  before  meals),  he  should  feed  the  Brahmanas  in  the 
mid-day.  (92) 

With  his  face  directed  towards  the  east  or  the  Sun, 
he  should  take  his  meals.  Seated  on  a  purified  seat,  he 
should  place  his  feet  on  the  ground,  (93) 

28 


214  Us'and  Saihhitd. 

To  take  meals  with  one's  face  directe  d  towards  the 
east,  produces  longevity ;  [to  do  so]  with  the  face  directe  d 
towards  the  south,  yields  fame ;  to  eat  with  the  face 
towards  the  west,  brings  on  prosperity  ;  and  to  eat  with 
the  face  towards  the  north,  yields  [the  fruits  of]  truth- 
fulness. (94) 

He  (i.e.,  one  leading  the  domestic  mode  of  life), 
should  himself  take  his  meals  afterwards  and  place 
the  residue  on  the  ground.  This,  Us'ana  says,  is  equal 
to  fasting.  (95) 

Again,  washing  his  hands  and  feet,  [and]  rinsing  his 
mouth  and  being  shorn  of  anger,  he  should  take  his 
meals  in  the  night  in  a  purified  place  after  having  it 
[properly]  cleansed.  (96) 

Reciting  the  Vyahriti  and  encircling  the  food  with 
water,  he  should  sprinkle  it  afterwards  with  the  Pari~ 
s'echana-Mantram.  (97) 

Then  offering  food  to  Chitra-Gupta,  sprinkling  it 
and  reciting  the  Mantram,  [running  as, — ]  Amritopi- 
staranamasi,  he  should  perform  the  rite  of  Apos'ana.*  (98) 

With  the  recitation  of  Swaha  and  Pranava,  he  should 
offer  oblation  to  the  [vital  air]  Prdna.  Then  offering 
oblation  to  the  Apdna,  he  should  offer  the  same  after- 
wards to  the  Vydna.  (99) 

Thereupon  he  should  offer  the  same  to  the  Uddna}  and 
the  fifth  [oblation]  to  the  Samdna.  Then  understanding 
their  true  import,  a  twice-born  one  should  offer  oblation 
to  his  own  self.  (100) 

Having  meditated,  in  his  mind,  on  the  Divine  Self- 
Existent  Prajapati,  he  should,  at  his  pleasure,  take  the 
last  portion  of  the  food  with  curry.  (101) 

*  A  kind  of  prayer  repeated  before  and  after  eating. 


Us' ana  Samhita*  215 

After  eating,  he  should  recite  [the  Mantram]  Amrito- 
pidhanamasi  and  drink  water.  Having  sipped  water,  he 
should,  again,  perform  the  achamanam.  Then  reciting 
the  Mantram, — Gouriti,  or  thrice  Gayatri,  consisting  of 
three  padas  and  destructive  of  all  sins,  he  should  touch 
his  breast  with  the  Mantram^  Prdndndm  Grant  hi- 
rasi.  (102 — 103) 

Then  taking  up  the  thumb  of  the  foot  with  the  thumb, 
lifting  his  hand  and  being  self-controlled,  he  should  pass 
off  water  from  his  hand.  (104) 

Having  offered  oblations,  he  should  inspire  his  own- 
self  with  Mantrams,  reciting  Swadhd.  Then  with  the 
Mantram, — Yo  yapet  Brahman^  he  should  sprinkle 
himself  with  water.  (105) 

It  is  laid  down  in  the  Smriti  that  of  all  the  yagas 
[sacrifices],  dtma-yaga  is  the  foremost.  In  the  afternoon 
of  every  A'mdvasyd  (the  last  day  of  the  dark  fortnight) 
S'rdddha  should  be  performed  by  the  twice-born.  (106) 

This  S'rdddha  is  called  Pindanvaharyakam.*  In 
the  afternoon  of  the  day,  when  the  waning  of  the  Moon 
takes  place,  the  twice-born  should  perform  it  with  sanc- 
tified fish  and  meat.  (107) 

In  the  dark  fortnight  there  are  [fifteen]  tithis  (days) 
such  as  Pratipad  (the  first  day).  Leaving  off  the  four- 
teenth day,  [one  should  perform  it]  on  Panchami  (fifth 
day),  one  after  another.t  (108) 

*  Pinda  means  the  Pitris  or  the  departed  Manes.  It  is  so  called 
because  it  affords  gratification  to  them  for  a  month. 

t  There  are  fifteen  days  in  the  fortnight.  If  these  days  are  divided 
by  five,  three  groups  are  formed.  The  three  Panchami-da.ys  are  accord- 
ingly the  fifth,  tenth,  and  the  last  or  the  A'marvasyd~,  day.  Of  them,  the 
second,  i.e.,  the  tenth,  day'is  superior  to  the  first  or  the  fifth,  day,  and  the 
last,  i.e.,  the  A'mdvasyd-,  day  is  superior  to  the  second,  or  the  tenth,  day. 
The  word  uttarottarg,»i  in  the  Text  signifies  this  superiority. 


216  Us* ana  Samhitd. 

Amongst  the  tithis  beginning  with  the  first  day 
after  the  Full-Moon-Day,  divided  into  three  groups,  the 
A'mdvasyd  (the  last  day  of  the  dark  fortnight),  and  the 
three  Asktakas  [are  the  best].  The  three  sacred 
AshtakaS)  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  dark  fortnight  in  every 
month,  and  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  dark  fortnight  in 
the  month  of  Magha  and  under  the  constellation  of 
Maghd,  are  particularly  [preferable].  During  the  solar 
and  lunar  eclipses,  on  all  these  days,  and  on  the;death* 
of  boys,  occasional  funeral  rites  should  be  performed. 
Otherwise,  a  person  becomes  a  dweller  of  hell.  Kamya- 
S}raddhas  are  praised  in  eclipses,  o-n  the  last  days  of 
the  summer  and  winter  solistices,  and  when  the  Sun- 
enters  on  its  equinoctial  passage.  [A  S'rdddha, — per- 
formed] when  any  conjunction  of  planets,  foreboding 
evil,  takes  place,  [yields]  unending  fruits.  A  S'rdddha, 
performed  on  the  last  day  of  all  the  months  and  on 
birth-days,  [yields]  eternal  [fruits].  (109 — 112) 

Under  any  planet  and  on  any  tit  hi  and  day,  one  may 
perform  a  Kdmya-S}raddha  for  a  particular  object.  O  ye 
leading  twice-born  ones,  by  performing  the  same  under 
the  influence  of  the  Pleiades,  one  acquires  the  celestial 
region.  (113) 

Proper  ingredients  and  worthy  Brdhmanas  being 
available,  [one  should  perform  the  [S'rdddha] :  there  is 
no  limitation  of  time  in  it.  One  should  perform  an 
Abhyudaya-S'rdddha  at  the  commencement  of  all  [fes- 
tive and  initiatory]  rites,  such  as  the  birth  of  a  son,  etc. 
A  S'raddha,  that'is  performed  on  aparva-day,  is  called 
Pdrvana*  What  is  performed  every  day,  is  called  Nitya  ; 

*  In  some  Texts  there  is  janana,  i.e.,  on  the  birth  of  children.  The 
Srdddha  is  to  be  performed,  because  no  child-death  takes  place  in  a 
family  unless  the  Manes  are  offended, 


Us  and  Samhita.  217 

[what  is  performed  with  a  particular  end  in  view,  is 
called]  Kdmya.  [What  is  performed  occasionally,  when 
Ashtaka  and  other  exceptional  days  appear,  is  called) 
Naimittika.  ( 1 1 4 — 1 1 5) 

He,— -who  disregarding  a  Brahmana,' 'well-read  in  the 
S'ruti,  living  at  hand,  gives  the  food  to  another, — that 
sinful  wight  consumes,  by  such  a  deed,  his  seven  genera- 
tions. (116) 

If  a  Vipra  [living  at  a  distance]  excels  [the  one 
living  near]  in  character,  learning,  etc.,  [the  performer 
of  the  S'rdddha]  should,  himself,  offer,  with  care,  [the 
food]  unto  him,  renouncing  the  one  living  near.  (117) 

An  illiterate  Bra/imana,  accepting  funeral  cakes,, 
gold,  kine,  horses,  lands  and  sesame  seeds,  gets  con- 
sumed'like  a  wood.  (118) 

The  anniversary  day  of  the  death  of  the  lady,, 
devoted  to  her  husband,  who  ascends  the  same  funeral 
pyre  with  him,  arriving,  two  separate  funeral  balls 
(pindas)  should  be  made.  (119) 

[For  a  deceased  person,]  oblations  of  water  should  be 
religiously  offered];  and  S'rfrddha  and  Pdrvana, — called 
Nagna  (i.e.,  in  which  persons,  qualified  to  offer  pmda, 
should  shave  their  heads) — should  be  performed.  The  rite 
of  depositing  bones  [should  be  performed]  within  the  first 
three  days  after  death  ;  and  on  the  tenth  day,  the  pinda 
for  securing  final  beatitude  [should  be  offered].  (120) 

0«raf/2tf-funeral  rites  should  be  performed  on  the  tenth 
day  and  on  the  final  day  of  purification  [if  the  period 
is  somehow  increased].  If  the  rite  of  depositing  bones 
takes  place  on  the  tenth  day  or  on  a  day  subsequent  to 
that,  on  account  of  there  being  destroyed  or  lost,  and 
if  the  dead  body  is  to  be  cremated  again,;then  one  should 


2iS  Us  and  Samhitd. 

duly  perform  anew  the  ceremony  of  offering  water 
and  the  new  or  the  first  S'rdddha.  (121  — 122) 

A  twice-born  man,  whether  he  maintains  the  Sacred 
Fire  or  not,  whose  father  is  dead,  should  perform 
the  S'rdddha  every  day,  particularly  those  at  sacred 
places.  (123) 

If  the  Pitri~vesse\  lies  upraised  or  askance,  the 
departed  Mane-s,  being  enraged,  do  not  partake  of  the 
food.  (124) 

"  May  what  is  divorced  from  food,  rite  and  M  ant  ram 
become  faultless."  Having  recited  the  foregoing,  one 
should  feed  them  with  care.  (125) 

Ekoddistha,  Ekoddhisthavidhika,  Vriddhi,  Pdrvana 
and  Pdrvanavidhika, — these  fivefold  S'rdddhas  have 
been  enunciated  by  Bhrigu's  son.  (126) 

The  S'rdddha^  performed  with  care  at  the  time 
of  starting  on  a  journey,  is  called  the  sixth.  And  the 
Pdrvana,  performed  for  purification,  has  been  described 
by  Brahma  as  the  seventh.  (127) 

The  S'rdddha^  performed  for  the  Deities,  is  the  eighth, 
by  doing  which,  one  is  freed  from  fear.  At  the  two 
periods  of  junction  between  day  and  night,*  and  in  the 
night  no  Srdddha  should  be  performed,  for  no  evidence 
is  found  [in  the  Vedas  in  its  support].  (128) 

[Those  performed  at  various]  countries  (pilgrimages) 
particularly,  yield  unending  merits.  (129) 

A  SVtfflMdf  performed  at  Gayd,  and  death  at  Praydga 
(Allahabad,  the  confluence  of  the  Ganges  and  the 
Yamuna),  yield  unending  fruits.  The  intelligent  sages 
all  sing  and  describe  this  Gdthd  (discourse.)  (130) 

*  Some   Texts   read  Rdhudars'dnat  instead  of  Ahordtromadars'anat, 
i.e ,  during  the  eclipses,  no  S'rdddha  should  be  performed. 


Us' and  Safahitd.  2ig 

Many  sons,  endued  with  good  character  and  accom- 
plishments, should  be  sought  for.  If  one,  amongst  that 
multitude,  happens  to  go  to  Gayd,  and  even  if  going 
there  accidentally  in  a  company,  performs  the  Srddahay 
the  departed  Manes  are  gratified  by  him  ;  and  he,  too, 
comes  by  most  excellent  condition.  (131  — 132) 

On  the  Mountain  Vardha,  especially  in  Gayd  and  in 
such  like  pilgrimages,  [if  ,a  S'rdddha  is  performed],  the 
departed  Manes  are  gratified  thereby.  (133) 

With  rice,  barley,  bean,  water,  fruits,  roots,  leaves 
of  the  sacred  fig-tree,  vegetables,  rice  growing  wild  or 
without  cultivation,  Priyangu  (a  kind  of  creeper),  wheat, 
sesame  and  kidney  bean,  one  should  gratify  his  de- 
parted Manes.  At  the  time  of  a  S'rdddha,  he  should 
give  away  sweet  fruits,  sugar-cane  juice,  sweet  small 
cardamoms,  Vidaryas  (prickly  pear)  and  ducks.  He 
should  give  away  with  sugar  and  curd,  fried  paddy 
mixed  with  honey.  (134 — 136) 

One  should,  with  care,  give  at  a  S^rdddha,  deer,  lamb 
and  tortoise.  With  fish  and  meat,  [the  Manes  attain  to 
gratification  for]  two  months ;  and  [for]  three  months, 
with  the  meat  of  deer.  (137) 

With  mutton,  [they  are  gratified  for]  four  months ; 
with  the  meat  of  birds,  [for]  five  months  ;  with  the  meat 
of  goat,  [for]  six  months  ;  and  with  the  meat  of  Ruru- 
deer,  [for]  nine  months.  (138) 

With  the  meat  of  buffalo  and  pork,  [they]  are  grati- 
fied for  ten  months ;  and  with  the  meat  of  hare  and 
tortoise,  for  eleven  months.  (139) 

With  cow's  milk  and  Pdyasa  (milk  and  boiled-rice), 
[they  attain  to  gratification  for]  one  year.  With  the 
meat  of  rhinoceros,  [they  attain  to]  gratification  for 
twelve  years,  (140) 


220  Uzand  Samhitd. 

Black  pot  herbs,  sea-scrabs,  meat  of  rhinoceros  and 
black  goat,  honey  and  all  other  roots  lead  to  their  ever- 
lasting gratification.  (141) 

°  Having  himself  bought  or  obtained  by  begging  all 
the  ingredients  necessary  [for  performing  a  S'rdddha] 
for  a  deceased  person,  a  twice-born  man  should  make  a 
presentation  of  them,  with  care,  [at  a  S'rdddha.  The 
fruit  of  such  a  gift  is  said  to  be  eternal.  (142) 

One  should  avoid  pepper,  betel-nut,  Masuraka 
(pulse),  dirty  bottle-gourd,  Brinjal,  incantation,  the  meat 
of  crane,  deceitfulness,  big  roots,  broken  rice,  human 
flesh,  and  the  milk  of  she-buffalos.  (143) 

The  foremost  of  the  twice-born  ones  should,  with 
every  care,  avoid,  at  the  time  of  a  S'rdddha,  Kodrava  (a 
species  of  grain),  Kovidara  (fruit  and  leaves  of  the  tree 
of  the  same  name),  Sthalapaka  (a  kind  of  grain)  and 
Amari.  (144) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

PERSONS   WHO    OUGHT   TO   BE    INVITED   AT   A   S'RA*DDHA. 

HAVING  duly  bathed,  offered  libations  of  water  to  the 
departed  Manes,  Deities  and  the  /?ishis,  one,  being  of 
a  delightful  mind  and  purified,  should  perform  the 
S^raddha,  of  Pindanvaharyaka.*  (i) 

First  of  all,  he  should  cast  his  looks  towards  the 
Brahmanas,  who  have  mastered  the  Vtdas,  for  they  are 
the  most  qualified  in  offering  clarified  butter  and  food 
[to  the  departed  Manes]  and  are  [to  be  reverenced  like] 
a  guest,  according  to  the  Smriti.  (2) 

*  A  S'rdddha  in  which  one]  should  take  his  meals  after  the  funeral 
rice-ball  has  been  offered  to  the  Manes. 


Vf&nd  Saihhita.  221 

Those,  who  are  given  to  the  drinking  of  Soma-]\\\ce, 
Who  know  the  true  form  of  religion,  who  are  truthful, 
Who  observe  penances,  who  follow  regulations,  who 
know  their  wives  at  the  proper  time  after  the  menses, 
Who  preserve  the  Five  Sacred  Fires,  who  are  given  to 
t  Vedic  studies,  who  know  the  Yayur-  Veda,  who  know 
the  Rz^-  V$da,  who  are  Trisupania,  (i.e.,  study  the  same 
portion  of  the  V£das\,  who  are  Trimadhtt  (i.e.,  study 
the  same  portion  of  the  V6das\  who  are  Trinachiketa, 
(i.e.,  study  the  same  portion  of  the  Vedas\  who  have 
mastered  the  Sdmd-  Veda,  who  have  duly  studied  the 
Saman  called  the  Jyestha-Sama  ;  those,  who  have 
studied  the  Atharva-S'iras,  especially  the  Rudradhydyi  \ 
who  are  is  given  to  the  performance  of  Agnihotra, ;  the 
learned ;  those,  who  know  all  sins,  who  have  read  the 
Six  Angas ;  those,  who  are  given  to  the  adoration  of 
the  Guru,  the  Deities  and  the  Fires,  who  are  endued 
with  spiritual  knowledge,  who  are  non-injuring,  who 
tio  not  daily  accept  presents,  who  constantly  perform 
sacrifices,  who  are  given  to  [the  practice  of]  making 
gifts  ; — all  such  Brdhmauas  are  P  art  gtipdv  anas*  (i.en 
entitled  to  seats  of  honour  at  dinner  parties.)  (3 — 7) 

Even  if  they  may  not  be  of  the  same  Pravara 
{lineage)  and  of  the  same  Gotra  (family),  and  [even 
if  they  be  not]  relations^those  Brahmauds  are  to  be 
known  as  Pangtipdvands.  (8) 

First  of  all  one  should  feed  a  Yogin,  endued  with 
the  knowledge  of  self ;  in  his  absence,  a  Naishtika 
(a  perpetual  religious  student) ;  in  his  absence,  a  self- 
controlled  U pakarvdnaka  (a  religious  student  who 
wishes  to  pass  on  to  the  state  of  a  householder).  (9) 

*  Literally,  those  who  purify  fangti,  or  persons  who  sit  in  the  .same 
raw  to  dine. 
29 


222  t/s'and  Satiihitd. 


In  the  latter's  absence,  one  should  feed  a  houses 
holder,  who  wishes  to  acquire  emancipation  and  who  has 
given  up  company.  But  one  should  never  feed  a  house- 
holder who  performs  various  works  expecting  the  fruits 
thereof.  (io) 

In  this  world,  one,  who  feeds  a  Yatiti,  who  is  conver- 
sant with  the  three  Gunds  (universal  tentencies)  of 
Prakriti  (Nature)  and  the  spiritual  science,  reaps 
fruits  superior  to  that  of  (feeding)  a  thousand  persons 
well-read  in  the  Vedas.  (TI) 

Therefore  one  should,  with  care,  feed  the  foremost 
of  Yogins,  endued  with  the  knowledge  of  /'s'vara,  with 
food  and  clarified  butter  •  and  in  his  absence,  the  twice- 
born  persons.  (12) 

This  is  the  first  rule  in  the  distribution  of  the  tiavyd 
(food)  and  the  Kavya  (clarified  butter) ;  the  following  is 
the  minor  rule  which  good  people  fallow.  (13) 

One  should  feed  his  maternal  grandfather,  maternal 
uncle,  father-in-law,  preceptor,  and  daughter's  son,  if 
they  are  all  learned  and  are  like  unto  fire  irt  Brahmanic 
•energy.  (14) 

One  should  rtot  feed  a  friend  at  a  S'raddka  ;  he  must 
fee  secured  by  money.  Even  if  it  is  done  without  any 
rnoney-present  at  a  funeral  offering^  it  secures  pros- 
perous fruits  in  the  next  world.  (15) 

[In  the  absence  of  a  worthy  pferson,]  it  ts  better  ta 
adore  an  accomplished  friend,  but  never  a  qualified 
enemy.  Clarified  butter,  partaken  of  by  enemies,  be-; 
comes  fruitless  in-  the  region  of  the  dead.  (16) 

Having  offered  the  Havi  to  a  person,  who  is  not 
acquainted  with  the  Vedas,  the  giver  does  not  attain  to 
the  fruits  thereof.  A  person,  not  knowing  the  Vedas,- 
would,  in  the  next  world,  cat  as  many  burning  maces- 


Us'ana  Safahita.  223 

with  downward  faces  as  the  number  of  balls,  which  he 
would  eat  at  the  time  of  distributing  the  Ha-vya  and  Kavya. 
If  persons  learned  in  the  Vedas  and  the  Yogins  [take 
their  meals  at  a  SJraddha\  the  performer  is  honoJred 
both  in  this  world  and  the  next.  (17 — 18) 

The  twice-born  men,  as  mentioned  below,  who 
partake  of  the  Havya  become  A' sura  (demonaic).  He, 
in  whose  family  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and  the  [prac- 
tice of]  sitting  on  the  sacrificial  altar  has  been  given,  up 
for  three  generations,  is  to  be  known  as  a  bad 
Brdhmana,  and  he  [should  never  be  invited]  at  a 
S'rdddha.  (19) 

He,  who  is  the  servant  of  a  S'udra ;  he,  who  is  the 
servant  of  the  king  j  he,  who  is  proud ;  he,  who  is 
irreligious ;  he,  who  works  as  the  priest  for  a  [whole] 
village  ;  and  he,  who  leads  the  life  of  a  butcher  ; — these 
six  are  contemptuous  (nominal)  Brdhmands.  Manu  has 
designated  them  as  degraded  ones,  even  if  they  impart 
[lessons  in  the]  Vedas.  (20 — 22) 

The  following  are  disqualified  to  be  present  at  a 
S'raddha  ceremony  : — Those,  who  sell  the  S'ruti',  those, 
who  marry  widows ;  those,  who  enter  into  a  locked 
room  without  the  permission  of  the  owner ;  and 
those,  who  officiate  as  priests  for  inferior  castes  ; — are 
described  as  out-castes.  Those,  who  teach  unknown 
persons ;  those,  who  give  instructions  on  receiving  fees  ; 
those,  who  study  the  Vtdas  by  paying  fees  ; — are  des- 
cribed as  Vritakds.  The  Srdmands  (Bouddha  ascetics)  ; 
Nirgoodds,  (a  class  of  naked  mendicants) ;  those, 
who,  know  the  doctrines  of  the  Panehardtra  ;*  the 

*  This  is  a  sect  amongst  the  Vaishnavds.  The  promulgater  of  this 
sect  was  S'andilya  According  to  them,  Vishnu  is  the  Supreme  Deity 
and  the  sole  cause  of  all,  Deliverance  is  attainable  by  the  worship  of 
this  Deity. 


224  Us1  ana  Samhitd. 

Jinds  ;*  the  K&pdlik&stf  the  Pasupatas  ;.J— -if  these,  am* 
similar   other   heretics, — wicked   souls   pervaded  by  th'e 
quality  of    Tamas, — partake   of  the  ffavi,  the  S'rdddha 
doef  not  become  successful,  and  it  does  not   yield    fruits 
in  the  next   world.     O  ye  leading    Vipras,  a  twice-born 
man,    who    does   not  follow  an  established  order  of  life  ; 
as  well  as  the  one,  who  enters  upon  a  false  one  ; — are  to 
be  known  as   Pangfiduskakds  (i.e.,  those    who   are   un- 
worthy  to   sh   at  a  dinner   party.)     One,  who  has  a  bad 
skin  ;   one,  who  has  bad  nails  ;  one,  who  is  afflicted  with 
leprosy ;    one,   who   suffers   from  leucoderma  (i.e.,  white 
leprosys)  ;    one,  who  has  brown  colored  teeth  ;    one,  who 
is  wily  ;   one,  who  carries  on  a  trade  ;  a  thief ;  a  eunuch, 
an  atheist ;  a  drunkard  ;   one,   who  knaws  an  unmarried 
girl ;  one,  who  kills  heroes  ;  one,  wha  has  sexually  known, 
his  brother's  widow    (not   as   a   sacred  duty,  but  for  the 
carnal  gratification  of  one's  senses ;   an  incendiary  ;  oner 
who  takes  food,    offered   by  an  intelligent  person  called 
the  Kunda  ;  the  Brdhmands>  who  sell  the  Soma  ;  one,  who 
serves  meals  ;    an  injuring  person  ;  a  (Parivitti)  younger 
brother  who  marries  before  his  elder  has  been  married  ; 
one,  who  does  not  perform  the  five  great  sacrifices;   the 
son  of  a  widow,  re-married ;  one,  who  lives  on  usury ;  one, 
who  lives  by  astrological  calculations ;    o-ne,  who  lives  by 
singing  and  playing  on  musical  instruments  ;  one,  who  is 
afflicted  with  a  disease  ;  one,  who  is  deaf  ;  (23 — 30) 

*  A  follower  of  Jaina  doctrines. 

t  Followers  of  a  certain  S'aiva  Sect  (the  left-hand  order)  charac- 
terised by  carrying  skulls  of  men  in  the  form  of  garlands  and  eating 
Und  drinking  from  them. 

%  A  sect  of  S'aiva  worshippers  ;  they  hold  that  fs'wara,  the  Supreme 
Being  is  the  Efficient  Cause  of  the  world,  its  Creator  and Superintending- 
and  Ruling  Providence. 


Us'and  SamhitS.  225 

One,  who  is  defective  in  limbs  ;  one,  who  has  extra 
limbs  ;  a  religious  student,  who  has  committed  an  act  of 
incontinence  ;  one,  who  vilifies  a  maiden  ;  the  son  of 
a  woman  who  commits  adultery  during  the  life-time 
of  her  husband  ;  the  bastard  son  of  a  widow ;  one 
imprecated  with  a  curse  ;  a  low  Brahmana,  who  sub- 
sists upon  offerings  made  to  an  idol ;  (31) 

One,  who  injures  a  friend  ;  one,  who  is  deceitful ;  one, 
who  daily  beats  women  ;  one,  who  renounces  his  parents 
and  preceptor ;  as  well  as  one,  who  renounces  his 
wife;  (32) 

One,  who  has  no  issue ;  one,  who  gives  false 
evidence ;  one,  who  cooks  food ;  one,  who  lives  by 
treating  diseases  ;  one  who  goes  to  sea ;  one,  who  is 
ungrateful ;  one,  who  breaks  a  high  way  ;  and  one,  who 
breaks  an  agreement ;  (33) 

One,  who  is  given  to  the  vilification  of  the  Vtdas  \ 
one,  who  is  given  to  speaking  against  the  Deities  ;  one, 
who  is  given  to  speaking  ill  of  the  twice-born  ; — [all 
these]  should  be  avoided  in  all  rites  appertaining  to 
a  S'raddha.  (34) 

An  ungrateful  person  ;  a  deceitful  person  ;  a  wicked 
soul ;  an  atheist ;  one,  who  speaks  against  the  Vedas ; 
one,  who  slays  a  friend ;  one,  who  knows  another's  wife ; 
one,  who  falsely  accuses  a  learned  person ;  [should,  also, 
be  avoided.]  (35) 

What  is  the  use  of  speaking  more  on  this  subject, 
even  those,  who  after  doing  prescribed  works  perpe- 
trate interdicted  deeds,  should,  also,  be  carefully  avoided 
hi  a  Srdddha.  (36) 


CHAPTER  V. 

[RULES  OF  S'RA'DDHA.] 

HAVING  purified  himself  with  cow-dung  and  water  and 
being  self-controlled,  [the  performer  of  a  S'raddha^ 
saluting  all  the  twice-born,  should  invite  them  with  wel- 
come words,  (i) 

On  the  day  previous,  he  should  say, — "  To-morrow 
shall  my  S'raddha  take  place."  If  it  is  impossible,  he 
should  invite  a  Brahmana^  endued  with  [all]  the  marks 
mentioned  before.  (2) 

When  the  hour  far  the  S'raddha  arrives,  his  departed- 
Manes,  fleet  like  the  mind,  hearing  his  [invitation] 
and  meditating  on  it  with  a  concentrated  mind,  arrive 
there.  (3) 

The  departed  Manes,  who  range  in  the  intermediate 
region,  follow  the  Brdhmands,  remain  there  in  the  shape 
of  the  wind,  and  attain  to  the  most  excellent  condition 
after  partaking  of  the  food  [offered  there.]  (4) 

When  the  hour  for  the  S'rdddha  arrives,  the  Brah- 
mauds  who  are  invited,  should  all  lead  continent  lives 
and  sit  there  being  self-restrained  (5) 

They  should  all  be  shorn  of  anger  and  hastiness  and 
be  truthful  and  self-restrained.  One,  who  takes  meals 
at  a  S*rdddka,  should  give  up  fear,  sexual  intercourse, 
wending  a  way  and  the  recitation  [of  the  GdyatriJ]  (6) 

A  Brdhmandi  who,  being  invited,  accepts  another's 
invitation,  [is  a  sinner.]  And  a  twice-born  person,  who, 
having  invited  [Brdkmands,  according  to  his  acquire- 
ments], invites  another  out  of  stupefaction,  is  a  greater 
sinner  and  is  born  as  a  virmin  of  excreta.  (7) 


t/s'and  Safahila.  227 

A  Br&hman'a,  who  being  invited  at  a  S'raddha,  holds 
"sexual  intercourse,  is  visited  by  the  sin  of  Brahmani- 
'cide  and  is  born  amongst  the  degraded  castes  (8) 

The  departed  Manes  of  the  Wicked-minded  Vipra^ 
who  being  invited,  wends  a  way;  live  for  that  month 
on  dust.  (9) 

The  departed  Manes  of  the  twice-born  person,  whd 
being  invited,  picks  up  a  quarrel;  live  for  that  month  on 
dirt  and  excreta.  (TO) 

Therefore,  being  invited  at  a  $r&ddha\  a  twice-born 
tone  should  become  self-controlled.  The  performer  of 
the  Sraddha^  too,  should  be  shorn  of  anger,  remain 
purified  and  control  his  senses,  (li) 

Having  gone  to  the  southern  quarter,  [the  performer 
of  a  S'rdddha]  should,  attentively,  offer  [unto  the  invited 
persons^]  beautifying  [the  place],  Durvd-gi&ss  with  rootsy 
having  their  tips  directed  towards  the  south,  and  pure" 
Water.  (12) 

He  should  paste,  with  cow-dung,  a  low  groimd  in  the 
South,  cool,  demarcated,  possessed  of  auspicious  marks^ 
purified  and  secluded.  (13) 

The  departed  Manes  are  gratified  [with  ablations] 
offered  at  the  secluded  banks  of  rivers,  pilgrimages, 
One's  own  ground,  and  the  summits  of  mountains.  (14) 

One  should  not  offer  oblations  to  the  departed  Manes 
on  another's  ground.  Whatever  [rite]  is  performed 
[there],  by  men  out  of  stupefaction,  becomes  lost  on  ac- 
count of  its  ownership  [being  invested  in  another.]  (15) 

Forests,  mountains,  sacred  shrines,  sacrificial  places, 
all  these  are  described  as  having  no  owners.  No  one 
has  any  right  of  possession  over  them.  (16) 

A  twice-born  person  should  put  boundary  marks  all 
over  there  and  scatter  sesame  seeds.  All  places,  sullied 


tifana  Saihhita. 

by  the  Asurds,  are  purified  by  sesame  and  the  Aja  (a 
kind  of  corn.)  (17) 

He  should,  then,  according  to  his  power,  dedicate 
food,  purified  in  many  ways,  not  consisting  of  one  curry» 
fresh  and  of  Which  nothing  has  been  spent,  and  pros- 
perous with  articles  to  be  sucked  and  drunk.  (18) 

Then  when  the  noon  sets  in,  he>  having  approached 
the  twice-born>  who  have  pared  their  nails  and  shaved 
their  beards,  should  offer  them,  as  laid  down  in  the  ritual) 
sticks  for  rubbing  the  teeth.  (19) 

First  of  all  he  should  offer  unto  [the  Brahmanas  re* 
presenting  the]  Vis'wadevds,  in  Udumvara-vessels,  oil, 
unguents,  water  for  bathing  [and]  other  ingredients  of 
bathing^  and  perfumeries  of  sorts.  (20) 

Then,  having  risen  up  and  with  folded  palms,  he 
should  offer,  in  order,  water,  for  washing  the  feet  and 
rinsing  the  mouth,  unto  them,  when  they  have  returned 
from  after  bath.  (21) 

The  seats,  made  of  Kus'd,  for  those  Brdhntandst  who, 
being  invited  for  the  first  [party,  the  Deities])  are  beauti- 
fully seated  there  (i.e.,  the  place  where  a  S'raddha  is 
performed),  should  be  placed  facing  the  -east.  (22) 

They  (i.e.,  those  seats)  shall  have  one  Kus'd  facing 
the  south)  and  should  be  sprinkled  with  sesame-water. 
[The  performer  of  the  S'rdddha]  should  make  the  Brdh- 
mandS)  like  unto  the  Deities  themselves,  sit  thereon, 
saying, — (  Sit/  They  (the  Brdhmands)>  too,  should  sit 
separately.  (23) 

Two,  on  the  side  of  the  Deva,  [should  sit  with  their] 
faces  towards  the  east.  Three,  belonging  to  the  Pttritj 
should  sit  with  their  faces  towards  the  north.  Or  one  on 
each  side  should  [be  present]  there.  Such  is  [the  rule  in 
the  case]  of  the  maternal  grandfather.  (24) 


Us -and  Samhitd  229 

The    ceremony    of    reception,    the    determination    of 
time  and  place,  purity    and  the  [acquisition    of]    qualified 
•BrdhmaiiS) — these    five    destroy   [the   true  spirit  of]  thf- 
S^niddha.     Therefore  many  should  not  be  invited.  (25) 

Or,  one  should  feed  only  one  Brahmaita  who  has 
mastered  the  Vedas,  is  endued  with  good  character  and 
\vith  [the  knowledge  of]  the  S } ruti,  and  who  is  shorn  of 
[all]  bad  marks.  (26) 

All  self-restrained  persons,  [desirous  of  offering]  food 
to  a  qualified  person,  [should  offer  the  same],  in  a  temple, 
unto  him  returned  from  the  three  regions,  (27) 

He  should  then  offer  [a  part  of]  that  food  unto  the  Fire 
and  then  unto  the  [invited]  religious  student.  A  Bhikshu 
(religious  mendicant)  or  a  Brahmacharin  being  present 
for  food,  one  should  feed  them  to  satisfaction  after  [the 
invited  Brdhmans]  have  been  seated  [to  take  their 
meals]  at  a  S'raddha.  That  S'r&ddha  is  not  well  spoken 
of  where  an  Atithi  (uninvited  guest)  does  not  take  his 
food.  (28 — 29) 

Therefore,  even  at  places  of  pilgrimage,  the  Atithis 
should  be  adored  by  the  twice-born  ones  with  care.  Those 
twice-borns,  who  take  meals  at  a  S'rdddka,  if  they, 
"without  spending  a  night,  hold  sexual  congress  or  make 
gifts,  are,  forsooth,  born  in  the  species  of  crows.  One 
having  defective  limbs,  an  outcaste,  one  suffering  from 
leprosy,  a  merchant,  the  offsping  of  a  Nishada  by  a 
S'udra  woman,  one  having  a  foetid  nose,  a  fowl,  a  hog, 
and  a  dog  should  be  shunned  from  a  distance  in  ail 
S'raddhas.  One  should  not  touch  a  person  of  grim 
visage,  a  Mlec.hchha  and  a  woman  in  menses.  (30 — 32) 

One  should  avoid  persons  putting  on  violet  coloured 
raiments  and  [useless]  silk  raiments,  as  well  as  heretics*. 
Whatever  rites  are  performed  there  [in  a  S'raddha\ 


Sathfatd. 

towards  the  BrAhmans  belonging  te  the  Pitns,  should 
all  be  done  in  the  worship  of  the  Vaishadevas.  One 
should  bedeck,  with  ornaments,  all  those  [Brdhntans] 
seated  at  pleasure.  (33 — 34) 

[Then]  one  should  offer  Arghyct  Unto  their  hands 
with  the  Marram—"  Yddi-Vyd  ;"  as  also  scents,  garlands, 
incense,  etc.,  according  to  one's  might.  (35) 

Then  making  the  sacred  thread  hang  down  towards 
the  left  part  of  the  body  oVer  the  right  shoulder,  a 
wise  person,  with  his  face  directed  towards  the  south, 
should  invoke  the  departed  Manes  with  the  Mantram, — 
"UJaHtastivdr  (36) 

Having  invoked  [them]  and  been  commanded,  [he] 
should  then  recite  [the  Mantrani, — ]  " Ayantunas?* 
[Then  with  the  Mantram,—]  " S' annodfoi"  [he  should 
place]  water;  [and  with  the  Matttram,—~]  "Tilosi" 
sesame,  in  the  vessel.  (37) 

Having  placed  [\tfatef  and  sesame]  and  given  again, 
as  before,  Argkya  unta  their  hands,  [he  should],  being 
self-restrained,  place  the  remaining  water  of  Arghya  in 
aveicel.  (38) 

Having  placed,  with  this  vessel,  the  Arghya-\esse\ 
alon^  with  the  Pitris  (i.e.,  having  kept  it  as  a  place 
of  their  reside »ce)  and  then  taken  up  rice  soaked 
with  clarified  butter,  he  should  a.sk-*>'fAgnou  Karishye]'' 
(i.e.,  if  1  can  offer  oblation  t®  the  Fire*)  (39) 

Beim,  commanded  with  "  Kurushwa"  (do  it),  he 
should,  with  the  sacred  thread  on,*  offer  oblations  [ta 


*  This  and   similar   other   passages    distinctly   show  that  to  put  on 
She  sacrexi  thread   always,  \yas-  net    the    practice    prevailing  then.     Bi>t 
the  Brdkma>>as  used  to  put  on  the  sacred  thread,  as  a  distinctive  mark* 
befo    i-t  the  pe.iorma»ce  of   any  particular  religious  rite. 


Us' ana  Safahit&.  231 

the  Fire.]  Wearing  the  sacrificial  thread  and  with  the 
Kusa  in  hand,  one  should  perform  the  Homa.  (40) 

Wearing  the  sacred  thread  over  the  right  shoulder 
and  under  the  left  arm,  one  should  perform  the  tioma  for 
the  Pitris  and  the  Vis'wadevds.  Then  when  serving 
meals  to  the  Deities,  he  should  lower  down  his  right 
knee.  (41) 

Then  reciting,— Somdya  Pitrimate  Swadhd,  na**as% 
Agnaye  Kavyavdhandfa  Swadhd,  he  should  offer  obla- 
tions. (42) 

Being  self-restrained  and  stationed  near  the  image 
of  a  Great  Deity  or  in  a  cowpen,  he  should  consign  them 
to  the  hands  of  a  Vipra  in  the  absence  of  the  Fire.  (43) 

Therefore  having  circumambulated,  at  the  command 
[of  the  Brdhmanas\  the  [image  of  the]  Deity  and  his 
own  tutela/y  Deity,  he  should  paint,  with  covvdung,  be- 
fore him,  towards  the  south,  on  a  little  elevated  place,  an 
auspicious  circular  or  square  figure.  He  should,  then, 
with  a  AWa-reed,  rub  thrice  inside  the  figure.  (44 — 45) 

Thereupon  having  spread  there  Kus'a-grass,  with 
their  tips  directed  towards  the  south,  he  should,  being 
self-controlled,  make  three  bails  [for  the  Manes]  with 
the  residue  of  the  oblation.  (46) 

Thereupon  having  offered  the  Pindas  there,  he  should 
rub,  with  his  hands,  those  AW0-reeds  for  [the  satisfaction 
of]  the  partakers  of  the  paste.  Then  rinsing  and  rinsing 
his  mouth  thrice  and  suppressing  the  vital  airs  gradually, 
he  should,  by  and  by,  throw  the  residue  of  the  water 
near  the  Pindas.  Then  being  self-restrained,  he  should 
beat  the  Pindas  slowly.  (47 — 48) 

Thereupou  one  should  duly  feed  a  twice-born  person, 
with  the  remaining  portion  of  the  food  [forming  the] 
Pinda.  Here  (/.<?.,  in  a  Slraddhd)  a  person,  conversant 


Us* and  Saiiihiia, 

with    religious    laws,    should    bow   snto  the  six  se'aso: 
the  departed  Manes  and  the  Deities.   (49) 

If  the .  burning  lamp  is  extinguished,  while  taking 
meals  at  a  Sraddha,  one  should  not  again  take 
food.  Having  taken  it,  ane  should  perform  the 
Ch  a  n  drdy  ana.  150-) 

One  should  offer  corns,  various  cakes  of  flour,  sweet 
boiled  milk  and  rice,  soup>  vegetables,  desired-for  fruits, 
milk,  curd,  clarified  butter  and  honey.  (51) 

One  should  dedicate  desiredrfor  boiled  rice,  various 
edibles  and  drinks  and  all  that  is  liked  by  the  leading 
twice-bornsv  (52) 

One,  seeking  one's  well-being,  should  give  .unto  the 
twice-borns  paddy,  various  kinds  ot  sesame,  sugar  and 
warm  boiled  rice,  but  not  (warm)  raots,  fruits,,  and, 
drinks.  One  should  not  [while  offering  these]  shed- 
tears  ;  nor  should  one  be  angry  ;  nor  should  one  speak, 
an  untruth.  (53—54) 

>    One  should  not  touch  boiled  rice   with  the  feet  ;  nor 
should    one    scatter   it.       The    Ydtudhanas  (Rdkshasas)r 
destroy  what   is    offered    angrily    or  hastily,   or   what  is 
acquired    by    sinful     means.  .    One  should    not,    with    a 
moistened  body,  stand  near  a  twice-born  person.   (55 — ^56) 

One  should  not  look  at  the  crows  or  drive  away  the 
birds  ;  for  the  departed  Manes,  for  knowing  the  real 
truth,  come  there  in  those  forms.  (57) 

One  should  not  give  anything  there  with  the  hands 
[only],  nor  simple  salt  (i.e.,  without  mixing  it  with  any 
other  article) ;  nor  should  one  give  it  in  an  iron  vessel, 
nor  disrespectfully.  (58) 

[By  offering  food]  in  a  golden  vessel,  or  in  an 
Udumvara  one,  -and  -particularly  HI  the  horn  of-  a. 


Us'and  Sanihitd.  233 

rhinoceros,    one   comes    by   the    most    excellent    sover- 
eignty.  (59) 

He,  who  feeds  the  departed  Manes  in  an  earthen 
vessel,  goes,  with  the  eater,  to  the  most  dreadful  hell1 
of  Purodhd,  (60) 

One  should  not  offer  food  in  unequal  quantities  in  the 
same  row,  nor  should  one  beg  food,  nor  should  [the 
eaters]  quarrel  with  [one  another].  By  begging  food> 
one  despatches  oneself  to  a  dreadful  hell.  (61) 

Abstaining  from  speech,  one  should  take  food  ;  even 
when  accosted,  one  should  not  describe  the  real  virtues 
[of  the  food].  As  long  as  the  merits  of  the  Ham  are 
not  described,  the  departed  Manes  partake  of  the 
food.  (62) 

[Disregarding]  many  others  seeing  him,  a  twice- 
born  person,  seated  in  the  first  row,  should  not  take  his 
meals.  Such  an  ignorant  person  takes  upon  [himself] 
the  sin  of  the  [entire]  row.  (63) 

The  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  [who  is]  engaged> 
should  not  leave  anything  in  a  S'raddha.  Even  he  must 
not  prevent  one  from  offering  Maska-corns  ;  nor  shall 
he  look  at  another's  food.  (64). 

A  twice-born  one,  who  being  engaged  in  a  rite  for 
the  departed  Manes,  does  not  eat  Masha-corns,  is  "born,, 
after  death,  as  a  beast  for  twenty-one  births.  (65) 

One  should  make  them  [i.e.,  the  invited  Brdhmanas] 
listen  to  the  Vedic  recitations,  Dharma-Sdstras,  Itihdsas 
(History)  Purdns,  and  the  most  beautiful  portion  [of 
the  S'dstras]  dealing  with  [the  performance  of]  the! 
S'raddha.  (66) 

Thereupon  one  should  offer  food  and  scatter  it  on  the 
earth  before  those  who  ^re  unfexJ.  Then  accosting  the 


234  Us*  and  Softhhitd. 

gratified  [Brdhmans]  with  "Swa'ditam"  (are  you  satis- 
fied  ?),  he  should  make  them  sip  the  water.  (67) 

After  they  have  sipped  the  water,  he  should  address 
them  "  Bho  ramyatam"  (Hon'ble  Sirs,  please  take  rest). 
Thereupon  the  Brdhmans  should  say, — 'lSwadhd"  (68) 

Thereupon  he  should  communicate  the  residue  of  the 
food  unto  the  [Brdhmans  already]  fed.  Then  command- 
ed by  the  twice-borns,  he  should  do  what  they  say.  (69) 

In  a  Pitri-S 'rdddha  (i.e.,  Ekoddkistha  and  Pdrvana) 
"Swadita*  should  be  uttered ;  in  a  Goshtha  (i.e.,  a 
S'raddka\ described  by  Vis'wamitra)  "Sunrita"  ;  in  an 
Abhyudaya  S'rdddha,  "Sampannam"  ;  and  in  a  Daiva> 
"  Ruchitam?  (70) 

Being  speechless,  he  should  send  away  first  of  all 
the  Brdhmans  representing  the  Deities.  Then  looking 
towards  the  south,  he  should  beg  [the  following]  of  the 
departed  Manes.  (71). 

May  [the  number  of]  givers  [in  our  family]  multiply ; 
may  our  children  [be  given  to  the  reading  and  teaching 
of  the]  V&das-,  may  reverential  faith  [in  the  V£das] 
not  disappear  [in  our  family ;  may  riches,  to  be  given- 
away,  multiply  [in  our  family].  (72) 

One  should  offer  Pindas  and  edibles  unto  the  Brah- 
mans,  throw  them  into  the  Fire  or  water.  The  Vipras 
being  seated,  one  should  not  cleanse  the  leavings  of  the 
twice-born  persons.  (73) 

Thereupon  one,  seeking  a  son>  should  offer  unto*  one's 
wife,  the  middle  \Pinda\.  Then  washing  the  hands 
and  rinsing  the  mouth,  one  should  feed  one's  kinsmen  ID 
the  end.  (74) 

The  kinsmen  being  "gratified,  one  should,  thereafter 
feed  the  servants.  One  should,  afterwards,  take,  with 
one's  wife,  the  last  portion  of  the  food.  (75) 


So  Idng  the  siiri  is  not  Set,  one  should  not  look  at  the 
leavings  ;  the  pair  jshould  ledd  a  continent  life  for  that 
Night.  (76) 

He, — who  having  made  presents  in  a  S'r&ddtia,  or 
he, — who,  having  taken  nleals  [thre-at],  holds  sexual 
intercourse, — is  again  born  as  a  virmin,  after  having 
passed  through  [the  hell  of]  Mahdraurava.  (77) 

One  (/.*.,  the  performer  of  the  S'rdddha  or  the  par- 
taker of  food)  should  be  pure,  shorn  of  anger,  of  qtiiesj 
cent  soul,  truthful  and  self-controlled.  Even  the  per- 
former or  the  eater,  should  give  up  [for  that  day]  Vedic 
Studies  and  meditation  (78) 

The  twice-borns,  who,  having  made  presents  in  a 
Sraddhd,  take  their  meals  elsewhere,  are  equal  to1  great 
sinners  and  go  to  innumerable  hells.  (79) 

I  have  thus  attentively  described,  in  fall,  the  rituals 
relating  to  a  S'rdddhd.  An  Uddsin  (£n  indifferent 
ascetic)  should  perform  the  S*rdddha  with  A}ma  (raw  of 
uncooked  materials)  and  not  with  any  thing  else.  (80) 

A  twice-born  one  who  does  not  keep  the  Fife,  who 
wends  ways  and  who  is  given  to  all  sorts  of  evif  habits, 
should  perform  the  S'fdddhn  with  raw  rice.  A  S^udra 
should  always  do  the  s^me.  (81) 

A  twice-born  person,  who  is  conversant  with  re- 
ligious regulations,  should,  being  endued  with  reverential 
faith,  perform  the  S'rdddha  with  raw  riee.  He  should 
[then]  offer  the  same  as  oblations  to  the  Fire  and  make 
Pindas  with  the  same.  (82) 

He,    who,   having   controlled   his  mind,  performs  the 
S'raddha,   according   to  these  regulations,  attains  to  the' 
station  of  Vishnu,  being  daily  freed  from  his  sins.   (83) 
Therefore   the   foremost    of    the    twice-born    onesy 


Us'  ana  Samhitd 


should  perform  a  S'raddkfUyvith  all  care.  By  it  the 
Eternal  Lord  becomes  perfectly  adored.  (84) 

A  twice-born  person,  the  {foremost  of  them,  who  is 
-not  rich  should)  after  bathing  and  gratifying  the  depart- 
ed Manes  with  oblations  of  sesame  and  water,  perform 
[the  S'fdddha]  only  with  roots  or  fruits.  (85) 

One  should  not  offer  [Find  as  at  a  S'raddha~\  in  the 
lifetime  of  one's  father.  Homa  and  its  terminating  offer- 
ings are  laid  down  [for  such  a  one].  Or  such  a  person 
may  offer  \_Pindas]  for  them  to  whom  he  [his  father] 
offers  the  same.  This  is  the  opinion  of  the  learned.  (86) 

One  should  offer  \_Pinda\  for  him  who,  amongst  the 
father,  grandfather,  or  great  grandfather  is  dead,  and 
not  for  any  one  else.  (87) 

One  should,  with  reverence,  feed  any  one  amongst 
them  who  is  alive,  to  his  heart's  content.  Disregarding 
one  alive,  one  should  not  offer  [food  to  another].  Such 
is  the  S'ruti  (Vedic  regulation)  transmitted.  (88) 

A  Dvamushyayana  son*  should  offer  Pinda  [for  his 
procreator],  for  he  is  born  from  his  seed  (semen)  ;  he 
should  likewise  offer  [Pindd  for  the  other  father],  if  by 
his  religious  appointment  he  (i.e.,  the  son)  is  procreated 
by  another  on  his  barren  wife.f  (89) 

A  son,  [who  is  procreated]  without  any  agreement 
[upon  another's  wife],  should  offer  Pinda  for  [the  father] 

*  This  is  a  son,  who  is  begotten  by  a  person  of  good  birth,  on  the 
barren  wife  of  'another  person,  with  her  husband's  permission  or  with 
that  of  her  elders  in  the  absence  of  her  husband.  Such  a  sow  should 
offer  Pindas  fer  his  procreating  father  as  well  as  the  other  father 
who  is  the  husband  of  his  mother.  [See  Ydjnawalkya,  Chapter  1., 
Sloka  68—69.] 

f  i.e.,  if  there  .is  no  such  contract  between  the  parties,  fthe  one 
procreating  the  son,  and  the  person  on  whose  wife  the  son  is  begotten) 
as  that  the  son  shall  belong  to  them  both. 


Us-and  Saihhitt.  2tf 

\vho    gives    seed,    for   he   is.  born  of  his  sfmen.     Other- 
wise, [he  should  offer  it]  to  the  Kshetri  [father] .*  (90) 

He  should  offer  two  P Indus  both  for  the  Kshetri 
(father),  and  the  Viji  (procreator)  ;  or  in  one  (S'rdddha) 
he  should  offer  it  to  the  Kshetri  after  mentioning  the 
name  of  the  Viji.  (91) 

On  the  day  of  death,  he  should  perform  [the  S'raddha,} 
according  to  the  regulation  of  the  Ekoddishtha.^  But 
determining  the  impurity,  he  should  perform  the  Kamya- 
S'rdddha,  if  he  seeks  any  thing.  (92) 

One,  seeking  prosperity,  should  perform  the  Abhyu- 
daya-S'raddha  in  the  fore  part  of  the  day.  All  [its 
rituals  are  like  those  of  a]  Daiva.  No  external  rite 
should  be  performed.  (93) 

Darva  (grass)  should  be  spread  over  on  all  sides. 
Thereon  he  (the  performer)  should  feed  the  twice- 
born  ones.  He  should  say, — <c  Be  ye  gratified,  Nandi- 
mukha-Pitris"  (94) 

First  of  all,  the  S'raddha  of  the  female  ancestors 
should  take  place  ;  then  that  of  the  male  ones  ; 
then  that  of  the  [deceased]  maternal  grandfather. 
These  three  S'rdddhas  have  been  laid  down  in  the 
Smritis  for  the  Vriddhi  (i.e.,  offerings  made  to  the 
Manes  on  prosperous  occasions,  such  as  the  birth  of  a 
son,  et:.)  (95) 

First  [before  performing  these  S}raddhas\  offerings 
should  be  made  unto  the  Deities.  No  work  should  be 
done  from  the  left  to  the  right.  (96) 

*  The  father  on  whose  wife  he  has  been  begotten  by  another  person 
with  the  former's  permission. 

+  In  the  performance  of  the  S'rdddhaior  a  particular  person  on  the 
day  of  death,  it  is  not"  necessary  to  take  any  notice  of  the  purity  or 
'impurity  of  the  day. 

3* 


238  U's'and  Samhita. 

Having  made  adorations  with  flowers,  incense,  edibles 
and  ornaments  unto  the  variegated  altars,  the  idols  and 
the  twice-born  persons,  one,  with  the  sacred  thread  on, 
being  self-controlled  and  facing  the  east,  should  offer 
Pindas ;  and  having  adored  the  Mdtris,  a  learned  person 
should  perform  three  S'rdddhas.  (97—98) 

The    Mains    (deceased    female     ancestors),    being 
possessed   by    ire,  seek  to   injure  him,  who,  without 
forming  the  Matri-  Yajtia,  performs  a  S'rdddha.  (99) 


CHAPTER  VI. 

[VARIOUS  FORMS  0*  IMPUNITY.] 

IF  any,  amongst  the  Sapindas,  is  born  or  dead,  the  im- 
purity of  the  Brdhmands,  say  the  learned,  extends  over 
ten  days.  (l) 

During  the  period  of  impurity,  one  should  not  per- 
form any  of  the  (Nitya)  daily  rites,  and  particularly 
those  of  the  Kdmya  ;  nor  should  one  think  of  the  Vedic 
M ant  rams.  (2) 

At  this  time,  one,  who  keeps  the  [Sacred]  Fire,  being 
purified  and  shorn  of  anger,  should  feed  the  other  (i.e., 
pure^  twice-born  persons.  He  should,  with  dried  rice 
and  fruits,  offer  oblations  to  the  Fire  for  the  departed 
Manes.  (3) 

Others  should  not  touch  them  [who  are  in1  impurity] ; 
nor  should  they  offer  food  to  the  Spirits.  In  [an  impurity  }, 
consequent  on  the  birth  of  a]  son,  no  sin  is  committed 
by  touching  [the  other]  Sapindas,  with  the  exception 
of  the  mother.  Again,  in  [an  impurjty  of]  death,  it  has 
been  said  by  the  Sages,  that  one  can,  on  the  fourth,  or 
the  fifth,  day,  touch  him  who  is  given  £o  religious  study,. 


Us\ana  Samhita.  239 

who  celebrates  sacrifices,   or  who  is  conversant  with 
the  Vedas.  (4—5) 

On  the  tenth  day,  after  bathing,  all  [other  castes] 
may  be  touched  by  them.  Unmeritorious  [impurity],  in 
the  case  of  servants  and  unworthy*  Sapindas,  has  been 
described  [to  extend  over]  ten  days.  (6) 

A  person  possessing  one  qualificationf  [is  purified] 
in  four  days  ;  one  possessing  two, J  in  three  days  ;  and 
one  possessing  three,  in  one  day.  (7) 

After  the  tenth  day,  one    should  fully   read   out   the 

Veda  and  offer  oblations  to  the  Fire.     He  (i.e.,  one  who 

observes  impurity  for  ten  days)  becomes  worthy  of  being 

touched   on    the   fourth   day.     So  the   Patriarch    Manu 

has  said.  (8) 

The  period  of  impurity  of  those  who  do  not  per- 
form religious  rites,  who  are  not  read  in  the  Vedas,  and 
who  suffer  from  leprosy,  etc.,  terminates  with  their 
death.  (9) 

The  [period  of]  impurity,  on  the  death  of  [Nirguna] 
BrahmanaS)  ranges  from  three  to  ten  nights.  [Impurity 
on  the  death  of  a  Sapinda^\  before  he  is  invested  with 
the  sacred  thread,  extends  over  three  nights ;  and  for 
ten  nights, '.thereafter.  (10) 

[If  a  child]  is  dead  within  two  years  after  its  birth, 
the  same  [period  of  impurity,  *.*.,  ten  nights]  is  for 
the  parents.  Such  is  desired  [by  the  Law-givers].  [If 
the  Sapinda]  is  highly  unmeritorious,  [one  attains  to] 
purity  within  three  nights,  (u) 

*  Nirguna  persons  are  those  who  do  not  maintain  the  Sacred  Fires, 
as  described  in  the  S'ruti  and  the  Smriti. 

t  Two  qualifications  are  the  maintenance  of  jeither  the  Srauta-,  or 
the  Smdrta-,  Fire  and  Vedic  studies. 

$  Three  qualifications  are  the  maintenance  of  both  the  Fires  and 
complete  Vedic  study. 


240  Us' ana  Saihhita. 

The  same  [is  the  period  of  impurity,  i.e.,  three- 
nights]  for  the  parents  on  the  death  of  a  child  before- 
teething.  Such  is  the  deliverance  [of  the  'Riskis'].. 
Three  nights  [form  the  period  of  impurity  on  the 
demise]  of  a  child  that  has  teethed.  [A  child  is  called] 
Jfctadanta  when  the  teeth  grow.  (12) 

Immediate  is  [the  purification,  on  the  death  of  a 
child]  who  has  not  teethed  ;  [and  impurity  extends  over] 
one  night,  before  the  ceremony  of  tonsure  (Chuddkara- 
nam)  [is  performed  within  two  years]  ;  and  three  nights,, 
before  the  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread  (Upa- 
nayanam]  ;  and  ten  nights,  afterwards.  (13) 

If  a  child  is  dead  as  soon  as  it  is  born,  both  the 
father  and  mother  suffer  from  impurity  consequent  on 
the  birth*  [only]  ;  the  father,  too,t  becomes  unfit  to  be 
touched.  (14) 

Immediate  is  the  purification  for  the  Sapindas, 
[if  death  takes  place  after  ten  days].  One  day  [is  the 
period  of  impurity]  for  a  uterine  brother,  if  he  is 
Nirguna  (unmeritorious).  (15) 

If  death  takes  place  after  the  teething,  one  night  is 
the  period  of  impurity  for  the  Nirguna  Sapindas  ;  and' 
three  nights,  if  it  takes  place  after  the  ceremony  of 
tonsure.  (16) 

O  ye  learned  ones,  if  death  takes  place  before  the 
teething,  one  night  [is  the  period  of  impurity]  for  the 
Sapindas,  if  they  are  highly  disqualified.  (17. 

Immediate  is  the  purification  of  the  Sapindas  on 
the  dropping  [of  an  embryo]  by  abortion.  But  if 
the  Sapindas  are  greatly  disqualified,  a  day  and  night 


*  i.e.,  the  impurity  consequent  on  death  does  not  affect  them. 
t^Mother,  of  course,  is  also  not  to  be  touched,. 


Us* ana  Safahita.  241 

[form  the  period  of  impurity]  on  account  of  abor- 
tion. (18) 

Three  nights  hare  been  laid  down  [as  the  period 
of  impurity]  for  kinsmen,  if  they  act  according  to 
their  desire.  If  any  birth  takes  place  during  [the  period 
of  impurity  consequent  on]  a  birth  and  any  death  during 
[impurity  owing  to]  a  death,  purification  is  attained 
with  the  termination  of  [the  first  impurity].  [If  any 
such  incident  takes  place]  on  the  last  day  [of  impurity, 
the  period  is  increased  by]  two  nights.  [If  impurity} 
for  both  birth  and  death  simultaneously  takes  place,  it 
terminates  with  that  of  death.  (19 — 20) 

If  any  impurity,  multiplying  sin,*  takes  place  after 
[any  other  minor  impurity], — one  is  purified  by  it  (i.e. 
by  its  termination).  Hearing  of  an  impurity  conse- 
quent on  birth  or  death,  a  person,  gone  to  another 
country,  should  observe  impurity  till  the  [remaining] 
period  is  completed.  [If  he  hears  of  it]  after  the 
period  of  impurity  is  over,  three  nights  have  been 
spoken  of  [as  the  period  of  impurity]  for  the 
Sapi'ndas.  (21 — 22) 

Hearing  of  a  death  after  a  year,  a  bath  [brings  on 
purification].  Under  all  circumstances  and  in  all  times^ 

*  This  is  an  impurity  consequent  on  the  death  of  father,  mother, 
grandfather,  etc.,  which  is  called  Guru,  or  most  important  as'oucha,  im- 
purity. There  is  another  reading  "  ardhavrittimadds'ouchamurdhama- 
ny  ends' oudhyati"  meaning, — "  if  any  impurity,  of  a  more  import- 
ant character,  takes  place  after  half  the  period  of  another  impurity  is 
over,  it  lasts  for  the  entire  period  to  be  observed  for  the  latter,  and  at 
its  termination  one  is  purified."  Thus  the  meaning  of  the  context  is  : — 
Supposing  a  person  is  in  impurity  for  the  death  of  a  Sapinda  kinsman. 
After  four  days  his  father  or  mother  dies.  In  this  case,  his  impurity 
'  does  not  end  with  the  last  day  of  the  first  one,  but  extends  over  the 
entire  period,  beginning  with  the  commencement  of  the  latter. 


242  Us'and  Saihhitd. 

immediate  is  the  purification  for  a  person  who  is  obser- 
ving a  vow,  for  one  who  studies  the  Vedas,  and  for  one 
who  is  engaged  in  a  work  for  carrying  on  his  liveli- 
hood. [On  the  death  of]  maidens  who  have  been  en- 
gaged by  words  but  not  married,  the  father  and  the 
5Vz/>zW0-relations  [have  to  observe  impurity  for]  three 
nights.  If  marriage  has  been  solemnized,  [their] 
husbands  [are  to  observe  impurity].  One  day  has  been- 
prescribed  in  the  Smritis  [as  the  period  of]  impurity  on 
the  death  of  a  maiden  who  has  not  been  even  orally- 
engaged.  (23—25) 

Impurity  has  been  spoken  of  as  immediate  on  the 
death  [of  a  maiden]  within  two  years  from  birth.  [Im- 
purity extends  over]  a  night,  [if  she  dies  before]  the 
ceremony  of  tonsure.  (26) 

Three  nights  [form  the  period  of  impurity  if  a 
maiden  dies]  before  being  given  away  in  marriage ; 
and  ten  [nights]  after  that  [form  the  period  of  impurity 
in  her  husband's  family].  Three  nights  [form  the  period 
of]  impurity  on  the  death  of  a  maternal  grand- 
father. (27) 

Similarly  is  to  be  known  the  period  of  impurity  on 
the  death  of  a  uterine  sister.  Pakshini  (a  night  with 
the  two  days  enclosing  it,)  [forms  the  period  of 
impurity]  on  the  death  of  relations  formed  by  marriage 
as  also  of  Vdndhavas  (i.e.,  maternal  uncles).  (28) 

One  night  has  been  laid  down  [in  the  case  of  the 
death]  of  the  preceptor  or  a  fellow  religious  student. 
Immediate  [is  the  purification]  on  the  death  of  the 
king  in  whose  territory  [a  person]  lives.  (29) 

On  the  death  of  a  married  daughter  [living]  in  the 
house,  the  father  [has  to  observe  impurity  for]  three 
days ;  three  nights  [form  the  period  on  the  death  and 


Us'and  Saih/iitd. 

birth  of  sons  to]  Punarvu-wives  (i.e.,  widows  married 
by  him),  of  sons  born  in  the  family  (i.e.,  not  born  of  his 
own  loins),  and  of  the  preceptor.  A  day  and  night  is 
spoken  of  [as  the  period  of  impurity  on  the  death  of] 
a  wife  who  has  been  visited  by  another  person,  [and  ori 
that]  of  the  preceptor's  son  and  wife.  (30 — 31) 

One  night  [is  the  period  of  impurity  on  the  death] 
of  an  Upddhydya,  of  S'rotriyas  and  of  50//W0-rela- 
tions  living  in  [a  person's]  house.  (32) 

Three  nights  [form  the  period  of  impurity]  on  the 
death  of  the  mother-in-law  as  well  as  that  of  the  father- 
in-law.  Immediate  purification  is  laid  down  on  the  death 
of  a  Sagotra  (i.e.,  one  of  the  same  family  after  fourteen1 
generations).  133) 

A  Brdhmana  attains  to  purity  within  ten  days ;  a 
Kshatriya,  within  twelve  days  ;  a  Vaishya,  within  fifteen! 
days,  and  a  S'udra  within  a  month.  (34) 

It  has  been  desired  [by  the  Law-givers]  that  of  all 
persons,  born  in  the  families  of  the  Kshatriyas,  Vais'yaSj 
and  the  S'udr'ds  who  serve  good  Brdhntands  with  un- 
divided attention,  one  attains  to  purification  within  ten 
days  like  unto  a  Brdhmana  [himself].  (35) 

[If  a  person  born]  in  degraded  castes,  [serves  the 
Kshatriyas  and  Vais'yds^  [he  attains  to  purification] 
like  the  Kshatriyas  and  Vais'yds*  [On  the  death  of  a 
Sapinda-']  S'udra,  the  impurity  for  the  Vais'yds,  Kshatri- 
yas and  the  Brdhmands  extends,  in  order,  over  six,  three, 
and  one  night.  O  ye  leading  Brdhmands,  [similarly  on- 
the  death  of  a  Sapinda-  VaiJya  ]  the  impurity  for  the 
S'udrdSj  Kshatriyas  and  the  Brdhmands  extends  over 


*  If  a  person  serves  a  Kshatriya,  he  attains  purification  in  that  work- 
within  twelre  days  ;  and  if  a  Vaiiya,  within  fifteen  days. 


244  tiJana  Samhiia. 


a  fortnight,  six  nights  and  three  nights  respectively.  0 
ye  foremost  of  the  twice-born  race,  the  impurity  [on  the 
death]  of  a  Kshatriya,  for  the  Brdhmands,  the  Vats'  yds 
and  the  S'udrds  [extends],  it  is  said,  over  six  nights 
and  twelve  days  gradually.*  (36  —  38) 

On  the  death  of  a  Brdhmana,  the  S'udrds,  Vais^yds^ 
and  the  Kshatriyds  [should  have  to  observe  the  usual 
period  of  impurity].  By  performing  the  funeral  rites 
of  a  Brdhmana  who  is  a  Sapinda  (i.e.,  for  whom  one 
is  entitled  to  offer  a  Pinda),  a  Vipra  attains  to  puri- 
fication within  one  night.  The  Lotus-sprung  (Brahma) 
has  said  so.  By  taking  meals  or  living  with  [that 
Brahmana~\,  one  attains  to  purification  within  ten 
nights.  (39—40) 

If  having  his  mind  possessed  by  avarice,  one  speedily 
burns  [the  dead  body  of  a  Brdhmana],  a  twice-born 
person  (i.e.,  a  Brdhmana}  becomes  purified  within  ten  ; 
and  a  Kshatriya,  within  twelve  days.  (41) 

A  Vais'ya  attains  to  purification  within  a  fortnight  ; 
and  a  S'ddra,  within  a  month  ;  or  again,  in  six,  seven 
and  three  nights.  (42) 

Having  cremated  a  helpless,  friendless,  poor  Brdh- 
mana, the  Brdhmands  and  others  attain  to  purification 
by  drinking  clarified  butter  after  bathing.  (43) 

If  out  of  love,  a  person  of  a  lower  caste  touches, 
during  the  period  of  impurity  >  a  higher  caste,  and  a 
higher  caste  a  lower  one,  he  attains  to  purification  with 
[the  termination  of]  his  impurity.  [By  following  the 


*  These  Slokas  conclusively  prove  that  there  was  inter-caste- 
marriage  prevalent  at  that  time,  otherwise  these  laws,  relating  to  puri- 
fication, would  not  have  l<ti  i  .  ..  ,*  i  .  *'iv\  i  \iu. 


and   Sam  in  fit. 

'dead  body  of  a]  Kshatriya,  [a  Brdhmana}  attains  puri- 
fication in  one  day  ;  and  [following  that  of]  a  Vais'ya^ 
in  two  days.  (44) 

[In  following  that  of]  a  S'udra,  three  days  have  been 
spoken  of  [as  the  period  of  impurity] .  [He  should]  again 
[practise]  Prdndydm  for  a  hundred  times.  If,  before 
the  bones  of  a  S'udra  are  deposited,  a  Brdhmana  weeps 
with  his  (/.£.,  the  S'udras]  own  people,  [his]  impurity 
lasts  for  three  nights.  One  night  is  for  a  Kshatriya 
and  Vais'ya,  [if  they  do  the  same].  Otherwise  («>., 
after  the  depositing  of  the  bones),  a  Brdhmana  [attains 
purification  by  bathing  after  a  day  or  a  night].  (45 — 46) 

If,  before  the  bones  of  a  Vipra  are  deposited,  a 
Brdhmana  weeps  for  him,  he,  forsooth^  attains  puri- 
fication by  bathing  with  the  cloth,  worn  by  him  at  that 
time,  on.  (47) 

He,  amongst  the  Brdhmans  or  other  inferior  castes 
who  takes  food  with  them  (i.e.,  those  who  are  impure) 
or  drives  in  the  same  conveyance,  attains  purification 
within  ten  days  (i.e.)  the  fixed  period  of  impurity).  (48) 

He  who  wilfully  takes  their  (i.e.,  impure  persons') 
food,  even  if  he  be  a  Deity,  attains  purification  after 
observing  impurity  [for  the  fixed  period]  and  bathing 
after  its  termination.  (49) 

A  person,  who  under  the  pressure  of  famine  takes 
food  offered  by  them,  should  observe  impurity  for  the 
[number  of]  days  [he  has  taken  it] ;  thereafter,  he  should 
perform  penances.  (50) 

The  twice-born,  who  maintain  [their]  Sacred  Fires, 
should  on  the  death  of  their  Sapindas,  observe  impurity 
from  the  time  of  cremation  ;  and  others,  from  the  hour 
of  death.  (51) 

Sapindatd  (kinship  connected  by  the  offering   of  the 
32 


246  Us'ana  Samhita. 

funeral  rice-balls  to  the  Manes)  ceases  in  the  seventh 
generation  -*  Samdnodakabhdva]'  (relationship  connected 
by  the  libations  of  water  to  the  Manes  of  common 
ancestors)  ceases  when  there  is  no  knowledge  of  the 
name  and  birth  [of  a  person].  (52) 

Father,  grandfather  and  great-grandfather  [who  are 
entitled  to  S'raddhd],  the  Lepabhajas,\  and  one's  own 
self, — these  seven  generations  form  the  Sapindas.  (53) 

The  Divine  Prajapati  has  said  that  ^////^-rela- 
tionship extends  over  [three  generations]  upwards  [from 
the  great-grandfather].  Sapinda  relationship  extends 
over  three  degrees  in  case  of  persons  of  various  Varnas 
begotten  by  one  [father]  upon  many  wives  of  various 
castes.  (54) 

Architects,  artizans,  physicians,  maid-,  and  man-, 
servants,  kings,  and  royal  officers  have  been  described 
as  to  have  immediate  purification.  Persons,  who  make 
daily  charities  ;  one,  who  makes  a  Niyama  (i.e.,  a  parti- 
cular promise);  one,  who  knows  the  Brahman',  religious 
students ;  those,  who  are  initiated ;  those,  who  are 
engaged  in  religious  rites  ;  a  king  who  has  been  duly 
installed  and  those  who  continually  distribute  rice,— 
[all  these]— attain  immediate  purification  according  to 
ordinances.  (55—57) 

*  From  a  person  with  whom  the  calculation  begins,  six  generations 
upwards  and  six  generations  downwards  constitute  the  Spindas. 

t  This  relationship  extends  from  the  seventh  or  the  (eleventh)  to  the 
thirteenth  (or  the  fourteenth,  according  to  some,)  degree. 

\  Lepas  means  the  wipings  of  the  hand  (or  the  remnants  of  the 
food  sticking  to  the  hand)  after  offering  funeral  oblations  to  the  first 
three  ancestors  (father,  grandfather  and  great-grandfather);  these 
wipings  being  offered  to  the  three  ancestors  after  the  great-grandfather 
i.e.,  to  paternal  ancestors  in  the  4th,  5th  and  the  6th,  degree, 


Us' ami  Samhitfi.  247 

In  a  sacrifice,  at  the  time  of  wedding,  in  any  reli- 
gious rite  relating  to  a  Deity,  during  famine  or  any 
other  calamity,  immediate  purification  has  been  men- 
tioned. (58) 

Immediate  is  the  purification  for  those  who  have 
been  killed  by  poison,  by  lightning^  by  the  king,  by  the 
Br&kmanaS)  or  by  snake-bite.  (59) 

Immediate  purification  is  laid  down  in  a  death  by 
entering  into  fire,  by  jumping  down  from  a  high  place, 
by  taking  poison,  or  by  fasting ;  in  that  for  Brdh- 
mands  and  kine  ;  and  in  that  while  leading  the  life  of  a 
Sannyasin,  (60) 

There  is  no  impurity  [at  the  death  of]  perpetual 
religious  students,  forest-recluses,  Yatins>  and  religious 
students,  as  well  as  at  that  of  an  outcaste.  [This  has 
been  said]  by  the  learned.  (61) 


CHAPTER  VII. 

'[PERSONS  QUALIFIED  TO  PERFORM  THE  S'RA'DDHA.] 

No  cremation,  no  funeral  rites,  no  depositing  of  bones, 
no  shedding  of  tears,  [no  offering  of]  Pinda  and  no 
S'raddha  whatsoever  should  be  done  for  the  degraded 
ones,  (i) 

There  is  no  impurity  for  him  who  lays  a  violent  hand 
on  himself  with  fire,  poison,  etc.  No  cremation  and  no 
offering  of  water  should  be  made  for  him.  (2) 

If,  however,  by  a  mistake  one  dies  through  fire, 
poison,  etc.,  impurity  should  be  observed  for  him  and 
[the  rite  of  offering]  water  should  be  performed.  (3) 

If  a  son  is  born  [to  a  person],  gold,  paddy,  kine, 
clothes,  sesame,  rice,  oil,  molasses,  and  clarified  butter- 


348  Us  ana  Samhita. 

all  these  raw  materials    may    be  accepted  from   him   on* 
that  very  day.   (4) 

From  the  house  of  a  person  who  is  in  an  impure 
state,  fruits,  sugar-cane,  vegetables,  salt,  wood, 
water,  curd,  clarified  ^butter,  medicines,  milk,,  and  dried- 
food  may  be  accepted  daily.  One,  who  maintains  the 
Sacred  Fire,  shall  be  duly  burnt  with  the  Three 
Fires.  (5—6) 

One,  who  does  not  maintain  the  three  Sacred  Fires 
[should  be  burnt]  with  the  Sacred  Fire  consecrated  in  the 
house ;  and  other  inferior  persons,  with  the  ordinary  fire  ; 
—by  the  twice-born.  If  the  dead  body  is  not  found,  an 
image  should.be  made  with  Paldsa  [leaves,] ; — -and  be  only 
burnt  by  the  Sapinda- relations  endued  with  reverence,, 
controlling  speech  and  [mentioning]  only  the  name  and, 
family.  Water,  they  should  offer,  only  once.  (7 — 8) 

They  all,*  putting  on  wet  cloth  and  with  kinsmen, 
should  duly  offer  every  day,  [both]  morning  and  evening 
for  ten  days  [consecutively],  Pindas  >at  the  gate  of  the 
house  for  the  deceased  person.  They  should  feed  four 
Brahmanas.  On  the  second  day,  shavingf  shall  be  done 
along  with  all  kinsmen.  (9 — 10) 

Then  the  bones  [of  the  deceased  person]  should 
be  deposited  by  the  Jilati%  (chief-mourner)  with  all 
kinsmen.  [The  performer  of  the  ^'rdddha  on  that 

*  The  usual  practice  is  that  the  son  should  offer  the  Pindas.  In  the 
Text  Sarva  or  all,  is  mentioned ;  because,  in  the  absence  of  a  son,  all  the 
Sapindas  are  qualified  to  offer  Pindas. 

f  Shaving  takes  place  generally  on  the  last  but  one  day  of  im- 
purity. 

J  Here  the  word  Jndti  means  the  next  kin  who  performs  the  funer- 
ral  rite ;  and  he  is,  therefore,  qualified  to  perform  the  S'rdddha  in  the 
absence  of  a  son. 


1  and  Sawhita. 


day],    should,   with  reverence,  feed  an  uneven  number  o$ 
pure  Brdhm  anas  not  lesser  than  three,   (n) 

On  the  fifth,  ninth,  and  the  eleventh,  day  he  should 
feed  an  uneven  number  of  Brdhmands.  This,  rite  is. 
known  as  the  first  Strdrfdka.  (12) 

On  the  eleventh  day  (for  the  Rrdhmands}  and  on 
[the  day  after]  the  twelfth  (for  the  Kshatriyds),  the 
person,  who  lights  up  [the  funeral  pyre],  should,  with 
reverence,  offer  a  Pitida  and  a  Pavitra  fa  Kus1  d-  reed) 
in  honour  of  the  deceased.  And  he  should  [perform 
the  S'rdddha]  every  month  on  the  day  of  death  for  one 
year.  (13—14) 

It  is  said  that  after  full  one  year,  the  Sapindikaran 
(annual  S'rdddha  for  offering  Pindas)  should  be  p.er- 
formed.  O  leading  twice-born  ones,  [in  that  S'rdddha, 
the  performer)  should  make  four  vessels,  [one]  for  the 
deceased,  and  [three  for]  ancestors  of  three  degrees 
upwards.  (15) 

Thereupon  with  the  M'antramSf—*"Ye  Sam-ana  }  etc.," 
he  should  pour  down  [water  from]  the  vessel  dedicated 
to  the  deceased  into  those  offered  for  the  Pitris.  (grand- 
father, etc.).  Pindas  should  be  offered  in  the  same 
manner.  (16) 

It  is  laid  down  that  Sapindikaran,  S'rdddha  should 
be  preceeded  by  the  Daiva,  (i.e.,  offerings  made  to  the 
Deities).  There  one  should  invite  the  departed  Manes 
and  point  out  again  (i.e.,  invoke)  the  deceased.*  (17) 

No  separate  rite  should  be  performed  for  those 
deceased  ancestors  for  whom  Sapindikaran  has  [once] 
been  done.  He,  who  makes  separate  Pindas,  becomes  a 
destroyer  of  the  departed  Manes.  (18) 

*  A   deceased   person  is   called    Preta   till   the   celebration  of    the 
,  after  which  he  is  designated  Pitti, 


250  Us1  ana  Samhitd. 

After  the  death  of  his  father,  a  son  should  be  well 
instructed  in  the  word  Pinda.  He  should,  every  day,  offer 
boiled  rice  and  a  pitcher,  full  of  water,  according  to  the 
rites  to  be  performed  for  a  deceased  person.  (19) 

The  annual  \Vraddha>  which  should  be  performed 
every  year,  must  be  done  according  to  the  regulation  of 
a  Pdrvana-(S'rdddha).  Such  is  the  eternal  law.*  (20) 

[Every  rite]  for  the  parents,  such  as  the  offering  of 
the  Pindas,  should  be  performed  by  the  sons.  In  the 
absence  of  a  son,  the  wife  should  do  it ;  and  in  the 
absence  of  a  wife,  the  uterine  brother  should  do  the 
same.  (21) 

I  have  thus  described  duly  the  duties  of  the  house- 
holder. [The  duty]  of  women  is  to  serve  their  husbands. 
There  is  no  other  duty  laid  down  for  them.  (22) 

He,  who  daily  satisfies  his  own  duties  and  has  his 
mind  dedicated  to  I's'vara,  attains  to  that  great  station 
which  has  been  highly  spoken  of  in  the  Vedds.  (23) 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

[PENANCES  FOR  VARIOUS  SINS.] 
Penance  for  Brahminicide. 

THE  destroyer  of  a  Brahmana>  one  who  drinks  spiritu- 
ous liquors,  a  thief,  and  the  violator  of  the  preceptor's 
bed,  and  the  one  who  associates  with  them, — are  the 
great  sinners,  (i) 

He,   who   lives  for  a  year  in  their  company,  becomes 

*  This  is  the  ritual  when  the  father  dies  after  becoming  a  Sannydsin 
or  when  the  parents  die  on  an 


Us' and  Samhitd.  25 I 

degraded.     Even  he,  who  daily  sits  [with  them]  on   [the 
same]  bed  and  seat,  also,  becomes  degraded.  (2) 

A  twice-born  person,  who  knowingly  performs  reli- 
gious rites  for,  holds  sexual  union  with,  teaches  and 
takes  meals  with  [those  great  sinners],  becomes  forth- 
with degraded.  (3) 

A  twice-born  one,  who  unwillingly  and  out  of  ig- 
norance, receives  religious  instructions  [from  such 
a  sinner]  and  a  fellow-student  remain  outcasted  for  one 
year.  (4) 

One,  who  is  guilty  of  Brahminicide,  should,  for  self- 
purification,  by  making  a  hut,  begging  alms  and  carrying 
a  rod  with  the  skull  of  a  dead  [Brdhmana]  placed  on  its 
top,  live  in  a  forest  for  twelve  years.  (5) 

He  should  avoid  all  the  houses  belonging  to  the 
Brahmands  and  temples.  He  should  always  accuse  his 
ownself  and  think  of  the  [dead]  Brdhmana.  (6) 

Every  day  when  the  fire  is  shorn  of  its  smoke  and  all 
conversation  about  food  is  stopped,  gradually  he  should 
enter  into  seven  houses  belonging  to  qualified  castes  and 
capable  [of  offering  alms],  (7) 

Or,  [for  purification,]  he  should  voluntarily  betake  to 
fasting,  jump  down  from  a  high  place,  enter  into  a  burn- 
ing fire  or  into  the  water.  This  is  the  first  [part].  (8) 

Or,  for  a  Brdhmana  or  a  cow,  he  should,  disinterest- 
edly, give  up  his  vital  airs  (i.e.,  life) ;  or,  making  a  Vipra, 
suffering  from  a  long-standing  disease,  shorn  of  his  ail- 
ment, [he  attains  to  purification].  (9) 

By  offering  food  to  a  learned  [Brakmana],  one  is 
freed  ^from  [the  sin  of]  Brahminicide.  A  twice-born 
person  is  [also]  purified  by  taking  the  final  bath  in  a 
Horse-Sacrifice.  (lo) 

The  killer^of  a  Brdhmana,    who   gives  his  all  unto  a 


Us'and  Samhita. 


Brahmana  conversant  with  the  Vedas,  or  who  sees  the 
Bridge/*  is  freed  from  sins.  (11) 

Penance  for  Drinking  Spirituous  Liquors. 

A  DRINKER  of  spirituous  liquors  should  drink  wine,  red- 
hot  like  iron.  A  twice-born  person,  when  his  body  is 
[thus]  burnt,  is  freed  from  [the  sin].  (12) 

Or  by  drinking  red-hot  cow's  urine,  or  [similar] 
liquidified  cowdung,  milk,  clarified  butter  or  water, 
[he  is]  freed  from  the  sin.  (13). 

Or  for  the  expiation  of  the  sin,  he  should,  with  a  wet 
cloth  on  and  being  self-controlled,  perform  the  vow  of 
Brahmanicide  (for  twelve  years).  (14). 

Penance  for  the  Theft  of  Gold. 

A  Brahmana,  who  has  stolen  gold,  should,  after 
approaching  the  king  and  describing  his  own  misdeeds, 
once  say,  —  "  Do  thou  punish  me."  (15) 

Taking  up  the  mace,  the  king  should  himself  once 
strike  him.  Thereupon  he  [the  perpetrator]  becomes 
freed  [from  the  sin].  Or  by  [practising]  austerities  a 
Brahmana-thiei  becomes  freed].  (16) 

Finding  out  and  taking  up  by  the  hand  a  destructive 
mace,  stick,  or  an  iron  rod  sharpened  on  both  ends, 
running  about  with  dishevelled  hairs,  trumpeting  his 
own  sinful  deeds,  [a  perpetrator  of  a  crime  should  say,  —  ] 
"  Punish  me."  The  king  should  [then]  strike  the  thief. 
(17-18). 

Whether  meeting  with  death  or  escaping  it,  there- 
upon, he  is  freed  from  [the  sin  of]  theft.  Without 

*  This  refers  to  the  Bridge,  constructed  by  Rama  over  the  Sea,  at 
Rdmes'iuciram,  in  the  District  of  Madura,  tin  the  Madras  Presidency, 
popularly  known  as  Adam's  Bridge.  This  shows  that  this  Samhitd  must 
have  been  written  after  the  Rdmdyana  Period. 


Us'izna  Safahitfi.  253 

-punishing    [a  thief],  a  king  is  visited  wihh  the  sin  of  th» 
•thief.  (19) 

The  fruit  (*.<?.,  the  sin)  of  gold-theft  [committed  by] 
another  (i.e.,  a  Brahmana],  is  dissipated  by  [the  per- 
formance of]  austerities.  Putting  on  a  tattered  cloth,  a 
Brdhmana  should  practise  the  Brdkma-vow  in  the 
forest  [for  twelve  years].  (ao) 

By  [either]  taking  the  final  bath  in  a  Horse-Sacrifice3 
<©r  %y  giving  unto  the  Brdhmands  gold  equal  to  the 
weight  of  his  own  body,  a  twice-born  person  is  [also] 
purified.  (21) 

A  Brdhmana-ttfitt  of  gold,  for  the  expiation  of  that 
sin,  leading  a  continent  life.,  should  practise  hard 
austerities  for  a  year.  (22) 

Penance  for  Knowing  a  Step-Mother. 
BY     knowing   a   step-mother,    under    the    influence   of 
lust,    a  Brahmana   should  embrace  a  female-form,  made 
af  black  iron  after  his  heart  and  heated.  (23) 

Or  having  cut  off  himself  his  generative  organ  and 
testes  and  taken  N  them  in  his  palms,  he  should  proceed 
straight  on  to  the  so  ith  or  to  the  west  till  the  destruction 
of  his  body.  (24) 

Or,  for  expiation,  he  should  meet  with  death  for  his 
preceptor,  or  he  should  practise  the  Brahma-vo\\  [for 
twelve  years].  In  a  year  [he  is  also  purified]  by 
•embracing  the  branch  [of  a  tree]  full  of  thorns.  (25) 

Being  self-restrained  he  should  lie  down  on  earth. 
A  Vipra,  being  self-controlled  and  with  a  tattered  cloth 
on,  should  practise  hard  austerities  for  a  year.  One, 
knowing  a  step-mother,  should  thus  be  freed  [from  the 
sin.]  (26). 

The  foremost  of  the  twice-born  becomes  freed   [from 
<the   sin]    by  taking  the  final  bath  in  a  Horse-Sacrifice, 
33 


254  Us1  and  Satiihita. 

Leading  a  continent  life,  always  practising  austerities/ 
taking  his  meals  at  the  eighth  period  (/.£.,  in  the  night 
of  the  fourth  day  after  fasting  for  three  days),  standing 
or  seated  and  lying  down  on  earth,-^a  man,  who  has 
no  money,*  should  thus,  in  three  years,  be  freed  from 
the  sin.  (27 — 28) 

Or  he  should  perform  four  or  five  Chandrayanas.   (29) 

Penance  for  the  Sin  of  mixing  with  the  Degraded. 
IF  a  twice-born  person  mixes,  out  of  avarice,  with  a 
degraded  person,  he  should  once  perform,  for  the  ex- 
piation of  the  sin,  the  penance  laid  down  for  him  (i.e., 
the  degraded).  Such  a  person,  amongst  those  who  asso- 
ciate with  the  degraded,  attains  to  freedom  [from  the 
sin],  or  he  should  zealously  practise  hard  austerities 
for  one  year.  (30 — 31) 

Half  is  the  penance  for  associating  [with  them]  for 
six  months.  Such  purificatory  rites  dissipate  even  the 
impurity  of  the  great  sinners.  (32) 

One  attains  to  freedom  [from  th^  sin]  by  taking 
journeys  to  holy  places  situate  or  this  earth.  O  ye 
Vipras,  a  Brdhmana,  possessed  by  lust,  after  perpetrat- 
ing the  mighty  iniquities  of  Brahmanicide,  drinking 
spirituous  liquors,  theft,  or  knowing  his  step-mother, 
being  self-controlled,  should  perform  [the  vow  df]  fasting 
at  a  holy  place.  (33 — 34) 

Or  meditating  on  Kapardin  (S'iva),  he  should  enter 
into  the  fire  or  water.  Munis,  conversant  with  religious 
rites,  have  not  seen  of  any  other  means 'of  redemption 
[for  them].  (35) 


*  It  ^rtiovvs  that  a  rich  man  is  freed  from  the  sin  by  making  proper 
gifts. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

[PENANCES  FOR  VARIOUS  MINOR  SINS.] 

BY  willingly  knowing  his  daughter,  sister  or  daughter- 
in-law,  a  Vipra  shoufd  enter  into  a  burning  fire.  This 
is  the  law.  (i) 

By  co-habiting  with  mother's  sister,  maternal  uncle's 
wife,  or  with  father's  sister,  or  by  knowing  sister's 
daughter,  maternal  aunt's  daughter,  or  paternal  aunt's 
daughter,  one,  bein^  self-controlled,  [and]  after  practis- 
ing hard  austerities,  should  perform  four  or  five 
Chan  dray  anas.  (2 — 3) 

By  knowing  a  maternal  uncle's  daughter,  one  should  per- 
form the  Chandrdyana.  By  co-habiting  with  wife's  friend 
or  with  her  sister,  after  fasting  for  a  day  and  a  night, 
one  should  perform  the  Taptakrichha  (a  kind  of  penance). 
By  knowing  a  v  :man  in  [her]  menses,  [one  should 
attain]  purification  [by  fasting]  for  three  nights.  (4 — 5) 

By  co-habiting  with  a  Kstiatriya-\vQn\dii\,  [a  Brdh- 
mana]  is  purified  by  a  Chandrdyana  or  by  a  Pardka  (a 
kind  of  penance).  The  Divine  Unborn  (Brakmd)  has 
said  so.  (6) 

By  [consciously]  killing  a  frog,  mungoose,  crow,  cat, 
boar,  mouse  or  a  dog, — a  twice-born  person  should 
perform  a  great  penance  extending  over  sixteen  days. 
Or  by  [unconsciously]  killing  a  dog,  one  should  zealously 
drink  milk  for  three  nightb.  (7) 

Or  by  [unknowingly]  killing  a  cat  or  a  mur.^  jse, 
one  should  wend  a  way  a  Yojani  [in  length].  By  killing 
a  horse,  a  twice-born  person  should  perform  a  hard 
austerity  extending  over  twelve  [days].  (8). 

Having  killed  a  servant,  the  foremost  of  the  tw;ce- 
born  should  give  away  a  weapon  made  of  crude  iron. 


256  Us'ana  Samhitd. 

Having  slain  a  crane,,  ftangava-mouse,  Kritalamb'hak- 
boar,  a  black-spotted  raven,  Tilat,  franclonfcie  partridge 
or  a  parrot,: — [one  should  give  away]  a  two-years-old 
calf ;  and  a  three-years-old'  one,  for  having  killed  a- 
heron.  (9—10) 

By  killing  a  swan^  crane,  Vaka  (a  kind  of  crane), 
a  TzY^-bird,  a  monkey,  or  a  Bhdsa, — one  should  make  a 
gift  of  a  cow  unto  a  Brahmana.  (n) 

By  staying  animals  living  on  flesh  or  deer,  one 
should  give  away  a  milch-cow  ;  [by  killing]  animals  that 
do  not  take  flesh,  a  calf ;  and  [by  killing]  a  camel,  gold'1 
weighing  five  rupees.  (12) 

By  killing  animals  having  bones,  [one  should]  present 
something  to  a  Vipra  ;  and  by  killing  those  that  have 
no  bones,  one  is  purified  by  Pranaydma.  (13) 

By  destroying  trees  yielding  fruits,  groves,  creepers, 
and  large  trees  loaded  with  fruits, — one  should  recite  a- 
hundred  Reverses.  (14) 

To  take  clarified  butter  is  the  purification  [enjoined 
for  destroying]  flowering  [plants].  By  killing,  by 
mistake,  [a  cow],  one  should  perform  the  Charrdrayana* 
and  the  Paraka.  (15) 

There  is  no  penance,  for  willingly  killing  her  -(i.e.,. 
a  cow).  By  stealing  men,  women,  houses,  tanks,  wells 
or  other  watery  expanses,-— one  is  purified  by  the  Chan- 
drayana\  By  stealing  articles  of  little  value  from 
another's  house,  one  should  perform  the  austerest  Santa- 
pana  for  self-purification.  The  five  ingredients  supplied 
by  the  cow  (Panchagavya]  [form]  the  purification  for 
pilfering  rice,  etc.,  and  wealth.  (16 — 18) 

Fasting  for  three  nights  is  [the  penance  for  pilfering} 
grass,  wood,,  trees,  flowers,  garments,  hide,  meat  and 


Us* ana  SartihM.  257 

Fasting  for  tvyelve  nights  is  [the  penance  for  steal- 
ing] diamonds,  corals,  precious  stones,  gold,  silver,  iron> 
belmetal  and  pebbles.  (20) 

[For  robbing]  cloven-footed  and  one-hoofed  animals, 
one  should  perform  the  self-same  penance  [i.e-.,  fasting 
for  twelve  nights).  [He,  who]  pilfers  birds  and  medicinal 
herbs,  [should  live  on]  milk  for  three  days.  (21) 

[There  is]  no  [penance  for  taking]  the  meat  [of 
animals]  sacrificed  unto  a  deity ;  [for  taking  any  other 
meat,  onej  should  perform  the  Chandrayana.  Or,  fasting 
for  twelve,  days,  he  should  offer  oblations  of  clarified 
butter  to  the  Fire  with  the  Kushmauda-\_Mantram\.  (22) 

By  eating  [the  meat  of]  a  mungoose,  owl  or  a  cat, 
one  should  perform  the  Sdntapanam.  By  eating  [that 
of]  a  dog,  one  is  purified  by  performing  a  mortifying 
penance  or  by  looking  at  an  auspicious  planet.  (23) 

And  he  should  then  perform  the  initiatory  rites  as  laid 
down  before  [by  the  preceptors] .  By  eating  a  porcupine, 
crane,  swan,  Karandava  (water-fowl),  or  a  Chakravdka^ 
—one  should  fast  for  twelve  days.  By  eating  a  pigeon ,. 
Titiva-bird,  Bhdsa,  parrot,  Sdrasa  (a  kind  of  crane),  a 
leech,  or  a  goose, — one  should  perform  the  same  penance, 
\  By  eating  a  porpoise,  bean,  meat,  fish,  or  a  boar, — one 
]  should  perform  the  same  penance.  By  eating  a  cuckoo,  a 
bird  living  on  fish,  a  frog,  or  a  snake, — -one  attains  to 
purification  by  living,  for  a  month,  on  barley  boiled  with 
the  urine  of  a  cow.  By  eating  water-ranging  animals, 
those  born  in  water,  those  killed  by  Rdkskasas,  those 
having  blood-red  feet, — one  should  perform  the  self-same 
penance  for  a  week.  By  takingithe  meat  of  a  dead  or  a 
useless  animal  procured  for  one's  use,  one  should  per- 
form the  same  penance  for  the  expiation  of  the  sin.  By 
eating  a  pigeon,  an  elephant,  a  pot-herb,  a  fowl,  a  Rajak* 


258  Us' ana  Samhitd. 

or  an  alligator, — one  should  perform  the  Prajdpatya 
(penance).  By  eating  onion  or  garlic,  one  should 
perform  the  Chdndrdyana.  (24—31) 

[By  eating]  the  Vdrtaku,  (the  egg-fruit),  or  the 
Tanduliya  (broken  rice),  [or  the  both], — one  is  purified  by, 
Prajdpatya.  [By  eating]  the  As'mantaka  (a  plant  from 
the  fibres  of  which  a  Brdhmands  girdle  may  be  made), 
or  what  comes  near, — -one  is  purified  [by  performing] 
the  Taptakrichha.  By  eating  [the  flesh  of]  a  man  or 
a  hare,  one  is  purified  by  Prajdpatya.  By  eating 
bottle-gourd  or  turnip,  one  should  perform  the  very 
same  penance.  (32— -33) 

By  eating  Udumvara,  one  is  purified  by  self-sought 
[penance  of]  Taptakrichha.  By  eating  useless  (/.<?., 
not  dedicated  to  a  deity),  Krisara  Samjdva  (a  kind 
of  pudding),  Pdyasa  (rice  boiled  with  milk,  cake, 
S'ushkali  (a  preparation  of  cake), — -one  is  purified  by 
performing  this  penance  for  three  nights.  By  drinking 
milk,  unworthy  of  being  drunk,  [all],  especially  a 
Brahmachdarin  becomes  purified  in  a  fortnight  by  living 
on  barley  boiled  with  the  urine  of  a  cow.  By  drinking 
the  milk  of  a  cow  that  has  not  passed  ten  nights  from 
the  day  of  delivery,  that  of  a  (similar)  she-buffaloe,  that 
of  a  (similar)  she-goat,  that  of  a  cow  big  with  a  young 
one,  or  that  of  a  cow  that  has  no  calf, — one  should  per- 
form the  self-same  penance.  By  taking  unnatural  trans- 
formations of  these  (such  as,  curd,  etc.,)  or  drinking  them 
out  of  ignorance,— one  is  purified  within  seven  nights  by 
living  on  barley  boiled  with  the  urine  of  a  cow.  By 
taking  food  of  the  first  S'rdddha,  or  on  the  occasion  of 
a  birth  or  death,-^-a  Brdhmana  becomes  purified  by 
attentively  (performing)  the  Chdndrdyana.  A  twice-born 
person,  by  taking  the  food  of  a  person  who  does  not 


Vfana  Samhitd.  259 

perform  the  daily  rites,  the  end  of  which  is  not  ruinous, 
should  fully  perform  the  Chdndrdyana.  Having  taken 
food  prepared  by  people  who  are  disqualified  to  serve 
it,  that  of  a  degraded  caste,  or  that  offered  at  the 
monthly  funeral  rite  of  a  deceased  person, — one  [should, 
so  it  is  said,  perform]  the  Taptakrichha.  Having  taken 
boiled  rice  from  a  'Ckanddla,  a  twice-born  person  should 
completely  perform  the  [penance  of]  the  Chdndrayana. 
(34—41) 

By  unwittingly  taking  excreta,  urine,  or  any  other 
article  sullied  with  spirituous  liqubr,— - the  three  twice- 
born  castes  should  again  perform  the  Samskdras  (rites 
of  purification).  (42) 

The  twice-born,— amongst  those  taking,  out  of  ignor- 
ance, urine  or  excreta  of  birds  living  upon  flesh, — should 
perform  the  great  Sdntapanam.  (43) 

[By  taking]  Bhdsa,  frog,  dog  or  a  crow, — [one 
should]  perform  a  distressing  penance.  A  Brdhmanct, 
becomes  purified  by  Prajdpatya  and  a  painfully  restricted 
diet.  (44) 

By    drinking   water   from   a  wine-bowl,  a  Kshatriya 
should     perform    the     Taptakrichha ;    a    Vaisya,    three  * 
distressing      penances ;      [  and      a      Brdhmana,  ]      the 
Chdndrayana.   (45) 

By  taking  the  residue  of  food  or  the  remnant  of 
drinking  water  left  by  a  dog,  a  twice-born  one  becomes 
purified,  within  three  nights,  by  living  upon  barley  boiled 
with  the  urine  pf  a  cow.  (46) 

By  .drinking  water  sullied  with  urine  or  excreta, 
one  should  perform  the  Sdntapanam  capable  of  purify- 
ing the  body.  (47) 

If  a   Brdhmana   unknowingly  drinks  water  in  a  well 


Us'ana  Saihhila. 

or  a  vessel  belonging  to  a  Chanddla,  he  should  perform 
the  Sdntapanam  destructive  of  sins.  (48) 

By  drinking  water  touched  by  a  Chanddla,  the  fore- 
most of  the  twice-born  becomes  purified  [by  fasting] 
for  three  nights  or  by  taking  the  Panchagavya*  (49) 

By  taking  food,  without  bathing  after  willingly 
touching  a  great  sinner,  a  foolish  twice-born  person 
should  perform  the  Taptakrichha.  (50) 

By  marrying  in  another  caste  (i.e.,  a  •S'^dfrtf -maiden), 
one  (i.e.,  a  Brdhmana]  becomes  a  Mahapdtakin  (great 
pinner).  By  associating  with  such  a  sinner,  one  also 
becomes  a  sinner.  (51) 

By  simply  marrying  a  maiden  of  different  caste, 
twenty-four  penances  are  [to  be  performed] ;  half  of 
those,  for  living  with  her;  there  is  no  penance  in 
procreating  a  son  [on  her].  (52) 

By  taking  food,  out  of  ignorance,  after  seeing  a  Maha- 
pdtakin, a  Chandala,  or  a  woman  in  [her]  menses, — one 
is  purified  [by  fasting]  for  three  nights.  (53) 

By  taking  [one's]  m~als,  while  still  wet  after  bathing, 
one  becomes  purified  [by  fasting]  for  a  day  and  a  night. 
[By  doing  so]   knowingly,    [one  attains  to  purification] 
with  the  [performance  of]    a   distressing   penance.     So 
the  Divine  Lotus-Sprung  Deity  has  said.   (54) 

By  eating  dry  [meat],  rotten  or  foul-smelling 
articles, — a  twice-born  person  should  fast.  [He  should] 
do  it  again  and  again.  (55) 

By  officiating  as  a  p'riest  for  servants,  [or  by  helping] 
others  (i.e.,  other  castes)  in  other  rites,  by  perform- 
ing rite,s  causing  death  to  another  person,  and  other 

*  The  five   products  of  the   cow  taken  collectively,  i.e.,  milk,  curd, 
clarified  butter,  urine  and  the  dung. 


Us* and  Saih/ntd. 

unworthy  .deeds, — [a   Brdhmana]   becomes   purified  by 
three  distressing  penances.  (56) 

By  performing  the  cremation  of  those  who  have  been 
killed  by  a  Brdhmana,  a  twice-born  person  becomes 
purified  by  a  Prdj&patya,  living  [all  the  while]  on  barley 
boiled  with  the  urine  of  a  cow.  (57) 

He,  who  having  his  body  anointed  with  oil,  passes 
urine  or  excreta,  or  has  his  beard  shaven,  or  holds  sexual 
intercourse,  in  the  morning,  becomes  purified  [by  fast- 
ing] for  a  day  and  night.  (58) 

By  disregarding  (i.e.,  not  performing  Homo)  Vivaha- 
Fire  for  a  day,  a  leading  twice-born  person  becomes 
purified  in  three  nights  ;  [and  by  doing  so]  for  three 
nights  again,  [one  becomes  purified  by  fasting  for]  six 
days.  (59) 

By  neglecting  it  for  ten  or  twelve  days,  one  should 
perform  the  most  distressing  Chandrdyana  for  the  expia- 
tion of  that  sin.  (60) 

By  accepting  an  article  from  an  outcaste,  one  be- 
comes purified  by  throwing  it  away.  He  should,  also, 
duly  perform  a  penance.  So  has  the  Divine  Lord 
said.  (61) 

By  desisting  from  a  fast  [intended  to  bring  about 
death]  and  returning  from  the  order  of  religious  men- 
dicants, one  should  perform  three  distressing  (Prdjd- 
patyas)  and  Chdndrdyanas.  (62) 

[Them]  by  again  performing  all  the  purificatory  rites, 
such  as  the  Jdtakarman,  etc.,  twice-born  persons  [are] 
purified. t  They  should,  having  an  eye  on  religion, 
completely  perform  this  per>ance.  (63) 

By  not   performing  a  morning  adoration  "and  offer- 
ing   sacrificial   fuels  to  the  Fire  for  pressure  or  urgency 
of  work,   [a   Brahmachdrin\-~-i&\i\K%  his   meals   once, 
34 


262  Us" ana  Samhita. 

and  in  the  night  only,  [if]  an  evening  [rite  is  neg- 
lected], and  after  being  purified  by  bathing,  govern- 
ing his  mind  and  restraining  his  self, — should  recite  the 
Gayatri  eight  thousand  times  and  be  [thus]  purged  of 
[his  sin.]  (64 — 65) 

If  a  householder,  out  of  mistake,  does  not  perform 
his  5/7#^jfl-adoration  or  deviates  from  the  performance 
of  a  Srtdfafca-vow,  he  should  fast  far  the  day.  (66) 

In  consequence  of  wilfully  [neglecting  the  Sandhya\, 
the  foremost  of  the  twice-born  should  perform  the  dis- 
tressing penance  [of  Prdjapatya  for  full  one  year,  and 
should  perform  the  Chandrayana,  [if  he  does  so]  for 
livelihood.  [And]  by  making  a  gift  of  kine,  [he  is] 
purged  of  [his  sins].  (67) 

If  he  does  so,  prompted  by  agnosticism,  a  twice-born 
person  should  perform  the  Prajapatya.  By  performing 
the  Taptakrichha,  one  is  purged  off  of  [the  sin  of]  acting- 
against  the  Deities  and  preceptors.  (68) 

By  willingly  riding  a  car  drawn  by  camels  or  asses, 
one  becomes  purified  [by  fasting]  for  three  nights.  One 
should  not,  being  nude,  enter  into  the  water.  (69) 

The  purification  of  the  offspring  [of  sinners,  is 
brought  about]  by  taking  food  in  the  night  of  the  third 
day  for  a  month,  the  recitation  of  the  Samkitd  or  the 
performance  of  S' akala-Homa*  (70) 

By  putting  on  a  blue  or  a  dark-blue  raiment,  a  Brah- 
mana  should  fast  for  a  day  and  night,  and  he  should 
purify  [himself]  by  [taking]  the  Panchagavya  after 
bathing.  (71) 

By   reciting   the    Vedds,    Dharma-S' astras  and    the 


'  The  rite  of  offering  oblation  to  the  Sacred  Fire   as   followed  by  the 
S'dkala  School  of  the  Rig-Veda, 


Us*  an  a  Samhita.  263 

Pur  anas  before  the  Chanddlas,  one  is  purified  by  the 
Chdndrdyana.  There  is  no  other  means  of  redemption 
for  him.  (72) 

Having  touched,  on  some  occasion,  [the  dead  body  of 
a  person]  killed  by  hanging,  a  Brdhmana  becomes  puri- 
fied either  by  the  Chdndrdyana  or  the  Prdjdpatya.  (73). 

If,  without  washing  his  mouth  after  taking  his  meals, 
a  twice-born  person  touches  a  Chandala  or  any  other  low- 
born having  still  the  leavings  of  food  in  his  mouth, 
he  should  perform  the  Prdjdpatya  for  purification.  (74) 

By  touching  a  Chandala,  a  woman  who  has  given 
birth  to  a  child,  a  dead  body,  a  woman  in  [her]  menses 
or  those  touched  by  her,  or  any  outcaste,  one  should 
bathe  for  purification.  (75) 

If,  out  of  mistake,  one  touches  an  article  touched  by 
a  Chandala,  a  woman  who  has  given  birth  to  a  child,  or 
a  dead  body,  purification  is  attained  by  bathing,  rinsing 
the  mouth  and  [thereafter]  reciting  the  Gdyatri.  (76) 

By  touching  what  should  not  be  touched,  the  fore- 
most of  the  twice-born  should  purify  [himself]  by 
bathing.  And  he  should  [also]  rinse  his  mouth  for 
purification.  So  the  Divine  Grandfather  has  said.  (77) 

If,  on  any  occasion,  a  Vipra  passes  excreta  while 
taking  meals,  he  should  then  immediately  wash  himself, 
bathe,  fast  and  offer  libations  of  clarified  butter  to  the 
Fire.  (78) 

By  touching  the  dead  body  of  a  Chandala,  the  fore- 
most of  the  twice-born  should  perform  the  distressing 
penance  I  of  Prdjdpatya}.  Then  by  [fasting]  for  a  day 
and  night  [and]  seeing  a  star  in  the  sky,  [he  becomes] 
purified.  (79) 

Having  touched  spirituous  liquor,  a  twice-born  person 
should  perform  the  Prandyant  thrice  [for]  purification. 


264  Us' and  Samhita. 

[By   touching]     onion    or    garlic,     one    is   purified    by 
drinking  clarified  butter.  (80) 

Being  bitten,  by  a  dog  [on  the  lower  part  of  the 
navel],  a  Brdhmana  should  drink  milk  only  in  the  even- 
ing for  three  days  ;  threefold  is  the  penance,  if  bitten  on 
the  upper  part  of  the  navel.  (81) 

Threefold  is  the  penance,  [if  bitten]  on  the  arms  ; 
and  fourfold,  if  on  the  head.  Being  bitten  by  a  dog, 
the  foremost  of  the  twice-born  should,  after  bathing, 
recite  the  Gdyatri.  (82) 

An  indigent  householder, — who,  when  not  suffering 
from  an  ailment,  daily  takes  his  food  without  perform-* 
ing  the  Five  Sacrifices, — becomes  purified  by  perform- 
ing half  the  Prdjdpatya  (83) 

He,  who  does  not  adore  the  Sacred  Fire  deposited 
in  his  house  on  Azr^fl-days,  (i.e.,  on  the  day  of  the  New- 
Moon,  or  OH  the  day  of  any  Planetary  Conjunction) ; — 
as  also  he,  who  does  not  know  his  wife  after  the 
menses  ; — should  perform  half  the  Prajapatya.  (84) 

He, — who,  without  water  or  entering  into  water 
passes  urine  or  excreta, — becomes  purified  by  being 
immersed  in  water  with  a  cloth  on  or  by  touching 

it.*  (85) 

A  householder,  [who  does  so  by  practice],  should  fast 
for  three  days  [and]  recite  the  Gdyatri  for  eight  thousand 
times.  The  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  who  follows 
the  dead  body  of  a  S'tidra,  should  recite  the  Gdyatri 
eight  thousand  times  in  a  river.  A  Vipra,  by  swearing 
falsely  in  a  matter  relating  to  the  destruction  of  another 
Vipra,  should  perform  the  penance  of  Chdndrdyana, 
living  on  boiled  barley.  By  making  unequal  gifts  in  the 

*  This  is  the  penance  for  a  person  who  cannot    suppress   the  motion 
whi  le  in  water  and  so  forth. 


Us'and  Samhitd.  265 

same  row,    one  is   purified  by   [the  distressing  penance 
of  [Prdjdpatya].  (86—88). 

By  getting  on  the  shadow  of  a  lowcaste  person, 
one  should  drink  clarified  butter  after  bathing.  By  look- 
ing at  the  Sun  in  an  impure  state,  one  should  recite  the 
Mantram  "  Agnindraja"  (89). 

By  touching  human  bones,  one  is  purified  by  bathing. 
By  completing  his  religious  study,  a  Vipra  should  beg 
alms  for  full  one  year.  (90) 

[By  becoming]  ungrateful  to  a  Brdhmana  [after 
having  lived]  in  his  house,  [one]  should  perform  the 
penance  for  five  years.  By  disregarding  an  elderly 
Brdhmana  by  uttering  Hum  or  Thou,  one,  after  bathing 
and  rinsing  the  mouth,  should,  thereafter,  please  him 
with  salutation.  By  striking  [a  Brdh?nana\  with  a 
reed,  by  binding  his  neck  with  a  cloth  or  defeating 
him  in  a  dissension,  one  should  gratify  him  with 
salutation.  By  uplifting  a  rod  [to  strike  him],  one 
should  perform  a  distressing  penance  ;  and  by  [actually] 
striking  him,  a  most  distressing  one.  (91—93) 

By  shedding  a  Brdhmana's  blood,  one  should  perform 
the  most  painful  of  all  the  penances.  And  by  remon- 
strating with  his  preceptor,  one  should  perform  a  purify-. 
ing  penance.  (94) 

By  spitting  before  a  Deity  or  a  Rishi  or  reproach- 
ing [any  of]  them  aloud,  one  should,  for  the  expiation  of 
that  sin,  [fast]  one  or  two  nights.  (95) 

By  defeating  a  Brdhmana  in  a  discussion  about 
Mimamsd,  one  should  give  away  gold.  A  twice*born 
person,  who  passes  urine  or  excreta  in  gardens 
attached  to  temples  or  who  cuts  a  whole  leaf,  should,  for 
purification,  perform  the  penance  of*  Chdndrdyatia. 
The  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  who,  out  of  malevolent 


266  Us* ana   Samhitd. 

feelings,  passes  urine  in  a  temple,  should,  after  cutting 
off  his  generative  organ,  perform-  the  Chdndrayana. 
For  vilifying  the  Deities,  the  R.ishis,  or  the  Vedds,  a 
twice-born  person  should  fully  perform  the  Prajapatya. 
By  conversing  with  such  [persons],  one  should,  after 
bathing,  adore  the  Deities.  (96 — 99) 

If  a  woman,  in  her  girlhood,  commits  a  great  sin,  she 
should  have  a  penance  performed  by  her  father  on  her 
behalf,  (too) 

One  can  espouse  such  a  maiden,  if  the  penance  has 
been  performed.  Otherwise  he,  [who  marries  her,]  should 
be  outcasted.  Even  in  the  destruction  of  a  Kshatriya} 
one  should  perform,  for  a  year,  the  penance  for 
Brahmanicide.  After  that  period,  one  should  give  away 
a  thousand  kine  together  with  a  bull.  (101) 

By  killing  all  (insects,  etc.),  one  should  give  away 
gold  or  silver  to  the  weight  of  a  Mashd.  Copper,  tin, 
lead,  belmetal  and  iron  are  purified  by  water  and  earth. 
All  metallic  vessels,  containing  leavings,  are  purified 
by  ashes  and  water.  Gold,  silver,  precious  stones, 
conch-shell,  pearls,  corals,  diamonds,  ebony,  rope  and 
hide  are  purified  by  water.  (102) 

Being  touched  by  a  Chandala  or  a  S'wapacha  while 
passing  urine  or  excreta,  one  is  purified  by  [fasting  for] 
three  nights.  By  taking  the  residue  of  food,  one 
should  fast  for  six  days.  (103) 

If  one's  father,  maternal  grandfather  or  elder  brother 
[does  not  perform]  the  Tapas  and  the  Agnihotra,  there 
is  no  sin  in  the  younger  brother's  marrying  before  the 
elder.  (104) 

He, — who,  on  the  last  day  of  the  dark  fortnight, 
adores  a  Brah?nana-]$.dy,  thinking  of  the  Grandfather 
Brahma, — becomes  freed  from  all  sins.  (105) 


Us  ana  Savihitt.  267 

Having  obtained  the  auspicious  day  of  Amdvasyd, 
one  should  adore  Yama  (the  Regent  of  the  Dead)  and 
Bhava  (S'iva).  And  having  fed  tjie  Brdhmanas  [on 
that  day],  he  becomes  freed  from  all  sins.  (lo6) 

Having  adored,  with  all  the  leading  Brdhmanas, 
Mahddeva  on  the  eigth,  or  the  fourteenth,  day  of  the 
dark  fortnight,  one  is  freed  from  all  sins.  (107) 

Having  seen  the  three-eyed  Deity  with  all  the 
igredients  of  adoration  in  the  first  Yama  (part)  of  the 
night  of  the  thirteenth  day,  one  is  freed  from  the  entire 
multitude  of  sins.  fio8) 

By  accepting  gifts  from  everywhere,  sacrificial 
presents  and  a  golden  image,  one  is  released  by  per- 
forming the  ^//z^-Sacrifice  and  uttering  benedictory 
verses.  (109) 

One,  by  reciting  the  Gayatri,  for  ten  thousand 
times,  is  freed  from  all  sins,  (no) 

THE   END. 


SAMHITA'. 


WITH   A 

LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION. 


EDITED  AND   PUBLISHED   BY 

IHANMATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  MA,  M.R.A.S. 

Rector,  Keshub  Academy, 

Author  of  the  English  Translations  of  The  Rdmdyana,  Mahd- 

Bhdrata,  S'rimadbhdgavatam,  Mahdnirvdna-Tantramt 

Harivamia,  Agni  Purdnam,  Mdrkandeya 

Puranam,  &cn  &ct 


PRINTED  BY  H.  C.  DAS,  ELYSIOM  PRBSS, 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DUTT'S  STREET. 

1906. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

Awgiras  Sam  hit  a. 

CHAPTER    I. 

Subject.  Sloka,  Page, 
jance  for  taking   food   from  low- 
people                      ...                 ...  2  269 

Lowcastes                      ...                 ...  3  269 

Penance   for   drinking    water    from 

Jowcaste  people        ...                 ...  4—7  269 

Penance  on  being  touched  by  a  Brah- 

rnana  who  has   leavings    of  food 

in  his  mouth              ...                  ...  8  269 

Penance  for  being  touched  by  others  9—11  270 

The  use  of  clothes  dyed  with  Indigo  12—24  27° 

Penance  for  killing  kine  ...  25—31  271 
Penance  to  be  performed  for  a  child 

and  others                 ...                 ...  32 — 33  272 

Penance  for  beating  a  cow                 ...  34  272 

Regulations  about  menses               ...  35—42  272 

Purification  of  metals    ...                 ...  43—45  273 

Regulation  about  food  and  drink    ...  46—60  273 

Regulations  about  the  use  of  shoes  ...  61 — 63  275 

Partaking  of  food  in  a  S'radcHia      ...  64  275 

Inieidiction  about  food...                 ...  65  —  72  276 


CHAPTER  I. 

HAVING  seen  [the  import  of  the  V6das\>  the  ascetic 
Ahgiras  described,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  the 
regulations  of  penance  for  the  various  Varnas  amongst 
the  duties  of  the  order  of  householders,  (i) 

Having  partaken  of  boiled  rice  from  lowcaste  people, 
twice-born  persons  [should  perform  penances]  ;  [The 
learned]  have  laid  down  the  Chdndrdyana,  Krichha  and 
one  half- [distressing  like  the  latter]  for  the  Brahmanas, 
Kshatriyas  and  the  Vais'yas  [respectively].  (2) 

A  washerman,  cobbler,  actor,  Varuda,  Kaivarta, 
Meda>  and  Bhilla, — these  seven  are  described  in  the 
Smriti  as  lowcastes.  (3) 

When  one  drinks  water  lyiitg  stale  in  a  vessel  in  the 
house  of  a  lowcaste  person,  he  should  perform  a 
penance.  (4) 

What  penance  is  laid  down  for  the  Varnas^  if  they, 
out  of  ignorance,  drink  water  from  a  vessel  or  from  a 
well  .belonging  to  a  Chanddla  ?  (5) 

A  Brdhmana  should  perform  the  Sdntapanam\  a 
Kshatriya,  the  Prdjdpatya ;  a  Vais'ya,  half  the 
Prdjdpatya  ;  and  a  S'udra,  the  Pddakrichha.  (6) 

By  drinking,  unknowingly,  water  from  degraded 
castes,  a  Brdhmana}  fasting  for  a  day  and  night, 
becomes  purified  with  the  Paiichagavya.  (7) 

If,  on  any  occasion,  a  Brahmana  is  touched  by 
another  Brdhmana  who  has  still  the  leavings  of  food 
in  his  mouth  (i.e.,  who  has  not  washed  his  mouth 
after  taking  meals),  he  becomes  purified  by  rinsing  his 
mouth.  The  ascetic  Angiras  has^aid  so.  (8) 

35 


Awgir&s  Saihhita. 

If  he  is,  on  any  occasion,  touched  by  a  S'tidra.  who 
has  not  washed  his  mouth  after  taking  meals,  he  should 
bathe  and  recite  [the  G&yatri]  and  shall  become 
purified  by  [fasting  for]  half-a-day.  (9) 

If  a  Vipra  is  [similarly]  touched  by  a  VaiJya,  a  dog 
Of  a  S'tidra,  he  shaH,  after  fasting  for  one  night, 
become  pu::^ed  with  the  Panchagavya.  (10) 

If  [a  Br£hmana\  is  touched  by  a  person  who  has 
Still  the  leavings  of  food  in  his  mouth,  by  being  touched 
by  whom  in  a  pure  state  he  is  required  to  take  [a  purifica- 
tory] bath,  he  should  have  to  perform  the  Prdjdpatya.  (11) 

Hereafter  I  shall  describe  the  regulations  relating  to 
the  use  of  clothes  dyed  with  indigo.  There  is  no  sin 
[in  using  them]  while  lying  down  on  bed  for  co-habiting 
with  one's  wife.  (12) 

By  rearing  up  indigo  plants,  by  selling  them,  and 
acquiring  his  livelihood  therefrom,  a  Vipra  becomes 
degraded  ;  and  he  is  freed  from  the  sin  by  three  distress- 
ing penances.  (13) 

[Sacrificial]  bath,  charity,  recitation  [of  Afantrams], 
the  offering  of  oblations  to  the  Sacred  Fire,  Vedic  study 
and  the  offering  of  oblations  to  the  departed  Manes  as  well 
as  ther  [Fivfe]  great  Yajnas  (Sacrifices)  become  profitless  to 
a  person,  from  the  use  of  a  cloth  dyed  with  indigo.  ( 14). 

If  one,  out  of  ignorance,  puts  on  a  cloth  dyed  with 
indigo,  one,  after  fasting  for  a  day  an.d  night,  becomes 
purified  with  the  Panchagavya*  (15) 

If  by  his  carelessness  an  indigo  wood  pierces  tfte  body 

i  Brahmatia,  and  if  blood  is  seen   there,    the   twice- 

-i  person  shoald  perform  the  Chdndrdyana.  (16) 

It  a  twice-born  pr;:»on  eat       ce  boiled  with  the  sticks 
.r»  indigo  plant,  ne  shoaiu,  by  vomitting  out  the  foodr 
be  purified  'with  the  Panchagavya.  (17) 


1 


Awgiras  Safrhitd.  2jl 

The  three  Varnas  should  perform  the  C hand  r  fry  ana, 
if  twice-born  persons,  carelessly  and  out  of  error,  eat 
indigo  :  for  this  is  the  rule.  (18) 

The  food,  that  is  brought  by  a  person  putting  on  a 
cloth  dyed  with  indigo,  stands  the-  giver  in  good  »tead, 
but]  the  partaker  thereof  merely  eats  sin.  (19) 

Fasting  for  a  day  [is  laid  down!  for  Vipras  fed  with 
the  rice  which  is  boiled  by  [a  person  putting  on]  a 
raiment  dyed  with  indigo.  (20) 

The  husband  of  the  woman,  who  on  tbe  demise 
of  her  consort,  puts  on  a  raiment  dyed  with  indigo,  jgoes 
to  hell.  The  woman,  too,  [goes  to  hell]  thereafter.  (21) 

The  corns,  which  one  grows  on  a  field  sullied  with 
the  sowing  of  indigo,  are  unworthy  of  being  eaten  by 
the  twice-born.  By  eating  [them,  one]  should  perform 
the  Chdndrayana.  (22) 

Such  a  place  (i.e.,  where  indigo  has  been  sown]  should 
never  be  used  for  a  procession  with  idols,  for  the  dedica- 
tion of  a  bull,  for  celebrating  a  sacrifice  or  for  nicking 
gifts;  for  the  earth  [there]  has  become  contaminated.  (23) 

The  ground,  where  indigo  has  been  sown,  remains  im- 
pure for  twelve  years  and  becomes  pure  thereafter.  (24) 

One  should  perform  a  penance,  consisting  of  one 
portion,  for  those  kine  which  are  killed  by  being  given 
[too  much]  food  or  drink,  or  by  the  adminstraUon  of 
medicine.  (25) 

One  should  perform  half  the  part  of  a  penance  where 
kine  are  killed  or  distressed  by  the  defect  of  belte  or 
other  ornaments  ;  for  that  has  been  made  for  decorating 
them.  (26) 

While  controlling,  binding  with  a  rope,  obstruc- 
ting, or  by  an  accident  or  otherwise,  if  kine  are  killed, 
one  should  perform  th^.penance  of  Pddona.  (27) 


272  * A'ngtrds  Saihhitd. 

[The  branch  of  a  tree]  of  the  bulk  of  a  thumb-joint, 
measuring  an  arm  in  length,  covered  with  leaves  and 
having  a  top  is  called  a  Danda  (rod).  (28) 

If  a  person  strikes  a  cow  with  any  [implement] 
other  than  the  rod  mentioned  above,  twofold  is  the 
penance  for  him  for  his  purification.  (29) 

In  breaking  her  horns  or  bones  or  by  lynching  her, 
one  should  perform  a  penance  for  ten  nights  if  she 
recovers  by  that  time.  (30) 

[In  thfet  case,]  one  should  live  on  barley  mixed  with 
the  urine  of  a  cow.  This  is  the  most  wholesome 
penance  as  viewed  by  Angiras.  (31) 

Sin  does  not  continue  in  him  for  whom,  the  father 
or  preceptor  of  an  incapable  person  or  child  performs 
a  penance.  (32) 

One,  who  is  aged  eighty  years,  a  child  of  less  than 
sixteen  years  of  age,  women  and  diseased  persons  are 
allowed  to  perform  half  the  penance.  (33) 

If  a  cow,  when  beaten  with  a  stick,  swoons  away 
or  drops  down,  [the  recitation  of]  the  Gayatri  for  eight 
thousand  times  is  the  purifying  penance.  (34) 

A  woman,  in  [her]  menses,  becomes  pure  on  the 
fourth  day  after  bathing.  She  should  perform  [a  penance] 
after  her  menstrual  period  and  never  within.  (35) 

When  the  cataminal  flow  of  women  becomes  excessive 
for  any  disease,  they  do  not  become  impure  by  that  :  for 
this  is  not  natural  with  them  but  the  reverse  of  it.  (36) 

One  does  not  become  of  pure  conduct  so  long  as 
the  menstrual  flow  continues.  When  the  menses  is 
stopped,  a  woman  may  be  employed  in  domestic  works 
and  known  for  sexual  purpose.  ^^ 

On  the  first  day  [of  the  menses],  she  is  a  Chandala- 
woman  ;  on  the  second,  she  •&  the  murderess  of  a 


Angiras  Safohita.  273 

Brahmana ;  on  the  third,  she  is  called  a  washer-woman  ; 
and  on  the  fourth  day,  she  becomes  purified.  (38) 

When  [a  Brahmana]  is  touched  by  a  woman  in  [her] 
menses,  by  a  dog  or  by  a  S'udra,  he  becomes  purified 
by  the  Panchagavya  after  fasting  for  a  night.  (39) 

A  married  couple  is  impure  as  long  as  they  lie 
together  on  bed.  Getting  up  from  the  bed,  a  woman 
becomes  pure  but  the  man  continues  still  impure.  (40) 

One  should  never  rinse  his  mouth  or  wash  his  feet 
[with  water  placed]  in  a  belmetal  vessel  Belmetal 
is  purified  by  ashes  ;  and  copper,  by  acid.  (41) 

A  woman  is  purified  by  her  menses  ;  and  a  river,  by 
its  current.  [A  stone  vessel,  etc.,)  greatly  crusted  with 
impurities,  becomes  pure  by  being  left  on  the  ground 
for  six  months.  (42) 

Belmetal  vessels,  smelt  by  kine  and  those  con- 
taining leavings  of  food  partaken  of  by  a  S'udra,  are 
purified  by  being  kept  in  ashes  for  ten  days.  Similarly 
those,  sullied  by  crows,  [are  purified].  (43) 

The  purification  of  gold  and  silver  [is  encom- 
passed] by  air  and  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  moon.  (44) 

A  woolen  cloth  is  not  sullied  when  marked  with 
semen  or  touched  by  a  dead  body.  It  becomes  pure  when 
the  part  [affected]  is  washed  by  water  and  earth.  (45) 

By  taking  dried  food,  (cakes,  etc.,)  of  his  (a  S'udra's± 
a  Vipra  must  observe  a  penance  for  a  week.  Food, 
accompanied  with  curry,  is  digested  in  a  fortnight.  (46) 

Milk  and  curd  [are  digested]  within  a  month  ;  and 
clarified  butter,  within  six  months.  It  is  doubtful  if  oil 
is  digested  in  the  stomach  within  a  year.  (47) 

He,  who  continually  partakes  of  a  S'udra's  food 
for  one  month,  becomes  a  S'lidra  in  this  birth  and  is 
born  as  a  dog  after  death.  (48) 


274  Awgiras  Saihhit&. 

[Partaking  of]  a  S'udra's  food,  associating  with  a 
S'udra,  sitting  with  a  S'udra,  acquiring  knowledge 
from  a  S'udra,  degrade  even  one  burning  with  Brahma- 
energy.  (49) 

The  twice-born  person,  who  utters  benediction  before 
a  S'udra  and  salutes  him, — that  Brdhmana  as  well  as 
the  S'udra  go  to  hell.  (50) 

A  Vjpra  is  purified  on  the  tenth  day ;  and  a 
Kshatriya,  on;the  twelfth  day.  A  fortnight,  it  is  said,  [is 
for]  a  Vais'pi  and  a  S'udra  is  purified  in  a  month.*  (51) 

The  soul,  the  V<*da  (Vedic  study)  and  the  Three 
Fires, — these  five  are  destroyed,  if  an  Agnihotrin-  Vipra 
partakes  of  a  S'udra's  food.  (52) 

If  a  twice-born  person,  being  fed  by  a  S'udra's  food, 
procreates  sons,  those  sons  belong  to  him  (*>.,  the  S'udra 
who  gives  the  food) :  for  semen  originates  from  food.  (53) 

Any  article  touched  by  a  S'udra,  or  any  residue  of 
his  food,  should  not  be  given  to  a  twice-born  out  of 
carelessness  or  with  the  one  palm.  So  the  ascetic 
A'pastamva  has  said.  (54) 

One  may  always  take  a  Brdhmana's  food  ;  a  Ksha- 
triya's,  on  Parva-d&ys ;  a  Vais'ya's,  in  times  of 
calamity;  but  never  a  S'udra's.  (55) 

[By  taking]  a  Brahmnna's  food,  [one  attains  to] 
poverty;  [by  taking]  a  Kshatnya's  food,  [one  becomes] 
a  beast  ;  [by  taking]  a  Vais'ya's  food,  one  becomes  a 
S'udra;  [and  by  taking]  a  S'udra's  food,  one,  forsooth, 
goes  to  hell.f  (56) 

*  This  refers  to  impurity  consequent  on  the  birth  or  death  of  a 
Sapinda  relation. 

+  It  means  that  a  Brdhmana  should  not  beg  his  food  from  another 
£rakmana  and  live  thereon.  This  Sloka  entails  restriction  about  tatiing 
food  from  the  various  castes. 


Arigiras  Samkitt.  275 

The  food,  [offered]  by  a  Br&hmana,  is  ambrosia  ;  that 
by  a  Rshatriya  is  known  as  milk  ;  that  by  a  Vaisyct 
is  simple  food  ;  and  the  food  [offered]  by  a  S'udra,  is 
certainly  blood.  (57) 

The  iniquity  of  human  beings  stands  resting  on 
their  food.  One  eats  the  sin  of  a  person  whose  food 
he  partakes  of.  158} 

When  a  Vipra,  who  leads  the  life  of  a  religious 
student  and  has  mastered  his  senses,  drinks  any  drink 
and  unknowingly  takes  any  food  from  persons  suffering 
from  the  impurity  of  birth,  he  should  vomit  it  out,  rinse 
his  mouth  and  bathe  after  going  into  the  water.  Then 
reciting  the  Varuna-Mantram,  he  should  be  qualified  to 
perform  his  own  work.  (59 — 60) 

One  should  leave  off  his  shoes  [before  entering]  the 
house  in  which  the  Sacred  Fire  is  deposited,  a  cow-pen 
and  the  presence  of  a  Deity,  or  a  Brdhmana,  [and 
before]  taking  his  meals,  or  reciting  [the  Gayatri}.  (61) 

[If  a  person]  putting  on  [his]  sandals,  goes,  from  his 
house,  to  the  Five  Rooms,*  a  pious  king  should  cut  off 
his  two  legs.  (62) 

An  Agnihotrin  (i.e.,  who  maintains  the  Sacred  Fires), 
an  ascetic,  a  S'rotriya,  one  who  has  completely-studied 
the  Vedds>-~ these  may  go  there  with  [their]  sandals  on ; 
others  must  be  chastised  with  punishment.  (63) 

[On  the  S'rdddha}  of  a  son  who  had  gone  through 
all  the  Saihskdras  from  the  birth  to  the  Chiidd,  especially 
after  the  cremation  rite  (i.e.,  on  the  first  S'rdddha],  food 
should  be  partaken  of  only  by  the  Sapindas.  (64) 


•  The  Five  Rooms  are,— the  room  for  the  Fire,  the  cow.pen,  that  of 
an  idol,  that  of  a  Brdhmana,  the  one  in  which  one  takes  meals  and  the 
e»e  in  which  the  recitation  cf  the-  Gayatri  is  performed. 


276  Angiras  SamhilA. 

By  taking  the  food  of  a  professional  beggaf>  that 
at  a  new  Sraddka,  that  at  the  birth  of  a  child  and  that 
at  the  Garbhadhana  ceremony  of  a  woman,  one  should 
perform  the  Chdndrdyana.  (65) 

One  should  net  eat  the  food  of  a  maiden,  who,  after 
having  been  promised  to  be  given  away  in  marriage 
to  one,  is  actually  given  to  another.  She  is  designated 
Punarbhu.  (66) 

If  abortion  takes  place  before  the  celebration  of 
the  SarhsJ&ras,  Pumsavana,  or  the  Simantonnayan, 
then,  it  is  laid  down,  [the  child  in  the  womb]  is  purified 
with  [the  performance  of]  the  purificatory  rites  in  the 
second  conception.  (67) 

As  long  as  a  pregnant  woman  remains  within  ten 
months  (i.e.,  does  not  give  birth  to  a  child],  she  'should 
be  protected  by  the  king  and  others.  Thereafter  some 
other  arrangement  should  be  made.  (68) 

The  food  of  a  woman,  who,  disregarding  the  com- 
mand of  her  husband,  acts  against  him,  should  never  b» 
taken.  She  is  known  as  one  acting  at  her  will.  (69) 

One  should  not  take  food  in  the  house  of  a  woman 
who  has  no  issue.  He,  who  does  so  out  of  stupefaction, 
goes  to  the  Pdyasa-hell.  (70) 

The  relations,  who  out  of  stupefaction  live  upon  a 
woman's  wealth  or  use  her  clothes  and  conveyances- 
sinful  wights  [as  they  are],  go  to  hell.  (71) 

A  king's  food  steals  energy  and  a  S'udra's  food 
destroys  Z?r0/zw0- energy.  But  one,  who  takes  food 
from  persons  suffering  from  impurity,  eats  the  dirt  of 
the  [entire]  earth.  (72) 

THE  END. 


YAMA  SAMHITA*. 


WITH   A 


LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION, 


BDITBB  AN*   PUBLISHED   BY 

ANMATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  MA,  M.R.A.S., 

Rector,  Keshub  Acadtmy, 

Author  if  the  English  Translations  of  The  Rdmdyana,  Mahd- 

Bhdratat  Primadbhagavatam,  Mahdnirvdna-Tantram, 

Hariva&s'a,  Agni  Purdnam,  Mdrkandeya 

Purfnam,  &c.t  &c. 


Mcslta 

PRINTID  BY  H.  C.  DAS,  ELTSICM  PRESS, 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DOTT'S  STREET. 


TASLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


(Yama  Samhita.) 

Subject.  Pagei 

for  the  drinke-,  efc,  ...  ...  277 

Do.      for  .those  who  reiurn  from'  the  order  of 

h.:rrrms      ...  ...  ...  ...  277 

Penance   for    cremating  a   cow-  slaughterer    or  a 

Brah  ma  aa  committing  suicide       ...  ...  277 

The  RH.,«*  '.\tioi;  of    C:  .ndrayana      ...  ...  278 

Penance  for  drin]   />g  spirituous  liquors  ...  278 

HtJi  Ptaiuce  .,.  ...  ...  279 

Pena  »ce  for  tak     .j  forbidden  food    ...  ...  279 

The  time  for  i«-  ..-'ying  a  ni.uV.a        ...  ...  279 

The  deicviptkm  of    a  Vrish   'i  ...  ...  279 

Persons  to  be  shunned  at  a  Sraddha  ...  280 

Whut  gratifies  or  di.'o'eases  the  Pitris  ...  281 

Penance  for  taking  iuieriiicted  food  and  drink    ...  282 
Penance                 ^rnana,  who  being  a  mendicant 

wisV  :ome  a  house  holder  again  ...  282 

Cond'»-   .,    \>r  performing  a  religious  rite  ...  283 

Degraaed  Castes  ...  ...  ...  283 

Penance  for  btlni  touched  by  women  in  menses...  283 

3>;n2prous  places  r<-r  kine  ...  ...  284. 

The  Penance  for  killing  kine  ...  ...  284 

The  shaving  of   head  .or  .vomeu       ...  ...  285 

Origin  of    Imp  ...  ...  ...  286 

The   works   wuich   bhould    be    avoided   in,   the 

evening     ...  ...  286 


VA.MA.  SA.MHHTA'. 


THE  Dharma-S } astro,  (Religious  Code),  the  object  of 
which  is  to  discourse  on  penances,  is  founded  on  the 
duties  of  the  four  Varnas.  ( \ ) 

Those,  who  have  .not  been  killed  by  water,  fire, 
hanging,  adopting  the  life  of  a  mendicant,  fasting, 
poison,  falling  down,  Prdya  (fasting  till  death),  and 
self-inflicted  strokes  of  a  weapon — all  these  ;  [as  well 
as]  the  drunk,  and  those  interdicted  by  all  persons  are 
purified  by  the  Chdndrdyana  and  two  Taptakrichhas. 

(2-3) 

The  sinful  wights,  who  return  from  the  order  of 
Vanaprastha  (hermits),  lose  both  the  worlds.  By  giving 
away  a  cow  and  a  bull,  they  are  purified  by  two 
Chdndrdyanas.  (4) 

By  cremating  the  destroyer  of  a  cow,  of  a  Brahmana, 
or  a  person  killed  by  hanging  or  by  cutting  off  his 
(viz.,  the  latter's)  rope,  one  should  perform  a  Tapta- 
krichha.  (5) 

One,  bitten  by  a  worm  born  in  a  wound,  by  a  fly 
or  a  dog,  should  perform  half  the  Prdjapatya  and  maKe 
a  sacrificial  present  proportionate  to  his  might.  6) 

If  pus  and  blood  come  out  from  an  ulcer  made  by 
worms  at  a  Brahmana's  anus,  he  becomes  purified  by  the 
Mounji-Homa*  (7) 

*  The   offering   of  clarified   butter   to  the  Fire  by  a  Brdhmana  after 
being  invested  with  a  girdle  made  of  triple  4/z^T/a- grass, 

36 


278  Yama  Samhitd. 

If  a  Kshatriya,  a  VaiJya,  a  S'udra^  or  one  belong- 
ing bo  any  of  the  mixed  castes,  take  food  knowingly  [that 
pus  is  coming  out  of  the  anus],— -they  should  particularly 
perform  the  penance  of  Chdndrdyana.  (8) 

One  should  make  a  morsel  of  the  size  of  the  egg 
of  a  hen  ;  otherwise  for  faulty  eating,  he  would  never  be 
purified  by  it.  (9) 

In  the  light  fortnight,  one  should  increase  [the  number 
of  morsels]  one  by  one,  and  decrease  it  [similarly]  in 
the  dark  fortnight.  One  should  not  take  one's  meal 
in  the  Amdvasyd.  This  is  the  regulation  of  the 
Chii  nd  ray  ana  ( I  o) 

By  drinking  Surd  (wine)  and  other  spirituous  liquors 
and  taking  beef,  a  Vipra  should  perform  the  Tapta* 
krichha.  By  it  that  sin  is  dissipated.  ( 1 1 ) 

If  the  performer,  when  the  penance  is  undertaken, 
dies,  he  becomes  purified,  on  that  very  day,  both  in  thi's 
world  and  the  next.  (12) 

As  long  as  a  person,  living  separate,  is  not  purified 
by  a  penance,  his  other  [kinsmen)  should  not  be  touched 
[also]  ;  for  they  are  all  polluted.  (13) 

Their  food  should  not  be  partaken  of ;  nor  any  pre- 
sent should  be  accepted  from  them  ;  they  should  not  be 
given  lessons  in  a  study  ;  no  matrimonial  alliance  should 
l»e  made  with  them  ;  but  all  those  persons,  co-parcene&s 
of  the  same  property,  might  become  purified  after  they 
had  repented  and  performed  the  penance.  (14) 

A  father,  brother,  or  any  other  relation  should  per- 
form the  penance  for  a  child  whose  age  is  below  the 
eleventh  year  and  abave  the  fifth.  (15) 

There  is  no  offence  or  sin  for  a  child  younger  thart 
this.  There  is  no  punishment  from  the  king  for  him, 
nor  any  penance.  (16) 


Yatna  Sam  hit &.  279 

One,  who  is  eighty  years  old,  one  who  is  less  than 
sixteen  years  old,  women  and  diseased  persons  are 
allowed  to  perform  half  thejpenance.  (17) 

What  penance  should  those  persons  perform,  who  are 
touched  by  CJtanJMa-women  and  washer-women  after 
the  sunset  ?  (18) 

By  bathing  .in  and  drinking  the  water  brought  in 
the  day-time  and  mixed  with  silver  and  gold,  all  those 
persons  attain  to  purification.  So  it  is  laid  down  in  the 
Smriti.  (19) 

Of  S'iidras,  food  may  be  taken  from  a  servant, 
barber,  cow-herd,  one  with  whom  hereditary  friendship 
is  maintained,  those  who  cultivate  the  same  plot  of  land, 
and  from  him  who  dedicates  his  own  self.  (20) 

Those  ignorant  persons,  who  take  food  partaken 
of  by  a  S'udra,  being  required  to  undertake  a  penance, 
should  perform  a  Ckdndr&yana.  (21) 

The  father,  who  does  give  away  [in  marriage]  h*s 
maiden-daughter  after  she  has  attained  the  twelfth  year, 
drinks  her  menstrual  blood,  month  after  month.  (22) 

By  beholding  c^maiden  in  [her]  menses,  her  mother, 
father,  and  her  eldest  brother — these  three  go  to 
hell.  (23) 

If  any  Brahmaua,  under  the  influence  of  lust,  marries 
such  a  maiden,  that  Vipra^  the  husband  of  Vrishalit 
should  not  be  spoken  to  ;  nor  [should  he  be]  admitted 
into  a  row  [for  the  purpose  of  taking  meals.]  (24) 

A  barren  woman  should  be  known  as  a  Vrishali ; 
a  woman  who  gives  birth  to  a  dead  child,  is  [also 
called]  a  Vrishali.  A  S'udra-wom<in  is  to  be  known  as 
a  Vrishali,  and  similarly  a  maiden  in  [her]  menses.  (25) 

The  [sin],  that  a  twice-born  person  commits  by 
associating  with  a  Vrishali  for  a  night,  is  dissipated 


280  Yam  a  Sarhhifa. 

in  three  years  by  living  upon  food  acquired  by  begging 
and  reciting  [the  Gdyatri\  daily.  (26) 

She,  who,  renouncing  her  own  husband,  desires  for 
the  company  of  another  man,  is  to  be  known  as  a 
Vrishali ;  a  S'udra-\voma.n  does  not  [necessarily] 
become  a  Vrishali*  (27) 

There  is  no  redemption  for  the  person  who  has 
drunk  the  saliva  of  a  Vrishali,  has  been  sullied  by  her 
breathing,  and  has  procreated  a  son  on  her.  (28) 

One  suffering  from  white  leprosy,  one  suffering  from 
leprosy,  one  who  has  bad  nails,  one  who  has  black 
teeth,  one  who  perpetually  suffers  from  a  disease,  one 
who  has  not  all  the  limbs,  one  who  has  got  an  extra 
limb,  a  wicked  person,  one  who  always  envies  others, 
an  ugly  person,  a  eunuch,  a  heretic,  one  who  vilifies  the 

Vedds,  one  who  makes  false  discussion,  one  who  officiates 
as  a  priest  for  the*  S'udras,  one  who  officiates  as  a 
priest  for  those  to  whom  no  such  service  should  be  given, 
one  who  is  avaricious  for  gifts,  a  beggar,  one  who  is 
addicted  to  worldliness,  one  who  has  got  a  very  small 
tooth  in  the  rows  of  teeth,  a  physicftn,  one  who  makes 
a  false  talk — all  these  should  be  carefully  shunned  at  a 

S^raddha  and  [while  making  gifts].   (29 — 32) 

A  [Brakmana  who  subsists  upon    offerings    made  to 

an  idol,  one  who  works  as  a  servant,   one   who   sells   the 

Vedas — these    should    be  carefully  shunned.     Yama  has 

said  so.   (33) 

The    departed    Manes  of  the  person  and   the  Deities 

along   with    the    great    Rishis,    go     back    disappointed, 

who    engages    all     these     in     Havya     (sacrifices)     and 


*  This   signifies  that   an    unchaste    Brahman  a- woman    is   infinitely 
worse  than  a 


Yam  a  Saihhitd:  28  r 

Kavya  (the    rite   of  offering   oblations   to   the  departed 
Manes).  (34) 

[On]  seeing  a  Mahiskika*  first,  the  husband  of  a 
Vrishali  in  the  middle,  and  Vardhusika  (a  usurer)  in* 
the  end,  the  departed  Manes  go  back  disappointed.  (35) 

An  unchaste  wife  is  called  Mahishi.  He  who  for- 
gives her  for  her  sins,  is  known  as  Mahishika,  (36) 

He,  who  purchasing  an  article  at  a  fair  price,  sells 
it  at  a  higher  one,  is  named  Vardhusika.  He  is  the 
censured  of  the  Brahmavddins  (i.e.,  those  conversant 
with  the  Vtdds.  (37) 

So  long  the  boiled  rice  remains  warm,  [the  Brahmanas\ 
should,  abstaining  from  speech,  eat  it.  So  long  the 
virtues  of  an  offering  are  not  mentioned,  the- departed 
Manes  partake  of  it.  (38) 

The  virtues  of  Ham  should  not  be  mentioned,  where 
the  departed  Manes  are  gratified  with  oblations.  On  the 
departed  Manes  being  gratified  (i.e.,  after  the  S'raddha 
is  over),  the  offering  should,  afterwards,  be  described  as 
excellent.  (39) 

The  father,  residing  in  the  body  of  a  Brahmana> 
takes  as  many  morsels  of  food,  as  a  person,  conversant 
with  Mantrams,  takes  in  sacrifices  and  rites  of  offering 
oblations  to  the  departed  Manes.  (40) 

A  twice-born  person,  who  has  the  leavings  of  food 
in  his  mouth,  on  being  touched  by  such  a  person,  a  dog, 
or  a  S'udra  become  purified  with  the  Panchagavya, 
after  fasting  for  a  night.  (41) 

Mere  bathing  is  Iai4  down  in  a  case  while  [one  is], 
touched  by  [one]  having  no  leavings  of  food  in  the 
mouth.  By  being  touched  by  [a  S'udra]  having  leavings 

*  One  who  lives  by  the  prostitution  of  his  wife.. 


282  Yama  Saikhita. 

of  food  in  his  mouth,  [a  Brhdmana]  should  perform  a 
Prdjdpatya.  (42) 

As  long  as  the  Vipras  are  not  adored  with  com- 
plete feeding  and  gold,  so  long  that  sin  is  not  dissipated, 
even  if  one  has  performed  a  hard  penance.  (43) 

If  one's  body  is  encircled  by  crows,  cranes  or  vul- 
tures, or  is  touched  by  an  unholy  object,  or  if  [snch  an 
article]  touches  the  mouth  or  the  body,  the  purification 
of  such  a  person,  sullied  with  a  paste-,  [is  effected]  by 
bathing.  (44) 

If  leaving  aside  the  hands,  the  limbs  [skuate]  above 
the  navel  are  sullied  [by  the  excreta  of  a  crow,  etc.],  the 
upper  part  [is  purified  by]  bathing  ;  and  the  part  beneath 
[the  navel],  by  being  rubbed  with  earth  and  water.  By 
this  only  [the  upper  and  lower  Ihnbs]  are  purified.  (45) 

In  taking  what  should  not  be  eaten,  or  what  should 
not  be  drunk,  or  what  should  not  be  eaten  by  licking, 
or  semen,  urine  or  excreta, — what  should  be  the 
penance  ?  46) 

The  leaves  of  lotus,  Udumvara,  Villwa,  Kus1  a,  fig 
and  P alas1  a  [should  be  boiled  with  water] — by  drinking 
this  decoctidn  for  six  nights,  one  becomes  purified.  (47) 

A  Vipra> — who,  being  safe  in  a  fire  and  a  life  of 
mendicancy,  returns,  lives  disregarding  the  adoration  of 
the  Sacred  Fire,  and  wishes  again  to  enter  upon  the 
domestic  mode  of  life, — should  perform  three  Prdjd- 
patyas,  and  three  Chan  dray  anas.  He  becomes  again 
purified  with  the  Jatakarma  and  [other  Safaskdras\ 
mention&d  before.  (48 — 49)  • 

A  mattress  filled  with  cotton  (or  a  painter's  brush], 
pillows,  flower,  and  crimson-coloured  raiments,  become 
purified  by  being  dried  in  the  sun  and  sprinkled  [with 
water].  (50) 


Yama  Safahittl.  283 

By  knowing  the  place,  time,  one's  ownself,  articlesf 
the  necessity  of  articles,  the  cause  and  circumstances, 
one  should  perform  a  religious  rite.  (51) 

A  road,  mud,  water,  articles  made  of  iron,  grass  and 
brick-built  houses,  are  purified  by  the  air  and  the  solar 
rays,  (52) 

When  an  occasion  for  bathing  arrives  in  the  case 
of  a  person  suffering  from  a  disease,  one,  who  is  healthy, 
should  bathe  ten  times  and  touch  him.  By  it,  the  diseas- 
ed person  becomes  purified.  (53) 

A  washerman,  a  cobbler,  an  actor,  a  Varuda,  a 
Kaivarta,  a  Meda,  and  a  Bhilla — these  seven  are  known 
in  the  Smritis  as  the  degraded  castes.  (54) 

By  knowing  the  women  of  these  castes,,  [a  Brah- 
mana\  should  perform  a  Taptakrichha.  (55) 

What  is  the  penance  laid  down  for  various  castes, 
when  women  in  [their]  menses  touch  each  other?  (56) 

By  touching  a  woman  in  [her]  menses,  belonging  to 
the  same  family  or  having  the  same  husband,  either 
knowingly  or  unknowingly, — '[one,  i.e.,  a  woman  in  her 
menses]  becomes  purified  by  bathing  in  proper  time.  (57) 

A  Brahmana-woman  and  a  ^^r^-woman,  both  in 
[their]  menses,  touching  each  other,,  the  first  becomes 
purified  by  a  Prdjapatya  j  and  the  -S'^rfl-woman,  by  a 
Pada  (portion)  [of  a  Prajapatya].  (58) 

A  Kshatriya-\vorna.n  and  a  S^udm-woman,  touching 
each  other  while  in  [their]  menses,  the  former  should 
perform  a  penance  complete  in  all  parts  j  and  the  latter, 
half  [its]  portion.  (59) 

A  KflzVjKfl-woman  and  a  S'wafoz-woman,  touching 
each  other  while  in  [their]  menses,  the  former  should  per- 
form a  Padakrichha\  and  the  latter,  half  of  it.  (60) 

If  touched   by    a    dog,    a  goat,  a  jackal,  or  an  ass,  a 


284  Yam  a 

woman  in  [her]  menses  should  remain  fasting  for  that 
period  (i.e.,  the  period  of  menstruation)  and  purify  [her* 
self]  by  bathing|in  lime  (i.e.,  on  the  fourth  day.)  (61) 

Being  touched  by  Chanddlas,  a  woman  in  [her] 
menses  [shall  be  purified]  by  the  penance  of  Prajdpatya  ; 
and  one  who  is  not  in  menses,  by  a  century  of 
Praiidyamns.  <62) 

Being  touched  [by  a  woman  in  her  menses]  or  by  a 
degraded  caste  in  the  night,  a  Vipra  should  bathe, 
before  the  Fire,  with  the  water  brought  during  the  day- 
time. (63) 

Water  is  always  holy  when  touched  by  the  solar  rays 
during  the  day,  and  by  the  rays  of  the  the  stars  in  the 
night ;  at  the  two  periods  of  junction  and  in  the 
evening.  (64) 

If  a  twice-born  person  drinks  water  touched  with  the 
nails  and  fingers  at  the  time  of  rinsing  his  mouth,  he 
clearly  drinks  spirituous  liquor.  Such  is  the  deliverance 
of  Yama.  (65) 

In  a  ditch,  tank,  well,  by  [the  strokes  of]  stones,  by 
the  srtoke  of  weapons,  by  that  of  a  stick  or  clod  of 
earth,  in  a  cow-pen,  in  an  obstructed  place,  while  being 
tied  with  a  rope,  in  a  cow-shed  set  up  in  a  limited 
form,  [being  tied]  to  a  wood,  under  a  tree,  in  a  place 
where  it  is  difficult  to  come  from,  when  tied  with  a  rope 
or  cloth, — I  have  told  thee,  that  these  are  dangerous 
places  for  kine — whenever  and  under  whatever  circum- 
stance, a  cow  may  happen  to  die,  one  should  perform  a 
penance.  (66 — 68) 

[By    killing  a  cow]   with  the  stroke  of  a  wood,  [one 

should   perform]    the    Prajapatya.      Twofold    is     [the 

•punishment,   when    killed]  with  a  stone ;   when  killed  in 

a  ditch,   [one    should  perform]  half  the  penance  ;  and  a 


Yarn*  San  hit d.  285 

P&dakrUhha,  when  killed  under  a  tree.  When  [killed] 
with  the  stroke  of  a  weapon,  one  should  perform  three 
penances  ;  and  two,  [when  killed]  with  the  stroke  of 
a  stick.  (69 — 70) 

When  [a  cow]  is  strangled  to  death  by  a  cloth,  the 
slayer  of  the  cow  is  purified  by  one  Prajapatya.  He 
should  live  amongst  the  kine  near  a  river  or  a  dreary 
forest,  [and]  shave,  in  the  first  part,  the  hairs  of  the  body  ; 
in  the  second,  the  beards  ;  in  the  third,  the  hairs,  except- 
ing the  tuft  on  the  crown  ;  and  in  the  fourth,  the  tuft 
too.  (71—72) 

The  heads  of  women  should  not  be  shaven  :  they 
should  neither  follow  a  cow,  nor  pass  the  night  in  a  cow- 
pen.  Nor  should  they  recite  the  Vaidic  Mantram.  (73) 

Having  taken  up  all  the  hairs,  one  should  cut  them 
off  to  the  measurement  of  two  fingers.  This  is  the 
shaving  of  the  head  for  women  according  to  the 
Smriti.  (74) 

Impurity  originates,  both  on  the  birth  and  death  of 
a  person.  But  there  is  no  impurity  [on  the  death  of]  a 
sinful  person.  (75) 

One  should,  in  the  evening,  abstain  from  four  works,—* 
viz.t  from  taking  meals,  sexual  intercourse,  [and]  sleeping 
[these  three],  and  Vedic  study  [forming]  the  fourth.  (76) 

From  taking  meals,  [at  that  time],  originates  a 
disease  ;  from  sexual  intercourse,  a  very  wicked  offspring 
is  conceived  ;  from  sleep,  prosperity  disappears ;  [and 
there  is]  certain  death  in  Vedic  studies.  (77) 

O  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  desirous  of  well- 
being  unto  ignorant  castes,  these  institutes  have  been 
described  by  me  ;  determine  them  with  care.  (78) 


THE   END. 


37 


A.TKI  SAMHITAA 


WITH    A 


LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION. 


EDITED    AND   PUBLISHED   BY 

MANWIATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  W.A.,  M.R.A.S., 

Rector,  Keshub  Academy, 

Author  of  the  English  Translations  of  the  Rdm&yana,  Mahd* 

Bhdrata,  Srimadbhdgavatant,   Mahdnirva   a  Tantramt 

Harivanis'a,  Ag<ni  Purdnam,   Mdrkandeya 

Purdnam,  &c.,  &c. 


PRINTED  BY  H.  C.  DAS,  ELYSIUM  PRESS; 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DUTT'S  STREET. 

1907. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

[Atri  Samhita.] 

SUBJECT.  SLOKAS.  PAGE. 

The  Request  for  describing  the  Institutes      ...  1—2  287 
Atri's  Reply  and  the  fruits  of  listening          ...  3 — 7  287 
Persons  worthy  of  getting  religious    instruc- 
tions                       ...                ...                ...  8  287 

Duties    towards    the    Preceptor    and    the 

Scriptures               ...                 ...                ...  9—10  288 

Duties  of  various  Castes               ...                 ...  II— 16  288 

Duty  of  a  king  towards  a  renegade                ...  7  288 
The  fruit  of    following    one's   own    religion  ; 

what  out-castes^a  person         ...                 ...  18 — 21  289 

The  duty  of  the  king  towards  the  out-castes  22 — 24  289 

The'duties  of  the  Brahmanas      ...                ...  25 — 26  289 

The  sacrifices  of  the  king            ...                 ...  27—29  290 

Rules  of  bathing                            ...                 ...  30  290 

Dirts  of  man  and'their  purification                 ...  31—32  290 

Characteristics  of  Puahmanas      ...                ,».  33  290 

Definition^of  An-suya                  ...                 ...  34  291 

„          of  Soucha                    ...                ...  35  391 

,,           of  Mangala                 ...                 ...  36  291 

„           of  Anayasa                  ...                 ...  37  291 

„          of  Aspriba                  ...               ...  38  291 

,,          of  Dama                      ...                 ...  39  291 

,,          of  Dana    and    the    reward     of    a 

Brahmana  possessed  ef  all  these      ...  40 — 41  291 

Ishtha  and  Purtta  Acts                 ...                 ...  42 — 46  291 

Yantias  and  Niyamas                    ...                 ...  47 — 49  292 

Tha  fruits  of  ^bathing  and  having  a  son         ...  50 — 56  293 

Bathing  in  the  holy  rivers  and  its  fruits        ...  57 — 58  293 

The  Purification  of  food                ...                 ...  59—62  293 

Penance  for  neglecting  Sandhya  and  recitation  63—64  294 

Penance  for  being  bitten  by  a  serpent,  dog,  etc.  65 — 68  294 

,,        for  breaking  a  religious  rite            ...  69  294 

,.        for  taking  residue  and  forbidden  food  70 — 76  295 

Purification  jiof    a   house  contaminated    by  a 

dead    body                ...                ..,             ...  77—81  295 


II 


CONTENTS. 


Subject.  Slokas. 

Regulations  about  impurity          ...                 ...  82 — 104 

M             about  a  younger   brother   marry- 
ing before  or  preserving  the  Sacred  Fire  ...  105 — no 
Daily  and  occasional  rites             ...                 ...  in 

Chandrayana               ...                  ...                 ...  1 12 

Various  penances  described         ...                  ...  113 — 133 

Position  of  the  S'udras  and  women                 ...  134—139 
The   position   of  a  Brahmana  and  regulations 

about  their  taking  food            ...                 ...  140 — 148 

The  superiority  of  the  Veda         ...                 ...  149 

Havya  and  Kavya  ;    vessels    for  serving  food 

and  giving  alms     ...                 ...                 ...  150 — 154 

Rules  about  taking  alms  by  a  Bhikshu           ...  155 — 162 
Religious   prescription   about    knowing    one's 

own  wife                  ... 
Heinous  crimes  and  their  expiation 
Sins  relating  to  taking  food  and  their  penance 
The  purification  for  knowing  other  women   ... 
Purification  for  passing  urine,  of  cowshed  etc. 
The  purification  or  otherwise  of  women 
Regulations  about   drinking   water  and  spiri- 
tuous liquors           ...                 ...                 ...  200 — 208 

The  purification  for  various  minor  sins          ...  209—300 

Rules  for  taking  food  at  a  S'raddha               ...  301 — 3-, 5 

A  Holy  house             ...                ...                ...  306—307 

Purification  for  some  other  minor  sins           ...  308—315 

Regulations  about  speech  and  taking  meals  ...  311 — 1 17 

Regulations  about  gifts                 ...                 ...  318 — 336 

Persons  worthy  to  take  part  in  a  S'raddha    ...  337 — 350 

Time  for  performing  a  S'raddha                    ...  351 — 354 

Gifts  made  at  a  S'raddha             ...                 ...  355 — 363 

Classification  of  Vipras                 ...                 ...  364 — 374 

Bh^gavatas                   ...                 ...                 ...  375 

Persons  who  should  not  be  invited  and  adored  376—379 

Penances  for  a  few  minor  sins      ...                 ...  380 — 383 

Rules  and  fruits  of  bathing           ...                 ...  384 — 387 

Articles  not  to  be  refused              ...                 ...  388 

Fruits  for  following  injunctions,..                   ...  389—391 


Page. 
296 

299 
299 
300 
301 
301 

3<>3 


304 
305 


163 

305 

164  —  167 

306 

168—179 

306 

180—184 

307 

185—188 

308 

189—199 

308 

3°9 
3'i 
322 

323 

323 
324 
324 
326 
323 
328 
329 
330 
33 « 
33 i 
332 
332 
332 


CHAPTER  1. 

HAVING  saluted  Atri,  the  foremost  ol  those  conver- 
sant with  the  Vedds,  informed  of  the  regulations  of  all 
the  Scriptures,  adored  of  all  the  Rt'shzs,  seated  at  ease 
after  offering  ob'ations  at  an  A*nik>>tra,  all  [the  Riskis] 
gave  veni.  to  the  :e  words  :• — '  For  the  behoof  of  all  the 
worlds,  describe,  O  lord,  unto  us  [the  religious  insti- 
tues].  (1—2) 

ATRI  said  : — 

"  O  ye  conversant  with  the  essence  of  the  Vedas  and 
other  Scriptures,  I  shall  describe  all  that  has  been  seen 
and  heard  by  me  [for  the  determination  ot]  the  doubt 
[about]  which  you  have  asked  me.  (3) 

Having  rinsed  his  mouth  with  the  waters  of  all  the 
sacred  places,  bowed  unto  all  the  Deities,  and  recited 
all  the  Siiktas,  Atri,  following  all  the  Scriptures,  deter- 
mined, for  the  four  Varnasy  a  Religious  Code,  destructive 
of  all  sins,  eternal  and  dissipating  all  doubts.  (4 — 5) 

Listening  to  this  most  excellent  Code  of  religious 
injunctions,  those,  who  commit  iniquities  in  this  world, 
and  others,  who  vilify  religion,  are  freed  from  all 
sins.  (6) 

Therefore  this  should  be  carefully  studied  by  those 
who  are  conversant  with  the  Vedds  and  be  communicated 
fairly  unto  disciples  endued  with  good  conduct.  (T) 

[The  knowledge  of]  this  S*  Astra  should  not  be  given 
by  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  unto  those  born 


288  Atri  SamhM. 

in    bad   families,    those  leading  a  bad  life,  those  who  are 
foolishly  ignorant,  and  deceitful  twice-born  persons.   (8) 

Even,  if  the  preceptor  communicates  one  letter  to 
a  disciple,  there  is  no  article  on  earth,  by  presenting 
which  he  may  be  freed  from  his  debt.  (9) 

He,  who  does  not  regard  a  preceptor,  the  giver  of 
even  one  letter,  is  born  amongst  the  Chandalas  after 
having  gone  through  a  hundred  births  in  the  canine 
species.  (10) 

He,  who  having  taken  [lessons  in]  a  V^da^  dis- 
regards the  other  Scriptures,  is  immediately  born  in  the 
species  of  beasts  for  twenty-one  times,  (n) 

Those  men,  who  perform  their  respective  duties,  be- 
come, by  following  their  own  works,  beloved  of  the 
people,  even  if  they  live  at  a  distance,  (12) 

To  celebrate  sacrifices,  to  make  gifts  and  to  study 
the  Vedds — [these  three  are]  the  religious  works  of  a 
Vipra\  to  accept  presents,  to  deliver  instructions  [in 
the  Vedas~\>  and  to  officiate  at  sacrifices  [are  the 
means  of  his]  livelihood.  (13) 

To  celebrate  sacrifices,  to  make  gifts,  and  to  study 
[the  V6d&s\i  [arel  the  religious  works  of  a  Kskatriya  ; 
to  live  by  arms,  to  protect  mankind  [are  his  means  of] 
livelihood.  (14). 

To  make  gifts,  to  study  [the  Vedas\,  and  to  celebrate 
sacrifices  [are  the  religious  works  of]  a  Vais'ya ;  and 
agricultre  [is  his  secular  work].  To  serve  the  twice- 
born  [is  the  religious  work  of]  the  S } udras  ;  and  the 
work  of  art  [is  his  secular  work].  (15) 

By  following  these  Institutes  [which]  have  been  des- 
cribed by  me,  the  Varnas  come  by  most  excellent  con- 
dition after  attaining  to  great  honours  in  this  world.  (16) 

The    king,  who  punishes  them  who,  renouncing  their 


Atrl  Saihhitd.  289 

own  religion,  follow  another's,  becomes  glorified  in  the 
celestial  region.  (  17) 

By  following  his  own  religion  even  a  S'udra  en- 
joys the  celestial  region.  Another's  religion  should  be 
renounced  like  the  most  beautiful  wife  of  another 
person.  (18) 

The  S'udra,  who  engages  in  the  recitation  [of  the 
Gayatri\  and  the  offering  of  oblations  to  the  Sacred 
Fire,  should  be  killed  by  the  king  ;  for  by  that  he 
becomes  the  destroyer  of  the  kingdom  as  the  water  is  of 
fire.  (19) 

Acceptance  of  gifts,  giving  instructions  [in  the 
Vedds\  selling  an  article  which  should  not  be  sold,  and 
officiating  as  a  priest  at  a  sacrifice — the  doing  of  these 
four,  [is  described]  in  the  Smritis  as  outcasting  the 
Kshatriya  and  the  Vaisya.  (20) 

[By  selling]  meat,  shell-lac  and  salt,  [a  Brahmana\ 
becomes  immediately  outcasted.  By  selling  milk,  a 
Brdhmana  becomes  a  S'udra  within  three  days.  (21) 

The  king  should  punish,  with  life,  the  village  har- 
bouring thieves  by  giving  alms  to  the  twice-born,  who 
do  not  perform  religious  rites  and  study  the  Vedds.  (22) 

The  kingdom,  where  the  ignorant  partake  of  the 
food  which  should  be  taken  by  the  learned,  courts 
draught  (want  of  rain)  ;  or  a  great  calamity  appears 
there.  (23) 

There  the  god  of  rain  pours  down  showers  where 
the  king  adores  these — the  Brdhmanas  learned  in  the 
Vedds  and  well-versed  in  all  the  scriptures.  (24) 

Formerly  the  Brdhmanas  were  created  for  protect- 
ing all  these,  the  three  .regions  (heaven,  earth,  and 
firmament),  the  three  Vedds  (^ik,  Yajush,  and  the 
Sdman)^  the  A's'ramas  (orders  ,  and  the  three  Fires.  (25)  . 


290  Atri  Samhita. 

The  twice-born-  vl-o  perform  both  the  Sandhya- 
adorations  by  abstaining  from  speech,  remain  glori- 
ously in  the  celestial  region  for  a  thousand  celestial 
years.  (26) 

The  king,  who  examines  the  virtue  and  sin  [of  all 
the  four  Varnas],  attains  to  fame,  celestial  region  and 
solidarity  of  [his]  kingdom  ;  and  his  treasury  becomes 
replenished  again.  (27) 

The  punishment  of  the  wicked,  the  adoration  of  the 
pious,  the  enrichment  of  the  treasury  by  fair  means, 
impartiality  towards  those  who  approach  him  with 
prayers,  and  the  protection  of  the  kingdom, — these  five 
have  been  spoken  of  as  the  sacrifices  for  the  kings.  (28) 
The  Brahmanas,  by  a  thousand  sacrifices,  do  not 
attain  to  that  piety  which  the  kings  do  by  protecting 
their  subjects.  (29) 

In  the  absence  of  watery  expanses  attached  to 
temples,  [one  should  bathe]  in  lakes  and  ponds.  By 
taking  up  four  Pindas  [made  of  clay],  one  should  bathe 
[in  a  tank]  belonging  to  another.  (30) 

Fat,  semen,  blood,  marrow,  urine,  excreta,  dirt  of 
the  ears,  nails,  phlegm,  bones,  dirt  of  the  eye,  and  drops 
of  perspiration, — these  twelve  are  the  dirts  of  men.  (31) 
The  purification  of  each  six,  in  order,  has  been 
described  by  the  learned  sages ; — the  first  six  [are 
purified]  by  earth  and  water ;  and  the  second  six,  by 
mere  water.  (32) 

Purity,  desire  for  doing  good  unto  others,  absence 
of  exertion,,  absence  of  jealousy,  absence  of  avarice, 
self-restraint,  charity  and  mercy  are  the  characteristics 

of  a  Brdhmana.   (33) 

• 
A  really  accomplished  person  does  not  try  to  suppress 

another's  merit :  he  praises  another's  accomplishments  ; 


Atri  Samhitd.  29! 

he  does  not  laugh  at  another's  shortcomings ;  [such  a 
spirit]  is  called  Anasuyd  (want  of  jealousy).  (34) 

Renunciation  of  forbidden  food,  association  with 
those  who  are  not  badly  spoken  of,  and  abiding  by  good 
conduct — is  spoken  of  as  S'oucha  (purity).  (35) 

To  follow  good  conduct  always  and  to  renounce  a 
bad  one,  has  been  described  as  Mangala  by  the  'R.ishis 
well-read  in  Religious  Codes.  (36) 

One  should  not  do,  to  an  excess,  what  afflicts  the 
body,  whether  good  or  bad.  This  is  called  Andydsa 
(want  of  exertion).  (37) 

One  should  be  contented  with  all  articles,  whenever 
what  arrives  ;  one  should  not  long  for  another's  wives  ; 
this  is  called  Asprihd  (want  of  desire).  (38) 

If  external  or  spiritual  pain  is  created  by  others,  and 
one  is  not  offended  and  does  not  wreak  revenge,  it 
(i.e.,  the  spirit)  is  called  Dama.  (39) 

Even  from  a  limited  income,  something  should  be 
given  away  daily  with  care  and  liberal  spirit.  This  is 
called  Dana  (charity).  (40) 

One  should  behave,  like  his  own  self,  towards  others, 
his  own  relations  and  friends,  him  who  envies  him,  and 
an  enemy.  This  is  called  Dayd  (mercy).  (41) 

A  twice-born  person,  even  if  he  be  a  householder, 
who  is  possessed  of  all  these  marks,  attains  to  the 
highest  station  [after  death],  and  is  not  born  again  in 
this  world.  (42) 

Maintenance  of  the  Sacred  Fires,  and  the  adoration 
of  the  Vis'wadtvds  are  called  Ishta  (holy  ceremony  or 
sacrifice).  (43) 

[The  excavation  of]  tanks,  wells,  and  other  watery 
expanses,  [the  construction  of]  temples,  [the  distribu- 


292  Atri  Safahita. 

tion    of]   food,    and   [the  laying  out  of]  pleasure-gardens 
are  called  Purta  (acts  of  pious  liberality).   (44) 

Both  Ishta-,  and  Purta-,  [acts]  should,  with  care, 
be  performed  by  a  Brahmana.  By  the  Ishta  one 
attains  to  the  celestial  region ;  and  by  the  Purta} 
emancipation.  ^45) 

Twice-born  persons  have  equal  rights  in  the  reli- 
gious acts  of  Ishta  and  Purta.  A  S'udra  is  quali- 
fied to  perform  the  Ishta,  but  not  the  Vedic  rites.  (46) 

A  learned  person  should  always  observe  the  Yamas 
(moral  or  religious  duties  or  observances),  but  not  the 
Niyamas  (religious  austerities)  daily.  By  performing  the 
Niyamas  always  and  disregarding  the  Yamas,  one 
becomes  degraded.  (47) 

Absence  of  cruelty,  forgiveness,  truthfulness,  absten- 
tion from  injury,  charity,  simplicity,  love,  cheerfulness, 
sweetness  [of  temper],  and  mildness, — these  are  the  ten 
Yamas.  (48) 

Purity,  [celebration  of]  sacrifice,  austerity,  [making] 
gift,  Vedic  study,  abstention  from  undue  sexual  inter- 
course, [observance  of)  vow,  abstention  from  speech, 
fasting  and  bathing, — these  ten  are  the  Niyamas.  (49) 

One  should  immerse  an  image  made  of  Kus'a-grzss 
in  sacred  waters.  He,  for  whom  it  is  immersed,  gains 
eight  parts  of  the  purity.  (50) 

[The  person], — mother,  father,  brother,  friend,  or  the 
preceptor,  for  whom  one  bathes, — attains  to  twelve 
portions  of  the  fruit  [thereof].  (51) 

The  representative  of  a  son  should  be  appointed  by  a 
sonless  person*  with  care,  for  the  rite  of  offering  Pinda 
and  water.  (52) 

*  i.e.,  should  adopt  a  son. 


Air t   SamhitS. 

tf  a  father  sees  the  face  of  a' living  son  born,  he  is 
Freed  from  the  debt  [he  owes  _to  his  ancestors]  and 
attains  to  immortality.  (53) 

With  the  very  birth  of  a  son,  a  father  is  freed  from 
his  ancestral  debt  and  attains  to  purification  on  that 
Very  day,  for  he  (i.e.,  the  son)  liberates  him  from  the 
hell.  (54) 

Many  sons  should  be  desired  :  for  if  any  [of  them] 
would  go  to  Gaya,  or  celebrate  a  Horse-Sacrifice,  or 
dedicate  a  Neela  Vrisha*  (55) 

All  the  departed  Mane's,  dreading  hell,  desire  for 
u  the  son,  who  would  go  to  Gaya  and  become  our 
saviour."  (56) 

By  bathing  in  the  holy  [river]  Phalgu,  seeing  the 
Deity  Gadadhara  (the  holder  of  mace,  Vishnu)  and 
touching  the  head  of  Gaya  (Asura)  with  his  feet,  one  is 
freed  [even]  from  [the  sin  of]  Brahmanicide.  (57) 

He  Who  touching  the  water  of  a  great  river  [like 
the  Ganges]  gratifies  the  Pitris  with  oblations  of 
water,  attains  to  eternal  regions  and  delivers  his  owa 
family.  (58) 

Listen  to  me  discoursing,  I  shall  describe  the  [means 
'of]  purification  of  the  food  [when  it  is  taken]  in  a 
dangerous  place,  where  there  is  no  desirable  and  pure 
food.  (59) 

A  Brdhmana  should  take  food  for  three  days  without 
salt  or  drink  the  extract  of  powerful  Brdhmi-tree  or 
S ' ankhapushpi  with  milk.  (60) 

If  a  twice-born  parson,  out  of  ignorance,'  drinks 
Water  from  a  vessel  used  for  spirituous  liquors,  what  is 

*  A  bull  that  has  white  tail,  hoops  and  horns  and  other  limbs  red. 

38 


294  Atri  Saihhitd. 

his   penance,    and   by    what   rite  is   he  freed  [from  the 
sin]  ?  (61) 

By  making  a  decoction  [of]  Palafa,  Villitia,  KuJat 
Istus  and  Udumvara,  leaves,  one  should  drink  it ;  [by 
doing  so]  for  three  nights,  one  attains  to  purifica- 
tion. (62) 

He,  who  out  of  carelessness  fails  to  perform  the? 
Sandhya  once,  either  in  the  morning  or  in  the  evening, 
should,  with  a  concentrated  mind,  recite,  after  bathing, 
the  Gdyatri  for  a  thousand  times.  (63) 

If  laden  with  grief  or  being  fatigued,  one  goes  out 
(i.e.,  fails  to  do)  the  bathing  and  recitation,  one  should, 
with  reverence,  perform  the  Brahma-Kurchha,  and 
purify  [oneself]  by  making  gifts.  (64) 

One,  bitten  by  a  serpent,  shall  be  purified  by  bathing 
in  the  water  on  the  horns  of  kine,  or  at  the  confluence 
of  great  rivers,  or  by  seeing  the  ocean,  (65) 

If  a  Brahmana  is  bitten  by  a  wolf,  dog,  or  a  jackal, 
he  shall  be  purified  by  drinking  clarified  butter  mixed 
with  water  [sanctified  with]  gold,  (66). 

But  a  Brahmana-\zdy,  rf  bitten  by  a  dog,  jackal,  or 
a  wolf,  shall  be  immediately  purified  on  seeing  the  rise 
of  a  star  or  a  planet.  (67) 

Bitten  by  a  dog,  a  person,  while  in  the  observance 
of  a  vow,  should  fast  for  three  nights.  By  eatiirg  barley 
boiled  with  clarified  butter,  be  should  bring  about  the 
termim-atio-n  of  his  vow.  (68) 

He,  who  breaks  a  religions  observance  out  of  stupe- 
faction, ignorance  or  avarice,  shall  be  purified  by  [fast- 
ing for]  three  nights.  He  should  again  undertake  that 
"eligious  observance.  (69) 

if  a    Brahmana    tin-knowingly   takes   th«   residue  of 


Atn  Samhitd.  295 

another  Brdnmana's  food,  he  becomes  purified  by  recit- 
ing the  G&yatri  for  a  couple  of  days.   (70) 

If  a  Br&hmana  unknowingly  takes  the  residue  of 
9.  Kshatriya's  food,  he  becomes  purified  by  [fasting  for] 
three  nights.  As  in  [the  case  of  a  Kshatriya,  so  it  is 
[in  that]  of  a  Vais'ya.  (71) 

By  taking  forbidden  food,  the  residue  of  a  food 
partaken  of  by  a  S'udra  or  a  woman,  or  by  eating 
forbidden  meat,  one  should  drink  the  extract  of  barley 
for  seven  nights.  (72) 

Bathing  is  laid  down  [for  a  person]  touched  by  a 
dog.  By  partaking  of  the  food  taken  by  a  dog,  he  should 
perform  a  distressing  penance  for  six  months,  (73) 

By  being  touched  by  castes  that  should  not  be 
touched,  one  should  bathe.  He,  who  takes  the  residue 
of  their  food,  should  perform  a  distressing  penance 
for  six  months.  (74) 

By  unknowingly  taking  excreta,  urine  or  articles 
contaminated  by  spirituous  liquor,  the  three  twice-born 
Varnas  should  have  again  to  perform  all  the  purificatory 
rites,  (75) 

In  performing  again  the  purificatory  rites,  twice- 
born  persons  would  not  be  required  to  shave  their  heads, 
hold  girdles,  carry  staffs,  or  perform  the  practice  of  beg- 
ging alms.  (76) 

I  shall  now  describe  the  purification  of  a  house  con- 
taminated by  a  dead  body  being  placed  inside.  Earthen 
vessels  and  boiled  rice  of  the  place  should  be  left  off.  (77) 
By  taking  out  all  those  articles  from  the  house,  one 
should  hav*e  it  pasted  with  cowdung ;  and,  then,  smelt 
by  a  goat.  (78) 

Being  sanctified  with  the  Brahma-Mantram  and 
sprinkled  with  the  water  of  Kus'a  and  gold  that  house 


296  Atri  SaihhitA. 

becomes     purified.     Th^re    is    not    the    least    doubt    in 
it-   (79) 

A  twice-born  person,  having  been  forcibly  misguided 
by  a  king,  or  a  degraded  caste,  should  first  undergo- 
through  all  the  purificatory  rites  and  then  perform  three 
distressing  penances.  (So) 

Bathing  is  laid  down  for  him  who  is  touched  by  a 
dpg.  By  taking  the  residue  of  its  food,  he  should, 
with  care,  perform  the  distressing  penance  [of  Praja- 
patya\.  (81) 

I  shall,  hereafter,  describe  the  regulations  about  im- 
purity. And  later  on  I  shall,  again,  discourse  on 
penances.  (82) 

A  Brdhmana,  who  maintains  the  Sacred  Fires  and  is 
well-read  in  the  Vedas,  becomes  purified  in  one  day  ; 
one,  who  has  only  mastered  the  V£das>  in  three  days  • 
and  one,  who  is  shorn  of  all  accomplishments,  in  ten? 
days.  (83) 

There  is  no  impurity  far  a  person  who,  being  purified 
by  (t'.e.j  according  to  the  injunctions  of)  the  S'dsfras,  is 
engaged  in  the  performance  of  a  religious  rite,  as  well  as 
for  him  who  maintains  the  Sacred  Fires,  for  the  king, 
and  for  him  for  whom  a  BrUhmftna  so  desires.  (84) 

A  Brdhmana  becomes  purified  in  ten  nights ;  a 
Kshatriyn,  in  twelve  days  ;  a  Vais'ya,  in  fifteen  days  ; 
and  a  S*udra,  in  a  month.  (85) 

Funeral  cakes  and  water  should  be  offered  to  air 
the  SapindaS)  born  in  the  same  family,  up  to  the  seventh 
generation.  Impurity,  consequent  on  a  death,  should 
follow  the  same  [precedent].  (86) 

The  impurity  [consequent  on  a  birth]  extends  for  ten 
nights  in  the  fourth  generation';  for  six  days,  in  the  fifth - 
for  thslee  nights,  in  the  sixth;  for  two  days,  in  the 


Atrl  SathhitA.  297 

seventh  ;  for  one  day.  in  the  eighth  ;  and  two  praharas,- 
in  the  ninth.  In  an  impurity,  consequent  on  a  birth,  in 
the  tenth  [generation],  one  becomes  purified  by  mere 
bathing.  (87—88) 

The  impurity,  of  female  servants  and  of  wives  taken' 
from  inferior  castes,  consequent  on  a  death  or  a  birth, 
should  be  like  that  of  the  husband;  and  the  husband' 
being  dead,  [the  impurity  should  be  [like  that  of]  the 
family  of  birth.  (89) 

The  third  [person],  touching  a  dead  body,  fi.e.}  one, 
who  touches  a  person  touching  one  who  has  touched  a' 
dead  body,)  should  bathe  with  his  raiment  on  ;  the  fourth,, 
should  eat  by  begging  from  seven  houses.  Such  is-  the 
r&gulation,  of  the  Smriti,  relating  to  the  touching  of 
a  dead  body,  (go) 

[On  the  birth  or  death  of  a  co-wife's  son],  the  im- 
purity, of  wives  married  at  the  same  time  and  living' 
conjointly,  should  be  like  that  of  their  husband.  [Butf 
when  living  separately,  [their  impurity  would  be]  separ- 
ate (i.e.,  according  to  each  one's  caste).  (91) 

By  drinking  the  milk  of  a  she-camel  or  that  of  a 
she-goat,  or  by  taking  food  [rendered  impure]  on  account 
of  a  birth  or  death,  or  that  of  a  cook,  or  that  at  a  new 
S'rdddha,  one  should  perform  a  Chdndrayana.  (92) 

The  man,  who  partakes  of  an  impure  food  having 
an  irreligious  act  in  view  (i.e.-,  with  a  desire  of  not  per- 
forming the  Sandfya -adoration,  etc.,)  should  fast  for  three- 
nights  and  reside  in  the  water  for  one  night.  (93) 

On  the  occasion  of  a  birth  or  death,  one  should  not 
make  arrangements  for  any  great  sacrifice,  but  with 
dry  food  or  fruits,  one  should  perform  [the  usual] 
Ho  ma.  '941 

Immediate    is   the  purification,  if  a  child  dies  within 


2§S  Atri  SaihhM. 

ten    days   of  its  birth  ;    [no  impurity,  consequent  on  its] 
birth   or  death,  should  continue.  (95) 

After  th*  ceremony  of  tonsure,  [a  boy]  is  qualified 
to  perform  the  rite  of  offering  water  and  funeral  balls 
and  recite  the  Swadha  and  the  name.  (96) 

A  religious  student  and  a  Yatin  [become  imme- 
diately purified].  In  the  recitation  of  the  Mantrams 
determined  upon  before,  in  a  sacrifice,  and  in  a  marriage 
[wherein  the  rite  of  the  Vfiddhi-S'r&ddha  has  been  per- 
formed], immediate  purification  is  laid  down.  (97) 

There  is  no  sin,  if  any  intervening  impurity,  conse- 
quent on  a  birth  or  death,  takes  place,  in  the  celebration 
of  a  marriage,  festivity,  or  a  sacrifice,  determined  upon 
before.  So  Atri  has  said.  (98) 

The  purification,  it  is  laid  down,  [for  the  impurity]  of 
touching,  on  account  of  the  birth  of  a  stillborn  child,  [is 
effected]  by  rinsing  the  mouth,  if  one  has  not  touched 
the  mother  who  has  given  birth  to  such  a  child.  (99) 

The  touching  of  a  Kshatriya  on  the  fifth  day,  and 
of  a  Vais'ya  on;  the  seventh  day,  is  known  (i.e.,  sanc- 
tioned) by  the  learned.  (100) 

The  touching  of  the  S'tidra  on  the  tenth  day  has. 
been  sanctioned  by  the  learned.  On  the  occasion  of  a 
birth  or  death,  the  purification  of  self  is  effected  in  a 
month.  (101) 

Perpetual  impurity  attaches  to  one  who  is  always 
sickly,  one  who  does  not  perform  religious  rites,  one 
who  is  ignorant,  one  who  is  notoriously  henpecked,  one 
who  is  grossly  inclined  to  vile  practices,  one  who  is 
always  dependent  upon  others,  and  one  who  abstains 
from  Vedic  study  and  the  vow  of  celibacy.  (102 — 103) 

Two  Prajapatyas  are  laid  down  in  the  Srmiti  for  a 
Parimtti  (an  elder  brother  whose  younger  brother  k 


Ain  Saihhttd.  299 

tttarried  before  him) ;  one,  tor  the  maiden  [so  married]  ; 
the  most  distressing  of  all  penances^  for  the  person 
who  gives  away  [a  maiden  in  such  a  marriage]  ;  and 
Santapanam,  for  the  Parivttta  (a  younger  brothef 
married  before  his  elder  brother).  (104) 

There  is  no  sin  in  a  younger  brother's  marrying 
before  his  elder,  [if  the  latter  is]  hunchbacked,  dwarf, 
lame,  of  censurable  conduct,  ignorant  of  the  Vtdas,  or 
by  birth  blind,  deaf  or  dumb.  (105) 

[The  elder  brother]  being  a  eunuch,  residing  in 
another  country,  being  outcasted,  adopting  the  life  of 
renunciation,  being  devoted  to  the  study  of  the  yoga- 
S'dstra,  there  is  no  sin  in  the  younger  brother's  marrying 
before  his  elder.  (106). 

There  is  no  sin  in  the  younger  brother's  marrying 
before  his  elder,  if  his  father,  grandfather  or  elder 
brother  had  not  been  qualified  to  maintain  the  Sacred 
Fires.  (107) 

In  the  case  of  the  death  [of  the  elder  brother's  wife, 
or  in  the  case  of  his  going  to  another  country,  or  on  his 
being  sullied  with  a  sin;  [a  younger  brother]  becomes 
qualified  [to  maintain  the  Sacred  Fire].  (108) 

If  the  eldest  brother  lives  near,  but  does  not  maintain, 
the  Sacred  Fire,  [a  younger  brother],  permitted  by  him, 
may  do  so  ;  such  is  the  deliverance  of  S'ahkha.  (109) 

[The  maintenance  of]  the  Sacred  Fire,  [the  study 
of]  the  Vedas,  [the  practice  of]  the  austerities  shall 
not  contaminate  (a.  younger  brother]  with  the  sin  of 
taking  before.  But  a  younger  brother  can  never 
perform  a  S * raddha  without  the  permission  [of  the  eld* 
est  brother],  (no) 

The  daily  and  occassional  rites  described  in  the 
S'ruti  and  the  religious  rites  performed  with  the  sole 


Atri  S  ambit  a. 

intention  of  attaining  to  the  celestial  region,  one  should 
always  perform  and  acquire  piety  therefrom,    (it  i) 

In  the  light-fortnight,  one  should  increase  [the 
dumber  of  morsels]  one  by  one,  [and  similarly]  decrease 
it  in  the  dark-fortnight.  One  should  not  take  meals  on 
the  Amdvasyd.  Such  is  the  regulation  about  Chandra- 
.yana.  This  had  been  described  by  the  ancient  sages  as 
destructive  of  mighty  iniquities.  (112) 

Sins,  begotten  of  heinous  crimes  [likeBrahmani- 
cide,  etc.],  do  not  touch  one  who  is  given  to  the  study 
of  the  Vedas,  forgiving^  and  devoted  to  the  performance' 
of  great  sacrifices.  (113) 

By  seeing  the  sun  during  the  day,  living  Ori  air  only^ 
and  reciting  the  Gayatri  a  thousand  timeSj  and  living  in 
the  water  during  the  nightj  one  becomes  purified  except 
in  Brahmanicide.  (114) 

[One  attains  to  purification]  by  drinking  the  decoc- 
tion of  lotus,  Udumvara,  Vilwa,  Kusa,  As'watha,  and 
PalaJa,  leaves.  This  is  called  Parnakrickha.  (115; 

By  drinking  the  P&nskagavya,  (milk,  curd,  urine  of  a 
cow,  cowdung,  and  clarified  butter  made  of  the  milk  of- 
a  cow),  one  should  fast  the  next  day.  This  is  the  regu- 
lation about  Santapana.  (116) 

By  taking  each  article  of  the  Santapana  (such  as 
the  milk,  curd,  etc.,)  for  six  days,  one  should  fast  on  the 
seventh.  This  penance^  extending  over  seven  days, 
is  called,  in  the  Smriti^  M aha- Santapana.  (117) 

[One  should  take  these  articles]  in  the  evening  for 
three  days^  and  in  the  morning  for  three  days  ;  [then 
one  s4iould]  take  unsolicited  food  for  three  days  ;  then 
one  should  take  no  food  for  three  days ;  this  is 
the  regulation  of  the  Prajapatya  described  in  the 
Smriti.  (118) 


Atri   Samhitd.  301 

[In  this  penance,]  twelve  morsels  in  the  evening  ; 
fifteen,  in  the  morning  ;  and  twenty-four,  [in  the  period] 
when  unsolicited  [food  is  to  be  taken]  ; — are  sanctioned 
by  the  Smriti.  One  should,  as  laid  down  in  the  Smriti, 
fast  [for  the  last  three]  days.  (119) 

[One  should]  take  only  one  morsel  [only]  every 
three  days  as  before,  and  fast  for  the  last  three  days. 
This  is  called  Atikrichhah.  (120) 

Know  that  for  purification,  a  body-purifying  morsel 
should  be  made  of  the  size  of  a  hen-egg  or  of  the  size 
of  that  which  could  conveniently  be  taken  in  one's 
mouth.  (1^1) 

[In]  a  Taptakrichhah^\  one  should  drink  hot  water  for 
three  days  ;  and  hot  milk  for  [another]  three  days. 
And  drinking  hot  clarified  butter  for  three  days,  olie 
should  live  on  air  for  [the  next]  three  days.  (122) 

One  should  drink  water  to  the  measure  of  six  pal  as 
[for  three  days],  and  milk  to  the  measure  of  three 
pnlas  [for  another  three  days]  ;  and  one  pal  a  of  clarified 
butter  [for  the  next  three  days].  Such  is  the  regulation 
of  the  Taptakrichhah.  (123) 

One  should  take  curd  for  three  days;  clarified  butter 
for  three  days,  [arid]  milk  for  [another]  three  days;  and 
live  on  air  for  [the  next]  three  days.  (124) 

One  should  take  curd  and  milk  to  the  measure  of 
three  palas  and  one  p/ila  of  clarified  butter.  This  is 
called  the  sacred  Vedic  penance  of  Krichhrah.  (125) 

One  should  take  one  meal  for  a  day,  live  on  unsoli- 
cited food  for  one  night  and  fast  for  a  day.  This  is 
called  Padakrichtyah,  (126) 

If  one  lives  on  milk  for  twenty-one  days,  [the  penance 
is  called  KrichhratikrichhraU.     And  it  is  called  Paraka 
when' one  fasts  for  twelve  days.    (127) 
39 


Atri  Samhitd. 


If  one  takes  every  day  a  morsel  of  oil-cake,  curd 
and  powdered  grain  [for  four  days]  and  fasts  for  another 
day,  [the  penance]  is  called  Soumyakrichhrah.  (128) 

If  each  one  of  all  these  is  performed,  in  order,  for 
three  days,  (the  penance)  is  known  as  Tulnpurushd 
[extending  over]  fifteen  days.  (129) 

One  should  drink  the  tepid  milk  flowing  from  [the 
udders  of]  a  Kapild-(c.Q\\)  «-when  milcked.  This  is  the 
penance  Vyasakritah  (performed  by  Vyasa).  It  puri- 
fies even  a  Chandala.  (130,). 

To  take  meals  in  the  night  is  known  as  NaktOf 
(Vrata  or  night  penance).  Chdndrayana  is  spoken  of 
[as  the  penance]  for  sins  for  which  no  expiation  is, 
laid  down.  (131) 

Persons,  having  asceticism-  for  wealth,  obtain  the 
same  fruits  by  these  penances,  as  they  get  by  perform- 
ing Agnistoma  and  other  Sacrifices  with  twofold  sacri-. 
ficial  presents.  (132) 

One,  given,  to  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and  of  for- 
giving, [disposition],  if  he  makes  enquiries  into  the 
Dharma-S  '  dstras  ;  and  a  householder  too,  if  he  is, 
endued  with  purity  and  good  conduct  ;  —  become  freed, 
[from  sins].  (133) 

[The  religious  rites]  of  the  twice-born  have  been 
described,  O  great  ~Rishi,  hear,  I  shall  hereafter  describe 
what  brings  about  the  fall  of  S'udras  and  women.  (1.34) 

Recitation  [of  the  Gayatri\  austerity,  and  journeys. 
to  sacred  places,  adoption  of  a  Sannydsa-lite,  practice 
of  Mantrams  and  adoration  of  Deities,  —  these  six  bring 
about  the  fall  of  women  and  S'iidras.  (135) 

The  woman,  who,  during  the  lifetime  of  her  husband,, 
fasts  while  performing  a  religious  rite,  robs  the  longevity 
of  her  husband.  Such  a  woman  goes  to  hell.  (136) 


A:tri  Saihhitd.  303 

A  woman,  desirous  of  bathing  in  a  sacred  water, 
should  drink  the  water  washing  the  feet  of  her  husband, 
of  S'iva  or  of  Vishnu.  She  should,  thereby,  attain  to 
the  most  excellent  station.  (137) 

A  woman  is  [always]  the  left  limb,  the  husband  being 
alive  or  dead  ;  and  he>  the  right  one.  But  in  a  S?r&ddh&\ 
sacrifice,  and  marriage,  a  wife  should  always  [be  placed] 
in  the  right.  (138) 

Soma  (the  Moon),  the  Gandharvas,  and  the  Angirah 
have  conferred  purity  on  them  ;  and  Fire,  all  holiness. 
Women  are,  therefore,  always  holy.  (139) 

By  birth,  one  is  known  as -a  Brdhmana  ;  and  by  the 
purificatory  rites,  he  is  called  a  Dwija  (twice-born).  He 
attains  to  the  dignity  of  a  Vipra  by  learning  ;  and  by 
these  three,  to  that  of  a  S'fotriya.  (140) 

He,  who  studies  the  Veda-S'astra  and  follows  the 
import -of  Scriptural  injunctions,  is  called  a  Vedavid 
(one  knowing  the  Vedas) ;  his  utterance  is  sanc- 
tifying. (141) 

That  religion  is  to  be  known  as  the  highest  which 
a  leading  Brdhmana,  knowing  the  Vedas,  follows — • 
but  not  that  which  is  followed  by  ten  thousand  illiterate 
persons.  (142) 

By  reciting  [the  Gdyatri]  and  making  Homa  (offer- 
ing oblations  to  the  Fire),  foremost  persons  of  the  twice- 
born  race  shine  lik^  fire  ;  and  [they]  meet  with  ruin,  by 
accepting  presents  like  fire  by  water.  (143) 

Like  the  wind  driving  away  the  clouds  in  the  sky, 
the  learned  and  foremost  twice-born  persons  dissipate 
the  sins  begotten  of  accepting  presents,  by  Prdna- 
yama.  (144) 

When   a    Vipra,  after  taking  his  meals  or  rinsing  his 


3°4 

mouth,  remains  with  a  wet  hand,  he  gets  his  wealth, 
strength,  fame,  energy  and  life  lessened.  (145) 

One  should  not  partake  of  his  food,  who,  seated  on 
his  seat,  rinses  his  mouth  in  the  dining  room  ;  and  by 
taking  it,  one  should  perform  a  Chandrnyana.  (146) 

One  should  not  partake  of  his  food,  who,  placing1  a 
vessel  on  his  scat,  rinses  Ms  mouth;  and  by  taking  it, 
one  should  perform  a  Chandrayana.  (147) 

[If]  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  after  taking  his 
meals  and  washing  his  hands,  drinks  the  water  thereof, 
the  Asuras  partake  of  his  food  ;  and  the  departed 
Manes  go  back  disappointed.  (1481 

There  is  no  ^'astra  superior  to  the  Veda\  there  is 
no  elderly  person  superior  to  the  mother ;  and  there 
is  no  friend  superior  to  charity  both  in  this  world  and 
and  in  the  next.  But  what  is  given  to  an  unworthy 
person,  consumes  the  family  up  to  the  seventh  genera- 
tion. (149) 

When  food  is  offered  in  an  iron  vessel,  the  Celes- 
tials do  not  acxvp:  the  Havyn  ;  and  the  departed  Manes 
do  not  accept  the  Kavya.  That  food  is  like  excreta 
unto  him  who  partakes  of  it  ;  and  the  giver,  too,  goes 
to  hell.  (150) 

A  learned  person  should  not  serve  food,  placed 
elsewhere,  with  his  left  hand  ;  nor  should  he  do  it  in  an 
iron  vessel.  (151) 

He,  who  in  a  S'rdddka,  feeds  the  departed  Manes 
in  an  earthen  vessel — both  he  and  the  partaker — go  to 
hell.  (152) 

When  other  vessels  are  not  available,  one  may  offer 
[food]  in  an  earthen  vessel  with  the  permission  of  the 
twice-born  persons.  Their  words,  true  or  false,  consti- 
tute an  authority.  (153) 


Atn    San  hit d.  305 

There  is  no  virtue  for  the  person  who  gives  alms 
in  golden,  iron,  copper,  belmetal,  or  in  silver,  vessels. 
The  accepter  thereof  also  partakes  of  sins.  (154) 

[A  Bhiksiiu\  should  never,  even  in  a  calamity,  take 
his  food  from  belmetal  vessels  ;  for  the  Yatins  should 
take  their  m-als  [only]  on  Az/^'tf-leaves,  and  a  house- 
holder, from  a  belmetal  vessel.  '155) 

A  Yutin,  taking  his  food  from  a  belmetal  vessel, 
reaps  the  sin  of  both  the  belmetal  vessel  and  the  house- 
holder. ( 156) 

A  Bhikshu  is  not  visited  by  sin  by  taking  food  from 
golden,  iron,  copper,  belmetal  and  silver  [vessels]  ;  but 
he  commits  a  sin  by  taking  those  vessels.  (157) 

If  [one]  pours  water  into  [a  Bhikshd s\  hands,  then 
offers  alms  and  again  pours  water — that  alms  be- 
comes like  [the  mount]  Meru  ;  and  that  \vater,  like  an 
ocean.  (158) 

[A  Bhikshu'}  should  collect  alms  by  begging  from 
door  to  door,  as  a  bee  collects  honey  from  flower  to 
flower,  even  from  amongst  the  Mlechchha- families.  But 
food,  collected  from  one  house,  should  not  be  partaken 
of  even  in  Vrihaspati's  house.  (159) 

One,  who,  leaving  the  domestic  mode  of  life,  begs 
boiled  rice  except  in  a  calamity,  should  drink  Vajra 
(sour  gruel)  for  ten  nights  ;  and  water,  for  three 
nights.  (160) 

Barley  mixed  with  the  urine  of  a  cow  and  boiled 
•with  clarified  butter  is  called  "  Vajra"  So  the  divine 
Atri  has  said.  (161) 

A  Brahmacharin^  a   Yutin,  a  student,  one  who  main- 
tains   his    preceptor,    a    wanderer    and    a    man    of  poor 
means, — these     six    are    described,    in    the   Smriti,    as 
the  Bhikshus.   ',162) 


306  Atri 

A  mortal  should  know  his  enciente  wife  for  [the 
first]  six  months  ;  and  again,  after  the  child  has  teethed* 
Such  is  the  religious  prescription.  (163) 
•'  The  first  is  Brahmanicide  ;  the  second  is  co-habita- 
tion with  a  step-mother;  and  the  third  is  the  drinking  of 
spirituous  liquors  ;  the  fourth  is  called  theft  [of  gold 
from  a  Brahmana-ma.$ter~\  ;  the  fifth  is  association  with 
these  sinful  wights  ; — -these  are  heinous  crimes.  (164) 

For  the  purification  of  these  sins,  one  should  perform 
three  penances  for  three  years  successively  ;  by  it,  one 
becomes  freed  from  the  sin  of  Brahmanicide  when 
committed  unknowingly.  (1631 

It  is  laid  down  that  one-half  [of  the  sin]  of  Brah- 
manicide  [visits  a  man  for  killing]  Kshatriyas  ;  similarly, 
six  and  twelve  portions,  for  [killing]  Vais'yas  and 
Sudras.  (166) 

The  destroyer  of  a  woman  is  purified  by  taking  his 
meals  in  the  night  and  sleeping  on  earth  for  three 
months;  and  by  performing  thirty  Prajapatyas.  (167) 

A  twice-born  person,  who  takes  food  from  a  washer- 
man, or  from  an  actor,  or  from  one  who  lives  on  bamboo^ 
work,  should  perform  a  Chdndrdyana.  (168) 

By  knowing  women  of  lowcastes,  taking  their  meals 
and  lying  with  them  on  the  same  bed,  one  should  get 
[himself]  purified  with  a  Paraka.  (169) 

By  drinking  the  water  [that  lies]  in  a  Chandala's 
vessel,  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born  should  live,  for 
thirty-seven  days,  on  barley  and  the  urine  of  a  cow.  (170) 

A  Brahmana,  who  unknowingly  partakes  of  cooked 
food  touched  by  outcastes  or  by  women  in  [their]  menses, 
should  perform  \\^\i-^-Prajdpatya.  (171) 

The  [following  are  the  means  of]  expiation  for  the 
four  castes  when  they  [happen  to]  partake  of  a  Chan- 


Atri  Sainkitfr.  307 

data's  food.  A  Brdhmana  should  perform  a  Chandra- 
yana  ;  and  a  Kshatriya,  a  Sc.ntapa.nam.  (172) 

A  Vai'sya  should  perform  a  penance  and  live  on* 
the  Pafichagavya  for  six  nights.  A  S'udra  should: 
perform  [the  same]  for  three  nights  and  purify  [himself] 
by  making  gifts.  (173) 

If  a  Brahmana,  getting  upon  a  tree,  eats  its  fruits, 
and  a  Chandala  standing  down  touches  its  root,  what 
would  be  the  penance  [for  that  Brdhmana']'}  (174) 

With  the  permission  of  other  Brdhmanas.,  he  should 
bathe  with  the  cloth  on  ;  that  Vipra  should  take  his- 
meals  in  the  night  [for  one  day]  and  purify  [himself]; 
by  taking  clarified  butter.  (175) 

If  getting  upon  the  same  tree,  a  Brahmana  and  a 
Chanddla  eat  the  fruits  thereof,  what  then  would  be  the 
penance  [for  the  former]  ?  (176) 

Having  obtained  permission  from  [other]  Brdh- 
maiias,  he  should  bathe  with  the  cloth  on.  Then  after 
fasting  for  a  day  and  night,  he  should  purify  [himself] 
by  taking  the  Pafichagavya.  (177) 

What  would  be  the  penance  then,  when  a  Brdh- 
matta  and  a  Chandala  getting  upon  the  same  branch, 
of  a  tree  eat  its  fruits  ?  (178) 

He  becomes  purified  by  taking  the  Panchagavya,. 
after  fasting  for  three  nights.  (179) 

The  purification  for  knowing  a  Mlechchha-wom&ii 
[consists]  in  a  Sdntapanam,  or,  it  is  said,  [one  may  attain 
to]  purification  by  performing  a  Taptakrichhrah.  (180) 

If  a  person  lives  with  a  wife  known  by  a  Mlechchka, 
[he  becomes  purified]  by  bathing  with  the  cloth  on 
and  drinking  clarified  butter.  (181) 

Again,  [for  knowing  a  woman]  brought  by  another 
for  [the  purpose  of]  procreating  a  son,  [one  becomes] 


3-0$  Atn 

purified  by  bathing  in  the  water  of  a  river    and   drinking 
clarified  butter.   (182) 

By  co-habiting,  unknowingly,  with  the  women  of  the 
Chaudalas,  Mlechchhas,  Swnpachas,  as  well  as  those 
who  observe  the  Kapala-Vrata*  one  is  purified  by  a 
Paraka.  (  83) 

But  if  one  knows  them,  willingly,  and  procreates 
children,  he  is  degarded  to  the  same  caste  ;  there  is 
no  doubt  in  it,  for  that  mari  is  born  as  her  son.  (184) 

If  a  twice-born  person,  being  anointed  with  oil 
or  clarified  butter,  passes  urine  or  excreta  ;  or  if  a  twice- 
born  person  being  anointed  with  oil  or  clarified  butter, 
touches  a  Chandala  ; — he  should,  after  fasting  for  a  day 
and  night,  purify  [himself]  with  the  Panchagavya.  (185) 

By  touching  hairs,  insects,  nails,  nerves,  bones,  and 
thorns,  one  becomes  purified  by  bathing  in  river-water 
and  drinking  clarified  butter.  (186 

By  touching  the  bones  of  a  fish,  or  of  a  jackal, 
nails,  an  oyester-shell,  or  a  small  univalve  shell,  one 
becomes  purified  by  bathing  and  drinking  hot  clarified 
butter  purified  by  gold.  (187) 

The  purity  [or  otherwise]  of  a  cow-shed,  a  boiler- 
house,  oil-mill,  sugarcane-press,  women  and  diseased 
persons  should  not  be  discussed  (i.e.,  they  are  always 
pure).  (188) 

A  woman  is  not  sullied  by  being  known  bv  another  ; 
nor  a  Brdhmana,\)y  [harmful]  Vedic  rites  ;!nor  a  [river] 
water,  by  urine  and  excreta  ;  nor  fire,  by  burning  impure 
articles.  (189) 

Women  were  first  enjoyed  by  the  Celestials  ;  then,  by 
the  moon,  the  Gandharvas  and  the  Fires.  Afterwards 

*  Lowcastes  :  offspring  of  a  Brahmana- mother  and  a  fisherman  father. 


Jim 


men  to  enjoy  them.     They   are   never  affected   by 
;any  sin.  (190) 

When  a.  woman  conceives  by  being  known  by  a 
asavarna  (i.£.,  one  belonging  to  a  higher  caste  than 
she),  she  remains  impure  till  she  does  not  give  birth 
to  a  child.  (191) 

When,  after  delivery,  the  menstrual  blood  is  seen, 
the  woman  becomes  purified  like  pure  gold.  (192) 

If  despite  her  complete  unwillingness,  a  woman  is 
known  deceitfully,  forcibly  or  stealthily,  that  woman, 
unaffected  by  any  sin,  should  not  be  renounced  ;  for  she 
has  not  done  so  willingly.  [Her  husband]  may  hold 
congress  with  her  at  the  time  of  the  menses,  [for  a 
\voman]  becomes  pure  at  the  flowering  time.  (1^3—194) 

A  washerman,  a  cobbler,  an  actor,  a  Varuda,  a 
Kaivarta,  a  M£da,  and  a  Bhilla  —  these  seven  are  known, 
in  the  Smriti,  as  degraded  castes.  (195) 

By  knowing  their  women,  taking  their  food  and 
accepting  gifts  from  them,  if  willingly,  one  should  per- 
form Prdjdpatya  for  a  year  ;  and,  if  unknowingly,  two 
Chandrayanas.  (196) 

The  woman,  who  has  once  been  known  by  the 
Mltchchhas,  or  by  the  perpetrators  of  crimes,  becomes 
purified  with  the  Prdjdpatya  and  the  menstrual 
flow.  (197) 

The  woman,  who  has  once,  being  taken  away  for- 
cibly, or  herself,  by  being  imposed  upon>  been  Ihua 
known,  becomes  purified  with  a  Prdjdpatya.  (198) 

,  If  the  menses  appears  in  women  who  have  been  prac- 
tising hard  austerities  for  a  long  time,  their  religious 
observances  are  not  destroyed  thereby.  (199) 

If  a   twice-born   person    drinks   water   from    vessels 
contaminated  by  spirituous  liquors,  he  becomes  purified 
40 


a  io  Afri 

y  undergoing   the    purificatory 


rites  once  again.   (200) 

.  The  trees,  belonging  to  degraded  castes  and  having 
many  flowers  and  fruits,  could  be  enjoyed  by  all  with 
their  fruits  and  flowers,  1201) 

If  a  twice-born  person  drinks  water  touched  by  a 
Chatiddla,  he  becomes  purified  by  a  Krichhrapnda.  So 
the  ascetic  A'pastarnva  has  said.  (202) 

What  would  be  the  penance  for  drinking  water  from 
a  well  contaminated  by  phlegms,  shoesr  excreta,  urine, 
menstrual  blood  of  a  woman  and  spirituous  liquor?  (203) 

[To  fast]  for  one  day,  two,  and  three,  days,  is  the 
purifying  penance  for  the  [three]  twice-born  castes 
[severally].  To  take  meals  in  the  night  is  the  punish- 
ment for  a  S'lidra.  (204) 

By  touching  [an  article]  immediately  vomitted  out, 
a  Vipra  should  bathe  with  his  raiment  on  ;  [by  touching] 
what  was  ejected  on  the  previous  day,  [one  should  fast 
for]  a  day  and  a  night  ;  [and  by  touching  what  was  eject- 
ed] days  before,  [one  should  fast  for]  three  days.  (205) 

The  head,  neck,  thighs  and  feet  being  contaminated 
with  spirituous  liquor,  one  should  fast,  in  order,  for  teny 
six,  three  and  one  day.  (206) 

By  once  unknowingly  drinking  spirituous  liquors,. 
except.  5ttr<f-(wine),  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born 
becomes  purified  by  living  on  the  urine  of  a  cow  and 
barley  for  ten  nights.  '207) 

The  Celestials  do  not  partake  of  the  food  nor  drink 
the  water  offered  by  the  foremost  of  the  twice-bornr 
who  eats  the  food  of  a  drunkard  or  of  a  Chandala.  (208} 

The  woman,  who  falls  down  from  the  funeral  pyrer 
[of  her  husband],  or  who  gets  no  menses  on  account 


Atri  Sartihitd.  31  f 

of  a   disease,   becomes    purified  by  a*  Prajdpntya    and 
feeding  ten  Brahmanas.  (209) 

The  twice-born  persons, — who,  returning  from  a  life 
of  mendicancy  or  coming  back  alive  from  water,  tire, 
or  from  a  vow  of  fasting  to  death,  desire  again  to  lead 
the  domestic  mode  of  life, — should  perform  three 
Prajapatyas  or  one  Ckdndrdyana.  And  it  is  said  that 
they  are  required  to  perform  all  the  purificatory  rites 
beginning  with  the  Jdtakarman.  (210 — 211) 

No  impurity  [should  be  observed],  no  water  [should 
be  offered] ,  no  tears  [should  be  shed],  no  singing  of 
merits,  no  expression  of  sorrow,  and  no  living  on  a 
bare  bedstead,  should  be  done  for  those  killed  by  a 
Brdhmands  imprecation.  (212) 

He,  who  does  so  out  of  affection  or  fear,  should 
perform  one  purifying  penance  by  living  upon  the  urine 
of  a  cow  and  barley.  (213) 

Three  nights  [form  the  period  of  purification]  for 
him,  who,  being  aged,  losing  all  knowledge  of  the  puri- 
ficatory injunctions  of  the  Smriti  and  neglecting  the 
instructions  of  a  physician,  kills  himself,  by  falling  down 
from  a  high  place,  or  by  entering  into  water,  or  fire,  or 
by  fasting.  His  bones  should  be  deposited  on  the 
second  day.  And  performing  the  watery  rite  on  the 
third  day,  [his  son]  should  perform  the  S'rdddha  on 
the  fourth.  (214 — 215) 

Whence  would  his  welfare  come  and  how  could  his 
ignorance  be  destroyed  in  whose  house  there  is  not  a 
single  cow  followed  by  a  calf  ?  (216) 

A  cow  being  killed  by  excessive  milking,  carrying 
an  excessive  load,  by  its  nose  being  bored  through,  in 
a  river  or  in  a  mountain,  or  by  being  shut  up,  one  should 
perform  a  Pddo<na.  (217) 


3i2  A'tri  SamhM-. 

The  virtuous  driving  of  a  ploughshare,  is  by 
eight  bulls  ;  [to  do  so  by]  six  bulls,  is  what  is  in  general* 
practice;  to  do  so  by  four  [is  the  work]  of  the  cruel- 
hearted  ;  one  who  does  so  by  two  bulls,  is  the  killer  of 
a  bull.  (218) 

It  is  laid  down  in  fche^  Smriti  that  two  bulls  shall 
carry  a  plough  for  one  prahara  ;  four,  up  to  mid^day  ; 
six,  up  to  the  third  part  of  the  day  ;  and  eight,  for  the 
whole  day.  (219)* 

One  killing  a  cow  by  a  piece  of  wood*  a  clod  of 
earth,  or  a  stone,  should  perform  the  distressing  penance 
of  Sdntdpanam;  if  she  is  killed  by  a  earthen  clod,  one 
should  perform  the  Prajdpatya  ;  and  if  by  an  iron,  a 
highly  distressing  penance.  (2*20) 

When  the  penance  is  completed,  one  should  feed 
the  Brdhmanas  and  make  a  gift  of  a  cow  with  a  bull: 
unto  a  Vipra.  (221) 

The  penance  for  killing  a  S^udra  is  also  laid  down, 
for  slaying  a  S'arabha-fotr,  camel,  horse,  elephant,., 
lion,  tiger  or  an  ass.  (222) 

By  killing  a  cat,  an  alligator,  a  mungoose,  a  frog  or 
a  bird,  one  should  either  drink  [only]  milk  for  three 
days  or  perform  a  Padakrichhrah.  (223) 

[Fasting  for]  three  nights  [effects]  the  purification 
of  one  touched  by  a  Chanddla  or  of  one  sullied  by 
urine  or  excreta.  And  by  taking  the  residue  of 
one's  own  food,  he  should  act  similarly  (i.e.,  fast  for 
three  nights).  (224) 

The  purification  of  contaminated  tanks,  wells  and 
pools,[of  water,  is  effected]  by  taking  out  one  hundred 

••  The  import  of  the  S'loka  is,  that  one  commits  no  sin  if  he  makes 
these  bulls  work  for  a  limited  time,  so  that  they  may  not  suffer  from 
excessive  toil  or  exhaustion. 


313, 

jarfuls    of    water     and  then    by    [throwing   into    themj 
Panchagavya.  (225) 

[If  the  water  of  a  vessel]  is  sullied  by  bones  or  skint 
or  by  asses  or  dogs,  all  its  water  should  be  thrown  off,, 
an-d  its  purity,  [effected  byj  rubbing.  (226) 

The  water,  of  a  vessel  in.  which  a  cow  is  milked,, 
that  in  a  leather  hag,  that  in  an  instrument  for  fetching; 
water,  that  in  the  hands  of  an  artizan  or  of  a  mechanic,, 
that  used  by  women,  aged  persons  or  by  children,  and 
that  used  by  them,  whose  impurity  has  not  been  marked^, 
are  [always]  pure.  (227): 

The    [question,  of}  impu?Ry  should  not  be  thought  of 
when    a  city  is  besieged,  in  an  inaccessible  place,  in  an- 
encampment,  when-   the   house   is   set   on  fire,     when   at 
sacrifice  is  begun,  or  in  great  festivities.  (228) 

By  drinking  water  from  a  place  whence  travellers 
get  water  for  drinking,  in  a  forest  (t.e-.,  in  an  unknown- 
tank),  in  a  vessel,  in  a  well,  in  a  Droni  (vessel  containing 
water  for  bathing),  or  that  trickling  down  from  the 
sheath  [of  a  sword],  or  that  touched  by  a  S'wapdka 
or  by  a  Chandala,  one  becomes  purified;  with  the 
Panchagavya.  (229) 

If  one  drinks  the  water  of  a  well  polluted  with, 
semen,  excreta  or  urine,  one  becomes  purified,  in  three 
nights.  [By  drinking  such  water]  in  a  jar,  [one  should 
perform]  the  Sdntdpanam.  (230-) 

If  a  leading  twice-born-  person  unknowingly  drinks 
water  contaminated  by  an  entirely  or  partially  rotten 
dead  body,  he  should,  by  so  drinking,  perform  the 
penance  of  Taptakrichhrah.  (231)) 

By  drinking  the  milk  of  a  she-camel,  that  of  a  she- 
ass,  or  that  of  a  woman,  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born, 
should  perform  the  penance  of  Taptakrichhrah.  (232) 


314  AM 

The  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  when,  having  still 
the  leavings  of  food  in  his  mouth,  touched  by  a 
caste  outside  [the  pale  of  the  recogniged  castes],  should, 
after  fasting  for  five  nights,  get  purified  with  the 
Panchgnvya.  (233) 

The  water  that  gives  satisfaction  to  the  kine,  that 
which  is  in  natural  state,  that  which  lies  on  earth,  that 
which  is  in  a  leather  bag,  that  which  is  in  currents,  or 
that  which  is  taken  up  by  an  instrument,  is  [always] 
pure.  (234) 

Bathing  is  laid  down  [for  him,  who  is]  touched  by 
a  Chandala ;  when  so  touched  while,  he  has  still  the 
leavings  of  food  in  his  mouth,  [one]  should  get  purified 
[by  fasting]  for  three  nights.  (2351 

Articles  brought  from  a  machine  are  never  impure  ; 
all  the  instruments  are  pure,  except  that  which  manu- 
factures wine.  (236) 

Barley,  gram,  date,  or  camphor,  whether  broken  or 
unbroken,  are  held  to  be  pure  by  the  Sntriti.  Other 
articles,  when  separated  from  husks,  are  pure.  (237) 

The  actions  of  women  are  not  to  be  discussed;  [they 
are  always]  pure.  Rain-drops  are  always  unsullied,  and 
so  is  the  dust  driven  by  the  wind.  (238) 

If  one,  amongst  many  articles  lying  together,  be- 
comes sullied,  only  that  one  is  to  be  considered  impure, 
and  not  the  others  under  any  circumstances.  (239) 

Of  all  sitting  in  the  same  row  but  taking  meals 
separately,  if  one  puts  on  a  cloth  dyed  with  indigo,  all 
of  them  [become]  impure,  according  to  the  Sntriti.  (240) 

He,  in  whose  cotton  cloth  or  silk  raiment  indigo 
dye  is  seen,  should  have  to  fast  for  three  nights  ;  and 
others,  for  one  night  only.  (241) 

"  O  lord,    O  thou    having   asceticism   for  wealth,  do 


Atn  San>hita, 

tliou  tell  how  could  one  be   purified,   if   he  touches  what 
should     not    be    touched     in     the    night    after    sunset." 
[Said  the  "Risk is.}    (242' 
[AiRi  said  : — ] 

Touching,  in  the  night,  after  sunset,  the  water 
brought  during  the  daytime,  ^brings  about  the  purifica- 
tion of  all,  except  the  touching  of  a  dead  body.  (243) 

Thereupon  [a  learned  persojp]  after  examining  the 
place,  time,  age,  power  and  [the  nature  of]  the  sin, 
should  determine  the  penance  for  the  sin,  the  expiation 
of  which  has  not  been  spoken  of.  244} 

There  is  no  sin  in  being  touched  while  going  to  see 
idols,  in  'marriages,  in  sacrifices,  and  in  all  sorts  of 
festivities.  (245) 

Arnnalam  (gruel  made  from  the  fermentation  of 
boiled  rice),  milk,  fried  paddy,  curd,  sour  gruel,  any 
article  fried  with  oil,  buttermilk,  [even  when  made] 
by  a  S?  Jidra  does  not  bring  on  any  sin.  (246) 

Raw  meat,  clarified  butter,  oil,  and  oily  substances 
entrailed  from  fruits,  even  when  kept  in  vessels  of  de- 
graded castes,  attain  to  purification  when  brought 
out.  (247) 

By  knowingly  drinking  water  from  the  Vudras, 
a  Brahmana  should  fast  for  a  day  and  night  and,  [then] 
after  bathing,  should  get  [himself]  purified  with  the 
Pafichagavya.  (248) 

The  Vipra,  who  maintains  the  Sacred  Fire,  if  he 
commits  a  great  sin,  should  throw  the  vessels  into  the 
water,  and  then  replace  the  Fire.  (249) 

His  food  should  not  be  taken,  who,  without  taking 
the  Wvaka-'Fire  (i.e.,  without  marrying),  wishes  to  lead 
the  domestic  mode  of  life  ;  for  he  is  known  in  the 
Smriti  as  one  whose  cooking  is  useless,  (250) 


3*6  Atrl  Saihhita. 

By  taking  food  from  one  whose  cooking  is  of  na 
value,  a  twice-born  person  should  perform  a  penance, 
By  thrice  performing  the  Prdndyama  in  the  waters, 
rinsing  his  mouth  and  taking  clarified  butter,  he  attains 
to  purification.  (251) 

For  the  expiation  of  the  sin  of  Paftchasuna*  one 
should  perform  a  Vais'wad$v&-\Sa.cnf\cz]  in  the  Vaidik-, 
Loukik-  (ordinary  1,  and  the  HutochchhistA-^  Fire,  either 
in  water  or  on  earth.  (252) 

If  the  eldest  brother  becomes  disqualified,  the 
youngest,  endued  with  accomplishments  and  knowledge, 
[and  therefore]  the  best,  should  marry  and  set  up  the 
Sacred  Fire  before  [his  elder  brother].  (253) 

If  the  eldest  brother  is  unsullied  by  any  sin  and 
[the  younger  brother]  sets  up  the  Sacred  Fire  before, 
he  commits  the  sin  of  Brahmanicide  daily  ;  there  is  no 
doubt  in  it.  (254) 

Bathing  is  laid  down  for  him  who  is  touched  by  a 
M aha -Pat  a  kin.  Bathing  is  [also]  laid  down  for  him 
who  partakes  of  his  food.  (255) 

By  associating  with  the  degraded  for  a  month  or  a 
fortnight,  one  attains  to  purification  by  living  on  barley 
and  the  urine  of  a  cow  for  half-a-month.  (256) 

By  [knowingly]  taking  once  the  food  of  a  degraded 
pei  son,  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born  should  perform 
\i?i\i-&-Krichhrah,  By  unknowingly  eating  it,  he  should 
perform  a  Sdntapanam.  (257) 

*  Hearth,  (iron)  mortar,  pestle,  flat  stone  and  a  wooden  mortar, — 
these  five  are  called  5ww/f.  The  expiation  is  for  the  sin  that  accrues 
from  killing  animals  in  ait  these. 

f  The  fire  that  is  kc  pt  up  by  clarified  butter  after  the  performance  of 
the  daily  Hotna. 


Am  StrtiftiM.  3*7 

When  a  person  partakes  of  the  food  of  a  degraded 
<one  or  takes  his  meals  in  a  Chandala? s  house,  he  should 
live  upon  water  [only]  for  a  fortnight.  S'atatapa  has 
said  so.  (258) 

No  cremation  should  be  performed  for  those  that 
are  killed  by  a  Brahmana  or  by  a  cow,  nor  for  the 
degraded  ;  this  is  the  deliverance  of  S'ahkha.  (259) 

The  twice-born  person,  who  under  the  influence  of 
lust,  knows  a  C^flwakz/0-woman,  should  get  [himself] 
purified  by  three  penances  [performed]  according  to  the 
regulation  of  the  Prajdpatya.  (260) 

If  a  Brahmana  takes  food  or  accepts  [a  present] 
from  a  degraded  person,  he  should,  after  vomitting  the 
food  and  returning  the  present,  perform  an  Atikfichhrah 
(a  highly  distressing  penance).  (261) 

One  should  not  touch  the  wood,  clod  of  earth,  or  the 
twig  fallen  on  a  dead  body  from  the  hands  of  a  degraded 
caste,  nor  the  residue  of  his  food ;  [by  doing  so],  one 
should  fast  for  a  day  and  night.  (262) 

By  touching  a  Chandala^  an  outcaste,  a  Mltchchha,  a 
wine-bowl,  or  a  woman  in  [her]  menses,  a  twice-born 
person  should  not  take  his  meals.  If  [he  is  touched  by 
any  of  these,]  while  taking  [his]  meals,  [he  must  at  once 
stop.]  (263) 

Thereafter  he  should  not  take  his  meals  ;  and  giving 
up  his  food,  he  should  bathe.  And  being  commanded  by 
the  Brdhmanas,  he  should  fast  for  three  nights.  And 
taking  Yavaka  (food  prepared  from  barley)  together  with 
clarified  butter,  he  should  complete  the  sacrifice.  (264) 

Purification    is    [effected  by  fasting]  for  three  nights, 
if  a  person,  while  taking  meals,  touches  a  crow  or  a  fowl  ; 
[if  he  does   so]   with  the   leavings  of  food  in  his  mouth, 
4' 


318  Atri  Sariihitd. 

[he    should    get    himself    purified    by    fasting]     for   a 
day.  (265) 

By  undertaking  the  duties  of  a  perpetual  religious 
student,  vowing  lifelong  abstinence  and  chastity,  he, 
who  deviates  from  them,  should  perform  a  Chandrayana 
extending  over  a  month.  S'atdtapa  has  said  so.  (266) 

Prdjapatya  is-  laid  down  for  holding  sexual  inter- 
course with  a  beast,  or  with  a  harlot.  By  holding  inter- 
course with  a  cow,  one  should  perform-  a  Chdndrayaya 
spoken  of  by  Manu.  (267) 

By  discharging  semen  into  inhuman  females  except  a 
cow,  into  a  woman  in  [her]  menses,  into  others  that  have 
no  female  organs  (/.£'.,  a  man  or  a  eunuch),  or  into  water 
one  should  perform  the  penance  of  Sdntapanam.  (268) 

If  one  touches  a  woman  in  [her]  menses-,  a  woman 
who  has  given  birth  to  a  child,  or  a  lowcaste  woman,  he 
should  get  himself  purified  by  [fasting  for]  three  nights. 
This  is  the  eternal  regulation.  (269) 

If  one  cohabits  with  a  woman  in  [her]  menses  or 
with  lowcaste  women,  he  is  known  as  being  obliged  to 
perform  a  penance ;  he  should  [take  his]  bath  before 
that.  (270) 

[By  touching  them  while  passing  urine J  one  should 
observe  [fasting]  for  one  night ;.  and  for  three  nights-, 
while  passing  excreta  }  for  three  nights,  while  drinking 
water  ;  and  for  five  or  seven  nights,  while  holding  inter- 
course. (27 1} 

A  Prdjdpatya  is  laid  down  for  those  touching 
[them].,,  while  taking  meals  ;  and  [fasting]  for  a  day 
and  night,  while  cleansing  the  teeth  with  a  piece  o£ 
wood,  '^his  is  the  purifying  regulation  according  to  the 
Smriti.  (272) 

By   bein  r   tou  haudala 


Atri  Saihhitd.  319 

a  woman  in  her  menses  should  remain  fasting  till  [the 
menstrual  period]  and  should  get  herself  purified  by 
bathing  in  time.  (273) 

If  a  woman,  in  her  menses,  is  touched  by  camels, 
jackals  or  hogs,  she  should  remain  fasting  for  five  nights 
and  get  herself  purified  with  the  Panchagavya.  (274) 

[In  case  of]  women,  in  their  menses,  touching  each 
other,  a  Brahmana-woman,  touching  another  Rrahmana- 
woman,  should  remain  fasting  for  one  night  and  get  her- 
self purified  with  the  Panchagavya.  (275) 

[In  case  of]  women,  in  their  menses,  touching  each 
other,  a  Bra/imana-woma.n,  touching  a  Kshatriya-wom&n, 
should  get  herself  purified  by  [fasting  for]  three  nights. 
This  is  the  deliverance  of  Vya*sa.  (276) 

[In  case  of]  women,  touching  each  other  while  in 
menses,  a  Brakmana-wom&n,  touching  one  born  of  a 
Vais'ya,  should  fast  for  four  nights  and  get  herself 
purified  with  the  Panr.hagavya.  (2jn) 

[In  case  of]  women,  touching  each  other  while  in 
men-ses,  a  Brdhmana-\voma.n,  touching  one  born  of  a 
S*udra,  becomes  purified  by  [fasting  for]  six  nights. 
[This  is  rule  when]  a  Brahmana-woman  does  so 
willingly.  (278) 

If  a  Brfikmana-womzn  unknowingly  touches  them 
all,  she  should  perform  half  the  penance.  This  has  been 
described  as  the  purification  for  the  four  Varnas.  (279) 

S'ankha's  deliverance  is : — If  a  Brahmana  is  touched 
by  another  Brahmana  having  the  leavings  of  food  in 
his  mouth,  while  taking  meals  or  passing  urine,  he  should 
bathe  ;  the  recitation  of  the  Gayatri  and  performance 
of  Homa  are  for  the  Brahmana  who  is  [similarly] 
touched  by  a  Kshatriya ;  when  by  a  Vai^sya,  he  should 
perform  a  Nakta-  Vrata  (abstention  from  food  during  the 


Atri  SamhM. 

night)  ;  and   fasting  [is  for  him,  if  similarly  touched  by]i 
*&udra.  (280—281) 

A  cobbler,  a  washerman,  one  making  articles  of 
bamboo,  a  fisherman  and  an  actor, — having  touched  alii 
these  out  of  stupefaction,  a  twice-born  person  should,, 
being  self-restrained,  rinse  his  mouth,  (282) 

By  being  touched  by  these,  a  twice-born  person, 
should  drink  water  for  one  night ;  by  being  touched  by 
them,  having  the  leavings  of  food  in  their  mouth,  he 
should  [fast]  for  three  nights  and  get  himself  purified  by 
drinking  .clarified  butter.  (283) 

The  Brahmana,  who  goes  under  the  shadow  of  a 
S'wapdka.)  should  bathe  and  get  himself  purified  by 
drinking  clarified  butter.  (284) 

A   twice-born   person,    against    whom   a    charge    is 
laid,    should   perform    the  penance  for  Brahmanicide  in 
the   forest,    or   fast    for   a   month    or  perform  a  Chan- 
dray  ana.   (285) 

When  a  false  accusation  is  made,  [one  should]  per- 
form the  penance  for  the  destruction  of  an  embryo. 
Fasting  for  twelve  days,  he  should  get  himself  purified) 
by  a  Pardka.  (286) 

By  killing  a  deceitful  Brahmana,  one  should  perform 
the  penance  for  killing  a  S'lidra.  A  qualified  person,, 
having  killed  one  who  is  shorn  of  accomplishments,, 
should  perform  a  Paraka.  (287) 

If  a  man,  sullied  with  a  minor  sin>,  breathes  his  last, 
the  person,  who  performs  the  funeral  rite  for  him,  should 
perform  two  Pr&japatyas.  (288) 

If  a  twice-born  person,  while  taking  meals,  touches 
[another]  out  of  excessive  love,  he  should  perform  the 
Nakta  (night-fasting)  for  three  nights  ;  and  if  not  out 
of  love,  he  should  fast  [for  three  nights].  (289) 


Atri  Sarithita.  321 

By  eating  the  residue  of  the  food  taken  by  a  cat,, 
crow,  dog,  or  a  mungoose,  or  a  food  contaminated  by 
hairs  or  by  insects,  one  should  drink  the  highly  powerful 
decoction  of  Brakmi-\e?.ves.  ^90) 

By  willingly  getting  upon  a  conveyance  drawn  by 
camels  or  asses,  or  by  bathing  in  a  nude  state,  a  Vipra^ 
should  become  purified  with  the  Prandyama.  (291) 

[When  one],  having  suppressed  the  vital  airs,  recites, 
the  Gdyatri  thrice  with  the  Vyahriti-Pranava,  and 
the  Mantram-"A'pojyotih,  it  is  called  Prdndydma.  (29,2:) 

In  Panchagavya,  one  must  put  one  portion  ofc 
dung  ;  twice,  urine  ;  fourfold,  clarified  butter  and  nfilk  ; 
and  eight  times  curd,  of  a  cow.  (293,) 

A  S^udtra  who  takes  the  Panchagavya  and  & 
Brdhmana  who  drinks  spirituous  liquors  are  equally 
guilty.  They  live  in  hell  for  good.  1294.) 

The  milk  of  a  she-goat,  of  a  cow,  or  of  a  she-buffaloe 
which  eat  unholy  things  (excreta,«etc.),  [should  never  be 
used]  in  Havya  and  Kavya  ;  and  cowdung  [of  such  a 
cow]  should  never  be  used  for  paste.  (295; 

The  milk  of  those  that  have  more  or  less  udders,  as 
well  as  that  of  those  which  drink  milk  from  the  udders 
[of  other  kine]  must  never  be  offered  to  the  Celestials  ; 
even  though  offered,  it  remains  A  hut  a  [unaccepted,  Le.+ 
like  that  which  has  not  been  offered  at  all].  (296) 

By  taking  food  at  the  rite  of  depositing  the  Sacred 
Fire,  in  a  Soma-Yajna  (Moon-Plant  Sacrifice),  at  the 
rite  of  Simantonnayana,  at  a  S?rdddha  consequent  on 
a  birth,  and  at  the  first  Sraddha,  one  should  perform  a 
Chdndrayana.  v297) 

A  Kshatriyas  food  destroys  energy,  and  a  S'udra's. 
food  destroys  Z?/-a^w£-vigour.  He,  who  partakes  o£ 
his  daughter's  food,  eats  the  dirt  of  the  earth.  (298) 


322  Air  I  SariihitS. 

If  one's  own  daughter  does  not  give  birth  to  a  child, 
the  father  should  not  take  his  meals  at  her  house.  He 
who  takes  food  out  of  love,  goes  to  the  Puya-\\t\\.  (299) 

One  informed  of  the  esoteric  meaning  of  all  the 
Scriptures,  who  having  studied  the  four  Vldas,  takes 
Iris  meals  in  a  Kshatriyafs  house,  is  born  as  a  virmin 
in  excreta.  (300) 

The  departed  Manes,  of  a  twice-born  person,  who, 
except  in  a  calamity,  takes  food  at  the  first  S^raddha, 
at  that  taking  place  in  the  third  fortnight,  at  a  six- 
monthly,  monthly,  or  at  an  annual  S'raddha,  become 
degraded.  (301) 

[By  taking  food]  at  the  first  S*raddha,  [one  should 
perform]  a  Chandrayana  ;  at  a  monthly,  a  Paraka  ;  at 
a.  third  fortnightly,  an  Atikrichhrah  ;  at  a  six-monthly,  a 
Krichhrah  ;  at  an  annual,  a  Padakrichhrah  ;  and  at  the 
next  annual,  [he  should  fast]  for  a  day.  (302) 

The  departed  Manes,  of  the  twice-born  person, 
who,  without  observing  Brahmacharyya}  takes  his  food 
in  monthly  S^rdddhas^  Parvv-S'raddhas,  at  a  twelfth- 
day*  S?raddh a,  in  a  third-fortnightly,  or  at  an  annual 
S'rdddha,  fall  down,  even  if  when  stationed  in  the  region 
of  Brahma".  (303) 

By  fasting  for  a  day,  when  taking  food  in  a  Vraddha 
which  should  be  performed  on  the  eleventh  day  ; 
and  for  three  days  when  taking  food  prepared  by 
many  persons  collectively  ; — a  Vipra,  duly  reciting  the 
Mantram-  "  Kushmanda"  should  offer  clarified  butter 
to  the  Fire.  (304) 

.  By  taking  the  food  of  that  wicked-souled  wight  in 
whose  house  twice-born  persons  do  not  take  meals 
either  in  a  fortnight  or  in  a  month,  a  twice-born  person 
should  perform  a  Chandrayana.  (305) 


Atri  Saihhitd.  -323 

The  house,  which  does  not  resound  with  Vedic 
recitation,  which  is  not  adorned  with  kine,  and  which  is 
not  filled  with  children,  is  like  a  cremation-ground.  (306) 

The  place,  where  many  people,  even  when  laughing, 
do  not  speak  of  any  thing  else  but  religion,  is,  even- 
when  without  any  Religious  Code,  religious  and  there- 
fore holy,  according  to  the  Smriti.  (3071 

He,  who  unknowingly  salutes  a  lowcaste  person-, 
should  immediately  bathe  and  get  [himself]  purified  by 
taking  clarified  butter.  '308) 

If,  when  ready  for  bathing,  a  tvyice-born  person  takes 
his  meal  or  drinks  water,  he  should,  after  bathing  and 
being  self-restrained,  recite  the  Gtiyafri  for  eight 
thousand  times.  309) 

To  cleanse  the  teeth  with  a  ringer,  to  eat  unmixed  salt, 
and  to  eat  earth  is  equally  sinful  like  eating  beef.  (310) 

[To  live  under]  the  shade  of  a  Kapithva-tezz  during 
the  day,  [to  take]  curd  in  the  night,  [to  live]  under  the 
shade  of  a  Y0»«-tree,  to  use  a  cotton-reed  for  cleaning 
the  teeth,  robs  even  Vishnrfs  prosperity.  (311) 

The  Sun  [when  seen  at  tbe  rising],  the  wind  [of  tbe 
cremation  ground],  the  water  on  the  finger-nails,  the 
water  in  a  pitcher  touched  by  a  cloth  at  the  time  of 
bathing,  the  dust  of  a  broomstick,  and  water  sprink- 
ling from  the  hairs,  destroy  the  virtue  acquired  in  tbe 
day.  (312) 

He,  who  is  covered  with  the  broomstick  dust  and  the 
water  sprinkling  from  hairs,  [both]  originating  from  a 
temple,  is  [said  to  be]  sprinkled  with  the  Ganges- 
water.  (313) 

The  earth,  in  an  anthill,  in  the  hole  of  a  mouse7 
in  the  water,  in  the  cremation-ground,  at  the  root  of  a 
tree,  in  a  temple,  and  that  dug  by  bulls7  should  always 


324  Atri 

be   discarded   by   learned   persons    seeking  their   well* 
being.  (314) 

Earth  freed  from  pebbles  and  stones,  should  be 
collected  from  a  holy  place.  (315) 

[While  passing]  excreta,  [holding]  sexual  inter- 
course, [making]  Homa,  cleansing  the  teeth,  bathing, 
taking  meals,  and  making  adorations,  one  should  always 
abstain  from  speaking  at  all.  316) 

He, — who,  always  abstaining  from  speech,  takes  his 
meals  for  full  one  year, — lives  gloriously  in  the  celestial 
region  for  a  thousand  Kofi  Yugas.  '317) 

Placing  the  feet  on  the  seat  and  binding  the  waist 
and  knee-joints  with  a  piece  of  cloth  ( Proud? apada  , 
one  should  not  bathe,  make  gifts,  recite  the  Gdyatri, 
perform  Homa,  take  meals,  adore  the  Deities,  study  the 
Vedas  and  offer  oblations  to  the  departed  Manes.  (318) 

He, — who,  having  killed  a  leading  Brahmana,  gives 
away  his  all, — reaps  the  fruit  of  destroying  a  foetus  after 
having  killed  all  creatures.  1319) 

To  make  gifts  is  known  as  necessary  on  the  occasion 
of  an  eclipse,  a  marriage,  the  last  day  of  a  month  and 
at  the  delivery  of  a  woman.  It  is  therefore  better  [to 
make  gifts]  even  in  the  night.  ^320) 

He,  who  gives  away  a  sacred  thread  of  silk,  cotton, 
or  patta  iwoven  silk),  wins  the  fruit  of  making  a  gift 
of  a  cloth.  (321) 

One  should,  with  reverence  and  due  rite,  give  away  a 
belmetal  vessel,  beautified  and  filled  with  clarified 
butter.  [By  it,]  he  wins  the  fruit  of  an  Agnistoma.  '322) 

He,  who  gives  away  a  pair  of  excellent  sandals  at 
the  time  of  a  S'raddka,  even  when  wending  another 
(i.e.,  improper)  way,  wins  the  fruit  of  giving  away  boil- 
ed rice.  323) 


A'fri  Saihhita. 

The  person,  who  attentively  makes  a  gift  of  an  oil- 
Vessel  completely  filled,  forsooth,  goes  to  the  celestial 
region  ;  there  is  no  doubt  in  it.  (324) 

He,  who  gives  food  during  famine  ;  he,  who  gives 
gold  in  a  prosperous  time  ;  and  he,  who  gives  water  in  a 
.forest  [where  there  is  no  water],  fares  gloriously  in  the 
celestial  region.  (325) 

A  cow  is  known,  in  the  Smriti,  as  the  earth,  so  long 
she  gives  birth,  half-way,  to  a  young  one.  By  him,  who 
gives  away  such  a  cow,  the  earth  is  made  a  gift  of.  (326) 

The  fires  are  gratified  with  clarified  butter  ;  and  the 
departed  Manes,  with  oblations  ;  and  all  the  Celestials  are 
adored  by  him,  who  gives  food  daily  to  the  kine.  (327) 

All  the  sins,  inherited  by  one,  from  birth,  from 
father  and  mother)  are  all)  forsooth,  speedily  dissipated 
1  by  the  gifts  of  food  and  cloth.  (328) 

He,  who  gives  away  a  black  antelope-skin  with  all 
the  necessary  ingredients,  rescues,  from  hell,  a  hundred 
generations.  (329) 

The  Sun,  Varuna,  Vishnu  Brahma,  Soma,  Fire,  and 
the  Divine  Wielder  of  the  Trident  ^S'iva),  welcome  the 
giver  of  lands.  (330) 

With  the  expiration  of  a  hundred  years  [enjoyment 
in  the  celestial  region],  only  an  atom  of  sands,  collected 
in  heaps  reaching  the  region  of  the  Saptarshi}  is  des- 
troyed.* (331) 

No  deterioration  [of  piety]  is  seen  in  him  who  gives 
away  a  maiden-daughter  [in  marriage],  and  in  him 
who  gives  life  in  a  disease.  These  three  gifts  bear 
equal  fruits.*  (332) 

The   gift    of  learning    is    superior  to  all  these  gifts. 

*  The   meaning    is   that  there  is  na  end  of  his  enjoying  the  piety  so 
acquired. 

42 


326  AM  Saihhitd. 

One,  who  gives  it  with  an  end  in  view  to  a  non-deceitful 
Brahmana  and  to  one's  own  Kinsmen  headed  by  the  sons 
attains  to  the  celestial  region ;  and  if  disinterestedly,  to 
emancipation.  (333) 

If  a  person  seeks  his  own  well-being,  he  should  make 
gifts  unto  a  Brahmana ,  well-read  in  the  Vedas,  versed 
in  al7  the  Scriptures,  devoted  to  parents,  knowing 
his  wife  in  the  time  of  RzV«,  (i.e.,  immediately  after 
the  menstrual  period),  endued  with  good  character 
and  conduct,  and  given  to  bathing  in  the  morning. 

(334—335) 

Leaving  aside  learned  Brahmanas,  one  should  not 
make  any  gifts  to  any  other  person.  I  have  neither  seen 
nor  heard  of  such  a  course.  (336) 

I  shall  now  describe  the  twice-born  persons,  who 
are  worthy  to  take  part  in  a  S'rdddha ; — by  making  gifts 
to  whom  the  departed  Manes  live  [in  the  celestial  re- 
gion] eternally ;  and  [also]  those,  a  gift  unto  whom 
becomes  profitless.  (337) 

One  should  never  feed  these  at  a  S'raddha%\ — one 
who  is  short  of  limbs  ;  one  who  is  diseased  ;  one  who 
does  not  study  the  S'ruti  and  the  Smriti ;  and  one  who 
always  speaks  the  untruth.  (338) 

[One  should  not  feed]  a  hurtful  person,  a  deceitful 
person  ;  one  who  hiding  his  ownself  learns  the  Veda ; 
one  who  is  a  servant ;  one  who  is  tawny-coloured  ;  a 
deaf ;  one  suffering  from  white  leprosy ;  one  who  is 
diseased ;  one  who  has  a  bad  skin ;  one  who  has  withered 
hairs ;  one  who  suffers  from  jaundice ;  one  who  wears 
matted  locks  ;  one  who  carries  a  load  ;  one  wno  is  angry ; 
one  who  has  taken  two  wives  ;  and  one  who  has  married 
a  Vrishali.  C339— 34°) 

He,    who   creates  dissensions  ;  he  who  injures  many; 


Atn  Sariihitd.  227 

one   who   is   short   of  limbs  ;    or   one  who  has  an  extra 
limb; — these  should  also  be  excluded.  (341) 

One  who  eats  too  much  ;  one  who  has  a  poorly  grave 
face  ;  he  who  is  egoistic ;  and  one  who  is  gifted  with 
wicked  intellect ; — neither  should  any  be.  ever  given  to, 
nor  should  any  be  ever  accepted  from  any  of  these.  (342) 

He  who  contaminates  a  row  by  physical  deformities 
but  is  well-read  in  the  Vedas,  is  not  blameable,  as  Yama 
has  said,  and  is  the  sanctifier  of  the  row.  (343) 

The   S'ruti   and   the    Smriti   are    described   as  the 
two  eyes  of  the  Vipras.     One  who  is  deficient  in  either 
of  the  two,  is  described  as  the  one-eyed ;  and  one  who  is 
deficient  in  the  both,  as  stone-blind.  (344) 
ATRI  has  said  : 

"  That  wretch  of  a  blind  man,  who  has  no  [know- 
ledge of]  the  Vruti  or  of  the  Smriti,  who  has  no 
character,  no  family,  should  not  be  given  any  present 
at  a  S'rdddha.  (345) 

Therefore  the  Brahmanahood  (i.e.,  the  status  and 
dignity)  of  a  Brdhmana  [is  encompassed]  by  both  the 
Vedas  and  the  Dharma-S'astras]  and  not  by  the  Vedas 
only.  The  divine  Atri  has  said  so.  (346) 

He, — who,  endued  with  eyes  stationed  in  yoga,  places 
the  forepart  of  his  foot  (i.e.,  wends  good  ways),  and 
observes  the  regulations  and  restrictions  established 
by  human  usage,  the  Dharma-S 'astras,  the  Vedas  and 
the  Riski's, — is,  indeed,  one  endued  with  most  excellent 
vision  and  a  master  of  all  the  S'dstras.  (347) 

One  should  feed  at  a  S'raddha,  one  who  observes 
religious  vows,  is  born  in  a  good  family  and  is  always 
devoted  to  the  S'ruti  and  the  Smriti.  [By  it,  the  resi- 
dence] of  the  departed  Manes  [becomes]  eternal  [in 
the  eternal  region].  (348) 


328  Atri  Sarhhitd. 

As  long  as  [such  Vipras\  take  morsels  of  food 
[offered]  to  the  effulgent  departed  Manes,  the  father, 
grandfather  and  the  great-grandfather,  even  when 
stationed  in  hell,  become  liberated  and  repair  to  the 
celestial  region*  Therefore,  one  should  examine  care- 
fully the  Brdhmanas  at  the  time  of  a  Sraddha. 

(349—350) 

A  twice-born  person,  hearing  his  father  dead,  who 
does  not  perform  the  S'raddha  at  the  every  wane  of 
the  Moon  (i.e.,  Amavasya)  is  required  to  perform  a 
penance.  (351) 

Wealth,    sons,    and   the   family   of  the  householder, 
who  does  not  perform  the  S'raddha  when  the   Moon    is 
in    conjunction    with   the    Kanya  (the  sixth  sign  of  th< 
zodiac,  i.e.,  in  the  dark-fortnight  of  the  month  of  A's'vin), 
become  destroyed  by  the  sighs  of    the  Manes.  (352) 

When  the  Sun  is  in  the  Kanyd,  the  departed  Mane; 
get  good  sons.  The  region  of  the  dead  remains  always 
empty  till  the  seeing  of  the  Vris'chika  (the  sign  Scorpio, 
i.e.,  till  the  Amavasya  of  the  month  of  A's'vin).  (353) 

Thereupon,  if,  at  the  advent  of  the  Vris'chika  (i.e.) 
on  the  Amavasya),  the  departed  Manes  become  dis- 
appointed [for  the  non-performance  of  the  S'rdddha], 
they,  imprecating  a  highly  dreadful  curse  on  the  son, 
brother,  daughter's  son,  or  son's  son,  return  to  their  own 
habitations.  (354) 

Those,  who  are  devoted  to  the  rites  for  the  departed 
Manes,  attain  to  the  most  excellent  condition.  (355) 

As  fire  exists  in  all  [pieces  of]  wood  [in  an  invisible 
form  but  is  manifested]  by  friction,  so  virtue  is,  for- 
sooth, visible  by  gifts  made  at  a  S'rdddh^a.  (356) 

To  make  gifts  at  a  S'raddha  is  undoubtedly  equal 
to  the  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  all  the  scrip- 


Atri  Samkita.  329 

tares,  bathing  at  the  sacred  places  and  the  fruit  of  all 
the  scriptures.  (35-7) 

Like  the  Sun  freed  from  all  clouds,  like  the  Moon 
released  from  Rahu,  one, — laden  with  all  sins  and 
minor  sinsr — does  undoubtedly,  freed  from  all  sins,  get 
over  all  miseries  and  attains,  himself,  to  all  sorts  of 
felicity.  (358— 3591 

Of  all  gifts,  that  made  at  a  S'rdddha  is  superior. 
The  gift  [made]  at  a  S'rdddha  is  [the  instrument  of] 
purification,  when  sin  equal  to  [the  Mount]  Meru  [in 
height]  is  committed.  By  performing  a  S'rdddha^  one 
reigns  supreme  in  the  celestial  region.  (3601 

A  Brahmands  boiled  rice  is  ambrosia ;  that  of  a 
Kshatriya  is  known,  in  the  Smnti,  as  milk  ;  that  of  a 
Vais'ya  is  simple  food ;  and  that  of  a  S'udra  is 
blood.  (361) 

All  this  has  been  described  by  me  at  the  time  of  a 
S'rdddha  [at  a  rite  for]  the  Vais'wadevds,  at  the  Homa, 
at  the  adoration  of  a  Deity  and  at  the  recitation.  (362) 

Because  the  boiled  rice  of  a  Vipra  is  sanctified  by  the 
RzV-,  Yajush-,  and  the  Sdma-,  (Mantram),  it  is  ambrosia  ; 
because  a  Kshatryids  boiled  rice  is  subject  to  the  domi- 
nations of  laws  and  acquired  by  fair  ways  and  religious 
rites,  it  is  called  milk  ;  and  a  Vais'ya's  boiled  rice  is 
called  so,  because  [it  is  acquired]  by  tending  cattle.  (363) 

In  the  Smriti,  there  are  ten  classifications  of  Vipras, 
viz.}  a  Deva,  an  ascetic,  a  twice-born  one,  a  king,  a 
Vais'ya,  a  S'udra,  a  Nishdda,  a  beast,  Mlechchha  and 
a  Chanddla.  (364) 

One  who  performs  [both  the  morning  and  evening] 
adorations,  the  sacred  bath,  the  recitation  of  the 
Gdyatri}  the  Homa,  the  daily  adoration  of  the  Deities, 


33®  Atri  Samhita. 

and  who  receives  guests  and  worships  the 
is  called  a  Deva-Brdhmana.  (365) 

A  Vipra,  who  lives  on  vegetables,  leaves,  roots  and 
fruits,  always  lives  in  the  forest,  and  always  performs  a 
Sraddha,  is  called  a  Muni.  (366) 

He,  who  daily  studies  the  Veddnta,  gives  up  com- 
panionship, and  discusses  the  Sdnkhya-Yoga,  is  called  a 
Dwija.  (367) 

That  Vipra,  who,  in  the  very  beginning  of  a  battle 
and  before  all,  strikes  all  holders  of  bow  with  weapons 
and  defeats  [them], — is  called  a  Kshtra.  (368) 

That  Vipra,  who  is  given  to  agriculture,  who  tends 
kine,  and  who  drives  a  trade,  is  called  a  Vaisya.  (369) 

That  Vipra,  who  sells  shell-lac,  salt,  saffron,  milk, 
clarified  butter,  honey,  or  meat,  is  called  a  S*udra.  (370) 

A  Vipra,  who  is  a  thief  or  a  robber,  or  who  is  ever 
prone  to  give  bad  advice  or  give  vent  to  harsh  words, 
and  who  is  always  fond  of  fish  and  flesh,  is  called  a 
Nishada.  (371) 

A  Vipra  who  does  not  know  the  true  nature  and 
being  of  Brahman  but  is  always  proud  of  his  sacrificial 
thread,  is  for  that  sin  called  a  Pasu  (beast).  (372) 

A  Viprq,  who  unhesitatingly  obstructs  [the  use  of] 
tanks,  wells,  watery  expanses,  pleasure-grounds  and 
lakes,  is  called  a  Mlechchha.  (373) 

A  Vipra,  who  is  devoid  of  all  religious  rites,  is  igno- 
rant, innocent  of  all  forms  of  religions  and  is  cruel  to 
all  creatures,  is  called  a  Chandala.  (374) 

These,  failing  to  understand  the  Vedas,  study  the 
Dharma-S } astras  ;  those,  failing  to  master  the  Dharma- 
Udstras,  study  the  Purdnas  ;  those,  failing  to  acquire 
prbficiency  in  the  Puranas,  betake  to  agriculture ;  and 


Atri  Saihhitd.  331 

those,  failing  in  it,  become  Bhdgavatas  (deceitful 
followers  of  Vishnu.)  (375) 

The  astrologers  (i.e.,  who  live  by  astrological  calcu- 
lations) ;  the  followers  of  the  Atharvan  ;  and  those,  who 
recite  the  Puranas,  without  understanding  their  mean- 
ing ; — should  never  be  invited  at  a  S'rdddha,  sacrifice 
and  at  the  distribution  of  great  gifts.  (376) 

[In  doing  so,]  a  S'raddha  for  the  Manes,  becomes 
dreadful,  a  gift  becomes  fruitless,  and  a  sacrifice  becomes 
profitless  ;  therefore,  one  should  always  shun  them.  (377) 

The  four  [classes  of]  Vipras,  who  sell  sheep,  who 
are  painters,  who  are  physicians,  and  who  read  the 
positions  of  stars,  should  never  be  adored,  even  if  they 
are  equal  to  Vrihaspati  in  learning.  (378) 

The  panegyrists,*  the  flatterers,  cheats,  those  who 
act  harshly,  and  those  who  are  avaricious, — these  five 
Brahmanas  should  never  be  adored,  even  if  they  are 
equal  to  Vrihaspati  in  learning.  (379) 

A  maiden,  who  is  bought,  should  never  be  taken 
as  a  wife  ;  the  sons,  begotten  on  her,  are  not  qualified 
to  offer  funeral  cakes  to  their  departed  Manes.  (380) 

Even  when  pierced  with  arrows  in  all  his  eight 
limbs,  if  a  twice-born  person  drinks  water  with  his  palm, 
it  is  tantamount  to  the  drinking  of  spirituous  liquor  or 
to  the  taking  of  beef.  (381) 

By  washing  the  feet  of  Brahmanas  [lying]  with 
thighs  upraised,  one  lives  like  a  Chanddla  (i.e.,  in  an  im- 
pure state)  till  he  immerses  himself  in  the  Ganges.  (382) 

The  touching  of  the  shades  of  lamps,  beds,  and  seats, 
of  the  cotton-wood  intended  for  cleansing  the  teeth,  and 
of  the  dust  raised  by  a  goat, — robs  even  the  prosperity 
of  S'akra,  (383) 


A'tri  Saihtita. 

[To  bathe]  in  a  well,  is  ten  times  more  [meritorious") 
than  [bathing]  in  the  house ;  [to  bathe]  on  the  bank 
is  ten  times  mote  [meritorious]  than  [bathing]  in  a 
well ;  [to  bathe]  in  a  river  is  ten  times  more  [meri- 
torious] than  [bathing]  on  a  bank.  There  is  no  enumera* 
tion  [of  virtues  in  bathing  in]  the  (ranges.  (384) 

The  current  water  is  for  a  Br&hrtiana  ;  that  of  a  tank> 
is  for  a  Rshatriya  \  that  of  a  well  or  a  pond,  is  for  a 
Vais'ya  ;  that  of  a  pitcher,  is  for  a  S'tidra.  (385) 

On  the  demise  of  a  great  Guru  -(i.e.)  father  or  mother), 
one  should  not,  for  a  year,  bathe  at  a  sacred  place, 
make  great  gifts  and  oblations  of  sesame  to  others.  (386) 

[In  that  year,]  one  should  perform  the  S^raddha  at 
the  Ganges,  at  Gaya,  on  the  day  of  death  and  oh  the 
Antavasya^&xy ;  and  offer  the  Maghd-pindas,  avoiding 
[the  performance  of]  other  [S'rdddkas.']  (387) 

Clarified  butter,  oil,  milk  and  curd, — these  four  are 
the  main  ingredients  of  A'jya  (offering  of  clarified  butter)  j 
these  should  not  be  discarded  even  when  offered.  (388) 

Having  listened  to  these  religious  injunctions  des* 
cribed  by  Atri  himself,  those  Risht's,  devoted  to  religious 
observances,  again  spoke  to  that  high-souled  one  as  fol* 
lows  : — ••  (389) 

Those,  who  would  steadfastly  follow  these  religious 
injunctions,  shall  attain  to  the  celestial  region  after 
acquiring  fame  in  this* world.  (390) 

One,  seeking  learning,  would  obtain  learning ;  one, 
desiring  wealth,  would  get  ,,wealth ;  one,  longing  for  a 
long  life,  would  acquire  longevity  ;  and  one,  wishing  for 
prosperity,  would  win  great  prosperity.  (391) 

THE   END. 


SAMVARTA    8AMHITA'. 


LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION. 


EDITED    AND    PUBLISHED    BY 


fflANIYIATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  M.A.,  M.R.A.S.,     • 

Rector,  Keshub  Academy, 

Author  of  the  English  Translations  of  The  Rdmdyana,  Mahd- 
Bhdrata,  S'rimadbhdgavatam,  Mahdnirvdna-Tantranii 
fa,  Agni  Puranam,  Mdrkandeya 
Purdnam,  &c,t  &c. 


PRINTED  BY  H,  C.  DAS,  ELYSIUM  PRESS, 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DOTT'S  STREET. 


1907. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


\JSamvarta  Sam/t'ftdr.'} 

SUBJECT.  SLOKAS.      PACK 

The  question  of  the  Rishis  ...  ^ 

Fit  place  for  religious  rites  ...  ... 

Duties  of  a  Brahmacharin  ...  ... 

Regulations  about  taking  food     ... 

,,          about  A'chamanara  ...  ... 

Penance  for  neglecting  religious  meditation... 

Further  duties  of  a  Brahmacharin  ,. 

Regulations  about  impurity  on  birth  or  death 

Regulations  about  gifts  ...  ,.. 

Duties  in  brief  of  eht  four  orders  ... 

Penance  for  Brahminicide          ,M  ».» 

i,         for  drinking  wine          »..  »». 

„         for  theft  ..«  ••• 

„         for  knowing  a  step- mother  ,.. 

,,         for  associating  with  sinner  ..« 

,,         for  killing  Kshatriyas,  Vaishyas  and 

Sudras     ...  •••  »».     126—128 

it         for  cow-slaughter          ...  ..«     129 — 140 

„         for  killing  other  animals  or  insects...     141—148 
i,         for  knowing  other  women  ...     149—168 

,,         for  a  Sannyasin  knowing  a  woman        169 — 170 
„          for  killing  men  ...  ...  171 

Persons  on  whose  death  nothing  should  be 

done  ».«  ...  ...     172—176 

Penance  for  taking  forbidden  foods  and 
drinks  and  that  for  being  touched  by 
an  outcaste  ,.«  «*  ...  177—199 

Penance  for  other  minor  sins     „.  »,.    200—227 


I—  3 

333 

4 

333 

5—  1  1 

333 

12  —  14 

334 

15—22 

334 

23 

335 

24—37 

335 

38-45 

337 

46—95 

338 

96—107 

343 

ic8  —  113 

344 

114—119 

345 

120—122 

346 

123 

346 

124—125 

346 

346 
347 
348 
348 
351 
351 

351 


352 

354 


SAMJ3ITA*. 


HAVING  approached  Saiiivarta,  seated  alon6,  well-versed 
in  Spiritual  Science,  the  /ftshis,  desirous  of  [listening  to] 
religion  (i.e.,  religious  institutes)  asked,  saying,  —  -"  O 
lord,  \ve  wish  to  listen  to  rites  capable  of  securing 
spiritual  well-being.  O  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  duly 
describe,  unto  us,  religion,  discriminating  what  is  good 
and  what  is  bad.  (i  —  2) 

All  [the  /ftshisj  headed  by  Vamadeva  put  this  ques- 
tion to  that  highly  effulgent  [/?ishi].  He>  of  a  delighted 
mind,  replied  to  all  those  Munins,  saying,  —  "Hear."  (3) 

The  country,  where  a  black  antelope  always  ranges 
of  its  own  accord,  is  to  be  known  as  a  religious  place, 
fit  for  the  performance  of  religious  rites  for  the  twice- 
born.  (4) 

Being  invested  with  the  sacred  thread,  a  Vipra  should 
always  do  good  unto  his  preceptor.  A  Brahmacharin. 
•should  renounce  garlands,  scents,  honey  and  meat.  (5) 

He  should  duly  perform  the  Sand/iya-a.dor3ition  in 
the  morning  when  the  stars  [are  still  visible],  and  the 
evening-adoration  when  the  sun  is  half-set  and  the 
A  }  ditya  (Sun)  is  still  in  the  western  sky.  (6) 

Standing    up  a  Brahmacharin,    being  self-restrained, 
"should    perform    the    finst    part  of  the  recitation  [of  the 
Gdyatri].     And  being  seated,  he  should  steadfastly  per- 
form the  after-portion  of  the  recitation.   (7) 

Therefore  an  intelligent  [Brahmacharin]  should  per- 
form the  Homa  at  both  the  times  ;  thereupon,  he  should 
study  [the  Vedas],  looking  at  the  face  of  his  pre- 
ceptor. V8) 

43 


334  Satovarto  Samhild. 

He  should  first  recite  the  Pranai)a>  then 
Vyahriti)  and  then  the  Gayatrt  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end,  and  then  commence  the  study  of  the 
V£das.  (9) 

Placing  the  two  hands  firmly  on  the  two  thighs,  with 
the  permission  of  the  preceptor  he  should  begin  his 
course.  He  should  not  have  his  mind  strayed  away 
[to  any  other  subject].  (10) 

A  Brahmacharin,  observant  of  the  vow^  should  always 
beg  alms  [both]  in  the  morning  and  evening.  Having 
dedicated  it  to  the  preceptor,  he  should;  in  a  purified 
state  and  restraining  his  speech,  take  his  meals  with 
his  face  directed  towards  the  east,  (i  i) 

To  take  rneals  in  the  morning  and  evening  is  sanc- 
tioned in  the  S'ruti  for  the  twice-born  ones.  No  food 
should  be  taken  in  the  interval.  The  regulation,  [in 
this]  is  equal  to  that  of  the  Agnihotra.  (12) 

After  rinsing  his  mouth,  a  twice-born  person  should 
take  his  meals,  and  wash  his  mouth  after  taking  food, 
He,  who  takes  food  without  performing  the  A'cha* 
manam^  is  required  to  perform  an  expiation.  (13) 

A  twice-born  person,  who  drinks  or  eats  without  per- 
forming the  A'chamanam}  should  be  purified  by  reciting 
the  Gdyatri  for  a  hundred-and-eight  times.  (14) 

A  twice-born,  who  stands  without  washing  his  feet, 
or  who  performs  the  Achamanam  without  binding  the 
tuft  of  his  hair  on  the  crown  or  without  putting  on  his 
sacred  thread,  is  impure.  (15) 

With   the  sacred  thread   on    and   the   face  directed 

towards  the  north,  one    may    perform   the   Achamanam 

with   the  Brahma-  Tirtha  ;  or,  a  twice-born  person  may, 

with    the    sacred   thread  on,    restraining  his  speech  and 

facing  the  east,  perform  it  daily  in  a  purified  state.  (16) 


Sawvarta  Saihhitd.  335 

'  In  the  water,  one  should  perform  the  A'chamanam  by 
standing.  Eternal  purification  [is  also  effected]  by 
performing  the  A'chamanam  on  the  ground.  By  per- 
forming the  A'chamanam  both  in  water  and  on  the 
earth,  one  attains  to  purification.  (17) 

Ode  should  purify  one's  hands  up  to  the  wrist ;  and 
the  feet,  with  water ;  without  making  any  sound,  one 
should  perform  the  A'chamanam  thrice,  or  four  times 
with  water,  not  hot,  having  its  own  colour,  taste  and 
smell,  without  any  froth  and'reaching  up  to  the  heart. 
Rubbing  his  mouth  twice,  he  should  touch  the  twelve 
limbs.  (18 — 19) 

After  bathing,  drinking,  eating  or  touching  [an  im- 
pure object],  O  ye  leading  twice-born  ones,  a  Vipra, 
by  performing  the  A'chamanam,  according  to  this 
regulation,  attains  to  purification.  (20) 

A  S'udra  becomes  purified  [by  touching  the  twelve 
limbs]  with  his  hand  ;  a  Vais'ya,  with  water  'touching 
merely]  the  teeth.  And  a  Kshatriya,  by  performing  the 
A'chamanam  with  water  reaching  the  throat,  attains  to 
purification.  (21) 

[By  performing  it,]  being  seated  on  a  seat,  or  when 
sitting  on  his  hams  with  a  cloth  girt  round  the  legs  and 
knees,  or  with  one  foot  placed  above  another,  one  never 
attains  to  purification.  (22) 

If  one  fails  to  perform  religious  meditation,  or  even- 
ing-adoration, or  to  offer  oblations  to  the  Fire,  he  should, 
after  bathing  and  being  restrained,  recite  the  Gayatri 
for  a  thousand-and-eight  times.  (23) 

A  Brahmacharin,  who  eats  boiled  rice  of  a  person 
suffering  from  the  impurity  of  birth,  or  that  at  the  first 
Sr'dddha,  or  that  at  the  monthly  [S'rdddha},  should  get 
himself  purified  [by  fasting]  for  three  nights.  (24) 


336  Samvarta 

A  Brahmacharin, — who,  being  stricken  with  lust 
knows  a  woman, — should,  being  observant  of  regulations-,, 
perform  one  most  distressing  penance  of  Praja- 
patya.  (25) 

If  a  Brahmacharin  happens  to  take  somehow  honey 
or  meat,  he  should,  after  performing  the  Prajapabya,  be 
purified  by  a  Mounji-Homa.  (26) 

On  a  Parva-day,  a  Brahmacharin  should  dedicate 
cakes  and  offer  oblations  of  clarified  butter  to  the  Fire 
with  the  Mantrams  of  S'akala-Homa.  (27) 

A  Brahmacharin,.  who  knowingly  discharges  his  semi- 
nal fluid,  should  perform  the  expiation  consequent  on 
the  breach  of  the  vow ;  and  if  unwillingly,  he  should 
be  purified  by  bathing.  (28) 

He  should,  then,  after  roving  about  for  alms,  be  at 
his  ease  [again] ;  for  the  semen  is  like  unto  one's  own- 
self.  He,  who  takes  food  without  taking  his  bathr 
should  recite  the  Gdyatri  for  one  hundred  and  eight 
times.  (29) 

He,  who  takes  his  food  or  drink  from  a  S'tidra's 
hands,  should  get  himself  purified  with  the  Paiichaga-vya 
after  fasting  for  a  day  and  night.  (30) 

Having  taken  boiled  rice,  that  is  dry,  or  rotten,  o-r 
that  partaken  of  by  another  or  contaminated  with  hairsr 
one  should  get  himself  purified  with  the  Panchaga'vya 
after  fasting  for  a  day  and  night.  (31) 

By  taking  food  in  a  vessel  belonging  to  a  S'udra 
or  in  a  broken  plate,  one  should  get  himself  purified  with 
the  Panchngavya  after  fasting  for  a  day  and  night.  (32) 

If  a    Brahmacharin,    on    any  occasion,  sleeps  during 
the    day  in  a  healthy   state,  he  should,  after  bathing  and 
.  adoring  the  Sun,  recite  the  Gdyatri  for  one  hundred  and 
eight  times.   (33) 


Samvarta  Sartiftita.  337 

Thus  is  described  the  duty  of  those  living  in  the 
first  A's'rama  or  order.  By  following  it,  one,  attains-  to- 
the  mosi  excellent  condition.  (54) 

Thereupon  commanded  by  the  preceptor,  a  twice- 
born  person  should  espouse,  according  to  the  Brahma 
form  of  marriage,  a  maiden,  belonging  to-  the  same  caste, 
born  in  a  great  family,  endued  with  all  good  marks- 
and  possessed  of  character  and  beauty.  A  twice-born 
person  should,  daily  and  duly,  perform- the  five  sacrifices. 
A  Vipra,  seeking  his  well-being,  should,  under  no  circum- 
stances, abandon  them.  One  should,  [however,]  always 
abandon  them  [in  an  impurity  consequent]  on  birth  and? 
death.  (35—37) 

A  Vipra,  [on  the  occasion  of  a  birth  or  death]  should 
refrain,  for  ten  days,  from  making  gifts  or  studying  the 
Veda's.  A  Kshatriya  is  purified  in  twelve  days  ;  a  Vai- 
s'ya  in  fifteen  days  ;  and  a  S'udra  in  a  month.  Such  is 
the  deliverance  of  Sarhvarta.  (38) 

[After  cremation,]  water  should  be  offered,  after  bath, 
to  the  deceased  by  those  born  in  the  s-ame  family 
on  the  first;  third,  seventh  and  the  ninth  day.  (39) 

On  the  fourth  day,  one  (i.e.,  the  chief  mourner)  should 
deposit  [the  bones  of  the  departed]  along  with  all  per- 
sons born  in  the  same  family.  Thereupon  after  the 
depositing  of  the  bones,  the  touching  of  the  limbs  of  [the 
chief  mourner]  is  laid  down.  (40) 

On  the  fourth  day,  a  Brahmana's  [limbs  should  be 
touched]  ;  on  the  sixth,  a  Kshatriya's  ;  and  on  the  eighth, 
and  the  tenth,  a  Vaisya's  and  S'udra's  [limbs  should  be 
respectively  touched.]  (41) 

Similarly  regulations  about  [the  impurity  of]  birth 
have  been  laid  down  by  the  learned.  Refraining  from 


338  Samvarta  Saihhtti. 

adoring  the  Vais'wadevas  [the  Brahmaaas]  become  purf- 
fied  in  ten    nights.  (42) 

To  bathe  with  the  raiment  on,  is  laid  down* for  the 
father  on  the  birth  of  a  son.  A  mother  becomes  purified 
in  ten  days.  The  touching  of  the  father  [is  sanctioned 
after]  bath.  (43) 

There  (i.e.,  during  the  period  of  impurity)  Homa 
may  be  performed  with  dry  food  and  fruits  ;  but  one 
should  never  perform  any  rite  of  the  five  sacrifices 
[in  a  period  of  impurity  consequent]  on  birth  and 
death.  (44) 

After  the  tenth  day  a  Vipra,  conversant  with  Reli- 
gious Institutes,  should  make  a  full  study  [of  the  Vedas]  ; 
[andj  auspicious  gifts,  destructive  of  inauspiciousness, 
should  be  duly  made.  (45) 

What  is  most  pleasant  unto  the  dwellers  of  the  [three] 
regions,  what  is  most  sought  for  by  a  householder, 
should  be  given  unto  an  accomplished  [Brahmana  by 
one,]  desiring  for  un-ending  [fruits].  (46) 

By  giving  unto  a  great  Vipra,  various  sorts  of  arti- 
cles, profuse  riches  and  gems  born  in  an  ocean,  a  person, 
shorn  of  sins,  attains  to  great  prosperity.  (47) 

The  person,  who,  being  conversant  with  Religious 
Institutes,  gives  away  scents,  ornaments  and  garlands, 
enjoys  always  scents  and  remains  happy  wherever  he  is 
born.  (48) 

A  gift,  that  is  made  with  reverence  to  a  person  who 
is  well-read  in  the  Vedas  and  born  in  a  good  family, 
yields  a  great  fruit.  (49) 

Having  invited  a  Vipra,  possessed  of  character, 
knowledge  of  the  S'ruti  and  good  birth,  a  pure  and 
highly  learned  person  should  adore  him  with  Havya 
and  Kavya.  (50) 


339 

Various  articles,  yielding  juice  and  kindling  desire1 
[For  possession],  should  be  made  a  gift  of  by  one 
seeking  his  own  well-being  and  desiring  for  eternal  resi- 
dence in  the  celestial  region.  (51) 

One,  who  makes  gift  of  a  cloth,  puts  on  a  good  cloth 
[in  the  next  birth] ;  the  giver  of  silver  [attains  to] 
beauty  ;  a  man,  who  gives  art-ay  gold,  gets  a  long  life 
and  energy.  (5^) 

By  giving  [promise  of]  fearlessness  unto  creatures 
one  comes  by  all  desired  for  objects,  attains  to  longivity 
and  becomes  happy.  (53) 

The  giver  of  corns  and  water  and  thai?  of  clarified 
butter,  enjoy  happiness.  Having  made  gifts  of  orna- 
ments decorating  [the  person  of  a  Brdhmana]  one  at- 
tains to  the  fruits  thereof  (i.e.)  comes  by  ornaments  in 
the  next  birth).  (54) 

By  giving,  unto  a  Vipra,  fruits,  roots,  Various  vegeta- 
bles and  sweet-scented  flowers,  one  is  born  as  a  learned 
person.  (55) 

A  discriminating  person,  who  gives  betel-leaves  unta 
the  Brahmands,  is  born  [in  another  birth]  as  an  intelli- 
gent, lucky,  wise,  and  handsome  person.  (56) 

By  making  presents  of  sandals,  shoes,  umbrellas, 
bedsteads,  seats  and  various  vehicles,  one  attains  to  a 
divine  position.  (57) 

He,  who  with  great  care  makes  gifts  of  fire  and  pro- 
fuse fuels  in  winter,  attains  to  fiery  effulgence  of  the' 
body,  wisdom,  beauty  and  good  luck.  (58) 

By  giving  medicine,  oil  and  food  for  curing  the  aiL* 
ments  of  the  diseased,  one  becomes  freed  from  diseases, 
happy  and  long-lived  (in  another. birth).  (59) 

He,  who  gives  fuels  unto  the   Vipras   at   the    advent 
of   the    winter,   daily    winning   victories    in    battle   and 


being   possessed    of   prosperity,    shines    with  effu)ge'ncr3 
[in  his  next  birth].   (60) 

He,  who,  decorating  a  maiden  with  ornaments,  gives 
fier,  unto  a  becoming  bridegroom,  according  to  the 
Brahma  mode  of  marriage',  enjoys  extraordinary  prospe- 
rity by  the  virtue  of  the  giving  away  of  the  maiden,  ac- 
quires the  applause  of  the  pious,  and  attains  to  un-end- 
ing  fame.  (61 — 62) 

Having  given  away  [a  maiden],  sanctified  with  Homa- 
Mantrams,  a  person  attains  the  fruits  of  hundreds  of 
y^/iMtfratf-Sacrifice.  (63) 

Having  ^iven  away  a  maiden-daughter,  decorated 
with  ornaments,  clothes  and  seats  a  father  attains  to 
the  celestial  region  and  is  adored  of  the  Suras  (celes- 
tials .  (64) 

The  Moon  enjoys  a  maiden  when  hairs  grow  on 
her  person  ;  seeing  the  menstrual  blood  the  Gandhar- 
vas  [enjoy  her]  ;  and  seeing  her  rising  breasts,  the 
Fire.  ^65) 

[A  maiden]  eight  years  [old]  becomes  a  Gouri ;  one 
of  nine  years  a  Rohini  \  ond  of  ten  years,  a  Kanyd 
(maiden) ;  and  after  thatj  a  Rajasvald  (a  woman  in 
menses).  (66) 

By  seeing  a  maiden  in  menses,  her  mother,  father 
and  eldest  brother — these  three  go  to  hell.  (67) 

Therefore  one  should  espouse  a  maiden  before  .she 
has  menstryated  ;  the  marriage  of  an  eight  years  old 
maiden  is  most  preferrable.  (68) 

A  learned  person,  who  makes  a  gift  of  oil>  seats  and 
water  for  washing  feet>  becomes  always  of  a  delighted 
mind  and  happy  in  this  wrorld.  (69) 

He> — who  gives  away,  according  to  his  power,  after 
decorating  them,  two  bulls,  endued  with  good  marks, 


• 


Saihkitd.  341 

capable  of  carrying  carts  and  accompanied  with  a  plough, 
— lives,  having  his  soul  purged  off  of  all  sins  and  secured 
all  desired-for  objects,  in  the  celestial  region  for  years 
equalling  their  downs  in  number,  (70 — -ji) 

He,— who  gives  away,  unto  a  twice-person,  a  milch- 
cow,  after  decorating  her  with  belmetal  bells  and  a 
cloth, — becomes  glorified  in  the  celestial  region.  (72) 

By  giving,  unto  a  Brahmaiia,  who  has  mastered  the 
Vedas,  fertile  lands  and  a  young  cow,  one  becomes  glorU 
fied  in  the  celestial  region.  (73) 

Tne  first  offspring  of  the  Fire  is  gold  ;  Vishnu's  off- 
spring is  the  earth  ;  and  kine  are  the  daughters  of  the 
Sun.  By  him,  who  makes  gifts  of  gold,  earth  and  kine, 
three  regions  are  given  away.  (74 1 

A  man  lives  gloriously  in  the  celestial  region  for 
years  equalling  the  number  of  fruits  and  vegetables 
dedicated  [by  him].  (75) 

The  fruit,  of  all  sorts  of  gifts,  follows  one  birth ; 
but  the  fruit,  of  the  gift  of  gold,  eartu  and  of  an  eight 
years  old  maiden,  follows  seven  births.  (76) 

That  man,-— who  makes  gift  of  a  good-natured  milch- 
cow  with  a  calf,  having  its  horns  bedecked  with  silver 
or  gold,  covered  with  a  cloth,  and  freed  from  any 
disease, — repairing  to  the  celestial  region,  lives  near 
Brahma  for  so  many  thousand  years  as  are  the  downs 
of  the  cow  and  the  calf.  (77 — -78) 

He, — who,  according  to  the  regulation  mentioned 
before,  makes  gift  of  a  sound  bull, — reaps  fruits  ten  times 
more  than  what  is  got  by  the  gift  of  a  cow  [only].  (79) 

The  giver  of  watt;  being  freed  from  thirst  for  all 
objects,  attains  to  incomparable  gratification  ;  the  giver 
of  boiled  rice,  being  gratified  with  all  objects,  enjoys 
happiness.  (80) 

44       ' 


342  Saiftlwrta  Safahitt. 

Of  all  gifts  that  of  boiled  rice,  is  considered  as 
the  highest  in  the  Smriti]  his  life  (i.e.,  the  giver's)  be- 
comes mure  fruitful  than  those  of  all  creatures.  (81) 

Since  the  Lord  [Brahma]  creates,  in  every  cycle,  all 
creatures  from  boiled  rice,  therefore  there  has  never 
been  nor  shall  there  ever  be  any  gift  higher  than  that 
of  b0iled  rice.  (82  j 

There  is  no  gift  superior  to  that  of  boiled  rice,  for 
from  boiled  rice  all  creatures,  forsooth,  originate  and 
live.  (83) 

By. giving,  in  order,  unto  a  Vipra  superior  in  accom- 
plishments, earth,  cowdung,  Kus'a-reed  and  the  sacri- 
ficial thread,  one  is  born  in  a  great  family.  (84) 

He,  who  makes  gifts  of  scents  for  the  mouth  and 
wood  for  cleaning  the  teeth,  becomes  endued  with  p«re 
fragrance  and  expert  in  speech.  (85) 

He, — who  gives,  unto  a  Vipra,  water  for  washing  the 
feet,  generative  organ  and  the  anus, — becomes  always 
©f  purified  understanding.  (86) 

HC) — who  gives,  unto  the  diseased,  medicine,  food 
suited  to  ailments,  oily  substances,  those  for  rubbing 
the  body,  and  protection, — becomes  freed  from  all  sorts 
of  diseases.  (87) 

By  giving  away  molasses,  sugar-cane  juice,  salt, 
curries,  and  sweet-scented  drinks,  one  becomes  greatly 
happy.  (88) 

The  virtue,  [acquired]  by  various  gifts,  has  thus  been 
completely  described  ;  by  the  virtue  of  the  gift  of  learn- 
ing, one  lives  gloriously  in  the  region  of  Brahmd.  (89) 

The  Vipras, — who  give  boiled  rice  unto  one  another, 
who  adore  one  another  and  who  accept  presents 
fr:>m  one  another, — save  [themselves  mutually]  and  are 
saved.  (9*) 


Samvarta  Sartihitj.  343 

By  an  intelligent  person,  seeking  his  own  well-being, 
these  gifts  and  others  should  be  made  specially  unto 
the  poor,  the  blind  and  other  distressed  persons.  (91) 

The  person,  who  gets  the  hairs  shaved  and  the  nails 
pared  of  the  BrahmachdVins  and  Yatins,  is  born 
possessed  of  excellent  eyes.  (92) 

The    man, — who    places    lamps    in    temples,    in    the 
houses  of  the  twice-born,  at  the  crossing  of  four  roads, — 
is  born  endued  with  intellect,    discriminating    knowledge 
and  excellent  eyes.   (93) 

A  person, — by  making  gifts  of  sesame,  according  to 
his  might  in  the  daily  and  occasional  rites,  as  well  as 
in  those  undertaken  with  a  particular  motive, — is  born 
possessed  of  children,  animal?  and  wealth.  (94) 

A  Vipra,  who,  being  solicited,  gives  away  grass,  wood, 
etc.,  as  asked  for,  reaps  fruits  equal  to  thai  of  the  gift 
of  a  cow.  (95) 

A  man,  who  being  engaged  in  maintai  ^ng  his  own 
wife,  commits  culpable  deeds,  but  knows  her  in  the 
time  of  RzVw,  comes  by  a  most  excellent  condition.  (96) 

Living  in  the  house,  a  Vipra,  after  [performing  the 
duties  of]  the  second  order,  should,  on  his  flesh  being 
loosened  and  hairs  growing  grey,  resort  to  the  third 
order.  (97) 

Taking  his  own  wife,  desirous  of  following  him,  and 
the  sacred  Fire,  a  wise  man  should  repair  to  the  forest 
and  must  not  abandon  the  Homa-[Fire]  (there  ;  (98) 

He  should  duly,  with  forest-grown  fruits,  offer  cakes 
[to  the  Celestials  and  the  departed  Manes]  ;  and  he 
should  give  alms,  consisting  of  vegetables,  fruits  and 
roots,  unto  the  mendicants.  (99) 

Offering  oblations  to  the  Fire,  he  should  daily  study, 


344  Samvarta  Samhita. 

[the    VSdas] ;    [and]    on    every    Parva-dayt   he    should 
perform  the  Ishti  and  the  Pdrvana  rites.   (100) 

Thus  living  in  the  forest  and  being  informed  of 
regulations  about  all  objects,  he  should,  after  finishing 
the  If  ami-rites  and  restraining  his  senses  absolutely,, 
resort  to  the  fourth  order.  (101) 

By  placing  the  sacred  Fire  within  himself,  a  twice- 
born  person  should  adopt  the  life  of  mendicancy  (i.e.9  of 
a  Bhikshu},  He  should  be  given  to  the  study  of  the 
Veda  and  be  devoted  to  spiritual  science.  (102) 

By  begging  eight,  seven,  or  five,  morsels  of  food  and 
washing  them  all  with  water,  that  Muni,  being  self-con- 
trolled, should  partake  of  them.  (103) 

After  taking  his  meals,  a  Vipra  should  live  alone 
in  a  solitary  forest ;  and,  controlling  his  mind,  body  and 
speech,  should  meditate  on  [the  Para-Brahma.]  (104) 

He  should  not  seek  death  or  life  ;  so  long  as  the  lease 
of  life  exists,  he  should  await  the  appointed  hour.  (105) 

Thus  serving  the  [four]  orders,  a  twice-born  person,, 
who  has  conquered  anger  and  the  senses  and  who 
has  learnt  the  Veda-S^dsira^  attains  to  the  region  of 
Brahma.  (106) 

The  regulations,  of  all  the  Asramas,  have  thus  been 
described  as  a  side-issue  ;  I  shall  now  duly  describe  the 
atonement  for  all  tfie  sins.  (107). 

The  killer  of  a  Brahmana,  a  drunkard,  a  stealer  of 
gold,  and  one  who  knows  his  step-mothei — all  these  are 
tnakfipiitakins  (great  sinners)  ;  the  fifth  is  one  who 
associates  with  them.  (108) 

Clad  in  bark,  wearing  matted  locks,  and  carrying  a 
speical  mark,  the  destroyer  of  a  Brahmana  should  repair 
into  a  forest ;  and,  being  shorn  of  all  desires,  he  should' 
live  on  forest 'fruits.  (109) 


Samvarta  Saihhita.  345 

If  he  cannot  maintain  himself  with  the  forest-pro- 
duces, like  a  mendicant  he  should  roam  in  a  village ; 
[and]  being  self-controlled  and  carrying  the  mark  of  a 
bedstead  that  man  should  beg  alms  from  the  four 
Varnas.  (110) 

Having  taken  alms,  he  should  again  return  to  the 
forest ;  that  sinful  wight,  shorn  of  idleness,  sjiould 
always  live  in  the  forest,  (in) 

That  sinful  wight,  who  has  killed  a  Brahmana,  should 
announce  his  crime  and  perform  the  penance  for  twelve 
years  according  to  this  regulation.  (112) 

Having  controlled  all  the  senses  [and]  being  devoted 
to  the  well-being  of  all  creatures,  one,  after  performing 
the  atonement  for  Brahmanicide,  would  be  freed  from« 
the  sin.  (113) 

Hereafter,  O  ye  Vipras,  I  shall  describe,  unto  ye,  who 
are  desirous  of  hearing,  the  means  of  expiation,  laid 
down  by  the  Veda-S 'astra,  for  the  drinker  of  spirituous 
liquors.  (114) 

Goudi*  Paishthi;\  as  well  as  Mddhvi\  are  known 
as  the  three  sorts  of  spirituous  liquor  ;  the  one  is  as- 
sinful  as  are  the  others  ;  they  should  never  be  drunk  of 
by  the  twice-born.  (115) 

The  drinker  of  spirit  ous  liquors^  who  wishes  to- 
be  freed  from  the  sin,  should  drink  Sura  (wine)  after 
having  heated  it,  or  the  urine  of  a  cow  of  the  colour  of 
fire  ;  or,  he  should  eat  cowdung  of  a  similar  colour.  (116) 

[Or,  he  should  drink]  heated  clarified  butter  or 
similar  milk  ;  or,  freed  from  all  desires,  he  should  live 
on  particles  of  rice.  (117) 

*  Spirit  distilled  from  molasses, 
t  Spirit  distilled  from  rotten  rice. 
+  Spirit  distilled  from  ^/0wa-flo\vers. 


346  Sumy  aria 

Or,  the  drinker  of  spirituous  liquor  should  perforns 
three  Ch  /fat  dray ana  -penances.  With  the  performance 
of  the  penance,  he  would  be  freed  from  the  sin.  (118) 

Undoubtedly  this  is  the  purification  for  a  drinker  of 
spiritous  liquor.  By  drinking  water  kept  in  a  wine- 
bowl, one  is  required  to  perform  the  purificatory  rites 
again.  (119) 

By  stealing  gold,  a  man  should  communicate  it  unto 
the  king.  Then  the  king,  taking  up  a  mace,  should  kill 
the  thief.  (120) 

If  that  thief  survives  [the  stroke,]  he  would  be  freed 
from  [the  sin  of]  theft ;  or,  by  living  in  a  forest,  being 
clad  in  bark,  he  should  perform  the  penance  for  Brahma- 
nicide.  (121) 

Or,  having  made  a  female  figure  with  iron  and  heated 
it,  he  should  embrace  it ;  such  is  the  purification  for 
theft  according  to  the  deliverance  of  Saihvarta.  (122) 

By  lying  on  the  bed  of  a  step-mother,  one  should 
lie  down  on  an  iron  bed  ;  or,  a  twice-born  person  should 
perform  three  or  four  Chandrdyanas.  A  penance  being 
thus  performed,  he  would,  thereafter,  be  freed  from  the 
sin.  (123) 

If  any  person,  stupefied  by  sin,  associates  for  six 
or  more  months  with  these,  he  should  perform  the 
penance  mentioned  before.  (124) 

By  associating  with  the  mahap'itakins  (great  sinners); 
such  as  the  destroyer  of  a  Brahmana,  one  should,  for 
the  purification  of  that  sin,  perform  the  penance  laid 
down  for  each  [sinner  respectively],  f  125) 

By  killing  a  Kshatriya,  one  becomes  purified  with 
three  Krichchhras;  being  self-restraimed,  he  should 
similarly  perform  three  Krichchhras.  (126) 

If  any   how   one,    under  the  influence  of  ignorance, 


Sawvarta  Saftfiitd.  34'7 

kills  a  Vais'va,  that  man — the  destroyer  of  the  Vais'ya, 
should  perform  a  Krichchhatikrichchhra.  (127) 

By  killing  a  S'udra,  one  should  duly  perform  a 
Tapta-Krichchhra.  (128) 

I  shall,  in  sooth,  describe  the  redemption  for  a  cow- 
slaughter.  A  person,  killing  a  cow,  should,  after  con- 
trolling his  senses,  sleep  on  the  bare  earth  in  a  cowpen 
filled  with  kine  for  haK-a-month.  A  twice-born,  seeking 
freedom  from  sin,  should  live,  in  order,  upon  all  these-- 
Suktu  (sour  gruel),  Yavaka  ;boiled  barley),  Piuyaka 
(sesame-paste),  milk,  curd  and  cowdung.  Shorn  of  nails 
and  hairs,  he  would  be  purified  in  half-a-month. 
(124—131) 

Bathing  thrice  and  following  kine,  a  person,  being  self- 
restrained  and  shorn  of  pride,  should  do  all  these.  (132) 

He  should,  according  to  his  might,  recite  daily  the 
Giiyatri  and  the  sacred  verses.  Then  completing  his 
vow,  he  should  give  a  most  excellent  feast  to  the 
Vipras.  (133) 

The  Vipras  being  fed,  he  should  give  away  a  cow 
as  a  present.  (134). 

Many  kine  being  slain  [by  one]  either  by  binding  or 
by  shutting  up,  the  penance  for  his  purification  would 
be  double  of  that  for  [killing]  a  cow.  (135) 

If,  by  an  accident  on  any  occasion,  one  [cow]  is 
killed  by  many,  they  should  severally  perform  each  part 
of  the  penance  [laid  down]  for  [a  cow-]  slaughter.  (136) 

If,  for  branding  [a  cow],  for  treating  a  cow,  or  for 
bringing  out  a  dead  foetus,  any  calamity  (i.e ,  death) 
happens,  there  would  be  no  sin.  (137) 

There  is  no  penance  for  [a  cow]  being  killed  by 
being  bound  in  the  night,  by  a  serpent,  tiger,  fire,  or  by 
any  other  calamity,  (138) 


348  SaMVarta   Saihkita. 

[When  a  cow  is  killed]  by  being  shut  up,  one  should 
perform  one  part  of  the  penance  ;  when  by  being  bound) 
two  parts;  and  [when  killed]  for  cutting  off  a  limb,  [one 
should  perform  the  full  penance]  less  by  one  part  (139) 

By  killing  it  with  stones,  sticks,  rods  or  wea* 
pons,  one  should  perform  a  complete  penance  for  purifica- 
tion. (140) 

By  killing  an  elephant,  a  horse,  a  buffaloe,  a  camel 
or  a  monkey,  one  should  fast  for  seven  nights  in  all  these 
[sins.]  (141) 

By  killing  a  tiger,  a  dog,  a  lion,  a  bear  or  a  boar,  a 
twice-born  person  should  perform  a  penance  and*  feed 
the  Brahmaiias.  (142) 

By  killing  all  sorts  of  forest-ranging  deer,  one  should 
remain  fasting  for  three  nights  and  recite  the  Agni- 
Mantrams.  (143) 

By  killing  a  swan,  a  crew,  a  crane,  a  pigeon,  a  Sarasa 
or  a  Bhasa,  one  should  spend  three  days  [in  fast- 
ing-] (144) 

Chakravaka  (ruddy  goose),  Krouficha  (heron),  Sarika", 
parrot,  Tittiri,  falcon,  vulture,  Vuluka,  pigeon,  Tittibha, 
Jalapada  (water-fowl  having  a  net),  cuckoo,  fowl, —  [in 
the  destruction]  of  all  these  birds,  fasting  for  a  day  [is 
laid  down.]  (145 — 146) 

By  killing  a  frog,  a  snake,  a  cat,  or  mouse  one  should 
remain  fasting  for  three  nights  [and  then]  feed  the  Brah- 
maiias. (147) 

By  killing  boneless  worms,  one  is  purified  with  the 
Prandyama  ;  in  killing  those  that  have  bones,  a  learned 
Vipra  should  make  some  presents.  (148) 

A  twice-born  person,  who,  stricken  with  lust,  knows 
a  C^aWtf/a-woman,  is  purified,  in  order,  with  thres 
Krichchhras  [beginning]  with  the  Prdjdpatya.  (149) 


Saihhitd.  349 

POT  knowing  a  Pukkasa- woman  (the  offspring  of  a 
Nishada  by  a  S'udra-woman),  whether  under  the  influence 
•of  lust  or  no^  the  penance  of  Chandrayana  is  laid  down 
as  the  highest  purification  in  the  Smriti.  (150) 

By  knowing  an  actress,  a  S1  aildshi  (a  dancing  girl), 
a.  washer-woman,  one  who  makes  her  living  by  bamboo- 
tnade  articles,  and  a  cobbler-woman,  one  should  perform 
&  Chandfayana.  (151) 

For  him  the  penance  of  Santapanam  becomes  des- 
tructive of  sin  who,  under  the  influence  of  lust,  knows 
a  Kshatriya-,  or  a  Vais'ya-,  woman.  (152) 

By  knowing  a  S'udra-woman  for  a  month  or  hall-a- 
tnonth,  a  Brahmana  would  become  purifiedjn  a  fortnight 
fey  living  on  barley  and  the  urine  of  a  cow.  (153) 

By  knowing  [another]  Brahmana's  wife,  a  Vipra 
•should  perform  a  Prdjapatya  \  a  Kshatriya,  by  knowing 
[another]  Kshatriya's  wife,  should  perform  the  same 
penance  (154) 

By  holding  intercourse  with  a  cow,  a  man  should 
perform  the  penance  of  Chandrayana.  (155) 

By  knowing  a  preceptor's  daughter,  father's  sister 
•or  her  -daughter,  one  should  perform  the  penance  of 
'Chandrdyana.  (156) 

By  unknowingly  knowing  a  maternal  uncle's  wife, 
•a  woman  of  one's  own  family,  the  daughter  of  a  maternal 
Uncle,  or  a  daughter-in-law,  one  would  become  purified 
by  a  Pardka.  (157) 

By  knowing  the  wife  of  a  paternal  uncle,  or  a 
Brother's  wife,  one  should  perform  the  penance  [laid 
•down]  for  knowing  a  step-mother.  There  exists  no 
other  redemption  for  him.  (158) 

By    getting    upon    (i.e.,    co-habiting   with)  one's  own 
father's  wives   other   than    his    own    mother,    and    by 
45 


350 

knowing  any  of  these  women,  viz.,  a  sister,  a  matefnal 
uncle's  daughter,  a  step-mother's  sister,  that  vilest  of 
men  should  perform  a  Taptakrichchhra.  (159) 

For  that  vilest  of  men,  who  knows  his  own  mother, 
daughter,  or  his  own  sister  no  atonement  has  been 
laid  down.  (160) 

For  knowing  a  maiden,  one  should  perform  this  (i.e.* 
the  Prajdpatya) ;  in  holding  sexual  intercourse  with 
an  animal  or  a  harlot,  Prajdpatya  is  laid  down.  (161) 

A  twice-born  person,  who  knows  his  wife's  friend,  a 
maiden,  his  own  mother-in-law,  or  his  wife's  sister,  one 
engaged  in  Niyama,  or  one  observant  of  a  religious 
vow,  should  perform  an  ordinary  penance  and  give  away 
a  milch-cow.  (162) 

A  highly  distressing  penance  is  laid  down  for  the 
expiation  of  his  sin,  who  co-habits  with  a  woman  in  her 
menses,  or  with  one  who  is  in  the  family  way,  or  with  a 
degraded  woman.  (163) 

By  knowing  a  prostitute,  a  Brahraana  should  perform 
a  Krichchhra  ;  such  is  the  expiation  of  sins  according 
to  the  deliverance  of  Saihvarta.  (164) 

By  knowing  another  Brahmana's  wife,  a  Brahmana 
would  become  purified  by  a  Krichchhra.  (165) 

If  somehow,  a  Brahmana-woman  comes  in  contact 
with  a  S'udra,  she  should  perform  the  penance  of 
Chandrdyana  which  is  most  purifying  according  to  the 
Smriti.  ,(166) 

By  somehow  knowing  a  Brahmana-woman,  a  Ksha- 
triya  or  a  Vaisya  would  be  purified  in  a  month  by  living 
on  barley  and  the  urine  of  a'cow.  (167) 

By  knowing  the  women  of  Chandalas,  Pukkasas, 
S'wapakas,  or  of  other  degraded  castes,  one  of  a  superior 
caste  should  perform  three  Chdndrdyanas.  (168) 


Samvarto  Saihhita,  351 

Listen  now  to  the  means  of  expiation  for  [other] 
sinners  [than  those  mentioned  above].  A  wicked-mind- 
ed person,  who,  having  adepted  a  life  of  renunciation 
knows  a  woman  for  procreating  children,  should  there- 
after, untiringly  perform  a  penance,  extending  over  six 
months.  (169). 

This  is  the  penance  for  those,  who  after  taking 
•poison  or  entering  into  fire  [for  committing  suicide], 
become  dark-coloured  or  of  variegated  colour.  This  is 
also  the  penance,  laid  down  in  the  Smriti,  for  those 
outcastes  who  vilify  [chaste]  women  and  know  cen- 
surable women.  (170) 

[This  is  also]  the  purification  for  killing  men  ;  the 
King  of  the  departed  spirits  (Yama)  has  said  so.  (171) 

No  tear  should  be  shed  by  the  good,  seeking  their 
own  well-being,  for  those  killed  by  kine,  or  for  those 
who  kave  committed  suicide.  (172) 

He, — who  carries  the  dead-body  of,  or  cremates  the 
same,  or  performs  the  watery  rites  for,  any  of  these, — • 
should  perform  the  penance  of  C hand  ray  ana.  (173) 

By  merely  touching  the  dead-body  (i.e.,  not  carrying 
or  cremating  the  same),  or  by  only  touching  its  cloth, 
the  former  should  perform  a  penance ;  and  the  latter, 
fast  for  a  day.  (174) 

[The  offering  of]  water  and  funeral  cakes  [and  the 
performance  of]  S'rdddha  for  the  great  sinners  and  for 
those  who  commit  suicide,  do  not  at  all  reach  [them]  but 
are  stolen  by  the  Rakshasas.  (175) 

No  Sfraddha  should  be  performed  by  those  who  have 
been  killed  by  the  Chandalas,  acquatic  animals  and 
snakes,  [as  well  as]  for  those  who  have  been  killed  by 
the  punishment  [given]  by  the  Brahmanas.  (176) 


352  Samvarta  S ambit  A. 

If  [before  cleaning  himself]  after  passing  urine  or 
excreta  or  with  the  leavings  of  food  in  his  mouth,  a 
twice-born  person  is  touched  by  a.  dog,  etc.,  he  should,, 
after  bathing,  recite  the  G&yatri  for  a  thousand  times. 

(177) 

By   touching   a    Chandala,  an  outcaste,  a  dead-body, 
a   lowcaste,    a   woman  in  her  menses,  and  a  woman  in  a 
state  of  impurity  consequent  on  child-birth,    one   should* 
bathe  with  the  cloth  on.   (178) 

Bathing  is  laid  down  for  him  who  touches  an  object 
which  should  not  be  touched  [with  an  article  in  his 
hand]  ;  after  that  dchnmanam  and  sprinkling  of  that 
article  with  water  is  spoken  of.  (179) 

The  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  who,  with  the 
leavings  of  food  in  his  mouth,  is  touched  by  a  Chandala 
or  any  other  [degraded  caste],  becomes  purified  by 
living  on  barley  and  the  urine  of  a  cow  for  six  nights. 
(180) 

By  being  touched  by  a  dog  or  by  another  woman  in 
menses,  a  woman  in  menses  should  fast  for  the  remain- 
ing days  [of  the  menstrual  period]  and  get  herself  puri- 
fied by  drinking  clarified  butter  after  bathing  [at  the 
end  of  the  menstrual  period].  181 

By  drinking  well-water  contaminated  by  a  Chandala's 
vessel,  one  becomes  purified  by  living  on  barley  and  the 
urine  of  a  cow  for  three  nights.  (182) 

By  drinking  water,  out  of  ignorance,  in  sacred 
waters,  tanks  and  rivers  polluted  by  the  degraded  castes, 
one  becomes  purified  with  the  Pnnchagavya.  (183) 

By  drinking  water  from  wine-bowls,  from  a  place 
where  it  is  distributed  to  travellers,  and  that  which 
comes  from  the  sky,  a  twice-born  person,  after  fasting 
for  a  day  and  night,  should  take  the  Panchagavya.  (184) 


Samvarta  Saihhitft.  353 

By  drinking  water  from  a  well  contaminated  by  ex- 
creata  and  urine,  twice-born  persons  become  purified 
[by  fasting]  for  three  nights  ;  Santapanam  is  laid  down,, 
in  the  Smriti,  as  the  expiation  for  drinking  water 
from  a  pitcher  [similarly  contaminated].  (185) 

[The  following  is]  the  means  of  purification  for  suU 
lied:tanks,  wells  and  ponds.  By  taking  out  a  hundred 
pitcherfuls  of  water,  one  should  throw  the  Panckagavya 
[into  them].  (186) 

By  drinking  the  milk  of  a  sheep,  that  of  an  animal 
whose  hoof  is  not  cloven,  (as  a  horse,  an  ass,  etc.,)  and 
that  of  a  she-camel,  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  for 
the  purification  thereof,  should  take  barley  for  three 
nights.  (187) 

By  taking  the  milk  of  a  she-goat,  that  of  a  cow 
pursued  by  a  bull  for  impregnating  her,  and  that  of  an 
animal  that  takes  excreta,  one  attains  to  purification 
[by  fasting]  for  three  nights.  (188) 

By  taking  excreta  and  urine,  one  should  perform  a 
Prajdpatya  ;  taking  the  food  partaken  of  by  a  dog,  crow 
or  a  cow,  a  twice-born  person  should  [fast]  for  three 
days.  (189) 

By  taking  the  food  partaken  of  by  a  cat  or  a  mouse, 
a  twice-born  person  should  take  the  Paftchagavya  ;  by 
taking  the  residue  of  a  S'udra's  food  one  would  become 
purified  [by  fasting]  for  three  nights.  (190) 

By  taking  onion,  garlic,  as  well  as  a  domesticated 
fowl,  a  mushroom,  and  a  domesticated  hog,  a  twice-born, 
person  should  perform  a  Chdndrdyana.  (191) 

By  taking  the  urine  or  excreta  of  a  dog,  ass,  camel, 
monkey,  jackal  or  a  Kanka  (bird),  a  man  should  perform 
the  penance  of  Chdndrdyana.  (192) 


354  Samvarta  Samhftd. 

By  taking  boiled  rice,  which  is  stale,  or  which  is 
sullied  by  hairs  or  insects,  or  which  has  been  seen  by 
outcastes,  a  twice-born  person  should  take  the  Pancha- 
gavya,  (193) 

By  taking  food  from  the  vessel  of  a  degraded  caste, 
or  from  that  of  a  woman  in  menses,  one  would  become 
purified,  in  half-a-month,  by  living  upon  barley  and  the 
urine  of  a  cow.  (194) 

By  taking  all  these  interdicted  food, — beef,  human 
flesh  and  what  is  brought  by  the  hand  of  a  dog,  one 
should  perform  a  Chdndrdyana.  (195) 

[By  taking  food]  at  the  hands  of  a  Chandala,  a 
S'wapaka  or  of  a  Pukkasa,  a  Vipra  would  become  puri- 
fied, in  half-a-month,  by  living  upon  barley  and  the  urine 
of  a  cow.  (196) 

By  associating  with  an  outcaste  for  a  month  or  a 
half,  one  would  become  purified,  in  half-a-month,  by 
living  upon  barley  and  the  urine  of  a  cow.  (197) 

And  on  every  occasion  when  a  twice-born  person 
would  think  himself  impure,  he  should  perform  a  Homa 
with  sesame  and  recite  the  Gdyatri.  (198) 

This  auspicious  regulation  about  penance  has  been 
spoken  of  by  me.  The  penance,  for  sins  not  mentioned 
[before],  should  now  be  spoken  of  [by  me].  (199) 

Forsooth,  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born  would  be 
daily  freed  from  sins  by  gifts,  Homa}  recitation  of  the 
Gtyatri,  the  practice  of  the  Prdndydma  and  Vedic 
study.  (200) 

The  gift  of  gold,  that  of  a  cow,  and  that  of  earth, 
dissipate  sins  [committed  in  this  life]  and  those  com- 
mitted in  pristine  life.  (201) 

He, — who,   gives   unto   a   self  controlled  twice-born 


Saihhita. 


|)erS<frrt,  sesame  and  a  cow,—  MS  freed  from  sins,  such  as 
Brahmanicide,  etc.;  there  is  no  doubt  in  it.  (20j) 

By  fasting  on  the  Full-Moon  day  when  the  month 
of  Magha  sets  in  and  giving  sesame  unto  the  Brahmanas, 
one  is  freed  from  all  [sorts  of]  sins.  (203) 

By  fasting  on  the  Full-Moon  day  in  the  month  o£ 
Rarttika  and  giving  away  gold,  raiment  and  boiled-rice, 
a  person  is  freed  from  iniquities  (204^ 

Amnvasyd  (the  last  day  of  the  dark  fortnight),  the 
twelfth  day  of  each  fortnight,  the  last  day  of  a  month 
particularly,  and  a  Sunday,  —  these  are  the  most  fitting 
days  [for  performing  religious  rites].  (205) 

Bathing^  the  recitation  of  the  Gdyatri,  Homa,  the 
feeding  of  the  Brahmanas,  fasting,  and  making  gifts 
on  all  these  days,  each  of  these  purifies  a  man.  (206) 

A  learned  person,  after  being  bathed,  purified,  put- 
ting on  a  washed  cloth,  being  of  a  purified  soul,  having 
controlled  his  senses,  and  resorting  to  the  Sdttwik 
state  of  mind,  should  make  gifts.  (207) 

For  the  expiation  of  minor  sins,  Homas^  to  the 
number  of  a  thousand,  should  be  performed,  with 
seven  Vydhritis,  by  the  twice-born  ones  seeking  their 
own  well-being.  (208) 

A  twice-born  person  committing  heinous  crimes, 
should  perform  a  Laksha  (a  hundred  thousand)  Homn\ 
[and  then]  from  the  recitation  of  the  Gdyatri,  [he] 
becomes  freed  from  all  sins.  (209) 

For  the  purification  of  all  sins,  one  should,  going  to 
a  forest  or  on  the  bank  of  a  river,  recite  the  most  sacred 
Gdyatri,  the  mother  of  the  Vedas.  (210) 

Bathing  there,  suppressing  the  vital  airs,  restraining 
his  speech  and  being  purified  by  three  Prdndyamas^ 
a  twice-born  person  should  recite  the  Gdyatri.  (211) 


356  Savftt)nrta 

Being  clad  in  a  pure  cloth,  seated  on  the  ground  and 
on  a  pure  spot,  and  self-restrained,  and  by  performing 
the  dchamaftam  with  a  pure  hand,  one  should  begin  the 
recitation  of  the  Gdytitri.  (212) 

By  the  recitation  of  the  Gayatri,  all  the  sins>  both 
of  this  world  and  of  another,  are  dissipated  in  five 
nights.  (213) 

There  is  no  purification  of  iniquitous  deeds  superior 
to  the  Gayatri.  (214) 

By  reciting  the  Gayatri  accompanied  with  Maha* 
Vydhritis  and  Prdndydma,  a  Vipra  becomes  freed  from 
all  sins.  (215) 

Living  on  a  restricted  diet  and  being  given  to  the 
well-being  of  all  creatures,  a  Brahmacharin,  by  the  re- 
citation of  one-hundred  thousand  Gdyatri^  becomes  freed 
from  all  sins.  '216) 

By  officiating  as  a  priest  for  him  for  whom  no 
priestly  service  should  be  rendered,  by  taking  boiled  rice 
of  a  censurable  wight,  one,  by  reciting  one  thousand 
and  eight  Gdyatri,  becomes  freed  [from  sins],  (217) 

As  a  snake  throws  off  its  slough,  so  a  foremost  of  the 
twice-born,  who  daily  studies  the  Gdyatri,  becomes 
freed  [from  his  sins]  in  a  month;  (218) 

A  Vipra, — ^who  being  restrained  and  purified,  always 
recites  the  Gdyatfi,  goes,  becoming  like  air  and  assum* 
ing  the  astral  body,  to  the  most  excellent  station.  (219) 

A  twice-born  person  should  daily  recite  mentally  the 
seven  Vydhritis,  accompanied  with  Pranava ;  and  the 
Gdyatri,  accompanied  with  S'irasd-M ant  rant.  (220) 

The  suppression  of  one's  own  vital  airs  constitutes 
the  regulation  of  the  Prdndydma.  Being  self-restrain- 
ed, one  should  perform  the  Prdndydma  thrice  every 
day.  (221) 


*$ ami)  art  a  Safahita.  357 

Three  Prdudydmas  being  practised,  any  sin,  that  is 
committed  by  the  mind,  word  or  the  body,  is  forthwith 
destroyed.  (222) 

He, — who  reads  the  Rz^f-  Veda,  the  Yajush  with  its 
branches,  and  the  Samans  with  their  esoteric  meanings, 
— becomes  freed  from  all  sins.  (223) 

By  reciting  the  Pavamani-Sukta,  the  entire  Purusha- 
Siikta,  and  the  Pitri-Mantram  [recited  by]  Madhu- 
chchhandas,  one  becomes  freed  from  all  sins.  (224) 

By  reciting  the  Brdhmana-Mandala  [of  the  Rz^"- 
Veda\  Vtihat-Kathd  mentioned  in  the  Rudra-Sukta, 
Vdmadeva-Mantram,  and  the  Vrihat-Sdma,  one  be- 
comes freed  from  all  sins.  (225) 

By  performing  the  Chan  dray  ana,  the  highest  puri- 
ficatory measure  for  all  sins,  one  attains  to  purification 
and  the  most  excellent  station.  (2261 

This  most  sacred  Dharma-S' astra  (Religious  In- 
stitute) was  described  by  Samvarta.  By  studying  it,  a 
Brahmaiia  attains  to  the  eternal  abode  of  Brahma.  (227) 


THE    END. 


46 


KA'TYA'YANA   SAMHITA'. 


WITH    A 


LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION, 


EDITED   AND    PUBLISHED    BY 

IWANIVIATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  M.A.,  M.R.A.S., 

Rector,  Kesh.ub  Academy, 

Author  of  the  English  Translations  of  The  Rdmdyana,  Mahd- 

Bhdrata,  S'rimadbhdgavatam,  Mahdnirvdna-Tantram, 

Harivams'a,  Agni  Purdnam,  Mdrkandeya 

Purdnam,  &c.,  &c. 


PRINTED  BY  H.  C.  DAS,  ELYSIUM  PRESS. 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DUTT'S  STREET. 

1907. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

[Kdtydyana  Samhita.] 

SUBJECT.  SLOKAS.  PAG«t 

Formation  of  Sacred  Thread       ...                 ...  I — 4  359 

Use  of  fingers  and  hands  in  the  performance 

of  a  religious  rite                       ...                 ...  5 — 8  359 

Regulation  about  G*yatri              .»,                  ...  9 — 10  360 

The  adoration  of  the  Mains        ...                 ...  II — 18  360 

The  placing  of  the  Kus'a              ...                  ,.4  1—4  36: 

Regulations  about  a  S'raddha     .>,                  ..*  5—14  362 

Interdicted  acts  and  regulations  about  rites  ...  1—6  363 

Mantrams  and  Rules  of   Parvana  S'raddha"...  7— 14  364 

Regulations  about  S'raddha         ...                  ...  I  — 12  365 

^Performance  of  SVaddha  at  the  beginning  of 

other  rites                ...                  ...                  ...  I  —  n  366 

Rules   about  a  younger  brother's  superseding 

his  elder                  ...                 ...                 ...  I — 8  368 

The  Deposit  of  the  Sacred  Fire  ...                 ...  9— -15  36^ 

Description  of  various  sacrificial   implements  I — 14  370 
Description  of  sacrificial  implements,  offerings 

and  fuels                  ...                  ...                  ...  1—24  371 

Description  of  Homas  and  their  regulations...  I — 15  374 

Regulations  about  bathing             ...                  ...  I — 14  376 

The  Sandhya-adorations                ...                  .,.  I — 17  378 

Oblations  to  the  various  Deities   ...                   ...  1—6  380 

The  five  great   sacrifices                ...                  ...  I — 14  382 

>— T"e  offering  of  Valis                       ...                  .,,  I — 7  389 

Brahma  Yajoa  and  the   fruit   of  Vedic   study  S— 15  385 

Regulation  about  gifts                     ...                  .,.  I — g  386 

Description  of  sacrificial  implements             ...  10 — 16  387 

Nyancha  and  other  rites               .,.                  .,.  17—21  388 

Classes  of  S'raddhas                       .„.                  ...  1—22,  388 

Implements  and  offerings  of  a  S'laddha        ...  1—25  392 
Various  classes   of  Religious  rites  an  I  regu- 
lations about  Horn  a                 ...                .,,  I — 24  395 


H 


Subject.  Slo'Uas.  Page1, 

Adoration  of  the  Sacred  Fire       ...  ...  1—4  3^8 

Duties  of  a  wife          ...                 ...  ...  I—  12  39^ 

Uules  of  Homa            ...                  ...  ...  13—16  400 

Adoration  and  use  of  thte  Sacred  Fire  ...  t  —  18  400 

Uules  of  cremation     ...                 ...  ...  i  —  16  402 

Consolation  offered  by  relatfVei  ...  ..,  1—  16  404 

Further  regulation  about  cremation  ...  1  —  14  405 

Offering*,  rites,  etc.,  for  a  deaJ  person  ...  I—  16  407 

The  various  Mantrams                 ,.,  ...  I  —  H  407 

Preparation  of  Charii                     ...  ...  1—5  412 

The  time  for  a  cow  and  Hotse-Sacrifice  .;.  6—8  412 

Various  other  riles                          ...  .;.  fc)  —  17  413 

Anvaharyya                   .;.                   .;.  ;..  t  414 

kshipra-Horrta  and  obUtibrt        .;.  ...  2—4  414 

Penance  for  offering  bones,  salt,  etc.  ...  5—6  415 

t^ules  of  Homa            ...                  ...  ...  7  —  lo  415 

Definition  of  Manava,  Enah,  Dand^i  ;;.  II  —  13  41$ 

Presents,  Upakarman-rite           ...  ...  14  —  2!  416 

Various  monthly  rites                   .;.  ,;.  i  —  it)  417 

Description  of  sactificial  animal...  .;.  I  —  7  415! 

Other  offeiings            .;.                 .;;  ;..  8—  1£  4^d 


THEREUF 


KA'TYA'YANA-SAMHITA'. 


CHAPTER  I. 


'HEREUPON  like  unto  a  lamp  [lighting  up  all  objects 
in  darkness],  I  shall  fully  point  out  the  Regulation  of 
all  the  rites  mentioned,  but  not  made  clear,  by  Gobhila, 
as  also  of  other  [religious]  works,  (i) 

Three  circles  of  thread  should  be  formed  upwards  ; 
and  three  circles,  downwards ;  thus  a  sacred  thread 
becomes  of  three  circles :  then  one  knot  should  be 
made.  (2) 

That  which  hanging  on  the  spinal  chord  and  the 
navel  reaches  the  waist, — such  a  sacrificial  thread  should 
be  held  (i.e.,  worn),  and  not  one  longer  or  loftier 
than  it.  (3) 

One  must  always  put  on  the  sacred  thread  and  bind 
the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown  :  what  one  does  without 
having  the  sacred  thread  on  or  without  binding  the  tuft 
of  hair  on  the  crown,  is  equal  to  an  act  not  done.  (4) 

Drinking  water  thrice,  one  should,  therewith,  sprinkle 
the  mouth  twice  ;  then  [one  should]  sprinkle  with  water 
the  following  places  : — the  face,  nose,  eyes,  ears,  navel, 
breast,  head  and  the  ankles.  (5) 

Closing  the  three  fingers,  one  should  touch  one's 
face ;  with  the  thumb  and  the  forefinger,  one  should 
touch  one's  nose  -,  with  the  thumb  and  the  nameless 
finger,  the  eyes  and  the  ears  [should  be  touched]  again 
and  again.  (6) 


360  Katy'yana  Saihhitfi. 

With  the  smallest  finger  and  the  thumb,  [one  should 
touch]  the  navel  ;  and  the  breast,  with  the  palm  ;  with  all 
the  fingers,  the  head;  and  afterwards,  one  should  touch 
the  arms  with  the  tips  [of  all  the  fingers].  (7) 

Where  instructions  about  a  religious  rite  have  been 
delivered  to  a  person  engaged  in  performing  them,  but 
no  limb  has  been  mentioned,  there  the  riofht  hand  should 

o 

be  known  as  [the  one]  competent  for  performing  the 
rite.  (8) 

Where  there  is  no  rule  about  the  quarter  in  the 
performance  of,  the  recitation  of  the  Gayatri,  and  the 
Homa,  Aindri  (east),  Soumi  (south-east),  and  Aparajitft 
(north-east), — these  three  directions  have  been  spoken 
[as  the  fittest].  (9) 

Where  there  is  no  such  regulation  [that  one  should 
perform  a  rite]  either  standing,  sitting,  or  bending  the 
fo  part  of  the  body,  one  should  do  it  by  sitting 
and  not  by  bending  the  forepart  of  the  body  nor  by 
standing,  do) 

Gouri,  Padma,  S'achi,  Medha,  Savitri,  Vijaya,  Java, 
Devasena,  Svadha,  Svaha,  Dhriti,  Pushti,  Tushti  with 
Atmadevata, — these  Matris  are  the  mothers  of  the 
Lokas.  For  performing  a  Vriddhi-ute  (on  the  occasion 
of  a  marriage,  etc.,)  these  fourteen,  added  by  GarjeVa,. 
should  be  adored,  (n — 12) 

In  all  religious  rites,  the  Matris  with  the  leader 
,of  the  Gaiias  (Garies'a^  should  be  adored  with  care. 
Thev,  being  adored,  make  [the  performer]  wortfiy  of 
adoration.  (13) 

Having  drawn  figures  on  white  images,  canvas  and 
'dried  paddy,  [they  should  be  adored]  with  separate 
•fifaivcdyfts  (articles,  of  worship^.  (14) 

With  clarified  butter,  one  should  make  seven   or  five 


SaihhitA.  361 

currents  on  the  Avail,  neither  very  low  nor  very  high, 
as  Vasudhdrds.  (15) 

Then,  being  self-controlled,  having  recited  there 
\ongevity~giving-Mantrants,  for  the  purpose  of  Sydnti 
(peaceful  completion  of  the  rite),  one  should  reverentially 
undertake  a  S'rdddha  for  six  departed  Manes.  (16) 

Without  offering  oblations  to  the  departed  Manes 
at  a  S"1  raddha,  one  should  not  perform  a  Vedic  rite  ; 
even  there  the  Mdtris  should  be  adored  first  with 
care.  (17) 

The  full  complement  of  regulations,  spoken  of  by 
Vasishtha,  should  be  observed  here  without  fish  or  meat, 
I  shall,  hereafter,  describe  what  difference  is  there. 


CHAPTER  II. 

HAVING  made  an  even  number  of  Brahman^s,  invited 
in  the  morning,  to  take  their  seats  on  both  the  sides, 
one  should,  with  an  evenly  extended  palm,  offer  them 
Kus'd.  (i) 

The  Kus  as  for  a  sacrifice  should  be  of  a  green- 
colour  ;  those  for  Pakayajna,  yellow  ;  those  for  Pitris 
should  be  with  roots  ;  and  those  for  Vis'wadevds  should 
be  of  a  variegated  colour.  (2) 

Green  Kus' as,  with  leaves,  dried,  plain,  shorn  of  any 
defect  and  of  the  measure  of  a  cubit  (i.e.,  the  distance 
From  the  elbow  to  the  end  of  the  closed  fist),  should 
>e  spread  [with  the  Pitri-Tirtha.}  (3) 

When  the  Kus'ds,  that  are  spread  for  offering  funeral 
:akes,  and  those  [spread]  for  offering  water,  are  held 
rhile  passing  urine  or  excreta,  they  should  be  thrown 
iway  :  so  it  is  laid  down  [in  the  Smriti].  (4) 


362  Kdty&yana  Sathhit-A. 

While  performing  a  rite   for  the  Deities,  one  should 
always  lay  down   the  right  knee    [on  the  ground] ;  and 
one    should    lay  down  the  left  knee,  while  performing  a 
rite  for  the  departed  Manes.  (5) 

The  right  knee  should  never  be  laid  low  [in  a 
Vriddhi  S'rdddha]  ;  in  it,  one  should  always  serve  the 
Pitris  reverentially  like  unto  the  Divinities.  (6) 

Having  made  them  (i.e.,  the  Brahmanas)  sit  on  the 
Kus'd  offered  to  the  Pitris,  according  to  the  following 
regulation,  and  having  recited  their  family  and  name,  one 
should  offer  Arghya  to  the  deceased  ancestors,  (7) 

In  it,  no  Apasavya  [going  round  a  person,  so  as  to 
keep  the  right  side  towards  him]  should  be  done  ;  no 
Pitri-Tirtha  is  wished-for  ;  the  filling  up  of  the  vessels 
should  be  made  with  the  Daiva-Tirtha  (water).  (8) 

Having  made,  [amongst]  all  the  pairs  [of  Brahmanas,] 
the  younger  place  his  hand  on  that  of  the  elder,  and 
their  Pavitras  being  placed  in  the  foreparts  of  their 
palms,  Arghya  should  be  given  ;  in  it,  [the  Arghya] 
should  not  be  given  separately.  (9) 

A  Pavitra,  in  each  and  every  place,  should  be  made 
of  Kus'A-rceds,  having  tips  and  two  rows  of  leaves  and 
no  leaves  in  the  middle  part,  and  should  be  of  the  siz.e 
of  the  span  of  the  thumb  and  the  forefinger,  do) 

This  is  the  mark  described  of  Pinjali ;  this  is  also 
necessary  for  cleaning  clarified  butter,  (xi) 

Some  say  that  a  Kus 'a-Pinjali  should  be  made  of 
dried  or  withered  blossoms  or  of  fresh  raw-blossoms.  (12) 

The  recitation  of  the  Pitri-Mantram,  the  touching 
of  the  heart,  the  seeing  of  degraded  persons,  passing 
wind,  excessive  laughter,  speaking  an  untruth,  the 
touching  of  a  cat  or  of  a  mouse,  speaking  harshly  and 
the  rise  of  anger, — -any  of  these  portends  taking  place 


performing   a   religious   rite,    one    should   touch 
Water.  (13—14) 


CHAPTER  III. 

To  perform  no  rite,  to  do  that  which  is  enjoined  for* 
another  branch,  and  thirdly  to  perform  improper  rites, 
are  the  three  classes  of  Akriyds  (interdicted  acts),, 
mentioned  by  the  learned,  for  those  who  perform  religious 
rites,  (i) 

Fruitless  becomes  the  operation  of  that  stupid  wigbt^ 
who,  renouncing  the  protection  of  his  own  branch,  wishes 
to  follow  that  of  another.  (2) 

That  which  has  not  been  mentioned  in  one's  own- 
branch  [of  the  Veda^\  but  what  has  been  mentioned  in 
another  branch,  as  not  colliding  [with  one's  own 
regulation],  should  be  performed  by  the  learned  like 
Agnihotra  and  other  rites.  (3) 

If  a  person,  after  being  engaged  in  a  religious  rite, 
commits  an  improper  act  out  of  ignorance,  he  should 
thereupon  complete  the  same,  beginning  from  the  part 
where  the  irregularity  has  taken  place.  (4) 

If  he  happens  to  know  after  the  completion  [of  a 
rite]  that  an  irregularity  has  been  committed  by  him,  he 
should  perform  it  again  \  no  re-performance  of  all  the 
rites  [is  allowed].  (5) 

When  any  irregularity  takes  place  in  a  prominent 
religious  rite,  it  should  again  be  performed  with  all-  its1 
parts ;  but  if  any  irregularity  takes  place  in  any  of  its1 

parts,  neither   it   nor  the   [principal]  rite  should  be  per- 

formed  again.  (6) 


364  Rdtyayana  Sam  kit  a. 

[In  a  Pdrvana-S'rdddha],  the  recitation  of  the 
Madhuvata-Mantram  thrice  after  the  Gayatri  is  laid 
down  for  those  who  wish  to  feed  [the  Brdhmanas]  • 
but  [the  Abhyudayika-Syraddhd\  is  divorced  from  the 
Madhu-Mantram.  (71 

In  it,  one  should  never  recite  a  Mantram  describing 
the  greatness  of  the  Pitris ;  but  the  recitation  of  any 
other  auspicious  Sortta-^  Sdma->  Mantram  should  not  be 
omitted.  (8) 

[In  a  Pdrvana-S'rdddhct)  the  Brahmanas]  being  grati- 
fied [with  food],  boiled  rice,  near  the  residue,  should  be 
scattered  like  sesame  or  barley  ;  [in  an  A }  bhyudayika^\ 
the  opposite  procedure  should  be  adopted,  (9) 

[In  an  A'bhyudayika,~]  the  question, — "Susam- 
pannam"  (is  it  well-done  ?),  should  be  put  instead  of, — • 
14  Triptdh  stha  "  (are  you  gratified  ?)  ;  when  they  say 
that  "  it  is  well-done,"  one  should  dedicate  the  last 
portion  of  the  food,  (io) 

Having  invoked  [the  spirit  of  one's  father]  at  the 
base  of  the  Kus'd-reeds  having  their  tops  directed 
towards  the  east,  one  should  pour  water  from  the  vessel 
at  the  root  with  the  Mantram, — "Avantinikshva"  (ii; 

At  the  middle  and  the  topmost  parts,  [one  should 
invoke]  the  second  and  the  third  [degrees  of  Manes,  i.e., 
one's  grandfather,  and  great-grandfather] ;  on  the  left 
side,  [one  should  invoke]  [the  three  grades  of  departed 
Manes,]  such  as,  the  maternal  grandfather,  etc.  (12) 

Having  taken  up  the  boiled  rice  from  all  [the  collec- 
tions] ;  mixed  it  with  curry,  barley,  jujube  and  curd ; 
been  seated  facing  the  east ;  and  offered  funeral  cakes 
of  the  size  of  ^/-fruits,  like  unto  the  offering  of  water  ;— • 
one  should  again  sprinkle  the  Dar&Ad-grass  with  the 
water,  washing  the  vessel.  (13—14) 


Ratyayana.  Saihhitd. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Ifl  a  5V0dV//?0-operation,  gradual  [advancement  of  the 
-giver  is  effected]  by  the  gradual  offering  of  funeral 
-cakes  [from  bottom  upwards]  ;  and  gradual  degradation 
(is  effected  by  offering  the  same]  at  the  top  down- 
wards, (i) 

Therefore  in  all  the  S'rdddhas,  principal  and  minor, 
one  should  offer  small  Pindas  at  the  bottom,  middle, 
•and  the  top  [of  the  A^£'«-reeds].  (2) 

Then  one  should  dedicate  scents  and  other  [articles] 
silently  and  then  make  the  twice-born  persons  perform  the 
A'chamanam  ;  in  other  places,  (i.e.,  in  other  S'rdddfras) 
this  procedure,  without  barley,  should  be  observed.  (3) 

[Funeral  cakes  should  be  offered]  in  a  Lowland,  in 
the  south ;  [the  offerer  should  sit]  facing  the  south ; 
the  Darbka-gr&ss  [should  be  scattered]  with  their  tops 
directed  towards  the  south ;  this  is  the  regulation  iu 
other  [S'rfyldhas].  (4). 

[With  the  Mantram~\  "  Suprokshitamastu.  "  (it 
is  sprinkled  well),  one  should  sprinkle  with  water  the 
ground  lying  before  [the  Brahmanas] ;  [with  the 
Mantram, — ]"  S'ivd  A'pah  santu  "  (may  water  become 
Auspicious),  one  should  poar  water  into  the  hands  of  a 
couple  [of  Brahmanas].  (5) 

[With  the  Mantram, — ]  "  Soumanasyamastu"  (be  of 
delighted  mind),  one  should,  hereafter,  offer  flowers ; 
and  with, — "  Akshatanchdrishtafichdstu  ".  (may  fried 
paddy  remove  ills),  one  should  offer  fried  paddy.  (6) 

Akshayyodakadan  (gift  of  inexhaustible  water)  should 
be  made  like  that  of  Arghya  ;  one  should  daily  do  it 
with  the  sixth  inflection,  and  never  with  the  fourth.  (7) 

In  [the  offering  of]  Arghya,  of  inexhaustible  water, 
<of  Pinda,  in  sprinkling  water  on  the  Darbha-gii&s  at  a 
47 


366  K&tydyana  Saihhit>d. 


,  and  in  reciting  the  Swa-dhd  [at  the 
termination  of  the  rite],  no  regular  order  needs  be 
maintained.  (8) 

Replies  being  given  by  the  leading  twice-born  in 
all  the  prayers,  one,  reciting  the  Mantram^  for  placing 
a  vessel  on  the  back  with  the  face  upwards,  (i.e.,  "Urjjam 
Vahantih")  should  sprinkle  water  on  the  Pindas  strewn 
with  Pavitra.  (9) 

Then  the  pairs  of  Brahmanas  should  be  made  to 
recite  "  Swasti"  (peace  be  unto  you)*  Then  joining  the 
tops  of  both  the  thumbs  and  saluting  the  Vipra  standing 
at  the  head,  one  should  then  follow  him.  (10) 

The  entire  course  of  S*  rdddha-rules  has  thus  been 
briefly  described  by  me  ;  they  who  know  them  never 
make  mistakes  in  S'rdddha-rites.  (n) 

He,  who  knows  the  sum-total  of  this,  mysterious- 
science  told  by  Vas'ishtha,  knows  the  S'  rdddha-\*\\\zs\ 
and  not  any  one  else.  (12) 


CHAPTER   V. 

IN  all  those  rites,  which,  once  commenced,  are  to  be 
performed  respectfully,  the  adoration  of  the  Mdtris  ano! 
the  celebration  of  the  (A' bhyudayika-j  S*  r&ddha  should 
not  be  done,  on  every  occasion,  by  the  performer  of 
the  rite,  (i) 

In  depositing  the  Sacred  Fire,  in  the  two  Homas 
(morning  and  evening),  in  the  Vais'wadeva-fedoratiott] 
in  the  Fiz/z-rite,  in  a  half-monthly  sacrifice,  in  that  per- 
formed on  the  Full-Moon  day,  and  in  a  new  sacrifice, 
the  learned  sages,  informed  of  rituals  relating  to  sacri- 
fices, hold,  that  one  S'raddha  should  be  performed  aad 
wot  separately.  (2 — 3} 


Katyayana  SafahitA. 

In  an  Ashtaka-(Homa),  in  a  S'rdddha  [for  the 
departed  Manes],  in  a  Soshyanti-(Homa),  in  Jdtakarma 
(a  ceremony  consequent  on  a  birth),  and  in  a  rite  to 
be  performed  on  the  return  of  a  person  from  a  foreign 
country,  no  \A*  bhyudayika-]S*  rdddha  should  be  per- 
formed. (4) 

In  all  the  rites  beginning  with  the  marriage  and 
ending  with  the  Garbhadhana}  which  we  have  heard  of, 
it  is  only  in  a  marriage  that  one  should  perform  this 
S^raddha  and  not  at  the  beginning  of  every  rite.  (5) 

For  Nishkramana  (the  rite  of  bringing  out  a  child  to 
the  public  in  the  fourth  month),  and  for  that  of  entering 
into  a  house,  there  is  one  S'raddha  in  the  night-fall. 
In  a  religious  ceremony,  performed  for  the  attainment 
of  religious  prosperity,  one  should  not  perform  a 
S'raddha  in  the  beginning.  (6) 

In  all  the  six  rites,  such  as  the  application  of  plough, 
etc.,  one  should  perform  [the  S*rdddha\  separately. 
And  at  the  recurrence  of  every  such,  one  should  perform 
one  [S'rdddha],  but  not  in  the  beginning.  (7) 

There  is  no  [performance  of]  S'rdddha  at  the  rites 
that  are  performed  for  the  well-being  of  big  animals 
at  the  appearance  of  a  solar  disc ;  and  for  that  of 
smaller  animals  at  the  appearance  of  a  lunar  disc.  (8) 

It  should  not  be  performed  in  the  end  in  rites  for 
the  crooked  positions  of  the  planets ;  and  in  rites 
like  [the  administration  of]  poison  for  being  bitten  [by 
a  snake]  and  in  the  treatment  of  worm-bite.  (9) 

While  performing  a  number  of  rites,  the  Mdtrts 
should  be  adored  once,  and  a  S'raddha  should  be  per- 
formed once  at  the  beginning  and  not  separately  in  [all 
the  rites].  (lo) 


K at y ay  ana  SarhMftf, 

Whenever  a  S'raddha  takes  place,  there  the  Jffd 
[should  be  adored].  This  has  been  spoken  of  [by  me]  as* 
a.  side-issue.     The  main  point  I  would  [new  proceed  toj 
describe  truthfully.   (IP) 


CHAPTER  VF. 

IF  the  eldest  brother  has  deposited  the  Sacred  Fire,  theo 
one  should  deposit  the  same  being  subject  to  the  time 
of  depositing  and  the  person  who  has  engendered  the 
Fire,  (i) 

He,  who  takes  a  wife  or  deposits  the  Sacred  Fire 
before  his  eldest  brother,  is  known  as  Parivf'ttd.  And 
the  brother,  born  before,  is  known  as  Parivitti.  (2) 

Both  the  Parivitti  and  Parivetta  go  to  hell.  Even 
if  they  have  performed  a  penance,  they  partake  of  the 
fruits  of  Pddona.  (3) 

If  superseding  [the  eldest  and  other]  brothers, — living 
in  foreign  countries,  having  no  generative  power,  having 
one  testes,  not  bom  of  the  same  mother,  addicted  to- 
public  women,  outcasted,  [and  those  who  are]  acting 
like  S'udras,  suffering  from  a  serious  disease,  innert, 
dumb,  blind,  deaf,  hunch-backed,  dwarf,  lepers,  greatly 
aged,  widowers,  given  to  agriculture,  servants  of  the 
king,  given  to  the  multiplication  of  wealth  and  doing 
whatever  they  like,  divorced  from  the  family,  insane 
and  thieves, — a  younger  brother  marries  or  deposits  the 
Sacred  Fire,  he  commits  no  sin.  (4 — 6) 

Even  when  hasty,  one  should,  wait,  at  least  for  three 
years,  [for  a  senior  brother,]  who  multiplies  his  wealth 
by  usury,  who  serves  the  king,  who  cultivates  the  land 
and  who  lives  in  a  foreign  country.  (7) 


Kdtydyane  S*riihi-t&.  369. 

When  one  hears  of  no  news  [of  a  senior  brother] 
living  in  a  foreign  country,  one  should  do  it  after  [waiting 
for]  a  year ;  if  he  returns  again,  [the  younger  brother] 
should  perform  a  part  of  a  penance  for  purification.  (8) 

In  a  Lakshmana-nte  (Le.,  a  rite  beginning  voitb 
Parisamuhana,)  i.e.,  sprinkling  water  round  the  Sacri- 
ficial Fire  to  Parishtka,  (i.e.,  pouring  water),  one  should 
draw  lines  with  Kus'd  [around  the  FireJ  leaving  off 
seven  fingers  [on  each  side]  [of  the  following  lines] : — 
twelve  fingers  form  the  measure  of  the  line  that  is 
directed  towards  the  east ;  the  measurement  of  another 
line  touching  its  base  and  running  towards  the  north,  is 
twenty-one  fingers ;  the  remaining  lines  attached  to 
the  one  running  towards  the  north,  are  of  the  measure- 
ment of  a  thumb.  (9 — 10) 

If  the  rite  of  measurement  and  the  person  to  do  it,  are 
not  mentioned,  the  sacrificer  should  make  the  measure- 
ment. This  is  the  conclusion  of  the  learned,  (n) 

One  should  deposit  the  Sacred  Fire,  and  it  is  highljr 
spoken  of  by  all.  Sacrificial  fuels  should  be  collected 
by  one  willingly  for  kindling  that  Fire.  (12) 

He,  to  whom  a  maiden  has  been  given  by  one  by 
words,  should  collect  the  last  sacrificial  fuels  for  deposit- 
ing the  Sacred  Fire  ;  otherwise  not.  (13) 

If  in  an  unmarried  state  that  maiden  dies,  he  should! 
not  be  guilty  of  the  breach  of  vow.  By  that  Fire,  he 
rn^ay  marry  another  maiden.  (14) 

If  after  soliciting,  he  does  not  get  a  maiden,  he  should 
consign  that  Fire  unto  himself  and  forthwith  adopt  the 
next  order.  (15) 


37®  Katyayana  SafahitL 

CHAPTER  VII. 

IT  is  said  that  A  rani*  and  the  Uttara-Arani  (i.e.,  the 
upper  part)  should  be  made  of  the  branches  spreading 
towards  the  east  or  north  or  upwards  of  an  As'wattha, 
grown  in  an  extensive  ground  and  having  a  5Jflw£-tree 
attached  to  its  root.  It  is  preferable  that  Chatra  and 
Ovilft  should  be  made  of  the  strongest  parts  of  the 
wood,  (i — 2) 

The  [tree,]  the  root  of  which  is  attached  to  a  S'ami, 
is  called  S'amigarbha  ;  in  the  absence  of  a  S'amigarbha, 
one  should  speedily  create  Fire  from  [one  which  is 
not  so].  (3) 

A  length  of  twenty-four  thumbs,  a  breadth  of  six 
thumbs,  and  a  height  of  four,  have  been  described  as  the 
size  of  the  Aranis.  (4) 

A  Pramantha  is  to  be  of  eight  fingers  [in  size]  ; 
a  Chair  am,  ten  fingers,  and  an  Ovili,  twelve  fingers. 
These  are  churning  instruments.  (5) 

Where  instruction  is  given  about  the  measurement  of 
the  thumb,  there  one  should  always  take  measurements 
with  its  bigger  knot.  (6) 

A  Netra  (the  string  of  a  churning  stick)  should  be 
made  with  three  circles  of  the  down  of  a  cow's  tail 
mixed  with  hemp  fibres  of  the  size  of  a  pure  Vyama 
(a  measure  of  length  equal  to  the  space  between  the 
tips  of  the  fingers  of  either  hand  when  the  arms  are 
extended)  ;  by  it,  the  Fire  should  be  churned.  (7) 

The  head,  the  eyes,  the  ears,  the  face,  and  the 
shoulders, — these  five  limbs  of  the  Arani  should  be  of 

*  A   piece  of  wood   of  the   S'awi-tree  used  for  kindling  the  Sacred 
Fire  by  attrition  ;  the  fire-producing  wooden  stick. 
f  Sacrificial  implements. 


Kdtydyana  SartihitA.  37  * 

the  size  of  a  thumb  each ;  the  breast  is  spoken  of  [aa 
measuring]  two  thumbs.  (8) 

The  chest  [is  to  measure]  one  thumb  ;  the  belly  is 
known  in  the  Smriti  [as  measuring]  three  thumbs  ;  the 
hip  is  known  [to  measure]  one  thumb  ;  the  abdomen, 
two  ;  and  the  anus,  two.  (9) 

The  two  thighs,  the  two  knee-joints,  and  the  two 
feet,  should  severally  measure  four,  three,  and  one  thumb. 
These  limbs  of  the  Arani  have  been  described  by  those 
conversant  with  the  rituals  of  a  sacrifice.  (10) 

What  is  spoken  of  as  the  Guhyam  (anus)  of  the 
Arani  is  called  the  Devayoni.  The  Fire,  that  is  generated 
here,  is  spoken  of  as  the  most  auspicious,  (n) 

Those  who  churn  the  Fire  elsewhere,  come  by  the 
fear  of  ailments.  This  is  the  regulation  in  the  first 

o 

churning,  and  not  in  the  subsequent  ones.  (12) 

The  Pramantha  (churning)  should  always  be  done 
with  the  upper  part  of  the  Arani.  He,  who  performs 
the  churning  by  any  other  method,  is  affected  by  the 
sin  of  being  born  in  a  mixed  caste.  (13) 

If  the  upper  part  of  the  Arani  be  wet,  has  holes, 
las  any  circular  part,  or  any  cleft,  it  does  no  good  unto 
the  sacrificer.  (14) 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

DULY  putting  on  a  new  cloth  and  a  sacrificial  thread, 
and  with  his  face  directed  towards  the  east,  one  should 
hold  the  Yantra  (sacrificial  implement),  (i) 

Having  firmly  fixed  the  top  of  the  churning  stick 
on  the  Chatra-Vridhna  and  placed  the  Arani  in  the 
north,  a  learned  man  should  place  on  it  the  Vridhna.  (2) 


K&ty'&yatoto 

He  should  then  place  the  Ovili,  fixed  "to  a 
attached  to  the  base  of  the  Chat r a  [on  the  Aretni\ 
turning  its  top  towards  the  north  ;  then  being  self- 
testrained  and  in  a  state  of  purity,  he  should,  hold  the" 
Yantra  with  all  his  strength,  so  that  it  may  not  move.  (3) 

His  wives,  putting  on  new  raiments,  should  put  three 
folds  of  string  around  the  Chatrarti  and  first  of  all, 
churn  the  Arani,  so  that  Fire  might  drop  in  the 
'east,  (4) 

The  rite  of  placing  the  Sacred  Fire  should  not  be 
performed  by  the  twice-born,  if  they  have  not  even  one 
wife  ;  all  the  rites,  that  are  done  [in  that  state],  know, 
as  being  not  done  at  all.  (5) 

Many  wives  of  the  same  caste  and  of  other  castes 
existing,  the  rite  of  churning,  for  producing  the  Fire, 
should  be  done  by  the  chaste  wives  of  the  same  caste, 
on  account  of  the  superiority  of  birth.  (6) 

Of  them,    one   very   capable,    or   any   one  of  them, 
[or,  in    her    absence,]    any    one    of  the  wedded    wives 
[belonging  to  other  castes],  should   carefully  churn  the 
Fire.  (7) 

In  it,  one  should  not  employ  a  S'lidra-wife,  or  one 
who  tries  to  injure  her  husband  or  is  jealous  of  him, 
or  one  who  does  not  perform  religious  observances,  or 
one  who  lives  with  other  men.  (8) 

Having  made  Lakshmana,  for  [the  Fire,]  born,  placed 
it,  lighted  it,  and  put  sacrificial  fuels  into  it,  he  should 
make  Brahma  seated.  (9) 

Then  offering  the  libation,  effecting  the  completion  of 
the  rite  with  all  the  Mantrams,  and  at  the  end  of  the 
sacrifice, — for  the  well-being  of  the  house,  [the  sacrificer] 
should  present  unto  a  Brahmana  two  pieces  of  raiment 
and  a  cow.  (10) 


Rdtyayfina  Sartihita.  373 

Where  there  is  no  instruction  about  the  //0#z0-vessel, 
Sruva  (sacrificial  ladle)  is  mentioned  in  the  Smriti 
fas  the  vessel  for  pouring]  liquid  substances  ;  in  minor 
rites,  the  palm  is  used  [as  the  vessel]  ;  with  Srucha  also, 
a  Homa  is  performed,  (n) 

It  is  said  in  the  Smriti  that  a  Sruva  should  be  made 
of  Khadira-,  or  Palds'a-,  wood  ;  and  be  of  the  size  of  two 
•vitasti  (a  measure  of  length,  equal  to  twelve  angulas 
or  fingers) ;  a  Srucha  should  be  of  the  length  of  an 
arm  ;  and  the  handle  should  be  round.  (12) 

The  forepart  of  a  Sruva  should  be  like  a  nese  ;  there 
should  be  two  holes  [on  the  two  sides]  of  the  circum- 
ference of  two  fingers  [each]  ;  the  hole  [in  the]  Sruva 
should  be  like  that  of  a  S'ard  (an  earthen  tray-like 
vessel)  ;  one  should  make  it  on  a  nirvd/ia-method  and 
six  fingers  deep.  (13) 

Their  cleaning  should  be  done  by  a  person,  wishing 
to  perform  Homa,  with  Kus'd-grzss,  facing  the  ea'st ; 
when  dipped  in  clarified  butter,  they  should  be  washed 
with  hot  water.  (14) 

[One  should  place  the  articles]  near  the  Fire  either  in 
the  east  side,  facing  the  east ;  or  in  the  north-side,  facing 
the  north  ;  he  should  collect  all  the  articles  which  should 
be  used  [in  the  HomaJ]  (15) 

When   no  article   for  offering  into  Fire  is  mentioned, 

;iarified  butter  is  sanctioned  for  the  Homa-rttzs  ;  [and 
hen  Mantram  or  Deity  is  not  mentioned,]  the  conclusion 
that  Prdjapatya-Mantram  (  Vydhriti),  and  Prajdpati 
should  be  recited,  and  adored].  (16) 
One  should  never  take  fuels  which  are  stouter  than 
le  thumb  ;  those  shorn  of  bark,  those  having  worms, 
nd  those  having  clefts,  [should  not  be  used],  (17) 

Those    measuring    mo*e     than    a    Prades'a,    those 
4* 


374  Katyayana  Sariihitd. 

measuring  less  than  a  Prddes'a,  those  having  branches, 
those  not  completely  made  (i.e.,  having  leaves),  and 
those  having  no  strength  (i.e.,  useless  ones),  should  never 
be  used  in  Homa  by  one  conversant  [with  rituals],  (18) 

The  measurement  of  a  sacrificial  fuel  is  described 
to  be  a  couple  of  Prades'a  (the  span  of  the  thumb  and 
the  forefinger)  ;  in  all  rites,  such  should  be  the  sacrificial 
fuels.  (19) 

The  learned  say  that  there  are  eighteen  kinds  of 
sacrificial  fuels,  but  in  the  Half-Monthly  S'rdddhas,  in 
that  performed  on  the  Full  Moon-Day,  and  in  other 
similar  rites,  twenty  fuels  [are  used].  (20) 

Before  and  after  a  Homa,  one  should,  without  [re- 
citing] a  Mantram  or  without  [naming]  a  Deity,  throw 
the  Samid  (a  kind  of  tree)  ;  for  it  grows  for  generating 
the  Fire.  (21) 

The  preceptors  have  recorded  in  the  Smriti  that 
the  sacrificial  fuels,  in  a  Homa  performed  with  clarified 
butter,  are  for  creating  the  Fire.  I  shall  now  clearly 
describe  where  this  should  not  be  done.  (22) 

It  is  laid  down  that  no  sacrificial  fuel  [should 
be  used]  in  the  rites  called  Angahoma,  Samittantra, 
[and]  Soskyanfi\  in  all  those  and  [other]  similar  rites 
where  no  such  mention  is  made  (such  as  the  Vais'wa- 
devar  etc.,)  ;  in  a  Homa  performed  for  averting  the 
calamity  of  breaking  a  limb  ;  in  a  Watery- //oratf  ;  and 
in  all  the  rites  where  oblations  of  Sama-],uice  [are 
offered].  (23 — 24) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

[!N  the  evening]  when  the  Sun  is  at  a  distance  of  thirty- 
six  fingers  before    reaching  the  Setting  Hill  and  [in  the 


K city  ay  an  a  SaihhttA.  375 

morning]  after  seeing  the  solar  rays,  one  should  generate 
the  Sacred  Fire,  (i) 

The  //0/tftf-regulation  of  those  who  wish  to  perform 
Homa  at  the  rising  of  the  Sun,  does  not  become  pro- 
fane till  the  Sun  does  not  rise  a  hand  above  the  Rising 
Hill.  (2) 

As  long  as  the  Stars  are  not  completely  visible  in 
the  sky  and  the  crimson  rays  do  not  disappear  [from 
the  firmament],  one  may  perform  the  Evemng-ffo/na.  (3) 

When  the  Sun  disappears  under  dust,  snow,  or 
clouds,  or  behind  a  tree,  one  may  offer  oblations  to  the 
Sandhya ;  one's  religious  observance  would  not  be 
stopped  thereby.  (4) 

In  Kshipra-Homa,  a  twice-born  person  should 
neither  perform  the  Parisamuhanam  (sprinkling  water 
around  the  Sacrificial  Fire\  nor  should  he  recite  the 
Virupdksha-Mantram  ;  he  should  also  avoid  the 
Prapada  (the  M ant  ram  beginning  with  Tapas'cha, 
Tejas'cha,  etc.).  (5) 

In  every  rite,  one  should  perform  the  Paryyukshanam 
(sprinkling  water)  with  [the  Mantram^ — ]  Aait&hnviti 
and  sing  the  Vdmadevya  thrice,  at  the  end.  (6) 

The   seeing    of  the    Moon,    as    mentioned,  should  be 

done    in    rites    where    no  Homa  is  to  be  performed  ;  the 

V amadevya    should  be  sung  in  the  end  [when]  a  number 

>f  rites    [is  performed  in  a  day].     The    Vaiswadeva-nte 

>hould  take  place]  after  the    K^//-rite.  (7) 

In  those  rites  in  which  [A^^-reeds]  are  [already] 
scattered  on  the  ground  at  the  end,  no  [more]  scatter- 
ing should  take  place.  For  successfully  performing 
me  rite,  one  should  leave  off  the  circumference.  (8) 

In    all    oblations   in  sacrifice,  not  one  of  these  three, 
•spreading  the  Kus}d  outside,   sprinkling  water  into  the 


37$  Katyayana  S*mkM. 

Sacrificial  Fire>  the  recitation  of  the  Vdmadevya,  should 
be  done.  (9) 

It  is  said  in  the  Smriti  that  in  the  matter  of  Hamshya 
(vegetable  diet),  barley  is  superior ;  and  next  to  it,  is  the 
Vrihi  (a  kind  of  corn)  ;  one  must  avoid  the  Mdsha 
(corn),  the  Kodraua  (corn),  and  the  white  sesame,, 
even  if  nothing  is  available.  (10) 

When  any  oblation  is  offered  with  a  hand,  the  twelve 
knots  should  be  rilled;  when  by  a  belmetal  vessel,  the 
Sruva  should  be  filled  [with  offerings]  ;  clarified  butter 
should  be  offered  with  the  Daiva-Tirtha  into  the  Fire- 
having  embers  and  flames,  (u) 

A  man,  who  throws  offerings  into  a  Fire  that  has 
no  embers  or  flames,  becomes  of  weaV  digestion,  suffers 
from  dysentry  and  is  born  as  a  poor  man.  (12) 

He,  who  seeks  freedom  from  diseases,  long  life  and 
great  prosperity,  should  perform  Hcma  with  a  Fire 
set  with  sacH  icial  fuels,  and  never  with  that  into  which 
no  sacrificial  fu;  Is  have  been  given,  (ij) 

When  pre-  ared  to  offer  oblations,  one  should  not 
kindle  trie  Fire  with  the  Hasta,  S'urpa,  or  the  Vajra 
(sacrificial  implement),  or  with  wood  ;  he  may  do  it  by  a, 
fan.  (14) 

The  Fire  is  to  be  kindled  by  [the  air  of]  the  mouth, 
for  it  originates  from  the  Mantram  uttered  by  the 
mouth  ;  that  Fire  should  not  be  kindled  by  the  mouth 
[is  an  injunction]  applied  to  the  Z.0#/£z/£#-(  ordinary) 
Fire.  (15) 


CHAPTER   X. 

IF  not  suffering  from  any  disease,  one  should  daily,  after 
washing  the  teeth,  bathe  in   the   morning,   in  rivers,  etc.,, 


KAtyayana  Saihhitd.  377 

as   in    the    day-time  ;    when    bathing   in   the  house,  one 
should  recite  the  Mantram.  (i) 

The  wood  for  cleaning  the  teeth,  as  spoken  of  by 
Na"rada  and  others,  should  be  cut  measuring  eight  fingers 
and  contain  bark.  With  its  tip,  one  should  rub  the 
teeth.  (2) 

Rising  up,  washing  the  eyes,  becoming  pure  and  self- 
restrained  and  reciting  the  Mantram,  one  should  rub 
the  teeth  with  a  wood.  (3) 

[The  Mantram  is  : — ]"O  tree,  give  us  long  life, 
strength,  fame,  energy,  children,  cattle,  wealth,  know- 
ledge of  the  Vedcls,  discriminative  knowledge  and 
genius."  (4) 

In  two  months,  beginning  with  S'ravana}  all  the  rivers 
get  their  menstrual  courses.  [No  one]  should  bathe  in 
them,  excluding  the  rivers  which  go  to  an  ocean.  (5) 

[The  watery  expanses,]  the  courses  of  which  da 
not  go  beyond  eight  Kros'as  (16  miles),  are  not  worthy 
of  the  name  of  a  river  :  they  are  described  as  pools.  (6) 

[In  offering  water]  in  an  Upakarman  (a  ceremony 
performed  before  commencing  to  read  the  Vedas  after 
the  monsoon),  in  a  rite  of  dedication,  in  a  bathing  after 
a  death  and  at  the  solar  or  lunar  eclipse,  the  Rajah- 
(or  menstruation-)  impurity  exists  no  longer.  (7) 

When  the  Brahmavadins  go  out  for  bathing  in  an 
Upakarman,  or  in  a  dedication  rite,  all  the  Vedas,  the 
Chhandas,  the  Celestials  headed  by  Brahma,  the  departed 
Manes,  Marichi  and  other  /?ishis,  gratified  and  seeking 
water,  follow  them  in  their  bodily  forms.  (8—9) 

Where  these  all  appear,  the  sins  of  murder,  etc.,  are, 
forsooth,  dissipated  what  to  speak  of  the  impurity  of 
a  river  ?  (10) 

When  the  ^?ishis  bathe  and  when  a  person,  situate  in 


378  Kdtyayana  Samhita. 

their  midst,  has  his  body  sprinkled  with  [their]  scattering 
drops  of  water,  [if  he  be]  a  Brahmana,  he  comes  by 
learning  and  other  desired-for  objects  ;  [and  if]  a  maiden, 
she  comes  by  a  becoming  bridegroom  ;  and  he,  forsooth, 
attains  to  well-being  in  the  next  world,  (n  — 12) 

The  Anirddas'd'ha*  departed  Manes,  who  are  of  the 
form  of  Rakshasas,  eat  all  the  impure  offerings, 
water,  etc.,  presented  in  a  raw  earthen  vessel  by  a 
person  in  a  state  of  impurity.  (13) 

During  solar  and  lunar  eclipses  all  the  waters,  that 
exist  on  earth  and  even  that  in  a  well,  become  like  that 
of  the  Ganges.  (14) 


CHAPTER  XI. 

HEREAFTER  I  shall  describe  the  regulations  relating  to 
the  S a  nd/iy  a -adorations,  since  it  is  mentioned  in  the 
Smriti}  that  a  Vipra,  who  does  not  perform  the  Sandhyd, 
is  not  entitled  to  perform  a  religious  rite,  (i) 

Having  taken  up  Kus'd-reeds  in  the  left-hand,  one 
should  perform  the  rite  of  A'chamanam;  short  Kus' as 
are  the  most  distinguished,  while  offering  invocation  ; 
and  the  long  ones  shall  form  the  bed  or  layer.  (2) 

The  Darbhas  are  spoken  of  as  being  holy  ;  therefore, 
in  a  Sandhyd-rite  the  left-hand  should  be  made  to  hold 
them,  and  the  right  one  should  hold  the  Pavitra  (two 
blades  of  A^'^-grass  used  at  sacrifices  in  purifying 
and  sprinkling  the  ghee}.  (3) 

One  should  protect  one's  own  self  by  sprinkling  water 

»  The  departed  Manes,  within  ten  days  from  the   day   of    death,   are 
called  Anirddas" aha  Pretas, 


Kdtydyana  Samhitd.  379 

on  all  sides,  and  sprinkle    one's   own    head  by  drops   of 
water  with  the  Kus\i.   (4) 

The  Pranava,  Bhurbhuvah,  Swah  Gdyatri  [forming 
the  third],  the  three  Mantrams,— "A  'pohishta,  etc.," 
[forming]  the  fourth,  [are  the  Mantrams']  for  the 
Mdrjanam  (sprinkling  the  head  with  water).  (.51 

The  three  eternal  M  ahdvydhritis,  Bhuh,  etc.,  Mahah, 
Janah,  Tapah,  Satya,  the  Gayatri,  A.pojyotirasomritarii, 
Brahma  Bhiirbhuvah  Swah,  [forming]  the  first  part 
of  the  Gayatri — at  the  beginning  of  all  these  Mantrams 
and  at  the  end  of  the  first  part  of  the  Gdyatri,  one 
should  recite  the  Pranava.  (6 — 7) 

Having  restrained  the  vital  airs,  one  should  recite 
thrice  these  ten  and  seven  Vydhritis,  Gayatri,  Gayatri' 
S'irah  (first  part)  and  the  Pranava.  This  process  is 
called  the  Prdndydma.  (8) 

"  Taking  water  in  his  palm,  putting  the  nose  into  it, 
and  suppressing  the  breath  or  not,  one  should  recite 
once  or  thrice  the  Aghamarshana-Siikta.  19) 

Standing  up,  one  should  throw  water  with  joined 
palms  towards  the  Sun,  [reciting]  the  three  Mantrams 
(Pranava,  three  Vydhritis  and  the  Gayatri) ;  then 
with  the  two  Rz^- Mantrams, — u  Udutyarh,"  and 
"  Chitram  Devdndm,  etc.,  one  should  perform  the  rite  of 
Suryopasthanam  (appearance  of  the  Sun).  (10) 

The  sages  say  that  Suryopasthanam  should  be  per- 
formed at  the  two  Sandhyd- adorations  ;  if  one  wishes 
to  do  it  during  the  noon,  one  should  recite,  in  addition 
to  it,  the  Mantram, — "  Vibhrdt"  (u) 

With  the  heels  not  touching  the  heels,  or  with  one 
foot  touching  the  earth,  or  with  that  foot  up-raised,  or 
with  joined  palms,  or  with  up-raised  arms, — one  should 
perform  this  rite.  (12) 


3§o  Katyayana  Saihhita. 

In  whatever  part  there  is  greater  distress  and  troubled, 
there  is  greater  well-being  ;  so  say  the  learned  for,  well* 
being  proceeds  from  hardship.  (13) 

According  to  one's  own  might,  one  should  perform 
the  first  Sandhya  before  the  rising  of  the  Sun  ;  the 
middle  one,  in  the  noon  ;  and  the  third,  in  the  evening, 
before  the  Stars  become  visible  ;  but  at  every  Sandhydt 
one  should  recite  the  three  'Riks  (Pranava}  the  three 
Vyahritis  and  the  Gdyatri}.  (14) 

This  is  spoken  of  as  the  threefold  Sandhya^  wherein 
exists  the  dignity  of  a  Brahmana.  He  is  not  called  a 
Brahmana  who  has  no  reverence  for  it.  (15) 

As  serpe-nts  cannot  approach  Garuda,  so  imperfection 
cannot  approach  him  who  fears  the  non-performance 
of  the  Sandhya  and  who  is  always  given  to  bathing.  (16) 

According  to  one's  own  might,  one  should,  from  the 
very  beginning,  recite  the  Veda-(Mantrams)  daily.  If 
one  cannot  recite  all  the  Vedic  Mantrams,  one  should 
invoke  the  presence  of  Rudra  in  the  end.  (17) 


CHAPTER    XII. 

THEREUPON  reciting  in  the  beginning  "OM"  and  "Tar- 
pay  Ami  Namah"  (I  offer  oblation),  one  should,  with  water 
and  sesame,  offer  oblations  to  the  Deities  and  the 
departed  Manes,  (i) 

Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra,  Prajapati,  the  Vedas,  the 
Divinities,  the  Chhandas,  the  7?ishis,  the  Ancient  Pre- 
ceptors, the  Gandharvas,  the  other  tribes  inferior  to  the 
Gandharvcis,  the  incarnate  months  and  years,  the  female 
Divinities,  the  group  of  Apsaras,  the  followers  of  the 
Divinities,  the  Nagas,  the  Oceans,  the  Mountains,  the 


Rivers,  Deified  men,  other  men,  Yakshas,  the  Rakshasas, 

the    Supernas    (the    feathery   tribes),  the    Pis'achas,  the 

'earth,  herbs,  animals,  trees,  the  four  troups   of  spirits,— 

unto    these, — one   should  offer  oblations  being   invested 

with  the  sacred  thread.     Yama,  the  emissaries  of  Yama, 

the   Fire,  the  bearers    of    sacrificial    offerings,      Soma, 

Yama,    Aryyama,     Agnishwatta,     Somapa    and    Varhi- 

shadas, — these    Pitris,   unto  each  of  them, —  one  should 

bffer  water  every  time.     The  three  degrees  of  ancestors, 

on   the  paternal  side— the    three    degrees    of  ancestors 

on  the  maternal  side,  unto  each  of  these  ancestors, — one 

should   offer   water  thrice.     Unto  the  eldest  brother,  the 

father-in-law,    the   paternal    uncle,    the    maternal  uncle, 

and   unto    others   of  the    parental    families,   one  should 

'offer  handfuls  of  water,  saying, — ll  I  gratify,  with  this  last 

handful  of  water,  all  those  who  are  desirous  of  receiving 

water  from  me."     The  S'lokas  [relating  to  this    rite   are 

mentioned]   below.  (2) 

As  one,  stricken  by  the  solar  rays  in  autumn,  wishes 
for  a  shade ;  as  one  thirsty,  for  water  ;  as  one  hungry, 
for  food ;  as  a  child,  for  the  mother,  and  a  mother,  for 
the  child ;  as  a  woman,  for  a  man,  and  a  man  for  a 
woman  ; — so  all  elemental  creations,  movable  and  im- 
movable, desire  for  water  from  a  Vipra  ; — for  he  does 
good  unto  all.  (3 — 4) 

Therefore,  he  should  every  day  offer  watery  oblations ; 
"by  not  doing  so,  he  is  visited  with  a  great  sin  ;  and  by 
doing  it,  he  maintains  the  entire  universe.  (5) 

For  the  shortness  of  the  time  for  Homa  and  for  the 
complexity  of  the  rite  of  bathing,  one  should  not  take 
a  prolonged  bath  in  the  morning;  the  non-performance 
of  Homa  is  a  censurable  [act.]  (6) 


382  katyayana  Savhhitt. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

THE  regulation  of  the  Five  great  Sacrifices  is  spoken  6^ 
the  constant  performance  of  which  enables  a  Vipra  to 
attain  to  eternal  residence,  (i) 

One  should  know,  as  great  Sacrifices,  those  that  are 
performed  successively  for  the  Deities,  the  Spirits,  the' 
departed  Manes,  for  Brahma  and  for  mankind.  (2) 

To  deliver  religious  instructions,  is  the  Brahmayajna  ; 
to  offer  watery  oblations,  is  the  Pitriyajna ;  to  offer  obla- 
tions of  clarified  butter  to  the  Fire,  is  the  De-vayajna  ;  to 
offer  Valis  (offerings))  is  the  Bhutayajna ;  an4  to  treat 
guests,  is  the  Nriyajna.  (3) 

A  S'rdddha  or  the  offering  of  Vdlh  to  the  Pitrisi 
is  [also  called]  Pitriyajna  ;  what  is  called  the  recita-* 
tion  of  the  S'ruti,  is  also  designated  as  Brahma- 
yajna. (4) 

This  (*>.,  the  Brahmayajna  in  the  shape  of  the! 
rccitatation  of  the  S'ruti?)  should  be  performed  after  the 
Tar  pan  am  (the  offerings  of  water)  ;  the  next  (/.*.,  the 
Brahmayajna  in  the  form  of  delivering  religious  instruc- 
tions,) should  be  performed  after  the  Morning- Homa  ;  and 
[that  in  the  shape  of  singing  the  Vdmadevya  should  be 
performed]  at  the  termination  of  the  Vaias'itfadeva-nte  ; 
[it  should  not  be  performed]  at  any  other  time  except 
at  these  three  [periods].  (5) 

If  there  is  no  other  eater  or  [sufficient]  eatable, 
one,  for  the  attainment  of  success  in  a  Pttriyajna^ 
should  feed  at  least  one  Brahmana.  There  is  no  Daiva- 
paksha  (divine  fortnight)  in  it.  (6) 

Taking  up  a  little  quantity  of  boiled  rice,  a  twice- 
born  person  should,  every  day,  according  to  his  might 
and  with  d-ie  order,  offer  it  unto  the  departed  Manes  and 
burrian  beings.  (7) 


Kdtyayana  SaihhitH. 

said, — "  Pitribhya  idam"  (i.e.,  this  is  for  the 
departed  Manes),  he  should  recite  "  Swadhd "  [there- 
after] ;  saying, — "  Manushyebhya  idam "  (i.e.,  this  is 
for  men),  he  should  recite  "  Hanta"  And  he  should 
accordingly  offer  water.  (8) 

Two  meals  a  day  have  been  prescribed  by  the  Sages 
for  the  Brahmanas  living  on  this  mortal  earth  ;  one  is  in 
the  day  time,  and  the  other  in  the  night  within  a 
Prhara  (a  period  roughly  reckoned  at  three  hours) 
and  a  half.  (9) 

Even  when  fasting,  one  should  daily  perform  the 
Vais'wadeva  and  the  F0/z-rites,  both  in  the  evening  and 
morning;  otherwise,  he  will  be  affected  by  sin.  (10) 

"  Amuskmai  Namah"  (salutation  unto  such  a  person) 
—•such  is  the  regulation  laid  down  for  the  F#/z-offerings  ; 
since  for  offering  a  Vali}  one  should  only  make  a  saluta- 
tion, (n) 

"SwdM,"  "  Vashat"  and  "Namah,"—  [these  three] 
are  for  the  Celestials ;  "  Swadha "  is  for  the  departed 
Manes  ;  and  "  Hanta"  is  for  mankind.  (12) 

Therefore  one  should  daily  make  offerings  to  the 
Pittis  by  reciting  "  Swadhd"  Some  say  the  word 
"  Namah  "  may  be  added  to  it.  But  Goutama  [says],— 
"not  so."  (13) 

If  the  Valis  are  kept  in  one  place  in  a  compact 
form  attached  to  each  other,  they  do  "not  become  sullied 
even  when  touched  by  a  huge  cat ;  such  is  from  the 
evidence  of  the  S'ruti.  (14) 


384  Katyoyana  SartJtitS. 

CHAPTER    XIV. 

Now  about  the  placing  of  Valis  (offerings  of  food), 
Like  funeral  cakes  in  a  Vriddhi  S'raddha,  one  should* 
place,  one  after  another,  four  Valis  for  the  earth,  the 
air,  the  Vis'vvadevas  and  the  Prajapati ;  on  their  left  side,, 
those  for  water,  herbs,  trees,  sky  and  Kama  (desire) 
[should  be  placed] ;  on  their  left,  those  for  men,  Indra, 
Vasuki  and  Brahma  ;  on  the  right  side  of  all  those,  for 
the  Pitris  [should  be  placed! .  These  fourteen  [should  be 
placed]  every  day.  There  are  Kdmya-  Va  ris,  such  as, 
the  A'sasya^  etc.  Both  the  sides  of  all  should  be  sprink- 
led with  water.  The  residue  should  be  known  as  a 
Pinda.  (i) 

The  Homa-,  and  Vali-,  rites  are  not  the  ordinary 
Kdmyas  (i.e.,  rites  performed  with  a  particular  end).  It 
is  specially  said  that  the  daily  Homa-^  and  Vali-,  rites 
should  be  performed  first.  (2) 

They  may  be  performed  after  the  Kdmya-rite^,  but 
never  in  the  middle;  for  another  rite  must  not  be  under- 
taken, while  one  is  being  performed.  (3) 

Homa  for  the  Fire  and  others,  that  spoken  of  by 
Goutama,  S ' akala-Homa  with  Vali  rites,  are  for  him* 
who  has  deposited  the  Sacred  Fire.  (4) 

Touching  water,  looking  at  the  Sun  and  with  joined 
palms,  one,  before  the  recitation  of  the  Vdmadedya, 
should  pray  for  the  multiplication  of  wealth,  freedom 
from  disease,  longevity,  lordly  powers  •intellect,  patience, 
auspiciousness,  courage,  energy,  cattle,  strength,  the- 
knowledge  of  the  Vedas,  the  dignity  of  a  Brahmana,. 
good  luck,  success  in  business,  headship  of  the  family 
and  excellent  mastery.  [He  should  say, — J  "O-thou  the 
witness  of  all,  grant  us  all  these  ;  may  we  not  be  shorn- 
of  wealth/'  — 


Katyayana 

There  is  no  Sacrifice  superior  to  a  Brahmay*,jfta, ; 
there  is  no  gift  superior  to  that  of  the  Vedas  ;.  all  other 
gifts  and  all  other  Sacrifices  have  limited  [fruits]  ;  but 
no  one  has  seen  the  end  of  these.  (8) 

By  reading  the  Ri/c  daily,  one  gratifies  the  Celestials 
with  streams  ot  ho*  ey  and  milk  ;  by  reading  the  Yajusk 
daily,  [one  gratifies  them]  with  streams  of  clarified  butter 
and  ambrosia.  (9) 

By  reading  the  Sdman  daily,  [one  gratifies  them] 
with  streams  of  Soma -Juice  and  clarified  butter  ;  and 
by  reading  the  Atharvan  of  Angirasii,  with  streams  of 
sacrifices.  (10) 

By  reading  the  principal  and  minor  aphorisms,  the 
Purdnds  and  Itihdsds  (Histories)  daily,  one  gratifies 
them  with  streams  of  meat,  thickened  milk,  oudana 
(barley  cakes)  and  honey,  (n) 

By  reading  daily,  according  to  one's  might,  any  of 
all  these  scriptures,  headed  by  the  Rz£,  one  gratifies  the 
departed  Manes  with  streams  of  honey  and  clarified 
butter.  (12) 

They,  being  gratified,  gratify  him  (the  performer) 
whether  alive  or  dead.  He  may  range  at  will  in  all  the 
celestial  habitations.  (13) 

No  great  sin  affects  him,  and  be  becomes  the  sanc- 
tifier  of  the  row.  With  the  perusal  of  the  regulations  of 
a  sacrifice,  one  reaps  the  fruits  of  that  sacrifice.  (14) 

He  comes  by  the  fruits  of  the  threefold  gift  of 
earth  filled  with  riches.* 


*  Brahmayajna  means  here  the  reading  of  the  Vedas,  atid 
ddnam  m  ans  the  deliverance  grafts  of  Vedic  i 


K&tyayana  Samhitd. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

WHATEVER  sacrificial  present  is  mentioned  in  a  rite> 
it  must  be  given  to  Brahma  after  the  termination  there- 
of. If  it  is  not  mentioned,  the  vessel  full  of  offerings 
would  go  [to  Brahma],  (i) 

With  what  gives  complete  gratification  to  many 
eaters,  but  not  with  a  lesser  quantity,  one  should  make  a 
vessel  filled.  This  is  the  settled  regulation.  (2) 

If  any  other  person  performs  the  rite  [for  the 
sacrifice],  that  Hotfi  'sacrificial  priest)  should  take  half 
of  the  sacrificial  present  ;  [if  the  sacrificer]  himself 
performs  both  [the  works  of  Brahmd  and  Hata\,  he 
should  give  it  to  another.  (3) 

He,  who  wishes  to  make  daily  gifts  and  seeks  his 
own  well-being,  should  never  supersede  the  family- 
priest,  the  Guru  and  a  precepter  who  lives  near.  (4) 

Having  addressed  [the  family  preceptor  and  priest] 
saying,—  "I  make  this  present  unto  him,"  one  should  give 
away  [a  present]  ;  if  without  asking  this,  one  gives  [a 
present]  to  a  qualified  person,  it  yields  no  fruit.  (5) 

Having  mentally  offered  the  best  part  to  these  two, 
when  they  live  at  a  distance,  one  should  give  it  to  others. 
This  is  the  best  regulation  about  a  gift.  (6) 

He,  who  by  superseding  a  Brahmana  who  delivers 
religious  instructions  and  lives  near,  makes  a  gilt,  is 
visited  with  the  sin  of  theft  overcoming  [the  fruits  of  the 
same.]  (7) 

When  an  ignorant  person  lives  near  one's  house  and 
a  qualified  person  at  a  distance,  there  is  no  sin  in 
superseding  that  ignorant  wight  and  making  a  gift  unto 
the  qualified  one.  (8) 

There  is  no  [sin  in]  superseding  a  Brahmana  [by 
shunning]  a  Vipra  who  is  divorced  from  Vedic  learning. 


K at y  ay  an  a  Saihhiid. 

Leaving   aside  a  burning  fire,  one  should  not  offer  obla- 
tion to  ashes.   (9) 

In  all  the  offerings  of  clarified  butter,  the  A'jyastk&li 
(vessel  for  keeping  clarified  butter)  should  be  made 
'either  of  metallic  substances  or  of  earth,  (io) 

One  could  make  the  size  of  A'jyasthdli  as  One  likes  ; 
'one  strong  and  without  holes,  is  described  as  the  best 
Ajyasthali.  (n) 

Its  expanse  and  height  should  be  of  the  size  of  the 
Sacrificial  fuel ;  but  it  must  be  strong  and  should  not 
have  a  big  (wide)  mouth.  A  Charusthdli*  made  of 
fearth  or  of  Uduinvara-tizz  is  most  preferable.  (12) 

tharti  should  be  prepared  according  to  the  deliver^ 
arice  of  tine's  own  branch  ;  it  should  be  well-cooked,-— 
must  not  be  burnt}  nor  made  hard ;  it  must  be  good; 
[and]  neither  of  a  highly  liquid  condition  nor  stale.  (13) 

A  Mekshana  (a  vessel  for  (containing  clarified  butter) 
should  be  made  of  the  same  class  [of  trees]  from  which 
sacrificial  fuels  [are  made] ;  its  size  would  be  half  [of 
the  sacrificial  fuel]  ;  its  forepart  would  be  heavy  like 
a  plump  thumb  and  it  should  be  particularly  fit  for  con^ 
traing  drops  of  clarified  butter.  (14) 

Similarly  a  Darvi  (ladle  or  spoon)  [should  be  made]. 
I  shall  describe  the  distinction  thereof.  The  forepart  of 
a  Darvi  would  measure  two  fingers ;  and  its  size  would 
be  four  times  that  of  a  Mekshana.  (15) 

A  Mushala  (pestle  for  cleaning  rice)  and  a  Ulti- 
khala  (mortar  for  grinding  rice]  should  be  made  of 
wood  [of  the  tree  from  which  sacrificial  fuels  are  col- 
lected], must  be  expansive,  strong  and  of  any  size 
one  likes.  A  S'tipra  (a  winnowing  basket)  should  be 
made  of  bamboos.  (16) 

— - — . * 

*  A  ressel  for  preparing    Cham,  a  kind  of  sacrificial  food, 


a'tyayana  Stnhkiia. 

While  performing  a  Nyanc/ia-rite  (i.e.,  reciting  Man- ' 
'trams  for  the  earth  by  lying  on  the  face),  one  should 
place  one's  face  down  on  the  right  palm,  and  placing  the 
left  hand  oh  it,  direct  the  foreparts  of  the  two  hands 
towards  one"s  bwri  self.  (17) 

Seated  [on  one's  seat]  and  directing  the  two  hands; 
kept  in  their  own  places  and  firmly  placed,  towards  the 
Fire,  one  should  perform  the  Pradaksliinam  and  Pnri- 
samtihanain  (/>.,  the  collection  of  Fires,  scattered  hither 
and  thither,  unto  one  place1.  (18; 

There  Should  be  three  fences  of  the  size  of  an  arm 
each,  straight,  having  bark,  no  cuts,  no  tops.  In  the 
view  of  one  class  of  men,  there  should  be  four  on  four 
sides.  (19) 

One  should  place  two  Paridhis  fences  on  two  sides 
of  the  Fire  running  towards  the  east ;  and  one  on  the 
west,  facing  the  north  ;  and  if  another  is  to  be  placed, 
it  should  be  placed  in  the  east,  facing  the  north.  (20) 

[As  in  the  rites  to  be  performed]  with  barley,  wheat 
[may  be  used];  as  [in  the  rites  to  be  performed]  with 
Vfihi,  S'dli  [may  be  used]  so ;  in  the  absence  of  proper 
articles  their  substitutes  may  be  accepted.  (21) 


CHAPTER 

A  Sraddha  in  which  Pindas  are  to  be  offered  for  the 
gratification  for  a  month,  is  to  be  preferably  performed 
on  the  wane  of  the  Moon  (Amdvasyd-day)  ;  it  should  be 
performed  in  the  third  part  of  the  day,  but  never 
towards  the  evening,  (i) 

When  a   Chaturdas'i   (the    fourteenth    day   of    the 
dark   fortnight)   extends  over  three  divisions  of  the  day 


Kdtyfyana  Sarhhifd.  389 

£nd  the  Amdvasyd  lasts  for  a  shorter  period,  a  S1  raddha 
should  be  performed  on  the  previous  day.   (2) 

What  has  been  said  [by  my  father  Gobhila,]  "  that 
the  day  On  which  the  Moon  is  not  seen,"  (i.e.,  on  such 
an  Amdvasyd-fay,  a  S'rdddha  should  be  performed,)  and 
the  [expression,—]  "  on  the  wane  of  the  Moon,"  must 
be  known  as  to  mean  the  same.*  (3) 

The  Text, — "  being  visible  once,"  refers  to  the 
Chaturdas'i-fay  ;  [if  both  the  days  arrive,  one]  should 
wait  for  the  Amdvasyd  ;  (but  if  the  Amdvasyd  does  not 
appear  at  the  time  fit  for  the  performance  of  the 
S'rdddha  [in  both  the  days],  one  may  perform  it  at 
the  end  [of  the  Chaturdas'i]^  (4) 

The  Moon  disappears  in  the  eighth  part  of  the 
Chaturdas'i,  and  a  part  of  it  re-appears  in  the  eighth 
part  of  the  Amdvasyd  according  to  S'astric  deli- 
verance. (5) 

Persons,  conversant  with  the  movements  of  the 
Moon,  (i.e.,-  the  Astrologers),  speak  of  some  distinction 
in  the  Amdvasyd  of  the  month  of  Agrahayana  and 
Jaistha.  (6) 

*  i.e.,  A  S'rdddhd  should  be  performed  on  an  A'tnavasya-day  when 
the  Moon  is  not  visible. 

\  These  S'lokas  are  very  elliptical  and  require  elucidation. 

Gobhila  said  : — "  A  S'rdddha  should  be  performed  on  an  Amdvasyd - 
day  when  the  Moon  is  not  visible." — Katyayana  says : — "  kshine 
rajani,"  when  the  Moon  wanes.  Sanction  is  given  that  a  S'rdddka 
is  to  be  performed  on  the  Antdvasyd-day  succeeding  the  Chaturdas'i. 
But  the  Moon  is  visible  on  the  fourteenth  day,  and  Gobhila's  Text  is  : — 
"Yadahastyweva  Chandramd  na  dris'yeta" — the  day  in  which  the  Moon 
is  "  not  visible."  This  Text  contradicts  the  Tex t, — "  kshint  rajani"  To 
avoid  this  contradiction  the  subsequent  S'loka  is  written.  There  is  no 
contradiction  if  it  means  that  the  S'raddha  should  be  performed  imme- 
diately after  the  disappearance  of  the  Moon  which  takes  place  in  the 
day  previous  to  the  Amdvasyd, 

50 


390  R at y  ay  an  a  Saihkita. 

In  these  two  days,  a  part  of  the  lunar  rays  exists 
in  the  first  Prahara,  but  it  fully  disappears  in  the  last 
part.  Astrologers  say  so.  (7) 

Even  in  that  year  in  which  one  intercalary  month 
i>  added  to  twelve,*  [the  Moon]  does  not  become  visi- 
ble by  the  third  [part]  ;t  knowing  these  movements  of 
the  Moon,  one  should,  in  the  last  part  of  the  wane  of 
the  Moon,  offer  [oblations].  :8) 

Sometimes  an  Amavasy a  becomes  co-mingled  with 
the  ChaturdaJi*  Some  (the  */;?.] urvedins)  know  it  as  an 
inferior  [occasion]  for  the  performance  of  a  S^rdddha. 
Others  (the  Rikvedins)  consider  it  the  best.  (9) 

If  on  the  next  day,  one  gets  an  Amailasya  increased 
by  three  Yamas  (periods),  a  Pitriyama  (Sraddha) 
should  be  performed  at  that  time.  (io) 

One    should   make  a  fortnightly    Charu   on   the  first7' 
day   of  the   fortnight.     People    should    do  it  in  the  first 
part  of  the  day.     Other  learned  men  [hold  that   it    may 
be    performed]   when  [the   second  day  of  the  fortnight] 
comes   upon  [the  first].  (11) 

One  has  no  right  to  perform  the  rites  for  the 
departed  Manes  of  his  own  father  [while  he  is  alive]. 
Superseding  a  living  person,  one  should  never  make 
a  gift.  Such  is  the  S'ruti.  (12) 

*  This  intercalary  month  is  called  Mala  (impure)  Mdsa  (month), 
because  no  religions  rites  are  performed  in  this  month. 

t  1  he  S'loka  is  very  elliptical  and  obscure.  The  purport  is  that  in 
the  year  in  which  there  is  an  intercalary  month  even  in  these  two 
months,  there  is  a  decrease  of  more  than  one-fourth  part  of  the  lunar 
ray  in  the  first  part  of  the  Antdvasyd.  Or,  in  the  eighth  part  of  th6 
Ckaturdas'i,  one-fonrth  portion  of  the  lunar  ray  disappears  ;  and  in  the 
seventh  part  of  the  Antacvatya,  it  disappears  fully  and  it  reappears  on 
the  last  part  thereof.  So  a  S'rdddha  should  be  performed  imme- 
diately after  the  disappearance  of  the  Moon  in  the  seventh  part  of  the 
a. 


Kdtyayana  Safahitt.  391 

If  one's   father   dies  while  his  grandfather  is  alive, 
me  should  offer  oblations  for   him.     If  the   grandfather 
lies,    when   the   great-grandfather   is   alive,  one   should 
offer  oblations  [for  the  both].   (13) 

But,  one  whose  great-grandfather  is  dead,  should 
make  three  Pindas^  for  the  father,  grandfather,  and  the 
great-grandfather.  (14) 

Another  Text  of  the  S'ruti  is  : — A  twice-born  person 
should  offer  food  and  water  to  the  departed  Manes 
superseding  a  living  person.  Or  his  own  father  should 
offer  oblations  to  his  father.  (15) 

If   one's  grandfather   dies   after   the    demise   of   his 
father,  the  sixteen  S'rdddhas — including  one  that  is  per- 
>rmed  on   the   eleventh   day — should   be   celebrated  by 
grandson.  (16) 

But  it  should  not  be  done  by  the  grandson,  if  the 
grandfather  has  got  any  other  son.  Having  performed 
the  Sapinda-S'rdddha,  he  should  perform  the  six  monthly 
ones.  (17) 

The  grandson  and  the  great-grandson  should  not 
perform  the  purificatory  rites,  (i.e.,  the  Sapindakaran- 
S'rdddha]  'for  [the  grandfather  and  the  great-grand- 
father,] for  whom  no  purificatory  rite  has  been  perform- 
ed. One  should  then  perform  only  the  purificatory  rite 
tor  the  father.  So  Katyayana  has  said.  (18) 

One  should  make  one's  grandfather,  who  has  attained 
to  the  condition  of  a  Preta  (deceased  ancestor)  or  who 
has  got  over  that  position,  forsooth,  perform  the  purifica- 
tory rites  for  the  father.  <  19) 

One's  father  being  killed  by  a  Brihmana,  [or  on 
being  dead]  when  outcasted,  living  a  life  of  mendi- 
cancy, or  committing  a  transgression, — one  should  offer 


3Q2  Katyayana  SaihhitA. 

oblations  unto  those  to  whom  he  (i.e.,  the  father)  used  to 
give.  (20) 

The  Sapindakaran  of  the  mother  should  be  perform- 
ed [by  the  daughter]  with  the  grandmother,  according  to 
the  regulation  mentioned  before,  if  she  has  no  son.  (21) 

Except  on  the  day  of  death,  no  separate  Pindas 
should  be  offered  to  women  since  the  Smriti  says  that 
they  get  gratification  from  the  part  of  the  Pindas  offered 
to  their  respective  husbands.  (22) 

A  daughter's  son  should  first  offer  the  Pinda  to  his 
mother ;  secondly,  to  her  father ;  and  thirdly>  to  her 
father's  father.  (23) 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

A  Karsu  (trench),  that  one  digs  before  one's  front,  is 
known  as  the  Piirvd  (first)  ;  the  one,  that  is  dug  on  its 
south,  is  the  middle  one ;  and  the  one,  that  is  dug  on  the 
[further]  south,  is  called  the  last,  (i) 

They  should  be  made,  beginning  with  the  north-west 
corner  and  ending  with  the  south-east,  each  at  a  dis- 
tance of  one-and-a-half  fingers  ;  their  ends  should  be 
pointed  ;  the  middle  parts,  like  barley  ;  and  they  should 
be  spacious  like  a  boat.  (2) 

The    S'ankhu    (stake)    should    be   made  of  Khadira 
(wood)  and  decorated  with  silver.     The  measurement   of' 
a  S'ankhu    and    Upaves'a    (stool),    is    known   as  twelve 
fingers.  (3) 

Karsus  should  be  thickly  covered  with  Kus}a,  having 
their    tips    directed  towards  the  south-east.     In  a  Pitri- 
^  one  should  cover  [a  Karsu]y  ending  in  the  south, 


K&tyavdna  SatohitH.  393 

with    [Kus'as   having   their   tips    directed  towards    the 
south.  (4) 

Sweet-scented  Ta^T-a-flowers,  sandal  and  other 
pastes,  and  Souvira-co\\yri\im  for  Pinjalis,  are  known 
and  spoken  of  [as  the  best  in  a  S}raddha\  (5) 

Having  collected  all  those  articles  which  are  fit  [for 
the  rite],  one  should,  without  hastiness  and  in  a  pure 
state,  perform  the  S*raddha  after  finishing  the  worship 
of  the  Deities.  (6) 

Having  performed  the  rites,  as  mentioned  by  Vasi- 
shtha,  beginning  from  the  gift  of  a  seat  to  the  offering  of 
the  Arghya,  one  should  offer,  in  all  the  vessels,  sesame 
and  water.  (7) 

Having  offered  water  separately  and  silently,  one 
should  offer  sesame  and  water  with  the  Mantram  ; 
scented-water  should  be  offered  in  order  of  proxi- 
mity. (8) 

The  departed  Manes  of  the  person,  who  offers 
sesame  and  water  in  an  A' sura-vessel,  do  not  accept 
food  from  him  for  fifteen  years.  (9) 

In  the  Smritt,  a  vessel  made  of  earth  and  in  a 
potter's  wheel,  is  called  A' sura  ;  that  made  by  the  hand, 
as  a  Sthdli,  etc.,  is  called  Dai-vika  (*.£.,  vessel  for  the 
Deities.  (10) 

Dedicating,   in   order,  unto  the   Br^hmands,    scents, 
season-flowers  and  incense, — one  should,  thereafter,  per- 
form the  Agnoukarana-Homa.  (ii) 

Agnoukarana-Homa  should  be  performed  by  one 
invested  with  the  sacrificial  thread  and  with  the  face 
directed  towards  the  east.  The  S'ruti  Text  is  that  one 
should  offer  oblations  to  the  Fire  for  the  Deities.  (12) 

Or  it  should  be  performed  by  one  wearing  the  sacred 
thread  over  the  right  shoulder  and  facing  the  south ; 


394  Katyayana  SathhitS. 

having  determined  the  offering  of  clarified  butter  for 
one,  one  should  not  give  [it]  to  another,  (13^ 

In  this  [rite],  one  should  not  utter  "  Swdhd"  in  the 
end  ;  nor  should  any  offering  of  clarified  butter  be  made 
without  it.  Having  offered  oblation  to  the  Fire  with 
"Swdhd"  one  should,  afterwards,  complete  the  recitation 
of  the  Mantram.  (14) 

A  person,  who  has  not  deposited  the  Sacred  Fire, 
after  pouring  libations  of  clarified  butter  unto  the  hand 
of  the  person  who  is  the  head  of  [the  Brdhmanas]  re- 
presenting the  Pitris}  should  silently  offer  the  residue 

into  the  vessels  [belonging  to]  others.  (15) 

• 
One  should  never  separately  repeat  the  Homa-Man- 

trams,  in  [proper]  tune  and  with  A'ckamanam,  etc.;  one 
should  silently  recite  the  others.  (16) 

When  in  this  rite,  Savytna  pdnina  (by  the  left  hand) 
is  spoken  of  [by  my  father  Gobhila] ;  it  means  the 
observance  the  taking  up  the  AW0-reeds  by  the  left 
hand.  (17) 

By  holding  the  Pinjali,  etc.,  [by  the  right  hand]  from 
the  left,  one  should,  therewith,  perform  the  Ullekhanam 
(rubbing)  by  the  left  hand.  (18) 

By  taking  up  a  little  from  all  sorts  of  offerings  and 
mixing  them  up  with  the  Charu,  one  should  begin  to 
offer  Pindas.  (19) 

In  a  Parva-S'raddha,  one  should  offer  Pindas  tb  the 
father  in  the  northern  Kars'u,  to  the  grandfather  in  the 
middle  one,  and  to  the  great-grandfather  in  the  one 
placed  in  the  south.  (20) 

Some  say  that  one  should  go  to  the  end  of  the  north 
by  turning  round  on  the  left.  Gotam,  S'dndilya  and 
S£ndilyayan  say  so.  («i) 


ttatyayand  Saihhitd.  395 

Circumambulation,  suppressing  the  vital  airs  and 
meditating  on  the  Pitris  truly  arid  reciting  the  Man- 
tram,  one  should  return  in  the  same  way  and  pass  his 
breath.  (22) 

On  the  eighth  day  off  the  month  of  F*h£Iguna,  one 
should  himself,  or  make  his  wife,  cook  vegetable-leaves. 
Where  a  Honia  with  vegetable-leaves  is  to  be  performed, 
it  must  be  do'ne  accdfding  to  the  rules  of  an  Ashtaka- 
S'rdddha  where  sweet-barley-cakes  [are  offered],  (23) 

GobhiJa  and  Gotama  say  that  Anwashtdkd-S'rdddha 
should  be  performed  in  the  middle  one.  Koutsa  kishi 
says  that  Anwdshtakd  may  be  performed  in  all  the 
Ashtakas  (a  collection  of  three  days,— ^seventh,  eighth 
and  nihth,  beginriing  with  the  seventh  day  alter  the  Full- 
Moon).  (24) 

If  in  the  place  of  an  animal,  one  cooks  Sthdli  settled 
afterwards,  one  should  boil  it  with  the  milk  of  &  young 
cow  having  a  calf.  (25) 


CHAPTER  XVlll. 

THE  learned  describe  one  class  [of  religious  rites]  begin- 
ning with  the  evening  and  ending  with  the  morning, 
and  another  class  as  beginning  with  the  Pdurnamdsct 
(Full-Moon-day)  and  efiding  with  the  Dars'a  (tenth 
day.,  (i) 

After  the  offering  of  full  oblation,  one  should  perform 
a  Homa  on  any  day  that  comes  first  between  the  Darsa 
and  the  Poufnantdsa.  Such  is  the  Sruti.  (2) 

After  Purn&huti)  one  should  perform  the  Evening- 
Homa  ;  thereupon,  after  the  Pdka-Yajnct}  one  should  per- 
form the  Vais'wadeva-adora.tiQ'n  and  the  fWz-rite.-  ( 


Afterwards,  according  to  one's  own  might,  one  should 
feed  such  Brahmanas  as  one  may  desire.  The  sacrificer 
should,  thenj  take  his  meals.  So  says  Katyayana.  (4) 

Shorn  of  idleness,  one  should  perform  the  morning; 
and  th^  Evening- Homa  into  the  Vaivdhika~¥\re.  After 
performing  the  Chaturthi-Homa,  one  should  do  this. 
Such  is  the  opinion  of  S'atyayana.  (5) 

After  performing  the  Putndhtiti,  one  should  perform 
Homa  in  the  morning,  and  then  [offer]  the  Evening 
Oblation.  The  Morning- Homa  should  be  as  usual,  and 
the  regulation,  for  the  succeeding  Homa>  is  also  the 
same.  (6) 

After  the  expiration  of  the  Pournamdsa  (Full-Moon- 
day)  as  Well  as  that  of  the  Amdvasyd,  one  should  per- 
form Homa  on  the  day  when  worthy  articles  of  offering 
and  qualified  priest  would  be  available.  (7) 

I  shall  now  describe  how  a  Homa  should  be  per- 
formed afterwards  when  a  person;  being  unable  to  offer 
oblations  to  the  Fire,  passes  time  fasting  and  being  self- 
restrained.  (8) 

Calculating  the  number  of  offerings  [neglected]  and 
placing  them  in  full  on  a  vessel,  one  shpuld  duly  offer 
them  in  excess  to  the  others  With  Mant^anis.  (9) 

When  an  expiatory  Homa  is  to  be  performed  with 
the  VydhritiS)  foiir  offerings  are  known  [to  be  offered], 
there,  as  in  the  case  of  espousing  a  maiden,  (to) 

Or,  it  should  be  performed  with  the  Mantram, — - 
"Aj&4fa"  etc. ;  or  a  Prdjdpatya-Qfizrtng  should  be  made. 
This  is  the  threefold  regulation  of  a  Prdyuschitta-  (ex^ 
piatory)  Homa,  according  to  the  Smriti.  ill) 

If,  on  any  occasion,  a  Sacred  Fire  comes  in  contact 
with  an  ordinary  one,--one  should  offer  oblations  of 


Katyayana 

clarified  butter  with  the  Mantram<—  "Agnaye  vim* 
thayL"  (12) 

If  it  comes  in  contact  with  lightning-flashes,  one 
should  offer  oblations  to  the  Fire  with  the  Mantram,— 
*'  Apsumdn  ;"  [if  it  comes  in  contact]  with  a  bad  fire, 
one  should  offer  oblations  [with  the  Mantram^ — ]  "Ag- 
nayt  s'uchayt."  (1.3) 

If  a  Sacred  Fire  comes  in  contact  with  that  consuming 
a  house,  a  Kshamavan-Homa  should  be  performed  by  the 
twice-born.  [Similar  is  the  procedure,]  when  it  comes 
in  contact  with  a  wild  fire.  If  the  heat  generated  by 
these  two  fires,  touches  the  heart, — one  should  extinguish 
the  generated  one  and  enkindle  the  other  which  is 
detached.  Giri  S'arma  has  said  so.  (14 — 15) 

One  cannot  perform  a  Homa  for  another,  without 
offering,  at  least,  one  sacrificial  fuel  to  one's  own  Fire. 
But  one  may  offer  oblations  for  purifying  the  embryo  till 
it  is  not  born.  (16) 

In  every  Homa  for  the  Naming-Rite,  etc.,  Loukika- 
(ordinary)  Fire  [should  be  improvised]  ;  for  a  Fire 
consecrated  by  the  father,  does  not  go  to  the  son.  (17) 

He,  on  whose  Fire  other's  Homa  shall  be  performed, 
should  make  a  Vats' wdnara-Daivata-Charu  (sacrificial 
food);  for  that  is  his  penance.  (18) 

If  another  performs  a  Homa  on  one's  own  Fire,  if 
one  performs  one's  own  Homa  on  another's  Fire,  if  one 
fails  to  perform  a  Pitri-  Yajna  or  two  Vais'wadeva- 
rites,  if  one  takes  the  newly-grown  rice  without  per- 
forming the  new  Yajna,  or  if  one  takes  the  boiled  rice 
of  a  degraded  caste, — one  should  make  Vais'wdnara- 
Charu.  (19 — 20) 

In  all  the  purificatory  rites  for  his  son,  a  father 
should  offer  Pindas  (funeral  cakes)  to  one's  own  father, 


398  Kntyayana  Samhitd* 

grandfather,  etc.  In  his  absence,  [one  should  offer 
them]  to  the  higher  [manes].  (21) 

If  in  a  Bhutapravachana  (a  rite  for  the  promulgation 
of  a  child),  a  wife,  disabled  by  menstrual  impurity, 
does  not  come  near,  what  would  the  sacrificers  do  ?  (22) 

The  woman  of  the  same  caste,  who  cooks  rice  in 
the  kitchen,  should  be  made  to  make  the  Pravachana, 
or  one  should  perform  it  with  Pranava  as  said  by 
Katyayana.  (23) 

In  a  sacrifice,  in  a  Vast  it  (rite  of  adoration  of  the 
earth  ,  in  holding  by  palms,  in  making  a  Stambha 
(pillar),  in  making  a  Kus'a-Vatu,  in  making  a  seat  of 
Kusd  and  in  spreading  Kus'd,  there  is  no  limit  of 
Darbhas.  (24) 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

HAVING  made  over  the  charge  of  the  Sacred  Fire  to 
his  wives  and  selected  a  sacrificial  priest,  a  Vipra  may 
proceed  to  a  foreign  country.  One  must  not  uselessly 
j£o  to  a  foreign  country,  nor  should  one  live  there  for 
good,  (i) 

Wh~n  living  in  a  foreign  land,  one  should  mentally 
think  of  the  daily  rites  after  being  purified  and  shorn  of 
idleness  and  seated.  One  should  follow  all  [the  rites] 

in  proper  time.   (2) 

' 

A  woman  devoted  to  her  husband  and  seeking  good 
fortune,  wealth  and  non-widowhood,  should  also  humbly 
serve  the  Fire  without  any  break.  (3) 

One  should  engage  in  this  rite  a  wife  who  has  given 
birth  to  heroic  sons,  who  carries  out  the  behests  of 


Kdtyayana  Saihhita.  399 

her  consort,  is  beloved,  expert  in  business,  speaks  sweet 
words  and  is  spotless.  (4) 

If  it  cannot  be  performed  by  one,  they  (i.e.,  the  wives) 
should,  either  according  to  seniority  or  ability,  severally 
or  jointly,  perform  the  rite,  according  to  their  own 
light  and  knowledge  of  the  scriptures.  (5) 

The  seniority  of  women  [is  determined]  by  their 
good  fortune,  and  that  of  the  twice-born,  by  their  bear- 
ing. The  fame  or  asceticism  of  women  does  not  lead  to 
the  gratification  of  iheir  husbands.  (6) 

The  woman  following  the  commands  of  her  hnsband, 
who,  like  Uma,  gratifies  the  Fire  with  manifold  reli- 
gious observances,  attains  to  good  luck  in  the  next 
world.  (7) 

The  woman, — who,  even  vvhen  bending  low  with 
humility,  is  disliked  by  her  husband, — must  have 
disregarded  in  a  previous  birth  her  husband,  Uma  and 
the  Fire.  (8) 

He,  who  rising  up  in  the  morning,  sees  a  S'rotriya 
(one  I  :rned  in  the  Sruti\  a  blessed  lady,  a  cow,  the 
Fire,  as  well  as  a  person  who  maintains  his  Sacred  Fire, 
becomes  freed  from  all  calamities.  (9) 

He,  who  rising  up  in  the  morning,  sees  a  sinful  wight, 
an  unlucky  woman,  a  degraded   person,    a    nude    wight, 
and  one  whose    nose   has   been    cut   off,    is   visited   by 
IgCali.  (10) 

What  hell  is  there  where  a  woman,  disregarding  her 
husband  out  of  stupefaction,  does  not  go  to  ?  What 
sorrow  is  there  which  she  does  not  know  after  attaining 
to  a  human  birth  with  great  difficulty  ?  (u) 

Is  there  any  region  which  a  woman  serving  her  hus- 
band, does  not  attain  ?  Again  returning  to  this  world 


400  K at y ay  ana  Safakita. 

from  the  celestial  region,  she  becomes  like  an   ocean  of 
happiness.  (12) 

What  Homa  is  laid  down  for  that  person,  maintain- 
ing his  Sacred  Fire,  who  having  a  living  wife  wishes  for 
other  wives,  for  some  reason  or  other?  (13) 

Homa  should  be  performed  with  his  own  Fire  and 
never  with  the  ordinary  one.  It  is  laid  down  that  no 
rite  of  a  person  who  has  consecrated  the  Sacred  Fire, 
should  be  performed  with  the  ordinary  fire.  (14) 

Till  the  seeing  of  Dhruva,  he  shall  have  the  Homa 
performed  by  another  with  six  oblations.  Till  he  is  not 
married,  there  is  no  necessity  of  his  own  self.  (15) 

The  three  forms  of  Prayaschitta  (penetential 
rite)  that  have  been  spoken  of  before,  have  been 
described  by  good  men  conversant  with  sacrifice,  as 
Shad 'ahutikam.  (16) 


CHAPTER    XX. 

A  Homa  should  never  be  performed  by  the  'Ritwik 
and  others  in  the  absence  of  the  married  couple.  What 
is  done  in  their  absence  becomes  profitless,  (i) 

By  leaving  aside  the  Sacred  Fire  and  transgressing 
the  limit,  if  a  person  goes  away  with  his  wife  and  the 
time  for  Homa  expires,  he  shall  have  to  deposit  the  Fire 
again.  (2) 

If  the  Sacred  Fire  is  mixed  up  with  the  fire  that  des- 
troys a  forest,  one  should  preserve  it.  And  when  that 
fire  is  extinguished,  he  should  again  consecrate  it.  (3) 

If  one  having  many  wives  goes  on  superseding  the 
eldest  one,  some  wish  that  the  Fire  should  be  consecrated 
again.  But  this  is  not  [the  view  of]  Gotama,  (4) 


Kdtyayana  Saitihttd.  401 

Having  cremated  a  becoming  wife,  dead  before,  with 
the  fire  of  the  vessel, — one  should  get  himself  re-married 
without  delay  [and  consecrate  the  Fire  again].  (5) 

A  twice-born  person,  who  is  conversant  with  religi- 
ous laws,  should  cremate  a  good-charactered  wife  of  the 
same  caste,  who  dies  before,  with  the  sacrificial  vessel 
according  to  the  Agnihotra- method.  (6) 

One  who,  having  his  first  wife  living,  cremates  the 
second  wife  with  the  Vaitanika-Y\ts>  is  equal  to  the 
destroyer  of  a  Brahmana.  (7) 

Know  him  to  be  a  Brahmojjham  (abandoning  the 
dignity  of  a  Brahmana)  who  renounces  the  Agnihotra 
(adoration  of  the  Sacred  Fire;  on  the  death  of  his  second 
wife.  (8) 

One  must  not  abandon  the  Vedic  Fire  on  the  death 
of  one's  wife,  but  should  perform  all  the  rites  therewith 
as  long  as  one  lives.  9) 

Having  made  a  golden  image  of  his  illustrious  wife 
Sita,  the  eternal  Rama  celebrated  many  sacrifices  along 
with  his  brothers.  (10) 

He,  who  any  how  cremates  -  his  wife  with  his  own. 
Sacred  Fire,  attains  to  womanhood  and  his  wife  attains 
to  manhood,  (iij 

If  a  twice-born  person  be  guilty  of  a  heinous  crime 
and  if  his  wife  be  dead  or  living  in  another  country  ^ 
his  son  would  be  entitled  [to  maintain  the  Sacred 
Fire.  (12) 

If  a  wife,  worthy  of  respect,  being  insulted  by 
her  husband,  dies  before, — she  attains  to  manhood 
for  three  births,  and  the  man  becomes  born  as  a 
woman.  (13) 

In  the  rite  of  consecrating  the  Sacred  Fire  again,  the 
former  sex  shall  be  as  before,  But  the  distinction  is 


402  Kdtydyana  Saihhitd. 

that,  the  rite  of  Agnyupasthdndm  (placing  on  the  Fire) 
[should  be  performed],  and  eight  oblations  of  clarified 
butter  [offered].  (14) 

Finishing  up  to  end  the  Vyahriti-Homa,  one  should 
place  the  Sacred  Fire.  He  should  recite  merely  the 
A'gneya-Sukta,  such  as, — "K'astejdmi  ramdnasas"  (15) 

With  the  M  ant  rams, — "Agnimiffe?*  (I  adore  Agni); 
"Agna  dydhi"  (come  Fire),  "Agna  dydhi  vitaye"  (come 
Fire  to  this  sacrifice),  the  three  Mantrams, — "Agnirjyoti" 
etc.,  "Agnim  dutam"  (Fire  the  messenger),  and  "Agne- 
mrid'a" — [with  these  eight  Mantrams^\ — one  should, 
duly  and  in  proper  order,  offer  eight  oblations.  Then 
one  should  perform  the  compiling  oblations  and  other 
rites  as  before.  (16 — 17) 

The  consecrating  of  the  Fire  on  the  other  Aranis}  is 
not  allowed  so  long  as  a  little  of  the  first  two  Aranis  is 
visible.  (18) 

One  should  throw  into  the  burning  Fire,  the  destroyed 
Sruka-Sruva  (sacrificial  ladles),  the  up-turned  vessel 
and  the  Mushala  (mace),  having  its  top  directed  towards 
the  east.  (18) 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

IF  a  person  is  incapable  of  performing  a  Homa  himself, 
he  should  come  before  the  Fire  ;  if  he  is  unable  to  do 
that  even,  he  should  sit  up  on  his  bed.  (i) 

If  at  the  time  of  performing  the  Evening-Homa,  the 
householder  appears  so  weak  [as  to  die  immediately], 
then  the  Morning  -Homa  should  be  performed.  If  he 
survives,  [on  the  morning,]  he  may  perform  it  again,  if  he 
so  wishes.  (2) 


Katyayana  Satiihitd.  4°3 

Having  bathed  the  dead  body  and  covered  it  with  a 
pure  raiment,  one  should  place  it,  having  its  head 
turned  towards  the  south,  on  the  ground  strewn  with 
Kus'd-retds.  (3) 

Having  soaked  it  with  clarified  butter,  one  should 
again  sprinkle  it  with  water.  It  shall  then  be  clothed, 
invested  with  another  sacred  thread,  bedecked  with 
flowers  and  have  all  its  limbs  pasted  with  sandal.  (4) 

Having  placed  gold  into  its  seven  apertures  and 
covered  its  face  with  a  cloth,  the  sons  and  others  should 
carry  it.  (5) 

Having  taken  boiled  rice  in  a  raw  earthen  vessel, 
one  should  follow  the  dead  body,  preceded  by  an 
Agnihotrin}  and  scatter  half  [of  the  boiled  rice]  on 
the  way.  (6) 

Then  reaching  the  cremation-ground,  [the  chief 
mourner,]  seated  with  his  face  directed  towards  the 
south  and  bending  low  his  left  knee-joint,  should,  mixing 
up  the  remaining  half  [of  the  rice]  with  sesame,  offer  it 
according  to  the  regulations  of  Pinda.  (7) 

Thereupon    after   bathing,  the    son  and  others,  on  a 

purified    spot    of    the    ground,  qualified  by  its  marks  for 

making  a  funeral  pyre,  should  make  a    huge    collection 
of  wood.   (8) 

Then  placing  on  it  the  dead  body  on  its  back  with  its 
head  towards  the  south,  one  should  place,  on  its  mouth,  a 
Sruk,  filled  with  clarified  butter ;  on  its  nose,  a  Sruvam 
with  its  top  directed  towards  the  south  ;  on  its  legs,  the 
eastern  Arani ;  on  its  breast,  the  northern  A  rani ;  on  its 
left  side,  S'upra  ;  on  its  right  side,  the  Chamasa ;  on 
the  space  between  the  two  thighs,  the  Mushala  ;  and 
on  the  collar  bones,  the  Udukhala  (mortar).  One  who 
has  not  consecrated  the  Fire,  should  be  placed  on  its 


Katynyana  SafahitA. 

face.  One  who  will  set  fire  to  the  Fire,  shall  neither  have 
tears  in  the  eyes  nor  be  stricken  with  fear.  (9 — n) 

Making  the  sacred  thread  hang  down  towards  the 
left  part  of  the  body  over  the  right  shoulder,  controlling 
speech  and  facing  the  south  and  performing  [all  rites  in 
that  state],  bending  low  one's  left  knee,  and  facing  the 
Fire,  one  should  gradually  lighten  up  the  fire.  (12) 

He  should  recite  the  Mantram, — "Thou  wert  crea- 
ted by  him  ;  may  he,  through  thee,  be  born  again  ; 
may  he  attain  to  the  celestial  region."  (13) 

When  the  master  of  a  house*  is  thus  cremated,  he  gets 
over  all  his  sins.  He  who  cremates  his  body,  also  gets 
praiseworthy  children.  (14) 

As  a  traveller,  carrying  his  own  weapon,  traverses 
fearlessly  the  forest  and  reaches  the  appointed  place,  so 
a  person,  who  consecrates  the  Sacred  Fire,  adorned  with 
the  weapon  of  a  sacrificial  vessel,  transcends  all  the 
regions  and  attains  to  Brahma.  (15 — 16) 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

THEREUPON  without  looking  [at  the  Fire],  all  those  who 
touch  the  dead  body,  should  go  to  the  water  ;  bathe  with 
their  raiments  on  ;  rinse  their  mouths ;  and  offer  water 
on  the  ground  to  the  departed  one.  (i) 

Reciting  the  family  and  name,  they  should  afterwards 
szy—UTarpaydmi"  (I  offer  water).  Directing  the  tops  of 
the  AW0-reeds  towards  the  south,  they  should  separate- 
ly [offer  water]  with  sesame.  After  having  thus  per- 
formed the  watery-rite  completely  and  bathed  and  rinsed 
their  mouths  again,  they  shall  be  seated  on  a  plot 
of  ground  covered  with  green  grass,  their  followers 
saying,— (2— 3) 


Kdtydyana  SarhhitA,  405 

fl  All  living  creatures  do  not  live  for  ever ;  there- 
fore do  not  grieve.  Practise  with  care  religion,  for  it 
will  go  with  you.  (4) 

"Foolish,  indeed,  is  that  wight  who  seeks  real 
essence  in  a  man  who  is  as  unsubstantial  as  the  trunk  of 
a  plantain  tree  and  the  water-bubbles.  (5) 

"  The  earth,  the  oceans  and  even  the  Deities  run  to 
destruction ;  why  would  not  then  the  region  of  the 
mortals,  like  unto  a  foam,  meet  with  destruction  ?  (6) 

"  What  is  there  to  repent  for,  if  the  body,  which  is 
known  to  be  composed  of  five  [substances],  is  again 
reduced  to  five  [original  substances]  under  the  influence 
of  physical  actions  ?  (7) 

"  All  collections  meet  with  destruction  ;  all  elevations 
meet  with  fall ;  all  unions  meet  with  separation  ;  and 
every  life  ends  with  death*  (8) 

"  A  departed  person,  losing  all  control,  eats  the 
phlegms  and  tears  discharged  by  kinsmen.'  Therefore 
none  should  weep,  but  [all]  must  perform  the  rites 
with  care."  (9) 

Having  been  thus  accosted,  they  should  return  home 
preceded  by  younger  persons.  Others  (but  kinsmen) 
would  get  themselves  purified  by  bathing,  touching  the 
fire  and  drinking  clarified  butter.  (10) 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

THE    assignment   of    vessels   for    a   person     who   has 
deposited  the  Sacred  Fire  should  be  made  thus.     In  this, 
there  is  a  special   regulation    mentioned    in    the    Sutras 
about  the  black-antelope-skin,  etc.  (i) 
52 


406  Kdtyayana  Satiihitd. 

If  one  dies  in  a  foreign  country,  his  bones  should  be 
brought,  soaked  with  clarified  butter  and  cremated^ 
covered  with  wool.  The  assignment  of  vessels  should 
be  made  as  before.  (2) 

If  the  bones  are  not  procurable,  leaves,  to  the  number 
of  bones,  should  be  burnt  according  to  the  regulation 
spoken  of ;  impurity  lasts  till  then.  (3) 

If  a  person,  who  has  deposited  the  Sacred  Fire,  is 
accidentally  affected  with  a  heinous  iniquity,  his  son  and 
others  should  maintin  the  Fire  till  his  sins  are  not 
dissipated.  (4) 

If  after  committing  a  sin,  a  person  dies  without  per- 
forming the  penetential  rite,  his  Household  Fire  should 
be  extinguished ;  and  the  S'routa-Fire,  together  with 
the  ingredients,  should  be  thrown  into  the  water.  (5) 

Or  he  should  throw  them  both  into  the  water,  for 
Fire  originates  from  Water ;  or  he  should  give  the 
vessels  unto  a  Vipra ;  or  [he  should]  burn,  or  throw, 
them  into  the  water.  ^6) 

A  woman,  wending  a  righteous  way,  should  be 
cremated  in  this  way ;  but  the  Mdntram,  for  putting 
the  Fire,  should  not  be  recited  in  her  case  ;  such  is  the 
determined  conclusion  [of  the  Smriti\.  (7) 

With  that  Fire,  one  should  cremate  one's  wife,  if  she 
had  not  proved  [herself]  independent  [of  her  consort], 
or  degraded  [herself].  After  that  the  vessels  should  be 
consumed  separately  near  [the  funeral  pyre].  (8) 

On  the  next,  or  on  the  third,  day,  the  depositing  of 
bones  should  take  place.  The  regulation  relating  to  that, 
as  laid  down  by  the  Rishts,  should  now  be  spoken  of.  (9) 

Having  finished  bathing  as  before  ;  wearing  the  sa- 
cred thread  over  the  right  shoulder  and  under  the  left 


K at y  ay  ana  SatiihitH.  407 

arm  ;  and  abstaining  from  speech  ; — one  should  soak  the 
bones  with  cow-milk.  (10) 

Having  taken  up  the  bones  from  ashes  with  the 
branches  of  a  S* ami  or  a  Patdsa-tree,  one  should  soak 
them  with  clarified  butter  made  of  cow-milk  and  then 
sprinkle  them  with  scented  water,  (n) 

Having  placed  them  inside  an  earthen  vessel,  one 
should  encircle  it  with  thread.  Then  digging  a  hole  on 
a  sanctified  spot,  one  should  place  them  in  that  hole 
facing  the  south.  (12) 

Then  filling  up  the  hole  with  earthen  balls  and 
corals,  one  should  perform  thereon  the  remaining  portion 
of  the  rite  that  should  be  performed  in  the  morning.  (13) 

Such  is  the  rule  of  cremation  for  a  deceased  person 
who  had  not  deposited  the  Sacred  Fire  ;  fire  should  be 
put  [to  their  funeral  pyre]  like  that  of  women.  What 
has  [already]  been  said,  should  now  be  dwelt  on  [at 
length].  (14) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

IN  a  state  of  impurity,  all  rites,  beginning  with  the 
Sandhyd,  should  be  renounced.  A  Homa,  with  dried 
rice  or  fruits,  may  be  performed  in  the  S'rou fa-Fire,  (i) 
One  should  offer  Akrita  (raw  corn)  ;  in  its  absence, 
'ritd-Krita  (rice) ;  or  Krita  (boiled)  according  to  the 
igulations  obtaining  at  the  rite  of  *  first  taking  the 
)iled  rice.  (2) 

Odana,  S'aktu  (kinds  of  cakes),  etc.,  are  called 
'rita  ;  rice,  etc.,  are  called  Kritd-Krita  ;  and  Vrihi^ 
tc.,  are  called  Akrita  : — the  learned  speak  of  these 
iree  classes  of  offerings.  (3) 


4'<>8  Kdtydyarta  Saibhifrd. 

When  any  such  [preventive]  cause  appears,,  as  im- 
purity, residence  in  another  country,  inability,  or  partak- 
ing of  food  at  a  S'raddha, — one  should  have  the  Homa- 
performed  by  another.  (4) 

A  Brahmacharin  should  not  renounce  his  own  work 
even  in  a  state  of  impurity ;  [an  impurity  would  not 
be  an  impediment]  in  a  sacrifice  after  initiation  or  in 
the  performance  of  a  distressing  penance.  (5) 

Even  on  the  demise  of  the  father,  they  are  not  affec- 
ted by  any  impurity.  The  impurity  of  a  Brahmacharin 
takes  place  after  the  performance  of  his  religious  rite 
of  lasts  for  three  days.  (6) 

The  S'raddha  of  a  Sdgnika  would  take  place  on  the 
eleventh  day  after  the  cremation.  But  the  annual 
S'raddha,  one  should  always  perform  on  the  day  o§ 
death.  (7) 

Twelve  monthly  S'rdddhas,  the  first  S'raddha  after 
the  death,  two  six-monthlies,  and  the  Sapindikaran — -. 
these  are  the  sixteen  S'rdddhas.  (8) 

[The  first]  six-monthly  S'rdddha  should  take  place 
either  one  or  three  days  previous  to  the  day  of  death. 
And  the  annual  S*rdddha,  forming  the  [second]  six- 
monthly,  would  also  take  place  one  or  three  days 
previous  to  the  day  of  death.  (9) 

The  first  fifteen  S'rdddhas  should  be  performed  for 
one  who  has  no  son ;  and  the  other  also  should  be  per- 
formed on  one  day  in  the  year.  [The  Srdddha^  for  the 
one  who  has  a  son,  should  always  be  performed.*  (10) 

The  husband  of  a  woman  having  no  son,  shall  not 
perform  [the  Pdrvana-S'rdddha]  for  her ;  nor  shall  a 

*  The  Commentator  Raghunandan  has  given  a  different  interpretation 
of  this  couplet.  He  says  :— "  The  first  fifteen  S'rdddhas  and  the  annual 
Ekoddhiskt&.S'rdddha  should  be  performed  for  a  sonless  man  or  woman. 


K&tyayana  Saihhita.  40$ 

father  do  it  for  the  son ;  nor  the  eldest  brother,  for 
the  younger,  (i  i) 

Having  duly  performed  the  Sraddha  on  the  eleventh 
day,,  a  son  who  has  deposited  the  Sacred  Fire,  should 
subsequently  p-erform  the  SapincPa  for  his.  father  or 
mother.  (12) 

After  the  Sapind>ikaranam>  one  should  not  perform  a 
S}raddha  every  month  according  to  the  Ekoddishthet* 
regulation.  But  Gotama  says,  one  should  do  it.  (13). 

Leaving  off  the  [Srdddha  to  be  performed  for] 
agricultural  operations,  the  first  sixteen  S'raddhas  and 
the  annual,  there  shall  be  six  Pind'as  in  the  subsequent 
ones.  This  is  the  rule.  (14) 

In  the  offering  of  the  Arghya^  in  that  of  unending 
water,  in  that  of  Pind'a,  in  Avanejana  (sprikling  watec 
qn  the  Darbha-grass  at  a  ,SV#flfa%tf-ceremony)  and  in 
reciting  Swddhdy  there  shall  be  the  stoppage  of  the 
ritual.  (15) 

The  S'r&ddka  and  other  good  offices  should  not  be 
performed  for  them,  who  were  punished  (i.e.,  killed) 
by  the  Brahmanas,  and  for  whom  no  cremation  has 
been  done,  (16) 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

IN  the  collection  of  Mantrams,  the  five  u  Agne,"  etc., 
should  be  recited  by  those  who  seek  brevity.  Twenty 
M  ant  rams  are  necessary  in  its  application,  (i) 

"  Vayu"  [should  be  used,]  instead  of  "Agni."  The 
word  "  Chandra"  and  "  Suryya"  should  be  understood. 
And  understanding  all  in  the  fifth  Sutra,  each  Mantram 
should  be  recited  four  times  according  to  the  S'rutt.  (2) 


410  Katyayana  Samhitd. 

In  the  five  Mantrams  of  the  first  group  of  five,  shall 
occur  the  expression, — "Papi  Lakshmih"  Those,  con- 
versant with  sacrificial  rituals,  know  it  so.  (3) 

In  the  second  group,  shall  occur  [the  word] 
"  Patighni ;"  in  the  third,  "  Aputraka  ;"  in  the  fourth, 
"  Apasavyd"  These  are  the  twenty  oblations.  (4) 

In  the  Dhriti-Homa  as  well  as  in  the  eight  Gonama- 
Homas,  one  should  not  use  ["  Swdhd,"  with  the  fourth 
declension] ;  in  the  "  Gonama-Homa"  one  should 
offer  oblations  with  "  Aghna"  instead  of  the  fourth 
declension.  (5) 

The  hidden  leaves  on  the  top  of  the  branch  of  a 
creeper,  is  described  as  S'uiigd*  According  to  the 
S'ruti,  a  chaste  womo.n,  observant  of  a  vow  and  an  un- 
worthy Brahmana  [should  buy  itj.f  (6) 

S'dlatu  is  mentioned  for  indigo,  and  Granthah  is 
used  for  a  Stavaka.  The  hairs  on  both  sides  of  the 
head,  are  called  Kapushnikd ;  those  on-  the  back,  are 
called  Kapuchchhalam.  (7) 

Salali  means  the  pointed  sticks  of  a  porcupine  ;  and 
Viratara,  an  arrow.  Sesame  and  rice,  boiled  together, 
passes  by  the  name  of  Krishara.  (8) 

In  the  Naming  Rite — the  word  Muni}  Vasu  and 
Pisacha  should  always  be  used  in  the  plural  number. 
And  YakshaS)  the  Pitris,  the  Vis'lw6d£vas,  the  guests 
and  other  Divinities  should  be  treated  with  oblations.  (9) 

In  the  Homa-riies  of  Planets  beginning  with  Lunar 
Mansion  called  Krittika^  of  those  beginning  with  Snake 
(Rohini,  etc.),  of  those  beginning  with  Vis'dkhd  (the 


*  The  Sheath  of  a  young  bud. 

f  In  the  Gobhild- Sutra,  there  is  a  regulation  about  the  purchase  of 
the  S'ungd.  Katyayana  has  explained  the  term  and  mentioned  the 
names  of  persons  who  should  buy  them. 


K.itydyana  Saihhitd.  411 

sixteenth  Lunar  Mansion  consisting  of  two  Stars),  of 
those  beginning  with  A's'ad*a  (the  twentieth  and  twenty- 
first  Lunar  Mansions),  of  those  beginning  with  Dhanishtha 
(the  twenty-third  Lunar  Mansion  consisting  of  four 
Stars^,  and  of  those  beginning  with  AJwini  (the  first 
of  the  twenty-seven  Nakshatras  or  Lunar  Mansions 
consisting  of  three  Stars), — one  should  offer  oblations 
with  the  plural  number.  Dual  should  be  used  for  the 
remaining  two  pairs  ;  and  singular,  for  the  rest.  (10 — 1 1) 

Amongst  the  Deities  [presiding  over  the  Planets], 
the  Serpent,  the  Air,  the  Water,  the  Vis^wedevas  and 
the  Pitris  should  be  offered  oblations  with  the  plural 
number.  (12) 

Being  ordered  by  his  preceptor  in  the  performance 
of  a  religious  rite,  a  Brahmacharin  should  follow  his 
behest  by  saying,— "  Vdd'am,"  (well);  or  "Orit,"  (yes).  (13) 

Till  the  [final]  bath,  the  shaving  of  the  head — except 
the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown,  should  be  done  by  a  Brah- 
macharin, if  he  has  not  taken  the  vow  of  a  lifelong  celi- 
bacy. (14) 

He  must  not  remove  the  dirt  of  his  body — except 
in  a  calamity,  must  not  sport  in  water  ;  nor  should 
he  wear  ornaments.  And  like  a  rod,  he  should  take 
his  bath.  (15) 

How  should  one  offer  oblations  when  the  Deities  are 
adverse  ?  Having  performed  the  penetentiary  Homa, 
one  should  again  offer  oblations  in  due  order.  (16) 

If  on  any  occasion,  one  performs  a  purificatory  rite 
after  the  proper  time  is  over,  he  should  perform  Homa} 
on  all  these  occasions  destructive  of  sins.  (17) 

The  Vaishwdnara-Ckaru  is  laid  down  as  the  penance 
for  him  who  without  performing  the  new  sacrifice,  eats 
the  boiled  rice  of  new  crops,  even  out  of  ignorance.  (18) 


K at y  ay  ana  SarhMtfi, 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

How  should  the  Cham  (sacrificial  food)  be  made, — in  the 
rite  of  the  combination  of  Charu,  in  a  sacrifice  attended 
with  cow-slaughter,  in  the  rite  of  the  dedication  of  a 
bull,  in  a  Horse-Sacrifice,  on  the  Full-Moon-day  in  the 
month  of  S'ravana,  in  the  evening  and  at  the  commence- 
ment of  agricultural  operations  ?  How  should  the  pre- 
sentations of  offerings  and  libations  to  the  Fire  be  made, 
in  all  those  rites  ?  (i — 2) 

Proportionate  to  the  number  of  Divinities,  offerings 
should  be  taken  up  separately.  Twice  they  should  be 
taken  up  silently  ;  and  Homa,  performed  separately.  (3) 

[And]  the  quantity  of  the  Charu  would  be  such  as 
will  leave  some  remnant  after  the  completion  of  the 
Homa  as  mentioned  in  a  particular  rite.  (4) 

In  the  rite  of  the  combination  of  Char u  and  in  that 
at  a  sacrifice  for  the  Pitris,  one  should  perform  Homa 
with  a  Mekshana  ;  others  say, — that  [a  Homo]  should  be 
Upastirndi  (i.e.,  clarified  butter  should  be  poured  into  a 
Sruva- vessel  with  the  Sruk  or  sacrificial  ladle)  and 
Abhigkdrita  (i.e.}  accompanied  with  the  pouring  of 
clarified  butter).  (5) 

The  time  and  regulation  about  the  dedication  of  a 
bull  has  been  described,  in  brief,  by  Katyayana.  Since 
Gobhila  has  not  spoken  of  it.  (6) 

The  universally  received  time,  for  a  Cow-,  and 
a  Horse-,  Sacrifice,  as  well  as  for  the  rite  of 
Prastararohana  (getting  upon  a  rock  or  bed),  has  been 
mentioned  in  some  other  book  of  instructions.  (7) 

The   regulation   in  another  book  of  laws,  is,  that  the 


.'ityayaha   Sartttiita.  4*3 

U'me  for  a  Cow-Sacrifice,  is  the  day  of  Mdrgapaiya,  and 
that  for  a  Horse-Sacrifice  is  the  Nir&jAna-fay**  .8) 

Some  say  that  the  Sacrifice  for  the  New  [Rice]  should 
be  performed  in  the  autumn  or  in  the  spring.  Others  say 
[that  it  should  be  performed]  when  the  paddy  is  ripe  ; 
forest-recluses  should  perfom  it  when  S'yAmM£a-crop 
ripe.  (9) 

In  the.  rites  to  be  performed  on  the  Full-Moon-day 
in  the  month  of  A's'wina,  in  agricultural  rites,  in 
the  worship  of  the  Deity  of  the  household, — -the  sacri- 
ficers,  conversant  with  the  secrets  of  sacrifices,  lay 
down  the  following  Ho  ma.  (10) 

The  Smriti  enjoins  that  two,  five  and  two  oblations 
should  be  cffeted,  in  order,  with  clarified  .butter.  The 
remaining  oblations  should  be  made  with  clarified  butter; 

o 

S@  Katyanana  has  said,  (n) 

Milk,  according  to  others,  curd  mixed  with  clarified 
butter,  is  called  Prislidtaka.  By  obtaining  that,  one 
should  make  Payasa-Charu.  (12) 

The  holding  of  the  seven  herbs,  namely,  Vrihi^  S'dli, 
Mudga,  wheat,  mustard,  sesame  and  barley,  dissipates 
all  sins.  ( 13) 

The  purificatory  rites  of  men  have  been  remembered 
by  Gotama  and  other  Rishis.  Then  all  the  Ashtaka- 
rites  should  be  performed  in  due  time,  i  14) 

The  twice-born  person,  who  performs,  even  once, 
the  Ashtaka-nteSt  becoming  the  sanctifier  of  the  row, 
goes  to  regions  pouring  clarified  butter.  (15) 

*  A  kind  of  military  and  religious  ceremony,  performed  by  kings 
or  generals  of  armies  in  the  month  of  A's'wina,  before  they  took  the 
field  ;  (it  was,  so  to  say,  a  general  purification  of  the  king's  Purohuaj 
the  ministers,  and  all  the  various  component  parts  of  the  army,  together 
with  the  arms  and  implements  of  war  by  means  of  sacred  Mantrams).  • 

53 


414  Katyayatid 

He, — who,  being  engaged  in  a  religious  rite,  serves 
the  Fire,  in  a  purified  state,  even  for  a  day, — lives  iri 
the  celestial  region  for  a  hundred  day:-  by  the  fruits1 
thereof.  (16) 

He, — who,-  having  consecrated  the  Fire,  does  not  per- 
form sacrifices  in  honour  of  the  Deities,  after  giving 
them  hopes, — that  repudiator  of  the  Deities,  is  called 
Nirakriti  (repudiator).  (17) 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

TrfE  S'raddha,  that  is  performed  at  the  commence- 
ment of  a  rite;  the  sacrificial  present,  that  is  given  at 
the  end ;  and  the  second  one,  that  should  be  performed 
on  an  Amdvasyd,  is  called  Anvdkdryya*  (i) 

In  Ekasadhya-  (capable  of  being  performed  by  one) 
Homa,  there  is  no  spreading  of  the  Kus'a,  no  sprin- 
kling of  water  round  the  Sacrificial  Fire,  and  no  Udgdsd- 
danam  (obtaining  of  water);  for,  it  is  known  as  Kshiprd 
(quick)  Homa.  (2) 

One  should  offer  oblations- with  curd  or  milk  in  the 
absence  of  VfiJii  and  barley  ;  in  its  absence,  with  rice- 
gruel  ;  and  in  its  absence,  with  water.  (3) 

Having  recited  the  Roudra,  Rdkshasa,  Pitrya  and 
the  enchanting  Mantram, — one  should,  touching  one's 
own  body,  touch  water.  (4) 

*  The  Nandimukha-S'rdddha  is  called  Anvdhdryya,  because  it  is 
performed  after  the  adoration  of  the  Mdttis.  A  dakshind  is  so  called, 
be.cause,  it  is  offered  at  the  termination  of  a  religious  rite,  And  the 
Amavasyd-S'rdddha  is  so  called,  because  it  is  performed  after  the  adora^ 
tion  of  the  departed  Man«s. 


Katyayana  Saihhittl.  415 

If  one  is  seen  offering  bones  in  the  quarters  presided 
over  by  the  Moon  or  the  Varuna,  then  offering  oblations 
with  Vyahritis, — one^should  administer  punishment  unto 
the  twice-born  (5^ 

He, — who  makes  offering  of  salt,  honey,  meat  or  any 
saline  substance,  must  take  his  meals  after  fasting. 
He  must  not  take  any  thing  in  the  night  (6) 

If  the  sacrificial  priest  and  offerings  not  being  avail- 
able, the  Even  ing-  Homo,  is  not  performed  in  its  proper 
time, — it  may  be  performed  in  the  next  morning  before 
the  hour  of  the  Morning- Homa.  But  it  should  be  done 
after  the  celebration  of  the  penetentiary  Homa.  7) 

The  hour  of  the  Mormng-ffoma  exiends  till  before 
that  of  the  Evening-^/;*,?.  The  time  for  a  Dars'a,  ex- 
tends till  before  that,  for  the  Full-Moon-day  S?rfcddha\ 
and  that  for  the  latter,  till  before  the  hour  for  Dars'a.  (8) 

Failing  to  perform  the  Vais'wadfoa-rites,  one  should 
remain  fasting  for  the  day  and  night.  Then  performing 
the  penitentiary  rite,  one  should  again  undertake  the 
rite.  (9) 

The  two  Hornets  (Morning  and  Evening)  and  the 
Dars'a  and  Pournamasa-rites  being  not  performed,  one 
should  again  deposit  the  Sacred  Fire.  Such  is  the  deli- 
verance of  Bhargava.  (lo) 

One  who  has  not  studied  the  ^tig-Veda^  is  called 
Mdnava  ;  a  black  antelope  is  called  Enah,  according  to 
the  Si'triti  (of  Gobhila)  ;  a  white-coloured  deer,  is  called 
Ruru',  and  a  stake  is  called  Sumarah.  (n) 

A  Brdhmana's  Danda  a  staff  given  to  a  twice-born 
person  at  the  time  of  his  investiture  with  the  sacred 
thread)  sho.ild  be  made,  in  size,  extending  up  to  the  end 
of  hairs  ;  that  of  a  Kshatriya,  up  to  the  fore-head  ;  and. 
that  of  a  Vais'ya,  up  to  the  nose.  (12) 


4t6  K at y  ay  an  a, 

They  shall  be  all  straight,  without  knots,  handsome 
to  look  at,  unproductive  of  anxiety  to  men,  covered  with 
bark  and  unsullied  by  fire.  (13) 

The    superiority   of  a   cow    is     spoken     of  by     the 
Brahmana"s    and    is    mentioned    in  the   Vedas.     There  is 
none    superior    to    her ;    and    a    cow  is,  therefore,  called 
Vara.   (14) 

In  all  those  rites,  at  the  termination  of  which  no 
sacrificial  present  is  mentioned,  a  cow  or  a  raiment 
should  form  the  presents  unto  the  preceptor.  (15) 

Exposition  at  an  improper  place,  recitation  in  parts 
and  erroneous  teaching,  bring  about  the  rejection  of  a 
S'ruti.  (i 6) 

The  hW\\ti\-Updkarma\i*  and  Utsarga^  duly  per- 
formed by  the  twice-born,  increase  afresh  the  power  of 
the  Vedas.  (17) 

Whatever  rke  the  twice-born,  even  sportively,  per- 
form by  the  help  of  the  Vedas  not  rejected,  always 
yields  for  them  Siddhi  (supernatural  powers).  (18) 

Having  duly  instructed  the  pupils  in  the  three 
Rich-Mantrams — Gayatri,  Gayatra  and  Varhaspatya, 
a  preceptor  should  begin  the  Upakarman  of  the 
S'ruti.  (19^ 

In  the  Satfnhita  (of  the  Veda],  there  are,  in  order, 
twenty  classes  of  metres.  With  the  first  Mnntram 
composed  in  each  metre,  he  should  perform  Homa  for 
all  those  Chhandas.  (20) 

With  the  subsequent  portions  of  the  Charchcha- 
(Recitation)  M  ant  rams,  he  should  perform  Homa  for 

*  A   ceremony    performed    before    commencing    to    read    the     Veda 
after  the  monsoons. 

f  Th«  rite  performed  at  th*  completion  of  "the  study  of  the 


K at y *y ana  SaihhitS.  4!7 

hymns,  the  Brahmana   (portion    of  the    Vedas]  and   the 
Angas  (the  six  auxiliary  parts  of  the  }Veda.   (21) 


RADT  t?i 


CHAPTER    XXVIII. 

BARLEY  is  called  Akshata  ;  when  fried,  it  becomes 
Dhdna  ;  Vrihi-rict  when  fried,  is  called  Laja  ;  and  a 
pitcher  is  called  Svdndika.  (i) 

For  the  six  months  when  the  Sun  is  in  the  southern 
solistice,  a  wise  man  should  not  study  the  subsequent 
mysterious  subjects  and  the  U pant  shads,  (2) 

A  person  conversant  with  religious  science,  should 
study  during  the  northern  solistice  after  performing  the 
Updkarmau-nte.  Utsarga  (terminating  rite)  should  be 
performed  on  the  Full-Moon-day  either  in  the  month  of 
S'^vana  or  of  the  Bhadra.  (3) 

One  should  not  marry  a  woman  who  has  not  auspici- 
ous marks,  who  has  profuse  hairs  on  her  person, 
and  who  is  born  of  a  woman  giving  birth  to  a  single 
child.  (4) 

Three  attached  footsteps  pass  by  the  name  of  Pra- 
krama  in  the  Smriti.  It  is  mentioned  by  the  Adhvyar- 
yyu  in  all  the  Smdrdtta,  and  S'routa,  rites.  (5) 

One  should  offer  oblations  of  food  facing  the  quarter 
in  which  [they  should  be  placed].  Nyancha-Karma 
(lying  on  the  face)  should  not  always  be  performed  in  all 
those  rites  [that  are  celebrated]  [in  the  month  of] 
S'ra"vana.  (6) 

The  oblations  at  the  end  of  a  Vali  (food-offering) 
and  Agnipranayanam  (fetching  the  Fire)  would  not  take 
place  every  day.  But  Ulmukha  (torchlight/  must  always 
be  done.  (7) 


41 8  Katyaytina  San  Jit  fa. 

All  art  entitled  to  the  Mantram  for  despatching 
Prishdtaka  (milk  mixed  with  ghee)  and  for  eating  the 
new-boiled  rice  left  after  offering  it  to  the  Fire.  (8) 

If  Brahmana's  are  not  near  at  hand,  [the  sacrificer] 
should  himself  look  at  the  Prishdtaka.  Even  in  a  New 
Sacrifice,  one  should  partake  of  the  residue  of  the 
clarified  butter.  (9) 

All  the  jujube  branches  are  called  Kalatavya.  Conch- 
shells  grown  in  a  sandy  soil,  are  known  in  the  Smriti 
as  Jdtas'ila  (pitumen).  (10) 

When  with  the  destruction  of  a  rock  a  precious  stone 
is  destroyed,  one' should,  collecting  it,  purify  the  same. 
He  should  not  wait  for  the  Agrahdyanic  rite,  (i  i) 

If  the  S'rav  arid-rite,  is  stopped  for  some  impurity 
consequent  upon  birth,  etc..  one  should  completely 
perform  the  A'grahdyanic  rite,  except  the  offering  of  the 
Vali.  (12)  £ 

Thereupon  one  should  lie  down  on  one's  own  bed, 
either  for  a  month,  half-a-month,  seven  nights,  three 
nights,  or  for  a  day,  or  immediately.  (13) 

After  that,  one  should  not  use  Mantrams.  Nor 
should  one  follow  the  rules  governing  the  Room  in 
which  the  Fire  is  deposited.  No  new  cloth  should  be 
spread,  nor  should  there  be  any  mention  of  the  south  or 
the  sides.  (14) 

If  they  are  very  strong;  then  even  when  the  rite  is 
begun  in  Agrahayana,  one  should  sprinkle  two  pitchers 
with  water  reciting  the  Mantrams  all  the  while.  One 
should  recite  the  Mantrams  at  every  pitcher.  (15) 

A  small  impediment  has  been  mentioned  by  many  in 
the  Smriti  as  an  obstacle.  Prdna-Sammita,  etc.,  has 
been  described  as  an  impediment  by  Vas'istha.  (16) 


-. 


Kdtyayand  Safahitd. 

IVhen  therp.  is  a  contradiction  of  words,  the  deliver- 
ance of  the  majority  is  considered  as  an  authority.  Where 
evidence  is  of  equal  weight,  reason  is  described  as  an 
authority.  (17) 

A  palm  is  called  Triiiyamvaka  ;  the  head  is  called 
Apupah  ;  a  ball  is  called  Palas'a  ;  and  powdered  iron  is 
called  Chivara.  (18) 

In  some  places,  one  should  touch  with  the  forepart 
f  the  Nameless  finger ;  and  in  some  places,  one 
should  consecrate  with  Mantrams  by  merely  looking  at 
them.  (19)  • 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

IN  all  the  rites  the  Srotas  (stream)  of  animals  should 
be  sprinkled  with  water  quietly  by  a  bunch  of  J(us'a, 
according  to  one's  desire.  The  two  vessels  made  of 
Palis  a,  are  for  keeping  the  marrow,  (i) 

The  seven  apertures  in  the  head,  the  four  udders,  the 
fiavel,  the  hip  and  the  anus,  are  the  fourteen  Srotas  of  a 
Cow.  (2) 

The  hoof  is  for  cutting  flesh.  Having  collected  the 
entire  quantity  of  marrow  according  to  the  rules  of 
learned  men,  one  should  perform  Homa  and  then  termi- 
nate the  Mantrams.  (3) 

The  breast,  the  tongue,  the  lap,  the  bones,  the  two 
kidneys,  the  anus,  the  udders,  the  hip,  the  shoulder,  the 
testes  and  the  sides,  are  spoken  of  as  the  limbs  of  an 
animal.  (4) 

In  number,  the  Availinam  ^cutting  into  pieces)  is 
eleven,  as  there  are  eleven  limbs.  But  it  is  sometimes 


426 


fourteen,    as  there   are   two   kidneys,  t\vo  sides  and 
testes   (5) 

As  somehow  or  other  the  injunctions  of  the  S'rutt 
must  be  carried  into  effect,  so  there  should  be  eight 
ttifc-fiotnas,  even  when  the  Charu  sacrificial  food;  is 
prepared  with  a  goat.  (6) 

Proportionate  to  [the  number]  of  Avadanas  that  one 
Would  have  made  on  animals  were  they  available, 
Pindas  of  rice  boiled  with  milk,  should  be  made  in  tris 
absence  of  animals;  (7) 

In  the  absence  of  animals^  one  should  make  a  liquid 
food  of  rice,  milk  and  sugar  boiled  together  for 
Uhana-zvxTy  ;  and  similarly,  in  the  Anvashtakd-n\.t.  (8) 

Some  learned  men  speak  of  the  superiority  of  the 
offering  of  Pindas  \  for,  it  is  seen  that,  at  holy  places^ 
chiefly  at  Gaya,  merely  Pindas  are  offered.  (9) 

Other  great  Kls/iis  speak  of  the  superiority  of 
feeding;  for,  it  is  seei»  that,  great  care  is  taken  in  exa- 
mining the  Brahmanas  (10) 

The  regulation  of  an  A  ma-S'  raddha  (i.e.,  one  per- 
formed with  raw  materials],  is  that  [it  should  be  done] 
\vith  Pindas.  The  study  of  the  Vedas  is  forbidden  hi 
the  case  of  taking  food  at  a  S'raddha  ;  and  in  that  of 
listening  to  the  .iV^d^tf-  regulations.  (11) 

I  have  arrived  at  this  conclusion,  after  having  collect- 
ed the  opinions  of  learned  men.  Since  there  is  the 
superiority  of  both  the  rites,  therefore  this  is  the 
aggregate  opinion.  (12) 

The    sprinkling    of  an    animal   vvith  water   in   Pitri- 

rites,    should    be  done  by  one  wearing  the  sacred  thread 

over  the  right  shoulder  and    under    the    left   arm.     And 

One    should   offer    Charu    by    wearing  the  sacred  thread 

Under  the  right  arm.  (13; 


Ktiiy&yansi  Saihhit&.  421 

The  collection  of  Avaddnam  and  not  that  of  any 
rthing  else,  is  for  establishing  the  superiority.  The 
'offering  of  oblation  is  the  superior  part ;  the  remaining 
portion  is  but  an  ordinary  aft  air.  (14) 

Any  elevated  place  is  called  Dvipa  ;  any  place 
'covered  with  green  grass  is  called  Ishtaka  in  the  Smriti* 
Any  watery  place  is  called  Kilina',  and  that  which  is 
-distant  from  a  pool  is  called  Maru.  (15) 

The  gate,  the  window,  the  pillar,  the  earth,  the  plinth 
and  the  last  corner  should  have  no  holes,  nor  should  the 
gate  of  the  house  have  any  holes  ;  and  it  must  be  in  the 
possession  of  the  A'ryyas.  (16) 

In  it  Vrihi  is  called  Vas'angamd  ;  and  barley  is  called 
S'ankka  :;  reciting  the  name  by  such  a  one,  one  should 
•offer  oblations  like  those  of  a  Kshipra-Homa.  (17) 

Arghya  is  formed  by  the  collection  <eyf  fried  paddy, 
flowers,  water  and  scents.  And  Madhuparka  is  formed 
by  the  combination  of  curd  and  hon-ey.  (18) 

With  a  belmetal  vessel,  one  should  pour  Arghya 
into  the  palms  of  a  venerable  person.  One  should  also 
•dedicate  Madhuparka  placed  in  a  belmetal  vessel 
•and  covered  by  a  belmetal  vessel.  (19) 


THE    ENB. 


54 


VRIHASPATI  8AJIHITA'. 

TE3C27 


WITH    A 


LITBRATL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION. 


K>1TBI>  AND  PUBLISHED   BY 

MANMATHA  NATH  DUTT  (SKastri),  MA,  M.R.A.S:, 

Rector,  Keskub  Aeademy, 

of  the  English  Translations  of  the  Rdmdyavfa^  Mah&- 
Bhdratat  Srimadfrh&gavatam,   Mahd^irvdna-Tantram, 
'eL,  Agni  Purdn&m,   Mdrkandeya 
Pur  Attain  t  &c>,  &c» 


PRINTED  BY  H.  C.  DAS,  ELYSIUM  PRESS, 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  Duir's  STRBBT, 

1907. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

[  Vrihaspati  \Samhitd.'] 

SUBJECT.  SLOKAS.  PAGE 

Various  gifts  and  their  fruits        ...                 ,.,             1—6  423 

Measurement  of  lands                  ...                 ..,             7—8  423 

Various  other  gifts                        ...                 ...  9 — 34  424 

Penance  for  various  sins                ...                 ...  35 — 45  426 

Penance  for    the    theft    of    a   Brahmana's 

property                  ,,,                ...                ,„  46—54  427 

Worthy  recipients       ...                 ...                 ...  55 — 61  428 

Fruits  of  various  other  gifts          ...                 ...  62—66  429 

The  destroyer  of  a  Brahmana     ...                 .,,  67 — 69  429 

Sin  for  obstructing  marriage,  etc.                   ...                70  430 

The  reward  of  taking  fruits,  etc,,  and  absten- 
tion from  injury,  etc.                .,,                 ...  71—72  430 
The  fruits  of  other  deeds             ,,,               „,  73—80  430 


}         VUIHASPATI  SAMHITA: 

HAVING  celebrated  a  hundred  sacrifices  [and]  completed 
[them]  with  profuse  presents,  King  Indra  accosted 
Vrihaspati,  the  foremost  of  orators,  saying, —  (i) 

"  O  lord,  by  what  gift  happiness  is  always  multi- 
plied ?  Tell  me,  O  thou  of  great  asceticism,  of  that, 
which,  being  given,  yields  most  precious  fruits. "  (2) 

Being  thus  accosted  by  Indra,  the  greatly  wise 
Vrihaspati,  the  master  of  speech  and  the  priest  of  the 
Celestials,  said, —  (3) 

"  O  Vasava,  he,  who  makes  gifts  of  gold,  cow  and 
lands,  is  freed  from  all  sins.  (4) 

"  Gold,  silver,  raiment,  diamond  and  precious  stones, 
are  all  given  by  him  who  gives  away  lands.  (5) 

.  <(  By  giving  away  furrowed  lands,  capable  of  germi- 
nating seeds  and  filled  with  corns,  one  lives  gloriously 
in  the  celestial  region,  so  long  as  the  solar  rays  remain 
in  the  three  regions.  (6) 

"  By  making  a  gift  of  land,  even  of  the  measurement 
of  a  Gocharma,  one  is  purged  of  any  sin  he  commits 
under  the  distressing  pressure  of  limited  means  of 
livelihood.  (7) 

"A  plot  of  land,  thirty  rods  of  ten  cubits  in  length 
and  ten  such  in  breadth,  is  called  Gocharma.  [The 
gift  of  such  a  land  yields]  great  fruits.  (8) 

"  Or  the  plot  of  land  where  a  thousand  kine,  having 
given  birth  to  young  ones,  may  live  comfortably,  is 
called  Gocharma  in  the  Smriti.  (9) 

(f  By  making  gift  of  a  land  unto  a  Vipra,  endued  with 
accomplishments,  asceticism  and  self-controlled,  one 


Vrihaspaii 

enjoys  the  art-ending  fruits  thereof,  so  long  as  the   eart&> 
girt  by  the  occean  exists,  (ro) 

"  As  seeds,  scattered  on  the  surface  of  the  earth' 
germinate ;  so  virtue,  acquired  by  the  gift  of  lands, 
multiplies,  (ii) 

"  As  a  drop  of  oil,  thrown  into  water,  spreads  itself ; 
so  the  virtue  of  the  gift  of  lands,  multiplies  itself  in' 
every  corn.  (12) 

"The  giver  of  rice  becomes  ever  happy  ;  and  that  of 
raiments,  beautiful.  The  man,  who  makes  gifts  of  lands, 
becomes  always  like  a  king.  (13) 

"As  a  milch-cow  rears  its  calf  by  discharging'  milk: 
so,  O  thousand-eyed  t)eity,  the  land,  given  away,  multi- 
plies the  prosperity  of  the  giver.  (14) 

"[By  giving  away  lands,  one  comes  by  the  fruits  of 
the  gifts  of)  conch-shell,  house,  umbrella,  animate  and 
inanimate  objects,  and  elephants.  The  fruit  of  the 
gift  of  lands,  O  Purandara,  comprises  various  virtues 
and  the  celestial  region.  (15) 

"  The  Sun,  Varana,  Vishnu,  Soma,  Fire-God,  and  the 
Divine  Holder  of  the  Trident  (S'iva),  gratify  the  giver  of 
lands.  (16) 

"The    fathers    vaunt    and    the   grandfathers  become 

o 

gratified,    [and    say, — >]    (  A   giver    of  lands    is   born    in 
our  family.     He  will  become  our  rescuer.'   (17) 

"The  gifts  of  kine,  lands  and  learning,  are  spoken  of 
as  supreme  gifts.  They,  forsooth,  rescue  the  giver 
from  all  sins.  ( 18) 

"  The  givers  of  clothes,  go  [to  the  other  region],- 
being  covered  therewith.  And  those,  who1  fail  to  do1 
so,  go  nude.  The  givers  of  food,  go  there,  gratified 
[with -food].  And  those,  who  do  not  make  gifts  of  food, 
jo  hungry.  (19) 


Vrihaspafi  Satiititd. 

"  All  the    departed    Manes,  afraid    of  hell,    seek    it, 
linking, — '  T  he    son   who  will  go  to  Gaya  would  be  cuf 
rescuer.'  (20) 

One  should  desire  for  many  sons,  for  if  one  happens? 
to  go  to  Gaya",  or  one  happens  perform'  a  Horse-Sacri- 
fice, or  to  dedicate  a  JVtfa-bu\\.  (21) 

"  The  one,  the  upper  part  of  whose  tail  is  dark-blue 
in  colour,  whose  hoops  are  twany-cokmred,  and  whose 
horns  are  white,  is  called  a  Ntla-bu\\.  (22) 

<;  If  that  A^/tf-bull,  having  a  twanty-coloured  tail,  goes 
about  eating  grass,  the  departed  Manes  [of  the  giver],- 
remain  gratified  for  sixty  thousand  years.  (23)' 

"If  the  mud,  upraised  from  the  bank,  exists  on  its- 
horns,  the  departed  Manes  of  the  dedicator  repair  to  ther 
most  beautiful  region  of  Sofflct.  (24) 

"  Formerly  [this  earth  [belonged]  to  Yadtf,  ttilipa,. 
Nriga,  Nahusha  and  other  kings ;  and  in>  future  it 
will  go  to  others.  (25) 

"  This  earth  was  given  away  by  many  kings,  Sdgara, 
and  others.  But  the  fruit  belongs  to  him  in  whoser 
possession  the  land  exists.  (26) 

"  The  perpetrator  of  sinful  deeds-, — he,  who  kills  a 
Brahmana,  who  kills  a  woman,  who  kills  his  father, 
who  kills  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  kine,  who  seizes 
lands  given  away  by  his  own  self  or  by  another, — rots 
with  his  departed  Manes  by  becoming  a  virmin  in  his- 
own  excreta.  (27 — 28) 

"  He,  who  speaks  ill  of  the  gift  of  lands,  and  he, 
who  gives  permission  for  stealing  the  same,  goes  to 
hell.  (29) 

"  The  giver  of  land  and  the  stealer  of  the  same,  reap 
the  virtue  or  the  sin,  and  no  one  else.  Till  the  dissolu- 
tion of  the  universe,  [the  giver]  remains  upwards  (i.e., 


426  Vrihaspati  Saihhitd. 

in  the  celestial  region);  and  the  stealer,  downwards  (t.e,, 
in  hell).  (30) 

"The  first  offspring  of  the  Fire,  is  gold.  The 
daughter  of  Vishnu,  is  the  earth.  A  cow  is  the  daughter 
of  the  Sun.  He,  who  gives  away  gold,  cow,  or  the  earth, 
becomes  the  giver  of  the  threefold  regions  (i.e.,  enjoys 
the  fruits  of  such  a  gift).  (31) 

"  [A  part  of]  the  earth,  extending  over  eighty-six 
thousand  Yoyanas}  being  given  away  by  one  of  one's 
own  accord,  it  gives  everywhere  all  sorts  of  desired-for 
objects.  (32) 

"  Both  he, — who  accepts  the  gifts  of  lands,  and  he, — 
who  makes  such  a  gift, — are  the  performers  of  pious 
deeds.  And  they,  forsooth,  repair  to  the  celestial 
region.  (33) 

"The  fruits  of  all  the  [other]  gifts,  follow  one  birth, 
but  those  of  the  gifts  of  gold,  lands  and  a  seven  years 
old  maiden,  follow  seven  births.  (34) 

"  Thinking  that  I  am  the  soul,  he,  who  does  no  injury 
to  the  fourfold  creations  (those  born  of  perspiration, 
those  born  of  eggs,  the  vegetables,  and  those  born  of 
the  uterus),  has  nothing  to  fear  of,  even  when  he  is 
alienated  from  his  body.  (35) 

"Those  men,  by  whom  a  land  is  improperly  stolen, 
or  those  by  whom  it  is  made  to  be  stolen, — both  the 
stealer  and  the  orderer, — destroy  their  seven  genera- 
tions. (36) 

"  That  wicked-minded  person,  stupefied  by  Tamas 
(disorganizing  tendency),  pilfers  a  land  or  makes  another 
do  the  same,  is  killed  by  Varuna's  noose,  and  is  born  in 
the  species  of  the  feathery  tribe.  (37) 

"  If  denying  the  gift,  one  pilfers  a  land  belonging  to 


Vrihaspati   SartJtttA.  42 J 

a    Bfahmana,    his    three    generations   are   destroyed  by 
tears  shed  [by  such  a  Bra"hmana].  (38) 

"  The  stealer  of  lands,  is  not  purified  by  [the  gift  of] 
a  thousand  of  wells  and  tanks,  by  [the  celebration  of] 
a  hundred  Horse-Sacrifices,  and  by  the  gift  of  a  Koti 
(ten  millions)  of  kine.  (39) 

"  He,  who  wrongly  possesses  a  cow,  a  piece  of 
gold,  or  a  plot  of  land  half  a  cubit  in  measurement, 
lives  in  hell  till  the  hour  of  final  dissolution.  (40) 

"One  meets  with  destruction  by  wrongfully  possess- 
ing a  boundary  land,  measuring  even  half  a  cubit.  By 
obstructing  a  roadtrodden  by  kine,  or  the  village-road, 
or  the  cremation-ground,  and  striking  the  kine,  one  re- 
mains in  hell  till  the  final  dissolution.  Vya"sa's  deli- 
verance is  that  one  should  sow  corns  in  a  barren  place, 
dig  wells  in  a  waterless  place.  The  false  accusation 
of  a  maiden,  destroys  five  generations  ;  and  that  of  a 
cow,  ten.  (41—43) 

"The  false  accusation  of  a  horse,  destroys  a  hundred 
generations;  that  of  men  (i.e.}  servants),  a  thousand. 
Those  born  and  those  who  will  be  born  in  the  family  of 
one  who  utters  a  falsehood  for  gold,  are  destroyed.  (44) 

"To  speak  false  for  land,  destroys  all.  There- 
fore, one  should  never  utter  a  falsehood  for  land.  One 
should  never  cherish  an  inclination  for  a  Brdhmana's 
property,  even  if  his  vital  breath  comes  up  to  the 
throat.  (45) 

"That  dreadful  poison  has  no  medicine  and  no  physi- 
cian. Poison  is  no  poison  ;  but  a  Brahmana's  property 
[verily]  is  spoken  of  as  poison.  (46) 

"Poison  kills  only  one  man  [who  takes  it],  but  a 
Brahmana's  property  destroyes  even  his  son  and  grand- 


Vrihaspat'i 


One  can  digest  iron,  powdered  stone  and  even 
poison.  (47) 

"What  man,  in  the  three  regions,  can  digest  a  Bra*h- 
mana's  'property  ?  A  Brdhmana's  anger  is  a  weapon,  a 
Icing's  hand  is  a  weapon.  (48) 

UA  weapon  destroys  only  one  man  ;  but  a  Brali- 
mana's  anger,  the  entire  family.  The  Bra'hmana's  have 
thus  ire  for  their  weapons  ;  and  Hari  (Vishnu)  has  the 
-discus  -for  his  weapon.  (491 

"[A  Brahmana's]  anger  is  fiercer  than  the  discus  ;  one 
should  not,  therefore,  make  a  Brahmana  irate.  Those 
destroyed  by  fire  or  the  Sun,  may  grow  again.  (50) 

"  But  there  is  no  re-growth  for  him,  who  has  been 
•destroyed  by  a  Brahmana's  ire.  Fire  destroys  [an 
article]  by  its  power  >  and  the  Sun,  by  its  rays.  (51) 

"The  king  consumes  [a  person]  with  the  rod  of  chas- 
tisement ;  and  a  Vipra,  with  anger.  That  wealth  which 
creates  a  desire  for  a  Brahmana's  property  and  hanker- 
ing for  what  is  dedicated  to  a  Deity,  leads  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  one's  family  and  self.  The  theft  of  a  Brahma- 
na's  property,  Brahmanicidej  the  pilfering  of  a  poor 
man's  wealth,  and  that  of  a  preceptor's  or  a  friend's 
gold,  afflicts  one,  even  if  one  is  stationed  in  the  celestial 
region.  The  sin,  attached  to  the  stealth  of  a  Brah- 
mana's property,  is  never  dissipated.  (52—54) 

"  If  one  bides  that  sin,  it  will  get  wind  elsewhere. 
The  weapons  [bought]  and  the  soldiers  fed  by  a  Brah- 
mana's wealth,  are  destroyed  in  a  battle  like  water  in. 
sands.  O  Vasava,  O  foremoost  of  the  Celestials, 
eternal  is  the  gift  that  is  made  unto  a  person  who  is 
well-read  in  the  Vedas,  born  in  a  good  family,  poor, 
contented,  humble,  given  to  the  well-being  of  all 
creatures,  who  studies  the  Vedas,  performs  penances, 


Vnhaspaii  SaihhtiA.  499 

tias  acquired  knowledge  and  controlled  the  senses.  As 
milk,  curd,  clarifie-d  butter  and  honey,  placed  in  a  raw 
earthen  vessel,  are  destroyed  for  the  defect  of  the  vessel,, 
>so  an  ignorant  man,  who  accepts  cows,  gold,  raiment, 
food,  land  and  sesame,  is  consumed  like  a  wood.  If 
an  ignorant  person  lives  in  one's  own  house,  and  one 
'vastly  read  in  the  S'ruti  at  a  distance,— presents  should 
be  made  unto  the  one  who  is  master  of  the  Veda. 
There  is  no  sin  in  superseding  the  ignorant  wight.  A 
learned  person,  O  Vasava,  rescues  the  family  by  aeven 
and  seven  (i.e.,  seven  generations  upwards  and  seven 
downwards).  (55 — 61) 

"  He,  who  excavates  a  new  tank,  or  reclaims  an  old 
ene,  lives  gloriously  in  the  celestial  region  after  res- 
cuing his  entire  family.  (62) 

"  He,  who  reclaim's  old  tanks,  wells,  pools,  forests 
-and  gardens,  enjoys  the  same  fruits  of  the  original 
maker.  (63) 

"  The  person,  O  Vasava,  in  whose  tank,  water  exists 
•even  in  the  summer  season,  never  comes  by  any  dis^ 
stressing  condition.  (64) 

"O  foremost  of  ike  kings,  the  person,  in  whose  tank 
on  this  earth,  water  exists  eve^n  for  a  day,  rescues  seven 
generations  upwards  and  downwards.  (65) 

"  By  making  gifts  of  lamp,  one  becomes  of  a  hand- 
some body.  By  making  gifts  of  edibles,  one  acquires 
.memory  and  intellect.  (66) 

"  If,  after  perpetrating  iniquitous  deeds,  one  gives 
food  unto  one  soliciting  the  same  and  especially  unto  .a 
JBrahmana,  one  is  not  affected  by  the  sin  [thereof],  (67) 

"  [The  sages]  call  him  the  destroyer  of  a  Brahmana, 
who,  when  seeing  fanfrs,  kine  and  wives  *f  one,  forcibly 
55 


430  Vrihaspati 

taken  by  another,  does  not  communicate  [the  matter 
unto  the  master].  (68) 

'•'  If  a  king,  on  being  communicated  by  the  Brahma- 
n^s,  oppressed  by  anger,  does  not  save  them^  him  also, 
t.  /  call  the  destroyer  of  a  Brahmana.  (69) 

"  He,  vTho,  out  of  stupefaction,  puts  impediments  in 
an  .  np^  ii.ug  marriage,  sacrifice  or  gift,  O  Vasava,  is 
be  v  *s  ><inmin  after  death.  (70) 

•  V/odlu.  is  multiplied  by  a  gift ;  and  life  [is  pro- 
longed1 by  tl.e  p  otection  of  lives.  By  abstention  from 
ii  ur-  ,  o/ie  'enjoys  the  fruits  [thereof  in  the  shape  of] 
beauty,  prosperity  and  f.eedom  from  diseases.  (71) 

"Bv  partaking  of  fruits  and  roots,  one  attains  to  the 
adorai>Ie  celestial  region  along  with  the  dwellers  there- 
in. By  fasting,  one  enjoys  a  kingdom  and  happiness 
everywhere.  (72) 

"[The'acquisition  of]  kine,  etc.,  [is  the  fruit  of]  initia^ 
tion.  One,  by  living  on  grass,  attains  to  the  celestial 
region.  One,  by  bathing  three  times  [a  day],  acquires 
women  :  and  by  drinking  air  only  [and  dying  thereby], 
one  reaps  the  fruit  of  a  sacrifice.  (73) 

"A  kingdom  does  not  accomplish  what  [is  gained  b$] 
a  twice-born  person,  who  bathes  daily,  adores  the  Sun, 
and  recites  the  Mantrams  at  the  two  periods  of  junction. 
One  attains  to  the  celestial  region  by  meeting  with 
death  while  fasting.  (74) 

"  Entering  into  a  fire  by  being  self-restrained,  one 
lives  gloriously  in  the  region  of  Brahma.  He,  who- 
returns  precious  stones,  comes  by  creature-comforts  and 
sons.  (75) 

"He,  who  fasts,  lives,  for  good,  in  the  celestial 
region.  He,  who  always  lies  down  on  one  side,  comes 
by  a  desired-for  condition. 


Vrihaspatt  Saihbitt.  431 

"  He,  who  resorts  to  a  hero's  seat,  a  hero's  bed 
and  a  hero's  place,  has  eternal  regions  and  desired-for 
objects.  (77). 

"  By  performing  fasting,  initiation  and  water-sprink- 
ling for  twelve  years>  one  attains  to  a  region  superior  to 
that  of  heroes.  (78) 

"By  studying  all  the  Vtdas,  one  is  immediately  freed 
from  sorrow.  He,  who  performs  sanctifying  religious 
rites,  lives  gloriously  in  the  celestial  region.  (79) 

(  The  twice-born,  who  study  the  holy  deliverance  of 
Vrihaspati,  have  these  four,  -viz. — longevity,  learning, 
fame  and  strength,  multiplied."  (80) 


THE  END. 


DAKSHA  SAMHITA*. 


WITH    A 


LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION. 


EDITED   AND   PUBLISHED   BY 

JflANWATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  MA,  IYI.R.A.S., 

Rector,  Keshub  Academy, 

Anther  of  the  English  Translations  of  the  Rdmdyanam,  Mahd* 

Bhdratamt  Srimadbhdgavatam,  Mahdnirvdna-Tantramt 

Harivams'a,  Agni  Purdnam,   Mdrkandeya 

Purdnam,  &c.,  &c. 


PRINTED  BY  H.  C.  DAS,  ELYSIUM  PRESS, 

40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DUTT'S  STREET. 

1907. 


DAKSHA  SAMHITA'. 


CHAPTER    I. 

THERE  was   a  patriarch    named   Daksha,    who   was  ac- 
quainted  with   the  true   import    of    D karma   (religion), 
Artha   (worldly  profit),    the  foremost    of  all  those  con- 
versant with  the    Ved.'is,    and   a   perfect    master  of  all 
^fcrms  of  learning,   (i) 

Creation,  universal  dissolution,  preservation  and  des- 
truction take  place  of  themselves,  and  the  soul  abides  in 
Brahman.  (2) 

A   Brahmachdrin    (religious   student),   a   Grihastha 
(householder),    a    Vdnaprastha    (forest-recluse)     dna    a 
Yatin    (hermit) — for  all   these,    Daksha  wrote  his  Insti- 
tutes. (3) 

As  long  as  a  boy  does  not  attain  to  the  age  of 
eight,  [he  is  known]  as  a  new-born  babe.  He  is  to  be 
known  as  an  embryo,  the  difference  [only]  being  that  of 
his  individuality.  (4) 

'In  the  period  [that  is  during  the  period]  that  he  is 
not  invested  with  the  sacred  thread,  there  is  no  sin  in  a 
food  and  an  interdicted  edible,  in  drink,  in  what  should 
be  spoken  or  not,  and  in  falsehood.  (5) 

By  doing  forbidden  deeds,  after  being  invested  with 
the  sacred  thread,  one  commits  a  sin.  As  long  as  he  is 
not  sixteen  years  old,  he  is  not  entitled  to  follow  an 
established  rule  or  practice.  (6) 

As  long  as  one   studies  the    Vedds  and   follows  the 
Vedic  observances,  he  is  called  a  Brahmachdrin.    There- 
after, on  being  bathed,  he  becomes  a  householder.  (7) 
56 


434  Daksha  Saihhitd. 

Two  classes  of  Brahmacharin  have  been  mentioned 
by  the  wise  in  the  Smriti.  The  first  is  Upakurvanaka 
(a  Brahmana,  in  a  state  of  pupilage,  who  wishes  to 
pass  on  to  the  state  of  a  householder);  the  second 
is  Naishthika  (one  who  leads  a  life  of  perpetual 
celibacy.  (8) 

He, — who  after  having  adopted  the  life  of  a  house- 
holder, becomes  a  religious  student  again, — is  neither  a 
Yatin  nor  a  Vanaprastha>  but  he  is  divorced  from  all 
the  A' dramas.  (9) 

A  twice-born  person  should  not  live,  even  for  a  day, 
without  following  any  order.  If  he  lives  without  follow- 
ing an  order,  he  is  required  to  perform  a  penitential 
rite.  (10) 

He, — who,  divorced  from  an  order,  engages  himself 
in  recitation,  or  in '  the  performance  of  Homa,  or  in 
making  gifts,  or  in  Vedic  study, — does  not  reap  the  fruit 
thereof,  (u) 

The  three  orders  should  be  followed  in   due  succes- 
sion, andnot  in  a  reverse  course.  There  is  none  more  sinful 
than  he  who  follows  them  in  a  reverse  order.  (12) 

A  Brakmacharin  is  marked  by  a  girdle,  a  black  ante- 
lope skin  and  a  staff  ;  a  householder,  by  the  sacrifices 
for  the  Deities,  etc.;  and  a  forest-recluse,  by  the  presence 
of  nails  and  hairs.  And  a  Yatin  [is  known]  by  a 
threefold  staff.  These  are  the  different  characteristic 
marks.  (13) 

He,  who  has  none  of  these  marks,  is  no  follower 
of  an  order ;  and  he  is  required  to  perform  a  penitential 
rite.  The  order  of  the  above-mentioned  rites  has  not 
been  spoken  of,  nor  has  the  time  [of  those  rites]  been 
,  in  the  Smriti^  by  the  Sages.  (14) 


Daksha  Saihhitd.  435 

For  the  behoof  of  the  twice-born,  Daksha  himself 
has  spoken  of  [all  those  rites].  (13) 


CHAPTER  II. 

I  SHALL  now  describe  all  those  rites,  which,  being  con* 
ducive  to  their  well-being,  should  be  performed  by  the 
twice-born  every  day,  after  getting  up  from  the  bed  early 
in  the  morning,  (i) 

From  sunrise  to  sunset,  a  Vipra  should  not  remain, 
even  for  a  moment,  without  performing  the  daily  and  the 
obligatory  rites}  as  also  those  performed  with  an  end  in 
view  and  those,  not  censurable.  (2) 

If  a  twice-born  person,  abandoning  his  own  rite, 
performs  those  of  another  caste,  either  unwittingly  or 
out  of  stupefaction,  he  becomes  degraded  thereby.  (3) 

Instructions  would  [now]  be  delivered  by  me  about 
what  should  be  performed  in  the  first  part  of  the  day. 
I  would  [also]  describe  in  full  all  those  different  rites 
which  should  be  performed  in  the  various  divisions  of 
the  day, — the  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh 
and  the  eighth.  (4 — 5) 

When  the  dawn  arrives,  one  should,  after  duly 
performing  the  purificatory  works  (i.e.,  passing  urine 
and  excreta)  and  cleansing  the  teeth,  bathe  in  the 
morning.  (6) 

Bathing  in  the  morning  is  the  purifier  of  the  highly 
dirty  body,  having  nine  apertures,  [and]  passing  [urine 
and  excreta]  day  and  night.  (7) 

The  organs  of  a  sleeping  person  become  moistened 
and  pass  discharges,  The  superior  organs  thereby 
come  to  the  level  of  the  inferior  ones,  (8) 


436  Daksha  Samhitd. 

Besmeared  with  sweat  and  perspiration,  one  gets  up' 
from  the  bed.  Therefore  without  bathing,  one  must) 
not  perform  any  religious  rite,  such  as,  the  recitation  of 
the  Mantrams,  the  celebration  of  Homa,  etc.  (9) 

If  a  Vipra,  getting  up  from  the  bed  at  dawn,  takes  his 
daily  bath  early  in  the  morning  for  three  years,  he  has- 
the  sins  of  his  entire  birth  dissipated,  (lo) 

Bathing  in  the  morning,  at  the  period  of  conjunc- 
tion when  the  Sun  rises,  is  equal  to  the  [penitential  rite 
of]  Prdjapatya  in  the  destruction  even  of  mighty 
iniquities.  (11) 

The  Rishis  highly  speak  of  early  bathing,  in  the 
morning;  for  it  yields  fruits  seen  and  unseen.  One  who 
bathes  in  the  morning,  with  his  soul  purified,  is  entitled 
to  perform  all,  sucb  as,  the  recitation  of  the  Mantramsr 
etc.  (12) 

It  is  said  that  one  should  rinse  the  mouth  after 
bathing.  By  performing  the  A'chamanam  (rinsing), 
according  to  the  following  regulation,- — one  attains  to- 
purification.  (13) 

Having  washed  both  the  hands  and  feet,  one  should' 
drink  water  thrice,  after  seeing  it  carefully.  Then  one 
should  rub  the  mouth  twice,  with  the  thumb  curved  & 
little.  (14) 

Having  sprinkled  his  two  feet  completely  with 
water,  one  should  touch  one's  limbs  with  the  fingers. 
Thereafter,  one  should  touch  the  two  nostrils  wkh  the 
thumb  and  the  forefinger.  Sprinkling  water  thrice, 
one  should  touch  one's  face.  Then  sprinkling  the 
feet  completely  with  water,  one  should  touch  the 
limbs.  (15) 

Thereafter,  one  should  touch  the  nose  with  the  thumb 
and  the  forefinger.  And  with  the  thumb  and  the  name- 


Daksha  Saihhitll,  437 

less  one,  one  should  repeatedly  touch  the  eyes  and  the 
ears.  (16) 

Then  one  should  touch  the  navel  with  the  thumb 
and  the  little  finger;  the  breast,  with  the  right  palm; 
then  the  head,  with  all  the  fingers ;  and  the  arms,  with 
the  tops  of  all  the  fingers.  (17) 

That  Brahmana  in  particular,  who  does  not  perform 
his  Sandkyd-a.dor3itions,  in  the  evening,  morning  and 
the  noon,  becomes  in  his  lifetime  like  a  S'udra.  After 
his  death,  he  is  born  as  a  dog.  (18) 

One,  who  does  not  perform  the  Sandkyd-adorations, 
is  always  impure,  and  is  unworthy  of  all  religious 
rites.  The  fruit,  of  any  religious  rite  that  he  may 
perform,  goes  not  to  him.  (19) 

After  the  termination  of  the  Sandhya.-^ oration,  one 
should  himself  perform  a  Homa.  The  fruit,  which  one 
reaps  by  himself,  performing  the  Homa,  is  not  attained 
if  it  is  performed  by  another.  (20) 

When  a  Homa  is  performed  by  any  of  these — a 
"Ritwi&t  a  son,  the  preceptor,  a  brother,  a  daughter's  son, 
and  a  son-in-law,  it  is  equal  to  that  performed  by  one's 
own  self.  (2n 

Having  performed  the  sacrifice  for  the  Deities,  one 
should,  thereafter,  adore  the  preceptor  and  look  at  the 
auspicious  articles.  The  rites  for  the  Deities  should  be 
performed  in  the  first  part  of  the  day  ;  that  for  men,  in 
the  middle  part ;  that  for  the  departed  Manes,  in  the 
afternoon  ;  all  these  rites  are  to  be  performed  with 
great  care.  (22 — 23) 

If  one  performs  a  rite  in  the  evening  which  should 
be  performed  in  the  morning,  he  reaps  no  fruit  there- 
by, as  a  barren  woman  by  sexual  intercourse.  (24) 

It  is  laid  down  that  all  the  rkes,  should  be  performed 


Daksha  Saihkitd. 

in    the   first   part  of  the  day.     And  the  Vtdds,  it  is  laid 
down,  should  be  studied  in  the  second  part.  (25) 

The  study  of  the  Vedas  is  spoken  of  as  the  highest 
austerity  for  the  Vipras.  The  study  of  the  Vedas  with 
its  six  auxiliaries  is  to  be  known  as  Brhma-Yajiia.  (26) 

The  first  is  the  admission  [of  the  superiority]  of 
the  Vedas ;  then  discussion  [on  the  Vedas],  then  the 
study,  then  the  recitation  [of  the  VMas\,  and  then  the 
deliverance  of  instructions  unto  the  disciples.  This  is 
the  fivefold  practice  of  the  Vedas.  (2?) 

This  time  (i.e.,  the  second  part  of  the  day)  is  alsa 
spoken  of  as  the  fittest  time  for  the  gathering  of  sacri-» 
ficial  fuels,  flowers,  Kus'a,  etc.  In  the  third  part  of  the 
day,  means,  for  acquiring  riches  and  supporting  the  de- 
pendants, should  bethought  of.  (28) 

The  father,  the  mother,  the  preceptor,  the  wife,  the 
children,  the  poor  people,  the  dependants,  the  incomers 
and  the  guests,  are  spoken  of  as  the  Poshyas  (i.e.,  those 
who  should  be  supported  .  (29) 

Kinsmen,  relatives,  those  suffering  from  diseases, 
who  have  none  to  look  after  them,  those  who  seek  re- 
fuge, and  others  having  no  means,  are  also  spoken  o:r 
as  the  Poshyas  (30) 

To  support  the  Poshyas,  is  the  most  excellent  expe- 
dient for  attaining  to  the  celestial  region.  By  oppres- 
sing them,  one  goes  to  Jhell.  Therefore  one  should 
support  them  with  care.  (31) 

One  should  especially  offer  boiled  rice  unto  all 
creatures.  One  should  make  presents  unto  the  learned, 
;or  else  he  would  go  to  hell.  (32) 

Blessed  is  his  life,  who  alone  is  the  instrument  of 
support  unto  many.  Those  men  are  like  the  dead) 
although  alive,  who  live  for  themselves  only.  (33)  . 


Daksha  Samhitd.  439 

• 

Some  live  for  many  ;  others  live  for  their  kith  and 
kin  ;  others  [only]  for  themselves.  And  some  cannot, 
with  difficulty  [even],  support  themselves.  (34) 

One  desiring  for  lordly  powers,  should  make  gifts 
unto  the  poor,  the  helpless  and  the  learned.  By  making 
gifts  unto  unworthy  persons,  people  are  born  dependant 
on  another's  fortune.  (35* 

I  consider  that  wealth,  which  one  presents  unto 
worthy  persons  and  which  one  offers  every  day  in 
Horna,  as  the  true  wealth.  The  rest  belongs  to  some 
body  else  which  one  merely  protects.  In  the  fourth  part 
of  the  day,  one  should  fetch  earth  for  bathing.  (36; 

[One  should  in  the  same  part  of  the  day,  collect] 
sesame,  flowers,  Kus*a,  etc.  One  should  bathe  in  the 
natural  water.  Bathing  has  been  spoken  of  as  being 
threefold,  viz.t — Nitya  (daily),  Naimitika  (obligatory, 
as  in  the  solar  or  lunar  eclipse),  and  Kdmya  (having  an 
end,  such  as  the  attainment  of  the  celestial  region 
in  view;.  (37) 

Of  them  that  which  is  Nitya  (daily),  divides  itself 
again  into  three  : — (i)Maldpaharanam  ^that  which  re- 
moves the  dirt  of  the  body)  ;  (2),  the  next  is  the  one 
which  is  done  after  reciting  the  Mantrams*  (38) 

[The  third]  is  the  bathing  at  the  two  periods  of 
junction.  These  are  the  divisions  of  bathing  described. 
Mdrfanam  (sprinkling  the  person  with  water  by  means 
of  the  hands)  should  be  made  in  the  water.  Prand- 
ydma  may  be  practised  anywhere.  (39) 

Then  adorations  should  be  offered  to  the  Sun  j  after- 
wards the  recitation  of  the  Gdyatri  is  spoken  of.  The 
Sun  is  the  Deity  of  the  Gdyatri  at  whose  mouth  the 
threefold  Fire  is  stationed.  (40) 


440  Daksha  Samhita. 

The  "Rishi  (Saintly  Author)  is  Vis'va"mitra  and  the 
metre  is  Gdyatri.  Sdvitri  is  thus  qualified.  In  the  fifth 
part  of  the  day,  due  divisions  should  be  made.  (41) 

[Divisions  of  food  should  be  made]  for  the  departed 
Manes,  the  Deities,  the  mankind  and  the  insects,  etc. 
Such  is  the  deliverance  [of  Daksha].  Since  a  house- 
holder gives  daily  sustenance  unto  the  Deities,  the 
human  beings  and  the  bipeds,  the  order  of  a  Grihastha 
is,  therefore  the  foremost  of  all  A's'ramas.  The  order 
of  a  householder  is  spoken  of,  as  the  source  of  the  three 
other  A's'ramas  (42 — 43) 

That  being  deteriorated,  the  other  three  also  become 
s  ubject  to  decay.  A  trunk  has  the  root  for  its  life, 
the  branches  have  the  trunk,  and  the  leaves  have  the 
branches,  [for  their  life].  (44) 

The  root  being  destroyed,  all  these  meet  with  des- 
truction. A  householder  should  therefore  be  protected 
with  every  care.  (45) 

He  is  to  be  reverenced  and  adored  by  the  king  and 
the  three  other  castes,  [except  the  Brahmana] .  He  is 
is  called  a  householder  who  performs  the  duties  of  the 
order.  A  householder  [does  not  become  a  householder"] 
by  [merely  possessing]  a  house.  (46) 

A  man, — neglecting  his  own  duties,  and  failing  to 
bathe,  offer  oblations  to  the  Fire,  recite  the  Mantrams 
and  make  gifts, — does  not  become  [a  householder]  by 
[merely  having]  a  son  and  a  wife.  (47) 

By   being   indebted   to  the  Deities  and  others,*  one 


*  This  refers  to  the  various  debts  which  a  man  is  to  satisfy.  The 
debt  to  the  Deities,  one  satisfies  by  performing  religious  rites  ;  the  debt 
to  the  departed  [Manes,  one  satisfies  by  performing  the  S'rdddha  ;  the 
debt  to  the  Rishis,  one  satisfies  by  making  religious  studies ;  and  the 
debt  to  mankind,  one  satisfies  by  feeding  them. 


Samkitt.  441 

goes  to  hdl.  One  who  eats  alone,  is  the  taker  of  food, 
while  the  other  [who  shares  it  with  many,]  is  th«  feeder 
of  others.  (48) 

[The  difference  between  these  two,  is  : — 1  He,  who 
only  takes  food  for  himself,  [lives  alone  for  himself  and] 
does  not  feed  others.  He, — -who  makes  allotments  [of 
food  unto  the  guests],  is  forgiving,  compassionate, 
devoted  to  the  Deities  and  guests, — -is  a  pious  house- 
holder. He  is  spoken  as  the  leading  householder  in 
whom  exists  these  accomplishments,  -viz., — mercy,  bash- 
fulness,  forgiveness,  reverential  faith,  discriminative 
knowledge^  practice  of  Yoga  and  gratitude.  Having 
made  an  allotment  [of  the  food],  a  householder  should 
partake  of  the  residue.  (49 — 51) 

Having  partaken  of  the  food  and  sat  at  ease,  he 
should  digest  the  same.  He  should  then  spend  the 
sixth  and  seventh  parts  of  the  day  in  the  study  of 
the  Itiha&as  and  the  Puranas.  (52-) 

In  the  eigth  part  [of  the  day],  temporal  affairs 
should  be  attended  to.  Then,  again,  he  should  adore  the 
Fire  in  the  evening.  He  should  next  perform  Homa, 
take  meals  and  finish  other  household  works.  (53) 

Having  performed  [all  the  duties],  one  should,  after- 
wards, study  the  Vedas  a  little.  One  should  spend  the 
two  periods  of  time  after  Pradosha  (nightfall)  in  the 
study  of  the  Vedas.  (54) 

He,  who  then  sleeps  for  the  next  two  periods,  is  com- 
petent to  attain  to  Brahman.  Occasional  rites  and  those 
undertaken  with  a  particular  aim,  one  may  perform  at 
any  time  whatsover  when  the  necessity  arises.  No  fixed 
time  is  laid  down  for.  them.  One,  b^ing  born  in  this 
world,  shall  have  to  meet  with  death  here.  (55 — 56) 

57 


442  Daksha  Sariihiia. 

One  wishing  for  happiness,  should,  therefore,  per- 
form all  the  duties  with  every  care.  The  middle  period- 
is  the  best  for  all  the  rites.  By  partaking  of  the 
clarified  batter  left  as  remnant  of  the  offering  of  obla- 
tion, and  going  to  sleep  in  due  time, — a  Brahmana  has 
never  to  suffer  from  any  physical  disabilities.  (57 — 58) 


CHAPTER  III. 

A  HOUSEHOLDER  has  nine  Sudhds.  I  shall  express 
these  nine  in  words.  Similarly  there  are  nine  [proper] 
acts  and  nine  [improper]  acts,  (i) 

Secret  deeds  are  nine  ;  open  works  are  nine  ;  sue- 
e,ij|fssful  works  are  nine  ;  and  unsuccessful  works  are 
also  nine.  (2) 

There  are  nine  objects  which  are  never  to  be 
given  away  [by  a  householder].  These  groups  of 
nine  always  lead  to  the  aggrandisement  of  a  house- 
holder. (3) 

I  shall  now  describe  the  .SW^0- articles.  When  any 
distinguished  person  comes  to  the  house,  one  should 
gently  offer  these  four, — the  mind,  the  eye,  the  face,  and 
the  words.  One  should  rise  up  and  say, — ''come  here  ;" 
carry  on  a  pleasant  conversation,  saying, — "welcome  ;" 
treat  him  with  food ;  and  follow  him.  [All]  these 
works  should  be  carefully  [performed].  (4 — 5) 

Other  minor  gifts  [are  :] — [pointing  out  of]  a  place 
[for  sitting]  ;  [offering  of]  water  [for  washing  the  feet]; 
[offering  of]  a  /<"#$' tf- seat  ;  washing  the  feet ;  [offering 
of]  oil  for  rubbing  the  body ;  [offering  of]  a  bed ; 
[and  offering  of]  food,  according  to  one's  might.  A 
householder  should  not  take  his  food  before  his  guest 


Daksha   Saihkitd.  4^3 

is  fed,  the   offering   of  earth   and   water  ; — all    these,  a 
householder  should  always  perform.    (6 — 7) 

dorations,  bathing,  recitation  of  the 
Homa,  Vedic  study,  adorations  of  the  Deities, 
adoration  of  the  Vis'wadevds,  hospitable  treatment 
extended  to  the  guests,  according  to  one's  own  might, 
proper  allotment  of  food  for  the  departed  Manes,  Deities, 
human  beings,  the  poor,  the  helpless,  the  ascetics,  the 
father,  the  mother  and  the  preceptor, — these  are  the  nine 
[sacred]  works.  Iniquitous  deeds  are,  again,  [the  follow- 
ing : — ]  Falsehood,  knowing  another's  wife,  taking  for- 
bidden food,  knowing  a  woman  who  should  not  be 
known,  drinking  what  should  not  be  drunk,  theft,  com- 
mitting injury,  doing  works  not  sanctioned  in  the  S'ruti, 
transgression  of  a  friend's  duty, — these  are  nine  im- 
proper deeds.  One  should  avoid  them  all.  Longevity, 
wealth,  weakness  of  a  house,  counsel,  sexual  inter- 
course, medicine,  austerity,  charity,  and  honour, — these 
nine  should  be  carefully  kept  secret.  Freedom  from 
a  disease,  satisfaction  of  a  debt,  gift,  study,  sale,  giving 
away  a  daughter  in  marriage,  dedication  of  a  bull,  secret 
sin,  and  the  act  of  not  being  censured  by  others, — 
these  nine  should  be  publicly  done  by  a  householder. 
(8—14) 

What  is  presented  as  a  gift  to  the  father,  to  the 
mother,  to  the  .preceptor,  to  a  friend,  to  a  humble 
person,  to  one  who  has  done  any  good,  to  the  poor, 
to  the  helpless  and  to  distinguished  persons,  yields 
fruits.  (15) 

What  is  given  as  a  present  to  a  wicked  person,  to 
a  panegyrist,  to  an  ignorant  wight,  to  a  bad  physician, 
to  a  liar,  to  a  cheat,  to  a  flatterer,  to  a  wandering  actor, 
and  to  a  thief,  becomes  fruitless.  (16) 


444  Daksha  Saihhitd. 

A  small  property,  what  is  gained  by  begging,  what 
is  kept  as  a  security,  trust-money,  a  woman,  a  woman's 
personal  property,  what  is  inherited,  whole  estate 
and  public  property, — these  nine  articles  should  never 
be  given  av^ay  even  in  a  calamity,  if  there  is  any  living 
member  in  the  family.  That  foolish  wight  who  gives 
them  away,  is  required  to  perform  a  penitential  rite. 

(17-^18)  ' 

The  Goddess  of  Prosperity  in  this  world  and  in  the 
celestial  regi©n  in  the  next,  does  not  forsake  a  person 
who  knows-  these  groups  of  nine  and  performs  the  rftes 
mentioned  therein.  (19) 

Others  should  be  looked  upon  as  his  own  self  by  a 
person  desiring  for  happiness.  Happiness  and  sorrow 
are  equal  both  unto  on«'s  ownself  and  unto  others.  (20) 

Happiness  or  sorrow,  which  should  be  afforded  unto 
others,  would  afterwards  again  arise  in  one's  own 
self.  (21) 

No  article  is  procurable  without  trouble.  How  can 
any  religious  rite  be  performed  in  the  absence  of 
[proper]  articles  ?  There  is  no  religion  in  the  absence 
of  rites..  And  wherfe  is  happiness  in  the  absence  of 
religion  ?  (22) 

All  persojis  seek  ha-ppiness ;  but  that  originates 
from  religion.  Therefore  religion  should  always  be 
careftilly  practised  by  all  the  castes.  (23) 

A  rite  for  the  next  world  should  be  performed  by 
articles  acquired  by  fair  means.  A  gift  should  be  duly 
made  unto  an  a^ccprnplished  person  in  proper  time  (24). 

In  making  a  gift,  the  particular  fruit  multiplies,  in 
order,  in  equal  number,  twofold,  thousandfold,  and  end- 
kssly.  Similar  [is  the  fruit]  in  committing  injury.  (25) 

Equal    [is   the   fruit']    when    a  jsft   is    made   unto  a 


Daksha  Saihhitd.  44$ 

Bnihmana  ;*  a  thousandfold,  [when  it  is  made  unto]  a 
preceptor ;  and  endless,  [when  it  is  nvade  unto]  one 
who  has  mastered  the  V^dds.  (26) 

Not  only  that  which  one  gives  unto'an  unworthy 
person  who  neglects  all  injunctions,  becomes  futile,  but 
the  remaining  virtue  is  also  destroyed  [thereby].  (27) 

Finding  out  one  who  solicts  a  gift  for  preventing  a 
calamity  or  for  maintaining  his  relatives,  one  should 
make  a  gift ;  otherwise  it  would  yield  no  fruit.  (28; 

The  virtue  of  a  person,  who  establishes  an  orphan  by 
performing  the  rite  of  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread, 
marriage,  etc.,  for  him,  cannot  be  enumerated.  (29) 

The  well-being,  which  is  attained  by  a  person  for 
settling  down  a  Vipra,  is  not  acquired  by  an  Agnihotra~y 
or  an  Agnisthoma-i  rite.  (30) 

Whatever  is  greatly  prized,  whatever  is  the  most 
favourite  article  in  the  house,  should  be  given  away 
unto  a  qualified  person  by  one  seeking  an  endl-ess 
possession  of  all  those  articles.  (31) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  household  of  men  has  the  wife  for  its  root,  if  she 
follows  the  Ved&s  ;  there  is  none  equal  to  the  domestic 
mode  of  life,  if  a  wife  is  under  the  control  of  her 
husband,  (i) 


*  The  Text  has  Brdhmana  Vruve,  i.e.,  one  who  pretends  to  be  a 
Brahnaana  but  neglects  the  duties  of  the  caste.  It  is,  however,  curious 
how  may  the  fruit  be  twofold  in  this  case.  But  we  have  rendered  the 
Text  literaHy.  Berhaps  the  Author  means  Brdhmcma-Sh&thali. 


446  Daksfia  Samhitd. 

With  her,  one  reaps  the  fruits  of  the  threefold  objects 
of  life,  namely, — Dharma  (Virtue),  Artha,  (worldly 
profit)  and  Kama  (desire).  If  she  follows  her  own  will 
•and  is  not  curbed  [by  her  husband]  out  of  love,  she  be- 
comes uncontrollable  afterwards  like  unto  a  disease 
neglected.  She  who  follews  the  will  of  her  lord,  does 
not  give  vent  to  *evil  words,  is  an  expert,  is  chaste, 
speaks  pleasant  words,  is  protected  by  her  own  self, 
and  is  devoted  to  her  consort,  is  a  goddess  and  not  a 
woman.  (2 — 4) 

This  world  is  like  a  celestial  region  unto  him  whosat 
wife  follows  him  obediently.  It  is  like  a  hell  unto  him 
whose  wife  is  against  him.  There  is  no  doubjt  in  it.  (5) 

Mutaal  attachment  [between  a  husband  and  a  wife], 
is  rare  even  in  the  celestial  region.  There  is  nothing 
sjiore  painful  than  the  fact  that  one  is  attached  to, 
and  another  is  unfavourably  (disposed  towards,  [the 
other].  (6) 

The  domestic  mode  of  life  is  fc>r  happiness  ;  and 
happiness  is  dependent  on  a  wife  in  the  house.  She, 
who  is  humble,  knows  the  mind  and  is  under  the  control 
[of  her  husband], — is  a  [real]  wife.  (7) 

Otherwise  s«he  always  becomes  miserable  and  dis- 
appointed. Disagreement  of  the  mind  always  takes 
place  when  a  person  has  a  wife  always  going  against 
him,  and  specially  when  he  has  two  wives.  (8) 

All  wives  are  like  leeches.  Even  if  daily  gratified 
with  ornaments,  dresses  and  foodj,  they  never  cease  to 
extort  a  man.  (9) 

That  small  leecher  merely  sucks  the  blood  while  the 
ofejher   draws  the  wealth,  property,  flesh,  energy,  strength 
'  and  t&e  happiness  of  a  man.  (10) 


Daksh*  Sa*ihtt&.  447 

In  childhood,  she  always  remains  afraid  ;  in  youth, 
she  becomes  disobedient ;  and  afterwards  in  old  ager 
she  considers  her  own  husband  as  a  servant,  (n) 

Obedient,  unsullied  by  harsh  speech,  expert,  chaste 
and  devoted  to  her  husband, — a  wife,  endued  with 
all  these  accomplishments,  is,  forsooth,  the  Goddess  of 
Prosperity  personified.  (12) 

She,  who  is  always  of  a  delighted  mind,  acquainted 
with  the  position  and  number  of  household  articles, 
and  always  affords  satisfaction  unto  her  husband,  is 
the  [real]  wife;  others  are  like  decrepitude.  (13) 

Glory  is  for  that  person  in  this  world,  whose  disciple, 
wife,  little  child,  brothers,  grown  up  son,  servants  and 
dependants  are  all  humble.  (14) 

The  first  is  the  Dharmapatni  (i.e.,  a  wife  helping  in 
the  acquisition  of  virtue)  ;  the  second  is  for  increasing 
lust.  In  the  latter,  originates  the  fruit  that  is  seen,  but 
not  what  is  not  seen  (i.e.,  virtue).  (15) 

If  she  (i.e.,  the  first  wife)  be  freed  from  any  short- 
comings, she  is  called  Dharmapatni.  If  she  suffers 
from  any  defect,  there  would  be  no  sin  in  accepting 
a  second  one  [for  as  such],  if  she  happens  to  be  endued 
with  accomplishments.  (16) 

He,  who  renounces,  in  youth,  a  wife  who  is  free 
from  any  fault  and  is  not  degraded,  will  attain,  after 
death,  to  womanhood  and  become  barren.  (17) 

A  woman  who  forsakes  her  poor  or  diseased  husband, 
is  repeatedly  born  either  as  a  bitch,  a  vulture,  or  a 
shark.  (18) 

A  woman,  who,  after  the  demise  of  her  husband, 
ascends  the  funeral  pyre,  becomes  of  good  conduct  and 
lives  gloriously  in  the  celestial  region. 


448  Dak  ska 

As  a  snake-catcher  forcibly  takes  out  a  snake  from 
a  hole,  so  she,  rescuing  her  husband  [from  hell,  lives 
happily  with  him.  (20) 


CHAPTER  V. 

WHAT  is  pure  and  what  is  impure  have  been  spoken 
of ,  [what  is  pure,]  should  be  done  ;  [and  what  is  impure,] 
should  be  avoided  by  intelligent  men.  Wishing  for 
your  gjpod,  I  shall  speak  a  little  on  their  significance,  (i) 

Care  should  always  be  bestowed  on  the  purificatory 
rites.  The  purificatory  rite  has  been  described  in  the 
Sntriti  as  the  root  of  the  twice-born.  All  the  rites  of 
a  person,  who  is  divorced  from  the  purity  of  conduct, 
become  futile.  (2) 

Purity  is  being  spoken  of  as  being  twofold, — 
external  and  internal.  It  is  said  in  the  Smriti  that 
external  purity  [is  effected]  by  earth,  water,  etc.  Purity 
of  thought  is  internal  [purity].  (3)' 

External  purity  is  superior  to  impurity  ;  and  internal 
purity  is  superior  to  that  (i.e.,  external  purity).  He  who 
is  pure  in  both  (i.e.,  externally  and  internally),  is  [said 
to  be]  in  a  state  of  purity  and  no  one  else.  (4) 

Earth  should  be  given  once  in  the  generative  organ  ; 
thrice,  in  the  anus  ;  ten  times,  in  the  left  palm";  seven 
times,  in  both  the  palms  ;  and  thrice,  on  the  feet.  (5) 

This  is  the  purification,  spoken  of,  for  a  householder  ;• 
for  [the  followers  of]  the  other  three  [orders],  it  is,  in 
order,  twofold,  threefold  and  fourfold  for  the  fourth 
[order].  (6) 


Daksha   Saihhifd.  449 

The  earth  [that  is  to  be  applied  to  the]  first  (i.e.,  the 
generative  organ)  should  be  half-a-handful  as  described 
in  the  Sntriti;  for  the  second  and  the  third,  it  has  been 
described  half  of  each.  (7) 

The  earth  with  which  three  knots  of  a  finger  are 
filled  up,  has  been  described  for  being  applied  to  the 
generative  organ.  This  purification  is  for  the  house- 
holders. Twice  as  much  is  for  the  Brahmachanns  (8) 

Threefold  is  for  the  forest-recluses  ;  and  fourfold 
for  the  Yatins.  Water  should  be  used  as  long  as  the 
earth  is  not  washed  off.  (g> 

Purification  is  effected  by  earth  and  water.  There 
is  no  trouble  nor  [is  there  any]  expenditure  of  money. 
His  mind  has  been  examined*  who  is  lax  in  the  matter 
of  purification.  (10) 

This  is  the  purification  for  the  day-time.  Another 
is  laid  down  for  the  night.  One  method  obtains  for 
the  Vipras  at  the  time  of  calamity,  and  another  when 
they  are  at  ease,  (ii) 

A  half  of  the  purification  which  is  necessary  in  the 
day-time,  is  laid  down  for  the  night.  Half  of  it,  is  for 
a  diseased  person  ;  and  a  half  of  it,  for  him  who  is  in  a 
hurry  to  go  in  the  middle  of  a  road.  (12) 

More  or  less  should  not  be  done,  in  the  matter  of 
purification,  by  him  who  wishes  for  purity.  There  is 
no  penance  for  the  transgression  of  the  established 
practice.  (13) 


*  -i.e.,  He  who  is  not  inclined  to  undergo  the  purifying   process,   for 
it  is  neither  troublesome  nor  expensive. 

58 


45°  Daksha 


CHAPTER  VI. 

I  SHALL  now  describe,  fully  and  in  order  of  preceden'ceV 
the  impurity  arising  from  birth  of  death,  as  well  as 
that  which  lasts  for  life,  (i) 

Immediate  purification,  —  one  lasting  for  a  day  ;  those 
for  two,  three,  four,  ten,  and  twelve,  days  ;  that  for  & 
fortnight  ;  that  far  a  month  ;  and  that  terminating  with1 
death  ;  —  these  ten  form  the  fixed  time  of  impurity.  I 
shall,  in  due  order,  describe  them  fivlly.  (2  —  3) 

He,  —  '\v  ho-  is  acquainted  with1  the  exposition  of  the 
Vedas  together  with  their  Angas  (six  auxiliaries),  Kalpcts 
(Codes  of  Law),  and  their  Pafaasya  (their  gnostic 
portions),  and  who  performs  the  rites  laid  down  therein,  — 
suffers  from  no  impurity.  (4) 

Immediate  purification  is  laid  down  for  kings,  sacri- 
ficial priests,  those  initiated,,  children,  for  a  death  in  a1 
foreign  country,  for  those  engaged1  in  a  religious  ob- 
servance, and  for  those  engaged1  in  a  sacrifice.  (5^) 

One    day    is    spoken    of  for   him1  who  maintains  the 

Sacred   Fire   and   studies  the    Vedti's.  Two,  three,    and' 

four,  days,  are  for  those  who  are  inferior  and  more 
inferior.  (6) 

A  Brahmana,  by  caste,  is  purified  in  ten  days;  a1 
Kshatriya,  in  twelve  days;  a  Vais'ya,  in  fifteen-  days  j* 
and  a  S?udra,  in  a  month.  (7) 

Perpetual  impurity  is  spoken  of  for  all  of  them,  who,- 
without  bathing,  offering  oblations  to  the  Fire  and> 
making  gifts,  partake  of  [their]  meals'.  (8) 

Perpetual  impurity  is  for  a  diseased  person,  a  miser, 
one  laden  with  debts,  one  who  does  not  perform  reli- 
gious rites,  an  illiterate  person,  and  especially  for  a> 
ben  -pecked  person.  (9) 


Daksha  Samhita.  451 

Daily  impurity  is  for  one  who  is  addicted  to  gam- 
bling, etc.,  and  for  a  dependant.  The  impurity  of  a 
person,  who  does  not  perform  the  S'r&ddhas,  ends  with 
his  ashes  (i.e.,  death).  (10) 

Temporary  impurity  is  not  for  them,  but  a  lifelong 
one.  Thus  impurity^according  to  the  differentiation  of 
merits  has  been  spoken  of.  (n) 

If  an  impurity,  consequent  on  birth,  takes  place  with 
that  of  one  arising  from  death ;  or  if  an  impurity, 
originating  from  death,  happens  with  that  of  birth — in 
a  cmse  of  such  a  combined  impurity,  one  is  purified  with 
[the  end  of  the]  impurity  consequent  on  death.  (12) 

To  make  gifts,  to  accept  presents,  Ho  ma  and  Vedic 
study  are  stopped  in  a  state  of  impurity.  A  Vipra, 
conversant  with  scrifices,  deserves  purification  after  the 
tenth  day.  (13) 

Gifts  should  be  duly  made,  for  it  saves  one  from  in- 
auspicousness.  If  any  impurity,  consequent  on  death, 
takes  place  within  the  time  of  a  similar  one,  and  that 
arising  from  birth  happens  in  the  course  of  a  like  one,— 
in  cases  of  such  combined  impurities,  one  is  purified  at 
the  end  of  the  previous  one.  In  both  the  cases,  within 
ten  days,  one  should  not  partake  of  any  food  of  the 
family  [laden  with  such  an  impurity].  (14 — 15) 

On  the  fourth  day,  the  bones  should  be  deposited  by 
the  twice-born.  The  touching  of  the  limbs  is  laid 
down  after  the  depositing  of  the  bones.  (1 6) 

If  one  husband  takes  wives  from  all  the  castes  in 
their  natural  order,  then  on  the  occasion  of  the  child- 
birth, impurity  extends  over  ten,  six,  three  and  one, 
days  respectively.  (17) 

There  would  be  no  impurity,  consequent  on  a  birth 
or  death,  when  a  .sacrifice  is  being  performed*  or  a  mar- 


452  Dak  ska  Samhitfr. 

riage  is    being  solemnized,  when  there  is  a  revolution  rn> 
the  country,  or  a  Horn  a  is  being  performed.   (18) 

All  these  impurities  have  been  spoken  of  for  the  time, 
place  and  case.  There  is  no  impurity  for  a  person  who> 
is  visited  with  a  calamity.  (19) 


CHAPTER  VII. 

'I  SHALL  now  describe  that  Yoga  by  which  the  universe, 
the  soul  and  the  senses  are  brought  under  control,   (if 

Prdndydma  (suspension  of  the  breath',  Dhydnw 
(meditation),  Pratyahara  (withdrawal  of  the  mind 
from  external  objects),  Dhnrana  (concentration),  Tarkah 
(abstract  reasoning),  and  Samddhi  (absorption  of 
thought  into  the  Supreme  Spirit), — are  called  the  six 
Angns  (steps)  of  Yoga.  (>} 

Yoga  does  not  consist  in  resorting-  to  a  forest ;  nor 
does  it  consist  in  thinking  of  many  literary  works  ;  nor 
does  Yoga  is  performed  by  religious  observances,  sacri- 
fices and  ascetic  austerities.  (3) 

Yoga  does  not  consist  in  taking  any  particular  food" 
or  in  fixing  one's  looks  on  the  tip  of  the  nose.  Nor 
does  it  originate  from  the  observance  of  purity,  more 
than  what  is  mentioned  in  the  S'dstras.  (4) 

Nor  is  Yoga  done  by  the  abstention  from5  speech,. 
the  recitation  of  the  Mantrams  and  the  clever  perform- 
ance of  the  many  illusory  feats.  Sumetimes  Yoga  is 
attained  by  one  who  has  disassociated  himself  from' 
worldly  concerns.  (5) 

Yoga   arises  from    strict  concentration,  practice,  firm 
resolution,   continued    disgust  in  worldly  affairs,  and 
by  any  other  meajys,   (6) 


DaKsha  Stnhhitd.  453? 

Yoga  is  accomplished  by  finding  pleasure  in-  the 
meditation  of  self,  by  the  toy  of  purity  and  by  the 
consideration  of  all  creatures  as  equal  and  not  by  any 
other  means.  (7) 

He,  who  is  devoted  to  self;  who  d;a<rfy  sports  in  self  ;• 
who  is  given  to  the  culture  of  self ;  who  is  always  en- 
gaged in  the  meditation  ©I  self ;  who  is  by  nature  fond 
of  self;  who  is  contented  ;  who  has  not  his  mind  attach- 
ed to  any  other  object ;  and  who  is  well-satisfied  with 
self ; — succeeds  in  attaining  to  Yoga.  (8 — 9) 

One  should  be  engaged  in  Yoga  even  when  asleep-,, 
especially  when  awake.  In  the  Smrifi,  a  person,  who 
displays  such  an  exertion,  is  described  as  the  foremost 
of  those  conversant  with  Brahman.  (10) 

He,  who  does  not  see  a  self,  is  like  unto  Brahman- 
This  is  the  deliverance  of  Daksha.  (11) 

The  Yatin,  who  has  his  mind  attached  to  worldly 
objects,  does  not  attain  to  Moksha  (liberation)  ;  there* 
fore  a  Yogin  should  carefully  renounce  attachment  for 
things  earthly.  (12) 

Some  say  that  the  attachment  of  the  senses  to- 
their  objects  is  Yoga.  Irreligion  is  accepted  as  reli- 
gion by  these  ignorant  people.  (13) 

Others  say  that  the  union  of  the  mind  and  the  soul  is 
Yoga.  These  are  greater  dunces  than  the  first,  and  are 
simply  deprived  of  Yoga.  (14) 

By  dissevering  the  mind  from  [all]  its  faculties  and 
unifying  the  individual  soul  with  the  Supreme  One, 
liberation  is  to  be  attained.  This  is  spoken  of  as  the 
highest  Yoga.  (15) 

Attachment,  stupefaction,  distraction,  bashfulness 
and  fear,  are  spoken  of  as  the  operations  of  the  mind* 
One  should  bring  these  under  subjection.  (16) 


454  Daksha 

He,  who  has  controlled  the  five  ordinary  senses 
together  with  the  higher  six  (i.e.,  the  mind)  is  incapable 
of  being  defeated  by  the  Celestials,  Asuras  and  the 
mankind.  (17) 

A  hero  is  not  spoken  of  as  one,  who  has  forcibly 
taken  possession  of  another's  kingdom  ;  he,  who  has 
controlled  all  the  senses,  is  described  by  the  learned  as 
a  hero.  (18) 

By  making  all  the  senses,  which  run  towards  the 
external  objects,  operate  internally,  one  should  engage 
the  mind  in  [the  meditation  of]  the  Atman  (self)  (19) 

Being  freed  from  all  distracting  thoughts,  one 
should  consign  the  individual  soul  to  the  Brahman. 
This  is  Dhyana,— this  is  Yoga  ;  the  remnant  is  nothing 
but  the  amplification  of  a  book.  (20) 

Renouncing  attachment  for  earthly  objects,  when 
the  mind  becomes  steadied  in  the  form  of  the  power  of 
the  soul,  it  is  called  Samadhi.  (21) 

Temporary  is  the  position  that  is  attained  by  the 
unification  of  the  four  (via.,  corporal  .body,  subtile  body, 
individual  soul  and  the  Supreme  Soul).  But  eternal, 
real,  and  unending  is  what  is  acquired  by  the  union 
of  the  two  (i.e.,  the  individual  soul  and  the  Supreme 
Soul).  (22) 

It  is  a  contradiction  when  what  does  not  exist  for  all,, 
is  spoken  of  as  existent.  Therefore  that  does  not  exist 
in  the  heart  of  another.  (23) 

Brahma  is  to  be  known  by  one's  own  self,  like 
cohabitation  with  a  maiden.  One,  who  is  not  a  Yogin 
does  not  know  (Brahman]  ; — as  one,  born  blind,  does, 

know  a  pitcher.   (24) 

Brahma   is   completely   knowable  by  him  who  daily 


fiaksha  Safahitd.  453 

poetises     Yoga.      The     Eternal    Para-Brahma   is   not 

ascertainable  on  account  of  subtleness.   (25) 

Like  mental  thoughts*  the  learned  know  It  (Brah- 
inaii)  as  one.  Women  and  illiterate  people  consider 
it  as  manifdld.  (26) 

Even  the  Celestials,  \Vhd  are  possessed  of  SaitiAd 
'(harrrioriising  tendency),  are  under  the  control  of  the' 
object  of  the  senses^  what  to  speak  of  rrten  in  this 
respect  who  are  under  the  influence  of  stupefaction1 
and  possessed  of  a  very  small  portiori  of  the  Saitiud* 
gtina.  (27) 

Therefore  casting  off  the  impurities  of  the  mindj 
one  should  take  up  the  staff  [of  a  Yogin}  ;  others  can- 
hot  do  it  arid  become  subject  to  the  objects  of  the" 

senses.    (28) 

•  The  vuatefj  driven  by  the  wind  and  converted 
into  waVes,  does  not  stand  still  evert  for  a  moment; 
Therefore,  one  should  not  place  confidence  in  any.  (29) 

Many  persons  drive  their  livelihood  Under  the 
Umbrage  of  a  triple  start  [i.e.,  of  being  a  Sartnyasin~\  ; 
he,  who  does  not  know  Brdhmdn^  is  not  worthy  of 
holding  the  triple  staff.  (301 

[A  Yogin}  should  always  preserve  his  Brahma- 
charyya  [celibacy];  Sexual  intercourse  is  of  eight 
sorts  : — -viz.)  thinking  of  a  woman,  talking  [about  it]y 
-dalliance  with  a  woman,  looking  [at  a  woman  with  an 
impure  desire]^  speaking  to  her  secretly,  determination 
[for  holding  a  sexual  congress],  persistent  endeavour 
[for  doing  it]  and  the  actual  deed.  The  learned  hold 
that  these  are  the  eight  divisions  of  sexual  inter- 
course. (31—32) 

This   should   never   be   thought   or   spoken  of,   nof" 


456  Daksh'a  $  (Militia. 

Should  it   ever   be    done.     One,    who   has    mastered  all 
these  propensities,  is  a  Yatin,  and  none  else.   (33) 

Branding  him  as  an  outcaste,  the  king  should 
speedily  turn  him,  who,  having  adopted  the  life  of 
mendicancy,  does  not  observe  its  regulations,  out  of  his 
kingdom.  (34). 

'One  [mendicant]  i-s  a  Bhikshu  ;  two  are  called 
Mitthuna  in  the  Smriti ;  three  are  ca-lled  Grama  ;  and 
more  than  that,  Nagara.  (35) 

A  Nagara,  Grama ,  or  a  Mithuna  should  not  be 
formed  [by  a  Yatin}.  By  doing  these  three,  a  Yatin 
transgresses  his  own  duty.  (36) 

If  they  would  thus  come  to  live  together,  their 
conversation  would  [naturally]  tend  towards  begging, 
the  king,  the  objects  of  their  affection,  slandering  -ami 
jealousy.  (37) 

The  exposition  of  the  Scriptures  for  lucre  and  adora- 
tion, the  collection  of  disciples  and  many  other  similar 
displays  are  [in  vogue]  amongst  the  bad  ascetics  (38) 

Meditation,  purification,  begging  alms,  and  always 
living  in  a  solitary  place, — 'these  four  are  the  duties  of  a 
Bhikshu.  He  must  not  follow  the  fifth.  (39) 

[A  Bhikshu}, — emaciated  by  ascetic  austerities  and 
tire  recitation  of  the  Afantram,  disabled  by  interrup- 
tions of  health,  age,  infirmity  or  decrepitude,  possessed 
by  an  evil  planet,  deranged  in  intellect — [may  seek  re- 
fuge in  a  house].  (40) 

But  a  healthy  and  youthful  Bhikshu  cannot  betake 
to  a  home-life ;  he  would  thereby  vitiate  that  place 
and  injure  the  learned.  (41) 

Such  a  healthy  and  youthful  person  destroys  his 
Brahmacharyya ;  when  Brahmacharyya  is  destroyed, 
his  family  also  meets  with  destruction.  (42) 


Daksfia  SarttfittA.  457 

If  while  living  in  a  house,  a  Bhikshu  holds  sexual 
intercourse  then  the  root  of  the  master  of  that  house 
is  cut  off.  (43) 

What  is  the  use  of  any  other  religious  rite  for  him  in 
whose  house  a  Yatin  finds  shelter  even  for  a  moment  ? 
He  becovnes  blessed  thereby.  (44. 

Living  even  for  one  night,  a  Yatin  consumes  all 
the  *i:;s  that  are  collected  by  a  householder  till  hi* 
death.  (45) 

The  three  worlds,  consisting  of  animate  and  in- 
animate creations,  are  fed  by  him  who  feeds  a  Yatin, 
laden  with  toil,  in  tbe  order  of  hermitage,  by  the 
practices  cf  Yoga.  (46) 

•  ui-try,  in  wiii^.n  a  Y^gin^  well-versed  in  medi- 
tation, ;esides,  becomes  purified,  what  to  speak  of  hit 
relatives?  (47) 

The  thought  of  dualism,  monism,  dualism-and- 
monism,  no-dualism  and  no-monism,  leads  to  the  highest 
acquisition.  (48) 

Perme;iteci  by  the  thought  of  Brahman,  one  should 
neither  think  of  oivi's  self  nor  of  his  relationship  with 
another.  ObtairJng  such  a  stage,  one  comes  by  the 
most  excellent  station.  (40) 

Some  firmly  believe  in  dual'.sm  ;  and  some,  in 
monism.  I  would  describe  the  firmly-formed  tenets  of 
the  monists.  (50) 

'  If  one  sees  a.  second  object  except  the  self,  then  he 
should  study  the  S'&strcs  and  listen  to  [the  views 
contained]  in  innumerable  books.  (51) 

The  Vipras,  who  study  the  Institutes  of  Daksha,  con- 
taining  an   account    of  the  most   excellent  duties  of  all 
the   orders   as    spoken    of  duly,    repair  to   the  celestial 
religion.  (52) 
59 


Daksha  SafahitA. 


Even  if  an  inferior  person  studies  and  listens  to 
it  reverentially,  he  comes  by  son,  grandson,  animals  and 
fame.  (53) 

If  a  twice-born  person  makes  this  Dharma  &astra 
listened  to  by  others  at  the  time  of  a  S'rdddha,  it  yields 
endless  fruits  and  comes  to  the  departed  Manes.  (54) 


THE   END. 


S' A'T  A  5TA  P  A  S  A  MHITA 


WITH    A 


LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION. 


EDITED   AND    PUBLISHED    BY 

MANMATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  M  A-,  M.R.A-S 

Rector,  Keslntb  Academy, 

Author  of  the  English  Translation  of  the  Rdmdyanam,  Mdhd- 

hdratam,  Srimidbkagivitini.   M.ilianirudnd  Tantrum, 

Harivams'a,  Agni  Pttrauun,  Markandeya, 

Purdnam,  &c  ,  &c. 


PRINTED  BT  H.  C.  DAS,  ELYSIUM  PRESS. 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  OUTT'S  STREET. 

1907. 


» 


CHAPTER  1. 


HE  Mahapaiakins  who  do  not  perform  the  peni- 
tentiary rites,  are  born,  after  their  sufferings  in 
hell,  with  bodies  disfigured  with  the  signs  [of  their 
crimes],  (i) 

The  sin-indicating  signs  appear  in  every  birth  but, 
With  the  performance  of  the  penitential  rites  and 
Repentance  [for  the  commission  of  the  sins]  they  dis- 
appear. (2) 

The  marks  of  heinous  crimes  appear  for  seven 
births  [consecutively]  ;  those  of  the  Upapataks  (minor 
sins),  for  live  ;  and  those  of  other  sins,  for  three.  (3) 

The  diseases,  begotten  of  the  iniquitous  deeds  of 
mankind,  disappear  with  proper  treatment.  They  are 
cured  by  the  recitation  of  the  Gdyatri,  adoration  of  the 
Celestials,  performance  of  Honia  and  gifts.  (4) 

A  sin,  committed  in  a  previous  birth,  assails  people 
in  the  shape  of  a  disease  after  the  termination  of 
the  sufferings  in  a  hell.  It  is  dissipated  by  reci* 
tation  etc.,  (5) 

Leprosy,     consumption,    gonorrhoea,    diarrhcea,    ob- 

^struction    in    urination,   stone,   cough,  dysentery,  fistula, 

obstinate  ulcers,  inflammation   of  the   glands,    paralysis, 

loss   of  eyes, — these  diseases,  says  the  Smriti^  originate 

from  the  perpetration  of  heinous  crimes.  (6 — 7) 

Dropsy,  liver,    spleen,    colic,  ulcer,    short-breathing, 

dyspepsia,    fever,    cold,  forgetfulness,    distraction  of  the 

senses,  Galagraha  (a  kind  of  disease),    bloody   tumour, 

dry     spreading   itch,    are  the  diseases  begotten  of  minor 

60 


460  Satatapa,  Safahita. 

sins  ;  convulsive  fits,  appearance  of  circular  figures  of 
various  sizes  on  the  body,  trembling  of  the  body,  itches, 
elephantisis,  Poondarika  (a  kind  of  leprosy),  and  other 
diseases,  originate  from  Unupdta-s\r\s.  The  diseases  of 
mankind,  heard  by  [the  name  of]  piles,  originate  from 
Atipapa  (heinous  crimes).  (8 — la) 

Various  other  diseases  originate  from  the  combina- 
tion of  sins.  Their  symptoms  and  penitentiary  rites 
should  be  spoken  of  in  due  order,  (il) 

In  Mahapaiakas  (gravest  sins),  [gifts]  must  be  in 
full  ;  in  minor  offences,  in  half ;  in  other  sins,  one 
should  give  away  a  sixth,  according  to  the  nature  of 
the  disease  and  proportionate  to  one's  power  or  other- 
wise. (12) 

The  general  rule  for  making  a  gift  of  kine  and 
other  rites,  is  this  : — In  the  gift  of  a  cow,  it  should 
be  of  a  good  nature,  with  a  calf  and  yielding 
milk.  (13) 

In  the  gift  of  a  bull,  it  should  be  endued  with  aus- 
picious marks  and  decorated  with  gold  and  a  piece  of 
white  cloth.  In  the  gift  of  earth,  one  should  give  away, 
unto  the  twice-born,  lands  of  the  measurement  of  ten 
Nivarttana.  (14) 

A  Ni-varttana  consists  of  thirty  rods,  each  rod  being 
ten  cubits  [in  length].  Ten  Nivarttanas  make  one 
Gocharma.  By  making  a  gift,  [of  such  a  piece  of  land], 
one  lives  gloriously  in  the  celestial  region.  (15) 

Where  a  hundred  Nishkas  (gold  coins)  are  to  be 
given  away,  gold,  fifty  or  twenty  Nishkas  in  quantity, 
[should  be  given]  ;  in  the  gift  of  a  horse,  one  should 
present  a  quiet  and  good-looking  animal,  bedecked  with 
ornaments.  (16) 


S&tatapa  Saihhitt.  461 

In  the  gift  of  a  buffalo,  one  should  give  away  a  she- 
buffalo  endued  with  a  golden  weapon.  And  in  a  great 
gift,  one  should  give  away  an  elephant  with  a  golden 
fruit.  (17) 

In  the  adoration  of  a  Deity,  one  should  present  a 
hundred  thousand  excellent  flowers.  In  the  matter  of 
feeding  the  twice-born,  one  should  offer  sweet  edibles 
unto  a  thousand  Brahmana's.  (18) 

After  adoring  the  Holder  of  the  Trident  (S'iva)  with  a 
hundred  thousand  flowers,  one  should  recite  the  Rudra- 
Mantram.  One  should  recite  the  Rudra-Mantram 
eleven  times.  Having  performed  the  tenth  part  of  a 
Homa  with  oblations  of  clarified  butter  covered  with 
Guggula  (fragrant  gum  resin),  one  should  perform 
A' bhisechanam  (sprinkling  with  water)  with  the  Varuna- 
Mantram.  In  a  5'fltf/z- (pacification)  rite,  one  should 
pacify  the  goblins  after  pacifying  the  planets.  (19 — 20) 

In  the  gift  of  paddy,  as  laid  down  in  the  Smriti^ 
good  paddy  of  the  quantity  of  a  Khdra  (a  measure  of 
grain  equal  to  16  Dronas),  or  of  six  [should  be  given]  ; 
and  in  the  gift  of  cloth,  two  pieces  of  silk  raiments  with 
camphor  [should  be  given].  (21) 

Having  made  ten,  five,  eight,  or  four,  good  Br£hma- 
nas  seated,  made  up  the  Sankalfa  (determination) 
according  to  one's  own  desire,  performed  the  adoration 
of  Vishnu, — one  should  make  presents  of  kine,  accord- 
'  ing  to  one's  might,  unto  the  twice-born,  after  having 
decorated  them,  proportionate  to  one's  means,  with 
dresses  and  ornaments.  (22-— 23) 

One  should  then  solicit  from  them,  the   due    penance  • 
[for   a   sin]   as  punishable  [by  the  king].     Then  having 
duly    performed    the   penitential    rite    with   their    per- 
mission, one  should,   again,   for   completing   the  same, 


462  S'dtdtapa  Samhita. 

properly  adore  the  twice-born  persons.  Gratified,  the- 
Brahmanas  should  accord  permission  unto  one  who 
wishes  to  perform  a  religious  rite.  (24 — 25) 

If  the  Brahmanas  desire  it,  all  the  faults  in  the  matter 
of  recitation,  or  in  austerity  or  sacrificial  rites  dis- 
appear. (26) 

The  Deities  honour  what  the  Brahmanas  say.  The 
Brdhmanas  are  at  one  with  all  the  Deities  and  their 
words  never  prove  otherwise.  (27) 

Fasting,  religious  observance,  pilgrimage,  religious 
austerity,  if  all  these  are  performed  by  the  Vipras,  com- 
plete becomes  the  fruit  thereof.  (28) 

When  the  earthly  deities  (i.e.,  the  Brahmanas)  say 
that  it  is  well-done,  one  should  carry  it  on  his  head  after 
saluting  them.  [Thereby]  he  reaps  the  fruit  of  an 
Agnisihoma-nie.  (29) 

The  Brahmanas  are  the  moving  pilgrimages  void  of 
water  and  granting  all  desires.  Persons  suffering  from 
the  impurity  [of  sins],  are  purified  by  their  word-like 
water.  (30) 

Having  obtained  their  permission  and  received  their 
blessings,  one  should,  after  feeding  the  twice-born 
according  to  one's  might,  take  one's  meals  along  with 
one's  own  kinsmen.  (31) 


CHAPTER  II. 


AFTER  serving  his  term  in  hell,  the  destroyer  of  a 
Brahmana,  is  born  afflicted  with  white  leprosy.  There- 
fore, for  the  expiation  of  that  sin,  one  should  perform 
a  penitential  rite,  (i) 


S'dt&tapa  SafahitZ.  463 

Five  pitchers  should  be  placed  filled  with  five  gems, 
five  leaves  and  covered  with  a  piece  of  white  cloth.  (2) 

Earth  collected  from  horse-stable,  etc.,  should  be 
placed  into  them  ;  they  should  be  filled  to  the  brim  with 
sacred  water  and  contain  five  bitters  and  various  sorts 
of  fruits.  (3) 

Sarvoushadi  (sacred  medicinal  herbs)  should  be 
placed  inside  them.  And  they  should  be  placed  on  each 
side  by  the  twice-born.  One  should  then  place  on  the 
middle  pitcher,  a  lotus  of  eight  petals  made  of 
silver.  (4) 

On  it,  one  should  place  the  figure  of  the  four-faced 
Deity  Brahma,  made  of  half-a-fWfl  of  gold.  (5) 

With  scents,  flowers, -incense,  etc.,  the  sacrificer, 
should  duly  adore  it  thrice  daily  with  the  Purushasukta- 
Mantram.  (6) 

Thereupon  the  Brahmanas,  observing  celibacy, 
should  gradually,  recite  their  own  Vedds, — the  Rig~- 
Veddj  and  others,  into  the  pitchers  placed  in  the  east 
and  other  quarters.  (7) 

Thereupon  after  propitiating  the  planets,  one'should 
perform  the  tenth  part  of  a  Homa  on  the  middle  pitcher 
with  sesame  and  gold  soaked  with  clarified  butter.  (8) 

Having  finished  this  rite,  extending  over  twelve  days, 
the  foremost  of  the  twice-born  should  sprinkle  the 
sacrificer  with  water  in  the  altar.  (9) 

Thereupon  one  should,  proportionate  to  his  means, 
present  kine,  lands,  gold,  sesame,  etc.,  unto  the  twice- 
born.  Unto  the  A'chdryya,  he  should  give  the  idol.  (10) 

[He  should  say  : — ]  "  O  ye  A'dityas,  Vasus,  Rudras, 
Vis'wadevas,  Maruts,  being  gratified,  do  ye  Destroy 
my  most  terrible  sin,  (n) 


464  Sat  at  a  pa  Sari  hit  A. 

Repeatedly  reciting  this  Mantram  with  reverence, 
he  should  beg  pardon  from  the  A'charyya.  By  observ- 
ing this  regulation,  one  suffering  from  white-leprosy, 
becomes  purified.  (12) 

The  slayer  of  a  cow,  after  his  sufferings  in  a  hell, 
is  born  as  a  leper.  His  redemption  is  as  follows.  He 
should  place  a  pitcher  filled  with  articles  mentioned 
before.  Its  body  should  be  pasted  with  red  sandal, 
filled  with  red  flowers  and  covered  with  a  red  cloth. 
Having  thus  made  that  pitcher  red,  he  should  place  it  in 
the  south.  (13  — 14) 

He  should  then  place  on  it  a  copper  plate  filled  with 
powdered  sesame ;  he  should  place  on  it  the  image  of 
Yama,  made  with  gold  of  the  quantity  of  a  Nishka.  (15) 

He  should  then  adore  it  with  the  Purushasukta- 
Mantram,  [praying, — ]  "  May  my  sin  be  dissipated. " 
One,  well-read  in  the  Sama-Veda,  should  finish  the  reci- 
tation of  the  Saman  near  the  pitcher.  (16' 

Having  performed  the  tenth  part  of  the  Homo,  with 
mustard  and  Abhishechanam  (sprinkling  with  water) 
with  the  Pavamanisukta,  one  should  present,  unto  the 
A'charya,  the  image  of  the  King  of  Righteousness.  (17) 

"  May  Yama  seated  on  a  buffalo,  with  a  dreadful  rod 
in  his  hand,  the  presiding  Deity  of  the  south, — may  he 
remove  my  sin."  (18) 

Having  recited  this  Mantram,  one  should  perform 
the  Visarjjana^nteJ*  He  should  then  spend  a  month 
being  filled  with  reverence  and  faith.  The  sin  of  the 
destruction  of  a  Brahmana  or  a  cow  is  dissipated  by 
this  penitential  rite.  (19) 

*  The  life  of  a  Deity  is  invoked  in  the  image  at  the  commencement 
of  the  worship  ;  and  at  the  end  of  it,  the  said  life  is  said  to  be  thrown 
into  water.  Visatyjana  signifies  "  to  throw  off." 


Satatapa  Sarhhitd.  465 

The  destroyer  of  one's  own  father  is  born  as  an 
innett; — and  that  of  mother,  as  a  blind  person,  after 
undergoing  the  pangs  of  a  hell.  One  should,  therefore, 
duly  perform  the  penitential  rite.  (20) 

One  should,  according  to  directions,  perform  thirty 
Prajapatyas.  After  the  termination  of  the  rite,  one 
should  make  a  boat  with  gold,  in  quantity  weighing  a 
Pa/a.  (21) 

Then  placing  a  pitcher  made  of  silver,  .one  should 
keep  a  copper  plate  on  it.  Then  an  image  of  the  Deity 
(Vishnu),  bearing  the  mystic  mark  of  S'rivatsa,  should 
be  made  of  gold  of  the  quantity  of  a  Nishka.  (22) 

Covering  it  with  a  silk  cloth,  one  should  duly  adore 
it.  He  should  then  present,  unto  a  twice-born  person, 
the  boat  containing  all  the  requisites.  (23) 

"O  Vasudeva,  O  lord  of  the  universe,  O  thou  station- 
ed in  all  creatures,  O  thou  the  destroyer  of  the  calamity 
of  one  who  bows  unto  thee,  do  thou  rescue  mej  who  am 
sunk  in  the  ocean  of  iniquity."  (24) 

Having  recited  this  Mantram  and  saluted  it,  one 
should  present  it  (i.e.,  the  image)  unto'Ja  Brahmana ;  one 
should  make  presents  unto  other  Brdhmanas  proportion- 
ate to  one's  means.  (25) 

The  destroyer  of  a  sister  is  born  as  a  deaf  after  the 
termination  of  sufferings  in  a  hell.  In  the  destruction  of 
a  brother,  [one  is  born]  as  a  dumb.  The  following  is  the 
redemption  laid  down  in  the  Smriti.  (26) 

One  should,  for  the  expiation  of  the  sin,  perform  a 
Chandrdyana-i\\.e.  After  the  termination  of  this  religi- 
ous observance,  one  should  make  gift  of  a  book  with  a 
golden  fruit.  (27) 

Reciting  the  following  Mantrams,  one  should  throw 
off  the  image  of  the  divine  wife  of  Brahma, — "O 


466  S^dtdtapa 

Sarasvvati,  O  Mother  of  the  universe,  O  presiding 
Goddess  of  the  words  of  the  V6dds>  O  great  Goddess> 
rescue  me  from  the  sin  originating  from  the  iniquitous 
deeds.  A  person,  slaying  a  child,  is  born  as  one  whose 
children  die  on  birth.  (28 — 29) 

For  the  purification  of  this  sin,  one  should  perform 
the  wedding  of  a  Brahmana  and  duly  listen  to  the  reci* 
tation  of  [the  religious  work]  Harivams'a.  (30) 

One  should  then  duly  recite  the  Maharudra*  Eleven 
Rudras  with  six  Angas  pass  by  the  name  of  Rudra.  (31) 

The  aggregate  formed  by  these  eleven,  is  called 
Maharudra.  Similarly  this  aggregate  of  eleven  is  also 
called  Atirudra.  (32) 

[With  this  Mantram]  and  ten  thousand  Dufva-gr&sst 
the  tenth  part  of  a  Homa  should  be  performed.  Eleven 
gold  Nishkas  should  be  given  away  as  the  sacrifical 
present.  (33) 

But  these  eleven  Palas,  one  should  present  unto  a 
twice-born  person  according  to  one's  means.  One 
should,  also,  proportionate  to  one's  might,  make  presents 
unto  other  Brahmanas.  (34) 

[The  priest]  should  make  the  pair  bathe  afterwards 
with  the  Var una- Mantram.  [The  sacrificer]  should 
give  unto  the  Acharyya  clothes  and  ornaments.  (35) 

One,  killing  a  cow,  is  born  as  a  leper  and  his 
family  becomes  extinct.  For  the  expiation  of  that 
sin,  one  should  perform  a  hundred  Prdjdpatya-\>ti\+ 
ances.  (361 

After  the  termination  of  the  rite,  one  should,  after 
making  gifts  of  lands,  listen  to  the  recitation  of  the 
Mahdbhdratam.  The  slayer  of  a  wqman  suffers  [in 
another  birth]  with  chronic  diarrhoea.  He  should  plant 
ten  As'wathva-tiees.  (37) 


S'&tatapa  Saihhitd.  467 

tie  should  then  give  away  a  small  quantity  of  sugar, 
and  feed  a  hundred  Bra'hmana's.  The  destroyer  of  a 
king  suffers  from  consumption.  The  following  is  his 
redemption.  (38) 

By  giving  away  kine,  lands,  gold,  sweetmeats, 
water,  clothes,  a  small  quantity  of  clarified  butter  and 
sesame, — by  making  gifts  in  this  order,  the  disease  of 
consumption  is  cured.  A  man,  killing  a  Vais'ya,  is 
born  suffering  from  blood  discharges.  (39 — 40) 

Performing  four  Prajapatyas,  one  should  dedicate 
paddy  [to  the  quantity  of]  seven  [Khari].  The  des- 
troyer of  a  S'udra  is  born  as  a  man  suffering  from  the 
diseasre  of  Danddpatdnaka  (41) 

After  performing  one  Prdjdpatya  one  should  give 
away  a  cow  with  a  money-present.  In  the  destruction 
of  artizans,  one  is  born  as  being  harsh-speeched.  (42) 

For  the  expiation  of  that  sin,  a  white  bull  should  be 
given  away.  A  person,  slaying  an  elephant,  becpmes 
unsucessful  in  all  works.  (43) 

Having  a  palace  made,  one  should  place  an  image 
of  Ganes'a,  or  he  should  recite  the  Canes' a-Mantr am  a 
thousand  times.  (44) 

The  gratification  of  Gana  should  first  be  done  by  th6 
leaves  of  A'w/^M^'^-leaves  and  barley-cakes.  By  slay- 
ihg  a  camel,  one  is  born  with  a  hoarse  voice.  (45) 

For  the  purification  of  that  sin,  one  should  presort 
camphor  to  the  quantity  of  a  palam.  By  slaying  a  horse 
one  is  born  with  a  crooked  face.  (46) 

.For  the  expiation  of  that  sin,  one   should  give   away 
sandal  wood,  one  hundred  palas,  in  quantity.     By  kill"  ,g 
a  sht.-.bi  -Aa!o,  one  ;s  born  with  Krishnagulma  (a  chronic 
enlargement  of  t'he  spleen).  (47) 
61 


468  Srdtdtn/Ja  Saihhifa. 

\ 

By  killing  an  ass,  one  is  born  with  ass-like  hairs1 
on  his  body.  One  should  [for  the  expiation  of  the 
sin,]  present  an  idol  made  of  gold  weighing  three 
Nishtzas.  (48) 

By  killing  a  Tar4kskif-fatrr  erne  is  born  having, 
eyes  like  those  of  a  crow.  For  the  expiation  of  that 
sin,  one  should  give  away  a  cow  made  of  precious 
stones.  49) 

By  killing  a  boar,  a  person  is  born  with  long  and  pro- 
jt»cting  teeth.  For  the  purpose  of  purification,  he  should^ 
make  a  gift  of  a  pitcher  filled  with  clarified  butter  and 
money.  (50) 

By  killing  a  deer,  one  is  born  lame  ;.  and  a  jaekal, 
without  foot.  By  him,  a  horse  made  of  gold  weighing 
a  Pa/a,  should  be  given  away.  (51) 

By  killing  a  goatT  one  is  born  with  an  extra  limb.  A- 
she-goat  covered  with  a  cloth  of  variegated  colours, 
should  be  given  away  by  him.  (52) 

By  killing  a  lamb,  one  is  born  with  Jaundice.  For 
purification,  he  should  present  unto  a  Brahmafm  one 
Pala  of  musk.  (53) 

By  killing  a  cat,  one  is  born  with  a  twany-coloured 
arm.  He  should  make  a  present  of  a  pigeon  made  of 
gold  to  the  weight  of  a  Niskka.  (54) 

By  killing  a  S'uka  and  a  Sari  ta  pair  of  parrots),  a 
man  becomes  a  stammerer  in  his  next  birth.  He  should 
present  unto  a  Brdhmana  a  good  scriptural  work  with 
money.  (55) 

The  destroyer  of  a  crane  is  born  with  a  long  nose. 
He  should  give  away  a  white  cow.  The  destroyer  of  a 
crow  is  born  earless.  He  should  give  away  a  black 
cow.  (56) 


S'atatapa  SatiihitH.  469 

The  expiation  for  the  sin  of  destruction,  now  spoken 
«®f,  is  for  the  Brahmanas.  Half  of  it,  in  order,  should 
hold  good  in  the  case  of  the  Kshatriyas  and  other 

[castes].   .57) 


CHATPTKR   111. 
A  D'R  INKER  of  spiriituous  liquor  is  born  with  black  teeth. 
After  performing   a  Prajapatya-i\tei   he   should   make 
seven  figures  with  sugar  and  give   them    away   for   the 
-expiation  of  his  sin.   (i) 

Having  recited  the  Maharudra-Mantram,  one  should 
perform  the  tenth  part  of  a  Homo,  with  sesame.  Then 
Abhishekha  (sprinkling  with  water)  should  be  performed 
with  the  Varuna-Mantram.  (2) 

The  drinker  of  spirituous  liquor  is  born  suffering 
from  Raktapitta  (discharge  of  blood  from  the  mouth). 
For  purification  he  should  give  away  a  pitcher  [either] 
iilled  with  clarified  butter  or  one-half  filled  with  honey, 
together  with  gold.  (3) 

By  taking  a  forbidden  food,  one  is  born  as  a  worm 
in  the  womb.  For  purification,  one  should  fast  on  the 
Bhishma-Panchaka-fay*  (4) 

By  taking  food  seen  by  a  woman  in  her  courses,  one 
is  born  as  a  worm  in  the  womb.     By  living  on  the  urine 
.  of   cow    and    barley    for    three    nights,    one  becomes 
•purified.  (5) 

By  taking  food  touched  by  a  person  who  ought  not 
to  be  touched,  one  is  born  as  a  worm  in  the  womb.  By 
fasting  for  three  nights,  he  is  freed  from  that  sin.  (6) 

*  Five -days  from  the  eleventh  to  the  fifteenth    i»\  $Vie   bright-hall   o.$ 
the  month  of  Karttika,  sacred  to  Bhishnria. 


470  S'atatapa,  Saihhitd. 

By  putting  obstacles  in  another's  feeding,  one  is  born 
with  dyspepsia.  He  should,  as  a  penance,  duly  perform 
a  hundred  thousand  Homas.  (7) 

He,  who  partakes  of  bad  food,  a  good  article  being 
available,  gets  his.  digestive  power  impaired.  He 
should  perform  three  Prajapatyas  and  feed  one  hundred 
twice-born  persons.  (8) 

The  adminstrator  of  poison  becomes  subject  to  cold. 
He  should  give  away  ten  milch-kine.  He,  who  ob- 
structs a  high  road,  suffers  from  the  disease  of  foot. 
He  should  make  the  gift  of  the  horse.  (9) 

A   wUy    person,    after    sufferings    in    hell,    is  born 

with   the   afflictions    of    Asthma   and    Bronchitis.  One 

thousand    Palas    of    clarified    butter   should   be  given 
away  by  him.  (10) 

A  wicked  person  becomes  subject  to  epilepsy.  For 
the  expiation  of  the  sin,  he  should,  after  performing  a 
Brahma&urcJia-penznce,  give  away  a  cow  with  a  money 
gift.  (|i) 

By  giving  pain  to  another,  one  is  born  as  a  sufferer 
of  colic.  For  the  expiation  of  that  sin,  he  should  give 
away  edibles  and  recite  the  Rudra-Mantram.  (12) 

By  putting  fire  to  a  forest,  one  is  born  as  suffering 
from  diarrhoea  attended  with  blood  purging.  For  the 
expiation  of  that  sin,  a  fig-tree  should  be  planted  by 
him.  (13) 

He,  who  passes  urine  even  once  in  a  temple  or  in 
water,  is  afflicted  with  the  diseases  of  the  rectum  (as 
piles,  fistula,  etc.,)— diseases  as  dreadful  as  the  sin 
itself.  (14) 

Diseases  of  the  rectum  are  cured  by  the  adora- 
tion of  the  deities  for  a  month,  gift  of  a  couple 


Satatapa  Safahitd.  47 r 

of    kine,    and   the    performance     of     one    Prajdpatya- 
penance.  (15) 

Liver,  spleen  and  dropsy  are  the  diseases  which  origi- 
nate from  procuring  abortions.  For  their  cure  the  follow- 
ing penitential  rite  is  laid  down  in  the  Smriti.  (16) 

In  these  [diseases]  one  should  present  unto  a  Vipra 
a  Jaladhtnu,  -according  to  the  regulation,  with  three 
Palas  of  either  gold,  silver  or  copper.  (17) 

He,  who  breaks  an  idol,  is  born  without  4ny  resi- 
dence of  his  own.  He  should  pour  water  on  a  As'watka- 
tree  daily  for  a  year.  (18) 

He  should  then  perform  the  nuptials  of  the  As'wathva- 
tree  according  to  the  regulations  of  his  own  family. 
Then  he  should  establish  the  image  of  the  Deity  of  Im- 
pediments (GaneVa^  duly  adored.  (19) 

He,  who  gives  vent  to  foul  words,  is  born  with 
a  broken  limb.  He  should  give  unto  a  twice-born 
person  two  Palas  of  silver  and  two  pitchers  filled  wkh 
milk.  (20) 

He,  who  vilifies  others,  becomes  bald-headed  [in 
another  birth].  He  should  make  a  gift  of  a  cow  with 
gold.  He  who  laughs  at  others,  is  born  with  one  ear. 
He  should  make  a  gift  of  a  cow  with  pearls.  (21) 

He,  who  shows  partiality  in  an  assembly,  is  born 
suffering  from  paralysis.  He  should  make  a  gift  of  gold, 
three  Nishkas  in  weight,  unto  one  who  wends  truthful 
ways.  (22) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  pilferer  of  a  Vipra's  gold  is  born,  after  the  suffer- 
ings in  a  hell,  as  the  destroyer  of  his  own  family.     After 


472  Sdtatapa  Samhita. 

performing  three  Chandrayanas,  he  should  make  a  gift 
.of  a  hundred  gold  coins,  (i) 

The  pilferer  ot  copper  is  born,  after  [serving  his 
term  in]  hell  as  suffering  from  Oudumvara  a  kind  of 
Jeprosy).  After  performing  one  Prajapatya,  he  should 
make  a  gift  of  a  hundred  Pa/as  of  copper.  (2) 

The  stealer  of  bellmetal  becomes  subject  to  the 
disease  of  Poonjarika  (a  kind  of  leprosy).  Having 
bedecked  a  twice-born  person  with  ornaments,  he  should 
make  a  gift,  unto  him,  of  a  hundred  Palas  of  bell- 
metal.  (3) 

The  pilferer  of  brass  is  born  with  twany-coloured 
eyes.  Fasting  on  an  Ekad&fi-A&y  and  bedecking  a 
good  Brahmana  with  ornaments,  he  should  present  unto 
him  one  hundred  Palas  of  brass.  (4) 

A  person,  pilfering  pearls,  is  born  with  twany- 
coloured  hairs.  Fasting,  he  should  give  away  a  hundred 
pearls  according  to  proper  regulations,  (5) 

A  person,  stealing  tin,  is  born  suffering  from  eye- 
diseases.  Fasting  for  a  day,  he  should  give  away  one 
hundred  Palas  of  tin.  (6) 

A  person,  pilfering  lead,  is  born  as  suffering  from 
head-diseases.  Fasting  for  a  day,  he  should  give  away 
one  Dhenu  weight  of  clarified  butter  according  to  the 
proper  regulations.  (7) 

A  person,  stealing  milk,  L  born  as  a  diabetic  patient. 
He  should  duly  give,  unto  a  Brahmana,  milk  one  Dhenu 
in  weight.  (8) 

By  stealing  milk  curd  a  person  is  born  insane.  For 
purification,  curd,  one  Dhcnu  in  weight,  should  be 
given  by  him  unto  a  Vipra.  (9) 

A    stealer   of    hon-y   is    born    as   being    subject    to 


S'dt&tapcr   Sinhkttd.  473 

fry  e- diseases.  After  fasting,  he  should  give,  unto  a 
t wire-born  person,  honey,  one  Dh&uu  in  weight.  (10) 

A  stealer  of  sugarcane-preparation  (becomes  sub- 
ject) to  Gulma  (chronic  enlargement  of  the  liver  or 
spleen).  For  the  expiation  of  that  sin,  molasses,  one 
Dhenu  in  weight,  should  be  presented  by  him.  (il) 

A  person,  stealing  iron,  is  born  with  spotted  limbs. 
Fasting  for  a  day,  he  should  give  away  one  hundred 
Pal  as  of  iron.  (12) 

A  person,  stealing  oil,  suffers  from  itches,  etc., 
Fasting,  he  should  give,  unto-  a  Vipra,  two  pitchers 
filled  with  oil.  (13) 

By  pilfering  uncooked  rice,  one  is  born  without 
teeth.  He  should  present  images  of  the  twin-As' wins 
made  of  two  Nishkas  of  gold.  (14) 

By  pilfering  cooked  rice,  one  is  born  with  a  disease 
on  the  tongue.  He  should  recite  the  Gayatri  for  a 
hundred  thousand  times  and  perform  the  tenth  part  of 
a  Homa  with  sesame.  (15) 

A  person,  stealing  fruits,  is  born  with  ulcerated 
fingers.  He  should  give  unto  a  twice- born  person  ten- 
thousand  fruits  of  sorts  (16) 

By  pilfering  betel-leaves,  one  is  bnrn  with  white 
Hps.  He  should  give  away  two  most  excellent  Vidrumas 
(corals)  with  money  presents.  (17) 

A  person,  stealing  vegetable  leaves,  is  born  with 
black  eyes.  He  should  oive  unto  a  Brdhmana  two 
most  precious  sapphires.  (18) 

By  pilfering  trunks  or  roots,  a  person  is  born  with  a 
shortened  hand.  A  temple  for  a  Deity  or  a  garden 
should  be  made  by  him  according  to  his  might.  (19) 

By   pilfering  scents,  one  is  born  wiih  limbs  emitting 


474  Satatapa  SavhhM. 

foul    smell.     He   should    offer   oblations   of  a   hundred 
thousand  lotuses  to  the  Fire.  (20) 

A  person,  pilfering  wood,  is  born  with  a  palm 
always  perspiring.  For  purification,  he  should  give, 
unto  a  learned  person,  a  Kusum&ha-ftower,  two  Palas 
in  size.  (21) 

The  pilferer  of  learning  and  books  is  born  dumb. 
He  should  ^ive  unto,  a  Br^hmana,  works  on  Nydya 
(Logic)  and  Itih'isa  (History)  with  money  presents.  (22) 

The  stealer  of  a  cloth  suffers  from  leprosy.  He 
should  give,  unto  a  Brdhmana,  the  image  of  Brahma", 
made  of  gold,  a  Nishka  in  weight,  and  two  pieces  of 
cloth.  (23) 

The  pilferer  of  wool  is  born  with  profuse  hairs  on 
his  body.  He  should  give,  unto  a  twice-born  person, 
an  idol  of  Fire,  made  of  gold,  one  Nishka  in  weight, 
together  with  a  blanket.  (24) 

By  pilfering*  silken  fibres,  a  man  is  born  without 
hairs  on  his  body.  For  the  purposes  of  purifica- 
tion, a  cow  should  be  given  by  him  unto  a  twice-born 
person.  (25) 

By  stealing  medicinal  herbs  one  is  born  suffering 
from  the  disease  of  Suryavarta.  He  should,  for  a 
month,  offer  Arghya  to  the  sun  and  give  away 
gold.  (26) 

The    pilfirer   of  crimson-colored   raiment  and  corals 
suffers    from    acute   gout.     He  should  give  away  a  she- 
buffalo  with  a  cloth  and  precious  jems.  (27) 

The  pilferer  of  a  Vipra's  jewels  is  born  son-less. 
For  the  purpase  of  purification  the  recitation  of  the 
Maharudra-Mantram  should  be  d©ne  by  him.  (28) 

Here   are  laid  down  all  these  regulations  which,  one, 
whose  child  dies  after  birth,  should  perform.     He  should 


Sat&tape,  Saihhitd.  475 

duly  perform  the  tenth  part  of  a  Homa  with  Palas'a 
twigs.  (29) 

Various  fevers  originate  from  the  stealth  of  articles 
belonging  to  a  deity,  such  as  fever,  great  fever,  Rudra 
fever,  and  Vishnu  fever.  (30) 

One  should  recite  into  ears  Rudra-mantram  in 
a  [simple]  fever,  Maharudra  in  a  high  fever,  Atirudra 
in  a  Rudra  fever,  and  twice  the  latter  in  a  Vaishnava 
fever.  ^3 1 ) 

The  stealer  of  various  other  articles  is  born  suffer- 
ing from  chronic  diarrhoea.  By  him,  according  to  his 
might,  shall  be  given  boiled  rice,  water,  raiments  and 
gold.  (32) 


CHAPTER    V. 

THE  generative  organ  of  a  person  disappears  who 
knows  his  mother.  By  cohabiting  with  a  Chandala 
woman  one  is  born  without  testes.  (i) 

For  the  expiation  of  that  sin,  one  should  place  a 
pitcher  in  the  north  covered  with  a  crimson  cloth  and 
decorated  with  crimson-coloured  garlands.  (2) 

On  it  one  should  place,  in  a  bell  metal  vessel  the 
image  of  the  god  of  riches,  seated  on  a  man  and 
made  of  gold  to  the  weight  of  six  Nishkas.  (3) 

He  should  adore,  with  the  Purusha-S'ukta 
Mantram,  the  giver  of  riches  having  an  universal 
form.  A  Vipra,  conversant  with  the  Atharva-Veda> 
should  recite  Atharvan.  (4) 

Having    made   an    idol    of  gold,  twenty  Nishkas  in 
weight,  and  adored   it,    one   should   dedicate   it   unto  a 
Vipra  saying,  "  I  am  freed  from  my  sin."  ($) 
62 


tdtaa   Sathhita. 


May  the  beautiful  deity,  the  lord  of  Widhis,  the 
beloved  friend  of  Shankara,  and  the  presiding  deity  of 
the  quarter  belonging  to  the  moon,  destroy  my  sin.  (6) 

For  the  purification  of  the  sin  encompassing  the 
destruction  of  the  generative  organ  and  the  testes,  one 
should  recite  this  Mantram  and  duly  give  the  image 
unto  the  A'ch&rya.  (7) 

By  violating  a  preceptor's  bed  one  is  born  suffer- 
ing from  diFeult  urination.  Its  expiation  shall  be 
effected  by  rites  pointed  out  by  the  Scriptures.  (8) 

On  an  auspicious  day  one  should  place  a  pitcher, 
in  the  West,  covered  with  a  blue  cloth  and  decorated 
with  blue  garlands.  (9) 

On  it  one  should  place,  in  a  copper  vessel,  the 
image  of  the  deity  Varuna  (the  god  of  water),  the  lord 
of  aquatic  animals,  made  of  gold,  six  Nishkas  in 
weight.  (10) 

With  the  Purusha-S'iikta  Mantram  he  should 
adore  Varuna  of  the  universal  form.  A  Brahmana, 
conversant  with  the  Sama-veda,  shall  recite  Sdman 
there,  (u) 

Having  made  an  idol  of  gold  with  twenty  Nishkas 
of  gold  and  adored  it,  he  should  give  it  unto  a  Vipra" 
saying  "  I  am  freed  from  sin."  (121 

May  the  divine  Varuna,  the  lord  of  aquatic  animals, 
the  sanctifier  of  the  universe,  the  pilot  in  the  ocean 
of  the  world,  purify  me.  (13) 

Having  duly  recited  this  Mantram  and  decorated 
the  idol,  one  should  present  it  unto  the  A'chdrya  for 
the  cure  of  difficult  urination  (14) 

By  knowing  one's  own  daughter  one  is  born  with 
black  leprosy.  By  knowing  one's  own.  sister  one  is 
born  with  yellow  leprosy.  (15} 


gdtatapa  Saihhitd.  477 

For  averting  its  action,  one  should  place  a  pitcher, 
in  the  east,  covered  with  a  yellow  cloth  and  decorated 
with  yellow  garlands.  (16) 

Thereon  he  should  place,  in  a  golden  vessel,  the 
image  of  the  king  of  the  celestials,  of  the  worlds  of 
<he  thunder-bolt,  made  of  six  Nishkas  of  gold.  (17) 

He  should  adore  Vasava,  having  a  universal  form, 
with  the  Pufushd-f?&kta  Mantram.  There  the  Yayush\ 
Sama  and  the  Rig-Veda  shall  be  recited.  (18) 

Having  made  a  golden  idol  with  ten  Nishkas  and 
worshipped  it,  he  should  present  it  unto  a  Vipra  saying, 
"  I  am  freed  from  the  sin."  (19) 

May  the  king  of  the  celestials,  the  weilder  of 
the  thunder-bolt,  the  abode  of  Vishnu,  the  performer 
of  a  hundred  sacrifices,  and  the  possessor  of  a  thousand 
eyes,  dissipate  my  sin.  (20) 

Having  duly  recited  this  Mantram,  he  should  pre- 
sent unto  the  Achdrya  the  image  of  the  thousand- 
eyed  deity  for  the  expiation  of  that  sin.  (21) 

By  knowing  a  brother's  wife  one  is  born  with  an 
incurable  leprosy  with  fingers  and  toes  falling  off.  By 
knowing  a  son's  wife  one  is  born  with  black 
leprosy.  (22) 

By  him,  for  the  expiation  of  the  sin,  shajl  be  per- 
formed a  half  of  the  penance  mentioned  before.  A 
tenth  part  of  the  Homa  shall  be  performed,  in  every 
«case,  with  seasame,  soaked  with  clarified  butter.  (23) 

From  cohabitng  with  women,  who  should  not  be 
.  known,  originates  the  disease  of  Dhruvamandala  fa 
kind  of  leprosy).  Having  made  image  of  a  cow  with 
iron,  to  the  size  of  sixty  sesame,  carrying  a  load  of 
cotton,  with  bellmetal  adders  and  with  a  calf,  one  should 
duly  present  it  unto  a  Vipra,  and  recite  the  Mantrtm  : 


47 S  S'dtdtapa  Safohitd. 

"  May   the   mother   Surabhi,    daughter    of  Vishnu,  des- 
troy my  sin."  (24 — 25) 

From  cohabiting   with   a   female   ascetic  originates 
the    disease   of  stone   in  the  bladder.     One  should  per- 

form  a  penitential  rite  for  the  expiation  of  that  sin.  (26) 
He   should   give  unto  a  learned    Brahmana,   as    laid 
down  in  the  S'dstras,  one  Dhenu  of  honey  as  well   as  a 
hundred  dronas  of  sesame  accompanied  with  gold.  (27) 

By  knowing  one's  father's  sister  one  is  born  with 
an  ulcer  on  the  right  half  of  the  body.  Expiation 
shall  be  performed  by  him  by  making  gifts  of  goats 
according  to  his  might.  (28) 

By  knowing  a  maternal  uncle's  wife  one  is  born 
as  a  haunch-back.  By  making  the  gift  of  a  black  ante- 
lope skin  one  should  perform  the  penitential  rite.  (29) 

By  knowing  a  mother's  sister  one  gets  ulcers  on  the 
left  part  of  the  body.  By  him  redemption  shall  be 
effected  by  making  gifts  properly.  (30) 

By  knowing  a  dead  wife  one  is  bcrn  as  one  whose 
wife  dies.  For  the  expiation  of  that  sin  he  should 
celebrate  the  nuptials  of  a  Brahmana.  (31) 

By  knowing  a  woman  of  his  own  family  one  is 
born  with  fistula  in  ano.  By  him  redemption  shall  be 
effected  by  a  careful  gift  of  a  She-buffalo.  (32) 

By  cohabiting  with  a  female  ascetic  a  person  is 
born  suffering  from  gonorrhoea.  He  should  recite  the 
Rudra-Mantram  for  one  month  and  give  away  gold 
according  to  his  might.  (33) 

By  knowing  one's  own  wife  who  is  initiated,  one 
is  born  suffering  from  the  vitiation  of  blood.  For  the 
expiation  of  that  sin  he  should  perform  Pr£japat- 


Satatapa  Safakita.  479 

By  knowing  the  wife  of  a  person  belonging  to  his 
own  caste,  one  is  born  suffering  from  the  ulceration  of 
the  heart.  For  the  expiation  of  that  sin  he  should 
perform  two  Prajapatyas.  (34)  • 

By  knowing  the  wife  of  a  person  belonging  to  his 
,own  caste,  one  is  born  suffering  from  the  ulceration 
of  heart.  For  the  expiation  of  that  sin  he  should  per- 
form two  Prajapatyas.  (35) 

By  cohabiting  with  a  beast,  one  is  born  suffering 
from  urinary  diseases.  For  self-purification  he  should 
give  two  plates  filled  with  sesame  (36) 

By  cohabiting  with  a  mare,  one  is  born  suffering 
from  constipation  of  the  bowels.  For  expiation  he 
should  bathe  S'iva  for  a  month  with  a  thousand 
lotuses.  (37) 

These  diseases  undoubtedly  affect  men  after  the 
termination  of  their  residence  in  hells.  Likewise  they 
affect  women  who  associate  with  similar  men.  (38) 


CHAPTER  V!. 

THOSE  who  have  been  killed  by  a  horse,  boar,  horns, 
[by  falling  down  from]  a  mountain,  tree,  or  an  elevated 
place,  by  a  cart,  fire,  wood,  weapon,  stone,  poison  or 
hanging,  (i) 

Those  killed  by  being  wounded  by  a  tiger,  serpent, 
elephant,  a  king,  thief,  enemy,  or  a  leopard  ;  those  killed 
by  a  wood  or  a  dart ;  those  for  whom  no  purificatory 
rites  have  been  performed.  (2) 

Those  killed  by  cholera,  by  having  rice-balls  stuck 
in  the  throat,  and  long  standing  diarrhoea ;  those  killed 


4$o  Sdtatapa  Safahita. 

by  being  possessed  by  S'dkini*  and    other    evil  Grahas 
(planets)  ;   (3) 

Those  dead  being  unworthy  of  being  touched,  or 
suffering  from  •impurity  or  having  no  sons — those  dead 
under  the  following  thirty  five  conditions  dcf  not  come 
by  a  better  condition.  (4) 

The  three  generations  upwards  from  the  father  are 
entitled  to  Pindas  (the  remnants  of  the  food  sticking 
to  the  hand  after  offering  funeral  oblations  to  the  first 
three  ancestors),  three  upwards  that  are  Ndndimukhds 
i.e.,  to  whom  a  S'raddha  is  performed  on  a  festive  oc- 
casion) ;  three  upwards  that  are  called  A'srumukhds.  (5) 

Being  gratified  these  twelve  orders  of  Pitris  (depart- 
ed manes)  grant  children  ;  if  they  are  not  placed  in 
proper  condition  they  destroy  children.  (6) 

The  ten  killed  by  tiger  etc.,  are  destructive  of  con- 
ception ;  the  twelve,  killed  by  weapons  etc.,  destroy 
the  foetus.  (7) 

The  ten  or  twelve,  killed  by  poison,  etc.,  destroy  a 
boy  one  year  old.  A  departed  mane,  dead  without  any 
issue,  creates  childlessness.  (8) 

He,  who  cohabits  with  a  maiden,  is  killed  by  a  tiger ; 
Hie  administrator  of  poison,  by  a  snake ;  the  mischief- 
maker  of  a  king,  by  an  elephant.  (9) 

The  destroyer  of  a  royal  prince  [is  killed  by  the 
king]  ;  and  the  destroyer  of  an  animal,  by  a  thief  ;  he 
who  creates  dissensions  amongst  friends,  by  an  enemy  ; 
and  one  of  the  conduct  of  a  crane,  by  a  wolf.  (10) 

The  destroyer  of  a  preceptor  [dies]  on  the  bed  ;  an 
envious  person,  being  divorced  from  purificatory  rites  ; 
one  committing  mischief  unto  other,  without  any 

*  A    kind   of  female   being   attendant   on    Durga  (supposed  to  be  a 
demon  or  fairy. 


S' at aia pa  Safrhitd. 

Samskrifa  (cremation  etc)  ;  and  the  pilferer  of  a  trust 
money  [is  killed]  by  a  dog.  ( 1 1) 

One,  who  kills  another  by  a  noose,  is  killed  by  a 
boar  in  a  forest  ;  one  making  a  cloth  by  kHling  an  insect 
is  killed  by  an  insect  (12) 

One,  who  is  inimical  towards  S'ankara,  [is  killed] 
by  a  horned  animal  ;  and  a  wicked  man,  by  a  cart ;  the 
stealer  of  lands,  by  falling  down  from  an  elevated 
place  ;  and  one  who  obstructs  a  sacrifice,  by  fire.  (13) 

The  stealer  of  sacrificial  presents  [is  killed]  by 
forest  fire  ;  the  vilifier  of  the  S'ruti,  by  weapons  ;  the 
vilifier  of  the  twice-born,  by  a  stone  ;  and  one  who 
gives  evil  tendency,  by  poison.  (14) 

He,  who  commits  injury  [is  killed]  by  hanging;  the 
breaker  of  a  bridge,  by  water  ;  the  filferer  of  the 
royal  rod,  by  worms  ;  and  the  stealer  of  iron,  by  chronic 
diarrhoea.  (15) 

He  who  works  with  pride,  is  killed  by  S'akini  and 
and  other  evil  spirits.  One  studying  the  Vedas  on  an 
interdicted  day  is  killed  by  a  thunder-bolt.  (16) 

The  pilferer  of  the  sacred  books  dies  touching  an 
article  that  shall  not  be  touched.  The  seller  of  wine 
dies  degraded  ;  and  the  pilferer  of  a  Brdhmana's  cloth, 
childless.  (17) 

The  penances  for  all  those  persons  shall  in  due  order 
be  spoken  of.  One  should  make  with  gold,  one  Nishka 
in  weight,  the  image  of  a  male  being  of  the  form  of  a 
Preta  (the  Regent  of  the  dead  having  four  arms,  with  a 
rod  in  hand,  seated  on  a  buffalo).  He  should  make  a 
pinda  (funeral  cake)  to  the  size  of  a  prastha  with 
flour  and  black  sesame.  (18 — 19) 

He  should  place  a  pitcher  filled  with  honey,  clarified 
butter,  and  sugar,  and  containing  a  golden  ear-ring,  the 


4&2  S'dtdtapd    Samhttd. 

base  of  which  is  not  black,  containing  five  leaves,  cover- 
ed with  a  black  cloth  and  consisting  of  Sarbaushadhl 
(lit : — all  cure).  Thereon  he  should  place  a  plate  filled 
with  paddy  and  fruits.  Then  he  should  place  on  it 
seven  kinds  of  paddy  with  fruits.  Having  placed  the 
image  of  the.  Preta  on  the  pitcher  he  should  adore 

It.    (20—22) 

He  should  daily  offer  libations  of  milk  with  the 
Purusha-S'ukta  Mantram,  and  then  one,  conversant 
with  Vadas,  should  recite  in  the  pitcher  the  Rudra- 
Mantram  with  six  divisions.  (23) 

Similarly,  one  should  celebrate  the  adoration  etc.,  of 
Yama  with  Yama-S'ukta.  For  self*purification  the 
recitation  of  the  Gayatri  should  be  performed.  (24) 

Having  propitiated  the  planets  before,  he  should 
perform  the  tenth  part  of  Homa  with  sesame.  Then 
with  water  sacred  to  the  Pitris  he  should  offer  sesame 
and  water,  and  pindqs  unto  the  Preta,  of  unknown  family 
and  name.  Then  he  should  recite  the  following  Mon- 
tr am  :  "  I  offer  this  pindas  consisting  of  sasame,  honey 
and  clarified  butter  unto  that  Preta,  who  is  troubling  me. 
Then  in  honour  of  the  Preta,  he  should  dedicate  unto 
Vishnu  twelve  black  pitchers  filled  with  water  and  con- 
taining a  plate  of  sesame.  Then  he  should  sprinkle  the 
A  chary  a  and  his  wife  with  the  water  of  the  pitcher 
consecrated  with  the  Varuna  Mantram,  "  S'uchirvara- 
yudhadhara"  (holder  of  pure  and  most  excellent  wea- 
pon). Then  the  sacrificer  shall  offer  the  final  present 
unto  the  A'chdrya.  (25 — 29) 

Then  offerings  should  be  made  unto  Narayana  ac- 
<*ordinff  to  the  deciscions  of  the  S'astra.  This  is  the 
general  regulation,  spoken  of,  for  these  who  die  under 
infernal  conditions.  (30) 


Sat&tapa  SaihhitA, 

Special  regulations  should  be  known  again  in  casejs 
of  persons  killed  by  tigers.  If  a  person  is  killed  by  a 
tiger  for  him  should  be  performed  the  nuptials  of 
another's  daughter.  (31) 

In  case  of  a  snake-bite  offerings  should  be  given 
unto  snakes  ;  presents  of  gold  should  be  made  in  all 
cases.  One  being  killed  by  an  elephant  one  should  give 
away  an  idol  of  an  elephant  made  of  gold,  four 
nishkces  in  weight.  (32) 

For  one  being  kililed  by  the  king,  one  should^give 
away  a  golden  figure  of  a  male  being  ;  a  cow,  for  being 
killed  by  a  thief ;  and  a  bull,  by  an  enemy.  (33) 

For  one  being  killed  by  a  woif,  one  should  give 
away  gold  according  to  his  might.  On  a  person  dying 
in  bed,  a  bed  made  of  cotton  with  an  image  of  Vishnu 
made  of  gold,  one  nishka  in  weight,  lying  on  it,  should 
be  given  away.  For  ene  dying  in  an  impure  state, 
an  image  of  Hari,  made  of  gold,  two  nishkas  in  weight, 
[should  be  given  away}  (34 — 35) 

For  one  dying  without  the  purificatory  rites  being 
performed  unto  one,  the  nuptials  for  a  bachelor  should 
performed.  A  person  being  killed  by  a  god,  one 
should  bury  some  money,  according  to  his  might, 
under  earth.  (36) 

For  a  person  kiMed  by  a  boar  one  skould  ggve  away 
a  buffalo,  accompanied  with  a  money-gift.  For  one 
killed  by  wo^ns  one  should  present  food  made  of 
wheat  unto  the  twice-born.  (.37) 

For  one  killed  by  a  horned  animal  one  should  give 
away  a  bull  covered  with  a  cloth.  For  one  killed  by  a 
Cart  one  should  give  away  a  properly  equipped 
•horse,  (.38) 


484  Sdtatapa  Samhttd. 

For  one  killed  by  falling  from  an  elevated  place 
one  i  ould  give  away  a  Dhdnya  Giri,  For  one  killed 
by  ae  one  should  give  away  sandals  according  to  his 
might.  (39) 

For  one  killed  by.  forest-fire  one  should  call  a  meet- 
ing in  his  house  ;  and  for  one  killed  by  a  weapon  one 
should  give  away  a  she-buffalo  accompanied  with  a 
money  present.  (40) 

For  one  killed  by  stone  one  should  give  away  a 
milch-cow  with  a  calf.  For  one  killed  by  poison  one 
should  give  away  lands  containing  cultivated  fields.  (41) 

For    o^e    killed   by  hanging  one  should  give  away  a 
rrp.lch-cjw  ;  and    for    one    killed    by    water    one    should 
the    image    of  Varuna    made  of  gold,  three 
nishkas  in  weight.   (42) 

ror  one  killed  by  [falling  down]  a  tree  one  should 
give  away  a  golden  tree  accompanied  with  a  gold  coin. 
For  one  killed  from  chronic  diarrhoea,  one,  being  self- 
restrained,  should  recite  the  Gayatri  for  a  hundred 
thousand  times.  (43) 

For  one  killed  by  a  S'akini  or  any  other  evil  spirit, 
one  should  duly  recite  the  Rudra  Mantram.  For  one 
killed  by  a  thunder-bolt  one  should  make  gifts  of 
learning.  (44) 

For  one  dead  by  touching  an  article  tbat  should 
not  be  touched,  one  should  complete  the  recitation  of 
the  Vedas.  For  one  dead  while  touching  a  degraded 
caste  one  should  give  away  books  on  sacred  litera- 
ture. (45) 

For  one  dying  in  a  degraded  state  one  should  per- 
form sixteen  Pnijapatyas.  For  .one  dying  childless 
one  should  perform  ninety  Krichchhas  (distressing 
penance)  (46) 


Sat&tapa  Safahttd.  485 

For  one  killed  by  a  horse  one  should  give  away  a 
horse  made  of  gold,  three  nishkas  in  weight.  For  one 
killed  by  monkey  one  should  give  away  a  monkey  made 
of  gold.  (471 

For  one  dying  of  cholera  one  should  treat  a  century 
of  Brahmanas  with  sweet  edibles.  For  one  killed  by 
fire  sticking  to  the  throat  one  should  give  away  a 
dhenu  of  sesame.  (48) 

For  one  dying  of  a  disease  of  the  hair  one  should 
perform  eight  Krichchhas.  According  to  this  regulation 
one  should  perform  the  funeral  rites  for  them.  (49) 

Thereupon  being  freed  frcm  the  condition  of  a preta 
(dead)  the  gratified  Pitris  (departed  manes)  grant  sons, 
grand-sons,  longevity,  health  and  wealth.  (50) 

Here  ends  the  [account  of  the]  :  fruits  [of  various] 
acts  given  by  S'dtdtapa  to  his  disciple  S'arabhanga 
accosting  him  with  humility,  (51) 


THE   END, 


LIKHITA.  SAMHIT.A/. 

TIEIKIT 


WITH  A 


LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION, 


EDITED    AND    PUBLISHED    BY 

MANMATHA  NATH  DUTT  (Shastri),  M  A-,  M.R.A.S- 

Rector,  Keshnb  Academy, 

Author 'of  the  English  Translation  of  the  Rdmdyanam,  Maha- 

Bhdratam,  Srimadbhdgavatam,   Mahanirvdna-Tantram, 

Harivams'a,   Agni  Purdnam,  Markandeya, 

Purdnam,   &c  ,  &c. 


Satattta 

PRINTED  BY  H.  C.  DAS,  ELYSIUM  PRESS. 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DUTT'S  STREET. 

1907. 


SAMHJTA.'. 


iSAc 


ACRIFICE  or  other  religious  rites,  and  the  digging  of 
tanks,  etc.,  shall  be  performed  with  care  by  a  Brahmana. 
By  Ishta  (religious  rite)  one  attains  to  the  celestial 
region,  and  by  Purtta  (digging  of  tanks,  e,tc.,)  one 
attains  to  emancipation,  (i). 

[Such  a  tank  at  least  be  excavated]  that  sacred 
water  may  He  on  earth  at  least  for  a  day  ;  that,  (i.e.,  a 
tank)  in  which  the  thirst  of  a  cow  is  satisfied',  rescues 
seven  generations.  (2) 

By  planting  trees  a  mortal  attains  to  those  regions 
which  are  described  [as  being  attainable]  by  the  gift 
of  lands  or  kine.  (3) 

He,  who  reexcavates  and  restores  delapidated  wells, 
tanks,  lakes,  and  temples,  reaps  the  fruits  of  Purttd 
acts.  (4) 

Adoration  of  the  sacred  Fire,  ascetic  austerity,  truth- 
fulness, the  protection  of  the  V£das  hospitality,  and 
the  worship  of  the  Vis' wade  vas  are  spoken  of  as 
Ishta.  (5) 

The  [three]  twice-born  castes  have  equal   rights  in 
both  Ishta  and   Purtta  works.     A  S'udra  is    entitled 
''to  [perform]  Purtta  [works]  but  not  Vedic  rites.  (6) 

As  long  as  the  bone  of  a  man  exists  in  the  Ganges 
water  for  so  many  thousands  of  years  he  lives  gloriously 
in  the  celestial  region.  (7) 

One  should   offer   libations    of  water   in   water  unto 
the  celestials   and   the   Pitris.     For  those  dead  without 
going  through  the  purificatory    rites    one    should   offer 
libations  of  water  on  land.  (8) 
64 


Likhita  Saibhita. 

The  deceased,  for  whom  a  bull  is  let  loose  o'ri  the' 
eleventh  day,  is  released  from  the  region  of  the  dead, 
and  goes  to  that  of  the  Pit  r  is.  (9) 

Many  sons  should  be  sought  for,  because  one  of  them 
at  least  may  happen  to  go  to  Gaya,  or  celebrate  a  horse- 
sa.  -.  iti.x,  or  dedicate  a  Neela  bull.  (10) 

If  one,  after  entering  Beneres,  leaves  that  place 
on  any  occasion  and  goes  elsewhere,  the  Bhutas 
(spirits)  laugh,  striking  their  palms,  amongst  them- 
selves, (u) 

The  person  naming  whom  one  offers  a  pindd  at 
Gayds'iras,  goes  to  the  celestial  region,  if  stationed  irt 
a  hell  ;  and  attains  to  emancipation,  if  residing  in  the 
celestial  region.  (12) 

One  takes  him,  whether  he  be  his  own  relative  or 
an  out-sid^r,  to  the  eternal  region  of  Brdhman,  by 
naming  whom  he  offers  a  pinda  at  any  place  in  the 
sacred  shrine  of  Gaya.  (13') 

That  which  has  a  crimson  colour,  white  hoops,  tail 
and  head,  is  called  in  the  S?nriti,  a  Neela  bull.  (14) 

The  first,  twelve  monthly,  twc  six  mo'nthly,  and  the 
annual,  ones, — these  are  the  sixteen  S'raddhas.  (15) 

The  Pis'dchahood  of  the  person,  for  whom  these  six- 
teen Ekdddhistha  Sraddkas  are  not  performed,  re-- 
rnains  fixed  even  if  a  hundred  [annual]  S'raddhas  are 
offered.  (16) 

After  the  performance  of  the  Sapindikaran  S'raddha 
a  twice-born    person    should   perform,    every   year,    the 
Ekoddhisthas  o-n  days  of  their  death,  separately  for  his 
father  and  mother.   (17) 

Every  year,  for  the  gratification  of  one's  father  anc$ 
mother,  one  should  perform  a  daiva  (ri:te  for  the  deities) 
and  offer  o\\e  pinda  only.  (i8j 


Likhita  SafokitA.  489 

On  the  last  day  of  a  month,  on  the  two  eclipses, 
on  a  Parva,  and  on  Mahalaya  three  pfndas  should  be 
offered,  and  one  on  the  day  of  death.  (19) 

If  a  twice-born  person  performs  the  Parvana 
S'rdddha  neglecting  the  Ekoddhistha,  know  that  as 
fruitless ;  and  he  is  known  as  the  destroyer  of  his 
father.  (20) 

After  the  performance  of  the  Sapindakaran,  [the 
annual  S'rdddha}  should  be  celebrated  according  to 
the  Regulation  of  the  Pdrvana  for  him  who  dies  on  an 
Amdvasyd  day  in  the  Pitri  fort-night  (the  dark  half  of 
Bhadrapada).  (21) 

[He  who  dies]  after  holding  the  triple  staff,  does  not 
come  by  the  condition  of  a  pretd  (deceased),  on  the- 
eleventh  day  of  his  death  a  [S'rdddha]  should  be  per- 
formed according  to  the  Pdrvana  regulations.  (22) 

A  twice-born  person  should  offer  daily  a  pitcher 
filled  with  water  for  him  for  whom  a  Sapindakaran 
subsequent  to  the  annual  [S'rdddha]  is  laid  down  in 
the  Smriti.  (23) 

On  the  day  of  her  death,  with  one  [pin  da]  a  Sapin- 
dakaran for  a  woman  should  be  performed  by  her  hus- 
band.  It  should  be  mixed  with  that  for  the  paternal 
grand-mother.  The  latter  living,  it  should  be  mixed 
with  that  for  her  mother-in-law,  or  grand-mother-in-law. 
This  is  the  fixed  rule.  (24 — 25) 

After  the  termination  of  the  nuptial  rite,  and  on  the 
nigiit  of  the  fourth  day,  a  woman  becomes  one  with 
her  husband,  in  a  pinda}  gotra  <, family),  and  impurity 
consequent  upon  births  and  deaths  therein.  (26) 

At   the   seventh  pada    (foot-step j*  after  marriage  a 

*  The  seven  steps  at  a  marriage  (the  bride  and  bride-groo-n    walk 
together  seven  steps  after  which  the  marriage  becomes  irrevocable). 


LikKifo  S&Aihita. 

woman  becomes  divorced  from  his  own  family.  Gifts,, 
and  the  offering  of  pindas  and  water  should  be  done 
[according  to  the  regulation  of]  her  husband's  gotv& 
(family).  (27) 

By  taking  the  name  of  the  two  in  every  pinda  it 
should  be  offered- for  the  two  mothers.  Three  pindas> 
should  be  offered  for  the  six.  The  giver,  by  doing  so,, 
does  not  become  stupefied.  (28) 

Even  if  Ire  be  a  Brahmaiia^  conversant  with  M'antrasr 
and  affected  by  physical  sins  as  well  as  th©s*e  affecting, 
a  row  (diners),  still  Yama  calls  him.  sinl«s& ;  and  sucb 
a  person  is  the  s^nctifier  of  the  rowv.  (29,;) 

The  residue  of  the  oblation*  offered  to  the  Fire,  one 
should  place  in  a  Pitri  vessel  and  distribute  amongst 
the  Pitris ;  he  should  ne*ver  put  it  in  a  vessel  for  the 
¥is'wadevas>.  (30) 

If  a  Vipra,  who  does  maintain  the  Sacred;  Fire,, 
performs  a  Pdrvana  S'rdddha,  he  should  always  per- 
form fearlessly  that  for  his  ancestors  in  the  maternal 
line.  (31) 

Ekoddisktka  and:  not  a:  Pdrvana  Srraddha  should1 
be  offered  unto  them,  men,  or  women  who  die  son* 
less.  (32) 

On  the  self  same  Ttt'hi  on  which- a  twice-born  person^ 
dies,  gifts  and  the  offering  of  funeral-  cakes  and  water 
should  be  made  unto  him.  (33) 

Birth-day  ceremony  and  Ab'iskeka  (consecration  by 
sprinkling  water)  should,  never  be  done  in  the  redun- 
dant month.  But  the  S'rdddha  preceding  the  annual: 
one,  may  take  place  in  the  redundant  month.  (34) 

That  month  is  considered  interdicted  for  every  rite. 
In  the  other  (re.,  pure)  part  of  the  month  and  in  the 
same  Tit  hi  any  rite  may  be  performed.  (35) 


Likhita  Swfahit&.  491 

One  may  daily  cook  rice  with  the  fire,  kept  in  the 
house,  or  with  an  ordinary  one.  It  is  laid  down  that 

Homa  should  be  performed  in  that  fire  with  which 
rice  is  cooked.  (36) 

One  should  zealously  offer  oblations  every  day  to> 
the  Vaidik  and  Laukika  (ordinary)  fire.  By  [offering 
oblations]  to  the  Vaidika  one  attains  to  the  celestial 
region,  and  those  to  the  Laukika  dissipate  sins.  (37) 

He,  who  does  not  preserve  the  sacred  fire,  should 
offer  oblations  to  the  Fire  reciting  the  S'akal'a  Mantram 
preceded  by  Vyahnti^  and  then,  distributing  food 
amongst  the  Bhutas  (evil  spirits),  should  himself  take 
meals.  (38) 

He  should  not  touch  the  food  so  long  the  Brahmanas 
ate  not  dismissed.  He  should  then  perform  Grihatvali* 
This  is  the  established  religious  ritual.  (39) 

Darbhas  (grass)r  black  antelope  skins.  Mantras^  and 
Brahmanas,  in  particular,  never  become  desecrated,, 
so  they  may  be  employed  repeatedly.  (40) 

A  twice -born  person  should  always,  with  a  Kus'a  in 
his  hand,  drink  water  and  rinse  his  mouth.  It  is  not 
considered  as  sullied  as  the  residue  of  his  meals.  This 
is  always  the  regulation.  A  KuJa  is  as  unsuitable 
as  the  hand.  (41 — 42) 

The  blades  of  Kus'd  grass  should  be  caught  hold  of 
with  the  left  hand,  and  the  mouth  should  be  rinsed 
with  the  right.  The  ignorant,  who  do  not  retain 
Kus'ds  in  their  left  hands  on  the  occasion,  are  supposed 
to  rinse  their  mouths  with  blood.  (43) 

Kus'a  blades  fastened  with  the  waist-knot  of  a 
wearing  cloth,  or  with  the  strings  of  a  holy  thread  should 
be  always  regarded  as  unsullied,  in  as  much  as  they 
are  as  pure  as  the  body  itself.  (44) 


49*  Likhtto  SarhMM. 

Kusta  blades  in  touch  with  the  Pind'as  dedicatedofe 
one's    departed    manes,    or   with   any  kind   of  excreted 
matter,    as    well    as   those    used  in  offering  libations  of 
Water  to  Pitris^  should  be  rejected  as  unclean.   (45) 

One  should  practise  Brahmacharyam  (absolute 
continence)  on  the  occasion  of  celebrating  a  Pdrvana 
or  Ekodd/ishtQ  S*vaddh&,  as  well  as  in  connection  with 
celebrating  the  one  which  is  undertaken  with  the  sole 
object  of  propitiating  one's  departed  manes,  (46) 

Oblations  should  be  first  given  to  one's  departed 
manes  on  the  mother's  side,,  the*  to  those  on  the 
father's  side,  and  thereafter  to  those  on  the  maternal 
grand-father's  side,*  in  connection  with  the  celebration 
of  a  Vriddhi  S'rdddha  (offerings  made  to  one's  de-. 
parted  manes  on  prosperous  occasions  such,  as  the  birth 
pf  a  son,  etc.)  (47) 

Kratu  and  Daksha,  Vasu  and  Satya,  Kala  and 
Kama,  Dhuri  and  LQchana,  and  Pururava  and  Madra- 
yasa,  are,  in  couples,  styled  as  Vishwadevas.  (48) 

May  the  mighty  Vishwadevas,.  of  illustrious  fate,, 
come,  and  grant  us  the  boon  in  resp,ect  of  the  celebra-- 
tion  of  those  S'rdddhas  of  which  they  have  been  res- 
pectively ord'ained  to  act  as  the  presiding  deities.  (49) 

Kratu  and  Daksha  are  the  Vishwadevas,  who  should 
be  invoked  to  preside  over  an  Ishta  S'rdddha  ceremony. 
(A  S'raddha  celebrated  for  tire  fruition  of  any  earthly 
desire).  Vasu  and  Satya  are  the  Vishwadevas,  who 
should  be  invoked  in  connection  with  a  Deva  S^raddhct 
(S'raddha  celebrated  in  honour  of  the  gods.)  Kala  and 
Kama  are  the  Vishwadevas,.  who  should  be  addressed; 

*  A    Sdma  Vedi  Brahmana  need  not   make  any    offering   to    manqs. 
On    his   mother's  side   (Matri  paksha)   in   connection   with  a    Viiddhi. 
Th««  is  t,h«  regulation  :— Tr. 


likhita  SdihbiM. 


bh  the  occasion  of  an  Agni  K&ryaya  (oblatiori 
to  the  Fire  god),  Dhuri  and  Lochona  in  respect  of 
Ambara  Kdryayam,  and  Pururavd  and  Madravasa 
in  connection  with  a  Pdrvana  S'rdddha  (the  general 
Ceremony  of  offering  oblations  to  all  the  manes  on 
days  of  Pdrvana  such  as;  the  new  moon,  etc.)  (50) 

A  wise  man  should  not  wed  a  girl  without  an 
uterine  (or  step-brother)  of  her  own  arid  whose  father's 
name  is  not  known,  apprehending  lest  she  might  have 
been  previously  given  away  as  a  Putrikd.  (51) 

"I  give  this  daughter,  who  has  got  no  uterine  brother 
of  her  o\vn,  duly  bedecked  with  ornaments,  to  you. 
The  male  child  begotten  on  her  person  shall  be  a 
son  of  mine."  The  girl;  who  is  thus  given  away,  is 
tailed  a  Putrikd.  (52) 

The  son  begotten  on  a  Putrikd  daughter  should  first 
offer  oblations  to  his  mother,  then  to  his  mother's 
father,  and  then  to  his  father's  father.  (53) 

He,  who  feeds  (offers  oblations  to)  his  departed 
manes  in  earthen  vessels  on  the  occasion  of  a  S'rdddha^ 
is  consigned  to  hell  in  the  company  of  the  invited 
Brahmanas  and  the  priest  officiating  at  the  cere- 
mony. (54) 

Earthen  vessels  may  be  substituted  for  other  kinds 
of  utensils,  tin  the  occasion,  with  the  permission  of  the 
congregated  Brahmanas,  provided  they  be  first  smeared 
with  clarified  butter.  Such  earthen  Vessels  ate  not 
impure.  (55) 

The  departed  rrianes  of  £  person,  who  himself,  having 
performed  a  S'rdddhet,  dines,  that  day,  out  of  greed,  irt 
connection  with  another's  .SVtfflfo^tf-cefemonyj,  stand 
deprived  of  oblations  and  libations  of  water,  and  comtf 
by  a  worse  condition  in  the  ft  ether  regions.  (56) 


The  departed  manes  of  a  person,  who  hims*K  hav  in'g 
performed   a   S'rdddha^  or  having  dined  in  connection 
\vith   one  done  by  another,  travels,  that  day,  more  than 
•a  distance   of  one    Rrosha   (two    miles1,    eat    dust  for  a 
whole  month  reckoned  from  that  date.     (57) 

Having  performed  a  S?raddha  ceremony,  one  should 
tefrain  from  doing  the  following  eight  things,  #/#.,  eating 
a  second  time  that  day,  travelling,  carrying  a  weight, 
reading,  sexual  intercourse,  giving  or  taking  of  any 
gift,  and  performance  of  a  Homa.  (58) 

By  travelling  (under  the  circumstance)  one  is  born 
as  a  horse  in  one's  next  birth ;  by  eating  a  second 
meal,  a  crow ;  by  doing  any  work,  a  slave  ;  by  knowing 
a  wife,  a  hog.  (59) 

One  should  first  drink  a  little  water  consecrated  by 
ten  times  reciting  the  Sdvitri  Mantra^  and  after  that 
attend  to  one's  daily  Sandhyd  rite.  By  so  doing  one  is 
absolved  from  all  sins  incidental  to  doing  forbidden  acts 

o 

[under  the  auspicies  of  a  Sr&ddha  ceremony].  (60) 

An  act  of  Japa,  Hoi&a,  or  gift-taking  not  per* 
formed  by  one  in  wet-clothes,  or  without  covering 
one's  knees,  proves  abortive  (in  respect  of  its  religious 
merit.)  (61) 

A  rite  of  Ckdndfdyana  penance  should  be  practised 
before  celebrating  an  Adya  S'raddha  ;  a  Pardka  Vrata^ 
in  connection  with  a  monthly  S'raddha;  a  Tapta 
Krichchha  V^ata  in  connection  with  the  one  which  is 
practised  at  the  close  of  every  third  week  (Tripaksha) 
or  of  a  complete  month,  or  of  the  first  six  months  of 
a  year  ;  a  three  night's  fast,  in  connection  with  the  one 
to  be  performed  on  the  completion  of  the  second-half 
of  the  year  (Undbdika)  ;  and  one  night's  (one  day  and 
night)  fast,  in  connection  with  the  celebration  of  a 


Likhitil  Saihkita*  495 

Sa'pifttlakarana  ceremony  (A  S'rddddha  ceremony) 
celebrated  on  the  completion  of  a  year  from  the  date 
of  the  death  of  a  deceased  person,  or  earlier,  if  happens 
to  be  performed  in  connection  with  any  special  act 
such  as,  the  marriage  or  Upanayana  of  any  of  his  sons 
cr  daughters,  etc.,  and  which  is  supposed  to  liberate 
his  spirit  from  the  mansions  of  the  Pretas}.  Unclean- 
ness  incidental  to  an  act  of  helping  in  the  cremation  of 
a  dead  body  is  removed  by  practising  a  Pdda  Krichchha 
(quarter  part  of  a  Krichchha  Vratd]  penance  for  a 
month  from  the  date  of  the  cremation.  (62 — 63) 

A  rite  of  S'raddha  should  not  be  performed  Unto 
the  spirit  of  a  suicide,  nor  of  one,  either  dead  through 
the  curse  of  a  Brahmana,  or  killed  by  a  snake,  lizard, 
or  a  fanged  or  horned  animal  (64) 

By  touching  the  corpse  of  a  person  kifled  by  a  caw, 
or  a  Brdhmana,  or  dead  From  the  effects  of  voluntary 
strangulation)  a  Brahmana  is  reborn  as  a  cow,  of  a  horse* 
The  contact  of  such  a  dead  body  is  interdicted.  (65) 

The  cutter  of  a  noose  or  of  a  chord  of  binding  strings, 
as  well  as  the  one  guilty  of  incendiarism,  should  expiate 
his    guilt    by   practising   a   7 apta    Krichchha    penance; ' 
This  is  ordained  by  the  patriarch  Manu.  (66) 

The  performance  of  a  Tapta  Krichchha  Vrata  con- 
sists in  living  on  a  little  warm  water  alone  for  the 
lirst  three  days  ;  on  a  little  worm  milk  alone  for  the 
second  three  days  ;  on  a  little  warm  clarified  butter4 
alone  for  the  third  three  days  ;  and  on  air  alone  for" 
the  last  or  fourth  three  days  of  the  entire  term  of  the 
penance.  (67) 

The  man,  in  rembrance  of  (whose  guilt),  one,  who 
has  been  robbed  of  a  wife,  field,  house,  cow,  land,  or 

65 


496  Likhita  Samhitd. 

gold,  suffers  self-immolation,  should  be  regarded  as  a 
Brdhmanaghdti  (Brahmanicide).  (68) 

There  is  atonement  for  the  guilt  of  an  abettor  or  ac- 
complice of  a  ravisher  of  female  chastity.  The  ravisher 
alone  should  be  regarded  as  Brahmaghdti.  (69) 

By  unwillingly  partaking  of  boiled  rice  (lit.  any 
kind  of  food)  in  a  Chandala's  house,  as  well  as  of  that 
prepared  by  a  fallen  or  degraded  person,  one  should 
live  on  water  alone  for  a  fortnight.  The  term  of  the 
penance  should  be  extended  to  a  month  in  cases  where 
the  delinquency  has  been  knowingly  committed.  (70) 

The  touch  of  a  fallen  yogin  should  be  expiated 
by  an  ablution  ;  'that  of  the  residue  of  the  meals  of 
the  degraded  by  the  performance  of  a  Prajdpatya, 
Vratam.  (71) 

Killing  of  a  Brahmana,  wine-drinking,  theft  of  gold 
to  the  weight  of  more  than  eighty  Ratis,  and  defiling 
one's  preceptor's  bed*  are  the  four  cardinal  sins,  the 
fifth  being  the  one  born  of  the  company  of  such  a 
sinful  person.  (72) 

Bv  helping  a  sinner  fatting  under  any  of  the  five 
preceding  categories  in  matters  of  expiation,  either  out 
of  affection,  greed,  fear,  or  ignorance,  one  commits  thfc 
same  sin  as  the  sinner  seeking  such  expiation.  (73) 

A  Brahmana  happening  to  touch  before  washing 
his  mouth  after  eating  another  similarly  circumstanced 
as  himself,  should  bathe  that  moment  and  rinse  his  mouth- 
with  water,  whereby  he  would  be  clean  again.  (74) 

A  man  commits  no  sin  by  marrying  before  his  elder 
Vr^het-'s  11  T  ia  -  where  t'u:  latter  is  either  a  hunch- 

*  Guru-talpaga — means    the  defiler   of  a   preceptor's   bed;   but    the 
scholiast  interpretes  the  term  as  signifying  an  act  of  knowing  one's  step- 
mother .  — Tr. 


Likhita  Sathhita.  497 

back,  dwapf,  eunuch,  or  idiot,  or  is  deaf,  dumb  born- 
blind,  or  of  indistinct  speech.  (75) 

On  one's  elder  brother  happening  to  loose  his  virility, 
or  to  have  resorted  to  the  practice  of  yoga,  or  to  a 
life  of  asceticism,  or  to  be  degraded  in  life  on  account 
of  a  sojourn  to  a  country  a  residence  wherein  is  con- 
sidered degrading  (i.e.,  supposed  to  degrade  a  man  in 
society),  one  is  at  liberty  to  marry  even  before  the 
marriage  of  such  an  elder  brother.  (76) 

A  penitential  rite,  similar  to  that  laid  down  in  con- 
nection with  an  act  of  cow-killing,  should  be  practised 
by  one  who  sells  horses  or  elephants  for  money,  or  mis- 
chievously fills  up  a  tank  or  well,  or  fells  or  cuts  down  a 
tree.  (77) 

All  the  hairs  of  the  body  should  be  shaved  in 
cases  where  a  penance  to  the  extent  of  a  Pdda  (quarter) 
measure  would  be  found  to  be  enjoined.  In  two 
Pddas  or  half  penances,  the  penitent  should  shave  his 
mustaches  only ;  all  the  hairs  of  the  head  excepting 
the  tuft  on  the  crown,  in  three  legged  (Tripdda)  or 
three  quarter  penances ;  and  the  hair  of  the  entire 
hqad  in  full  or  or  four-footed  ones.  (78) 

An  act  of  ablution  is  the  expiation  for  touching 
boiled  rice  prepared  *by  a  Chandala ;  a  Prdjapatyu 
Vrata,  for  touching  the  remnants  of  his  meal.  (79) 

A  Prdjdpatya  Vrata  is  the  penance  for  a  Brahmana 
unwillingly  drinking  water  out  of  a  Chandala's  cup  or 
w.-uter  vessel,  and  vomiting  or  belching  out  the  same 
immediately  after  drinking.  (80) 

A  Krichchha  sdntdpana  instead  of  a  Prajdpapatya 
Vrata  would  be  the  expiatory  penance  in  his  case 
if  the  water  is  not  ejected  out  of,  and  retained  and 
digested  in,  the  stomach,  (81) 


Likhita  Sctfahita. 

A    Brahrnana    should    practise   a   Krichchha  Santa- 
pana    Vrata ;    a    Kshatriya,    a    Prajdpatya    Vrata ;  a 
Vaiskya,    a  half  Prajdpatya  ;  and  a  S'udra,  a    quarter 
part  of  the  last  named  penance.  (82) 

A  woman  in  her  periods,  happening  to  be  touched 
by  a  dog,  hpg,  or  crow,  should  observe  a  single 
night's  fast,  and  regain  her  cleanness  by  taking 
Panchagavyam  (cowdung,  cow's  urine,  cow  milk,, 
milkcurd  and  Ghrita.  (83.) 

A  man  by  unintentionally  touching  a  woman  in 
her  menses  some  where  below  her  navel  should  instan- 
taneously bathe.  A  three  night's  fast  is  the  expiation 
in  cases  where  the  contact  is  intentional  and  at  a  part 
©f  the  body  above  her  umbilicus.  (84) 

The  Sapindas  of  a  male  child,  dead  within  ten  days 
of  its  birth,  are  not  affected  by  uncleanness  incidental 
to  the  death ;  and  no  libations  of  water  should  be 
offered  to  its  spirit  in  such-  a  case.  (8,5) 

A  birth^uncleanness  (uncleariness  due  to  the  birth  of 
a  child  in  the  family)  occurring  within  the  term  of  one 
due  to  a  death  (in  the  same  family)  should  termi- 
nate with  the  latter.  But  a  death-uncleannes,  occur- 
ing  within  the  term  of  a-  birth-uncleanness,  does  not 
abate  with  its  extinction.  Deafch-uncleanness  is  stron- 
ger than  birth-uncleanness.  (86) 

Agnates  related  to  a  deceased  person  within  sixth 
degree  of  consanguinity  are  unclean  for  one  day,  withio 
the  fifth  deree  of  consanguinity,  for  seven  days  ;  and 
within  the  third  degree  of  consanguinity  for  ten  days 
only*  (87) 

The  period  of  uncleaness  due  to  the  death  of  a  de- 
ceased, Br  ah  mana  without  the  consecrated  fire  (Niragni) 


Not  followed  by  the  Bengal  School. — TV. 


Likhita  SathfiitA.  499 

should  be  counted  from  after  the  hour  of  his  death, 
while  that  in  respect  of  a  Sdgnika  Brahmana  (with  the 
consecrated  fire)  should  be  counted  from  after  the  cre- 
mation of  his  dead  body.  (88) 

Raw  meat,  clarified  butter,  honey,  and  oils  expressed 
out  of  the  seeds  of  fruits  (such  as  almond  oil,  etc.), 
kept  in  the  vessel  of  another  unclean  person,  become 
clean  as  soon  as  they  are  taken  out  of  it.  (89) 

The  dust,  raised  by  the  ends  of  a  broomstick,  and 
happening  to  defile  the  bathing  or  drinking  water  of  a 
person  kept  in  a  vessel,  or  touching  his  bathing  apparel, 
tends  to  destroy  bis  religious  merit  on  the  moment  of 
such  contact  or  defilement.  (901 

111  luck  (Alakshmi]  resides  in  the  shade  of  a 
Kapiththa  tree  during  the  day,  in  the  mixture  of  milk- 
curd  and  barley  powder  during  the  night,  and  constantly 
in  the  kernels  of  Amalaka  fruit.  (91) 

One  should  perform  three  Homas  and  a  hundred 
times  recite  the  Gayatri  Mantram  in  connection  with 
each  act  he  thinks  to  be  of  evil  augury.  (92) 


THE  END. 


VYA'SA  SAMHITA/. 

TE3CT 


WITH    A 


LITERAL  PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION. 


EDITED    AND    PUBLISHED    BY 

MANMATHA  NATH   DUTT  (Shastri),  IK.A.,  W.R.A.S, 

Rector,  Keshub  Academy, 

Author  of  the  English  Translations  of  the  Rdmdyanant,  Mah&+ 

Bhdratamt  Srimadbhdgavatam,  Mahdnirvdna-Tantram, 

Harivamsa,  Agni  Purdnam,   Mdrkandeya 

Purdnam,  &c.t  &c. 


PRINTED  BY  H.  C.  DAS  ELYSIUM  PRESS, 
40,  NAYAN  CHAND  DUTT'S  STREET. 

1907. 


SAMHJTAA 


tHAPTER  I. 


HOLY  SAGES  '(Munis  )  approached  that  repository 
of  penitential  Sanctity,  Veda  Vydsa^  who  was  blissfully 
seated  irt  his  hermitage  at  Benares,  and  asked  him  ques- 
tions regarding  the  duties  of  the  members  of  different 
sOcialorders  (Varnas).  (I) 

He  Of  excellent  memory  having  been  thus  interro- 
g-ate'd  by  (other  holy  sages  t  recollected  the  Smritis  as 
propounded  in  the  ^eda^  and  complacently  said,  hear, 
t)  Munis  !  (2) 

Religious  rites  inculcated  in  the  Vedas  should  be 
practiced  in  countries  Where  black  antelopes  are  found 
to  roam  about  in  nature.  (3) 

In    matters    of    discrepancy    between    the    S'rutis, 
•Smrit'is,    and   Pur  anas,   the   former  should    be    hfdd  aS 
'decisive,  whereas  the  Smritis  sh'ould  have  preference    in 
ail    tbpics   where    there  Would  be  a  difference  of  opinion1  ' 
betwe-en  them  and  the  Pit  r  anas.   (4; 

The  term  '"  twice-born"  denotes  the  Bi-ahmarias, 
Kshatriyas,  and  Vaibhyas.  Only  these  three  orders* 
•are  entitled  to  practise  religious  rites  propounded  irt 
the  S'*utis\  Storitis  an'd  Purdnas  in  exclusion  bi  all 
other  castes.  (5) 

The    fourth    order    is    the  SVdra,  hencb  the  S'udras; 
are    entitled    to    practise  reli^iuus  rites,  but  tl»tty  are  not 
privileged  to  recite  any  Vedic  Mantra^    nor  to   pioabuci 
the  terms  Svuha,  Svadhd  'end  Vaskai.   (6^ 
66 


502  Vyfov  SafahitA. 

The  daughter  of  a  Brdhmana,  duly  wedded  to  a 
Brahmana,  is  called  a  Vipramnna.  All  religious  rites- 
and  ceremonies  such  as,  postnatal  rites,  etc.,  should  be 
done  unto  the  male  child  of  a  Vipravinnd  according 
to  the  regulations  laid  down  in  respect  ct  a  Brah- 
mana ;  those  unto  the  male  child  of  a  Brahmana  by  a 
Kshatriya  wife  \Kshatra-vinna)  should  be  done  in  the 
manner  of  a  Kshatriya  ;  while  those  unto  the  son  of  a 
Brahmana  by  his  lawfully  married  S'ud-ra  wife  in  the 
manner  of  a  S'udra.  (7) 

All  {religious  rites  should  be  done  unto  a  male  child 
begot  by  a  Brabmana  or  a  Kshatriya  on  his  married 
Vaishya  wife  in  the  manner  of  a  Vaishya,  while  those 
unto  the  son1  of -a  S'udra  mother,  under  the  circumstance, 
should  be  done  in  the  manner  of  a  S'udra.  A  son- 
begot  by  a  man  of  inferior  caste  on>  a  woman'  of  superior 
caste  is  worse  than  a  S'udra.  (8) 

A  son>  begot  by  a  S^udra  on-  a  Brdhmana  girl  should 
fee  considered  as  a  Chanddla.  Such  a  son-  is  debarred 
from,  practising  any  religious  rite.  There  are  three 
kinds  of  Chanddlas.  To  the  first  kind  or  order  belong, 
the  sons  begotten  on  unmarried  girls.  To  the  second 
©rder  belong  the  sons  begot  by  persons  on  wives' 
belonging  to  their  own-  Gotras,  (9) 

To-  the  third  kind1  belong  the  sons-  begotten'  By 
S'udra  fathers  on  mothers  who  are  Brahmanis.  Var- 
dhakis  (carpenters),  Napitas  (barbers)3.  Gopas  (milkmen), 
Ashapas,.  Kumbhakaras  (potters),  Vanik  (tradeis),- 
Kayasthas  (Userers),  Malakaras  (flower-men),  Varatas> 
Medas,.  €handalas,  Dasas,  Shvapachas,  Kolas  and 
beefeaters  belong  to  the  lowest  castes  of  men.  Even  a 
conversation  with  a  person  of  any  of  these  castes  should 


Vy&sa  Samhitd.  503 

be  expiated  by  an  ablution  and  a  sight  of  the  sun. 
(10—12). 

The  rites  of  Garbhadhanam  (religious  rites  perform- 
ed for  the  conception  of 'one's  wife),  Pumsavanam  (reli- 
gious rites  performed  for  the  causation  of  the  birth  of 
a  male  child),  Simantonnayanam  (described  below), 
Jatakarma  (post-natal  rites),  Namakaranam  (rite  of 
first  nomenclature),  Nishkramanam  (formal  taking  out 
of  the  child  in  the  open),  Annaprdshanam  (ceremony 
of  first  feeding  the  child  with  boiled  rice),  Vapanam 
(ceremony  of  tonsure),  Karnavedha  (ceremony  of  per- 
forating the  child's  ear-lobes),  Vratadesha  (the  cere- 
mony of  in  vesture  with  the  holy  thread),  Vtddrambha 
(ceremonial  commencement  of  the  study  of  the  V£das), 
KeJantam  (ceremony  of  cutting  the  child's  hair), 
Snanam  (ceremonial  ablution),  Vivah&gni-parigraha 
(the  ceremony  of  lighting  up  the  nuptial  fire  which  is 
kept  burning  ever  afterwards),  Tretagni-samgraha  (the 
ceremony  of  kindling  the  three  different  kinds  of  fire 
known  as  Dakshinagnih,  Gdrhapatydgnih,  and  Ayhava- 
niyagnih  which  are  kept  burning  till  the  death  of  the 
lighter),  are  the  sixteen  purificatory  rites  ordained  to 
be  performed  in  the  case  of  a  Brahmana  in  the  scrip- 
tures.* (13—15^ 

The  recitation  of  any  Mantra  by  a  woman  is  prohi- 
bited in  the  ten  ceremonies  commencing  with  the  Jata- 
karma and  ending  with  the  Karnaveda ;  but  she  is 
privileged  to  recite  Mantras  in  connection  with  the 
celebration  of  her  marriage  ceremony.  These  ten  rites 
should  be  done  unto  the  S'udras  without  any  Mantras 
whatsoever.  (16) 

*  The   number   is   reduced    to  ten  in  the  case  of  a  Brahmana  who  is 
not  a  4ustp4ian  of  the  sacred  fire.  Tr. 


504  Vy/rsa 

The  rite  of  Garbkadhanam  should  be  done  unfea 
pne's  wife  on  the  fi,rst  appearance  of  her  menses ;  the 
rite  of  Pvriisaiffintm  in,  the  third  m.onth  of  her  first 
pregnancy ;  and  the  rite  o,f  Simantonnayfln&m  (the 
cerempny  of  tbt  parting  of  the '.hair),  during  the  eighth 
month  '  f  -  P station,.  The  rite  of  Jatakarma.  should  be 
done  i;i>u.  •  -v.;vd  o  i  the  sixth  day  of  its  birth  ;  the  rite 
of  W^ff.karan^m-9t  on  the  eleventh  day;  and  the 
rite  of  Nishkrampna.m.  in  the  fourth  month  of  its 
birth.  (17) 

The  rite  of  An^apras^ftnam.  should  be  done  unto  if; 
in  the  eleventh  month  ;  and  the  ceremony  of  tonsure  a,c- 
cording  to  the  custom  of  its  father's  family  (but  before  it 
completes  the  third'  year  of  its  age).  After  the  ceremony 
of  tonsure  that  of  fZartiavedka  should  be  done  unto  a, 
child.  (18. 

The  son  of  a  Brahmana,  should  be  invested  with,  the. 
holy  thread  at  the  eighth  year  of  his  age  reckoned  from, 
the  period  of  his  inteT-ut-erine  life.  Similarly,  the  inves- 
ture  with  the  holy  thread  in  the  case  of  a  Kshatriya  or 
Vaishya  child  should  be  made  a,t  the  eleyen.th  and; 
twelfth  year,  respectively.  (19) 

Sons  of  BTah,man4s,  Kshatriyas,  a,nd!  Vaishyas,  nob 
invested  with  tfye  holy  thread,  after  having  respectively 
attained  the  ages  of  fifteen  years  and,  two,  months,, 
twenty-one  years  and  *vvo  months,  and,  twenty-three 
years  and  tjiyo  mppths,  b^cp.me  deprived,  of  the  right  of 
^nvesture  and,  studying  the  Vedas.  They  are  called, 
'"atyas.  Such  children  should  expiate  ^heir  guilt  by 
performing  a  Vrdtyastoma  sacrifice.  (20,) 

Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaishyas  are  called  the. 
twice-born.  Their  first  births  tai-.e  place  when  they 
a^re  delivered  of  their  mother's  womb  ;  their  second,. 


Vyasa  SafahM.  50.$; 

they  duly  accept  the  Gayatri  Mantra   from   their 
preceptors.  (21) 

Thus  made  twice-born,  and  free  from  all  other 
fjaults,  they  become  entitled  to  study>  the  Vtdas,  Smritisi 
and  Pur  anas.  (2-2) 

Having  been  dqly  invested  with  the  holy  thread;  they, 
should  reside  HI  the  houses  of  their  preceptors,  observ- 
ing perfect  celebacy,  wearing  the  girdle;  girdlfc-cloth, 
holy  thread)  and  using  the  staff  and  deer-skin.  (23) 

On  an  auspicious  day,  and  having  obtained  the  per-, 
missipn,  of  their  preceptors,  they  should  cast  oblations, 
into  the  sacred'  fire,  and  commence  the  study  of/  the 
Vedas  by  reciting  the  Omkdra  and  the  Gayatri  (24) 

A   twice-born    (pupil)    should    study    the     Dharm&r 
S'astras  under- the  guidance  of  his  preceptor  for-  learn* 
iptfthe    rules   of  decorum   and  cleanliness  (both  mental< 
and    physical),    and:  do   whatever   is   beneficial   to   his, 
master.  (25) 

Then,  having  made  obeisance  to  the  elders,  he 
should'  sit  beside  his  preceptor,  constantly  exert  his, 
best  for  the  furtherance  of  his  studies,  and  do  nothing 
else  than»  what  is. beneficial  to. him  (preceptor^.  (26) 

Eyen.  having  been  reprimanded,  by  his  preceptor,  he 
should  not  make  any  repjy  in.  retort,  nor,  go,  away  event, 
when  driven  away  by  the  formers.  (27) 

Living  a  life  of  perfect  celebacy,  he  should  renounce 
all  hatred,  envy,  malice,  idle  glances- a,t  the  sun,  singing^ 
dancing,  intoxication,,  (lit :.  insanity),  calumny,  personal; 
decorations,  application,  of.  'collyrium,  along   the  eyelids, 
contemplation     of    himself     in     the    mirror,    smeanng 
the   body    w.ith    scented  unguents,  use  of  sandal  pastes., 
or   garlands    of,  flowers,    idle    strolls,    and     discontent,. 
(28-29) 


506  Vyasa  SaikhitA. 

A  little  after  midday,  and  with  the  permission  of 
his  preceptor,  he  should  ungreedily  ask  for  alms  of 
men  of  good  conduct  and  regulated  habits  (Niyama], 
and  having  obtained  the  alms,  he  should  instantly 
retire  therefrom,  considering  the  articles  of  gift  as 
riches.  (30) 

Having  performed  the  midday  rites,  he  should  take 
his  meal  with  the  permission  of  his  preceptor.  He 
should  not  take  only  cooked  rice,  nor  that  which  is  the 
residue  of  another's  meal.  At  the  close  of  his  meal  he 
should  rinse  his  mouth  with  water.  (31) 

Even  while  in  distress,  the  acceptance  of  any  wealth 
excepting  the  alms  is  prohibited.  He  may  dine  in 
connection  with  a  Pitri  S'raddha  if  thereto  invited 
by  a  person  without  any  disqualification,  and  if  his 
preceptor  approves  it.  (32) 

A  single  meal,  which  is  not  incompatible  with  the 
spirit  of  Brahmacharyam  is  what  is  enjoined  to  be  taken 
by  him  (the  student),  every  day.  Having  partaken  of 
it,  he  should  wait  upon  his  preceptor.  Then  having 
cast  twigs  of  sacred  trees  ( Samid)  into  the  sacrificial 
fire,  he  should  attend  to  his  preceptor's  comforts.  In 
the  night,  and  with  the  permission  of  his  teacher,  he 
should  lie  down  in  a  recumbent  posture,  after  the  former 
had  been  comfortably  laid  in  bed.  (33— "35) 

A  Brahmacharin  should  thus  daily  practise  his  vow> 
until  the  completion  of  his  study  of  the  Vedas,\  he 
should  devote  himself  to  the  good  of  his  master,  be 
sweet  of  speech  and  devout  in  spirit.  (36) 

The  twice-born  one,  who  studies  the  Vedas  in  this 
manner,  becomes  capable  of  (effectively)  cursing  or 
granting  boon  to  other  persons,  and  lives  in  the  same 
region  with  the  Rishis,  after  death.  (37) 


VytiA  SatohitA. 

Milk,  wine,  honey,  and  clarified  butter  are  the 
articles  which  the  gods  are  fond  of.  He  should  con- 
stantly study  the  Vedas  except  on  the  interdicted  days. 
On  such  days  their  other  collateral  subjects  should  be' 
studied  with  the  preceptor's  permission.  (38) 

An  infringement  of  the  preceptor's  order  makes 
all  studies  of  the  Vedas  abortive.  Hence,  one  should 
study  them  in  a  submissive  spirit.  Even  a  little  study 
of  the  Vedas  stands  their  twice-born  reader  in  good 
stead  both  in  this  world  and  the  next.  (39) 

The  ritualistic  (Naishtkika)  Brahmacharin^  who 
practises  this  vow  from  his  Upanayana  (investure  with 
the  holy  thread)  till  death,  attains  to  Brahma.  (40) 

The  twice-^born  one,  who  practises  this  vow  for 
thirty-six  years,  is  called  a  Upakurvanak.  At  the  close 
of  this  Vrata,  the  vowist  should  shave  bis  head.  Thus 
having  finished  the  study  of  all  the  Vedas  or  of  any 
part  thereof,  he  (the  student)  should  give  honorarium 
to  his  preceptor  (Dakhind)  after  having  obtained  his 
permission  thereto,  and  bathe  thereafter  (41) 


CHAPTER  II. 

At  tbe  close  of  such  Vedic  studies,  and  having  per- 
formed the  rite  of  Avabhritha  ablution  (lit. — ceremony 
of  ablution  at  the  completion  of  a  principal  sacrifice) 
a  twice-born  one,  wishing  to  be  a  house-holder,  should 
seek  the  hands  of  a  girl  of  unimpeachable  birth  and 
family,  (i) 

The  daughter  of  an  erudite  father  of  good   conduct 
and  having  sons  of  his  own  loins,  and  born  of  a  family 


Vy&sti 

free  from  all  "blemishes  6r  any  contagidtis  or  herecfc 
tary  disease,  and  not  plighted  far  money  to  any  other 
bridegroom  before,  and  not  of  the  same  P'rabara  and 
•Gotra  with  him,  nor  related  to  him  as  a  Safiinda  in 
his  father's  or  mothers  side  and  belonging  to  his  own 
varna  and  social  order,  slender,  of  auspicious  signs, 
clad  in  silken  garments,  and  not  above  eight  years 
of  age,*  and  whose  paternal  ancestors  to  thfe  tenth 
•degree  in  the  ascending  line  were  all  men  of  renown; 
should  be  solemnly  wedded  by  a  (twice-born)  according 
to  religious  rites,  if  preferred  in  marriage.  (2 — 4) 

A  daughter  should  be  given  in  marriage  to  a  (twice- 
born)  one,  befitting  her  family  in  respect  of  learning; 
birth,  etc.,  and  suited  to  her  in  years,  according  to  the 
rites  of  a  Brahma  marriage,  or  according  to  any  other 
regulation  where  the  former  would  not  avail.  (5) 

Her  father,  grand-father;  brother,  uncle;  cdgttates  and 
mother  are  successively  entitled  to  give  away  a  girl 
in  marriage.  In  the  absence  of  a  father,  a  grand-father 
will  formally  give  her  away,  and  so  on,  in  the  order 
of  enumeration.  The  bride  cart  herself  give  her  away 
in  the  absence  of  any  of  these  relations.  16) 

Thfe  sin  incidental  td  (an  act  of)  procuring;  abortion' 
(lit :  destruction  of  the  foetus)  is  committed,  if  through 
the  negligence  of  her  giver  a  girl  menstrates  before  her 
marriage.  He,  who  does  not  give  awa,y  a  daughter  in 
marriage  before  she  attains  her  pubbrty,  becomes"  de- 
graded, (j) 

Both  the  giver  and  the  taker  of  a  girl  (in  marriage) 
stand  exonerated  from  all  penalties  if  the  latter  gives 
her  ".away  saying,  "I  give  this  girl  to  you,"  and  the 

*  Several  Gorhmentators  interpret  the  term  as  denoting  "fair.coloured.'1 


Vyasa  SarhfiitA* 

latter  accepts  the  gift  by  saying^  "I  take  her  (as  ttiy 
wife)."  (8) 

A  man  by  desserting  a  blameless  girl,  or  defiling  an 
innocent  one,  makes  himself  liable  to  punishment,  (9) 

(A  twice  born)  one  can  take  a  wife  who  is  not  of  his 
own  caste  (Varna),  even  after  marrying,  one  of  hrs  own 
order  (Varna).  The  son  begotten  on  the  wife  of  one's 
own  caste,  does  not  stand  as  an  Asavarna  (of  a  different 
caste)  son  to  one  under  the  circumstance.  (10) 

A  Brahmana  can  marry  a  Kshatriya  or  Vaishya  girl; 
a  Kshatriya  can  take  a  Vaishya  wife,  and  a  Vaishya 
can  wed  a  S':udra's  daughter.  But  the  member  of 
an  inferior  caste  can  not  wed  a  girl  of  superior 
caste.  (-11) 

Amongst  wives  of  different  castes,  she,  who  is  of 
the  same  caste  with  her  lord,  should  be  his  companion  in 
matters  of  piety  and  religion.  Of  several  wives  all 
belonging  to  the  same  caste  as  their  lord,  she,  who  has 
the  greatest  attachment  to 'piety,  should  have  prefer- 
ence as  regards  companionship  in  the  celebration  of 
religious  rites,  etc.  (12) 

The  god  Brahma  cleft  his  body  in  two,  of  yore,  Out 
of  one  part  sprang  the  husbands,  and  out  of  the  other 
the  wives.  This  is  what  the  S'ruti  relates.  (13) 

A  man,  so  long  he  does  not  take  a  wife,  is  but  (a) 
half  (incomplete)  being.  A  half  (thing)  can  not  beget. 
A  whole  (thing)  only  can  beget.  This  is  the  dictum  of 
the  S'ruti.  (14) 

A  wife  is  weightier  than  the  woi'd  w  \\  its  virtues, 
wealth,  and  enjoyment,  since  with  the  help  'of  no  other 
auxiliary  than  a  wife  can  he  b°ar  KS  burden.  Hence, 
one  should  marry,  and  by  constant  practice  t.[  self- 
control  duly  maintain  her.  (15) 


5"io  Vyasa  Saihtiifd. 

Having  married;  a  man  should  live  with  his  wife* 
and  the  sacred  fire  in  his  own  house,  not  neglecting  his- 
duties  and  the  Vaitanika  (sacrificial)  fire  with  the  advent 
of  opulence.  (16) 

Each  day,  he  should  cheerfully,  perform  the  Smart  a> 
rites  with  tne  help  of  the  nuptial  fire,  and  those  in- 
culcated1 in  the  ^rutis  with  that  of  the  sacrificial^ 
one.  (17) 

Day  and  night,  the  wedded1  couple  should  be  one  in> 
spirit  in  respect  of  all  matters  of  piety,,  gain,  and 
desire  (enjoyment).  They  should  be  one  in  vows  and' 
practices.  (18) 

A  woman  has  no  separate  existence  from  her  lords 
in  matters  of  piety,  gain  and  desire.  The  S'astras  have 
enjoined  this  dependency  of  love.  (19) 

A  wife  should  quit  her  bed  before  her  lord,  cleanse 
(wash)  her  person,  fold  up  the  beds,  and  make  her  house 
clean  and  tidy.  (20) 

Then  having  entered  the  chamber  of  Homa  (sacrifi- 
cial fire)  she  should  (first)  wash  and  plaster  its  floor,  and; 
then  the  yard  of  her  house,  and  after  that,  wash  with 
warm  water  the  vessels  of  oils,  clarified  butter,  etc., 
which  are  used  in  connection  with  Agnikaryayas,  and 
keep  them  in  their  proper  places.  (21) 

Utensils  or  implements,  which  are  used  in  couples- 
(such  as  the  pestle  and  mortar,  etc.,)  should  never  be 
separated.  The  vessels  (of  rice,  etc.,)  should  be  cleansed 
and  refilled  with  their  respective  contents,  and  the 
kitchen-utensils  should  be  taken  out,  cleansed,  and  re- 
placed in  their  proper  positions.  (22; — 23) 

The  oven  should  be  repaired  and  replastered  with 
earth  and  clay,  and  the  fire  should  be  lighted  therein. 
Thus  having  performed  her  morning  (house-hold); 


'Vyasa  Sathhitd*  -jm 

•duties,  arrd  pondered  over  the  dishes  of  different 
{flavours  (to  be  prepared,  that  day),  and  allotment  of 
>work  to  different  workers,  and  the  daily  expenditure 
•of  the  household,  she  should  make  obeisarfce  to  her 
elders  and  superiors.  (24) 

Then  she  should  decorate  her  person  with  the 
•ornaments  given  to  her  by  her  father-in-law,  husband, 
•  father,  mother,  maternal  uncle,  or  relations.  (25) 

Pure  in  her  thought,  speech  and  action,  and  obe- 
dient to  the  dictates  of  her  =lord,  she  should  follow 
him  (in  life)  like  his  own  shadow,  seek  his  good  like  a 
trusted  friend,  and  minister  /to  his  desires  like  a 
servant.  26 — 27) 

Then  having  finished  cooking,  she  should  report 
of  it  to  her  husband  saying,  "  the  rice  is  cooked."  The 
husband  having  made  offerings  therewith  to  the 
Vishvadevas,  she  should  first  feed  the  children,  and 
ithen  serve  out  the  morning  meal  to  her  lord.  (28) 

Then,  with  the  permission  of  her  lord,  she  would 
;partake  of  the  residue  of  the  boiled  rice  and  cooked 
dishes  (described  above),  and  spend  the  closing  portion 
of  '.the  day  in  contemplation  of  the  family  earnings  and 
expenditure.  (29) 

Having  again  attended  to  the  cleansings  of  the 
house,  etc.,  at  evening,  she  should  cook  the  night 
meals  (of  the  household)  and  provide  her  husband  with 
a  sumptuous  repast.  (30) 

Then  the  cheerful  lamps  should  be  lighted,  and  she, 
having  spread  out  a  comfortable  bed,  attend  to  massage 
the  body  of  her  lord.  (31) 

After  her  husband  had  slept,  she  should  lie  down 
by  her  side,  not  entirely  bereft  of  clothes,  with  her 


512  Vy&sa 

mind   fully   eentered   in  his  self,  cautious,  non-desiring,, 
and  with  her  passions  held  under  a  healthy  control.    (32); 

She  should  not  speak  too  loudly,  nor  harshly,  or 
unpleasantly  to  her  lord,  avoiding  all  quarrels,  lamen- 
tations, and  perfidies.  (33) 

She  should  not  be  prodigal  in  her  purse,  nor  hostile 
to  the  spirit  of  piety  or  gain.  Carelessness,  fickleness 
of  mind,  anger,  envy,  deception,  vanity,  rivalry,  mis- 
chievousness,  cruelty,  inordinate  pride,  cunningness,. 
atheism,  daringness,  discontent,  and  dissimulation  are 
the  fifteen  vices  which  a  chaste  wife  should  always  try 
to  renounce.  (34—35) 

A  chaste  wife,  who  thus  worships  her  lord,  acquires 
fame  and  blessings  in  this  life,  and  lives  in  the  same 
region  with  "him,  after  death.  (36) 

I  have  described  the  daily  or  general  duties  of  wives, 
now  hear  me  discourse  on  their  specific  ones.  A  wife, 
on  the  appearance  of  her  flow,  should  renounce  all 
those  duties,  as  she  becomes  unclean.  Bashfully  she 
should  reside  in  a  lonely  chamber,  avoiding  the  eyes 
of  her  friends  and  relations.  (3.7) 

Clad  in  a  single  sheet  of  cloth,  and  forsaking 
ornaments  and  ablution,  she  should  sit  silent  with  her 
eyes  cast  downward.  Avoiding  all  listless  movements 
of  her  eyes  and  extremities,  she  should  take  boiled  rice 
at  night  alone  during  her  periods.  (38 — 39). 

Having  passed  three  nights  in  such  a  staid  condi- 
tion of  mind,  she  should  wash  her  clothes,  and  bathe, 
on  the  morning  of  the  fourth  day.  (40) 

Then  having  seen  the  face  of  her  husband  she  would 
be  clean  again,  whereupon  she  should  resume  her  usual 
house-hold  duties  as  before.  (41) 

The  sixteen  (successive)  nights  from  the  first  appear- 


Vydsa   Sariihitd.  513 

ance  of  the  flow  in  women  are  called  the  Menstrual 
period.  Healthy  male  seeds  (sperms)  cast  into  healthy 
fields  (female  reproductive  organs)  during  this  period 
are  found  to  sprout  lead  to  conception).  (42) 

The  first  four  nights  of  the  period  should  be  avoided 
as  Parva  days,  as  well  as  those  marked  by  the  asterisms 
called  Revati,  Pitraksha  and  Rakshasa.  Fecundation 
should  take  place  on  each  even  night  during  the  mens- 
trual peroid  alone.  (43) 

A  man,  clad  in  a  silk  garment  and  duly  bedecked 
with  ornaments,  should  visit  his  wife  on  (any  of  these 
even)  nights,  whereby  he  would  ge?t  a  son  bearing  all 
auspicious  signs  on  his  person.  (44) 

Even  the  vow  of  a  Brahmacharin,  who  visits  his  wife 
during  her  menstrual  period,  is  not  vitiated  by  so  doing. 
Even  he,  who  does  not  know  any  other  woman,  com- 
mits no  sin  by  going  unto  his  own  wife  during  her 
menstrual  period  according  to  the  natural  inclinations 
of  his  mind.  (45) 

A  husband  not  visiting  his  wife  during  her  menstrual 
period  is  guilty  of  fceticide.  The  infidel  wife,  who  gets 
herself  impregnated  by  another  man  is  fit  to  be  aban- 
doned by  her  lord.  (46) 

A  wife,  procuring  abortion  of  her  pregnancy  caused 
by  her  husband,  is  guilty  of  a  Mahdpatakam.  A  hus- 
band, by  unjustly  desserting  his  own  innocent  wife,  be- 
comes a  spiritual  out-caste.  (47) 

A  chaste  wife  should  not  renounce  her  lord,  even  if 
he  be  guilty  of  a  Mahapdtakam,  praying  that  his  sin 
might  be  extinguished  in  no  distant  time.  (48). 

A  husband  should  not  look  at  the  face  of  his  faithless 
wife.  He  should  banish  her  in  a  distant  country  after 
a  good  censuring.  (49) 


514 

A  good  wife  should  renounce  all  pleasures  as  long  as 
iher  husband  would  be  absent  in  a  distant  country. 
The  widow  of  a  Brahmana  should  either  immolate 
herself  in  fire  with  the  corpse  of  her  deceased  husband, 
•or,  observe  a  vow  of  life-long  Brahmacharayam  (conti- 
nence) from  that  date,  shaving  the  hair  of  her  head,  and 
foregoing  all  articles  of  luxury.  (50—51) 

A  faithless  wife  may  be  again  entrusted  with  the 
wifely  duties  by  her  lord  after  -her  next  menstrual  ablu- 
«tion  (at  the  close  of  her  next  monthly  flow)  after  the  act 
«of  infidility,  and  treat  her  as  his  own  wife  as  before. 

A  husband  may  forsake  and  banish  in  any  distant 
country,  any  of  the  following  wives,  viz-.,  those  who 
-are  deceitful,  faithless  (ilk :  forsaking  virtue  or  religion) 
(hostile  to  her  husband's  desines,  invalid  (suffering  from 
•an  incurable  or  longstanding  disease),  wicked,  addicted 
ito  wine,  gambling,  or  hunting  excursions,  or  inimical  to 
this  intrests.  A  husband  should  count  a  superseded  wife 
(Adhivinna*)  still  as  a  wife  of  his  own  after  he  has 
imarried  a  second  time.  ((52 — 53) 

Under  n©  circumstance  women  should  be  'kept  un- 
protected. Fathers,  husbands,  and  sons  should  take 
,'thera  -under  their  guardianship  in  succession.  (54) 

The  dead  bodies  of  deceased  and  well  born  wives, 
who  leave  behind  them  sons,  grandsons,  and  great 
grandsons,  etc.,  should  be  -duly  cremated.  They  (wives) 
attain  to  the  same  region  with  their  husbands,  who  had 
iperformed  Pitri  Yajnas  in  itheir  lives  and  are  hence  en- 
ititled  to  spiritual  emancipation,  after  death.  (55 — .5.6) 


Vyasa  SaihhM.  515, 

CHAPTER   III. 

THE  acts  of  a  house-holder  may  be  classified-  as  Nityam, 
Naimittikan  and  Kdmayam*  Now  hear  roe  describe 
each  of  these  kinds  in-  detail,  (i) 

A  householder  sbauld  quit  his  bed  at  the  close  of 
the  las-t  quarter  of  the  night,  meditating  upon  the  self 
of  (god)  Hari.  Then*  havin-g  seen  auspicious  articles, 
he  should  commence  the  necessary  works  of  his  daily 
Hfe,  (2) 

Then  having  eased  and  washe'd  himself,  he  should 
bask  in  the  glare  of  fire.  After  that,  he  should  cleanse 
his  teeth  with  water,  bathe,  perform  his  rite  of  Sandhya 
worship,  and  offer  libations  of  water  to  the  gods  and 
Pitris  in  succession-  (as  regulated).  (3) 

Then  the  best  of  Brahmanas  should  stu-dy  the 
Vedas,  histories  (Itihasas),  and  the  kindred  branches- 
of  knowledge  ( Veddngas),  give  instructions  to  his  own> 
pupils,  and  fee.d  the  good  Brahmanas.  (4) 

Acquire  that  which  has  not  been  already  acquired,, 
and  having  obtained  it  distribute  it  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. Equals  should  not  sit  with  equals  without  first 
reporting  their  own  presence  or  arrival.  (5) 

*  A  Kamayam  k&rma  is  an  act  whose  performance  is  imperatively 
obligatory  on  all  persons,  and  a  non-performance  whereof  detracts 
one's  religious  merits,  though  its  performance  does  not  make  any  addi- 
tion to  it. 

A  Naimittikam  karma  is  an  act  whose  performance  is  not  impera- 
tively obligatory,  nor  its  non -performance  detracts  fromr  or  per- 
formance |adds  to,  oners  religious  merit.  It  is  a  specific  act  enjoined 
to  be  performed  on  a  special  occasion. 

A  Kamayam  Karma  is  an  act  which    is    performed    for   the   fruition  J 
of   any  definite  ob)ect,   such  as  a  residence  m  heaven,,  or  the  birth  of  a 
male  child,  etc, 


516  Vyasa,  SafahitA. 

In  tanks,  lakes,  wells,  and  fountains,  etc.,  belonging 
to  others,  one  should  bathe  duly  after  having  first  taken 
five  handfuls  of  clay  (Pancha-Pinda)  therefrom.  (6) 

In  cases  where  Tirthas  would  be  unavailable,  or  in 
those  wherein  ablution  would  not  be  practicable,  one 
should  bathe  in  the  court-yard  of  a  house  with  water 
enough  to  wet,  and  be  rinsed  out  of,  his  cloth.  (7) 

The  rite  of  ablution  should  be  performed  by  recit- 
ing the  A'pohishta  Mantra  \  the  rite  of  purification 
(Mdrjanam)  should  be  done  by  reading  the  one  begin- 
ning with  Drupadddiva  Mumuchdna.  After  the  bath, 
the  bather  should  thrice  practise  Prdndydma,  and  look  at 
the  sun  by  reciting  the  Suryopasthdna  Mantram,  (8) 

Then  having  recited  the  Gdyatri,  the  twice-born 
ones  should  commence  the  study  of  the  Vedas.  Having 
studied  portion  of  the  Sdman,  Yajus,  and  Atharvan, 
they  should  commence  reading  the  Itihdsas,  Pardnas^ 
and  Upanishads,  either  entirely,  or  in  parts,  if  a  com- 
plete perusal  is  not  feasible.  This  should  be  done  every 
day.  (9—10) 

A  twice-born  one,  thr©ugh  the  merit  of  such  studies, 
acquires  all  the  virtues  which  can  be  acquired  by  cele- 
brating religious  sacrifices,  by  making  gifts  and  prac- 
tising penitential  austerities.  Hence,  he  should  read 
the  Vedas,  every  day,  without  indulging  in  any  idle 
talk,  (n) 

The  Dharma  S'astras,  Itihdsas  and  Pur  anas  should 
be  read,  if  possible,  in  their  entireties,  and  at  the  end 
of  such  studies  a  twice-born  one  should  first  offer  liba- 
tions of  water  to  the  gods.  (12) 

The  rite  of  Tarpanam  (offering  libation)  should  be 
performed  as  follows  :— He  (performer  of  the  rite)  should 
sit  with  his  face  looking  eastward  and  his  right  knee- 


Vyasa  Sart&tt'A.  5*7 

d  and  placed  on  the  ground.  (Thus  seated)  he 
should  catch  hold  of  his  holy  thread  in  the  usual  pos- 
ture, and  a  Kusha  blade  with  the  first  phalanx  of  his 
right  thumb,  and  offer  a  single  libation  of  water  con- 
'taining  barley  corn  to  the  Gods  by  reciting  the  Devd, 
Yaksha,  etc.,  Mantra  —  (May  the  gods,  Yakshas,  etc.,  be 
leased,  etc;,)  (t 

Then  he  should  sit  with  his  knees  flexed  and  placed 
on  the  ground,  and  his  face  turned  towards  the  north, 
catching  hold  of  his  holy  thread  in  the  posture  of  a 
necklace,  and  offer  two  libations  of  water  containing 
barley  and  sesame  unto  each  spirit  of  men  with  the 
end  of  a  kttsha  blade  held  at  the  root  of  his  little  finger. 
The  libations  should  be  cast  towards  the  north.  (14) 

Then    seated    with    his    left  knee  flexed  and  his  holy 
thread  placed  on  his  right  shoulder,  he,  looking  eastward, 
-should  offer  three  libations  of  water,  containing    sesame 
•only,  unto  his  father,  grandfather  and  great  grandfather, 
as   well    as    unto   his    departed   maternal     grandfather, 
;maternal  great  grandfather,  maternal  great  great  grand- 
fater,  and  so  on,  unto  the  spirits  of  his    paternal    grand- 
mother and  paternal  great  grandmother,  with  the  end  of 
^a    Kush'a   blade,   double  the  ordinary  length,  held  at  the 
root  of  his  right  index  finger.    (15 — 1,7) 

The  spirits  of  deceased  persons  belonging  to  the 
'family  of  one's  meternal  grandfather,  or  to  one's  own 
Gotra,  and  whose  corpses  had  not  been  duly  cremated, 
should  be  separately  propitiated  with  the  offering  *f  a 
single  oblation,  each.  (18) 

The  water  squeezed  out  »f  the  wearing  cloth  of  a 
performer  of  Tarpanam  should  be-offered  as  libations 
unto  the  spirits  of  those  deceased  in  his  family,  who  had 
•died -without  tl  . ..  of  Ama.pras'atw.'ni  having 


5i 8  Vyasa  Sathkitd. 

done  unto  them,   6*r   whose    dead  bodies   had    not  b'eeft 
cremated.  (19) 

The  departed  manes  of  him,  who  thus  squeezes  watef 
drops  out  of  his  wearing  cloth  and  offers  them  as  libations 
(as  above  described)  without  first  having  offered  libations 
of  water  unto  them,  despair  of  obtaining  any  water  at 
all,  with  the  gods  and  Rishis,  such  as  Sanaka  etc.,  (20) 

A  rite  of  Tarpanam  done  with  water  containing 
Kus'a  blades  and  sesame,  and  by  reciting  their  Gotras 
and  names  with  the  term  svadha  (obeisance)  appended 
thereto,  becomes  gratifying  to  the  Pitris.  One  done 
without  any  of  these  factors  proves  abortive.  (21) 

A  rite  of  Tarpanam  done  by  a  person  while  thinking 
of  other  things,  or  not  according  to  the  regulations  of 
tbe  S'astras,  or  without  being  seated  on  a  proper 
cushion,  proves  as  blood  to  his  departed  manes.  (22) 

The  Pitris  propitiated  with  a  Tarpanam  duly  per- 
formed as  above  regulated,  grants  all  wished- for  things 
to  its  performer.  (23) 

The  deities  mentioned  in  the  Jalamantra  should  be 
worshipped  by  reciting  the  Mantras  in  which  the  names 
o£  Brahma,  Vishnu,  S'iva,  A'ditya,  and  Mitra-Varuna, 
occur.  (24) 

Having  performed  the  rite  of  Suryopasthanam  with 
his  face  turned  towards  the  east,  a  twice-born  one 
should  purify  the  water  by  invoking  the  names  of 
Brahma,  Agni,  Indra,  OshadUi,  Jiva  and  Vishnu.  In 
connection  with  this  rite  he  should  recite  the  Mantra^ 
Yat^  etc.,  with  the  term  Natnas  appended  to  it,  by 
addressing  the  name  of  each  of  these  (divinities).  After 
that,  he  should  rinse  his  mouth,  and  bathe.  (25 — 26) 

Then  having  entered  his  house,  a  twice-born  one 
should  perform  the  four  Pdka-Yajnas  (simple  domestic 


Vydsa   Saihhita.  519 

sacrifices)  with  the  help  of  the  Avasathya  fire  (the  sacred 
fire  kept  in  the  house).  He,  whose  A'vasathya  fire  has 
not  been  lighted  at  all,  should  perform  the  Homa  by 
casting  oblations  of  boiled  rice  soaked  in  clarified  butter 
in  the  Laukika  fire,  according  the  regulations  of  the 
Sakala  (a  school  of  the  R/^-  Veda)  school.  (27 — 28) 

The  oblations  should  be  cast  in  the  sacred  fire  by 
severally  and  combinedly  reciting  the  Vyahritis  and 
the  six  Mantras  running  as  Deva  Kritasya  etc.,  (29) 

After  that,  the  Prajapatya  Svishta  Krita  Homa 
should  be  performed  by  offering  twelve  oblations  unto 
the  fire,  prefixing  Om  and  appending  Svahd  to  the 
Mantra  according  to  the  Svishta  regulation.  (30) 

The  oblations  should  be  offered  on  Kusha  blades 
spread  out  on  the  ground  ;  and  the  one,  well-versed  in  the 
S'astraSy  should  first  offer  three  oblations  by  prefixing 
Om  and  appending  Namas  to  the  Mantra  as  follows  : — 
Om,  to  Vishvadevas  (Namas)  obeisance ;  Om,  to  all 
the  beings  (Bhutas)  Namas  (obeisance);  Om,  to 
the  lord  of  all  the  beings  (Butandm  Patayae)  Namas 
(obeisance) ;  and  after  that,  Om,  to  Pitris  (obeisance) 
Namas.  (31 — 32) 

The  washings  of  the  vessels  should  be  cast  in  the 
North-west,  and  sixteen  morsris  of  boiled  rice  soaked 
in  clarified  butter  should  be  offered,  by  saying,  "  these 
(morsels  of)  boiled  rice  to  men"  (Idam  Annam  Manu- 
shyevyah  Hanta).  (33) 

A  twice-born  one  should  offer  six  oblations  of  boiled 
rice  to  his  six  departed  manes  (father,  grandfather, 
great-grand  father,  maternal  grandfather,  maternal 
great  grand  father,  and  maternal  great  great  grand 
father)  by  mentioning  the  name  and  Coin,  of  each, 
and  by  appending  the  term  Svadhd  to  each  of  these 


520  Vyasa  SaihHit'a. 

Mantras,  according  to  one's  might  and  the  regulations' 
of  the  Pitri  Yajna.  (34) 

A  few  texts  of  the  Vedas  should  be  recited  on 
the  occasion^  for  the  completion  of  the  Brahma- 
Yajna.  (35) 

Then  having  taken  a  quantity  of  boiled  rice  in  his- 
hand,  he  should  walk  out  of  his  room  and  offer  morsels* 
of  it  to'  crows  and1  Svapaehas  (Chanddlas^  lit',  dog- 
feeders-).  (36} 

Then  in  a  pure  spirit,  and  for  a  period  of  forty- 
eight  minutes  (Muhurta),  the  house-holder  should' 
calmly  wait  at  his  gate  for  any  chance-comer  (Atithi)  ; 
and  having  found  any  hungry,  sober  Atithi  coming 
from  a  distance,  he  should'reverentially  accost  and  wel- 
come him  to  his  house.  (37- — 38) 

He  should  give  him  water  for  washing  his  feet,  and 
show  him  every  mark  of  respect.  An  Atithi,  duly 
honoured;  is  greater  than  a  Yajna  (sacrifice),  inasmuch- 
as  he  makes  his  host  entitled  to  the  merit  of  heaven 
on  the  very  day  of  his  arrival.  (39) 

An  Atithi,  and  a  Brahmana  well-versed  in  the 
Vedas,  happening  to  arrive  at  one'  house  during  the 
celebration  of  the  Vais>tvade<va  sacrifice,  should  be  duly 
honoured.  Propitiated  with  hospitality  both  of  them 
lead  their  host  to  heaven;  dishonoured  they  lead  him 
to  helh  (40) 

A  marriage  relation,  a  Snataka;  a  king,  an  A'chdr- 
yaya,  a  friend,  and  a  Ritvik,  even  happening  to  call; 
at  one's  house,,  each  year,  should  be  religiously  res- 
pected. (41) 

One  should  honour  a  S'rotriya  arrived  at  one's  house,, 
and  dismiss  him  with  the  gift  of  a  cow.  (42) 


Vydsa  Safahi-tfa  52'B 

Osne  should  bid  farewell  to  an  Atithi,  or  to  a  S'ro- 
triya  guest,  by  following  him  a  little  beyond  the  com- 
pound of  one's  own  house.  One  should  feed  one's  friends, 
maternal  uncles,  agnates,  and  marriage-relations  arrived 
at  one's  shouse.  A  Yati  is  privileged  to  accept  alms 
from  a  house-holder  profferred  with  respect.  (4.3 — 44) 

The  man,  who  partakes  of  good  food  himself,  comes 
by  a  worse  fate  by  giving  bad  food  to  another.  A. 
house-holder  eats  sin  by  eating  before  the  infants,. 
oldmen,.  sick  folks  aind  pregnant  women  in-  his  house 
are  relieved  of  their  hunger.  (45) 

Without  being  invited  one  should  not  ea-t,  nor 
desire  to  eat,  any  cooked  food  at  another's  house.  A 
twice-born  one  is  at  liberty  to  reject  an  invitation  by  a 
man  of  questionable  repute.  (46) 

Boiled  rice  (cooked  food)  belonging  to  a  S'udra,  to* 
a  calumniated  person,  to  an  usurer,  to  one  of  false 
speech,  to  a  cruel  man,  to  a  thief,  to  one  of  an  irascible 
temperament,  to  one  abandoned  by  one's  parents,  to> 
a  slave,  to  the  haughty,  to  a  butcher  or  hunter,  to  an 
actor,  to  a  wine-seller,  to  an  arrogant,  insane,  Vratya^ 
or  shameless  person,  to-  a  breaker  of  vows,  to  an 
athiest,  to  a  miser,  to-  one  who  goes-  naked,  to  one  in 
danger,  to  a  non-Aryan,to  a  woman,  to  a  calumniator, 
to  a  renowned  though  dependent  person,  to  a  stealer 
of  king's  revenue  or  divine  chattels,  to  one  defiled 
through  evil  company,  conduct,  food,  or  bed,  to  an 
irreverent  man,  to  a  degraded  person,  or  to  a  man- 
of  despicable  conduct,  is  unfit  to  be  partaken  of.  He, 
who  partakes  of  such  a  man's  boiled  rice,  becomes 
equally  degraded  with  him.  47 — 51) 

Boiled  rice  belonging  to  a  Napita  (barber),  a  Kula 
mitra,  Ardhasiri  (ploughman),  D&sa  or  -Gopalaka, 


522  Vyasa  SaihhitA. 

(though  these  men  are  all  S'udras),  may  be  eaten  with- 
out the  fear  of  committing  any  sin.  Twice  born  ones 
of  known  families  can  safely  partake  of  one  another's 
boiled  rice.  (52) 

Boiled  rice  procured  with  one's  own  earnings, 
or  kept  in  a  vessel  which  is  not  defiled  by  the  touch  of 
wine,  nor  licked  by  a  dog,  nor  smelled  by  a  cow,  nor 
touched  by  a  crow  or  a  S'udra,  is  always  pure.  (53) 

Such  boiled  rice,  as  well  as  that  which  has  not  been 
previously  partaken  of,  nor  stale  or  prepared  over 
night,  nor  taken  out  of  the  kitchen,  and  is  nicely 
cooked,  should  be  eaten,  every  day.  (54) 

The  several  preparations  of  (rice,  pulse,  barley,  and 
wheat,  etc.,)  known  as  Kris  ara,  Sanja'va,  Pupa  and 
Pdyasa,  are  edible,  and  a  Brahmana  while  not  officiat- 
ing as  a  priest  at  any  religious  sacrifice,  should  not 
take  meat  or  animal  food.  (55) 

A  Brahmana,  engaged  in  the  celebration  of  a  reli- 
gious sacrifice,  becomes  degraded  by  not  taking  meat. 
A  Kshatriya  should  eat  the  cooked  flesh  of  a  quarry  after 
Jiaving  propitiated  therewith  the  gods  and  his  departed 
manes.  A  Vaishya  can  take  meat,  lawfully  obtained 
for  money,  after  having  worshipped  therewith  his 
departed  manes.  (56 — 57) 

A  twice-born  one,  by  eating  the  cooked  flesh  of 
an  animal  wantonly  slaughtered  (not  killed  in  any 
sacrifice),  suffers  the  pangs  of  hell  for  eternal  time,  or 
as  long  as  the  sun  and  stars  would  shine  in  heaven.  A 
Brahmana,  by  abjuring  meat,  acquires  the  merit  of  a 
horse-sacrifice,  all  his  desires  are  fructified,  and  he  be- 
comes an  emancipated  self  even  though  he  be  a  house- 
holder. (58) 


Vy&sa  Samhiti.  563 

A  twice  born  one  can  drink  the  milk  of  a  cow  of 
She-buffalo ;  but  that  milk  should  be  seasonably  milched 
after  the  tenth  day  of  her  parturition,  her  calf  conti- 
nuing in  a  healthy  state.  The  milk  of  a  cow  or  she- 
buffalo  in  heat  or  in  pregnancy  should  be  rejected  as 
unwholesome.  (59 — -60). 

A  twice  born  one,  who  has  eaten  an  onion,  white 
bringel,  red  radish,  red  garlic  or  turnip,*  Jatugarbha 
fruit,  or  any  unseasonable  flower,  or  taken  the  milky 
juice  of  an  Aruna  tree,  should  practise  a  Chandra* 
yana  Vrata.  (61) 

Boiled  rice  (food)  which  has  come  from  art  Unknown 
source,  or  has  been  defiled  by  speech  (ordered  to  be 
set  apart  for  another),  or  has  been  acquired  by  giving 
pain  to  any  one,  and  out  of  which  morsels  have  not 
been  proffered  to  any  creature,  burns  down  a  house* 
holder  as  fire  if  he  partakes  of  it.  (62) 

A  house-holder  should  always  take  his  food  iti 
golden  or  silver  vessels,  or  in  these  made  of  bell-metal, 
substituting  the  fragrant  leaves  of  the  Palasha,  Lodhra, 
or  Padma  for  them  in  cases  where  they  would  be  un- 
available. A  yati  or  a  Brahmachdrin  should  use  the 
kind  of  utensil  which  he  thinks  proper  for  his  cult. 

(63-64) 

Having  sprinkled  drops  of  water  over  the  boiled  rice 
(served  out  to  him),  a  twice-born  one  should  cast  three 
small  oblations  thereout  on  the  ground,  saying,  "to  the 
lord  of  Bhu  obeisance  (Manias],  to  the  lord  of  Bhuvct 
obeisance  (Nagitas^  and  to  the  lord  of  beings  (Bhutd* 
ndmpataye  Namas)  obeisance.  (65) 

Then  having  moistened  his  mouth  with  a  handful 
of  water,  he  should  do  Homa  unto  the  five  vital  airs, 
appending  the  terra  Svdhd  to  the  name  of  each  of 


them,    and    thereafter   partake    of    the    boiled   rice,    £s 
desirable.   (66) 

Silently  and  without  any  other  thought  in  his  mind, 
or  anywise  condemning  it,  he  should  partake  of  the 
boiled  rice  until  the  satisfaction  of  hunger.  After 
that,  he  should  sprinkle  watet  over  the  plate  and 
leave  it.  (67) 

He  should  take  a  morsel  out  of  the  residue  of  boiled 
'rice  and  cast  it  on  the  ground.  Then  having  washed  his 
mouth,  he  should  pass  the  rest  of  the  day  in  good  com- 
pany with  topics  of  ancient  lore  and  in  the  study  of 
Itihasas  and  good  literature.  (68) 

On  the  approach  of  evening,  he  should  attend  to  his 
Sandhya  worship,  and  cast  oblations  in  the  sacred  fire. 
Every  day,  a  twice-born  one  should  eat  in  the  company 
of  his  servants  and  dependants.  An  Atithi  arrived 
at  the  time  of  his  evening  Homa  should  be  honoured 
toy  a  house-holder  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  inasmuch 
as  a  dishonoured  Atithi  robs  the  piety  of  the  house- 
hold. (69 — 70) 

He  should  not  overload  his  stomach  with  food  ;  and 
having  washed  his  mouth  and  feet  at  the  close  of  his 
evening  meal,  a  house-holder  should  lie  down  in  a  com- 
fortable bed  with  his  head  not  turned  towards  the  North 
or  the  West.  (71) 

Unless  badly  jeopardised  in  health,  or  otherwise 
incapable,  a  twice-born  one  should  never  neglect  the  „ 
timely  performance  of  his  Homa  and  Sandhya  rites.  (72) 
Quitting  his  bed  wjthin  forty-eight  minutes  of  the 
sun-rise,  he  should  ponder  over  his  own  earthly  interests. 
A  capable  and  healthy  man  should  thus  act  every  day  in 
his  life.  (73) 


7,?   Sam-  525 

CHARIER  IV. 

THIS  Scriptural  Code  framed  by  the  holy  Vyasa  is  but 
•a  compendium  of  all  kinds  of  pieties.  All  virtues  and 
pieties  (enjoined  to  be  performed)  by  the  four  orders 
are  intimately  connected  with  the  liberation  of  self  (i) 

Verily  verily,  (the  holy  Vyasa)  hns  repeatedly  said 
unto  men  that,  a  household  is  the  best  hermitage  in 
the  world.  H^  who  faithfully  discharges  the  duties 
'of  a  house-holder,  acquires  the  merit  of  visiting  all  the 
holy  shrines.  (2) 

The  house-holder,  who  reveres  his  elders  and  pre- 
'ceptors,  supports  his  servants,  is  kind,  unenvious,  truth- 
ful and  self-controlled,  daily  performs  his  Hojna  and 
if  a  pa  (divine  contemplation  and  mental  recitation  of 
a  Mtintra],  is  faithful  to  his  own  wife  without  coveting 
that  of  another,  and  gives  no  handle  to  obloquy,  acquires 
the  merit  of  a  pilgrimage,  without  stirring  out  of  his 
own  house.  (3 — 4) 

Ablutions  in  all  the  holy  pools  cannot  absolve 
the  sin  of  him,  who  daily  steals,  or  covets,  other  men's 
wives  and  riches.  (5) 

A  true  and  dutiful  house-holder  bathing  in  his  own 
yard  acquires  the  merit  of  all  holy  ablutions.  Three 
quarters  of  piety  belong  to  a  house-holder  as  the  giver 
of  food,  the  remaining  quarter  attaches  itself  to  him  as 
the  master  c  f  the  household.  (6) 

Sin  can  never  approach  the  threshold  of  a  house 
wherein  the  master  hospitably  accommodates  the  Brah- 
rnanas,  washes  the  dust  off  their  feet,  gratifies  them 
with  food,  makes  offerings  to  Vis'vadevas,  and  doles 
out  alms  to  the  indigent.  (7) 

The  god  of  death  (Yam a)    can  never  touch  the  man, 
gives  to  the  Brahmanas  water  for  washing  their  'feet, 
69 


526  Vyasa  Saihhit&> 

shoes,  food,  and  hermitages  to  live  in,  and  Welcomes 
them  home  by  waiving  lighted  lamps  before  them.  (8) 

The  departed  manes  of  a  person  drink  nectar  out 
of  cups  of  lotus  leaves  so  long  as  the  washings  of  the 
feat  of  Brahmanas  stand  moistening  the  earth  of  his 
court-yard.  (9) 

O  you  foremost  of  the  Rishis  \  the  merit,  which  is 
acquired  by  making  gifts  of  Kapila  cows  on  the  day  of 
the  full  moon  in  Kartika,  is  likewise  acquired  by 
washing  the  feet  of  Brahmanas.  (10) 

The  fire  god  can  be  gratified  by  welcoming  the 
Brahmanas  ;  Indra,  by  offering  seats  unto  them  ;  the 
Pitris,  by  washing  their  feet  ;  and  the  (g0d)  Ptajdpati^ 
by  giving  food  unto  them.  (PI) 

One's  own  parents  are  shrines  of  excellent  sanctity, 
no  doubt,  though  kine  and  the  Ganges  are  holier  ;  but 
the  Brahmanas  are  the  holiest  of  the  holies  on  earth,  a 
holier  thing  than  they  is  not,  nor  ever  will  be.  (12) 

All  the  holy  pools  and  shrines  such  as,  Karukshetra, 
Naimisha,  Pushkara,  Gangddvara,  and  Kedaia  volun- 
tarily visit  the  house-holder  in  his  own  house,  who  has 
subdued  all  his  senses  and  desires.  He  is  absolved 
of  all  sin.  (13—14) 

O  you  Brahmanas,  now  I  shall  relate  to  you  the 
virtue  of  charity  or  gift- making  as  it  should  be  prac* 
tised  by  the  members  of  the  four  social  orders,  and  as 
it  was  narrated  by  the  holy  Vyasa  of  yore.  (15) 

That  wealth  alone,  which  a  man  spends  in  gifts  to- 
the  good  Brahmanas,  or  in  gratification  of  his  ovrn 
de:>ires,  is  the  only  true  wealth,  the  rest  is  but 
trust.  (16) 

The  riches  of  the  rich  are  what  they  enjoy  and 
endovr.  Others  play  with  the  widows  arvd  riches  of 


Vyasa  Saihhitd.  527 

those  who  neither  enjoy  nor  endow,  after  their 
death.  (17) 

What  does  his  wealth  avil  the  soul  of  a  man,  after 
death ;  (since)  transient  is  the  very  body  which  he 
tries  to  nourish  with  the  aid  there  of  ?  (18) 

Transient  is  wealth,  transient  are  the  limbs  of  one's 
body.  The  only  reality  is  that  death  is  fast'approching. 
~ Acquire  pieties,  every  day.  (19) 

Why  not  give  away  your  riches  in  charity  which 
you  shall  have  to  leave  behind,  after  death,  if  you  have 
not  already  spent  them  in  acts  of  piety,  enjoymept  or 
fame  ?  (20) 

Truly  realised  is  the  end  of  his  life  on  whose 
life  depends  the  livelihood  of  his  friends,  relations, 
and  Brahmanas.  Who  does  not  live  for  his  own  ends  in 
this  world  ?  (21) 

Even  the  beasts  live  and  pamper  their  own  bellies. 
Of  what  use  is  the  strength,  health  and  longevity  of 
him  who  does  not  do  any  act  of  public  good  ?  '22) 

If  you  have  but  a  morsel  of  food,  why  don't  you 
give  half  of  it  to  the  poor  ?  Will  any  body  ever  get 
his  wished-for  riches  in  this  life  ?  (23) 

Verily  do  I  consider  a  miser  to  be  a  man  of  great 
renunciation,  inasmuchas  he  leaves  behind  him  all  his 
hoarded  riches,  after  death.  A  charitable  man  is  the 
veritable  miser  living,  since  he  would  be  benefitted  by 
his  wealth  (spent  in  charities)  in  the  next  world.  (24) 

One  day  we  shall  have  to  quit  this  life.  He  dies 
not  who  has  realized  the  end  of  his  life  (by  making 
charities).  A  miser,  dead,  is  like  an  ass,  who  only 
carries  other  mens'  ingots  on  his  back.  (25) 

Even  space  and  time  will  die  one  day,  but  the 
merit  of  a  spontaneous  and  voluntary  gift  (///  : — Made 


528"  Vyasa 

without  the  asking,   or  to  a  person   come   without  any 
call)  will  never  suffer  any  death.  (26) 

A  reciprocity  of  gifts  may  he  a  social  function,  but 
rs  no  virtue.  It  does  not  bear  any  religious  merit,  like 
the  milk  of  a  black  cow  (whose  calf  is  dead),  milched' 
out  of  greed  and  profferred  to  the  gods,  etc.  (27) 

Verily  the  enjoyers  (beneficiaries)  of  a  charitable 
endowment,  contingent  on  the  happening  of  a  future 
calamity,  are  not  actually  seen.  But  since  eternal  is- 
the  merit  of  a  gift,  the  maker  of  a  gift  never  reverts- 
to  the  plain  of  human  existence.  (28)' 

By  making  gifts  to  one's  parents,  brothers,  father- 
in-law,  mother-in-law,  wife,  or  children,  one  is  entitled 
to  an  eternal  residence  in  heaven.  (29) 

A  gift  made   to   one's   father   is  hundred  times  more 
meritorious  than    the    one    made  to    an  outsider,   tnose 
made    to   one's   mother   and    sister    being    respectively 
ten  times  greater  than  the  latter.     A- gift  made    to  one's- 
brother  bears  eternal  fruit.   (30) 

O  you  lords  of  Munis !  Every  day  gifts  should5 
be  made  to-  the  Brahmarias.  Any  one  coming  and' 
Basking  for  gifts-  (charities V should  be  succoured.  131) 

Several    recipients    of   gifts    (receivers   of  charities) 
may  be  persons  well-versed  in   the    Vedas^   or  practisers- 
of  penitential  austerities.     But  the   best   of  such   takers 
are  those  who  have    never  partaken  of  a  S'udra's  boiled- 
rice.   (32-1 

A  gift  should 'be  made  to  an  erudiate  person-  living* 
at  a  distance  in  preference  to  an  iMeterate  one  living- 
elose  by  one's  house.  Nothing  can  be  humiliating 
(insulting)  to  an  illiterate  Brahmana.  (33) 

The    status    of   well-birth   is   extinguished    by  one's 
ling  an  article  consecrated  to  divine  use,  or   belong- 


Vydsa  SaihkitA.  52-9 

Jng  to  a  Brahmana,  and  by  insulting  a  Brahmana 
as  well.  (34) 

By  not  making  any  gift  to  a  Brahmana,  ignorant  of 
the  Vedas,  one  does  not  commit  the  sin  of  insulting 
a  ferahmana.  Oblations  are  cast  in  the  saered  fire, 
and  not  in  its  ashes.  (351 

He,  who  causes  a  Brahmana,  who  has  been  studying 
the  Vedas  in  the  vicinity,  to  be  superseded  in  a  matter 
of  feeding  or  gift-taking,  destroys  his  three  fold 
relations.  (36) 

A  Brahmana,  who  has  not  studied  the  Vedas,  doesr 
like  a  wooden  elephant,  or  a  leather-deer,  but  bear  the 
name  of  the  genus  he  belongs  to.  (37) 

Like  a  desserted  hamlet,  like  a  waterless  well, 
a  Brahmana,  who  has  not  read  the  Vedas,  is  a 
Brahmana  only  in  name.  (38) 

An  article  given  to  a  Brahmana  (well  versed  in  the 
Vedas)  or  'cast  in  the  sacred  fire  by  way  of  ablution, 
constitutes  the  true  wealth  (possession)  of  a  person, 
the  rest  is  but  insignificant.  (39) 

A  gift  made  to  a  Vruva  Brahmana  is  doubly  meri-  % 
torious  than  the  one  made  to  a  Sama  Brdhmana.  A  gift 
made  to  an  Achdryaya  is  a  thousand  times  more 
meritorious  than  the  latter,  while  the  one  made  to 
a  Brdhmana  well  versed  in  Vedas  bears  immortal 
fruit.  (40) 

One,    born    of    the    seeds    of  a    Brahmana   but    not 
purified    with    any    of  the   purificatory  rites  or  Mantras, 
and  making  use  of  his  caste  as  a  means  of  livelihood,  is 
I!     i  q   ?nma  &  41) 

whom   all    the  purificatory  rites 
of  Garbhadhdnanti    etc.,   have  been  performed,  but  who 


530  Vyasa  Saihhita. 

has   neither   read   nor  taught  any  part  of  the  Vedas,  is 
called  a  Vruva  Brahmana.    (42) 

A  Brahmana,  who  practises  penitential  austerities 
and  performs  the  rite  of  Homa,  every  day,  and  teaches 
the  Vedas  with  their  Kalpas  and  Rahasyas,  is  called 
an  Achdryaya.  (43) 

A  Brahmana,  who  dwly  celebrates  the  Pas'uvandha, 
Chaturmasya,  Agnisthoma  and  other  Vedic  sacri- 
fices, propounds  the  true  import  of  the  Vedic  texts 
with  the  six  allied  branches  of  study  in  cases  of  doubt 
or  discrepancy,  and  regularly  studies  the  Itihdsas  and 
PuranaS)  should  be  alone  regarded  as  well  versed  in 
the  Vedas  (Vedapdraga) .  (44 — 45) 

Members  of  no  other  castes  live  such  a  glorious 
life  as  the  Brahmanas  do.  Who  is  that,  who  having 
trodden  such  a  glorious  path,  wiM  relinquish  it  ?  (46) 

Brahmanas  constitute  the  divinity  of  the  gods. 
They  are  the  stuff  which  the  energy  of  Brahma  is 
made  of,  and  form  the  apparent  cause  of  the  creation 
and  continuity  of  the  worlds.  (47) 

In  the  field-like  mouth  of  a  Brahmana,  which  is 
free  from  all  gravels  and  thorns  (of  falsehood  and 
harsh  words)  should  be  sown  the  seeds  of  sacrificial 
Mantras.  The  cultivator,  who  does  this  (gets  all  reli- 
gious rites  and  sacrifices  performed  by  Brahmanas) 
witnesses  the  fruition  of  all  his  desires.  (48) 

In  good  fields  the  seeds  must  be  sown  ;  in  good 
recipients  the  gifts  should  be  stored.  Whatever  is 
cast  in  a  good  field  or  recepient  can  not  suffer  any 
deterioration.  (49) 

The  cereals  (foodgrains  in  one's  store)  begin  to 
dance  with  pleasure  on  the  arrival  of  a  modest  and 


Vya$A  Saihhitd.  53 1 

Brahmana  at  one's  house,  saying^  "  we  shall 
come  by  a  better  fate."  (50) 

Grains  of  rice  given  to  an  unholy  Brahmana,  who 
has  broken  his  vows  and  neglected  the  study  of  the 
Vedas,  begin  to  cry  in  dismay,  saying,  "  what  evils  have 
we  committed  to  be  punished  with  such  a  degrada* 
tion.  (51) 

A  Brahmana  well  versed  in  the  Vedas  should  be 
repeatedly  repasted  even  after  satiety,  whereas  an  illete- 
rate  one,  fasting  even  for  six  consecutive  nights,  should 
not  be  helped  with  food.  (52) 

Holy  things)  whose  likes  are  in  the  stomach  of  a 
Brahmaiia,  should  be  atone  given  to  him.  Who  are 
the  more  worthy  recipients  of  gifts  than  the  Brahmanas 
in  whose  body  the  gods  partake  of  their  Havyas  (liba- 
tions of  clarified  butter  proffered  to  the  gods)  and  the 
Pitris,  their  Kavyas  (oblations.)  ?  Beings  are  not  their 
bodies,  and  hence  organisms  cannot  be  revered  as 
holy.  (53—54) 

The  article  of  gift  eaten  or  taken  by  a  dutiful,  pure- 
hearted,  (Brahmana)  reader  of  the  Vedas,  bears  im^ 
mortal  merit,  which  does  not  suffer  any  diminution 
through  one's  successive  rebirths.  (55) 

Several  scholars  desire  for  gifts  of  horses* and 
elephants,  others  discard  them,  saying,  "to  whom  does 
this  wealth  belong,  and  who  is  the  real  master  of  grains 
or  riches.  (56) 

The  seeds  (of  knowledge),  previously  sown  in  the 
fields  of  Brahmanas  duly  ploughed  with  the  plough  of 
the  Vedas,  have  sprouted  as  the  only  true  corn  in 
life.  (57) 

Of  a  hundred,  one  is  born  a  hero  j  of  a  thousand,  a 
wise  man ;  and  of  a  hu  ndred  thousand,  an  orator,  I 


532  'Vyas-ti   Sail&iU. 

'doubt  whether  a  man  of  true  charities  will  ever  tak'e  his 
birth  or  not.    i  58 ) 

A  conquest  does  not  make  a  hero,  nor  studies  a 
wise  man.  Eloquence  do^s  not  make  an  orator,  nor 
gifts  a  charitable  man.  59) 

He,  who  has  conquered  his  senses,  is  the  real  hero. 
He,  who  practises  virtues,  is  really  wise.  A  speaker 
is  he,  who  discusses  pleasant  and  beneficial  topics, 
and  he,  who  gives  with  reverence,  is  the  maker  of  true 
gifts.  (60) 

One  by  making  gifts  of   varie .      ...„ 
all  seated  in  the  same  row,  either  out  of  affection,  fright 
or    greed,    commits    the    sin    of     Brahmanieide.       tt    is 
so    related    in    the     Vgdiis,    and  the    Riskis  Mug  ot 
such.   (61) 

Gifts  made  unto  an  illeterate  (Brahmana),  like 
seeds  sown  in  a  sandy  soil,  or  clarified  butter  kept  in  a 
pot  of  asheS)  or  libations  poured  over  burnt  out  cinders^ 
prove  abortive  (fail  to  bear  any  merit).  (62) 

In  what  kind  of  womb  will  the  twice-born  one 
(Brahmana),  who  lives  on  boiled  rice  of  those,  xvho  are 
unclean  with  the  uncleanness  due  to  any  death  or  birth  in 
their  families,  or  partakes  of  that  prepared  by  a  S'udraj 
take  -his  birth  (in  his  next  incarnation;  ?  Verily  I  can 
not  say  that.  (63  > 

He,  who  dies  \\  ith  a  Sudra's  boiled  rice  in  his  stomach) 
is  sure  to  be  reborn  as  a  hog>  and  ah  his  progeny  will 
belong  to  the  same  genus,  after  death.  (64) 

He  will  be  born  as  a  vulture  in  his  twelve  successive 
rebirths  ;  as  a  hog,  in  seven  ;  and  as  a  dog,  in  seven* 
This  is  what  Manu  has  opined  on  the  subject.  (65) 

He,  who  dies  with  the  boiled  rice  of  a  Brahmana  in 
his  stomach,  acquires  nectar,  after  death,  Dicing  with 


Vyasa  Satfihita.  533 

i 
that   of  a  Kshatriya  in  his  stomach,  he  is  punished  with 

indigence  in  his  next  birth  ;  with  that  of  a  Vaishya  in 
his  stomach,  he  is  consigned  to  the  vile  necessity  of 
eating  a  Sudra's  boiled  rice  again  ;  and  with  that  of  a 
S'udra  boiled  rice  in  his  stomach,  he  is  consigned  to 
the  torments  of  hell,  in  his  next  life.  (66) 

The  Brahmana,  who  partakes  of  a  S'udra fs  boiled 
rice  continuously  for  a  month,  becomes  degraded  to 
the  status  of  S'udra,  in  this  life,  and  will  be  born  as 
a  dog  in  the  next.  (67) 

The  gods  .and  the  Pitris  desert  the  Brahamana,  who 
takes  a  S'udra  wife,  or  partakes  of  boiled  rice  cooked 
by  her,  and  he  is  consigned  to  the  pangs  of  Raurava 
hell,  after  death.  (68) 

The  B-rahmana,  who  cooks  his  food  in  vessels 
defiled  by  the  touch  of  men  of  vile  castes,  or  do  those 
acts  which  are  calculated  to  degrade  a  twice  born  one 
in  his  social  status,  or  promiscuously  go  unto  women 
of  forbidden  castes,  is  sure  to  be  consigned  to  hell,  after 
death.  (69) 

Cooking  of  boiled  rice  for  the  gratification  of  one's 
own  hunger  without  dedicating  it  to  the  use  of  Brah- 
manas,  Atithis,  and  the  god  presiding  over  a  row 
of  Brahmana  at  a  dinner,  constant  vilification  of  Brah- 
manas,  and  selling  the,  Vedas  for  money  : mercenary 
teaching  of  the  Vedas)  are  the  five  acts  which  rank 
equally  with  an  act  of  Brahmanicide  in  respect  of 
sin.  (70)  n 

Every  day,  this  S'astra,  framed  by  Vyasa,  should  be 
carefully  studied,  and  those,  who  follow  the  regulations 
herein  laid  down,  suffer  no  fall  in  life.  (71) 

THE   END. 
70 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


PK 

300$ 
E5D8 
1906 


Vedas.  English.  Selections 
Samhita 


