===== Internet Archive OCR: hindumysticismsi00dasg_0_djvu.txt =====

LIN DU MY IIe 


ssid hes i ae REZNOR PITS 


nk its et 


hein pS Pe 


tie ike Ra i 
y ta Peet at 
Pa in iG 
me ey ee age y 
i. : ay ‘ 


HINDU MYSTICISM 


ha Se ie 
histo 


Re 


PROFESSOR S. N. DASGUPTA 
Presidency College, Calcutta 


x NOY 1 i 


HINDU MYSTICISM, . 


SIX LECTURES 
BY 
S. N. DASGUPTA, M.A., Ph.D. (Cal.), Ph.D. (Cantab.) 


Late Lecturer in the University of Cambridge, England. Late 
Professor of Sanskrit, Chittagong College, Bengal. 
Professor of Philosophy, Presidency College, 
Calcutta. Author of “A History of 
Indian Philosophy,” “Yoga as 
Philosophy and Religion.” 


(Norman Wait Harris Foundation Lectures, 1926) 


Northwestern University 
Evanston, Il. 


REIS esestls th tN CIN 
THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO. 
1927 


COPYRIGHT 


THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO. 
1927 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


To 
PIS EX OCHRE N GY: 


The Rt. Howble Victor Alexander George Roberti Bulwer- 
Lytton, Earl of Lytton P.C., G.C.S.1., G.C.1.E., Chancellor of 
The University of Calcutta and Governor of Bengal, Indta. 


May tt please your Excellency, 


I know that your noble and cultivated soul will always be 
eager to receive with cordial hospitality the high ideals, thoughts 
and attainments of the people of any age and of any country, 
but more particularly of India, over the destinies of a part of 
which your excellency had to preside for some time. 


Mine is a humble performance, but I feel extremely grate- 
ful to you that it was solely through the kind patronage of your 
excellency that I could avail myself of the opportunities that 
came and accept the invitations of many foreign universities, at 
one of which these lectures were delivered. Your generous 
courtesies, cordiality and sympathetic willingness to help will 
always endear your name to me, as it will do to many others. 
By associating this brief account of the mystics of India with 
your name I am only paying my tribute of respect to you for 
the high respect that you yourself have for the lofty ideals of 
humanity. I shall be glad tf you will kindly accept this un- 
worthy gift and sometimes think of India, her past greatness 
and future possibilities. 


I remain your Excellency, 
Loyally and sincerely yours, 


Surendranath Dasgupta, 


Presidency College, 
Calcutta. 


THE N. W. HARRIS LECTURES 


were founded in 1906 through the gener- 
osity of Mr. Norman Wait Harris of Chi- 
cago, and are to be given annually. The 
purpose of the lecture foundation is, as ex- 
pressed by the donor, “‘to stimulate scientific 
research of the highest type and to bring the 
results of such research before the students 
and friends of Northwestern University, 
and through them to the world. By the term 
‘scientific research’ is meant scholarly in- 
vestigation into any department of human 
thought or effort without limitation to re- 
search in the so-called natural sciences, but 
with a desire that such investigation should 
be extended to cover the whole field of hu- 
man knowledge.” 


VI 


PREFACE 


OTH on the continent and in America, Hindus 

are associated with mysticism, but, so far as I 
know, the subject of Hindu mysticism has as yet re- 
ceived no systematic treatment, either in the way of 
general introduction, or in the way of a comprehensive 
account. The man in the street cannot, as a rule, dis- 
tinguish between the lower and the higher forms of 
mysticism. He looks upon mysticism in general with 
some kind of superstitious awe or reverence, and he 
thinks of it as an obscure and supernatural method by 
which, in some unaccountable manner, miraculous feats 
may be performed or physical advantages reaped—de- 
parted spirits made visible, fortunes told, muscles de- 
veloped, riches earned without effort, dangerous and 
incurable diseases cured by simple amulets or blessings, 
infallible prophesies made, and the like. I shall not 
say anything as to whether or not such phenomena 
are possible, for my present interest concerns not facts 
but beliefs. But whether or not the phenomena ac- 
tually occur, they imply beliefs that there are short 
cuts to the attainment of advantages through mysteri- 
ous, supernatural or miraculous powers undiscoverable 
by reason. I refer to this as inferior mysticism, be- 
cause the purposes relate solely to the attainment of in- 


vir 


VIII PREFACE 


ferior mundane benefits. Distinguishable therefrom is 
the belief that the highest reality or the ultimate reali- 
sation and fulfilment (whatever may be their nature) 
cannot be attained by reason alone, but that there are 
other avenues to them, namely, the firm and steady 
control of will, the development of right emotions, or 
both combined, or by them both along with the highest 
functioning of reason. This is superior and true 
mysticism because it is directed to the liberation of 
the spirit and the attainment of the highest bliss. 

Mysticism in Europe has a definite history. In spite 
of the variety of its types, it may roughly be described 
to refer to the belief that God is realised through ec- 
static communion with Him. With the Islamic mystics, 
the Christian mystics, and the devotional mystics or 
bhaktas of India, the vision of God and His grace is at- 
tained through devotional communion or devotional 
rapture of various kinds. But in all these mystics, we 
find a keen sense of the necessity of purity of mind, con- 
tentment, ever alert striving for moral goodness, self- 
abnegation, and one-pointedness to God. There can 
be no true mysticism without real moral greatness. 
This mysticism should therefore be distinguished from 
a mere delusory faith that God often grants us a vision 
of Him or appears to us in dreams, or from a faith in 
the infallibility of the scriptures and so forth, for the 
latter are often but manifestations of credulity or of 
a tendency to believe in suggestions, and may often be 
associated with an inadequate alertness of critical and 
synthetic intellect. 


' PREFACE Ix 

I have defined mysticism as a belief or a view, but 
in reality it means much more than that. In the life 
of the true mystics, beliefs exert a great formative in- 
fluence. They are no mere intellectual registrations of 
opinions or temporary experiences, but represent the 
dynamic, the dominant tone of their personality as 
it develops and perfects itself. Mysticism is not an 
intellectual theory; it is fundamentally an active, for- 
mative, creative, elevating and ennobling principle of 
life. I have not here taken note of poems or thoughts 
involving merely mystical beliefs but have touched 
only upon those which are the outward expressions 
of a real inner flowering of life in the persons of 
those who have tried to live a saintly life of mysticism. 

Mysticism means a spiritual grasp of the aims and 
problems of life in a much more real and ultimate 
manner than is possible to mere reason. A developing 
life of mysticism means a gradual ascent in the scale 
of spiritual values, experience, and spiritual ideals. 
As such, it is many-sided in its development, and as 
rich and complete as life itself. Regarded from this 
point of view, mysticism is the basis of all religions— 
particularly of religion as it appears in the lives of 
truly religious men. 

An acquaintance with Indian religious experience 
shows that there are types of religious and mystical 
experience other than that of an intimate communion 
with God. I have therefore made my definition of 
mysticism wider, so that it may include not only the 
Islamic, Christian, and the Bhakti forms of Indian 


ns PREFACE 


mysticism but other types of Indian mysticism as well. 
I could not hope to give an exhaustive analysis or 
even a fairly comprehensive treatment of the chief 
features of the different types of Indian mysticism 
within the limits of these six lectures. I have there- 
fore attempted only a brief general outline of some of 
the most important types, indicating their mutual re- 
lations, sometimes genetically and sometimes logically. 
I have omitted all reference to the connected meta- 
physical issues, as a comprehensive treatment of these 
philosophical problems may be found in my “A His- 
tory of Indian Philosophy” (Cambridge University 
Press), the first volume of which has already been 
published and the other volumes are in the course of 
publication. 

I have first described the sacrificial type of mystic- 
ism. ‘This cannot in all its particulars be regarded as 
a mysticism of a superior order, but it develops many 
features of the higher types and marks the starting- 
point of the evolution of Indian mysticism. I have 
then discussed the four chief types of mysticism: the 
Upanishad, the Yogic, the Buddhistic and the Bhakti, 
though there are many branches of these particular 
types upon which I could not enter. I have mentioned 
some other minor types of mysticism. In addition 
there are some which are of a syncretistic nature, 
exhibiting elements of belief and duties of two or three 
distinct types of mysticism in combination. I could 
not present them all. The five main types that I have 
here described, however, may be regarded as funda- 


PREFACE XI 


mental; and, though very much more could have been 
said in the way of elaboration and illustration, all their 
striking characteristics have been briefly touched upon 
and materials have largely been drawn directly from 
the original sources. I hope that I may in the future 
have an opportunity to take up the subject again and to 
deal with it more elaborately. 

Perhaps I should have entitled the present volume 
“The Development of Indian Mysticism .” But the 
word “Indian” might be misunderstood in America. I 
have therefore selected “Hindu Mysticism,” “Hindu” 
standing for Indian. I have dropped the word “Devel- 
opment” to avoid any initial impression of forbidding 
technicality. For similar reasons diacritical marks 
have been omitted. 

I now have the very pleasant duty of thanking the 
Harris Foundation Lecture Committee which did me 
the honour of asking me to deliver these lectures and 
President Walter Dill Scott; Professor Edward L. 
Schaub and Professor T. W. Koch, the Secretary of 
the committee. Considering the high reputation of my 
predecessors, who were outstanding scholars in their 
respective branches of learning, I feel extremely dif- 
fident about my own humble performance. I have re- 
ceived so much hospitality and kindness in America 
that I shall always think of this great country with 
appreciative enthusiasm and admiration. But I can 
never express adequately my gratefulness and thanks 
to Professor Edward L. Schaub, who was chiefly re- 
sponsible for my invitations to the American Univer- 


XII PREFACE 


sities and who helped me so generously in seeing these 
lectures through the press, as well as in suggesting 
many changes of style and expression—to say nothing 
of his personal courtesies and cordiality which will al- 
ways endear his name to me. 


S. N. Dasgupta. 
Calcutta, India, 1927. 


Preface 


ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 


LECTURE I 


BAC TUICIAL VIN SHIGIS I entices ions ciaiteralecaicig & ay is crus. ales 


i 


2. 


Soe 


10. 


Rig Veda and Atharva Veda, the earliest religious 
documents of the human race. Their probable dates. 
Atharva Veda consists mainly of hymns, of charms, 
and of incantations. Rig Veda consists mainly of 
hymns and of prayers for prescribed rituals. 

Nature of Vedic ritualism. 

Strictest accuracy in the performance of all ritual- 
istic details was deemed indispensably necessary for 
realising the fruits of the sacrifices; since reason 
was unable to discover why this should be so, the 
hymns and the ritualistic directions were above rea- 
son and therefore had no author; they were self-ex- 
istent and eternal. 

The entire Vedic literature was conceived as being 
only a body of commands. This conception of com- 
mands did not imply any commander. 

The mysterious powers of the sacrifices can neBdice 
all kinds of physical advantages. 

The mysterious conception of Vedic commands. 
Simple prayers of the primitive sages of the Vedas 
show how deeply they were impressed by the in- 
explicable phenomena of nature which led them to 
believe in deities presiding over these phenomena. 
Revelation in the Vedic sense. The Vedic com- 
mands are impersonal, infallible, and eternal. 
Reason must be subordinated to Vedic revelation, 


XIII 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


XIV 
and truths discovered by reason should be attested 
by reference to the Vedas. 

11. Definition of mysticism. 

12. Special features of sacrificial mysticism. 

13. Development of sacrificial mysticism into substi- 
tution-meditations. 

14. Some forms of substitution-meditations are found 
even now in India among certain sections of the 
people. 

15. The development of substitution-meditations marks 
a new stage of advance towards the liberation of 
thought from the narrow limitations of sacrificial 
mysticism. Loose generalisation of thought made 
such an advance possible. 

16. How the substitution-meditations contributed towards 
the development of the idea of Brahman, the supreme 
reality, as the identity of being, thought and bliss. 

17. How the monotheistic Vedic hymns contributed to- 
wards the formation of the concept of Brahman. 

18. The mysterious force of sacrifices and the idea of 
Brahman. 

19. The dawn of a quest of Brahman. 

20. Transition from the worship of deities to the highest 
realisation of truth and reality, the Brahman. 

21. The rise of the Upanishad literature, which deals 
with the growth and development of the concept of 
Brahman, also called the Vedanta. 

LECTURE II 

Mysticism of the Upanishads....... ee eae 

1. Monotheistic hymn of Hiranyagarbha. 

Though monotheistic passages are found in the sac- 
rificial manuals, the emphasis is nevertheless almost 
wholly on the sacrificial system. 

3. The science of Brahman is based wholly on the fact 


that the spiritual needs of man always tend to tran- 


a 


13. 


14. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


scend the limitations of his mundane necessities, 
Modern civilisation tends to stifle this higher call of 
man by seducing him to earthly desires. The story 
of Prajapati and Virocana. 

The story of Maitreyi and Yajnavalkya illustrates 
the spiritual longing of man in Maitreyi’s craving 
for immortality. 

The highest state of immortality is a supra-conscious, 
ineffable state of mystic experience, where there is 
not the duality of the knower and the known. 

The supra-conscious experience underlies our so-called 
personality as its background, essence or truth—as 
the true self which is dearest and nearest to us and 
for which everything is dearer to us. 

This experience is ultimate and fundamental in its 
nature—the ultimate reality, as the ground of all 
things. 

This quest after the highest reality which is also our 
ultimate intuitional experience—a belief in a superior 
impersonal principle, the inmost essence of man, which 
enlivens our thoughts, actions and feelings is the 
chief feature of Upanishad mysticism. 

The story of Naciketas and “what becomes of man 
after death.” Philosophical quest of truth preferable 
to a life of mundane comforts. 

Growth of materialistic civilisation leads us away 
from the transcendent spiritual ideals of life. 

The highest spiritual essence can be realised only by 
inner intuitive contact and not by logical reasoning. 
The fundamental essence of man is the inner illu- 
mination of pure thought, which is also the ultimate 
principle underlying all things. 

This immortal essence cannot be grasped by intellect, 
but only realised by superior intuition, and this is 
the mysticism of the Upanishads. 

There is another and different line of thought which 


XV 


XVI 


15. 


16. 


ay: 


18. 


19. 


20. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


conceives Brahman as the supreme lord who moves 
our life and sense faculties to activity. 

A mythical story to illustrate the fact that all nat- 
ural objects, such as fire, wind, etc., derive their re- 
spective functions and power from this supreme 
lord. 

Yet this supreme creator and sustainer of the uni- 
verse, and the inner controller of us all, is in some 
other passages spoken of as having become the vis- 
ible many of the universe though he is in Himself 
one. 

The dualistic tendency of God, soul and the world, 
is very prominent in some passages, while side by 
side with it there are many passages of an apparently 
pantheistic import. 

Yet the Upanishads seem to emphasise very strongly 
the view of ineffable and ultimate experience realised 
by direct intuition. 

Interpreters of the Upanishads differ as to which of 
these strains of Upanishad thought is most funda- 
mental. But in the life of a true Upanishad mystic 
all the apparently contradictory lines of thought find 
an untold harmony and expression incomprehensible 
to logical thought. 

The mystic experience in the Upanishads can be at- 
tained only through the most rigorous moral discipline 
of self-abnegation, self-control and peace, by untiring 
and patient search and by inner intuitive vision of the 
spirit. The highest state is absolutely indescribable. 


LECTURE III 


Yopa vl ysticismity. ig ci niitie jsieln talon te ea 


L 


Perfecting of moral life is indispensable for the real- 
isation of Upanishad truth, and references to self- 
control are found in some of the Upanishad passages. 
Modes of sense-control prevalent in India since at 
least 700 or 800 B. C. 


61 


= 


13. 


14. 


15; 


16. 


17. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Story of a hypnotic trance in the Mahabharata. 
The root of most forms of Indian mysticism is its 
theory of the self as pure consciousness and the ulti- 
mate principle of all that exists. 

The concept of “I” and the true self. 

It is difficult for modern Western people correctly to 
understand and appreciate the spiritual aspirations of 
the great sages of ancient India—so different are the 
physical and social environments of the restful hermi- 
tages of ancient India from the modern centres of 
civilisation of Western countries. 

Spirit and mind distinguished. The ultimate aim is 
to break the bondage of the mind. 

Mind grows through conscious and subconscious im- 
pressions and states, and yoga consists in the ces- 
sation of all mental states. 

The seer is sensitive to the slightest pain, and his 
aim is to uproot all pains and future possibilities. 
The great positive virtues which a yogin must prac- 
tice. 

Indispensable moral acquirements of a yogin. 

In addition to these, a certain course of bodily and 
mental discipline is also considered indispensable. 
Various bodily practices, including breath control, 
etc., have to be undertaken to stop all movements of 
the body, voluntary and involuntary. 

Some of the processes of purifying the body by in- 
ternal washings. 

The aim of yoga concentration by which the mind is 
steadied is different from ordinary concentration. By 
it the mind becomes fixed in an object, and for the 
time all mental functions of differentiation, associa- 
tion, etc., cease—absorptive concentration or samadhi. 
Gradual advancement on yoga lines through faith and 
energy. 

The intuitional knowledge of prajna—final destruc- 


XVII 


XVIII TABLE OF CONTENTS 


tion of the mind necessary for the liberation of the 
spirit. 
LECTURE IV 
Buddhistic (Mysticism 3 is ae cedetaie «raise lente ae 


1. Detachment from antipathy and attachment, supreme 
self-control, and absolute desirelessness considered 
indispensable by yoga for the liberation of the spirit. 

2. Legendary account of the way in which the Buddha 
was led to the path of yoga. 

3. The way to Nirvana as absolute extinction of the 
mind is through absolute desirelessness, right disci- 
pline, and yoga concentration. 

4. Difference between the system of the Buddha and the 
system of Patanjali with regard to the ultimate goal. 

5. Goal as Nirvana and as the absolute liberation of the 
spirit. 

6. Belief in Nirvana is the basis of Buddhist mysticism. 

7. The idea of liberation and the idea of essenceless 
Nirvana are very similar to each other. 

8. A digression in the way of referring to other forms 
of mysticism, as, for example, a belief in tapas, as- 
ceticism and self-mortification as able to lead to our 
highest realisation. 

9. Different types of ascetics. 

10. Supernatural power ascribed to tapas or self-mortifi- 
cation. 

11. Tapas as self-mortification contrasted with tapas as 
the power of endurance of physical privations and as 
self-control. 

12. The Buddha found the old course of excessive self- 
mortification and rigor undesirable and took to a 
moderate course. 

13. Virtues of universal friendship, compassion, etc. 

14. In the Hindu scheme of virtues, caste virtues and 
caste duties oftentime narrowed the scope of univer- 
salism. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS xXIx 


15. Universal friendship was the active creed in Maha- 
yana Buddhism. 
16. Different grades of Buddhas. 
17. Story of Aryadeva’s universal compassion. 
18. The career of a Bodhisattva. 
19. The virtues of a Bodhisattva. 
20. The moral progress of a Bodhisattva. 
21. Universal good the ultimate aim of the Bodhisattva. 
LECTURE? Vi 
Classical Forms of Devotional Mysticism........ 113 
1. Yoga ideal of individualistic perfection. 
Hindu system of life not individualistic, but based 
on a caste system of the social order. 
3. Hindu system of caste duties. 
4, Philosophy of the Gita emphasises the need of the 
dedication of all actions and their fruits to God. 
5. Self-surrender to God is the ideal of the yogin of the 
Gita. 
6. The ideal of love of God in the Puranas. 
7. Ramanuja’s conception of love of God as ceaseless 
contemplation of God. 
8. Bhakti or devotion to God is found to be a revival 
of the yoga method in later times. 
9. Love of God as a supreme emotion in the Bhagavata 
Purana. 
10. Special features of the path of Bhakti contrasted 
with the older path. 
11. For whom is the path of devotion intended? 
12. Vallabha’s definition of Bhakti; his doctrine of pra- 
patti or self-surrender. 
13. The doctrine of prapatti contrasted with the doctrine 
of Bhakti of the Bhagavata. ; 
14. Mysticism in the emotion of Bhakti. 
15. Love of God an indispensable factor of religious psy- 


chology. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


XX 
16. Place of reason and emotion in religion. 
17. Passion for God as illustrated in the life of Chai- 
tanya of Bengal. 
18. The legend of Krishna. 
19. Chaitanya’s life. 
20. Chaitanya’s passionate love of God. 
LECTURE, Vi 
Popular ‘Devotional Mysticism. 02). ees 
1. God as great and God as the dearest. 
2. Spiritualisation of the events of Krishna legends and 
vicarious participation in the life-drama of Krishna. 
3. God as father and mother. 
4. Different concepts of Bhakti. 
5. Vallabha’s notion of Bhakti as pushti. 
6. How human love becomes divine. 
7. Candidasa’s ideal of the transformation of human 
love into divine. 
8. Love of God in South-India, in the songs of the 
Alvars. 
9. Relation of the old Bhakti school to the new school 
of Bhakti—Khecar, the teacher of Namdev. 
10. Essence of Namdev’s teachings. 
11. Tukaram and his hymns of devotion. 
12. Love of God in the North-Indian saints. 
13. Kabir, his reformatory spirit and his love of God. 
14. Love of God a great leveller. 
15. Some hymns of Kabir showing his reformatory zeal. 
16. Some hymns of Kabir illustrating his views on purifi- 
tion and his great intoxication for God. 
17. The mystic Rui Das. 
18. The mystic Mira Bai. 
19, Mira Bai’s hymns illustrating her great love of God. 
20. The mystic poet and Saint Tulsidas. 
21. Mystic feelings of the people in general who are often 
illiterate. 
22. The value of spiritual longing cannot be expressed 


in terms of utility. 


EU Beh 
SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 


LE GEURE AL 
SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 


HE Hindus possess a body of sacred compositions | 
called the Vedas. Of these there are four collec- 
tions. Two of them comprise original hymns. The 
contents of the others consist largely of poems derived 
from the former two. The collections of original 
hymns, known as the Rig Veda and the Atharva Veda, 
include, respectively, 1028 original hymns of about 
10600 stanzas and 731 hymns of about 6000 stanzas. All 
of these were kept in memory and transmitted by reci- 
tation and close memorizing on the part of teachers and 
pupils in an unbroken chain of early traditions from a 
time when writing was probably not known. The 
opinions of scholars vary greatly regarding the an- 
tiquity of this literature; some think that the hymns 
were composed about 6000 B. C. or at a still earlier 
date, while others think that they were composed about 
1200 B. C. or 1000 B. C. The Vedic hymns are prob- 
ably the earliest important religious documents of the 
human race. 1 
The hymns of the Atharva Veda contain among 
other things descriptions of charms for curing diseases, 
prayers for long life and health, imprecations against 
demons, sorcerers and enemies, charms pertaining to 
women—to secure their love or arouse jealousy, and 


3 


4 HINDU MYSTICISM 


the like—charms for securing harmony and influence 
in an assembly, charms for securing the prosperity of 
household, fields, cattle, business, gambling, etc., 
charms in expiation of sins and defilement. The 
hymns of the Rig Veda, on the other hand, are often 
praises of various deities, who are frequently mere 
personifications of the different powers of nature, such 
as the rain-god, the wind-god, the fire-god, and the 
like. The prayers in these hymns are praises of the 
greatness and power, the mysterious nature, and the 
exploits of these deities, as well as prayers for various 
favors. Often the favors sought are of the nature of 
material blessings, such as long life, vigorous offspring, 
cattle and horses, gold, etc. Prayers for the advance- 
ment of the inner spiritual achievements of man, for 
righteousness or moral greatness, prayers expressing 
a passionate longing for the divine or a humble sub- 
mission of the mind to the divine will are not so fre- 
quent. Most of these prayers were recited in the per- 
formance of certain prescribed rituals. Though from 
the praises of the gods one might infer that it was the 
gods who were supposed to bestow the benefits, it was 
in fact the complete set of ritualistic performances that 
was considered to be the cause of the showering of the 
benefits. It was supposed that these ritualistic per- 
formances when carried out in all their details, pre- 
cisely and accurately, could by their joint and mysteri- 
ous effect produce a mysterious something whereby the 
prayers were fulfilled. 2 

I shall omit from my discussion the hymns of the 
Atharva Veda which deal only with spells, witchcraft 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 5 


and incantations. But while I take for examination 
those hymns of the Rig Veda which express beautiful 
ideas about the nature-deities and which voice personal 
requests for material comforts or for advantages, it 
should be understood that they also were chanted in 
connection with the performance of rituals and sacri- 
fices. It is difficult to determine whether in the earliest 
period definite theories had been formulated regarding 
the intimate and indispensable connection between the 
chanting of these hymns of personal appeal and the 
performance of the rituals. But if we judge by the 
Vedic literature of the Brahmanas (probably com- 
posed shortly after the hymns, and later appended to 
them) which indicate authoritatively the place of these 
hymns in the ritualistic observances and specify what 
hymns were to be uttered under what ritualistic con- 
ditions and in what order or manner, it seems almost 
certain that the prevailing form of what is commonly 
called the Vedic religion may in strictness not be con- 
sidered as a religion in the ordinarily accepted mean- 
ing of this term. Many of the ritualistic observances, 
or yajna, required the help. of a large number of 
priests, and large quantities of butter, rice, milk, ani- 
mals, etc. They had to be performed with the most 
elaborate details from day to day, for months together 
and sometimes even for ten or twelve years; and it 
was enjoined that all the observances should be per- 
formed in exact accordance with the prescriptions laid 
down in the Brahmana literature. Even the slightest 
inaccuracy or the most trifling inexactness would be 
sufficient to spoil the entire effect of the sacrifice. But 


6 HINDU MYSTICISM 


if the sacrifices were performed with the strictest ac- 
curacy, then the material advantages for which they 
were performed were bound to come regardless of the 
good will or the ill will of the gods to whom the pray- 
ers were offered. Tvashtar had performed a sacrifice 
for the birth of a son who might kill Indra, but owing 
to a slight error in pronunciation the meaning of the 
prayer was changed and the sacrifice produced a son 
who was not a killer of Indra but of whom Indra was 
the killer. 3 

This idea of sacrifice is entirely different from any- 
thing found in other races. For with the Vedic peo- 
ple, the sacrifices were more powerful than the gods. 
The gods could be pleased or displeased; if the sacri- 
fices were duly performed the prayers were bound to be 
fulfilled., The utterance or chanting of the stanzas 
of the Vedic hymns with specially prescribed accents 
and modulations, the pouring of the melted butter in the 
prescribed manner into the sacrificial fire, the husking 
of rice in a particular way, the making and exact plac- 
ing of cakes, all the thousand details of rituals—often 
performed continuously for days, months and years 
with rigorous exactness—was called a yajna (fre- 
quently translated into English, “sacrifice’’). All the 
good things that the people wanted, be it the birth of a 
son, a shower of rain, or a place of enjoyment in 
heaven, were believed to be secured through the per- 
formance of these sacrifices. It is possible that when 
these hymns were originally composed, they were but 
simple prayers to the deified powers of nature, or that 
they were only associated with some simple rituals. 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 7 


But the evidence that is presented to us in the later 
Vedic and non-Vedic records containing descriptions 
of these sacrifices and discussions respecting their 
value, convinces us beyond doubt that it was the per- 
formance of these sacrifices, perfect in every detail in 
accordance with the dictates of the sacrificial man- 
uals, the Brahmanas, that was believed to be capable 
of producing everything that a man could desire. A 
direct consequence of this apparently unmeaning ne- 
cessity of strictest accuracy of ritualistic performances 
is a theory that came to be formulated and accepted 
in later periods, namely, that the sacrificial rites re- 
vealed such supernatural wisdom that they could not 
have been made by any one but were self-existent. 
It came to be held that the hymns of the Vedas, as 
well as the sacrificial manuals, were without author- 
ship; that they existed eternally, prescribing certain 
courses of ritualistic procedure for the attainment 
of particular advantages and prohibiting certain un- 
desirable courses of action. Consistently with the 
sacrificial theory it was also believed that the meanings 
of the hymns, so far as they described events or facts 
of nature or the exploits and the conduct of the 
gods were of a legendary character, that their true 
value consisted in the enjoining of particular courses 
of action or of dissuading people from other courses 
of action. 4 

Religion in its ordinarily accepted sense means a 
personal relationship with some divine or transcendent 
person to whom we submit and to whom we pray for 
material advantages or for spiritual or moral enlight- 


8 HINDU MYSTICISM 


enment. But here was a belief in the divinity or the 
uncreatedness of a literature—the Vedas—which was 
believed to contain within itself the secret laws of the 
universe. Here there was a conception of commands, 
categorical in nature and external in character, with- 
out the least suggestion of any commander. Though 
these commands were supposed not to have emanated 
from any person, they may nevertheless in some sense 
be described as transcendent, for they were regarded 
as far above human wisdom. No reason could be 
given why a particular sacrificial performance should 
produce any particular kind of material advantage. 
There stand the commands—commands which had re- 
vealed themselves to the minds of the various sages, 
which had no beginning in time, which do not imply 
any commander, and which are absolutely faultless 
and unerring in their directions. 5 


_=e==The sacrifices, thus, were supposed to possess a mys- 


terious power capable of regulating and modifying the 
workings of the universe for the advantage of indi- 
viduals; and the Vedic commands were thought to em- 
body omniscience respecting the ways of the world. 
Though the repository of omniscience, the Vedas were 
not conceived as divulging to us their secrets but 
merely as providing a body of directions which, if fol- 
lowed, would give whatever advantages one craved 
in this life or the next. The sacrifices (yajna) or their 
mysterious powers, are called dharma, a term which 
in Indian vernaculars is often used wrongly to translate 
the English word “religion.” The Vedic hymns, the 
priests, and the sacrifices are also called ‘‘the great” 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 9 


by the application of the term brahman, which in later 
Indian philosophy and religion had such a momen- 
tous history. 6 

What we have described is no ordinary magic of 
spells and incantations, but a repository of the cosmic 
secrets and cosmic forces. These impersonal com- 
mands unité in them the concepts of an unalterable 
law and perfect omniscience; they imply therefore the 
possibility of reaping all the comforts of this life and 
of the after-life by submission to them and compliance 
with them. But they involve no law-giver, no divine 
person, no author of the universe or of the destinies 
of human beings who must be pacified, obeyed or 
loved, and by whose grace we receive the blessings of 
life. We can control our own destinies, and have 
whatever we may want, if we only follow the com- 
mands. There is no other mystery of life save this 
great mystery of the Vedic commands, and these are 
absolutely inscrutable. These commands do not teach 
ordinary laws of social life or of behavior toward our 
fellow-beings, or anything that we could discover by 
our own intelligence and wisdom. Neither do they 
teach us anything that we could learn by experience 
or reason. They give direction for the attainment of 
the good things of this life or of the after-life only in 
so far as the means thereto are absolutely undiscover- 
able by us. They are not a body of facts, but a body 
of commands and prohibitions. Yet they do not rep- 
resent commands of the inner conscience or of the 
spirit within us; they do not give us any food for the 
spirit. They represent an objective and unalterable 


10 HINDU MYSTICISM 


law realistically conceived, and they relate to desires 
for material comforts in this life or the life in heaven. 
This concept gives us all the principal elements of re- 
ligion except that of a divine person. The acceptance 
of the blessings of this life as gifts from God, and a 
sense of our duty to please Him by submission and 
prayer are, therefore, not implied in this system of 
Vedic sacrifices. What is implied is some great im- — 
personal force which harmonises ourselves and our 
destinies with the happenings and events of the world 
of nature. Instead of God we find here a body of 
commands which demand our obedience and rever- 
ence; but the source of their power and the secret of 
their omniscient character and uncreatedness cannot 
be determined by us through reason or experience. 
But this ritualistic mysticism—if we may be permitted 
thus to call it—must be distinguished from the simple 
feelings and ideas that are found in the hymns them- 
selves. In all probability the latter did not originally 
imply the complicated ritualistic hypotheses of the later 
period. Z 

The forces of nature with their wonderful manifes- 
tations of inexplicable marvels appeared to the early 
sages like great beings endowed with life and person- 
ality. They were treated at times as friendly, but again 
as hostile. Sometimes the mystery of the natural 
phenomena seemed stupifying in its psychological ef- 
fect. The laws of nature were at that time unknown, 
and there was no obstacle to the free flight of the 
imagination. When the Vedic sage saw the sun pro- 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 11 


ceeding in his upward and downward course through 
the sky he cried out in his wonder: 


“Undropped beneath, not fastened firm, how comes it 
That downward turned he falls not downward? 
The guide of his ascending path,—who saw it??? 


The sage is full of wonder that “the sparkling waters 
of all rivers flow into one ocean without ever filling it.” 
He perceives the unalterable course of the sun from 
day to day, and the succession of day and night, and 
he exclaims with delight: “Every day, in unceasing 
interchange with night and her dark wonders, comes 
the dawn with her beautiful ones to reanimate the 
worlds, never failing in her place, never in her time.” 
Again, he is puzzled when thinking whither the shin- 
ing ones of the sky disappear, and he cries forth in 
amazement: 


“Who is it knows, and who can tell us surely 
Where lies the path that leads to the Eternals? 
Their deepest dwellings only we discover, 
And hidden these in distant secret regions.” 


In how many hymns does the singer express his wonder 
that the rough red cow gives soft white milk. To the 
god Indra he cries: 


“Grant me, O God, the highest, best of treasures, 
A judging mind, prosperity abiding, 

Riches abundant, lasting health of body, 

The grace of eloquence, and days propitious.” 


1 This translation is from Kaegi-Arrowsmith, The Rig Veda, 
p. 35. The immediately following translations are taken from 
the same work. 


12 HINDU MYSTICISM 


To the God of the destroying storm he prays: 


“Let me through thy best medicines, O Rudra, 
My life on earth prolong a hundred winters. 
From us dispel all hatred and oppression, 

On every side calamity drive from us. 


Where then, O Rudra, is thy hand of mercy, 
The hand that healing brings and softens sorrow, 
That takes away the ills which the gods send? 
Let me, O mighty one, feel thy forgiveness. 


The hero gladdened me amid tumult 

With greater might when I his aid entreated; 

Like some cool shade from the Sun’s heat protected 
May I attain to Rudra’s grace and refuge.” 


Again when he is penitent he would ask forgiveness 
of the god Varuna, the personification of the all-em- 
bracing heaven, and say: 


“Tf we to any dear and loved companion 
Have evil done, to brother or to neighbour, 
To our own countryman or to a stranger, 
That sin do thou O Varuna forgive us.” 


rs 
“Forgive the wrongs, committed by our fathers, 
What we ourselves have sinned in mercy pardon; 
My own misdeeds do thou O God take from me, 
And for another’s sin let me not suffer.” 
Or, again, 


“Tf ever we deceived like cheating players, 

If consciously we have erred or all unconscious 
According to our sin do not thou punish; 

Be thou the singer’s guardian in thy wisdom.” 


But besides these prayers, we sometimes find poems 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 13 


“composed by the Vedic people, descriptive of their 
varied experiences of ordinary life. Thus a gambler 
gives his experience as follows: 


“My wife has never angered me nor striven, 

Was ever kind to me and my companions; 

Though she was faithful to me, I have spurned her, 
For love of dice, the only thing I value. 


The gambler’s wife deserted mourns; his mother 
Laments her son, she knows not where he wanders. 
And he in debt and trouble, seeking money, 
Remains at night beneath the roof of strangers. 


And when I say that I will play no longer, 
My friends abandon me and all desert me; 
Yet then again I hear the brown dice rattling 
I hasten, like a wanton to her lover.” 


Again we read: 


“The gambler hurries to the gaming table, 

‘Today I'll win,’ he thinks in his excitement. 

The dice inflame his greed, his hopes mount higher ; 
He leaves his winnings all with his opponent.” 


When we read these hymns we see in them the simple 
prayers of a simple primitive people impressed with 
the inexplicable and varied phenomena of a tropical 
climate. They turn to the forces behind the latter as 
personified deities, describing the phenomena and of- 
fering their simple prayers. We find in these prayers 
experiences of simple wonder, of sufferings and of 
simple enjoyments. But when we come to the sacri- 
ficial stage of development we find a religious outlook 
in which the independent simple meanings of the 


14 HINDU MYSTICISM 


hymns possess importance only for their sacrificial 
utterance in particular contexts. During the particular 
ritual observances the different verses were often torn 
out of their contexts and were combined with others 
which apparently had little or no relation with them 
and no conceivable bearing on the performances during 
which they were chanted or uttered. They were simply 
the means for the performance of the sacrifices. Their 
simple meanings as descriptions of things or events or 
phenomena or ideas were dropped from consideration. 
The value attached to them centered about their being 
uttered or chanted in particular Vedic sacrifices in ac- 
cordance with certain sacrificial canons of interpreta- 
tion. The entire significance of these hymns consisted 
either in their use as directions for the performance of 
certain sacrificial duties or in their utterance in these 
sacrifices under prescribed conditions as found in the 
sacrificial manuals, the Brahmanas, which were con- 
sidered as part of the Vedas. Thought and feeling 
were driven from their places of importance in human 
nature, and the whole emphasis was laid on the inter- 
pretation of the Vedic literature as a system of duties 
involving commands and prohibitions, and nothing 
else. Some of these duties were compulsory, while 
others were voluntary in the sense that they had to be 
performed only when one wanted to secure some de- 
sired end unattainable by any means discoverable by 
his reason or experience. 8 

The authority which this system of Vedic injunc- 
tions and prohibitions was supposed to possess was so 
high as to demand the entire submission of one’s will 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 15 


and thought. Their claims did not stand in need of 
any justification by reason or logic, for they were sup- 
posed to be guides in a sphere where reason and ex- 
perience were utterly helpless. The only fruitful way 
in which reason could be employed with regard to 
these Vedic commands was by accepting their author- 
ity and then trying to explain them in such a way that 
their mysterious nature might be reconciled to us. 
These Vedic commands cannot be described as “revela- 
tions” in the ordinary Christian sense of the term; for 
the latter presupposes the existence of a living God 
able and willing to bestow the body of truths that man 
requires, whereas the Vedic commands are devoid of 
any notion of a law-giver. This sacrificial mysticism, 
if it may be so called, does not recognize any God or 
supreme being from whom these commands emanate 
or who reveals them to man. The commands are taken 
as eternal truths, beginningless and immortal, revealing 
themselves to man and demanding man’s submission to 
them. Nevertheless they are not spiritual or inner 
truths revealed from within man himself; they are ex- 
ternal and impersonal commands which contain within 
themselves the inscrutable secrets of nature and of the 
happiness of man. 9 
The fact that the Vedas were regarded as revela- 
tions of eternal truths, truths which no human reason 
asia ever challenge, naturally divested reason of con- 
fidence in its ability to unravel the mysteries of man 
and of the world. Even in the somewhat later days of 
the evolution of Vedic culture, when there grew up a 
school of thinkers who disbelieved the claim that the 


16 HINDU MYSTICISM 


whole of the Vedas were nothing but a body of com- 
mands and prohibitions and who held that there were 
at least some particular portions of the Vedas which 
dealt with the eternal truths of spiritual facts and ex- 
periences of reality, the belief remained unshaken that 
what the Vedas gave one as truths were unshakeable 
and unchallengeable by reason or by experience. This 
means a definite lowering or degradation of reason in 
its capacity as truth-finder. Reason calls for counter- 
reason and leads through an endless regressus without 
ever being able to lead to truth. The Vedas, then, are 
the only repository of the highest truths, and the func- — 
tion of reason is only to attempt to reconcile these 
truths with our experience and sense-observation. It 
is surprising that reason has continued to remain in 
this subordinate position throughout the development 
of Indian religious and philosophical thought almost 
to our own days. No change, no new idea could be 
considered to be right or could be believed by the peo- 
ple, unless it could also be shown that it had the sanc- 
tion of the Vedas. Reason was never trusted as the | 
only true and safe guide. 10 

The word “mysticism” is a European word with a 
definite history. Most European writers have used it 
to denote an intuitive or ecstatic union with the deity, 
through contemplation, communion, or other mental © 
experiences, or to denote the relationship and poten- 
tial union of the human soul with ultimate reality. But 
I should for my present purposes like to give it a 
wider meaning which would include this and the other 
different types of mysticism that I may be discussing 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 17 


in the course of this series of lectures. I should like 
to define mysticism as a theory, doctrine, or view that 
considers reason to be incapable of discovering or of 
realising the nature of ultimate truth, whatever be the 
nature of this ultimate truth, but at the same time be- 
lieves in the certitude of some other means of arriving 
at it. If this definition be accepted, then this ritualistic 
philosophy of the Vedas is the earliest form of mysti- 
cism that is known to India or to the world. This 
Vedic mysticism prepared the way for the rise of the 
other forms of mysticism that sprang up in India. 
Subsequent lectures will deal with these later forms, 
in some of which at least it will be easy to notice their 
similarity to Western types of mysticism with which 
Western readers are more or less familiar. 11 

The main elements of the sacrificial mysticism of | 
the Vedas may be summarised as follows: First, a be- 
lief that the sacrifices when performed with perfect 
accuracy, possess a secret, mysterious power to bring 
about or produce as their effect whatever we may de- 
sire either in this life or in the hereafter. Second, the 
conception of an unalterable law—involved in such 
invariable and unfailing occurrences of effects con- 
sequent upon the performance of these sacrifices. 
Third, an acceptance of the impersonal nature of the 
Vedic literature, as having existed by itself from be- 
ginningless time and as not created or composed by 
any person, human or divine. Fourth, the view that 
the Vedic literature embodies nothing but a system 
of duties involving commands and prohibitions. Fifth, 
a recognition of the supreme authority of the Vedas 


18 HINDU MYSTICISM 


as the only source of the knowledge of ultimate truths 
which are far beyond the powers of human reason. 
Sixth, the view that truth or reality, whether it be of 
the nature of commands or of facts (as was main- 
tained by the later Vedic schools of thought, the Upani- 
shads), could be found once for all in the words of the 
Vedas. Seventh, the belief that the Vedic system of 
duties demands unfailing obedience and submission. 
Two definite characteristics emerge from these: first, 
the transcendent, mysterious, and secret power of the 
sacrifices, replacing the natural forces personified as 
gods; second, the ultimate superiority of the Vedas 
as the source of all truths, and as the unchallengeable 
dictators of our duties, leading to our material well- 
being and happiness. The assumption of the mys- 
terious omnipotence of sacrifices, performed by fol- 
lowing the authoritative injunctions of the Vedas in- 
dependently of reason or logical and discursive 
thought, forms the chief trait of the mysticism of the 
Vedic type. There is nothing here of feeling or even 
of intellect, but a blind submission, not to a person 
but to an impersonal authority which holds within it 
an unalterable and inscrutable law, the secret of all 
powers which we may want to wield in our favor. 12 

The next step in the development of this type of 
mysticism consists in the growth of a school of thought 
which sought to intellectualise the material sacrifices. 
It encouraged the belief that it was quite unneces- 
sary actually to perform the sacrifices requiring the 
expenditure of enormous sums of money for the col- 
lection of materials and for labor. The same results 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 19 


might be as well obtained through certain kinds of 
meditation or reflection. Thus, instead of the actual 
performance of a horse sacrifice, in which the immola- 
tion of a horse is accompanied by other rituals engag- 
ing the services of large numbers of men and the ex- 
penditure of funds such as kings alone could provide, 
one might as well think of the dawn as the head of a 
horse, the sun as its eye, the wind as its life, the heaven 
as its back, the intervening space as its belly, the sky 
as its flesh and the stars as its bones. Such a medi- 
tation, or rather concentrated imagining of the uni- 
verse as a cosmic horse, would, it was maintained, pro- 
duce all the beneficial results that could be expected 
from the performance of an actual horse sacrifice. 
Thus, these attempts to intellectualise sacrifices took 
the form of replacing by meditation the actual sacri- 
fices, and this substitution was believed to produce re- 
sults which were ‘equally beneficial. This meditation 
by substitution gradually took various forms: certain 
letters of the alphabet had, for example, to be thought 
of, or meditated upon, as Brahman or some other deity, 
or as vital functions of the body, or as some personi- 
fied nature deity. This meditation was supposed to 
produce beneficial results. It should not be supposed 
that the sacrificial forms were entirely supplanted by 
these new forms of substitution-meditations. Rather 
did they spring up side by side with them. These forms 
of meditation did not mean prolonged contemplation, 
or any logical process of thinking, but merely the sim- 
ple practice of continually thinking of one entity, 
process, or letter as another entity or process. 13 


20 HINDU MYSTICISM 


Even in modern India there are still many men who 
believe that the repetition of mystical formulas (appar- 
ently meaningless combinations of letters, or the names 
of some deities) is capable of producing beneficial re- 
sults. Even the worship of a round or an oval stone 
as the god Vishnu or Siva, or again the worship of a 
waterjug or an image as a particular god or goddess, is 
nothing but a modified form of substitution-medita- 
tion, one thing being considered and meditated upon 
as another. These practices are to be distinguished 
from the ordinary spells and incantations commonly 
believed in by uneducated people. These substitution- 
meditations are often believed to be productive of vir- 
tue. They form the normal modes of worship of the 
ordinary Hindu and have now taken the place of the 
old sacrifices. Nevertheless the old Vedic sacrifices 
are also to a certain extent performed _on occasions of 
marriages and other domestic ceremonies, as an in- 
dispensable part of those ceremonies which still claim 
to belong entirely to the Vedic order. 14 

But, refraining from further references to modern 
India, let us pick up our thread of discussion and note 
the next stage in the development of the substitution- 
meditations. Although the latter were in their con- 
ception doubtless as mystical and magical as the old 
sacrifices, they represent an advance. For in them 
the mystical powers are supposed to reside not in ex- 
ternal performances, but in specific forms of medita- 
tion or thinking. This represents an approach toward 
a consciousness of self and toward a recognition of 
the mystical powers of thought and meditation of a 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 21 


peculiar type. But it was only after an almost endless 
and fruitless search that the highest idea of self and 
the highest idea of world mystery and its solution 
dawned in the minds of the Vedic thinkers. What we 
find at this stage is merely that the Vedic thinkers had 
become conscious of the activity of thought and of 
imagination, and had begun to realise that the activity 
involved in thinking ought to be considered to be as 
potent a power as the activity involved in the actual 
performances of material sacrifices. Man’s inner 
thought and his performance of sacrificial duties in 
the world outside are both regarded as capable of pro- 
ducing mysterious changes and transformations in na- 
ture which would benefit man. Passages are to be 
found in the literature where the vital and other inner 
processes of the self are compared with a sacrifice. 
The three periods of human life are considered as 
being the same as the three bruisings of the sacri- 
ficial plant soma; and the functions of hungering, eat- 
ing and begetting are considered to be the same as the 
different ceremonies of the soma sacrifice. Logical 
thinking in Vedic times seems to have taken the form 
of crude generalisation. The fundamental operation 
of logical thinking is generalisation based on a scru- 
tiny of facts of experience, noting differences and 
avoiding false identifications. But in the early stages 
of Vedic thinking, generalisations were very crude 
and based on insufficient data, slurring points of dif- 
ference and making bold identifications. Thus from 
the fact that we perspire through heat, there arose 
the cosmological belief that out of fire there came wa- 


22 HINDU MYSTICISM 


ter. From observation of three principal colors, red, 
white and black (the colors of fire, water and earth) 
sprang the idea that the universe is made up of the 
three elements, viz., fire, water and earth. It was 
thought that wherever there was red, it was due to 
the existence of fire, wherever there was white it was 
due to the existence of water, and wherever there was 
~ black, it was due to the existence of earth. 15 

By a similar loose process of generalisation the 
word Brahman came to denote the Vedic verses, truth, 
sacrifices, and knowledge. Etymologically the word 
means “The Great.’’ Probably it signified vaguely and 
obscurely the mysterious power underlying these sac- 
rifices and the substitution-meditations. Both the ideas 
involved in the conception of Brahman as the highest 
power and the highest knowledge were derived from 
the notion of the sacrifices. Thus we read in the cele- 
brated man-hymn of the Rig Veda that the gods offered 
the supreme man as a sacrifice and that from this great 
oblation all living creatures, as well as the atmosphere, 
sky, earth and the four quarters, came into being. 
Three parts of this supreme man transcend the world 
while one part of him is the whole world about us; and 
yet, he is himself both the sacrifice and the object of 
the sacrifice. 

But while I have just emphasised the importance of 
the mysticism of sacrifice in the development of the 
mystical conception of Brahman as the supreme being, 
it would be wrong to hold that the mysticism of the 
sacrifices is alone responsible for the evolution of the 
great concept of Brahman. Side by side with the con- 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 23 


cept found in the Rig Veda of the many gods as per- 
sonifications of the forces of nature, there was also 
growing a tendency toward the conception of one su- 
preme being, and this tendency gradually gained in 
force. Thus, in Rig Veda X. 114.5 we find a verse in 
which it is said that the deity is one, though he is called 
by various names. One of the hymns (R. V. X. 129), 
again, runs as follows: 


“Then there was neither Aught nor Naught, no air nor sky 
beyond. 

What covered all? Where rested all? In watery gulf pro- 
found? 

Nor death was then, nor deathlessness, nor change of night 
and day. 

That one breathed calmly, self-sustained; naught else beyond 
it lay. 

Gloom hid in gloom existed first—one sea eluding view. 

The one a void in chaos wrapt, by inward fervor grew. 

Within it first arose desire, the primal germ of mind, 

Which nothing with existence links, as ages searching find. 

The kindling ray that shot across the dark and drear abyss,— 

Was it beneath or high aloft? What bard can answer this? 

There fecundating powers were found and mighty forces 
strove,— 

A self-supporting mass beneath, and energy above. 

Who knows and who ever told, from whence this vast crea- 


tion rose? 

No gods had then been born. Who then can e’er the truth 
disclose 

Whence sprang this world, whether framed by hand divine 
or no,— 


Its lord in heaven alone can tell, if he can show.” 


2 The translation is taken from Muir’s Original Sanskrit 
Texts, Vol. V. 


24 HINDU MYSTICISM 


Again, in the Atharva Veda (X, 7.) we find a hymn 
dedicated to Skambha where the different parts of this 
deity are identified not only with the different parts of 
the material world but also with a number of moral 
qualities such as faith, austere fervor, truthfulness, 
etc. All the thirty-three gods of the Vedas are con- 
tained within him and bow down to him. He is also 
called Brahman, ‘The Great.” In the next hymn of 
the Atharva Veda (X. 8) Brahman is adored and 
spoken of as presiding over the past and the future, 
and he is said to be residing within our hearts and to 
be the self which never decays but is self-existent and 
self-satisfied. This appears to be very much like the 
idea of the Upanishads of which I shall speak in my 
next lecture. In the Shatapatha Brahmana, also, we 
hear of Brahman as having created the gods; and in 
the Taittiriya Brahmana, Brahman is said to have cre- 
ated the gods and the entire world. 17 

Thus we find that the conception of one great being 
who created_the world and the gods, and who is also 
the power presiding over our lives and spirits, was 
gradually dawning in the minds of a few people. And 
though the sacrificial theory tended to lead away from 
the ordinary meanings of these Vedic hymns, the de- 
velopment of the sacrificial theory itself also made for 
the conception of some mysterious force which recon- 
ciled the destinies of the world and nature with those 
of men and their desires. This mysterious power, it 
was held, is resident not only in things external but 
also in activities of the inner life; it manifests itself in 
the power of thought, as is exemplified by the mysteri- 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 25 


ous efficacy of the substitution-meditations. What was 
the nature of this mysterious power? It is difficult to 
answer this question. We have seen that its concep- 
tion varied in significance according to the mode of 
its development and the sources from which it evolved. 
But when once the conception was formed, all these 
constituent notions were mixed together. People re- 
garded Brahman as the highest, but they did not know 
how Brahman was to be known. Those who started 
with the sacrificial bias, thought substitution-medi- 
tations to be the way to a knowledge of Brahman. 
And so we find various instructions regarding medi- 
tation upon objects, such as the wind, life, fire, etc., 
—even upon unmeaning letters. 18 

But parallel with this tendency went another, viz., 
an intellectual search after Brahman, the highest, 
which displayed a contempt for sacrifices. We find 
Brahmins going out of their own sphere to warrior 
castes and kings for secret instruction about the na- 
ture of Brahman. There are narratives in which we 
find that kings belonging to the warrior caste fill proud 
Brahmins with a sense of discomfiture by exposing the 
ignorance of the latter concerning the secret nature of 
Brahman. Thus Balaki Gargya approached King 
Ajatashatru with the request to be allowed to explain 
to him the nature of Brahman. He then tried twelve 
times in succession to define Brahman as the presiding 
person in the sun, moon, lightning, ether, wind, fire, 
water, etc.; and in each case King Ajatashatru refuted 
him by showing the lower position that such presiding 
persons occupy in the whole of the universe, whereas 


26 HINDU MYSTICISM 


Brahman should be that which is the highest. Again, 
we find another narrative in which five Brahmins meet 
and discuss the question, “What is our Atman and 
what is Brahman?” They proceed to Uddalaka Aruni 
with the question. When Uddalaka mistrusts his abil- » 
ity to answer the question, all six go to King Ashva- 
pati Kaikeya for instruction. King Ashvapati first 
asks them what it is that they worship as Atman or 
Brahman, anticipating their error that they still regard 
Atman or Brahman as a new kind of external divinity. 
The six Brahmins explain Atman in succession as the 
heaven, the sun, the wind, space, water, and the earth, 
and in so doing assume it to be an objective and an ex- 
ternal deity more or less like the old Vedic deities. 
This shows us a stage of thought in which people 
somehow understood Brahman to be the highest prin- 
ciple, but yet found it difficult to shake off their old 
conceptions of external deities or personifications of 
nature. Again we find Sanatkumara instructing Narada 
regarding the nature of Brahman. In so doing Sanat- 
kumara starts from “Name,” by which he probably 
understands all conceptual knowledge. With his pe- 
culiar logic, which is difficult for us to follow, he ob- 
serves that speech is greater than name, that mind is 
greater than speech, that imagination is greater than 
mind, and so on. Passing in succession through a 
number of such concepts, from lower to higher, he 
ultimately stops at that which is absolutely great, the 
unlimited, beyond which there is nothing and within 
which is comprehended all that is to be found in the 
outer and the inner world. 19 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM ai 


The most important point to be noted in the devel- 
opment of this stage of thought is that worship or 
prayer is possible only as directed toward a deity con- 
ceived with limited powers and as occupying a sub- 
ordinate position in the universe. But with reference - 
to that which is conceived as the highest truth and the 
highest power, there is no longer the possibility of ex- 
ternal forms of worship. We shall find in the next 
lecture not only that it is not possible to worship Brah- 
man but that it is not possible to reach Brahman by 
logical thought or any kind of conceptual apprehen- 
sion. ‘Thus in a Upanishadic story, referred to by 
Shankara, we are told of a person who approached a 
sage Bahva and sought from him instructions regard- 
ing the nature of Brahman. Bahva did not speak. He 
was asked a second time; still he did not speak. Yet 
again he was asked, but still he did not speak. When 
the inquirer became annoyed by this, Bahva told him 
that he was, from the first, by his silence telling him 
how Brahman was to be described: Brahman is silence 
and so cannot be represented in speech. There are, 
however, unmistakable indications that there were still 
some who believed that even the highest could be 
worshipped and adored and that men could still sub- 
mit themselves to Him as to the highest personal God 
who comprehends us all and controls us all. But the 
idea that was gradually gaining ground with some of 
the most important sages, and which will be expounded 
in the next lecture, was that Brahman, as the highest, 
is no ordinary personal God who can be induced by 
worship to favor us or who can be approached by the 


28 HINDU MYSTICISM 


pure intellect or even by feeling. Brahman still retains 
its mysterious character as the highest power, truth, 
being and bliss which can neither be worshipped nor 
known by ordinary means of knowledge. But its na- 
ture can be realised, and realised so perfectly that the 
realisation will be like the bursting of a shell of light, 
a revelation which will submerge the whole of one’s life 
together with all that it contains. The next lecture 
will describe this type of mysticism of the Upani- 
shads, which represents one of the highest and best, 
and undoubtedly one of the most distinctive, types of 
mysticism that India has produced. 20 

The Upanishads form the concluding portions of 
the Vedic literature, both chronologically from the 
point of view of the development of ideas. They were 
composed later than the priestly manuals, the Brah- 
manas, and the manuals of substitution-meditations in 
the Aranyaka literature, and they form the most au- 
thoritative background of all later Hindu philosophical 
thought. They possess the high authority of the Vedas 
and are the source of the highest wisdom and truth. 
The word “Upanishad” has been interpreted etymo- 
logically by Shankara to mean “that which destroys 
all ignorance and leads us to Brahman.” It has also 
been interpreted to mean a secret or mystical doc- 
trine, or a secret instruction, or a secret and confiden- 
tial sitting. I have elsewhere, in my History of Indian 
Philosophy, shown how all the different systems of 
orthodox Indian philosophy look to the Upanishads for 
light and guidance, differently interpreting the Upani- 
shad texts to suit their own specific systems of thought. 


SACRIFICIAL MYSTICISM 29 


Eleven of these, Isha, Kena, Katha, Prashna, Mun- 
daka, Mandukya, Taittiriya, Aitareya, Chandogya, 
Brihadaranyaka, and Svetashvatara, are probably the 
oldest. They vary greatly in length: while the Isha 
Upanishad would occupy but a single printed page, 
Brihadaranyaka would occupy at least fifty pages. 
Since the longer ones probably contain compositions 
of different periods and of different authorship they 
represent various stages of evolution and exhibit dif- 
ferent intentions. Being the concluding portions of 
the Vedas, they are called the Vedanta. Their inter- 
pretations by different later writers gave rise to differ- 
ent systems of Vedanta philosophy. (One of these 
well-known forms of Vedanta philosophy was made 
known to the western world for the first time by a 
gifted Hindu, Svami Vivekananda.) The Upanishads, 
themselves, however, do not seem to have been written 
in a systematic, well-connected and logical form. They | 
are mystical experiences of the soul gushing forth } 
from within us; they sparkle with the beams of a new/ 
light; they quench our thirst, born at their very sight. 
It was of these that the German philosopher Schopen- 
hauer said: “How does every line display its firm and 
definite and throughout harmonious meaning. From 
every sentence deep, original, and sublime thoughts 
arise and the whole is pervaded by a high and holy 
and earnest spirit. . . . In the whole world there is 
no study, except that of the originals, so beneficial 
and so elevating as that of the Upanishads. It has 
been the solace of my life, it will be the solace of my 
death.” Cases are known in which even Christian 


30 HINDU MYSTICISM 


missionaries, sent out to India to teach church doc- 
trines to clergymen or to preach Christianity among 
the Indians, became so fascinated by the high and lofty 
teachings of the Upanishads that they introduced the 
teaching of the Upanishads in the Church and as a 
consequence were compelled to resign their posts. To 
Hindus of all denominations there is nothing higher 
and holier than the inspired sayings of the Upanishads. 
To them we shall address our attention in the next 
lecture. 21 


LECTURE Il 
MYSTICISM OF THE’/UPANISHADS 


LECTURE II 
PA BeVY S TICISM OF spn ESUPANISHADS 


N the last lecture reference was made to a few of 
the monotheistic hymns of the Rig Veda and the 
Atharva Veda. Others might be cited; for instance, 
the adoration hymn to Hiranyagarbha (R. V. X. 121) 
who is therein described as the lord of the universe. 


“In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, 

Born as the only lord of all existence. 

This earth he settled firm and heaven established: 
What god shall we adore with our oblations? 
Who gives us breath, who gives us strength, whose bidding 
All creatures must obey, the bright gods even; 
Whose shade is death, whose shadow life immortal: 
What god shall we adore with our oblations? 

Who by his might alone became the monarch 

Of all that breathes, of all that wakes or slumbers, 
Of all, both man and beast, the lord eternal: 

What god shall we adore with our oblations? 
Whose might and majesty these snowy mountains, 
The ocean and the distant stream exhibit ; 

Whose arms extended are these spreading regions: 
What god shall we adore with our oblations? 

Who made the heavens bright, the earth enduring, 
Who fixed the firmament, the heaven of heavens; 
Who measured out the air’s extended spaces: 

What god shall we adore with our oblations ?’’4 


1 Translation taken from Kaegi-Arrowsmith, The Rig Veda, 
p. 88 f. 


33 


34 HINDU MYSTICISM 


Or one may point to such hymns as the following: 


“Who is our father, our creator, maker, 

Who every place doth know and every creature, 
By whom alone to gods their names were given, 
To him all other creatures go to ask him.’ 


But such hymns are not numerous and probably be- 
long to the last epoch of the composition of the Vedic 
hymns. Most of the Vedic hymns exhibit a conspicu- 
ous tendency toward the polytheistic personification of 
nature. From most of them the monotheistic tendency 
is well-nigh absent. 1 

So, also, the literature of the sacrificial manuals, 
the Brahmanas, emphasizes the doctrine of the sacri- 
fice. The adoration hymns of the different gods have 
lost their independent value and are esteemed only on 
account of the fact that these verses, sometimes muti- 
lated and torn out of their context, are uttered or 
chanted in connection with various sacrificial rituals. 
This literature also contains some passages of a mono- 
theistic or pantheistic character; but the emphasis is 
almost entirely on the performance of the sacrifices. 
In the Aranyaka literature, which contains the substi- 
tution-meditations, the value and power of thought is 
realized for the first time. But it is only in the Upani- 
shads that one finds the earliest instances of a sincere 
and earnest quest after Brahman, the highest and the 
greatest. 2 

The most important characteristic which disting- 
uishes the science of Brahman from the science of the 


2R. V. X. 82.3, as translated by Kaegi-Arrowsmith. 


IN THE UPANISHADS 35 


sacrifices consists in the fact that the former springs 
entirely from inner, spiritual longings, while the latter 
is based almost wholly on mundane desires. The sci- 
ence of sacrifice aimed at the acquirement of merit, 
which could confer all the blessings of life in conse- 
quence of due obedience to the Vedic and ritualistic in- 
junctions and prohibitions. The science of Brahman, 
however, did not seek any ordinary blessings of life. 
It proceeded from the spiritual needs of our soul which 
could be satisfied only by attaining the highest aim. 
All that is mortal, all that is transient and evanescent, 
all that gives men the ordinary joys of life, such as 
wealth or fame confer, are but brute pleasures and 
brute satisfactions, which please only so long as men 
allow themselves to be swayed by the demands of their 
senses. In the hurry and bustle of our modern life, 
of rapid movements over land, sea and air, in this age 
of prolific scientific inventions and appliances which 
add to our material comforts and luxury, in this age 
of national jealousies and hatreds, which in the name 
of patriotism and freedom often try to enslave others 
or monopolize the necessities and luxuries of life for 
the use of the people of a particular country, it is 
easy to forget that we have any needs other than the 
purely material ones. With all the boasted culture 
of our modern age, with all our advancement of sci- 
ence and progress, do we ever stop to think just what 
we mean by progress? We have no doubt discovered 
many new facts of nature, and brought many natural 
forces under our control. But like vultures soaring 
high in the air, with greedy eyes fixed on the bones 


36 HINDU MYSTICISM 


and flesh of the carrion in the field below, are we not, 
in all our scientific soarings, often turning our greedy 
eyes to sense gratifications and trying to bind science 
to the attainment of new comforts and luxuries? 
The new comforts and luxuries soon become absolute 
necessities, and we eagerly press forward to the in- 
vention of some other new modes of sense gratifica- 
tion and luxury. Science debased to the end of spread- 
ing death and of enslaving humanity, or to the end of 
procuring newer and newer sensations, a life spent in 
the whirlpool of fleeting pleasures, varied, subtle, and 
new, and in the worship of the almighty dollar is what 
most of us tend to call progress. We live more for the 
body than for the soul. Our body is our soul; our body 
is our highest Brahman. The story is told in the Chan- 
dogya Upanishads that Virochana and Indra went to 
Prajapati to receive instructions regarding the nature 
of the self, or of Brahman the highest. Prajapati gave 
a course of false instructions, apparently to test the 
powers of discrimination of his two pupils Virochana 
and Indra. He asked them to get themselves well- 
dressed and appear at their best, and then to look into 
a mirror. When they did so and saw the image of 
their own bodies in the mirror, Prajapati told them 
that it was their well-dressed bodies reflected in the 
mirror that was the true self and the highest Brahman; 
and they went away satisfied with the answer. Indra, 
indeed, later returned to Praiapati dissatisfied with the 
answer; but Virochana (probably an old ancestor of 
ours) was satisfied with the answer that there is noth- 


IN THE UPANISHADS 37 


ing higher than what appears to our senses, our earthly 
body, and our earthly joys. 3 

But what a different answer do we get from Mai- 
treyi, the wife of Yajnavalkya in the Brihadaranyaka 
Upanishad II. 4. Yajnavalkya, wishing to become a 
hermit, explained to his two wives Maitreyi and Katy- 
ayani that he wished to divide his wealth between them 
so that they might live independently while he was 
away seeking his higher spiritual destiny. But Mai- 
treyi replied: “Well, sir, if you could give me all the 
wealth of the world, could I become immortal by that?” 
“No,” said Yajnavalkya, “you will only live in pleas- 
ure as the rich men do, but I can promise you no hope 
of immortality through wealth.” Maitreyi replied, 
“Well, sir, what shall I do with that with which I can- 
not be immortal? Tell me if you know anything by 
which I may be immortal.” rt 

It is this spiritual craving for immortality that dis- 
tinguishes the mental outlook of the sages of the 
Upanishads from our own. Yet this desire for im- 
mortality is no mere desire for personal survival con- 
tinuing the enjoyment of pleasures under newer and 
happier conditions of life, whether in this world or in 
heaven. This quest for immortality, as it is found in 
the Upanishads, is in no sense a yearning for personal 
immortality, the decayless, diseaseless, deathless ex- 
istence of the individual with his body in full vigor of 
youth. Neither is it the desire for a bodiless existence 
of a self fond of sensual joys and sense gratifications 
and fettered by all the needs and necessities of mun- 
dane relations and mundane gratifications. This quest 


38 HINDU MYSTICISM 


for immortality is identical with the quest of the high- 
est self, the highest truth and reality, the highest 
Brahman. It is the perception and realization of the 
inner spring of our life and the inmost spirituality of 
man as he is within himself, beyond the range of sense 
_and of discursive thought. If it were a sense-feeling 
——color, taste, touch, or sound—it might easily be 
pointed out as this or that sense-datum. It is an in- 
effable, non-conceptual, inner experience, lying in its 
own unfathomable depth. When a lump of salt is 
thrown into the sea, it is entirely dissolved in it; by 
no means can any part of the lump be recovered in 
its original form, but every part of the water tastes 
saline. Similarly, when this stage of supra-conscious- 
ness (prajnana) is reached, all ordinary experiences 
are submerged and dissolved in this great, infinite, 
limitless, homogeneous experience. Like the calm and 
changeless consciousness of deep, dreamless sleep, is 
this stage where all duality has vanished: there is no 
person who knows, nor anything that he is aware 
of. Ordinary knowledge presupposes a difference be- 
tween ourselves, our knowledge, and that of which we 
are aware. When I see a color, there is the “I”? which 
sees, there is the knowledge of the color and also the 
color itself. When I smell, there is the “I” that smells 
and the smell; when I think, there is the “I” that thinks 
and that which is thought; when I speak there is the 
“T” that speaks and that which is spoken. No one 
would for a moment think of identifying these. But at 
this stage of the non-conceptual intuition of the self 
—an unspeakable, ineffable experience—there is no 


IN THE UPANISHADS 39 


trace of any duality, and we have one whole of bliss- 
ful experience wherein is distinguished no one that 
knows and nothing that he is aware of. All ordinary 
states of knowledge imply a duality of knower and 
that which is known; but this is an experience where 
all duality has vanished. 5 

Nevertheless this experience is not something which 
is wholly beyond, or wholly out of all relation with, 
our conscious states of dual experience. For it is the 
basis, or background, as it were, of all our ordinary 
knowledge involving the knower and the known. In 
music, the different notes and tones cannot be grasped 
separately from and independently of the music itself, 
and when we are busy in apprehending separately the 
different notes we miss the music or the harmony 
which is in itself a whole of experience that cannot be 
taken in parts, in the multiplicity of the varied notes. 
So it is with this ineffable experience, which in reality 
underlies all our ordinary experiences and states of 
knowledge as the basis or ground of them all; when we 
are lost in the discursive multiplicity of our ordinary 
‘experience, we miss this underlying reality. But when 
once again we are in touch with it, our so-called per- 
sonality is as it were dissolved in it, and there ensues 
that infinitude of blissful experience in which all dis- 
tinctions are lost. Whatever is dear to me, as e. g., 
father, mother, wife, money, fame, etc., is so because I 
love my own self so dearly. It is because I can find 
the needs of my self best realized through these that 
I love these. None of these can be ends in themselves ; 
it is only the self that can be an end unto itself, ir- 


40 HINDU MYSTICISM 


respective of any other ulterior end or motive. None 
of the many-sided interests, desires, and activities of 
the self represent the self in its entirety or in its es- 
sence. It is only this supra-conscious experience, 
which actually underlies them all, that can be called the 
real self and that for which everything else exists. 
Everything else is dear to me because my self is dear 
to me; but this supra-conscious experience underlies 
the so-called personality, or self, as its very essence, 
truth and final reality. 6 

It is indeed difficult for us, with the traditions and 
associations of our modern world, to believe in the 
reality of this intuitional experience, unless we attempt 
to realize it ourselves—unless, by turning our minds 
entirely away from sense-objects and sense-enjoy- 
ments, we deliberately, with faith and firmness, 
plunge into the depths of this new kind of experience. 
It cannot be expressed in words or understood by con- 
ceptual thought; it reveals itself only to supra-con- 
scious experience. The language of the sages of the 
Upanishads seems strange to us; but we cannot hope 
to understand a thing of which we have had no ex- 
perience. Talk to a child of ten about the romantic 
raptures of love felt by a pair of lovers, or of the 
maddening intoxication of sense cravings; what would 
he understand of it? Talk to a Greenlander about the 
abominable heat of an African desert; will he be able 
to imagine it? When an experience is to be realized, 
the powers of mere logical thinking or of abstraction 
or of constructive imagination are not sufficient for the 
purpose. Only another realization of the same experi- 


IN THE UPANISHADS 41 


ence can testify to its truth. We are here concerned 
with an experience which is non-conceptual, intuitive, 
and ultimate. But, what is more, subtle, fine and 
formless as it is, it is said to be the source, basis, and 
ground of everything else. According to a story told in 
the Chandogya Upanishad VI, when Shvetaketu re- 
turned after\a stay of twelve years at the house of his 
preceptor, where he studied all the Vedas, he became 
arrogant, considered himself to be a wise man, and 
hardly ever talked with others. His father said to 
him: ‘Well, Shvetaketu, what have you learned that 
you seem to think yourself so wise? Do you know 
that which when once known everything else becomes 
known’ When you once know what iron is, you 
know all that can be made out of iron, for these are 
in essence nothing but iron; we can distinguish the 
iron vessels from iron only by their specific forms and 
names. But whatever may be their names and forms, 
the true essence in them all, whether they be needles, 
pans or handles, is nothing but iron. It is only that 
you find therein so many forms and names. What are 
these names and forms worth without the essence? It 
is the essence, the iron, that manifests itself in so 
many forms and names; when this iron is known, all 
that is made of iron is also known. It is the ineffable 
reality, the ultimate being which is the essence of 
everything else. As rivers which flow into the sea 
lose all their individuality in it and cannot be distin- 
guished, so all divergent things lose their individuality 
and distinctness when they are merged in this highest 
being, the ultimate reality from which they have all 


42 HINDU MYSTICISM 


sprung forth. Fine and subtle though this experience 
be, yet it is in reality the entire universe of our knowl- 
edge. A small seed of an oak tree when split open 
reveals nothing that we can call worth noting, yet it is 
this fine kernel of the seed that holds within it the 
big oak tree.” 7 

The chief features of this Upanishad mysticism 
are the earnest and sincere quest for this spiritual il- 
lumination, the rapturous delight and force that char- 
acterize the utterances of the sages when they speak 
of the realization of this ineffable experience, the ul- 
timate and the absolute truth and reality, and the im- 
mortality of all mortal things. Yet this quest is not 
the quest of the God of the theists. This highest real- 
ity is no individual person separate from us, or one 
whom we try to please, or whose laws and commands 
we obey, or to whose will we submit with reverence 
and devotion. It is, rather, a totality of partless, sim- 
ple and undifferentiated experience which is the root 
of all our ordinary knowledge and experience and 
which is at once the ultimate essence of our self and 
the highest principle of the universe, the Brahman or 
the Atman. There is, indeed, another current of 
thought, evident in several passages of different Upani- 
shads, in which Brahman is conceived and described 
as the theistic God. This will be dealt with separately 
later on. The special characteristic of the line of 
thought that has now been described is a belief in a 
superior principle which enlivens our life, thoughts, 
actions, desires and feelings, which is the inmost heart 
of the self of man, the immortal and undying reality 


IN THE UPANISHADS 43 


unaffected by disease and death, and which is also the 
ultimate and absolute reality of the universe. 8 

A story is told in the Katha Upanishad according 
to which King Vajashravasa made a sacrifice involving 
a gift of all the valuables that he possessed. When 
everything of the sort had been given away, he madea 
supplementary gift of his cows which were all old and 
useless. His son Naciketas, finding that these gifts 
would be more embarassing than useful to the recip- 
ient, disapproved of his father’s action. He thought 
that his father had not finished giving his “all” until 
he, his son, was also given away. So he asked his 
father, “To whom are you going to give me?” He 
was dear to his father; so his father did not like this 
question and remained silent. But when the question 
was again and again repeated, the father lost his tem- 
per and said, “I give you over to death.” Then Naci- 
ketas went to the place of Yama, the king of death, 
where he remained fasting for three days and nights. 
Yama, willing to appease him, requested him to take 
any boons that pleased him. WNaciketas replied that 
men do not know what happens to people when they 
have passed from earthly life, whether they still con- 
tinue to exist or whether they cease to exist; and he 
requested Yama to answer this question on which there 
were sO many divergent opinions. Yama in answer 
said that this was a very difficult question and that 
even the gods did not know what becomes of man 
after he passes away from his earthly life; that, there- 
fore, he would rather give Naciketas long life, big 
estates, gold in abundance, horses, elephants, and 


44 HINDU MYSTICISM 


whatever else in the way of earthly enjoyment might 
seem to him desirable. But the philosophical quest 
was dearer to Naciketas than all the earthly goods 
that the king of death could bestow upon him. Money, 
he thought, can not satisfy man; money is of use only 
so long as a man lives, and he can live only so long 
as death does not take him away. This quest of the 
ultimate destiny of man, of his immortal essence, is 
itself the best and the highest end that our hearts may 
pursue. So Naciketas preferred to solve this mys- 
tery and riddle of life rather than to obtain all the 
riches of the world and all the comforts that they 
could purchase. 9 

The king of death appreciated the wisdom of Naci- 
ketas’ choice. He explained that there are two paths, 
the path of the good and the path of the pleasant, and 
that they are different paths, leading to two entirely 
different goals. The mad hankering after riches can 
only justify itself by binding us with ties of attach- 
ment to sense-pleasures which are short-lived and 
transitory. It is only the spiritual longing of man 
after the realization of his highest, inmost, truest, and 
most immortal essence that is good in itself, though 
it does not appeal to greedy people who are always 
hankering after money. Desire for money blinds our 
eyes, and we fail to see that there is anything higher 
than the desire for riches, or that there is anything 
intrinsically superior to our ordinary mundane life of 
sense-pleasures and sense-enjoyments. The nature of 
the higher sphere of life and of the higher spiritual 
experiences cannot be grasped by minds which are al- 


IN THE UPANISHADS 45 


ways revolving in the whirlpool of mad desires for 
riches and sense-enjoyments. As the sage, in his se- 
rene enjoyment of spiritual experiences, may well 
think sense-pleasures dull, insipid, and valueless, so 
the multitude who live a worldly life of ordinary 
pleasures and enjoyments, fail to perceive the existence 
of this superior plane of life and the demands of the 
spirit for the realization of its immortal essence. They 
think that nothing exists higher and greater than this 
mundane life of ordinary logical thought and sense- 
enjoyments. Most men live on this ordinary level of 
life; they see, hear, taste, touch and smell. They 
think and they argue. They have a mind which thinks, 
feels, and wills, and they have senses which seek their 
own gratification. They employ the former in the 
service of the latter and every day discover newer and 
subtler ways of sense-gratification; they also employ 
the latter to serve the former by furnishing sense data 
to guide and check the course of logical thought and 
the development of science. The more men, upon 
comparing opinions, find themselves agreeing that they 
possess nothing of a more lofty character, the more 
they cease to believe in the validity and truth of the ex- 
istence of anything undying in man. They fail to no- 
tice that the life they are living has had the effect of 
chilling and freezing the clear flowing stream of spir- 
itual experiences and of stifling the spiritual instincts 
and longings of the soul. Generations of lives spent 
without once turning the eyes to the spiritual light 
within have served to build up traditions, beliefs, and 
tendencies of such an order that faith in the existence 


46 HINDU MYSTICISM 


of the higher spirituality of man is lost. Discourse 
about the spirituality of man in its highest sense ap- 
pears to most men to be no more than a myth of by- 
gone days or the result of the undue nervous excitation 
or heated imagination of a religious intoxication. The 
net result of our modern education, civilization, and 
culture has been the disappearance of the belief that 
there is anything higher than the gratification of man’s 
primitive instincts under such checks as society re- 
quires, the pursuit of the physical sciences, and the 
successful employment of the art of reasoning for the 
satisfaction of all the diverse interests of human be- 
ings. So Yama, the king of death, says to Naciketas 
that the majority of the people do not believe that there 
is anything higher than the ordinary mundane life, be- 
ing content with the common concerns and interests of 
life; that it is only the few who feel this higher call 
and are happy to respond to it and to pursue a course 
of life far above the reach of the common man. 10 

But what is this undying spiritual essence, or exist- 
ence? Cannot our powers of reasoning, as they are 
employed in philosophical discussion or logical argu- 
ments, discover it? If they can, then at its best it can 
be nothing loftier than thought and can not be consid- 
ered as the highest principle by which even thought it- 
self and all conscious processes, as well as the func- 
tioning of all sense-operations, are enlivened and vital- 
ized. So Yama tells Naciketas that this highest spir- 
itual essence in us cannot be known by discursive rea- 
son. Only persons who have realized this truth can 
point this out to us as an experience which is at once 


IN THE UPANISHADS 47 


self-illuminating and blissful and which is entirely dif- 
ferent from all else that is known to us. Once it is thus 
exhibited, those who have the highest moral elevation 
and disinclination to worldly enjoyments can grasp it 
by an inner intuitive contact with the reality itself 
(adhyatmayoga). This truth is indeed the culmination 
of all the teaching of the Vedas. 11 


To Naciketas’ question as to what becomes of men |“ 


when they leave this earthly life, Yama’s answer is that 
no one is ever born and no one ever dies. Birth and 
death pertain only to our physical bodies, but our es- 
sence is never born and never dies. The birth and 
death of the physical body may well be explained by 
reference to physical causes, and there is not much of a 
mystery therein. But man cannot be identified with 
his body, nor can he be identified simply with the life 
which he has in common with all other animals, and 
even with plants. Life, in a large measure, seems to be 
nothing but a harmonious functioning of the inner or- 
gans of the body; but no one would say that these 
movements of the organs can be called “man.” There 
is a superior principle which vitalises and quickens the 
process of life, enlivens the activity of thought, moves 
the senses to their normal and regular operations, 
which is realized, or intuited, as the very essence of 
our inner illumination, and which is also the highest 
and ultimate principle underlying all things. 12 

We are here face to face with the real mysticism of 
the Upanishads. This highest essence of man, the self, 
the Brahman, is difficult of perception; it is hidden, as 
in a deep cavern, in that deathless being who exists 


48 HINDU MYSTICISM 


from the beginning of all time and beyond all time. It 
is the subtlest, the smallest of the small and yet the 
greatest of the great. It exists changeless and just the 
same one when everything else that it has vitalized has 
ceased to exist. This, our inmost self, cannot be known 
by much learning or scholarship, nor by sharp intelli- 
gence, nor by strong memory. It can only be known, 
or intuited, by the person to whom it reveals its own 
nature. In one place we are told that it can be in- 
tuited only by an inner, direct, and immediate touch. 
In another place it is said that it can only be perceived 
by those who have practised the perceiving of fine 
truths by a superfine intelligence of the highest order 
(Katha I. 3.12). The path to this superior intuition 
is like the edge of a sharp razor, dangerous and diffi- 
cult. It is beyond all sense-knowledge; and he who 
intuits this secret truth of the beginningless, endless, 
unchangeable and eternal overcomes all death. For, 
once one realizes oneself to be identical with this high- 
est principle, death and the fear of it sink into insignifi- 
cant, illusory nothingness. 13 

There is, however, another line of thought running 
through the different Upanishads in which Brahman 
appears as the supreme Lord from whom everything 
has proceeded and who is the source of all energy. 
Thus in the Kena Upanishad we find the query: “By 
whose will and directed by whom does the mind work, 
and directed by whom did life first begin? By whose 
will does the organ of speech work, and led by whom 
do the eye and the ear perform their respective func- 
tions?’ Then comes the answer: “It is from Him 


IN THE UPANISHADS 49 


that the organ of speech, the ear, the eye, the mind and 
life have all derived their powers; He is the thought 
of thought, the mind of mind, and the life of life. So 
neither mind nor eye, neither ear nor speech, can tell 
us anything about Him, because neither the eye nor 
the ear nor the mind can reach Him, but He alone is 
the agent operative through all these organs and mak- 
ing the eye perceiver, the ear hearer, the mind a thinker 
and the life a living force. But He, in his own nature, 
cannot be grasped by any one of these.” 14 

A story is told to illustrate the greatness of Brahman 
as the supreme and all-powerful Lord. All the gods 
were at one time congratulating themselves on their 
own greatness, though all the while it was Brahman 
alone who was great. Brahman saw the false conceit 
of the gods and appeared before them as the all-power- 
ful Lord. The gods sent the god of fire to him to en- 
quire who this great Lord was. Agni, the god of fire, 
approached him and this great Lord asked Agni who 
he was and what he could do? Agni replied that he 
was the god of fire and could burn the whole world. 
Brahman then put before him a straw and asked him 
if he could burn it. Agni tried with all his might to 
burn it, but failed. Thereupon Agni returned to the 
gods saying that he could not learn who this great 
lord was. Vayu, the wind-god, approached Brahman 
and said that he was the wind-god and could blow 
away the whole world. Again Brahman placed a straw 
before him, asking him to blow it away if he could. 
Vayu also failed and came back to the other gods. Then 
Indra came forward to inquire who this great Lord 


50 HINDU MYSTICISM 


was, but Brahman had already disappeared from the 
scene. Thereupon a bright glorious goddess appeared 
in the sky and told him that this supreme Lord was 
Brahman, that He alone was great, and that all the 
powers of the gods of fire,wind, etc., were derived from 
him. 15 

It is said in the Katha VI. 1-3 that all the worlds are 
maintained in him. He is like a big tree which has 
its roots far below and its branches above, forming 
the visible universe around us. He is the great Life 
from which everything else has come into being. Noth- 
ing dare ignore, disobey, or outstrip Him. He is like 
a great thunder of fear over us all. It is by His fear 
that the fire and the sun give heat, that the wind blows, 
and that Death runs about. He is elsewhere described 
(Brrh. IV. IV. 22) as the controller, Lord and master 
of all. He is the Lord of all that has been and all that 
will be. He is the creator of the universe and the 
world belongs to Him and He to the world (Brrh. IV. 
IV. 13). Yet He is the inmost self of all living beings 
(sarvabhutantaratma) and the immortal inner control- 
ler of them all (antaryamin). But, though He is the 
controller and creator of all, yet it is He who has be- 
come this visible universe of diverse names and forms. 
Just as the wind and the fire appear in different 
forms, so He also appears in all the varied forms 
that present themselves to us in this world. Being 
one in Himself, He has become the visible many of 
the universe. But yet He is absolutely untouched by 
faults and defects of this mortal world. As the Sun 
which by its light illumines all colors and forms for 


IN THE UPANISHADS 51 


the eye and is yet unaffected by the defects of our 
eyes, so the Brahman, who by his light has brought 
all things into existence and continues as their inmost 
essence, is yet wholly unaffected by their defects, their 
mortal and transitory forms. 16 


Whether the teaching of the Upanishads is to be ~~ 


called pantheism or not will depend on the definition 
of pantheism. Certainly there are some passages such 
as those just considered which describe Brahman as 
having spread Himself in diverse forms in all the ob- 
jects that we see around us. This might readily be 
taken as indication of some form of materialistic pan- 
theism. But this is merely one phase or aspect of the 
matter. It seems to be contradicted by the idea of Brah- 
man as the creator, ruler, and controller, by whose will 
everything moves and the order of events is kept in its 
right place undisturbed. Neither life nor death nor 
any of the powers of nature can transgress his orders; 
He is a thundering fear over us all, and yet He is also 
the bridge by which all the diverse things of the world 
are connected with one another and with man, their 
spiritual master. This latter conception, which is 
present in many passages of the Upanishads, is appar- 
ently dualistic and implies a personal God. The Shve- 
tashvatara Upanishad abounds in passages of an avow- 
edly dualistic character. There it is said that He alone 
is the Lord of all bipeds and quadrupeds, the protector 
and master of the universe, and yet is hidden in all be- 
ings. The duality between the individual soul and God 
is also definitely expressed in at least two of the earlier 
Upanishads, Mundaka 3. 1. 1 and Shvetashvatara 4. 6, 


52 HINDU MYSTICISM 


where, with reference to Brahman and the individual, 
it is said that two birds which are alike in nature and 
friendly to each other reside in the same tree, but that 
one of them (the individual) eats sweet fruits (1. e. 
of his own deeds) while the other is happy in 
itself without eating any fruit whatsoever. In the 
same Shvetashvatara Upanishad, the sage is described 
as saying: “I know this great person who resides be- 
yond all darkness (of sin and ignorance), as bright as 
the sun. He who knows Him escapes death and there 
is no other way of escape. There is nothing superior 
to Him, and there is nothing which is greater than 
Him, and there is nothing smaller than Him. He 
stands alone by Himself in the Heavens unmoved like 
a tree, and yet the world is filled by this person.” 
But this also is a passing phase. In a passage im- 
mediately preceding that in the Mundaka Upanishad 
just referred to, it is said that Brahman is right before 
us in the front; Brahman is behind us in the back; 
Brahman is on the right and on the left. Again it is 
said in the Katha Upanishad: “He who perceives 
diversity in this world suffers the death of all deaths.” 
“He is the controller and the self of all beings; He 
makes the one form many, being one He satisfies the 
desires of the many.” 17 

The most important emphasis of the Upanishads 
seems to be on that ineffable experience which lies 
hidden in the background of all our experiences and 
at the same time enlivens them all. Yet the experi- 
encer himself is lost, and dissolved as it were, in this 
superior experience, where there is neither experi- 


IN THE UPANISHADS 53 


encer nor that which is experienced. This experience, 
or state, cannot be intellectually grasped; it can only 
be pointed out as different from all that is known, or 
from all that can be described as “this” or “that.” One 
can only assert that “It is not this,” “It is not this.” 
It is like the state of a deep dreamless sleep, like the 
feeling of intense bliss where neither the knower nor 
the known can be distinctly felt but where there is 
only the infinitude of blissful experience. 18 

The various commentators upon the Upanishads be- 
longing to different schools of thought and yet each in- 
terested to secure for himself the support of the Upani- 
shads, have been fighting with one another for the 
last twelve hundred years or more to prove that the 
Upanishads are exclusively in favor of one party as 
against the others. Thus some contend that the Upani- 
shads teach that Brahman alone exists and all the rest 
that appears is false and illusory. Others hold that 
the Upanishads favor the doctrine of modified duality 
of man in God and of God in man. Still others main- 
tain that the Upanishads give us exclusively a doc- 
trine of uncompromising duality. And so forth. Pas- 
sages have often been twisted and perverted, and many 
new connections and contexts have been introduced 
or imposed upon the texts, to suit the fancy or the 
creed of the individual commentator. I think all these 
interpretations are biassed and onesided, and therefore 
inexact. The Upanishads reveal to us different phases 
of thought and experience, not a consistent dogmatic 
philosophy. The apparent inconsistency of the differ- 
ent phases of thought is removed if we take a psycho- 


54 HINDU MYSTICISM 


logical point of view and consider them as different 
stages of development in the experience of minds 
seeking to grasp a sublime, ultimate but inexpressible 
truth. This truth has a logic of its own, different from 
the logic of discursive thought wherein distinctions are 
firm and rigid, where concepts are like pieces of brick 
mortared together by the logical movement of thought. 
Its logic is that of experience in which the apparently 
contradictory ideas or thoughts lose their contradictori- 
ness and become parts of one solid whole. The differ- 
ent phases of experience are lived through and en- 
joyed as inalienable parts of one great experience. 
When attempts are made to describe any particular 
phase of this experience it will naturally seem to con- 
flict with the other phases in the eyes of those who have 
not the capacity of realising the concrete whole ex- 
perience and who can only look at the phases from 
an external and a purely intellectual point of view 
where distinctions cannot be obliterated. When a 
lover embraces his. beloved in his first kiss, he may feel 
her as the holiest angel, as his own dear life or as the 
embodiment of all his happiness, as, Shelley says, his 
“Spouse, Sister Angel, Pilot of the Fate,” 


“Of unentangled intermixture, made 
By love, of light and motion; one intense 
Diffusion, one serene Omnipresence.” 


But these epithets when applied to a woman can hardly 
be justified, according to intellectual standards, as prop- 
erly applied, though the lover may have felt an inde- 
scribable sweetness of love in which all these diverse 


IN THE UPANISHADS 55 


sentiments melted together to form its taste and flavor. 
The different phases of experience and belief which 
we find in the Upanishads need not therefore be taken 
out and pitted against one another. They may all be 
regarded as stages of experience between which the 
minds of the sages oscillated in attempting the realisa- 
tion of a truth which was beyond speech, beyond 
thought and beyond all sense-perception. It was some- 
times felt as the great over-lord, the controller, creator, 
ordainer, and master of all, sometimes as the blissful 
spiritual experience, and sometimes as the simple unity 
in which all duality has vanished. 19 

This truth, pérson, or absolute—whatever it may be 
called—was felt as the highest embodiment of moral 
perfection. It is complete self-illumination, bodiless, 
faultless, sinless and pure. It is, as it were, covered 
by a cup of gold in such wise that we, looking at the 
shiny cup, miss the real treasure that lies concealed be- 
neath. Its illumination reveals itself only when our 
minds have turned away from all the external lights 
of the outside world; for where this light is shin- 
ing, all the other lights of the sun, the moon, 
and the stars have ceased to give light. The 
Upanishads tell us again and again that it cannot 
be perceived by any of our senses and that it can- 
not be comprehended by reasoning, or by logical 
and discursive thought, or by discussions, scholarship 
and much learning, or even by the reading of the 
scriptures. Only those who have ceased from all sinful 
actions and have controlled all their sense desires, who 
are unruffled by passions of all kinds and are at peace 


56 HINDU MYSTICISM 


with themselves, can have the realization of this great 
truth by the higher intuitive knowledge (prajnana, as 
distinguished from jnana, or cognition). In Mundaka 
III.1, it is said that we can attain this self by truth, 
control, spiritual fervor and absolute extinction of all 
sex desires. Only the sages who have purged them- 
selves of all moral defects and faults are capable of 
perceiving this holy spiritual light within themselves. 
The Upanishads never tire of repeating that the rev- 
elation of this truth is possible only through the most 
perfect moral purity which results in a natural illu- 
mination of intuitive perception when one seeks to 
attain this partless essence through meditation. Not 
only can this truth not be perceived by the eye or de- 
scribed in speech; but it cannot even be gained as a 
boon, or gift, by pleasing the gods or by ascetic prac- 
tices or by sacrificial performances. It can only be 
attained by an intuition (para) which is superior in 
kind to the Vedic knowledge of sacrifices, called the 
lower knowledge (apara). By supreme moral eleva- 
tion and untiring and patient search one can come in 
touch with Brahman and can enter into Him, but one 
must abandon all his mundane desires by which he is 
bound to earthly things. And when through this high 
moral elevation, control of desires, meditation and the 
like, one comes face to face with this highest reality, 
or Brahman, he is lost in it like rivers in the sea; 
nothing remains of him which he can feel as a sepa- 
rate individual, but he becomes one with Brahman. 
This is known by the seer through his heart when his 
senses have ceased to move and when his thought and 


IN THE UPANISHADS 57 


intellect have come to a dead halt. No one can de- 
scribe what that existence is; one can only say that it 
is “being,” nothing more. Here all the knots of the 
heart are untied, all doubts are dispelled, and there is 
one spiritual light of unity that shines forth in its se- 
rene oneness. 20 


ACA CN Re: NN 
Y OG ARIVEY SIL IGLSM 


pty ne 
i a Shin 


hon | 


few 


LECTURE III 
YOGA MYSTICISM 


HE last lecture dealt with the ineffable intuitive 

experience which the sages of the Upanishads re- 
garded as absolute and ultimate in nature. The Upani- 
shads, however, indicate no definite method for arriv- 
ing at the perception of this truth. It is made clear 
that the pathway consists not in erudition or scholar- 
ship, and that it is not traversed by any sharpness of 
intelligence. The truth is such that it cannot be con- 
ceived by the human mind or described by language. 


One of the fundamental conditions of attaining it is \ 
the complete elevation of the moral life, including the , 


} 


} 


absolute control of all passions and desires, the aban- | 
donment of worldly ambitions and hopes, and the at- | 
tainment of an unruffled peace of mind. But the dawn- | 


ing of the supra-consciousness which can reveal this 
truth does not, even so, depend entirely on our own 


efforts; there is something like divine mercy that must_” 


be awaited..This self can only be realized by those to 
whom it reveals itself. The perfecting of our moral 
life is a prerequisite; but no method deliberately and 
consciously pursued is sufficient to bring us all the way 
into the full realization of the highest truth. In at 
least one or two of the Upanishads indications of a 


61 


62 HINDU MYSTICISM 


different line of thought and method of realization 
are to be found. Thus in Katha III, our senses are 
compared with horses which are always running after 
their respective sense-objects. He who is not wise 
but is without control over his own mind cannot 
control his senses, just as a bad driver cannot control 
his horses. If anyone wishes to make his way to his 
highest goal, he should have wisdom for his driver and 
his mind as the reins of the horses of the senses. In 
Katha VI, it is said that there is a state in which 
the five senses, thought, intellect, and mind all cease to 
operate, and this highest stage of absolute sense-re- 
straint is called “Yoga,” or spiritual union. 1 

There are ample literary evidences that from very 
early times—from at least 700 or 800 B. C.—people 
were in the habit of concentrating their minds on par- 
ticular objects and thereby stopping the movement of 
the mind and the senses and achieving wonderful, 
miraculous powers. It is difficult to say how the an- 
cient Indians discovered thi¢ mode of mental control. ] 
But it seems very probable that as at first practised 
it did not form a part of any metaphysical system of 
thought but was simply the practise of mental con- 
centration and breath control for the sake of the re- 
sulting peace and quietness of mind, as well as of the 
miraculous powers which could be achieved thereby. 
The powers of hypnotism, or mesmerism, seem to have 
been very well known in ancient India and were also 
included among the powers that could be derived from 
the yoga practices. 2 

A story is told in the Mahabharata (13.40) that 


YOGA MYSTICISM 63 


Devasharma, a sage, had a very beautiful wife, named 
Ruci, whom he carefully guarded from the seductive 
influences of Indra who desired to possess her. Once 
he had to go away to perform sacrifices at a distant 
place, and he left his wife under the protection of his 
pupil Vipula. The pupil knew that Indra could resort 
to many clever disguises and that it would be difficult 
to protect Ruci from him by guarding her by any 
external means. So he decided to enter into her mind 
by his powers of yoga and to control her behavior and 
speech from within. Accordingly, he sat in front of 
his teacher’s wife and remained staring at her eyes, 
inhibiting all movements of his own body. In this 
way he entered into her body and remained there await- 
ing his teacher’s return. Now Indra, thinking that 
the lady was alone in the house, came there in his fine 
and radiant form. He saw there the inanimate body 
of Vipula, the pupil, with its eyes absolutely motion- 
less as if they were painted on canvas. He also saw 
the lady sitting there in all her resplendent beauty. 
On beholding Indra, she wished to rise and greet him; 
but being controlled from within by her husband’s 
pupil, she could not succeed in doing as she desired. 
Indra spoke to her in his own charming manner, tell- 
ing her that he had come there for her and that he was 
Indra. Perceiving that the lady was showing signs of 
becoming fascinated, Vipula controlled all her senses 
and limbs from within in such a way that, though she 
desired very much by rising from her seat to receive 
Indra, she could not do so. When Indra found her 
silent and unresponsive, he again spoke to her and 


64 HINDU MYSTICISM. 


asked her to rise and receive him. Again, though she 
wanted to welcome him, Vipula controlled her speech 
so that she told Indra that he had no business to come 
to her, and she was ashamed that she so spoke against 
her will. Indra then understood the whole affair and 
was much afraid. Vipula then returned to his own 
body and took Indra to task for his misbehavior. 3 

Many other stories, illustrating the various kinds of 
miraculous powers of yoga, might be repeated. But 
let us turn to a consideration of the principal use of 
the yoga practices for the spiritual enlightenment, the 
ultimate and absolute freedom of man, as described 
by Patanjali, the great yoga writer of about 150 B. C. 
Patanjali not only describes the principal yoga practices, 
but he gives a philosophical basis to the whole system 
and indicates, for the first time] how yoga may be 
utilized for the emancipation of man from the bondage 
of his mind and senses. \It was explained in the last 
lecture that the sages of the Upanishads believed in a 
supra-conscious experience of pure self-illumination as 
the ultimate principle, superior to and higher than any 
of our mental states of cognition, willing, or feeling. 
The nature of this principle is itself extremely mysti- 
cal; many persons, no doubt, are unable to grasp its 
character. It has been shown that, even in the days of 
the Upanishads, it was recognized to be obscure, and 
that the sages were never tired of saying that it could 
neither be perceived by the eye nor conceived in 
thought ; but that, nevertheless, the sages believed in its 
existence as the ultimate being and not as an experi- 
ence of ecstatic feeling or any other kind of transient 


YOGA MYSTICISM | 65 


psychological state. It was regarded as the real self 
and the ultimate reality. It is this view of self that is 
the root, as it were, of Indian mysticism. 4 
If we ask ourselves what we understand by “I,” we 
shall all find that, though it is in the most constant use, 
it is also the obscurest word in all our dictionaries. 
About the meaning of the word, in one sense we can 
never doubt; for there is no person who can ever doubt 
whether he is himself or another person. But when 
we try to understand what it definitely and actually 
means, it appears to be one of the most elusive of 
words. It certainly cannot designate merely our bod- 
ies; nor does it mean any particular idea or feeling 
of a temporary character. So we have to admit that 
while we all understand what it means we cannot de- 
fine it. This is not the place to enter into all the recon- 
dite philosophical discussions to which the problem of 
the nature of the self has given rise. But some attempt 
must be made to explain what the Indians understood 
by the immortal and unchangeable self. Some be- 
lieved this self to be the same in all persons, while 
others believed it to be many; but the conception of 
its nature was more or less the same in most of the 
systems of Indian thought. It was pure, contentless 
consciousness, altogether different from what we un- 
derstand by idea, knowledge, or thought. Our thoughts 
and feelings are changeful; but this mysterious light 
of pure consciousness was changeless. / The ultimate | 
aim of the yoga processes (as of most of the Indian 
systems of thought) is to dissociate ourselves from | 
our sensations, thoughts, ideas, feelings, etc., to learn ° 


66 HINDU MYSTICISM 


that these are extraneous associations, foreign to the 
nature of self but adhering to it almost so inseparably 
that the true self cannot be easily discovered as a 
\__separate and independent entity. 5 

But with the Indian sages this doctrine of a transcen- 
dent self was not merely a matter of speculative phi- 
losophy. For philosophy came to them much later 
than the actual practice of the liberation of this true 
self from the bondage of the association with all our 
so-called psychical states, ideas, feelings, emotions, 
- images and concepts. It is very difficult for a Western 
mind of today to understand, or appreciate, the minds 
of the Indian seers. They felt a call from within the 
deep caverns of their selves—a call which must have 
started from a foretaste of their own true essence— 
which made all earthly pleasures or hopes of heavenly 
pleasures absolutely distasteful to them. They could 
feel satisfied only if they could attain this true free- 
dom, their true self. To appreciate their experience 
at all one must, in imagination, take a long jump back- 
ward of about twenty-five centuries and across the 
waters of the Atlantic and the Indian oceans, and pic- 
ture to oneself the valley of the lofty snow-capped 
peaks of the Himalayas looking high up to the infinite 
of the heavens and, far beyond, the peaceful groves 
and cottages where the innocence and forbearance of 
man had endeared him to trees and beasts alike, where 
no other sounds disturbed the serene forest-dwellers 
than the breezy rustling of the lofty Sal trees and the 
grovy palms. The necessities of the men who dwelt 
there were few. They often wore clothes made from 


YOGA MYSTICISM 67 


birch bark, and ate fruits and vegetables that grew 
wild in the hermitage and rice which grew without 
much trouble of cultivation. The cows of the hermi- 
tage supplied them with milk and butter. They did 
not take any animal life for food; the birds ate from 
their hands, the soft-eyed gazelles roamed about their 
huts, made of straw or leaves of trees, and the pea- 
cocks danced in the shady groves of their forest walks. 
The clear, transparent waters of the holy river Ganges 
and other rivers watered their hermitages, and the 
cool breezes delightfully refreshed their bodies and 
minds when the wearisome tropical heat had relaxed 
their nerves and muscles into inaction. These men had 
no riches, and they did not seek them. Their natural 
needs were few, and it never occurred to them that 
these could be augmented or multiplied. They thought, 
rather, that what needs they had were in themselves 
too numerous and could be indefinitely curtailed. Even 
in rather recent times a story is told to the effect that 
a scholar in Bengal, called Ramnath, was visited by 
Raja Krishnachandra of Bengal who wanted to bestow 
riches on him and asked him if he had any wants. 
The scholar replied that he had plenty of rice in his 
house and that he could make his soup out of the sour 
leaves of the tamarind tree which grew in his yard; 
the only difficulty that he had was with regard to some 
intellectual problems which he was still not able to 
solve. For men who live in a world of sky-scrapers, 
motor cars and comforts of all sorts, with its varied 
scientific, political and social ambitions, with its desire 
for wealth and its highly developed system of trade 


68 HINDU MYSTICISM 


and commerce, it is inevitably difficult to appreciate, 
or rightly understand, the minds of those who felt dis- 
inclined to all worldly things and were uneasy until 
they could touch their own inmost self. Theirs, how- 
ever, was no ordinary pessimism, as is too often sup- 
posed by unsympathetic and shallow-minded scholars, 
who lack the imagination and the will to understand 
the Indian thought and culture of the past. They felt 
dissatisfied with the world not because the world had 
no pleasures or joys to offer, but because their desire 
for attaining their highest good, their true selves, was 
so great that it could tolerate no compromise with any 
other kind of desire. The sole ambition of the yogins, 
or the seers who practised the yoga discipline, was to 
become absolutely free from all kinds of bonds and 
from all kinds of extraneous determination. 6 

The problem of how to become free naturally raised 
the question as to who is to become free and from 
what. The logic of the yogins is irresistible. It is the 
self which has to become free; in fact it is always free. 
The self is the ultimate principle of pure conscious- 
ness, distinct from all mental functions, faculties, pow- 
ers, or products. By a strange, almost inexplicable, 
confusion we seem to lose touch with the former so 
that we consider it as non-existent and characterize 
the latter with its qualities.It is this confusion which 
is at the root of all our psychological processes. All 
mental operations involve this confusion by which 
they usurp the place of the principle of pure conscious- 
ness so that it is only the mind and the mental opera- 
tions of thought, feeling, willing, which seem to be 


YOGA MYSTICISM 69 


existing, while the ultimate principle of consciousness 
is lost sight of. If we call this ultimate principle of 
consciousness, this true self, “spirit” and designate all 
our functions of knowing, feeling, and willing collec- 
tively as “mind,” then we may say that it is only by 
a strange confusion of mind with spirit that the mind ~ 
comes to the forefront and by its activities seems to 
obscure the true light of the spirit. Our senses run 
after their objects and the mind establishes relations 
between the sense-data, or sensations, and deals with 
the concepts formed therefrom as it carries on the 
processes of logical thought with the aid of memory. 
The external objects which draw minds to them are 
not in themselves directly and immediately responsible 
for obscuring the spirit or in binding it to them. It 1s, 
rather, the mind and its activities by which the true 
nature of the spirit seems to be obscured so that the 
mind usurps the rightful place of the spirit. What is 
necessary, therefore, is to control the activities of the 
mind and to stop all mental processes. If we can in 
this way kill the mind, all logical thought and all sense 
processes will be killed with it. The light of the spirit 
will then shine alone by itself unshadowed by the dark- 
ening influence of thought. The spirit, the ultimate 
principle of consciousness, and the self are one and the 
same thing, the three terms expressing the threefold 
aspect of its nature. But this entity, by whichever 
name it is called, is to be distinguished from mind, 
whose activities are thoughts, feelings, etc. We may 
here employ a simile. We may say that the spirit is 
like a pure white light covered by the colored dome 


70 HINDU MYSTICISM 


of the mind. This colored dome hides the pure white 
light, and, without changing the nature of the white 
light by its own color, makes the latter appear as col- 
ored and wrongfully appears itself to be a source of 
colored light, though it has no light whatsoever of it- 
self. We fail to recognize the white light within and 
take it for granted that the colored dome is itself a 
colored light. The only way to restore the purity of 
the white light is by smashing the colored dome. Simi- 
larly, the only way in which the spirit may be made to 
realize, in its own non-conceptual way, its own lonely 
light is by breaking the mind to pieces. 7 

The mind lives by its activities of sensing, perceiving 
and conceiving. It creates illusions and hallucina- 
tions, revives past experiences in memory, and some- 
times passes into a state of sleep in which it creates 
dreams. If the movement of the mind could be en- 
tirely stopped, its disintegration would be effected. 
The process of yoga consists in so controlling the ac- 
tivity of the mind that it ceases to pass through its 
different states. The cessation of all mental states is 
yoga. These mental states as they rise and pass away 
are not altogether lost. They continue in the subcon- 
scious mind as impressions which are revived by proper 
excitations. As they are thus revived and repeated, 
and return to the subconscious, the impressions be- 
come strengthened, growing more and more powerful 
and more likely to occur as conscious states. Thus, 
for example, when we once devote ourselves to mak- 
ing money and to enjoying the comforts it can pro- 
cure, we become more and more deeply absorbed in 


YOGA MYSTICISM 71 


earning money and enjoying its comforts. Similarly, 
the scholar through days and nights of study in his 
library grows ever more attached to his occupation of 
study. It is in this way that the tendencies of the 
mind become strengthened; repeating themselves al- 
most mechanically they keep alive the continual flow 
of the mind from one state to another.~ Yoga consists | 
in stopping the conscious and sub-conscious mental | 
flow entirely and absolutely. 8 

It is easy to see that no one will think of destroying 
his mind unless his desire for the absolute freedom of 
the spirit becomes so great that all the activities of the 
mind, all his sense-enjoyments, all his thoughts and 
feelings, lose all interest for him and appear to him to_. 
be entirely valueless.’ This disinclination to all worldly 
things, called vairagya, is the first thing which leads 
the yogin to seek the way of yoga to deliver himself __ 
forever from all mundane experiences. The seer is 
as sensitive as the pupil of the eye. Just as a speck of 
dust, which passes altogether unnoticed on any other 
part of the body, causes great pain when it gets into 
the eye, so the suffering, which is absolutely unnoticed 
by the ordinary person, is felt keenly by the seer. All 
ordinary pleasures appear to be distasteful to him. 
There is nothing in anything worldly that can give him 
any satisfaction. He is in that mood in which he is 
dissatisfied with them all and wishes to shun them. 9_ 

Such a state of mind cannot be produced unless the 
mind has risen to the highest plane of moral elevation. 
Unless the mind is made absolutely pure there cannot | 
be any steady disinclination toward worldly things. 


72 HINDU MYSTICISM 


A seer must abstain from all injury to living beings. 
His tenderness should extend not only to all human 
individuals but to all living beings. He would not will- 
fully take the life of, or injure, any living being. He 
would not steal the property of any other person. He 
would be absolutely truthful in thought, word and deed. 
Veracity consists in the agreement of words and 
thoughts with facts. But it must always be employed 
for the good of others and not for their injury. If it 
proves injurious to living beings, with whatever inten- 
tion it be uttered it is not truth. Though outwardly 
such a truthful course may be considered virtuous yet 
since by his truth he has caused injury to another he 
has in reality violated the ideal of absolute non-injury. 
The seer must have a complete control of the sex ten- 
dencies. He must not desire anything more than the 
bare necessities. For the acquisition of things always 
entails attachment and greed, and injury to others in 
acquiring and preserving them. If in performing the 
great duty of universal non-injury, and in cultivating 
the other virtues auxiliary to it, a man be troubled by 
thoughts of sin, he should try to substitute for the 
sinful ideas those which are contrary to them. Thus, 
if the old habit of sin tends to drive him along the 
wrong path, he should, in order to banish it, entertain 
ideas such as the following:—‘“Being burnt up as I 
am in the fires of the world, I have taken refuge in 
the practice of yoga, which gives protection to all. 
Were I to resume the sins which I have abandoned, I 
should certainly be behaving like a dog witich eats its 
own vomit—lI should be acting as if I were to take up 


YOGA MYSTICISM 73 


again that which I had once put aside.’ Thus one 
should habituate himself to meditation upon the harm- © 
ful effects of the tendencies which are leading him 
along the wrong path. The habituation to this con- 
trary tendency consists in continually thinking that 
these immoral tendencies cause an infinity of pain 
and error. Pain and error are the unending fruits of 
these immoral tendencies and in the recognition of 
this lies the power of righting the trend of our 
thoughts. 10 
Other moral qualities of a positive character are 
considered indispensable to a seer toiling on the path 
of yoga. These are: purity, contentment, indiffer- 
ence to physical difficulties of heat, cold, etc., study 
and self-surrender to God. Purity here means both 
physical and mental cleanliness. Contentment means 
that self-satisfied condition of the mind in which we 
are at peace with ourselves, having ceased to run after 
new wants. Indifference to physical difficulties is 
also a virtue to be acquired by the yogin, who should 
be able to bear calmly the bodily wants of hunger and 
thirst, heat and cold. He should also be able to stop 
his physical movements for a considerable length of 
time, and be able, as well, to stop his desire to talk 
with others and to remain absolutely dumb. 11 
In the last lecture, on the Upanishadic mysticism, 
it was shown that when such a high standard of moral 
elevation is reached and we seek to know the inmost 
essence of self, the self often reveals its own true na- 
ture through a direct intuition which is beyond the 
grasp of the mind and the senses. The yogins, how- 


74 HINDU MYSTICISM 


ever, not only emphasized the necessity of the highest 
moral perfection but they also required a particular 
course of physical and mental discipline as indispen- 
sable to the realization of yoga’s high ideal. The yogins 
emphasized not only the negative aspect of morality, 
such as abstinence from injury, falsehood and the like, 
but also such positive moral virtues as purity and con- 
tentment. The four cardinal virtues which a yogin was 
required to possess were universal friendship (maitri), 
compassion for all who suffer (karuna), happiness in 
the happiness of others (mudita), and a sympathetic 
consideration for the failings of others (upeksha). But 
even these were not deemed sufficient; they were only 
preliminary acquirements which the yogin must pos- 
sess before starting with his yoga practices. The ac- 
quisition of these moral virtues went, indeed, a long 
way in restraining the mind from running after sense- 
objects and from being disturbed by greed, passions 
and antipathies ; for the yogin was self-controlled, con- 
tented, pure in mind and body, and peaceable and char- 
itable toward all living beings. But still he must be 
able to control his bodily movements. He must there- 
fore habituate himself to sitting in one posture for a 
long time, not only for hours and days but often for 
months and years together. This implied the attain- 
ment of a power to bear calmly hunger and thirst, heat 
and cold, and all physical hardships. 12 

In order that the movement in the body may be re- 
duced to a minimum, it is necessary to acquire a con- 
trol over breathing. To practice the science of breath- 
control, the yogin seats himself firmly, fixes his eyes 


YOGA MYSTICISM 75 


on an object beyond him, or rather on the tip of his 
own nose or on the point between his two eye-brows, 
and slowly inhales a full breath. At first the breath 
that is taken in is kept perhaps for a minute and then 
slowly exhaled. The practice is continued for days 
and months, the period of the retention of the breath 
taken in being gradually increased. With the growth 
of breath-control, one may keep his breath suspended, 
without exhalation or inhalation, for hours, days, 
months and even years together. With the suspension 
of the respiratory process the body remains in a state 
of suspended animation, without any external signs of 
life. The heart ceases to beat, there is neither taking 
in of food nor evacuation of any sort, there is no 
movement of the body. There is a complete cessa- 
tion of the respiratory process as, with his mouth shut 
and his tongue turned backwards behind the tonsils 
stopping the passage of air firmly like a lid, the yogin 
sits in his fixed posture in an apparently lifeless con- 
dition. Even in modern times there are many well- 
attested cases of yogis who can remain in this appar- 
ently lifeless condition for more than a month. I 
have myself seen a case where the yogin stayed in this 
condition for nine days. The case of Saint Haridas 
is well-known. He remained buried underneath the 
ground for forty days under strict vigilance of guards. 
When, after forty days of breathless and foodless con- 
dition of suspended animation, he was brought out of 
the earth, there was apparently no life in him, no 
movement of breath, no heart-beats. But after his 
body had been rubbed and much water had been 


76 HINDU MYSTICISM 


poured on him he again came back to life and began 
to breathe normally. 13 

Various methods of purifying the body were grad- 
ually discovered by which the yogin could so temper 
the body as to make it immune to diseases. In earlier 
times, before the elaborate bodily disciplines had been 
discovered, the yogin prayed to God and depended on 
His grace for the immunity from disease which was 
so necessary to the proper performance of his yoga 
duties. But later on, the yogin tried to be more or 
less independent of God’s grace and discovered a 
whole system of bodily exercises, breathing exercises, 
and automatic internal washings by which his body 
became so tempered that no diseases could easily at- 
tack him. These consisted, first, in habituating the 
body to keeping fixed postures which required va- 
rious muscular movements. By this means the yogin 
could make his body flexible, reduce its unnecessary 
fat, and attain full control over his voluntary muscles. 
For these postures required the exercise of all the vol- 
untary muscles. Second, through the breathing exer- 
cises which could be performed in different forms 
and in different degrees of intensity, combined with 
the different postures, the yogin obtained control over 
the various involuntary muscles which regulate the op- 
eration of the viscera, including the bladder and the 
excretory organs, the heart, the stomach, etc. Added 
to these was, third, the thorough washing away of the 
impurities which, being secreted by some of the in- 
ternal organs, obstruct their normal activity and lower 
their power of resistance. These washings can be 


YOGA MYSTICISM 77 


easily performed by the control that the yogin acquires 
over his inner involuntary muscles. Thus, for ex- 
ample, the yogin can take water into the intestines by 
expelling air from these cavities and thus forcing in 
water by the downward path from a tub in which he 
may be sitting at the time. He can expel air from 
these cavities by means of the control that he has over 
the muscles of those organs which to a normal person 
are quite involuntary. Thus, at any time that he likes 
he can thoroughly wash his stomach, his bladder, 
urethra, etc. He has thus a thorough access to all the 
important cavities of the body where impurities may be 
produced and deposited. In short, by the combined 
operation of postures, breath-control, breathing exer- 
cises, and. the voluntary washings of the impurities 
from all the important cavities of the body, he can 
so increase his power of physical resistance as to re- 
main practically immune to all diseases. 14 

But these are all merely external preparations to fit 
the body for the yoga practices. The real yoga prac- 
tice of the mind can be properly begun only when these 
preliminaries have been to a large extent acquired so 
that the chances of external bodily disturbances and 
internal disturbances due to passions, antipathies, at- 
tachments, etc., have been minimized. The yogin be- 
gins this superior mental yoga by concentrating at first 
on any gross physical object. This concentration is 
not the ordinary concentration of thought as exem- 
plified in any scientific or literary work. For this lat- 
ter type of concentration consists in the limiting of 
the mind’s activity to matters associated with the ob- 


78 HINDU MYSTICISM 


ject of attention. Thus, if we concentrate on the 
writing of a poem or the description of scenery, what 
we do is to restrain the mind from flying off to other 
objects in which we are not interested at the time and 
to focus it upon the relations between various asso- 
ciated images and thoughts. The mind is in such 
cases in a lively state of movement within a limited 
sphere, always seeking to discover new relations or to 
intensify the comprehension of relations and facts al- 
ready known.’ But yoga concentration aims not to 
/ discover any new relations or facts or to intensify 
any impression; it aims solely to stop the movement 
of mind and to prevent its natural tendency towards 
comparison, classification, association, assimilation and 
the like. The fixing of the mind on an object is done 
with the specific purpose of pinning it to that object 
and of preventing its transition to any other object. 
By this process the mind becomes one with the object, 
and so long as it is pinned to that object its move- 
ment is stopped. At the first stage of this union, there 
is knowledge of the name and the physical form of the 
object to which the mind has been pinned. But at the 
next stage nothing is known of the object in its or- 
dinary relations of name and form, but the mind be- 
comes one with the object, steady and absolutely mo- 
tionless. This state is called a state of samadhi, or 
absorptive concentration. This stage arises when the 
mind by its steadiness becomes one with its object, 
divested of all associations of name and concept, so 
that it is in direct touch with the reality of the thing 
uncontaminated by associations. In this state, the ob- 


YOGA MYSTICISM 79 


ject does not appear as an object of my consciousness 
but my consciousness, becoming divested of all “I” or 
“mine,” becomes one with the object itself. There is 
no awareness here that “I know this,” but, the mind 
having become one with the thing, the duality of sub- 
ject and object disappears, and the result is the trans- 
formation of the mind into the object of its concen- 
tration. Our ordinary knowledge of things is full of 
false and illusory associations which do not communi- 
cate to us the real nature of the object; but when such 
an absorptive union of object and mind takes place, a 
new kind of intuition is produced, called prajna, sim- 
ilar to the Upanishadic intuition, called prajnana, and 
thereby the real nature of the thing is brought home 
to us. This prajna knowledge, which is a new kind of 
intuition produced by stopping the movement of the 
mind, is entirely different from the ordinary logical 
type of cognition of thoughts, images, etc. This in- 
tuition is a direct acquaintance, more or less similar 
to direct perceptual vision but free from the ordinary 
errors of all sense-perception. Such a steadiness can 
however be achieved only after continual practice. 
A yogin must be always watchful, particularly in the 
first stages, to keep his mind steadily on the object of 
his concentration. He must have, therefore, an inex- 
haustible fund of active energy (virya). 15 

On the negative side we have, therefore, disinclina- 
tion to worldly things; on the positive side, firm faith 
in the efficacy of the yoga process and vigorous energy 
exercised in steadying the mind in contemplation. 
Gradually, as the yogin becomes more proficient, he se- 


80 HINDU MYSTICISM 


lects subtler and finer objects for his concentration; 
and at each stage in this refinement, new forms of 
intuitional prajna, or yoga knowledge, dawn. With 
this advancement, the yogin develops many miraculous 
‘powers over natural objects and over the minds of 
men. Truths wholly unknown to others become known 
to him. Though all these powers confirm his faith 
in the yoga process, he does not allow himself to be led 
away by their acquisition, but steadily proceeds toward 
that ultimate stage in which his mind will be disin- 
tegrated and his self will shine forth in its own light 
and he himself will be absolutely free in bondless, 
companionless loneliness of self-illumination. 16 

This prajna, or yoga intuitional knowledge, may be 
considered as a new dimension of knowledge wholly 
different from any other kind of knowledge derived 
by the movement of the mind. The most fundamental 
characteristic of yoga mysticism consists, on its neg- 
ative side, not only in a disbelief in the ability of 
sense-perception and logical thought to comprehend 
the ultimate truth about the absolute purity and un- 
attached character of our true self; but also in a dis- 
belief in the possibility of the realisation of this high- 
est truth so long as the mind itself is not destroyed. 
On its positive side, it implies that intuitional wisdom 
is able to effect a clear realisation of truth by grad- 
ually destroying the so-called intellect. The destruc- 
tion of mind, of course, also involves the ultimate 
destruction of this intuition itself. So neither the in- 
tuition nor our ordinary logical thought is able to 
lead us ultimately to self-realisation. There are thus 


YOGA MYSTICISM } 81 


three stages of knowledge. First, our ordinary sense- 
knowledge and logical thought which always deal with 
the world and worldly objects and which appear val- 
ueless to us when we are in spiritual exaltation and 
are anxious to attain the highest truth. Second, the 
intuitional yoga wisdom, which can only be attained 
when, as a result of the highest moral elevation and 
the yoga practices, the mind can be firmly steadied on 
an object so that it becomes one with that object and 
all its movements completely cease. This yoga wis- 
dom gives us a direct non-conceptual vision of, or 
acquaintance with, the ultimate truths concerning all 
objects on which our minds may be concentrated; and 
gradually, as the yogin begins to concentrate on subtler 
and finer objects, such as mind, self, etc., higher and 
nobler truths concerning these become known to hint 
Though we are free to concentrate on any object what- | 
soever, it is desirable for the quicker attainment of, 
our goal that we should concentrate on God—sur7 
render ourselves to Him. /In the most advanced state 
of this yoga intuition, all the truths regarding the na- 
ture of the true self, of the mind and of the material 
world and its connection with mind, become clear, 
and as a result of this and also as a result of the 
gradual weakening of the constitution of the mind, the 
latter ceases to live and work and is dissociated for- 
ever from the spirit or the self. It is then that the 
spirit shines forth in its own lonely splendor, free 
from the bondage of the mind which had so long by 
its activities led it towards false worldly attachments 
and to a false non-appearance of its own pure nature 


82 HINDU MYSTICISM 


in all the varied products of ordinary knowledge, feel- 
ing and willing which make up our worldly life. The 
highest and ultimate revelation of truth is therefore 
not only non-conceptual and non-rational, but also 
-non-intuitional and non-feeling. It is a self-shining 
which is unique. 17 


> 


LECTURE IV 
BUDDHISTIC MYSTICISM 


he 
; 
rh 
% / 


. 


| a Midge 
Rik i 


y 
ws 


ae 


LECTURE 1V 
BUDDHISTIC MYSTICISM 


HE process of yoga described in the last lecture 

consists of a threefold course, viz., high moral 
elevation, physical training of the body for yoga prac- 
tice, and steady mental concentration associated with 
the revelation of yoga wisdom, which leads to a knowl- 
edge of reality as it is. This system of thought and 
practice, though not without unique and distinctive 
features, was largely an adoption from very early 
times. Thus the heretical school of the Jains, which, 
like the Buddhistic school, holds to a monastic religion, 
but which was founded earlier than 500 B. C., the 
date of the Buddha, also considered yoga as the means 
of liberation of the soul. For the Jains, the liberated 
state of the soul is not one of pure, feelingless, non- 
conceptual, non-intuitional self-illumination, but is a 
state of supreme happiness in which the liberated self 
possesses a full perfection of all kinds of knowledge: 
perceptual, logical, alogical, intuitional and trance cog- 
nition. This liberation is attained, they believe, by the 
performance of yoga. Yoga with them consists mainly 
of a high elevation of character and complete cessation 
from the doing of evil, like the yoga of Patanjali de- 
scribed in the last lecture. They lay great emphasis 


85 


86 HINDU MYSTICISM 


on the principle of non-injury, but they also urge the 
necessity of the other virtues demanded by the yoga 
of Patanjali. Here, then, we have a system of thought 
according to which high moral elevation, by the ces- 
sation from all evil-doing and the acquirement of all 
the positive virtues is supposed to reveal a knowledge 
of reality as it is, and ultimately to liberate us from 
the bondage of our deeds and bring us to a state 
of perfect happiness, perfect knowledge and perfect 
power. The Jains, like the yogins, also believe that 
without the control of the mind no one can proceed in 
the true path. All our acts become controlled when 
our minds become controlled. It is by attachment and 
antipathy that man loses his independence. It is thus 
necessary for the yogin that he should be free from 
both attachment and antipathy and become independ- 
ent in the real sense of the term. When a man learns 
to look upon all beings with an equal eye, he can 
effect such freedom, in a manner impossible even by 
the practice of the strictest asceticism through millions 
of years. 1 
_~ The Buddha himself, as the legendary account of 
his life tells us, once went out with his friends for a 
ride on horseback through the fields outside his cap- 
ital. There he saw that, as the fields were being 
ploughed by the peasants, many insects were being 
mutilated and killed with each drive of the plough; 
and he saw also the sufferings of the poor beasts that 
were employed in the field. Extremely affected by 
these sufferings, he dismounted from his horse and 
sat on the grassy ground to reflect on the ultimate des- 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 87 


tiny of all beings. He realized that sufferings, diseases, 
old age and death are evils to which we are all sub- 
ject. At that moment he saw a monk who said that, 
being afraid of births and deaths, he had renounced 
the world’ for his eternal salvation. The suggestion 
affected him very deeply. He therefore decided to re- 
nounce the world and seek to discover the way to the 
extinction of all sorrows, sufferings, diseases, old age 
and death. After testing many ways followed by other 
people, the Buddha himself adopted the path of yoga 
for the attainment of the truth that he ultimately dis- 
covered. As he sat with fixed determination he was 
tempted in various ways by Mara, the Buddhist Satan, 
but all these temptations failed and the Buddha re- 
mained firm in his purpose. 2 
/ Inthe teachings and instructions found in Pali works 
’ ascribed to the Buddha, it is said that we are bound, 
without and within, by the entanglements of desire 
and that the only way of loosening these is by the prac- 
tice of right discipline, concentration and wisdom. 
Right discipline or sila means the desisting from the 
commission of all sinful deeds. This is the first pre- 
requisite. Thereby one refrains from all actions 
prompted by bad desires. Concentration or samadhi is 
a more advanced effort. By it all the roots of the old 
vicious tendencies and desires are destroyed, and one 
is led to the more advanced state of a saint. It leads 
directly to prajna or true wisdom; and by this wisdom 
one achieves his final emancipation. Here also, as in 
the yoga of Patanjali, the individual must habituate 
himself to meditating on the fourfold virtues of uni- 


88 HINDU MYSTICISM 


versal friendship, universal compassion, happiness in 
the happiness of all, and indifference to any kind of 
preferment, whether of himself, his friend, his enemy 
or a neutral party. By thus rooting out all misery he 
will eventually become happy; he will avoid thoughts 
of death and live cheerfully, and will then pass over 
to the idea that other beings would also fare similarly. 
He may in this way habituate himself to thinking that 
his friends, his enemies and all those with whom he is 
not connected might all become happy. He may fix 
himself in this meditation to such an extent that he 
obliterates all differences between the happiness of 
himself and that of others. He remembers that if he 
allows himself to be affected by anger he would weaken 
the self-restraint which he has been carefully practis- 
ing. If some one has done a vile action by inflicting an 
injury, that cannot be a reason why he should himself 
do the same by being angry with others. If he were 
finding fault with others for being angry, could he 
himself indulge in anger? A saint who has thus made 
his sila or right discipline firm enters into a state of 
concentration which has four stages of gradual ad- 
vancement. In the fourth or the last stage both hap- 
piness and misery vanish and all the roots of attach- 
ment and antipathies are destroyed. With the mastery 
of this stage of concentration there comes the final state 
of absolute extinction of the mind and of total cessa- 
tion of all sorrows and sufferings—Nirvana. / 3 

It is easy to see that this system of yoga is very much 
akin to Patanjali’s yoga; and it is not improbable that 
both Patanjali and Buddha but followed a practice 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 89 


which had been in existence from much earlier times, 
so that neither of them may be credited with its dis- 
covery. But there is one point in which there is at 
least a good deal of theoretical difference between 
Buddha’s system and that of Patanjali. The ultimate 
goal of all concentration and its highest perfection 
with the Buddha is absolute extinction, while with 
Patanjali it is liberation of the spirit as self-illumina- 
tion. 4 

It is indeed very difficult to describe satisfactorily 
the ultimate mystical stage of Buddhistic Nirvana. For 
in one sense it is absolutely contentless. It is the state 
of deliverance from all sorrow and from all happiness. 
Yet, as the ultimate ideal of all our highest strivings 
and the goal of all our moral perfection and concen- 
tration, it was an ideal which was in the highest degree 
attractive to the Buddhists. Had it been conceived as 
pure and simple extinction or annihilation, it could not 
have had the attraction for the Buddhists that it did. 
In many passages it is actually described as blissful. 
In other passages it is held to be like the extinction of 
a flame. Some European scholars have considered the 
descriptions of Nirvana by the Buddhists to be inco- 
herent or inconsistent. It is not surprising that Euro- 
pean scholars, who are temperamentally often very 
different from the Buddhists of India, should fall into 
error in trying to comprehend the mystical state of: 
Nirvana. Whether we read the teachings of the Upani- 
shads or of the yoga of Patanjali, the ultimate state 
representing the goal of all the spiritual quest and spir- 
itual strivings of the sages is set forth as absolutely 


90 HINDU MYSTICISM 


contentless and non-conceptual. It is the self no doubt, 
but this self is entirely different from the self with 
which we are familiar in all our ordinary worldly con- 
cerns. It is the extinction of all our sorrows and pleas- 
ures and all our worldly experiences as much as is Nir- 
vana. It is a state of absolute dissolution of all world- 
process. Though a blissful state, there is no distinc- 
tion here between the bliss and the enjoyer of the bliss. 
But still it is just such a non-logical ultimate state that 
could stimulate the highest strivings of the best men 
of India. To call it blissful is not to understand bliss 
in an ordinary way. For this ete bliss is incom- 
prehensible by the intellect. 5 

Nirvana was conceived as a state similar to that 
just described. If it was compared to the extinction 
of a flame, this was quite proper. For is it not a state 
in which all worldly experiences entirely and absolutely 
cease to exist? Yet it is blissful in the sense that it 
can stimulate our spiritual cravings and spiritual striv- 
ings to the highest degree. The Hindus thought that 
at this state there is only the self-luminous self. The 
Buddhists, however, could not say what exists at this 
state for they denied the existence of the self. But 
the teaching of the Hindus is scarcely more compre- 
hensible, except for the fact that at least from the 
grammatical and literary point.of view we have in “the 
self-luminous self” a positive expression. But this self 
is as indescribable as is the state of Nirvana, except 
by the negative method of “not this,” ‘“‘not that.” But 
still this state was rightfully called immortal and bliss- 
ful because it was looked upon by the Buddhists as 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 91 


the end of all their sufferings, the goal of all their spir- 
itual strivings, and the culmination of spiritual perfec- 
tion. What is especially emphasized, from the negative 
point of view, is that it is absolutely non-logical in its 
nature. It has no describable essence. The mysticism 
of the Buddhist consists in a belief in this essenceless 
state of Nirvana’ as the state of ultimate perfection 
and ultimate extinction, to be realized by the com- 
plete extinction of desires and the supra-intellectual 
wisdom of the yoga practice. 6 

So, though, for academic and philosophical discus- 
sions, the essenceless state of the vacuity of Nirvana 
is absolutely different from the pure self of yoga lib- 
eration, yet from the point of view of mystical experi- 
ence both are too deep and unfathomable for ordinary 
comprehension. Both are transcendent, unworldly, 
and contentless in their nature; and the methods of 
their realization are also largely similar. 7 

In digressing, I shall now turn your attention to 
other forms of mysticism inviting a belief in non-logical 
methods of achieving one’s highest goal of power, hap- 
piness, wisdom or emancipation, and shall speak of 
Indian asceticism. The Taittiriya Brahmana, which 
was composed probably as early as 700 B. C. (if not 
even earlier) speaks of Brahmacharya in the sense 
of studying the Vedas with due self-control. We find 
there the story of Bharadvaja who practised Brahma- 
charya for one whole life which was as long as three 


1 There are some Buddhist thinkers, the Sthiramati, who hold 
that the state of Nirvana is a state of subject-object-less, pure, 
unchangeable consciousness called atayvignana. 


92 HINDU MYSTICISM 


lives. Indra approached him and, finding him decayed 
and old, said, ‘““Bharadvaja, if I were to give you a 
fourth life, what would you do with it?’ He an- 
swered, “I would use it in practising Brahmacharya.” 
The word tapas etymologically means heat, and in the 
Atharva Veda (XVII. 1. 24) is actually used in the 
sense of the heat of the sun. But by an extension of 
meaning the word was used to denote also the exertion 
of mental energy for the performance of an action 
and for the endurance of privations of all kinds, of 
heat, cold, and the like. It was regarded as a great 
force which could achieve extraordinary results. Thus 
it is said in the Taittiriya Upanishad that the Great 
Being performed tapas and having done so created all 
the world. In Rig Veda (X. 167. 1) Indra is said to 
have gained Heaven by tapas. Tapas was thus prob- 
ably understood from very early times as some kind 
of austere discipline, the exact nature of which, how- 
ever, was rather vague, changeable and undefined. 8 

In Ashvaghosha’s Buddhacharita, which was written 
probably during the first century of the Christian era, 
we find that the Buddha was told by an ascetic in the 
forest how different ascetics lived like birds, by pick- 
ing up grains left in the fields; others ate grass like 
animals; some lived with snakes; some sat still, like 
ant-hills, with nests of birds in the tangles of their 
long hair and snakes playing on their bodies; some 
lived in water, with tortoises eating parts of their bod- 
ies, thinking that misery itself is virtue and that the 
highest happiness in Heaven can be achieved by under- 
going sufferings of all kinds. Even in recent times In- 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 93 


dian ascetics have inflicted on themselves various kinds 
of self-mortifications for the merits that are supposed 
to be derived from them. Thus a Brahmin ascetic at 
Benares is known to have lived for thirty-five years on 
a flat board studded with iron nails or spikes on which 
he sits and lies down at full length and which he never 
leaves night or day. Another common form of self- 
torture is to raise one or both arms above the head, 
and to hold them there until they become stiff and 
atrophied. Some ascetics are known to live with four 
fires burning very near them on their four sides and 
with the sun shining over their heads. Others under- 
take prolonged fastings and take vows of silence for 
years. 9 

We read in the Puranas that self-mortification by it- 
self was believed to generate a force. By virtue of 
the force, power or energy of these self-mortifications, 
an ascetic who performed them could exact from the 
god he worshipped, any boon that he wanted and the 
god could not refuse to grant him the boon even 
though he knew that the effect of granting it would 
be seriously mischievous. In the Ramayana, the great- 
est epic of India, the story is told of Ravana, the great 
demon who carried away Sita, the wife of Rama. 
Ravana had won the boon from Prajapati that he 
could not be killed by gods or demons, and it was 
by virtue of this boon that he could conquer all the 
gods, though he was ultimately killed by Rama, a 
man. A story is told of a demon who had a boon 
from the god Shiva that the person on whose head he 
would put his hands would be reduced to ashes. When 


94 HINDU MYSTICISM 


the boon was granted, the demon wanted to test its 
truth by putting his hands on the head of the god 
Shiva himself. Shiva was very much afraid and 
started to fly away with the demon pursuing him in 
hot haste. But the god Shiva had no power of taking 
away the favor that he had granted, for it was earned 
by the force of the tapas of the demon. Vishnu, who 
came to rescue the god Shiva, played a trick upon the 
demon. The latter was asked to test the truth of the 
boon about which he was sceptical on his own head 
and thus he was reduced to ashes. This tapas is often 
described as a fire. Unless the boon is granted and 
the ascetic desists from his tapas, it is believed that the 
fire of his tapas might even burn the whole world as 
it were. The force of these stories is that there was a 
belief that self-mortification is itself a source of great 
power and that by it one could gain any desire, be it an 
immortal life in Heaven, the conquest of all the worlds, 
or any other fanciful desire—even the liberation from 
all bondage. We thus find that, just as in the Vedic 
school sacrifice was conceived as a power which could 
produce any beneficial results that the sacrificer want- 
ed, so in this Puranic school there was the belief that 
tapas as self-mortification could give an individual 
anything he craved. It was a power by itself. These 
tapas performances were apparently carried out to 
please certain gods, just as oblations were offered to 
the Vedic gods in sacrifices; yet the god with refer- 
ence to whom the tapas was performed had no power 
to refuse the boon. The boons were exacted from the 
gods by the power of tapas, whether or not the gods 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 95 


willed to grant them of their own free volition, just 
as the effects of sacrifice did not in any way depend on 
the good will of the gods to whom offerings were made 
at those sacrifices. 10 

We know that tapas as the power of endurance of 
physical privations and troubles was an indispensable 
accessory of both the Buddhist yoga and Patanjali’s 
yoga. The gradual abandonment of desires until their 
ultimate extinction could be effected, was essential both 
to yoga and to Buddhism. It is true that the Upani- 
shads do not speak of the extinction of desires, but 
they certainly praise self-control as an indispensable 
desideratum. There is indeed the law of karma which 
requires that every person reap the fruits of his ac- 
tions, whether good or bad, and that if the life of the 
present birth is not sufficient for the experience of the 
sufferings or the joys which are put to his account in 
accordance with the measure of his vice or virtue, he 
will enjoy or suffer the fruits of his deeds in another 
birth. So, in an endless chain of births and rebirths, 
moves on the cyclic destiny of man. All his rebirths 
are due to the fact that he is filled with desires, and 
for their fulfillment he performs actions out of at- 
tachments, passions, antipathies, etc. By the law of 
karma (which acts automatically according to some, 
and is controlled by the will of God according to 
others) he enjoys or suffers the fruits of his actions 
in this or in subsequent births. So if the successive 
chain of births is to be terminated, the accretion of 
the fruits of karma must be stopped, and if the 
accretion of karma is to be stopped, desire must be 


96 HINDU MYSTICISM 


rooted out. I shall not enter into the subtle question 
as to whether the place of superior importance belongs 
to karma or to the extinction of desires in the Hindu, 
Buddhist and Jaina schemes of life. Whichever of 
the two may be considered the more important in each 
particular Hindu or Buddhist system of thought, they 
are nevertheless indissolubly connected. For out of 
desires come the actions and their fruits, and out of 
actions and the enjoyment or suffering of their fruits 
of pleasures or sorrows come further desires, and so 
on. However, if one looks at the matter psychologic- 
ally, the extinction of desires may be considered the 
more important, since it is for Indian philosophy the 
indispensable ethical desideratum for all spiritual 
achievement. If the ultimate freedom of the spirit 
and the cessation of the cycle of births and rebirths 
be the ultimate ethical and spiritual goal, this can only 
be attained by the extinction of desires and the ter- 
mination of the accretion of the fruits of our deeds. 
The development of the ideal of tapas is a direct re- 
sult of this ideal of the extinction of desires. It was 
probably thought in some circles that control of de- 
sires implies on its positive side the idea of self-mor- 
tification. Logically it certainly does not. But the 
mistaken transition is easy. So there grew up a system 
of practice in which people thought that self-mortifi- 
cations are of the highest merit and are capable of giv- 
ing anything that might be desired. Soon degeneration 
set in. Self-mortifications were probably introduced 
as supplementary to the control of desires. They then 
came to be practiced for the indulgence of desires for 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 97 


attaining heaven or superior power, and thus began to 
perform functions similar to those that were ascribed 
to sacrifices in Vedic circles. 1] 

The Buddha himself, as the legendary account of 
Ashvaghosha’s Buddhacharita relates, directs the same 
criticisms as the above against the practice of self- 
mortification. He deplores the fact that, after leaving 
all worldly comforts, relatives and friends, men should 
with all these self-mortifications called tapas, desire 
only the satisfaction of desires. People are afraid 
of death, but when they seek the satisfaction of de- 
sires this leads to births, and thus they again face death 
of which they are afraid. If self-mortification is by 
itself productive of virtue, then the enjoyment of 
pleasures must be vicious. But if it is believed that 
virtue produces pleasures or happiness, and if pleas- 
ures are vices, then virtue produces vice, which is self- 
contradictory. It is strange, however, that the Buddha 
himself, when he wanted to attain to the highest wis- 
dom or philosophy, undertook for six years the most 
rigorous asceticism and with all his limbs emaciated 
was almost on the point of death. He did not, of 
course, aim at the fruition of any ordinary desires, but 
at the discovery of the wisdom by which birth and 
death and all the sufferings associated with them could 
be stopped. All the same, he at first followed the 
custom then prevalent among ascetics and underwent 
the most austere discipline. But at the end of six years 
he realized that the performance of asceticism was 
unnecessary and without value for the attainment of 
the higher wisdom. He then bethought himself as to 


98 HINDU MYSTICISM 


how he might regain his former strength and physique. 

He thought that by hunger, thirst and fatigue the 
mind loses its ease, and that if the mind is not at ease 
one cannot by its use attain the highest wisdom. It 
is by the due satisfaction of the senses that the mind 
comes to its ease, and it is the easy, peaceful, and 
healthy mind in a healthy body that can attain the wis- 
dom of yoga concentration. So the Buddha gave up 
his old forms of hard ascetic practice and tried to re- 
gain his health by proper food, bathing, etc. His as- 
sociates, however, who probably knew only the old 
forms of practice, and were therefore shocked over 
his abandonment of them, left him. It was only after 
he had thus recovered his health that he could resist 
all the temptations of Mara, the Buddhistic Satan, and 
attain by concentration, highest wisdom. The wisdom 
that the Buddha attained seems to have been more of 
the nature of logical thought, but the goal that was to 
be attained by such wisdom was the mystical, inex- 
pressible, essenceless Nirvana; and the direct means by 
which this could be attained was not logical thought 
or reasoning or scriptural or other kinds of learning, 
but the extinction of all desires (trishna-kshaya). 12 

The principal virtues of universal friendship, uni- 
versal compassion, etc., to which reference has already 
been made, were appreciated early in Buddhism and 
also in the yoga of Patanjali. But it may well be ar- 
gued that there was scarcely any place for the active 
manifestation of universal friendship or universal 
compassion in a scheme of life which was decidedly 
individualistic. No one who sought the absolute free- 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 99 


dom of his own self, or the extinction of his whole 
personality like the extinguishing of a flame, and who 
sought the cessation of his own rebirths and sorrow 
as the only goal and the only ambition to be realized, 
could have much scope for any active manifestation 
of univérsal friendship. The altruistic ideal can 
therefore at best be merely a disposition, and can mani- 
fest itself merely in a negative way, e. g., in non-in- 
jury to any being. But a person who holds such an 
individualistic notion of salvation cannot, in his 
scheme of life, have any leisure or opportunity for the 
doing of active good to others. 13 

In the Hindu Puranas or religio-mythological 
works, written in poetry, we sometimes come across 
tales of wonderful self-sacrifice for the good of the 
gods or even for the good of animals who sought pro- 
tection. But tales of self-sacrifice from the motive of 
universal friendship are very rare, and they do not 
seem to fit in with the Hindu ideal of personal and in- 
dividual liberation. A story is told that when the gods 
were in great trouble in their war with Vritra, a 
demon, they approached the sage Dadhichi. For it 
was decreed by fate that the demon could be killed 
with a weapon made of Dadhichi’s bones but with 
nothing else. Dadhichi, in response to the request of 
the gods, willingly gave up his life, in order that the 
gods, with a weapon made of his bones, might destroy 
the demon. A story is also told of King Shibi, who 
was tested by the gods Indra and Agni. Agni took the 
form of a pigeon, and Indra that of a pursuing hawk. 
The pigeon took shelter with King Shibi. The latter 


100 HINDU MYSTICISM 


would not give it over to the hawk because the pigeon 
had taken shelter with him and under these circum- 
stances he would rather give up his own life than allow 
the pigeon to be killed. At last the hawk said that he 
would be satisfied if King Shibi would give from his 
own body flesh of the same weight as that of the pig- 
eon, and the king cut the flesh of his thigh with his 
own sword. This, however, is a case of the kshatriya’s 
virtue of giving shelter to those who seek it, even at 
the sacrifice of one’s own life. It does not exemplify 
self-sacrifice for the good of beings in general, out of 
pure motives of universal friendship. The tale is a 
Brahmanic adaptation of a Buddhist story called Shi- 
bijataka, in which King Shibi is said to have torn out 
his eyes and made a gift of them out of motives of 
pure charity alone. In another story in the Mahabha- 
rata, Shibi is said to have cut up his own son as food 
for a Brahmin who desired the son’s flesh for din- 
ner; and to please the Brahmin Shibi was prepared 
to join in eating the dinner consisting of his own son’s 
flesh. The motive here was the supreme duty of pleas- 
ing the Brahmins and giving them whatever they 
wanted. 14 

But though the ideal of universal friendship and 
compassion does not seem to have been an active creed 
among the Hindus or among the followers of the Hin- 
ayana school of early Buddhism, it assumed a role of 
paramount importance in the Mahayana school of 
Buddhism. Here universal altruism and universal 
compassion, and happiness and sorrow in the happi- 
ness and sorrow of others, form the dominant prin- 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 101 


ciple. The philosophy of the Mahayana Buddhism 
was peculiarly idealistic. It taught that matter as 
such has no existence in any form, and that all things 
perceived are but creations of the mind, and more like 
a magic show than reality. Everything, according to 
it, is essenceless and indescribable, mere phantom crea- 
tion of the mind. Indeed, mind itself is not ultimately 
real in any sense, but is as illusory a creation as all 
other things created by it. It is the realization of this 
that was called bodhi or perfect knowledge. Those 
who perceive this truth attain perfect knowledge and, 
like a flame extinguished, reach Nirvana or the final 
deliverance from all sorrows and rebirths. 15 

There is a lower order of saints called arhats, or 
pratyekabuddhas. These praiyekabuddha saints are 
said to be of a lower order because they live alone by 
themselves like the rhinoceros. By their spiritual en- 
deavors, they obtain a logical understanding of the 
way in which all worldly things originate and pass 
away; and by meditation on the essencelessness of all 
things, they attain perfect knowledge and Nirvana. 
They are not instructed by any one, nor do they teach 
others to attain the knowledge that they gain. They 
are accustomed from the beginning to lead a lonely 
life like the Hindu yogis, and the instruction of others 
does not interest them. They are therefore regarded 
as being only Buddhas or enlightened ones of a lower 
order. 

The higher Buddhas are those who aim not only at 
the vision of truth for destroying their inner notion 
of self or ego and all desires of existence and non-ex- 


102 HINDU MYSTICISM 


istence, but also at doing good to all living beings and 
constantly practicing the great virtues. Their enlight- 
enment includes not only the possession of the truth 
indispensable to salvation, but also omniscience, uni- 
versal knowledge of all details of things, and omnipo- 
tence. The perfect Buddha attains these powers not 
only through his prolonged meditations, by which he 
gets insight into the principles of all things, but also 
through his infinite merits of constantly performing 
the great virtues of charity, patience, etc. The man 
who aims at the attainment of this superior Buddha- 
hood is called a Bodhisattva (one who is on the way to 
the attainment of perfect knowledge). His superior 
aim consists in this that, at the cost of personal suffer- 
ings, he wishes the temporal happiness of others. He 
continually desires for others supreme and temporal 
happiness, and for himself the Buddhahood as a means 
of realizing this service to others. Even after the saint 
attains true enlightenment and knows that there is no 
essence in anything and that nothing exists, he con- 
tinues to practice the virtues of charity, morality and 
patience, and to mature the qualities of his supreme 
enlightenment. 16 

We sometimes hear very remarkable stories of 
Buddhist saints, even of actual historical saints, who 
showed supreme self-control and compassion for 
others. Thus it is said of Aryadeva, a great Buddhist 
teacher of the second century, that he once defeated 
in argument a teacher of non-Buddhistic doctrines. A 
young disciple of this defeated teacher, greatly enraged 
over his teacher’s defeat, determined to murder Arya- 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 103 


deva and awaited a suitable opportunity. One day 
Aryadeva was preaching the doctrine of the essence- 
lessness of all things, and was refuting heretical views 
before his pupils in a solitary forest. After this in- 
struction, while he was taking a walk alone, the enemy 
stabbed him from ambush, saying, “You conquered 
my teacher with your knowledge, but I now conquer 
you with my sword.” Aryadeva, holding fast with 
his hands his stabbed belly, bade the would-be assassin 
take his three clothes and bowl and escape over the 
mountains in monk’s garb so that others might not 
capture and punish him. He further told him that 
he was very sorry for him because of the seeds of 
sinful deeds that he was sowing. The murderer was 
deeply moved by the saint’s compassion and sympathy, 
and asked Aryadeva to teach him the doctrine. Even 
in his wounded condition Aryadeva began to teach him 
the Buddhist doctrine of the essencelessness of all 
things. After giving him some instructions Aryadeva 
fell in a swoon and his assailant escaped. Soon after- 
wards Aryadeva’s pupils came and enquired about the 
murderer. To them the teacher replied that there was 
no one who was killed or who killed, no friend and no 
enemy, no murderer, that everything was a delusion 
due to ignorance. 17 

He who is kind and good and has a great propen- 
sity for doing good to others, and who, though in- 
capable of committing a sinful action for himself, may 
yet be so moved by love for his fellow beings as to 
commit a wrong action for them, is fit to take the vow 
of a Bodhisattva who would spend all his future career 


104 HINDU MYSTICISM 


for the good of others. His enthusiasm is not for the 
egoistical calm of the saint who is anxious for his own 
deliverance; he is moved by the most altruistic of all 
motives, viz., compassion for all creatures. It is such 
a person who takes the vow of Bodhisattva or one 
who aspires to the goal of a future Buddha. 

But even then it is one thing to take a vow and an- 
other thing to fulfil it. Ordinarily one’s unconstrained 
love is given to himself and it is only by reflection that 
the Bodhisattva learns to care wholly for the welfare 
of others. At the lower stages, his nature leaves him 
at the mercy of his inclination; his knowledge of truth 
is but slight, and the direct penetrating sight of the 
yoga meditations is entirely lacking to him. But by a 
continual repetition of his high aspirations, and by a 
more and more studious practice of the good works 
which they involve, he gradually comes to the higher 
stages of progress. As he enters these, wishing to 
bear the burden of the sins of all human beings in the 
hells and elsewhere, he becomes free from all fears 
of evil reputation, rebirth, death, etc. Becoming more 
and more perfect, he gradually masters the virtues of 
faith, compassion, affection for all, disinterestedness, 
reverence for self and for others. All his actions are 
for the good of others, and his only thought is that he 
may be serviceable to all beings. 18 

The person who intends to enter upon the higher 
career of a Bodhisattva and ultimately to become the 
perfect Buddha, places himself under the guidance of 
a religious preceptor, performs the moral or pious 
works, and undertakes the vow of bodii. He thinks 


: 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 105 


that it is only by a desire to become a perfect Buddha 
for the salvation of men, and by dedicating himself 
to the good of all beings, that the sins of his past lives 
can be wholly removed. He confesses his own guilt 
and imperfections and deplores them. He wishes to 
dedicate all the fruits of his virtuous deeds, merit and 
piety to the good of all creatures and for the at- 
tainment of their Bodhi. He wishes to be the bread 
for those who are hungry, and the drink for those who 
are thirsty. He devotes himself by his love to all 
beings; and in his compassion for their sufferings, he 
gives all that he is, to all creatures. It is by such deter- 
minations that he produces in himself the proper state 
of mind with which one may start in the high career 
of a Bodhisattva. He has then to keep a strict vigi- 
lance over his thoughts and over the resolutions that 
he has taken, and keep a continued watchfulness over 
mind and body. He must also perform the great vir- 
tues called paramitas, for thinking, though good in it- 
self, is not enough by itself; it must be continually 
supplemented by the exercise of the great virtues. He 
should restrain himself from all evil by continued 
watchfulness over his mind and body, and by self- 
control attained in this way. But he must also contin- 
ually perform the great virtues in order to strengthen 
his life in progressive good. 

One of the most important of these virtues is that 
of giving due scope to compassion (karuna). The 
aspirant thinks that his neighbor suffers pain as he 
suffers his. Why should he be anxious about himself 
and not about his neighbor? Such a man may even 


106 HINDU MYSTICISM 


commit a sin if he knows that this will be beneficial to 
one of his fellow-beings. For the sake of doing good 
to others he should always be prepared to abandon 
even his meditations or even his chastity. It is 
through this universal compassion that he can recon- 
cile all beings to himself—by almsgiving, amiability, 
obligingness, and sharing the joy and sorrow of others. 
But he ought also to take care that his tendency to 
charity do not become so excessive as to stand in the 
way of his spiritual advancement. For it is only on a 
high stage of spirituality that he can make himself 
most genuinely serviceable to others. To give even 
one’s flesh and blood for the good of others is good, 
but the giving of spiritual food is certainly better. It 
is not good to sacrifice one’s body to satisfy the appe- 
tite of a tiger when that body in a sound condition can 
be utilized for giving spiritual instruction to others. 19 

Careful adherence to morality, consisting of purity 
of intention, reformation after transgression, and re- 
gard for the law of right conduct, is another of the 
important conditions which a Bodhisattva should 
strictly meet. Without going into any details, the main 
principle of morality consists in abstaining from all 
actions hurtful to others, or the maxim, “Do not do to 
others what you would not like others to do unto you.” 
But apart from this negative virtue of abstention, he 
should also acquire the positive virtues of devotion 
to study, reflection and meditation, reverence to the 
teacher, nursing the sick, confession of guilt, associa- 
tion with people in their good and useful undertakings 
and in their difficulties and sicknesses, giving them 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 107 


right teaching, etc.,—in short, doing good to all peo- 
ple in all possible ways. 

Another important virtue is patience or control of 
anger, for anger is the greatest of all sins. He should 
also practice the virtue of energetically conquering all 
incapacity of body and mind, all attachment to pleas- 
ures and want of firm determination. This he can do 
by thinking of the evil effects of these traits and by re- 
calling that, unless he can firmly keep himself to the 
strict path of virtue, he will never be able to cross the 
ocean of suffering, and that, however low may be his 
present state, he may by continued exertion raise him- 
self to the highest stage of perfection of the Buddhas. 
He should also derive additional strength by thinking: 
first, of his great desire to rid himself and all other be- 
ings from all their sins: second, of his great pride 
over undertaking to bear the burdens of all creatures; 
third, of his joy in undertaking new tasks as soon as 
the old ones are finished—his happiness is in action it- 
self, and he seeks in action no other fruit than the 
pleasure of the action done; fourth, of his self-mastery 
of attention, and of keeping his mind and body always 
completely alert. If he for any reason fails once, he 
must discover the cause and see that he may not fail 
again. 20 

Two further virtues are contemplation or concentra- 
tion and the true wisdom which realizes the nothing- 
ness of all things. It is surprising how a metaphysics 
of extreme idealism, of the nothingness and essence- 
lessness of all things, or of nihilism, could set for the 
achievement of the highest spiritual perfection a pro- 


108 HINDU MYSTICISM 


gram of life and endeavor which is altruistic in the 
most extreme degree imaginable. What is required is 
a state of perfection in which the individual esteems 
the ultimate state of mystical deliverance—Nirvana or 
extinction—to be of little consequence, and is prepared 
to undergo all troubles, and refuse to enter Nirvana, 
unless and until all beings become good and happy and 
come to the path of deliverance. Out of the doc- 
trines of self-control and the ideal of the extinction 
of desires, there has thus come a scheme of life in 
which desirelessness is attained by magnifying the 
scope of desires from the individual to the universal, 
by rejecting personal good for the sake of the good of 
others. This good is not sought with a view to any 
selfish aims, for the seer knows that nothing exists and 
that all forms and names are empty and essenceless. 
But he takes it upon himself to do this because of his 
supreme compassion and of his determination to de- 
vote himself to the service of his fellow-beings and to 
bring to them the light of perfection. The milk of 
human kindness flows through him, and it is this flow 
of kindness in him which leads him to his highest 
perfection. With him, as Shantideva (a great author- 
ity) says, even contemplation occupies only a lower 
place. For he attains to his highest only by persisting 
in the path of compassion. 

The two cardinal features of his conduct are a firm 
conviction of the equality of his self with that of his 
neighbor and the substitution of his neighbor’s self 
for his self. Each of these features involves a clear 
insight into the nature of things. If with great strength 


BUDDHIST MYSTICISM _— 109 


one can duly exemplify them, he attains all the merits 
of a Bodhisattva. He understands that our only en- 
emy is our selfish “ego.” Thus, he speaks to his own 
self, “Renounce, O my thought, the foolish hope that 
I have still a special interest in you. I have given you 
to my neighbor, thinking nothing of your sufferings. 
For if I were so foolish as not to give you over to 
the creatures, there is no doubt that you would deliver 
me to the demons, the guardians of hell. How often, 
indeed, have you not handed me over to those wretches, 
and for what long tortures! I remember your long 
enmity, and I crush you, O self, the slave of your own 
- interests. If I really love myself, I must not love my- 
self. If I wish to preserve myself, I must not pre- 
serve myself.’ 21 


*L. de la Vallée Poussin’s article “Bodhisattva,” Encycl- 
opaedia of Religion and Ethics (edited by James Hastings), 
WiOlsell Ape. 7 00. 


iis j 
Padre ee 
Ash ae 


me ie rN e 
iH aaNet 


nh 
eat 


LECTURE: V 


CLASSICAL FORMS OF DEVOTIONAL 
MYSTICISM 


Faniit foat 
As re 
Abe Bay! ; 


Agi 


bras her 


4 ike 
Lapa 


DE Ca Rani 


CLASSICAL FORMS OF DEVOTIONAL 
MYSTICISM 


E have described the ideal of supreme self-con- 

trol and of the extinction of all desires as an in- 
dispensable requirement for the attainment of high | 
perfection. This end is believed to be reached by re- , 
placing egoism with unlimited universalism, the indi- | 
vidual learning to desire his own good by desiring the | 
good of others. ,,But such an unlimited universalism 
could hardly be practiced within the limited sphere of 
the duties and activities of a householder. The ideal 
yogin who renounced the world and spent a life of su- 
preme self-control and suppression of all desires, and 
who practiced his yoga courses in which all move- 
ments of his body are inhibited, could not live in so- 
ciety and follow the ordinary vocations of life. Cut 
off from society, he pursued a goal of individualistic 
perfection. 1 
But the general Hindu system of life was not mon- 
istic, individualistic, or separatistic. Hindu society 
was divided into four castes. We find (1) Brah- 
mins, who followed the scholarly and the priestly line 
of work, studied the Vedas, gave spiritual instruction 
and performed the sacrifices; (2) Kshatriyas, the war- 


113 


114 HINDU MYSTICISM 


rior caste who protected the weak from the attacks 
of the strong, governed kingdoms as kings, and gave 
to the Brahmins all protection and encouragement in 
their scholarly and priestly works; (3) Vaishyas, or 
the trading and pastoral caste, who increased the 
wealth of the country by trading and farming; and (4) 
Shudras, or the servant caste, recruited from the non- 
Aryans who found a home in the Aryan societies and 
served as menials to the Brahmins, Kshatriyas and 
Vaishyas. 

The Brahmin went to live with his teacher from the 
age of eight and remained with him until he had com- 
pleted the study of the Vedas. He then returned from 
the house of his teacher and was bound according to 
the injunction of the scriptures to get married, to per- 
form regularly the sacrifices, to be united with his wife 
and procreate sons, to teach students, and to make gifts 
or charities to proper persons at auspicious times and 
at holy places. Upon reaching the age of fifty he had to 
retire to forest life with his wife, and give himself up 
to holy thoughts and the leading of a holy life. In the 
last stage of his life, it was necessary for him to re- 
nounce even his forest life of retirement. He had to 
sever himself from all his attachments, lead the life 
of a hermit and get his food by begging. Of these 
four stages of life, called Brahmacharya, Grihastha, 
Vanaprastha, and Yati, the householder’s life was re- 
garded as the best. For this stage (ashrama) pro/ 
vided an opporunity for the doing of good to the 
people of all the other stages of life, by gifts, by the 
performance of sacrifices, by instruction to teachers, 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 115 


and by the procreation of good sons who might be- 
come the future supporters of society. Performance 
of sacrifices, teaching, and the procreation of sons 
were regarded as debts with which every Brahmin 
was born, and no Brahmin had any right to seek the 
individualistic goal of a hermit’s life unless and until 
he had discharged these duties for the major portion 
of his life. “ 

Similarly, it was regarded as the duty of a Kshat- 
riya to protect the weak and to fight in a good cause, 
and of a Vaisya to carry on trading and farming. The 
performance of the class of duties belonging to each 
caste at its specific stage of life is the imperative duty 
(dharma) ; transgression of it was held to be trans- 
gression of duty and hence vicious (adharma). YWhat 
was expected of every man was that he follow the spe- 
cific duties allotted to his caste, satisfy his desires 
of life, and enjoy the pleasures of life. It was a bal- 
ance in which equal attention was paid to the perform- 
ance of the allotted duties and to the satisfaction of 
personal needs and desires that was regarded as the 
true ideal of life for all normal aNd Only in ex- 
ceptional cases did the Hindu schente~of life admit 
the renouncement of this life (trivarga) of threefold 
duties in a search for the attainment of the goal of 
liberation (apavarga). The yearning after a higher 
life was an actual and soul-stirring experience among 
spiritually-minded persons. They were allowed the 
privilege of renouncing the life of ordinary pleasures, 
and of seeking to kill all other desires and to attain 
true knowledge, by intuition, moral elevation, yoga 


116 HINDU MYSTICISM 


or even by asceticism. In their case alone, however, 
was this exception made. But even then the exception 
was not very readily admitted in orthodox Hindu 
circles. We remember the great effort that Shankara, 
the great Vedanta teacher, had to make, especially in 
his commentary on the Gita, to establish this point. 
He taught that those who attained higher knowledge 
(jnana) were exempt from the allotted duties of or- 
dinary persons. These duties were obligatory only 
for those who did not attain the higher knowledge. 
But Shankara’s interpretation of the Gita was objected 
to by other authorities. 3 

The Gita is a work of great sanctity and popularity 
among the Hindus. It consists of seven hundred sim- 
ple verses, of which the first chapter of forty-six 
verses forms the introduction. It is written in the 
form of a dialogue between Lord Krishna and Arjuna, 
the great warrior who, on the battlefield of the terri- 
ble Indian civil war described in the classic heroic 
poem Mahabharata, is appalled at the prospect of the 
fearful impending destruction and refuses to fight. 
Lord Krishna tries to persuade him, in the Gita, that 
as a Kshatriya, (a man of the military caste) it is his 
duty to fight. To add strength to his persuasion he 
makes use of many moral and religious arguments. 
Traditionally this theme forms a part of the fifth canto 
of the Mahabharata. Though its date is uncertain, it 
may well be believed to have been written about the 
second or the third century B. C. It discards self- 
mortification and believes in three kinds of tapas: first, 
bodily discipline—respect to gods, Brahmins and the 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 117 


wise, purity, sincerity, chastity and non-injury; sec- 
ond, speech discipline—sweet and truthful speech, 
and study; and third, mental discipline—content- 
ment, self-control, amiability, purity of mind, and 
meditation. 

But the great solution of the Gita is the compro- 
mise it advances between the worldly life of allotted 
duties and the hermit life of absolute renouncement, 
and between a life of lawful and proper enjoyment 
and the absolute extinction of desires. The program \ 
that it proposes is, on the one hand, that we purify 
our minds, purging them of all attachments and pas- 
sions by dedicating all the fruits of our actions to 
God; and yet, on the other hand, that we continue to 
perform all the duties belonging to our particular caste 
or stage of life. It is not the actions but our own in- 
clinations and passions that really bind us. But if we 
can augment our faith in and our affection for God 
to such an extent that in our love for Him we free 
ourselves from all other attachments while yet we con- 
tinue to perform the allotted and normal duties, the 
- actions can in no wise bind us to a lower goal. A life 
dedicated to God, and lived for and in love of Him, 
is a life which is inevitably ennobled to the highest 
degree. “A seer who has been able to liberate himself 
from the tendency to self-seeking and from attach- 
ment is never over-pleased at any good fortune nor 
over-sorry at any misfortune. His is a calm and un- 
ruffled life. He takes the pleasures and sorrows of 
life without the least perturbation; he has no fear and 
no anger; he is firm in himself, unshakeable and un- 


118 HINDU MYSTICISM ° 


moved. Yet he follows the daily routine of social and 
other duties. 

The Gita seems to reject the doctrine that the body 
and mind may be made entirely motionless or inactive. 
Simple physical conditions could make the body move; 
and it urges that it is only a false show of morality 
when the body is controlled and yet one continues to 
think of doing bad things or to harbor thoughts of at- 
tachment. /The mysticism of the Gita consists in the 

( belief that the performance of actions without personal 
if attachment or self-seeking motive, and with a dedi- 
cation of their fruits to God, leads a man to his high- 

| est realization or liberation. Knowledge is praised, 
4 but only because true knowledge is conducive to the 
acceptance of such a life of desireless self-surrender 
to God. ¢ A man who has no personal motive in an 
~ action really does not perform the action though to all 
appearances he may seem to be so doing. It is only such 

a person who my truly be called a yogin. / His is a 
/ mind that is constantly fixed on God, and he performs 
_ all his duties for the sake of duty, out of reverence 
‘to the law, and with complete self-surrender to God. 4 
“ Self-surrender to God, or self-abnegation, however, — 
does not in the Gita involve a personal relationship of 
communion and love so much as it does the moral 
qualities of compassion, universal friendship, humility, 
contentment, want of attachment, self-control and 
purity. The expectation is emphasized that a person 
possessed of these moral qualities will be equally un- 
ruffled in sorrow and in happiness and that he will be 
the friend of all. Mind and intellect are to be concen- 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 119 


trated on God, and all actions are to be surrendered - 
to Him. This does not necessarily mean a superabun- 
dance of love. It may be an offshoot of the old yoga 
ideal of Patanjali. Here it is enjoined that the mind 
and intellect be concentrated on God, for, if this is 
done, God, being satisfied by this attachment, will help 
the yogin, and by His divine grace the yogin may 
achieve his goal much more easily than would otherwise 
be possible. The idea of the surrender of all actions to 
God is also to be found in the yoga of Patanjalli. 
Though the writer of the Gita admits breath-control 
as a discipline, yet his whole emphasis is laid on self- 
abnegation and self-surrender to God. Breath-control 
seems to be given only a subordinate value, that of a 
means of purifying the mind. We have, therefore, in 
the Gita a new solution of how a man may attain his 
highest liberation. He may remain a member of so- 
ciety and perform his allotted duties provided he has 
the right sort of moral elevation, has fixed his mind 
on God, has dissociated himself from all attachment, 
and, by self-surrender and self-abnegation, has de- 
voted himself to God. It is faith in the special grace 
of God to those who have surrendered themselves to 
Him that forms the essence of the Gita 5 
_ Though the idea of love for God does not show it- 
self in any prominent way in early Sanskrit literature, 
except in the Pancaratra literature, itis very improbable 
that the idea was not known from very early times. 
For some of the monotheistic Vedic hymns reveal an 
intimate personal relation with the deity, implying af- 


120 HINDU MYSTICISM 


fection; and in the Buddhist literature we find fre- 
quent references to love for the Buddha. 

In the Vishnu Purana we are given the story of 
Prahlada. Because of his devotion to Hari, his father 
tormented him in various ways and sought to put him 
to death by throwing him into fire or into the sea, by 
administering poison, and by various other methods. 
But he was saved from all these perils by the grace 
of Hari, and as a true devotee of the great Lord he 
was not in the least angry with his father. In all the 
adoration to Hari, whether on the part of Prahlada 
or as otherwise reported in the Vishnu Purana and in 
many of the other early Puranas, the great Lord is 
adored and praised metaphysically or philosophically as 
the great Being from whom everything has come forth 
and to whom everything will return, as the great con- 
troller of the universe and the great lord who is re- 
siding within us and is controlling us, and as the prime 
mover of the material cosmic world which is only a 
manifestation of his power. The subtle and primal 
cosmic matter is a concrete expression of the energy 
of the Lord. By His will it is set in active operation 
and transforms itself into the visible universe. The 
universe, therefore, though in a sense different from 
Him, is ultimately sustained and supported by Him; 
created by Him, it will ultimately return to Him. 
Many are the hymns in the Puranas which praise God 
in this philosophical manner and extol His great pow- 
ers. There are also numberless instances in which 
God is said to be pleased by philosophic meditation, 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 121 


and in consequence appears to the devotee, to speak 
with him, and to grant him the boon he seeks. 6 

The earlier literature does not always emphasize the 
feeling element in devotion. In the Vishnu Purana, 
however, we find that when God came face to face with 
Prahlada and asked him if he had a boon to crave, he 
besought the same attachment for the Lord that ordi- 
nary people have for sense enjoyments. The devotion 
that Prahlada had previously shown was a concentra- 
tion on God and a serene contemplation in which he be- 
came one, as it were, with the Lord. Ramanuja, the 
great Vedanta commentator of the 11th century, also 
defines devotion (bhakti) as a contemplation of God 
unbroken as the smooth and ceaseless flow of oil. But 
that such a contemplation necessarily implies love of 
God as its inner motive cannot be denied, and Rama- 
nuja also describes this ceaseless contemplation as hav- 
ing its main source in love for God, who was so dear to 
the devotee. But all that I wish to point out in this con- 
nection is that, in this aspect of devotion, contempla- 
tion and communion are more prominent than any ex- 
uberance of feeling. Prahlada was attached to God 
by his love of Him; God was the dearest of all dear 
things to him. It was this inmost and most deep- 
seated love for God that stirred him to withdraw his 
mind from all other things and to enter into such a 
contemplation of God that he became absorbed in 
Him, his whole personality lost in an ecstatic trance! 
unity with God. But this did not satisfy Prahlada. 
He desired such a devotion to God that the very 
thought of Him would bring the same sort of satis- 


122 HINDU MYSTICISM 


faction that persons ordinarily have in thinking of 
sense-objects. He desired not only contemplative 
union but longed also to taste God’s love as one tastes 
the pleasures of the senses. 7 

It is the contemplative union with God that we find 
in the Gita, and the transition to it from the state of 
yoga concentration is not difficult to understand. Self- 
surrender to God, the higher moral elevation, and con- 
centration on God are all present in Patanjali’s yoga. 
But here the objective was the destruction of the mind 
through psychical exercises accompanied by the com- 
plete inhibition of bodily and mental activity. Later 
the devotee seeks to attain liberation through the spe- 
cial grace of the Lord, which he can hope to acquire 
by such contemplative union. 

In later Indian thought the method of yoga on the 
one hand receded in favor of that of bhakti or devo- 
tion; on the other hand, its pure form became greatly 
complicated by the development of many mysterious 
doctrines and rites which became associated with it, 
sought its support, and claimed to be forms of it. But 
my time is limited and I cannot enter into these latter 
forms of mysticism. Nor can I describe those mys- 
tical religious movements which, arising as a reaction 
against the dominant religious ideal of extreme sense- 
control and the practice of desirelessness, tried to for- 
mulate certain principles and methods by which one 
could attain his highest goal not by sense-control but 
by sense-enjoyments. In these schemes, sense-indul- 
gence under certain specified conditions was consid- 
ered not only harmless but an indispensable desider- 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 123 


atum. They probably started among some of the Bud- 
dhist schools and they soon became very common 
among certain sects of the Hindus. But the elucida- 
tion of these ideas would require a special course of 
lectures. I shall, therefore, leave them and pass di- 
rectly to the development of the mysticism of love to 
God, as it is presented in the Bhagavata Purana and 
other relevant later literature. 8 

It is in the Bhagavata Purana, whose date is prob- 
ably the eleventh century A. D., that we first meet with 
the idea of devotion as the supreme source of a bliss 
or spiritual enjoyment that is itself the highest goal 
and so completely usurps the place of wisdom or philo- 
sophical knowledge. Even in the Gita true wisdom 
was regarded as a fire which reduces to ashes, as it 
were, all the past deeds whose fruits were not yet on 
the point of being enjoyed. But in the Bhagavata we 
read (11.14) that it is bhakti which destroys all the 
past sins. The old principle of self-surrender to God 
and a life spent in God-intoxication is the happiest of 
all lives. A man of such self-surrender has nothing 
else but God as his possession: he is supremely self- 
controlled, and the enjoyment that he has from his 
constant association with God keeps him absolutely 
happy and content with all things. Such a man does 
not aspire to any heavenly happiness or even to lib- 
eration. Devotion is regarded as having also a pro-_ 
tective virtue. Even an ordinary devotee who is often 
led away by his sense attachments is so purified by 
this devotion that he is no longer overcome by exter- 
nal attachments or passions. The Lord can be realized 


124 HINDU MYSTICISM 


by bhakti and by nothing else. Neither the perform- 
ance of the allotted duties nor knowledge combined 
with the austere discipline of tapas can purify a man 
who is devoid of all bhakti. This bhakti, however, is 
no longer the old contemplative meditation of God, 
stirred by a deep-seated love. It is the ebullition of 
feelings and emotions of attachment to God. It mani- 
fests itself in the soft melting of the heart and ex- 
presses itself in tears, inarticulate utterances of speech, 
laughter, songs and dances, such as can only be pos- 
sible through a mad intoxication of love. This kind 
of bhakti is entirely different from the calm contem- 
plative life of complete self-abnegation and self-sur- 
render to God and a mind wholly immersed in God 
and the thought of God. 9 

The Bhagavata Purana is aware of the three meth- 
ods of approach by knowledge, work and devotion, 
and also of the approach through yoga. Moreover, 
while emphasizing the superiority of devotion, it does 
not deny the efficacy of the other methods of ap- 
proach. The latter are also described in the Gita; in- 
deed, the Gita also emphasizes the bhakti method. Both 
-the Gita and Bhagavata criticize the older course of 
the Vedic sacrifices, but neither of them has the bold- 
ness to pass an unconditional condemnation. The Gita 
says that one should perform these sacrifices, which 
are obligatory, with a pure and desireless mind. The 
fault of those who devote themselves to sacrifices is 
that they are filled with ordinary desires for pleasures 
and are not acquainted’ with any higher goal of life. To 
one who is infused with the higher ideal of life and can 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 125 


emancipate himself from desires by self-surrender 
to God, the performance of sacrifices, as of any other 
kinds of action, can do no harm. Indeed, it is good 
that under these circumstances one should not forsake 
his allotted duties. 

The Bhagavata holds that the only efficacy of the 
Vedic restrictions and prohibitions is to be found in 
the fact that they offer a check on the natural inclina- 
tions of man and ultimately help him to desist from 
sense-activities and sense-propensities. The promise, 
of heavenly rewards as the result of the performance 
of sacrifices is only a trick to incline people to ac- 
commodate themselves to modes of life offering only a 
restricted scope of sense-gratification. Its appeal is 
therefore only to those of the lowest plane. Those 
who are of the next higher order and have been able 


to accommodate themselves to a life of desirelessness © 


would perform the obligatory duties without in the 
least looking forward to their fruits. In the next 
higher stage, a man may follow the path of yoga, or 
the path of wisdom respecting the supreme unity of 
Brahman, or any other line of devotion. 10 

The path of devotion, however, is most fitted for. 
those who are neither too much attached to sense- 
desires nor too much detached from them. Such men 
may adopt the line of bhakti and thereby purify their 
minds and, by self-surrender to God and the taste of 
supreme human happiness in their love, become averse 
to all other desires and enjoyments. Thus they learn 
to live a life of supreme devotion. They come to ex- 
perience such intense happiness that all their limbs 


nr Oe DRINAT 
MIF NE 


Ww 


NOV 
A 


| 


14 1992 
A 


2 


Ap > 
beady PAPE CN 


126 HINDU MYSTICISM 


and senses become saturated therewith and their minds 
swim, as it were, in a lake of such supreme bliss that 
even the bliss of ultimate liberation loses its charm. 
Such an individual desires to live on, enjoying the love 
of God with heart, soul and body. When he acquires 
such a bhakti, it purifies his mind from all passions 
and impurities, and destroys all the bonds of his deeds 
and their fruits. For such a person is so attached to 
God that there is nothing else for which he cares; 
without any effort on his part, other attachments and 
inclinations lose their hold over him. So great is his 
passion for God that it consumes all his earthly pas- 
sions. It is so great that it is its own satisfaction; it 
seeks nothing beyond itself. It stands by itself. Asa 
great spring of happiness, it is ultimate and self-com- 
plete. 

The bhakta who is filled with such a passion does 
not experience it merely as an undercurrent of joy 
which waters the depths of his heart in his own pri- 
vacy, but as a torrent that overflows the caverns of 
his heart into all his senses. Through all his senses he 
realizes it as if it were a sensuous delight; with his 
heart and soul he feels it as a spiritual intoxication of 
joy. Such a person is beside himself with this love of 
God. He sings, laughs, dances and weeps. He is no 
longer a person of this world. The germ of this love 
is already found in the Vishnu Purana, where Prahlada 
seeks as a boon that bhakti which is an attachment for 
God no less strong than the attraction to sense-objects 
felt by ordinary sensual persons. 11 

Vallabha, a later writer, defines bhakti as a great, 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 127 


firm feeling of love, associated with a sense of God’s | 
superiority and greatness. It places the bhakta or 
the devotee in a subordinate position. The latter is 
described as approaching God as one approaches his 
master, desiring mercy and protection and soliciting 
His special grace. But this idea of seeking protec- 
tion and special grace, with a sense of God’s supreme 
superiority, and finding oneself happy in thinking of 
the greatness of the superior Being, is by no means 
restricted to Hindu circles. There are numerous evi- 
dences of Buddhists praising the Buddha and seeking 
his protection, and finding great joy in extolling his 
great qualities and powers. Bhaktishataka of Rama- 
chandra Bharati of the 13th century may be referred 
to as a typical instance. 

This kind of bhakti is also associated with the doc- 
trine of prapatti, or taking refuge in God, and is to 
be found among many classes of Vaishnavas, includ- 
ing the followers of Ramanuja. Prapatti consists in 
taking refuge in God with great faith and with the 
strong conviction that it is God and God alone who 
can help one to attain one’s end. Like the fabled bird 
Chataka that would rather die of thirst than drink 
any water other than that falling from the clouds, the 
devotee looks to God for succor, and would seek no 
other help. Believing that God alone is the saviour, 
the devotee depends entirely on Him, and refuses to 
take any other course than that of remaining in entire 
dependence upon Him. God, for him, is the great 
master of whom he is the humble servant; God is the 
controller alike of his mind and his body. 12 


128 HINDU MYSTICISM 


This is only a detailed method of the self-surrender 
already referred to in the Gita. Naturally the latter 
also is based on a belief in the great mercy of God, 
who is sure to free the devotee who with complete 
reliance has taken refuge in Him as his master and 
Lord. But in this case the prapatti or taking refuge 
in God is always with a purpose. It is for the realiza- 
tion of an end that the devotee relies on the mercy, 
goodness or grace of God. He believes that he can 
by this means alone attain what he wants. But the 
bhakti praised in the Bhagavata is of a sort superior 
to this. It is a devotion without motive of any kind. 
It is the love of God proceeding directly from the 
heart and not prompted by any reason. The true bhakta 
does not love God because he seeks something from 
Him, but he loves Him freely and spontaneously. He 
sacrifices everything for this love. It is his only pas- 
sion in life and he is filled with God. God is attracted 
by such love and always abides with such a bhakta 
and encourages his great love for him. All distinc- 
tions of caste, creed or social status vanish for those 
who are filled with this true and sincere devotion to 
God. It isa great leveller. To the eye of a true bhakta 
all beings are but manifestations of God’s power, and 
they are all equal. Impelled by this idea of universal 
equality and by the idea of God being in all things 
and all things in God, he is filled with such a sweet- 
ness of temper that howsoever he may be tyrannized 
over by any one he cannot think of inflicting any in- 
jury in return. Nor can he remain unaffected when 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 129 


he sees the sufferings of his fellow-beings, however 
lowly or depraved they may be. 13 

The question is sometimes asked whether such devo- 
tional systems of mysticism are pantheistic. To this . 
no satisfactory reply can be given without a proper 
definition of pantheism. Without entering into any 
discussion regarding the meaning of this term or the 
distinctive metaphysical features of the different sys- 
tems of Vaishnavism, I can here say only that all these 
systems in a manner agree as to the duality of God 
and man. They consider man as a manifestation of 
the power of God. Though ultimately sustained and 
always controlled by God, man is for all empirical 
purposes different from Him. This psychological, log- 
ical and ontological difference between God and man 
is the basis of devotion and worship. In the devel- 
opment of devotion there may, however, come a stage 
in the mind of the devotee when he becomes one with 
the Lord in the exuberance of his feelings. But at 
the next instant the experience may again be differen- 
tiated into a feeling of duality and of distinction be- 
tween him and God. The devotee may then come to 
regard himself as a servant of God or His son, or 
friend, or spouse. It cannot be said, in this inner 
dialectic of feeling, which of the phases is the truer 
and has a greater claim to our acceptance. For we 
have here an alternation of feeling which sometimes 
expresses itself as an experience of communion or 
contemplative unity with God and then by its own 
inner movement passes for its own realization into 
the various other modes of relationships through which 


130 HINDU MYSTICISM 


ordinary human love expresses itself. It is a circular 
movement. At one stage within it, man becomes 
God, but, at the other, God slowly becomes man and 
participates with him in diverse human relationships 
of love and its joys. 14 

Love of God is not a thing which we produce in 
ourselves by excessive brooding or by self-hypnotism 
or by any other method. It is a permanent flame, 
slowly burning in the caverns of all our hearts. Only, 
however, when it gains strength through study, and 
through association with other devotees at an oppor- 
tune moment, do we come to know of it. The basis 
of all religions is this love of God. For if this love 
of God were not vital to us, all that the great proph- 
ets have been trying to preach would have been un- 
real and futile. If it were not a real experience which 
in some sense is shared by us all, an experience which 
ennobles us and raises us far above the selfish petti- 
nesses of life, no prophet and no religious deed would 
be able to appeal to our higher natures and establish 
the claims of religion. Religion is by nature an other- 
worldly attitude of life—one which we have along with 
our worldly attitude. ‘Man does not live by bread 
alone,” is a very elastic proposition. If we by nature 
wanted only that which satisfies our appetites, there 
would have been no art, no philosophy, and no religion. 
Our being is such that side by side with the tendencies 
that take us to the satisfaction of our appetites or to 
sense-gratifications, there are others which in an unac- 
countable manner lift us higher. The senses when 
properly exercised give us sense pleasures; the mind, 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 131 


through its activities of logical thinking, affords the 
corresponding joys and the satisfaction of truth-seek- 
ing; and the spirit longs to associate itself with some 
higher ideal, with a greater and superior being, or with 
a transcendent unspeakable something of which it has 
at first only an indistinct vision. 15 

Reason moves within a circle and cannot get be- 
yond it. When the ultimate reason of reasoning is 
to be sought, we have to rest in a tendency, tempera- 
ment or feeling. Ask a philosopher why he engages 
in philosophical speculation. He may say that he seeks 
to know the truth of some particular or some universal 
problem. But ask him again why he so seeks and he 
will probably say that he does it because he finds 
therein a special satisfaction. The satisfaction, though 
not measureable in physical terms, is yet enough for 
him. He possesses intellectual curiosity and it must 
be gratified. Ask a scientist and you will probably 
receive the same answer. One can never explain our 
endeavors in any of the higher planes of life, philos- 
ophy, art or religion, by reference to any of the ordi- 
nary needs and objects of life. These higher activi- 
ties are apparently without any reason, but still they 
justify themselves and they are our very existence. 
That bread alone should not satisfy man is part of his 
very nature and there is no getting away therefrom. 
It is an absolute fact with man. The case of religion 
is very similar. There is a spiritual longing in the 
heart of man, indistinct and undefined, but steady like 
a flame tapering upwards to some divine goal. The 
mystics of the Bhagavata Purana of whom I am now 


132 HINDU MYSTICISM 


speaking called it the love of God. They felt that 
there is nothing higher than the culture of this love. 
The seed of it they regarded as latent within the 
individual. Hearing and singing the praises of God 
stimulates its growth—sprinkles it with water, as it 
were—until it ascends higher and higher and eventu- 
ally reaches God. Like an expert gardener the in- 
dividual has always to see that no beast of a sin, 
tramples this tender creeper, and that no offshoots, no 
branches of worldly desires, obstruct its upward 
growth. Whenever he is tempted by worldly desires 
or to pray to God for worldly good, he is allowing off- 
shoots to grow on the body of the tender creeper of 
God’s love and to interfere with its upward growth. 
He must cut them off and make the creeper of love 
grow freely in one direction, until it connects him with 
God and he thus comes to enjoy its sweet fruits. 16 

The type of bhakti which is preached in the Bhaga- 
vata Purana is well illustrated in the life of Chai- 
tanya, who was born in Navadvip, in Bengal, in 1486 
and died in 1534. In his life we find an exemplifica- 
tion of how love of God may be cultivated for its 
own sake, without any kind of ulterior motive whether 
of liberation or of happiness. In the accounts which 
his biographers have given of his mysticism, a dis- 
tinction is drawn between the experience of God’s 
love as self-surrender to Him, or taking refuge in 
Him through attachment to Him, and a driving passion 
of love for God, i. e., between what they call rati and 
preman. A distinctiou‘is also drawn between a course 
of attachment and love of God adopted out of a sense 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 133 


of duty or of reverence for the scriptures and a pas- 
sion of love which springs spontaneously and over- 
flows unrestrainedly. A distinction is further made 
between love of God with an overwhelming sense of 
His greatness and superiority, awe and reverence, and 
love of God as an easy flow of affection to one who is 
nearest and dearest to us. Real intimacy with God is 
only possible in the case of the latter alternative, when 
a free flow of passionate love springing spontaneously 
from within associates us with God as the most inti- 
mate friend and beloved without whom we cannot live. 
Chaitanya acknowledges, of course, the peaceful calm 
y and tender love for God called shanta, and the sub- 
mission of the heart to God in obligation and service 
to Him, called the service attitude, dasya; but to look 
upon God as one’s own most intimate friend, sakhya, is 
regarded by him as higher than either of the first two 
attitudes. To look upon God as one’s dearest beloved 
or lover, or to love Him with a feminine love as that 
with which a woman loves her beloved, he considers 
the deepest, sweetest and most perfect love, mad- 
hura. 

- According to the legend, Lord Krishna was born of 
Devaki and Vasudeva in a prison-house where the 
King Kansa, who was afraid of the birth of the infant 
who was foretold to be his future destroyer, had con- 
fined his mother Devaki. Later Krishna was car- 
ried to the house of a cowherd chief, Nanda. There 
he grew up, having as his associates cowherd boys 
with whom he was very friendly. He came to be re- 
garded as God incarnate, as the result of a number 


134 HINDU MYSTICISM 


of miracles which he performed. The wives of most 
of the cowherd people, who were, in reality but the 
female incarnations of God’s energy, became attached 
to him and loved him dearly. They were sorely pained 
over the separation when he later on left for Mathura, 
a city at some distance from Brindaban, the scene of 
his early activities. Krishna’s early life illustrates 
the love for him of his fostermother Yashoda, wife 
of the cowherd chief Nanda, the love for him of his 
cowherd friends, and the love of the cowherd girls for 
him as their lover. Inasmuch as Krishna was consid- 
ered to be God, these three kinds of love for Krishna 
as described in the tenth chapter of the Bhagavata 
Purana, together with the other two time-honored 
modes of loving God, viz., the peaceful quiet love of 
God and the love of God as God’s servant, came to 
- be considered as the five fundamental modes of loving 
God. The attention of the later Vaishnavas was so 
much drawn to the excellence of the three kinds of 
love described in the Bhagavata, and particularly of 
the love of God as one’s lover, that no less than four- 
teen commentaries have been published dealing with 
this portion of the Bhagavata Purana. Love of 
Krishna was the most absorbing passion of Chaitanya’s 
life and, though he came to taste all the different ways 
of loving God, it was the sweet love of Krishna as 
the lover, husband and Lord that was the most im- 
portant feature of his life. 18 

Chaitanya’s elder brother had turned a recluse. So 
his mother Sachi Devi would not at first send Chai- 
tanya to school, since she believed that it is through 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 135 


knowledge that one learns the transitoriness of all 
things, and she thought it better that her son should 
grow untutored than that he become learned and re- 
nounce the world. So Chaitanya, or Nimai as he was 
called in his early life, grew wild. But he gradually 
grew so wild that he could no longer be tolerated, and 
so he was sent to school. He mastered Sanskrit gram- 
mar and logic very thoroughly and at twenty started 
a school himself. Numerous anecdotes are told by his 
biographers of his great scholarship and of occasions 
when he defeated reputed scholars in open debates. 
At this period he scoffed at all religions and was con- 
sidered by many to be absolutely godless. In the mean- 
while he had settled down in life. His first wife hav- 
ing died, he married again. But at this time Chai- 
tanya’s deeper nature began to reveal itself and he 
wanted to visit the temple of the God Krishna at Gaya, 
several hundred miles distant from his village. On his 
| way thither he met a great Vaishnava saint and at his 
sight his higher spiritual life was stirred into life. 
When he reached the temple of Gaya he experienced 
a rapturous fervor of love for Krishna, and he became 
an entirely different man. “Where is my God Krish- 
na,” became his chief cry. In thinking of Krishna, 
in seeking Him, in relating his vision of Him, he 
would be so overpowered as often to become uncon- 
scious. It was in this condition that he was brought 
home from Gaya by his friends. He spent his days 
and nights in reciting and singing the name of God. 
He, his intimate friend Nityananda, and his other 
friends used thus to sing the name of God and to dance 


136 HINDU MYSTICISM 


about with a particular type of music produced by spe- 
cial musical instruments. This music touched the in- 
ner, spiritual chords of life and brought on a great 
religious intoxication in all the hearers, and par- 
ticularly in Chaitanya and his followers. Chaitanya 
lived continually in this state of religious intoxication. 
He had no respect for caste or creeds but was a friend 
of all. He could not continue this sort of life midst 
the worldly conditions of his native village. Hence 
he renounced the world to preach the love of God all 
over India. In this work he spent the rest of his years, 
going about from place to place, thousands of miles, 
on foot. The vision of God was always before him 
in the form of Lord Krishna. His whole life was a 
passionate flow of love for this deity, and this emotion 
was generally so intense that as he sang and danced 
like a mad man he often became unconscious. He had 
so thoroughly identified himself as a partner in the 
episodes of the life of Krishna as described in the 
Bhagavata that the slightest incidents deriving either 
from personal conversations and relations or from 
the scenes of nature sufficed to suggest to him similar 
adventures or events in the life of Krishna. 19 

Chaitanya described God’s love in its most exalted 
form as being like the love of a woman in deep attach- 
ment to a man, where the attachment is so deep that 
all sex considerations have ceased—a love so intense 
that only an insatiable desire of union in love remains 
and all the earthly relations of man and woman have 
ceased. God, he taught, is himself a great controller 
of us all, and in His eternal love is always attracting 


x 


CLASSICAL MYSTICISM 137 


us, drawing us up toward greater and greater perfec? 
tion. Love is His very nature. So it is only through 
a passionate love of Him that we can enjoy His deep 
love for us. The older ideals of liberation, of heavenly 
happiness, of the destruction of the mind and the like 
were considered by Chaitanya to be absolutely insig- 
nificant for a person whose mind has been fired by a, 
great passion that flows in torrents to God, the great | 
ocean of love, who washes away all his sins and de- 
fects. In the end, Chaitanya, in an outbreak of divine 
passion which he was unable to restrain, jumped into 
the deep blue ocean on the South and was lost forever 
to human eyes. So passed away one drop of God’s 
love in human shape into that eternal and limitless 
Ocean of divine love from which it had descended 
upon the earth. 20 


Deb GER A a Ma 
ANAS Nad ity 
1 : eo ees 


¥ y 
AP by 


. 1 Vid "- 7 
4 ava ‘ 
. a typ alia 
bhlh at VL ws 
? reat, > By } 


BAe ye 


egy, 


bit Ma Je 
PP teh ‘nad 
“it 1a, i" rx ?, 


patina 


RECIURE? Vi 
POPULAR DEVOTIONAL MYSTICISM 


} i Me Ns , 
Aen vib 
; ARYA 


* 
* 
ry 

¥ 


ak 
i Ae 


i Na Binge 


Sauda 
Chae aviNus 
pa pasta 


j 
ane 


SERS eee 
Nn Que 


a! d Li mp Re) 
DY eGo ae 
eit ont oA 


LECTURE Vi 
POPULAR DEVOTIONAL MYSTICISM 


HE chief features of the passionate devotion for 

God described in the last lecture are its spon- 
taneity and its transference of human relations and 
emotions to God through the medium of the Krishna 
legend described in the Bhagavata Purana. It pre- 
supposes the theory of the incarnation of God as man, 
which makes it possible to think of God in human re- 
lations and in human ways. The idea of God as father 
is indeed as old as the Vedas. It is expressed also in 


oWseveral passages of the Gita (9,17, 11.43, 11.44, 14.4) 


and in the Puranas, in the Nyaya-bhashya of Vatsy- 
ayana, as well as elsewhere. Nevertheless it did not, 
during this period, seem to gain much strength in the 
way of fostering an intimate relation with God or of 
affecting worship. Wherever it appears it seems to be 
but one of the many passing phases in which God’s re- 
lation to man is viewed when God is praised and ex- 
tolled in His greatness as Lord and Master. But in 
the new school of bhakti the conception of God as 
creator, supporter, father, lord and master, or as the 
ultimate philosophical principle, is subordinated to the 
conception of god as the nearest and dearest. The 
most important feature is His nearness to and His 
intimacy with us—not His great powers, which create 


141 


142 HINDU MYSTICISM 


a distance between Him and us. That He is the great- 
est of the great and the Highest of the high, that there 
is nothing greater and higher than Him is admitted by 
all. His greatness, however, does not reveal the secret 
of why He should be so dear to us. He may be the 
greatest, highest, loftiest and the most transcendent, 
but yet He has made His home in our hearts and has 
come down to our level to give us His affection and 
love. Indeed He is conceived as so near to us that 
we can look upon Him and love Him with the love 
of a very dear friend, or with the devotion and the in- 
tensity of love of a spouse. Love is a great leveller; 
the best way of realizing God is by making Him an 
equal partner in life by the force of intense love. 1 

The legend of Krishna supplies a human touch to 
God’s dealings with men. With the help of this legend 
the bhaktas of the new school, by a peculiar mystical 
turn of mind, could conceive of God as at once a great 
being with transcendent powers and also as an inti- 
mate friend or a dear lover maintaining human rela- 
tions with his bhaktas. The episodes of Krishna’s 
life in Brindaban are spiritualized. They are often 
conceived to happen on a non-physical plane where 
both Krishna and his partners are thought to play 
their parts of love and friendship in non-physical bod- 
ies. Thus they are not regarded as particular events 
that took place at specific points of time in the life 
of a particular man, Krishna. They are interpreted 
as the eternal, timeless and spaceless play of God with 
His own associates and His energies, with whom He 
eternally realizes Himself in love and friendship. The 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 143 


part that his bhaktas had to play was to identify them- 
selves, by a great stretch of sympathy, as partners in 
or spectators of God’s love-play, and find their fullest 
satisfaction in the satisfaction of God. For a true 
bhakta, it is not necessary, therefore, that his sense- 
inclinations should be destroyed. What is necessary 
is merely that these should be turned towards God and . 
not towards himself, i. e., that he use his senses not 
for his own worldly satisfaction but to find enjoyment 
and satisfaction in the great love-drama of God by 
identifying himself with one of the spiritual part- 
ners of God in his love-play. Hence it is not essential 
_ that all desires and sense-functions, as the Gita says, 
be destroyed, or that the individual behave as if he had 
desires while yet being absolutely desireless. It was 
required that the bhakta have the fullest satisfaction 
of his sense and inclinations by participating in the 
joys of Krishna in his divine love-play. For such 
participation and vicarious enjoyment was regarded 
as true love (preman), while the satisfaction of one’s 
own senses or of one’s own worldly purposes was 
viewed as a vicious passion. Thus here we have a 
new scheme of life. The ideal of desirelessness and 
absolute self-control is replaced by that of participa- 
tion in a drama of divine joy, and the desires are given 
full play in the direction of God. Desires are not to 
be distinguished; only their directions are to be 
changed. 2 

Though this form of bhakti has iff various circles © 
at times been debased and encroached upon by diverse 
kinds of eroticism or erotic mysticism, it cannot be 


144 HINDU MYSTICISM 


denied that many of the immediate and later follow- 
ers of Chaitanya achieved great spiritual success in 
this form of bhakti-worship. In the Narayaniya chap- 
ter of the fifth canto of the Mahabharata God is spoken 
of as a father, mother and teacher; and in the Yoga 
Sutra of Patanjali and elsewhere the idea is often 
expressed that God originally taught the Vedas to the 
sages and that He is therefore the original teacher. 
In all these writings, however, the love of God super- 
cedes deep reverence. The true bhakta looked upon 
God as the divine dispenser; he considered all that he 
had—kingdoms, riches, wife and all that he could call 
his own—to be God’s. Love of God as the mother of 
the world plays an important part in the religious at- 
titude of many bhakti worshippers. This is particularly 
true in the case of Ramprasad and others, notably the 
sage Ramakrishna of recent times. And in this at- 
tribution of motherliness to God both Ramprasad and 
Ramakrishna view Him as a tender mother who is al- 
ways helping her child, condoning his sins and trans- 
gressions, partial to his weaknesses and concerned to 
better him. Nevertheless He cannot be attained by 
_ mere formal worship but only through a whole-hearted 
worship, with a proper control of the sense-inclina- 
tions. 6 

The theory of bhakti seems to have its original 
source in the Pancaratra school of Vaishnavism. 
However, the doctrine of supreme self-surrender to 
Narayana, Hari*or Krishna as the one and only God 
in disregard of all other mythical gods, represents a 
teaching of the Gita, the chief work of the Ekanti 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 145 


school of Vaishnavas; and this doctrine forms the 
universal basis of all kinds of bhakti worship, though 
among the Shaktas or Shaivas the supreme deity went 
by the name of Shakti or Shiva. The Gita plainly 
teaches, as we have already pointed out in our previ- 
ous lecture, that there is no other God but Narayana 
or Krishna, that He alone is great and that we should 
lay aside all other modes of religious worship and take 
refuge in Him. In Chaitanya this devotion to God 
developed into a life-absorbing passion; yet in all ad- 
vanced forms of bhakti the chief emphasis is on su- 
preme attachment to God. The sort of bhakti which 
Prahlada asked as a boon from Hari was such an at- 
tachment for Him as worldly persons have for the 
objects of their senses. Such a bhakti, as described 
in the Bhagavata or the Shandilya sutra, is not 
worship out of a sense of duty. or mere meditation on 
God or mere singing of His name, but it is deep affec- 
tion (anurakt:). It is therefore neither knowledge 
nor any kind of activity, but is a feeling. And the 
taking of refuge (prapatti) in God is also not moti- 
vated by knowledge but by a deep affection which im- 
pels the individual to take his first and last stay in 
Him. But though a feeling, this bhakti does not bind 
anyone to the world. For the world is but a manifesta- 
tion of God’s maya, and God so arranges for those 
who love Him that His maya cannot bind His bhakta 
to the world. 4 

But how is such a bhakti possible? For this also 
we have ultimately to depend on God. There is a 
passage in the Upanishads (Katha II. 23) which states 


146 HINDU MYSTICISM 


that He can be attained by him whom He (God) 
chooses. This text has often been cited to indicate 
that it is only the chosen man of God who has the 
privilege of possessing a special affection for God. 
Vallabha declares this special favor (pushti) of God 
indispensable for the rise of such an affection for God. 
He further holds that according to the different de- 
grees of the favor of God one may have different de- 
grees of affection for Him, though by avoiding the 
commission of sinful actions, by cleansing the mind of 
the impurities of worldly passions, and by inclining 
the mind towards God, one may go a great way in de- 
serving His special favor. It is only by the highest 
special favor of God that one’s affection or attachment 
for Him can become an all-consuming and all-engulf- 
ing passion (vyasana—see the Prameyaratnarnava). 
True devotion to God, affection or love for Him, must 
always be an end in itself and never a means to any 
other end, not even salvation or liberation, so much 
praised in the classical systems of philosophy. This 
all-absorbing passion for God is the bhakta’s eternal 
stay in God, and dearer to him than liberation or any 
other goal of religious realization. s) 

It is not out of place here to mention that among 
various Hindu sects it was held that an engrossing 
passion of any kind may so possess the whole mind 
that all other mental functions may temporarily be 
suspended, and that gradually, through the repeated 
occurrence of such a passion, the other mental func- 
tions may be altogether annihilated. Thus, absorp- 
tion in a single supreme passion may make the mind 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 147 


so one-pointed that all other attachments are tran- 
scended and the individual attains Brahmahood (see 
the Spandapradipika). In the Upanishads (Brihada-, 
ranyaka IV. 3.21) we find that the bliss of Brahman 
is compared with the loving embrace of a beloved 
woman. To love one’s husband and to serve him as 
a god was regarded from very early times as the only 
spiritualizing duty for a woman. Hence the idea that 
ordinary man-and-woman love may be so perfected as 
to become a spiritual force easily won acceptance in 
certain circles. This man-and-woman love developed 
an absorbing and dominant passion, completely inde- 
pendent and unaided by other considerations of marital 
and parental duties. In its non-marital forms, it was 
considered to be capable of becoming so deep as to 
become by itself a spiritualizing force. Moreover, it 
was thought that the transition from human love to di- 
vine love was so easy that a man who had specialized 
in the experience of deep man-and-woman love of a 
non-marital type could easily change the direction of 
his love from woman to God, and thus indulge in a 
passionate love for God. The story is told that in his 
early career the saint Bilvamangala became so deeply 
attached to a courtesan named Cintamani that one 
night he swam across a river supported by a floating 
corpse, then scaled a high wall by holding on to the 
tail of a serpent, and finally well-nigh broke his limbs 
in jumping down from the wall into the yard of Cin- 
tamani. The woman, however, rebuked him, saying 
that if he entertained toward God a little of the love 
that he had for her he would be a saint. This pro- 


148 HINDU MYSTICISM 


duced such a wonderful change in Bilvamangala that 
he forthwith became a God-intoxicated man. Later, 
in his saintly life, when he once again felt attracted by 
a woman, he plucked out his eyes so that external 
forms and colors might not further tempt him. This 
blind saint became one of the best-reputed among all 
the saints, devoting his life to the love of God. 6 

Thus there grew up a school of mystics, including 
the great poet Candidas and others, who devoted 
themselves to the cultivation of the spirituality of love 
and the deification of human love, and who thought 
that more could be learned through such efforts than 
through any other mode of worship. “There is no 
god or goddess in Heaven who can teach spiritual 
truths more than the person whom one loves with the 
whole heart.” The goddess Basuli whom Candidas 
worshipped is said to have admonished him to adhere 
to his love for the washerwoman Rami, saying that 
Rami would be able to teach him truths that no one 
else could, and to lead him to such bliss as not even 
the creator himself might do. A somewhat similar 
idea of the purificatory power of intense human love 
is found in the Vishnupurana. In describing the il- 
licit love of a cowherd-girl for Krishna, the Vishnu- 
purana says that at her separation from him she un- 
derwent so much suffering that all her sins were ex- 
piated, and that in thinking of him in her separation 
from him she had so much delight as would be equal to 
the collective culmination of all the happiness that she 
could enjoy as a reward of her virtuous actions. By 
the combination of the suffering and the bliss, she ex- 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 149 


hausted all the fruits of her bad and good deeds, and 
thus by her thoughts of Krishna she attained her lib- 
eration. Somewhat allied with the idea of human wor- 
ship, though not of the man-and-women type just men- 
tioned, is a certain attitude sometimes adopted toward 
man as a religious teacher. The latter was considered 
in many circles as the representative of God on earth, 
and self-surrender, love and devotion to him was 
considered to lead one to God. This sort of worship 
was prevalent among the Hindus and the Buddhists 
from pretty early times. One fact should be noted. 
It was associated with reverence and a sense of the 
religious teacher’s superiority, whereas the other type 
of worship (through romantic love) raised the man 
and woman by their constancy and sufferings for each 
other and the happiness that each enjoys in the com- 
pany and thought of the other. In this latter case, 
love is religion, and all pain endured for the beloved, 
joy. With the exception of the phase of love-mystic- 
ism just mentioned, I have thus far confined myself to 
a description of different forms of mysticism as por- 
trayed in Sanskrit writings. I shall now turn to the 
mysticism of divine love that found expression in the 
vernaculars of North India and of the South. But 
this is a vast subject and I can say.only a few words. 7 

Let me advert first to the Alvar saints of the South, 
the earliest of whom belonged to the second and the 
latest to the tenth century, A. D. They all wrote 
psalms or songs in Tamil, a Dravidian tongue of South 
India. They were inspired by the teachings of Vaish- 
navism when it travelled from the North to the South. 


150 HINDU MYSTICISM 


Their doctrines were more or less similar to those 
touched upon in the preceding lecture in connection 
with the bhakti mysticism of the Bhagavata Purana 
and the Gita. They are embodied in psalms and not 
in any connected philosophical treatise. Describing - 
his insatiable love of God, Nam Alvar says: 


“As I dote on the Lord of Katkarai (God) 
Whose streets with scarlet lily are perfumed 
My heart for his wonderful graces melts 
How then can I, my restless love suppress?’ 


With reference to Nam Alvar, Govindacarya has 
said: “Briefly, Saint Nam Alvar declares that when 
one is overcome by bhakti exaltation, trembling in 
every cell of his being, he must freely and passively 
allow this influence to penetrate his being, and carry 
him beyond all known states of consciousness; never 
from fear or shame that bystanders may take him for 
a madman, ought the exhibition of this bhakti-rapture 
that deluges his being, to be suppressed. The very 
madness is the means of distinguishing him from the 
ordinary mortals to whom such beatific vision is neces- 
sarily denied. The very madness is the bhakta’s pride. 
In that very madness, the saint exhorts, “run, jump, 
cry, laugh and sing, and let every man witness it.” 8 

Let us now pass on to other saints of the South, 
Namdev and Tukaram. The bhakti school referred 
to in the last lecture, and most of the other branches 
of this school, developed under purely Brahminic tra- 
ditions and in the shadow of Brahminic scriptures, 


1 Govindacarya’s translation. 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 151 


the Puranas and the like. And though in the Bhaga- 
vata we find that even the foreign and aboriginal races 
of the Kiratas, Hunas, Andhras, Pulindas, Pukkasas, 
Abhiras, Suhmas, Yavanas, Khasas, etc., become pure 
if they are attached to God, yet the Brahminic civiliza- 
tion had such a hold over the country that the cult of 
bhakti grew up around the traditional cult of Rama, 
or Krishna, Shiva or Shakti. Representation of God 
in images and their worship by the bhaktas, faith in 
the legends of Krishna and other inferior deities as 
told in the Puranas, preferential treatment of the 
Brahmin caste, respect to the Vedas, etc., became very 
intimately associated with the doctrine of bhakti 
preached in the Puranas and other Sanskrit scriptures. 
We know, of course, that the bhakti cult spread also 
among foreigners. Thus, in the second century B. C., 
the Greek king Heliodorus, son of Dios, dedicated to 
Vasudeva a flagstaff bearing an image of the bird Ga- 
ruda, on which the God Vasudeva or Krishna was said 
to ride. Now, though the sons of some demons are 
also known to have been great bhaktas, as described 
in the Puranas, yet the latter all accepted the tradi- 
tional God Vasudeva and they regarded the legends 
associated with Krishna or Vasudeva as real episodes 
of his life. In the thirteenth century A. D., we find 
that Visoba Khecar, the teacher of the bhakta Nam- 
dev, denounced the worship of images as a substi- 
tute for the God Krishna or for any other god. He is 
said to have instructed Namdev to abandon image- 
worship, saying: “A stone god never speaks. What 
possibility then of his removing the disease of mun- 


152 HINDU MYSTICISM 


dane existence? A stone image is regarded as God, 
but the true God is wholly different. If a stone god 
fulfills desires, how is it he breaks when struck? Those 
who adore a god made of stone, lose everything 
through their folly. Those who say and hear that a 
god of stone speaks to his devotees are both of them 
fools. Whether a holy place is small or large there 
is no god but stone or water. There is no place which 
is devoid of God. That God has shown ‘Nama in his 
heart and thus Khecar conferred a blessing on him.’” 
Namdev was a tailor by caste and he worshipped the 
idol at Pandharpur in the Maratha country in South 
India. However, he had a full knowledge of the true 
nature of God, as had other bhaktas of Sanskritic tra- 
ditions. Thus he says: ‘The Veda has to speak by 
Thy might and the Sun has to move round; such is the 
might of Thee, the Lord of the Universe. Knowing 
this essential truth I have surrendered myself to Thee. | 
By Thy might it is that the clouds have to pour down 
rain, mountains to rest firm and the wind to blow.’ 
Again: “Vows, fasts and austerities are not at all 
necessary; nor is it necessary for you to go on a pil- 
_grimage. Be you watchful in your hearts and always 
sing the name of Hari. It is not necessary to give up 
eating food or drinking water; fix your mind on the 
foot of Hari. Neither is it necessary for you to con- 
template the one without attributes. Hold fast to the 
love of the name of Hari.” “Recognize him alone to 
be a righteous man, who sees Vasudeva in all objects, 


2 Bhandarkar’s Vaishnavism. 
3 Tbid. 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 153 


eradicating all pride or egoism. The rest are entangled 
in the shackles of delusion. To him all wealth is like 
earth, and the nine gems are mere stones. The two, 
desire and anger, he has thrown out, and he cherishes 
in his heart quietude and forgiveness.”* Again he 
says: “Firmly grasp the truth which is Narayana. 
Purity of conduct should not be abandoned; one should 
not be afraid of the censure of people and thus accom- 
plish one’s own purpose. Surrender yourself to your 
loving friend (God) giving up all ostentation and 
pride. The censure of people should be regarded as 
praise and their praise not heeded. One should enter- 
tain no longing for being respected and honored, but 
should nourish in oneself a liking for devotion. This 
should be rendered firm in the mind and the name of 
God should not be neglected even for a moment.’”’ 9 

The essence of the teachings of Namdev, as of al- 
most all the other bhaktas of whom I shall now be 
speaking, 1s purity of mind, speech, and deed, utter 
disregard of castes, creeds and other social distinc- 
tions, a tendency to leave all for God, and in love 
and joy to live in God always, utterly ignoring all 
social, communal and religious prejudices, narrow- 
ness, dogmas and bigotry. It is held that God is om- 
nipotent and omnipresent and that He cannot be iden- 
tified with any particular deity or his character prop- 
erly narrated by any particular legendary or mythical 
ways of thinking. At the same time it is contended 


4 Ibid. 
5 [bid. 


154 HINDU MYSTICISM 


that we may call him by any name we like, for He is 
always the same in all. 10 

Another great Maratha saint was Tukaram of the 
seventeenth century. Tukaram was a low class Hindu. 
His father was a petty trader. When his father, in 
his old age, wanted to give over his business to his 
eldest son Savji, the latter refused the task since he 
did not wish a worldly life. So the business was en- 
trusted to Tukaram when he was at the age of thir- 
teen. Four years later his father died. Then Tukaram 
was imposed upon by crafty persons and his business 
was wrecked. His wife, however, procured a loan; 
the business was restored and then he began to prosper. 
Once, however, while he was returning home, Tukaram 
met a man who was on the point of being dragged to 
prison for his debts. Tukaram at once gave all that 
he had to this debtor in order to achieve his release. 
From that time on Tukaram renounced all worldly 
vocations and devoted his life to singing the glories 
of God and the dearness of our relations to Him. He 
employed a particular kind of verse which he often 
composed extempore and in which he frequently spoke. 
Thus Tukaram says: “God is ours, certainly ours, 
and is the soul of all souls. God is near to us, cer- 
tainly near, outside and inside. God is benignant, cer- 
tainly benignant, and fulfills every longing even of a 
longing nature.” Again he says: “This thy nature 
is beyond the grasp of the mind or of words, and 
therefore I have made devoted love a measure. I 
measure the endless by the measure of love. He is 
not to be truly measured by any other means. Thou 


POPULAR MYSTICISM Loo 


art not to be found by processes of concentration, sac- 
rificial rites, practice of austerities, or any bodily ex- 
ertions, or by knowledge. Oh Kesava, accept the 
service which we render to thee in the simplicity of 
our hearts.” Still again: “The Endless is beyond, 
and between him and me there are lofty mountains of 
desire and anger. I am not able to ascend them, nor 
do I find any pass. Insurmountable is the ascent of 
my enemies. What possibility is there of my attaining 
my friend Narayana (God) ?” He expresses his heart 
full of longing for God in the following words :° 


“As on the bank the poor fish lies 
And gasps and writhes in pain, 
Or, as a man with anxious eyes: 
Seeks hidden gold in vain,— 
So is my heart distressed and cries 
To come to thee again. 
Thou knowest, Lord, the agony 
Of the lost infant’s wail 
Yearning his mother’s face to see. 
(How oft I tell this tale.) 
O, at thy feet the mystery 
Of the dark world unveil. 
The fire of this harassing thought 
Upon my bosom prays. 
Why is it I am thus forgot? 
(O, who can know thy ways?) 
Nay, Lord, thou seest my hapless lot; 
Have mercy, Tuka says.” 


Desolate and disconsolate for the love of God he 
prays at His door: 


6 This and the immediately following translations are taken 
from Macnicol’s work, Psalms of the Maratha Saints. 


156 HINDU MYSTICISM 


“A beggar at thy door, 

Pleading I stand; 

Give me an alms, O God, 

Love from thy loving hand. 
Spare me the barren task, 
To come, and to come for nought. 
A gift poor Tuka craves, 
Unmerited, unbought.” 


Again: 

“OQ save me, save me, Mightiest, 

Save me and set me free. 

O let the love that fills my breast 

Cling to thee lovingly. 
Grant me to taste how sweet thou art; 
Grant me but this, I pray, 
And never shall my love depart 
Or turn from thee away. 

Then I thy name shall magnify 

And tell thy praise abroad, 

For very love and gladness I 

Shall dance before my God. 
Grant to me, Vitthal, that I rest 
Thy blessed feet beside; 
Ah, give me this, the dearest, best, 
And I am satisfied.” 11 


Leaving this bhakti movement of the South, which 
dates from the thirteenth to the seventeenth century, 
from Jnanesvar and Namdev to Tukaram, we pass to 
the bhakti movement of North India, represented by 
Kabir, Nanak and others. It followed the line traced 
by the Gita and the Bhagavata. Having been developed 
in the vernacular, however, it appealed directly to the 
masses. It largely dissociated itself from the complex 
entanglements of Hindu mythology which had en- 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 157 


meshed the devotional creed of spiritual loyalty to 
God in the legend of Krishna and his associates. 12 

Kabir (1440-1518) was an abandoned child, prob- 
ably because of the illegitimacy of his birth. He was 
brought up by a weaver, Niru, and his wife, Nina. 
Throughout his life he lived in Benares, probably him- 
self following the profession of a weaver. He is said to 
have been a disciple of Ramananda, a disciple of Rama- 
nuja, the great Vaishnava teacher of the South. But 
he likewise came into touch with some Mohammedan 
Pirs and was also probably acquainted with certain 
forms of Sufism. His was a religion which derived 
its life from what was best among both the Hindus and 
the Mohammedans. However, he disliked the bigotry 
and superstitions of all formal religions and was con- 
sequently persecuted by both the Hindus and the Mo- 
hammedans. With him and his followers, such as 
Ruidas and Dadu, we find a religion which shook off 
all the traditional limitations of formal religions, with 
their belief in revealed books and their acceptance of 
mythological stories, and of dogmas and creeds that 
often obscure the purity of the religious light and con- 
tact with God. Kabir considered the practice of 


yoga, alms, and fasting, and the feeding of Brahmins, 


not only useless but improper without the repetition 
of God’s name and love for Him. He discarded the 
Hindu ideas regarding purity, external ablutions and 
contact with so-called impure things with as much 
force as he rejected the Mohammedan belief in cir- 
cumcision or the requirement that a Brahmin should 
wear a holy thread, or any other marks of caste. When 


158 HINDU MYSTICISM 


Kabir’s parents found that they could not subdue his 
Hindu tendencies they wanted to circumcise him, and 
at this he said: 


“Whence have come the Hindus and Mussulmans? Who hath 
put them in their different ways, 

Having thought and reflected in thy heart, answer this—who 
shall obtain Heaven and who Hell.’’? 13 


Now we know that the doctrine of bhakti had a 
great levelling influence. Even according to the Gita 
and the Bhagavata Purana, bhakti removed all in- 
equalities of caste and social status.) We know that 
Haridas (his Mohammedan name is not known) was 
converted from Mohammedanism to Vaishnavism by 
Chaitanya and Nityananda. In lauding him Chaitanya 
once said: ‘Your holy thoughts are as the streams of 
the Ganges in which your soul bathes every hour. 
Your pious acts earn for you that virtue which the 
people seek in sacrificial rites prescribed in the scrip- 
tures. You are constantly in touch with the loftiest 
of ideals which give you the same merit as the study 
of the Vedas. What sadhu or Brahmin is there who 
is good and great as you are?’’® In the Brihat Nara- 
diya Purana we find that even a candala (the lowest 
‘caste among the Hindus) becomes the greatest of all 
Brahmins if he loves God.” So the new religious ideal 
of bhakti, in all its enthusiastic circles, dispensed with 


7 Most of the translations of Kabir’s hymns are from the 
translation of The Bijak of Kabir by the Rev. Ahmed Shah. 
There are some which I translated directly from the hymns in 
Hindu. 


8 Sen’s Chaitanya and his Companions, p. 69. 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 159 


' the considerations of caste, creed, and social status. 14 

There was, therefore, nothing particularly novel in 
Kabir’s' insistence that the time-honored distinctions 
of caste, creed and social status are absolutely value- 
less or in his emphasis upon the need of bhakti for all, 
as that which alone exalts a man. But in Kabir we 
| find a reformatory zeal. He never tires of reiterating 
the worthlessness of all these superstitions of caste, 
creed, social status, external purity and impurity, 
penances, asceticism, and all sorts of formalities which 
passed by the name of religion though in fact having 
nothing to do with it. Thus Kabir says: 


“Tf union with God be obtained by going about naked, 
All the deer of the forest shall be saved. 
What mattereth it whether man goeth naked or weareth a 
deerskin, 
If he recognize not God in his heart? 
If perfection be obtained by shaving the head, 
Why should not sheep obtain salvation? 
If, O brethren, the continent man is saved, 
Why should not a eunuch obtain the supreme reward? 
Saith Kabir, hear, O my brethren, 
Who hath obtained salvation without God’s name?” 
Again he says: 
“They who battle in the evening and the morning 
Are like frogs in the water. 
When men have no love for God’s name, 
They shall all go to the god of death. 
They who love their persons and deck themselves out in 
various guises, 
Feel not mercy even in their dreams. 
Many leading religious men call them quadrupeds, 
And say that only holy men shall obtain happiness in this 
ocean of trouble. 


160 HINDU MYSTICISM 


Saith Kabir, why perform so many ceremonies? 
Forsaking all other essences quaff the great essence 
of God’s name.” 


These allusions to bathing and other activities refer 
to religious practices followed by many Hindus but 
vigorously denounced by Kabir. 15 

To a Yogin who said to Kabir that one could not at- 
tain deliverance without chastening his heart by the 
performance of yoga Kabir said: 


“Without devotion the qualities of the heart cling to the heart, 
Who secured perfection by merely chastening his heart? 
What holy man has succeeded in chastening his heart? 

Say who hath saved any one by merely chastening his heart. 
Every one thinketh in his heart that he is going to chasten it, 
But the heart is not chastened without devotion. 

Saith Kabir, let him who knoweth this secret 

Worship in his heart God, the lord of the three worlds.” 


Kabir in speaking of the search after God says: 


“When I turned my thoughts toward God, I restrained my mind 
and my senses, and my attention became lovingly fixed on Him. 
O Bairagi, search for Him who neither cometh nor goeth, who 
neither dieth nor is. 
My soul turning away from sin, is absorbed in the universal 
soul.” 


Describing the view that God is not confined to any 
mosque, church or temple, Kabir says: 


“Tf God dwell only in the mosque, to whom belongeth the 
rest of the country? 
They who are called Hindus say that God dwelleth in 
an idol: 
I see not the truth in either sect. 
O God, whether Allah or Ram, I live by Thy name, 
O Lord, show kindness unto me. 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 161 


Hari dwelleth in the south, Allah hath his place in the 
west. 

Search in thy heart, search in thy heart of hearts; there 
‘is his place and abode. 

The Brahmins yearly perform twenty-four fastings ... 
the Mussulmans fast in. the month of Ramzan. 

... Kabir is a child of Ram and Allah and accepteth 
all gurus and Pirs.” 


Describing his great love and intoxication for God, 
Kabir says: 


“T am not skilled in book knowledge, nor do I understand 
controversy: 

I have grown mad reciting and hearing God’s praises. 

O father, I am mad; the whole world is sane; I am mad; 

I am ruined; let not others be ruined likewise; 

I have not grown mad out of my own will; God hath 
made me mad— 

The true guru hath dispelled my doubts— 

I am ruined, and have lost my intellect; 

Let nobody be led astray in doubts like mine. 

He who knoweth not himself is mad; 

When one knoweth himself he knoweth the one God. 

He who is not intoxicated with divine love in this human 
birth shall never be so. 

Saith Kabir, I am dyed with the dye of God.” 


Thus, on the one hand, Kabir waged war against 
the prevailing superstitions, rituals and litanies of all 
religions and religious sects; and, on the other hand, 
he dived deep in the depth of God’s love and he be- 
held nothing but God on all sides, becoming as it were 
one with Him in spiritual union. Thus, he says: 


“With both mine eyes I look, 
But I behold nothing save God; 
Mine eyes gaze affectionately on Him.” 


162 HINDU MYSTICISM 


The motto of his life was, as he often said, “Remem- 


ber God, Remember God, Remember God, my breth- . 


ren;’’ and in his own life he felt that he was absorbed 
in the Infinite. 16 
' Rui Das (also called Ravi Das), a shoe-maker by 


caste, was another great disciple of Ramananda. His © 


songs and hymns are full of humility and devotion. 
However, he evidences none of the reformatory zeal 
that animated Kabir. I shall quote the translation 
of only one hymn which seems to me typical of Rui 
Das’s attitude of love towards God. He says: 


“There is none so poor as I, none so compassionate as 
Thou; 

For this what further test is now necessary? 

May my heart obey thy words, fill thy servant therewith. 

I am a sacrifice to thee, O God; 

Why art thou silent? 

For many births have I been separated from Thee, O 
God ; 

This birth is on thine own account. 

Saith Rui Das, putting my hopes in Thee, I live; it is 
long since I have seen thee.” 17 


Still another great saint of love was Mira Bai, a 
princess of Rajputana, who from her childhood (born 
about 1504 A. D.) was devoted to an image of Lord 
Krishna called Girdharlal. Her marriage proved un- 
happy. At the time of going to her husband’s place 
she became very disconsolate. She wept until she be- 
came unconscious at the idea of leaving the image of 
Girdharlal behind. So her parents gave her the image 
as a part of her marriage dowry. It proved that Mira 
could not get on well with the family of her father- 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 163 


in-law, for she was always given to the adoration and 
worship of her little image, representing to her Lord 
Krishna, and it was this image that she considered as 
her husband. Her father-in-law made attempts to kill 
her, but she was miraculously saved. Ultimately she 
left his abode and went to Brindaban, the place of 
Lord Krishna’s activities, to have her passion for 
Krishna realized. Here again, in the case of this 
princess saint who left her all for Krishna, we find 
the potency of the Krishna legend. 18 

I shall quote here the translation of one of Mira 
Bai’s hymns which show her great attachment for 
Krishna, in an image of whom, at Dvaraka, she was, 
as the tradition says, ultimately lost. Her soul was 
so full of deep longing for Lord Krishna, or Girdhar 
as she called him, that she proclaims: 


“T have the god Girdhar and no other ; 

He is my spouse on whose head is a crown of peacock 
feathers, 

Who carrieth a shell, discus, mace and lotus, and who 
weareth a necklace; 

I have forfeited the respect of the world by ever sit- 
ting near holy men. 

The matter is now public; everybody knoweth it. 

Having felt supreme devotion I die as I behold the world. 

I have no father, son, or relation with me. 

I laugh when I behold my beloved; people think I weep. 

I have planted the vine of love and irrigated it again 
and again with the water of tears, 

I have cast away my fear of the world, what can any- 
one do to me 

Mira’s love for her god is fixed, come what may.” 19 


India is a land of saints. There are hundreds of 


164 HINDU MYSTICISM 


them of whom one could say much. But my time is 
limited and I have well-nigh exhausted your patience. 
Yet I cannot conclude without referring briefly to 
Tulsidas, the greatest Hindu poet of India and a great 
saint. 

Tulsidas lived in the seventeenth century. He did 
not inaugurate any new faith, but accepted the Hindu 


mythology and the theory of the incarnation of God,\ A 


the appearance of the attributeless God as a God of 
infinite attributes. In his view Rama was the incar- 
nation of God, the savior and father of mankind. An 
all-surrendering devotion to him, he believed, is our 
only duty and the sole legitimate passion of life. God 
is great not only in His greatness, but also in his 
mercy. He knows the sins and the frailties of men, 
and is always prepared to help them repel their temp- 
tations. To run counter to the will of God is sin, and 
it is only by acknowledging our sins and taking an all- 
surrendering refuge in Him, in love and faith, that 
we can be saved. Connected herewith was the doctrine 
of the brotherhood of man and of our duty toward our 
neighbors. Tulsidas is said to have been very much 
attached to his wife in his early life. On one occasion 
he followed her to her father’s place, much to her an- 
noyance, and she said that if he had as much love for 
God Rama as he had for her he would be saved. This 
struck Tulsidas to the heart and he renounced the 
world. By his great strength of character, his remark- 
able poetic gifts which he applied to religious subjects, 
and by his strong faith, Tulsidas soon endeared him- 
self to his countrymen. No one has exercised a greater 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 165 


influence than he over the Hindi-speaking people of 
North India. 20 

I have now described, though but briefly, some of 
the main types of Indian mysticism in their mutual 
relations; others could not be so much as touched 
upon owing to the limitations of time. I am fully alive 
to the imperfections of my treatment. Great as they 
are, they must have appeared to you even greater on 
account of the difficulty that you must have experi- 
enced in placing yourselves on the mental plane of 
these mystics. The subtle metaphysical and philo- 
sophical background of these different types of mysti- 
cism I have here been compelled to disregard. But I 
have elsewhere undertaken an historical survey of all 
the different systems of Indian Philosophy.? Through 
oral instruction, tradition, and the example of great 
men who renounced the world in pursuance of the 
high ideals of philosophy, the essence of these differ- 
ent systems, with their spiritual longings and their 
yearnings after salvation and the cessation of rebirth, 
have gradually been filtering down into the minds of 
the masses of the population. The tiller of the soil 
and the grocer in the shop may be uneducated and 
often wholly illiterate, but even they, while tilling the 
ground, driving a bullock cart or resting after the 
work of the day, will be singing songs full of mystical 
meaning, and for the moment transporting themselves 


9In my History of Indian Philosophy, the first volume of 
which has already been published by the Cambridge University 
Press, England. 


166 HINDU MYSTICISM 


to regions beyond the touch of material gains and 
comforts: 


“The sky and the earth are born of mine own eyes. 

The hardness and softness, the cold and the heat are 
the products of my own body; 

The sweet smell and the bad are of my own nose.” 


Or, 


“Nobody can tell whence the bird unknown 

Comes into the cage and goes out. 

I would feign put round its feet the fetter of my mind 
Could I but capture it.’1° 


A traveller in the village of Bengal or on board the 
steamers plying the rivers of the interior of rural Ben- 
gal, may often hear a middle-aged or old Mohamme- 
dan or a Hindu singing mystical, philosophical or 
mythical songs of the love of Krishna and Radha, or 
of the renouncement of the world by Chaitanya, while 
a large crowd of men is assembled around the singer 
listening to him with great reverence and feeling. The 
singer is probably describing the world as a mirage 
or a mere phantom show of maya, or is expressing the 
futility of his worldly life on account of his having 
lost his friendship with his own self. 


“My hope of the world is all false, 
What shall be my fate, 
O kind, good lord? 
I am not in love with him (self) with whom 
I have come to live in this house (body) 
O kind, good lord.” 


10 Dr. Rabindranath Tagore’s opening address at the First 
Philosophical Congress at Calcutta, in 1925. 


POPULAR MYSTICISM 167 


So the sublime teachings of philosophy and the 
other-worldly aspirations of mysticism, with their 
soothing, plaintive and meditative tendencies, have wa- 
tered the hearts of Bengal right into the thatched cot- 
tages of this land. Wealth and comfort: they all ap- 
preciate as do people everywhere, but they all know 
that money is not everything, and that peace of mind 
and the ultimate good of man cannot be secured 
through it or any other worldly thing. They are im- 
mersed in the world; but still the wisdom of the ages 
and the teachings of the saints have not been in vain, 
and at times they are drawn away from the world— 
their souls unknowingly long for deliverance and find 
a mystic delight in it. It is only the educated or 
Anglicized Hindu who, dazzled by the gay colors 
of the West, sometimes turns a deaf ear to the old 
tune of his country—the flute of Krishna calling 
from afar through the rustling leaves of bamboos and 
the cocoanut groves of the village homes—and, in the 
name of patriotism and progress, installs a foreign 
god of money and luxury in the ancestral throne of 
the god of the Indian heart—the god of deliverance. 
The thoughts and aspirations of the ages, our myths, 
our religions, our philosophies, our songs and 
poetry, have all interpenetrated and formed a 
whole which cannot be expressed through a por- 
trayal of its elements. They represent a unique 
experience which I feel with my countrymen, but 
which is incommunicable to any one who is unable 
imaginatively to bring himself into tune with that 
spirit. The British in India have understood as much 


168 HINDU MYSTICISM 


of the country as is necessary for policing it, but no 
foreigner has ever adequately understood our land. 
Those of you who see India through newspapers and 
the strange tales and stories of tourists who “do” In- 
dia in a month, can hardly hope to go right to the 
place where the heart of India lies. | 21 

But, you may perhaps ask, what may I gain by 
knowing India as it really is at its heart? Well, that 
is a different matter. Perhaps you may derive gain, 
perhaps not. You may further ask what is it that one 
gains through such spiritual longing, realization, or 
mystical rapture. And I shall frankly confess that 
one certainly gains nothing that will show itself in 
one’s bank account. But with all my appreciation and 
admiration of the great achievements of the West in 
science, politics and wealth, the Upanishad spirit in 
me may whisper from within: What have you gained 
if you have not gained yourself, the immortal, the 
infinite? What have you gained if you have never 
tasted in your life the deep longing for deliverance 
and supreme emancipation?. And the spirit of the 
saints of ages whispers in my ears: What have you 
gained if you have not tasted the joys of self-sur- 
render, if your heart has not longed to make of you 
a flute in the hands of Krishna, that master musician 
of the universe, and if you have not been able to 
sweeten all your miseries with a touch of God? 22 


mi F 
ay 
i! 


BYE We 
r y UU FONT Te | Vai \ \ > Wii , vay ‘ ‘i vs t, Uy he hy 
& } } Ma Pate Vive wih cea Ak ee Cae 
; Ouin nae at oo ee IN Rath be AED A © iy, i! ‘ VY Sims ks 
Liacae et i 1a | Us yt PO a Mat oe ON 

iA Nace rhe i 

ar cr) 


i 
i, 


Alea, Vali 


wet ’ 
aA 7 
PHY ees oe 
ARRAN AN ea 
a avy) j 


wal 


nd 
RN ] 
hb hits tid, Von 


a ce | 
, ae 


Weare 


a 
rar 
ta 
My aM 
; sist uP ee 
oy i x MY UL" 
i. + H +f i cy Le 


i ee ne 


Cay 


Ag 


