===== Internet Archive OCR: hindumannerscust1906dubo_djvu.txt =====

US  ;  -v   PSP 

HUH  .v    ..  ■ 


SHRSgr 


*SWF 


Ssa* 


HB 


.".■'■:.;'-:■.  >■'■' 


■■L 

■HP 


PHI 


MBi  ill 


u 


gftgl 


Pfit 


Please 

handle  this  volume 

with  care. 

The  University  of  Connecticut 
Libraries,  Storrs 


BOOK    309.154  D8S?   .    , 


DUBOIS    #    h 


rD   clR\rZNN°,^MANN^    CUSTOMS 


3    "".53    0007730?    0 


^ 


HINDU    MANNERS,    CUSTOMS 
AND    CEREMONIES 


HENKY   FROWDE,    M.A. 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE    UNIVERSITY   OF  OXFORD 

LONDON,    EDINBURGH 

NEW    YORK  AND    TORONTO 


-V  J 


HINDU 
MANNEES,  CUSTOMS 

AND 

CEREMONIES 

BY    THE 

ABBE  J,  A,  DUBOIS 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  AUTHOR'S  LATER  FRENCH  MS.  AND 
EDITED  WITH  NOTES,  CORRECTIONS,  AND  BIOGRAPHY 


HENRY  K.  BEAUCHAMP,  CLE. 

FELLOW  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  MADRAS  J   FELLOW  OF  THE  ROYAL  HISTORICAL  SOCIETY 
MEMBER  OF  THE  ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY 


WITH    A    PREFATORY    NOTE    BY   THE    RIGHT    HON.    F.    MAX    MULLER 
AND    A   PORTRAIT 


THIRD  EDITION 

OXFORD 
AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 

190G 


OXFORD 

PRINTED   AT   THE   CLARENDON    PRESS 

BY   HORACE   HART,    M.A. 

PRINTER   TO   THE   UNIVERSITY 


EDITORS   PREFACE   TO   THIRD 
EDITION 

The  fact  that  a  third  reprint  of  this  complete  edition  of 
the  Abbe  Dubois'  Hindu  Manners,  Customs,  and  Ceremonies 
has  been  called  for  within  a  period  of  a  few  years  is  sufficient 
proof  of  the  high  value  which  is  still  attached  to  the  Abbe's 
observations  and  of  the  wide  popularity  which  his  work 
still  enjoys.  It  was  stated  in  my  Preface  to  the  first 
edition  : — '  The  impression  may  be  felt  in  many  minds 
that  a  book  written  so  long  ago  can  be  of  little  practical 
use  at  present ;  but  the  fact  is  that  the  Abbe's  work, 
composed  as  it  was  in  the  midst  of  the  people  themselves, 
is  of  a  unique  character,  for  it  combines,  as  no  other  work 
on  the  Hindus  combines,  a  recital  of  the  broad  facts  of 
Hindu  religion  and  Hindu  sociology  with  many  masterly 
descriptions,  at  once  comprehensive  and  minute,  of  the 
vie  intime  of  the  people  among  whom  he  lived  for  so  many 
years.  With  any  other  people  than  the  Hindus  such 
a  work  would  soon  grow  out  of  date  ;  but  with  them  the 
same  ancestral  traditions  and  customs  are  followed  nowadays 
that  were  followed  hundreds  of  years  ago,  at  least  by  the 
vast  majority  of  the  population.' 

Not  only  in  India  but  also  in  the  United  Kingdom  and 
the  Colonies,  as  well  as  in  several  countries  of  Europe  and 
in  the  United  States  of  America,  reviews  and  notices  of 
the  work  have  appeared,  bearing  invariable  testimony  to 
the  conspicuous  merits  of  the  Abbe's  work.  I  may  add 
that  it  formed  the  subject  of  the  annual  address  of  a  learned 
President  of  the  Royal  Historical  Society,  and  of  the  Presi- 
dential Address  at  an  annual  meeting  of  the  Hindu  Social 


iv      EDITOR'S    PREFACE   TO  THIRD   EDITION 

Conference  by  the  late  Mr.  Justice  Ranade,  the  famous 
Mahratta  Brahmin  leader  of  Bombay  ;  and  it  also  furnished 
a  text  for  some  observations  in  an  important  speech  delivered 
in  Bombay  by  the  late  Viceroy  and  Governor- General  of 
India,  Lord  Curzon. 

What  may  be  regarded  as  still  more  satisfactory,  perhaps, 
is  that  by  the  Indians  themselves  the  work  has  been  received 
with  universal  approval  and  eulogy.  The  general  accuracy 
of  the  Abbe's  observations  has  nowhere  been  impugned  ; 
and  every  Indian  critic  of  the  work  has  paid  a  warm  tribute 
to  the  Abbe's  industry,  zeal,  and  impartiality.  Perhaps 
I  may  quote  in  conclusion  here  the  opinion  expressed  by 
one  of  the  leading  Indian  newspapers,  The  Hindu,  which 
in  the  course  of  a  long  review  of  the  book,  remarked  : 
'  It  is  impossible  to  run  through  the  immense  variety  of 
topics  touched  in  this  exceedingly  interesting  book  ;  but 
we  entirely  agree  with  Mr.  Beauchamp  in  his  opinion  that 
the  book  is  as  valuable  to-day  as  it  ever  was.  It  contains 
a  valuable  collection  of  information  on  a  variety  of  subjects, 
including  ceremonies  and  observances  which  might  pass 
as  trifles  in  the  eye  of  many  an  ordinary  person.  The 
Abbe's  description  might  be  compared  with  the  experience 
of  the  modern  Hindu,  who  will  find  that  while  the  influence 
of  English  education  is  effecting  a  quiet  and  profound 
change  and  driving  the  intellectual  and  physical  faculties 
of  the  people  into  fresh  grooves,  the  bulk  of  the  people, 
whom  that  influence  has  not  reached,  have  remained 
substantially  unaltered  since  the  time  of  the  French 
Missionary.' 

H.  K.  B. 

Madras,  October,  1905. 


PREFATORY  NOTE 

By  the  Right  Hon.  F.  Max  Muller 

It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  Abbe  Dubois,  the  author 
of  Mozurs,  Institutions  et  Ceremonies  des  Pewples  de  VInde, 
died  only  in  1848.  By  his  position  as  a  scholar  and  as 
a  student  of  Indian  subjects,  he  really  belongs  to  a  period 
previous  to  the  revival  of  Sanskrit  studies  in  India,  as 
inaugurated  by  Wilkins,  Sir  William  Jones,  and  Cole- 
brooke.  I  had  no  idea,  when  in  1846  I  was  attending 
in  Paris  the  lectures  of  Eugene  Burnouf  at  the  College  de 
France,  that  the  old  Abbe  was  still  living  and  in  full  activity 
as  Directeur  des  Missions  Etrangeres,  and  I  doubt  whether 
even  Burnouf  himself  was  aware  of  his  existence  in  Paris. 
The  Abbe  belongs  really  to  the  eighteenth  century,  but  as 
there  is  much  to  be  learnt  even  from  such  men  as  Roberto 
de'  Nobili,  who  went  to  India  in  1606,  from  H.  Roth, 
who  was  much  consulted  by  Kircher  in  his  China  Illustrata 
(1667),  and  others,  so  again  the  eighteenth  century  was 
by  no  means  devoid  of  eminent  students  of  Sanskrit,  of 
Indian  religion,  and  Indian  subjects  in  general.  It  is  true 
that  in  our  days  their  observations  and  researches  possess 
chiefly  a  historical  interest,  but  they  are  by  no  means  to 
be  neglected.  They  make  us  see  how  the  acquaintance  of 
European  scholars  with  India  began,  and  under  what 
circumstances  the  first  steps  were  taken  by  these  pioneers, 
chiefly  missionaries,  towards  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the 
ancient  language  of  India,  Sanskrit,  and  through  it,  towards 
gaining  an  acquaintance  with  one  of  the  most  interesting 
peoples  and  one  of  the  richest  and  most  original  literatures 
of  the  world.  The  reports  sent  from  India  by  the  Pere 
Cceurdoux  (1767),  and  published  by  Barthelemy  in  the 
Memoirs  of  the  French  Academy,  the  letters  of  the  Pere 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

In  the  Library  of  the  Madras  Literary  Society  and 
Auxiliary  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  may  be  seen,  in 
a  conspicuous  position  above  one  of  the  doorways,  a 
striking  portrait  in  oil-colours.  This  portrait  at  a  distance 
one  takes  to  be  that  of  some  Hindu,  clothed  in  white, 
wearing  a  white  turban,  and  holding  in  one  hand  the 
bamboo  staff  that  tradition  assigns  to  a  Hindu  pilgrim. 
A  closer  inspection,  however,  shows  that  in  reality  it  is 
the  portrait  of  a  European,  albeit  the  face  is  so  tanned, 
and  so  furrowed  with  the  lines  of  age  and  thought,  that 
the  first  impression  that  one  receives  of  it  is  not  easily 
dispelled.  It  is  a  face  that  literally  speaks  to  you  from 
the  canvas.  The  broad  forehead,  the  well-shaped  but 
somewhat  prominent  nose,  the  firm  but  kindly  mouth, 
and  above  all  the  marvellously  intelligent  eyes,  all  bespeak 
a  man  of  no  common  mould.  Whoever  the  artist  was 
(and  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  his  name  or  the 
circumstances  which  led  to  his  executing  the  work),  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  he  has  succeeded  in  depicting  a 
countenance  that  is  full  of  character  ;  while  as  a  back- 
ground to  his  picture  he  has  painted  a  low  range  of  bare, 
rugged  hills  that  seem  to  be  in  thorough  keeping  with  his 
subject,  and  to  suggest,  as  a  kind  of  inspiration,  the  hard, 
self-denying,  but  solid  life-work  of  him  whose  features  he 
has  handed  down. 

This  portrait  is  that  of  the  Abbe  J.  A.  Dubois,  a  Christian 
Missionary  who  laboured  for  some  thirty-one  years  in  India, 
.striving  to  fulfil  the  task  which  his  sense  of  religious  duty 
imposed  upon  him.     Merely  in  this  respect  one  can  claim 


METHODS  ADOPTED  BY  DUBOIS 

for  him  no  special  merit,  for  the  annals  of  Christian  Missions 
in  India  are  full  of  the  names  of  those  who  spent  them- 
selves and  were  spent  in  the  service  of  their  Master.  His 
special  claim  to  recognition  will  be  found  elsewhere,  namely, 
in  the  wonderful  record  which  he  compiled  of  the  manners, 
customs,  institutions,  and  ceremonies  of  the  people  among 
whom  he  lived  and  moved  and  had  his  being  for  so  great 
a  portion  of  his  life.  He  seems  to  have  recognized  from 
the  very  first  day  of  his  arrival  in  India  that  Christian 
Mission  work  meant  something  more  than  the  mere  preach- 
ing and  expounding  of  the  Gospel  ;  that  it  included  among 
its  chief  essentials  to  success  a  long  and  thorough  study  of 
the  innermost  life  and  character  of  the  people  amidst 
whom  it  was  to  be  carried  on.  In  his  day,  it  must  be 
remarked,  there  were  no  royal  roads  to  such  knowledge. 
There  were  no  text-books  to  prepare  the  way  by  their 
critical  analyses  of  the  sacred  Hindu  writings.  Such 
knowledge  had  to  be  gained  at  first  hand,  and  by  the  more 
laborious  (though,  it  must  be  confessed,  more  sure)  method 
of  personal  inquiry  in  situ.  '  I  had  no  sooner  arrived 
amongst  the  natives  of  India,'  the  Abbe  himself  tells  us, 
'  than  I  recognized  the  absolute  necessity  of  gaining  their 
confidence.  Accordingly  I  made  it  my  constant  rule  to 
live  as  they  did.  I  adopted  their  style  of  clothing,  and 
I  studied  their  customs  and  methods  of  life  in  order  to  be 
exactly  like  them.  I  even  went  so  far  as  to  avoid  any 
display  of  repugnance  to  the  majority  of  their  peculiar 
prejudices.  By  such  circumspect  conduct  I  was  able  to 
ensure  a  free  and  hearty  welcome  from  people  of  all  castes 
and  conditions,  and  was  often  favoured  of  their  own  accord 
with  the  most  curious  and  interesting  particulars  about 
themselves.' 

Unfortunately  such  details  concerning  the  Abbe's  per- 
sonal history  as  we  possess  are  extremely  meagre.     His 

a  3 


x  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION 

modesty  is  so  extreme  that  he  rarely  appears  in  his  own 
person  throughout  his  work,   and  those  particulars  that 
I  have  been  able  to  obtain  have  been  culled  from  various 
other    sources — chiefly    from     the    Madras     Government 
Secretariat,  from  the  British  Museum,  and  from  the  Missions 
ttrangeres.     The  absolute  retirement  of  the  Abbe  from 
European  society  for  a  long  series  of  years  after  his  arrival 
in  India,  though  it  qualified  him,  as  was  said  when  his 
work  first  appeared,   '  for  penetrating  into  the  dark  and 
unexplored  recesses  of  the  Hindu  character,'  also  veiled 
him  in  an  equal  degree  from  the  curiosity  of  his  readers. 
Major  Mark  Wilks,  the  accomplished  historian  of  Mysore, 
who  in  those  days  was  British  Resident  in  that  province, 
in  introducing  the  Abbe's  work  to  the  notice  of  the  Govern- 
ment of  Fort  St.  George,  remarked  :   '  Of  the  history  and 
character  of  the  author,  I  only  know  that  he  escaped  from 
one  of  the  fusillades  of  the  French  Revolution  and  has 
since  lived  amongst  the  Hindus  as  one  of   themselves  : 
and  of  the  respect  which  his  irreproachable  conduct  in- 
spires, it  may  be  sufficient  to  state  that  when  travelling,  on 
his  approach  to  a  village,  the  house  of  a  Brahmin  is  uni- 
formly   cleared    for   his    reception,    without    interference, 
and  generally  without  communication  to  the  officers  of 
Government,    as   a   spontaneous   mark   of   deference   and 
respect.'     Subsequently,    however,    Major    Wilks    became 
much  more  intimate  with  the  Abbe,  and  the  latter  speaks 
of  him  years  afterwards  in  terms  of  great  affection  as  his 
patron    and    friend.     With    regard    to    the    circumstance 
mentioned  above  as  having  induced  him  to  leave  France 
and  come  to  India,  the  Abbe  remarked  afterwards  :   '  It 
is  quite  true  that  I  fled  from  the  horrors  of  the  Revolution, 
and  had  I  remained  I  should  in  all  probability  have  fallen 
a  victim,  as  did  so  many  of  my  friends  who  held  the  same 
religious  and  political  opinions  as  myself  ;  but  the  truth 


PERSONAL  HISTORY  OF  DUBOIS  xi 

is  I  embarked  for  India  some  two  years  before  the  fusillades 
referred  to  took  plaee.' 

Be  this  as  it  may,  I  have  aseertained  that  the  Abbe 
was  ordained  in  the  diocese  of  Viviers  in  1792,  at  the 
age  of  twenty- seven,  and  left  France  in  the  same  year. 
He  entered  on  his  Mission  work  under  the  guidance  of  the 
Missions  Strange  res.  On  reaching  India  he  was  attached 
to  the  Pondicherry  Mission  ;  and  for  the  first  few  years  he 
seems  to  have  laboured  in  what  are  now  the  Southern 
Districts  of  the  Madras  Presidency.  He  must  have  quickly 
made  for  himself  a  name,  for  on  the  fall  of  Seringapatam 
he  was  specially  invited,  on  the  recommendation,  it  is 
said,  of  Colonel  Wellesley,  afterwards  Duke  of  Wellington, 
to  visit  the  capital  of  Mysore  in  order  to  reconvert  and 
reorganize  the  Christian  community  which  had  been  forcibly 
perverted  to  Mahomedanism  by  Tippu  Sultan.  En  passa?U, 
I  may  mention  that,  through  the  influence  of  the  Abbe  in 
Mysore,  not  a  single  priest  of  the  Missions  ^trangeres  was 
persecuted  by  Tippu.  For  these  apostates,  we  learn,  he 
pleaded  eloquently  before  Mgr.  Champenois,  the  Bishop, 
and  with  such  good  effect  that  he  once  more  gathered  the 
lost  sheep,  of  whom  there  were  1,800  in  Seringapatam 
alone,  into  the  Christian  fold,  and  established  on  a  per- 
manent basis  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  in  the  province 
of  Mysore.  Of  the  practical  farsightedness  which  guided 
him  in  his  work,  we  may  judge  by  two  incidents  that  have 
been  incidentally  recorded  of  him.  He  met  the  problem 
of  the  poverty  of  the  people  committed  to  his  care  by 
founding  agricultural  colonies  on  the  lines  that  have 
during  these  past  few  years  been  advocated  by  the  Salvation 
Army  and  others,  his  principal  colony  being  at  Sathalli, 
near  Hassan  ;  and  he  used  his  influence  to  such  good 
effect  in  preventing  epidemics  of  small-pox  by  promoting 
vaccination  (then,  be  it  remembered,  a  comparatively  novel 


kii  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION 

idea)  that  he  was  afterwards  granted  a  special  pension  by 
the  East  Indian  Company.  '  The  literary  reputation  which 
M.  Dubois  has  acquired  in  this  country,'  wrote  one  of  his 
colleagues,  M.  Mottet,  in  1823,  '  is  the  least  of  his  merits. 
He  has  honoured  and  served  the  mission  in  every  way, 
and  perhaps  more  than  any  one  of  us.  The  Indians  had 
the  greatest  attachment,  confidence  and  respect  for  him.' 
M.  Launay,  in  his  recently  published  Histoire  des  Missions 
de  Vlnde,  remarks  :  '  Among  other  benefits  which  he  con- 
ferred upon  his  flock,  may  be  mentioned  his  zeal  in  estab- 
lishing agricultural  colonies,  and  also  introducing  vaccina- 
tion to  stay  the  ravages  of  small-pox  ;  in  which,  in  spite 
of  the  extraordinary  tenacity  of  native  prejudice,  he 
succeeded  so  fully  that  in  1803-4  a  total  of  25,432  natives 
were  vaccinated  and  registered  ;  in  memory  of  which  the 
natives  still  remember  him  by  the  title  of  "  Doddhaswa- 
miayavaru,"  or  "  Great  Lord."  M.  Launay  adds  that  in 
some  parts,  especially  at  Karumattampatty,  he  is  spoken 
of  to  this  day  as  '  the  prince's  son,  the  noblest  of  Euro- 
peans.' 

For  the  moment  let  us  return  to  the  great  descriptive 
work  which  he  compiled  during  his  hours  of  leisure.  That 
the  Abbe  was  from  the  first  a  close  observer  of  the  people 
among  whom  he  lived  and  a  keen  student  of  their  religious 
and  social  institutions  is  perfectly  apparent.  But  the  idea 
of  putting  the  results  of  his  investigations  into  writing 
originated,  as  he  tells  us,  '  in  consequence  of  notices  in  the 
public  papers  calling  for  authentic  documents  regarding 
these  people  for  the  use  of  the  historiographers  of  the 
Honourable  Company  engaged  in  writing  the  history  of 
India.'  The  idea  once  formed,  he  set  to  work  with  charac- 
teristic thoroughness,  though  with  too  much  modesty  he 
remarks  :  '  I  aim  not  at  the  rank  of  an  author,  which  is 
suited  neither  to  my  talents  nor  to  the  secluded  state  in 


DUBOIS'  CHIEF  WORK  xiii 

which  my  profession  confines  me  amongst  the  natives  of 
the  country.'  He  remarks  further,  however  :  '  During  my 
long  sojourn  in  India  I  never  let  slip  any  opportunity  of 
collecting  materials  and  particulars  of  all  sorts.  My  in- 
formation has  been  drawn  partly  from  the  books  which 
are  held  in  highest  estimation  amongst  the  people  of  India 
and  partly  from  such  scattered  records  as  fell  by  chance 
into  my  hands  and  contained  facts  upon  which  I  could 
thoroughly  rely.  But  in  regard  to  the  majority  of  the 
materials  which  I  now  offer  to  the  public  I  am  chiefly 
dependent  on  my  own  researches,  having  lived  in  close 
and  familiar  intercourse  with  persons  of  every  caste  and 
condition  of  life.  Probably  many  Europeans  settled  in 
India  would  have  been  more  capable  than  myself  of  per- 
forming the  same  task  ;  but  I  may  be  permitted  to  doubt 
whether  there  has  been  any  person  more  favourably 
situated  for  gleaning  information  or  more  zealous  in  his 
pursuit  of  knowledge.' 

At  the  same  time  he  disclaims  for  his  work  any  general 
applicability  to  the  whole  of  India.  His  observations 
extend,  broadly  speaking,  to  the  India  that  lies  south  of 
the  Vindyan  Range  ;  and  even  within  those  limits  he  is 
careful  to  remark  that  local  differences  are  so  many  and 
so  marked  that  '  there  is  no  class  or  sect  or  community  of 
Hindus  that  has  not,  in  addition  to  the  general  rules 
of  Hindu  society,  some  domestic  usages  peculiar  to  itself.' 
So  that,  as  he  says,  it  is  impossible  to  generalize  with 
complete  accuracy  on  any  subject  connected  with  them. 

But  though  the  Abbe  with  characteristic  modesty  leaves 
to  '  the  many  learned  Europeans  residing  in  the  country  ' 
the  task  of  compiling  from  authentic  documents  '  a  more 
methodical  and  comprehensive  history  of  the  Hindus,'  his 
own  work  possesses  special  merits  of  its  own  and  is  far 
superior  to  any  that  could  be  compiled  from   books  of 


xiv  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION 

reference  and  literary  investigations,  for,  as  Major  Wilks 
said  of  it,  '  it  was  meditated  and  composed  in  the  midst  of 
the  people  whom  it  describes,  and  in  writing  it  the  author 
followed  the  only  path  that  has  ever  yet  led  to  a  true 
delineation  of  national  character,  namely,  the  path  of 
original  research  and  personal  observation.' 

The  French  MS.  of  the  work  which  the  Abbe  compiled 
under  the  circumstances  and  according  to  the  design 
above  described  has  a  somewhat  remarkable  history.  In 
its  original  form  it  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  Major  Wilks 
in  the  year  1806,  when  the  Abbe  had  been  some  fourteen 
years  in  the  country.  Major  Wilks  appears  to  have  kept 
it  by  him  and  studied  it  for  more  than  a  year,  and  then 
to  have  forwarded  it  to  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George 
with  a  letter  of  warm  recommendation,  in  which  he  re- 
marked :  '  So  far  as  my  previous  information  and  sub- 
sequent inquiry  have  enabled  me  to  judge,  it  contains  the 
most  correct,  comprehensive,  and  minute  account  extant 
in  any  European  language  of  the  customs  and  manners 
of  the  Hindus.'  This  judgement  was  heartily  endorsed 
by  Sir  James  Mackintosh,  to  whom  Major  Wilks  would 
appear  to  have  sent  it  for  his  opinion,  and  also  by  Mr.  W. 
Erskine,  of  Bombay,  a  man  of  distinguished  talents  and 
an  acknowledged  authority  in  everything  connected  with 
the  mythology,  literature,  customs,  and  institutions  of  the 
people  of  India.  Fortified  in  his  own  opinion  of  its  high 
merits  by  the  concurrence  of  these  two  eminent  men, 
Major  Wilks  had  no  difficulty  in  persuading  Lord  William 
Bentinck,  who  was  then  at  Madras,  to  purchase  the  MS. 
on  behalf  of  the  East  India  Company,  the  sum  eventually 
agreed  upon  being  2,000  star  pagodas  (i.e.  in  the  present 
currency  some  8,000  rupees).  In  accordance  with  the 
Abbe's  request  this  sum  was  invested  in  Government 
paper  and  the  interest  paid  to  him  regularly  afterwards 


HISTORY  OF  DUBOIS'  MSS.  xv 

— a  modest  sum,  no  doubt,  judged  by  latter-day  standards 
of  literary  remuneration ;  but,  then,  the  Abbe's  wants 
were  modest.  According  to  Major  Wilks  all  that  he  hoped 
for  was  '  a  recompense  sufficient  to  shield  his  future  life 
from  those  miseries  of  extreme  want  which  he  had  once 
already  encountered.' 

In  summing  up  his  own  opinion  of  the  Abbe's  work 
Lord  William  Bentinck  remarked  with  characteristic  can- 
dour and  good  sense  : — 

'  The  result  of  my  own  observation  during  my  residence 
in  India  is  that  the  Europeans  generally  know  little  or 
nothing  of  the  customs  and  manners  of  the  Hindus.  We 
are  all  acquainted  with  some  prominent  marks  and  facts, 
which  all  who  run  may  read  ;  but  their  manner  of  think- 
ing, their  domestic  habits  and  ceremonies,  in  which  cir- 
cumstances a  knowledge  of  the  people  consists,  is,  I  fear, 
in  great  part  wanting  to  us.  We  understand  very  imper- 
fectly their  language.  They  perhaps  know  more  of  ours  ; 
but  their  knowledge  is  by  no  means  sufficiently  extensive 
to  give  a  description  of  subjects  not  easily  represented  by 
the  insulated  words  in  daily  use.  We  do  not,  we  cannot, 
associate  with  the  natives.  We  cannot  see  them  in  their 
houses  and  with  their  families.  We  are  necessarily  very 
much  confined  to  our  houses  by  the  heat ;  all  our  wants 
and  business  which  would  create  a  greater  intercourse 
with  the  natives  is  done  for  us,  and  we  are  in  fact  strangers 
in  the  land.  I  have  personally  found  the  want  of  a  work 
to  which  reference  could  be  made  for  a  just  description 
of  the  native  opinions  and  manners.  I  am  of  opinion  that, 
in  a  political  point  of  view,  the  information  which  the 
work  of  the  Abbe  Dubois  has  to  impart  might  be  of  the 
greatest  benefit  in  aiding  the  servants  of  the  Government 
in  conducting  themselves  more  in  unison  with  the  customs 
and  prejudices  of  the  natives.' 

The  purchase  of  the  MS.  was  reported  by  the  Madras 
Government  to  the  Board  of  Directors  in  1807  as  '  an 
arrangement  ...  of  great  public  importance  '  ;  and  the 
MS.  itself  was  transmitted  to  London  at  the  same  time  for 


xv i  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION 

translation  and  publication.  It  was  not  until  1816,  how- 
ever, that  the  English  translation  was  actually  published, 
with  the  sanction  of  the  East  India  Company  and  under 
the  personal  supervision  of  Major  Wilks.  Meanwhile  a 
copy  of  the  MS.  in  the  records  of  Fort  St.  George  had 
in  1815  attracted  the  attention  of  Mr.  A.  D.  Campbell, 
Superintendent  of  the  Local  Board  of  Examiners,  who, 
in  apparent  ignorance  of  the  fact  that  the  original  copy 
had  been  sent  to  England  for  publication,  proposed  to 
publish  an  annotated  edition  of  it  in  Madras.  Accordingly 
he  commenced  the  task ;  but  almost  immediately  he 
reported  to  the  Local  Government  as  follows  : — 

'  I  soon  found  enough  to  satisfy  me  that  it  would  be 
unfair  to  proceed  further  in  this  pursuit  without  first 
affording  the  author  an  opportunity  of  revising  his  work, 
being  convinced  that  the  increased  experience  of  the  Abbe 
Dubois  and  his  further  acquaintance  with  the  customs  and 
habits  of  the  Hindus  would  enable  him  to  correct  many 
parts  of  the  MS.,  and  to  add  new  information  on  the  very 
curious  and  interesting  subjects  on  which  it  treats.  I  have 
now  the  honour  of  submitting  to  the  Board  the  reply  of 
the  Abbe  Dubois  to  a  reference  which  I  made  to  him  on 
this  subject,  and  it  will  thence  be  perceived  that,  notwith- 
standing the  very  favourable  manner  in  which  the  accuracy 
of  the  facts  stated  in  the  MS.  has  been  mentioned  by 
Colonel  Wilks,  the  author  admits  that  the  work  requires 
"  considerable  alterations  "  and  "  many  additions,"  and 
that  "  there  are  chapters  which  ought  to  be  entirely  made 
again."  ' 

It  is  from  this  point  that  the  history  of  the  MS.  becomes 
most  interesting.  It  appears  from  a  careful  examination 
which  I  have  made  of  the  records  in  the  Madras  Govern- 
ment Secretariat  (which  records  include  several  letters  in 
the  Abbe's  own  handwriting)  that  the  MS.  was  sent  back 
to  the  Abbe  for  his  additions,  excisions,  and  corrections, 
and  that  these  were  verv  considerable.     Indeed  the  MS. 


EARLIER   EDITIONS  xvii 

was  completely  altered,  recast  and  enlarged,  until  it  bore 
hardly  more  resemblance  to  the  original  work  than  a  rough 
outline  sketch  does  to  a  finished  picture. 

And  yet  this  rough  sketch,  so  to  speak,  has  up  to  this 
day  been  all  that  English  readers  have  had  presented  to 
them  of  the  Abbe's  work.  I  do  not  for  one  moment  desire 
to  detract  from  the  artistic  and  literary  value  of  that  sketch, 
admirable  as  it  is,  and  as  it  has  been  acknowledged  to  be 
by  the  authorities  quoted  above.  But  what  I  do  mean  to 
say  is  that  the  sketch  is  only  an  extremely  poor  representa- 
tion of  what  the  Abbe's  great  work  really  was. 

The  true  history  was  this.  When  the  MS.  was  returned 
to  him  in  1815,  the  Abbe  put  into  it  all  the  additions  and 
corrections  suggested  by  many  years  of  additional  study 
and  investigation  ;  and  when  he  sent  it  back  to  the  Govern- 
ment of  Madras,  it  was,  practically  speaking,  a  different 
work  altogether.  On  receipt  of  the  revised  MS.  the  Govern- 
ment of  Madras  decided  that  the  only  course  open  to  them 
was  to  send  it  to  the  Court  of  Directors  in  England,  as  the 
original  MS.  had  been.  Unfortunately,  however,  before 
the  revised  MS.  could  reach  England  the  original  draft  had 
been  translated  and  published  ;  and  it  is  this  edition  which 
has  been  sold  ever  since,  and  upon  which  the  Abbe's  repu- 
tation has  rested. 

It  is  true  that  a  so-called  '  revised  '  edition  was  published 
some  thirty  odd  years  ago,  but  it  was  merely  a  reprint  (and 
unfortunately  a  very  considerably  curtailed  reprint)  of  the 
original  English  edition.  The  only  sign  that  I  have  been 
able  to  discover  of  the  revised  MS.  in  the  Fort  having  been 
consulted,  is  the  inclusion  of  a  dedicatory  page  that  had  been 
added  by  the  Abbe  when  he  sent  his  finally  corrected  copy 
to  the  Madras  Government  before  leaving  India.  As  far 
as  I  can  ascertain  the  chief  effect  of  this  new  edition  was 
a  demand  for  a  verbatim  reprint  of  the  original  edition 


xviii  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

which  had  been  so  arbitrarily  cut  down  ;  and  this  was 
almost  immediately  supplied  by  the  publishers. 

The  Abbe,  the  Local  Government,  and  Mr.  Campbell,  it 
may  be  remarked,  were  all  in  hopes  that  a  second  revised 
edition  would  be  published  containing  the  corrections  and 
additions  that  had  subsequently  been  made  ;  but  for  some 
reason  or  another  this  has  never  hitherto  been  done. 

The  view  which  the  Abbe  took  of  the  edition,  as  it  ap- 
peared, is  expressed  in  a  letter  in  English  (of  which  he  had 
a  good  knowledge)  addressed  to  the  Madras  Government, 
dated  Seringapatam,  February  20,  1818,  with  which  letter 
he  submitted  still  further  revisions.  The  Abbe  remarked 
therein  : — 

1  Since  I  wrote  my  last  additions  and  corrections,  a  gentle- 
man in  the  place  having  favoured  me  for  my  perusal  with 
a  copy  of  the  English  translation  of  the  work,  I  was  sorry 
to  observe  that,  owing  perhaps  to  some  oversight  on  the 
part  of  the  copyists  of  my  original  MS.,  or  other  accidents, 
many  interesting,  authentic,  and  quite  unexceptionable 
paragraphs,  and  in  some  instances  whole  pages,  had  been 
passed  over,  which  circumstance  occasions  chasms  in  the 
narrative  and  otherwise  renders  the  descriptions  very  im- 
perfect, and  in  a  few  instances  contradictory.  These  dif- 
ferences are  pointed  out  and  corrected  in  the  accompanying 
sheets  ;  and  the  other  inaccuracies  to  be  found  in  the 
original  MS.  and  the  translation  were  fully  corrected  and 
the  work  considerably  enlarged  in  the  additions  sent  before 
to  Government.  I  therefore  request  that  the  accompanying 
accounts  may  be  sent  without  delay  to  the  Hon'ble  the 
Court  of  Directors  to  be  added  to  the  former  ones,  in  order 
that  if  the  work  goes  through  a  second  edition  it  may  be 
made  as  interesting  and  curious  as  it  lies  in  my  power  to  do.' 

Nor  were  these  the  last  corrections  made  in  the  text  of 
his  work  by  the  good  Abbe,  for  three  years  later,  and  a  short 
time  before  he  left  India  for  good  and  all,  he  sent  a  fair  copy 
of  his  'finally  corrected'  work  to  the  Madras  Government. 


EARLIER  EDITIONS  xix 

which,  like  the  two  former  MSS.,  was  sent  to  England  and 
is  now  in  the  India  Office  Library.  One  copy  of  this,  I  may 
mention,  was  taken  by  the  Abbe  to  France,  and  was  pub- 
lished in  the  original  French.  The  number  issued  was 
however  small,  and  copies  of  it  are  now  almost  unprocurable. 
And  another  copy  of  the  MS.  was  left  in  the  records  of  Fort 
St.  George.  This  last-named  copy  I  have  carefully  com- 
pared with  the  English  translation  which  has  hitherto  been 
available  to  the  public,  and  the  comparison  has  shown  me 
how  vastly  superior  in  every  way  (I  might  say  every  page) 
is  the  Abbe's  later  and  unpublished  work  as  contrasted 
with  his  first  draft,  composed  sixteen  years  earlier,  which 
despite  its  imperfections  has  enjoyed  so  much  popularity 
amongst  English  students  of  Hinduism. 

It  is  certainly  very  strange  that  all  the  facts  which  I  have 
detailed  above  have  never  before  attracted  attention,  and 
that  although  copies  of  the  Abbe's  finally  completed  work 
are  to  be  found  in  the  records  of  the  India  Office  and  of  the 
Government  of  Madras,  it  has  never  before  been  discovered 
that  the  published  English  edition  is  not  in  reality  a  com- 
plete or  true  representation  of  the  Abbe's  long  labours  in 
the  field  of  original  research.  For  all  that,  however,  this 
edition  has  been  largely  drawn  upon  by  English  writers, 
chief  amongst  whom  we  may  mention  Mill,  the  historian  of 
India,  while  Oriental  students  like  Professor  Wilson  have 
acknowledged  the  assistance  it  afforded  them,  and  in  the 
British  Museum  there  is  a  copy  of  it  containing  a  manuscript 
note  by  Coleridge  which  shows  that  the  poet  had  gone  to 
it  for  inspiration.  '  This  is  the  honestest  book  of  the  kind,' 
Coleridge  pronounced,  'as  written  by  a  Frenchman,  that 
I  have  ever  read.' 

Now,  if  this  faulty  English  edition  has  been  so  widely 
consulted  and  so  frequently  extolled,  an  English  edition 
of  the  Abbe's  revised  work  ought  to  be  infinitely  more 


xx  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION 

valuable.  This  was  tho  thought  which  presented  itself  to 
me  when  I  discovered,  almost  accidentally,  while  looking 
through  the  French  MS.  in  the  Madras  Government's 
records,  that  the  good  Abbe  had  never  had  justice  done  to 
him.  Accordingly,  with  the  permission  and  with  the  aid 
of  the  Madras  Government,  I  have  made  a  verbatim  trans- 
lation of  the  work  in  its  complete  form  which  I  here  present 
to  the  public,  together  with  such  notes  and  observations  as 
seem  necessary  to  put  the  text  into  line  with  later  develop- 
ments and  research. 

As  to  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  Abbe's  work,  I  have  no 
hesitation  in  saying  that  it  is  as  valuable  to-day  as  ever  it 
was,  even  more  valuable  in  some  respects.  It  is  true  that 
a  mass  of  learned  literature  on  the  religious  and  civil  life  of 
the  Hindus  has  accumulated  since  the  Abbe's  days,  and  it 
is  still  accumulating  ;  and  the  impression  may  be  felt  in 
many  minds  that  a  book  written  so  long  ago  can  be  of  little 
practical  use  at  present  ;  but  the  fact  is  that  the  Abbe's 
work,  composed  as  it  was  in  the  midst  of  the  people  them- 
selves, is  of  a  unique  character,  for  it  combines,  as  no  other 
work  on  the  Hindus  combines,  a  recital  of  the  broad  facts 
of  Hindu  religion  and  Hindu  sociology  with  many  masterly 
descriptions,  at  once  comprehensive  and  minute,  of  the  vie 
intime  of  the  people  among  whom  he  lived  for  so  many  years. 
With  any  other  people  than  the  Hindus  such  a  work  would 
soon  grow  out  of  date  ;  but  with  them  the  same  ancestral 
traditions  and  customs  are  followed  nowadays  that  were 
followed  hundreds  of  years  ago,  at  least  by  the  vast  majority 
of  the  population.  I  do  not  deny  that  some  of  the  Abbe's 
statements  require  to  be  modified  in  the  light  of  changes 
that  have  taken  place  amongst  the  educated  classes  since 
the  introduction  of  Western  learning,  but  such  necessary 
modifications,  which,  as  remarked  above,  I  have  introduced 
in  the  form   of  notes,  are  surprisingly  few.     Enumerated 


VALUE  OF  DUBOIS'  RESEARCHES  xxi 

separately  by  themselves,  no  doubt  these  changes  might 
furnish  material  for  a  substantial  volume,  for  no  person 
would  now  be  so  foolish  as  to  repeat  the  assertion  so  long 
maintained  unchallenged  that  the  Hindu  nation  is  completely 
apathetic,  unchanging,  and  non-progressive  in  the  modern 
sense.  But  in  editing  the  Abbe's  work  I  have  confined 
myself  to  modifying  such  statements  as  seemed  to  require 
modification,  and  have  avoided  as  far  as  possible  any  digres- 
sions that  were  not  suggested  by  the  text  itself. 

Petty  local  differences  in  civil  and  religious  affairs  are 
a  marked  feature  of  Hinduism,  just  as  almost  innumerable 
subdivisions  and  sub-sections  and  sub-sub-sections  are  a 
marked  feature  of  the  caste  system.  Hence  it  is  that  much 
which  is  perfectly  true  of  one  locality  is  false  of  another  ; 
and  accordingly  it  is  impossible  to  describe  the  many  details 
of  Hindu  life  and  character  without  mental  reservations 
as  to  possible  exceptions.  Nevertheless,  there  are  certain 
broad,  fundamental  principles  underlying  these  many 
differences  and  inequalities  ;  and  it  is  upon  these  that  the 
Abbe  rears  the  fabric  of  his  extraordinary  work.  More- 
over, the  Abbe  appears  to  me  to  avoid  the  many  pitfalls  of 
this  uneven  field  of  investigation  with  peculiar  skill.  It 
would  be  wrong  to  say  that  all  his  observations  are  generally 
applicable  or  perfectly  just,  but,  taken  as  a  whole,  they 
are  remarkably  true  and  unprejudiced. 

I  am  here  tempted  to  quote  at  some  length  the  observa- 
tions concerning  the  Abbe  and  his  researches  made  by  a 
prominent  Hindu,  the  Honourable  Dewan  Bahadur  Srina- 
vasa  Raghava  Iyengar,  CLE.,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Madras 
Presidency  College  Literary  Society  in  May,  1.896.  This 
gentleman  is  well  fitted  to  express  an  opinion  on  a  subject 
of  the  kind,  for  not  only  has  he  been  for  some  years  past 
Inspector-General  of  Registration  in  Madras,  a  department 
of  the  public  service  which  in  its  dealings  is  in  closer  touch 


XXII 


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION 


< han  any  other  with  the  material  and  social  conditions  of 
the  people  themselves,  but  he  is  himself  the  author  of 
a  most  authoritative  work  on  the  moral  and  material  pro- 
gress of  Southern  India  under  British  rule.  At  the  meeting 
referred  to  he  observed  : — 

'  The  Abbe  was  a  most  remarkable  character,  and  a  study 
of  his  life  cannot  fail  to  be  of  profit  to  us  all.  It  has  been 
said,  and  said  truly,  that  one  half  of  the  nation  does  not 
know  how  the  other  half  lives.  The  difficulties  which  a 
foreigner  has  of  understanding  the  inner  life  and  modes  of 
thought  of  a  people  to  which  he  does  not  belong  may  indeed 
be  said  to  be  immense.  The  Abbe  surmounted  these 
difficulties  by  devoting  thirty  years  of  his  life  to  his 
subject.  To  effect  his  purpose  he  adopted  the  garb,  the 
manners,  and,  as  he  says,  even  the  prejudices  of  the 
people  among  whom  his  lot  was  cast ;  won  their  respect 
and  confidence;  and  was  held  by  them  in  quite  as  much 
reverence  as  one  of  their  yogis  or  gurus.  The  quotations 
from  his  work  show  his  shrewd  common  sense,  clear-sighted- 
ness, and  perfect  candour.  Any  account  given  by  such  a 
man  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  people  amongst 
whom  he  lived  must  in  any  case  be  instructive,  and  I  for 
one  look  forward  with  great  interest  to  the  forthcoming 
revised  edition  of  the  Abbe's  work.' 

In  many  respects  the  Abbe  displays  a  truly  wonderful  in- 
sight into  things.  For  instance,  in  his  finally  corrected  work 
there  is  a  passage  (evidently  a  late  interpolation)  in  which 
he  sums  up  in  a  few  brief  sentences  his  opinion  of  British 
dominion  in  India,  and  which  is  all  the  more  remarkable  as 
coming  from  a  Frenchman.    In  that  passage  he  remarks  : — 

'  The  European  Power  which  is  now  established  in  India 
is,  properly  speaking,  supported  neither  by  physical  force 
nor  by  moral  influence.  It  is  a  piece  of  huge,  complicated 
machinery,  moved  by  springs  which  have  been  arbitrarily 
adapted  to  it.  Under  the  supremacy  of  the  Brahmins  the 
people  of  India  hated  their  government,  while  they  cherished 
and  respected  their  rulers  ;  under  the  supremacy  of  Euro- 
peans they  hate  and  despise  their  rulers  from  the  bottom  of 


DUBOIS  ON  BRITISH  RULE  xxiii 

their  hearts,  while  they  cherish  and  respect  their  govern- 
ment. And  here  I  would  remark  that  the  rule  of  all  the 
Hindu  princes,  and  often  that  of  the  Mahomedans,  was, 
properly  speaking,  Brahminical  rule,  since  all  posts  of  con- 
fidence were  held  by  Brahmins. 

1  If  it  be  possible  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  people 
of  India  I  am  convinced  that  this  desirable  result  will  be 
attained  under  the  new  regime,  whatever  may  be  said  by 
detractors  who  are  ready  to  find  fault  with  everything. 
Whatever  truth  indeed  there  may  be  in  the  prejudiced 
charges,  engendered  by  ignorance  and  interested  motives, 
which  are  brought  against  the  new  order  of  things,  and 
which  are  perhaps  inseparable  from  every  great  administra- 
tion, I  for  one  cannot  believe  that  a  nation  so  eminently 
distinguished  for  its  beneficent  and  humane  principles  of 
government  at  home,  and  above  all  for  its  impartial  justice 
to  all  classes  alike — I  for  one  cannot  believe  that  this 
nation  will  ever  be  blind  enough  to  compromise  its  own  noble 
character  by  refusing  participation  in  these  benefits  to  a  sub- 
ject people  which  is  content  to  live  peaceably  under  its  sway. 

'  At  the  same  time  I  venture  to  predict  that  it  will  attempt 
in  vain  to  effect  any  very  considerable  changes  in  the  social 
condition  of  the  people  of  India,  whose  character,  principles, 
customs,  and  ineradicable  conservatism  will  always  present 
insurmountable  obstacles.  To  make  a  people  happy,  it  is 
essential  that  they  themselves  should  desire  to  be  made 
happy  and  should  co-operate  with  those  who  are  working 
for  their  happiness.  Now,  the  people  of  India,  it  appears 
to  me,  neither  possess  this  desire  nor  are  anxious  to  co- 
operate to  this  end.  Every  reform  which  is  obviously 
devised  for  their  well-being  they  obstinately  push  aside  if  it 
is  likely  in  the  least  degree  to  disturb  their  manner  of  living, 
their  most  absurd  prejudice,  or  their  most  puerile  custom. 

'  Nevertheless  the  justice  and  prudence  which  the  present 
rulers  display  in  endeavouring  to  make  these  people  less 
unhappy  than  they  have  been  hitherto  ;  the  anxiety  they 
manifest  in  increasing  their  material  comfort  ;  above  all, 
the  inviolable  respect  which  they  constantly  show  for  the 
customs  and  religious  beliefs  of  the  country;  and,  lastly, 
the  protection  they  afford  to  the  weak  as  well  as  to  the  strong, 
to  the  Brahmin  as  to  the  Pariah,  to  the  Christian,  to  the 


xxiv  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

Mahoiuedan,  and  to  tlie  Pagan  :  all  these  have  contributed 
more  to  the  consolidation  of  their  power  than  even  their 
victories  and  conquests.  .  .  . 

'  It  has  been  asserted  that  any  great  power  based  neither 
on  a  display  of  force  nor  on  the  affection  and  esteem  of 
subject  races  is  bound  sooner  or  later  to  topple  under  its 
own  weight.  I  am  far  from  sharing  this  opinion  altogether. 
The  present  Government  is  in  a  position  in  which  it  has 
little  or  nothing  to  fear  from  extraneous  disturbance.  True 
it  is  that  like  all  empires  it  is  subject  to  possible  chances  of 
internal  dissension,  military  revolt,  and  general  insurrection. 
But  I  firmly  believe  that  nothing  of  this  sort  will  happen  to 
it  so  long  as  it  maintains  amongst  its  troops  the  perfect 
discipline  and  the  sense  of  comfort  which  at  present  exist, 
and  so  long  as  it  does  all  in  its  power  to  make  its  yoke  scarcely 
perceptible  by  permitting  its  subjects  every  freedom  in 
the  exercise  of  their  social  and  religious  practices. 

'  It  is  the  poverty  of  the  country  which  in  my  opinion 
gives  most  cause  for  apprehension — a  poverty  which  is 
accompanied  by  the  most  extraordinary  supineness  on  the 
part  of  the  people  themselves.  The  question  is,  will  a 
Government  which  is  rightly  determined  to  be  neither  unjust 
nor  oppressive  be  able  always  to  find  within  the  borders 
of  this  immense  empire  means  sufficient  to  enable  it  to  meet 
the  heavy  expenses  of  its  administration  ?  But,  after  all, 
God  alone  can  foretell  the  destiny  of  Governments ! ' 

Time  has  but  proved  incontestably  the  truth  of  these 
far-seeing  criticisms.  Even  the  Mutiny  is  therein  antici- 
pated and  its  chief  cause  accurately  foretold,  while  nobody 
will  deny  the  justice,  even  at  the  present  day,  of  the  Abbe's 
observations  on  the  attitude  of  the  natives  of  India  towards 
the  British  Government  and  on  the  difficulties  with  which 
that  Government  has  to  contend  in  administering  its  vast 
Eastern  empire,  according  to  Western  notions  of  civilization 
andprogress,  with  the  resources  that  it  yields  for  that  purpose. 

There  is  one  other  matter  which  I  feel  bound  to  refer 
to  before  concluding  this  brief  notice  of  the  Abbe's  sojourn 
and  work  in  India,  and  that  is  the  impression  he  derived 


DUBOIS    ON   MISSIONS  xxv 

after  three  decades  of  Mission  labour  as  to  the  possibility 
of  converting  India  to  Christianity.  I  have  no  wish  to 
renew  the  bitter  controversy  which  ensued  on  the  publi- 
cation of  his  Letters  on  the  State  of  Christianity  in  India 
soon  after  his  return  to  France  ;  but  no  notice  of  the  Abbe's 
career  would  be  complete  without  some  reference  to  it. 
The  purport  of  those  Letters,  as  I  understand  them,  was  to 
assert  that,  under  existing  circumstances,  there  is  no  human 
possibility  of  converting  the  Hindus  as  a  nation  to  any  sect  of 
Christianity  ;  or  in  the  Abbe's  own  words, '  Let  the  Christian 
religion  be  presented  to  these  people  under  every  possible 
light,  .  .  .  the  time  of  conversion  has  passed  away,  and  under 
existing  circumstances  there  remains  no  human  possibility 
of  bringing  it  back.'  It  would  require  a  reproduction  of 
the  whole  text  of  these  Letters  to  explain  fully  the  grounds 
upon  which  the  Abbe  based  a  decision  so  humiliating  to 
himself  and  to  his  fellow-Christian  workers,  but  the  chief 
cause  undoubtedly  was  the  invincible  barrier  of  what  we 
may  call  nowadays  intellectual  Hinduism,  but  which  the 
Abbe  called  Brahminical  prejudice.  He  refers  regretfully 
to  the  collapse  of  the  Church,  with  its  hundreds  of  thousands 
of  converts,  many  of  them  of  high  caste,  established  by  the 
Jesuits  Beschi  and  de  Nobili  in  Madura  ;  but  at  the  same 
time  he  made  no  concealment  of  the  real  causes  of  their 
failure.  '  The  Hindus  soon  found  that  those  missionaries 
whom  their  colour,  their  talents,  and  other  qualities  had 
induced  them  to  regard  as  such  extraordinary  beings,  as 
men  coming  from  another  world,  were  in  fact  nothing  else 
but  disguised  Feringhis  (Europeans),  and  that  their  country, 
their  religion,  and  original  education  were  the  same  as  those 
of  the  evil,  the  contemptible  Feringhis  who  had  of  late  in- 
vaded their  country.  This  event  proved  the  last  blow  to 
the  interests  of  the  Christian  religion.  No  more  conversions 
were  made.     Apostasy  became  almost  general  in  several 


xxv]  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

quarters,  and  Christianity  became  more  and  more  an  object 
of  contempt  and  aversion  in  proportion  as  European  manners 
became  better  known  to  the  Hindus.' 

It  is  necessary  to  remark  that  the  Abbe's  Letters  were 
vehemently  answered  by  the  Protestant  missionaries, 
Hough  and  Townley  ;  but  we  need  not  enter  into  the 
details  of  the  controversy.  In  another  place  the  Abbe 
remarked  :  '  Should  the  intercourse  between  individuals  of 
both  nations,  by  becoming  more  intimate  and  more  friendly, 
produce  a  change  in  the  religion  and  usages  of  the  country, 
it  will  not  be  to  turn  Christians  that  they  will  forsake  their 
own  religion,  but  rather  (what  in  my  opinion  is  a  thousand 
times  worse  than  idolatry)  to  become  mere  atheists,  and 
if  they  renounce  their  present  customs  it  will  not  be  to 
embrace  those  of  Europeans,  but  rather  to  become  what 
are  now  called  Pariahs.' 

In  a  word,  the  Abbe  completely  despaired  of  the  higher 
castes  ever  becoming  Christians,  though  he  was  ready  to 
acknowledge  that  there  was  a  harvest-field  among  the 
low  castes  and  outcastes.  Of  his  own  attempts  to  convert 
the  Hindus  he  remarks  :  '  For  my  part  I  cannot  boast  of 
my  successes  in  this  sacred  career  during  the  period  that 
I  have  laboured  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  Christian 
religion.  The  restraints  and  privations  under  which  I  have 
lived,  by  conforming  myself  to  the  usages  of  the  country  ; 
embracing,  in  many  respects,  the  prejudices  of  the  natives  ; 
living  like  them,  and  becoming  all  but  a  Hindu  myself  ;  in 
short,  by  being  made  all  things  to  all  men,  that  I  might  by 
all  means  save  some — all  these  have  proved  of  no  avail  to 
me  to  make  proselytes.  During  the  long  period  I  have  lived 
in  India  in  the  capacity  of  a  missionary,  I  have  made,  with 
the  assistance  of  a  native  missionary,  in  all  between  two 
and  three  hundred  converts  of  both  sexes.  Of  this  number 
two-thirds  were  Pariahs  or  beggars  ;    and  the  rest   were 


DUBOIS'   CONCLUSIONS   ENDORSED      xxvii 

composed  of  Sudras,  vagrants,  and  outcastes  of  several  tribes, 
who,  being  without  resource,  turned  Christians  in  order  to 
form  connexions,  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  marriage,  or 
with  some  other  interested  views.' 

These  various  quotations  from  the  Abbe's  Letters  are 
likely  to  inspire  indignation  among  Christian  missionaries, 
but  his  general  conclusions  certainly  find  a  remarkable 
echo  in  the  following  extract  on  Christianity  in  Mr.  Baines's 
General  Report  on  the  Census  of  1891  : — 

'  Its  greatest  development  is  found  where  the  Brah manic 
caste  system  is  in  force  in  its  fullest  vigour,  in  the  south  and 
west  of  the  Peninsula,  and  amongst  the  Hill  tribes  of  Bengal. 
In  such  localities  it  is  naturally  attractive  to  a  class  of  the 
population  whose  position  is  hereditarily  and  permanently 
degraded  by  their  own  religion,  as  Islam  has  proved  in 
Eastern  Bengal,  and  amongst  the  lowest  class  of  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  Panjab.  We  have  seen  that  in  the  early  days 
of  Portuguese  missionary  enterprise,  it  was  found  necessary 
to  continue  the  breach  that  Brahmanic  custom  had  placed 
between  certain  grades  of  society  and  those  above  them  ; 
but  in  later  times,  and  in  foreign  missions  of  the  Reformed 
Church,  the  tendency  has  been  to  absorb  all  caste  distinc- 
tions into  the  general  commission  of  the  Christianity  of  that 
form.  The  new  faith  has  thus  affected  the  lower  classes 
more  directly  than  the  upper,  who  have  more  to  lose  socially, 
and  less  to  gain.'  .  .  . 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  in  the  agricultural  settlement 
of  reconverted  Christians  at  Sathalli  in  Mysore,  previously 
alluded  to,  the  inhabitants  retained  theirHindu  caste  distinc- 
tions ;  and  the  following  observations  in  Mr.  V.  N.  Narasim- 
miyengar's  Mysore  Census  Report  (1891)  are  noteworthy  : — 

'  Roman  Catholicism  is  able  to  prevail  among  the  Hindus 
more  rapidly  and  easily,  by  reason  of  its  policy  of  tolerating 
among  its  converts  the  customs  of  caste  and  social  obser- 
vances, which  constitute  so  material  a  part  of  the  Indian 
social  fabric.  In  the  course  of  the  investigations  engen- 
dered by  the  census,  several  Roman  Christian  communities 


xxviii  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

have  been  met  with,  which  continue  undisturbed  in  the 
rites  and  usages  which  had  guided  them  in  their  pre-con- 
version  existence.  They  still  pay  worship  to  the  Kalasam 
at  marriages  and  festivals,  call  in  the  Brahmin  astrologer 
and  purohita,  use  the  Hindu  religious  marks,  and  conform 
to  various  other  amenities,  which  have  the  advantage  of 
minimizing  friction  in  their  daily  intercourse  with  their 
Hindu  fellow-caste  brethren.' 

And  yet  the  Christian  native  is  nowadays  but  in  the 
ratio  of  seven  in  a  thousand  of  the  whole  population.  The 
remark  accordingly  made  by  the  Roman  Catholic  Bishop 
of  Agra  to  Jacquemont  is  as  applicable  now  as  it  was  when 
it  was  uttered  in  1828 :  '  La  caldalja  e  molto  grande,  ma  la 
carne  e  molto  poca.' 

The  last  years  of  the  Abbe's  life  were  spent  at  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Missions  Etrangeres  at  Paris.  He  left 
India,  never  to  return,  on  January  15,  1823,  his  passage 
having  been  paid  by  the  East  India  Company  and  a  special 
pension  settled  upon  him  for  life  in  recognition  of  the 
many  services  which  he  had  rendered  in  India.  On  his  re- 
turn to  Paris  he  was  at  once  made  Director  of  the  Missions 
Etrangeres,  and  from  1836  to  1839  he  filled  the  post  of 
Superior.  During  his  leisure  he  found  time  to  translate  into 
French  the  whole  of  the  Pancha-tantra,  the  famous  book  of 
Hindu  fables,  a"hd  also  a  work  which  he  entitled  The  Exploits 
of  the  Guru  Paramarta.  He  lived  for  no  less  than  a  quarter 
of  a  century  after  returning  to  Europe,  and  died  in  1848  at 
the  patriarchal  age  of  eighty- three. 

In  conclusion  I  desire  to  acknowledge  the  kind  assist- 
ance and  advice  which  I  have  received  from  many  Hindu 
friends  and  others  while  editing  the  Abbe's  work  r  especially 
do  I  desire  to  acknowledge  the  help  rendered  to  me  by 
Mr.  C.  V.  Munisawmy  Iyer,  a  Brahmin  gentleman,  who 
associated  himself  with  me  in  the  revision  of  the  proofs. 

H.  K.  B. 
MADRAS,  /September,  1897. 


CONTENTS 


Portrait  or  Dubois Frontispiece 

PAGES 

Editor's  Preface  to  Third  Edition 


ni-iv 

v-vii 

viii-xxviii 

1-13 


Prefatory  Note  by  Max  Muller 

Editor's  Introduction  . 

Author's  Preface 

PART  I. 

General  View  of  Society  in  India,  and  General  Remarks 
on  the  Caste  System. 

Chapter  I.  Division  and  Subdivision  of  Castes. — Castes  pecu- 
liar to  certain  Provinces. — Particular  Usages  of  some  Castes. 
— Division  of  Castes  founded  on  Parentage. — Subordination  of 
Castes. — Outward  Signs  of  certain  Castes. — Division  of  Caste- 
groups  into  Right-hand  and  Left-hand 14-27 

Chapter  II.  Advantages  resulting  from  Caste  Divisions. — 
Similar  Divisions  amongst  many  Ancient  Nations         .         .         .  27-37 

Chapter  III.  Expulsion  from  Caste. — Cases  in  which  such  De- 
gradation is  inflicted. — By  whom  inflicted. — Restoration  to  Caste. 
—Methods  of  effecting  it 38-44 

Chapter  IV.     Antiquity  and  Origin  of  Caste     ....  44-48 

Chapter  V.  The  Lower  Classes  of  Sudras. — Pariahs. — Chuck- 
lers,  or  Cobblers,  and  others  equally  low. — Contempt  in  which  they 
are  held. — Pariahs  strictly  speaking  Slaves. — Washermen,  Barbers, 
and  some  others. — Disrepute  into  which  Mechanical  Skill  has  fallen. 
— Nomads  and  Vagabonds. — Gypsies. — Quacks. — Jugglers. — Wild 
Tribes,  &c.  49-80 

Chapter  VI.     The  Poverty  of  the  Hindus         ....  80-97 

Chapter  VII.  The  Mythical  Origin  of  the  Brahmins. — Their 
Name  and  their  Original  Founders. — Conjectures  on  their  True 
Origin. — Buddhists  and  Jains        ......  97-108 

Chapter  VIII.  Different  Kinds  of  Brahmins. — Outward  Signs 
by  which  they  are  distinguishable  .....         108-111 

Chapter  IX.  The  different  Hindu  Sects. — Vishnavites  and 
Sivaites. — The  Exterior  Marks  and  Customs  peculiar  to  each. — 
The  Pavadam. — The  Mutual  Hatreds  and  Differences  between  the 
Sects. — Reason  for  the  Dislike  which  ordinary  Brahmins  feel  for 
Vishnavite  Brahmins  and  those  belonging  to  other  Sects. — Sub- 
divisions of  the  two  Principal  Sects       .....  111-123 

Chapter  X.  The  Gurus,  or  Hindu  Priests. — The  Portrait  of  a 
true  Guru,. — Their  Temporal  and  Spiritual  Power. — The  Fear  and 


vxx  CONTENTS 

PACES 

Respect  that  they  inspire. — Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy  composed  of 
the  Superior  and  Inferior  Priests. — The  Honours  paid  to  them. — 
Priestesses 123-133 

Chapter  XI.  Purohitas,  or  Priests  who  officiate  at  Public  and 
Private  Ceremonies. — The  Hindu  Almanac  as  published  by  the 
Purohitas 134-138 

Chapter  XII.  MarUrama. — Their  Efficacy. — The  Gayatri. — 
The  word  '  Awn.' — Magic  Mantrams 138-143 

Chapter  XIII.  Explanation  of  the  Principal  Ceremonies  of 
the  Brahmins  and  of  other  Castes. — The  Sam-kalpa. — Puja. — 
Aratti. — Akshatas. — Pavitram. — Sesamum  and  Darbha  Grass. — 
Puniaha-vacluma. — Panclia-gavia. — Purification  of  Places  where 
Ceremonies  take  place. — Pandals,  or  Pavilions  made  of  Leaves   143-155 

Chapter  XIV.  Ceremonies  to  be  observed  after  a  Woman's  Con- 
finement.— Ceremonies  performed  over  Infants     .         .         .        155-159 

PART  II. 

The  Four  States  of  Brahminical  Life. 

Chapter  I.  The  Bralimachari. — Ceremony  of  the  Upanayana, 
or  Investiture  of  the  Triple  Cord 160-170 

Chapter  II.  Conduct  of  the  Brahrnachari. — Rules  to  be  fol- 
lowed.— Rights  acquired  by  investiture  with  the  Cord. — The  Six 
Privileges  of  Brahmins. — The  Vedas 170-178 

Chapter  III.  External  Defilements.  The  care  that  a  Brahmin 
should  take  to  avoid  them. — His  Conduct  in  this  respect. — Means 
of  Purification 178-186 

Chapter  IV.  Internal  Defilements. — Abstinence  from  all 
Intoxicating  Liquors,  and  from  everything  that  has  had  Life. — 
Particular  Horror  of  the  Brahmins  for  the  Flesh  of  the  Cow. — Their 
Abhorrence  of  Europeans  who  eat  it  as  Food  .         .         .        186-194 

Chapter  V.  Defilements  of  the  Soul,  and  the  Means  of  Purifica- 
tion.— Places  of  Purification. — Sins  for  which  there  is  no  Forgive- 
ness.— Conjectures  on  the  Origin  of  Brahmin  Customs  connected 
with  Defilement  and  Purification. — Defilement  by  Europeans,  and 
an  Incident  which  happened  to  the  Author  from  this  Cause  .        194-204 

Chapter  VI.  Marriage  amongst  Brahmins  and  other  Hindus. 
— Celibacy. — Those  who  may  remain  unmarried. — Polygamy 
tolerated  only  amongst  the  Upper  Classes. — The  two  Sexes  nearly 
equal  in  numbers. — Indissolubility  of  the  Marriage  Tie. — How 
Marriages  are  arranged. — Preparatory  Ceremonies. — Solemn  Cere- 
monies for  the  first  and  following  Days. — Marriage  amongst  Sudras. 
— Marriage  amongst  Kshatriyas. — Duties  after  Marriage    .        205-235 

Chapter  VII.  The  Second,  or  Grahastha,  Status  of  Brahmin. — 
Rules  of  Life  which  the  Brahmin  Grahastha  should  daily  follow. — 


CONTEXTS 


XXXI 


Introduction. — Forms  to  bo  observed  when  relieving  Nature  and 
when  Washing. — Manner  of  cleansing  the  Teeth. — Sandhya,  Part  I. 
— Rules  relating  to  Ablutions. — The  Correct  Order  of  Daily  Avoca- 
tions.— Rules  to  be  followed  when  Eating  and  when  going  to  Bed. 
— Sandhya,  Part  II. — Mantrams  of  which  the  Sandhya  is  com- 
posed.— Sandhya  for  Morning,  Noon,  and  Evening. — Conclusion. — 
General  Remarks  .         . 235-269 

Chapter  VIII.     Brahminical  Fasts. — The  Custom  of.  Rubbing 
the  Head  and  Body  with  Oil. — The  Over-indulgence  of  Brahmins. — 
— Their  Scrupulous  Observance  of  Custom. — Reflections  on  this 
Subject. — Their  Samaradhanas,  or  Public  Feasts. — Sudra  Feasts  269-281 

Chapter  IX.  The  Kinds  of  Food  expressly  forbidden  to  Brah- 
mins.—Occult  Rites.— The  Disgusting  Rite  called  Sakti    .        282-288 

Chapter  X.     The  Various  Occupations  of  Brahmins  .        288-295 

Chapter  XL  Religious  Tolerance  amongst  the  Brahmins. — 
Their  Indifference  with  regard  to  their  own  Religion. — Their  Sub- 
lime Ideas  of  the  Deity. — A  Comparison  between  them  and  the 
Greek  Philosophers. — The  State  of  Christianity. — The  Political 
Intolerance  and  Ignorant  Presumption  of  Brahmins     .         .        295-306 

Chapter  XII.  The  Morality  of  Brahmins. — Their  Deceit  and 
Dissimulation. — Their  Want  of  Filial  Devotion. — Their  Inconti- 
nence.— Causes  of  their  Depravity. — Unnatural  Offences. — Out- 
ward Decency. — The  Chastity  of  their  Women. — Brahmin  Methods 
of  Revenge. — Brahmin  Selfishness 306-315 

Chapter  XILT.  The  Outward  Appearance  of  Brahmins  and 
other  Hindus. — Their  PhysicalDefects. — Remarks  on  the  Kakrelaks 
or  Albinoes,  as  described  by  Naturalists,  who  are  not  allowed  Burial 
after  Death. — Other  Hindus  to  whom  the  same  Honour  is  denied. 
— Exhumation  of  Corpses. — The  Feeble  Physique  of  the  Hindus. — 
The  same  Feebleness  and  Deterioration  to  be  observed  throughout 
the  Animal  and  Vegetable  Kingdoms. — Weakness  of  the  Mental 
Faculties  of  Hindus. — The  Language  of  the  Brahmins. — Their 
Costume.— Their  Houses 316-325 

Chapter  XIV.  Rules  of  Etiquette  amongst  Brahmins  and 
other  Hindus. — Modes  of  Greeting 326-331 

Chapter  XV.  The  Ornaments  worn  by  Hindus. — The  Dif- 
ferent Marks  with  which  they  adorn  their  Bodies   .         .         .        332-335 

Chapter  XVI.  Brahmin  Wives. — The  Education  of  Women. — 
Ceremonies  which  take  place  when  they  arrive  at  a  Marriageable 
Age,and  during  Pregnancy. — The  Low  Estimation  in  which  Women 
are  held  in  Private  Life. — The  Respect  that  is  paid  to  them  in 
Public— Their  Clothing  and  Ornaments        ....        336-342 

Chapter  XVII.     Rules  of  Conduct  for  Married  Women    .        343-349 

Chapter  XVIII.  Mourning.— The  Condition  of  Widowhood.— 
The  General  Contempt  for  Widows. — Remarriages  forbidden.        350-355 


xxxii  CONTENTS 

PAGES 
Chapter  XIX.     The  Custom  which  at  times  obliges  Widows  to 
allow  themselves  to  be  burnt  alive  on  the  Funeral  Pyre  of  their 
Deceased  Husbands 355-3C7 

Chapter  XX.  Adoption. — Rules  regarding  the  Partition  of 
Property 368-376 

Chapter  XXI.  The  Learning  of  the  Brahmins.— Their  Colleges. 
— Astronomy. — Astrology. — Magic 376-392 

Chapter  XXII.     The  Poetry  of  the  Hindus      .        .        .        392-401 

Chapter  XXIII.  Brahmin  Philosophy. — The  Six  Sects  called 
ShanMata.—  The  Doctrine  of  the  Buddhists  .         .         .         .        401-415 

Chapter  XXIV.  Chronology  of  the  Brahmins. — The  Epoch  of 
the  Flood 415-420 

Chapter  XXV.  The  Epistolary  Style  of  the  Brahmins. — Hindu 
Handwriting 420-433 

Chapter  XXVI.     Hindu  Fables 433-450 

Chapter  XXVII.     Hindu  Tales 450-474 

Chapter  XXVIII.     Niti  Slohas,  or  Moral  Stanzas     .        .  474-482 

Chapter  XXIX.     The  Funeral  Ceremonies  of  Brahmins  .  482-489 

Chapter  XXX.  The  Various  Ceremonies  observed  after  Burial 
in  Honour  of  the  Dead 489-500 

Chapter  XXXI.  The  Third  Condition  of  Brahmins,  viz.  Yana- 
prastha,  or  Dweller  in  the  Jungle. — The  Respect  paid  to  Yanapras- 
thas. — Conjectures  as  to  their  Origin. — Comparison  between  them 
and  the  Wise  Men  of  Greece  and  other  Philosophers. — The  Rules  of 
theVanaprasthas. — Their  Renunciation  of  the  World  and  Pleasures 
of  the  Senses.— Their  Moral  Virtues 5C0-509 

Chapter  XXXLT.  Sacrifices  of  the  Vanaprastlia  Brahmins. — 
Sacrifice  of  the  Yagnam. — The  Lesser  Yagnam. — The  Greater 
Yagnam. — The  Giants,  Enemies  of  the  Vanaprasthas   .         .        509-517 

Chapter  XXXIII.  Penance  as  a  Means  of  purifying  the  Soul. 
— The  Penance  of  the  Yanaprasthas. — Modern  Gymnosophists,  or 
Naked  Penitents.— Purification  by  Fire         ....        517-522 

Chapter  XXXIV.  The  Fourth  State  of  the  Brahmins,  that 
of  the  Sannyasi. — Preparation  for  this  Holy  State. — Ceremonies 
of  Initiation. — Rules  to  be  followed  by  the  Sannyasi   .         .        522-527 

Chapter  XXXV.  A  Sannyasi' 's  Principal  Duties. — Meditation. 
— Its  Various  Stages. — What  it  consists  of,  and  how  Hindu  Devo- 
tees practise  it. — General  Remarks. — Comparisons  between  the 
Hindu  Sannyasis  and  those  who  lead  Similar  Lives  among 
Christians .        528-538 

Chapter  XXXVI.  The  Funeral  Ceremonies  of  Brahmin  Sann- 
yasis    ...........        538-541 


CONTENTS  xxxiii 

PART  III. 

Religion. 

pages 
Chapter  I.     Origin  of  the  Trimurti  and  the  Primitive  Idolatry 
of  the  Hindus.— Comparison  between  the  Greek  and  Indian  Divi- 
nities.— Peculiar  Idolatry  of  the  Hindus. — Worship  of  the  Elements 
represented  by  the  Trimurti 542-555 

Chapter  II.  Metempsychosis. — Explanation  of  this  Religious 
Doctrine. — Penalties  for  Different  Sins. — The  Hindus  as  Authors 
of  the  Doctrine  of  Metempsychosis. — Difference  between  them  and 
the  Greeks  in  this  Respect. — Naraka,  or  Hell ;  Punishments  en- 
dured there. — Abodes  of  Bliss        ......         556-567 

Chapter  III.  Hindu  Feasts. — The  New- Year  Feast. — The 
Feast  of  the  Household  Gods. — Commemoration  of  the  Dead. — 
Feast  of  the  Schools. — Feasts  in  Honour  of  Serpents. — Military 
Feasts. — The  Feast  of  Lamps. — Sacrifices  to  Plants. — The  Feast 
of  the  Lingayats. — The  Pongvl  Ceremonies. — General  Remarks  567-577 

Chapter  IV.  Hindu  Temples. — Ceremonies  performed  inthem. 
— Temples  built  on  Mountains. — Pyramids. — The  Architecture  of 
Pagodas. — The  Shape  and  Ornaments  of  the  Idols. — Their  Conse- 
cration.— Sacred  Pillars. — Temple  Priests  and  Servants. — Sacri- 
fices. —  Dancing-girls.  —  Musicians.  —  Hindu  Music.  —  Brahmin 
Tricks  and  Artifices  for  attracting  Worshippers. — The  Hindu  Desire 
for  Children. — The  Revolting  Practices  to  which  they  submit  to 
obtain  them. — Remarkable  Ceremonies  and  Vows. — Prostitution 
in  Certain  Temples. — Religious  Tortures. — The  Rape  of  Women. — 
Famous  Temples. — Tirupati. — Jagannath. — Public  Processions. 
—General  Remarks 577-612 

Chapter  V.  The  Principal  Gods  of  the  Hindus. — Brahma. — 
Vi shnu. — Rama. — Krishna. — Siva. — The  Lingam. — Vigneshwara. 
— Indra. — The  Abodes  of  Bliss  of  these  Different  Gods. — Swarga. 
— Kailasa. — Vaikuniha. — Sattya-loJca    .....         612-636 

Chapter  VI.  The  Worship  of  Animals. — The  Worship  of  Mon- 
keys.—Of  Bulls.— Of  the  Guruda  Bird.— Of  Snakes.— Of  Fishes.— 
The  Worship  of  BTiootams,  or  Evil  Spirits. — Human  Sacrifices    636-648 

Chapter  VII.  Inanimate  Objects  of  Worship. — The  Salagrama 
Stone.— The  Tulasi.—Darbha  Grass.— The  Sacred  Fig-Tree  .        648-653 

Chapter  VIII.  The  Administration  of  Civil  and  Criminal  Jus- 
tice.— Customs  connected  with  Usury. — Various  Kinds  of  Punish- 
ment.— Trial  by  Ordeal. — The  Prevalence  of  Perjury. — Remarks 
on  the  European  Courts  of  Justice 654-667 

Chapter  IX.  The  Military  System  of  the  Hindus.— Ancient 
and  Modern  Methods  of  Warfare. — The  Material  formerly  com- 
posing their  Armies. — The  Military  Game  of  Chess  invented  by  the 
Hindus. — Poligars. — Different  Weapons  that  have  been  in  Use  at 
Various  Times  in  India 667-684 


xxxiv  CONTENTS 

PAGES 
APPENDIX  I.     The  Jains. — Differences  between  them  and  the 
Brahmins 685-700 

Appendix  II.     The  Eka-Dasi,  or  Eleventh  Day  of  the  Moon     701-706 

Appendix  III.     Siva-Ratri,  or  Siva's  Night       .         .         .        706-708 

Appendix   IV.     Rules  of  Conduct  for   Women    during   their 
Periodical  Uncleanness  .......         708-710 

Appendix  V.     Remarks  on  the  Origin  of  the  Famous  Temple 
ofJagannath 710-716 

Appendix  VI.     Trial  by  Ordeal.— Its  Different  Forms       .        717-722 
Index  ....  .....        723-741 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 


Though  Europeans  have  possessed  settlements  in  India 
for  more  than  three  centuries,  it  is  only  within  recent 
times  that  authentic  details  have  been  obtained  with 
respect  to  the  people  who  dwell  in  this  vast  country  and 
whose  ancient  civilization,  methods  of  government,  manners, 
creeds,  and  customs,  are  nevertheless  so  well  worthy  of 
notice.  It  is  impossible  to  doubt  for  a  moment  that  science 
and  art  nourished  amongst  these  nations  at  an  epoch  when 
our  most  civilized  countries  of  the  West  were  still  plunged 
in  the  dark  abyss  of  ignorance.  The  various  forms  of  their 
institutions,  both  political  and  social  ;  their  knowledge  of 
mathematics,  especially  of  astronomy  ;  their  systems  of 
metaphysics  and  ethics  :  all  of  these  had  long  ago  made 
the  people  of  India  famous  far  beyond  their  own  borders  ; 
while  the  renown  of  Hindu  philosophers  had  reached  even 
Europe.  The  many  ill-informed  and  often  contradictory 
narratives  about  India  which  have  been  published  in 
modern  times  have  deservedly  fallen  into  discredit.  Yet, 
it  must  be  admitted,  some  good  work  has  been  done  by 
certain  Literary  Societies  that  have  of  recent  years  been 
established  in  India,  the  members  of  which,  possessing 
access  to  original  sources  of  information,  have  begun  to 
survey  with  a  more  critical  eye  these  records  of  divine  and 
human  knowledge,  whose  depositaries  have  hitherto  guarded 
them  with  zealous  care  behind  a  veil  of  mystery.  Without 
doubt  the  members  of  these  Societies,  distinguished  as  they 
mostly  are  by  their  erudition,  will  continue  to  devote 
special  study  to  the  languages  of  the  country  and  to  make 
abundant  use  of  the  sources  of  information  open  to  them. 
Yet,  it  must  be  confessed,  the  information  which  we  possess 
about  the  people  of  India  is  very  meagre  compared  with 
that  which  it  is  most  important  for  us  to  acquire.     The 

DUBOIS  B 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 

ancient  history  of  their  country  is,  for  one  tiling,  enshrouded 
in  chimera  and  fable,  and,  unfortunately,  such  incoherence 
and  such  obscurity  prevail  in  their  written  records,  which 
are  our  only  means  of  really  getting  at  the  truth,  that  it 
is  not  too  much  to  presume  that  we  shall  never  succeed  in 
throwing  proper  light  on  all  this  mass  of  absurdities.  The 
most  popular  and  best  known  of  these  written  records  are 
the  Bd may ana,  the  Bhagavata,  and  the  Mahdbhdrata  '  ; 
but  the  information  which  their  authors  give  about  the 
dates,  events,  and  duration  of  the  different  dynasties  ; 
about  the  heroes  of  India  and  their  prowess  in  war  ;  about 
the  various  revolutions  which  occurred  in  the  country  and 
the  circumstances  which  led  to  them  ;  about  the  beginnings 
of  Hindu  polity  ;  about  the  discoveries  and  progress  in 
science  and  art ;  in  a  word,  about  all  the  most  interesting 
features  of  history, — all  information  of  this  kind  is,  as  it 
were,  buried  amid  a  mass  of  fable  and  superstition. 

My  readers  will  see  in  the  following  pages  to  what  ex- 
tremes the  people  of  India  carry  their  belief  in  and  love 
for  the  marvellous.  Their  first  historians  were  in  reality 
poets,  who  seem  to  have  decided  that  they  could  not  do 
better  than  compose  their  poems  in  the  spirit  of  the  people 
for  whom  they  were  writing.  That  is  to  say,  they  were 
guided  solely  by  the  desire  to  please  their  readers,  and 
accordingly  clothed  Truth  in  such  a  grotesque  garb  as  to 
render  it  a  mere  travesty  from  an  historical  point  of  view. 
The  Indian  Muse  of  History  thus  became  a  kind  of  magician 
whose  wand  performed  wonders.  The  successors  of  these 
first  poet-historians  were  actuated  by  the  same  motives, 
and  even  thought  that  it  added  to  their  own  glory  to 
improve  on  their  predecessors  and  to  surpass  them  in  the 
absurdity  of  their  fictions. 

While  waiting  for  inquirers,  more  skilful  than  myself,  to 
find  a  way  through  this  labyrinth,  which  to  me  is  absolutely 
inextricable,  I  offer  to  the  public  a  large  number  of  authentic 
records  which  I  have  carefully  collected,  and  which,  for 
the  most  part,  contain  particulars  that  are  either  un- 
known or  only  partially  known,  in  the  hope  that  they 
will  be  found  not  altogether  devoid  of  interest.     I  believe, 

1  These  arc  the  three  great  Hindu  Epic  poems.  Vide  Part  II, 
Chapter  XXII,  and  Part  III,  Chapter  V. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  3 

at  any  rate,  that  they  will  be  aeknowledged  to  contain 
some  useful  materials  for  future  savants  who  may  under- 
take a  complete  and  methodical  treatise  on  the  people  of 
India,  a  task  which  is  far  beyond  my  powers  and  which 
moreover  I  could  not  possibly  have  laid  upon  myself, 
seeing  that  I  was  without  literary  aids  of  any  kind  during 
my  long  and  absolute  seclusion  amongst  the  natives  of  the 
country. 

In  this  new  edition  the  contents  of  my  first  MS.  have 
been  carefully  revised  and  corrected.  They  have,  more- 
over, been  considerably  augmented  by  many  curious  details 
which  did  not  appear  in  the  original  document.  At  the 
same  time,  I  have  made  no  substantial  changes  in  the 
order  and  classification  of  the  contents.  Five  or  six 
additional  chapters,  and  a  number  of  corrections  and  im- 
provements in  the  body  of  the  work,  constitute  all  the 
difference  between  this  and  the  earlier  draft.  Since  the 
English  translation  of  the  latter  appeared,  great  political 
changes  have  taken  place  amongst  the  people  whose 
manners  and  institutions  I  have  sketched  ;  but,  as  these 
changes  were  not  taken  into  account  in  my  original  plan, 
I  have  not  considered  myself  bound,  when  referring  to 
them,  to  go  beyond  the  limits  which  I  prescribed  for  myself 
in  the  first  instance.  In  all  that  I  say  about  the  administra- 
tion of  the  Peninsula  my  readers  will  at  once  perceive  that 
I  have  in  mind  the  Governments  preceding  that  which  has 
now  made  itself  master  of  the  destinies  of  the  Indian  people, 
and  which  has  freed  them  from  the  iron  yoke  of  a  long 
series  of  arbitrary  rulers,  under  whose  oppression  they 
groaned  during  so  many  centuries. 

This  colossal  dominion,  which  a  European  Government 
has  succeeded  in  establishing  in  India  without  any  very 
great  difficulty  and  without  any  very  violent  shocks,  has 
filled  the  people  of  India  with  admiration,  and  has  fully 
convinced  the  Powers  of  Asia  of  the  great  superiority  of 
Europeans  in  every  way,  and  more  especially  in  the  art 
of  subjugating  and  governing  nations. 

We  too  may  well  wonder  at  a  conquest  which  appears 
indeed  almost  miraculous.  It  is  difficult  for  us  to  imagine 
how  a  mere  handful  of  men  managed  to  coerce  into  sub- 
missive obedience  a  hundred  millions  of  people,  scattered 


4  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 

over  a  country  which  extends  for  twenty-four  degrees  of 
latitude  north  and  south  and  for  nearly  the  same  number 
of  degrees  east  and  west.  And  it  is  still  more  difficult  to 
understand  how  these  few  men  are  able  to  maintain  within 
the  bounds  of  duty  and  subordination  a  population  whose 
creeds,  habits,  customs,  and  manner  of  life  are  so  absolutely 
different  from  their  own. 

Yet  one  will  have  little  or  no  difficulty  in  accounting  for 
such  a  phenomenon  if  one  examines  on  the  one  hand  the 
spirit,  character,  and  institutions  of  the  people  governed, 
and  on  the  other  the  system  adopted  by  those  governing 
them.  The  people  of  India  have  always  been  accustomed 
to  bow  their  heads  beneath  the  yoke  of  a  cruel  and  oppres- 
sive despotism,  and  moreover,  strange  to  say,  have  always 
displayed  mere  indifference  towards  those  who  have  forced 
them  to  it.  Little  cared  they  whether  the  princes  under 
whom  they  groaned  were  of  their  own  country  or  from 
foreign  lands  l.  The  frequent  vicissitudes  that  befell  those 
in  power  were  hardly  noticed  by  their  subjects.  Never  did 
the  fall  of  one  of  these  despots  cause  the  least  regret  ; 
never  did  the  elevation  of  another  cause  the  least  joy. 
Hard  experience  had  taught  the  Hindus  to  disregard  not 
only  the  hope  of  better  times  but  the  fear  of  worse.  The 
fable  of  the  ass  urged  by  its  master  to  escape  from  approach- 
ing robbers  is  most  appropriate  to  these  people.  They 
have  always  considered  themselves  lucky  enough  if  their 
religious  and  domestic  institutions  were  left  untouched  by 
those  who  by  good  fortune  or  force  of  arms  had  got  hold  of 
the  reins  of  government. 

The  European  Power  which  is  now  established  in  India 
is,  properly  speaking,  supported  neither  by  physical  force 
nor  by  moral  influence.  It  is  a  piece  of  huge,  complicated 
machinery,  moved  by  springs  which  have  been  arbitrarily 
adapted  to  it.  Under  the  supremacy  of  the  Brahmins  the 
people  of  India  hated  their  government,  while  they  cherished 
and  respected  their  rulers  ;  under  the  supremacy  of  Euro- 
peans they  hate  and  despise  their  rulers  from  the  bottom 
of  their  hearts,  while  they  cherish  and  respect  their  govern- 
ment.    And  here  I  would  remark  that  the  rule  of  all  the 

1  This  is  illustrated  in  the  familiar  proverb,  '  What  matters  it  whether 
Rama  reigns  or  the  Rakshasa  (Ravana)  reigns  ? '— Eu. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  5 

Hindu  princes,  and  often  that  of  the  Mahomedans,  was, 
properly  speaking,  Brahminical  rule,  since  all  posts  of 
confidence  were  held  by  Brahmins. 

If  it  be  possible  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  people 
of  India  I  am  convinced  that  this  desirable  result  will  be 
attained  under  the  new  regime,  whatever  may  be  said  by 
detractors  who  are  ready  to  find  fault  with  everything. 
Whatever  truth  indeed  there  may  be  in  the  prejudiced 
charges,  engendered  by  ignorance  and  interested  motives, 
which  are  brought  against  the  new  order  of  things,  and 
which  are  perhaps  inseparable  from  every  great  administra- 
tion, I  for  one  cannot  believe  that  a  nation  so  eminently 
distinguished  for  its  beneficent  and  humane  principles  of 
government  at  home,  and  above  all  for  its  impartial  justice 
to  all  classes  alike — I  for  one  cannot  believe  that  this 
nation  will  ever  be  blind  enough  to  compromise  its  own 
noble  character  by  refusing  participation  in  these  benefits 
to  a  subject  people  which  is  content  to  live  peaceably  under 
its  sway. 

At  the  same  time  I  venture  to  predict  that  it  will  attempt 
in  vain  to  effect  any  very  considerable  changes  in  the 
social  condition  of  the  people  of  India,  whose  character, 
principles,  customs,  and  ineradicable  conservatism  will 
always  present  insurmountable  obstacles.  To  make  a 
people  happy,  it  is  essential  that  they  themselves  should 
desire  to  be  made  happy  and  should  co-operate  with  those 
who  are  working  for  their  happiness.  Now,  the  people  of 
India,  it  appears  to  me,  neither  possess  this  desire  nor  are 
anxious  to  co-operate  to  this  end.  Every  reform  which  is 
obviously  devised  for  their  well-being  they  obstinately  push 
aside  if  it  is  likely  in  the  least  degree  to  disturb  their  manner 
of  living,  their  most  absurd  prejudice,  or  their  most  puerile 
custom. 

Nevertheless  the  justice  and  prudence  which  the  present 
rulers  display  in  endeavouring  to  make  these  people  less 
unhappy  than  they  have  been  hitherto  ;  the  anxiety  they 
manifest  in  increasing  their  material  comfort  ;  above  all, 
the  inviolable  respect  which  they  constantly  show  for  the 
customs  and  religious  beliefs  of  the  country  ;  and,  lastly, 
the  protection  they  afford  to  the  weak  as  well  as  to  the 
strong,  to  the  Brahmin  as  to  the  Pariah,  to  the  Christian, 


0  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 

to  the  Mahomedan,  and  to  the  Pagan  :  all  those  have  con- 
tributed more  to  the  consolidation  of  their  power  than  even 
their  victories  and  conquests. 

There  is  another  circumstance  no  less  remarkable  which 
may  account  for  the  stability  and  power  of  this  Govern- 
ment, and  that  is  the  sagacity  with  which  it  has  chosen 
persons  to  fill  places  of  responsibility  under  it.  For  up- 
rightness of  character,  education,  and  ability  it  would  be 
hard  to  find  a  body  of  public  servants  better  capable  of 
filling  with  zeal  and  distinction  the  offices,  more  or  less 
important,  that  are  entrusted  to  them. 

During  the  thirty  years  spent  by  me  in  the  various 
provinces  of  India  I  have  had  the  honour  of  knowing 
a  very  large  number  of  these  public  servants,  and  it  gives 
me  much  pleasure  to  testify  here  to  the  many  excellent 
qualities  which  I  have  almost  invariably  found  them  to 
possess.  Cast  away,  as  it  were,  on  the  shores  of  this 
foreign  land  at  a  time  when  my  own  country  was  a  prey 
to  all  the  horrors  of  a  disastrous  revolution,  I  never  failed 
to  receive  from  them  the  warmest  hospitality.  Even 
when  a  desperate  war  might  well  have  given  rise  to  bitter 
prejudice  against  everything  French,  I  never  failed  to  find 
amongst  the  rulers  of  India  many  friends  and  benefactors. 
Would  that  the  fear  of  offending  their  modesty  did  not 
forbid  my  mentioning  here  in  testimony  of  my  regard  the 
names  of  many  of  them  equally  distinguished  for  their 
high  merit  and  for  their  commanding  position.  But  even 
at  the  risk  of  appearing  indiscreet  I  cannot  pass  over  one 
of  them  in  silence.  I  cannot,  in  the  fullness  of  my  gratitude, 
abstain  from  mentioning  publicly  how  much  I  owe  to  the 
Honourable  Mr.  Arthur  Henry  Cole,  the  British  Resident 
in  Mysore.  This  worthy  official,  whose  public  and  domestic 
virtues,  inexhaustible  charity,  and  polished  manners  are 
recognized  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Peninsula,  has 
found  a  fitting  recognition  of  his  fine  character  in  the  love 
and  respect  of  the  natives  subject  to  his  jurisdiction,  who 
with  one  voice  have  hailed  him  as  the  father  of  their  country. 
All  that  he  has  done  for  the  natives  of  Mysore  will  be  long 
remembered  by  them.  As  regards  myself,  nothing  can 
equal  the  many  acts  of  kindness  which  he  has  heaped  upon 
me  during  my  stay  of  twenty  years  in  the  province  subject 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  7 

to  his  authority.  If  these  words  ever  reach  him  I  trust 
that  he  will  recognize  in  them  the  genuine  feelings  of 
respect  and  gratitude  which  I  shall  ever  cherish  towards 
him. 

One  might  accuse  me  of  blind  prejudice  if  I  went  so  far 
as  to  affirm  that  everybody  vested  with  authority  in  this 
land  was  without  exception  worthy  of  high  praise.  The 
fact  is,  we  do  not  live  in  an  age  of  miracles.  It  is  probable, 
it  is  even  certain,  that  not  all  of  those  entrusted  with  the 
supervision  of  this  huge  political  machinery  are  influenced 
by  the  purest  motives.  And  yet  the  system  of  watchful 
control  is  such  that  any  man  who  allows  himself  to  be 
tempted  from  the  path  of  duty  by  greed  and  avarice 
cannot  hope  to  hide  his  corrupt  doings  from  the  eye  of 
superior  authority  for  any  length  of  time.  Every  subject 
of  the  dominant  power,  however  humble  he  may  be,  is 
allowed  the  right  of  free  petition  ;  and  this  is  sufficient 
guarantee  that  any  well-founded  grievances  will  be  set 
right,  any  well-proven  abuses  put  a  stop  to. 

It  has  been  asserted  that  any  great  power  based  neither 
on  a  display  of  force  nor  on  the  affection  and  esteem  of 
subject  races  is  bound  sooner  or  later  to  topple  under  its 
own  weight.  I  am  far  from  sharing  this  opinion  altogether. 
The  present  Government  occupies  a  position  in  which  it 
has  little  or  nothing  to  fear  from  extraneous  disturbance. 
True  it  is  that  like  all  empires  it  is  subject  to  possible 
chances  of  internal  dissension,  military  revolt,  and  general 
insurrection.  But  I  firmly  believe  that  nothing  of  this 
sort  will  happen  to  it  so  long  as  it  maintains  amongst  its 
troops  the  perfect  discipline  and  the  sense  of  comfort 
which  at  present  exist,  and  so  long  as  it  does  all  in  its 
power  to  make  its  yoke  scarcely  perceptible  by  permitting 
its  subjects  every  freedom  in  the  exercise  of  their  social 
and  religious  practices  l. 

It  is  the  poverty  of  the  country  which  in  my  opinion 
gives  most  cause  for  apprehension — a  poverty  which  is 
accompanied  by  the  most  extraordinary  supineness  on 
the  part  of  the  people  themselves.     The  question  is,  will 

1  Students  of  Indian  History  will  bear  witness  to  the  wisdom  of  the 
Abbe's  remarks,  which  subsequent  history  has  so  strikingly  tended  to 
confirm. — Ed. 


8  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 

a  Government  which  is  rightly  determined  to  be  neither 
unjust  nor  oppressive  be  able  always  to  find  within  the 
borders  of  this  immense  empire  means  sufficient  to  enable 
it  to  meet  the  heavy  expenses  of  its  administration '  ? 
But,  after  all,  God  alone  can  foretell  the  destiny  of  Govern- 
ments ! 

But  I  must  return  to  the  contents  of  my  work.  During 
my  long  sojourn  in  India  I  never  let  slip  any  opportunity 
of  collecting  materials  and  particulars  of  all  sorts.  My 
information  has  been  drawn  partly  from  the  books  which 
are  held  in  highest  estimation  amongst  the  people  of  India 
and  partly  from  such  scattered  records  as  fell  by  chance 
into  my  hands  and  contained  facts  upon  which  I  could 
thoroughly  rely.  But  in  regard  to  the  majority  of  the 
materials  which  I  now  offer  to  the  public  I  am  chiefly 
dependent  on  my  own  researches,  having  lived  in  close 
and  familiar  intercourse  with  persons  of  every  caste  and 
condition  of  life.  Probably  many  Europeans  settled  in 
India  would  have  been  more  capable  than  myself  of  per- 
forming the  same  task  ;  but  I  may  be  permitted  to  doubt 
whether  there  has  been  any  person  more  favourably 
situated  for  gleaning  information  or  more  zealous  in  his 
pursuit  of  knowledge.  I  had  no  sooner  arrived  amongst 
the  natives  of  India  than  I  recognized  the  absolute  necessity 
of  gaining  their  confidence.  Accordingly  I  made  it  my 
constant  rule  to  live  as  they  did.  I  adopted  their  style  of 
clothing,  and  I  studied  their  customs  and  methods  of  life 
in  order  to  be  exactly  like  them.  I  even  went  so  far  as 
to  avoid  any  display  of  repugnance  to  the  majority  of  their 
peculiar  prejudices.  By  such  circumspect  conduct  I  was 
able  to  ensure  a  free  and  hearty  welcome  from  people  of 
all  castes  and  conditions,  and  was  often  favoured  of  their 
own  accord  with  the  most  curious  and  interesting  par- 
ticulars about  themselves. 

In  publishing  these  records  of  my  researches  I  have  no 
wisli  to  aspire  to  literary  fame.  I  have  noted  down  just 
what  I  saw,  just  what  I  heard,  just  what  I  read.  I  have 
aimed  only  at  simplicity  and  accuracy.  If  I  have  here 
and  there  ventured  to  give  a  few  opinions  and  conjectures 

1  Within  these  few  lines  the  Abbe,  with  extraordinary  insight,  has 
embodied  the  great  problem  of  British  administration  in  India. — Ed. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  9 

of  my  own,  I  beg  that  my  readers  will  not  suppose  that 
I  have  done  so  out  of  vanity  and  with  the  object  of  posing 
as  a  profound  scholar,  which  I  am  not.  However  severely 
critics  may  attack  my  work,  they  cannot  be  more  keenly 
aware  of  its  imperfections  than  myself.  I  know  well  that 
my  researches  might  have  been  presented  in  a  form  more 
agreeable,  more  animated,  and  more  methodical.  There 
are  many  matters  mentioned  by  me  which  called  for  more 
profound  discussion,  clearer  criticism,  and  wider  treatment. 
A  more  correct  and  more  brilliant  style  would  have  con- 
cealed the  dryness  of  certain  details.  But  I  beg  indulgent 
readers  to  consider  the  circumstances  which  have  prevented 
me  from  satisfying  such  conditions.  Separated  as  I  was 
for  more  than  thirty  years  from  all  intercourse  with  my 
fellow-countrymen,  communicating  only  rarely  and  occa- 
sionally with  Europeans,  passing  my  whole  life  in  villages 
in  the  midst  of  rude  cultivators  of  the  soil,  deprived  of 
all  the  advantages  which  great  cities  offer  to  those  writers 
who  are  clever  enough  to  profit  by  the  labours  of 
their  predecessors,  prevented  from  invoking  the  aid  and 
counsel  of  intelligent  men,  having  no  books  to  refer  to 
except  my  Bible  and  a  few  writings  without  merit  and 
without  interest  which  chance  rather  than  choice  put  into 
my  hands,  compelled  indeed  to  rely  upon  the  imperfect 
recollection  of  what  I  had  read  and  learned  in  my  youth  : 
with  all  these  disadvantages  it  was  only  to  be  expected 
that  my  work  would  be  defective.  Nevertheless  I  am 
persuaded  that  the  notes  which  I  have  taken  so  much 
trouble  to  collect  will  afford  some  useful  material  to  others 
more  favourably  situated  than  myself  ;  and  I  have  there- 
fore no  hesitation  in  offering  them  to  the  public. 

There  is  one  motive  which  above  all  others  has  in- 
fluenced my  determination.  It  struck  me  that  a  faithful 
picture  of  the  wickedness  and  incongruities  of  polytheism 
and  idolatry  would  by  its  very  ugliness  help  greatly  to  set 
off  the  beauties  and  perfections  of  Christianity.  It  was 
thus  that  the  Lacedaemonians  placed  drunken  slaves  in 
the  sight  of  their  children  in  order  to  inspire  the  latter 
with  a  horror  of  intemperance. 

There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  true  God  was 
well  known  to  the  people  of  India  at  the  time  when  they 

B  3 


10  AUTHOR'S   PREFACE 

first  banded  themselves  together  us  a  nation.  For  who 
can  doubt  that  our  blessed  religion  was  originally  that  of 
the  whole  world  ?  Who  can  doubt  that  it  would  have 
exercised  universal  sway  from  the  days  of  Adam  to  the 
end  of  time  if  its  original  form  as  established  by  God 
Himself  and  its  primitive  traditions  had  been  carefully 
respected  2  Unfortunately  human  passion  gained  the 
upper  hand.  Whole  nations  were  corrupted,  and  men 
made  for  themselves  a  religion  more  suited  to  the  depravity 
of  their  own  hearts.  Nevertheless,  what  has  now  become 
of  the  innumerable  deities  of  Greece  and  Rome  ?  They 
have  vanished  like  an  empty,  transitory  dream.  Let  us 
pray  that  the  Almighty  may  be  pleased  to  allow  the  torch 
of  Truth  to  illumine  the  countries  watered  by  the  Ganges  ! 
Doubtless  the  time  is  still  far  distant  when  the  stubborn 
Hindu  will  open  his  eyes  to  the  light  and  tear  himself 
away  from  his  dark  superstitions  ;  but  let  us  not  despair, 
a  day  will  come  when  the  standard  of  the  Cross  will  be 
flying  over  the  temples  of  India  as  it  flies  now  over  her 
strong  places1. 

Certain  statements  to  be  found  in  my  work  will  seem 
almost  incredible  to  my  readers.  All  that  I  can  say  is 
that  I  have  set  down  nothing  without  assuring  myself 
most  carefully  of  its  truthfulness.  For  the  rest,  my 
readers  will  feel  much  less  doubt  as  to  the  accuracy  of 
these  statements  when  they  have  learned  to  recognize 
how  eminently  original  the  people  of  India  are  in  their 
manners  and  customs.  So  original  are  they,  indeed,  that 
one  may  search  in  vain  for  types,  or  anything  approaching 
to  types,  of  them  amongst  other  nations  of  the  world, 
ancient  or  modern. 

With  regard  to  caste  usages  I  must  warn  my  readers 
that  my  researches  were  confined  to  the  provinces  south 
of  the  Kistna  River,  where  I  passed  most  of  the  time  that 

1  Yet  even  now  the  number  of  Christians  in  India  is,  comparatively 
speaking,  small.  They  form  about  '75  per  cent,  of  the  whole  popula- 
tion, and  nearly  75  per  cent,  of  the  total  are  found  in  Madras,  Tra van- 
core,  Hyderabad,  Mysore,  and  Cochin.  And  concerning  the  native 
Christians  of  these  parts  a  distinguished  and  much-travelled  member  of 
the  Civil  Service  recently  remarked,  '  Their  Christianity,  as  I  have  seen 
it,  too  often  breathes  but  little  of  the  spirit  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.' 
—Ed. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  11 

I  was  in  India.     I  cannot  say  whether  these  usages  are  the 

same  to  the  north  of  that  river  and  in  Hindustan  proper  ; 
but  if  any  differences  there  be  it  is  probable  that  they 
exist  only  in  form.  There  is  no  place  in  India  which  does 
not  possess  certain  customs  and  practices  of  its  own,  and 
it  would  be  impossible  to  give  descriptions  of  them  all. 
Fundamentally,  however,  caste  constitutions  are  the  same 
everywhere.  Furthermore,  however  many  the  shades  of 
difference  between  the  various  castes,  however  diversified 
the  customs  that  control  them,  only  slight  differences 
exist  between  the  various  forms  of  religious  belief.  Indeed, 
the  religion  of  the  Hindus  may  be  said  to  form  a  common 
centre  for  the  numerous  elements  which  constitute  Hinduism 
in  its  widest  sense.  Moreover  there  is  a  certain  general 
uniformity  of  rule  and  practice  in  everyday  social  matters, 
which  compels  one  to  look  upon  the  different  masses  of 
the  population  as  belonging  in  reality  to  one  big  family. 
Nevertheless,  whatever  I  may  say  in  the  following  pages 
must  not  be  given  a  too  general  meaning,  for  it  is  hardly 
necessary  to  point  out  that  in  such  a  huge  country  there 
are  many  peculiarities  of  language  and  custom  which  are 
purely  local  in  character.  For  instance,  a  careful  observer 
would  see  less  resemblance  between  a  Tamil  and  a  Canarese, 
between  a  Telugu  and  a  Mahratta,  than  between  a  French- 
man and  an  Englishman,  an  Italian  and  a  German. 

Even  when  they  migrate  or  travel  from  one  province 
to  another,  natives  of  India  never  throw  off  what  I  may 
call  the  characteristics  of  their  natal  soil.  In  the  midst  of 
their  new  surroundings  they  invariably  preserve  their  own 
language  and  customs. 

On  the  Malabar  coast  one  may  count  five  different 
tribes,  established  from  time  immemorial,  within  a  hundred 
leagues  of  territory  north  and  south.  They  are  the  Xairs 
or  Naiftiars,  the  Kurgas  or  Kudagas,  the  Tulus,  the  Kon- 
kanis,  and  the  Kanaras.  Although  amalgamated  in  some 
degree,  each  of  these  tribes  still  preserves  to  the  present 
day  the  language  and  mode  of  life  peculiar  to  the  place 
from  which  it  originally  sprang.  The  same  thing  may  be 
remarked  throughout  the  Peninsula,  but  especially  in  the 
Tamil  country  and  in  Mysore,  where  many  families  of 
Telusus  are  to  be  found  whose  ancestors  were  obliged  for 


12  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 

various  reasons  to  quit  their  native  soil  and  migrate  thither. 
The  remembrance  of  their  original  birthplace  is  engraved 
on  the  hearts  of  these  Telugus,  and  they  always  carefully 
avoid  following  the  peculiar  usages  of  their  adoptive 
country.  Yet  they  are  invariably  treated  with  the  most 
perfect  tolerance.  Indeed,  every  native  of  India  is  quite 
free  to  take  up  his  abode  wherever  it  may  seem  good  to 
him.  Nobody  will  quarrel  with  him  for  living  his  own  life, 
speaking  what  language  he  pleases,  or  following  whatever 
customs  he  is  used  to.  All  that  is  asked  of  him  is  that 
lie  should  conform  generally  to  the  accustomed  rules  of 
decorum  recognized  in  the  neighbourhood. 

The  Brahmin  caste  has  seemed  to  me  to  merit  particular 
attention.  It  is  the  caste  whose  rules  and  practices  are 
most  scrupulously  observed.  All  persons  who  have  visited 
India  or  who  have  any  notion  of  the  character  of  the 
Brahmins,  of  the  high  esteem  in  which  they  hold  them- 
selves, and  of  the  distant  hauteur  with  which  they  treat 
the  common  people,  will  be  able  to  appreciate  the  diffi- 
culties which  anybody  must  encounter  who  would  become 
intimate,  or  even  acquainted,  with  these  proud  personages. 
The  hate  and  contempt  which  they  cherish  against  all 
strangers,  and  especially  against  Europeans  ;  the  jealous 
inquietude  with  which  they  hide  from  the  profane  the 
mysteries  of  their  religious  cult  ;  the  records  of  their  learn- 
ing ;  the  privacy  of  their  homes  :  all  these  form  barriers 
between  themselves  and  their  observers  which  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  pass  \ 

Nevertheless,  by  much  diplomacy  and  perseverance 
I  have  succeeded  in  surmounting  most  of  the  obstacles 
which  have  turned  back  so  many  others  before  me.  I  there- 
fore trust  that  the  minute  particulars  which  I  have  given 
in  this  work  will  be  accepted  as  a  record  of  all  that  it  is 
useful  to  know  about  the  religious  ceremonies  and  ritual 
of  the  Hindus. 

I  have  divided  this  work  into  three  parts.  The  first 
presents  a  general  purview  of  society  in  India,  and  con- 
tains details  concerning  all  classes  of  its  inhabitants.     In 

1  Since  the  Abbe  wrote,  vast  stores  of  Brahminical  lore  have  been 
brought  to  light  by  enterprising  savants  in  Europe,  especially  by  Professor 
Max  Miiller. — Ed. 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  13 

Hie  second  part  I  have  discussed  the  Brahmins  more  par- 
ticularly, both  in  themselves  and  in  relation  to  other  castes. 
The  third  part  contains  particulars  of  the  religious  tenets 
and  deities  of  India. 

Among  the  papers  which  are  published  separately,  as 
Appendices,  there  is  one  on  the  Jains  which  I  hope  will  be 
read  not  without  interest.  These  schismatics  are  to  be 
found  in  great  numbers  in  the  western  provinces  of  the 
Peninsula,  and  especially  in  Malabar,  where  they  represent 
the  majority  of  the  population.  They  form  a  perfectly 
distinct  class,  and  differ  widely  from  the  Brahmins  in  many 
essential  points  of  doctrine  and  practice. 


PART  I 

GENERAL  VIEW  OF  SOCIETY  IN  INDIA, 
AND  GENERAL  REMARKS  ON  THE  CASTE  SYSTEM 

CHAPTER  I 

Division  and  Subdivision  of  Castes. — Castes  peculiar  to  Certain  Pro- 
vinces.— Particular  Usages  of  some  Castes. — Division  of  Castes 
founded  on  Parentage. — Subordination  of  Castes. — Outward  Signs 
of  certain  Castes. — Division  of  Caste-groups  into  Right-hand  and 
Left-hand. 

The  word  caste  is  derived  from  the  Portuguese,  and  is 
used  in  Europe  to  designate  the  different  tribes  or  classes 
into  which  the  people  of  India  are  divided  l.  The  most 
ordinary  classification,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most 
ancient,  divides  them  into  four  main  castes.  The  first 
and  most  distinguished  of  all  is  that  of  Brahmana,  or 
Brahmins  ;  the  second  in  rank  is  that  of  Kshatriyas,  or 
Rajahs  ;  the  third  the  Vaisyas,  or  Landholders  and  Mer- 
chants ;  and  the  fourth  the  Sudras,  or  Cultivators  and 
Menials. 

The  functions  proper  to  each  of  these  four  main  castes 
are  :  for  Brahmins,  priesthood  and  its  various  duties  ;  for 
Kshatriyas,  military  service  in  all  its  branches  ;  for  Vaisyas, 
agriculture,  trade,  and  cattle-breeding  ;  and  for  Sudras, 
general  servitude.  But  I  will  describe  more  fully  hereafter 
the  several  social  distinctions  which  are  attached  to  each 
of  them. 

Each  of  the  four  main  castes  is  subdivided  into  many 
others,  the  number  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  determine 

1  The  Sanskrit  word  is  Varna  =  colour,  thus  showing  that  upon  the 
difference  of  colour  between  the  Aryan  Brahmins  and  the  aboriginal 
inhabitants  the  distinction  of  caste  was  originally  founded. — Pope. 


THE  FOUR  MAIN  CASTES  15 

because  the  subdivisions  vary  according  to  locality,  and 
a  sub-caste  existing  in  one  province  is  not  necessarily  found 
in  another. 

Amongst  the  Brahmins  of  the  south  of  the  Peninsula, 
for  example,  there  are  to  be  found  three  or  four  principal 
divisions,  and  each  of  these  again  is  subdivided  into  at 
least  twenty  others.  The  lines  of  demarcation  between 
them  are  so  well  defined  as  to  prevent  any  kind  of  union 
between  one  sub-caste  and  another,  especially  in  the  case 
of  marriage. 

The  Kshatriyas  and  Vaisyas  are  also  split  up  into  many 
divisions  and  subdivisions.  In  Southern  India  neither 
Kshatriyas  nor  Vaisyas  are  very  numerous  ;  but  there  are 
considerable  numbers  of  the  former  in  Northern  India. 
Howbeit,  the  Brahmins  assert  that  the  true  Kshatriya 
caste  no  longer  exists,  and  that  those  who  pass  for  such 
are  in  reality  a  debased  race. 

The  Sudra  caste  is  divided  into  most  sub-castes.  Nobody 
in  any  of  the  provinces  where  I  have  lived  has  ever  been 
able  to  inform  me  as  to  the  exact  number  and  names  of 
them.  It  is  a  common  saying,  however,  that  there  are 
18  chief  sub-castes,  which  are  again  split  up  into  108  lesser 
divisions. 

The  Sudras  are  the  most  numerous  of  the  four  main 
castes.  They  form,  in  fact,  the  mass  of  the  population, 
and  added  to  the  Pariahs,  or  Outcastes,  they  represent  at 
least  nine-tenths  of  the  inhabitants.  When  we  consider 
that  the  Sudras  possess  almost  a  monopoly  of  the  various 
forms  of  artisan  employment  and  manual  labour,  and  that 
in  India  no  person  can  exercise  two  professions  at  a  time, 
it  is  not  surprising  that  the  numerous  individuals  who 
form  this  main  caste  are  distributed  over  so  many  distinct 
branches. 

However,  there  are  several  classes  of  Sudras  that  exist 
only  in  certain  provinces.  Of  all  the  provinces  that 
I  lived  in,  the  Dravidian,  or  Tamil,  country  is  the  one 
where  the  ramifications  of  caste  appeared  to  me  most 
numerous.  There  are  not  nearly  so  many  ramifications  of 
caste  in  Mysore  or  the  Deccan.  Nowhere  in  these  latter 
provinces  have  I  come  across  castes  corresponding  to 
those  which  are  known  in  the  Tamil  country  under  the 


1(>     CASTES  PECULIAR  TO  CERTAIN  PROVINCES 

names  of  MoodeUy,  Agambady,  Nattaman,  Totiyar,  Udaiyan, 
VcUeyen,  Upiliyen,  Pollen,  and  several  others1. 

It  should  be  remarked,  however,  that  those  Sudra  castes 
which  are  occupied  exclusively  in  employments  indispens- 
able to  all  civilized  societies  are  to  be  found  everywhere 
under  names  varying  with  the  languages  of  different 
localities.  Of  such  I  may  cite,  amongst  others,  the  gar- 
deners, the  shepherds,  the  weavers,  the  Panchalas  (the 
five  castes  of  artisans,  comprising  the  carpenters,  gold- 
smiths, blacksmiths,  founders,  and  in  general  all  workers 
in  metals),  the  manufacturers  and  venders  of  oil,  the 
fishermen,  the  potters,  the  washermen,  the  barbers,  and 
some  others.  All  these  form  part  of  the  great  main  caste 
of  Sudras  ;  but  the  different  castes  of  cultivators  hold  the 
first  rank  and  disdainfully  regard  as  their  inferiors  all 
those  belonging  to  the  professions  just  mentioned,  refusing 
to  eat  with  those  who  practise  them. 

In  some  districts  there  are  castes  which  are  not  to  be 
met  with  elsewhere,  and  which  may  be  distinguished  by 
peculiarities  of  their  own.  I  am  not  aware,  for  example, 
that  the  very  remarkable  caste  of  Nairs,  whose  women 
enjoy  the  privilege  of  possessing  several  husbands,  is  to  be 
found  anywhere  but  in  Travancore  2.  Amongst  these  same 
people,  again,  is  another  distinct  caste  called  Nambudiri, 
which  observes  one  abominable  and  revolting  custom.  The 
girls  of  this  caste  are  usually  married  before  the  age  of 
puberty  ;  but  if  a  girl  who  has  arrived  at  an  age  when 
the  signs  of  puberty  are  apparent  happens  to  die  before 
having  had  intercourse  with  a  man,  caste  custom  rigorously 
demands  that  the  inanimate  corpse  of  the  deceased  shall 
be  subjected  to  a  monstrous  connexion.  For  this  purpose 
the  girl's  parents  are  obliged  to  procure  by  a  present  of 
money  some  wretched  fellow  willing  to  consummate  such 
a    disgusting   form    of  marriage  :    for    were    the   marriage 

1  Moodelly,  '  chief  man  '  or  highly  respectable  trader.  Agambady,  he 
who  performs  menial  offices  in  temples  or  palaces.  Nattaman,  a  caste  of 
cultivators.  Totiyar,  a  caste  of  labourers.  Udaiyan,  a  potter.  Yaleyen, 
a  fisherman.      Upiliyen,  salt  manufacturer.     Fallen,  agriculturist. — Ed. 

2  It  would  be  more  correct  to  say  West  Coast.  Moreover,  although 
Xair  women  are  commonly  described  as  polyandrous,  they  are  not  really 
so,  for  though  they  enjoy  the  privilege  of  changing  their  husbands,  they 
do  not  entertain  more  than  one  husband  at  a  time. — Ed. 


CASTES  PECULIAR  TO  CERTAIN  PROVINCES  17 

not  consummated  the  family  would  consider  itself  dis- 
honoured \ 

The  caste  of  Kullars,  or  robbers,  who  exercise  their 
calling  as  an  hereditary  right,  is  found  only  in  the  Marava 
country,  which  borders  on  the  coast,  or  fishing,  districts. 
The  rulers  of  the  country  are  of  the  same  caste.  They 
regard  a  robber's  occupation  as  discreditable  neither  to 
themselves  nor  to  their  fellow  castemen,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  they  consider  robbery  a  duty  and  a  right 
sanctioned  by  descent.  They  are  not  ashamed  of  their 
caste  or  occupation,  and  if  one  were  to  ask  of  a  Kullar  to 
what  people  he  belonged  he  would  coolly  answer,  '  I  am 
a  robber  !  '  This  caste  is  looked  upon  in  the  district  of 
Madura,  where  it  is  widely  diffused,  as  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  among  the  Sudras. 

There  exists  in  the  same  part  of  the  country  another 
caste,  known  as  the  Totiyars,  in  which  brothers,  uncles, 
nephews,  and  other  near  relations  are  all  entitled  to  possess 
their  wives  in  common. 

In  Eastern  Mysore  there  is  a  caste  called  Morsa-Okkala- 
Makkalu,  in  which,  when  the  mother  of  a  family  gives  her 
eldest  daughter  in  marriage,  she  is  obliged  to  submit  to 
the  amputation  of  two  joints  of  the  middle  finger  and  of 
the  ring  finger  of  the  right  hand.  And  if  the  bride's  mother 
be  dead,  the  bridegroom's  mother,  or  in  default  of  her  the 

1  Whatever  may  have  been  the  case  in  the  days  of  the  Abbe,  these 
customs  no  longer  exist.  In  regard  to  this,  Mr.  W.  Logan,  in  his  Manual 
of  Malabar,  writes  thus  :  '  To  make  tardy  retribution — if  it  deserves 
such  a  name — to  women  who  die  unmarried,  the  corpse,  it  is  said, 
cannot  be  burnt  till  a  tali  string  (the  Hindu  equivalent  of  the  wedding- 
ring  of  Europe)  is  tied  round  the  neck  of  the  corpse,  while  lying  on  the 
funeral  pile,  by  a  competent  relative.  Nambudiris  are  exceedingly 
reticent  in  regard  to  their  funeral  ceremonies  and  observances,  and  the 
Abbe  Dubois'  account  of  what  was  related  to  him  regarding  other 
observances  at  this  strange  funeral-pile  marriage  requires  confirmation.' 
Careful  inquiries  made  of  the  leading  members  of  the  Nambudiri  com- 
munity and  of  others  in  Malabar  who  have  an  intimate  knowledge  of 
Nambudiri  customs  have  convinced  me  that  the  Abbe  must  have  mis- 
understood his  informant  in  regard  to  the  practice  which  he  records 
here.  What  is  done  in  such  a  case  is  merely  to  perform  the  religious 
rites,  usually  associated  with  Hindu  marriages,  over  the  dead  body  of 
the  woman  before  the  corpse  is  cremated.  By  marriage  here  is  meant 
merely  the  tying  of  the  tali  (the  emblem  of  marriage)  and  not  the  act 
of  consummation  of  marriage. — Ed. 


18        SPECIAL  CASTE  CUSTOMS 

mother  of  the  nearest  relative,  must  submit  to  this  eruel 
mutilation  1 . 

Many  other  castes  exist  in  various  districts  which  are 
distinguished  by  practices  no  less  foolish  than  those  above 
mentioned. 

Generally  speaking,  there  are  few  castes  which  are  not 
distinguished  by  some  special  custom  quite  apart  from  the 
peculiar  religious  usages  and  ceremonies  which  the  com- 
munity may  prescribe  to  guarantee  or  sanction  civil  con- 
tracts. In  the  cut  and  colour  of  their  clothes  and  in  the 
style  of  wearing  them,  in  the  peculiar  shape  of  their  jewels 
and  in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  displayed  on  various 
parts  of  the  person,  the  various  castes  have  many  rules, 
each  possessing  its  own  significance.  Some  observe  rites 
of  their  own  in  their  funeral  and  marriage  ceremonies  : 
others  possess  ornaments  which  they  alone  may  use,  or 
flags  of  certain  colours,  for  various  ceremonies,  which  no 
other  caste  may  carry.  Yet,  absurd  as  some  of  these 
practices  may  appear,  they  arouse  neither  contempt  nor 
dislike  in  members  of  other  castes  which  do  not  admit 
them.  The  most  perfect  toleration  is  the  rule  in  such 
matters.  As  long  as  a  caste  conforms  on  the  whole  to  the 
recognized  rules  of  decorum  it  is  permitted  to  follow  its 
own  bent  in  its  domestic  affairs  without  interruption,  and 
no  other  castes  ever  think  of  blaming  or  even  criticizing 
it,  although  its  practices  may  be  in  direct  opposition  to 
their  own. 

There  are,  nevertheless,  some  customs  which,  although 
scrupulously  observed  in  the  countries  where  they  exist, 
are  so  strongly  opposed  to  the  rules  of  decency  and  decorum 
generally  laid  down  that  they  are  spoken  of  with  dis- 
approbation and  sometimes  with  horror  by  the  rest  of  the 
community.  The  following  may  be  mentioned  among 
practices  of  this  nature. 

In  the  interior  of  Mysore,  women  are  obliged  to  accom- 
pany the  male  inmates  of  the  house  whenever  the  latter 
retire  for  the  calls  of  nature,  and  to  cleanse  them  with 
water  afterwards.     This  practice,  which  is  naturally  viewed 

1  This  custom  is  no  longer  observed  ;  instead  of  the  two  ringers  being 
amputated,  they  are  now  merely  bound  together  and  thus  rendered  unfit 
for  use. — Ed. 


USE  OF  INTOXICATING  LIQUORS  19 

with  disgust  in  other  parts  of  the  country,  is  here  regarded 
as  a  sign  of  good  breeding  and  is  most  carefully  observed  1. 

The  use  of  intoxicating  liquors,  which  is  condemned  by 
respectable  people  throughout  almost  the  whole  of  India, 
is  nevertheless  permitted  amongst  the  people  who  dwell  in 
the  jungles  and  hill  tracts  of  the  West  Coast.  There  the 
leading  castes  of  Sudras,  not  excepting  even  the  women 
and  children,  openly  drink  arrack,  the  brandy  of  the 
country,  and  toddy,  the  fermented  juice  of  the  palm. 
Each  inhabitant  in  those  parts  has  his  toddy-dealer,  who 
regularly  brings  him  a  daily  supply  and  takes  in  return  an 
equivalent  in  grain  at  harvest  time. 

The  Brahmin  inhabitants  of  these  parts  are  forbidden 
a  like  indulgence  under  the  penalty  of  exclusion  from 
caste.  But  they  supply  the  defect  by  opium,  the  use  of 
which,  although  universally  interdicted  elsewhere,  is  never- 
theless considered  much  less  objectionable  than  the  use  of 
intoxicating  liquors. 

The  people  of  these  damp  and  unhealthy  districts  have 
no  doubt  learnt  by  experience  that  a  moderate  use  of 
spirits  or  opium  is  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  health, 
and  that  it  protects  them,  partially  at  any  rate,  against 
the  ill  effects  of  the  malarious  miasma  amidst  which  they 
are  obliged  to  live.  Nothing  indeed  but  absolute  necessity 
could  have  induced  them  to  contravene  in  this  way  one 
of  the  most  venerable  precepts  of  Hindu  civilization. 

The  various  classes  of  Sudras  who  dwell  in  the  hills  of 
the  Carnatic  observe  amongst  their  domestic  regulations 
a  practice  as  peculiar  as  it  is  disgusting.  Both  men  and 
women  pass  their  lives  in  a  state  of  uncleanness  and  never 
wash  their  clothes.  When  once  they  have  put  on  cloths 
fresh  from  the  looms  of  the  weavers  they  do  not  leave 
them  off  until  the  material  actually  drops  from  rottenness. 
One  can  imagine  the  filthy  condition  of  these  cloths  after 
they  have  been  worn  day  and  night  for  several  months 
soaked  with  perspiration  and  soiled  with  dirt,  especially 
in  the  case  of  the  women,  who  continually  use  them  for 
wiping  their  hands,  and  who  never  change  their  garments 
until  wear  and  tear  have  rendered  them  absolutely  useless. 

1  If  this  custom  ever  existed,  the  spread  of  education  has  effectually 
put  a  stop  to  it. — Ed. 


20  A  SABBATH   OF  THE   'LINGAYATS' 

Yet  this  revolting  habit  is  most  religiously  observed, 
and,  if  anybody  were  so  rash  as  to  wash  but  once  in  water 
the  cloths  with  which  he  or  she  is  covered,  exclusion  from 
caste  would  be  the  inevitable  consequence.  This  custom, 
however,  may  be  due  to  the  scarcity  of  water,  for  in  this 
part  of  the  country  there  are  only  a  few  stagnant  ponds, 
which  would  very  soon  be  contaminated  if  all  the  in- 
habitants of  a  village  were  allowed  to  wash  their  garments 
in  them. 

Many  religious  customs  are  followed  only  by  certain 
sects,  and  are  of  purely  local  character.  For  instance,  it 
is  only  in  the  districts  of  Western  Mysore  that  I  have 
observed  Monday  in  each  week  kept  nearly  in  the  same 
way  as  Sunday  is  among  Christians.  On  that  day  the 
villagers  abstain  from  ordinary  labour,  and  particularly 
from  such  as,  like  ploughing,  requires  the  use  of  oxen  and 
kine.  Monday  is  consecrated  to  Basava  (the  Bull),  and 
is  set  apart  for  the  special  worship  of  that  deity.  Hence 
it  is  a  day  of  rest  for  their  cattle  rather  than  for  themselves. 

This  practice,  however,  is  not  in  vogue  except  in  the 
districts  where  the  Lingayats,  or  followers  of  Siva  1,  pre- 
dominate. This  sect  pays  more  particular  homage  to  the 
Bull  than  the  rest  of  the  Hindus  ;  and,  in  the  districts 
where  it  predominates,  not  only  keeps  up  the  strict  observ- 
ance of  the  day  thus  consecrated  to  the  divinity,  but  forces 
other  castes  to  follow  its  example. 

Independently  of  the  divisions  and  subdivisions  common 
to  all  castes,  one  may  further  observe  in  each  caste  close 
family  alliances  cemented  by  intermarriage.  Hindus  of 
good  family  avoid  as  far  as  possible  intermarriage  with 
families  outside  their  own  circle.  They  always  aim  at 
marrying  their  children  into  the  families  which  are  already 

1  Mr.  L.  Rice,  in  his  Mysore  and  Coorg,  remarks  :  '  Lingayats  :  The 
distinctive  mark  of  this  caste  is  the  wearing  on  the  person  of  a  Jangama 
lingam,  or  portable  linga.  It  is  a  small  black  stone  about  the  size  of 
an  acorn,  and  is  enshrined  in  a  silver  box  of  peculiar  shape,  which  is 
worn  suspended  from  the  neck  or  tied  round  the  arm.  The  followers  of 
Basava  (the  founder  of  the  sect,  whose  name  literally  means  Bull,  was 
in  fact  regarded  as  the  incarnation  of  Nandi,  the  bull  of  Siva)  are  properly 
called  Liugavantas,  but  Lingayats  has  become  a  well-known  designation, 
though  not  used  by  themselves,  the  name  Sivabhakta  or  Sivachar  being 
one  they  generally  assume.' — Ed. 


CLOSE   MARRIAGE    RELATIONSHIPS  21 

allied  to  them,  and  the  nearer  the  relationship  the  more 
easily  are  marriages  contracted.  A  widower  is  remarried 
to  his  deceased  wife's  sister,  an  uncle  marries  his  niece, 
and  a  first  cousin  his  first  cousin.  Persons  so  related 
possess  an  exclusive  privilege  of  intermarrying,  upon  the 
ground  of  such  relationship  ;  and,  if  they  choose,  they 
can  prevent  any  other  union  and  enforce  their  own  pre- 
ferential right,  however  old,  unsuited,  infirm,  and  poor 
they  may  be  1. 

In  this  connexion,  however,  several  strange  and  ridiculous 
distinctions  are  made.  An  uncle  may  marry  the  daughter 
of  his  sister,  but  in  no  case  may  he  marry  the  daughter  of 
his  brother.  A  brother's  children  may  marry  a  sister's 
children,  but  the  children  of  two  brothers  or  of  two  sisters 
may  not  intermarry.  Among  descendants  from  the  same 
stock  the  male  line  always  has  the  right  of  contracting 
marriage  with  the  female  line  ;  but  the  children  of  the 
same  line  may  never  intermarry. 

The  reason  given  for  this  custom  is  that  children  of  the 
male  line,  as  also  those  of  the  female  line,  continue  from 
generation  to  generation  to  call  themselves  brothers  and 
sisters  for  as  long  a  time  as  it  is  publicly  recognized  that 
they  spring  from  the  same  stock.  A  man  would  be  marry- 
ing his  sister,  it  would  be  said,  if  the  children  of  either  the 
male  or  the  female  line  intermarried  amongst  themselves  ; 
whereas  the  children  of  the  male  line  do  not  call  the  children 
of  the  female  line  brothers  and  sisters,  and  vice  versa,  but 
call  each  other  by  special  names  expressive  of  the  relation- 
ship. Thus  a  man  can,  and  even  must,  marry  the  daughter 
of  his  sister,  but  never  the  daughter  of  his  brother.  A 
male  first  cousin  marries  a  female  first  cousin,  the  daughter 
of  his  maternal  aunt ;  but  in  no  case  may  he  marry  the 
daughter  of  his  paternal  uncle. 

This  rule  is  universally  and  invariably  observed  by  all 
castes,  from  the  Brahmin  to  the  Pariah.  It  is  obligatory 
on  the  male  line  to  unite  itself  with  the  female  line.  Agree- 
ably to  this  a  custom  has  arisen  which  so  far  as  I  know 
is  peculiar  to  the  Brahmins.  They  are  all  supposed  to 
know  the  gotram  or  stock  from  which  they  spring  :  that  is 

1  This  custom  is  gradually  giving  way  now  amongst  the  higher  castes. 
—Ed. 


22  VAISYAS    AND   SUDRAS 

to  say,  they  know  who  was  the  ancient  Muni  or  devotee 
from  whom  they  descend,  and  they  always  take  care,  in 
order  to  avoid  intermarriage  with  a  female  descendant  of 
this  remote  priestly  ancestor,  to  marry  into  a  gotram  other 
than  their  own. 

Hindus  who  cannot  contract  a  suitable  marriage  amongst 
their  own  relations  are  nevertheless  bound  to  marry  in 
their  own  caste,  and  even  in  that  subdivision  of  it  to  which 
they  belong.  In  no  case  are  they  permitted  to  contract 
marriages  with  strangers.  Furthermore,  persons  belonging 
to  a  caste  in  one  part  of  the  country  cannot  contract 
marriages  with  persons  of  the  same  caste  in  another  part, 
even  though  they  may  be  precisely  the  same  castes  under 
different  names.  Thus  the  Tamil  Yedeyers  and  the  Canarese 
Uppareru  would  never  consent  to  take  wives  from  the 
Telugu  Gollavaru  and  the  Tamil  Pillay,  although  the  first 
two  are,  except  for  their  names,  identical  with  the  second 
two. 

The  most  distinguished  of  the  four  main  castes  into 
which  the  Hindus  were  originally  separated  by  their  first 
legislators  is,  as  we  have  before  remarked,  that  of  the 
Brahmins.  After  them  come  the  Kshatriyas,  or  Rajahs. 
Superiority  of  rank  is  at  present  warmly  contested  between 
the  Vaisyas,  or  merchants,  and  the  Sudras,  or  cultivators. 
The  former  appear  to  have  almost  entirely  lost  their 
superiority  except  in  the  Hindu  books,  where  they  are 
invariably  placed  before  the  Sudras.  In  ordinary  life  the 
latter  hold  themselves  to  be  superior  to  the  Vaisyas,  and 
consider  themselves  privileged  to  mark  their  superiority  in 
many  respects  by  treating  them  with  contumely. 

With  regard  to  the  Vaisya  caste  an  almost  incredible 
but  nevertheless  well-attested  peculiarity  is  everywhere 
observable.  There  is  not  a  pretty  woman  to  be  found  in 
the  caste.  I  have  never  had  much  to  do  with  the  women 
of  the  Vaisya  caste  ;  I  cannot  therefore  without  injustice 
venture  to  add  my  testimony  to  that  of  others  on  this 
subject  ;  but  I  confess  that  the  few  Vaisya  women  I  have 
seen  from  time  to  time  were  not  such  as  to  afford  me 
an  ocular  refutation  of  the  popular  prejudice.  However, 
Vaisya  women  are  generally  wealthy,  and  they  manage 
to  make  up  for  their  lack  of  beauty  by  their  elegant  attire. 


SUB-DIVISIONS   OF  CASTES  23 

Even  the  Brahmins  do  not  hold  the  highest  social  rank 
undisputed.  The  Panchalas,  or  five  classes  of  artisans 
already  mentioned,  refuse,  in  some  districts,  to  acknow- 
ledge Brahmin  predominance,  although  these  five  classes 
themselves  are  considered  to  be  of  very  low  rank  amongst 
the  Sudras  and  are  everywhere  held  in  contempt.  Brahmin 
predominance  is  also  still  more  warmly  contested  by  the 
Jains,  of  whom  I  have  treated  in  one  of  the  Appendices  to 
this  work. 

As  to  the  particular  subdivisions  of  each  caste  it  is 
difficult  to  decide  the  order  of  hierarchy  observed  amongst 
them.  Sub-castes  which  are  despised  in  one  district  are 
often  greatly  esteemed  in  another,  according  as  they  con- 
duct themselves  with  greater  propriety  or  follow  more 
important  callings.  Thus  the  caste  to  which  the  ruler  of 
a  country  belongs,  however  low  it  may  be  considered 
elsewhere,  ranks  amongst  the  highest  in  the  ruler's  own 
dominions,  and  every  member  of  it  derives  some  reflection 
of  dignity  from  its  chief. 

After  all,  public  opinion  is  the  surest  guide  of  caste 
superiority  amongst  the  Sudras,  and  a  very  slight  acquain- 
tance with  the  customs  of  a  province  and  with  the  private 
life  of  its  inhabitants  will  suffice  for  fixing  the  position 
which  each  caste  has  acquired  by  common  consent. 

In  general  it  will  be  found  that  those  castes  are  most 
honoured  who  are  particular  in  keeping  themselves  pure 
by  constant  bathing  and  by  abstaining  from  animal 
food,  who  are  exact  in  the  observance  of  marriage  regula- 
tions, who  keep  their  women  shut  up  and  punish  them 
severely  when  they  err,  and  who  resolutely  maintain  the 
customs  and  privileges  of  their  order. 

Of  all  the  Hindus  the  Brahmins  strive  most  to  keep  up 
appearances  of  outward  and  inward  purity  by  frequent 
ablutions  and  severe  abstinence  not  only  from  meat  and 
everything  that  has  contained  the  principle  of  life,  but 
also  from  several  natural  products  of  the  earth  which 
prejudice  and  superstition  teach  them  to  be  impure  and 
defiling.  It  is  chiefly  to  the  scrupulous  observance  of 
such  customs  that  the  Brahmins  owe  the  predominance  of 
their  illustrious  order,  and  the  reverence  and  respect  with 
which  they  are  everywhere  treated. 


24    RICJHT-HAXD   AND   LEFT-HAND   FACTIONS 

Amongst  the  different  classes  of  Sudras,  those  who 
permit  widow  remarriage  are  considered  the  most  abject, 
and.  except  the  Pariahs,  I  know  very  few  castes  in  which 
such  marriages  are  allowed  to  take  place  openly  and  with 
the  sanction  of  the  caste  l. 

The  division  into  castes  is  the  paramount  distinction 
amongst  the  Hindus  ;  but  there  is  still  another  division, 
that  of  sects.  The  two  best  known  are  those  of  Siva  and 
Vishnu,  which  are  again  divided  into  a  large  number  of 
others. 

There  are  several  castes,  too,  which  may  be  distinguished 
by  certain  marks  painted  on  the  forehead  or  other  parts  of 
the  body. 

The  first  three  of  the  four  main  castes,  that  is  to  say 
the  Brahmins,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaisyas,  are  distinguished 
by  a  thin  cord  hung  across  from  the  left  shoulder  to  the 
right  hip.  But  this  cord  is  also  worn  by  the  Jains  and  even 
by  the  Panchalas,  or  five  castes  of  artisans,  so  one  is  apt  to 
be  deceived  by  it. 

From  what  has  been  said  it  will  appear  that  the  name 
of  a  caste  forms  after  all  its  best  indication.  It  was  thus 
that  the  tribes  of  Israel  were  distinguished.  The  names  of 
several  of  the  Hindu  castes  have  a  known  meaning  ;  but 
for  the  most  part  they  date  from  such  ancient  times  that  it 
is  impossible  to  find  out  their  significance. 

There  is  yet  another  division  more  general  than  any 
I  have  referred  to  yet,  namely,  that  into  Right-hand  and 
Left-hand  factions.  This  appears  to  be  but  a  modern 
invention,  since  it  is  not  mentioned  in  any  of  the  ancient 
books  of  the  country  ;  and  I  have  been  assured  that  it  is 
unknown  in  Northern  India.  Be  that  as  it  may,  I  do  not 
believe  that  any  idea  of  this  baneful  institution,  as  it  exists 
at  the  present  day,  ever  entered  the  heads  of  those  wise 
lawgivers  who  considered  they  had  found  in  caste  distinc- 
tions the  best  guarantee  for  the  observance  of  the  laws 
which  they  prescribed  for  the  people. 

This  division  into  Right-hand  and  Left-hand  factions, 
whoever  invented  it,  has  turned  out  to  be  the  most  direful 

1  Remarriage  of  virgin  widows  is  one  of  the  foremost  planks  in  the 
platform  of  Social  Reform,  but  it  is  opposed  violently  by  the  ortho- 
dox.— En. 


OPPOSITION   BETWEEN   FACTIONS  25 

disturber  of  the  public  peace.  It  has  proved  a  perpetual 
source  of  riots,  and  the  cause  of  endless  animosity  amongst 
the  natives. 

Most  castes  belong  either  to  the  Left-hand  or  Right-hand 
faction.  The  former  comprises  the  Vaisyas  or  trading 
classes,  the  Panchalas  or  artisan  classes,  and  some  of  the 
low  Sudra  castes.  It  also  contains  the  lowest  caste,  namely, 
the  Chucklers  or  leather- workers,  who  are  looked  upon  as 
its  chief  support. 

To  the  Right-hand  faction  belong  most  of  the  higher 
castes  of  Sudras.  The  Pariahs  are  its  chief  support,  as 
a  proof  of  which  they  glory  in  the  title  Valangai-Mougattar, 
or  friends  of  the  Right-hand.  In  the  disputes  and  con- 
flicts which  so  often  take  place  between  the  two  factions  it 
is  always  the  Pariahs  who  make  the  most  disturbance  and 
do  the  most  damage. 

The  Brahmins,  Rajahs,  and  several  classes  of  Sudras  are 
content  to  remain  neutral,  and  take  no  part  in  these 
quarrels.  They  are  often  chosen  as  arbiters  in  the  differ- 
ences which  the  two  factions  have  to  settle  between  them- 
selves. 

The  opposition  between  the  two  factions  arises  from 
certain  exclusive  privileges  to  which  both  lay  claim.  But 
as  these  alleged  privileges  are  nowhere  clearly  defined  and 
recognized,  they  result  in  confusion  and  uncertainty,  and 
are  with  difficulty  capable  of  settlement.  In  these  circum- 
stances one  cannot  hope  to  conciliate  both  parties  ;  all 
that  one  can  do  is  to  endeavour  to  compromise  matters  as 
far  as  possible. 

When  one  faction  trespasses  on  the  so-called  rights  of 
the  other,  tumults  arise  which  spread  gradually  over  large 
tracts  of  territory,  afford  opportunity  for  excesses  of  all 
kinds,  and  generally  end  in  bloody  conflicts.  The  Hindu, 
ordinarily  so  timid  and  gentle  in  all  other  circumstances  of 
life,  seems  to  change  his  nature  completely  on  occasions 
like  these.  There  is  no  danger  that  he  will  not  brave  in 
maintaining  what  he  calls  his  rights,  and  rather  than 
sacrifice  a  tittle  of  them  he  will  expose  himself  without  fear 
to  the  risk  of  losing  his  life. 

I  have  several  times  witnessed  instances  of  these  popular 
insurrections  excited  by  the  mutual  pretensions  of  the  two 


26  RIOTOUS   DISTURBANCES 

factions  and  pushed  to  such  an  extreme  of  fury  that  the 
presence  of  a  military  force  has  been  insufficient  to  quell 
them,  to  allay  the  clamour,  or  to  control  the  excesses  in 
which  the  contending  factions  consider  themselves  entitled 
to  indulge. 

Occasionally,  when  the  magistrates  fail  to  effect  a  re- 
conciliation by  peaceful  means,  it  is  necessary  to  resort  to 
force  in  order  to  suppress  the  disturbances.  I  have  some- 
times seen  these  rioters  stand  up  against  several  discharges 
of  artillery  without  exhibiting  any  sign  of  submission. 
And  when  at  last  the  armed  force  has  succeeded  in  restoring 
order  it  is  only  for  a  time.  At  the  very  first  opportunity 
the  rioters  are  at  work  again,  regardless  of  the  punishment 
they  have  received,  and  quite  ready  to  renew  the  conflict 
as  obstinately  as  before.  Such  are  the  excesses  to  which 
the  mild  and  peaceful  Hindu  abandons  himself  when  his 
courage  is  aroused  by  religious  and  political  fanaticism. 

The  rights  and  privileges  for  which  the  Hindus  are  ready 
to  fight  such  sanguinary  battles  appear  highly  ridiculous, 
especially  to  a  European.  Perhaps  the  sole  cause  of  the 
contest  is  the  right  to  wear  slippers  or  to  ride  through 
the  streets  in  a  palanquin  or  on  horseback  during  marriage 
festivals.  Sometimes  it  is  the  privilege  of  being  escorted 
on  certain  occasions  by  armed  retainers,  sometimes  that 
of  having  a  trumpet  sounded  in  front  of  a  procession,  or 
of  being  accompanied  by  native  musicians  at  public  cere- 
monies. Perhaps  it  is  simply  the  particular  kind  of  musical 
instrument  suitable  to  such  occasions  that  is  in  dispute  ; 
or  perhaps  it  may  be  the  right  of  carrying  flags  of  certain 
colours  or  certain  devices  during  these  ceremonies.  Such 
at  any  rate  are  a  few  of  the  privileges  for  which  Hindus 
are  ready  to  cut  each  other's  throats. 

It  not  unfrequently  happens  that  one  faction  makes  an 
attack  on  the  rights,  real  or  pretended,  of  the  other.  There- 
upon the  trouble  begins,  and  soon  becomes  general  if  it 
is  not  appeased  at  the  very  outset  by  prudent  and  vigorous 
measures  on  the  part  of  the  magistracy. 

I  could  instance  very  many  examples  bearing  on  this 
fatal  distinction  between  Right-hand  and  Left-hand  ;  but 
what  I  have  already  said  is  enough  to  show  the  spirit  which 
animates  the   Hindus   in  this   matter.     I  once   witnessed 


PETTY   CAUSES   OF  DISPUTE  27 

a  dispute  of  this  nature  between  the  Pariahs  and  Chuckhrs, 
or  leather-workers.  There  seemed  reason  to  fear  such 
disastrous  consequences  throughout  the  whole  district  in 
question,  that  many  of  the  more  peaceful  inhabitants  began 
to  desert  their  villages  and  to  carry  away  their  goods  and 
chattels  to  a  place  of  safety,  just  as  is  done  when  the  country 
is  threatened  by  the  near  approach  of  a  Mahratta  army. 
However,  matters  did  not  reach  this  extremity.  The 
principal  inhabitants  of  the  district  opportunely  offered  to 
arbitrate  in  the  matter,  and  they  succeeded  by  diplomacy 
and  conciliation  in  smoothing  away  the  difficulties  and  in 
appeasing  the  two  factions,  who  were  only  awaiting  the 
signal  to  attack  each  other. 

One  would  not  easily  guess  the  cause  of  this  formidable 
commotion.  It  simply  arose  from  the  fact  that  a  Chuckler 
had  dared  to  appear  at  a  public  ceremony  with  red  flowers 
stuck  in  his  turban,  a  privilege  which  the  Pariahs  alleged 
to  belong  exclusively  to  the  Right-hand  faction  1 ! 


CHAPTER  II 

Advantages  resulting  from  Caste  Divisions. — Similar  Divisions  amongst 
many  Ancient  Nations. 

Many  persons  studyso  imperfectly  the  spirit  and  character 
of  the  different  nations  that  inhabit  the  earth,  and  the  in- 
fluence of  climate  on  their  manners,  customs,  predilections, 
and  usages,  that  they  are  astonished  to  find  how  widely 
such  nations  differ  from  each  other.  Trammelled  by  the 
prejudices  of  their  own  surroundings,  such  persons  think 
nothing  well  regulated  that  is  not  included  in  the  polity 
and  government  of  their  own  country.  They  would  like 
to  see  all  nations  of  the  earth  placed  on  precisely  the  same 
footing  as  themselves.  Everything  which  differs  from  their 
own  customs  they  consider  either  uncivilized  or  ridiculous. 

1  These  faction  fights  have  gradually  disappeared  under  the  civilizing 
influences  of  education  and  good  government  ;  and  if  they  ever  occur 
at  all,  are  confined  to  the  lowest  castes  and  never  spread  beyond  the 
limits  of  a  village.  The  distinctions  between  the  two  factions,  however, 
still  exist. — Ed. 


28  PREJUDICES   AGAINST  CASTE 

Now,  although  man's  nature  is  pretty  much  the  same  all 
the  world  over,  it  is  subject  to  so  many  differentiations 
caused  by  soil,  climate,  food,  religion,  education,  and  other 
circumstances  peculiar  to  different  countries,  that  the 
system  of  civilization  adopted  by  one  people  would  plunge 
another  into  a  state  of  barbarism  and  cause  its  complete 
downfall. 

I  have  heard  some  persons,  sensible  enough  in  other 
respects,  but  imbued  with  all  the  prejudices  that  they  have 
brought  with  them  from  Europe,  pronounce  what  appears 
to  me  an  altogether  erroneous  judgement  in  the  matter  of 
caste  divisions  amongst  the  Hindus.  In  their  opinion, 
caste  is  not  only  useless  to  the  body  politic,  it  is  also  ridi- 
culous, and  even  calculated  to  bring  trouble  and  disorder 
on  the  people.  For  my  part,  having  lived  many  years  on 
friendly  terms  with  the  Hindus,  I  have  been  able  to  study 
their  national  life  and  character  closely,  and  I  have  arrived 
at  a  quite  opposite  decision  on  this  subject  of  caste.  I 
believe  caste  division  to  be  in  many  respects  the  chef- 
d'oeuvre,  the  happiest  effort,  of  Hindu  legislation.  I  am 
persuaded  that  it  is  simply  and  solely  due  to  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  people  into  castes  that  India  did  not  lapse  into 
a  state  of  barbarism,  and  that  she  preserved  and  perfected 
the  arts  and  sciences  of  civilization  whilst  most  other 
nations  of  the  earth  remained  in  a  state  of  barbarism. 
I  do  not  consider  caste  to  be  free  from  many  great  draw- 
backs ;  but  I  believe  that  the  resulting  advantages,  in  the 
case  of  a  nation  constituted  like  the  Hindus,  more  than 
outweigh  the  resulting  evils. 

To  establish  the  justice  of  this  contention  we  have  only 
to  glance  at  the  condition  of  the  various  races  of  men  who 
live  in  the  same  latitude  as  the  Hindus,  and  to  consider 
the  past  and  present  status  of  those  among  them  whose 
natural  disposition  and  character  have  not  been  influenced 
for  good  by  the  purifying  doctrines  of  Revealed  Religion. 
We  can  judge  what  the  Hindus  would  have  been  like,  had 
they  not  been  held  within  the  pale  of  social  duty  by  caste 
regulations,  if  we  glance  at  neighbouring  nations  west  of 
the  Peninsula  and  east  of  it  beyond  the  Ganges  as  far  as 
China.  In  China  itself  a  temperate  climate  and  a  form 
of  government  peculiarly  adapted  to  a  people  unlike  any 


ADVANTAGES   OF  CASTE  29 

other  in  the  world  have  produced  the  same  effect  as  the 
distinction  of  caste  among  the  Hindus. 

After  much  careful  thought  I  can  discover  no  other 
reason  except  caste  which  accounts  for  the  Hindus  not 
having  fallen  into  the  same  state  of  barbarism  as  their 
neighbours  and  as  almost  all  nations  inhabiting  the  torrid 
zone.  Caste  assigns  to  each  individual  his  own  profession 
or  calling  ;  and  the  handing  down  of  this  system  from 
father  to  son,  from  generation  to  generation,  makes  it 
impossible  for  any  person  or  his  descendants  to  change 
the  condition  of  life  which  the  law  assigns  to  him  for  any 
other.  Such  an  institution  was  probably  the  only  means 
that  the  most  clear-sighted  prudence  could  devise  for  main- 
taining a  state  of  civilization  amongst  a  people  endowed 
with  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  the  Hindus. 

We  can  picture  what  would  become  of  the  Hindus  if 
they  were  not  kept  within  the  bounds  of  duty  by  the  rules 
and  penalties  of  caste,  by  looking  at  the  position  of  the 
Pariahs,  or  outcastes  of  India,  who,  checked  by  no  moral 
restraint,  abandon  themselves  to  their  natural  propensities. 
Anybody  who  has  studied  the  conduct  and  character  of 
the  people  of  this  class — which,  by  the  way.  is  the  largest 
of  any  in  India  2 — will  agree  with  me  that  a  State  consist- 
ing entirely  of  such  inhabitants  could  not  long  endure, 
and  could  not  fail  to  lapse  before  long  into  a  condition  of 
barbarism.  For  my  own  part,  being  perfectly  familiar  with 
this  class,  and  acquainted  with  its  natural  predilections 
and  sentiments,  I  am  persuaded  that  a  nation  of  Pariahs 
left  to  themselves  would  speedily  become  worse  than  the 
hordes  of  cannibals  who  wander  in  the  vast  wastes  of 
Africa,  and  would  soon  take  to  devouring  each  other. 

I  am  no  less  convinced  that  if  the  Hindus  were  not  kept 
within  the  limits  of  duty  and  obedience  by  the  system  of 
caste,  and  by  the  penal  regulations  attached  to  each  phase 
of  it,  they  would  soon  become  just  what  the  Pariahs  are, 
and  probably  something  still  worse.     The  whole  country 

1  This  is  true  only  of  Southern  India,  where  the  Pariahs  number 
5,000,000.  They  form  one-seventh  of  the  total  population  of  the  Madras 
Presidency.  Of  late  years  the  degraded  condition  of  these  outcastes 
has  attracted  much  attention,  ami  a  great  deal  is  now  being  done  to 
elevate  them  morally  and  materially. — Ed. 


30  THE   FOUNDATIONS   OF  CASTE 

would  necessarily  fall  into  a  stale  of  hopeless  anarchy, 
and,  before  the  present  generation  disappeared,  this  nation, 
so  polished  under  present  conditions,  would  have  to  be 
reckoned  amongst  the  most  uncivilized  of  the  world. 
The  legislators  of  India,  whoever  they  may  have  been, 
were  far  too  wise  and  too  well  acquainted  with  the  natural 
character  of  the  people  for  whom  they  prescribed  laws  to 
leave  it  to  the  discretion  or  fancy  of  each  individual  to 
cultivate  what  knowledge  he  pleased,  or  to  exercise,  as 
seemed  best  to  him,  any  of  the  various  professions,  arts, 
or  industries  which  are  necessary  for  the  preservation  and 
well-being  of  a  State. 

They  set  out  from  that  cardinal  principle  common  to  all 
ancient  legislators,  that  no  person  should  be  useless  to  the 
commonwealth.  At  the  same  time  they  recognized  that 
they  were  dealing  with  a  people  who  were  indolent  and 
careless  by  nature,  and  whose  propensity  to  be  apathetic 
was  so  aggravated  by  the  climate  in  which  they  lived,  that 
unless  every  individual  had  a  profession  or  employment 
rigidly  imposed  upon  him,  the  social  fabric  could  not  hold 
together  and  must  quickly  fall  into  the  most  deplorable 
state  of  anarchy.  These  ancient  lawgivers,  therefore,  being 
well  aware  of  the  danger  caused  by  religious  and  political 
innovations,  and  being  anxious  to  establish  durable  and 
inviolable  rules  for  the  different  castes  comprising  the 
Hindu  nation,  saw  no  surer  way  of  attaining  their  object 
than  by  combining  in  an  unmistakable  manner  those  two 
great  foundations  of  orderly  government,  religion  and 
politics.  Accordingly  there  is  not  one  of  their  ancient 
usages,  not  one  of  their  observances,  which  has  not  some 
religious  principle  or  object  attached  to  it.  Everything, 
indeed,  is  governed  by  superstition  and  has  religion  for  its 
motive.  The  style  of  greeting,  the  mode  of  dressing,  the 
cut  of  clothes,  the  shape  of  ornaments  and  their  manner  of 
adjustment,  the  various  details  of  the  toilette,  the  archi- 
tecture of  houses,  the  corners  where  the  hearth  is  placed 
and  where  the  cooking  pots  must  stand,  the  manner  of 
going  to  bed  and  of  sleeping,  the  forms  of  civility  and 
politeness  that  must  be  observed  :  all  these  are  severely 
regulated. 

During  the  many  years  that  I  studied  Hindu  customs 


CASTE   IN   PALESTINE  AND  EGYPT         31 

1  cannot  say  that  I  ever  observed  a  single  one,  however 
unimportant  and  simple,  and,  I  may  add,  however  filthy 
and  disgusting,  which  did  not  rest  on  some  religious  prin- 
ciple or  other.  Nothing  is  left  to  chance  ;  everything  is 
laid  down  by  rule,  and  the  foundation  of  all  their  customs 
is  purely  and  simply  religion.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the 
Hindus  hold  all  their  customs  and  usages  to  be  inviolable, 
for,  being  essentially  religious,  they  consider  them  as  sacred 
as  religion  itself. 

And,  be  it  noted,  this  plan  of  dividing  the  people  into 
castes  is  not  confined  to  the  lawgivers  of  India.  The 
wisest  and  most  famous  of  all  lawgivers,  Moses,  availed 
himself  of  the  same  institution,  as  being  the  one  which 
offered  him  the  best  means  of  governing  the  intractable 
and  rebellious  people  of  whom  he  had  been  appointed  the 
patriarch. 

The  division  of  the  people  into  castes  existed  also  amongst 
the  Egyptians.  With  them,  as  with  the  Hindus,  the  law 
assigned  an  occupation  to  each  individual,  which  was 
handed  down  from  father  to  son.  It  was  forbidden  to 
any  man  to  have  two  professions,  or  to  change  his  own. 
Each  caste  had  a  special  quarter  assigned  to  it,  and  people 
of  a  different  caste  were  prohibited  from  settling  there. 
Nevertheless  there  was  this  difference  between  the  Egyptians 
and  the  Hindus  :  with  the  former  all  castes  and  all  pro- 
fessions were  held  in  esteem  ;  all  employments,  even  of 
the  meanest  kind,  were  alike  regarded  as  honourable  ; 
and,  although  the  priestly  and  military  castes  possessed 
peculiar  privileges,  nobody  would  have  considered  it 
anything  but  criminal  to  despise  the  classes  whose  work, 
whatever  it  happened  to  be,  contributed  to  the  general 
good  1.  With  the  Hindus,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are 
professions  and  callings  to  which  prejudice  attaches  such 
degradation  that  those  who  follow  them  are  universally 
despised  by  those  castes  which  in  the  public  estimation 
exercise  higher  functions. 

It  must  here  be  remarked,  however,  that  the  four  great 
professions  without  which  a  civilized  nation  could  not 
exist,  namely,  the  army,  agriculture,  commerce,  and  weav- 

1  See  what  the  illustrious  Bossuet  says  on  this  point  in  his  DivcuiM* 
sur  VHistoire  UniverseUe,  Part  III. — Dubois. 


32        CASTE  AMONGST  ANCIENT  NATIONS 

ing,  are  held  everywhere  in  the  highest  esteem.  All  castes, 
from  the  Brahmin  to  the  Pariah,  are  permitted  to  follow 
the  first  three,  and  the  fourth  can  be  followed  by  all  the 
principal  classes  of  Sudras  1. 

These  same  caste  distinctions  observable  amongst  Hindus 
exist  likewise,  with  some  differences,  amongst  the  Arabs 
and  Tartars.  Probably,  indeed,  they  were  common  to  the 
majority  of  ancient  nations.  Cecrops,  it  will  be  remembered, 
separated  the  people  of  Athens  into  four  tribes  or  classes, 
while  their  great  lawgiver,  Solon,  upheld  this  distinction 
and  strengthened  it  in  several  ways.  Numa  Pompilius, 
again,  could  devise  no  better  way  of  putting  an  end  to  the 
racial  hatred  between  Sabines  and  Romans  than  by  separat- 
ing the  body  of  the  people  into  different  castes  and  classes. 
The  result  of  his  policy  was  just  what  he  had  desired.  Both 
Sabines  and  Romans,  once  amalgamated  in  this  manner, 
forgot  their  national  differences  and  thought  only  of  those 
of  their  class  or  caste. 

Those  who  instituted  the  caste  system  could  not  but 
perceive  that  with  nations  in  an  embryonic  stage  the  more 
class  distinctions  there  are  the  more  order  and  symmetry 
there  must  be,  and  the  more  easy  it  is  to  exercise  control 
and  preserve  order.  This,  indeed,  is  the  result  which  caste 
classification  amongst  the  Hindus  has  achieved.  The  shame 
which  would  reflect  on  a  whole  caste  if  the  faults  of  one  of 
its  individual  members  went  unpunished  guarantees  that 
the  caste  will  execute  justice,  defend  its  own  honour,  and 
keep  all  its  members  within  the  bounds  of  duty.  For,  be 
it  noted,  every  caste  has  its  own  laws  and  regulations,  or 
rather,  we  may  say,  its  own  customs,  in  accordance  with 
which  the  severest  justice  is  meted  out,  just  as  it  was  by 
the  patriarchs  of  old. 

Thus  in  several  castes  adultery  is  punishable  by  death  2. 
Girls  or  widows  who  succumb  to  temptation  are  made  to 
suffer  the  same  penalty  as  those  who  have  seduced  them. 
The  largest  temple  of  the  town  of  Conjeeveram,  in  the 
Carnatic,  an  immense  building,  was  constructed,  so  it  is 

1  This  statement  is  not  quite  correct,  for  in  Southern  India,  at  any 
rate,  some  classes  of  Pariahs  are  most  expert  weavers,  and  are  honoured 
as  such  throughout  the  country. — Ed. 

2  This  of  course  is  no  longer  allowed  by  law. — Ed. 


CASTE  PENALTIES  33 

said,  by  a  rich  Brahmin  who  had  been  convicted  of  having 
had  illicit  intercourse  with  a  low-caste  Pariah  woman. 
He  was,  however,  sentenced  to  this  severe  penalty,  not  so 
much  on  account  of  the  immorality  of  his  action,  seeing 
that  in  the  opinion  of  the  Brahmins  it  was  not  immoral 
at  all,  but  on  account  of  the  low-caste  person  who  had 
been  the  partner  of  his  incontinence.  There  are  various 
kinds  of  delinquencies  in  connexion  with  which  a  caste 
may  take  proceedings,  not  only  against  the  principal 
offenders,  but  against  those  who  have  taken  any  part 
whatever  in  them.  Thus  it  is  caste  authority  which,  by 
means  of  its  wise  rules  and  prerogatives,  preserves  good 
order,  suppresses  vice,  and  saves  Hindus  from  sinking  into 
a  state  of  barbarism. 

It  may  also  be  said  that  caste  regulations  counteract  to 
a  great  extent  the  evil  effects  which  would  otherwise  be 
produced  on  the  national  character  by  a  religion  that 
encourages  the  most  unlicensed  depravity  of  morals,  as 
well  in  the  decorations  of  its  temples  as  in  its  dogmas 
and  ritual. 

In  India,  where  the  princes  and  the  aristocracy  live  in 
extreme  indolence,  attaching  little  importance  to  making 
their  dependants  happy  and  taking  small  pains  to  inculcate 
in  them  a  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  there  are  no  other 
means  of  attaining  these  desirable  ends  and  preserving 
good  order  than  by  authoritative  rulings  of  the  caste 
system.  The  worst  of  it  is,  these  powers  are  not  suffi- 
ciently wide,  or  rather  they  are  too  often  relaxed.  Many 
castes  exercise  them  with  severity  in  cases  that  are  for  the 
most  part  frivolous,  but  display  an  easy  and  culpable 
indulgence  towards  real  and  serious  delinquencies.  On  the 
other  hand,  caste  authority  is  often  a  check  against  abuses 
which  the  despotic  rulers  of  the  country  are  too  apt  to 
indulge  in.  Sometimes  one  may  see,  as  the  result  of 
a  caste  order,  the  tradesmen  and  merchants  of  a  whole 
district  closing  their  shops,  the  labourers  abandoning  their 
fields,  or  the  artisans  leaving  their  workshops,  all  because 
of  some  petty  insult  or  of  some  petty  extortion  suffered  by 
some  member  of  their  caste  ;  and  the  aggrieved  people  will 
remain  obstinately  in  this  state  of  opposition  until  the  injury 
has  been  atoned  for  and  those  responsible  for  it  punished. 


34  PURITY  OF  HINDI'   DESCENT 

Another  advantage  resulting  from  the  caste  system  is 
the  hereditary  continuation  of  families  and  that  purity  of 
descent  which  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  Hindus,  and  which 
consists  in  never  mixing  the  blood  of  one  family  or  caste 
with  that  of  another.  Marriages  are  confined  to  parties 
belonging  to  the  same  family,  or  at  any  rate  the  same 
caste.  In  India,  at  any  rate,  there  can  be  no  room  for  the 
reproach,  so  often  deserved  in  European  countries,  that 
families  have  deteriorated  by  alliances  with  persons  of  low 
or  unknown  extraction.  A  Hindu  of  high  caste  can, 
without  citing  his  title  or  producing  his  genealogical  tree, 
trace  his  descent  back  for  more  than  two  thousand  years 
without  fear  of  contradiction.  He  can  also,  without  any 
other  passport  than  that  of  his  high  caste,  and  in  spite  of 
his  poverty,  present  himself  anywhere  ;  and  he  would  be 
more  courted  for  a  marriage  alliance  than  any  richer  man 
of  less  pure  descent.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  to  be  denied 
that  there  are  some  districts  where  the  people  are  not 
quite  so  particular  about  their  marriages,  though  such 
laxity  is  blamed  and  held  up  to  shame  as  an  outrage  on 
propriety,  while  those  guilty  of  it  take  very  good  care  to 
conceal  it  as  much  as  possible  from  the  public. 

Further,  one  would  be  justified  in  asserting  that  it  is  to 
caste  distinctions  that  India  owes  the  preservation  of  her 
arts  and  industries.  For  the  same  reason  she  would  have 
reached  a  high  standard  of  perfection  in  them  had  not  the 
avarice  of  her  rulers  prevented  it.  It  was  chiefly  to  attain 
this  object  that  the  Egyptians  were  divided  into  castes, 
and  that  their  laws  assigned  the  particular  place  which 
each  individual  should  occupy  in  the  commonwealth. 
Their  lawgivers  no  doubt  considered  that  by  this  means 
all  arts  and  industries  would  continue  to  improve  from 
generation  to  generation,  for  men  must  needs  do  well 
that  which  they  have  always  been  in  the  habit  of  seeing 
done  and  which  they  have  been  constantly  practising  from 
their  youth. 

This  perfection  in  arts  and  manufactures  would  un- 
doubtedly have  been  attained  by  so  industrious  a  people  as 
the  Hindus,  if,  as  I  have  before  remarked,  the  cupidity  of 
their  rulers  had  not  acted  as  a  check.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
no  sooner  has  an  artisan  gained  the  reputation  of  excelling 


HINDU  ARTS  AND  MANUFACTURES  35 

m  his  craft  than  he  is  at  once  carried  off  by  order  of  the 
sovereign,  taken  to  the  palace,  and  there  confined  for  the 
rest  of  his  life,  forced  to  toil  without  remission  and  with 
little  or  no  reward.  Under  these  circumstances,  which  are 
common  to  all  parts  of  India  under  the  government  of 
native  princes,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  every  art  and 
industry  is  extinguished  and  all  healthy  competition 
deadened.  This  is  the  chief  and  almost  the  only  reason 
why  progress  in  the  arts  has  been  so  slow  among  the 
Hindus,  and  why  in  this  respect  they  are  now  far  behind 
other  nations  who  did  not  become  civilized  for  many  cen- 
turies after  themselves. 

Their  workmen  certainly  lack  neither  industry  nor  skill. 
In  the  European  settlements,  where  they  are  paid  according 
to  their  merit,  many  native  artisans  are  to  be  met  with 
whose  work  would  do  credit  to  the  best  artisans  of  the 
West.  Moreover  they  feel  no  necessity  to  use  the  many 
European  tools,  whose  nomenclature  alone  requires  special 
study.  One  or  two  axes,  as  many  saws  and  planes,  all  of 
them  so  rudely  fashioned  that  a  European  workman  would 
be  able  to  do  nothing  with  them — these  are  almost  the 
only  instruments  that  are  to  be  seen  in  the  hands  of  Hindu 
carpenters.  The  working  materials  of  a  journeyman  gold- 
smith usually  comprise  a  tiny  anvil,  a  crucible,  two  or 
three  small  hammers,  and  as  many  files.  With  such 
simple  tools  the  patient  Hindu,  thanks  to  his  industry, 
can  produce  specimens  of  work  which  are  often  not  to  be 
distinguished  from  those  imported  at  great  expense  from 
foreign  countries.  To  what  a  standard  of  excellence  would 
these  men  have  attained  if  they  had  been  from  the  earliest 
times  subjected  to  good  masters  ! 

In  order  to  form  a  just  idea  of  what  the  Hindus  would 
have  done  with  their  arts  and  manufactures  if  their  natural 
industry  had  been  properly  encouraged,  we  have  only  to 
visit  the  workshop  of  one  of  their  weavers  or  of  one  of 
their  printers  on  cloth  and  carefully  examine  the  instru- 
ments with  which  they  produce  those  superb  muslins, 
those  superfine  cloths,  those  beautiful  coloured  piece-goods, 
which  are  everywhere  admired,  and  which  in  Europe  occupy 
a  high  place  among  the  principal  articles  of  adornment. 
In  manufacturing  these  magnificent  stuffs  the  artisan  uses 


36  COHESION  OF  CASTE  COMMUNITIES 

his  feet  almost  as  much  as  his  hands.  Furthermore  the 
weaving  loom,  and  the  whole  apparatus  for  spinning  the 
thread  before  it  is  woven,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  tools 
which  he  uses  for  the  work,  are  so  simple  and  so  few  that 
altogether  they  would  hardly  comprise  a  load  for  one  man. 
Indeed  it  is  by  no  means  a  rare  sight  to  see  one  of  these 
weavers  changing  his  abode,  and  carrying  on  his  back  all 
that  is  necessary  for  setting  to  work  the  moment  he  arrives 
at  his  new  home. 

Their  printed  calicoes,  which  are  not  less  admired  than 
their  muslins,  are  manufactured  in  an  equally  simple 
manner.  Three  or  four  bamboos  to  stretch  the  cloth, 
as  many  brushes  for  applying  the  colours,  with  a  few 
pieces  of  potsherd  to  contain  them,  and  a  hollow  stone 
for  pounding  them  :  these  are  pretty  well  all  their  stock 
in  trade. 

I  will  venture  to  express  one  other  remark  on  the  political 
advantages  resulting  from  caste  distinctions.  In  India 
parental  authority  is  but  little  respected  :  and  parents, 
overcome  doubtless  by  that  apathetic  indifference  which 
characterizes  Hindus  generally,  are  at  little  pains,  as  I  shall 
show  later  on,  to  inspire  those  feelings  of  filial  reverence 
which  constitute  family  happiness  by  enchaining  the  affec- 
tions of  the  children  to  the  authors  of  their  existence. 
Outward  affection  appears  to  exist  between  brothers  and 
sisters,  but  in  reality  it  is  neither  very  strong  nor  very 
sincere.  It  quickly  vanishes  after  the  death  of  their 
parents,  and  subsequently,  we  may  say,  they  only  come 
together  to  fight  and  to  quarrel.  Thus,  as  the  ties  of 
blood  relationship  formed  so  insecure  a  bond  between 
different  members  of  a  community,  and  guaranteed  no 
such  mutual  assistance  and  support  as  were  needed,  it 
became  necessary  to  bring  families  together  in  large  caste 
communities,  the  individual  members  of  which  had  a 
common  interest  in  protecting,  supporting,  and  defending 
each  other.  It  was  thus  that  the  links  of  the  Hindu  social 
chain  were  so  strongly  and  ingeniously  forged  that  nothing 
was  able  to  break  them. 

This  was  the  object  which  the  ancient  lawgivers  of  India 
attained  by  establishing  the  caste  system,  and  they  thereby 
acquired  a  title  to  honour  unexampled  in  the  history  of 


CASTE  SENTENCES  :*7 

the   world.     Their  work  lias  stood  the  test  of  thousands 

of  years,  and  lias  survived  the  lapse  of  time  and  the  many 
revolutions  to  which  this  portion  of  the  globe  has  been 
subjected.  The  Hindus  have  often  passed  beneath  the 
yoke  of  foreign  invaders,  whose  religions,  laws,  and  customs 
have  been  very  different  from  their  own  ;  yet  all  efforts  to 
impose  foreign  institutions  on  the  people  of  India  have 
been  futile,  and  foreign  occupation  has  never  dealt  more 
than  a  feeble  blow  against  Indian  custom.  Above  all,  and 
before  all,  it  was  the  caste  system  which  protected  them. 
Its  authority  was  extensive  enough  to  include  sentences  of 
death,  as  I  have  before  remarked.  The  story  is  told,  and 
the  truth  of  it  is  incontestable,  that  a  man  of  the  Rajput 
caste  was  a  few  years  ago  compelled  by  the  people  of  his 
own  caste  and  by  the  principal  inhabitants  of  his  place  of 
abode  to  execute,  with  his  own  hand,  a  sentence  of  death 
passed  on  his  daughter.  This  unhappy  girl  had  been  dis- 
covered in  the  arms  of  a  youth,  who  would  have  suffered 
the  same  penalty  had  he  not  evaded  it  by  sudden  flight. 

Nevertheless,  although  the  penalty  of  death  may  be 
inflicted  by  some  castes  under  certain  circumstances,  this 
form  of  punishment  is  seldom  resorted  to  nowadays.  When- 
ever it  is  thought  to  be  indispensable,  it  is  the  father  or 
the  brother  who  is  expected  to  execute  it,  in  secrecy. 
Generally  speaking,  however,  recourse  is  had  by  prefer- 
ence to  the  imposition  of  a  fine  and  to  various  ignominious 
corporal  punishments.  As  regards  these  latter,  we  may 
note  as  examples  the  punishments  inflicted  on  women  wTho 
have  forfeited  their  honour,  such  as  shaving  their  heads, 
compelling  them  to  ride  through  the  public  streets  mounted 
on  asses  and  with  their  faces  turned  towards  the  tail, 
forcing  them  to  stand  a  long  time  with  a  basket  of  mud 
on  their  heads  before  the  assembled  caste  people,  throwing 
into  their  faces  the  ordure  of  cattle,  breaking  the  cotton 
thread  of  those  possessing  the  right  to  wear  it,  and  ex- 
communicating the  guilty  from  their  caste  \ 

1  The  infliction  of  such  punishments  might  nowadays  be  followed  by 
prosecution  in  the  Civil  and  Criminal  Courts. — Ed. 


38 

CHAPTER  III 

Expulsion  from  Caste. — Cases  in  which  such  Degradation  is  inflicted. — 

By  whom  inflicted. — Restoration  to  Caste. — Methods  of  effecting  it. 

Of  all  kinds  of  punishment  the  hardest  and  most  un- 
bearable for  a  Hindu  is  that  which  cuts  him  off  and  expels 
him  from  his  caste.  Those  whose  duty  it  is  to  inflict  it 
are  the  gurus,  of  whom  I  shall  have  more  to  say  in  a  sub- 
sequent chapter,  and,  in  default  of  them,  the  caste  headmen. 
These  latter  are  usually  to  be  found  in  every  district,  and 
it  is  to  them  that  all  doubtful  or  difficult  questions  affecting 
the  caste  system  are  referred.  They  call  in,  in  order  to 
help  them  to  decide  such  questions,  a  few  elders  who  are 
versed  in  the  intricacies  of  the  matters  in  dispute. 

This  expulsion  from  caste,  which  follows  either  an  in- 
fringement of  caste  usages  or  some  public  offence  calculated 
if  left  unpunished  to  bring  dishonour  on  the  whole  com- 
munity, is  a  kind  of  social  excommunication,  which  deprives 
the  unhappy  person  who  suffers  it  of  all  intercourse  with 
his  fellow-creatures.  It  renders  him,  as  it  were,  dead  to 
the  world,  and  leaves  him  nothing  in  common  with  the 
rest  of  society.  In  losing  his  caste  he  loses  not  only  his 
relations  and  friends,  but  often  his  wife  and  his  children, 
who  would  rather  leave  him  to  his  fate  than  share  his 
disgrace  with  him.  Nobody  dare  eat  with  him  or  even 
give  him  a  drop  of  water.  If  he  has  marriageable  daughters 
nobody  asks  them  in  marriage,  and  in  like  manner  his  sons 
are  refused  wives.  He  has  to  take  it  for  granted  that 
wherever  he  goes  he  will  be  avoided,  pointed  at  with  scorn, 
and  regarded  as  an  outcaste. 

If  after  losing  caste  a  Hindu  could  obtain  admission  into 
an  inferior  caste,  his  punishment  would  in  some  degree  be 
tolerable  ;  but  even  this  humiliating  compensation  is  denied 
to  him.  A  simple  Sudra  with  any  notions  of  honour  and 
propriety  would  never  associate  or  even  speak  with  a 
Brahmin  degraded  in  this  manner.  It  is  necessary,  there- 
fore, for  an  outcaste  to  seek  asylum  in  the  lowest  caste  of 
Pariahs  if  he  fail  to  obtain  restoration  to  his  own  ;  or  else 
he  is  obliged  to  associate  with  persons  of  doubtful  caste. 
There  are  always  people  of  this  kind,  especially  in  the 


EXPULSION  FROM  CASTE  39 

quarters   inhabited   by   Europeans;   and   unhappy    is    the 

man  who  puts  trust  in  them  !  A  caste  Hindu  is  often 
a  thief  and  a  bad  character,  but  a  Hindu  without  caste  is 
almost  always  a  rogue. 

Expulsion  from  caste  is  generally  put  in  force  without 
much  formality.  Sometimes  it  is  due  merely  to  personal 
hatred  or  caprice.  Thus,  when  persons  refuse,  without 
any  apparent  justification,  to  attend  the  funeral  or  marriage 
ceremonies  of  their  relations  or  friends,  or  when  they  happen 
not  to  invite  the  latter  on  similar  occasions,  the  individuals 
thus  slighted  never  fail  to  take  proceedings  in  order  to 
obtain  satisfaction  for  the  insult  offered  to  them,  and  the 
arbitrators  called  in  to  decide  the  case  usually  pass  a  decree 
of  excommunication.  When  a  case  is  thus  settled  by 
arbitration,  however,  a  sentence  of  excommunication  does 
not  bring  upon  the  guilty  person  the  same  disgrace  and  the 
same  penalties  which  are  the  lot  of  those  whose  offence 
offers  no  room  for  compromise. 

Otherwise  it  matters  little  whether  the  offence  be  deli- 
berate, whether  it  be  serious  or  trivial,  in  determining 
that  a  person  shall  pay  this  degrading  penalty.  A  Pariah 
who  concealed  his  origin,  mixed  with  other  Hindus,  entered 
their  houses  and  ate  with  them  without  being  recognized, 
would  render  those  who  had  thus  been  brought  into  con- 
tact with  him  liable  to  ignominious  expulsion  from  their 
caste.  At  the  same  time  a  Pariah  guilty  of  such  a  daring 
act  would  inevitably  be  murdered  on  the  spot,  if  his  enter- 
tainers recognized  him. 

A  Sudra,  too,  who  indulged  in  illicit  intercourse  witli 
a  Pariah  woman  would  be  rigorously  expelled  from  caste 
if  his  offence  became  known. 

A  number  of  Brahmins  assembled  together  for  some 
family  ceremony  once  admitted  to  their  feast,  without 
being  aware  of  it,  a  Sudra  who  had  gained  admittance  on 
the  false  assertion  that  he  belonged  to  their  caste.  On  the 
circumstance  being  discovered,  these  Brahmins  were  one 
and  all  outcasted,  and  were  unable  to  obtain  reinstatement 
until  they  had  gone  through  all  kinds  of  formalities  and 
been  subjected  to  considerable  expense. 

I  once  witnessed  amongst  the  Gollavarus,  or  shepherds, 
an  instance  of  even  greater  severity.     A  marriage  had  been 


W  INSTANCES  OF  CASTE  VIOLATION 

arranged,  and,  in  the  presence  of  the  family  concerned, 
certain  ceremonies  which  were  equivalent  to  betrothal 
amongst  ourselves  had  taken  place.  Before  the  actual 
celebration  of  the  marriage,  which  was  fixed  for  a  con- 
siderable time  afterwards,  the  bridegroom  died.  The 
parents  of  the  girl,  who  was  very  young  and  pretty,  there- 
upon married  her  to  another  man.  This  was  in  direct 
violation  of  the  custom  of  the  caste,  which  condemns  to 
perpetual  widowhood  girls  thus  betrothed,  even  when,  as 
in  this  case,  the  future  bridegroom  dies  before  marriage 
has  been  consummated.  The  consequence  was  that  all 
the  persons  who  had  taken  part  in  the  second  ceremony 
were  expelled  from  caste,  and  nobody  would  contract 
marriage  or  have  any  intercourse  whatever  with  them. 
A  long  time  afterwards  I  met  several  of  them,  well  advanced 
in  age,  who  had  been  for  this  reason  alone  unable  to  obtain 
husbands  or  wives,  as  the  case  might  be. 

Let  me  relate  another  instance.  Eleven  Brahmins 
travelling  in  company  were  obliged  to  cross  a  district 
devastated  by  war.  They  arrived  hungry  and  tired  in 
a  village,  which,  contrary  to  their  expectations,  they  found 
deserted.  They  had  with  them  a  small  quantity  of  rice, 
but  they  could  find  no  other  pots  to  boil  it  in  than  some 
which  had  been  left  in  the  house  of  the  village  washerman. 
To  touch  these  would  constitute  in  the  case  of  Brahmins 
an  almost  ineffaceable  defilement.  Nevertheless,  suffering 
from  hunger  as  they  were,  they  swore  mutual  secrecy,  and 
after  washing  and  scouring  the  pots  a  hundred  times  they 
prepared  their  food  in  them.  The  rice  was  served  and  the 
repast  consumed  by  all  but  one,  who  refused  to  partake 
of  it,  and  who  had  no  sooner  returned  home  than  he  pro- 
ceeded to  denounce  the  ten  others  to  the  chief  Brahmins 
of  the  village.  The  news  of  such  a  scandal  spread  quickly, 
and  gave  rise  to  a  great  commotion  amongst  all  classes  of 
the  inhabitants.  An  assembly  was  held.  The  delinquents 
were  summoned  and  forced  to  appear.  Warned  before- 
hand, however,  of  the  proceedings  that  were  to  be  in- 
stituted against  them,  they  took  counsel  together  and 
agreed  to  answer  unanimously,  when  called  upon  to  explain, 
that  it  was  the  accuser  himself  who  had  committed  the 
heinous  sin  and  who  had  imputed  it  to  them  falsely  and 


ATTACHMENT  TO  CASTE  1 1 

maliciously.     The  testimony  of  ten  persons  was  calculated 

to  carry  more  weight  than  that  of  one.  The  accused  were 
consequently  acquitted,  while  the  accuser  alone  was  igno- 
niiniously  expelled  from  caste  by  the  headmen,  who, 
though  they  were  perfectly  sure  of  his  innocence,  were 
indignant  at  his  treacherous  disclosure. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  no  longer  be  surprising 
to  learn  that  Hindus  are  as  much,  nay,  even  more,  attached 
to  their  caste  than  the  gentry  of  Europe  are  to  their  rank. 
Prone  to  using  the  most  disgustingly  abusive  language  in 
their  quarrels,  they  nevertheless  easily  forgive  and  forget 
such  insulting  epithets  ;  but  if  one  should  say  of  another 
that  he  is  a  man  without  caste,  the  insult  would  never  be 
forgiven  or  forgotten. 

This  strict  and  universal  observance  of  caste  and  caste 
usages  forms  practically  their  whole  social  law.  A  very 
great  number  of  people  are  to  be  found  amongst  them,  to 
whom  death  would  appear  far  more  desirable  than  life,  if, 
for  example,  the  latter  were  sustained  by  eating  cow's  flesh 
or  any  food  prepared  by  Pariahs  and  outcastes. 

It  is  this  same  caste  feeling  which  gives  rise  to  the  con- 
tempt and  aversion  which  they  display  towards  all  foreign 
nations,  and  especially  towards  Europeans,  who,  being  as 
a  rule  but  slightly  acquainted  with  the  customs  and  pre- 
judices of  the  country,  are  constantly  violating  them. 
Owing  to  such  conduct  the  Hindus  look  upon  them  as 
barbarians  totally  ignorant  of  all  principles  of  honour  and 
good  breeding. 

In  several  cases,  at  least,  restoration  to  caste  is  an 
impossibility.  But  when  the  sentence  of  excommunication 
has  been  passed  merely  by  relations,  the  culprit  conciliates 
the  principal  members  of  his  family  and  prostrates  himself 
in  a  humble  posture,  and  with  signs  of  repentance,  before 
his  assembled  castemen.  He  then  listens  without  com- 
plaint to  the  rebukes  which  are  showered  upon  him,  receives 
the  blows  to  which  he  is  oftentimes  condemned,  and  pays 
the  fine  which  it  is  thought  fit  to  impose  upon  him.  Finally, 
after  having  solemnly  promised  to  wipe  out  by  good  con- 
duct the  taint  resulting  from  his  degrading  punishment, 
he  sheds  tears  of  repentance,  performs  the  sasktanga  before 
the  assembly,  and  then  serves  a  feast  to  the  persons  present. 

C  3 


42  THE  'SASHTANGA' 

When  all  this  is  finished  lie  is  looked  upon  as  reinstated. 

The  sashta?iga,  by  the  way,  is  a  sign  or  salute  expressing 
humility,  which  is  not  only  recognized  amongst  the  Hindus 
and  other  Asiatic  nations,  but  was  in  use  amongst  more 
ancient  peoples.  Instances  of  it  are  quoted  in  Scripture, 
where  this  extraordinary  mark  of  respect  is  known  as 
adoration,  even  when  it  is  paid  to  simple  mortals.  {Vide 
Genesis  xviii.  2 ;  xix.  1  ;  xxxiii.  3  ;  xlii.  6  ;  xliii.  26  ;  1. 
18,  &c,  &c.)  In  the  same  way  the  Egyptians,  Chaldeans, 
and  other  nations  mentioned  in  Holy  Writ  were  acquainted 
with  this  method  of  reverent  salutation  and  observed  it 
under  the  same  circumstances  as  the  Hindus.  As  I  shall 
often  have  occasion  in  this  work  to  mention  the  sashtanga 
1  will  give  here  a  definition  of  it.  The  person  who  performs 
it  lies  prostrate,  his  face  on  the  ground  and  his  arms  ex- 
tended beyond  his  head.  It  is  called  sashtanga  from  the 
prostration  of  the  six  members,  because,  when  it  is  performed, 
the  feet,  the  knees,  the  stomach,  the  chest,  the  forehead, 
and  the  arms  must  touch  the  earth.  It  is  thus  that  pro- 
strations are  made  before  persons  of  high  degree,  such  as 
princes  and  priests.  Children  sometimes  prostrate  them- 
selves thus  before  their  fathers.  It  is  by  no  means  rare 
to  see  Sudras  of  different  classes  performing  sashtanga 
before  Brahmins  ;  and  it  often  happens  that  princes,  before 
engaging  an  enemy,  thus  prostrate  themselves  before  their 
armies  drawn  up  in  battle  array  \ 

When  expulsion  from  caste  is  the  result  of  some  heinous 
offence,  the  guilty  person  who  is  readmitted  into  caste  has 
to  submit  to  one  or  other  of  the  following  ordeals  :  his 
tongue  is  slightly  burnt  with  a  piece  of  heated  gold  ;  he  is 
branded  indelibly  on  different  parts  of  his  body  with  red- 
hot  iron  ;  he  is  made  to  walk  barefooted  over  red-hot 
embers  ;  or  he  is  compelled  to  crawl  several  times  under 
the  belly  of  a  cow.  Finally,  to  complete  his  purification, 
he  is  made  to  drink  the  pancha-gavia.  These  words,  of 
which  a  more  detailed  explanation  will  be  given  later  on, 
signify  literally  the  five  things  or  substances  derived  from  the 

1  Here  and  elsewhere  the  Abbe  makes  the  mistake  of  interpreting 
saslUanga  to  mean  '  the  six  angas,'  or  '  parts  of  the  body.'  Sashtanga 
(Saashtanga)  really  means  with  the  eight  jxirt*  of  the  body,  which  are  the 
two  hands,  the  two  feet,  two  knees,  forehead,  and  breast. — Ed, 


UNPARDONABLE  SINS  OE  CASTE  t3 

body  of  a  cow  ;  namely,  milk,  curds,  ghee  (clarified  butter), 
dung  and  urine,  which  are  mixed  together.  The  last- 
named,  urine,  is  looked  upon  as  the  most  efficacious  for 
purifying  any  kind  of  uncleanness.  I  have  often  seen 
superstitious  Hindus  following  the  cows  to  pasture,  waiting 
for  the  moment  when  they  could  collect  the  precious  liquid 
in  vessels  of  brass,  and  carrying  it  away  while  still  warm 
to  their  houses.  I  have  also  seen  them  waiting  to  catch  it 
in  the  hollow  of  their  hands,  drinking  some  of  it  and  rubbing 
their  faces  and  heads  with  the  rest.  Rubbing  it  in  this 
way  is  supposed  to  wash  away  all  external  uncleanness, 
and  drinking  it  to  cleanse  all  internal  impurity.  When 
this  disgusting  ceremony  of  the  pa?icha-gavia  is  over,  the 
person  who  has  been  reinstated  is  expected  to  give  a  great 
feast  to  the  Brahmins  who  have  collected  from  all  parts  to 
witness  it.  Presents  of  more  or  less  value  are  also  expected 
by  them,  and  not  until  these  are  forthcoming  does  the 
guilty  person  obtain  all  his  rights  and  privileges  again. 

There  are  certain  offences  so  heinous  in  the  sight  of 
Hindus,  however,  as  to  leave  no  hope  of  reinstatement  to 
those  who  commit  them.  Such,  for  example,  would  be 
the  crime  of  a  Brahmin  who  had  openly  cohabited  with 
a  Pariah  woman.  Were  the  woman  of  any  other  caste, 
I  believe  that  it  would  be  possible  for  a  guilty  person,  by 
getting  rid  of  her  and  by  repudiating  any  children  he  had 
had  by  her,  to  obtain  pardon,  after  performing  many 
purifying  ceremonies  and  expending  much  money.  But 
hopeless  would  be  the  case  of  the  man  who  under  any 
circumstances  had  eaten  of  cow's  flesh.  There  would  be 
no  hope  of  pardon  for  him,  even  supposing  he  had  com- 
mitted such  an  awful  sacrilege  under  compulsion. 

It  would  be  possible  to  cite  several  instances  of  strange 
and  inflexible  severity  in  the  punishment  of  caste  offences. 
When  the  last  Mussulman  Prince  reigned  in  Mysore  and 
sought  to  proselytize  the  whole  Peninsula,  he  began  by 
having  several  Brahmins  forcibly  circumcised,  compelling 
them  afterwards  to  eat  cow's  flesh  as  an  unequivocal  token 
of  their  renunciation  of  caste.  Subsequently  the  people 
were  freed  from  the  yoke  of  this  tyrant,  and  many  of  those 
who  had  been  compelled  to  embrace  the  Mahomedan 
religion  made  every  possible  effort,  and  offered  very  large 


44    THE  'UNPARDONABLE  SIN'  OF  HINDUISM 

sums,  1<>  be  readmitted  to  Hinduism.  .Assemblies  were 
held  in  different  parts  of  the  country  to  thoroughly  consider 
their  cases.  It  was  everywhere  decided  that  it  was  quite 
possible  to  purify  the  uncleanness  of  circumcision  and  of 
intercourse  with  Mussulmans.  But  the  crime  of  eating 
cow's  flesh,  even  under  compulsion,  was  unanimously 
declared  to  be  irredeemable  and  not  to  be  effaced  either 
by  presents,  or  by  fire,  or  by  the  pancha-gavia. 

A  similar  decision  was  given  in  the  case  of  Sudras  who 
found  themselves  in  the  same  position,  and  who,  after 
trying  all  possible  means,  were  not  more  successful.  One 
and  all,  therefore,  were  obliged  to  remain  Mahomedans. 

A  Hindu,  of  whatever  caste,  who  has  once  had  the 
misfortune  to  be  excommunicated,  can  never  altogether 
get  rid  of  the  stain  of  his  disgrace.  If  he  ever  gets  into 
trouble  his  excommunication  is  always  thrown  in  his 
teeth. 

CHAPTER  IV 

Antiquity  and  Origin  of  Caste. 

Apparently  there  is  no  existing  institution  older  than 
the  caste  system  of  the  Hindus.  Greek  and  Latin  authors 
who  have  written  about  India  concur  in  thinking  that  it 
has  been  in  force  from  time  immemorial ;  and  certainly  the 
unswerving  observance  of  its  rules  seems  to  me  an  almost 
incontestable  proof  of  its  antiquity  \     Under  a  solemn  and 

1  Dr.  Muir,  in  Old  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i.  p.  159,  reviewing  the  texts 
which  he  had  cited  on  this  subject,  says  : — '  First,  we  have  the  set  of 
accounts  in  which  the  four  castes  are  said  to  have  sprung  from  pro- 
genitors who  were  separately  created  ;  but  in  regard  to  the  manner  of 
their  creation  we  find  the  greatest  diversity  of  statement.  The  most 
common  story  is  that  the  castes  issued  from  the  mouth,  arms,  thighs, 
and  feet  of  Purusha,  or  Brahma.  The  oldest  extant  passage  in  which 
this  idea  occurs,  and  from  which  all  the  later  myths  of  a  similar  tenor 
have  no  doubt  been  borrowed,  is  to  be  found  in  the  Purusha  Sukta  ;  but 
it  is  doubtful  whether,  in  the  form  in  which  it  is  there  represented,  this 
representation  is  anything  more  than  an  allegory.  In  some  of  the  texts 
from  the  Bhagavata  Purana  traces  of  the  same  allegorical  character 
may  be  perceived  ;  but  in  Manu  and  the  Puranas  the  mystical  import 
of  the  Yedic  text  disappears,  and  the  figurative  narration  is  hardened 
into  a  literal  statement  of  fact.  In  the  chapters  of  the  Vishnu,  Vayu, 
and  Miirkandeya  Puranas,  where  castes  arc  described  as  coeval  with 


CASTE  IN  THE  PURANAS  45 

unceasing  obligation  as  the  Hindus  are  to  respect  its  usages, 
new  and  strange  customs  are  things  unheard  of  in  their 
country.  Any  person  who  attempted  to  introduce  such 
innovations  would  excite  universal  resentment  and  opposi- 
tion, and  would  be  branded  as  a  dangerous  person.     The 

creation,  and  as  having  been  naturally  distinguished  by  different  guruu, 
or  qualities,  involving  varieties  of  moral  character,  we  are  nevertheless 
allowed  to  infer  that  those  qualities  exerted  no  influence  on  the  classes 
in  which  they  were  inherent,  as  the  condition  of  the  whole  race  during 
the  Krita  age  is  described  as  one  of  uniform  perfection  and  happiness  ; 
while  the  actual  separation  into  castes  did  not  take  place,  according  to 
the  Vayu  Purana,  until  men  had  become  deteriorated  in  the  Treta  age. 

'  Second,  in  various  passages  from  the  Brahmanas  epic  poems,  and 
Puranas,  the  creation  of  mankind  is  described  without  the  least  allusion 
to  any  separate  production  of  the  progenitors  of  the  four  castes.  And 
whilst  in  the  chapters  where  they  relate  the  distinct  formations  of  the 
tastes,  the  Puranas  assign  different  natural  dispositions  to  each  class, 
they  elsewhere  represent  all  mankind  as  being  at  the  creation  uniformly 
distinguished  by  the  quality  of  passion.  In  one  text  men  are  said  to 
be  the  offspring  of  Vivasat ;  in  another  his  son  Mami  is  said  to  be  their 
progenitor,  whilst  in  a  third  they  are  said  to  be  descended  from  a  female 
of  the  same  name.  The  passage  which  declares  Manu  to  have  been  the 
father  of  the  human  race  explicitly  affirms  that  men  of  all  the  four  castes 
were  descended  from  him.  In  another  remarkable  text  the  Mahabharata 
categorically  asserts  that  originally  there  was  no  distinction  of  classes, 
the  existing  distribution  having  arisen  out  of  differences  of  character 
and  occupation.  In  these  circumstances,  we  may  fairly  conclude  that 
the  separate  origination  of  the  four  castes  was  far  from  being  an  article 
of  belief  universally  received  by  Indian  antiquity.' 

The  following  is  the  categorical  assertion  in  the  Mahabharata  (Santi 
parvan)  above  referred  to.  It  occurs  in  the  course  of  a  discussion  on 
caste  between  Bhrigu  and  Bharadwaja.  Bhrigu,  replying  to  a  question 
put  by  Bharadwaja,  says:  'The  colour  [varna)  of  the  Brahmins  was 
white  ;  that  of  the  Kshatriyas  red  ;  that  of  the  Vaisyas  yellow,  and  that 
of  the  Sudras  black.'  Bharadwaja  here  rejoins,  *  If  the  caste  {varna)  of 
the  four  classes  is  distinguished  by  their  colour  {varna),  then  a  confusion 
of  all  the  castes  is  observable.  .  .  .'  Bhrigu  replies,  '  There  is  no  differ- 
ence of  castes  :  this  world,  having  been  at  hist  created  by  Brahma 
entirely  Brahmanic,  became  (afterwards)  separated  into  tastes  in  con- 
sequence of  works.  Those  Brahmins  (lit.  twice-born  men)  who  were 
fond  of  sensual  pleasure,  fiery,  irascible,  prone  to  violence,  who  had 
forsaken  their  duty  and  were  red  limbed,  fell  into  the  condition  of 
Kshatriyas.  Those  Brahmins  who  derived  their  livelihood  from  kine, 
who  were  yellow,  who  subsisted  by  agriculture,  and  who  neglected  to 
practise  their  duties,  entered  into  the  state  of  Vaisyas.  Those  Brahmins 
who  wen-  addicted  to  mischief  and  falsehood,  who  were  COVetoUS,  who 
lived  by  all  kinds  of  work,  who  were  black  and  had  fallen  from  purity, 
sank  into  the  condition  of  Sudras.' — Ed. 


4<>  ANTIQUITY  OF  CASTE  CEREMONIES 

task,  however,  would  be  such  a  difficult  one  that  I  can 
hardly  believe  that  any  proposal  of  the  kind  would  ever 
enter  an  intelligent  person's  head.  Everything  is  always 
done  in  exactly  the  same  way  ;  even  the  minutest  details 
are  invested  with  a  solemn  importance  of  their  own,  because 
a  Hindu  is  convinced  that  it  is  only  by  paying  rigorous 
attention  to  small  details  that  more  momentous  concerns 
are  safeguarded.  Indeed,  there  is  not  another  nation  on 
earth  which  can  pride  itself  on  having  so  long  preserved 
intact  its  social  customs  and  regulations. 

The  Hindu  legislators  of  old  had  the  good  sense  to  give 
stability  to  these  customs  and  regulations  by  associating 
with  them  many  outward  ceremonies,  which,  by  fixing 
them  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  ensured  their  more  faithful 
observance.  These  ceremonies  are  invariably  observed,  and 
have  never  been  allowed  to  degenerate  into  mere  forms  that 
can  be  neglected  without  grave  consequences.  Failure  to 
perform  a  single  one  of  them,  however  unimpoitant  it 
might  appear,  would  never  go  unpunished. 

One  cannot  fail  to  remark  how  very  similar  some  of 
these  ceremonies  are  to  those  which  were  performed  long 
ago  amongst  other  nations.  Thus  the  Hindu  precepts 
about  cleanness  and  uncleanness,  as  also  the  means  em- 
ployed for  preserving  the  one  and  effacing  the  other,  are 
similar  in  many  respects  to  those  of  the  ancient  Hebrews. 
The  rule  about  marrying  in  one's  caste,  and  even  in  one's 
family,  was  specifically  imposed  upon  the  Jews  in  the  laws 
which  Moses  gave  them  from  God  \  This  rule,  too,  was 
in  force  a  long  time  before  that,  for  it  appears  to  have  been 
general  amongst  the  Chaldeans.  We  find  also  in  Holy 
Writ  that  Abraham  espoused  his  niece,  and  that  the  holy 
patriarch  sent  into  a  far  country  for  a  maiden  of  his  own 
family  as  a  wife  for  his  son  Isaac.  Again,  Isaac  and  his 
wife  Rebecca  found  it  difficult  to  pardon  their  son  Esau 
for  marrying  amongst  strangers,  that  is,  amongst  the 
Canaanites  ;  and  they  sent  their  son  Jacob  away  into 
a  distant  land  to  seek  a  wife  from  amongst  their  own 
people. 

In  the  same  way  to-day,  Hindus  residing  in  a  foreign 

1  Numbers  xxxvi.  5-12. 


TRADITIONAL  ORIGIN  OF  CASTE  47 

country  will  journey  hundreds  of  leagues  to  their  native 
land  in  search  of  wives  for  their  sons. 

Again,  as  to  the  caste  system,  Moses,  as  is  well  known, 
established  it  amongst  the  Hebrews  in  accordance  with 
the  commands  of  God.  This  holy  lawgiver  had,  during 
his  long  sojourn  in  Egypt,  observed  the  system  as  estab- 
lished in  that  country,  and  had  doubtless  recognized  the 
good  that  resulted  from  it.  Apparently,  in  executing  the 
divine  order  with  respect  to  it  he  simply  adapted  and  per- 
fected the  system  which  was  in  force  in  Egypt. 

The  Indian  caste  system  is  of  still  older  origin.  The 
Hindu  sacred  writings  record  that  the  author  of  it  was  the 
God  Brahma,  to  whom  they  attribute  the  creation  of  the 
world,  and  who  is  said  to  have  established  this  system 
when  he  peopled  the  earth.  The  Brahmins  were  the  pro- 
duct of  his  brain  ;  the  Kshatriyas  or  Rajahs  issued  from 
his  shoulders  ;  the  Vaisyas  from  his  belly  ;  and  the  Sudras 
from  his  feet. 

It  is  easy  to  understand  the  allegorical  signification  of 
this  legend,  in  which  one  can  distinctly  trace  the  relative 
degrees  of  subordination  of  the  different  castes.  The 
Brahmins,  destined  to  fulfil  the  high  functions  of  spiritual 
priesthood  and  to  show  the  way  of  salvation  to  their  fellow- 
men,  issue  from  the  head  of  the  Creator  ;  the  Kshatriyas, 
endowed  with  physical  force  and  destined  to  undergo  the 
fatigues  of  war,  have  their  origin  in  the  shoulders  and  arms 
of  Brahma  ;  the  Vaisyas,  whose  duty  it  is  to  provide  the 
food,  the  clothing,  and  other  bodily  necessities  of  man,  are 
born  in  the  belly  of  the  god  ;  and  the  Sudras,  whose  lot 
is  servitude  and  rude  labour  in  the  fields,  issue  from  his  feet. 

Besides  this  traditional  origin  of  the  different  castes, 
known  to  all  Hindus,  there  is  another  to  be  found  in  their 
books,  which  traces  the  institution  back  to  the  time  of  the 
Flood.  For,  it  should  be  noted,  this  terrible  world-renovat  - 
ing  disaster  is  as  well  known  to  the  Hindus  as  it  was  to 
Moses.  On  this  important  subject,  however,  I  shall  have 
more  to  say  subsequently ;  suffice  it  to  remark  that  a 
celebrated  personage,  reverenced  by  the  Hindus,  and 
known  to  them  as  Mahanuvu,  escaped  the  calamity  in  an 
ark,  in  which  were  also  the  seven  famous  Penitents  of 
India.     After  the  Flood,  according  to  Hindu  writers,  this 


4S  CASTE  SUBDIVISIONS 

saviour  of  the  human  race  divided  mankind  into  different 
castes,  as  they  exist  at  the  present  day  *. 

The  many  subdivisions  into  which  these  four  great 
original  castes  were  broken  up  date  undoubtedly  from 
later  times.  They  were  due  to  the  absolute  necessity  of 
assigning  to  each  person  in  a  special  manner  his  particular 
place  in  the  social  organization.  There  are  some  Hindu 
authors  who  assert  that  the  individuals  composing  the  first 
ramifications  of  the  large  Sudra  caste  were  the  bastard 
offspring  of  the  other  higher  castes,  and  owed  their  origin 
to  illicit  intercourse  with  the  widows  of  the  four  great 
caste  divisions.  It  is  said  that  these  bastard  children, 
born  of  a  Brahmin  father  and  a  Kshatriya  mother,  or  of 
a  Vaisya  father  and  a  Sudra  mother,  &c,  were  not  recog- 
nized by  any  of  the  four  primary  castes,  and  so  they  were 
placed  in  other  caste  categories  and  were  assigned  special 
employments,  more  or  less  humble,  according  to  their 
extraction. 

A  few  of  these  many  subdivisions  are  said  to  be  of  quite 
recent  origin.  For  instance,  the  five  artisan  classes  are 
said  to  have  originally  formed  only  one  class,  as  also  the 
barbers  and  washermen,  the  Gollavarus  and  Kurubas,  and 
a  large  number  of  others  who  in  recent  times  have  split  up 
into  new  sub-castes. 

CHAPTER  V 

The  Lower  Classes  of  Sudras. — Pariahs. — Chucklers,  or  Cobblers,  and 
others  equally  low. — Contempt  in  which  they  are  held. — Pariahs 
strictly  speaking  Slaves. — Washermen,  Barbers,  and  some  others. — 
Disrepute  into  which  Mechanical  Skill  has  fallen. — Nomads  and 
Vagabonds. — Gypsies. — Quacks. — Jugglers. — Wild  Tribes,  &c. 

We  have  already  remarked  that  amongst  the  immense 
number  of  classes  of  which  the  Sudra  caste  is  composed,  it 
is  impossible  to  give  precedence  to  any  one  class  in  par- 
ticular ;  the  natives  themselves  not  being  agreed  on  that 
point,  and  the  social  scale  varying  in  different  parts  of  the 
country.  There  are  certain  classes,  however,  who,  owing 
to  the  depth  of  degradation  into  which  they  have  fallen, 

1  The  appellation  Mahanuim  is  well  worthy  of  remark.  It  is  a  com- 
pound of  two  words — Maha  great,  and  Nuvu,  which  undoubtedly  is 
the  same  as  Noah. — Dubois. 


THE    PARIAH    CAST  10  19 

are  looked  upon  as  almost  another  race  of  beings,  altogether 
outside  the  pale  of  society  ;  and  they  are  perfectly  ready 
to  acknowledge  their  own  comparative  inferiority.  The 
best  known  and  most  numerous  of  these  castes  is  the 
Parayer,  as  it  is  called  in  Tamil,  the  word  from  which  the 
European  name  Pariah  is  derived  l.  The  particulars  which 
I  am  about  to  give  of  this  class  will  form  most  striking 
contrasts  with  those  I  shall  relate  subsequently  about  the 
Brahmins,  and  will  serve  to  demonstrate  a  point  to  which 
I  shall  often  refer,  namely,  how  incapable  the  Hindus  are 
of  showing  any  moderation  in  their  caste  customs  and 
observances. 

Their  contempt  and  aversion  for  these  social  outcastes 
are  as  extreme,  on  the  one  hand,  as  are  the  respect  and 
veneration  which  they  pay,  on  the  other,  to  those  whom 
their  superstitions  have  invested  with  god-like  attributes. 
Throughout  the  whole  of  India  the  Pariahs  are  looked  upon 
as  slaves  by  other  castes,  and  are  treated  with  great  harsh- 
ness. Hardly  anywhere  are  they  allowed  to  cultivate  the 
soil  for  their  own  benefit,  but  are  obliged  to  hire  themselves 
out  to  the  other  castes,  who  in  return  for  a  minimum  wage 
exact  the  hardest  tasks  from  them. 

Furthermore,  their  masters  may  beat  them  at  pleasure  ; 
the  poor  wretches  having  no  right  either  to  complain  or 
to  obtain  redress  for  that  or  any  other  ill-treatment  their 
masters  may  impose  on  them.  In  fact,  these  Pariahs  are 
the  born  slaves  of  India  ;  and  had  I  to  choose  between 
the  two  sad  fates  of  being  a  slave  in  one  of  our  colonies 
or  a  Pariah  here,  I  should  unhesitatingly  prefer  the  former. 

This  class  is  the  most  numerous  of  all,  and  in  conjunc- 
tion with  that  of  the  Chucklers,  or  cobblers,  represents  at 
least  a  quarter  of  the  population.  It  is  painful  to  think 
that  its  members,  though  so  degraded,  are  yet  the  most 
useful  of  all.  On  them  the  whole  agricultural  work  of  the 
country  devolves  2,  and  they  have  also  other  tasks  to  per- 
forin which  are  still  harder  and  more  indispensable. 

1  Parayen  means  one  that  beats  the  drum  [parai).—  Ed. 

2  This  is  the  case  only  in  certain  districts  of  Southern  [ndia,  such  as 
Chingleput  and  Tanjore.  An  appreciable  percentage  »>!  the  Pariah-, 
has  now  migrated  to  the  towns,  where  they  serve  as  domestic  servants 
in  European  and  Eurasian  households.— Ed. 


50  ABJECT  CONDITION   OF   PARIAHS 

However,  notwithstanding  the  miserable  condition  of 
these  wretched  Pariahs,  they  are  never  heard  to  murmur, 
or  to  complain  of  their  low  estate.  Still  less  do  they  ever 
dream  of  trying  to  improve  their  lot,  by  combining  together, 
and  forcing  the  other  classes  to  treat  them  with  that 
common  respect  which  one  man  owes  to  another.  The 
idea  that  he  was  born  to  be  in  subjection  to  the  other 
castes  is  so  ingrained  in  his  mind  that  it  never  occurs  to 
the  Pariah  to  think  that  his  fate  is  anything  but  irrevocable. 
Nothing  will  ever  persuade  him  that  men  are  all  made  of 
the  same  clay,  or  that  he  has  the  right  to  insist  on  better 
treatment  than  that  which  is  meted  out  to  him  1 . 

They  live  in  hopeless  poverty,  and  the  greater  number 
lack  sufficient  means  to  procure  even  the  coarsest  clothing. 
They  go  about  almost  naked,  or  at  best  clothed  in  the 
most  hideous  rags. 

They  live  from  hand  to  mouth  the  whole  year  round, 
and  rarely  know  one  day  how  they  will  procure  food  for 
the  next.  When  they  happen  to  have  any  money,  they 
invariably  spend  it  at  once,  and  make  a  point  of  doing  no 
work  as  long  as  they  have  anything  left  to  live  on. 

In  a  few  districts  they  are  allowed  to  cultivate  the  soil 
on  their  own  account,  but  in  such  cases  they  are  almost 
always  the  poorest  of  their  class.  Pariahs  who  hire  them- 
selves out  as  labourers  earn,  at  any  rate,  enough  to  live 
on  ;  and  their  food,  though  often  of  the  coarsest  description, 
is  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  hunger.  But  those 
who  are  their  own  masters,  and  cultivate  land  for  them- 
selves, are  so  indolent  and  careless  that  their  harvests, 
even  in  the  most  favourable  seasons,  are  only  sufficient  to 
feed  them  for  half  the  year. 

The  contempt  and  aversion  with  which  the  other  castes 
— and  particularly  the  Brahmins — regard  these  unfortunate 
people  are  carried  to  such  an  excess  that  in  many  places 
their  presence,  or  even  their  footprints,  are  considered 
sufficient  to  defile  the  whole  neighbourhood.  They  are 
forbidden  to  cross  a  street  in  which  Brahmins  are  living. 

1  The  Christian  missionaries  in  India  have  done  and  are  doing  much 
to  elevate  the  condition  and  character  of  this  class.  In  Madras  city 
there  are  now  Pariah  associations,  and  also  a  journal  specially  represent- 
ing; Pariah  interests. — Ed. 


DEFILEMENT  BY  CONTACT  WITH    PARIAHS   51 

Should  they  be  so  ill-advised  as  to  do  so.  the  Latter  would 
have  the  right,  not  to  strike  them  themselves,  because 
they  could  not  do  so  without  defilement,  or  even  touch 
them  with  the  end  of  a  long  stick,  but  to  order  them  to  be 
severely  beaten  by  other  people.  A  Pariah  who  had  the 
audacity  to  enter  a  Brahmin's  house  might  possibly  be 
murdered  on  the  spot.  A  revolting  crime  of  this  sort  has 
been  actually  perpetrated  in  States  under  the  rule  of  native 
princes  without  a  voice  being  raised  in  expostulation  \ 

Any  one  who  has  been  touched,  whether  inadvertently 
or  purposely,  by  a  Pariah  is  defiled  by  that  single  act, 
and  may  hold  no  communication  with  any  person  what- 
soever until  he  has  been  purified  by  bathing,  or  by  other 
ceremonies  more  or  less  important  according  to  the  status 
and  customs  of  his  caste.  It  would  be  contamination  to 
eat  with  any  members  of  this  class  ;  to  touch  food  pre- 
pared by  them,  or  even  to  drink  water  which  they  have 
drawn  ;  to  use  an  earthen  vessel  which  they  have  held  in 
their  hands  ;  to  set  foot  inside  one  of  their  houses,  or  to 
allow  them  to  enter  houses  other  than  their  own.  Each 
of  these  acts  would  contaminate  the  person  affected  by  it, 
and  before  being  readmitted  to  his  own  caste  such  a  person 
would  have  to  go  through  many  exacting  and  expensive 
formalities.  Should  it  be  proved  that  any  one  had  had 
any  connexion  with  a  Pariah  woman  he  would  be  treated 
with  even  greater  severity.  Nevertheless,  the  disgust  which 
these  Pariahs  inspire  is  not  so  intense  in  some  parts  of  the 
country  as  in  others.  The  feeling  is  most  strongly  developed 
in  the  southern  and  western  districts  of  the  Peninsula  ;  in 
the  north  it  is  less  apparent.  In  the  northern  part  of 
Mysore  the  other  classes  of  Sudras  allow  Pariahs  to  ap- 
proach them,  and  even  permit  them  to  enter  that  part  of 
the  house  which  is  used  for  cattle.  Indeed,  in  some  places 
custom  is  so  far  relaxed  that  a  Pariah  may  venture  to  put 
his  head  and  one  foot,  but  one  foot  only,  inside  the  room 

1  Even  to  this  day  a  Pariah  is  not  allowed  to  pass  a  Brahmin  Btreel 
in  a  village,  though  nobody  can  prevent,  or  prevents,  his  approaching 
or  passing  by  a  Brahmin's  house  in  towns.  The  Pariahs,  on  their  part, 
will  under  no  circumstances  allow  a  Brahmin  to  pass  through  their 
jxircherries  (collections  of  Pariah  huts),  as  they  firmly  believe  that  it 
will  lead  to  their  ruin. — Ed. 


52  THE   ORIGIN  OF  PARIAHS 

occupied  by  the  master  of  the  house.  It  is  said  that  still 
further  north  the  difference  between  this  and  other  Sudra 
castes  gradually  diminishes,  until  at  last  it  disappears 
altogether. 

The  origin  of  this  degraded  class  can  be  traced  to  a  very 
early  period,  as  it  is  mentioned  in  the  most  ancient  Puranas. 
The  Pariahs  were  most  probably  composed,  in  the  first 
instance,  of  all  the  disreputable  individuals  of  different 
classes  of  society,  who,  on  account  of  various  offences,  had 
forfeited  their  right  to  associate  with  respectable  men. 
They  formed  a  class  apart,  and  having  nothing  to  fear  and 
less  to  lose,  they  gave  themselves  up,  without  restraint,  to 
their  natural  tendencies  towards  vice  and  excess,  in  which 
they  continue  to  live  at  the  present  day. 

In  very  early  days,  however,  the  separation  between 
Pariahs  and  the  other  castes  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
so  marked  as  at  present.  Though  relegated  to  the  lowest 
grade  in  the  social  scale,  they  were  not  then  placed  abso- 
lutely outside  and  beyond  it,  the  line  of  demarcation 
between  them  and  the  Sudras  being  almost  imperceptible. 
Indeed,  they  are  even  to  this  day  considered  to  be  the 
direct  descendants  of  the  better  class  of  agricultural 
labourers.  The  Tamil  Vellalers  and  the  Okkala-makkalu- 
kanarey  do  not  disdain  to  call  them  their  children.  But 
one  thing  is  quite  certain,  that  if  these  classes  share  a 
common  origin  with  the  Pariahs  and  acknowledge  the 
same,  their  actions  by  no  means  corroborate  their  words, 
and  their  treatment  of  the  Pariahs  leaves  much  to  be 
desired. 

Europeans  are  obliged  to  have  Pariahs  for  their  servants, 
because  no  native  of  any  other  caste  would  condescend  to 
do  such  menial  work  as  is  exacted  by  their  masters.  For 
instance,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  find  amongst  the 
Sudras  any  one  who  would  demean  himself  by  blacking  or 
greasing  boots  and  shoes,  emptying  and  cleansing  chamber 
utensils,  brushing  and  arranging  hair,  &c.  ;  and  certainly 
no  one  could  be  found  who  for  any  consideration  whatever 
would  consent  to  cook  food  for  them,  as  this  would  necessi- 
tate touching  beef,  which  is  constantly  to  be  seen  on  the 
tables  of  Europeans,  who  thereby  show  an  open  disregard 
of  the  feelings  and  prejudices  of  the  people  amongst  whom 


PARIAHS  AS   DOMESTIC  SERVANTS  :>:>> 

they  live.  Foreigners  are  therefore  obliged  to  have  recourse 
to  Pariahs  to  perform  this  important  domestic  service.  If 
the  kind  of  food  which  they  do  not  scruple  to  eat  lowers 
Europeans  in  the  eyes  of  the  superstitious  native,  much 
more  are  they  lowered  by  the  social  status  of  the  people 
by  whom  they  are  served.  For  it  is  a  fact  recognized  by 
all  Hindus  that  none  but  a  Pariah  would  dare  to  eat  food 
prepared  by  Pariahs. 

It  is  undeniable  that  this  want  of  consideration  on  the 
part  of  Europeans — or  rather  the  necessity  to  which  they 
are  reduced  of  employing  Pariahs  as  servants — renders 
them  most  obnoxious  to  other  classes  of  natives,  and 
greatly  diminishes  the  general  respect  for  the  white  man. 
It  being  impossible  to  procure  servants  of  a  better  caste, 
foreigners  have  of  necessity  to  put  up  with  members  of 
this  inferior  class,  who  are  dishonest,  incapable  of  any 
attachment  to  their  masters,  and  unworthy  of  confidence. 
Sudras  who  become  servants  of  Europeans  are  almost  in- 
variably vicious  and  unprincipled,  as  devoid  of  all  feeling 
of  honour  as  they  are  wanting  in  resource  ;  in  fact,  they 
are  the  scum  of  their  class  and  of  society  at  large.  No 
respectable  or  self-respecting  Sudra  would  ever  consent  to 
enter  a  service  where  he  would  be  in  danger  of  being  mis- 
taken for  a  Pariah,  or  would  have  to  consort  with  Pariahs. 
Amongst  other  reasons  which  contribute  largely  to  the 
dislike  that  natives  of  a  better  class  entertain  for  domestic 
service  under  Europeans,  is  the  feeling  that  their  masters 
keep  them  at  such  a  great  distance,  and  are  generally 
haughty  and  even  cruel  in  their  demeanour  towards  them. 
But  above  all  things  they  dread  being  kicked  by  a  Euro- 
pean, not  because  this  particular  form  of  ill-treatment  is 
physically  more  painful  than  any  other,  but  because  they 
have  a  horror  of  being  defiled  by  contact  with  anything  so 
unclean  as  a  leather  boot  or  shoe.  Pariahs,  accustomed 
from  their  childhood  to  slavery,  put  up  patiently  with 
affronts  of  this  kind  which  other  natives,  who  have  more 
pride  and  self-respect,  are  unable  to  endure. 

Under  other  circumstances,  it  should  be  remarked, 
domestic  service  in  India  is  by  no  means  regarded  as 
degrading.  The  servant  has  his  meals  with  his  master, 
the  maid  with  her  mistress,  and  both  go  through  life  on 


54  OCCUPATIONS   OP  PARIAHS 

an  almost  equal  footing.  The  conduct  of  Europeans  being 
in  this  respect  so  totally  different,  natives  who  have  any 
sense  of  decency  or  self-respect  feel  the  greatest  repugnance 
to  taking  service  with  them.  One  cannot  wonder  therefore 
that  only  the  very  dregs  of  the  population  will  undertake 
the  work. 

But  to  return  to  the  Pariahs.  One  is  bound  to  confess 
that  the  evil  reputation  which  is  borne  by  this  class  is  in 
many  respects  well  deserved,  by  reason  of  the  low  conduct 
and  habits  of  its  members.  A  great  many  of  these  un- 
fortunate people  bind  themselves  for  life,  with  their  wives 
and  children,  to  the  ryots,  or  agricultural  classes,  who  set 
them  to  the  hardest  labour  and  treat  them  with  the  greatest 
harshness.  The  village  scavengers,  who  are  obliged  to 
clean  out  the  public  latrines,  to  sweep  the  streets,  and 
to  remove  all  rubbish,  invariably  belong  to  this  class. 
These  men,  known  in  the  south  by  the  name  of  totis,  are, 
however,  generally  somewhat  more  humanely  treated  than 
the  other  Pariahs,  because,  in  addition  to  the  dirty  work 
above  mentioned,  they  are  employed  in  letting  the  water 
into  the  tanks  and  channels  for  irrigating  the  rice  fields  ; 
and  on  this  account  they  are  treated  with  some  considera- 
tion by  the  rest  of  the  villagers.  Amongst  the  Pariahs 
who  are  not  agricultural  slaves  there  are  some  who  groom 
and  feed  the  horses  of  private  individuals,  or  those  used 
in  the  army  ;  some  are  in  charge  of  elephants  ;  others  tend 
cattle  ;  others  are  messengers  and  carriers  ;  while  others, 
again,  do  ordinary  manual  work.  Within  recent  times 
Pariahs  have  been  allowed  to  enlist  in  the  European  and 
Native  armies,  and  some  of  them  have  risen  to  high  rank, 
for  in  point  of  courage  and  bravery  they  are  in  no  way 
inferior  to  any  other  caste.  Yet  their  bringing  up  puts  them 
at  a  great  disadvantage  in  acquiring  other  qualifications 
necessary  for  the  making  of  a  good  soldier,  for  they  are 
induced  with  difficulty  to  conform  to  military  discipline, 
and  are  absolutely  deficient  in  all  sense  of  honour  \ 

Pariahs,  being  thus  convinced  that  they  have  nothing  to 

1  The  Abbe  is  too  sweeping  in  many  of  his  statements  about  Pariahs. 
For  instance,  in  these  days  at  any  rate,  the  Pariah  Sepoys  in  the  Madras 
army  are  extremely  well  disciplined,  especially  the  corps  of  Sappers. 
—Ed. 


THEIR   VICE  AND   UNCLEANLINESS 

lose  or  gain  in  public  estimation,  abandon  themselves 
without  shame  or  restraint  to  vice  of  all  kinds,  and  the 
greatest  lawlessness  prevails  amongst  them,  for  which  they 
do  not  feel  the  least  shame.  One  might  almost  say  that, 
in  the  matter  of  vice,  they  outstrip  all  others  in  brutality, 
as  the  Brahmins  do  in  malice.  Their  habits  of  uncleanli- 
ness  are  disgusting.  Their  huts,  a  mass  of  filth  and  alive 
with  insects  and  vermin,  are,  if  possible,  even  more  loath- 
some than  their  persons.  Their  harsh  and  forbidding 
features  clearly  reveal  their  character,  but  even  these  are 
an  insufficient  indication  of  the  coarseness  of  their  minds 
and  manners.  They  are  much  addicted  to  drunkenness, 
a  vice  peculiarly  abhorrent  to  other  Hindus.  They  in- 
toxicate themselves  usually  with  the  juice  of  the  palm- 
tree,  called  toddy,  which  they  drink  after  it  has  fermented, 
and  it  is  then  more  spirituous.  In  spite  of  its  horrible 
stench  they  imbibe  it  as  if  the  nauseous  liquid  were  nectar. 
Drunken  quarrels  are  of  frequent  occurrence  amongst 
them,  and  their  wives  are  often  sufferers,  the  unhappy 
creatures  being  nearly  beaten  to  death,  even  when  in 
a  state  of  pregnancy.  It  is  to  this  brutality  and  violence 
of  their  husbands  that  I  attribute  the  frequent  miscarriages 
to  which  Pariah  wives  are  subject,  and  which  are  much 
more  common  amongst  them  than  amongst  women  of  any 
other  caste. 

What  chiefly  disgusts  other  natives  is  the  revolting 
nature  of  the  food  which  the  Pariahs  eat.  Attracted  by 
the  smell,  they  will  collect  in  crowds  round  any  carrion, 
and  contend  for  the  spoil  with  dogs,  jackals,  crows,  and 
other  carnivorous  animals.  They  then  divide  the  semi- 
putrid  flesh,  and  carry  it  away  to  their  huts,  where  they 
devour  it,  often  without  rice  or  anything  else  to  disguise 
the  flavour.  That  the  animal  should  have  died  of  disease 
is  of  no  consequence  to  them,  and  they  sometimes  secretly 
poison  cows  or  buffaloes  that  they  may  subsequently  feast 
on  the  foul,  putrefying  remains.  The  carcases  of  animals 
that  die  in  a  village  belong  by  right  to  the  toti  or  scavenger, 
who  sells  the  flesh  at  a  very  low  price  to  the  other  Pariahs 
in  the  neighbourhood.  When  it  is  impossible  to  consume 
in  one  day  the  stock  of  meat  thus  obtained,  they  dry  the 
remainder  in  the  sun,  and  keep  it  in  their  huts  until  they 


56  FOOD   EATEN   BY   PARIAHS 

run  short  of  olhcr  food.  There  arc  few  Pariah  houses 
where  one  does  not  see  festoons  of  these  horrible  fragments 

hanging  up  ;  and  though  the  Pariahs  themselves  do  not 
seem  to  be  affected  by  the  smell,  travellers  passing  near 
their  villages  quickly  perceive  it  and  can  tell  at  once  the 
caste  of  the  people  living  there.  This  horrible  food  is, 
no  doubt,  the  cause  of  the  greater  part  of  the  contagious 
diseases  which  decimate  them,  and  from  which  their  neigh- 
bours are  free. 

Is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  after  what  has  just  been  stated, 
that  other  castes  should  hold  this  in  abhorrence  ?  Can 
they  be  blamed  for  refusing  to  hold  any  communication 
with  such  savages,  or  for  obliging  them  to  keep  themselves 
aloof  and  to  live  in  separate  hamlets  ?  It  is  true  that  with 
regard  to  these  Pariahs  the  other  Hindus  are  apt  to  carry 
their  views  to  excess  ;  but  as  we  have  already  pointed  out, 
and  shall  often  have  to  point  out  again,  the  natural  in- 
stinct of  the  natives  of  India  seems  to  run  to  extremes  in 
all  cases. 

The  condition  of  the  Pariahs,  which  is  not  really  slavery 
as  it  is  known  amongst  us,  resembles  to  a  certain  extent 
that  of  the  serfs  of  France  and  other  countries  of  Northern 
Europe  in  olden  times.  This  state  of  bondage  is  at  its 
worst  along  the  coast  of  Malabar,  as  are  several  other 
customs  peculiar  to  the  country  *.  The  reason  is  that 
Malabar,  owing  to  its  position,  has  generally  escaped  the 
invasions  and  revolutions  which  have  so  often  devastated 
the  rest  of  India,  and  has  thus  managed  to  preserve  un- 
altered many  ancient  institutions,  which  in  other  parts 
have  fallen  into  disuse. 

Of  these  the  two  most  remarkable  are  proprietary  rights 
and  slavery.  These  two  systems  are  apparently  insepar- 
able one  from  the  other  :  and,  indeed,  one  may  well  say, 
no  land  without  lord.  All  the  Pariahs  born  in  the  country 
are  serfs  for  life,  from  father  to  son,  and  are  part  and  parcel 
of  the  land  on  which  they  are  born.  The  land-owner  can 
sell  them  along  with  the  soil,  and  can  dispose  of  them  when 
and  how  he  pleases.  This  proprietary  right  and  this 
system  of  serfdom  have  existed  from  the  remotest  times, 

1  Things  in  this  respect  have,  of  course,  changed  a  great  deal  for  the 
better  since  the  Abbe  wrote. — Ed. 


PARIAH   SLAVERY  57 

and  exist  still  amongst  the  Nairs,  the  Coorgs,  and  the 
Tulus,  the  three  aboriginal  tribes  of  the  Malabar  coast. 
This  is,  I  believe,  the  only  province  in  India  where  pro- 
prietary right  has  been  preserved  intact  until  the  present 
day.  Everywhere  else  the  soil  belongs  to  the  ruler,  and 
the  cultivator  is  merely  his  tenant.  The  lands  which  he 
tills  are  given  to  him  or  taken  away  from  him  according 
to  the  wrill  of  the  Government  for  the  time  being.  On 
the  Malabar  coast,  however,  the  lands  belong  to  those 
who  have  inherited  them  from  their  forefathers,  and  these 
in  their  turn  possess  the  right  of  handing  them  down  to 
their  descendants.  Here  the  lands  may  be  alienated,  sold, 
given  away,  or  disposed  of  according  to  the  will  of  the 
owners.  In  a  word,  the  jus  utendi  et  abutendi,  which  is  the 
basis  of  proprietary  right,  belongs  entirely  to  them.  Every 
landed  proprietor  in  that  country  possesses  a  community 
of  Pariahs  to  cultivate  his  fields,  who  are  actually  his 
slaves  and  form  an  integral  part  of  his  property.  All 
children  born  of  these  Pariahs  are  serfs  by  birth,  just  as 
their  parents  were  ;  and  their  master  has  the  right,  if  he 
choose,  to  sell  or  dispose  of  parents  and  children  in  any 
way  that  he  pleases.  If  one  of  these  Pariahs  escapes  and 
takes  service  under  another  master,  his  real  master  can 
recover  him  anywhere  as  his  own  property.  If  a  proprietor 
happens  to  possess  more  slaves  than  he  requires  for  cultivat- 
ing his  land,  he  sells  some  to  other  landlords  who  are  less 
fortunate  than  himself.  It  is  by  no  means  uncommon  to 
see  a  debtor,  who  is  unable  to  pay  his  debts  in  hard  cash, 
satisfy  his  creditors  by  handing  over  to  them  a  number  of 
his  Pariah  slaves.  The  price  of  these  is  not  exorbitant. 
A  male  still  young  enough  to  work  will  fetch  three  rupees 
and  a  hundred  seers  of  rice,  which  is  about  the  value  of 
a  bullock. 

But  the  landed  proprietors  do  not  usually  sell  their 
slaves  except  in  cases  of  great  emergency  ;  and  even  then 
they  can  only  sell  them  within  the  borders  of  their  own 
country.  In  no  case  have  they  a  right  to  export  them 
for  sale  to  foreigners. 

Each  land- owner  in  the  province  of  Malabar  lives  in 
a  house  that  is  isolated  in  the  middle  of  his  estate.  Here 
he  dwells,  surrounded  by  his  community  of  Pariah  serfs, 


58  HUMANE   TREATMENT  OF  SLAVES 

who  are  always  remarkably  submissive  to  him.  Some 
land-owners  possess  over  a  hundred  of  them.  They  treat 
them  usually  in  the  most  humane  manner.  They  give 
them  only  such  work  as  their  age  or  strength  permits  ; 
feed  them  on  the  same  rice  that  they  themselves  eat  ;  give 
them  in  marriage  when  they  come  of  age  ;  and  every  year 
provide  them  with  clothing,  four  or  five  yards  of  cloth  for 
the  women  and  a  coarse  woollen  blanket  for  the  men. 

In  Malabar  it  is  only  the  Pariahs  who  are  thus  con- 
demned to  perpetual  slavery  ;  but  then  there  are  no  free 
men  amongst  them.  All  are  born  slaves  from  generation 
to  generation.  They  have  not  even  a  right  to  buy  their 
own  freedom  ;  and  if  they  wish  to  secure  their  indepen- 
dence they  can  only  do  so  by  escaping  secretly  from  the 
country.  All  the  same,  I  have  not  heard  that  they  often 
resort  to  this  extremity.  They  are  accustomed  from  father 
to  son  to  this  state  of  servitude  ;  they  are  kindly  treated 
by  their  masters  ;  they  eat  the  same  food  as  they  do  ; 
they  are  never  forced  to  do  tasks  beyond  their  strength  ; 
and  thus  they  have  no  notion  of  what  freedom  or  inde- 
pendence means,  and  are  happily  resigned  to  their  lot. 
They  look  upon  their  master  as  their  father,  and  consider 
themselves  to  belong  to  his  family.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
their  physical  condition,  which  is  the  only  thing  that  appeals 
to  their  senses,  is  much  better  than  that  of  their  brethren 
who  are  free.  At  any  rate,  the  Pariah  slave  of  Malabar  is 
certain  of  a  living,  the  supreme  requirement  of  nature, 
whereas  the  free  Pariah  of  other  provinces  lives  for  half 
his  time  in  actual  want  of  the  meanest  subsistence,  and  is 
often  exposed  to  death  from  starvation  l. 

It  is  indeed  a  piteous  sight,  the  abject  and  half-starved 
condition  in  which  this  wretched  caste,  the  most  numerous 
of  all,  drags  out  its  existence.     It  is  true  that  amongst 

1  The  slaves  spoken  of  here  are  not  Pariahs  but  Cherumars,  who  claim 
to  be  somewhat  superior  in  rank  to  the  Pariahs.  From  1792  the  East 
India  Company  steadily  endeavoured  to  emancipate  the  Cherumars.  In 
1843  an  Emancipation  Act  was  passed,  but  it  was  explained  to  the 
Cherumars  that  it  was  their  interest,  as  well  as  their  duty,  to  remain 
with  their  masters  if  treated  kindly.  '  Sections  370,  371,  &c.  of  the 
Indian  Penal  Code,'  writes  Mr.  Logan  in  his  Malabar  Manual,  'which 
came  into  force  on  Jan.  1,  1862,  dealt  the  real  final  blow  at  slavery  in 
India.' — Ed. 


PARIAH   IMPROVIDENCE  59 

Pariahs  it  is  an  invariable  rule,  almost  a  point  of  honour, 
to  spend  everything  they  earn  and  to  take  no  thought  for 
the  morrow.  The  majority  of  them,  men  and  women, 
are  never  clothed  in  anything  but  old  rags.  But  in  order 
to  obtain  a  true  idea  of  their  abject  misery  one  must  live 
amongst  them,  as  I  have  been  obliged  to  do.  About  half 
of  my  various  congregations  consisted  of  Pariah  Christians. 
Wherever  I  went  I  was  constantly  called  in  to  administer 
the  last  consolations  of  religion  to  people  of  this  class. 
On  reaching  the  hut  to  which  my  duty  led  me,  I  was  often 
obliged  to  creep  in  on  my  hands  and  knees,  so  low  was 
the  entrance  door  to  the  wretched  hovel.  When  once 
inside,  I  could  only  partially  avoid  the  sickening  smell  by 
holding  to  my  nose  a  handkerchief  soaked  in  the  strongest 
vinegar.  I  would  find  there  a  mere  skeleton,  perhaps 
lying  on  the  bare  ground,  though  more  often  crouching  on 
a  rotten  piece  of  matting,  with  a  stone  or  a  block  of  wood 
as  a  pillow.  The  miserable  creature  would  have  for  cloth- 
ing a  rag  tied  round  the  loins,  and  for  covering  a  coarse 
and  tattered  blanket  that  left  half  the  body  naked.  I 
would  seat  myself  on  the  ground  by  his  side,  and  the  first 
words  I  heard  would  be  :  '  Father,  I  am  dying  of  cold  and 
hunger.'  I  would  spend  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  so  by 
him,  and  at  last  leave  this  sad  spectacle  with  my  heart 
torn  asunder  by  the  sadness  and  hopelessness  of  it  all, 
and  my  body  covered  in  every  part  with  insects  and  vermin. 
Yet,  after  all,  this  was  the  least  inconvenience  that  I  suffered, 
for  I  could  rid  myself  of  them  by  changing  my  clothes  and 
taking  a  hot  bath.  The  only  thing  that  really  afflicted  me 
was  having  to  stand  face  to  face  with  such  a  spectacle  of 
utter  misery  and  all  its  attendant  horrors,  and  possessing 
no  means  of  affording  any  save  the  most  inadequate 
remedies. 

Oh  !  if  those  who  are  blessed  with  this  world's  goods, 
and  who  are  so  inclined  to  create  imaginary  troubles  for 
themselves  because  they  have  no  real  ones  ;  if  the  dis- 
contented and  ambitious  who  are  always  ready  to  grumble 
and  complain  of  their  fate,  because  perchance  they  have 
only  the  mere  necessaries  and  are  unable  to  procure  the 
luxuries  and  pleasures  of  life  ;  if  they  would  only  pause 
for  a  moment  and  contemplate  this  harrowing  picture  of 


(50  THE   PALLERS 

want  and  misery,  liovv  much  more  gratefully  would  they 
appreciate  the  lot  that  Providence  has  assigned  to  them  ! 

As  for  myself,  for  the  first  ten  or  twelve  years  that 
1  was  in  India,  I  lived  in  such  abject  poverty  that  I  had 
hardly  sufficient  means  to  procure  the  bare  necessaries  of 
life  ;  but  even  then  I  was  as  happy  and  contented  as  I  am 
now  that  I  am  better  off.  Besides  the  consolations  which 
my  religion  gave  me  under  these  trying  circumstances,  my 
reason  found  me  others  in  the  reflection  that  nineteen- 
twentieths  of  the  people  among  whom  I  was  living  were 
bearing  far  greater  trials  of  all  kinds  than  any  that  I  was 
called  on  to  endure. 

Besides  the  Pariahs,  who  are  to  be  found  all  over  the 
Peninsula,  there  are  in  certain  provinces  other  clashes 
composed  of  individuals  who  equal  and  even  surpass  them 
in  depravity  of  mind  and  customs,  and  in  the  contempt 
in  which  they  are  held.  Such,  for  instance,  is  the  caste 
of  Palters,  who  are  only  found  in  Madura  and  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Cape  Comorin.  The  Pallers  consider  them- 
selves superior  to  the  Pariahs,  inasmuch  as  they  do  not 
eat  the  flesh  of  the  cow  ;  but  the  Pariahs  look  on  them 
as  altogether  their  inferiors,  because  they  are  the  scum  of 
the  Left-hand  faction,  whilst  they  themselves  are  the 
mainstay  of  the  Right-hand. 

These  two  classes  of  degraded  beings  can  never  agree, 
and  wherever  they  are  found  in  fairly  equal  numbers,  the 
disputes  and  quarrels  amongst  them  are  interminable. 
They  lead  the  same  sort  of  life,  enjoy  an  equal  share  of 
public  opprobrium,  and  both  are  obliged  to  live  far  apart 
from  all  other  classes  of  the  inhabitants. 

Amongst  the  forests  on  the  Malabar  coast  there  lives 
a  tribe  which,  incredible  as  it  may  seem,  surpasses  the  two 
of  which  I  have  just  spoken  in  degradation  and  squalid 
misery.  They  are  called  Puliahs,  and  are  looked  upon  as 
below  the  level  of  the  beasts  which  share  this  wild  country 
with  them.  They  are  not  even  allowed  to  build  them- 
selves huts  to  protect  themselves  from  the  inclemencies  of 
the  weather.  A  sort  of  lean-to,  supported  by  four  bamboo 
poles  and  open  at  the  sides,  serves  as  a  shelter  for  some  of 
them,  and  keeps  off  the  rain,  though  it  does  not  screen 
them  from  the  wind.     Most  of  them,  however,  make  for 


THE    PULIAHS    AND   CHUCKLERS  6] 

themselves  what  may  be  called  nests  in  the  brandies  of 
the  thickest-foliaged  trees,  where  they  perch  like  birds  of 
prey  for  the  greater  part  of  the  twenty-four  hours.  They 
are  not  even  allowed  to  walk  peaceably  along  the  high- 
roads. If  they  see  any  one  coming  towards  them,  they 
are  bound  to  utter  a  certain  cry  and  to  go  a  long  way 
round  to  avoid  passing  him.  A  hundred  paces  is  the 
very  nearest  they  may  approach  any  one  of  a  different 
caste.  If  a  Nair,  who  always  carries  arms,  meets  one  of 
these  unhappy  people  on  the  road,  he  is  entitled  to  stab 
him  on  the  spot 1.  The  Puliahs  live  an  absolutely  savage 
life,  and  have  no  communication  whatever  with  the  rest 
of  the  world. 

The  Chucklers,  or  cobblers,  are  also  considered  inferior 
to  the  Pariahs  all  over  the  Peninsula,  and,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  they  show  that  they  are  of  a  lower  grade  by  their 
more  debased  ideas,  their  greater  ignorance  and  brutality. 
They  are  also  much  more  addicted  to  drunkenness  and 
debauchery.  Their  orgies  take  place  principally  in  the 
evening,  and  their  villages  resound,  far  into  the  night, 
with  the  yells  and  quarrels  which  result  from  their  intoxica- 
tion. Nothing  will  persuade  them  to  work  as  long  as  they 
have  anything  to  drink  ;  they  only  return  to  their  labour 
when  they  have  absolutely  no  further  means  of  satisfying 
their  ruling  passion.  Thus  they  spend  their  time  in  alter- 
nate bouts  of  work  and  drunkenness.  The  women  of  this 
wretched  class  do  not  allow  their  husbands  to  outshine 
them  in  any  vice,  and  are  quite  as  much  addicted  to  drunken- 
ness as  the  men.  Their  modesty  and  general  behaviour 
may  therefore  be  easily  imagined.  The  very  Pariahs  refuse 
to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  Chucklers,  and  do  not 
admit  them  to  any  of  their  feasts. 

There  is  one  class  amongst  the  Pariahs  which  rules  all 
the  rest  of  the  caste.  These  are  the  Valluvas  2,  who  are 
called  the  Brahmins  of  the  Pariahs  in  mockery.  They  keep 
themselves  quite  distinct  from  the  others,  and  only  inter- 
marry in  their  own  class.     They  consider  themselves  as 

1  No  native  is  nowadays  allowed  to  carry  arms  without  a  licence. 
But  even  now  the  Puliahs  are  forbidden  to  approach  a  person  of  higher 
caste.     They  always  stand  at  a  distance  of  20  to  30  yards. — Ed. 

2  These  are  sometimes  physicians  and  astrologers. — Ed. 


62  BARBERS   AND    WASHERMEN 

the  gurus,  or  spiritual  advisers,  of  the  rest.  It  is  they 
who  preside  at  all  the  marriages  and  other  religious  cere- 
monies of  the  Pariahs.  They  predict  all  the  absurdities 
mentioned  in  the  Hindu  almanac,  such  as  lucky  and  un- 
lucky days,  favourable  or  unfavourable  moments  for 
beginning  a  fresh  undertaking,  and  other  prophecies  of 
a  like  nature.  But  they  are  forbidden  to  meddle  with 
anything  pertaining  to  astronomy,  such  as  the  foretelling 
of  eclipses,  changes  of  the  moon,  &c,  this  prerogative 
belonging  exclusively  to  the  Brahmins. 

There  are  other  classes  too,  which,  though  a  trifle  higher 
in  the  Hindu  social  scale,  are  for  all  that  not  treated  with 
much  more  respect.  Firstly,  amongst  the  Sudras  there  are 
those  who  follow  servile  occupations,  or  at  least  occupa- 
tions dependent  on  the  public  ;  secondly,  those  who  per- 
form low  and  disgusting  offices,  which  expose  them  to 
frequent  defilements  ;  and,  thirdly,  there  are  the  nomadic 
tribes,  who  are  always  wandering  about  the  country, 
having  no  fixed  abode. 

Amongst  the  first  I  place  the  barbers  and  the  washer- 
men. There  are  men  belonging  to  these  two  employments 
in  every  village,  and  no  one  exercising  the  same  profession 
can  come  from  another  village  to  work  in  theirs  without 
their  express  permission.  Their  employments  are  trans- 
mitted from  father  to  son,  and  those  who  pursue  them 
form  two  distinct  castes. 

The  barber's  business  is  to  trim  the  beard,  shave  the 
head,  pare  the  nails  on  hands  and  feet,  and  clean  the  ears 
of  all  the  inhabitants  of  his  village.  In  several  of  the 
southern  provinces  the  inhabitants  have  all  the  hair  on 
different  parts  of  their  bodies  shaved  off,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  eye-brows  ;  and  this  custom  is  always  observed 
by  Brahmins  on  marriage  days  and  other  solemn  occasions  '. 
The  barbers  are  also  the  surgeons  of  the  country.  What- 
ever be  the  nature  of  the  operation  that  they  are  called  on 
to  perform,  their  razor  is  their  only  instrument,  if  it  is  a 
question  of  amputation  ;   or  a  sort  of  stiletto,  which  they 

1  This  custom  of  shaving  the  hair  from  all  parts  of  the  body,  for 
ceremonies  where  absolute  purity  is  required,  is  not  peculiar  to  the 
Brahmins  ;  it  was  also  common  amongst  the  Jews,  for  the  same  reason, 
and  was  part  of  their  ceremonial  law  (Numbers  viii.  6,  7). — Dubois. 


THEIR  DESPISED  CONDITION  63 

use  for  paring  nails,  if  they  have  to  open  an  abscess,  or 
the  like.  They  are  also  the  only  accredited  fiddlers  ;  and 
they  share  with  the  Pariahs  the  exclusive  right  of  playing 
wind  instruments,  as  will  be  seen  presently. 

As  to  the  washermen,  their  business  is  much  the  same 
here  as  everywhere  else,  except  for  the  extreme  filthiness 
of  the  rags  that  are  entrusted  to  them  to  be  cleaned. 

Those  engaged  in  these  two  occupations  are  in  such 
a  dependent  position  that  they  dare  not  refuse  to  work 
for  any  one  who  chooses  to  employ  them.  They  are  paid 
in  kind  at  harvest  time  by  each  inhabitant  of  their  village. 
No  doubt  the  contempt  in  which  they  are  held  by  men  of 
other  castes,  who  look  upon  them  as  menials,  is  due  partly 
to  this  state  of  subjection,  and  also  to  the  uncleanness  of 
the  things  which  they  are  compelled  to  handle. 

The  potters  also  are  a  very  low  class,  being  absolutely 
uneducated. 

The  five  castes  of  artisans,  of  which  I  have  already 
spoken,  and  also,  as  a  rule,  all  those  employed  in  mechanical 
or  ornamental  arts,  are  very  much  looked  down  upon  and 
despised. 

The  Moochis,  or  tanners,  though  better  educated  and 
more  refined  than  any  of  the  preceding  classes,  are  not 
much  higher  in  the  social  scale.  The  other  Sudras  never 
allow  them  to  join  in  their  feasts  ;  indeed,  they  would 
hardly  condescend  to  give  them  a  drop  of  water  to  drink. 
This  feeling  of  repulsion  is  caused  by  the  defilement  which 
ensues  from  their  constantly  handling  the  skins  of  dead 
animals. 

As  a  rule,  the  mechanical  and  the  liberal  arts,  such  as 
music,  painting,  and  sculpture,  are  placed  on  very  much 
the  same  level,  and  those  who  follow  these  professions, 
which  are  left  entirely  to  the  lower  castes  of  the  Sudras, 
are  looked  upon  with  equal  disfavour  1. 

As  far  as  I  know,  only  the  Moochis  take  up  painting  as 
a  profession.  Instrumental  music,  and  particularly  that 
of  wind  instruments,  is  left  exclusively,  as  I  have  already 

1  Those  who  follow  these  liberal  arts  are  treated  with  more  respect  in 
these  clays.  At  all  events,  they  are  not  looked  upon  with  disfavour. 
There  are  now  many  Brahmins  in  Southern  India  who  are  professional 
musicians,  though  they  play  on  certain  instruments  only.  —  Ki>. 


64  BINDU    PAINTING    AND   MUSIC 

mentioned,  to  the  barbers  and  Pariahs1.  The  little  pro- 
gress that  is  made  in  these  arts  is  no  doubt  due  to  the 
small  amount  of  encouragement  which  they  receive.  As 
for  painting,  one  never  sees  anything  but  daubs.  The 
Hindus  are  quite  satisfied  if  their  artists  can  draw  designs 
of  striking  figures  painted  in  the  most  vivid  colours.  Our 
best  engravings,  if  they  are  uncoloured,  or  our  finest 
miniatures  or  landscapes,  are  quite  valueless  in  their  eyes. 

Though  the  Hindus  much  enjoy  listening  to  music,  and 
introduce  it  freely  into  all  their  public  and  private  cere- 
monies, both  religious  and  social,  yet  it  must  be  admitted 
that  this  charming  art  is  here  still  in  its  infancy.  I  should 
say  Hindus  are  no  further  advanced  in  it  now  than  they 
were  two  or  three  thousand  years  ago.  They  do  not  expect 
their  musicians  to  produce  harmonious  tunes  when  they 
play  at  their  feasts  and  ceremonies,  for  their  dull  ears 
would  certainly  not  appreciate  them.  What  they  like  is 
plenty  of  noise  and  plenty  of  shrill  piercing  sounds.  Their 
musicians  are  certainly  able  to  comply  with  their  wishes 
in  this  respect.  Such  discordant  noises  are  infinitely  more 
pleasing  to  them  than  our  melodious  airs,  which  possess 
no  charm  whatever  for  them.  Of  all  our  various  instru- 
ments, they  care  only  for  drums  and  trumpets.  Their 
vocal  music,  too,  is  not  a  whit  more  pleasing  to  European 
ears  than  their  instrumental.  Their  songs  are  chiefly 
remarkable  for  uninspiring  monotony  ;  and  though  they 
have  a  scale  like  ours,  composed  of  seven  notes,  they  have 
not  tried  to  produce  from  it  those  harmonies  and  combina- 
tions which  fall  so  deliciously  on  our  ears. 

Why  is  it,  it  may  well  be  asked,  that  it  should  be  con- 
sidered shameful  to  play  on  wind  instruments  in  India  ? 
I  suppose  it  is  on  account  of  the  defilement  which  the  players 
contract  by  putting  such  instruments  to  their  mouths  after 
they  have  once  been  touched  by  saliva,  which,  as  I  shall 
show  presently,  is  the  one  excretion  from  the  human  body 
for  which  Hindus  display  invincible  horror.  There  is  by 
no  means  the  same  feeling  with  regard  to  stringed  instru- 
ments. In  fact,  you  may  often  hear  Brahmins  singing  and 
accompanying  themselves  on  a  sort  of  lute  which  is  known 

1  Classes  superior  to  the  barbers  and  Pariahs  also  play  wind  instru- 
ments at  the  present  time. — Ed. 


MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS  65 

by  the  name  of  vina.  This  instrument  has  a  rather  agree- 
able tone,  and  would  be  still  more  pleasing  if  the  sounds 
extracted  from  it  were  more  varied.  It  has  always  been 
a  favourite  amongst  the  better  classes  ;  and  its  invention 
must  date  from  an  extremely  remote  period,  for  it  is  often 
mentioned  in  Hindu  books,  where  the  gods  themselves  are 
represented  as  playing  on  the  vina  to  soothe  themselves 
with  its  sweet  melodies.  It  is  generally  taught  by  Brah- 
mins ;  and  as  their  lessons  are  very  expensive,  and  they 
persuade  their  pupils  that  a  great  many  are  necessary  in 
order  to  attain  proficiency,  it  is  obvious  that  none  but  the 
rich  can  afford  themselves  this  pleasure. 

The  vina  of  the  Hindus  is  probably  the  same  as  the 
cithara  l,  or  harp,  of  the  Jews,  in  playing  which  King 
David  excelled,  and  with  which  he  produced  those  melo- 
dies which  soothed  and  calmed  his  unfortunate  master  Saul, 
after  God  had  given  Saul  up  as  a  prey  to  his  evil  passions. 

Besides  the  vina,  the  Brahmins  have  another  stringed 
instrument  called  Icinnahra,  which  is  something  like  a 
guitar,  and  the  tone  of  which  is  not  unpleasant. 

The  Hindus  do  not  use  gut  for  the  strings  of  their  in- 
struments, as  Europeans  do.  They  would  not  dare  to 
touch  anything  so  impure,  for  if  they  did  they  would  con- 
sider themselves  defiled  by  the  contact.  To  avoid  such 
a  serious  impurity  they  use  metal  strings. 

I  will  now  turn  to  the  nomadic  castes,  which  swell  the 
number  of  wretched  and  degraded  beings  amongst  the 
nation  I  am  describing.  Without  any  fixed  abode,  wander- 
ing about  from  one  country  to  another,  the  individuals  of 
which  these  vagabond  tribes  are  composed  pay  little  or 
no  attention  to  the  various  customs  which  are  obligatory 
on  every  respectable  Hindu  ;  and  this  is  why  they  are  so 
cordially  detested. 

One  of  the  largest  of  these  castes  is  that  which  is  known 
in  the  south  by  the  name  of  Kuravers  or  Kurumarus. 
This  is  subdivided  into  two  branches,  one  of  which  carries 
on  a  trade  in  salt.  Gangs  of  men  bring  this  article  from 
the  coast  and  distribute  it  in  the  interior  of  the  country, 
using  asses,  of  which  they  possess  considerable  numbers, 

1  The  Mahomedans  of  Northern  India  have  a  stringed  instrument 
known  as  cithar. — Ed. 

DUBOIS  D 


66  WANDERING  TRIBES 

as  their  means  of  transport.  As  soon  as  they  have  sold 
or  bartered  this  commodity,  they  reload  the  asses  with 
different  kinds  of  grain,  for  which  there  is  a  ready  sale  on 
the  coast,  and  start  off  again  at  once.  Thus  their  whole 
lives  are  spent  in  hurrying  from  one  country  to  another 
without  settling  down  in  any  place. 

The  occupation  of  the  second  branch  of  these  Kuravers 
is  to  make  baskets  and  mats  of  osier  and  bamboo,  and  other 
similar  utensils  which  are  used  in  Hindu  households.  They 
are  obliged  to  be  perpetually  moving  from  one  place  to 
another  to  find  work,  and  are  without  any  fixed  abode. 

The  Kuravers  are  also  the  fortune-tellers  of  the  country. 
They  speak  a  language  peculiar  to  themselves,  which  is 
unintelligible  to  any  other  Hindu.  Their  manners  and 
customs  have  much  in  common  with  those  of  the  wandering 
tribes  that  are  known  in  England  as  Gypsies,  and  in  France 
as  Egyptians,  or  Bohemians.  Their  women  tell  the  fortunes 
of  those  who  consult  them  and  are  willing  to  pay  them. 
The  person  who  wishes  to  learn  his  fate  seats  himself  in 
front  of  the  soothsayer  and  holds  out  his  hand,  while  she 
beats  a  little  drum,  invokes  all  her  gods  or  evil  spirits, 
and  gabbles  aloud  a  succession  of  fantastic  words.  These 
preliminaries  over,  she  studies  with  the  most  scrupulous 
attention  the  lines  on  the  hand  of  the  simple-minded 
person  who  is  consulting  her,  and  finally  predicts  the  good 
or  evil  fortune  that  is  in  store  for  him.  Many  attempts 
have  been  made  to  trace  the  origin  of  these  wandering 
tribes,  who  are  to  be  found  telling  fortunes  all  over  the 
world.  The  general  opinion  appears  to  be  that  they  origin- 
ally came  from  Egypt,  but  this  view  might  possibly  be 
changed  if  these  Kuravers  of  India  were  to  be  closely 
examined,  and  their  language,  manners,  and  customs  com- 
pared with  those  of  the  Gypsies  and  Bohemians. 

The  Kuraver  women  also  tattoo  the  designs  of  flowers 
and  animals  which  decorate  the  arms  of  most  young  Hindu 
women.  The  tattooing  is  done  by  first  delicately  tracing 
the  desired  objects  on  the  skin,  then  pricking  the  outline 
gently  with  a  needle,  and  immediately  after  rubbing  in 
the  juice  of  certain  plants,  whereby  the  design  becomes 
indelible. 

The  Kurumarus  are  much  addicted  to  stealing,  and  from 


THE  KALLA-BANTRUS  67 

this  tribe  come  the  professional  thieves  and  pickpockets 
known  by  the  name  of  Kalla-bantrus.  These  people  make 
a  study  of  the  art  of  stealing,  and  all  the  dodges  of  their 
infamous  profession  are  instilled  into  them  from  their 
youth.  To  this  end  their  parents  teach  them  to  lie  obsti- 
nately, and  train  them  to  suffer  tortures  rather  than  divulge 
what  it  is  to  their  interest  to  hide.  Far  from  being  ashamed 
of  their  profession,  the  Kalla-bantrus  glory  in  it,  and  when 
they  have  nothing  to  fear  they  take  the  greatest  pleasure 
in  boasting  of  the  clever  thefts  they  have  committed  in 
various  places.  Those  who,  caught  in  the  act,  have  been 
badly  hurt,  or  who  have  been  deprived  by  the  magistrates 
of  nose,  ears,  or  right  hand,  show  their  scars  and  mutila- 
tions with  pride,  as  proofs  of  their  courage  and  intrepidity  ; 
and  these  men  are  usually  the  chosen  heads  of  their  caste. 

They  always  commit  their  depredations  at  night.  Noise- 
lessly entering  a  village,  they  place  sentinels  along  the 
different  roads,  while  they  select  the  houses  that  can  be 
entered  with  the  least  risk.  These  they  creep  into,  and  in 
a  few  minutes  strip  them  of  all  the  metal  vessels  and  other 
valuables  they  can  find,  including  the  gold  and  silver 
ornaments  which  the  sleeping  women  and  children  wear 
round  their  necks.  They  never  break  open  the  doors  of 
the  houses,  for  that  would  make  too  much  noise  and  so 
lead  to  their  detection.  Their  plan  is  to  pierce  the  mud 
wall  of  the  house  with  a  sharp  iron  instrument  specially 
made  for  the  purpose,  with  which  they  can  in  a  few  moments 
easily  make  a  hole  large  enough  for  a  man  to  creep  through. 
They  are  so  clever  that  they  generally  manage  to  carry  out 
their  depredations  without  being  either  seen  or  heard  by 
any  one.  But  if  they  happen  to  be  surprised,  the  Kalla- 
bantrus  make  a  desperate  resistance  and  do  their  best  to 
escape.  If  one  of  their  number  is  killed  in  the  scrimmage, 
they  will  run  any  risk  to  obtain  possession  of  the  corpse. 
They  then  cut  off  the  head  and  carry  it  away  with  them 
to  avoid  discovery. 

In  the  provinces  which  are  governed  by  native  princes, 
these  villains  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  protected  by  the 
authorities,  who  countenance  their  depredations  in  return 
for  a  stipulated  sum,  or  on  condition  that  they  pay  the 
value  of  half  the  booty  that  they  steal  to  the  revenue 


68  THE  KALLA-BANTRUS  AS  THIEVES 

collector  of  the  locality.  But  as  such  an  understanding 
could  not  possibly  be  anything  more  than  tacit  in  any 
civilized  country,  this  infamous  arrangement  is  kept  secret. 
The  culprits,  therefore,  can  expect  no  compensation  to  be 
publicly  awarded  them  by  the  magistrates  for  the  wounds 
and  mutilations  which  they  may  suffer  in  the  course  of 
their  nocturnal  raids  ;  but  these  same  magistrates  will  do 
their  best  to  screen  or  palliate  their  offences,  the  profits 
of  which  they  share,  and  will  always  protect  their  clients 
from  well-deserved  punishment  when  they  appear  before 
them  in  court. 

The  last  Mussulman  prince  who  governed  Mysore  had 
a  regular  regiment  of  Kalla-bantrus  in  his  service,  whom  he 
employed,  not  to  fight  amongst  his  troops,  but  to  despoil 
the  enemy's  camp  during  the  night,  to  steal  the  horses, 
carry  off  any  valuables  they  could  find  amongst  the  officers' 
baggage,  spike  the  enemy's  guns,  and  act  as  spies.  They 
were  paid  according  to  their  skill  and  success.  In  times  of 
peace  they  were  sent  into  neighbouring  States  to  pilfer  for 
the  benefit  of  their  master,  and  also  to  report  on  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  rulers.  The  minor  native  princes  called 
Poligars  always  employ  a  number  of  these  ruffians  for  the 
same  purposes. 

In  the  provinces  where  these  Kalla-bantrus  are  coun- 
tenanced by  the  Government,  the  unfortunate  inhabitants 
have  no  other  means  of  protecting  themselves  from  their 
depredations  than  by  making  an  agreement  with  the  head 
of  the  gang  to  pay  him  an  annual  tax  of  a  quarter  of  a 
rupee  and  a  fowl  per  house,  in  consideration  of  which  he 
becomes  responsible  for  all  the  thefts  committed  by  his 
people  in  villages  which  are  thus,  so  to  say,  insured1. 

Besides  the  Kalla-bantrus  of  the  Kurumaru  caste,  the 
province  of  Mysore  is  infested  by  another  caste  of  thieves, 
called  Kanojis,  who  are  no  less  dreaded  than  the  others. 

But  of  all  the  nomadic  castes  which  wander  about  the 
country,  the  best  known  and  most  detested  is  the  Lambadis, 
or  Sukalers,  or  Brinjaris.  No  one  knows  the  origin  of  this 
caste.     The   members   of   it   have   different   manners  and 

1  This,  of  course,  is  no  longer  allowed.  The  thieving  classes  have, 
under  a  more  rigid  system  of  police,  been  compelled  to  take  to  more 
lawful  pursuits. — En. 


THE  LAMBADIS  69 

customs,  and  also  a  different  religion  and  language  from 
all  the  other  castes  of  Hindus.  Certain  points  of  resem- 
blance, however,  which  are  to  be  found  between  them  and 
the  Mahrattas,  lead  one  to  believe  that  they  must  have 
sprung  from  these  people  in  the  first  instance,  and  have 
inherited  from  them  their  propensities  for  rapine  and  theft, 
and  their  utter  disregard  for  the  rights  of  property  when 
they  think  they  are  stronger  than  their  victims  and  are 
safe  from  retributory  justice.  However,  the  severe  sen- 
tences that  the  magistrates  have  latterly  passed  on  them 
in  several  districts  have  exercised  a  salutary  influence. 
They  no  longer  dare  to  rob  and  steal  openly.  But  the 
lonely  traveller  who  meets  them  in  some  lonely  spot  had 
better  beware,  especially  if  they  have  reason  to  think  that 
he  would  be  worth  plundering. 

In  time  of  war  they  attach  themselves  to  the  army  where 
discipline  is  least  strict.  They  come  swarming  in  from  all 
parts,  hoping,  in  the  general  disorder  and  confusion,  to  be 
able  to  thieve  with  impunity.  They  make  themselves  very 
useful  by  keeping  the  market  well  supplied  with  the  pro- 
visions that  they  have  stolen  on  the  march.  They  hire 
themselves  and  their  large  herds  of  cattle  to  whichever 
contending  party  will  pay  them  best,  acting  as  carriers  of 
the  supplies  and  baggage  of  the  army.  They  were  thus 
employed,  to  the  number  of  several  thousands,  by  the 
English  in  their  last  war  with  the  Sultan  of  Mysore.  The 
English,  however,  had  occasion  to  regret  having  taken 
these  untrustworthy  and  ill-disciplined  people  into  their 
service,  when  they  saw  them  ravaging  the  country  through 
which  they  passed  and  causing  more  annoyance  than  the 
whole  of  the  enemy's  army.  The  frequent  and  severe 
punishments  that  were  inflicted  on  their  chiefs  had  no 
restraining  effect  whatever  on  the  rest  of  the  horde.  They 
had  been  attracted  solely  by  the  hope  of  plunder,  and 
thought  little  of  the  regular  wages  and  other  inducements 
which  had  been  promised  them. 

In  times  of  peace  these  professional  brigands  occupy 
themselves  in  trading  in  grain  and  salt,  which  they  convey 
from  one  part  of  the  country  to  the  other  on  their  bullocks  ; 
but  at  the  least  whisper  of  war,  or  the  slightest  sign  of 
coming  trouble,  they  are  at  once  on  the  look-out,  ready  to 


70  HUMAN   SACRIFICES 

take  advantage  in  the  first  moment  of  confusion  of  any 
opportunity  for  pillaging.  In  fact,  the  unfortunate  in- 
habitants of  the  country  fear  an  invasion  of  a  hostile  army 
far  less  than  they  do  a  sudden  irruption  of  these  terrible 
Lambadis. 

Of  all  the  castes  of  the  Hindus  this  particular  one  is 
acknowledged  to  be  the  most  brutal.  The  natural  pro- 
clivities of  its  members  for  evil  are  clearly  indicated  by 
their  ill-favoured,  wild  appearance  and  their  coarse,  hard- 
featured  countenances,  these  characteristics  being  as 
noticeable  in  the  women  as  in  the  men.  In  all  parts  of 
India  they  are  under  the  special  supervision  of  the  police, 
because  there  is  only  too  much  reason  for  mistrusting  them. 

Their  women  are,  for  the  most  part,  very  ugly  and 
revoltingly  dirty.  Amongst  other  glaring  vices  they  are 
supposed  to  be  much  addicted  to  incontinency  ;  and  they 
are  reputed  to  sometimes  band  themselves  together  in 
search  of  men  whom  they  compel  by  force  to  satisfy  their 
lewd  desires. 

The  Lambadis  are  accused  of  the  still  more  atrocious 
crime  of  offering  up  human  sacrifices.  When  they  wish  to 
perform  this  horrible  act,  it  is  said,  they  secretly  carry  off 
the  first  person  they  meet.  Having  conducted  the  victim 
to  some  lonely  spot,  they  dig  a  hole  in  which  they  bury 
him  up  to  the  neck.  While  he  is  still  alive  they  make 
a  sort  of  lamp  of  dough  made  of  flour,  which  they  place 
on  his  head.  This  they  fill  with  oil,  and  light  four  wicks 
in  it.  Having  done  this,  the  men  and  women  join  hands, 
and,  forming  a  circle,  dance  round  their  victim,  singing 
and  making  a  great  noise,  till  he  expires. 

Amongst  other  curious  customs  of  this  odious  caste  is 
one  that  obliges  them  to  drink  no  water  which  is  not 
drawn  from  springs  or  wells.  The  water  from  rivers  or 
tanks  being  thus  forbidden,  they  are  obliged  in  a  case  of 
absolute  necessity  to  dig  a  little  hole  by  the  side  of  a  tank 
or  river  and  take  the  water  that  filters  through,  which  by 
this  means  is  supposed  to  become  spring  water. 

Another  nomadic  caste  is  that  of  the  Wuddars,  whose 
trade  is  to  dig  wells,  tanks,  and  canals,  and  to  repair  dykes. 
They,  too,  have  to  travel  about  in  search  of  work.  This 
caste  is  also  much  despised.     The  manners  of  the  individuals 


THE  PAKANATTIS  71 

composing  it  are  as  low  as  their  origin,  and  their  minds  as 
uncultivated  as  their  manners.  Their  extreme  uncouthness 
may,  perhaps,  account  for  the  low  estimation  in  which  they 
are  held. 

In  Mysore,  and  in  the  north-west  of  the  Carnatic,  another 
caste  of  nomads  is  to  be  met  with,  known  as  Pakanattis. 
They  speak  Telugu,  and  originally  formed  part  of  the  caste 
of  Gollavarus,  or  shepherds,  and  were  agriculturists.  They 
took  to  their  present  kind  of  life  about  a  hundred  and  fifty 
years  ago,  and  like  it  so  much  that  it  would  be  impossible 
to  persuade  them  to  change  it  for  any  regular  occupation. 
The  cause  of  their  secession  from  the  rest  of  their  caste 
was  that  one  of  their  headmen  was  grievously  insulted  by 
the  governor  of  the  province  in  which  they  lived.  As  they 
never  received  any  redress  at  all  commensurate  with  the 
affront,  they  determined  to  avenge  themselves  by  deserting 
their  homes  in  a  body,  and  thus  bringing  all  the  agricul- 
tural work  of  the  country  to  a  standstill.  From  that  time 
to  this  they  have  never  attempted  to  return  to  their  former 
mode  of  life,  but  are  always  wandering  from  place  to  place 
without  settling  anywhere.  Some  of  their  headmen,  with 
whom  I  have  conversed,  have  told  me  that  they  number 
about  two  thousand  families,  half  of  whom  wander  through 
the  Telugu  country  and  the  rest  through  Mysore.  The 
headmen  meet  from  time  to  time  to  settle  the  differences 
which  frequently  arise  amongst  the  members.  However, 
the  Pakanattis  are  the  quietest  and  best  behaved  of  all  the 
wandering  tribes.  They  are  kept  in  excellent  order  ;  and 
though  they  always  go  about  in  bands,  theft  and  pillage 
are  unknown  amongst  them,  and  if  any  of  them  are  found 
guilty  of  either,  they  are  severely  punished  by  the  rest. 
They  are  all  most  miserably  poor  ;  the  better  off  possess 
a  few  buffaloes  and  cows,  the  milk  of  which  they  sell,  but 
the  greater  number  of  them  are  professional  herbalists. 
They  collect  plants,  roots,  and  other  things  in  the  different 
countries  that  they  wander  through,  such  as  are  used  for 
medicine  or  dyes,  or  for  salves,  &c,  for  horses  and  cattle. 
These  they  sell  in  the  bazaars,  and  the  little  money  that 
they  thus  earn  helps  them  considerably.  They  supplement 
their  livelihood  by  hunting,  fishing,  begging,  and  charlatanry. 

All  these  tribes  live  entirely  isolated  from  the  rest  of 


72  NOMADIC  CAMPS 

the  world,  with  whom  they  hold  no  communication,  except 
in  order  to  obtain  the  bare  necessaries  of  life.  They  lead 
for  the  most  part  a  pastoral  life,  and  their  headmen  occa- 
sionally possess  considerable  herds  of  eattle,  consisting  of 
bullocks,  buffaloes,  and  asses.  They  travel  in  bands  of  ten, 
twenty,  thirty,  or  more  families.  They  shelter  themselves 
under  bamboo  or  osier  mats,  which  they  carry  everywhere 
with  them.  Each  family  has  its  own  mat  tent,  seven  or 
eight  feet  long,  four  or  five  feet  broad,  and  three  or  four 
feet  high,  in  which  father,  mother,  children,  poultry,  and 
sometimes  even  pigs,  are  housed,  or  rather  huddled  together, 
this  being  their  only  protection  against  bad  weather.  They 
always  choose  woods  or  lonely  places  as  sites  for  their 
camps,  so  that  no  one  can  see  what  goes  on  amongst  them. 
Besides  their  mat  tents  and  the  other  necessaries  for  camp- 
ing, they  always  take  care  to  be  provided  with  small  stores 
of  grain,  as  well  as  with  the  household  utensils  necessary 
for  preparing  and  cooking  their  food.  Those  who  possess 
beasts  of  burden  make  them  carry  the  greater  part  of  their 
goods  and  chattels,  but  the  unfortunate  wTetches  who  have 
no  other  means  of  transport  are  compelled  to  carry  alj 
their  worldly  possessions,  that  is  to  say,  the  necessaries 
for  housing  and  feeding  themselves.  I  have  seen  the 
husband  carrying  on  his  head  and  shoulders  the  tent,  the 
provisions,  and  some  earthen  vessels,  whilst  the  wife,  her 
body  half  uncovered,  carried  an  infant  on  her  back,  hanging 
behind  her  in  the  upper  part  of  her  cotton  garment  ;  on 
her  head  was  the  mortar  for  husking  the  rice  ;  while  follow- 
ing her  came  a  child  bending  under  the  weight  of  the  rest 
of  the  household  chattels. 

I  have  often  seen  this  sad  spectacle,  and  always  with 
deep  feelings  of  pity.  Such  is  the  kind  of  life  which  many 
Hindus  are  accustomed  to,  and  which  they  bear  without 
murmuring  or  complaining,  and  without  even  appearing 
to  envy  those  whose  lives  are  spent  in  pleasanter  places. 

Each  one  of  these  nomadic  tribes  has  its  own  habits, 
laws,  and  customs  ;  and  each  forms  a  small  and  perfectly 
independent  republic  of  its  own,  governed  by  such  rules 
and  regulations  as  seem  best  to  them.  Nothing  is  known 
by  the  outside  world  of  what  happens  amongst  them. 
The  chiefs  of  each  caste  are  elected  or  dismissed  by   a 


NOMAD  SELF-GOVERNMENT  73 

majority  of  votes.  They  are  commissioned,  during  the 
time  that  their  authority  lasts,  to  enforce  the  caste  rules, 
to  settle  disputes,  and  to  punish  all  misdemeanour  and 
crime.  But  however  heinous  offences  may  be,  they  never 
involve  the  penalty  of  death  or  mutilation.  The  guilty 
person  has  only  either  to  pay  a  fine,  or  suffer  a  severe 
flogging  or  some  other  corporal  punishment.  Travelling 
ceaselessly  from  one  country  to  another,  these  vagrant 
families  pay  no  tax  to  any  Government  :  the  majority 
possess  nothing,  and  they  have  consequently  no  need  of 
the  protection  of  a  prince  to  guard  them  against  spoliation. 
Further,  they  have  no  claims  to  take  before  the  courts, 
since  they  administer  justice  themselves  ;  and  being  with- 
out any  ambition,  they  ask  neither  pardon  nor  favour  from 
any  prince.  All  these  nomadic  tribes  stink  in  the  nostrils 
of  other  Hindus,  owing  to  the  kind  of  life  which  they  lead, 
to  the  small  esteem  in  which  they  hold  the  religious  practices 
observed  by  other  castes,  and,  lastly,  to  the  vulgar  vices 
to  which  they  are  enslaved.  But  the  heaviest  indictment 
against  them  is  their  excessive  intemperance  in  eating  and 
drinking.  With  the  exception  of  cow's  flesh,  they  eat  in- 
discriminately of  every  kind  of  food,  even  the  most  revolt- 
ing, such  as  the  flesh  of  foxes,  cats,  rats,  snakes,  crows,  &c. 
Both  men  and  women  drink  to  excess  toddy  and  arrack, 
i.e.  the  spirit  of  the  country,  and  they  will  consume  every 
kind  of  liquor  and  enervating  drug  which  they  can  procure. 

The  majority  of  these  vagabonds  live  in  a  state  of  ex- 
treme poverty.  When  no  other  resource  remains  to  them 
they  beg,  or  else  send  their  women  to  earn  their  livelihood 
by  prostitution. 

Among  the  degraded  beings  who  form  the  dregs  of 
society  in  India  must  be  classed  the  jugglers,  the  charlatans, 
mountebanks,  conjurers,  acrobats,  rope-dancers,  &c.  There 
are  two  or  three  castes  which  practise  these  professions, 
travelling  from  country  to  country  to  find  patrons  or  dupes. 
It  is  not  surprising,  with  a  people  so  credulous  and  endued 
with  such  a  love  of  the  marvellous  as  the  Hindus,  that  such 
impostors  should  abound.  They  are  regarded  as  magicians 
and  sorcerers,  as  men  versed  in  witchcraft  and  all  the  occult 
sciences,  and  are  viewed  with  fear  and  distrust  ;  while  the 
hatred  in  which  they  arc  held  is  much  greater  than  is 


71  JUGGLERS  AND  QUACKS 

Ebcci >rded  in  Europe  to  people  of  the  same  description. 
Some  of  these  charlatans  cany  on  a  trade  with  a  credulous 
public  in  quack  medicines  and  universal  panaceas.  They 
may  often  be  heard  in  the  street  haranguing  the  multitude 
and  extolling  their  wares.  They  even  surpass  our  own 
quacks  in  effrontery  and  barefaced  imposture.  Others  are 
conjurers  or  acrobats  ;  and  both  one  and  the  other  perform 
really  astonishing  feats  of  legerdemain  and  agility.  Euro- 
pean jugglers  would  certainly  have  to  lower  their  colours 
before  them. 

The  best  known  of  these  castes  is  that  of  the  Bombers  or 
Dombarus.  To  the  earnings  which  the  men  make  by  their 
industry  the  women  also  add  the  sums  that  they  gain  by 
the  most  shameless  immorality  ;  their  favours,  if  such  a 
word  be  applicable,  are  accorded  to  any  one  who  likes  to 
pay  for  them.  However,  in  spite  of  all  this,  the  Dombers 
lead  a  wretched  life  ;  and  their  extreme  poverty  is  caused 
by  their  boundless  intemperance.  They  always  spend  in 
eating  and  drinking  much  more  than  they  actually  possess  ; 
and  when  all  their  means  are  exhausted  they  have  recourse 
to  begging. 

Other  troops  of  vagabonds  of  the  same  class  adopt  the 
profession  of  travelling  actors.  I  once  met  a  large  party 
who  were  representing  the  ten  Avatars  (or  incarnations)  of 
Vishnu,  on  which  subject  they  had  composed  as  many 
sacred  plays.  The  greater  number  of  them,  however,  play 
obscene  and  ridiculous  farces  in  the  streets,  with  boards 
and  trestles  for  their  stage  ;  or  else  they  exhibit  marionettes, 
which  they  place  in  disgusting  postures,  making  them  give 
utterance  to  the  most  pitiable  and  filthy  nonsense.  These 
shows  are  exactly  suited  to  the  taste  and  comprehension 
of  the  stupid  crowd  which  forms  the  audience.  Hindu 
players  have  learned  from  experience  that  they  can  never 
rivet  the  attention  of  the  public  except  at  the  expense  of 
decency,  modesty,  or  good  sense  l. 

Some  Hindu  jugglers  turn  their  attention  to  snake- 
charming,  especially  with  cobras,  the  most  poisonous  of 
all.     These  they  teach  to  dance,  or  to  move  in  rhythm  to 

1  At  the  present  time  there  are  many  Indian  theatrical  eompanies 
formed  somewhat  after  the  fashion  of  European  eompanies.  Their  per- 
formances, too,  have  improved  a  great  deal  since  the  Abbe's  time. — Ed. 


SNAKE-CHARMERS  75 

music  ;  and  they  perform  what  appear  to  be  the  most 
alarming  tricks  with  these  deadly  reptiles.  In  spite  of  all 
their  care  and  skill  it  sometimes  happens  that  they  are 
bitten  ;  and  this  would  infallibly  cost  them  their  lives,  did 
they  not  take  the  precaution  to  excite  the  snake  every 
morning,  forcing  it  to  bite  several  times  through  a  thick 
piece  of  stuff  so  that  it  may  rid  itself  of  the  venom  that 
re-forms  daily  in  its  fangs.  They  also  pose  as  possessors  of 
the  secret  of  enchanting  snakes,  pretending  that  they  can 
attract  them  with  the  sound  of  their  flutes.  This  craft 
was  practised  elsewhere  in  the  very  earliest  times,  as  may 
be  gathered  from  a  passage  in  Holy  Scripture,  where  the 
obstinacy  of  a  hardened  sinner  is  likened  to  that  of  a  deaf 
adder  that  shuts  its  ears  to  the  voice  of  the  charmer.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  I  can  vouch  for  it  that  the  pretended  power 
of  Hindu  snake-charmers  is  a  mere  imposture.  They  keep 
a  few  trained  tame  snakes,  which  are  accustomed  to  come 
to  them  at  the  sound  of  a  flute,  and  when  they  have  settled 
the  amount  of  their  reward  with  the  persons  who  think, 
or  have  been  persuaded,  that  there  are  snakes  in  the 
vicinity  of  their  houses,  they  place  one  of  these  tame 
reptiles  in  some  corner,  taking  care  not  to  be  observed. 
One  of  the  conditions  on  which  they  always  insist  is  that 
any  snake  which  they  charm  out  of  a  hole  shall  not  be  killed, 
but  shall  be  handed  over  to  them.  This  point  settled,  the 
charmer  seats  himself  on  the  ground  and  begins  to  play 
on  his  flute,  turning  first  to  one  side,  then  to  the  other. 
The  snake,  on  hearing  these  familiar  sounds,  comes  out  of 
its  hiding-place,  and  crawls  towards  its  master,  gliding 
quietly  into  the  basket  in  which  it  is  usually  shut  up. 
The  charmer  then  takes  his  reward  and  goes  off  in  search 
of  other  dupes  \ 

I  will  now  give  some  particulars  about  the  wild  tribes 
which  inhabit  the  jungles  and  mountains  in  the  south  of 
India.  They  are  divided  into  several  castes,  each  of  which 
is    composed    of    various    communities.     They    are    fairly 

1  Even  to  this  clay  there  is  a  class  of  village  servants  called  Kudimis, 
whose  business  it  is  to  collect  medicinal  herbs  and  other  plants  that 
might  be  required  by  the  people.  These  Krtdijnix  arc  also  professional 
snake-catchers,  and  are  supposed  to  possess  infallible  antidotes  against 
snake-  poison . — Ed. 


76  JUNGLE  TRIBES 

numerous  in  many  places  in  the  Malabar  hills,  or  Western 
Ghauts,  where  they  are  known  by  the  generic  name  of 
Kadu-Kurumbars.  These  savages  live  in  the  forests,  but 
have  no  fixed  abode.  After  staying  a  year  or  two  in  one 
place  they  move  on  to  another.  Having  selected  the  spot 
for  their  temporary  sojourn,  they  surround  it  with  a  kind 
of  hedge,  and  each  family  chooses  a  little  patch  of  ground, 
which  is  dug  up  with  a  sharp  piece  of  wood  hardened  in 
the  fire.  There  they  sow  small  seeds,  and  a  great  many 
pumpkins,  cucumbers,  and  other  vegetables  ;  and  on  these 
they  live  for  two  or  three  months  in  the  year.  They  have 
little  or  no  intercourse  with  the  more  civilized  inhabitants 
of  the  neighbourhood.  The  latter  indeed  prefer  to  keep 
them  at  a  distance  from  their  houses,  as  they  stand  in  con- 
siderable dread  of  them,  looking  upon  them  as  sorcerers 
or  mischievous  people,  whom  it  is  unlucky  even  to  meet. 
If  they  suspect  a  Kadu-Kurumbar  of  having  brought  about 
illness  or  any  other  mishap  by  his  spells,  they  punish  him 
severely,  sometimes  even  putting  him  to  death. 

During  the  rains  these  savages  take  shelter  in  miserable 
huts.  Some  find  refuge  in  caves,  or  holes  in  the  rocks,  or 
in  the  hollow  trunks  of  old  trees.  In  fine  weather  they 
camp  out  in  the  open.  At  night  each  clan  assembles  at 
a  given  spot,  and  enormous  fires  are  lit  to  keep  off  the  cold 
and  to  scare  away  wild  beasts.  Men,  women,  and  children 
all  sleep  huddled  together  anyhow.  The  poor  wretches 
wear  no  clothes,  a  woman's  only  covering  being  a  few 
leaves  sewn  together  and  tied  round  the  waist.  Knowing 
only  of  the  simple  necessities  of  existence,  they  find  enough 
to  satisfy  their  wants  in  the  forest.  Roots  and  other 
natural  products  of  the  earth,  snakes  and  animals  that  they 
can  snare  or  catch,  honey  that  they  find  on  the  rugged 
rocks  or  in  the  tops  of  trees,  which  they  climb  with  the 
agility  of  monkeys;  all  these  furnish  them  with  the  means  of 
satisfying  the  cravings  of  hunger.  Less  intelligent  even  than 
the  natives  of  Africa,  these  savages  of  India  do  not  possess 
bows  and  arrows,  which  they  do  not  know  how  to  use. 

It  is  to  them  that  the  dwellers  in  the  plains  apply  when 
they  require  wood  with  which  to  build  their  houses.  The 
jungle  tribes  supply  them  with  all  materials  of  this  kind, 
in  exchange  for  a  few  valueless  objects,  such  as  copper 


THE  KADU-KURUMBARS  77 

or  brass  bangles,  small  quantities  of  grain,  or  a  little  tobacco 
to  smoke  l. 

Both  men  and  women  occupy  themselves  in  making  reed 
or  bamboo  mats,  baskets,  hampers,  and  other  household 
articles,  which  they  exchange  with  the  inhabitants  of  more 
civilized  parts  for  salt,  pepper,  grain,  &c. 

According  to  the  people  of  the  plains,  these  savages 
can,  by  means  of  witchcraft  and  enchantments,  charm  all 
the  tigers,  elephants,  and  venomous  snakes  which  share  the 
forests  with  them,  so  that  they  need  never  fear  their  attacks. 

Their  children  are  accustomed  from  their  earliest  infancy 
to  the  hard  life  to  which  nature  appears  to  have  condemned 
them.  The  very  day  after  their  confinement  the  women 
are  obliged  to  scour  the  woods  with  their  husbands  in  order 
to  find  the  day's  food.  Before  starting  they  suckle  the 
new-born  child,  and  make  a  hole  in  the  ground,  in  which 
they  put  a  layer  of  teak  leaves.  The  leaves  are  so  rough 
that  if  they  rub  the  skin  ever  so  gently  they  draw  blood. 
In  this  hard  bed  the  poor  little  creature  is  laid,  and  there 
it  remains  till  its  mother  returns  in  the  evening.  On  the 
fifth  or  sixth  day  after  birth  they  begin  to  accustom  their 
infants  to  eat  solid  food  ;  and  in  order  to  harden  them  at 
once  to  endure  inclement  weather,  they  wash  them  every 
morning  in  cold  dew,  which  they  collect  from  the  trees  and 
plants.  Until  the  infants  can  walk,  they  are  left  by  them- 
selves from  morning  till  night,  quite  naked,  exposed  to 
sun,  wind,  rain,  and  air,  and  buried  in  the  holes  which 
serve  them  for  cradles. 

The  whole  religion  of  these  savages  seems  to  consist  in 
the  worship  of  bhootams,  or  evil  spirits,  which  worship  they 
perform  in  a  way  peculiar  to  themselves.  They  pay  no 
regard  whatever  to  the  rest  of  the  Hindu  deities. 

Besides  the  Kadu-Kurumbars  there  is  another  tribe  of 
savages  living  in  the  forests  and  mountains  of  the  Carnatic, 
and  known  by  the  name  of  Irulers,  or  in  some  places 
Soligurus.  Their  habits  are  identical  with  those  of  the 
Kadu-Kurumbars.  They  lead  the  same  kind  of  life,  have 
the  same  religion,  customs,  and  prejudices  ;  in  fact,  one 
may  say  that  the  difference  between  the  two  tribes  exists 
only  in  name. 

1  These  transactions  are  now  regulated  by  the  forest  laws. — En. 


78  THE  MALAI-KONDIGARUS 

In  several  parts  of  Malabar  a  tribe  is  to  be  found  called 
the  Malai-Kondigaru,  which,  though  as  wild  as  those  men- 
tioned above,  has  perhaps  a  little  more  in  common  with 
civilized  humanity.  They  live  in  the  forests,  and  their 
principal  occupation  is  to  extract  the  juice  of  the  palm- 
tree,  part  of  which  they  drink,  the  rest  they  sell.  The 
women  climb  the  trees  to  obtain  it,  and  they  do  so  in 
a  surprisingly  agile  manner.  These  people  always  go  about 
naked.  The  women  only  wear  a  little  rag,  which  flutters 
about  in  the  wind  and  most  imperfectly  covers  that  portion 
of  their  bodies  which  it  is  supposed  to  hide.  During  one 
of  the  expeditions  which  the  last  Sultan  of  Mysore  made 
into  the  mountains,  he  met  a  horde  of  these  savages,  and 
was  much  shocked  at  their  state  of  nudity  ;  for,  however 
depraved  Mahomedans  may  be  in  their  private  life,  nothing 
can  equal  the  decency  and  modesty  of  their  conduct  in 
public.  They  are  horrified  at  word  or  look  that  even 
verges  on  indecency  or  immodesty,  especially  on  the  part 
of  their  women.  The  Sultan  therefore  caused  the  head- 
men of  the  Malai-Kondigarus  to  be  brought  before  him, 
and  asked  them  why  they  and  their  women  did  not  cover 
their  bodies  more  decently.  They  excused  themselves  on 
the  plea  of  poverty,  and  that  it  was  the  custom  of  their 
caste.  Tippu  replied  that  he  must  require  them  to  wear 
clothing  like  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  country,  and  that 
if  they  had  not  the  means  wherewith  to  buy  it,  he  would 
every  year  provide  them  gratuitously  with  the  cotton  cloths 
necessary  for  the  purpose.  The  savages,  however,  though 
urged  by  the  Sultan,  made  humble  remonstrances,  and 
begged  hard  to  be  allowed  to  dispense  with  the  encum- 
brance of  clothing.  They  finally  told  him  that  if  they 
were  forced  to  wear  clothing,  contrary  to  the  rules  of  their 
caste,  they  would  all  leave  the  country  rather  than  put  up 
with  so  great  an  inconvenience  ;  they  preferred  to  go  and 
live  in  some  other  distant  forest,  where  they  would  be 
allowed  to  follow  their  customs  unmolested.  The  Sultan 
was  accordingly  obliged  to  give  way. 

In  and  around  Coorg  is  another  tribe  of  savages  known 
by  the  name  of  Yeruvaru.  It  is  akin  to  the  Pariah  caste, 
and  is  composed  of  several  communities  scattered  about 
in   the   jungles.     These   people,    however,    work   for   their 


THE  YERUVARUS  7!) 

living,  and  make  themselves  useful  to  the  rest  of  the  popula- 
tion. They  leave  their  homes  to  get  food  from  the  more 
civilized  inhabitants  of  the  neighbourhood,  who,  in  return 
for  a  small  quantity  of  rice  given  as  wages,  make  them 
work  hard  at  agricultural  pursuits.  The  indolence  of  these 
savages  is  such,  however,  that  as  long  as  there  is  a  handful 
of  rice  in  their  huts  they  absolutely  refuse  to  work,  and 
will  only  return  to  it  when  their  supply  of  grain  is  entirely 
exhausted.  Nevertheless,  the  other  inhabitants  are  obliged 
to  keep  on  good  terms  with  them,  because  they  perform 
all  the  hardest  manual  labour,  and  because  if  one  of  them 
was  affronted  or  thought  himself  ill-treated,  all  the  rest  of 
the  clan  would  take  his  part,  and  leave  their  usual  abode 
and  hide  in  the  forest.  The  civilized  inhabitants,  to  whom 
they  are  thus  indispensable,  would  not  be  able  to  persuade 
them  to  resume  their  work  until  they  had  made  friendly 
overtures  and  agreed  to  pay  damages.  These  wild  yet 
simple-minded  people  find  it  so  difficult  to  procure  the  bare 
necessaries  of  life  that  they  never  even  think  of  small 
luxuries  which  most  other  Hindus  are  so  fond  of,  such  as 
betel,  tobacco,  oil  to  anoint  their  heads,  &c.  They  do  not 
even  appear  to  envy  those  who  enjoy  them,  and  are  satisfied 
if  they  can  get  a  little  salt  and  pepper  to  flavour  the  taste- 
less vegetables  and  roots  which  form  the  principal  part  of 
their  food. 

All  these  wild  tribes  are  gentle  and  peaceable  by  nature. 
They  do  not  understand  the  use  of  weapons  of  any  sort, 
and  the  sight  of  a  stranger  is  sometimes  sufficient  to  put 
to  flight  a  whole  community.  No  doubt  the  climate  in 
which  they  live  is  in  a  great  measure  responsible  for  their 
timid,  lazy,  and  indolent  character.  They  are  very  unlike 
the  savages  who  people  the  vast  forests  of  America  or 
Africa,  inasmuch  as  they  do  not  know  what  war  means, 
and  appear  to  be  quite  incapable  of  returning  evil  for 
evil.  For,  of  course,  no  sane  person  believes  the  accusa- 
tion brought  against  them  that  they  can  injure  their 
neighbours  by  means  of  spells  and  enchantments.  Hidden 
in  thick  forests,  or  in  dens  and  caves  in  the  rocks,  they  fear 
nothing  in  the  world  so  much  as  the  approach  of  a  civilized 
being,  and  far  from  envying  the  happiness  which  the  latter 
boasts  of  having  found  in  the  society  of  his  fellow- men, 


SO  THE   REPUTED   WEALTH  OF   INDIA 

they  shun  any  intercourse  with  him,  fearing  lest  he  should 
try  to  rob  them  of  their  liberty  and  independence,  and  lest 
they  should  be  condemned  to  submit  to  a  civilization  which 
to  them  is  only  another  term  for  bondage. 

At  the  same  time,  these  wild  tribes  of  Hindus  retain 
a  few  of  the  prejudices  of  their  fellow-countrymen.  For 
instance,  they  are  divided  into  castes,  they  never  eat  beef, 
they  have  similar  ideas  about  defilement  and  purifica- 
tion, and  they  keep  the  principal  regulations  relating  to 
them. 


CHAPTER  VI 

The  Poverty  of  the  Hindus. 

India  has  always  been  considered  a  most  wealthy  and 
opulent  country,  more  favoured  by  nature  than  any  other 
in  the  world,  a  land  literally  flowing  with  milk  and  honey, 
where  the  soil  yields  all  that  is  necessary  for  the  existence 
of  its  happy  people  almost  without  cultivation.  The  great 
wealth  accumulated  by  a  few  of  its  native  princes,  the  large 
fortunes  so  rapidly  acquired  by  many  Europeans,  its 
valuable  diamond  mines,  the  quality  and  quantity  of  its 
pearls,  the  abundance  of  its  spices  and  scented  woods, 
the  fertility  of  its  soil,  and  the,  at  one  time,  unrivalled 
superiority  of  its  various  manufactures  :  all  these  have 
caused  admiration  and  wonder  from  time  immemorial. 
One  would  naturally  suppose  that  a  nation  which  could 
supply  so  many  luxuries  would  surpass  all  others  in  wealth. 

This  estimation  of  the  wealth  of  India  has  been  com- 
monly accepted  in  Europe  up  to  the  present  day  ;  and 
those  who,  after  visiting  the  country  and  obtaining  exact 
and  authentic  information  about  the  real  condition  of  its 
inhabitants,  have  dared  to  affirm  that  India  is  the  poorest 
and  most  wretched  of  all  the  civilized  countries  of  the 
world,  have  simply  not  been  believed.  Many  people  in 
Europe,  after  reading  what  various  authors  have  to  say 
about  India's  manufactures  and  about  the  factories  which 
turn  out  the  delicate  muslins,  fine  cloths,  and  beautiful 
coloured  cottons,  &c,  which  are  so  much  admired  all  the 
world  over,  have  supposed  that  the  establishments  pro- 
ducing such  magnificent  stuffs  must  have  supplied  models 


HINDU  WEAVERS  81 

for  those  which  are  to  be  found  at  Manchester,  Birmingham, 
Lyons,  and  other  cities  in  Europe.  Well,  the  truth  is 
(and  most  people  are  still  unaware  of  the  fact)  all  these 
beautiful  fabrics  are  manufactured  in  wretched  thatched 
huts  built  of  mud,  twenty  to  thirty  feet  long  by  seven  or 
eight  feet  broad.  In  such  a  work-room  the  weaver  stretches 
his  frame,  squats  on  the  ground,  and  quietly  plies  his 
shuttle,  surrounded  by  his  family,  his  cow,  and  his  fowls. 
The  instruments  he  makes  use  of  are  extremely  primitive, 
and  his  whole  stock  in  trade  could  easily  be  carried  about 
by  one  man.  Such  is,  in  very  truth,  an  exact  picture  of 
an  Indian  factory.  As  to  the  manufacturer  himself,  his 
poverty  corresponds  to  the  simplicity  of  his  work-shop. 
There  are  in  India  two  or  three  large  classes  whose  only 
profession  is  that  of  weaving.  The  individuals  comprising 
these  classes  are,  for  the  most  part,  very  poor,  and  are 
even  destitute  of  the  necessary  means  for  working  on  their 
own  account.  Those  who  deal  in  the  products  of  their 
industry  have  to  go  to  them,  money  in  hand,  and  after 
bargaining  with  them  as  to  the  price,  quality,  and  quantity 
of  the  goods  required,  are  obliged  to  pay  them  in  advance. 
The  weavers  then  go  and  buy  the  cotton  and  other  neces- 
saries with  which  to  begin  work.  Their  employers  have  to 
supervise  their  work  and  keep  a  sharp  look-out  lest  they 
decamp  with  the  money,  especially  if  the  advances  happen 
to  be  in  any  way  considerable. 

As  regards  the  condition  of  the  Hindus  generally,  I  think 
that  the  following  account  may  make  things  plain.  It  is 
based  on  a  long  acquaintance  with  the  inhabitants  of  a  large 
tract  of  country.  Still,  the  casual  observer  may  find  fault 
with  it  if  he  judges  it  by  what  he  has  noticed  in  large  towns, 
more  especially  on  the  coast.  There,  at  least,  most  of  the 
natives  possess  houses  of  more  or  less  value  which  they 
can  dispose  of  if  necessary,  an  advantage  not  shared  by  the 
rural  classes.  Besides,  the  towns  are  the  rendezvous  of 
the  rich  and  industrious,  and  of  those  who  intend  to  become 
so  by  fair  means  or  foul,  so  it  is  not  surprising  to  find 
a  higher  standard  of  comfort  prevailing  there.  It  is  from 
experience  of  the  masses  of  the  population  that  I  have  been 
able  to  present  this  sketch  of  the  different  degrees  of  poverty 
or  wealth  amongst  the  people.  *~^ 


\V 


82  THE  POOREST  CLASS  OF  HINDUS 

I  should  class  the  inhabitants  of  the  Indian  Peninsula  in 
the  following  manner.  The  first  and  lowest  class  may  be 
said  to  be  composed  of  all  those  whose  property  is  below 
the  value  of  £5  sterling.  This  class  appears  to  me  to  com- 
prise nine- twentieths,  or  perhaps  even  a  half,  of  the  entire 
population.  It  includes  most  of  the  Pariah  class  and  nearly 
all  the  Chucklers  (leather- workers)  ;  and  these  together 
form  at  least  a  quarter  of  the  population.  To  them  must 
be  added  a  considerable  portion  of  the  Sudras,  all  the 
poorest  members  of  the  other  castes,  and  the  multitude  of 
vagrants,  beggars,  and  impostors  who  are  to  be  met  with 
everywhere. 

Most  of  the  natives  of  this  class  hire  themselves  out  as 
agricultural  labourers,  and  are  required  to  do  the  hardest 
manual  labour  for  the  smallest  possible  wage.  In  the 
places  where  they  are  paid  in  coin,  they  receive  only  just 
enough  to  buy  the  coarsest  of  food.  Their  wage  varies 
from  twelve  to  twenty  rupees  a  year,  according  to  locality. 
They  are  better  paid  along  the  coast.  With  this  amount 
they  are  obliged  to  feed  and  clothe  themselves.  In  some 
places  they  are  paid  half  in  coin  and  half  in  grain,  or  else 
they  get  their  keep,  and  over  and  above  that  receive  from 
four  to  eight  rupees  a  year  \ 

Some  of  the  younger  members  of  this  class  hire  them- 
selves out  without  wages,  on  condition  that,  after  working 
faithfully  for  seven  or  eight  years,  their  master  will  provide 
them  with  a  wife  of  their  own  caste  and  defray  all  nuptial 
expenses.  Married  servants  who  are  fed  by  their  masters 
carry  home  their  daily  rations.  This  food  is  supposed  to 
be  sufficient  for  the  wants  of  one  person,  or,  to  quote  the 
native  saying,  '  to  be  enough  to  fill  the  belly  '  ;  but  they 
have  to  share  it  with  their  wives  and  children,  who  also 
have  to  work  and  thus  add  to  the  provision.  When  they 
are  in  actual  want,  as  often  happens,  they  go  and  seek  for 
food  in  the  woods,  or  on  the  banks  of  the  rivers  and  tanks, 
where  they  find  leaves,  shrubs,  roots,  and  herbs.  These 
they  boil,  as  often  as  not  without  even  salt  or  any  kind 
of    condiment  ;   and    this    primitive    food    forms,    for    the 

1  The  scale  is  higher  everywhere  nowadays,  but  so  also  is  the  cost  of 
food-stuffs.  Nowhere  in  India  does  the  common  labourer  earn  much 
more  than  a  '  livi^wage.' — Ed. 


THEIR  CHRONIC  INDEBTEDNESS  8.3 

greater  part  of  the  year,  the  most  substantial  part  of  their 
meals.  Clumps  of  bamboo  abound  in  the  woods,  and  its 
shoots  form,  for  two  or  three  months  of  the  year,  a  great 
resource  to  the  poor  people  who  live  near  the  places  where 
it  grows. 

As  soon  as  the  children  belonging  to  the  class  living  in 
a  state  of  servitude  have  reached  the  age  of  eight  or  nine, 
they  join  the  same  master  who  employs  their  father,  the 
boys  looking  after  the  cattle  and  the  girls  sweeping  out 
the  byres,  collecting  the  dung,  grinding  the  grain,  &c. 

The  well-to-do  cultivators  always  employ  men  of  this 
class  ;  and,  in  order  to  keep  them  in  perpetual  bondage, 
they  lend  them  money  either  on  the  occasion  of  a  marriage 
or  for  other  purposes.  The  poor  wretches  find  themselves, 
on  account  of  their  small  wages,  quite  unable  to  pay  back 
the  capital  thus  advanced,  and  in  many  cases  even  the 
interest,  which  soon  exceeds  the  original  loan,  and  are 
therefore  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  working,  with  their 
wives  and  children,  until  the  end  of  their  days.  From  the 
time  this  happens  their  masters  look  upon  them  as  actual 
slaves,  and  refuse  to  grant  them  manumission  until  they 
have  repaid  both  the  principal  and  interest  of  the  sum 
which  they  or  their  fathers  borrowed  perhaps  twenty  or 
thirty  years  before. 

Those  natives  belonging  to  this  class  who  are  in  a  state 
of  independence  live  by  various  industries.  The  greater 
number  are  carriers  and  coolies,  or  casual  agricultural 
labourers  in  receipt  of  a  small  daily  wage.  The  last-named 
are  generally  paid  in  grain,  but  when  they  receive  money 
their  wage  varies  from  a  penny  to  twopence  a  day,  accord- 
ing to  the  district.  However,  they  only  work  in  proportion 
to  their  wage,  and,  whatever  the  task,  a  good  European 
workman  would,  in  most  cases,  do  as  much  as  four  natives. 
But  as  the  independent  labourer  is  often  out  of  work,  and 
as  the  smallness  of  his  wage  or  his  improvidence  does  not 
allow  of  his  putting  by  anything,  his  lot  is  no  better,  perhaps 
even  worse,  than  that  of  his  brother  in  slavery,  and  he  is 
often  in  absolute  want.  Most  of  them  have  nothing  of 
their  own,  or  at  the  best  only  a  wretched  hut  twelve  or 
fifteen  feet  long  by  five  or  six  broad,  and  from  four  to  five 
feet  high,  which  is  full  of  insects  and  vermin  and  exhales 


84       SMALLEST  CLASS  OF  AGRICULTURISTS 

an  awful  stench.  Into  this  hovel  they,  witli  their  wives 
and  children,  crowd  higgledy-piggledy.  Their  belongings 
consist  of  a  few  earthen  vessels,  one  or  two  sickles,  and  the 
rags  in  which  they  stand.  Those  who  are  a  little  less 
poverty-stricken  have  a  brass  lotah  for  drinking  purposes, 
and  another  out  of  which  they  eat,  a  hoe,  two  or  three 
sickles,  a  few  silver  bracelets,  worth  three  or  four  rupees, 
belonging  to  the  women,  and  two  or  three  cows  \  These 
people  are  agriculturists  and  farm  Government  lands,  on 
which  they  pay  a  tax  varying  from  two  to  twenty-five 
shillings. 

Such,  in  truth,  is  the  state  of  misery  in  which  half  the 
population  of  India  passes  its  life  2. 

I  place  in  the  second  class  all  those  whose  property 
ranges  from  £5  to  £25  sterling.  This  class,  I  should  say, 
includes  about  six-twentieths  of  the  entire  population  and 
is  composed  chiefly  of  Sudras.  Those  included  in  it  are 
mostly  agriculturists  on  their  own  account.  Their  poverty 
does  not  allow  of  their  hiring  others  to  work  under  them. 
They  cultivate  Government  land,  and  pay  a  yearly  tax  of 
from  one  to  twenty  pagodas,  according  to  the  value  of  the 
land.  They  sometimes  require  as  many  as  three  ploughs. 
Their  entire  property  consists  of  a  few  cattle,  a  few  small 
gold  and  silver  trinkets,   one   or  two  copper  vessels  for 

1  Many  Hindus  own  a  few  oxen  and  cattle,  which  are  supposed  to  be 
the  most  valuable  part  of  their  property  ;  in  fact  their  degree  of  comfort 
is  judged,  more  or  less,  by  the  number  of  these  valuable  animals  which 
they  possess.  As  soon  as  a  Hindu  has  acquired  a  sufficient  sum  of 
money,  he  spends  it  as  a  rule  on  a  pair  of  draught  oxen  and  a  cow.  But 
the  intrinsic  value  of  these  animals  is  small.  The  country  oxen  are,  as 
a  rule,  stunted,  weak,  and  incapable  of  enduring  much  fatigue.  Four 
or  five  rupees  is  their  outside  value. — Dubois. 

2  In  this  connexion  the  reader  will  do  well  to  refer  to  an  excellent 
Blue  Book  entitled,  Progress  of  the  Madras  Presidency  during  the  Forty 
Years  from  1853  to  1892,  by  the  late  Dewan  Bahadur  S.  Srinivasa 
Raghavaiengar,  C.I.E.,  a  distinguished  Government  official,  who  clearly 
proves  therein  that  a  very  great  advance  has  been  made  by  the  country 
during  the  last  four  decades.  Emigration  also  offers  large  fields  of 
profitable  employment  to  the  Indian  coolie  nowadays — Ceylon,  the 
Straits  Settlements,  Africa,  the  West  Indies,  Mauritius,  &c,  all  com- 
peting for  his  services.  The  difficulty  is  to  induce  him  to  leave  his 
miserable  home.  Those  who  do  emigrate  sometimes  return  with  com- 
paratively large  savings,  and  become  either  petty  shopkeepers  or  petty 
cultivators. — Ed. 


PLEDGING  OF  CROPS  85 

drinking  and  a  few  more  for  eating  purposes,  and  some 
iron  farm  implements.  They  live  in  thatched  mud  huts, 
rather  more  commodious  and  a  little  less  filthy  than  those 
previously  described.  Weavers,  barbers,  washermen,  and 
other  workmen  who  cater  for  the  wants  of  the  public  may 
also,  for  the  most  part,  be  included  under  this  head. 

The  cultivators  of  this  second  class,  although  better  off 
than  those  of  the  first,  find  it  hard  to  make  both  ends 
meet  even  in  the  best  seasons.  They  are  obliged  to  sell  at 
least  half  their  crop  beforehand  at  low  prices,  to  enable 
them  to  pay  their  taxes,  and  the  miserly  usurers  who  profit 
by  their  poverty  leave  them  hardly  sufficient  for  the  wants 
of  their  family  during  six  or  eight  months  of  the  year  ; 
in  fact,  many  of  them  have  only  food  enough  to  last  four 
months.  Some  never  even  gather  the  harvest  from  the  field 
they  have  sown,  for  as  soon  as  the  corn  has  formed  in  the 
ear  they  are  day  by  day  driven  by  hunger  to  cut  off  some  of 
the  green  ears,  with  which  they  make  a  sort  of  soup.  Con- 
sequently, by  harvest  time  there  is  nothing  but  stubble  left 
to  gather,  and  to  save  themselves  the  trouble  of  cutting  it 
they  merely  turn  three  or  four  cows  into  the  field  to  graze. 
If  by  dint  of  self-denial  they  allow  their  crops  to  grow  up 
intact,  it  is  not  they  who  benefit  by  them,  for  as  soon  as 
the  grain  has  been  threshed  the  money-lenders  step  in 
and  take  their  due,  and  afterwards  come  those  who  lent 
them  grain  when  they  had  nothing  to  eat,  and  demand 
payment  of  the  original  quantity  plus  twenty- five  per  cent, 
interest ;  that  is  to  say,  a  man  borrowing  twenty  measures 
of  corn  has  to  repay  twenty-five. 

The  grain  takes  about  four  months  to  ripen,  and  this 
period  is  called  the  time  of  "prosperity,  or  sukha  kala.  It  is 
about  the  only  season  in  the  year  when  the  poor  have 
enough  of  even  the  coarsest  kinds  of  food,  consisting  of 
various  sorts  of  small  pulse,  much  the  same  as  that  which 
is  used  in  Europe  to  fatten  pigs  and  fowls,  and  in  India 
to  feed  horses.  Hence  the  well-known  proverb,  '  Do  not 
approach  a  Pariah  during  the  sukha  kala  season,  nor  go 
within  range   of  an  ox   during  the   Divuligai  V     This  is 

1  This  feast  will  be  specially  mentioned  later  on.     Its  celebration  takes 
place  in  November,  when  the  country  is  clothed  in  verdure. — Dubois. 
It  is  also  called  Dccpavali  and  Divali. — Ed. 


cSG  DEFICIENCY  OF  FOOD 

because  both  become  unmanageable  then,  from  an  un- 
wonted state  of  prosperity. 

In  most  provinces  those  who  cultivate  rice  do  not  eat  it, 
hut  sell  it  to  pay  their  taxes.  During  the  four  months  the 
<suk/ia  kala  lasts,  they  live  on  the  pulse  and  millet  which 
they  cultivate  in  their  fields.  During  the  rest  of  the  year 
their  only  daily  sustenance,  in  almost  all  cases,  consists  of 
a  plateful  of  millet,  seasoned  with  a  little  pounded  salt 
and  chillies.  When  after  paying  their  taxes  and  debts 
they  come  to  the  end  of  their  store  of  grain,  supposing  there 
has  been  any  remnant,  they  are  reduced  to  living  from  hand 
to  mouth.  Some  of  them  borrow  grain,  which  they  pro- 
mise to  repay  with  interest  after  the  next  harvest  ;  others 
explore  the  woods  and  the  banks  of  rivers  and  tanks  in 
search  of  leaves,  bamboo  shoots,  wild  fruits,  roots,  and 
other  substances  which  help  them  to  exist,  or  rather,  pre- 
vent them  from  dying  of  hunger. 

Thus  for  about  three  months  of  the  year  almost  three- 
quarters  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Peninsula  are  on  the 
verge  of  starvation.  In  the  south  these  three  months  are 
July,  August,  and  September  ;  and  the  saying  is  that  those 
who  have  grain  to  eat  then  are  as  happy  as  princes.  The 
scarcity  begins  to  be  less  felt  by  October,  for  then  several 
of  the  smaller  species  of  grain  are  ready  for  harvesting, 
and  the  rains  have  brought  out  in  the  fields  quantities  of 
edible  herbs,  which  suffice  to  allay  the  pangs  of  hunger. 

Nor  are  men  alone  exposed  to  want  during  a  great  part 
of  the  year  ;  domestic  animals  have  to  bear  the  same 
privations.  Most  families  own  cattle,  and  each  hamlet 
possesses  considerable  herds  which  can  only  graze  within 
the  narrow  limits  assigned  to  them.  The  small  amount  of 
straw  which  the  crops  produce  does  not  last  long,  and  the 
animals  are  then  reduced  to  nibbling  at  the  few  plants 
scattered  here  and  there  in  the  barren  fields.  During  the 
three  or  four  months  when  the  sun  is  especially  hot,  all 
vegetable  life  is  scorched  up,  and  the  wretched  animals 
can  scarcely  find  enough  fodder  for  their  daily  sustenance. 
They  may  then  be  seen  searching  for  clayey  soil,  impreg- 
nated with  salt,  which  they  proceed  to  lick  with  avidity, 
and  that,  together  with  the  water  they  drink,  comprises 
almost  all  their  food.     This  is   why,   throughout  the  hot 


SUPERIOR  AGRICULTURAL  CLASS  87 

weather,  they  are  mere  skeletons  and  ean  hardly  stand. 
I  have  often,  at  this  time  of  the  year,  been  in  villages  where 
there  were  more  than  a  hundred  cows,  and  yet  sometimes 
I  eould  not  procure  so  much  as  half  a  measure  of  milk  for 
my  breakfast l. 

Thirdly,  I  may  reckon  together  those  Hindus  whose 
property  varies  in  value  from  £25  to  £50  sterling.  They 
comprise  about  one-tenth  of  the  population,  and  are  prin- 
cipally agricultural.  They  farm  lands  large  enough  to 
require  two,  three,  or  even  four  ploughs,  and  their  rental 
is  from  ten  to  thirty  pagodas.  This  class  lives  in  fairly 
comfortable  circumstances,  and  most  of  the  people  are  able 
to  lay  in  sufficient  grain  for  the  whole  year  after  meeting 
their  taxes.  Many  of  them  have  even  more  than  they 
require  for  their  own  consumption,  and  are  able  to  sell  or 
lend  the  surplus  to  those  in  their  village  who  have  run 
short  of  food.  We  have  seen  on  what  outrageous  terms 
these  loans  are  effected.  The  well-to-do  amongst  them 
employ  as  servants  one  or  more  of  those  who  come  under 
the  first  class.  They  have  larger,  more  comfortable,  and 
slightly  cleaner  thatched  dwellings  than  the  others,  and 
they  and  their  wives  have  at  least  a  change  of  raiment, 
which  is  more  than  rare  in  the  two  preceding  classes.  But 
even  their  possessions  are  far  from  betokening  wealth  ; 
they  consist  of  a  few  gold  and  silver  trinkets,  some  copper 
vessels,  and  a  great  many  earthenware  pots  piled  up  in 
a  corner  of  the  house  ;  and  besides  these  they  own  ploughs 
and  other  farming  implements,  some  cotton-spinning  wheels, 
and  various  primitive  tools  of  small  value.  Cattle  are  their 
chief  source  of  wealth.  As  to  their  comfort,  it  is  at  best 
a  relative  term,  for  the  contraction  of  debts  is  a  custom 
common  to  all  the  Hindus  we  have  hitherto  spoken  of. 
Most  of  them  are  debtors  as  well  as  creditors,  but  their 
assets  seldom  exceed  their  liabilities,  and  they  are  in  no 
greater  hurry  to  pay  their  creditors  than  their  debtors  are 
to  pay  them. 

Besides  tilling  the  land,  many  Hindus  of  this  class  keep 

1  The  fact  is,  the  slaughter  of  cattle  being  forbidden  by  the  Hindu 
religion,  large  herds  of  old  and  useless  animals  are  maintained,  which 
deprive  the  healthy  and  useful  animals  of  their  proper  share  of  food. — 
Ed. 


88    WONDERFUL  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  HINDU 

goats  and  sheep,  and  their  young,  added  to  the  one  or  two 
calves  they  are  able  to  sell  from  time  to  time,  bring  in 
a  small  income.  Two  or  three  milch-kine  and  one  or  two 
buffaloes  supply  them  with  a  certain  quantity  of  butter 
for  four  or  five  months  in  the  year,  of  which  they  make 
good  use.  The  sale  of  pigs,  fowls,  eggs,  &c,  also  contributes 
to  their  support,  and  even  enables  them  to  save  for  future 
needs,  or  to  meet  matrimonial  expenses.  Nevertheless, 
after  a  bad  harvest  numbers  of  these  cultivators  are  reduced 
to  the  same  state  of  want  as  those  below  them,  and  are 
obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  same  shifts. 

In  these  times  of  distress  the  Hindus  have  only  their 
wonderful  constitutions  to  fall  back  upon.  Accustomed 
from  their  earliest  infancy  to  privations  of  every  kind, 
they  are  able  to  keep  body  and  soul  together  on  the  smallest 
pittance  of  food.  A  pound  a  day  of  millet  flour,  boiled  in 
water  and  reduced  to  a  thin  gruel,  is  enough  to  prevent 
a  family  of  five  or  six  persons  from  dying  of  hunger.  With 
no  food  besides  this  gruel  and  water  the  majority  of  the 
natives  manage  to  keep  hale  and  hearty  for  months  together. 
Furthermore,  they  possess  the  no  less  valuable  faculty  of 
sleeping  at  will.  An  idle  Hindu  invariably  goes  to  sleep, 
and  so  does  the  man  who  has  nothing  to  eat.  If  the 
homely  proverb  '  he  who  sleeps  dines  '  can  be  taken  liter- 
ally, the  Hindus  certainly  find  consolation  in  it  in  times  of 
scarcity. 

The  fourth  class  comprises  those  whose  property  varies 
in  value  from  £50  to  £100  sterling,  and  I  should  say  it 
forms  three-fortieths  of  the  population.  These  people  live 
in  comfort,  being  chiefly  Brahmins  or  well-to-do  Sudras. 
They  all  keep  servants  belonging  to  the  lowest  class  to  aid 
them  in  cultivation.  Besides  this,  some  of  them  are  rich 
enough  to  embark  on  commercial  speculations  in  connexion 
with  grain  or  other  commodities,  while  others  lend  small 
sums  of  money  at  high  interest.  This  class  provides  the 
villages  with  their  Sudra  headmen,  and  these  men  are  at 
the  same  time  the  largest  holders  of  Government  lands. 
They  also  exercise  in  their  villages  the  functions  of  collectors 
of  revenue,  petty  magistrates,  and  public  arbitrators.  As 
they  are  usually  held  responsible  by  Government  for  the 
due  payment  of  all  taxes  levied  on  their  villages,  they  are 


VILLAGE  HEADMEN  89 

obliged  to  conciliate  the  villagers,  to  prevent  their  secretly 
migrating  elsewhere,  which  would  mean  the  non-cultiva- 
tion of  the  land,  and  consequent  inability  on  their  part  to 
furnish  the  revenue  due  to  the  State.  These  men  have 
quite  a  patriarchal  authority  in  their  villages,  but  those 
who  attempt  to  abuse  their  power  are  soon  confronted 
with  deserted  homesteads,  waste  lands,  and  ruin  staring 
them  in  the  face. 

A  striking  example  of  this  happened  when  a  new  and 
detested  system  was  established  by  the  creation  of  Mutta- 
dars,  or  hereditary  farmers  of  revenue,  which  caused  the 
ruin  of  most  of  the  districts  where  it  was  enforced.  No 
sooner  were  these  Muttadars  raised  to  what  they  considered 
an  exalted  position  than  they  began  to  give  themselves 
great  airs  and  tried  to  carry  things  with  a  high  hand.  Men 
who  had  formerly  been  in  a  low  position,  or  in  obscurity, 
now  indulged  in  horses,  palanquins,  trumpeters,  and 
peons  ;  in  fact  they  gave  themselves  up,  without  any 
justification,  to  such  pomp  and  splendour  as  the  native 
delights  in.  As  the  crops  produced  by  the  lands  whose 
revenue  they  had  farmed  could  not  possibly  defray  the 
cost  of  this  expensive  mode  of  life,  they  had  recourse  to 
a  system  of  blackmailing  to  increase  their  incomes.  The 
consequence  of  this  arbitrary  and  unprecedented  behaviour 
was  the  flight  of  their  victims,  who  left  the  lands  unculti- 
vated.    The  final  result  was  the  ruin  of  the  Muttadars. 

The  Sudra  headmen  of  the  villages  are  usually  sensible, 
polite,  and  well-educated  men.  Most  of  them  know  how 
to  read  and  write.  Although  they  have  the  failings, 
common  to  all  natives,  of  cunning  and  deceit,  they  are  far 
from  being  proud,  intolerant,  and  haughty  like  the  Brah- 
mins. By  nature  they  are  gentle,  shy,  and  insinuating, 
and  they  behave  with  marked  respect  and  submission 
towards  their  superiors.  Towards  their  equals  they  are 
polite  and  complaisant,  and  towards  their  inferiors  affable 
and  condescending.  In  fact,  they  know  well  how  to  adapt 
themselves  to  their  surroundings. 

The  class  occupying  the  fourth  rung  on  the  ladder  which 
I  have  used  to  describe  the  various  degrees  of  civilization 
in  India  is  the  one  which,  to  my  mind,  is  the  most  respect- 
able   and  the   most  interesting.     It   is  this   class,  chiefly. 


90      THE  GENTLEFOLK  OF  HINDU  SOCIETY 

which  influences  public  opinion  amongst  the  Sudras,  and 
maintains  order  throughout  all  ranks  of  society.  One  can 
tell  at  a  glance  that  the  natives  of  this  class  are  all  well- 
to-do  and  independent.  As  a  rule,  they  are  a  more  polite, 
better-educated,  and  better-mannered  race,  and  they  look 
happier  and  more  contented  than  the  members  of  the  other 
three  classes.  Most  of  the  latter  have  thin,  drawn  faces, 
a  heavy  carriage,  coarse  minds,  low  manners,  and  a  melan- 
choly and  stupid  appearance,  all  of  which  bespeak  plainly 
enough  the  privations  and  sufferings  of  their  lot.  Just 
the  reverse  is  noticeable  amongst  the  natives  of  the  fourth 
class. 

In  the  fifth  class  I  should  include  all  those  whose  property 
varies  in  value  from  £100  to  £200  sterling.  It  comprises 
about  one-thirtieth  of  the  whole  population,  and  is  com- 
posed chiefly  of  Brahmins  or  Vaisyas,  and  of  the  wealthiest 
among  the  Sudras.  Agriculture,  trading  in  grain  or  other 
commodities,  money-lending  on  such  usurious  terms  as 
twenty-five,  thirty,  and  even  fifty  per  cent.  :  such  are  the 
different  forms  of  livelihood  they  thrive  upon.  Their 
cleanly  appearance  betokens  comfort,  and  most  of  them 
live  in  tiled  houses.  They  are  also  careful  to  conform  to 
the  rules  of  polite  society.  They  perform  daily  ablutions, 
and  their  houses  are  kept  ceremoniously  clean  by  smearing 
the  floors  regularly  with  cow's  dung.  To  appear  more 
worthy  in  the  eyes  of  the  public  the  Sudras  of  this  class 
usually  abstain  from  all  animal  food,  and,  in  imitation  of 
the  Brahmins,  live  entirely  on  milk  and  vegetables. 

The  natives  belonging  to  this  and  the  following  classes 
constitute  what  may  be  called  the  gentlefolk  of  Hindu 
society,  and  some  of  the  faults  which  characterize  the 
Brahmins,  such  as  pride  and  intolerance,  are  noticeable 
in  them.  Those  amongst  them  who  are  agriculturists  do 
not  till  their  own  lands,  unless  very  urgent  works  are 
necessary  ;  they  employ  servants  from  the  lowest  class  to 
do  it  for  them. 

The  sixth  class  may  be  said  to  comprise  individuals 
whose  tangible  property  varies  in  value  from  £200  to  £500 
sterling,  and  it  represents,  I  should  say,  about  one-fiftieth 
of  the  population.  Brahmins  form  quite  half  of  this  class, 
and  the  remainder  is  made  up  of  the  best  representatives 


THE  WEALTHIEST  CLASS  OF  HINDUS        91 

of  the  other  castes.  Their  wealth  consists  partly  of 
ma-niams,  or  hereditary  lands  exempt  from  taxation, 
partly  of  gardens  planted  with  arecas,  cocoanut  and  other 
fruit  trees,  and  partly  also  of  trinkets,  money,  and  cattle. 
Besides  this,  they  speculate  in  the  same  way  as  the  natives 
of  the  preceding  class.  Some  of  them  occupy  the  position 
of  assistant  collectors  of  public  revenue,  magistrates'  clerks, 
and  other  posts  in  the  public  service.  They  are  proud  of 
the  comfort  they  enjoy,  and  their  arrogance  is  unrivalled. 

Properties  valued  at  more  than  £500  sterling  are  rarely 
to  be  met  with  in  the  villages.  Natives  who  possess  more 
than  this  live  in  agraharams,  or  Brahmin  villages,  in  towns, 
or  in  district  boroughs,  where  they  have  more  opportunity 
for.  commercial  speculations,  and  for  furthering  their  am- 
bitious schemes  to  procure  posts  under  Government. 

The  seventh  class  may  be  said  to  be  composed  of  those 
whose  property  varies  in  value  from  £500  to  £1,000  sterling. 
I  should  say  only  one-hundredth  part  of  the  population 
belongs  to  this  class,  and  at  least  half  of  them  are  Brahmins. 
The  rest  are  the  wealthiest  among  the  Vaisyas  and  Sudras. 

The  eighth  class  includes  those  whose  properties  range 
in  value  from  £1,000  to  £2,000  sterling,  and  it  comprises 
one  two-hundredths  of  the  population.  It  is  almost  entirely 
composed  of  Brahmins,  with  a  small  percentage  of  Vaisyas 
and  Sudras,  who  live  in  towns  and  capitals  where  they 
devote  themselves  almost  entirely  to  commerce  or  are 
employed  under  Government.  Properties  valued  at  five 
to  ten  thousand  pagodas  are  extremely  rare,  even  in  the 
towns,  and  are  confined  to  the  richest  merchants  and  to 
those  who  have  held  for  a  long  time  the  highest  offices 
under  Government.  Still,  there  are  some  which  exceed 
even  ten  thousand  pagodas,  but  these  are  so  few  that  they 
can  easily  be  counted  in  each  province. 

Speaking  generally,  the  following  proportion  may  be 
established  between  properties  in  India  and  properties  in 
Great  Britain  : — 

India.  Great  Britain. 

Those  of  £500  to  £1,000  correspond  to  £5,000  to  £10,000 
„     £1,000  to  £2,000  „  £10,000  to  £20,000 

„     £2,000  to  £5,000  „  £20,000  to  £50,000 

„     £5,000  to  £10,000  „  £50,000  to  £100,000 

„     £10,000  and  above  „  £100,000  and  above. 


92        RECKLESS  SQUANDERING  OF  WEALTH 

But  a  difference,  more  essential  even  than  that  between 
the  characters  of  the  two  nations,  is  observable  in  con- 
nexion with  properties.  In  Europe  tlrey  are  preserved 
intact,  and  are,  with  but  few  exceptions^  transmitted  from 
father  to  son  generation  after  generatioh.  In  India,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  is  nothing  permanent  about  them, 
especially  among  the  Sudras.  The  latter  make  their  money 
either  by  their  industry,  talents,  or  cunning,  and'  once  it  is 
made  they  do  not  know  how  to  spend  it  wisely.  ^Realizing 
that,  do  what  they  may,  they  will  necessarily  be  looked 
down  upon  as  parvenus,  they  soon  acquire  all  the  charac- 
teristic vices  of  the  nouveaux  riches.  Iri  ^me-th£y^become 
as  proud  and  arrogant  as  any  Brahmin,  and  their  >;sole 
object  seems  to  be  to  win  a  name  for  lordly  extravagance. 
Money  becomes  no  object  to  them,  so  long  as  it  procures 
the  gratification  of  their  vanity.  Immense-  fortunes  seldom 
survive  the  second  generation,  owing  i-to.-  the  manner;  in 
which  the  sons  foolishly  squander  the ''wealth  laboriously 
gained  by  their  fathers.  It  is  not  uncoinr^on  to  rind  sons 
who  have  inherited  millions  from  their -father  end  their 
days  in  beggary. 

A  native's  house  is  besieged  as  soon -as  he  is  known  to 
be  a  wealthy  man,  and  this  not  only  by/his  own  relatives, 
but  also  by  the  indigent  of  his  caste,  ajid  by  ar#tf)rde  of 
parasites  of  every  description,  including  poverty-stricken 
Brahmins,  religious  mendicants,  ballad-mongers,  and  low 
flatterers,  who  feed  his  vanity  by  writing  odes  to  his  honour 
and  glory,  and  by  lavishing  on  him  praise  of  the  most 
fulsome  nature.  All  these  dependants  stick  to  the  wealthy 
native  like  leeches,  fighting  with  each  other  as  to  who 
shall  carry  off  the  largest  share  of  the  prize,  and  never 
releasing  their  hold  on  their  victim  until  they  have  stripped 
him  of  everything. 

As  to  the  general  condition  of  the  natives  now,  as  com- 
pared with  what  it  was  thirty  years  ago,  the  question  arises, 
has  it  improved  or  has  it  deteriorated  ?  I  have  occasionally 
heard  this  important  question  discussed  amongst  thoughtful 
and  well-informed  Europeans,  but  they  could  rarely  agree 
with  one  another  on  the  subject.  Some  maintained  that 
the  masses  are  enjoying  greater  prosperity  than  ever  they 
did  before  ;   others  that  they  have  never  been  in  a  more 


IMPROVEMENT  UNDER  BRITISH  RULE       93 

wretched  state  ;  while  a  few  hold  that  things  are  prac- 
tically where  they  were  before  the  change  of  government 
took  place.  But  it  is  evidently  absurd  to  suppose  that 
a  well-meaning,  just,  and  equitable  Government,  which 
has  succeeded  one  that  was  arbitrary,  oppressive,  and 
tyrannical,  has  produced  no  amelioration  in  the  condition 
of  the  people,  whatever  peculiarities  of  character  and  dis- 
position the  latter  may  possess,  and  however  great  an 
obstacle  their  institutions  may  be  to  the  philanthropic 
endeavours  of  the  new  regime  to  make  their  lives  more 
bearable,  if  not  actually  happier.  This  common-sense  view 
of  the  case  is  borne  out  by  my  own  observations.  To  me 
it  seems  undeniable  that  the  condition  of  the  people  has 
improved  in  many  important  directions  at  least,  and  I  have 
found  that  the  most  sensible  natives  themselves  admit  it. 
I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  the  lowest  classes  in  the  land 
are  better  off,  for  in  some  provinces  close  observation  will 
reveal  an  increase  of  misery  :  but  where  that  is  the  case, 
I  attribute  it  to  causes  beyond  the  power  of  any  Govern- 
ment to  prevent  or  put  an  end  to  ;  and  further,  I  think 
that,  given  the  same  causes,  the  misery  would  have  been 
more  acute  under  the  old  regime. 

Of  these  causes  the  chief  one  is  the  rapid  increase  of 
the  population.  Judging  by  my  own  personal  knowledge 
of  the  poorer  Christian  populations  in  Mysore  and  in  the 
districts  of  Baramahl  and  Coimbatore,  I  should  say  that 
they  have  increased  by  twenty-five  per  cent,  in  the  last 
twenty-five  years.  During  this  period  Southern  India  has 
been  free  from  the  wars  and  other  decimating  calamities 
which  had  been  dealing  havoc  almost  uninterruptedly  for 
centuries  before. 

Some  modern  political  economists  have  held  that  a  pro- 
gressive increase  in  the  population  is  one  of  the  most 
unequivocal  signs  of  a  country's  prosperity  and  wealth. 
In  Europe  this  argument  may  be  logical  enough,  but  I  do 
not  think  that  it  can  be  applied  to  India  ;  in  fact,  I  am 
persuaded  that  as  the  population  increases,  so  in  proportion 
do  want  and  misery.  For  this  theory  of  the  economists  to 
hold  good  in  all  respects  the  resources  and  industries  of  the 
inhabitants  ought  to  develop  equally  rapidly  ;  but  in  a 
country  where  the  inhabitants  are  notoriously  apathetic 


94  INCREASING  BIRTH-RATE 

and  indolent,  where  customs  and  institutions  are  so  many 
insurmountable  barriers  against  a  better  order  of  tilings, 
and  where  it  is  more  or"  less  a  sacred  duty  to  let  things 
remain  as  they  are,  I  have  every  reason  to  feel  convinced 
that  a  considerable  increase  in  the  population  should  be 
looked  upon  as  a  calamity  rather  than  as  a  blessing. 

It  is  in  the  nature  of  things  that,  in  times  of  peace  and 
tranquillity,  when  the  protection  of  a  just  Government  is 
afforded  both  to  person  and  property,  an  increase  in  the 
population  of  India  should  take  place  at  an  alarming  rate, 
since  it  is  an  indisputable  fact  that  no  women  in  the  world 
are  more  fruitful  than  the  women  of  India,  and  nowhere 
else  is  the  propagationof  the  human  race  so  much  encouraged. 
In  fact,  a  Hindu  only  marries  to  have  children,  and  the 
more  he  has  the  richer  and  the  happier  he  feels.  All  over 
India  it  is  enough  for  a  woman  to  know  how  to  cook,  pound 
rice,  and  give  birth  to  children.  These  three  things  are 
expected  of  her,  especially  the  last,  but  nothing  more.  It 
would  even  appear  displeasing  if  she  aspired  to  anything 
else.  No  Hindu  would  ever  dream  of  complaining  that 
his  family  was  too  large,  however  poor  he  might  be,  or 
however  numerous  his  children.  A  barren  woman  is  made 
to  feel  that  there  can  be  no  worse  fate,  and  barrenness 
in  a  wife  is  the  most  terrible  curse  that  can  possibly  fall 
on  a  family. 

Another  serious  cause  of  the  poverty  of  modern  India 
is  the  decrease  in  the  demand  for  hand  labour,  resulting 
from  the  introduction  of  machinery  and  the  spread  of 
manufactures  with  improved  methods  in  Europe.  Indeed, 
Europe  no  longer  depends  on  India  for  anything,  having 
learnt  to  beat  the  Hindus  on  their  own  ground,  even  in 
their  most  characteristic  industries  and  manufactures,  for 
which  from  time  immemorial  we  were  dependent  on  them. 
In  fact,  the  roles  have  been  reversed,  and  this  revolution 
threatens  to  ruin  India  completely. 

Just  before  returning  to  Europe  I  travelled  through  some 
of  the  manufacturing  districts,  and  nothing  could  equal  the 
state  of  desolation  prevailing  in  them.  All  the  work-rooms 
were  closed,  and  hundreds  of  thousands  of  the  inhabitants, 
composing  the  weaver  caste,  were  dying  of  hunger  ;  for 
through  the  prejudices  of  the  country  they  could  not  adopt 


INTRODUCTION  OF  MACHINERY  95 

another  profession  without  dishonouring  themselves.  I 
found  countless  widows  and  other  women  out  of  work, 
and  consequently  destitute,  who  used  formerly  to  maintain 
their  families  by  cotton-spinning.  Wherever  I  went  the 
same  melancholy  picture  confronted  me. 

This  collapse  in  the  cotton  industry  has  indirectly 
affected  trade  in  all  its  branches  by  stopping  the  circula- 
tion of  money,  and  the  cultivators  can  no  longer  reckon 
on  the  manufacturers  who,  in  the  days  of  their  prosperity, 
were  wont  to  buy  up  their  surplus  grain,  and  even  to  lend 
them  money  when  they  were  in  arrears  with  their  taxes. 
This  has  led  the  cultivators  to  the  hard  necessity  of  relin- 
quishing their  grain  to,  and  thus  becoming  the  prey  of, 
remorseless  usurers. 

Such  is  the  deplorable  condition  into  which  the  poor 
Hindus  have  sunk  ;  and  it  grows  worse  daily,  thanks  to 
the  much- vaunted  improvements  in  machinery  which  some 
nations  glory  in.  Ah  !  if  only  the  inventors  of  these  in- 
dustrial developments  could  hear  the  curses  which  this 
multitude  of  poor  Hindus  never  tire  of  heaping  upon  them  ! 
If  only,  like  me,  they  had  seen  the  frightful  misery  which 
has  overtaken  whole  provinces,  owing  entirely  to  them  and 
their  inventive  genius,  they  would  no  doubt,  unless  they 
were  entirely  wanting  in  human  pity,  bitterly  repent  having 
carried  their  pernicious  innovations  so  far,  and  having 
thereby  enriched  a  handful  of  men  at  the  expense  of  millions 
of  poor  people,  to  whom  the  very  name  of  their  com- 
petitors has  become  odious  as  the  sole  cause  of  their  utter 
destitution  ! 

And  let  no  one  venture  to  assert  that  the  unfortunate 
Hindus  can,  if  they  choose,  find  a  recompense  in  the  fertility 
of  their  soil.  The  sight  of  vast  plains  lying  fallow  and 
waste  may  induce  the  superficial  observer  to  accuse  the 
natives  of  indolence  or  the  Government  of  mismanagement, 
but  he  is  not  aware  that  the  greater  part,  if  not  the  whole, 
of  these  vast  plains  are  sterile,  bare,  and  incapable  of 
cultivation  through  want  of  water  during  most  of  the  year. 
In  Southern  India,  at  the  present  time,  there  are  few  lands 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  wells,  tanks,  and  rivers  which 
are  not  under  cultivation,  even  on  the  summits  of  the 
highest  hills  ;  and  if  by  any  chance  a  few  fields  still  lie 


96       THE  HINDU'S  INBRED  CONSERVATISM 

unreclaimed,  it  is  due  to  the  hopeless  sterility  of  the  soil, 
which,  even  in  the  best  seasons,  would  never  repay  the 
labourer  for  his  trouble,  or  else  because,  to  yield  any  profit 
at  all,  they  would  require  more  capital  and  more  courage 
than  most  of  the  people  possess. 

It  is,  to  my  mind,  a  vain  hope  to  suppose  that  we  can 
really  very  much  improve  the  condition  of  the  Hindus,  or 
raise  their  circumstances  of  life  to  the  level  prevailing  in 
Europe.  The  efforts  of  a  Government  which  is  humane 
and  generous,  as  well  as  just,  may  succeed  up  to  a  certain 
point  in  lessening  some  of  their  hardships  ;  but  as  long  as 
it  is  in  the  nature  of  the  Hindus  to  cling  to  their  civil  and 
religious  institutions,  to  their  old  customs  and  habits,  they 
must  remain  what  they  have  always  been,  for  these  are  so 
many  insurmountable  obstacles  in  the  path  of  progress 
and  to  the  attainment  of  a  new  order  of  things  better 
calculated  to  bring  them  happiness.  They  will  continue 
to  grovel  in  poverty  as  long  as  their  physical  and  intellectual 
faculties  continue  in  the  same  groove. 

Therefore,  to  make  a  new  race  of  the  Hindus,  one  would 
have  to  begin  by  undermining  the  very  foundations  of 
their  civilization,  religion,  and  polity,  and  by  turning 
them  into  atheists  and  barbarians.  Having  accomplished 
this  terrible  upheaval,  we  might  then  perhaps  offer  our- 
selves to  them  as  lawgivers  and  religious  teachers.  But 
even  then  our  task  would  be  only  half  accomplished.  After 
dragging  them  out  of  the  depths  of  barbarism,  anarchy, 
and  atheism  into  which  we  had  plunged  them,  and  after 
giving  them  new  laws,  a  new  polity,  and  a  new  religion, 
we  should  still  have  to  give  them  new  natures  and  different 
inclinations.  Otherwise  we  should  run  the  risk  of  seeing 
them  soon  relapse  into  their  former  state,  which  would  be 
worse,  if  anything,  than  before. 

Let  our  theoretical  philanthropists,  with  their  mistaken 
and  superficial  notions  concerning  the  genius  and  character 
of  the  Hindus  and  the  varied  and  multitudinous  social 
links  that  bind  them  together,  exclaim  as  much  as  they 
please  in  their  unreflecting  enthusiasm,  that  nothing  has 
been  done  for  the  physical  and  spiritual  improvement  of 
the  race.  My  reply  is,  '  Why  do  you  expound  your  shallow 
theories  in  Europe  ?     Come  and  study  the  question  on  the 


A  POLICY  OF  NON-INTERFERENCE  97 

spot.  Make  personal  inquiry  into  the  manners  and  customs 
of  the  people  ;  realize  for  yourselves  whether  all  possible 
means  have  been  tried  with  a  view  to  gaining  this  desirable 
end.  And  then,  but  not  till  then,  make  up  your  minds  on 
the  question.' 

Since  our  European  ways,  manners,  and  customs,  so 
utterly  different  from  theirs,  do  not  allow  of  our  winning 
their  confidence,  at  least  let  us  continue  to  earn  their 
respect  and  admiration  by  humane  examples  of  compas- 
sion, generosity,  and  well-doing.  Let  us  leave  them  their 
cherished  laws  and  prejudices,  since  no  human  effort  will 
persuade  them  to  give  them  up,  even  in  their  own  interests, 
and  let  us  not  risk  making  the  gentlest  and  most  sub- 
missive people  in  the  world  furious  and  indomitable  by 
thwarting  them.  Let  us  take  care  lest  we  bring  about,  by 
some  hasty  or  imprudent  course  of  action,  catastrophes 
which  would  reduce  the  country  to  a  state  of  anarchy, 
desolation,  and  ultimate  ruin,  for,  in  my  humble  opinion, 
the  day  when  the  Government  attempts  to  interfere  with 
any  of  the  more  important  religious  and  civil  usages  of 
the  Hindus  will  be  the  last  of  its  existence  as  a  political 
power. 

CHAPTEE  VII 

The  Mythical  Origin  of  the  Brahmins. — Their  Name  and  their  Original 
Founders. — Conjectures  on  their  True  Origin. — Buddhists  and 
Jains. 

The  real  origin  of  the  Brahmins  is  wrapped  in  mystery, 
and  one  can  only  hazard  conjectures  on  the  subject,  or  put 
belief  in  myths.  The  story  most  generally  accepted  says 
that  they  were  born  from  Brahma's  head,  which  accounts 
for  their  name.  One  would  suppose  that  as  all  castes 
were  born  from  this  same  father  they  would  be  privileged  to 
bear  the  same  name  ;  but  as  the  Brahmins  were  the  first- 
born, and  issued  from  the  noblest  part  of  the  common 
parent,  they  claimed  special  privileges  from  which  all 
others  were  rigorously  excluded.  They  have  another 
theory  to  bear  out  the  accepted  belief  that  no  one  else 
is  entitled  to  the  illustrious  name  of  Brahmin.  They  say 
that  no  one  knows  anything  about  Brahma's  attributes 


98  THE  SEVEN   PENITENTS 

and  virtues  beyond  what  they  themselves  choose  to  teach 
mankind,  and  that  this  knowledge  in  itself  gives  them  the 
right  to  bear  his  name.  Anyhow,  their  name  is  undoubtedly 
derived  from  Brahma's.  The  old  writers  call  them  '  Brah- 
manahas,'  or  '  Brahmahas,'  which  some  of  the  Latin 
authors  turned  into  '  Brachmanes.'  The  great  difference 
between  their  caste  and  all  others  is  that  a  Brahmin  only 
becomes  a  Brahmin  after  the  ceremony  of  the  triple  cord, 
which  will  be  described  hereafter.  Until  this  essential 
ceremony  has  been  performed  he  ranks  only  as  a  Sudra. 
By  mere  birth  he  is  no  different  from  the  rest  of  his  race  ; 
and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  he  is  called  Dvija  (Bis  genitus, 
or  Twice-born).  His  first  birth  only  gives  him  his  man- 
hood, whereas  the  second  raises  him  to  the  exalted  rank 
of  Brahmin,  and  this  by  means  of  the  ceremony  of  the 
triple  cord.  Indeed,  two  out  of  the  seven  famous  Peni- 
tents, who  are  supposed  to  have  been  the  original  founders 
of  the  various  sects  of  Brahmins  of  the  present  day,  did 
not  originally  belong  to  this  caste  at  all ;  but  by  reason  of 
the  length  and  austerity  of  their  term  of  penance,  they 
were  rewarded  by  having  their  state  of  penitent  Kshatriyas 
changed  to  that  of  penitent  Brahmins  by  the  investiture 
of  the  triple  cord.  These  seven  Penitents,  or  Rishis,  or 
Munis,  of  Hindu  history  (I  shall  often  refer  to  them  in  the 
pages  of  the  present  work)  are  the  most  celebrated  per- 
sonages recognized  by  the  people  of  India.  Their  names 
are  Kasyapa,  Atri,  Bharadwaja,  Gautama,  Viswamitra, 
Jamadagni,  and  Vasishta.  The  last-named  and  Viswa- 
mitra are  those  who  were  considered  worthy  of  being 
admitted  into  the  high  caste  of  Brahmins.  These  far- 
famed  Rishis  must  be  of  great  antiquity,  for  they  existed 
even  before  the  Vedas,  which  allude  to  them  in  several 
places.  They  were  the  favoured  of  the  gods,  and  more 
especially  of  Vishnu,  who  at  the  time  of  the  Deluge  made 
them  embark  on  a  vessel  which  he  piloted,  and  thereby 
saved  them  from  destruction.  Even  the  gods  were  called 
to  account  for  having  offended  these  holy  men,  who  did 
not  hesitate  to  curse  the  deities  who  committed  infamies. 
The  seven  Penitents,  after  setting  a  virtuous  example 
on  earth,  were  finally  translated  to  heaven,  where  they 
occupy  a  place  amongst  the  most  brilliant  constellations. 


BRAHMIN  ORIGINS  99 

They  are  to  be  recognized  in  the  seven  stars  that  form  the 
Great  Bear,  which,  according  to  Hindu  tradition,  are 
neither  more  nor  less  than  the  seven  famous  Rishis  them- 
selves. They  are,  according  to  Hindu  legend,  the  ancestors 
of  the  Brahmins  in  reality  and  not  by  metamorphosis,  and 
it  is  believed  that  without  ceasing  to  shine  in  the  firmament 
they  can,  and  occasionally  do,  revisit  the  earth  to  find  out 
what  is  occurring  there. 

Are  there  any  families  in  Europe  which  can,  notwith- 
standing the  mythical  origins  which  heraldic  science  pro- 
fesses to  discover,  pride  themselves  on  the  possession  of 
such  ancestors  '?  And  seeing  that  in  our  own  aristocracy 
a  man  with  a  noble  lineage  is  not  above  assuming  an  air 
of  extreme  hauteur  and  exclusiveness,  we  ought  not  to  be 
surprised  at  a  Brahmin's  vanity  or  at  the  contempt  with 
which  he  treats  any  one  belonging  to  an  inferior  caste. 
This  idea  of  handing  down  to  posterity  the  names  of  their 
great  men  by  immortalizing  them,  and  assigning  to  them 
a  place  among  the  constellations,  appears  to  have  been  an 
almost  universal  practice  amongst  ancient  races. 

Astronomy  has  played  an  important  part  in  the  history 
of  almost  all  idolatrous  nations  ;  and  of  all  false  creeds  it 
certainly  is  the  least  unreasonable,  and  has  survived  the 
longest.  The  religious  and  political  lawgivers  of  these 
races  were  clever  enough  to  perceive  that  the  worship  of 
the  stars  had  taken  a  great  hold  upon  mankind,  and  that 
the  simplest  and  most  effectual  way  of  perpetuating  the 
memory  of  their  heroes  would  be  to  transform  them  into 
outward  objects  that  were  always  before  the  eyes  of  the 
people.  It  was  thus  that  the  Greeks  and  Romans  con- 
secrated the  memory  of  their  divinities  and  demi-gods  ; 
and  no  doubt  the  Hindu  lawgivers  were  prompted  to 
immortalize  their  seven  Rishis  by  means  of  the  brightest 
stars  in  the  sky  because  they  realized  that  a  Hindu  imagina- 
tion is  only  appealed  to  through  the  visible,  and  therefore 
that  was  the  best  way  to  perpetuate  the  veneration  due  to 
these  illustrious  beings.  But  whatever  may  have  been  the 
claims  of  Brahmins  to  a  celestial  origin,  it  is  a  well-authen- 
ticated fact  that  neither  their  caste  nor  any  other  existed 
in  the  countries  to  the  north-east  of  Bengal  four  or  five 
centuries  ago.     About  that  time  the  inhabitants  of  those 


100  EARLY  COLONIZATION  OF  INDIA 

parts,  thinking  that  it  might  be  to  their  advantage  to  adopt 
the  customs  of  their  neighbours,  began  to  clamour  for 
Brahmins.  Accordingly,  some  were  made  to  order  out  of 
the  youths  of  the  country,  who,  after  conforming  to  the 
customs  and  rites  of  the  Brahmins,  were  incorporated  into 
their  caste  by  the  investiture  of  the  triple  cord.  The 
descendants  of  these  ready-made  Brahmins  have  ever  since 
been  considered  on  an  equality  with  the  rest.  The  southern 
Brahmins  do  not  care  to  be  reminded  of  the  fact  ;  yet  they 
are  obliged  to  admit  it,  as  well  as  that  two  of  the  Rishis 
were  originally  Kshatriyas.  An  objection  which  people 
often  put  to  them  is  that  if  nothing  but  the  investiture  of 
the  triple  cord  can  make  Brahmins  of  them,  then  their 
wives,  who  do  not  go  through  the  ceremony,  really  belong 
to  the  Sudras  ;  and  this  means  that  all  Brahmins  are  obliged 
to  marry  out  of  their  caste  and  by  so  doing  violate  their 
most  sacred  principles.  The  reply  they  invariably  make 
to  this,  as  to  other  embarrassing  questions,  is  that  they 
are  but  following  time-honoured  customs  and  institu- 
tions. 

One  is  certainly  justified  in  expressing  doubt  on  the 
subject  of  the  Brahmins'  origin,  but  I,  for  one,  should  be 
sorry  to  oppose  my  conjectures  to  their  absurd  fables. 
Far  be  it  from  me  to  start  any  theories.  My  only  desire 
is  to  collect  materials  which  may  help  those  who  are  trying 
to  lift  the  veil  which  shrouds  from  view  the  cradle  of  the 
universe.  It  is  practically  admitted  that  India  was  in- 
habited very  soon  after  the  Deluge,  which  made  a  desert 
of  the  whole  world.  The  fact  that  it  was  so  close  to  the 
plains  of  Sennaar,  where  Noah's  descendants  remained 
stationary  so  long,  as  well  as  its  good  climate  and  the 
fertility  of  the  country,  soon  led  to  its  settlement.  I  will 
say  nothing  of  the  conquests  of  Hercules,  Bacchus,  and 
Osiris,  as  most  learned  men  look  upon  them  as  fabulous 
beings,  and  those  who  admit  an  element  of  truth  in  the 
tales  carefully  denude  them  of  all  the  extravagant  details 
which  tradition  assigns  to  them  *.  The  history  of  Sesostris, 
although  equally  full  of  impossibilities,  has  something  more 
truthful  and  authenticated  about  it.  The  few  ancient 
monuments  which  have  been  preserved  make  him  out  to 
1  See  Plutarch's  Isis  and  Osiris,  chap.  xxxv. 


SUPPOSED  ARABIAN  SETTLEMENTS        101 

have  been  the  bravest,  not  to  say  the  only,  warrior  that 
peaceful  Egypt  had  to  boast  of  for  a  period  of  more  than 
sixteen  centuries,  and  they  also  lead  one  to  believe  that 
he  was  the  greatest  of  all  conquerors,  with  an  empire 
extending  from  the  Danube  to  the  Ganges.  But  his  Indian 
conquests  were  as  temporary  and  unstable  as  those  of  his 
illustrious  rival  Alexander  the  Great  much  later  on  in  the 
world's  history. 

As  to  the  settlements  that  the  Arabs  are  supposed  to 
have  made  in  India,  according  to  some  authors,  I  think 
only  superficial  students  will  be  found  ready  to  believe  in 
them.  The  fact  that  they  are  nomads,  who  have  always 
lived  a  wandering  life  within  reach  of  India,  gives  some 
appearance  of  reality  to  the  theory.  Some  indeed  believe 
that  the  caste  system  was  borrowed  from  them,  since  it 
still  exists  in  Arabia  ;  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  a  custom 
common  to  all  the  ancient  races  of  the  earth. 

I  do  not  trace  the  origin  of  the  Brahmins  either  to 
Egypt  or  to  Arabia,  and  I  believe  them  to  be  the  descen- 
dants not  of  Shem,  as  many  argue,  but  of  Japheth.  Accord- 
ing to  my  theory  they  reached  India  from  the  north,  and 
I  should  place  the  first  abode  of  their  ancestors  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Caucasus. 

Two  famous  mountains  situated  in  Northern  India, 
known  as  Great  Meru  (Maha-Meru)  and  Mount  Mandara 
(Mandara  Parvata),  are  frequently  mentioned  in  their  old 
books  and  in  their  prayers,  liturgies,  and  civil  and  religious 
ceremonies.  These  mountains,  which  I  believe  to  be  one 
and  the  same  under  slightly  different  names,  are  so  far 
away  that  their  precise  whereabouts  is  unknown  to  the 
Brahmins  of  to-day  \  And  this  is  not  surprising  in  a 
country  where  geographical  science  is  confined  to  know- 
ledge of  the  places  situated  between  Benares  and  Cape 
Comorin.  The  Hindus  themselves  claim  to  be  descended 
from  the  inhabitants  of  these  distant  northern  regions, 
and  they  believe  that  it  was  there  that  the  seven  illus- 
trious ancestors  of  the  Brahmins  were  born,  whose  descen- 

1  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  mountains,  and  others  mentioned 
as  lying  around  them,  belong  to  the  great  ranges  of  Central  Asia,  from 
which  flow  the  great  rivers  that  water  Siberia,  China,  Tartary,  and 
Hindustan. — Ed. 


102     THE  SEVEN  SONS  OF  JAPHETH 

dants  have  spread  little  by  little  throughout  the  length  and 
breadth  of  the  land.  This  opinion  of  the  Hindus  as  to  tli<- 
origin  of  the  Brahmins  is  confirmed  by  the  Brahmins 
themselves,  by  the  manner  in  which  they  treat  one  another. 
The  northern  Brahmin  considers  himself  nobler  and  of 
higher  rank  than  his  southern  brother,  inasmuch  as,  having 
originated  closer  to  the  cradle  of  the  race,  there  is  less  room 
for  doubt  concerning  the  fact  of  his  direct  descent  from 
the  Rishis.  Surely  these  seven  Hindu  Penitents,  or  philo- 
sophers, must  be  the  seven  sons  of  Japheth,  who,  with  their 
father  at  their  head,  led  one-third  of  the  human  race 
towards  the  West,  when  men  began  to  disperse  after  the 
Flood.  They  did  not  all  reach  Europe.  Some  of  them  on 
their  way  there  turned  northwards,  under  the  guidance  of 
Magog,  second  son  of  Japheth,  and  penetrated  into  Tartary 
as  far  as  the  Caucasian  Range,  in  which  vast  tract  of 
country  they  made  several  settlements. 

I  hazard  no  conjectures  here  which  are  not  borne  out 
by  the  Scriptures  or  by  the  commentaries  of  its  wise  in- 
terpreters, with  whose  aid  I  might  easily  pretend  to  much 
erudition  ;  it  would  only  be  necessary  to  copy  out  verbatim 
what  Bochart  and  the  savant  Dom  Calmet  have  written 
on  this  subject. 

Any  one  believing  in  the  connexion  between  names  and 
facts  will  be  struck  with  the  similarity  existing  between 
Magog's  name  and  Gautama's,  commonly  called  Gotama. 
Ma,  or  maha,  signifies  great,  so  that  Gotama  must  mean 
the  Great  Gog  or  Magog  1. 

Furthermore,  pagan  history  adds  weight  to  these  con- 
jectures of  mine  on  the  origin  and  antiquity  of  the  Brah- 
mins. Learned  men  allude  to  more  than  one  Prometheus. 
According  to  the  Greeks  the  most  celebrated  of  them  all 
is  a  son  of  Japheth.  He  created  man  out  of  the  soil,  and 
instilled  life  into  him  with  the  fire  stolen  from  heaven. 
This  bold  enterprise  irritated  Jupiter,  who  punished  him 
by  chaining  him  to  one  of  the  Caucasian  Mountains,  where 
a  vulture  devoured  his  liver  as  fast  as  it  renewed  itself. 
Hercules  killed  the  vulture,  and  thereby  put  the  son  of 
Iapetus,  or  Japheth,  out  of  his  torture. 

1  Much  of  this  seems  extremely  fanciful.  Max  Miiller  and  other 
modern  authorities  should  be  consulted. — Ed. 


PROMETHEUS  AND  BRAHMA  103 

Why  should  not  Brahma  and  Prometheus  be  one  and 
the  same  person  ?  The  Hindu  divinity  is  known  also 
under  the  names  of  Brema  and  Prume  in  some  of  their 
tongues.  All  these  names  bear  resemblance  to  Prome- 
theos,  or  the  god  Prome  of  the  Greeks.  Brahma,  like 
Prometheus,  is  looked  upon  as  the  creator  of  man,  who  is 
supposed  to  have  issued  from  the  various  parts  of  Brahma's 
body.  Brahma  was  also  their  great  lawgiver,  being  the 
author  of  the  Vedas,  which  he  wrote  with  his  own  hand. 
He  had  more  than  once  to  appeal  to  Vishnu  for  help,  just 
as  Prometheus  relied  on  Hercules  to  deliver  him  from  his 
enemies. 

This  pretension  on  the  part  of  the  Hindu  Prometheus 
to  be  regarded  as  the  maker  of  man,  and  therefore  a  god, 
has  been  handed  down  in  some  part  to  his  eldest  sons, 
the  Brahmins,  who  humbly  call  themselves  the  Gods 
Brahma,  or  the  Gods  of  the  Earth.  At  certain  times  the 
people  prostrate  themselves  before  them  in  adoration,  and 
offer  up  sacrifices  to  them. 

Again,  several  authors,  both  sacred  and  profane,  have 
tried  to  prove  that  the  Prometheus  who  wished  to  pass  as 
the  creator  of  man  was  no  other  than  Magog  himself.  It 
is  hardly  likely  that  so  near  the  time  of  the  Deluge  the  real 
Creator  should  have  been  so  completely  forgotten  that 
a  son  of  Noah  was  able  to  pass  himself  off  as  a  god  ;  but 
it  is  quite  possible  that  his  descendants  deified  him,  when 
the  spirit  of  idolatry  began  to  reign  on  earth.  It  was 
Magog  who  settled  in  Tartary  with  all  those  who  elected 
to  follow  him,  having  decided  to  separate  from  Japheth's 
other  children.  From  thence  he  or  his  descendants  spread 
over  India  and  other  countries,  which  had  rightly  fallen 
to  Shem's  lot.  This  verified  Noah's  prophecy  that  Japheth's 
dominion  would  be  far-reaching,  and  that  his  posterity 
would  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem  (Gen.  ix.  27).  But  admit- 
ting that  Tartary  or  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Caucasus 
was  the  birthplace  of  the  Brahmins,  it  is  not  easy  to  decide 
the  precise  date  of  their  arrival  in  India.  It  appears 
certain,  however,  that  they  were  already  established  there 
in  a  flourishing  condition  more  than  nine  centuries  before 
the  Christian  era,  as  that  was  about  the  time  of  Lycurgus's 
visit  to  them  ;  and  it  is  not  likely  that  one  of  the  wisest 


104  THE  EARLY  BRAHMINS 

of  the  ancient  philosophers  would  have  undertaken  such 
a  long  and  tedious  journey  unless  the  reputation  of  the 
learned  men  he  was  going  all  that  way  to  consult  was  an 
old  and  established  fact. 

The  ancient  Hindu  works  teach  us  that  the  Brahmins  of 
those  times  differed  essentially  in  matters  of  principle 
and  conduct  from  their  brethren  of  to-day.  The  original 
Brahmin  is  described  as  a  penitent  and  a  philosopher, 
living  apart  from  the  world  and  its  temptations  and  entirely 
engrossed  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge,  leading  a  life  of 
introspection  and  practising  a  life  of  purity.  At  that 
period  of  their  history  the  Brahmins  were  not  such  an 
intolerant  and  exclusive  race  that  penitents  belonging  to 
other  castes  could  not  be  initiated  by  the  Diksha  cere- 
mony *,  or  the  investiture  of  the  triple  cord.  There  are 
many  examples  of  this  in  their  literature.  The  simple  and 
blameless  lives  led  by  the  primitive  Brahmins,  their  con- 
tempt for  wealth  and  honours,  their  disinterestedness,  and, 
above  all,  their  extreme  sobriety,  attracted  the  attention 
of  the  princes  and  the  people.  The  greatest  kings  were 
not  above  rendering  homage  to  them  and  treating  them 
with  more  respect  than  they  would  have  dared  to  demand 
for  themselves  from  their  own  subjects.  These  philo- 
sophers, living  secluded  from  the  world  with  their  wives 
and  children,  multiplied  exceedingly. 

Although  the  modern  Brahmin  has  degenerated  con- 
siderably, he  still  acts  up  to  a  great  many  of  the  customs 
and  institutions  of  his  ancestors.  Like  them,  he  prefers 
to  live  in  retired  places,  far  from  the  noisy  haunts  of  man  ; 
and  that  is  the  reason  why  he  settles  in  isolated  villages, 
from  which  all  natives  belonging  to  other  castes  are  ex- 
cluded. There  are  numbers  of  these  villages  in  the  different 
provinces  of  the  Indian  Peninsula,  and  they  are  known  by 
the  names  of  agraras  or  agraharas  2.  Still  more  do  the 
Brahmins  resemble  their  ancestors  in  the  way  in  which 
they  fast  frequently  and  wash  themselves  daily,  and  in  all 
that  concerns  their  sacrifices  ;  but,  perhaps,  most  of  all  in 

1  Diksha  means  consecration  ;  (undergoing)  a  religious  observance  for 
a  particular  purpose  ;  solemn  preparation. — Ed. 

2  Agrara  is  merely  a  corruption  of  the  word  agrahara,  which  literally 
means  '  land-grant  to  Brahmins.' — Ed. 


CORRUPTION  OF  MODERN  BRAHM1NISM      105 

their  scrupulous  abstinence,  not  only  from  meat  and  all 
forms  of  living  food,  but  even  from  anything  with  which 
superstition  or  prejudice  may  have  connected  any  idea  of 
pollution. 

The  religious  system  of  the  Brahmins  and  the  absurd 
theogony  which  they  have  propagated  in  India  seem  to  be 
the  points  on  which  they  have  gone  most  astray  from  the 
teachings  of  their  predecessors.  I  cannot  believe  that  the 
original  lawgivers  of  the  Hindus  intended  to  introduce 
a  creed  so  abominable  and  palpably  absurd  as  that  which 
at  present  exists  amongst  them.  Their  mythology  origin- 
ally consisted  of  allegories  made  intelligible  by  means  of 
visible  and  material  objects,  so  that  religious  knowledge 
should  not  die  out  of  the  minds  of  men  who  appeared  to 
be  little  influenced  by  anything  that  failed  to  make  a  direct 
impression  on  their  senses.  But  a  coarse,  ignorant,  in- 
dolent, and  superstitious  race  soon  forgot  the  spirit  of  its 
creed,  and  ended  by  believing  solely  in  the  forms  and 
emblems  which  had  been  employed  ;  so  that,  before  long, 
they  quite  lost  sight  of  the  spiritual  beings  of  which  these 
emblems  were  only  symbolical.  But  I  shall  have  occasion 
to  refer  to  this  question  again,  and  so  shall  merely  state 
here  that  the  long  tissue  of  fables  on  which  the  present 
religion  of  the  Hindus  is  founded  is  not,  to  my  mind,  very 
ancient  ;  at  least,  the  greater  part  of  it  is  not.  Although 
some  authors  think  differently,  nothing  will  persuade  me 
that  their  mythology  is  much  older  than  that  of  the 
Greeks. 

The  primitive  creed  of  the  ancient  Brahmins  seems  to 
have  been  utterly  corrupted  by  their  successors.  The  first 
form  of  idolatry  into  which  all  nations  fall,  after  forgetting 
their  traditions  concerning  the  unity  of  God  and  the 
absolute  and  exclusive  worship  He  expects  from  all  His 
creatures,  is  the  adoration  of  the  stars  and  conspicuous 
elements,  such  as  earth,  fire,  and  water.  Apparently  the 
first  Brahmins  practised  the  purer  cult,  but  afterwards 
their  descendants  reached  the  lowest  stage  of  idolatry  by 
adoring  images  and  statues,  which  were  intended  only  as 
the  emblems  of  the  objects  of  their  worship.  It  was  when 
this  came  to  pass  that  India  and  the  greater  part  of  Asia 
probably  split  up  into  the  two  beliefs  which  still  exist, 

E  3 


106  THE  BUDDHISTS 

one  embracing  the  fables  of  the  Trimurti  and  the  other 
the  religion  of  Buddha. 

The  creeds  of  these  two  sects  probably  sprang  from  the 
common  source  of  Brahminism,  and  are  only  corruptions 
of  it.  Some  modern  authors  believe  that  originally  Bud- 
dhism reigned  supreme  throughout  India,  on  either  side 
of  the  Ganges,  and,  perhaps,  even  throughout  the  whole 
of  Asia  from  Siberia  to  Cape  Comorin  and  the  Malacca 
Straits,  and  from  the  Caspian  Sea  to  the  Gulf  of  Kamt- 
chatka.  In  any  case,  Buddhism  appears  to  have  been  as 
ancient  as  the  cult  of  the  Trimurti.  In  both  Tibets,  in 
Tartary,  and  in  China,  we  know  that  Buddhism  still  pre- 
dominates. According  to  the  historian  La  Loubere,  it 
was  introduced  into  China  from  Siam  in  bygone  ages,  and 
not,  as  is  generally  supposed,  from  Cape  Comorin.  In 
Burma,  Siam,  Laos,  Cambodia,  Cochin  China,  Japan, 
Corea,  and  in  most  of  the  kingdoms  beyond  the  Ganges, 
Buddhism  is  the  recognized  religion.  The  Singalese  in- 
habitants of  Ceylon  are  also  Buddhists,  and  the  cult  was 
introduced  to  them  by  missionaries  and  colonists,  who 
a  long  time  ago  came  over  from  Burma  to  settle  there. 
In  fact,  this  religion,  with  the  immortal  Grand  Lama  !  of 
Tibet  as  its  sovereign  pontiff,  is  still  beyond  dispute  of  all 
existing  creeds  the  one  that  embraces  the  greatest  number 
of  adherents. 

If  the  last  census  published  by  order  of  the  Chinese 
Government  is  correct,  their  vast  empire  numbers  about 
300,000,000  inhabitants,  and  if  one  estimates  the  popula- 
tions of  the  remaining  Asiatic  dominions  where  Buddhism 
prevails  at  150,000,000  only,  which  is  a  very  moderate 
calculation,  then  about  one-half  of  the  human  race  has 
Buddhism  for  its  religion. 

Besides  these  two  predominant  creeds,  there  exists 
a  third  about  which,  until  recently,  little  was  known. 
I  refer  to  the  religion  of  the  Jains.  This  sect  stands  quite 
aloof,  hating  equally  both  Brahminists  and  Buddhists,  as 

1  Like  a  second  Phoenix  the  Grand  Lama  never  dies.  When  he  is 
about  to  divest  himself  of  his  earthly  coil,  the  Bonzes  choose  a  child  of 
three  or  four  into  whose  body  they  cause  his  soul  to  migrate,  and  this 
child  is  declared  his  successor.  All  faithful  Buddhists  believe  implicitly 
in  this  miraculous  rebirth. — Dubois. 


THE  JAINS  107 

well  as  their  doctrines.  They  maintain  that  both  the 
Trimurti  and  Buddhism  are  abominable  modern  inven- 
tions, and  mere  travesties  of  the  true  and  primitive 
religion  of  India,  which  has  remained  pure  and  unimpaired 
amongst  them  only.  They  also  hold  that  they  alone  are 
the  real  descendants  of  the  old  Brahmin  Penitents,  whose 
doctrines,  customs,  and  usages  they  protect  from  universal 
degradation  and  from  the  monstrous  innovations  of  Brah- 
mins and  Buddhists  alike. 

Brahminism  underwent  a  hard  struggle  before  it  succeeded 
in  establishing  its  dominion  in  India,  owing  to  the  opposi- 
tion offered  to  it  by  the  Jains  ;  but  after  a  long  and  bloody 
war  the  latter  were  crushed  and  had  to  submit  to  whatever 
conditions  the  Brahmins  chose  to  dictate.  The  jealousy 
and  animosity  which  these  religious  wars  stirred  up  still 
prevail  as  strongly  as  ever,  even  after  a  lapse  of  two  or 
three  thousand  years.  Time,  which  generally  softens  the 
strongest  hatreds  and  brings  together  the  greatest  enemies, 
has,  in  this  case,  failed  to  obliterate  the  traces  of  the 
ancient  wrongs  of  which  each  sect  mutually  accuses  the 
other.  The  daily  prayer  of  a  certain  sect  of  Brahmins 
contains  a  curse  levelled  at  the  heads  of  the  Jains,  who 
retaliate  by  exclaiming,  when  they  rise  to  pray,  'Brahma 
kshayam ! '  '  May  the  Brahmin  perish.'  If  either  sect 
comes  into  power,  it  takes  the  opportunity  of  humiliating 
its  adversaries  and  of  punishing  them  without  mercy  when- 
ever occasion  offers. 

But  whatever  may  be  the  respective  claims  of  Buddhists, 
Brahmins,  and  Jains  with  regard  to  the  antiquity  of  their 
religions  and  the  differences  of  doctrine  that  divide  them, 
it  appears  highly  probable  that  they  all  sprang  originally 
from  the  same  source.  All  three  believe  in  the  funda- 
mental doctrine  of  metempsychosis.  The  images  they 
worship  bear  a  great  likeness  to  one  another,  and  most  of 
these  seem  to  be  merely  allegorical  emblems  invented  to 
help  them  to  remember  their  original  divinities.  All  their 
religious  establishments  are  alike  composed  of  priests, 
monks,  and  hermits.  All  their  sacrifices,  and  the  cere- 
monies which  accompany  them,  are  nearly  identical.  And, 
lastly,  there  is  the  resemblance  of  the  languages  used  by 
the  priests  in  their  religious  services  ;  that  is  to  say,  the 


108  AFFINITY  BETWEEN  RELIGIONS 

Sanskrit  of  the  Brahmins  and  Jains  on  this  side  of  the 
Ganges,  and  the  Pali,  which  is  evidently  derived  from  the 
Sanskrit,  of  the  Buddhists  beyond  the  Ganges.  All  these 
help  to  prove  incontestably  the  affinity  existing  between 
the  three  religions. 

As  very  little  is  known  about  the  Jain  cult  by  Europeans, 
although  it  is  to  be  found  in  all  parts  of  the  Peninsula, 
I  shall  give  in  an  appendix  a  short  account  of  their  doc- 
trines and  of  the  principal  controversial  points  between 
them  and  their  sworn  enemies,  the  Brahmins.  I  should 
like  to  be  able  to  do  the  same  with  regard  to  the  Buddhists, 
but  I  have  not  been  able  to  procure  authentic  documents 
about  their  cult.  Residents  of  Ceylon,  where  Buddhism 
predominates,  ought  to  be  able  to  supply  the  blank  thus 
left  in  my  work. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

Different    Kinds    of   Brahmins. — Outward    Signs    by    which   they    are 
distinguishable. 

Brahmins  are  subdivided  into  seven  sects,  each  of 
which  has  for  its  patron  one  of  the  celebrated  Penitents 
already  mentioned.  Besides  this,  they  are  split  up  into 
four  classes,  each  class  recognizing  one  of  the  four  Vedas 
as  its  own.  Thus  there  are  Brahmins  of  the  Yajur-Veda, 
of  the  Sama-Veda,  of  the  Rig-Veda,  and  of  the  Atharva- 
Veda.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  this  fourth  class  is  extinct  ; 
but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  still  exists,  although  there  are 
but  few  representatives  left,  who  are  even  more  exoteric 
than  the  other  castes,  because  they  allow  bloody  sacrifices 
to  be  offered  up,  and  do  not  even  draw  the  line  at  human 
beings.  Added  to  this,  they  teach  a  belief  in  witchcraft, 
and  any  one  who  is  supposed  to  possess  the  art  earns  the 
odious  reputation  of  being  a  sorcerer.  When  the  yagnam 
sacrifice  takes  place,  it  is  customary  for  Brahmins  of  all 
four  Vedas  to  be  present.  The  prayers  which  are  offered 
up  at  the  sandhya  1  are  quoted  from  the  four  Vedas,  each 

1  Later  on  I  shall  explain  in  what  the  yagnam  and  sandhya  consist. — 
Dubois.  [  Yagnam  literally  means  worship  (in  prayer  or  praise) ;  sacri- 
ficial rite,  or  sacrifice  (to,  of,  by)]. — Ed. 


MARKS  OF  THE  BRAHMINS  109 

Brahmin  repeating  those  of  his  own  particular  Veda, 
which  accounts  for  the  slight  differences.  Under  ordinary 
circumstances  the  Brahmins  do  not  appear  to  be  very 
strict  about  these  minor  distinctions,  or  to  prefer  one 
Veda  to  another.  Nor  is  this  altogether  surprising,  con- 
sidering that  the  author  of  the  famous  Indian  poem  Bhaga- 
vata  declares  that  originally  the  four  Vedas  were  one  and 
the  same.  According  to  him  it  was  the  Penitent  Vyasa 
who  divided  them  into  four  books,  and  at  the  same  time 
added  introductions  and  commentaries  to  render  them 
more  intelligible.  Indeed,  owing  to  inherent  faults,  or  to 
the  mistakes  made  by  ignorant  and  inattentive  copyists, 
the  Vedas  are  so  obscure  that  even  men  of  learning  find  it 
hard  to  fathom  them.  I  shall  have  more  to  say  about  the 
Vedas  presently.  To  Vyasa  is  also  attributed  the  author- 
ship of  the  eighteen  Puranas1.  These  are  eighteen  poems, 
all  equally  futile,  containing  most  minute  accounts  of 
Hindu  mythology  with  its  gods  and  heroes.  The  fables 
contained  in  them  are  responsible  for  the  gross  forms  of 
idolatry  practised  by  the  Hindus. 

Brahmins  are  also  distinguishable  by  their  sect,  by  their 
names,  by  the  marks  which  they  trace  on  their  foreheads 
and  other  parts  of  the  body,  and  also  by  the  high  priest 
to  whose  jurisdiction  they  are  subject.  The  four  principal 
sects  of  Brahmins  south  of  the  Kistna  are  :  the  Vishnavites, 
the  Smarthas,  the  Tatuvadis,  and  the  Utrassas.  The  dis- 
tinctive mark  of  the  Vishnavite  Brahmins  is  the  namam  2. 
Their  simhasana,  that  is,  the  place  where  their  high  priest 
resides  and  their  chief  school,  is  at  Hobbala  in  the  Northern 
Carnatic.  The  Smartha  Brahmins  trace  three  horizontal 
lines  on  the  forehead  with  sandalwood  paste.  Their  sim- 
hasana is  at  Singeri  in  North-west  Mysore.  Besides  these 
horizontal  lines  on  the  brow,  the  Tatuvadi  Brahmins  have 
ineffaceable  marks  branded  on  certain  parts  of  their  bodies 
with    a   red-hot   iron.     Their   simhasana    is   at   Sravenur. 

1  The  names  are  Brahma-purana,  Padma  purana,  Vishnu-purana, 
Siva-purana,  Bhagavata,  Bavirhotara-purana,  Naraddia,  Markandeya- 
purana,  Brahniakeyvreta- purana,  Linga- purana,  Yaraha- purana,  Skanda- 
purana,  Vamana-purana,  Vayu-purana,  Kurma-purana,  Matsia-purana, 
Garuda-purana,  Brahmanda-purana. — Dubois. 

-  See  following  chapter. 


110  BRAHMINICAL  SECTS 

The  Utrassa  Brahmins  draw  a  perpendicular  line  from  the 
top  of  the  forehead  to  the  base  of  the  nose. 

There  are  also  Brahmins  known  as  Cholias,  who  are  more 
or  less  looked  down  upon  by  the  rest.  They  appear  to  be 
conscious  of  their  own  inferiority,  for  they  hold  themselves 
aloof  from  other  Brahmins.  All  menial  work  connected 
with  the  temples  is  performed  by  them,  such  as  washing 
and  decorating  the  idols,  preparing  lighted  lamps,  incense, 
flowers,  fruits,  rice,  and  other  similar  objects  of  which 
sacrifices  are  composed.  In  many  temples  even  Sudras 
are  allowed  to  exercise  these  functions,  and  men  of  this 
caste  are  always  chosen  for  the  office  of  sacrificer  in  pagodas 
where  rams,  pigs,  cocks,  and  other  living  victims  are  offered 
up.  No  Brahmin  would  ever  consent  to  take  part  in 
a  sacrifice  where  blood  has  to  be  shed.  It  is  perhaps  on 
account  of  the  work  they  condescend  to  do  that  the  Cholia 
Brahmins  have  fallen  into  such  contempt.  According  to 
the  general  view  of  the  Brahmins,  to  do  any  work  which 
can  be  left  to  the  lowest  amongst  the  Sudras  is  to  put 
themselves  on  their  level,  and  consequently  to  degrade 
themselves.  In  any  case  the  work  of  a  pujari  is  not  thought 
much  of,  and  by  some  it  is  considered  absolutely  degrading. 
However,  some  Brahmins  have  to  accept  this  task  on 
account  of  their  poverty,  but  they  only  do  so  with  extreme 
reluctance.  It  is  a  common  proverb  amongst  them  that 
for  the  sake  of  one's  belly  one  must  play  many  parts  l. 

There  are  other  Brahmins  who  are  derisively  called  meat 
Brahmins  and  fish  Brahmins.  For  instance,  there  are  the 
Konkani  Brahmins,  who  come  from  Konkana,  who  eat  fish 
and  eggs  without  the  slightest  compunction,  but  will  not 
touch  meat.  And  there  are  many  Brahmins  from  the 
northern  provinces  who  make  no  secret  of  the  fact  that 
they  eat  meat.  People  tell  me,  though  I  can  hardly  believe 
it,  that  such  conduct  does  not  lessen  the  esteem  in  which 
they  are  held  in  their  own  country  by  those  of  their  own 
caste  who  abstain  from  such  forbidden  food.  Anyhow, 
when  these  degenerate  Brahmins  visit  Southern  India,  and 
their  ways  become  known,  all  the  other  Brahmins  keep 
them  at  a  distance  and  refuse  to  have  any  dealings  with 

1  In  Sanskrit :  Udara  nimittam  bahii  krita  vcsham,  which  literally 
means,  '  For  the  belly's  sake  many  rCics  are  played.' — Ed. 


SOUTHERN  AND  NORTHERN  BRAHMINS     111 

them.  I  wonder  whether  the  first  Hindu  lawgivers  forbade 
the  eating  of  meat  and  of  all  other  substances  containing 
the  germ  of  life.  Do  the  southern  Brahmins  observe  a  rule 
strictly  laid  down,  and  do  the  northern  Brahmins  therefore 
break  a  law  common  to  the  whole  caste  ?  It  is  probable 
that  the  northern  Brahmins,  feeling  the  want  of  more 
substantial  food,  freed  themselves  from  a  custom  which 
was  not  found  irksome  by  their  southern  brethren  in  a 
hotter  climate. 


CHAPTER  IX 

The  different  Hindu  Sects. — Vishnavites  and  Sivaites. — The  Exterior 
Marks  and  Customs  peculiar  to  each. — The  Pavadam. — The  Mutual 
Hatreds  and  Differences  between  the  Sects. — Reason  for  the  Dislike 
which  ordinary  Brahmins  feel  for  Vishnavite  Brahmins  and  those 
belonging  to  other  Sects. — Subdivisions  of  the  two  Principal  Sects. 

The  Brahmins  recognize  six  sects,  which  they  designate 
by  the  generic  name  of  Shat  Mata  (the  Six  Sects,  or  Six 
Schools)  ;  and  each  of  these  sects  has  a  numerous  follow- 
ing. They  are  composed  entirely  of  Brahmins,  and  each 
has  its  own  particular  doctrine  of  metempsychosis.  How- 
ever, they  do  not  carry  these  purely  scholastic  differences 
to  the  point  of  reciprocal  hatred  or  persecution,  and  the 
subjects  under  dispute  are  pretty  much  the  same  as  those 
which  provoke  polemical  discussions  amongst  scholars  and 
dialecticians  in  other  countries.  I  shall  refer  again  to  this 
matter  elsewhere,  and  will  now  speak  about  the  two  great 
sects  of  the  Sudras.  It  will  be  seen  that  they  are  far  from 
being  as  calm  and  tolerant  over  points  of  doctrine  as  the 
Brahmins.  As  a  general  rule,  Hindus  profess  to  pay  equal 
honour  to  the  two  great  divinities  of  the  country,  Vishnu 
and  Siva,  without  showing  preference  for  either,  though 
there  are  a  great  many  sectarians  who  devote  themselves 
exclusively  to  the  worship  of  one  or  the  other. 

The  one  sect  is  usually  called  Vishnu-bhaktas,  which 
means  votaries  of  Vishnu  ;  the  other  is  called  Siva-bhaktas, 
or  votaries  of  Siva.  The  latter  sect  is  also  called  Linga- 
daris,  and  the  former  Namadaris.  These  names  are  derived 
from  the  distinguishing  marks  which  the  sectarians  wear  \ 

1  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  anything  more  obscene  than  the  meaning 


112  VLSHNAVITE  DEVOTEES 

The  followers  of  Vishnu  wear  the  emblem  called  namam, 
which  they  paint  on  their  foreheads.  It  consists  of  three 
lines,  one  perpendicular  and  two  oblique,  meeting  at  the  base, 
and  thus  forming  a  sign  which  resembles  a  trident.  The 
centre  line  is  red,  the  two  outer  lines  are  white  and  are 
painted  on  with  a  sort  of  clay  called  namam  ;  hence  the 
name  given  to  this  emblem.  The  distinctive  sign  of  the 
Sivaites  is,  generally  speaking,  the  lingam.  They  sometimes 
wear  it  fastened  to  the  hair  or  round  the  arm,  enclosed 
in  a  little  silver  tube  ;  but  more  often  they  hang  it  round 
the  neck,  and  the  silver  box  containing  it  rests  on  the 
chest. 

Instead  of  the  namam,  some  devotees  of  Vishnu  paint 
a  single  red  perpendicular  line  in  the  middle  of  their  fore- 
heads in  a  distinctive  manner  ;  and  instead  of  the  lingam 
many  of  the  votaries  of  Siva  rub  their  foreheads  and  various 
parts  of  their  bodies  with  the  ashes  of  cow- dung  by  way 
of  showing  their  devotion. 

The  special  devotees  of  Vishnu  are  to  be  found  in  great 
numbers  in  the  southern  provinces  of  India,  where  they 
are  known  by  various  names,  such  as  Andi,  Dasari,Raman- 
jogi,  Bairagi,  and  many  others  1. 

Besides  the  namam,  which  is  an  unmistakable  sign  of 
this  sect,  most  of  the  devotees  may  also  be  distinguished 
by  the  extraordinary  costume  that  they  affect.  The  clothes 
which  they  wear  are  dyed  a  deep  yellow,  shading  into  red ; 
many  cover  their  shoulders  with  a  coloured  patchwork 
blanket,  which  they  partly  use  as  a  cloak ;  their  turbans, 
too,  are  composed  of  a  motley  of  many  hues.  Some  wear 
a  cheetah's  skin  on  their  shoulders  instead  of  the  blanket. 
Most  of  them  have  long  necklaces  of  black  seeds,  the  size 
of  nuts.  Besides  this  ridiculous  costume,  which  vies  with 
a  jester's  motley,  the  devotees  of  Vishnu  always  carry 
a  bronze  gong  and  a  conch  shell  called  a  sangu  when  they 
are  travelling  or  begging.     Both  of  these  are  used  to  make 

of  these  two  marks  of  Hindu  worship,  namely,  the  lingam  and  the 
namam  ;  obscene,  that  is,  from  the  European  point  of  view.  From 
the  Hindu  point  of  view  they  symbolize  spiritual  and  religious  truths 
connected  with  the  divine  origin  and  generation  of  mankind. — Ed. 

1  The  Abbe  is  wrong  in  saying  that  an  Andi  is  a  devotee  of  Vishnu  ; 
he  is  always  a  devotee  of  Siva.  Among  Bairagis,  too,  there  are  devotees 
both  of  Vishnu  and  of  Siva. — Ed. 


RELIGIOUS  BEGGARS  113 

a  noise  and  to  announce  their  approach  \  With  one  hand 
they  strike  the  gong  with  a  little  drumstick,  producing 
a  bell-like  sound  ;  with  the  other  they  hold  the  sangu  to 
their  mouth,  and  blow  through  it  shrill  and  piercing  sounds, 
which  are  very  monotonous.  These  two  objects  are  always 
to  be  seen  in  the  hands  of  those  followers  of  Vishnu  who 
are  beggars  by  profession,  and  who  in  some  way  resemble 
the  mendicant  friars  of  old.  On  their  breasts  they  wear 
a  sort  of  brass  plate,  on  which  is  engraved  a  likeness  of  the 
monkey  Hanumanta,  or  else  one  of  the  Avatars,  or  incarna- 
tions, of  Vishnu.  Some  of  them  wear  a  number  of  little 
bells  either  hanging  from  their  shoulders  or  on  their  legs, 
the  tinkling  of  which  warns  people  of  their  approach.  To 
all  the  above  paraphernalia  some  add  an  iron  rod,  at  each 
end  of  which  hangs  a  little  brazier  of  the  same  metal  con- 
taining the  fire  for  burning  the  incense  of  which  their 
sacrifices  are  composed. 

To  ask  for  alms  is  looked  upon  as  a  right,  and  even  an 
inherent  duty,  in  this  sect.  Indeed,  as  a  rule  in  India 
any  one  who  assumes  the  cloak  of  religion  can  practise 
begging  as  a  profession. 

It  is  principally  when  they  are  making  pilgrimages  to 
some  sacred  spot  that  these  religious  beggars  make  use  of 
their  privileges.  Sometimes  you  meet  as  many  as  a 
thousand  in  one  party.  They  scatter  themselves  through 
the  various  villages  within  reach  of  their  route,  and  each 
inhabitant  takes  in  a  certain  number  of  them,  so  that  all 
travelling  expenses  are  saved.  This  is  the  only  occasion 
on  which  they  travel  in  such  large  numbers,  though  they 
never  wander  about  quite  alone.  Their  manner  when 
demanding  alms  is  most  insolent  and  audacious,  and  often 
threatening.  If  their  demands  are  not  instantly  complied 
with,  they  will  noisily  repeat  their  request,  striking  their 
gongs  and  producing  the  most  deafening  sounds  from  their 
sangus  all  the  time.  If  such  methods  are  not  successful, 
they  have  been  known  to  force  their  way  into  a  house, 
break  all  the  household  utensils,  and  damage  everything 
they  can  find.  These  religious  mendicants  generally  pursue 
their  begging  to  an  accompaniment  of  singing  and  dancing. 
Their  songs  are  a  species  of  hymns  in  honour  of  their 
1  Also  devotees  of  Siva  do  this. — Ed. 


114     BEGGARS  AND  INTEMPERANCE 

deities  ;  and  they  very  often  sing  indecent  ballads.  The 
more  freely  the  latter  are  interlarded  with  obscenities, 
the  better  are  they  calculated  to  attract  offerings  from 
the  public. 

The  intemperance  to  which  these  religious  beggars,  and 
indeed  all  the  devotees  of  Vishnu,  are  addicted,  causes  the 
better  class  of  Hindus  to  regard  them  with  great  disfavour. 
In  fact,  such  mendicants  seem  rather  to  pride  themselves 
on  their  want  of  moderation  in  eating  and  drinking,  from 
a  feeling  of  opposition  to  the  Lingayats,  and  in  order  to 
make  the  difference  between  themselves  and  their  adver- 
saries more  apparent.  The  sobriety  of  the  latter  equals,  if 
it  does  not  surpass,  that  of  the  Brahmins.  Vishnavites  eat 
all  kinds  of  meat  ostentatiously,  and  drink  arrack,  toddy, 
or  any  other  intoxicating  liquors  or  drugs  that  they  can 
procure,  without  scruple  or  shame.  Excesses  of  all  kinds 
are  laid  to  their  charge,  and  it  is  amongst  them  that  that 
most  abominable  rite  called  sakti-puja l  is  practised,  of 
which  I  shall  speak  at  greater  length  further  on. 

The  chief  objects  of  veneration  amongst  the  votaries  of 
Vishnu  are  the  monkey,  the  bird  of  prey  called  garuda,  and 
the  cobra.  Should  any  one  be  so  imprudent  as  to  kill,  or 
even  injure,  any  one  of  these  creatures  in  their  presence, 
he  might  find  the  consequences  very  unpleasant,  and  he 
would  only  be  able  to  expiate  this  supposed  crime  by  offer- 
ing the  sacrifice  called  pavadam,  which  is  only  performed 
on  very  grave  occasions,  such  as  those  just  mentioned,  or 
when  it  is  a  question  of  obtaining  reparation  for  an  injury 
done  to  some  member  of  the  sect,  but  felt  to  reflect  on  all 
the  others.  This  expiatory  sacrifice  is  a  very  serious 
affair  ;  for  it  consists  in  immolating  a  human  victim,  and 
then  resuscitating  him  ! 

When  it  is  reported  that  any  person  has  committed  such 
an  offence  as  renders  the  pavadam  necessary,  all  the  Vishnu- 
bhaktas  flock  in  crowds  to  the  culprit's  house,  round  which 
as  many  as  2,000  and  more  have  been  known  to  assemble, 
each  of  them  provided  with  his  gong  and  his  sangu.     They 

1  Sakti-puja  is  the  worship  of  Sakti,  which  is  the  active  power  or 
female  energy  of  a  deity  (especially  of  Siva).  This  puja  is  observed 
largely  among  the  Sivaites,  and  to  some  extent  among  the  Vishnavites. 
—Ed. 


THE  PA  V  AD  AM  SACRIFICE  115 

begin  by  arresting  the  person  who  is  the  cause  of  the  assem- 
blage ;  and  then  they  erect  at  a  short  distance  from  the 
house  a  small  tent,  which  is  quickly  surrounded  by  many 
rows  of  Vishnavites.  The  chiefs  select  some  member  of 
the  sect  who  is  willing  to  be  sacrificed,  and  he  is  exhibited 
to  the  crowd  who  have  come  to  witness  the  spectacle. 
They  make  a  slight  incision  in  his  arm  from  which  blood 
flows,  and  the  victim  then  appears  to  grow  weaker  and 
weaker,  until  he  falls  fainting  to  the  ground,  where  he 
remains  motionless.  The  victim,  who  of  course  is  only 
feigning  death,  is  then  carried  to  the  tent  which  has  been 
erected  for  the  purpose,  and  around  which  the  Vishnu- 
bhaktas  group  themselves,  taking  great  care  that  no  one 
shall  approach  who  does  not  belong  to  their  sect.  Others 
watch  the  house  of  him  who  has  been  the  cause  of  the 
ceremony.  All  this  time  the  whole  multitude  are  shouting 
and  screaming  at  the  top  of  their  voices,  which,  added  to 
the  banging  of  the  gongs  and  the  harsh  and  lugubrious 
notes  of  the  sangus,  produces  a  din  and  confusion  of  sounds 
as  indescribable  as  they  are  unbearable.  This  fearful 
hubbub  continues  until  the  offending  party  has  paid  the 
fine  imposed  on  him,  which  is  generally  far  beyond  his 
means.  However,  the  inhabitants  of  the  village  and  neigh- 
bourhood, exasperated  beyond  all  measure,  usually  try  and 
make  some  agreement  with  the  leader  of  the  fanatics, 
and,  paying  them  part  of  the  stipulated  sum,  entreat  them 
to  bring  the  ceremony  of  the  pavadam  to  a  speedy  termina- 
tion, and  to  return  to  their  homes.  When  their  demands 
have  been  satisfied  the  headmen  retire  to  the  tent,  and 
restore  the  dead  man  to  life.  To  bring  about  this  miracle 
an  incision  is  made  in  the  thigh  of  somebody  amongst  them. 
The  blood  which  flows  from  it  is  collected  in  a  vessel,  and 
then  sprinkled  over  the  body  of  the  victim.  By  virtue  of 
this  simple  ceremony  the  pretended  dead  man  comes  back 
to  life,  in  the  best  possible  health.  He  is  then  again  shown 
to  the  spectators,  who  appear  thoroughly  convinced  of  the 
reality  of  this  marvellous  resurrection  \ 

In  order  to  consummate  the  expiation  of  the  crime  or 

1  The  pavadam  is  probably  called  after  Pavadammai,  a  minor  deity 
of  ferocious  temper.  The  ceremony  is  not  observed  nowadays  in  any 
part  of  the  country. — Ed. 


116  THE  LINO  AY  ATS  OR  SIVAITES 

offence  which  lias  given  rise  to  the  ceremony,  they  give 
a  great  feast  with  the  money  derived  from  the  fine,  and 
every  one  departs  as  soon  as  it  is  over. 

I  once  saw  the  pavadam  celebrated  with  much  solemnity 
in  a  village  near  my  house.  The  offence  which  provoked 
it  arose  from  an  inhabitant  of  the  village  having  uninten- 
tionally felled  a  tree  called  kaka-mara  \  which  bears  yellow 
Mowers,  and  to  which  the  followers  of  Vishnu  offer  sacrifices 
and  worship. 

The  sect  of  Siva  is  just  as  numerous  as  that  of  Vishnu. 
It  predominates  altogether  in  several  provinces.  In  the 
western  parts  of  the  Peninsula,  along  the  whole  length  of 
the  long  chain  of  mountains  which  separates  what  are 
known  in  Europe  as  Malabar  and  Coromandel,  the  followers 
of  Siva  form  at  least  half  of  the  population  for  a  distance 
extending  for  more  than  100  miles  from  north  to  south. 

Like  the  Brahmins  they  abstain  from  all  animal  food 
and  from  everything  that  has  had  even  a  germ  of  life, 
such  as  eggs,  &c,  some  vegetable  products  being  included 
under  this  head.  Instead  of  burning  their  dead,  as  do 
most  Hindus,  they  bury  them.  They  do  not  recognize 
the  laws  relating  to  defilement  which  are  generally  accepted 
by  other  castes,  such,  for  instance,  as  those  occasioned  by 
a  woman's  periodical  ailments,  and  by  the  death  and  funeral 
of  relations.  They  have  also  other  rules  and  regulations 
which  differ  from  those  generally  in  force.  Their  indiffer- 
ence to  all  such  prescriptive  customs  relating  to  defilement 
and  cleanliness  has  given  rise  to  a  Hindu  proverb  which 
says  :  '  There  is  no  river  for  a  Lingayat  '  ;  meaning  that 
the  members  of  this  sect  do  not  recognize,  at  all  events 
on  many  occasions,  the  virtues  and  merits  of  ablutions. 

The  point  in  the  creed  of  the  Sivaites  which  appears  to 
me  to  be  most  remarkable  is  their  entire  rejection  of  that- 
fundamental  principle  of  the  Hindu  religion,  marujanma , 
or  metempsychosis.  In  consequence  of  their  peculiar  views 
on  this  point  they  have  no  titis,  or  anniversary  festivals, 
to  commemorate  the  dead  and  to  afford  them  the  benefit 
of  the  prayers,  sacrifices,  and  intercessions  of  the  living, 
of  which  festivals  I  shall  speak  more  fully  later  on.  A 
Lingayat  is  no  sooner  buried  than  he  is  forgotten. 
1  Cassia  fistula. — Ed. 


THE  SIVAITE  GURUS  117 

Amongst  the  Sivaites  there  also  exists  a  sect  known  by 
the  name  of  Vira-seiva,  which  refuses  to  recognize  any 
caste  distinctions,  maintaining  that  the  lingam  makes  all 
men  equal.  If  even  a  Pariah  joins  the  sect  he  is  con- 
sidered in  no  way  inferior  to  a  Brahmin.  Wherever  the 
lingam  is  found,  there,  they  say,  is  the  throne  of  the  deity, 
without  distinction  of  class  or  rank.  The  Pariah's  humble 
hut  containing  this  sacred  emblem  is  far  above  the  most 
magnificent  palace  where  it  is  not. 

The  direct  opposition  of  their  religious  tenets  and  rules 
of  life  to  those  of  all  other  Hindus,  and  especially  to  those 
of  Brahmins,  renders  the  Lingayats  peculiarly  obnoxious 
in  the  eyes  of  the  latter,  who  cannot  endure  the  sight  of 
the  Jangamas  and  other  headmen  of  the  sect.  Amongst 
the  Lingayats,  as  amongst  the  Namadaris,  are  an  immense 
number  of  religious  beggars,  called  Pandarams,  Voderus, 
Jangamas,  &c.  Many  of  these  penitent  Sivaites  have  no 
other  means  of  subsistence  except  begging.  They  ply  their 
trade  systematically  and  in  gangs.  Some,  however,  live  in 
retreat  in  the  mutts  (monasteries)  or  temples,  which  usually 
possess  lands,  the  rents  of  which,  added  to  the  offerings 
of  the  faithful,  are  sufficient  to  maintain  them. 

The  gurus,  or  priests  of  Siva,  who  are  known  in  the 
western  provinces  by  the  name  of  Jangamas,  are  for  the 
most  part  celibates.  They  have  a  custom  which  is  peculiar 
to  themselves,  and  curious  enough  to  be  worth  remarking. 
When  a  guru  travels  about  his  district  he  lodges  with  some 
member  of  the  sect,  and  the  members  contend  amongst 
themselves  for  the  honour  of  receiving  him.  When  he  has 
selected  the  house  he  wishes  to  stay  in,  the  master  and  all 
the  other  male  inmates  are  obliged,  out  of  respect  for  him, 
to  leave  it,  and  go  and  stay  elsewhere.  The  holy  man 
remains  there  day  and  night  with  only  the  women  of  the 
house,  whom  he  keeps  to  wait  on  him  and  cook  for  him, 
without  creating  any  scandal  or  exciting  the  jealousy  of 
the  husbands.  All  the  same,  some  scandal- mongers  have 
remarked  that  the  Jangamas  always  take  care  to  choose 
a  house  where  the  women  are  young. 

The  costume  worn  by  the  ascetics  of  Siva  is  very  much 
the  same  as  that  of  the  Vishnavites.  Both  are  equally 
peculiar   in   their   attire.     They   always    wear   clothes   of 


118  AN  INITIATORY  RITE 

kavi  colour,  that  is  to  say,  dark  yellow  verging  on  red. 
This  colour  is  obligatory,  not  only  on  the  devotees  of  both 
Vishnu  and  Siva,  but  also  on  every  one  who  is  under  a  vow 
of  penance.  It  is  the  colour  affected  by  all  gurus  and  Hindu 
priests  of  all  denominations,  by  fakirs,  also  by  all  the  priests 
and  religious  followers  of  Buddha  who  live  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Ganges. 

Besides  the  lingam,  there  are  several  other  outward 
signs  by  which  the  devotees  of  Siva  may  be  recognized, 
such  as  the  long  necklaces  of  seeds  called  rudrakshas,  which 
resemble  a  nutmeg  in  size,  colour,  and  nearly  in  shape  ; 
also  the  cow-dung  ashes  with  which  they  besmear  their 
forehead,  arms,  and  various  other  portions  of  the  body. 
The  two  chief  objects  of  their  devotion  are  the  lingam  and 
the  bull. 

Though  children  usually  follow  the  religion  of  their 
fathers,  they  do  not  become  Vishnavites  or  Lingayats 
merely  by  right  of  birth.  They  are  only  admitted  to  the 
sect  that  their  parents  belong  to  when  they  have  reached 
a  certain  age,  and  after  being  initiated  by  the  guru.  This 
ceremony  of  initiation  is  called  diksha  \  It  consists  in 
repeating  certain  appropriate  mantrams,  or  prayers,  over 
the  neophyte,  and  whispering  some  secret  instructions  in 
his  ear.  But  these  are  all  spoken  in  a  language  which  is 
seldom  understood  even  by  the  person  who  presides  at  the 
ceremony. 

By  the  diksha  the  new  member  acquires  a  perpetual 
right  to  all  the  privileges  of  the  sect  into  which  he  has 
been  admitted.  Persons  of  all  castes  can  become  Vish- 
navites, and  after  their  admission  can  wear  the  namam  or 
distinctive  mark  on  their  foreheads.  Neither  Pariahs  nor 
even  Chucklers  are  excluded  ;  and  it  has  been  noticed  that 
the  lower  castes  are  particularly  numerous  in  this  sect. 

I  do  not  think  there  would  be  any  greater  difficulty  in 
becoming  a  member  of  the  Siva  sect,  but  as  on  initiation 
the  members  undertake  to  entirely  give  up  eating  meat 
and  drinking  any  intoxicating  liquor,  the  lower  castes, 
who  do  both  unhesitatingly,  find  the  conditions  too  hard. 
Consequently,    only   high-class    Sudras    and   scarcely   any 

1  This  word  means  '  initiation.'  Native  Christians  often  call  Baptism 
gniana  diksha,  which  means  '  spiritual  initiation.' — Dubois. 


TOLERANT  SECTARIANISM  119 

Pariahs  belong  to  this  sect.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for 
people  to  change  from  one  sect  to  the  other,  according  as 
it  suits  their  interest,  or  even  out  of  spite  or  caprice.  Either 
sect  will  take  a  convert  from  the  other  without  asking  any 
questions  or  making  any  difficulty.  Sometimes  one  comes 
across  missionaries  scouring  the  country  with  written  pro- 
fessions of  faith  in  their  hands,  and  using  various  means 
for  gaining  proselytes  to  their  respective  sects.  In  some 
parts  a  remarkable  peculiarity  is  to  be  observed  in  refer- 
ence to  these  two  sects.  Sometimes  the  husband  is  a 
Vishnavite  and  bears  the  namam  on  his  forehead,  while 
the  wife  is  a  follower  of  Siva  and  wears  the  lingam.  The 
former  eats  meat,  but  the  latter  may  not  touch  it.  This 
divergence  of  religious  opinion,  however,  in  no  way  destroys 
the  peace  of  the  household.  Each  observes  the  practices 
of  his  or  her  own  particular  creed,  and  worships  his  or  her 
god  in  the  way  that  seems  best,  without  any  interference 
from  the  other.  At  the  same  time,  each  sect  tries  its  best 
to  magnify  its  own  particular  deity  and  to  belittle  that  of 
its  rivals.  The  devotees  of  Vishnu  declare  that  the  pre- 
servation of  the  universe  is  entirely  due  to  him,  and  that 
to  him  Siva  owes  both  his  birth  and  existence,  since  Vishnu 
saved  him  several  times  under  such  circumstances  that 
without  his  aid  Siva  must  infallibly  have  perished.  There- 
fore Vishnu  is  immeasurably  above  Siva  in  every  respect, 
and  to  him  alone  should  homage  be  offered. 

The  devotees  of  Siva,  on  their  side,  maintain  obstinately 
that  Vishnu  is  of  no  account,  and  has  never  committed 
any  but  the  basest  actions,  which  only  disgrace  him  and 
make  him  hateful  in  the  eyes  of  men.  As  proofs  of  their 
assertions  they  point  to  several  facts  in  the  life  of  this 
deity,  which  their  adversaries  cannot  deny,  and  which 
certainly  do  not  redound  to  his  credit.  Siva,  according  to 
them,  is  sovereign  lord  of  all,  and  therefore  the  proper 
object  of  all  worship. 

According  to  the  Vishnavites  it  is  the  height  of  all 
abomination  to  wear  the  lingam.  According  to  their 
antagonists,  whoever  is  decorated  with  the  namam  will  be 
tormented  in  hell  by  a  sort  of  fork  similar  in  form  to  this 
emblem.  These  mutual  recriminations  often  end  in  violent 
altercations  and  riots.     The  numerous  bands  of  religious 


120  SECTARIAN  SQUABBLES 

mendicants  of  both  sects  are  specially  apt  to  provoke 
strife.  One  may  sometimes  see  these  fanatics  collected 
together  in  crowds  to  support  their  opinion  of  the  super- 
excellence  of  their  respective  doctrines.  They  will  over- 
whelm each  other  with  torrents  of  abuse  and  obscene 
insults,  and  pour  forth  blasphemies  and  imprecations,  on 
one  side  against  Siva,  on  the  other  against  Vishnu  ;  and 
finally  they  will  come  to  blows.  Fortunately  blood  is 
seldom  shed  on  these  battle-fields.  They  content  them- 
selves with  dealing  each  other  buffets  with  their  fists, 
knocking  off  each  other's  turbans,  and  much  tearing  of 
garments.  Having  thus  given  vent  to  their  feelings,  the 
combatants  separate  by  mutual  consent. 

That  these  religious  dissensions  do  not  set  the  whole 
country  ablaze,  or  occasion  those  crimes  of  all  kinds  which 
were  for  centuries  the  result  of  religious  fanaticism  in 
Europe  and  elsewhere,  is  due  no  doubt  to  the  naturally 
mild  and  timid  character  of  the  Hindus,  and  especially  to 
the  fact  that  the  greater  number  compound  with  their 
consciences  and  pay  equal  honour  to  Vishnu  and  Siva. 
Being  thus  free  from  any  bias  towards  either  party,  the 
latter  serve  as  arbitrators  in  these  religious  combats,  and 
often  check  incipient  quarrels. 

There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  these  controversies 
were  wont  to  excite  general  ferment  in  several  provinces 
at  no  very  remote  date.  The  agitation,  excited  in  the  first 
instance  by  fanatical  devotees,  was  further  fomented  by 
the  Rajahs  and  other  princes,  who  became  Vishnavites  or 
Sivaites  according  as  it  suited  their  political  interests. 

Those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  character  and  dis- 
position of  the  Bairagis  and  Goshais  of  the  north,  and  of 
the  Dasari,  Andis,  Jangamas,  and  Pandarams  in  the  south, 
are  fully  persuaded  that  it  would  still  be  quite  easy  for 
two  ambitious  and  hostile  princes  to  arm  these  fanatics 
and  persuade  them  to  come  to  blows  if  they  raised  the 
standard  of  Basava  (the  bull)  on  one  side,  and  of  Hanu- 
mania  (the  monkey)  on  the  other. 

In  these  religious  squabbles,  which  still  take  place  occa- 
sionally, the  Vishnavites  appear  to  be  the  more  fanatical 
and  fervent,  and  they  are  almost  always  the  aggressors. 
The  reason  is,  that  this  sect  draws  most  of  its  members 


ORIGIN  OF  SIVAITES  AND  VISHNAVITES    121 

from  the  very  dregs  of  society,  and  so  takes  a  delight  in 
creating  troubles  or  disturbances.  The  followers  of  Siva, 
on  the  other  hand,  who  belong  to  the  upper  classes  of  the 
Sudras,  are  much  more  peaceable  and  tolerant. 

The  majority  of  the  Hindus,  and  particularly  the  Brah- 
mins, take  no  part  whatever  in  these  religious  squabbles. 
The  latter  act  on  the  principle  of  paying  equal  honour  to 
the  two  chief  deities  of  the  country,  and  though,  as 
a  rule,  they  appear  to  have  a  preference  for  Vishnu,  they 
never  let  a  day  pass  without  offering  in  their  own  houses 
a  sacrifice  to  the  lingam,  which  is  Siva's  emblem. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  determine  the  origin  of  these  two 
sects.  Some  authors  have  thought  that  they  are  quite 
a  modern  institution.  Yet  they  are  alluded  to  in  several 
of  the  most  ancient  Puranas.  One  of  the  Avatars,  or  in- 
carnations, of  Vishnu,  called  Narasimha,  that  is  to  say, 
half -man  half -lion,  is  the  form  under  which  this  deity  dis- 
guised himself  when  he  came  to  deliver  the  earth  from  the 
giant  Hiranniakashiapa,  who  was  ravaging  it.  We  learn 
in  the  Bhagavata  that  this  cruel  monster  had  a  good  son 
called  Prahlada,  who  belonged  to  the  Vishnavite  sect,  and 
who  made  the  greatest  efforts  to  induce  his  father  to 
embrace  his  special  form  of  religion,  but  without  success. 
However,  the  ill-feeling  between  the  two  sects  seems  not 
to  have  been  so  marked  at  the  beginning. 

Brahmins  in  general  look  upon  the  Vishnavite  Brahmins 
(see  Chapter  VIII),  who  profess  a  special  devotion  for 
Vishnu  if  they  do  not  worship  him  exclusively,  as  detest- 
able schismatics.  The  preference  that  the  latter  show  for 
a  sect  composed  almost  entirely  of  Sudras  and  the  lowest 
of  the  people,  and  their  practice  of  appearing  in  public 
with  their  foreheads  decorated  with  the  namam,  just  like 
common  Pariahs  or  Chucklers,  are  all  offences  which  degrade 
them  in  the  eyes  of  their  noble  confreres. 

No  doubt  the  same  contempt  would  be  felt  for  Brahmins 
who  wore  the  lingam,  but  I  have  never  seen  one  thus 
decorated,  and  I  doubt  whether  one  could  be  found  any- 
where in  the  south,  from  the  banks  of  the  Kistna  to  Cape 
Comorin.  I  have  been  told,  however,  that  there  are  some 
districts  in  the  north  where  persons  of  this  caste  are  to  be 
found  who  devote  themselves  exclusively  to  the  worship 


122  SECTARIAN  SUBDIVISIONS 

of  Siva,  and  who  always  wear  the  emblem  of  this 
deity. 

The  sect  of  Vishnavite  Brahmins  appears  to  have  origin- 
ated in  Dravida  or  Aravam  (the  Tamil  country).  From 
there  they  spread  over  the  provinces  up  to  the  Kistna, 
where  they  have  retained,  to  the  present  day,  their  own 
peculiar  customs  and  language,  as  well  as  their  own  cult. 
The  Brahmins  who  inhabit  the  country  north  of  this  river 
have  never  permitted  these  stubborn  schismatics  to  settle 
amongst  them. 

The  feeling  of  aversion  which  orthodox  Brahmins  enter- 
tain for  the  Vishnavite  Brahmins  is  shared  by  Hindus  of 
all  castes.  A  stigma  of  reproach  appears  to  cling  to  them. 
It  cannot  be  the  case,  however,  that  the  disfavour  with 
which  they  are  regarded  is  entirely  due  to  their  exclusive 
worship  of  Vishnu.  I  think  it  must  be  largely  imputed  to 
their  excessive  pride  and  arrogance,  their  extreme  severity, 
and  their  supercilious  manners  ;  for  though  all  Brahmins 
share  these  characteristics,  it  is  generally  acknowledged 
that  the  Vishnavites  display  them  in  an  intensified  form. 

Be  the  reason  what  it  may,  there  is  no  denying  that  the 
Vishnavites  form  a  class  by  themselves  in  society.  The 
antipathy  which  these  two  orders  of  Brahmins  feel  for 
each  other  is  noticeable  on  all  occasions.  The  members 
of  one  sect  never  invite  members  of  the  other  to  eat  with 
them,  or  to  participate  in  their  civil  or  religious  feasts  ; 
and  when  one  of  them  is  raised  to  a  position  of  authority, 
it  is  on  persons  of  his  own  sect  that  his  patronage  is  be- 
stowed. 

The  two  sects  of  Vishnavites  and  Sivaites  are  each  sub- 
divided into  several  others,  which  are  known  under  the 
general  term  of  M alias  or  Mattancharas.  Amongst  the 
Vishnavites,  for  instance,  there  are  the  Vaishnavas,  the 
Tatuvadis,  the  Bamojus,  the  Satanis,  &c,  sub-sects  wThich 
again  are  divided  into  a  great  many  others.  For  instance, 
amongst  the  Vaishnavas  there  are  the  Vaishnava-triamalas, 
the  Kandalas,  the  Nallaris,  &c. 

The  Jogis,  the  Jangamas,  the  Voderus,  the  Viraktas,  the 
Bolu-Jangamas,  the  Vira-seivas,  &c,  belong  to  the  Sivaites. 

Each  of  these  sub-sects  has  its  own  peculiar  tenets, 
mysteries,   mantrams,   sacrifices  ;  in  fact,   some  points   of 


DOCTRINAL  DISPUTES  123 

variation  in  rites  as  in  doctrines.  The  heads  of  these 
sub-sects  dislike  and  avoid  each  other.  They  often  quarrel 
over  the  various  points  of  doctrine  which  cause  such 
divisions.  But  these  are  forgotten,  or,  at  any  rate,  allowed 
to  remain  in  abeyance,  should  it  be  necessary  to  make 
common  cause  in  defending  the  interests  of  the  sect  as 
a  whole,  during  the  disputes  which  occasionally  arise 
between  the  Vishnavites  and  Sivaites. 


CHAPTER   X 

The  Gurus,  or  Hindu  Priests. — The  Portrait  of  a  true  Guru. — Their 
Temporal  and  Spiritual  Power. — The  Fear  and  Respect  that  they 
inspire. — Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy  composed  of  the  Superior  and 
Inferior  Priests. — The  Honours  paid  to  them. — Priestesses. 

I  shall  begin  this  chapter  by  giving  an  accurate  descrip- 
tion of  a  true  guru  belonging  to  the  sect  of  Siva.  This 
picture  is  taken  from  the  Vedanta  Sara  \  to  which  it  serves 
as  an  introduction.  At  the  same  time  I  must  warn  my 
readers  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  any  points  of 
resemblance  between  this  picture  and  the  gurus  of  the  present 
day,  who  are  very  far  from  attaining  to  this  pitch  of  per- 
fection. The  sketch  will,  however,  prove  that  even  the 
very  highest  moral  virtues  were  not  unknown  to  the  Hindus, 
though  now  they  regard  them  only  as  subjects  for  specu- 
lative discussion. 

4  A  true  guru  is  a  man  who  is  in  the  habit  of  practising 
all  the  virtues  ;  who  with  the  sword  of  wisdom  has  lopped 
off  all  the  branches  and  torn  out  all  the  roots  of  sin,  and 
who  has  dispersed,  with  the  light  of  reason,  the  thick 
shadows  in  which  sin  is  shrouded  ;  who,  though  seated  on 
a  mountain  of  sins,  yet  confronts  their  attacks  with  a  heart 
as  hard  as  a  diamond  ;  who  behaves  with  dignity  and 
independence  ;  who  has  the  feelings  of  a  father  for  all  his 
disciples  ;  who  makes  no  difference  in  his  conduct  between 
his  friends  and  his  enemies,  but  shows  equal  kindness  to 
both  ;  who  looks  on  gold  and  precious  stones  with  the 
same  indifference  as  on  pieces  of  iron  or  potsherd,  and 
values  the  one  as  highly  as  the  other  ;  whose  chief  care  is 

1  A  translation  of  this,  by  Jacobs,  is  included  in  Triibner's  Oriental 
Series. — Ed. 


124  THE  IDEAL  GURU  PORTRAYED 

to  enlighten  the  ignorance  in  which  the  rest  of  mankind 
is  plunged.  He  is  a  man  who  performs  all  the  acts  of 
worship  of  which  Siva  is  the  object,  omitting  none  ;  who 
knows  no  other  god  than  Siva,  and  reads  no  other  history 
than  his  ;  who  shines  like  the  sun  in  the  midst  of  the  dark 
clouds  of  ignorance  which  surround  him  ;  who  meditates 
unceasingly  on  the  merits  of  the  lingam,  and  proclaims 
everywhere  the  praises  of  Siva  ;  who  rejects,  even  in  thought, 
every  sinful  action,  and  puts  in  practice  all  the  virtues  that 
he  preaches  ;  who,  knowing  all  the  paths  which  lead  to 
sin,  knows  also  the  means  of  avoiding  them  ;  who  observes 
with  scrupulous  exactitude  all  the  rules  of  propriety  which 
do  honour  to  Siva.  He  should  be  deeply  learned,  and 
know  the  Vedanta  perfectly.  He  is  a  man  who  has  made 
pilgrimages  to  all  the  sacred  places,  and  has  seen  with  his 
own  eyes  Benares,  Kedaram,  Conjeeveram,  Ramesvaram, 
Srirangam,  Sringeri,  Gokarnam,  Kalahasti,  and  other  spots 
which  are  consecrated  to  Siva.  He  must  have  performed 
his  ablutions  in  all  the  sacred  rivers,  such  as  the  Ganges, 
the  Jumna,  the  Sarasvati,  the  Indus,  the  Godavari,  the 
Kistna,  the  Nerbudda,  the  Cauvery,  &c,  and  have  drunk 
of  each  of  these  sanctifying  waters.  He  must  have  bathed 
in  all  the  sacred  springs  and  tanks,  such  as  the  Surya- 
pushkarani,  the  Chandra-pushkarani,  the  Indra-push- 
karani,  and  others,  wherever  they  may  be  situated.  He 
must  have  visited  all  the  sacred  deserts  and  woods, 
such  as  Neimisha-aranya,  Badari-aranya,  Dandaka-aranya , 
Goch-aranya,  &c,  and  have  left  his  footprints  in  them. 
He  must  be  acquainted  with  all  the  observances  for  pen- 
ance or  asramas,  such  as  are  enjoined  by  the  most  famous 
devotees,  and  which  are  known  by  the  names  of  Nara- 
yana-asrama,  Vamana-asrama,  Gautama-asrama,  Vasishta- 
asrama.  He  must  be  one  who  has  practised  these  religious 
exercises,  and  who  has  derived  benefit  from  them.  He 
must  be  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  four  Vedas,  the 
Tarka-sastram  (or  logic),  the  Bhoota-sastram  (exorcism), 
the  Mimamsa-sastram  (exegetics,  &c),  &c.  He  must  be 
well  versed  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Vcdanga  (six  auxiliaries 
of  the  Vedas),  of  the  Jyotisha-sastram  (astrology),  of  Vaidya- 
sastram  (medicine),  of  Dharma-sastram  (ethics),  of  Kaviana- 
takam  (poetry),  &c,  and  he  must  know  by  heart  the  eighteen 


THE  GURUS'  EXTENSIVE  POWERS  125 

Puranas  and  the  sixty-four  Kalais  l.  This  is  the  character 
of  a  true  guru  ;  these  are  the  qualities  which  he  ought  to 
possess,  that  he  may  be  in  a  position  to  show  others  the 
path  of  virtue,  and  help  them  out  of  the  slough  of  vice.' 

This  is  what  the  Hindu  gurus  ought  to  be,  but  are  not. 
What  follows  is  a  description  of  them  as  they  really  are. 

The  word  guru,  properly  speaking,  means  '  master  '  or 
'  guide,'  and  this  is  why  parents  are  sometimes  called  the 
maha-gurus  or  grand  masters  of  their  families,  and  kings 
are  called  the  gurus  of  their  kingdoms,  and  masters  the 
gurus  of  their  servants. 

The  word  is  also  used  to  designate  persons  of  distinguished 
rank  who  are  raised  to  a  high  position  and  invested  with 
a  character  for  sanctity,  which  confers  both  spiritual  and 
temporal  power  upon  them.  The  latter,  which  is  exercised 
over  the  whole  caste,  consists  in  regulating  its  affairs,  in 
keeping  a  strict  watch  to  see  that  all  its  customs,  both 
those  for  use  in  private  as  well  as  in  public,  are  accurately 
observed,  in  punishing  those  who  disregard  them  and 
expelling  from  caste  those  who  have  deserved  this  indig- 
nity, in  reinstating  the  penitent,  and  several  other  no  less 
important  prerogatives.  Besides  this  temporal  authority, 
which  no  one  disputes,  they  also  exercise  very  extensive 
spiritual  power.  The  sashtanga  or  prostration  of  the  six 
members  2  when  made  before  them  and  followed  by  their 
asirvadam,  or  blessing,  will  obtain  the  remission  of  all 
sins.  The  very  sight  even  of  gurus  will  produce  the  same 
effect.  Any  prasadam  or  gift  from  them,  though  usually 
some  perfectly  valueless  object,  such  as  a  pinch  of  the 
ashes  of  cow-dung  with  which  they  besmear  their  fore- 
heads, the  fruits  or  flowers  that  have  been  offered  to  idols, 
the  remains  of  their  food,  the  water  with  which  they  have 
rinsed  out  their  mouths  or  washed  their  face  or  feet,  and 
which  is  highly  prized  and  very  often  drunk  by  those  who 
receive  it  ;  in  short,  any  gift  whatever  from  their  sacred 
hands  has  the  merit  of  cleansing  both  soul  and  body  from 
all  impurities. 

1  These  include  all  kinds  of  worldly  wisdom. — Dubois. 

2  It  has  already  been  pointed  out  in  a  note  to  a  former  chapter  that 
sashtanga  does  not  mean  the  prostration  of  six  members  but  of  eight 
members. — Ed. 


126  GURUS'  CURSES 

On  the  other  hand,  while  the  beneficial  effects  of  their 
blessings  or  their  trivial  presents  excite  so  large  an  amount 
of  respect  and  admiration  from  the  dull-witted  public, 
their  maledictions,  which  are  no  less  powerful,  are  as 
greatly  feared.  The  Hindus  are  convinced  that  their 
curses  never  fail  to  produce  effect,  whether  justly  or  un- 
justly incurred.  Their  books  are  full  of  fables  which  seem 
to  have  been  invented  expressly  to  exemplify  and  strengthen 
this  idea.  The  attendants  of  the  guru,  who  are  interested 
in  making  the  part  which  their  master  plays  appear  credible, 
are  always  recounting  ridiculous  stories  on  this  subject,  of 
which  they  declare  they  have  been  eye-witnesses  ;  and  in 
order  that  the  imposture  may  be  the  less  easily  discovered, 
they  always  place  the  scene  in  some  distant  country. 
Sometimes  they  relate  that  the  person  against  whom  the 
curse  was  fulminated  died  suddenly  whilst  the  guru  was 
still  speaking  ;  that  another  was  seized  with  palsy  in  all 
his  limbs,  and  that  the  affliction  will  remain  until  the 
anathema  has  been  removed  ;  or  that  the  guru's  male- 
diction caused  some  woman  to  be  prematurely  confined  ; 
or  that  a  labourer  saw  all  his  cattle  die  suddenly  at  the 
moment  when  the  malediction  was  hurled  at  his  head  ; 
or  that  one  man  was  turned  to  stone  and  another  became 
a  pig  ;  in  fact,  they  will  relate  a  thousand  similar  absurdi- 
ties quite  seriously  1 . 

If  the  foolish  credulity  of  the  Hindu  will  carry  him  to 
these  lengths,  can  any  one  be  surprised  if  his  feelings  of 
respect  and  fear  for  his  guru  are  equally  extravagant  ? 
He  will  take  the  greatest  care  to  do  nothing  that  might 
displease  him.  Hindus  have  been  reduced  to  such  terrible 
straits  as  to  sell  their  wives  or  their  children  in  order  to 
procure  the  money  to  pay  the  imposts  or  procure  the 
presents  that  their  gurus  remorselessly  claimed  from  them, 

1  The  ideas  of  the  Hindus  on  the  subject  of  the  blessings  and  curses 
of  their  gurus  are  analogous,  at  any  rate  in  point  of  extravagance,  to 
those  which,  according  to  Holy  Scripture,  were  current  in  the  time  of 
the  ancient  Patriarchs.  Noah's  curse  on  his  son  Ham  and  his  blessing 
on  the  other  two,  Shem  and  Japheth,  bore  fruit  (Genesis  ix).  The 
value  that  Esau  and  Jacob  set  on  their  father  Isaac's  blessing  is  well 
known  (Genesis  xxvii) ;  also  the  bitter  regret  of  Esau  when  he  found 
that  he  had  been  supplanted  by  Jacob. — Dubois. 


ECCLESIASTICAL  HIERARCHY  127 

rather  than  run  the  risk  of  exposing  themselves  to  their 
much-dreaded  maledictions  \ 

Each  caste  and  each  sect  has  its  own  particular  gurus  : 
but  the  latter  are  not  all  invested  with  equal  authority  ; 
a  sort  of  hierarchy  exists  amongst  them.  Besides  the  vast 
numbers  of  subordinate  priests  who  are  to  be  met  with 
everywhere,  each  sect  has  a  limited  number  of  high  priests 
who  exercise  authority  over  the  inferior  gurus,  deputing 
to  them  their  powers  of  spiritual  jurisdiction.  These  high 
priests  have  also  the  right  of  degrading  their  inferiors 
from  their  position  and  of  putting  others  in  their  places. 
The  residences  of  Hindu  high  priests  are  generally  known 
by  the  name  of  simhasana  2.  These  simhasanas  are  to  be 
found  in  various  provinces  of  India.  Each  caste  and  each 
sect  acknowledges  one  that  specially  belongs  to  it.  For 
instance,  the  Brahmins  who  belong  to  the  Smartha  sect 
have  a  different  guru  from  the  Tatuvadi  sect,  and  these 
again  recognize  a  different  one  from  the  Vishnavite  Brah- 
mins. 

The  different  branches  of  the  sects  of  Vishnu  and  Siva 
have  also  their  own  particular  gurus  and  high  priests. 
The  Sri-Vaishnavas,  for  instance,  acknowledge  four  sim- 
hasanas and  seventy-two  pitahs  or  supplementary  establish- 
ments, where  the  inferior  gurus  reside,  besides  a  multitude 
of  subordinate  ministers  who  are  also  called  gurus. 

The  high  priests,  as  well  as  the  inferior  priests  belonging 
to  the  sect  of  Siva,  are  drawn  entirely  from  the  Sudra 
caste  3  ;  but  the  greater  number  of  the  head  gurus  belong- 
ing to  the  Vishnavites  are  Vishnavite  Brahmins,  and  they 
appoint  the  inferior  clergy  of  that  sect.     The  most  famous 

1  Times  are  changed  since  the  days  of  the  Abbe,  and  the  gurus  in 
most  cases  are  the  mere  hangers-on  of  rich  disciples.  They  may  be  able 
to  exercise  some  influence  over  the  illiterate  and  poor,  but  with  the 
majority  of  the  educated  and  well-to-do  their  influence  is  not  very 
great. — Ed. 

2  This  word  may  be  translated  '  throne.'  It  is  derived  from  the  two 
words  simha,  which  means  lion,  and  asana,  which  means  a  seat,  because 
a  high  priest's  throne  ought  to  be  covered  with  a  lion's  skin.  Custom, 
however,  has  changed  this  for  that  of  a  tiger. — Dubois. 

Sim?uisana  is  more  correctly  derived  from  the  figure  of  a  lion  on  the 
back  of  the  seat. — Ed. 

3  This  is  not  true. — Ed. 


128  GURUS  ATTACHED  TO  PRINCES 

simhasana  of  the  Vishnavites  is  in  the  sacred  town  of 
Tirupati  in  the  Carnatic.  There  a  kind  of  arch-pontiff  (the 
Mahant)  resides,  whose  jurisdiction  extends  over  almost 
the  whole  of  the  Peninsula. 

Brahmins  are  also,  as  a  rule,  the  gurus  of  the  various 
sects  of  Hindus  who  are  more  tolerant  than  those  just 
mentioned,  that  is  to  say,  those  who  worship  both  Vishnu 
and  Siva. 

The  high  priest  or  the  guru  belonging  to  one  sect  has  no 
authority  over  any  other.  Neither  his  prasadam  l,  nor  his 
curse,  nor  his  blessing  would  carry  any  weight  with  them  ; 
and  it  is  very  rarely  that  you  hear  of  priests  overstepping 
the  limits  of  their  own  jurisdiction. 

People  of  very  high  rank,  such  as  kings  or  princes,  have 
a  guru  exclusively  attached  to  their  households  who  accom- 
panies them  everywhere.  They  prostrate  themselves  daily 
at  the  guru's  feet  and  receive  from  him  the  prasadam  or 
gift,  and  the  asirvadam,  or  blessing.  When  they  travel 
the  guru  is  always  in  close  attendance  ;  but  if  they  are 
going  to  take  part  in  a  war  or  any  other  dangerous  ex- 
pedition, the  holy  man  takes  care  to  remain  prudently 
behind.  He  usually  contents  himself  under  these  circum- 
stances with  bestowing  his  blessing  and  giving  some  small 
present  or  amulet,  which  he  has  consecrated,  and  which, 
if  carefully  preserved,  possesses  the  infallible  virtue  of 
averting  all  misfortunes  to  which  they  might  be  exposed 
when  far  from  their  spiritual  guide. 

Princes,  from  motives  of  ostentation,  affect  to  keep  their 
gurus  in  great  splendour,  with  the  result  that  the  latter's 
extravagant  pomp  often  exceeds  their  own.  Besides  giving 
them  many  very  valuable  presents,  they  also  endow  them 
with  land  yielding  large  revenues.  Hindu  high  priests 
never  appear  in  public  except  in  magnificent  state.  They 
like  best  to  show  off  all  their  splendour  when  they  are 
making  a  tour  in  their  districts.  They  either  ride  on 
a  richly  caparisoned  elephant  or  in  a  superb  palanquin. 
Many  have  an  escort  of  cavalry,  and  are  surrounded  by 
guards  both  mounted  and  on  foot,  armed  with  pikes  and 
other  weapons.     Bands  of  musicians  playing  all  sorts  of 

1  Prasada  means  literally  serenity,  cheerfulness,  kindness,  favour, 
&c.,  and  it  has  come  to  mean  '  food  or  anything  offered  to  an  idol.' — Ed. 


PRIESTLY  MAGNIFICENCE  129 

instruments  precede  them,  and  numberless  flags  of  all 
colours,  on  which  are  painted  pictures  of  their  gods,  flutter 
in  the  midst  of  the  cavalcade.  The  procession  is  headed 
by  heralds,  some  of  whom  sing  verses  in  the  high  priest's 
honour,  while  the  rest  go  on  ahead  and  warn  the  passers-by 
to  clear  the  way  and  to  pay  the  homage  and  respect  that 
are  his  due  *.  All  along  the  route  incense  and  other  per- 
fumes are  burnt  in  the  high  priest's  honour  ;  new  cloths 
are  perpetually  spread  for  him  to  pass  over  ;  triumphal 
arches  called  toranams,  made  of  branches  of  trees,  are 
erected  at  short  intervals  ;  bevies  of  professional  prosti- 
tutes and  dancing-girls  form  part  of  the  procession,  and 
relieve  each  other  at  intervals,  so  that  the  obscene  songs 
and  lascivious  dances  may  continue  uninterruptedly  2.  This 
magnificent  spectacle  attracts  great  crowds  of  people, 
who  prostrate  themselves  before  the  guru,  and,  after 
having  offered  him  their  respectful  homage,  join  the  rest 
of  the  crowd  and  make  the  air  ring  with  their  joyful 
shouts. 

The  gurus  of  inferior  rank  make  a  show  in  proportion  to 
their  means.  Those  who  belong  to  the  sect  of  Vishnu 
known  by  the  name  of  Vaishnavas  generally  travel  on 
some  sorry  steed.  Some  are  even  reduced  to  walking  on 
foot.  The  Pcmdarams  and  Jangamas,  priests  of  Siva,  go 
on  horseback  or  in  a  palanquin,  but  their  favourite  mode 
of  progression  is  riding  on  an  ox. 

Gurus,    as   a   rule,    rank   first   in   society.     They   often 

1  The  custom  amongst  persons  of  high  rank,  such  as  gurus,  kings, 
princes,  and  governors  of  provinces,  of  being  preceded  on  their  march 
by  heralds,  singing  their  praises,  is  very  general  in  India.  These  heralds 
give  a  long  account  of  their  master's  noble  origin,  of  his  exalted  rank,  of 
his  boundless  power,  his  virtues,  and  his  many  excellent  qualities  ;  and 
they  admonish  the  public  to  pay  the  respect  and  homage  which  are  due 
to  so  great  a  personage.  This  custom,  though  of  Hindu  origin,  has  been 
adopted  by  the  Mahomedans.  It  appears,  as  may  be  seen  from  the 
writings  of  both  sacred  and  secular  authors,  that  the  practice  of  being 
preceded  by  heralds  dates  from  very  ancient  times — see  Genesis  xli.  43  ; 
Esther  vi.  8  ;  and  there  are  several  other  passages  in  the  Bible  where 
such  heralds  are  spoken  of. — Dubois. 

2  This  picture  is  greatly  exaggerated.  Nowhere  do  '  professional 
prostitutes  and  dancing-girls  '  form  part  of  processions  in  honour  of 
gurus.  On  the  contrary,  prostitutes  are  not  allowed  to  approach  these 
holy  men. — Ed. 

DUBOIS  £ 


130  PASTORAL  VISITS  OF  GURUS 

receive  tokens  of  respect,  or  rather  of  adoration,  that  are 
not  offered  to  the  gods  themselves.  And  this  is  not  sur- 
prising when  one  remembers  that  every  Hindu  is  fully 
persuaded  that,  under  certain  circumstances,  the  gurus 
have  authority  even  over  the  celestial  powers. 

From  time  to  time  gurus  make  tours  of  inspection  in 
those  districts  where  their  followers  are  most  numerous. 
They  sometimes  go  as  much  as  a  hundred  miles  from  their 
habitual  residence.  The  chief,  if  not  the  only,  object  of 
the  expedition  is  to  collect  money.  Besides  the  fines  which 
they  impose  upon  those  who  have  committed  some  crime, 
or  been  guilty  of  breaking  some  rule  of  their  caste  or  sect, 
they  are  merciless  in  extorting  tribute  money  from  their 
followers,  which  often  greatly  exceeds  their  means.  They 
call  this  method  of  obtaining  money  dakshina  1  and  pada- 
kanikai 2,  and  no  one,  however  poor  he  may  be,  is  exempt 
from  paying  it.  There  is  no  insult  or  indignity  that  gurus 
will  not  inflict  upon  any  one  who  either  cannot  or  will  not 
submit  to  this  tax.  Deaf  to  all  entreaties,  they  cause  the 
defaulter  to  appear  before  them  in  an  ignominious  and 
humiliating  attitude,  publicly  overwhelm  him  with  insults 
and  reproaches,  and  order  that  mud  or  cow- dung  shall  be 
thrown  in  his  face.  If  these  means  do  not  succeed,  they 
force  him  to  give  up  one  of  his  children,  who  is  obliged 
to  work  without  wages  until  the  tribute  money  is  paid. 
Indeed,  they  have  been  known  to  take  away  a  man's  wife 
as  compensation.  Finally,  as  a  last  and  infallible  resource, 
they  threaten  him  with  their  malediction  ;  and  such  is  the 
Hindu's  credulity,  and  so  great  his  dread  of  the  evils 
which  he  foresees  will  fall  upon  him  if  the  curse  be  spoken, 
that,  if  it  is  not  absolutely  impossible,  he  submits  and  pays 
the  required  sum  3. 

The  gurus  also  increase  their  revenue  by  means  of  taxes, 
called  guru-dakshina,  which  are  levied  on  the  occasion  of 

1  Dakshina  literally  means  the  sacrificial  fee.  It  has  now  come  to 
mean  gift.  The  gift  to  the  priest  is  enforced  more  or  less  among  the 
Madhvas  ;  but  among  the  Sivaites  and  Vishnavites  the  priests  are  more 
lenient. — Ed. 

-  This  word  means  literally  '  offering  at  the  feet.'  See  Chapter  III. — 
Dubois. 

3  Nowadays  gurus  exercise  less  extensive  powers  over  their  disciples. 
—Ed. 


ILLICIT  CONNEXIONS  131 

a  birth,  at  the  ceremony  of  the  diksha  (initiation),  at 
a  marriage,  or  at  a  death. 

If  these  pastoral  visits  were  of  very  frequent  occurrence 
it  is  evident  that  the  resources  of  the  poor  flock  would  soon 
be  exhausted.  Fortunately,  those  of  the  chief  gurus,  which 
are  the  most  expensive,  take  place  but  seldom.  Some  make 
a  tour  of  their  districts  once  in  five  years,  others  once  in 
ten  only,  and  others,  again,  only  once  in  a  lifetime. 

Some  gurus  are  married,  but  most  are  celibates.  The 
latter,  however,  do  not  appear  to  adhere  very  strictly  to 
their  vow  of  chastity.  Their  conduct  on  this  head  is  the 
more  open  to  misconstruction  in  that  they  can  have  one 
or  two  women  in  their  houses  as  cooks.  According  to  the 
customs  and  ideas  of  the  country,  for  a  man  to  keep  a 
female  servant  and  to  have  her  as  his  mistress  are  one  and 
the  same  thing.  No  Hindu  can  be  persuaded  of  the  possi- 
bility of  free,  and  at  the  same  time  innocent,  intercourse 
between  a  man  and  a  woman. 

But  in  spite  of  this,  the  common  herd,  who  fancy  that 
gurus  are  not  made  of  the  same  clay  as  other  mortals  and 
are  consequently  impeccable,  are  in  no  wise  shocked  at 
these  illicit  connexions.  Sensible  people  take  no  notice, 
but  shut  their  eyes  and  say  that  allowances  must  be  made 
for  human  weakness. 

The  Brahmins  pretend  that  they  are  the  gurus  for  all 
castes,  and  that  they  alone  have  a  right  to  the  rank  and 
honours  appertaining  to  that  profession  ;  but,  as  I  have 
already  mentioned,  a  number  of  common  Sudras  also  con- 
trive to  raise  themselves  to  that  dignified  position.  The 
Brahmins,  of  course,  look  upon  them  as  intruders,  but  this 
does  not  in  the  least  prevent  their  enjoying  all  the  honours 
and  advantages  which  belong  to  their  rank  in  the  caste 
and  sect  by  which  they  are  acknowledged. 

Except  when  they  are  making  their  tours  of  inspection, 
most  gurus  live  in  seclusion,  shut  up  in  isolated  hermitages 
called  mutts.  They  are  rarely  seen  in  public.  Some  of 
them  live  in  the  vicinity  of  the  large  pagodas.  But  the 
high  priests,  whose  large  households  and  daily  hospitalities 
entail  considerable  expenditure,  generally  live  in  the  large 
agraharas  or  towns  inhabited  principally  by  Brahmins, 
and  for  this  reason  called  punyasthalas,  or  abodes  of  virtue. 


132  RESPECT  SHOWN  TO  GURUS 

There  they  give  audience  to  the  numerous  members  of 
their  flocks  who  come  to  perform  worship,  to  receive  their 
asirvadam  (benediction)  and  their  prasadam  (gift),  to  offer 
presents,  to  bring  complaints  about  the  infraction  of  rules 
and  customs,  &c.  Hindus,  on  presenting  themselves  before 
their  guru,  first  perform  the  sashtatiga,  and  then  touch  the 
ground  with  each  side  of  the  forehead.  The  holy  man 
replies  to  this  mark  of  respect  by  gravely  pronouncing  the 
word  'Asirvadam  !  '  On  hearing  this,  his  worshippers  rise 
and  receive  the  prasadam  from  him,  which  he  gives,  whisper- 
ing the  following  words,  if  they  belong  to  the  Siva  sect,  in 
their  ear  :  '  It  is  I  who  am  thy  guru,  and  whom  thou  art 
bound  to  worship.' 

The  followers  of  Siva,  having  thus  done  homage  to  their 
Jangamas  and  Pandarams,  proceed  to  perform  a  very  dis- 
gusting ceremony.  They  solemnly  pour  water  over  the 
feet  of  their  guru  and  wash  them,  reciting  mantrams  the 
while  ;  then  carefully  collecting  the  water  so  used  in  a 
copper  vessel,  they  pour  part  of  it  over  their  head  and 
face,  and  drink  the  rest. 

The  Vishnavites  go  through  a  similar  ceremony  with 
their  gurus  ;  and  this  is  by  no  means  the  most  revolting 
of  the  marks  of  respect  which  these  idiotic  fanatics  delight 
in  paying.  A  piece  of  food  that  a  guru  has  already  masti- 
cated, or  the  water  with  which  he  has  rinsed  out  his  mouth, 
at  once  becomes  sacred  in  their  eyes,  and  is  swallowed  with 
avidity. 

About  ten  miles  from  the  fort  of  Chinnerayapatam  a 
hermitage  is  to  be  found,  known  by  the  name  of  Kudlu- 
gondur,  where  a  Vishnavite  guru  has  taken  up  his  abode. 
This  solitary  mutt,  though  but  a  poor  place  to  look  at,  is 
visited  by  a  great  number  of  devotees,  who  go  there  to 
offer  their  homage  to  the  penitent,  to  receive  his  asirvadam 
and  prasadam,  and  through  them  the  remission  of  their 
sins.  I  have  been  informed  by  some  of  these  pilgrims 
themselves,  that  the  more  enthusiastic  amongst  them  watch 
for  the  moment  when  the  old  guru  is  about  to  expectorate, 
when  they  stretch  out  their  hands,  struggling  as  to  who 
shall  have  the  happiness  and  good  luck  to  catch  the  super- 
fluous fluid  which  the  holy  man  ejects  ;  the  rest  of  the 
scene  is  indescribable. 


TEMPLE  WOMEN  133 

Gurus  sometimes  authorize  agents  to  collect  the  tributes 
and  offerings  of  the  faithful,  and  also  give  them  power  to 
impose  fines  on  evil-doers. 

After  having  discharged  the  duties  to  their  followers 
which  their  position  imposes,  and  performed  their  daily 
ablutions  and  sacrifices,  both  morning  and  evening,  the 
gurus  employ  the  rest  of  their  time — or  they  ought  to  do 
so  if  they  adhered  to  their  rules — in  the  study  and  con- 
templation of  their  sacred  books.  In  the  case  of  married 
gurus  the  office  descends  from  father  to  son.  Successors 
to  the  unmarried  gurus  are  nominated  by  their  superiors, 
who  generally  choose  one  of  their  own  creatures.  A  high 
priest  is  usually  assisted  by  a  coadjutor  during  his  lifetime, 
who  succeeds  his  chief  as  a  matter  of  course. 

To  the  sects  both  of  Siva  and  Vishnu  priestesses  are 
attached,  that  is  to  say,  women  specially  set  apart,  under 
the  name  of  wives  of  the  gods,  for  the  service  of  one  or  other 
of  these  deities.  They  are  quite  a  distinct  class  from  the 
dancing-girls  of  the  temples,  but  are  equally  depraved. 
They  are  generally  the  unfortunate  victims  of  the  immorality 
of  the  Jangamas  or  Vaishnavas.  These  priests,  by  way  of 
keeping  up  a  character  for  good  behaviour,  and  conciliating 
the  families  upon  whom  they  have  brought  dishonour,  put 
the  whole  blame  on  Vishnu  or  Siva  ;  and  the  poor  gods,  as 
is  only  fair,  are  forced  to  make  amends.  So  the  girls  are 
given  to  the  gods  as  wives,  by  the  aid  of  a  few  ceremonies  ; 
and  we  know  that  these  worthy  gurus  enjoy  the  privilege 
of  representing  in  everything  the  gods  whose  ministers 
they  are.  The  women  who  are  thus  consecrated  to  Vishnu 
are  called  garuda-basavis  (wives  of  garuda),  and  have  the 
image  of  this  bird  tattooed  on  their  breasts  *  as  the  dis- 
tinctive mark  of  their  rank. 

The  priestesses  of  Siva,  are  called  linga-basavis ,  or  women 
of  the  lingam,  and  bear  this  sign  tattooed  on  their  thighs. 

Though  these  women  are  known  to  be  the  mistresses  of 
the  priests  and  other  dignitaries,  still,  for  all  that,  they 
are  treated  with  a  certain  amount  of  consideration  and 
respect  amongst  their  own  sect. 

1  This  bird,  which  is  consecrated  to  Vishnu,  and  of  which  I  shall 
presently  speak  at  greater  length,  is  known  by  European  ornithologists 
as  the  Malabar  eagle. — Dubois. 


134 


CHAPTER  XI 

Purohitas,  or  Priests  who  officiate  at  Public  and  Private  Ceremonies. — 
The  Hindu  Almanac  as  published  by  the  Purohitas. 

To  settle  which  are  lucky  or  unlucky  days  on  which  to 
begin  or  put  off  an  undertaking  or  expedition  ;  to  avert, 
by  mantrams  and  suitable  prayers,  the  curses,  spells,  or 
other  evil  influences  of  the  planets  and  elements  ;  to  purify 
persons  who  have  become  unclean  ;  to  give  names  to 
newly-born  children  and  draw  their  horoscopes  ;  to  bless 
new  houses,  wells,  and  tanks  ;  to  purify  dwellings  and 
temples  which  have  become  polluted,  and  also  to  con- 
secrate the  latter  ;  to  animate  idols  and  install  in  them 
their  particular  deities  by  the  power  of  their  mantrams  : 
these  are  but  a  few  of  the  duties  which  come  within  the 
province  of  the  Brahmin  purohitas,  whose  services  are  in- 
dispensable on  such  occasions.  The  most  important  of 
their  duties,  however,  is  the  celebration  of  weddings  and 
funerals.  The  ceremonies  on  these  occasions  are  so  num- 
erous and  complicated  that  an  ordinary  Brahmin  would 
never  be  able  to  get  through  them  all  ;  they  can  only  be 
learned  by  special  study.  Besides,  there  are  mantrams 
and  formulas  connected  with  them  which  are  known  only 
to  the  purohitas,  and  which  are  described  in  books  of  ritual 
which  they  take  great  care  to  hide  from  the  eyes  of  all 
persons  outside  their  own  sect.  The  father  makes  his  son 
learn  these  formulas  by  heart,  and  thus  they  descend  from 
generation  to  generation  in  the  same  family.  The  puro- 
hitas are  not  actuated  by  any  pious  motives  in  taking  this 
jealous  care  of  their  knowledge  and  surrounding  all  their 
doings  with  so  much  mystery  ;  their  fear  is  that  rivals  may 
step  in  who  would  share  the  profits  which  these  religious 
exercises  yield. 

The  consequence  is  that  there  are  very  few  Brahmin 
purohitas,  and  sometimes  they  have  to  be  fetched  from 
a  great   distance   when   their  ministrations  are  needed  \ 

1  A  purohita  is  now  to  be  found  in  almost  every  village  where  Brahmins 
live.  He  enjoys  a  maniam  or  free  grant  of  land.  In  course  of  time  the 
original  family  is  divided  into  many  families  of  cousins,  who  hold  office 


THE  HINDU  ALMANAC  135 

If  they  have  reason  to  expect  a  generous  reward,  they  will 
start  off  at  once,  or  at  any  rate  they  will  send  a  son  who  is 
well  versed  in  their  ritual.  Sometimes  ordinary  Brahmins 
pass  themselves  off  as  purohitas,  especially  amongst  the 
Sudras,  who  are  not  very  particular  on  this  point.  These 
interlopers  are  unacquainted  with  the  formulas  and  correct 
mantrams,  and  so  they  mumble  a  few  words  of  Sanskrit 
or  some  ridiculous  and  unintelligible  sentences,  believing 
that  this  is  quite  good  enough  for  stupid  Sudras.  But  if 
the  real  purohitas,  who  from  self-interest  are  always  on  the 
alert,  discover  that  their  prerogatives  have  been  invaded 
and  their  powers  usurped,  a  violent  quarrel  ensues  between 
them  and  their  sacrilegious  rivals. 

One  of  the  most  valued  privileges  of  the  purohitas  is  the 
right  of  publishing  the  Hindu  Almanac.  The  majority  of 
them,  being  too  ignorant  to  compile  it,  buy  copies  every 
year  from  those  of  their  brethren  who  are  sufficiently  well 
versed  in  astronomy  to  be  able  to  calculate  the  eclipses 
and  variations  of  the  moon.  It  must  be  admitted  that 
these  learned  Hindus,  unacquainted  as  they  are  with  the 
analytical  operations  which  in  Europe  facilitate  the  com- 
putation of  the  movements  of  the  stars,  and  having  only 
the  most  ancient  tables  wherewith  to  assist  their  calcula- 
tions, require  an  enormous  amount  of  patience  and  con- 
centrated attention  to  produce  results  which  are  in  any 
degree  trustworthy. 

This  almanac  is  an  absolute  necessity  to  every  purohita, 
since  it  tells  him  not  only  which  are  the  lucky  and  unlucky 
constellations,  and  fortunate  or  inauspicious  days,  but  also 
which  are  the  propitious  hours  in  each  day  ;  for  it  is  only 
at  these  particular  moments  that  the  ceremonies  can  begin 
at  which  he  is  called  on  to  preside.  The  Brahmins  also 
draw  inspiration  from  this  book  in  predicting  happy  and 
unhappy  events  in  life.     Numbers  of  people  come  to  con- 

and  enjoy  the  maniam  in  turn.  The  purohita  is  a  Brahmin  whose  busi- 
ness it  is  to  fix  auspicious  days  for  marriages,  journeys,  and  undertakings 
generally.  He  presides  at  the  marriage  and  funeral  ceremonies  of 
Sudras,  but  not  at  the  marriage  ceremonies  of  Brahmins.  The  Brahmin 
who  presides  at  the  latter  is  called  upadhiaya.  A  purohita  is  sometimes 
called  a  panchangi,  or  one  who  has  charge  of  the  panchangam  or  almanac, 
not  a  very  dignified  office. — Ed. 


136  SUPERSTITIOUS  PREDICTIONS 

suit  them  on  points  like  these  ;  and  it  is  not  the  common 
people  only  on  whom  this  superstition  has  such  a  strong 
hold,  for  princes  and  persons  of  the  highest  rank  believe 
in  it  even  more  firmly,  if  that  be  possible.  There  is  no  one 
in  high  position  who  has  not  one  or  more  official  purohitas 
living  in  his  palace  ;  and  these  men  act,  so  to  speak,  like 
rulers  of  the  universe.  They  go  every  morning  and  with 
ludicrous  gravity  announce  to  the  prince,  to  his  state 
elephant,  and  to  his  idols,  each  in  their  turn,  all  that  is 
written  in  the  almanac  relating  to  that  particular  day. 
Should  the  prince  wish  to  hunt,  walk,  or  receive  visits  from 
strangers,  and  the  perspicacity  of  the  purohita  discovers  in 
his  infallible  book  that  this  is  an  unpropitious  moment,  the 
chase,  the  walk,  or  the  visit  is  postponed.  In  large  temples 
a  purohita  is  specially  retained  to  read  to  the  idols  every 
morning  the  predictions  for  that  day  contained  in  the 
almanac  \ 

The  Hindu  calendar  is  known  by  the  name  of  the  pan- 
changam,  which  means  the  five  members,  because  it  con- 
tains five  leading  subjects  :  to  wit,  the  age  of  the  moon 
in  the  month  ;  the  constellation  near  which  the  moon  is 
situated  on  each  particular  day  ;  the  day  of  the  week  ; 
the  eclipses  ;  and  the  positions  of  the  planets.  Lucky  and 
unlucky  days  are  also  indicated  ;  those,  for  instance,  on 
which  a  person  may  travel  towards  one  of  the  four  cardinal 
points  ;  for  any  one  who  could  safely  travel  to-day  towards 
the  north  would  probably  be  overtaken  by  misfortune  if 
he  attempted  to  journey  to  the  south.  There  are  number- 
less other  predictions  of  a  similar  nature  in  the  almanac, 
which  it  would  be  tedious  to  give  in  detail. 

1  The  panchangam  Brahmin  is  one  who,  by  studying  the  almanac,  is 
able  to  state  propitious  or  unpropitious  times.  He  gets  his  livelihood 
by  going  certain  rounds,  day  by  day,  from  house  to  house,  declaring 
the  condition  of  things,  as  per  the  almanac,  and  receiving  in  return 
a  dole  consisting,  usually,  of  grain.  He  is  not  held  in  much  respect  by 
his  own  caste  people,  but  he  is  much  looked  up  to  by  other  castes.  He 
is  consulted  by  his  constituents,  from  time  to  time,  when  they  wish  to 
know  the  propitious  period  for  any  undertaking,  as  starting  on  a  journey, 
making  an  important  purchase,  putting  on  new  clothes  or  new  jewels, 
or  when  about  to  take  up  a  new  appointment,  or  when  any  other  im- 
portant event  is  contemplated.  He  is  a  Smartha  by  sect ;  that  is,  he 
is  really  a  worshipper  of  Siva  and  wears  the  marks  of  that  god,  but  at 
the  same  time  he  respects  and  worships  Vishnu. — Padfield. 


THE  HINDU  NEW  YEAR'S  DAY  137 

On  the  first  day  of  the  Hindu  year,  called  Ugadi  \  which 
falls  on  the  first  day  of  the  March  moon,  the  purohita 
summons  all  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the  neighbourhood 
to  his  residence,  and  there  solemnly  announces,  amidst 
much  music,  singing,  and  dancing,  who  will  be  king  of  the 
gods  and  who  king  of  the  stars  for  the  year,  who  will  be 
their  prime  ministers,  and  who  will  command  the  army  ; 
who  will  be  the  god  of  the  harvest,  and  what  crops  will  be 
most  plentiful.  He  foretells,  too,  whether  the  season  will 
be  wet  or  dry,  and  whether  locusts  or  other  insects  will, 
or  will  not,  attack  and  devour  the  young  plants  ;  whether 
the  insects  and  vermin,  which  disturb  the  repose  of  the 
poor  Hindu,  will  be  more  or  less  troublesome,  more 
or  less  numerous  ;  whether  it  is  to  be  a  healthy  or 
unhealthy  year ;  whether  there  will  be  more  deaths 
than  births  ;  whether  there  will  be  peace  or  war  ;  from 
what  quarter  the  country  will  be  invaded  ;  who  will  be 
victorious,  &c. 

Those  who  ridicule  the  purohita  and  his  predictions  are 
the  very  first  to  have  recourse  to  him  if  the  country  is 
threatened  with  any  great  calamity,  such  as  war,  famine, 
drought,  &c.  Thus  powerful  is  the  sway  which  supersti- 
tion exercises  over  the  whole  land.  It  is  not  only  the 
idolatrous  Hindus  who  give  credence  to  these  absurdities  ; 
Mahomedans,  Native  Christians,  half-castes,  and  sometimes 
even  Europeans,  are  not  ashamed  to  consult  the  astrologer 
or  purohita. 

The  high-class  purohitas  only  expound  to  Brahmins  the 
oracles  contained  in  the  almanac,  but  many  less  fortunate 
Brahmins  procure  copies  for  themselves,  and  reap  a  rich 
harvest  from  the  credulity  of  the  lower  classes.  The 
panchangam  serves  as  an  excuse,  but  it  is  only  another 
way  of  demanding  alms.  This  method  of  earning  a  liveli- 
hood, however,  causes  them  to  be  despised  by  persons  of 
their  own  caste,  and  they  only  resort  to  it  when  other 
resources  have  failed.  They  always  quote  their  favourite 
axiom  :  '  In  order  to  fill  one's  belly  one  must  play  many 
parts.' 

The  purohitas  appear  to  date  back  to  very  ancient  times. 

1  Ugadi  is  the  Telugu  New  Year's  Day.  Nowadays  there  is  no  music 
or  dancing  on  the  occasion  of  the  purohita  reading  the  almanac. — Ed. 

F  3 


138  THE  PUROHITAS 

Most  Hindu  writers  mention  them,  and,  if  they  are  to 
be  believed,  the  highest  honours  were  paid  to  these 
Brahmins  in  times  gone  by.  They  and  the  gurus  share 
the  duty  of  preserving  intact  the  ancient  customs,  and  it 
is  they  who  are  loudest  in  condemning  those  who  violate 
them. 

To  them  also  is  due  the  credit  of  having  preserved  from 
destruction  all  the  books  of  history  or  of  science  that  have 
survived  the  revolutions  by  which  the  country  has  been 
so  often  convulsed. 

All  the  purohitas  are  married,  and  I  believe  this  to  be 
obligatory,  in  order  that  they  may  minister  in  Brahmins' 
houses.  A  widower  would  not  be  admitted,  as  his  very 
presence  would  be  considered  sufficient  to  bring  mis- 
fortune \ 


CHAPTER  XII 

Mantrams. — Their  Efficacy. — The  Gayatri. — The  word  'Aum.' — Magic 

Mantrams. 

These  famous  mantrams,  which  the  Hindus  think  so 
much  of,  are  nothing  more  than  prayers  or  consecrated 
formulas,  but  they  are  considered  so  powerful  that  they 
can,  as  the  Hindus  say,  enchain  the  power  of  the  gods  them- 
selves. Mantrams  are  used  for  invocation,  for  evocation, 
or  as  spells.  They  may  be  either  preservative  or  destruc- 
tive, beneficent  or  maleficent,  salutary  or  harmful.  In 
fact,  there  is  no  effect  that  they  are  not  capable  of  pro- 
ducing. Through  them  an  evil  spirit  can  be  made  to  take 
possession  of  any  one,  or  can  be  exorcised.  They  can 
inspire  with  love  or  hate,  they  can  cause  an  illness  or  cure 
it,  induce  death  or  preserve  life,  or  cause  destruction  to 
a  whole  army.  There  are  mantrams  which  are  infallible 
for  all  these  and  many  other  things  besides.  Fortunately 
one  mantram  can  counteract  the  effect  of  another,  the 
stronger  neutralizing  the  weaker. 

The  purohitas  are  more  familiar  with  these  mantrams 
than  any  other  class  of  Hindus  ;  but  all  Brahmins  are 
supposed  to  be  acquainted  at  any  rate  with  the  principal 
1  This  is  only  partially  applicable  nowadays. — Ed. 


THE  EFFICACY  OF  MAXTRAMS  139 

ones,  if  this  Sanskrit  verse,  which  one  often  hears  repeated, 
is  to  be  believed  : — 

Devadhtnam  jagat  sarvam, 

Mantradhinam  ta  dtvata 
Tan  mantram  brahmanadhinam 

Brahmana  mama  devata. 

Which  means,  '  The  universe  is  under  the  power  of  the 
gods  ;  the  gods  are  under  the  power  of  mantrams  ;  the 
mantrams  are  under  the  power  of  the  Brahmins  ;  there- 
fore the  Brahmins  are  our  gods.'  The  argument  is  plainly 
set  out,  as  you  may  see,  and  these  modest  personages  have 
no  scruples  about  arrogating  to  themselves  the  sublime  title 
of  Brahma  gods,  or  gods  of  the  earth. 

As  an  instance  of  the  efficacy  of  mantrams,  I  will  cite 
the  following  example,  which  is  taken  from  the  well-known 
Hindu  poem  Brahmottara-Kanda,  composed  in  honour  of 
Siva  : — 

'  Dasarha,  king  of  Madura,  having  married  Kalavati, 
daughter  of  the  king  of  Benares,  was  warned  by  the  prin- 
cess on  their  wedding-day  that  he  must  not  take  advantage 
of  his  rights  as  her  husband,  because  the  mantram  of  the 
five  letters,  which  she  had  learned,  had  so  purged  and  puri- 
fied her  that  any  man  who  ventured  upon  any  familiarities 
with  her  would  do  so  at  the  risk  of  his  life,  unless  he  had 
been  previously  cleansed  from  all  defilements  through  the 
same  medium.  Being  his  wife  she  could  not  teach  him 
this  mantram,  because  by  doing  so  she  would  become  his 
guru,  and  consequently  his  superior.  The  next  day  the 
husband  and  wife  both  went  in  quest  of  the  great  Rishi, 
or  penitent,  Garga,  who,  on  learning  the  object  of  their 
visit,  bade  them  fast  for  one  day  and  bathe  the  following 
day  in  the  Ganges.  Thus  prepared  the  pair  returned  to 
the  penitent,  who  made  the  husband  sit  down  on  the  ground 
facing  the  east,  and  having  seated  himself  by  his  side,  but 
facing  the  west,  he  whispered  these  two  words  in  his  ear, 
"Namah  Sivaya  1  !  "  Scarcely  had  the  king  Dasarha  heard 
these  marvellous  words  when  a  flight  of  crows  was  seen 
issuing  from  different  parts  of  his  body,  which  flew  away 
and  disappeared  ;  these  crows  being  nothing  more  or  less 

1  This  means,  '  All  hail  to  Siva  !  '  and  is  the  mantram  of  the  five 
letters. — Dubois. 


140  THE  MOST  FAMOUS  MANTRAM 

than  the  sins  which  the  prince  had  previously  com- 
mitted.' 

'  Tli is  story,'  continues  the  author,  '  is  really  true.  I  had 
it  from  my  guru  Veda-Vyasa,  who  learned  it  himself  from 
the  Para-Brahma.  The  king  and  his  wife,  thus  purified, 
lived  happily  together  for  a  great  many  years,  and  only 
quitted  this  world  to  join  Para-Brahma,  the  Supreme 
Being,  in  the  abode  of  bliss.' 

When  one  points  out  to  the  Brahmins  that  these  much- 
vaunted  mantrams  do  not  produce  startling  effects  in  the 
present  day,  they  reply  that  this  must  be  attributed  to  the 
Kali-yuga,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  Fourth  Age  of  the  world, 
in  which  we  are  now  living,  a  veritable  age  of  iron,  when 
everything  has  degenerated  ;  a  period  of  calamities  and 
disasters,  when  virtue  has  ceased  to  rule  the  earth.  They 
maintain,  nevertheless,  that  it  is  still  not  at  all  uncommon 
for  mantrams  to  work  miracles,  and  this  they  confirm  by 
citing  stories  which  are  quite  as  authentic  and  credible  as 
the  one  I  have  just  related. 

The  most  famous  and  the  most  efficacious  mantram  for 
taking  away  sins,  whose  power  is  so  great  that  the  very 
gods  tremble  at  it,  is  that  which  is  called  the  gayatri.  It 
is  so  ancient  that  the  Vedas  themselves  were  born  from  it. 
Only  a  Brahmin  has  the  right  to  recite  it,  and  he  must 
prepare  himself  beforehand  by  other  prayers  and  by  the 
most  profound  meditation.  He  must  always  repeat  it  in 
a  low  voice,  and  take  the  greatest  care  that  he  is  not  over- 
heard by  a  Sudra,  or  even  by  his  own  wife,  particularly  at 
the  time  when  she  is  in  a  state  of  uncleanness.  The  follow- 
ing are  the  words  of  this  famous  mantram  1  : — 

Tat  savitur  varenyam  bhargo  devasya 
Dhimahi  dhiyo  yo  nah  prachodayat. 

1  Long  after  I  had  finished  my  first  work,  I  found  in  No.  27  of  the 
Asiatic  Journal  of  1818  two  different  English  translations  of  the  gayatri, 
the  exactitude  of  which  I  in  no  way  vouch  for,  nor  can  I  give  any  pre- 
ference to  either  translation.     This,  at  any  rate,  is  the  sense  of  them  : — 

1.  '  Let  us  worship  the  light  of  God,  greater  than  you,  0  Sun,  who 
can  so  well  guide  our  understanding.  The  wise  man  always  considers 
this  (the  Sun)  the  supreme  manifestation  of  the  divinity.' 

2.  '  Let  us  worship  the  supreme  light  of  the  Sun,  the  God  of  all  things, 
who  can  so  well  guide  our  understanding,  like  an  eye  suspended  in  the 
vault  of  heaven.' — Dubois. 


THE  MYSTERIOUS  WORD  *  AUM  '  141 

It  is  a  prayer  in  honour  of  the  Sun,  one  of  whose  names 
is  Savitru.  It  is  a  great  mystery.  Each  word,  and  indeed 
each  syllable,  is  full  of  allusions  which  only  a  very  few 
Brahmins  understand.  I  have  never  met  any  one  who 
was  able  to  give  me  an  intelligible  translation  or  explana- 
tion of  them.  A  Brahmin  would  be  guilty  of  an  unpardon- 
able crime  and  the  most  terrible  sacrilege  if  he  imparted 
it  to  an  unbeliever.  There  are  several  other  mantrams 
which  are  called  gayatri,  but  the  one  mentioned  above  is 
that  which  is  most  generally  used. 

After  the  gayatri,  the  most  powerful  mantram  is  the 
mysterious  monosyllable  om  or  aum.  Though  it  is  to  the 
interest  of  the  Brahmins  to  keep  the  real  meaning  of  this 
sacred  word  a  profound  secret,  and  though  the  greater 
number  of  them  do  not  understand  it  themselves,  there 
does  not  appear  to  be  much  doubt  that  it  is  the  symbolic 
name  of  the  Supreme  Being,  one  and  indivisible,  like  the 
word  aum  \  This  mystic  word,  which  is  always  pronounced 
with  extreme  reverence,  suggests  an  obvious  analogy  to 
that  ineffable  and  mysterious  Hebrew  word  Jehovah. 

Though  the  Brahmins  are  supposed  to  be  the  sole  guar- 
dians of  the  mantrams,  many  others  venture  to  recite 
them.  In  some  professions  they  are  absolutely  indispens- 
able. Doctors,  for  instance,  even  when  not  Brahmins, 
would  be  considered  very  ignorant,  and,  no  matter  how 
clever  they  might  be  in  their  profession,  would  inspire  no 
confidence,  if  they  were  unable  to  recite  the  special  man- 
tram  that  suited  each  complaint  ;  for  a  cure  is  attributed 
quite  as  much  to  mantrams  as  to  medical  treatment.  One 
of  the  principal  reasons  why  so  little  confidence  is  placed 
in  European  doctors  by  the  Hindus  is  that,  when  adminis- 
tering their  remedies,  they  recite  neither  mantrams  nor 
prayers  2. 

1  The  Hindu  conception  of  the  word  aum  is  thus  explained  by  one 
authority  : — '  As  long  as  there  has  been  a  Hindu  Faith  the  power  of 
sound  has  been  recognized  in  the  Sacred  Word.  In  that  word  lie  all 
potencies,  for  the  sacred  word  expresses  the  one  and  latent  Being,  every 
power  of  generation,  of  preservation,  and  of  destruction.  .  .  .  Therefore 
was  it  never  to  be  sounded  save  when  the  mind  was  pure,  when  the 
mind  was  tranquil,  when  the  life  was  noble.' — Ed. 

2  Failure  to  feel  the  pulse  is  also  regarded  by  the  Hindus  as  a  sure 
proof  of  medical  ignorance. — Ed. 


142  MANTRAMS  USED  BY  SORCERERS 

Mid  wives  must  also  be  acquainted  with  a  good  many  ; 
and  they  are  sometimes  called  mantradaris,  or  women  who 
repeat  mantrams  ;  for  there  is  no  moment,  according  to 
Hindu  superstitions,  when  mantrams  are  more  needed  than 
at  the  birth  of  a  child.  Both  the  new-born  infant  and  its 
mother  are  peculiarly  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  the 
evil  eye,  the  inauspicious  combination  of  unlucky  planets 
or  unlucky  days,  and  a  thousand  other  unpropitious  ele- 
ments. A  good  midwife,  well  primed  with  efficacious  man- 
trams, foresees  all  these  dangers  and  averts  them  by  reciting 
the  proper  words  at  the  proper  moment. 

But  the  cleverest  mantram  reciters,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  most  feared,  are  the  charlatans  who  profess  to  be 
thoroughly  initiated  in  the  occult  sciences,  such  as  sor- 
cerers, necromancers,  soothsayers,  &c.  They  have  in  their 
possession,  if  they  are  to  be  believed,  mantrams  which  are 
capable  of  working  all  the  wonders  which  I  enumerated  at 
the  beginning  of  this  chapter.  They  recite  them  for  the 
purpose  of  discovering  stolen  property,  thieves,  hidden 
treasure,  foretelling  future  events,  &c.  In  a  country  where 
superstition,  ignorance,  and  the  most  extravagant  credulity 
reign  supreme,  it  is  no  wonder  that  impostors  abound  and 
are  able  to  make  a  large  number  of  dupes. 

The  hatred  which  is  felt  for  these  mischievous  sorcerers 
is  only  equalled  by  the  fear  that  they  inspire  ;  and  that  is 
saying  a  great  deal.  Woe  to  any  one  who  is  accused  of 
having  injured  another  by  his  spells  !  The  punishment  that 
is  usually  inflicted  consists  in  pulling  out  two  front  teeth 
from  the  upper  jaw.  When  bereft  of  these  two  teeth,  it 
is  thought  the  sorcerer  will  no  longer  be  able  to  pronounce 
his  diabolical  mantrams  distinctly.  If  he  mispronounces 
the  words  his  familiar  spirit  will  be  angry,  and  the  mis- 
fortune that  he  is  trying  to  bring  down  upon  some  one  else 
will,  it  is  thought,  fall  on  his  own  head. 

One  day  a  poor  man  who  lived  near  me,  and  who  had 
just  undergone  this  painful  punishment,  came  and  threw 
himself  at  my  feet,  protesting  his  innocence  and  begging 
for  protection  and  for  advice  as  to  how  he  could  obtain 
justice.  The  unfortunate  fellow  certainly  did  not  look  like 
a  sorcerer,  but  as  I  had  neither  the  power  nor  the  means  of 
interfering  in  the  affair,  I  could  only  offer  him  my  sym- 


MAGIC  SYLLABLES  143 

pathy  and  assure  him  how  indignant  I  felt  at  the  iniquitous 
treatment  to  which  he  had  been  subjected. 

There  are  certain  majitra7?i.s  which  have  a  very  special 
signification.  They  are  called  bija-aksharas,  or  radical 
letters  ;  such,  for  instance,  as  hram.  hrim,  hrom,  hroum, 
hraha,  &c.  To  those  who  have  the  key  to  the  true  pro- 
nunciation of  them  and  know  how  to  use  and  apply  them, 
nothing  is  impossible  ;  there  is  no  limit  to  the  miracles  they 
can  perform.     The  following  is  an  example  : — 

Siva  had  initiated  a  little  bastard  boy  into  all  the  mys- 
teries of  these  radical  letters.  The  boy  was  the  son  of 
a  Brahmin  widow,  and  on  account  of  the  stain  on  his  birth 
had  experienced  the  mortification  of  being  excluded  from 
a  wedding  feast,  to  which  many  persons  of  his  caste  had 
been  invited.  He  revenged  himself  by  simply  pronouncing 
two  or  three  of  these  radical  letters  through  a  crack  in  the 
door  of  the  room  where  the  guests  were  assembled.  Im- 
mediately, by  virtue  of  these  marvellous  words,  all  the 
dishes  that  had  been  prepared  for  the  feast  were  turned 
into  frogs.  This  wonderful  occurrence  naturally  caused 
great  consternation  amongst  the  guests.  Every  one  was 
convinced  it  was  due  to  the  little  bastard,  and  fearing 
worse  might  happen  they  all  rushed  with  one  accord  to 
invite  him  to  come  in.  After  they  had  apologized  humbly 
for  what  had  happened  he  entered  the  room  and  merely  pro- 
nounced the  same  words  backwards,  when  the  frogs  suddenly 
disappeared,  and  they  saw  with  great  pleasure  the  cakes 
and  other  refreshments  which  had  been  on  the  table  before. 

I  will  leave  it  to  some  one  else  to  find,  if  he  can.  any- 
thing amongst  the  numberless  obscurations  of  the  human 
mind  that  can  equal  the  extravagance  of  this  story,  which 
a  Hindu  would  nevertheless  believe  implicitly. 

CHAPTER   XIII 

Explanation  of  the  Principal  Ceremonies  of  the  Brahmins  and  of  other 
Castes. — The  Sam-l;alpa. — Puja. — Aratti. — Akshatas. — Pavitram. — 
Sesamum  and  Darbha  Grass. — Puniaha  vachana. — Pancha-gavia. — 
Purification  of  Places  where  Ceremonies  take  place. — Pandals,  or 
Pavilions  made  of  Leaves. 

Before  entering  into  more  particular  details  with  regard 
to  the  ceremonies  of  the  Brahmins,  it  is  necessary,  in  order 


144  THE  SAM-KALPA 

to  make  the  rest  of  this  book  intelligible,  to  begin  by  giving 
an  explanation  of  certain  terms  pertaining  to  these  cere- 
monies, and  also  a  short  summary  of  the  chief  objects 
aimed  at.  This  sketch  will  suffice  to  indicate  the  peculiar 
tastes  and  inclinations  of  the  Brahmins,  and  will  no  doubt 
cause  my  readers  to  inquire  how  these  men  were  able  to 
impose  so  many  extravagant  absurdities  on  a  people  whose 
civilization  dates  from  such  very  ancient  times,  and  yet  to 
retain  their  full  confidence. 

The  Sam-kalpa. 

The  chief  preparatory  ceremony  amongst  the  Brahmins 
is  the  sam-kalpa,  which  means  literally  '  intensive  contem- 
plation V 

This  method  of  mental  preparation  must  in  no  instance 
be  omitted  before  any  religious  ceremony  of  the  Brahmins. 
When  the  sam-kalpa  has  been  performed  with  due  medita- 
tion, everything  that  they  undertake  will  succeed  ;  but  its 
omission  is  alone  sufficient  to  transform  all  the  ceremonies 
that  follow  into  so  many  acts  of  sacrilege  which  will  not 
pass  unpunished.  The  Brahmin  must  meditate  prelimi- 
narily on  the  following  points.     He  must  think — 

1.  Of  Vishnu,  meditating  upon  him  as  the  ruler  and 
preserver  of  this  vast  universe,  as  the  author  and  giver  of 
all  good  things,  and  as  he  who  brings  all  undertakings  to 
a  successful  issue.  With  these  thoughts  in  his  mind  he 
repeats  thrice  the  name  of  Vishnu,  and  worships  him. 

2.  He  must  think  of  Brahma.  He  must  remember  that 
there  are  nine  Brahmas,  who  created  the  eight  million  four 
hundred  thousand  kinds  of  living  creatures,  of  which  the 
most  important  is  man  ;  that  it  is  the  first  of  these  Brahmas 
who  is  ruling  at  the  present  time  ;  that  he  will  live  for 
a  hundred  years  of  the  gods  -  ;  that  his  life  is  divided  into 
four  parts,  of  which  the  first  and  half  the  second  are  already 
gone.     He  must  then  worship  him. 

3.  He  must  think  of  the  Avatara,  or  incarnation,  of 
Vishnu  in  the  form  of  a  white  pig,  which  was  the  shape  in 

1  Sam-kalpa  literally  means  resolve  of  the  mind,  will,  purpose,  definite 
intention,  determination,  desire.  It  is  no  ceremony  in  itself,  but  is 
a  prelude  to  every  ceremony. — Ed. 

-  Each  day,  according  to  the  reckoning  of  the  gods,  is  as  long  as 
several  milliards  of  years. — Dubois. 


A  PROCESS  OF  MEDITATION  145 

which  that  deity  slew  the  giant  Hirannyaksha.  After 
having  thoroughly  realized  the  idea  that  this  Avatara  is 
the  most  celebrated  of  all  in  the  Kali-yuga,  he  worships 
the  pig  god. 

4.  He  must  think  of  Manu.  He  reminds  himself  that 
there  are  fourteen  Manus,  of  which  the  names  are  Svaro- 
chisha,  Tamasa,  Svayambhuva,  Raivata,  &c.  &c,  and  that 
they  reign  over  the  fourteen  worlds  during  the  hundred 
gods'  years  that  Brahma's  life  will  last.  As  Vaivaswata 
Manu  is  now  in  power  in  the  Kali-yuga,  in  which  the 
Hindus  are  living  at  this  present  time,  he  offers  him  worship. 

5.  He  must  think  of  the  Kali-yuga.  He  must  recollect 
that  we  are  at  present  in  the  early  part  of  this  yuga. 

6.  He  must  think  of  Jambu-Dwipa.  This  is  the  con- 
tinent in  which  India  is  situated.  He  pictures  it  to  him- 
self as  surrounded  by  a  sea  of  salt  water,  having  in  the  centre 
a  mountain  of  gold  sixteen  thousand  yojanas  1  high,  called 
Mahameru,  on  the  thousand  summits  of  which  the  gods 
have  fixed  their  abode.  He  must  remember  that  at  the 
foot  of  this  mountain  on  the  east  side  grows  the  Jambu- 
vruksha,  a  tree  which  is  a  thousand  yojanas  high  and  as 
many  in  circumference  ;  that  the  juice  of  the  fruits  of  this 
tree,  which  fall  of  their  own  accord  when  ripe,  forms  a 
large  river  which  flows  towards  the  west,  where  it  mingles 
its  waters  with  those  of  the  sea  ;  that  the  water  of  this 
river  possesses  the  power  of  converting  everything  it 
touches  into  gold,  for  which  reason  it  has  been  called  the 
Bangaru-nadi  or  Golden  River.  The  Brahmin  must  not 
omit  to  think  of  this  sacred  tree,  nor  yet  of  the  continent 
of  Jambu-Dwipa,  where  it  is  situated. 

7.  He  must  think  of  the  great  king  Bharata,  who  at 
one  time  governed  Jambu-Dwipa  and  whose  reign  forms 
one  of  the  Hindu  eras. 

8.  He  must  think  of  the  side  of  the  Mahameru  which 
faces  him,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  west  side  of  this  sacred 
mountain,  if  he  lives  to  the  west  of  it,  of  the  east,  if  he 
lives  to  the  east  of  it,  &c. 

1  The  ordinary  yojana  is  about  nine  miles,  but  the  sacred  yojana 
which  is  here  mentioned,  is  very  much  longer. — Dubois. 

Yojana  literally  means  the  distance  driven  at  a  yoking  or  stretch  ; 
equal  to  four  krodas,  or  about  nine  English  miles. — Ed. 


146  FURTHER  MEDITATIONS 

9.  He  must  think  of  the  corner  of  the  world  called  Agni- 
diku,  or  the  Corner  of  Fire,  over  which  the  god  Agni-Iswara 
presides,  and  which  is  that  part  of  the  world  in  which  India 
is  situated. 

10.  He  must  think  of  the  Dravida  country,  where  the 
Tamil  (Arava)  language  is  spoken. 

11.  He  must  think  of  the  moon's  pathway,  and  the 
change  of  one  moon  to  another. 

12.  He  must  think  of  the  year  of  the  cycle  in  which  he 
is  living.  The  Hindu  cycle  is  composed  of  sixty  years, 
each  of  which  has  its  own  particular  name.  And  he  must 
say  aloud  the  name  of  the  particular  year  of  the  cycle  in 
which  he  is  living. 

13.  He  must  think  of  the  ay  ana  in  which  he  is.  There 
are  two  ayanas  in  the  year,  each  of  which  lasts  six 
months — one  called  the  dakshina-ayana  or  southern  ay  ana, 
which  includes  the  time  during  which  the  sun  is  south 
of  the  equinoctial  line,  and  the  other  called  uttara- 
ayana  or  northern  ayana,  which  comprises  the  rest 
of  the  year,  during  which  the  sun  is  north  of  this  line. 
He  must  pronounce  the  name  of  the  ayana  which  is  then 
going  on. 

14.  He  must  think  of  the  rutu,  or  season  of  the  year. 
There  are  six  rutus  in  the  year,  each  of  which  lasts  two 
months.  He  must  pronounce  the  name  of  the  rutu  in 
which  he  is  performing  the  sam-kalpa. 

15.  He  must  think  of  the  moon.  Each  moon  is  divided 
into  two  equal  parts,  one  of  which  is  called  Sukla-paksha 
and  the  other  Krishna-paksha.  Each  of  these  divisions 
lasts  fourteen  days,  and  each  day  has  its  own  special  name. 
He  must  call  to  mind  the  division  and  day  of  the  moon, 
and  pronounce  their  names. 

16.  He  must  think  of  the  day  of  the  week  and  pronounce 
the  name. 

17.  He  must  think  of  the  star  of  the  day.  There  are 
twenty-seven  in  each  lunar  month,  each  of  which  has  a  name. 
He  must  pronounce  the  name  of  the  one  which  is  in  the 
ascendant  on  that  day. 

18.  He  must  think  of  the  yoga  1  of  the  day.  There  are 
twenty-seven  of  these,  corresponding  to  the  twenty-seven 

1   Yoga  means  conjunction  of  stars. — Ed. 


PUJA,  OR  SACRIFICE  147 

stars,  each  with  its  own  name.  He  must  pronounce  the 
name  of  the  yoga,  as  also  that  of  the  star. 

19.  He  must  think  of  the  karana,  of  which  there  are 
eleven  in  each  lunar  month,  each  with  its  own  name.  The 
same  formality  must  be  gone  through  as  with  the  star  and 
the  yoga. 

All  these  divers  objects  to  which  the  Brahmin  must  turn 
his  thoughts  when  performing  the  sam-kalpa  are  so  many 
personifications  of  Vishnu,  or  rather  are  Vishnu  himself 
under  different  names.  Besides  this  ordinary  sam-kalpa, 
there  is  another  more  elaborate  one,  which  is  reserved  for 
grand  occasions,  and  which  will  be  described  further  on. 

This  pious  introduction  to  all  their  ceremonies  averts, 
by  virtue  of  its  merits,  every  obstacle  which  the  evil  spirits 
and  giants  would  put  in  the  way.  The  name  of  Vishnu 
alone,  it  is  true,  is  sufficient  to  put  them  to  flight,  but 
nothing  can  resist  the  power  of  the  sam-kalpa. 

Puja;  or  Sacrifice  1. 

Of  all  the  Hindu  rites,  puja  is  the  one  that  occurs  most 
frequently  in  all  their  ceremonies,  both  public  and  private, 
in  their  temples  and  elsewhere.  Every  Brahmin  is  abso- 
lutely obliged  to  offer  it  at  least  once  a  day  to  his  household 
gods.  There  are  three  kinds  of  pujas — the  great,  the 
intermediate,  and  the  small. 

The  great  sacrifice  is  composed  of  the  following  parts  : — 

1.  Avahana.     The  evocation  of  the  deity. 

2.  Asana.     A  seat  is  presented  to  him  to  sit  on. 

3.  Swagata.  He  is  asked  if  he  has  arrived  quite  safely, 
and  if  he  met  with  no  accident  on  the  way. 

4.  Padya.  Water  is  offered  to  him  for  washing  his 
feet, 

5.  Arghya.  Water  is  presented  to  him  in  which  flowers, 
saffron,  and  sandalwood  powder  have  been  placed. 

6.  Achamania.  Water  is  offered  that  he  may  wash  his 
mouth  and  face  in  the  prescribed  fashion. 

7.  Madhu-parka.  He  is  offered  in  a  metal  vessel  a 
beverage  composed  of  honey,  sugar,  and  milk. 

8.  Snana-jala.     Water  for  his  bath. 

1  Puja  means  honour,  respect,  homage,  worship. — Ed. 


148  THE  ARATTI  CEREMONY 

9.  Bhooshan-abharanasya.  He  is  presented  with  cloths, 
jewels,  and  ornaments. 

10.  Gandha.     Sandalwood  powder. 

11.  Akshatas.     Grains  of  rice  coloured  with  saffron. 

12.  Push  pa      Flowers. 

13.  Dhupa.     Incense. 

14.  Dipa.     A  lighted  lamp. 

15.  Neiveddya.  This  last  offering  is  composed  of  cooked 
rice,  fruit,  liquefied  butter,  sugar  and  other  eatables,  and 
betel. 

Before  offering  these  gifts,  care  should  be  taken  to 
sprinkle  a  little  water  over  them  with  the  tips  of  the  fingers. 
The  worshippers  then  prostrate  themselves  before  the 
deity. 

For  the  intermediate  puja  the  last  nine  articles  are 
offered  ;  for  the  lesser,  only  the  last  six. 

When  sacrifices  of  blood  are  necessary  to  appease  ill- 
disposed  gods  or  evil  spirits,  the  blood  and  the  flesh  of  the 
animals  that  have  been  sacrificed  are  offered  to  them. 

Arti  or  Aratti. 

This  ceremony  is  performed  only  by  married  women  and 
courtesans.  Widows  would  not  be  allowed,  under  any 
circumstances,  to  participate  in  it l. 

A  lamp  made  of  kneaded  rice-flour  is  placed  on  a  metal 
dish  or  plate.  It  is  then  filled  with  oil  or  liquefied  butter 
and  lighted.  The  women  each  take  hold  of  the  plate  in 
turn  and  raise  it  to  the  level  of  the  person's  head  for  whom 
the  ceremony  is  being  performed,  describing  a  specified 
number  of  circles  with  it.  Instead  of  using  a  lighted  lamp 
they  sometimes  content  themselves  with  filling  a  vessel 
with  water  coloured  with  saffron,  vermilion,  and  other  in- 
gredients. The  object  of  this  ceremony  is  to  counteract 
the  influence  of  the  evil  eye  and  any  ill-effects  which, 
according  to  Hindu  belief,  may  arise  from  the  jealous  and 
spiteful  looks  of  ill-intentioned  persons. 

The  aratti  is  one  of  the  commonest  of  their  religious 

1  ^Yidows  are  not  allowed  to  take  part  in  any  of  the  domestic  cere- 
monies of  the  Hindus.  Their  presence  alone  would  be  thought  to  bring 
misfortune,  and  if  they  dared  to  appear  they  would  be  rudely  treated 
and  sent  away. — Dubois. 


A  SAFEGUARD  AGAINST  THE  '  EVIL  EYE  '     149 

practices,  and  is  observed  in  public  and  private  \  It  is 
performed  daily,  and  often  several  times  a  day,  over  persons 
of  high  rank,  such  as  rajahs,  governors  of  provinces,  generals, 
and  other  distinguished  members  of  society.  Whenever 
people  in  these  positions  have  been  obliged  to  show  them- 
selves in  public,  or  to  speak  to  strangers,  they  invariably 
call  for  the  courtesans  or  dancing-girls  from  the  temples  to 
perform  this  ceremony  over  them,  and  so  avert  any  un- 
pleasant consequences  that  might  arise  from  the  baleful 
glances  to  which  they  have  been  exposed.  Kings  and 
princes  often  have  dancing-girls  in  their  employ  who  do 
nothing  else  but  perform  this  ceremony  2. 

The  aratti  is  also  performed  for  idols.  After  the  dancing- 
girls  have  finished  all  their  other  duties  in  the  temple,  they 
never  fail  to  perform  this  ceremony  twice  daily  over  the 
images  of  the  gods  to  whom  their  services  are  dedicated. 
It  is  performed  with  even  more  solemnity  when  these  idols 
have  been  carried  in  procession  through  the  streets,  so  as 
to  turn  aside  malignant  influences,  to  which  the  gods  are 
as  susceptible  as  any  ordinary  mortal. 

Aratti  is  also  performed  for  the  same  purpose  over 
elephants,  horses,  and  other  domestic  animals. 

This  superstition  about  the  evil  eye  is  common  enough 
in  many  European  countries.  I  have  seen  simple  French 
peasants  hastily  draw  their  children  away  from  some 
stranger  or  ill-looking  person,  for  fear  his  glance  might 
cast  some  spell  over  the  little  ones.  The  same  notion  was 
prevalent  at  the  time  of  the  ancient  Romans,  as  Virgil, 
amongst  others,  bears  witness  in  the  following  verse  : — 
'  Nescio  quis  teneros  oculus  mihi  fascinat  agnos.' 

The  Romans  too  had  their  god  Fascinus,  and  amulets  of 
the  same  name  were  given  to  children  to  wear  to  preserve 
them  from  spells  of  this  nature.  The  statue  of  the  god, 
placed  on  the  triumphal  car,  preserved  returning  con- 
querors from  the  malignity  of  the  envious.  Hindus  call 
this  spell  drishti- dosha,  or  the  influence  of  the  eye.  And 
they  invented  the  aratti  to  avert  and  counteract  it.     Their 

1  The  word  aratti  itself  means  trouble,  misfortune,  pain. — Ed. 
a  Aratti  is  performed  also  when  people  take  children  from  one  village 
to  another,  on  visits  to  relations  and  friends. — Ed. 


150  THE  AKSHATAS  AND  PAVITRAM 

credulity  on  this  subject  is  boundless.  According  to  them 
it  is  not  only  animate  objects  that  come  under  the  influence 
of  the  driskti-dosha  ;  vegetable  substances  are  equally 
susceptible  to  it.  It  is  to  avert  this  spell  that  they  stick 
up  a  pole  in  all  their  gardens  and  fields  that  are  under 
cultivation.  On  the  top  of  this  pole  they  fix  a  large  earthen 
vessel,  well  whitened  on  the  outside  with  lime.  This  is  to 
attract  the  attention  of  malicious  persons  who  may  be 
passing,  as  it  will  be  the  first  thing  to  catch  their  eye  and 
will  thus  prevent  their  spells  from  producing  any  disastrous 
effects  on  the  crops,  which  otherwise  would  certainly  be 
affected  by  the  evil  influence. 

Akshatas. 
This  is  the  name  given  to  husked  rice  coloured  with 
a  mixture  of  saffron  and  vermilion.  There  are  two  kinds 
of  akshatas,  one  specially  consecrated  by  mantrams,  the 
other  simple  coloured  rice.  The  first  is  used  when  per- 
forming puja  and  in  other  great  ceremonies  ;  the  other 
kind  is  only  a  toilet  requisite,  or  is  used  as  an  offering  of 
politeness.  It  is  considered  good  manners  to  offer  some 
in  a  metal  cup  to  any  one  to  whom  a  ceremonious  invitation 
is  sent.  The  latter  in  return  takes  a  few  grains  and  applies 
them  to  the  forehead. 

The  Pavitram  \ 

The  object  of  the  pavitram  is  to  scare  away  giants,  evil 
spirits,  or  devils,  whose  mission  it  is  to  bring  disasters 
upon  men  and  mar  the  ceremonies  of  the  Brahmins.  The 
very  sight  of  the  pavitram  makes  them  tremble  and  take 
to  flight. 

This  powerful  amulet  consists  of  three,  five,  or  seven 
stalks  of  darbha  grass  plaited  together  in  the  form  of  a  ring. 
Before  beginning  any  ceremony  the  presiding  purohita  takes 
the  pavitram,  and,  after  dipping  it  in  sanctified  water, 
places  it  on  the  ring  finger  of  his  right  hand.  The  seeds 
and  oil  of  sesamum  are  very  nearly  as  efficacious  as  the 

1  The  pavitram  is  made  of  stalks  of  darbha  grass.  It  is  worn  simply 
as  a  mark  of  sanctification.  Three  stalks  are  generally  used  for  funeral 
ceremonies  ;  two  for  marriage  ceremonies  and  other  auspicious  occa- 
sions.— Ed. 


THE  PUNIAHA-VACHANA  CEREMONY       151 

pavitram ;  but  the  grass  they  call  darbha  is  the  most 
efficacious,  for  it  possesses  the  virtue  of  purifying  every- 
thing that  it  touches.  The  Brahmins  can  do  nothing 
without  it.  It  is  the  basis  of  all  those  pious  and  meri- 
torious acts  which  are  known  by  the  generic  term  of  mok- 
sharthas,  or  deeds  which  lead  to  everlasting  felicity,  and 
which  consist  of  the  asva-medha  (sacrifice  of  the  horse), 
the  vaja-peya,  the  raja-suya,  the  sattra-yaga,  and  other 
kinds  of  yagnas  which  are  particularly  pleasing  to  Vishnu  \ 
No  important  action  in  life  can  take  place  without  it. 
That  is  to  say,  it  is  necessary  in  the  kamyarthas,  which 
include  the  garbha-dana,  the  jata-karma,  the  nama-karma, 
the  anna-prasana,  the  chaula,  the  upanayana,  the  simanta, 
and  marriage  2.  It  is  in  frequent  use  in  the  various  religious 
exercises  of  the  Brahmins  pertaining  to  their  four  states, 
namely,  Brahmachari,  Grahastha,  Vana-prastha,  and  Sann- 
yasi  (vide  p.  160  et  seq.).  In  fact  this  sacred  grass,  the 
purity  of  which  is  considered  unequalled,  appears  in  every 
religious  or  civil  ceremony. 

PUNI  AH  A-  VACHAN  A . 

The  literal  translation  of  this  word  is  '  the  evocation  of 
virtue,'  and  it  is  the  name  given  to  the  ceremony  by  which 
the  sacred  water  is  consecrated.  They  proceed  thus  : — 
Having  purified  a  place  in  the  housa  in  the  ordinary  manner, 
they  sprinkle  it  with  water.  Then  the  officiating  Brahmin 
purohita  seats  himself  with  his  face  to  the  east,  and  they 
place  before  him  a  banana  leaf  with  a  measure  of  rice  on  it. 
At  one  side  is  a  copper  vessel  full  of  water,  the  outside  of 
which  has  been  whitened  with  lime  ;  the  mouth  of  the 
vessel  is  covered  with  mango  leaves,  and  it  is  placed  on 
the  rice.  Near  the  copper  vessel  they  put  a  little  heap  of 
saffron,  which  represents  the  god  Vigneshwara,  to  whom 

1  Vaja-peya  =  trial  of  strength  ;  a  kind  of  soma  sacrifice.  Sattra- 
yaga  =  another  great  soma  sacrifice.  Raja-suya  =  royal  inaugural  sacri- 
fice.— Ed. 

2  Kamyarthas  =  deeds  which  lead  to  worldly  happiness.  Garbha- 
dana  =  pregnancy.  Jata-karma  —  horoscope  writing.  Nama-lcarma  = 
naming  ceremony.  Anna  prasana  =  weaning  or  food-giving  ceremony. 
Chaula  =  head-shaving  ceremony.  Upanayana  =  initiation  of  a  pupil. 
Simanta  =  ceremony  of  parting  the  hair,  in  the  case  of  women  six  or 
eight  months  in  pregnancy. — Ed. 


152  RITE  OF  THE  PANCHA-GAVTA 

they  perform  puja,  and  for  neiveddya  they  offer  jaggery 
(raw  sugar)  and  betel.  They  then  throw  a  little  sandal- 
wood powder  and  akshatas  into  the  copper  vessel,  while 
reciting  appropriate  mantrams,  with  the  intention  of  turn- 
ing the  water  which  it  contains  into  the  sacred  water  of 
the  Ganges.  Finally  they  offer  a  sacrifice  to  the  vessel, 
and  for  neiveddya  they  offer  bananas  and  betel.  The  water 
thus  sanctified  purifies  places  and  persons  that  have  become 
unclean. 

Pancha-gavia. 

I  have  already  explained  1  of  what  disgusting  materials 
the  mixture  known  by  this  name  is  composed.  This  is 
the  way  in  which  it  is  consecrated.  The  house  is  purified 
in  the  usual  way.  They  then  bring  five  little  new  earthen 
vessels,  into  one  of  which  they  put  milk,  into  another  curds, 
into  a  third  liquefied  butter,  into  a  fourth  cow-dung,  and 
into  the  fifth  the  urine  of  a  cow.  These  five  little  vessels 
are  then  placed  in  a  row  on  the  ground  on  some  darbha 
grass,  and  they  perform  puja  in  the  following  manner  : — 
First,  they  make  a  profound  obeisance  before  the  deity 
pancha-gavia,  and  they  meditate  for  some  time  on  his 
merits  and  good  qualities.  Some  flowers  are  placed  on 
the  five  vessels,  and  for  asana  they  make  the  god  an  imagi- 
nary present  of  a  golden  seat  or  throne.  They  then  offer 
to  each  vessel,  as  arghya,  a  little  water,  which  is  poured 
round  them.  For  padya,  a  little  more  water  is  poured 
out  for  them  to  wash  their  feet,  and  achamania  is  offered 
immediately  afterwards  in  the  same  way.  The  snana-jala 
is  water  in  which  a  little  garika  grass  has  been  steeped, 
which  is  presented  to  the  god  pancha-gavia,  to  enable  him 
to  perform  his  ablutions.  The  tops  of  the  vessels  are  then 
covered  with  akshatas,  while  they  are  presented,  in  imagina- 
tion of  course,  with  jewels,  rich  garments,  and  sandal- 
wood. In  conclusion  they  offer  them  flowers,  incense,  a 
lighted  lamp,  bananas,  and  betel  as  neiveddya,  and  finally 
make  another  profound  obeisance. 

These  preliminaries  ended,  the  officiating  priest  addresses 
the  following  prayer  to  the  god  pancha-gavia,  or,  what  is 
the  same  thing,  to  the  substances  contained  in  the  five 
1  Chapter  III. 


PURIFICATION  OF  PLACES  153 

vessels  :  '  0  god  pancha-gavia,  vouchsafe  to  pardon  the 
sins  of  all  the  creatures  in  the  world  who  offer  sacrifice  to 
you  and  drink  you,  pancha-gavia.  You  have  come  pro- 
ceeding from  the  body  of  the  cow  ;  therefore  I  offer  you 
my  prayers  and  sacrifices,  in  order  that  I  may  obtain  the 
remission  of  my  sins  and  the  purification  of  my  body, 
which  are  accorded  to  those  who  drink  you.  Vouchsafe 
also  to  absolve  us,  who  have  offered  you  puja,  from  all  the 
sins  that  we  have  committed  either  inadvertently  or 
deliberately.     Forgive  us  and  save  us  !  ' 

After  this  prayer  they  make  another  profound  obeisance 
and  put  the  contents  of  the  five  vessels  into  one.  Then 
taking  this  vessel  into  his  hands,  the  purohita  performs  the 
hari-smarana  \  drinks  a  little  of  this  precious  liquid,  pours 
a  little  into  the  hollow  of  the  hands  of  all  persons  present, 
who  also  drink  it,  and  keeps  the  rest  for  use  during  the 
ceremony.  Betel  is  then  presented  to  the  Brahmins  who 
are  present,  after  which  they  disperse. 

Nothing  can  equal  the  supposed  purifying  virtues  of 
this  mixture.  Brahmins  and  other  Hindus  frequently 
drink  it  to  remove  both  external  and  internal  defile- 
ments. 

There  is  also  another  lustral  preparation  called  pancha- 
amrita,  which  is  composed  of  milk,  curds,  liquefied  butter, 
honey,  and  sugar  mixed  together.  This  is  not  filthy  and 
disgusting  like  the  one  previously  mentioned,  but  then  it  is 
much  less  efficacious.  It  however  possesses  a  certain 
degree  of  merit  under  some  circumstances. 

The  Purification  of  Places. 
Before  the  performance  of  any  ceremony  the  place  where 
it  is  to  take  place  must  be  previously  purified.  This  is 
usually  the  duty  of  the  women,  and  the  principal  ingredients 
required  are  cow-dung  and  darbha  grass.  They  dilute  the 
cow-dung  with  water  and  make  a  sort  of  plaster  with  it, 
which  they  spread  over  the  floor  with  their  hands,  making 
zigzags  and  other  patterns  with  lime  or  chalk  as  they  go 
on.  They  then  draw  wide  lines  of  alternate  red  and  white 
over  this  and  sprinkle  the  whole  with  darbha  grass,  after 
which  the  place  is  perfectly  pure.  This  is  the  way  in  which 
1  Hari-smarana  means  meditating  on  Hari,  or  Vishnu. — Ed. 


154  PANDALS  OR  PAVILIONS 

Hindus  purify  their  bouses  day  by  day  from  the  defile- 
ments caused  by  promiscuous  goers  and  comers.  It  is 
the  rule  amongst  the  upper  classes  to  have  their  houses 
rubbed  over  once  a  day  with  cow- dung,  but  in  any  class 
it  would  be  considered  an  unpardonable  and  gross  breach 
of  good  manners  to  omit  this  ceremony  when  they  expected 
friends  to  call  or  were  going  to  receive  company. 

This  custom  appears  odd  at  first  sight,  but  it  brings  this 
inestimable  benefit  in  its  train,  that  it  cleanses  the  houses 
where  it  is  in  use  from  all  the  insects  and  vermin  which 
would  otherwise  infest  them. 

Pandals. 

All  the  more  important  Hindu  ceremonies,  such  as 
upanayana,  marriages,  &c,  take  place  under  canopies 
made  of  leaves  and  branches  of  trees  which  are  erected 
with  much  pomp  and  care  in  the  courtyard  or  in  front  of 
the  principal  entrance  door  of  the  house.  The  pandal  is 
usually  supported  by  twelve  wooden  posts  l  or  pillars,  and 
covered  with  foliage  and  branches  of  trees.  The  top  or 
ceiling  is  ornamented  with  paintings  or  costly  stuffs,  while 
the  whole  is  hung  with  garlands  of  flowers,  foliage,  and 
many  other  decorations.  The  pillars  are  painted  in  alter- 
nate bands  of  red  and  white.  The  pandals  of  rich  people 
are  often  exquisitely  decorated.  A  propitious  day,  hour, 
and  star  are  always  chosen  on  which  to  erect  these  canopies. 
Then  the  relations  and  friends  all  assemble  to  set  up  the 
centre  pillar,  which  is  called  the  muhurta-kal,  and  to  which 
they  offer  puja  to  the  accompaniment  of  music.  Under 
this  canopy  all  the  ceremonies  connected  with  the  fete  take 
place,  and  the  guests  remain  underneath  it  till  the  end  of 
the  performance.  The  houses  of  Hindus  are  not  as  a  rule 
sufficiently  spacious,  or  in  any  way  well  adapted  for  receiv- 
ing large  numbers  of  guests,  so  necessity  has  suggested  this 
picturesque  alternative. 

Besides  these  pandals,  which  are  only  used  on  grand 
occasions,  upper-class  people  generally  have  a  permanent 

1  Amongst  the  Sudras  it  is  only  those  who  belong  to  the  Right-hand 
faction  who  are  allowed  to  have  twelve  pillars  or  posts  to  their  pandals. 
If  a  Left-hand  Sudra,  who  is  only  entitled  to  eleven,  should  take  upon 
himself  to  put  twelve,  a  frightful  fracas  would  ensue. — Dubois. 


CEREMONIES  AFTER  CONFINEMENT        155 

one  before  their  principal  entrance  door  to  protect  from  the 
sun  persons  who  may  come  to  visit  them,  and  who  could 
not  with  propriety  and  due  regard  to  custom  be  invited  to 
come  inside. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

Ceremonies  to  be  observed  after  a  Woman's  Confinement. — Ceremonies 
performed  over  Infants. 

JATA- KARMA. 

When  a  Brahmani  begins  to  feel  the  pangs  of  child-birth 
her  husband  should  be  near  her,  so  that  he  may  carefully 
note  the  date  of  the  month,  the  day,  the  star  of  the  day, 
the  yoga,  the  Jcarana,  the  hour,  and  the  moment  when  the 
child  is  born.  And  to  prevent  any  of  these  details  being 
forgotten,  he  puts  them  down  in  writing. 

The  house  where  a  woman  is  confined,  as  well  as  all 
those  who  live  in  it,  are  unclean  for  ten  days.  Before  this 
time  is  up  they  must  have  no  intercourse  with  any  one. 
On  the  eleventh  day  all  the  linen  and  clothes  that  have 
been  used  during  this  period  are  given  to  the  washerman, 
and  the  house  is  purified  in  the  manner  I  have  already 
described.  Then  they  call  in  a  Brahmin  purohita.  The 
woman  who  has  just  been  confined,  holding  the  child  in 
her  arms,  and  with  her  husband  by  her  side,  seats  herself 
on  a  sort  of  earthen  platform,  which  is  set  up  in  the  centre 
of  the  house  and  covered  with  a  cloth.  The  purohita  then 
approaches  them,  performs  the  sam-kalpa,  offers  puja  to 
the  god  Vigneshwara,  and  goes  through  the  ceremony  of 
the  puniaha-vachana,  or  consecration  of  the  sacred  water. 
He  pours  a  small  quantity  of  this  water  into  the  hands  of 
the  father  and  mother  of  the  child,  who  drink  a  portion 
and  pour  the  rest  over  their  heads.  He  also  sprinkles  this 
water  over  the  house  and  all  who  are  living  in  it,  and  throws 
what  remains  down  the  well.  The  purohita  is  then  pre- 
sented with  some  betel  and  a  small  gift,  after  which  he 
departs.  This  ceremony,  which  is  called  jata-karma,  re- 
moves all  uncleanness,  but  the  woman  who  has  been 
confined  does  not  become  perfectly  pure  before  the  end 


156  CEREMONY  ON  NAMING  A  CHILD 

of  a  month.     Until  that  time  has  elapsed  she  must  live 
apart  and  have  no  communication  with  any  one  l. 

Nam  A- KARMA. 

On  the  twelfth  day  after  the  birth  of  the  child  they  give 
it  a  name.  This  is  the  nama-karma  ceremony.  The  house 
having  been  duly  purified,  the  father  of  the  child  invites 
his  relatives  and  friends  to  be  present  at  the  ceremonies 
and  at  the  feast  which  follows  them.  The  guests  go  all 
together  to  perform  their  ablutions.  On  their  return  they 
first  of  all  offer  the  sacrifice  to  fire  called  homam,  in  honour 
of  the  nine  planets.  Then  the  father  of  the  child,  holding 
it  in  his  arms,  seats  himself  on  the  little  raised  platform  of 
earth  and  performs  the  sam-kalpa.  By  his  side  is  a  copper 
dish  full  of  rice.  With  the  first  finger  of  his  right  hand, 
in  which  he  holds  a  gold  ring,  he  writes  on  this  rice  the  day 
of  the  moon,  the  name  of  the  day,  that  of  the  constellation 
under  which  the  child  was  born,  and  finally  the  name  that 
he  wishes  to  give  him.  He  then  calls  the  child  three  times 
by  this  name  in  a  loud  voice. 

This  ceremony  ended,  he  gives  a  present  to  the  presiding 
-purohita,  distributes  betel  to  all  the  Brahmins  present,  and 
then  all  take  their  places  at  the  feast  which  has  been  pre- 
pared. As  soon  as  it  is  finished  the  master  of  the  house 
again  offers  betel  to  his  guests,  and  also  presents,  if  he  is 
rich  enough. 

The  mother  of  the  child  does  not  appear  at  this  cere- 
mony for  the  reason  mentioned  at  the  end  of  the  preceding 
section. 

Anxa-prasana. 

As  soon  as  the  child  is  six  months  old  he  is  weaned. 
Then  the  anna-prasana  takes  place.  The  name  of  this 
ceremony  expresses  the  idea  of  feeding  the  child  on  solid 

1  This  custom  closely  resembles  that  which  Jewish  women  were 
obliged  to  follow  under  similar  circumstances  (Leviticus  xi),  but  the 
Hindus  pay  no  attention,  as  did  the  Israelites,  to  the  difference  in  the 
sex  of  the  child.  As  regards  the  time  during  which  the  uncleanness  of 
the  mother  lasts,  it  is  just  the  same  with  the  Hindus  whether  a  boy  or 
a  girl  is  born. — Dubois. 

This  is  wrong.  When  a  mother  gives  birth  to  a  girl,  pollution  lasts 
for  forty  days  ;  in  the  case  of  a  boy,  only  thirty  days. — Ed. 


CEREMONY  USED  WHEN  WEANING         157 

food  for  the  first  time.  For  this  occasion  they  choose 
a  month,  a  week,  a  day,  and  a  star  which  all  combine  to 
give  favourable  auguries.  A  pandal  is  erected,  which  is 
ornamented  all  round  with  toranams  \  or  wreaths  of  mango 
leaves,  some  of  which  are  also  hung  over  the  entrance 
door  of  the  house,  the  inside  of  which  has  been  carefully 
purified  by  the  women.  The  father  of  the  child  sallies 
forth,  provided  with  a  cup  full  of  akshatas,  to  invite  his 
relations  and  friends  to  the  feast.  All  the  guests,  having 
purified  themselves  by  bathing,  assemble  under  the  pandal. 
The  mother,  holding  the  child  in  her  arms,  and  accom- 
panied by  her  husband,  seats  herself  beside  him  on  the 
little  platform  of  earth  which  has  been  set  up  in  the  centre. 
The  purohita  advances  towards  them,  performs  the  sam- 
Icalpa,  offers,  firstly,  homam  in  honour  of  the  nine  planets, 
then  a  sacrifice  to  fire,  to  which  he  presents  clarified  butter 
and  betel  for  neiveddya.  When  he  has  finished,  the  women 
sing  verses  expressing  their  good  wishes  for  the  future 
happiness  of  the  child,  and  perform  aratti 2  over  him. 

The  father  offers  puja  to  his  household  gods,  and  a 
portion  of  the  dishes  prepared  for  the  general  feast  is  set 
apart  as  neiveddya  for  them. 

Then  the  married  women  form  a  procession  and  sing, 
while  they  bring  in  a  new  dish  of  silver-plated  copper, 
which  is  given  by  the  maternal  uncle  of  the  child,  and  one 
of  those  cords  made  of  cotton  thread  which  all  Hindus 
wear  round  their  loins,  and  to  which  the  little  piece  of  calico 
is  fastened  which  covers  their  private  parts.  They  touch 
the  child  with  these  two  articles,  and  then  pour  some 
paramanna,  a  mixture  composed  of  rice,  sugar,  and  other 
ingredients,  into  the  vessel.  Recommencing  their  song, 
they  proceed  in  the  same  solemn  order  towards  the  house- 
hold gods  and  place  before  them  the  dish,  which  is  then 
known  as  the  dish  god.  They  make  a  profound  obeisance 
all  together  to  this  new  deity  ;  then  addressing  it  and  the 
rest  of  the  deities,  they  implore  them  to  make  the  child 
grow,  to  give  him  strength,  health,  long  life,  and  plenty  of 

1  These  torananu  are  always  used  at  times  of  rejoicing.  They  are  an 
outward  sign  of  rejoicing,  and  an  announcement  that  a  feast  is  going  on, 
inviting  people  to  come. — Dubois. 

-  -See  last  chapter. 


158  THE  CHAULA  CEREMONY 

this  world's  goods.  Then  taking  up  again  the  dish  god, 
they  carry  it  back,  still  singing,  to  the  child.  They  first 
of  all  fasten  the  little  cord  round  its  loins.  Two  of  the 
women  then  make  it  open  its  mouth,  while  a  third  pours 
some  of  the  mixture  contained  in  the  dish  down  its  throat. 
Instruments  of  music  are  playing  and  the  women  are 
singing  during  the  whole  of  this  ceremony.  It  is  termi- 
nated by  the  aratti,  after  which  all  the  Brahmins  present 
are  offered  akshatas  consecrated  by  mantrams.  Each  one 
takes  a  pinch  of  the  coloured  rice,  part  of  which  he  puts 
on  the  child's  head  and  the  rest  on  his  own. 

Then  they  sit  down  to  a  feast,  and  the  ceremony  is  ended 
by  a  distribution  of  betel  and  a  few  presents  given  by  the 
master  of  the  house  to  his  guests. 

The  Chaula. 

Three  years  after  the  birth  of  the  child  1  the  tonsure,  or 
chaula,  is  made  for  the  first  time.  The  Brahmins  who  are 
invited  assemble  under  the  pandal  after  having  performed 
their  ablutions.  The  child  is  brought  in  by  his  father  and 
mother,  who  seat  him  between  them  on  the  little  earthen 
platform.  The  married  women  then  proceed  to  perform 
his  toilette.  They  begin  by  anointing  him  from  head  to 
foot  with  oil,  after  which  they  wash  him  with  warm  water. 
They  then  colour  his  forehead  and  sundry  other  parts  of 
his  body  with  powdered  sandalwood  and  akshatas,  deck 
him  with  ornaments,  and  finally  put  a  long  necklace  of 
coral  beads  round  his  neck  and  two  bracelets  to  match  on 
his  wrists. 

The  purohita  then  draws  near  the  child  thus  adorned 
and  performs  the  sam-kalpa,  and  also  offers  homam  to  the 
nine  planets.  He  next  traces  on  the  floor  in  front  of  the 
child  a  square  patch  with  red  earth,  which  they  cover  with 
rice  that  has  the  husk  on.  The  idol  Vigneshwara  is  placed 
on  one  side,  and  to  it  they  perform  puja,  offering  brin- 
jals  2,  raw  sugar,  and  betel  for  neiveddya. 

The  child  is  made  to  sit  near  the  square  patch,  and  the 

1  Only  the  male  child. — Ed. 

2  Beriiigcla  in  Portuguese,  a  purple  vegetable  shaped  something  like 
a  fig. — Dubois. 

This  is  wrong.     Brinjala  are  never  offered  to  an  idol. — Ed. 


BESTOWING  THE  TONSURE  159 

barber,  after  offering  worship  to  his  razor  \  proceeds  to 
shave  the  child's  head,  leaving  one  lock  at  the  top,  which 
is  never  cut.  While  the  barber  is  performing  his  part  of 
the  ceremony,  the  women  sing,  musical  instruments  are 
played,  and  all  the  Brahmins  present  remain  standing  in 
perfect  silence.  As  soon  as  the  barber  has  finished,  they 
throw  him  the  money  due  to  him.  This  he  picks  up,  and 
before  retiring  he  also  carries  off  the  rice  that  has  been 
scattered  over  the  square  patch. 

The  child  is  immediately  put  into  a  bath  to  purify  him 
from  the  defiling  touch  of  the  barber.  Then  his  toilette  is 
begun  anew.  The  women  perform  the  ceremony  of  aratti, 
and  the  purohita  for  the  second  time  performs  the  komam 
to  the  nine  planets.  The  entertainment  generally  ends 
with  a  feast  and  the  distribution  of  presents  to  the  Brah- 
mins. The  musicians  are  then  paid,  and  receive  besides 
their  money  a  measure  of  rice  each. 

The  ears  of  children  of  both  sexes  are  pierced  at  about 
the  same  age.  This  is  an  occasion  for  another  feast,  very 
closely  resembling  the  preceding  ones.  The  goldsmith  per- 
forms the  operation  with  a  very  fine  gold  wire,  and  the 
size  of  the  hole  is  gradually  increased  from  time  to  time. 
The  hole  is  generally  made  larger  in  the  ears  of  girls,  so 
that  they  may  wear  larger  ornaments.  In  some  provinces 
both  men  and  women  have  the  holes  as  large  as  a  Spanish 
piastre. 

However  odd  these  customs  may  appear  to  us,  at  any 
rate  they  have  the  advantage  of  bringing  the  Brahmins 
often  together  and  obliging  them  to  fulfil  their  mutual 
obligations.  And  they  certainly  help  to  form  a  class  of 
men  who  in  tone  and  manners  are  infinitely  superior  to 
other  Hindus. 

1  This   act   of   worship,    which   the   barber   always   performs    before 
shaving  any  one,  consists  in  putting  the  razor  to  his  forehead. — Dubois. 
The  same  practice  is  observed  by  all  artisans. — Ed. 


PART    II 

THE  FOUR  STATES  OF  BRAHMINICAL  LIFE 
CHAPTEE  I 

The  Brahmachari. — Ceremony  of  the  Upanayana,  or  Investiture  of  the 
Triple  Cord. 

In  this  Second  Part  I  will  bring  to  notice  the  most  re- 
markable peculiarities  of  the  Brahmin  caste,  the  one  of  all 
others  which  clings  most  tenaciously  to  long  established 
customs.  Europeans  have  possessed  up  to  the  present 
time  but  very  imperfect  information  on  this  subject,  and 
what  little  information  has  been  obtained  has  been  taken 
as  it  were  by  stealth  from  the  Brahmins,  whose  constant 
endeavour  it  is  to  veil  their  customs  in  mystery.  I  think 
that  the  details  I  am  about  to  give  will  in  consequence  be 
found  of  considerable  interest.  These  customs,  however, 
do  not  belong  exclusively  to  the  Brahmin  caste  ;  some  of 
them  are  common  to  other  castes  as  well. 

The  life  of  a  Brahmin  has  to  be  considered  under  four 
important  aspects.  The  first  is  that  of  the  young  Brahmin 
who  has  been  invested  with  the  triple  cord,  and  who  is 
from  that  time  called  Brahmachari.  The  second  is  that 
of  the  Brahmin  who  has  married,  and  who  is  thenceforward, 
but  especially  after  he  has  become  a  father,  called  Gra- 
hastha.  The  third  is  that  of  the  Brahmin  who,  renouncing 
the  world,  retires  into  the  jungles  with  his  wife,  and  who 
is  then  known  as  Vana-prastha  (or  dweller  in  the  jungle). 
The  fourth,  and  last,  is  the  state  of  Sannyasi,  or  that  of 
the  Brahmin  who  decides  to  live  entirely  in  solitude,  apart 
even  from  his  wife,  a  mode  of  life  considered  even  more 
edifying  than  Vana-prastha. 

It  is  well  known  that  all  Brahmins  wear  a  thin  cord  \ 
hung  from  the  left  shoulder  and  falling  on  to  the  right 
hip.     It  is  composed  of  three  strands  of  cotton,  each  strand 

1  This  cord  is  called  yagnopavitam  in  Sanskrit,  jandemu  in  Telugu 
punul  in  Tamil,  jcnivara  in  Canarese. — Dubois. 


CEREMONY  OF  THE  TRIPLE  CORD         161 

formed  by  nine  threads.  The  cotton  with  which  it  is 
made  must  be  gathered  from  the  plant  by  the  hand  of  a 
pure  Brahmin,  and  carded  and  spun  by  persons  of  the  same 
caste,  so  as  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  its  being  defiled  by 
passing  through  unclean  hands.  After  a  Brahmin  is 
married  his  cord  must  have  nine  and  not  three  strands  \ 

Brahmins,  and  all  the  other  castes  which  have  the  right 
to  wear  this  cord,  prize  it  more  highly  and  are  certainly 
more  proud  of  it  than  are  many  Europeans  who  by  noble 
birth  or  great  deeds  possess  the  right  to  wear  the  cordon 
of  the  knightly  orders. 

Children  from  the  age  of  five  to  nine  are  invested  with 
this  cord.  March,  April,  May,  and  June  are  considered  the 
most  favourable  months  for  the  investiture.  As  the  cere- 
mony entails  a  considerable  outlay,  the  poorer  Brahmins 
go  from  house  to  house  begging  and  collecting  funds  with 
which  to  defray  the  necessary  expenses  ;  and  natives  of 
all  castes  believe  that  in  making  such  contributions  they 
are  performing  a  pious  act. 

This  ceremony  is  called  the  upanayana,  which  means 
'  introduction  to  knowledge,'  for  by  it  a  Brahmin  acquires 
the  right  to  study.  Several  of  the  rites  performed  on  this 
occasion  are  also  performed  at  the  marriage  ceremony,  so 
I  will  only  describe  here  those  which  are  peculiar  to  the 
cord  ceremony,  and  I  will  describe  later  on  those  common 
to  both.  The  following  details  are  extracts  from  the  ritual 
of  the  purohitas,  which  bears  the  title  of  Nittya  Karma. 

To  begin  with,  the  father  of  the  candidate  must  provide 
himself  with  many  pieces  of  cotton  cloth  and  plenty  of 
small  gold  and  silver  coins,  to  be  given  as  presents  to  the 
guests.  He  must  also  have  a  large  supply  of  rice,  flour, 
fresh  and  dried  vegetables,  fruit,  oil  of  sesamum,  clarified 

1  The  number  three,  adopted,  and  so  to  say  consecrated,  in  this  and 
in  many  other  instances,  is  evidently  used  in  an  allegorical  sense.  I  am 
rather  inclined  to  believe  that  it  refers  to  the  three  principal  divinities 
of  India — Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva. — Dubois. 

The  Abbe  is  incorrect  as  to  the  number  of  strands.  After  marriage 
a  Brahmin  must  wear  six,  and  may  wear  nine.  The  triple  cord  is  thus 
explained  by  one  authority :  '  It  symbolizes  the  body,  speech,  and 
mind.  It  symbolizes  the  control  of  each ;  and  therefore  when  the 
knots  are  tied  in  it,  it  means  that  the  man  who  wears  the  thread  has 
gained  control  over  body,  speech,  and  mind.' — Ed. 


162  PRELIMINARY  PREPARATIONS 

butter,  and  milk  in  various  forms,  &c,  for  the  feast  ; 
sandalwood,  vermilion,  saffron  ;  and,  above  all  things, 
plenty  of  betel-leaf  and  areca-nut.  Further,  there  must 
be  in  abundance  earthen  vessels  of  all  kinds,  shapes,  and 
sizes,  seeing  that  on  each  of  the  four  days  that  the  feast 
lasts  new  ones  will  be  required  ;  those  which  have  been 
once  used  on  this  occasion,  as  on  that  of  a  marriage,  being 
always  broken  into  little  pieces.  When  everything  is 
ready,  the  father  goes  to  consult  the  purohita,  or  family 
priest,  to  ascertain  what  day  will  be  most  propitious. 
The  purohita  having  fixed  a  day,  a  pandal,  or  pavilion,  is 
erected.  The  preliminary  ceremonies  and  purifications  are 
gone  through,  and  the  invitations  issued  in  the  customary 
manner.  Meanwhile,  the  women  decorate  the  walls  of 
the  house,  both  inside  and  out,  with  alternate  broad  bands 
of  red  and  white  paint.  When  the  guests  have  arrived 
and  are  all  assembled  under  the  pandal,  the  purohita  makes 
his  appearance,  bringing  with  him  a  cord  and  an  antelope's 
skin  \ 

Having  performed  the  sam-kalpa,  he  offers  puja,  or 
adoration,  to  Vigneshwara,  who  is  represented  by  a  small 
conical  heap  of  fresh  cow-dung,  placed  in  the  centre  of  the 
pandal.  He  also  makes  to  him  offerings  of  garika  2,  sandal- 
wood, akshatas,  or  coloured  rice,  incense,  and  a  lighted 
lamp. 

This  god  Vigneshwara,  or  Pillayar,  or  Ganesa  3,  &c,  of 
whom  we  shall  frequently  have  occasion  to  speak,  is  the 
god  of  obstacles,  as  his  name  (Vigna-iswara)  denotes.  He 
is  of  a  morose  and  irascible  disposition,  and  always  ready 
to  annoy  and  thwart  those  who  fail  to  pay  him  sufficient 
respect.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  so  much  deference  is 
shown  to  him,  and  that  on  grand  feast-days  his  good  offices 
are  the  first  to  be  invoked,  his  worshippers  fearing  lest  he 
should  take  it  into  his  head  to  disturb  the  feast  and  bring 
it  to  an  untimely  end. 

1  The  antelope's  skin  is  used  as  a  mat  on  which  the  priest  sits.  The 
skins  of  both  the  antelope  and  the  tiger  are  considered  extremely  pure : 
consequently  one  may  sit  on  them  without  fear  of  defilement. — Dubois. 

2  Garika  in  Canarese,  amgu  in  Tamil,  durva  in  Sanskrit — a  kind  of 
millet-grass,  Panicum  dactylon. — Ed. 

s  Ganesa  literally  means  god  of  the  inferior  deities. — Ed. 


THE  FIRST  DAY'S  CEREMONIES  163 

The  sacrifice  to  Vigneshwara  ended,  the  master  of  the 
house  presents  betel-nut  to  the  Brahmins,  and  then  they 
all  proceed  to  make  their  ablutions.  On  their  return,  the 
neophyte  is  made  to  sit  on  a  raised  platform  of  earth  in 
the  centre  of  the  pandal.  The  married  women  chant 
sacred  songs,  while  they  proceed  to  adorn  him  as  for  the 
ceremony  of  the  chaula,  though  on  this  occasion  the  gar- 
ments are  even  richer  and  more  costly  ;  and  finally  they 
delicately  pencil  his  eyelids  with  antimony  l. 

His  toilette  finished,  the  father  and  mother  of  the  can- 
didate seat  themselves  by  his  side  on  the  dais,  and  the 
women  perform  the  ceremony  of  the  aratti.  Puja  is  offered 
to  the  household  gods,  and  for  neiveddya,  or  votive  offering, 
portions  of  all  the  dishes  prepared  for  the  feast  are  set 
aside.  The  guests  then  seat  themselves  on  the  ground,  in 
rows,  the  women  placing  themselves  so  as  not  to  be  seen 
by  the  men.  The  women  belonging  to  the  household  bring 
in  the  rice  and  the  various  dishes  which  have  been  prepared 
for  the  feast,  helping  everything  with  their  fingers,  the  use 
of  spoons  being  unknown  amongst  them.  Each  guest 
receives  his  portion  on  a  banana  leaf,  or  on  other  leaves 
sewn  together,  which  are  never  used  more  than  once. 
When  the  meal  is  over,  betel  and  areca-nut  are  distributed, 
and  the  guests  then  separate. 

The  following  day  is  called  the  muhurta,  or  great  day  ; 
it  is  that  on  which  the  actual  investiture  takes  place. 
The  guests  are  invited  to  reassemble  as  on  the  preceding 
day. 

The  would-be  recipient  is  seated  on  the  dais,  between 
his  father  and  mother,  all  three  having  their  faces  turned 
towards  the  east.  His  loins  are  girt  with  a  '  pure  '  cotton 
cloth,  that  is  to  say,  either  a  new  one,  or  at  least  one  that 
has  been  newly  washed  2.  The  married  women  perform 
his  toilette,  singing  all  the  while. 

1  This  is  a  kind  of  ointment  formerly  used  by  other  nations.  It  is 
still  a  common  practice  amongst  the  people  of  India  to  ornament  the 
faces  of  their  children  with  it.  Courtesans  and  beauties,  too,  often  use 
it.  It  certainly  enhances  the  brilliancy  of  the  eyes,  and  is  a  pleasing 
addition  to  a  handsome  face. — Dubois. 

2  It  is  not  only  on  this  occasion  that  a  '  pure  '  cloth  is  obligatory. 
Each  time  that  a  Brahmin  bathes  he  washes  his  clothing,  to  purify  it. — 
Dubois. 


164  THE  SECOND  DAY'S  CEREMONIES 

The  purohita  then  approaches,  holding  in  his  hands  an 
earthen  chafing-dish  full  of  hot  embers.  He  performs  the 
sam-kalpa,  and  then  formally  consecrates  the  pan  of  hot 
coals,  which  by  virtue  of  his  mantram  becomes  a  god.  To 
this  he  offers  the  sacrifice  called  homam,  throwing  on  the 
fire  some  pieces  of  the  aswatta,  or  sacred  fig-tree,  some 
cooked  rice,  and  some  melted  butter.  After  this  nine 
specially  selected  Brahmins  offer  the  same  sacrifice  of  the 
homam  in  honour  of  the  nine  planets.  Then  each  having 
chosen  a  married  woman,  they  all  go  off  together,  still 
singing,  to  convey  the  sacred  fire  to  some  place  apart, 
where  it  must  be  carefully  attended  to  and  kept  burning 
until  the  last  day  of  the  festival.  It  would  be  considered 
a  very  bad  omen  if,  from  inattention  or  any  other  cause, 
this  fire  were  to  be  extinguished  sooner. 

The  inauguration  of  the  ishta  devata  (or  tutelary  deity) 
immediately  follows.  The  married  women  provide  them- 
selves with  a  large  copper  vessel,  which  must  be  new  and 
whitewashed  outside.  They  take  it,  preceded  by  instru- 
ments of  music,  to  be  filled  from  a  well  or  river.  On  return- 
ing to  the  house  they  place  some  mango  leaves  over  the 
mouth  of  the  vessel,  and  on  the  top  of  the  leaves  a  cocoanut, 
coloured  yellow  with  powdered  saffron.  The  vessel  is  then 
wrapped  in  a  woman's  cloth  which  has  been  dyed  the 
same  colour,  and  is  placed  on  the  ground,  on  the  top  of 
a  small  heap  of  rice.  Round  its  neck  are  then  hung  two 
palm  leaves,  rolled  up  and  coloured  red,  and  also  a  necklace 
of  small  black  seeds,  and  a  few  other  female  ornaments. 
The  purohita  then  invokes  the  tutelary  deity  and  invites 
him  to  settle  on  the  vessel,  which  becomes  from  that 
moment  a  female  divinity,  to  whom  the  women  promptly 
make  an  offering  of  flowers,  incense,  akshatas,  a  lighted 
lamp,  and  some  betel-leaf.  The  mother  of  the  young  man 
then  places  the  vessel,  i.e.  the  new  goddess,  on  her  head, 
and  accompanied  by  the  other  women,  all  singing  in  chorus, 
and  preceded  by  the  musicians,  makes  a  solemn  progress 
round  the  village,  under  a  kind  of  canopy.  On  returning 
to  the  house  she  replaces  the  vessel,  and,  with  the  assist- 
ance of  some  of  the  other  women,  drapes  round  the  two 
central  pillars  of  the  pandal  two  perfectly  new  cloths  of 
the  kind  worn  by  women.     The  same  procession  then  starts 


THE  ACTUAL  INVESTITURE  165 

again  to  fetch  some  mould  from  ant-heaps  raised  by  kar* 
raiyan  \  With  this  they  fill  five  small  pots.  These  again 
are  sown  with  nine  kinds  of  seed,  which  are  well  sprinkled 
with  milk  and  water,  to  make  them  sprout  quickly.  The 
purohita  approaches  the  five  pots,  and  by  virtue  of  his 
mantrams,  or  incantations,  turns  them  also  into  divinities. 
The  women  then  perform  the  customary  acts  of  puja  before 
them,  and  after  prostrating  themselves  place  them  close  to 
the  tutelary  deity.  Then  comes  the  invocation  of  gods, 
planets,  and  ancestors.  I  shall  give  full  particulars  of  this 
ceremony  when  describing  a  marriage. 

During  the  invocation  to  the  gods  a  piece  of  saffron- 
coloured  thread  is  attached  to  the  right  wrist  of  the  neo- 
phyte. A  barber  then  cuts  the  nails  of  his  fingers  and  toes 
and  shaves  his  head,  to  the  sound  of  instrumental  music 
and  the  songs  of  the  women. 

The  young  Brahmin  next  proceeds  to  bathe,  in  order  to 
purify  himself  after  having  been  defiled  by  the  barber's 
touch.  After  his  ablutions  the  women  again  dress  him  in 
pure  new  cloths. 

He  is  then  purified  by  the  purohita's  incantations  from 
all  the  sins  committed  through  youthful  ignorance  since 
the  day  of  his  birth.  The  purohita  also  makes  him  a  girdle 
of  plaited  darbha,  or  sacred  grass  (Poa  cynosuroides),  and 
winds  it  three  times  round  his  body,  reciting  mayxtrams  all 
the  time.  At  this  juncture  some  small  coins  are  distributed 
to  all  the  Brahmins  present.  A  muduga 2  stick,  three 
cubits  long,  is  then  produced,  and  also  ten  pieces  of  rag 
such  as  are  used  by  men  in  the  East  to  cover  their  private 
parts  3.  These  are  dyed  yellow  in  saffron  water,  and  are 
hung  in  a  row  on  the  muduga  stick,  which  the  candidate 
puts  over  his  shoulders.  The  purohita  then  recites  the 
'  neck  mantram  '  and  invests  the  youth  with  the  triple 
cord,  which  constitutes  him  a  Brahmin.  During  this 
solemn  performance  the  women  sing,  the  musicians  play, 
bells  are  rung,  and  to  add  to  the  uproar  all  present  make 

1  These  are  the  white  ants  so  common  in  India,  and  so  destructive. — 
Dubois. 

2  Butca  frondosa.     In  Sanskrit  palasa. — Ed. 

8  Many  natives  only  wear  this  diminutive  covering.  It  is  as  small 
as  is  compatible  with  any  regard  to  modesty. — Dubois. 


166      REMARKABLE  INITIATORY  PHRASES 

as  much  noise  as  they  can  by  striking  gongs  or  anything 
else  they  can  lay  their  hands  on. 

After  his  investiture  the  newly  initiated  member  takes 
part  in  what  is  known  as  the  young  men's  feast  \  which  is 
prepared  for  him  and  for  other  young  Brahmins  who  have 
recently  been  invested  with  the  cord. 

At  the  termination  of  the  repast  the  young  man  again 
seats  himself  on  the  raised  platform  of  earth,  facing  the 
east.  His  father  seats  himself  by  his  side,  but  with  his 
face  turned  towards  the  west.  A  cloth  is  then  thrown 
over  them,  hiding  them  from  the  eyes  of  the  assembly. 
Again  the  women  begin  to  sing,  and  the  musicians  to  play. 
Meanwhile  the  father  is  whispering  in  his  son's  ear  the 
secrets  and  mantrams  which  in  his  new  position  as  a  duly 
initiated  Brahmin  it  is  fitting  for  him  to  know.  It  is 
said  that  the  following  remarkable  words  form  part  of  the 
discourse  : — 

'  Remember,  0  my  son,  that  there  is  only  one  God, 
who  is  the  Creator,  Lord,  and  Source  of  all  things  ;  whom 
every  Brahmin  should  worship  in  secret.  But  know  also 
that  this  is  a  great  mystery  that  must  never  be  revealed 
to  the  vulgar  and  ignorant  people.  Should  you  ever  reveal 
it,  surely  great  misfortune  will  fall  upon  you.' 

These  instructions,  however,  being  given  in  Sanskrit,  are 
not  likely  to  be  understood  by  the  youth  in  whose  ears 
they  are  uttered. 

The  Brahmins  present  then  place  akshatas,  consecrated 
by  mantrams,  on  the  head  of  their  new  colleague,  and  the 
women  perform  the  ceremony  of  aratti.  Betel  is  afterwards 
served  out  to  the  guests,  who,  after  bathing,  return  for  the 
feast,  which  should  on  this  day  be  on  a  particularly  splendid 
and  liberal  scale. 

The  same  evening,  just  when  the  lamps  are  being  lighted, 
parents  and  friends  again  assemble  under  the  pa?idal,  and 
the  newly  initiated  member  seats  himself  on  the  earthen 
dais  once  more.  The  married  women  then  go  and  fetcli 
the  pan  containing  the  sacred  fire,  which  is  solemnly  placed 
beside  him,  much  singing  going  on  the  while.  The  purohiia 
performs  the  sam-kalpa  and  recites  mantrams  over  this  fire, 

1  In  .Sanskrit  kumara  bhojunam.  Only  Brahmacharis  partake  of  this 
feast,  each  being  presented  also  with  a  new  cloth. — Ed. 


THIRD  AND  FOURTH  DAYS'  CEREMONIES     167 

while  singers  and  musicians  start  afresh  with  renewed 
vigour.  The  young  Brahmin,  standing  over  the  coals, 
offers  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  the  sacrifice  called  homam, 
which,  by  his  investiture  with  the  cord,  he  has  now  acquired 
the  right  to  do.  After  this  sacrifice,  and  another,  which 
the  youth  performs  specially  to  the  fire,  the  women  make 
a  procession  and  carry  back  the  pan  of  coals  to  its  place, 
returning  to  perform  aratti  to  the  young  Brahmin.  The 
day  terminates  with  a  further  distribution  of  betel  to  the 
Brahmins,  after  which  they  all  separate. 

On  the  third  day  there  is  the  same  assembly  again,  and 
for  the  most  part  a  repetition  of  the  ceremonies  of  the 
preceding  day,  particularly  that  of  the  homam  ;  while  the 
day's  proceedings  are  terminated  as  before  by  a  feast. 

The  ceremonial  of  the  fourth  and  last  day  has  a  few 
additional  peculiarities.  After  a  repetition  of  the  usual 
preliminaries,  the  women  of  the  party  form  a  procession 
and,  singing  all  the  time,  go  and  fetch  the  sacred  fire, 
which  they  set  down  close  to  the  newly  initiated  member, 
who,  standing  up,  places  a  few  stalks  of  darbha  grass  round 
the  pan  of  hot  embers.  He  then  performs  homam  by 
throwing  on  to  the  brazier  some  twigs  of  the  sacred  fig- 
tree,  some  cooked  rice,  some  liquefied  butter,  and  some 
coarse  sugar. 

Thence  they  go  to  the  tutelary  deity,  and  having  offered 
puja  to  him,  they  invite  him  to  depart  as  he  came.  At  the 
same  time  a  little  of  the  sacramental  water  from  the  deified 
vessel  is  poured  into  the  hand  of  each  person  present,  who 
forthwith  drinks  it,  the  remainder  being  thrown  away. 
The  deity  is  also  despoiled  of  his  yellow  cloth  and  of  the 
saffron  thread  with  which  he  was  decorated.  After  a  few 
prayers  have  been  addressed  to  these  different  objects,  the 
divine  essence  is  supposed  to  escape  from  them. 

The  saffron-coloured  thread  which  was  fastened  round 
the  wrist  of  the  new  member  is  now  taken  off  and  put  to 
soak  in  some  milk. 

One  large  new  earthen  vessel  and  five  smaller  ones,  all 
with  lids,  are  then  brought,  smeared  on  the  outside  with 
lime.  The  five  smaller  vessels  are  rilled  with  water  to 
begin  with,  and  are  then  all  emptied  into  the  larger  one. 
The  lid  of  the  larger  vessel  is  put  on,  and  it  is  then  placed 


168  THE  CLOSING  SCENES 

against  the  central  pillar  of  the  pandal,  to  which  is  sus- 
pended a  wreath  of  flowers  falling  exactly  over  the  mouth 
of  the  vessel.  An  offering  is  made  to  it  of  sandalwood, 
coloured  rice,  and  flowers,  and  for  neiveddya,  or  votive 
offering,  cakes  and  cooked  rice.  All  those  present  are  then 
sprinkled  with  the  ceremonial  water  contained  in  the  vessel. 
Then  they  go  on  to  the  five  little  vessels  before  mentioned, 
which  are  filled  with  earth.  Puja  is  offered  to  them,  and 
they  are  then  placed  in  a  row,  receiving  severally  the  name 
of  one  of  the  following  five  divinities  :  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
Varuna,  Rudra,  and  Devendra.  They  are  then  carried 
separately,  and  placed  at  the  foot  of  five  of  the  pillars 
supporting  the  pandal.  They  are  invoked  in  the  names 
which  have  just  been  given  them,  puja  is  offered  to  them, 
and  the  divinities  are  finally  invited  to  return  whence  they 
came.  Puja  is  offered  to  the  five  little  pots,  and  the 
celestial  beings  they  have  been  representing  are  also  invited 
to  retire.  Then  comes  the  turn  of  all  the  gods  in  general, 
the  planets,  and  the  ancestors  whose  presence  was  invoked 
at  the  beginning  of  the  feast.  Litanies  are  recited  in  their 
honour,  and  they  too  are  politely  invited  to  depart.  Then 
the  praises  of  the  mantapam  deity,  that  is  to  say,  of  the 
pandal  itself,  are  sung  ;  and  he  also  is  dismissed.  Then 
the  women,  singing  all  the  time,  perform  the  aratti  to  the 
new  member  ;  and  every  one  being  seated  for  the  feast, 
the  new  Brahmin  takes  his  place  amongst  the  elders  of 
the  caste.  After  the  meal  is  over  he  is  presented  to  each 
of  the  principal  guests  in  succession,  and  does  sashtanga, 
or  prostration,  to  them  ;  they,  on  their  part,  congratulate 
him  on  his  promotion,  and  wish  him  every  good  fortune. 
In  conclusion,  the  master  of  the  house  distributes  money 
amongst  his  guests,  also  pieces  of  cloth,  the  value  of  which 
is  in  proportion  to  the  wealth  of  the  giver.  A  cow  is 
occasionally  added  to  the  other  gifts. 

Brahmins  everywhere  are  unsurpassed  in  the  art  of 
flattery  ;  and  on  these  occasions  they  laud  to  the  very 
skies  those  who  have  been  prodigal  in  their  gifts.  Their 
liberality  is  exalted  in  all  directions,  and  the  most  exagger- 
ated eulogies  are  lavished  on  them.  The  recipients  of  all 
this  ridiculous  flattery  are  generally  sufficiently  idiotic  to 
be  gratified  by  it,  and  consider  that  it  amply  repa3Ts  them 


THE  TRIPLE  CORD  IN  OTHER  CASTES      169 

for  the  enormous  outlay  which  their  childish  vanity  has 
caused  them  to  incur. 

Before  separating,  all  the  guests,  both  men  and  women, 
accompany  the  new  Brahmin,  who  is  seated  in  an  open 
palanquin,  richly  ornamented,  on  a  solemn  procession 
through  the  streets.  On  their  return,  the  women,  in  songs, 
tell  him  of  all  the  prayers  that  they  have  offered  for  his 
future  happiness,  and  they  wind  up  the  feast  by  the  cere- 
mony of  aratti.  As  for  the  new  Brahmin,  he  must  be 
careful  to  perform  the  homam,  evening  and  morning,  for 
the  next  thirty  days. 

Such  are  the  formalities  which  accompany  the  most 
important  and  solemn  event  in  a  Brahmin's  life.  As  we 
have  remarked  already,  it  is  not  by  birth  alone  that  a 
Brahmin  is  superior  to  other  men.  It  is  this  regenerating 
ceremony  which  gives  him  a  new  existence  and  makes  him 
worthy  to  be  elevated  in  his  capacity  as  a  dvija,  or  twice- 
born  (bis  genitus),  to  the  sublime  status  of  his  ancestors. 

All  this  long  ceremonial,  besides  many  other  foolish 
trifles  which  I  have  not  thought  worth  mentioning,  is 
strictly  obligatory.  Were  a  single  detail  omitted,  the 
whole  community  would  raise  a  chorus  of  protest.  It 
would  be  labour  lost  to  endeavour  to  discover  the  origin 
of  these  ceremonies.  Some  few  traces  of  it  might  be  dis- 
covered in  the  old  pagan  times  ;  but  assuredly  no  other 
nation  in  the  world  has  preserved  so  completely  the  minutest 
details  of  its  ancient  superstitions. 

Some  other  Hindus  share  with  the  Brahmins  the  honour 
of  wearing  the  triple  cord.  They  are  the  Jains,  the  Ksha- 
triyas  or  Rajahs,  the  Vaisyas,  and  even  the  Panchalas. 
Rajahs  receive  the  cord  from  the  hands  of  a  Brahmin 
purohita  ;  but  the  only  ceremony  necessary  on  this  occasion 
is  the  sacrifice  called  homam.  The  new  member  then  gives 
a  great  feast  to  the  Brahmins  to  celebrate  the  event,  but 
he  is  not  allowred  to  be  present  himself  ;  and  further,  he 
also  distributes  gifts  amongst  them.  Before  they  depart 
he  is  admitted  to  their  presence,  and  performs  the  sash- 
tanga,  perhaps  in  token  of  gratitude  for  the  honour  they 
have  done  him,  or  else  merely  to  abase  himself  before 
these  '  gods  of  the  earth.' 

If  the  Hindu  books  are  to  be  believed,  the  Brahmins 

G  3 


170  KEEPING  THE  ANNIVERSARY 

used  formerly  to  exercise  such  supreme  power  over  the 
kings  and  rulers  of  the  country  that  they  were  looked 
upon  by  the  latter  as  beings  of  a  different  order,  and  superior 
to  other  mortals  ;  princes  accounting  it  an  honour  to  receive 
some  mark  of  distinction  from  them.  And  the  Brahmins, 
on  their  part,  either  to  enhance  their  own  dignity,  or  per- 
haps from  gratitude  for  the  favours  they  received  from  the 
Rajahs,  granted  them  the  special  privilege  of  wearing,  like 
themselves,  the  triple  cord. 

As  for  the  Vaisyas,  they  do  not  receive  it  till  the  day  of 
their  marriage,  when  the  officiating  Brahmin  presents  it 
to  them.  The  Panchalas  are  also  decorated  under  similar 
circumstances,  but  it  is  conferred  on  them  by  the  guru,  or 
priest,  of  their  own  caste. 

After  a  Brahmin  has  been  invested,  he  is  expected  to 
keep  the  anniversary  every  year  at  the  time  of  the  full 
moon  in  the  month  of  Sravcma,  or  August.  This  anniver- 
sary is  always  celebrated  by  a  feast,  for  which  there  are 
many  prescribed  ceremonies  ;  but  I  will  spare  the  reader 
any  further  wearisome  details.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the 
Brahmin  has  to  change  his  cord,  the  small  rag  in  front  of 
his  private  parts,  and  the  cloth  with  which  his  loins  are 
girt,  all  of  which  is  done  with  much  solemnity.  The  per- 
formance of  this  periodical  duty  obtains  for  him  the  remis- 
sion of  all  the  sins  committed  during  the  year,  and  it  is 
therefore  called  the  Feast  of  the  Annual  Atonement. 

The  Kshatriyas  and  the  Vaisyas  also  keep  this  annual 
feast  like  the  Brahmins. 


CHAPTER   II 

Conduct  of  the  Brahmachari. — Rules  to  be  followed. — Rights  acquired 
by  investiture  with  the  Cord. — The  Six  Privileges  of  Brahmins. — 
The  Vedas. 

The  state  of  Brahmachari  continues  from  the  ceremony 
of  the  wpanayana  until  marriage.  This  period  of  his  life 
is  looked  upon  as  a  time  of  study,  of  trial,  of  subordination, 
and  of  initiation  into  the  rules  and  regulations  of  caste. 
To  learn  to  read  and  write  ;  to  commit  the  Vedas  and 
mantrams    to    memory  ;  to    study    in    those    branches    of 


TRAINING  YOUNG  BRAHMINS  171 

knowledge  for  which  he  shows  any  aptitude,  that  is,  if 
his  parents  are  sufficiently  wealthy  to  be  able  to  give  him 
masters  :  above  all  things,  to  learn  arithmetic  in  its  ele- 
mentary forms,  and  to  study  the  various  idioms  of  the 
language  :  these  are  the  occupations  that  fill  up  his  days. 
The  Brahmins  have  their  separate  schools,  to  which  children 
of  other  castes,  particularly  Sudras.  are  never  admitted. 
The  nature  of  their  studies,  the  discipline  and  mode  of 
teaching,  the  very  principles  of  education,  are  all  totally 
different  in  the  one  and  in  the  other.  The  Brahmachari 
must  never  chew  betel  :  he  must  never  put  flowers  in  his 
turban  or  in  his  hair,  or  ornament  his  forehead  with  the 
paste  of  sandalwood  l  ;  and  he  must  never  look  in  a  looking- 
glass.  Every  day.  morning  and  evening,  he  must  perform 
the  homam.  or  sacrifice  of  fire.  He  must  take  the  greatest 
pains  to  conform  to  the  rules  and  customs  of  his  caste  ; 
he  must  show  the  most  absolute  and  prompt  obedience  to 
his  parents  and  his  teachers  ;  he  must  be  modest,  deferen- 
tial and  respectful  to  his  superiors,  and  affable  to  his 
equals.  His  family  and  his  masters  take  particular  care 
to  instruct  him  in  the  art  of  lying  and  dissimulation,  cunning 
and  deceit  \  qualities  which  are  fully  developed  in  all 
Brahmins,  and  form  the  principal  traits  in  their  character. 
There  are.  besides,  hundreds  of  minute  details  most  essen- 
tial in  a  Brahmin's  education,  comprising  rules  of  good 
manners  and  decorous  conduct,  the  art  of  speaking  and 
conversing  in  well-chosen  language,  the  appropriate  de- 
meanour to  assume  on  different  occasions,  how  to  hold 
oneself  and  how  to  use  one's  eyes,  the  different  degrees  of 
hauteur  or  humility  which  should  be  shown  under  various 
circumstances  and  at  different  times  and  places  according 
to  the  people  who  are  present. 

Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  the  stress  which  is  laid  upon 
these  petty  precepts  governing  the  conduct  of  young 
Brahmins,  there  are  few  who  conform  to  them  in  all  essen- 
tials.     Even   of   the   rules   of   conduct    many   are    merely 

1  This  is  incorrect.  The  use  of  this  paste  on  the  forehead  is  obligatory, 
though  the  smearing  of  it  on  the  body  is  forbidden  until  after  marriage. 
—Ed. 

-  There  is  no  truth  in  such  an  assertion.  These  evil  qualities  are  never 
deliberately  inculcated. — Ed. 


172  BRAHMINICAL  PRIVILEGES 

matters  of  form.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  see 
their  foreheads  ornamented  with  sandalwood  paste  and  their 
mouths  full  of  betel  \ 

If,  from  want  of  means  or  other  causes,  a  young  Brahmin 
is  still  unmarried  at  the  age  of  eighteen  or  twenty,  he  ceases 
to  be  a  Brahmachari,  but  at  the  same  time  he  does  not 
become  a  Grahastha.  For  all  that,  be  his  age  and  con- 
dition what  they  may,  from  the  time  that  he  receives  the 
cord,  he  obtains  the  right  to  the  six  privileges  which  are 
inherent  in  this  status.  These  privileges  are  :  (1)  to  read 
the  Vedas,  (2)  to  have  them  read  to  him,  (3)  to  perform 
the  sacrifice  of  the  yagnam,  (4)  to  cause  the  yagnam  to 
be  performed,  (5)  to  give,  and  also  (6)  to  receive,  pre- 
sents and  alms.  Three  of  these  privileges,  (2),  (4),  and  (5), 
are  also  shared  by  the  Kshatriyas  or  Rajahs.  As  to  the 
despised  Sudras,  they  possess  only  one  of  them,  namely, 
that  which  allows  them  to  give  alms  or  presents  to  those 
Brahmins  who  will  condescend  to  accept  them  from  their 
impure  hands. 

To  the  Brahmins  alone  belongs  the  light  of  reading  the 
Vedas,  and  they  are  so  jealous  of  this,  or  rather  it  is  so  much 
to  their  interest  to  prevent  other  castes  obtaining  any 
insight  into  their  contents,  that  the  Brahmins  have  in- 
culcated the  absurd  theory,  which  is  implicitly  believed, 
that  should  anybody  of  any  other  caste  be  so  highly  im- 
prudent as  even  to  read  the  title-page,  his  head  would 
immediately  split  in  two.  The  very  few  Brahmins  who  are 
able  to  read  these  sacred  books  in  the  original  only  do  so 
in  secret  and  in  a  whisper.  Expulsion  from  caste,  without 
the  smallest  hope  of  re-entering  it,  would  be  the  lightest 
punishment  for  a  Brahmin  who  exposed  these  books  to 
the  eyes  of  the  profane. 

These  four  marvellous  books  are  held  to  be  the  work  of 
Brahma  himself,  who  wrote  them  with  his  own  hand  on 
pages  of  gold.  Brahma,  it  is  said,  explained  their  meaning 
to  four  famous  Munis,  or  penitents,  to  whom  the  books 
were  entrusted,  and  to  whom  was  confided  the  task  of 
explaining  them  to  the  Brahmins.  Sumantu,  the  first  of 
these  celebrated  personages,  was  given  the    Yajur-Veda  ; 

1  The  chewing  of  betel  by  Brahmacharis  is,  nevertheless,  an  uncommon 
occurrence. — Ed. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  VEDAS  173 

Pailada,    the    Big-Veda  ;  Jaimini,    the    Sama-Veda  ;  and 

Angirasa,  the  Atharva-Veda  \ 

But  let  it  not  be  imagined  for  one  moment  that  these 
books  contain  matter  of  much  interest.  Their  antiquity 
alone,  real  or  pretended,  is  their  sole  recommendation.  A 
lengthy  exposition  of  Hindu  polytheism  as  it  existed  origin- 
ally, the  most  contemptible  and  ridiculous  stories  concern- 
ing the  fanciful  penances  to  which  their  hermits  subjected 
themselves,  the  metamorphosis  of  Vishnu,  the  disgusting 
lingam,  &c.  ;  such  are,  according  to  the  evidence  which 
I  have  acquired,  more  or  less  an  epitome  of  the  contents 
of  these  books,  of  which  the  Brahmins  make  such  a  great 
mystery  2. 

The  fourth  of  these  books,  the  Atharva-Veda,  is  the 
most  baneful  work  of  all  in  the  hands  of  a  people  already 
given  over  to  the  grossest  superstition.  It  is  a  sort  of 
conjuring  book,  professing  to  teach  the  magic  art  of 
injuring  by  means  of  spells  and  enchantments.  Bloody 
sacrifices  are  also  ordained  in  it. 

It  is  from  these  books  that  the  Brahmins  have  unearthed 
the  greater  number  of  those  mantrams  which  bring  them 
in  so  much  money,  and  cause  them  to  be  held  in  such 
high  esteem.  This,  in  fact,  is  what  renders  the  Vedas  so 
precious  to  the  Brahmins. 

Such  Brahmins  as  devote  themselves  to  the  higher 
branches  of  knowledge  learn  the  Vedas  by  heart  ;  and 
though  the  greater  number  do  not  understand  the  real 
meaning  of  what  they  have  learnt,  still  they  are  looked 
upon  in  some  sort  as  doctors  of  theology,  and  are  given 
the  name  of  Veidikas.  It  is  true,  nevertheless,  that  those 
who  devote  themselves  to  the  study  of  these  books  cannot 
hope  to  extract  any  instruction  from  them,  for  they  are 

1  Mahidhara,  on  the  Yajasaneyi  Sanhita  (Weber's  ed.  p.  1),  says  in 
regard  to  the  division  of  the  Vedas  :  '  Veda-vyasa,  having  regard  to 
men  of  dull  understanding,  in  kindness  to  them,  divided  into  four  parts 
the  Veda  which  had  been  originally  handed  down  by  tradition  from 
Brahma,  and  taught  the  four  Vedas,  called  Rig,  Yajush,  Saman,  and 
Atharvan,  in  order,  to  Paila,  Vaisampayana,  Jaimini,  and  Sumantu  ; 
and  they  again  to  their  disciples.  In  this  way,  by  tradition,  the  Veda 
of  a  thousand  Sakhas  was  produced.' — Ed. 

2  The  Vedas  and  other  sacred  Hindu  writings  are  now,  of  course, 
available  to  any  student.  The  Abbe's  sweeping  assertion  would  not 
now  be  endorsed. — Ed. 


174  THE  UPANISHADS 

written  in  ancient  Sanskrit,  which  has  become  almost 
wholly  unintelligible  ;  and  such  numberless  mistakes  have 
been  introduced  by  copyists,  either  through  carelessness 
or  ignorance,  that  the  most  learned  find  themselves  quite 
unable  to  interpret  the  original  text.  Out  of  twenty 
thousand  Brahmins  I  do  not  believe  that  one  could  be 
found  who  even  partially  understood  the  real  Vedas. 

The  original  text  must  not,  as  is  often  done,  be  con- 
founded with  the  more  modern  introductions  and  com- 
mentaries written  by  the  penitent  Vyasa.  These  were 
interpolated  with  the  view  of  rendering  the  text  more 
intelligible.  They  are  known  under  the  general  name  of 
Upanishads,  and  are  three  in  number — the  U pa-Veda,  the 
Karma- Veda,  and  the  Sakha- Veda.  It  is  not  much  more 
than  these  commentaries  that  the  most  learned  of  modern 
Brahmins  are  capable  of  explaining.  Their  meaning  is 
unintelligible  except  to  those  who  have  a  considerable 
acquaintance  with  Sanskrit,  the  language  in  which  they  are 
written.  Many  learn  to  read  and  recite  them  mechanically, 
without  understanding  a  word  of  them. 

In  the  agraharas,  or  Brahmin  villages,  and  other  places 
where  Brahmins  congregate  in  large  numbers,  you  may 
perhaps  come  across  some  who  are  Sanskrit  scholars,  but 
even  they  would  be  unable  to  produce  a  good  interpretation 
of  the  Vedas.  Some  Brahmins  give  gratuitous  instruction 
in  those  parts  of  the  Vedas  which,  thanks  to  the  com- 
mentaries, have  been  made  intelligible,  while  other  Brah- 
mins, too  poor  to  forgo  remuneration,  hold  classes  in  which 
the  same  instruction  is  given  to  paying  pupils. 

Rich  Brahmins  make  a  point  of  encouraging  the  study  of 
the  Vedas  by  offering  prizes  and  other  rewards,  this  being 
in  the  eyes  of  their  fellows  a  work  of  the  greatest  merit. 

The  Brahmins  have  done  the  Rajahs  the  honour  of 
allowing  them  also  to  encourage  the  study  of  the  Vedas 
by  founding  schools  for  that  purpose  and  paying  the  pro- 
fessors. And  I  am  convinced  that  nowadays  they  would 
not  refuse  a  similar  honour  even  to  a  common  Sudra. 
But  be  that  as  it  may,  there  is  not  much  eagerness  displayed 
amongst  the  Brahmins  for  this  tedious  kind  of  study. 
Poverty  prevents  some  from  taking  it  up,  while  indifference 
and  idleness  prevent  others. 


SACRIFICES  OFFERED  TO  FIRE  175 

In  the  yagnam,  a  name  which  comprises  the  third  and 
fourth  Brahminical  privileges,  the  sacrifice  called  homam 
is  apparently  included,  for  the  homam  of  the  Rajahs  is 
totally  different.  Every  Brahmin  must  perform  the 
homam  at  least  once  a  day.  It  is  a  sacrifice  offered  to 
fire  under  various  circumstances  1. 

This  sacrifice  is  made  by  lighting  a  brazier,  which  is 
then  consecrated  by  mantrams.  Into  this  are  thrown 
small  pieces  of  wood,  gathered  from  one  of  the  seven 
sacred  trees,  and  afterwards  a  little  melted  butter  and 
cooked  rice  ;  these  offerings  being  accompanied  by  suitable 
mantrams.  The  homam  is  almost  invariably  followed  by 
another  sacrifice,  which  is  specially  offered  to  fire,  but  only 
the  ordinary  puja  is  performed.  I  think  by  the  word 
yagnam  may  be  understood  all  sacrifices  which  are  accom- 
panied by  mantrams. 

The  fifth  privilege  of  the  Brahmins,  namely,  the  giving 
of  alms  and  presents,  is  much  less  to  their  taste  than  the 
sixth,  in  which  the  operation  is  reversed.  It  must,  how- 
ever, be  admitted  that  rich  Brahmins  display  a  lavish 
hospitality,  besides  being  charitable  in  other  ways.  But 
this  is  only  to  members  of  their  own  caste  ;  the  rest  of  the 
human  race  is,  if  not  detested,  at  least  absolutely  of  no 
account  so  far  as  they  are  concerned. 

Amongst  the  gifts  which  Brahmins  are  willing  to  receive 
there  are  some  which  are  more  specially  acceptable.  They 
are  called  the  pancha-danas,  or  the  five  gifts  ;  and  they 
are  gold,  land,  clothes,  grain,  and  cows.  The  last-men- 
tioned gift  causes  them  particular  pleasure,  seeing  that 
milk  in  various  forms  is  their  principal  food.  Brahmins 
also  possess  large  landed  properties  originally  given  them 
by  generous  princes  and  on  which  they  pay  no  taxes. 
These  descend  from  father  to  son,  and  always  retain  their 
immunity  from  taxation.  As  a  rule  Brahmins  do  not  culti- 
vate their  lands  themselves,  but  lease  them  out  to  the 
Sudras,  taking  half  the  crops  as  rent. 

The  Brahmins  generally  live  on  their  lands,  which  are 

1  The  sacrifice  made  to  fire,  or  by  means  of  fire,  is  a  form  of  idolatry 
by  no  means  peculiar  to  the  Hindus.  It  is  well  known  to  what  great 
lengths  Persians,  Chaldeans,  and  other  ancient  races  carried  super- 
stition with  respect  to  it. — Dubois. 


170  BEGGING  BY  BRAHMINS 

called  agrakaras.  Numbers  of  these  estates  are  to  be 
found  in  the  various  provinces  of  the  Peninsula. 

Then  again,  in  their  character  as  high  priests,  the  Brah- 
mins gather  in  the  greater  part  of  the  revenue  of  the  lands 
belonging  to  the  different  temples,  and  furthermore  receive 
all  the  offerings  brought  by  devotees  to  the  various  idols. 

A  Brahmin  sees  nothing  humiliating  in  asking  for  or 
receiving  alms.  According  to  his  ideas  it  is  a  right,  of 
which  he  may  make  free  use.  His  attitude  when  begging 
is  also  very  unlike  that  of  the  poor  wretch  amongst  our- 
selves, who  fawns  and  grovels  for  the  smallest  trifle.  The 
Brahmin  asks  for  alms  as  for  something  that  is  his  due, 
and  not  as  if  imploring  a  favour  or  benefit.  At  the  same 
time  he  displays  none  of  the  importunity  or  impertinence 
to  which  people  are  subjected  by  the  Mahomedan  fakirs, 
or  by  the  Sudra  beggars  who  belong  to  the  sects  of  Siva 
or  Vishnu.  The  begging  Brahmin  boldly  enters  a  house 
and  states  what  he  wants.  Should  he  receive  anything,  he 
takes  it  without  saying  a  word,  goes  away  without  any 
acknowledgement  and  without  showing  the  smallest  sign 
of  gratitude.  Should  he  meet  with  a  refusal,  however,  he 
retires  without  any  complaint  or  grumbling  \ 

But  woe  betide  any  one  who  ventures  to  make  the 
Brahmins  promises  which  he  subsequently  fails  to  perform  ! 
That  would  be  a  fearful  sin,  which  could  not  fail  to  draw 
down  the  divine  wrath  upon  the  guilty  person.  A  Hindu 
author  gives  the  following  example  as  a  proof.  '  Hata  ! 
Hata  !  2  '  cried  a  monkey  one  day,  seeing  a  fox  devouring 
a  rotten  carcase.     '  In  a  former  state  of  existence  you  must 

1  Manu  says  :  '  Let  every  man,  according  to  his  ability,  give  wealth 
to  Brahmins,  detached  from  the  world  and  learned  in  Scripture ;  such 
a  giver  shall  attain  heaven  after  this  life  '  (xi.  6).  Very  early  in  the 
statutes,  a  universal  law  is  proclaimed,  the  spirit  of  which  pervades  the 
whole  code.  This  law  calmly  lays  down  that  whatever  exists  in  the 
universe  is  all,  in  effect,  though  not  in  form,  the  wealth  of  the  Brahmins  ; 
since  the  Brahmin  is  entitled  to  it  all  by  his  primogeniture  and  eminence 
of  birth.  '  The  Brahmin  eats  but  his  own  food  ;  wears  but  his  own 
apparel ;  and  bestows  but  his  own  alms  ;  through  the  benevolence  of 
the  Brahmin  indeed  other  mortals  enjoy  life  '  (i.  100-101).  This  is 
a  pretty  broad  principle  to  enunciate,  so  it  is  easy  to  see  how  there  is 
nothing  derogatory  in  a  Brahmin  receiving  alms,  since  he  takes  but  what 
is  his  own,  besides  leaving  a  blessing  to  the  giver. — Padfield. 

2  A  kind  of  exclamation. — Dubois. 


BRAHMIN  PRIVILEGES  1 


i  i 


have  committed  some  atrocious  crimes  to  be  condemned 
in  your  present  life  to  eat  such  disgusting  food.'  '  Alas  !  ' 
replied  the  fox  with  a  groan,  '  it  is  only  what  I  deserve. 
Once  upon  a  time  I  was  a  man,  and  I  then  promised  a 
Brahmin  a  present,  and  failed  to  keep  my  word  ;  that  is 
why  I  was  born  again  in  my  present  condition,  which  you 
find  so  revolting.' 

Brahmins  declare  that  he  who  fails  to  keep  faith  with 
them,  or  who  injures  them  in  any  way,  will  be  condemned 
after  death  to  be  born  again  as  a  devil.  Such  a  person 
could  live  neither  on  the  earth  nor  yet  in  the  air,  but  would 
be  reduced  to  dwelling  in  a  thick  forest,  for  ever  hidden 
amongst  the  foliage  of  a  leafy  tree.  Day  and  night  he 
would  groan  and  bewail  his  unhappy  fate.  His  only  food 
would  be  the  filthy  juice  of  the  palm  tree,  mixed  with  the 
saliva  of  dogs  ;  and  he  would  have  to  use  a  human  skull 
as  a  cup. 

Brahmins,  as  a  rule,  are  exempt  from  all  taxes  on  houses 
and  other  personal  property.  In  many  districts  they  pay 
no  customs  duty l.  They  are,  again,  not  liable  to  be 
impressed  into  compulsory  service,  or  called  upon  for  those 
requisitions  which  fall  so  heavily  on  the  other  inhabitants, 
who  are  obliged  to  labour  at  public  works,  such  as  the 
making  and  mending  of  the  high-roads,  the  repairing  of 
temples,  tanks,  canals,  &c,  and  who  also  have  to  carry 
provisions  for  the  troops  when  on  the  march,  or  for  magis- 
trates and  other  public  servants,  more  often  than  not 
without  any  payment  for  their  labour,  or  even  sufficient 
food,  and  with  no  compensation  for  the  losses  which  these 
requisitions  cause  them.  Such  general  servants  of  the 
public  as  carpenters,  blacksmiths,  barbers,  and  washer- 
men are  often  obliged,  at  least  in  many  districts,  to  work 
gratuitously  for  the  Brahmins  2. 

In  countries  governed  by  native  princes  Brahmins  are 
rarely  condemned  to  any  serious  corporal  punishment ; 
and  however  heinous  their  crimes  may  be,  they  are  never 
liable  to  the  penalty  of  death.     The  murder  of  a  Brahmin, 

1  This,  of  course,  is  no  longer  the  ease  under  British  rule. — Ed. 

2  This,  however,  is  not  due  to  any  actual  pressure,  but  to  the  fact  that 
these  public  servants  enjoy  grants  of  land  (maniams),  and  they  work 
gratuitously  for  the  whole  village. — Ed. 


178        BRAHMINS  UNDER  FOREIGN  RULE 

no  matter  for  what  reason,  would  be  eonsidered  absolutely 
unpardonable,  for  it  is  the  greatest  of  all  known  crimes 
and  would  not  fail  to  bring  some  terrible  calamity  to  the 
whole  country  in  which  it  had  been  committed. 

However,  in  those  countries  which  are  under  European 
or  Mahomedan  rule,  where  the  sacred  character  of  the 
Brahmin  is  held  in  much  less  reverence,  they  are  liable  like 
any  other  native  to  punishments  proportioned  to  their  mis- 
demeanours. Sometimes  the  Mahomedans  beat  them  to 
death,  unless  they  pay  considerable  sums  to  buy  them- 
selves off,  a  process  which  suits  their  persecutors,  who  are 
much  better  pleased  to  have  their  money  than  their  blood. 
But  sometimes  either  from  avarice,  or  because  they  are 
afraid  that  if  they  once  let  their  oppressors  fleece  them  in 
this  manner  they  will  never  be  rid  of  such  persecutions 
until  they  are  despoiled  of  all  that  they  possess,  they  prefer 
to  suffer  all  kinds  of  torture,  even  death  itself,  rather  than 
part  with  their  money.  When  Brahmins  find  themselves 
in  this  sorry  plight  there  are  no  lies,  no  false  statements, 
oaths,  and  protestations  that  they  will  not  employ  in  the 
hope  of  extricating  themselves.  Such  conduct  can  excite 
no  surprise  when  one  remembers  that  they  do  not  hesitate 
to  teach  publicly  that  lies  and  perjury,  if  used  to  gain 
personal  advantage,  are  virtuous  and  meritorious.  This 
convenient  doctrine  has  spread  marvellously,  for  there  is 
not  a  native  of  India  who  would  scruple  to  make  use  of 
both,  to  serve  his  own  ends  l. 

CHAPTER  III 

External  Defilements. — The  care  that  a  Brahmin  should  take  to  avoid 
them. — His  Conduct  in  this  respect. — Means  of  Purification. 

All  that  pertains  to  external  and  internal  defilement, 
bodily  and  spiritual,  is  the  very  beginning  and  foundation 
of  a  Hindu's  education,  both  religious  and  civil.  They 
have  invented  numberless  minute  and  ridiculous  precautions 
to  prevent  the  possibility  of  coming  in  contact  with  any- 
thing which,  according  to  their  views,  would  defile  their 

1  No  respectable  persons  (Brahmins  included)  are  known  to  preach 
such  doctrines  nowadays.  And  the  Abbe's  assertions  are  altogether  too 
sweeping. — Ed. 


DEFILEMENT  BY  THE  DEAD  179 

persons,  their  clothes,  their  furniture,  their  temples,  &c.,  &c. 
It  is  principally  this  ineradicable  prejudice  which  has  raised 
such  an  insurmountable  barrier  between  them  and  the  rest 
of  mankind.  Obliged  by  their  religious  tenets  to  hold 
themselves  aloof  from  every  one  who  does  not  share  their 
beliefs,  they  can  never,  under  any  circumstances,  be  on 
such  friendly  or  confidential  terms  with  any  stranger  as 
would  arise  from  feelings  of  mutual  esteem  and  respect. 
It  is  undoubtedly  from  the  Brahmins  that  the  other  Hindus 
have  picked  up  this  absurd  prejudice,  for  it  is  in  strongest 
force  amongst  them  (the  Brahmins).  The  predominating 
idea  in  their  general  conduct,  and  in  their  every  action  in 
life,  is  what  they  call  cleanness  ;  and  it  is  the  enormous 
amount  of  care  that  they  take  to  keep  themselves  '  clean,' 
to  prevent  any  sort  or  kind  of  defilement,  and  to  purify 
themselves  from  any  uncleanness  that  they  may  have 
contracted,  which  gives  them  their  ascendency  over  other 
castes.  It  is  one  of  the  special  duties  of  the  Brahmachari 
to  be  well  versed,  at  an  early  age,  in  the  customs  and 
practices  regulating  this  important  branch  of  Hindu  law. 

In  all  countries  the  sight  of  a  human  corpse  produces 
a  thrill  of  horror.  Every  one  has  a  strong  aversion,  amount- 
ing almost  to  repugnance,  to  touching  a  dead  body.  But 
Hindus  consider  that  the  mere  fact  of  assisting  at  a  funeral 
is  sufficient  to  defile  them.  When  the  ceremony  is  over, 
they  immediately  hasten  to  plunge  themselves  into  water, 
and  no  one  would  dare  to  return  home  without  having  thus 
purified  himself.  Even  the  news  of  the  death  of  a  relative, 
though  it  may  have  happened  a  hundred  miles  away, 
produces  the  same  effect,  and  every  member  of  the  family 
who  receives  the  news  must  purify  himself.  Friends 
and  simple  acquaintances,  however,  are  not  contaminated 
thereby. 

The  moment  a  Hindu  has  breathed  his  last  the  necessary 
preparations  for  his  funeral  begin,  for  as  long  as  the  body 
remains  in  the  house,  neither  the  inmates,  nor  even  their 
neighbours,  can  eat  or  drink  or  attend  to  their  usual  occupa- 
tions. I  have  seen  the  service  in  a  temple,  where  a  large 
congregation  had  assembled,  entirely  suspended  until  the 
body  of  a  man  who  had  died  not  far  off  had  been  removed. 
Neither  incense  nor  any  other  perfume  would  purify  a  house 


180  WOMEN  AND  UNCLEANNESS 

where  a  death  had  taken  place.  A  Brahmin  purohita  must 
come  to  remove  the  impurity  with  which  all  the  inmates 
are  contaminated.  To  this  end  he  offers  sacrifices,  recites 
mantrams  suitable  to  the  occasion,  and  at  frequent  intervals 
makes  copious  libations  of  holy  water  l. 

The  monthly  period,  and  the  after-effects  of  child-birth, 
as  I  have  remarked  before,  render  women  for  the  time 
being  unclean  2. 

The  mother  of  the  newly-born  child  lives  entirely  apart 
for  a  whole  month  or  more,  during  which  time  she  may 
touch  neither  the  vessels  nor  the  furniture  of  the  house, 
nor  any  clothes,  and  still  less  any  person  whatsoever.  The 
time  of  her  seclusion  being  over,  she  is  immersed  in  a  bath, 
or  else  a  great  quantity  of  water  is  poured  over  her  head 
and  body.  Women  are  similarly  isolated  during  the  time 
of  their  periodical  uncleanness.  In  all  decent  houses  there 
is  a  sort  of  small  gynaeceum  set  apart  for  them  ;  but 
amongst  the  poor,  in  whose  huts  there  is  no  such  accom- 
modation, the  women  are  turned  into  the  street,  under 
a  sort  of  shed  or  outhouse,  or  else  they  are  allowed  a  corner 
of  the  cowshed. 

When  the  time  of  uncleanness  is  passed,  all  the  garments 
that  the  woman  has  worn  are  given  to  the  washerman. 
Her  clothes  are  not  allowed  inside  the  house  ;  in  fact,  no 
one  would  even  dare  to  look  on  them  3. 

When  the  washerman  brings  the  clothes  back,  the  Brah- 
mins never  fail  to  put  them  into  water  again,  inasmuch  as 

1  According  to  the  law  of  Moses,  when  an  Israelite  died  in  a  house 
or  in  a  tent,  all  the  people  living  therein,  and  all  the  furniture  it  con- 
tained, were  unclean  for  seven  days  (Numbers  xix.  14,  15).  Any  one 
who  touched  the  body,  the  bones,  or  the  tomb  of  a  dead  man  was  also 
unclean  for  seven  days.  For  purification,  the  ashes  of  a  red  heifer, 
which  had  been  offered  up  as  a  sacrifice  by  the  high  priest  on  the  Day 
of  Atonement,  were  cast  into  a  vessel  full  of  pure  water  (Numbers  xix. 
3-6).  And  an  undefined  person,  free  from  all  impurity,  dipped  a  bunch 
of  hyssop  into  this  water,  and  besprinkled  the  furniture,  the  room,  and 
the  people  who  were  defiled.  On  the  seventh  day  these  latter  bathed 
themselves  in  water,  and  washed  their  clothes,  after  which  they  were 
considered  perfectly  cleansed. — Dubois. 

2  Jewish  women  were  considered  unclean  under  similar  circumstances  : 
and  the  law  of  Moses  gives  clear  directions  as  to  the  manner  in  which 
they  were  to  purify  themselves. — Dubois. 

8  The  Jews  shared  the  same  views  on  this  subject.  Isaiah  lxiv.  G. 
Esther  xiv.  10. — Dubois. 


UNCLEAN  OBJECTS  181 

the  washerman,  by  the  touch  of  his  hand,  has  defiled  them 
anew.  The  same  thing  happens  with  new  cloths  which 
come  straight  from  the  unclean  hands  of  a  Sudra  weaver. 

Wives  of  Lingayats,  however,  content  themselves  with 
rubbing  their  foreheads  with  the  ashes  of  cow-dung  to 
purify  themselves  on  similar  occasions  ;  and  by  this  simple 
act,  which  they  call  bhasma  snana,  or  the  bath  of  ashes, 
they  consider  that  they  are  completely  purified.  In  this 
way  a  precautionary  measure  most  beneficial  to  health  in 
this  hot  country  becomes  perverted  by  superstition.  On 
the  one  hand  it  is  minutely  observed  by  those  who  do  not 
in  the  least  appreciate  its  real  utility,  while  it  is  neglected 
by  others  who  think  it  only  a  pious  practice,  to  be  replaced 
with  equal  advantage  by  another. 

Earthen  vessels,  by  reason  of  the  material  of  which  they 
are  composed,  can  never  be  purified  when  once  they  become 
unclean,  and  in  this  they  differ  from  metal  ones.  Washing 
will  purify  the  latter,  but  should  the  former  become  defiled, 
they  must  be  destroyed  1. 

As  long  as  earthen  vessels  are  new,  and  in  the  hands  of 
the  potter,  any  one,  even  a  Pariah,  may  handle  them  with 
impunity  ;  but  from  the  moment  that  they  have  contained 
water,  they  can  only  be  used  by  the  person  who  filled  them, 
or  by  members  of  the  same  caste.  Brahmins  carry  their 
scruples  on  this  point  so  far  as  never  to  allow  strangers  to 
enter  their  kitchens,  the  doors  of  which  are  always  kept 
carefully  shut,  lest  some  profane  and  unclean  person  should 
cast  an  eye  on  the  earthenware  inside,  which,  rendered 
unclean  by  that  one  look,  would  be  only  fit  to  be  immediately 
broken  to  pieces  2.  It  is  to  avoid  the  risk  of  a  similar 
disaster  that  their  women  never  draw  water  in  earthenware 
vessels,  but  always  use  those  made  of  brass  and  copper. 

It  is  just  the  same  with  their  clothes  as  with  their  vessels. 
Some  can  be  defiled,  others  cannot.  Silk,  for  instance, 
remains   always   pure,    also   cloth   made   of   the   fibres   of 

1  Beds,  furniture,  clothes,  and  vessels  became,  under  the  Jewish  law, 
unclean  by  contact  with  anything  that  was  impure,  and  often  were  the 
means  of  contaminating  other  objects  (Leviticus  xi.  32). — Dubois. 

2  Brahmins  and  rich  Sudras  arc  gradually  abandoning  the  use  of 
earthenware  vessels  for  cooking,  and  are  using  vessels  of  brass  and  bell- 
metal.     These  are  even  sometimes  cleaned  by  Sudras  nowadays. — Ed. 


182     REPUGNANCE  TO  LEATHER  ARTICLES 

certain  plants.  For  this  reason  the  ancient  Brahmin 
hermits  always  wore  clothes  made  of  either  one  or  the  other 
material.  Brahmins  at  the  present  day,  too,  prefer  to 
wear  silk,  particularly  at  meals.  When  a  Brahmin  doctor 
wishes  to  feel  the  pulse  of  a  sick  Sudra,  he  first  wraps  up 
the  patient's  wrist  in  a  small  piece  of  silk  so  that  he  may 
not  be  defiled  by  touching  the  man's  skin  l.  The  cotton 
clothes  which  are  worn  by  most  natives  are  peculiarly 
susceptible  of  defilement.  It  is  quite  sufficient  to  render 
them  unclean  if  a  person  of  an  inferior  caste,  or,  above  all, 
a  European  or  a  Pariah,  touch  them.  In  the  eyes  of  a 
Hindu,  a  Pariah  and  a  European  are  on  the  same  level. 
It  is  impossible  to  help  laughing  at  the  ridiculous  care 
and  perpetual  pains  which  an  orthodox  Brahmin  will  take 
to  preserve  his  person  and  his  clothes  from  contact  with 
anything  unclean.  But,  whatever  they  may  do,  it  is 
impossible  for  them  to  escape  contamination  in  a  popu- 
lous town.  Hence  the  more  scrupulous  are  obliged  to 
quit  the  towns  and  take  up  their  abode  in  the  villages. 
Others,  however,  from  motives  of  self-interest,  compound 
with  their  conscience,  and  disregard  the  rules.  Exposed 
as  they  must  be  to  continual  contact  with  people  of  all 
sorts,  in  the  busy  haunts  where  their  business  takes  them, 
they  content  themselves  with  changing  their  garments  on 
their  return  home.  These  are  immediately  dipped  into 
water,  and  the  uncleanness  is  removed. 

Leather  and  skins  of  all  kinds,  except  those  of  the  tiger 
and  the  antelope,  are  considered  particularly  unclean.  Caste 
Hindus  must  never  touch  with  their  hands  the  slippers  or 
sandals  that  are  worn  on  the  feet.  A  person  riding  must 
always  carefully  cover  with  cloth  any  part  of  the  harness 
or  saddlery  that  is  made  of  leather.  So  it  is  that  caste 
Hindus  do  not  understand  how  any  one  can  possibly  wear 
anything  made,  as  they  say,  of  the  remains  of  dead  animals, 
such  as  boots,  gloves,  or  leather  breeches,  without  a  feeling 
of  horror  and  repugnance.  The  ordinary  costume  of  a 
European  greatly  contributes  to  increase  the  low  opinion 
that  Hindus  have  formed  of  the  delicacy  of  our  tastes. 
A  scrupulous  Brahmin  must  look  very  carefully  where  he 

1  And  so,  too,  when  a  Sudra  doctor  feels  the  pulse  of  a  Brahmin 
patient. — Ed. 


EATING  AND  DRINKING  183 

puts  his  feet  when  walking.  He  would  be  defiled  and 
obliged  to  bathe  if  by  accident  his  feet  should  touch  a  bone, 
a  piece  of  broken  glass  or  earthenware,  a  rag,  a  leaf  from 
which  any  one  had  eaten,  a  bit  of  skin  or  leather,  hair,  or 
any  other  unclean  thing.  The  place  where  he  sits  must 
also  be  chosen  with  great  care.  Some  penitents  always 
carry  with  them  the  '  pure  '  skin  of  a  tiger  or  antelope  on 
which  to  sit  ;  others  use  a  common  mat,  while  the  rich 
have  carpets  ;  but  any  one  may  sit  on  the  ground  without 
fear  of  defilement,  if  the  place  has  been  recently  rubbed 
over  with  cow- dung. 

The  way  in  which  they  take  their  food  is  also  a  matter 
of  some  moment.  However  many  guests  there  may  be,  it 
would  be  considered  very  rude  to  speak  to  any  one.  They 
eat  in  silence,  and  conversation  only  begins  at  the  end  of 
the  meal,  after  they  have  washed  their  hands  and  mouths  K 
Nothing  must  be  touched  with  the  left  hand,  for  reasons 
to  be  given  later  on,  unless  it  be  the  copper  vessel  which 
contains  water.  Hindus  drink  only  once,  that  is  when 
they  have  finished  eating,  and  they  do  so  by  pouring  the 
liquid  into  their  mouths  from  a  distance.  To  drink  as  we 
do,  by  putting  the  glass  or  cup  to  the  lips,  would  in  their 
eyes  be  the  height  of  indecency.  While  eating  great  care 
must  be  taken  that  not  a  fragment  falls  into  the  leaf  serving 
as  a  neighbour's  plate.  One  single  grain  of  rice,  one  crumb 
even,  would  effectually  prevent  the  latter  from  continuing 
his  meal ;  or  at  any  rate  he  would  have  to  take  a  fresh 
leaf  and  another  portion  of  food. 

No  doubt  the  same  cause  which  makes  Hindus  of  the 
higher  castes  so  extremely  particular  about  their  manner 
of  eating  and  drinking,  accounts  for  their  strong  aversion 
to  wind  instruments  of  music.  This  cause  is  their  insur- 
mountable horror  of  saliva.  They  would  look  on  a  man 
who  spat  upon  the  floor  as  quite  destitute  of  good  manners. 
Spittoons  are  to  be  found  in  every  house  ;  but  should  none 
be  provided  and  any  one  require  to  spit  he  would  have  to 
go   outside 2.     However,    from   a   sanitary   point   of   view 

1  This  is  not  now  the  case  ;  conversation  does  go  on  during  meals. 
Occasionally,  however,  an  individual  makes  a  resolve  always  to  abstain 
from  talking  while  at  meals. — Ed. 

2  Spittoons  are  not  often  found  in  Brahmin  houses. — Ed. 


184  DISPOSAL  OF  FOOD  REMNANTS 

there  is  nothing  astonishing  in  this  excessive  scrupulosity. 
No  properly  brought-up  European  would  dream  of  expec- 
torating on  the  floor  of  a  room.  But  with  a  Hindu  it  is 
less  from  a  due  regard  to  cleanliness  than  from  his  ever- 
recurring  fear  of  bodily  defilement. 

The  remains  of  food  are  never  put  aside  and  kept  after 
a  meal,  nor  are  they  given  to  the  servants.  As  has  been 
already  stated,  to  be  a  servant  is  no  degradation.  A  servant 
generally  eats  with  his  master,  and  what  he  left  could  not 
be  offered  to  the  poor,  unless  they  were  Pariahs,  who  take 
anything.  Food  remnants,  in  fact,  are  thrown  to  the  crows 
and  the  dogs.  Rice  that  is  to  be  given  away  to  the  poor 
of  the  same  caste,  or  any  other  persons  with  whom  it  is 
allowable  to  eat,  is  boiled  separately.  Rice  given  to  other 
castes  is  always  uncooked  ;  and  it  is  thus  that  a  Brahmin 
receives  it  from  persons  of  an  inferior  caste,  who  make  him 
a  present. 

High- caste  Hindus,  and  particularly  Brahmins,  rarely 
use  plates  and  dishes  at  their  meals.  Sometimes,  but  only 
when  quite  alone  in  their  own  houses,  they  may  use  a 
service  of  copper  or  other  metal ;  but  they  are  forbidden 
to  use  earthenware  or  china.  Usually  the  rice  and  other 
dishes  are  served  on  a  banana  leaf,  or  on  the  leaves  of 
some  tree  neatly  sewn  together  in  the  form  of  a  plate.  To 
offer  a  Brahmin  food  on  a  metal  plate  which  some  one  had 
already  used,  would  be  considered  a  deadly  insult.  Natur- 
ally the  use  of  spoons  and  forks  is  also  forbidden.  Fingers 
are  used  instead,  and  Hindus  cannot  at  all  understand  how 
we  can  use  these  implements  a  second  time,  after  having 
once  put  them  to  our  mouths,  and  allowed  them  to  be 
touched  with  saliva.  If  Hindus  should  happen  to  eat  dry 
food  or  fruits  between  meals,  they  break  off  pieces  and 
throw  them  into  their  mouths,  fearing  if  they  put  them 
into  their  mouths  with  their  fingers  the  latter  might  be 
tainted  with  saliva  \  A  European  once  wrote  a  letter  to 
some  friend  of  his,  recommending  a  Brahmin  acquaintance 
of  mine  to  his  notice.  When  he  had  finished  his  letter  he 
sealed  it  with  a  wafer,  which  he  moistened  by  placing  it 
on  the  tip  of  his  tongue.     The  Brahmin,  who  saw  him  do 

1  This  practice,  like  others,  becomes  mechanical.  Hindus  never  give 
a  thought  to  them. — Ed. 


ENDLESS  ABLUTIONS  185 

it,  would  not  take  or  touch  the  letter,  and  left  in  anger, 
considering  he  had  been  grievously  insulted.  He  preferred 
to  lose  any  advantage  he  might  have  gained  from  this 
letter  of  recommendation,  rather  than  be  the  bearer  of 
a  missive  that  had  been  thus  defiled. 

There  are  several  kinds  of  animals,  especially  dogs  \  to 
touch  which  would  defile  a  Brahmin.  It  is  very  interesting 
to  watch  their  movements,  and  the  care  they  will  take  to 
avoid  the  familiar  caresses  of  these  faithful  companions  of 
man.  If,  in  spite  of  their  efforts,  the  dog  really  does  touch 
them,  they  are  obliged  to  hurry  off  immediately  and  plunge, 
with  all  their  clothes  on,  into  water,  and  thus  remove 
from  both  their  person  and  their  garments  the  stain  which 
they  had  involuntarily  acquired  by  the  touch  of  one  of 
these  unclean  animals. 

There  is  an  infinity  of  other  kinds  of  exterior  defilement 
to  which  Brahmins  are  exposed,  but  I  think  what  has 
been  already  said  is  sufficient  to  make  known  their  views 
on  the  subject. 

It  is  obvious  that  so  many  external  defilements  neces- 
sitate endless  ablutions.  There  are  certain  rivers  and  tanks 
which  are  held  to  possess  peculiarly  cleansing  properties, 
and  those  Brahmins  who  live  near  them  are  perpetually 
bathing  in  their  waters,  while  those  who  from  living  at 
a  greater  distance  are  deprived  of  this  advantage,  have  to 
content  themselves  with  whatever  water  or  tank  is  nearest 
to  their  dwelling-place.  In  many  places  they  do  not  allow 
Sudras  to  approach  the  place  where  they  bathe,  either  for 
the  purpose  of  drawing  water  or  to  make  their  own  ablu- 
tions. But  they  are  obliged  to  be  less  exclusive  in  places 
where  they  are  not  supreme. 

A  Brahmin  rarely  passes  a  day  without  bathing  at  least 
once  2,  while  those  who  wish  to  call  public  attention  to 

1  Amongst  the  many  animals  looked  upon  as  unclean  by  Jews,  the 
dog  was  particularly  numbered.  But  it  was  only  by  eating  the  flesh, 
or  touching  the  dead  carcase  of  one,  that  they  were  defiled.  The  touch 
of  a  living  dog  did  not  matter.  Furthermore,  every  commentator  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures  has  agreed  that  these  defilements  were  only  figura- 
tive of  other  and  far  more  important  uncleannesses,  namety,  the  sins 
and  offences  which  we  commit  against  God  and  our  neighbour. — 
Dubois. 

2  One  bath  every  day  is  compulsory,  and  is  invariably  taken. — Ed. 


186  ANOINTING  THE  BODY 

their  minute  observance  of  religious  customs  must  bathe 
three  times  a  day. 

It  is  a  common  practice  amongst  natives  to  anoint  them- 
selves occasionally  from  head  to  foot  with  either  oil  of 
sesamum  or  sometimes  castor  oil.  They  remove  the  dirt 
which  results  from  it  by  rubbing  it  off  with  certain  herbs. 
They  then  have  hot  water  poured  over  their  bodies,  and 
finally  bathe  in  cold  water.  At  their  grand  ceremonials 
Brahmins  are  in  the  habit  of  offering  some  such  oily  mixture 
to  all  their  guests,  who  rub  themselves  over  from  head  to 
foot  with  it,  and  then  plunge  into  a  bath.  Dead  bodies  are 
similarly  anointed  before  being  conveyed  to  the  funeral 
pile  or  burying  ground  ;  and  this  office  is  always  performed 
by  the  nearest  relatives. 

CHAPTER  IV 

Internal  Defilements. — Abstinence  from  all  Intoxieating  Licmors,  and 
from  everything  that  has  had  Life. — Particular  Horror  of  the 
Brahmins  for  the  Flesh  of  the  Cow. — Their  abhorrence  of  Europeans 
who  eat  it  as  Food. 

Besides  those  external  defilements  which  only  affect  the 
outer  skin,  there  are  others  which  Brahmins  and  other 
Hindus  say  insinuate  themselves  into  the  body,  and  which 
can  only  be  got  rid  of  by  proper  methods  ordained  by  rule 
and  custom.  There  is  no  doubt  that  it  was  for  the  sake 
of  health  and  cleanliness,  in  the  first  instance,  that  Hindu 
lawgivers  inculcated  these  principles  of  defilement  and 
purification.  The  heat  of  the  Indian  climate,  the  profuse 
perspiration  which  is  the  natural  result,  and  the  diseases 
which  are  endemic  in  consequence  of  it,  all  help  to  im- 
poverish the  blood  of  the  inhabitants  ;  and  from  these 
causes  doubtless  originated  those  obligatory  precautions 
which  have  since  been  strengthened  by  custom  and  supersti- 
tion, and  which  are  considered  to  be  best  calculated  to 
counteract  these  deadly  influences.  If  the  salutary  rules 
at  first  prescribed  have  in  the  course  of  ages  become  per- 
verted into  the  present  childish  and  puerile  ceremonial, 
which  common  sense  rejects,  the  fault  must  be  attributed 
partly  to  popular  superstition  which  exaggerates  and  dis- 
torts everything,  partly  to  popular  ignorance,  and  partly 


THE  BRAHMINS  AS  WATER-DRINKERS      187 

to  the  cunning  and  avarice  of  the  hypocritical  charlatans 
who  mislead  the  people. 

Water  may  be  said  to  be  a  Brahmin's  jxole  bovorage.  In 
order  that  it  may  be  pure-and  may  not  defile  the  person 
who  drinks  it,  it  is  indispensable  that  it  should  be  drawn 
and  carried  by  a  member  of  his  own  caste  ;  to  drink  water 
drawn  by  strange  hands  would  be  a  great  sin,  the  remis- 
sion of  which  could  only  be  obtained  at  the  cost  of  elaborate 
and  expensive  ceremonies.  In  some  places  Brahmins  and 
Sudras  fetch  their  water  from  the  same  place,  but  if  by 
chance  the  water-pot  of  the  latter  should  touch  that  of 
the  former,  the  Brahmin  immediately  breaks  his,  if  it  is 
made  of  earthenware,  or,  if  of  brass  or  copper,  gives  it 
a  thorough  scouring  with  sand  and  water.  In  those  parts 
of  the  country  which  are  under  the  rule  of  native  princes, 
Brahmins  forbid  any  one  of  another  caste  to  approach 
their  wells  ;  but  where  Mahomedans  are  in  power,  and 
more  particularly  in  the  large  towns  under  European  rule, 
it  is  not  unusual  to  see  Brahmins,  Sudras,  and  even  Pariahs, 
all  drawing  water  from  the  same  source.  But  all  the  same, 
I  once  witnessed  on  the  coast  a  violent  disturbance  caused 
by  the  inconceivable  effrontery  of  a  Pariah  woman  who 
had  dared  to  draw  water  from  the  common  well. 

Curdled  milk  diluted  with  water  is  a  very  favourite  drink 
with  Hindus.  It  is  usually  Sudras  who  prepare  and  sell 
this  refreshing  beverage.  Although,  generally  speaking, 
there  is  more  water  than  milk  in  the  mixture,  Brahmins 
have  no  scruples  in  partaking  of  it,  and  if  any  one  re- 
proaches them  with  thus  using  water  drawn  and  handled 
by  Sudras,  they  reply  that  the  curdled  milk,  which  has 
come  from  the  body  of  a  cow,  cleanses  it  from  all  impuri- 
ties. 

On  the  other  hand,  they  have  an  invincible  repugnance 
to  the  liquor  which  is  obtained  by  tapping  cocoanut  and 
other  palms  and  several  other  trees  of  the  country.  This 
juice  is  sweet  and  refreshing  if  drunk  before  it  has  begun 
to  ferment,  but  if  taken  in  excess  it  is  intoxicating.  A 
spirit  called  arrack  is  distilled  from  it,  and  for  this  also  there 
is  the  same  repugnance.  As  a  rule,  a  respectable  Hindu 
will  not  touch  spirits  or  any  intoxicating  drink,  considering 
that  they  cause  one  of  the  greatest  internal  defilements 


188  HINDU  TEMPERANCE 

that  it  is  possible  to  contract.  In  consequence  of  this 
praiseworthy  opinion  drunkenness  is  looked  upon  as  a 
degrading  and  infamous  vice,  and  any  one  would  be  promptly 
and  ignominiously  expelled  from  his  caste  were  he  found 
guilty  of  giving  way  to  it.  It  is  only  Pariahs  and  men  of 
the  lowest  classes  who  dare  publicly  to  consume  intoxicat- 
ing drinks.  Nevertheless,  one  does  see  occasionally  in 
European  settlements  and  in  the  large  towns  high-caste 
natives,  and  even  Brahmins,  breaking  the  law  of  temper- 
ance ;  but  it  is  only  in  strict  privacy,  and  after  every 
precaution  has  been  taken  to  conceal  the  unpardonable 
weakness. 

The  air  one  breathes  may  also  be  the  means  of  internal 
defilement  ;  for  instance,  it  would  mean  defilement  if  the 
olfactory  nerves  of  a  Brahmin  became  sensible  of  the  smoke 
arising  from  a  funeral  pyre  where  a  body  was  being  burned, 
or  from  the  fire  on  a  Pariah's  hearth  where  food  was  being 
cooked. 

In  certain  parts  of  the  country,  if  Pariahs  perceive  that 
a  Brahmin  is  coming  their  way,  they  make  a  long  detour, 
in  fear  lest  the  effluvia  which  is  given  off  by  their  unclean 
persons  should  defile  the  exterior  and  interior  of  this  noble 
personage.  When  Sudras  speak  to  a  Brahmin  etiquette 
obliges  them  to  keep  at  a  respectful  distance,  or  at  least 
that  they  should  put  the  right  hand  before  their  mouths, 
so  that  the  taint  of  their  poisonous  breath  may  not  reach 
him.  It  were  very  desirable,  for  the  peace  and  honour  of 
Sudra  husbands,  that  this  excessive  delicacy  extended  also 
to  their  wives  ;  but  Brahmins  are  far  from  feeling  the  same 
superb  disdain  towards  them.  As  for  the  wives  of  Pariahs, 
the  feeling  of  antipathy  for  everything  connected  with 
this  class  is  so  strong,  and  the  defilement  which  results 
from  even  an  innocent  and  accidental  touch  is  so  difficult 
to  remove,  that  one  very  rarely  hears  of  a  Brahmin  who 
has  been  so  blinded  by  passion  as  to  have  had  any  inter- 
course with  a  woman  of  this  class. 

It  is  with  regard  to  their  food  that  Brahmins  take  the 
most  excessive  precautions.  They  are  never  allowed  to 
touch  meat,  and  this  excludes  not  only  anything  that  has 
had  life,  fish  included,  but  also  anything  that  has  contained 
a  germ  of  life,  such  as  eggs  of  all  sorts.     Vegetables,  which 


STRICT  RULES  OF  ABSTINENCE  189 

form  their  principal  food,  are  also  subject  to  numerous 
exceptions.  Thus  they  reject  any  vegetable  whose  root 
or  stem  grows  in  the  shape  of  a  head,  such  as  onions,  garlic, 
mushrooms,  &c.  Is  it  because  they  have  discovered  some 
hurtful  properties  in  these  plants  ?  I  think  not.  The 
greater  number  of  such  vegetables  are,  on  the  contrary, 
considered  by  other  people  to  possess,  in  that  very  hot 
climate,  antiseptic  and  health-giving  qualities. 

I  have  often  tried  to  find  out  the  reason  why  these 
vegetables  are  avoided,  but  I  have  never  been  able  to  ex- 
tract any  other  answer  from  those  I  have  questioned  than 
that  it  was  the  custom  and  rule  to  avoid  them  \ 

To  adhere  strictly  to  all  these  rules  of  abstinence  is  what 
is  called  eating  properly.  Whoever  eats  of  forbidden  things 
cannot,  according  to  Brahminical  doctrine,  keep  his  body 
really  pure.  However,  I  am  quite  satisfied  by  experience 
that  there  are  some  who  occasionally  relax  the  severity  of 
these  rules  ;  but  the  extreme  care  which  is  taken  to  conceal 
the  fact  proves  what  a  strong  hold  the  rules  have  over  the 
greater  number. 

These  strict  rules  of  abstinence  are  observed  by  all  the 
respectable  people  of  this  large  Hindu  nation  ;  they  are 
most  scrupulously  obeyed  in  the  family  circle,  without  any 
one  daring  to  think  of  violating  them,  even  under  the  most 
pressing  necessity.  They  appear  to  have  existed  from  the 
time  when  the  natives  of  India  were  formed  into  one 
nation  ;  that  is  to  say,  at  no  very  distant  date  from  the 
Flood,  and  it  seems  to  me  they  show  a  strong  indication 
of  the  great  antiquity  of  this  people. 

And  this  law  of  abstinence,  far  from  losing  force  and 
falling  into  abeyance,  has  gained  many  additional  adherents 
from  among  the  better  class  of  Sudras.  Its  minute  observ- 
ance is  the  surest  way  of  gaining  respect  even  amongst 
those  who  do  not  feel  called  upon  to  impose  similar  priva- 

1  Whatever  the  motive  may  be,  there  are  no  doubt  some  superstitions 
attached  to  it.  Every  one  knows  the  extreme  veneration  in  which  the 
Egyptians  held  onions  and  other  vegetables  of  the  same  family.  They 
even  swore  by  the  leeks  and  onions  in  their  gardens.  Juvenal  (Satires, 
xv)  laughs  at  them  about  it  : 

'  Porrum  et  cepe  nefas  violare,  et  frangere  morsu, 
O  sanctas  gentes  quibus  haec  nascuntur  in  hortis 
Numina  !  ' — Dubois. 


190         ABSTENTION  FROM  ANIMAL  FOOD 

tions  upon  themselves.  Only  Sudras  of  the  very  lowest 
class  eat  meat  openly  ;  and  many  of  these  do  not  venture 
to  cook  it  in  their  own  houses,  but  in  a  secluded  corner  of 
their  cowsheds.  To  ask  a  Hindu  if  he  eats  meat,  even 
when  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  he  does  so,  is  to  insult 
him  deeply  ;  while  to  offer  meat  at  a  meal  to  a  guest  with 
whom  one  is  not  intimate,  would  be  the  height  of  rudeness. 
Hindus  who  eat  meat  do  so  only  in  the  privacy  of  their 
own  families  or  in  company  with  near  relatives  or  intimate 
friends.  Even  the  common  Sudras  do  not  offer  meat  at 
their  festive  gatherings  such  as  wedding  feasts.  Were  they 
to  do  so  their  guests  would  consider  themselves  insulted, 
and  would  leave  immediately. 

The  Lingayats,  or  votaries  of  Siva,  are  strict  abstainers 
from  anything  that  has  possessed  the  principle  of  life. 
But  the  careful  manner  in  which  they  thereby  try  to  main- 
tain perfect  internal  purity  does  not  profit  them  much, 
as  they  are  credited  at  the  same  time  with  neglecting  some 
of  the  precautions  necessary  to  preserve  their  external 
purity.  They  are  blamed,  for  instance,  for  allowing  their 
women  to  come  and  go  about  the  house  during  the  time  of 
their  periodical  uncleanness,  and  for  not  insisting  on  purify- 
ing ablutions  afterwards  ;  the  same  also  during  and  after 
confinements.  In  fact,  they  neglect  a  great  many  cleanly 
customs  which,  putting  superstition  aside,  are  most  bene- 
ficial to  health  in  hot  climates. 

People  who  abstain  entirely  from  animal  food  acquire 
such  an  acute  sense  of  smell  that  they  can  perceive  in 
a  moment  from  a  person's  breath,  or  from  the  exudation 
of  the  skin,  whether  that  person  has  eaten  meat  or  not  ; 
and  that  even  after  a  lapse  of  twenty-four  hours. 

In  some  parts  there  is  a  peculiar  custom  which  allows 
men  to  eat  meat,  but  strictly  forbids  it  to  women. 

To  eat  the  flesh  of  the  cow  is  an  ineffaceable  defilement. 
The  bare  idea  of  tasting  it  would  be  abhorrent  to  any 
devout  Hindu.  This  invincible  repugnance,  based  as  it  is 
now  solely  on  the  superstition  which  places  the  cow  among 
the  principal  Hindu  deities,  had  most  probably  at  first 
a  much  more  sensible  but  not  less  forcible  motive,  namely 
self-interest.  The  Hindu  lawgivers  recognized,  of  course, 
that  these  animals,  so  useful  to  man  in  all  places  and  under 


ITS  BENEFIT  IN  HOT  CLIMATES  191 

all  circumstances,  were  particularly  valuable  in  a  country 
where  there  is  no  other  beast  available  for  tilling  or  for 
transporting  agricultural  and  commercial  products.  Besides 
which,  the  milk  was  an  indispensable  addition  to  the  food 
of  the  multitude  of  poor  natives  who  would  otherwise  have 
no  other  food  than  insipid  vegetables. 

Perhaps  we  may  also  add  another  motive  besides  that  of 
preserving  the  species  of  these  valuable  animals,  and  that 
is  the  indigestible  nature  of  beef.  Indeed,  in  a  climate 
where  the  organs  of  the  stomach  are  so  much  weakened  by 
excessive  perspiration,  the  habitual  use  of  heavy  food 
would  have  soon  destroyed  the  health  of  the  people.  I 
have  known  many  Europeans  who  entirely  left  off  eating 
meat  for  this  reason,  because  they  found  that  they  could 
not  eat  it  without  suffering  afterwards  from  indigestion  ]. 

At  the  same  time  the  Hindu  lawgivers  knew  the  character 
of  their  compatriots  too  well  to  imagine  that  simple  pro- 
hibitions and  punishments  would  suffice  to  save  the  lives 
of  these  precious  animals.  So,  calling  religion  to  their  aid, 
they  deified  them.  To  kill  a  cow — according  to  the  prin- 
ciples of  Hindu  law — is  not  only  a  crime,  but  an  awful 
sacrilege,  a  deicide,  which  can  only  be  expiated  by  the  death 
of  the  offender  ;  while  to  eat  of  the  flesh  of  a  cow  is  a 

1  Montesquieu  says  :  '  There  are  many  local  laws  peculiar  to  different 
religious  beliefs.  The  tenet  of  metempsychosis  is  peculiarly  suited  to 
the  Indian  climate.  The  excessive  heat  burns  up  all  the  pasture,  and 
there  is  little  left  with  which  to  feed  the  cattle.  There  is  always  a  danger 
of  there  being  too  few  beasts  to  till  the  ground.  Cattle  multiply  but 
slowly  in  that  country,  and  are  subject  to  many  diseases.  Hence  it  is 
that  a  religious  law  which  protects  them  is  very  necessary  from  an 
economical  point  of  view.  But  while  the  pastures  are  all  burnt  up, 
rice  and  vegetables  grow  very  well  by  the  help  of  irrigation.  Thus 
a  religious  law  which  only  allows  of  this  kind  of  food  is  useful  to  the 
people  of  the  country.  Furthermore,  while  meat  is  usually  tasteless  in 
hot  climates,  milk  and  butter,  which  are  obtained  from  these  animals, 
form  the  chief  items  of  food.  The  law  forbidding  cows  to  be  killed 
and  eaten  as  food  is  therefore  not  without  reason  in  India  '  (Esprit  des 
Lois,  book  xxiv.  ch.  24). — Dubois. 

Sir  M.  Monier- Williams  in  his  book  on  Hinduism  says  in  a  foot-note  : 
'  Happily  for  the  Hindus,  the  cow  which  supplies  them  with  their  only 
animal  food — milk  and  butter — and  the  ox  which  helps  to  till  their 
ground,  were  declared  sacred  at  an  early  period.  Had  it  not  been  so, 
this  useful  animal  might  have  been  exterminated  in  times  of  famine. 
What  is  now  a  superstition  had  its  origin,  like  some  other  superstitions, 
in  a  wise  forethought.' — Ed. 


192      DISREGARDING  NATIVE  PREJUDICES 

defilement  which  cannot  be  purified.  Pariahs,  however, 
are  tacitly  allowed  to  feast  on  the  flesh  of  those  animals 
which  die  of  old  age  or  disease.  In  their  case  this  is  not 
looked  upon  exactly  as  a  crime  ;  but,  as  we  have  already 
seen,  this  privilege,  of  which  these  miserable  outcastes 
avail  themselves  without  scruple,  contributes  a  good  deal 
towards  keeping  up  that  sort  of  curse  which  overshadows 
them. 

The  flesh  of  the  buffalo,  camel,  horse,  elephant,  &c,  in 
fact  everything  that  comes  under  the  head  of  large  meat, 
inspires  all  Hindus,  Pariahs  excepted,  with  almost  as  great 
an  abhorrence  as  the  flesh  of  the  cow  or  ox.  There  is  the 
same  idea  of  defilement  connected  with  it. 

I  have  already  pointed  out  that  Europeans  do  not  seem 
disposed  to  adopt  the  same  rules  of  abstinence  as  are 
followed  by  the  people  among  whom  they  live,  and  that, 
without  paying  any  attention  to  the  disgust  which  they 
cause,  they  continue  to  eat  beef  openly.  It  is  certain  that 
this  conduct  estranges  them  from  all  the  better  classes  of 
Hindus,  who,  consequently,  in  this  respect  place  them  far 
below  the  Pariahs.  It  is  true  that  the  first  conquerors  of 
India,  in  defiance  of  the  most  sacred  and  long-established 
customs  of  the  country,  killed  oxen  and  cows  without 
exciting  a  general  insurrection  against  such  an  insult  as 
the  slaughter  of  animals  worshipped  by  Hindus  as  their 
gods  ;  and  it  is  also  true  that  for  several  succeeding  cen- 
turies the  handful  of  foreigners  established  among  them 
have  been  allowed  to  kill  these  sacred  animals  with  impunity 
to  satisfy  their  own  appetites  ;  but  they  have  only  to 
thank  the  mild,  temperate,  and  indolent  character  of  the 
nation  which  has  spared  them  1. 

Amongst  ancient  nations  there  are  few  who  would  with 
so  much  patience  have  allowed  their  religious  beliefs  to 

1  This  horror  of  cow-killing  is  as  strong  among  Hindus  throughout 
India  to-day  as  it  ever  was.  The  remarkable  revival  of  Hinduism 
during  the  last  few  years  has  been  characterized  by  the  formation  of 
innumerable  secret  religious  societies  for  the  protection  of  the  cow,  and 
the  riots  among  Hindus  and  Mahomedans  in  recent  years  are  more  or 
less  directly  traceable,  it  is  asserted,  to  the  propaganda  of  these  societies. 
It  may  be  mentioned  that  in  Kashmir,  until  quite  recently,  cow-killing 
was  punishable  with  death,  and  imprisonment  for  life  is  now  the  penalty. 
—Ed. 


KILLING  SACRED  ANIMALS  193 

be  openly  set  at  naught.  The  Israelites,  when  in  captivity 
in  Egypt,  begged  for  permission  from  Pharaoh  to  make 
a  pilgrimage  into  the  desert,  there  to  sacrifice  to  God 
without  fear  of  interruption,  because  they  would  have  been 
liable  to  be  all  massacred  or  stoned  had  they  dared  to 
perform  such  sacrifices  in  the  sight  of  the  idolatrous  Egyp- 
tians, who  worshipped  as  gods  some  of  the  very  animals 
that  they  required  for  their  sacrifices  \ 

Cambyses  made  himself  more  execrable  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Egyptians  by  killing  the  ox  Apis,  than  by  all  the 
cruelties  and  acts  of  tyranny  of  which  he  was  guilty  in 
dealing  with  this  peaceable  people  2. 

The  Egyptians  considered  that  to  kill,  even  by  accident, 
one  of  their  sacred  animals  was  the  most  heinous  of  crimes. 
Whoever  was  guilty  of  such  an  act  was  invariably  put  to 
death.  A  Roman  soldier  was  torn  in  pieces  by  the  popu- 
lace, in  spite  of  the  terror  that  the  name  of  Rome  inspired, 
for  having  by  mischance  killed  a  cat.  Diodorus,  who 
records  this  incident,  also  mentions  that  during  a  famine 
the  Egyptians  preferred  to  devour  each  other  rather  than 
touch  the  animals  they  held  sacred. 

The  Hindus  would  also  carry  their  scruples  to  the  same 
point.  In  whatever  straits  they  might  be  they  would 
prefer  to  die  rather  than  save  their  lives  by  killing  cattle. 
From  this  we  may  conclude  that,  though  they  daily  witness 
the  slaughter  of  these  sacred  animals  by  Europeans,  without 
uttering  any  loud  complaint,  they  are  far  from  being  in- 
sensible to  the  insult.  But  restrained  by  the  fear  which 
these  foreigners  have  always  inspired  in  them,  they  con- 
tent themselves  with  complaining  in  secret  and  storing  up 
in  their  hearts  all  the  indignation  that  they  feel.  Pious 
Lingayats  have  often  come  to  me,  imagining  that  my  title 
of  European  priest  gave  me  great  influence  over  my  fellow- 
countrymen,  to  implore  me,  in  earnest  terms,  and  often 
with  tears  in  their  eyes,  to  do  everything  in  my  power  to 

1   Exodus  viii.  26. 

3  '  Did  Cambyses  do  well,'  asks  Voltaire,  ■  when  after  conquering 
Egypt  he  killed  the  ox  Apis  with  his  own  hand  ?  Why  not  ?  He 
showed  the  idiots  that  their  gods  could  be  brought  to  the  pit  without 
nature  rising  in  her  wrath  to  avenge  the  sacrilege  !  '  This  is  Voltaire's 
smart  criticism,  but  I  think  few  wise  statesmen  or  sensible  persons  would 
share  his  opinion. — Dubois. 

DUBOIS  H 


104  PURIFYING  BODY  AND  SOUL 

put  a  stop  to  this  sacrilege.  In  States  which  are  still  ruled 
by  heathen  princes  on  no  pretext  whatever  is  it  permitted 
to  kill  a  cow.  In  fact,  this  act  of  sacrilege,  so  hateful  to 
Hindus,  is  only  permitted  in  provinces  where  Europeans 
or  Mahomedans  hold  sway. 

To  purify  the  body  from  any  interior  defilement  that 
may  have  been  contracted  there  is  no  more  efficacious  way 
than  by  the  performance  of  the  pancha-gavia. 

As  to  other  ordinary  defilements,  from  which  one  can 
never  quite  escape,  they  may  be  removed  in  several  ways, 
which  I  shall  speak  of  in  the  next  chapter.  If  these  cere- 
monies can  purify  the  soul  from  sin,  so  much  the  more 
will  they  be  capable  of  purifying  the  body  from  all  un- 
cleanness,  both  external  and  internal. 

CHAPTER  V 

Defilements  of  the  Soul,  and  the  Means  of  Purification. — Places  of 
Purification. — Sins  for  which  there  is  no  Forgiveness. — Conjectures 
on  the  Origin  of  Brahmin  Customs  connected  with  Defilement  and 
Purification. — Defilement  by  Europeans,  and  an  Incident  which 
happened  to  the  Author  from  this  Cause. 

The  doctrine  is  laid  down  in  Hindu  books,  is  endorsed 
by  the  philosophers  of  the  country,  and  is  admitted  also 
sometimes  by  Brahmins,  that  the  only  real  defilement  of 
the  soul  proceeds  from  sin,  which  is  caused  by  perversity 
of  the  will.  One  Hindu  poet,  Vemana,  expresses  himself 
thus  on  this  subject : — '  It  is  water  which  causes  mud,  and 
it  is  water  which  removes  it.  It  is  your  will  that  makes 
you  commit  sin,  and  it  is  by  your  will  alone  that  you  can 
be  purified1.'  This  doctrine,  though  imperfectly  carried 
out  in  practice,  certainly  proves  that  Hindus  acknowledge 
that  it  is  only  by  an  effort  of  the  will  and  by  a  renunciation 
of  sin  that  pardon  and  purification  of  the  soul  can  be 
obtained. 

But  this  enlightenment,  which  reason  will  never  allow  to 
be  entirely  extinguished  even  in  the  midst  of  the  deep 
shadows  of  gross  idolatry,  has  become,  if  not  extinguished, 
at  any  rate  entirely  obscured  by  the  religious  formulariza- 

1  This  is  not  to  be  found  among  the  verses  of  Vemana,  but  any  Telugu 
verse  of  which  the  author  is  unknown  is  ascribed  to  him. — Pope. 


ABLUTIONS  IN  SACRED  WATERS  195 

tion  to  which  the  Brahmins  have  become  slaws.  The 
Brahmins  have  allowed  themselves  to  believe  that  without 
either  the  wish  or  the  intention  of  renouncing  evil  it  is 
possible  for  the  soul  to  be  purified  by  various  means,  which, 
through  the  extreme  facility  with  which  they  can  be  em- 
ployed, can  only  tend  to  lessen  the  real  abhorrence  of  sin 
and  give  a  false  sense  of  security  to  the  sinner.  The  ■pancha- 
gavia,  for  example,  is  sufficient  to  obtain  the  remission  of 
any  sin  whatever,  even  when  the  sin  has  been  committed 
deliberately  ;  and  that  is  really  why  the  use  of  such  a  dis- 
gusting liquid  (the  urine  of  the  cow)  is  so  strongly  upheld. 
Looking  as  they  do  upon  sin  as  a  material  or  bodily  defile- 
ment, it  is  not  surprising  that  they  consider  mere  ablutions 
of  the  body  sufficient  to  wipe  it  out.  Ablutions  performed 
in  certain  sacred  rivers,  such  as  the  Ganges,  the  Indus,  the 
Godavari,  the  Cauvery,  and  others,  purify  both  soul  and 
body  from  any  defilements  they  may  ever  have  contracted. 
It  is  even  possible  for  a  person  living  at  a  distance  to  obtain 
the  advantages  conferred  by  their  cleansing  waters  without 
leaving  his  house  ;  he  has  only  to  transport  himself  thither 
in  intention,  and  to  think  of  the  place  while  bathing. 

There  are  several  celebrated  streams  and  tanks  in  India 
credited  with  the  same  purifying  virtue  ;  but  some  of  them 
only  possess  this  virtue  at  intervals  more  or  less  frequent. 
Thus  the  waters  of  the  famous  tank  of  Combaconum,  in 
Tan j ore,  are  only  endowed  with  cleansing  properties  once 
in  twelve  years  ;  while  those  of  the  spring  which  rises  in 
the  hill  Tirutanimalai,  in  the  Carnatic,  are  efficacious  every 
three  years.  There  are  few  provinces  in  India  which  do 
not  possess  sacred  tanks.  When  the  year  and  the  day 
arrive  for  people  to  bathe  in  these  sanctifying  waters, 
a  pilgrimage  is  made  to  the  spot  by  enormous  crowds  of 
devotees,  who  have  been  warned  beforehand  by  messengers 
sent  in  all  directions  by  the  Brahmins,  who  are  interested 
in  keeping  up  this  holy  fervour.  On  the  appointed  day 
they  all  stand  round  the  tank,  awaiting  the  propitious 
moment  to  plunge  into  it.  Directly  the  purohita  gives  the 
signal,  all  present,  men  and  women,  rush  into  the  water, 
shouting  and  screaming,  and  making  an  indescribable 
uproar.  They  soon  find  themselves  heaped  one  on  top 
of  the  other,  so  that  they  can  hardly  move.     It  almost 


196  SACRED  OBJECTS  IN  NATURE 

always  happens  that  in  the  midst  of  this  frightful  con- 
fusion several  are  drowned  or  suffocated,  and  many  come 
out  with  broken  or  dislocated  limbs  \  Happy  are  those 
accounted  who  lose  their  lives  on  such  an  occasion  !  Their 
fate  is  more  to  be  envied  than  lamented  ;  for  these  victims 
of  religious  ardour  go  straight  to  the  realms  of  bliss. 

The  time  of  an  eclipse  is  also  considered  a  particularly 
opportune  moment  for  purifying  oneself  from  sin.  Bathing 
at  that  time,  wherever  it  may  be  possible,  but  especially 
in  the  sea,  possesses  the  merit  of  cleansing  the  soul  from 
all  defilements.  To  bathe  during  the  solstices  or  equinoxes, 
at  the  time  of  a  new  or  of  a  full  moon,  or  on  the  eleventh 
day  of  the  moon,  is  also  considered  efficacious.  The  mouth 
of  a  river,  the  point  where  it  joins  another,  or  where  in  its 
windings  its  course  runs  from  east  to  west,  are  also  peculiarly 
propitious. 

To  read  the  Puranas  and  other  sacred  writings,  to  make 
pilgrimages  to  certain  temples  and  holy  places  called  jmnya- 
sthala,  to  climb  to  the  top  of  certain  very  high  mountains, 
and  even  simply  to  gaze  at  them  :  all  these  procure  the 
forgiveness  of  sins.  There  is  one  of  these  holy  mountains 
in  the  Carnatic,  in  the  district  of  Coimbatore.  It  is  called 
Nilagiri-malai,  and  is  believed  to  be  the  highest  in  the 
province  2.  For  this  reason  alone  the  Hindus  have  made 
it  a  punyasthala,  or  place  of  virtue,  their  custom  being  to 
deify  everything  extraordinary  in  nature.  As  it  is  very 
difficult  to  reach  the  top  of  this  mountain,  a  view  of  the 
summit  alone  (and  it  is  visible  a  long  way  off)  is  considered 
sufficient  to  remove  the  burden  of  sin  from  the  conscience 
of  any  person  who  looks  at  it  ;  provided  that  he  looks  at 
it  with  that  intention. 

In  connecting  religious  sentiment  with  everything  which 
has  any  distinctive  peculiarity  or  grandeur,  they  have  not 
forgotten  to  include  the  magnificent  waterfalls  which  sur- 
prise and  charm  the  eye.     Thus  the  Cauvery  Falls,  and 

1  This  is  the  Maha-mahham  festival.  A  benevolent  Government 
now  takes  the  precaution  of  reducing  the  depth  of  the  water  to  a  few 
inches,  to  prevent  such  disasters.  At  the  celebration  of  the  festival  in 
1897,  500,000  people  were  present. — Ed. 

a  The  Nilgiris,  or  Blue  Mountains — now  a  sanatorium,  the  summer 
headquarters  of  the  Madras  Government. — Ed. 


THE  FIVE  DEADLY  SINS  197 

several  others,  are  supposed  to  be  pre-eminently  suitable 
for  ablutions.  In  a  word,  one  everywhere  comes  across 
places  consecrated  by  superstition,  where  the  greatest 
sinners  can,  with  the  most  perfect  ease,  extinguish  in 
a  limpid  and  accommodating  stream  the  burning  fires  of 
remorse  by  which  they  may  be  troubled. 

To  recite  mantrams  ;  to  exercise  the  happy  privilege  of 
looking  at  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,  especially  gurus  ; 
to  think  of  Vishnu  and  the  other  principal  deities  :  these 
are  all  most  efficacious  in  purifying  the  soul.  A  Brahmin 
who  happened  to  go  three  times  round  a  temple  of  Siva 
merely  in  pursuit  of  a  dog  that  he  was  beating  to  death, 
obtained  the  remission  of  all  his  sins,  and  also  the  special 
favour  of  being  transported  immediately  to  Kailasa  \ 

Admittance  into  Vaikuntha  2  was  once  granted  to  a  great 
sinner  simply  for  having  pronounced,  even  in  blasphemy, 
the  name  of  Narayana  and  the  name  of  Vishnu.  All  this 
is  vouched  for  in  the  sacred  Hindu  books. 

There  are,  however,  some  sins  so  heinous,  according  to 
Hindu  ideas,  that  they  cannot  be  expiated  by  any  of  the 
means  before  mentioned.  These  unpardonable  sins  are  five 
in  number  : — 

1.  Brahmahattya,  the  murder  of  a  Brahmin. 

2.  Sisuhattya,  the  destruction  of  an  unborn  child,  i.e. 
wilfully  causing  an  abortion. 

3.  Surapana,  to  drink  toddy,  the  juice  of  the  palm-tree. 

4.  Swarna-Sneya,  to  steal  gold. 

5.  Guru-talpa-gamana,  to  have  sexual  intercourse  with 
the  wife  of  one's  guru  or  of  one's  spiritual  or  temporal 
superior. 

Some  add  a  sixth,  which  consists  in  holding  communica- 
tion with  any  one  guilty  of  any  of  these  five  sins,  commonly 
called  pancha-patakas,  the  five  crimes.  These  fearful  crimes 
cannot  be  wiped  out  in  the  lifetime  of  the  offenders  by  any 
of  the  usual  means  employed  for  the  purification  of  the 
soul.  Those  who  are  guilty  of  them  expiate  them  after 
death,  by  one  or  more  transmigrations  of  the  soul  into 
some  vile  animal,  or  by  the  torments  of  Naraka,  i.e.  hell. 

Besides  the  sins  committed  during  his  present  existence, 
from  which  a  Brahmin  must  be  constantly  purifying  him- 
1  The  paradise  of  .Siva.  -  The  paradise  of  Vishnu. 


198  DEFILEMENT  AND  PURIFICATION 

.self,  lie  must  also  think  of  expiating  those  committed  in 
a  former  state.  To  become  a  Brahmin  by  reincarnation  is 
the  happiest  destiny  possible  for  a  human  being.  It  is 
a  reward  which  is  only  granted  for  the  accumulated  merits 
of  many  successive  generations.  Yet  the  fact  of  the  re- 
incarnation is  in  itself  a  proof  that  there  still  remains  in 
that  person  some  fault  to  be  expiated  :  otherwise  the  soul 
would  have  been  transported  to  the  Sattyaloka,  or  paradise 
of  Brahma,  and  thereby  would  have  been  spared  the  trouble 
of  animating  another  mortal  body  here  below.  Actual  good 
deeds,  such  as  giving  alms  to  Brahmins,  constructing  wells 
or  tanks,  building  temples,  or  contributing  to  the  cost  of 
religious  services,  and  various  other  works  of  charity,  are 
held  to  add  considerably  to  the  efficacy  of  the  various 
methods  of  purification  which  we  have  just  spoken  of, 
when  performed  in  conjunction  with  them. 

I  will  say  nothing  here  of  the  many  hindrances  to  the 
perfect  purification  of  the  soul  caused  by  a  man's  wife  or 
children,  by  his  worldly  possessions,  by  his  caste,  and  by 
his  passions.     They  will  be  referred  to  elsewhere. 

Defilements  and  purifications  form  together  one  of  the 
most  important  articles  in  Brahmin  doctrine  and  the  Hindu 
creed.  The  practices  and  opinions  with  regard  to  these 
subjects  are  so  extraordinary  and  so  unique  that  it  would 
be  most  interesting  to  thoroughly  investigate  the  motives 
which  originally  gave  rise  to  them ;  but,  either  from 
prudence  or  from  ignorance  on  their  part,  I  have  never 
been  able  to  gather  from  Hindus  any  authentic  information 
about  them.  Everything  that  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain 
has  been  founded  more  or  less  on  conjecture.  But  I  have 
often  had  occasion  to  remark,  that,  after  allowing  for 
exaggeration,  many  Hindu  rites  bear  a  strong  resemblance 
to  those  practised  by  other  nations  in  bygone  ages.  Thus 
Jacob  at  Bethel,  when  preparing  to  offer  up  a  sacrifice, 
commanded  his  household  to  purify  themselves,  and  to 
change  their  garments  \  When  the  Israelites  were  warned 
that  God  would  appear  to  them  in  the  desert  of  Sinai, 
God  commanded  them  by  Moses  to  wash  their  clothes, 
and  not  to  touch  their  wives  for  three  days  beforehand  '\ 
Many  passages  in  the  Hindu  sacred  writings  recall  the  rules 
1  Genesis  xxxv.  2.  ~  Exodus  xix.  10,  14- 


THE  HINDU  RELIGION  NOT  BORROWED     199 

which  the  law  of  Moses  laid  down  for  the  children  of  Israel 
concerning  the  various  kinds  of  defilements,  real  and 
technical l. 

It  is,  in  fact,  impossible  to  deny  that  there  are  many 
striking  points  of  resemblance  between  Jewish  and  Hindu 
customs.  Should  one  then  conclude  that  the  latter  copied 
them  from  the  former  1  I  think  not.  If  they  are  alike 
in  some  essentials,  they  display  great  dissimilarity  in  their 
outward  forms.  Besides,  there  is  nothing  that  I  know  of 
in  the  history  either  of  the  Egyptians  or  of  the  Jews  to 
show  that  these  people  existed  as  a  nation  prior  to  the 
Hindus.  The  peculiarity  of  the  dogmas  and  rites  of  the 
Hindu  religion,  the  strong  antipathy  which  the  Hindus  feel 
for  anything  that  savours  of  imitation,  the  unshaken  firm- 
ness with  which  they  cling  to  ideas  which  originated  at 
a  date  now  lost  in  the  darkness  of  antiquity,  the  intolerance, 
the  pride,  the  presumption  of  the  Brahmins,  and  above  all 
their  detestation  and  contempt  for  foreigners  and  foreign 
customs  :  all  these  make  me  confident  that  the  Hindus 
never  borrowed  anything  from  other  nations.  Everything 
connected  with  the  Hindus  is  stamped  with  the  impress  of 
originality  and  independence.  Never  could  this  vain  and 
self-sufficient  people,  who  are  so  filled  with  the  idea  of  their 
own  moral  ascendency,  have  condescended  to  model  their 
habits  and  customs  on  those  of  foreigners,  whom  they  have 
always  kept  at  the  greatest  possible  distance.  How,  then, 
came  the  Hindus  to  originate  these  singular  notions  of 
defilement  and  purification  ?  I  feel  that  I  possess  neither 
the  necessary  learning  nor  the  necessary  talent  to  cope 
satisfactorily  with  this  difficult  question.  I  must  therefore 
beg  my  readers'  indulgence  in  briefly  laying  before  them 
the  conjectural  opinions  which  I  have  formed  on  the 
subject. 

Even  before  the  Flood  men  were  imbued  with  these 
notions  of  defilement  and  purification.  Amongst  animals 
there  were  the  clean  and  the  unclean.  God  recognized  this 
distinction  when  He  dictated  to  Noah  the  number  of  each 
species  that  was  to  go  into  the  ark  \ 

It  is  probable  that  the  tradition  of  this  classification  of 
things  clean  and  unclean  was  handed  down  by  the  deseen- 
1  Leviticus  xv.  11-15.  a  Genesis  vii.  2. 


200       CLEANLINESS  AND  PUBLIC  HEALTH 

dants  of  the  men  who  escaped  the  Flood.  When  they  began 
to  eat  animal  food,  and  noticed  that  the  flesh  of  some  beasts 
was  not  as  wholesome  or  palatable  as  that  of  others,  their 
opinions  with  regard  to  this  tradition  were  strengthened  ; 
and,  beginning  by  giving  up  what  they  found  was  dele- 
terious to  their  health,  they  finally  persuaded  themselves 
that  they  could  not  even  touch  the  unclean  thing  without 
being  defiled. 

These  ideas  about  defilement  were  common  to  several 
other  ancient  nations.  They,  like  the  Hindus,  had  recourse 
to  water  and  fire  as  means  of  purification.  They  also  had 
their  sacred  rivers.  At  the  time  when  the  Hindus  began 
to  regard  the  waters  of  the  Ganges,  the  Indus,  and  Godavari 
as  peculiarly  sacred,  and  to  attribute  to  them  those  cleansing 
properties  which  could  purify  both  soul  and  body,  the  in- 
habitants of  Colchis  and  other  peoples  living  near  the 
Phasis  credited  the  waters  of  that  river  with  the  same 
virtues,  while  those  of  the  Nile  were  considered  equally 
efficacious  amongst  the  Egyptians. 

Cleanliness  is  a  most  important  factor  in  preserving 
public  health.  The  luxury  of  clothes  in  those  primitive 
times  was  reduced  to  just  what  was  necessary  to  cover  the 
body,  or  to  protect  it  from  atmospheric  changes  ;  and 
garments  were  rarely  changed.  The  habits  of  the  people 
therefore  naturally  tended  to  counteract  the  unhealthy 
consequences  which  would  ensue  from  their  prolonged  use, 
by  the  frequent  washing  of  these  garments  in  pure  water. 

Everything  in  nature  had  deteriorated  after  the  Flood. 
There  were  many  more  diseases,  and  in  searching  for  the 
causes  of  them  people  thought  that  the  unwholesome 
nature  of  certain  kinds  of  food  might  be  partly  answer- 
able for  it.  Therefore  the  use  of  such  food  was  forbidden. 
They  also  realized  that  some  of  these  diseases  were  con- 
tagious ;  therefore  the  persons  who  were  attacked  by  them 
were  isolated.  The  science  of  medicine  was  at  that  time 
in  its  infancy,  but  it  was  soon  seen  that  the  greater  number 
of  these  maladies  were  caused  by  the  unhealthy  condition 
or  poverty  of  the  blood,  owing  to  excessive  perspiration  ; 
and  the  salutary  effects  of  a  bath  being  fully  recognized, 
a  bath  was  finally  considered  as  a  sovereign  remedy  for  all 
complaints. 


ORIGIN  OF  HINDU  CUSTOMS  201 

Men  were  at  length  obliged  to  disperse  in  different 
directions,  and  gradually  peopled  the  various  countries 
of  the  globe.  India,  being  close  to  the  plains  of  Sennaar 
and  enjoying  a  good  climate  and  a  fertile  soil,  was  doubtless 
one  of  the  first  countries  thus  inhabited.  The  very  high 
temperature  made  those  in  authority  feel  that  here,  even 
more  than  in  the  country  they  had  left,  the  rules  of  abstin- 
ence from  certain  meats,  and  attention  to  personal  clean- 
liness, must  be  strictly  enforced  under  pain  of  severe 
punishments. 

In  all  probability,  therefore,  these  Hindu  notions  about 
defilement  and  purification  originated  at  some  date  anterior 
to  the  Flood,  and  after  being  handed  down  from  genera- 
tion to  generation,  undergoing  various  alterations  and 
modifications  either  from  superstition,  the  whim  of  some 
important  person,  or  from  motives  of  expediency  to  suit 
purely  local  conditions,  they  at  length  crystallized  them- 
selves into  their  present  form,  and  still  continue  to  have  the 
strongest  hold  on  the  people. 

Though  the  Hindus  are  fairly  tolerant  so  far  as  the  actual 
dogmas  of  their  religion  are  concerned,  they  do  not  allow 
the  smallest  divergence  of  opinion  on  the  subject  referred 
to  in  the  present  chapter.  If  Europeans  living  in  India, 
simply  for  the  good  of  their  health,  would  or  could  con- 
descend so  far  as  to  make  their  mode  of  life  conform  to  that 
of  the  higher  classes  of  natives,  at  any  rate  in  all  essential 
matters,  how  much  more  cordial  and  friendly  the  relations 
between  the  two  peoples  would  be  !  When  I  was  travelling 
in  districts  where  Europeans  were  as  yet  but  little  known 
I  generally  met  with  an  agreeable  welcome.  Indeed,  some- 
times I  was  received  with  the  most  generous  hospitality. 
Brahmins  themselves  have  not  disdained  to  offer  me  shelter 
in  their  own  houses  on  seeing  my  long  beard  and  my  native 
costume  l.  I  must  own,  however,  that  my  attendants  took 
care  that  people  should  be  favourably  disposed  towards  me 
by  publishing  abroad  that  though  I  was  a  European  priest, 

1  The  influence  thus  acquired  by  the  Abbe  is  testified  to  by  Colonel 
Wilks,  thus  :  '  Of  the  respect  which  his  irreproachable  conduct  inspires, 
it  may  be  sufficient  to  state  that  when  travelling,  on  his  approach  to 
a  village  the  house  of  a  Brahmin  is  uniformly  cleared  for  his  reception 
without  interference,  and  generally  without  communication  to  the  officers 
of  government.  a>  a  spontaneous  mark  of  deference  and  respect.* — El>. 

H  3 


202  DUBOIS  AS  A  GURU 

a  Feringhi  guru,  I  was  also  the  priest  of  all  those  castes  of 
natives  who  had  embraced  the  religion  of  Sarveswara  \ 
that  I  adhered  strictly  to  all  the  Brahmin  rules,  made 
frequent  ablutions,  just  as  they  did,  abstained  from  meat 
and  all  intoxicating  drinks,  &c,  &c. 

These  last  assertions  were  pure  falsehoods,  which,  on  my 
honour,  I  had  never  sanctioned  ;  but  all  the  same  they 
were  made  and  repeated  unknown  to  me,  whenever  my 
followers  thought  it  to  their  interest  or  mine.  Neverthe- 
less, in  spite  of  the  greatest  attention  and  circumspection 
on  my  part  to  avoid  giving  offence  to  my  hosts,  I  occasion- 
ally found  myself  involved  in  a  difficulty  without  its  being 
in  the  least  my  fault.  Here  is  a  curious  case  in  point. 
Travelling  in  South  Mysore,  I  arrived  one  evening  at 
a  village  where  I  was  obliged  to  pass  the  night.  As  there 
was  no  public  lodging  in  the  place,  my  people  asked  the 
village  headman  to  provide  some  shelter.  The  headman 
was  a  Brahmin,  and  at  first  made  some  difficulties  ;  but  to 
gain  his  help  my  people  told  the  usual  falsehoods  about 
myself.  The  Brahmin,  before  making  any  promise,  came 
to  the  place  where  I  was  waiting,  and  after  gazing  at  me 
from  head  to  foot  silently  and  attentively,  asked  me  simply 
if  I  was  accompanied  by  any  Pariahs  or  dogs  (for  these 
both  occupied  the  same  level  in  his  opinion).  I  told  him 
that  I  allowed  neither  Pariahs  nor  dogs  near  me,  and  that 
all  my  followers  were  men  of  good  caste.  After  a  few 
moments'  reflection,  during  which  he  fixed  his  eyes  with 
evident  predilection  on  my  beard  and  my  native  costume, 
he  said  to  me  :  '  You  are  a  European,  but  out  of  respect 
for  your  dignity  as  guru,  and  in  consideration  of  what  your 
people  tell  me  with  regard  to  your  strict  conformity  to  the 
customs  of  the  country,  I  will  give  you  lodging  in  my  own 
house.  Take  off  your  shoes  and  follow  me.'  I  entered 
his  house  with  my  followers,  and  installed  myself  in  a  tidy 
part  of  the  house  which  he  assigned  to  me.  Shortly  after- 
wards my  host,  hearing  me  cough,  ran  to  me  in  great 
haste,  and   with   a  very   serious  air  expressed   the   hope 

1  A  word  which  Native  Christians  employ  to  express  God.  It  means 
literally,  '  the  Ruler  of  all  things  '  (the  Lord  of  all).  Protestant  mis- 
sionaries have  objected  to  the  use  of  the  word,  because  it  is  one  of  the 
titles  of  the  god  Siva. — Dubois. 


A  FALSE  ACCUSATION  203 

that  I  would  not  defile  the  house  by  spitting  in  it.  I  did 
my  best  to  calm  his  fears,  assuring  him  that  he  had  no 
reason  to  fear  my  transgressing  any  of  the  strict  rules  of 
Hindu  custom.  Despite  my  assurances,  however,  I  noticed 
that  he  charged  one  of  his  sons  to  keep  watch  over  me. 
Another  spy  was  charged  with  observing  the  conduct  of 
my  servants.  At  sundown  one  of  these  latter  left  the 
village  to  answer  a  call  of  nature.  Hardly  had  he  returned 
when  the  person  watching  my  servants,  having  seen  him 
in  the  distance,  ran  to  tell  his  master  that  his  house  had 
been  polluted,  that  he  had  admitted  into  it  people  of  low 
habits,  for  had  he  not  seen  with  his  own  eyes  one  of  my 
servants  return  from  answering  a  call  of  nature  without 
having  washed  himself  and  enter  the  house  in  this  horrible 
state  of  defilement  1  On  this  my  host  rose  in  great  wrath, 
and  with  gestures  and  looks  of  anger  repeated  to  me  what 
he  had  been  told,  ending  by  exclaiming  :  '  Is  any  sin  equal 
to  this  !  Behold  the  kind  of  gratitude  which  I  ought  to 
have  foreseen  in  offering  you  hospitality.  I  had  a  pre- 
sentiment that  my  good- nature  would  bring  me  trouble. 
To  do  such  a  thing  without  washing  afterwards  !  What 
a  crime  !  What  a  scandal  !  What  an  infamy  !  What 
shame  for  my  house  !  .  .  .  You  must  punish  severely  the 
low  person  who  has  so  horribly  defiled  my  house.  You 
shall  pay  me  all  the  cost  of  purification  !  And  depart, 
quit  my  house  at  once  !  ' 

I  let  him  vent  his  choler  without  interrupting  him,  and 
when  he  had  ceased  I  answered  him  calmly  that,  if  his 
complaints  were  well  founded,  reparation  should  be  made 
him.  But  first  of  all  he  must  prove  that  the  offence  had 
really  been  committed.  My  servant  denied  it  strenuously, 
and  indignantly  demanded  on  his  own  part  that  his  accuser 
should  be  punished.  He  had,  he  asserted,  simply  stooped 
down  to  answer  a  call  of  nature  different  from  that  alleged. 
His  accuser  nevertheless  stuck  to  his  assertion  with  horrible 
oaths.  The  Brahmin,  believing  him  rather  than  my  ser- 
vant, insisted  on  my  leaving  the  house.  Thereupon,  in 
a  firm  tone,  I  declared  that  I  would  neither  punish  my 
servant  nor  pay  compensation  for  an  injury  which  had  not 
been  proved.  As  to  the  order  which  he  had  given  that 
I  should  leave  his  house,  it  was,  I  told  him,  an  unreason- 


204  A  MIDNIGHT  FLIGHT 

able  violation  of  the  laws  of  hospitality.  1  was  ready  to 
obey  it,  seeing  that  he  was  master  of  his  own  house,  but  he 
was  also  headman  of  the  village,  and  he  was  therefore 
bound  to  find  me  another  lodging  for  the  night. 

The  Brahmin  went  out  repeating  his  complaints  for  the 
hundredth  time.  Shortly  afterwards  he  returned  with  a 
number  of  the  villagers,  who  were  even  louder  than  him- 
self in  their  protestations.  They  demanded  that  my  servant 
should  be  delivered  up  to  them  for  severe  punishment,  and 
that  I  should  pay  compensation,  repeatedly  exclaiming  : 
'  What  shame  !     What  wickedness  !     Wliat  abomination  !  ' 

My  servant,  fearing  the  consequences  that  might  ensue, 
racked  his  brains  for  some  way  of  proving  his  innocence. 
At  last  he  found  one  which  would  have  been  conclusive 
before  less  prejudiced  judges.  '  If  I  am  guilty  of  what 
you  say,'  he  exclaimed,  '  let  two  of  you  come  away  with 
me  and  examine  my  person.'  The  Brahmin,  anxious  to 
prove  him  guilty,  refused  on  unreasonable  grounds  to  sanc- 
tion such  an  unanswerable  argument.  Finally,  after  a  long 
and  useless  discussion,  we  decided  to  adjourn  the  dispute 
until  the  morning.  I  left  the  Brahmin's  house,  and  went 
and  lodged,  together  with  my  people,  in  a  cowshed  outside 
the  village,  in  which  I  was  allowed  as  a  great  favour  to 
pass  the  night.  My  people,  even  more  alarmed  than 
myself,  left  the  cowshed  to  see  what  was  happening  in 
the  village,  and  came  and  reported  to  me  that  a  great 
disturbance  was  taking  place  :  that  everybody  was  talking 
about  the  incident  ;  that  everywhere  punishment  and  com- 
pensation were  demanded,  and  that  if  we  stayed  there  until 
the  morning  my  servant  would  run  the  risk  of  being  severely 
beaten.  To  save  myself  such  a  vexation  I  was  quite  ready 
to  sacrifice  a  few  rupees,  though  I  would  never  have  con- 
sented to  have  my  poor  servant  exposed  to  maltreatment 
for  such  an  offence,  whether  guilty  or  not.  Consequently 
I  thought  the  most  prudent  thing  to  do  was  to  flee.  At 
one  o'clock  at  night,  when  the  cowherd  was  sleeping  peace- 
fully in  a  corner  of  the  shed,  we  left  quietly.  I  mounted 
my  horse  and  we  decamped  in  all  haste.  Before  sunrise 
we  had  passed  the  borders  of  the  district  where  this  un- 
fortunate occurrence  took  place,  and  were  therefore  out 
of  danger. 


205 


CHAPTER  VI 

Marriage  amongst  Brahmins  and  other  Hindus.— Celibacy. — Those  who 
may  remain  unmarried.— Polygamy  tolerated  only  amongst  the 
Upper  Classes.— The  two  Sexes  nearly  equal  in  numbers.— Indis- 
solubility of  the  Marriage  Tie.— How  Marriages  are  arranged.— 
Preparatory  Ceremonies. — Solemn  Ceremonies  for  the  first  and 
following  Days. — Marriage  amongst  Sudras. — Marriage  amongst 
Kshatriyas.— Duties  after  Marriage. 

To  a  Hindu  marriage  is  the  most  important  and  most 
engrossing  event  of  his  life  ;  it  is  a  subject  of  endless 
conversation  and  of  the  most  prolonged  preparations.  An 
unmarried  man  is  looked  upon  as  having  no  social  status 
and  as  being  an  almost  useless  member  of  society.  He  is 
not  consulted  on  any  important  subject,  and  no  work  of 
any  consequence  may  be  given  to  him.  A  Hindu  who 
becomes  a  widower  finds  himself  in  almost  the  same  position 
as  a  bachelor,  and  speedily  remarries. 

Though  marriage  is  considered  the  natural  state  for  the 
generality  of  men,  those  who  from  pious  motives  remain 
unmarried  are  looked  up  to  and  treated  with  the  utmost 
respect.  But  it  is  only  those  persons  who  have  renounced 
the  world,  and  have  chosen  to  lead  a  life  of  contemplation, 
who  can  take  vows  of  celibacy.  In  any  other  case  marriage 
is  the  rule,  and  every  one  is  under  the  obligation  of  dis- 
charging the  great  debt  to  his  ancestors,  namely,  that  of 
begetting  a  son  \  No  doubt  it  will  be  asked  whether  the 
Hindu  devotees  who  take  vows  of  celibacy  do  really  remain 
as  chaste  as  they  are  supposed  to  be.  I  should  say  without 
hesitation,  No.  Many  have  concubines  under  various  pre- 
texts, and  many  give  themselves  up  in  secret  to  vices 
which  would  disgust  the  most  shameless  libertine.  Amongst 
this  latter  class  are  the  greater  number  of  the  gurus  and 
sannyasis,  who  wander  about  the  country  and  live  on  the 
credulity  of  the  public.  Others  shut  themselves  up  in 
seclusion  and  lead  idle  and  easy-going  lives,  their  sole 
occupation  being  to  receive  the  abundant  offerings  flowing 
in  from  the  ignorant  and  foolish  who  believe  in  the  false 

1  The  Sanskrit  word  for  son,  putra,  means  literally,  '  one  who  saves 
from  put  or  hell ' — the  hell  into  which  parents  without  sons  fall. — Ed. 


200  RELIGIOUS  CELIBATES 

reputation  for  holiness  which  such  people  have  acquired. 
But  persons  of  sense  are  not  taken  in  by  their  hypocrisy, 
and  it  is  fairly  notorious  that  these  knaves,  in  the  seclusion 
of  their  retreats,  give  themselves  up  to  the  grossest  im- 
moralities. 

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  I  am  accusing 
all  unmarried  Hindus  without  exception  of  leading  dissolute 
lives.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  been  credibly  informed  by 
those  whose  word  may  be  relied  on,  and  who  know  what 
they  are  talking  about,  that  some  few  may  be  found  who 
deny  themselves  all  intercourse  with  women  ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  one  is  led  to  believe  that  they  allow  themselves 
other  infamous  pleasures  of  such  an  abominable  character 
that  delicacy  forbids  one  to  accept  the  accusation  except 
under  strong  proof ;  so  I  prefer  to  think  that  there  are  a 
few  unmarried  Hindus  who  are  able  to  resist  all  sensual 
pleasures. 

And  why,  after  all,  should  one  refuse  to  believe  that 
some  of  these  sannyasis  or  penitents  are  able  to  exercise 
such  self-control,  however  difficult  it  may  be  to  subdue 
one's  passions  in  a  country  where  the  warm  climate  and 
the  corrupt  state  of  morality  continually  serve  to  arouse 
them  '  ?  Do  not  these  men,  either  from  ostentation  or 
from  fanaticism,  subject  their  bodies  to  the  most  cruel 
ordeals  ?  And  the  harsh,  self-inflicted  tapasas,  or  penances, 
do  they  not  prove,  as  far  as  one  can  see,  their  wish  and 
intention  to  subdue  their  sinful  lusts  ?  All  the  same,  in 
spite  of  their  hypocritical  affectations  of  piety,  the  greater 
number  of  these  sannyasis  are  looked  upon  as  utter  im- 
postors, and  that  by  the  most  enlightened  of  their  fellow- 
countrymen. 

But  this  privilege  which  men  possess  of  remaining  single, 
and  giving  themselves  up  to  a  life  of  contemplation,  is  not 
shared  by  women,  They  at  all  events  cannot,  under  any 
circumstances,   take  vows  of  celibacy.     Subjected  on  all 

1  Montesquieu  says  that  our  natural  human  tendency  is  to  prefer  in 
the  cause  of  religion  anything  that  presupposes  effort.  So  in  the  matter 
of  morality,  we  incline  theoretically  to  anything  that  bears  the  impress 
of  asceticism.  Celibacy,  for  instance,  has  taken  the  greatest  hold  on 
those  to  whom  it  seems  most  unsuited,  and  on  whom  it  might  have  the 
most  disastrous  results  (Esprit  des  Lois,  xxv.  4). — Abbe  Dubois. 


POLYGAMY  UOTJSUAL  207 

sides  to  the  moral  ascendency  of  man,  the  very  idea  that 
they  could  possibly  place  themselves  in  a  state  of  indepen- 
dence and  out  of  men's  power  is  not  allowed  to  cross  their 
minds.  The  opinion  is  firmly  established  throughout  the 
whole  of  India,  that  women  were  only  created  for  the 
propagation  of  the  species,  and  to  satisfy  men's  desires. 
All  women  therefore  are  obliged  to  marry,  and  marriages 
are  carefully  arranged  before  they  arrive  at  a  marriage- 
able age.  If  by  that  time  they  have  not  found  a  husband, 
they  very  rarely  keep  their  innocence  much  longer.  Ex- 
perience has  taught  that  young  Hindu  women  do  not 
possess  sufficient  firmness,  and  sufficient  regard  for  their 
own  honour,  to  resist  the  ardent  solicitations  of  a  seducer. 
Therefore  measures  cannot  be  taken  too  early  to  place  them 
intact  in  their  husbands'  hands.  Those  who  are  unable 
to  enter  into  any  lawful  union  form  a  connexion  as  con- 
cubines with  any  man  who  cares  to  receive  them  as  such. 

Polygamy  is  tolerated  amongst  persons  of  high  rank, 
such  as  rajahs,  princes,  statesmen,  and  others.  Kings  are 
allowed  five  legitimate  wives,  but  never  more.  None  the 
less  this  plurality  of  wives  amongst  the  great  is  looked 
upon  as  an  infraction  of  law  and  custom,  in  fact,  as  an 
abuse.  But  in  every  country  in  the  world  those  in  power 
have  always  been  able  to  twist  the  law  in  their  own  favour, 
however  definitely  it  may  be  laid  down.  The  principal 
Hindu  gods  had  only  one  wife.  Brahma  had  only  Saras- 
vati ;  Vishnu,  Lakshmi ;  and  Siva,  Parvati.  It  is  quite 
true  that  under  their  different  forms  these  venerable  per- 
sonages committed  frequent  breaches  of  their  marriage 
vow  ;  but  this  only  serves  to  prove  that  from  the  earliest 
times  marriage  was  looked  upon  by  the  Hindus  as  a  legal 
union  between  two  persons  of  opposite  sexes. 

If  in  the  present  day  any  person  of  inferior  rank  cohabits 
with  several  women,  one  only  of  them  bears  the  name  and 
title  of  wife;  the  others  are  merely  concubines.  In  several 
castes  the  children  of  the  latter  are  illegitimate,  and  if  the 
father  dies  without  having  previously  settled  some  of  his 
property  upon  them,  they  have  no  share  when  it  comes  to 
be  divided.  I  only  know  of  one  case  in  which  a  man  can 
legally  marry  a  second  wife,  his  first  being  still  alive  ; 
and  that  is  when,  after  he  has  lived  for  a  long  time  witli 


208  ALLEGED  EXCESS  OF  FEMALES 

his  wife,  she  is  certified  to  be  barren,  or  if  she  has  only 
borne  female  children ;  for  in  the  latter  case  the  debt  to 
one's  ancestors — that  is  to  say,  the  birth  of  a  son — is  con- 
sidered to  have  been  imperfectly  paid.  But  even  in  this 
case,  before  a  man  contracts  a  second  marriage  it  is  neces- 
sary that  he  should  obtain  the  consent  of  the  first ;  and 
she  is  always  regarded  as  the  chief  wife  and  retains  all  her 
prerogatives. 

It  may  be  remembered  that  for  the  same  reason  Abraham 
took  Hagar  to  be  his  wife  during  the  lifetime  and  with  the 
consent  of  Sarah,  his  lawful  wife.  One  may  also  remember 
what  dissensions  arose  in  the  family  of  the  holy  patriarch 
as  the  result  of  this  marriage  with  two  women.  It  is 
exactly  the  same  in  Hindu  families  where  there  are  two 
legal  wives.  Consequently  the  majority  of  Hindu  husbands 
prefer,  under  such  circumstances,  to  give  up  the  hope  of 
having  a  son,  rather  than  be  subjected  to  the  numberless 
troubles  which  are  the  invariable  result  of  the  remedy 
permitted  by  law. 

Some  modern  writers  have  hazarded  the  theory  that  in 
hot  countries  the  number  of  women  greatly  exceeds  that  of 
men.  It  is  Bruce,  I  think,  who  first  advanced  this  opinion 
in  his  account  of  his  travels  in  Arabia  and  Abyssinia. 
Even  before  my  own  experience  had  led  me  to  a  totally 
different  conclusion  on  this  point,  it  had  always  appeared  to 
me  that  his  deductions  were  wrong,  or  at  any  rate  doubtful. 
If  my  memory  does  not  deceive  me,  this  author  tried  to 
prove  the  numerical  excess  of  the  female  sex  from  the  fact 
that  in  the  families  of  some  Arab  princes,  amongst  a  large 
number  of  children  hardly  one-sixth  were  males  ;  and  from 
this  particular  instance  he  drew  a  general  conclusion.  It 
is  evident  that  the  calculation  is  fundamentally  wrong. 
To  obtain  a  sound  basis  on  which  to  found  such  a  conclu- 
sion, a  census  must  be  taken  of  a  large  number  of  families 
of  all  classes,  and  upon  that  alone  can  such  a  rule  of  pro- 
portion be  drawn.  The  proportion  of  births  in  the  harems 
of  a  few  Eastern  princes,  with  many  wives,  cannot  furnish 
any  standard  from  which  to  determine  what  takes  place 
amongst  the  people  themselves,  where  conjugal  union  is 
restricted  to  what  it  ought  to  be  according  to  the  laws  of 
healthy  morality  and  true  civilization. 


A  DOUBTFUL  HYPOTHESIS  209 

Some  sceptics,  however,  turning  this  pretended  discovery 
of  Bruce  to  account,  have  drawn  from  it  what  they  consider 
an  incontrovertible  argument  to  prove  that  religion  is 
merely  a  question  of  geography,  and  that  Christianity 
cannot  be  suitable  for  all  countries  and  all  nations  ;  for 
marriage  being  the  natural  state  of  all  human  beings, 
a  religion  that  forbids  polygamy  would  in  hot  countries 
reduce  more  than  half  of  one  sex  to  a  state  of  enforced 
celibacy.  But  supposing  the  hypothesis  on  which  this 
objection  to  the  universality  of  Christianity  is  based  to 
be  as  true  as  I  believe  it  to  be  false,  it  seems  to  me  that 
it  would  prove  the  existence  of  little  or  nothing  contrary 
to  Divine  Providence,  who  in  giving  us  the  inestimable 
benefit  of  divine  revelation,  as  manifested  by  the  teaching 
of  an  Incarnate  God,  appears  to  have  designed  that  this 
precious  gift  of  Christianity  should  be  shared  by  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  terrestrial  globe.  It  seems  to  me  that, 
for  this  objection  to  have  any  weight,  it  is  necessary  to 
prove  that  amongst  the  whole  of  the  human  race,  taken 
collectively,  there  is  a  much  larger  number  of  the  female 
than  of  the  male  sex  ;  for  it  is  upon  the  whole  human  race, 
taken  collectively,  that  the  Creator  looks  as  on  one  large 
family.  In  each  individual  member  of  this  family  He  sees 
only  the  being  created  in  His  own  image,  without  dis- 
tinction of  country,  colour,  language,  or  bodily  form  ;  and 
His  intention  was  that  all  men  should  form  one  common 
brotherhood,  united  by  all  the  ties  of  a  common  nature 
and  common  origin. 

At  the  same  time  I  have  reason  to  believe,  from  my 
own  personal  observation,  that  the  view  is  utterly  wrong 
which  holds  that  in  hot  climates  the  number  of  women  far 
exceeds  that  of  the  men.  For  many  years  I  exercised  my 
religious  calling  in  many  parts  of  the  Indian  Peninsula,  and 
I  paid  particular  attention  to  the  point  in  question.  From 
exact  registers  which  I  kept  of  all  baptisms,  it  may  be  seen 
that  I  yearly  administered  this  sacrament  to  two  or  three 
hundred  children  of  all  castes  ;  and  I  have  been  able  to 
prove  that  during  any  single  year  the  preponderance  in 
births  of  one  sex  over  the  other  never  exceeded  fifteen  to 
twenty-five,  and  that  it  was  sometimes  one  and  sometimes 
the  other  sex  which  predominated  within  these   narrow 


21()     THE  SEX1S  EQUALLY  PROPORTIONED 

limits.  These  registers,  which  extended  over  a  period  of 
more  than  twenty-five  years,  are  no  longer  within  my 
reach  ;  but  I  am  convinced  that  out  of  perhaps  G,000 
children  baptized  by  me,  one  sex  did  not  outnumber  the 
other  by  more  than  200.  Another  convincing  proof  that 
the  proportion  of  the  two  sexes  is  about  equal  in  India,  is 
furnished  by  the  Brahmins,  who  can  only  have  one  legiti- 
mate wife,  and  for  whom  marriage  is  obligatory.  One 
hardly  ever  meets  with  a  woman  who  is  not,  or  has  not 
been,  married.  Blind,  dumb,  deaf,  or  lame,  all  find  hus- 
bands amongst  poor  Brahmins,  whose  low  fortunes  do  not 
allow  them  to  aspire  to  an  alliance  with  any  more  attractive 
spouse. 

It  may,  it  is  true,  be  retorted  that  amongst  Brahmins 
a  widow  cannot  remarry,  whereas  a  widower  may  at  once 
take  to  himself  another  wife.  The  consequence  is,  it  may 
be  urged,  that  the  women  of  this  caste  must  be  more 
numerous  than  the  men.  But  I  reply  that  the  age  at  which 
the  two  sexes  marry  compensates  for  this  difference.  Girls 
are  married  when  seven  or  even  five  years  old,  whilst  boys 
wait  till  they  are  sixteen,  twenty,  or  even  older.  I  am 
therefore  decidedly  of  opinion  that  in  hot  as  well  as  in 
temperate  climates  the  births  of  the  two  sexes  are  nearly 
equal  ;  and  that  polygamy  is  opposed  to  all  laws,  both 
natural  and  divine1. 

This  unnatural  custom  of  polygamy,  which  finds  a  place 
amongst  some  nations,  may  be  attributed  to  sinful  lust, 
to  abuse  of  the  power  of  the  strong  over  the  weak,  and  to 
the  dominion  of  the  one  sex  over  the  other.  It  is  evidently 
altogether  contrary  to  the  intention  of  the  Creator,  who, 
when  He  created  the  father  of  mankind,  gave  him  only 

1  According  to  the  Census  Report  of  1891,  to  every  1,000  males  there 
are  returned  only  958  females  ;  and  the  tables  show  that  there  are  in 
the  country  fewer  females  than  males  to  the  number  of,  speaking  roundly, 
6}  millions.  The  deficiency  is  greatest  in  the  Punjab,  N.W.  Provinces, 
and  Rajputana.  In  Bengal,  Madras,  and  Upper  Burma,  however, 
females  are  in  excess  to  the  extent  of  something  under  three-quarters 
of  a  million.  The  conclusion  arrived  at  with  regard  to  the  deficiency  of 
females  is  that  it  is  to  a  large  extent  due  to  deliberate  concealment  and 
deliberate  omission  from  the  Census  returns.  But  the  Report  remarks  : 
'  The  subject  of  sex  is  a  very  intricate  one,  and  the  more  one  studies  it 
the  less  inclined  is  a  cautious  statist  to  adopt  any  single  explanation.' 
The  Report  examines  the  whole  question  at  considerable  length. — Ed. 


THE  MARRIAGE  TIE  INDISSOLUBLE        211 

one  woman  to  wife,  and  indeed  ordained  that  man  and  his 
one  companion  should  form  but  one  flesh  \ 

A  celebrated  statesman  of  the  last  century  (Burke), 
speaking  on  this  subject  from  a  political  point  of  view,  said 
that  the  Christian  religion,  by  bringing  marriage  back  to 
its  primitive  and  only  legitimate  state,  had  contributed 
more  by  that  alone  to  the  general  peace,  happiness,  stability, 
and  civilization  of  the  human  race,  than  it  would  have  been 
possible  for  it  to  do  in  any  other  department  of  divine 
providence. 

The  indissolubility  of  the  marriage  tie  is  also  an  essential 
principle  which  it  seems  to  me  is  not  less  firmly  established 
amongst  the  Hindus  than  that  which  limits  this  important 
act  to  the  legal  union  of  one  man  with  one  woman.  A 
Hindu  can  only  put  away  his  legitimate  wife  for  one  cause, 
and  that  is  adultery.  If  this  rule  is  violated,  it  is  only 
among  the  most  degraded  of  the  lower  castes.  A  marriage 
can  also  be  annulled  if  it  has  been  contracted  in  violation 
of  the  prohibitory  degrees  which  are  laid  down  by  custom, 
and  which  of  themselves  are  sufficient  to  nullify  the  union. 

I  have  never  yet  heard  of  a  divorce  being  permitted  on 
account  of  incompatibility  of  temper,  nor  have  I  ever 
heard  of  a  man  being  allowed  to  put  away  his  wife,  how- 
ever vicious  she  might  be,  simply  in  order  to  marry  another 
woman.  Hindus,  as  I  shall  presently  show,  put  too  serious 
a  value  on  this  solemn  contract  to  allow  it  to  be  thus 
degraded  to  a  state  which  would  be  nothing  more  or  less 
than  concubinage.  A  Hindu,  and  especially  a  Brahmin, 
would  hardly  be  inclined  to  repudiate  his  wife  even  for 
adultery,  unless  her  guilt  were  very  notorious.  As  a  general 
rule,  when  the  wife  of  a  Brahmin  gives  occasion,  by  in- 
judicious behaviour,  for  remarks  of  a  kind  damaging  to 
her  character,  her  friends  and  relatives  do  their  utmost 
to  excuse  her  conduct  and  to  hush  up  all  scandal  about 
her,  so  as  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  such  an  extreme  measure 
as  a  divorce,  the  disgrace  of  which  would  reflect  on  the 
whole  caste. 

I  will  now  give  a  detailed  account  of  the  principal  cere- 
monies which  take  place  both  before  and  at  the  time  of 
a  wedding. 

1  Genesis  ii.  24. 


212  INFANT  MARRIAGES 

A  young  Brahmin  should,  ordinarily  speaking,  be  married 
when  he  is  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  but  the  ceremony  is 
often  postponed  till  he  is  older  than  this.  The  wife  chosen 
for  him  is  generally  five,  seven,  or  at  the  utmost  nine 
years  old  \ 

This  custom  of  marrying  girls  in  their  early  childhood, 
and  as  soon  as  possible,  though  common  to  all  castes,  is 
most  strictly  observed  by  the  Brahmins.  When  once  a 
girl  has  passed  the  marriageable  age,  it  is  very  difficult 
for  her  to  find  a  husband.  In  this  caste  there  is  often  an 
enormous  difference  in  age  between  the  husband  and  the 
wife.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  see  an  old  man  of  sixty 
or  more,  having  lost  his  first  wife,  marry  for  the  second 
time  a  little  child  five  or  six  years  old,  and  even  prefer 
her  to  girls  of  mature  age.  What  is  the  result  of  this  ? 
The  husband  generally  dies  long  before  his  wife,  and  often 
even  before  she  has  attained  the  age  which  would  allow 
him  to  exercise  his  rights  as  a  husband.  So  the  poor  girl 
becomes  a  widow  before  she  has  even  become  a  wife,  and 
as  by  the  custom  of  her  caste  she  may  not  marry  again, 
she  is  oftentimes  tempted  to  lead  a  dissolute  life,  thereby 
reflecting  discredit  on  the  whole  caste.  Everybody  recog- 
nizes these  abuses,  but  the  idea  of  remedying  them,  by 
allowing  a  young  widow  to  break  through  the  stern  rule 
of  custom  and  marry  again,  would  never  even  enter  the 
head  of  a  Hindu,  more  especially  of  a  Brahmin  2.  It  is 
true  that  the  strange  preference  which  Brahmins  have  for 
children  of  very  tender  years  would  make  such  a  permis- 
sion almost  nominal  in  the  case  of  their  widows  3. 

1  The  Jews  also  married  their  children  at  an  early  age.  A  youth 
who  was  not  married  before  he  was  eighteen  was  considered  by  them 
to  be  sinning  against  the  command  of  the  Creator,  which  says  :  '  In- 
crease and  multiply.'  He  was  free  to  marry  as  soon  as  he  had  attained 
the  age  of  thirteen.  Their  daughters  were  betrothed  in  childhood,  and 
were  married  as  soon  as  they  had  arrived  at  a  suitable  age,  which  was 
usually  fixed  by  them  at  twelve. — Dubois. 

-  Hindu  social  reformers  are  now  agitating  for  virgin-widow  re- 
marriages, and  in  a  few  instances  such  marriages  have  been  brought 
about. — Ed. 

3  Amongst  the  Jews  it  was  permissible  for  widows  to  marry  again  ;  but 
those  who  voluntarily,  out  of  respect  and  affection  for  their  dead  husbands, 
refrained  from  marrying  again,  were  looked  up  to  with  very  great  respect. 
— Dubois. 


SERVINC4  TIME  FOR  A  WIFE  213 

The  expenses  of  a  wedding  are  so  considerable  that  in 
all  castes  one  often  sees  young  men,  who  are  without  the 
necessary  means,  using  the  same  expedient  to  procure  a 
wife  that  Jacob  employed  with  Laban.  Just  like  the  holy 
patriarch  a  Hindu  without  means  will  enter  the  service  of 
one  of  his  relations,  or  of  some  other  person  of  the  same 
caste  who  has  daughters  to  marry,  and  will  engage  himself 
to  serve  for  a  certain  number  of  years  without  wage,  on 
condition  that,  at  the  end  of  that  time,  he  is  to  receive 
one  of  the  daughters  in  marriage.  When  the  time  agreed 
upon  has  expired  the  father  fulfils  his  promise,  undertakes 
the  whole  expense  of  the  marriage,  and  then  allows  the 
young  couple  to  go  away  and  live  where  they  please.  At 
their  departure  he  gives  them  a  cow,  a  pair  of  oxen,  two 
copper  vessels  (one  for  drinking,  the  other  for  their  food), 
and  enough  rice  to  feed  them  for  the  first  year  of  their 
married  life.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  in  India  the  term 
which  a  man  has  to  serve  for  his  wife  is  the  same  as  that 
for  which  Jacob  bound  himself  to  Laban,  namely  seven 
years  (Genesis  xxix.  20)  1. 

The  inclinations  of  the  persons  about  to  be  married  are 
never  consulted.  In  fact,  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  do  so 
amongst  the  Brahmins,  seeing  the  age  at  which  they  marry 
their  daughters.  But  even  the  Sudras,  who  often  do  not 
marry  their, daughters  until  they  have  attained  full  age, 
would  never  dream  of  consulting  the  tastes  and  feelings  of 
their  children  under  these  circumstances.  The  choice  is 
left  entirely  to  the  parents.  That  which  chiefly  con- 
cerns the  young  man's  family  is  the  purity  of  the  caste 
of  his  future  wife.  Beauty  and  personal  attractions  of 
any  kind  count  for  nothing  in  their  eyes.  The  girl's 
parents  look  more  particularly  to  the  fortune  of  their 
future  son-in-law,  and  to  the  character  of  his  mother,  who 
after  the  marriage  becomes  the  absolute  mistress  of  the 
young  wife  2. 

The  same  months  are  chosen  for  a  wedding  as  are  selected 
for  the  ceremony  of  the  uyanayana,  that  is  to  say,  the 

1  No  such  custom  exists  now. — Ed. 

2  A  Sanskrit  verse,  commonly  quoted,  says  :  '  The  girl  courts  beauty  ; 
the  mother,  riches  ;  the  father,  knowledge  ;  relatives,  good  lineage  ; 
other  people,  sumptuous  marriage-feasts.' — Ed. 


2H    ARRANGING  MARRIAGE  PRELIMINARIES 

months  of  March,  April,  May,  and  June,  and  especially  the 
two  last l. 

However,  it  is  possible  in  a  case  of  urgency  for  a  marriage 
to  take  place  in  November  or  February.  But  in  both 
these  months  there  are  so  many  precautions  to  be  observed, 
so  many  calculations  to  be  made  according  to  the  signs  of 
the  Zodiac,  the  phase  of  the  moon,  and  other  ridiculous 
follies,  that  it  is  far  from  easy  to  find  a  day  on  which  all 
the  auspices  are  propitious. 

There  are  four  different  ways  of  arranging  the  prelimi- 
naries of  a  marriage.  The  first,  the  most  honoured  and 
respected  of  all,  is  for  the  father  of  the  bride  not  only  to 
refuse  to  receive  the  sum  of  money  to  which  he  is  entitled 
from  the  young  man's  parents,  but  to  undertake  to  bear 
all  the  expenses  of  the  ceremony,  to  purchase  all  the  jewels 
and  other  ornaments  which  it  is  customary  to  give  a  girl 
on  this  occasion,  and  also  to  make  handsome  presents  to 
the  son-in-law  and  his  parents.  But  this  can  only  be  done 
by  the  rich  and  people  of  high  position. 

The  second  way  is  for  the  parents  of  both  the  contract- 
ing parties  to  agree  to  share  all  the  expenses.  The  third 
method  is  that  usually  adopted  by  people  of  all  castes  who 
are  not  rich.  The  parents  of  the  girl  insist  not  only  on  the 
youth's  parents  bearing  all  the  expenses  of  the  wedding 
and  of  the  jewels,  but  they  also  exact  payment  of  a  sum 
of  money  in  return  for  their  daughter,  the  amount  of  which 
is  laid  down  by  caste  custom.  This  method  is  the  commonest 
of  all ;  for  to  marry  and  to  buy  a  wife  are  synonymous 
expressions  in  India.  Most  parents  make  a  regular  traffic 
of  their  daughters.  The  wife  is  never  given  up  to  her 
husband  until  he  has  paid  the  whole  of  the  sum  agreed 
upon  2.     This  custom  is  an  endless  source  of  quarrels  and 

1  It  is  probable  that  the  original  reason  why  the  Hindus  selected  these 
four  months  as  the  most  auspicious  for  marriages,  is  that  during  these 
months  all  agricultural  work  is  either  finished  or  suspended  on  account 
of  the  great  heat,and  also  because  thecrops,  which  have  just  been  gathered 
in,  help  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  wedding. — Dubois. 

2  It  was  the  custom  also  among  the  Jews  for  the  husband  to  give  the 
wife  her  dower.  Genesis  xxxiv.  8,  9,  &c,  xxxi.  15  ;  1  Samuel  xviii.  2o  ; 
liusea  iii.  2. — Dubois. 

This  is  not  true  in  the  majority  of  instances,  though  there  may  be 
extreme  cases  of  the  kind.     The  following  words  were  uttered  recently 


PAYMENT  TO  A  FATHER-IN-LAW  215 

disputes.  If  a  poor  man,  after  the  marriage  has  taken 
place,  cannot  pay  the  stipulated  amount,  his  father-in-law 
sues  him  for  it,  and  takes  his  daughter  away  hoping  that 
the  desire  to  have  her  back  again  will  induce  the  man  to 
find  the  money.  Sometimes  this  succeeds,  but  it  pretty 
often  happens  that  the  son-in-law,  being  always  unable  to 
pay  the  debt,  leaves  his  wife  for  years  as  a  pledge  with  his 
father-in-law,  and  at  last  the  latter,  convinced  that  by  this 
means  he  will  get  nothing,  and  fearing  lest  his  daughter 
should  succumb  to  the  temptations  to  which  her  youth 
exposes  her,  withdraws  his  demands.  A  compromise  is 
effected  and  the  husband  at  length  regains  his  wife  l. 

The  fourth  method,  to  which  none  but  the  very  poorest 
have  recourse,  is  very  mortifying  to  the  girl's  parents,  for 
they  go  themselves  and  hand  her  over  to  the  tender  mercies 
of  the  young  man's  parents,  leaving  it  to  them  to  do  what 
they  will  with  her,  to  marry  her  when  and  how  they  like, 
to  spend  as  little  or  as  much  as  they  choose  on  the  wedding, 
and  begging  them  at  the  same  time  to  pay  them  something 
for  their  daughter. 

As  soon  as  the  parents  have  discovered  a  suitable  girl, 
and  have  ascertained  if  the  family  are  likely  to  assent, 
they  choose  a  day  when  all  the  auguries  are  favourable, 
and  go  to  formally  ask  for  her.  They  provide  themselves 
with  a  new  cloth,  such  as  is  worn  by  women,  a  cocoanut, 

by  one  of  the  speakers  at  an  annual  conference  of  the  Kistna  District 
Association  :  '  Gentlemen  !  The  monstrous  custom  of  selling  girls  needs 
no  words  of  mine  to  make  you  try  to  root  it  out  from  our  society.  I  will 
give  you  one  particular  case  which  will  show  you  the  advisability  of 
taking  proper  steps  to  remove  the  evil.  A  certain  gentleman,  in  a  certain 
village,  married  his  daughter,  ten  years  old,  to  an  old  man  of  eighty-one, 
and  received  Rs.  2,000  for  the  bargain.  In  due  course  the  girl  matured, 
and  the  nuptial  ceremony  was  performed.  The  girl  was  sent  to  her 
hated  husband,  much  against  her  will.  She  escaped  from  the  room  in 
the  dead  of  night  and  threw  herself  into  a  well.  When  the  old  man 
awoke  in  the  morning  he  missed  his  young  wife,  and,  on  search  being 
made,  her  dead  body  was  found  floating  in  a  well.  There  are  several 
instances  of  this  sort.  In  some  cases,  if  the  ill-assorted  pair  be  seen 
together,  the  bride  will  appear  as  a  daughter,  or  even  a  grand-daughter. 
The  young  brides  become  widows  even  in  a  week  after  their  marriages. 
These  evils  are  too  apparent  to  me,  and  I  think  you  will  enthusiastically 
carry  this  resolution.' — Ed. 

1  I  do  not  believe  that  any  Hindu  father  of  respectability  would  take 
such  a  step. — Ed. 


216  RELIANCE  ON  OMENS 

five  bananas,  some  vermilion,  and  some  powdered  sandal- 
wood. While  on  the  way,  they  pay  great  attention  to  any 
omens  that  they  may  notice.  If  they  consider  them  to  be 
unfavourable  they  retrace  their  steps,  and  postpone  the 
business  till  another  day.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  a  snake 
cross  their  path,  or  a  cat,  or  a  jackal,  or  if  they  should 
happen  to  see  anything  that  is  regarded  as  an  evil  omen  ', 
they  decide  that  the  best  thing  to  do  is  to  return  to  their 
home. 

If  nothing  of  this  sort  has  disturbed  them  on  the  way, 
they  present  themselves  at  the  house  of  the  girl's  parents 
and  make  known  the  object  of  their  visit.  The  latter, 
before  giving  any  answer,  look  steadfastly  towards  the 
south,  and  wait  till  one  of  those  little  lizards  which  one 
sees  running  about  the  walls  of  a  house  has  uttered  a  certain 
sharp  cry,  such  as  these  reptiles  often  make.  Then  when 
the  Lizard  of  the  South  has  spoken,  the  parents  of  the  girl 
give  their  consent  to  the  marriage,  and  accept  the  present 
which  has  been  brought  by  the  other  parties. 

In  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  about  dusk,  they  call 
together  a  few  relatives  and  friends,  and  summon  a  purohita 
in  order  to  consult  him  about  the  marriage.  Whilst  the 
men,  seated  on  mats  or  carpets,  are  talking  together,  the 
women  purify  a  part  of  the  house  ;  that  is  to  say,  they 
rub  the  floor  well  with  cow-dung  mixed  with  water,  and 
then  draw  lines  of  red  and  white  upon  it.  As  soon  as  they 
have  finished,  they  bring  in  the  god  Vigneshwara,  to  whom 
they  do  puja,  and  for  neiveddya  they  offer  peas,  sugar, 
a  cocoanut,  and  a  sweet  beverage  called  paramanna.  All 
present  wrorship  this  god,  and  pray  him  to  remove  any 
obstacles  which  might  interfere  with  the  projected  marriage. 
If  during  this  ceremony  the  Lizard  of  the  South  again  utters 
his  cry  they  think  it  a  favourable  omen. 

After  this  ceremony,  the  purohita  fixes  on  a  lucky  day 
on  wrhich  to  begin  to  celebrate  the  marriage.     The  parents 

1  All  Hindus  are  full  of  these  superstitions.  No  matter  how  important 
the  business  may  be  that  they  are  about  to  undertake,  they  will  never 
hesitate  for  a  moment  to  put  it  off,  if  they  catch  sight  of  one  of  these 
objects  or  one  of  these  animals.  I  have  several  times  seen  labourers 
take  their  oxen  back  to  their  sheds,  and  remain  idle  all  day,  simply 
because  when  leaving  the  village  in  the  morning,  a  snake  had  crossed 
their  path. — Dubois. 


PROVIDING  WEDDING  ACCESSORIES       217 

of  the  girl  then  definitely  give  their  permission,  and  in 
token  of  their  promise  they  offer  betel  to  all  those  who  are 
present.  These  preliminaries  ended,  they  begin  to  think 
of  making  preparations  for  the  wedding.  Gold  and  silver 
ornaments  are  ordered  for  the  couple,  and  form  the  subject 
of  endless  discussion.  The  wedding  garments  are  also  got 
ready,  a  large  number  of  cloths,  such  as  are  worn  by  both 
men  and  women,  are  bought  to  be  given  away  as  presents 
to  relations  and  friends,  a  large  store  is  laid  in  of  rice, 
wheat  flour,  liquefied  butter,  oil  of  sesamum,  peas  of  all 
kinds,  dried  and  fresh  vegetables  \  fruits,  groceries,  pickles, 
and  in  fact  every  sort  of  edible  that  a  Brahmin  is  permitted 
to  use.  They  also  provide  saffron,  or  turmeric,  vermilion, 
antimony,  sandalwood  powder,  incense,  quantities  of  flowers, 
akshatas,  or  coloured  rice,  betel,  areca-nut,  &c,  &c.  ;  also 
a  great  quantity  of  small  silver  and  copper  coins.  Further, 
they  buy  new  baskets,  and  above  all,  plenty  of  new  earthen 
vessels  of  all  shapes  and  kinds  ;  for  these  vessels  may 
never  be  used  a  second  time,  and  are  immediately  broken 
after  being  once  used,  no  matter  to  what  purpose  they 
have  been  put. 

When  everything  is  ready,  they  begin  to  put  up  a  pandal 
or  canopy.  The  god  Vigneshwara  is  carried  into  it,  and 
to  him  they  do  puja,  entreating  him  to  ward  off  any  hind- 
rance or  misfortune  which  might  happen  during  the  celebra- 
tion of  the  marriage. 

The  purohita  who  presides  at  the  ceremony  must  be  one 
of  the  first  to  take  up  his  place  under  the  pandal ;  he 
must  be  provided  with  some  darbha  grass,  small  pieces  of 
wood  from  the  seven  sacred  trees,  and  a  few  other  indis- 
pensable objects  for  the  sacrifices  he  is  about  to  offer  up. 

In  the  first  place,  due  honour  is  paid  to  the  household 
gods.  To  this  end  all  the  Brahmins  present,  both  men 
and  women,  anoint  their  heads  with  oil  of  sesamum,  and 
then  bathe.  The  women,  after  preparing  the  various 
dishes  for  the  feast,  take  a  portion  from  each,  which  they 

1  Amongst  the  many  kinds  of  vegetables  which  Brahmins  cat,  there 
are  three  which  are  considered  particularly  choice ;  these  are  a  species 
of  small  round  pea,  the  katri  kai  (the  bdingela  of  the  Portuguese,  a  sort 
of  brinjal  or  egg-plant),  and  pumpkins.  Among  fruits  they  also  have 
a  preference  for  three — bananas,  mangoes,  and  jack-fruit. — DUBOIS. 


218  RITES  ON  FIRST  THREE  DAYS 

place  on  a  metal  dish,  and  proceed,  singing  songs  and  accom- 
panied by  all  the  guests,  to  offer  it  as  neiveddya  to  these 
gods,  having  first,  of  course,  done  puja  to  them.  They 
even  go  so  far  as  to  place  to  the  right  of  them  pickles,  to 
give  a  relish  to  their  rice,  while  on  their  left  they  place 
a  cup  full  of  the  sweet  drink  called  paramanna,  with  which 
to  quench  their  thirst.  The  master  of  the  house  then 
performs  the  sam-kalpa  and  offers  sandalwood,  akshatas, 
flowers,  and  lustral  water  to  his  guests,  who  ought,  when 
receiving  all  this,  to  think  of  the  household  gods,  in  whose 
honour  the  feast  immediately  following  is  spread,  great 
pains  having  been  taken  to  make  it  bountiful  and  magnifi- 
cent. Betel  is  distributed  at  the  termination  of  the  repast, 
after  which  the  guests  disperse. 

The  second  day,  nine  Brahmins  specially  chosen  for  the 
purpose  perform  the  sacrifice  of  homam  and  another  to 
fire,  in  honour  of  the  nine  planets,  as  at  the  ceremony  of 
the  upanayana.  Two  women  take  the  consecrated  fire 
and  carry  it,  singing  the  while,  to  the  centre  of  the  pandal, 
placing  it  on  the  raised  dais  of  earth.  Each  of  the  women 
then  receives  a  present  of  a  new  cloth,  and  a  little  bodice 
called  ravikai.  All  present  then  walk  round  the  brazier  of 
hot  coal  reciting  mantrams,  scattering  darbha  grass  and 
bowing  to  the  ground.  Presents  are  given  to  the  nine 
Brahmins  who  have  sacrificed  to  the  planets,  and,  as  usual, 
the  meeting  ends  with  a  feast. 

The  third  day  the  father  of  the  bridegroom,  having  made 
his  ablutions,  takes  some  akshatas  in  a  cup,  and  goes  out 
early  to  call  together  relatives  and  friends.  As  soon  as  all 
are  assembled  under  the  pandal,  a  pure  cloth  or  carpet  is 
spread  on  the  raised  earthen  dais,  and  the  future  husband 
and  wife  are  seated  thereon  facing  the  east.  The  married 
women  then  approach  them  and  rub  their  heads  with  oil, 
singing  the  while,  and  then  proceed  with  the  important 
ceremony  known  as  nalangu,  which  consists  in  smearing 
the  naked  parts  of  their  bodies  with  powdered  saffron,  and 
immediately  after  pouring  a  great  quantity  of  warm  water 
over  their  heads  \     The  women  never  cease  singing  the 

1  Xalangu  is  not  a  religious  ceremony.  The  powdered  saffron  is  mixed 
with  quicklime,  and  made  into  a  paste  which  is  red  in  colour.  It  is 
rubbed  only  on  the  feet. — Ed. 


INVOKING  THE  GODS  219 

whole  time,  and  are  accompanied  by  musical  instruments. 
After  the  nalangu  is  over  the  women  array  the  young  couple 
in  new  clothes,  as  has  already  been  described  in  the  chapter 
on  the  upanayana.  The  evening  of  the  same  day,  at  the 
moment  when  the  lamps  are  being  lighted,  the  guests 
return  to  assist  at  the  following  ceremony  : — The  married 
women,  singing  all  the  time,  take  a  wooden  cylinder  which 
they  cover  with  lime  and  then  paint  with  red  longitudinal 
stripes.  On  this  they  tie  small  twigs  of  the  mango-tree. 
They  next  sprinkle  a  great  quantity  of  powdered  saffron 
over  the  cylinder,  which  they  immediately  afterwards  dip 
into  a  new  earthen  vessel.  This  they  carry  with  much 
solemnity,  singing  the  while,  to  the  centre  of  the  pandal, 
where  they  offer  it  a  sacrifice  of  incense,  and  offer 
some  betel  for  neiveddya.  Every  person  present  makes 
a  profound  obeisance  to  the  vessel.  No  other  saffron 
but  what  is  thus  consecrated  is  used  during  the  whole 
ceremony. 

All  these  proceedings  are  merely  preparatory  to  the 
marriage  ceremony  itself,  which  lasts  for  five  days. 

The  first  day  is  called  muhurta,  that  is  to  say,  the  great 
day,  or  the  happy  and  auspicious  day.  It  is  on  this  day 
that  the  most  important  and  solemn  ceremonies  take  place. 
The  head  of  the  family  goes  out  early  to  invite  his  guests, 
while  the  women  busy  themselves  with  purifying  the  house 
and  the  pandal,  which  they  decorate  all  round  with  wreaths 
of  mango  leaves.  The  guests  having  arrived  stand  in  a  row, 
and  first  adorn  their  foreheads  with  akshatas  and  sandal- 
wood. They  next  anoint  their  heads  with  the  oil  of  sesa- 
mum  which  is  provided  for  them,  and  then  they  go  and 
perform  their  ablutions.  On  their  return  the  purohita  per- 
forms the  sam-kalpa  and  invokes  all  their  gods,  beginning 
with  Brahmaj  "Vishnu,  Rudra,  Devendra,  and  then  the 
twelve  Adityas,  the  eight  Vasus,  the  nine  Brahmas,  the 
eleven  Rudras,  the  Gandharvas,  the  Siddhas,  the  Saddhyas, 
the  Naradas,  the  seven  great  Penitents,  the  nine  planets  ; 
in  fact,  every  deity  whose  name  occurs"  to  his  memory. 
With  low  obeisance  he  invites  them  all  to  come  to  the 
marriage-feast,  makes  many  flattering  speeches  to  them, 
and  begs  them  to  remain  under  the  pandal,  and  to  preside 
over  the  ceremony  during  the  five  days  that  it  lasts. 


220  INVOKING  THE  ANCESTORS 

Then  conies  the  invocation  of  ancestors.  The  couple 
about  to  be  married  are  seated  on  the  earthen  dais  in  the 
centre  of  the  pandal,  having  on  each  side  of  them  their 
fathers  and  mothers,  all  with  their  faces  turned  towards 
the  east.  The  father  of  the  bride  rises,  places  the  pavitram 
amulet  on  the  ring-finger  of  his  right  hand,  performs 
the  sam-kalpa,  and  puts  a  certain  quantity  of  rice  in  a 
metal  dish,  and  on  this  rice  a  cocoanut  dyed  yellow,  three 
areca-nuts  in  their  shells,  and  five  others  without  their 
shells1. 

Then,  taking  one  of  the  nuts  in  one  hand  and  the  metal 
dish  in  the  other,  he  repeats  three  times  in  a  loud  voice 
the  names  of  his  father,  his  grandfather,  and  his  great- 
grandfather. Each  time  he  pronounces  their  names  he 
raps  the  copper  dish  three  times  with  the  areca-nut,  and 
at  last,  again  invoking  them  by  name,  he  says  :  '  O  my 
ancestors,  you  who  dwell  in  the  pitraloka  (or  paradise  of 
ancestors),  deign  to  come  to  this  pandal,  bringing  with  you 
all  the  other  ancestors  who  preceded  you.  Be  present, 
I  beseech  you,  during  the  five  days  of  this  marriage-feast, 
preside  at  the  festivity,  and  grant  to  it  a  happy  termina- 
tion !  '  He  then  gives  the  rice,  the  cocoanut,  and  the 
areca-nut  which  were  on  the  dish  to  the  purohita. 

This  done,  the  married  women  bring  some  fire  on  a  new 
earthen  chafing-dish,  and,  singing,  place  it  in  the  centre 
of  the  pandal.  The  purohita  then  consecrates  it  by  scatter- 
ing all  round  it  some  darbha  grass.  To  the  north  of  it  he 
places  some  small  pieces  of  the  sacred  fig-tree,  by  the  side 
of  which  are  placed  three  small  earthen  vessels  and  one  of 
copper.  The  first  contains  milk,  the  second  liquefied 
butter,  the  third  curds,  and  the  fourth  a  certain  quantity 
of  cooked  and  uncooked  rice  mixed  together.  To  the 
south  of  the  brazier  are  spread  nine  portions  of  rice  on 
a  large  banana  leaf.  These  are  tastefully  arranged  in 
squares,  each  portion  being  destined  for  one  of  the  nine 
planets.  Puja  is  done  to  each  of  these  nine  planets  in- 
dividually, and  offerings  of  bananas  and  betel  are  made  to 

1  These  various  objects  are  an  offering  which  he  makes  to  his  ancestors 
when  inviting  them  to  the  wedding.  It  is  always  considered  polite  to 
offer  a  present  to  any  distinguished  guest  whom  you  invite  to  any 
ceremony. — Dubois. 


THE  MUHURTA  CEREMONY       221 

them  as  neiveddya,  after  which  they  receive  the  same 
invitation  as  the  gods  and  the  ancestors. 

The  purohita  places  on  the  east  side  of  the  brazier  another 
banana  leaf,  on  which  he  spreads  darbha  grass  and  akshatas. 
This  is  an  offering  to  Brahma,  to  whom  is  presented  a 
neiveddya  of  raw  sugar  and  betel.  Then  follows  the  invoca- 
tion of  the  ashta-dik-palakas,  or  the  eight  divine  guardians 
of  the  eight  corners  of  the  world  ;  and  puja  is  offered  them 
on  the  same  banana  leaf.  Then  comes  the  inauguration 
of  the  ishta-devata  or  tutelary  deity,  and  the  deification  of 
the  five  little  pots  in  the  manner  that  has  already  been 
described  for  the  upanayana. 

These  ceremonies  ended,  the  father  of  the  girl  performs 
the  homam  in  honour  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Rudra,  of 
the  eight  gods  who  guard  the  eight  compass-points  of  the 
world,  of  the  eight  Vasus,  and  of  Indra,  taking  care  to 
mention  all  these  gods  by  name,  and  also  to  repeat  man- 
trams  suitable  to  the  occasion.  He  again  does  homam  to 
the  nine  planets,  makes  a  sacrifice  to  fire,  and  offers  the 
latter  some  liquefied  butter  as  neiveddya. 

A  new  earthen  chafing-dish  is  then  brought,  to  which 
they  fasten  a  piece  of  saffron  thread,  and  on  it  is  placed 
the  consecrated  fire.  Women  carry  this  fire  away  to  a 
place  apart,  singing,  of  course,  the  while.  Great  care  is 
taken  not  to  let  the  fire  go  out  till  the  end  of  the  festivity. 
It  would  be  considered  a  terribly  bad  omen  if,  through 
negligence  or  any  other  cause,  it  should  be  extinguished. 

Now  comes  the  muhurta,  that  is  to  say,  the  most  essential 
ceremony  of  the  marriage.  To  begin  with,  a  sacrifice  is 
offered  to  Vigneshwara.  The  bride  and  bridegroom  are 
seated  on  the  earthen  dais,  their  faces  towards  the  east, 
and  the  married  women  proceed,  singing  the  while,  with 
the  young  people's  toilette,  which  is  of  the  most  elegant 
and  sumptuous  description.  When  attired  the  bridegroom 
rises,  performs  the  sam-kalpa,  prays  to  the  gods  to  pardon 
all  the  sins  he  has  committed  since  he  received  the  triple 
cord  ;  and,  to  be  the  more  sure  of  this  pardon,  he  recites 
a  mantram,  and  gives  fifteen  fanams  to  a  Brahmin  as  alms. 
He  then  dresses  himself  up  as  a  pilgrim,  and  makes  all 
preparations  as  if  he  were  really  going  to  take  a  long 
journey,  announcing  that  he  is  going  to  start  on  a  holy 


222  THE  KAXKAXA  CEREMONY 

pilgrimage  to  Kasi,  that  is  Benares.  He  leaves  the  house 
accompanied  by  the  married  women  singing  in  chorus, and 
by  his  parents  and  friends,  and  preceded  by  instruments  of 
music.  After  passing  the  outskirts  of  the  village  he  turns 
his  steps  to  the  east. 

But  here  his  future  father-in-law  meets  him,  and  asks 
him  where  he  is  going,  and  on  learning  the  object  of  his 
journey,  begs  him  to  give  it  up.  He  tells  him  that  he  has 
a  young  virgin  daughter,  and  that  if  he  wishes  it  he  will 
give  her  to  him  in  wedlock.  The  pilgrim  accepts  the  pro- 
posal with  joy,  and  returns  with  his  escort  to  the  place 
whence  he  set  out.  On  his  return  the  women  perform  the 
ceremony  of  the  aratti. 

The  bride  and  bridegroom  having  again  taken  their 
places  on  the  dais,  and  the  sam-kalpa  having  been  per- 
formed, they  then  begin  the  important  ceremony  called 
kankana  \  For  this  purpose  they  obtain  two  pieces  of 
saffron  or  turmeric,  round  which  they  tie  a  double  thread. 
They  place  on  a  metal  dish  two  handfuls  of  rice,  and  on 
this  rice  a  cocoanut  painted  yellow,  and  on  the  cocoanut 
the  two  pieces  of  saffron.  Prayers  are  offered  to  all  the 
gods  collectively,  who  are  implored  to  come  and  place 
themselves  on  this  kankana,  and  to  remain  there  till  the 
five  days  of  the  marriage  ceremony  have  been  accomplished. 
The  bridegroom  then  takes  one  of  the  pieces  of  saffron  and 
ties  it  on  his  wife's  left  wrist,  who  in  her  turn  ties  the 
other  piece  on  his  right  wrist.  The  rice  and  cocoanut  on 
which  the  kankana  has  been  lying  are  then  given  to  the 
purohita. 

Then  follows  the  procession  of  the  tutelary  deity.  The 
mother  of  the  bride,  accompanied  by  the  other  women 
and  the  Brahmins  who  are  present,  go  and  fetch  the  copper 
vase  which  represents  the  ishta-devata.  The  women  begin 
to  sing  and  the  musicians  to  play,  and  forming  a  procession 
they  march  to  the  end  of  the  street,  where,  after  choosing 
a  clean  spot,  they  pour  out  some  of  the  water  contained  in 
the  vase.  They  do  puja  to  the  deity  while  it  rests  on  the 
ground,  and  then  it  is  taken  back  with  the  same  pomp  to 
the  place  whence  it  came.     Then  follows  the  most  important 

1  The  ceremony  is  actually  called  kankana-dharana,  that  is,  the  tying 
or  wearing  of  the  kankana. — Ed. 


1  THE  GIFT  OF  THE  VIRGIN  '  22.°> 

ceremony  of  all.  which  is  called  kania-dana,  or  ihe  gift  of 
the  virgin.  This  is  what  takes  place.  The  bridegroom 
being  seated  facing  the  east,  his  father-in-law  performs 
the  sam-kalpa,  places  himself  in  front  of  him,  and  looks  at 
him  fixedly  for  some  time  without  speaking.  He  is  sup- 
posed to  imagine  that  he  sees  in  his  son-in-law  the  great 
Vishnu  ;  and  with  this  in  his  mind,  he  offers  him  a  sacrifice 
of  arghya,  padya,  achamania,  akshatas,  sandalwood,  and 
flowers.  A  new  copper  vessel  is  then  brought.  In  this  the 
young  man  places  his  feet,  which  his  father-in-law  washes 
first  with  water,  then  with  milk,  and  then  again  for  the 
third  time  with  water,  while  reciting  suitable  mantrams. 

He  performs  the  great  sam-kalpa,  which  consists  in 
adding  to  the  ordinary  sam-kalpa  (vide  Part  I,  Chapter  XIII) 
the  names  and  attributes  of  the  Bharata  Varsha,  the  Sali- 
vahana,  the  seven  islands,  the  seven  seas,  the  seven  pur  as  or 
cities,  the  seven  Penitents,  the  seven  mountains,  the  sacred 
places  (punyasthalas),  and  the  holy  cities  {puny a  puras). 

He  next  thinks  of  his  father,  his  grandfather,  and  great- 
grandfather. Pronouncing  their  names  aloud,  he  prays 
that  these  and  the  twenty-one  other  ancestors  who  have 
preceded  them,  may  attain  moksha  (or  paradise).  Then, 
holding  betel  in  one  hand  and  taking  his  daughter's  hand 
in  the  other,  he  says  a  prayer  to  Vishnu,  begging  him  to 
look  with  a  gracious  eye  on  this  gift  that  he  is  making  of 
his  virgin  daughter.  He  then  places  her  hand  in  that  of 
her  future  husband,  pours  a  little  water  over  it,  and  gives 
him  some  betel,  the  usual  token  of  a  gift. 

The  gift  of  the  virgin  is  followed  by  three  other  gifts, 
namely,  the  go-dana,  bhu-dana,  and  salagrama-dana,  which 
mean  the  gift  of  cows,  the  gift  of  land,  and  the  gift  of 
salagramas,  or  small  stones,  to  which  they  attach  a  super- 
stitious value,  and  which  will  be  spoken  of  later  on. 

Then  follows  the  ceremony  called  mangalewhta  l.  The 
bride  and  bridegroom  are  seated  facing  each  other,  and 
a  sheet  of  silk  is  suspended  in  front  of  them.  This  is  held 
by  twelve  Brahmins,  and  hides  them  from  the  other  guests, 
who  successively  invoke  in  a  loud  voice  Vishnu  and  his 

1  This  means  '  the  eight  marriage  blessings.'  The  ceremony  concludes 
with  the  throwing  of  coloured  rice  over  the  couple  by  way  of  blessing 
them. — Ed. 


224  BESTOWINfJ   THE  '  TALI ' 

wife  Lakshmi,  Brahma  and  Sarasvati,  Siva  and  Parvati, 
the  Sun  and  his  wife  Chhaya,  the_Moo_n  and  his  wife  Rohini, 
lndra  and  Sathi,  Vasishta  and  Arundhati,  Rama  and  Sita, 
Krishna  and  Rukmani,  and  several  other  pairs  of  gods 
and  goddesses. 

As  soon  as  the  mangalashta  is  finished  they  fasten  on  the 
tali,  that  is,  the  little  gold  ornament  which  all  married 
women  wear  round  their  necks  ;  the  tali  is  strung  on  a  little 
cord  which  is  dyed  yellow  with  saffron  water,  and  com- 
posed of  108  very  fine  threads  closely  twisted  together. 
Other  little  ornaments  of  gold  are  also  added,  round  which 
are  fastened  flowers  and  fine  black  seeds.  Two  handfuls 
of  rice  are  placed  in  a  metal  pot,  on  the  rice  is  laid  a  cocoa- 
nut  dyed  yellow,  and  on  the  top  of  the  cocoanut  the  tali, 
to  which  they  offer  a  sacrifice  of  sweet  perfumes-  The 
tali  is  then  taken  round  to  all  the  guests,  both  men  and 
women,  who  touch  it  and  bless  it l. 

Four  large  metal  lamps,  each  with  four  wicks,  are  brought 
in  and  placed  on  a  stand,  which  must  also  be  of  the  same 
metal.  Above  are  set  other  lamps  fashioned  out  of  a 
paste  composed  of  ground  rice,  and  these  are  filled  with 
oil.  They  are  lighted,  and  four  women  take  them  in  their 
hands.  At  the  same  time  all  round  the  pandal  a  great 
number  of  other  lamps  are  lighted.  Then  ensues  a  tremen- 
dous din.  The  women  sing,  the  musicians  play,  bells  are 
rung,  cymbals  are  clashed,  and  anything  and  everything 
within  reach  from  which  sound  can  be  extracted  is  seized 
on,  each  one  striving  to  outdo  the  other  in  creating  noise  2. 

In  the  midst  of  this  hubbub  the  husband  advances 
towards  his  young  wife,  who  is  seated  facing  the  east,  and 
while  reciting  mantrams  he  fastens  the  tali  round  her  neck, 
securing  it  with  three  knots. 

The  husband  and  wife,  sitting  side  by  side,  then  offer 
each  other  betel.  Two  married  women  approach  them, 
give  them  their  blessing,  and  place  akshatas,  which  have 
been  consecrated  by  mantrams,  on  their  heads,  and  finally 
perform  the  ceremony  of  aratti. 

1  Old  ladies  whose  husbands  are  alive  are  specially  requested  to  touch 
and  bless  the  tali,  to  ensure  the  couple  a  long  married  life. — Ed. 

2  This  noise  is  intended  to  drown  any  sounds  of  weeping,  sneezing, 
quarrelling,  &c,  which  are  considered  bad  omens. — Ed. 


THE  SESHA  CEREMONY  225 

\Fire  is  then  brought  on  a  new  earthen  brazier,  and  the 
purohita  consecrates  it  with  mantrams,  surrounds  it  with 
darbha  grass,  and  does  homam  to  it.  The  fire  is  surrounded 
by  lighted  lamps,  and  near  it  is  placed  a  small  stone  called 
the  sandalwood  stone,  no  doubt  because  it  has  been  smeared 
with  sandalwood  oil.  Then  the  husband,  holding  his  wife's 
hand,  walks  three  times  round  the  sacred  fire,  and  each 
time  he  makes  the  circuit  he  takes  his  wife's  right  foot  in 
his  right  hand,  and  makes  her  touch  the  sandalwood  stone 
with  it,  touching  the  stone  with  his  own  foot  at  the  same 
time.  Whilst  performing  this  action  the  thoughts  of  both 
husband  and  wife  should  be  directed  to  the  great  mountain 
of  the  North  called  Sapta-kula  parvata  or  the  mountain  of 
the  seven  castes,  the  original  home  of  their  ancestors,  the 
mountain  being  represented  by  this  sandalwood  stone. 

These  are  the  various  ceremonies  which  compose  the 
muhurta.  As  soon  as  they  are  finished,  two  bamboos  are 
planted  in  the  centre  of  the  pandal  side  by  side,  and  at 
the  foot  of  each  of  them  is  placed  a  bamboo  basket.  The 
bride  and  bridegroom  then  stand  up,  each  in  a  basket,  and 
two  other  baskets  full  of  rice  are  brought.  They  take 
handfuls  of  this  rice  and  shower  it  over  each  other  in  turn. 
This  they  continue  to  do  many  times,  until  they  are  tired, 
or  are  told  to  stop  \ 

In  some  castes  the  guests  perform  this  ceremony,  which 
is  called  sesha,  for  the  newly  married  pair.  Princes  and 
very  rich  people  have  been  known  to  use  for  the  sesha, 
instead  of  rice,  pearls  and  precious  stones  mixed  together. 
After  the  sesha  the  couple  return  to  their  usual  seat. 
Akshatas  consecrated  by  mantrams  are  then  distributed  to 
the  guests.  The  husband  throws  over  his  right  shoulder 
a  piece  of  new  and  clean  cloth,  one  end  of  which  he  unfo'ds 
before  the  assembled  Brahmins,  from  whom  he  receives 
a  blessing,  while  they  also  recite  a  mantram  and  place  a 
portion  of  the  akshatas  they  have  just  received  on  the  cloth. 
He  takes  these  in  his  hand  and  puts  one  portion  on  his 

1  In  some  countries  the  Jews  of  the  present  day  observe  a  custom  of 
throwing  handfuls  of  wheat  over  a  newly  married  couple,  but  especially 
over  the  wife,  saying  :  '  Increase  and  multiply.'  Sometimes  pieces  of 
money  which  are  intended  for  the  poor  are  mingled  with  the  wheat. — 
Dubois. 


226    ALLEGORICAL  MEANING  OF  CEREMONIES 

own  head,  and  the  rest  on  his  wife's  head,  after  which  the 
women  again  perform  aratti  to  the  newly  married  couple. 

It  is  easy  to  see  the  allegorical  meaning  of  most  of  the 
ceremonies  which  have  just  been  described,  and  which  are 
the  most  solemn  and  important  of  the  whole  proceedings. 
The  kania-dana,  for  instance,  typifies  the  handing  over  of 
the  girl  by  the  father  to  the  son-in-law  and  the  renuncia- 
tion of  parental  authority  over  her.  The  son-in-law  for  his 
part  fastens  the  tali  round  his  wife's  neck  to  show  that  he 
accepts  the  gift,  and  that  from  henceforth  she  is  his  pro- 
perty. ("The  sacrifice  of  the  homam  and  the  thrice-repeated 
circuit  of  the  newly  married  couple  round  the  fire  are 
a  mutual  ratification  of  the  contract  they  have  just  made 
with  one  another,  for  there  is  no  more  solemn  engagement 
than  that  entered  into  in  the  presence  of  fire,  which  Hindus 
look  upon  as  the  purest  of  their  gods,  and  which  for  this 
reason  they  always  prefer  to  any  other  when  they  wish  to 
make  an  oath  specially  binding  The  ceremony  of  the 
mangalashta  is  to  call  down  divine  blessings  on  the  newly 
married  couple.  That  of  the  sesha  is  the  outward  expres- 
sion of  the  wish  that  they  may  enjoy  an  abundance  of  this 
world's  goods,  or  that  their  union  may  be  fruitful,  or  per- 
haps both. 

When  all  these  ceremonies  are  ended  sandalwood  powder, 
akshatas,  and  betel  are  given  to  all  the  Brahmins  present, 
both  men  and  women.  All  must  then  go  and  perform  their 
ablutions  and  return  for  the  feast,  which  on  this  day  must 
be  specially  magnificent. 

Before  sitting  down  to  eat,  they  never  fail  to  carry  with 
due  solemnity  to  the  household  gods  their  share  of  the  food 
which  has  been  prepared. 

All  the  guests  being  seated  in  a  row  upon  the  ground, 
the  men  quite  apart  from  the  women,  so  that  the  latter  are 
out  of  sight,  a  large  banana  leaf  is  placed  before  each  person, 
and  a  helping  of  boiled  rice  is  placed  on  it,  and  on  one  side 
two  other  leaves,  folded  in  the  form  of  cups,  one  contain- 
ing melted  butter  and  the  other  a  strongly  spiced  sauce. 
The  second  course  consists  of  dried  peas,  green  vegetables, 
and  roots  of  various  kinds.  The  third  course  consists  of 
fritters,  puddings  boiled  in  water,  others  fried  in  butter, 
others  sweetened  and  spiced,  curdled  milk,  and  salt  pickles. 


THE  MARRIAGE  FEAST  227 

Bananas,  jack,  and  other  fruits  make  up  the  fourth  course. 
Then  follows  the  kalavanta,  which  consists  of  four  different 
dishes  all  highly  flavoured,  and  composed  of  various  in- 
gredients mixed  with  rice.  To  finish  the  repast  a  beverage 
is  handed  round  composed  of  lime-juice,  sugar,  cardamom, 
and  aniseed  mixed  with  water.  The  whole  meal  takes 
place  in  absolute  silence. 

When  all  the  guests  have  feasted  they  turn  their  atten- 
tion to  the  meal  for  the  newly  married  couple,  not. for- 
getting the  necessary  ceremonies  connected  with  it.  {First 
of  all  the  sacred  fire  is  brought  and  placed  before  the  dais 
on  which  they  are  sitting.  The  husband  rises  and  does 
homam  to  the  fire,  whilst  the  purohita  repeats  mantrams. 
Then  the  women  form  a  procession,  and  singing  take  the 
fire  back  to  its  original  place?]  The  young  married  couple, 
holding  each  other  by  the  h^nd,  go  to  the  place  where  the 
tutelary  deity  is  reposing,  and  make  a  deep  obeisance  to  it. 
The  husband  then  does  puja  to  it,  and  offers  as  neiveddya 
some  cakes  and  boiled  rice.  They  make  a  similar  obei- 
sance to  the  five  little  earthen  vases  placed  near  the  deity, 
in  which  are  sown  ten  kinds  of  seeds,  and  sprinkle  them 
with  water. 

It  is  only  after  having  gone  through  all  these  prelimi- 
naries that  the  young  married  couple  are  allowed  to  partake 
of  the  meal  which  has  been  specially  prepared  for  them. 
They  sit  down  facing  one  another  in  the  centre  of  the 
pandal  on  two  little  stools,  the  bridegroom  facing  east. 
Before  them  is  spread  a  large  banana  leaf,  and  at  each  of 
its  four  corners  are  placed  four  lamps  made  of  ground  rice 
filled  with  oil,  which  are  lighted,  as  well  as  many  others  all 
round  the  pandal.  Then  the  married  women  bring  in  on 
two  metal  dishes  the  different  viands  which  have  been 
prepared  for  the  young  couple,  much  singing  and  music 
going  on  the  while.  After  they  have  been  helped,  melted 
butter  is  poured  three  times  on  to  their  fingers,  and  after 
swallowing  this  they  begin  to  eat  their  food  together  from 
the  same  leaf  \     To  eat  in  this  manner  is  a  sign  of  the 

1  This  custom  is  not  observed  nowadays  in  Hindu  marriages,  but  the 
bridegroom  and  bride  exchange  comestibles  from  each  other's  leaves. 
When  they  live  together  afterwards  the  wife  may,  and  does,  eat  off  her 
husband's  leaf,  after  he  has  finished  eating. — Ed. 


228  AVERTING  THE  EVIL  EYE 

most  complete  union,  and  is  the  most  unmistakable  proof 
of  friendship  that  two  persons  closely  united  could  possibly 
give  each  other.  Later  on  the  wife  will  be  allowed  to  eat 
what  her  husband  leaves,  but  never  again  will  she  be 
permitted  to  eat  in  company  with  him.  This  is  a  favour 
which  is  only  granted  her  on  her  wedding-day. 

Their  meal  finished,  the  newly  married  couple  go  outside, 
preceded  by  music,  and  accompanied  by  the  women  sing- 
ing, by  all  the  guests,  and  by  the  purohita.  The  purohita 
points  out  to  them  a  small  star  called  Arundhati,  the  wife 
of  the  Penitent  Vasishta,  which  is  to  be  found  near  the 
pole-star.  The  couple  nrnke  a  deep  reverence  to  the  star 
and  return  to  the  house  in  the  same  procession  \  There 
the  women  perform  the  ceremony  of  aratti.  This  ter- 
minates the  ceremonies  of  the  first  day,  called  muhurta,  or 
the  great  day. 

I  will  spare  my  readers  the  details  of  the  ceremonies 
which  occupy  the  four  following  days,  and  which,  as  a  rule, 
are  merely  a  repetition  of  those  just  described.  What  little 
variety  there  is,  is  much  in  the  same  style.  These  cere- 
monies are  interspersed  with  the  most  innocent  games  and 
amusements,  which  would  appear  to  us  utterly  ridiculous, 
and  only  suitable  for  little  children,  but  which  afford  them 
the  greatest  pleasure  and  infinite  amusement. 

Amongst  the  second  day's  ceremonies  one  of  the  most 
extraordinary  is  when  they  place  a  sort  of  ornament,  called 
bassinam,  on  the  forehead  of  both  the  husband  and  wife. 
This  bassinam  is  covered  with  gold-leaf  or  gold  paper,  and 
flowers  are  entwined  round  it.  The  object  of  the  bassinam 
is  to  avert  the  effects  of  the  drishti-dosha  or  evil  eye,  the 
spell  which  is  cast  by  the  looks  of  jealous  or  ill-disposed 
people.  Placed  thus  on  the  most  conspicuous  part  of  the 
body  it  is  supposed  to  attract  the  eyes  of  the  malevolent, 
and  thus  prevent  them  exercising  their  malign  influence 
on  the  persons  of  the  newly  married  couple. 

Amongst  the  ceremonies  which  take  place  on  the  third 
day  there  is  a  peculiar  one.  The  husband,  as  usual,  per- 
forms the  sacrifice  of  the  komam  and  another  to  fire,  and 

1  Arundhati  was  the  chaste  and  devoted  wife  of  Vasishta  Rishi ;  and 
when  the  couple  look  at  this  star  they  make  a  vow  that  they  too  will 
live  like  Vasishta  and  Arundhati. — En. 


INNOCENT  AMUSEMENTS  229 

after  him  his  wife  comes  up  and  performs  the  same  sacrifice, 
only  with  this  difference,  that  instead  of  using  boiled  rice, 
she  uses  parched  rice.  This  is,  I  believe,  the  only  occasion 
on  which  a  woman  can  take  an  active  part  in  any  of  these 
sacrifices,  which  the  Brahmins  hold  to  be  most  sacred  and 
most  solemn. 

The  only  remarkable  ceremony  which  takes  place  on  the 
fourth  day  is  the  nalangu,  in  which  the  newly  married 
couple  rub  each  other's  legs  three  times  with  powdered 
saffron.  I  do  not  in  the  least  understand  the  meaning  of 
this  ceremony.  I  fancy  its  only  object  is  to  kill  time. 
Europeans  under  similar  circumstances  would  spend  it  in 
drinking,  often  to  excess  ;  or  in  gambling,  dancing,  singing 
songs  in  honour  of  love  and  wine,  sometimes  even  in 
carrying  on  intrigues  with  the  object  of  loosening  the 
sacred  marriage  tie,  which  it  is  the  object  of  marriage 
ceremonies  to  make  secure.  The  Hindus  spend  their 
wedding-days  more  wisely  in  religious  observances,  of 
which  the  greater  number  are  well  calculated  to  leave 
a  lasting  impression  on  the  minds  of  those  attending  them. 
The  innocent  and  artless  games  with  which  they  amuse 
themselves  afford  them  none  the  less  pleasure  because  they 
are  so.  In  the  domestic  festivities  of  the  Brahmins,  decency, 
modesty,  purity,  and  reserve  are  always  conspicuous.  This 
is  the  more  remarkable  as  they  obey  a  religion  whose 
dogmas  are  for  the  most  part  saturated  with  immorality. 

The  fifth  day  is  chiefly  occupied  in  dismissing,  with  all 
the  customary  formalities,  the  gods,  the  planets,  the  great 
penitents,  the  ancestors,  and  all  the  other  divinities  who 
have  been  invited  to  the  feast.  They  dismiss  even  the 
kankanam,  that  is  to  say,  the  two  pieces  of  saffron  attached 
to  the  wrists  of  the  newly  made  husband  and  wife.  Finally, 
the  god  of  the  mantapam,  that  is  to  say  of  the  pandal,  is 
himself  dismissed.  Then  follows  the  distribution  of  presents, 
which  vary  in  value  according  to  the  means  of  the  host. 
The  purohita  who  has  taken  the  most  prominent  part,  and 
after  him  the  women  who  have  been  singing  the  whole 
time  from  beginning  to  end,  carry  off  the  lion's  share  of 
these  bounties.  I  must  just  mention  that  the  songs  which 
arc  sung  at  these  ceremonies  contain  nothing  obscene  or 
even  erotic  ;  they  are  either  a  sort  of  explanation  of  the 


230  A  WEDDING  PROCESSION 

aim  and  object  of  each  ceremony  or  else  a  long  rigmarole 
in  praise  of  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  in  which  they  also 
give  expression  to  the  most  heartfelt  wishes  for  their  future 
happiness. 

The  festivity  ends  with  a  solemn  procession  through  the 
streets,  which  generally  takes  place  at  night  by  torchlight 
in  the  midst  of  squibs  and  fireworks  of  all  kinds.  The 
newly  married  pair  are  seated  face  to  face  in  an  open  palan- 
quin highly  decorated.  Both  of  them  are  loaded,  rather 
than  adorned,  with  flowers,  jewels,  and  other  ornaments, 
for  the  most  part  borrowed  for  the  occasion.  The  pro- 
cession advances  slowly.  Relatives  and  friends  before 
whose  houses  it  passes,  come  out  to  meet  it.  The  women 
perform  the  ceremony  of  aratti  to  the  couple,  and  the 
men  give  presents  of  silver,  fruits,  sugar,  betel,  &c.  These 
gifts  are  really  only  a  loan,  for  those  who  receive  them 
are  expected  to  return  them  on  similar  occasions  to  the 
givers.  I  have  sometimes  seen  wedding  processions  that 
were  really  beautiful,  though  perhaps  not  quite  according 
to  our  taste. 

Such  are  a  Brahmin's  wedding  ceremonies,  all  of  which, 
and  many  more  minute  observances  which  I  have  not 
thought  it  worth  while  to  mention,  are  scrupulously  per- 
formed with  more  or  less  magnificence  by  rich  as  well  as 
by  poor. 

Sudras'  marriage  ceremonies  are  equally  solemn,  though 
much  less  elaborate.  In  every  caste  marriage  is  looked 
upon  as  the  most  important  affair  in  a  man's  life.  It  is 
also  the  most  expensive  one,  and  brings  many  a  Hindu 
to  ruin.  Some  spend  on  it  all  that  they  possess,  and 
a  great  deal  more  besides  ;  while  others,  in  order  to  fulfil 
what  is  expected  of  them,  contract  debts  which  they  are 
never  able  to  repay  l. 

I  shall  say  nothing  of  the  feasts  which  are  given  by  their 
relatives  and  friends  to  the  newly  married  couple,  of  the 
presents  they  receive,  or  of  the  ceremonies  in  their  honour. 
I  will  only  add  that  for  a  whole  month  the  feasting  and 
rejoicings  go  on. 

When  all  the  festivities  have  at  length  come  to  an  end, 

1  One  of  the  planks  of  the  Social  Reform  platform  is  the  reduction 
of  marriage  expenses. — Ed. 


THE  HINDU  IDEA  OF  WOMEN  231 

the  bride  returns  home  with  her  parents,  who  keep  her  shut 
up  till  such  time  as  she  shall  be  able  to  fulfil  all  the  duties 
of  a  wife.  This  also  is  another  occasion  for  festivities. 
There  is  the  same  gathering  of  friends  and  relatives,  and 
almost  the  same  ceremonies,  with  a  few  exceptions,  that 
took  place  at  the  first  wedding.  The  father  and  mother 
of  the  bridegroom,  on  being  informed  that  their  daughter- 
in-law  has  arrived  at  an  age  when  the  marriage  can  be 
consummated,  go  and  fetch  her,  and  conduct  her  home 
in  triumph.  And  in  order  that  she  may  become  accus- 
tomed by  degrees  to  married  life,  her  own  parents  come  at 
the  end  of  a  month  and  take  her  back  to  her  own  home, 
and  for  the  first  few  years,  or  until  she  has  children,  she 
lives  alternately  in  her  parents'  and  in  her  husband's  house. 
These  mutual  arrangements  are  at  first  a  proof  of  the 
happy  understanding  existing  between  the  two  families. 
But  unfortunately  this  harmony  rarely  lasts  long,  for  very 
soon,  finding  herself  ill-treated  and  even  beaten  by  her 
husband,  and  tormented  in  a  thousand  ways  by  an  exact- 
ing mother-in-law  who  treats  her  like  a  slave  and  vents  upon 
her  all  her  whims  and  ill-temper,  the  poor  young  wife  is 
forced  to  a  surreptitious  flight,  seeking  shelter  and  pro- 
tection under  her  father's  roof.  Then,  relying  on  promises 
of  better  treatment  in  future,  she  consents  to  resume  her 
fetters  ;  but  fresh  outrages  soon  force  her  to  escape  again. 
In  the  end,  resigning  herself  to  the  inevitable,  or  for  the 
sake  of  her  children,  she  gives  up  the  struggle,  and  meekly 
bows  to  marital  authority.  A  real  union  with  sincere  and 
mutual  affection,  or  even  peace,  is  very  rare  in  Hindu 
households.  The  moral  gulf  which  exists  in  this  country 
between  the  sexes  is  so  great  that  in  the  eyes  of  a  native 
the  woman  is  simply  a  passive  object  who  must  be  abjectly 
submissive  to  her  husband's  will  and  fancy.  She  is  never 
looked  upon  as  a  companion  who  can  share  her  husband's 
thoughts  and  be  the  first  object  of  his  care  and  affection. 
The  Hindu  wife  finds  in  her  husband  only  a  proud  and 
overbearing  master  who  regards  her  as  a  fortunate  woman 
to  be  allowed  the  honour  of  sharing  his  bed  and  board. 
If  there  are  some  few  women  who  are  happy  and  beloved 
by  those  to  whom  they  have  been  blindly  chained  by  their 
family,  this  good  fortune  must  be  attributed  to  the  naturally 


232  SUDRA  MARRIAGES 

kind  disposition  of  their  husbands,  and  not  in  any  way  to 
the  training  the  latter  have  received  1. 

A  Brahmin  purohita  does  not  usually  preside  at  a  Sudra 
marriage  unless  the  contracting  parties  are  very  rich  and 
of  high  position,  and  thus  able  to  recompense  him  hand- 
somely. Generally  the  ceremony  is  performed  by  one  of 
the  mendicant  Brahmins  who  go  about  selling  Hindu 
almanacs  from  door  to  door. 

In  each  caste  custom  differs  as  to  the  manner  in  which 
a  bride  is  demanded,  the  sum  of  money  paid  for  her,  the 
quantity  and  the  value  of  her  jewels,  the  colour  and  price 
of  the  wedding  garments,  the  arrangements  as  to  who  shall 
defray  the  expenses  of  the  ceremony,  the  number  of  feasts 
provided  for  the  guests,  and  the  presents  made  to  relatives 
and  friends. 

Amongst  the  Sudras  the  erection  of  the  pandal  is  one  of 
the  most  important  and  solemn  of  the  ceremonies.  It  is 
set  up  in  the  street,  opposite  the  entrance-door  of  the  house, 
seven,  five,  or  three  days  before  the  wedding  festivities 
begin.  As  soon  as  it  is  put  up  a  procession  is  formed, 
accompanied  by  music,  to  fetch  the  ara-sani,  that  is  to  say, 
a  green  branch  of  the  sacred  fig-tree  with  leaves  on  it. 
This  is  planted  in  the  centre  of  the  pandal ;  puja  is  offered 
to  it  and  also  votive  offerings.  All  present  walk  round  it 
in  single  file,  making  deep  obeisance  to  it.  It  represents 
Vishnu,  to  whom  the  sacred  fig-tree  is  specially  dedicated, 
and  it  remains  in  the  middle  of  the  pandal  during  the  whole 
of  the  ceremonies  as  the  tutelary  god  of  the  festivity. 
Processions  round  it  take  place  at  intervals,  always  accom- 
panied by  the  same  marks  of  respect.  Another  peculiarity 
at  a  Sudra  wedding  is  that  a  lamp  is  kept  alight  in  a  pro- 
minent part  of  the  pandal  during  the  three  days'  festivities, 
the  wick  of  which  is  composed  of  108  threads.  Among 
the  Sudras  also  the  number  of  earthen  cooking-pots  is 
restricted  to  ten. 

The  Brahmin  who  presides  at  the  marriage  begins  by 
breaking  one  or  more  cocoanuts  before  the  ara-sani,  and 
according  as  the  nut  breaks  in  this  or  that  direction,  favour- 
able or  unfavourable  auguries  of  the  future  of  the  nev.lv 

1  The  spread  of  education,  though  it  has  not  extended  far  amongst 
Hindu  women,  is  gradually  changing  many  of  these  domestic  evils. — Ed. 


KSHATRIYA  MARRIAGES  233 

married  pair  are  determined.     Almost  all  the  other  cere- 
monies are  identical  with  those  of  the  Brahmins. 

At  the  marriage  of  Kshatriyas  or  Rajahs,  the  ceremonial 
differs  very  little  from  that  of  the  Brahmins.  A  purohita 
invariably  presides  and  takes  the  leading  part.  All  the 
Brahmins  who  live  in  the  place  and  in  the  neighbourhood 
are  invited,  but  as  they  cannot  eat  with  people  of  this 
caste,  they  receive  each  day  portions  of  rice,  melted  butter, 
curdled  milk,  peas,  vegetables,  and  fruits,  which  they  cook 
for  themselves  and  feast  upon  apart. 

At  the  termination  of  the  ceremonies  they  receive  more 
or  less  valuable  presents  of  cloths  and  other  things  accord- 
ing to  their  rank  and  in  proportion  to  the  means  of  the 
family  who  give  the  feast. 

At  the  marriages  of  Kshatriyas,  too,  all  the  different 
kinds  of  weapons  used  in  warfare  are  brought  in  with 
much  solemnity,  accompanied  by  the  songs  of  the  women 
and  by  instruments  of  music.  These  weapons  remain 
hung  up  in  the  most  conspicuous  part  of  the  pandal  until 
the  festivities  are  ended.  The  guests  offer  them  sacrifices, 
and  worship  them  from  time  to  time,  and  similar  proces- 
sions are  made  round  them  to  those  of  the  Sudras  round 
the  sacred  fig-branch. 

The  work  from  which  I  have  extracted  these  details 
gives  particulars  of  a  remarkable  expedient  for  procuring 
a  wife  sometimes  adopted  by  the  noble  caste  of  Kshatriyas. 
When  a  young  man  of  this  caste  wishes  to  marry,  instead 
of  going  through  the  usual  prescribed  forms  and  humiliating 
proceedings  with  the  parents  of  the  girl  that  he  has  in  view, 
he  exercises  the  right  of  carrying  off  the  noble  lady  on 
whom  he  has  set  his  affections.  To  ensure  success  in  his 
enterprise  he  collects  a  numerous  following,  unexpectedly 
declares  hostilities  against  the  king  whose  son-in-law  he 
hopes  to  be,  and  tries  to  wrest  his  daughter  from  him  either 
by  force  or  strategy.  As  soon  as  she  is  in  his  power  he 
conducts  her  to  his  home  in  triumph,  and  celebrates  the 
marriage  with  all  due  solemnity.  This  method  of  procur- 
ing a  wife,  says  the  author,  is  the  most  approved  of  all  in 
the  case  of  a  Kshatriya  ;  and,  in  fact,  Hindu  books  often 
mention  similar  instances  of  rape,  but  always  amongst  the 
Rajah  caste. 

13 


234     DUTIES  PRESCRIBED  FOR  KSHATRIYAS 

The  ritual  of  the  Brahmin  purohitas,  after  describing  in 
detail  the  ceremonies  to  be  observed  at  a  Kshatriya  mar- 
riage, always  terminates  with  a  short  sermon  on  the  principal 
duties  imposed  on  this  noble  caste. 

k  The  real  caste  of  Kshatriyas  has  ceased  to  exist,'  says 
this  same  author,  '  and  the  so-called  Kshatriyas  of  the 
present  time  are  a  bastard  race  \  Whoever  pretends  to 
be  a  true  Kshatriya  ought  to  know  that  he  can  only  be 
a  soldier,  and  nothing  else,  and  that  his  one  object  in  life 
is  to  make  war.  During  a  war  he  should  be  careful  not  to 
injure  a  labourer,  an  artisan,  any  one  who  flees  before  him, 
who  asks  his  assistance  or  who  places  himself  under  his 
protection,  any  one  who  during  the  battle  or  after  it  lays 
down  his  arms  and  with  supplicating  hands  asks  for  quarter. 
In  a  word,  he  should  conduct  himself  in  these  circum- 
stances according  to  the  rules  laid  down  in  the  Dharma- 
sastra.  The  true  Kshatriya  when  engaged  in  fighting  an 
enemy  should  give  up  all  desire  to  live.  Far  be  it  from 
him  to  think  of  retreating  or  taking  to  flight  !  On  the 
contrary,  let  him  advance  bravely,  resolved  to  conquer  or 
to  die  !  The  happiest  death  for  a  Kshatriya,  the  one  he 
should  wish  for  most,  is  to  die  sword  in  hand,  fighting. 
It  procures  for  him  the  inestimable  happiness  of  being 
admitted  to  Swarga  2.  Boundless  ambition  is  the  highest 
virtue  a  Kshatriya  can  possess.  However  vast  his  posses- 
sions may  be  already,  he  should  never  say  that  he  has 
enough.  All  his  thoughts  should  tend  to  enlarging  and 
extending  his  territories  and  to  making  war  on  neighbour- 
ing princes  with  a  view  to  appropriating  their  possessions 
by  main  force.  He  should  show  faith  and  piety  towards 
the  gods  ;  he  should  respect  Brahmins,  placing  the  utmost 

1  This  caste  was  almost  entirely  annihilated  by  Vishnu,  who  visited 
the  earth  in  the  person  of  Parasurama.  The  Kshatriyas,  it  is  related, 
had  increased  to  such  an  extent  that  they  filled  the  whole  earth,  which 
they  ruled  with  such  unbearable  tyranny,  that  Vishnu,  with  a  view  to 
deliver  the  world  from  their  unjust  oppression,  began,  as  Parasurama, 
a  long  and  bloody  war  against  them,  in  which  all  the  men  of  the  caste 
were  exterminated.  Only  the  women  were  spared,  and  they  became 
the  concubines  of  Brahmins.  The  Kshatriyas  of  the  present  day  arc 
descendants  of  the  bastards  who  resulted  from  these  illegitimate  unions. 
— Dubois. 

a  Paradise  of  Indra. 


ABUNDANT  CHARITY  INCULCATED         235 

confidence  in  them,  and  loading  them  with  gifts.  Truth 
and  justice  are  the  foundations  on  which  all  his  actions 
should  be  based.  His  leisure  moments  should  be  given 
up  to  reading  the  Dhanur-veda  13  and  other  sacred  works 
which  he  has  the  right  to  study,  and  he  should  regulate 
his  conduct  by  the  customs  of  his  caste.  Humane  and 
generous,  he  must  never  refuse  to  do  good  to  any  one, 
whoever  he  may  be,  and  it  should  be  said  of  no  one  that 
he  left  a  Kshatriya's  presence  unsatisfied.  The  best  and 
most  honourable  way  in  which  he  can  spend  his  wealth 
is  to  give  abundant  alms  to  Brahmins,  to  build  temples 
with  gopurams,  to  erect  rest-houses  and  other  buildings 
for  public  use  on  the  high-roads,  to  repair  those  that  are 
falling  into  decay,  to  sink  wells  and  make  reservoirs  and 
tanks,  and  to  establish  chutrams  (almshouses  for  Brahmins) 
in  many  places.  He  should  do  his  best  to  rule  his  country 
with  equity,  and  should  keep  a  careful  watch  lest  he  act 
unjustly.  He  must  give  to  all  his  subjects  their  due,  and 
never  exact  from  them  more  than  what  rightfully  belongs 
to  him.  In  short,  his  duty  is  to  model  his  conduct  in  every- 
thing on  the  rules  laid  down  in  the  Dhanna-sastra.' 

CHAPTER  VII 

The  second,  or  Grahadha,  Status  of  Brahmin. — Rules  of  Life  which  the 
Brahmin  Grahastha  should  daily  follow. — Introduction. — Forms  to 
be  observed  when  relieving  Nature  and  when  Washing. — Manner 
of  cleansing  the  Teeth. — Sandhya,  Part  I. — Rules  relating  to  Ablu- 
tions.— The  Correct  Order  of  Daily  Avocations. — Rules  to  be 
followed  when  Eating  and  when  going  to  Bed. — Sandhya,  Part  II. 
— Mantrams  of  which  the  Sandhya  is  composed. — Sandhya  for 
Morning,  Noon,  and  Evening. — Conclusion. — General  Remarks. 

The  greater  part  of  the  matter  contained  in  this  chapter 
will  not  perhaps  appear  very  interesting  to  some  readers. 
However,  the  subject,  considered  from  a  philosophical 
point  of  view,  seemed  to  me  to  be  curious,  and  I  think 
that  many  will  forgive  the  prolix  details  that  I  am  about 
to  give  for  the  sake  of  learning  more  exactly  what  the 
customs  of  the  Brahmins  really  are.  I  have  gleaned  these 
details  from  the  great  book  of  Brahmin  ritual  called  Nittia- 
karma.  I  shall  classify  them  in  parts  and  sections,  as  is 
1  This  Veda  treats  of  the  science  of  archery. — Ed. 


236  WHO  IS  A  GRAHASTHA  BRAHMIN 

usually  done  in  works  of  this  kind,  and  shall  follow  the 
divisions  as  they  exist  in  the  original.  The  name  of 
Grahastha  Brahmin  is,  strictly  speaking,  only  given  to  those 
who  are  married,  and  who  already  have  children.  A  young 
Brahmin  after  his  marriage  ceases  virtually  to  be  a  Brah- 
machari,  but  as  long  as  his  wife  by  reason  of  her  youth 
remains  with  her  parents,  he  is  not  considered  a  real 
Grahastha.  He  only  earns  the  right  to  this  title  after  he 
has  paid  the  debt  to  his  ancestors,  that  is,  by  being  the  father 
of  a  son.  Brahmins  who  have  fulfilled  this  latter  condition 
form  the  real  bulk  of  the  caste  ;  it  is  they  who  uphold  its 
rights  and  settle  any  differences  that  may  arise.  It  is  they 
who  are  expected  to  see  that  the  customs  are  observed  and 
to  further  them  b}^  precept  and  example. 

Introduction. 

The  Grahastha  should  rise  every  day  about  an  hour  and 
a  half  before  the  sun  appears  above  the  horizon.  On 
rising  his  first  thoughts  should  be  for  Vishnu.  He  then 
calls  upon  the  following  gods  to  cause  the  sun  to  rise, 
saying  :  '  0  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Siva,  Sun,  Moon,  Mars, 
Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus,  Saturn,  Rahu,  Ketu,  cause  the 
dawn  to  appear  !  ' 

He  pronounces  the  name  of  his  guru,  or  spiritual  teacher, 
and  addresses  the  following  prayer  to  him  :  '  I  offer  worship 
to  you  ;  to  you  who  resemble  the  god  whom  I  love  most  ; 
it  is  by  your  wise  advice  that  I  am  able  to  escape  the  dangers 
and  perils  of  this  world.' 

He  must  then  imagine  himself  to  be  the  Supreme  Being, 
and  say  :  '  I  am  God  !  there  is  none  other  but  me.  I  am 
Brahma  ;  I  enjoy  perfect  happiness,  and  am  unchange- 
able.' He  thinks  deeply  on  this  point  with  great  com- 
placency for  some  time,  fully  persuading  himself  that  he 
is  really  Brahma.  After  this  he  addresses  Vishnu  thus  : 
1  0  god,  who  art  a  pure  spirit,  the  giver  of  life  to  all  things, 
the  ruler  of  the  universe,  and  the  husband  of  Lakshmi,  by 
your  command  I  rise,  and  am  about  to  occupy  myself 
with  the  affairs  of  this  world.' 

He  must  then  think  of  what  work  he  has  before  him 
during  the  day,  of  the  good  deeds  that  he  proposes  to  do, 
and  of  the  best  means  of  carrying  out  his  intentions.     He 


RULES  OBSERVABLE  BY  BRAHMINS       237 

reminds  himself  that  his  daily  tasks  to  be  meritorious  must 
be  done  zealously  and  piously,  and  not  indifferently  and 
perfunctorily.  Whilst  thus  thinking  he  takes  courage,  and 
makes  a  resolution  to  do  his  best.  After  that  he  performs 
the  hari-smarana,  which  consists  in  reciting  aloud  the 
litanies  to  Vishnu,  and  in  repeating  his  thousand  names  \ 
These  preliminaries  ended,  he  must  attend  to  the  calls 
of  nature,  and  the  following  are  the  rules  which  he  must 
follow  in  this  important  matter  : — 

Section  I. — Rules  to  be  observed  by  Brahmins  when 
answering  the  calls  of  nature. 

I.  Taking  in  his  hand  a  big  chembu  (brass  vessel)  he  will 
proceed  to  the  place  set  apart  for  this  purpose,  which  should 
be  at  least  a  bowshot  from  his  domicile  2. 

II.  Arrived  at  the  place  he  will  begin  by  taking  off  his 
slippers,  which  he  deposits  some  distance  away,  and  will 
then  choose  a  clean  spot  on  level  ground. 

III.  The  places  to  be  avoided  for  such  a  purpose  are  : 
the  enclosure  of  a  temple  ;  the  edge  of  a  river,  pond,  or 
well  ;  a  public  thoroughfare  or  a  place  frequented  by  the 
public  ;  a  light -coloured  soil  ;  a  ploughed  field  ;  and  any 
spot  close  to  a  banian  or  any  other  sacred  tree. 

IV.  A  Brahmin  must  not  at  the  time  wear  a  new  or 
newly  washed  cloth. 

1  The  hari-smarana  consists  in  saying :  '  Hail  Govinda !  Hail 
Kesava  !  Hail  Narayana  !  Hail  Hari !  '  &c,  &c.  It  must  not  be 
supposed,  however,  that  all  the  names  and  epithets  by  which  this  god 
is  designated  have  any  very  flattering  meanings  attached  to  them. 
For  instance,  Govinda  means  cowherd  ;  Kesava,  '  he  who  has  hair  on 
his  head  '  ;  Narayana,  '  he  who  lives  on  the  waters,'  &c.  Several  other 
names  of  Vishnu  are  even  more  ridiculous  than  these. — Dubois. 

2  I  have  decided  only  after  much  hesitation  to  give  these  somewhat 
disgusting  details.  To  a  judicious  and  enlightened  student,  however, 
a  knowledge  of  the  common,  everyday  habits  of  a  nation  is  not  without 
its  use  ;  and  overcoming  my  natural  repugnance  on  this  account,  I  have 
ventured  to  believe  that  my  readers  will  pardon  me  for  not  excising  so 
important  a  section  of  the  Brahmin's  vade  mecum.  I  may  remark  at 
the  same  time  that  all  these  minute  details  pertaining  to  cleanliness 
and  health  belong  to  an  elaborate  system  of  hygiene  which  extends  to 
other  practices  of  the  people  of  India,  and  which  is  certainly  very  bene- 
ficial in  a  hot  country  like  theirs.  The  Hebrew  lawgiver  also  did  not 
forbear  to  insert  rules  similar  to  these  in  the  Hebrew  books  of  law  (Deut. 
xxiii.  12,  13). — Dubois. 


-2:)*  STRICT  RULES  OF  HYGIENE 

V.  He  will  take  care  to  hang  his  triple  cord  over  his  left 
ear  and  to  cover  his  head  with  his  loin-cloth. 

VI.  He  will  stoop  down  as  low  as  possible.  It  would  be 
a  great  offence  to  relieve  oneself  standing  upright  or  only 
half  stooping  :  it  would  be  a  still  greater  offence  to  do  so 
sitting  on  the  branch  of  a  tree  or  upon  a  wall. 

VII.  While  in  this  posture  he  should  take  particular  care 
to  avoid  the  great  offence  of  looking  at  the  sun  or  the  moon, 
the  stars,  fire,  a  Brahmin,  a  temple,  an  image,  or  one  of 
the  sacred  trees. 

VIII.  He  will  keep  perfect  silence. 

IX.  He  must  chew  nothing,  have  nothing  in  his  mouth, 
and  hold  nothing  on  his  head. 

X.  He  must  do  what  he  has  to  do  as  quickly  as  possible, 
and  rise  immediately. 

XI.  After  rising  he  will  commit  a  great  offence  if  he  looks 
behind  his  heels. 

XII.  If  he  neglects  none  of  these  precautions  his  act 
will  be  a  virtuous  one,  and  not  without  merit  ;  but  if  he 
neglects  any  of  them  the  offence  will  not  go  without 
punishment. 

XIII.  He  will  wash  his  feet  and  hands  on  the  very  spot 
with  the  water  contained  in  the  chembu  which  he  brought. 
Then,  taking  the  vessel  in  his  right  hand,  and  holding  his 
private  parts  in  his  left  hand,  he  will  go  to  the  stream  to 
purify  himself  from  the  great  defilement  which  he  has 
contracted. 

XIV.  Arrived  at  the  edge  of  the  river  or  pond  where  lie 
purposes  to  wash  himself,  he  will  first  choose  a  suitable 
spot,  and  will  then  provide  himself  with  some  earth  to  be 
used  along  with  the  water  in  cleansing  himself. 

XV.  He  must  be  careful  to  provide  himself  with  the 
proper  kind  of  earth,  and  must  remember  that  there  are 
several  kinds  which  cannot  be  used  without  committing 
an  offence  under  these  circumstances.  Such  are  the  earth 
of  white-ant  nests  ;  salt-earth  ;  potters'  earth  ;  road-dust  ; 
bleaching  earth  ;  earth  taken  from  under  trees,  from  temple 
enclosures,  from  cemeteries,  from  cattle  pastures  ;  earth 
that  is  almost  white  like  ashes  ;  earth  thrown  up  from  rat- 
holes  and  such  like. 

XVI.  Provided  with  the  proper  kind  of  earth,  he  will 


AN  ELABORATE  PROCESS  239 

approach  the  water  but  will  not  go  into  it.  He  will  take 
some  in  his  chembu.  He  will  then  go  a  little  distance  away 
and  wash  his  feet  and  hands  again.  If  he  has  not  a  brass 
vessel  he  will  dig  a  little  hole  in  the  ground  with  his  hands 
near  the  river-side  and  will  fill  it  with  water,  which  he  will 
use  in  the  same  way,  taking  great  care  that  this  water  shall 
not  leak  back  into  the  river. 

XVII.  Taking  a  handful  of  earth  in  his  left  hand  l,  he 
will  pour  water  on  it  and  rub  it  well  on  the  dirty  part  of 
his  body.  He  will  repeat  the  operation,  using  only  half 
the  amount  of  earth,  and  so  on  three  times  more,  the 
amount  of  earth  being  lessened  each  time. 

XVIII.  After  cleansing  himself  thus  he  will  wash  each 
of  his  hands  five  times  with  earth  and  water,  beginning 
with  the  left  hand. 

XIX.  He  will  wash  his  private  parts  once  with  water 
and  potters'  earth  mixed. 

XX.  The  same  performance  for  his  two  feet,  repeated 
five  times  for  each  foot,  beginning,  under  the  penalty  of 
eternal  damnation,  with  the  right  foot. 

XXI.  Having  thus  scoured  the  different  parts  of  his 
body  with  earth  and  water  he  will  wash  them  a  second 
time  with  water  only. 

XXII.  After  that  he  will  wash  his  face  and  rinse  his 

1  It  is  only  the  left  hand  that  may  be  used  on  these  occasions.  It 
would  be  thought  unpardonably  filthy  to  use  the  right  hand.  It  is 
always  the  left  hand  that  is  used  when  anything  dirty  has  to  be  done, 
such  as  blowing  the  nose,  cleaning  the  ears,  the  eyes,  &c.  The  right 
hand  is  generally  used  when  any  part  of  the  body  above  the  navel  is 
touched,  and  the  left  hand  below  that.  All  Hindus  are  so  habituated 
to  this  that  one  rarely  sees  them  using  the  wrong  hand.  The  custom 
of  carefully  washing  the  dirty  part  after  answering  a  call  of  nature  is 
strictly  observed  in  every  caste.  The  European  habit  of  using  paper 
is  looked  upon  by  all  Hindus,  without  exception,  as  an  utter  abomina- 
tion, and  they  never  speak  of  it  except  with  horror.  There  are  some 
who  even  refuse  to  believe  such  a  habit  exists,  and  think  it  must  be 
a  libel  invented  out  of  hatred  for  Europeans.  I  am  quite  sure  that 
when  the  natives  talk  amongst  themselves  of  what  they  call  our  dirty, 
beastly  habits,  they  never  fail  to  put  this  at  the  head  of  them  all,  and  to 
make  it  a  subject  of  bitter  sarcasm  and  mockery.  The  sight  of  a  foreigner 
spitting  or  blowing  his  nose  into  a  handkerchief  and  then  putting  it 
into  his  pocket  is  enough  to  make  them  feel  sick.  According  to  their 
notions  it  is  the  politest  thing  in  the  world  to  go  outside  and  blow  one's 
nose  with  one's  fingers  and  then  to  wipe  them  on  a  wall. — Dubois. 


240        RULES  FOR  CLEANING  THE  TEETH 

mouth  out  eight  times  \  When  he  is  doing  this  last  act 
lie  must  take  very  great  care  to  spit  out  the  water  on  his 
left  side,  for  if  by  carelessness  or  otherwise  he  unfortunately 
spits  it  out  on  the  other  side,  he  will  assuredly  go  to  hell. 
XXIII.  He  will  think  three  times  on  Vishnu  and  will 
swallow  a  little  water  three  times  in  doing  so  2. 

Section  II. — Rules  to  be  observed  when  cleaning  the  teeth  3. 

I.  To  clean  his  teeth  a  Hindu  must  use  a  small  twig  cut 
from  either  an  uduga,  a  rengu,  or  a  neradu  tree,  or  from 
one  of  a  dozen  others  of  which  the  names  are  given  by  the 
author. 

II.  If  such  a  twig  is  unobtainable,  he  may  use  a  bit  of 
wood  cut  from  any  thorny  or  milky  shrub. 

III.  Before  cutting  the  twig  he  must  repeat  the  following 
prayer  to  the  gods  of  the  woods  :  '  0  gods  of  the  woods  ! 
I  cut  one  of  your  small  twigs  to  cleanse  my  teeth.  Grant 
me,  for  this  action,  long  life,  strength,  honours,  wit,  many 
cattle  and  much  wealth,  prudence,  judgement,  memory, 
and  power.' 

IV.  This  prayer  ended,  he  cuts  a  twig  a  few  inches  in 
length,  and  softens  one  end  into  the  form  of  a  painter's 
brush. 

V.  Squatting  on  his  heels  and  facing  either  east  or  north, 

1  It  is  necessary  to  rinse  the  mouth  out  after  every  action  which  is 
calculated  to  cause  any  defilement.  The  rule  is  to  rinse  the  mouth  out 
four  times  after  making  water,  eight  times  after  answering  an  ordinary 
call  of  nature,  twelve  times  after  taking  food,  and  sixteen  times  after 
sexual  intercourse.  It  is  easy  to  recognize  in  this  rule  one  of  those 
wise  ordinances  of  hygiene  so  appropriate  to  the  climate  and  rendered 
obligatory  by  usage. — Dubois. 

2  This  is  called  achamania. — Ed. 

3  The  practice  of  rinsing  out  the  mouth  and  scrubbing  the  teeth  well 
with  a  small  piece  of  green  wood  freshly  cut  from  the  branch  of  a  tree 
is  very  general,  not  only  amongst  Brahmins,  but  also  amongst  all  other 
castes.  Europeans,  as  a  rule,  are  considered  to  neglect  this  practice 
so  indispensable  to  cleanliness  and  comfort,  and  in  consequence  are  still 
further  despised  on  that  account ;  while  those  Europeans  who  do  clean 
their  teeth  are  held  to  do  so  in  such  an  objectionable  manner  as  rather 
to  add  to  the  disgust  which  Hindus  feel  for  those  who  are  neglectful 
of  this  custom,  because  they  use  for  this  purpose  a  brush  made  with  the 
bristles  of  a  dead  animal,  and  therefore  impure,  and  also  because  they 
use  the  same  brush  many  times,  though  it  has  after  the  first  time  been 
defiled  by  saliva. — Dubois. 


ABSTENTION   ON  CERTAIN  DAYS  241 

he  scrubs  all  his  teeth  well  with  this  brush,  after  which  he 
rinses  his  mouth  with  fresh  water. 

VI.  He  must  not  indulge  in  this  cleanly  habit  every  day. 
He  must  abstain  on  the  sixth,  the  eighth,  the  ninth,  the 
eleventh,  the  fourteenth,  and  the  last  day  of  the  moon,  on 
the  days  of  new  and  full  moon,  on  the  Tuesday  in  every 
week,  on  the  day  of  the  constellation  under  which  he  was 
born,  on  the  day  of  the  week  and  on  the  day  of  the  month 
which  correspond  with  those  of  his  birth,  at  an  eclipse,  at 
the  conjunction  of  the  planets,  at  the  equinoxes,  the 
solstices,  and  other  unlucky  epochs,  and  also  on  the  anni- 
versary of  the  death  of  his  father  or  mother. 

VII.  Any  one  who  cleans  his  teeth  with  his  bit  of  stick 
on  any  of  the  above-mentioned  days  will  have  hell  as  his 
portion  ! 

VIII.  He  may,  however,  except  on  the  day  of  the  new 
moon  and  on  the  ekadasi  (eleventh  day  of  the  moon), 
substitute  grass  or  the  leaves  of  a  tree  for  this  piece  of 
wood. 

IX.  On  the  day  of  the  new  moon  and  on  the  ekadasi  he 
may  only  clean  his  teeth  with  the  leaves  of  the  mango,  the 
juvi,  or  the  nere. 

After  having  cleaned  his  teeth  the  Brahmin  must  direct 
his  steps  to  some  water  to  go  through  the  important  act 
of  the  sandhya  l. 

Section  III. — The  First  Part  of  the  Sandhya.  Rules  to 
be  observed  by  a  Brahmin  while  washing. 

I.  He  performs  the  sam-kalpa,  then  calling  to  mind  the 
gods  of  the  waters,  he  worships  them.  He  then  thinks  of 
the  Ganges,  and  addresses  the  following  prayer  to  the  sacred 
river  :  '  O  Ganges  !  who  were  born  in  Brahma's  pitcher, 
whence  you  descended  in  streams  on  to  Siva's  hair,  from 
Siva's  hair  to  Vishnu's  feet,  and  thence  flowed  on  to  the 
earth  to  wash  out  the  sins  of  all  men,  to  purify  them  and 

1  The  word  sandhya  answers  to  our  word  '  twilight  '  ;  it  indicates  the 
moment  in  the  day  when  the  sun  reaches  its  apogee.  Thus  the  sandhya 
must  be  performed  three  times  a  day,  morning,  noon,  and  evening. — 
Dubois. 

Sandhya  literally  means  '  meeting,'  between  day  and  night,  that  is. 
—Ed. 


242  RULES   FOR    WASHING 

promote  their  happiness  !  You  are  the  stay  and  support 
of  all  living  creatures  here  below  !  I  think  of  you,  and  it 
is  in  my  mind  to  bathe  in  your  sacred  waters.  Deign  to 
blot  out  my  sins  and  deliver  me  from  all  evil.' 

II.  This  prayer  ended,  he  must  think  of  the  seven  sacred 
rivers  (the  Ganges,  the  Jumna,  the  Indus,  the  Godavari, 
the  Saras vati,  the  Nerbudda,  and  the  Cauvery).  Then 
plunging  into  the  water,  he  fixes  his  thoughts  intently 
on  the  Ganges,  and  imagines  that  he  is  really  bathing  in 
that  river. 

III.  His  ablutions  finished,  he  turns  towards  the  sun, 
takes  water  in  his  hands  three  times,  and  makes  a  libation 
to  the  sun  by  letting  the  water  run  off  the  tips  of  his  fingers. 

IV.  He  then  leaves  the  water,  girds  up  his  loins  with 
a  pure  cloth,  and  puts  another  on  his  shoulders.  He  sits 
down  with  his  face  to  the  east,  fills  his  brass  vessel  with 
water,  which  he  places  in  front  of  him,  rubs  his  forehead 
with  the  ashes  of  cow-dung  or  sandalwood,  and  traces  on 
it  the  red  mark  called  tiloki  according  to  the  custom  of  his 
caste.  He  ends  by  hanging  either  a  wreath  of  flowers 
round  his  neck,  or  else  a  string  of  seeds  called  rudrakshas. 

V.  He  thinks  of  Vishnu,  and  in  honour  of  him  drinks 
three  times  a  little  of  the  water  contained  in  the  vessel. 
He  also  makes  three  libations  to  the  sun  by  pouring  water 
on  the  ground. 

VI.  Similar  libations  are  made  in  honour  of  the  gods 
Vishnu,  Siva,  Brahma,  Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Neiruta,  Varuna, 
Vayu,  Kubera,  Isana,  the  air,  the  earth,  and  all  the  gods 
in  general,  mentioning  those  by  name  which  occur  to  his 
memory. 

VII.  Then  he  rises,  pronouncing  aloud  the  name  of  the 
sun,  and  worshipping  him.  He  then  meditates  some  time 
on  Vishnu,  and  repeats  the  prescribed  form  of  prayer  in 
his  honour  \ 

VIII.  He  again  repeats  the  names  of  the  gods,  turning 
round  the  while,  and  ends  by  making  them  a  profound 
bow. 

IX.  Thinking  once  again  of  the  sun,  he  addresses  the 
following  prayer  to  him  : — 

4  0  sun-god  !     You  are  Brahma  at  your  rising,  Rudra  at 
1  Details  of  this  will  be  found  in  the  second  part  of  the  sandhya. 


THE   SACRED    EKJ-TREE  243 

noon,  and  Vishnu  when  setting.  You  are  the  jewel  of  the 
air,  the  king  of  the  day,  the  witness  of  everything  that 
takes  place  on  earth  ;  you  are  the  eye  of  the  world,  the 
measurer  of  time  ;  you  order  the  day  and  night,  the  weeks, 
the  months,  the  years,  the  cycles,  the  kalpas,  the  yugas, 
the  seasons,  the  ayanas,  the  times  of  ablution  and  of  prayer. 
You  are  lord  of  the  nine  planets  ;  you  absolve  the  sins  of 
those  who  pray  to  you  and  offer  you  sacrifices.  Darkness 
flies  at  your  approach.  In  the  space  of  sixty  ghatikas 
(twenty-four  minutes)  you  ride  mounted  in  your  chariot 
over  the  great  mountain  of  the  North,  which  is  ninety 
million  five  hundred  and  ten  thousand  yojanas  in  extent. 
I  worship  you  with  all  my  strength  ;  deign  in  your  mercy 
to  put  away  all  my  sins.' 

X.  Hereupon  he  turns  round  and  round,  twelve,  twenty- 
four,  or  forty-eight  times  according  as  he  is  able,  in  honour 
of  the  sun. 

XI.  He  then  goes  to  a  sacred  fig-tree,  and  with  his  face 
towards  the  east  makes  it  a  profound  inclination,  repeating 
the  following  prayer  the  while  :  '  0  aswatta  tree  !  You  are 
a  god  !  You  are  the  king  of  trees  !  Your  roots  represent 
Brahma,  your  trunk  Siva,  your  branches  Vishnu.  Thus 
are  you  the  emblem  of  the  Trimurti.  All  those  who  honour 
you  in  this  world  by  performing  to  you  the  ceremony  of 
the  upanayana  or  of  marriage  \  by  walking  round  about 
you,  by  adoring  you  and  singing  your  praises,  or  by  other 
similar  acts,  will  obtain  remission  of  their  sins  in  this  world 
and  a  home  of  bliss  in  the  next.  Penetrated  with  the  con- 
sciousness of  these  truths  I  praise  and  adore  you  with  all 
my  strength.  Deign  to  give  me  a  proof  of  your  goodness 
by  vouchsafing  the  pardon  of  my  sins  in  this  world,  and 
a  place  with  the  blessed  after  death.' 

XII.  He  then  walks  round  the  tree  seven,  fourteen, 
twenty-one,  twenty-eight,  thirty-five,  or  more  times,  accord- 
ing as  he  has  strength,  always  increasing  the  number  by 
seven. 

XIII.  He  then  reads  some  devotional  book  for  a  certain 
time,  and  having  finished  he  rises,  clothes  himself  with 
pure  cloths,  plucks  a  few  flowers  to  offer  to  his  household 

1  It  will  be  seen  in  the  following  pages  that  this  tree  is  given  in  marriage 
with  all  due  solemnity. — Dubois. 


244  DAILY   AVOCATIONS 

gods,  fills  his  copper  vase  with  water,  and  returns  to  his 
house. 

Section  IV. — A  Brahmin's  daily  avocations. 

I.  On  returning  to  his  house  the  Brahmin  Grahastha 
makes  the  sacrifice  of  homam,  and  may  then  attend  to  his 
ordinary  affairs. 

II.  Towards  noon,  after  having  ordered  his  meal,  he 
returns  to  the  river  to  perform  the  sandhya  for  the  second 
time,  just  as  he  did  in  the  morning,  the  prayers  only  being 
different. 

III.  He  returns  home,  taking  the  greatest  care  to  remain 
undefiled,  and  avoiding  with  scrupulous  anxiety  the  touch 
of  anything  on  the  road  that  might  defile  him.  For  in- 
stance, he  would  have  to  return  promptly  to  the  river  if 
by  any  accident  he  set  foot  on  a  piece  of  broken  glass  or 
pottery,  a  bit  of  rag,  hair,  or  a  piece  of  skin,  &c,  or  if  he 
was  touched  by  a  person  of  inferior  caste.  It  is  necessary 
for  him  to  preserve  the  most  absolute  purity  to  be  able  to 
perform  the  sacrifice  which  he  is  about  to  make. 

IV.  On  his  return  to  his  house  he  proceeds  with  the 
daily  sacrifice  due  to  his  household  gods.  Everything 
being  ready  for  this  important  ceremony,  he  turns  towards 
the  east  or  towards  the  north,  and  remains  some  time  in 
deep  meditation.  Taking  a  position  below  the  divinity, 
he  places  the  flowers  he  brought  as  an  offering  to  the  right 
of  the  god  to  whom  he  is  going  to  do  jmja.  Before  him  is 
placed  a  vessel  full  of  water,  also  incense,  a  lamp,  sandal- 
wood, cooked  rice,  and  other  things  of  which  the  sacrifice 
is  to  be  composed. 

V.  He  first  drives  away  the  giants  and  evil  spirits  by 
snapping  his  fingers  ten  times,  and  turning  round  and 
round.     By  these  means  he  prevents  their  approach. 

VI.  He  then  sets  to  work  to  provide  himself  with  a  new 
body,  beginning  with  these  words  :  '  I  myself  am  the 
divinity  to  whom  I  am  about  to  offer  sacrifice.'  By  virtue 
of  these  words  he  unites  the  individual  soul  which  reposes 
in  his  navel  with  the  supreme  soul  which  reposes  in  his 
breast.  In  the  same  way  he  unites  successively  the  different 
elements  of  which  he  is  made,  the  earth  to  the  water,  the 
water  to  the  fire,  the  fire  to  the  wind,  the  wind  to  the  air. 


UNDERGOING  METAMORPHOSIS  245 

VII.  He  presses  the  right  nostril  with  his  thumb  and 
repeats  the  monosyllable  jon  sixteen  times,  and  breathing 
heavily  through  the  left  nostril  he  thereby  dries  up  the 
body  which  forms  his  mortal  tenement. 

VIII.  With  his  thumb  and  first  finger  he  closes  both 
nostrils,  repeats  the  word  ron  six  times,  holds  his  breath, 
thinks  of  fire  ;  and  by  this  means  burns  his  body. 

IX.  He  repeats  the  word  lorn  thirty-two  times,  blowing 
hard  all  the  time  through  his  right  nostril.  He  thus  blows 
away  the  body  which  has  just  been  burned.  He  must 
think  of  a  new  set  of  senses,  and  the  thought  will  of  itself 
suffice  to  procure  them  for  him. 

X.  Then  thinking  of  water,  he  causes  the  amrita  to  fall 
from  the  moon  by  pronouncing  the  sacred  word  aum.  He 
diffuses  this  amrita  over  the  whole  of  his  body,  which  then 
becomes  resuscitated. 

XI.  Finally,  while  saying  the  word  jom  he  thinks  of  the 
elements  of  which  he  is  composed,  and  arranges  them  in 
order,  in  the  place  of  those  he  has  just  got  rid  of. 

XII.  He  again  repeats  :  '  I  am  myself  the  divinity  to 
whom  I  am  about  to  do  sacrifice.'  He  then  brings  back 
to  his  navel  the  individual  soul  which  had  been  incorporated 
in  the  supreme  soul,  after  which,  putting  his  right  hand  on 
his  head,  he  says  :  '  Glory  to  the  Penitent  Narada  !  '  and 
he  imagines  that  this  Penitent  is  then  resting  on  his  head. 
Placing  his  hands  on  the  vessel  of  water  beside  him  he 
evokes  upon  it  the  mantra  gayatri.  Finally,  he  lays  his 
hand  on  his  chest,  and  Vishnu  is  at  once  there.  He 
finishes  by  saying  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  over  the 
new  and  perfectly  pure  body  which  he  has  just  made  for 
himself. 

After  this  preparatory  ceremony,  called  santi-yoga,  he 
does  puja  to  his  household  gods.  He  may  also  do  it,  over 
the  little  stone  salagrama,  to  all  kinds  of  gods.  This  is 
indeed  the  most  perfect  form  of  worship.  But  he  may 
also  do  it  over  a  vessel  full  of  water. 

XIII.  He  then  sits  down  to  his  meal.  If  his  means 
allow  of  it  he  should  not  fail  to  invite  daily  as  many  poor 
Brahmins  as  possible  to  this  repast. 

XIV.  He  eats  in  silence,  but  he  does  not  begin  until  he 
has  carefully  put  on  one  side  for  his  departed  ancestors 


246        RULES   OBSERVED  DURING  MEALS 

a  small  portion  of  the  rice  and  other  dishes  prepared  for 
him. 

The  following  are  the  principal  rules  which  he  is  enjoined 
to  observe  while  taking  his  meal  ;  but  for  the  most  part 
they  are  neglected  : — 

After  his  food  has  been  served  the  Brahmin  pours  a  little 
water  round  the  food,  then  traces  a  square  patch  with 
a  thin  stream  of  water,  puts  a  little  rice  in  the  middle, 
and  says  :  '  Glory  to  Narayana  !  '  sprinkling  over  it  a  few 
drops  of  water.  He  also  places  a  little  rice  on  each  of 
the  corners  of  the  square,  saying  successively  :  '  Glory  to 
Vishnu  !  Glory  to  the  god  of  evil  spirits  (Siva)  !  Glory 
to  the  god  of  the  earth  (Brahma)  !  Glory  to  the  earth  !  ' 
repeating  each  time,  '  I  offer  him  this  rice.'  On  the  rice 
that  he  is  going  to  eat  he  places  either  some  leaves  of  the 
tulasi ',  or  a  few  of  the  flowers  that  he  offered  in  the 
preceding  sacrifice.  He  then  traces  a  circular  patch  with 
a  thin  stream  of  water,  and  puts  some  rice  in  the  centre. 
This  is  an  offering  to  the  evil  spirits. 

Pouring  a  little  water  into  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  he 
drinks  it  as  a  foundation  for  the  meal  he  is  about  to  make. 
He  takes  a  little  rice  soaked  in  melted  butter  and  puts  it 
into  his  mouth,  saying  :  '  Glory  to  the  wind  which  dwells 
in  the  chest  !  '  At  the  second  mouthful,  '  Glory  to  the 
wind  which  dwells  in  the  face  !  '  At  the  third,  '  Glory  to 
the  wind  which  dwells  in  the  throat  !  '  At  the  fourth, 
'  Glory  to  the  wind  which  dwells  in  the  whole  body  !  ' 
At  the  fifth,  •  Glory  to  those  noisy  ebullitions  which  escape 
above  and  below  !  ' 

Sannyasis,  penitents,  and  widows  may  not  eat  anything 
in  the  evening.  Should  they  do  so  they  wrould  be  guilty 
of  a  crime  equal  to  that  of  killing  a  Brahmin.  The  most 
minute  attention  must  be  paid  to  food  ;  but  the  chief  point, 
and  the  most  laudable  without  doubt,  is  to  see  that  the 
cooking  is  done  with  perfect  cleanliness.  This  duty  gener- 
ally devolves  on  the  women,  though  most  Brahmins  pride 
themselves  on  being  good  cooks.  The  room  set  apart  for 
cooking  operations  is,  as  far  as  possible,  the  most  retired 
room  in  the  house,  so  that  strangers,  and  particularly 
Sudras,  may  not  be  able  to  look  in,  as  that  would  defile 
!  The  basil  plant,  Ocimum  sanctum, — Ei>. 


LEAVES  USED  AS  PLATES  247 

the  earthen  vessels.  The  spot  must  be  well  purified  to 
begin  with  by  rubbing  the  floor  over  with  cow-dung  mixed 
with  water.  The  clothing  of  the  persons  who  do  the  work 
must  have  been  freshly  washed. 

The  Brahmin  being  seated  on  the  ground,  his  wife  places 
a  banana  leaf  in  front  of  him,  or  the  leaves  of  other  trees 
sewn  together  to  serve  as  plates.  She  pours  a  few  drops 
of  water  on  them,  and  then  helps  the  rice,  putting  the  other 
dishes  on  each  side.  To  flavour  the  rice  they  pour  upon 
it  melted  butter,  for  which  Brahmins  have  a  particular 
fondness,  or  they  flavour  it  with  a  kind  of  sauce  so  highly 
spiced  that  no  European  palate  could  stand  its  pungency. 
Everything  is  helped  as  well  as  eaten  with  the  fingers 
only.  Should  however  the  dishes  be  very  hot  the  wife 
may  use  a  wooden  spoon  so  as  not  to  burn  herself. 

When  a  Brahmin  or  any  other  Hindu  eats,  those  whom 
he  has  invited  are  allowed  to  be  present.  As  a  rule  it  is 
considered  the  height  of  rudeness  to  look  at  any  one  who 
is  eating,  and  Hindus  who  are  obliged  when  travelling  to 
take  their  meals  in  rest-houses,  or  under  trees,  are  very 
careful  to  hang  up  screens  round  the  place  where  they  eat 
so  as  not  to  be  seen. 

As  soon  as  the  husband  has  finished  his  meal  the  wife 
takes  hers  on  the  same  plate,  upon  which,  as  a  proof  of  his 
affection  for  her,  the  husband  will  leave  a  few  scraps. 
She,  for  her  part,  will  show  no  repugnance  at  eating  the 
fragments  that  he  has  left.  The  following  story,  which 
I  read  in  some  Indian  book,  illustrates  this  : — 

'  An  old  Brahmin  was  so  badly  attacked  by  leprosy 
that  one  day  a  joint  of  one  of  his  fingers  dropped  off  while 
he  was  eating,  and  fell  on  his  leaf-plate.  When  his  wife's 
turn  came  to  take  her  food,  she  contented  herself  with 
simply  putting  this  piece  of  finger  on  one  side,  and  ate  up 
the  remains  that  her  husband  had  left  without  showing  the 
smallest  repugnance.  The  Brahmin,  who  was  watching 
her,  was  so  delighted  with  such  a  proof  of  her  devotion 
that,  after  overwhelming  her  with  praise,  he  asked  her 
what  she  would  like  as  a  reward.  '  Alas  !  '  she  said  in 
a  melancholy  tone,  '  what  reward  can  I  hope  for  %  I  am 
young  and  childless,  and  perhaps  soon  1  may  find  myself 
one  of  the  hated  and  despised  class  of  widows  !  '     '  No,' 


248  A   REMEDY  FOR  INDIGESTION 

answered  the  Brahmin,  '  you  shall  not  go  unrewarded. 
I  will  arrange  for  your  happiness.'  Accordingly  the 
Brahmin,  being  a  holy  man  and  much  beloved  by  the 
gods,  in  spite  of  his  leprosy,  was  granted  the  favour  of  re- 
incarnation and  was  allowed  to  live  with  his  wife  as  long 
as  she  and  he  desired.  In  the  enjoyment  of  abundant 
riches,  and  of  all  the  gifts  that  nature  can  bestow,  they 
saw  three  generations  pass  away,  being  reborn  each  time 
they  reached  the  ordinary  term  of  human  life.  Moreover 
as  a  climax  to  their  happiness  they  had  numerous  children 
with  each  new  life.  At  last,  tired  of  this  life,  they  both 
died,  and  were  transported  to  the  Sattya-loka  or  paradise 
of  Brahma.'     But  to  return  to  our  subject. 

XV.  His  meal  over,  the  Brahmin  washes  his  hands  and 
rinses  his  mouth.  He  must  also  gargle  his  throat  twelve 
times. 

XVI.  He  takes  some  leaves  of  the  tulasi  which  he  had 
offered  before  his  meal  to  his  household  gods,  and  bringing 
to  his  mind  the  thought  of  either  the  penitent  Agastya  or 
the  giant  Kumbhakarna  he  swallows  these  leaves,  by 
doing  which  he  ensures  a  good  digestion  for  the  meal  just 
eaten  and  wards  off  any  illness  l. 

XVII.  He  gives  betel  and  areca-nut  to  the  poor  Brah- 
mins invited  to  dinner  and  dismisses  them.  He  then 
spends  some  time  reading  devotional  books. 

XVIII.  His  reading  finished,  he  puts  some  betel  into  his 
mouth,  and  is  then  free  to  look  after  his  ordinary  business 
or  to  go  and  see  his  friends,  taking  care  all  the  time  not  to 
covet  either  the  goods  or  the  wives  of  others. 

XIX.  Towards  sunset  he  returns  for  the  third  time  to 
the  river  and  performs  the  evening  sandhya,  repeating  the 
ceremonies  of  the  morning  and  midday. 

XX.  On  his  return  home  he  performs  the  homam  for  the 
second  time,  and  reads  some  Puranas.  He  again  goes 
through  the  hari-smarana,  which,  as  we  have  already 
described,  consists  in  reciting  the  litanies  to  Vishnu  and 
pronouncing  his  thousand  names  aloud. 

XXI.  He  then  visits  the  temple  nearest  to  his  house, 

1  Agastya  is  the  dwarf  Rishi,  who  is  said  to  have  swallowed  the  ocean 
in  three  gulps.  Kumbhakarna  is  a  giant  famous  for  his  voracious 
appetite. — Ed. 


RULES   ABOUT  SLEEPING  240 

but  he  must  never  present  himself  there  empty-handed. 
He  must  take  as  an  offering  either  oil  for  the  lamp,  cocoa- 
nuts,  bananas,  camphor,  or  incense,  &c,  of  which  the  sacri- 
fices are  composed.  If  he  is  very  poor  he  must  at  least  bring 
some  betel  leaves. 

XXII.  If  the  temple  is  dedicated  to  Vigneshwara 
(Pillayar)  he  walks  round  it  once,  after  which,  turning 
towards  the  god,  he  takes  the  lobe  of  his  left  ear  in  his 
right  hand  and  the  lobe  of  his  right  ear  in  his  left  hand, 
and  in  this  jiosition  squats  down  on  his  heels  three  times  ; 
lie  then  strikes  himself  gently  on  both  his  temples.  If  the 
shrine  is  dedicated  to  Siva  he  walks  round  it  twice,  and 
three  times  if  it  is  consecrated  to  Vishnu. 

XXIII.  Having  performed  his  religious  duties  he  returns 
home,  takes  his  evening  meal,  observing  the  usual  cere- 
monies, and  goes  to  bed  soon  afterwards.  A  Brahmin 
must  purify  the  place  where  he  is  going  to  sleep  by  rubbing 
it  over  with  cow-dung,  and  he  must  manage  so  that  the 
place  cannot  be  overlooked  by  any  one. 

A  Brahmin  must  never  sleep  on  a  mountain,  in  a  grave- 
yard, in  a  temple,  in  any  place  where  they  do  puja,  in  any 
place  dedicated  to  evil  spirits,  under  the  shadow  of  a  tree, 
on  ground  that  has  been  tilled,  in  a  cowshed,  in  the  house 
of  his  guru,  in  any  spot  that  is  higher  than  that  where  the 
image  of  some  god  happens  to  be,  any  place  where  there 
happens  to  be  ashes,  holes  made  by  rats,  or  where  snakes 
generally  live.  He  must  also  take  care  not  to  spend  the 
night  in  houses  where  the  servants  are  insolent,  for  fear  of 
some  accident. 

A  Brahmin  puts  a  vessel  full  of  water  and  a  weapon  near 
where  he  lays  his  head.  He  rubs  his  feet,  washes  his 
mouth  twice,  and  then  lies  down. 

A  Brahmin  must  never  go  to  bed  with  his  feet  wet,  nor 
sleep  under  the  beam  which  supports  the  roof  of  the  house  \ 
He  must  avoid  sleeping  with  his  face  turned  to  the  west 
or  north.  If  it  is  impossible  to  arrange  it  otherwise  it 
would  be  better  to  be  turned  towards  the  north  than 
towards  the  west.  When  lying  down  he  offers  worship  to 
the  earth,  to  Vishnu,  to  Nandikeswara,  one  of  the  chief 

1  This  is  said  to  be  a  necessary  precaution,  as  on  these  beams  snakes 
are  often  to  be  found. — Eo. 


250  PRAYERS   AT   BED-TIME 

spirits  who  guard  Siva,  and  to  the  bird  garuda  (Brahminy 
kite),  to  whom  he  makes  the  following  prayers  : — 

'  Illustrious  son  of  Kasyapa  and  Vinata  !  king  of  birds, 
with  beauteous  wings  and  sharp-pointed  beak  ;  you  who 
are  the  enemy  of  snakes,  preserve  me  from  their  poison  !  ' 

He  who  repeats  this  prayer  when  he  goes  to  bed,  when 
he  rises,  and  after  his  ablutions,  will  never  be  bitten  by 
a  snake.  Here  is  another  and  most  efficacious  prayer 
which  they  are  supposed  to  make  a  rule  of  saying  before 
going  to  bed.  It  bears  the  name  of  kalasa,  and  is  addressed 
to  those  evil  spirits,  Siva's  guardians.  While  repeating  it 
the  right  hand  must  be  placed  over  the  various  parts  of  the 
body  as  they  are  mentioned  : — 

'  May  my  head  be  preserved  from  all  accidents  by 
Bhairava,  my  forehead  by  Bishana,  my  ears  by  Bhuta 
Karma,  my  face  by  Preta-Vahana,  my  thighs  by  Bhuta 
Karta,  my  shoulders  by  the  Ditis  who  are  endowed  with 
supernatural  strength,  my  hands  by  Kapalini  who  wears 
round  his  neck  a  chaplet  of  human  skulls,  my  chest  by 
Santa,  my  belly,  lips,  and  two  sides  by  Ketrika,  the  back 
of  my  body  by  Kadrupala,  my  navel  by  Kshetraja,  my 
sexual  organs  by  Vatu,  my  ankles  by  Siddha  Vatu,  and  the 
rest  of  my  body  from  my  head  to  my  feet  by  Surakara, 
my  body  to  my  waist  by  Vidatta,  and  from  below  my 
waist  by  Yama  !  May  the  fire  which  receives  the  worship 
of  all  the  gods  preserve  me  from  all  evil  in  whatever  place 
I  may  happen  to  be  !  May  the  wives  of  the  demons  watch 
over  my  children,  my  cattle,  my  horses,  my  elephants  ! 
May  Vishnu  watch  over  my  country,  and  may  the  God 
who  takes  care  of  all  things  also  take  care  of  me,  par- 
ticularly when  I  find  myself  in  some  place  which  is  not 
under  the  protection  of  my  divinity  !  ' 

Whoever  recites  this  prayer  every  evening  when  going  to 
bed  will  come  to  no  harm.  It  suffices  to  wear  it  on  the  arm, 
to  write  it,  and  to  read  it,  to  become  rich  and  live  happily. 

XXIV.  Finally,  the  Brahmin  must  again  think  of  Vishnu, 
and  this  should  be  his  last  thought  before  sleeping. 

Section  V. — Second  Part  of  the  Sandhya.  Mantrams  or 
Prayers,  according  to  the  Yagur  Veda  ritual. 

If  for  any  reason  the  Brahmin  Grahastha  is  unable  to 


THE  MORNING  SANDHYA  251 

perform  the  ablutions  that  form  part  of  the  first  part  of 
the  sandhya,  he  must  at  any  rate  try  to  accomplish  the 
second  part  by  attentively  and  devoutly  repeating  the 
prayers  that  belong  to  it.  He  first  stands  with  his  face 
to  the  east  or  towards  the  sun.  He  begins  by  knotting 
the  little  lock  of  hair  which  grows  on  the  top  of  his  head, 
then  he  takes  a  little  darbha  grass  in  his  left  hand,  and  in 
his  right  hand  a  larger  quantity  which  he  cuts  to  the  length 
of  his  palm. 

The  Morning  Sandhya. 

He  begins  his  religious  exercises  with  the  following 
prayer  : — 

Apavitraha  pavitrova  sarva  vastam, 
Gatopiva  yassmaret  pundareekaksham, 
Sabahiabhiantara  suchihy. 

This  means  :  '  Whether  a  man  be  pure  or  impure,  or  in 
whatsoever  station  in  life  he  may  find  himself,  if  he  thinks 
of  him  who  has  eyes  like  the  lotus  l  he  shall  be  pure  within 
and  without.' 

He  then  prays  to  the  water  in  the  following  words  : — 
'  Water  of  the  sea,  of  the  rivers,  of  tanks,  of  wells,  and 
of  any  other  place  whatsoever,  hear  favourably  my  prayers 
and  vows  !  As  the  traveller,  fatigued  with  the  heat,  finds 
rest  and  comfort  under  a  tree's  shade,  so  may  I  find  in 
you  solace  and  assistance  in  all  my  ills,  and  pardon  for  all 
my  sins  ! 

'  0  Water  !  you  are  the  eye  of  sacrifice  and  battle  ! 
You  have  an  agreeable  flavour  ;  you  have  the  bowels  of 
a  mother  for  us,  and  all  her  feelings  towards  us  !  I  call 
upon  you  with  the  same  confidence  with  which  a  child  at 
the  approach  of  danger  flies  to  the  arms  of  a  loving  mother. 
Cleanse  me  from  my  sins,  and  all  other  men  of  their  sins. 
0  Water  !  at  the  time  of  the  Flood  Brahma  the  omniscient, 
whose  name  is  spelt  with  one  letter,  existed  alone,  and 
existed  under  your  form.  This  Brahma  brooding  over  you 
and  mingling  with  you  2  did  penance,  and  by  the  merits 
of  his  penance  created  night.     The  waters  which  covered 

1  That  is,  Vishnu. 

2  These  words  recall  the  words  of  the  second  verse  of  the  first  chapter 
of  Genesis. — Dubois. 


252  PRAYERS  TO    VARIOUS  DEITIES 

the  earth  were  drawn  into  one  place  and  formed  the  sea. 
Out  of  the  sea  were  created  the  day,  the  years,  the  sun, 
the  moon,  and  Brahma  with  his  four  countenances.  Brahma 
created  anew  the  firmament,  the  earth,  the  air,  the  smaller 
worlds,  and  everything  that  was  in  existence  before  the 
Flood.' 

This  prayer  ended,  the  Brahmin  sprinkles  a  few  drops 
of  water  on  his  head  from  three  stalks  of  the  sacred  darbha 
grass. 

Whoever  in  the  morning  shall  address  these  prayers  to 
water,  and  shall  be  duly  impressed  with  their  import,  will 
surely  receive  remission  of  his  sins. 

Then  clasping  his  hands,  the  Brahmin  says  : — 

'  Vishnu  !  your  eyes  are  like  a  flower  !  I  offer  you  my 
worship.  Pardon  my  sins  ;  I  perform  the  sandhya  to  keep 
my  good  name  and  dignity  as  a  Brahmin.'  He  then  recalls 
to  mind  the  names  of  the  greater  and  lesser  worlds  and 
the  divinities  who  inhabit  them,  particularly  the  fire,  the 
wind,  and  the  sun,  also  Brihaspati,  Indra,  and  the  gods 
of  the  earth. 

After  that  he  puts  his  right  hand  on  his  head,  and  recalls 
to  his  memory  the  names  of  Brahma,  of  the  wind,  and  of 
the  sun.  He  then  shuts  his  eyes,  and  at  the  same  time 
closing  his  right  nostril  with  his  thumb,  he  invokes  the  god 
Brahma  in  these  words  : — 

1  Come,  Brahma,  come  to  my  navel,  and  stay,  stay  there 
a  long  time.' 

He  then  fancies  to  himself  that  this  powerful  god  is  seated 
on  his  navel ;  that  the  deity  is  red  in  colour,  having  four 
faces  and  two  arms,  a  cord  round  his  waist,  holding  a 
pitcher  in  his  hand,  riding  on  a  goose,  and  accompanied  by 
a  multitude  of  divinities.  He  then  thinks  of  him  as  having 
had  no  beginning,  as  possessing  the  key  to  all  knowledge 
and  being  able  to  grant  all  the  desires  of  mankind,  and 
especially  as  the  head  guru  of  Brahmins,  endowed  with  the 
fullest  power  to  purify  and  sanctify  them  ;  finally  as  the 
Creator  of  all  things,  and  as  an  eternal  being.  After  which 
he  says  : — 

'  Glory  to  the  earth  !     Glory  to  the  greater  worlds  1  !  ' 

1  There  are  seven  greater  worlds,  the  names  of  which  are  Bhu,  Bhuvar, 
Svar,  Mahar,  Janar,  Tapah,  Sattya.     The  first  is  the  earth,  the  last  the 


INVOCATIONS   TO   VISHNU   AND   SIVA      253 

(These  lie  mentions  by  name,  and  thinks  of  them  as  all 
lighted  by  the  sun.)  '  May  my  heart  and  my  will  be  drawn 
to  the  path  of  virtue  ;  may  my  desires  be  fulfilled  in  this 
life  and  in  the  next.  To  you,  Brahma,  who  have  created 
water,  light,  amritam,  &c,  to  you  I  offer  adoration.' 

This  prayer  finished,  he  breathes  heavily  through  his 
left  nostril,  and  thereby  puts  to  flight  all  the  sins  contained 
in  his  body.  Then,  closing  the  left  nostril  with  either  the 
thumb  or  the  middle  finger  of  the  right  hand,  he  thinks  of 
Vishnu,  whom  he  addresses  in  these  terms  : — 

'  Come,  Vishnu,  come  to  my  chest,  and  stay  there,  stay 
there,  stay  there  a  long  time.' 

He  then  fancies  Vishnu  seated  on  his  chest.  This  god  is 
brown  in  colour,  he  has  four  arms,  he  carries  a  shell  in  one 
hand,  the  weapon  called  sankha  in  another,  in  the  third 
a  cholera,  and  in  the  fourth  a  lotus.  He  rides  on  the  bird 
of  prey  garuda,  The  Brahmin  thinks  of  him  as  omnipresent 
in  the  fourteen  worlds  and  upholding  everything  by  his 
power.     Then  he  says  : — 

1  Glory  to  the  lesser  worlds  l  !  '  (These  he  mentions  by 
their  names.)     '  I  think  of  them,  of  water,  and  of  amritam.' 

By  virtue  of  this  prayer  all  his  sins  are  blotted  out. 

He  then  thinks  of  Siva,  whom  he  invokes  as  follows  : — 

'  Come,  Siva,  come  to  my  forehead  !  Stay,  stay,  stay 
there  a  long  time.' 

He  imagines  Siva  seated  on  his  forehead.  This  god  is 
white  ;  he  carries  the  trisula  or  trident  in  one  hand,  and 
a  small  drum  in  the  other  ;  on  his  forehead  is  a  new  moon. 
He  has  five  faces,  and  each  face  has  three  eyes  ;  he  rides 
on  an  ox.  He  is  represented  further  as  the  god  self-creating 
and  self-sufficient,  as  the  universal  destroyer.  Then  the 
Brahmin  says  : — 

'  Glory  to  all  the  lesser  worlds  !  '  (These  he  mentions  by 
name.) 

Then  he  adds,  speaking  to  Siva  :  '  Destroyer  of  everyi 
thing  in  the  fourteen  worlds,  destroy  my  sins  also.' 

paradise  of  Brahma.  They  always  add  the  word  loka,  which  means 
a  place  (locus). — Ed. 

1  There  are  seven  lesser  worlds,  the  names  of  which  are  Atala,  Vitala, 
Sutala,  Rasatala,  Talatala,  Mahatala,  Patala.  The  last  is  the  infernal 
regions,  the  lowest  of  all. — Ed. 


254  PRAYER    TO  THE    SUN 

Whoever  repeats  this  prayer,  and  makes  the  foregoing 
meditation,  will  assuredly  obtain  pardon  of  all  his  sins 
and  be  saved.  However,  as  men  are  liable  to  fall  into 
innumerable  sins,  they  can  hardly  do  too  much  to  ensure 
their  being  forgiven,  and  the  stain  of  their  wickedness 
removed.  The  Brahmin  therefore  addresses  the  following 
prayer  to  the  sun  : — 

'  0  sun  !  who  art  prayer  itself  and  the  god  of  prayer  : 
forgive  me  all  the  sins  that  I  have  committed  while  praying, 
all  those  that  I  have  committed  during  the  night  by  thought, 
word,  and  deed ;  forgive  me  all  those  that  I  have  committed 
against  my  neighbour  by  slander  or  false  witness,  by  violat- 
ing or  seducing  another  man's  wife,  by  eating  forbidden 
food,  by  receiving  presents  from  a  man  of  low  caste,  in 
a  word,  all  sins  of  any  kind  into  which  I  may  have  fallen 
by  night  or  by  day.' 

Whoever  addresses  this  prayer  to  the  sun,  and  is  filled 
with  the  conviction  of  what  he  is  saying  and  performs  the 
achamania  at  the  same  time,  will  be  absolved  from  all 
his  sins  and  will  go  after  his  death  to  the  abode  of  the 
sun. 

To  perform  the  achamania  he  must  hold  some  water  in 
the  hollow  of  his  right  hand,  and  put  it  three  times  to  his 
mouth.  He  must  touch  the  under  part  of  his  nose  with 
the  back  of  his  thumb  ;  then  joining  his  thumb  and  first 
finger  together  he  must  touch  both  his  eyes,  then  joining 
all  the  other  fingers  together  to  his  thumb  he  must  touch 
his  ears,  his  navel,  his  chest,  his  head,  and  both  shoulders. 
And  before  putting  the  water  to  his  mouth  he  must  always 
be  careful  to  purify  it  by  repeating  over  it  the  following 
prayer  :  '  Water  !  you  are  of  a  good  taste,'  &c,  as  men- 
tioned before.  Passing  his  hand  three  times  above  his 
head  he  lets  fall  a  few  drops  of  water  on  it,  and  then  thrice 
pours  a  little  on  the  ground.  He  draws  a  long  breath, 
and  thus  ejects  all  the  sins  in  his  body.  He  must  then 
recite  the  prayer  which  begins  with  the  words  :  '  O  water  ! 
at  the  time  of  the  Flood,'  &c,  as  cited  above. 

Water  should  be  looked  upon  as  the  Supreme  Being, 
and  as  such  adoration  is  offered  to  it.  Nothing  is  more 
efficacious  than  water  to  cleanse  men  from  their  sins. 
Therefore  one  cannot  perform  one's  daily  ablutions  too 


THE   GODDESS   GAYATRI  255 

often  ;  or  at  least  touch  water  and  think  of  it,  and  so  obtain 
a  remission  of  sin.  After  having  thus  worshipped,  the 
Brahmin  draws  a  little  water  into  his  nostrils,  and  then 
shoots  it  out  again.  With  this  water  the  sinful  man  also 
falls  to  the  ground  and  is  crushed  under  the  left  heel. 
Then  turning  to  the  east,  the  Brahmin  stands  on  tiptoe. 
Raising  slightly  his  hands,  the  palms  turned  towards 
heaven,  he  makes  the  following  prayer  to  the  sun  : — 

'  0  Sun  !  fire  is  born  of  you,  and  from  you  the  gods 
derive  their  splendour  ;  you  are  the  eye  of  the  world  and 
the  light  of  it  !  ' 

Nothing  is  more  efficacious  than  this  prayer,  accompanied 
by  adorations,  for  turning  aside  anything  that  may  bring 
sorrow,  or  sin,  or  pain,  and  for  protection  against  un- 
toward accident.     He  must  add,  still  addressing  the  sun  : — 

'  Glory  to  Brahma,  Supreme  Being  !  Glory  to  the 
Brahmins  !  Glory  to  the  Penitents  !  Glory  to  the  gods  ! 
Glory  to  the  Vedas  !  Glory  to  Vishnu  !  Glory  to  the 
winds  !  ' 

While  reciting  this  prayer  he  offers  the  tarpana,  that  is, 
a  libation  of  water,  to  such  of  these  gods  as  he  names  and 
to  all  the  gods  in  general.  He  puts  under  his  feet  a  stalk 
of  darbha  grass,  and  standing  upright,  on  one  foot  if  possible, 
he  recites  the  famous  gayatri  mantram,  which  is  as  follows1: — 

'  Come,  goddess,  come  and  make  me  happy.  You  who 
are  the  voice  of  Brahma,  whose  name  is  formed  of  three 
letters  ;  who  are  the  mother  of  the  Vedas,  who  are  also 
the  mother  of  Brahma  ;  I  offer  you  my  adoration.'  He 
who  thus  invokes  the  goddess  gayatri  three  times  a  day 
will  thereby  be  purified  from  all  his  sins. 

He  then  pronounces  the  monosyllable  aum,  and  cracks 
his  fingers  ten  times  while  turning  round.  This  is  to  scare 
away  giants  and  evil  spirits.  He  must  then  think  again 
of  the  goddess  gayatri.  In  the  morning  he  must  picture 
her  to  himself  as  a  young  girl  of  extraordinary  beauty, 
resembling  Brahma  in  appearance,  riding  on  a  goose,  holding 

1  The  gayatri  mantram,  as  we  have  already  observed,  is  the  most 
sacred,  the  most  sublime,  the  most  meritorious,  and  the  most  efficacious 
of  all  the  mantrams  of  the  Brahmins.  They  have  deified  this  prayer, 
until  they  have  come  to  look  upon  it  not  only  as  a  mantram,  but  as  an 
actual  goddess  itself. — Dubois. 


266  AN    EFFICACIOUS    MANTRAM 

in  her  hand  a  stalk  of  darbha  grass,  dwelling  in  the  sun's 
face  and  in  the  ritual  of  the  Yajur  Veda.  Having  thus 
pictured  her  in  his  mind,  he  prostrates  himself  before  her. 

He  then  addresses  Vishnu  in  these  words  :  '  Vishnu  ! 
your  eyes  are  like  a  flower,'  &c,  as  before. 

To  recite  the  gayatri  without  having  previously  offered 
homage  to  Vishnu  would  be  labour  lost.  Such  a  lapse 
would  indeed  be  a  source  of  sin.  They  count  on  their 
fingers  the  number  of  times  that  they  recite  the  gayatri. 
The  hands  should  be  held  aloft  and  covered  over  with 
a  cloth,  so  that  no  one  can  see  how  many  repetitions  have 
been  made.  They  say  it  in  a  low  voice  so  that  no  one 
can  hear  them.  The  following  is  the  text  of  this  sublime 
prayer  : — 

Aum  !  Glory  to  Patala  !  Glory  to  the  Earth  !  Glory 
to  Swarga  !  I  think  of  the  splendid  light  of  the  Sun. 
May  he  deign  to  turn  my  heart  and  my  soul  towards  the 
path  of  virtue,  and  to  the  blessings  of  this  world  and  of 
the  next l  !  ' 

Every  Brahmin  ought  to  recite  this  mantram  from  a 
thousand  to  ten  thousand  times  daily.  He  may,  if  self- 
indulgent,  repeat  it  only  a  hundred  or  even  only  twenty 
limes,  but  in  no  case  less  than  eight  times. 

It  is  by  virtue  of  this  prayer  that  Brahmins  become  like 
Brahma,  and  after  their  death  share  his  happiness.  It  is 
so  extremely  efficacious  that  its  fervent  repetition  will 
blot  out  the  most  heinous  sins,  such  for  instance  as  having 

1  This  form  does  not  seem  to  agree  altogether  with  the  original  text 
given  in  the  chapter  on  mantrams.  I  think  the  explanation  is  that  there 
are  several  forms  of  gayatri,  which  vary  according  to  the  Vedas  from 
which  they  are  taken. — Dubois. 

One  would  think  from  the  Abbe's  description  of  the  gayatri  that  it 
was  a  meaningless  mantram,  but  the  Hindus  assert  that  in  it  is  summed 
up  their  highest  philosophy.  The  following  is  the  text  of  the  gayatri, 
with  its  translation  : — 

Aum,  bhur,  bhiivah,  suvah  ! 
Aum,  tat  savitur  varenyam 
Bhargo  devasya  dhimahi 
Dhiyo  yo  nah  prachodayat, 
Aum,  earth,  sky,  heaven  ! 
Aum,  that  excellent  vivifier 
The  light  divine,  let  us  meditate  upon, 
Which  (light)  enlightens  our  understanding. — Ep. 


SUNDRY    PRAYERS  257 

killed  a  Brahmin  or  a  pregnant  woman,  drunk  intoxicat- 
ing liquors,  or  betrayed  one's  most  intimate  friend,  &c. 
The  Brahmin  then  dismisses  the  goddess  in  these  terms  : — 

'  I  have  prayed  to  you,  0  illustrious  goddess,  to  obtain 
remission  of  my  sins.  Forgive  me  them,  and  grant  that 
after  my  death  I  may  enjoy  the  delights  of  Vaikuntha. 
You  have  Brahma's  face  ;  you  are  Brahma  himself.  It 
is  you  who  have  created,  who  preserve,  and  who  destroy 
everything.  Grant  that  I  may  be  happy  in  this  world, 
that  joy,  wealth,  and  prosperity  may  always  be  my  portion, 
and  that  after  my  death  my  lot  may  be  still  happier  and 
more  lasting  !  Return,  0  goddess,  after  having  granted 
me  this  favour,  return  to  your  usual  dwelling-place  !  ' 

He  offers  her  tarpana,  or  the  libation  of  water,  as  also 
to  the  sun  and  to  the  planet  Venus,  saying  : — 

'  Glory  to  the  sun  and  to  the  planet  Venus  !  May  the 
water  that  I  now  offer  you  find  favour  in  your  sight  !  ' 

He  finally  addresses  this  prayer  to  fire  : — 

'  0  fire  !  listen  to  what  I  am  about  to  say  !  Burn  my 
enemies,  and  those  who  speak  evil  of  the  Vedas  !  The 
number  of  my  sins  is  like  a  sea  of  fire,  without  bottom 
and  without  shore,  ready  to  consume  me.  I  implore  your 
mercy,  and  may  it  be  to  me  a  means  of  salvation  !  ' 

He  then  evokes  Rudra  (Siva),  whose  countenance  is  like 
that  of  time  and  of  fire,  and  says  to  him  : — 

'  You  are  the  Veda,  you  are  the  truth  !  You  are  the 
Supreme  Being  !  Your  face  is  marvellous  !  You  are  the 
face  of  the  world  !  I  offer  you  adoration.'  Then  he 
says  : — 

'  Glory  to  Brahma  !  Glory  to  water  !  Glory  to  the  god 
Varuna  !     Glory  to  Vishnu  !  ' 

He  offers  the  tarpana  to  each  of  these  gods,  and  then  to 
the  sun,  to  whom  he  says  :— 

'  Illustrious  son  of  Kasyapa,  you  resemble  a  lovely 
flower  !  You  are  the  enemy  of  darkness  ;  through  you 
all  our  sins  are  forgiven.  I  offer  you  my  worship  as  to  the 
greatest  of  gods  ;  deign  to  receive  it  graciously.'  Finally, 
he  turns  round  three  times  in  honour  of  the  sun,  and  makes 
him  a  profound  bow. 


258  THE   NOONDAY   SANDHYA 

The  Noonday  Sandhya  l. 

The  Brahmin,  having  performed  his  ablutions  and  tied 
up  the  little  lock  of  hair  on  the  top  of  his  head,  traces  one 
of  the  usual  marks  on  his  forehead,  and  turning  towards 
the  east,  says  : — 

1  Vishnu  !  the  gods  delight  to  look  on  the  beauties  of 
your  dwelling-place  ;  the  sight  charms  them,  they  are  never 
tired  of  beholding  it,  they  open  wide  their  eyes,  the  better 
to  be  able  to  contemplate  it  !  ' 

Then,  addressing  the  sun,  he  says  :  '  God  of  light  !  God 
of  the  day  !  You  are  the  god  of  the  planets  and  of  all 
that  has  life  ;  you  are  the  god  who  purifies  men  and  blots 
out  all  their  transgressions,  accept  the  worship  that  I  offer 
to  you  !  ' 

He  then  says  : — 

'  Glory  to  the  lesser  worlds  !  Glory  to  Swarga  !  Glory 
to  the  earth  !  Glory  to  Maha-loka  !  Glory  to  Tapo-loka  ! 
Glory  to  Yama-loka  !  Glory  to  Sattya-loka  !  It  is  by  the 
almighty  power  of  the  sun,  the  Supreme  Being,  that  water, 
light,  amrita,  Brahma  with  the  four  faces,  and  everything 
that  exists,  have  been  created.' 

Putting  his  left  thumb  on  his  right  hand,  he  says  : — 

'  May  everything  in  me,  be  it  good  or  bad,  commendable 
or  blameworthy,  be  purified  bv  the  sun,  the  Supreme 
Being  !  ' 

By  virtue  of  this  prayer  his  sins  are  dried  up.  Then, 
closing  up  both  his  nostrils,  he  carries  his  thoughts  back 
to  Krishna,  the  son  of  Nanda.  This  thought  causes  sin 
to  tremble.  He  must  picture  sin  to  himself  under  the  form 
of  a  black  man  with  a  horrible  face.  Then,  putting  his 
thumb  to  his  left  nostril,  he  recalls  Siva,  and  says  : — 

1  Siva,  who  are  the  chief  of  evil  spirits,  save  me  from 
punishment  and  put  my  sins  to  flight  with  your  trident  !  ' 

Breathing  strongly  through  his  left  nostril,  he  performs 
the  achamania,  and  says  : — 

'  The   water  purifies  the  earth  ;   may  the  earth  which 

has  been  purified  by  the  water  take  away  all  the  sins 

which  I  may  have  committed — by  eating  after  another 

person,  by  partaking  of  forbidden  food,  by  receiving  gifts 

1  This  is  really  called  Madhya-Vandana. — Ed. 


SUNDRY   INVOCATIONS  269 

from  a  man  of  low  caste  or  from  a  sinful  person.  I  pray 
that  the  water  may  purify  me  from  all  sin,  whatsoever  it 
may  be.'  He  performs  the  achamania  twice  more,  for 
nothing  washes  away  sin  more  surely  than  water.  Every 
Brahmin  should  therefore  perform  achamania  ;  for  by  this 
act  alone  not  only  will  all  his  sins  be  remitted,  even  to  the 
murder  of  a  Brahmin  or  of  a  pregnant  woman,  but  further 
it  also  makes  him  sinless  for  all  time  to  come.  He  then 
takes  three  stalks  of  darbha  grass,  and  sprinkles  some  drops 
of  water  on  his  head  with  it  ;  but  he  must  first  purify  the 
water  by  reciting  over  it  the  gayatri  and  the  following 
mantrams  : — '  0  water  !  who  are  spread  on  the  bosom  of 
the  earth,  grant  that  I  may  perform  the  sandhya,  so  that, 
being  purified  by  it,  I  may  perform  puja  !  '  '0  water  ! 
you  have  a  good  taste,'  &c,  and  so  on  as  before.  He 
sprinkles  some  water  with  the  three  stalks  of  darbha  grass, 
first  on  the  earth  and  then  on  his  head.  He  who  in  addition 
to  the  above  recites  the  following  prayer,  may  be  assured 
that  all  his  desires  will  be  gratified,  that  he  will  live  in  the 
midst  of  plenty  and  be  happy  : — '  0  water  !  you  are  in 
everything  that  has  life,  in  all  quarters  of  the  world,  even 
on  the  tops  of  the  highest  mountains.  You  are  of  super- 
lative excellence,  you  are  the  light,  you  are  the  amrita  !  ' 
He  then  rises,  and  filling  both  his  hands  with  water,  pours 
it  on  the  ground,  saying  : — 

'  Glory  to  Patala  !  Glory  to  the  Earth  !  Glory  to 
Swarga  !  '  Then,  turning  to  the  sun,  and  raising  his  hands 
on  high,  he  says  : — 

'  0  Sun  !  you  are  the  will  of  the  gods,  you  are  the 
opposite  of  water  !  You  are  the  eye  of  the  gods  Mitra, 
Varuna,  and  of  Fire  ;  you  shine  in  Swarga,  on  the  earth, 
and  everywhere  !  '  He  then  repeats  the  prayer  which 
begins  with  these  words  : — 

k  Glory  to  Brahma,  the  Supreme  Being  !  '  &c,  and  so 
on  as  before. 

He  places  one  or  two  stalks  of  darbha  grass  under  his 
feet,  and  evokes  the  gayatri  in  these  words  : — 

*  Come,  goddess,  come  and  shower  your  favours  upon 
me  !  You  are  the  word  of  Brahma,  the  mother  of  the 
Vedas  :  it  is  from  you  that  Brahma  was  born.  I  offer 
you  puja  !     You  are  the  mother  of  Brahmins.     It  is  you 


260  THE  VYAHRITI 

who  bear  the  engine  of  the  world,  and  carry  the  weight 
thereof.  It  is  through  your  protection  that  men  live 
peacefully  in  the  world,  for  by  your  care  all  evil,  fear, 
and  danger  are  kept  far  from  them.  It  is  through  you 
that  men  become  virtuous,  and  it  is  from  you  that  puja 
derives  its  efficacy.  You  are  eternal  !  Hasten,  great 
goddess,  and  answer  my  prayer  !  ' 

It  is  by  virtue  of  this  prayer  that  the  gods  have  attained 
to  Swarga  ;  that  snakes  penetrate  into  the  bowels  of  the 
earth,  and  float  in  the  midst  of  the  waters  ;  that  fire 
possesses  the  power  of  burning  ;  that  Brahmins,  grown 
like  to  the  gods,  merit  daily  to  receive  worship  and  sacri- 
fice from  other  men  in  acknowledgement  of  their  sur- 
passing knowledge  and  virtue.  He  repeats  the  invocation 
to  the  sun,  and  purifies  himself  in  pronouncing  the  sacred 
word  aura.  Then  he  performs  the  vyahriti  in  the  following 
manner  : — 

'  Glory  to  Patala  !  '  (he  puts  his  hands  to  his  head). 

'  Glory  to  the  Earth  !  '  (he  puts  his  hands  on  the  tuft  of 
hair  on  the  top  of  his  head). 

'  Glory  to  Swarga  !  '  (he  touches  himself  all  over  his 
body). 

Then  he  exclaims,  *  Aum-bhatu !  '  at  the  same  time 
cracking  his  fingers  ten  times  whilst  turning  round,  and  he 
stamps  the  ground  with  his  left  heel  to  scare  away  giants 
and  evil  spirits. 

He  evokes  the  gayatri  afresh,  whom  now  at  noon  he 
represents  to  himself  under  the  image  of  Vishnu,  in  the 
prime  of  life,  clothed  in  a  golden  robe,  and  dwelling  in  the 
sun's  face.  He  then  recites  the  gayatri  mantram  the  proper 
number  of  times,  exactly  as  before  described,  and  then  he 
dismisses  the  deity,  saying  : — 

'  You  are  born  of  Siva's  face  ;  you  dwell  in  the  bosom 
of  Vishnu  ;  you  are  known  of  Brahma  ;  go,  goddess, 
whither  you  will  !  You  are  Brahma,  the  Supreme  Being  ; 
you  receive  the  worship  of  Vishnu  ;  you  are  the  life  of 
Brahmins  ;  their  fate  is  in  your  hands  ;  it  is  in  your  power 
to  give  them  happiness  in  this  world  and  in  the  next  ; 
give  me  many  children,  and  may  I  always  have  abundance 
of  wealth.  Illustrious  mother  !  I  have  offered  you  puja  ; 
now  depart  whither  it  seemeth  good  !  ' 


PRAISING  THE  GODDESS  GAYATRI         261 

Nevertheless  he  says  yet  another  prayer  to  her  : — 

1  Divine  wife  of  Narayana  !  preserve  me  from  any  pain 
in  my  head,  face,  tongue,  nose,  nostrils,  ears,  shoulders, 
thighs,  feet,  and  in  any  part  of  my  body  ;  preserve  me 
from  pain  day  and  night  !  ' 

He  thus  sings  the  gayatrVs  praises  : — 

1  You  are  quick-witted  ;  you  are  enlightenment  itself  ; 
you  are  not  subject  to  human  passions  ;  you  are  eternal  ; 
you  are  almighty  ;  you  are  purity  itself  ;  you  are  the 
refuge  and  salvation  of  mankind  ;  you  are  omniscient  ; 
you  are  the  mother  of  all  the  Vedas,  of  which  you  are  the 
emblem  ;  you  are  also  the  emblem  of  prayer.  It  is  to 
you  that  all  sacrifices  must  be  offered  ;  all  earthly  bless- 
ings are  at  your  disposal  ;  in  an  instant  you  can  destroy 
everything.  Happiness  and  misery,  joy  and  sorrow,  hope 
and  fear  are  in  your  hands  ;  everything  is  dependent  on 
you.  All  men  pray  to  you,  and  at  the  same  time  your 
fascinations  cast  a  spell  over  them.  You  fulfil  all  their 
desires,  and  overwhelm  them  with  benefits  ;  to  you  they 
owe  success  in  all  their  undertakings  ;  you  put  away  their 
sins  ;  you  make  them  happy  ;  you  are  present  in  all  three 
worlds  ;  you  have  three  bodies  and  three  faces,  and  the 
numeral  three  is  of  your  very  essence  !  ' 

He  who  thus  sings  the  gayatri's  praises  will  receive  his 
reward  ;  all  his  sins  will  be  forgiven. 

Casting  his  eyes  on  liquefied  butter,  he  says  :  '  O  butter  ! 
you  are  the  light  ;  by  your  power  everything  shines  ;  you 
are  the  friend  of  the  gods  ;  you  form  part  of  the  sacrifices 
that  are  offered  to  them,  you  are  the  essence  of  these 
sacrifices  !  ' 

Then,  addressing  the  gayatri  anew,  he  says  :  '  You  can 
be  divided  into  two,  three,  and  four  parts  ;  nothing  can 
equal  your  brilliancy  ;   I  offer  you  puja  !  '     He  adds  : — 

'  0  goddess,  who  dwell  on  the  mountains  of  the  North, 
you  are  known  to  Brahma  !  Go  now  whither  you  will, 
you  are  the  sacrificer  of  the  sacrifice.  It  is  you  who  offer 
it,  it  is  you  who  receive  it.  It  is  you  who  regulate  the 
offerings,  it  is  you  who  make  them,  it  is  you  who  receive 
them  ;  you  have  yielded  the  north-east  to  Siva,  and  you 
have  taken  up  your  abode  in  the  north-west.  If  we 
enjoy  light,  it  is  you  to  whom  we  owe  it,  to  you  who  have 


202  THK  ARGHYA  OFFERING 

granted  it  to  us  that  we  may  by  its  aid  fulfil  our  religious 
duties  !  ' 

He  addresses  the  fire  in  these  words  : — 

'  0  fire  !  come  here  ;  I  have  need  of  you  for  puja  ;  offer 
it  yourself,  since  you  are  the  emblem  of  it  !  ' 

He  says  to  the  water  : — 

1  0  water  !  remain  on  the  earth,  for  the  use  of  us  who 
require  you  :  remain  that  we  may  drink  you,  and  come 
down  abundantly  to  fertilize  our  land  !  ' 

Whoever  repeats  all  these  prayers  at  the  midday  sandhya 
will  have  all  his  wishes  gratified  and  obtain  pardon  for  all 
his  sins. 

He  again  addresses  the  gayatri  as  follows  : — '  I  worship 
you,  0  goddess,  under  the  image  of  Brahma.  You  are  the 
mother  of  the  world  ;  Brahmins  offer  you  pitja,  and  in 
return  enjoy  your  favours.  You  have  the  outward  appear- 
ance of  a  stone  ;  but  you  are  indeed  the  creator,  preserver, 
and  destroyer  of  everything  !  ' 

He  offers  arghya  to  the  sun.  To  this  end  he  puts  water 
and  red  flowers,  some  darbha  grass,  some  sandalwood 
powder,  and  some  mustard  seed  into  a  plated  copper 
vessel.     While  mixing  all  these  together,  he  says  : — 

1  0  sun  !  you  are  the  most  brilliant  of  all  the  stars  ! 
Vishnu  borrows  his  splendour  from  you  !  You  are  pure 
and  you  purify  men  ;  I  offer  you  worship  !  Glory  to  the 
sun  !     I  offer  him  this  arghya  !  ' 

Such,  then,  is  the  noonday  sandhya.  It  is  a  religious 
exercise  which  must  never  be  omitted,  but  if  for  any  reason 
one  fails  to  perform  it,  one  must  do  penance  before  per- 
forming the  evening  sandhya.  This  penance  consists  in 
repeating  the  gayatri  ten  times,  and  offering  arghya  to  the 
sun. 

A  Brahmin  who  does  not  perform  the  sandhya  regularly 
is  not  permitted  to  fulfil  any  other  act  of  religious  wor- 
ship. It  would  be  quite  fruitless  for  him  to  offer  puja, 
or  sraddha  (the  sacrifice  for  the  dead),  or  to  fast  or  to 
pray. 

The  inestimable  advantages  which  the  gayatri  mantram 
procures  are  proportionate  to  the  number  of  times  it  is 
repeated.  Thus  for  a  thousand  repetitions  you  would 
obtain  success  in  all  your  undertakings  ;  for  ten  thousand, 


THE  EVENING  SANDHYA  263 

the  forgiveness  of  sins  and  abundance  of  this  world's 
goods  ;  for  twenty  thousand,  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  the 
gift  of  knowledge  ;  for  a  hundred  thousand,  the  supreme 
grace  of  becoming  a  Vishnu  after  death. 

It  is  considered  most  meritorious  to  solemnly  undertake 
to  recite  the  gayatri  for  a  certain  fixed  time  daily,  the 
credit  gained  thereby  being  graduated  according  to  the 
length  of  time  devoted  to  the  exercise.  It  depends,  that 
is  to  say,  on  the  choice  that  one  makes  of  the  three  follow- 
ing periods  :  (1)  from  sunrise  to  sunset  ;  (2)  from  sunrise 
to  noon  ;  and  (3)  at  intervals  of  about  three  hours. 

Any  Brahmin  who  makes  such  a  vow  calls  together 
a  certain  number  of  his  fellow-Brahmins,  and  says  in  their 
presence  : — 

'  To-day  being  such  and  such  a  day  of  such  and  such 
a  month,  I,  so-and-so  Brahmin,  of  such  and  such  country 
and  family,  being  desirous  of  averting  all  danger  from  myself, 
of  growing  in  virtue,  and  of  obtaining  the  delights  of  Swarga 
after  my  death,  hereby  call  all  present  to  witness  that 
I  vow  to  recite  the  gayatri  every  day  from  such  an  hour 
till  such  an  hour.' 

The  Evening  Sandhya. 

Brahmins  begin  this  sandhya  about  sunset,  but  it  must 
not  be  performed  on  the  day  of  the  sankranti,  that  is  to 
say,  on  the  day  that  the  sun  moves  from  one  sign  of  the 
Zodiac  to  another,  nor  on  the  days  of  the  new  and  full 
moon,  nor  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the  moon,  nor  yet  on  the 
day  on  which  one  has  offered  the  sacrifice  for  the  dead 
called  sraddha.  To  perform  the  evening  sandhya  under 
these  circumstances  would  be  committing  a  crime  equal 
to  the  murder  of  a  Brahmin.  If  a  Brahmin  has  just  lost 
his  father,  his  mother,  or  one  of  his  children  ;  if  his  gums 
bleed,  or  if  through  a  wound  or  accident  any  part  of  his 
body  above  the  navel  lias  been  bleeding,  or  in  a  word  if 
he  finds  that  he  is  impure,  he  would  commit  an  unpardon- 
able sin  by  performing  the  evening  sandhya.  Indeed,  in 
the  last  case  he  would  lose  all  his  possessions  and  his 
children.  Except  under  these  special  circumstances,  he 
must  never  neglect  this  religious  duty,  and  he  must  care- 
fully observe  the  following  rules  : — 


264  PRAYERS  TO  VARIOUS  DEITIES 

Ho  makes  the  usual  ablutions.  Then,  turning  to  the 
north,  he  reealls  the  memory  of  Vishnu.  He  then 
thinks  of  Brahma  and  addresses  the  following  prayer  to 
him  : — 

'  Brahma,  you  have  four  faces,  you  are  my  creator  ! 
Forgive  me  all  the  sins  that  I  have  committed.  I  am  now 
beginning  the  evening  sandhya.  Deign  to  be  present,  and 
repose  on  my  chest,  and  deliver  me  from  my  sins.' 

He  then  recites  the  mantram  which  begins  with  these 
words  : — '  Glory  to  the  lesser  worlds  !  '  and  so  on  as  before. 
Closing  up  both  nostrils,  he  thinks  of  Vishnu,  and  imagines 
that  he  is  resting  on  his  navel,  and  says  :  '  0  Vishnu  ! 
you  are  of  great  stature  and  black  in  colour.  You  have 
four  arms,  you  are  the  preserver  of  all  that  exists  ;  destroy 
my  sins.'  He  offers  worship  to  the  seven  greater  worlds, 
as  in  the  morning  sandhya,  and  again  addressing  Vishnu, 
he  says  :  '  You  have  created  light,  amrita,  and  all  that  is 
used  for  the  food  of  mankind.  Preserve  me,  and  preserve 
all  that  lives  in  the  world  !  '  Closing  the  right  nostril  with 
his  finger,  he  breathes  strongly  through  the  left,  and  by 
this  means  burns  all  the  sins  that  are  in  his  body.  Then 
he  ejects  them  by  breathing  forcibly  through  the  right 
nostril.  He  then  directs  his  thoughts  to  Siva,  the  destroyer 
of  sin  and  of  all  things,  and  imagines  that  he  is  resting  on 
his  forehead.  He  says  to  him  :  '  0  Siva  !  you  are  white 
and  tall.  You  have  the  mark  of  a  half- moon  on  your 
forehead  ;  you  have  three  eyes  ;  you  destroy  all  things  ; 
you  are  the  god  of  gods  ;  I  implore  your  protection,  and 
offer  you  worship  !  '  He  once  more  offers  puja  to  the 
different  worlds,  and  destroys  his  sins  by  virtue  of  the 
following  prayer  : — '  Oh,  may  my  sins  be  destroyed  by  the 
almighty  power  of  the  sun  and  the  fire  !  '  He  adds  :  '  O 
fire  !  you  are  prayer  and  the  god  of  prayer.  Forgive  me 
all  the  mistakes  I  have  made  in  the  different  mantrams  that 
I  have  recited  ;  and  forgive  me,  besides,  all  the  sins  that 
I  have  this  day  committed  in  thought,  word,  and  deed. 
May  this  water,  which  I  drink  from  my  uplifted  hand, 
destroy  everything  bad  and  sinful  that  may  be  in  me.' 
He  performs  the  achamania  as  at  the  morning  sandhya. 
He  also  inhales  some  purified  water  into  his  nostrils,  as 
he  did  before,  and  recites  the  mantram  which  begins  with 


THE  MAN  OF  SIN  265 

the  words  :  '  O  water  !  at  the  time  of  the  Flood,'  &c, 
and  so  on,  as  before  mentioned. 

Then  lie  ejects  by  a  forcible  expiration  the  water  in  his 
nostrils,  which  carries  away  the  sinful  man,  whom  he 
crushes  at  once  upon  a  stone.  He  represents  this  man  of 
sin  to  himself  as  a  powerful  being,  of  extraordinary  strength, 
with  a  red  belly,  white  hair  and  beard,  and  a  hideous  and 
distorted  face  \ 

He  evokes  the  gayatri,  and  turning  to  the  west,  he 
says  : — 

'  0  god  of  the  day,  on  whom  depends  the  happiness  of 
mankind,  I  offer  the  evening  sandhya  :  deign  to  honour  me 
with  your  presence  !  O  goddess  gayatri,  who  are  the 
emblem  of  the  Vedas  and  the  word  of  Brahma,  whose 
name  is  composed  of  three  letters  !  I  offer  you  jmja  ; 
hasten  hither  that  I  may  be  happy  !  ' 

Whilst  making  this  prayer  his  hands  are  spread  open  and 
raised  towards  heaven.  He  then  rubs  his  hands  together 
and  puts  them  to  his  breast,  believing  in  imagination  that 
the  gayatri  is  reposing  there.  He  cracks  his  finger-joints 
ten  times,  and  turns  round  at  the  same  moment ;  and  by 
that  he  closes  all  places  of  egress,  so  that  the  goddess 
cannot  depart.  He  pictures  her  to  himself  as  an  old  woman, 
having  Siva's  face,  riding  on  an  ox,  dwelling  in  the  disk 
of  the  sun,  and  united  to  all  the  Vedas.     Then  he  says  : — 

'  Divine  wife  of  Siva  !  you  are  the  mother  of  all  that  is. 
I  offer  you  puja  at  the  approach  of  night,  take  me  under 
your  protection  and  save  me  !  Come,  gayatri,  come  and 
favourably  hear  my  prayers  !  ' 

Whoever  recites  these  words  will  obtain  all  that  he  asks 

1  Here  is  another  portrait  of  a  man  of  sin,  culled  from  the  Sama- 
Veda  :  '  The  murder  of  a  Brahmin  forms  the  head  of  the  man  of  sin  ; 
drinking  intoxicating  liquors,  the  eyes  ;  theft,  particularly  of  gold,  the 
face  ;  the  murder  of  a  guru,  the  ears  ;  the  murder  of  a  woman,  the 
nose  ;  the  murder  of  a  cow,  the  shoulders  ;  the  rape  of  another  man's 
wife,  the  chest ;  the  wilful  production  of  abortion,  the  neck  ;  oppression 
of  the  innocent  and  just,  the  belly  ;  ill  treatment  of  any  one  who  has 
sought  protection,  the  stomach  ;  to  slander  your  guru,  violate  a  virgin, 
betray  a  secret  confided  to  you,  or  to  be  false  to  any  one  who  has  relied 
on  you,  these  arc  the  private  parts  and  the  thighs  ;  and  the  hairs  of 
these  are  the  smaller  sins.  This  man  of  sin  is  of  gigantic  stature,  and 
has  a  horrihle  face  ;  he  is  black,  and  has  wild  bright  eyes  ;  he  delight p 
in  torturing  mankind.' — Dubois. 

K  '6 


266  CLOSING  PRAYERS 

for.  Then,  facing  the  north,  with  his  arms  hanging  down, 
he  recites  the  gayatri  mantram,  in  the  same  manner  and  the 
same  number  of  times  as  before.  It  is  impossible  to  repeat 
this  prayer  too  often  in  the  evening,  evening  prayers  being 
so  much  more  efficacious  than  others.  A  Brahmin  who 
daily  recites  this  prayer  uninterruptedly  from  sunset  to 
midnight  will  by  this  pious  exercise  most  assuredly  place 
himself  beyond  the  possibility  of  want  or  misery,  and  will 
ensure  for  himself  a  quiet  and  peaceful  death,  without 
sickness  or  pain,  when  his  long  and  prosperous  career 
shall  draw  to  a  close. 

To  dismiss  the  goddess  gayatri  he  uses  the  same  formulas 
as  those  of  the  noonday  sandhya,  and,  after  the  tarpaiia, 
or  libation  of  water,  to  the  sun  and  the  planet  Venus,  he 
addresses  Siva  in  these  words  : — '  0  Rudra  !  protect  me 
from  all  accident  and  danger  as  well  by  night  as  by  day. 
You  are  the  lord  of  the  world  ;  take  me  under  your  pro- 
tection that  nothing  may  hurt  me  or  do  me  harm.'  The 
prayer  to  fire  follows  ;  then  he  offers  tarpana  to  the  follow- 
ing gods,  saying  :  '  Glory  to  Brahma  !  Glory  to  water  ! 
Glory  to  Varuna  !  Glory  to  Vishnu  !  Glory  to  Rudra  !  ' 
While  offering  arghya  to  the  sun,  he  says  :  '  God  of  light, 
god  of  the  day  !  I  offer  you  worship  !  Receive  the  arghya 
that  I  now  present  to  j^ou,  and  deliver  me  from  the  cares 
and  dangers  of  the  world  !  ' 

Conclusion. 

1  I  will  conclude,'  the  author  goes  on  to  say,  '  by  ex- 
plaining what  the  sandhya  is,  and  on  what  occasions  it 
should  be  offered. 

'  Brahma,  the  author  and  father  of  the  Vedas,  wishing 
to  extract  the  essence  of  them,  composed  the  sandhya, 
which  is  in  respect  to  the  other  Vedas  what  butter  is  to 
milk,  or  what  gold  is  compared  with  the  other  metals.  In 
short,  as  honey  is  the  quintessence  of  flowers,  so  the  sandhya 
is  the  quintessence  of  the  Vedas. 

'  And  as  the  sandhya  is  all  that  is  most  sublime  in  the 
Vedas,  so  is  the  gayatri  all  that  is  most  sublime  in  the 
sandhya.  This  celebrated  prayer  obtains  for  mankind  the 
remission  of  their  sins,  plenty,  joy,  wealth,  health,  and 
also  ensures  their  happiness  hereafter. 


IMPOSING  ON  THE  IGNOBANT  267 

'  They  must  beware  of  teaching  this  prayer  to  the  de- 
graded Sudras.  Whoever  dared  to  do  so  would  assuredly 
go  to  the  infernal  regions — he,  his  father,  and  his  children  ; 
and  if  a  Sudra  happened  to  overhear  a  Brahmin  repeating 
it  he  would  inevitably  go  to  the  same  place  and  remain 
there  for  all  eternity. 

■  I  have  said  it,  and  I  repeat  it,'  says  the  author,  '  let 
them  beware  of  making  it  known  to  the  Sudras,  under 
pain  of  eternal  damnation. 

1  No  meditation,  penance,  sacrifice,  knowledge,  prayer, 
can  compare  in  efficacy  to  the  gayatri  mantram.  Its 
merits  are  superexcellent,  but  it  must  also  be  kept  a  pro- 
found secret.  It  was  Brahma  himself  who  composed  it 
expressly  for  Brahmins. 

'  This  is  the  idea  which  must  be  formed  of  the  goddess 
gayatri.  Though  she  appears  under  the  form  of  a  prayer, 
it  must  be  recognized  that  she  is  the  Supreme  Being,  and 
she  must  be  worshipped  as  such.  Brahma,  who  composed 
this  mantram,  taught  it  to  Indra,  who  taught  it  to  Yama  ; 
he  in  turn  instructed  Siva,  who  taught  it  to  the  Brahmins.' 

Such  are  the  prayers  and  ceremonials  used  by  Brahmins 
when  performing  the  three  sandhyas,  and  such  are  the 
extravagant  absurdities  to  which  they  are  bound  to  con- 
form. 

The  intense  and  mysterious  solemnity  with  which  they 
perform  all  this  ceremonial  is  intended  to  persuade  others 
that  its  end  and  object  must  be  of  the  highest  and  most 
vital  importance  ;  the  inner  meaning  being  quite  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  vulgar  and  ignorant.  Every  care  is  taken 
to  strengthen  this  opinion  ;  and  they  use  the  greatest 
precautions  to  exclude  the  searching  eyes  of  educated 
persons. 

Though  assured  of  the  blind  credulity  of  the  ignorant 
masses  over  whom  they  hold  sway,  they  are  well  aware 
that,  if  ever  the  spell  should  be  broken,  their  charlatanism 
and  cupidity  would  stand  revealed,  and  they  would  then 
become  the  laughing-stock  of  the  public. 

If  the  sandhya  really  represents  the  cream  of  the  Vedas, 
I  do  not  think  that  any  European  will  regret  the  want  of 
a  wider  acquaintance  with  these  famous  books.  As  an 
excuse  for  the  fantastic  folly  of  many  of  their  religious 


268  ALLEGED  ALLEGORICAL  RITES 

performances  Brahmins  assert  that  some,  if  not  all,  are 
only  allegories,  of  which  the  inner  meaning  is  more  rational. 
This  may  very  likely  be  true  ;  but  I  am  fully  persuaded 
that  the  tradition  of  this  inner  meaning  has  been  lost. 
There  are  beyond  question  very  few  Brahmins  who  would 
be  able  to  give  even  the  most  imperfect  idea  of  what  their 
rites  were  originally  intended  to  convey.  It  is  an  un- 
doubted fact  that  the  greater  number  of  them  have  nothing 
in  their  minds  beyond  the  material  and  literal  fulfilment 
of  the  ridiculous  ceremonies  which  they  are  in  the  habit 
of  performing.  Take,  for  instance,  their  celebrated  mys- 
terious gayatri,  of  which  each  word,  they  aver,  contains 
a  hidden  meaning — a  meaning,  however,  which  is  inter- 
preted in  as  many  different  ways  as  there  are  castes  and 
sects  l. 

The  first  four  sections  of  this  chapter  are  taken  from  the 
Nitya  Karma,  or  Brahminical  ritual.  I  was  acquainted 
with  the  second  part  of  the  sandhya  when  I  first  compiled 
this  work  ;  I  had  read  a  full  description  of  its  details  in 
a  little  manuscript  of  M.  Pons,  formerly  a  Jesuit  missionary 
in  the  Carnatic,  who  died  about  eighty  years  ago.  He  had 
travelled  all  over  Southern  India,  and  was  a  good  Sanskrit 
scholar,  having  written  a  grammar  of  that  language.  But 
the  particulars  which  this  learned  man  gave  appeared  to 
me  so  extraordinary  and  so  incredible,  that  I  doubted  their 
authenticity  and  did  not  venture  to  use  them.  I  after- 
wards procured  a  book  in  Canara  entitled  Purohita-Asrama- 
Karma,  or  '  The  Religious  Observances  of  a  Brahmin 
Purohita,'  in  which  I  found  the  same  details  in  almost 
exactly  the  same  words.  I  consulted  some  Brahmins  on 
the  subject,  and  they  assured  me  that  they  were  sub- 
stantially correct,  but  that  there  were  some  mantrams  and 
ceremonies  mentioned  which  were  not  in  use  in  the  Southern 
Provinces,  though  they  were  used  in  the  north.  Indeed 
I  was  assured  the  ceremonial  and  mantrams  vary  slightly 
in  different  parts,  according  to  the  Veda  and  the  sect  of 
those  that  follow  them.     But,  according  to  my  informants, 

1  A  Hindu  would  contend  that  the  fact  of  the  hidden  meaning  of  the 
mantrants  having  been  lost  does  not  make  the  mantrams  absurd,  but  only 
those  who  perform  the  ceremonies  without  understanding  their  mean- 
ing.—Ed. 


WHO  PERFORM  THE  SANDHYA  269 

most  Brahmins  neglect  and  are  even  altogether  ignorant 
of  the  greater  part  of  them. 

The  Kshatriyas  and  the  Vaisyas  must  also  perform  the 
sandhya  ;  but  it  is  not  as  obligatory  for  them,  especially  for 
Vaisyas,  as  it  is  for  Brahmins.  Furthermore,  the  mantrams 
and  ceremonials  of  the  latter  are  quite  different,  and  not 
nearly  so  numerous. 

The  Jains  also  perform  the  sandhya.  As  for  the  Sudras, 
they  can  only  make  simple  ablutions,  without  any  prayers 
or  ceremonies  ;  but  any  one  who  wishes  to  be  distinguished 
from  the  vulgar  herd,  and  to  be  considered  a  more  exalted 
person,  rarely  fails  to  perform  the  ablutions  at  least  once 
a  day.  To  see  them  one  would  never  think  that  those 
who  perform  the  sandhya  are  actuated  in  any  way  by  a 
spirit  of  devotion.  The  Brahmin  gets  through  all  these 
ceremonies  and  repeats  all  these  prayers  as  quickly  as 
possible  ;  he  is  like  a  schoolboy  gabbling  over  a  lesson  he 
has  learnt  by  heart  ;  and  this,  like  everything  else,  is  all 
performed  perfunctorily  and  as  a  duty  to  be  discharged 
with  all  possible  celerity. 

CHAPTER   VIII 

Brahminical  Fasts. — The  Custom  of  Rubbing  the  Head  and  Body  with 
Oil. — The  Over-indulgence  of  Brahmins. — Their  Scrupulous  Observ- 
ance of  Custom. — Reflections  on  this  Subject. — Their  Samara- 
dhanas,  or  Public  Feasts. — Sudra  Feasts. 

Brahmins  are  obliged  to  keep  frequent  and  often  pro- 
longed fasts  l.  They  are  expected  to  accustom  themselves 
to  them  as  indispensable  adjuncts  of  their  religion  from 
the  day  they  assume  the  triple  cord.  Even  old  age,  in- 
firmity, or  sickness,  unless  it  be  very  serious,  is  not  held 
to  exempt  them  from  these  fasts. 

1  One  is  perpetually  struck  by  the  numerous  points  of  resemblance 
between  the  manners  and  customs  of  modern  Brahmins  and  those  of 
the  Pharisees,  with  which  we  have  become  acquainted  through  the 
Holy  Scriptures.  Their  lives  are  full  of  the  same  affectations,  they 
share  the  same  dread  of  defilement,  there  are  the  same  continual  ablu- 
tions and  bathings,  the  same  scrupulous  attention  to  the  outward 
observance  of  the  law,  the  same  frequent  fasts,  &c.  ;  but  all  this  is 
tainted  by  overweening  pride,  ostentation,  and  hypocrisy.  What 
St.  Matthew  says  of  this  sect  (xxiii.  27)  might  certainly  be  applied  without 
injustice  to  the  Brahmins  of  India.  —  Dubois. 


270  BRAHMINICAL  FAST-DAYS 

On  ordinary  days  the  Brahmin  Grahasiha  may  take  two 
meals  ;  one  after  midday,  and  one  before  going  to  bed. 
But  this  rule  has  many  exceptions.  There  are  many  days 
on  which  he  is  allowed  to  take  only  one  meal,  about  three 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  ;  and  there  are  others  when  he 
may  neither  eat  nor  drink. 

The  days  of  the  new  and  full  moon  are  fast-days,  as  also 
the  tenth,  eleventh,  and  twelfth  days  of  each  lunar  month, 
which  are  called  the  ekadasi  vrata ;  on  the  tenth  and 
twelfth  days  one  meal  may  be  taken,  on  the  eleventh  day, 
called  ekadasi,  no  meal  at  all  is  allowed.  To  fast  on  these 
three  days  has  a  special  merit  \  As  the  fast  which  is  kept 
on  the  eleventh  day  of  each  lunar  month  is  observed  with 
particular  solemnity,  I  will  give  a  few  details  of  it  in  an 
appendix  2. 

The  thirteenth  day  of  the  moon  is  an  unlucky  day. 
Brahmins  must  eat  nothing  on  that  day  till  sunset s.  In 
the  evening,  before  taking  their  food,  they  offer  puja  to 
Siva,  to  propitiate  him,  and  then  begin  to  eat. 

The  feast  called  Sivaratri  (or  '  Siva's  Night  ')  falls  on 
the  fourteenth  day  of  the  moon  in  the  month  of  Maga 
(February),  the  origin  and  particulars  of  which  will  be 
seen  in  an  appendix  4.  On  that  day  no  one  must  eat  or 
drink,  or  even  sleep,  for  the  whole  twenty-four  hours. 
Every  three  hours  during  the  day  and  night  puja  is  offered 
to  Siva,  and  not  until  the  following  day,  after  having  per- 
formed the  sandhya,  are  they  at  liberty  to  eat B. 

On  the  ninth  day  of  the  lunar  month  Cheitra  (April), 
being  the  anniversary  of  the  incarnation  of  the  great  god 
Vishnu  in  the  person  of  Rama,  Brahmins  may  take  only 
one  meal  in  the  day,  and  that  without  rice  ;  they  may 
only  eat  peas,  cakes,  bananas,  and  cocoanuts  6. 

1  The  eleventh  day  is  the  only  strict  fast-day,  and  it  is  observed  only 
by  old  and  religiously  disposed  Brahmins  and  widows.  The  Madhva 
Brahmins  observe  the  fast  more  scrupulously  than  others  nowadavs. 
—Ed. 

-  Appendix  II. 

3  This  fast  is  not  generally  observed  nowadays. — Ed. 

4  Appendix  III. 

5  This  festival  is  only  observed  by  followers  of  Siva,  and  never  by 
Vishnavites. — Ed. 

6  This  festival,  though  strictly  speaking  a  Vishnavite  festival,  is  also 
observed  by  ordinary  Sivaites. — Ed. 


ANOINTING  WITH  OIL  271 

On  the  eighth  day  of  the  month  of  Sravana  (August), 
the  day  of  Vishnu's  incarnation  in  the  person  of  Krishna, 
they  are  forbidden  to  take  any  food  at  all,  and  must  give 
themselves  up  to  works  of  piety.  They  make  clay  images 
of  Krishna  and  his  wife  Rukmani,  Satya  Bhama,  Bala- 
Badra,  Rohini,  Vasu-Deva,  Nanda,  Devaki.  At  midnight 
they  offer  puja  to  all  these  deities  together,  and  for  nei- 
veddya  they  offer  cocoanuts,  bananas,  coarse  sugar,  common 
peas,  peaflour,  milk,  and  cakes.  The  next  day,  after  the 
sandhya,  they  can  take  their  usual  meals. 

They  must  also  fast  on  the  anniversaries  of  the  ten 
Avatars  (incarnations)  of  Vishnu  ;  on  the  days  called 
irmnuvadi,  yugadi,  sankranti  ;  on  the  days  of  eclipses  ;  at 
the  equinoxes,  solstices,  and  the  conjunction  of  planets, 
and  other  unlucky  days  ;  on  the  anniversary  of  the  death 
of  father  or  mother  ;  on  Sundays  and  several  other  days 
during  the  year. 

On  fast-days  a  man  is  not  allowed  to  have  intercourse 
with  his  wife  ;  the  women  are  forbidden  to  rub  their  bodies 
with  powdered  saffron  and  the  men  to  anoint  their  heads 
with  oil.  Wednesday  and  Saturday  are  the  only  days  in 
the  week  on  which  this  cosmetic  process  may  be  indulged 
in  with  advantage.  To  anoint  yourself  on  other  days 
might  produce  serious  consequences.  For  instance,  if  you 
anoint  yourself  on  Sunday,  you  run  the  risk  of  catching  all 
sorts  of  complaints  ;  if  on  Monday,  that  of  losing  your 
personal  attractions  ;  if  on  Tuesday,  you  will  shorten  your 
life  ;  and  if  on  Friday,  you  will  probably  become  over- 
whelmed with  debts.  Nevertheless,  when  the  case  is  one 
of  urgent  necessity,  they  may  anoint  themselves  on  one 
of  these  days  after  taking  certain  precautions  \ 

Whenever  any  one  wishes  to  perform  this  operation,  it 
is  necessary  first  to  think  of  Asvatthama,  of  Bhali  Chakra- 
varti,  of  Veda-Vyasa,  of  Hanumanta,  of  Vibhishana,  of 
Krupacharia,  and  of  Parasu-Rama.  Dipping  the  tips  of 
his  fingers  in  the  oil,  the  anointer  must  let  seven  drops  fall 
on  the  ground,  as  a  libation  in  honour  of  these  seven  per- 
sonages. After  that  he  may  anoint  his  head  in  the  usual 
manner  2. 

1  These  customs  are  not  very  strictly  observed  nowadays. — Ed. 

2  The  custom  of  oiling  the  body  was  very  common  among  the  Jews. 


272  OVER-EATING  AT  MEALS 

This  libation  is  considered  rather  important.  The  seven 
personages  whose  names  have  been  mentioned  are  supposed 
to  require  oil  to  anoint  their  heads  ;  it  is  only  fair,  therefore, 
to  give  them  a  few  drops.  They,  on  their  side,  from  feel- 
ings of  gratitude,  grant  long  life  and  riches  to  whoever 
shows  them  this  mark  of  respect. 

But  to  return  to  the  fasts.  The  Brahmins  do  not  appear 
to  feel  the  least  inconvenience  from  enforced  abstinence 
from  food.  Neither  is  it  a  great  hardship  to  them,  for 
from  their  early  youth  they  are  accustomed  to  eat  nothing 
till  after  midday.  Besides,  on  these  days  of  mortification 
they  take  care  to  make  up  for  the  lateness  of  their  meal 
by  the  large  quantity  they  eat  when  once  they  begin. 
Habit  has  enabled  Brahmins  to  overload  their  stomachs 
with  most  indigestible  food,  without  feeling  any  discomfort 
or  inconvenience.  One  often  sees  a  Brahmin,  after  making 
a  hearty  meal  of  rice  and  liquefied  butter,  eat  the  whole  of 
a  huge  jack-fruit  \  which  would  be  enough  to  give  ten 
Europeans  violent  indigestion. 

These  frequent  fasts  appear  to  form  part  of  a  dietary 
system  which  has  been  misinterpreted  in  a  religious  sense  ; 
or  more  probably  they  are  due  to  a  desire  on  the  part  of 
the  Brahmins  to  attract  public  attention  and  respect  by 
an  ostentatious  display  of  moderation.  Be  that  as  it  may, 
gluttony  may  certainly  be  included  among  the  numerous 
vices  of  the  Brahmins.  There  is  no  limit  to  their  appetite 
when  they  get  the  opportunity  of  indulging  it,  and  such 
opportunities  frequently  occur,  seeing  that  their  number- 
less ceremonies  always  end  with  a  feast  ;  and  on  these 
occasions  they  make  a  point  of  gorging  themselves  to  the 
utmost  extent.     There  is  no  doubt  that,  in  spite  of  their 

They  considered  it  a  healthy  and  cleanly  habit.  They  anointed  the 
hair  and  beard  (Psalm  cxxxiii.  2).  At  festivals  or  on  days  of  public 
rejoicing  they  anointed  either  their  whole  bodies  or  else  only  the  head 
or  feet  with  unguents  (St.  Matthew  vi.  17  ;  St.  Luke  vii.  38  ;  St.  John 
xii.  3).  They  also  anointed  the  dead  (St.  Mark  xiv.  8,  xvi.  1  ;  St.  Luke 
xxiii.  56).  Their  kings  and  high  priests  were  anointed  at  their  con- 
secration. The  vessels  of  the  Tabernacle  were  also  consecrated  with 
holy  oil  (Exodus  xxx.  26-28).— Dubois. 

These  semi-divine  personages  are  called  Chiranjivis  in  Sanskrit, 
literally  '  the  long-lived.' — Ed. 

1  The  tree  which  produces  this  is  the  tijaca-marum  of  Malabar.  It  is 
the  largest  fruit  known,  and  is  extremely  indigestible. — Dubois. 


BRAHMIN  GLUTTONY  273 

being  accustomed  to  it,  this  habit  of  eating  to  excess  would 
in  the  end  be  productive  of  disastrous  consequences  in 
a  climate  where  moderation  in  all  things  must  be  the  rule 
of  life,  if  fasts  enforced  by  custom  did  not  give  their  stomachs 
a  little  rest  from  time  to  time. 

If  Brahmins  can  with  a  certain  amount  of  justice  reproach 
Europeans  for  intemperance  in  drinking,  with  no  less  justice 
can  Europeans  retort  that  Brahmins  show  great  want  of 
moderation  in  eating.  Besides,  drunkenness  is  not  an 
habitual  vice  among  respectable  Europeans,  and  those  who 
frequently  give  way  to  it  are  looked  upon  with  contempt 
by  their  own  countrymen  ;  whereas  Brahmins,  who  are 
the  cream  of  Hindu  society,  and  '  the  gods  of  the  earth.' 
are  perfect  slaves  to  their  stomachs.  Indeed  the  most 
revolting  gluttony  does  not  horrify  them,  and  they  even 
justify  it  under  the  cloak  of  religion.  It  is  by  no  means 
uncommon  for  them  to  gorge  themselves  to  such  repletion 
that  they  are  unable  to  rise  from  the  place  where  they 
have  been  eating. 

Far  from  being  ashamed  of  this,  they  pretend  that  it  is 
infinitely  pleasing  to  the  god  Jivattma,  that  is  to  say,  to 
the  "principle  of  life,  which  they  have  deified.  The  more 
liquefied  butter  and  other  food  they  can  cram  into  their 
stomachs,  the  better  the  god  Jivattma  will  be  pleased. 
When  they  sit  down  to  a  feast  it  is  curious  to  watch  the 
preparations  that  are  made  so  that  nothing  may  hinder 
the  full  play  of  the  appetite,  and  Jivattma  be  thoroughly 
satisfied.  To  prevent  themselves  from  being  inconvenienced 
in  any  way  during  this  important  operation  of  eating,  they 
begin  by  taking  off  their  turbans  and  clothes,  sitting  down 
to  the  feast  almost  naked.  While  eating  they  occasionally 
stroke  their  heads,  their  throats,  their  chests,  and  their 
stomachs,  and  rub  these  portions  of  their  bodies  in  order- 
as  it  were,  to  help  the  food  to  descend  more  quickly  into 
the  abdominal  regions.  They  never  get  up  from  a  meal 
until  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  swallow  another  morsel  ; 
and  then,  to  alleviate  the  enormous  amount  of  work  their 
stomachs  are  put  to,  they  swallow  a  piece  of  asafoetida, 
the  aperient  and  sudorific  qualities  of  which  no  doubt  pre- 
vent the  ill  effects  which  would  otherwise  infallibly  result 
from  such  excesses. 


274       STOPPAGE  OF  WORK  ON  FAST-DAYS 

To  /ill  one's  .stomach  well  is  a  very  favourite  expression 
amongst  Hindus,  and  one  you  very  often  hear.  Whenever 
they  feast  in  another's  house  the  host  never  fails  to  ask 
his  guests  if  their  stomachs  are  well  filled.  The  first 
question  that  a  Brahmin's  wife  and  children  ask  on  his 
return  from  a  feast  is,  '  Have  you  filled  your  stomach 
well  ?  '  and  it  affords  him  the  greatest  pleasure  to  be  able 
to  answer,  while  he  gently  rubs  that  part  of  his  person, 
'  My  stomach  is  well  filled.' 

Hindus  belonging  to  other  castes  which  have  the  right 
to  wear  the  triple  cord  also  keep  most  of  the  Brahminical 
fasts,  and  so  do  even  some  Sudras  who  have  not  that 
privilege,  but  who  wish  to  gain  the  respect  and  considera- 
tion of  the  public.  When  these  days  of  mortification 
come  round  all  manual  labour  is  stopped,  all  outdoor 
work  is  suspended,  the  shops  are  closed,  and  workmen, 
artisans,  and  labourers  give  themselves  and  their  cattle 
a  rest.  Fasts  which  recur  so  often  naturally  cause  a  con- 
siderable waste  of  time,  but  in  a  country  where  industry 
meets  with  so  little  encouragement  this  drawback  is  not 
much  felt  ;  and  the  indolent  Hindu  has  generally  more 
time  on  his  hands  than  he  requires  to  look  after  his  busi- 
ness, which  is  never  of  a  very  pressing  nature.  It  is 
indeed  quite  probable  that  their  natural  indolence  and 
dislike  for  work  of  all  kinds  partly  contributed  to  the  in- 
stitution of  so  many  days  of  rest  ! 

All  these  practices  which  the  Hindu  thinks  himself  called 
upon  to  observe  are  so  overladen  with  fanciful  and  even 
ridiculous  details  that  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  any 
civilized  people  could  have  preserved  them  intact  up  to 
the  present  day.  The  Hindus,  however,  are  so  obstinately 
devoted  to  custom  and  precedent  that  no  sensible  person 
amongst  them  would  think  for  a  moment  of  trying  to 
bring  about  a  change.  It  is  true  that  several  of  their 
modern  philosophers,  such  as  Vemana,  Tiruvalluvar, 
Pattanattu-pillai,  Agastya  and  others,  have  ridiculed  such 
customs  ;  yet  they  nevertheless  recommend  people  to 
follow  them,  and  themselves  conform  minutely  to  every 
observance  \ 

1  Amongst  the  few  Hindu  works  which  are  written  in  a  free  philo- 
sophical vein,  and  in  which  the  Hindu  religion  and  its  customs  are  openly 


HINDUS  AND  EUROPEAN  USAGES  275 

Our  Western   religion,  education,  and   manners  are  bo 

diametrically  opposed  at  all  points  to  the  religious  and 
civil  usages  of  the  Hindus  that  they  are  naturally  looked 
upon  with  a  most  unfavourable  eye  by  the  latter.  In 
their  opinion  Europeans  may  almost  be  placed  below  the 
level  of  beasts,  and  even  the  more  sensible  among  them 
cannot  understand  how  people,  possessed  in  other  ways  of 
so  many  superior  qualities,  can  conform  in  their  everyday 
life  to  manners  and  customs  which  differ  so  radically  from 
their  own,  and  which,  as  a  natural  consequence,  they  con- 
sider most  coarse  and  degraded. 

The  Brahmin  rule  of  life  is  in  appearance  intolerably 
severe,  but  it  has  become  for  them  a  mere  matter  of  habit 
encouraged  by  vanity  and  self-interest.  Their  punctilious- 
ness in  the  fulfilment  of  their  religious  duties  day  by  day, 
their  self-denials  and  their  fasts,  form  part  of  the  business  of 
their  lives  and  are  looked  upon  in  the  light  of  pastimes. 
They  know,  too,  full  well,  that  the  eyes  of  the  multitude 
are  always  on  them,  and  the  smallest  relaxation  of  their 
discipline  or  the  least  negligence  in  any  particular  would 
put  an  end  to  the  almost  boundless  veneration  and  respect 

criticized,  not  one  that  I  know  of  has  been  written  by  a  Brahmin.  All 
the  works  of  this  kind  that  I  have  seen  have  emanated  from  authors 
who  were  not  of  this  caste.  Tiruvalluvar  was  a  Pariah,  Pattanattu- 
pillai  and  Agastya  were  both  of  the  Vellala  caste,  and  their  poems  are 
written  in  Tamil ;  Sarovignaimurti  was  a  Lingayat,  and  his  works  are 
in  Canarese.  One  of  the  most  famous  is  Vemana,  whose  poems,  origin- 
ally written  in  Telugu,  have  since  been  translated  into  several  other 
languages.  We  are  told  that  this  philosopher,  who  was  of  the  Reddy 
caste,  and  was  born  in  the  district  of  Cuddapah,  died  towards  the  end 
of  the  seventeenth  century.  His  writings,  from  which  I  have  seen 
several  extracts,  appear  to  me  to  be  most  interesting,  and  are  distinguished 
by  much  discernment  and  independence.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the 
authors  of  all  these  satirical  and  revolutionary  works  belong  to  recent 
times.  If  in  earlier  days  any  enlightened  writers  published  similar 
works,  the  Brahmins  have  taken  care  that  not  a  trace  of  them  shall 
remain.  Nowadays  they  rage  against  the  authors  we  have  mentioned, 
and  speak  of  their  works  with  contempt.  They  cannot,  of  course, 
succeed  in  destroying  them,  but  they  do  everything  in  their  power  to 
prevent  the  reading  of  them. — Dubois. 

The  last  sentences  of  the  Abbe's  note  are  misleading,  for  these  authors 
are  held  in  great  respect,  and  are  much  read  by  educated  Brahmins. 
These  latter  must  be  distinguished  from  the  purely  priestly  class  of 
Brahmins,  whose  interest  it  may  be  to  dissuade  people  from  studying 
these  works. — Ed. 


276         BREAKING  ESTABLISHED  CUSTOMS 

with  which  the  common  people  regard  them.  I  have 
however  met  with  Brahmins  who  were  sufficiently  reason- 
able to  admit  that  many  of  their  customs  were  opposed  to 
all  common  sense,  and  that  they  only  practised  them  out 
of  consideration  for  their  co-religionists.  I  know  also  that 
most  of  them  evade  the  rules  and  absolve  themselves 
without  hesitation  from  the  performance  of  very  many 
of  their  trifling  ceremonies  when  they  are  quite  certain 
that  these  lapses  will  remain  a  profound  secret.  Thus,  for 
example,  there  are  very  few  who  perform  their  ablutions 
more  than  once  a  day,  or  who  strictly  observe  the  pre- 
scribed fasts.  To  keep  up  appearances,  to  dazzle  the  eyes 
of  the  public,  to  avoid  scandal,  such  are  the  limits  of  their 
pious  zeal.  Although  in  public  they  affect  the  utmost 
strictness,  they  are  very  much  less  particular  in  private 
life  ;  and  a  well-known  saying  confirms  this  assertion  :  '  A 
real  Brahmin  in  the  agrahara  .,  half  a  Brahmin  when  seen 
afar  off,  and  a  Sudra  when  entirely  out  of  sight  V 

It  must  be  acknowledged,  however,  that  they  are  very 
tenacious  of  these  long-established  customs.  Any  one  who 
is  believed  to  openly  neglect  them  incurs  severe  censure 
and  contempt,  and  also  lays  himself  open  to  serious  insults 
and  annoyances.  The  gurus  of  the  Brahmins  keep  a  very 
watchful  eye  over  the  others.  Those  found  guilty  of  a 
breach  of  discipline  are  not  always  let  off  with  severe 
reprimands  publicly  delivered.  The  saintly  gurus  rarely 
omit  the  imposition  of  a  heavy  fine,  the  amount  of  which 
is  fixed  by  themselves. 

The  purohitas  also  are  obliged,  for  the  sake  of  example 
and  to  keep  up  appearances,  to  follow  the  Brahminical 
usages  with  the  utmost  strictness,  even  to  the  minutest 
details  ;  but  it  is  greatly  to  their  interest  to  keep  up  all 
these  practices,  seeing  that  they  form  a  never-failing  source 
of  profit. 

The  scrupulous  exactitude  of  the  Brahmins  is  particularly 
noticeable  at  the  samaradhanas,  or  public  feasts,  to  which 
they  are  often  invited  by  persons  of  high  degree,  such  as 

1  The  name  of  villages  entirely  peopled  by  Brahmins. 

2  This  is  even  more  true  nowadays  than  it  was  in  the  time  of  the 
Abbe,  at  any  rate  among  the  Brahmins  educated  on  Western  lines. 
—  Ed 


BRAHMIN  FEASTS  277 

Rajahs,  governors  of  provinces,  and  other  high  officials,  or 
wealthy  individuals  who  pride  themselves  on  the  enormous 
expense  which  their  prodigality  entails  on  these  occasions. 
The  dedication  of  a  new  temple,  the  inauguration  of  an 
idol,  the  celebration  of  a  feast-day  or  of  a  marriage,  the 
birth  of  an  heir,  &c,  expiatory  ceremonies  for  the  sins  of 
the  departed  to  procure  their  admittance  into  the  abode 
of  bliss,  votive  ceremonies  to  ensure  victory  in  time  of 
war,  to  avert  the  evil  effects  of  an  unlucky  constellation, 
or  to  obtain  rain  in  time  of  drought,  &c,  &c.  ;  one  and  all 
of  these  are  opportunities  for  samaradhanas  K  It  is  need- 
less to  add  that  the  Brahmins  who  make  their  living  out 
of  these  and  similar  practices  insist  very  warmly  on  their 
being  kept  up,  and  place  them  in  the  foremost  rank  of 
meritorious  actions.  When  a  samaradhana  is  announced 
as  about  to  take  place,  all,  men  and  women,  from  seven  or 
eight  miles  round,  flock  to  it,  sometimes  to  the  number 
of  over  two  thousand  2.  Each  and  all  bring  with  them 
an  appetite  well  calculated  to  do  full  justice  to  the  hospi- 
tality of  their  entertainer.  These  gatherings  are  composed 
entirely  of  Brahmins,  and  as  every  one  keeps  his  eye  on 
his  neighbour  there  is  much  rivalry  as  to  who  will  show 
the  greatest  familiarity  with  the  customs  of  their  caste 
and  the  greatest  zeal  in  carrying  them  out.  An  ancient 
Roman  philosopher  once  said  that  he  could  not  imagine 
how  two  augurs  could  meet  without  laughing  in  each  other's 
faces.  What  would  he  have  thought  of  the  grave  and 
serious  mien  which  Hindu  soothsayers  and  impostors  pre- 
serve under  similar  circumstances  ? 

Seated  on  the  ground  in  long  rows,  the  women  entirely 
separated  from  the  men,  they  sing  in  turn  while  waiting 
for  their  food,  either  Sanskrit  hymns  in  honour  of  their 
deities  or  love -songs.  All  those  who  are  listening  cry  out 
as  a  mark  of  approval,  lHara  !  Hara  !  Govinda  '  /  '  though 
the  greater  number  have  probably  understood  nothing  of 
what  has  been  sung. 

1  The  Jews  had  also  their  solemn  feasts.  Frequent  mention  is  made 
of  them  in  the  Bible. — Dubois. 

-  There  is  a  sarcastic  Tamil  proverb  to  the  effect  that  '  a  Brahmin 
will  walk  even  a  hundred  miles  for  rice  and  dholl." — Ed. 

s  A  style  of  acclamation.  They  arc  the  names  of  Siva  and  Vishnu. — 
Dubois. 


278  SUDKA  FEASTS 

The  giver  of  the  entertainment  is  not  permitted  to  eat 
with  his  guests  unless  he  is  himself  a  Brahmin.  If  lie  is 
of  another  caste  he  appears  after  the  feast  is  finished,  and 
prostrates  himself  humbly  before  these  gods  of  the  earth 
who  have  done  him  the  honour  to  devour  the  food  he  has 
provided,  and  who  in  return  give  him  their  asirvada  or 
blessing.  If  their  host  crowns  the  feast  by  a  distribution 
of  presents  of  cloth  or  money,  their  fulsome  compliments 
will  know  no  bounds,  and  they  will  exalt  him  even  above 
their  own  deities.  At  this  the  host  feels  excessively 
flattered,  thoroughly  convinced  that  such  an  honour 
cannot  be  too  dearly  bought.  I  have  already  remarked 
that  all  Hindus  are  particularly  susceptible  to  flattery. 
There  is  an  entire  caste  called  Battus,  who  are  in  a  way 
flatterers  by  profession.  Their  only  occupation  in  life  is 
to  grovel  before  people  of  position  or  importance,  and  to 
recite  or  sing  before  them  verses  composed  in  their  honour, 
which  are  full  to  overflowing  of  the  most  extravagant 
eulogies.  The  most  astonishing  thing  is  that,  instead  of 
wounding  the  modesty  and  susceptibilities  of  those  to  whom 
they  are  addressed,  these  songs  are  received  with  compla- 
cency and  looked  upon  as  sincere  tributes  to  undoubted 
merit,  the  author  being  handsomely  rewarded  for  them. 

Those  who  belong  to  the  sects  of  Siva  and  Vishnu  also 
have  their  samaradhanas,  or  public  feasts,  which  are  given 
by  the  wealthy  among  them ] .  As  all  the  guests  who 
crowd  to  these  entertainments  are  Sudras,  and  for  the 
most  part  low,  uneducated  people,  the  festivities  are 
generally  very  noisy  and  disorderly,  and  frequently  end 
in  a  quarrel.  The  various  classes  of  common  Sudras  also 
get  up  feasts  amongst  themselves,  but  these  have  no  re- 
semblance to  the  samaradhanas  of  the  Brahmins,  the  only 
motive  of  the  feasters  being  to  enjoy  a  festivity  which 
usually  ends  in  a  debauch.  At  a  Brahmin  feast  the  greatest 
order  and  propriety  prevail,  but  Sudra  feasts  differ  in  no 
wise  from  the  orgies  which  take  place  in  Europe  in  the 
low  pot-houses  frequented  by  the  scum  of  the  population. 
The  Sudras  generally  postpone  the  discussion  of  their  many 
and  frequent  differences  until  some  occasion  of  this  sort 

1  This  is  untrue  of  Vishnavitc  Brahmins,  for  no  two  Vishnavite  Brah- 
mins will  cat  together  unless  they  be  very  closely  related. — Ed. 


PRELIMINARY  QUARRELS  279 

conies  round.  Every  one,  indeed,  arrives  with  a  firm 
determination  to  have  a  good  fight  and  to  make  plenty  of 
noise  over  it.  The  moment  when  the  meal  is  ready  and 
the  giver  of  the  feast  has  invited  his  guests  to  come  in 
and  partake  of  it,  is  generally  the  time  that  they  consider 
most  suitable  for  the  discussion  of  their  pretended  griev- 
ances. They  stop  the  whole  assemblage  by  uttering  the 
customary  oath  in  the  name  of  the  prince  or  governor  of 
the  province,  and  declare  that  no  one  shall  begin  to  eat 
until  their  grievances  have  been  listened  to,  their  wrongs 
redressed,  and  the  culprits  punished.  And  then  the  dispute 
begins.  Some  take  one  side  and  some  another,  but  all  par- 
ticipate in  it,  and  the  quarrel  becomes  general.  They  all 
scream  at  the  top  of  their  voices,  without  listening  to  a 
word  any  one  else  is  saying  ;  they  hurl  the  most  disgusting 
accusations  at  one  another,  mixed  with  horrible  impreca- 
tions and  insults,  without  pausing  to  give  either  party 
a  chance  of  replying.  Then  their  blood  rises,  and  the 
quarrel  waxes  warmer  and  warmer.  They  proceed  to 
threatening  gestures  and  rush  towards  each  other,  their 
faces  contorted  with  rage  and  fury.  Any  one  who  did  not 
know  the  Hindu  character  would  swear  they  were  all  going 
to  fly  at  each  other's  throats.  Their  host,  however,  who 
generally  maintains  a  strict  neutrality  on  these  occasions, 
continues  to  superintend  his  domestic  arrangements  with 
the  utmost  composure,  or  else  retires  to  some  peaceful 
corner  and  quietly  smokes  his  pipe,  a  tranquil  spectator 
of  the  scene  around  him,  knowing  full  well  that  the  belli- 
gerents must  ultimately  tire  themselves  out  by  the  vehem- 
ence of  their  cries  and  gesticulations,  and  that  they  will 
calm  down  from  sheer  exhaustion.  He  then  selects  three 
or  four  to  act  as  arbitrators,  and,  placing  himself  with 
them  between  the  two  parties,  succeeds,  after  no  little 
difficulty,  in  restoring  peace.  They  then  investigate  the 
cause  of  the  quarrel,  and  try  to  arrange  the  affair  so  as  to 
satisfy  both  sides.  If  this  is  impossible,  the  final  decision 
is  put  off  till  some  future  time,  when  the  whole  scene  is 
re-enacted  from  the  beginning.  Promptly  forgetting  the 
epithets  which  they  have  been  mutually  heaping  on  each 
other,  the  guests  at  length  seat  themselves  and  begin  tli^ 
feast,  which  has  had  plenty  of  time  to  get  cold.     As  a  rule 


280  PARIAH  FEASTS 

it  would  be  waste  of  labour  to  try  to  arrange  a  difference 
of  opinion  between  Sudras  without  first  allowing  them  to 
quarrel  and  abuse  each  other,  and  even  come  to  blows  '. 
After  these  preliminaries,  which  they  generally  repeat 
several  times,  you  may  attempt  the  task  of  reconciliation 
with  some  hope  of  success. 

The  Pariahs  also  sometimes  have  feasts  amongst  them- 
selves, but  these  are  invariably  disgusting  orgies.  Follow- 
ing the  customs  of  their  caste,  they  make  a  point  of  in- 
toxicating themselves  with  the  juice  of  the  palm-tree,  of 
which  there  is  always  a  vast  quantity  drunk.  The  guests, 
who  know  that  these  orgies  always  end  in  a  free  fight,  go 
ready  armed  with  stout  sticks,  and  the  feast  rarely  concludes 
without  bloodshed.  Similar  quarrels  almost  always  form 
part  of  the  wedding  ceremonies  of  a  Sudra.  During  the 
time  that  I  lived  in  India,  I  celebrated  over  2,000  marriages 
amongst  Christian  Sudras  of  all  castes  ;  and  I  only  remember 
one  such  occasion  on  which  there  was  not  a  violent  alterca- 
tion, which  ended  more  often  than  not  in  a  furious,  if  not 
sanguinary,  battle.  The  principal  cause  of  dissension  is 
the  marriage  settlement.  It  is  seldom  that  the  bride's 
parents  do  not  try  to  cheat  those  of  the  bridegroom  over 
the  quantity  or  value  of  the  jewels,  or  over  the  colour  and 
price  of  the  wedding  garments.  At  other  times,  perhaps,  it 
is  the  friends  and  relations  who  feel  themselves  aggrieved. 
They  complain  bitterly  that  the  respect  and  consideration 
which  were  their  due  have  not  been  shown  them,  either 
in  not  consulting  them  before  the  marriage  was  arranged, 
or  by  a  lack  of  due  form  and  ceremony  in  their  invitation. 

There  are  many  small  details  which  must  be  attended  to 
when  a  feast  is  given  amongst  the  various  Sudra  classes. 
The  quality  of  the  food,  the  method  of  preparing  and  serving 
it,  and  a  thousand  other  minutiae,  are  all  points  which 
have  long  since  been  settled  by  immemorial  custom,  the 
non-observance  of  which  would  entail  very  serious  con- 

1  The  truth  is,  a  marriage  or  funeral  ceremony  is  the  only  occasion 
when  all  the  members  of  one  family  or  members  of  one  caste  meet,  and 
it  therefore  offers  the  best,  if  not  the  only,  opportunity  for  an  aggrieved 
member  to  lay  his  complaint  before  his  castc-beadmen.  It  is  too  much 
to  say  that  they  come  '  determined  to  have  a  good  light,"  with  or  without 
reason. — En. 


FAULT-FINDING  BY  GUESTS  28] 

sequences.  Even  involuntary  mistakes  of  the  most  trivial 
kind  are  not  overlooked  or  forgiven.  The  following  story 
is  an  instance.  I  was  once  in  a  village  where  a  man  of 
the  Oopara  or  gardener  caste  was  giving  a  feast  to  his 
friends  and  to  the  headman  of  his  caste.  All  the  guests 
had  seated  themselves  and  begun  their  meal,  when  one  of 
them,  whilst  eating,  found  a  small  stone  in  his  rice,  which 
hurt  his  teeth.  He  promptly  spat  out  everything  he  had 
in  his  mouth  on  to  his  plate,  found  the  tin}7  stone,  and 
placing  it  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand  rose  from  his  place, 
and  thus  addressed  all  the  other  guests.  '  Sirs  !  '  he  said, 
pointing  to  the  giver  of  the  feast,  '  here  is  a  man  who 
invites  us  to  his  house,  and  then  gives  us  stones  instead  of 
rice  !  '  And  he  then  showed  this  little  pebble  to  every 
person  present.  '  Shame  !  shame  !  '  cried  all  the  guests  ; 
'  our  host  must  be  punished.'  Thereupon  they  all  got  up, 
leaving  their  meal  unfinished,  to  deliberate  as  to  the  punish- 
ment that  should  be  inflicted  for  so  grave  an  offence.  The 
poor  fellow  was  mulcted  in  a  heavy  fine,  and  was  also  con- 
demned to  provide  another  feast  on  twice  as  sumptuous 
a  scale  for  the  heads  of  the  caste. 

It  is  considered  good  style  amongst  the  Sudras  never  to 
ajjpear  pleased  or  satisfied  with  any  entertainment  that 
may  be  offered  them.  The  host  may  spend  large  sums 
for  the  gratification  of  his  guests,  and  may  take  every 
possible  care  that  the  food  is  nicely  prepared  and  well 
served  ;  but  the  greatest  compliment  that  he  can  expect 
or  hope  for  is  that  his  feast  is  just  fit  for  dogs.  Hence  the 
common  saying,  that  if  a  Sudra  invited  to  a  feast  can  find 
fault  with  nothing  else,  he  will  be  sure  to  complain  that 
there  was  not  enough  salt. 

The  master  of  the  house  must  not  be  annoyed  at  these 
incivilities  ;  he  must  listen  to  the  fault-finding  patiently, 
and  make  what  excuses  he  can  for  the  inferiority  of  his 
repast.  His  only  consolation  is  the  thought  of  the  revenge 
he  will  take  when  he,  in  his  turn,  is  invited  to  a  feast  by 
his  fastidious  and  too  candid  friends. 

Intoxicating  drinks  are  forbidden  at  these  feasts,  and  it 
would  be  considered  an  insult  of  the  deepest  dye  to  even 
suggest  them.  When  the  meal  is  over,  betel  is  handed 
round,  and  the  guests  retire  at  once. 


282 


CHAPTER   IX 

The  Kinds  of  Food  expressly  forbidden  to  Brahmins. — Occult  Rites. — 
The  Disgusting  Rite  called  Sakti. 

There  are  as  regards  food  three  things  which  a  Brahmin 
must  avoid  with  the  most  scrupulous  care  :  he  must  not 
eat  anything  that  has  had  life  or  has  even  contained  the 
principle  of  life  ;  he  must  not  drink  intoxicating  liquors  ; 
he  must  not  touch  food  that  has  been  prepared  by  persons 
of  another  caste.  It  is  no  greater  privation  to  a  Brahmin 
to  abstain  from  eating  meat,  accustomed  as  he  is  from  his 
earliest  youth  to  go  without  it,  and  even  to  look  upon  it 
as  abominable  food,  than  it  is  for  us  to  refrain  from  eating 
the  flesh  of  certain  domestic  animals,  for  which,  either 
from  natural  prejudice  or  from  its  unpleasant  taste,  we 
feel  a  strong  repugnance.  Thus,  when  a  Hindu  abstains 
from  all  animal  food,  he  is  only  conforming  to  a  feeling  of 
unconquerable  repulsion,  the  result  partly  of  imagination 
and  partly  of  long-established  custom.  I  once  met  a 
Brahmin  who,  on  seeing  some  eggs  being  broken  and  beaten 
up  for  an  omelette,  immediately  complained  of  feeling  un- 
well, and  in  the  course  of  a  few  moments  was  violently 
sick. 

The  aversion  which  Brahmins  feel  for  sura-pana,  or  the 
use  of  intoxicating  beverages — an  aversion  to  which  I  have 
several  times  had  occasion  to  call  attention — springs  at  any 
rate  from  most  commendable  principles.  In  places  where 
Brahmins  congregate  in  great  numbers  infractions  of  this 
rule  of  abstinence  are  extremely  rare,  and  such  a  thing  as 
a  drunken  Brahmin  is  unknown.  They  are  not,  however, 
quite  so  strict  on  this  point  when  they  live  in  some  isolated 
spot,  away  from  the  watchful  eyes  of  their  gurus.  A 
Brahmin's  house,  situated  at  some  distance  from  a  village 
in  Tanjore,  once  caught  fire,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
village  hastened  to  the  spot  to  try  and  snatch  what  they 
could  from  the  flames.  Amongst  the  things  saved  were 
a  large  earthen  vessel  of  salt  pork  and  another  containing 
arrack,  or  native  rum.  The  proprietor  felt  the  loss  of  his 
house  much  less  than  he  did  this  overwhelming  disclosure. 


COVERT  VIOLATION  OF  CASTE  283 

He  became  the  laughing-stock  of  the  neighbourhood,  and 
felt  the  jeers  and  mockery  of  which  he  was  the  object  so 
keenly  that  he  was  obliged  to  leave  the  country  and  hide 
his  shame  elsewhere.  One  may  well  conjecture,  without 
doing  them  any  injustice,  that  there  are  many  other 
Brahmins  whose  delinquencies  have  not  been  brought  to 
light  by  accidents  of  this  kind.  These  lapses  from  strict 
adherence  to  the  law  are  especially  frequent  in  towns, 
where  illicit  pleasures  are  easily  obtainable.  More  than 
once  it  has  come  to  my  knowledge  that  certain  Brahmins 
were  in  the  habit  of  meeting  in  small  numbers  in  the  houses 
of  Sudras  in  whom  they  thought  they  could  place  con- 
fidence, there  to  partake  in  the  strictest  privacy  of  feasts 
from  which  neither  intoxicating  liquors  nor  meat  were 
excluded.  Furthermore,  the  Brahmins  became  so  demora- 
lized by  these  debauches  that  they  allowed  their  hosts  to 
eat  with  them,  thus  shamelessly  committing  a  threefold 
breach  of  those  laws  of  their  caste  which  they  are  most 
especially  enjoined  to  keep. 

These  little  orgies  sometimes  entail  very  unpleasant  con- 
sequences. The  Sudras'  wives  are,  of  course,  obliged  to 
be  in  the  secret,  and  as  La  Fontaine  says  : — 

Rien  ne  pese  tant  qu'un  secret ; 

Le  porter  loin  est  difficile  aux  dames. 

Hindu  women  are  by  no  means  exceptions  to  this  rule. 
A  Brahmin  woman  whom  I  knew,  allowed  herself  to  be 
persuaded  by  a  Sudra  woman,  a  friend  of  hers,  to  eat 
part  of  a  stew  which  the  latter  had  cooked,  and  she  even 
went  so  far  as  to  say  she  thought  it  excellent.  A  short 
time  afterwards  the  two  friends  quarrelled,  and  at  the  end 
of  a  violent  altercation  the  Sudra  woman,  to  punish  her 
adversary  and  silence  her  at  the  same  time,  publicly  pro- 
claimed the  sin  which  the  other  in  a  moment  of  greediness 
had  committed.  Covered  with  shame  and  confusion  at 
this  unexpected  revelation,  which  she  found  it  impossible 
to  refute,  the  poor  Brahmin  woman  fled  from  the  place  in 
despair,  vowing,  too  late,  that  she  would  never  allow  herself 
to  be  caught  again. 

The  use  of  intoxicating  liquors  is  more  common  than 
the  eating  of  forbidden  food,  as  it  is  so  much  less  liable 


284    PUNISHING  OFFENDERS  AGAINST  CASTE 

to  detection.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  admitted,  it 
is  an  unheard-of  thing  to  see  an  intoxicated  Brahmin  in 
the  public  streets.  The  reproach  of  intemperance  can  only 
be  levelled  at  a  very  small  number  of  men  of  low  reputa- 
tion, who  have  lost  all  sense  of  shame.  One  could  not, 
with  any  degree  of  justice,  say  that  the  reproach  was 
generally  applicable  to  Brahmins,  who  are  in  this  matter 
beyond  even  the  shafts  of  slander  itself  ]. 

The  duty  of  punishing  offences  of  this  kind  devolves 
upon  the  gurus.  When  in  the  course  of  their  peregrina- 
tions they  hear  that  any  one  has  misconducted  himself  in 
such  a  manner,  they  order  the  culprit  to  appear  before 
them  ;  and  if  after  due  investigation  his  delinquency  is 
proved,  he  has  to  listen  to  a  severe  reprimand  and  occasion- 
ally undergo  corporal  punishment.  Frequently  also  he 
has  to  pay  a  heavy  fine  ;  and  if  the  offence  is  a  very  grave 
one,  he  is  put  out  of  caste.  Nevertheless,  for  fear  lest  too 
many  persons  might  be  inculpated,  or  on  account  of  the 
high  position  of  a  particular  delinquent,  or  to  avoid  creat- 
ing a  scandal,  or  for  other  similar  reasons,  the  gurus  find 
it  advisable  to  shut  their  eyes  to  many  peccadilloes.  The 
gurus,  too,  are  not  always  impeccable  in  the  matter  of 
bribes,  and  will  often  find  reasons  for  allowing  a  culprit 
to  escape  who  has  managed  to  ingratiate  himself  with 
them. 

I  was  once  at  Dharmapuri,  a  small  town  in  the  Carnatic, 
just  at  the  time  when  a  Brahmin  guru  was  visiting  that 
district.  A  person  of  the  Brahmin  caste  was  accused 
before  him  of  breaking  the  rules  with  regard  to  food,  and 
even  of  publicly  deriding  them.  The  accusation  was  a 
very  serious  one,  and  well  substantiated  ;  so  the  culprit 
was  cited  to  appear,  and  the  evidence  against  him  was 
heard.  The  guru,  convinced  of  the  guilt  of  the  accused, 
had  made  up  his  mind  to  break  his  triple  cord  and  turn 
him  out  of  caste  ;  but  the  accused,  on  hearing  of  this 
terrible  determination,  showed  not  the  smallest  emotion. 
Without  displaying  the  least  discomfiture  he  advanced 
boldly  into  the   midst    of    the  assembly,  and  prostrating 

1  This  applies  equally  well  in  the  present  day.  Yet  nobody  can 
doubt  that  the  number  of  Brahmins  who  infringe  caste-customs  in 
food  and  drink  is  increasing  year  by  year. — Ed. 


A  CASTE  STORY  285 

himself  before  the  guru,  made  the  following  speech  : — 
1  So  you  have  decided,  you  and  your  assessors,  to  break 
my  cord  !  Well,  that  will  not  be  a  heavy  loss,  as  for  two 
farthings  I  can  get  another.  But  what  is  your  motive  for 
treating  me  with  so  much  severity,  and  for  dishonouring 
me  thus  publicly  I  Is  it  because  I  have  eaten  animal 
food  ?  But  then  a  guru's  justice  should  be  meted  out 
impartially,  and  punishments  should  be  awarded  without 
respect  of  persons.  Why  am  I  the  only  one  to  be  accused, 
the  only  one  to  be  punished,  when  there  are  so  many  others 
who  are  quite  as  much  to  blame  as  myself,  or  even  more 
so  ?  If  I  turn  my  eyes  on  one  side,  I  see  two  or  three 
among  my  accusers  who  not  long  since  partook  with  me 
of  an  excellent  leg  of  mutton.  If  I  look  on  the  other  side, 
I  see  several  who  have  not  disdained  to  accept  the  invita- 
tion of  a  common  Sudra  friend,  who  treated  us  to  an 
admirable  chicken  stew  ;  while  there  are  others  not  less 
to  blame  on  this  score  who  have  not  dared  to  put  in  an 
appearance  in  this  assembly.  Have  I  your  permission  to 
mention  their  names  ?  I  am  quite  ready  to  produce  wit- 
nesses, and  to  substantiate  my  accusation.' 

Struck  dumb  by  this  speech,  which  was  delivered  with 
the  utmost  confidence  and  imperturbable  assurance,  the 
guru  began  to  consider  what  the  consequences  of  this  affair 
would  be,  and  how  it  would  end  if  he  persisted  in  carrying 
it  to  its  proper  termination  ;  so  he  put  a  stop  to  all  future 
complications  by  crying  out,  with  great  presence  of  mind  : 
'  Who  has  brought  this  babbler  here  ?  Do  you  not  see 
that  he  is  mad  ?  Turn  him  out  of  the  assembly  at  once, 
and  let  me  hear  no  more  of  him.' 

If  these  slight  and  rare  infractions  of  the  law,  which  are, 
after  all,  only  weaknesses  inseparable  from  human  nature, 
were  the  only  sins,  they  would  be  undeniably  small  indeed  ; 
but  occasionally  one  may  also  come  across  vice  and  wicked- 
ness in  their  most  hideous  forms.  It  once  came  to  my 
knowledge  that  men  calling  themselves  conjurers  or  magi- 
cians used  to  attend  nocturnal  gatherings,  which  were 
held  in  a  deserted  spot  that  I  knew  of,  there  to  give  them- 
selves up  to  indescribable  orgies  of  debauch  and  intemper- 
ance. 

The  leader  of  these  orgies  was  a  Vishnavite  Brahmin, 


286  DISGUSTING  RELIGIOUS  ORGIES 

and  several  Sudras  were  initiated  into  the  mysterious 
iniquities  which  were  carried  on  there.  They  drank  and 
ate  to  excess  everything  that  is  forbidden  to  a  Hindu,  not 
excepting  even  the  flesh  of  the  cow,  and  the  abominations 
practised  on  these  occasions  are  too  disgusting  to  be 
described.  They  always  finished  up  with  sacrifices  and 
displays  of  magic,  the  supposed  effects  of  which  spread 
fear  and  consternation  amongst  the  peaceable  inhabitants 
of  the  whole  neighbourhood,  for  the  superstitious  terrors 
of  the  Hindu  are  easily  awakened.  People  were  on  the 
point  of  appealing  to  the  magistrates  for  protection  against 
these  diabolical  assemblies,  when  the  debauchees  who  com- 
posed them,  seeing  they  were  about  to  be  discovered,  left 
the  province  and  never  dared  to  appear  there  again. 

Amongst  the  abominable  rites  practised  in  India  is  one 
which  is  only  too  well  known  ;  it  is  called  sakti-puja  ; 
sakti  meaning  strength  or  power  l.  Sometimes  it  is  the 
wife  of  Siva  to  whom  this  sacrifice  is  offered  ;  sometimes 
they  pretend  that  it  is  in  honour  of  some  invisible  power. 
The  ceremony  takes  place  at  night  with  more  or  less  secrecy. 
The  least  disgusting  of  these  orgies  are  those  where  they 
confine  themselves  to  eating  and  drinking  everything  that 
the  custom  of  the  country  forbids,  and  where  men  and 
women,  huddled  together  in  indiscriminate  confusion, 
openly  and  shamelessly  violate  the  commonest  laws  of 
decency  and  modesty. 

The  Namadharis,  or  followers  of  Vishnu,  are  the  most 
frequent  perpetrators  of  these  disgusting  sacrifices.  People 
of  all  castes,  from  the  Brahmin  to  the  Pariah,  are  invited 
to  attend.  When  the  company  are  assembled,  all  kinds  of 
meat,  including  beef,  are  placed  before  the  idol  of  Vishnu. 
Ample  provision  is  also  made  of  arrack,  toddy  and  opium, 
and  any  other  intoxicating  drug  they  can  lay  their  hands 
on.  The  whole  is  then  offered  to  Vishnu.  Afterwards  the 
pujari,  or  sacrificer,  who  is  generally  a  Brahmin,  first  of 
all  tastes  the  various  kinds  of  meats  and  liquors  himself, 

1  It  is  more  correctly  described  as  '  the  power  or  energy  of  the  god  as 
represented  in  some  of  the  many  female  forms.'  It  has  been  estimated 
that  of  the  Hindus  in  Bengal,  about  three-fourths  are  devoted  to  the 
worship  of  sakti,  though  the  forms  of  worship  vary  greatly.  In  Bengal 
the  Vnmacharis  observe  the  most  disgusting  rites  of  all. — Ed. 


INTOXICATION  AND  INDECENCY  287 

then  gives  the  others  permission  to  devour  the  rest.  Men 
and  women  thereupon  begin  to  eat  greedily,  the  same 
piece  of  meat  passing  from  mouth  to  mouth,  each  person 
taking  a  bite,  until  it  is  finished.  Then  they  start  afresh 
on  another  joint,  which  they  gnaw  in  the  same  manner, 
tearing  the  meat  out  of  each  other's  mouths.  When  all 
the  meat  has  been  consumed,  intoxicating  liquors  are 
passed  round,  every  one  drinking  without  repugnance  out 
of  the  same  cup.  Opium  and  other  drugs  disappear  in 
a  similar  fashion.  They  persuade  themselves  that  under 
these  circumstances  they  do  not  contract  impurity  by 
eating  and  drinking  in  so  revolting  a  manner.  When 
they  are  all  completely  intoxicated,  men  and  women  no 
longer  keep  apart,  but  pass  the  rest  of  the  night  together, 
giving  themselves  up  without  restraint  to  the  grossest 
immorality  without  any  risk  of  disagreeable  consequences. 
A  husband  who  sees  his  wife  in  another  man's  arms  cannot 
recall  her,  nor  has  he  the  right  to  complain  ;  for  at  those 
times  every  woman  becomes  common  property.  Perfect 
equality  exists  among  all  castes,  and  the  Brahmin  is  not 
of  higher  caste  than  the  Pariah.  The  celebration  of  these 
mysterious  rites  may  differ  sometimes  in  outward  forms, 
but  in  spirit  they  are  always  equally  abominable.  Under 
certain  circumstances  the  principal  objects  which  form  the 
sacrifice  to  sakti  are  a  large  vessel  full  of  native  rum  and 
a  full-grown  girl.  The  latter,  stark  naked,  remains  stand- 
ing in  a  most  indecent  attitude.  The  goddess  Sakti  is 
evoked,  and  is  supposed  to  respond  to  the  invitation  to 
come  and  take  up  her  abode  in  the  vessel  full  of  rum,  and 
also  in  the  girl's  body. 

A  sacrifice  of  flowers,  incense,  sandalwood,  coloured  rice, 
and  a  lighted  lamp  is  then  offered  to  these  two  objects  ; 
and  for  neiveddya  a  portion  of  all  the  viands  that  have  been 
prepared.  This  done.  Brahmins,  Sudras,  Pariahs,  both  men 
and  women,  intoxicate  themselves  with  the  rum  which  was 
offered  to  sakti,  all  drinking  from  the  same  cup  in  turn  \ 
To  exchange  pieces  of  the  food  that  they  are  in  the  act  of 
eating,  and  to  put  into  one's  own  mouth  what  has  just 
been   taken   from   another's,    are   under   these   conditions 

1  I  have  mentioned  before  that  to  a  Hindu  who  has  been  decently 
brought  up  this  mode  of  drinking  is  absolutely  abhorrent. — Dubois. 


288  RELIGIOUS  ORGIES  AMONGST  THE  ANCIENTS 

regarded  as  acts  of  virtue  by  the  fanatics.  As  usual,  the 
meeting  winds  up  with  the  most  revolting  orgy. 

Without  the  salutary  restraint  of  a  healthy  tone  of 
morality,  how  can  these  people  be  expected  to  fight  success- 
fully against  the  vehemence  of  their  passions  %  And  then, 
when  they  give  way  to  unbridled  licence,  they  think  to 
stifle  remorse  by  investing  these  horrible  practices  with  a 
religious  element,  as  if  sacrilege  could  disguise  their  moral 
turpitude.  Strange  to  say,  it  is  the  Brahmins,  and  very 
often  the  women  of  this  caste,  who  are  frequently  the  most 
ardent  promoters  of  these  Bacchanalian  orgies.  However, 
debauches  of  this  kind  entail  such  heavy  expenses  as 
fortunately  to  prevent  their  frequent  recurrence. 

Of  course  it  is  well  known  that  most  ancient  nations 
had  their  own  peculiar  mysterious  rites,  and  that  very  few 
among  them  failed  to  worship  profligacy  in  some  shape  or 
other.  Greece  might  well  feel  ashamed  of  the  depravity 
which  pervaded  the  cultus  of  a  large  number  of  her  deities. 
Many  remains  still  exist,  proving  irrefutably  that  the  grossest 
excesses  defiled  the  temples  of  Venus,  Ceres,  Bacchus,  &c, 
while  the  Persian  Mitra  and  the  Egyptian  Osiris  were  the 
objects  of  equally  impure  worship. 

Holy  Scripture  tells  us  something  of  the  abominations 
practised  by  the  Canaanites  in  honour  of  Baal,  Baal-peor, 
and  Moloch,  which  brought  down  upon  them  such  terrible 
punishments.  Thus  we  see  that,  all  the  world  over,  idolatry 
assumed  much  the  same  forms,  for  ignorance  and  fanaticism 
can  have  but  one  termination. 

At  the  same  time,  the  Hindus,  accustomed  as  they  are 
to  carry  everything  to  extremes,  appear  to  have  surpassed 
all  the  other  nations  of  the  world,  both  ancient  and  modern, 
in  the  unconscionable  depravity  with  which  so  many  of 
their  religious  rites  are  impregnated. 


CHAPTER  X 

The  Various  Occupations  of  Brahmins. 

If  Brahmins  kept  strictly  to  the  letter  of  the  rules  of 
their  caste,  they  would  live  in  isolated  places,  far  from  the 
haunts  of  men,  where  their  whole  lives  would  be  spent  in 


BRAHMINS  AS  COURTIERS  289 

religious  exercises.  They  would  perform  their  ablutions 
regularly  three  times  a  day  ;  they  would  offer  the  sacrifice 
called  sraddha  to  their  ancestors,  a  ceremony  which  they 
alone  have  the  right  to  perform  ;  they  would  look  after 
their  households,  paying  particular  attention  to  the  educa- 
tion of  their  children  ;  and  they  would  devote  all  their 
leisure  moments  to  reading  the  Vedas  and  other  sacred 
writings,  to  acquiring  knowledge,  and  to  meditation.  But 
the  poverty  of  many  of  their  number,  and  the  avarice  and 
ambition  which  are  the  ruling  passions  of  each  and  all, 
preclude  the  possibility  of  such  a  philosophical  mode  of 
existence. 

Naturally  cunning,  wily,  double-tongued,  and  servile, 
they  turn  these  most  undesirable  qualities  to  account  by 
insinuating  themselves  everywhere  ;  their  main  object, 
upon  which  they  expend  the  greatest  ingenuity,  being  to 
gain  access  to  the  courts  of  princes  or  other  people  of  high 
rank.  This  end  achieved,  they  quickly  gain,  by  their 
hypocritical  conduct,  the  affection  and  confidence  of  those 
who  have  received  them  ;  and  very  soon  the  best  and 
most  lucrative  posts  are  the  reward  of  their  pressing  atten- 
tions. Thus  it  happens  that  the  prime  ministers  of  Asiatic 
princes  are  almost  always  Brahmins.  Shut  up  in  their 
palaces,  and  plunged  in  voluptuous  idleness,  the  nominal 
rulers  rarely  give  a  thought  to  anything  beyond  the  means 
of  increasing  their  enjoyments,  creating  fresh  amusements, 
and  giving  new  zest  to  their  passions  by  ever-varying 
means.  The  welfare  of  their  people  and  the  government 
of  their  country  are  very  secondary  considerations,  if  not 
matters  of  indifference.  Women,  baths,  perfumes,  obscene 
•dances,  filthy  songs,  each  in  turn  excite  their  senses.  Only 
flatterers  of  the  lowest  type  and  despicable  procurers  are 
allowed  to  come  near  them,  and  these  are  always  ready  to 
applaud  the  dissolute  vagaries  of  their  master. 

That  the  Brahmins,  thus  raised  to  positions  of  importance 
at  the  courts  of  these  slothful  and  useless  princes,  do  not 
forget  their  relatives  and  friends,  can  well  be  imagined. 
Indeed  they  usually  divide  the  most  lucrative  of  the  sub- 
ordinate posts  among  them.  Thus  surrounded  by  creatures 
upon  whom  they  can  rely  and  who  can  also  rely  upon  them, 
a  tacit  collusion  is  established,  by  means  of  which  each  one 


290      MENTAL  SUPERIORITY  OF  BRAHMINS 

can   in  his  own  department,  enrich  himself  with  remarkable 
rapidity,  by  carrying  on  unchecked  a  system  of  injustice 
fraud,  dishonesty,  and  oppression-qualities  m  which  most 
individuals  of  this  caste  have  been  thoroughly  well  trained. 
Better  educated,  more  cunning,  more  keen-witted    with 
greater  talents  for  intrigue  than  other  Hindus,  Brahmins 
become  necessary  even  to  the  Mussulman  princes  them- 
selves, who  cannot  govern  without  their  assistance.     ±ne 
Mahomedan  rulers  generally  make  a  Brahmin  their  secretary 
of  state,  through  whose  hands  all  the  state  correspondence 
must  pass.     Brahmins  also  frequently  fill  the  positions  of 
secretaries  and  writers  to  the  governors  of  provinces ;  and 
districts.     Generally  speaking,  the  Mahomedans  of  India 
are  so  ignorant  of  the  first  principles  of  public  administra- 
tion   and  so  utterly  unacquainted  with  the  simplest  rules 
of  arithmetic,  that  they  are  obliged  to  have  recourse  to 
the  Brahmins  for  everything  that  requires  enlightenment 
and  knowledge.     In  return,  the  latter  know  how  to  copy 
only  too  faithfully  the  harsh  and  tyrannical  methods  ot 
the"  Mahomedans.    When  it  is  a  question  of  plundering  the 
people  or  extorting  money  from  them,  they  employ  a  thou- 
sand vexatious  means,  sometimes  even  going  so  far  as  to 
resort  to  torture.     But  they  rarely  obtain  the  same  hold 
over  the  Mahomedan  princes  that  they  do  over  those  ot 
their  own  religion.     With  the  former  they  remain  at  then- 
posts   until   by   endless   peculation   and  extortion,   either 
authorized  or  tacitly  allowed,  they  contrive  to  amass  large 
fortunes.     But  the  moment  their  wealth  becomes  a  no- 
torious fact,  that  moment  their  disgrace  is  certain.     Ihey 
in  their  turn  are  imprisoned,  tortured,  and  forced  to  dis- 
gorge  the   riches   that   they   have   so   unjustly   acquired. 
However,  some  of  them,  foreseeing  the  fate  that  must  befall 
the  servants  of  such  masters,  keep  a  sharp  look-out    and 
place  the  fruit  of  their  plunder  in  security,  either  by  keep- 
ing a  part  of  it  in  some  secret  hiding-place   or  by  sending 
it  away  to  some  country  beyond  the  tyrant  s  reach. 

The"  Brahmins  have  also  been  clever  enough  to  work 
their  way  into  favour  with  the  great  European  Power 
that  now  governs  India.  They  occupy  the  highest  and 
most  lucrative  posts  in  the  different  administrative  boards 
and  Government  offices,  as  well  as  in  the  judicial  courts  ot 


BRAHMINS  IN  THE   PUBLIC  SERVICE        291 

the  various  districts.  In  fact  there  is  no  branch  of  public 
administration  in  which  they  have  not  made  themselves 
indispensable.  Thus  it  is  nearly  always  Brahmins  who 
hold  the  posts  of  sub-collectors  of  revenue,  writers,  copyists, 
translators,  treasurers,  book-keepers,  &c.  It  is  especially 
difficult  to  do  without  their  assistance  in  all  matters  con- 
nected with  accounts,  as  they  have  a  remarkable  talent  for 
arithmetic.  I  have  seen  some  men  in  the  course  of  a  few 
minutes  work  out,  to  the  last  fraction,  long  and  com- 
plicated calculations,  which  would  have  taken  the  best 
accountants  in  Europe  hours  to  get  through  l. 

Furthermore,  their  perfect  knowledge  of  native  opinion 
and  of  the  ways  in  which  it  may  be  guided,  to  say  nothing 
of  the  influence  which  they  exercise  over  public  feeling  by 
the  prerogatives  of  their  birth,  are  quite  sufficient  reasons 
to  account  for  the  readiness  with  which  their  services  are 
accepted.  In  fact,  the  veneration  and  respect  with  which 
their  fellow-countrymen  regard  them  shed,  in  the  opinion 
of  the  vulgar,  a  kind  of  reflected  glory  and  dignity  on  the 
different  Government  offices  in  which  they  occupy  sub- 
ordinate positions.  But  woe  to  the  European  head  of  the 
office,  who  does  not  keep  the  strictest  watch  over  the 
conduct  of  these  said  subordinates,  or  places  implicit  con- 
fidence in  them  !  He  will  soon  find  himself  the  victim  of 
his  own  negligence,  with  his  position  seriously  compromised. 
I  have  known  many  Europeans  holding  most  distinguished 
and  lucrative  appointments  end  by  losing  their  reputation, 
their  honour,  their  position,  and  their  fortune,  all  because 
they  left  too  much  in  the  hands  of  the  Brahmins  under 
them,  for  whose  misdeeds  the  Government  held  them 
responsible.  In  vain  did  these  high  officials  exhaust  all 
their  resources  against  the  authors  of  their  ruin  ;  imprison- 
ment and  punishment  were  equally  ineffectual.  Most  of 
these  peccant  subordinates  would  rather  die  in  irons  than 
restore  one  farthing  of  their  ill-gotten  gains. 

One  can  well  imagine  that  when  Brahmins  are  launched 
in  the  turmoil  of  public  affairs  they  soon,  lose  sight  of  the 
religious  observances  of  their  caste.     Occupied  with  the 

1  The  proportion  of  Brahmins  in  Government  employ  is  still  large  ; 
for  it  is  the  Brahmins  who,  more  than  any  others,  have  availed  them- 
selves of  the  benefits  of  English  education. — Ed. 


•292  SOLDIERS  AND  TRADERS 

government  of  a  kingdom  or  a  province,  they  have  neither 
the  time  nor  even  the  wish  to  give  themselves  up  to  the 
exercise  of  their  interminable  religious  rites.  As,  however, 
they  are  in  positions  of  authority  and  can  dispense  or  with- 
hold favours  at  their  pleasure,  no  one  dares  to  call  attention 
to  their  negligence.  It  is  sufficient  if  they  conform  in  the 
more  important  matters.  Their  dignity  releases  them, 
without  entailing  disagreeable  consequences,  from  the 
necessity  of  attending  to  minor  details.  Firmly  convinced 
as  they  are  of  the  truth  of  their  favourite  dictum  that  to 
fill  one's  belly  one  must  play  many  parts,  Brahmins  are 
clever  at  turning  their  hands  to  many  ways  of  earning 
a  livelihood.  Some  take  up  medicine,  and  it  is  said  with 
considerable  success.  Others  become  soldiers.  In  the 
Mahratta  armies  there  are  many  Brahmins  ;  but  I  cannot 
believe  that  a  military  force  composed  of  men  of  this  caste 
could  ever  be  very  formidable.  Bravery  and  courage  are 
foreign  to  their  nature,  and  their  education  would  not 
tend  to  foster  these  soldier-like  qualities.  Nevertheless, 
there  have  been  several  Brahmin  generals  whose  military 
careers  have  not  been  without  glory.  Many  Brahmins 
who  are  in  trade,  especially  in  the  province  of  Gujerat,  are 
considered  excellent  men  of  business.  Those,  however, 
who  choose  this  walk  in  life  are  rather  looked  down  upon 
by  the  rest  of  their  caste,  not  so  much  on  account  of  their 
profession  as  merchants  or  shopkeepers,  but  because  of 
the  very  small  amount  of  attention  which  they  pay  to  their 
caste  customs  and  observances.  Trade  in  itself  is  not  con- 
sidered at  all  degrading  to  a  Brahmin,  and  men  of  this 
caste  who  are  engaged  in  it  are  to  be  met  with  everywhere  ; 
only  there  are  many  things  which  Brahmins  are  not  allowed 
to  sell,  and  which  consequently  they  cannot  include  in  their 
operations,  such,  for  instance,  as  red  cloths,  the  seeds  and  oil 
of  sesamum,  husked  rice,  liquids  of  every  kind,  salt,  perfumes, 
fruits,  vegetables,  poisons,  honey,  butter,  milk,  sugar,  &c. 
One  almost  invariably  finds  that  subordinate  collectors 
of  revenue,  custom-house  officers,  writers,  book-keepers, 
village  schoolmasters,  and  astronomers  are  Brahmins. 
They  are  very  useful  as  messengers,  because  they  are  never 
detained  anywhere  ;  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  many 
of  the  large  merchants,  living  in  provinces  governed  by 


FILLING  MENIAL  OFFICES  293 

native  princes,  employ  them  as  coolies  or  porters,  and  pay 
them  very  highly,  because  custom-house  officers  have  orders 
to  let  everything  that  they  carry  pass  through  free.  This 
calling,  though  arduous,  is  by  no  means  the  least  lucrative. 
Those  who  follow  it  travel  almost  free  of  expense,  for  along 
every  main  road  there  are  numerous  hostelries  called 
chuttrams,  where  Brahmins  alone  have  the  right  to  lodge, 
and  where  they  are  fed  gratuitously.  The  revenues  which 
these  establishments  derive  from  their  landed  property, 
and  the  abundant  alms  which  they  receive,  amply  com- 
pensate the  persons  who  manage  them,  and  who  are  Brah- 
mins also,  for  the  expenses  entailed  by  the  hospitality 
which  they  extend  to  their  brethren. 

The  great  facility  with  which  they  can  everywhere  intro- 
duce themselves  under  all  sorts  of  disguises,  without  exciting 
the  smallest  suspicion,  and  the  adroitness  with  which  they 
can  play  all  sorts  of  parts  and  extricate  themselves  from 
the  most  difficult  positions,  render  them  peculiarly  well 
fitted  to  act  as  spies  in  time  of  war,  always  supposing  that 
you  can  be  sure  that  they  are  not  serving  both  parties, 
a  circumstance  which  often  happens  without  any  one  being 
the  wiser.  Poverty  or  self-interest  sometimes  reduces  them 
to  occupy  positions  which  are  very  derogatory  to  their 
illustrious  birth.  Thus  sometimes  they  are  seen  acting  as 
dancing-masters  to  courtesans  attached  to  the  service  of 
the  temples.  Others  become  cooks  ;  but  when  they  are 
reduced  to  this  latter  calling,  and  serve  masters  of  inferior 
caste,  these  latter  undertake  never  to  touch  the  vessels 
which  their  cook  uses  in  preparing  the  food.  The  cook 
will  serve  the  food  when  it  is  ready,  but  will  not  remove 
what  is  left  after  the  meal  is  over.  What  the  Brahmin 
cook  prepares  and  touches  is  pure  for  his  master,  but 
what  the  master  touches  is  impure  and  would  defile  the 
cook.  Some  even  demean  themselves  so  far  as  to  be 
washermen  and  water-carriers  for  persons  of  their  own 
caste,  and  even  undertake  to  perform  the  very  meanest 
requirements  of  domestic  service. 

Superstition,  which  exercises  such  an  important  influence 
throughout  the  whole  of  India,  also  affords  great  resources 
to  those  in  search  of  a  means  of  livelihood.  An  illness, 
a  fall,  a  law-suit,  a  fresh  undertaking,  a  newly  built  house. 


294  LIVING  ON  NATIVE  CREDULITY 

a  bad  omen,  an  unpleasant  dream,  and  a  thousand  other 
similar  things,  are  all  occasions  on  which  their  credulous 
neighbours  come  running  to  them  for  advice,  and  for  which 
they  make  them  pay  as  dearly  as  possible.     The  Hindu 
Almanac,  about  the  composition  of  which  I  have  already 
spoken,  has  always  an  answer  or  a  remedy  for  everything. 
Brahmins  are  never  at  a  loss  for  an  answer,   no   matter 
on    what    point   they    may    be    consulted.     Clever    char- 
latans that  they  are,  they  make  their  various  calculations 
with  the  utmost  gravity  ;  and  to  give  greater  weight  to 
their  words  they  bewilder  their  clients  with  stories  invented 
on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  which  they  tell  with  portentous 
emphasis.     For,  I  repeat  again,  as  arch-impostors  they  are 
absolutely  unrivalled.     Every  Hindu  is  an  adept  at  dis- 
guising  the    truth  ;  but  on  this    point   the    Brahmin   far 
excels  every  other  caste.     Indeed,  this  vice  has  become  so 
deeply  engrained,  that,  far  from  being  ashamed  of  it,  they 
regard  it  on  the  contrary  as  a  subject  for  exultation  and 
vanity.     I  once  had  a  long  conversation  with  two  of  those 
Brahmins   who  gain   their   living  at  the   expense   of   the 
credulous    public,    and  they  ended   by  agreeing  with  me 
as   to  the  superiority  of  the  Christian  religion  over   the 
absurdities  of  their  own  theogony.     '  All  that  you  say  is 
reasonable  and  true,'  they  repeated  several  times.     '  But 
then,'  I  replied,  '  if  all  that  I  say  is  reasonable  and  true, 
it  follows  that  all  that  you  say  to  the  people  must  be  false 
and  ridiculous.'     '  That  also  is  true,'  they  admitted  ;  '  but 
these  lies  comprise  our  livelihood.     If  we  were  to  expound 
to  the  people  only  such  truths  as  you  have  just  been  telling 
us, how  should  we  obtain  the  wherewithal  to  fill  our  stomachs?'' 
Then  again,  flattery,  in  the  art  of  which  Brahmins  are 
also  past-masters,  is  also  a  great  source  of  profit  to  them. 
However  proud  and  haughty  they  may  be,  they  never  find 
any  difficulty  in  grovelling,  in  the  most  humiliating  manner, 
at  the  feet  of  any  one  from  whom  they  think  they  can 
gain  some  advantage.     They  attach  themselves  like  leeches 
to  the  great  merchants  or  other  rich  individuals,  and  are 
never  tired  of  playing  the  role  of  admirers  and  flatterers. 
They  know  full  well  that  to  appeal  to  a  native's  vanity  is 
to  attack  him  at  his  weakest  point  ;  and  naturally  they 
turn  this  knowledge  to  the   best   possible  account.     The 


TEMPLE  REVENUES  295 

grossest  flattery,  verging  on  the  absurd,  is  what  is  most 
pleasing  to  the  ears  of  their  modest  patrons,  and  is  the 
surest  way  of  loosening  the  latter's  purse-strings.  But  the 
most  inexhaustible  mine  of  wealth  to  Brahmins  is  their 
religion.  As  chief  priests  they  exercise  the  highest  func- 
tions, and  consequently  derive  almost  all  the  profit.  In 
certain  famous  temples,  such  as  Tirupati,  Rameswaram, 
Jaganath  (Puri)  and  others,  thousands  of  Brahmins  live 
on  the  revenues  with  which  these  temples  are  endowed. 

Those  who  cannot  find  means  of  existence  in  their  native 
country  go  and  seek  their  fortunes  elsewhere,  often  journey- 
ing as  much  as  two  hundred  miles  from  their  families. 
Expatriation  is  a  very  small  matter  to  them,  and  they 
never  hesitate  to  accept  it  if  there  is  anything  to  be  gained 
by  it. 

CHAPTER   XI 

Religious  Tolerance  amongst  the  Brahmins. — Their  Indifference  with 
regard  to  their  own  Religion. — Their  Sublime  Ideas  of  the  Deity. — 
A  Comparison  between  them  and  the  Greek  Philosophers.— The 
State  of  Christianity. — The  Political  Intolerance  and  Ignorant 
Presumption  of  Brahmins. 

I  have  already  said  that  the  general  feeling  amongst 
Brahmins  is  that  all  the  Hindu  deities  ought  to  receive  an 
equal  share  of  attention  and  worship,  since  they  are  not 
really  antagonistic  one  to  another.  The  quarrels  and  wars 
which  erstwhile  took  place  between  these  deities  were 
never  of  long  duration,  and  have  in  no  wise  prevented 
their  living  since  then  in  perfect  amity  together.  I  have 
also  remarked  that  in  consequence  of  this  the  greater 
number  of  the  Brahmins  strongly  disapprove  of  the  numerous 
sectaries  who  devote  themselves  to  the  worship  of  one  par- 
ticular deity  and  pay  little  or  no  attention  to  the  others, 
on  the  ground  that  they  are  inferior  and  subordinate  to 
the  special  deity  which  they  prefer.  But  are  these  self- 
same Brahmins  really  so  devoted  to  the  religion  of  their 
country  and  to  the  worship  of  these  deities  ?  Well,  though 
this  assertion  may  appear  paradoxical,  I  should  say  that, 
of  all  Hindus,  they  care  the  least  and  have  the  smallest 
amount  of  faith  in  them.     It  is  by  no  means  uncommon 


296  IRREVERENCE  FOR  THE  GODS 

to  hear  them  speaking  of  their  gods  in  terms  of  the  most 
utter  contempt.  When  they  are  displeased  with  their  idols 
they  do  not  scruple  to  upbraid  them  fiercely  to  their  faces, 
at  the  same  time  heaping  the  grossest  insults  upon  them, 
with  every  outward  gesture  and  sign  of  anger  and  resent- 
ment. In  fact,  there  is  absolutely  no  limit  to  the  blas- 
phemies, curses,  and  abuse  which  they  hurl  at  them  under 
these  circumstances  \ 

There  is  a  well-known  Hindu  proverb  which  says,  '  A 
temple  mouse  fears  not  the  gods.'  This  exactly  applies  to 
the  Brahmins,  who  enter  their  temples  without  showing  the 
slightest  sign  of  serious  thought  or  respect  for  the  divinities 
who  are  enshrined  in  them.  Indeed,  they  often  seem  to 
choose  these  particular  places  to  quarrel  and  to  fight  in. 
Even  while  performing  their  numerous  religious  fooleries, 
their  behaviour  shows  no  indication  of  fervour  or  real 
devotion.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  their  religious  devotion 
increases  or  diminishes  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of 
profit  they  expect  to  make  out  of  it,  and  it  also  depends 
on  the  amount  of  publicity  surrounding  them.  Those 
deities  who  do  not  contribute  towards  the  welfare  of  their 
votaries  here  below  only  receive  very  careless  and  per- 
functory worship. 

The  histories  of  their  gods  are  so  ridiculous  and  so  ex- 

1  Any  one  who  is  familiar  with  the  vernaculars  of  India  knows  that 
they  contain  an  immense  number  of  terms  of  abuse,  which  are  so  ex- 
traordinary, and  so  abominably  obscene,  that  it  would  be  impossible 
to  find  their  counterpart  in  any  Billingsgate  of  Europe.  However, 
disgusting  expressions  are  so  greatly  to  the  taste  of  the  Hindus,  that, 
not  content  with  their  own  well-endowed  vocabulary,  they  carefully 
learn  and  appropriate  all  the  bad  language  that  they  hear  in  their 
quarrels  with  the  foreigners  who  live  amongst  them.  When  Hindus 
are  angry  with  their  gods,  which  is  usually  the  case  when  they  do  not 
receive  a  favourable  answer  to  their  prayers,  one  may  see  them  entering 
the  temples  with  many  outward  expressions  of  rage  and  mortification, 
and  exhausting  their  vocabulary  in  curses  and  reproaches  hurled  against 
their  unhappy  gods,  whom  they  openly  accuse  of  impotence  and  fraud. 
In  their  ordinary  conversation  they  often  use  most  irreverent  expres- 
sions regarding  their  gods,  one  of  the  least  obnoxious  being,  '  If  I  do  not 
keep  my  word  may  the  same  punishment  fall  upon  me  as  I  should 
deserve  if  I  had  seduced  the  wife  of  my  god.'  If  a  person  of  high  position 
has  a  grievance  against  the  gods,  he  sometimes  revenges  himself  by 
having  the  doors  of  their  temples  stopped  up  with  thorns  and  brambles, 
so  that  no  one  can  enter  to  worship  or  to  offer  sacrifices. — Dubois. 


COGNIZANT  OF  THE  SUPREME  BEING       207 

travagant  that  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  Brahmins  are 
at  heart  conscious  of  the  absurdity  of  worshipping  such 
beings.  There  is,  therefore,  very  little  danger  incurred  in 
ridiculing  the  gods  in  the  presence  of  Brahmins.  Very 
often  they  agree  with  the  scoffer,  and  even  enlarge  upon 
what  he  has  said.  Many  Brahmins  can  repeat  by  heart 
songs  and  verses  that  treat  with  very  scanty  respect  the 
divinities  which  they  worship  so  ostentatiously  in  public, 
while  their  audience  listen  without  any  sign  of  disapproval. 
Brahmins  have  no  fear  of  such  conduct  calling  forth  either 
reproof  or  punishment.  The  Sudras,  who  are  more  simple 
and  credulous  than  the  Brahmins,  would  not  be  so  indulgent 
under  similar  circumstances,  and  it  would  be  particularly 
imprudent  to  ridicule  any  particular  god  of  theirs  in  the 
presence  of  those  who  are  specially  devoted  to  him. 

There  is  another  factor  which  must  be  taken  into  account 
in  estimating  the  scanty  veneration  which  they  pay  their 
gods,  to  whom  nevertheless  self-interest,  education,  custom, 
and  respect  for  public  opinion  oblige  them  to  display  out- 
ward respect  ;  and  that  is  the  clear  and  precise  knowledge 
which  most  of  them  must  have  gleaned  from  their  books 
of  a  '  God  who  is  the  Author  and  Creator  of  all  things  ; 
eternal,  immaterial,  omnipresent,  independent,  in  all  things 
blessed,  exempt  from  pain  and  care  ;  the  spirit  of  truth, 
the  source  of  all  justice  ;  governor,  dispensator,  and  regu- 
lator of  all  things  ;  perfect  in  wisdom  and  knowledge  ; 
without  shape  or  countenance,  without  limit,  without 
nature,  without  name,  without  caste,  without  parentage  ; 
of  an  absolute  purity  which  excludes  all  passion,  all  bias, 
all  compromise.' 

All  these  qualifications  and  many  others  which  are  not 
less  characteristic  are  translated  literally  from  their  books, 
and  are  used  by  Brahmins  to  explain  the  Supreme  Being, 
to  whom  they  sometimes  give  the  name  of  Parabrahma, 
Paramatma,  &c.  Is  it  credible  that,  knowing  this,  they 
can  seriously  bestow  the  title  of  gods  on  the  almost  count- 
less number  of  animate  and  inanimate  things  which  form 
the  chief  objects  of  the  vulgar  cult  I  It  follows,  therefore, 
that  they  ought  to  confine  their  worship  to  this  supreme 
and  unique  Being,  of  whom  they  still  retain  such  a  sublime 
perception.     There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  whatever  thai 

l  3 


298  PERVERSE  SUPERSTITION 

their  Brahmin  ancestors  worshipped  only  this  one  Supreme 
Being  ;  but  with  the  lapse  of  time  they  fell  victims  to 
idolatry  and  superstition,  and,  shutting  their  eyes  to  the 
light  that  they  possessed,  stifled  the  voice  of  conscience. 
Was  it  not  for  the  same  reason  that  God  pronounced  that 
condemnation  of  which  the  Apostle  St.  Paul  speaks  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans  against  certain  philosophers  of  his 
time,  who  knowingly  rejected  the  truth  l  Is  not  this  the 
reason  why  the  Brahmins  of  to-day  are  given  over,  like 
those  philosophers  of  old,  to  all  the  sins  of  a  perverse  will 
and  to  the  many  kinds  of  vice  and  corruption  with  which 
they  are  imbued,  and  from  which  other  castes  are  more  or 
less  exempt,  seeing  that  they  possess  stronger  faith  ? 

It  is  true  that  Brahmins  are  not  the  only  philosophers 
who  have  been  induced  by  purely  worldly  considerations 
to  hide  the  greatest  and  most  important  of  truths  from 
their  fellow- men.  They  are  only  following  in  the  steps 
of  the  philosophers  of  ancient  Greece.  Even  Socrates,  the 
greatest  of  them  all,  whose  ideas  on  the  subject  of  the  Deity 
were  almost  as  perfect  as  those  which  have  been  given  us 
by  revelation,  never  dared  to  avow  them  openly  :  and, 
although  he  thoroughly  recognized  all  the  absurdities  of 
paganism,  he  maintained  the  principle  that  every  one  should 
follow  the  religion  of  his  country. 

Plato,  his  disciple,  who  was  so  distressed  that  Greece 
and  all  the  other  countries  of  the  world  should  be  given 
over  to  a  false  and  dissolute  religion,  and  who  also,  like 
Socrates,  believed  in  the  true  God,  said  that  these  were 
truths  which  should  not  be  disclosed  to  the  common 
people. 

The  whole  world,  as  Bossuet  says,  was  plunged  at  that 
time  in  the  same  error  ;  and  truth,  though  known  to  a  few, 
remained  captive  and  dared  not  appear  in  the  light  of  day. 
Those  who  knew  and  believed  in  the  true  God  thought  it 
sufficient  to  worship  Him  in  secret,  and  held  that  there 
was  no  harm  in  paying  outward  respect  to  idols  with  the 
rest  of  the  world.  Revelation  had  not  yet  purified  their 
ideas  on  this  subject.  The  truth  was  known  only  in  one 
very  small  corner  of  the  world.  The  worshippers  of  the 
true  God  were  only  to  be  seen  in  small  numbers  in  the 
temple  of  Jerusalem. 


TOLERANCE  FOR  OTHER  RELIGIONS       299 

But  there  is  one  essential  difference  between  these  ancient 
philosophers  and  the  modern  Hindus  :  the  former  were  few 
in  number,  and  lacked  the  necessary  means  and  influence 
which  would  have  enabled  them  to  make  an  impression  on 
the  multitude  and  successfully  combat  the  errors  into 
which  it  had  fallen  ;  whereas  the  Brahmins,  owing  to  their 
numbers  and  to  the  high  estimation  in  which  they  are  held 
by  the  public,  could  easily,  if  they  wished,  and  if  their 
interests  and  their  vices  were  not  opposed  thereto,  over- 
throw the  entire  edifice  of  idolatry  throughout  the  whole 
of  India,  and  substitute  the  knowledge  and  worship  of 
the  true  God,  of  whom  they  already  possess  so  perfect 
an  idea. 

Brahmins  do  not  confine  themselves  to  professing  devotion 
to  all  the  Hindu  deities.  Though  the  rules  of  their  caste 
forbid  their  indulging  in  any  outward  signs  of  worship  to 
the  gods  of  other  nations,  one  of  the  principles  taught  in 
their  books  and  recognized  by  them  is  that,  among  the 
many  different  religions  to  be  found  throughout  the  world, 
and  which  they  call  Anantaveda,  there  is  not  one  that  should 
be  despised  and  condemned.  They  might  even  entertain 
some  feeling  of  respect  for  Mahomedanism,  encumbered 
though  it  is  with  so  much  outward  form  and  ceremony, 
and  with  the  many  superstitions  with  which  the  Indian 
Mahomedans  have  invested  it,  had  not  the  harsh  and 
oppressive  rule  of  the  latter,  as  well  as  their  open  con- 
tempt for  the  civil  and  religious  institutions  of  the  rest  of 
the  inhabitants, made  their  persons  and  their  religion  equally 
odious  to  the  Hindus. 

The  Christian  religion  commands  the  approbation  of 
Brahmins  in  several  respects.  They  admire  its  pure  and 
holy  morality  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  they  hold  that 
some  of  its  precepts  are  beyond  man's  power  of  fulfilment, 
and  that  its  sublimely  high  standard  of  morality  is  only 
suitable  for  persons  leading  a  contemplative  life,  who  have 
retired  from  the  world  and  are  consequently  sheltered  from 
its  temptations.  On  the  other  hand,  as  Christianity  con- 
demns most  of  their  customs  and  superstitions,  it  has  on 
that  account  become  most  hateful  to  them.  The  Hindu 
who  embraces  it  is  not  considered  to  belong  to  the  same 
nation  as  themselves,  because  his  new  religion  forces  him 


300     FORMER  ASCENDENCY  OF  CHRISTIANITY 

Id  reject  those  customs  and  practices  which  they  regard  as 
the  link  binding  them  all  indissolubly  together. 

However,  it  must  be  confessed  that  if,  in  these  latter 
days,  idolatrous  Hindus  have  shown  a  greater  aversion  to 
the  Christian  religion  as  they  became  better  acquainted 
with  Europeans,  the  result  must  be  attributed  solely  to 
the  bad  conduct  of  the  latter.  How  could  the  Hindus 
think  well  of  this  holy  religion,  when  they  see  those  who 
have  been  brought  up  in  it,  and  who  come  from  a  country 
where  it  is  the  only  one  that  is  publicly  professed,  openly 
violating  its  precepts  and  often  making  its  doctrines  the 
subject  of  sarcasm  and  silly  jests  I  It  is  curious  to  note 
that  the  Brahmin  does  not  believe  in  his  religion,  and  yet 
he  outwardly  observes  it  ;  while  the  Christian  believes  in 
his,  and  yet  lie  does  not  outwardly  observe  it.  What  a  sad 
and  shameful  contrast  ! 

Before  the  character  and  behaviour  of  Europeans  became 
well  known  to  these  people,  it  seemed  possible  that  Chris- 
tianity might  take  root  amongst  them.  Little  by  little  it 
was  overcoming  the  numberless  obstacles  which  the  pre- 
judices of  the  country  continually  placed  in  its  way.  Several 
missionaries,  animated  by  a  truly  apostolic  zeal,  had  pene- 
trated into  the  interior  of  the  country,  and  there,  by  con- 
forming scrupulously  to  all  the  usages  and  customs  of  the 
Brahmins — in  their  clothing,  food,  conversation,  and  general 
conduct  in  life — had  managed  to  win  the  attention  of  the 
people,  and  by  dint  of  perseverance  had  succeeded  in 
gaining  a  hearing.  Their  high  character,  talents,  and 
virtues,  and  above  all  their  perfect  disinterestedness, 
obtained  for  them  the  countenance  and  support  of  even 
the  native  princes,  who,  agreeably  surprised  at  the  novelty 
of  their  teaching,  took  these  extraordinary  men  under 
their  protection,  and  gave  them  liberty  to  preach  their 
religion  and  make  what  proselytes  they  could. 

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  Robert  a  Nobilibus,  a  nephew 
of  the  famous  Cardinal  Bellarmin,  and  founder  of  the 
Mission  at  Madura,  where  he  died  at  the  beginning  of  the 
last  century,  converted  nearly  100,000  idolaters  in  that 
very  kingdom.  His  contemporary,  the  Jesuit  Brito,  bap- 
tized 30,000  heathens  in  the  country  of  the  Maravas, 
where   lie   finally  gained  the  crown  of  martyrdom.     The 


ITS  RETARDED  PROGRESS  301 

missionaries  scattered  about  the  other  provinces  of  the 
Peninsula  also  laboured  hard,  and  with  the  greatest  success, 
to  extend  Christianity  amongst  the  Hindus.  The  French 
Mission  at  Pondicherry  numbered  60,000  native  Christians 
in  the  province  of  Arcot,  and  was  daily  making  further 
progress  when  the  conquest  of  the  country  by  Europeans 
took  place — a  disastrous  event  as  far  as  the  advance  of 
Christianity  was  concerned.  Having  witnessed  the  immoral 
and  disorderly  conduct  of  the  Europeans  who  then  overran 
the  whole  country,  the  Hindus  would  hear  no  more  of 
a  religion  which  appeared  to  have  so  little  influence  over  the 
behaviour  of  those  professing  it,  and  who  had  been  brought 
up  in  its  tenets  ;  and  their  prejudice  against  Christianity 
has  gone  on  increasing  steadily  day  by  day,  as  the  people 
became  more  familiar  with  Europeans,  until  it  finally 
received  its  death-blow.  For  it  is  certainly  a  fact  that 
for  the  last  sixty  years  very  few  converts  have  been  made 
in  India.  Those  still  remaining  (and  their  number  is  daily 
diminished  by  apostasy)  are  mostly  the  descendants  of 
the  original  converts  made  by  the  Jesuit  missionaries. 
About  eighty  years  ago  there  must  have  been  at  least 
1,200,000  native  Christians  in  the  Peninsula,  while  now,  at 
the  very  utmost,  they  amount  to  but  one-half  of  that  number. 

This  holy  religion,  which,  when  it  was  first  introduced 
into  India  about  300  years  ago,  had  only  such  obstacles 
as  indifference  or  deep-rooted  superstition  to  contend  with, 
is  now  looked  upon  with  unconquerable  aversion.  A  re- 
spectable Hindu  who  was  asked  to  embrace  the  Christian 
religion,  would  look  upon  the  suggestion  either  as  a  joke, 
or  else  as  an  insult  of  the  deepest  dye.  To  such  an  extreme 
is  this  hatred  now  carried  in  some  parts,  that  were  a  Hindu 
of  good  repute  to  be  on  intimate  terms  with  Christians,  he 
would  not  dare  own  it  in  public. 

A  Hindu  who  embraces  Christianity  nowadays  must 
make  up  his  mind  to  lose  everything  that  makes  life 
pleasant.  He  is  henceforth  an  outcast  from  society.  He 
must  renounce  his  patrimony,  his  right  to  inherit,  his 
father,  mother,  wife,  children,  and  friends  l.  He  is  aban- 
doned and  shunned  by  every  one. 

1  The  law  now  recognizes  a  convert's  right  to  his  share  of  the  family 
property. — Ei>. 


302     EXCLUDING  STRANGERS   FROM  TEMPLES 

Europeans  should  indeed  blush  and  take  shame  to  them- 
selves when  they  see  to  what  depths  of  degradation  and 
abasement  the  religion  of  their  fathers  has  sunk  in  this 
country  through  the  misconduct  and  bad  example  of  their 
fellows  K 

But  to  return  to  the  matter  in  hand  :  many  people 
have  attributed  to  narrowmindedness  and  intolerance  the 
excessive  care  which  Brahmins  take  to  exclude  strangers 
from  their  temples  and  religious  ceremonies.  For  my  part, 
I  think  that  their  only  motive  is  to  secure  themselves  from 
the  approach  of  men  who,  from  the  way  in  which  they  live, 
and  from  the  clothes  which  they  wear,  are  in  their  eyes  in 
a  perpetual  state  of  defilement.  In  the  course  of  my  travels, 
chance  has  sometimes  brought  me  to  the  door,  or  into  the 
enclosure,  of  one  of  their  large  temples,  just  when  a  crowd 
had  assembled  to  witness  some  solemn  ceremony  or  pro- 
cession, and  giving  way  to  curiosity,  I  have  stopped  to  look 
on  at  my  leisure.  On  such  occasions  the  Brahmins  them- 
selves have  sometimes  invited  me  to  enter  their  temple, 
being  satisfied  as  to  my  manner  of  living  and  conduct  ;  an 
honour  which,  out  of  respect  to  my  calling,  I  always  felt 
bound  to  decline. 

When  I  had  to  build  or  restore  a  church,  it  was  very 
often  from  Brahmins  that  I  obtained  the  site  and  the 
necessary  materials  ;  and  when  I  did  occasionally  meet 
with  opposition  in  the  public  discharge  of  my  religious 
duties,  it  was  never  due  to  Brahmins,  but  to  fanatical 
sectaries,  to  religious  mendicants,  and  to  other  vagabonds 
who  are  always  wandering  about  the  country. 

But  if  Brahmins  cannot  with  any  justice  be  accused  of 
intolerance  in  the  matter  of  religion,  the  same  can  certainly 
not  be  said  in  regard  to  their  civil  usages  and  customs. 
On  these  points  they  are  utterly  unreasonable.  We  have 
already  seen  many  proofs  of  this  in  the  preceding  chapters, 
and  what  I  am  now  about  to  add  will  form  a  fitting  sequel. 
It  is  part  of  their  principles  to  avoid  and  despise  strangers. 

1  In  his  Letters  on  the  State  of  Christianity  in  India  the  Abbe  goes 
into  the  whole  of  this  question  at  great  length  ;  but  he  ascribes  to  Brah- 
minical  influence,  rather  than  to  Anglo-Indian  immorality,  the  chief 
cause  of  '  the  impossibility  of  making  real  converts  to  Christianity 
among  the  natives  of  India.' — En. 


UNCHANGEABLE  CUSTOMS  30.3 

The  signs  of  affection,  friendship,  and  even  respect  which 
they  sometimes  show  them  are  only  hypocritical,  their 
motive  being  entirely  that  of  self-interest.  If  a  European 
were  to  come  and  tell  me  that  he  had  found  amongst  the 
Hindus  a  really  disinterested  friend,  I  should  without 
hesitation  predict,  while  pitying  his  simplicity  and  excess 
of  confidence,  that  sooner  or  later  his  pretended  friend 
would  deceive  and  betray  him. 

Being  fully  persuaded  of  the  superlative  merits  of  their 
own  manners  and  customs,  the  Hindus  think  those  of  other 
people  barbarous  and  detestable,  and  quite  incompatible 
with  real  civilization.  This  ridiculous  pride  and  these 
absurd  prejudices  have  always  been  so  deeply  ingrained 
in  them,  that  not  one  of  the  great  dynastic  changes  that 
have  taken  place  in  India  in  modern  times  has  been  able 
to  effect  the  smallest  change  in  their  mode  of  thinking 
and  acting.  Though  they  have  had  to  submit  to  various 
conquerors  who  have  proved  themselves  to  be  their  superiors 
in  courage  and  bravery,  yet,  in  spite  of  this,  they  have 
always  considered  themselves  infinitely  their  superiors  in 
the  matter  of  civilization. 

The  Mahomedans,  who  can  tolerate  no  laws,  no  customs, 
and  no  religion  but  their  own,  used  every  advantage  which 
conquest  gave  them  in  a  vain  attempt  to  force  their  religion 
on  the  people  who  had  succumbed  to  them  almost  without 
resistance.  But  these  same  Hindus,  who  did  not  dare  to 
complain  when  they  saw  their  wives,  their  children,  and 
everything  they  held  most  dear  carried  off  by  these  fierce 
conquerors,  their  country  devastated  by  fire  and  sword, 
their  temples  destroyed,  their  idols  demolished  ;  these  same 
Hindus,  I  say,  only  displayed  some  sparks  of  energy  when 
it  became  a  question  of  changing  their  customs  for  those 
of  their  oppressors.  Ten  centuries  of  Mahomedan  rule, 
during  which  time  the  conquerors  have  tried  alternately 
cajolery  and  violence  in  order  to  establish  their  own  faith 
and  their  own  customs  amongst  the  conquered,  have  not 
sufficed  to  shake  the  steadfast  constancy  of  the  native 
inhabitants.  Bribes  of  dignities  and  honours,  and  the  fear 
of  annoyance  and  loss  of  position,  have  had  but  a  slight 
effect  on  them,  and  that  confined  to  a  few  Brahmins. 
Indeed,  the  dominant  race  has  had  to  yield,  and  has  even 


304  BRAHMIN    EGOTISM 

been  forced  to  adopt  some  of  the  religious  and  civil  practices 
of  the  conquered  people. 

It  is  true  that  the  tyrannical  way  in  which  the  Maho- 
medans  have  always  governed  this  mild  and  gentle  people 
was  not  calculated  to  conciliate  them  ;  but  perhaps  the 
time  is  not  far  distant  when  the  Hindus  may  see  themselves 
delivered  from  the  iron  yoke  which  has  weighed  so  long 
upon  them.  As  a  rule  they  care  little  for  the  troubles 
and  ills  of  this  life,  but  it  would  be  difficult  for  them  to 
forget  all  the  miseries  that  their  inhuman  masters  have 
heaped  upon  them. 

The  Brahmins  in  particular  cherish  an  undying  hatred 
against  the  Mahometans.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  the 
latter  think  so  lightly  of  the  pretensions  of  these  so-called 
gods  of  the  earth  ;  and,  above  all,  the  Mahomedans  do  not 
scruple  to  display  hearty  contempt  for  their  ceremonies 
and  customs  generally.  Besides,  the  haughty  Mussulmans 
can  vie  with  them  in  pride  and  insolence.  Yet  there  is 
this  difference  :  the  arrogance  of  a  Mussulman  is  based 
only  on  the  political  authority  with  which  he  is  invested, 
or  on  the  eminence  of  the  rank  that  he  occupies  ;  whereas 
the  Brahmin's  superiority  is  inherent  in  himself,  and  it 
remains  intact,  no  matter  what  his  condition  in  life  may 
be.  Rich  or  poor,  unfortunate  or  prosperous,  he  always 
goes  on  the  principle  engrained  in  him  that  he  is  the  most 
noble,  the  most  excellent,  and  the  most  perfect  of  all  created 
beings,  that  all  the  rest  of  mankind  are  infinitely  beneath 
him,  and  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  so  sublime  or 
so  admirable  as  his  customs  and  practices. 

With  regard  to  any  special  exhibitions  of  wisdom,  par- 
ticularly in  the  province  of  learning,  it  would  be  impossible 
to  persuade  Brahmins  that  there  are  men  outside  their 
caste  who  are  capable  of  disputing  the  first  place  with 
them.  As  for  the  industrial  or  aesthetic  arts,  they  look 
upon  them  as  beneath  their  attention.  Probably  the  gross 
ignorance  of  the  greater  number  of  the  Mahomedan  natives 
of  India,  who  are  not  even  capable  of  drawing  up  their 
own  almanac,  may  have  helped  to  contribute  to  the  good 
opinion  that  Brahmins  have  of  themselves  ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  if  the  Mahomedans  had  any  honesty  of  feeling 
at  all,  would  they  not  drop  some  of  this 'ridiculous  boasting, 


PREJUDICE  AGAINST  EUROPEANS  305 

considering  the  immense  and  incontestable  superiority  that 
the  many  Europeans  who  live  in  this  country  have  over 
them  ?  The  Brahmins,  on  the  other  hand,  far  from  accept- 
ing this  superiority,  scornfully  repudiate  anything  that  they 
hear  in  regard  to  the  ingenious  contrivances  and  useful 
discoveries  which  have  made  such  giant  strides  in  Europe 
of  late  years.  Nothing  that  has  not  been  discovered  by 
Brahmins,  and  nothing  that  is  not  to  be  found  in  their 
books,  would  be  considered  worthy  of  one  moment's  atten- 
tion on  their  part.  You  may  often  meet  with  men  of  the 
Brahmin  caste  who,  from  some  interested  motive  or  other, 
have  learnt  European  languages  and  understand  them 
thoroughly,  but  you  never  find  in  their  hands  a  book 
written  in  one  of  these  languages,  and  no  one  could  ever 
persuade  them  that  such  a  book  contained  anything  useful 
which  they  did  not  already  know,  or  which  was  not  to  be 
found  in  one  of  their  books.  No  doubt  frank  and  friendly 
relations  between  them  and  educated  Europeans  may  in 
time  overcome  this  absurd  and  inexplicable  perverseness  ; 
but  nothing  leads  one  to  hope  that  they  will  ever  seek  to 
establish  such  relations  \ 

How,  indeed,  could  a  Brahmin  or  any  other  Hindu  have 
any  real  feelings  of  friendship  or  esteem  for  Europeans  so 
long  as  the  latter  continue  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  sacred 
cow,  which  a  Hindu  considers  a  much  more  heinous  offence 
than  eating  human  flesh,  so  long  as  he  sees  them  with 
Pariahs  as  domestic  servants,  and  so  long  as  he  knows  that 
they  have  immoral  relations  with  women  of  that  despised 
caste  I  He,  it  must  be  remembered,  considers  himself 
defiled  and  obliged  to  purify  himself  by  bathing  if  so  much 
as  the  shadow  of  one  of  these  Pariahs  is  thrown  across 
him.  How,  indeed,  could  he  feel  well  disposed  towards 
Europeans  when  he  sees  them  give  way  without  shame  or 
remorse  to  drunkenness,  which  to  him  is  the  most  dis- 
gusting of  vices,  and  which,  were  he  to  be  but  once  publicly 
convicted  of  it,  would  bring  upon  him  the  most  serious 
consequences  ?  How  can  he  respect  Europeans  when  he 
sees  their  wives  on  terms  of  the  most  intimate  familiarity 
with  their  husbands,  being  equally  intemperate,  and  eating, 

1  The  spread  of  English  education  during  the  last  sixty  years    has 
certainly  brought  about  an  improvement  in  this  direction. — Ed. 


306  EUROPEAN  CLOTHING 

drinking,  laughing,  and  joking  with  other  men,  and,  above 
all,  dancing  with  them  :  he,  in  whose  presence  a  wife  dare 
not  even  sit,  and  to  whom  it  is  inconceivable  that  any 
woman,  unless  she  be  a  concubine  or  a  prostitute,  could 
even  think  of  indulging  in  such  pastimes  ?  How,  again, 
could  he  mix  with  Europeans  when  he  sees  their  clothing, 
which  in  shape  alone  seems  to  him  to  savour  of  indecency 
by  showing  too  much  of  the  human  form,  and  of  which  so 
many  articles,  such  as  shoes,  boots,  gloves,  are  made  from 
the  skins  of  animals  ;  he,  who  cannot  understand  how 
any  decent  man  could  handle,  wear,  or  even  touch  these 
remains  of  dead  animals  without  shuddering  with  dis- 
gust ? 


CHAPTER   XII 

The  Morality  of  Brahmins. — Their  Deceit  and  Dissimulation. — Their 
Want  of  Filial  Devotion. — Their  Incontinence. — Causes  of  their 
Depravity. — Unnatural  Offences. — Outward  Decency. — The  Chastity 
of  their  Women. — Brahmin  Methods  of  Revenge. — Brahmin  Selfish- 


But  are  the  Brahmins,  who  are  so  easily  shocked  at  the 
sins  and  vices  of  others — are  they  themselves  exempt  from 
all  human  weaknesses  ?  Are  their  morals  irreproachable  ? 
Oh,  far  from  it  !  My  pen  would  refuse  to  describe  all  their 
wrong-doings  ;  but,  so  far  as  is  possible,  I  will  try  to  give 
a  clear  and  impartial  sketch  of  them. 

I  think  that  we  may  take  as  their  greatest  vices  the 
untrustworthiness,  deceit,  and  double-dealing  which  I  have 
so  often  had  occasion  to  mention,  and  which  are  common 
to  all  Hindus.  It  is  quite  impossible  to  fathom  their 
minds  and  discover  what  they  really  mean  ;  more  impos- 
sible, indeed,  than  with  any  other  race.  He  would  indeed 
be  a  fool  who  relied  on  their  promises,  protestations,  or 
oaths,  if  it  were  to  their  interest  to  break  them.  All  the 
same,  I  do  not  think  that  these  vices  are  innate  in  them. 
It  must  be  remembered  that  they  have  always  been  until 
quite  recently  under  the  yoke  of  masters  who  had  recourse 
to  all  sorts  of  artifices  to  oppress  and  despoil  them.  The 
timid  Hindu  could  think  of  no  better  expedient  with  which 
to  defend  himself  than  to  meet  ruse  with  ruse,  dissimulation 


TXFILIAL  BEHAVIOUR  307 

with  dissimulation,  and  fraud  witli  fraud.  The  prolonged 
use  of  weapons  for  which  excuse  may  be  found  in  their 
natural  desire  to  resist  the  oppression  of  their  rulers,  ended 
by  becoming  a  habit  which  it  is  now  impossible  for  them 
to  get  rid  of.  An  almost  unconquerable  propensity  to 
theft  is  also  to  be  noticed  amongst  the  Hindus.  They 
never  let  slip  an  opportunity  of  stealing,  unless  they  think 
they  are  likely  to  be  found  out.  With  them  honesty  is 
always  secondary  to  their  own  personal  interest.  The 
natural  sentiments  of  filial  respect  and  devotion,  the 
foundation  of  all  other  virtues  and  the  first  link  in  the 
social  chain,  exercise  very  little  influence  over  a  Brahmin's 
children.  The  outward  show  of  love  and  respect  that  they 
occasionally  make  is  purely  formal,  and  means  nothing. 

Young  children  will  obey  their  father,  because  they  fear 
punishment  if  they  do  not  ;  but  they  will  overwhelm  their 
mother  with  abuse,  and  will  insult  her  grossly,  even  going 
so  far  at  times  as  to  strike  her.  When  they  grow  older 
they  fail  to  respect  even  their  father,  and  it  often  happens 
that  he  is  obliged  to  give  way  to  his  sons,  who  have  made 
themselves  masters  of  the  house.  Strange  to  say,  nowhere 
are  parents  fonder  of  their  children  than  they  are  in  India  ; 
but  this  fondness  usually  degenerates  into  weakness.  If 
the  children  are  good,  they  are  extravagantly  praised  ;  if 
they  are  naughty,  their  parents  show  the  utmost  ingenuity 
in  rinding  excuses  for  them.  The  mild  punishments  that 
their  naughtiness  or  disobedience  brings  down  upon  them 
invariably  err  on  the  side  of  leniency.  The  parents  do  not 
dare  to  whip  them  or  scold  them  sharply,  or  even  inflict 
any  punishment  that  they  would  be  likely  to  feel.  The 
father  and  mother  content  themselves  with  making  feeble 
remonstrances  about  their  bad  behaviour,  and  if  these 
produce  no  effect,  they  leave  them  to  grow  up  in  their 
evil  ways.  The  few  sensible  parents  who  show  more  firm- 
ness and  severity  with  their  children  are  met  with  a  show 
of  temper.  Sons  do  not  hesitate  to  resist  the  parental 
authority,  and  threaten  to  escape  it  by  running  away  and 
living  elsewhere.  This  threat  rarely  fails  to  produce  the 
desired  effect ;  the  parents'  severity  melts  away  and  they 
become  passive  witnesses  of  the  disorderly  conduct  of 
their  sons,  who,  encouraged  by  this  first  victory,  end  by 


308        PASSIONS  PREMATURELY  AROUSED 

becoming  absolute  masters  of  the  house.  One  must,  however, 
do  them  the  justice  to  say  that,  after  having  thus  gained 
the  mastery  over  their  parents,  they  take  great  care  of 
them,  as  a  general  rule,  and  see  that  they  want  for  nothing 
in  their  old  age.  But  I  fancy  that  in  acting  thus  they  are 
moved  less  by  filial  affection  than  by  considerations  of 
what  the  world  will  say.  In  the  case  of  such  spoilt  children, 
subjected  as  they  are  from  their  earliest  youth  to  influences 
which  prematurely  develop  the  latent  germs  of  passion 
and  vice,  the  knowledge  of  evil  always  comes  before  the 
first  dawnings  of  reason.  At  the  time  of  their  lives  when, 
according  to  the  laws  of  nature,  the  passions  should  remain 
unawakened,  it  is  not  at  all  unusual  to  find  children  of 
both  sexes  familiar  with  words  and  actions  which  are 
revolting  to  modesty.  The  instincts  which  are  excited  at 
an  early  age  by  the  nudity  in  which  they  remain  till  they 
are  seven  or  eight  years  old,  the  licentious  conversation 
that  they  are  always  hearing  around  them,  the  lewd  songs 
and  obscene  verses  that  their  parents  delight  in  teaching 
them  as  soon  as  they  begin  to  talk,  the  disgusting  expres- 
sions which  they  learn  and  use  to  the  delight  of  those  who 
hear  them,  and  who  applaud  such  expressions  as  witti- 
cisms ;  these  are  the  foundations  on  which  the  young 
children's  education  is  laid,  and  such  are  the  earliest  impres- 
sions which  they  receive. 

Of  course  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  that,  as  they  get  older, 
incontinence  and  all  its  attendant  vices  increase  at  the 
same  time.  It  really  seems  as  if  most  of  the  religious 
and  civil  institutions  of  India  were  only  invented  for  the 
purpose  of  awakening  and  exciting  passions  towards  which 
they  have  already  such  a  strong  natural  tendency.  The 
shameless  stories  about  their  deities,  the  frequent  recur- 
rence of  special  feast-days  which  are  celebrated  everywhere, 
the  allegorical  meaning  of  so  many  of  their  everyday 
customs  and  usages,  the  public  and  private  buildings 
which  are  to  be  met  with  everywhere  bearing  on  their 
walls  some  disgusting  obscenity,  the  many  religious  services 
in  which  the  principal  part  is  played  by  prostitutes,  who 
often  make  even  the  temples  themselves  the  scenes  of  their 
abominable  debauchery  ;  all  these  things  seem  to  be  calcu- 
lated to  excite  the  lewd  imagination  of  the  inhabitants  of 


KEEPING  SEPARATE  ESTABLISHMENTS     309 

this  tropical  country  and  give  them  a  strong  impetus 
towards  libertinism. 

In  order  to  prevent  the  consequences  of  this  precocious 
sensuality,  parents  must  hasten  to  marry  their  children 
as  early  as  possible.  Yet  marriage  under  these  circum- 
stances does  not  always  prove  a  very  powerful  restraint. 
Nothing  is  more  common  than  for  a  married  man  to  keep 
one  or  more  concubines  away  from  his  home,  in  a  separate 
establishment,  according  as  his  pecuniary  circumstances 
permit.  This  state  of  affairs  is  particularly  common  in 
large  towns,  where  it  is  so  much  easier  to  keep  it  a  secret 
from  the  legitimate  wife,  and  thus  avoid  the  domestic 
quarrels  and  dissensions  which  are  the  natural  consequences. 
Nevertheless,  even  in  the  country,  the  jealousy  of  a  wife 
is  rarely  a  hindrance  to  a  husband's  profligacy.  She  may 
try  in  vain  to  bring  him  back  by  remonstrances  and  threats  ; 
in  vain  she  may  leave  her  home  and  take  refuge  with  her 
parents.  Her  faithless  husband  recalls  her  and  maybe 
swears  to  behave  better  in  future.  But  she  is  soon  deceived 
again  !  She  soon  finds  herself  deserted  once  more  ;  and 
finally  she  must  perforce  resign  herself  to  seeing,  hearing, 
and  suffering  eveiything  without  making  any  further  com- 
plaint. 

And  after  all,  is  it  surprising  that  libertinism  and  all  its 
consequences  prevail  in  a  country  where  the  passions  have 
so  many  incentives  and  such  ample  opportunities  of  satis- 
faction !  Look  at  the  crowd  of  widows  in  the  prime  of 
life  who  are  forbidden  to  remarry,  and  who  are  only  too 
ready  to  yield  to  the  temptations  by  which  they  are  assailed. 
Modesty  and  virtue  place  no  restrictions  on  them  ;  their 
only  fear  is  that  their  misconduct  may  be  found  out.  Con- 
sequently, abortion  is  their  invariable  resource  to  prevent 
such  a  contingency,  and  they  practise  it  without  the 
slightest  scruple  or  remorse.  There  is  not  a  woman  amongst 
them  who  does  not  know  how  to  bring  it  about.  This 
odious  crime,  so  revolting  to  all  natural  feeling,  is  of  no 
importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  Hindus.  According  to  their 
view,  to  destroy  a  being  that  has  never  seen  the  light  is 
a  lesser  evil  than  that  a  woman  should  be  dishonoured. 
The  crimes  of  these  unnatural  mothers  do  not  always, 
however,  go  unpunished  ;   many  of  them  fall  victims  to 


310       BOOKS  INCULCATING  DEBAUCHERY 

the  violent  remedies  which  they  employ  to  get  rid  of  their 
shame.  But  should  these  remedies  fail  in  having  the 
desired  effect,  and  the  women  be  no  longer  able  to  conceal 
their  condition,  they  give  out  that  they  are  going  to  make 
a  pilgrimage  to  Benares,  which  is  a  very  favourite  form 
of  devotion  amongst  Brahmins  of  both  sexes.  Then 
having  chosen  a  discreet  companion  in  whom  they  can 
confide,  they  start  on  their  journey  ;  but  the  supposed 
pilgrimage  comes  to  an  end  in  a  neighbouring  village,  at 
the  house  of  some  relative  or  friend,  who  helps  them  to 
live  in  seclusion  until  such  time  as  the  child  shall  be  born. 
They  then  hand  over  the  result  of  their  misconduct  to 
any  one  who  will  take  charge  of  it,  and  return  to  the  bosom 
of  their  family. 

Besides  these  sources  of  depravity  which  are  common 
to  all  castes,  there  are  a  great  many  others  peculiar  to  the 
Brahmins.  Many  of  them  possess  abominable  books  in 
which  the  most  filthy  and  disgusting  forms  of  debauchery 
are  systematically  described  and  taught.  These  books 
also  treat  of  such  matters  as  the  art  of  giving  variety  to 
sensual  pleasures,  the  decoction  of  beverages  calculated  to 
excite  the  passions,  or  renew  them  when  exhausted.  They 
also  contain  recipes  for  philtres,  which  are  supposed  to 
have  the  property  of  inspiring  unholy  love.  The  courte- 
sans of  the  country  often  have  recourse  to  these  potions 
in  the  hope  of  retaining  the  affections  of  those  whom  they 
have  enslaved,  mixing  them  secretly  in  the  food  of  their 
victims.  I  am  told  that  the  ingredients  of  which  these 
potions  are  composed  would  inspire  the  greatest  libertine 
with  disgust  and  horror  for  his  mistress  if  it  ever  came  to 
his  knowledge. 

To  have  any  connexion  with  a  courtesan,  or  with  an 
unmarried  person,  is  not  considered  a  form  of  wickedness 
in  the  eyes  of  the  Brahmins.  These  men,  who  look  upon 
the  violation  of  any  trivial  custom  as  a  heinous  sin,  see  no 
harm  in  the  most  outrageous  and  licentious  excesses.  It 
was  principally  for  their  use  that  the  dancers  and  prosti- 
tutes who  are  attached  to  the  service  of  the  temples  were 
originally  entertained,  and  they  may  often  be  heard  to 
intone  the  following  scandalous  line  : — 

Vesya  darisanam  punyam  fxxpa  nam  nam  ! 


ADULTERY  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES        311 

which  means,  '  To  have  intercourse  with  a  prostitute  is 
a  virtue  which  takes  away  sin  V 

Adultery  on  the  part  of  a  woman,  though  it  is  con- 
sidered shameful  and  is  condemned  in  Brahminical  law, 
is  punished  with  much  less  severity  in  their  caste  than  in 
many  others.  So  long  as  it  is  kept  a  secret  it  is  regarded 
as  a  matter  of  very  small  importance.  It  is  the  publicity 
of  it  which  is  the  sin.  If  it  becomes  known  the  husbands 
are  the  first  to  contradict  any  gossip  that  may  be  current 
in  order  to  avoid  any  scandal  or  disagreeable  consequences. 

However,  the  shame  and  dishonour  which  are  the  in- 
evitable consequences  of  sins  of  this  nature,  and  which 
are  also  reflected  on  the  families  of  the  culprits,  serve  as 
a  check  to  a  great  many  and  keep  them  in  the  path  of 
virtue.  Those  who  succumb  to  an  irresistible  temptation 
are  generally  clever  enough  to  invent  expedients  to  hide 
their  weakness  from  spiteful  eyes.  But  woe  to  those  who 
have  been  so  imprudent  or  so  careless  as  to  fail  to  hide 
their  misdeeds.  There  is  no  insult  that  charitable  persons 
of  their  own  sex  will  not  heap  upon  them,  and  if  the  least 
quarrel  arises  amongst  them  this  would  be  the  first  thing 
brought  up  against  them.  Their  confusion  under  these 
circumstances  proves  a  warning  to  others  to  be  more 
circumspect,  or,  at  any  rate,  to  save  appearances  at  all  costs. 

But  the  depravity  of  the  Hindus  does  not  end  here. 
There  are  depths  of  wickedness  a  thousand  times  more 
horrible  to  which  the  greater  number  of  them  are  not 
ashamed  to  descend. 

In  Europe,  where  the  Christian  religion  has  inspired 
a  salutary  horror  for  certain  unnatural  offences,  one  would 
find  it  difficult  to  believe  the  stories  which  show  to  what 
lengths  these  disgusting  vices  are  carried  by  the  greater 
number  of  heathens  and  Mahomedans,  to  whom  they  have 
become  a  sort  of  second  nature.  We  all  know  how  greatly 
the  Arabs  and  their  neighbouring  tribes  are  addicted  to 
them.  Kaempfer  says  that  in  Japan  there  are  public 
establishments  for  this  purpose  which  are  tolerated  by 
Government;  and  very  much  the  same  thing  is  done  in  China. 

1  The  real  translation  is,  '  Looking  upon  a  prostitute,*  &c.  This  line, 
it  may  be  mentioned,  is  not  a  quotation  from  any  book  of  Hindu  religion, 
but  is  often  quoted  falsely  as  such. — Ed. 


312  UNNATURAL  VICE 

The  facility  with  which  the  Hindu  can  gratify  his  passions 
in  a  natural  manner  in  a  country  where  courtesans  abound 
renders  these  disgusting  practices  less  common  ;  but  it  by 
no  means  prevents  them  altogether.  In  the  larger  towns 
in  India  there  are  generally  houses  to  be  found  given  over 
to  this  odious  form  of  vice.  One  sometimes  meets  in  the 
streets  the  degraded  beings  who  adopt  this  infamous  pro- 
fession. They  dress  like  women,  let  their  hair  grow  in 
the  same  way,  pluck  out  the  hair  on  their  faces,  and  copy 
the  walk,  gestures,  manner  of  speaking,  tone  of  voice, 
demeanour,  and  affectations  of  prostitutes.  Other  secret 
crimes  are  also  carried  on  in  India,  and  especially  among 
the  Mahomedans  ;  but  decency  will  not  allow  me  to  speak 
of  them.  They  are  the  same  as  those  which  are  mentioned 
in  the  Bible  (Leviticus  xviii  and  xx),  and  which  brought 
down  such  terrible  punishments  on  the  inhabitants  of 
Canaan  who  had  been  guilty  of  them. 

Being  hardly  able  to  believe  in  the  possibility  of  such 
abominable  wickedness,  I  asked  a  Brahmin  one  day  whether 
there  was  any  truth  in  what  I  had  heard.  Far  from  deny- 
ing the  stories,  he  smilingly  confirmed  them  ;  nor  did  he 
appear  to  be  even  shocked  at  such  iniquity.  Indeed  he 
seemed  to  be  quite  amused  at  the  confusion  and  embarrass- 
ment that  I  felt  in  asking  him  such  questions.  At  last 
I  said  to  him  :  '  How  is  it  possible  for  one  to  believe  that 
such  depraved  tastes  exist,  degrading  men  as  they  do  to 
a  far  lower  level  than  the  beasts  of  the  field,  in  a  country 
where  the  union  of  the  two  sexes  is  so  easy  ?  '  '  On  that 
point  there  is  no  accounting  for  tastes,'  he  replied,  bursting 
out  into  a  laugh.  Disgusted  with  this  reply,  and  filled  with 
contempt  for  the  man  who  was  not  ashamed  to  speak  thus, 
I  turned  on  my  heel  and  left  him  without  another  word. 

From  the  earliest  ages  these  unnatural  offences  have 
been  common  in  the  East  amongst  heathen  nations.  In 
the  laws  that  God  gave  the  Israelites,  He  warns  them  to 
be  on  their  guard  against  these  detestable  vices,  which 
were  known  to  be  very  prevalent  amongst  the  inhabitants 
of  the  countries  they  were  going  to  take  possession  of, 
and  which  were  one  of  the  chief  reasons  for  their  total 
extermination. 

If  the  Christian  religion  had  done  nothing  more  than 


OUTWARD  PROPRIETY  313 

render  these  iniquities  revolting  and  execrable,  that  alone 
would  be  sufficient  to  ensure  our  love  and  respect  for  it. 

It  may  seem  incredible,  after  what  I  have  just  said, 
when  I  add  that  there  is  no  country  in  the  world  where 
greater  attention  is  paid  to  what  may  be  described  as 
outward  propriety.  What  we  call  love-making  is  utterly 
unknown  amongst  the  Hindus.  The  playful  sallies,  the 
silly  jokes,  the  perpetual  compliments,  and  the  eager  and 
unlimited  display  of  attention  in  which  our  youths  are  so 
profuse  would  be  looked  upon  as  insults  by  any  Hindu 
lady,  even  the  least  chaste,  that  is,  if  they  were  offered 
to  her  in  public.  Even  if  a  husband  indulged  in  any 
familiarities  with  his  own  wife  it  would  be  considered 
ridiculous  and  in  bad  taste.  To  inquire  after  a  man's 
wife,  too,  is  an  unpardonable  breach  of  good  manners  ; 
and  when  one  is  visiting  a  friend  one  must  be  careful 
never  to  speak  to  the  ladies  of  the  house  \ 

Thus  it  is  that  here  below  mankind  seems  incapable  of 
preserving  the  happy  medium.  For  our  part  we  exceed 
in  one  direction  by  giving  way  to  undue  familiarity  with 
persons  of  the  opposite  sex  ;  while  the  Hindus  for  their 
part  err  on  the  side  of  reserve.  The  extreme  suscepti- 
bility of  the  latter  in  this  respect  is  due  to  the  opinion 
they  hold  that  no  mark  of  affection  between  man  and 
woman  can  be  either  innocent  or  disinterested.  If  a  Euro- 
pean lady  is  seen  taking  a  gentleman's  arm,  even  though 
he  may  profess  the  profoundest  respect  for  her,  nothing 
would  persuade  a  Hindu  that  she  was  not  his  mistress. 

These  strict  principles  of  etiquette  are  instilled  into  the 
mind  of  a  Hindu  woman  from  her  early  youth,  and,  owing 
to  the  severity  with  which  lapses  from  them  are  treated 
in  some  castes,  indiscretions  are  far  less  frequent  than  one 
would  imagine  to  be  the  case,  considering  how  early  the 
licentious  habits  of  Hindu  men  are  formed.  Whatever  may 
be  said  to  the  contrary,  Hindu  women  are  naturally  chaste. 
To  cite  a  few  examples  of  unseemly  conduct,  a  few  lapses 
attributable  to  human  frailty,  is  no  proof  of  their  want  of 
chastity  as  a  body  ;  just  as  it  is  no  proof  to  cite  the  shame- 
less conduct  of  those  poor  wretches,  prostitutes  by  birth 

1  In  the  case  of  relatives  and  intimate  friends  no  such  objection  is 
taken. — Ed. 


314      RESENTMENT  AND  REVENGE 

and  profession,  who  follow  the  armies  and  live  in  con- 
cubinage with  Europeans.  I  would  even  go  so  far  as  to 
say  that  Hindu  women  are  more  virtuous  than  the  women 
of  many  other  more  civilized  countries.  Their  tempera- 
ment is  outwardly  calm  and  equable,  and  though  a  pas- 
sionate fire  may  smoulder  underneath,  without  the  igniting 
spark  it  will  remain  quiescent.  Is  this  dormant  coldness 
of  disposition  to  be  attributed  to  the  secluded  way  in  which 
they  are  brought  up,  or  to  the  reserved  demeanour  that  is 
taught  them  from  their  infancy,  or  to  the  unbridgeable  gulf 
that  is  fixed  between  them  and  their  male  relatives,  with 
whom  the  least  familiarity  is  not  permissible ;  or,  what  is 
not  very  likely,  can  it  be  put  down  to  climatic  influence  ? 
I  cannot  say.  But  whoever  studies  their  character  and 
conduct  from  this  particular  standpoint  as  impartially  and 
disinterestedly  as  I  have  done,  will,  I  feel  sure,  be  con- 
strained to  render  the  same  tribute  to  their  chastity. 

Having  thus  spoken  of  the  special  power  which  sexual 
passion  exercises  in  India,  a  power  which  unfortunately 
is  only  too  strongly  felt  in  other  quarters  of  the  globe, 
I  will  now  say  a  few  words  on  two  other  passions  which 
are  equally  violent,  and  to  which  the  Hindu  is  particularly 
susceptible,  namely,  the  resentment  of  injury  and  the 
desire  for  revenge.  The  Brahmins  are  particularly  ran- 
corous. The  bitter  feeling  caused  by  an  injury  or  affront 
never  leaves  them.  Feuds  are  perpetuated  in  families  and 
become  hereditary,  and  a  perfect  reconciliation  is  never 
effected.  Self-interest  sometimes  brings  two  enemies 
together,  but  they  only  dissemble  for  the  time  being, 
and  never  conquer  their  feeling  of  hatred.  It  is  not  un- 
usual to  see  a  son  or  a  grandson  revenging  wrongs  done 
fifty  years  before  to  father  or  grandfather.  Furthermore 
such  vengeance  takes  a  peculiar  form.  Duels  seem  to 
them  foolish,  and  they  rarely  have  recourse  to  assassina- 
tion or  violence.  Timid  and  weak-minded  as  they  are, 
they  do  not  like  to  commit  themselves  to  bold  or  mur- 
derous devices.  Their  favourite  weapons  are  spells  and 
enchantments.  They  think  that  by  reciting  maledictory 
mantrams,  or  calling  to  their  aid  the  diabolical  arts  of 
some  wicked  magician,  they  will  surely  cause  their  enemy 
to   be   attacked   by  some   incurable   malady.     To  get   up 


BRAHMIN  SELFISHNESS  315 

a  quarrel  and  then  overwhelm  each  other  with  the  grossest 
insults  is  a  common  mode  of  revenge,  and  one  in  which 
Brahmins  excel.  But  their  most  perfidious  weapon,  and 
one  which  they  are  especially  clever  at  using,  is  slander. 
Sooner  or  later,  by  crooked  ways  or  underhand  intrigues, 
they  contrive  to  deal  their  enemies  some  fatal  blow  by  this 
means. 

Murder  and  suicide  occur  occasionally  amongst  the 
Hindus,  though  such  crimes  are  regarded  by  them  with 
greater  horror  than  by  any  other  people.  Poison  is  gener- 
ally the  means  employed  when  a  murder  is  committed. 
It  is  usually  women  who  are  guilty  of  suicide.  Driven  to 
despair  by  the  ill-treatment  of  a  brutal  husband,  or  by  the 
annoyances  of  a  spiteful  mother-in-law,  or  by  any  of  those 
domestic  worries  which  are  so  common  in  a  Hindu  house- 
hold, they  lay  criminal  hands  on  themselves  and  destroy 
the  life  which  has  become  unbearable. 

Intense  selfishness  is  also  a  common  characteristic  of 
a  Brahmin.  Brought  up  in  the  idea  that  nothing  is  too 
good  for  him,  and  that  he  owes  nothing  in  return  to  any 
one,  he  models  the  whole  of  his  life  on  this  principle.  He 
would  unhesitatingly  sacrifice  the  public  good,  or  his 
country  itself,  if  it  served  his  own  interests  ;  and  he  would 
stoop  to  treason,  ingratitude,  or  any  deed,  however  black, 
if  it  promoted  his  own  welfare.  He  makes  it  a  point  of 
duty  not  only  to  hold  himself  aloof  from  all  other  human 
beings,  but  also  to  despise  and  hate  from  the  bottom  of 
his  heart  every  one  who  happens  not  to  be  born  of  the 
same  caste  as  himself.  And  further,  he  thinks  himself 
absolved  from  any  feelings  of  gratitude,  pity,  or  considera- 
tion towards  them.  If  he  occasionally  shows  any  kindli- 
ness, it  is  only  to  some  one  of  his  own  caste.  As  for  the 
rest  of  mankind,  he  has  been  taught  from  his  earliest  youth 
to  look  upon  them  all  as  infinitely  beneath  him.  According 
to  the  principles  in  which  he  has  been  brought  up,  he  ought 
even  to  treat  them  with  contempt,  hatred,  and  harshness, 
as  beings  created  solely  to  serve  him  and  minister  to  his 
wants  without  there  being  any  necessity  for  him  to  make 
the  smallest  return.     Such  are  the  Brahmins  '  ! 

J  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  Abbe  paints  the  Brahmins  in  darker 
colours  than,  as  a  bodv,  thev  deserve. — En. 


316 


CHAPTER   XIII 

The  Outward  Appearance  of  Brahmins  and  other  Hindus. — Their 
Physical  Defects. — Remarks  on  the  Kakrdaks  or  Albinoes,  as 
described  by  Naturalists,  who  are  not  allowed  Burial  after  Death. 
— Other  Hindus  to  whom  the  same  Honour  is  denied. — Exhuma- 
tion of  Corpses. — The  Feeble  Physique  of  the  Hindus. — The  same 
Feebleness  and  Deterioration  to  be  observed  throughout  the  Animal 
and  Vegetable  Kingdoms. — Weakness  of  the  Mental  Faculties  of 
Hindus. — The  Language  of  the  Brahmins. — Their  Costume. — Their 
Houses. 

Having  given  a  sketch  of  the  moral  character  of  the 
Brahmins,  I  will  now  say  a  few  words  about  their  physical 
appearance.  Many  of  the  characteristics  of  this  kind  that 
I  am  to  mention  do  not,  however,  specially  pertain  to 
them,  but  are  common  to  Hindus  of  other  castes.  Faces 
and  figures  vary,  as  they  do  in  every  other  caste  ;  but 
there  are  certain  physical  deformities  common  enough  in 
Europe  which  are  much  more  rarely  seen  in  India.  Thus, 
for  instance,  one  seldom  meets  persons  who  are  hump- 
backed or  lame,  unless  they  have  become  so  by  accident. 
If  a  child  is  born  with  any  bodily  defect,  it  is  attributed 
to  the  evil  influence  of  two  unlucky  constellations  which 
must  have  been  in  conjunction  at  the  time  of  birth,  or  to 
some  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon  that  took  place  at  that 
moment.  On  the  other  hand,  blindness  is  very  common. 
No  doubt  the  chief  cause  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  habit 
that  poor  people  have  of  going  about  in  nature's  garb, 
with  their  heads  exposed  to  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun  ; 
and  it  is  doubtless  in  the  hope  of  preventing,  as  far  as 
possible,  the  terrible  scourge  of  ophthalmia  that  they  so 
frequently  anoint  their  heads  with  castor  oil  or  oil  of 
sesamum. 

The  Hindus,  like  every  other  race,  have  certain  physical 
characteristics  which  are  peculiar  to  themselves.  Except 
for  their  colour,  however,  they  seem  to  me  to  be  more  like 
Europeans,  especially  in  their  physiognomy,  than  any  other 
Asiatic  race.  Generally  speaking,  they  have  glossy  black  hair, 
narrow  foreheads,  and  dark,  or  occasionally  grey  \  eyes. 

1  They  do  not  at  all  admire  the  blue  eyes  of  Europeans.  They  con- 
sider them  a  deformity,  and  call  them  '  cats'  eyes.' — Dubois. 


PHYSICAL  CHARACTERISTICS  317 

Their  stomachs  are  flat,  and  they  rarely  carry  much  flesh. 
Their  legs  are  usually  slightly  bowed  the  wrong  way  and 
a  little  crooked,  the  result  no  doubt  of  their  habit  of  squat- 
ting on  the  ground  with  their  legs  crossed  under  them  like 
our  tailors.  Neither  have  they  any  calves,  which  are  con- 
sidered anything  but  a  beauty.  Men  who  work  in  the 
fields  or  who  are  always  exposed  to  the  sun  are  quite  as 
black  in  colour  as  the  inhabitants  of  Kaffraria  or  Guinea  ; 
but  the  complexion  of  those  who,  like  the  Brahmins,  spend 
their  days  under  cover,  or  lead  a  sedentary  life,  is  many 
degrees  lighter.  A  very  dark  Brahmin  and  a  fair  Pariah 
are  looked  upon  as  monstrosities.  Hence  no  doubt  the 
proverb  '  Beware  of  a  black  Brahmin  or  a  fair  Pariah  !  ' 
A  Brahmin  is  generally  the  colour  of  brass,  or  perhaps  of 
weak  coffee.  This  is  considered  the  most  correct  shade  ; 
and  the  women  who  are  the  colour  of  light  gingerbread  are 
most  admired.  I  have  seen  Brahmins,  and  particularly 
Brahmin  women,  who  were  not  as  dark  as  the  inhabitants 
of  Southern  Europe.  Furthermore  the  palms  of  the  hands 
and  the  soles  of  the  feet  of  Hindus  of  both  sexes  are  almost 
as  white  as  our  own  \ 

On  the  mountains  and  in  the  dense  jungles  of  the  Malabar 
coast  there  are  some  savage  tribes  who  are  much  lighter 
in  colour.  In  Coorg  there  is  a  tribe  known  as  the  Malai- 
Kondiaru  who  in  outward  appearance  closely  resemble 
Spaniards  and  Portuguese.  The  cause  of  this  phenomenon 
is  no  doubt  due  partly  to  the  climatic  influences  of  the 
country  they  live  in,  and  partly  to  their  habit  of  always 
living  in  dense  forests  where  the  rays  of  the  sun  cannot 
penetrate. 

You  may  sometimes  meet  a  few,  but  very  few,  indi- 
viduals whose  skin  is  even  fairer  than  that  of  a  European, 
and  with  hair  of  the  same  colour.  Of  course  this  extreme 
fairness  is  unnatural,  and  makes  them  very  repulsive  to 
look  at.  In  fact,  these  unfortunate  beings  are  objects  of 
horror  to  every  one,  and  even  their  parents  desert  them. 
They  are  looked  upon  as  lepers  2. 

1  They  share  this  characteristic  with  the  Negroes. — Dubois. 

-  Learned  physiologists  have  thought  that  these  men  really  are  lepers, 
and  that  this  whiteness  is  produced  by  some  malady  which  dries  up  the 
skin.     They  also  think  that  black  people  would  be  much  more  suDJect 


318  ALBINOES 

They  are  called  Kakrelaks  '  as  a  term  of  reproach.  This 
peculiarity  does  not  prevent  some  of  them  from  living  to 
a  great  age.  They  cannot  bear  the  light,  neither  can  they 
look  fixedly  at  anything  so  long  as  the  sun  is  up.  During 
the  day  they  close  their  eyelids,  leaving  only  a  slit  to  look 
through  ;  but  as  soon  as  night  comes  on  they  open  wide 
their  large  pink  eyes,  and  are  able  to  go  about  quite  easily, 
seeing  as  well  as  other  people. 

The  question  has  been  raised  as  to  whether  these  degene- 
rate individuals  can  produce  children  like  themselves,  and 
afflicted  with  nyctalopia.  Such  a  child  has  never  come 
under  my  observation  ;  but  I  once  baptized  the  child  of 
a  female  Kakrelak,  who  owed  its  birth  to  a  rash  European 
soldier,  though  this  circumstance  does  not  afford  any  proof 
on  the  subject 2. 

These  unfortunate  wretches  are  denied  decent  burial 
after  death,  and  are  cast  into  ditches.  This  custom  arises 
from  a  native  superstition  which  does  not  allow  any  person 
who  has  died  while  suffering  from  a  cutaneous  disease  to 
be   buried.     The   Hindus  believe   that   were   this   done   a 

to  this  affliction  if  it  were  not  for  their  habit  of  anointing  themselves 
frequently  with  oil  or  some  other  fatty  substance.  At  the  same  time 
it  should  be  observed  that  these  human  anomalies  are  to  be  met  with 
all  over  the  world.  Thus  you  find  the  Bedas  in  Ceylon,  wild  creatures 
with  white  skins  and  red  hair.  There  are  Kakrelaks  in  all  the  American 
Islands  ;  then  again  there  are  the  Dondos  or  albinoes  of  Southern  Africa 
(Aethiopes  albieantes).  Lastly,  these  colourless  people  are  particularly 
numerous  in  the  Isthmus  of  Darien. — Dubois. 

1  The  kakrelaks  are  horrible  insects,  disgustingly  dirty,  which  give 
forth  a  loathsome  odour.  They  are  of  the  same  species  as  our  bugs, 
but  much  larger.  These  unpleasant  and  destructive  insects  shun  the 
day  and  its  light.  They  remain  hidden  in  holes  or  crannies  in  walls, 
and  come  out  at  night  to  devour  all  the  food  they  can  find  and  to  disturb 
sleepers. — Dubois. 

3  This  fact  disposes  at  any  rate  of  the  opinion  which  some  have  held 
that  these  people  cannot  bear  children.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether 
there  would  be  any  issue,  supposing  both  parents  were  albinoes.  The 
white  Negroes  of  Africa  are  believed  never  to  be  able  to  produce  children ; 
but  the  Kakrelaks  in  Asia  are  supposed  to  be  prolific,  and  their  progeny 
are  said  to  be  of  the  same  colour  as  the  rest  of  the  nation.  Anyhow,  no 
one  has  been  able  to  discover  for  certain  if  albinoes  have  been  born 
from  other  than  Negroes  or  dark-coloured  parents  ;  and  we  may  con- 
clude that  these  ill-favoured  children  are  not  a  special  variety  of  the 
human  species,  any  more  than  are  the  Cretins  in  the  Canton  of  Valais. — 
Dubois. 


WHO  ARK  LEFT  UNBURIED  319 

drought  or  some  other  public  calamity  would  befall  the 
whole  country. 

Burial  is  also  refused,  at  least  in  several  provinces,  to 
persons  who  die  of  wounds  or  eruptive  diseases,  such  as 
small-pox  or  measles,  &C.1  Also  to  those  whose  bodies 
have  white  marks  on  them  ;  to  pregnant  women  who  die 
before  child-birth  2  ;  and  above  all  to  the  many  who  fall 
victims  to  tigers.  The  tragic  fate  of  these  last  is  in  a  manner 
consecrated  by  those  heaps  of  stones  which  the  traveller 
sometimes  comes  across  in  his  journeys,  and  which,  on  the 
very  spot  where  they  died,  cover  the  remains  of  those  who 
have  perished  so  deplorably  3. 

In  consequence  of  this  absurd  superstition,  when  the 
country  has  been  a  long  time  without  rain,  the  inhabitants 
think  the  drought  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  some 
one  must  have  surreptitiously  infringed  this  unwritten 
law.  Accordingly  the  magistrates  give  immediate  orders 
that  all  bodies  that  have  been  buried  in  the  course  of  the 
year  shall  be  exhumed,  and  become  food  for  the  birds  of 
prey.  I  myself  once  had  great  difficulty  in  preventing 
a  Christian  cemetery  being  violated  and  the  remains  of 
the  dead  disturbed  in  this  manner.  Fortunately,  at  the 
critical  moment,  rain  came  down  in  torrents,  and  so  the 
profanation  of  the  dead  was  avoided.  Otherwise  I  should 
have  been  forced  to  yield  to  the  clamour  of  a  senseless 
mob. 

But  to  return  to  the  subject  in  hand,  which  has  been 
rather  lost  sight  of  during  this  long  digression. 

All  Hindus,  and  particularly  Brahmins,  have  weak  con- 
stitutions, and  in  this  respect  they  are  greatly  inferior  to 

1  Brahmins  who  die  of  small- pox  are  burnt  in  the  usual  way,  at  any 
rate  in  South  India.     The  Sudras  invariably  bury  such  corpses. — Ed. 

2  It  is  usual  amongst  Brahmins  to  take  the  foetus  from  the  body  of 
a  dead  pregnant  woman,  and  the  latter  is  burned  separately. — Ed. 

3  The  bodies  even  of  criminals  and  suicides  were  not  deprived  of 
burial  by  the  Jews  ;  yet  there  are  examples  in  Holy  Scripture  which 
bear  some  resemblance  to  this  Hindu  custom.  Thus  Achan,  after  he 
had  been  stoned,  was  buried  under  a  heap  of  stones  (Joshua  vii.  25,  26), 
and  Absalom's  case  is  mentioned  in  2  Samuel  xviii.  17.  The  king  of  Ai 
was  treated  in  the  same  way  (Joshua  viii.  29).  Finally,  Jeremiah  pro- 
phesies that  the  wicked  Jehoiakim,  son  of  Josiah,  should  have  '  the 
burial  of  an  ass  '  (Jeremiah  xxii.  19). — Dubois. 


320  DRAWBACKS  IN  NATURE 

Europeans.  They  have  not  the  strength,  vigour,  or  activity 
of  the  latter.  One  European  workman  would,  under  any 
circumstances,  do  at  least  as  much  as  two  natives.  This 
constitutional  weakness,  which  is  partly  inherent,  is  greatly 
increased  by  the  hardships  and  privations  that  they  are 
condemned  to  bear  all  their  lives. 

The  climate,  which  is  the  chief  cause  of  the  degeneration 
of  the  human  race  in  these  countries,  exercises  a  no  less 
fatal  influence  in  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms. 
Green  stuff,  roots,  and  fruits  are  for  the  most  part  insipid 
and  tasteless,  and  do  not  possess  half  the  nutritive  value  of 
those  grown  in  Europe.  A  very  few  may  be  cited  as  ex- 
ceptions to  this  rule.  The  vegetable  products  of  India 
included  in  our  list  of  groceries  are  pungent  enough  to 
destroy  the  membrane  of  one's  throat.  Again,  the  in- 
digenous flowers,  with  two  or  three  exceptions,  have  no 
scent.  Lastly,  the  trees  and  shrubs  to  be  found  in  the 
forests  or  in  uncultivated  places  are  generally  covered 
with  thorns  and  prickles.  The  elephant  and  tiger  are 
strong  and  vigorous  enough,  but  all  the  other  animals, 
whether  wild  or  domesticated,  share  in  the  universal 
debilitation.  What  we  call  butcher's  meat  has  very  little 
succulence  in  it,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  flavour  of  the 
game  that  would  tempt  the  least  fastidious  European 
palate.  Vainly  would  one  search  for  a  good  hare  or  part- 
ridge. One  is  inclined  to  think  that  nature  here  has  re- 
duced the  nutritive  value  of  all  animals  and  vegetables  in 
proportion  to  the  weakness  of  the  human  beings  whose  food 
they  are  to  be. 

But  as  a  cruel  compensation,  nature  is  prodigal  with 
creatures  that  are  hurtful,  and  with  many  things  that  are 
useless,  to  man.  The  forests  and  jungles  are  inhabited  by 
elephants,  tigers,  and  other  wild  animals  which  are  deadly 
foes  to  man  and  his  flocks  and  herds.  The  country  is 
overrun  with  snakes  and  other  deadly  reptiles,  while  birds 
of  prey  may  be  seen  everywhere  in  large  numbers.  Every 
kind  of  irritating,  destructive,  and  abominable  insect 
swarms  and  multiplies  in  a  manner  that  is  equally  sur- 
prising and  annoying.  Even  poisonous  plants  are  by  no 
means  uncommon,  and  their  hurtful  properties  show  no 
signs  of  deterioration. 


ENERVATED  TEMPERAMENTS  321 

It  is  true  that  the  four  elements  seem  to  conspire  together 
for  the  purpose  of  weakening  everything  that  matures  or 
vegetates  in  this  portion  of  the  globe.  The  soil  itself  is 
generally  light,  sandy,  and  wanting  in  substance  ;  it  re- 
quires a  great  deal  of  skilled  labour  to  make  it  fertile. 
The  air  is  almost  everywhere  unhealthy,  damp,  and  enervat- 
ing ;  the  water  in  the  wells  and  tanks  is  usually  brackish 
and  unpleasant  to  the  taste  :  indeed,  the  excessive  heat 
of  the  sun  dries  up  everything,  animal  and  vegetable. 
The  mental  faculties  of  the  Hindus  appear  to  be  as  feeble 
as  their  physique.  I  should  say  that  no  other  nation  in 
the  world  could  boast  of  as  many  idiots  and  imbeciles. 
There  are,  of  course,  very  many  sensible,  capable  persons 
amongst  the  Hindus,  who  possess  marked  abilities  and 
talents,  and  who  by  education  have  developed  the  gifts 
with  which  nature  has  endowed  them  ;  but  during  the 
three  hundred  years  or  so  that  Europeans  have  been 
established  in  the  country  no  Hindu,  so  far  as  I  know, 
has  ever  been  found  to  possess  really  transcendent  genius. 

Their  want  of  courage  almost  amounts  to  absolute 
cowardice.  Neither  have  they  that  strength  of  character 
which  resists  temptation  and  leaves  men  unshaken  by 
threats  or  seductive  promises,  content  to  pursue  the  course 
that  reason  dictates.  Flatter  them  adroitly  and  take  them 
on  their  weak  side,  and  there  is  nothing  you  cannot  get  out 
of  them. 

The  prudent  forethought  which  prompts  men  to  take 
heed  to  their  future  as  well  as  to  their  present  wants  seems 
almost  an  unknown  quality  among  the  majority  of  Hindus. 
They  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,  and  all  they  care 
about  is  to  gratify  their  vanity  and  their  extravagant 
whims  for  the  moment.  They  are  so  taken  up  with  the 
pleasures  and  enjoyments  of  the  present  that  they  never 
think  of  looking  beyond  to  the  possible  misery  and  priva- 
tions that  may  await  them  in  the  future. 

This  want  of  forethought  is  in  a  great  measure  responsible 
for  those  reverses  of  fortune  which  so  frequently  happen  to 
them,  and  by  which  they  pass  from  the  greatest  wealth 
and  luxury  to  the  bitterest  poverty.  It  is  true  they  bear 
these  sudden  transitions  from  comfort  to  misery  with  the 
most  marvellous  resignation  ;  but  then  this  resignation  is  not 

DUBOIS  M 


322  BRAHMIN  CHARACTERISTICS 

the  outcome  of  principle  or  of  dignified  patience — it  is  due 
rather  to  their  apathetic  temperament,  which  makes  them 
incapable  of  feeling  any  strong  emotion.  They  enjoy  their 
good  fortune  mechanically  and  without  thought,  and  they 
take  their  losses  with  the  same  calm  imperturbability  \ 

I  prefer  to  think  that  the  ingratitude  with  which  they 
are  so  often  and  so  justly  accused  may  be  attributed  to 
this  phlegmatic  disposition,  and  not  to  wilful  wrong- 
headedness.  Nowhere  is  a  kindness  so  soon  forgotten  as 
among  Hindus.  Gratitude — which  is  a  feeling  that  springs 
up  spontaneously  in  all  true  hearts,  which  is  a  duty  that 
bare  justice  prescribes,  and  which  is  a  natural  result  of 
benefactions  received — is  a  virtue  to  which  the  Hindu  shuts 
his  heart  entirely. 

But  let  us  leave  this  picture,  which  does  not  represent 
a  very  pleasing  side  to  their  character,  and  let  us  return 
to  the  consideration  of  their  physical  peculiarities.  It  is 
easy  to  recognize  a  Brahmin  by  a  sort  of  swagger  and 
freedom  in  his  gait  and  behaviour.  Unconsciously,  and 
apparently  unaffectedly,  he  shows  by  his  tone  and  manner 
the  superiority  that  his  birth,  rank,  and  education  have 
given  him.  Brahmins  have  also  a  peculiar  way  of  talking 
and  expressing  themselves.  They  never  make  use  of  the 
common  or  vulgar  expressions  of  other  castes.  Their 
language  is  generally  concise,  refined,  and  elegant  ;  and 
they  enrich  their  vocabulary  with  many  Sanskrit  words. 
They  have  also  peculiar  modes  of  expression  which  the 
Sudras  never  use  ;  and  their  conversation  is  always  inter- 
spersed with  pedantic  proverbs  and  allegories.  Their 
idioms  are  so  numerous  and  varied,  that  though  you  may 
think  you  know  their  language  well,  it  often  happens  that 
you  cannot  understand  them  when  they  are  talking  fami- 
liarly amongst  themselves.  In  speaking  and  writing  they 
make  use  of  endless  polite  and  flattering  terms,  often  very 
aptly  ;  but  they  carry  the  practice  ad  nauseam.  Their 
compliments  are  always  exaggerated  and  high-flown.  They 
think  nothing  of  placing  those  whom  they  wish  to  flatter 
above  the  level  of  their  deities  ;  indeed,  that  is  a  very 
usual  beginning  to  a  congratulatory  speech. 

1  This  imperturbability  might  more  correctly  be  attributed  to  the 
prevailing  belief  in  the  doctrine  of  fatalism. — Ed. 


ARTICLES  OF  CLOTHING  323 

If  the  language  of  the  Brahmins  is  rich  in  gracious  and 
flattering  expressions,  it  is  even  more  so  in  terms  of  abuse 
and  coarse,  indecent  invective.  Though  they  pride  them- 
selves on  their  courtesy  and  knowledge  of  the  world,  when 
they  lose  their  tempers  they  are  no  better  than  our  lowest 
rag-pickers  ;  and  an  incredible  quantity  of  disgusting  and 
obscene  language  pours  from  their  mouths  on  such  occa- 
sions. 

Their  clothing  is  of  the  most  simple  description.  It  is 
as  nearly  as  possible  just  what  it  was  in  the  earliest  ages. 
Two  pieces  of  cotton  cloth  without  hem  or  stitch,  one 
10  or  12  feet  long,  the  other  14  or  16,  and  3  or  4  feet  wide, 
are  their  only  garments.  With  the  first  piece  they  cover 
their  shoulders,  with  the  second  they  gird  their  loins.  Of 
the  latter,  one  end  is  passed  between  their  thighs  and  is 
tucked  behind  into  the  portion  which  goes  round  their 
bodies,  while  the  other  end  forms  a  drapery  in  front,  and 
hangs  with  a  certain  careless  grace  to  their  feet.  Their 
loin-cloths  are  generally  ornamented  with  a  border  of  silk 
of  a  different  colour  from  the  rest  of  the  cloth  itself.  This 
costume  is  very  suitable  for  persons  who,  like  them,  are 
most  particular  about  keeping  themselves  always  in  a  state 
of  purity  and  cleanliness,  for,  as  one  may  imagine,  it  does 
not  cost  much  to  wash  their  cloths  often.  Many  have  also 
a  kind  of  large  sheet,  with  which  they  cover  themselves 
up  at  night,  or  when  the  mornings  are  cold.  Since  Euro- 
pean piece-goods  have  been  procurable  all  over  the  country, 
those  who  have  been  able  to  afford  them  have  bought 
cloths  of  brilliant  scarlet,  which  are  a  source  of  great  pride 
and  pleasure  to  them.  It  appears  that  formerly  the  Hindus 
went  about  with  bare  heads,  and  their  bodies  naked  to  the 
waist  ;  and  even  at  the  present  day  the  natives  on  the 
Malabar  coast  go  about  in  this  fashion.  So  also  do  a  great 
many  others  who  live  in  the  dense  forests  where  the  same 
customs  have  prevailed  from  time  immemorial,  and  where 
no  revolutionary  changes  have  penetrated.  Nowadays 
most  Hindus  wear  a  turban,  an  article  of  dress  which  they 
have  copied  from  the  Mahomedans.  It  is  made  of  fine 
thin  muslin,  often  as  much  as  60  or  70  feet  long,  but  at 
most  only  2  feet  in  width.  They  twist  it  artistically  round 
their  heads,  but  the  manner  of  arranging  it  varies  in  different 


324  HINDU  HOUSES 

provinces  and  with  different  castes.  Men  who  are  in  service 
with  either  Europeans  or  Mahomedans  wear  a  long  coat  of 
fine  muslin  or  calico,  very  full  in  the  skirt,  and  made  in 
a  peculiar  way.  This  also  is  a  foreign  fashion  recently 
copied  from  the  Mahomedans.  Brahmins  and  Mahomedans 
may  be  distinguished  from  each  other  by  the  fact  that  the 
former  fasten  their  coats  on  the  left  side,  and  the  latter 
on  the  right.  Both  generally  wear  over  this  garment  a 
belt,  made  of  some  fine  material,  and  wound  several  times 
round  the  waist. 

All  Brahmins,  rich  or  poor,  dress  alike  ;  but  the  rich 
usually  wear  finer  and  more  expensive  materials. 

Most  Hindus  wear  more  or  less  expensive  ornaments 
either  in  the  middle  or  the  upper  part  of  the  ears.  These 
ornaments  vary  in  size  and  pattern  according  to  locality 
and  caste.  But  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  of  this 
kind  of  adornment  later  on. 

The  simplicity  of  their  houses  equals  that  of  their  costume. 
These  are  generally  thatched  with  straw  and  have  mud 
walls,  particularly  in  the  country.  The  houses  in  the  towns 
are  better  built  ;  but  they  are  all  arranged  on  the  same 
plan,  and  are  all  equally  simple.  The  interior  resembles 
a  little  cloister,  with  a  gallery  round  it,  while  in  the  centre 
there  is  a  court  of  varying  size.  From  this  you  enter  the 
tiny,  dark,  windowless  rooms,  into  which  light  and  air 
can  only  penetrate  by  means  of  a  door  about  4  feet  high 
by  3  feet  wide.  These  little  dens  are  absolutely  uninhabit- 
able during  the  hot  weather.  The  kitchen  is  always  placed 
in  the  furthest  and  darkest  corner  of  the  house,  so  as  to 
be  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  strangers'  eyes.  I  have 
already  explained  the  motive  of  this  arrangement.  The 
hearth  is  invariably  placed  on  the  south-west  side,  which 
they  call  '  the  fire-god's  quarter,'  because  the  Hindus 
believe  that  there  this  deity  resides. 

As  the  men  are  not  allowed  to  pay  visits  to  the  women 
of  the  family,  who  are  always  occupied  with  their  domestic 
affairs  and  remain  shut  up  in  a  part  of  the  house  to  which 
outsiders,  as  a  rule,  are  not  admitted,  large  open  seats  or 
raised  platforms  are  constructed  both  inside  and  outside 
the  principal  entrance  door,  on  which  the  men  sit  cross- 
legged,   while  they  talk  about  business,   discuss  religion, 


PUBLIC  BUILDINGS  325 

politics,  or  science,  receive  visits,  and  in  fact  kill  time  as 
best  they  can. 

Besides  the  private  houses,  one  or  more  public  buildings 
are  generally  to  be  found  in  all  villages  of  any  size.  These 
consist  usually  of  a  shed  or  long  room,  open  down  the 
whole  length  of  one  side.  They  are  what  Europeans  call 
choultries,  and  they  correspond  to  the  caravanserais  of 
other  Eastern  nations.  These  rest-houses,  which  are  usually 
large  and  convenient,  not  only  serve  as  a  shelter  for  travellers, 
but  are  also  used  as  council  chambers,  where  the  headmen 
assemble  to  consider  the  public  affairs  of  the  village,  settle 
law-suits,  put  an  end  to  quarrels,  and  pacify  disputants. 
They  are  also  used  for  the  celebration  of  religious  rites  in 
places  where  there  are  no  temples. 

All  the  villages  are  built  very  irregularly,  without  any 
plan  or  symmetry.  The  houses  are  crowded  closely  to- 
gether ;  the  streets  are  very  narrow,  and  excessively  dirty, 
with  the  exception  of  the  street  in  the  larger  villages  where 
the  market  is  held,  which  is  kept  cleaner,  and  in  which 
a  certain  amount  of  order  is  maintained.  A  few  steps 
from  the  entrance  door  of  each  house  is  a  large  ditch  into 
which  all  the  manure  from  the  stable  and  the  refuse  from 
the  house  are  thrown.  During  the  rains  these  sewage  pits 
become  full  of  water  and  form  cesspools,  which  give  off 
the  most  disgusting  effluvia.  But  this  unpleasant  arrange- 
ment, which  is  the  same  in  all  the  villages,  does  not  appear 
to  affect  the  inhabitants  in  any  way. 

All  the  houses  being  covered  with  thatch  and  crowded 
together,  when  a  fire  breaks  out — a  by  no  means  rare 
occurrence — a  whole  village  is  often  burned  down  in  less 
than  half  an  hour. 

Though  in  the  larger  towns  the  houses  are  tiled  and 
not  thatched,  there  is  no  more  symmetry  in  their  arrange- 
ment than  in  the  villages,  and  the  streets  are  so  narrow 
that  two  persons  can  scarcely  walk  abreast.  In  the  middle 
of  each  street  there  usually  runs  a  sewer,  which  receives 
all  the  rubbish  and  filth  from  the  houses.  This  forms 
a  permanent  open  drain,  and  gives  off  a  pestilential  smell, 
which  none  but  a  Hindu  could  endure  for  a  moment. 


326 


CHAPTEE  XIV 

Rules  of  Etiquette  amongst  Brahmins  and  other  Hindus. — Modes  of 

Greeting. 

It  is  unnecessary,  and  it  would  be  tedious,  to  give  a 
detailed  list  of  the  numberless  rules  governing  Hindu 
etiquette.  If  I  cite  a  few  it  will  give  a  general  idea  of  the 
rest. 

Hindus  have  several  ways  of  greeting  each  other.  In 
some  provinces  they  put  the  right  hand  on  the  heart ;  in 
others  they  simply  stretch  it  out  to  the  acquaintance  they 
are  meeting,  for  they  never  greet  a  person  whom  they  do 
not  know,  unless  he  be  of  very  high  rank.  When  two 
Hindu  acquaintances  meet,  they  generally  say  a  few 
meaningless  words  to  each  other,  such  as,  '  You — So-and- 
so — you  here  ?  That's  all  right  !  '  '  And  I — So-and-so — 
here  I  am.'     Then  each  goes  on  his  way. 

They  have  also  borrowed  the  salaam  from  the  Maho- 
medans  ;  but  this  they  never  use  except  to  strangers. 
The  salaam  consists  in  touching  the  forehead  with  the  right 
hand,  and  bowing  at  the  same  time,  with  more  or  less 
emphasis,  according  to  the  rank  of  the  person  they  are 
greeting.  In  the  case  of  a  person  of  very  high  rank  they 
sometimes  touch  the  ground  with  both  hands  and  then 
raise  them  to  their  foreheads,  or  else  they  come  close  to 
him  and  touch  his  feet  three  times. 

Hindus  who  do  not  belong  to  the  Brahmin  caste  greet 
Brahmins  by  performing  namaskara,  which  consists  in 
joining  both  hands,  touching  the  forehead,  and  then 
putting  them  above  the  head.  This  mode  of  salutation, 
which  is  only  offered  to  a  superior,  is  accompanied  by  these 
two  words,  '  Saranam,  ayya  !  '  which  means  '  Respectful 
greeting,  my  lord  '  ;  upon  which  the  Brahmin  extends  his 
right  hand,  partially  open,  as  if  he  expects  to  receive 
something  from  the  person  who  is  paying  him  this  mark 
of  respect,  and  gravely  answers  with  this  one  word,  ' Asir- 
vadam  ! '  which  answers  to  the  Latin  '  Bene] axit  tibi  Deus  !  ' 
or  to  our  '  God  bless  you  !  '  It  is  a  mysterious  compound 
expression,  made  up  of  three  words  which  convey  good 


GREETING  ACQUAINTANCES  327 

wishes.  Only  Brahmins  and  gurus  have  the  right  to  give 
the  asirvadam  or  to  pronounce  the  sacred  word  over  those 
who  treat  them  with  respect  or  give  them  presents.  Some 
persons,  when  saluting  a  Brahmin,  content  themselves  with 
raising  their  clasped  hands  as  far  as  their  chest. 

Another  very  respectful  manner  of  greeting  is  to  extend 
both  hands  towards  the  feet  of  him  whom  you  wish  to 
honour,  or  to  seize  his  knees  while  you  throw  yourself  at 
his  feet.  This  is  a  very  common  mode  of  greeting  between 
a  son  and  a  father,  or  between  a  younger  and  an  elder 
brother,  on  meeting  after  a  long  separation.  The  same 
humble  attitude  is  also  adopted  when  asking  for  pardon  or 
for  a  favour  ;  and  only  when  the  object  is  attained  does 
the  postulant  relax  his  hold  on  the  feet  of  the  person  whom 
he  is  addressing. 

But  of  all  the  modes  of  salutation  the  most  solemn  and 
the  most  reverential  is  the  sashtanga,  or  prostration  of  the 
six  members,  of  which  mention  has  already  been  made 
elsewhere  l.  When  a  Hindu  is  about  to  make  a  ceremonious 
visit  to  members  of  his  family  who  live  at  a  distance,  he 
makes  a  halt  when  he  gets  near  the  place  and  sends  some 
one  to  warn  his  relatives  that  he  is  coming.  The  relatives 
then  start  at  once  to  fetch  him,  and  conduct  him  to  their 
home,  often  with  much  ceremony,  and  accompanied  by 
music.  It  is  not  customary  either  to  shake  hands  or  to 
kiss  each  other  on  these  occasions.  A  man  who  publicly 
kisses  a  woman,  even  if  she  be  his  wife,  commits  the  grossest 
breach  of  social  decorum.  A  brother  would  not  think  of 
taking  such  a  liberty  with  a  sister,  or  a  son  with  his  mother. 
Only  on  a  visit  of  condolence  do  they  make  a  pretence 
of  doing  so  to  the  person  to  whom  the  visit  is  paid  ;  and 
this  form  of  salute,  in  which  the  lips  do  not  really  touch 
the  face,  is  only  permissible  between  persons  of  the  same 
sex. 

Women  bow  respectfully  to  men  without  speaking  or 
looking  at  them.  Children  salute  their  parents  in  the  same 
manner  and  stand  upright  before  them,  with  their  arms 

1  See  Chapter  III. 

It  has  already  been  pointed  out  in  a  note  to  p.  42  that  the  Abbe  is 
wrong  in  translating  sashtanga  as  '  six  members  '  instead  of  '  eight 
members.' — Ed. 


328  OFFERING  CONDOLENCES 

crossed  on  their  chests.  Whenever  relatives  or  very  great 
friends  meet  after  a  long  separation,  they  clasp  each  other 
in  their  arms  and  take  hold  of  each  other's  chin,  shedding 
tears  of  joy. 

Hindus  who  visit  or  meet  each  other  after  a  long  absence 
have,  like  ourselves,  a  set  of  commonplace  phrases  which 
they  make  use  of  for  want  of  anything  better.  But  in 
most  cases  the  ideas  they  express  are  diametrically  opposed 
to  ours.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  we  Europeans  were  speak- 
ing to  a  friend  or  acquaintance,  we  should  think  he  would 
be  pleased  if  we  congratulated  him  on  his  appearance  of 
good  health,  his  increased  stoutness,  or  his  good  complexion, 
&c.  If  we  think  him  altered  for  the  worse,  we  take  care  not 
to  let  him  see  that  we  notice  it,  for  fear  it  might  pain  him. 

A  Hindu,  on  the  contrary,  when  he  meets  a  friend,  no 
matter  how  strong  and  well  he  may  be  looking,  never  fails 
to  offer  him  the  following  greeting  :  '  How  sadly  you  have 
altered  since  I  last  saw  you  !  How  thin  and  worn  you 
look  !  I  fear  you  must  be  very  ill,'  and  other  equally 
consoling  remarks.  It  would  offend  a  Hindu  deeply  if 
you  were  to  say  he  was  looking  well  on  first  meeting  him. 
Any  one  who  was  so  ill  advised  as  to  make  so  indiscreet 
a  remark  would  certainly  be  suspected  of  feeling  jealous, 
envious,  and  regretful  at  the  signs  of  health  which  were 
the  theme  of  his  unfortunate  compliments. 

In  the  same  way,  you  must  never  congratulate  a  Hindu 
on  his  good  luck  ;  you  must  not  say  that  he  has  pretty 
children,  a  lovely  house,  beautiful  gardens,  fine  flocks  and 
herds,  or  that  everything  that  he  undertakes  turns  out 
well,  or  that  he  is  happy  or  lucky,  &c.  ;  he  would  be  sure 
to  think  that  envy  prompted  compliments  of  this  kind. 
Long  ago,  before  I  knew  anything  about  Hindu  etiquette, 
I  was  walking  one  day  at  the  edge  of  a  large  tank  or  lake, 
where  some  men  were  fishing  with  nets.  I  stood  still  to 
watch  them,  and  seeing  that  they  landed  a  quantity  of 
fish  each  time  the  nets  were  let  down,  I  thought  I  might 
congratulate  them  on  their  good  luck.  But  my  civility 
had  a  most  unlooked-for  result,  for  these  worthy  people 
gathered  up  their  nets  and  their  fish  without  a  word,  and 
looking  at  me  very  indignantly,  promptly  went  off,  grum- 
bling to  each  other  under  their  breath  :   '  What  have  we  done 


MODE  OF  TAKING  LEAVE       329 

to  this  Feringhi  guru  that  he  comes  here  and  is  so  jealous 
of  us  *  ' 

Just  as  we  French  and  English  do,  but  contrary  to  the 
Spanish  and  Portuguese  custom,  the  Hindus,  in  quitting 
an  apartment  with  a  visitor,  always  allow  him  to  walk 
first.  The  object  is  to  avoid  turning  one's  back  upon 
a  guest,  and  he,  in  turn,  in  order  not  to  appear  wanting 
in  politeness,  walks  sideways  until  both  have  passed  the 
threshold.  When  leaving  the  presence  of  a  prince  or  any 
great  personage,  it  is  customary,  for  the  same  reason,  to 
walk  backwards  until  one  is  out  of  his  presence  ;  and  this 
is  also  why  a  servant,  when  accompanying  his  master  on 
foot  or  on  horseback,  never  walks  in  front  of  him. 

It  is  considered  good  manners  in  India  to  blow  your  nose 
with  your  fingers  ;  and  there  is  nothing  impolite  in  audibly 
getting  rid  of  flatulency.  Persons  of  all  ranks,  indeed, 
seem  to  rather  encourage  this  habit,  as  according  to  them 
it  is  a  sure  sign  of  a  good  digestion.  It  is  certainly  an 
original,  if  somewhat  disgusting  spectacle  to  a  European, 
to  see  a  large  number  of  Brahmins  coming  away  from 
a  feast  indulging  in  a  sort  of  competition  as  to  who  shall 
give  vent  to  the  loudest  eructations,  calling  out  at  the 
same  time,  with  emphatic  gravity,  '  Narayana  ! '  as  if  to 
thank  Vishnu  for  his  favours. 

After  sneezing  a  Hindu  never  fails  to  exclaim,  '  Rama  ! 
Rama  1 '  and  no  doubt  there  is  some  superstition  attached 
to  this  pious  ejaculation  l.  Again,  when  a  Brahmin  yawns, 
he  snaps  his  fingers  to  the  right  and  left  to  scare  away  evil 
spirits  and  giants. 

To  tread  on  any  one's  foot,  even  by  accident,  demands 
an  immediate  apology.  This  is  done  by  stretching  out 
both  hands  towards  the  feet  of  the  offended  person.  A 
box  on  the  ear  is  not  considered  a  graver  affront  than  a 

1  One  knows  that  amongst  the  old  heathen  nations  a  sneeze  was 
supposed  to  contain  a  great  mystery.  Old  writers  mention  many  facts 
which  prove  what  superstitious  deductions  credulous  persons  drew  from 
it.  The  custom  of  uttering  a  prayer  or  good  wish  on  behalf  of  a  person 
who  has  sneezed  has  existed  from  time  immemorial.  The  Greeks  said 
to  such  a  person  tfOi ;  the  Romans,  '  Salve.*  Though  with  us  the 
fashion  of  saying,  '  May  your  wishes  be  granted  !  '  or  '  God  bless  you  !  ' 
has  rather  gone  out,  politeness  demands  that  at  least  you  should  make 
a  bow. — Dubois. 

M  3 


330  RULES  OF  ETIQUETTE 

blow  given  with  the  fist,  or  a  kick  with  the  bare  foot ;  but 
a  blow  on  the  head,  should  it  knock  off  the  turban,  is  a  very 
gross  insult.  By  far  the  greatest  indignity  of  all,  however, 
is  to  be  struck  with  one  of  the  shoes  or  sandals  that  Hindus 
wear.  Whoever  submitted  to  such  an  insult  without  in- 
sisting on  receiving  satisfaction,  would  be  excluded  from 
his  caste.  The  mere  threat  of  such  an  insult  is  often 
sufficient  to  provoke  a  criminal  prosecution. 

It  is  a  mark  of  respect  when  women  turn  their  backs  on 
men  whom  they  hold  in  high  esteem.  At  any  rate,  they 
must  turn  away  their  faces  or  cover  them  with  their  saris. 
Again,  when  they  leave  the  house,  propriety  requires  them 
to  proceed  on  their  way  without  paying  any  attention  to 
the  passers-by  ;  and  if  they  see  a  man  they  are  expected 
to  bow  their  heads  and  look  in  the  opposite  direction. 
There  are  a  good  many,  however,  who  are  not  always 
quite  so  modest. 

Any  one  who  sees  a  person  of  high  rank  coming  towards 
him,  must  go  off  the  road,  if  he  is  on  foot,  so  as  to  leave 
the  way  perfectly  free,  and  if  he  is  on  horseback  or  in 
a  palanquin  he  must  get  down  and  remain  standing  until 
the  great  person  has  passed  and  is  some  distance  off.  When 
speaking  to  a  superior,  politeness  demands  that  an  inferior 
should  put  his  right  hand  before  his  mouth  to  prevent  any 
particle  of  his  breath  or  saliva  reaching  and  defiling  him. 
If  an  inferior  meets  a  superior  out  of  doors  he  must  take 
off  his  shoes  before  greeting  him.  A  Hindu,  moreover, 
must  never  enter  his  own  house,  much  less  a  stranger's, 
with  leather  shoes  on  his  feet. 

In  several  of  the  Southern  Provinces  the  Sudras  are  in 
the  habit  of  taking  off  the  cloth  which  covers  the  upper 
part  of  their  bodies,  winding  it  round  their  waists,  and 
standing  with  arms  crossed  on  their  chest  while  speaking 
to  a  superior.  The  women  of  certain  castes  do  the  same 
in  the  presence  of  their  husbands,  or  of  any  man  to  whom 
they  wish  to  show  respect.  Their  rules  of  propriety  oblige 
them  to  appear  before  men  stripped  to  the  waist ;  and  to 
omit  to  do  so  would  show  a  great  want  of  good  breeding. 

When  Brahmins  are  talking  to  a  man  of  another  caste, 
or  to  a  European  from  whom  they  have  nothing  to  hope 
or  to  fear,  they  stand  with  their  hands  behind  their  backs 


CEREMONIOUS  VISITS  331 

— a  position  which  signifies  contempt  for  their  interlocutor, 
and  which  they  are  always  very  pleased  to  assume,  to  show 
the  sense  of  their  own  superiority.  When  they  pay  a  visit, 
no  matter  what  may  be  the  rank  or  dignity  of  their  host, 
they  never  wait  till  they  are  asked  to  take  a  seat,  but  do 
so  the  instant  they  enter  the  room.  People  of  all  castes, 
when  visiting  a  superior,  must  wait  until  they  are  dismissed 
before  they  can  take  leave. 

There  are  several  ceremonious  visits  which  must  be  paid, 
such  as  visits  of  condolence,  visits  at  pongul,  and  several 
others  of  which  I  shall  speak  later  on.  The  feast  of  pongul 
and  the  following  days  are  mostly  celebrated  by  presents 
which  near  relatives  make  to  each  other,  and  which  consist 
of  new  earthen  vessels  on  which  certain  designs  are  traced 
in  lime,  also  ground  rice,  fruit,  sugar,  saffron,  &c.  Such 
gifts  are  conveyed  with  much  solemnity  and  accompanied 
by  instruments  of  music.  These  little  attentions  are  in- 
dispensable in  the  case  of  certain  individuals.  For  instance, 
a  mother  must  not  neglect  giving  presents  to  her  married 
daughter  ;  otherwise  the  mother-in-law  would  resent  the 
omission  to  her  dying  day. 

With  them  letters  of  condolence  on  occasions  of  mourning 
can  never  take  the  place  of  a  visit,  as  they  so  often  do  with 
us.  Some  member  of  the  family  must  go  in  person  to  wail 
and  lament,  and  perform  the  other  ridiculous  ceremonies 
that  are  customary  on  such  occasions,  even  though  a  journey 
of  fifty  miles  or  more  has  to  be  made. 

When  a  Hindu  visits  a  person  of  importance  for  the  first 
time  he  must  not  omit  to  take  presents  with  him,  which 
he  will  offer  as  a  mark  of  respect,  and  to  show  that  he  comes 
with  friendly  intentions.  It  is  generally  considered  a  lack 
of  good  manners  to  appear  with  empty  hands  before  any 
one  of  superior  position,  or  from  whom  a  favour  is  expected. 
Those  whose  means  do  not  permit  of  their  offering  presents 
of  great  value  may  bring  such  things  as  sugar,  bananas, 
cocoanuts,  betel,  &c. 

In  conclusion,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  laws  of 
etiquette  and  social  politeness  are  much  more  clearly  laid 
down,  and  much  better  observed  by  all  classes  of  Hindus, 
even  by  the  lowest,  than  they  are  by  people  of  correspond- 
ing social  position  in  Europe. 


332 
CHAPTER  XV 

The  Ornaments  worn  by  Hindus. — The  Different  Marks  with  which  they 
adorn  their  Bodies. 

Every  Hindu,  even  including  those  who  have  made 
a  profession  of  penitence  and  have  renounced  the  world, 
wears  earrings.  The  sannyasis  or  penitents,  who  are  sup- 
posed to  have  given  up  the  three  things  which  most  natur- 
ally tend  to  excite  man's  cupidity — that  is  to  say,  women, 
honours,  and  riches — wear  copper  earrings  in  token  of 
humility.  But  generally  such  ornaments  are  made  of 
gold,  and  are  of  different  shapes,  though  most  frequently 
oval.  Occasionally  these  pendants  are  so  large  that  one 
can  easily  pass  one's  hand  through  them.  Some  are  made 
of  copper  wire,  round  which  gold  wire  is  so  twisted  as  to 
cover  the  copper  completely.  Those  who  are  fairly  well 
off  wear  them  with  a  large  pearl  or  precious  stone  in  the 
centre. 

These  ear  ornaments,  which  are  sometimes  of  enormous 
size,  are  another  proof  of  the  Hindu's  strong  attachment  to 
his  old  customs.  All  writers,  both  sacred  and  profane,  bear 
witness  to  the  fact  that  similar  ornaments  have  been  worn 
from  time  immemorial.  On  grand  occasions,  such  as 
marriage  feasts,  they  put  four  or  five  pairs  into  their  ears, 
and  at  the  end  or  in  the  centre  of  each  of  these  is  added 
another  small  ornament  set  with  some  precious  stone.  In 
some  parts  of  the  country  a  gold  ring  is  also  attached  to 
the  cartilage  which  divides  the  nostrils.  Poor  people, 
Pariahs  included,  who  cannot  afford  to  buy  such  valuable 
ornaments,  wear  some  small  inexpensive  trinket  in  their 
ears.  But,  no  matter  what  their  caste  or  circumstances, 
fashion  decrees  that  no  one  shall  be  without  this  species 
of  adornment. 

Rich  Hindus  wear  round  their  necks  gold  chains  or 
strings  of  pearls  with  large  medallions  set  with  diamonds 
which  reach  to  their  chests  ;  and  you  often  see  them 
wearing  gold  finger-rings  set  with  precious  stones  of  great 
value.  They  also  frequently  wear  round  their  waists  a 
girdle  made  of  gold  or  silver  thread  woven  with  much 
taste  and  skill,  and  carry  massive  gold  bracelets  on  their 


PAINTING  MARKS  ON  THE  BODY  333 

arms,  which  sometimes  weigh  as  much  as  a  pound  each. 
Married  men  wear  silver  rings  on  their  toes  \  Many, 
again,  tie  above  their  elbows  little  hollow  tubes  of  gold 
or  silver  containing  magical  mantrams,  which  they  wear  as 
charms  to  avert  ill  luck. 

They  have  many  other  baubles  of  the  same  kind  2.  Even 
the  private  parts  of  the  children  have  their  own  particular 
decorations.  Little  girls  wear  a  gold  or  silver  shield  or 
cod-piece  on  which  is  graven  some  indecent  picture  ;  while 
a  boy's  ornament,  also  of  gold  or  silver,  is  an  exact  copy 
of  that  member  which  it  is  meant  to  decorate. 

Then  there  is  the  custom  of  painting  the  forehead  and 
other  parts  of  the  body  with  different  figures  and  emblems 
in  various  colours,  a  custom  unknown  elsewhere,  but  which 
appears  to  have  been  common  enough  among  ancient 
nations.  The  simplest  of  all  and  the  most  common  is  the 
one  called  pottu,  which  consists  of  a  small  circular  mark 
about  an  inch  in  diameter,  placed  in  the  centre  of  the 
forehead.  It  is  generally  yellow,  but  sometimes  red  or 
black  in  colour,  and  the  paint  is  mixed  with  a  sweet-smelling 
paste  made  by  rubbing  sandalwood  on  a  damp  stone. 
Instead  of  the  pottu,  some  paint  two  or  three  horizontal 
lines  across  their  foreheads  with  the  same  mixture,  and 
others  a  perpendicular  line  from  the  top  of  the  forehead 
to  the  nose.  Some  Brahmins  and  some  of  the  Hindus  of 
Northern  India  apply  this  paste  to  their  cheeks  rather 
effectively.  Others  use  it  to  decorate  the  neck,  breast, 
belly,  and  arms  with  different  designs,  while  others  again 
smear  their  bodies  all  over  with  the  mixture. 

1  Brahmin  men  never  wear  such  rings. — Ed. 

2  The  variety  and  number  of  ornaments  is  almost  bewildering  ;  but 
they  all  have  their  proper  names  and  shapes.  Indian  artisans  do  not 
need  to  rack  their  brains  to  invent  novelties.  There  are  no  changing 
fashions,  either  in  dress  or  in  ornaments.  A  woman  can  wear  what 
once  belonged  to  her  grandmother,  or  to  one  removed  very  many  degrees 
further  back,  for  the  matter  of  that,  either  clothes  or  jewels  ;  and  this 
without  any  incongruity,  or  exciting  remark.  There  is  a  perpetual 
recurrence  of  old  patterns,  improved,  it  may  be,  but  the  design  will  be 
the  same.  Of  course  it  is  in  jewels  for  females  that  the  variety  occurs 
most. — Padfield. 

It  is  a  common  belief  among  Hindus  that  there  must  always  be  at 
least  a  speck  of  gold  on  one's  person,  in  order  to  ensure  personal  cere- 
monial purity. — Ed. 


334  SMEARING  WITH  ASHES 

Vishnavite  Brahmins,  as  well  as  those  of  other  castes 
who  are  particularly  devoted  to  the  worship  of  Vishnu, 
paint  their  foreheads  with  the  emblem  namam l,  which 
gives  their  faces  a  most  extraordinary,  and  sometimes 
even  ferocious  appearance.  The  most  enthusiastic  devo- 
tees of  this  sect  paint  the  same  design  on  their  shoulders, 
arms,  breast,  and  belly  ;  and  the  Bairagis,  a  sect  who  go 
about  stark  naked,  often  draw  it  on  their  hinder  parts. 

The  worshippers  of  Siva  cover  their  foreheads  and  various 
parts  of  their  bodies  with  the  ashes  of  cow-dung,  or  with 
ashes  taken  from  the  places  where  the  dead  are  burned  2. 
Some  of  them  smear  themselves  all  over  from  head  to  foot  ; 
others  content  themselves  with  smearing  broad  bars  across 
the  arms,  chest,  and  belly. 

Many  Hindus  who  do  not  belong  to  any  sect  in  par- 
ticular smear  their  foreheads  with  ashes.  Brahmins,  with 
the  exception  of  a  very  few  who  belong  to  some  special 
sect,  do  not  follow  this  custom,  though  sometimes,  after 
they  have  performed  their  morning  ablutions,  they  draw 
a  little  horizontal  line  with  ashes  across  their  foreheads. 

The  Hindus  also  display  on  their  bodies  many  other 
marks  and  devices  of  different  colours  and  designs,  which 
vary  according  to  the  different  castes,  sects,  and  provinces. 
It  would  be  difficult  to  explain  the  origin  and  meaning  of 
the  greater  number  of  these  symbols  ;  those  who  wear 
them  are  often  themselves  ignorant  of  their  meaning. 
Some,  the  pottu  amongst  the  number,  appear  to  have  been 
invented  solely  for  ornament,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that, 
as  a  rule,  some  superstitious  meaning  is  attached  to  them. 
Thus  the  ashes  of  cow-dung  are  used  in  memory  of  the 
long  penance  of  Siva  and  of  several  other  holy  personages, 
who  always  covered  themselves  with  these  ashes  in  token 
of  humility. 

Anyway,  the  Hindu  code  of  good  breeding  requires  that 
the  forehead  shall  be  ornamented  with  a  mark  of  some 
sort.  To  keep  it  quite  bare  is  a  sign  of  mourning.  It  is 
also  a  sign  that  the  daily  ablutions  have  not  been  per- 
formed, that  a  person  is  still  in  a  state  of  impurity,  or  that 

1  See  Chapter  IX. 

2  Ashes  taken  from  burning-grounds  are  not  usually  employed  now- 
adays.— Ed. 


COSMETIC  USED  BY  WOMEN  335 

he  is  still  fasting.  If  one  meets  an  acquaintance  after 
noon  with  his  forehead  still  bare,  one  always  asks  if  it  is 
because  he  has  not  yet  broken  his  fast.  It  would  be  rude 
to  appear  before  decent  people  with  no  mark  whatever  on 
the  forehead. 

Women  attach  much  less  importance  than  men  to  this 
kind  of  decoration.  As  a  rule,  they  are  satisfied  with 
making  the  little  round  pothi  mark  on  the  forehead  in  red, 
yellow,  or  black,  or  else  a  simple  horizontal  or  perpendicular 
line  in  red.  But  they  have  another  kind  of  decoration  of 
which  they  are  very  fond.  It  consists  in  painting  the  face, 
neck,  arms,  legs,  and  every  part  of  the  body  that  is  visible 
with  a  deep  yellow  cosmetic  of  saffron.  Brahmin  women 
imagine  that  they  thereby  greatly  enhance  their  beauty, 
since  it  makes  their  skin  appear  less  dusky.  Love  of 
admiration  no  doubt  has  taught  them  that  this  paint  gives 
them  an  additional  charm  in  the  eyes  of  Hindus,  but  it 
produces  quite  the  contrary  effect  on  Europeans,  who  think 
them  hideous  and  revolting  when  thus  besmeared. 

No  doubt  all  these  daubings  appear  very  ridiculous  in 
our  eyes,  and  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  it  can  render 
any  one  more  attractive,  at  least  according  to  our  way  of 
thinking.  But  amongst  the  many  artificial  means  of 
adornment  which  caprice  and  fashion  have  forced  upon  us 
there  are  several  which  excite  just  as  much  ridicule  amongst 
the  Hindus.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  days  when  it  was 
the  custom  to  powder  the  hair,  they  could  not  understand 
how  a  young  man  with  common  sense  could  bring  himself 
to  appear  as  if  he  had  the  white  head  of  an  old  man.  As 
to  wigs,  Hindus  are  absolutely  horrified  at  seeing  a  Euro- 
pean, holding  some  important  position,  with  his  head 
dressed  out  in  hair  which  may  have  been  taken  from 
a  leper,  or  a  corpse,  or  at  best  from  a  Pariah  or  prostitute. 
To  defile  one's  head  with  anything  so  unclean  and  abomin- 
able is  regarded  by  the  Hindu  as  most  horrible  !  It  would  be 
no  great  hardship  to  expose  a  bald  head  to  free  contact  with 
the  air  in  such  a  warm  climate,  but  were  they  all  doomed 
to  severe  colds,  nothing  would  ever  persuade  the  Hindus 
to  adopt  the  fashion  of  wearing  wigs.  And  so  we  laugh  at 
them,  and  they  at  us.  And  this  is  the  way  of  the  world. 
Yae  tibi !  vae  nigrae  !  dicebat  cacabus  ollae. 


336 


CHAPTER  XVI 

Brahmin  Wives. — The  Education  of  Women. — Ceremonies  which  take 
place  when  they  arrive  at  a  Marriageable  Age,  and  during  Preg- 
nancy.— The  Low  Estimation  in  which  Women  are  held  in  Private 
Life. — The  Respect  that  is  paid  to  them  in  Public. — Their  Clothing 
and  Ornaments. 

The  social  condition  of  the  Brahmanis,  or  wives  of 
Brahmins,  differs  very  little  from  that  of  the  women  of 
other  castes,  and  I  shall  have  little  to  say  about  it.  This 
interesting  half  of  the  human  race,  which  exercises  such 
enormous  power  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  and  often 
decides  the  fate  of  empires,  occupies  in  India  a  position 
hardly  better  than  that  of  slaves.  Their  only  vocation  in 
life  being  to  minister  to  man's  physical  pleasures  and 
wants,  they  are  considered  incapable  of  developing  any  of 
those  higher  mental  qualities  which  would  make  them 
more  worthy  of  consideration  and  also  more  capable  of 
playing  a  useful  part  in  life.  Their  intellect  is  thought  to 
be  of  such  a  very  low  order,  that  when  a  man  has  done 
anything  particularly  foolish  or  thoughtless  his  friends  say 
he  has  no  more  sense  than  a  woman.  And  the  women 
themselves,  when  they  are  reproved  for  any  serious  fault 
and  find  it  difficult  to  make  a  good  excuse,  always  end  by 
saying,  '  After  all,  I  am  only  a  woman  !  '  This  is  always 
their  last  word,  and  one  to  which  there  is  no  possible 
retort.  One  of  the  principal  precepts  taught  in  Hindu 
books,  and  one  that  is  everywhere  recognized  as  true,  is 
that  women  should  be  kept  in  a  state  of  dependence  and 
subjection  all  their  lives,  and  under  no  circumstances  should 
they  be  allowed  to  become  their  own  mistresses.  A  woman 
must  obey  her  parents  as  long  as  she  is  unmarried,  and  her 
husband  and  mother-in-law  afterwards.  Even  when  she 
becomes  a  widow  she  is  not  free,  for  her  own  sons  become 
her  masters  and  have  the  right  to  order  her  about  ! 

As  a  natural  consequence  of  these  views,  female  educa- 
tion is  altogether  neglected.  A  young  girl's  mind  remains 
totally  uncultivated,  though  many  of  them  have  good 
abilities.  In  fact,  of  what  use  would  learning  or  accom- 
plishments be  to  women  who  are  still  in  such  a  state  of 


EDUCATION  OF  WOMEN  337 

domestic  degradation  and  servitude  ?  All  that  a  Hindu 
woman  need  know  is  how  to  grind  and  boil  rice  and  look 
after  her  household  affairs,  which  are  neither  numerous 
nor  difficult  to  manage. 

Courtesans,  whose  business  in  life  is  to  dance  in  the 
temples  and  at  public  ceremonies,  and  prostitutes  are  the 
only  women  who  are  allowed  to  learn  to  read,  sing,  or 
dance.  It  would  be  thought  a  disgrace  to  a  respectable 
woman  to  learn  to  read  ;  and  even  if  she  had  learnt  she 
would  be  ashamed  to  own  it.  As  for  dancing,  it  is  left 
absolutely  to  courtesans  ;  and  even  they  never  dance  with 
men.  Respectable  women  sometimes  amuse  themselves 
by  singing  when  they  are  alone,  looking  after  their  house- 
hold duties,  and  also  on  the  occasions  of  weddings  or  other 
family  festivities  ;  but  they  would  never  dare  to  sing  in 
public  or  before  strangers. 

Such  feminine  occupations  as  knitting  or  needlework 
are  quite  unknown  to  them  ;  and  moreover  any  talents 
that  they  might  develop  in  this  direction  would  be  wasted, 
as  their  clothing  consists  of  one  long  piece  of  coloured 
calico,  without  any  join  or  seam  in  it,  though  most  of  them 
know  how  to  card  and  spin  cotton,  and  very  few  houses 
are  without  one  or  more  spinning-wheels  \ 

I  have  already  described  what  takes  place  when  a  young 
girl,  who  has  been  married  in  her  early  childhood,  arrives 
at  the  age  when  she  is  fit  to  live  with  her  husband  (Chapter 
VI).  These  festivities  are  called  the  consummation  of  the 
marriage. 

The  young  woman  herself  cannot  appear,  because  she 
is,  for  the  first  time  in  her  life,  in  a  state  of  uncleanness, 
and  for  several  days  she  is  obliged  to  remain  in  a  separate 
part  of  the  house.  But  after  she  has  gone  through  the 
usual  rites  of  purification  she  returns  to  the  family,  and 
numberless  other  ceremonies  are  performed  over  her, 
amongst  others  several  which  are  supposed  to  counteract 
the  effects  of  witchcraft  or  the  evil  eye.  She  is  then  con- 
ducted with  much  pomp  to  her  husband's  house. 

1  Many  Hindu  women  and  girls  now  do  needlework  of  some  kind, 
and  it  is  taught  in  most  of  the  girls'  schools.  The  old-fashioned  mothers- 
in-law  complain  that  this  new  departure  has  proved  detrimental  to  the 
performance  of  the  more  ordinary  household  duties. — Ed. 


338  DOMESTIC  QUARRELS 

The  Sudras,  and  even  the  Pariahs,  have  grand  festivities 
when  their  daughters,  though  still  unmarried,  arrive  at 
a  marriageable  age.  The  event  is  announced  to  the  public 
with  all  the  outward  show  that  accompanies  the  most 
solemn  ceremonies.  A  pandal  is  erected ;  toranams  or 
strings  of  mango-leaves  are  hung  in  front  of  the  entrance 
door  of  the  house  ;  feasts  are  given ;  much  music  re- 
sounds. In  fact,  it  is  a  kind  of  advertisement  or  invitation 
to  young  men  in  want  of  a  wife. 

When  a  Brahmin's  wife  becomes  pregnant  there  are 
endless  ceremonies  to  be  performed,  some  indeed  for  each 
separate  month.  In  any  caste  it  would  be  considered  a 
disgrace  to  the  woman,  and  in  a  less  degree  to  her  parents, 
if  her  first  child  were  born  anywhere  but  under  the  paternal 
roof.  Her  mother  accordingly  comes  and  fetches  her  about 
the  seventh  month  of  her  pregnancy,  and  she  is  not  allowed 
to  return  to  her  own  home  till  her  health  is  entirely  re- 
established. When  she  departs  her  mother  is  supposed  to 
give  her  a  new  piece  of  cotton  cloth  and  some  more  or  less 
valuable  ornaments  according  to  her  means  and  her  caste. 
But  in  no  case  would  the  woman,  to  whatever  caste  she 
might  belong,  return  from  her  parents'  to  her  husband's 
house  unless  her  mother-in-law  or  some  equally  near 
relation  came  to  fetch  her.  Her  husband  has  to  conform 
to  this  custom  when  his  wife  chooses  to  leave  him  and 
takes  refuge  under  the  paternal  roof,  sometimes  for  a  mere 
whim,  or  for  some  very  trifling  cause.  But  in  any  case, 
even  when  the  fault  is  all  on  her  side,  the  husband  must 
go  and  fetch  her  back. 

These  domestic  quarrels  and  separationsoccur frequently, 
and  are  generally  the  fault  of  the  mother-in-law,  who  looks 
upon  her  son's  wife  as  a  slave  that  has  been  bought  and 
paid  for.  The  elder  woman,  indeed,  lives  in  constant 
dread  of  her  daughter-in-law  obtaining  too  much  ascend- 
ency over  the  husband,  and  by  this  means  contriving  her 
own  emancipation  ;  and  accordingly  seizes  every  oppor- 
tunity of  breeding  discord  between  them.  This  fear  is, 
as  a  rule,  perfectly  uncalled  for  ;  for  the  men  themselves 
show  very  little  inclination  to  be  ruled  by  their  wives,  and 
condescend  to  very  little  of  what  we  call  conjugal  tender- 
ness in  their  relations  with  them. 


DEFERENCE  SHOWN  TOWARDS  HUSBANDS    339 

The  women,  on  the  other  hand,  are  so  thoroughly  accus- 
tomed to  harsh  and  domineering  treatment  from  their 
husbands  that  they  would  be  quite  annoyed  if  the  hus- 
bands adopted  a  more  familiar  tone.  I  once  knew  a  native 
lady  who  complained  bitterly  that  her  husband  sometimes 
affected  to  be  very  devoted  to  her  in  public  and  allowed 
himself  such  little  familiarities  as  are  looked  upon  by  us 
as  marks  of  affection.  '  Such  behaviour,'  said  she,  '  covers 
me  with  shame  and  confusion.  I  dare  not  show  myself 
anywhere.  Did  any  one  ever  see  such  bad  manners 
amongst  people  of  our  caste  ?  Has  he  become  a  Feringhi 
(European),  and  does  he  take   me  for  one  of  their  vile 


women 


i  I 


As  a  rule  a  husband  addresses  his  wife  in  terms  which 
show  how  little  he  thinks  of  her.  Servant,  slave,  &c,  and 
other  equally  flattering  appellations,  fall  quite  naturally 
from  his  lips. 

A  woman,  on  the  other  hand,  never  addresses  her  hus- 
band except  in  terms  of  the  greatest  humility.  She  speaks 
to  him  as  my  master,  my  lord,  and  even  sometimes  my  god. 
In  her  awe  of  him  she  does  not  venture  to  call  him  by  his 
name  ;  and  should  she  forget  herself  in  this  way  in  a  moment 
of  anger,  she  would  be  thought  a  very  low  class  of  person, 
and  would  lay  herself  open  to  personal  chastisement  from 
her  offended  spouse.  She  must  be  just  as  particular  in 
speaking  of  him  to  any  one  else  :  indeed,  the  Hindus  are 
very  careful  never  to  put  a  woman  under  the  necessity  of 
mentioning  her  husband  by  name.  If  by  chance  a  Euro- 
pean, who  is  unacquainted  with  this  point  of  etiquette, 
obliges  her  to  do  so,  he  will  see  her  blush  and  hide  her 
face  behind  her  sari  and  turn  away  without  answering, 
smiling  at  the  same  time  with  contemptuous  pity  at  such 
ignorance. 

Politeness  also  forbids  you  to  address  a  person  of  higher 
rank  by  his  name. 

But  if  women  enjoy  very  little  consideration  in  private 
life,  they  are  in  some  degree  compensated  by  the  respect 

1  It  may  be  noted  that  at  marriage  feasts,  &c.,  the  males  and  females 
keep  apart ;  and  furthermore  the  usual  personal  invitations  to  such 
feasts  are  invariably  conveyed  to  men  by  men,  and  to  women  by  women. 
—Ed. 


340  RESPECT  FOR  WOMEN  IN  PUBLIC 

which  is  paid  to  them  in  public.  They  do  not,  it  is  true, 
receive  those  insipid  compliments  which  we  have  agreed 
to  consider  polite  ;  but  then,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are 
safe  from  the  risk  of  insult.  A  Hindu  woman  can  go  any- 
where alone,  even  in  the  most  crowded  places,  and  she  need 
never  fear  the  impertinent  looks  and  jokes  of  idle  loungers. 
This  appears  to  me  to  be  really  remarkable  in  a  country 
where  the  moral  depravity  of  the  inhabitants  is  carried 
to  such  lengths.  A  house  inhabited  solely  by  women  is 
a  sanctuary  which  the  most  shameless  libertine  would  not 
dream  of  violating.  To  touch  a  respectable  woman  even 
with  the  end  of  your  finger  would  be  considered  highly 
indecorous,  and  a  man  who  meets  a  female  acquaintance 
in  the  street  does  not  venture  to  stop  and  speak  to  her. 

When  travelling  the  men  walk  in  front  and  the  women 
follow  some  distance  behind.  You  very  rarely  see  the 
men  address  a  word  to  their  humble  followers.  If  they 
come  to  a  river  which  has  to  be  forded  the  women  tuck  up 
their  cloths  above  the  hips,  and  in  this  naked  state  they 
approach  near  enough  to  their  travelling  companions  to 
permit  of  the  latter  stretching  out  a  helping  hand  behind 
them  to  help  them  to  withstand  the  force  of  the  current ; 
but  never  would  you  see  any  one  under  these  circumstances 
commit  an  indiscretion  like  that  which  caused  Orpheus  to 
lose  his  Eurydice. 

I  have  often  spent  the  night  in  one  of  the  common  rest- 
houses,  where  the  men  and  women  lodging  there  were  lying 
all  huddled  together  anyhow  and  almost  side  by  side  ; 
but  I  have  never  known  or  heard  of  any  one  disturbing 
the  tranquillity  of  the  night  by  indecent  act  or  word.  Should 
any  person  be  so  ill-advised  as  to  attempt  anything  of  the 
sort,  the  whole  room  would  be  up  in  arms  against  him  in  a 
moment,  and  prompt  chastisement  would  follow  the  offence. 

A  woman's  costume  consists  of  a  simple  piece  of  cotton 
cloth,  made  all  in  one  piece,  and  woven  expressly  for  the 
purpose.  It  is  from  30  to  40  feet  long,  and  rather  more 
than  4  feet  wide.  All  sorts  and  kinds  are  made,  in  every 
shade  and  at  every  price,  and  they  always  have  a  border 
of  a  contrasting  colour.  The  women  wind  part  of  this 
cloth  two  or  three  times  round  their  waists,  and  it  forms 
a  sort  of  narrow  petticoat  which  falls  to  the  feet  in  front ; 


A  HINDU  WOMAN'S  COSTUME  341 

it  does  not  come  so  far  down  behind,  as  one  of  the  ends  of 
the  cloth  is  tucked  in  at  the  waist  after  passing  between 
the  legs,  which  are  thus  left  bare  as  far  as,  or  even  above, 
the  calf.  This  arrangement  is  peculiar  to  Brahmin  women  ; 
those  of  other  castes  arrange  their  draperies  with  more 
decency  and  modesty.  The  other  end  of  the  cloth  covers 
the  shoulders,  head,  and  chest.  Thus  the  clothing  for  both 
sexes  is  made  without  seams  or  sewing — an  undeniable 
convenience,  considering  how  often  they  have  to  bathe 
themselves  and  wash  their  garments  ;  for  Brahmin  women 
have  to  observe  the  same  rules  of  purification  as  the  men, 
and  are  equally  zealous  in  the  performance  of  this  duty. 
The  custom  of  women  veiling  their  faces  has  never  been 
practised  in  India,  though  it  has  been  in  use  among  many 
other  Asiatic  nations  from  time  immemorial.  Here  the 
women  always  go  about  with  their  faces  uncovered,  and  in 
some  parts  of  the  country  they  also  expose  the  upper  half 
of  their  bodies  *. 

Quiet  and  retired  as  is  the  life  of  a  Hindu  woman,  it 
cannot  be  said  to  be  one  of  complete  and  rigorous  seclusion. 
Though  all  friendly  intercourse  with  men  is  forbidden  to 
them,  still  they  may  talk  to  those  who  come  to  the  house 
as  friends  or  acquaintances  without  fear  of  unpleasant 
consequences.  Eunuchs — those  deplorable  victims  of 
Oriental  jealousy — are  unknown  in  India,  and  the  natives 
never  dream  of  putting  the  virtue  of  their  women  under 
the  care  of  these  miserable  beings.  They  are  not  to  be 
found  even  in  the  palace  of  a  prince,  where  women  are 
always  guarded  and  waited  on  by  women. 

In  several  parts  of  India  young  girls  and  married  women 
wear  a  sort  of  little  bodice  under  their  cloth,  which  covers 
the  breast,  shoulders,  and  arms  as  far  as  the  elbows  ;  but 
this,  I  am  told,  is  a  modern  innovation,  and  borrowed  from 
the  Mahomedans. 

I  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  custom  of  leaving  all 
the  upper  part  of  the  body  uncovered  as  far  as  the  waist 
was  formerly  common  to  both  sexes  in  the  southern  parts 
of  India.  It  still  prevails  on  the  Malabar  coast,  and  in 
the  neighbouring  provinces. 

1  This  custom  still  prevails  in  Malabar  and  Travancore,  but  it  is 
gradually  dying  out  amongst  the  educated  classes. — Ed. 


342  DRESSING  THE  HAIR 

The  custom  of  tattooing  the  arms  of  young  girls  with 
indelible  designs  of  figures  or  flowers  is  very  general.  I 
have  already  described  how  this  tattooing  is  done.  When 
their  skin  is  not  very  dark  they  generally  ornament  their 
faces  in  the  same  way,  by  putting  three  or  four  spots  on 
the  cheeks  and  chin.  These  marks  produce  very  much 
the  same  effect  as  the  black  patches  which  were  once  the 
fashion  with  European  ladies.  I  have  already  mentioned 
the  habit  which  the  beauties  of  India  and  Brahmin  ladies 
observe  of  painting  all  the  visible  parts  of  their  bodies 
with  yellow  saffron,  and  also  of  darkening  their  eyelids 
with  antimony. 

In  order  to  make  their  hair  more  glossy  and  silky  they 
frequently  oil  it.  They  part  it  exactly  in  the  middle,  and 
then  roll  it  up  behind  into  a  sort  of  chignon,  which  is 
fastened  behind  the  left  ear.  To  make  this  chignon  larger 
they  often  insert  some  tow,  or  else  some  cotton  wool 
specially  prepared  for  the  purpose.  Hindu  women  gener- 
ally possess  beautiful  black  hair,  which  is  soft  and  straight. 
It  is  very  rarely  to  be  seen  of  any  other  colour.  They  are 
much  given  to  wearing  sweet-smelling  flowers  in  their  hair, 
and  also  ornaments  of  gold,  none  of  any  other  metal  being 
permissible,  though  they  sometimes  use  a  silver  buckle  to 
fasten  the  hair  together  at  the  back. 

Silver  ornaments  may  be  worn  on  the  arms,  but  are  more 
frequently  used  to  decorate  the  feet  and  ankles  -.  Some 
of  their  anklets  are  actual  fetters,  weighing  as  much  as 
two  or  three  pounds.  There  are  special  rings  made  for 
each  toe,  often  entirely  covering  them. 

Bracelets  are  sometimes  made  hollow,  and  are  more  than 
an  inch  in  diameter.  They  are  of  different  patterns,  accord- 
ing to  the  country  in  which  they  are  made  and  the  caste  of 
the  person  who  wears  them.  They  are  worn  either  above 
the  elbow  or  round  the  wrist,  and  are  made  of  gold  or 
silver,  as  the  means  of  the  wearer  will  allow.  Quite  poor 
women  wear  copper  bracelets,  and  some  have  more  than 
half  their  fore-arms  covered  with  glass  bangles. 

Neck  ornaments  consist  of  gold  or  silver  chains,  or  strings 

1  It  is  remarkable  that  gold  ornaments  are  never  worn  by  Hindus  on 
the  feet,  the  reason  being  that  it  is  a  sacred  metal,  and  would  be  thereby 
defiled. — Ed. 


FEMININE  ORNAMENTS  343 

of  large  gold  beads,  pearls,  or  coral.  In  fact,  beads  of  all 
kinds  and  of  greater  or  less  value  are  much  in  demand. 
Some  women  wear  necklaces  more  than  an  inch  wide,  set 
with  rubies,  emeralds,  and  other  precious  stones.  But  to 
enumerate  all  the  different  kinds  of  ornaments  worn  by 
Hindu  ladies  would  take  a  very  long  time.  To  give  a  single 
instance,  I  could  mention  eighteen  or  twenty  different  kinds 
of  ornaments  that  are  used  for  the  ears  alone. 

Even  the  nose  is  considered  a  suitable  object  for  decora- 
tion. The  right  nostril  and  the  division  between  the  two 
nostrils  are  sometimes  weighted  with  an  ornament  that 
hangs  down  as  far  as  the  under  lip.  When  the  wearers 
are  at  meals,  they  are  obliged  to  hold  up  this  pendant  with 
one  hand,  while  feeding  themselves  with  the  other.  At 
first  this  strange  ornament,  which  varies  with  different 
castes,  has  a  hideous  effect  in  the  eyes  of  Europeans,  but 
after  a  time,  when  one  becomes  accustomed  to  it,  it  gradu- 
ally seems  less  unbecoming,  and  at  last  one  ends  by  thinking 
it  quite  an  ornament  to  the  face. 

It  is  no  uncommon  sight  to  see  a  woman  decked  out  in 
all  her  jewels  drawing  water,  grinding  rice,  cooking  food, 
and  attending  to  all  the  menial  domestic  occupations,  from 
which  even  the  wives  of  Brahmins  do  not  consider  them- 
selves exempt. 

It  is,  of  course,  needless  to  remark  that  all  this  extrava- 
gant display  is  very  often  obtained  only  at  the  sacrifice 
of  other  more  useful  and  necessary  requirements  in  their 
homes. 

When  a  girl  marries,  everything  that  she  receives  from 
her  future  father-in-law,  or  that  she  takes  away  with  her 
from  her  old  home,  is  most  clearly  and  distinctly  set  down, 
item  by  item,  in  a  kind  of  legal  document.  All  these  things 
are  her  own  personal  property,  which  she  takes  care  to 
claim  when  she  becomes  a  widow. 


CHAPTER  XVII 

Rules  of  Conduct  for  Married  Women. 

«  Nothing  serves  so  well  to  illustrate  the  attitude  and 
behaviour  of  Hindus  towards  their  wives  as  the  rules  of 


344  DUTIES  OF  A  FAITHFUL  WIFE 

conduct  which  are  prescribed  for  the  latter  in  the  Padma- 
purana,  one  of  their  most  valued  books  :  rules  which  I  will 
translate  literally.  They  are  reputed  to  be  the  work  of 
the  famous  penitent  Vasishta,  who  recommends  their 
observance  by  every  faithful  wife.  I  cannot  say  that  I 
altogether  approve  of  them  ;  some  of  them  appear  to  me 
absurd  ;  others  there  are  which,  from  a  social  point  of 
view,  are  harmful  ;  all  of  them  evidently  have  for  their 
object  the  reduction  of  this  interesting  '  better  half  '  of 
the  human  race  to  the  lowest  state  of  subjection.  It  is 
not  to  be  wondered  at,  therefore,  if  we  find  many  foolish 
examples  of  Hindu  superstition,  which  is  a  necessary 
element  in  every  institution  of  the  country.  Order  and 
continuity  are  not  so  conspicuous  as  one  might  desire 
in  the  ideas  of  the  great  penitent  Vasishta  ;  but  I  give 
a  passage  closely  following  the  original,  as  a  specimen  of 
the  style  of  writing  that  prevails  among  the  Hindus  : — 

1  Give  ear  to  me  attentively,  great  King  of  Dilipa  !  I  will 
expound  to  thee  how  a  wife  attached  to  her  husband  and 
devoted  to  her  duties  ought  to  behave. 

*  There  is  no  other  god  on  earth  for  a  woman  than  her 
husband.  The  most  excellent  of  all  the  good  works  that 
she  can  do  is  to  seek  to  please  him  by  manifesting  perfect 
obedience  to  him.  Therein  should  lie  her  sole  rule  of 
life. 

'  Be  her  husband  deformed,  aged,  infirm,  offensive  in 
his  manners  ;  let  him  also  be  choleric,  debauched,  immoral, 
a  drunkard,  a  gambler  ;  let  him  frequent  places  of  ill- 
repute,  live  in  open  sin  with  other  women,  have  no  affec- 
tion whatever  for  his  home  ;  let  him  rave  like  a  lunatic  ; 
let  him  live  without  honour  ;  let  him  be  blind,  deaf,  dumb, 
or  crippled  ;  in  a  word,  let  his  defects  be  what  they  may, 
let  his  wickedness  be  what  it  may,  a  wife  should  always 
look  upon  him  as  her  god,  should  lavish  on  him  all  her 
attention  and  care,  paying  no  heed  whatsoever  to  his 
character  and  giving  him  no  cause  whatsoever  for  dis- 
pleasure. 

*  A  woman  is  made  to  obey  at  every  stage  of  her  exist- 
ence. As  daughter,  it  is  to  her  father  and  mother  she 
owes  submission  ;  as  wife,  to  her  husband,  to  her  father- 
in-law,  and  to  her  mother-in-law  ;  as  widow,  to  her  sons; 


MODEST  DEMEANOUR  345 

At  no  period  of  her  life  can  she  consider  herself  her  own 
mistress. 

'  She  must  always  be  attentive  and  diligent  in  all  her 
domestic  duties  ;  she  should  be  ever  watchful  over  her 
temper,  never  covetous  of  the  goods  of  others,  never 
quarrelsome  with  her  neighbours,  never  neglectful  of  work 
without  her  husband's  permission,  and  always  calm  in  her 
conduct  and  deportment. 

1  Should  she  see  anything  which  she  is  desirous  of  pos- 
sessing, she  must  not  seek  to  acquire  it  without  the  consent 
of  her  husband.  If  her  husband  receives  the  visit  of 
a  stranger,  she  shall  retire  with  bent  head  and  shall  con- 
tinue her  work  without  paying  the  least  attention  to  him. 
She  must  concentrate  her  thoughts  on  her  husband  only, 
and  must  never  look  another  man  in  the  face.  In  acting 
thus,  she  will  win  the  praise  of  everybody. 

1  Should  any  man  make  proposals  to  her,  and  endeavour 
to  seduce  her  by  offering  her  rich  clothes  or  jewels  of  great 
value,  by  the  gods  !  let  her  take  good  care  not  to  lend  an 
ear  to  him,  let  her  hasten  to  flee  from  him. 

■  If  her  husband  laugh,  she  must  laugh  ;  if  he  be  sad, 
she  must  be  sad  ;  if  he  weep,  she  must  weep  ;  if  he  ask 
questions,  she  must  answer.  Thus  will  she  give  proofs  of 
her  good  disposition. 

'  She  must  take  heed  not  to  remark  that  another  man  is 
young,  handsome,  or  well  proportioned,  and,  above  all,  she 
must  not  speak  to  him.  Such  modest  demeanour  will 
secure  for  her  the  reputation  of  a  faithful  spouse. 

'  It  shall  even  be  the  same  with  her  who,  seeing  before 
her  the  most  beautiful  gods,  shall  regard  them  disdainfully 
and  as  though  they  were  not  worthy  of  comparison  with 
her  husband. 

'  A  wife  must  eat  only  after  her  husband  has  had  his  fill. 
If  the  latter  fast,  she  shall  fast  too  ;  if  he  touch  not  food, 
she  also  shall  not  touch  it  ;  if  he  be  in  affliction,  she  shall 
be  so  too  ;  if  he  be  cheerful,  she  shall  share  his  joy.  A 
good  wife  should  be  less  devoted  to  her  sons,  or  to  her 
grandsons,  or  to  her  jewels  than  to  her  husband.  She 
must,  on  the  death  of  her  husband,  allow  herself  to  be  burnt 
alive  on  the  same  funeral  pyre  ;  then  everybody  will  praise 
her  virtue. 


346  CLEANLINESS  AND  ECONOMY 

*  She  cannot  lavish  too  much  affection  on  her  father-in- 
law,  her  mother-in-law,  and  her  husband  ;  and  should  she 
perceive  that  they  are  squandering  all  the  family  substance 
in  extravagance,  she  would  be  wrong  to  complain  and  still 
more  wrong  to  oppose  them. 

'  She  should  always  be  ready  to  perform  the  various 
duties  of  her  house,  and  to  perform  them  diligently. 

1  Let  her  bathe  every  day,  rubbing  saffron  on  her  body. 
Let  her  attire  be  clean,  her  eyelids  tinged  with  antimony, 
and  her  forehead  marked  with  red  pigment.  Let  her  hair 
be  well  combed  and  adorned.  Thus  shall  she  be  like  unto 
the  goddess  Lakshmi. 

'  Before  her  husband  let  her  words  fall  softly  and  sweetly 
from  her  mouth  ;  and  let  her  devote  herself  to  pleasing 
him  every  day  more  and  more. 

1  She  must  be  careful  to  sweep  her  house  every  day,  to 
smooth  the  floor  with  a  layer  of  cow-dung,  and  to  decorate 
it  with  white  tracery.  She  must  keep  the  cooking  vessels 
clean,  and  must  be  ready  with  the  meals  at  the  proper  hours. 

'  If  her  husband  be  gone  out  to  fetch  supplies  of  wood, 
leaves,  or  flowers  to  perform  the  sandhya,  or  for  any  other 
purpose,  she  shall  watch  for  the  moment  of  his  return  and 
shall  go  to  meet  him.  She  shall  go  before  him  into  the 
house,  shall  hand  him  a  stool  to  sit  down  upon,  and  shall 
serve  up  the  food  prepared  to  his  taste. 

1  She  shall  inform  him  in  time  of  what  is  wanted  in  the 
house,  and  shall  manage  with  care  what  he  brings  home. 

'  Prudent  in  her  conversation,  she  must  be  careful,  in 
conversing  with  gurus,  sannyasis,  strangers,  servants,  and 
other  persons,  to  adopt  a  tone  suitable  to  the  position  of 
each. 

'  In  exercising  in  her  house  the  authority  given  to  her 
by  her  husband,  she  must  do  so  gently  and  intelligently. 

1  She  must,  as  in  duty  bound,  use  for  the  expenses  of 
her  household  all  the  money  with  which  her  husband 
entrusts  her,  not  taking  any  of  it  surreptitiously  for  herself 
or  for  her  parents,  or  even,  without  her  husband's  permis- 
sion, for  works  of  charity. 

1  She  must  never  meddle  with  the  affairs  of  others,  nor 
lend  ear  to  stories  of  the  good  luck  or  misfortune  which 
has  befallen  others. 


BEHAVIOUR  DURING  PREGNANCY         347 

*  Never  let  her  yield  to  anger  or  malice. 

'  Let  her  abstain  from  all  food  that  is  not  to  her  hus- 
band's taste.  Let  her  not  oil  her  head  when  her  husband 
does  not  oil  his  own. 

1  If  her  husband  go  away  anywhere  and  ask  her  to 
accompany  him,  let  her  follow  him  ;  if  he  tell  her  to  remain 
at  home,  let  her  not  leave  the  house  during  his  absence. 
Until  his  return  she  shall  not  bathe,  or  anoint  her  head 
with  oil,  or  clean  her  teeth,  or  pare  her  nails  ;  she  shall 
eat  but  once  a  day,  shall  not  lie  down  on  a  bed,  or  wear 
new  clothes,  or  adorn  her  forehead  with  any  of  the  ordinary 
marks  1. 

1  A  woman  during  her  menstrual  period  shall  retire  for 
three  days  to  a  place  apart.  During  this  time,  she  shall 
not  look  at  anybody,  not  even  at  her  children,  or  at  the 
light  of  the  sun.  On  the  fourth  day  she  shall  bathe,  observ- 
ing the  proper  rites  for  such  occasions  which  were  estab- 
lished before  the  Kali-yuga  2. 

-  A  woman,  when  she  is  pregnant,  must  conform  to  all 
the  rites  prescribed  for  such  occasions.  She  must  then 
avoid  the  company  of  women  of  doubtful  virtue  and  of 
those  who  have  lost  all  their  children  ;  she  must  drive 
away  from  her  mind  all  sad  thoughts  ;  she  must  be  careful 
not  to  gaze  at  terrifying  objects,  or  to  listen  to  sad  stories, 
or  to  eat  anything  indigestible  3.  By  observing  these  rules, 
she  will  have  beautiful  children  ;  by  neglecting  them  she 
will  risk  a  miscarriage. 

'  A  wife,  during  the  absence  of  her  husband,  should 
strictly  conform  to  his  parting  counsels.  She  should  be 
heedless  of  her  attire,  and  should  not  devote  herself,  under 
the  plea  of  devotion  to  the  gods,  to  any  special  acts  of 
piety. 

'  If  a  husband  keep  two  wives,  the  one  should  not  amuse 
herself  at  the  expense  of  the  other,  be  it  for  good  or  for 
evil ;  neither  should  the  one  talk  about  the  beauty  or  the 

1  These  restrictions  are  not  observed  nowadays. — Ed. 

a  The  hermit  Vasishta  here  describes  these  practices.  I  will  explain 
them  in  Appendix  IV. — Dubois. 

Nowadays  a  woman  in  this  condition  is  not  forbidden  communication 
with  her  children. — Ed. 

3  It  may  be  added  that  a  cocoanut  is  never  broken  in  the  presence  of 
a  pregnant  woman. — Ed. 


348  RETURNING  GOOD  FOR  EVIL 

ugliness  of  the  children  of  the  other.  They  must  live  on 
good  terms,  and  must  avoid  addressing  unpleasant  and 
offensive  remarks  to  each  other. 

*  In  the  presence  of  her  husband,  a  wife  must  not  look 
about  her,  but  must  keep  her  eyes  fixed  on  him,  in  readi- 
ness to  receive  his  orders.  When  he  speaks,  she  must  not 
interrupt  him,  nor  speak  to  anybody  else  ;  when  he  calls 
her,  she  must  leave  everything  and  run  to  him. 

1  If  he  sing,  she  must  be  in  ecstasy  ;  if  he  dance,  she 
must  look  at  him  with  delight ;  if  he  speak  of  learned 
things,  she  must  listen  to  him  with  admiration.  In  his 
presence  indeed  she  ought  always  to  be  cheerful,  and  never 
show  signs  of  sadness  or  discontent. 

'  Let  her  carefully  avoid  creating  domestic  squabbles  on 
the  subject  of  her  parents,  or  on  account  of  another  woman 
whom  her  husband  may  wish  to  keep,  or  on  account  of 
any  unpleasant  remark  which  may  have  been  addressed 
to  her.  To  leave  the  house  for  reasons  such  as  these 
would  expose  her  to  public  ridicule,  and  would  give  cause 
for  much  evil  speaking. 

,  '  If  her  husband  flies  into  a  passion,  threatens  her,  abuses 
her  grossly,  even  beats  her  unjustly,  she  shall  answer  him 
meekly,  shall  lay  hold  of  his  hands,  kiss  them,  and  beg  his 
pardon,  instead  of  uttering  loud  cries  and  running  away 
from  the  house. 

'  She  must  not  say  to  her  husband  :  "  Thou  hast  hurt 
me,  thou  hast  beaten  me  unjustly  ;  I  will  no  more  speak 
to  thee  ;  hereafter  the  relations  between  ourselves  will  be 
no  other  than  those  between  a  father  and  his  daughter,  or 
a  brother  and  his  sister.  I  shall  no  more  have  anything 
to  do  with  thy  affairs  ;  I  will  no  longer  have  anything  in 
common  with  thee."  Such  words  ought  never  to  fall  from 
her  lips. 

'  If  any  of  her  relatives  or  friends  invite  her  to  their 
house  on  the  occasion  of  some  feast  or  ceremony,  she  shall 
not  go  there  without  the  permission  of  her  husband,  and 
unless  accompanied  by  some  elderly  woman.  She  shall 
remain  there  for  as  short  a  time  as  possible,  and  on  her  return 
she  shall  render  a  faithful  account  to  her  husband  of  all  that 
she  has  seen  or  heard  ;  she  shall  then  resume  her  domestic 
duties. 


BLESSINGS  ASSURED  TO  A  GOOD  WIFE     349 

1  While  her  husband  is  absent,  she  shall  sleep  with  one  of 
her  female  relatives,  and  not  alone.  She  shall  make  con- 
stant inquiries  after  the  health  of  her  husband.  She  shall 
send  constant  messages  to  him  to  return  as  soon  as  possible, 
and  shall  offer  up  prayers  to  the  gods  for  him. 

'  Let  all  her  words  and  actions  give  public  proof  that  she 
looks  upon  her  husband  as  her  god.  Honoured  by  every- 
body, she  shall  thus  enjoy  the  reputation  of  a  faithful  and 
virtuous  spouse. 

'  If,  in  the  event  of  her  husband  dying,  she  resolves  to 
die  with  him,  glorious  and  happy  will  she  be  in  the  world 
to  which  her  husband  will  lead  her  after  his  death.  But 
whether  she  dies  before  or  with  her  husband,  or  whether 
she  survives  him,  a  virtuous  wife  may  rest  assured  that  all 
sorts  of  blessings  will  await  her  in  the  other  world. 

'  A  wife  can  enjoy  no  true  happiness  unless  she  attains 
it  through  her  husband  ;  it  is  he  who  gives  her  children  ; 
it  is  he  who  provides  her  with  clothes  and  jewels  ;  it  is  he 
who  supplies  her  with  flowers,  sandalwood,  saffron,  and  all 
good  things. 

'  It  is  also  through  his  wife  that  a  husband  enjoys  the 
pleasures  of  this  world  ;  that  is  a  maxim  taught  in  all  our 
learned  books.  It  is  through  his  wife  that  he  does  good 
works,  that  he  acquires  riches  and  honour,  and  that  he 
succeeds  in  his  enterprises.  A  man  without  a  wife  is  an 
imperfect  being.' 

These  rules  of  conduct  may  seem  extremely  severe,  yet 
they  are  faithfully  observed,  especially  among  the  Brah- 
mins. 

Among  certain  sects  of  the  Vishnavite  Brahmins  a 
peculiar  custom  exists.  A  daughter-in-law  is  never  allowed 
to  speak  to  her  mother-in-law.  When  she  wishes  to  com- 
municate anything  to  her,  she  does  it  by  signs  ;  and  when 
the  mother-in-law  gives  orders  to  the  daughter-in-law,  the 
latter  answers  by  an  inclination  of  the  head,  thereby  in- 
dicating that  she  has  understood  the  orders  given  her. 
She,  however,  at  times  manages  to  make  up  for  this  en- 
forced silence  by  having  recourse  to  spirited  and  expressive 
gestures  :  so  much  so,  that  her  dumb  repartees  often  cause 
her  mother-in-law  to  boil  with  rage. 


350 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

Mourning. — The  Condition  of  Widowhood. — The  General  Contempt  for 
Widows. — Remarriages  forbidden. 

The  happiest  death  for  a  woman  is  that  which  overtakes 
her  while  she  is  still  in  a  wedded  state.  Such  a  death  is 
looked  upon  as  the  reward  of  goodness  extending  back  for 
many  generations  1  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  greatest  mis- 
fortune that  can  befall  a  wife  is  to  survive  her  husband. 

Should  the  husband  die  first,  as  soon  as  he  breathes  his 
last  the  widow  attires  herself  in  her  best  clothes  and  bedecks 
herself  with  all  her  jewels  2.  Then,  with  all  the  signs  of 
the  deepest  grief,  she  throws  herself  on  his  body,  embracing 
it  and  uttering  loud  cries.  She  holds  the  corpse  tightly 
clasped  in  her  arms  until  her  parents,  generally  silent 
spectators  of  this  scene,  are  satisfied  that  this  first  demon- 
stration of  grief  is  sufficient,  when  they  restrain  her  from 
these  sad  embraces.  She  yields  to  their  efforts  with  great 
reluctance,  and  with  repeated  pretences  of  escaping  out  of 
their  hands  and  rushing  once  again  to  the  lifeless  remains 
of  her  husband.  Then,  finding  her  attempts  useless,  she 
rolls  on  the  ground  like  one  possessed,  strikes  her  breast 
violently,  tears  out  her  hair,  and  manifests  many  other 
signs  of  the  deepest  despair.  Now,  are  these  noisy  profes- 
sions of  grief  and  affliction  to  be  attributed  to  an  excess  of 
conjugal  affection,  to  real  sorrow  ?  The  answer  will  appear 
rather  perplexing,  when  we  remark  that  it  is  the  general 
custom  to  act  in  this  manner,  and  that  all  these  demon- 
strations are  previously  arranged  as  a  part  of  the  ceremonies 
of  mourning. 

After  the  first  outbursts  of  grief,  she  rises,  and,  assuming 
a  more  composed  look,  approaches  her  husband's  body. 
Then  in  one  continuous  strain,  which  would  be  hardly 
possible  under  real  affliction,  she  apostrophizes  her  husband 
in  a  long  series  of  questions,  of  which  I  give  a  summary 
as  follows  : — 

1  Children  are  even  consoled  with  the  thought,  when  their  mothers 
die  in  a  wedded  state. — Ed. 

3  This  is  the  last  occasion  on  which  she  is  allowed  to  wear  ornaments 
of  any  kind. — Ed. 


APOSTROPHIZING  THE  DEAD  351 

■  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  What  wrong  have  I  done 
thee,  that  thou  shouldst  thus  leave  me  in  the  prime  of  my 
life  ?  Had  I  not  for  thee  all  the  fondness  of  a  faithful 
wife  ?  Have  I  not  always  been  virtuous  and  pure  ?  Have 
I  not  borne  thee  handsome  children  ?  Who  will  bring 
them  up  ?  Who  will  take  care  of  them  hereafter  ?  Was 
I  not  diligent  in  all  the  duties  of  the  household  ?  Did  I 
not  sweep  the  house  every  day,  and  did  I  not  make  the 
floor  smooth  and  clean  ?  Did  I  not  ornament  the  floor 
with  white  tracery  ?  Did  I  not  cook  good  food  for  thee  ? 
Didst  thou  find  grit  in  the  rice  that  I  prepared  for  thee  ? 
Did  I  not  serve  up  to  thee  food  such  as  thou  lovedst,  well 
seasoned  with  garlic,  mustard,  pepper,  cinnamon,  and  other 
spices  ?  Did  I  not  forestall  thee  in  all  thy  wants  and 
wishes  ?  What  didst  thou  lack  whilst  I  was  with  thee  ? 
Who  will  take  care  of  me  hereafter  ?  ' 

And  so  on.  At  the  end  of  each  sentence  uttered  in 
a  plaintive  chanting  tone,  she  pauses  to  give  free  vent  to 
her  sobs  and  shrieks,  which  are  also  uttered  in  a  kind  of 
rhythm.  The  women  that  stand  around  join  her  in  her 
lamentations,  chanting  in  chorus  with  her.  Afterwards, 
she  addresses  the  gods,  hurling  against  them  torrents  of 
blasphemies  and  imprecations.  She  accuses  them  openly 
of  injustice  in  thus  depriving  her  of  her  protector.  This 
scene  lasts  till  her  eloquence  becomes  exhausted,  or  till 
her  lungs  are  wearied  out  and  she  is  no  longer  capable  of 
giving  utterance  to  her  lamentations.  She  then  retires 
to  take  rest  for  a  while,  and  to  prepare  some  new  phrases 
against  the  time  when  the  body  is  being  prepared  for  the 
funeral  pyre. 

The  more  vehement  the  expression  of  a  woman's  grief, 
the  more  eloquent  and  demonstrative  her  phrases,  the  more 
apparently  genuine  her  contortions  on  such  occasions,  so 
much  the  more  is  she  esteemed  a  woman  of  intelligence 
and  education.  The  young  women  who  are  present  pay 
the  most  minute  attention  to  all  that  she  says  or  does  ; 
and  if  they  observe  anything  particularly  striking  in  her 
flights  of  rhetoric,  in  her  attitudes,  or  in  any  of  her  efforts 
to  excite  the  attention  of  the  spectators,  they  carefully 
treasure  it  in  their  memory,  to  be  made  use  of  should 
a  similar  misfortune  ever  happen  to  themselves.     If  a  wife 


352      professional  women  mourners 

who  was  really  afflicted  by  the  loss  of  her  husband  confined 
herself  to  shedding  real  tears  and  uttering  real  sobs,  she 
would  only  be  thoroughly  despised  and  considered  an  idiot. 
The  parents  of  a  young  widow  once  complained  to  me  of 
her  stupidity  as  follows  :  '  So  foolish  is  she  that,  on  the 
death  of  her  husband,  she  did  not  utter  a  single  word  ; 
she  did  nothing  but  cry,  without  saying  anything  V 

In  several  parts  of  India,  as  formerly  among  tbe  Greeks 
and  Romans,  professional  women  mourners  may  be  hired. 
When  called  in  to  attend  the  obsequies,  these  women  arrive 
with  dishevelled  hair  and  only  half  clothed,  wearing  their 
scanty  garments  in  a  disordered  fashion.  Collecting  in 
a  group  round  the  deceased,  they  commence  by  setting 
up  in  unison  the  most  doleful  cries,  at  the  same  time 
beating  their  breasts  in  measured  time.  They  weep,  sob, 
and  shriek  in  turns.  Then  addressing  themselves  to  the 
deceased,  each  in  succession  eulogizes  his  virtues  and  good 
qualities.  Anon  they  apostrophize  him,  vehemently  re- 
monstrating with  him  for  quitting  life  so  soon.  Finally, 
they  point  out  to  him,  in  the  plainest  possible  terms,  that 
he  could  not  have  committed  a  more  foolish  act.  In  dis- 
charging these  duties,  which  are  a  curious  mixture  of 
tragedy  and  comedy,  they  take  turn  and  turn  about,  and 
their  affected  sorrow  lasts  until  the  corpse  is  removed. 
As  soon  as  the  obsequies  are  over,  they  receive  their  wages, 
and  their  faces,  which  were  so  lugubrious  a  few  moments 
before,  once  more  assume  their  wonted  calmness. 

Widows,  who  in  the  learned  tongue  are  called  vidhava, 
a  word  akin  to  the  Latin  vidua,  are  held  in  much  less 
respect  than  other  women  ;  and  when  they  happen  to  have 
no  children,  they  are  generally  looked  upon  with  the 
utmost  scorn.  The  very  fact  of  meeting  a  widow  is  calcu- 
lated to  bring  ill-luck.  They  are  called  moonda,  a  reproach- 
ful term  which  means  '  shorn-head,'  because  every  widow 
is  supposed  to  have  her  hair  cut  off.  This  rule,  however, 
is  not  everywhere  followed,  especially  among  the  Sudras  2. 

1  The  Hebrews  also,  on  the  death  of  friends  and  relatives,  made  a  great 
parade  of  all  the  external  signs  of  sorrow.  They  cried,  rent  their  gar- 
ments, beat  their  breasts,  tore  out  their  hair  or  beards,  or  else  had  them 
cut,  and  even  inflicted  cuts  on  their  bodies.  See  Leviticus  xix.  28, 
xxi.  5 ;  Jeremiah  xvi.  6,  &c. — Dubois. 

2  And  also  among  the  Tengalai  Vaishnava  Brahmins. — Ed. 


TOKENS  OF  WIDOWHOOD  353 

When  women  quarrel,  this  opprobrious  term,  moonda,  is 
generally  the  first  abusive  word  that  passes. 

A  widow  has  to  be  in  mourning  till  her  death.  The 
signs  of  mourning  are  as  follows  : — She  is  expected  to  have 
her  head  shorn  once  a  month  ;  she  is  not  allowed  to  chew 
betel  ;  she  is  no  longer  permitted  to  wear  jewels,  with  the 
exception  of  one  very  plain  ornament  round  her  neck  ;  she 
must  wear  coloured  clothes  no  longer,  only  pure  white 
ones  ;  she  must  not  put  saffron  on  her  face  or  body,  or 
mark  her  forehead  \  Furthermore,  she  is  forbidden  to 
take  part  in  any  amusement  or  to  attend  family  festivities, 
such  as  marriage  feasts,  the  ceremony  of  upanayana,  and 
others  ;  for  her  very  presence  would  be  considered  an  evil 
omen. 

A  very  few  days  after  the  death  of  her  husband,  a  widow's 
house  is  invaded  by  female  friends  and  relatives,  who 
begin  by  eating  a  meal  prepared  for  them.  After  this 
they  surround  the  widow  and  exhort  her  to  bear  her  miser- 
able lot  with  fortitude.  One  after  another  they  take  her 
in  their  arms,  shed  tears  with  her,  and  end  by  pushing 
her  violently  to  the  ground.  They  next  join  together  in 
lamenting  her  widowhood,  and  finally  make  her  sit  on  a 
small  stool.  Then,  one  of  her  nearest  female  relatives, 
having  previously  muttered  some  religious  formulae,  cuts 
the  thread  of  the  tali,  the  gold  ornament  which  every 
married  woman  in  India  wears  round  her  neck.  The 
barber  is  called  in,  and  her  head  is  clean  shaved.  This 
double  ceremony  sinks  her  instantly  into  the  despised  and 
hated  class  of  widows.  During  the  whole  time  that  these 
curious  and  mournful  rites  are  being  performed,  the  un- 
fortunate victim  is  making  the  whole  house  resound  with 
her  cries  of  woe,  cursing  her  sad  lot  a  thousand  times. 

The  thread  of  the  tali  must  be  cut,  not  untied.  This 
practice  has  given  rise  to  a  very  common  curse  ;  two 
women  when  quarrelling  never  forget  to  say  to  each  other  : 
'  May  you  have  your  tali  cut  !  '  which  means,  '  May  you 
become  a  widow  !  ' 

The  signs  of  sorrow  manifested  by  a  Hindu  lady  who 

1  She  must,  however,  smear  her  forehead  with  sacred  ashes  if  she  is 
a  widow  of  the  Saiva  sect,  and  mark  her  forehead  with  red  powder  if 
a  Vaishnava. — Ed. 

DUBOIS  N 


354  THE  SAD  FATE  OF  WIDOWS 

loses  her  husband  are  of  so  exaggerated  a  description  that 
one  cannot  help  doubting  their  perfect  sincerity;  yet  it  is 
impossible  that  any  Hindu  widow  could  face  the  sad  future 
awaiting  her  with  tearless  eyes.  Doomed  to  perpetual 
widowhood,  cast  out  of  society,  stamped  with  the  seal  of 
contumely,  she  has  no  consolation  whatever,  except  maybe 
the  recollection  of  hardships  that  she  has  had  to  endure 
during  her  married  life. 

I  do  not  refer  here  to  those  unfortunate  girls  of  five  or 
six  years  of  age,  who,  married  to  Brahmins  of  over  sixty, 
very  often  become  widows  before  they  attain  the  age  of 
puberty.  Fortunately  their  youth  and  inexperience  pre- 
vent their  brooding  over  the  sad  condition  in  which  they 
have  been  placed  by  such  inhuman  and  iniquitous  pre- 
judices. But  think  of  the  numberless  young  widows  in 
the  prime  of  life  and  strength.  How  do  they  bear  up 
against  this  cruel  expulsion  from  the  society  of  their  fellow- 
creatures  ?  The  answer  is,  Better  than  one  would  be  in- 
clined to  believe.  The  fact  is,  they  must  perforce  be 
resigned  to  their  fate  ;  and  however  despised  a  widow 
may  be,  there  is  this  consolation,  that  one  who  remarries 
is  a  hundred  times  more  so,  for  she  is  shunned  absolutely 
by  every  honest  and  respectable  person.  Thus  there  are 
few  widows  who  would  not  look  upon  proposals  to  remarry 
as  a  downright  insult,  though  in  this  respect  they  are 
seldom  put  to  the  test.  Even  an  old  gouty  Brahmin,  as 
poor  as  Irus,  would  feel  indignant  at  the  very  suggestion 
of  marrying  a  widow,  though  she  were  rich  and  endowed 
with  all  the  charms  of  youth  and  beauty. 

One  result  of  this  prejudice,  which  is  firmly  and  irre- 
vocably established  in  India,  is  that  the  country  abounds 
with  widows,  especially  among  the  Brahmins.  Among  this 
caste  shorn-heads  are  to  be  seen  everywhere.  Of  course 
a  certain  corruption  of  morals  is  the  inevitable  result  of 
such  a  state  of  things,  but  it  is  not  pushed  to  such  an 
extent  as  might  be  expected.  The  natural  modesty  of 
Hindu  women,  the  way  in  which  they  are  brought  up, 
their  ordinarily  chaste  and  circumspect  demeanour,  the 
calmness  of  their  passions  :  all  these  go  a  great  way  towards 
providing  as  it  were  strong  barriers  against  the  attacks  of 
the  licentious,  who,  whatever  may  be  said  to  the  contrary 


WIDOWS  SELDOM  SEDUCED  355 

by  ill-informed  writers,  do  not  succeed  in  winning  over 
women  of  the  better  class  so  easily  as  in  many  other  coun- 
tries where  the  lawful  union  of  the  two  sexes  is  not  beset 
with  so  many  obstacles. 

Besides,  even  if  we  refuse  to  believe  that  young  widows 
possess  in  themselves  sufficient  strength  of  will  to  resist 
seduction,  there  are  many  other  obstacles  beyond  their 
own  control,  which  also  serve  as  so  many  bulwarks  to  their 
modesty.  Chief  among  such  obstacles  must  be  reckoned 
the  diligent  watchfulness  exercised  over  them  by  their 
parents  ;  the  severity  of  the  convenances  which  forbid  any 
kind  of  familiar  intercourse  between  men  and  women  ;  the 
very  heavy  punishments  which  follow  even  the  most  trivial 
lapses  ;  and,  finally,  the  mere  disgrace,  which  in  India, 
above  all  countries  of  the  world,  entails  the  most  tremendous 
penalties  on  the  person  detected  in  an  indiscretion  l. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

The  Custom  which  at  times  obliges  Widows  to  allow  themselves  to  be 
burnt  alive  on  the  Funeral  Pyre  of  their  Deceased  Husbands. 

Although  the  ancient  and  barbarous  custom  which 
imposes  the  duty  on  widows  of  sacrificing  themselves 
voluntarily  on  the  funeral  pyre  of  their  husbands  has  not 
been  expressly  abolished,  it  is  much  more  rare  nowadays 
than  formerly,  especially  in  the  southern  parts  of  the 
Peninsula.  In  the  North  of  India  and  in  the  provinces 
bordering  on  the  Ganges,  however,  women  are  only  too 
frequently  seen  offering  themselves  as  victims  of  this  horrid 
superstition,  and,  either  through  motives  of  vanity  or 
through  a  spirit  of  blind  enthusiasm,  giving  themselves 
up  to  a  death  which  is  as  cruel  as  it  is  foolish. 

The  Mahomedan  rulers  never  tolerated  this  horrible 
practice  in  the  provinces  subject  to  them  ;  but,  notwith- 
standing their  prohibition,   wretched  fanatics  have  more 

1  The  social  reformers  of  the  present  day  are  doing  all  that  they  can 
to  encourage  the  remarriage  of  virgin  widows,  those  unhappy  girls  who, 
married  before  they  come  of  age,  become  widows  before  cohabitation 
with  their  husbands  is  possible.  So  far,  however,  the  success  which 
these  reformers  have  met  with  is  extremely  small,  and  those  who  brave 
caste  custom  in  this  respect  are  invariably  outcasted. — Ed. 


356  SUTTEE  OPTIONAL  FOR  WIDOWS 

than  once  succeeded  in  bribing  the  subordinate  repre- 
sentatives of  authority  to  give  permission  to  commit  the 
deed  in  violation  of  the  laws  of  humanity  and  common 
sense. 

The  great  European  Power  which  nowadays  exercises  its 
sway  all  over  the  country  has  tried,  by  all  possible  means 
of  persuasion,  to  put  an  end  altogether  to  this  barbarous 
custom  ;  but  its  efforts  have  been  only  partially  successful, 
and,  generally  speaking,  it  has  been  obliged  to  shut  its 
eyes  to  this  dreadful  practice,  since  any  attempt  to  remedy 
it  by  force  would  have  exposed  it  to  dangerous  opposi- 
tion. 

Nobody  is  a  greater  admirer  than  myself  of  the  wise 
spirit  that  animates  this  enlightened  and  liberal  Govern- 
ment in  manifesting  to  its  Hindu  subjects  such  a  full  and 
perfect  tolerance  in  the  practice  of  their  civil  and  religious 
usages  ;  and  nobody  is  more  fully  alive  than  I  am  to  the 
dangers  and  difficulties  that  an  open  defiance  of  these  pre- 
judices, which  are  looked  upon  as  sacred  and  inviolable, 
would  give  rise  to.  But  does  the  abominable  custom  in 
question  form  part  of  Hindu  institutions  ?  Are  there  any 
rules  which  prescribe  its  observance  by  certain  castes  ?  All 
the  information  which  I  have  been  able  to  gather  on  the 
subject  tends  to  make  me  believe  that  there  are  no  such 
rules.  The  infamous  practice,  although  encouraged  by  the 
impostors  who  regulate  religious  worship,  is  nowhere  pre- 
scribed in  an  imperative  manner  in  the  Hindu  books.  It 
is  left  entirely  to  the  free  will  and  pleasure  of  the  victims 
who  thus  sacrifice  themselves.  No  blame  and  no  discredit 
are  attached  nowadays  to  the  wife  whose  own  honest 
judgement  suggests  that  she  ought  not  to  be  in  such  a 
hurry  to  rejoin  in  the  other  world  the  husband  who  so  often 
made  her  wretched  in  this.  It  would  be  quite  possible, 
therefore,  by  the  display  of  firmness,  combined  with  pru- 
dence, to  strike,  without  any  considerable  danger,  at  the 
very  root  of  this  shocking  practice.  Certainly  it  reflects 
discredit  on  the  Government  which  tolerates  it  and  mani- 
fests no  great  indignation  !  with  regard  to  it. 

1  During  recent  years,  owing  to  the  number  of  these  abominable 
sacrifices  being  on  the  increase,  especially  in  the  Bengal  Presidency 
and  in   the  districts   bordering  on  the  Ganges,  the  Government   has 


A  PROOF  OF  WIFELY  DEVOTION  357 

It  was  principally  in  the  noble  caste  of  Rajahs  that  the 
suttee  originated.  It  was  looked  upon  as  a  highly  honour- 
able proof  of  wifely  attachment  and  love,  which  enhanced 
the  glory  of  the  families  of  these  wretched  victims  of  blind 
zeal.  Should  a  widow,  by  reason  of  a  natural  fondness 
for  life  or  through  lack  of  courage,  endeavour  to  avoid 
the  honour  of  being  burnt  alive  on  the  funeral  pyre  of  her 
deceased  husband,  she  was  considered  to  be  offering  a  gross 
insult  to  his  memory. 

I  was  once  able  to  thoroughly  convince  myself  of  the 
influence  which  this  false  point  of  honour  still  exercises 
over  the  minds  of  fanatical  Hindus,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  discern  that  this  act  of  devotion  to  which  these  wretched 

thought  fit  to  interfere  to  check  this  inconceivable  mania  by  adopting 
at  least  persuasive  measures.  It  has,  therefore,  directed  the  different 
magistrates  scattered  about  the  country  to  examine  very  minutely  all 
the  circumstances  attending  the  custom  of  suttee  (this  is  the  name  by 
which  these  barbarous  sacrifices  are  known),  and  never  to  sanction  it 
except  after  exhausting  all  the  means  to  oppose  it  which  prudence  may 
suggest  to  them.  No  woman  can,  therefore,  now  devote  herself  to 
a  death  of  this  kind  without  the  sanction  of  the  magistracy.  When 
such  permission  is  sought,  the  magistrates  cause  the  victim  to  appear 
before  them  and  question  her  carefully  to  assure  themselves  that  her 
resolution  is  entirely  voluntary,  and  that  no  outside  influence  has  been 
brought  to  bear  upon  her.  They  then  try  by  every  possible  exhorta- 
tion and  counsel  to  induce  her  to  give  up  her  horrible  design.  But 
should  the  widow  remain  firm  in  her  resolution,  they  leave  her  mistress 
of  her  own  fate.  The  Protestant  missionaries,  when  they  first  arrived 
in  the  country,  expressed  a  just  horror  of  these  abominable  sacrifices, 
and  strove  to  diminish  their  number  ;  but  being  ill  acquainted  with  the 
character  of  the  Hindus  and  with  their  devoted  attachment  to  custom, 
they  used  brusque  and  violent  measures  which  only  resulted  in  augment- 
ing the  evil.  I  have  seen  the  lists  of  widows  who  had  sacrificed  them- 
selves on  the  funeral  pyre  of  their  husbands  from  1810  (the  period  at 
which  the  missionaries  commenced  their  labours)  up  to  the  year  1820  ; 
and  I  have  remarked  that  the  number  of  these  victims  progressively 
increased  every  year  during  that  space  of  time.  In  1817  there  were 
706  suttees  in  the  Bengal  Presidency.  It  is  true  that  this  insane  practice 
is  much  more  in  vogue  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  than  anywhere  else. 
In  the  southern  parts  of  the  Peninsula  of  India  suttees  are  seldom  seen. 
I  am  convinced  that  in  the  Madras  Presidency,  which  numbers  at  least 
thirty  millions  of  inhabitants,  not  thirty  widows  allow  themselves  to  be 
thus  burnt  during  a  year. — Dubois. 

Suttee  is  now,  of  course,  absolutely  abolished.  Its  prohibition  by 
law  was  effected  during  the  Governor-Generalship  of  Lord  William 
Bentinck  (1825-1835),  at  the  instance  of  the  great  Rajah  Ram  Mohun 
Roy.— Ed. 


358  HONOUR  PAID  TO  THE  VICTIMS 

victims  sacrificed  themselves  is  not  always  the  result  of 
their  own  free  will  and  resolution.  The  poligar  or  prince 
of  Cangoondy  in  the  Carnatic  having  died,  neither  entreaties 
nor  threats  were  spared  to  induce  his  widow  to  allow  her- 
self to  be  burnt  alive  with  him.  It  was  urged  that  this 
honourable  custom  had  been  observed  for  a  long  time  past 
in  the  family,  and  that  it  would  be  a  great  pity,  indeed,  to 
allow  it  to  fall  into  disuse.  The  funeral  ceremonies  were 
delayed  from  day  to  day  in  the  hope  that  the  widow  would 
at  last  make  up  her  mind  to  prefer  a  glorious  death  to 
a  remnant  of  life  spent  in  contempt  and  opprobrium.  It 
was  a  fruitless  attempt  !  The  obstinate  princess  turned 
a  deaf  ear  to  all  the  pressing  entreaties  of  her  relatives  ; 
and  ultimately  the  deceased  was  obliged  to  depart  alone 
to  the  other  world. 

It  must,  however,  be  confessed  that  some  widows  commit 
this  folly  readily  enough,  spurred  on  as  they  are  by  the 
thought  of  the  wretchedness  of  widowhood,  by  vanity,  by 
the  hope  of  acquiring  notoriety,  perhaps  also  by  a  genuine 
feeling  of  enthusiasm.  It  should  be  remembered  that  they 
are  awarded  boundless  honours,  and  are  even  deified  after 
death.  Vows  are  made  and  prayers  addressed  to  them, 
and  their  intercession  is  sought  in  times  of  sickness  and 
adversity.  Such  remnants  of  their  bodies  as  have  not  been 
entirely  consumed  by  the  fire  are  most  devoutly  gathered 
together,  and  on  the  spot  where  they  have  sacrificed  them- 
selves small  monumental  pyramids  are  erected  to  transmit 
to  posterity  the  memory  of  these  brave  victims  of  conjugal 
affection — a  tribute  all  the  more  conspicuous,  because  the 
erection  of  tombs  is  almost  unknown  among  the  Hindus  \ 
In  a  word,  women  who  have  had  the  courage  to  deliver 
themselves  so  heroically  to  the  flames  are  numbered  among 
the  divinities,  and  crowds  of  devotees  may  be  seen  coming 
in  from  all  sides  to  offer  them  sacrifices  and  to  invoke 
their  protection. 

To  these  inducements  of  vain  and  empty  glory — sufficient 
of  themselves  to  make  a  deep  impression  on  a  feeble  mind 
— must  be  added  the  entreaties  of  relatives,  who,  if  they 

1  In  some  old  Hindu  houses,  even  to  this  day,  may  be  seen,  impressed 
with  turmeric  paste  on  the  walls,  the  marks  of  the  hands  of  women  who 
underwent  suttee. — Ed. 


FORCING  A  RELUCTANT  CONSENT         359 

perceive  the  slightest  inclination  on  the  part  of  the  widow 
to  offer  up  her  life,  spare  no  means  in  order  to  convince 
her  and  force  her  to  a  final  determination.  At  times  they 
go  so  far  as  to  administer  drugs,  which  so  far  deprive  her 
of  her  senses  that  under  their  influence  she  yields  to  their 
wishes.  This  inhuman  and  abominable  method  of  wheed- 
ling a  consent  out  of  the  unhappy  woman  is  in  their  opinion 
justified,  because  her  tragic  end  would  bring  great  honour 
and  glory  to  the  whole  of  their  family. 

Some  authors  have  maintained  that  this  detestable 
practice  originated  primarily  either  from  the  jealousy  of 
husbands,  or  rather,  perhaps,  from  their  fear  that  their 
discontented  wives  might  seek  to  get  rid  of  them  by  poison. 
As  for  myself,  I  have  been  unable,  either  in  the  writings  of 
Hindu  authors,  or  in  my  free  and  familiar  intercourse  with 
many  persons  well  versed  in  the  manners  and  customs  of 
the  country,  to  discover  any  justification  for  either  of  these 
two  theories.  And  surely  the  lot  of  a  wife,  even  when  she 
is  doomed  to  suffer  wrong  at  the  hands  of  a  cruel  and 
immoral  husband,  is  far  preferable  to  that  of  a  widow,  to 
whom  all  hope  of  a  re-marriage  under  happier  conditions 
is  forbidden.  It  is  hardly  likely,  indeed,  that  Hindu 
women  would  go  to  the  length  of  committing  a  crime 
which  must  render  their  lot  much  worse  than  before  !  At 
the  same  time  I  am  by  no  means  inclined  to  attribute 
these  voluntary  sacrifices  to  an  excess  of  conjugal  affection. 
We  should,  for  instance,  be  greatly  mistaken  were  we  to 
allow  ourselves  to  be  deceived  by  the  noisy  lamentations 
which  wives  are  accustomed  to  raise  on  the  death  of  their 
husbands,  and  which  are  no  more  than  rank  hypocrisy. 
During  the  long  period  of  my  stay  in  India,  I  do  not  recall 
two  Hindu  marriages  characterized  by  a  union  of  hearts 
and  displaying  true  and  mutual  attachment l. 

When  a  woman,  after  mature  deliberation,  has  once 
declared  that  she  desires  to  be  burnt  alive  with  her  deceased 

1  It  is  impossible  to  regard  the  conclusion  here  drawn  as  anything  but 
greatly  exaggerated.  The  influence  of  women,  ignorant  and  uneducated 
as  they  are,  is  in  many  Hindu  households  exceedingly  strong,  and  it  is 
an  error  to  picture  them  as  the  mere  slaves  of  the  men,  though  the 
ascendency  of  the  latter  is  still  a  marked  feature  of  Hindu  sociology. 
—Ed. 


360  A  DISPUTE  FOR  PRECEDENCE 

husband,  her  decision  is  considered  irrevocable.  She  cannot 
afterwards  retract  ;  and  should  she  refuse  to  proceed  of 
her  own  free  will  to  the  funeral  pyre,  she  would  be  dragged 
to  it  by  force.  The  Brahmins  who  regulate  all  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  tragedy,  and  also  her  relatives,  come  by 
turns  to  congratulate  her  on  her  heroic  decision  and  on  the 
immortal  glory  which  she  is  about  to  acquire  by  such  a 
death — a  death  which  will  exalt  her  to  the  dignity  of  the 
gods.  All  possible  means  which  fanaticism  and  supersti- 
tion can  suggest  are  brought  to  bear  upon  her  in  order  to 
keep  up  her  courage,  to  exalt  her  enthusiasm,  and  to  excite 
her  imagination.  When,  at  last,  the  fatal  hour  draws  nigh, 
the  victim  is  adorned  with  rare  elegance  :  she  is  clothed  in 
her  richest  apparel,  is  bedecked  with  all  her  jewels,  and  is 
thus  led  to  the  funeral  pyre. 

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  describe  the  finishing  scenes  of 
this  dreadful  ceremony  without  feelings  of  distress.  But, 
in  the  meantime,  I  must  solicit  the  indulgence  of  my  readers 
for  a  short  digression  which  is  not  wholly  disconnected  with 
my  subject.  When  a  husband  has  several  lawful  wives,  as 
often  happens  in  the  caste  of  the  Rajahs,  the  wives  some- 
times dispute  as  to  who  shall  have  the  honour  of  accom- 
panying their  common  husband  to  the  funeral  pyre,  and 
the  Brahmins  who  preside  at  the  ceremony  determine 
which  shall  have  the  preference.  Here  is  an  instance  to 
the  point  extracted  from  the  Mahabharata,  one  of  their 
most  esteemed  books  : — 

1  King  Pandu  had  retired  into  the  jungles  with  his  two 
wives,  there  to  devote  himself  to  acts  of  penance.  At  the 
same  time  a  curse  was  imposed  upon  him,  which  doomed 
him  to  instant  death  should  he  dare  to  have  intercourse 
with  either  of  them.  The  passion  which  he  felt  for  the 
younger  of  his  wives,  who  was  extremely  beautiful,  over- 
came all  fear  of  death  ;  and,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  for 
several  days  she  continued  to  represent  to  him  the  dire 
results  that  must  necessarily  follow  his  incontinency,  he 
yielded  at  last  to  the  violence  of  his  love  ;  and  immediately 
the  curse  fell  upon  him.  After  his  death,  it  was  necessary 
to  decide  which  of  his  two  wives  should  follow  him  to  the 
funeral  pyre,  and  there  arose  a  sharp  altercation  between 
them  as  to  who  should  enjoy  this  honour. 


WIDOWS  WITH  CHILDREN  EXEMPTED     361 

'  The  elder  of  the  two  spoke  first,  and  addressing  the 
assembly  of  Brahmins  who  had  gathered  together  for  the 
purpose,  she  urged  that  the  fact  of  her  being  the  first  wife 
placed  her  above  the  second.  She  should,  therefore,  be 
given  the  preference.  Besides,  she  urged,  her  companion 
had  children  who  were  still  young,  and  who  required 
their  mother's  personal  care  and  attention  for  their  bring- 
ing up  \ 

1  The  second  wife  admitted  the  seniority  of  the  first  ; 
but  she  maintained  that  she  alone,  having  been  the  im- 
mediate cause  of  the  sad  death  of  their  common  husband 
in  allowing  him  to  defy  the  curse  which  doomed  him  to 
perish,  was  thereby  entitled  to  the  honour  of  being  burnt 
with  him.  "  As  regards  the  bringing  up  of  my  children," 
she  added,  addressing  the  other  wife,  "  are  they  not  yours 
just  as  much  as  they  are  mine  ?  Do  not  they  too  call 
you  mother  ?  And  by  your  age  and  experience  are  you 
not  better  fitted  than  I  to  attend  to  their  bringing  up  ?  "  ' 

In  spite  of  the  eloquence  of  the  younger  wife,  it  was,  at 
last,  unanimously  agreed  by  the  judges  that  the  first  wife 
should  have  the  preference — a  decision  at  which  the  latter 
lady  was  greatly  delighted. 

Most  Sudras,  as  well  as  Hindus  of  the  Siva  sect,  bury 
their  dead  instead  of  burning  them,  and  there  are  several 
instances  of  wives  having  been  buried  alive  with  their 
deceased  husbands.  But  the  ceremonies  in  either  case  are 
nearly  the  same. 

I  will  relate  here  two  incidents  which  took  place  at  no 
great  distance  from  the  place  where  I  was  living,  and  which 
will  give  a  good  idea  of  what  these  deplorable  scenes  of 
mad  fanaticism  are  like  : — 

In  1794,  in  a  village  of  the  Tanjore  district  called  Pudu- 
pettah,  there  died  a  man  of  some  importance  belonging 
to  the  Komathj  (Vaisya)  caste.  His  wife,  aged  about  thirty 
years,    announced    her    intention    of    accompanying    her 

1  The  custom  of  suttee  does  not  require  widows  who  have  young 
children  to  burn  themselves  with  the  body  of  their  husbands  ;  they 
are  even  forbidden  to  do  so.  Does  this  exception  proceed  from  a  feeling 
of  humanity  ?  By  no  manner  of  means  !  It  is  actuated  merely  by 
the  fear  that  a  large  number  of  orphans  would  become  a  burden  to  the 
community. — Dubois. 

N  3 


362  DESCRIPTION  OF  A  SUTTEE 

deceased  husband  to  the  funeral  pyre.  The  news  having 
rapidly  spread  abroad,  a  large  concourse  of  people  flocked 
together  from  all  quarters  to  witness  the  spectacle.  When 
everything  was  ready  for  the  ceremony,  and  the  widow 
had  been  richly  clothed  and  adorned,  the  bearers  stepped 
forward  to  remove  the  body  of  the  deceased,  which  was 
placed  in  a  sort  of  shrine,  ornamented  with  costly  stuffs, 
garlands  of  flowers,  green  foliage,  &c,  the  corpse  being 
seated  in  it  with  crossed  legs,  covered  with  jewels  and 
clothed  in  the  richest  attire,  and  the  mouth  filled  with 
betel.  Immediately  after  the  funeral  car  followed  the 
widow,  borne  in  a  richly  decorated  palanquin.  On  the 
way  to  the  burning-ground  she  was  escorted  by  an  immense 
crowd  of  eager  sight-seers,  lifting  their  hands  towards  her 
in  token  of  admiration,  and  rending  the  air  with  cries  of 
joy.  She  was  looked  upon  as  already  translated  to  the 
paradise  of  Indra,  and  they  seemed  to  envy  her  happy  lot. 

While  the  funeral  procession  moved  slowly  along,  the 
spectators,  especially  the  women,  tried  to  draw  near  to 
her  to  congratulate  her  on  her  good  fortune,  at  the  same 
time  expecting  that,  in  virtue  of  the  gift  of  prescience 
which  such  a  meritorious  attachment  must  confer  upon 
her,  she  would  be  pleased  to  predict  the  happy  things 
that  might  befall  them  here  below.  With  gracious  and 
amiable  mien  she  declared  to  one  that  she  would  long 
enjoy  the  favours  of  fortune  ;  to  another,  that  she  would 
be  the  mother  of  numerous  children  who  would  prosper 
in  the  world  ;  to  a  third,  that  she  would  live  long  and 
happily  with  a  husband  who  would  love  and  cherish  her  ; 
to  a  fourth,  that  her  family  was  destined  to  attain  much 
honour  and  dignity  ;  and  so  forth.  She  then  distributed 
among  them  leaves  of  betel  ;  and  the  extraordinary  eager- 
ness with  which  these  were  received  clearly  proved  that 
great  value  was  attached  to  them  as  relics.  Beaming  with 
joy,  these  women  then  withdrew,  each  in  the  full  hope  that 
the  promised  blessings  of  wealth  and  happiness  would  be 
showered  on  her  and  hers. 

During  the  whole  procession,  which  was  a  very  long  one, 
the  widow  preserved  a  calm  demeanour.  Her  looks  were 
serene,  even  smiling  !  ;   but  when  she  reached  the  fatal  place 

1  Several  travellers  have  said,  and  I  am  inclined  to  believe  it,  that 


A  PAINFUL  SPECTACLE  363 

where  she  was  to  yield  up  her  life  in  so  ghastly  a  manner, 
it  was  observed  that  her  firmness  suddenly  gave  way. 
Plunged,  as  it  were,  in  gloomy  thought,  she  seemed  to  pay 
no  attention  whatever  to  what  was  passing  around  her. 
Her  looks  became  wildly  fixed  upon  the  pile.  Her  face 
grew  deadly  pale.  Her  very  limbs  were  in  a  convulsive 
tremor.  Her  drawn  features  and  haggard  face  betrayed 
the  fright  that  had  seized  her,  while  a  sudden  weakening 
of  her  senses  betokened  that  she  was  ready  to  faint  away. 

The  Brahmins  who  conducted  the  ceremony,  and  also  her 
near  relatives,  ran  quickly  to  her,  endeavouring  to  keep  up 
her  courage  and  to  revive  her  drooping  spirits.  All  was  of 
no  effect.  The  unfortunate  woman,  bewildered  and  dis- 
tracted, turned  a  deaf  ear  to  all  their  exhortations  and 
preserved  a  deep  silence. 

She  was  then  made  to  leave  the  palanquin,  and  as  she  was 
scarcely  able  to  walk,  her  people  helped  her  to  drag  herself 
to  a  pond  near  the  pyre.  She  plunged  into  the  water  with 
all  her  clothes  and  ornaments  on,  and  was  immediately 
afterwards  led  to  the  pyre,  on  which  the  body  of  her  hus- 
band was  already  laid.  The  pyre  was  surrounded  by 
Brahmins,  each  with  a  lighted  torch  in  one  hand  and  a  bowl 
of  ghee  in  the  other.  Her  relatives  and  friends,  several  of 
whom  were  armed  with  muskets,  swords,  and  other  weapons, 
stood  closely  round  in  a  double  line,  and  seemed  to  await 
impatiently  the  end  of  this  shocking  tragedy.  This  armed 
force,  they  told  me,  was  intended  not  only  to  intimidate 
the  unhappy  victim  in  case  the  terror  of  her  approaching 
death  might  induce  her  to  run  away,  but  also  to  overawe 
any  persons  who  might  be  moved  by  a  natural  feeling  of 
compassion  and  sympathy,  and  so  tempted  to  prevent  the 
accomplishment  of  the  homicidal  sacrifice. 

At  length,  the  purohita  Brahmin  gave  the  fatal  signal. 
The  poor  widow  was  instantly  divested  of  all  her  jewels, 
and  dragged,  more  dead  than  alive,  to  the  pyre.     There  she 

they  force  upon  these  wretched  victims  of  superstition  a  kind  of  drink, 
which  confuses  the  mind  and  prevents  them  from  forming  a  correct 
notion  of  the  dreadful  torture  to  which  they  are  being  led.  This  bever- 
age, they  say,  consists  of  a  decoction  of  saffron.  It  is  known  that  dried 
saffron  pistils  (Crocus  sativus),  taken  in  large  quantities,  cause  violent 
and  convulsive  laughter,  sometimes  terminating  in  death. — Dubois. 


364     THE  SUTTEE  OF  TWO  QUEENS 

was  obliged,  according  to  custom,  to  walk  three  times 
round  the  pile,  two  of  her  nearest  relatives  supporting 
her  by  the  arms.  She  accomplished  the  first  round  with 
tottering  steps  ;  during  the  second  her  strength  wholly 
forsook  her,  and  she  fainted  away  in  the  arms  of  her  con- 
ductors, who  were  obliged  to  complete  the  ceremony  by 
dragging  her  through  the  third  round.  Then,  at  last, 
senseless  and  unconscious,  she  was  cast  upon  the  corpse 
of  her  husband.  At  that  moment  the  air  resounded  with 
noisy  acclamations.  The  Brahmins,  emptying  the  contents 
of  their  vessels  on  the  dry  wood,  applied  their  torches, 
and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  the  whole  pile  was  ablaze. 
Three  times  was  the  unfortunate  woman  called  by  her 
name.     But,  alas  !  she  made  no  answer. 

The  last  king  of  Tanjore,  who  died  in  1801,  left  behind 
him  four  lawful  wives.  The  Brahmins  decided  that  two 
of  these  should  be  burnt  with  the  body  of  their  husband, 
and  selected  the  couple  that  should  have  the  preference. 
It  would  have  been  an  everlasting  shame  to  them  and  the 
grossest  insult  to  the  memory  of  the  deceased  had  they 
hesitated  to  accept  this  singular  honour.  Being  fully  con- 
vinced, moreover,  that  no  means  would  be  spared  to  induce 
them  to  sacrifice  themselves  either  willingly  or  unwillingly, 
they  made  a  virtue  of  necessity  and  seemed  perfectly  ready 
to  yield  to  the  terrible  lot  which  awaited  them. 

The  necessary  preparations  for  the  obsequies  were  com- 
pleted in  a  single  day. 

Three  or  four  leagues  from  the  royal  residence  a  square 
pit  of  no  great  depth,  and  about  12  to  15  feet  square,  was 
excavated.  Within  it  was  erected  a  pyramid  of  sandal- 
wood, resting  on  a  kind  of  scaffolding  of  the  same  wood. 
The  posts  which  supported  it  were  so  arranged  that  they 
could  easily  be  removed,  and  would  thereby  cause  the  whole 
structure  to  collapse  suddenly.  At  the  four  corners  of  the 
pit  were  placed  huge  brass  jars  filled  with  ghee,  to  be  thrown 
on  the  wood  in  order  to  hasten  combustion. 

The  following  was  the  order  of  the  procession  as  it 
wended  its  way  to  the  pyre.  It  was  headed  by  a  large 
force  of  armed  soldiers.  Then  followed  a  crowd  of  musicians, 
chiefly  trumpeters,  who  made  the  air  ring  with  the  dismal 
sound  of  their  instruments.     Next  came  the  king's  body 


THE  FUNERAL  PYRE  365 

borne  in  a  splendid  open  palanquin,  accompanied  by  his 
guru,  his  principal  officers,  and  his  nearest  relatives,  who 
were  all  on  foot  and  wore  no  turbans  in  token  of  mourning. 
Among  them  was  also  a  large  number  of  Brahmins.  Then 
came  the  two  victims,  each  borne  on  a  richly  decorated 
palanquin.  They  were  loaded,  rather  than  decked,  with 
jewels.  Several  ranks  of  soldiers  surrounded  them  to  pre- 
serve order  and  to  keep  back  the  great  crowds  that  flocked 
in  from  every  side.  The  two  queens  were  accompanied  by 
some  of  their  favourite  women,  with  whom  they  occasion- 
ally conversed.  Then  followed  relatives  of  both  sexes,  to 
whom  the  victims  had  made  valuable  presents  before  leaving 
the  palace.  An  innumerable  multitude  of  Brahmins  and 
persons  of  all  castes  followed  in  the  rear. 

On  reaching  the  spot  where  their  untimely  fate  awaited 
them,  the  victims  were  required  to  perform  the  ablutions 
and  other  ceremonies  proper  on  such  occasions  ;  and  they 
went  through  the  whole  of  them  without  hesitation  and 
without  the  least  sign  of  fear.  When,  however,  it  came  to 
walking  round  the  pile,  it  was  observed  that  their  features 
underwent  a  sudden  change.  Their  strength  seemed  well- 
nigh  to  forsake  them  in  spite  of  their  obvious  efforts  to 
suppress  their  natural  feelings.  During  this  interval  the 
body  of  the  king  had  been  placed  on  the  top  of  the  pyramid 
of  sandalwood.  The  two  queens,  still  wearing  their  rich 
attire  and  ornaments,  were  next  compelled  to  ascend  the 
pile.  Lying  down  beside  the  body  of  the  deceased  prince, 
one  on  the  right  and  the  other  on  the  left,  they  joined 
hands  across  the  corpse.  The  officiating  Brahmins  then 
recited  in  a  loud  tone  several  mantrams,  sprinkled  the  pile 
with  their  tirtam  or  holy  water,  and  emptied  the  jars  of 
ghee  over  the  wood,  setting  fire  to  it  at  the  same  moment. 
This  was  done  on  one  side  by  the  nearest  relative  of  the 
king,  on  another  by  his  guru,  on  others  by  leading  Brah- 
mins. The  flames  quickly  spread,  and  the  props  being 
removed,  the  whole  structure  collapsed,  and  in  its  fall  must 
have  crushed  to  death  the  two  unfortunate  victims.  There- 
upon all  the  spectators  shouted  aloud  for  joy.  The  un- 
happy women's  relatives  standing  around  the  pile  then 
called  to  them  several  times  by  name,  and  it  is  said  that, 
issuing  from  amidst  the  flames,  the  word  Yen  f  (What  ?) 


366  SUTTEE    PRESENTS 

was  heard  distinctly  pronounced.  A  ridiculous  illusion,  no 
doubt,  of  minds  blinded  by  fanaticism  ;  for  it  could  never 
be  believed  that  the  unfortunate  victims  were  at  that 
moment  in  a  condition  to  hear  and  to  speak. 

Two  days  after,  when  the  fire  was  completely  extin- 
guished, they  removed  from  amidst  the  ashes  the  remnants 
of  the  bones  that  had  not  been  entirely  consumed,  and  put 
them  into  copper  urns,  which  were  carefully  sealed  with 
the  signet  of  the  new  king.  Some  time  afterwards,  thirty 
Brahmins  were  selected  to  carry  these  relics  to  Kasi  (Benares) 
and  to  throw  them  into  the  sacred  waters  of  the  Ganges. 
It  was  arranged  that,  on  their  return  from  that  holy  city, 
they  should  receive  valuable  presents,  upon  producing 
authenticated  certificates  to  the  effect  that  they  had  really 
accomplished  the  journey,  and  had  faithfully  executed 
the  task  entrusted  to  them.  A  portion  of  the  bones  was, 
however,  reserved  for  the  following  purpose  : — they  were 
reduced  to  powder,  mixed  with  some  boiled  rice,  and  eaten 
by  twelve  Brahmins.  This  revolting  and  unnatural  act 
had  for  its  object  the  expiation  of  the  sins  of  the  deceased 
— sins  which,  according  to  the  popular  opinion,  were  trans- 
mitted to  the  bodies  of  the  persons  who  ate  the  ashes,  and 
were  tempted  by  money  to  overcome  their  repugnance  for 
such  disgusting  food.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  believed  that 
the  filthy  lucre  thus  earned  can  never  be  attended  with 
much  advantage  to  the  recipients.  Amidst  the  ashes,  too, 
were  picked  up  small  pieces  of  melted  gold,  the  remains  of 
the  ornaments  worn  by  the  princesses. 

Presents  were  given  to  the  Brahmins  who  presided. at 
the  obsequies,  and  to  those  who  had  honoured  the  cere- 
monies with  their  presence.  To  the  king's  guru  was  given 
an  elephant.  The  three  palanquins  which  had  served  to 
carry  the  corpse  of  the  king  and  the  two  victims  to  the  pile 
were  given  away  to  the  three  leading  Brahmins.  The 
presents  distributed  among  the  other  Brahmins  consisted 
of  cloths  and  of  money  amounting  to  nearly  twenty- five 
thousand  rupees.  Several  bags  of  small  coin  were  also 
scattered  among  the  crowds  on  the  roadside  as  the  funeral 
procession  was  on  its  way  to  the  pyre.  Finally,  twelve 
houses  were  built  and  presented  to  the  twelve  Brahmins 
who  had  the  courage  to  swallow  the  powdered  bones  of 


ERECTING   A  SHRINE  367 

the  deceased,  and  by  that  means  to  take  upon  themselves 
all  their  sins. 

A  few  days  after  the  funeral  the  new  king  made  a  pil- 
grimage to  a  temple  a  few  leagues  distant  from  his  capital. 
He  there  took  a  bath  in  a  sacred  tank,  and  was  thus  purified 
of  all  the  uncleanness  that  he  had  contracted  during  the 
various  ceremonies  of  mourning.  On  this  occasion  also 
presents  were  given  to  the  Brahmins  and  to  the  poor  of 
other  castes. 

On  the  spot  where  the  deceased  king  and  his  two  unhappy 
companions  had  been  consumed  a  circular  mausoleum  was 
erected,  about  12  feet  in  diameter,  surmounted  by  a  dome. 
The  reigning  prince  visits  it  from  time  to  time,  prostrates 
himself  humbly  before  the  tombs,  and  offers  sacrifices  to 
the  manes  of  his  predecessor  and  to  those  of  his  worthy 
and  saintly  spouses. 

Crowds  of  devotees  also  repair  thither  to  offer  up  vows 
and  sacrifices  to  the  new  divinities,  and  to  implore  their 
help  and  protection  in  the  various  troubles  of  life. 

In  the  year  1802  I  heard  accounts  of  a  great  number  of 
so-called  miracles  performed  through  their  intercession. 

It  is  only  after  long  and  serious  reflection  on  the  many 
eccentricities  and  inconsistencies  of  the  human  mind  that 
one  can  look  without  astonishment  upon  the  deplorable 
scenes  of  which  a  few  of  the  main  features  have  just  been 
described.  It  is  indeed  unaccountable  how  these  Brah- 
mins, who  are  so  scrupulous  and  attach  so  much  importance 
to  the  life  of  the  most  insignificant  insect,  and  whose 
feelings  are  excited  to  pity  and  indignation  at  the  very 
sight  of  a  cow  being  slaughtered,  can,  with  such  savage 
cold-bloodedness  and  wicked  satisfaction,  look  upon  so 
many  weak  and  innocent  human  beings,  incited  by  hypo- 
critical and  barbarous  inducements,  being  led  with  affected 
resignation  to  a  punishment  so  cruel  and  undeserved.  I 
leave  to  others  the  task  of  explaining  these  inconceivable 
contradictions,  if,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  possible  to  assign  any 
reasons  for  such  superstitious  fanaticism,  whose  charac- 
teristic feature  is  to  suppress  all  natural  and  rational 
sentiment. 


308 


CHAPTER  XX 

Adoption. — Rules  regarding  the  Partition  of  Property. 

When  a  Brahmin  finds  that  he  has  no  male  issue,  whether 
by  reason  of  the  barrenness  of  his  wife  or  through  the 
untimely  death  of  all  the  sons  he  has  had  by  her,  he  is 
permitted,  nay  bound,  by  the  rules  of  his  caste  to  procure 
a  son  by  means  of  adoption,  in  order  that  he  may,  at  least 
fictitiously,  fulfil  the  great  debt  to  his  ancestors,  namely,  the 
propagation  of  a  direct  line  of  posterity.  Although  marriage 
constitutes  the  perfect  state  of  man,  this  perfection  is 
nevertheless  deficient  when  a  man  does  not  leave  a  son 
behind  him  to  perform  his  obsequies  ;  and  this  defect  alone, 
according  to  Hindu  writers,  is  quite  sufficient  to  deprive 
him  of  happiness  in  the  next  world. 

This  notion  prevails  so  strongly  among  the  Hindus  that 
I  have  known  barren  women  not  only  consenting  to  their 
husbands  taking  other  wives,  but  even  earnestly  advising 
them  to  do  so,  and  helping  them  in  their  quest.  There  is 
not  one  of  them,  however,  who  is  not  fully  alive  to  the 
annoyances  and  discomforts  to  which  she  is  exposing  her- 
self by  thus  introducing  as  her  rival  another  woman,  who 
must  naturally,  by  her  youthfulness  and  fecundity,  soon 
become  an  object  more  beloved  than  herself  by  their  common 
husband. 

It  has  already  been  said  that  polygamy  is  tolerated 
among  the  ruling  classes  only;  and  when  we  find  other 
women  besides  the  lawful  wife  living  in  the  families  of 
private  individuals  of  high  caste,  especially  among  the 
Brahmins,  either  they  are  living  there,  as  already  stated, 
with  the  consent  of  the  lawful  wife,  or  else  they  are  merely 
hired  concubines.  However,  a  husband  who  has  had  no 
male  issue  by  his  wife,  being  fully  alive  to  the  unpleasant 
consequences  arising  from  a  second  marriage,  almost  in- 
variably prefers  to  have  recourse  to  the  system  of  adoption. 

A  Brahmin  generally  chooses  from  among  his  own  relatives 
the  child  that  he  wishes  to  legally  adopt  as  his  son  ;  and  if 
perchance  he  finds  nobody  in  his  own  family  worthy  of 
the  honour,  he  applies  to  some  poor  fellow  of  his  own  caste 


ADOPTING  A  SOX  369 

who  is  burdened  with  many  children.  So  long  as  the 
adoptive  father  is  rich,  lie  is  sure  not  to  meet  with  a  re- 
fusal l. 

The  adopted  son  renounces  wholly  and  for  ever  all  his 
claims  to  the  property  and  succession  of  his  natural  father, 
and  acquires  the  sole  right  to  the  heritage  of  his  father  by 
adoption.  The  latter  is  bound  to  bring  him  up,  to  feed 
him,  and  to  treat  him  as  his  own  son  ;  to  have  the  cere- 
mony of  upanayana,  or  the  triple  cord,  performed  for  him, 
and  to  see  him  married.  The  adopted  son,  in  his  turn,  is 
obliged  to  take  care  of  his  adoptive  father  in  his  old  age 
and  in  sickness,  just  as  if  he  were  his  natural  father,  and 
to  preside  at  his  obsequies.  On  the  death  of  his  adoptive 
father  he  enters  into  full  possession  of  his  inheritance — 
assets  as  well  as  liabilities.  Should  there  be  any  property 
left,  he  enjoys  it  ;  but  if,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are 
debts,  he  is  bound  to  pay  them.  He  is,  moreover,  by  his 
adoption  admitted  into  the  gothram  or  family  stock  of  the 
adopter,  and  is  considered  to  have  left  that  in  which  he 
was  born  2. 

It  is  only  natural  that,  in  a  country  where  everything  is 
performed  with  so  much  solemnity,  an  event  of  such 
importance  should  be  attended  with  great  ceremonies.  The 
following  are  a  few  of  the  most  important  : — 

The  first  thing  to  be  done,  as  might  be  expected,  is  to 
select  an  auspicious  day.  They  then  adorn  the  portals  of 
the  house  with  toranams  (garlands  of  leaves)  and  put  up 
a  temporary  pandal.  The  festivities  open  with  a  sacrifice 
to  Vigneshwara  and  the  nine  planets  ;  and  the  other  pre- 
paratory ceremonies  already  described  are  likewise  gone 
through.  The  adoptive  father  and  mother  take  their  seats 
on  the  small  dais  raised  in  the  middle  of  the  pandal.  The 
mother  of  the  child  is  presented  with  a  new  garment  and 
with  a  hundred  or  a  hundred  and  fifty  pieces  of  silver  as 
her  nursing  wages.  Then,  with  her  son  in  her  arms,  she 
approaches  the  adoptive  father,  who  asks  her  in  a  loud 

1  The  strict  rule  is  that  the  natural  mother  of  the  adopted  son  must  be 
a  marriageable  relative  of  the  adoptive  father.  Nowadays,  however, 
a  Hindu  is  allowed  to  adopt  anv  bov  provided  he  be  of  the  same  caste. 
—Ed. 

2  Gothram  literallv  means  '  cowshed.' — Ed. 


370  THE  ADOPTION  CEREMONY 

and  distinct  voice,  in  presence  of  the  whole  assembly, 
whether  she  delivers  over  her  child  to  be  brought  up.  To 
this  she  answers  in  the  same  tone  that  she  does  deliver  the 
child  to  be  brought  up.  This  utterance  bears  a  compre- 
hensive meaning.  It  is  a  formal  intimation  that  she  gives 
up  her  son  not  as  a  slave  who  is  sold,  but  to  be  looked  upon 
and  treated  as  a  child  of  the  family  into  which  he  is  about 
to  enter  l. 

They  next  bring  in  a  dish  filled  with  water  into  which 
some  powdered  saffron  has  been  thrown.  The  purohita 
blesses  this  mixture  by  muttering  mantrams  and  performing 
certain  ceremonies.  Then  the  mother  of  the  child  2  hands 
the  dish  to  the  adoptive  father,  and  at  the  same  time, 
invoking  fire  to  bear  witness  to  the  deed,  she  thrice  repeats 
the  following  words  : — '  /  give  up  this  child  to  you  ;  I  have 
no  more  right  over  him.''  The  adoptive  father  then  takes 
the  child,  and  seating  him  on  his  knees,  addresses  the 
relatives  present  as  follows  : — '  This  child  has  been  given 
to  me,  after  fire  has  been  invoked  as  a  witness  of  the  gift  : 
and  I,  by  this  saffron  water  which  I  will  now  drink,  promise 
to  bring  him  up  as  my  own  son.  From  this  moment  he  is 
entitled  to  the  enjoyment  of  all  his  rights  over  my  property, 
sharing,  at  the  same  time,  the  burden  of  my  debts.' 

After  these  words,  he  and  his  wife  pour  out  a  small 
quantity  of  the  saffron  water  in  the  hollow  of  their  right 
hands  and  drink  it  up.  They  then  pour  a  little  into  the 
hand  of  the  adopted  child  and  make  him  also  drink  it, 
adding  :  '  We  have  admitted  this  child  into  our  gothram, 
and  we  incorporate  him  into  it.' 

This  is  the  last  event  in  the  ceremony  of  adoption.  I 
have  remarked  that  at  the  age  of  six  months  Hindu  children 
are  solemnly  invested  with  the  girdle  or  waist-string,  to 

1  Generally  a  boy  is  adopted  when  he  is  fit  for  the  wpanayana  ceremony  ; 
and  both  ceremonies  are  performed  simultaneously. — Ed. 

2  It  is  the  mother  of  the  child  who  plays  the  most  important  part  in 
this  ceremony  ;  the  father  being  present  there  only  as  a  mere  formality. 
The  reason  is  that  in  India  all  the  children  are  supposed  to  belong  by 
right  to  the  mother.  Should  a  married  man,  or  a  man  living  in  con- 
cubinage, happen  to  separate  himself,  for  some  cause  or  other,  from  his 
wife  or  concubine,  the  latter  would  be  entitled  to  take  away  all  their 
children,  without  the  possibility  of  the  slightest  opposition  on  the  part 
of  the  father. — Dubois. 


USING  SAFFRON-WATER  371 

which,  six  or  seven  years  later,  is  attached  a  small  piece 
of  cloth  intended  to  cover  the  private  parts.  Should  the 
adopted  child  be  already  wearing  this  string,  they  break  it 
and  supply  him  with  a  fresh  one  ;  but  should  he  have 
none,  they  at  once  begin  to  invest  him  with  it  with  all 
the  usual  ceremonies.  It  is  by  this  act  that  his  incorpora- 
tion into  the  gothram  or  family  clan  of  his  new  father  is 
sanctified. 

The  festivities,  as  usual,  wind  up  with  a  repast  and  the 
distribution  of  betel  and  presents  to  the  guests. 

The  use  of  saffron  water  on  this  occasion  accounts  for 
the  fact  that  an  adopted  child  generally  receives  the  appel- 
lation of  the  '  saffron-water  child  '  of  such  a  one  \  a  term 
which,  it  should  be  added,  has  nothing  offensive  about  it. 

The  ceremony  of  adoption  is  almost  identical  among  the 
Sudras  and  the  Brahmins,  with  this  one  difference,  that 
among  the  Sudras  the  adoptive  father  and  his  wife  pour 
the  saffron  water  on  to  the  feet  of  the  adopted  child  with 
one  hand,  and  catch  and  drink  it  with  the  other. 

An  adoptive  father  may  choose  not  only  a  child  of  tender 
years,  but  even  an  adult,  should  that  suit  his  taste  and 
purpose  better. 

Persons  whose  means  do  not  permit  them  to  perform  the 
ceremony  of  adoption  with  so  much  pomp  and  circum- 
stance, have  a  simpler  and  more  expeditious  mode  of  per- 
forming it.  It  is  deemed  sufficient  if  the  mother  of  the 
child  and  the  adopted  father  invoke  fire  to  witness  their 
mutual  bargain.  Dwellers  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  need 
simply  call  to  witness,  in  such  a  case,  the  waters  of  that 
sacred  river. 

In  whatever  fashion  the  ceremony  of  adoption  be  per- 
formed, the  adopted  child  no  longer  retains  any  right  either 
to  the  property  or  the  heritage  of  his  natural  father,  nor 
can  he  be  held  answerable  for  the  debts  which  the  latter 
may  leave  at  his  death. 

The  adoption  of  girls  is  rare,  although  instances  of  it  are 
not  wanting. 

1  The  Hindus  take  a  pleasure  in  giving  each  other  nicknames,  some 
of  which  are  very  insulting  indeed.  They  generally  choose  such  names 
with  reference  to  some  mental  or  bodily  defect  of  the  person  concerned, 
or  on  account  of  some  dishonourable  act  imputed  to  him. — Dubois. 


372  THE  DIVISION  OF  PROPERTY 

The  work  from  which  I  have  extracted  these  particulars 
relating  to  adoption  also  furnishes  a  solution  of  some  of 
the  difficulties  that  arise  in  certain  cases  with  regard  to 
the  division  of  property.  The  little  that  it  contains  on 
the  subject  seems  to  me  sufficiently  interesting. 

We  find  there  laid  down  the  supposititious  case  of  a  man 
who,  after  adopting  a  son,  has  subsequently  had,  contrary 
to  his  expectation,  six  children  by  his  legitimate  wife, 
namely,  four  boys  and  two  girls.  The  father  and  two  of 
the  boys  die  ;  one  of  the  girls  and  the  adopted  son  are 
married  ;  there  remain  two  boys  and  a  girl  who  are  un- 
married ;  and  provision  must  also  be  made  for  the  sub- 
sistence of  the  widow.  The  question  is,  How,  in  such 
a  case,  ought  the  property  devolved  by  succession  to  be 
divided  ? 

The  answer  given  is  to  the  following  effect  : — First,  the 
amount  necessary  for  the  funeral  expenses  of  the  deceased 
father  ought  to  be  set  apart,  and  the  money  required  for 
the  marriage  of  the  three  unmarried  children  ought  to  be 
placed  in  the  hands  of  a  trustworthy  executor. 

Secondly,  the  property  that  remains  after  these  amounts 
have  been  set  aside  shall  be  divided  into  six  shares.  The 
adopted  son  shall  take  for  himself  a  share  and  a  half,  and 
the  remainder  shall  be  equally  divided  among  the  brothers 
and  the  mother.  Should  the  mother  be  dead,  the  property 
is  divided  only  into  five  shares  and  a  half,  unless  all  the 
brothers,  with  common  accord,  relinquish  on  behalf  of  their 
unmarried  sister,  with  the  object  of  providing  her  with 
jewels,  that  part  of  the  inheritance  which  would  have  fallen 
to  the  mother,  who  is  perfectly  at  liberty,  before  her  death, 
to  dispose  of  this  share  in  favour  of  her  daughters,  without 
the  slightest  objection  being  raised  thereto  by  the  sons. 
If  she  has  not  done  so,  the  brothers  alone,  independently 
of  the  sisters,  set  apart  a  reasonable  amount  for  a  decent 
funeral,  and  divide  equally  among  themselves  whatever 
remains  of  her  property. 

This  decision  of  the  Brahmins,  while  in  accordance  with 
the  general  custom  of  the  country,  which  entitles  sons  to 
equal  shares  of  the  paternal  property,  and  excludes  the 
daughters  by  merely  granting  them  a  dowry,  departs  from 
it  in  so  far  as  mothers  have  no  share  whatever  in  the  pro- 


OBLIGATION  FOR  MAINTENANCE  373 

perty  of  their  husbands,  their  sons  being  conjointly  bound 
to  provide  for  their  maintenance  during  their  lives. 

Should  a  man,  by  reason  of  the  barrenness  of  his  first 
wife,  marry  a  second,  and  the  latter  have  a  son,  all  the 
father's  property  belongs  exclusively  to  this  son  ;  the  first 
wife,  after  the  death  of  the  common  husband,  can  claim 
nothing  from  the  estate  :  but  the  son  is  bound  to  provide 
for  her  maintenance  in  a  decent  manner,  and  to  meet  all 
the  expenses  of  her  funeral.  If  the  first  wife  does  not 
choose  to  continue  to  live  with  the  second,  the  relatives 
meet  together  and  arrange  for  the  allotment  to  her  of 
a  sufficient  income  according  to  her  condition  in  life. 

A  certain  man,  rinding  that  his  first  wife  was  barren, 
married  a  second,  then  a  third  ;  but  it  so  happened  that 
these  two,  like  the  first,  were  barren  also,  and  the  man, 
therefore,  died  without  issue.  The  deceased  had  an  elder 
and  a  younger  brother,  besides  several  cousins,  sons  of  his 
paternal  uncles.  None  of  these,  however,  had  been  living 
with  him.  They  had  long  before  divided  their  family 
property,  and  each  was  living  separately.  The  question 
arises,  Who  ought  to  be  regarded  as  the  rightful  heir  of 
the  deceased  ?  The  answer  given  is,  that  the  rightful  heir 
is  the  younger  brother,  because,  being  the  youngest  of  the 
family,  to  him,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country, 
belongs  the  right  of  presiding  at  the  obsequies — a  right 
which  carries  with  it  the  heirship.  He  thereby  becomes 
the  head  of  the  family  and  the  master  of  the  house.  It  is 
he,  therefore,  who  is  obliged  to  provide  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  three  widows  left  by  his  brother.  Should  any  one 
of  the  three  choose  to  return  to  her  father's  house,  she 
would  be  at  perfect  liberty  to  do  so,  and  even  to  take  away 
with  her  all  the  jewels  given  to  her  by  her  deceased  hus- 
band. Furthermore,  the  family  council  would  determine 
upon  the  allowance  which  her  brother-in-law,  as  the  heir 
to  her  husband's  property,  would  be  bound  to  make  to 
her  to  enable  her  to  subsist.  If  she  elected  to  remain  in 
her  deceased  husband's  house  and  to  have  an  establishment 
of  her  own  there,  she  could  not  be  refused  permission  ;  but 
in  that  case  her  brother-in-law  would  not  be  under  the 
necessity  of  assigning  her  any  considerable  income  ;  and 
she  would  be  obliged,  at  her  own  risk,  to  supplement  such 


374  FAMILY  COUNCILS 

income  with  alms.  It  is  well  known,  however,  that  such 
a  mode  of  living  has  nothing  disgraceful  about  it,  since 
begging  is  one  of  the  six  privileges  of  the  Brahmins.  Finally, 
the  brother-in-law  is  bound  to  bear  all  the  expenses  of  the 
funerals  of  the  three  widows  should  they  happen  to  die 
before  him. 

If  the  deceased  husband  be  the  youngest  of  the  brothers, 
the  elder  brother  would  then  become  the  sole  inheritor, 
and  on  him  would  devolve  all  the  rights  and  obligations 
connected  with  the  heritage.  In  the  absence  of  brothers, 
the  nearest  relative  on  the  father's  side  becomes  sole 
heir. 

In  cases  where  doubts  arise  as  to  the  transmission  of 
the  property,  the  relatives  are  called  in  to  decide  the 
matter  according  to  the  prevailing  custom  of  the  country, 
or  as  justice  may  dictate  to  them.  But  very  often  the 
partiality  prevailing  in  these  family  councils  turns  the 
scale  in  favour  of  the  one  who  is  able  to  purchase  the  sup- 
port of  the  others.  The  collusions,  intrigues,  and  acts  of 
injustice  practised  on  such  occasions  are  without  number, 
and  tend  to  throw  discredit  on  an  institution  which  owes 
its  origin  to  truly  patriarchal  principles. 

It  may  be  observed  from  what  has  been  already  said 
that  the  right  of  inheritance  and  the  duty  of  presiding  at 
the  obsequies  are  inseparable  one  from  the  other.  When, 
therefore,  a  wealthy  man  dies  without  direct  descendants, 
a  crowd  of  remote  relatives  appear  to  dispute  with  each 
other  the  honour  of  conducting  the  funeral  rites.  The 
contest  is  occasionally  so  tumultuous  and  prolonged  that 
the  body  of  the  deceased  is  in  a  state  of  complete  putre- 
faction before  a  definite  settlement  of  these  many  preten- 
sions is  arrived  at.  On  the  other  hand,  on  the  death  of 
a  needy  man  burdened  with  debts,  the  survivors  take  every 
possible  care  to  disprove  near  relationship. 

There  is  another  rule  regarding  succession  among  the 
Hindus,  which  will,  doubtless,  appear  to  us  highly  incom- 
patible with  the  true  principles  of  justice. 

A  father  dies,  leaving  several  male  children,  who,  from 
carelessness  or  some  other  cause,  do  not  trouble  themselves 
about  the  legal  partition  of  the  paternal  inheritance.  One 
of  them,  by  his  industry  and  diligence,  acquires  wealth, 


UNDIVIDED  FAMILY  PROPERTY  375 

while  the  others,  leading  a  debauched  and  idle  life,  become 
seriously  involved  in  debt.  These,  after  a  life  of  dissipa- 
tion and  wandering  from  place  to  place,  learn  at  last  that 
their  brother,  by  his  industry  and  good  conduct,  has 
amassed  a  brilliant  fortune.  They  at  once  hasten  to  him 
and  call  upon  him  to  share  with  them  the  property  he  has 
acquired  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  and  moreover  render 
him  jointly  responsible  for  the  debts  resulting  from  their 
disorderly  habits  \  The  creditors  themselves,  too,  have 
the  right  to  recover  from  him  by  law  what  is  due  to  them 
from  his  brothers.  More  than  this,  should  brothers,  who 
neglect  to  divide  their  family  property,  die  before  such 
partition  has  been  actually  effected,  the  same  community 
of  property  and  of  debts  holds  good  among  their  children, 
and  it  descends  from  generation  to  generation  so  long  as 
the  property  remains  undivided.  It  is  by  no  means  rare 
to  see  cousins  of  the  third  and  fourth  degree  engaged  in 
lawsuits  concerning  rights  of  succession  dating  back  from 
time  immemorial.  Neither  is  it  an  uncommon  thing  to 
see  the  richer  members  of  a  family  coerced  by  the  poorer 
ones  to  admit  the  latter  to  a  share  of  their  hard-earned 
fortune,  while  these  burden  them  with  their  poverty  and 
their  debts. 

In  a  country  where  nearly  everything  is  regulated  by 
custom,  and  where  the  usages  are  as  many  and  as  various 
as  the  different  provinces,  these  lawsuits  in  connexion  with 
the  partition  of  properties  are  an  endless  source  of  chicanery. 
There  is  one  advantage,  however,  from  a  social  point  of 
view,  arising  from  this  singular  system,  namely,  that  it 
gives  such  relatives  as  are  liable  to  be  affected  by  the  law 
of  partition  the  right  to  watch  over  each  other's  conduct, 

1  In  Madras  a  proposal  was  recently  made  by  a  Hindu  member  of  the 
local  Legislature  to  introduce  a  Bill  to  secure  for  every  individual  of 
an  '  undivided  '  Hindu  family  '  the  gains  of  his  learning.'  The  Bill 
was  passed  by  the  Legislative  Council,  but  in  deference  to  very  strong 
feeling  subsequently  expressed  by  the  Hindu  community  at  large  the 
Governor  of  Madras  (Sir  Arthur  Havelock)  vetoed  the  measure.  At 
present,  when  a  claim  is  made  to  '  the  gains  of  learning  '  of  one  of  the 
members  of  an  '  undivided  '  family,  those  who  prefer  the  claim  invari- 
ably attempt  to  prove  that  the  member  to  whose  gains  they  lay  claim 
was  educated  out  of  the  undivided  family  property,  and  that  therefore 
the  undivided  members  have  a  right  to  share  his  gains. — Ed. 


376  SINGLE  MALE  HEIRS  UNKNOWN 

and  to  restrain  the  debauchery  and  extravagance  of  those 
whose  misconduct  might  involve  them  all  in  distress. 

The  appointment  of  a  single  heir  among  the  male  children 
of  a  family  is  a  thing  unknown  in  India.  The  brothers 
divide  the  paternal  property  equally,  to  the  exclusion  of 
the  sisters,  who  have  no  share  whatever  in  it.  The  father 
does  not  even  possess  the  privilege  of  treating  one  of  his 
sons  more  generously  than  the  rest  \  The  Hindus  cannot 
conceive  how  a  father  could  despoil  several  of  his  children 
in  order  to  enrich  one  of  them  in  particular  ;  and  they  are 
simply  astounded  when  they  are  told  that  this  custom 
prevails  in  many  countries  of  Europe.  But  what  makes 
us  still  more  ridiculous  in  their  eyes  is  that  this  favoured 
heir  should  very  often  be,  not  the  son  who  distinguishes 
himself  above  the  rest  by  his  filial  devotion,  his  virtues, 
and  his  talents,  but  one  who  by  chance  happens  to  be  the 
first-born,  and  who  may  perhaps  be  the  most  foolish  and 
vicious  of  the  whole  family. 

CHAPTER  XXI 

The  Learning  of  the  Brahmins. — Their  Colleges. — Astronomy. — Astro- 
logy-— Magic. 

It  is  certain  that  from  the  earliest  times  learning  was 
cultivated  by  the  Hindus.  The  Brahmins  have  always 
been,  as  it  were,  its  depositaries,  and  have  always  con- 
sidered it  as  belonging  exclusively  to  themselves.  They 
saw  well  enough  what  a  moral  ascendency  knowledge 
would  give  them  over  the  other  castes,  and  they  therefore 
made  a  mystery  of  it  by  taking  all  possible  precautions  to 
prevent  other  classes  from  obtaining  access  to  it. 

The  question  arises,  Have  they  themselves  systematically 
cultivated  learning  ?  Have  they  made  any  appreciable 
progress  in  its  pursuit  ?  This  we  must  answer  in  the 
negative,  if  at  least  we  are  to  compare  what  has  come 
down  to  us  from  their  ancient  authors  with  the  present 
conditions  of  instruction  and  learning  amongst  them.     I  do 

1  There  is  nothing,  however,  to  prevent  a  father  from  allotting  the 
whole  or  any  portion  of  his  self-acquired,  as  opposed  to  his  ancestral 
property,  to  any  one  of  his  sons,  or  disposing  of  it  in  any  other  way  he 
pleases. — Ed. 


STATIONARY  CHARACTER  OF  LEARNING  377 

nut  believe  that  the  Brahmins  of  modern  times  are,  in  any 
degree,  more  learned  than  their  ancestors  of  the  times  of 
Lycurgus  and  Pythagoras.  During  this  long  space  of  time 
many  barbarous  races  have  emerged  from  the  darkness  of 
ignorance,  have  attained  the  summit  of  civilization,  and 
have  extended  their  intellectual  researches  almost  to  the 
utmost  limits  of  human  intelligence  ;  yet  all  this  time  the 
Hindus  have  been  perfectly  stationary.  We  do  not  find 
amongst  them  any  trace  of  mental  or  moral  improvement, 
any  sign  of  advance  in  the  arts  and  sciences.  Every 
impartial  observer  must,  indeed,  admit  that  they  are  now 
very  far  behind  the  peoples  who  inscribed  their  names  long 
after  them  on  the  roll  of  civilized  nations. 

The  learning  which  won  for  them  so  much  respect  and 
reverence  from  their  fellow-countrymen,  and  which  ren- 
dered them  so  famous  in  the  eyes  of  foreign  nations,  among 
whom  ignorance  and  superstition  then  prevailed,  was 
connected  with  astronomy,  astrology,  and  magic.  Several 
authors  have  given  details  of  their  astronomical  system, 
and  it  is  fully  explained  in  the  Asiatic  Researches.  More- 
over, Father  Pons,  a  former  Jesuit  missionary  in  the 
Carnatic,  had,  long  before  this,  discussed  it  in  a  highly 
interesting  treatise  published  in  the  Memoires  de  V  Academic 
des  Sciences,  and  likewise  we  find  it  discussed  in  the  Histoire 
Generate  de  Tons  les  Peuples  by  the  Abbe  Lambert.  It  is 
from  these  sources  that  the  famous  astronomer  Bailly 
derived  almost  all  that  he  has  written  on  Hindu  Astro- 
nomy. 

The  accuracy  of  the  investigations  of  the  learned  Jesuit 
missionary  in  this  direction  has  been  since  confirmed  ;  but 
in  the  same  work  he  speaks  of  the  schools  and  of  what  he 
calls  the  '  academies  '  of  India.  It  seems  to  me  that  he  is 
rather  too  favourably  impressed  with  these  latter  institu- 
tions, and  is  far  too  profuse  in  his  eulogies  on  the  methods 
of  teaching  and  the  course  of  studies  in  vogue  in  the  so- 
called  academies. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  no  comparison  whatever  can  be 
drawn  between  schools  in  India  and  those  in  Europe.  The 
system  pursued  in  the  former  of  causing  everything  to  be 
learnt  by  rote  is,  in  my  opinion,  essentially  wrong,  and 
tends  to  prolong  indefinitely  the  course  of  study.     More- 


378   INSUFFICIENT  EDUCATIONAL  STIMULUS 

over,  there  is  no  regular  plan  of  instruction,  and  there  is 
no  public  institution  which  is,  properly  speaking,  devoted 
to  the  diffusion  of  knowledge.  It  is  true  that  in  certain 
large  towns,  or  in  the  precincts  of  some  of  the  more  important 
temples,  Brahmins  who  are  really  learned,  or  who  pretend 
to  be  so,  impart  the  knowledge  which  they  possess — some 
gratuitously  and  others  for  payment  ;  still,  for  all  this, 
instruction  is  carried  on  without  any  definite  system  or 
any  attempt  at  discipline — elements  absolutely  necessary 
to  give  to  these  studies  a  character  of  permanence  and 
uniformity.  Let  a  youth  learn  who  has  a  mind  to  do  so, 
and  as  long  as  he  chooses  :  this  seems  to  be  their  guiding 
principle.  There  is  nothing  in  these  institutions  which  is 
calculated  to  stimulate  the  teachers  or  to  encourage  the 
pupils.  There  are  no  public  examinations  to  undergo,  no 
degrees  to  aspire  to,  no  prizes  to  be  won  ;  in  fine,  no 
special  privilege  or  advantage  of  any  importance  is  held 
out  to  students  who  distinguish  themselves  by  their  attain- 
ments. It  is  true  that  those  who  have  a  reputation  for 
learning  are  esteemed  by  the  public,  but  empty  reputation 
without  any  substantial  benefit  is  not  a  motive  sufficiently 
powerful  to  stimulate  a  Brahmin.  It  would  be  well  enough 
if  learned  Hindus  were  frequently  encouraged  by  the 
liberality  of  their  princes,  but  the  latter  are  too  deeply 
immersed  in  the  enjoyment  of  material  pleasures  to  be  able 
to  appreciate  the  real  value  of  learning  and  to  take  the 
trouble  to  patronize  it  \  Accordingly  one  seldom  comes 
across  educated  Brahmins  who  owe  their  knowledge  to 
one  of  these  public  schools.  They  are,  in  fact,  entirely 
beholden  for  it  to  the  exertions  of  their  parents  and  to 
private  tuition.  Thus  it  is  that  learning  is  almost  always 
transmitted  from  family  to  family,  from  generation  to 
generation,  and  becomes,  so  to  say,  hereditary. 

So  much,  then,  for  the  course  of  study,  the  universities, 
and  the  litterateurs  of  India. 

The  Hindu  system  of  astronomy  being,  as  I  have  said 

1  Education  on  European  lines  is  now  widely  extended,  of  course,  but 
the  diffusion  of  Hindu  knowledge  and  the  study  of  Sanskrit,  its  principal 
medium,  is  still  pretty  much  as  the  Abbe  describes  it.  It  is  only  just  to 
observe,  however,  that  it  has  been,  and  is,  more  largely  patronized  by 
Hindu  princes  than  the  Abbe  implies. — Ed. 


ASTROLOGY  AND  ITS  INFLUENCE  379 

before,  sufficiently  well  known,  I  shall  refrain  from  repeat- 
ing here  what  others  have  said  on  the  subject.  But  I  shall 
dwell  at  some  length  on  the  other  two  branches  of  their 
scientific  knowledge,  namely,  astrology  and  magic. 

Astrology. 

Astrology,  together  with  the  silly  notions  which  originate 
from  it,  has  at  all  times  exercised  a  great  influence  over  the 
nations  of  the  world,  civilized  as  well  as  uncivilized.  In 
Europe  the  appearance  of  a  comet  or  a  total  eclipse  formerly 
spread  the  greatest  terror  in  the  minds  of  the  multitude, 
who  looked  upon  these  celestial  phenomena  as  the  fore- 
runners of  some  public  calamity  ;  and  even  at  the  present 
day  these  chimerical  fears  still  exercise  some  influence  over 
the  imagination  of  the  ignorant  and  superstitious. 

The  influence  of  the  stars,  scrutinized  with  the  eyes  of 
reason,  need  not  be  looked  upon  altogether  as  an  idle 
imagining  ;  and  there  is  doubtless  a  happy  medium  to  be 
observed  between  the  widely  divergent  opinions  of  authors 
concerning  the  action,  more  or  less  direct,  more  or  less 
limited,  exercised  by  the  stars  over  the  vegetable  and 
animal  kingdoms  of  this  earth  of  ours.  Be  this  as  it  may, 
however,  no  other  nation  appears  to  have  carried  its  astro- 
logical notions  to  such  extremes  of  folly  as  the  Hindus. 
With  their  wonted  exaggeration  in  all  things,  it  is  only 
natural  that  they  should  entertain  wild  ideas  about  a 
science  which  opens  so  vast  a  sphere  to  the  imagination. 
All  the  rubbish  they  have  written  on  this  subject  would 
certainly  be  too  tedious  to  read.  I  will,  therefore,  content 
myself  with  referring  briefly  to  a  few  of  the  important 
principles  on  which  their  so-called  science  of  astrology 
rests. 

Each  planet  in  turn  is  supposed  to  exercise  its  influence 
during  the  space  of  a  year.  The  ruling  planet  is  attended 
by  another,  which  plays  the  part  of  a  minister.  The  latter 
assumes  in  the  following  year  the  supreme  functions  of  the 
former  ;  and  so  on  year  after  year. 

Some  of  these  planets  are  beneficent,  others  the  reverse. 
The  Moon,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  and  Venus  are  of  the  former 
order.  Under  their  sway  everything  thrives  :  men  live 
happily  and  are  blessed  with  abundance  ;  the  fertile  fields 


380  ASTROLOGICAL  ABSURDITIES 

yield  rich  harvests,  and  the  fruitful  trees  bear  abundantly. 
The  Sun,  Mars,  and  Saturn,  on  the  other  hand,  have  a 
tendency  to  cause  evil  to  animate  as  well  as  to  inanimate 
nature.  Their  reign  is,  therefore,  almost  always  disas- 
trous. Men  are  oppressed  with  sickness  ;  they  attain 
success  in  nothing  ;  they  experience  only  troubles  and 
disappointments  :  moreover,  the  rains  hold  off,  the  soil 
becomes  unfruitful,  famine  and  misery  everywhere  prevail. 
When,  however,  an  unpropitious  planet  has  for  its  attendant 
minister  a  planet  of  an  opposite  character,  and  vice  versa, 
the  good  one  counteracts  and  counterbalances,  at  least  to 
a  certain  degree,  the  evil  influence  of  the  other.  Thus  one 
can  expect  to  enjoy  unalloyed  happiness  only  during  those 
years  when  two  benign  planets  hold  their  sway  at  one 
and  the  same  time.  Similarly,  one  must  dread  continual 
misfortunes  when  both  planets  have  an  evil  inclination 
to  harass  unfortunate  mankind. 

There  are  four  principal  clouds  which  yield  rain,  and 
each  in  its  turn  discharges  this  duty  for  the  space  of  one 
year.  Their  names  are  Samvarta,  Avarta,  Pushkala,  Drona. 
The  first  and  the  last  are  favourably  disposed  towards 
mankind,  and  yield  copious  showers.  Avarta  and  Push- 
kala, on  the  other  hand,  produce  nothing  but  storms  and 
hurricanes,  and  are  sparing  of  the  rain  which  refreshes 
and  fertilizes  the  soil. 

The  frequency  of  rain  depends  also  to  a  great  extent  on 
the  good  or  bad  will  of  seven  elephants.  Each  of  these  is 
known  by  its  own  name,  and  each  in  turn  is  charged  with 
the  annual  duty  of  carrying  water  to  the  clouds.  Four  of 
them  display  great  activity  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty, 
and  supply  the  clouds  with  an  ample  provision  of  rain. 
But  the  other  three  acquit  themselves  very  carelessly  of 
their  duty  during  their  terms  of  service  ;  consequently  the 
ground  remains  parched  up,  and  scarcity  prevails. 

Seven  snakes,  each  also  bearing  a  particular  name, 
exercise  in  turn  for  the  space  of  one  year  supreme  authority 
over  all  species  of  snakes. 

The  snake  Ananta,  the  first  one,  is  the  most  powerful  of 
all,  and  supports  the  earth  on  its  head.  The  year  of  its 
reign  is  considered  unhappy,  inasmuch  as  snakes  are  then 
extremely  venomous,  and  their  bite  invariably  proves  fatal. 


PREDICTIONS  AND  DIVINATIONS  381 

The  reign  of  the  snake  Karkataka  is  equally  unhappy. 

The  remaining  five  are  by  no  means  equally  mischievous. 
It  is  seldom  that  persons  are  bitten  by  snakes  while  these 
are  in  power  ;  and  should  a  person  be  bitten,  the  bite  does 
not  prove  fatal.  The  snake  Maha-Padma  particularly  is 
the  friend  of  men  ;  it  not  only  prevents  other  snakes  from 
harming  them,  but  also  comes  to  their  aid  by  sending  the 
physician  Dhanmantari  to  cure  such  as  may  have  been 
accidentally  bitten. 

By  the  combination  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac 
with  the  planets  and  with  the  star  which  is  in  the  ascendant 
on  each  day  of  the  moon,  Hindu  astrologers  believe  them- 
selves capable  of  telling  the  secrets  as  well  as  the  future 
events  of  life. 

The  Sun  remains  thirty  days  in  each  of  the  signs  of  the 
Zodiac  ;  the  Moon,  two  days  and  a  quarter  ;  Mars  and 
Mercury,  a  month  and  a  half  ;  Jupiter,  one  year  ;  Venus, 
two  years  and  a  half  ;  Saturn,  one  year  and  a  half. 

Each  sign  of  the  Zodiac  has,  besides,  two  stars  and 
a  quarter,  which  are  assigned  to  it  from  among  the  twenty- 
seven  constellations  or  stars  of  the  lunar  month. 

By  comparing  all  these  phenomena,  and  by  joining,  in 
regular  order,  certain  words  with  the  different  signs  of  the 
Zodiac,  they  are  enabled  to  know  the  past,  the  present, 
and  the  future,  and  to  recover  things  that  have  been  lost 
or  stolen.  The  coincidence  of  these  words  is,  for  this 
purpose,  combined  with  the  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  the  planet, 
the  star,  and  the  time  of  the  day  or  night  at  which  the 
astrologer  is  consulted. 

By  the  same  means  it  is  possible  to  find  out,  not  only 
the  place  wherein  a  stolen  article  is  secreted,  but  also  the 
sex  and  the  caste  of  the  thief.  They  are  also  able  to 
ascertain  whether  or  not  the  stolen  or  lost  article  will  be 
recovered,  according  as  the  sign,  the  planet,  and  the  star 
which  correspond  to  the  time  at  which  the  consultation 
takes  place  are  favourable  or  the  reverse. 

They  discover  in  the  same  way  whether  a  person  who  has 
been  long  absent  is  dead  or  alive  ;  whether  he  is  sick  or  in 
good  health  ;  whether  he  is  at  liberty  or  in  prison  ;  whether 
he  will  return  or  not. 

But  one  of  the  most  important  combinations  calculated 


382  HOROSCOPES 

is  that  relating  to  birth.  In  fact,  according  to  the  Hindus, 
the  future  lot  of  men  is  supposed  to  depend  on  the  sign  of 
the  Zodiac  and  the  star  under  which  they  are  born.  This 
is  what  they  call  lagnam.  It  is  supposed  that  each  of  the 
twelve  signs  prevails  over  daily  occurrences  during  a  fixed 
interval  of  time.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  sign  Aries  (the 
Ram)  prevails  for  two  hours  ;  Taurus  (the  Bull)  for  two 
hours  and  a  quarter  ;  Gemini  (the  Twins)  for  two  hours 
and  a  half  ;  and  so  on.  Again,  the  sign  which  corresponds 
to  the  moment  of  birth  is  termed  Janma-lagnam  ;  and  by 
combining  it  with  the  planet  and  the  star  of  the  day,  they 
ascertain  beyond  a  doubt  whether  the  child  is  born  to  be 
happy  or  unhappy. 

Of  the  seven  days  of  the  week,  three  are  held  to  be 
unlucky,  namely,  Sunday,  Tuesday,  and  Saturday.  On 
these  days  no  important  business  ought  to  be  undertaken, 
no  journey  begun. 

Of  the  twenty -seven  stars  of  each  lunar  month,  seven 
are  reputed  to  be  more  or  less  unlucky  ;  and  everything 
undertaken  on  the  days  on  which  these  appear  is  attended 
with  disastrous  results. 

The  rest  of  the  science  is  based  on  similar  considerations. 

Magic. 

Magic,  that  art  which  gives  shrewd  people  such  influence 
over  fools,  seems  to  have  found  a  favourite  abode  in  the 
Peninsula  of  India.  Certainty,  in  this  respect,  India  has 
no  reason  to  be  envious  of  the  ancient  Thessaly  or  of  the 
city  of  Colchis,  famous  for  the  enchantments  of  Circe  and 
Medea.  True,  I  am  not  aware  that  Hindu  sorcerers  have 
retained  the  power  of  causing  the  moon,  whether  willing 
or  not,  to  come  down  from  the  height  of  the  firmament  ; 
but  short  of  this,  there  is  nothing  which  Hindu  magicians 
are  incapable  of  doing.  Thus  there  is  not  a  single  Hindu 
who  does  not,  during  the  whole  course  of  his  life,  dream 
about  sorcery  and  witchcraft.  Nothing  in  this  country 
happens  by  chance  or  from  natural  causes.  Obstacles  of 
every  kind,  disappointments,  unlucky  incidents,  diseases, 
premature  deaths,  barrenness  of  women,  miscarriages, 
diseases  among  cattle  ;  in  fine,  all  the  scourges  to  which 
human  beings  are  exposed  are  attributed  to  the  occult  and 


BELIEF  IN  THE  MAGICAL  ART  383 

diabolical  machinations  of  some  wicked  enchanter  hired 
by  an  enemy.  Should  a  Hindu,  at  the  time  he  is  visited 
by  any  calamity,  happen  to  be  at  variance  with  any  one 
of  his  neighbours,  the  latter  is  immediately  suspected  and 
accused  of  having  had  recourse  to  magic  to  harm  him. 
The  accused,  of  course,  never  puts  up  patiently  with  an 
imputation  so  invidious.  Anger  is  engendered,  and  the 
flame  of  discord  grows  hotter  and  hotter,  until  some  serious 
consequences  result  from  this  new  development. 

If  the  immense  progress  in  enlightenment  made  by  the 
most  civilized  nations  of  Europe  has  not  yet  been  able  to 
completely  eradicate  these  absurd  prejudices,  if  the  rural 
parts  of  Europe  are  still  full  of  people  who  believe  in 
sorcerers  and  in  their  magical  charms,  and  if  in  the  public 
places  of  our  towns  one  still  sees  crowds  of  impostors  in 
wretched  garb  professing  to  furnish  those  around  them 
with  the  favours  of  fortune,  is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that 
in  a  country  like  India,  plunged  as  it  is  in  the  darkness  of 
gross  ignorance  and  superstition,  the  belief  in  magic  is 
carried  to  the  very  last  point  ?  Thus  it  is  that  at  every 
step  one  meets  with  batches  of  these  soothsayers  and 
sorcerers  distributing  good  luck  to  all  comers,  and  for 
a  consideration  unfolding  to  the  view  of  the  rich  and  of 
the  poor  the  secrets  of  their  destinies. 

But  these  sorcerers  of  the  lowest  rank,  whose  whole 
stock-in-trade  consists  of  a  large  fund  of  impudence,  are 
not  held  in  much  dread.  Others  there  are  whose  diabolical 
art  knows  no  bounds,  and  who  are  initiated  into  the  most 
profound  secrets  of  magic.  To  inspire  love  or  hatred  ;  to 
introduce  a  devil  into  the  body  of  any  one,  or  to  expel  it  ; 
to  cause  the  sudden  death  of  an  enemy,  or  to  bring  on  him 
an  incurable  disease  ;  to  produce  contagious  diseases  among 
cattle,  or  to  preserve  them  against  such  contagion  ;  to  lay 
bare  the  closest  secrets  ;  to  restore  stolen  or  lost  articles, 
&c.  :  all  these  are  mere  bagatelles  to  such  men.  The  very 
sight  of  a  person  who  is  reputed  to  be  gifted  with  such 
enormous  power  inspires  terror. 

These  professors  of  magic  are  often  consulted  by  persons 
who  wish  to  avenge  themselves  on  some  enemy  by  means 
of  witchcraft.  Their  help  is  also  sought  by  sick  folk  who 
are  persuaded  that  their  disease  has  been  caused  by  the 


384  HINDU  BOOKS  ON  MAGIC 

casting  of  some  magical  spell  upon  them,  and  who  wish  fco 
recover  their  health  by  throwing  a  counter-spell  upon  those 
who  caused  the  disease  by  such  means. 

The  Hindus  have  several  books  which  treat  ex  professo 
of  all  these  follies  of  the  magic  art.  The  principal  and 
most  ancient  of  them  is  the  fourth  Veda,  called  the  Atharva- 
Veda  \  The  Brahmins  would  have  it  believed  that  this 
book  has  been  lost  ;  but  it  is  known  that  it  still  exists, 
and  that  they  keep  it  in  concealment  with  even  greater 
care  than  they  do  the  other  three.  In  fact,  the  magicians 
being  everywhere  dreaded  and  hated,  the  Brahmins  have 
good  reason  to  conceal  everything  that  may  lead  to  the 
suspicion  of  their  being  initiated  in  the  secret  dealings  of 
these  impostors.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  magic  occupies 
one  of  the  first  places  in  the  list  of  sciences  of  which  these 
great  men  profess  to  be  the  sole  inheritors  2.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  their  ancestors  cultivated  the  art  from  time 
immemorial ;  and  it  is  not  likely  that  the  successors  would 
have  neglected  so  good  an  example,  and  allowed  the  practice 
to  fall  into  disuse.  Many  Brahmins,  moreover,  in  spite  of 
the  restrictions  imposed  upon  them,  are  known  to  have 
made  a  special  study  of  this  mysterious  book.  Besides,  do 
not  their  religious  sacrifices  and  their  mantrams  bear  a 
great  resemblance  to  magical  formulae  and  conjurings  ? 
Furthermore,   do  not  the   marvellous  effects  which  they 

1  Atharva-Veda  is  a  collection  of  formulae  to  avert  the  consequences 
of  mistakes  or  mishaps  in  sacrifices.  Atharvan,  Brahmana's  eldest  son, 
identified  with  Angirasa,  is  the  author  of  this  Veda,  which  belongs  to 
a  later  period  than  the  other  three  Vedas.  This  Veda  is  a  collection  of 
original  hymns  mixed  up  with  incantations.  It  has  no  direct  relation 
to  mere  rituals  or  sacrifices.  The  recitation  of  this  Veda  is  considered 
to  confer  longevity,  to  cure  diseases,  to  obtain  success  in  love  or  gaming, 
to  effect  the  ruin  of  enemies,  and  to  secure  the  reciter's  own  prosperity. 
—Ed. 

2  It  should  be  remarked  that  if  the  Hebrews  and  the  various  other 
peoples,  whom  Holy  Writ  represents  as  being  addicted  to  these  abomin- 
able superstitions,  did  not  actually  borrow  them  from  the  Hindus,  they 
must  both  at  least  have  copied  the  system  from  the  same  sources.  We 
are  aware  of  the  extensive  reputation  enjoyed  by  magicians  and  sooth- 
sayers among  the  children  of  Israel,  who  were  strictly  warned  by  God, 
through  Moses,  against  consulting  such  men  (Leviticus  xix.  31,  xx.  6). 
Saul,  who  had  vainly  tried  to  exterminate  or  expel  them,  was  weak 
enough  to  have  recourse  to  the  enchantments  of  the  witch  of  Endor. — 
Dubois. 


POWER  ATTRIBUTED  TO  MAGICIANS       385 

are  supposed  to  produce,  and  the  power  ascribed  to  them 
of  counteracting  the  will  even  of  the  gods  themselves, 
place  them  on  a  par  with  the  chimerical  attributes  which 
the  vulgar  mind  ascribes  to  enchantments  2 

I  happen  to  have  come  across  a  Hindu  book  treating  of 
the  subject  in  hand,  which  perhaps  few  Europeans  have 
yet  heard  of.  It  is  called  the  Agrushada  Parikshai.  The 
passages  which  I  will  here  extract  from  it  will  never  make 
anybody  a  sorcerer,  but  it  strikes  me  that  they  may  not 
be  wholly  uninteresting  to  those  who  like  to  meditate  on 
the  aberrations  and  follies  of  the  human  mind. 

The  author  begins  by  investigating  the  extent  of  a 
magician's  power.  Such  power  is  enormous.  A  magician 
is  the  dispenser  of  both  good  and  evil ;  but  is  more  fre- 
quently inclined  by  natural  malevolence  to  do  evil  rather 
than  good.  Nothing  is  easier  for  him  than  to  afflict  any- 
body with  sicknesses,  such  as  fever,  dropsy,  epilepsy, 
stricture,  palsy,  madness  ;  and,  in  fine,  diseases  of  all 
species.  But  all  this  is  a  mere  trifle  compared  with  what 
his  art  can  otherwise  do  !  It  is  capable  of  completely 
destroying  an  army  besieging  a  city,  and  also  of  causing 
the  sudden  death  of  the  commander  of  a  besieged  fortress 
and  of  all  its  inhabitants,  and  so  forth. 

The  Mahomedans  in  India,  being  quite  as  superstitious 
as  the  natives  of  the  country,  are  no  less  infatuated  with 
the  power  of  magic.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  last 
Mussulman  prince  who  reigned  in  Mysore,  the  fanatical 
and  superstitious  Tippu  Sultan,  during  his  last  war,  in 
which  he  lost  his  kingdom  and  his  life,  engaged  the  services 
of  the  most  celebrated  magicians  of  his  own  country  and 
of  neighbouring  provinces,  in  order  that  they  might  employ 
all  the  resources  of  their  art  in  destroying  by  some  effi- 
cacious operation  the  English  army  which  was  then  advanc- 
ing to  besiege  his  capital,  and  which  he  found  himself  utterly 
incapable  of  repelling  by  force  of  arms.  In  this  difficult 
and  critical  position  the  magicians  very  humbly  acknow- 
ledged their  powerlessness  ;  and  to  save  the  reputation  of 
their  craft  they  were  obliged  to  maintain  that  their  magical 
operations,  so  potent  when  directed  against  every  other 
enemy,  were  utterly  ineffectual  against  Europeans  \ 

1  It  is  generally  believed  by  the  Hindus  that  such  sorcerers   and 


386       INCANTATIONS  AND  ENCHANTMENTS 

But  if  magic  teaches  the  means  of  doing  evil,  it  also 
affords  the  means  of  counteracting  its  pernicious  effects. 
There  is  no  magician  so  skilful  but  that  others  can  be  found 
more  skilful  than  he,  to  destroy  the  evil  effects  of  his 
enchantments,  and  cause  them  to  recoil  with  all  their 
force  upon  himself  or  upon  his  clients.  Apart  from  the 
direct  influence  exercised  by  themselves,  the  magicians 
also  possess  an  ample  collection  of  amulets  and  talismans, 
which  are  looked  upon  as  efficacious  against  all  sorcery 
and  spells,  and  which  are  largely  distributed,  not  without 
payment  of  course,  amongst  those  who  consult  them. 
For  instance,  there  are  certain  glass  beads  made  magical 
by  mantrams,  different  kinds  of  roots,  and  thin  plates  of 
copper  engraved  with  unknown  characters,  strange  words 
and  uncouth  figures.  These  amulets  are  always  worn  by 
Hindus,  who,  when  protected  by  such  talismans,  believe 
themselves  quite  safe  from  all  kinds  of  evil. 

Secret  remedies  for  inspiring  illicit  passion,  for  rekindling 
the  flame  of  extinct  love,  and  for  reviving  impaired  virility, 
also  fall  within  the  province  of  these  professors  of  magic, 
and  form  by  no  means  the  least  lucrative  part  of  their 
trade.  It  is  to  such  men  that  a  wife  always  applies  when 
she  wishes  to  reclaim  her  faithless  husband  or  to  prevent 
him  from  becoming  so.  Debauched  gallants  and  lewd 
women  also  seek  the  help  of  love  philtres  to  seduce  or 
captivate  the  object  of  their  passion. 

I  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  find  in  the  book  which 
I  am  now  describing  mention  made  of  incubi.  But  these 
demons  of  India  are  much  more  mischievous  than  those  of 
whom  the  Jesuit  Delrio  speaks  in  his  Disquisitiones  Magicae. 
By  the  violence  and  persistence  of  their  embraces  they  so 
tire  out  the  women  whom  they  visit  at  night  under  the 
form  of  a  dog,  a  tiger,  or  some  other  animal,  that  the  un- 
fortunate creatures  die  of  sheer  lassitude  and  exhaustion. 

Our  author  speaks  at  great  length  of  the  means  best 
suited  to  enchant  weapons.  The  effects  which  weapons  so 
treated  have  the  virtue  of  producing  are  in  no  way  inferior 
to  those  caused  by  the  famous  Durandal  (Orlando's  enchanted 
sword)  and  by  the  spear  of  Argail,  which  in  ancient  times 

magicians  are  powerless  against  Governments — an  ingenuous  admission 
of  force  majeure  ! — Ed. 


HOW  MAGIC  IS  ACQUIRED  387 

routed  so  many  miscreants.  The  Hindu  gods  and  giants  in 
their  wars  against  eacli  other  used  no  other  weapons  but 
these.  Is  there  anything,  for  instance,  that  can  be  com- 
pared with  the  Arrow  of  Brahma  or  the  Arrow  of  the  Serpent 
Capella  '?  The  former  is  never  shot  without  causing  the 
destruction  of  a  whole  army  ;  and  the  latter,  launched  in 
the  midst  of  enemies,  has  the  effect  of  causing  them  to  drop 
down  in  a  state  of  lethargy — an  effect  which,  as  one  may 
well  suppose,  made  singularly  short  work  of  those  who 
were  subjected  to  it. 

There  is  not  a  secret  of  magic  which  this  book  does  not 
teach  us.  It  puts  us  in  possession  of  the  means  of  acquir- 
ing wealth  and  honour  ;  of  rendering  barren  women  fruit- 
ful ;  of  discovering,  by  merely  rubbing  the  hands  and  eyes 
with  some  enchanted  mixtures,  treasures  buried  in  the 
ground  or  hidden  elsewhere  ;  of  acquiring  invulnerability 
and  the  most  formidable  powers  in  war  by  means  of  bones 
carried  on  the  person.  Strange  to  say,  the  only  thing 
which  it  does  not  reveal  is  the  means  of  rendering  oneself 
immortal. 

It  is  not  by  entering  into  compact  with  the  devil,  as  our 
magicians  were  erstwhile  supposed  to  have  done,  that  the 
magicians  of  India  obtained  the  power  of  performing  so 
many  prodigies.  These  latter,  indeed,  are  not  the  kind  of 
people  to  run  the  risk  of  having  their  necks  twisted  in  evil 
company  of  this  sort.  It  is  quite  sufficient  for  a  Hindu  to 
become  an  expert  in  the  black  art  if  he  receives  a  few 
private  lessons  from  the  guru,  or  master,  of  the  adepts. 
It  is  this  guru  who  guides  him  in  the  right  way,  who  confers 
his  powers  upon  him,  and  to  whom  he  owes  obedience. 
Should  a  god,  a  demon,  or  a  spirit  be  so  stubborn  as  to 
disregard  the  orders  of  the  newly  initiated  disciple,  the 
latter  has  simply  to  repeat  his  injunction  in  the  name  and 
from  the  feet  of  his  guru. 

Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva  themselves  are  subject  to  the 
commands  of  the  magicians.  There  are,  however,  certain 
divinities  who  are  invoked  by  preference.  Among  these  the 
planets  occupy  the  first  place.  The  term  graha,  by  which 
they  are  designated,  signifies  the  act  of  seizing,  that  is,  of 
laying  hold  of  those  whom  they  are  enjoined  by  magical 
enchantments    to   torment.     The    next    in   order   are    the 


m  MAGIC  MANTRAMS 

hhoothams.  or  the  elements,  each  of  which  contains  a  de- 
structive principle.  Then  come  the  pretas  or  spirits  of  dead 
bodies,  the  pisachas  or  pisasus — a  term  by  which  the 
Native  Christians  designate  the  devil  ;  the  female  deities 
called  sakti  ;  Kali,  the  goddess  of  destruction  ;  and  Marana 
Devi,  the  goddess  of  death. 

In  order  to  call  all  these  spirits  into  action,  the  magician 
has  recourse  to  various  mysterious  ceremonies,  mantrams 
and  sacrifices.  The  sacrifices  are  the  same  as  those  already 
described,  with  a  few  trifling  differences.  For  instance,  the 
magician  must  be  stark  naked  while  he  offers  up  these 
sacrifices  to  Lakshmi,  the  wife  of  Vishnu  ;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  must  be  decorously  clad  when  such  sacrifices 
are  offered  to  Rama. 

The  flowers  offered  to  the  god  invoked  must  be  red  ;  and, 
when  the  object  is  to  produce  the  death  of  any  person,  the 
boiled  rice  offered  up  must  be  stained  with  blood,  for  which 
purpose  a  human  victim,  a  young  girl  for  choice,  is  some- 
times slain  1. 

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  grand  virtue  of  man- 
trams  ;  but  it  is  especially  in  connexion  with  magic  that 
they  are  most  effective.  Mantrams  have  such  an  influence 
over  the  gods,  even  of  the  very  first  rank,  that  they  are 
quite  unable  to  resist  doing,  either  in  the  heavens,  or  in 
the  air,  or  on  earth,  all  that  the  magician  requires  of 
them. 

Among  the  said  mantrams  there  are  some,  called  the 
fundamentals,  whose  effects  are  decisive  and  irresistible. 
They  are  composed  of  various  strange  monosyllables,  harsh 
of  sound  and  difficult  to  pronounce  ;  such  as  h'hom,  h'rhum, 
sh'hrum,  sho'rhim,  ramaya,  namaha.  This  last  word  signi- 
fies '  respectful  greeting.' 

The  magician  sometimes  repeats  these  mantrams  in  a 
humble  and  supplicatory  manner,  loading  with  praises  the 
god  whom  he  invokes  ;  but  he  quickly  resumes  his  im- 
perious tone,  and  exclaims  as  though  in  a  vehement  rage, 
'  Grasp  it  !  Grasp  it  !  '  or  *  Begone  !  Begone  !  If  thou  art 
willing  to  do  what  I  ask  of  thee,  well  and  good  ;  if  not, 
I  command  thee  to  do  it  in  the  name  of  such  and  such 
a  god,  in  the  name  of  the  feet  of  my  guru  !  '  Whereupon 
1  Such  a  thing  is  unheard  of  nowadays. — Ed. 


A  MAGICIAN'S  STOCK-IN-TRADE  389 

the  god  cannot  do  otherwise  than  comply  with  the  magician's 
demands  without  a  murmur  ! 

From  the  haughty  and  indecorous  manner  in  which  the 
Hindu  magicians  treat  their  good-natured  deities,  it  may 
be  judged  that  they  are  not  the  men  to  allow  themselves  to 
be  frightened  as  easily  as  were  the  poor  witches  of  Horace, 
Canidia  and  Sagana,  who,  it  will  be  remembered,  were  put 
to  terrified  flight  by  a  commonplace  sound,  resembling  the 
bursting  of  an  inflated  bladder,  made  by  the  God  of  the 
Gardens,  who  had  been  troubled  by  the  enchantments 
which  they  came  to  perform  every  night  in  the  place 
entrusted  to  his  keeping. 

It  is  impossible  to  enumerate  the  various  drugs,  in- 
gredients, and  utensils  that  go  to  make  up  the  stock-in- 
trade  of  an  Indian  magician.  There  are  certain  incanta- 
tions, in  the  performance  of  which  it  is  necessary  to  use 
the  bones  of  sixty -four  different  animals — neither  more  nor 
less — and  amongst  them  may  be  mentioned  those  of  a  man 
born  on  a  Sunday  which  happens  to  be  new-moon  day,  of 
a  woman  born  on  a  Friday,  the  feet-bones  of  a  Pariah, 
of  a  cobbler,  of  a  Mahomedan,  and  of  a  European.  If  all 
these  bones  are  mixed  together,  enchanted  by  mantrams, 
consecrated  by  sacrifices,  and  then  buried  in  the  house, 
or  at  the  threshold  of  an  enemy  on  a  night  that  the  stars 
show  to  be  propitious,  they  will  infallibly  cause  the  enemy's 
death. 

In  the  same  way,  should  the  magician,  in  the  silence  of 
the  night,  bury  these  bones  at  the  four  cardinal  points  of 
a  hostile  camp,  and  then,  retiring  to  some  distance,  repeat 
seven  times  the  mantram  of  defeat,  the  result  will  be  that 
within  seven  days  the  whole  encamped  army  will  either 
disperse  of  itself  or  perish  to  the  last  man. 

Thirty- two  weapons,  consecrated  by  the  sacrifice  of  a 
human  victim,  will  spread  such  dismay  among  a  besieging 
army  that  a  hundred  of  their  opponents  will  appear  to  it 
as  a  thousand. 

Sometimes  a  quantity  of  mud  collected  from  sixty-four 
filthy  places  is  kneaded  together  with  hair,  parings  of 
nails,  bits  of  leather,  &c,  and  is  then  moulded  into  small 
figures,  on  the  breasts  of  which  the  name  of  one's  enemy 
is  written.     Certain  words  and  mantrams  are  then  repeated 


390    MUTILATING  REPRESENTATIVE  FIGURES 

over  these  figures,  which  are  also  consecrated  by  sacrifices. 
No  sooner  is  this  done  than  the  grahas  or  planets  take 
possession  of  the  person  against  whom  such  incantations 
are  directed,  and  afflict  him  with  a  thousand  ills. 

These  figures  are  sometimes  pierced  through  and  through 
with  an  awl,  or  are  mutilated  in  various  ways  with  the 
intention  of  killing  or  mutilating  in  the  same  manner  the 
person  who  is  the  object  of  vengeance  \ 

Sixty-four  roots  of  different  kinds  of  noxious  plants  are 
known  among  the  magicians,  and,  when  duly  prepared 
with  mantrams  and  sacrifices,  become  powerful  weapons  for 
covertly  dealing  fatal  blows  to  obnoxious  persons. 

It  must  here  be  remarked  that  the  profession  of  a  magician 
is  not  altogether  free  from  danger.  If  the  Hindus  them- 
selves are  revengeful,  their  gods  are  also  passably  so. 
Again,  the  gods  do  not  obey  without  some  feeling  of  anger 
the  orders  given  to  them  by  a  miserable  mortal,  and  they 
sometimes  punish  in  a  very  cruel  and  brutal  manner  the 

!  At  all  times  and  in  all  places  the  same  ridiculous  and  barbarous 
means  have  sufficed  to  excite  the  imagination  of  the  vulgar,  the  ignorant, 
and  the  superstitious.  They  were,  are,  and  will  be  the  same  throughout 
the  world.     Thus  Medea,  in  Ovid  : — 

Per  tumulos  errat,  passis  discincta  capillis, 

Certaque  de  tepidis  colligit  ossa  rogis  ; 
Devovet  absentes,  simulacraque  cerea  fingit, 
Et  miserum  tenues  in  iecur  urget  acus. 
The  two  witches  of  Horace  who  have  just  been  mentioned  also  had, 
among  their  other  magical  apparatus,  two  figures,  one  of  wool  and  the 
other  of  wax  : 

Maior 

Lanea,  quae  poenis  compesceret  inferiorem : 
Cerea  suppliciter  stabat,  servilibus,  utque 
lam  peritura,  modis. 
The  fanatical  Leaguers  of  France  in  the  sixteenth  century  carried  their 
superstitious  practices  to  such  extremes  that  they  caused  wax  figures 
to  be  made  representing  Henry  III  and  the  King  of  Navarre.  They 
pierced  the  different  parts  of  these  figures  with  thorns  for  the  space  of 
forty  days,  and  on  the  fortieth  day  they  struck  them  about  the  region  of 
the  heart,  believing  that  they  would  thereby  cause  the  death  of  the 
princes  whom  the  images  represented.  In  the  year  1751  a  pretended 
sorcerer  named  Trois-rchelles,  who  was  executed  on  the  Place  de  Greve, 
declared  during  his  examination  that  there  existed  in  France  three 
hundred  thousand  persons  practising  the  same  profession  as  himself. 
Possibly  he  exaggerated,  but  at  all  events,  if  historians  eliminated  from 
their  records  all  the  follies  of  men,  they  would  certainly  not  have  much 
left  to  relate. — Dubois. 


RIVALRY  AMONGST  MAGICIANS  391 

person  who  ventures  to  command  them.  Woe  to  him  who 
commits  the  smallest  error,  or  makes  the  slightest  omission 
in  the  innumerable  ceremonies  that  are  obligatory  under 
such  circumstances  !  He  is  immediately  crushed  with  the 
full  weight  of  the  mischief  which  he  was  preparing  for 
others. 

Then  again,  a  magician  is  in  constant  danger  from  rivals 
who  exercise  the  same  trade,  especially  when  his  rivals 
are  as  skilful  as  himself,  or  maybe  more  so.  For  these 
may  succeed  in  counteracting  his  charms,  and  in  bringing 
upon  his  own  head,  or  upon  the  heads  of  his  clients,  the 
whole  weight  of  his  evil  machinations.  Accordingly  there 
exists,  in  appearance  or  in  reality,  an  inveterate  mutual 
hatred  amongst  this  crowd  of  men  who  pretend  to  be  the 
interpreters  of  destiny.  Occasionally  they  are  seen  to  bid 
defiance  to  each  other,  and  to  enter  the  lists  in  the  presence 
of  witnesses  and  arbitrators,  whom  they  call  upon  to  decide 
which  of  the  two  is  the  more  skilful  in  his  art.  The  test 
consists,  for  example,  in  having  to  lift  from  the  ground 
a  spell-bound  object,  such  as  a  piece  of  straw,  a  wand,  or 
a  piece  of  mone}^.  The  two  antagonists,  placing  themselves 
at  either  side  of  and  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  afore- 
said object,  pretend  to  approach  it  ;  but  the  mantrams 
which  they  utter,  or  the  enchanted  ashes  which  they  sprinkle 
upon  each  other,  have  the  effect  of  arresting  their  course. 
An  invisible  and  irresistible  force  seems  to  drive  them  back  ; 
they  try  again  and  again  to  advance  towards  the  object, 
but  as  often  have  to  draw  back.  They  redouble  their 
efforts  ;  convulsive  movements  agitate  them  ;  the  sweat 
pours  from  them  ;  they  spit  blood.  At  last  one  of  them 
succeeds  in  getting  hold  of  the  spell-bound  object,  and  he 
is  proclaimed  the  victor. 

Sometimes,  again,  one  of  the  combatants  is  thrown 
violently  upon  the  ground  by  the  force  of  the  mantrams  of 
his  antagonist.  He  then  rolls  about  like  one  possessed, 
and  finally  remains  for  some  time  motionless,  feigning  un- 
consciousness. At  last,  however,  he  recovers  the  use  of  his 
senses,  gets  up  apparently  much  fatigued  and  exhausted, 
and  retires  covered  with  shame  and  confusion.  A  sickness 
of  several  days'  duration  is  supposed  to  be  the  immediate 
result  of  his  strenuous  yet  futile  efforts. 


392  PRECONCERTED  EFFECTS 

It  will,  doubtless,  be  easily  guessed  that  these  pitiable 
fooleries  are  the  outcome  of  a  premeditated  understanding 
between  the  shameless  charlatans  who  practise  them.  But 
the  multitude  who  pay  for  being  treated  to  a  spectacle  of 
this  kind,  and  who  look  upon  the  actors  with  fear  and 
admiration,  are  fully  persuaded  that  all  their  contortions 
are  due  to  supernatural  causes.  It  must,  however,  be 
admitted  that  these  men  go  through  their  parts  with  really 
admirable  skill  and  precision.  On  many  an  occasion  they 
have  been  seen  to  perform  sleight-of-hand  tricks  with  such 
rare  skill  as  to  astonish  persons  of  a  much  less  credulous 
turn  of  mind  than  the  Hindus  *. 

CHAPTER  XXII 

The  Poetry  of  the  Hindus. 

From  the  very  earliest  times  poetry  has  been  very  much 
in  vogue  with  the  Hindus,  and  it  is  still  held  in  high  regard 
by  them.  One  is  even  inclined  to  believe  that  at  first  they 
had  no  other  written  language.  Not  one  of  their  original 
ancient  books  is  written  in  prose,  or  in  the  vulgar  tongue — 
not  even  the  books  on  medicine,  which  are  said  to  be  very 
numerous  in  the  Sanskrit  language. 

We  may  naturally  infer  that  the  practice  of  writing  in 
a  style  and  idiom  beyond  the  comprehension  of  the  vulgar 
was  mainly  due  to  the  artful  precaution  of  the  Brahmins, 
who  found  in  it  a  sure  means  of  excluding  all  other  castes 
from  participating  in  a  knowledge  of  which  they  wished  to 
retain  a  monopoly. 

It  is  quite  certain  that  all  the  Hindu  books  in  prose  are 
of  modern  origin.  It  is  in  verse  that  the  eighteen  Puranas, 
and  other  similar  works,  have  been  translated  from  the 
Sanskrit  into  Tamil,  Telugu,  and  Canarese,  and,  I  think, 
into  all  the  other  vernaculars  of  India. 

1  The  magic  art  is  still  firmly  believed  in  throughout  India.  How- 
ever, the  rules  whereby  magical  powers  can  be  acquired  are  so  rigorous 
and  difficult,  and  the  consequences  of  any  violation  or  infringement  of 
them  supposed  to  be  so  dangerous  to  the  man  who  attempts  to  practise 
them,  that  only  a  very  few  ever  become  adepts.  In  all  parts  of  the 
country  men  are  to  be  seen  who  are  said  to  have  become  mad  on  account 
(if  some  violation  of  the  prescribed  ceremonies  for  the  acquisition  of  the 
black  art. — Ed. 


VERNACULAR  POETS  393 

Tamil  poetry  seems  to  have  been  chiefly  cultivated  by 
the  Sudras  ;  and  even  Pariahs  have  been  the  authors  of 
various  poems  in  that  language.  The  Tamil  poets,  how- 
ever, while  imitating  the  form  and  style  of  Sanskrit  poetry, 
have  added  so  many  rules  of  their  own  that  it  is  difficult 
to  excel  in  the  writing  of  it. 

Telugu  and  Canarese  poetry  is  chiefly  the  work  of  Brah- 
mins. 

Having  acquired  some  knowledge  of  the  most  important 
rules  of  Hindu  prosody,  which,  I  think,  are  the  same  in  all 
the  vernaculars  of  the  country,  Sanskrit  not  excepted,  I  will 
try  to  describe  them  briefly  here.  The  subject  seems  to 
me  likely  to  interest  philologists.  I  will,  therefore,  describe  : 
(1)  the  different  kinds  of  poetry  ;  (2)  the  long  and  short 
quantities  ;  (3)  the  different  feet  ;  (4)  the  different  metres  ; 
(5)  the  method  of  rhyme  ;  (6)  the  composition  of  verses  ; 
(7)  the  style  of  their  poetry  generally. 

The  Different  Kinds  of  Poetry. 

There  are  five  kinds  of  poetry,  namely,  padam,  padyam, 
dwipada,  dandaka,  yakshakaram.  Some  add  to  these 
another  kind  under  the  name  of  padia,  but  as  this  is, 
properly  speaking,  poetical  prose,  it  is  not  generally  con- 
sidered as  belonging  to  the  province  of  poetry. 

The  padam  includes  not  only  the  odes  in  honour  of  gods, 
princes,  and  other  great  personages,  but  also  obscene  and 
amorous  ditties,  sprightly  dialogues  between  gods  and 
goddesses,  and  other  similar  compositions,  some  of  which 
are  called  sringaram  (ornament),  because  they  describe  the 
beauty  of  women  and  their  different  methods  of  adornment. 

The  erotic  songs  are  also  called  sittinbam  (pleasures  of 
the  will).  Of  this  sort  there  is  an  infinite  variety.  They 
are  sung,  for  the  most  part,  by  religious  mendicants  when 
they  go  from  house  to  house  asking  for  alms.  The  more 
coarse  and  indecent  they  are,  the  better  they  suit  the 
tastes  of  the  hearers,  whose  generosity  is  manifested  in 
proportion  to  the  enjoyment  derived  from  them. 

The  hymns  in  honour  of  the  gods  are  called  kirthanam 
(praise),  a  term  which  these  compositions  well  deserve  on 
account  of  the  high-flown  eulogies  with  which  they  are 
replete. 

o  :; 


394  DIFFERENT  KINDS  OF  POETRY 

The  word  padam  corresponds  likewise  to  our  strophe, 
stanza,  or  couplet. 

Pad  yam  includes  the  great  poems  composed  in  honour  of 
<^ods  and  heroes.  They  are  divided  into  stanzas.  There 
are  at  least  thirty  different  forms  of  these  stanzas,  which 
may  be  introduced  and  interspersed  in  the  course  of  the 
same  poem.  The  padyams  are  also  used  in  compositions 
dealing  with  moral  and  satirical  subjects.  The  Telugu  poet 
Vemana  and  the  Tamil  poet  Tiruvalluvar  excelled  in  these 
two  kinds  of  composition,  of  which  I  shall  speak  again  at 
the  end  of  the  present  chapter. 

The  species  of  poetry  called  dwipada  (two  feet)  is  not 
subject  to  very  strict  rules.  It  might  be  described  as  free 
improvisation,  and  is  used  in  the  recital  of  short  stories 
and  adventures. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  enter  into  details  about  the  other 
kinds  of  poetry  ;  it  is  easy  to  conjecture  what  they  are  like 
from  what  has  been  already  said. 

Long  and  Short  Quantities. 

Hindu  verses,  like  those  in  Greek  and  Latin,  are  formed 
of  feet,  composed  of  letters  long  or  short  in  quantity. 
From  these  long  and  short  feet  are  formed  hemistichs,  or 
lines  which,  combined  in  their  turn,  form  stanzas. 

I  have  remarked  that  the  feet  are  composed  of  letters, 
because  in  the  Indian  languages  there  are  no  such  things 
as  syllables.  Every  consonant  carries  its  own  vowel,  which 
is  incorporated  with  it.  In  several  languages  of  India  com- 
binations such  as  bra,  pla,  &c,  which  we  call  syllables,  are 
also  written  as  one  single  letter. 

The  short  letters  are  called  laghu-aksharam,  and  the  long 
ones  guru-aksharam,  in  allusion,  no  doubt,  to  the  slow  and 
solemn  gait  of  a  Hindu  guru.  Even  in  ordinary  writing 
they  seldom  fail  to  make  a  distinction  between  the  long  and 
short  letters  with  their  particular  marks.  This  is  scrupu- 
lously observed  in  pronunciation  ;  and  in  verse  it  is  quite 
indispensable. 

In  Hindu,  as  well  as  in  Greek  and  Latin  poetry,  a  long 
letter  is  equivalent  to  two  short,  and  two  long  to  four  short. 
Thus  the  word  mcitd,  composed  of  two  long  letters,  is  equiva- 
lent to  the  word  iruvadu,  composed  of  four  short  ones. 


QUESTIONING  A  BRAHMIN  395 

But  there  are  letters  which,  though  short  in  prose  writing 
and  in  ordinary  conversation,  become  long  in  verse  by  their 
position  ;  thus  the  initial  a  in  the  word  aksharam,  though 
short  generally,  becomes  long  in  versification,  being  placed 
before  two  consonants,  Jc  and  sha.  In  the  same  manner 
the  letter  ka,  though  usually  short,  is  long  in  such  words  as 
karman,  Jcarnam,  &c,  on  account  of  the  two  consonants 
which  follow  it. 

As  I  wished  to  know  whether  this  rule  admitted  of  that 
poetical  licence  of  which  we  find  some  examples  in  the 
writings  of  the  best  Latin  poets — that  is,  whether  a  final 
short  letter  could  become  long  by  position  when  the  word 
which  follows  it  begins  with  two  consonants — I  questioned 
a  Brahmin  whom  I  had  asked  to  explain  to  me  the  structure 
of  Hindu  versification.  He  had  already  seemed  somewhat 
surprised  at  the  facility  with  which  I  understood  his  ex- 
planations, and  I  noticed  that  his  professorial  tone  and 
arrogant  self-conceit  were  gradually  diminishing.  But 
when  I  asked  this  question  he  stood  dumbfounded,  and 
for  a  while  stared  me  in  the  face  without  uttering  a  word. 
At  length  he  answered  :  '  I  wonder  how  such  a  thought 
could  have  occurred  to  you,  knowing  as  you  do  so  little 
as  yet  even  of  the  rudimentary  elements  of  our  poetry.' 
I  told  him  that  the  different  kinds  of  poetry  which  were 
studied  in  my  own  country  bore  many  resemblances  to 
the  poetry  of  India,  and  that  the  knowledge  I  had  pre- 
viously derived  from  the  former  had  led  me  to  ask  this 
particular  question.  But  his  astonishment,  instead  of 
decreasing,  grew  still  greater.  He  found  it  very  difficult 
to  understand  how  such  sublime  things  could  ever  have 
entered  the  minds  of  foreigners,  and  how  poets  could  be 
found  elsewhere  than  in  India.  This  absurd  prejudice  on 
his  part  easily  impressed  him  with  the  idea  that  I  was 
a  person  of  wonderful  mental  penetration.  One  advantage 
which  resulted  from  our  conversation  was  that  in  future 
his  conduct  towards  me  became  much  more  respectful. 

As  in  Latin,  the  last  letter  or  vowel  of  a  Hindu  verse 
may  be  of  any  quantity  at  pleasure  ;  but  in  such  cases  the 
distinction  must  always  be  marked  in  accentuation. 

In  an  idolatrous  country  everything  necessarily  tends 
towards  superstition.     The  poets  of  India,  therefore,  hold 


306  SUPERSTITION  IN  POETRY 

some  letters  to  be  of  good  and  others  of  ill  omen.  The 
ambrosial  letters  (amritam)  come  under  the  head  of  the 
former,  while  the  poisonous  letters  (visham)  belong  to  the 
latter  class.  This  distinction,  however,  is  not  observed  in 
the  poems  in  praise  of  the  gods,  who  are  supposed  to  be 
beyond  such  influences.  But  in  verses  which  concern 
simple  mortals  the  case  is  very  different.  Particular  care 
must  be  taken  never  to  begin  any  verse  addressed  to  them 
with  a  visham  or  unlucky  letter.  In  the  Telugu  and 
Canarese  languages,  the  letters  ke,  ki,  pe,  pi,  te,  ti,  &c., 
are  of  this  number,  because  these  letters  when  written 
have  the  point  turned  downwards.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  letters  ko,  po,  to,  &c,  are  considered  to  be  lucky  letters 
(amritam),  because  they  have  the  point  turned  upwards. 

The  Feet  in  Verse. 

The  feet  are  called  ganams,  and  there  are  two  kinds,  the 

simple  ganams  and  the  upaganams.     The  first  are  eight  in 

number,  and  are  expressed  by  the  word  mahajasanarayala , 

made  up  of  the  first  letters  of  the  following  : — (1)  maganam, 

(2)  haganam,  (3)  jaganam,  (4)  saganam,  (5)  naganam,  (6) 
raganam,  (7)  yaganam,  (8)  laganam. 

The  first  consists  of  three  longs  ;  the  second,  of  a  long 
and  two  shorts  ;  the  third,  of  a  long  between  two  shorts  ; 
the  fourth,  of  two  shorts  and  a  long  ;  the  fifth,  of  three 
shorts ;  the  sixth,  of  a  short  between  two  longs  ;  the  seventh, 
of  a  short  and  two  longs  ;  the  eighth,  of  two  longs  and 
a  short. 

There  are  eight  upaganams  expressed  by  the  word 
gavahana-gamanala,  made  up  likewise  by  the  combination 
of  the  first  letters  of  the  following  words  : — (1)  gaganam, 
composed  of  two  longs  ;   (2)  vaganam,  of  a  short  and  a  long  ; 

(3)  haganam,  of  a  long  and  a  short  ;  (4)  nalam,  of  four 
shorts  ;  (5)  galam,  of  two  shorts  ;  (6)  malagam,  of  three 
longs  and  a  short  ;  (7)  nagam,  of  three  shorts  and  a  long  ; 
(8)  latam,  of  two  longs  and  two  shorts. 

The  Hindu  poets  discern  a  certain  relation  between  the 
ganams  and  the  upaganams,  according  to  the  effects  which 
they  are  severally  supposed  to  possess  the  faculty  of  pro- 
ducing. They  are  all  under  the  protection  of  different 
planets  ;  and  according  to  the  good  or  evil  dispositions  of 


DIFFERENT  METRES  809 

these  latter,  they  bring  good  or  ill  luck.  Those  under  the 
auspices  of  the  moon,  which  in  India  is  the  symbol  of 
comfort  and  coolness,  are  favourable  ;  but  the  case  is  just 
the  reverse  with  those  governed  by  the  sun.  It  therefore 
follows  that  a  piece  of  poetry  must  never  begin  with  a 
malign  ganam.  The  Hindu  prosodies  are  very  diffuse  and 
wearisome  on  this  subject. 

The  Different  Metres. 

The  lines,  properly  speaking,  of  verses  are  formed  of 
ganams  and  upaganams,  and  are  called  padams  or  chara- 
nams,  words  which  signify  literally  feet.  They  may  be 
compared  to  the  hemistichs  or  lines  of  pentameter  verse 
in  Latin,  or  to  the  lines  of  ten  and  twelve  syllables  in 
French  and  English.  The  variety  of  padams  depends  on 
the  number  of  ganams  they  contain  ;  some  having  three, 
five,  seven,  or  more. 

In  certain  padams  any  of  the  ganams  may  be  used,  and 
these  latter  may  be  varied  at  pleasure,  provided  the  re- 
quisite number  of  shorts  and  longs  is  preserved.  This 
variety,  however,  must  be  managed  with  a  certain  amount 
of  taste  and  be  free  from  all  affectation  ;  when  it  is  done 
with  discretion,  it  enhances  the  beauty  and  force  of  the 
verses,  which  otherwise  would  become  too  monotonous. 
It  is  just  the  same  with  Latin  hexameters,  which  would  be 
wanting  in  grace  if  the  poet  were  to  put  either  all  dactyls 
or  all  spondees  in  the  first  four  feet. 

The  Hindu  poets,  however,  cannot  indulge  in  this  inter- 
change of  ganams  in  all  their  compositions.  There  are 
cases  in  which  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  them  to  use 
only  such  as  the  rules  prescribe. 

The  various  kinds  of  lines  in  Hindu  verse  have  all  special 
names.  One  is  called  the  elephant,  another  the  tiger, 
another  the  cobra  ;  and  so  forth. 

Rhyme. 
There  are  two  kinds  of  rhymes  in  Hindu  poetry.  One 
occurs  at  the  beginning  of  the  line,  and  is  called  yeti  or 
vadi.  Thus,  where  one  line  begins  with  the  word  Uirti 
and  the  other  with  kirtana,  hi  is  the  yeti.  The  other  kind 
of  rhyme  occurs  in  the  second  letter  or  syllable  of  the  line, 


398  HINDU  RHYMES 

and  is  called  prasam.  Thus,  in  two  lines,  one  beginning 
with  gopagni  and  the  other  with  dipantram,  pa  is  the 
prasam. 

For  the  yeti  rhyme  the  letters  ka,  kaha,  ksha,  ga,  gsha, 
the  simple  tsha,  and  the  aspirate  tshaha,  &c,  may  be 
used. 

For  the  prasam  rhyme  attention  is,  strictly  speaking, 
paid  only  to  the  consonant,  which  ought  to  be  absolutely 
the  same  ;  the  vowel  does  not  matter  so  much.  Thus  da, 
de,  di,  do,  du  all  rhyme  together.  These  kinds  of  rhymes, 
however,  are  not  considered  fine. 

Generally  speaking,  the  more  words  there  are  in  a  line 
having  the  yeti  and  the  prasam  alike,  the  more  beautiful 
they  appear  to  the  Hindus.  For  our  part  we  should  look 
upon  them  as  mere  childish  alliterations,  recalling  to  our 
minds  the  line  of  Ennius  so  often  in  the  mouths  of  school- 
boys : 

0  Tite  fcute  Tati  tibi  tanta,  tyranne,  tulisti  ! 

There  are  also  other  kinds  of  poetry,  which,  like  ours, 
have  their  rhyme  at  the  end  of  the  lines.  In  these  cases 
they  end  as  a  rule  with  the  same  consonant  and  sometimes 
with  the  same  word. 

Generally  speaking,  the  difficulties  of  rhyme  are  simply 
hopeless,  and  often  puzzle  Hindu  versifiers  themselves. 

Verses. 

With  the  padams,  or  lines,  arranged  symmetrically  with 
regard  to  quantity  and  rhyme,  are  formed  the  padyams, 
sometimes  called  slokams.  They  are,  properly  speaking, 
stanzas  or  couplets,  sometimes  regular,  sometimes  irregular. 

These  padyams  are  of  several  kinds,  and  each  has  its 
special  name. 

In  the  simple  kanda-padyam  certain  feet  only  can  be 
introduced,  in  the  same  way  as  in  Latin  hexameters,  in 
which  dactyls  and  spondees  only  are  used.  But  a  single 
ganam,  or  foot,  may  sometimes  comprise  a  whole  line, 
sucli  as  the  following  :   Devaki-Deviki-Kamsudu. 

The  limits  of  this  work  hardly  permit  me  to  enter  into 
more  minute  details  concerning  the  numerous  rules  to 
which   the   structure   and  arrangement    of   Hindu   poetry 


RICHNESS  OF  METAPHORS  399 

are  subject  ;  but  it  will  appear  from  what  has  been  already 
said  that  Hindu  versification  is  by  no  means  easy.  There 
are  nevertheless  a  great  many  people  of  all  castes  who 
dabble  in  rhymes,  and  amuse  themselves  by  reading  out 
publicly  and  ostentatiously  the  pieces  they  have  composed. 
In  India,  as  in  Europe,  poetasters  abound,  while  good  poets 
are  very  scarce.  The  Indian  languages,  however,  being 
very  rich  in  synonyms,  afford  a  great  advantage  to  the 
Hindu  poet. 

There  are  five  principal  authors  who  have  written  on  the 
subject  of  Hindu  prosody  ;  and  these  have  laid  down  fixed 
and  unalterable  laws  for  making  verses.  Their  collected 
works  are  called  Chandas.  The  Brahmin  who  taught  me 
was  guided  in  his  instructions  by  a  book  whose  author  had 
so  arranged  that  every  rule  was  comprised  in  a  verse  which 
served  at  once  the  double  purpose  of  an  example  of  the 
rule  as  well  as  the  rule  itself. 

Of  Taste  and  Style  in  Hindu  Poetry. 

The  predominating  features  of  Hindu  poetry  are  emphasis, 
affectation,  and  bombast.  Every  Hindu  poet  would  seem 
to  be  a  prototype  of  him  who,  in  Horace, 

Proicit  ampullas  et  sesquipedalia  verba, 

or  of  the  Clitarchus  compared  by  Longinus  to  a  man  who 
opens  his  mouth  wide  to  blow  through  a  tiny  flute.  The 
poetry  of  all  nations  has  its  peculiar  turns  of  expression, 
its  licences,  its  own  vocabulary,  &c,  which  render  it 
difficult  of  understanding  by  foreigners  ;  but  in  Hindu 
poetry  the  frequent  use  of  elliptical  phrases,  of  allegories, 
of  metaphors,  and  of  expressions  not  in  vogue  in  ordinary 
language,  renders  the  meaning  so  obscure  that  it  is  impos- 
sible to  understand  it  properly  unless  one  makes  a  special 
study  of  the  subject.  Even  a  thorough  knowledge  of 
Hindu  prose  works  is  of  no  avail. 

Were  Hindu  literature  better  known  to  us,  it  is  possible 
that  we  should  find  that  we  have  borrowed  from  it  the 
romantic  style  of  our  days,  which  some  find  so  beautiful 
and  others  so  silly.  If  the  Hindu  poet  has  occasion  to 
describe  any  particular  object,  he  seldom  omits  even  the 


400  PAINTING!  A  WORD-PICTURE 

minutest  details.     He  thinks  it  his  duty  to  present  it  to 
the  view  in  all  its  phases. 

S'il  rencontre  un  palais,  il  m'en  depeint  la  face ; 
II  me  promene  aprfea  de  terrasse  en  terrasse : 
Ici  s'offre  un  perron  ;   la  rt-gne  un  corridor  ; 
La  ce  balcon  s'enferme  en  un  balustre  d'or, 
II  compte  des  plafonds  les  ronds  et  les  ovales. 

If  a  Hindu  poet  has  a  beautiful  woman  for  his  theme,  he 
will  certainly  never  be  content  with  merely  stating,  in 
a  more  or  less  flowery  style,  that  she  is  endowed  with  all 
the  charms  of  body  and  mind.  Like  the  painter  who 
reproduces  on  the  canvas  one  feature  after  another  of  his 
model,  so  does  our  Hindu  poet  pass  in  review  a  capite 
usque  ad  calcem  the  various  charms  of  the  beauty  he  is 
describing.  The  colour  of  her  skin,  the  expression  of  her 
face  and  eyes,  in  fine,  everything  connected  with  her,  even 
her  most  secret  charms,  appear  to  him  objects  worthy  of 
his  praise.  The  finishing  strokes  of  his  brush  are  generally 
reserved  for  the  touching  up  of  all  the  moral  and  intel- 
lectual qualities  which  his  imagination  can  impart  to  the 
fair  subject  of  his  verses.  It  may  be  easily  imagined  that 
these  descriptive  details,  overloaded  as  they  are  with  a  vast 
display  of  epithets,  become  exceedingly  diffuse  ;  but  we 
cannot  deny  to  them  at  least  the  credit  of  exactitude. 

Hindu  poetry  at  first  sounds  harsh  and  inharmonious  to 
a  European  ear,  by  reason  of  the  frequent  aspirations  with 
which  many  of  the  letters  at  the  beginning,  in  the  middle, 
and  at  the  end  of  the  words  are  pronounced  ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  this  laboured  pronunciation  gives  to  the  recital 
a  stately  and  sonorous  tone,  which  seldom  fails  to  please 
one  who  has  become  used  to  it.  At  the  same  time  it  must 
be  confessed  that  foreigners,  and  even  natives  who  have 
not  been  well  trained  in  it  from  infancy,  find  almost  in- 
surmountable difficulties  in  mastering  this  method  of  pro- 
nunciation. 

The  short  pieces  that  I  have  seen  have  appeared  to  me 
generally  weak  and  uninspiring.  I  know  not  whether  the 
Hindus  have  any  real  dramatic  works.  I  only  know  of 
a  few  productions  of  this  nature,  and  these  are  mixed  up 
with  songs  and  dialogues.  The  Dasa-avatara.  or  the  ten 
incarnations  of  Vishnu,  is  among  the  number.     But  I  am 


HINDU   EPICS  401 

not  in  a  position  to  give  any  particulars  as  to  their  merit, 
or  even  of  their  contents,  seeing  that  I  have  never  taken 
the  trouble  to  read  any  of  them. 

More  fortunate  than  the  French,  who  are  never  weary 
of  repeating  that  no  epic  poem  exists  in  their  literature, 
the  Hindus  boast  of  a  great  number.  The  two  most 
celebrated  are  the  Ramayana  and  the  Bhagavata.  Both 
are  of  inordinate  length.  The  former  recounts  the  deeds 
and  exploits  of  Vishnu  under  the  incarnation  of  Rama  ; 
while  the  latter  relates  the  adventures  of  Vishnu  meta- 
morphosed in  the  form  of  Krishna.  Their  authors  have 
introduced  into  them  the  whole  idolatrous  system  of  the 
country — a  system  on  which  they  are  often  at  variance 
among  themselves.  It  may  be  easily  understood  that  the 
'  unities  '  prescribed  by  Aristotle  have  not  been  observed  in 
these  epics.  The  Bhagavata  takes  up  its  hero  even  before 
his  birth,  and  does  not  quit  him  till  after  he  is  dead. 

The  fertile  imagination  of  the  ancient  Greeks  conceived 
nothing  that  can  be  compared  with  the  incredible  powers 
and  wonderful  achievements  of  the  Hindu  heroes,  whose 
exploits  are  celebrated  in  these  books.  Even  the  colossal 
Enceladus  and  the  giant  Briareus,  with  his  fifty  heads  and 
his  hundred  hands,  were  but  pigmies  compared  with  the 
wonderful  giants  who,  according  to  the  Ramayana,  some- 
times fought  for  Rama  and  sometimes  against  him. 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

Brahmin  Philosophy. — The  Six  Sects  called  Shan  Mata. — The  Doctrine 
of  the  Buddhists. 

I  have  previously  shown  (in  Part  II,  Chapter  XI)  that 
the  ancient  Brahmins  recognized  one  Supreme  and  Almighty 
Being,  possessing  all  the  attributes  that  reasonable  man 
should  ascribe  to  such  a  Being.  It  is  impossible  to  believe 
that  these  sages,  being  thus  impressed  with  the  idea  of  so 
perfect  a  Godhead,  could  have  countenanced  the  absurdities 
of  polytheism  and  idolatry.  It  was  their  successors  who 
adopted  these  absurdities,  little  by  little,  until  they  led  the 
nation,  whose  oracles  they  were,  into  all  the  extravagant 
doctrines  in  which  they  are  now  involved.     It  must  never- 


402  TWO  BRAHMIN  £ECTS 

theless  be  acknowledged  that  the  speculative  theories  in 
which  these  ancient  philosophers  indulged  in  the  first 
instance,  and  of  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  later 
on,  were  calculated  to  corrupt  this  pure  conception  of  the 
Deity  and  of  the  worship  due  to  Him.  Indeed,  it  was  not 
long  before  divided  opinions  arose  regarding  the  nature  of 
God  and  the  creation  of  the  Universe.  Two  principal  sects 
were  gradually  developed,  each  of  which  possesses  up  to 
the  present  day  numerous  adherents  among  the  modern 
Brahmins  l.  The  first  is  called  the  Dwaita  (twofold)  sect, 
whose  adherents  recognize  the  existence  of  two  beings, 
namely,  God  and  Matter,  which  He  created  and  which  is 
one  with  Him.  The  other  sect,  called  Adwaita  (not  two- 
fold), comprises  those  who  acknowledge  but  one  Being, 
one  Substance,  one  God.  It  has  a  more  numerous  following 
than  the  other,  and  includes  in  its  ranks  the  majority  of 
those  Brahmins  who  profess  to  be  exceptionally  learned. 
Its  adepts  designate  the  leading  principles  of  their  doctrine 
by  the  technical  words  Abhavena  Bhavam  Nasti,  meaning 
de  nihilo  nihil  fit  (from  nothing  nothing  is  made).  They 
maintain  that  Creation  is  an  impossibility,  and  at  the  same 
time  they  hold  that  pre-existing  and  eternal  Matter  is 
absolutely  chimerical.  From  these  premises  they  conclude 
that  all  that  we  call  the  universe,  including  all  the  various 
phenomena  which  we  see  to  be  comprised  within  it,  has  no 
real  existence  at  all,  but  is  merely  the  result  of  illusion, 
which  is  known  among  them  as  Maya.  From  the  large 
number  of  stories  which  they  have  invented  for  the  purpose 
of  illustrating  this  doctrine  I  have  selected  the  following  : 

1  There  are,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  three  sects.  The  first  is  that  of 
Adwaita,  or  non-dualism.  '  The  Universe  exists,  but  merely  as  a  form 
of  the  one  eternal  essence.  All  animate  and  inanimate  things  are  but 
parts  of  the  Deity,  and  have  no  real  existence  of  their  own.'  Then 
comes  the  Dwaita  doctrine,  or  dualism,  which  holds  that '  God  is  supreme, 
yet  essentially  different  from  the  human  soul  and  from  the  material 
world,  both  of  which  have  a  real  and  eternally  distinct  existence.'  A 
third  and  important  section  hold  the  doctrine  of  Yisishtadwaita,  or 
doctrine  of  unity  with  attributes.  This  doctrine  is  like  that  of  Adwaita, 
holding  that  the  Deity  and  the  Universe  are  one,  but  it  goes  further  in 
holding  that  the  Deity  is  not  void  of  form  or  quality  ;  it  regards  Him 
as  '  being  endowed  with  all  good  qualities  and  a  twofold  form  :  the 
Supreme  Spirit,  Paramatma  or  Cause,  and  the  gross  one,  the  effect,  the 
Universe  or  Matter.' — Ed. 


'MAYA,'  OR  ILLUSION  403 

'  A  certain  man,  in  a  dream,  imagined  that  he  had  been 
crowned  king  of  a  certain  country  with  great  pomp  and 
circumstance.  The  next  morning,  on  leaving  his  house, 
he  met  a  traveller,  who  gave  him  a  detailed  account  of 
festivities  and  ceremonies  that  had  actually  taken  place 
on  the  occasion  of  the  coronation  of  the  king  of  the  same 
country,  and  of  which  he  was  himself  an  eye-witness. 
The  incidents  related  by  the  latter  agreed  in  all  particulars 
with  what  the  former  had  dreamed.  Illusion,  Maya,  was 
equally  prevalent  in  both  cases  ;  and  there  was  no  more 
reality  in  what  the  one  man  had  seen  than  in  what  the 
other  man  had  dreamed.  In  a  word,  things  that  we  take 
for  realities  are  nothing  but  illusions  emanating  from  the 
Deity,  who  is  the  sole  Being  with  an  actual  existence. 
Our  senses  deceive  us  in  presenting  to  us  objects  which  do 
not  really  exist.  These  objects  indeed  are  nothing  but 
appearances  or  modifications  of  the  Deity  ;  that  is  to  say, 
there  is  nothing  real  about  them.' 

I  do  not  know  whether  these  would-be  philosophers 
deduce  from  this  pernicious  doctrine  all  the  consequences 
which  naturally  result  from  it,  and  look  upon  God  as  the 
immediate  author  of  all  the  evil  as  well  as  all  the  good 
that  takes  place  on  the  earth.  Several  of  them,  at  any 
rate,  are  not  ashamed  to  express  this  opinion.  The  Brah- 
mins with  whom  I  have  discussed  the  subject  have  candidly 
confessed  to  me  that,  in  their  opinion,  neither  good  nor  evil 
exists  ;  that,  in  fact,  all  crimes,  even  parricide,  adultery, 
fraud,  and  perjury,  are  but  acts  incited  by  the  divine 
power  ;  or  rather,  that  these  acts  are  imaginative  and  are 
simply  the  strange  result  of  Maya,  a  delusion  which  deceives 
us  and  causes  us  to  take  the  shadow  for  the  reality  \ 

The  doctrine  of  Dwaita  admits  of  two  actual  substances 
— God,  and  Matter  created  by  God,  with  which  He  is 
inseparably  united.  God,  according  to  this  doctrine,  is 
omnipresent.  He  pervades  all  Matter  and  incorporates 
Himself,  so  to  speak,  with  it.  He  is  present  in  every 
animate  and  inanimate  thing.  He  does  not,  however, 
undergo  the  least  change  or  the  least  modification  by  such 

1  The  Abbe's  opinion  of  the  Adwaita  doctrine  is  not  supported  by 
modern  authorities,  such  as  Professor  Beussen  and  Professor  Max  Miiller, 
who  have  written  of  it  in  the  highest  terms  of  praise. — Ed. 


4n4  THE   DWATTA   DOCTRIXK 

coexistence,  whatever  may  be  the  badness  and  imper- 
fection of  the  things  with  which  He  is  united.  In  support 
of  this  last  contention,  the  adherents  of  the  doctrine  of 
Dwaita  cite,  for  the  purpose  of  comparison,  fire  and  the 
rays  of  the  sun.  They  say  that  fire  can  be  incorporated 
in  every  substance,  pure  and  impure,  yet  it  never  loses 
any  of  its  own  purity  ;  so  also  with  the  rays  of  the  sun, 
which  are  never  polluted  even  when  penetrating  heaps  of 
filth  and  mud. 

According  to  these  sectarians  our  souls  emanate  from 
God  and  form  part  of  Him  ;  just  as  light  emanates  from 
the  sun,  which  illuminates  the  whole  world  with  an  infinite 
number  of  rays  ;  just  as  numberless  drops  of  water  fall 
from  the  same  cloud  ;  and  just  as  various  trinkets  are 
formed  from  the  same  ingot  of  gold.  Whatever  may  be 
the  number  of  these  rays,  of  these  drops  of  water,  and  of 
these  trinkets,  it  is  always  to  the  same  sun,  to  the  same 
cloud,  and  to  the  same  ingot  of  gold  that  they  respectively 
belong. 

However,  from  the  very  moment  that  a  soul  is  united 
with  a  body  it  finds  itself  imprisoned  in  the  darkness  of 
ignorance  and  sin,  just  like  a  frog  caught  in  the  gullet  of 
a  snake  from  which  it  has  no  chance  of  escaping.  Although 
the  soul,  thus  imprisoned,  continues  to  be  one  with  God, 
it  is,  nevertheless,  to  a  certain  extent  disunited  and  separated 
from  Him.  However  great  and  good  the  soul  may  be 
which  animates  a  human  form,  it  becomes  from  that  moment 
subject  to  all  the  sins,  to  all  the  errors,  and  to  all  the  weak- 
nesses which  are  the  natural  consequences  of  this  union 
with  a  body.  The  vicissitudes  that  affect  the  soul  while 
it  is  united  with  a  body  do  not,  however,  affect  that  part 
of  its  nature  which  is  divine.  In  this  respect  the  soul  may 
be  compared  to  the  moon,  whose  image  is  reflected  in  the 
water  :  if  the  water  in  which  the  image  of  the  moon  is 
reflected  be  disturbed,  the  image  also  becomes  disturbed  ; 
but  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  moon  itself  is  disturbed. 
The  changes  and  chances  of  the  soul  united  with  different 
bodies  do  not  seriously  concern  God,  from  whom  it  emanates ; 
and  as  to  the  soul  itself,  it  is  immutable,  never  undergoing 
the  slightest  change.  Its  union  with  the  body  lasts  till 
such  time  as,  by  meditation  and  penance,  it  attains  a  degree 


THE  QUALITIES  OF  THE  SOUL  105 

of  wisdom  and  perfection  which  permits  it  to  reunite  itself 
anew,  and  that  inseparably  and  for  ever,  with  God  :  that 
is  to  say,  it  ceases  to  migrate  from  one  body  to  another. 

The  soul  is  said  to  be  endowed  with  one  of  the  following 
three  gunas,  or  inherent  qualities,  viz.  sattva,  rajas,  or 
tamas — good?iess,  passion,  or  ignorance.  It  frees  itself  at 
one  time  from  one,  at  another  time  from  another,  of  these 
inherent  qualities,  and  it  attains  perfection  only  after  it  is 
entirely  freed  from  all  of  them. 

The  five  senses  of  the  body  play  the  part  of  councillors 
and  slaves  to  the  soul.  For  instance,  should  the  soul 
perceive  a  desirable  object,  it  immediately  conceives  the 
desire  of  possessing  it.  The  feet  are  ordered  to  approach 
it,  and  when  the  object  is  in  view,  the  eyes  are  commanded 
to  behold  it,  and  the  hands  to  seize  it,  which  orders  are 
immediately  executed.  The  nostrils  are  then  commanded 
to  smell  it,  the  mouth  to  open,  and  the  tongue  to  taste  it  ; 
and  these  organs  comply  with  its  wishes.  Thereupon  the 
object  passes  into  the  body  with  which  the  soul  is  united, 
and  the  soul  is  then  satisfied.  Thus  it  is  the  soul  that 
regulates  the  actions  and  the  movements  of  the  body.  It 
may  be  compared,  in  this  respect,  with  a  magnet  placed  on 
a  brass  plate  beneath  which  is  an  iron  needle.  If  the 
magnet  be  moved  round  the  plate,  the  needle  follows  in 
the  same  direction  ;  but  if  the  magnet  be  removed,  the 
needle  at  once  drops  down  and  remains  motionless.  The 
magnet  is  therefore  typical  of  the  soul,  and  the  needle  of 
the  body.  As  long  as  these  two  are  united,  the  body  is 
susceptible  of  motion  ;  but  no  sooner  does  the  soul  quit 
the  body  to  take  up  its  abode  elsewhere  than  the  body 
becomes  insensible,  is  dissolved,  and  returns  to  the  five 
elements  from  which  it  was  originally  formed.  The  soul, 
on  the  other  hand,  like  the  magnet,  loses  nothing  of  its 
efficacy,  and  in  whatever  body  it  takes  up  its  abode,  always 
remains  the  same. 

The  two  great  sects  of  philosophers  above  mentioned 
were  subsequently  divided  into  six  others,  known  by  the 
general  name  of  Shan  Mata  (the  six  sects,  or  schools). 
Their  names  are  (1)  Saiva,  (2)  Sahta,  (3)  Charvaka,  (4) 
Kapalika,  (5)  Vaishnava,  (6)  Bouddha.  To  strive  to  purify 
the  soul,  to  acquire  wisdom  and  perfection,  to  dissipate 


JOB  SIX  SCHOOLS  OF  THOUGHT 

the  darkness  of  sin  and  ignorance,  to  free  oneself  from  the 
thraldom  of  passion  and  from  the  wretchedness  of  life  with 
a  view  to  union  with  and  absorption  in  the  Great  Being, 
the  Universal  Soul,  the  Paramatma  or  Parabrahma  :  such 
are  the  objects  aimed  at  by  these  various  sects.  Each  is 
distinguished  from  the  others  by  differences  of  opinion 
on  the  nature  of  perfect  happiness  and  on  the  means  of 
attaining  it. 

The  different  forms  of  knowledge  taught  in  these  schools 
are  known  by  the  following  names  :  (1)  Nyaya1,  (2)  Ve- 
danta,  (3)  Mimamsa,  (4)  Sankhya,  (5)  Patanjala,  (6)  Vaise- 
shika. 

The  first  of  these  schools,  the  Saiva,  founded  by  Gau- 
tama 2,  who  came  from  Tirat,  near  Patna,  on  the  borders 
of  the  Ganges,  is  held  to  surpass  the  others  in  Tarka-sastra, 
i.e.  Logic.  It  recognizes  four  sources  of  knowledge,  viz. 
(1)  Pratyaksha,  or  the  testimony  of  the  senses  rightly 
exercised  ;  (2)  Anumana,  or  natural  and  visible  signs,  as 
for  instance  smoke,  which  is  proof  of  the  presence  of  fire  ; 
(3)  Upamana,  or  Upama,  or  the  application  of  a  known 
definition  to  an  unknown  object  still  to  be  defined  ;  (4) 
Aptha-sabdam,  or  the  authority  of  infallible  texts,  which 
authority  they  ascribe  to  the  Vedas,  so  far  as  religion  and 
the  worship  of  the  gods  are  concerned,  and  to  the  maxims 
of  Gautama,  their  founder,  so  far  as  other  matters  are 
concerned. 

After  the  study  of  Logic,  the  professors  of  this  school 
lead  their  disciples  to  the  study  of  the  visible  world,  and 
then  to  a  knowledge  of  its  Author,  whose  existence,  although 
invisible,  is  demonstrable  by  the  process  of  Anumana. 
They  gather  from  the  same  source  proofs  of  His  under- 
standing, and  from  His  understanding  they  deduce  His 
immateriality. 

But  although  God  in  His  essence  is  spiritual,  they  say 
that  He  possesses  the  power  of  rendering  Himself  per- 
ceptible, and  has,  in  fact,  exercised  that  power.  From 
nirakara,  or  possessing  no  form,  He  has  become  akara,  or 

'  Nyaya  is  a  compound  Sanskrit  root,  meaning  literally  '  that  by 
which  we  enter  into  a  thing  and  draw  conclusions.' — Ed. 

J  This  Gautama  is  not  to  be  confused  with  Gautama  Buddha,  the 
founder  of  Buddhism. — Ed. 


THE  VEDANTA  SCHOOL  107 

possessing  form,  with  a  view  to  shape  and  animate  the 
world,  whose  atoms,  although  eternal,  are  nevertheless, 
without  His  presence,  motionless  and  lifeless. 

Man,  according  to  them,  is  composed  of  one  body  and 
two  souls,  the  one  supreme,  called  Paramatma,  which  is 
nothing  else  than  God  Himself  ;  the  other  animal  or  vital, 
known  by  the  name  of  Jivatma,  which  is  in  us  the  sentient 
principle  of  pleasure  and  pain.  Some  hold  that  this  is 
spiritual,  others  that  it  is  material. 

In  order  to  attain  supreme  wisdom  and  perfect  happiness 
this  sentient  principle  must  be  extinguished  ;  its  complete 
extinction  leading  to  union  with  Paramatma.  The  various 
gradations  by  which  this  union  is  attained  will  be  spoken 
of  later  on.  It  begins  with  contemplation  of,  and  ends  in 
perfect  identity  with,  God  Himself.  The  process  of  metem- 
psychosis continues  in  the  meantime,  the  soul  never  ceasing 
its  transmigrations  from  one  body  to  another. 

It  must  here  be  remarked  that  by  the  word  Soul  the 
learned  mean  the  Will  or  else  the  Ego,  the  consciousness 
of  Self. 

The  Vedanta  school,  founded  by  the  celebrated  Sankara 
Acharya,  is  distinguished  from  the  rest  by  its  metaphysics, 
and,  we  may  add,  by  the  obscurity  of  its  dogmas.  Most 
of  the  Brahmins  of  the  present  day  who  wish  to  pass  them- 
selves off  as  learned  men,  blindly  embrace  its  principles 
without  understanding  them.  True  sannyasis  are  nowa- 
days not  to  be  found  except  in  this  school,  which  is  founded 
on  the  system  of  Adwaita. 

The  characteristic  feature  of  this  sect  is  the  belief  in 
the  simple  unity  of  the  being,  who  is  none  other  than  the 
Ego,  that  is  to  say,  the  Soul.  Nothing  exists  except  the 
Ego,  yet  this  Ego  in  its  simple  and  absolute  unity  is,  so 
to  speak,  a  trinity  {trinus)  by  (1)  its  existence,  (2)  its 
infinite  wisdom,  and  (3)  its  supreme  happiness. 

But  as  the  consciousness  of  Self  is  not  at  all  in  accord- 
ance with  the  sublime  notions  of  this  school,  they  admit 
another  purely  negative  principle,  which,  in  consequence, 
has  no  actual  existence.  This  is  the  Maya  of  the  Ego, 
i.e.  error  or  illusion.  For  instance,  I  believe  I  am  now 
writing  to  you  about  the  Vedanta  ;  but  I  am  mistaken. 
It  is  true,  indeed,  I  am  Ego,  I  do  actually  exist ;  but  you 


108  THE  SANK  UNA   SCHOOL 

air  nut  You,  you  do  not  exist.  There  is  nothing  existent 
in  tlie  world,  except  the  Ego.  There  is  nothing  Vedanta, 
nor  doctrine,  nor  any  being  except  the  Ego.  In  imagining 
to  myself  that  you  exist,  I  am  under  the  illusion  of  Maya. 
I  am  mistaken  ;  that  is  all  :  the  subject  of  my  illusion 
does  not  in  fact  exist. 

Maya,  or  illusion,  makes  men  believe  that  they  have 
wives  and  children,  that  they  possess  cattle,  jewels,  houses, 
and  other  temporal  goods  :  but  nothing  of  all  this  is  real. 
Hindus  explain  the  effects  of  this  illusion  very  imperfectly 
by  comparing  them  to  a  rope  coiled  on  the  ground  and 
mistaken  for  a  snake. 

True  wisdom  consists  in  obtaining  deliverance  from  this 
illusion  by  diligent  contemplation  of  Self,  by  persuading 
oneself  that  one  is  the  unique,  eternal,  and  infinite  Being, 
and  so  forth,  without  allowing  one's  attention  to  be  diverted 
from  this  truth  by  the  effects  of  Maya. 

The  key  by  which  the  soul  may  free  itself  from  these 
illusions  of  Maya  is  contained  in  the  following  words, 
which  these  pretentious  sages  are  bound  to  repeat  without 
ceasing  : — Ahum- Eva- Param- Brahma,  that  is  to  say,  /  am 
myself  the  Supreme  Being.  The  hypothetical  conception 
of  this  idea,  they  say,  should  eventually  result  in  actual 
conviction  and  lead  to  supreme  blessedness. 

The  basic  principle  of  the  Sankhya  school,  founded  by 
Kapila,  is  the  doctrine  of  Dwaita  ;  it  rejects  the  Upamana 
of  Logic,  and  seems  generally  less  pretentious  than  the 
other  schools.  It  also  teaches  that  the  soul  is  simply  a  part 
of  God,  and  that  the  wisdom  acquired  by  yoga,  or  contem- 
plation, ends  in  either  actual  or  spiritual  unity  with  God. 

Kapila  recognized  a  spiritual  nature  and  a  material 
nature,  both  of  them  real  and  eternal.  The  spiritual 
nature,  by  the  exercise  of  the  will,  unites  itself  with  the 
material  nature  outside  itself.  From  this  union  are  born 
an  infinite  number  of  forms  and  a  certain  number  of  quali- 
ties. Amongst  the  forms  is  that  of  the  Ego,  by  reason  of 
which  each  being  can  say  :   /  am  I,  and  not  another. 

As  stated  above,  the  qualities  are  three  in  number,  viz. 
goodness,  passion,  ignorance.  One  or  other  of  these  three 
qualities  predominates  in  all  animate  beings  and  accounts 
for  the  differences  to  be  observed  amongst  them. 


ABSORPTION   IN  THE  GODHEAD  409 

Another  union  of  spirit  (together  with  its  forms  and 
qualities)  with  Matter  produces  the  elements  ;  and  a  third 
produces  the  world  as  it  stands. 

Such  then,  according  to  this  doctrine,  is  the  synthesis  of 
the  universe.  Wisdom  acquired  through  various  stages 
of  contemplation  produces  freedom  of  the  spirit,  which 
liberates  itself  at  one  time  from  one  form  or  quality,  at 
another  time  from  another,  by  constantly  meditating  on 
these  three  truths  : — 

1.  I  exist  not  in  any  thing  ! 

2.  Nothing  exists  in  me  ! 

3.  I  myself  exist  not  ! 

This  is  expressed  by  the  combination  of  these  three 
words  : 

Nasmeeha-namama-naham  ! 

The  time  comes  at  last  when  the  spirit  has  liberated 
itself  from  all  its  forms  and  qualities.  This  means  the  end 
of  the  world,  when  everything,  returning  to  its  primitive 
state,  is  lost  in  and  identified  with  God. 

Kapila  maintains  that  every  religion  known  to  him  serves 
but  to  draw  together  more  closely  the  bonds  in  which  the 
spirit  is  held,  instead  of  helping  it  to  free  itself  from  them. 
For,  says  he,  the  worship  of  subordinate  deities,  who  are  in 
reality  nothing  but  the  offspring  of  the  most  degraded  and 
latest  conceived  union  of  spirit  with  Matter,  binds  us  more 
closely  to  the  object  of  it  instead  of  liberating  us  from  it. 

The  worship  also  of  superior  deities,  who  are  in  reality 
only  the  offspring  of  the  closest  union  of  spirit  with  Matter, 
cannot  but  be  in  the  same  way  an  obstacle  to  complete 
spiritual  freedom.  Such  is  the  contention  of  Kapila,  and 
one  can  but  conclude  that  he  wished  to  sap  to  the  very 
foundations  the  authority  of  the  Vedas  and  of  the  Hindu 
religion.  Indeed,  the  groundwork  of  his  doctrine  seems 
to  bear  a  very  close  resemblance  to  that  of  Spinoza  and 
other  modern  philosophers. 

His  doctrine  gives  us  also  to  understand  that  the  gods 
of  the  Vedas  are  merely  allegorical  figures  relating  to  the 
world  itself,  as  much  in  its  first  principles  as  in  its  com- 
ponent parts,  which  are  but  emanations  from  or  modifica- 
tions of  these  first  principles. 


410  THE  MIMAMSA  SCHOOL 

Kapila  rejects  in  toto  the  commonly  accepted  tenets  of 
the  Hindu  religion,  which,  according  to  him,  are  founded 
on  mythical,  wicked,  and  impious  stories. 

He  teaches  that  everything  that  tends  to  cherish  the 
passions,  to  which  one  must  necessarily  yield  if  they  are 
not  surmounted,  is  calculated  to  bind  the  spirit  anew  to 
Matter  and  to  prolong  its  captivity.  It  is  only  after  having 
overcome  all  such  passions,  and  especially  those  of  lust, 
anger,  and  avarice,  that  one  can  aspire  to  complete  free- 
dom and  the  supreme  blessedness  known  as  mukti. 

The  Mimamsa  school,  which  recognizes  a  blind  and 
irresistible  predestination,  professes  absolute  toleration 
with  regard  to  other  sects.  Its  adepts  scrutinize  and  dis- 
cuss the  dogmas  of  these  sects,  without  condemning  them 
or  venturing  on  any  decided  opinion  with  regard  to  them. 
They  commend  the  utmost  tolerance  in  matters  of  opinion, 
and  affirm  that  every  sect — nay,  every  religion — pursues 
the  same  end.  viz.  happiness,  although  they  may  differ  as 
to  the  means  of  attaining  it. 

I  have  already  described  l  the  abominable  orgies  of  the 
sakti-'puja,  practised  by  the  votaries  of  the  Sakta  sect 2. 
Their  principal  doctrine  seems  to  be  that  happiness  consists 
in  the  enjoyment  of  sensual  pleasures. 

There  is  another  sect  called  Bouddha  Mata,  which  has 
no  Brahmin  adherents  at  all,  its  followers  being  chiefly 
Buddhists,  whose  number  at  present  is  very  small  in 
Southern    India.     Their    doctrine    is    pure     materialism. 

1  See  Part  II,  Chapter  IX. 

2  The  Saivas  are  all  worshippers  of  Siva  and  Bhavani  conjointly,  and 
they  adore  the  linga  or  compound  type  of  this  god  and  goddess,  as  the 
Vaishnavas  do  the  image  of  Lakshminarayana.  There  are  no  exclusive 
worshippers  of  Siva  besides  the  sect  of  naked  Gymnosophists  called 
Lingis  ;  and  the  exclusive  adorers  of  the  goddess  are  the  Saktas.  In 
this  last-mentioned  sect,  as  in  most  others,  there  is  a  right-handed  and 
decent  path,  and  a  left-handed  and  indecent  mode  of  worship  ;  but  the 
indecent  worship  of  this  sect  is  most  grossly  so,  and  consists  of  unbridled 
debauchery  with  wine  and  women.  This  profligate  sect  is  supposed  to 
be  numerous,  though  unavowed.  In  most  parts  of  India,  if  not  in  all, 
they  are  held  in  deserved  detestation  ;  and  even  the  decent  Saktas  do 
not  make  public  profession  of  their  tenets,  nor  wear  on  their  foreheads 
the  mark  of  the  sect,  lest  they  should  be  suspected  of  belonging  to  the 
other  branch  of  it.  The  sacrifice  of  cattle  before  idols  is  peculiar  to  this 
sect. — H.  T.  Colebrook. 


THE  MATERIALIST  SCHOOL  411 

Spinoza  and  his  disciples  endeavoured  to  palm  it  oil  as 
a  new  invention  of  their  own  ;  but  the  atheists  of  India 
recognized  this  doctrine  many  centuries  before  them,  and 
drew  from  it  pretty  much  the  same  deductions  which  their 
European  brethren  afterwards  drew,  and  which  have  been 
propagated  in  modern  times  with  such  deplorable  success. 

According  to  this  odious  doctrine  there  is  no  other  god 
but  Matter,  which  is  divided  into  an  infinite  number  of 
substances,  forming  as  many  deities  according  to  some, 
and  forming  but  one  god  according  to  others.  They  hold 
that  there  can  be  neither  vice  nor  virtue  during  life  ;  neither 
heaven  nor  hell  after  death.  The  truly  wise  man,  according 
to  them,  is  he  who  enjoys  every  kind  of  sensual  pleasure, 
who  believes  in  nothing  that  is  not  capable  of  being  felt, 
and  who  looks  upon  everything  else  as  chimerical. 

God,  that  is  to  say  Matter,  remarks  a  philosopher  of  this 
abominable  school,  possesses  four  saktis  or  faculties,  which 
are  like  so  many  wives  to  him.  These  are  Knowledge, 
Desire,  Energy,  and  Maya,  or  Illusion.  The  body,  by 
applying  all  its  senses  at  one  and  the  same  time  to  a  par- 
ticular object,  enjoys  unalloyed  pleasure,  which  is  said  to 
be  imperfect  when  the  enjoyment  is  limited  to  a  part  only 
of  the  senses.  It  is  also  from  this  want  of  consciousness, 
or  from  its  partial  application,  that  pain  and  sleep  originate. 
Death  is  merely  the  total  failure  of  the  application  of  bodily 
consciousness  to  the  senses.  The  body  thus  becomes  in- 
sensible and  perishes. 

It  is,  they  say,  simply  to  amuse  and  divert  Himself  with 
the  pleasures  of  infancy  that  God,  that  is  to  say  Matter, 
assumes  the  form  of  a  child.  Similarly  He  attains  the 
respective  stages  of  adolescence  and  old  age.  Such,  briefly, 
according  to  this  school,  is  the  whole  secret  of  birth,  life, 
and  death. 

The  second  sakti  or  divine  faculty  is  Desire,  the  effects 
of  which  are  as  varied  as  its  impressions.  God  is  man, 
horse,  insect,  &c,  in  fact,  whatever  He  wishes  to  be.  This 
Desire  is,  in  different  creatures,  as  varied  as  their  inclina- 
tions. But  each  is  satisfied  when  enjoying  what  pleases 
him  most. 

The  sakti  of  Desire,  however,  obscures  that  of  Know- 
ledge :   that  is,  it  hinders  one  from  knowing  that  there  is 


412       ENERGY  AS  A  GENERATING  FORCE 

no  other  deity  but  the  body,  and  that  birth,  life  and  death, 
sin  and  virtue,  and  the  successive  re-births  are  purely 
chimerical.  From  this  ignorance,  occasioned  by  Desire, 
originate  the  inclinations  of  mankind  ;  such  as  the  affection 
of  a  mother  for  her  children  and  the  care  she  bestows  in 
bringing  them  up.  The  truly  wise  man,  who  is  anxious  to 
acquire  a  clear  perception  of  the  truth,  must,  therefore, 
renounce  all  such  Desire. 

The  third  sakti  is  Energy,  about  which  these  pretentious 
philosophers  speak  still  more  foolishly.  The  universe, 
according  to  them,  was  in  a  state  of  chaos  ;  men  lived 
without  laws  and  without  caste,  in  a  state  of  utter  in- 
subordination. To  remedy  this  disorder,  a  general  con- 
sultation of  bodies  was  held.  Energy  spoke  first  :  '  Collect- 
ing from  all  bodies  whatever  is  found  most  excellent  in 
each,  I  will  form  a  perfect  man,  who  by  his  beauty,  wisdom, 
and  strength  shall  make  himself  master  of  the  whole  earth, 
and  shall  become  its  sovereign  lord.  I  will  be  his  spouse  ; 
and  from  our  union  shall  be  born  bodies  innumerable,  each 
more  perfect  than  another.' 

The  proposal  of  Energy  was  approved  and  carried  into 
effect.  It  fully  succeeded  ;  and  from  the  wife  of  a  Brah- 
min called  Suddhodana  Energy  begot  the  god  Buddha, 
who  was  a  man  incomparable  in  all  his  perfections  and 
the  lawgiver  of  the  human  race.  He  promulgated  laws,  the 
transgression  of  which  alone  constituted  sin.  And  the 
greatest  sin  of  all  is  to  deny  Buddha  to  be  what  he  is. 
He  who  acknowledges  him  is  the  true  Buddhist,  the  genuine 
Brahmin,  the  guru  among  Brahmins.  He  knows  no  other 
god  than  his  own  body.  To  his  body  alone  he  offers  up 
sacrifice,  and  procures  for  it  all  possible  sensual  pleasures. 
He  has  no  dread  of  anything  ;  he  eats  indiscriminately  of 
all  food  ;  he  scruples  not  to  lie  in  order  to  attain  the  object 
of  his  wish  ;  he  acknowledges  neither  Vishnu  nor  Siva,  nor 
any  other  god  but  himself. 

But,  seeing  that  all  individual  bodies  are  so  many  deities, 
why  is  it  that  they  do  not  all  possess  the  same  feelings, 
the  same  inclinations,  and  the  same  knowledge  8  Why  is 
there  such  a  great  number  of  them  ignorant  of  so  many 
beautiful  things,  of  which  the  Buddhists  make  so  much  I 
Such  were  substantially  the  objections  which  a  new  prose- 


KAPILAS  THEORY  OF  CREATION  413 

lyte  of  the  sect  addressed  to  one  of  its  wise  men.  The  latter 
replied  that  the  evil  was  born  of  the  fourth  wife,  or  sakti, 
of  the  divinity,  called  Maya  or  Illusion,  which  fascinates 
and  deceives  mankind,  making  them  look  upon  what  is 
false  as  true.  It,  moreover,  misleads  them  into  the  belief 
that  there  are  gods  ;  that  there  are  such  vicissitudes  as 
living  and  dying,  pollution  and  purification  ;  and,  finally, 
that  there  are  sufferings  and  rewards  after  death.  The 
only  method  of  preserving  oneself  from  Maya  is  to  cling 
to  the  doctrine  of  Buddhism  in  acknowledging  no  other 
god  but  the  material  body. 

The  author  from  whose  work  I  have  extracted  this  very 
obscure  account  of  the  system  undertakes  to  explain  the 
theory  of  Creation,  and  to  show  how  God,  united  to  Maya, 
produced  men  differing  so  greatly  in  their  inclinations. 
But  all  that  he  advances  on  this  subject  is  merely  the 
result  of  an  extravagant  imagination,  and  is  no  more  worthy 
of  attention  than  the  talk  of  a  sick  man  deprived  of  the  use 
of  his  reason  by  delirium  \ 

Returning  to  his  doctrines,  I  may  remark  that  he  sneers 
at  the  Brahmins  for  their  ablutions,  fasts,  penances, 
sacrifices,  Vedas,  &c.  The  true  Veda,  or  rather  the  true 
religion,  he  declares,  is  for  a  man  to  procure  for  himself  all 
sensual  enjoyments  ;  to  gratify  all  his  desires  ;  to  avenge 
himself  on  his  enemies,  even  unto  death  ;  to  renounce  all 
feelings  of  humanity,  and  to  live  but  for  himself.  Such 
sentiments  as  filial  affection,  kindness,  gentleness,  and  pity 
are  regarded  in  this  infamous  book,  not  as  virtues,  but 
(who  would  believe  it  ?)  as  sins.  As  an  illustration  of  this 
principle,  mention  is  made,  in  terms  of  the  highest  praise, 
of  a  certain  king  who  scarcely  ever  quitted  the  apartments 
of  his  wives,  and  who  condemned  to  death  a  person  whose 
only  crime  was  to  pity  the  sufferings  of  his  fellow-creatures. 

It  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  wondered  at  that  human 
monsters  who  professed  doctrines  so  detestable  and  so 
opposed  to  all  considerations  of  social  well-being,  became 
objects  of  general  execration,  and  that  they  were  almost 

1  This  description  of  Buddhism  conveys  an  altogether  false  impression, 
and  readers  are  recommended  to  consult  more  modern  authorities  on  the 
subject. — Ed. 


414  BUDDHISTS   AND    BRAHMINS 

exterminated  in  India,  where,  it  appears,  they  were  once 
so  powerful. 

Nevertheless,  I  doubt  whether  the  genuine  Buddhists, 
even  in  countries  where  their  religion  is  predominant, 
would  dare  to  avow  publicly  such  terrible  doctrines.  I 
even  suspect  that  the  book  which  contains  an  exposition 
of  this  doctrine  is  the  work  of  Brahmins  themselves,  who, 
for  the  purpose  of  bringing  odium  upon  a  sect  for  which 
their  caste  entertains  the  most  implacable  hatred,  invented 
these  opinions,  the  very  mention  of  which  makes  one  shudder. 
At  any  rate  the  book  contains  certain  maxims  which 
betray  the  influence  of  Hindu  sophistry.  The  following  are 
examples  illustrating  the  foolish  extremes  to  which  they 
go  :— 

'  One  ought  never  to  yield  to  taste  or  appetite  in  eating 
or  drinking ;  one  must  habituate  oneself  to  the  most 
nauseous  food.' 

'  One  must  elevate  oneself  above  the  prejudices  of  the 
vulgar,  and  one  must  always  pursue,  in  one's  conduct  and 
mode  of  thinking,  a  course  opposite  to  that  of  others.' 

The  Brahmins,  in  order  to  cast  odium  on  the  Jains,  their 
enemies,  accuse  them  also  of  professing  the  doctrines  of 
Buddhism  ;  but  the  Jains  resent  with  indignation  the  false 
insinuations  of  their  adversaries.  I  have  myself  heard 
several  Jains  speak  very  forcibly  on  the  horror  which  such 
principles  inspire  in  them,  and  complain  most  bitterly  of 
the  dubious  methods  of  the  Brahmins,  who,  actuated  by 
hatred  and  jealousy,  are  not  at  all  ashamed  to  resort  to 
these  false  imputations. 

There  are  also  other  sects,  not  so  well  known  ;  and 
among  them  is  the  Nastika  sect,  whose  fundamental 
doctrine  consists  in  absolute  pyrrhonism  or  scepticism  ; 
and  also  the  Lokayatha  Sastra  sect,  whose  adherents 
recognize  no  differences  of  condition  amongst  mankind, 
no  precepts  relating  to  pollution  and  purification,  and  who 
are,  moreover,  accused  of  devoting  themselves  to  witch- 
craft and  enchantments. 

Such,  in  brief,  is  what  I  have  been  able  to  understand 
of  the  numerous  doctrines  about  which  there  exists  such 
diversity  of  opinion  amongst  the  Hindus.  With  the  object 
of  obtaining  an  insight  into  these  various  matters  with 


A   BRAHMIN  TEACHER  415 

greater  facility,  I  engaged  the  services  of  a  Brahmin,  who 
was  said  to  be  learned,  and  who,  in  fact,  was  not  wanting 
in  intelligence  or  knowledge.  But  I  soon  perceived  that 
he  was  himself  completely  lost  in  this  labyrinth  of  meta- 
physics ;  and  the  various  Commentaries  to  which  he  re- 
ferred for  some  plausible  explanations  of  my  difficulties 
tended  only  to  increase  those  difficulties.  However,  being 
very  often  too  proud  and  presumptuous  to  acknowledge 
his  inability  to  make  me  understand  what  he  did  not  under- 
stand himself,  he  tried  to  get  out  of  his  difficulties  by  hums 
and  haws.  By  gestures  and  pantomimic  signs,  which  were 
truly  laughable,  he  endeavoured  to  make  up  for  the  explana- 
tions which  I  in  vain  sought  from  him,  and  he  often  left 
me  to  myself  to  clear  up  my  own  difficulties. 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

Chronology  of  the  Brahmins. — The  Epoch  of  the  Flood. 

The  Hindus  recognize  four  ages  of  the  world,  to  which 
they  give  the  name  of  yugas.  They  assign  to  each  yuga 
a  period  of  time  which,  when  all  the  yugas  are  added 
together,  would  make  the  creation  of  the  world  date  back 
several  millions  of  years. 

The  first  is  called  Kritha-yuga,  to  which  they  assign 
1,728,000  years.  The  second,  which  they  call  Tretha-yuga, 
lasted  about  1,296,000  years.  The  third,  called  Dwapara- 
yuga,  lasted  about  864,000  years.  And  the  last,  in  which 
we  are  now  living,  is  called  Kali-yuga,  or  the  Age  of  Misery. 
It  should  last  about  432,000  years.  The  present  year  of 
the  Christian  era  (1825)  corresponds  to  the  year  4,926  of 
the  Kali-yuga. 

According  to  this  calculation  the  world  has  now  been  in 
existence  for  3,892,926  years. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  for  me  to  waste  time  in  proving 
that  the  first  three  ages  are  entirely  mythical.  The  Hindus 
themselves  seem  to  regard  them  in  that  light,  since  in 
ordinary  life  they  make  no  mention  of  them.  All  their 
calculations  and  dates,  as  well  as  all  the  most  ancient  and 
authentic  records  at  present  to  be  found  among  them,  are 
reckoned  from  the  commencement  of  the  Kali-yuga. 


416  THE  KALI-YUGA 

This  pretension  to  remote  antiquity  is  a  favourite  illusion 
amongst  ancient  civilized  peoples,  who,  as  they  sank  into 
idolatry,  soon  forgot  the  traditions  of  their  ancestors 
regarding  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  believed  they 
could  add  to  their  own  glory  by  assuming  an  origin  which 
was,  so  to  say,  lost  in  the  dim  vista  of  mythical  times. 
It  is  well  known  to  what  extremes  the  Chinese,  the  Egyp- 
tians, and  the  Greeks  carried  this  mania,  and  it  is  charac- 
teristic of  the  Hindus  that  they  far  excel  these  nations  in 
their  pretensions. 

At  the  close  of  each  of  the  yugas.  there  took  place  a 
universal  upheaval  in  nature.  No  trace  of  the  preceding 
yuga  survived  in  that  which  followed.  The  gods  them- 
selves shared  in  the  changes  brought  about  by  these  great 
upheavals.  Vishnu,  for  instance,  who  was  white  in  the 
preceding  yuga,  became  black  in  the  present  one. 

But  of  all  the  yugas  the  most  direful  is  the  Kali-yuga,  in 
which  we  now  live.  It  is  verily  an  Iron  Age,  an  epoch 
of  misrule  and  misery,  during  which  everything  on  earth 
has  deteriorated.  The  elements,  the  duration  of  life,  the 
character  of  mankind  :  everything,  in  a  word,  has  suffered, 
everything  has  undergone  a  change.  Deceit  has  taken  the 
place  of  justice,  and  falsehood  that  of  truth.  And  this 
degeneration  must  continue  and  go  on  increasing  till  the 
end  of  the  yuga. 

From  what  I  have  just  stated  it  will  be  seen  that  the 
commencement  of  the  true  era  of  the  Hindus,  that  is  to 
say,  of  their  Kali-yuga,  dates  from  about  the  same  time  as 
the  epoch  of  the  Deluge — an  event  clearly  recognized  by 
them  and  very  distinctly  mentioned  by  their  authors,  who 
give  it  the  name  of  Jala-pralayam,  or  the  Flood  of  Waters. 

Their  present  era,  indeed,  dates  specifically  from  the 
commencement  of  this  Jala-pralayam.  It  is  definitely 
stated  in  the  Markandeya-purana  and  in  the  Bhagavata 
that  this  event  caused  the  destruction  of  all  mankind,  with 
the  exception  of  the  seven  famous  Rishis  or  Penitents 
whom  I  have  often  had  occasion  to  mention,  and  who  were 
saved  from  the  universal  destruction  by  means  of  an  ark, 
of  which  Vishnu  himself  was  the  pilot.  Another  great 
personage,  called  Manu,  who,  as  I  have  tried  elsewhere  to 
show,  was  no  other  than  the  great  Noah  himself,  was  also 


RECKONING  TIME  FROM  THE  DELUGE     417 

saved  along  with  the  seven  great  Penitents.  The  universal 
flood  is  not,  to  my  knowledge,  more  clearly  referred  to  in 
the  writings  of  any  heathen  nation  that  has  preserved  the 
tradition  of  this  great  event,  or  described  in  a  manner  more 
in  keeping  with  the  narrative  of  Moses,  than  it  is  in  the 
Hindu  books  to  which  I  have  referred. 

It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  such  testimony  should  be 
afforded  us  by  a  people  whose  antiquity  has  never  been 
called  in  question  ;  the  only  people,  perhaps,  who  have 
never  fallen  into  a  state  of  barbarism  ;  a  people  who, 
judging  by  the  position,  the  climate,  and  the  fertility  of 
their  country,  must  have  been  one  of  the  first  nations  to 
be  regularly  constituted  ;  a  people  who  from  time  imme- 
morial have  suffered  no  considerable  changes  to  be  made 
in  their  primitive  customs,  which  they  have  always  held 
inviolable.  And  curiously  enough,  in  all  their  ordinary 
transactions  of  life,  in  the  promulgation  of  all  their  acts, 
in  all  their  public  monuments,  the  Hindus  date  everything 
from  the  subsidence  of  the  Flood.  They  seem  to  tacitly 
acknowledge  the  other  past  ages  to  be  purely  chimerical 
and  mythical,  while  they  speak  of  the  Kali-yuga  as  the  only 
era  recognized  as  authentic.  Their  public  and  private 
events  are  always  reckoned  by  the  year  of  the  various 
cycles  of  sixty  years  which  have  elapsed  since  the  Deluge. 
How  many  historical  facts,  looked  upon  as  established 
truths,  have  a  far  less  solid  foundation  than  this  ! 

Another  very  remarkable  circumstance  is  that  the  Hindu 
method  of  reckoning  the  age  of  the  world  agrees  essentially 
with  what  we  have  in  Holy  Scripture.  In  Genesis  viii.  13, 
for  example,  we  read  :  '  In  the  six  hundredth  and  first  year, 
in  the  first  month,  the  first  day  of  the  month,  the  waters 
were  dried  up  from  off  the  earth.'  We  read  in  Hindu 
works  :  '  On  such  a  day  of  such  a  month  of  such  a  year 
of  such  a  cycle,  reckoning  from  the  commencement  of  the 
Kali-yuga.' 

It  is  true  that  in  the  passage  just  quoted  from  Holy 
Scripture  the  date  is  reckoned  from  Noah's  birth.  He  was 
then  entering  on  his  six  hundred  and  first  year.  But 
according  to  many  chronologists,  it  appears  that  in  times 
immediately  succeeding  the  Deluge  the  Scriptures  reckon 
time  by  this  patriarch,  and  that   the  anniversary  of  his 


418  HINDU  AND  CHINESE  CYCLES 

birth  commemorated  the  day  on  which  the  earth  was 
restored  to  mankind — a  memorable  epoch  from  which  they 
henceforth  dated  the  years  of  the  newly-restored  earth, 
that  is,  of  the  new  era  which  they  had  just  entered. 

The  mighty  changes  which  nations  underwent  entirely 
upset  their  calculations  relating  to  those  remote  times  ;  but 
the  Hindus,  settled  as  they  were  in  a  country  long  exempt 
from  the  revolutionary  troubles  that  agitated  other  coun- 
tries, have  been  able  to  preserve  intact  the  tradition  of 
those  events. 

Their  ordinary  cycle  is  of  sixty  years,  but  they  have  also 
adopted  another  of  ninety  years,  used  in  astronomical 
calculations.  The  latter  is  a  much  more  recent  invention, 
and  was  introduced  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  a  famous 
king  of  India,  named  Salivahana,  who  reigned  over  a  pro- 
vince then  called  Sagam,  and  who  died  at  the  end  of  the 
first  century  of  the  Christian  era.  It  should  be  remarked 
that  the  use  of  these  two  different  cycles  could  never 
occasion  the  least  confusion  in  point  of  dates,  since  a  period 
of  three  ordinary  cycles  corresponds  to  a  period  of  two 
astronomical  cycles,  and  they  both  start  from  the  same 
epoch. 

The  Chinese,  likewise,  have  an  ordinary  cycle  of  sixty 
years  in  common  with  the  Hindus  ;  but  there  is  this 
difference  between  the  two  :  the  Chinese,  according  to 
Du  Halde,  are  ignorant  as  to  when  their  era  commenced, 
at  least  with  reference  to  the  epoch  of  the  Flood.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  hardly  likely  that  the  two  nations  could 
have  communicated  with  each  other  on  this  subject,  seeing 
that  they  do  not  agree  in  their  computations.  According 
to  the  author  just  quoted,  the  birth  of  our  Saviour  falls  on 
the  fifty-eighth  year  of  the  Chinese  cycle,  while  it  coincides 
with  the  forty-second  year  of  the  Hindu  cycle.  But  this 
coincidence,  nevertheless,  goes  to  confirm  the  high  antiquity 
of  the  cycle  of  sixty  years  still  in  use  with  the  two  most 
ancient  races  on  the  face  of  the  earth. 

It  would  be  quite  useless  to  inquire  whether  this  cycle 
was  adopted  before  the  Flood,  and  whether  it  was  from 
Noah  or  his  immediate  descendants  that  the  Hindus  and 
Chinese  learned  its  use.  We  do  know  for  certain,  however, 
that  the  weekly  period  was  known  prior  to  this  remarkable 


DATES   OF  THE  FLOOD  419 

event,  and  that  the  Hindu  week  agrees  exactly  with  that 
of  the  Hebrews  and  with  ours.  Indeed,  the  days  of  their 
week  correspond  exactly  with  those  of  ours,  and  bear 
similar  names. 

One  peculiar  circumstance  is  that  just  as  every  day  of 
the  Hindu  week  has  its  own  particular  name,  so  has  each 
of  the  sixty  years  of  a  cycle.  Thus,  they  do  not  say  like 
us  that  a  certain  event  happened,  say,  on  the  twentieth  or 
thirtieth  year  before  or  after  such  an  era.  But  they  give 
the  year  its  particular  name,  and  say,  for  example,  that 
such  an  event  happened  in  the  year  Kilasa,  in  the  year 
Bhava,  in  the  year  Vikary,  and  so  forth. 

The  only  real  difficulty  is  that  the  Hindu  computation 
with  regard  to  the  epoch  of  the  Flood  does  not  appear  to 
correspond  with  that  of  Holy  Scripture. 

But  it  should  be  remembered  that  there  is  a  difference 
of  more  than  nine  hundred  years  between  the  period 
supposed  to  have  elapsed  between  the  Flood  and  the  Birth 
of  Christ  according  to  the  Septuagint  on  the  one  hand, 
and  according  to  the  Vulgate  on  the  other  hand.  Yet 
neither  of  these  calculations  is  wholly  rejected,  and  both 
of  them  are  supported  by  able  chronologists.  The  Catholic 
Church,  which  adheres  to  the  Vulgate  for  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, adopts  the  calculation  of  the  Septuagint  for  the 
Roman  Martyrology,  which  forms  part  of  its  liturgy.  The 
difference,  therefore,  between  the  Hindu  calculation  and 
ours  does  not  appear  a  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting  it,  or 
even  for  supposing  that  it  does  not  proceed  from  the  same 
source. 

According  to  Hindu  calculations,  the  time  that  elapsed 
between  the  Deluge  and  the  Birth  of  Jesus  Christ  is  3,102 
years.  This  period  differs  from  that  laid  down  in  the 
Vulgate  by  about  770  years  ;  but  it  approaches  much 
nearer  to  the  calculations  made  in  the  Septuagint,  which 
gives  3,258  years  between  the  Deluge  and  the  commence- 
ment of  the  Christian  era.  If  we  accept  this  last  calcula- 
tion, the  epoch  of  the  Hindu  Jala-pralayam  does  not  differ 
from  that  of  the  Deluge  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  by  more 
than  156  years,  a  discrepancy  of  no  great  importance, 
considering  the  intricacy  of  a  computation  which  dates 
from  such  remote  times.     I  am,  therefore,  fully  convinced 


420  DIFFERENCES  IN  COMPUTATION 

t liat  the  Hindu  computation  wives  to  corroborate  the 
accuracy  of  the  event  as  narrated  by  Moses,  and  adds 
incontestable  evidence  to  prove  that  most  important  event, 
the  Universal  Deluge. 

Some  modern  chronologists,  with  the  learned  Tournemine 
at  their  head,  who  based  their  calculations  on  the  Vulgate, 
have  professed  to  reckon  between  the  Deluge  and  the 
Christian  era  a  period  of  3,234  years,  and  they  have  sup- 
ported their  calculations  with  substantial  arguments.  Their 
learned  investigations  in  this  direction  excited  even  in 
those  days  the  admiration  of  competent  critics.  In  relying, 
therefore,  on  this  calculation,  we  have  a  difference  of  only 
132  years  between  the  Hindu  computation  and  that  of  Holy 
Scripture  as  regards  the  Deluge. 

Deucalion's  Flood  does  not  approach  so  near  the  Uni- 
versal Deluge  of  Scripture  as  the  Jala-pralayam  of  the 
Hindus.  All  the  critics  place  the  former  so  near  the  Birth 
of  Jesus  Christ  that  its  comparative  modernness  alone  is 
quite  sufficient  to  prove  that  it  has  not  even  been  borrowed 
from  other  ancient  nations.  The  Flood  of  Ogyges,  the 
occurrence  of  which  is  generally  placed  in  the  year  248 
before  that  of  Deucalion,  is,  however,  posterior  by  more 
than  twelve  hundred  years  to  the  Universal  Deluge,  accord- 
ing to  the  Hindu  calculations  of  the  Jala-pralayam.  We 
have,  therefore,  fresh  evidence  that  the  Flood  of  Ogyges 
and  that  of  Deucalion  were  only  partial  inundations,  if 
indeed  they  are  not  altogether  mythical. 


CHAPTEK  XXV 

The  Epistolary  Style  of  the  Brahmins. — Hindu  Handwriting. 

The  epistolary  style  of  the  Brahmins  and  of  Hindus  in 
general  is  in  many  respects  so  different  from  ours  that 
a  few  specimens  may  be  not  uninteresting  to  many  of  my 
readers. 

Letter  to  an  Inferior. 

■  They,  the  Brahmin  Soobayah,  to  him  the  Brahmin 
Lakshmana,  who  possesses  all  kinds  of  good  qualities,  who 
is  graced  with  all  the  virtues,  who  is  true  to  his  word,  who. 


LETTER  TO  AX  INFERIOR  421 

by  the  services  he  renders  to  his  relations  and  friends, 
resembles  the  Chintamani  \     Asirvadam  2  / 

'  The  year  Kilasa,  the  fourth  day  of  the  month  of  Phal- 
yuna.  I  am  at  Dharmapuri  and  in  good  health.  I  am  very 
anxious  to  have  news  of  thee. 

*  As  soon  as  this  letter  reaches  thee,  thou  must  go  to  that 
most  excellent  and  most  virtuous  Brahmin  Anantayah, 
and,  prostrating  thyself  at  full  length  at  his  feet,  thou 
must  offer  him  my  most  humble  respects. 

'  And  then,  without  delay,  thou  must  present  thyself 
before  the  chetty  (merchant)  Rangapah,  and  declare  to  him 
frankly  on  my  behalf  that  if  he  will  now  place  in  thy  hands 
the  three  thousand  rupees  which  he  owes  me,  with  the 
interest  due  thereon  at  thirty  per  cent.,  I  will  forget  all 
that  has  passed,  and  the  matter  shall  be  finally  settled. 
But  if,  on  the  contrary,  he  makes  excuses  and  puts  off  the 
payment  of  the  said  amount,  including  interest,  tell  him 
that  I  am  acquainted  with  certain  efficacious  means  of 
teaching  him  that  no  person  shall  with  impunity  break  his 
word  with  a  Brahmin  such  as  I  am.  This  is  all  I  have  to 
say  to  thee.     Asirvadam  !  ' 

Letter  to  an  Equal. 

'  To  them,  the  lords,  the  lords  Ramayah  3,  who  possess 
all  those  good  qualities  and  virtues  which  render  a  man 
esteemed  ;  who  are  worthy  of  all  the  favours  which  the 
gods  can  bestow  ;  who  are  the  particular  favourites  of  the 
goddess  Lakshmi ;  who  are  great  as  Mount  Meru  ;  who 
possess  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  Yajur-Veda  ;  they,  the 
Brahmin  Soobayah.     Namaskaram  4  / 

'  The  year  Durmati,  the  fifteenth  of  the  month  of  Vei- 
shaka,  I  and  all  the  members  of  my  family  being  in  the 
enjoyment  of  good  health.     I  shall  learn  with  great  pleasure 

1  This  is  a  mythical  stone  which  is  supposed  to  procure  every  blessing 
for  those  who  possess  it. — Dubois. 

2  The  word  Asirvadam  means  '  blessing.' — Ed. 

3  A  superior  and  even  an  equal  is  always  addressed  in  the  plural, 
both  in  speaking  and  writing.  This  is  a  rule  invariably  observed  among 
the  well-bred. — Dubois. 

4  Namaskaram  means  '  respectful  greeting.' — Dubois. 


422  LETTEB   TO   AX  EQUAL 

that  it  is  the  same  with  you  ;  and  1  trust  you  will  let  me 
know  in  detail  all  the  matters  which  give  you  joy  and 
contentment. 

'  The  twenty-second  of  the  above-mentioned  month  being 
a  day  on  which  all  the  good  omens  are  combined,  we  have 
selected  it  for  the  commencement  of  the  marriage  festivities 
of  my  daughter  Vijaya-Lakshmi.  I  beg  you  will  be  good 
enough  to  be  present  here  before  that  day,  and  to  bring 
with  you  all  the  members  of  your  household  without 
excepting  any.  I  beg  that  you  will  place  yourself  at  the 
head  of  the  ceremony,  and  that  you  will  be  pleased  to  con- 
duct it  *. 

'  Lastly,  if  there  is  anything  in  which  I  can  be  of  service 
to  you,  I  request  you  will  be  pleased  to  let  me  know. 
Namaskaram! ' 

Letter  to  a  Superior, 

*  To  them,  the  lords,  the  Brahmin  lords,  the  great  Brah- 
mins Lakshmanayah,  who  are  endowed  with  every  virtue  ; 
who  are  great  as  Mount  Meru  ;  who  possess  a  perfect 
knowledge  of  the  four  Vedas  ;  who,  by  the  splendour  of 
their  good  works,  shine  forth  like  the  sun  ;  whose  renown 
is  known  throughout  the  fourteen  worlds,  and  who  are 
highly  praised  therein  : — I,  Krishnayah,  their  humble  ser- 
vant and  slave,  keeping  myself  at  a  respectful  distance 
from  them,  with  both  hands  joined,  my  mouth  closed,  my 
eyes  cast  down,  my  head  bent — I  wait  in  this  humble 
posture,  until  they  may  vouchsafe  to  cast  their  eyes  on 
one  who  is  nothing  in  their  presence.  After  obtaining 
their  leave,  approaching  them  with  fear  and  respect,  and 
prostrating  myself  on  the  ground  at  their  feet,  which  are  in 
reality  tamarasa  (lotus)  flowers  ;  after  saluting  those  feet 
with  profound  respect  and  kissing  them,  I  address  to  them 
the  following  humble  supplication  : — 

'  The  year  Vikary,  the  twentieth  of  the  month  Pushya, 
I,  your  most  humble  slave,  whom  you  have  deigned  to  look 
upon  as  some  chattel,  having  received  with  both  hands  the 
letter  which  your  excellency  humbled  yourself  by  writing 

1  This  is  an  expression  used  merely  out  of  politeness  in  the  case  of 
every  one  who  is  invited  under  similar  circumstances. — Dubois. 


LETTER  TO  A  SUPERIOR  423 

to  me,  having  kissed  it  and  put  it  on  my  head,  I  afterwards 
read  it  with  all  possible  attention  and  care.  Your  excel- 
lency may  rest  assured  that  I  will  execute  punctually  the 
orders  contained  in  it,  without  departing  from  them  by  the 
breadth  of  a  grain  of  sesamum.  The  business  mentioned 
in  the  letter  has  already  been  fairly  begun,  and  I  hope  that 
by  the  efficacy  of  your  excellency's  benediction  it  will  soon 
terminate  to  your  excellency's  honour  and  advantage.  As 
soon  as  it  is  finished,  I,  your  most  humble  servant  and  slave, 
shall  not  fail  to  present  myself  at  your  excellency's  feet  to 
receive  your  orders. 

'  Lastly,  I  entreat  your  excellency  to  impart  to  me  the 
commands  and  instructions  necessary  to  enable  me  to  act 
in  a  manner  agreeable  to  your  excellency,  and  to  point  out 
to  me  in  what  way  I  may  render  myself  most  acceptable 
to  your  sacred  feet,  which  are  real  tamarasa  flowers.  For 
this  purpose  it  will  not  be  necessary  for  your  excellency  to 
humble  yourself  still  more  by  writing  to  me  a  second  time  : 
but  it  will  suffice  if  I  receive  from  your  excellency's  bounty 
a  leaf  of  betel  indented  with  your  nail,  through  some  con- 
fidential person  who  can  verbally  explain  to  me  the  orders 
of  your  excellency  \ 

'  Such  is  my  most  humble  prayer.' 

The  complimentary  expressions  used  at  the  beginning  of 
all  these  letters,  and  the  humble  and  servile  tone  which 
pervades  them,  especially  the  third  letter,  present  when 
translated  sufficiently  remarkable  examples  of  epistolary 
style,  yet  I  have  by  no  means  brought  out  the  full  force, 
or  rather  the  extreme  platitude,  of  all  these  expres- 
sions. 

Our  language  has  no  equivalents  for  the  expressions  of 
base  flattery  and  humility  with  which  the  Hindus  are  so 
lavish  in  their  correspondence.  These  expressions  are, 
moreover,  used  with  a  certain  amount  of  moderation  in  the 
letters  just  quoted.  I  have  seen  some  the  complimentary 
preface  alone  of  which  would  have  filled  two  pages  of  this 
book.  The  eloquence  of  a  writer  is  inexhaustible  under  this 
head,  especially  when  there  is  any  question  of  obtaining 

1  This  device  frequently  serves  for  credentials  in  conveying  verbal 
messages. — Dubois. 


424  FLUTTERING   EPISTLES 

some  boon  or  favour.  A  petitioner  can,  indeed,  without 
fear  of  seeing  it  thrown  back  in  his  face, — 

A  son  heros,  dans  un  bizarre  ouvrage, 
Donner  de  l'encensoir  au  t ravers  du  visage. 

The  thicker  the  smoke  of  the  incense  the  more  does  it  natter 
him  to  whom  it  is  offered. 

In  letters  written  by  one  Hindu  to  another,  one  never 
finds  respectful  assurances  or  compliments  offered  to  a  wife. 
The  mere  mention  of  her  in  a  letter  would  be  considered 
not  simply  as  an  indiscretion,  but  as  a  gross  breach  of 
politeness,  at  which  the  husband  would  have  every  reason 
to  feel  aggrieved. 

When  one  Hindu  has  occasion  to  communicate  to  another 
the  death  of  one  of  his  relatives,  the  custom  is  to  slightly 
burn  the  end  of  the  palm-leaf  on  which  the  afflicting  news 
is  written  ;  and  this  is  similar  to  the  black  seal  used  by  us 
in  such  cases.  The  same  practice  is  observed  as  a  sign  of 
displeasure,  when  one  has  occasion  to  administer  a  severe 
reprimand  in  writing. 

When  a  superior  writes  to  an  inferior,  he  puts  his  own 
name  before  that  of  the  person  to  whom  he  writes.  The 
reverse  is  the  case  when  an  inferior  writes  to  a  superior. 
Any  breach  of  this  token  of  civility  on  the  part  of  an 
inferior  would  be  considered  a  dire  insult  by  the  person  to 
whom  he  owed  respect.  Politeness  also  requires  that, 
when  writing  to  an  equal,  you  should  place  your  own  name 
last. 

Having  said  this  much  on  the  epistolary  style  of  the 
Hindus,  I  will  now  offer  some  notes  that  I  have  collected 
on  their  handwriting. 

Learned  European  scholars  have  made  endless  researches 
as  to  the  origin  of  the  art  of  writing,  the  manner  in  which 
it  was  transmitted  by  one  people  to  another,  the  different 
characters  used,  and  the  various  kinds  of  tablets  and  other 
materials  employed.  Many  conjectures  have  been  offered 
concerning  the  systems  invented  by  the  Chinese  and  the 
Egyptians  to  transmit  their  ideas  otherwise  than  verbally. 
The  languages  of  India,  however,  seem  to  have  escaped  the 
learned  investigations  of  philologists.  Nevertheless,  a  care- 
ful study  of  these  languages  would,  if  I  am  not  mistaken. 


WRITING   ATTRIBUTED   TO  BRAHMA        425 

throw  a  good  deal  of  light  on  questions  still  shrouded  in 
uncertainty.  I  have  not  the  slightest  pretensions  to  having 
discovered  any  new  origin  of  written  language,  nor  have 
I  the  vain  presumption  of  depriving  the  Phoenician  Cadmus 
of  the  glory  of  having  invented  the  elementary  principles 
of— 

Cet  art  ingenieux 
De  peindre  la  parole  et  de  parler  aux  yeux 
Et  par  les  traits  divers  de  figures  tracees 
Donner  de  la  couleur  et  du  corps  aux  pensees. 

I  shall  think  myself  fortunate  enough  if  what  I  am  about 
to  say  be  considered  worthy  of  the  attention  of  the  learned, 
and  if  it  present  some  points  of  interest  to  those  who  are 
fond  of  discovering  traces  of  primitive  times  in  the  usages 
that  still  exist. 

The  Hindu  books  attribute  the  credit  of  this  invaluable 
invention  to  the  great  Brahma,  the  creator  of  men  and  the 
sovereign  arbiter  of  their  destinies.  The  serrated  sutures 
to  be  seen  on  a  skull  are,  they  say,  nothing  less  than  the 
handwriting  of  Brahma  himself  ;  and  these  indelible  charac- 
ters, traced  by  his  divine  hand,  contain  the  irrevocable 
decrees  regulating  the  destiny  of  each  individual  of  the 
human  race.  It  may  be  urged  that  this  Hindu  belief  is 
a  mere  myth,  and,  as  such,  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  basis 
of  any  reasonable  conjectures.  I  am  of  the  same  opinion  ; 
but  it  must  also  be  admitted  that  it  is  one  of  the  oldest 
myths  of  India,  and  it  proves  at  any  rate  that  when  it  was 
invented  the  knowledge  of  writing  already  existed.  Other- 
wise how  could  the  Hindus  of  those  remote  times  have 
discovered  traces  of  writing  in  these  marks  on  skulls  % 
Another  fact,  or  another  myth,  if  one  prefers  to  call  it  so, 
may  be  said  to  corroborate  this.  The  four  Vedas  are 
considered  to  be  the  work  of  the  god  Brahma,  who  wrote 
them  with  his  own  hand  on  leaves  of  gold.  These  books, 
which  contain  the  ritual  of  the  idolatrous  ceremonies 
practised  by  these  people,  are  held  by  them  in  great  venera- 
tion, and  their  high  antiquity  is  nowhere  called  into  ques- 
tion. Other  books,  too,  many  of  which  are  undoubtedly 
very  old,  speak  of  the  Vedas  as  of  a  far  earlier  date.  More- 
over, the  language  in  which  they  are  written  has  become 
unintelligible    in    many   places.     The    Vedas,    indeed,    by 

p  3 


42(5  A  VEDIC  LEGEND 

whomsoever  they  may  have  been  written,  conclusively 
prove  that  the  origin  of  Hindu  writing  dates  from  a  period 
which  is  lost  in  remote  antiquity. 

One  of  the  principal  articles  of  the  Hindu  faith  is  that 
relating  to  the  ten  Avatars,  or  incarnations,  of  Vishnu. 
The  first  and  earliest  is  called  the  Matsya-avatar ,  that  is, 
the  incarnation  of  the  god  in  the  form  of  a  fish.  And  what 
was  the  cause  of  it  ?  It  was  the  loss  of  the  four  books  of 
the  Vedas.  Brahma,  under  whose  care  they  were  left,  fell 
asleep,  and  a  giant,  his  enemy,  availed  himself  of  the 
opportunity  to  steal  the  sacred  volumes.  Having  escaped 
unperceived,  the  giant  hid  himself  in  the  sea  with  his 
precious  booty,  which  he  swallowed,  thinking  it  would  be 
safer  in  his  bowels.  Vishnu,  having  been  informed  of 
what  had  happened,  changed  himself  into  a  fish,  and  went 
in  pursuit  of  this  enemy  of  the  gods.  After  a  long  search, 
he  at  length  discovered  the  giant  in  the  deepest  abyss  of 
the  ocean.  He  attacked  him,  vanquished  him,  and  tore 
him  in  pieces.  He  then  plucked  the  hidden  books  from  the 
giant's  entrails,  and  restored  them  to  the  god  who  was  their 
author  and  guardian. 

Is  there  anything  to  be  found  in  any  books  of  ours  whose 
unquestionable  antiquity  is  recognized  by  European  writers 
that  might  be  said  to  compare  with  this  fable,  any  indica- 
tion of  sources  from  which  it  could  have  been  borrowed, 
thus  proving  its  modern  date  ?     I  think  not. 

Some  of  the  Hindu  authors  ascribe  the  invention  of 
writing  to  a  famous  Penitent  called  Agastya,  who,  it  is 
said,  was  not  taller  than  a  hand's  breadth.  He  is  one  of 
the  most  ancient  persons  recognized  by  the  Hindus,  in- 
asmuch as  they  make  him  contemporary  with  the  seven 
Penitents  who  were  saved  from  the  Flood  in  the  ark,  of 
which  Vishnu  himself  was  the  pilot. 

Again,  the  Gymnosophists,  or  naked  penitents  of  India, 
have  never  been  regarded  as  mythical  personages.  Even 
in  the  time  of  Lycurgus,  that  is  to  say,  nearly  nine  hundred 
years  before  the  Christian  era,  these  philosophers  enjoyed 
such  a  reputation  for  wisdom  and  learning  that  their  fame 
had  spread  to  countries  far  remote  from  their  own.  There 
is  every  reason  to  believe  that  their  fame  could  only  have 
been  established  gradually,  and  that  their  philosophy  dated 


DIFFERENCES  IN  WRITTEN  CHARACTERS     427 

from  a  very  remote  period.  True,  some  authors  assert  that 
their  philosophy  was  handed  down  by  oral  tradition,  and 
that  they  never  committed  anything  to  writing.  It  is, 
however,  hard  to  believe  that  men  who  gave  themselves 
up  to  the  study  of  philosophy  and  astronomy  could  have 
done  so  without  having  recourse  to  written  records. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  I  will  now  briefly  describe  the  present 
style  of  writing  among  the  Hindus,  mentioning  (1)  the 
written  characters  used,  (2)  the  materials  on  which  they 
are  recorded,  (3)  the  manner  in  which  they  are  written, 
and  (4)  the  shape  of  their  books  and  of  the  communications 
which  they  address  to  each  other. 

It  is  generally  stated  that  there  are  eighteen  living 
languages  in  use  in  India  ;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  there 
are  many  more.  All,  or  at  any  rate  the  majority  of  them, 
have  their  own  distinct  alphabetical  characters.  It  is  true 
that  some  of  these  characters,  if  carefully  examined,  bear 
a  very  close  resemblance  to  each  other  ;  but  in  the  majority 
of  them  one  can  distinguish  no  similarities.  Yet,  however 
diversified  may  be  the  characters  employed  in  writing, 
there  are  many  similarities  to  be  observed  in  pronuncia- 
tion and  phraseology.  In  all  these  languages  the  arrange- 
ment of  words  admits  of  few  changes  or  differences.  In 
this  particular  they  differ  widely  from  the  European 
languages,  which,  with  a  general  resemblance  in  their 
alphabetical  characters,  admit  of  large  variations  in  con- 
struction and  phraseology. 

What  resemblance  could,  for  instance,  be  found  between 
the  letters 

(a  short)  (along)  (tha) 

of  the  Tamil  language  and  the  letters 

e>  «■  5 

(a  short)  (a  long)  (tha) 

of  the  Telugu  language  ?  And  the  difference  is  not  less 
striking  in  the  other  letters  of  the  alphabet.  Yet  these 
two  languages  are  spoken  in  countries  bordering  on  each 
other,  which  in  other  respects  present  many  points  of 
resemblance.  The  same  diversity  with  regard  to  alphabets 
is  noticeable  in  other  Indian  languages. 


428     VARIATIONS  IN  LETTERS  AND  CIPHERS 

Other  facts  worthy  of  note  are  that  in  all  the  languages 
of  India  (1)  the  letters  are  arranged  in  the  same  order  ; 
(2)  the  short  and  long  vowels  are  always  placed  at  the 
beginning  of  the  alphabet  and  before  the  consonants  ;  (3) 
these  vowels  are  purely  initial  letters,  which  are  never 
written  except  at  the  beginning  of  a  word,  special  inflec- 
tions being  assigned  to  them  when  used  in  the  middle  of 
a  word  or  after  a  consonant ;  (4)  each  consonant  must  have 
a  vowel  inflection  :  thus,  b,  c  are  pronounced  ba,  ca,  and 
their  form  is  changed  when  other  vowel  inflections  are 
substituted.  For  instance,  in  Canarese  the  following  letters 
change  their  form  according  to  the  vowel  inflections  to 
which  they  are  subject,  thus  : — 

20       S3      &        ri  £5  &         y^)        £o 

ba       be       bi       tha       they       thee       dho       dhu 

How  is  it  that  there  is  so  much  resemblance  between 
the  various  idioms  of  these  languages,  and  so  much  dis- 
similarity between  the  letters  of  their  alphabets  ?  Sanskrit 
appears  to  be  the  common  type  on  which  the  other  languages 
have  modelled  their  phraseology  ;  how  comes  it  then  that 
they  have,  in  opposition  to  the  mother-tongue,  adopted 
letter  formations  so  different  from  that  of  their  common 
parent  ? 

Similar  variations  are  observable  in  the  forms  of  their 
ciphers  or  symbols.  Though  they  all  use  the  decimal 
notation,  they  differ  widely  in  the  formation  of  their 
arithmetical  figures.  In  the  Tamil  language,  each  decimal 
number  is  denoted  by  a  different  sign,  thus  : — 
s  u)  or  p& 

1  10  100  1000 

In  Telugu,  and  in  most  of  the  other  languages  of  the 
country,  they  follow  exactly  the  system  which  we  have 
adopted  from  the  Arabs,  the  units  being  expressed  by 
a  single  figure,  the  tens  by  two,  the  hundreds  by  three,  the 
thousands  by  four,  and  so  on. 

This  method,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  slight  differ- 
ences in  the  shape  of  the  figures,  is  the  one  most  commonly 
used.  The  similarity  which  exists  between  this  method 
and  that  of  the  Arabs  can  hardly  have  been  the  result 
of  chance.     If  one  nation  did  not  borrow  it  from  the  other, 


WRITING  MATERIALS  429 

it  is  at  any  rate  probable  that  both  borrowed  it  from  the 
sarue  source. 

The  Tamil  arithmetical  symbols  seem,  however,  to  bear 
a  greater  resemblance  to  the  Roman  than  to  the  Arabic 
numerals.  Like  the  Romans,  the  Tamils  express  the 
greater  part  of  their  arithmetical  signs  by  letters  of  the 
alphabet,  and  use  only  a  single  letter  to  denote  units, 
tens,  hundreds,  and  thousands  as  stated  above. 

But,  dissimilar  as  are  the  written  characters  of  the  various 
Hindu  languages,  they  are  still  more  dissimilar  to  the 
written  characters  known  to  us  as  used  by  other  ancient 
nations,  such  as  Syriac,  Hebrew,  Arabic,  Greek,  &c.  LTnlike 
the  majority  of  Oriental  languages,  which  are  written  from 
right  to  left,  Sanskrit  and  the  various  dialects  of  India 
are  written,  like  the  European  languages,  from  left  to 
right. 

Paper  is  not  unknown  to  the  Hindus.  They  manufacture 
it,  not  from  cotton  rags,  as  is  generally  believed,  but  from 
the  fibre  of  the  aloe.  I  am,  however,  inclined  to  believe 
that  the  use  of  this  coarse  paper  is  of  comparatively  recent 
date  in  India,  subsequent,  that  is,  to  the  invasion  of  the 
Moghuls,  who  must  have  introduced  it.  At  any  rate, 
following  the  example  of  the  Moghuls,  the  Hindus  living 
in  the  interior  of  the  country,  where  palm  leaves  are  not 
procurable,  use  paper  instead.  But  more  generally  they 
use  black  tablets  named  kadatta,  on  which  they  write  with 
a  white  pencil,  called  in  Canarese  balapu,  made  of  a  cal- 
careous quarried  stone  which  is  very  common  in  the  country. 
And  it  is  with  these  materials  that  children  learn  writing  in 
the  schools. 

Nevertheless  the  ordinary  practice  almost  everywhere  is 
to  write  on  palm  leaves,  of  which  there  are  two  species, 
large  and  small.  The  latter  are  the  commoner  and  are  said 
to  be  the  better  ;  they  are  about  three  inches  wide  and  two 
feet  long.  Seven  or  eight  lines  can  be  written  on  each  leaf. 
They  are  thicker,  stiffer,  and  stouter  than  double  paper,  so 
that  one  can  easily  write,  or  rather  engrave,  on  both  sides 
of  them.  The  other  kinds  of  leaves  are  broader,  but  not 
so  strong.  They  are  therefore  used  only  in  those  places 
where  the  smaller  kinds  are  not  easily  procurable.  They 
are  sometimes  used  specially  as  a  mark  of  respect  when 


430  THK  STILUS 

writing  to  a  person  of  rank.  The  island  of  Ceylon  pro- 
duces an  enormous  quantity  of  the  smaller  leaves,  and  they 
are  so  cheap  that  a  halfpenny's  worth  of  them  would  be 
sufficient  for  copying  an  entire  folio  volume. 

Quintus  Curtius  relates  that  the  Hindus,  at  the  time  of  the 
invasion  of  Alexander  the  Great,  wrote  with  an  iron  stilus 
on  the  soft  and  smooth  bark  of  trees.  It  is  quite  probable 
that  palm  leaves  were  mistaken  for  the  bark  of  trees  ;  for 
nowhere  in  India  can  any  evidence  be  found  to  prove  that 
the  bark  of  trees  has  ever  been  used  for  the  purpose  of 
writing. 

Aeneas,  in  Virgil's  epic,  implores  the  Cumaean  Sibyl  not 
to  write  her  oracles  on  the  leaves  of  trees,  which  the  winds 
might  speedily  disperse  : 

Foliis  tantum  ne  carmina  manda, 
Xe  turbata  volcnt  rapidis  ludibria  ventis. 

All  the  commentators  are  of  opinion  that  the  reference  here 
is  to  palm  leaves.  It  is  therefore  to  be  presumed  that  these 
leaves  were  quite  different  from  those  now  used  in  India, 
which,  on  account  of  their  weight  and  thickness,  could  not 
be  blown  about  by  the  wind. 

The  Hindus  write  with  an  iron  stilus,  or  pencil,  which  is 
from  eight  to  nine  inches  long.  The  handle  of  the  instru- 
ment generally  ends  in  a  knife,  which  is  used  to  trim  the 
sides  of  the  leaves  so  as  to  make  them  all  of  one  size.  In 
writing  with  the  stilus  neither  chair  nor  table  is  required. 
The  leaf  is  supported  on  the  middle  finger  of  the  left  hand, 
and  is  kept  steady  by  being  held  firmly  between  the  thumb 
and  the  forefinger.  The  stilus,  in  writing,  does  not  glide 
along  the  leaf,  as  does  our  pen  on  paper  ;  but  the  writer, 
after  finishing  a  word  or  two,  fixes  the  point  of  his  instru- 
ment on  the  last  letter,  and  pushes  the  leaf  from  right  to 
left  till  the  line  of  writing  is  finished.  This  is  executed 
with  such  ease  that  it  is  by  no  means  a  rare  sight  to  see 
Hindus  writing  as  they  walk  along. 

As  the  characters  thus  traced  are  only  a  sort  of  faint 
engraving,  of  the  same  colour  as  the  leaf  itself,  and  there- 
fore not  easily  decipherable,  it  is  the  common  practice  to 
besmear  the  whole  with  fresh  cow-dung.  The  leaf  is  after- 
wards wiped  clean,  but  the  new  material  fills  up  the  engraved 


HOW  BOOKS  ARE  BOUND  431 

letters  and  gives  them  a  darker  colour,  thus  rendering  them 
more  distinct  and  readable. 

This  mode  of  writing  is  undoubtedly  more  convenient 
and  more  simple  than  ours,  so  far  at  least  as  writing  on 
a  small  scale  is  concerned,  for  it  does  not  require  all  the 
materials  that  we  need  on  such  occasions  ;  but  it  will  be 
readily  understood  that  it  is  not  equally  convenient  for 
writings  of  a  somewhat  voluminous  nature. 

As  in  our  ancient  manuscripts,  the  absence  of  every  kind 
of  punctuation,  and  the  confusion  arising  from  words  and 
phrases  not  being  sufficiently  separated,  render  the  perusal 
of  the  works  of  Hindu  authors  extremely  difficult.  The 
complicated  rules  of  orthography  pertaining  to  some  of 
their  languages,  and  especially  to  Tamil,  tend  to  increase 
this  difficulty  still  further.  Very  often  the  most  experienced 
person  is  unable  to  read  without  difficulty,  especially  if  the 
writer  has  adhered  strictly  to  the  rules  of  grammar,  which 
are  generally,  however,  either  ignored  or  neglected. 

When  Hindus  write  on  paper  they  do  not  use  a  quill 
pen.  A  Brahmin  could  not,  without  defilement,  touch  so 
impure  an  instrument.  Consequently  a  thin  reed  is  used, 
called  kalam,  a  word  evidently  of  modern  origin  borrowed 
from  the  Portuguese.  The  kalam  is  somewhat  thicker  than 
our  quill  pen,  and  is  mended  in  the  same  manner.  Hindus 
employed  under  Europeans,  however,  lay  aside  these 
scruples,  and  use  the  same  materials  as  their  masters. 

When  a  Hindu  wishes  to  make  up  a  book  of  the  palm 
leaves  on  which  he  has  written,  he  has  no  need  of  a  book- 
binder. He  merely  bores  a  small  hole  at  each  extremity 
of  the  leaves,  and  fastens  them  all  together  by  means  of 
two  small  pegs  or  sticks  of  wood  or  iron.  Two  thin  boards, 
of  the  same  length  and  breadth  as  the  leaves,  are  then 
placed  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  them,  and  thus  form  the 
binding  or  covers  of  the  book.  A  long  string  fastened  to 
one  of  the  covers  serves  to  hold  the  leaves  together.  If 
this  plan  is  simple,  it  certainly  is  not  convenient  ;  for 
whenever  one  wishes  to  consult  the  book,  the  string  must 
be  loosened,  the  pegs  by  means  of  which  the  leaves  arc 
strung  together  must  be  removed,  and  the  whole  volume 
taken  to  pieces. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  Hindu  system  of  writing  and 


432  HINDU  MANUSCRIPTS 

of  binding  books  closely  resembles  that  of  the  ancient 
Romans,  who  wrote  on  extremely  thin  wooden  boards, 
which  they  strung  together  and  formed  into  a  codex. 

The  following  is  the  plan  adopted  by  the  Hindus  in  the 
transmission  of  letters  : — They  roll  up  the  palm  leaves  on 
which  they  are  written,  and  put  them  into  an  outer  cover- 
ing, upon  which  they  write  the  address.  At  the  junction 
of  the  two  ends  of  the  outer  leaf,  which  are  held  together 
by  means  of  a  small  incision  in  each,  a  kind  of  rough  knot 
is  made,  serving  as  a  seal.  Due  attention  must  be  paid  to 
the  length  and  breadth  of  the  leaves  on  which  letters  are 
written,  which  vary  according  to  the  rank  and  dignity  of 
those  to  whom  they  are  addressed. 

To  be  the  bearer  of  a  letter  denotes  a  kind  of  subordi- 
nate position.  This  duty  cannot  therefore  be  entrusted 
to  superiors,  or  even  to  equals,  unless  they  undertake  it 
voluntarily.  In  the  latter  case,  etiquette  forbids  the  letter 
being  given  into  the  hands  of  the  person  who  has  offered 
to  deliver  it  ;  the  missive  must  be  placed  on  the  ground 
at  his  feet,  and  he  picks  it  up  and  becomes  responsible  for 
its  safe  delivery. 

The  changes  in  the  form  of  writing  which  time  brings 
about  in  other  countries  do  not  offer  a  safe  ground  for 
conjecture  in  the  case  of  Hindu  manuscripts.  I  have  seen 
a  deed  of  gift  written  more  than  two  hundred  years  ago  on 
a  plate  of  gold  in  Canarese  characters,  the  letters  of  which 
were  perfectly  legible  and  exactly  like  those  at  present  in 
use,  the  form  of  writing  having  undergone  no  change  what- 
ever during  that  long  interval  of  time. 

Nevertheless  there  are  certain  monuments  in  the  country 
of  very  great  antiquity,  bearing  inscriptions  engraved  in 
characters  no  longer  in  use.  Some  are  also  to  be  found  in 
various  places  the  characters  of  which  are  wholly  unknown 
and  evidently  foreign.  I  must  leave  this  matter  to  our 
learned  philologists  ;  as  for  myself,  I  admit  that  I  am 
unable  to  explain  the  fact. 

The  remarks  I  have  made  above  concerning  the  dis- 
similarity of  the  written  characters  and  the  resemblance  of 
the  grammatical  style  in  the  various  Indian  languages  are 
equally  applicable  to  Siamese.  At  least,  so  it  has  been 
pointed  out  to  me  by  persons  who  are  familiar  with  that 


THE  SIAMESE   LANGUAGE  433 

language,  and  who  have  discovered  in  its  alphabet  an 
arrangement  exactly  similar  to  that  of  the  Hindu  alphabets. 
In  some  languages  of  India  the  sign  or  inflection  denoting 
the  vowel  that  always  accompanies  a  consonant  is  placed 
before  it ;  the  same  practice  is  followed  with  regard  to 
several  letters  in  Siamese  writing.  Like  the  Hindus,  the 
Siamese  write  from  left  to  right.  This  coincidence  can 
hardly  be  alleged  to  be  the  result  of  chance  ;  it  rather 
indicates  some  common  origin. 

The  investigations  of  modern  authors  with  regard  to  this 
subject  leave  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  Pali  language,  or 
the  learned  tongue  of  Siam,  is  a  corrupt  form  of  the  San- 
skrit. And  this  mother-tongue  appears  to  have  extended 
even  still  farther,  since  we  find  a  large  number  of  Sanskrit 
words  in  the  Malay  language. 

However,  in  shape  the  Siamese  letters  as  written  appeared 
to  me  to  bear  no  resemblance  whatever  to  the  Hindu  alpha- 
bets with  which  I  was  acquainted. 

CHAPTER  XXVI 

Hindu  Fables. 

The  Hindus  are  particularly  fond  of  poetry  and  fiction, 
and  their  literature  contains  a  large  collection  of  interest- 
ing fables.  Some  of  these  fables  possess  a  moral  signifi- 
cance and  are  very  popular  ;  while  others  are  merely  stories, 
of  no  great  value  from  a  literary  point  of  view.  I  have, 
however,  selected  a  few  stories  which  appeared  to  me 
calculated  to  interest  my  readers,  and  a  collection  of  them 
will  be  found  in  the  next  chapter. 

The  fables  are  to  be  found  in  large  numbers  in  various 
Hindu  books.  They  are  generally  based  on  excellent  moral 
principles,  and  contain  some  severe  criticisms  on  the  vices 
of  men.      The  following  I  have  heard  related  many  times  : — 

'  A  traveller,  having  missed  his  way,  was  overtaken  by 
darkness  in  the  midst  of  a  dense  forest.  In  fear  of  wild 
beasts,  he  decided  that  the  only  means  of  escaping  them 
would  be  to  spend  the  night  in  the  branches  of  one  of  the 
largest  trees  which  he  could  find.  He  therefore  climbed 
into  a  tree,  and,  without  further  thought  of  the  dangers 
which  might  befall  him,  fell  fast  asleep,  and  awoke  only 


434  A   TYPICAL   HINDU    FABLE 

when  the  rays  of  the  morning  sun  warned  him  that  it  was 
time  to  continue  his  journey.  As  he  was  preparing  to 
descend,  he  cast  his  eyes  downwards,  and  espied  at  the 
foot  of  the  tree  a  huge  tiger  eagerly  and  impatiently  watch- 
ing, as  it  were,  for  its  prey.  Struck  with  terror  at  the  sight 
of  the  beast,  the  traveller  remained  for  a  while  transfixed 
to  the  spot  where  he  sat.  At  length,  recovering  himself 
a  little  and  looking  all  round  him,  he  observed  that  near 
the  tree  on  which  he  sat  were  many  others,  with  their 
branches  so  interlaced  that  he  could  easily  pass  from  one 
to  another,  and  thus  escape  the  danger  which  threatened 
him  below.  He  was  on  the  point  of  making  his  escape  in 
this  way,  when,  raising  his  eyes,  he  saw  a  huge  snake 
hanging  to  the  branch  immediately  over  him,  with  its  head 
nearly  touching  his  own.  The  snake  was  apparently  fast 
asleep,  but  the  slightest  noise  might  rouse  it.  At  the  sight 
of  this  twofold  danger  to  which  he  found  himself  exposed 
the  poor  traveller  lost  all  courage.  His  mind  wandered, 
his  trembling  limbs  could  hardly  support  him,  and  he  was 
on  the  point  of  falling  into  the  clutches  of  the  tiger  which 
was  watching  for  him  below.  Chilled  with  fright,  he 
remained  motionless  in  face  of  the  cruel  death  that  awaited 
him,  expecting  every  moment  to  be  his  last.  The  unfortunate 
man,  however,  having  somewhat  recovered  his  senses,  once 
more  raised  his  eyes,  and  perceived,  on  one  of  the  topmost 
branches  of  the  tree,  a  honeycomb,  from  which  sweet  drops 
of  honey  were  trickling  down  at  his  side.  Thereupon  he 
stretched  forward  his  head,  opened  his  mouth,  and  put  out 
his  tongue  to  catch  the  drops  of  honey  as  they  fell  ;  and  in 
this  delicious  enjoyment  he  thought  no  more  of  the  awful 
dangers  which  surrounded  him.' 

Besides  the  detached  apologues  to  be  found  in  their 
books,  which  they  are  very  fond  of  alluding  to  in  their 
everyday  conversations,  the  Hindus  have  a  regular  collec- 
tion of  old  and  popular  fables  called  Pancka-tantra  (the 
Five  Tricks),  which  have  been  translated  into  all  the 
languages  of  the  country  \  It  is  perhaps  the  only  literary 
work  possessed  by  them  which  is  instructive  and  worthy 

1  Two  volumes  of  these  fables,  translated  by  the  Abbe,  were  published 
in  Paris  in  1872  and  1877,  twenty  years  after  his  death. 

The  East,  the  land  of  myth  and  legend,  is  the  natural  home  of  the 


THK    PANCHA-TANTRA    FABLES  435 

of  attention.  All  castes,  without  any  distinction  whatever, 
are  allowed  to  read  it.  The  moral  of  some  of  these  fables 
might  possibly  seem  dangerous,  because  calculated  to  teach 
how  to  do  evil  rather  than  how  to  avoid  it  ;  but,  speaking 
generally,  their  teachings  are  praiseworthy  enough. 

The  first  of  these  fables  of  the  Pancha-tantra  explains 
how  impostors  and  clever  knaves  succeed  by  artifice  and 
falsehood  in  causing  harm  to  persons  whom  they  wish  to 
ruin,  or  in  sowing  dissension  among  the  most  intimate  of 
friends.  The  object  which  the  author  has  in  view  appears 
to  be  to  warn  princes  and  other  great  personages,  for  whose 
instruction,  by  the  way.  the  work  seems  to  be  principally 
written,  against  the  intrigues  of  mean  parasites  and  hypo- 
critical courtiers  who  throng  their  palaces,  and  who,  by 
base  flattery,  calumny,  deceit,  and  intrigue,  succeed  in 
ruining  and  supplanting  their  best  friends  and  most  faithful 
servants. 

The  following  is  a  short  resume  of  the  story  : — 
In  the  city  of  Patali-puram  there  reigned  a  king  called 
Suka  Darusha,  who  had  a  faithful  minister  named  Amara- 
Sati.  This  good  prince  had  three  sons,  who  were  noted 
for  their  stupidity  and  vulgarity,  and  who  were  viewed  by 
their  father  with  the  most  extreme  dissatisfaction.  The 
minister  Amara-Sati,  conscious  of  the  sorrow  which  was 

fable,  and  Hindustan  was  the  birthplace,  if  not  of  the  original  of  these 
tales,  at  least  of  the  oldest  shape  in  which  they  still  exist.  The  Pancha- 
tantra  have  been  translated  into  almost  every  language,  and  adapted 
by  most  modern  fabulists.  The  Kalila  wa  Damna  (from  the  names  of 
two  jackals  in  the  first  story),  or  fables  of  Bidpai  or  Pilpay,  is  an  Arab 
version  made  about  760  a.d.  From  the  Hebrew  version  of  Rabbi  Joel, 
John  of  Capua  produced  a  Latin  translation  about  the  end  of  the  fifteenth 
century,  whence  all  later  imitations  are  derived.  The  Hitopadesa,  or 
'  friendly  instruction,'  is  a  modernized  form  of  the  same  work,  and  of  it 
there  are  three  translations  into  English  by  Dr.  Charles  Wilkins,  Sir 
William  Jones,  and  Professor  F.  Johnson. 

From  Hindustan  the  Sanskrit  fables  passed  to  China,  Thibet,  and 
Persia  ;  and  they  must  have  readied  Greece  at  an  early  date,  for  many 
of  the  fables  which  passed  under  the  name  of  Aesop  are  identical  with 
those  of  the  East.  Aesop  to  us  is  little  more  than  a  name,  though,  if 
wc  may  trust  a  passing  notice  in  Herodotus,  he  must  have  lived  in  the 
sixth  century  B.C.  Probably  his  fables  were  never  written  down,  though 
several  are  ascribed  to  him  by  Xenophon,  Aristotle,  Plutarch,  and  other 
Greek  writers,  and  Plato  represents  Socrates  as  beguiling  his  last  days 
by  versifying  such  as  he  remembered. — Ed. 


43(3  THE   LION  AND  THE   BULL 

preying  on  his  master,  advised  him  to  convene  a  general 
meeting  of  all  the  Brahmins  of  his  kingdom,  in  order  to 
ascertain  whether  there  was  not  one  amongst  them  who 
would  undertake  the  responsibility  of  educating  the  three 
young  princes  and  instilling  into  them  feelings  more  worthy 
of  their  high  birth.  The  minister's  advice  was  followed  ; 
but  of  all  the  assembled  Brahmins  there  was  only  one, 
named  Vishnu-Sarma  l,  who  felt  himself  capable  of  accom- 
plishing so  difficult  a  task. 

Vishnu-Sarma,  after  carefully  studying  the  characters 
and  dispositions  of  his  pupils,  began  the  work  of  reforma- 
tion ;  and  in  order  to  accomplish  his  task,  related  to  them 
a  large  number  of  fables,  the  lessons  of  which  he  took  great 
pains  to  instil  into  their  minds. 

The  dramatis  personae  of  the  first  of  these  fables  are 
a  lion  holding  sway  in  a  vast  forest,  a  bull  named  Sanjivaka, 
and  two  foxes,  one  called  Damanaka  and  the  other  Kara- 
taka,  both  in  the  service  of  the  lion  king. 

The  bull  Sanjivaka  had  been  accidentally  lost  by  his 
master  in  the  lion  king's  forest,  where  he  was  leading 
a  peaceful,  harmless  life.  Now  the  two  foxes,  as  it  happened, 
had  been  disgraced  and  ignominiously  expelled  from  the 
court  of  the  lion.  One  day  the  lion  was  quenching  his 
thirst  in  the  river  Jumna,  which  flowed  through  the  forest, 
when  suddenly,  while  returning  to  his  cave,  he  heard 
a  most  frightful  noise  like  thunder,  the  like  of  which  he 
had  never  heard  before.  It  was  in  fact  the  bellowing  of 
the  bull  Sanjivaka.  Seized  with  sudden  fear,  and  believing 
that  an  animal  which  was  able  to  utter  such  a  dreadful 
noise  must  assuredly  be  vastly  superior  to  himself,  the 
lion  was  consumed  with  dread  lest  a  rival  had  come  to 
dispute  his  forest  kingdom.  Greatly  troubled  in  his  mind, 
he  reflected  how  he  might  get  rid  of  this  imaginary  danger. 
While  in  this  dilemma,  a  happy  thought  struck  him  :  it 
was  to  reconcile  himself  with  his  former  ministers,  the 
two  foxes,  who  might  possibly  help  him  with  their  advice. 
He  therefore  sent  messengers  to  them,  beseeching  them  to 
resume  their  former  posts  in  his  court,  and  promising  to 
honour  them  in  future  with  unbounded  confidence. 

Karataka  and  Damanaka,  aware  of  the  real  reason  of 
1  In  the  Telugu  copy  he  in  called  tionui  Jcntna. — Dubois. 


FOXES    AS   GO-BETWKKXS  4.37 

their  recall  to  the  king's  court,  affected  the  greatest  in- 
difference with  regard  to  the  offers  made  to  them.  Before 
complying  with  the  request  of  the  monarch,  they  calculated 
all  the  possible  consequences  of  such  a  reconciliation  ;  and 
with  this  in  view  they  related  to  each  other  a  number  of 
stories  bearing  on  the  advantages  and  inconveniences  that 
might  result  from  their  return  to  the  king's  court.  Suffice 
it  to  say  they  at  last  decided  to  accept  the  lion's  offer,  and 
accordingly  waited  upon  him. 

The  monarch  welcomed  the  two  foxes  with  much  cor- 
diality, and  confessed  to  them  the  alarming  fears  which 
assailed  him  and  the  cause  thereof.  Without  further  delay 
he  deputed  them,  after  giving  them  the  necessary  instruc- 
tions, to  wait  upon  the  rival  who  had  caused  him  such 
uneasiness.  The  object  of  their  mission,  they  were  in- 
formed, was  to  fathom  the  designs  of  this  unknown  per- 
sonage, and,  if  he  had  come  thither  with  hostile  intentions, 
to  inquire  of  him  on  what  conditions  he  was  willing  to  live 
in  peace  with  the  titular  monarch. 

The  two  foxes  immediately  went  in  search  of  the  for- 
midable Sanjivaka,  and  at  last  found  him  grazing  peace- 
fully on  the  borders  of  the  river  Jumna.  At  sight  of  him 
the  two  plenipotentiaries  gazed  at  each  other  with  astonish- 
ment and  burst  into  loud  fits  of  laughter,  for  they  could 
not  understand  how  the  presence  in  the  forest  of  a 
poor  helpless  bull,  forsaken  by  his  owner,  could  possibly 
cause  so  much  anxiety  to  their  master.  After  thinking 
the  matter  over,  they  decided  to  make  the  best  of  it  by 
encouraging  the  lion  in  his  fears,  and  thereby  increasing 
the  importance  and  value  of  their  mediation.  Their  plan 
being  well  pondered  over,  they  went  up  to  the  bull  Sanji- 
vaka and  haughtily  told  him  that  the  place  he  had  chosen 
for  his  abode  was  the  dominion  of  a  lion,  whose  authority 
extended  throughout  the  forest.  They  rated  him  severely 
for  his  daring  conduct,  and  told  him  that  he  was  running 
a  great  risk  of  falling  a  victim  to  the  anger  of  the  king  of 
the  forest.  '  But,'  added  they,  '  as  the  lion  is  of  a  generous 
disposition,  we  will  persuade  him  to  pardon  you  and  to 
take  you  under  his  protection.  Come  along  with  us  to 
him,  and  above  all  be  very  careful  to  show  proper  respect 
and  humility  in  his  presence.' 


438  PLOTTING   A    RIVAL'S   DOWNFALL 

Returning  to  the  lion,  the  two  foxes  began  to  make  the 
most  of  their  services.  In  their  opinion  the  bull  Sanjivaka 
was  all  that  he  was  supposed  to  be  ;  and  moreover  he  had 
the  reputation  of  being  passionate,  hot-tempered,  distrust- 
ful, and  obstinate.  '  But,'  added  they,  '  by  dint  of  skill 
and  persuasion  we  have  succeeded  in  inducing  him  to  be 
your  intimate  friend  and  faithful  ally.'  The  bull  was  at 
this  stage  introduced  to  the  lion,  who  deemed  himself 
extremely  fortunate  in  having,  by  the  mediation  of  his  two 
ministers  the  foxes,  gained  the  alliance  of  so  powerful 
a  friend. 

Sanjivaka  was  not  long  in  gaining  the  favour  of  his  royal 
master,  whose  full  and  unbounded  confidence  he  soon  won 
by  his  gentleness,  obedience,  and  other  good  qualities. 

Accordingly  the  two  foxes  were  once  more  forsaken  by 
their  master,  and  found  themselves  obliged  to  live  in 
obscurity  and  dishonour,  as  formerly.  Sanjivaka,  without 
even  aspiring  to  any  such  honour,  had  become  the  channel 
and  medium  through  whom  all  favours  were  bestowed  by 
the  king.  Thereupon  Karataka  and  Damanaka  perceived 
that  they  had  made  a  great  mistake  in  introducing  this 
stranger  to  the  lion's  court.  The  ruin  of  their  rival  was 
evidently  the  only  means  by  which  they  could  hope  to 
regain  their  former  influence.  But  rinding  themselves  too 
weak  to  get  rid  of  their  enemy  by  force,  they  resolved  to 
achieve  their  object  by  artifice  and  intrigue.  Accordingly 
they  prepared  themselves  for  the  task  by  telling  each  other 
a  great  many  fables,  the  main  purpose  of  which  was  to 
show  what  one  could  accomplish  by  bringing  into  play  at 
the  proper  season  the  active  powers  of  an  intriguing  mind. 

Having  skilfully  devised  a  plan  of  attack,  they  succeeded 
in  finding  their  way  once  again  into  the  king's  court  ;  and 
concealing  their  wicked  intentions  under  a  guise  of  zeal 
and  attachment  to  their  master's  interests,  they  succeeded 
by  dint  of  slander  and  other  machinations  in  poisoning  the 
mind  of  the  lion  with  a  deep  distrust  of  the  bull  Sanjivaka, 
At  last  the  king,  really  persuaded  that  his  quiet  and  well- 
behaved  favourite  cherished  the  design  of  secretly  getting 
rid  of  him,  in  order  that  he  might  usurp  the  dominion  of 
the  forest,  fell  upon  the  unfortunate  Sanjivaka  and  tore 
him  to  pieces. 


THE   CROW   AND  THE   OWLS  439 

The  moral  of  the  second  fable  of  the  Pancha-tantra  is  to 
show  the  advantages  of  union  and  friendship  among  the 
weak  in  times  of  trouble  or  danger.  It  tells  the  story  of 
a  dove,  a  rat,  a  raven,  a  gazelle,  and  a  tortoise,  who,  by 
simply  helping  one  another,  escaped  the  greatest  dangers. 

The  third  fable  tells  the  story  of  the  crows  and  the  owls. 
It  sets  forth  the  dangers  to  which  a  person  is  exposed  by 
confiding  his  private  affairs  to  those  whose  character  he  is 
not  well  acquainted  with,  or  to  those  who,  after  having  for 
a  long  time  been  avowed  enemies,  return  under  the  deceitful 
mask  of  friendship.  It  relates  how  a  crow,  by  his  cunning 
and  hypocrisy,  succeeded  in  stealing  his  way  into  the  society 
of  owls,  the  declared  enemies  of  his  race,  and  in  winning 
their  entire  confidence.  Thereupon,  the  crow  made  the 
best  of  this  opportunity  to  study  their  habits,  their  re- 
sources, and  their  strong  and  weak  points,  until  he  was 
able  to  devise  a  safe  means  of  attacking  and  exterminating 
them.  For  instance,  he  soon  found  out  that  their  common 
abode  was  a  vast  cave,  which  possessed  only  one  entrance. 
He  also  discovered  that  his  hated  foes  experienced  insur- 
mountable difficulty  in  facing  the  light  of  the  sun.  Fur- 
nished with  this  valuable  information,  he  hastened  to 
convene  a  general  meeting  of  the  crows.  He  counselled 
them  all  to  take  in  their  beaks  as  much  straw,  twigs,  and 
other  combustible  material  as  they  could  carry  and  to 
follow  him  quietly.  Accordingly  some  thousands  of  his 
fellows  spread  their  wings  and  arrived  at  midday  near  the 
cave,  where  the  owls,  their  enemies,  were  slumbering  in 
fancied  security.  The  crows  heaped  up  before  the  entrance 
of  the  cave  the  inflammable  material  they  had  brought 
with  them  and  set  fire  to  it  all.  The  majority  of  the  owls 
were  instantly  suffocated  by  the  smoke,  while  those  which 
attempted  to  fly  away  perished  in  the  flames. 

A  monkey  and  a  crocodile  are  the  characters  represented 
in  the  fourth  fable.  It  illustrates  the  dangers  to  which 
one  is  exposed  by  associating  with  wicked  persons  whose 
friendship  and  affection,  however  sincere  they  may  appear 
to  be  to  start  with,  result  sooner  or  later  in  treachery, 
especially  if  their  own  interests  are  at  stake.  This  is  the 
attitude  manifested  by  the  crocodile  towards  his  friend, 
the  monkey,  who  had  reposed  the  utmost  confidence  in 


440      THE    BRAHMIN   AND    HLS   MONGOOSE 

him.  The  monkey,  however,  succeeds  in  evading  by  his 
cunning  the  treacherous  plot  which  the  crocodile  devised 
for  his  destruction. 

The  fifth  fable  is  about  a  Brahmin  and  his  mongoose,  and 
illustrates  the  imprudence  of  judging  rashly  by  appear- 
ances. A  Brahmin  once  possessed  a  mongoose,  to  which 
his  wife  and  himself  were  very  much  attached.  The  same 
Brahmin  had  a  child  which  was  still  in  the  cradle.  One 
day,  being  obliged  to  leave  the  house  on  some  very  pressing 
business,  and  there  being  nobody  to  take  care  of  the  child, 
the  Brahmin  entrusted  it  to  his  mongoose,  telling  the  little 
animal  that  it  would  have  to  answer  with  its  life  for  any 
accident  that  might  happen  to  the  infant  during  his  absence. 
As  soon  as  the  Brahmin  had  gone  out,  the  mongoose  took 
up  its  place  quite  close  to  the  cradle,  determined  to  perish 
rather  than  permit  the  slightest  injury  to  the  precious  being 
entrusted  to  its  care.  Now  it  happened  that  a  huge  snake 
had,  unobserved,  found  its  way  into  the  house  by  a  crevice 
in  the  wall.  Issuing  from  its  hiding-place,  it  approached 
the  cradle  and  prepared  to  attack  the  child.  The  mon- 
goose no  sooner  perceived  the  frightful  reptile  than  it 
rushed  furiously  upon  it,  and,  after  a  long  and  painful 
struggle,  seized  it  by  the  throat,  strangled  it,  and  in  its 
rage  tore  it  to  pieces.  Soon  afterwards  the  Brahmin  re- 
turned. The  mongoose,  recognizing  the  voice  of  its  master, 
ran  to  him  and  tried  to  express  its  joy  by  rolling  at  his 
feet,  playfully  biting  at  his  legs,  snowing  indeed  every 
manifestation  of  delight  at  having  performed  such  a  brave 
deed.  The  Brahmin,  however,  having  carefully  examined 
the  mongoose,  and  finding  it  covered  with  the  blood  which 
had  flowed  from  the  wounds  of  the  serpent,  rashly  con- 
cluded that  the  blood  could  only  be  that  of  his  infant 
child,  whom,  as  he  thought,  the  mongoose  had  killed  ; 
and,  in  a  fit  of  rage,  he  seized  a  thick  stick  which  was 
close  by  and  killed  the  poor  animal  on  the  spot. 

However,  what  were  his  grief  and  despair  when  on 
entering  the  room  where  he  had  left  his  child,  he  found  it 
calmly  sleeping  ;  while  around  the  cradle  were  the  scattered 
remains  of  the  huge  snake  which  the  mongoose  had  just- 
killed  !  He  bitterly  reproached  himself  for  his  imprudence 
and  rashness,  but,  alas  !  too  late  ;  and  was  grieved  sorely 


THE    BRAHMIN   KALA-SARMA  441 

at  the  thought  that  he  had  inconsiderately  sacrificed  the 
poor  animal,  to  whom  alone  he  was  indebted  for  the  pre- 
servation of  his  beloved  son  \ 

The  author  of  the  Pancha-tantra  has  introduced  into  these 
five  principal  fables  a  large  number  of  minor  fables  which 
are  related  by  the  respective  characters  to  each  other. 
Some  of  these  latter  resemble  those  of  Aesop,  but  are  far 
more  prolix.  The  Pancha-tantra  is  so  constructed  that  one 
fable,  before  it  is  finished,  suggests  another,  which  in  its 
turn  suggests  a  third,  and  so  on.  A  great  deal  of  ingenuity 
is  displayed  in  this  plan  of  narration  ;  but  the  continuous 
dovetailing  of  one  story  into  another  is  very  wearisome  to 
the  reader,  who  sometimes  loses  sight  altogether  of  the 
beginning  of  a  story,  which  only  ends  later  on  in  the  work. 

A  literal  translation  of  a  few  of  these  fables  will  give 
my  readers  a  fair  idea  of  the  rest  of  them.  The  following 
are  extracted  from  the  first  part  of  the  Pancha-tantra  : — 

The  Adventures  of  the  Brahmin  Kala-Sarma. 

The  Brahmin  and  the  Crab. 

Once  upon  a  time,  in  the  city  of  Soma-Puri,  there  lived 
a  Brahmin  named  Kala-Sarma,  who,  after  existing  for  a 
long  time  in  penury,  suddenly  found  himself  raised  to 
opulence  by  a  happy  combination  of  circumstances.  He 
thereupon  resolved  to  undertake  a  pilgrimage  to  the  holy 
city  of  Benares,  there  to  obtain  pardon  for  all  his  sins  by 
bathing  in  the  waters  of  the  sacred  Ganges.  On  his  way 
thither,  he  one  day  reached  the  river  Sarasvati,  flowing 
through  a  desert  which  he  was  crossing.  He  determined 
to  perform  his  usual  ablutions  in  it  ;  and  no  sooner  had  he 
stepped  into  the  water  than  he  saw  coming  towards  him 
a  crab,  which  asked  him  where  he  was  going.  Learning 
that  he  was  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the  Ganges,  the  crab  re- 
quested the  Brahmin  to  carry  it  with  him  to  this  sacred 
river,  promising  in  return  for  this  service  to  remember  his 
kindness  all  its  life,  and  to  do  all  that  lay  in  its  power  to 

1  A  tale  exactly  similar  to  this  has  been  long  current  in  Europe.  It 
has  been  told  both  in  story-books  and  pictures.  The  circumstances  are 
exactly  the  same,  with  the  exception  that  the  animal  which  fell  a  victim 
to  the  rashness  of  its  master  is  a  dog  instead  of  a  mongoose. — Dubois. 


442  THE   BRAHMIN   AND   THE   CRAB 

be  of  use  to  him  should  an  opportunity  offer  itself.  The 
Brahmin,  astonished  at  the  crab's  promise,  asked  how  a 
creature  so  weak  and  despicable  as  itself  could  possibly 
be  of  any  service  to  a  man,  and  especially  to  a  Brahmin. 
To  this  the  crab  replied  by  the  following  fable  : — 

The  King,  the  Elephant,  and  the  Brahmin. 

In  the  city  of  Prabavathi-Patna  there  lived  a  king  named 
Adita-Varma.  One  day  the  king,  when  out  hunting  with 
a  crowd  of  attendants  in  the  midst  of  a  dense  forest, 
observed  a  huge  elephant  approaching,  whose  sudden 
appearance  spread  terror  among  his  followers.  The  king, 
however,  succeeded  in  calming  the  fears  of  his  people, 
and  told  them  that  they  must  try  to  capture  the  animal 
and  lead  it  away  to  his  palace.  Accordingly,  they  dug 
a  deep  pit,  covering  it  with  branches  and  leaves.  This 
done,  the  whole  company  surrounded  the  elephant,  leaving 
only  one  passage  leading  to  the  pit  for  him  to  escape,  into 
which,  in  fact,  the  elephant  eventually  fell.  The  king  was 
delighted  at  their  success,  and  told  them  that  before  trying 
to  release  the  elephant  from  the  pit  they  must  keep  it 
starving  there  for  eight  days,  when,  having  lost  all  its 
strength,  it  might  be  more  easily  made  captive.  Accord- 
ingly, everybody  retired,  leaving  the  elephant  in  the  trap. 
Two  days  afterwards,  a  Brahmin  who  was  travelling  on 
the  banks  of  the  river  Jumna  happened  to  pass  that  way, 
and  seeing  the  elephant  in  the  pit,  asked  the  animal  by 
what  unfortunate  accident  it  found  itself  there.  The 
elephant  told  him  about  its  sad  adventure,  complaining  at 
the  same  time  of  the  torments  which  it  was  enduring,  not 
only  from  the  fall,  but  by  hunger  and  thirst.  It  besought 
the  Brahmin  to  have  pity  and  to  help  it  to  regain  its  liberty. 
The  Brahmin  replied  that  it  was  quite  beyond  his  physical 
powers  to  drag  out  from  such  a  deep  pit  a  body  of  such 
huge  weight  and  bulk.  But  the  elephant  still  further 
entreated  him,  and  besought  him  at  any  rate  to  give  it 
the  benefit  of  his  advice  as  to  how  it  was  possible  to  escape 
from  the  dangers  which  threatened  it.  To  this  the  Brahmin 
replied  that  if  it  had  formerly  rendered  service  to  anybody, 
it  should  now  invoke  that  person's  aid.  '  I  do  not  re- 
member,' answered  the  elephant,  '  to  have  rendered  service 


THE   ELEPHANT   AND  THE   RATS  443 

to  any  one  except  to  the  rats,  which  I  did  in  the  following 
manner  : — 

The  Elephant  and  the  Rats. 

k  In  the  country  of  Kalinga-Desa  there  lived  a  king 
named  Swarna-Bahu  l,  who  suddenly  found  his  kingdom 
infested  with  myriads  of  rats,  which  destroyed  every  living 
plant  and  spread  desolation  everywhere.  His  subjects, 
unable  to  subsist  in  the  midst  of  such  a  plague,  waited 
upon  the  king  and  entreated  him  to  devise  some  means  of 
freeing  the  country  from  the  ravages  of  these  destructive 
creatures.  The  king  immediately  mustered  all  the  hunters 
and  trappers  in  his  kingdom,  who,  furnished  with  nets  and 
snares  of  all  kinds,  proceeded  at  once  to  make  war  on  the 
rats.  By  dint  of  much  labour  and  patience,  they  succeeded 
at  last  in  drawing  all  the  rats  from  their  holes,  every  one 
of  them  being  captured  and  shut  up  alive  in  large  earthen 
vessels,  where  they  were  left  to  perish  of  hunger. 

'  Meanwhile,'  continued  the  elephant,  '  I  happened  to  be 
passing  by  the  spot  where  the  rats  were  huddled  up  in 
confinement.  Their  chief,  hearing  me  coming,  called  out 
to  me  and  entreated  me  to  have  compassion  on  him  and  his 
companions  and  to  save  their  lives,  which,  said  he,  was 
extreme^  easy,  since  all  that  was  necessary  was  to  kick 
to  pieces  the  earthen  vessels  which  held  them  captive. 
Touched  with  pity  at  the  sad  lot  of  these  unfortunate 
creatures,  I  shattered  their  temporary  prisons,  and  thus 
rescued  them  all  from  certain  death.  The  chief  of  the 
rats,  after  thanking  me  profusely,  promised  that  he  and 
his  companions  would  for  ever  remember  the  signal  service 
I  had  rendered  them,  and  swore  that  they  would  requite  my 
kindness  should  I  ever  happen  to  get  into  any  difficulty.' 

When  the  elephant  had  finished  its  story,  the  Brahmin 
advised  it  to  call  to  its  aid  the  rats,  whom  it  had  so  signally 
helped.  He  then  wished  it  a  speedy  deliverance  and  pro- 
ceeded on  his  journey. 

The  elephant,  left  to  itself,  concluded  it  could  not  do 
better  than  follow  the  advice  given  by  the  Brahmin.  At 
the  call  of  the  elephant,  the  chief  of  the  rats  immediately 
ran  to  its  aid.     No  sooner  did  the  elephant  perceive  its 

1  Swarna-Bahu  means  '  golden-armed.' — Ed. 


444  DIMINUTIVE   AIDS   TO   STRENGTH 

little  friend  than  it  explained  the  misfortunes  that  had 
befallen  it,  as  well  as  the  troubles  with  which  it  was  still 
threatened,  and  entreated  the  rat  to  help  it  somehow  or 
other  out  of  its  prison. 

'  The  service  which  thou  standest  in  need  of,  my  lord 
elephant,'  answered  the  rat,  '  presents  no  difficulties  to  me  ; 
be,  therefore,  of  good  courage,  and  I  promise  to  effect  thy 
deliverance  very  shortly.' 

The  chief  of  the  rats  immediately  assembled  several 
millions  of  its  subjects,  and  led  them  to  the  pit  where  their 
liberator  was  buried.  They  set  to  work  at  once  to  burrow 
all  round,  throwing  the  earth  into  the  pit,  which  gradually 
rilled  little  by  little  until  the  elephant  was  able  to  reach 
the  surface  and  shake  itself  free  from  all  danger. 

At  the  close  of  this  fable  the  crab  thus  addressed  the 
Brahmin  :  '  If  a  rat  was  able  to  render  such  a  signal  service 
to  an  elephant,  is  it  not  possible  that  an  opportunity  might 
occur  when  I  might  be  in  a  position  to  oblige  thee  and  to 
testify  my  gratitude  to  thee  ?  ' 

The  Brahmin  Kala-Sarma,  delighted  at  finding  so  much 
intelligence  in  such  an  insignificant  creature,  no  longer 
hesitated  to  take  the  crab  with  him,  and  putting  it  in  his 
travelling  bag,  proceeded  on  his  journey.  One  day,  while 
traversing  a  dense  forest  at  midday,  when  the  sun  was 
hottest,  he  halted  to  rest  beneath  the  shade  of  a  thick  tree, 
where  he  soon  fell  asleep  ;  and  this  is  what  happened 
while  he  was  buried  in  deep  slumber  : — 

The  Crow,  the  Serpent,  the  Brahmin,  and  the  Crab. 

Near  the  tree  under  which  the  Brahmin  Kala-Sarma  was 
enjoying  his  peaceful  slumber,  a  huge  snake  had  taken  up 
its  abode  in  a  white-ant  heap,  and  in  the  branches  of  the 
same  tree  a  crow  had  built  its  nest.  Now  the  crow  and  the 
serpent  had,  in  the  capacity  of  neighbours,  contracted  a  close 
alliance.  When  any  wearied  traveller  happened  to  rest  under 
the  shade  of  the  tree,  the  crow  by  a  certain  cry  gave  notice 
immediately  to  its  friend  the  snake,  and  the  latter,  forth- 
with emerging  from  its  retreat,  quietly  approached  the 
traveller  and  bit  him,  causing  instantaneous  death.  There- 
upon the  crow  would  call  its  fellow-crows  together,  and 
the  whole  of  them  would  fall  upon  the  corpse  and  devour  it. 


THE   CROW   AND  THE  CRAB  445 

No  sooner  had  the  crow  perceived  that  the  Brahmin 
pilgrim  was  sound  asleep  than  it  gave  the  serpent  notice 
by  the  usual  signal.  The  snake  immediately  issued  from 
its  retreat  and  bit  the  Brahmin,  killing  him  instantly  by  its 
deadly  venom.  The  crow  hastened  to  summon  its  friends 
and  relations,  and  the  whole  of  them  pounced  together  on 
the  corpse.  But  as  they  were  preparing  to  devour  it,  the 
head  crow  espied  something  moving  in  the  bag  of  the 
traveller,  and  curious  to  know  what  it  was,  put  its  head 
into  the  bag.  Thereupon  the  crab  caught  it  by  the  neck 
with  its  claws  and  proceeded  to  strangle  it  to  death.  The 
crow  cried  aloud  for  mercy,  but  the  crab  swore  that  it 
would  not  let  go,  unless  the  Brahmin  whose  death  the  crow 
had  just  caused  was  restored  to  life.  The  crow  made 
known  to  its  companions  the  extremity  in  which  it  found 
itself  and  the  conditions  under  which  the  crab  agreed  to 
spare  its  life.  It  besought  its  comrades  to  go  in  all  haste 
and  tell  its  friend  the  snake  of  its  critical  situation,  and  to 
request  it  to  reanimate  the  body  of  the  Brahmin  without 
delay.  The  snake,  informed  of  the  misfortune  that  had 
befallen  its  friend,  approached  the  deceased,  applied  its 
mouth  to  the  spot  where  it  had  bitten  him,  sucked  out  all 
the  venom  with  which  it  had  poisoned  him,  and  restored 
him  to  life. 

When  the  Brahmin  regained  his  senses  he  was  not  a  little 
surprised  to  see  his  crab  holding  a  crow  fast  imprisoned  in 
its  claws.  The  crab  gave  him  an  account  of  what  had  just 
happened,  at  which  the  traveller,  who  had  believed  himself 
to  be  waking  from  a  sweet  slumber,  was  exceedingly 
amazed.  '  However,'  said  he  to  the  crab,  '  since  the  crow 
has  satisfied  the  conditions  which  thou  didst  ask  of  him, 
thou  must  also  fulfil  the  promise  which  thou  madest  to 
him  of  sparing  his  life  ;  let  him,  therefore,  go  now.' 

But  the  crab,  desiring  to  punish  the  wicked  crow  in 
a  proper  manner,  and  fearing  to  carry  out  its  design  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  snake,  answered  that  it  would  set 
its  captive  free  only  at  some  distance  from  the  spot  where 
they  were.  The  Brahmin,  therefore,  carried  them  both 
a  little  farther  on,  and  then,  opening  his  bag,  told  the  crab 
to  hesitate  no  longer  in  fulfilling  his  promise. 

'  Foolish  man  !  '  answered  the  crab,  '  can  we  attach  the 


Hii       THE   PILGRIM  AND  THE   CROCODILE 

least  fait  1 1  to  the  words  of  the  wicked  \  Can  we  ever  rely 
on  their  promises  ?  Thou  art,  of  course,  ignorant  of  the 
fact  that  this  treacherous  crow  has  already  caused  the 
death  of  a  host  of  innocent  beings,  and  that  if  I  now  set 
him  free  he  will  cause  a  still  greater  number  to  perish. 
Wouldst  thou  like  to  know  what  good  people  gain  by 
obliging  the  wicked  ?  Wouldst  thou  like  to  learn  how  the 
latter  ought  to  be  treated  when  once  they  are  in  our  power  ? 
The  following  fable  will  teach  thee  : — 

The  Brahmin,  the  Crocodile,  the  Tree,  the  Cow,  and  the  Fox. 

'  Once  upon  a  time,  in  the  Brahmin  village  of  Agni-sthala, 
situated  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Jumna,  there  lived 
a  Brahmin  named  Astika.  While  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the 
Ganges,  he  happened  one  day  to  reach  a  river  in  which  he 
intended  to  perform  his  ablutions.  No  sooner  had  he  stepped 
into  the  water  than  a  crocodile  approached  him,  and  learn- 
ing the  purpose  for  which  he  had  undertaken  the  journey, 
entreated  him  most  earnestly  to  carry  it  with  him  to  the 
waters  of  the  sacred  river,  where  it  hoped  to  be  able  to  live 
more  at  its  ease  than  in  that  river,  which  frequently  ran 
dry  during  the  hot  season  and  caused  it  the  most  terrible 
sufferings.  The  Brahmin,  moved  to  compassion,  allowed 
the  crocodile  to  get  into  his  bag,  and,  hoisting  it  on  his 
shoulders,  proceeded  on  his  journey.  On  reaching  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges  the  pilgrim  opened  his  bag,  and  point- 
ing out  to  the  crocodile  the  waters  of  the  river,  bade  it 
crawl  in.  The  crocodile,  however,  replied  that  it  felt  tired 
out  by  the  long  journey  they  had  made  together,  and  was 
not  strong  enough  to  reach  the  water  by  itself.  It  there- 
fore requested  the  Brahmin  to  carry  it  in  to  a  certain 
depth.  The  Brahmin,  without  the  least  suspicion  of  foul 
play,  complied  with  this  last  request  of  the  crocodile.  He 
advanced  as  far  as  he  could  into  the  bed  of  the  river  and 
there  deposited  his  travelling  companion.  Just  as  he  was 
turning,  however,  the  crocodile  seized  him  by  the  leg  and 
tried  to  drag  him  into  deeper  water.  Filled  with  dismay, 
and  incensed  at  such  perfidy,  the  pilgrim  exclaimed  :  '  O 
deceitful  and  wicked  villain  !  Is  it  thus  that  thou  returnest 
evil  for  good  ?     Is  this  the  kind  of  honesty  which  thou 


AN  APPEAL  TO  ARBITRATION  447 

practisest  \  Is  this  the  gratitude  which  1  have  to  expect 
from  thee  for  the  service  I  have  rendered  ?  " 

1  "  Nonsense  !  "  replied  the  crocodile.  "  Why  dost  thou 
talk  to  me  of  honesty  and  gratitude  %  The  only  honesty  of 
our  days  is  to  ruin  those  who  cherish  us." 

1  "  Be  pleased,  at  any  rate,  to  stay  the  execution  of  thy 
perfidious  design  for  a  little  while,"  entreated  the  Brahmin, 
"  and  let  us  see  if  the  morality  which  thou  professest  would 
be  approved  by  anybody.  Let  us  refer  the  matter  to 
arbitrators  ;  and  should  there  be  found  only  three  who 
approve  thy  mode  of  acting  and  thinking,  I  consent  to  be 
devoured  by  thee." 

1  The  crocodile  yielded  to  the  wishes  of  the  Brahmin,  and 
agreed  to  defer  the  sacrifice  until  it  had  secured  the  appro- 
bation of  three  arbitrators  who  saw  nothing  to  blame  in  it. 

1  They  applied  first  of  all  to  a  mango-tree  planted  on  the 
river  bank.  The  Brahmin  asked  the  tree  if  it  was  right  to 
do  evil  to  those  who  had  done  us  good. 

*  "  I  do  not  know,"  answered  the  mango-tree,  "  if  that  is 
permitted  or  not  ;  but  I  know  very  well  that  it  is  just  the 
kind  of  treatment  which  men  like  you  mete  out  to  me. 
I  appease  their  hunger  by  nourishing  them  with  my  succu- 
lent fruits  ;  and  I  shield  them  from  the  heat  of  the  sun 
by  sheltering  them  under  my  shade.  Yet,  as  soon  as  old 
age  or  any  accident  makes  me  unfit  to  render  them  such 
services,  they,  forgetting  my  past  kindness,  cut  my  branches, 
and  lastly  deprive  me  of  life  itself  by  digging  up  my  very 
roots.  Hence  I  conclude  that  honesty  among  men  consists 
in  destroying  those  who  cherish  them." 

'  The  crocodile  and  the  Brahmin  then  accosted  an  old 
cow  which  was  grazing  without  a  keeper  on  the  banks  of 
the  river.  The  Brahmin  asked  if  it  was  not  an  offence 
against  honesty  to  do  evil  to  those  who  had  done  good  to  us. 

'  "  What  dost  thou  mean  by  the  word  honesty  %  "  answered 
the  cow.  "  Honesty  in  our  days  consists  in  harming  those 
who  have  rendered  us  service  ;  I  have  learned  this  only  too 
well  from  any  own  sad  experience.  Till  recently  I  rendered 
most  important  services  to  man.  I  ploughed  his  fields  ; 
I  gave  him  calves  ;  I  nourished  him  with  my  milk.  But, 
alas  !  now  that  I  am  grown  old  and  unfit  to  be  of  service 
to  him,  he  has  discarded  me.     Forsaken  and  helpless  on 


448  THE   WILY   FOX 

the  banks  of  this  river,  I  find  myself  exposed  at  every 
moment  to  the  fury  of  wild  beasts." 

'  The  opinion  of  a  third  arbitrator  only  was  wanting  to 
complete  the  ruin  of  the  Brahmin.  Perceiving  a  fox,  he 
asked  him  the  same  question  that  he  had  asked  the  mango- 
tree  and  the  cow.  But  before  making  an  answer  the  fox 
wished  to  be  better  informed  of  the  points  at  issue.  So 
the  Brahmin  gave  a  detailed  account  of  the  services  he  had 
rendered  to  the  crocodile  and  of  the  treacherous  act  that 
the  latter  was  meditating.  The  fox  laughed  heartily,  and 
seemed  at  first  to  be  going  to  decide  in  favour  of  the  croco- 
dile. "  However,"  said  he,  "  before  pronouncing  a  final 
judgement  on  your  affair,  I  must  see  how  you  both  travelled 
together." 

'  The  crocodile,  without  the  least  suspicion  as  to  what 
the  fox  intended  to  do,  and  without  the  least  hesitation, 
got  into  the  bag,  which  the  Brahmin  then  hoisted  upon  his 
back.  The  fox  told  the  Brahmin  to  follow  him,  and  on 
reaching  an  isolated  spot  he  made  signs  to  the  Brahmin  to 
place  his  load  on  the  ground.  No  sooner  had  the  latter 
done  so  than  the  fox  took  a  huge  stone  and  smashed  the 
head  of  the  crocodile  with  it.  Then  turning  to  the  Brahmin, 
the  fox  said  :  "  Foolish  man  that  thou  art,  may  the  dangers 
to  which  thou  hast  been  exposing  thyself  teach  thee  to  be 
more  careful  in  future  !  Remember  well  that  we  should 
never  make  friends  or  associates  of  the  wicked."  The  fox 
then  called  his  family  together  and  made  an  excellent  meal 
of  the  dead  crocodile  ;  and  the  Brahmin,  after  accomplish- 
ing the  object  of  his  pilgrimage  by  bathing  in  the  waters 
of  the  Ganges,  returned  home  safe  and  sound. 

'  This  fable,'  said  the  crab  to  his  benefactor  the  Brahmin, 
who  was  attentively  listening  to  his  narrative,  '  ought  to 
convince  thee  that  no  covenant  should  be  made  with  the 
wicked,  and  that  we  may  without  the  least  scruple  fail  in 
our  word  to  them.  When  we  happen  to  have  them  in  our 
power,  we  should  ruthlessly  destroy  them.'  Saying  this, 
the  crab  tightened  its  clasp  on  the  crow  and  strangled  it 
to  death. 

After  this  exhibition  of  exemplary  punishment  the 
Brahmin  Kala-Sarma,  taking  up  the  crab  again,  continued 
his    journey  ;  and    when    he    reached    the    river    Ganges, 


ANTIQUITY   OF  THE   FABLES  449 

deposited  his  little  benefactor  there,  as  desired.  After 
expressing  his  deep  gratitude  for  the  signal  service  the 
crab  had  rendered  to  him  in  saving  his  life,  he  performed 
his  ablutions  in  the  sacred  river  and  returned  to  his  own 
country,  which  he  reached  without  further  accident. 

I  will  not  relate  any  more  of  these  fables,  though  most  of 
them  are  very  instructive.  My  intention  has  been  merely 
to  draw  the  attention  of  my  readers  to  a  work  which,  in 
my  opinion,  is  the  most  interesting  and  useful  in  the  whole 
range  of  Hindu  literature. 

It  is  impossible  to  determine  the  age  of  these  fables, 
since  no  authentic  evidence  of  their  date  is  now  extant. 
It  is  supposed  that  they  were  translated  into  Persian 
towards  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century,  under  the  reign 
of  the  Emperor  Nurjehan  ;  and  the  fragments  which  have 
been  published  in  Europe  have,  no  doubt,  been  extracted 
from  this  Persian  translation.  Indeed,  La  Fontaine  himself 
appears  to  have  gone  to  it  for  some  of  his  fables. 

The  Hindus  themselves  place  the  Pancha-tantra  among 
their  oldest  literary  productions  ;  and  the  wide  popularity 
which  it  enjoys  may  be  said  to  be  some  proof  in  favour  of 
this  opinion.  At  any  rate  the  fables  contained  in  this  work 
appear  to  be  older  than  those  of  Aesop.  It  is  uncertain 
what  was  the  birthplace  of  that  fabulist  ;  whence  we  may 
suppose  that  he  learnt  from  the  Hindu  philosophers  the  art 
of  making  animals  and  inanimate  beings  speak,  with  the 
view  of  teaching  mankind  their  faults. 

It  is  uncertain  whether  these  fables  were  originally  com- 
posed by  the  Brahmin  Vishnu-Sarma  in  verse  or  in  prose. 
They  were  most  probably  in  verse,  as  that  was  the  recog- 
nized mode  of  composition  in  ancient  India.  It  is  at  any 
rate  certain  that  copies  exist  of  the  Pancha-tantra  written 
in  Sanskrit  verse.  Thence  they  may  have  been  translated 
into  prose  for  the  instruction  and  amusement  of  those  to 
whom  the  poetic  language  was  not  familiar. 

The  five  principal  fables,  together  with  the  great  number 
of  minor  tales  interwoven  in  them,  form  a  volume  of  con- 
siderable size. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  such  a  work  should  have  an 
extensive  popularity  among  a  people  like  the  Hindus,  prone 

DUBOIS  Q 


450  PROFESSIONAL   STORY-TELLERS 

to  fiction  and  admiring  the  marvellous.  Nor  is  it  necessary, 
in  order  to  charm  an  imaginative  people  like  the  Hindus, 
to  exhibit  any  particular  wit  or  erudition.  There  are 
numbers  of  Hindus  who  make  it  their  sole  profession  to 
wander  from  one  place  to  another  relating  fables  and  stories 
which  are  very  often  utterly  devoid  even  of  common  sense. 
Men  of  the  shepherd  caste  in  particular  often  earn  a  liveli- 
hood in  this  manner.  Hence  the  saying,  It  is  a  shepherd's 
tale,  which  is  frequently  used  by  the  Hindus  to  show  that 
a  story  is  incredible. 

CHAPTEK  XXVII 

Hindu  Tales. 
The  Four  Deaf  Men. 

Once  upon  a  time  a  shepherd,  who  happened  to  be  deaf, 
was  tending  his  flock  near  his  village.  Though  it  was  past 
midday,  his  wife  had  not  yet  brought  him  his  breakfast. 
He  was  afraid  to  leave  his  sheep  to  fetch  his  food  lest 
some  accident  should  befall  them  ;  and  so,  after  waiting 
some  time  longer,  and  being  pressed  by  hunger,  he  adopted 
the  following  course.  There  chanced  to  be  a  taliari,  or 
village  watchman,  cutting  grass  for  his  cow  on  the  banks 
of  a  neighbouring  stream,  so  the  shepherd  went  up  to  him, 
though  rather  reluctantly,  for  men  of  this  class,  although 
placed  as  guardians  over  public  and  private  property  in 
the  village  and  supposed  to  prevent  any  thefts  being  com- 
mitted, are,  generally  speaking,  great  thieves  themselves. 
The  shepherd,  nevertheless,  requested  him  to  keep  an  eye 
on  his  flock  during  the  short  time  he  would  be  absent, 
and  assured  him  that  on  his  return  from  breakfast  he  would 
reward  him  handsomely  for  his  trouble. 

Now  the  taliari  happened  to  be  as  deaf  as  the  shepherd 
himself,  and  not  understanding  a  word  of  what  was  being 
spoken  to  him,  answered  angrily  as  follows  : — 

1  What  right  hast  thou  to  this  grass,  which  I  have  been 
at  such  trouble  to  cut  ?  Is  my  cow  to  starve,  while  thy 
sheep  are  being  fattened  at  its  expense  ?  Go  about  thy 
business  and  let  me  alone  !  '  As  he  finished  speaking  he 
made  an  expressive  motion  with  his  hand,  which  the  shep- 


A  MUTUAL  MISUNDERSTANDING  451 

herd  understood  as  a  signal  of  compliance  with  his  request. 
The  latter,  therefore,  immediately  ran  towards  the  village, 
fully  determined  to  give  his  wife  a  good  trouncing  for  her 
neglect.  But  he  had  no  sooner  reached  his  home  than  he 
saw  his  wife  stretched  in  the  doorway  and  rolling  in  the 
agonies  of  a  violent  colic,  the  result  of  eating  a  quantity 
of  raw  beans. 

At  the  sight  of  the  sufferings  of  his  poor  wife  the  anger 
of  the  shepherd  vanished,  although  he  saw  to  his  chagrin 
that  the  necessity  of  rendering  her  help  and  of  preparing 
his  own  breakfast  would  detain  him  longer  than  he  had 
expected.  Distrusting  the  honesty  of  the  taliari,  to  whom 
he  had  confided  the  care  of  his  flock,  he  made  all  possible 
haste,  and  finally  returned.  On  reaching  his  sheep,  which 
he  found  peacefully  grazing  at  some  distance  from  the  spot 
where  he  had  left  them,  his  first  thought  was  to  count  them  ; 
and  overjoyed  at  finding  that  there  was  not  a  single  one 
missing,  he  exclaimed  :  '  This  taliari  is  a  really  honest 
fellow  !  He  is  the  very  jewel  of  his  class.  I  promised 
him  a  reward,  and  he  shall  indeed  have  one.' 

Now  there  was  a  lame  sheep  in  the  flock,  which  was 
however  sound  enough  in  other  respects,  and  so  he  put  it 
on  his  shoulders  and  carried  it  to  the  taliari,  saying  to  him  : 
'  Thou  didst  indeed  watch  my  flock  very  carefully  during 
my  absence  ;  well,  here  is  a  sheep  which  thou  shalt  have 
as  a  reward  for  thy  trouble.'  But  the  taliari,  catching 
sight  of  the  lame  sheep,  exclaimed  angrily  :  '  What  dost 
thou  mean  by  accusing  me  of  having  broken  thy  sheep's 
leg  %  I  swear  that  I  have  not  stirred  from  the  spot  where 
thou  now  seest  me  ;  I  have  not  gone  near  thy  flock  !  ' 

'  Yes,'  answered  the  shepherd,  '  it  is  nice  and  fat  ;  it  will 
furnish  a  good  feast  for  thy  family  and  friends.' 

'  Have  I  not  told  thee,'  replied  the  taliari  in  a  rage, 
1  that  I  never  went  near  thy  sheep  ?  and  yet  thou  accusest 
me  of  having  broken  the  leg  of  one  of  them  !  Get  away 
from  here,  or  I  will  give  thee  a  sound  thrashing.'  And  he 
showed  by  his  gestures  that  he  was  determined  to  put  his 
threats  into  execution. 

The  shepherd,  perceiving  at  last  that  his  friend  was 
getting  into  a  passion,  and  unable  to  understand  the  cause 
of  this  unjust  provocation,  put  himself  into  an  attitude  of 


452         CONFUSION   WORSE   CONFOUNDED 

defence.  The  pair  were  all  but  coming  to  blows,  when 
a  man  on  horseback  happened  to  pass  by.  They  thereupon 
stopped  the  rider  ;  and  the  shepherd,  laying  hold  of  the 
bridle,  said  to  him  :  '  Sir,  kindly  listen  for  a  moment  and 
say  whether  it  is  I  who  am  in  the  wrong  in  this  dispute. 
I  want  to  present  this  man  with  a  sheep  as  a  reward  for 
a  small  service  which  he  has  rendered  me,  and  he  falls 
upon  me  and  wishes  to  fight  me.' 

The  taliari,  speaking  in  his  turn,  said  :  '  This  dolt  of 
a  shepherd  dares  to  accuse  me  of  having  broken  the  leg  of 
one  of  his  sheep,  whereas  I  did  not  even  go  near  his  flock.' 

Now  the  horseman  to  whom  they  had  appealed  as 
arbitrator  was  even  more  deaf  than  they  were,  and  not 
understanding  a  word  of  what  was  spoken  to  him,  replied  : 
'  Yes,  I  confess  that  this  horse  does  not  really  belong  to 
me.  I  found  him  straying  on  the  roadside  ;  I  was  in  a 
hurry,  and  I  mounted  him  so  that  I  might  get  along  faster. 
If  he  belongs  to  you,  take  him  by  all  means  ;  but  let  me 
continue  my  way,  for  I  have  no  time  to  lose.' 

The  shepherd  and  the  taliari,  each  imagining  that  the 
rider  had  decided  in  favour  of  his  adversary,  became  more 
violent  than  ever,  cursing  him  whom  they  had  chosen  as 
their  arbitrator,  and  accusing  him  roundly  of  partiality. 

At  this  crisis  an  aged  Brahmin  chanced  to  pass  by,  and 
as  he  appeared  more  fit  to  settle  their  differences  they  stopped 
him  and  requested  him  to  listen  to  them  for  a  moment. 
Shepherd,  taliari,  and  horseman  all  spoke  together  at  the 
same  time,  each  telling  his  own  tale  and  explaining  to  the 
Brahmin  the  subject  of  the  dispute,  and  requesting  him  to 
decide  which  of  them  was  in  the  wrong. 

The  Brahmin,  who  was  as  deaf  as  the  other  three,  re- 
plied :  '  Yes,  yes,  I  quite  understand  you.  My  wife  has 
sent  you  all  to  prevent  my  going  away,  and  to  persuade 
me  to  return  home  ;  but  I  have  quite  made  up  my  mind, 
and  you  will  not  succeed  in  your  attempt.  Now,  do  you 
all  know  my  wife  ?  She  is  a  real  shrew  !  It  is  impossible 
for  me  to  live  any  longer  with  such  a  harridan  !  Ever 
since  the  time  I  had  the  misfortune  to  buy  x  her,  she  has 
made  me  commit  more  sins  than  it  will  be  possible  for  me 

1 1  have  previously  remarked  that  '  to  marry  '  and  '  to  buy  a  woman  ' 
are  synonymous  terms  among  the  Hindus. — Dubois. 


CUTTING  THE   KNOT  453 

to  expiate  in  a  hundred  regenerations.  I  am  therefore 
going  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Kasi  (Benares),  and  on  reaching 
the  holy  city  I  mean  to  wash  myself  in  the  sacred  waters 
of  the  Ganges,  in  order  that  I  may  purify  myself  from  the 
innumerable  sins  which  her  wickedness  has  caused  me  to 
commit.  I  have  furthermore  made  up  my  mind  to  live 
henceforth  by  alms  in  a  foreign  country,  and  apart  from 
her.' 

While  they  were  all  four  shouting  thus  at  the  top  of  their 
voices,  without  being  able  to  understand  each  other,  the 
rider  perceived  at  a  distance  some  people  rapidly  approach- 
ing them.  Fearing  lest  they  might  be  the  owners  of  the 
horse  which  he  had  taken,  he  immediately  dismounted  and 
took  to  his  heels. 

The  shepherd,  finding  suddenly  that  it  was  getting  late, 
hastened  back  to  his  flock,  which  had  strayed  away  some 
distance,  uttering  curses  as  he  trudged  along  against  all 
arbitrators,  and  complaining  loudly  that  there  was  no  more 
justice  on  the  earth.  Finally  he  attributed  all  the  troubles 
and  disappointments  he  had  experienced  that  day  to  the 
fact  that  a  snake  had  crossed  his  path  *  in  the  morning. 

The  taliari  turned  to  his  load  of  grass  ;  and  finding  the 
lame  sheep  there,  took  it  up  on  his  shoulders  and  carried 
it  away  home,  to  punish  the  shepherd,  as  he  thought,  for 
the  unjust  quarrel  he  had  fastened  on  him. 

As  for  the  aged  Brahmin,  he  continued  his  way  till  he 
reached  a  neighbouring  choultry,  where  he  stopped  to  spend 
the  night.  Quiet  rest  and  sound  sleep  dispelled  the  feelings 
of  anger  and  ill-humour  which  he  had  cherished  against 
his  wife,  and  the  next  morning  several  Brahmins,  relatives 
and  friends  of  his,  came  in  search  of  him,  and  having  found 
him,  succeeded  at  last  in  soothing  his  temper  and  per- 
suading him  to  return  home,  promising  to  use  their 
best  endeavours  to  render  his  wife  more  obedient  and  less 
quarrelsome  in  future. 

The  Four  Foolish  Brahmins. 

In  a  certain  district  proclamation  had  been  made  of 
a  samaradhanam,  one  of  those  grand  feasts  given  to  Brah- 

1  This,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  is  one  of  the  most  evil  omens. — 
Dubois. 


454  FOUR   FOOLISH   BRAHMINS 

mins  on  divers  occasions.  Four  individuals  of  this  caste, 
having  each  set  out  from  a  different  village  to  attend  the 
feast,  happened  to  meet  each  other  on  the  road,  and  having 
discovered  that  they  were  all  proceeding  to  the  same  place, 
agreed  to  travel  together  during  the  remainder  of  their 
journey.  While  thus  walking  along  in  company,  they 
were  met  by  a  soldier  going  in  the  opposite  direction, 
who,  on  passing  them,  greeted  them  with  the  salutation 
generally  made  to  Brahmins  ;  that  is,  he  joined  his  hands 
together,  put  them  to  his  forehead,  and  said  :  '  Saranam 
ayya  !  '  ('  Respectful  greeting  to  you,  my  lord  !  ')  to  which 
the  four  Brahmins  replied  at  one  and  the  same  time  : 
' Asirvadam  !  '  ('  Our  blessing  !  '). 

Subsequently  they  reached  a  well  by  the  roadside,  and 
there  they  sat  down  to  quench  their  thirst  and  to  rest  for 
a  while  under  the  shade  of  a  neighbouring  tree.  While 
thus  occupied,  and  rinding  no  better  subject  of  conversa- 
tion, one  of  them  took  it  into  his  head  to  break  the  silence 
by  saying  to  the  others  :  '  You  will  admit  that  the  soldier 
whom  we  have  just  met  was  a  man  of  exceptional  polite- 
ness and  discernment.  Did  you  not  remark  how  he  singled 
me  out,  and  how  carefully  he  saluted  me  ?  ' 

'  It  was  not  you  whom  he  saluted,'  replied  the  Brahmin 
seated  next  to  him,  '  it  was  to  me  particularly  that  he 
addressed  his  greeting.' 

1  You  are  both  mistaken,'  exclaimed  the  third.  '  I  can 
assure  you  that  the  greeting  was  addressed  to  me  alone  ; 
and  the  proof  is  that  when  the  soldier  said  his  "  Saranam 
ayya"  he  cast  his  eyes  upon  me  !  ' 

'  Not  at  all,'  replied  the  fourth.  '  It  was  I  only  he 
saluted  ;  otherwise,  should  I  have  answered  him  as  I  did, 
by  saying  "  Asirvadam  "  ?  ' 

The  altercation  grew  so  warm  that  the  four  travellers 
were  at  last  on  the  point  of  coming  to  blows,  when  one  of 
them,  the  least  stupid  of  the  four,  wishing  to  prevent  so 
silly  a  quarrel  proceeding  to  extremes,  cried  as  follows  : — 
'  What  fools  we  are  to  be  thus  quarrelling  for  no  purpose  ! 
After  heaping  on  each  other  all  the  insults  we  are  capable 
of,  and  after  fighting  with  each  other  like  the  Sudra  rabble, 
shall  we  be  any  nearer  to  the  solution  of  our  differences  ? 
The  fittest  person  to  settle  the  controversy,  I  think,  is  he 


AN   AMBIGUOUS   ANSWER  455 

who  occasioned  it.  The  soldier  cannot  have  gone  very  far. 
Let  us,  therefore,  run  after  him  as  quickly  as  we  can,  and 
ascertain  from  him  which  of  us  four  it  was  whom  he  in- 
tended to  salute.' 

This  advice,  appearing  sound  to  all  of  them,  was  immedi- 
ately followed.  Accordingly,  the  four  set  off  in  pursuit  of 
the  soldier,  and  at  last,  quite  out  of  breath,  overtook  him 
about  a  league  beyond  the  place  where  he  had  saluted 
them.  No  sooner  had  they  caught  sight  of  him  than  they 
cried  out  to  him  to  stop  ;  and  before  they  had  quite  reached 
him  had  put  him  in  full  possession  of  the  points  of  their 
dispute,  requesting  him  to  settle  it  by  saying  to  which  of 
them  he  had  directed  his  salutation. 

The  soldier,  instantly  perceiving  the  character  of  the 
people  he  had  to  deal  with,  and  wishing  to  amuse  himself 
a  little  at  their  expense,  coolly  replied  that  he  intended  his 
salutation  for  the  greatest  fool  of  the  four,  and  then,  turning 
his  back  on  them,  continued  his  journey. 

The  Brahmins,  confounded  with  this  answer,  turned  back 
and  continued  their  journey  for  some  time  in  perfect  silence. 
But  the  greeting  of  the  soldier  had  taken  so  strong  a  hold 
of  them  that  at  last  they  could  remain  silent  no  longer. 
The  quarrel  was  therefore  renewed  with  greater  fury  than 
before.  The  point  at  issue  this  time  was  as  to  which  of 
the  four  was  entitled  to  the  distinction  mentioned  by  the 
soldier,  inasmuch  as  each  claimed  to  be  the  greatest  fool 
of  the  party. 

The  dispute  as  to  who  had  the  right  to  claim  this  extra- 
ordinary distinction  grew  so  hot  and  strong  that  a  hand- 
to-hand  scuffle  seemed  inevitable.  However,  the  one  who 
had  advised  conciliation  once  before  again  wisely  inter- 
posed with  the  view  of  making  peace,  and  spoke  as 
follows  : — 

'  I  think  myself  the  greatest  fool  of  us  all,  and  each  of 
you  thinks  the  same  thing  of  himself.  Now,  I  ask  you, 
is  it  by  screaming  at  the  top  of  our  voices  and  by  dealing 
each  other  blows  that  we  shall  arrive  at  a  decision  as  to 
which  of  the  four  is  the  greatest  fool  ?  No,  certainly  not  ; 
let  us  therefore  put  an  end  to  our  quarrel  for  the  time. 
Here  we  are  within  a  short  distance  of  Dharmapuri  ;  let 
us  go  thither  and  present  ourselves  at  the  choultry  (the  court 


455  PROOFS   OF   FOOLISHNESS 

of  justice),  and  request  the  authorities  to  settle  our  dispute  V 
As  this  advice  seemed  sensible  enough,  they  all  agreed  to 
adopt  it. 

They  could  not  have  arrived  at  the  choultry  at  a  more 
opportune  moment.  The  authorities  of  the  village  of 
Dharmapuri,  consisting  of  Brahmins  and  others,  were 
just  then  all  assembled  there  ;  and  as  there  was  no  other 
important  case  to  be  settled  that  day,  they  at  once  pro- 
ceeded with  the  hearing  of  the  cause  of  the  strangers,  who 
were  asked  to  explain  the  facts  of  their  case. 

One  of  the  four  thereupon  advanced  into  the  middle  of 
the  assembly  and  related,  without  omitting  the  slightest 
detail,  all  that  had  happened  in  connexion  with  the  greeting 
of  the  soldier  and  his  ambiguous  reply. 

On  hearing  the  details  of  the  case  the  whole  court  burst 
into  fits  of  laughter.  The  president,  who  was  a  man  of 
humorous  disposition,  was  delighted  at  having  found  so 
favourable  an  opportunity  of  amusing  himself.  Assuming, 
therefore,  a  grave  demeanour  and  ordering  every  one  to 
keep  silent,  he  thus  addressed  the  suitors  :  '  As  you  are 
strangers  and  quite  unknown  in  this  town,  it  is  impossible 
that  the  point  at  issue,  namely,  who  is  the  greatest  fool, 
can  be  proved  by  the  evidence  of  witnesses.  There  is  only 
one  way  that  I  can  see  in  which  you  can  enlighten  your 
judges.  Let  each  of  you  in  his  turn  disclose  to  us  some 
incident  of  his  life  on  which  he  considers  he  can  best  establish 
his  claim  to  egregious  folly.  After  hearing  you  all  in  turn, 
we  can  then  decide  as  to  which  of  the  four  has  a  right  to 
superiority  in  this  respect,  and  which  of  you  can  in  con- 
sequence claim  for  himself  exclusively  the  soldier's  greet- 
ing.' 

All  the  suitors  having  agreed  to  this  proposal,  one  of  the 
Brahmins  obtained  permission  to  speak,  and  addressed  the 
assembly  as  follows  : — '  I  am  very  poorly  clad,  as  you 
doubtless  see,  and  my  ragged  condition  does  not  date  from 
to-day.  I  will  tell  you  how  I  came  to  be  so  shabbily  attired. 
Many  years  ago  a  rich  merchant  of  our  neighbourhood,  who 
was  always  very  charitable  towards  Brahmins,  presented 
me  with  two  pieces  of  the  finest  cloth  that  had  ever  been 

1  Most  Indian  villages  even  to  this  day  possess  a  chavadi  or  choultry. 
where  the  village  authorities  meet  and  dispense  justice. — Ed. 


THE   BRAHMIN  AND   THE   CLOTHS  457 

seen  in  our  agraharam  (village).  I  showed  them  to  all  my 
friends,  who  never  failed  to  admire  them  greatly.  "  A 
beautiful  present  like  that,"  said  they  to  me,  "  can  only  be 
the  reward  of  good  deeds  performed  in  a  previous  birth." 
Before  putting  them  on  I  washed  them,  according  to  the 
usual  custom,  in  order  to  purify  them  from  the  defilement 
of  the  weaver's  and  merchant's  touch.  Now,  they  were 
hanging  up  to  dry  with  the  ends  fastened  to  two  branches 
of  a  tree,  when  a  dog  happening  to  come  that  way  ran 
under  them.  I  caught  sight  of  the  vile  animal  only  after 
it  had  got  some  distance  away,  and  I  was  therefore  not 
quite  sure  whether  it  had  touched  my  cloths  and  thus 
polluted  them.  I  asked  my  children  who  were  close  by 
about  it,  but  they  said  they  had  not  noticed  the  dog.  How, 
then,  was  I  to  make  sure  about  the  matter  ?  Well,  I 
decided  to  go  down  on  all-fours  till  I  was  about  the  height 
of  the  dog  ;  and  in  this  posture  I  crawled  under  the  cloths. 
"  Did  I  touch  them  ?  "  I  asked  my  children,  who  were 
watching  me.  They  answered,  "  No,"  and  I  leapt  with 
joy  at  the  happy  result.  Nevertheless,  a  moment  later  it 
struck  me  that  the  dog  might  possibly  have  touched  them 
with  his  tail.  So  to  be  quite  sure  of  this,  I  fastened  an 
upturned  sickle  on  my  back,  and  then,  again  crawling 
along  on  all-fours,  I  passed  a  second  time  under  the  cloths. 
My  children,  whom  I  had  asked  to  watch  carefully,  told 
me  that  this  time  the  sickle  had  just  touched  the  cloths. 
Not  doubting  in  the  least  that  the  end  of  the  dog's  tail  must 
have  also  touched  the  cloths  in  the  same  way,  I  laid  hold 
of  them,  and,  in  a  fit  of  thoughtless  rage,  tore  them  to 
pieces.  The  occurrence  soon  became  known  to  every- 
body in  the  neighbourhood,  and  I  was  everywhere  voted 
to  be  a  fool.  "  Even  if  the  dog  really  defiled  thy  cloths," 
said  one,  "  couldst  thou  not  have  removed  the  defilement 
by  washing  them  a  second  time  ?  "  Another  asked  why 
I  had  not  given  the  cloths  to  some  poor  Sudra  instead  of 
tearing  them  to  pieces.  "  Who  would  dream  of  giving 
you  cloths  again  after  such  senseless  folly  on  your  part  ?  " 
This  last  remark,  I  may  add,  has  proved  only  too  true  ; 
for  ever  since  then,  whenever  I  ventured  to  apply  to  any- 
body for  a  present  of  cloths,  the  usual  reply  has  been  that 
I  simply  wanted  them  to  tear  to  pieces.' 

Q  3 


458         THE   BRAHMIN   AND   THE   BARBER 

When  he  had  finished  his  story,  one  of  the  auditors 
remarked  to  him  :  '  You  seem  to  be  very  clever  at  crawling 
about  on  all-fours.'  '  Yes,  I  am  indeed  very  clever  at  it,' 
answered  the  Brahmin,  '  as  you  shall  see.'  And,  suiting 
his  action  to  his  words,  he  went  down  on  all-fours,  and 
proceeded  to  run  two  or  three  times  round  the  spectators, 
who  were  splitting  then  sides  with  laughter. 

'  Enough,  enough  !  '  cried  the  president.  '  All  that  we 
have  heard  and  seen  furnishes  evidence  very  much  in  your 
favour,  but  before  coming  to  any  decision  we  must  hear 
what  the  others  have  to  say  for  themselves.' 

A  second  Brahmin  accordingly  spoke  as  follows  ; — 

1  One  day,  in  order  to  present  a  decent  appearance  at 
a  samaradhanam  (treat  to  Brahmins),  which  had  been 
announced  in  our  neighbourhood,  I  called  in  the  barber 
to  shave  my  head  and  chin.  When  he  had  finished,  I  told 
my  wife  to  give  him  a  copper  coin  for  his  trouble  ;  but  by 
mistake  she  gave  him  two.  In  vain  did  I  request  the  barber 
to  return  me  the  other  coin.  He  was  obstinate,  and  refused 
to  do  so  ;  and  the  more  I  insisted  on  his  returning  it,  the 
more  stubborn  did  he  become.  The  dispute  was  becoming 
very  serious  when  the  barber,  assuming  a  milder  tone, 
observed  :  "  There  is  only  one  way  of  settling  the  difference 
between  us.  For  the  extra  coin  which  you  ask  me  to 
return  I  will  shave  your  wife's  head  as  well,  if  that  suits 
you."  "  Certainly,"  answered  I,  after  a  moment's  reflec 
tion  ;  "  your  proposal  will,  doubtless,  put  an  end  to  our 
quarrel  without  unfairness  on  either  side." 

'  My  wife,  hearing  what  was  about  to  happen  to  her, 
wished  to  run  away  ;  but  I  laid  hold  of  her  and  made  her 
sit  down,  while  the  barber,  armed  with  his  razor,  com- 
pletely shaved  her  head.  My  wife  kept  crying  out  most 
bitterly  the  whole  time,  abusing  and  cursing  both  of  us  ; 
but  I  let  her  rave,  for  I  preferred  seeing  her  head  clean 
shaven  to  giving  this  villain  of  a  barber  money  which  he 
had  not  rightly  earned.  My  wife,  deprived  thus  of  her 
beautiful  hair,  immediately  hid  herself  through  sheer 
shame,  and  dared  not  appear  again.  The  barber  also 
decamped,  and  meeting  my  mother  in  the  street,  related 
to  her  with  infinite  gusto  what  had  just  taken  place.  She 
at  once  hastened  to  the  house  to  assure  herself  of  the  fact, 


A  SAMARADHANAM  INCIDENT  459 

and  when  she  saw  her  daughter-in-law  completely  shorn, 
she  stood  motionless  and  dumbfounded  for  a  moment,  and 
then,  flying  into  a  fit  of  anger,  overwhelmed  me  with  curses 
and  insults,  which  I  bore  patiently  without  uttering  a 
word,  for  I  soon  began  to  feel  that  I  richly  deserved  them. 
The  villain  of  a  barber,  in  his  turn,  took  a  mischievous 
pleasure  in  telling  everybody  of  the  incident,  until  I  became 
the  general  laughing-stock.  Slanderous  people,  improving 
on  his  story,  were  not  slow  in  insinuating  that  the  object 
of  my  having  my  wife's  head  shaved  was  to  punish  her  for 
her  infidelity.  Crowds  gathered  about  the  door  of  my 
house,  and  even  an  ass  was  brought  to  carry  the  supposed 
adulteress  through  the  streets  in  the  manner  usual  on  such 
occasions. 

'  A  report  of  the  affair  soon  reached  the  ears  of  my  wife's 
relatives,  who  hastened  to  inquire  what  was  the  matter. 
You  can  easily  imagine  the  terrible  hubbub  and  trouble 
they  made  at  the  sight  of  their  unfortunate  daughter. 
They  immediately  took  her  away  with  them,  travelling  at 
night  that  she  might  be  spared  the  shame  of  being  exposed 
to  public  view  in  so  humiliating  a  condition,  and  they  kept 
her  for  four  years  without  coming  to  terms  of  any  kind 
with  me,  though  at  length  they  restored  her  to  me. 

'  This  unfortunate  incident  made  me  miss  the  samara- 
dhanam,  for  which  I  had  been  preparing  by  a  three  days' 
fast.  I  was  all  the  more  chagrined  to  find  afterwards  that 
it  was  a  most  sumptuous  feast,  and  that  ghee,  among  other 
good  things,  had  been  profusely  served.  A  fortnight  after- 
wards another  samaradhanam  was  announced,  which  I  had 
the  imprudence  to  attend.  I  was  greeted  with  howls  from 
more  than  eight  hundred  Brahmins  who  had  assembled 
there,  and  who,  seizing  me  by  force,  insisted  on  my  pub- 
lishing the  name  of  the  accomplice  of  my  wife's  guilt,  in 
order  that  he  might  be  prosecuted  and  punished  according 
to  the  rigid  rules  of  the  caste.  I  solemnly  asserted  that 
I  was  myself  the  guilty  party,  and  explained  to  them  all 
the  true  motive  that  induced  me  to  act  in  such  a  manner. 
My  hearers  were  immensely  surprised  at  what  I  told  them, 
and,  looking  at  each  other,  at  last  exclaimed  :  "Is  it 
possible  that  any  married  woman  who  has  not  violated 
the  laws  of  honour  should  have  her  head  shaved  1     This 


460  A  MARRIED  COUPLE'S   BET 

man  must  be  either  a  downright  impostor  or  the  greatest 
fool  on  the  face  of  the  earth."  And  I  hope,  gentlemen,' 
said  the  narrator  in  conclusion,  '  that  you  too  will  think 
the  same,  and  that  you  will  consider  my  folly  to  have  been 
far  superior  to  that  of  the  Brahmin  who  tore  his  cloths 
to  pieces.' 

The  assembly  agreed  that  the  speaker  had  put  forward 
a  very  strong  case  ;  but  justice  required  that  the  other 
two  should  also  be  heard. 

The  third  claimant,  who  was  burning  with  impatience 
to  speak,  addressed  the  court  as  follows  : — 

'  My  name  was  originally  Anantayya,  but  I  am  now 
known  everywhere  as  Betel  Anantayya,  and  here  follows  the 
reason  why  this  nickname  was  given  me. 

'  My  wife  had  been  living  with  me  for  about  a  month, 
after  having  remained  for  a  long  time  at  her  father's  house 
on  account  of  her  youth,  when  one  night  on  going  to  bed 
I  told  her — I  know  not  for  what  reason — that  all  women 
were  chatterboxes.  She  at  once  angrily  retorted  that  she 
knew  some  men  who  were  as  much  chatterboxes  as  women. 
I  saw  at  once  that  she  was  alluding  to  myself  ;  and  feeling 
extremely  piqued  at  the  sharpness  of  her  retort,  I  said  : 
"  Now,  just  let  us  see  which  of  us  two  will  speak  the  first  !  " 
"  Certainly,"  quoth  she  :  "  but  what  shall  the  loser  forfeit?" 
"  A  betel-leaf  1,"  answered  I ;  and  the  wager  being  thus 
made,  we  both  went  to  sleep  without  uttering  another 
word. 

'  The  next  morning,  when  the  sun  was  already  pretty 
high,  and  there  were  no  signs  of  our  appearing,  the  other 
people  in  the  house  called  out  to  each  of  us  by  name,  but 
received  no  answer.  They  shouted  louder  still,  and  still 
there  was  silence.  Then  they  knocked  violently  at  the  door 
of  our  room  ;  but  to  no  purpose.  Finally,  everybody  in 
the  house  became  thoroughly  alarmed,  suspecting  that  we 
had  both  died  suddenly  during  the  night.  The  carpenter 
of  the  village  was  accordingly  sent  for  in  hot  haste.  He 
was  soon  on  the  spot  with  his  tools,  and  promptly  broke 
open  the  door  of  our  room. 

'  Judge  of  the  surprise  of  all  when  they  found  both  of  us 
wide  awake  and  in  the  apparent  enjoyment  of  the  best  of 
1  Thirty  or  forty  of  these  leaves  could  be  had  for  a  farthing. — Dubois. 


MISTAKEN   CONJECTURES  461 

health,  but  deprived  of  the  use  of  speech.  Various  means 
were  adopted  to  induce  us  to  speak,  but  without  success. 
My  mother,  who  was  greatly  alarmed,  gave  loud  vent  to 
her  grief,  and  all  the  Brahmins  of  the  village,  both  men 
and  women,  flocked  to  our  house  to  learn  what  all  the 
noise  was  about.  The  house  was  soon  filled  with  people, 
and  each  drew  his  own  conclusions  as  to  the  accident  which 
was  supposed  to  have  befallen  us.  The  prevailing  opinion 
was  that  it  all  resulted  from  the  curse  of  some  secret  enemy. 
Accordingly,  my  relatives  forthwith  sent  for  a  famous 
magician  living  in  the  neighbourhood  to  counteract  the 
spell.  As  soon  as  he  arrived  he  began  by  fixing  his  eyes 
on  us  for  some  moments.  Then  he  walked  round  us  several 
times,  uttering  strange  words,  felt  different  parts  of  our 
bodies,  and  did  so  many  other  strange  things  that  the  re- 
membrance of  them  still  makes  me  laugh  whenever  I  think 
of  them.  At  last  he  declared  that  we  were  really  under 
the  influence  of  a  spell.  He  even  named  the  evil  spirit 
which,  according  to  him,  possessed  us,  and  described  it  as 
very  obstinate  and  uncontrollable.  Considering  the  difficul- 
ties that  he  would  have  in  expelling  it,  he  stated  that  five 
pagodas  at  least  would  be  required  to  meet  the  expenses  of 
the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies  that  must  be  performed 
if  he  was  to  be  successful. 

1  My  relatives,  who  were  by  no  means  well-to-do  people, 
were  utterly  dismayed  at  the  exorbitant  sum  demanded 
by  the  magician  ;  but  rather  than  allow  us  to  remain 
dumb,  they  agreed  to  his  terms,  and  promised  moreover 
to  give  him  a  suitable  present  if  he  succeeded  in  restoring 
to  us  the  use  of  our  tongues. 

'  The  magician  was  on  the  point  of  beginning  his  mystic 
ceremonies,  when  one  of  our  Brahmin  friends  who  was 
present  maintained,  in  opposition  to  everybody  else,  that 
what  we  were  suffering  from  was  a  simple  malady  enough, 
such  as  he  had  often  seen  before,  and  he  undertook  to  cure 
us  without  any  expense  whatever.  For  this  purpose  all 
that  he  required  was  a  plate  of  red-hot  charcoal  and  a 
small  bar  of  gold.  As  soon  as  these  had  been  brought  he 
heated  the  bar  of  gold  almost  to  melting-point  ;  then 
taking  it  up  with  pincers,  he  applied  it  red  hot  to  the 
soles  of  my  feet,  below  my  elbows,  on  the  pit  of  my  stomach, 


402  WHO  LOST  THE  WAGER 

and  lastly  on  the  top  of  my  head.  I  endured  these  cruel 
tortures  without  showing  the  smallest  symptom  of  pain 
or  uttering  the  least  complaint.  Indeed,  I  would  rather 
have  died,  if  necessary,  than  lose  the  bet  I  had  made. 
11  Now  let  us  try  the  remedy  on  the  woman,"  said  the 
shrewd  operator,  who  was  rather  discouraged  at  my  firm- 
ness. He  then  approached  my  wife  and  applied  the  red- 
hot  bar  of  gold  to  the  soles  of  her  feet.  But  no  sooner 
did  she  feel  the  effects  of  the  burning  than  she  quickly 
drew  away  her  leg,  and  cried  out,  "  Appah  !  Appah  !  " 
(Enough  !  Enough  !).  Then,  turning  towards  me,  she  said  : 
"I  have  lost  the  wager;  here  is  your  betel-leaf."  "Did 
I  not  tell  you,"  said  I,  taking  the  leaf,  "  that  you  would 
be  the  first  to  speak  ?  You  thus  prove  by  your  own 
conduct  that  I  was  right  in  saying  last  night,  when  we 
went  to  bed,  that  women  are  chatterboxes." 

'  The  spectators,  thoroughly  astounded,  were  gazing  at 
each  other  without  understanding  anything,  until  I  ex- 
plained to  them  the  wager  we  had  made  overnight  before 
going  to  sleep.  "  What  downright  folly  !  "  they  all  ex- 
claimed together.  "  What  !  "  said  they,  "  was  it  for  a  leaf 
of  betel  that  you  spread  this  alarm  in  your  own  house 
and  through  the  whole  village  ?  Was  it  for  a  leaf  of  betel 
that  you  showed  such  courage  in  allowing  yourself  to  be 
burnt  from  the  feet  to  the  head  ?  Never  in  the  whole 
world  was  there  seen  such  stupid  folly."  And  from  that 
time  I  have  always  gone  by  the  name  of  Betel  Anantayya.' 

This  story  appeared  to  the  assembly  remarkable  enough 
as  illustrating  extraordinary  foolishness  ;  but  it  was  only 
fair,  they  said,  that  they  should  hear  the  claims  that  the 
fourth  suitor  had  to  put  forward.  And  he,  having  been 
granted  permission  to  speak,  thus  addressed  the  assembly: — 

*  As  the  girl  to  whom  I  was  married  was  too  young  to 
cohabit  with  me,  she  continued  to  remain  for  six  or  seven 
years  in  her  father's  house.  At  last,  however,  she  attained 
the  proper  age,  and  I  was  duly  apprised  of  the  fact  by  her 
parents.  My  father-in-law's  house  was  six  or  seven  miles 
away  from  ours,  and  my  mother,  being  unwell  at  the  time 
we  received  this  happy  intelligence,  was  not  in  a  fit  state 
to  undertake  the  journey.  She  therefore  entrusted  to  me 
the  duty  of  fetching  my  wife  home.     She  counselled  me  so 


BRINGING   HOME   A   BRIDE  463 

to  conduct  myself  in  word  and  deed  that  the  girl's  parents 
might  not  discover  my  natural  stupidity.  "  Knowing  as 
I  do,"  said  my  mother  as  I  took  leave  of  her,  "  the  shallow- 
ness of  thy  pate,  I  very  much  fear  that  thou  wilt  commit 
some  foolish  mistake  or  other."  But  I  promised  to  con- 
form to  her  instructions  and  to  be  on  my  best  behaviour  ; 
and  so  departed. 

'  I  was  very  well  received  by  my  father-in-law,  who  gave 
a  grand  feast  to  all  the  Brahmins  of  the  village  in  honour 
of  my  visit.  At  length,  the  day  appointed  for  our  departure 
having  arrived,  my  wife  and  I  were  permitted  to  start.  On 
taking  leave  of  us,  my  father-in-law  poured  out  his  blessings 
upon  us  both,  but  wept  most  bitterly,  as  if  he  had  a  pre- 
sentiment of  the  misfortune  that  was  about  to  befall  his 
unfortunate  daughter. 

'  It  happened  to  be  the  hottest  part  of  the  year  ;  and  the 
heat,  on  the  day  of  our  departure,  was  something  terrible. 
Moreover,  we  had  to  traverse  a  desert  plain  several  miles 
across,  and  the  sand,  heated  by  the  burning  sun,  soon 
began  to  scorch  the  feet  of  my  young  wife,  who  had  been 
brought  up  in  comfort  in  her  father's  house,  and  was  not 
accustomed  to  such  hardships.  Unable  to  endure  the 
fatigues  of  the  journey,  she  burst  into  tears.  I  led  her  on 
by  the  hand,  and  tried  my  best  to  rally  her  spirits.  But 
it  was  in  vain.  She  soon  became  so  utterly  tired  that  she 
could  not  move  another  step,  and  lay  down  on  the  ground, 
declaring  that  she  was  prepared  to  die  on  that  very  spot. 
My  distress  may  easily  be  imagined.  Seated  by  her  side, 
I  could  not  think  what  to  do  next,  when  suddenly  I  spied 
a  merchant  passing  by,  leading  a  number  of  bullocks  laden 
with  various  kinds  of  goods.  I  accosted  him  at  once,  and, 
with  tears  in  my  eyes,  told  him  the  trouble  I  was  in,  and 
entreated  him  to  help  me  with  his  good  advice  in  my  dis- 
tressing position.  The  merchant  approached  my  wife, 
and,  looking  at  her  attentively,  informed  me  that,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  stifling  heat  then  prevailing,  the  poor 
girl's  life  would  be  equally  in  danger,  whether  she  remained 
where  she  was  or  proceeded  farther  on  her  journey.  "  Rather 
than  that  you  should  be  subjected  to  the  pain  of  seeing 
her  perish  before  your  very  eyes,  and  perhaps  also  be 
exposed  to   the   suspicion   of   having  yourself  killed  her, 


464  A   FORCED   SALE 

I  should  advise  you  to  give  her  up  to  me,"  he  said.  "  I 
will  put  her  on  the  back  of  one  of  my  best  bullocks,  and 
will  take  her  away  with  me,  thus  saving  her  from  certain 
death.  You  will,  it  is  true,  lose  her  ;  but  it  is  nevertheless 
far  better  that  you  should  lose  her  with  the  satisfaction  of 
having  saved  her  life  than  that  you  should  incur  the 
suspicion  of  having  killed  her.  As  for  her  jewels,  they 
cannot  be  worth  more  than  twenty  pagodas.  See,  here 
are  twenty-five  for  them,  and  you  shall  give  me  your 
wife."  The  arguments  of  the  man  seemed  to  me  quite 
unanswerable.  I  therefore  took  the  money  which  he 
offered  me,  while  he,  lifting  my  wife  in  his  arms,  placed 
her  on  one  of  his  bullocks,  and  made  haste  to  continue  his 
journey.  I  also  continued  mine,  and  reached  home  rather 
late,  my  feet  all  blistered  by  the  hot  sand  over  which  1  had 
to  walk  the  whole  way.  "  Where  is  thy  wife  ?  "  my 
mother  asked  me,  surprised  to  see  me  return  alone.  There- 
upon I  related  to  her  all  that  had  happened  since  I  had  left 
home,  and  finally  told  her  of  the  sad  accident  that  had 
happened  to  my  youthful  spouse,  and  how  I  had  given 
her  away  to  a  passing  merchant,  rather  than  be  a  witness 
of  her  death,  and  be  suspected  moreover  of  having  been 
the  cause  of  it.  At  the  same  time  I  showed  my  mother 
the  twenty- five  pagodas  that  I  had  received  from  the 
merchant  as  compensation. 

'  Filled  with  rage  at  what  I  had  told  her,  my  mother  was 
utterly  speechless  for  a  while  as  if  turned  into  stone.  Then 
her  suppressed  feelings  of  indignation  got  the  better  of 
her,  and  she  gave  vent  to  the  most  violent  imprecations 
and  curses  at  my  conduct.  "  Thou  fool,  thou  wretch  !  " 
exclaimed  she,  "  what  hast  thou  done  !  Sold  thy  wife, 
hast  thou  ?  Delivered  her  up  to  another  man  !  A  Brah- 
min wife  become  the  concubine  of  a  low-caste  merchant  ! 
What  will  people  think  of  it  ?  What  will  her  relatives  and 
ours  say  when  they  learn  this  disgraceful  story  ?  Is  it 
possible  to  imagine  a  more  egregious  instance  of  folly  and 
stupidity  1  "  The  sad  occurrence  which  had  happened  to 
my  wife  soon  reached  the  ears  of  her  relatives,  who  hastened 
to  my  village,  filled  with  rage  and  indignation,  and  fully 
resolved  to  beat  me  to  death.  And  they  certainly  would 
have  murdered  both  me  and  my  innocent  mother  had  we 


AWARDING  THE   PALM  465 

not  been  forewarned  of  their  coming,  and  escaped  from 
their  furious  vengeance  by  a  speedy  flight.  Being  them- 
selves unable  to  avenge  the  wrong  done,  they  laid  the 
matter  before  the  heads  of  the  caste,  who  unanimously 
found  me  guilty,  and  sentenced  me  to  pay  a  fine  of  two 
hundred  pagodas  as  compensation  for  the  injury  done  to 
the  honour  of  my  father-in-law.  Moreover,  a  proclamation 
was  issued  by  which  everybody  was  forbidden,  under  pain 
of  excommunication,  ever  to  give  any  woman  in  marriage 
to  such  an  idiot  as  myself.  I  was,  therefore,  condemned 
to  remain  a  widower  for  the  rest  of  my  life.  It  was  lucky 
for  me,  indeed,  that  I  was  not  altogether  outcasted,  a  favour 
which  I  owed  to  the  great  respect  and  esteem  in  which  my 
father  had  been  held. 

'  I  must  now  leave  you  to  judge  if  this  instance  of  foolish- 
ness on  my  part  is  in  any  way  inferior  to  those  with  which 
my  rivals  have  been  entertaining  you,  and  if  the  honour 
of  being  the  biggest  fool  is  not  justly  due  to  me.' 

The  assembly,  after  mature  deliberation,  decided  that  all 
four  suitors  had  given  such  absolute  proofs  of  folly  that 
each  was  justly  entitled  to  claim  superiority  in  his  own 
way  over  the  others  ;  and  that  each  was  at  liberty  to  call 
himself  the  greatest  fool  of  all,  and  to  attribute  to  himself 
the  greeting  of  the  soldier.  '  Each  of  you  has  gained  his 
suit,'  remarked  the  president,  '  so  you  may  now  continue 
your  journey  in  peace,  if  that  is  possible.' 

Delighted  with  so  equitable  a  judgement,  the  travellers 
left  the  court,  each  shouting  louder  than  the  other  :  '  I 
have  gained  my  suit,  I  have  gained  my  suit  !  ' 

The  Story  of  Appaji,  Prime  Minister  of  King  Krishna  Roy  a  1. 

Before  the  invasion  of  the  Mussulmans,  at  a  time  when 
the  Hindus  enjoyed  the  happiness  of  being  ruled  by  princes 

1 1  have  included  this  little  story  in  the  collection  of  Hindu  fiction, 
because  I  found  it  in  the  same  book  from  which  I  extracted  the  others. 
However,  well-informed  Hindus  have  told  me  that  the  story  has  been 
clothed  in  the  form  of  fiction  simply  in  order  to  make  it  more  popular, 
and  that  it  is  really  founded  on  historical  fact.  The  memory  of  the 
good  King  Krishna  Roya,  and  of  his  faithful  minister  Appaji,  is  still 
cherished  by  the  people  of  India,  who  speak  of  him  as  a  prince  whose 
sole  care  was  to  render  his  people  happy,  in  which  good  work  he  was 
most  powerfully  seconded  by  his  minister.     The  period  of  his  reign  is 


466  THE   STORY  OF   APPAJI 

of  their  own  nation,  one  of  these  princes,  named  Krishna 
Roya,  was  holding  sway  over  one  of  the  most  fertile  pro- 
vinces of  Southern  India.  This  benevolent  ruler  was  ever 
anxious  to  gain  the  love  and  respect  of  his  subjects  by  doing 
everything  in  his  power  to  make  them  happy  ;  and,  in 
order  to  attain  this  end  more  readily,  he  always  took  the 
most  particular  care  to  employ  as  his  ministers  and  con- 
fidential advisers  those  persons  only  who  by  their  wisdom, 
experience,  and  prudence  were  capable  of  affording  him 
wise  counsel.  His  prime  minister,  Appaji,  enjoyed  more 
of  his  confidence  than  any  other,  because  he  possessed  the 
happy  knack  of  letting  his  master  know  the  truth  about 
things  by  means  of  the  most  entertaining  and  striking 
allegories.  One  day,  when  this  wise  minister  was  alone 
with  his  sovereign,  the  latter,  having  nothing  particular  to 
do  at  the  moment,  asked  him  to  solve  the  following  pro- 
blem. '  Appaji,'  said  he,  '  I  have  often  heard  it  said  that 
in  their  religious  and  social  usages  men  simply  follow  a 
beaten  track,  blindly  and  indiscriminately,  however  absurd 
such  usages  may  be.  Can  you  prove  to  me  the  truth  of 
this  assertion  and  the  justice  of  that  famous  proverb  : 
J  air  a  marula,  J  ana  marula  l  ? ' 

Appaji,  with  his  usual  modesty,  promised  the  king  to 
apply  himself  to  the  solution  of  the  question  and  to  give 
his  answer  in  a  few  days.  Returning  home  with  his  mind 
full  of  the  problem,  the  minister  sent  in  search  of  his 
shepherd  who  was  taking  care  of  his  sheep.  This  man  was 
a  simple  country  boor  with  a  rustic's  ordinary  intelligence. 
When  the  shepherd  arrived,  Appaji  addressed  him  as  follows : 
— '  Hear  me,  Kuruba  2  ;  you  must  instantly  lay  aside  your 
shepherd's  garb  and  put  on  that  of  a  sannyasi  or  penitent, 
whom  you  must  represent  for  a  few  days.  You  will  begin 
by  rubbing  your  whole  body  with  ashes  ;  you  will  then 

said  to  date  a  short  time  before  the  Mahomedan  invasion.  However, 
whether  this  little  story  be  fact  or  fiction,  it  is  none  the  less  a  most 
excellent  satire  on  the  credulity  of  the  Hindus. — Dubois. 

1  The  meaning  of  this  is  :  '  Is  it  the  customs  that  are  ridiculous,  or  is 
it  the  persons  who  follow  them  who  are  ridiculous?'  The  answer  being: 
'  It  is  the  people  who  follow  them  who  are  ridiculous.' — Dubois. 

2  This  is  a  name  common  enough  among  persons  belonging  to  the 
caste  of  shepherds.  Those  who  take  care  of  cows  or  goats  form  another 
caste  called  Golla. — Dubois. 


THE   FALSE   SANNYASI  467 

take  in  one  hand  a  bamboo  staff  with  seven  knots,  and  in 
the  other  the  gourd  in  which  a  penitent  always  carries 
water,  while  under  your  arm  you  will  carry  the  antelope's 
skin  on  which  persons  of  that  class  must  always  sit.  Thus 
equipped,  you  must  go  without  delay  to  the  mountain  just 
outside  the  town  and  enter  the  cave  which  is  to  be  found 
on  its  slope.  You  must  lay  your  antelope's  skin  on  the 
floor  of  the  cave,  and  then  squat  down  on  it  like  a  sannyasi, 
your  eyes  firmly  fixed  on  the  ground,  your  nostrils  tightly 
shut  with  one  hand,  and  the  other  hand  resting  on  the  top 
of  your  head.  Be  very  careful  to  play  your  part  properly, 
and  take  good  care  not  to  betray  me.  It  is  possible  that 
the  king,  accompanied  by  his  whole  court  and  by  a  great 
crowd  of  other  people,  will  come  to  visit  you  in  the  cavern ; 
but  whoever  presents  himself,  even  though  it  be  I  or  the 
king  himself,  remain  perfectly  motionless  in  the  posture 
which  I  have  described  to  you,  looking  at  nobody,  speaking 
to  nobody.  And  whatever  happens,  even  though  they 
should  tear  out  the  hairs  one  by  one  from  your  body,  show 
not  the  smallest  sign  of  pain,  and  do  not  budge  an  inch. 
These,  Kuruba,  are  my  commands.  If  by  any  chance  you 
deviate  in  the  least  degree  from  the  instructions  which 
I  have  given  you,  you  will  answer  for  it  with  your  life  ; 
but  if  on  the  contrary  you  follow  them  punctiliously,  you 
may  count  upon  a  magnificent  reward.' 

The  poor  shepherd,  accustomed  all  his  life  simply  to 
look  after  his  sheep,  was  very  diffident  as  to  his  ability  to 
change  his  condition  for  that  of  a  sannyasi  ;  but  the  tone 
of  his  master  was  so  imperative  that  he  judged  it  prudent 
to  waive  all  objections  and  to  obey  him  blindly.  Furnish- 
ing himself  with  all  the  necessary  paraphernalia  of  his  new 
profession,  and  thinking  over  all  that  he  had  been  ordered 
to  do,  he  departed  for  the  cave.  Meanwhile  Appaji  returned 
to  the  palace,  where  he  found  the  king  surrounded  by  his 
courtiers.  Approaching  the  monarch  with  a  serious  air, 
Appaji  addressed  him  in  the  following  terms  : — '  Great 
king,  pardon  me  if  at  this  moment,  when  surrounded  by 
your  wise  councillors  you  are  considering  the  best  means 
of  making  your  people  happy — pardon  me,  I  say,  if  I 
interrupt  you  in  order  to  announce  to  you  that  the  day 
has  come  when  the  gods,  pleased  with  your  eminent  virtues, 


468  AN  ETHEREAL   PERSONAGE 

have  decided  to  give  you  a  marked  token  of  their  favour 
and  of  their  protection.  At  the  very  moment  that  I  am 
speaking  a  most  wonderful  thing  is  happening  in  your 
kingdom  and  not  very  far  from  your  royal  residence.  On 
the  slope  of  the  mountain  that  lies  near  to  your  capital 
there  is  a  cave  in  which  a  holy  penitent,  who  has  descended 
without  doubt  from  the  very  abode  of  the  great  Vishnu, 
has  deigned  to  take  up  his  dwelling.  In  profound  medita- 
tion on  the  perfections  of  Parabrahma  he  is  wholly  insensible 
to  all  terrestrial  objects  ;  he  partakes  of  no  other  nourish- 
ment than  the  air  which  he  breathes  ;  not  one  of  the 
objects  that  affect  the  five  senses  make  the  slightest  impres- 
sion on  him.  In  a  word,  it  may  with  truth  be  said  of  him 
that  his  body  alone  dwells  in  this  world  below,  while  his 
soul,  his  thoughts,  and  all  his  feelings  are  already  closely 
united  to  the  Divinity.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that 
the  miraculous  appearance  of  this  holy  personage  in  your 
kingdom  is  a  manifest  guarantee  of  the  interest  which  the 
gods  take  in  you  and  yours.' 

These  words  of  Appaji  were  listened  to  with  astonish- 
ment and  wonder  by  the  king  and  his  courtiers.  The  king 
at  once  decided  to  go  without  delay  to  visit  this  illustrious 
penitent,  whose  praises  the  prime  minister  had  sung  so 
highly.  And  in  order  that  the  visit  might  be  made  with 
a  dignity  worthy  of  the  eminent  virtues  of  him  who  was  the 
object  of  it,  the  king  announced  that  he  would  go  accom- 
panied by  his  whole  court  and  escorted  by  his  whole  army. 
Furthermore,  he  caused  to  be  proclaimed  to  all  his  subjects, 
by  public  criers,  by  the  beating  of  drums,  and  by  the 
blowing  of  trumpets,  his  reasons  for  making  the  visit  to 
the  mountain  ;  and  everybody  was  invited  to  follow  him. 
The  procession  was  soon  on  its  way.  Never  before  had  such 
a  magnificent  gathering  been  witnessed  ;  never  had  such 
a  huge  multitude  of  people  assembled  together.  Pleasure 
was  depicted  upon  every  countenance.  The  air  rang  with 
cries  of  joy  ;  while  every  one  congratulated  himself  on 
having  lived  to  enjoy  the  happiness  of  looking  upon  one 
of  the  greatest  personages  that  had  evTer  appeared  on 
earth.  On  his  arrival  at  the  cave  the  king,  filled  with 
awe  at  the  sight  of  so  sacred  a  spot,  entered  it  with  all 
the  marks  of  the  most  profound  respect.     It  was  not  long 


A  GROVELLING  MONARCH  469 

before  he  descried  the  form  of  the  illustrious  penitent, 
crouching  in  the  strange  manner  enjoined  upon  him  by  the 
minister,  and  apparently  as  motionless  as  the  rocks  which 
formed  his  retreat.  After  gazing  upon  him  for  some  time 
in  silence,  the  king  tremblingly  approached,  and  prostrat- 
ing himself  before  him,  with  his  hands  joined,  addressed 
him  humbly  as  follows  : — '  Illustrious  penitent  !  happy  is 
the  destiny  which  allowed  me  to  live  until  this  day,  so  that 
I  might  enjoy  the  inestimable  happiness  of  looking  upon 
your  sacred  face.  I  know  not  what  it  is  that  has  procured 
for  me  such  a  wonderful  blessing.  The  little  that  I  have 
done  during  my  life  cannot  possibly  have  rendered  me 
worthy  of  such  a  distinction  ;  probably,  therefore,  it  is  to 
the  good  works  of  my  ancestors  or  to  some  good  work 
which  I  may  have  accomplished  in  preceding  births  that 
I  now  owe  my  good  luck.  However  this  may  be,  the  day 
on  which  I  have  seen  your  sacred  feet  is  certainly  the  most 
glorious  and  happy  of  my  life.  In  future  I  have  nothing 
more  to  desire  in  this  world,  for  in  seeing  these  sacred  feet 
of  yours  I  have  obtained  the  greatest  blessing  which  could 
happen  to  any  mortal.  The  sight  of  your  feet  alone  is 
sufficient  to  wash  away  all  the  sins  which  I  have  committed 
both  in  this  generation  and  in  the  preceding  one.  Hence- 
forth I  am  as  pure  as  the  water  of  the  Ganges,  and  all  my 
desires  are  accomplished  V 

The  supposed  penitent  heard  this  flattering  discourse 
without  evincing  the  slightest  sign  that  he  had  heard  it, 
and  without  change  either  of  countenance  or  posture.  The 
crowd  surrounding  him,  astonished  at  this  indifference, 
became  perfectly  convinced  that  he  was  a  supernatural 
being,  for  in  no  other  way  could  they  account  for  his  solemn 
silence  and  complete  immovability.  '  It  is  evident,'  they 
said,  '  that  only  the  body  of  this  holy  penitent  inhabits 
this  lower  world,  while  his  soul  and  his  thoughts  must  be 
united  to  the  Divinity  whose  image  he  is.'  The  king, 
Krishna  Roya,  in  the  ecstasy  of  his  religious  zeal,  and 
unable  to  attract  a  single  glance  from  the  holy  penitent, 
addressed  him  in  still  more  flattering  terms  in  the  hope 
of  winning  at  any  rate  one  look  from  him.     Vain  hope, 

1  This  is  the  stereotyped  form  of  address  used  in  all  Hindu  books 
when  describing  the  respects  paid  to  a  holy  personage. — Ed. 


470  A  HIRSUTE   RELIC 

however  !  The  penitent  made  not  the  slightest  movement 
of  the  head,  nor  relaxed  for  one  moment  the  imperturbable 
gravity  of  his  demeanour. 

The  prince  was  just  about  to  leave  the  cave,  when 
Appaji  addressed  him  as  follows  : — '  Great  king,  having 
come  so  far  to  visit  this  grand  personage,  who  will  hence- 
forth become  an  object  of  public  veneration,  you  must 
not  depart  without  having  received  his  blessing,  or  at  any 
rate  some  gift  which  will  bring  you  happiness  for  the  rest 
of  your  days.  Absorbed  in  meditation,  and  insensible  to 
the  material  objects  which  surround  him,  this  penitent 
cannot  break  his  silence  ;  nevertheless  you  should  try  to 
obtain  something  from  him,  be  it  only  one  of  the  hairs 
of  his  body.'  The  king  took  the  advice  of  his  minister, 
and,  approaching  the  sannyasi,  he  tore  out  with  extreme 
care  one  of  the  hairs  of  his  chest,  put  it  to  his  lips,  kissed 
it  devoutly,  and  then,  showing  it  to  the  spectators,  he 
cried  :  '  I  will  preserve  this  all  my  life.  I  will  cause  it 
to  be  enclosed  in  a  golden  locket,  which  shall  always  hang 
about  my  neck  and  be  the  most  precious  of  all  my  orna- 
ments, thoroughly  convinced  as  I  am  that  so  noble  a  relic 
will  prove  to  be  a  talisman  against  all  the  untoward  acci- 
dents of  life.' 

The  ministers  and  courtiers,  in  imitation  of  their  master 
and  wishing  to  participate  in  the  same  blessings,  surrounded 
the  poor  penitent,  and  each  one  of  them  tore  a  hair  from 
his  chest,  promising  at  the  same  time  to  preserve  it  as 
carefully  as  the  king  had  done  and  to  honour  it  as  a  holy 
relic.  Moreover,  the  escort  of  the  prince  and  the  huge 
multitude  which  had  accompanied  him,  learning  what  the 
king  and  his  courtiers  had  done,  were  determined  to  follow 
so  good  an  example  ;  and  in  a  very  short  time  the  supposed 
sannyasi  found  himself  deprived  of  every  hair  he  possessed, 
from  his  feet  to  his  head  ;  for  the  more  devout  amongst 
the  multitude  did  not  content  themselves  with  a  single 
one  of  his  hairs,  but  pulled  them  out  by  the  handful.  The 
poor  Kuruba  bore  this  horrible  torture  without  the  slightest 
complaint  or  the  smallest  change  of  posture,  and  without 
even  raising  his  eyes. 

On  his  return  to  his  palace  the  king  hastened  to  inform 
his  women  of  the  wonderful  person  whom  he  had  visited, 


THE  PENALTY  OF  SANCTITY  471 

and  showed  them  the  relic  of  which  he  had  become  the 
possessor.  The  royal  ladies,  filled  with  wonder,  one  by- 
one  took  the  hair  between  their  ringers,  kissed  it  devoutly, 
pressed  it  to  their  eyes,  and  expressed  an  eager  longing  to 
see  this  illustrious  personage.  But  as  etiquette  forbade 
persons  of  their  sex  and  rank  to  show  themselves  in  public, 
they  supplicated  the  king  to  accord  them  the  favour  of 
having  the  sannyasi  brought  to  the  palace,  so  that  they 
too  might  enjoy  the  happiness  of  looking  upon  him  and 
plucking  out  his  hairs  with  their  own  hands.  The  king  at 
first  refused  to  grant  their  request,  but,  yielding  at  length 
to  their  repeated  solicitations,  and  wishing  also  to  show 
as  much  honour  to  the  penitent  as  lay  in  his  power,  he 
dispatched  his  whole  court  and  army  on  foot  and  on  horse- 
back to  escort  the  holy  man  to  the  palace.  The  messengers 
arrived  at  the  cave  while  the  multitude  were  still  scrambling 
for  the  hairs  of  the  sannyasi.  The  foremost  and  most 
distinguished  amongst  them  at  once  approached  the  holy 
penitent.  After  explaining  to  him  most  humbly  the  object 
of  their  mission,  they  took  him  in  their  arms  and  placed 
him  in  a  superb  palanquin,  where  he  remained  in  the  same 
posture  that  he  had  so  carefully  maintained.  Thereupon 
he  was  conducted  with  the  greatest  pomp  and  circumstance 
through  the  streets  of  the  town,  followed  by  a  multitude 
of  spectators  who  filled  the  air  with  shouts  of  joy.  The 
poor  Kuruba,  who  had  eaten  nothing  for  two  days,  and 
who  was  moreover  feeling  extremely  sore  from  the  rough 
treatment  which  he  had  received,  was  very  far  from  enjoy- 
ing all  these  honours.  However,  in  the  hope  that  the 
farce  would  soon  come  to  an  end  and  that  he  would  get 
his  reward,  and  also  fearing  to  incur  the  wrath  of  his  master, 
he  managed  to  keep  up  his  courage  and  to  restrain  himself 
from  declaring  who  he  was.  '  What  have  I  done,'  he 
nevertheless  murmured  to  himself,  '  that  I  should  be  made 
to  play  a  part  which  so  little  suits  me  and  which  exposes 
me  to  so  much  suffering  ?  I  would  a  thousand  times 
rather  be  in  the  midst  of  my  flock  listening  to  the  roars 
of  the  tigers  in  the  jungle  than  be  deafened  by  the  shouts 
and  acclamations  of  this  stupid  crowd.  If  I  were  only 
with  my  sheep  at  the  present  time  I  should  have  had  two 
meals  already  ;  but  now  for  two  days  past  I  have  had 


472  DISAPPEARANCE   OF  THE   SAINT 

nothing  to  eat  at  all,  and  I  am  still  quite  in  the  dark  as  to 
when  and  how  all  this  will  end.' 

The  palace  was  reached  while  the  supposed  sannyasi 
was  turning  over  all  these  things  in  his  head.  Carried  into 
a  superb  apartment,  he  had  not  long  to  wait  before  he  was 
visited  by  the  princesses,  who  came  one  by  one  to  prostrate 
themselves  at  his  feet.  Each  of  them,  after  gazing  at  him 
in  wonder  and  silence  for  some  time,  was  consumed  with 
the  desire  of  possessing  one  of  his  hairs  as  a  relic  to  be  kept 
in  a  locket  of  gold,  and  to  be  reckoned  as  the  most  precious 
of  their  jewels.  But  in  vain  they  searched  every  visible 
part  of  his  body.  The  crowd  of  devotees  who  had  preceded 
them  had  not  left  a  single  hair  to  be  seen.  At  length,  after 
most  careful  search,  they  managed  to  discover  here  and 
there,  in  the  wrinkles  of  his  coarse  skin,  a  few  hairs  which 
had  escaped  notice.  With  these  they  were  perforce  obliged 
to  be  content,  and  having  religiously  collected  them  they 
retired.  Thereupon  the  king  ordered  that  the  penitent 
should  be  left  alone  during  the  night,  in  order  that  he 
might  enjoy  the  repose  of  which  he  was  so  much  in  need, 
after  the  fatiguing  and  painful  days  which  he  had  passed. 
Appaji,  however,  having  slipped  quietly  into  the  apartment 
where  the  poor  shepherd  was  languishing  of  hunger,  fatigue, 
and  anguish,  addressed  him  in  the  following  consoling 
manner  : — '  Kuruba,  the  time  of  thy  trial  is  at  an  end. 
Thou  hast  played  thy  part  most  excellently,  and  I  am  very 
pleased  with  thee.  I  promised  thee  a  reward.  Rest 
assured  that  thou  wilt  get  it.  Meanwhile  lay  aside  this 
costume  of  the  penitent  and  put  on  thy  shepherd's  gar- 
ments again.  Go  and  refresh  thyself  by  good  food  and 
peaceful  slumber,  and  to-morrow  morning  thou  shalt  return 
to  thy  occupation.' 

The  poor  fellow  did  not  require  to  be  told  twice.  He 
fled  by  a  secret  passage  which  his  master  pointed  out  to 
him,  determined  never  to  allow  himself  to  be  entrapped 
in  the  same  way  again. 

The  next  morning  the  king,  accompanied  by  his  principal 
officials,  returned  to  the  apartment  where  the  sannyasi  had 
been  left  the  night  before,  in  order  to  offer  him  anew  the 
homage  due  to  his  holiness.  But  what  was  their  surprise 
to  find  that  he  had  disappeared  !     This  circumstance,  of 


A  LESSON  IN  CREDULITY  473 

course,  only  contributed  to  strengthen  the  faith  of  the 
public  ;  and  none  doubted  that  this  holy  sannyasi  was 
really  a  divine  being  who  under  human  form  had  deigned 
to  pay  a  passing  visit  to  their  monarch,  and  during  the 
silence  of  the  night  had  returned  to  the  abode  of  happiness 
from  which  he  had  descended.  The  appearance  of  the  holy 
personage,  as  well  as  his  miraculous  disappearance,  formed 
for  many  days  afterwards  the  sole  topic  of  conversation 
at  the  court,  in  the  town,  and  throughout  the  entire  king- 
dom, until  at  length  people  grew  tired  of  always  repeating 
the  same  story,  and  nothing  more  was  heard  of  it. 

A  short  time  after  the  event  Appaji  was  one  day  at  the 
court  of  the  king  his  master,  when  the  latter  reminded  him 
of  the  question  which  he  had  asked  him  to  solve,  viz.  Is 
it  the  customs  which  are  ridiculous,  or  only  the  men  who 
follow  those  customs  ?  Appaji  was  only  waiting  for  his 
opportunity  of  answering  ;  and  having  obtained  an  assur- 
ance from  the  king  that  nothing  he  said  would  offend  his 
majesty,  if  his  explanation  were  sincere  and  full,  he  addressed 
the  king  as  follows  : — '  Great  king,  your  own  conduct  solved 
the  question  in  a  manner  quite  irrefutable,  at  the  time 
when  you  visited  the  cave  in  the  mountain  to  see  the 
penitent.  You  will  no  doubt  be  astonished  to  hear  that 
this  famous  personage  is  none  other  than  the  shepherd 
who  for  many  years  has  been  looking  after  my  sheep, 
a  stupid  and  uncouth  man  who  is  only  capable  of  inspiring 
you  with  the  most  sovereign  contempt !  Yet  it  is  to  this 
very  personage  that  you  and  your  whole  court  rendered 
divine  honours  ;  and  that,  moreover,  on  my  sole  testimony. 
The  multitude  followed  blindly  in  your  steps,  and  without 
trying  to  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  matter,  or  to  gain  any 
knowledge  of  the  object  of  their  devotion,  they  gave  them- 
selves up  in  an  access  of  religious  zeal  to  honour  as  a  god 
an  unknown  and  miserable  shepherd  who  has  hardly 
sufficient  intelligence  to  distinguish  him  from  brute  beasts. 
Does  not  all  this  afford  a  most  striking  proof  that  men  in 
their  religious  and  civil  usages  only  follow  a  beaten  track  ? 
Thus  you  yourself  have  justified  the  truth  of  the  ancient 
proverb  which  says  :  Jatra  marula,  J  ana  morula.'* 

Krishna  Roya,  far  from  being  angry  with  the  liberty 
which  Appaji  had  taken  with  him  in  order  to  bring  home 


474  THE   FAITHFUL  MINISTER 

to  him  the  truth  on  a  point  of  such  importance,  evinced, 
on  the  contrary,  more  affection  and  confidence  than  ever 
towards  his  minister,  and  continued  to  regard  him  as  the 
most  faithful  and  stanch  of  all  his  adherents. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII 

Niti  Slokas,  or  Moral  Stanzas. 
The  slokas,  or  moral  stanzas,  of  which  I  am  about  to 
give  a  translation,  are  familiar  to  all  Hindus  who  are  in 
any  way  educated.  In  most  Hindu  schools  children  are 
made  to  learn  them  by  heart  as  a  kind  of  catechism.  They 
are  written  in  Sanskrit  verse,  but  as  this  classical  language 
is  not  studied  or  understood  by  many  people,  each  sloka  is 
accompanied  by  a  literal  translation  in  the  vulgar  tongue. 
The  Hindus  take  great  delight  in  introducing  these  slokas 
into  their  ordinary  conversations.  I  have  tried  in  my 
translation  to  diverge  as  little  as  possible  from  the  original 
text  ;  but  the  difficulty  of  reproducing  in  a  European 
language  certain  terms  and  expressions  peculiar  to  the 
Indian  languages  has  resulted  in  a  few  of  these  sentences 
being  somewhat  incoherent.  This  fault,  of  course,  is  not 
observable  when  they  are  read  in  the  original.  In  trans- 
lating them  I  have  followed  the  order  observed  by  the 
Indian  author.  The  original  collection  contains  a  very 
large  number  of  others,  but  I  have  restricted  myself  to 
reproducing  the  principal  of  them  in  order  not  to  tire  my 
readers. 

I.  He  who  feeds  us  is  our  father  ;  he  who  helps  us  is 
our  brother  ;  he  who  places  his  confidence  in  us  is  our 
friend  ;  those  whose  sentiments  accord  with  ours  are  our 
kinsmen. 

II.  If  a  margosa  seed  be  dropped  into  a  beverage  com- 
posed of  sugar,  honey,  and  ghee,  the  whole  of  it  becomes 
so  bitter,  that  although  milk  may  rain  upon  it  for  a  thou- 
sand years  the  mixture  will  lose  nothing  of  its  bitterness. 
This  is  symbolical  of  the  wicked,  who,  however  good  people 
may  be  to  them,  never  lose  their  natural  tendency  to 
do  evil. 

III.  Beware  of  becoming  attached  to  any  country  which 
is  not  your  own,  or  of  serving  any  master  who  is  a  foreigner  ; 


NITI   SLOKAS  475 

renounce  all  relatives  who  are  only  so  nominally  ;  keep 
nothing  which  does  not  belong  to  you  ;  and  leave  a  guru 
who  can  do  you  no  good. 

IV.  If  you  undertake  to  do  anything  which  you  find  to 
be  beyond  your  powers,  give  it  up  at  once.  If  an  individual 
dishonours  a  whole  class,  he  should  be  excommunicated  ; 
if  a  single  inhabitant  causes  ruin  to  a  whole  village,  he  should 
be  expelled  from  it  ;  if  a  village  causes  the  ruin  of  a  district, 
it  should  be  destroyed  ;  and  if  a  district  causes  the  ruin 
of  the  soul,  it  must  be  abandoned  \ 

V.  In  the  afflictions,  misfortunes,  and  tribulations  of 
life  only  he  who  actively  helps  us  is  our  friend. 

VI.  Just  as  a  plant  of  the  forest  becomes  a  friend  of  the 
body  when  by  virtue  of  its  medicinal  properties  it  cures 
an  illness  which  afflicts  the  body,  however  different  the 
one  may  be  from  the  other ;  similarly,  he  who  renders  us 
services  should  be  considered  our  friend,  however  lowly 
may  be  his  condition  and  however  far  he  may  be  separated 
from  us  ;  whereas  he  who  affects  to  be  our  friend  should, 
if  he  attempts  to  hurt  us,  be  regarded  as  our  enemy. 

VII.  One  may  render  good  service  to  the  wicked,  yet 
whatever  good  one  may  do  to  them  resembles  characters 
written  in  water,  which  are  effaced  as  soon  as  they  are 
written  ;  but  services  rendered  to  good  people  are  like 
characters  engraved  on  stone,  which  are  never  effaced. 

VIII.  One  should  keep  oneself  five  yards  distant  from 
a  carriage,  ten  yards  from  a  horse,  one  hundred  yards 
from  an  elephant ;  but  the  distance  one  should  keep  from 
a  wicked  man  cannot  be  measured. 

IX.  If  one  ask  which  is  the  more  dangerous  venom,  that 
of  a  wicked  man  or  that  of  a  serpent,  the  answer  is,  that 
however  subtle  the  poison  of  a  serpent  may  be,  it  can  at 
any  rate  be  counteracted  by  virtue  of  mantrams  ;  but  it  is 
beyond  all  power  to  save  a  person  from  the  venom  of 
a  wicked  man. 

1  The  first  sentence  appears  to  form  part  of  another  sloka.  The  correct 
rendering  of  this  sloka  is  : — If  an  individual  dishonours  a  family,  he  may 
be  expelled  from  the  family  ;  if  a  family  dishonours  a  village,  it  may  be 
expelled  from  the  village  ;  if  a  village  dishonours  a  district,  it  may  be 
destroyed  ;  if  one's  country  is  dangerous  to  one's  personal  safety,  it 
may  be  abandoned. — Ed. 


476  POPULAR   APHORISMS 

X.  To  attempt  to  change  the  character  of  a  wicked 
man  by  being  kind  to  him  is  like  trying  to  make  a  hog 
clean.  It  is  no  use  to  mix  water  with  milk  and  offer  the 
same  to  an  eagle,  for  the  eagle  knows  the  secret  of  separat- 
ing the  milk  from  the  water  *.  This  is  symbolical  of  the 
wicked. 

XI.  The  venom  of  a  scorpion  is  to  be  found  in  its  tail, 
that  of  a  fly  in  its  head,  that  of  a  serpent  in  its  fangs  ;  but 
the  venom  of  a  wicked  man  is  to  be  found  in  all  parts  of 
his  body. 

XII.  A  wise  man  preserves  an  equal  mind  both  in 
adversity  and  in  prosperity.  He  allows  himself  neither  to 
be  crushed  by  the  former,  nor  elated  by  the  latter. 

XIII.  An  intelligent  man  is  he  who  knows  when  to 
speak  and  when  to  be  silent,  whose  friendship  is  natural 
and  sincere,  and  who  never  undertakes  anything  beyond 
his  powers. 

XIV.  Virtue  is  the  best  of  friends,  vice  is  the  worst  of 
enemies,  disappointment  is  the  most  cruel  of  illnesses, 
courage  is  the  support  of  all. 

XV.  Just  as  the  crow  is  the  Pariah  among  birds,  and 
the  ass  the  Pariah  among  quadrupeds,  so  is  an  angry 
sannyasi  the  Pariah  among  penitents  ;  but  the  vilest  of 
Pariahs  is  the  man  who  despises  his  fellows. 

XVI.  Just  as  the  moon  is  the  light  of  the  night  and  the 
sun  the  light  of  the  day,  so  are  good  children  the  light  of 
their  family. 

XVII.  Flies  look  for  ulcers,  kings  for  war,  wicked  men 
for  quarrels  ;  but  good  men  look  only  for  peace. 

XVIII.  The  virtuous  man  may  be  compared  to  a  large 
leafy  tree  which,  while  it  is  itself  exposed  to  the  heat  of 
the  sun,  gives  coolness  and  comfort  to  others  by  covering 
them  with  its  shade. 

XIX.  When  we  die  the  money  and  jewels  which  we  have 
taken  such  trouble  to  amass  during  our  life  remain  in  the 
house.  Our  relatives  and  friends  accompany  us  only  to 
the  funeral  pyre  where  our  bodies  are  burnt  ;  but  our 
virtues  and  our  vices  follow  us  beyond  the  grave. 

XX.  Temporal  blessings  pass  like  a  dream,  beauty  fades 

1  In  the  Hindu  proverb  it  is  the  swan  which  is  credited  with  this 
power,  and  not  the  eagle,  as  Dubois  states  it. — Ed. 


GOLDEN   RULES  477 

like  a  flower,  the  longest  life  disappears  like  a  flash.  Our 
existence  may  be  likened  to  the  bubble  that  forms  on  the 
surface  of  water. 

XXI.  Take  heed  not  to  trust  yourself  to  the  current  of 
a  river,  to  the  claws  or  the  horns  of  an  animal,  or  to  the 
promises  of  kings. 

XXII.  Take  heed  to  place  no  trust  in  a  false  friend  ; 
only  disappointment  will  be  experienced  from  a  wicked 
woman  ;  nothing  good  can  be  hoped  for  from  a  person 
who  is  forced  to  act  against  his  inclinations  ;  nothing  but 
misfortune  can  be  looked  for  in  a  country  where  injustice 
prevails. 

XXIII.  A  man  of  courage  is  recognizable  in  a  moment 
of  danger,  a  good  wife  when  one  is  reduced  to  misery,  firm 
friends  in  times  of  adversity,  and  faithful  relatives  at  the 
time  of  a  marriage. 

XXIV.  A  hypocrite  who  disguises  his  true  character  and 
wishes  to  pass  for  an  honest  man  is  comparable  to  strong 
vinegar  which  one  tries  to  make  sweet  by  mixing  with  it 
camphor,  musk,  and  sandal.  The  attempt  may  well  be 
made,  but  the  vinegar  will  never  altogether  lose  its  sour- 
ness. 

XXV.  To  show  friendship  for  a  man  in  his  presence  and 
to  libel  him  in  his  absence  is  to  mix  nectar  with  poison. 

XXVI.  A  mirror  is  of  no  use  to  a  blind  man  ;  in  the 
same  way  knowledge  is  of  no  use  to  a  man  without 
discernment. 

XXVII.  Take  care  to  spend  nothing  without  hope  of 
profit ;  to  undertake  nothing  without  reflection  ;  to  begin 
no  quarrel  without  good  cause.  He  who  does  not  follow 
these  golden  rules  courts  his  own  ruin. 

XXVIII.  He  who  works  with  diligence  will  never  feel 
hunger  ;  he  who  devoutly  meditates  will  never  commit  any 
great  sin  ;  he  who  is  vigilant  will  never  feel  fear  ;  and  he 
who  knows  when  to  speak  and  when  to  be  silent  will  never 
be  drawn  into  a  quarrel. 

XXIX.  Truth  is  our  mother,  justice  our  father,  pity  our 
wife,  respect  for  others  our  friend,  clemency  our  children. 
Surrounded  by  such  relatives  we  have  nothing  to  fear. 

XXX.  It  is  easier  to  snatch  a  pearl  from  the  jaws  of 
a  crocodile  or  to  twist  an  angry  serpent  round  one's  head 


478  MORAL  QUALITIES 

like  a  garland  of  Mowers  without  incurring  danger,  than  to 
make  an  ignorant  and  obstinate  person  change  his  ideas. 

XXXI.  The  miser  acknowledges  neither  god  nor  guru, 
neither  parents  nor  friends.  He  who  suffers  from  hunger 
pays  no  heed  whether  the  viands  be  well  or  ill  seasoned. 
He  who  loves  and  cultivates  knowledge  has  no  taste  for 
idleness.  The  froward  person  has  neither  shame  nor 
restraint. 

XXXII.  Temporal  blessings  are  like  foam  upon  the 
water  ;  youth  passes  like  a  shadow  ;  riches  disappear  like 
clouds  before  the  wind.  Therefore  to  virtue  alone  should 
we  hold  fast. 

XXXIII.  Let  us  realize  well  that  death  watches  like 
a  tiger  to  seize  us  unawares,  sickness  pursues  us  like  a 
relentless  enemy,  earthly  joys  are  like  a  leaky  vessel  from 
which  water  trickles  ceaselessly  until  it  is  empty. 

XXXIV.  Before  the  existence  of  earth,  water,  air,  wind, 
fire,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Siva,  sun,  stars,  and  other  objects, 
God  One  and  Eternal  was  in  existence. 

XXXV.  Pride  and  arrogance  suit  no  one  ;  constancy, 
humanity,  sweetness,  compassion,  truth,  love  for  one's 
neighbour,  conjugal  fidelity,  goodness,  amiability,  cleanli- 
ness, are  all  qualities  that  distinguish  really  virtuous  people. 
He  who  possesses  all  these  ten  qualities  is  a  true  guru. 

XXXVI.  Unhappy  is  the  son  whose  father  contracts 
debts  ;  unhappy  is  the  father  whose  son  bears  a  bad 
character  ;  unhappy  is  the  wife  whose  husband  is  unfaithful. 

XXXVII.  To  show  friendship  to  a  man  while  he  is 
prosperous  and  to  turn  one's  back  upon  him  when  he  is 
in  distress,  is  to  imitate  the  conduct  of  prostitutes,  who 
evince  affection  for  their  protectors  only  so  long  as  they 
are  opulent  and  abandon  them  as  soon  as  they  are  ruined. 

XXXVIII.  There  are  six  things  which  almost  invariably 
entail  unhappy  consequences — the  service  of  kings,  robbery, 
horsebreaking,  the  accumulation  of  wealth,  sorcery,  and 
anger. 

XXXIX.  Never  make  known  one's  condition,  one's 
wealth,  one's  mistress,  one's  mantrams,  one's  remedies,  the 
place  where  one  has  hidden  his  money,  the  good  works 
which  one  does,  the  insults  which  one  has  received,  or  the 
debts  which  one  has  contracted. 


SAYINGS   ABOUT  WOMEN  479 

XL.  Knowledge  is  the  health  of  the  body,  poverty  is  its 
plague,  gaiety  is  its  support,  sadness  makes  it  grow  old. 

XLI.  A  shameless  man  fears  the  maladies  engendered  by 
luxury,  a  man  of  honour  fears  contempt,  a  rich  person  fears 
the  rapacity  of  kings,  gentleness  fears  violence,  beauty 
fears  old  age,  the  penitent  fears  the  influence  of  the  senses, 
the  body  fears  Yama,  the  god  of  death  ;  but  the  miser  and 
the  envious  fear  nothing. 

XLII.  Just  as  milk  nourishes  the  body  and  intemperance 
causes  it  to  sicken,  so  does  meditation  nourish  the  spirit, 
while  dissipation  enervates  it. 

XLIII.  It  is  prudent  to  live  on  good  terms  with  one's 
cook,  with  ballad-mongers,  with  doctors,  with  magicians, 
with  the  rulers  of  one's  country,  with  rich  people,  and  with 
obstinate  folk. 

XLIV.  Birds  do  not  perch  on  trees  where  there  is  no  fruit ; 
wild  beasts  leave  the  forests  when  the  leaves  of  the  trees 
have  fallen  and  there  is  no  more  shade  for  them  ;  insects 
leave  plants  where  there  are  no  longer  flowers  ;  leeches  leave 
springs  which  no  longer  flow  ;  women  leave  men  who  have 
become  old  or  poverty-stricken  ;  a  minister  leaves  the 
service  of  an  obstinate  king  ;  servants  leave  a  master  who 
has  been  reduced  to  poverty.  Thus  it  is  that  self-interest 
is  the  motive  of  everything  in  this  world. 

XLV.  Only  the  sea  knows  the  depth  of  the  sea,  only  the 
firmament  knows  the  expanse  of  the  firmament  ;  the  gods 
alone  know  the  power  of  the  gods. 

XLVI.  However  learned  one  may  be,  there  is  always 
something  more  to  be  learnt  ;  however  much  in  favour  one 
may  be  with  kings,  there  is  always  something  to  fear  ; 
however  affectionate  women  may  be,  it  is  always  necessary 
to  be  wary  of  them. 

XLVII.  The  meaning  of  a  dream,  the  effects  of  clouds 
in  autumn,  the  heart  of  a  woman,  and  the  character  of 
kings  are  beyond  the  comprehension  of  anybody. 

XL VIII.  It  is  more  easy  to  discover  flowers  on  the 
sacred  fig-tree,  or  a  white  crow,  or  the  imprint  of  fishes' 
feet,  than  to  know  what  a  woman  has  in  her  heart. 

XLIX.  The  quality  of  gold  is  known  by  means  of  the 
touchstone  ;  the  strength  of  a  bull  is  known  by  the  weight 
that  it  will  carry  ;  the  character  of  a  man  is  known  by  his 


480  .MAXIMS    OF   PRUDENCE 

sayings  ;  but  there  is  no  means  by  which  we  can  know  the 
thoughts  of  a  woman. 

L.  Place  no  confidence  in  a  parasite,  or  in  a  miser,  or 
in  any  one  who  meddles  in  affairs  which  do  not  concern 
him.  Do  nothing  to  damage  your  friend.  Avoid  all  com- 
munications with  your  friend's  wife  when  he  is  away. 

LI.  A  prudent  man  will  never  divulge  his  thoughts  to 
another  before  he  knows  that  other's  thoughts. 

LII.  Nothing  is  more  seductive  and,  at  the  same  time, 
more  deceitful  than  wealth.  It  is  extremely  troublesome 
to  acquire,  to  keep,  to  spend,  and  to  lose. 

LIII.  Courage  is  the  most  splendid  quality  in  an  elephant ; 
high-spiritedness  is  the  most  splendid  quality  in  a  horse  ; 
the  moon  is  the  most  beautiful  ornament  of  the  night  ; 
the  sun  is  the  most  beautiful  ornament  of  the  day  ;  cleanli- 
ness is  the  most  beautiful  ornament  of  the  house  ;  gentleness 
in  words  is  the  most  beautiful  ornament  of  speech  ;  virtuous 
children  are  the  most  beautiful  ornaments  of  families  ;  so 
too  is  modesty  the  most  beautiful  ornament  in  a  woman, 
and  justice  the  most  beautiful  quality  in  kings. 

LIV.  Just  as  rain  brings  an  end  to  famine,  the  bearing 
of  children  an  end  to  a  woman's  beauty,  an  illicit  transac- 
tion an  end  to  the  wealth  of  him  who  permits  it  ;  so  does 
the  degradation  into  which  great  people  may  fall  bring  an 
end  to  their  greatness. 

LV.  When  one  sees  blades  of  sahrabi 1  grass  on  white -ant 
heaps  one  can  tell  at  once  that  snakes  are  there  ;  so  when 
one  sees  anybody  frequenting  the  company  of  wicked  men 
one  may  feel  sure  that  he  is  as  wicked  as  the  others. 

LVI.  Great  rivers,  shady  trees,  medicinal  plants,  and 
virtuous  people  are  not  born  for  themselves,  but  for  the 
good  of  mankind  in  general. 

LVII.  The  joy  of  a  Brahmin  invited  to  a  good  feast,  of 
a  famished  cow  to  which  fresh  grass  is  offered,  or  of  a 
virtuous  woman 2  who  goes  to  a  feast  where  she  meets 

1  Dubois  evidently  means  darbha  grass. — Ed. 

2  If  Hindu  stories  are  to  be  believed,  it  was  formerly  a  practice  among 
Hindu  women,  who  happened  to  become  separated  from  their  husbands 
by  accident,  to  get  up  a  feast  on  a  very  large  scale,  and  to  invite  people 
of  all  sorts  and  conditions  to  it  on  the  chance  of  coming  across  their 
long-lost  husbands. — Ed. 


ON   PREDESTINATION  4s  1 

her  long-absent  husband  is  not  greater  than  that  of  a  good 
soldier  who  goes  to  the  wars. 

LVIII.  Only  death  can  cut  short  the  affection  of  a  faithful 
woman  for  her  family,  of  a  tiger  and  other  wild  animals  for 
their  claws,  of  a  miser  for  his  riches,  of  a  warrior  for  his 
weapons. 

LIX.  Take  care  not  to  fix  your  abode  in  a  place  where 
there  is  no  temple,  no  headman,  no  school,  no  river,  no 
astrologer,  and  no  doctor. 

LX.  We  may  descend  into  hell,  establish  our  dwelling  in 
the  abode  of  Brahma  or  in  the  paradise  of  Indra,  throw 
ourselves  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  ascend  to  the  summit 
of  the  highest  mountain,  take  up  our  habitation  in  the 
howling  desert  or  in  the  town  where  K  libera  reigns,  take 
refuge  with  Yama,  bury  ourselves  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth, 
brave  the  dangers  of  battle,  sojourn  in  the  midst  of  veno- 
mous reptiles,  or  take  up  our  abode  in  the  moon  ;  yet  our 
destiny  will  none  the  less  be  accomplished.  All  that  will 
happen  to  us  will  be  such  as  it  is  not  in  our  power  to  avoid  \ 

LXI.  Bad  ministers  cause  the  ruin  of  kings,  evil  oppor- 
tunities that  of  young  men,  worldly  communications  that 
of  penitents,  good  works  done  without  discernment  that  of 
Brahmins. 

LXII.  The  vice  or  virtue  which  prevails  in  a  kingdom 
is  attributed  to  the  monarch  ;  the  faults  of  kings,  to  their 
ministers  ;  the  defects  of  women,  to  their  husbands  ;  those 
of  children,  to  their  parents  ;  and  those  of  disciples,  to 
their  gurus. 

LXIII.  Just  as  intoxicating  liquors  destroy  our  sense  of 
taste,  so  does  a  son  of  bad  character  destroy  a  whole  family. 
The  society  of  wicked  men  dishonours  those  whose  company 
they  frequent.  Self-interest  destroys  friendships  that  are 
most  firmly  cemented. 

LXIV.  He  who  boasts  of  knowing  that  which  he  does 
not  know  and  he  who  affects  not  to  know  that  which  he 
does  know  are  equally  blameworthy. 

LXV.  There  are  three  kinds  of  persons  who  are  well 

1  In  order  to  understand  clearly  the  sense  of  this  stanza,  one  must 
remember  that  Hindus  admit  the  doctrine  of  absolute  predestination, 
and  assert  that  the  destiny  of  each  man  is  irrevocably  written  on  his 
forehead  by  the  hand  of  Brahma  himself. — Dubois. 

DUBOIS  R 


482  ON   ACQUIRING   KNOWLED(JK 

received  everywhere — a  gallant  warrior,  a  learned  man,  and 
a  pretty  woman. 

LXVI.  The  favours  of  a  prostitute  appear  like  nectar  at 
first,  but  they  soon  become  poison.  The  pursuit  of  know- 
ledge is  troublesome  at  first,  but  knowledge  is  a  source  of 
great  delight  when  it  is  acquired. 

LXVII.  A  virtuous  man  ought  to  be  like  the  sandal- tree, 
which  perfumes  the  axe  that  destroys  it. 

CHAPTER  XXIX 

The  Funeral  Ceremonies  of  Brahmins. 
The  closing  moments  of  a  Brahmin's  life  are  associated 
with  a  number  of  ridiculous  ceremonies.  One  might  sup- 
pose therefrom  that  Brahmins  were  eager  to  preserve  after 
their  death  that  superiority  over  their  fellows  which  they 
boast  about  so  much  during  their  lifetime  ;  and  that  their 
desire  was  to  surpass  everybody  else  in  the  foolishness  of 
their  practices  at  the  period  when  the  scythe  of  Father 
Time  reduced  these  gods  of  the  earth  to  the  level  of  the 
humblest  Pariah.  For  the  rest,  most  Hindus  observe  very 
many  formalities  when  their  near  relatives  die.  As  soon 
as  the  symptoms  of  death  become  manifest  in  a  Brahmin, 
a  spot  is  chosen  on  the  ground  and  smeared  over  with 
cow-dung.  On  this  darbha  grass  is  strewn,  and  over  this 
again  is  placed  a  new  and  ceremonially  pure  cloth,  upon 
which  the  dying  man  is  then  laid.  His  loins  are  next 
girded  with  another  ceremonially  pure  cloth.  Then,  the 
dying  man  having  given  his  permission,  the  ceremony  called 
sarva  prayaschitta,  or  perfect  expiation,  is  performed  by  the 
purohita  and  the  chief  mourner — that  is  to  say,  the  person 
who  is  most  nearly  related  to  the  deceased  or  who  by 
common  usage  has  the  right  to  perform  this  function. 
Then  a  few  small  coins  of  gold,  silver,  and  copper  are  carried 
in  on  a  metal  salver,  and  on  another  akshatas,  sandalwood, 
and  pancha-gavia.  The  purohita  pours  a  few  drops  of  the 
pancha-gavia  !  into  the  mouth  of  the  dying  man,  by  virtue 
of  which  his  body  becomes  perfectly  purified.  Then  the 
general  purification  ceremonies  are  proceeded  with.  The 
purohita  and  the  chief  mourner  invite  the  sick  Brahmin  to 

1  See  Part  I,  Chapter  XIII. 


BRAHMIN    FUNERAL   CEREMONIES         483 

recite  in  spirit,' if  lie  cannot  articulate  distinctly,  certain 
man  trams,  by  virtue  of  which  he  is  delivered  from  all  his 
sins.  After  this  a  cow  is  brought  in  along  with  her  calf  ; 
her  horns  are  ornamented  with  rings  of  gold  or  brass, 
her  neck  with  garlands  of  flowers,  while  her  body  is  covered 
with  a  new  piece  of  cloth  ;  and  she  is  also  decorated  with 
various  other  ornaments.  The  cow  is  led  up  to  the  sick 
person,  who  takes  her  by  the  tail,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
purohita  recites  a  mantram  praying  that  the  cow  may  lead 
the  dying  Brahmin  by  a  happy  road  into  the  other  world. 
The  latter  then  makes  a  present  of  the  animal  to  some  other 
Brahmin,  into  whose  hand  he  pours  a  few  drops  of  water 
in  token  of  the  gift.  This  gift  of  a  cow  is  called  godana, 
and  is  indispensable  if  one  wishes  to  arrive  without  mishap 
in  Yama-loka,  or  the  kingdom  of  Yama,  the  king  of  hell. 
Bordering  Yama-loka  there  is  a  river  of  fire  which  all  men 
must  cross  after  they  have  ceased  to  live.  Those  who  have 
made  the  godana,  when  they  come  to  their  last  hour,  will 
find  on  the  banks  of  this  river  a  cow  which  will  help  them 
to  pass  on  to  the  opposite  bank  without  being  touched  by 
the  flame.  After  the  godana,  the  coins  placed  on  the 
metal  salver  are  distributed  to  the  Brahmins,  and  the 
sum  total  ought  to  equal  the  price  of  the  cow.  After- 
wards the  dasa-dana,  or  the  ten  gifts,  are  prepared.  These 
are  to  be  distributed  at  the  obsequies  which  will  subse- 
quently take  place.  The  gifts  consist  of  cows,  lands, 
gingelly  seeds,  gold,  liquefied  butter,  cloth,  various  kinds 
of  grains,  sugar,  silver,  and  salt.  These  ten  articles,  which 
are  offered  to  the  Brahmins,  are  supposed  to  be  extremely 
acceptable  to  the  gods,  and  procure  for  him  who  offers 
them  a  blessed  sojourn  in  the  Abode  of  Bliss  after  death. 
A  Brahmin  must  not  be  allowed  to  die  on  a  bed  or  even 
on  a  mat,  and  for  this  reason  :  the  soul  in  separating  itself 
from  the  body  in  which  it  is  incorporated  enters  into  another 
body,  which  leads  it  to  the  Abode  of  Bliss  destined  for  it, 
and  if  the  dying  Brahmin  were  to  expire  on  a  bed,  he  would 
be  obliged  to  carry  it  with  him  wherever  he  went,  which, 
it  may  easily  be  supposed,  would  be  very  inconvenient. 
Accordingly,  it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  relieve  the  dying 
person  of  such  a  burden,  to  offer  abundant  alms  and  per- 
form expensive  ceremonies.     This  absurd  custom  has  sug- 


484  PREPARATION    FOR    BURIAL 

gested  a  curse  which  is  very  common  amongst  the  Brahmins 
when  they  quarrel  with  each  other.  '  Mayst  thou,'  they 
will  say,  '  have  no  person  near  thee  to  place  thee  on  the 
ground  in  the  hour  of  death  !  ' 

As  soon  as  the  dying  person  has  breathed  his  last,  it  is 
a  recognized  custom  that  everybody  present  must  at  once 
burst  into  tears  ;  and  that  in  a  fashion  strictly  laid  down 
for  the  occasion.  The  chief  mourner  then  proceeds  to 
bathe  without  taking  off  his  clothes,  next  has  his  head  and 
face  shaved,  and  lastly  goes  to  bathe  a  second  time  in 
order  to  purify  himself  from  the  defilement  of  the  barber's 
touch.  On  his  return  he  causes  to  be  brought  to  him 
pa?wha-gavia,  gingelly  oil,  darbha  grass,  raw  rice,  and  a  few 
other  things.  He  places  on  the  ring  finger  of  the  right 
hand  the  pavitram l.  Then  he  performs  the  sam-kalpa, 
and  offers  homam  (sacrifice  to  fire)  in  order  that  the  deceased 
may  obtain  a  place  in  heaven. 

Then  the  corpse  is  washed,  and  the  barber  shaves  off  all 
the  hair.  It  is  washed  a  second  time,  and  after  that  sandal- 
wood and  akshatas  are  placed  upon  the  forehead  and  gar- 
lands of  flowers  round  the  neck.  The  mouth  is  filled  with 
betel-leaves  and  the  body  is  apparelled  in  rich  raiment  and 
jewels.  It  is  then  placed  on  a  kind  of  state  bed,  where  it 
remains  exposed  to  view  during  the  time  that  the  pre- 
parations for  the  obsequies  are  proceeding.  When  these 
have  been  finished,  the  person  who  is  presiding  at  the 
ceremony  brings  a  new  piece  of  ceremonially  pure  cloth  in 
which  he  wraps  the  corpse.  A  strip  of  this  cloth  is  torn 
off,  and  a  small  piece  of  iron,  on  which  a  few  drops  of 
gingelly  oil  are  poured,  is  tied  up  in  it.  This  cloth  is 
twisted  into  the  form  of  a  triple  cord,  and  must  be  kept 
for  twelve  days,  to  be  used  in  the  various  ceremonies  of 
which  I  shall  speak  later  on. 

The  litter  on  which  the  body  is  placed  is  constructed  as 
follows.  To  two  long  parallel  poles  are  fastened  trans- 
versely seven  pieces  of  wood  with  ropes  of  straw,  and  on 
this  the  body  is  placed.  Then  they  bind  the  toes  and  the 
two  thumbs  together  2.     The  shroud,  which  until  then  has 

1  See  Part  I,  Chapter  XIII. 

2  As  soon  as  a  person  breathes  his  last  his  toes  and  thumbs  are  tied 
with  a  small  piece  of  cloth. — Ed. 


THE   FUNERAL   PROCESSION  485 

been  merely  thrown  over  the  body,  is  now  wrapped  around 
it,  and  is  bound  strongly  with  straw  ropes.  If  the  dead 
Brahmin  happens  to  leave  a  wife  behind,  his  face  is  left 
uncovered.  The  chief  mourner  then  gives  the  signal  to 
depart,  and.  carrying  fire  in  an  earthen  vessel,  puts  himself 
at  the  head  of  the  procession.  After  him  comes  the  funeral 
litter,  ornamented  with  flowers,  green  leaves,  coloured 
cloths,  and  sometimes  costly  stuffs.  Surrounding  it  are 
the  parents  and  friends  of  the  deceased,  all  of  them  without 
turbans,  and  having  simply  a  piece  of  cloth  thrown  over 
their  heads  in  token  of  mourning.  The  women  are  never 
allowed  to  attend  the  funeral  ceremonies  out  of  doors  *. 
They  remain  in  the  house  and  utter  most  lamentable  cries. 
On  the  way  to  the  funeral  pyre  three  halts  are  made. 
Each  time  the  mouth  of  the  dead  person  is  opened,  and 
a  little  raw  and  soaked  rice  is  placed  in  it.  so  that  hunger 
and  thirst  may  at  the  same  time  be  satisfied.  These  halts, 
however,  have  a  more  serious  motive.  Instances  have 
been  known,  it  is  said,  of  persons  believed  to  be  dead 
having  not  been  so  in  reality,  or  if  really  dead  having 
come  to  life  again  2.  Seeing  that  the  spirits  of  the  nether 
world  or  their  emissaries  have  been  known  to  make  mistakes 
in  their  choice  and  to  take  one  person  for  another,  these 
halts  are  made  to  give  plenty  of  time  for  the  spirits  to 
recognize  any  mistakes  they  may  have  made,  so  that  no 
person  may  be  thrown  on  the  funeral  pyre  who  is  still 
destined  to  live.  Each  of  these  halts  lasts  about  a  quarter 
of  an  hour.  On  arrival  at  the  burning-ground  a  shallow 
pit  is  first  dug,  about  six  feet  in  length  and  three  in  breadth. 
This  is  then  consecrated  by  mantrams  and  sprinkled  with 
ceremonial  water,  while  several  small  pieces  of  money  are 
thrown  into  it. 

Then  the  funeral  pyre  is  erected,  and  the  corpse  is  placed 
upon  it.     The  chief  mourner  next  takes  a  small  ball  of  dry 

1  This  is  not  true  of  the  Brahmins,  whose  women  always  follow  the 
procession  to  the  cremation  ground. — Ed. 

-  These  halts  are  made  to  allow  time  for  recovery,  if  the  man  is  not 
dead,  before  reaching  the  cremation  ground.  For  it  is  a  firm  belief 
that  if  by  any  chance  the  supposed  corpse  should  revive  after  reaching 
the  pyre,  dire  consequences  would  result  to  the  village.  He  is  not, 
under  those  circumstances,  allowed  to  go  back  to  the  village,  but  is 
expelled  altogether. — Ed. 


486  THE  FINAL   RITES 

cow-dung,  .sets  fire  to  it,  places  it  upon  the  hollow  of  the 
deceased's  stomach,  and  performs  on  this  lighted  bratty 
the  sacrifice  of  homam.  Then  follows  a  most  extraordinary 
ceremony,  which  at  the  same  time  is  certainly  a  very  dis- 
gusting one,  the  chief  mourner  placing  his  lips  successively 
to  all  the  apertures  of  the  deceased's  body,  addressing  to 
each  a  mantram  appropriate  to  it,  kissing  it,  and  dropping 
on  it  a  little  ghee.  By  this  ceremony  the  body  is  supposed 
to  be  completely  purified.  The  chief  mourner  then  places 
a  small  piece  of  gold  money  in  the  mouth,  and  everybody 
present  in  turn  deposits  in  it  a  few  grains  of  soaked  rice. 
The  near  relatives  then  approach  and  deprive  the  corpse 
of  all  the  jewels  with  which  it  is  adorned,  and  even  of  its 
shroud  ;  and  then  it  is  covered  with  small  splinters  of  wood 
which  are  sprinkled  with  pancha-gavia.  The  chief  mourner 
walks  round  the  funeral  pyre  three  times,  and  pours  upon 
it  some  water  that  is  allowed  to  trickle  from  an  earthen 
vessel  which  he  carries  on  his  shoulder,  and  which  he  after- 
wards breaks  on  the  head  of  the  deceased. 

This  last  act  and  that  which  follows  formally  constitute 
him  the  dead  man's  heir  l.  Then  a  lighted  torch  is  brought 
to  him.  Before  he  takes  it,  however,  it  is  customary  for 
him  to  show  his  grief  by  uttering  mournful  cries.  In  dis- 
playing his  grief  he  rolls  upon  the  ground,  strikes  his  breast 
fiercely  with  his  hand,  and  makes  the  air  resound  with  his 
cries.  Following  his  example,  all  present  also  weep  bitterly, 
or  pretend  to  do  so,  holding  themselves  clasped  one  to 

1  '  The  offering  to  deceased  fathers  at  the  sraddha  is  the  key  to  the 
Hindu  law  of  inheritance.  It  furnishes  the  principal  evidence  of  kin- 
ship, on  which  the  title  to  participate  in  the  patrimony  is  founded,  no 
power  of  making  wills  being  recognized  in  Manu,  or  any  other  authorita- 
tive code  of  Hindu  Jurisprudence.  .  .  .  The  object  of  such  sraddhas  is 
two-fold,  viz.  first,  the  re-embodying  of  the  soul  of  the  deceased  in  some 
kind  of  form  after  cremation  of  the  corpse,  or  simply  the  release  of  the 
subtile  body  which  is  to  convey  the  soul  away.  Secondly,  the  raising 
him  from  the  regions  of  the  atmosphere,  where  he  would  have  otherwise 
to  roam  for  an  indefinite  period  among  demons  and  evil  spirits  to  a 
particular  heaven  or  region  of  bliss.  There  he  is  eventually  half  deified 
among  the  shades  of  departed  kinsmen.  Manu,  however,  is  not  clear 
as  to  the  precise  effect  of  the  sraddha.  He  merely  states  that  its  per- 
formance by  a  son  or  the  nearest  male  kinsman  is  necessary  to  deliver 
a  father  from  a  kind  of  hell  called  Put,  and  that  the  spirits  of  the  departed 
{Pitris)  feed  on  the  offered  food.' — Momer-Williams. 


ABLUTIONS  PERFORMED  BY  MOURNERS  487 

another  as  a  sign  of  grief.  Then,  taking  hold  of  the  torch, 
the  chief  mourner  sets  fire  to  the  four  corners  of  the  pile. 
As  soon  as  the  flames  have  caught  hold  of  it  everybody 
retires,  with  the  exception  of  the  four  Brahmins  who  have 
carried  the  corpse,  and  who  must  remain  on  the  spot  until 
the  whole  pyre  has  been  consumed.  Meanwhile  the  heir 
goes  to  bathe  himself  without  taking  off  his  clothes  ;  while 
soaked  in  this  way,  he  selects  a  clear  spot  on  the  ground 
and  causes  rice  and  pulse  to  be  cooked  there  in  a  new 
earthenware  vessel,  which  he  must  keep  carefully  for  the 
ten  days  following.  Then  directing  his  thoughts  to  the 
deceased,  he  pours  a  libation  of  oil  and  water  on  the  ground, 
strews  darbha  grass  over  it,  which  he  also  sprinkles  with 
the  same  mixture  of  oil  and  water,  and  on  this  again  he 
places  the  rice  and  pulse  after  moulding  them  in  the  form 
of  balls.  A  third  libation  is  then  offered,  mantrams  are 
recited,  and  the  balls  are  thrown  to  the  crows,  which,  as 
every  one  knows,  are  very  common  in  India.  The  Hindus 
believe  these  noisy  and  rapacious  birds  to  be  evil  spirits, 
in  fact,  devils  under  the  form  of  crows.  This  offering, 
therefore,  is  intended  to  render  them  kindly  disposed 
towards  the  dead  man.  If  they  refuse  to  accept  the  food, 
which  we  are  told  sometimes  happens,  it  is  a  very  bad 
omen  for  him,  and  instead  of  being  admitted  into  the 
Abode  of  Bliss  he  will  find  himself,  despite  all  the  man- 
trams  and  purifying  ceremonies,  made  captive  in  the  Yama- 
loka,  that  is  to  say,  in  hell. 

After  the  corpse  has  been  consumed,  the  four  Brahmins 
who  remained  near  the  pyre  return  to  the  place  where  the 
other  people  present  at  the  ceremonies  have  gathered 
together  K  Three  times  they  walk  round  the  assembly, 
asking  permission  to  take  the  bath  of  the  Ganges.  Then 
they  proceed  to  perform  their  ablutions  in  order  to  purify 
themselves  of  the  pollution  of  having  carried  a  corpse. 
The  chief  mourner  invites  all  present  to  take  the  bath  of 
the  dead,  the  mritika-snana,  which  is  supposed  to  be  on 
behalf  of  the  deceased  whose  body  has  just  been  consumed 
by  the  flames.  This  bath,  it  is  supposed,  will  refresh  it 
after  the  fiery  ordeal.     Then  a  few  small  coins  and  some 

1  These  people  always  meet  on  the  bank  of  a  river  or  a  tank. — Ed. 


488       DUTIES  DEVOLVING   ON   THE   HEIR 

betel-leaves  are  distributed  among  those  present,  and 
every  one  who  has  a  right  to  them  is  presented  with  the 
dasa-dana,  after  which  all  return  to  the  door  of  the  deceased's 
house,  though  no  person  enters  the  house  because  it  is  still 
defiled.  Finally,  everybody  washes  his  feet  and  returns 
to  his  own  house. 

Nevertheless,  for  the  heir  another  ceremony  still  remains, 
which  consists  in  filling  a  little  chatty  with  earth  and 
sowing  nine  kinds  of  grain,  namely  rice,  barley,  gingelly 
seeds,  and  the  five  kinds  of  pulse.  He  waters  them  so 
that  they  may  quickly  sprout  and  be  used  for  certain  cere- 
monies which  follow.  A  thing  of  the  very  highest  impor- 
tance that  he  must  do  that  day  is  to  place  in  the  habitation 
of  the  deceased  a  small  vessel  full  of  water,  over  which  he 
hangs  a  thread  tied  at  one  end  to  the  ceiling  L.  This  thread 
is  intended  to  serve  as  a  ladder  to  the  prana,  that  is  to  say, 
to  the  life-breath  which  animated  the  body  of  the  deceased, 
and  which  by  this  thread  is  enabled  to  descend  and  drink 
the  water  during  the  ten  days  which  follow.  And  in  order 
that  the  prana  may  have  something  to  eat  as  well  as  to 
drink,  a  handful  of  rice  is  placed  each  morning  by  the  side 
of  the  vessel. 

It  is  not  until  all  these  ceremonies  and  formalities  have 
been  accomplished  that  the  people  of  the  house  are  allowed 
to  take  any  food.  For  they  have  neither  eaten  nor  drunk 
anything  since  the  moment  that  the  deceased  gave  up  the 
ghost.  All  these  practices  and  those  which  I  will  briefly 
detail  in  the  following  chapter  are  most  rigorously  observed. 
The  omission  of  the  most  minute  of  them  would  cause 
no  less  scandal  than  the  omission  of  the  more  important. 
Nevertheless  poverty  is  allowed  as  an  excuse  for  neglecting 
those  which  entail  large  expenditure.  For  instance,  most 
Brahmins  would  be  quite  unable  to  make  the  dasa-dana, 
or  ten  gifts. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  these  practices,  however  super- 
stitious they  may  appear,  clearly  denote  that  the  Hindus 
have  preserved  a  most  distinct  idea  of  the  immortality  of 
the  soul ;  that  they  recognize  the  corruption  of  human 
nature  and  the  necessity  of  resorting  to  means  of  purifica- 

1  This  is  nut  done  in  some  parts  of  South  India. — Ed. 


HINDU  IDEA   OF  IMMORTALITY  *89 

lion  for  enabling  the  soul  to  enter  the  blessed  state  and 
enjoy  the  rights  which  it  has  forfeited  through  sin.  And 
the  prana,  for  instance,  which  is  regarded  by  the  Hindus 
sometimes  as  the  soul  and  sometimes  as  the  breath  of  life, 
reminds  us  of  the  spiraculum  vitae  of  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
by  the  aid  of  which  the  Creator  gave  life  to  the  clay  out  of 
which  He  formed  mankind. 

CHAPTER  XXX 

The  Various  Ceremonies  observed  after  Burial  in  honour  of  the  Dead. 

Hindu  mourning  lasts  one  year,  during  which  a  large 
number  of  ceremonies  have  to  be  observed.  The  principal 
are  as  follow  : — 

On  the  day  after  the  funeral  the  chief  mourner,  accom- 
panied by  his  relatives  and  friends,  goes  to  the  place 
consecrated  to  the  burning  of  the  dead.  There  he  recom- 
mences the  ceremonies  of  the  previous  evening,  without 
forgetting  the  food  for  the  crows,  and  places  on  the  ground 
the  strip  of  cloth  which  has  been  torn  from  the  pall.  The 
Brahmins  present  take  the  bath  of  the  dead  (mritika-snana), 
receive  betel,  and  depart.  The  heir,  however,  keeps  back 
one  of  them,  and  gives  him  two  measures  of  rice,  peas, 
and  vegetables,  wrapped  in  a  new  cloth,  which  he  presents 
as  well,  so  that  he  may  make  a  good  meal  and  be  well 
clothed  by  proxy  as  it  were  for  the  deceased,  in  case  the 
rice,  the  peas,  the  oil,  and  the  water  which  have  already 
been  offered  for  the  latter  may  not  be  sufficient  to  allay 
his  hunger  and  quench  his  thirst,  and  so  that  he  may  not 
be  without  clothes  to  cover  his  nakedness  in  the  next 
world. 

On  the  third  day,  the  heir  again  summons  his  relatives 
and  friends.  He  erects  a  small  pandal  in  a  corner  of  his 
courtyard,  and  has  rice,  seven  sorts  of  vegetables,  cakes, 
&c,  cooked  there.  When  these  viands  have  been  prepared, 
he  places  them  on  a  cloth  folded  in  four,  and  covers  them 
all  with  another  cloth.  Then  five  small  earthen  pots  are 
brought  filled  with  pancha-gavia,  as  also  a  measure  of  rice, 
some  peas,  vegetables,  sandalwood,  akshatas,  three  small 
pieces  of  cloth  dyed  yellow,  some  flour,  a  small  stick  two 
cubits  in  length,  some  betel,  some  gingelly  oil,  and  the  ten 

K  o 


490  CEREMONIES   AFTER    BURIAL 

gifts  (dasdrdana).  Provided  with  all  these  and  accom- 
panied by  his  relatives,  he  returns  to  the  burning-groundi 
There  he  performs  his  ablutions,  puts  on  the  ring,  or 
pavifram,  performs  the  sam-kalpa,  and  then  fills  a  new 
earthen  pot  with  water,  which  he  sprinkles  over  the  ashes 
of  the  deceased.  After  that  he  sprinkles  them  with  milk. 
He  squats  on  his  heels  with  his  face  turned  to  the  east, 
performs  once  more  the  sam-kalpa,  stirs  the  ashes  with 
the  small  stick  above  mentioned,  looking  for  any  bones 
that  may  have  escaped  the  flames,  and  these  he  puts  into 
an  earthen  pot,  reciting  a  mantram  meanwhile.  Gathering 
up  a  portion  of  the  ashes,  he  throws  them  into  the  water. 
The  remainder  he  collects  into  a  heap,  to  which  he  gives 
the  rough  semblance  of  a  human  figure,  supposed  to  repre- 
sent the  deceased.  He  offers  as  sacrifice  to  it  a  portion 
of  the  things  he  has  brought,  sprinkles  it  with  pancha- 
gavia,  and  puts  the  whole  into  an  earthen  pot.  These 
sad  mementoes  of  the  deceased  are  destined  to  be  thrown 
subsequently  into  one  of  the  sacred  rivers. 

He  then  raises  a  mound  of  earth  twelve  inches  high  on 
the  exact  spot  where  the  dead  body  has  been  burnt,  and 
taking  three  small  stones  he  places  one  in  the  middle  of 
the  mound,  which  receives  the  name  of  the  deceased  ;  the 
second,  which  he  places  at  the  south  end,  is  named  Yama  ; 
and  the  third,  which  he  places  at  the  north  end,  is  called 
Rudra.  Calling  these  three  stones  by  the  names  which 
he  has  given  them,  he  proceeds  to  rub  them  over  with 
gingelly  oil,  bathes  them  while  he  continues  to  recite  man- 
trams,  and  clothes  them  in  the  three  pieces  of  yellow  cloth 
with  which  he  has  provided  himself.  Afterwards,  putting 
them  back  in  their  places,  he  offers  them  puja  and  nei- 
veddya,  and  pours  a  libation  of  oil  and  water  in  honour  of 
each  particular  one.  Then  all  the  Brahmins  present  file  in 
one  by  one,  embrace  the  chief  mourner,  and  weep  with  him. 
The  distribution  of  dasa-dana  follows  as  on  the  first  day. 

The  three  stones  are  next  placed  in  the  earthen  pot  that 
is  intended  for  cooking  the  rice  and  the  peas,  which  are 
mixed  with  a  fresh  supply  of  these  vegetables,  and  the  heir 
carries  it  all  to  the  border  of  the  tank.  After  cooking  the 
viands  he  offers  them  to  the  three  stones,  repeats  his  liba- 
tions, and  at  last  throws  the  rice  and  the  peas  to  the  crows. 


THE   BRAHMIN  WIDOW  491 

A  meal  and  a  cloth  are  again  bestowed  on  a  Brahmin  by 
proxy  as  it  were  for  the  deceased  ;  and  the  day  ends  in 
pretty  much  the  same  manner  as  those  preceding  it. 

It  is  considered  of  great  importance  to  preserve  carefully 
for  ten  days  the  three  little  stones,  as  well  as  the  pot  used 
for  the  cooking  of  the  crows'  food.  If  by  misfortune  a 
single  one  of  these  articles  were  lost,  all  the  ceremonies 
would  have  to  be  begun  over  again. 

From  the  fourth  to  the  ninth  day  inclusive,  these  foolish 
ceremonies  are  repeated  daily.  The  objects  are  (1)  to  pre- 
vent the  deceased  suffering  from  hunger,  thirst,  and  naked- 
ness ;  (2)  to  enable  him  to  divest  himself  as  quickly  as 
possible  of  his  hideous  and  ghastly  carcase  and  to  assume 
a  beautiful  form,  so  that,  in  a  new  birth,  he  may  be  neither 
deaf,  nor  blind,  nor  dumb,  nor  lame,  nor  afflicted  with  any 
bodily  infirmity. 

On  the  tenth  day  the  chief  mourner  rises  early  to  make  his 
ablutions,  constructs  a  little  pandal  in  his  courtyard,  causes 
rice,  peas,  and  three  sorts  of  vegetables  to  be  cooked  there, 
prepares  the  drink  called  paramanna,  and  some  rice  cakes 
cooked  in  water.  He  places  the  whole  on  a  large  plantain 
leaf,  with  three  pieces  of  saffron  on  the  top.  In  short,  he 
prepares  all  the  articles  indispensable  for  the  sacrifices  and 
offerings  which  he  is  about  to  make. 

When  all  is  ready,  the  widow  of  the  deceased,  after  per- 
forming her  ablutions,  paints  her  eyelids  with  antimony, 
her  forehead  with  vermilion,  her  neck  with  sandalwood- 
paste,  her  arms  and  legs  with  saffron  ;  she  then  puts  on  her 
richest  garments,  bedecks  herself  with  all  her  jewels,  twines 
red  flowers  in  her  hair,  and  hangs  garlands  of  sweet-smelling 
flowers  round  her  neck.  The  married  women  surround  her, 
clasp  her  by  turns  in  their  arms,  and  weep  with  her. 

The  chief  mourner,  provided  with  all  his  sacrificial  para- 
phernalia, and  followed  by  his  relatives  and  friends,  as  well 
as  by  the  widow  and  her  companions,  returns  once  more  to 
the  burning-ground,  where  all  the  preparatory  ceremonies 
are  renewed  just  as  those  already  described.  This  time  he 
mixes  some  earth  with  water,  and  spreads  three  coats  of 
the  mud  on  the  three  stones,  accompanied  by  mantrams, 
adjurations,  sacrifices,  offerings,  &c. 

The  women  present  then  surround  the  widow  once  more, 


492  DISCARDING  THE  WIDOW'S  ORNAMENTS 

beating   their   heads   and   breasts   in   measured   time  and 
weeping  and  sobbing  as  loud  as  they  can. 

The  chief  mourner  makes  three  little  balls  of  boiled  rice 
and  peas,  places  them  on  the  ground  on  darbha  grass,  pours 
a  libation  of  oil  and  water,  offers  the  little  balls  to  the 
deceased,  and  then  throws  them  to  the  crows. 

He  puts  back  the  three  stones  into  the  earthen  pot  which 
has  played  so  important  a  part  during  these  ten  days, 
carries  them  to  the  edge  of  the  tank,  performs  sam-kalpa, 
puts  the  pavitram  on  his  ringer,  walks  into  the  water  up  to 
his  neck,  turns  to  the  east,  and  looking  towards  the  sun, 
says  : — 

k  Till  now,  these  stones  have  represented  the  dead  body  ; 
may  that  dead  body  from  this  moment  leave  its  hideous 
form  and  take  that  of  the  gods  !  May  it  be  transported  into 
Swarga  to  enjoy  all  its  pleasures  as  long  as  the  Ganges  shall 
flow,  as  long  as  these  stones  shall  last !  ' 

At  these  words  he  throws  the  pot  and  the  stones  inside  it 
over  his  head  into  the  water.  Then  he  performs  his  ablu- 
tions, returns  to  the  bank,  performs  the  sam-kalpa,  and 
distributes  the  dasa-dana.  Then,  with  the  permission  of 
the  Brahmins,  he  and  his  near  relatives  are  shaved  ;  for 
during  these  ten  days  of  mourning  shaving  is  not  allowed. 
Finally,  after  numberless  foolish  ceremonies,  of  which  I  have 
given  only  a  short  epitome,  all  repair  to  the  edge  of  the 
tank.  There  a  heap  of  earth  four  fingers  high  is  made, 
on  which  is  placed  a  little  ball  also  of  earth,  which  receives 
the  name  of  the  deceased.  Then  the  widow,  surrounded 
by  her  companions  and  showing  no  sign  of  grief,  divests  her- 
self of  her  jewels  and  rich  garments,  wipes  off  the  artificial 
pigments  with  which  she  had  smeared  different  parts  of  her 
body,  and  finally  takes  off  the  tali  which  she  wears  round 
her  neck.  This  discarded  ornament  she  places  near  the 
ball  of  earth  which  represents  her  deceased  husband, 
uttering  these  words  the  while  :  '  I  abandon  all  these  to 
prove  to  thee  my  love  and  my  devotion.'  Then  ensue  fresh 
wailings  and  weepings  on  the  part  of  her  companions. 

The  purohita  appears  on  the  scene  at  this  moment  to  per- 
form the  puniaha-vachana,  that  is,  the  consecration  of  holy 
water  '.     He  makes  all  the  women  who  are  participating  in 
1  See  Part  I,  Chapter  XIII. 


FEASTINC4  THE   BRAHMINS  493 

the  mourning  drink  a  little  of  this  water,  and  sprinkles  some 
drops  on  their  heads.  By  this  means  they  obtain  purifica- 
tion from  the  defilement  which  they  have  contracted  by 
taking  part  in  the  funeral  ceremonies. 

The  heir  gives  to  each  person  present  an  areca-nut  and 
a  betel-leaf,  and  to  the  widow  a  white  cloth,  which  she 
immediately  puts  on. 

Finally,  all  return  to  the  house  of  the  deceased,  where, 
after  having  inspected  the  lamp,  which  ought  to  have  been 
kept  burning  all  this  time  on  the  spot  where  the  deceased 
breathed  his  last,  each  one  takes  leave  and  does  not  enter 
his  own  house  till  he  has  washed  his  feet  at  the  door. 

Being  now  left  alone,  the  heir  takes  the  five  little  earthen 
pots  in  which  he  had  sown  some  seeds  on  the  first  day,  offers 
them  puja,  and  then  throws  them  into  the  water. 

On  the  eleventh  day,  as  soon  as  his  ablutions  are  over,  he 
goes  to  summon  nineteen  Brahmins,  to  whom  he  first  of  all 
offers  a  feast  to  be  eaten  by  proxy  for  the  deceased.  Then 
he  puts  into  a  basket  a  large  earthen  chatty  containing  two 
measures  of  rice,  and  into  another  basket  several  more 
earthen  pots  of  a  smaller  size.  He  provides  himself  with 
liquefied  butter,  gingelly  oil,  darbha  grass,  flowers,  &c,  and, 
accompanied  by  the  Brahmins  invited,  goes  to  the  edge  of 
the  tank.  There  he  digs  a  small  hole,  blesses  it  with  man- 
trams,  places  therein  his  little  earthen  pots,  and  lights  a  fire. 
At  the  four  corners  of  the  hole  he  places  darbha  grass  and 
sprinkles  oil  all  round  it.  He  spreads  some  boiled  rice  on 
a  plantain  leaf,  sprinkles  it  with  ghee,  and  makes  it  into 
thirty-six  little  balls,  which  he  throws  subsequently  into  the 
fire  one  after  the  other.  To  this  fire  he  makes  profound 
obeisance,  beseeching  it  to  grant  the  deceased  access  into 
the  Abode  of  Bliss.  He  then  distributes  dasa-dana  and 
gives  the  Brahmins  some  betel.  The  latter  then  go  to  bathe 
themselves,  and  return  to  assist  in  the  ceremony  of  the 
deliverance  of  the  bull. 

For  this  purpose  a  bull  three  years  old  is  chosen.  It  must 
be  all  of  one  colour,  either  white,  red,  or  black.  After 
washing  it  they  smear  it  with  sandalwood-paste  and  akshatas, 
decorate  it  with  garlands  of  flowers,  and  with  a  red-hot  iron 
brand  on  the  right  haunch  the  figure  of  one  of  Siva's 
weapons  called  snlah.    The  chief  mourner  implores  this  god 


494  DELIVERANCE    OF  THE   BULL 

to  consent  to  the  deliverance  of  the  bull,  so  that,  as  a  reward 
for  this  good  deed,  the  deceased  may  find  a  place  in  an 
Abode  of  Bliss.  They  then  set  loose  the  bull,  which  is 
allowed  to  wander  about  grazing  without  a  keeper  wherever 
it  likes,  and  it  is  given  as  a  present  to  some  Brahmin  l. 

The  nineteen  Brahmin  guests  seat  themselves  in  a  line  on 
small  stools.  The  heir  spreads  darbha  grass  before  them,  and 
gives  a  blade  of  it  to  each,  while  reciting  a  mantram  and 
uttering  the  name  of  the  deceased.  He  then  sprinkles  some 
drops  of  oil  on  their  heads,  presents  them  with  sandalwood- 
paste,  gives  to  each  a  present  of  two  pieces  of  cloth,  offers 
a  libation  of  oil  and  water,  and  again  serves  them  with  food. 

The  repast  over,  he  mixes  some  boiled  rice,  peas,  and 
herbs  together,  rolling  them  all  into  three  balls,  which  he 
puts  into  an  earthen  pot.  After  sundry  libations,  offerings, 
and  other  formalities,  he  throws  these  three  balls  to  the 
cattle  and  dismisses  the  nineteen  Brahmins,  who,  before 
returning  home,  take  good  care  to  bathe. 

On  the  twelfth  day  the  heir  goes  to  summon  eight  Brah- 
mins, and  makes  them  sit  down  on  as  many  stools  in  front 
of  him.  He  chooses  one  of  them  to  represent  the  corpse 
of  the  dead  man,  and  gives  him,  as  well  as  the  seven  others, 
a  blade  of  darbha  grass  with  the  usual  ceremony.  He  then 
traces  three  squares  on  the  ground,  over  which  he  spreads 
cow-dung,  which  he  blesses  with  mantrams,  and  over  this 
again  he  pours  oil  and  spreads  darbha  grass.  In  the 
middle  square  he  places  the  Brahmin  whom  he  has  ap- 
pointed to  represent  the  corpse,  sprinkles  over  his  feet  oil 
and  darbha  grass,  and  then  washes  them  with  water. 

Two  other  Brahmins  step  into  the  second  square,  and  the 
five  others  into  the  third.  To  each  of  them  he  performs  the 
same  office.  Having  made  them  sit  down,  he  approaches 
the  one  who  represents  the  corpse,  sprinkles  on  his  head  and 
hands  some  drops  of  oil,  while  repeating  a  mantram,  puts 
earrings  in  his  ears  and  a  gold  ring  on  his  finger,  makes  him 
a  present  of  two  pieces  of  cloth,  a  white  blanket,  a  brass 
chembu  (drinking  bowl),  and  some  betel,  hangs  round  his 
neck  one  of  the  rosaries  called  rudrakshas,  and  smears  him 
with  sandalwood-paste.     Each   of   the   seven  others   also 

1  These  bulls  are  usually  dedicated  to  a  temple,  and  they  are  used  for 
breeding  purposes. — Ed. 


OTHER   FUNERAL   CEREMONIES  495 

receives  two  pieces  of  cloth,  a  white  blanket,  and  a  chembu. 
Then  they  all  take  part  in  the  repast  prepared  for  them. 
At  its  conclusion  the  heir  puts  some  rice  and  oil  in  a  dish, 
and  moulds  four  balls,  which  he  places  on  the  ground  after 
performing  the  necessary  formalities.  One  of  these  balls 
is  intended  for  the  deceased,  a  second  for  the  deceased's 
father,  a  third  for  his  grandfather,  and  the  last  for  his  great- 
grandfather.    Taking  the  deceased's  ball,  he  says  : — 

1  Till  now  thou  hast  preserved  the  hideous  appearance  of 
a  corpse  :  from  this  moment  thou  shalt  clothe  thyself  in  the 
divine  form  of  thy  ancestors  ;  thou  shalt  inhabit  with  them 
the  pitri-loka  (abode  of  the  ancestors)  and  there  enjoy  every 
sort  of  happiness.' 

He  then  divides  this  ball  into  three  portions  and  mixes 
one  portion  with  each  of  the  remaining  three  balls. 

In  the  same  way  he  tears  the  little  strip  of  cloth  which 
represents  the  triple  cord  of  the  deceased  into  three  pieces 
and  puts  one  on  each  ball.  To  all  of  these  he  makes  offer- 
ings and  libations.  After  this,  comes  a  further  distribution 
of  dasa-dana.  Finally,  the  balls  and  offerings  are  thrown 
to  the  cattle. 

When  all  this  long  and  monotonous  ceremony  is  ended, 
the  chief  mourner  anoints  his  head  with  oil,  takes  a  bath, 
and  returns  home  well  covered  up  in  a  cloth.  He  embraces 
his  relatives  and  friends,  addressing  words  of  consolation 
to  each  in  turn.  He  paints  his  forehead  with  sandalwood- 
paste  and  akshatas,  resumes  his  turban  and  ordinary  clothes, 
and  distributes  presents  according  to  his  means. 

The  purohita  also  recites  a  great  many  mantrams,  and 
sprinkles  all  the  corners  of  the  house  with  holy  water,  by 
which  means  it  is  purified,  together  with  all  those  who 
inhabit  it  \ 

On  the  thirteenth  day  the  heir  performs  homam  in  the 
accustomed  manner  in  honour  of  the  nine  planets. 

A  ceremony  something  like  that  of  the  twelfth  day  takes 
place  on  the  twenty-seventh  ;  but  only  three  Brahmins 
take  part  in  this,  representing  respectively  the  deceased, 

1  The  same  kind  of  ceremony  took  place  amongst  the  Romans  on  the 
tenth  day,  named  denicales  feriae.  As  may  have  been  observed,  this  is 
not  the  only  feature  of  resemblance  between  the  funeral  ceremonies  of 
the  Romans  and  those  of  the  Hindus. — Dubois. 


496  FUNERALS   OF    BRAHMIN   WOMEN 

his  father,  and  his  grandfather.  One  is  supposed  to  call 
himself  Vasudeva,  the  second  calls  himself  Yama,  and  the 
third  calls  himself  the  Sun.  The  heir  makes  the  usual 
offerings  and  libations  to  these  personages,  gives  each  of 
them  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  has  a  meal  served  up  to  them,  at 
the  end  of  which  he  kneads  three  balls  composed  of  rice, 
peas,  and  herbs,  which  are  solemnly  offered  to  the  deceased 
and  his  two  ancestors. 

The  same  ceremony  is  repeated  on  the  30th,  45th,  60th, 
75th,  90th,  120th,  175th,  190th,  210th,  240th,  270th,  300th, 
and  330th  day  after  the  death  of  the  deceased.  Further, 
the  anniversaries  of  the  deaths  of  his  father  and  mother 
must  be  celebrated  by  a  Hindu  all  his  life  long  without  fail  ; 
and  each  time  most  of  the  formalities  just  mentioned  must 
be  observed  and  liberal  gifts  made  to  Brahmins. 

At  each  new  moon  it  is  the  indispensable  duty  of  a  man  to 
offer  a  libation  of  oil  and  water  to  his  deceased  father,  as 
well  as  to  his  grandfather  and  to  his  great-grandfather  l. 

I  have  mentioned  that  the  pecuniary  circumstances  of 
many  Brahmins  do  not  allow  of  their  fulfilling  to  the  letter 
the  costly  obligations  imposed  upon  a  chief  mourner.  But 
there  are  a  great  many  which  are  obligatory  and  which 
entail  considerable  expense.  Conceit  and  vanity,  which  are 
such  strong  incentives  in  the  minds  of  Brahmins,  induce 
many  of  them  to  contract  debts  infinitely  beyond  their 
means  in  order  to  make  a  show  on  such  occasions. 

The  funeral  ceremony  for  a  woman  is  nearly  the  same  as 
that  for  a  man.  Rather  less  attention,  however,  is  paid  to 
a  widowed  mother  of  a  family.  And  much  less  still  to  a 
widow  who  dies  without  children  ;  the  flames  of  the  funeral 
pile  have  scarcely  consumed  the  mortal  remains  of  such  a 
one  before  she  is  forgotten.  When  a  Brahmin  woman  dies, 
the  married  women,  kinswomen,  or  friends  of  the  family 
assist  at  her  funeral  ceremony,  and  it  is  they  who  receive 
the  usual  presents  and  distributions. 

The  obsequies  of  the  Kshatriyas  and  Vaisyas  are  per- 
formed with  nearly  the  same  pomp  as  those  of  the  Brah- 

1  And  also  to  their  wives.  Libations  are  also  sometimes  offered  to  the 
maternal  grandfather,  great-grandfather,  and  great-great-grandfather 
and  their  wives. — Ed. 


KSHATRIYA,  VAISYA,  AND  SUDRA  FUNERALS  497 

mins.  the  ceremonies  which  are  observed  hasting  twelve 
days. 

It  is  always  a  purofiita  who  presides  at  the  death-bed, 
and  who  directs  the  mourning  ceremonies  in  both  these 
castes.  The  chief  mourner  invites  the  Brahmins,  to  whom 
offerings  and  presents  are  made.  These  ceremonies  are 
repeated  every  month  during  the  first  year  ;  and  after  that 
it  suffices  if  the  titi,  that  is  the  anniversary,  is  celebrated 
regularly. 

The  last  services  which  the  Sudras  render  to  their  dead 
are  accompanied  by  much  less  ceremony  and  formality. 
They  have  neither  mantrams  nor  sacrifices.  However, 
when  a  Sudra's  last  hour  is  come,  it  is  customary  to  call 
a  Brahmin  to  go  through  the  ceremony  of  prayaschitta 
(expiation)  for  him.  His  family  is  also  permitted  to  bestow 
on  the  Brahmins  godana  and  dasa-dana,  as  well  as  the  other 
customary  gifts  and  presents.  As  soon  as  a  Sudra  dies, 
they  wash  his  body  and  have  him  shaved  by  the  barber. 
Then  they  pay  attention  to  his  toilet,  which  they  strive  to 
render  as  elegant  as  possible,  and  afterwards  place  him 
sitting  cross-legged  on  a  sort  of  bed  of  state.  When  all  is 
ready  for  the  obsequies,  they  remove  him,  still  in  the  same 
position,  to  an  open  litter,  or  shrine,  ornamented  with 
flowers,  green  leaves,  and  valuable  cloths,  or  else  to  an 
open  palanquin  splendidly  decorated.  The  body  is  then 
carried  to  the  funeral  pyre  by  twelve  bearers. 

Musical  instruments  are  employed  in  the  funeral  pro- 
cessions of  the  Sudras,  but  never  in  those  of  the  higher 
castes.  The  two  principal  instruments  are  the  long  trumpet , 
called  in  Tamil  tarai,  and  the  sankha,  or  sangu,  another  no 
less  lugubrious  instrument  made  out  of  a  large  sea-shell 
(the  conch).  As  soon  as  a  Sudra  has  breathed  his  last, 
two  of  these  tarais  are  blown  to  announce  the  sad  news  to 
all  the  neighbours.  Their  harsh  and  piercing  sounds  are 
audible  at  a  great  distance,  and  cannot  fail  to  inspire 
a  pious  horror  wherever  they  are  heard.  One  trumpet  will 
sound  a  B  flat,  droning  on  this  note  for  the  space  of  half 
a  minute  ;  then  another  trumpet  answers  in  G  sharp  ;  and 
thus  they  respond  by  turns.  This  monotonous  and  ear- 
splitting  noise  continues  without  interruption  from  the 
moment  of  death  until  the  end  of  the  obsequies. 


498         SUDRA   RITE   OF  MILK   OFFERIXC; 

Mourning  in  the  Sudra  caste  lasts  only  three  days.  The 
third  day  is  called  the  day  of  milk  offering.  To  perform 
this  ceremony  the  chief  mourner  provides  himself  with 
three  young  cocoanuts,  four  cocoanut  branches,  a  measure 
of  raw  rice,  some  boiled  rice,  herbs,  fruits,  &c.  He  fills  an 
earthen  pot  with  milk,  places  it  in  a  new  basket,  and 
accompanied  by  the  relatives  and  friends  of  the  family, 
preceded  by  conch-players,  goes  to  the  place  where  the 
body  of  the  deceased  was  burnt.  On  his  arrival  he  draws 
some  water  in  an  earthen  pot  and  sprinkles  it  over  the 
ashes  on  the  pyre.  Above  this  he  erects  a  small  pandal, 
covered  with  palm  leaves  and  supported  by  four  pillars, 
the  interior  of  which  he  drapes  with  a  piece  of  cloth.  He 
collects  the  bones  which  have  escaped  the  flames,  puts 
the  largest  one  on  a  flat  cake  made  of  dried  cow-dung,  and 
gathers  up  the  rest  in  a  heap.  He  calls  the  deceased  by 
name  and  pours  milk  over  the  bones.  During  this  libation 
the  conch-players  make  the  air  resound  with  their  lugu- 
brious noise. 

The  chief  mourner  then  piles  up  the  ashes  over  the 
bones.  At  the  side  he  places  half  a  cocoanut,  and  on  the 
top  pieces  of  another  cocoanut  which  he  breaks,  sprinkling 
the  milk  over  this  pyramid  of  ashes.  He  places  a  third 
cocoanut  close  by  on  a  plantain  leaf  and  invokes  Haris- 
chandra  K 

Finally,  he  kneads  the  rice  and  other  eatables  which  he 
has  brought  with  him  into  a  round  mass  and  throws  the 
whole  to  the  crows,  calling  meanwhile  upon  the  name  of 
the  deceased. 

Then  the  relatives  and  friends  come  in  turn  to  embrace 
the  chief  mourner,  holding  him  in  their  arms  and  weeping 
with  him.  He  takes  the  large  bone  which  was  placed  in 
reserve  ;  and  all  the  mourners,  to  the  doleful  notes  of  the 
conches,  go  and  throw  this  bone  into  the  neighbouring  tank. 
After  bathing,  all  accompany  the  chief  mourner  to  his 
house.  There  with  much  ceremony  they  put  a  new  turban 
on  his  head,  and  each  hastens  to  do  justice  to  the  repast 
prepared  for  the  occasion.  Thus  ends  the  funeral  cere- 
mony. 

1  One  of  the  kings  of  Ayodhya,  who  was  famous  for  speaking  the 
truth.— Ed. 


UNLUCKY   DAYS   FOR   DYING  499 

Wealthy  Sudras  do  not  stop  here.  They  proceed  on  the 
thirtieth  day  to  a  new  ceremony,  on  which  occasion  they 
strive  to  rival  the  Brahmins  in  magnificence.  And  the 
Brahmins,  since  they  enjoy  all  the  honour  and  profit  of  the 
feast,  take  care  not  to  show  any  jealousy. 

The  funeral  ceremonies  of  the  Sudras  vary  much  in 
different  districts.  In  some  places  Hindus  of  this  caste 
bury  their  dead  instead  of  burning  them.  In  other  places 
they  throw  the  body  into  the  river,  deliberately  feigning 
the  river  to  be  the  Ganges.  This  kind  of  burial,  the  most 
expeditious  and  least  costly  of  any,  is  common  enough 
among  the  sects  of  Siva  and  the  poorer  classes  of  Sudras. 

The  solemn  occasion  when  man  shuffles  off  his  mortal 
coil  naturally  offers  ample  matter  for  speculation  to  the 
imaginative  Hindus.  They  attribute  to  the  moon  a  sort 
of  Zodiac  composed  of  twenty-seven  constellations,  each 
of  which  presides  at  one  of  the  twenty-seven  days  of  its 
periodical  course.  The  last  five  are  all  more  or  less  fatal. 
Woe  to  the  relatives  of  him  who  dies  in  the  period  when 
the  moon  travels  through  them  !  The  body  of  the  deceased, 
in  this  case,  cannot  be  removed  from  the  house  either  by 
the  door  or  the  window.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
make  an  opening  through  the  wall  for  this  purpose.  And 
this  is  not  all.  To  escape  the  unfortunate  accidents  which 
would  inevitably  follow  such  an  untimely  death,  the  most 
prudent  course  is  to  abandon  the  house  for  six  months,  or 
at  least  three  months,  according  to  the  degree  of  the  malign 
influence  of  the  constellation  which  was  in  the  ascendant 
on  the  day  of  death  \  At  the  end  of  this  time  they  remove 
the  bushes  with  which  they  stuffed  up  the  front  door  of  the 
ill-fated  house  where  the  death  occurred.  The  remotest 
corners  of  the  building  are  carefully  purified,  a  purification 
which  can  be  completed  only  by  the  intervention  of  a 
purohita,  who  has  to  be  called  in,  and  of  course  paid  for. 
Finally,  a  meal  must  be  given  to  the  Brahmins  and  presents 
must  be  made  to  them  ;  after  that  the  occupants  will  have 
nothing  else  to  fear. 

A  death  happening  on  Saturday  entails  almost  equally 
serious  inconveniences.     It  is  a  hundred  to  one  in  that  case 

1  Xowadays  it  is  customary  simply  to  shut  up  the  room  in  which 
a  man  dies. — Ed. 


500  OFFSPRING   ABANDONED 

that  another  member  of  the  same  household  will  die  before 
the  year  is  out  l.  The  only  way  to  stave  it  off  is  to  sacrifice 
a  living  animal,  such  as  a  ram,  a  he-goat,  a  fowl,  &c,  as 
a  burnt  offering. 

Thus  superstition  follows  the  Hindu  even  to  the  last 
days  of  his  existence.  We  have  already  seen  what  silly 
fancies  assail  him  from  his  cradle.  The  child  born  under 
an  unlucky  star  is  not  only  himself  destined,  according  to 
common  belief,  to  all  sorts  of  troubles  and  accidents  during 
the  course  of  his  life,  but  he  brings  bad  luck  to  those  with 
whom  he  is  united  by  the  ties  of  blood  ;  and  it  is  not 
uncommon  to  see  parents,  convinced  of  the  truth  of  these 
so-called  malign  influences,  quietly  abandoning  on  a  high- 
road innocent  babes  who  happened  to  be  born  on  a  certain 
day  which  the  prognostications  of  the  professional  astro- 
loger have  signified  to  be  unlucky,  or  else  handing  them 
over  to  any  one  who  is  bold  enough  to  run  the  risk  of 
assuming  charge  of  such  an  ill-omened  burden  2.  There 
are  even  unnatural  parents  of  this  kind  who  go  the  length 
of  cruelly  strangling  or  drowning  these  tiny  victims  of 
most  stupid  and  at  the  same  time  most  atrocious  super- 
stition 3. 

CHAPTER  XXXI 

The  Third  Condition  of  Brahmins,  viz.  Vanaprastha,  or  Dweller  in  the 
Jungle. — The  Respect  paid  to  Vanaprasthas. — Conjectures  as  to 
their  Origin. — Comparison  between  them  and  the  Wise  Men  of 
Greece  and  other  Philosophers. — The  Rules  of  the  Vanaprasthas. — 
Their  Renunciation  of  the  World  and  Pleasures  of  the  .Senses. — 
Their  Moral  Virtues. 

The  third  condition  of  Brahmins  is  that  of  Vanaprastha, 
that  is  to  say,  dweller  in  the  jungle.  I  doubt  if  there  are 
any  of  them  left  in  the  country  watered  by  the  Indus  and 
the    Ganges,    where    this    sect    of    philosophers    certainly 

1  It  is  also  believed  that  a  death  on  a  Thursday  entails  two  other 
deaths  in  the  same  family. — Ed. 

2  Nowadays  this  is  not  practised. — Ed. 

3  Cases  of  infanticide  were  in  quite  recent  times  witnessed  daily, 
especially  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  until  at  last  the  Government  of 
Lord  Wellesley  declared  that  any  one  guilty  of  such  a  crime  would  be 
tried  in  the  courts  and  punished  with  all  the  rigour  of  the  law.  This 
measure  has  had  the  good  effect  of  diminishing  the  evil,  but  has  not 
rooted  it  out  altogether. — Dubois. 


EARLY  HINDU   PHILOSOPHERS  501 

flourished  at  one  time  in  great  numbers.  The  sect  lias 
entirely  disappeared  from  the  Peninsula  of  India  l.  In 
ancient  times  the  desire  of  sanctifying  themselves  in 
solitude  and  of  reaching  a  higher  degree  of  spiritual  perfec- 
tion induced  numerous  Brahmins  to  abandon  their  resi- 
dence in  towns  and  their  intercourse  with  mankind,  and 
to  go  and  live  in  the  jungle  with  their  wives,  whom  they 
persuaded  to  follow  them.  They  were  favourably  received 
by  those  who  had  originally  conceived  this  praiseworthy 
resolution,  and  from  them  they  learned  the  rules  of  their 
life  of  seclusion.  These  philosophers  brought  much  dis- 
tinction to  the  Brahmin  caste  ;  and  it  even  seems  likely 
that  the  Brahmin  caste  owed  its  origin  to  them.  They  are 
still  revered  as  the  first  teachers  of  the  human  race  and  the 
first  lawgivers  of  their  countrj7. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  was  the  fame  of  these 
Yanaprastha  Brahmins  that  excited  so  lively  a  curiosity  in 
Alexander  the  Great.  They  were  in  fact  none  other  than 
those    Brachmanes    and  Gymnosophists   whose   customs, 

1  It  is  indeed  wholly  improbable  that  all  Brahmins  conformed  to  this 
rule,  but  the  second  verse  of  the  sixth  book  of  the  Laws  of  Manu  pre- 
scribes that  when  the  father  of  a  family  perceives  his  hair  to  be  turning 
grey,  or  as  soon  as  his  first  grandchild  is  born,  and  after  he  has  paid  his 
three  debts,  he  is  to  retire  to  a  forest,  and  there  to  practise  austerities 
as  a  hermit : — 

Having  taken  up  his  sacred  fire  (agnihotram)  and  all  the  domestic 
utensils  for  making  oblations  to  it,  and  having  gone  forth  from  the  town 
to  the  forest,  let  him  dwell  there  with  all  his  organs  of  sense  well  re- 
strained. 

With  many  kinds  of  pure  food  let  him  perform  the  five  maha-yugnaa 
or  '  devotional  rites.' 

Let  him  also  offer  the  vaitanika  oblations  with  the  (three  sacred)  fires 
according  to  rule. 

Let  him  roll  backwards  and  forwards  on  the  ground,  or  stand  all  day 
on  tiptoe  (prapadaih) ;  let  him  move  about  by  alternately  standing  up 
and  sitting  down,  going  to  the  waters  to  bathe  at  the  three  savanas 
(sunrise,  sunset,  and  midday). 

Let  him  practise  the  rules  of  the  lunar  penance. 

In  the  hot  weather  let  him  be  a  jxincha  tapas. 

Let  him  offer  libations  (tarpayet)  to  the  gods  and  Pitris,  performing 
ablutions  at  the  three  savanas. 

Having  consigned  the  three  sacred  tires  (vaitanan)  to  his  own  person 
(by  swallowing  the  ashes)  according  to  prescribed  rules,  let  him  remain 
without  tire,  without  habitation,  feeding  on  roots  and  fruits,  practising 
the  vow  of  a  muni  (i.  e.  the  mauna-vrata  of  perpetual  silence). — Ed. 


502     RESPECT   SHOWN   TO  VANAPRASTHAS 

doctrines,  and  learning  have  been  described  by  several 
ancient  historians. 

Mention  is  often  made  of  these  hermit  Brahmins  in  the 
ancient  books  of  India.  They  are  there  represented  as 
living  in  solitary  cells,  entirely  cut  off  from  all  intercourse 
with  mankind  and  from  all  the  distractions  of  social  life, 
and  devoting  their  whole  time  to  spiritual  observances. 

The  most  famous  and  ancient  of  all  were  the  seven  great 
Penitents  whom  I  have  already  several  times  mentioned. 
Their  successors,  too,  continued  to  enjoy  the  highest 
renown.  Kings  paid  them  honours  which  reached  the 
point  of  worship,  and  attached  the  greatest  value  to  their 
benedictions.  Princes  trembled  at  the  mere  idea  of  in- 
curring their  wrath,  convinced  that  their  curse  would 
entail  direful  consequences.  This  is  how  the  author  of 
the  Padma-purana  describes  the  reception  of  some  Vana- 
prasthas  by  the  great  King  of  Dilipa  : — 

'  Filled  with  unutterable  joy  and  respect,  he  bowed 
himself  to  the  ground  before  them.  Then  making  them 
sit  down,  he  washed  their  feet,  drank  some  of  the  water 
that  he  used  for  that  purpose,  and  poured  the  rest  over  his 
head.  Joining  his  two  hands  together  and  putting  them 
to  his  forehead,  he  made  a  profound  obeisance  and  addressed 
them  in  these  words  :  "  The  happiness  which  I  feel  to-day 
on  seeing  you  can  only  be  the  reward  of  the  good  works 
which  I  must  have  done  in  previous  existences  ;  at  the 
sight  of  your  sacred  feet,  which  are  verily  lotus  flowers, 
I  possess  all  that  heart  can  desire  ;  my  body  is  perfectly 
pure,  now  that  I  have  had  the  honour  of  seeing  you.  You 
are  the  gods  whom  I  worship  ;  I  know  no  other  gods  but 
you.     I  am  henceforth  as  pure  as  the  water  of  the  Ganges." 

It  is  not  surprising  that  kings  humbled  themselves  in 
the  presence  of  these  sages,  seeing  that  the  great  gods 
themselves  paid  respect  to  them,  and  considered  them- 
selves honoured  by  their  visits.  Indeed  there  is  no  mark 
of  distinction  and  respect  which  the  gods  did  not  bestow 
upon  the  Vanaprasthas,  who,  on  their  part,  treated  the 
gods  with  scant  courtesy  and  very  often  with  insolence. 
For  example,  one  Vanaprastha,  who  visited  the  three 
principal  Hindu  divinities  in  turn,  began  by  giving  each 
a  kick  to  see  how  they  endured  such  an  affront,  and  to 


ORIGIN   OF  THE   VANAPRASTHAS  503 

learn  their  character  by  their  behaviour.  In  fact,  these 
penitents  were  wont  to  assume  a  kind  of  superiority  over 
the  gods,  and  punished  them  severely  when  they  found 
them  to  blame.  The  evil  deeds,  and  especially  the  lasci- 
viousness,  of  Brahma,  Siva,  and  Devendra,  brought  upon 
them  the  curses  of  many  penitents. 

The  mythologies  which  relate  these  adventures,  however 
absurd  they  may  be,  at  any  rate  prove  in  what  high  estima- 
tion these  hermits  were  held,  and  how  ancient  is  their 
origin.  On  this  last  point  I  wish  to  add  certain  considera- 
tions to  those  which  I  have  already  mentioned,  and  will 
then  leave  the  subject  to  my  reader's  own  judgement. 

I  start  again  with  the  very  probable  hypothesis  that  in 
the  seven  Hindu  Penitents  who  escaped  the  catastrophe  of 
the  Flood,  are  to  be  recognized  the  seven  sons  of  Japheth, 
some  of  whom  at  the  time  of  the  dispersion  of  mankind 
must  have  come  by  way  of  Tartary  and  established  them- 
selves in  India,  becoming  the  first  founders  of  Brahminism 
and  the  lawgivers  of  the  families  whose  descendants  peopled 
this  portion  of  the  globe.  As  is  the  case  with  all  ancient 
civilized  nations,  time  wrought  changes  in  the  laws  which 
they  instituted,  regulating  religious  worship,  morality,  and 
the  maintenance  of  social  order  :  indeed,  in  all  the  wise 
measures  which  they  took  to  preserve  the  well-being  of 
their  fellow-men.  This  is  the  common  fate  of  all  institu- 
tions which  do  not  bear  the  impress  of  God.  They  either 
collapse  altogether  or  become  disfigured  under  the  ever- 
repeated  attacks  of  prejudice,  passion,  and,  above  all, 
personal  interest.  The  simple  but  wise  maxims  of  the 
first  Hindu  lawgivers  soon  degenerated  into  an  abstract 
and  subtle  system  of  metaphysics,  quite  beyond  the  com- 
prehension of  all  but  a  few  adepts  ;  and  these  latter, 
moved  by  a  common  ambition  to  lord  it  over  their  fellows, 
gradually  formed  an  exclusive  community  isolated  from 
the  rest  of  the  nation.  The  privacy  of  their  life,  their 
frugality,  their  contempt  of  riches,  the  purity  of  their 
morals,  could  not  fail  to  gain  for  these  earliest  Brahmins 
the  respect  and  veneration  of  the  common  people. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  philosophy  flourished  in 
India  before  it  had  been  so  much  as  thought  of  in  Greece. 
Of  what  account,  in  truth,  was  the  learning  of  Greece,  of 


504         (J REEK  AND   HINDU   PHILOSOPHY 

what    account    her    system   of    polity,    until    Pythagoras, 

Lycurgus,  and  other  famous  Greek  travellers,  animated  by 
the  desire  of  educating  themselves,  studied  the  manners  and 
customs  of  Asiatic  peoples,  and  borrowed,  from  the  Hindus 
especially,  many  precepts  and  doctrines  ? 

But  though  the  philosophy  of  the  Greeks  was  of  later 
origin  than  that  of  the  Vanaprasthas,  it  soon  surpassed  the 
latter  in  the  clearness  of  its  principles  and  the  soundness  of 
its  morality.  Under  the  guidance  of  the  Greek  philosophers 
an  immense  impulse  was  given  to  the  cultivation  of  learn- 
ing ;  and  the  most  profound  and  luminous  investigations 
were  made  regarding  the  nature  of  the  Deity,  until  the  gods 
of  paganism  were  shorn  of  all  the  false  glory  which  had 
hitherto  surrounded  them.  The  Vanaprasthas  had  already, 
it  is  true,  made  great  progress  in  this  direction  ;  but  yield- 
ing to  the  impulses  of  an  unbridled  imagination,  they  soon 
buried  their  philosophy  beneath  a  heap  of  false  ideas  and 
vain  imaginings  with  regard  to  the  means  of  purifying  the 
soul  and  to  the  spiritual  side  of  life  generally.  The  ridicu- 
lous principles  which  they  enunciated  ended  by  becoming, 
in  their  eyes,  divinely  sanctioned  obligations  ;  and  from 
that  time  forward  the  wisest  Hindus  really  became  the 
most  foolish. 

This  chimera  of  soul-purification  which  they  pursued,  so 
to  speak,  beyond  the  range  of  their  own  reasoning  powers, 
led  them  from  error  to  error,  from  pitfall  to  pitfall,  until 
they  likewise  dragged  down  with  them  the  people  whose 
oracles  they  were. 

The  question  arises,  was  there  ever  any  connexion 
between  the  Hindu  Gymnosophists  and  Zoroaster,  or  the 
Magi  of  Persia  ?  All  that  I  can  say  in  answer  to  this 
question  is  that,  though  some  resemblances  may  be  traced 
between  the  Ghebres,  or  descendants  of  the  ancient  Persian 
fire-worshippers,  and  the  Hindus  in  the  worship  wrhich  they 
both  render  to  this  element  and  to  the  sun,  their  religious 
doctrines  and  customs  are  in  every  other  respect  entirely 
different.  Indeed,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  the  Hindu  religious 
and  political  system  is  sui  generis  in  its  very  foundations, 
and  contains  special  characteristics  of  which  no  trace  can 
be  found  in  that  of  any  other  nat  on. 

Only    minute   examination   can    bring    to   light    certain 


RULES   FOR  A   VANAPRASTHA  505 

features  of  resemblance  between  the  moral  and  religious 
principles  professed  by  Hindus  and  those  of  other  ancient 
schools  of  philosophy  in  other  countries.  Several  of  the 
Brahminical  rules  of  conduct  correspond  closely  with  those 
followed  by  Zeno  and  the  Stoics  ;  their  plan  of  making 
their  pupils  learn  everything  by  heart  resembles  that  of 
the  Druids  ;  their  taste  for  a  solitary  life,  like  that  of  the 
Vanaprasthas,  is  also  shared  by  the  Rechabites,  the  Thera- 
peutics, the  Children  of  the  Prophet,  the  Magi  of  Persia, 
the  Essenes  of  Egypt.  But  what  arguments  can  be  drawn 
from  these  feeble  analogies  to  disprove  the  antiquity  and 
originality  of  Hindu  philosophy  ?  And  possibly  it  was  the 
Hindus  that  furnished  the  original  models,  while  the  others 
only  imitated  them. 

The  life  of  a  Vanaprastha  was  founded  on  the  rigorous 
observance  of  certain  established  rules  to  which  he  bound 
himself  on  initiation.  Here  are  some  of  the  principal,  as 
found  in  Hindu  books,  together  with  a  few  remarks  of  my 
own  on  each  : — 

I.  '  The  Vanaprastha  must  renounce  the  society  of  other 
men,  even  of  his  own  caste,  and  must  take  up  his  abode  in 
the  jungle  far  from  towns  and  all  habitations.' 

He  did  not,  however,  renounce  the  world  so  entirely  but 
that  he  was  permitted  to  appear  in  it  from  time  to  time  ; 
and  of  this  there  are  several  instances  in  Hindu  works. 
Besides,  after  he  had  passed  thirty-seven  years  in  solitude, 
the  penitent  might  resume  his  place  in  society  without 
losing  any  of  the  consideration  which  belonged  to  him  as 
a  Vanaprastha. 

II.  '  He  must  take  his  wife  with  him,  who  will  subject 
herself  to  the  same  rule  of  life  as  himself.' 

It  is  by  this  rule  especially  that  the  Vanaprastha  is 
distinguished  from  the  Sannyasi,  who  is  obliged  to  live  in 
celibacy  and  renounce  his  wife,  if  he  is  already  married. 
But  though  complete  continence  is  not  enjoined  on  the 
Vanaprastha,  he  is  directed  to  use  the  privileges  of  marriage 
with  the  greatest  moderation. 

III.  '  He  must  live  only  in  huts  covered  with  leaves, 
more  comfortable  dwelling-places  being  forbidden  to 
those  who  profess  to  renounce  the  world  and  all  its 
pleasures.' 


506  SUBJECTS   FOR   STUDY 

1  may  remark  thai  houses  thatched  with  palmyra  or 
cocoanut  leaves  are  very  common  in  India. 

IV.  '  He  must  not  wear  cotton  cloths  ;  he  must  only 
wear  materials  made  of  vegetable  fibres.' 

This  latter  kind  of  cloth  is  not  uncommon  in  Northern 
India.  It  is  as  soft  as  silk  to  the  touch,  and  has  the  advan- 
tage, inestimable  for  a  Hindu,  of  not  being,  like  cotton, 
liable  to  pollution. 

V.  '  He  must  observe  with  the  most  scrupulous  accuracy 
the  rules  prescribed  for  Brahmins,  especially  those  regarding 
ablutions  and  the  prayers  accompanying  them,  which  must 
be  performed  three  times  a  day.' 

VI.  'He  must  pay  the  greatest  attention  to  the  choice 
of  his  food.  His  usual  diet  should  be  the  plants  and  fruits 
which  grow  wild  in  the  jungle.  He  must  abstain  from  all 
those  whose  root  or  stem  grows  in  the  form  of  a  bulb.' 

I  have  already  remarked  that  the  Brahmins  of  the  present 
day  retain  this  rule  of  diet. 

VII.  '  Meditation  and  the  contemplation  of  Parabrahma 
must  occupy  all  his  leisure.  He  must  strive  by  this  means 
to  attain  to  union  with  the  Supreme  Deity.' 

I  will  detail  elsewhere  the  different  steps  by  which  this 
union  is  achieved. 

VIII.  '  Sacrifice,  and  above  all  that  of  the  yagnam,  should 
be  reckoned  one  of  the  principal  religious  exercises.' 

It  will  be  seen  in  the  following  chapter  of  what  this 
famous  yagnam  sacrifice  consists. 

The  acquisition  of  knowledge  was  another  of  the  principal 
occupations  of  these  hermits.  Theology,  metaphysics,  and 
astronomy  were  what  they  cultivated  by  choice.  Many  of 
them  devoted  themselves  to  the  vain  study  of  astrology  ; 
and  it  is  to  them  that  the  Hindus  are  indebted  for  the 
majority  of  their  books  of  magic,  from  which  magicians 
even  at  the  present  day  learn  the  tricks  which  cause  them 
to  be  so  much  in  request. 

According  to  these  Vana/prastha  philosophers,  three 
principal  desires  are  innate  in  man,  viz.  land,  gold,  and 
women  ;   or,  in  other  words,  ambition,  wealth,  and  luxury  l. 

By  the  desire  of  land,  they  understood  ancestral  estates 

1  These  three  great  desires  are  expressed  by  the  words  loka-vaticha/ia- 
artha-vanchana,  sthree-vanchana. — Dubois. 


RENUNCIATION   OF  LAND  AND   GOLD      507 

and  the  landed  properties  that  a  man  can  acquire  in  the 
course  of  his  life,  the  possession  of  a  whole  kingdom  not 
excepted.  They  had  so  completely  severed  themselves 
from  the  temporal  blessings  of  this  world,  and  had  showed 
themselves  so  entirely  disinterested,  that  their  exhortations 
and  example  sometimes  induced  even  kings  to  leave  their 
dominions  in  contempt  for  the  pomp  and  circumstance  by 
which  they  were  surrounded,  and  to  join  with  them  in 
leading  an  ascetic  life  in  the  jungle.  Hindu  books  mention 
with  approbation  several  cases  of  this  sort.  These  anchorite 
princes  sometimes  outdid  the  Vanaprasthas  themselves  in 
fervour  and  austerity  ;  and  the  latter,  far  from  showing 
themselves  jealous,  as  a  reward  for  such  great  zeal  granted 
the  princes  the  signal  favour  of  allowing  them  to  become 
penitent  Brahmins,  thus  enrolling  them  in  their  own 
caste. 

By  the  desire  of  gold  the  Vanaprasthas  understood  not 
this  metal  alone,  but  also  all  the  honours  and  luxuries  of 
life  which  can  be  procured  with  money,  such  as  lucrative 
employments,  valuable  household  goods,  fine  houses,  rich 
apparel,  dainty  fare,  &c.  They  displayed  a  complete  aver- 
sion from  all  these  false  blessings.  The  furniture  of  their 
huts  was  confined  to  a  few  brass  and  earthenware  vessels. 
They  considered  themselves  passing  rich  when  they  possessed 
a  few  cows  to  furnish  the  milk  which  formed  their  chief 
diet  ;  and  it  was  the  gift  of  one  of  these  animals  that 
pleased  them  most.  Hindu  books  relate  extravagant 
stories  about  the  cows  of  these  ascetics.  For  instance, 
one  of  them  furnished  not  only  the  milk  but  all  the  victuals 
necessary  for  an  entire  army  K  A  neighbouring  prince 
heard  of  this  wonderful  beast,  and  conceived  the  plan  of 
carrying  her  off  by  force  from  the  Vanaprastha,  who  had 
received  her  from  the  gods  as  a  reward  for  his  great  piety  ; 
but  the  cow,  as  brave  as  she  was  fruitful,  charged  the  prince's 
army  and  completely  routed  it  ! 

As  these  devotees  lived  very  frugally,  their  expenditure 
was  but  small.  The  offerings  brought  to  them  by  their 
numerous  admirers  were  not  only  sufficient  to  keep  them 
in  food,  but  also  placed  them  in  a  position  to  make  doles 

1  This  is  the  cow  Kamadhewu  mentioned  in  a  previous  chapter. — Ed. 


508  CONTINENCE  TO   BE   OBSERVED 

to  the  poor,  and  to  entertain  other  devotees  who  visited 
them.  They  ate  only  one  meal  a  day.  The  use  of  in- 
toxicating liquors  was  strictly  forbidden,  though  this 
deprivation  troubled  them  but  little.  Accustomed  from 
infancy  to  look  on  such  beverages  with  horror,  they  re- 
garded drunkenness  as  the  most  degrading  of  vices. 

By  the  desire  of  women  the  Vanaprasthas  understood  all 
the  sensual  pleasures  which  are  not  rendered  lawful  by  the 
sacred  bonds  of  marriage  ;  and  even  in  the  exercise  of  the 
privileges  of  married  life  they  were  enjoined  to  exercise 
extreme  moderation.  Thus  they  preserved  the  tradition 
of  those  divine  words  which  were  spoken  to  our  first  ances- 
tors, '  Increase,  and  multiply,  and  cover  the  earth.'  They 
recognized  no  other  end  or  object  in  the  union  of  the  sexes 
than  the  propagation  of  the  human  species,  and  beyond 
this  saw  nothing  but  intemperance  and  fornication.  More- 
over they  were  persuaded  that  a  man  could  not  acquire 
wisdom,  and  the  happiness  which  results  from  it,  except 
by  subduing  the  passions,  and  especially  the  one  which 
holds  the  greatest  sway  over  mankind  and  has  the  most 
enervating  effects  on  the  mental  faculties.  They  believed 
that  a  single  act  of  incontinence  was  sufficient  to  destroy 
the  virtue  of  many  years  passed  in  the  most  austere  penance. 
Hindu  books  relate  innumerable  examples  of  the  praise- 
worthy and  unceasing  efforts  which  they  made  to  bridle 
the  lust  of  the  flesh.  But  by  one  of  those  contradictions 
which  abound  in  Hindu  books,  side  by  side  with  the  account 
of  the  punishments  inflicted  on  a  hermit  for  his  inability  to 
conquer  his  sensual  passions,  we  find,  related  with  expres- 
sions of  enthusiasm  and  admiration,  the  feats  of  debauchery 
ascribed  to  some  of  their  munis — feats  that  lasted  without 
interruption  for  thousands  of  years  ;  and  (burlesque  idea  !) 
it  is  to  their  pious  asceticism  that  they  are  said  to  owe  this 
unquenchable  virility. 

Be  all  this  as  it  may,  if  the  moral  virtues  of  the  Vana- 
prasthas were  neither  real  nor  lasting,  seeing  that  they  were 
based,  not  on  humility,  but  on  ostentatious  pride,  we  must 
nevertheless  admit  that,  whatever  motives  influenced  them, 
they  at  any  rate  were  not  inferior  to  the  ancient  philo- 
sophers of  Greece.  They  practised  hospitality  and  enjoined 
it  on  others.     The  founder  of  their  sect  directed  them  to 


A   VANAPRASTHA'S   VIRTUES  509 

look  out  of  doors  before  every  meal  to  see  if  there  was 
anybody  near  who  was  hungry  ;  and  it  was  their  duty  to 
invite  such  a  person  to  eat  with  them,  whether  he  was 
a  friend  or  an  enemy.  It  was  a  sublime  and  admirable 
precept  ;  but  I  will  not  commit  myself  to  assert  that  it 
was  strictly  observed  in  practice.  They  were  above  all 
enjoined  to  restrain  their  anger,  and  greatly  prided  them- 
selves on  their  patience  and  moderation  under  the  insults 
to  which  they  were  sometimes  exposed.  Nevertheless,  in 
spite  of  such  admirable  philosophy,  it  seems  certain  that  it 
took  very  little  to  rouse  their  spleen.  A  wholesome  dread 
of  provoking  their  resentment  was  generally  felt  ;  for  they 
were  on  such  occasions  unsparing  with  their  curses,  which, 
as  we  know,  had  terrible  consequences. 

Justice,  humanity,  honesty,  compassion,  disinterested- 
ness, in  fact  all  the  virtues,  were  recognized  by  them  ; 
and  they  taught  them  to  others  by  precept  and  example. 
Hence  it  is  that  the  Hindus  profess,  at  least  in  theory, 
almost  the  same  principles  of  morality  as  ourselves  ;  and 
if  they  do  not  practise  all  the  obligations  which  one  man 
owes  to  another  in  civilized  society,  it  is  not  because  they 
are  ignorant  of  them. 

CHAPTEE  XXXII 

Sacrifices  of  the  Vanaprastha  Brahmins. — Sacrifice  of  the  Yagnam. — 
The  Lesser  Yagnam. — The  Greater  Yagnam. — The  Giants,  Enemies 
of  the  Vanaprasthas. 

The  most  common  sacrifice  among  the  Vanaprasthas  was 
that  of  homam.  They  performed  it,  as  I  have  already 
mentioned,  by  kindling  a  fire,  throwing  into  it  some  grains 
of  rice  soaked  in  ghee,  and  reciting  mantrams.  Fire  seems 
to  have  been  the  object  worshipped,  and  it  was  offered 
sometimes  specially  to  the  sun,  sometimes  to  all  the  planets. 
These  hermits  also  offered  other  daily  sacrifices  to  the  gods, 
consisting  of  simple  products  of  nature,  such  as  flowers, 
incense,  rice,  vegetables,  and  fruits.  Their  whole  time  was 
occupied  in  such  sacrifices,  repeated  several  times  every 
day,  in  ablutions,  and  in  meditation  on  the  perfections  of 
Parabrahma.  Though  it  is  certain  that  sacrifices  of  blood 
have  been  common  in  India  from  the  remotest  ages,  we 


510  THE   YAGNAM   SACRIFICE 

liave  no  evidence  that  the  Brahmins  ever  participated  in 
them  in  the  character  of  sacrificers.  Such  functions  were 
always  entrusted  to  people  of  other  castes  ;  and  even 
Rajahs  did  not  disdain  to  perform  them.  In  the  present 
day,  the  Brahmins  do  not  officiate  in  temples  where  it  is 
the  custom  to  sacrifice  living  victims. 

There  was  only  one  occasion  on  which  the  Vanaprasthas 
could,  without  scruple,  deprive  a  living  creature  of  exist- 
ence ;  it  was  when  they  made  the  famous  sacrifice  of 
yagnam,  which  is  still  held  in  great  honour  among  modern 
Brahmins.  A  ram  is  the  victim  usually  offered  :  but  such 
is  the  horror  with  which  they  regard  the  shedding  of  blood, 
that  they  either  beat  the  animal  to  death  or  strangle  it, 
instead  of  slaughtering  it l.  Latter-day  Brahmins,  however, 
are  not  all  agreed  about  the  lawfulness  of  this  sacrifice. 
The  Vaishnavas  regard  it  as  an  abominable  practice,  in 
which  they  obstinately  refuse  to  participate.  They  main- 
tain that  it  is  an  innovation  of  much  more  recent  date  than 
their  ancient  religious  laws,  and  that  it  is  contrary  to  the 
most  sacred  and  inviolable  rule  which  forbids  murder  under 
any  form  and  for  any  reason  whatever.  This  doctrine  of 
the  Vaishnavas  is  one  of  the  chief  reasons  why  they  are 
accused  of  heresy  by  other  Brahmins  2. 

The  sacrifice  of  yagnam  is,  in  the  opinion  of  its  advocates, 
the  most  meritorious  sacrifice  of  any  3.  It  is  considered 
extremely  acceptable  to  the  gods  ;  and  the  person  who 

1  This  operation  is  usually  performed  by  men  of  the  potter  caste. — 
Ed. 

2  Nevertheless  the  sacrifice  of  yagnam  is  performed  by  the  Vadakalais 
among  the  Vishnavites  in  Southern  India. — Ed. 

3  The  Indian  Mirror,  the  leading  native  newspaper  of  Calcutta,  quite 
recently  (1896)  remarked:  'What  are  the  Hindus  doing  to  mitigate 
the  rigour  of  the  water-famine  and  the  cholera  epidemic  ?  How  many 
of  them  have  even  recollected  the  injunctions  of  the  Vedas,  so  far  as 
the  yagnas  are  concerned  ?  A  yagna  on  a  large  scale,  which  not  only 
means  the  feeding  of  the  sacred  fire  with  ghee,  and  the  burning  of  incense, 
but  also  the  feeding  of  the  poor  in  large  numbers  daily  for  months 
together,  will  cost  a  hundred  thousand  rupees  or  more.  If  the  Vedas 
are  to  be  relied  on,  such  a  yagna  does  good  always  both  to  the  rulers 
and  the  ruled.  Vedic  yagnas  have  not  been  performed  in  India  for  many 
and  many  a  year.  Is  there  no  true  Hindu  among  the  millions  of  India 
who  would  come  forward  and  support  us  in  our  proposal  ?  Are  there 
not  among  the  Maharajahs  and  Rajahs  of  the  land  a  few  still  who  would 
be  found  ready  and  willing  to  bear  the  expense  of  such  a  yagna  ?  ' — Ed. 


AX    EXPENSIVE   SOLEMNITY  511 

offers  it,  or  causes  it  to  be  offered,  may  count  on  abundant 
temporal  blessings  and  on  the  entire  remission  of  the  sins 
which  he  has  committed  for  a  hundred  generations.  Nothing 
less  than  such  advantages  was  necessary  to  determine  the 
Brahmins  to  overcome  the  horror  with  which  the  destruc- 
tion of  a  living  creature  inspired  them.  Furthermore, 
Brahmins  possess  the  exclusive  privilege  of  performing 
this  sacrifice.  Other  castes  may  not  even  be  present  at 
it,  though  by  a  special  grace  they  are  authorized  to  provide 
the  means  of  carrying  it  out.  The  expenses  that  it  necessi- 
tates are  very  considerable,  for  crowds  of  Brahmins  attend 
the  solemnity,  and  each  one  must  receive  a  present  from 
the  person  who  offers  the  yagnam — a  circumstance  which 
suggests  that  it  is  not  so  much  devotion  as  interest  that 
takes  them  there.  However,  this  sacrifice  is  rarely  offered, 
few  people  being  able  or  willing  to  bear  the  great  cost  which 
it  entails.  The  following  are  the  principal  ceremonies  which 
are  observed  : — 

The  person  who  is  going  to  preside  at  the  yagnam  an- 
nounces the  day  fixed  for  the  sacrifice  throughout  the 
whole  district,  and  invites  all  Brahmins  to  attend.  It  is 
necessary  that  Brahmins  of  each  of  the  four  Vedas  should 
be  present  ;  if  a  representative  of  each  of  these  classes 
does  not  appear,  the  solemnity  must  be  put  off.  Neither 
Sudras,  whatever  their  rank  may  be,  nor  Brahmins  who 
are  infirm  or  diseased,  or  blind  or  lame,  &c,  nor  Brahmins 
who  are  widowers,  may  be  present  at  it. 

A  ram  is  chosen  after  undergoing  the  most  minute 
inspection.  It  must  be  perfectly  white,  about  three  years 
of  age,  in  good  condition  and  well  proportioned  in  every 
respect l.  A  purohita  proclaims  the  favourable  moment 
when  the  ceremony  can  begin,  and  the  assembled  Brah- 
mins, who  sometimes  number  over  two  thousand,  hasten 
to  the  appointed  spot.  A  hole  is  first  dug  ;  and  after  the 
homam  and  other  ordinary  preliminaries,  a  large  fire  is 
lighted  and  is  kept  burning  by  logs  of  wood  cut  from  the 
sacred  trees  aswatta,  alai,  icham,  porasu,  and  by  a  great 
quantity  of  darbha  grass.  The  whole  is  drenched  with 
ghee,  which  causes  the  flames  to  rise  to  a  great  height.     In 

1  This  is  incorrect,  inasmuch  as  the  victim  must  be  perfectly  black. 
It  is  usually  presented  by  the  goatherds  as  a  free  gift. — Ed. 


512  KILLING   THE   RAM 

the  meanwhile  the  purohita  recites  mantrams  in  a  loud 
voice,  scraps  of  which  are  loudly  repeated  by  the  spec- 
tators. The  ram  is  then  brought  into  the  midst  of  the 
assembly,  rubbed  with  oil,  put  in  a  bath,  and  then  stained 
with  akshatas.  The  body  and  horns  are  garlanded  with 
flowers,  and  cords  made  of  darbha  grass  are  tied,  or  rather 
tightly  bound,  round  the  animal.  All  the  time  the  puro- 
hita is  repeating  mantrams,  the  supposed  object  of  which 
is  to  kill  the  victim.  This  obviously  inadequate  proceed- 
ing, however,  is  supplemented  by  closing  the  nostrils,  ears, 
and  mouth  of  the  animal  while  the  Brahmins  present  deal 
heavy  blows  on  the  beast,  and  finally  one  of  them  suffocates 
it  by  pressing  his  knee  on  its  throat.  The  purohita  and  his 
attendants  meanwhile  repeat  mantrams  in  a  loud  voice, 
and  these  are  supposed  to  ensure  a  quick  and  painless 
death  for  the  victim.  It  would  be  a  very  inauspicious 
omen  if  the  ram  uttered  the  slightest  cry  while  it  was 
enduring  these  tortures  *. 

As  soon  as  the  animal  is  dead,  the  Brahmin  who  presides 
at  the  ceremony  cuts  open  the  stomach  and  tears  out  the 
entrails  along  with  the  fat.  These  he  holds  suspended 
over  the  fire,  the  fat  dropping  into  it  as  it  melts.  At  the 
same  time  liquefied  butter  is  poured  over  the  fire  as  a 
libation. 

The  victim  is  skinned  and  hacked  in  pieces,  which  are 
then  fried  in  butter.  A  portion  is  thrown  into  the  fire  as 
an  oblation,  while  the  rest  is  divided  between  the  Brahmin 
who  has  presided  at  the  sacrifice  and  the  person  who  bears 
the  expense  of  it.  These  in  their  turn  distribute  their 
portions  to  the  Brahmins  present,  who  scramble  wildly  for 
the  scraps  and  devour  them  as  something  sacred  and  aus- 
picious. This  is  particularly  remarkable,  because  it  is  the 
only  occasion  on  which  the  Brahmins  may,  without  com- 
mitting sin,  eat  of  that  which  has  had  life  or  the  germ 
of  life. 

They  then  offer  to  the  fire,  as  neiveddya,  boiled  and  raw 
rice,  the  latter  husked  and  well  washed. 

All  these  ceremonies  and  a  great  number  of  others  being 
over,  betel,  which  has  previously  been  placed  all  round  the 

1  If  the  victim  utters  any  sound  it  is  believed  that  the  family  of  the 
Brahmin  who  offers  the  yagnam  will  gradually  become  extinct. — Ed. 


THE   GRAND    YAGNAM  513 

fire,  is  distributed  to  the  Brahmins.  Finally,  the  person 
who  has  borne  the  expense  of  the  sacrifice  makes  gifts,  in 
money  and  clothes,  to  all  present,  according  to  the  rank 
and  dignity  of  each  ;  a  costly  munificence,  considering  the 
multitude  of  those  who  take  part  in  the  ceremony. 

The  Brahmin  who  has  presided  at  the  yagnam  is  hence- 
forth considered  an  important  personage.  He  has  acquired, 
for  instance,  the  right  of  keeping  up  a  perpetual  fire  in  his 
house.  If  this  fire,  by  some  accident,  were  to  be  extinguished, 
he  would  be  forced  to  rekindle  it,  not  with  light  procured 
from  a  flint,  but  with  that  produced  by  rubbing  two  pieces 
of  dry  wood  together.  When  a  Brahmin  honoured  in  this 
way  dies,  his  funeral  pile  must  be  lighted  with  this  fire. 
After  that  the  fire  is  allowed  to  die  out  of  itself. 

I  have  never  been  able  to  discover  whether  this  sacrifice 
has  any  particular  divinity  for  its  object.  It  would  appear, 
however,  that  the  Brahmin  who  offers  it  is  free  to  dedicate 
it  to  any  god  that  he  chooses,  provided  the  deity  be  one  of 
the  first  rank.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  fire  of  the  yagnam 
bears  the  name  of  agni-iswara,  which  means  the  god  of  fire, 
as  if  it  were  offered  to  this  element  alone. 

Hindu  books  testify  that  this  sacrifice  was  much  more 
frequent  in  the  time  of  the  old  Vanaprasthas  ;  but  then  it 
was  performed  in  a  much  simpler  manner,  and  was  not 
accompanied  with  the  foolish  ostentation  that  was  after- 
wards associated  with  it. 

Yet,  after  all,  this  sacrifice  is  a  mere  nothing  compared 
with  the  grand  yagnam,  the  enormous  cost  of  which  has 
now  caused  it  to  fall  into  disuse.  Trustworthy  persons 
have  assured  me,  however,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the 
last  century  the  King  of  Amber  (Jeypore),  in  Upper  India, 
had  it  performed  with  the  utmost  magnificence.  The  gift 
which  he  made  to  his  high  priest  alone  is  said  to  have  cost 
a  lakh  of  rupees,  while  the  Brahmins  who  attended  it,  to 
the  number  of  several  thousands,  all  received  presents  pro- 
portionate to  their  rank  K 

The  mythical  stories  of  the  Hindus  make  frequent 
mention  of  this  splendid  sacrifice,  and  the  blessings  which 
it  procured  for  those  who  caused  it  to  be  performed.     The 

1  Yagnam  sacrifices  on  a  smaller  scale  are  performed  nowadays  in 
Southern  India. — Ed. 


514  SACRIFICE   OF  THE   HORSE 

gods  themselves,  and  also  the  giants,  during  the  wars 
which  they  waged  against  each  other,  seldom  failed  to 
perform  this  religious  ceremony,  of  which  one  of  the  least 
remarkable  results  was  to  procure  a  certain  victory  over 
the  enemy.  It  was  usual,  when  the  solemnities  of  the 
yagnam  were  over,  for  the  prince  on  whose  behalf  it  had 
been  celebrated  to  seat  himself  on  a  high  throne  for  the 
space  of  forty-eight  minutes,  and  during  that  time  the 
Brahmins  present  were  permitted  to  ask  him  for  anything 
they  pleased.  And  the  prince,  on  his  part,  was  bound  to 
satisfy  their  demands,  however  extravagant,  even  had  they 
extended  to  demanding  his  kingdom,  his  wife,  and  every- 
thing he  most  highly  esteemed.  If  he  failed  to  satisfy 
a  single  one  of  these  numerous  requests,  the  sacrifice  would 
have  been  of  no  avail. 

A  king  of  the  olden  times,  says  a  Hindu  chronicler, 
having  caused  the  grand  yagnam  to  be  performed  before 
setting  out  for  a  war  which  he  was  planning  against  a 
neighbouring  potentate,  presented  a  bushel  of  pearls  to 
each  of  the  Brahmins  present,  who  were  thirty  thousand 
in  number. 

Four  kinds  of  victims  might  be  offered  in  sacrifice, 
namely,  a  horse,  a  cow,  an  elephant,  or  a  man.  The  first 
was  called  asvamedha,  the  second  gomedha,  the  third 
rajasuya,  and  the  fourth  naramedha.  But  they  commonly 
sacrificed  a  horse  ;  and  hence  the  sacrifice  is  generally 
designated  by  the  name  of  asvamedha  (sacrifice  of  a  horse). 

The  victim  was  chosen  before  its  birth  ;  and  when  the 
mare,  its  mother,  had  foaled,  her  offspring  was  reared  for 
three  years  with  extraordinary  care  and  trouble.  Con- 
tinual sacrifices  were  made  to  Indra,  that  he  might  watch 
over  the  young  animal  ;  to  Yama,  that  he  might  preserve 
it  from  death  and  every  accident  ;  to  Varuna,  the  god  of 
water,  and  also  to  the  clouds,  that  they  might  cause  a 
fertilizing  rain  to  fall  and  plenty  of  grass  to  grow  for  its 
nourishment.  Similar  requests  were  also  made  to  a  number 
of  other  gods. 

The  victim  was  afterwards  let  loose  and  allowed  to  roam 
freely  over  a  wide  stretch  of  country,  though  it  was  followed 
everywhere  by  numerous  attendants  to  prevent  its  being 
stolen.     The  gods,  or  the  giants,   or  the  princes  against 


A   LEGEND   OF   VISHNU  515 

whom  the  sacrifice  was  to  be  directed  would  come  with  all 
their  armies  in  search  of  this  valuable  animal,  and  try  to 
seize  it  by  force  or  stratagem.  If  they  succeeded,  the 
sacrifice  was  averted,  and  they  were  thereby  delivered 
from  the  disasters  which  its  accomplishment  would  have 
brought  upon  them.  Indeed,  the  wonders  wrought  by  this 
grand  sacrifice  were  so  mighty  as  to  render  the  prince  who 
had  it  performed  invulnerable  and  certain  of  victory,  for 
amongst  other  things  it  furnished  him  with  enchanted 
weapons,  a  single  one  of  which  was  sufficient  to  overthrow 
a  whole  army. 

I  will  spare  the  reader  long  and  wearisome  details  of 
the  innumerable  ceremonies  which  took  place  during  the 
celebration  of  the  asvamedha,  and  will  content  myself  with 
giving  a  short  extract  from  a  story  which  refers  to  this 
famous  sacrifice,  and  which  at  the  same  time  describes 
one  of  the  ten  Avatars  of  Vishnu  : — 

'  The  giant-emperor  Bali  caused  to  be  performed  the 
grand  sacrifice  of  the  horse,  the  irresistible  effect  of  which 
was  to  secure  for  him  the  overthrow  of  all  other  sovereigns 
and  the  conquest  of  the  whole  world.  To  counteract  such 
fatal  consequences,  Vishnu  the  Preserver  presented  himself 
in  the  form  of  a  Brahmin  dwarf  before  the  tyrant,  and 
supplicated  him  humbly  for  the  grant  of  a  plot  of  ground 
only  three  soles  of  his  own  feet  in  area  to  enable  him  to 
offer  sacrifices.  The  Brahmin's  request  appeared  comical 
to  the  giant,  and  was  granted  without  hesitation.  Then 
Vishnu  changed  his  shape,  and  with  one  of  his  feet  he 
covered  the  whole  earth,  and  with  the  other  occupied  all 
the  space  between  earth  and  heaven.  Then  addressing 
the  giant,  he  said  :  "  Where  shall  I  find  room  for  the 
third  sole  \  "  "On  my  head,"  answered  the  enemy  of  the 
gods,  who  then  recognized,  but  too  late,  with  whom  he 
had  to  deal.  The  giant  thought  he  might  save  his  life  by 
thus  placing  himself  at  the  mercy  of  Vishnu  the  Preserver. 
But  it  happened  otherwise.  Vishnu  placed  his  foot  on  the 
head  of  the  giant  and  precipitated  the  monster  into  Patalam 
(hell),  and  delivered  the  world  of  that  great  scourge.' 

But  let  us  return  to  the  Vanaprastha  Brahmins.  It 
appears,  according  to  the  Hindu  books,  that  they  ex- 
perienced great  difficulties  in  the  accomplishment  of  their 


516  HINDU  GIANTS 

sacrifices.  Their  declared  enemies,  the  giants,  and  the  gods 
themselves,  were  continually  playing  evil  pranks  with  them. 
For  instance,  their  enemies  made  themselves  invisible,  and, 
flying  in  the  air,  defiled  the  offerings  by  letting  fall  upon 
them  pieces  of  meat  or  other  impure  substances,  so  that 
these  pious  acts  were  of  no  avail. 

I  should  have  written  at  less  length  about  these  famous 
giants,  if  they  had  not  seemed  to  me  to  be  grotesque 
representations  of  those  of  Holy  Scripture  \  whose  crimes 
in  a  great  measure  caused  the  Flood.  This  race  of  men 
again  flourished  after  that  great  catastrophe,  and  were  not 
entirely  destroyed  until  the  time  of  Joshua  2. 

The  Hindu  giants  are  represented  as  being  of  such 
colossal  stature  that  on  one  occasion,  in  order  to  wake  one 
of  them,  it  was  necessary  for  several  elephants  to  walk 
over  his  body.  Even  then  the  giant  hardly  felt  the  dis- 
comfort of  this  enormous  weight  ;  but,  by  dint  of  stamp- 
ing on  him,  the  huge  animals  at  last  produced  a  slight 
sensation,  resembling  the  tickling  which  an  ordinary  man 
feels  when  an  ant  or  a  fly  crawls  over  him.  It  was  this 
tickling,  rather  than  the  weight  of  the  elephants,  which 
roused  the  giant,  the  hairs  of  whose  body  were  like  the 
trunks  of  full-grown  forest  trees.  During  one  of  his  wars 
with  certain  gods,  this  same  giant  fastened  a  huge  rock  to 
each  of  his  hairs,  and  thus  equipped,  he  advanced  into  the 
middle  of  the  enemy's  army,  gave  himself  a  good  shake, 
and  thus  hurled  off  the  rocks,  which  falling  right  and  left 
crashed  his  enemies  to  the  last  man. 

The  giant  Ravana,  who  carried  off  Seeta,  Rama's  wife, 
had  ten  heads.  His  palace  in  the  Island  of  Ceylon,  of  which 
he  was  king,  was  of  such  an  enormous  height  that  at  mid- 
day the  sun  passed  under  one  of  its  arcades. 

These  giants  were  all  of  an  extremely  mischievous  dis- 
position, especially  the  Brahmin  giants.  A  great  number 
of  this  caste  had,  by  the  way,  been  turned  into  giants  as 
a  punishment  for  former  crimes.  In  fact,  there  were  whole 
armies  of  them,  and  sometimes  there  was  civil  war  between 
them,  though  more  often  they  joined  forces  in  fighting 
against  the  gods.  Occasionally  they  adopted  a  hermit's 
life,  without  thereby  changing  their  character,  or  becoming 
1  Genesis  vi.  4.  2  Numbers  xiii ;  Joshua  xi. 


AN   ARTFUL  STRATAGEM  517 

better  disposed.  The  penance  performed  by  the  giant 
Bhasmasura  was  so  long  and  severe,  that  he  thereby 
induced  Siva  to  grant  him  the  power  of  reducing  to  ashes 
all  those  on  whose  heads  he  placed  his  hands.  The  favour 
thus  obtained,  the  ungrateful  wretch  decided  to  let  Siva 
himself,  his  benefactor,  have  some  experience  of  the  power 
newly  conferred  upon  him.  Siva  was  at  his  wits'  end  to 
know  how  to  escape  from  his  enemy,  when  fortunately  he 
was  saved  by  a  stratagem  of  Vishnu.  The  latter  per- 
suaded the  giant  to  put  his  hand  on  his  own  head,  which 
he  did  without  thinking,  and  reduced  himself  to  ashes. 

The  above  is  a  sample  of  Hindu  mythology. 

It  may  be  presumed  that  these  giant  enemies  of  the 
Vanaprasthas  were  merely  the  chiefs  of  the  countries  in 
which  the  hermits  had  taken  up  their  abode.  These  chiefs, 
frightened  by  the  continual  sacrifices  and  mystic  rites  of 
the  formidable  strangers,  tried  to  get  rid  of  them  by  stirring 
up  quarrels  among  them  and  otherwise  interfering  with 
their  religious  practices.  Except  the  first  of  these  hermit 
Vanaprasthas,  most  of  those  who  embraced  this  kind  of 
life  gave  themselves  up  entirely  to  the  cultivation  of  magic 
and  astrology,  and,  impotent  though  their  mysterious 
practices  were  in  reality,  they  were  easily  able,  with  the 
help  of  their  false  prestige,  to  spread  terror  in  feeble  and 
credulous  minds.  Some  enthusiastic  poet,  in  relating  the 
history  of  the  quarrels  between  these  hermit  Brahmins  and 
the  mighty  princes  who  hated  them,  no  doubt  turned  the 
latter  into  giants.  Certainly  no  more  than  this  was  required 
to  make  the  legend  credible  among  a  people  so  addicted  to 
the  marvellous.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  appears  certain  that 
the  attacks  made  on  the  Vanaprasthas  finally  sapped  their 
power  to  its  very  foundations,  for  the  sect  no  longer  exists 
in  India. 

CHAPTER  XXXIII 

Penance  as  a  Means  of  purifying  the  Soul. — The  Penance  of  the  Vana- 
prasthas.— Modern  Gymnosophists,  or  Naked  Penitents. — Purifica- 
tion by  Fire. 

The  ancient  hermit-philosophers  of  India  maintained  that 
it  was  necessary  to  perform  divers  acts  of  penance  in  order 
to  disperse  the  phantoms  of  illusion,  or  Maya,  by  which 


518  SPIRITUAL   PRIDE 

men  are  seduced  and  led  astray.  It  was  only  by  penances, 
they  contended,  that  man  could  break  through  the  trammels 
of  his  personal  passions  and  everyday  surroundings,  which 
held  the  soul  enthralled.  The  right  degree  of  excellence 
and  spirituality  necessary  for  the  emancipation  of  the  soul, 
they  urged,  could  only  be  obtained,  little  by  little,  by  the 
exercise  of  continuous  penances.  By  these  means  alone 
could  the  soul  be  reunited  for  ever  to  the  Supreme  Divinity, 
to  Parabrahma  ;  and  it  was  only  when  he  had  achieved 
this  state  of  perfection  that  the  penitent  had  the  right  to 
cry:  'Ahum  Brahma/'  I  am  Brahma!  I  am  the 
Supreme  Being  ! 

Is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  men  who,  in  this  pursuit  of 
spiritual  perfection,  were  actuated  only  by  motives  of  pride 
and  self-conceit,  when  once  they  attained,  according  to 
their  own  vain  presumption,  the  state  of  perfection  at 
which  they  aimed — is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  I  say,  that  these 
men  looked  down  upon  all  the  rest  of  their  fellow-men  with 
ineffable  disdain,  whatever  their  social  rank  might  be,  and 
considered  them  as  degraded  beings  still  wallowing  in  the 
mire  of  vice,  slaves  to  their  own  passions  *  ? 

This  spiritual  pride  was  still  further  encouraged  by  the 
tokens  of  respect,  and  even  adoration,  which  the  very 
greatest  princes  showered  upon  them.  The  apparent  cold- 
ness with  which  they  received  such  homage  was  certainly 
not  the  outcome  of  humility  ;  it  was  rather  caused  by  the 
firm  conviction  that  they  were  only  receiving  what  was 
their  just  due.  Alexander  the  Great,  who  bent  every  one 
to  his  will,  tried  in  vain  to  persuade  one  of  the  most  cele- 
brated of  these  Vanaprasthas,  called  Dindime  or  Dandamis, 
to  visit  him.  However,  the  Hindu  philosopher  condescended 
to  write  to  the  conqueror,  though  the  letter  attributed  to 
him  by  the  Greek  historians  is  evidently  apocryphal,  or  at 
any  rate  interpolated  with  many  embellishments  and  ideas 
which  would  never  have  occurred  to  a  Gymnosophist.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  some  report  that  the  Macedonian  hero  saw 

1  The  Abbe  is  hardly  just  in  placing  such  a  low  value  on  this  pride  of 
righteousness.  The  sacred  Hindu  books  are  unanimous  in  describing 
these  saintly  men  as  gentle,  cpriet,  and  loving.  The  ignorant  and  narrow- 
minded  Brahmin  priests,  however,  cannot  be  said  to  have  ever  realized 
this  high  state  of  spiritual  perfection. — Ed. 


NAKED   PENITENTS  519 

m  it   nothing   but  impious  pride,   while  others   maintain 
that  he  admired  the  writer's  noble  and  philosophic  courage. 

And  how.  it  may  be  asked,  did  these  recluses  obtain, 
through  penance,  perfect  wisdom  and  perfect  purity  ?  The 
answer  is,  by  three  means  :  by  the  repression  of  their 
animal  passions,  by  meditation,  and  by  the  mortification 
of  the  flesh  and  of  all  the  senses  ;  in  fact,  by  complete 
self-abnegation. 

By  the  first  of  these  means  they  strove  to  destroy  the 
three  strongest  passions  to  which  man  is  subject,  namely, 
wealth,  land,  and  women  ;  and  to  free  themselves  com- 
pletely from  all  prejudices  in  respect  of  caste,  rank,  and 
honours.  They  further  aimed  at  the  repression  of  the  most 
ordinary  and  natural  impulses,  even  that  of  self-preserva- 
tion. They  insisted  on  their  disciples  being  insensible  to 
cold  or  heat,  wind  or  rain,  pain  or  sickness.  They  called 
this  moksha-sadhaka ,  or  the  practice  of  deliverance.  It  may, 
therefore,  be  said  that  in  many  respects  they  were  greater 
stoics  than  Zeno  himself  and  greater  cynics  than  Diogenes. 
At  the  same  time  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  majority 
of  these  VanaprastJias,  while  applauding  these  strict  doc- 
trines, left  the  practice  of  them  to  the  more  enthusiastic. 

There  are  penitents  professing  the  principles  of  moksha- 
sadhaka  even  at  the  present  day.  Some  of  them  go  about 
quite  naked,  the  object  of  this  indecent  practice  being  to 
convince  the  admiring  public  that  they  are  no  longer 
susceptible  to  the  temptations  of  lust.  There  is  also  a  class 
of  religious  mendicants,  called  Bairagis,  to  be  met  with 
everywhere,  who  show  themselves  in  public  in  a  state  of 
nature  *. 

The  people  evince  the  greatest  admiration  for  these  un- 
clothed devotees,  and  express  the  utmost  wonder  as  to  how 
they  succeed  in  controlling  a  passion  which  is  generally 
regarded  as  beyond  control.  Some  say  that  the  Bairagis 
owe  this  impotence  to  extreme  sobriety  in  eating  and 
drinking,  while  others  assert  that  it  is  the  result  of  the  use 
of  certain  drugs.  As  to  their  alleged  sobriety  it  is  a  mere 
fable.  Generally  speaking,  they  eat  all  kinds  of  meat  and 
drink  all  kinds  of  intoxicating  liquors  without  any  shame, 

1  This  would  now  be  punishable  by  law. — Ed. 


520  MEDITATION  AND  SELF-MORTIFICATION 

the  practice  of  moksha-sadhaka  and  their  status  as  Sannyasi 
acquitting  them  of  all  blame  in  this  respect l.  According 
to  other  authorities,  the  Bairagis  attain  this  condition  by 
purely  mechanical  means,  that  is,  they  attach  to  their 
generative  organs  a  heavy  weight  which  they  drag  about 
until  the  power  of  muscles  and  nerves  is  completely 
destroyed. 

Some  of  these  fanatics  profess  to  conquer  every  feeling 
of  disgust  that  is  innate  in  a  human  being.  They  will 
even  go  so  far  as  to  eat  human  ordure  without  evincing 
any  dislike.  Instead  of  treating  these  degraded  practices 
with  the  horror  and  contempt  that  thej'  merit,  the  Hindus 
regard  them  with  respect  and  honour,  true  to  their  custom 
of  admiring  everything  that  astonishes  them. 

Meditation,  the  second  means  of  achieving  spiritual  per- 
fection, accomplishes  what  the  repression  of  the  passions 
has  only  begun.  It  fills  the  soul  with  the  thought  of  God 
and  identifies  it  with  the  Divine  Being,  of  which  it  is  an 
emanation.  This  union  with  God  is  not  brought  about 
instantaneously,  but  gradually,  as  will  be  explained  else- 
where. It  was  with  the  object  of  accomplishing,  little  by 
little,  this  blessed  union  with  God  that  the  Vanaprastha 
devoted  a  considerable  portion  of  each  day  to  meditation, 
combining  this  devout  exercise  with  the  ordinary  sacrifices, 
particularly  the  sacrifice  to  fire,  called  homam. 

The  third  means  of  arriving  at  spiritual  perfection — 
mortification  of  the  flesh — consists  in  leading  a  hard  and 
austere  life  in  rigorous  and  almost  continuous  fasting,  and 
in  voluntary  and  self-inflicted  punishments,  and  above  all 
in  never  omitting  the  indispensable  duty  of  frequent  ablu- 
tions. 

These  Vanaprastha  recluses  were  fully  persuaded  that 
the  defilements  of  the  soul  were  communicated  to  the  body, 
and  those  of  the  body  to  the  soul.  They  held  that  ablu- 
tions, while  cleansing  the  body,  also  possessed  the  virtue 
of  purifying  the  soul,  especially  if  they  were  performed  in 
the  Ganges  or  in  some  other  waters  bearing  an  equal 
reputation  for  sanctity. 

The  purification  of  the  soul  was  completed  by  fire  ;  and 

1  This  is  only  true  of  the  lower  types  of  Bairagis. — Ed. 


FANATICAL  SUICIDES  521 

that  is  the  reason  why  the  bodies  of  these  penitents  were 
burned  after  death. 

Only  their  fellow  Brahmin  Vanaprasthas  assisted  at  their 
funeral  ceremonies,  which,  though  fundamentally  the  same 
as  those  of  the  modern  Brahmins,  were  much  simpler  and 
less  elaborate.  It  was  thought  that  the  extreme  care 
which  the  deceased  had  paid  to  the  purification  of  himself 
during  life  rendered  excessive  care  after  death  unnecessary 
and  superfluous. 

There  was  one  sure  and  certain  way  by  which  the  Vana- 
prastJias  might  attain  to  extreme  perfection  and  gain 
inestimable  happiness,  and  that  was  in  cutting  short  their 
lives  by  throwing  themselves  into  the  fire.  I  do  not  mean 
to  say  that  there  have  been  many  instances  of  this  viola- 
tion of  the  laws  of  nature  amongst  the  Vanaprasthas. 
Only  a  single  one  has  come  to  my  own  personal  knowledge. 
I  have  read  in  a  Hindu  book  that  one  of  these  recluses  and 
his  wife,  having  lived  in  retirement  for  a  long  time,  and 
arrived  at  a  very  advanced  age,  and  both  of  them  being 
equally  tired  of  this  world,  arranged  their  own  funeral  pile, 
quietly  lay  down  upon  it,  then  set  fire  to  it  with  their  own 
hands,  and  were  thus  consumed  together.  Having  by  this 
act  of  devotion  arrived  at  the  highest  state  of  perfection, 
their  souls  were  instantly  united  to  the  Divinity,  and  were 
exempted  from  reappearing  on  earth  to  undergo  the  succes- 
sive transmigrations  from  one  body  to  another  which  would 
have  been  their  fate  in  the  ordinary  course  of  events. 

There  are  still  fanatics  to  be  found  who  solemnly  bind 
themselves  to  commit  suicide,  under  the  conviction  that 
by  the  performance  of  this  mad  act  they  will  ensure  for 
themselves  the  immediate  enjoyment  of  supreme  blessed- 
ness. 

The  temple  of  Jagannath  (Puri),  and  other  places  which 
superstition  has  rendered  equally  famous,  have  often  been 
the  scenes  of  self-inflicted  death.  From  time  to  time,  too, 
one  comes  across  lunatics  travelling  through  the  country, 
loudly  proclaiming  their  intention  of  destroying  themselves, 
and  at  the  same  time  collecting  the  money  with  which  to 
defray  the  expenses  attendant  on  the  solemn  execution  of 
their  wicked  vow.  I  knew  one  of  these  wretches  to  be  the 
recipient  of  very  considerable  sums.     He  was  received  with 

s  3 


522  A   SUICIDE   TEMPORARILY   FRUSTRATED 

the  greatest  enthusiasm  and  respect  wherever  he  went.  He 
was  nicknamed  '  Sava  V  or  'the  corpse,'  and  he  always 
carried  upraised  in  his  hand  the  dagger  with  which  he  was 
going  to  kill  himself  ;  on  the  point  of  it  was  stuck  a  small 
lemon.  Everything  was  in  readiness  for  the  horrible  sacri- 
fice, the  victim  himself  having  fixed  the  day  on  which  it 
was  to  be  consummated.  Immense  crowds  had  assembled 
out  of  curiosity,  greatly  pleased  to  think  they  were  to  witness 
a  horrid  sight  ;  but  the  magistrate  of  the  district,  who  was 
a  humane  and  sensible  man,  caused  the  hero  of  the  tragedy 
to  be  brought  before  him,  took  away  his  dagger,  and 
ordered  him  to  be  conducted  out  of  the  district,  absolutely 
forbidding  him  to  re-enter  the  country.  A  few  months 
afterwards,  I  learned  that  the  maniac  had  carried  out  his 
dreadful  vow  on  the  banks  of  the  Tungabudra,  to  the 
delight  of  an  enormous  crowd  which  had  collected  to  enjoy 
the  revolting  spectacle.  There  is  nothing  improbable, 
therefore,  in  the  story  told  by  Diodorus  Siculus  of  the 
Brahmin  Calanus,  who  terminated  his  life  by  allowing 
himself  to  be  burnt  alive  in  the  presence  of  Alexander's 
army. 

The  above  are  a  few  examples  of  the  deplorable  and  fatal 
effects  of  Hindu  superstition.  Such  are  the  natural  results 
of  the  foolish  theories  of  ancient  philosophers,  the  most 
enlightened  men  of  their  times,  as  to  the  best  means  of 
purifying  the  soul  and  ensuring  certain  and  everlasting 
happiness. 

CHAPTER  XXXIV 

The  Fourth  State  of  the  Brahmins,  that  of  the  Sanmjasi. — Preparation 
for  this  Holy  State. — Ceremonies  of  Initiation. — Rules  to  be  followed 
by  the  Sannyasi. 

The  fourth  state  to  which  a  Brahmin  can  attain  is  that 
of  a  sannyasi,  a  state  so  sublime,  according  to  the  Hindu 
authors,  that  it  ensures,  even  during  the  short  space  of 
a  single  lifetime,  more  spiritual  blessedness  than  an  ordinary 
man  could  attain  in  ten  millions  of  regenerations  2. 

1  A  corrupt  form  of  the  Sanskrit  word  sapam. — Ed. 

-  Book  VI  of  the  Laws  of  Mann  directs  him  for  the  fourth  period  of 
his  life  to  wander  about  as  a  Bhikshu  or  Parivrajaka,  'religious  mendi- 
cant.'    Here  arc  a  few  rules  for  the  regulation  of  this  Jinal  stage  of  his 


BRAHMIN  SANNYASIS  523 

The  sannyasi  is  superior  to  the  vanaprastha,  inasmuch  as 
the  latter  does  not  wholly  renounce  the  world,  being  still 
connected  with  it  to  a  certain  extent  by  family  ties  ;  whilst 
the  sannyasi  imposes  upon  himself  the  painful  sacrifice  of 
leaving  his  wife  and  children.  Like  the  vanaprastha  he 
submits  to  severe  privations,  and  furthermore  takes  a  vow 
of  poverty  and  resigns  himself  to  living  entirely  on  alms. 
Every  Brahmin,  before  becoming  a  sannyasi,  must  have 
been  a  grahastha  ;  that  is  to  say,  he  must  have  been  married 
and  have  acquitted  himself  of  '  the  great  debt  to  his  an- 
cestors,' the  first  and  most  indispensable  of  duties  in  the 
eyes  of  a  Hindu,  that  of  perpetuating  his  species. 

There  are,  however,  a  few  examples  of  Brahmins  who 
have  become  sannyasis  while  still  young  and  unmarried. 
There  are  also,  it  is  true,  many  penitents  who  have  always 
been  celibates  ;  but  they  do  not  belong  to  the  Brahmin 
caste. 

A  Brahmin  is  not  allowed  to  become  a  sannyasi  in  a 
moment  of  remorse  or  from  a  sudden  feeling  of  enthusiasm. 
His  decision  must  be  the  result  of  calm  and  deliberate  self- 
examination  and  reflection,  and  must  be  based  on  a  sense 
of  disgust  for  the  world  and  its  pleasures,  and  on  an  ardent 
desire  to  attain  spiritual  perfection.  He  must  feel  himself 
capable  of  complete  severance  from  all  earthly  affairs.  If 
he  experiences  the  slightest  inclination  or  longing  for  those 
things  which  the  rest  of  mankind  struggle  for,  he  will 
thereby  lose  all  the  benefits  of  his  life  of  penance. 

When  a  Brahmin  who  aspires  to  the  state  of  sannyasi 
has  duly  reflected  on  the  step  he  is  about  to  take,  he  calls 
together  all  the  leading  Brahmins  of  the  neighbourhood, 

existence,  when  lie  is  sometimes  called  a  sannyasi,  '  one  who  has  given 
up  the  world  '  ;  sometimes  a  yati,  '  one  who  has  suppressed  his  pas- 
sions '  : — 

Let  him  remain  without  fire,  without  habitation  ;  let  him  resort  once 
a  day  to  the  town  for  food,  regardless  of  hardships,  resolute,  keeping 
a  vow  of  silence,  fixing  his  mind  in  meditation. 

With  hair,  nails,  and  beard  well  clipped,  carrying  a  bowl,  a  staff,  and 
a  pitcher,  let  him  wander  about  continually,  intent  on  meditation  and 
avoiding  injury  to  any  being. 

In  this  manner,  having  little  by  little  abandoned  all  worldly  attach- 
ments, and  freed  himself  from  all  concern  about  pairs  of  opposites,  he 
obtains  absorption  into  the  universal  Spirit. — Ed. 


524  INITIATION   CEREMONIES 

announces  his  intention,  and  begs  them  to  be  ready  to 
receive  his  solemn  vows  with  all  the  customary  formalities 
and  ceremonies. 

On  the  day  appointed  for  this  important  act,  the  candidate 
first  purifies  himself  by  bathing.  He  procures  ten  pieces 
of  cotton  cloth  such  as  are  worn  on  the  shoulders,  four  of 
them,  dyed  a  dark  yellow  {kavi),  being  destined  for  his  own 
use,  the  other  six  being  given  as  presents  to  men  of  his  own 
caste.  He  also  provides  himself  with  a  bamboo  staff  that 
has  seven  knots  or  joints,  some  small  silver  and  copper 
coins,  flowers,  aJcshatas,  sandalwood,  and,  above  all,  some 
-pancha-gavia.  He  drinks  a  little  of  the  last-named  bever- 
age, and  then  repairs  to  the  spot  where  the  ceremony  is  to 
take  place. 

The  officiating  guru  performs  the  ordinary  homam  and 
puja,  and  then  proceeds  to  whisper  into  the  candidate's 
ear  such  mantrams  and  instructions  as  are  prescribed  for 
the  state  he  is  about  to  enter.  He  next  commands  him, 
first,  to  don  one  of  the  yellow  cloths  that  he  has  brought, 
and  then,  in  token  of  his  renunciation  of  his  caste  as  well 
as  of  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  this  world,  to  break  his 
triple  cord  and  to  allow  the  tuft  of  hair  which  grows  on 
every  Brahmin's  head  to  be  shaved  off.  All  this  is  accom- 
panied by  mantrams  and  other  absurdities  which  it  is 
unnecessary  to  describe  in  detail. 

The  ceremony  ended,  the  candidate  takes  his  seven- 
knotted  bamboo  in  one  hand  l  and  a  gourd  full  of  water  in 

1  One  cannot  fail  to  recognize  in  the  Hindu  sannyasis  a  class  of  men 
similar  to  those  of  the  Jews  who  were  imbued  with  Rabbinical  doctrines 
in  connexion  with  cabala  and  numbers,  and  to  the  Greeks  who  held  the 
wild  theories  of  Pythagoras — idiotic  dreamers  who  crammed  the  minds 
of  their  fellow-countrymen  with  foolish  notions.  We  know  that  the 
cabala  believes  the  world  to  be  full  of  spirits,  which  one  can  in  the  course 
of  time  resemble,  by  practising  purity  of  life  and  meditation.  The 
sannyasVs  staff  with  its  seven  knots  is  not  merely  intended  to  aid  him 
in  walking.  It  is,  like  Aaron's  rod,  an  instrument  of  divination.  The 
seven  knots  are  also  not  without  a  mysterious  significance.  Who  has 
not  heard  of  the  perfection  of  the  number  seven  ?  The  high  esteem  in 
which  it  is  held  by  the  Hindus  is  clearly  proved  by  the  numerous  sacred 
places  and  objects  which  are  always  spoken  of  in  groups  of  seven,  such 
as  the  Seven  Penitents  (sapta  rishis),  the  Seven  Holy  Cities  (sapta  pura), 
the  Seven  Sacred  Islands  (sapta  dwipa),  the  Seven  Seas  (sapta  samudra), 
the  Seven  Sacred   Rivers  (sapta  nadi),  the  Seven  Sacred  Mountains 


RULES   TO   BE   OBSERVED  525 

the  other,  while  under  his  arm  lie  carries  an  antelope's 
skin.  These  three  things  are  all  that  he  is  now  allowed  to 
call  his  own.  Then  he  thrice  drinks  a  little  pancha-gavia, 
and  also  some  of  the  water  in  his  gourd  ;  he  repeats  the 
mantrams  which  his  guru  has  taught  him  ;  and  he  is  then 
a  sannyasi  for  life.  All  that  remains  for  him  to  do  is  to 
present  to  the  attendant  Brahmins  the  cloths  and  money 
which  he  has  brought  with  him. 

The  newly  initiated  must  conform  strictly  to  the  in- 
structions that  he  has  received  from  his  guru,  and  must 
follow  minutely  all  the  rules  laid  down  for  persons  of  his 
profession.  The  following  are  the  chief  of  these,  to  which 
I  have  added  a  few  remarks  of  my  own  : — 

I.  '  Every  morning,  after  he  has  performed  his  ablutions, 
a  sannyasi  must  smear  ashes  on  his  body  V 

The  majority  of  Hindus  only  smear  them  over  their  fore- 
heads. 

II.  '  He  must  take  only  one  meal  every  day.' 

This  rule  of  fasting  is  followed  not  only  by  the  Brahmin 

(sapta  parvata),  the  Seven  Sacred  Jungles  (sapta  arania),  the  Seven 
Sacred  Trees  {sapta  vruksha),  the  Seven  Castes  (sapta  Tenia),  the  Seven 
Inferior  and  Superior  Worlds  (sapta  loka),  &c.  Seven  too  is  an  uneven 
number,  and  all  the  uneven  numbers  are  considered  lucky.  For  example, 
take  the  famous  Trimarti  (Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva).  Virgil  also 
says : — 

Terna  tibi  haec  primum  triplici  diversa  colore 
Licia  circumdo,  terque  haec  altaria  circum 
Effigiem  duco  :   numero  Dens  impare  gaudet  .  .  . 
Necte  tribus  nodis  ternos,  Amarylli,  colores. 

While  on  the  subject  of  the  sannyasi' 's  staff  I  might  refer  to  the  rods 
of  Moses,  of  Elisha,  and  of  all  the  prophets  ;  the  augur's  staff,  the  pas- 
toral staffs  of  the  Fauns  and  sylvan  deities,  and  those  of  the  Cynics  ; 
but  I  will  leave  to  the  intelligent  reader  the  task  of  making  what  com- 
parisons he  thinks  proper. — Dubois. 

1  In  times  of  great  tribulation  the  Jews  used  to  cover  themselves 
with  sackcloth  and  ashes  in  token  of  their  sorrow  and  deep  repentance 
for  their  sins.  This  was  the  way  in  which  the  Ninevites  showed  their 
repentance.  In  France,  in  several  religious  houses,  it  was  a  duty  to 
lie  on  ashes  when  at  the  point  of  death.  The  Council  of  Benevento  in 
1091  ordained  that  the  faithful  should  put  ashes  on  their  heads  on  the 
first  day  of  Lent  to  promote  a  spirit  of  humiliation  and  penance  during 
that  holy  season,  by  bringing  to  their  recollection  the  words  of  Holy 
Scripture  :  '  Memento,  homo,  quia  pulvis  es,  et  in  pulverem  reverteris.'' — 
Dubois. 


526  HINDU  ADDICTION   TO   BETEL 

sannyasis,  but  by  many  others  who  by  severe  abstinence 
seek  to  attract  public  attention  and  respect. 

III.  '  They  must  forgo  the  use  of  betel  leaves.' 

These  are  the  leaves  of  a  plant  of  the  convolvulus  species, 
which  grows  in  the  maritime  districts  of  India.  They  have 
a  slightly  bitter  taste,  are  mixed  with  calcined  shells  or 
lime,  and  are  eaten  with  areca-nut  and  other  spices  accord- 
ing to  taste.  The  Hindus  are  perpetually  chewing  this 
preparation.  To  give  it  up,  when  one  is  accustomed  to 
it,  would  be  a  greater  privation  than  it  would  be  for  any 
one  among  us  to  give  up  tobacco. 

IV.  '  Not  only  must  he  avoid  all  female  society,  but  he 
must  not  even  look  at  a  woman.' 

V.  !  Once  a  month  his  head  and  face  must  be  shaved.' 
To  save  this  trouble  many  sannyasis  cause  their  disciples 

to  pull  out  the  hairs  of  their  head  and  beard  one  by  one. 
Some  sannyasis  neither  cut  their  hair  nor  shave  their 
beards,  but  plait  them  up  in  some  ridiculous  way.  These, 
however,  do  not  belong  to  the  Brahmin  caste. 

VI.  '  He  may  only  wear  wooden  sandals  on  his  feet.' 
This  is  a  most  uncomfortable  style  of  foot-gear  ;  it  is 

held  to  the  foot  by  a  wooden  peg,  which  comes  between 
the  big  and  second  toes.  The  sannyasis  use  these  clogs  to 
avoid  defilement,  which  could  not  be  avoided  if  they  went 
barefoot,  or  if  they  wore  leather  shoes. 

VII.  '  When  a  sannyasi  travels,  he  must  carry  his  seven- 
knotted  staff  in  one  hand,  his  gourd  in  the  other,  and  an 
antelope's  skin  under  his  arm.' 

Provided  with  these  three  articles  the  sannyasi  can  say, 
Omnia  mecum  porto.  The  staff  must  be  exactly  his  own 
height.  The  antelope's  skin  serves  both  for  a  seat  and  for 
a  bed. 

VIII.  '  He  must  live  entirely  by  alms,  which  he  has  the 
right  to  ask  wherever  he  goes.' 

Many  collect  considerable  sums  by  this  means  ;  but  they 
are  obliged  to  spend  any  surplus  in  charity  or  other  good 
works.  Some  spend  it  in  the  erection  of  rest-houses, 
pagodas,  &c,  or  in  digging  wells  and  constructing  reser- 
voirs for  water  for  the  use  of  the  public.  They  also  dispense 
hospitality  to  persons  who  pass  near  their  huts,  or  who 
come  to  visit  them. 


DIRECTIONS    FOR    RECEIVING    ALMS        527 

IX.  '  Though  a  sannyasi  has  the  right  to  ask  for  alms, 
it  is  more  proper  for  him  to  receive  them  without  asking. 
For  instance,  if  he  feel  hungry,  he  should  go  to  some  house 
where  people  are  living,  but  he  must  not  say  anything  to 
them  or  even  hint  at  his  wants.  If  they  give  him  anything 
voluntarily,  he  must  take  it  as  if  it  were  of  no  consequence 
to  him,  and  without  expressing  any  thanks.  If  he  receives 
nothing,  he  must  *:<>  away  without  either  feeling  or  showing 
any  annoyance.  Neither  must  he  complain  if  he  does  not 
like  the  taste  of  what  is  given  him.' 

X.  "  He  must  not  sit  down  to  eat.' 

XI.  '  He  must  build  his  hut  near  a  river  or  a  tank.' 
The  reason  of  this  is  that  he  may  be  able  to  make  frequent 

ablutions,  one  of  the  first  duties  of  a  sannyasi. 

XII.  '  When  travelling  he  must  make  no  stay  anywhere, 
and  he  must  only  pass  through  inhabited  districts.' 

XIII.  '  He  must  regard  all  men  as  equals.  He  must  not 
be  influenced  by  anything  that  happens,  and  must  be  able 
to  view  with  perfect  equanimity  even  revolutions  which 
overthrow  empires.' 

XIV.  '  His  one  object  in  life  must  be  to  acquire  that 
measure  of  wisdom  and  degree  of  spirituality  which  shall 
finally  reunite  him  to  the  Supreme  Divinity,  from  whom 
we  are  separated  by  our  passions  and  material  surround- 
ings. To  achieve  this  end  he  must  keep  his  senses  under 
perfect  control,  and  entirely  subdue  any  tendency  to  anger, 
envy,  avarice,  sensuality  :  in  fact,  to  any  unholy  impulses. 
Otherwise  his  penance  will  bear  no  fruit.' 

There  are  no  doubt  other  general  rules  which  these 
devotees  are  bound  to  follow  ;  but  I  have  only  been  able 
to  ascertain  the  above. 

Of  all  the  sannyasi?,  those  called  Bikshukas  are  con- 
sidered the  most  perfect  of  all.  They  are  under  no  re- 
strictions in  regard  to  food  ;  nothing  that  they  eat  or 
drink,  no  matter  how  impure  it  may  be,  has  power  to 
defile  them. 


528 


CHAPTER  XXXV 

A  SainiyasPs  Principal  Duties. — Meditation. — Its  Various  Stages. — 
What  it  consists  of,  and  how  Hindu  Devotees  practise  it. — General 
Remarks. — Comparisons  between  the  Hindu  Sannyasis  and  those 
who  lead  Similar  Lives  among  Christians. 

A  sannyasi's  first  and  most  important  duty  is  to  destroy, 
root  and  branch,  any  feeling  of  attachment  that  may  still 
linger  in  his  heart  for  the  world  and  its  vain  pleasures. 
Wife,  children,  parents,  friends,  caste  privileges,  cattle, 
lands,  jewels  and  other  temporal  possessions,  animal 
passions,  sensual  pleasures — all  these  are  but  so  many 
obstacles  standing  in  the  way  of  his  soul's  perfection.  In 
Hindu  books  they  are  likened  variously  to  thick  clouds 
which,  until  they  are  dispersed,  obscure  the  light  of  the 
sun,  or  to  violent  winds  that  disturb  the  surface  of  the 
water  and  prevent  the  reflection  of  this  luminary  in  all  its 
splendour  ;  to  the  coils  which  caterpillars  and  other  in- 
sects form,  and  of  which  they  cannot  rid  themselves  ;  or 
again  to  the  kernels  of  certain  fruits  in  which  grubs  and 
maggots  are  imprisoned. 

Such  are  the  similes  which  Hindu  authors  make  use  of 
when  trying  to  give  some  idea  of  the  hindrances  which 
earthly  passions  oppose  to  spirituality,  and  which  must  be 
overcome  before  perfection  can  be  attained  and  the  soul 
reunited  to  the  Divine  Being.  Nevertheless,  these  same 
authors  add,  the  tenements  in  which  caterpillars  and  grubs 
confine  themselves  do  not  hold  them  captive  for  ever. 
Neither  do  the  insects  cease  to  exist.  After  remaining  for 
some  time  in  a  state  of  torpor  and  quiescence,  the  feeble 
spark  of  life  which  they  still  retain  rekindles  and  gradually 
increases  in  strength  till  the  insects  are  able  to  destroy  the 
covering  in  which  they  are  enclosed,  and,  by  dint  of  per- 
severing labour,  at  last  open  out  a  passage  to  the  region 
of  light  and  liberty.  So  it  is  with  the  soul.  The  body  in 
which  it  is  imprisoned,  and  which  is  a  prey  to  worldly 
cares  and  tumultuous  passions,  will  not  hold  it  for  ever. 
After  many  re-incarnations  the  spark  of  perfect  wisdom, 
which  is  latent  in  every  man,  will  burn  more  brightly, 
until  the  soul  at  last  succeeds,  after  a  long  course  of  penance 
and  meditation,  in  breaking  asunder,  little  by  little,  all  the 


YOGAM   OR  MEDITATION  529 

ties  which  bind  it  to  the  world,  and  will  so  grow  in  virtue 
and  strength  that  it  will  finally  attain  that  degree  of  spiritual 
perfection  which  will  render  it  fit  to  be  incorporated  with 
the  Divinity.  Then,  leaving  the  body  which  has  so  long 
held  it  captive,  it  will  soar  upwards  and  be  united  for  ever 
with  the  Supreme  Soul  from  which  it  originally  sprang. 

The  course  which  a  sannyasi  should  pursue  to  arrive  at 
this  point  of  perfection  differs  somewhat  according  to  the 
sect  to  which  he  belongs.  His  period  of  emancipation 
begins  from  the  day  on  which  he  entered  the  holy  state  of 
sannyasi.  By  this  single  act  he  is  supposed  to  have  freed 
himself  from  those  ties  which  bind  other  men  to  the  world 
and  its  pleasures.  All  that  he  has  to  do  to  attain  perfec- 
tion is  to  make  frequent  ablutions,  to  drink  pancha-gavia 
constantly,  to  offer  daily  sacrifices,  and  to  live  a  life  of 
asceticism  and  penance,  but  above  all  of  meditation,  to 
which  he  must  devote  all  his  leisure  time. 

This  duty  of  meditation,  to  which  Hindus  attach  so 
much  importance,  appears  to  me  to  be  so  remarkable 
a  practice  for  idolaters,  that  I  have  thought  it  incumbent 
on  me  to  call  special  attention  to  it.  The  details  that  I  am 
about  to  relate  will  show  to  what  extremes  superstition 
and  fanaticism  will  pervert  men's  minds,  especially  when 
they  are  connected  with  self-conceit  and  a  longing  for 
notoriety. 

The  doctrine  of  meditation  is  called  yogam,  and  from  it 
the  word  yogi  is  derived,  which  is  the  name  usually  given 
to  a  tribe  of  vagabonds  who  are  erroneously  supposed  to 
devote  themselves  entirely  to  this  practice  l. 

According  to  the  Hindu  doctrine  the  practice  of  yogam 
has  a  peculiarly  spiritualizing  and  purifying  effect  on 
a  sannyasi,  for  he  thereby  passes  through  four  different 
stages,  each  one  more  perfect  than  the  last. 

The  first  is  called  salokyam,  or  unity  of  place.  In  this 
state  the  soul  inhabits,  as  it  were,  the  same  place  as  the 
Divinity  ;  it  is  as  though  it  were  in  the  presence  of  God. 
After  practising  for  a  long  time  the  duties  of  salokyam,  the 
soul  passes  on  to  the  second  stage,  called  samipyam  (proxi- 
mity).    In  this  stage,  by  practising  meditation  and  keeping 

1  This  is  too  sweeping  an  assertion.  All  yogis  are  not  vagabonds. 
—Ed. 


530  TRANSMIT  HATORY   DOCTRINE 

all  earthly  objects  out  of  the  mental  pale,  the  knowledge 
and  perception  of  God  become  more  and  more  acute,  and 
the  soul  seems  to  be  drawn  nearer  and  nearer  to  Him. 

After  having  spent  many  generations  in  this  stage,  the 
soul  passes  on  to  the  third,  the  sarupyam  (resemblance). 
Once  arrived  at  this  point,  the  soul  gradually  acquires 
a  perfect  resemblance  to  the  Divinity,  and  shares  to  a 
certain  extent  in  His  attributes.  Finally,  this  stage  leads 
on  to  the  fourth,  the  sayujyam  (identity),  and  then  the 
perfect  and  inseparable  union  of  the  soul  with  the  Deity 
becomes  complete. 

But  the  soul  requires  long  periods  of  time  to  pass  through 
these  four  stages  of  perfection  ;  it  must  undergo  a  great 
number  of  re-incarnations,  during  which  it  gradually 
acquires  the  degree  of  perfection  which  is  essential  to  its 
incorporation  with  the  Godhead.  In  order  to  explain  all 
these  indispensable  transmigrations  of  the  soul,  the  Hindu 
books  make  use  of  various  analogies,  such  as  the  follow- 
ing : — If  one  wished  to  extract  gold  from  a  mass  composed 
of  the  five  metals  l,  one  could  not  do  so  by  melting  it  once 
for  all.  Only  by  putting  it  through  the  fire  several  times 
could  one  separate  the  different  alloys  of  which  it  was 
composed  and  extract  the  gold  in  all  its  purity. 

They  illustrate  the  same  truth  by  various  other  similes  ; 
for  instance,  that  which  may  be  drawn  from  the  process  of 
making  clarified  butter,  an  article  of  food  which,  as  we 
already  know,  the  Brahmins  are  particularly  fond  of,  and 
which  they  consider  the  purest  of  all  manufactured  sub- 
stances. . 

The  majority  of  these  analogies,  and  the  principles 
deduced  from  them,  might,  if  looked  at  from  a  non-con- 
troversial point  of  view,  be  not  altogether  repugnant  to 
our  learned  metaphysicians,  or  at  any  rate  to  those  among 
us  who  have  given  themselves  up  to  a  life  of  meditation. 
We  may  at  any  rate  conclude  that  these  ancient  Hindu 
penitents  spent  more  time  and  thought  on  spiritual  matters 
than  we  might  have  expected.  Originally,  no  doubt,  this 
spiritual  side  of  their  religion  was  much  purer  and  less 
fanciful  than  it  is  now,  when  it  has  become  corrupted  by 

1  We  Europeans  recognize  a  greater  number  of  metals  than  five. — 
Dubois. 


SANNYAST   PENANCES  531 

gross  idolatry.  Now  it  merely  tends  to  increase  the  pride 
of  the  recluses  who  practise  it.  The  latter  indeed  set  up 
a  claim  to  unity  and  equality  with  the  Supreme  Being 
himself  ;  while  they  look  down  upon  their  fellow-creatures 
as  objects  of  supreme  contempt,  as  beings  who  are  still 
wallowing  in  the  mire  of  materialism  and  passion. 

And  how  did  these  so-called  penitents  carry  out  their 
doctrine  of  meditation,  concerning  which  they  made  such 
proud  boasting  ?  Before  idolatry  had  gained  a  hold  on 
the  country,  and  while  the  tradition  of  the  outward  forms 
as  well  as  of  the  inward  meaning  of  the  religion  with  which 
men  worshipped  the  Deity  after  the  Flood  still  lingered, 
this  doctrine  of  meditation,  prompted  as  it  was  by  lofty 
motives,  was  doubtless  capable  of  maintaining  the  soul  in 
a  constant  state  of  fervent  piety  towards  God  ;  but  at  the 
present  time  this  religious  exercise  is  undertaken  with  an 
object  very  different  and  much  less  estimable. 

I  cannot  better  explain  wherein  this  practice  of  medita- 
tion consists  for  a  modern  sannyasi  than  by  repeating  what 
I  was  told  by  two  Hindus  who  had  passed  a  long  novitiate 
under  the  direction  of  two  celebrated  recluses. 

'  I  was  a  novice  for  four  months,'  said  one  of  them, 
■  under  a  sannyasi  who  had  built  himself  a  hermitage  in 
a  lonely  spot  not  very  far  from  the  town  of  Bellapuram. 
Following  his  instructions,  I  spent  the  greater  part  of 
each  night  awake,  occupied  in  keeping  my  mind  an  abso- 
lute blank  and  thinking  of  nothing.  I  made  superhuman 
efforts  to  hold  my  breath  as  long  as  possible,  and  only 
breathed  when  I  was  on  the  point  of  fainting.  This 
suffocating  exercise  made  me  perspire  profusely.  One 
day,  at  high  noon,  I  thought  I  saw  a  bright  moon,  which 
seemed  to  move  and  sway  from  side  to  side.  Another 
time  I  imagined  myself  enveloped  in  thick  darkness  at 
midday.  My  director,  the  sannyasi,  who  had  warned  me 
that  while  going  through  this  course  of  penance  I  should 
see  many  marvels,  was  greatly  pleased  when  I  mentioned 
these  visions  to  him.  He  congratulated  me  on  the  progress 
that  I  was  making,  and  prescribed  fresh  exercises  which 
were  even  more  severe  than  the  first.  The  time  was  not 
far  distant,  he  assured  me,  when  I  should  experience  much 
more  surprising  results  from  my  penance.     At  last,  worn 


532  PAINFUL  EXPERIMENTS 

out  by  these  foolish  and  fatiguing  practices,  and  fearing 
lest  my  brain  might  really  be  turned,  I  left  the  sannyasi 
and  his  meditative  penances,  and  returned  to  my  former 
state  of  life.' 

The  second,  an  old  man  of  a  very  cheerful  disposition, 
told  me  the  following  story  of  his  novitiate  : — 

'  The  sannyasi  under  whose  direction  I  placed  myself 
had  built  his  hermitage  at  some  distance  from  the  fort  of 
Namakal,  in  a  desert  spot.  Amongst  other  exercises  which 
he  laid  down  for  me,  he  obliged  me  to  stare  at  the  sky 
every  day  without  blinking  my  eyes  or  changing  my  position. 
This  prolonged  effort  inflamed  my  eyes  terribly  and  often 
gave  me  dreadful  headaches.  Sometimes  I  thought  I  saw 
sparks  of  fire  in  the  air  ;  at  others  I  seemed  to  see  fiery 
globes  and  other  meteors.  My  teacher  was  much  pleased 
with  the  success  of  my  efforts  and  with  the  progress  I  was 
making.  He  had  only  one  eye,  and  I  knew  that  he  had 
lost  the  other  in  following  out  this  practice,  which  he 
assured  me  was  indispensable  if  I  wished  to  attain  to 
perfect  spirituality.  Bat  at  last  I  could  bear  it  no  longer, 
and  fearing  that  I  might  lose  the  sight  of  both  eyes,  I  bade 
farewell  to  meditation  and  the  celestial  firmament.  I  also 
tried  another  kind  of  exercise  for  a  time.  My  master  told 
me  that  an  infallible  means  for  making  rapid  progress 
towards  spirituality  was  to  keep  all  the  apertures  of  my 
body  completely  closed,  so  that  none  of  the  five  pranams 
(winds)  which  are  in  it  could  escape.  To  do  this  I  had  to 
place  a  thumb  in  each  ear,  close  my  lips  with  the  fourth 
and  little  fingers  of  each  hand,  my  eyes  with  the  two  fore- 
fingers, and  my  nostrils  with  the  two  middle  fingers  ;  and 
to  close  the  lower  orifice  I  had  to  cross  my  legs  and  sit 
very  tightly  on  one  of  my  heels.  While  in  this  attitude 
I  had  to  keep  one  nostril  tightly  shut,  and  leaving  the 
other  open  I  had  to  draw  in  a  long  deep  breath  ;  then, 
immediately  closing  that  nostril,  I  had  to  open  the  other 
and  thoroughly  exhale  the  air  that  I  had  just  inhaled.  It 
was  of  the  greatest  importance  that  the  inhalation  and 
exhalation  should  not  be  performed  through  the  same 
nostril.  I  continued  this  exercise  until  I  lost  consciousness 
and  fainted  away.' 

In  order  to  make  his  description  more  intelligible  the 


THE   SACRED   WORD    <AUM'  533 

renegade  sannyasi  insisted  on  going  through  the  perform- 
ance in  my  presence.  It  is  impossible  to  imagine  a  more 
ridiculous  scene.  But  he  took  care  to  change  his  exhaust- 
ing position  as  soon  as  possible,  bursting  into  shouts  of 
laughter  at  the  recollection  of  the  absurd  things  that  he 
had  been  compelled  to  do. 

I  will  now  give  some  other  examples  of  meditative 
exercises  gathered  from  Hindu  books,  which  will  show  how 
they  were  practised  in  former  days.  One  of  the  most 
famous  and  edifying  of  the  yogams  is  that  called  sabda- 
brahma  (the  word  of  Brahma)  or  pranava  ;  that  is  to  say, 
meditation  on  the  sacred  and  mysterious  word  aum — aum 
being  Brahma  himself  l. 

As  this  word  aum  is  composed  of  three  letters,  which  in 
writing  form  only  one,  we  may  consider  that  the  a  is 
Brahma,  the  u  Vishnu,  and  the  m  Siva.  The  sign  repre- 
senting these  three  letters,  which  in  combination  form  the 
sabda-brahma,  ends  with  a  semicircle  with  a  dot  in  the 
centre,  which  is  called  bi?idu,  and  is  the  emblem  of  the 
purely  spiritual  being. 

Those  who  desire  to  obtain  salvation  must  be  always 
meditating  on  this  word  and  constantly  repeating  it. 

But  to  make  this  meditation  effectual  one  must  begin  by 
obtaining  complete  mastery  over  oneself  and  by  entirely 
subduing  all  bodily  senses  and  passions.  One  must,  there- 
fore, gradually  withdraw  one's  thoughts  and  affections  from 
all  material  objects  and  fix  them  on  the  dot.  or  bindu, 
mentioned  above.  This  point  once  reached,  a  single 
moment  of  meditation  is  sufficient  to  ensure  the  most 
perfect  happiness. 

Vishnu  always  looks  favourably  on  such  meditations, 
and  from  the  moment  that  one  is  able  to  bring  oneself  to 
believe  firmly  that  the  pranava,  or  the  word  aum,  is  the 
Divine  Being,  one  sees  Vishnu  in  everything.  In  fact, 
one  sees,  hears,  and  thinks  of  nothing  but  him  ;  and, 
finally,  one  believes  that  there  is  nothing  existing  except  him. 

Just  as  there  is  nothing  worth  knowing  that  is  not  to 
be  found  in  the  Vedas,  so  no  meditation  is  equal  in  merit 
to  that  of  the  pranava,  or  the  word  aum. 

1  It  would  be  more  correct  to  say  Brahman — the  Supreme  Spirit 
itself. — Ed. 


534  THE   ASHTA-YOGA 

Another  kind  of  meditation,  which  is  quite  as  efficacious 
as  that  which  I  have  just  described,  is  the  ashta-yoga  (the 
eight  yogas).  The  following  is  a  short  analysis  of  it,  com- 
piled from  the  Saka  of  the  Rig-Veda  : — 

The  ashta-yoga  is  peculiarly  efficacious.  By  its  means 
Siva  himself  obtained  forgiveness  for  his  sins  *  and  the 
kingdom  of  Kailasa.  There  are  no  sins  that  it  will  not 
wipe  out  !  To  kill  a  Brahmin  or  a  cow,  to  steal  gold,  to 
drink  intoxicating  liquors,  to  violate  the  wife  of  one's 
guru,  to  bring  about  abortion,  are  all  most  heinous  crimes. 
To  slander  or  deceive  a  Brahmin,  or  break  a  promise  made 
to  a  Brahmin  ;  to  look  upon  a  poor  man  or  a  stranger 
when  one  is  eating  and  not  to  have  pity  on  him,  but  to 
repulse  him  and  send  him  away  hungry ;  to  prevent  cows 
from  drinking  when  they  are  thirsty  ;  to  try  to  pass  oneself 
off  as  learned  when  one  knows  nothing  ;  to  attempt  to 
dogmatize  on  the  practice  of  meditation  while  ignorant  of 
the  subject  ;  to  give  medicines  without  being  a  doctor  ; 
to  predict  the  future  when  one,  is  no  astrologer  ;  for  a 
Brahmin  to  offer  sacrifices  to  the  lingam  or  to  an  image  of 
Vishnu  after  a  Sudra  has  previously  sacrificed  to  them  : — 
all  these  are  indeed  terrible  sins.  But  the  ashta-yoga  will 
wipe  them  all  out.  It  is  thus  described  : — First  of  all,  one 
must  fast  for  three  consecutive  days  ;  after  which  one  must 
repair  to  a  temple  dedicated  to  Siva,  or  to  a  cemetery,  or 
to  a  bilva  tree.  There  one  must  perform  the  achamania 
and  paint  the  little  circular  mark  called  tilaka  on  one's 
forehead.  Having  prepared  a  clean  spot  on  the  ground, 
the  devotee  must  stand  upon  it  on  his  head  with  his  feet 
in  the  air.  In  this  position  he  must  six  times  perform  the 
pranayama,  which  consists  in  inhaling  through  one  nostril 
and  forcibly  expelling  the  air  through  the  other  2.  By  this 
means  the  Man  of  Sin  will  be  destroyed,  for  this  Man  of 
Sin  resides  in  the  nerve  which  is  found  on  the  left  side  of 
the  head.  While  expelling  the  air  from  the  body  by  the 
pranayama,  one  must  say  :  '  Nerve,  you  are  a  goddess  ! 
In  you  resides  the  Man  of  Sin.  I  am  about  to  wash  you  to 
rid  you  of  him.  So  begone !  '  A  violent  exhalation 
through  the  left  nostril  having  expelled  this  nerve  where 

1  See  Part  I,  Chapter  VII. 

2  Pranayama  literally  means  suppression  of  breath. — Er>. 


CORPORAL  PENANCES  535 

the  Man  of  Sin  dwelt,  the  devotee  must  then  wash  it  in 
warm  water  and  offer  puja  to  it.  Then  it  must  be  made 
to  return  to  its  proper  place.  To  effect  this  a  long  inhala- 
tion must  be  made  through  the  right  nostril,  accompanied 
by  the  following  words  : — '  Behold,  great  goddess,  freed 
from  sin,  you  are  the  mother  of  the  world  !  A  sacrifice  has 
been  offered  in  your  honour.  Return  now  to  the  place  that 
you  occupied  before.' 

This  is  the  exercise  of  the  ashta-yoga.  It  was  by  practis- 
ing this,  the  author  asserts,  that  Siva  became  the  ruler  of 
the  world  ;  Indra,  the  lord  of  the  Swarga  ;  Durga,  the 
mother  of  all  living  creatures  ;  and  Vishnu,  the  preserver 
of  all  things. 

There  are  many  other  yogams.  In  the  chapter  on  the 
sandhya,  I  gave  a  description  of  the  santi-yoga,  which  serves 
as  a  kind  of  preparation  to  the  Brahmin's  daily  sacrifice. 
But  enough  has  perhaps  been  said  to  show  how  puerile  are 
the  religious  exercises  of  the  Hindu  ascetics. 

They  have,  by  way  of  supererogation,  eighteen  kinds  of 
tapasas  or  corporal  penances,  of  increasing  degrees  of 
severity.  A  recluse  selects  the  one  for  which  he  feels 
most  inclination.  Among  the  most  painful  may  be  men- 
tioned that  which  consists  in  being  exposed,  stark  naked, 
to  the  sun  for  the  whole  day  in  the  hottest  weather,  and 
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  huge  fires  ;  and  that  in  which 
the  devotee  remains  for  a  whole  day  immersed  up  to  the 
neck  in  cold  water,  with  a  wet  cloth  round  the  head,  during 
the  coldest  season  of  the  year.  These  are  called  pancha- 
tapasas  (the  five  penances). 

One  often  sees  devotees  holding  their  arms  folded  above 
their  heads,  in  which  position  they  remain  till  the  nerves 
become  so  strained  and  benumbed  by  the  prolonged  tension 
that  they  cannot  regain  their  normal  position. 

Others,  again,  stand  on  one  foot,  holding  the  other  foot 
in  the  air  until  the  leg  swells  and  inflames  and  breaks  out 
all  over  into  sores. 

Hindu  books  are  full  of  the  merits  of  these  yogams  and 
lapasas.  Amongst  other  self-inflicted  tortures  they  give  an 
honourable  place  to  one  which  is  in  fact  the  ne  plus  ultra 
of  its  kind.  It  consists  in  holding  the  breath  for  such 
a  length  of  time  that  the  soul,  forced  to  depart  from  the 


536    MEDITATION    ENJOINED  IN   SCRIPTURE 

body,  makes  a  passage  for  itself  through  the  top  of  the  head 
and  flies  off  to  reunite  itself  to  Parabrahma. 

But  let  no  one  carry  away  the  idea  that  the  majority  of 
modern  recluses  feel  any  inclination  to  subject  their  bodies 
to  such  rough  usage.  Most  of  them  rest  content  with 
sitting  motionless,  their  eyes  closed  and  their  heads  bent, 
spending  their  whole  time  and  energy  in  thinking  of  nothing, 
and  keeping  their  minds  an  utter  blank.  Others  remain 
squatting  imperturbably  in  the  attitude  which  the  minister 
Appaji  recommended  to  his  shepherd,  as  already  described  K 
One  of  these  meditative  devotees,  who  lived  near  me, 
had  a  mania  for  imagining  that  he  saw  an  image  of  Vishnu 
always  before  him,  to  which  he  offered,  still  in  imagination, 
garments,  jewels,  and  all  sorts  of  food,  the  god  in  exchange 
giving  him  all  that  he  asked  for.  He  used  to  spend  two 
hours  every  day  in  this  occupation,  but  at  the  end  of  it 
all  he  invariably  found  himself,  as  before,  with  empty 
hands  and  an  equally  empty  stomach. 

No  doubt  there  were  men  after  the  Flood  who  still 
retained  the  precious  gift  of  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God, 
and  gave  themselves  up  to  the  contemplation  of  His 
infinite  perfections  as  a  means  of  keeping  alive  in  their 
hearts  a  proper  sense  of  the  worship  that  it  was  their  duty 
to  pay  Him.  Isaac  most  probably  was  only  continuing 
the  custom  of  his  father  Abraham  in  going  out,  at  the 
close  of  the  day,  to  meditate  in  the  fields  (Genesis  xxiv.  63). 
Moses  also  commanded  the  children  of  Israel  to  meditate 
continually  on  the  duty  of  loving  God  with  all  their  hearts  ; 
and  he  enjoined  them  to  meditate  on  this  when  in  their 
houses,  or  when  travelling,  so  that  God  might  be  always 
present  to  their  minds.  David,  who  had  himself  experienced 
the  benefit  of  meditation,  recommends  the  practice  in 
almost  all  his  Psalms  ;  and  this  advice  his  son  Solomon 
repeats.  The  pious  habit  has  thus  descended  from  genera- 
tion to  generation  from  the  time  of  the  Flood  to  the  estab- 
lishment of  Christianity,  and  the  religion  of  Christ  likewise 
regards  meditation  on  the  precepts  of  God  as  an  indis- 
pensable duty. 

The  first  Hindu  lawgivers,  who,  though  separating  them- 

1  See  Part  II,  Chapter  XXVII. 


AN  EXAGGERATED  DEVELOPMENT    537 

selves  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  preserved  their  knowledge 
of  the  true  God,  were  fully  impressed  with  the  necessity  of 
frequent  meditation  on  His  greatness,  fearing  that  other- 
wise they  might  insensibly  allow  the  recollection  of  the 
Deity  to  fade  from  their  minds  ;  but  these  just  ideas  were 
soon  warped  by  human  passions  and  corrupted  by  the 
spirit  of  idolatry,  so  that  they  quickly  degenerated  into 
ridiculous  and  meaningless  practices.  The  pious  men  who 
in  early  ages  gave  up  a  few  moments  in  each  day  to  serious 
thought  and  meditation  were  succeeded  by  fanatics,  who, 
retaining  only  the  mere  outward  forms  of  their  predecessors' 
inward  piety,  gave  themselves  up  in  their  mad  enthusiasm 
to  the  wildest  extravagance,  and  in  fact  to  any  folly  that 
they  thought  likely  to  attract  the  fancy  of  a  people  so 
devoted  to  exaggerations  of  all  kinds  as  the  Hindus.  Modern 
authors,  confusing  religious  practices  which  originate  in 
sincere  love  for  and  devotion  to  God  with  those  emanating 
from  vainglory,  hypocrisy,  and  superstition,  have  tried  to 
throw  discredit  on  the  life  of  asceticism  and  contemplation 
which  was  advocated  both  by  the  old  and  the  new  dis- 
pensation, and  have  presumed  to  trace  a  similarity  between 
it  and  the  absurd  yogams  of  the  Hindu  sannyasis.  But  it 
seems  to  me  that  a  small  amount  of  honest  thought  would 
have  shown  them  what  an  immense  difference  there  was 
both  in  the  objects  aimed  at  and  in  the  means  used  to 
attain  those  objects.  Let  them  compare  the  tenets  and 
practices  of  the  two  great  founders  of  the  ascetic  and  con- 
templative life  in  Holy  Writ  with  those  of  the  so-called 
sannyasi  philosophers  amongst  the  Hindus.  Can  Elijah 
and  John  the  Baptist  be  compared  for  one  moment  with 
the  sannyasis  Vasishta  and  Narada  ?  Is  there  any  sort  of 
resemblance  between  the  teachings  and  maxims  of  the 
former  and  of  the  latter  ?  The  Padma-purana  and  the 
Vishnu- pur  ana,  supposed  to  have  been  dictated  by  these 
two  sannyasis,  are  a  mass  of  exaggerations  and  absurdities. 
Could  the  same  charge  be  brought  against  the  doctrines  of 
the  holy  prophet  of  Israel  and  those  of  the  forerunner  of 
the  Messiah  ? 

The  penances  of  John  the  Baptist,  for  example,  have 
certainly  nothing  in  common  with  the  exaggerations  and 
hypocritical  follies  of  the  Hindu  sannyasis,  whose  sole  aim 


538  ST.   JOHN   BAPTIST   CITED 

and  object  is  to  attract  public  attention  to  themselves  '. 
The  actuating  motive  of  John  the  Baptist  was  the  deepest 
humility.  He  hid  himself  from  the  world.  He  shunned, 
despised,  and  rejected  its  honours,  and  wished  to  be  con- 
sidered the  least  and  humblest  among  men.  Nevertheless, 
in  his  solitude  he  did  not  forget  the  duties  laid  upon 
him  of  instructing  and  preparing  the  world  for  the  great 
event  which  was  about  to  be  accomplished.  Attracted  by 
the  fame  of  his  virtues,  men  of  all  ages  and  all  classes 
flocked  to  hear  the  pure  and  holy  doctrine  which  he  taught. 
Labourers,  soldiers,  publicans,  masters,  servants — all  de- 
sired to  hear  his  preaching,  and  all  received  wise  advice 
and  counsel  for  the  regulation  of  their  conduct  according 
to  their  various  conditions.  If  he  left  his  desert  home  for 
a  moment,  it  was  only,  like  his  predecessor  Elijah,  to 
extend  yet  further  the  word  of  God  and  to  reprove  with 
dauntless  courage  the  criminal  conduct  of  an  incestuous 
king. 

It  was  not  by  such  unmeaning  and  ridiculous  practices 
as  the  moksha-sadhaka,  the  pranava,  the  santi-yoga,  the 
homam,  the  pancha-gavia,  or  the  disgusting  sacrifices  to  the 
lingam,  that  these  saintly  hermits  and  their  disciples  sought 
to  arrive  at  perfection.  They  never  aimed  at  gaining 
popular  applause  by  excessive  and  unnatural  penances. 
Their  actions,  on  the  contrar}^  were  based  on  profound 
humility  and  on  a  sincere  desire  to  live  unhonoured  by  the 
world,  with  only  their  God  as  a  witness  to  the  purity  of 
their  lives  and  motives. 


CHAPTER   XXXVI 

The  Funeral  Ceremonies  of  Brahmin  Sannyasis. 

The  ceremonies  which  accompany  the  funerals  of  sann- 
yasis differ  in  many  respects  from  those  of  ordinary  Brah- 
mins. Vanaprasthas,  like  ordinary  Brahmins,  are  burned 
after  death  ;  but  sannyasis  are  invariably  buried,  no  matter 
what  their  rank  or  sect  may  be. 

The  son  of  a  sannyasi  (should  the  deceased  have  had  one 

1  This  can  hardly  be  called  an  impartial  and  correct  picture  of  the 
sannyasi. — Ed. 


BURYING   A   SANNYASI  539 

born  to  him  before  he  embraced  this  state)  must  preside 
at  the  funeral.  In  default  of  a  son,  there  is  always  some 
pious  Brahmin  who  will  take  on  himself  the  duty  and  bear 
the  cost.  There  is  often,  indeed,  much  rivalry  as  to  who 
shall  have  the  honour  of  filling  this  office,  as  it  is  con- 
sidered a  most  meritorious  one.  After  the  corpse  has  been 
washed  in  the  usual  manner,  it  is  wrapped  in  two  cloths 
dyed  yellow  with  kavi.  It  is  then  rubbed  all  over  with 
ashes,  and  a  chaplet  of  large  seeds  called  rudralcshas  l  is 
fastened  round  the  neck.  While  all  this  is  going  on  the 
other  Brahmins  play  on  bronze  castanets,  which  make  an 
ear-splitting  noise. 

Everything  being  in  readiness  for  the  obsequies,  the  body 
is  placed,  with  its  legs  crossed,  in  a  large  bamboo  basket, 
which  is  hung  from  a  strong  bamboo  pole  by  ropes  of 
straw.  This  basket  is  borne  by  four  Brahmins.  The  grave 
must  be  dug  near  a  river  or  a  tank,  and  must  be  about  six 
feet  deep  and  circular  in  form.  When  they  reach  the  spot 
the  Brahmins  deposit  at  the  bottom  of  the  grave  a  thick 
layer  of  salt,  on  which  they  place  the  deceased,  with  the 
legs  still  crossed.  They  then  fill  the  hole  with  salt  till  it 
reaches  the  sannyasi's  neck,  pressing  it  well  down  so  that 
the  head  may  remain  immovable.  On  the  head,  thus  left 
exposed,  they  break  innumerable  cocoanuts  until  the  skull 
is  completely  fractured  2.  They  then,  for  the  third  time, 
throw  in  salt  in  sufficient  quantities  to  entirely  cover  the 
remains  of  the  head.  Over  the  grave  they  erect  a  kind  of 
platform,  or  mound,  three  feet  in  height,  on  the  top  of 
which  they  place  a  lingam  of  earth  about  two  feet  high. 
This  obscene  object  is  immediately  consecrated  by  the 
Brahmins,  who  offer  to  it  a  sacrifice  of  lighted  lamps, 
flowers,  and  incense,  and  for  neiveddya,  bananas  and  para- 
mannam,  a  dish  to  which  the  Brahmins  are  particularly 
partial,  and  which  is  composed  of  rice,  cocoanut,  and  sugar. 
While  these  offerings  are  being  made,  hymns  are  sung  in 
honour  of  Vishnu,  all  present  screaming  at  the  top  of  their 
voices. 

1  This  word  rudrakdha  means  the  eye  of  Siva,  because  these  seeds  are, 
according  to  Hindu  legend,  formed  by  his  tears. — Dubois. 

2  The  object  of  this  is  to  free  the  prima  (life),  which  is  believed  to  be 
imprisoned  in  the  skull. — Ed. 


540  CEREMONIES   AFTER   BURIAL 

This  discordant  music  over,  the  presiding  Brahmin  walks 
round  the  lingam  three  times,  makes  a  profound  obeisance 
to  it,  expresses  the  hope  that  by  virtue  of  the  sacrifice 
offered  to  the  image  the  deceased  may  be  fully  satisfied, 
that  Siva  may  look  favourably  on  him,  that  Brahma  may 
receive  him  into  his  abode,  and  that  thus  he  may  escape 
another  re-incarnation  in  this  world.  He  then  pours  a 
little  rice  and  a  few  drops  of  water  on  the  ground,  picks  up 
all  the  fragments  of  the  cocoanut  shells  that  have  been 
broken  on  the  head  of  the  deceased,  and  distributes  them 
to  those  present,  who  scramble  for  the  pieces,  so  eager  are 
they  to  possess  these  relics,  which  are  supposed  to  bring 
good  luck.  The  'paramannam  is  then  divided  among  those 
who  have  no  children,  for  when  acquired  under  these 
circumstances  it  possesses  the  power  of  making  barren 
women  fruitful.  The  ceremonies  of  the  day  end  with 
ablutions  :  not  that  the  mourners  need  to  purify  them- 
selves from  any  defilement,  because  none  is  contracted  in 
attending  the  funeral  of  a  sannyasi  ;  but  these  ablutions 
serve  instead  of  the  bath  which  all  Brahmins  must  take 
three  times  a  day. 

For  ten  successive  days  after  the  funeral  the  person  who 
has  presided  thereat,  and  several  other  Brahmins  in  his 
company,  meet  every  morning  at  the  grave  of  the  deceased 
to  renew  the  offerings  to  the  lingam.  A  similar  ceremony 
takes  place  on  the  anniversary  of  his  death. 

On  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremonies,  the  presiding 
Brahmin  contents  himself  with  giving  a  very  frugal  repast 
to  all  those  who  have  attended  the  function,  after  which  he 
walks  thrice  round  the  assembly,  bows  to  them,  and  dis- 
misses them  without  giving  them  any  presents.  They,  in 
their  turn,  before  their  departure,  congratulate  him  on  the 
good  deed  that  he  has  performed  and  on  the  reward  that 
he  has  earned  thereby. 

The  tombs  of  these  sannyasis  sometimes  become  famous, 
and  crowds  of  devotees  flock  to  them,  bringing  offerings  and 
sacrifices  as  if  to  divine  beings.  The  strange  custom  of 
breaking  the  heads  of  these  dead  hermits  with  cocoanuts 
at  their  burial  has  no  doubt  some  connexion  with  the 
similar  practice  in  regard  to  the  lingam  stones  which  may 
often  be  seen  on  the  high-roads  or  in  much -frequented 


DEATH-BED    REPENTANCES  541 

places,  the  passers-by  being  in  the  habit  of  breaking  on  the 
top  of  these  lingams  the  cocoanuts  which  they  are  about  to 
offer  as  sacrifices. 

All  the  prayers,  oblations,  and  ceremonies  which  are 
offered  up  for  the  sannyasis  after  their  death  would  seem 
to  indicate  an  opinion  that  these  hermits  still  have  some 
sins  to  expiate,  and  that  their  perfect  happiness  remains 
doubtful l.  This  is  not  the  only  point  on  which  Hindu 
beliefs  contradict  each  other. 

I  have  already  said  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  confuse  Brah- 
min sannyasis  with  those  Sudra  penitents  belonging  to  the 
sects  of  Siva  and  Vishnu,  who  live  apart  in  solitary  hermit- 
ages. These  latter  are  not  obliged  to  fulfil  the  condition 
of  having  previously  been  fathers  of  families.  They  are 
supposed  to  have  always  been  absolutely  continent,  but 
I  should  be  very  sorry  to  be  compelled  to  guarantee  the 
fact. 

A  Brahmin  can  become  a  sannyasi  at  any  age.  Many 
are  to  be  met  with  who,  tormented  by  remorseful  con- 
sciences, devote  the  last  days  of  their  lives  to  this  profes- 
sion, and  even  embrace  it  on  their  death-beds,  convinced 
as  they  are  that  to  have  merely  become  a  penitent  is  a  sure 
safe-conduct  to  the  other  world.  The  same  formalities  as 
those  which  I  have  already  described  are  used  for  the 
admission  of  these  hoary  old  sinners  to  a  tardy  penitence  ; 
and  be  their  repentance  sincere  or  not,  they  can  safely 
count  on  receiving  after  death  all  the  advantages  and  all 
the  happiness  that  the  most  persevering  sannyasis  have 
a  right  to  expect  who  have  grown  old  in  the  exercise  of  the 
most  rigorous  austerities. 

1  These  ceremonies  would  appear  to  be  observed  more  as  a  matter  of 
ritual  than  of  expiation. — Ed. 


PART   III 

RELIGION 
CHAPTER   I 

Origin  of  the  Trimurti  and  the  Primitive  Idolatry  of  the  Hindus. — 
Comparison  between  the  Greek  and  Indian  Divinities. — Peculiar 
Idolatry  of  the  Hindus. — Worship  of  the  Elements  represented  by 
the  Trimurti. 

The  Hindus  understand  by  the  word  Trimurti  the  three 
principal  divinities  whom  they  acknowledge.  These  are 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva.  The  word  properly  signifies 
1  the  three  powers,'*  viz.  Creation,  the  special  attribute  of 
Brahma  ;  Preservation,  the  attribute  of  Vishnu  ;  and  Des- 
truction, the  attribute  of  Siva  \ 

These  three  divinities  are  represented  sometimes  singly 
with  their  special  emblems,  and  sometimes  joined  together 
in  a  single  body  with  three  heads.  It  is  under  the  latter 
form  that  they  obtain  the  name  of  Trimurti,  which  means, 
at  once,  both  the  three  bodies  and  the  three  powers.  This 
union  of  persons  is  the  allegorical  symbol  of  the  existence 
of  things  created,  which  can  neither  be  produced  nor  pre- 
served without  the  agreement  and  the  sanction  of  these 
three  powers. 

The  Trimurti  is  recognized  and  worshipped  generally  by 
all  Hindus  except  the  Jains.  Although  many  Hindus  are 
specially  devoted,  some  to  Siva  and  others  to  Vishnu, 
nevertheless  when  these  two  divinities  are  united  with 
Brahma  in  a  single  body  with  three  heads  they  all  pay 
equal  worship  to  the  three  without  regard  to  the  particular 
points  of  doctrine  which  otherwise  separate  them. 

1  The  first  is  the  religion  of  activity  and  works  ;  the  second,  that  of 
faith  and  love  ;  the  third,  that  of  austerity,  contemplation,  and  spiritual 
knowledge.  This  last  is  regarded  as  the  highest,  because  it  aims  at 
entire  cessation  of  action  and  total  effacement  of  all  personal  entity 
and  identity  by  absorption  into  simple  Soul. — Monier- Williams. 


THE    TRIMURTI  543 

It  is  very  difficult  to  trace  the  origin  of  the  Trimurti, 
inasmuch  as  the  accounts  of  it  do  not  agree.  In  some 
Puranas  it  is  related  that  the  Trimurti  sprang  from  a 
female  source  called  Adi-Sakti  (the  original  power),  who 
gave  birth  to  these  three  divinities  united  in  a  single  body  ; 
and  it  is  added  that  after  having  brought  them  into  the 
world  she  fell  so  desperately  in  love  with  them  that  she 
married  them. 

In  some  other  Puranas  we  read  that  Adi-Sakti  produced 
a  seed  from  which  was  born  Siva,  the  father  of  Vishnu. 

Elsewhere  we  are  told  that  a  flower  of  the  tamarasa 
plant  (water-lily)  sprang  from  the  navel  of  Vishnu,  and  that 
from  this  flower  Brahma  was  born. 

In  short,  we  find  in  the  Hindu  books  a  mere  tissue  of 
contradictions  relating  to  the  Trimurti,  and  the  absurd 
details  which  are  related  in  connexion  with  each  are  even 
more  inconsistent.  The  point  on  which  they  agree  to  a 
certain  extent  is  that  which  relates  to  the  excesses  and 
abominable  amours  of  the  three  divinities  composing  it. 

In  spite  of  the  great  power  which  these  divinities  enjoyed, 
they  were  nevertheless  often  compelled  to  feel  the  terrible 
vengeance  of  virtuous  persons,  who,  shocked  at  the  sight 
of  their  infamous  proceedings,  found  means  of  reducing 
them  to  subjection  and  inflicting  on  them  severe  punish- 
ment. Thus,  for  example,  there  was  a  certain  virgin, 
named  Anusooya,  who  was  as  much  renowned  for  her 
inviolable  chastity  as  for  her  devotion  to  the  gods  and  for 
her  tender  compassion  for  the  unfortunate.  The  divinities 
of  the  Trimurti,  having  heard  of  her,  became  so  greatly 
enamoured  that  they  resolved  upon  robbing  her  of  her 
virginity,  which  she  had  till  then  treasured  with  so  much 
care.  To  attain  their  object  the  three  seducers  disguised 
themselves  as  religious  mendicants,  and  under  this  guise 
went  to  ask  alms  of  her.  The  virgin  came  to  them,  and 
with  her  wonted  kindness  showered  gifts  upon  them.  The 
sham  beggars,  after  being  loaded  with  her  gifts,  told  her 
that  they  expected  from  her  another  favour,  which  was  to 
strip  herself  naked  before  them  and  to  satisfy  then  impure 
desires.  Surprised  and  frightened  by  this  shameful  pro- 
posal, she  repulsed  them  by  pronouncing  against  them 
certain  mantrams.     These,  together  with  some  holy  water 


544         PUNISHING    INCONTINENT   DEITIES 

which  she  poured  upon  them,  had  the  effect  of  converting 
them  into  a  calf.  After  they  had  been  thus  transformed, 
Anusooya  took  upon  herself  to  bring  up  this  calf  by  feeding 
it  with  her  own  milk.  The  Trimurti  remained  in  this 
humiliating  position  till  all  the  female  deities  combined 
together  and,  fearing  lest  some  great  misfortune  might 
befall  them  in  the  absence  of  their  three  principal  gods, 
after  consulting  one  another,  went  in  a  body  to  Anusooya 
and  begged  her  most  humbly  to  give  up  the  Trimurti  and 
to  restore  them  to  their  former  state.  It  was  with  great 
difficulty  that  Anusooya  was  persuaded  to  yield  to  their 
prayers,  and  even  then  she  imposed  a  condition  that  they 
should  first  of  all  be  ravished  (by  whom  the  fable  does  not 
say).  The  female  deities,  convinced  that  they  could  not 
otherwise  rescue  the  Trimurti,  consented  to  undergo  the 
penalty  required  of  them,  choosing  rather  to  lose  their 
honour  than  their  gods.  The  conditions  being  fulfilled, 
Anusooya  restored  the  Trimurti  to  their  former  state,  and 
they  returned  to  the  place  whence  they  came  l. 

This  scandalous  adventure  of  the  mighty  divinities  of 
the  Trimurti  is  one  of  the  least  indecent  of  the  kind  related 
in  the  Hindu  books. 

But  whatever  may  be  the  confusion  pervading  the  con- 
tradictory accounts  of  the  different  Puranas,  I  am  inclined 
to  believe  that  all  that  is  said  about  the  three  divinities 
of  the  Trimurti,  and  of  the  follies  which  are  ascribed  to 
them,  is  a  mere  mass  of  disgusting  allegory. 

At  the  commencement  of  their  idolatry  the  Hindus 
confined  their  worship  to  visible  objects,  such  as  the  sun, 
the  moon,  the  stars,  and  the  elements.  In  those  early 
times  they  felt  no  need  of  making  idols  of  stone,  wood,  or 
metal.  But  as  paganism  extended  its  dominion,  and  when, 
in  imitation  of  other  idolatrous  nations,  the  Hindus  went 
so  far  as  to  deify  simple  mortals,  they  had  recourse  to  statues 
and  images  in  order  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  their 
celebrated  men  and  to  transmit  their  virtues  to  posterity. 
By  degrees,  with  the  same  object  in  view,  they  gave  a 
bodily  form  to  all  the  objects  of  their  worship.     The  origin 

1  Hindus  would  say  that  these  stories  were  not  intended  to  illustrate 
the  immorality  of  their  gods,  but  to  affirm  that  a  chaste  woman  is  proof 
even  against  divine  temptation. — Ed 


ORIGIN   OF   HINDU   IDOLS  545 

of  the  Trimurti  dates,  I  believe,  from  a  period  long  after 
the  establishment  of  idolatry  in  India. 

It  may  justly  be  presumed  that  this  symbolic  representa- 
tion of  the  three  divinities  united  in  a  single  body  denotes 
merely  the  three  elements  which  are  most  perceptible  to 
all,  viz.  earth,  water,  and  fire.  In  course  of  time  the 
original  notion  vanished,  and  an  ignorant  people,  guided 
solely  by  the  impression  of  the  senses,  gradually  converted 
what  was  at  first  a  simple  allegory  into  three  distinct  and 
real  divinities. 

Before  pushing  my  inquiries  further  upon  this  subject, 
I  would  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  origin  which  many 
modern  writers  have  assigned  to  this  triple  divinity  of 
India.  They  have  asserted  that  these  three  gods  are 
nothing  else  but  the  three  principal  deities  of  the  Greeks 
and  the  Romans  under  different  names.  Brahma,  accord- 
ing to  them,  is  Jupiter,  Vishnu  is  Neptune,  and  Siva  is 
Pluto.  In  fact,  according  to  the  mythology  of  the  Greeks, 
Jupiter  is  the  author  and  the  creator  of  all  things  ;  he  is 
the  father,  the  master,  and  the  king  of  gods  and  men. 
Now,  all  these  attributes  belong  equally  to  Brahma.  The 
Hindus  say  that  the  universe  is  the  egg  of  Brahma,  and 
that  after  laying  it,  he  hatched  it.  He  also  particularly 
resembles  Jupiter  in  his  incestuous  alliances.  Jupiter  had 
for  his  wife  Juno,  his  sister  ;  Brahma  is,  at  the  same  time, 
the  father  and  the  husband  of  Sarasvati  :  and  it  would 
be  easy  to  enumerate  many  more  points  of  resemblance 
between  these  two  divinities. 

The  resemblance  between  Neptune  and  Vishnu  is  no  less 
striking.  Neptune  makes  the  waters  his  abode  ;  the  sea 
is  his  empire  ;  there  he  reigns,  mounted  on  his  chariot  in 
the  form  of  a  shell  drawn  by  sea-horses,  and  armed  with  his 
formidable  trident.  He  is  attended  by  Tritons,  who  make 
the  whole  sea  re-echo  with  the  sound  of  their  conches.  One 
of  the  most  common  names  for  Vishnu  is  Narayana,  which 
signifies  one  that  sojourns  in  the  waters.  He  is  represented 
as  quietly  sleeping  on  the  surface  of  the  ocean.  It  is  true 
he  has  neither  trident  in  his  hand  nor  Tritons  around  him  ; 
but  his  devotees  bear  on  their  forehead  a  symbolic  figure 
which  closely  resembles  a  trident,  and  in  imitation  of  the 
companions  of  Neptune  they  are  always  provided  with 


546         HINDU   AND   CJREEK    MYTHOLOGY 

a  conch,  or  sangu,  from  which  they  blow  ear-splitting 
blasts,  and  the  figure  of  which  is  also  stamped  on  their 
shoulders  with  hot  iron. 

Siva,  again,  is  a  perfect  prototype  of  Pluto,  the  gloomy 
god  of  hell,  the  lord  of  the  shades  and  of  night.  To  Siva 
belongs  the  power  of  destruction.  He  it  is  who  reduces 
everything  to  dust  ;  he  takes  delight  in  giving  vent  to  his 
sobs  and  groans  in  places  of  burial,  whence  he  derives  the 
name  of  Rudra  commonly  given  him.  It  signifies  one  who 
causes  lamentation. 

Pluto,  unable  to  find  a  woman  willing  to  dwell  with  him 
in  his  dismal  abode,  carried  off  Proserpine,  and  concealed 
her  so  well  that  for  a  long  while  she  escaped  the  search  of 
her  mother  Ceres.  In  like  manner,  Siva  found  a  wife  in 
a  remote  quarter.  Unable  to  get  one  elsewhere,  he  obtained 
one  at  last  from  the  mountain  Mandra,  who  gave  him  in 
marriage  his  daughter  Parvati,  in  consideration  of  a  long 
and  severe  penance  which  Siva  endured  for  her  sake  in  the 
deserts.  For  fear  lest  she  should  escape  from  him,  he 
carries  her  always  on  his  head,  concealed  in  his  enormously 
thick  hair  \ 

But  though  some  features  of  resemblance  lead  us  to 
believe  in  the  identity  of  the  fabulous  deities  of  India  with 
those  of  Greece  and  Rome,  we  find  ourselves  disconcerted 
at  every  step.  As  a  matter  of  fact  both  Vishnu  and  Siva, 
as  well  as  Brahma,  possess  many  traits  of  likeness  to  the 
Olympian  king.  It  was  Vishnu  who  cleared  the  earth  of 
a  multitude  of  giants  that  overran  it — giants  who  far 
exceeded  in  stature  Enceladus,  Briareus,  and  the  other 
Titans  who  were  destroyed  by  Jupiter.  Jupiter  is  borne 
by  an  eagle  ;  Vishnu  likewise  rides  a  pretty  eagle  called 
Garuda,  which,  though  the  smallest  of  the  birds  of  its  own 
species,  became  enormously  large  when  it  carried  the  god 
under  the  designation  of  Jagannatha,  i.  e.  Master  of  the 
World,  an  attribute  which  he  shares  with  the  most  powerful 
of  the  sons  of  Saturn. 

Juno  is  the  goddess  of  wealth.  The  name  of  Lakshmi, 
the  wife  of  Vishnu,  also  signifies  one  who  gives  riches.  Jealous 

1  The  Abbe  is  evidently  confusing  Parvati  with  Ganga  (the  Ganges), 
who  according  to  Hindu  mythology  is  always  carried  on  Siva's  head. 
Parvati  is  always  said  to  be  carried  on  Siva's  left  hip. — Ed. 


THREE    PRINCIPAL   DIVINITIES  547 

like  Juno,  Lakshmi  had  a  good  deal  to  suffer,  as  well  as 
her  prototype,  on  account  of  the  numberless  infidelities 
of  her  husband,  the  consequences  of  which  were  the  same, 
namely,  perpetual  domestic  quarrels.  The  Romans,  in  the 
feasts  which  they  celebrated  in  honour  of  their  gods,  always 
represented  Jupiter  in  company  with  his  wife  ;  and  the 
Hindus  do  the  same  in  the  case  of  Vishnu  and  Lakshmi. 

There  are  other  divinities,  such  as  Devendra,  Varuna,  and 
Yama,  who  display  still  greater  resemblances  to  the  three 
most  powerful  deities  of  Greek  mythology.  Devendra, 
whose  name  is  equivalent  to  that  of  master  of  the  deities, 
is  the  '  monarch  of  the  sky.'  He  exercises  his  sovereignty 
over  the  deities  of  the  second  rank,  who  inhabit  with  him 
a  place  called  Sivarga,  where  they  enjoy  all  kinds  of  carnal 
pleasures.  He  distributes  among  them  the  amrita,  which 
has  the  virtue  of  rendering  them  immortal *.  Like  Jupiter, 
he  is  armed  with  lightning  and  launches  it  against  the 
giants. 

Varuna  is  really  the  Hindu  Neptune.  He  is  the  god  of 
water,  the  lord  of  the  ocean,  and  is  worshipped  as  such  over 
the  whole  Peninsula. 

We  recognize  Pluto  in  Yama.  Yama  exercises  his 
sovereignty  in  Naraka  (hell),  as  Pluto  does  in  Tartarus. 
He  presides  at  men's  death-beds,  and  determines  their 
subsequent  destiny  according  to  the  deeds,  good  or  bad. 
which  they  have  done  during  their  lifetime.  I  might 
prolong  this  comparison,  without  however  drawing  the 
conclusion  that  the  Hindus  ever  borrowed  their  system  of 
theogony  from  the  Greeks,  or  the  Greeks  from  the  Hindus. 

But  if  it  is  not  from  other  ancient  peoples  that  the  Hindus 
derived  their  three  principal  divinities,  whence  have  they 
derived  them  ?  I  shall  attempt  some  reflections  on  this 
point  with  all  the  reserve  imposed  upon  me  by  a  subject  so 
difficult  of  explanation.  Let  us  first  observe  that  Hindu 
idolatry  differs  in  one  essential  point  from  that  which 
prevailed  formerly  in  Athens  and  in  Rome.  In  Greece 
and  Rome  it  was  not  the  sea  that  was  worshipped,  but 
its  monarch,  the  god  Neptune.  All  his  attendants,  the 
Nereids  and  the  Tritons,  had  a  share  in  the  worship  offered 

1  Mrita  signifies  death,  and  amrita  immortality.  The  amrita  does  not 
appear  to  differ  from  the  ambrosia  of  the  Greeks. — Dubois. 


548         MOTIVES    FOR    DEIFYING    OBJECTS 

to  him.  It  was  not  to  the  forests,  to  the  rivers,  or  to  the 
fountains  that  prayers  were  offered,  but  to  the  Fauns  and 
to  the  Naiads  who  presided  over  them. 

The  idolatry  of  India,  which  is  of  a  much  grosser  kind, 
has  for  the  object  of  its  worship  the  material  substance 
itself.  It  is  to  water,  to  fire,  to  the  most  common  house- 
hold implements  ;  in  a  word,  to  everything  which  they 
understand  to  be  useful  or  hurtful,  that  the  Hindus  pay 
direct  worship. 

It  is  true  that  they  admit  another  kind  of  idolatry  which 
is  a  little  more  refined.  There  are  images  of  deities  of  the 
first  rank  which  are  exposed  to  public  veneration  only 
after  a  Brahmin  has  invoked  and  incorporated  in  them 
these  actual  divinities.  In  these  cases,  it  is  really  the 
divinity  that  resides  in  the  idol,  and  not  the  idol  itself, 
that  is  worshipped. 

But  the  one  kind  of  worship  does  not  exclude  the  other  ; 
and  that  which  has  for  its  object  the  actual  substance 
itself  is  the  most  common. 

The  Hindus  hold,  as  an  invariable  principle,  that  every 
object,  animate  or  inanimate,  which  has  the  power  of  doing 
good  or  evil,  should  be  worshipped. 

'  My  god,'  a  respectable  Hindu  said  to  me  one  day,  '  is 
the  headman  amongst  my  field  labourers  ;  for  as  they  work 
under  his  orders,  he  can,  by  using  his  influence,  do  me 
much  good  or  much  evil.' 

I  have  somewhere  read  a  conversation  between  the  wives 
of  the  seven  famous  Bishis,  in  which  they  agreed  in  the 
principle  that  the  chief  god  of  a  woman  is  her  husband, 
by  reason  of  the  good  or  evil  he  can  do  her  ;  and  we  have 
already  seen  that  the  rules  of  conduct  drawn  up  for  Hindu 
ladies  continually  remind  us  of  this  idea.  It  is  this  same 
notion  which  makes  the  Hindus  attach  so  much  importance 
to  the  blessing  or  the  curse  of  persons  reputed  to  be  saints  ; 
it  is  on  the  same  principle  also  that  they  are  so  easily 
persuaded  to  give  the  name  of  god  to  princes  and  great 
personages,  and,  in  short,  to  every  one  from  whom  they 
have  something  to  hope  or  to  fear. 

There  is  one  phrase  which  among  the  civilized  nations 
of  Europe  has  at  all  times  been  a  metaphorical  exaggera- 
tion, but  which  is  taken  literally  in  India.     To  make  a  god 


EARTH,   WATER,    AND    FIRE  549 

of  one's  belly  bears  quite  a  different  meaning  for  a  Brahmin 
and  for  a  European. 

The  rage  for  deifying  everything  has  spread  even  to  the 
mountains  and  to  the  forests.  The  savage  tribes  who 
inhabit  these  places  do  not  worship  any  of  the  gods  of  the 
country  ;  they  have  one  special  deity  of  their  own  :  it  is 
a  big  root,  a  sort  of  potato,  which  grows  abundantly  in 
the  forests,  and  forms  their  principal  staple  of  food.  Know- 
ing nothing  more  useful  than  this  vegetable,  they  make  it 
the  object  of  their  worship.  In  its  presence  they  celebrate 
their  marriages,  and  in  its  name  they  take  their  oaths. 

Probably  the  Trimurti  owed  its  origin  to  this  mode  of 
viewing  objects.  Earth,  water,  and  fire  were  the  types 
of  the  three  divinities  which  compose  it.  The  earth  is  the 
common  mother  of  all  things,  animate  and  inanimate. 
Either  they  spring  from  her  bosom,  or  they  live  upon  her 
productions.  It  is  through  her  that  everything  subsists 
in  nature.  She  has,  therefore,  been  regarded  as  the  divine 
creator,  and  holds  the  first  rank  in  the  opinion  of  the 
Hindus,  who  have  made  her  their  Brahma. 

But  what  could  the  earth  do  without  the  help  of  water  ? 
Without  the  dews  and  the  rains  which  develop  the  seeds 
of  her  fertility  she  would  remain  barren,  and  would  soon 
find  herself  bereft  of  every  living  creature.  It  is  water 
which  gives  life,  preserves,  and  causes  to  grow  everything 
that  has  life  or  vegetates.  It  was,  therefore,  regarded  as 
the  divine  preserver,  that  is  to  say,  Vishnu. 

Fire,  in  penetrating  the  other  two  elements,  communi- 
cates to  them  a  portion  of  its  energy,  develops  their  pro- 
perties, and  brings  everything  in  nature  to  that  state  of 
growth,  maturity,  and  perfection  which  would  never  be 
arrived  at  without  it.  But,  should  it  cease  to  act  upon 
created  things,  every  one  of  them  perishes.  When  it  is 
in  its  free  and  visible  state,  this  active  agent  of  reproduc- 
tion destroys  by  its  irresistible  power  the  bodies  to  whose 
composition  it  had  before  contributed  ;  and  it  is  to  this 
formidable  power  that  it  owed  its  title  of  god-destroyer, 
that  is  to  say,  Siva. 

By  uniting  the  three  elements  in  a  single  body  with  three 
heads  the  founders  of  the  Hindu  theogony  wished  it  to  be 
understood  that  the  harmony  of  these  three  primal  elements 


550  WORSHIP   PAID   TO  WATER 

was  indispensable  to  the  production  and  reproduction  of  all 
secondary  bodies. 

This  is  not  a  theory  of  my  own  invented  merely  for  the 
purpose  of  explaining  the  original  idolatry  of  the  Hindus  ; 
it  is  their  own  peculiar  doctrine,  observed  by  them  in  daily 
practice.  It  is  even  one  of  the  fundamental  tenets  of  the 
religion  of  the  Brahmins.  To  convince  themselves  of  this, 
let  my  readers  reperuse  the  chapter  about  san&hya,  which 
so  formally  enjoins  the  special  and  direct  worship  of  the 
three  elements,  while  the  two  others,  air  and  ether,  are 
almost  forgotten. 

The  Brahmins  offer  worship  and  address  mystical  prayers 
to  the  seven  inferior  worlds,  of  which  the  first  and  the  most 
important  is  the  earth.  '  Glory  to  thee,  0  earth,  mother 
most  great,'  are  the  words  of  the  Yajur-  Veda  ;  and  imme- 
diately after  is  added,  '  Glory  to  thee,  0  fire,  who  art 
god.' 

There  is  no  surer  proof  that  they  attach  to  fire  itself  the 
idea  of  divine  essence  than  their  perpetual  sacrifices  of 
homam  and  of  yagnam,  in  which  no  other  object  of  worship 
than  this  element  is  observable. 

The  divinity  of  water  is  also  incontestably  recognized  as 
an  article  of  their  belief.  The  Brahmins  worship  it  and 
offer  prayers  to  it  when  they  make  their  daily  ablutions. 
It  is  then  that  they  invoke  the  holy  rivers,  among  others 
the  Ganges,  and  all  its  sacred  branches.  Often  too  they 
offer  oblations  to  water  by  casting  into  the  rivers  and 
tanks,  especially  at  the  places  where  they  bathe,  small 
pieces  of  gold  and  silver,  and  sometimes  pearls  and  other 
valuable  jewels. 

Furthermore,  sailors,  fishermen,  and  all  who  frequent  the 
sea,  visit  the  shore  from  time  to  time  to  pay  their  worship 
and  to  offer  up  their  sacrifices  to  it. 

When,  after  a  long  drought,  an  abundant  rain  brings 
hope  to  the  despairing  husbandman  by  filling  the  great 
reservoirs  for  the  irrigation  of  the  rice-fields,  the  inhabitants 
at  once  flock  to  them  and  with  signs  of  joy  exclaim,  '  The 
lady  is  arrived ' ;  and  they  bow  with  their  hands  clasped 
towards  the  water  which  fills  the  reservoirs,  while  he-goats 
or  rams  are  sacrificed  in  its  honour. 

At  the  season  of  the  year  when  the  Cauvery  inundates 


TEMPLES  DEDICATED  TO  THE  ELEMENTS   551 

the  barren  and  scorched  fields  on  its  banks  and  spreads 
freshness  and  fertility  far  and  wide — which  generally  takes 
place  in  the  middle  of  July — the  inhabitants  of  that  part 
of  the  Peninsula  crowd  to  its  banks,  many  of  them  coming 
from  a  great  distance,  in  order  to  congratulate  the  lady.Jthe 
water)  on  her  arrival  and  to  offer  her  sacrifices  of  all  sorts, 
such  as  pieces  of  money,  which  they  throw  to  her  that  she 
may  have  something  to  defray  her  expenses  ;  pieces  of 
linen  to  clothe  herself  ;  jewels  to  adorn  herself  ;  rice,  cakes, 
fruits,  and  other  eatables,  lest  she  should  suffer  from 
hunger  ;  household  utensils  such  as  baskets,  earthen  vessels, 
&c,  in  order  that  she  may  conveniently  cook  and  store  her 
provisions  and  have  everything  which  may  procure  her  an 
easy  subsistence. 

The  homage  which  the  Brahmins  in  the  sandhya  cere- 
monies pay  to  the  water  contained  in  the  copper  vessel,  the 
frequent  performance  of  achamania x  or  purification  by 
water,  and  many  other  similar  acts,  attest  the  reality  of 
the  special  worship  which  they  pay  to  water.  Hence  no 
doubt  arises  the  great  veneration  which  they  have  for 
Vishnu,  who  represents  this  element  in  the  Trimurti  ;  a 
veneration  far  superior  to  that  which  they  show  to  Siva, 
the  representative  of  fire. 

As  far  as  one  can  see,  in  ancient  times  the  elements  had 
temples  specially  dedicated  to  their  worship  ;  but  I  confess 
that  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  any  vestiges  of  such 
buildings  still  remaining.  Nevertheless,  if  we  may  believe 
the  evidence  of  a  Brahmin  who  was  consulted  on  the 
subject  by  Abraham  Rogers,  there  was,  when  this  traveller 
visited  India,  in  a  district  not  far  from  the  Coromandel 
Coast,  a  temple  dedicated  to  the  five  elements.  Be  this  as 
it  may,  however,  one  may  not  unfrequently  see  upon  the 
door  or  in  the  interior  of  the  temples  existing  at  the  present 
day  the  symbols  of  these  elements  represented  either  by 
five  lingams  arranged  in  a  line,  or  by  only  three  which  are 
symbols  of  the  material  Trimurti — earth,  water,  and  fire. 

It  may  be  remarked,  perhaps,  that  the  Hindus  are  not 
the  only  ancient  nation  which  has  adored  the  elements 
without  attaching  to  the  worship  the  idea  of  the  divinities 

1  Described  in  the  chapter  on  sandhya. 


552  SYMBOLISM   OF  THE   TRIMURTI 

who  subsequently  became  identified  with  it.  Most  idola- 
trous nations  have,  I  am  quite  aware,  made  the  elements 
the  actual  objects  of  their  worship.  But  this  confirms 
rather  than  contradicts  the  opinion  that  the  Hindus  gave 
t  hemselves  up  to  this  absurd  material  idolatry,  and  that  they 
invented  their  Trimurti  in  order  to  perpetuate  it  by  symbols. 
For  I  persist  in  my  belief  that  the  three  great  divinities, 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva,  were  originally  nothing  else  but 
the  three  elements  personified. 

The  Trimurti,  as  we  have  seen,  signifies  at  the  same  time 
the  three  bodies  and  the  three  powers.  These  three  bodies, 
symbolical  of  the  thre?  great  agents  of  Nature,  were  at 
first  simply  allegorical,  just  as  are  most  of  the  religious 
and  political  institutions  of  India.  This  decided  taste  for 
allegory,  which  is  characteristic  of  the  founders  of  the 
Hindu  religion  and  polity,  has  proved  the  source  of  many 
errors  in  the  case  of  a  people  who  are  invariably  guided 
simply  by  the  impression  of  their  senses,  and  who,  accus- 
tomed to  judge  things  only  by  their  outward  appearance, 
have  taken  literally  that  which  was  represented  to  them 
under  symbols,  and  have  thus  come  to  adore  the  actual 
image  itself  instead  of  the  reality. 

This  system  of  explanatory  symbolism  has  always  been, 
and  is  even  now,  so  familiar  to  Hindu  writers,  that  they 
often  describe  their  three  great  divinities  by  the  allegorical 
designations  peculiar  to  each.  We  have  seen,  too,  that 
they  recognize  in  men  three  sorts  of  dispositions  or  qualities 
which  they  call  satva,  rajas,  tamas.  Satva  is  the  gentle  and 
insinuating  disposition  ;  rajas,  the  irascible,  furious,  passion- 
ate ;  tamas,  the  dull,  heavy,  and  lethargic. 

They  attribute  one  of  these  qualities  to  each  of  the 
divinities  which  compose  the  Trimurti.  Thus  Vishnu  is 
endowed  with  satva,  Siva  with  rajas,  and  Brahma  with 
tamas.  Again,  these  same  qualities  are  also  applied  to  the 
three  elements.  The  earth,  like  Brahma,  is  heavy  and  in- 
different by  nature ;  the  water,  like  Vishnu,  is  insinuating 
and  penetrating  ;  the  fire,  like  Siva,  is  capable  of  destroying 
everything  by  its  violence. 

The  quality  tamas  is  so  inherent  in  the  earth  that  Hindu 
astronomers  often  confound  the  two.  Thus  in  a  lunar 
eclipse,  when  the  darkness  of  the  earth  intercepts  the  rays 


THE   ELEMENTS   PERSONIFIED  553 

of  the  sun,  they  say  that  the  tamas-bimbam,  or  the  disk 
tamas,  obscures  by  its  shadow  the  disk  of  the  moon. 

The  quality  rajas,  characteristic  of  fire  and  represented 
under  the  form  of  Siva,  is  ascribed  in  a  special  manner  to 
that  deity  by  the  Hindu  poets  ;  and  although  the  name 
of  Siva,  which  is  most  commonly  used,  signifies  joy,  the 
deity  bears  many  other  names  which  seem  to  show  that 
he  is  no  other  than  lire  personified.  Such,  for  instance, 
is  the  name  Jwala  (the  inflamed),  under  which  he  is  well 
known. 

I  shall  here  relate  a  strange  practice  which  seems  to  me 
to  support  the  opinion  I  hold  regarding  the  origin  of  the 
Trimurti.  Sometimes  during  the  periods  of  excessive  heat 
the  Hindus  suppose  that  Siva,  from  whom  it  emanates,  is 
more  than  usually  inflamed.  Consequently,  fearing  lest  he 
should  set  everything  on  fire,  they  place  over  the  head  of 
his  idol  a  vessel  filled  with  water.  In  this  vessel  a  little 
hole  is  pierced,  so  that  the  water  may,  by  falling  on  him 
drop  by  drop,  refresh  him  and  abate  the  burning  heat  that 
consumes  him. 

The  quality  satva,  ascribed  to  Vishnu,  applies  also  to 
water,  which  penetrates  and  insinuates  itself  into  the 
earth,  rendering  it  fertile  ;  for  the  name  of  Vishnu  signifies 
one  who  penetrates  everywhere.  Appu  (water)  is  a  common 
enough  name  for  this  deity  ;  but  the  commonest  of  all  is 
Narayana,  that  is  to  say,  one  who  moves  upon  the  waters. 

Furthermore,  the  idea  that  the  three  principal  divinities 
of  India  are  the  elements  personified  is  admitted  by  a  great 
number  of  Vishnavite  Brahmins,  and  I  am  indebted  to 
some  of  these  for  a  portion  of  the  arguments  on  which 
I  have  based  my  own  view.  They  have  at  the  same  time 
told  me  that  they  themselves  regard  all  that  is  commonly 
related  on  the  frimnrti  as  mere  fables  ;  but  as  the  dis- 
closure of  such  a  sentiment,  which  tends  to  nothing  less 
than  the  undermining  of  one  of  the  principal  foundations 
of  the  popular  religion,  would  stop  the  sources  of  their 
emoluments,  and  would  at  the  same  time  expose  them  to 
public  indignation,  they  are  careful  never  to  publish  their 
private  opinion  on  the  matter. 

This  theory  once  admitted,  it  will  be  easy  to  find  a  very 
clear  and  natural  meaning  for  certain  expressions  contained 

t3 


554         RESEMBLANCE    TO   THE   TRINITY 

in  the  Hindu  books — expressions  which  have  led  many 
authors  to  believe  that  the  people  of  India  possessed  from 
the  earliest  times  some  knowledge  of  the  Trinity.  '  These 
three  gods,'  say  those  books,  '  are  but  one  ;  Siva  is  the 
heart  of  Vishnu,  and  Vishnu  the  heart  of  Brahma  ;  it  is 
one  lamp  with  three  lighted  wicks.'  At  first  sight  these 
expressions  would  appear  to  indicate  one  god  in  three 
persons.  But,  even  granted  it  were  true  that  the  primi- 
tive Hindus  intended  to  transmit  to  their  posterity  the 
idea  of  the  Trinity  under  the  form  and  attributes  of  the 
Trimurti,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  result  has  been 
a  sadly  distorted  presentation  of  this  great  mystery.  On 
the  other  hand,  I  believe  there  is  another  explanation 
which  is  more  simple  and  more  reasonable.  I  cannot 
indeed  doubt  that  the  Hindu  writers,  in  using  the  expres- 
sions just  quoted,  and  many  others  of  the  same  kind, 
wished  them  to  be  understood  to  mean  that  the  co-opera- 
tion of  the  three  elements  in  question  was  indispensable 
for  the  production  and  reproduction  of  everything  that 
exists  in  nature,  a  co-operation  so  necessary  that  the  absence 
of  one  would  reduce  the  others  to  a  state  of  complete  inert- 
ness and  impotence. 

The  early  Fathers  of  the  Christian  Church,  such  as 
St.  Justin,  St.  Clement,  Theodoret,  St.  Augustine,  and 
others,  proved  the  truth  of  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity  to 
the  heathens  of  their  time  by  the  authority  of  the  ancient 
Greek  philosophers,  and  particularly  by  that  of  Plato  and 
his  principal  disciples,  such  as  Plotinus  and  Porphyry. 
They  gained  at  that  time  considerable  advantage  by  laying 
stress  on  those  authorities  in  whose  works  were  to  be  found 
the  words  Father,  Son,  Word,  Spirit ;  the  Father  compre- 
hending perfection,  the  Son  perfectly  resembling  the  Father, 
and  the  Word  by  whom  all  things  were  created  ;  these  three 
Persons  being  but  one  God.  Such  expressions  were  not 
the  chance  creations  of  those  philosophers  ;  they  formed 
the  foundation  of  the  system  of  Plato,  who  did  not,  how- 
ever, venture  to  teach  their  meaning  to  a  people  steeped  in 
the  follies  of  polytheism,  lest  he  should  be  treated  in  the 
same  manner  as  his  master  Socrates. 

Nevertheless,  I  doubt  whether  the  illustrious  Fathers  of 
the  Christian  Church  would  have  laid  so  much  stress  upon 


ETHER   PERSONIFIED   AS   INDRA  555 

such  authorities  had  they  not  found  in  the  writings  of  these 
Platonic  philosophers  expressions  more  precise,  less  in- 
consistent, and  less  tainted  with  materialism  than  those  to 
be  found  in  the  Hindu  books  relating  to  Trimurti. 

My  readers  have,  no  doubt,  been  astonished  to  find  that 
air,  the  element  which  some  ancient  Greek  philosophers 
considered  to  be  the  beginning  and  ending  of  everything 
created,  has  so  far  not  figured  in  this  discussion.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  Hindus  go  farther  than  the  Greeks. 
They  recognize  five  elements,  and  the  air  is  divided  by  them 
into  ether  and  wind,  or,  properly  speaking,  air,  which  is 
personified  under  the  name  of  Indra,  the  chief  of  the 
inferior  deities  and  the  king  of  the  ethereal  regions,  where 
he  dwells.  The  word  Indra  signifies  the  air  ;  in  his  domains 
the  winds  blow  according  to  his  commands.  In  the  Indra- 
purana  we  find  these  words  :  '  Indra  is  nothing  else  than 
the  wind,  and  the  wind  is  nothing  else  than  Indra.'  The 
wind  by  condensing  the  clouds  produces  lightning,  which 
is  the  weapon  of  this  deity.  He  launches  it  against  the 
giants,  with  whom  he  is  often  at  war  ;  and  he  is  sometimes 
victorious,  sometimes  vanquished.  The  clouds,  whose 
various  forms  represent  the  giants,  sometimes  stop  the 
wind  ;  sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  the  latter  disperses 
the  clouds  and  rids  the  air  of  them. 

This  taste  for  allegory,  which  is  inherent  amongst  all 
people  in  rudimentary  stages  of  civilization,  has  become  in 
the  case  of  the  Hindus  an  inexhaustible  source  of  errors 
in  matters  of  religion.  In  the  earlier  ages  would-be  com- 
mentators, by  interpreting  in  their  own  way  ideas  whose 
original  meaning  had  become  obscured  by  lapse  of  time, 
confused  everything  instead  of  making  everything  clear  ; 
and  later  their  successors,  wearied  by  attempts  to  explain 
what  seemed  to  them  inexplicable,  stuck  to  the  literal 
meaning,  and  thus  revived  the  extravagant  and  barbarous 
idolatry  which  forms  the  religious  system  of  the  modern 
Hindus. 


556 


CHAPTER   II 

Metempsychosis. — Explanation  of  this  Religious  Doctrine. — Penalties 
for  Different  Sins. — The  Hindus  as  Authors  of  the  Doctrine  of 
Metempsychosis. — Difference  between  them  and  the  Greeks  in  this 
Respect. — Naraka,  or  Hell ;  Punishments  endured  there. — Abodes 
of  Bliss. 

There  are  few  Hindu  books  in  which  the  doctrine  of 
metempsychosis  is  not  explained  and  expounded.  This 
doctrine  is,  as  is  generally  known,  one  of  the  fundamental 
principles  of  the  Hindu  religion.  The  following  is  an 
extract  from  the  Bhagavata  : — ■  Vishnu,  the  Supreme  Being, 
before  creating  anything  which  now  exists,  began  by  creat- 
ing souls  \  which  at  first  animated  bodies  of  fantastic 
shapes.  During  their  union  with  these  bodies  they  either 
committed  sin  or  practised  virtue.  After  a  long  abode  in 
these  provisional  dwelling-places,  they  were  withdrawn  and 
summoned  before  the  tribunal  of  Yama,  who  judges  the 
dead.  This  divinity  admitted  into  Swarga  (paradise)  those 
souls  which  had  led  virtuous  lives  ;  and  he  shut  up  in 
Naraka  (hell)  those  souls  which  had  given  themselves  up 
to  sin.  Souls  which  had  been  partly  virtuous  and  partly 
sinful  were  sent  to  earth  to  animate  other  bodies,  and  so 
to  endure  proportionately  the  pain  due  for  their  sins  and 
to  receive  the  reward  of  their  virtues.  Thus  every  new 
birth,  whether  happy  or  unhappy,  is  the  result  of  deeds 
practised  in  previous  generations,  and  is  either  the  reward 
or  punishment  for  them.  We  may  thus  judge  by  the  con- 
dition of  a  person  in  an  existing  generation  what  he  has 
been  in  the  previous  one. 

'  Nevertheless,  those  who  die  in  holiness  are  no  longer 
exposed  to  new  births  ;  they  go  straight  to  Swarga. 

1  The  souls  of  men,  after  death,  go  to  animate  other 
bodies.  Sometimes  it  is  the  body  of  an  insect,  of  a  reptile, 
of  a  bird,  or  of  a  quadruped,  and  sometimes  it  is  the  body 

1  The  philosophers  of  the  School  of  Pythagoras  held  that  these  souls 
were  not  only  immortal  but  eternal ;  that  is  to  say,  they  existed  before 
they  entered  the  bodies  of  living  creatures.  The  soul,  they  said,  cannot 
be  born  of  anything  mortal ;  otherwise  all  things  might  become  immortal. 
Nor  can  the  soul  be  reborn  of  anything  immortal,  because  that  which  is 
immortal  cannot  be  reproduced.  They  held,  therefore,  that  the  soul  is 
part  of  God  Himself.— Dubois. 


DOCTRINE  OF  METEMPSYCHOSIS  557 

of  another  man.  Nevertheless,  the  most  perfect  are  ad- 
mitted into  Swarga,  and  the  most  guilty  are  plunged  into 
Naraka.  It  is  solely  according  to  their  good  or  bad  deeds 
that  their  transmigration,  advantageous  or  otherwise,  is 
determined  ;  and  the  good  or  evil  they  will  have  to  ex- 
perience in  the  various  states  through  which  they  pass  is 
determined  in  the  same  manner. 

'  The  distinctions  and  differences  which  are  to  be  observed 
amongst  mankind  must  be  attributed  to  the  same  causes. 
Some  are  rich,  and  others  poor  ;  some  are  weakly,  others 
enjoy  good  health  ;  some  are  handsome,  others  ugly  ; 
some  are  of  low  birth,  others  highly  born  ;  some  are  happy, 
others  unhappy.  These  differences  are  not  the  result  of 
mere  chance,  but  of  goodness  or  wickedness,  as  the  case 
may  be,  in  preceding  existences. 

'  Man  is  the  highest  form  of  all  the  creatures  on  earth. 
To  be  born  a  man,  in  whatever  caste  it  may  be,  always 
presupposes  a  certain  degree  of  merit. 

'  Among  men  the  Brahmins  hold  the  first  rank.  The 
honour  of  giving  a  soul  to  a  Brahmin  is  the  reward  only  of 
the  accumulated  merits  of  many  previous  generations. 

'  To  practise  virtue  in  the  hope  of  some  reward  is  always 
a  good  thing  ;  but  to  practise  it  with  entire  disinterested- 
ness and  without  expecting  any  return  or  recompense,  this 
is  the  most  perfect.  Those  who  thus  practise  it  are  certain 
of  the  happiness  of  Swarga,  and  are  no  more  subject  to 
change. 

'  This  then  is  the  fruit  of  our  deeds.  This  is  the  reason 
why  the  same  soul  lives  sometimes  in  the  body  of  a  man, 
at  other  times  in  that  of  an  animal.  This  is  why  it  is  at 
one  time  happy,  at  another  time  unhappy,  in  this  world 
and  in  the  other.' 

I  will  not  follow  the  author  in  his  detailed  enumeration 
of  the  penalties  which  are  reserved  for  various  sins.  I  shall 
confine  myself  to  the  most  important  of  them. 

'  He  who  kills  the  cow  of  a  Brahmin  will  go  after  death 
to  hell,  where  he  will  for  ever  be  the  prey  of  serpents, 
and  tormented  by  hunger  and  thirst.  After  thousands  of 
years  of  horrible  sufferings  he  will  return  to  the  world  to 
animate  the  body  of  a  cow,  and  will  remain  in  this  state 
as  many  years  as  the  cow  has  hairs  on  its  body.     At  length 


558        PENALTIES   FOR    DIFFERENT   SINS 

lie  will  be  born  a  Pariah,  and  will  be  afflicted  with  leprosy 
for  a  period  of  ten  thousand  years. 

'  The  murder  of  a  Brahmin,  for  any  cause  whatsoever,  is 
a  sin  four  times  more  heinous  than  the  former.  Whoever 
is  guilty  of  it  will  be  condemned  at  his  death  to  take  the 
form  of  one  of  those  insects  which  feed  on  filth.  Being 
reborn  long  afterwards  a  Pariah,  he  will  belong  to  this 
caste,  and  will  be  blind  for  more  than  four  times  as  many 
years  as  there  are  hairs  on  the  body  of  a  cow.  He  can, 
nevertheless,  expiate  his  crime  by  feeding  forty  thousand 
Brahmins. 

'  If  a  Brahmin  kills  a  Sudra,  it  will  suffice  to  efface  the 
sin  altogether  if  he  recites  the  gayatri  a  hundred  times. 

1  He  who  kills  an  insect  will  himself  become  an  insect 
after  death.  Then  he  will  be  reborn  a  Sudra,  but  he  will 
be  subject  to  all  sorts  of  infirmities. 

'  Every  Brahmin  who  cooks  for  a  Sudra  or  who  travels 
mounted  on  an  ox  will  go  to  hell  after  death.  He  will  be 
plunged  there  into  boiling  oil  and  be  bitten  continuously  by 
venomous  snakes.  He  will  be  reborn  afterwards  under  the 
form  of  one  of  those  birds  of  prey  which  devour  corpses, 
and  will  remain  a  thousand  years  under  this  form,  and  also 
a  hundred  years  under  the  form  of  a  dog. 

'  Whoever  fells  a  sacred  fig-tree  commits  a  crime  four 
times  greater; than  the  murder  of  a  Brahmin,  and  will  be 
exposed  after  his  death  to  penalties  proportionate  to  a  sin 
so  heinous.' 

Several  modern  philosophers  have  maintained  that 
Pythagoras  attached  only  an  allegorical  sense  to  the  doc- 
trine of  metempsychosis.  The  most  general  opinion  is 
that  he  taught  it  merely  as  an  abstract  religious  doctrine. 
He  is  said  to  have  borrowed  it  from  the  Egyptians,  who, 
if  we  are  to  believe  Herodotus,  were  its  inventors.  But 
the  communications  between  Pythagoras  and  the  Brahmins 
and  Gymnosophists  of  India  lead  one  to  suppose  with 
quite  as  much  reason  that  he  borrowed  it  from  these  Indian 
philosophers,  for  we  know  that  the  Hindus  have  never 
copied  anything  from  contemporaneous  nations.  If  it  be 
true  that  at  the  time  of  the  travels  of  Pythagoras  the 
doctrine  of  metempsychosis  was  professed  by  the  Egyptians, 
they  had  probably  taken  their  ideas  from  the  same  sources 


THE    METAPHYSICS   OF   PYTHAGORAS      559 

as  the  people  of  India,  if  indeed  they  had  not  actually 
borrowed  them  from  the  latter.  It  is  certain,  furthermore, 
that  it  is  not  in  this  alone  that  the  metaphysics  of  Pytha- 
goras present  some  features  of  resemblance  to  those  of  the 
Gymnosophists.  Again,  we  know  that  Pythagoras  travelled 
for  his  own  instruction,  and  it  has  never  been  contended 
that  he  taught  anything  to  the  peoples  of  Asia  whom  he 
visited.  Besides,  various  Hindu  books,  which  undoubtedly 
existed  before  the  time  of  Pythagoras,  are  filled  with  this 
doctrine  of  metempsychosis  and  treat  of  it  as  an  article  of 
their  primitive  faith,  which  had  been  well  established  before 
his  time.  Anyhow,  whoever  the  originator  of  it  may  be,  it 
is  none  the  less  wonderful  that  such  a  chimerical  system 
was  not  only  acknowledged  in  almost  the  whole  of  Asia, 
but  has  even  found  credence  in  various  other  parts  of  the 
world.  It  is  well  known  that  Caesar  found  it  in  full  force 
amongst  the  Gauls  *  ;  and  one  is  astonished  to  find  that 
enlightened  men  like  Socrates  and  Plato  made  these  fan- 
tastic theories  the  object  of  their  serious  speculations. 
Have  we  not  seen  modern  writers,  too,  contending  that 
the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis  is  a  masterpiece  of  genius  ? 
They  have  indeed  maintained  that  Aristotle  admitted  the 
transmigration  of  the  soul  of  one  man  into  another,  though 
it  is  proved  that  he  rejected  as  absurd  the  idea  of  the 
transmigration  of  human  souls  into  the  bodies  of  beasts. 

In  consequence  of  his  belief  Pythagoras  deprecated  the 
eating  of  the  flesh  of  any  living  creature,  lest  perchance 
a  son  might  feed  on  the  body  of  his  father  and  thus  repeat 
the  horrible  feast  of  Thyestes.  The  most  zealous  of  his 
disciples  ate  only  vegetables ;  and  they  even  excluded 
beans  from  their  meals.  In  the  same  way  the  Brahmins 
still  refuse  to  eat  onions,  mushrooms,  and  certain  other 
vegetables.  Still,  the  example  of  these  more  rigorous 
disciples  of  Pythagoras  found  few  imitators  among  the 
rest. 

Either  Pythagoras  conceived  a  false  impression  of  the 

1  '  Druides  in  primis  hoc  volnnt  persuadere,  non  interire  animas  sed 
ab  aliis  post  mortem  transire  ad  alios  ;  atque  hoc  maxime  ad  virtutem 
excitari  putant,  metu  mortis  neglecto  '  (De  Bello  Gallico,  vi.  14).  Most 
heretics  of  the  primitive  Church,  to  say  nothing  of  the  Jews  of  later 
times,  believed  in  this  monstrous  superstition,  which  was  recognized 
also  by  Origen. — Dubois. 


560  REPUGNANCE   TO    ANIMAL   FOOD 

motives  of  the  abstinence  which  lie  had  seen  practised  by 
the  Hindus,  or  else  he  wished  to  excel  them  and  to  exag- 
gerate their  system  according  to  his  own  manner. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  everything  induces  us  to  believe 
that  the  Hindus,  though  foolish  enough  in  many  respects, 
are  not  so  foolish  as  to  believe,  when  they  show  repugnance 
to  feeding  on  anything  which  has  had  life,  that  they  might 
be  swallowing  the  limbs  of  their  ancestors.  In  proof  of 
this  I  may  remark  that  the  Lingayats,  that  is  to  say,  the 
followers  of  Siva,  reject  in  toto  the  doctrine  of  metem- 
psychosis, yet  they  abstain  from  all  animal  food  more 
religiously  perhaps  than  the  Brahmins  themselves. 

The  fear  of  pollution  and  the  horror  of  murder  are  in 
fact  the  principal  causes  of  the  antipathy  of  Hindus  to  this 
kind  of  food.  Their  primitive  teachers,  as  I  have  already 
remarked,  simply  had  in  view,  when  counselling  such 
abstinence,  the  preservation  of  useful  animals,  and  also 
the  preservation  of  health.  It  was  superstition,  impetuous 
as  a  flood,  that  always  tended  to  overflow  the  banks  of 
reason. 

We  have  already  seen  how  susceptible  and  fastidious 
a  respectable  Hindu  is  in  the  matter  of  pollution.  How 
then  could  a  meat  diet  agree  with  his  principles  in  this 
respect  ?  The  putrefaction  of  animals,  which  in  a  hot 
country  manifests  itself  so  quickly  and  in  so  disagreeable 
a  manner  ;  the  comparative  facility,  on  the  other  hand, 
with  which  products  of  the  earth  and  other  inorganic  sub- 
stances can  be  kept  from  the  putrefying  influence  of  the 
sun  ;  the  horror,  so  strongly  felt,  of  feeding  on  the  remains 
of  a  dead  body  ;  and  a  number  of  other  prejudices  which 
the  leaders  of  the  Hindu  religion  have  been  interested  in 
fostering,  are  reasons  sufficiently  powerful  to  act  upon 
minds  prepared  for  them  by  custom  and  education.  Let 
us  add  to  these  considerations  the  horror  inspired  by 
murder  among  Hindus  in  general — a  horror  which  is  so 
great  in  the  case  of  many  that  it  induces  them  to  spare 
even  the  lives  of  filthy  and  troublesome  insects  ;  for  the 
Brahmins  are  persuaded  that  there  is  no  difference  between 
the  souls  of  men  and  those  of  the  vilest  of  living  things. 
Hence  they  hold  that  there  is,  morally  speaking,  as  much 
crime  in  crushing  an  ant  as  in  committing  a  murder. 


THE   ORIGIN   OF   METEMPSYCHOSIS         563 

The  majority  of  the  Sudras  feel  no  scruples,  it  is  true,  in 
killing  animals  and  eating  their  flesh,  the  cow  alone  ex- 
cepted. They  even  include  in  their  ranks  butchers  and 
professional  hunters,  such  as  the  Boyas  or  Baiders  who 
inhabit  the  jungles  and  mountains  and  live  on  the  products 
of  the  chase.  But  it  is  also  proper  to  remark  that  it  is 
this  violation  of  a  respected  usage  which  in  a  great  measure 
brings  upon  them  the  contempt  of  the  higher  castes. 

At  first  the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis  appears  to  have 
been  limited  to  the  successive  transmigrations  of  souls  into 
various  human  bodies.  Later  on,  however,  it  received 
a  new  expansion,  viz.  that  the  souls  could  migrate  to  the 
bodies  of  beasts  and  to  all  material  objects.  The  Platonic 
philosophers,  who  were  ridiculed  for  assuming  that  the 
soul  of  a  king  might  enter  the  body  of  a  monkey,  or  that 
of  a  queen  the  body  of  a  grasshopper,  tried  to  evade  the 
difficulty  by  reducing  the  doctrine  to  its  primitive  sim- 
plicity, that  is  to  say,  by  limiting  the  transmigration  of 
the  souls  of  men  to  human  bodies  and  those  of  beasts  to 
their  own  species.  Plotinus  and  Porphyry  even  ventured 
to  assert  that  it  was  thus  that  their  master  had  intended 
it  to  be  understood.  But  their  retractation  was  too  late. 
It  is  always  a  mistake  to  endeavour  to  restore  a  building 
which  is  not  solid  in  its  foundations.  The  Hindus,  who 
are  more  persevering  and  less  exposed  to  the  contradictions 
of  enlightened  men,  have  religiously  preserved  their  own 
doctrine  of  metempsychosis  in  all  its  entirety. 

After  all,  the  doctrine  seems  to  have  been  invented 
merely  to  justify,  under  a  gross  allegory,  the  ways  of  the 
Supreme  Being  in  the  dispensation  of  rewards  and  punish- 
ments. The  first  doctrinal  article  admitted  by  the  Hindus 
is  common  to  the  Pythagoreans  ;  namely,  that  sin  ought 
to  be  punished  and  virtue  rewarded.  This  of  course  does 
not  usually  take  place  in  the  present  life,  since  very  often 
vice  is  triumphant  and  virtue  crushed.  In  order  to  remedy 
this  the  gods,  who  hold  the  destinies  of  men  in  their  hands, 
have  decreed  that  he  who  during  his  lifetime  has  been  an 
unbeliever,  a  thief,  a  murderer,  &c,  shall  be  born  again 
a  creeping  insect,  a  wild  animal,  an  outcaste,  blind,  poor,  &c. 

Their  notions  of  pollution  pervade  everything  ;  so  the 
Hindus  believe  that  a  soul  after  death  retains  some  of  the 


562  THE   SOUL'S   TRANSMIGRATIONS 

stains  and  impurities  contracted  in  preceding  generations, 
just  as  an  earthen  vessel  retains  for  a  long  time  the  odour 
of  any  strong  liquor  which  it  has  contained.  This  article 
of  belief  is  illustrated  by  the  example  of  a  woman  who  had 
been  a  fish  in  an  earlier  generation,  and  who,  though  really 
a  woman  in  the  present,  still  retained,  it  is  said,  an  odour 
which  betrayed  her  first  origin.  It  is  necessary  therefore 
that  a  long  succession  of  generations  should  cleanse  the  soul 
from  all  the  impurities  which  have  polluted  it  in  generations 
preceding — impurities  which  will  increase  indefinitely  if 
people  continue  to  lead  dissolute  lives. 

When  the  Hindus  are  asked  what  is  the  limit  of  these 
transmigrations,  they  are  unable  to  give  any  positive 
answer.  Nevertheless  their  sacred  books  affirm  that  a 
soul  only  succeeds  in  getting  rid  of  continual  transforma- 
tions when  by  long  penance  and  contemplation  it  has 
raised  itself  to  that  high  degree  of  wisdom  and  perfection 
which  identifies  it  with  the  Supreme  Being,  that  is,  with 
Parabrahma.  Before  reaching  such  sublime  heights,  it 
must  pass  through  all  the  trials  and  temptations  to  which 
human  weakness  has  been  condemned,  and  must  acquire 
by  its  own  experience  a  complete  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil.  It  begins  its  transmigrations  under  the  form  of  the 
vilest  insects,  and  rises  little  by  little  to  the  condition  of 
man,  in  which  state  the  spark  of  wisdom  concealed  in  it, 
after  having  remained  stationary  for  millions  of  years,  is 
at  length  developed  and  imperceptibly  leads  to  that  state 
of  perfection  and  purity  which  puts  an  end  to  changeful 
existence.  In  not  assigning  definite  periods  to  each  trans- 
migration of  the  soul  the  Hindu  philosophers  seem  to  be 
wiser  than  the  followers  of  Plato,  who,  with  absurd  pre- 
sumption, have  seen  fit  to  assign  fixed  and  definite  periods 
— in  some  cases  three  thousand,  and  in  others  ten  thousand 
years.  Further,  according  to  the  latter,  the  transmigra- 
tion is  not  left  to  chance  ;  each  soul  has  its  choice  of  abode 
according  to  the  inclinations  of  the  man  in  whose  body  it 
has  sojourned.  Thus  the  soul  of  Agamemnon  passed  into 
the  body  of  an  eagle  ;  that  of  Orpheus  animated  a  swan  ; 
that  of  Ajax,  a  lion  ;  that  of  Thersites,  an  ape,  &c. 

All  this  is  simply  ridiculous.  But  the  stumbling-block  of 
the  system  is  recollection  of  the  past.     Since  the  body  is 


THE   RIVER    LETHE  563 

only  a  prison,  a  shell,  how  is  it  that  the  soul,  as  soon  as  it 
has  quitted  its  abode,  loses  all  remembrance  of  what  has 
befallen  it  ?  Pythagoras,  it  is  true,  used  to  relate  to  his 
disciples  what  he  had  successively  been  since  the  siege  of 
Troy  l.  But  the  merest  caviller  among  them  might  have 
offered  the  following  objection  :  '  Since  you  so  well  re- 
member what  you  have  been  before  your  present  actual 
existence,  why  do  I  not  remember  in  the  same  manner  \  ' 
Pythagoras  would  no  doubt  have  answered  just  as  the 
Hindus  answer,  namely,  that  the  gift  of  remembrance  is 
granted  only  to  certain  privileged  souls,  and  that  they 
obtain  it  by  reciting  certain  appropriate  mantrams.  Un- 
fortunately, these  mantrams  are  not  unlike  the  waters  of 
the  Fountain  of  Youth,  of  which  every  one  boasts  to  be  the 
owner,  but  the  whereabouts  of  which  nobody  knows.  Plato, 
who  was  too  enlightened  not  to  recognize  this  weak  side 
of  the  system,  invented  the  river  Lethe.  The  souls  were 
obliged  to  drink  its  waters  before  returning  to  the  world, 
and  thereby  entirely  forgot  the  past.  The  invention  of 
this  fiction  required  neither  ingenuity  nor  wit.  The  Hindus 
cut  the  knot  more  freely.  They  say  that  the  act  of  regenera- 
tion suffices  to  make  one  forget  all  that  has  been  seen  or 
done  before.  A  child  under  two  or  three  years  of  age 
does  not  remember  one  day  what  he  did  the  day  before  ; 
still  more  therefore  will  he  forget  what  he  was  and  what  he 
did  before  his  new  birth. 

This  explanation  is  at  least  more  simple  than  that  of 
Plato,  if  it  is  not  equally  ingenious. 

Naraka,  or  Hell. 

Through  the  tissue  of  vain  fancies  which  the  Hindus 
have  woven  over  their  system  of  metempsychosis,  osten- 
sibly to  explain  it  but  in  practice  to  obscure  it,  we  may 
catch  a  few  faint  gleams  of  the  true  religion,  the  principles 
of  which  were  inculcated  by  the  patriarchs  of  old.  Apart 
from  the  rewards  and  punishments  which  they  regard  as 
the  due  retribution  in  this  world  of  the  good  or  evil  which 
a  man  has  done  in  a  preceding  generation,  it  is  certain 
that  they  acknowledge  a  future  life,  and  a  Supreme  Being, 

1  See  Ovid's  Metam.  xv.  3. 


564  NARAKA,    OR    HELL 

who  is  the  rewarder  of  the  good  and  the  terror  of  the 
wicked.  In  a  word,  they  recognize  a  paradise  and  a 
hell. 

But  how  grievously  have  these  sacred  truths  been  dis- 
torted in  the  mouths  of  these  ministers  of  idolatry  and 
falsehood  !  It  is  difficult  to  discover  a  single  trace  of  such 
fundamental  truths  amid  the  mass  of  extravagant  fables 
under  which  superstition  has  concealed  them. 

The  Hindus  agree  that  a  place  of  punishment  is  set 
apart  for  those  souls  which  have  given  themselves  up 
entirely  to  sin  during  their  life  on  earth.  This  they  call 
Naraka  or  Patala.  It  is  divided  into  seven  principal 
sections,  destined  to  contain  the  different  kinds  of  sinful 
souls ;  and  here  they  undergo  torments  more  or  less 
severe,  according  to  the  gravity  of  their  crimes. 

Yama,  the  judge  of  the  dead,  is  the  king  of  hell.  He  has 
servants  to  carry  out  his  decrees,  who  are  charged  with 
tormenting  the  inhabitants  of  Naraka.  His  emissaries  are 
constantly  on  the  watch  throughout  the  world.  They 
await  the  moment  of  death,  and  then  arrest  the  dead  and 
bring  them  before  Yama's  tribunal.  Yama  consults  his 
records,  kept  by  many  scribes  working  under  his  orders, 
and  containing  an  exact  account  of  all  the  good  and  evil 
which  is  done  on  earth.  According  to  the  report  submitted 
to  him,  this  sovereign  judge  pronounces  the  fate  of  the 
souls  which  appear  before  him  for  judgement,  and  awards 
punishments  proportionate  to  their  guilt. 

Yama,  however,  is  not  the  only  deity  possessing  agents 
on  earth  for  seizing  upon  the  souls  of  the  dead.  Vishnu 
and  Siva  have  also  their  agents,  who  know  perfectly  well 
the  devotees  of  their  respective  patrons.  When  such  souls 
die  the  emissaries  of  the  two  gods  contend  for  them  with 
Yama,  and  the  result  is  a  keen  conflict  and  often  a  bloody 
battle.  The  special  devotion  to  Siva  or  to  Vishnu,  however 
lukewarm  it  may  have  been,  possesses  so  much  merit  that 
the  emissaries  of  the  two  gods  usually  gain  the  victory  over 
those  of  Yama. 

As  for  the  torments  of  Naraka,  the  punishments  which 
the  wicked  have  to  endure  there  are  truly  terrible.  I  will 
here  give  an  abstract  of  what  the  Padma-purana  savs 
of  it  :— 


TORMENTS  OF  THE  DAMNED     565 

They  are  buried  there  in  eternal  darkness  :  only  groans 
and  frightful  lamentations  are  heard  ;  the  sharpest  pains 
that  steel  and  fire  can  cause  are  inflicted  without  respite. 
There  are  punishments  fitted  to  each  kind  of  sin,  to  each 
sense,  to  each  member  of  the  body.  Fire,  steel,  serpents, 
venomous  insects,  savage  beasts,  birds  of  prey,  gall,  poison, 
stenches  ;  in  a  word,  everything  possible  is  employed  to 
torment  the  damned.  Some  have  a  cord  run  through  their 
nostrils,  by  which  they  are  for  ever  dragged  over  the  edges 
of  extremely  sharp  knives  ;  others  are  condemned  to  pass 
through  the  eye  of  a  needle  ;  others  are  placed  between 
two  flat  rocks,  which  meet,  and  crush  without  killing  them  ; 
others  have  their  eyes  pecked  incessantly  by  famished 
vultures  ;  while  millions  of  them  continually  swim  and 
paddle  in  a  pool  filled  with  the  urine  of  dogs  or  with  the 
mucus  from  men's  nostrils,  &c. 

The  damned  do  not  succumb  under  these  terrible  penal- 
ties, but  rend  the  air  continually  with  their  screams  and 
groans,  which  echo  throughout  the  whole  abyss  of  hell 
and  add  still  greater  horror  to  this  frightful  dwelling- 
place. 

The  pains  of  hell  do  not  endure  for  ever  ;  they  last  pro- 
portionately to  the  gravity  of  the  crimes  committed.  The 
Hindu  sacred  writers  say  nothing  of  eternal  punishment. 
At  the  end  of  every  yxiga,  they  say,  there  takes  place  a 
universal  revolution — a  total  change  in  nature.  When  the 
Kali-yuga,  in  which  we  now  live,  has  filled  its  allotted  span, 
all  souls  will  return  to  the  divine  essence  from  which  they 
were  originally  separated,  and,  the  world  having  come  to 
an  end,  the  sufferings  of  the  damned  will  cease  also.  I  have 
before  mentioned  how  many  years  of  the  Kali-yuga  have 
already  elapsed,  and  how  many  millions  of  years  it  has 
still  to  run. 

When  the  souls  in  hell  have  expiated  their  sins,  they  are 
sent  back  to  the  earth  in  order  to  undergo  new  transmigra- 
tions. Their  return  to  the  world  always  takes  place  under 
the  form  of  some  vile  animal;  and  proceeding  from  one 
metamorphosis  to  another,  after  millions  of  years  they  are 
able  to  acquire  the  degree  of  virtue  and  perfection  necessary 
to  admit  of  their  being  again  united  inseparably  with  the 
Supreme  Being,  the  Universal  Soul  of  the  world. 


566 


The  Abodes  of  Bliss. 

The  Hindus  recognize  several  Abodes  of  Bliss  for  the 
souls  of  those  who  have  expiated  their  sins  by  repeated 
transmigrations  and  by  the  practice  of  virtue.  There  are 
four  principal  abodes  :  The  first  is  Swarga,  where  Indra 
the  divinity  presides,  and  where  all  virtuous  souls,  without 
distinction  of  caste  or  sex,  are  to  be  found. 

The  second  is  Vaikuntha,  the  paradise  of  Vishnu,  where 
dwell  his  particular  followers,  Brahmins  and  others. 

The  third  is  Kailasa,  the  paradise  of  Siva,  which  is 
reserved  for  the  devout  worshippers  of  the  lingam. 

The  fourth  is  Sattya-loka  (the  Place  of  Truth),  the  para- 
dise of  Brahma,  where  only  virtuous  Brahmins  have  the 
right  to  enter. 

The  pleasures  enjoyed  in  these  several  abodes  are  all 
corporal  and  sensual. 

The  souls  sojourning  in  them,  having  been  indulged  for 
periods  of  time  more  or  less  considerable  according  to  their 
respective  merits,  are  obliged  to  return  to  the  earth,  there 
to  begin  their  transmigrations  anew.  This  takes  place 
until  the  soul  is  perfectly  purified — a  consummation,  as 
we  have  seen,  which  is  not  the  affair  of  a  few  days.  How- 
ever, with  perseverance  they  eventually  attain  it.  When 
a  soul,  by  virtue  and  penances,  has  become  as  pure  as 
gold  and  has  freed  itself  entirely  from  the  allurements  of 
this  world,  it  is  re-united  with  Parabrahma,  with  God, 
with  the  Universal  Soul,  just  as  a  drop  of  water  returns  to 
the  sea  from  whence  it  came.  This  is  the  Supreme  Happi- 
ness, to  which  the  Hindus  give  the  names  of  Moksham 
(Deliverance)  and  Mukti  (the  Last  End). 

Thus  idolatry,  whatever  tendency  it  may  have  to  corrupt 
all  things,  has  at  least  respected  some  of  the  fundamental 
truths  graven  on  the  hearts  of  men,  the  knowledge  of 
which  is  indispensable  to  the  stability  of  all  civilized 
society.  The  people  of  India,  sunk  from  time  immemorial 
in  the  darkness  of  error  by  reason  of  the  avarice  and  ambi- 
tion of  their  religious  teachers,  still  preserve  some  positive 
ideas  of  a  Supreme  Being,  and  foresee  rightly  enough  the 
immortality  of  the  soul,  and  the  necessity  and  existence  of 


SACRED  TRUTHS   IMPERISHABLE  567 

another  life  in  which  the  good  shall  be  rewarded  and  the 
wicked  punished. 

What  other  conclusion  can  we  draw  from  this  than  that 
such  sacred  truths  will  never  perish  from  off  the  earth  ? 
The  atheist  and  the  materialist  may  heap  up  sophistry  on 
sophistry  in  order  to  obscure  these  truths  and  conceal  them 
from  the  eyes  of  nations  ;  but  their  efforts  are  in  vain. 
Graven  on  the  hearts  of  men  in  indelible  characters  by  the 
hand  of  the  Almighty  Himself,  these  truths  must  continue 
to  grow  and  to  bear  fruit  so  long  as  there  are  reasonable 
creatures  and  civilized  peoples  in  the  world. 

CHAPTER  III 

Hindu  Feasts. — The  New- Year  Feast. — The  Feast  of  the  Household 
Gods. — Commemoration  of  the  Dead. — Feast  of  the  Schools. — 
Feasts  in  Honour  of  Serpents. — Military  Feasts. — The  Feast  of 
Lamps. — Sacrifices  to  Plants. — The  Feast  of  the  Lingayats. — The 
Pongul  Ceremonies. — General  Remarks. 

Each  district  and  each  temple  of  the  least  importance 
has  its  own  particular  feasts,  recurring  at  intervals  during 
the  course  of  the  year  ;  and  besides  these  local  feasts 
there  are  many  others  that  are  generally  observed  every- 
where, taking  place  at  fixed  periods.  Feast-days  are  given 
up  to  rejoicings  and  diversions  of  all  kinds  ;  work  is  entirely 
suspended  ;  relatives  and  friends  meet  together  and  feast 
each  other  in  turn  ;  the  houses  are  decorated,  the  best 
jewels  and  apparel  are  worn,  and  the  time  is  spent  in 
games,  which  for  the  most  part  are  very  artless  and  inno- 
cent. Family  feasts,  however,  have  not  the  smallest  re- 
semblance to  those  celebrated  in  temples,  to  which  the 
people  flock  from  every  side,  and  which  often  give  rise  to 
the  most  scandalous  scenes. 

There  are  in  all  eighteen  obligatory  Hindu  feasts  in  the 
year,  but  I  will  mention  only  the  principal  ones.  First, 
there  is  the  feast  which  is  celebrated  on  the  first  day  of  the 
year,  called  Ugadi i,  and  which  falls  on  the  day  of  the 
new  moon  in  the  month  of  March.  On  this  occasion  Hindus 
are  expected  to  pay  each  other  visits  of  ceremony.  The 
feast  lasts  for  three  days,  during  which  they  give  themselves 

1  This  is  the  name  given  to  the  Telugu  New  Year's  Day. — Ed. 


568  THE   GAURI   FEAST 

up  to  enjoyment.  Fireworks  are  let  off,  and  cannon, 
rockets,  and  guns  are  heard  on  every  side.  It  is  about  this 
time,  also,  that  the  officers  of  Government  prepare  their 
revenue  accounts  for  the  year,  and  that  the  cultivators 
renew  the  leases  of  the  lands  which  they  farm. 

At  the  time  of  the  new  moon  in  the  month  of  February 
the  Lingayats,  or  followers  of  Siva,  celebrate  with  great 
pomp  their  feast  Siva-ratri  (Night  of  Siva).  This  lasts 
three  days,  and  during  the  course  of  it  the  Lingayats  wash 
and  purify  their  liyigam,  cover  it  with  a  new  cloth,  and  offer 
to  it  sacrifices  of  a  special  character.  They  also  visit  their 
jangamas  or  gurus,  and  present  them  with  gifts  \ 

The  festival  of  Gauri  takes  place  at  the  time  of  the  new 
moon  in  the  month  of  September,  and  lasts  many  days. 
Gauri  is  another  name  for  Parvati,  the  wife  of  Siva,  who  is 
the  object  of  peculiar  worship  on  this  occasion.  On  the 
last  day  of  the  feast  they  mould  a  figure  of  the  goddess  in 
rice  dough  ;  this  is  placed  in  a  shrine  beautifully  adorned, 
and  is  then  carried  with  great  pomp  through  the  streets. 
The  Gauri  feast,  however,  is  also  specially  dedicated  to 
the  household  gods,  which  are  represented  by  the  imple- 
ments, tools,  and  utensils  in  common  use  amongst  the 
people.  Thus,  the  farmer  collects  his  ploughs,  his  spades, 
and  his  sickles,  and  places  them  in  a  heap  on  a  spot  care- 
fully purified  by  a  layer  of  cow-dung.  He  prostrates  him- 
self at  full  length  before  the  various  implements  of  hus- 
bandry, and  offers  them  puja  and  neiveddya  according  to 
the  usual  manner.  He  then  puts  them  back  in  their  places. 
The  mason  offers  similar  homage  to  his  trowel,  his  square, 
&c.  ;  the  carpenter  to  his  axe,  his  saw,  and  his  plane  ; 
the  barber  to  his  razor  ;  the  writer  to  his  pen  or  stilus  ; 
the  tailor  to  his  scissors  and  needles  ;  the  huntsman  to  his 
gun  ;  the  fisherman  to  his  nets  ;  the  weaver  to  his  loom  ; 
the  butcher  to  his  cleaver  ;  and  so  on  in  the  case  of  all 
artisans.  The  women,  too,  collect  their  baskets,  winnows, 
rice-mills — in  short,  all  their  household  implements,  and 
prostrate  themselves  before  them,  offering  them  homage  in 
like  manner.  In  a  word,  there  is  not  a  person  who,  during 
this  solemn  time,  does  not  regard  as  so  many  deities  the 

1  Vide  Appendix  III. 


THE   DASARA  FEAST  569 

instruments  with  which  he  gains  his  livelihood.  The 
prayers  which  are  addressed  and  the  honours  which  are 
paid  to  them  are  intended  to  persuade  them  to  continue 
to  be  useful  to  their  possessors.  In  fact,  the  whole  cere- 
mony is  based  on  the  Hindu  principle,  that  it  is  necessary 
to  pay  honour  to  everything  which  may  be  either  useful  or 
hurtful. 

A  month  later,  at  the  new  moon  of  October,  comes  the 
feast  of  Maha-navami,  known  also  under  the  name  of 
Dasara,  specially  dedicated  to  the  memory  of  ancestors. 
This  feast  is  considered  to  be  so  obligatory  that  it  has 
become  a  proverb  that  anybody  who  has  not  the  means  of 
celebrating  it  should  sell  one  of  his  children  in  order  to  do 
so.  Each  family  offers  the  usual  sacrifices  to  its  deceased 
ancestors,  and  also  presents  them  with  new  cloths  such 
as  are  usually  worn  by  men  and  women,  in  order  that  they 
may  be  properly  clothed.  The  feast  lasts  nine  days.  This 
is  also  the  special  festival  of  universities  and  schools.  The 
students,  dressed  in  gay  apparel,  parade  through  the  streets 
every  day,  singing  verses  composed  by  their  professors, 
who  march  at  their  head.  They  also  recite  these  verses 
before  the  doors  of  their  relatives  and  the  principal  in- 
habitants of  the  place.  At  the  same  time  they  dance  and 
play  in  a  simple  fashion,  marking  time  by  striking  sticks 
together.  At  the  end  of  it  all  the  professors  receive  small 
presents  of  money  from  the  people  before  whom  their 
students  have  performed.  A  portion  of  the  sum  collected 
is  given  to  the  students  for  a  feast  on  the  last  day  of  the 
ceremonies,  and  the  remainder  the  professors  keep  for 
themselves. 

The  Dasara  is  likewise  the  soldiers'  feast.  Princes  and 
soldiers  offer  the  most  solemn  sacrifices  to  the  arms  which 
are  made  use  of  in  battle.  Collecting  all  their  weapons 
together,  they  call  a  Brahmin  purohita,  who  sprinkles  them 
with  tirtham  (holy  water)  and  converts  them  into  so  many 
divinities  by  virtue  of  his  mantrams.  He  then  makes  puja 
to  them  and  retires.  Thereupon,  amidst  the  beat  of  drums, 
the  blare  of  trumpets  and  other  instruments,  a  ram  is 
brought  in  with  much  pomp  and  sacrificed  in  honour  of  the 
various  weapons  of  destruction.  This  ceremony  is  observed 
with  the  greatest  solemnity  throughout  the  whole  Peninsula, 


570  ATHLETIC   CONTESTS 

not  only  by  the  Hindu  princes  and  soldiers,  but  also  by 
the  Mahomedans,  who  have  unreservedly  adopted  this 
idolatrous  practice  of  the  Hindus.  It  is  known  by  the 
special  name  of  ayuda-puja  (sacrifice  to  arms),  and  is 
entirely  military  ;  no  native  belonging  to  the  profession  of 
arms,  be  he  Pagan,  Mahomedan,  or  Christian,  makes  any 
scruple  of  joining  in  it. 

In  order  to  increase  the  solemnity  of  the  feast,  the  princes 
are  in  the  habit  of  giving  public  entertainments,  to  which 
immense  crowds  of  people  resort.  These  entertainments 
resemble  very  much  the  gladiatorial  combats  of  the  ancient 
Romans,  consisting  as  they  do  of  contests  between  animals, 
or  between  animals  and  men,  and  above  all  between  men. 
Athletes  sometimes  come  from  long  distances  to  contend 
for  the  prizes.  They  belong  mostly  to  a  caste  called  Jetti, 
and  are  trained  from  their  youth  in  contests  of  the  kind. 
Their  profession  is  to  injure  one  another  in  the  presence 
of  persons  who  are  able  to  pay  them  for  the  satisfaction  to 
be  derived  from  this  horrible  sport,  in  which  both  princes 
and  people  take  infinite  delight.  Ordinary  blows  with  the 
fist,  however  vigorously  applied,  would  not  cause  sufficient 
bloodshed,  so  before  entering  the  lists  the  champions  put 
on  gloves  studded  with  sharp  pieces  of  horn.  They  fight 
almost  naked,  and  before  coming  to  close  quarters  dance 
about  in  threatening  attitudes.  Then  they  close  furiously, 
and  deal  heavy  blows  on  each  other's  heads  with  their 
murderous  gloves.  Needless  to  say,  blood  flows  freely. 
When  they  have  had  enough  of  this,  they  seize  each  other 
round  the  body  and  fall  struggling  to  the  ground,  where 
they  tear  at  each  other  like  wild  beasts.  At  intervals  they 
cease  fighting  to  regain  breath  ;  but  they  soon  begin  again, 
and  the  combat  does  not  end  until  the  umpires  separate 
them  and  one  of  the  two  is  declared  victor.  Covered  with 
wounds  and  literally  bathed  in  blood,  they  retire  and  make 
room  for  new  combatants,  who  fight  with  the  same  ferocity. 
This  disgusting  spectacle  sometimes  lasts  for  hours  together, 
to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the  spectators,  who  mark  their 
enthusiasm  by  constant  applause.  When  all  is  over,  the 
prince  distributes  among  the  champions  prizes  proportionate 
to  the  skill  and  strength  which  each  of  them  has  displayed. 
The  wounds  and  dislocations  of  the  injured  are  attended  to 


THE   FEAST   OF   LAMPS  571 

by  men  of  their  own  caste,  the  Jettis  being  generally  very 
clever  in  surgery. 

At  the  end  of  November  or  the  beginning  of  December 
the  Deepavali  (feast  of  lamps)  is  celebrated.  It  occupies 
several  days.  Every  evening  while  it  lasts  the  Hindus 
place  lighted  lamps  at  the  doors  of  their  houses  or  hang 
paper  lanterns  on  long  poles  in  the  street.  This  feast 
appears  to  be  specially  dedicated  to  fire.  But  as  it  is 
held  at  a  time  when  most  of  the  cereal  crops  are  ready  for 
harvesting,  the  cultivators  in  many  places  are  then  in  the 
habit  of  going  together  in  procession  to  their  fields,  and 
there  offering  up  to  their  crops  prayers  and  sacrifices  of 
rams  or  goats,  in  order,  as  it  were,  to  give  thanks  to  their 
crops  for  having  ripened  and  become  fit  for  the  food  of 
man.  Every  husbandman  also,  on  three  days  in  succes- 
sion, proceeds  to  the  dungheap  which  he  has  collected  for 
manuring  his  fields  and  prostrates  himself  before  it,  pre- 
senting to  it  offerings  of  flowers,  lighted  tapers,  boiled  rice 
and  fruits,  and  begging  it  humbly  to  fertilize  his  lands  and 
to  procure  him  abundant  harvests.  This  worship,  it  may 
be  remarked,  very  much  resembles  that  which  the  Romans 
used  to  pay  to  their  god  Sterculius. 

The  Nagara-panchami  is  another  great  feast.  It  is 
celebrated  in  the  beginning  of  February  in  honour  of  snakes, 
and  especially  of  the  most  venomous  species,  such  as  the 
cobra,  called  naga  or  nagara  by  the  Hindus.  This  reptile, 
which  is  very  common  and  the  most  dangerous  of  all,  is 
honoured  in  a  very  special  manner  on  this  occasion.  The 
people  pay  visits  to  the  holes  where  snakes  of  this  sort  are 
generally  known  to  remain  concealed,  and  make  offerings 
to  them  of  milk,  plantains,  &c.  I  shall  have  something 
more  to  say  about  this  strange  cult  later  on. 

But  the  most  solemn  of  all  feasts,  at  any  rate  in  the 
south  of  India,  is  the  Pongul,  which  is  also  known  in  some 
places  as  the  Maha-sankranti  K  This  feast  is  the  occasion 
of  great  rejoicing  ;  and  the  Hindus  have  two  good  reasons 

1  Sankranii  is  the  name  given  to  the  first  day  of  the  solar  month  ; 
that  is  to  say,  to  the  day  on  which  the  sun  passes  from  one  sign  of  the 
Zodiac  to  another.  It  refers  here  to  its  entrance  into  the  sign  of  Capri- 
corn, a  period  which  the  ancients  celebrated  as  that  of  the  re-birth  of 
this  bright  luminary. — Dubois. 


572  THE   PONGUL  FESTIVAL 

for  regarding  it  with  joy.  One  is  because  the  month  pre- 
ceding the  Pongul,  which  is  entirely  made  up  of  unlucky 
days,  has  at  last  passed  ;  the  other  is  because  the  month 
which  follows  it  must  invariably  consist  of  lucky  days. 

During  the  inauspicious  month  which  preceded  the 
Pongul,  sannyasis,  or  mendicants  l,  go  from  door  to  door 
about  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  waking  all  sleepers  by 
beating  their  gongs,  warning  them  to  be  on  their  guard 
and  to  take  every  precaution  against  the  evil  influences 
of  this  unlucky  period,  by  appeasing,  by  means  of  prayers 
and  sacrifices,  the  god  Siva,  who  presides  over  it.  With 
this  purpose  in  view,  the  women  of  the  house  every  morn- 
ing prepare  a  small  patch  about  a  yard  square  outside  the 
door,  smearing  it  with  cow-dung,  and  tracing  several  white 
lines  upon  it  with  rice-flour.  They  then  place  within  this 
square  several  pellets  of  cow-dung,  each  adorned  with 
a  pumpkin  flower.  I  believe  these  pellets  are  supposed  to 
represent  Vigneshwara,  the  god  of  obstacles,  whom  they 
seek  to  appease  by  offering  him  a  bouquet.  But  I  do  not 
know  why  it  is  that  the  pumpkin  flower  is  chosen  in  this 
case.  Every  evening  these  little  balls  of  cow-dung,  together 
with  their  flowers,  are  carefully  collected,  to  be  kept  till 
the  last  day  of  the  month.  When  this  day  arrives  the 
women,  who  alone  are  charged  with  this  ceremony,  put 
them  into  a  new  basket,  and  accompanied  by  musical 
instruments  and  clapping  of  hands,  they  solemnly  carry 
them  away  beyond  the  precincts  of  their  dwellings  and 
throw  them  into  a  tank  or  some  other  retired  but  clean 
spot. 

The  Pongul,  or  Maha-sankranti.  always  takes  place 
during  the  winter  solstice,  the  period  when  the  sun,  having 
finished  its  course  towards  the  southern  hemisphere,  turns 
to  the  north  again  and  comes  back  to  visit  the  people  of 
India.  The  feast  lasts  three  days  ;  the  first  is  called 
Bhoghi- pongul  (Pongul  of  joy).  On  this  day  visits  are 
exchanged  between  relatives  and  friends,  who  make  presents 
and  give  entertainments  to  each  other  ;  the  day  passes  in 
diversions  and  amusements  of  all  sorts. 

The  second  day  is  called  Surya-pongul  (Pongul  of  the 

1  These  are  pandarams,  not  sannyasis. — Ed. 


THE   LAST  DAY   OF   PONGUL  573 

sun).  In  fact  the  feast  appears  to  be  specially  dedicated 
to  the  sun.  The  married  women  first  of  all  bathe  with 
their  clothes  on,  and  while  still  dripping  wet  put  rice  to 
boil  in  milk  on  a  fire  in  the  open  air.  As  soon  as  it  begins 
to  simmer,  they  all  cry  out  together,  Pongul,  Pongul  ! 
Pongul,  Pongul  !  Almost  immediately  afterwards  they  re- 
move the  vessel  from  the  fire  and  place  it  before  the  idol 
of  Vigneshwara,  to  whom  they  offer  a  portion  of  the  rice  ; 
another  portion  is  given  to  the  cows,  and  the  rest  is  eaten 
by  the  people  of  the  house. 

On  this  day  Hindus  again  exchange  visits.  On  meeting 
each  other  the  first  words  they  say  are  :  '  Has  the  rice 
boiled  ?  '  to  which  the  answer  is  :  '  It  has  boiled.'  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  the  feast  is  called  Pongul  in  the  south 
of  India,  the  word  being  derived  from  pongedi  in  Telugu, 
and  pongaradu  in  Tamil,  both  signifying  to  boil. 

The  third  day  is  called  the  Pongul  of  the  cows.  On  this 
day  they  put  into  a  big  vessel  filled  with  water  some  saffron 
powder,  some  seeds  of  the  tree  called  parati,  and  some 
leaves  of  the  margosa-tree.  After  mixing  the  ingredients 
well  together,  they  sprinkle  the  cows  and  the  oxen  with  the 
liquid,  walking  round  them  three  times.  All  the  men  of 
the  house  (for  the  women  are  excluded  from  this  ceremony) 
then  turn  successively  towards  the  four  points  of  the  com- 
pass and  perform  the  sashtanga,  or  prostration  of  the  six 
members,  four  times  before  the  animals  \ 

The  horns  of  the  cows  are  painted  in  various  colours, 
and  round  their  necks  are  hung  garlands  of  green  leaves 
interlaced  with  flowers.  On  these  garlands  are  hung  cakes, 
cocoanuts.  and  fruits,  which,  as  they  are  shaken  off  by  the 
animals,  are  eagerly  scrambled  for  and  devoured,  as  though 
they  were  sacred  things,  by  the  crowd  following. 

The  cows  are  then  driven  together  outside  the  town  or 
village,  and  are  then  made  to  scatter  in  all  directions  by 
the  aid  of  drums  and  noisy  instruments.  On  this  day 
cattle  are  allowed  to  graze  everywhere  without  restraint ; 
and  no  matter  what  damage  they  may  do  in  the  fields, 
they  are  never  driven  away. 

The  idols  are  afterwards  taken  from  the  temples  and 

1  As  already  explained,  it  is  prostration  of  the  eight,  not  six  members. 
—Ed. 


574  A   SPRING    FESTIVAL 

carried  in  procession,  to  the  sound  of  music,  to  the  place 
where  the  cattle  have  again  been  collected.  The  temple 
dancing-girls,  who  are  to  be  found  at  all  feasts  and  public 
ceremonies,  are  not  absent  on  this  occasion  ;  they  march 
at  the  head  of  the  large  concourse  of  people,  and  from  time 
to  time  pause  to  delight  the  spectators  with  their  lascivious 
dances  and  obscene  songs. 

The  feast  terminates  with  a  performance  which,  I  believe, 
has  no  other  object  than  simple  amusement.  The  crowd 
forms  itself  into  a  big  circle,  in  the  middle  of  which  a  hare 
is  let  loose,  which  in  its  efforts  to  escape  runs  round  and 
round,  from  side  to  side,  exciting  much  laughter  amongst 
the  spectators,  till  at  last  it  is  caught. 

The  idols  are  then  carried  back  to  the  temples,  the  cows 
are  led  back  to  the  sheds,  and  thus  ends  the  most  popular 
of  all  Hindu  feasts. 

The  Pongul,  as  I  have  said,  is  intended  to  celebrate  the 
period  when  the  sun  is  about  to  recommence  its  course. 
There  would  have  been  nothing  blameworthy,  nothing 
astonishing  in  the  people  hailing  with  joy  the  appearance 
of  this  great  fertilizing  luminary  in  their  hemisphere,  and 
rendering  praise  and  thanks  to  the  Almighty  as  the  Creator 
of  it ;  but  when  we  see  a  nation  which  professes  to  occupy 
the  first  place  amongst  the  civilized  races  of  the  world 
treating  this  as  an  occasion  for  the  most  idle  ceremonies, 
surely  we  ought  not  to  attribute  it  simply  to  the  weakness 
of  the  human  mind.  Ought  we  not  rather  to  recognize  in 
it  the  prompting  of  some  evil  spirit  seeking  to  seduce 
men  by  the  empty  pomp  that  accompanies  these  insane 
practices  I  We  should  not  hesitate  to  regard  them  as 
folly  in  a  single  individual  ;  are  they  therefore  less  un- 
reasonable or  more  excusable  when  an  entire  nation  prac- 
tises them  ?  Our  astonishment  ceases  when  we  carefully 
consider  the  causes  that  keep  the  Hindus  enchained  to 
degraded  forms  of  worship  like  these.  The  fact  is,  the 
laws  and  customs,  both  religious  and  civil,  of  the  Hindu 
people  are  so  closely  bound  together,  that  it  is  impossible 
to  attack  the  one  without  equally  injuring  the  other. 
Custom,  prejudice,  and  national  predilection  have  all 
served  to  establish  their  belief  that  religion  and  polity 
are  inseparable  ;  and  they  are  thoroughly  convinced  that 


FOSTERING   SUPERSTITION  575 

neither  the  one  nor  the  other  can  be  changed  without 
exposing  the  nation  to  the  danger  of  sinking  into  a  state 
of  barbarism  and  anarchy.  This  rigorous  observance  of 
their  religious  rites  on  the  part  of  the  Hindus  is  rendered 
yet  more  inviolable  by  reason  of  the  pride,  sensuality, 
and  moral  laxity  which  constitute  the  national  character. 
Everything  presented  to  them  by  their  religion  contributes 
to  the  encouragement  of  the  national  vices.  Passion,  pre- 
dilection, and  self-interest  all  combine  in  fostering  the 
forms  of  idolatry  to  which  they  are  enslaved.  Even  their 
games,  dances,  and  entertainments  are  all  conducted  with 
a  licence  which  derives  force  from  the  fact  that  it  is  sanc- 
tioned by  religion.  How,  it  may  well  be  asked,  can  a 
people  so  credulous,  so  easily  influenced  by  sensual  impres- 
sions and  all  the  pleasures  resulting  from  them — how  can 
they  help  being  devoted  to  a  religious  cult  which  accords 
so  well  with  their  natural  inclinations  \ 

Self-interest,  again,  that  powerful  motive  of  human 
actions,  is  not  the  feeblest  support  of  Hindu  idolatry.  The 
priests  of  the  Hindu  religion,  although  too  enlightened  to 
be  blinded  by  the  follies  which  they  instil  into  the  minds 
of  their  weak  fellow-countrymen,  are  none  the  less  zealous 
in  maintaining  and  encouraging  the  absurd  errors  which 
procure  their  livelihood,  and  which  keep  them  in  that 
high  estimation  which  they  have  wrongfully  usurped. 

Their  deceitful  tactics  are  specially  noticeable  in  con- 
nexion with  the  feasts  that  are  celebrated  at  the  more 
important  temples.  The  Brahmins  who  have  charge  of 
these  enrich  themselves  by  the  offerings  which  the  credulous 
and  stupid  worshippers  periodically  bring  ;  therefore  they 
take  infinite  pains  to  foster  superstition  and  curry  favour 
with  the  votaries.  The  triumphal  cars,  splendidly  orna- 
mented, on  which  the  idols  are  exposed  to  public  veneration 
in  all  the  brilliant  finery  peculiar  to  India  ;  the  unceasing 
round  of  songs,  dances,  games,  entertainments,  and  fire- 
works; the  limitless  crowd  of  devotees,  the  more  wealthy 
among  whom  vie  with  each  other  in  luxurious  display  and 
extravagant  profusion ;  above  all,  the  extreme  licence 
which  prevails  on  such  occasions,  and  the  facility  with 
which  every  one  can  satisfy  his  depraved  desires  ; — all  these 
give  infinite  pleasure  to  a  people  who  know  nothing  higher 


576  RESORTING   TO   DECEPTION 

than  such  material  enjoyments.  Thus  it  is  that  crowds 
gather  at  these  feasts  from  all  parts  ;  and  the  poor  husband- 
man, whose  whole  harvest  hardly  affords  subsistence  for 
himself  and  family  for  six  months  during  the  year,  will  sell 
a  part  of  it  in  order  to  contribute  to  the  expenses  incurred 
at  the  feasts,  and  to  enrich  the  clever  impostors  who  manage 
them  l.  But  apart  from  the  pomp  and  ceremony  displayed 
for  the  purpose  of  dazzling  the  eyes  of  the  people,  the 
Hindu  priests  have  recourse  to  another  kind  of  deception. 
According  to  them  nothing  can  equal  the  miracles  which 
are  daily  wrought  by  the  god  of  their  particular  temple  in 
favour  of  those  persons  who  put  their  trust  in  him  and 
make  him  presents.  Sometimes  it  is  a  barren  woman  who 
has  ceased  to  be  so,  a  blind  man  to  whom  the  faculty  of 
sight  has  been  restored,  a  leper  who  has  been  cured,  a 
cripple  who  has  recovered  the  use  of  his  legs,  &c.  There 
is  not  a  single  Hindu  who  would  dare  to  raise  the  shadow 
of  a  doubt  concerning  such  miracles. 

As  depositaries  of  a  religion  to  which  they  assign  an 
origin  that  is  lost  in  the  darkness  of  ages,  the  Brahmins 
know  very  well  how  to  make  use  of  the  fables  and  tradi- 
tions which  are  at  the  bottom  of  it  all,  such  as  the  wonderful 
adventures  of  the  gods,  giants,  and  ancient  kings,  the 
miraculous  proceedings  of  the  ancient  Hindu  sages,  and  the 
spiritual  seclusion  and  sanctity  of  the  ancient  Hindu 
hermits.  The  austerity,  however  extravagant  it  may 
seem,  of  Brahmin  penitents  ;  the  rigorous  abstinence 
which  ordinary  Brahmins  impose  upon  themselves  ;  their 
frequent  fasts  ;  their  daily  ablutions  ;  their  excessive  care- 
fulness regarding  external  and  internal  cleanliness  ;  their 
prayers  ;  their  long  periods  of  meditation  and  absorption  ; 
the  impenetrable  secrecy  and  air  of  mystery  which  accom- 
pany their  sandhya,  their  sacrifices,  and  the  majority  of 
their  ceremonies  ;  the  sacred  books,  of  which  they  are  the 
sole  interpreters  ; — all  these  contribute  to  support  the  in- 

1  '  Une  religion,'  says  Montesquieu,  '  chargee  de  beaucoup  de  pra- 
tiques attache  plus  a  elle  qu'une  autre  qui  Test  moins.  On  tient  beau- 
coup  des  choses  dont  on  est  continuellement  occupe  ;  temoin  l'obstination 
tenace  des  mahometans  et  des  juifs  et  la  facilite  qu'ont  de  changer  de 
religion  les  peuples  barbares  et  sauvages  qui,  uniquement  occupes  de  la 
chasse  ou  de  la  guerre,  ne  se  chargent  guere  de  pratiques  religieuses.' — 
Esprit  des  Lois,  xxv.  2. 


REASON  VERSUS  REVELATION     577 

rluence  which  they  have  gained  over  minds  that  apparently 
will  recognize  as  true  only  what  dazzles  the  imagination, 
or  what  is  contrary  to  common  sense.  So  true  it  is,  that 
mere  reason  is  totally  unable  to  raise  mankind  to  a  know- 
ledge of  God  ;  in  fact,  no  real  religious  cult  can  spring 
from  man's  reason  alone.  The  more  one  reflects  upon  the 
gross  absurdities  pertaining  to  the  idolatry  of  the  Hindus, 
the  more  convinced  one  becomes  of  the  inestimable  benefit 
of  Revelation,  whereby  the  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  Universe, 
in  Himself  incomprehensible,  reveals  Himself  to  His 
creatures. 

CHAPTER   IV 

Hindu  Temples. — Ceremonies  performed  in  them. — Temples  built  on 
Mountains. — Pyramids. — The  Architecture  of  Pagodas. — The  Shape 
and  Ornaments  of  the  Idols. — Their  Consecration. — Sacred  Pillars. — 
Temple  Priests  and  Servants. — Sacrificers. — Dancing-girls. — Musi- 
cians.— Hindu  Music. — Brahmin  Tricks  and  Artifices  for  attracting 
Worshippers. — The  Hindu  Desire  for  Children. — The  Revolting 
Practices  to  which  they  submit  to  obtain  them. — Remarkable 
Ceremonies  and  Vows. — Prostitution  in  Certain  Temples. — Religious 
Tortures. — The  Rape  of  Women. — Famous  Temples. — Tirupati. — 
Jagannathr. — Public  Processions. — General  Remarks. 

Buildings  dedicated  to  religious  worship  are  extremely 
numerous  in  India.  There  are  few  villages  or  hamlets 
which  have  not  at  least  one.  It  is  even  a  generally  received 
opinion  that  no  place  should  be  inhabited  where  there  is 
no  temple,  for  otherwise  the  inhabitants  would  run  grave 
risks  of  misfortune. 

Among  the  good  works  expected  of  the  rich,  one  of  the 
most  honourable  and  most  meritorious  consists  in  spending 
a  part  of  their  fortune  in  the  construction  and  endowment 
of  these  sacred  buildings.  Such  munificence,  it  is  argued, 
is  an  infallible  means  of  obtaining  the  protection  of  the 
gods,  remission  of  one's  sins,  and  admission  into  an  Abode 
of  Bliss  after  death.  But  vanity,  ostentation,  and  desire 
to  attract  attention  are  much  more  powerful  factors,  if 
indeed  they  are  not  the  only  ones  that  excite  beneficence 
on  the  part  of  the  wealthy. 

Besides  the  temples  with  which  all  villages  are  provided, 
one  finds  many  erected  in  isolated  spots,  in  woods,  on  the 
highways,  in  the  middle  of  rivers,  on  the  borders  of  tanks 

Dl'ROIS  U 


578  TEMPLES   ON    ELEVATED    SITES 

and  other  large  reservoirs,  and  especially  on  the  summits 
of  steep  rocks,  mountains,  and  hills.  This  practice  of  con- 
st 1  acting  buildings  consecrated  to  religious  worship  upon 
elevated  sites  must  have  struck  all  persons  who  have 
travelled  in  India.  In  fact  there  are  few  mountains,  where 
a  well  or  a  spring  is  to  be  found,  that  are  not  surmounted 
by  a  building  of  this  sort.  The  choice  of  sites  like  these 
does  not  appear  to  be  a  matter  of  caprice.  We  know  that 
the  same  practice  exists  among  the  majority  of  Asiatic 
nations.  Not  only  the  ancient  heathen  peoples,  but  even 
the  children  of  Israel,  always  chose  elevated  sites  for  pur- 
poses of  religious  worship.  When  God  ordered  the  Israelites 
to  take  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  He  commanded 
them  above  all  things  to  destroy  the  heathen  temples 
erected  on  mountains  and  other  lofty  spots,  to  break  in 
pieces  the  idols,  and  to  destroy  the  sacred  groves  with 
which  those  buildings  were  surrounded,  as  are  those  of  the 
Hindus  to  this  day.  Holy  Scripture  refers  often  to  these 
high  places  and  sacred  groves. 

One  can  only  offer  conjectures  regarding  this  custom  of 
placing  on  elevated  sites  the  temples  dedicated  to  the 
sacrifices  and  vows  which  the  people  addressed  to  their 
gods.  Some  authors  have  remarked  that  the  worship  of 
the  stars  having  always  been  more  or  less  a  part  of  pagan 
ritual,  the  heathen  constructed  their  temples  so  as  to  face 
the  east  at  a  certain  elevation,  in  order  that  the  rising  sun 
might  flood  the  interior  of  the  temples  with  its  light  and 
cast  its  rays  upon  the  religious  ceremonies  which  take  place 
at  that  time  of  day  \  No  doubt,  too,  they  thought  they 
were  thereby  approaching  as  near  as  possible  to  the  heavenly 
powers  whom  they  invoked.  Furthermore,  the  duties  of 
the  soothsayers  often  necessitated  such  elevated  positions, 
in  order  that  they  might  see  the  heavens  clearly. 

Besides  the  temples  of  idols  which  one  meets  with  at 
every  step  in  India,  statues  of  stone,  of  baked  earth,  and 
especially  of  granite,  representing  objects  of  popular  wor- 
ship, may  be  seen  on  the  high-roads,  at  the  entrances  of 
villages,  near  the  choultries,  on  the  borders  of  tanks,  near 

1  The  ceremonies  performed  in  honour  of  the  infernal  deities  took 
place  at  sunset ;  and  it  is  believed  that  the  entrances  of  the  temples  of 
these  divinities  faced  towards  the  west. — Dubois. 


STRUCTURAL   DETAILS  579 

rivers,  in  the  market-places,  and  elsewhere.  The  Hindus 
also  delight  in  placing  these  idols  of  stone  under  the  shade 
of  leafy  trees  especially  of  those  reputed  sacred,  such  as 
the  aswatta,  the  alai,  the  vepu,  &C.1  Some  of  these  idols 
are  placed  in  shrines,  and  others  in  the  open  air. 

Most  Hindu  temples  present  a  very  wretched  appear- 
ance, being  more  like  barns  or  stables  than  buildings  con- 
secrated to  the  gods.  Some  of  them  are  used  as  places  of 
public  assembly,  courts  of  justice,  or  rest-houses  for  travel- 
lers. There  are  many,  however,  which  as  seen  from  a 
distance  have  an  imposing  effect  and  excite  the  admiration 
of  the  traveller.  They  recall  to  mind  those  ancient  times 
when  architects  had  an  eye  for  posterity  as  well  as  for  their 
contemporaries,  and  were  much  more  intent  on  making 
their  works  durable  than  on  securing  elegance  at  the  cost 
of  solidity. 

The  structure  of  the  large  temples,  both  ancient  and 
modern,  is  everywhere  the  same.  The  Hindus,  devoted  as 
they  are  to  ancestral  customs,  have  never  introduced 
innovations  in  the  construction  of  their  public  edifices. 
Their  architectural  monuments,  such  as  they  exist  to-day, 
are  probably  better  examples  of  building  as  practised  by 
ancient  civilized  nations  than  the  ruins  of  Egyptians  and 
Greeks,  concerning  which  European  scholars  have  so  much 
to  say. 

The  entrance  gate  of  the  great  pagodas  opens  through 
a  high,  massive  pyramidal  tower,  the  summit  of  which  is 
ordinarily  topped  by  a  crescent  or  half-moon.  This  gate 
faces  the  east,  a  position  which  is  observed  in  all  their 
temples,  great  and  small.  The  pyramid  or  tower  is  called 
the  gopuram. 

Beyond  the  tower  is  a  large  court,  at  the  farther  end  of 
which  is  another  gate,  opening  like  the  first  through  a 
pyramid  of  the  same  form,  but  smaller.  Through  this  you 
pass  to  a-  second  and  smaller  court,  which  is  in  front  of 
the  shrine  containing  the  principal  idol. 

In  the  middle  of  this  second  court  and  facing  the  entrance 
to  the  shrine,  you  generally  see  upon  a  large  pedestal,  or 
within  a  kind  of  pavilion  open  on  all  sides  and  supported 

1  The  Ficus  religiosa,  the  Fie  us  indica,  and  the  Mdia  Azadirachta. 
—Ed. 


580  INTERIOR   OF  THE    SHRINK 

by  four  pillars,  a  coarsely  sculpt  mod  stone  figure,  either  of 
a  bull  Lying  Hat  on  its  belly,  or  of  a  lingam,  if  the  temple  is 
dedicated  to  Siva  ;  or  of  the  monkey  Hanuman,  or  of  the 
serpent  Capella,  if  it  is  a  temple  of  Vishnu  ;  or  of  the  god 
Vigneshwara  ;  or  maybe  of  some  other  symbol  of  Hindu 
worship.  This  is  the  first  object  which  the  natives  worship 
before  entering  the  shrine  itself. 

The  door  of  the  shrine  is  generally  low  and  narrow,  and 
it  is  the  only  opening  which  allows  a  free  passage  of  air 
and  light  from  outside,  for  the  use  of  windows  is  entirely 
unknown  in  the  Peninsula.  The  interior  of  the  shrine  is 
habitually  shrouded  in  darkness,  or  is  lighted  only  by  the 
feeble  nicker  of  a  lamp  which  burns  day  and  night  by  the 
side  of  the  idol.  One  experiences  a  sort  of  involuntary 
shock  on  entering  one  of  these  dark  recesses.  The  interior 
of  the  shrine  is  generally  divided  into  two  parts,  sometimes 
into  three.  The  first,  which  may  be  called  the  nave,  is 
the  largest,  and  it  is  here  that  the  worshippers  assemble. 
The  second  is  called  the  adytum,  or  sanctuary,  where  the 
idol  to  whom  the  shrine  is  consecrated  is  placed.  This 
chamber  is  smaller  and  much  darker  than  the  first.  It  is 
generally  kept  shut,  and  the  door  can  be  opened  only  by 
the  officiating  priest,  who,  with  some  of  his  acolytes,  has 
alone  a  right  to  enter  its  mysterious  precincts  for  the  pur- 
pose of  washing  and  dressing  the  idol  and  presenting  the 
offerings  of  the  faithful,  such  as  flowers,  incense  of  sandal- 
wood, lighted  lamps,  fruit,  butter-milk,  rich  apparel,  and 
jewels. 

Some  of  the  modern  Hindu  temples  are  vaulted,  but 
most  of  them  have  flat  roofs  supported  by  several  rows  of 
massive  stone  pillars,  the  capitals  of  which  are  composed 
of  two  heavy  stones  crossed,  on  which  are  placed  the  beams, 
also  of  stone,  which  extend  through  the  length  and  breadth 
of  the  building.  The  beams  again  are  covered  horizontally 
with  slabs  of  stone  strongly  cemented  to  prevent  leakage. 
Whether  the  object  be  to  make  these  buildings  more  impos- 
ing and  solid,  or  to  preserve  them  from  the  danger  of  fire, 
wood  is  never  employed  except  for  the  doors. 

The  adytum,  or  sanctuary,  is  often  constructed  with 
a  dome,  but  the  building  as  a  whole  is  generally  very  low, 
and  this  destroys  the  effect  of  its  proportions  in  a  striking 


THE   IDOLS   DESCRIBED  58l 

degree.  The  low  elevation  ;  the  difficulty  with  which  the 
air  finds  a  way  through  a  single  narrow  and  habitually 
elosed  passage  ;  the  unhealthy  odours  rising  from  the  mass 
of  fresh  and  decaying  flowers  ;  the  burning  lamps  ;  the  oil 
and  butter  spilt  in  libations  ;  the  excrements  of  the  bats 
that  take  up  their  abode  in  these  dark  places  ;  finally,  and 
above  all,  the  fetid  perspiration  of  a  multitude  of  unclean 
and  malodorous  people  ; — all  contribute  to  render  these 
sacred  shrines  excessively  unhealthy.  Only  a  Hindu  could 
remain  for  any  length  of  time  in  their  heated  and  pestilential 
precincts  without  suffocation  1. 

The  principal  idol  is  generally  placed  in  a  niche.  It  is 
clothed  with  garments  more  or  less  magnificent,  and  on 
great  festivals  is  sometimes  adorned  with  rare  vestments 
and  rich  jewrels.  A  crown  of  gold  set  with  precious  stones 
often  adorns  its  head.  For  the  most  part,  however,  the 
idols  of  stone  wear  a  cap  like  a  sugar-loaf,  which  imparts 
to  the  whole  figure  the  appearance  of  a  pyramid.  The 
Hindus,  by  the  way,  appear  to  have  a  special  fancy  for  the 
form  of  a  pyramid,  which  perhaps  is  due  to  some  symbolical 
notion.  We  know  that  various  nations  of  antiquity,  among 
others  the  Egyptians,  regarded  the  pyramid  as  the  symbol 
of  immortality  and  of  life,  the  beginning  of  which  was 
represented  by  the  base  and  the  end  or  death  by  the  summit. 
The  pyramid  was  also  the  emblem  of  fire. 

In  vain  are  Hindu  idols  decked  with  rich  ornaments  ; 
they  are  not  rendered  thereby  less  disagreeable  in  appear- 
ance. Their  physiognomy  is  generally  of  frightful  ugliness, 
which  is  carefully  enhanced  by  daubing  the  images  from 
time  to  time  with  a  coating  of  dark  paint.  Some  of  the 
idols,  thanks  to  the  generous  piety  of  rich  votaries,  have 
their  eyes,  mouth,  and  ears  of  gold  or  silver  ;  but  this 
makes  them,  if  possible,  yet  more  hideous.  The  attitudes 
in  which  they  are  represented  are  either  ridiculous,  gro- 
tesque, or  obscene.  In  short,  everything  is  done  to  make 
them  objects  of  disgust  to  any  one  not  familiar  with  the 
sight  of  these  strange  monsters. 

The  idols  exposed  to  public  veneration  in  the  temples 

1  The  Abbe  nowhere  remarks  on  the  burning  of  camphor,  which  plays 
iso  conspicuous  a  part  in  all  Hindu  worship,  and  which  acts  at  the  same 
time  as  a  disinfectant. — Ed. 


582     CONSECRATING    IDOLS  AND  TEMPLES 

are  of  stone,  while  those  carried  in  procession  through  the 

streets  are  of  metal,  as  are  also  the  domestic  gods  which 
every  Brahmin  keeps  and  worships  in  his  house.  It  is 
forbidden  to  make  idols  of  wood  or  other  easily  destructible 
material.  I  know  only  one,  that  of  the  goddess  Mari-amma, 
which  is  of  wood.  For  this  image  the  wood  of  a  certain  tree 
is  employed,  the  trunk  of  which  is  red  inside,  and  which, 
when  cut,  exudes  a  sap  the  colour  of  blood,  a  characteristic 
which  accords  well  with  the  merciless  nature  of  this  cruel 
divinity.  It  is  true,  one  also  often  sees  statues  of  clay  or 
of  masonry,  but  these  are  not  of  much  account,  and  inspire 
very  little  veneration. 

No  idol  can  become  an  object  of  worship  until  it  has 
been  duly  consecrated  by  a  number  of  ceremonies.  It  is 
necessary  first  of  all  that  the  deity  should  be  invoked,  in 
order  that  it  may  fix  its  abode  in  the  idol,  and  be  incor- 
porated with  it  ;  and  this  must  be  done  by  a  Brahmin 
purohita.  New  temples  are  also  subjected  to  a  solemn 
inauguration,  and  all  objects  destined  for  their  service 
must  be  formally  consecrated.  Both  temples  and  idols 
are  liable  to  be  desecrated  on  many  occasions.  If,  for 
example,  a  European,  a  Mahomedan,  or  a  Pariah  un- 
fortunately entered  a  sanctuary  or  touched  an  idol,  that 
very  instant  the  divinity  would  take  its  departure.  And 
in  order  to  induce  it  to  return,  all  the  ceremonies  would 
have  to  be  begun  over  again,  and  performed  more  elaborately 
and  at  greater  cost  than  before. 

Besides  the  idols  which  are  to  be  found  inside  every 
temple,  the  walls  and  four  sides  of  the  supporting  pillars 
are  covered  with  various  figures.  On  the  facade  of  the 
building  niches  are  arranged,  to  contain  symbolical  figures 
representing  men  and  animals,  for  the  most  part  in  indecent 
attitudes.  Furthermore,  the  walls  of  the  temple  enclosure, 
which  are  no  less  thick  and  solid  than  the  actual  buildings, 
are  also  sometimes  covered  with  these  obscene  or  grotesque 
images.  Outside  the  shrine,  opposite  and  close  to  the 
entrance  door,  and  sometimes  in  the  middle  of  one  of  the 
courts,  there  is  commonly  seen  a  granite  pillar,  from  forty 
to  fifty  feet  high,  octagonal  in  shape,  and  square  at  the 
base  of  the  shaft  ;  on  each  side  of  the  lower  part  figures 
are   sculptured.     The   pedestal  is   a   solid   mass   of   hewn 


TEMPLE   OFFICIALS  583 

stone.  The  eapital  of  the  column  ends  in  a  square  cornice, 
at  the  four  angles  of  which  small  bells  are  usually  suspended. 
Above  this,  again,  is  a  chafing  dish  in  which  incense  is 
burned  at  certain  times,  or  else  lighted  lamps  are  placed 
there. 

The  traveller  often  sees  on  the  roads,  and  even  in  remote 
spots,  lofty  columns  of  this  kind,  on  which  certain  devotees 
place  lamps  from  time  to  time.  During  the  feast  of  Dee- 
pa  vol  i,  of  which  mention  has  been  made  above,  and  which 
is  apparently  held  in  honour  of  fire,  lamps  are  to  be  seen 
burning  every  evening  on  such  columns.  Sometimes  the 
pillars  are  wreathed  with  pieces  of  new  cloth,  which  are 
finally  set  on  fire.  These  details  favour  the  view  that  the 
pillars,  constructed  as  they  always  are  in  places  exposed 
to  the  east,  are  consecrated  to  the  sun  or  to  the  element 
of  fire. 

Temple  offices  are  held  by  persons  of  various  castes. 
Nevertheless  all  posts  of  any  importance,  and  especially 
those  which  confer  profit  and  dignity,  are  always  held  by 
Brahmins. 

Among  the  numerous  officials  in  Hindu  worship  the 
sacrificers  occupy  first  rank  ;  then  come  the  consultative 
committees,  the  directors  of  ceremonies,  the  collectors  of 
temple  revenues,  and  the  treasurers.  Besides  these,  there 
are  hosts  of  subordinates  who  assist  in  the  administration 
of  the  temple  funds,  and  in  the  supervision  and  direction 
of  religious  observances. 

Sometimes,  but  not  frequently,  the  high  functions  of 
sacrificers  are  performed  by  common  Sudras  and  even 
Pariahs.  At  one  of  the  most  famous  temples  of  Mysore, 
called  Melkota,  during  the  great  festival  which  is  there 
celebrated  annually,  the  Pariahs  are  the  first  to  enter  the 
sanctuary  and  to  offer  sacrifices  to  the  idol,  and  it  is  only 
after  they  have  finished  that  the  Brahmins  begin  their 
sacrifices.  I  have  already  remarked  that  the  Sudras  are 
the  only  persons  holding  this  office  in  temples  where  it  is 
usual  to  immolate  living  victims. 

A  fact  worthy  of  remark  is  that  the  officiating  priests 
wear  no  special  costume  in  the  exercise  of  their  sacerdotal 
functions  ;  they  are  dressed  in  their  ordinary  clothes,  which 
are,  however,  newly  washed  for  the  purpose. 


584  WASHING   THE   IDOL 

In  most  of  the  temples  the  oblations  and  sacrifices  are 
confined  to  the  simple  products  of  nature.  The  offering  of 
lamps  is  also  specially  in  vogue.  Sometimes  thousands 
may  be  seen  burning  around  the  idol  and  in  the  enclosure 
of  the  temple  ;  they  are  filled  with  butter,  which  is  a  much 
more  acceptable  offering  to  the  gods  than  oil. 

Hindu  priests  offer  up  sacrifices  regularly  twice  a  day, 
morning  and  evening.  The  idol  to  which  the  sacrifice  is 
offered  is  first  thoroughly  washed,  and  the  water  used  for 
this  purpose  is  brought  from  the  river  with  much  pomp 
and  ceremony.  In  some  of  the  great  pagodas  it  is  brought 
on  the  backs  of  elephants,  preceded  by  dancing-girls  and 
musicians,  and  escorted  by  a  great  number  of  Brahmins 
and  various  attendants.  In  other  temples  the  Brahmins 
themselves  go  with  a  similar  show  of  ceremony  to  fetch 
the  water  morning  and  evening,  bringing  it  on  their  heads 
in  large  brass  vessels.  The  water  that  remains  after  the 
idol  has  been  washed  is  called  tirlham  (holy  water). 

As  soon  as  the  task  of  washing  the  idol  is  over,  the  priest 
performs  its  toilet,  which  consists  in  putting  on  its  clothes 
and  tracing  on  its  forehead  one  of  the  signs  which  the 
Hindus  are  accustomed  to  wear  on  their  own  foreheads. 
Puja  is  then  offered  to  it.  During  these  ceremonies  the 
officiating  priest  tinkles  a  little  bell,  which  is  held  in  his 
left  hand,  the  object  no  doubt  being  to  call  the  attention 
of  the  worshippers  to  each  stage  in  the  ceremonial  which 
is  taking  place  inside  the  shrine  and  out  of  sight. 

After  completing  his  mysterious  duties,  which  must  be 
concealed  from  profane  eyes  1,  the  priest  appears  and  dis- 
tributes to  the  people  who  are  assembled  in  the  hall  of  the 
temple  fragments  of  the  offerings  made  to  the  idol.  This 
prasadam  (sacred  gift)  is  received  with  eagerness.  If  it  is 
fruit  or  some  other  nutritious  substance,  it  is  eaten  ;  if  it 
is  flowers,  the  men  stick  them  in  their  turbans,  while  the 
women  entwine  them  in  their  hair.  Last  of  all,  the  priest 
pours  into  the  hollow  of  each  person's  hand  a  little  tirtham, 
which  is  drunk  immediately.  After  this  all  the  worshippers 
retire. 

The  courtesans  or  dancing-girls  attached  to  each  temple 

1  In  Vishnu  temples  these  '  mysterious  duties  '  are  performed  behind 
a  curtain  drawn  between  the  worshippers  and  the  idol. — Ed. 


TEMPLE   DANCING-GIRLS  585 

take  their  place  in  the  second  rank  ;  they  are  called  deva- 
dasis  (servants  or  slaves  of  the  gods),  but  the  public  call 
them  by  the  more  vulgar  name  of  prostitutes.  And  in  fact 
they  are  bound  by  their  profession  to  grant  their  favours, 
if  such  they  be,  to  anybody  demanding  them  in  return  for 
ready  money.  It  appears  that  at  first  they  were  reserved 
exclusively  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  Brahmins.  And  these 
lewd  women,  who  make  a  public  traffic  of  their  charms,  are 
consecrated  in  a  special  manner  to  the  worship  of  the 
divinities  of  India.  Every  temple  of  any  importance  has 
in  its  service  a  band  of  eight,  twelve,  or  more.  Their 
official  duties  consist  in  dancing  and  singing  within  the 
temple  twice  a  day,  morning  and  evening,  and  also  at  all 
public  ceremonies.  The  first  they  execute  with  sufficient 
grace,  although  their  attitudes  are  lascivious  and  their 
gestures  indecorous.  As  regards  their  singing,  it  is  almost 
always  confined  to  obscene  verses  describing  some  licentious 
episode  in  the  history  of  their  gods.  Their  duties,  however, 
are  not  confined  to  religious  ceremonies.  Ordinary  polite- 
ness (and  this  is  one  of  the  characteristic  features  of  Hindu 
morality)  requires  that  when  persons  of  any  distinction 
make  formal  visits  to  each  other  they  must  be  accompanied 
by  a  certain  number  of  these  courtesans.  To  dispense  with 
them  would  show  a  want  of  respect  towards  the  persons 
visited,  whether  the  visit  was  one  of  duty  or  of  polite- 
ness \ 

These  women  are  also  present  at  marriages  and  other 
solemn  family  meetings.  All  the  time  which  they  have  to 
spare  in  the  intervals  of  the  various  ceremonies  is  devoted 
to  infinitely  more  shameful  practices  ;  and  it  is  not  an 
uncommon  thing  to  see  even  sacred  temples  converted  into 
mere  brothels.  They  are  brought  up  in  this  shameful 
licentiousness  from  infancy,  and  are  recruited  from  various 
castes,  some  among  them  belonging  to  respectable  families. 
It  is  not  unusual  for  pregnant  women,  with  the  object  of 
obtaining  a  safe  delivery,  to  make  a  vow,  with  the  consent 
of  their  husbands,  to  devote  the  child  that  they  carry  in 
their  womb,  if  it  should  turn  out  a  girl,  to  the  temple 
service.  They  are  far  from  thinking  that  this  infamous 
vow  offends  in  any  way  the  laws  of  decency,  or  is  contrary 

1  This  custom  is  certainly  not  observed  at  the  present  clay. — Ed. 

U  3 


586  AIDS   TO    SEDUCTION 

to  the  duties  of  motherhood.  In  fact  no  shame  what- 
ever is  attached  to  parents  whose  daughters  adopt  this 
career. 

The  courtesans  are  the  only  women  in  India  who  enjoy 
t  he  privilege  of  learning  to  read,  to  dance,  and  to  sing. 
A  well-bred  and  respectable  woman  would  for  this  reason 
blush  to  acquire  any  one  of  these  accomplishments  \ 

The  deva-dasis  receive  a  fixed  salary  for  the  religious 
duties  which  they  perform  ;  but  as  the  amount  is  small 
they  supplement  it  by  selling  their  favours  in  as  profitable 
a  manner  as  possible.  In  the  attainment  of  this  object 
they  are  probably  more  skilful  than  similar  women  in  other 
countries.  They  employ  all  the  resources  and  artifices  of 
coquetry.  Perfumes,  elegant  costumes,  coiffures  best  suited 
to  set  off  the  beauty  of  their  hair,  which  they  entwine  with 
sweet-scented  flowers  ;  a  profusion  of  jewels  worn  with 
much  taste  on  different  parts  of  the  body  ;  graceful  and 
voluptuous  attitudes  :  such  are  the  snares  with  which  these 
sirens  allure  the  Hindus,  who,  it  must  be  confessed,  rarely 
display  in  such  cases  the  prudence  and  constancy  of  a 
Ulysses. 

Nevertheless,  to  the  discredit  of  Europeans  it  must  be 
confessed  that  the  quiet  seductions  which  Hindu  pro- 
stitutes know  how  to  exercise  with  so  much  skill  resemble 
in  no  way  the  disgraceful  methods  of  the  wretched  beings 
who  give  themselves  up  to  a  similar  profession  in  Europe, 
and  whose  indecent  behaviour,  cynical  impudence,  obscene 
and  filthy  words  of  invitation  are  enough  to  make  any  sensible 
man  who  is  not  utterly  depraved  shrink  from  them  with  horror. 
Of  all  the  women  in  India  it  is  the  courtesans,  and  especially 
those  attached  to  the  temples,  who  are  the  most  decently 
clothed.  Indeed  they  are  particularly  careful  not  to  expose 
any  part  of  the  body.  I  do  not  deny,  however,  that  this 
is  merely  a  refinement  of  seduction.  Experience  has  no 
doubt  taught  them  that  for  a  woman  to  display  her  charms 
damps  sensual  ardour  instead  of  exciting  it,  and  that  the 
imagination  is  more  easily  captivated  than  the  eye. 

1  In  these  days  female  education  is  slowly  extending  to  all  classes, 
and  the  prejudice  which  formerly  existed  no  longer  applies  to  women 
learning  to  read  and  sing,  though  dancing  is  still  restricted  to  the  pro- 
fessional dancing-girls,  and  is  not  considered  respectable. — Ed. 


TEMPLE   MUSICIANS  537 

God  forbid,  however,  that  any  one  should  believe  me  to 
wish  to  say  a  word  in  defence  of  the  comparative  modesty 
and  reserve  of  the  dancing-girls  of  India  !  Actions  can 
only  be  judged  by  their  motives  ;  and  certainly,  if  these 
Indian  women  are  more  reserved  in  public  than  their  sisters 
in  other  countries  which  call  themselves  more  civilized,  the 
credit  is  due  not  to  their  innate  modesty  but  to  national 
prejudice.  In  fact,  however  loose  the  Hindus  may  be  in 
their  morals,  they  strictly  maintain  an  outward  appearance 
of  decency,  and  attach  great  importance  to  the  observance 
of  strict  decorum  in  public.  The  most  shameless  pro- 
stitute would  never  dare  to  stop  a  man  in  the  streets  ; 
and  she  in  her  turn  would  indignantly  repulse  any  man 
who  ventured  to  take  any  indecent  liberty  with  her.  The 
man  who  behaved  familiarly  with  one  of  these  women  in 
public  would  be  censured  and  despised  by  everybody  who 
witnessed  the  scandal.     Is  it  the  same  among  ourselves  % 

After  the  dancing-girls  come  the  players  of  musical 
instruments  attached  to  the  service  of  the  temples.  Every 
pagoda  of  any  importance  always  has  a  more  or  less  nu- 
merous band  of  them.  They,  as  well  as  the  dancing-girls, 
are  obliged  to  attend  the  temple  twice  a  day,  and  to  fill  it 
with  discordant  sounds.  Their  presence  at  all  feasts  and 
ceremonies  is  likewise  obligatory.  Moreover,  they  cannot 
be  dispensed  with  during  the  great  family  feasts  and  cere- 
monies. The  Hindu  taste  for  music  is  so  marked  that  there 
is  not  a  single  gathering,  however  small,  which  has  not 
some  musicians  at  its  head. 

Those  who  are  regularly  attached  to  a  pagoda  receive 
a  fixed  salary.  The  instruments  on  which  they  play  are 
for  the  most  part  clarionets  and  trumpets  ;  they  have  also 
cymbals  and  several  kinds  of  small  drums.  The  sounds 
produced  by  these  instruments  are  far  from  pleasing,  and 
may  even  appear  hideous  to  European  ears.  The  Hindus 
recognize  a  kind  of  harmony,  however,  in  two  parts  :  they 
have  always  a  bass  and  a  high  counter-tenor  or  alto.  The 
latter  is  produced  by  a  wind  instrument  in  the  form  of 
a  tube  widened  at  its  base,  the  sounds  of  which  have  some 
resemblance  to  those  of  the  bagpipe. 

The  vocal  part  is  executed  by  a  second  band  of  musicians, 
who  take  turns  with  the  dancing-girls  in  singing  hymns  in 


588  DISCORDANT  MUSICAL  SOUNDS 

honour  of  the  gods.  Sometimes  the  Brahmins  and  other 
worshippers  form  the  chorus,  or  sing  separately  sacred 
poems  of  their  own  composition. 

The  nattuva,  or  conductor,  is  the  most  remarkable  of  all 
the  musicians.  In  beating  time  he  taps  with  his  ringers  on 
a  narrow  drum.  As  he  beats,  his  head,  shoulders,  arms, 
thighs,  and  in  fact  all  the  parts  of  his  body  perform  succes- 
sive movements  ;  and  simultaneously  he  utters  inarticulate 
cries,  thus  animating  the  musicians  both  by  voice  and 
gesture.  At  times  one  would  think  he  was  agitated  by 
violent  convulsions. 

The  dancing-women,  the  chorus,  and  the  orchestra  take 
turn  and  turn  about  during  a  religious  ceremony,  which 
often  terminates  with  a  procession  round  the  temple. 

Morning  and  evening  the  courtesans  before  leaving  never 
fail  to  perform  for  the  idol,  singing  the  while,  the  ceremony 
of  the  aratti,  for  the  purpose  of  averting  the  fatal  influence 
caused  by  the  looks  of  evil-minded  persons,  an  influence 
from  which  the  gods  themselves,  as  I  have  already  said, 
are  not  exempt. 

The  whole  musical  repertoire  of  the  Hindus  is  reduced  to 
thirty-six  airs,  which  are  called  ragas  ;  but  most  of  the 
musicians  hardly  know  half  of  them. 

Hindu  music,  whether  vocal  or  instrumental,  may  be 
pleasing  to  the  natives,  but  I  do  not  think  it  can  give  the 
slightest  pleasure  to  any  one  else,  however  little  sensitive 
be  his  ear.  Hindu  musicians  learn  to  play  and  sing  methodi- 
cally ;  they  keep  excellent  time  ;  and  they  have,  as  we 
have,  a  variety  of  keys.  In  spite  of  all  this,  however,  their 
songs  have  always  appeared  to  me  uninspiring  and  mono- 
tonous, while  from  their  instruments  I  have  never  heard 
anything  but  harsh,  high,  and  ear-splitting  sounds. 

However,  I  admit  that  the  chief  reason  why  a  European 
forms  an  unfavourable  opinion  of  Hindu  music  is  because 
he  judges  it  by  comparison  with  his  own.  To  appreciate  it 
rightly,  we  must  go  back  two  or  three  thousand  years  and 
imagine  ourselves  in  those  ancient  times  when  the  Druids 
and  other  priests  used  in  their  civil  and  religious  ceremonies 
no  other  music  but  dismal  cries  and  noisy  sounds,  produced 
by  striking  two  metal  plates  together,  by  beating  tightly- 
stretched  skins,  or  by  blowing  horns  of  different  kinds. 


ANTIQUITY  OF   HINDU   MUSIC  589 

We  must  remember  that  Hindu  music  at  the  present  day 
is  the  same  as  it  has  always  been  ;  and  that,  as  in  the  case 
of  their  other  arts,  it  has  undergone  no  alteration  and  has 
not  been  improved  in  any  way.  We  shall  then  feel  obliged 
to  be  more  indulgent ;  indeed,  we  may  even  feel  astonished 
that  Hindu  music  attained  such  perfection  at  the  very  begin- 
ning. For  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  scale  used  at  present 
by  the  Hindus  has  existed  from  the  earliest  times.  It  bears 
moreover  a  striking  resemblance  to  ours,  being  composed 
of  the  same  number  of  notes,  arranged  in  the  same  way,  as 
follows  : — 

8a  ri  ga  ma  pa  da  ni  sa 

Do  re  mi  fa  sol  la  si  do. 

Are  we  then  to  deny  the  merit  of  this  invention  to  Guy 
of  Arezzo  I  And  is  John  de  Meurs,  or  whoever  it  was  that 
perfected  the  system  of  the  learned  Benedictine,  to  have 
no  other  credit  than  that  of  having  borrowed  with  discern- 
ment from  the  same  source  I  We  know  that  Vossius 
maintained  that  the  Egyptians  had  a  musical  scale  similar 
to  ours  many  centuries  before  Guy  of  Arezzo  published  his 
own.     This  question  I  must  leave  for  others  to  solve. 

There  is  nothing,  as  I  have  already  shown,  into  which 
the  Hindus  do  not  introduce  some  superstitious  notions, 
and  it  would  have  been  a  miracle  if  music — a  diversion  of 
the  gods  themselves — had  not  furnished  them  with  means 
of  satisfying  their  taste  in  this  direction.  Every  note  of 
the  Hindu  scale  has  a  mark  characteristic  of  some  divinity, 
and  includes  several  hidden  meanings  deduced  from  its 
particular  sound  or  from  something  similar  to  it.  There 
are  also  notes  expressing  joy,  sadness,  sweetness,  anger, 
&c.  And  Hindu  musicians  take  great  care  not  to  confound 
notes  intended  to  express  these  varying  passions  of  the 
human  soul. 

All  the  musicians  who  play  wind  instruments  are  taken, 
as  I  have  already  remarked,  from  the  low  barber  caste,  the 
profession  being  handed  down  from  father  to  son. 

Heathen  worship  being  very  expensive,  the  priests  and 
servants  of  the  temples  have,  necessarily,  various  sources 
of  unfailing  revenue.  In  some  districts  a  kind  of  tithe  is 
collected  out  of  the  whole  produce  of  the  harvest  ;  in  others, 
every  temple  has  in  its  absolute  possession  extensive  lands 


.-)}><>       MAXIPl'LATIXC;    IDOLS   AS   ORACLES 

which  are  exempt  from  all  taxation,  and  the  produce  of 
which  is  exclusively  assigned  to  the  maintenance  of  the 
temple  and  of  its  numerous  staff.  I  have  mentioned  that 
in  the  case  of  these  persons  perquisites  are  of  no  small 
importance.  The  offerings  of  rich  devotees,  which  are 
divided  among  them  in  proportion  to  their  rank  and  dignity, 
are  sometimes  so  considerable,  in  the  principal  temples,  that 
they  have  aroused  the  cupidity  of  the  princes  of  the  country, 
particularly  of  Mahomedans.  These  latter,  as  a  sort  of 
compensation  for  tolerating  a  religion  which  they  abhorred, 
thought  fit  to  take  possession  of  more  than  half  of  these 
offerings. 

There  is  no  trick  which  the  Brahmins  will  not  employ  in 
order  to  excite  the  fervour  of  the  worshippers,  and  thus  to 
enrich  themselves  by  their  offerings.  The  most  obvious 
means  generally  produce  the  best  results.  In  the  foremost 
rank  we  must  place  the  oracles,  a  rich  mine  of  wealth 
which  pagan  priests  of  other  countries  worked  long  ago 
with  great  success,  and  which  the  lapse  of  ages  has  not  yet 
exhausted  for  the  heathen  priests  of  India.  Here  it  is  the 
idol  itself  which  addresses  the  dull  and  profoundly  atten- 
tive crowd  of  worshippers,  who  are  unable  to  understand 
that  some  cunning  rogue,  concealed  inside  or  close  by  the 
god  of  stone,  is  speaking  through  the  mouth  of  the  idol. 
The  idol,  or  its  interpreter,  also  undertakes  to  foretell  the 
future  ;  but  these  oracles,  like  those  of  ancient  Greece, 
contain  some  ambiguous  or  double  meaning.  Consequently, 
whatever  the  issue  may  be,  the  Brahmins  always  find  some 
way  of  making  it  agree  with  their  predictions  \ 

If  the  flow  of  offerings  by  any  chance  decreases,  the  idol 
will  inveigh  vehemently  against  the  indifference  and  mean- 
ness of  the  inhabitants  of  the  district,  proclaiming  once  for 
all  that  if  this  state  of  things  continues,  it  will  withdraw 
its  protection  from  them,  and  will  even  resort  to  the  ex- 
pedient of  decamping  in  search  of  other  more  grateful,  and 
especially  more  generous  worshippers  2. 

Or  perhaps  the  devout  mob  will  some  day  find  the  hands 

1  These  false  oracles  are  confined  to  temples  dedicated  to  the  inferior 
deities. — Ed. 

-  This  remark  also  applies  only  to  the  temples  dedicated  to  the  inferior 
deities. — Ed. 


EXPEDIENTS   TO   STIMULATE   DEVOTION  591 

and  feet  of  their  cherished  idol  bound  with  chains.  Cruel 
creditors,  it  is  announced,  have  brought  it  to  this  humilia- 
ting condition  because  it  could  not  pay  certain  sums  of 
money  which  it  had  borrowed  in  times  of  need  ;  and  they 
have  sworn  not  to  restore  it  to  liberty  until  the  whole 
sum,  capital  and  interest,  which  is  due  to  them  shall  have 
been  repaid.  Touched  with  compassion,  the  devotees  will 
hasten  to  consult  together  and  exact  contributions  from  all 
possible  sources  until  the  sum  necessary  to  liquidate  the 
liabilities  of  their  deity  has  been  furnished  to  the  Brahmins. 
As  soon  as  the  money  is  secured,  the  chains  of  the  idol  fall 
off,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  everybody.  In  some  famous 
temples,  such  as  that  of  Tirupati,  they  use  silver  instead  of 
iron  chains  to  bind  the  sacred  limbs  of  the  idol. 

There  is  another  expedient  to  which  the  Brahmins  fre- 
quently have  recourse.  All  of  a  sudden  it  is  proclaimed 
abroad  that  the  idol  has  been  attacked  by  a  dangerous 
disease  caused  by  the  grief  it  experiences  on  seeing  the 
devotion  of  the  people  abating  from  day  to  day.  The  idol 
is  taken  down  from  its  pedestal  and  carried  to  the  entrance 
of  the  temple,  where  it  is  exposed  to  the  public  gaze.  Its 
head  and  temples  are  rubbed  with  sundry  lotions  ;  drugs 
and  medicines  are  placed  before  it  ;  the  priests  from  time 
to  time  feel  its  pulse  with  a  display  of  the  gravest  uneasi- 
ness. Still  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  develop  from  day 
to  day,  and  the  priests  begin  to  despair  of  the  recovery  of 
the  idol.  This  alarming  intelligence  is  bruited  abroad,  and 
presents  and  offerings  soon  arrive  from  all  sides.  At  sight 
of  these  the  idol's  strength  begins  to  return  little  by  little  : 
then  it  becomes  convalescent  ;  and  finally  it  is  cured  and 
restored  to  its  place. 

Fear  and  awe  are  also  means  which  the  Brahmins  turn  to 
good  account  in  order  to  renew  the  wavering  faith  of  the 
people.  They  engage  certain  confederates,  into  whose 
bodies  they  affirm  the  angry  god  has  sent  a  pisacha,  or 
demon,  in  order  to  avenge  some  outrage  which  it  has 
received  from  wicked  men.  One  frequently  meets  with 
charlatans  who  fall  into  dreadful  convulsions  and  make 
contortions  and  grimaces  calculated  to  frighten  the  stoutest 
heart.  In  their  calmer  moments  they  give  a  piteous  and 
detailed  account  of  their  misfortunes,  which  they  attribute 


592         FEIGNING    DEMONIAC   POSSESSION 

to  the  just  resentment  of  the  god,  who  is  punishing  them 
for  their  indifference  towards  himself  and  his  ministers. 
They  gabble  phrases  in  many  dialects,  asserting  that  it  is 
the  demon  who  inspires  them,  and  who  has  imparted  to 
them  the  gift  of  languages.  They  eat  all  sorts  of  meat, 
drink  intoxicating  liquors,  and  observe  none  of  the  rules 
of  caste. 

But  this  is  not  imputed  to  them  as  a  crime  ;  it  is  all  laid 
to  the  charge  of  the  devil  that  possesses  them.  The  multi- 
tude are  filled  with  fear  at  the  sight  of  one  of  these  impostors, 
and  prostrate  themselves  before  him,  worshipping  the 
demon  who  has  taken  up  its  abode  in  him,  and  offering 
him  oblations  and  sacrifices,  in  order  to  propitiate  him 
and  prevent  him  from  injuring  them.  The  demoniac  is 
given  his  fill  of  meat  and  drink  ;  and  when  he  departs  he 
is  accompanied  with  much  pomp  and  music  to  the  next 
village,  where  he  plays  the  same  trick  and  finds  just  as 
many  dupes.  When  he  is  pleased  to  come  to  his  senses 
again,  he  exhorts  his  sympathetic  audience  to  profit  by 
the  terrible  example  which  he  affords  them,  to  show  more 
faith  in  their  god  than  he  did,  and  to  ensure  the  god's 
favour  and  protection  by  numerous  gifts  and  offerings. 

Miracles,  again,  are  a  most  profitable  branch  of  business 
for  Brahmins.  They  have  all  kinds,  and  suitable  for  every 
disease.  The  blind  recover  their  sight,  the  lame  walk,  the 
dead  come  to  life  again.  But  the  most  popular  miracle  is 
that  which  gives  fecundity  to  women.  One  continually 
hears  of  women  whose  pious  devotion  has  obtained  for 
them  the  signal  favour  of  bearing  children.  I  have  already 
remarked  that  barrenness  is  the  greatest  possible  curse  to 
a  woman  in  India,  and  the  most  dreaded  of  all  the  mis- 
fortunes that  can  befall  a  Hindu  family. 

Other  nations  which  are  very  proud  of  their  enlighten- 
ment and  morality  suppress  the  natural  desire  of  seeing 
oneself  born  again  in  one's  numerous  progeny  from  con- 
siderations of  personal  interest  and  ambition,  and  regard 
the  fruitfulness  of  their  women  with  aversion.  They  are 
moreover  not  ashamed  of  resorting  to  wicked  and  dis- 
gusting means  of  reducing  or  destroying  it  altogether,  thus 
outraging  the  most  holy  instincts  of  nature  in  order  that 
they  may  not  deprive  themselves  of  the  means  of  satisfy- 


DESIRE    FOR   PROGENY  593 

ing  their  ambition  or  of  procuring  the  luxuries  of  life,  as 
if  the  love  of  a  father  for  his  children  were  not  the  greatest 
of  all  pleasures.  Animated  in  this  respect  by  the  noblest 
and  purest  sentiments,  the  Hindus  consider  a  man  happy 
in  proportion  to  the  number  of  children  he  possesses. 
Among  them,  indeed,  children  are  considered  to  be  the 
blessing  of  a  house.  However  numerous  a  man's  family 
may  be,  he  never  ceases  to  offer  prayers  for  its  increase. 

The  children,  it  is  true,  soon  become  useful  to  their 
parents.  At  five  or  six  years  old  they  begin  to  tend  the 
calves,  while  those  a  little  older  take  care  of  the  cows  and 
oxen.  And  as  soon  as  they  are  strong  enough  they  assist 
their  fathers  in  tilling  the  fields  or  help  in  some  other  way 
to  maintain  the  family. 

There  is  a  superstition,  admirable  enough  in  its  way, 
which  is  a  powerful  factor  in  keeping  up  in  the  mind  of 
a  Hindu  this  ardent  desire  of  seeing  his  race  prolonged.  In 
his  eyes  there  is  no  misfortune  equal  to  that  of  not  leaving 
a  son  or  a  grandson  behind  to  perform  the  last  duties  in 
connexion  with  his  funeral.  Such  a  deprivation  is  re- 
garded as  capable  of  preventing  all  access  to  an  Abode  of 
Bliss  after  death. 

Hence  it  is  that  we  see  women  who  are  slower  in  con- 
ceiving children  than  they  would  wish,  hastening  from 
temple  to  temple,  and  sometimes  ruining  themselves  in  the 
extravagant  gifts  which  they  offer  in  order  to  obtain  from 
the  gods  the  inestimable  favour  of  becoming  mothers. 
Expert  at  reaping  profit  from  the  virtues  as  well  as  the 
vices  of  their  countrymen,  the  Brahmins  see  in  these  touch- 
ing impulses  of  nature  merely  a  means  of  gaining  wealth, 
and  also  at  the  same  time  an  opportunity  of  satisfying  their 
carnal  lusts  with  impunity.  There  are  few  temples  where 
the  presiding  deity  does  not  claim  the  power  of  curing 
barrenness  in  women.  And  there  are  some  whose  renown 
in  this  respect  is  unrivalled,  such,  for  example,  as  that  of 
Tirupati  in  the  Carnatic,  to  which  women  flock  in  crowds 
to  obtain  children  from  the  god  Venkateswara  \  On  their 
arrival,  the  women  hasten  to  disclose  the  object  of  their 
pilgrimage  to  the  Brahmins,  the  managers  of  the  temple. 
The  latter  advise  them  to  pass  the  night  in  the  temple, 
1   One  of  the  names  of  Vishnu. 


594  [MPOSING    ON    BARREN    WOMEN 

where,  they  say,  the  great  Venkateswara,  touched  by  their 
devotion,  will  perhaps  visit  them  in  the  spirit  and  accom- 
plish that  which  until  then  has  been  denied  to  them  through 
human  power.  I  must  draw  a  curtain  over  the  sequel  of 
this  deceitful  suggestion.  The  reader  already  guesses  at 
it.  The  following  morning  these  detestable  hypocrites, 
pretending  complete  ignorance  of  what  has  passed,  make 
due  inquiries  into  all  the  details  ;  and  after  having  con- 
gratulated the  women  upon  the  reception  they  met  with 
from  the  god,  receive  the  gifts  with  which  they  have  pro- 
vided themselves  and  take  leave  of  them,  after  flattering 
them  with  the  hope  that  they  have  not  taken  their  journey 
in  vain.  Fully  convinced  that  the  god  has  deigned  to  have 
intercourse  with  them,  the  poor  creatures  return  home 
enchanted,  flattering  themselves  that  they  will  soon  procure 
for  their  husbands  the  honour  of  paternity. 

People  who  have  not  sufficiently  reflected  upon  the 
extremes  to  which  the  superstitious  and  fanatical  credulity 
of  a  people  may  be  carried,  have  regarded  as  untrue  the 
stories  which  Father  Gerbillon,  Tavernier,  and  other 
travellers  have  told  of  the  Dalai-Lama.  His  excrements 
are  carefully  preserved,  dried,  and  distributed  as  relics  to 
pious  Tibetans,  who,  when  they  fall  ill,  make  use  of  them 
as  an  internal  medicine,  which  is  considered  to  be  a  sove- 
reign remedy  for  all  diseases.  The  fact  I  am  about  to 
relate,  which,  although  even  more  revolting,  is  nevertheless 
quite  true,  will  render  any  similar  stories  credible  enough. 
It  is  not  without  shame  that  I  enter  upon  an  account  of 
the  disgusting  incidents  which  I  am  here  to  describe.  I 
would  have  passed  them  over  in  silence  if  the  very  nature 
of  this  work  had  not  imposed  upon  me  the  painful  duty  of 
telling  everything. 

At  Nanjangud,  a  village  situated  about  ten  leagues  south 
of  Seringapatam,  there  is  a  temple  famous  throughout 
Mysore.  Among  the  numerous  votaries  who  flock  to  it 
are  many  women,  who  go  to  implore  the  help  of  the  idol 
in  curing  their  sterility.  Offerings  and  prayers  are  not  the 
only  ceremonies  which  have  to  be  gone  through.  On  leav- 
ing the  temple  the  woman,  accompanied  by  her  husband, 
has  to  go  to  a  place  where  all  the  pilgrims  are  accustomed 
to  resort  to  answer  the  calls  of  nature.    There  the  husband 


MISGUIDED   UNCLEANNESS  595 

and  the  wife  collect  with  their  hands  a  certain  quantity 
of  ordure  and  form  it  into  a  small  pyramid,  which  they  are 
careful  to  mark  with  a  sign  that  will  enable  them  to  recog- 
nize it.  Then  they  go  to  the  neighbouring  tank  and  mix 
in  the  hollow  of  their  hands  the  filth  which  has  soiled  their 
fingers.  (But  I  will  spare  my  readers  the  rest.)  After 
having  performed  their  ablutions  they  retire.  Two  or  three 
days  afterwards  they  visit  their  pyramid,  and,  still  using 
their  hands,  turn  the  filthy  mass  over  and  over  and  examine 
it  as  carefully  and  as  seriously  as  the  Roman  augurs  scruti- 
nized the  entrails  of  sacrificed  animals,  in  order  to  see  if 
any  insects  have  been  engendered  in  it.  In  this  case  it 
would  be  a  very  good  omen,  showing  that  the  woman  would 
soon  be  pregnant.  But  if,  after  careful  search,  not  even 
the  smallest  insect  is  visible,  the  poor  couple,  sad  and 
discouraged,  return  home  in  the  full  conviction  that  the 
expenses  they  have  been  put  to  and  the  pains  they  have 
taken  have  been  of  no  avail l. 

At  Mogur,  another  village  situated  a  short  distance  from 
the  former  (Nanjangud),  there  is  a  small  temple  dedicated 
to  Tipamma,  a  female  divinity,  in  whose  honour  a  great 
festival  is  celebrated  every  year.  The  goddess,  placed  in 
a  beautifully  ornamented  palanquin,  is  carried  in  proces- 
sion through  the  streets.  In  front  of  her  there  is  another 
divinity,  a  male.  These  two  idols,  which  are  entirely 
nude,  are  placed  in  immodest  postures,  and  by  help  of 
a  piece  of  mechanism  a  disgusting  movement  is  imparted 
to  them  as  long  as  the  procession  continues.  This  disgust- 
ing spectacle,  which  is  worthy  of  the  depraved  persons  who 
look  upon  it,  excites  transports  of  mirth,  manifested  by 
shouts  and  bursts  of  laughter.  Nor  is  this  all.  A  Pariah, 
who  has  made  a  special  study  of  all  the  obscene  and  filthy 
expressions  to  be  found  in  the  Hindu  language,  is  chosen  ; 
the  goddess  Tipamma  is  then  evoked  and  takes  up  her 
abode  in  his  person.  Then  any  one  who  wishes  to  hear 
foul  expressions  stands  before  the  man,  and  he  is  certain 
to  be  satisfied.  As  it  is  supposed  to  be  Tipamma  who 
speaks  through  the  mouth  of  the  Pariah,  the  devotees,  far 
from  being  offended  with  him,  are  quite  pleased  with  the 

1   We  believe  that  no  such  disgusting  practice  exists  nowadays. — Ed. 


50G  LIBERTINAOE   IN  TEMPLES 

goddess  for  having  deigned  to  overwhelm  them  with  insults. 
Even  high-caste  Hindus  are  to  be  seen  at  this  festival  set-k- 
ing to  obtain  the  coveted  honour. 

The  goddess  Tipamma  of  Mogur  is  not  the  only  member 
of  her  family.  She  has  six  sisters,  who  are  not  in  any  way 
inferior  to  her  in  point  of  decency  and  politeness.  Each 
one  of  them  has  her  own  temple,  in  which  like  ceremonies 
are  performed.  In  the  whole  of  Southern  Mysore,  from 
Alambadi  as  far  as  Wynaad,  for  a  distance  of  more  than 
thirty  leagues,  these  abominable  revels  are  held  in  the 
highest  esteem. 

There  are  temples  in  certain  isolated  places,  too,  where 
the  most  disgusting  debauchery  is  the  only  service  agree- 
able to  the  presiding  deity.  There  children  are  promised 
to  women  who,  laying  aside  all  shame,  grant  their  favours 
to  all  persons  indiscriminately.  At  such  places  a  feast  is 
celebrated  every  year  in  the  month  of  January,  at  which 
both  sexes,  the  scum  of  the  country-side,  meet.  Barren 
women,  in  the  hope  that  they  will  cease  to  be  so,  visit  them 
after  binding  themselves  by  a  vow  to  grant  their  favours 
to  a  fixed  number  of  libertines.  Others,  who  have  entirely 
lost  all  sense  of  decency,  go  there  in  order  to  testify  their 
reverence  for  the  deity  of  the  place  by  prostituting  them- 
selves, openly  and  without  shame,  even  at  the  very  gates 
of  the  temple. 

There  is  one  of  these  sinks  of  iniquity  five  or  six  leagues 
from  the  village  where  I  am  writing  these  pages,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Cauvery,  in  a  lonely  place  called  Junginagatta. 
The  temple  is  not  striking  to  look  at ;  but  the  January 
feast  is  celebrated  there  with  the  utmost  refinements  of 
vice. 

People  have  also  pointed  out  to  me  a  temple  of  the  same 
description  near  Kara-madai,  in  the  district  of  Coimbatore, 
and  another  not  far  from  Mudu-dorai,  in  Eastern  Mysore. 
I  have  before  remarked  that  these  dens  of  debauchery 
are  always  situated  in  places  far  removed  from  all  habita- 
tions. 

According  to  Herodotus  and  Strabo,  every  woman  among 
the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians  was  obliged  to  prostitute 
herself  once  in  her  life  in  the  temple  of  the  goddess  Mylitta, 
the  Aphrodite  of  the  Greeks.     This  tradition  so  flagrantly 


FANATICAL  SELF-TORTURE  597 

dehed  the  principles  of  modesty  with  which  nature  seems 
to  have  endowed  even  the  majority  of  brute  beasts  that 
many  modern  writers,  and  among  them  Voltaire,  have 
called  its  truth  in  question.  What  would  they  say  of  the 
infamous  festivals  of  which  I  have  just  drawn  a  sketcli  \ 
The  authority  of  husbands  in  India  is  moreover  such  that 
it  is  impossible  for  debauchery  of  this  kind  to  be  carried 
on  without  their  consent.  But  does  superstition  know  any 
bounds  \  Many  Hindu  religious  practices  afford  irrefutable 
proofs  of  the  truth  of  similar  incredible  details  which  ancient 
historians  have  handed  down  to  us. 

Here  the  scene  changes.  It  is  no  longer  a  question  of 
licentious  libertines  profiting  by  the  vicious  tendencies  or 
the  stupid  credulity  of  women  in  order  to  satisfy  their 
passions.  It  is  concerning  the  silly  fanatics  who  make  it 
their  task  to  torture  themselves  and  to  mutilate  their 
bodies  in  a  hundred  different  ways.  It  is  not  uncommon 
to  hear  of  Hindus,  in  case  of  a  serious  illness  or  of  some 
imminent  danger,  making  a  vow  to  mortify  some  important 
part  of  their  bodies,  on  condition  of  recovery.  The  most 
common  penance  of  this  sort  consists  in  stamping  upon  the 
shoulders,  chest,  and  other  parts  of  the  body,  with  a  red- 
hot  iron,  the  marks  symbolical  of  their  gods — brandings 
which  are  never  effaced,  and  which  they  display  with  as 
much  ostentation  as  a  warrior  does  the  wounds  he  has 
received  in  battle. 

Devotees  are  often  seen  stretched  at  full  length  on  the 
ground  and  rolling  in  that  posture  all  round  the  temples, 
or,  during  solemn  processions,  before  the  cars  which  carry 
the  idols.  It  is  a  remarkable  sight  to  see  a  crowd  of  fanatics 
rolling  in  this  manner,  quite  regardless  of  stones,  thorns, 
and  other  obstacles.  Others,  inspired  by  extreme  fanati- 
cism, voluntarily  throw  themselves  down  to  be  crushed 
under  the  wheels  of  the  car  on  which  the  idol  is  borne  ]. 
And  the  crowds  that  witness  these  acts  of  madness,  far 
from  preventing  them,  applaud  them  heartily  and  regard 
them  as  the  very  acme  of  devotion. 

Chidi-mari  is  another  torture  to  which  devotees  submit 
themselves  in  honour  of  the  goddess  Mari-amma,  one  of 
the  most  evil-minded  and  bloodthirsty  of  all  the  deities  of 
1  This  has  now  been  prohibited  by  law. — Ed. 


508     HOOK-SWINGING   AND   FIRE   ORDEALS 

India.  At  many  of  the  temples  consecrated  to  this  cruel 
goddess  there  is  a  sort  of  gibbet  erected  opposite  the  door. 
At  the  extremity  of  the  crosspiece,  or  arm,  a  pulley  is 
suspended,  through  which  a  cord  passes  with  a  hook  at  the 
end.  The  man  who  has  made  a  vow  to  undergo  this  cruel 
penance  places  himself  under  the  gibbet,  and  a  priest  then 
heats  the  fleshy  part  of  the  back  until  it  is  quite  benumbed. 
After  that  the  hook  is  fixed  into  the  flesh  thus  prepared, 
and  in  this  way  the  unhappy  wretch  is  raised  in  the  air. 
While  suspended  he  is  careful  not  to  show  any  sign  of 
pain ;  indeed  he  continues  to  laugh,  jest,  and  gesticulate  like 
a  buffoon  in  order  to  amuse  the  spectators,  who  applaud 
and  shout  with  laughter.  After  swinging  in  the  air  for  the 
prescribed  time  the  victim  is  let  down  again,  and,  as  soon 
as  his  wounds  are  dressed,  he  returns  home  in  triumph  1. 

Some  votaries,  again,  are  to  be  met  with  who  make 
a  vow  to  walk  with  bare  feet  on  burning  coals.  For  this 
purpose  they  kindle  a  large  pile  of  wood  ;  and  when  the 
flames  are  extinguished  and  all  the  wood  consumed,  they 
place  the  glowing  embers  in  a  space  about  twenty  feet  in 
length.  The  victim  stands  at  one  extremity  with  his  feet 
in  a  puddle  expressly  prepared  for  the  purpose,  takes 
a  spring,  and  runs  quickly  over  the  burning  embers  till  he 
reaches  another  puddle  on  the  other  side.  In  spite  of  these 
precautions  very  few,  as  one  can  imagine,  escape  from  the 
ordeal  with  their  feet  uninjured.  Others,  whose  weak  limbs 
do  not  permit  of  their  running  over  the  hot  embers,  cover 
the  upper  part  of  the  body  with  a  wet  cloth,  and  holding 
a  chafing-dish  rilled  with  burning  coals,  pour  the  contents 
over  their  heads.  This  feat  of  devotion  is  called  the  Fire- 
bath. 

Another  kind  of  torture  consists  in  piercing  both  cheeks 
and  passing  a  wire  of  silver  or  some  other  metal  through 
the  two  jaws  between  the  teeth.  Thus  bridled,  the  mouth 
cannot  be  opened  without  acute  pain.  Many  fanatics  have 
been  known  to  travel  a  distance  of  twenty  miles  with  their 

1  '  Hook-swinging,'  as  this  is  called,  is  still  practised  in  the  Madura 
district  (Madras).  Though  the  magistracy  have  orders  to  do  all  they 
can  to  prevent  it,  by  dissuading  men  from  offering  themselves  as  victims, 
still,  as  it  is  not  under  ordinary  circumstances  a  criminal  offence,  it 
cannot  be  prevented  by  legal  process. — Ed. 


OTHER    SEVERE  PENANCES  599 

jaws  thus  maimed,  and  remain  several  days  in  this  slate, 
taking  only  liquid  nourishment,  or  some  clear  broth  poured 
into  the  mouth.  I  have  seen  whole  companies  of  them, 
men  and  women,  condemned  by  their  self-inflicted  torture 
to  enforced  silence,  going  on  a  pilgrimage  to  some  temple 
where  this  form  of  penance  is  especially  recommended. 
There  are  others,  again,  who  pierce  their  nostrils  or  the 
skin  of  their  throats  in  the  same  way. 

I  could  not  help  shuddering  one  day  at  seeing  one  of 
these  imbeciles  with  his  lips  pierced  by  two  long  nails, 
which  crossed  each  other  so  that  the  point  of  one  reached 
to  the  right  eye  and  the  point  of  the  other  to  the  left.  I 
saw  him  thus  disfigured  at  the  gate  of  a  temple  consecrated 
to  the  cruel  goddess  Mari-amma.  The  blood  was  still 
trickling  down  his  chin  ;  yet  the  pain  he  must  have  been 
enduring  did  not  prevent  him  from  dancing  and  performing 
every  kind  of  buffoonery  before  a  crowd  of  spectators, 
who  showed  their  admiration  by  giving  him  abundant 
alms. 

There  are  a  great  many  ordinary  forms  of  penance, 
which  elsewhere  would  appear  more  than  sufficiently 
painful ;  but  devout  Hindus  do  not  rest  satisfied  with 
these  ;  they  try  unceasingly  to  invent  new  methods  of 
self-torture.  Thus,  for  example,  a  fanatic  self-torturer 
makes  a  vow  to  cut  half  his  tongue  off,  executes  it  coolly 
with  his  own  hands,  puts  the  amputated  portion  in  an 
open  cocoanut  shell,  and  offers  it  on  his  knees  to  the 
divinity. 

Then,  again,  there  are  others  who,  apparently  having 
nothing  better  to  do,  bind  themselves  to  go  on  a  pilgrimage 
to  some  distant  shrine  by  measuring  their  length  along  the 
ground  throughout  the  whole  distance.  Beginning  at  their 
very  doors,  pilgrims  of  this  description  stretch  themselves 
on  the  ground,  rise  again,  advance  two  steps,  again  lie 
down,  again  rise,  and  continue  thus  till  they  reach  their 
destination.  Considering  the  length  of  their  journeys  and 
the  fatigue  of  such  exercise,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  that  the 
pilgrims  do  not  go  far  off  the  route  to  sleep  at  the  end  of 
the  day.  Persons  have  been  seen  attempting  to  measure 
their  length  in  this  way  along  the  entire  road  which  runs 
between  the  sacred  town  of  Benares  and  the  temple  of 


600  CURIOUS   OFFERINGS   TO   IDOLS 

Jagannath  (Puri),  a  distance  of  more  than  two  hundred 
leagues.  1  should  not  like  to  swear,  however,  that  they 
really  accomplished  such  a  feat. 

This  tendency  of  Hindus  to  submit  their  bodies  to  severe 
and  often  cruel  tortures,  or  to  spend  their  means  in  costly 
offerings,  is  manifested  whenever  they  find  themselves  in 
critical  circumstances,  and  particularly  in  times  of  sick- 
ness. 

There  is  not  a  single  Hindu  who  does  not  in  such  cases 
make  a  vow  to  perform  something  more  or  less  onerous  on 
condition  that  he  is  delivered  safe  and  sound  from  his 
unfortunate  predicament.  The  rich  make  vows  either  to 
celebrate  solemn  festivals  at  certain  temples,  or  to  present 
to  the  pagoda  some  gift,  such  as  a  cow,  a  buffalo,  pieces  of 
cloth  or  other  stuffs,  gold  or  silver  ornaments,  &c.  If  the 
eye,  nose,  ear,  or  any  other  organ  be  afflicted,  they  offer 
to  the  idols  an  image  of  it  in  gold  or  silver. 

Among  the  numerous  offerings  which  this  superstitious 
mania  causes  to  flow  into  the  temples  of  the  Hindu  gods, 
there  is  one  common  enough,  but  which,  without  the  per- 
quisites which  accompany  it,  would  contribute  very  little 
to  increase  the  wealth  of  the  Brahmin  priests.  It  consists 
in  offering  one's  nails  and  hair  to  some  divinity.  It  is 
well  known  that  men  in  India  are  in  the  habit  of  shaving 
the  head  and  leaving  only  a  single  small  tuft  of  hair  to  grow 
on  the  crown.  Those  who  make  the  particular  vow  referred 
to  refrain,  for  many  years  together,  from  cutting  their  nails 
and  hair.  Then,  at  a  certain  fixed  time,  they  proceed 
in  state  to  the  temple,  and  there,  with  great  ceremony,  get 
rid  of  the  superfluous  growth  of  hair  and  nails,  which  they 
lay  at  the  feet  of  the  divinity  whom  they  wish  to  honour. 
This  custom  is  practised  only  by  men  ;  it  is  chiefly  recom- 
mended to  those  who  believe  themselves  to  be  possessed 
with  a  devil  *. 

We  must  do  justice  to  the  Brahmins  by  remarking  that 
they  are  never  so  silly  as  to  impose  on  themselves  vows  of 
self-torture.  They  leave  these  pious  pastimes  to  the  stupid 
Sudras.  And  even  the  Sudras  who  practise  such  penances 
are  for  the  most  part  men  of  low  birth  who  do  so  to  gain 

1  This  custom  is  also  practised  among  Sudra  women. — Ed. 


DEMANDING   WIVES    FOR   IDOLS  601 

their  livelihood;  or  else  fanatical  sectaries  of  Siva  or 
Vishnu,  actuated  by  religious  mania,  or  more  often  by  an 
inordinate  desire  of  securing  the  applause  and  admiration 
of  the  public. 

Apart  from  ordinary  superstitious  practices  which  flourish 
everywhere,  there  are  certain  temples  which,  in  this  respect, 
enjoy  special  privileges ;  such,  for  example,  as  that  of 
Tirupati  in  the  south  of  the  Peninsula.  This  temple,  which 
is  in  the  Carnatic,  is  dedicated  to  Vishnu  under  the  name 
of  Venkateswara.  Immense  multitudes  of  pilgrims  flock  to 
it  from  all  parts  of  India,  bringing  offerings  of  all  sorts,  in 
food,  stuffs,  gold,  silver,  jewels,  costly  cloths,  horses,  cows, 
&c,  which  are  so  considerable  that  they  suffice  to  maintain 
several  thousands  of  persons  employed  in  the  various  offices 
of  worship,  which  is  there  conducted  with  extraordinary 
magnificence. 

Among  the  noticeable  peculiarities  which  distinguish  the 
great  feasts  of  this  temple  there  is  one  which  I  must  not 
pass  over  in  silence.  At  a  certain  time  of  the  year  a  grand 
procession  is  formed,  which  attracts  an  immense  crowd  of 
persons  of  both  sexes.  While  the  image  of  Venkateswara 
is  borne  through  the  streets  on  a  magnificent  car,  the 
Brahmins  who  preside  at  the  ceremony  go  about  among 
the  crowd  and  select  the  most  beautiful  women  they  can 
find,  demanding  them  of  their  husbands  or  parents  in  the 
name  of  Venkateswara,  for  whose  service,  it  is  asserted, 
they  are  destined.  Those  husbands  who  have  not  lost  all 
common  sense,  understanding,  or  at  least  suspecting,  that 
a  god  of  stone  has  no  need  of  wives,  indignantly  refuse  to 
deliver  up  theirs,  and  bluntly  speak  their  mind  to  the 
hypocritical  rogues.  The  latter,  far  from  being  discon- 
certed, proceed  to  apply  to  others  who  are  better  disposed, 
for  some  of  the  men  are  delighted  at  the  honour  conferred 
upon  them  by  so  great  a  god  in  condescending  to  ally  himself 
with  their  family,  and  do  not  hesitate  to  deliver  their 
wives  and  even  their  daughters  into  the  hands  of  his 
priests  \ 

It  is  thus  that  the  seraglio  of  Tirupati  is  recruited.  When 
the  god  takes  it  into  his  head  that  some  of  his  wives  are 

1  Such  proceedings  would  hardly  be  tolerated  in  the  present  day. 
—Ed. 


602  THE   TEMPLE   OF  JAGANNATH 

beginning  to  grow  old  or  are  no  Longer  pleasing  to  him,  he 
signifies  through  the  priests  his  intention  of  divorcing 
them.  A  mark  is  branded  on  their  thighs  or  breasts  with 
a  red-hot  iron,  representing  the  god  Venkateswara,  and 
t  hey  receive  a  certificate  showing  that  they  have  faithfully 
served  a  certain  number  of  years  as  legitimate  wives  of  the 
god,  and  are  therefore  recommended  to  the  charitable 
public.  Then  they  are  dismissed,  and  provided  with  their 
certificate  of  good  conduct  they  go  about  the  country  under 
the  name  of  Kali-yuga-Lakshmis  (the  Lakshmis  '  of  Kali- 
yuga).  Wherever  they  go  their  wants  are  abundantly 
supplied. 

This  system  of  procuring  wives  for  their  idols  is  not 
a  peculiarity  of  the  temple  of  Tirupati.  The  priests  of 
many  other  temples  have  found  it  convenient  to  have  re- 
course to  it,  as  for  instance  those  in  charge  of  the  temple 
of  Jagannath,  which  is  even  more  famous  than  the  temple 
of  Tirupati.  Religious  ceremonies  are  conducted  in  this 
temple  with  the  greatest  magnificence.  It  is  situated  near 
the  sea  on  the  coast  of  Orissa.  The  principal  divinity 
worshipped  there  is  represented  under  a  monstrous  shape 
without  arms  or  head.  What  particularly  distinguishes 
this  pagoda  is  that  it  is  a  centre  of  union  among  the  Hindus. 
Although  it  is  specially  consecrated  to  Vishnu,  there  are 
no  distinctions  between  sects  and  castes.  Everybody  is 
admitted,  and  may  offer  worship  in  his  own  way  to  the 
presiding  deity.  Accordingly  pilgrims  resort  thither  from 
all  parts  of  India  ;  the  disciples  of  Vishnu  and  of  Siva 
frequenting  it  with  equal  zeal.  The  Bairagis  and  the 
Goshais  from  the  North,  the  Dasarus  and  the  Jangamas 
from  the  South,  lay  aside  their  mutual  animosities  when 
they  approach  this  sacred  place,  and  it  is  perhaps  the  only 
spot  in  India  where  they  do  so  2.  While  sojourning  there 
they  seem  to  form  but  one  brotherhood.  It  is  at  this 
temple  especially  that  one  sees  the  religious  fanatics,  of 
whom  I  have  already  spoken  above,  throwing  themselves 
before  the  car  of  the  idol  and  allowing  themselves  to  be 
crushed  beneath  its  wheels. 

Several    thousands    of    persons,    chiefly    Brahmins,    are 

1  Lakshmi  is  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Vishnu. — Dubois. 
3  Tirupati  is  the  same  in  this  respect. — Ed. 


SHOES   PRESENTED   TO   AN   IDOL         603 

employed  in  the  performance  of  the  religious  ceremonies 
of  the  temple.  The  erovvd  of  pilgrims  never  abates.  Those 
from  the  South  who  go  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Kasi,  or  Benares, 
always  take  the  Jagannath  (Puri)  road  up  the  coast  in 
order  to  offer  en  route  their  respectful  homage  to  its  pre- 
siding deity.  Those  from  the  North  who  go  to  the  temple 
of  Rameswaram,  which  is  situated  on  a  small  island  near 
Cape  Comorin,  also  take  this  road  ] . 

I  have  made  mention  elsewhere  of  a  tank  or  reservoir  of 
sacred  water  which  is  found  at  Kumbakonani  in  Tanjore, 
and  which  possesses  the  virtue  once  in  every  twelve  years 
of  purifying  all  those  who  bathe  in  it  from  all  spiritual 
and  corporal  infirmities  and  from  all  sins  committed  during 
manjr  generations.  When  the  time  for  this  easy  means  of 
absolution  draws  nigh,  an  almost  incredible  number  of 
pilgrims  flock  to  the  spot  from  all  parts  of  India. 

At  Palni,  in  Madura,  there  is  a  famous  temple  con- 
secrated to  the  god  Velayuda,  whose  devotees  bring  offer- 
ings of  a  peculiar  kind,  namely  large  sandals,  beautifully 
ornamented  and  similar  in  shape  to  those  worn  by  the 
Hindus  on  their  feet.  The  god  is  addicted  to  hunting,  and 
these  shoes  are  intended  for  his  use  when  he  traverses  the 
jungles  and  deserts  in  pursuit  of  his  favourite  sport.  Such 
shabby  gifts,  one  might  think,  would  go  very  little  way 
towards  filling  the  coffers  of  the  priests  of  Velayuda. 
Nothing  of  the  sort  :  Brahmins  always  know  how  to  reap 
profit  from  anything.  Accordingly  the  new  sandals  are 
rubbed  on  the  ground  and  rolled  a  little  in  the  dust,  and 
are  then  exposed  to  the  eyes  of  the  pilgrims  who  visit  the 
temple.  It  is  clear  enough  that  the  sandals  must  have 
been  worn  on  the  divine  feet  of  Velayuda  ;  and  they 
become  the  property  of  whosoever  pays  the  highest  price 
for  such  holy  relics. 

It  does  not  enter  into  my  calculations  to  offer  a  complete 
account  of  all  the  extravagant  absurdities  which  abound 
in  the  idolatrous  worship  of  the  Hindus,  or  of  all  the  tricks 
and  subterfuges,  more  or  less  clumsy,  by  means  of  which 
the  hypocritical  and  crafty  priests  foster  the  faith  of  the 

1  The  temple  of  Jagannath  being  one  of  the  most  celebrated  in  India, 
I  have  given  in  Appendix  VI  some  details  about  the  myths  and  tradi- 
tions relating  to  its  origin. — Dubois. 


604  RKLlClorS    PROCESSIONS 

people  while  they  increase  their  own  comfort.     A  subject 

of  tli is  nature  would  be  inexhaustible,  and  in  order  to  treat 
it  fully  I  should  require  many  volumes.  I  believe  I  have 
said  enough,  however,  to  give  a  fairly  good  idea  of  the  rest. 
But  I  must  add  a  few  words  concerning  the  religious  pro- 
cessions of  the  Hindus,  which  in  their  eyes  are  a  matter  of 
no  small  importance. 

There  is  not  a  single  temple  of  any  note  which  has  not 
one  or  two  processions  every  year.  On  such  occasions  the 
idols  are  placed  on  huge  massive  cars  supported  on  four 
large  solid  wheels,  not  made,  like  our  wheels,  with  spokes 
and  felloes.  A  big  beam  serves  as  the  axle,  and  supports 
the  car  proper,  which  is  sometimes  fifty  feet  in  height. 
The  thick  blocks  which  form  the  base  are  carved  with 
images  of  men  and  women  in  the  most  indecent  attitudes. 
Several  stages  of  carved  planking  are  raised  upon  this 
basement,  gradually  diminishing  in  width  until  the  whole 
fabric  has  the  form  of  a  pyramid. 

On  the  days  of  procession  the  car  is  adorned  with  coloured 
calicoes,  costly  cloths,  green  foliage,  garlands  of  flowers,  &c. 
The  idol,  clothed  in  the  richest  apparel  and  adorned  with 
its  most  precious  jewels,  is  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  car, 
beneath  an  elegant  canopy.  Thick  cables  are  attached  to 
the  car,  and  sometimes  more  than  a  thousand  persons  are 
harnessed  to  it.  A  party  of  dancing-girls  are  seated  on 
the  car  and  surround  the  idol.  Some  of  them  fan  the  idol 
with  fans  made  of  peacocks'  feathers  ;  others  wave  yak 
tails  gracefully  from  side  to  side.  Many  other  persons  are 
also  mounted  on  the  car  for  the  purpose  of  directing  its 
movements  and  inciting  the  multitude  that  drags  it  to 
continued  efforts.  All  this  is  done  in  the  midst  of  tremen- 
dous tumult  and  confusion.  In  the  crowd  following  the 
procession  men  and  women  are  indiscriminately  mixed  up, 
and  liberties  may  be  taken  without  entailing  any  conse- 
quences. Decency  and  modesty  are  at  a  discount  during 
car  festivals.  I  have  been  told  that  it  is  common  enough 
for  clandestine  lovers,  who  at  other  times  are  subject  to 
vexatious  suspicion,  to  choose  the  day  of  procession  for  their 
rendezvous  in  order  to  gratify  their  desires  without  restraint. 

The  procession  advances  slowly.  From  time  to  time 
a  halt  is  made,  during  which  a  most  frightful  uproar  of 


A   PERFECT   PANDEMONIUM  605 

shouts  and  cries  and  whistlings  is  kept  up.  The  courtesans, 
who  are  present  in  great  numbers  on  these  solemn  occasions, 
perform  obscene  dances  ;  while,  as  long  as  the  procession 
continues,  the  drums,  trumpets,  and  all  sorts  of  musical 
instruments  give  forth  their  discordant  sounds.  On  one 
side  sham  combatants  armed  with  naked  sabres  are  to  be 
seen  fencing  with  one  another  ;  on  another  side,  one  sees 
men  dancing  in  groups  and  beating  time  with  small  sticks  ; 
and  somewhere  else  people  are  seen  wrestling.  Finally, 
a  great  number  of  devotees  crawl  slowly  before  the  car  on 
hands  and  knees.  Those  who  have  nothing  else  to  do  shriek 
and  shout  so  that  even  the  thunder  of  the  great  India 
striking  the  giants  would  not  be  heard  by  them.  But  in 
order  to  form  a  proper  idea  of  the  terrible  uproar  and  con- 
fusion that  reigns  among  this  crowd  of  demoniacs  one  must 
witness  such  a  scene.  As  for  myself,  I  never  see  a  Hindu 
procession  without  being  reminded  of  a  picture  of  hell. 

The  above  is  only  a  slight  sketch  of  the  religious  cere- 
monies of  the  Hindus.  Such  is  the  spirit  of  piety  which 
animates  them  !  Whatever  may  have  been  the  shameful 
mysteries,  the  revolting  extravagances  of  paganism,  could 
any  religion  be  filled  with  more  insane,  ignoble,  obscene, 
and  even  cruel  practices  ? 

It  is  true  that  human  sacrifices  are  no  longer  openly 
tolerated  in  India.  But  what  matters  it  ?  If  the  female 
victim  does  not  fall  under  the  sword  of  the  sacrificer,  she  is 
so  misled  by  the  perfidious  suggestions  of  the  priests  that 
she  perishes  of  her  own  free  will  and  accord  on  the  funeral 
pyre,  or,  what  is  more  horrible,  by  the  very  hands  of  those 
who  have  given  her  existence  !  Are  not  they  also  human 
victims,  those  unhappy  widows  on  whom  superstition  has 
imposed  the  obligation  of  burning  themselves  alive  ?  And 
what  name  shall  we  apply  to  the  destruction  of  a  number 
of  innocent  girls  condemned  to  death  at  their  very  birth  ? 

These  self-same  Brahmins,  who  are  afraid  of  breaking  an 
egg  for  fear  of  destroying  the  germ  of  a  chicken,  have  they 
ever  expressed  the  slightest  indignation  when  they  have 
seen  parents,  more  ferocious  than  tigers,  sacrificing  all  their 
daughters  and  preserving  only  their  sons  l  \ 

1  This  execrable  custom  is  prevalent  among  certain  castes  of  Rajputs 
and  Jats  in  the  North  of  India.     Happily,  the  efforts  made  by  the 


606      BRAHMIN    [NFLUENCE    IX    HINDUISM 

Others,  again,  with  feelings  no  less  unnatural,  either 
drown  or  expose  to  wild  beasts  children  who  happen  to  be 
born  under  unlucky  stars.  Furthermore,  have  they  ever, 
these  Brahmins,  represented  to  the  people  over  whom  they 
exercise  such  paramount  influence,  how  shamelessly  they 
violate  nature  by  placing  the  sick,  whose  recovery  is  des- 
paired of,  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  or  of  some  other 
so-called  holy  river,  so  that  they  may  be  drowned  by  the 
floods  or  devoured  by  crocodiles  l  Have  they  ever  attempted 
to  restrain  the  frenzy  of  those  fanatics  who,  in  their  mistaken 
devotion,  foolishly  allow  themselves  to  be  crushed  under  the 
wheels  of  the  cars  of  their  idols,  or  throw  themselves  head- 
long into  the  stream  at  the  junction  of  the  Ganges  and  the 
Jumna  1  ? 

What  a  consoling  contrast  does  the  sublime  religion  of 
Jesus  Christ  offer  to  him  who  knows  how  to  appreciate  its 
blessings  !  How  inestimable  do  its  holy  precepts,  its  sweet 
and  pure  morality,  appear  in  comparison  with  the  hideous 
and  degraded  doctrines  which  I  have  here  so  reluctantly 
sketched  !  Of  a  truth,  it  is  God  Himself  who  has  not 
permitted  His  Divine  attributes  to  be  attached  to  a  false 
religion. 

But  some  will  say  that  the  iniquities  which  have  roused 
my  indignation  are  due  far  more  to  vicious  conditions  of 
civilization  than  to  perversity  of  religious  principle.  But 
I  may  reply,  what  is  then  the  object  of  true  religion,  if  it  is 
not  to  correct  such  vices  I  The  priests  of  a  religion  who 
advise,  encourage,  or  permit  crimes  to  be  committed  which 
they  could  prevent,  take  upon  themselves  the  whole  re- 
sponsibility for  the  evil.  And  in  this  the  modern  Brah- 
mins are  so  much  the  more  to  blame  because  they  have 
done  their  best  to  distort  and  render  unrecognizable  the 

Government  nowadays  to  extirpate  it  have  succeeded  in  making  these 
infanticides  less  frequent. — Dubois. 

The  Census  Report  for  1891  states  :  '  It  is  pretty  certain  that  the 
deliberate  putting  to  death  of  female  infants  is  a  practice  that  in  the 
present  day,  at  all  events,  is  confined  to  exceedingly  narrow  limits.  .  .  . 
On  the  whole,  even  in  Rajputana,  the  Census  returns  show  that  the 
practice  must  be  very  restricted  in  its  operation.  .  .  .  But  many  a  girl 
is  allowed  to  die  unattended  where  medical  aid  would  be  at  once  called 
in  if  the  son  were  attacked.' — Ed. 

1  Attempts  at  suicide  are  now  punishable  by  law. — Ed. 


DEVELOPING  THE   INCREDIBLE  607 

primitive  religion  of  which  they  constituted  themselves 
the  guardians,  and  which,  however  imperfect  it  may  have 
been,  was  far  from  possessing  the  monstrous  character 
which  it  acquired  later  in  the  hands  of  its  avaricious  and 
hypocritical  interpreters.  The  Hindu  system  of  religion  is 
nothing  more  than  a  lever  of  which  the  Brahmins  make  use 
habitually  for  influencing  the  passions  of  a  credulous  people, 
and  turning  them  to  their  own  advantage.  Instead  of 
bending  the  moral  character  of  the  nation  under  the  yoke 
of  the  primitive  creed,  they  have  invented  a  sham  religion 
suited  to  the  natural  propensities  of  the  people.  Quick  to 
recognize  the  special  predilections  of  their  fellow-country- 
men, they  know  that  everything  which  is  strange  and 
extraordinary,  everything  which  exceeds  the  bounds  of 
reason,  is  calculated  to  please  them  ;  and  they  have 
omitted  no  opportunity  of  using  this  knowledge  to  their 
own  profit. 

It  must  be  confessed  that  the  imagination  of  the  Hindus 
is  such  that  it  cannot  be  excited  except  by  what  is  mon- 
strous and  extravagant.  Ordinary  objects  produce  not 
the  slightest  impression  upon  their  blunted  intellects  ;  it 
needs  giants  or  pygmies  to  attract  their  attention.  However 
little  one  may  be  acquainted  with  them,  it  is  easy  to  con- 
vince oneself  of  this  truism.  If  you  attempt  to  amuse  or 
instruct  them,  they  will  listen  to  you  with  distracted  in- 
difference unless  you  intermingle  with  your  discourse  some 
extravagant  story,  some  absurd  fable,  or  some  fiction  that 
would  overturn  the  whole  economy  of  the  universe.  During 
the  conversations  which  I  have  frequently  held  with  Brah- 
mins on  the  subject  of  religion,  if  I  spoke  to  them  of  miracles 
wrought  by  the  power  of  God,  they  saw  nothing  extra- 
ordinary in  them.  If  I  related  to  them  the  exploits  of 
Joshua  and  his  army  and  the  wonders  they  performed 
through  the  intervention  of  God  in  the  conquest  of  the 
land  of  Canaan,  they  would  reply  with  an  air  of  triumph 
by  citing  the  prowess  of  their  Rama,  and  the  wonders, 
marvellous  in  quite  another  fashion,  which  attended  his 
conquest  of  the  island  of  Ceylon.  According  to  them, 
Samson  had  no  more  strength  than  a  child  as  compared 
with  Bali,  Ravana,  and  other  giants.  The  resurrection  of 
Lazarus  was,  in  their  opinion,  quite  unworthy  of  remark  ; 


608        INCOHERENT    RELIGIOUS   BELIEFS 

for,  they  said,  the  Vishnavites daily  perforin  similar  miracles 
during  the  ceremony  of  pavadam. 

What  conclusion  must  be  drawn  from  all  this  (  It  is  that 
a  wise  and  reasonable  religious  belief  cannot  be  evolved  by 
human  agency  alone.  God  alone  is  the  Supreme  Lawgiver. 
God  alone  can  interpret  His  mysterious  will  to  His  Prophets 
and  His  Church.  Without  His  grace  reason  is  at  fault,  and 
is  lost  in  the  uncertainty  of  idle  imaginings.  False  teachers 
of  idolatry  may  invent  dogmas  and  systems,  but  they  can 
never  reconcile  them  or  build  upon  them  any  stable  struc- 
ture of  religion. 

If,  for  inscrutable  reasons,  which  it  is  not  given  to  us  to 
know,  God  has  not  been  pleased  to  reveal  Himself  till  now 
to  a  people  whose  civilization  dates  back  to  the  darkest 
ages,  we  at  any  rate  should  congratulate  ourselves  on 
having  been  chosen  as  the  objects  of  His  favour. 

Many  Europeans  who  visit  India  are  struck  by  the  in- 
coherency  of  ideas  that  prevails  in  the  religion  professed 
by  its  inhabitants,  and  by  the  variety  of  its  doctrines  and 
ceremonies  ;  and  being  far  from  robust  in  their  own  faith, 
they  end  by  endorsing  one  of  the  favourite  axioms  of  modern 
philosophy,  namely,  that  '  all  religions  are  equally  agree- 
able to  God  and  lead  to  the  same  good  end.'  But  to  me 
the  strange  and  disquieting  picture  of  Hindu  religion  has 
always  presented  itself  in  quite  a  different  aspect.  The 
sight  of  such  an  extraordinary  religious  cult,  far  from 
shaking  my  faith,  has  on  the  contrary  greatly  contributed 
to  confirm  it  \ 

Certainly,  every  time  that  I  compare  the  grand  simplicity 
of  our  Holy  Scriptures,  the  sublime  teachings  of  our  Gospel, 

1  A  Tartar  king,  recently  converted,  having  communicated  to  Louis  IX 
his  intention  of  prostrating  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  Pope,  who  was  then 
at  Lyons,  the  saintly  monarch  dissuaded  him,  for  fear  that  the  dissolute 
manners  of  the  Christians  might  weaken  the  belief  of  this  stranger  in  the 
sanctity  of  the  Catholic  religion.  This  precaution  was  no  doubt  wise. 
Nevertheless,  another  traveller,  who  was  a  witness  of  the  immorality 
of  the  Roman  people,  felt  his  faith  strengthened,  and  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that  there  could  be  only  one  true  religion  that  could  be  upheld 
by  God's  omnipotence  amidst  such  terrible  corruption.  For  my  part, 
I  cannot  conceive  how  any  Christian  can  consistently  ignore  his  religious 
duties  when  he  becomes  closely  acquainted  with  an  idolatrous  people 
and  with  the  perverse  infatuation  and  extravagant  unreasonableness 
which  distinguish  an  idolatrous  cult. — Dubois. 


RELIGION   A   SUPERHUMAN   CONCEPTION  609 

the  solemn  splendour  of  our  religious  services,  with  the 
inconsistent  and  disgusting  myths  contained  in  the  Hindu 
Puranas  and  with  the  extravagant,  barbarous,  and  often 
terrible  religious  ceremonies  to  which  the  Hindus  are 
addicted,  I  cannot  help  feeling  that  the  Christian  religion 
shines  with  new  splendour.  I  cannot  help  experiencing 
an  irresistible  feeling  of  gratitude  for  the  blessing  of  having 
been  born  in  a  part  of  the  globe  to  which  God's  divine 
light  has  penetrated.  It  is  then  that  I  echo  the  words  of 
the  holy  Lawgiver  of  the  Hebrews  contained  in  Deutero- 
nomy iv.  8.  Some  so-called  philosophers  of  modern  times 
have  maintained  that  the  mind  of  man  alone  is  able  to 
conceive  a  just  notion  of  the  divinity.  They  have  dared 
to  attribute  that  which  they  themselves  have  conceived  it 
to  be  to  the  efforts  of  their  own  critical  faculties,  as  if  this 
power  itself  had  not  been  imprinted  on  their  minds  in  the 
first  instance  by  the  Christian  education  which  they  received 
in  early  youth. 

Where,  indeed,  are  there  to  be  found  any  philosophers, 
ancient  or  modern,  who  have  arrived  without  the  assist- 
ance of  Revelation  at  trustworthy  notions  of  God  and  of 
the  worship  due  to  Him  ?  Socrates,  the  most  renowned 
of  all,  spoke  of  the  Supreme  Being  in  a  manner  worthy  of 
Him.  Yet  even  he  was  unable  to  shake  off  entirely  the 
fetters  of  pagan  superstition.  After  drinking  the  cup  of 
hemlock  and  addressing  to  his  friends  a  sublime  discourse 
upon  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  he  again  returned  to  the 
vain  imaginings  of  pagan  worship,  and  addressing  Crito, 
told  him  he  had  vowed  the  sacrifice  of  a  cock  to  Aesculapius 
and  begged  him  to  accomplish  this  vow  on  his  behalf. 

The  Hindus,  like  all  idolatrous  nations,  originally  pos- 
sessed a  conception,  imperfect  though  it  was,  of  the  true 
God  ;  but  this  knowledge,  deprived  of  the  light  of  Revela- 
tion, grew  more  and  more  dim,  until  at  last  it  became 
extinguished  in  the  darkness  of  error,  of  ignorance,  and  of 
corruption.  Confounding  the  Creator  with  His  creatures, 
they  set  up  gods  who  were  merely  myths  and  monstrosities, 
and  to  them  they  addressed  their  prayers  and  directed  their 
worship,  both  of  which  were  as  false  as  the  attributes  which 
they  assigned  to  these  divinities. 

Nevertheless,  such  is  the  moral  obliquity  of  this  people 


610  CHRISTIAN    EXAMPLE   IN   INDIA 

that  nothing  even  to  this  day  has  been  capable  of  shaking 
their  faith  in  their  idols,  or  of  persuading  them  to  believe 
in  the  more  reasonable  religion  of  their  conquerors.  The 
Christians  have  vainly  endeavoured  to  introduce  their  creed 
by  persuasion.  And  if  the  Mahomedans  have  succeeded  in 
making  a  fairly  large  number  of  proselytes,  it  is  only  by 
employing  here  as  elsewhere  bribery  or  violence.  But  in 
spite  of  the  honours  and  dignities  offered  by  the  latter  to 
those  who,  renouncing  their  national  religion,  embraced  the 
Moslem  faith,  Mahomedan  missionaries  have  obtained  only 
partial  success  and  Mahomedanism  has  not  become  pre- 
dominant in  any  single  province  of  India. 

The  Christian  religion,  to  which  Europe  owes  its  civiliza- 
tion— that  blessed  and  humane  religion,  so  well  adapted 
to  alleviate  and  improve  the  condition  of  a  wretched  people 
crushed  under  the  yoke  of  oppression :  that  religion  whose 
manifest  truths  have  softened  the  hard  hearts  of  so  many 
barbarous  nations — has  been  preached  without  success  to 
the  Hindus  for  more  than  three  hundred  years.  It  is  even 
losing  day  by  day  the  little  ground  which  it  had  once 
gained,  against  a  thousand  obstacles,  through  the  zeal 
and  persevering  efforts  of  many  virtuous  and  zealous 
missionaries.  The  seed  sown  by  them  has,  in  fact,  fallen 
on  stony  ground.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  the 
conduct  of  the  Europeans  who  have  been  brought  up  in 
the  profession  of  Christianity,  and  who  are  now  to  be 
found  all  over  India,  is  too  often  unworthy  of  the  faith 
which  they  are  supposed  to  profess  ;  and  this  scandalous 
state  of  affairs,  which  the  natives  of  India  can  in  no  way 
explain,  is  a  powerful  factor  in  increasing  the  dislike  of  the 
latter  for  a  religion  which  apparently  its  own  followers  do 
not  themselves  respect. 

As  a  matter  of  course,  the  taint  of  corruption  which 
characterizes  all  the  religious  institutions  of  the  Hindus 
has  duly  left  its  mark  on  their  social  morality.  How, 
indeed,  could  virtue  prevail  in  a  country  where  all  the 
vices  of  mankind  are  justified  by  those  of  their  gods  ?  It 
naturally  follows  that  their  religion  and  their  morality  are 
equally  corrupt,  and  this  confirms  in  a  certain  sense  the 
reflection  of  Montesquieu,  that,  '  in  a  country  which  has 
the  misfortune  to  possess  a  religion  that  does  not  proceed 


INCENTIVES   TO   RELIGIOUS   PROFESSION  611 

from  God,  it  necessarily  follows  that  the  religion  is  identical 
with  the  system  of  morality  which  prevails  there,  because 
religion,  even  when  it  is  false,  is  the  best  guarantee  that 
men  can  have  of  the  honesty  of  other  men.' 

Some  few  articles  of  the  Hindu  faith,  if  freed  from  the 
absurd  trammels  with  which  Brahmin  deceit  has  surrounded 
them,  would  be  capable  of  offering  successful  resistance  to 
the  inroads  of  corrupt  influences.  For  instance,  the  fear 
of  the  punishments  reserved  for  the  wicked  in  hell,  the 
hope  of  the  reward  apportioned  to  the  blessed  in  the  Abodes 
of  Bliss,  and  even  the  strange  doctrine  of  metempsychosis 
which  grants  to  the  man  who  is  neither  altogether  virtuous 
nor  altogether  vicious  the  prospect  of  a  new  birth  more  or 
less  advantageous  and  proportionate  to  his  deeds,  would 
be  so  many  incentives,  which,  if  inculcated  in  the  minds 
of  the  people  by  disinterested  teachers  and  men  of  good 
faith,  would  contribute  powerfully  towards  bringing  them 
back  into  the  paths  of  righteousness.  But  how  different 
is  this  way  of  looking  at  things  from  that  of  the  Brahmins  ! 
The  punishments  of  hell,  exclusion  from  the  Abodes  of 
Bliss,  and  regenerations  in  vile  bodies  are  reserved  only 
for  those  who  have  done  some  injury  to  these  hypocritical 
and  selfish  persons,  or  who  have  not  helped  to  enrich  them. 
Robbers,  liars,  murderers — indeed  the  greatest  criminals — 
are  sure  of  immunity  after  death,  provided  they  give 
presents  to  the  Brahmins,  or  contribute  in  some  way  to 
their  worldly  comfort. 

The  only  real  good  which  the  Hindu  religion  does  is  to 
unite  in  one  body  under  its  banner  the  various  castes  and 
tribes  of  India,  the  differences  between  which  are  such  as 
would  otherwise  constitute  them,  so  to  speak,  different 
nations.  Without  this  common  tie  it  may  reasonably  be 
presumed  that  only  disorder  and  anarchy  would  prevail. 

It  is  quite  true,  therefore,  that  a  religion,  however  bad 
and  absurd  it  may  be,  is  still  preferable  to  the  absence  of 
any  religion  at  all.  Unquestionably,  in  my  opinion,  the 
worshipper  of  the  Trimurti  is  much  less  contemptible  than 
the  free-thinker  who  presumes  to  deny  the  existence  of 
God  l.     A  Hindu  who  professes  the  doctrine  of  met  em - 

1  I  say  '  wlio  'presumes,'  because  there  cannot  be  an  atheist  by  con- 
viction.    This  would  mean  a  man  who,  by  making  use  of  the  reason 


612     HINDUISM    PREFERABLE   TO   ATHEISM 

psychosis  proves  that  lie  has  infinitely  more  common  sense 
than  those  vain  philosophers  who  utilize  all  their  logic  in 
proving  that  they  are  merely  brute  beasts,  and  that  '  death 
is  merely  an  eternal  sleep  '  for  the  reasoning  man  as  well 
as  for  the  animal  which  cannot  reason.  But  whatever 
I  might  say  on  this  subject  could  in  no  way  excel  the  logical 
conclusions  which  I  might  quote  from  Montesquieu,  who 
refutes  a  paradox  expressed  by  a  man  more  celebrated  for 
his  genius  than  for  the  purity  of  his  religious  principles  \ 
And  I  may  fitly  terminate  these  remarks  by  drawing 
attention  to  the  testimony  of  Voltaire,  a  man  whom  nobody 
can  accuse  of  too  much  partiality  in  the  matter  of  religion  2. 

CHAPTEK  V 

The  Principal  Gods  of  the  Hindus. — Brahma. — Vishnu. — Rama. — 
Krishna.  —  Siva.  —  The  Lingam.  —  Vigneshwara.  —  Indra.  —  The 
Abodes  of  Bliss  of  these  Different  Gods. — Surtrga. — Kailasa. — 
Vaiknnthu. — Sattya-loka. 

Surely  no  one  will  expect  me  to  relate  here  the  histories 
of  all  the  inferior  deities  which  swarm  in  Hindu  mytho- 
logy ;  a  mere  catalogue  of  them  would  fill  a  large  volume  ; 
and  much  more  numerous  still  are  the  strange  stories  that 
Hindu  legends  contain  about  them.  Only  the  gods  of  the 
first  order,  di  majorum  gentium,  can  find  a  place  here. 
Among  those  of  the  highest  rank  are  first  of  all  Brahma, 
Vishnu,  and  Siva.  Sometimes,  under  the  name  of  the 
Trimurti,  these  three  gods  receive  the  homage  of  their 
devotees  in  common  ;  at  other  times  each  one  is  the  object 
of  particular  worship.  From  these  again  have  sprung  a 
multitude  of  others,  whom  the  Hindus,  faithful  to  their 
practice  of  exaggeration,  reckon  up  to  the  astounding  total 
of  three  hundred  and  thirty  millions.  I  will  only  refer  to 
the  most  renowned  of  these,  and  I  believe  that  my  readers 
will  thank  me  for  sparing  them  the  greater  part  of  the 
foolish  and  disgusting  details  which  the  people  of  India 

which  he  can  obtain  only  from  God,  concludes  that  there  is  no  God  ; 
a  conclusion  which  is  evidently  contradictory.  Only  a  fool,  then,  can 
be  an  atheist.  '  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  There  is  no  God.' — 
Dubois. 

1  Esprit  des  Lois,  xxiv.  -. 

-  Traite  de  la  Tolt ranee,  xx. 


BRAHMA,    THE    FOREMOST   DEITY         613 

attach  to  these  gods,  and  which  amount  with  them  to 
articles  of  faith.  Let  us  begin  with  the  deity  occupying 
the  first  rank  in  this  extensive  hierarchy. 

Brahma  l. 

According  to  tradition,  Brahma  issued  originally  from 
a  tamarasa  2  flower.  He  was  born  with  five  heads  ;  but 
he  outraged  Parvati,  the  wife  of  Siva,  and  Siva  avenged 
himself  by  striking  off  one  of  the  heads  of  the  adulterous 
god  in  single  combat.  Consequently,  Brahma  is  now 
represented  with  only  four  heads,  and  he  is  often  called 
the  four-faced  god. 

He  rides  on  a  swan,  and  his  emblem  is  a  water-lily.  His 
own  daughter,  Sarasvati,  is  his  wife.  Having  conceived  for 
her  an  incestuous  passion,  and  not  daring  to  satisfy  it 
under  the  human  form,  he  assumed  that  of  a  stag,  and 
changed  his  daughter  into  a  hind.  It  is  for  having  thus 
violated  the  laws  of  nature  that  he  has,  so  they  say,  neither 
temple  nor  worship  nor  sacrifice.  Some  pundits  maintain, 
however,  that  the  feeling  of  indifference  evinced  towards 
Brahma  is  caused  by  the  malediction  cast  upon  him  by 
a  certain  penitent  named  Bunumi,  who,  on  presenting 
himself  for  admission  to  the  Abode  of  Bliss,  was  received 
with  irreverence  by  the  god.     But  whatever  may  be  the 

1  '  The  more  common  name  for  the  one  Spirit  is  At  man  or  Para- 
matman,  and  in  the  later  system,  Brahman,  neut.  (nom.  Brahma), 
derived  from  root  brih,  "  to  expand,"  and  denoting  the  universally 
expanding  essence  or  universally  diffused  substance  of  the  universe. 
It  was  thus  that  the  later  creed  became  not  so  much  monotheistic  (by 
which  I  mean  the  belief  in  one  God,  regarded  as  a  Personal  Being  ex- 
ternal to  the  universe,  though  creating  and  governing  it)  as  pantheistic  ; 
Brahman  in  the  neuter  being  "  simple  infinite  being  " — the  only  real 
eternal  essence — which,  when  it  passes  into  universal  manifested  exist- 
ence, is  called  Brahma,  when  it  manifests  itself  on  the  earth,  is  called 
Vishnu,  and  when  it  again  dissolves  itself  into  simple  being,  is  called 
Siva  ;  all  the  other  innumerable  gods  and  demigods  being  also  mere 
manifestations  of  the  neuter  Brahman,  who  alone  is  eternal.  This,  at 
any  rate,  appears  to  be  the  genuine  pantheistic  creed  of  India  at  the 
present  day. ' — Mother- Willi ams. 

2  A  species  of  lotus,  or  water-lily,  Nymphaea  lotus.  It  is  well  known 
how  greatly  this  plant,  which  grows  extensively  in  Egypt,  in  the  canals 
that  serve  to  conduct  the  waters  of  the  Nile  for  watering  and  fertilizing 
the  land,  was  held  in  veneration  by  the  ancient  Egyptians. — Dubois. 


614         MANKIND    CREATED   BY   BRAHMA 

motive,  it  is  an  accepted  fact  that  Brahma  does  not  any- 
where receive  public  worship. 

They  allow  him,  however,  three  attributes  of  high  impor- 
tance: for  he  is  (1)  the  author  and  creator  of  all  things; 
(2)  the  dispenser  of  all  gifts  and  favours  ;  (3)  the  sovereign 
disposer  of  the  destiny  of  man. 

At  the  creation  of  mankind  the  Brahmins,  the  most 
noble  of  all  men,  sprang  from  his  head,  as  I  have  stated 
elsewhere  ;  the  Kshatriyas  issued  from  his  shoulders,  the 
Vaisyas  from  his  stomach,  the  Sudras  from  his  feet.  This, 
at  any  rate,  is  the  version  most  commonly  recognized  ; 
but  it  is  denied  by  some  authors,  who  say  that  Brahma 
created  a  first  man,  who  was  the  father  of  all  the  rest. 
Brahma  made  him  first  of  all  with  only  one  foot ;  but  seeing 
that  he  had  difficulty  in  moving  about  in  this  form,  Brahma 
destroyed  his  work,  and  made  another  with  three  feet  :  at 
last,  perceiving  that  this  third  foot  was  like  a  fifth  wheel 
to  a  coach,  Brahma  began  his  labour  over  again,  and  made 
man  with  two  feet. 

It  is  through  Brahma  in  his  quality  of  supreme  disposer 
that  the  other  gods,  the  giants,  and  certain  other  privileged 
creatures,  have  obtained  the  privileges  and  prerogatives 
which  they  enjoy.  Brahma  can  even  confer  immortality, 
as  he  has  done  in  the  case  of  some  famous  personages,  such 
as  the  giants  Ravana,  Hirannya,  and  several  others. 

By  reason  of  the  sovereignty  which  Brahma  exercises 
over  the  destinies  of  mankind,  all  men  are  born  with  their 
fates  written  on  their  foreheads  by  the  hand  of  the  god 
himself.  This  destiny  is  absolute  and  irrevocable.  It 
embraces  five  principal  objects,  namely,  length  of  life, 
disposition,  intelligence,  worldly  condition,  and  virtuous  or 
vicious  inclination.  What  Brahma  has  predestined  in  all 
these  is  inevitable  and  must  be  strictly  fulfilled.  The 
Hindus  are  so  fully  convinced  of  this  that  in  all  adversities 
and  troubles  of  life  they  are  heard  to  exclaim  :  Thus  was 
it  written  on  my  forehead/  If  they  are  called  upon  to 
sympathize  in  the  troubles  of  relative  or  friend,  they  never 
omit  to  utter  this  consolatory  saying  :  No  being  can  escape 
that  which  is  written  on  his  forehead/  Thus,  in  all  cases 
where  a  Christian  would  exclaim  with  humble  resignation, 
GckVb   will  be  clone,   they  say   with  an  equal  resignation, 


BELIEF  IN   PREDESTINATION  615 

What  is  written  on  the  forehead  must  be  fulfilled.  It  is  also 
upon  this  irrevocable  and  irresistible  destiny  that  Hindus 
lay  the  faults  and  crimes  committed  by  them.  Instances 
of  this  are  constantly  occurring  in  the  European  courts  of 
justice  now  established  in  the  country.  Thus,  when  judges 
ask  criminals  what  has  brought  them  to  commit  the  crimes 
for  which  they  are  convicted,  they  invariably  respond, 
Thus  it  was  written  on  my  forehead,  and  it  was  not  in  my 
power  to  avoid  it ] . 

Each  man  is  also  endowed  with  one  of  the  three  qualities 
of  which  mention  has  been  made  before,  namely,  goodness 
or  truth  (satva),  passion  (rajas),  ignorance  (tamas).  Which- 
ever of  these  qualities  has  fallen  to  a  man's  lot  is  inherent 
in  his  being,  and  is  in  conformity  with  his  deeds  in  previous 
existences  ;  it  influences  him  in  all  the  actions  of  his  life. 

This  doctrine  of  fate  or  destiny  was  recognized  in  heathen 
antiquity  from  the  earliest  times.  It  was  the  subject  of 
speculation  among  Greek  and  Roman  philosophers  ;  and, 
as  we  all  know,  there  are  philosophers  of  modern  times  who 
have  felt  no  shame  in  adopting  it.  However,  the  wisest  of 
the  Greek  and  Roman  philosophers  correctly  gauged  the 
consequences  of  attributing  such  an  influence  to  destiny, 
an  influence  which,  by  depriving  men  of  all  liberty,  destroys 
both  virtue  and  vice,  and  constitutes  God  the  Author  of 
all  crime.  In  other  terms,  that  is  to  say,  it  disturbs  the 
basis  of  all  morality  and  of  all  religion. 

Vishnu. 

One  of  the  commonest  names  of  Vishnu  in  the  southern 
part  of  the  Peninsula  is  Perumal.  His  devotees  are  fond 
of  invoking  him  under  the  name  of  Narayana  ;  and  he 
has  a  thousand  other  names,  of  which  the  Brahmins  have 
composed  a  species  of  litany  which  they  call  Hari- 
smarana. 

I  have  said  elsewhere,  concerning  the  worship  rendered 
to  Vishnu,  that  the  sign  of  the  namam,  which  his  followers 
trace  on  their  forehead,  is  the  distinctive  symbol  of  that 

1  This  was  the  excuse  offered  by  a  Hindu  who  was  a  few  years  ago 
charged  with  the  murder  of  his  mistress  at  the  Mazajron  Police  Court, 
Bombay,  for  the  sake  of  her  jewels. — Ed. 


G16  INCARNATIONS   OF  VISHNU 

warship.  His  cult  is  more  general  than  that  of  Siva, 
especially  among  the  Brahmins,  whose  favourite  god  appears 
to  be  Vishnu. 

He  is  represented  with  four  arms,  and  hence  is  sometimes 
named  the  four-armed  god.  The  bird  garuda  is  his  vehicle. 
He  bears  the  title  of  redeemer  and  preserver  of  all  that 
exists.  The  other  gods,  not  excepting  Brahma  himself, 
have  often  had  need  of  his  help  in  escaping  from  perils 
which  threatened  them.  In  his  quality  of  preserver  he 
has  found  himself  obliged  to  take  different  forms,  which 
the  Hindus  designate  under  the  name  of  Avatars  (incarna- 
tions). Of  these  they  count  ten  principal  ones,  the  nomen- 
clature of  which  is  contained  in  the  following  verses  : — 

Adau  matsyas  tatah  kurma  Varahascha  param  tatah 
Narasimha  maha  sahtir  vamanascha  param  tatah 
Ramascha  Balaramascha  parasustadanantaram 
Kalkirupascha  baudhascha  hyavatara  dasa  smitah. 

1.  Matsya-avatar,  in  the  form  of  a  fish  ; 

2.  VaraJia-avatar,  in  the  form  of  a  pig  ; 

3.  Kurma -avatar,  in  the  form  of  a  tortoise  ; 

4.  Narasimha-avatar,  in  the  form  of  a  monster,  half  man 
and  half  lion  ; 

5.  Vamana- avatar,  in  the  form  of  a  Brahmin  dwarf, 
named  Vamana  ; 

6.  Parasurama-avatar,  in  the  form  of  Parasurama  ; 

7.  Rama-avatar,  in  the  form  of  the  famous  hero  known  as 
Rama  ; 

8.  In  the  form  of  Bala-rama  ; 

9.  Bo  uddha- avatar,  in  the  form  of  Buddha  ; 

10.  Kalki-avatar,  in  the  form  of  a  horse. 

There  is  yet  another  famous  incarnation,  which  is  that  of 
Vishnu  in  the  person  of  Krishna,  without  counting  many 
others  ;  and  all  these,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  originally 
possessed  an  allegorical  meaning,  the  object  being  to  prove 
the  all-pervading  presence  of  the  divinity.  For  instance, 
one  reads  in  the  Bhagavata  : 

One  day,  the  penitent  Arjuna  having  invoked  Vishnu 
with  fervour  and  devotion,  and  having  prayed  him  to 
reveal  himself  to  him,  this  powerful  god,  who  has  deigned 
to  manifest  himself  to  man  under  all  kinds  of  forms, 
answered   him   thus  :   '  These,   Arjuna,   are   the  forms  in 


VISHNU'S  VARIOUS   FORMS  617 

which  thou  must  above  all  invoke  me,  acknowledging  them 
as  part  of  my  divine  essence  : — 

'  In  prayer,  I  am  the  Gayatri. 

'  In  speech,  I  am  the  word  Aum. 

'Among  the  gods,  I  am  Indra. 

'Among  the  stars,  I  am  the  Sun. 

'Among  the  hills,  I  am  Mount  Meru. 

'Among  the  Rudras,  I  am  Sankara. 

'Among  the  rich,  I  am  Kubhera. 

'Among  the  elements,  I  am  Fire. 

'Among  the  purohitas,  I  am  Bruhaspati. 

'Among  the  generals  of  armies,  I  am  Kartika. 

'Among  the  penitents,  I  am  Bhrigu. 

'Among  the  sages,  I  am  Kapila-Muni. 

'Among  the  Gandharvas,  I  am  Chitrarata. 

'Among  the  weapons,  I  am  the  Thunderbolt. 

'Among  the  birds,  I  am  the  Garuda. 

'Among  the  elephants,  I  am  Airavata. 

'Among  the  cows,  I  am  Surabhi. 

'Among  the  monkeys,  I  am  Hanuman. 

'Among  the  serpents,  I  am  Ananta. 

'Among  the  waters,  I  am  the  Sea. 

'Among  the  rivers,  I  am  the  Ganges. 

'Among  the  trees,  I  am  the  Asivatta. 

'Among  the  shrubs,  I  am  the  Tulasi. 

'Among  the  grasses,  I  am  the  Darbha. 

'Among  the  stones,  I  am  the  Salagrania. 

'Among  the  giants,  I  am  Prahlada. 

'Among  the  months,  I  am  Margasirsha. 

'Among  the  learned  books,  I  am  the  Sama-  Veda. 

'  In  short,  I  am  the  spirit  of  all  that  exists  ;  I  permeate 
the  universe.' 

The  Kalki-avatar,  or  horse  incarnation,  has  not  yet 
occurred,  but  it  is  expected,  although  the  time  and  place 
where  it  will  happen  are  not  known.  It  will  put  an  end 
to  the  kingdom  of  sin,  which  began  with  the  Kali-yuga. 

Vishnu  will  then  appear  in  the  form  of  a  horse  ;  he  will 
be  of  gigantic  stature  ;  he  will  be  armed  with  a  huge  axe  ; 
his  voice  will  resemble  the  rolling  of  thunder,  the  noise 
of  which  will  spread  terror  everywhere.  First  he  will 
destroy  all  kings,  then  all  other  men.     Finally,  seeing  that 

x  3 


618  A   FUTURE   ERA   FORECASTED 

his  father  and  mother  are  but  sinners  like  the  rest  of  man- 
kind, he  will  sacrifice  them  also  to  appease  his  anger.  After 
this  a  New  Age  will  begin,  when  virtue  and  happiness  will 
reign  on  the  earth. 

If  one  may  believe  certain  learned  Brahmins  whom 
I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  consulting  on  this  subject, 
it  would  appear  that  the  incarnation  of  Buddha  has  also 
not  yet  taken  place.  It  ought  to  have  occurred  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Kali-yuga  in  the  country  called  Kitoki. 
This  Buddha  will  preach  pure  atheism  to  mankind  :  he 
will  lead  even  the  gods  themselves  into  sin  and  error.  In 
these  unhappy  times  Sudras  will  be  seen  wearing  red  cloths, 
a  colour  which  is  only  meet  for  Brahmins,  and  acquiring 
knowledge,  the  Vedas  not  excepted.  So  little  virtue  will 
then  be  practised  on  the  earth  that  what  there  is  will  not 
suffice  to  render  man  happy  in  this  world  or  the  next.  The 
Brahmins  will  no  longer  fulfil  the  duties  of  their  calling, 
will  hold  in  no  esteem  the  rules  concerning  defilement  and 
cleanliness.  Children  will  no  longer  obey  their  parents  ; 
there  will  be  no  more  caste  distinctions  ;  even  kings  will 
practise  all  that  is  most  vile  and  contemptible  among  men. 
Earth  itself  and  the  other  elements  will  feel  the  effects  of 
the  universal  disorder  which  will  then  prevail  in  nature  ; 
the  former  will  lose,  at  any  rate  partially,  its  fertility  ; 
little  rain  will  fall  from  the  clouds ;  the  cows  will  yield 
but  little  milk,  and  that,  moreover,  will  not  be  fit  for 
making  butter. 

In  the  opinion  of  most  Brahmins,  however,  the  Avatar 
in  question  has  already  taken  place.  They  cannot  exactly 
fix  its  date,  but  they  maintain  that  it  is  this  Avatar  which 
put  an  end  to  the  bloody  sacrifices  formerly  in  vogue. 

It  is  probable  the  same  epoch  witnessed  the  establish- 
ment of  Buddhism,  which  prevails  throughout  the  greater 
part  of  Asia,  but  has  been  almost  entirely  destroyed  by  the 
Brahmins  in  India.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  certain  that 
under  this  Avatar  the  Brahmins  render  no  homage  to 
Buddha  or  to  Vishnu. 

I  must  mention  in  conclusion  the  famous  incarnation  of 
Vishnu  in  the  person  of  Rama,  which  forms  the  subject  of  the 
celebrated  epic  poem  known  as  the  liamayana,  the  most 
famous  of  all  Indian  books,  and  read  by  persons  of  all  castes. 


619 


Rama. 

Rama,  or  the  incarnation  of  Vishnu  under  this  name, 
was  the  son  of  Dasaradha,  King  of  Ayodhya  or  Ayodlii \  ; 
his  mother  was  Kousalya.  He  spent  the  first  years  of  his 
life  in  the  jungles  under  the  guidance  of  the  penitent 
Gautama 2.  It  was  there  that,  touching  with  his  feet 
Ahalya,  who  had  previously  been  turned  into  stone  by 
a  penitent's  curse 3,  he  restored  her  to  life  and  to  her 
original  form. 

Subsequently  he  went  to  the  court  of  Janaka,  King  of 
Mithila.  This  prince,  having  witnessed  several  of  his  deeds 
of  prowess,  proposed  to  him  that  he  should  break  the  bow 
of  Siva,  which  until  then  none  of  the  kings  of  the  earth 
had  been  able  to  do.  Rama  accomplished  this  task  with 
ease,  and  won  Sita,  daughter  of  the  King  of  Mithila,  as  the 
reward  of  his  strength  and  valour.  Hardly  had  the  marriage 
been  celebrated  when  Rama's  father  recalled  him,  and  en- 
trusted him  with  the  reins  of  government.  After  returning 
to  his  paternal  home  he  was  one  day  practising  with  his 
bow,  and  shot  an  arrow  with  such  force  that  its  twang  as 
it  left  the  bow  caused  an  abortion  in  a  Brahmin  woman 
who  was  present.  The  husband,  in  a  transport  of  rage, 
uttered  this  curse  : — '  May  Rama  henceforth  possess  no 
more  knowledge  than  the  rest  of  men  !  '  The  curse  had 
its  effect,  and  from  that  time  Rama  was  deprived  of  the 
divine  knowledge  inherent  in  him.  Shortly  after  this 
event,  Kaikeyi,  the  fourth  wife  of  Dasaradha,  earnestly 
desiring  to  obtain  the  crown  for  her  own  son,  visited  Rama 
and  implored  him  with  the  most  urgent  entreaties  to  forego 
his  claims.  This  Rama  consented  to  do,  and  after  abdicat- 
ing he  retired  once  more  into  the  jungles,  accompanied  by 
his  brother  Lakshmana  and  his  wife  Sita. 

One  day,  while  Rama  was  afar  off  in  the  forests,  Laksh- 
mana cut  off  the  ears  of  Surpanakha,  sister  of  the  ten- 
headed  giant  Ravana,  King  of  Lankah  (Ceylon),  who, 
indignant  at  the  insult  offered  to  his  sister,  avenged  him- 

1  Ayodhya  literally  means  '  unconquerable.' — Ed. 
3  The  name  of  the  penitent  is  not  Gautama,  but  Viswamitra. — Ed. 
3  It  was  Gautama,  the  husband  of  Ahalya,  who  was  the  penitent  in 
this  case. — Ed. 


620  AN  ABDUCTED  WIFE 

self  by  carrying  oft*  Sita.  Kama,  learning  on  his  return  of 
the  misfortune  which  had  befallen  him  in  his  absence,  was 
prostrated  with  grief,  and  could  think  of  nothing  but  the 
means  of  rescuing  his  beloved  Sita  from  the  clutches  of  her 
ravisher.  In  order  to  succeed  in  his  design,  he  began  by 
making  an  alliance  with  Sugriva  *,  king  of  the  monkeys,  to 
whom  he  rendered  great  service  by  killing  Vali,  his  brother, 
who  had  long  contested  the  empire  with  him  and  was  then 
in  possession  of  it. 

Impatient  for  news  of  his  wife,  Rama  determined  to  send 
some  one  to  Lankah  without  further  delay,  to  obtain  in- 
formation. The  undertaking  was  not  easy,  as  there  was 
an  arm  of  the  sea  to  cross.  But  Hanuman,  son  of  the 
Wind  and  commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of  monkeys, 
whom  Sugriva  had  sent  to  help  his  ally  Rama,  was  en- 
dowed with  extraordinary  agility,  which  seemed  to  render 
him  the  most  appropriate  person  for  such  an  embassy. 
He  was  therefore  appointed  to  the  task.  He  started, 
crossed  the  straits,  walking  dry-shod  over  the  surface  of 
the  waters,  and  arrived  at  Lankah.  After  a  long  and 
unsuccessful  search,  Hanuman  at  last  discovered  Sita 
sitting  in  a  solitary  spot  under  a  shady  tree,  plunged  in 
the  deepest  grief,  and  watering  the  ground  with  her  tears, 
while  her  sobs  alternated  with  curses  at  her  sad  fate.  At 
one  time  she  would  load  Ravana  with  maledictions,  at 
another  she  would  utter  the  most  poignant  regrets  at  the 
separation  from  her  beloved  Rama,  to  whom  she  swore 
inviolable  fidelity,  whatever  efforts  her  treacherous  ravisher 
might  employ  to  seduce  her. 

Hanuman  hurried  back  and  told  Rama  all  he  had  seen 
and  heard.  Rama  at  once  conceived  the  idea  of  con- 
structing a  dam  across  the  straits  to  make  a  passage  for 
his  army.  The  monkey  Hanuman,  entrusted  with  this 
great  undertaking,  set  to  work  to  uproot  mountains  and 
rocks.  At  each  journey  to  the  straits  he  carried  as  many 
stones  as  he  had  hairs  on  his  body,  and  piling  them  up  on 
one  another,  had  soon  achieved  his  task  of  joining  the  island 
of  Lankah  to  the  continent. 

Rama,  however,  thinking  himself  hardly  strong  enough 

J  Sugriva  literally  mean*  '  beautiful  necked." — Ed. 


RESCUED   BY   BEARS   AND   MONKEYS      621 

to  attack  his  formidable  enemy  with  the  army  of  monkeys, 
formed  a  second  army  of  bears,  and  with  this  reinforcement 
he  prepared  to  cross  the  straits.  Before  setting  out  he 
placed  a  lingam  on  the  dam,  and  offered  a  solemn  sacrifice 
to  it.  Then,  turning  towards  his  armies  of  bears  and 
monkeys,  he  addressed  them  as  follows  : — 

'  Brave  soldiers,  do  not  let  yourselves  be  frightened  by 
the  giants  against  whom  you  are  to  wage  war  ;  their 
strength  is  useless,  since  the  gods  are  not  on  their  side. 
Let  us  advance,  then,  without  fear  and  without  delay. 
We  march  to  certain  victory,  since  we  go  to  fight  the 
enemies  of  the  gods.' 

At  these  words  the  whole  force  moved  forward,  crossed 
the  straits,  invaded  Lankah,  engaged  in  several  battles 
with  the  giant  Ravana,  and  after  many  vicissitudes  of 
victory  and  defeat  at  last  gained  the  upper  hand  for  Rama. 
Ravana  was  vanquished  and  killed  ;  and  Sita,  the  cause 
of  this  terrible  war,  was  rescued  and  carried  off  in  triumph 
to  her  own  country  of  Ayodhya. 

On  leaving  Lankah,  Rama  placed  on  the  vacant  throne 
Vibhishana,  Ravana's  eldest  brother  \  in  recognition  of  the 
great  services  which  he  had  rendered  during  the  war,  and 
before  departing  promised  he  should  wear  the  crown  as 
long  as  the  world  lasted,  that  is,  as  long  as  the  name  of 
Rama  should  exist. 

Some  time  after  his  return  to  Ayodhya,  Rama,  having 
one  night  left  his  palace  in  disguise  to  find  out  what  was 
doing  in  the  city,  overheard  at  a  street  corner  some  words 
uttered  by  a  washerman  quarrelling  with  his  wife,  of  whose 
faithfulness  he  seemed  to  have  conceived  strong  suspicions. 
In  his  anger  the  washerman  declared  that  he  would  drive 
her  from  his  house,  telling  her  that  he  was  not  the  man  to 
keep  a  wife — as  Rama  did — who  had  been  in  the  power  of 
another.  These  words  fell  like  a  thunderbolt  on  Rama, 
who,  full  of  rage  and  grief,  hastened  back  to  his  palace. 
He  at  once  sent  for  his  brother  Lakshmana,  told  him  what 
he  had  heard,  and  ordered  him  to  seize  Sita,  take  her  far 
away  into  the  jungles,  and  put  her  to  death. 

Lakshmana  immediately  set  about  executing  his  brother's 

1  Vibhishana  was  a  younger  brother  of  Ravana.  He  was  a  noble- 
minded  rakshasa,  or  giant,  unlike  the  other  giants. — Ed. 


622  SITA   SAVED   BY   A   STRATAGEM 

orders.  However,  as  Sita  was  far  advanced  in  pregnancy, 
he  had  scruples  about  killing  her  in  this  condition,  and 
resolved  to  save  her  life.  The  difficulty  was  to  invent 
some  stratagem  in  order  to  persuade  Rama  that  he  had 
executed  the  task  entrusted  to  him.  Now  it  happened 
that  in  the  jungles  to  which  Sita  had  been  taken  there 
were  several  trees  which,  as  soon  as  an  incision  was  made 
in  the  bark,  emitted  a  juice  the  colour  of  blood.  Lakshmana 
accordingly  bent  his  bow,  and  taking  the  arrow  which  had 
been  destined  to  pierce  Sita's  heart,  shot  it  into  one  of  these 
trees,  staining  it  with  the  juice,  and  then  abandoned  Sita 
to  her  unhappy  fate.  He  at  once  returned  and  announced 
to  Rama  that  his  vengeance  had  been  satisfied,  and  for 
proof  of  it  showed  him  the  arrow  stained  with  Sita's 
blood  h 

Alone  and  abandoned  in  this  deserted  place,  poor  Sita 
proclaimed  her  despair  in  mournful  cries  and  torrents  of 
tears.  It  happened  that  Vasishta  the  penitent  had  made 
his  dwelling-place  not  far  off  2.  Attracted  by  the  weeping 
and  wailing  which  struck  his  ear,  he  approached  Sita,  and 
asked  her  who  she  was  and  what  was  the  cause  of  her 
trouble.  The  unfortunate  woman  thereupon  stopped  her 
sobs,  and,  assuming  an  air  of  dignity  which  filled  the 
penitent  with  respectful  fear,  answered  him  thus  :  '  I  am 
Sita  !  The  king  Janaka  is  my  father,  the  Earth  is  my 
mother,  and  Rama  is  my  husband.' 

At  these  words  the  penitent,  filled  with  the  most  pro- 
found feelings  of  veneration,  prostrated  himself  before  the 
goddess  ;  then,  rising  and  clasping  his  hands,  he  said  to 
her — 

'  Illustrious  goddess,  why  give  yourself  up  thus  to  grief 
and  despair  ?  Have  you  forgotten  that  you  are  the  queen 
and  mistress  of  the  world,  and  that  on  you  the  salvation 
of  all  creatures  depends  ?  ' 

He  spoke  a  few  more  words  of  consolation,  and  then  led 
her  to  his  hermitage,  where  he  offered  sacrifices  to  her. 

A  few  days  afterwards  Sita  brought  forth  twins,  which 

1  In  memory  of  this  event  it  is  customary  on  the  last  clay  of  the  military 
feast  of  the  Dasara  for  princes  to  go  with  great  ceremony  into  the  open 
country  and  there  shoot  off  arrows. — Dubois. 

-  It  was  not  Vasishta,  but  Valmiki,  the  author  of  the  Ramayana. — Ed. 


RAMA   KILLED   AND   RESURRECTED       623 

the  penitent  Vasishta  *  reared  with  as  much  care  as  if  they 
had  been  his  own  children. 

Now  it  came  to  pass  subsequently  that  Rama  resolved  to 
perform  the  great  sacrifice  of  yagnam,  and  let  loose  the 
horse  which  was  intended  for  the  victim.  The  animal, 
after  passing  through  many  countries,  came  to  the  place 
where  the  two  sons  of  Sita  dwelt  ;  and  they,  full  of  strength 
and  courage,  though  at  that  time  only  five  years  of  age, 
intercepted  and  stopped  him. 

The  monkey  Hanuman,  general  of  Rama's  armies,  was 
accordingly  sent  with  a  considerable  force  to  fight  against 
the  sons  of  Sita  and  to  recover  the  horse  ;  but  Hanuman 
was  vanquished  by  them,  and  compelled  to  seek  safety  in 
flight. 

Rama,  at  the  news  of  this  disaster,  placed  himself  at  the 
head  of  his  whole  forces,  and  went  in  person  to  attack  his 
new  enemies.  But  he  in  his  turn  was  defeated  by  the  sons 
of  Sita,  and  he  and  his  soldiers  were  cut  to  pieces,  not  one 
escaping.  Vasishta  x  was  informed  of  this  occurrence,  and 
proceeded  to  the  field  of  battle,  which  he  found  literally 
strewn  with  the  dead.  Touched  with  compassion  for  Rama 
and  his  troops,  he  pronounced  over  them  the  mantram 
which  restores  life,  and  raised  them  all  from  the  dead. 

Rama  returned  home,  and  determined  to  perform  once 
more  the  great  sacrifice  of  the  yagnam,  to  which  he  invited 
all  the  neighbouring  kings  and  all  the  illustrious  Brahmins 
of  the  country.  But  the  latter,  on  being  consulted  as  to 
the  best  means  of  making  the  sacrifice  complete,  answered 
that  it  could  not  be  so  unless  Rama's  wife  was  beside  him. 
After  raising  many  difficulties,  Rama  at  last  consented  to 
recall  her,  and  to  all  appearances  gave  her  a  hearty  welcome. 
Consequently  the  sacrifice  of  the  horse  was  a  complete 
success.  But  Rama  thereupon  wished  to  repudiate  his 
wife  anew,  and  to  send  her  back  to  the  jungles.  All  the 
kings  present  interceded  in  her  behalf.  Still  Rama  would 
not  yield  to  their  entreaties,  except  on  the  condition  that 
she  proved,  by  subjecting  herself  to  the  ordeal  of  fire,  that 
her  virtue  had  not  suffered  any  taint. 

Sita,  conscious  of  her  innocence,  issued  from  the  ordeal 
with  honour  and  glory,  and  from  many  others  not  less 
1  See  note  2  on  p.  622. 


024        A   VIRTUOUS  WOMAN  VINDICATED 

searching  ;  yet,  in  spite  of  all,  she  could  not  cure  her  hus- 
band of  his  odious  suspicions  and  unjust  jealousy. 

Overwhelmed  at  last  with  confusion  and  shame,  she 
burst  into  a  flood  of  tears,  and  in  the  extremity  of  her 
despair  she  addressed  the  following  prayer  to  her  mother  : — 

'  0  Earth  !  thou  to  whom  I  owe  my  existence,  justify 
me  this  day  in  the  sight  of  the  universe  ;  and  if  it  is  true 
that  I  have  never  ceased  to  be  a  virtuous  woman,  accord 
me  an  indisputable  proof  of  my  chastity  by  opening  thyself 
under  my  feet  and  swallowing  me  up  !  ' 

No  sooner  had  she  uttered  these  words  than  the  Earth, 
in  response  to  her  prayer,  opened  and  swallowed  her  up 
alive  within  her  bosom. 

Rama  did  not  tarry  long  before  following  his  spouse. 
Having  divided  his  kingdom  between  his  two  sons,  he 
retired  to  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  where  he  lived  for  some 
time  in  retirement  and  penance,  and  then  closed  his  mortal 
career. 

Krishna. 

The  history  of  Krishna,  or  of  Vishnu  under  this  name,  is 
told  in  many  Puranas.  The  eighteenth,  the  Bkagavata, 
deals  with  him  almost  exclusively.  I  will  give  a  very  short 
analysis  of  this. 

In  the  Jambu-Dwipa  is  a  country  called  Bharata-Varsha. 
In  this  country  is  Brinda-Vana,  or  paradise  of  Krishna, 
which  is  the  supreme  paradise,  where  untold  delights  are  to 
be  enjoyed.  It  is  larger  than  Swarga,  and  the  beauty  of  it 
is  beyond  all  description. 

It  is  inhabited  by  an  infinite  number  of  shepherds,  the 
chief  of  whom  is  Nanda,  Krishna's  foster-father.  On  the 
north  of  Brinda-  Vana  is  the  town  of  Mathura  1,  where 
Ugrasena  reigned.  He  was  expelled  from  his  kingdom  by 
his  son  Kamsa,  who  seized  the  throne  and  indulged  for 
a  long  while  in  innumerable  acts  of  injustice  and  unheard-of 
cruelty. 

The  Earth,  unable  to  bear  this  tyrant's  violence  any 
longer,  took  the  form  of  a  cow,  went  in  search  of  the  four- 
faced  Brahma,  and  having  done  him  homage,  spoke  as 
follows  : — 

1  The  modern  Muttra. — Ed. 


VISHNU   INCARNATED    AS    KRISHNA        025 

'  0  Creator  of  all  things,  it  is  to  you  that  I  owe  my  being  ; 
it  is  your  duty  therefore  to  protect  me.  The  king  Kamsa, 
who  has  given  himself  up  altogether  to  sin,  holds  me  in 
the  most  cruel  oppression.  I  can  bear  his  tyranny  no 
longer.  This  wicked  man  is  your  creature.  Therefore 
issue  orders  to  him  and  forbid  his  injuring  me  further.' 

Brahma,  angered  at  this  report,  went  with  the  supplicant 
to  Siva,  and  told  him  what  he  had  learnt.  All  these  next 
went  together  to  Vishnu,  the  Supreme  Being  ;  and  after 
they  had  offered  their  respectful  salutations,  the  cow — that 
is,  the  Earth  still  in  this  form — spoke  thus  : — 

'  Great  god,  you  always  listen  graciously  to  the  prayers 
addressed  to  you.  I  come,  then,  in  my  unhappiness  to 
implore  your  protection.  Kamsa,  the  cruel  Kamsa,  is  com- 
mitting the  most  unheard-of  cruelties  against  me.  I  pro- 
strate myself  at  your  feet,  and  beg  of  you  to  put  an  end  to 
them  by  slaying  this  evildoer.' 

After  listening  to  these  complaints,  Vishnu  asked  Brahma 
whether  he  had  not  formerly  granted  some  special  favour 
to  this  Kamsa,  and  what  was  its  nature. 

'  The  favour  which  I  granted  him,'  answered  Brahma, 
'  is  that  he  can  only  be  deprived  of  life  by  his  own  nephew. 
Enter,  therefore,  into  the  womb  of  Devaki,  his  sister  ;  for 
there  is  no  other  way  of  getting  rid  of  this  tyrant.' 

So  Vishnu  followed  Brahma's  advice,  and  became  in- 
carnate in  the  womb  of  Devaki,  sister  of  Kamsa  and  wife 
of  Vassu-Deva,  one  of  the  most  celebrated  merchants  of 
the  country. 

Kamsa,  on  learning  all  that  was  going  on,  placed  guards 
and  spies  everywhere,  thrust  Vassu-Deva  and  his  wife  into 
close  confinement,  and  loaded  them  with  fetters.  How- 
ever, Devaki  was  not  long  in  giving  birth  to  Krishna,  and 
the  day  of  his  birth  was  the  eighth  of  the  moon  of  the 
month  Badra  (September)  1.  Being  informed  that  Kamsa 
had  resolved  to  kill  the  child,  Devaki  managed  to  escape 
the  vigilance  of  the  guards  and  had  him  secretly  carried 
away  into  the  town  of  Gokulam. 

At  the  same  time  Yasoda,  wife  of  the  shepherd  Nanda, 
had  given  birth   to   a   daughter.     To   prevent   this   cruel 

1  It  was  the  month  of  Sravana  (eighth  day  after  full  moon),  not  the 
month  of  Badra. — Ed. 


626         KRISHNA'S   DEPRAVED   CONDUCT 

design  of  Kamsa,  the  two  children  were  interchanged. 
Yasoda,  who  had  sunk  into  a  deep  slumber  during  the 
birth  of  her  child,  had  been  unable  to  ascertain  whether 
she  had  given  birth  to  a  boy  or  a  girl  ;  she  did  not  there- 
fore detect  the  substitution,  and  always  looked  upon 
Krishna  as  her  own  son. 

As  soon  as  the  tyrant  Kamsa  had  learnt  of  his  sister's 
safe  delivery,  he  ordered  the  child  to  be  brought  to  him 
that  it  might  be  put  to  death.  But  the  child,  an  incar- 
nation of  the  Supreme  Being,  was  already  in  safety  at 
Gokulam,  in  the  house  of  the  shepherd  Nanda.  Kamsa 
wished,  but  in  vain,  to  vent  his  rage  on  the  little  girl,  who 
was  no  less  than  the  Supreme  Being  himself,  under  the 
name  of  Badra-Kali,  whose  adventures  are  to  be  found 
written  in  the  history  of  the  goddesses. 

Little  Krishna  spent  his  earlier  years  in  games  and 
amusements  suitable  to  his  age.  His  ordinary  pastime 
was  to  steal  milk  and  butter,  which  he  divided  afterwards 
with  his  friends  the  shepherdesses.  His  youth  was  thus 
spent  in  the  midst  of  a  pastoral  life,  and  he  is  often  repre- 
sented playing  on  a  flute,  the  favourite  instrument  of 
shepherds. 

On  reaching  manhood  he  gave  himself  up  entirely  to 
a  life  of  dissipation  and  most  unbridled  debauchery.  He 
did  not  even  respect  the  virtue  of  his  sisters  or  of  his  own 
mother.  He  carried  them  all  off  by  force,  and  treated 
them  as  if  they  had  been  his  legitimate  wives. 

In  the  meanwhile  he  declared  war  against  the  tyrant 
Kamsa,  his  uncle,  routed  and  slew  him,  and  gave  back  the 
crown  to  Ugrasena. 

Having  resolved  to  marry,  he  carried  off  the  maiden 
Rukmani  and  very  many  other  virtuous  girls.  The  number 
of  his  wives  amounted  to  sixteen  thousand,  and  they  bore 
him  a  prodigious  number  of  children. 

He  waged  several  wars  against  Vacharada,  against  the 
king  Banasura,  and  even  against  Siva  himself,  who  had 
sided  with  the  latter  monarch.  It  was  Aniruddha,  Krishna's 
son,  who  caused  the  dispute  between  his  father  and  Bana- 
sura,  whose  daughter   Balaramma x  he   (Aniruddha)   had 

1  The  daughter's  name  was  Usha. — Ed. 


FEATS   ACHIEVED   BY  KRISHNA  027 

attempted  to  carry  off.  The  ravisher  was  kept  prisoner 
for  a  long  time,  and  was  only  given  back  to  his  father  after 
several  long  and  bloody  battles.  Krishna,  after  rescuing 
his  son,  began  to  build  in  the  middle  of  the  sea  the 
town  called  Dwaraka,  and  took  his  innumerable  family 
thither. 

At  length,  having  seen  all  his  children  die  before  his  eyes, 
he  himself  paid  tribute  to  nature.  The  victim  of  a  curse, 
which  a  penitent  in  his  wrath  had  pronounced  against  him, 
he  fell  pierced  by  a  huntsman's  arrow. 

The  following  are  some  of  the  principal  blessings  which 
the  world  gained  from  this  incarnation  of  Vishnu  in  the 
person  of  Krishna  : — 

He  put  to  death  Poothana,  a  woman  celebrated  for  her 
extraordinary  size,  strength,  and  ferocity. 

He  effaced  from  the  earth  a  great  number  of  giants. 

He  uprooted  two  trees  of  such  tremendous  size  that  they 
covered  one-half  of  the  earth  with  their  shade. 

He  chastised  the  serpent  Kaliya. 

He  suspended  a  mountain  in  the  air  to  serve  as  an 
umbrella  for  forty  thousand  shepherds  who  had  been  over- 
taken by  a  storm  *. 

Besides  all  this,  he  cut  to  pieces  Kamsa  and  all  his 
followers. 

However,  this  is  enough  about  the  incarnations  of  Vishnu. 
Others  before  me  have  spoken  at  great  length  about  him. 
I  will  merely  repeat  that,  judging  by  the  outward  worship 
paid  to  him,  this  god  must  be  considered  as  disputing  the 
highest  rank  with  Brahma  ;  and  in  fact  many  Hindu 
pundits  look  upon  Brahma  merely  as  the  chief  of  the 
inferior  gods. 

To  Vishnu  are  attributed  five  weapons  called  by  the 
common  name  of  panchayuda.  But  the  two  principal  ones 
are  the  sankha,  which  he  holds  in  his  left  hand,  and  the 
chakra,  which  he  holds  in  his  right. 

Siva. 

This  god  is  also  called  Ishwara,  Rudra,  Sadasiva,  Maha- 
deva,  Parameswara,  and  a  host  of  other  names.     He  is 
1  The  mountain  on  that  account  was  called  Govardhanagiri. — Ed. 


628  SIVA'S   REPULSIVE   ASPECT 

represented  under  a  horrible  form,  in  allusion  no  doubt  to 
the  power  which  he  possesses  of  destroying  everything.  He 
is  made  to  appear  still  more  frightful  by  having  his  body 
covered  with  ashes.  His  long  hair  is  plaited  in  a  strange 
manner  ;  his  eyes  of  huge  size  make  him  appear  to  be  in 
a  constant  state  of  fury.  Instead  of  jewels  his  ears  are 
adorned  with  snakes,  which  are  likewise  twined  round  his 
body.  There  are  some  colossal  idols  representing  Siva 
which  are  calculated  to  inspire  genuine  terror. 

The  principal  attribute  of  this  god,  as  I  have  already 
mentioned  more  than  once,  is  the  power  of  destruction. 
Some  Hindu  authors  ascribe  to  him  also  the  power  of 
creation. 

His  vehicle  is  a  bull,  and  his  principal  weapon  is  the 
trident  or  trisula. 

The  history  of  Siva,  like  that  of  the  other  Hindu  deities, 
is  a  tissue  of  the  most  extravagant  fables.  It  consists  of 
endless  wars  waged  by  him  against  the  giants,  of  his  hatred 
and  jealousy  towards  the  other  gods,  and,  above  all,  of  his 
shameless  intrigues. 

In  one  of  his  wars,  wishing  by  an  unexpected  attack  to 
accomplish  the  ruin  of  all  his  enemies,  the  giants,  and  to 
take  possession  of  the  tripuram  in  which  they  had  entrenched 
themselves,  he  split  the  earth  into  two  equal  parts,  and  took 
one-half  as  a  weapon.  He  made  Brahma  the  general  of  his 
army  ;  the  four  Vedas  served  him  for  horses.  Vishnu  was 
used  as  an  arrow,  while  Mandra  Parvata  served  as  a  bow. 
In  place  of  a  bow-string  he  tied  to  his  bow  a  monstrous 
serpent.  With  this  formidable  equipment  Siva  led  his 
army  against  the  enemies  of  the  gods,  took  from  them  the 
three  fortresses  which  they  had  constructed,  and  extermi- 
nated them  all  without  sparing  a  single  one. 

Siva  had  much  trouble  in  finding  a  wife  ;  but  having 
done  a  long  and  austere  penance  in  the  deserts  bordering 
on  Mandra  Parvata,  Parvata  was  so  touched  that  he  finally 
consented  to  give  him  in  marriage  his  daughter  Parvati. 

The  Ling  am. 

The  lingam,  an  object  of  deep  veneration  throughout 
India,  is  the  symbol  of  Siva,  and  it  is  under  this  obscene 


AN  UNTIMELY   VISIT  629 

form  that  the  god  is  principally  honoured.  I  have  described 
elsewhere  what  this  infamous  figure  represents.  One  finds 
in  several  Puranas  details  of  the  origin  of  the  superstitious 
worship  of  which  it  is  the  object.  However  much  these 
details  may  vary,  as  to  the  main  point  the  story  is  every- 
where the  same.  Here,  in  abridged  form,  is  what  the 
Linga-purana  says  : — Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Vasishta,  accom- 
panied by  a  numerous  following  of  illustrious  penitents, 
went  one  day  to  Kailasa  (the  paradise  of  Siva)  to  pay 
a  visit  to  the  god,  and  surprised  him  in  the  act  of  inter- 
course with  his  wife.  He  was  not  in  the  least  discon- 
certed by  the  presence  of  the  illustrious  visitors,  and  so 
far  from  showing  any  shame  at  being  discovered  in  such 
a  position,  continued  to  indulge  in  the  gratification  of  his 
sensual  desires. 

The  fact  was  that  the  shameless  god  was  greatly  excited 
by  the  intoxicating  liquors  which  he  had  drunk,  and  with 
his  reason  obscured  by  passion  and  drunkenness,  he  was 
no  longer  in  a  state  to  appreciate  the  indecency  of  his 
conduct. 

At  sight  of  him  some  of  the  gods,  and  especially  Vishnu, 
began  to  laugh  ;  while  the  rest  displayed  great  indignation 
and  anger,  and  loaded  the  shameless  Siva  with  insults  and 
curses. 

They  said  to  him,  ■  Behold,  thou  art  but  a  devil,  thou 
art  worse  even  than  a  devil !  thou  hast  the  form  of  one, 
and  dost  possess  all  the  wickedness  !  We  came  here  in 
a  spirit  of  friendliness  to  pay  thee  a  visit,  and  thou  dost 
not  blush  to  make  us  spectators  of  thy  brutal  sensuality  ! 
Be  accursed  !  Let  no  virtuous  person  from  henceforth 
have  any  dealings  with  thee  !  Let  all  those  who  approach 
thee  be  regarded  as  brutes,  and  be  banished  from  the  society 
of  honest  folk  !  ' 

After  pronouncing  these  curses,  the  gods  and  the  penitents 
retired,  covered  with  shame. 

When  Siva  had  recovered  his  senses  a  little,  he  asked  his 
guards  who  it  was  that  had  come  to  visit  him.  They  told 
him  everything  that  had  taken  place,  and  described  to 
him  the  angry  attitude  that  his  illustrious  friends  had 
assumed. 

The  words  of  the  guards  fell  on  Siva  and  his  wife  Durga 


630  THE   LINGAM   ESTABLISHED 

like  a  clap  of  thunder,  and  they  both  died  of  grief 
in  the  same  position  in  which  the  gods  and  the  peni- 
tents had  surprised  them.  Siva  desired  that  the  act 
which  had  covered  him  with  shame,  and  which  had  been 
the  cause  of  his  death,  should  be  celebrated  among 
mankind. 

'  My  shame,'  said  he,  '  has  killed  me  ;  but  it  has  also 
given  me  new  life,  and  a  new  shape,  which  is  that  of  the 
lingam  !  You,  evil  spirits,  my  subjects,  regard  it  as  my 
double  self  I  Yes,  the  lingam  is  I  myself,  and  I  ordain 
that  men  shall  offer  to  it  henceforth  their  sacrifices  and 
worship.  Those  who  honour  me  under  the  symbol  of  the 
lingam  shall  obtain,  without  fail,  the  object  of  all  their 
desires,  and  a  place  in  Kailasa.  I  am  the  Supreme  Being, 
and  so  is  my  lingam.  To  render  to  it  the  honours  due  to 
a  god  is  an  action  of  the  highest  merit.  The  margosa-tree 
is,  of  all  trees,  the  one  I  love  the  best.  If  any  one  wish 
to  obtain  my  favours,  he  must  offer  me  the  leaves,  the 
flowers,  and  the  fruit  thereof.  Hear  once  more,  evil  spirits, 
my  subjects.  Those  who  fast  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the 
moon  of  the  month  Makha  (February)  in  honour  of  my 
lingam,  and  those  who,  on  the  following  night,  do  puja, 
and  present  to  me  leaves  of  the  margosa-tree,  shall  be 
certain  of  a  place  in  Kailasa  \ 

'  Hear  yet  again,  evil  spirits,  my  subjects.  If  you  desire 
to  become  virtuous,  learn  what  are  the  benefits  to  be 
derived  from  honour  rendered  to  my  lingam.  Those  who 
make  images  of  it  with  earth  or  cow-dung,  or  do  puja  to  it 
under  this  form,  shall  be  rewarded  ;  those  who  make  it  in 
stone  shall  receive  seven  times  more  reward,  and  shall 
never  behold  the  Prince  of  Darkness  ;  those  who  make  it 
in  silver  shall  receive  seven  times  more  reward  than  the 
last  named  ;  and  those  who  make  it  in  gold  shall  be  seven 
times  more  meritorious  still. 

'  Let  my  priests  go  and  teach  these  truths  to  men,  and 
compel  them  to  embrace  the  worship  of  my  lingam  !  The 
lingam  is  Siva  himself  ;  it  is  white  ;  it  has  three  eyes  and 
five  faces  ;  it  is  arrayed  in  a  tiger's  skin.  It  existed  before 
the  world,  and  it  is  the  origin  and  the  beginning  of  all 

1  It  is  the  bilva  {Acglc  Marmdos),  not  the  margosa,  which  is  sacred  to 
Siva.— Ed. 


A  SYMBOL  OF  PROCREATION  631 

beings.  It  disperses  our  terrors  and  our  fears,  and  grants 
us  the  object  of  all  our  desires.' 

It  is  incredible,  it  is  impossible  to  believe,  that  in  invent- 
ing this  vile  superstition  the  religious  teachers  of  India 
intended  that  the  people  should  render  direct  worship  to 
objects  the  very  names  of  which,  among  civilized  nations, 
are  an  insult  to  decency.  Without  any  doubt  the  obscene 
symbol  contained  an  allegorical  meaning,  and  was  a  type, 
in  the  first  instance,  of  the  reproductive  forces  of  nature, 
the  generative  source  of  all  living  beings.  For  the  rest, 
the  litigant  offers  an  incontestable  analogy  to  the  priapus 
of  the  Romans  and  the  phallus  of  the  Egyptians.  The 
fact  is,  all  the  founders  of  false  religions  had  need  to  appeal 
to  the  baser  senses,  and  to  flatter  the  passions  of  their 
proselytes  in  order  to  attract  them  to  their  foolish  doctrines 
and  blind  them  to  their  impostures. 

What  I  have  just  said  about  the  lingam  applies  also  to 
the  namam  1,  another  emblematic  and  not  less  abominable 
symbol,  which  is  not  unlike  the  Baal-peor  or  Belphegor  of 
the  Moabites. 

One  sees  figures  of  the  lingam,  not  only  in  the  temples 
dedicated  to  Siva,  but  also  on  the  high-roads,  in  public 
places,  and  other  frequented  spots. 

VlGNESHWARA. 

This  divinity  bears  also  the  names  of  Ganesa,  Pillayar, 
Vinayaka,  &c.  He  is  venerated  by  Hindus  of  all  sects, 
and  his  cult  is  universal.  One  comes  across  his  idol  every- 
where— in  temples,  schools,  chuttrams,  public  places,  forts, 
on  the  high-roads,  near  wells,  fountains,  tanks  ;  in  short, 
in  all  frequented  places.  It  is  taken  into  houses,  and  in 
all  public  ceremonies  Ganesa  is  always  the  first  god  to  be 
worshipped.  He  is,  as  I  have  said  before,  and  as  his  name 
implies,  the  god  of  obstacles,  and  by  reason  of  this  a  Hindu 
begins  every  serious  undertaking  by  seeking  to  propitiate 
him. 

He  is  represented  under  a  hideous  form,  with  an  elephant's 
head,  an  enormous  stomach,  and  disproportioned  limbs,  and 

1  Part  I,  Chapter  IX. 


032  THE   GOD  VIGNESHWARA 

with  a  rat  at  his  feet.  Siva  was  his  father,  and  Badra-Kali, 
or  Durga,  his  mother.  He  is  said  to  have  given  himself 
up  entirely  to  a  life  of  meditation,  and  to  have  never 
married. 

The  first  time  that  his  mother  Badra-Kali  saw  him,  she 
reduced  his  head  to  ashes  by  the  brilliancy  of  her  look. 
►Siva,  on  learning  this  misfortune,  and  being  sorely  grieved 
at  having  a  son  without  a  head,  considered  earnestly  how 
he  might  provide  him  with  this  eminently  useful  member. 
With  this  intent  he  sent  his  servants  with  orders  to  cut  off 
the  head  of  the  first  living  creature  they  met  sleeping  with 
the  face  turned  towards  the  north,  and  to  bring  it  to  him. 
An  elephant  happened  to  be  the  first  creature  they  per- 
ceived in  this  position,  and  following  Siva's  instructions 
they  cut  off  the  animal's  head,  and  hurried  back  with  it  to 
their  master.  Siva  took  it  and  fitted  it  on  his  son's  neck, 
and  since  then  Ganesa  has  preserved  the  shape  under 
which  he  is  still  represented. 

The  elephant's  head,  and  also  the  rat,  are  probably 
emblems  of  the  prudence,  sagacity,  and  forethought  which 
the  Hindus  attribute  to  this  divinity. 

Indra,  or  Devendra. 

Indra  is  the  king  of  the  gods  of  the  second  rank,  who 
live  with  him  in  Sivarga.  He  is  the  son  of  Kasyapa  and 
Aditi.  The  inferior  gods  and  the  virtuous  persons  who 
inhabit  his  happy  domains  are  without  number. 

To  make  them  happy  Indra  distributes  amrita  (nectar) 
to  them,  and  allows  them  to  enjoy  all  the  pleasures  of  the 
senses,  to  which  he  also  gives  himself  up  without  restraint ; 
there  is  no  kind  of  sensual  enjoyment  that  cannot  be 
indulged  in,  without  satiety,  in  Sivarga. 

Indra's  vehicle  is  an  elephant,  and  his  weapon  the  vajra, 
a  kind  of  sharp  knife.  Lightning  is  also  his  weapon  in  his 
wars  against  the  giants. 

The  Ashta-Dik-Palakas. 

Indra  occupies  the  first  rank  among  the  eight  Dik- 
Palakas,  who  preside  over  and  guard  the  eight  principal 


THE   ASHTA-DIK-PALAKAS 


633 


divisions  of  the  world.  The  following  table  will  explain 
all  that  is  interesting  about  these  divinities,  who  are  placed 
by  the  Hindus  after  the  gods  of  the  first  rank  : — 


Names. 

Position  of 

their 
kingdoms. 

Their  chargers. 

Their 
weapons  l. 

Colour  of 

their 
garments. 

Indra    . 
Agni     . 
Yama   . 
Neinita 
Varuna 
Vayu     . 
Kubera 
Isana    . 

East     .     .     . 
South-east     . 
South  .     .     . 
South-west    . 
West    .     .     . 
North-west    . 
North  .     .     . 
North-east     . 

An  elephant  . 
A  ram  .     .     . 
A  buffalo  .     . 
A  man .     .     . 
A  crocodile    . 
An  antelope  . 
A  horse      .     . 
A  bull  .     .     . 

The  vajra  .     . 
The  sakti  .     . 
The  danda 
The  kunta. 
The  pasa  .     . 
The  divaja 
The  khadga    . 
The  trisvla     . 

Red 

Violet 

Orange 

Dark  yellow 

White 

Blue 

Pink 

Grey 

Those  who  seek  for  analogies  between  the  gods  of  India 
and  those  of  Greece  may  remark  certain  striking  similari- 
ties. Like  the  Greek  gods,  each  Hindu  god  has  a  particular 
weapon,  and  also  a  particular  animal  sacred  to  him. 

Abodes  of  Bliss. 

There  are  four  Abodes  of  Bliss  :  Swarga,  Kailasa,  Vai- 
kuntha,  and  Sattya-loka.  The  first  is  Indra's  paradise,  the 
second  Siva's,  the  third  Vishnu's,  and  the  fourth  Brahma's. 

In  describing  these  pleasant  retreats,  the  Hindu  books 
represent  Mount  Maha-Meru,  on  the  slopes  of  which  they 
are  situated,  as  being  in  the  form  of  a  cone,  convoluted  like 
a  snail's  shell  and  divided  into  stages.  On  the  first,  on  the 
north  side,  is  Swarga,  Indra's  paradise  ;  to  the  left,  on  the 
east  side  and  at  the  next  stage,  is  Kailasa,  Siva's  paradise  ; 
at  a  still  higher  stage,  on  the  south  side,  is  Vaikuntha, 
Vishnu's  paradise ;  and,  finally,  on  the  summit  of  the 
mountain  is  Sattya-loka,  Brahma's  paradise. 

Swarga. 

Indra's  paradise  is  inhabited  by  the  gods  of  the  second 
rank,  who  are  all  children  of  Kasyapa,  and  of  his  first  wife 

1  The  names  of  these  weapons  cannot  be  translated  into  any  European 
language ;  each  one  of  them  has  a  particular  shape,  and  in  no  way 
resembles  any  of  ours. — Dubois. 


634  SWARGA,    INDRA'S   PARADISE 

Aditi.  The  palace  of  India,  their  eldest  son,  and  king  of 
this  realm  of  delight,  is  in  the  centre,  sparkling  with  gold 
and  precious  stones.  There  is  also  another  palace  of  equal 
splendour  for  Sati,  his  wife,  Puloma's  daughter.  Their  son 
is  Jay  ant  a.  In  this  paradise  grows  the  famous  kalpa-tree, 
the  golden  fruit  of  which  has  an  exquisite  flavour  ;  and 
there  also  is  the  cow  Kamadhenu,  which  gives  delicious 
milk.  This  fruit  and  milk  form  the  nourishment  of  the 
gods. 

The  kalpa-tree  and  Kamadhenu  the  cow  are  held  in  high 
esteem  by  the  Hindus,  and  are  referred  to  on  almost  every 
page  of  their  books.  This  tree  of  life  of  the  Hindus,  and 
their  Swarga  itself,  may  well  be  but  a  gross  imitation  of 
the  arbor  vitae  and  of  the  earthly  paradise  of  Genesis.  Be 
this  as  it  may,  however,  the  kalpa-tree,  which  grows  to 
the  height  of  ten  yojanas,  has  the  power  of  satisfying  all 
the  desires  of  men  who  put  their  trust  in  it.  As  for  Kama- 
dhenu the  cow,  she  is  not  less  prodigal  of  her  bounties,  and 
can,  among  other  things,  grant  milk  and  butter  in  abun- 
dance to  anybodj^  who  invokes  her  with  sincere  faith  and 
devotion.  Many  other  trees  are  to  be  found  in  Swarga, 
while  the  limpid  waters  of  many  rivers  meander  there  in 
all  directions,  the  principal  one  being  the  Mandakini.  The 
eyes  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  happy  abode  are  refreshed 
by  the  rhythmical  and  voluptuous  movements  of  throngs 
of  dancing-girls  ;  while  the  sweet  notes  of  the  vina  and 
kanohra1,  which  the  Gandharvas,  famous  musicians,  play 
in  accompaniment  to  their  melodious  songs,  charm  the  ear 
without  ceasing.  Innumerable  courtesans,  too,  are  always 
ready  to  satisfy  the  passions  which  they  excite.  Bruhaspati 
performs  the  office  of  guru  to  the  gods  in  Swarga,  and  ex- 
plains the  Vedas  to  them.  Finally,  strangely  enough,  two 
duly  appointed  physicians  are  to  be  found  there,  Chonata 
and  Kumara  2.  The  Ashta-Dik-Palakas,  mentioned  above, 
hold  the  first  rank,  as  is  natural,  among  the  inhabitants 
of  this  Abode  of  Bliss.  The  nine  planets  also  have  their 
abode  there,  and  it  is  from  thence  that  they  shine  upon  us. 

1  We  cannot  trace  this  word.  The  Abbe  probably  means  the  Tamil 
Kinnaram, — Ed. 

-  The  Abbo  has  made  a  mistake  here.  Apparently  he  refers  to  the 
twins  Asvini  Kumaras,  divine  physicians. — Ed. 


KAILASA   AND  VAIKUNTHA  (535 

The  seven  famous  penitents,   or  munis,   and  an  infinite 
number  of  other  saints  are  the  habitual  guests  of  Indra. 

Entrance  to  Swarga  is  granted  to  all  virtuous  persons, 
without  exception,  of  whatever  rank  or  caste,  provided 
they  have  attained  on  earth  the  required  degree  of  sanctity. 

Kailasa. 

Above  Swarga  is  a  city  constructed  on  a  triangular  plan. 
It  is  called  Kailasa,  and  sometimes  Parvata  (mountain). 
It  is  a  charming  place.  Siva  rules  over  it,  and  it  is  here 
that  he  resides  with  his  wife  Parvati.  They  are  both 
depicted  as  giving  themselves  up  continually  to  carnal 
pleasures.  Ganesa  and  Kartika  are  their  sons,  both  of 
whom  are  endowed  with  extraordinary  strength.  Ganesa, 
the  elder,  devotes  himself  exclusively  to  meditation ; 
Kartika  cares  for  nothing  but  weapons,  and  thinks  of 
nothing  but  war. 

Siva's  courtiers  are  a  band  of  evil  spirits,  of  whom 
Nandi  is  the  chief.  His  lieutenants  are  Bringi,  Bhima, 
and  Kadurgita,  all  of  whom  have  terrible  countenances. 

Bhairava,  Bhima,  and  Darshana  are  charged  with  the 
care  of  the  city,  which  is  peopled  with  various  kinds  of  evil 
spirits,  horrible  to  behold,  which  spread  terror  everywhere. 
They  go  about  naked,  and  are  continually  drinking,  quar- 
relling, and  fighting. 

Siva,  who  consumes  intoxicating  liquors  only,  is  always 
drunk.  He  abandons  himself  to  unlimited  and  shameless 
excesses  of  sensuality.  He  is  clothed  in  a  tiger's  skin 
covered  with  ashes,  and  his  body  is  entwined  with  serpents. 
Seated  on  his  ox,  he  rides  occasionally  on  the  neighbouring 
mountains  with  his  wife  Parvati.  The  demons  who  form 
their  escort  utter  piercing  cries,  terminating  with  a  shriek 
like  hit  !  kil  !  and  it  is  from  this  that  Kailasa  takes  its  name. 
The  paradise  of  Kailasa  is  reserved  for  the  followers  of  Siva, 
the  worshippers  of  the  disgusting  lingayn. 

Vaikuntha. 

Vaikuntha  is  the  paradise  of  Vishnu,  reserved  for  those 
who  are  specially  devoted  to  the  worship  of  this  god.  It  is 
above  Kailasa,  and  occupies  a  most  charming  site  ;   hence 


636  SATTYA-LOKA 

the  name  Yaikiuitha,  signifying  '  Pleasant.'  Gold  and 
precious  objects  of  all  sorts  sparkle  on  every  side.  In  the 
midst  of  this  enchanting  abode  rises  a  superb  palace  inha- 
bited by  Vishnu  and  his  wife  Lakshmi  ;  close  to  them  are 
Pradyumna,  their  eldest  son,  and  a  host  of  other  children, 
their  grandson  Aniruddha,  son  of  Pradyumna,  Usha,  his  wife, 
and  their  daughter  Bana.  In  this  abode,  as  in  the  rest, 
there  are  flowers,  trees,  quadrupeds,  birds,  and  especially 
peacocks  in  great  numbers. 

The  river  Karona  flows  below  the  royal  residence  l .  Many 
penitents  live  on  its  banks  and  there  spend  happy,  peaceful 
days  ;  their  food  consists  of  fruits  and  vegetables,  which 
grow  without  cultivation  ;  their  leisure  is  divided  between 
reading  the  Vedas  and  meditating. 

Sattya-loka. 

The  name  of  Sattya-loka  signifies  '  The  Place  of  Truth,'  or 
'  The  Abode  of  Virtue.'  Sattya-loka  is  the  highest  of  the 
Abodes  of  Bliss.  It  is  the  paradise  of  Brahma,  where  he 
lives  with  his  wife  Sarasvati.  The  Ganges  waters  this 
divine  retreat,  and  it  is  hence  that  some  of  its  purifying 
waters  have  reached  the  earth.  It  is  reserved  for  those 
Brahmins  only  who,  by  the  practice  of  virtue  on  earth,  have 
arrived  at  the  degree  of  sanctity  necessary  to  gain  admit- 
tance thereto.  Persons  of  any  other  caste,  however  edifying 
and  pure  their  lives  may  have  been,  are  irrevocably  excluded 
from  it. 

CHAPTER  VI 

The  Worship  of  Animals.— The  Worship  of  Monkeys.— Of  Bulls.— Of 
the  Garuda  Bird.— Of  Snakes.— Of  Fishes.— The  Worship  of  Bhoo- 
tams,  or  Evil  Spirits. — Human  Sacrifices. 

Of  all  the  different  kinds  of  idolatry  the  worship  of 
animals  is  certainly  one  of  the  lowest  forms,  and  the  one 
which  most  unmistakably  reveals  the  weakness  of  human 
nature  ;  for  man  thus  shows  himself  incapable  of  recognizing 
in  His  works  the  great  Creator  of  the  universe.  What  a  sad 
spectacle  it  is  when  man,  created  in  God's  own  image,  with 

1  The  name  of  the  river  is  Viraja  and  not  Karona.— Ed. 


WORSHIP   PAID   TO    ANIMALS  637 

a  countencance  so  formed  that  he  might  always  be  looking 
heavenwards  l,  so  forgets  his  sublime  origin  as  to  dare  to  bow 
the  knee  to  animals  !  It  is  almost  incredible  that  human 
beings  should  so  debase  themselves.  But  we  must  not 
lament  over  facts  without  inquiring  into  their  causes.  The 
worship  of  animals  becomes  more  comprehensible  when 
one  considers  the  foundations  on  which  all  idolatrous 
religions  are  based  ;  namely,  self-interest  and  fear.  In  the 
eyes  of  a  heathen  anything  that  can  be  useful  to  him  seems 
worthy  of  being  worshipped  ;  and  this  feeling  is  much 
stronger  in  regard  to  anything  that  can  harm  him.  Thus 
the  Egyptians,  though  they  were  so  highly  cultivated  in  the 
arts  and  sciences,  worshipped  the  bull  Apis,  the  ibis,  the 
crocodile,  beetles,  snakes,  &c,  on  account  either  of  the  good 
they  hoped  for  or  of  the  harm  they  feared  from  them.  As 
for  the  Hindus,  they  appear  to  be  firmly  convinced  that  as 
all  living  creatures  are  either  useful  or  hurtful  to  man,  it  is 
better  to  worship  them  all,  paying  them  more  or  less  atten- 
tion in  proportion  to  the  advantages  they  offer  or  the  fear 
which  their  qualities  inspire.  First  on  their  list  of  sacred 
creatures  are  the  monkey,  the  bull,  the  bird  called  garuda, 
and  snakes. 

The  Monkey,  or  Hanuman. 

The  great  reverence  in  which  the  monkey  is  held  by 
Hindus  is  no  doubt  due  to  its  likeness  to  man,  both  in  its 
outward  appearance  and  in  many  of  its  habits.  Perhaps 
also  its  thievish  and  destructive  propensities  may  be  partly 
accountable  for  the  consideration  which  it  enjoys.  At  any 
rate  Hindu  books  are  full  of  marvellous  tales  of  monkeys. 
In  my  remarks  in  the  preceding  chapter  on  Rama  I  have 
already  described  some  of  the  deeds  of  valour  wrought  by 
this  hero  at  the  head  of  his  army  of  monkeys.  Indeed,  the 
greater  part  of  the  Ramayana,  the  favourite  epic  of  the 
Hindus,  is  devoted  to  the  achievements  of  these  valiant 
monkey  soldiers  and  their  illustrious  general. 

The  cult  of  the  monkey  Hanuman  extends  over  the  whole 
of  India.     The  followers  of  Vishnu  are  specially  devoted  to 

1  Os  homini  sublime  dedit,  caelumque  tueri 
Jussit,  et  erectos  ad  sidera  tollere  vultus. 

Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  i.  85  sq. — Dubois. 


338      THE  MONKEY-GOD  HANUMAX 

this  deity,  but  all  are  ready  to  give  him  a  share  of  their 
homage.  Images  of  Hanuman  are  to  be  seen  in  most  tem- 
ples and  in  many  public  places.  They  are  also  to  be  found 
in  forests  and  desert  spots.  Indeed,  in  those  provinces 
where  there  are  many  followers  of  Vishnu,  you  can  scarcely 
move  a  yard  without  coming  across  an  image  of  this  beloved 
god.  The  offerings  made  to  him  consist  solely  of  natural 
products,  never  of  a  sacrifice  of  blood.  Wherever  monkeys 
are  to  be  found  in  a  wild  state,  their  devotees  daily  bring 
them  offerings  of  boiled  rice,  fruit,  and  various  other  kinds 
of  food  to  which  they  are  partial.  This  is  considered  a  most 
meritorious  act. 

Basava,  or  the  Bull. 

This  is  the  favourite  deity  of  the  Sivaites,  or  followers  of 
Siva.  Many  conjectures  have  been  offered  as  to  the  origin 
of  bull-worship  among  so  many  idolatrous  peoples.  It 
seems  to  me,  however,  that  the  reason  is  simple  enough. 
Was  it  not  most  natural  that  those  who  worshipped  so  many 
different  objects  should  offer  homage  to  animals  which  were 
so  pre-eminently  valuable  to  them,  which  were  their  com- 
panions in  labour,  on  which  they  relied  to  carry  on  all  their 
agricultural  work,  which  in  primitive  times  constituted 
their  one  source  of  wealth,  and  which  even  at  the  present 
day  form  the  basis  of  material  wealth  all  over  the  world  ? 
The  nations  which  did  not  actually  worship  them  as  gods 
were  always  careful  to  show  the  high  value  they  set  upon 
them.  For  instance,  amongst  the  Romans  to  kill  a  bull 
was  accounted  a  no  less  crime  than  to  kill  a  fellow-citizen  J  ; 
and  it  was  a  long  time  before  the  Athenians  could  bring 
themselves  to  offer  up  one  of  these  animals  in  their  sacrifices. 
There  is  every  reason  therefore  why  the  Hindus  should 
regard  their  cattle  with  extraordinary  veneration,  for  as 
a  matter  of  fact  oxen  and  cows  are  so  absolutely  necessary 
to  them  that  one  may  safely  say  it  would  be  quite  impossible 
for  them  to  exist  without  their  help.  For  this  reason,  there- 
fore, these  animals  are  reckoned  among  the  most  sacred 
objects  of  their  religion.     Their  images  are  to  be  found  in 

1  '  Bovis  tanta  fuit  apud  antiquos  veneratio,  ut  tarn  capitale  esset 
bovem  occidere  quam  civem.' — Columella,  Book  VI. 


SACRED   BULL   WORSHIP  030 

almost  every  temple,  particularly  in  those  dedicated  to  Siva, 
and  are  to  be  seen  in  great  numbers  in  those  districts  where 
the  sect  of  the  Lingayats  predominates.  The  sacred  bull 
is  usually  represented  as  lying  down  on  a  pedestal,  with 
three  of  his  legs  doubled  under  him,  and  the  right  forefoot 
extended  straight  out  beyond  his  head  l. 

Live  bulls  are  also  regarded  as  objects  of  public  worship 
by  Hindu  devotees.  By  way  of  investing  them  with  an 
appearance  of  sanctity  these  sacred  beasts  are  branded  on 
the  right  hind  quarter  with  a  design  representing  Siva's 
special  weapon.  They  are  allowed  perfect  liberty,  are  never 
tied  up  in  a  shed,  and  may  graze  wherever  they  please. 
They  are  often  to  be  seen  in  the  streets,  where  their  devotees 
worship  them  publicly  and  at  the  same  time  bring  them  rice 
and  different  kinds  of  grain  to  eat.  They  are  all  under  the 
safeguard  of  superstition,  and  though  they  wander  hither 
and  thither  night  and  day,  I  have  never  heard  of  one  being 
stolen.  When  they  die,  even  the  Pariahs  dare  not  eat  their 
flesh,  the  bodies  being  buried  with  much  pomp  and  ceremony. 

Priests  of  Siva  sometimes  travel  from  district  to  district 
with  these  sacred  bulls,  whose  horns  and  bodies  are  deco- 
rated with  much  taste.  Large  crowds  accompany  them, 
carrying  flags  of  various  colours  and  headed  by  bands  of 
music.  The  real  object  of  all  this  display  is  to  collect  alms 
from  the  faithful,  an  object  which  is  invariably  attained  ; 
for  multitudes  flock  to  worship  the  venerated  animal, 
prostrating  themselves  before  it  with  every  absurd  demon- 
stration of  devotion  that  superstition  can  suggest,  and  one 
and  all  never  forget  to  recompense  the  leader  of  the  pro- 
cession, who,  when  he  thinks  that  he  has  collected  sufficient 
contributions,  sets  the  sacred  beast  at  liberty  again. 

The  Bird  Garuda. 

The  kite  garuda  is  held  in  great  honour,  especially  by  the 
followers  of  Vishnu.  Brahmins,  after  finishing  their  morning 
ablutions,  will  wait  till  they  have  seen  one  of  these  birds 
before  returning  to  their  homes.  They  call  this  a  lucky 
meeting,  and  go  back  fully  convinced  that  it  will  bring  them 

1  There  is  an  enormous  specimen  in  the  Tanjore  temple. — Ed. 


040  THE   GARUDA,    OR    SACRED   KITE 

good  luck  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  It  is  a  common  bird 
enough.  Naturalists  classify  it  among  the  eagles  (the 
Malabar  eagle),  but  it  is  the  smallest  of  the  species.  It 
measures  barely  a  foot  from  its  beak  to  the  tip  of  its  tail, 
and  about  two  feet  and  a  half  across  its  outspread  wings. 
Its  body  is  covered  with  glossy  feathers  of  a  bright  chestnut 
colour  ;  its  head,  neck,  and  breast  are  whitish  ;  the  ends 
of  its  wings  are  a  glossy  black  ;  its  feet  are  yellow,  with 
black  claws.  It  is  a  pretty  and  graceful  bird  to  look  at  ; 
but  its  offensive  odour  renders  a  near  acquaintance  un- 
pleasant. It  utters  a  harsh,  shrill,  quavering  cry  like  kra! 
kra!  the  last  note  of  which  is  prolonged  into  a  mournful 
wail.  Though  apparently  strong  and  vigorous,  it  never 
attacks  any  bird  larger  than  itself  that  would  be  likely  to 
offer  resistance.  Indeed  its  timid  and  cowardly  nature 
makes  one  doubt  whether  it  really  does  belong  to  the  same 
species  as  the  king  of  the  feathered  tribe.  It  wages  per- 
petual war  upon  lizards,  rats,  and  especially  snakes.  When 
it  espies  one  of  the  last-named,  it  swoops  down  upon  it, 
seizes  it  in  its  talons,  carries  it  up  an  enormous  height,  and 
then  lets  it  drop.  Following  swiftly,  it  picks  it  up  again, 
killed  of  course  by  its  fall,  and  flies  off  with  it  to  some 
neighbouring  tree  where  it  may  be  devoured  at  leisure. 
Probably  out  of  gratitude  for  the  services  rendered  by  this 
bird  in  ridding  the  country  of  reptiles,  the  Hindus  have 
erected  shrines  in  its  honour,  just  as  the  Egyptians,  from 
a  similar  motive,  placed  the  ibis  amongst  their  tutelary 
deities. 

The  garuda  also  feeds  on  frogs  and  any  small  fish  that  it 
can  seize  in  shallow  water.  Moreover,  it  does  not  show 
much  consideration  for  the  poultry-yards  of  its  worshippers, 
on  which  it  often  makes  a  raid.  But  its  cowardice  is  such 
that  an  angry  hen  defending  her  chickens  can  easily  put  it 
to  flight,  and  only  the  chickens  which  have  imprudently 
wandered  from  their  mother's  side  are  likely  to  fall  into  its 
clutches.  Protected  by  superstition,  the  bird  has  no  fear  of 
man  ;  it  may  often  be  seen  on  the  roof  of  a  house,  or  in  some 
frequented  place.  Sunday  is  the  day  specially  devoted  to 
garuda-worshi]).  I  have  often  seen  Vishnavites  assembled 
together  on  that  day  for  the  express  purpose  of  paying  it 
homage.     They  call  the  birds  around  them  by  throwing 


SNAKE-WORSHIP  641 

pieces  of  meat  into  the  air,  which  the  birds  catch  very 
cleverly  with  their  claws. 

To  kill  one  of  these  birds  would  be  considered  as  heinous 
a  crime  as  homicide,  especially  in  the  eyes  of  the  followers  of 
Vishnu.  If  they  come  across  one  that  has  been  accidentally 
killed,  they  give  it  a  splendid  funeral.  And  they  pay  the 
same  respect  to  the  dead  remains  of  a  monkey  or  a  snake, 
performing  in  each  case  various  ridiculous  ceremonies,  in 
order  to  expiate  the  wickedness  of  the  unknown  author  of 
this  dreadful  crime. 

Snakes. 

Among  the  many  dangerous  animals  which  infest  India 
snakes  are  certainly  the  most  to  be  dreaded.  Though 
tigers  are  no  doubt  very  formidable  enemies,  they  are  not 
answerable  for  nearly  so  many  deaths  as  snakes.  During 
my  stay  in  India  hardly  a  month  passed  without  my  hearing 
that  some  person  had  been  killed,  close  to  where  I  happened 
to  be  living,  by  the  bite  of  a  poisonous  snake.  One  of  the 
commonest  snakes,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  venomous, 
is  the  cobra,  the  bite  of  which  causes  almost  immediate 
death.     It  is  accordingly  held  in  peculiar  veneration. 

Snake- worship,  which  is  a  common  form  of  idolatry  among 
almost  every  heathen  nation,  no  doubt  owes  its  origin  to 
men's  natural  fear  of  these  reptiles.  They  try  to  propitiate 
the  poisonous  species  with  offerings  and  sacrifices,  and  they 
treat  those  which  do  not  possess  deadly  fangs  with  the  same 
amount  of  respect,  because  in  their  ignorance  they  attribute 
to  a  benevolent  instinct  what  is  really  only  due  to  want  of 
power. 

As  if  the  actual  presence  of  these  dangerous  reptiles  were 
not  sufficient  to  terrify  the  native  mind,  Hindu  books  are 
filled  with  stories  and  fables  about  them,  and  pictures  or 
images  of  them  meet  you  at  every  turn. 

Snake-worshippers  search  for  the  holes  where  they  are 
likely  to  be  found,  and  which  more  often  than  not  are  in  the 
little  mounds  raised  by  the  kariahs,  or  white  ants.  When 
they  have  found  one,  they  visit  it  from  time  to  time,  placing 
before  it  milk,  bananas,  and  other  food  which  the  snake  is 
likely  to  fancy.  If  a  snake  happens  to  get  into  a  house,  far 
from  turning  out  the  inconvenient  guest  and  killing  it  on 


642  WORSHIP   OF   FISHES 

the  spot,  they  feed  it  plentifully  and  offer  .sacrifices  to  it 
daily.  Hindus  have  been  known  to  keep  deadly  snakes  for 
years  in  their  houses,  feeding  and  petting  them.  Even  if 
a  whole  family  were  in  danger  of  losing  their  lives,  no  one 
member  of  it  would  be  bold  enough  to  lay  sacrilegious  hands 
on  such  an  honoured  inmate. 

Temples  have  also  been  erected  in  their  special  honour. 
There  is  a  particularly  famous  one  in  Eastern  Mysore,  at 
a  place  called  Subramaniah,  which  is  also  the  name  of  the 
great  snake  so  often  mentioned  in  Hindu  fables  l.  Every 
year  in  the  month  of  December  a  solemn  feast  is  held  in  this 
temple.  Innumerable  devotees  flock  to  the  sacred  spot 
from  all  parts,  to  worship  and  offer  sacrifices  to  the  snakes. 
An  enormous  number  of  the  reptiles  have  taken  up  their 
abode  inside  the  building,  where  they  are  fed  and  looked 
after  by  the  officiating  Brahmins.  The  special  protection 
thus  afforded  has  allowed  them  to  increase  to  such  an  extent 
that  they  may  be  met  with  at  every  turn  all  over  the 
neighbourhood.  Many  of  their  worshippers  take  the  trouble 
to  bring  them  food.  And  woe  to  him  who  should  have  the 
audacity  to  kill  one  of  these  gruesome  deities.  He  would 
get  himself  into  terrible  trouble  2. 

The  denizens  of  water  also  come  in  for  their  share  of 
Hindu  worship.  It  is  quite  a  common  thing  to  see  Brahmins 
throwing  rice  or  other  food  to  the  fishes  in  rivers  and  tanks. 
Where  the  Brahmins  exercise  undisputed  authority,  fishing 
is  strictly  prohibited,  as,  for  instance,  near  the  large  agra- 
haras,  or  Brahmin  villages  ;  and  in  those  parts  of  the  rivers 
where  they  are  in  the  habit  of  bathing  I  have  often  seen 
huge  shoals  of  large  fish  swimming  about  near  the  surface, 
waiting  for  their  food.  At  the  slightest  sound  they  will  rush 
in  hundreds  towards  the  bank,  and  they  are  so  tame  that  they 
will  actually  feed  out  of  a  man's  hand  3. 

What  I  have  said  so  far  gives  but  a  feeble  notion  of  the 
superstitious  feelings  with  which  Hindus  regard  animals. 
Ought  these  feelings,  as  some  writers  think,  to  be  attributed 

1  It  is  also  called  Ananta  and  Mahasesha.  It  is  on  this  snake  that 
Vishnu  reclines  while  sleeping  on  the  sea. — Dubois. 

2  There  are  many  temples  of  this  description  still  existing,  to  which 
pilgrimages  are  made. — Ed. 

3  Fish-worship  is  connected  with  the  fish  Avatar  or  Mafsya-avatar  of 
Vishnu. — Ed. 


SUPERSTITIOUS    MOTIVES  648 

to  their  extreme  tender-heartedness,  to  their  gentle  and 
compassionate  natures  ?  I  should  say  decidedly  not.  Such 
childish,  yet  shameful,  forgetfulness  of  the  superiority  of 
man  over  all  other  created  beings  cannot  surely  arise  from 
any  noble  sentiments.  I  only  see  in  it  the  foolish  errors  of 
a  cowardly  and  weak-minded  people,  who  are  slaves  to  the 
idle  fancies  of  their  own  imaginations,  and  whose  reason  has 
become  so  obscured  that  they  are  incapable  of  recognizing 
the  just  and  natural  laws  governing  the  safety  of  mankind  1. 
The  most  irreconcilable  superstitions  2  and  the  most  ill- 
conceived  considerations  of  self-interest  are  the  only  motives 
which  actuate  Hindus  in  this  absurd  idolatry  of  birds  and 
beasts.  Any  one  who  has  made  a  careful  study  of  the  char- 
acter of  Brahmins,  who  display  so  much  care  and  tenderness 
for  monkeys,  snakes,  and  birds  of  prey,  will  soon  perceive 
that  these  same  men  show  the  most  utter  callousness  and 
indifference  for  the  misfortunes  and  wants  of  their  fellow- 
men.  Food  that  they  bestow  so  lavishly  on  all  sorts  of 
animals  would  be  pitilessly  withheld  from  an  unfortunate 
man  who  was  not  of  their  own  caste,  though  he  were  dying 
of  hunger  at  their  very  doors.  Instead  of  the  kindly  precept 
of  Christian  charity,  '  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy- 
self,' a  precept  which  should  draw  together  the  whole  human 
race  in  the  bonds  of  brotherhood,  the  Brahmins  have  sub- 
stituted, '  Thou  shalt  love  all  animals  as  thyself.'  I  will  not 
go  so  far  as  to  say  that  Hindus  are  unacquainted  with  those 
moral  precepts  which  are  more  or  less  common  to  all  civilized 
nations  ;  but  prej  udice  and  superstition  have  so  perverted 
their  judgement  that  they  are  incapable  of  regulating  their 
conduct  with  due  regard  to  what  is  right  and  proper  from 
a  human  point  of  view.     More  than  this  :    in  cases  where 

1  In  India  we  see  the  grossest  forms  of  superstition  side  by  side  with 
the  most  wonderfully  refined  systems  of  philosophy.  The  philosophic 
Brahmin  contends  that  it  is  ridiculous  to  try  to  inculcate  into  the  common 
and  uneducated  herd  the  subtler  forms  of  doctrine.  Hence  the  various 
forms  of  idolatrous  worship. — Ed. 

2  People  have  been  surprised  that  the  crocodile  was  worshipped  in  one 
part  of  Egypt,  while  the  ichneumon,  the  mortal  enemy  of  its  young,  was 
worshipped  in  another.  What  would  they  say  to  the  Hindus  who  might 
be  found  worshipping  the  deity  garuda  at  the  very  moment  that  the 
latter  was  in  the  act  of  tearing  to  pieces  and  devouring  their  other  deity, 
the  snake  ? — Dubois. 


644  BHOOTAMS,    OR   EVIL  SPIRITS 

these  precepts  are  practised  with  a  praiseworthy  object,  all 
the  merit  is  spoilt  by  the  evidently  self-interested  motives 
which  influence  them.  To  perform  a  virtuous  action  simply 
for  the  sake  of  enjoying  the  feeling  of  having  done  right,  is 
a  sentiment  entirely  beyond  their  comprehension.  If  you 
were  to  ask  a  rich  Hindu  why  he  spent  part  of  his  fortune  in 
erecting  buildings  consecrated  to  religious  worship,  in  estab- 
lishing rest-houses  for  the  accommodation  of  travellers,  or 
in  planting  trees  along  the  high-road  to  shelter  wayfarers 
from  the  burning  sun,  he  would  frankly  tell  you  that  such 
munificence  was  calculated  to  raise  him  in  public  esteem 
during  his  lifetime,  and  to  transmit  his  name  to  posterity 
after  his  death. 

Bhootams,  or  Evil  Spirits. 

Almost  all  ancient  philosophers,  among  them  Pythagoras 
and  the  followers  of  Plato,  have  agreed  in  saying  that  each 
human  being  is  under  the  influence  of  a  good  spirit  or  an 
evil  spirit  ;  some  even  go  so  far  as  to  allow  him  both  a  good 
and  a  bad  spirit.  Our  own  revealed  religion  can  suggest 
more  reasonable  ideas  on  this  subject  ;  but  superstition, 
the  creature  of  ignorance  and  fear,  was  obliged  to  fall  back 
on  the  imagination  to  find  plausible  reasons  for  the  alterna- 
tions of  good  and  evil  to  which  mankind  is  subject.  In- 
capable of  a  just  appreciation  of  the  workings  of  Providence, 
and  unable  to  fathom  that  which  is  inscrutable,  these 
heathen  people  imagine  that  the  sorrows  and  troubles  which 
befall  them  are  all  the  work  of  invisible  and  malicious  spirits, 
to  whom  they  must  offer  prayers  and  sacrifices  by  way  of 
propitiation.  Hindus  carry  their  credulity  on  this  point  to 
a  ridiculous  excess.  The  worship  of  evil  spirits  is  in  fact 
firmly  established  and  very  generally  practised  among 
them  l.  These  spirits  are  called  by  the  generic  name  of 
bhootams,  which  also  means  elements,  as  if  the  elements 
were  nothing  else  but  evil  spirits  materialized  and  were  the 

1  The  system  of  demon- worship  seems  to  have  been  that  of  the  tribes 
whom  the  Hindus  supplanted  and  drove  into  the  mountains  or  into  the 
extreme  south.  The  Brahmins  have  given  a  place  to  those  demons  in 
their  system,  and  represent  them  as  attendants  of  Siva  (Bhutesa  =  lord 
of  demons).  The  method  of  worship,  the  ceremonies  and  observances 
of  this  ancient  system,  are  foreign  to  the  genius  of  Hinduism. — Pope. 


BHOOTAM-WORSHIP  645 

primary  cause  of  all  natural  disturbances  and  troubles. 
Such  demons  are  also  called  pisachas,  dehias,  &c. 

There  are  temples  specially  dedicated  to  the  worship  of 
evil  spirits  ;  and  there  are  some  districts  where  this  par- 
ticular form  of  idolatry  holds  almost  exclusive  sway.  Most 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  long  range  of  hills  which  bounds 
Mysore  on  the  west  acknowledge  no  other  deity  than  the 
devil.  Each  family  has  its  own  bhootam,  to  which  it  offers 
daily  prayers  and  sacrifices  in  order  that  he  may  preserve 
its  members  from  the  ills  which  the  bhootams  of  their  enemies 
might  bring  upon  them.  Bhootam  images  are  to  be  found 
all  over  these  hills.  Sometimes  they  are  idols  with  hideous 
faces,  but  more  often  they  are  merely  shapeless  blackened 
stones.  Every  bhootam  has  his  own  particular  name.  Some 
are  thought  to  be  more  powerful  and  more  spiteful  than 
others,  and  these  are  naturally  most  widely  worshipped. 

All  these  evil  spirits  delight  in  sacrifices  of  blood.  Buf- 
faloes, pigs,  goats,  cocks,  and  other  living  animals  are  fre- 
quently slain  in  their  honour  ;  and  when  rice  is  offered  to 
them  it  must  be  dyed  with  blood.  They  do  not  disdain  to 
accept  offerings  of  intoxicating  liquors  and  drugs,  or  even 
flowers,  provided  they  are  red. 

I  have  noticed  that  the  worship  of  evil  spirits  is  most 
prevalent  in  mountainous  regions  and  in  sparsely  populated 
rural  tracts.  The  inhabitants  of  these  out-of-the-way  dis- 
tricts have  little  communication  with  more  civilized  parts, 
and  are  more  ignorant,  more  cowardly,  and  consequently 
more  superstitious  even  than  their  more  civilized  fellow- 
countrymen.  All  the  troubles  and  misfortunes  that  happen 
to  them  are  put  down  to  their  bhootams,  whose  anger  they 
think  they  have  somehow  incurred  ;  and  it  is  for  the  pur- 
pose of  disarming  this  malevolence  that  they  are  so  prodigal 
in  their  worship  of  them. 

The  wild  tribes  scattered  through  the  forests  of  Malabar, 
on  the  Carnatic  Hills,  and  elsewhere,  where  they  are  known 
as  Kadu-Kurumbars,  Sholigars,  Irulers,  &c,  worship  no 
other  gods  but  these  bhootams. 

Human  Sacrifices. 

In  vain  has  the  attempt  been  made,  for  the  credit  of 
humanity,  to  throw  doubt   upon  the  many  evidences  of 


646  HUMAN  SACRIFICES 

human  sacrifices  ;  but  unfortunately  the  proofs  are  too 
strong  :  they  are  written  in  blood  in  the  history  of  many 
nations,  and  can  be  only  too  clearly  proved.  Man,  over- 
whelmed with  infirmities  and  misfortunes,  and  fully  con- 
vinced that  they  were  the  punishment  of  his  sins,  imagined 
that  he  would  appease  and  propitiate  the  gods  by  offering 
them  the  noblest  and  most  perfect  sacrifice  that  he  could 
find.  Firmly  imbued  with  this  horrible  idea,  he  considered 
himself  justified  in  shedding  the  blood  of  human  victims  as 
well  as  that  of  animals.  If  such  an  atrocious  custom  needed 
confirmation,  recent  instances  of  it  could  be  quoted  among 
the  Hindus,  who,  in  common  with  other  heathen  nations, 
have  not  scrupled  to  drench  the  altars  of  their  gods  with  the 
blood  of  their  fellow-men. 

I  will  say  nothing  of  the  abominable  teachings  of  their 
magicians  in  this  respect.  Criminal  abuses  committed  by 
a  few  are  no  proof  of  the  absence  of  religion  and  morality  in 
a  nation  as  a  whole.  If  an  infamous  charlatan  ventures  to 
assure  powerful  patrons  who  are  so  weak  as  to  have  recourse 
to  his  arts,  that  it  is  necessary  to  shed  human  blood  in  order 
to  ensure  success  in  his  mysterious  operations,  and  if  it  is 
only  too  certain  that  unfortunate  virgins  have  been  sacri- 
ficed at  the  satkis  of  these  magicians,  the  disgrace  of  it  all 
must  rest  on  the  heads  of  those  who  are  responsible  for  the 
maintenance  of  social  order. 

A  similar  sacrifice,  however,  is  recommended  when  the 
grand  yagnam  is  performed  ;  and  though  a  horse  is  most 
often  offered,  still  the  nara-medha,  or  sacrifice  of  a  human 
victim,  is  held  to  be  infinitely  more  pleasing  to  the  deity 
who  is  the  object  of  the  ceremony,  and  is  consequently  to 
be  preferred.  There  is,  furthermore,  not  a  single  province 
in  India  where  the  inhabitants  do  not  still  point  out  to  the 
traveller  places  where  their  Rajahs  used  to  offer  up  to  their 
idols  unfortunate  prisoners  captured  in  war.  These  horrible 
sacrifices  were  performed  with  a  view  to  securing  success 
to  their  campaigns  through  the  intervention  of  the  gods. 
I  have  visited  several  places  where  these  scenes  of  carnage 
used  to  be  enacted.  They  are  generally  situated  on  the 
top  of  a  mountain  or  in  some  isolated  spot  ;  and  there  you 
find  a  mean-looking  temple,  or  sometimes  only  a  little 
shrine  containing  the  idol  in  whose  honour  all  this  human 


FORMER   PRACTICES   NOW  ABOLISHED     647 

blood  was  spilt.  The  victims  were  beheaded,  and  their 
heads  were  then  hung  up  as  trophies  before  the  bloodthirsty 
deity.  Sometimes  the  sacrificers  contented  themselves 
with  cutting  off  the  nose  and  ears  of  a  prisoner,  a  very 
common  form  of  punishment  in  India,  and  then  sent  him 
away  thus  mutilated.  A  little  pagoda  still  exists,  perched 
on  the  mountain  at  the  foot  of  which  lies  the  town  of 
Mysore,  not  far  from  Seringapatam,  which  enjoyed  a  wide 
notoriety  owing  to  the  number  of  executions  which  took 
place  there  when  heathen  princes  still  ruled  the  country. 

Old  men  have  told  me  that  this  horrible  custom  was  still 
practised  when  they  were  young.  There  was  nothing  in  it, 
according  to  their  views,  contrary  to  law  or  to  the  rights  of 
the  people  as  understood  by  the  then  reigning  princes.  It 
was  based  on  the  principle  that  reprisals  were  fair  and  legi- 
timate in  war  ;  and  it  was  accepted  by  the  people  without 
any  feelings  of  horror.  In  fact,  the  old  men  spoke  of  it  with 
the  utmost  indifference,  as  if  it  were  the  most  natural  thing 
in  the  world.  However,  the  advent  of  Mahomedans  and 
Europeans,  and  the  just  indignation  manifested  by  both 
at  these  abominable  sacrifices,  at  last  resulted  in  their 
abolition.  But  if  the  general  opinion  is  to  be  believed,  there 
are  still  several  small  independent  princes  who,  if  they  had 
their  own  way,  would  still  sanction  these  horrible  massacres. 

It  is,  I  fear,  indisputable  that  human  sacrifices  have  been 
offered,  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  on  the  altars  of 
Hindu  divinities.  If  any  additional  proof  be  needed  it  may 
be  found  in  the  Kali-purana.  Abominable  rites  of  this  kind 
are  there  expressly  enjoined.  The  ceremonies  which  should 
accompany  them  are  described  in  the  minutest  detail,  as 
also  the  results  which  will  ensue.  The  same  book  contains 
rules  of  procedure  in  sacrificing  animals,  and  mentions  the 
kinds  and  qualities  of  those  which  are  suitable  as  victims. 
Lastly,  it  specifies  those  deities  to  whom  these  bloody 
offerings  are  acceptable.  Among  them  are  Bahirava,  Yama, 
Nandi,  and,  above  all,  the  bloodthirsty  goddess  Kali. 

To  offer  human  sacrifices  is  regarded  as  the  exclusive 
right  of  princes,  and  they  are  even  enjoined  to  offer  them. 
Neither  a  Brahmin  nor  a  Kshatriya  may  ever  be  sacrificed. 
Every  human  victim  must  be  free  from  all  bodily  blemish, 
and  must  not  have  been  guilty  of  any  serious  crime.     All 


648       INANIMATE    OBJECTS   WORSHIPPED 

animals  that  are  offered  as  sacrifices  must  be  at  least  three 
years  old,  and  must  be  healthy  and  free  from  all  defects. 
Under  no  circumstances  can  Brahmins  preside  or  assist  in 
any  way  at  a  sacrifice  of  blood. 


CHAPTER   VII 

Inanimate  Objects  of  Worship. — The  Salagrama  Stone. — The  Tvlasi. — 
Darbha  Grass. — The  Sacred  Fig-Tree. 

Voltaire  thought  it  incredible  that  the  Egyptians  could 
ever  have  worshipped  onions  and  other  products  of  their 
gardens.  He  always  jeered  at  this  tradition,  and  looked 
upon  it  as  a  mere  fable.  But  the  fact  is,  in  matters  of 
superstition  truth  is  sometimes  stranger  than  fiction.  What 
I  have  already  said  and  what  I  am  now  about  to  say  re- 
specting the  Hindus  will  show  incontestable  that  there  are 
absolutely  no  limits  to  the  follies  of  idolatry.  The  Brah- 
mins, indeed,  must  needs  borrow  objects  from  all  three 
kingdoms  of  nature  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  magnificent  total 
of  three  hundred  and  thirty  millions  of  deities  which  they 
recognize  \  Amongst  the  inanimate  substances  which 
they  worship,  there  are  four  which  they  consider  especially 
sacred.  namely,  the  salagrama  stone,  darbha  grass,  the  plant 
tulasi,  and  the  aswatta  or  sacred  fig-tree. 

The  Salagrama  '-'. 

This  little  stone  is  held  in  great  honour  throughout  India. 
Brahmins  consider  it  to  be  a  metamorphosis  of  Vishnu,  and 
for  this  reason  they  offer  daily  sacrifices  to  it.  It  is  a  sort 
of  fossilized  shell  ammonite  or  nautilus,  oval,  striated,  um- 
bilicated,  and  ornamented  with  '  arborizations  '  or  tree-like 
markings  on  the  outside.  The  more  there  are  of  these  tree- 
like markings,  the  more  highly  they  are  revered. 

It  is  obligatory  for  every  Brahmin  to  have  one  of  these 
stones  in  his  possession.     They  are  handed  down  from  father 

1  These  are  properly  speaking  devas  or  divine  beings,  not  deities  in  the 
strict  sense  of  the  term. — Ed. 

2  The  snlagmiH  or  ammonite  found  in  the  Gundiek  and  other  rivers 
flowing  through  Nepal  is  said  to  be  a  form  of  Vishnu.  The  account  of 
its  origin  given  in  the  Skanda-purana  is  most  monstrously  and  incredibly 
abominable. — Pope 


THE   SALAGRAMA   STONE  649 

to  son,  and  are  regarded  as  precious  heirlooms  which  must 
never  pass  out  of  the  family.  It  is  written  in  the  Atharva- 
Veda  that  any  Brahmin's  house  in  which  there  is  no  sala- 
grama is  to  be  considered  as  impure  as  a  cemetery,  and  the 
food  which  is  prepared  in  it  as  unclean  as  a  dog's  vomit. 

Though  the  salagrama  is  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  meta- 
morphoses of  Vishnu,  it  partakes  at  the  same  time  of  the 
essence  of  all  the  other  deities,  and  through  it  puja  can  be 
offered  to  all  of  them.  There  is  nothing  more  efficacious  for 
the  remission  of  sins,  no  matter  how  grievous  they  may  be, 
than  to  possess  some  water  in  which  the  salagrama  has  been 
washed.  Forgiveness  of  sins  may  even  be  obtained  by 
simply  touching  the  water  which  has  been  thus  sanctified. 
He  who  always  keeps  such  water  in  his  house  ensures  thereby 
perpetual  wealth  ;  and  if  he  goes  further  and  drinks  it,  he 
will  not  only  obtain  forgiveness  of  his  sins,  but  he  will  also 
secure  his  happiness  in  this  world,  will  always  do  what  is 
right,  and  after  death  will  at  once  enjoy  the  delights  of 
Swarga.  But  before  drinking  this  marvellous  water  he 
must  not  forget  to  address  the  following  prayer  to  Vishnu  : — 
'  Narayana,  you  are  the  ruler  of  the  world  ;  it  is  your  pleasure 
to  confer  blessings  on  all  created  beings.  I  drink  this  water 
in  which  your  sacred  feet  have  been  washed  ;  I  drink  it  that 
I  may  be  cleansed  from  my  sins  ;  vouchsafe  to  pardon  me, 
who  am  the  greatest  of  sinners.' 


The  Tulasi. 

The  tulasi  {Ocymum  sanctum)  plant  is  to  be  found  every- 
where in  sandy  and  uncultivated  places.  It  is  a  species 
resembling  the  basil  that  grows  in  Europe.  Brahmins 
consider  it  to  be  the  wife  of  Vishnu,  and  revere  it  accordingly. 
'  Nothing  on  earth  can  equal  the  virtues  of  the  tulasi'  say 
they  :  Tulasi-tulana- nasty,  ataeva  tulasi.  Puja  must  be 
offered  daily  to  it.  When  a  Brahmin  is  dying  one  of  these 
plants  is  fetched  and  placed  on  a  pedestal.  After  puja  has 
there  been  offered  to  it,  a  bit  of  its  root  is  placed  in  the  mouth 
of  the  dying  man,  and  the  leaves  are  placed  on  his  face,  eyes, 
ears,  and  chest  ;  he  is  then  sprinkled  from  head  to  foot  with 
a  tulasi  twig  which  has  been  dipped  in  water.     While  this 

y3 


650  THE   TULASI   PLANT 

ceremony  is  being  performed  his  friends  cry  several  limes 
aloud,  Tulasi!  Tulasi!  Tulasi!  The  man  can  then  die  in 
the  happy  certainty  that  he  will  go  straight  to  Swarga  \ 

To  obtain  pardon  of  all  one's  sins  it  is  sufficient  to  look  at 
this  sacred  plant.  By  touching  it  a  man  is  purified  from  all 
defilement,  and  if  he  perform  the  najnaskara  to  it,  any  illness 
from  which  he  may  be  suffering  will  be  cured. 

Salvation  is  assured  to  any  one  who  waters  and  attends 
to  it  every  day.  If  a  branch  of  it  is  offered  to  Vishnu  in  the 
month  of  Kartika  (November),  it  will  be  more  pleasing  to 
the  god  than  a  thousand  cows.  Whoever  offers  to  Vishnu, 
at  anytime  whatsoever,  a  spray  of  tulasi  that  has  been  dipped 
in  saffron,  is  assured  of  becoming  like  Vishnu  himself,  and 
of  enjoying  a  share  in  Vishnu's  happiness.  To  give  a  twig 
of  tulasi  to  any  one  who  is  in  any  danger,  or  who  is  suffering 
from  anxieties  and  cares,  is  a  certain  means  of  securing  for 
him  a  satisfactory  ending  to  his  difficulties. 

These  are  only  a  few  of  the  many  virtues  possessed  by  the 
tulasi. 

Most  Brahmins  cultivate  the  plant  in  their  houses,  and 
offer  it  daily  prayers  and  sacrifices.  They  also  take  care 
that  it  shall  grow  near  the  places  where  they  perform  their 
ablutions,  and  in  their  meeting-places,  such  as  the  chuttrams. 
The  tulasi  is  usually  planted  on  a  little  mound  of  sand, 
which  they  call  brinda-vanam  2,  or  on  a  square  pillar,  three 
or  four  feet  in  height,  hollow  at  the  top,  with  its  four  sides 
facing  the  four  points  of  the  compass.  Brahmins  consider 
it  a  peculiarly  meritorious  act  to  carefully  water  and  culti- 
vate the  plant  :\ 

Its  leaves  have  a  sweet  aromatic  scent  and  act  as  a  cough 
elixir  and  cordial ;  indeed  Hindus  think  that  they  possess 
many  medicinal  properties.  Brahmins  always  swallow  one 
or  two  after  their  meals,  as  an  aid  to  digestion.  They  also 
eat  some  both  before  and  after  performing  their  ablutions  in 
cold  water,  in  order  to  keep  up  the  proper  temperature  in 
the  stomach  and  to  prevent  colds  and  chills  and  other 
maladies  which  might  attack  them  without  this  preventat  i  ve. 

1  This  formality  is  observed  only  by  the  Vishnavites. — Ed. 
'-'  This  name  is  also  given  to  the  place  inhabited  by  Krishna. — Dubois. 
8  The  plant  is  grown  in  the  courtyard  of  almost  every  Brahmin  house, 
and  the  women  offer  worship  to  it  daily. — Ed. 


DARBHA   GRASS  651 

It  was  probably  in  consequence  of  its  medicinal  properties 
that  the  Hindus  deified  the  plant  in  the  first  instance. 

Darbha  Grass  l. 

This  plant  belongs  to  the  genus  borage.  It  is  found 
everywhere,  especially  in  damp  marshy  ground.  Brahmins 
always  keep  some  in  their  houses,  and  it  is  used  in  all  their 
ceremonies.  It  grows  to  the  height  of  about  two  feet  and 
is  finely  pointed  at  the  top.  It  is  extremely  rough  to  the 
touch,  and  if  rubbed  the  wrong  way  it  cuts  through  the  skin 
and  draws  blood. 

Hindu  legends  differ  as  to  the  origin  of  this  sacred  grass. 
Some  say  that  it  was  produced  at  the  time  when  the  gods 
and  the  giants  were  all  busy  churning,  with  the  mountain 
Mandara,  the  sea  of  milk  in  order  to  extract  from  it  amrita 
or  nectar,  which  would  render  them  all  immortal.  The  story 
is  that  the  mountain,  while  rolling  about  on  Vishnu's  back 
(who,  under  the  form  of  a  turtle,  was  supporting  it),  rubbed 
off  a  great  many  of  the  god's  hairs,  and  that  these  hairs, 
cast  ashore  by  the  waves,  took  root  there  and  became 
darbha  grass.  Others  say  that  the  gods,  while  greedily 
drinking  the  amrita  which  they  had  with  infinite  pains 
extracted  from  the  sea  of  milk,  let  fall  a  few  drops  of  the 
nectar  on  this  grass,  which  thus  became  sacred.  Then, 
again,  others  assert  that  it  was  produced  at  the  time  when 
Mohini — that  is  to  say,  Vishnu  metamorphosed  into  a 
courtesan  of  that  name — was  distributing  amrita  to  the 
gods.  The  vessel  containing  the  nectar  was  supported  on 
Mohini's  hip,  from  which  some  fleshy  filaments  fell,  and 
taking  root  in  the  ground,  developed  under  the  form  of 
darbha  grass.  Be  this  as  it  may,  darbha  grass  is  looked  upon 
as  part  of  Vishnu  himself.  On  the  strength  of  this  the 
Brahmins  worship  it  and  offer  sacrifices  to  it,  and,  as  may  be 
remembered,  make  use  of  it  in  all  their  ceremonies,  in  the 
belief  that  it  possesses  the  virtue  of  purifying  everything. 
An  annual  feast  instituted  in  honour  of  the  sacred  darbha 
grass  is  celebrated  on  the  eighth  day  of  the  moon  in  the 
month  of  Badra  (September),  and  is  called  the  Darbha- 

1  This  sacred  grass  (Poa  cynosuroidcs)  is  essential  in  all  sacrifices. 
—Ed. 


652  THE   SACRED    FIG-TREE 

ashtami.  By  offering  the  grass  as  a  sacrifice  on  that  day 
immortality  and  blessedness  for  ten  ancestors  may  be 
secured  ;  and  another  result  is  that  one's  posterity  increases 
and  multiplies  like  the  darbha  grass  itself,  which  is  one 
of  the  most  prolific  members  of  the  vegetable  kingdom. 
I  have  no  idea  why  this  plant  should  have  been  selected  as 
worthy  of  special  honour.  I  have  never  heard  of  its  being 
endowed  with  any  peculiar  properties,  either  medicinal, 
culinary,  or  other,  which  would  account  for  its  high  position. 

The  Sacred  Fig-tree. 

There  are  seven  different  species  of  trees  which  the 
Brahmins  consider  sacred  and  accordingly  worship  ;  but, 
strange  to  say,  they  are  not  those  which  produce  the  best 
fruits.  It  is  true,  however,  that  their  thick  foliage  makes 
a  splendid  shade — a  priceless  boon  in  the  hot  climate  of 
India.  The  aswatta  l  comes  first  on  the  list.  It  is  one  of 
the  most  beautiful  trees  in  the  country,  and  grows  to  a  huge 
size.  It  is  to  be  found  everywhere,  but  especially  where 
the  Brahmins  perform  their  ablutions.  Its  large  leaves, 
very  soft  to  the  touch,  in  colour  bright  green,  are  so  light  and 
thin  that  the  slightest  breeze  sets  them  in  motion  ;  and  as 
they  produce  an  impression  of  most  refreshing  coolness,  the 
tree  is  considered  to  possess  health-giving  properties.  When 
stirred  by  a  breeze  the  leaves  make  a  pleasant  rustle,  which 
Hindu  authors  have  sometimes  likened  to  the  melodious 
sounds  of  the  vina.  When  to  all  these  attractive  natural 
characteristics  is  added  the  tradition  that  under  this  tree 
Vishnu  was  born,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  aswatta  is  regarded 
with  great  respect  and  veneration.  No  one  is  allowed  to 
cut  it  down,  lop  off  its  branches,  or  even  pull  off  its  leaves 
unless  they  are  to  be  used  for  acts  of  worship.  To  fell  one 
of  these  trees  would  be  an  awful  sacrilege,  and  quite  unpar- 
donable. It  is  consecrated  to  Vishnu,  or  rather  it  is  Vishnu 
himself  under  the  form  of  a  tree  2.     Sometimes  a  solemn 

1  It  is  called  arasa-maram  in  Tamil;  ravi-manu  in  Telugu  ;  aridi* 
mara  in  Canarese.  It  is  the  pagoda  fig-tree  {F  icus-religiosa),  the  tree 
of  God. — Dubois. 

3  The  aswatta  or  piped,  having  roots  hanging  from  above  and  branches 
bent  downwards,  is  allegorical.     Each  tree  springing  from  an  unperceived 


AN   ARBOREOUS   WEDDING  653 

inaugural  ceremony  is  gone  through,  called  Aswatta  pratishta, 
or  the  consecration  of  the  aswatta  tree.  This  ceremony, 
which  is  an  elaborate  and  costly  one,  possesses  the  virtue 
of  transforming  the  tree  into  a  divinity  by  inducting  Vishnu 
into  it.  The  Brahmins  assert  that  untold  blessings  will  be 
showered  upon  any  one  who  is  willing  to  bear  the  expense. 

I  have  already  described,  in  the  chapters  on  the  Sandhya 
and  on  Marriage,  the  manner  in  which  this  tree  is  worshipped, 
and  the  honours  that  are  paid  to  it.  Sometimes  it  is  invested, 
like  a  Brahmin,  with  the  triple  cord,  the  very  same  cere- 
monies being  performed.  And  sometimes  it  is  solemnly 
married.  Generally  a  ve/pu  or  margosa  tree  l  is  selected 
for  its  spouse,  and  occasionally  a  plantain  or  banana  tree. 
Almost  the  same  formalities  are  observed  for  this  curious 
marriage  as  in  the  case  of  a  marriage  between  Brahmins. 
Here  and  there,  on  the  high-roads  and  elsewhere,  the  aswatta 
and  vepu  trees  may  be  seen  planted  side  by  side  on  little 
mounds.  This  union  is  not  an  accidental  one,  but  the  result 
of  an  actual  marriage  ceremony.  Not  thirty  yards  from  the 
modest  hut  where  I  wrote  these  pages  were  two  of  these 
trees,  under  whose  shade  I  have  often  reclined.  Their 
trunks  were  so  closely  entwined  that  they  had  become 
incorporated  one  with  another.  The  inhabitants  of  the 
village  could  remember  to  have  seen  them  planted  together 
some  fifty  years  before,  and  said  that  they  had  been  present 
at  the  wedding  festivities,  which  lasted  several  days,  and 
were  celebrated  at  the  expense  of  a  wealthy  person  of  the 
neighbourhood  at  a  cost  of  more  than  1,500  rupees. 

Such,  then,  are  the  kind  of  good  works  which  Hindus 
perform  in  order  to  obtain  the  pardon  of  their  sins  in  this 
world  and  to  ensure  their  happiness  in  the  next  ;  and  such 
is  the  state  of  degradation  to  which  the  Brahmins,  so 
haughty,  presumptuous,  and  infatuated  with  their  own 
ideas  and  opinions,  have  reduced  a  nation  which  is  really 
worthy  of  better  things  2. 

root  is  emblematical  of  the  body,  which  really  springs  from  and  is  one 
with  the  Godhead.  In  the  Bhagavat-gita  it  is  said  to  typify  the  universe. 
It  is  said  to  be  the  male  of  the  vata  or  banian  (Ficus  indica). — Ed. 

1  This  is  another  sacred  tree,  which  is  dedicated  to  Siva,  the  Melia 
Azadirachta. — Dubois. 

2  See  Racine's  La  Rtligion,  cap.  v. — Dubois. 


654 


CHAPTER  VIII 

The  Administration  of  Civil  and  Criminal  Justice. — Customs  connected 
with  Usury. — Various  Kinds  of  Punishment. — Trial  by  Ordeal. — 
The  Prevalence  of  Perjury. — Remarks  on  the  European  Courts  of 
Justice. 

Governed  from  time  immemorial  by  despotic  princes, 
who  recognized  no  law  but  their  own  free  will  and  pleasure, 
India  has  been  accustomed  to  a  form  of  judicial  administra- 
tion peculiar  to  herself.  There  has  been  no  legal  code,  neither 
has  there  been  any  record  of  legal  usage.  There  are,  it  is 
true,  a  few  works  containing  general  legal  principles,  and 
a  few  wise  legal  maxims  which  have  helped  to  guide  the 
judges  in  their  decisions ;  yet  nowhere  have  there  been 
properly  organized  courts  of  justice.  Ordinary  cases  have 
generally  been  settled,  without  any  right  of  appeal,  by 
the  collectors  of  public  revenue,  assisted  by  assessors 
selected  from  the  principal  inhabitants  and  by  the  military 
officer  commanding  the  district. 

The  Hindus  have  neither  barristers  nor  solicitors  ;  neither 
are  they  compelled  to  submit  to  those  long  proceedings  and 
interminable  delays,  the  cost  of  which  often  equals  the 
value  of  the  matter  under  dispute.  When  it  is  a  question 
of  dividing  property  or  of  other  business  of  any  importance, 
it  is  generally  submitted  to  the  arbitration  of  relatives  or  of 
the  headmen  of  the  caste  ;  and  if  the  nature  of  the  suit  or 
the  high  rank  of  the  litigants  render  it  advisable,  all  the 
principal  inhabitants  of  the  district  assemble  to  decide  the 
point  at  issue  l. 

When  a  case  is  brought  before  the  revenue  officer  of  the 
district  and  his  assessors,  no  difficulty  is  experienced  in 
getting  them  to  settle  the  disputed  they  think  that  they 
are  likely  to  make  any  money  out  of  it.  Otherwise  they 
will  easily  invent  some  pretext  for  putting  off  the  matter 
till  some  future  time  when  they  may  have  more  leisure  to 
attend  to  it.  In  any  important  case  they  try  their  best  to 
bring  the  parties  to  an  amicable  understanding  ;  and  if  that 

1  Since  the  Abbe's  day  English  courts  of  justice  have  been  established 
all  over  the  country,  and  there  are  hosts  of  English  barristers  and  attor- 
neys and  native  vakils  practising  in  these  courts.  In  the  villages, 
however,  arbitration  is  still  resorted  to  in  petty  cases. — Ed. 


CIVIL   AND   CRIMINAL   PROCEDURE        655 

is  impossible,  they  leave  the  decision  to  a  panchayat,  or 
'  tribunal  of  five  arbitrators,'  which  may  be  composed 
of  a  larger,  but  never  of  a  smaller  number  than  five.  If 
caste  customs  are  the  subject  of  dispute,  the  settlement 
devolves  upon  the  heads  of  the  castes. 

The  procedure  generally  followed  is  that  dictated  by 
common  sense,  by  ordinary  intelligence,  and  by  such 
principles  of  equity  as  one  always  expects  to  find  established, 
in  theory  at  any  rate,  in  all  civilized  countries.  Besides, 
almost  every  member  of  a  caste  is  well  acquainted  with  its 
different  customs,  which  are  handed  down  by  tradition 
from  father  to  son,  and  thus  are  never  lost.  In  short,  the 
form  of  judicial  procedure  in  India  is  less  complicated  than 
that  of  Europe,  and  would  leave  little  to  be  desired  if  the 
scales  of  Themis  were  not  much  more  easily  put  off  their 
balance  there  than  in  other  countries.  Impartiality  and 
disinterestedness  are  virtues  with  which  Hindu  judges  have 
but  a  very  slight  acquaintance1.  Too  weak  to  be  able  to 
resist  the  bribes  that  are  offered  them,  to  be  independent 
of  the  prejudices  and  predilections  of  their  own  circle,  or 
to  be  above  all  considerations  of  personal  interest,  their 
judgements  are  rarely  conspicuous  for  unswerving  upright- 
ness and  integrity.  Almost  invariably  it  is  the  richer  suitor 
who  gains  the  day  ;  and  even  the  most  guilty  generally  find 
some  means  of  blunting  the  sword  of  justice. 

If  the  parties  to  a  suit  have  an  equally  good  case  or  an 
equally  bad  one,  the  party  which  makes  the  most  noise  and 
is  loudest  in  its  abuse  of  its  adversary  usually  gains  the  day, 
for  eloquence  at  the  Indian  Bar  consists  in  shouting  with  all 
the  strength  of  one's  lungs,  and  in  pouring  such  a  flood  of  in- 
vective on  one's  adversary  that  he  has  not  an  answer  left. 

There  are  two  or  three  Hindu  works  which  contain  rules 
and  directions  concerning  the  administration  of  justice, 
both  civil  and  criminal.  The  best  known  is  the  Dharma- 
Sastras,  which  contains,  amongst  other  things,  a  treatise  on 
Hindu  polytheism.  There  are  also  the  Niti-Sastras,  and 
the  Manu-Sastras,  which  have  been  partly  translated  into 
English  2.     Many  legal  precepts  and  decisions,  which  would 

1  Circumstances  have  now  altered  for  the  better  in  this  respect. — Ed. 

2  These  and  other  Hindu  classics  have  now  been  published  in  English 
form  in  The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  series. — Ed. 


658  NO    STATUTE   OF  LIMITATIONS 

he  most  useful  helps  to  a  judge,  might  he  gathered  from  these 
works  ;  but,  as  usual,  they  are  immersed  in  a  farrago  of  non- 
sense, religious  and  otherwise.  For  instance,  one  may  find 
there  numbers  of  decisions  in  hypothetical  cases  that  are 
either  perfectly  ridiculous  or  morally  impossible,  and  also 
numbers  of  idiotic  theses  propounded  ex  cathedra.  Further- 
more, whatever  valuable  information  may  be  found  here 
and  there  in  these  books  is  quite  beyond  the  comprehen- 
sion of  the  majority  of  Hindus,  who  do  not  in  the  least 
understand  the  learned  terms  in  which  they  abound. 

The  Hindus,  it  may  be  remarked,  recognize  no  prescriptive 
rights.  A  person  in  actual  possession  of  any  property,  who 
happens  to  have  no  legal  and  authentic  document  stating 
that  it  belongs  to  him,  is  liable  to  be  proceeded  against 
judicially  and  evicted  by  the  representatives  of  a  soi-disant 
legitimate  proprietor,  even  though  the  actual  possessor  could 
prove  that  he  and  his  ancestors  had  enjoyed  the  property 
without  question  and  in  good  faith  for  a  century  or  more. 
The  same  principle  holds  in  the  case  of  debts.  It  is  not  at  all 
an  uncommon  thing  for  creditors  to  sue  the  great-grandson  of 
the  original  debtor  for  a  debt  contracted  more  than  a  hundred 
years  before,  and  to  force  him  to  pay  it  even  though  he 
himself  might  be  totally  unaware  of  its  existence. 

Usury  is  a  recognized  institution  everywhere  ;  and  there 
is  no  limit  to  the  rate  of  interest.  In  the  parts  of  the  country 
where  I  lived  the  lowest  rate  was  twelve  per  cent.,  and  that 
they  call  the  dharma-vaddi  or  fair  interest,  a  rate  that  would 
not  shock  the  most  sensitive  conscience l. 

Indeed  to  lend  money  at  that  interest  is  considered  a 
meritorious  action.  Eighteen  to  twenty-five  per  cent,  is 
the  usual  rate,  and  money-lenders  have  been  known  to 
exact  the  extortionate  rate  of  fifty  and  even  a  hundred  per 
cent.  Happily  the  cupidity  of  these  money-lenders  often 
ends  in  their  over-reaching  themselves,  for  only  people  who 
are  ruined  and  absolutely  penniless  will  consent  to  pay  such 
interest,  and  consequently  the  greedy  creditor  runs  the  risk 
of  losing  both  interest  and  capital.  Borrowers  of  this  class 
do  not,  as  a  rule,  offer  any  security  which  the  creditor  can 

1  There  has  been  no  improvement  in  this  direction  since  the  days  of 
the  Abbe,  and  various  proposals  have  been  made  to  legislate  in  the 
matter. — Ed. 


USURIOUS   TRANSACTIONS  657 

pounce  upon  in  case  of  default  of  payment.  A  Hindu's 
whole  property  generally  consists  of  a  few  head  of  cattle  ; 
but  such  property  is  inviolable.  If  a  creditor  tried  to  seize 
a  debtor's  cattle,  the  magistrates  would  interfere  to  prevent 
it  ;  not  altogether  in  the  interests  of  the  agriculturist,  but 
because  by  thus  taking  away  the  means  of  cultivating  his 
fields,  the  creditors  would,  at  the  same  time,  prevent  his 
being  able  to  pay  the  taxes  which  belong  to  the  State. 
Even  the  hut  which  the  Hindu  inhabits  does  not  belong  to 
him,  but  is  the  property  of  the  State.  When  he  leaves  his 
village  to  settle  elsewhere,  he  has  no  right  to  dispose  of 
his  hovel.  It  remains  unoccupied  either  until  some  other 
inhabitant  comes,  and  with  the  consent  of  the  headmen  of 
the  village  takes  possession  of  it,  or  until  it  falls  to  pieces. 

Thus  it  may  readily  be  understood  that  usurious  money- 
lending  does  not  always  tend  to  enrich  the  usurer.  It  very 
often  happens  that  borrower  and  lender  are  both  completely 
ruined  together. 

Nevertheless,  the  lenders  need  never  relinquish  all  hope. 
The  legal  system  of  bankruptcy,  which  the  dishonest  man 
will  so  gladly  avail  himself  of,  and  by  which  he  can  grow 
rich  at  the  expense  of  his  creditors,  is  unknown  in  India. 
If  a  debtor  dies  insolvent,  his  descendants  to  the  sixth 
generation  continue  to  be  responsible  for  his  debts  \ 

Criminal  jurisprudence  in  India  varies  greatly.  In  some 
castes,  for  instance,  the  woman  who  commits  adultery 
renders  herself  liable  to  capital  punishment,  but  neither 
her  parents  nor  the  headmen  of  her  caste  have  to  carry  out 
or  assist  at  her  execution.  Her  husband  alone  has  the  right 
to  put  her  to  death.  These  severe  measures,  however, 
have  never  been  put  in  practice  except  in  countries  governed 
by  native  princes.  The  Mahomedans  always  opposed 
them  wherever  their  rule  extended.  They  thought  it  would 
be  less  cruel  and  more  advantageous  to  the  State  to  inflict 
very  heavy  fines  for  offences  of  this  nature.  Thus,  a  woman 
or  girl  not  a  prostitute  by  profession,  who  is  proved  to  have 
committed  adultery,  particularly  if  she  afterwards  became 
pregnant  and  thereby  convicted  herself,  would  be  sentenced 
to  a  very  heavy  fine,  quite  beyond  her  power  to  pay  ;   and 

1  The  law  on  this  subject  is  now  in  conformity  with  the  English  laws. 
— Ed. 


658  PECUNIARY   PENALTIES 

her  seducer  would  also  be  fined  to  the  same  amount.  If 
the  guilty  pair  were  unable  to  find  the  money,  the  fine  would 
fall  on  their  nearest  relatives,  who  would  be  obliged  to  pay 
it  for  them.  The  same  form  of  punishment  was  meted  out 
in  any  cases  of  a  glaring  nature  where  caste  customs  had 
been  broken.  These  fines  were  collected  by  the  revenue 
officer  of  the  district  in  which  the  offences  had  been  com- 
mitted. It  was  further  the  custom  for  the  offenders  to  give 
a  feast  to  the  headmen  of  their  caste  after  their  fines  had 
been  paid,  in  consideration  of  which  their  fault  was  con- 
sidered to  be  wiped  out. 

There  used  to  be,  and  still  are  in  some  districts,  con- 
tractors who  farmed  the  revenue  derivable  from  such  fines. 
These  men  agree  to  pay  a  fixed  sum  to  the  public  treasury, 
and  in  exchange  they  are  allowed  to  keep  all  the  fines  they 
collect  for  minor  offences  against  caste  customs,  or  other 
peccadilloes.  One  can  well  imagine  that  all  their  energies 
are  directed  to  preventing  any  person-;  from  going  un- 
punished. 

As  to  more  serious  crimes,  such  as  theft,  homicide,  &c, 
either  the  ruling  prince,  his  minister,  or  the  governor  of  a 
province  usually  passed  sentence  on  them.  The  governors, 
however,  had  not  the  right  to  condemn  a  man  to  capital 
punishment  without  the  ruler's  sanction.  Thieves,  as  a 
rule,  got  off  by  giving  up  what  they  had  stolen,  and  a  good 
deal  more  besides,  if  they  had  it.  The  unfortunate  man 
whose  goods  were  stolen  only  received  a  very  small  portion 
of  what  he  had  lost,  by  far  the  larger  portion  remaining  in 
the  hands  of  the  judge  who  had  kindly  consented  to  look 
into  the  matter.  Highway  robbery  was  punished  by  muti- 
lation— the  right  hand,  nose,  and  ears  of  the  robber  being 
cut  off. 

Murder  itself  was  rarely  punished  by  death.  If  the  person 
accused  was  rich  and  knew  what  to  give  to  the  governor  who 
tried  the  case,  means  could  always  be  found  to  divert  well- 
merited  punishment  from  the  culprit.  If  the  offender  was 
a  poor  man,  they  took  away  the  little  that  he  possessed  and 
banished  him  and  his  family  from  the  province. 

Thus  the  most  abominable  outrages  on  society  were  en- 
couraged or  only  lightly  punished  in  India,  whilst  imaginary 
crimes  invariably  entailed  punishment  on  any  who  might  be 


PUNISHMENT   BY   TORTURE  659 

accused  of  them.  A  poor  Pariah  was  put  to  death  in  Tan- 
jore  for  having  hurled  a  stone  at  and  killed  a  bull  dedicated 
to  Siva,  which  was  devastating  all  the  rice-fields  in  the 
neighbourhood.  I  knew  another  man  of  the  same  caste 
whose  hand  was  cut  off  for  having  killed,  also  with  a  stone, 
a  calf  which  was  trespassing  on  his  field.  He  too  would 
have  certainly  lost  his  life  had  he  not  been  able  to  prove 
that  the  offence  was  unintentional,  and  had  not  several  per- 
sons of  note  interceded  in  his  behalf  *. 

A  person  condemned  to  capital  punishment  is  either  shot, 
hanged,  or  beheaded.  There  are  many  forms  of  punishment 
and  torture  prevalent  in  India.  For  instance,  the  offender 
may  be  banished  from  the  country,  severely  flogged,  or 
rolled  naked  on  burning  hot  stones  ;  or  he  may  be  con- 
demned to  carry  a  heavy  weight  on  his  head  or  shoulders 
until  he  faints  from  exhaustion  ;  or  he  may  be  tied  to  a  stake 
and  exposed  to  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun  with  bare  head 
and  naked  body  ;  or  his  hands  and  feet  may  be  put  into 
fetters  tightened  till  they  almost  dislocate  the  joints  : 
needles  may  be  inserted  under  his  nails  ;  the  pungent  and 
acrid  juice  of  the  pepper-plant  may  be  injected  into  his  eyes 
and  nostrils  ;  or  large  bodkins  may  be  plunged  into  the 
most  sensitive  and  fleshy  parts  of  his  body,  and  on  their 
withdrawal  the  parts  be  rubbed  with  salt  and  vinegar  or 
burning  acids.  These  are  only  a  few  of  the  horrors  invented 
as  punishments  by  the  Hindus.  It  is  not  on  murderers, 
thieves,  and  offenders  of  that  class  that  these  terrible 
punishments  fall.  They  are  much  more  likely  to  be  inflicted 
on  Government  officials  guilty  of  malpractices  or  malversa- 
tion of  public  moneys,  or  on  anybody  who  is  known  to  be 
well  off,  but  who  declines  to  allow  himself  to  be  fleeced. 

In  those  provinces  which  are  still  under  native  govern- 
ment, and  especially  in  those  where  the  rulers  are  Mahome- 
dans,  no  man's  fortune  is  safe,  however  honestly  it  may 
have  been  acquired.  Government  agents,  aided  by  a  highly 
organized  system  of  espionage,  contrive  to  obtain  most 
accurate  information  respecting  the  amount  of  every  per- 
son's fortune  ;  and  whenever  an  unhappy  individual  is 
ascertained  to  have  saved  enough  to  attract  the  prince's 

1  The  Indian  Penal  Code  effectually  provides  against  such  sentences 
nowadays. — Ed. 


660  HINDU  STOICISM 

cupidity,  he  is  denounced,  arrested,  and  imprisoned.  If 
these  high-handed  proceedings  are  not  sufficient  to  induce 
him  to  transfer  the  contents  of  his  strong  box  into  the 
prince's  treasury,  harsher  measures,  such  as  torture,  are 
resorted  to. 

Mahomedans  treat  even  the  Brahmins  in  their  service 
with  the  same  severity.  But,  it  must  be  admitted,  the  latter 
only  experience  the  kind  of  treatment  that  they  have  so 
often  inflicted  on  their  fellows.  No  one  can  be  harder,  more 
cruel,  or  more  pitiless  towards  the  poor  agriculturists  than 
a  Brahmin  invested  with  authority,  when  he  sees  a  chance 
of  wringing  money  from  them.  Nevertheless  there  are 
many  Hindus,  and  Brahmins  particularly,  who  endure  with 
unshaken  firmness  and  courage  the  most  horrible  tortures 
inflicted  on  them,  even  when  their  lives  are  in  danger,  rather 
than  give  up  their  treasures.  I  have  known  Brahmins  who 
have  been  thus  persecuted  for  year  after  year  and  without 
success.  They  may  be  seen  with  their  bodies  so  covered 
with  bruises  and  wounds,  that  they  appear  to  be  but  one 
large  festering  sore,  a  prey  to  all  kinds  of  vermin  ;  and  in 
this  sad  plight  all  relief  is  denied  them,  even  to  the  extent 
of  refusing  dressing  for  their  wounds. 

If  the  poor  prisoner  survives  these  cruel  tortures,  his  tor- 
mentors, astonished  at  his  fortitude,  will  set  him  at  liberty, 
ashamed  at  last  of  their  unsuccessful  efforts  at  coercion. 
This  faculty  of  bearing  the  most  excruciating  pain  with 
calm  endurance  is  very  common  among  the  Hindus.  There 
are  some,  however,  who  are  not  thus  gifted  by  nature,  and 
who,  after  resisting  as  long  as  possible,  at  length  submit 
and  come  to  terms  with  their  oppressors.  These  weaker 
members  receive  a  present,  perhaps,  of  a  new  turban  or  a 
piece  of  new  cloth.  Their  persecutors  express  much  regret 
at  having  been  obliged  to  resort  to  such  harsh  measures, 
remarking  at  the  same  time  that  their  victims  might  have 
spared  themselves  much  pain  and  torment  by  acceding  to 
their  requests  in  the  first  instance.  The  victims  are  then 
restored  to  their  former  honours  and  employments.  Filled 
with  the  desire  to  recoup  themselves  for  their  losses,  they 
seize  every  opportunity  for  extortion,  until  they  become 
rich  once  more  and  are  forced  to  disgorge  their  plunder. 
But  whatever  crimes  they  may  commit  or  whatever  tortures 


TRIAL   BY   ORDEAL  661 

they  may  endure,  no  disgrace  is  attached  to  either.  The 
penalty  of  death  itself  leaves  no  stain  on  the  memory  of  the 
man  who  has  undergone  this  supreme  punishment  ;  and, 
as  a  natural  consequence,  no  sort  of  disgrace  is  reflected  on 
the  family  of  the  victim.  A  Brahmin  would  be  degraded 
and  banished  from  his  caste  for  having  eaten  food  which 
had  been  prepared,  or  drunk  water  that  had  been  drawn,  by 
a  person  of  lower  caste ;  but  were  he  convicted  of  stealing, 
of  uttering  vile  calumnies,  of  attempting  to  take  another 
man's  life,  or  of  betraying  his  prince  or  country,  none  of 
these  offences  would  prevent  his  appearing  without  fear  or 
shame  in  public,  or  would  hinder  his  being  well  received 
everywhere. 

In  civil  as  well  as  in  criminal  cases,  when  the  evidence  does 
not  completely  establish  a  fact,  the  Hindus  often  have  re- 
course to  ordeals  to  decide  the  point  at  issue.  There  are 
four  ordeals  generally  recognized  among  Hindus,  namely,  by 
the  scales,  by  fire,  by  water,  and  by  poison  1. 

It  is  not  the  magistrates  only  who  order  these  trials  by 
ordeal.  Any  one  has  the  right  to  insist  on  such  a  trial. 
Thus,  if  a  theft  has  been  committed,  the  head  of  a  household 
compels  each  member  to  undergo  an  ordeal.  In  the  same 
way,  the  head  of  a  village  may  force  it  upon  all  the  inhabi- 
tants on  whom  criminal  suspicion  may  rest  ,  and  a  jealous 
husband  may  order  the  same  in  the  case  of  his  wife  whose 
fidelity  he  doubts.  These  ordeals  sometimes  produce  such 
an  effect  on  the  real  culprits  that  they  are  convinced  that 
discovery  is  inevitable,  and  think  it  more  prudent  to  confess 
their  guilt  at  once  than  to  aggravate  the  matter  by  keeping 
silence.  On  the  other  hand,  such  ordeals  often  occasion 
deplorable  miscarriages  of  justice,  and  result  in  the  convic- 
tion of  innocent  persons,  who,  strong  in  the  knowledge  of 
their  innocence,  fondly  believe  that  the  natural  course  of 
things  will  be  reversed  in  their  favour  2. 

1  As  trial  by  ordeal  is  one  of  the  principal  features  in  Hindu  juris- 
prudence, I  have  given  a  more  detailed  account  of  it  in  Appendix  VI. — 
Dfbois. 

'-'  This  method  of  deciding  a  case,  degrading  example  as  it  is  of  the 
foolish  beliefs  of  which  the  human  mind  is  capable,  was  common  enough 
amongst  all  ancient  heathen  nations.  Indeed  it  was  still  in  existence  in 
most  Christian  countries  till  the  thirteenth  century.  In  the  belief  that 
it  was  impossible,  even  in  the  most  barbarous  ages,  for  the  obvious 


062   PERJURY  RAMPANT   AMONGST   HINDUS 

A  certain  young  woman  who  lived  close  to  my  house 
became  the  victim  of  her  husband's  jealous  suspicions.  To 
prove  her  innocence,  he  forced  her  to  plunge  her  arm  up  to 
the  elbow  into  a  bath  of  boiling  oil.  The  unhappy  woman, 
sure  of  her  inviolable  virtue,  did  not  hesitate  to  obey,  and 
the  result  was  that  she  was  most  frightfully  scalded.  The 
wound  became  inflamed  and  blistered,  finally  mortified,  and 
caused  the  unhappy  woman's  death. 

No  doubt  the  disregard  of  the  sanctity  of  an  oath  prevailing 
among  the  Hindus  has,  to  a  certain  extent,  necessitated  the 
adoption  of  this  system  of  trial  by  ordeal. 

Certain  it  is  that  there  is  no  nation  in  the  world  who  think 
so  lightly  of  an  oath  or  of  perjury.  The  Hindu  will  fearlessly 
call  upon  all  his  gods — celestial,  terrestrial,  and  infernal — to 
witness  his  good  faith  in  the  least  of  his  undertakings  ;  but 
should  fresh  circumstances  demand  it,  he  would  not  have 
the  smallest  scruple  in  breaking  the  word  that  he  had  so 
solemnly  pledged.  Woe  to  the  imprudent  person  who  con- 
fides to  Hindus  any  private  matter  that  affects  his  fortune, 
his  honour,  or  his  life  !  If  it  served  their  purpose,  they  would 
divulge  it  without  any  hesitation. 

The  unscrupulous  manner  in  which  Hindus  will  perjure 
themselves  is  so  notorious  that  they  are  never  called  upon 
to  make  a  statement  on  oath  in  their  own  courts  of  justice, 

abuses  of  this  system  to  have  escaped  the  eyes  of  the  judges  who  were 
bound  to  uphold  it,  some  people  have  suggested  that,  while  the  long 
ceremonious  prayers  and  exorcisms  which  preceded  the  ordeals  were 
going  on,  the  judges  were  able  to  determine  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  the 
accused  by  their  demeanour,  and  that  in  the  former  case  they  left  them 
to  the  ordeal,  while  in  the  latter  they  found  means,  either  by  the  applica- 
tion of  medicines  or  drugs  or  by  some  other  trickery,  to  ensure  their 
passing  through  the  ordeal  safe  and  sound.  It  appears  moreover  that 
Hindu  judges  used  to  protect  by  other  means  the  accused  who  were  to 
undergo  any  dangerous  ordeal.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  some  provinces, 
if  a  stolen  object  was  of  small  value,  such  as  a  gold  ornament,  the  judges 
would  order  a  vessel  full  of  water  to  be  brought,  and  each  suspected 
person  received  a  smaller  vessel  of  soft  clay,  which  he  had  to  place  in 
the  larger  vessel.  These  soft  earthen  vessels  were  easily  dissolved  in 
the  water,  and  the  lost  property  was  generally  found  at  the  bottom. 
Thus  the  culprit  escaped  undiscovered,  and  there  was  no  need  for  the 
ordeal  to  take  place. — Dubois. 

The  detection  of  crime  by  ordeal  is  not  entirely  dead  even  now.  But 
it  is  not,  of  course,  recognized  in  the  regular  courts,  and  in  fact  is  illegal. 
—Ed. 


THE   EUROPEAN  JUDICIAL   SYSTEM       663 

unless  they  are  persons  who  bear  an  exceptionally  high 


character  l, 


But  the  jurisprudence  of  the  Hindus,  like  the  rest  of  their 
political  institutions,  has  undergone  a  complete  change 
since  a  great  European  Power  has  dominated  the  country. 
Regular  courts  of  justice  have  been  established  at  great 
expense  in  every  district  to  protect  the  rights  and  settle  the 
differences  of  persons  of  all  classes,  irrespective  of  rank, 
position,  and  caste.  And  this  is,  undoubtedly,  one  of  the 
greatest  benefits  that  a  just  and  enlightened  Government 
can  bestow  on  any  country.  However  much  opinions  may 
differ  as  to  the  usages  of  these  courts,  it  seems  to  me  that  no 
one  can  deny  that  they  have  already  been  productive  of 
immense  benefit.  Nowadays  every  member  of  society  can 
rest  assured  that,  sooner  or  later,  the  wrongs  under  which  he 
suffers,  either  in  his  person  or  his  property,  will  be  redressed, 
and  he  can  also  rely  unreservedly  upon  the  impartiality  of 
his  judges,  an  advantage  he  was  far  from  enjoying  under  the 
iron  rule  of  his  former  despotic  masters.  At  the  same  time, 
it  must  be  admitted  that  the  present  judicial  system  has  by 
no  means  realized  all  the  objects  for  which  it  was  established. 
Indeed,  how  could  any  one  reasonably  expect  that  such 
a  huge  measure  of  reform  would  be  sealed  with  perfection 
from  its  very  commencement  ?  Every  creation  of  the  human 
brain  can  always  be  improved  upon  when  the  light  of  ex- 
perience has  shown  up  its  defects  and  revealed  the  mistakes 
that  have  been  committed.  For  example,  the  fact  cannot 
be  disguised  that  the  slow  and  cautious  method  of  procedure 
which  is  customary  in  a  European  court  of  law  is  by  no 
means  adapted  to  the  majority  of  Hindus,  who  from  their 
straitened  circumstances  and  the  nature  of  their  occupations 
cannot  afford  such  long  and  expensive  modes  of  litigation. 
Is  it  likely  that  they  would  find  it  convenient  to  wait  about 
at  the  place  where  justice  is  dispensed,  it  may  be  for  many 

1  In  India  :  What  can  it  teach  us  ?  Professor  Max  Miiller  defends  with 
no  little  skill  the  general  credibility  of  the  Hindus.  He  quotes,  inter 
alios,  Sir  John  Malcolm,  who  asserted  :  '  I  have  hardly  ever  known, 
where  a  person  did  understand  the  language,  or  where  a  calm  com- 
munication was  made  to  a  native  of  India  through  a  well-informed  and 
trustworthy  medium,  that  the  result  did  not  prove  that  what  had  at 
first  been  stated  as  falsehood  had  either  proceeded  from  fear  or  from 
misapprehension.' — Ed. 


664    HINDU   PROPENSITY   FOR   LITIGATION 

days,  till  their  turn  to  be  heard  comes,  leaving,  as  they  must , 
in  the  meantime  their  families  without  any  means  of  sub- 
sistence ?  From  this  point  of  view  the  new  system  is  all  to 
the  advantage  of  the  rich  and  influential  and  to  the  detriment 
of  the  poor,  against  whom  the  former  can  bring  vexatious 
suits  with  impunity.  So  great  is  the  dread  amongst  the 
poorer  Hindus  of  these  lengthy  processes,  and  of  the  pro- 
longed absences  from  their  homes  which  they  entail,  that 
when  they  are  cited  to  appear  as  witnesses  before  these  new 
tribunals,  they  will  often  spend  large  sums  in  bribing  the 
official  who  brings  the  summons,  if  any  means  whatever  can 
be  found  by  which  they  can  elude  the  hateful  business.  If 
brawls  or  quarrels  arise  in  a  village,  the  neighbours,  far  from 
interposing  and  trying  to  restore  peace,  retire  promptly  to 
their  own  houses,  terribly  afraid  lest  they  may  be  called  as 
witnesses  in  court,  and  thus  waste  much  precious  time  which 
otherwise  might  be  profitably  employed  in  the  fields  or 
in  the  house. 

The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  seems  to  be  that 
under  the  new  system  of  judicial  administration  sufficient 
attention  has  not  been  paid  to  the  peculiar  character,  dis- 
position, and  prejudices  of  the  people  for  whose  benefit  it  was 
devised.  It  was  not  sufficiently  borne  in  mind  that  nowhere 
in  the  whole  world  is  there  another  race  of  men  so  obstinate, 
so  deceitful,  and  so  litigious  as  the  Hindus,  partly  from  faults 
of  training  and  partly  from  their  deep-seated  attachment 
to  caste  customs.  What  we  should  think  trifles  appear  to 
them  of  the  utmost  importance,  and  are  often  the  cause  of 
lawsuits.  I  defy  the  most  active,  zealous,  and  intelligent 
judge,  especially  in  view  of  the  enormous  tract  of  country 
over  which  he  has  to  administer  justice — I  defy  him,  I  re- 
peat, to  hear  one-fifth  of  the  grievances,  either  real  or  ima- 
ginary, which  people  are  ready  to  pour  into  his  ears.  Three - 
fourths  at  least  of  the  legal  proceedings  have  to  do  with  the 
most  petty  concerns,  though  they  are  far  from  being  regarded 
as  such  by  the  complainants.  They  are  usually  about  small 
debts,  quarrels,  slanders,  trifling  assaults  without  bloodshed, 
petty  larceny,  &c.  The  settlement  of  these  small  matters 
might  very  well  be  removed  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
higher  courts  and  placed  in  the  hands  of  village  panchayats 
or  petty  courts  of  arbitration,  composed  of  the  best  materials 


IMPRISONMENT    FOR  DEBT  665 

available  ;  or  they  might,  in  part  at  any  rate,  be  left  to  the 
village  headmen,  whose  judgements  in  either  case  would  be 
expeditious  and  without  appeal.  It  could  certainly  not  be 
expected  that  these  subordinate  courts  would  fulfil  their 
duties  with  very  scrupulous  integrity  or  strict  impartiality  ; 
but  the  parties  concerned  would  always  have  as  compensa- 
tion for  the  small  injustices  of  which  they  might  now  and 
then  be  the  victims  the  immense  advantage  of  not  losing 
their  time  or  being  put  to  an  expense  which  more  often  than 
not  is  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  matter  in 
dispute. 

Of  the  penalties  sanctioned  by  the  European  courts  of 
justice,  imprisonment  for  debt,  amongst  others,  strikes  the 
Hindus  as  a  ridiculous  expedient,  and  it  is  one  at  which  they 
often  laugh.  To  be  deprived  of  liberty  without  any  addi- 
tional coercion  or  torture  appears  to  them  no  punishment 
at  all.  Any  Hindu  who  has  sufficient  private  means  would 
be  quite  contented  never  to  leave  his  house  night  or  day  ; 
he  would  be  in  a  state  of  indolent  repose,  chewing  betel, 
smoking  his  pipe,  eating,  drinking,  and  sleeping,  without 
taking  the  least  interest  in  what  was  going  on  in  the  world 
outside. 

There  are  two  classes  of  persons  who  are  imprisoned  for 
debt  :  firstly,  those  who  are  fraudulent  debtors,  who  can 
pay  but  refuse  to  do  so,  and  whom  torture  alone  would  bring 
to  their  senses  ;  and,  secondly,  those  who  are  absolutely 
insolvent.  The  first  of  these  two  classes  will  go  to  prison 
with  the  utmost  indifference,  while  the  second  are  positively 
delighted  to  be  sent  there,  because  the  aggrieved  party  is 
obliged  to  feed  them  while  they  are  in  prison.  And  what  can 
be  more  pleasing  to  Hindus  than  to  be  maintained  in  idle- 
ness I  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  most  Hindus,  when 
they  borrow  money,  do  so  with  the  lurking  hope  that  circum- 
stances will  arise,  or  that  they  will  think  of  some  expedient, 
by  which  they  will  be  able  to  elude  repayment.  Thus 
strong  measures  have  to  be  resorted  to  as  the  only  means  by 
which  payment  can  be  exacted  from  such  very  unscrupulous 
debtors.  When  the  time  for  payment  comes  and  the  creditor 
demands  his  money,  the  debtor  declares  he  has  none  and 
begs  for  further  grace,  swearing  by  all  his  gods  that  he  will 
pay  everything,  capital  and  interest,  at  the  time  stipulated. 


666  DEBTORS   AND   CREDITORS 

More  time  is  granted,  once  and  even  twice,  and  each  time 
the  debtor's  fine  promises  end  in  smoke.  At  last  the  creditor 
becomes  tired  of  these  interminable  delays,  grows  angry, 
and  arrests  the  debtor  in  the  name  either  of  the  ruler  of  the 
country  or  of  the  governor  of  the  province  l.  The  creditor 
forbids  his  debtor  to  eat  or  drink  without  his  permission,  and 
at  the  same  time  he  himself  is  bound  to  fast.  If  this  method 
does  not  succeed,  the  creditor  places  a  huge  stone  on  the 
debtor's  head  and  a  similar  one  on  his  own,  and  thus  bur- 
dened they  remain  motionless  opposite  each  other,  exposed 
to  the  heat  of  the  sun  ;  or  they  walk  till  one  of  them  faints 
from  exhaustion  ;  or  they  both  stand  on  one  foot  like 
cranes  ;  or  sometimes  the  creditor  seizes  the  debtor's  cattle 
and  shuts  them  up,  forbidding  any  one  to  feed  them  until 
payment  has  been  made  in  full.  At  last  the  debtor  is  so 
worried  that  he  is  unable  to  bear  it  any  longer  ;  he  comes 
to  terms,  pays  a  large  sum  on  account,  and  gives  good 
security  for  the  remainder.  Creditor  and  debtor  then  part 
on  the  best  of  terms.  Very  often  the  creditor  is  so  hard 
pushed  himself  that  he  is  obliged  to  relinquish  a  part  of 
what  is  due  to  him  in  order  to  get  back  some  of  his  money. 

Is  it  likely,  I  may  ask,  that  men  who  carry  obstinacy  and 
tenacity  to  such  lengths  would  be  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of 
enjoying  a  few  idle  weeks  in  prison  ? 

The  only  object  of  a  prison,  according  to  the  Hindus,  is  to 
prevent  the  accused  or  the  criminal  running  away.  No 
disgrace  is  attached  to  imprisonment,  and  consequently  it  is 
no  punishment  at  all.  In  fact  mere  imprisonment  is  not 
looked  upon  as  a  punishment  even  by  magistrates  in  native 
provinces.  Every  one  condemned  to  prison  has  to  undergo 
more  or  less  severe  torture  according  to  the  gravity  of  his 
offence.  If  it  is  but  a  trifling  misdemeanour,  the  delinquent 
is  beaten  and  then  set  at  liberty. 

All  intelligent  Hindus  are  agreed  that  the  penal  laws  in- 

1  This  method  of  arrest  is  very  common.  '  I  arrest  you,'  one  Hindu 
will  say  to  another,  '  in  the  name  of  the  King  or  the  East  India  Company, 
or  in  the  name  of  the  Collector  of  the  district,'  &c.  The  person  to  whom 
the  summons  is  addressed  is  obliged  to  obey  it,  to  leave  his  business, 
and  to  place  himself  at  the  disposal  of  his  adversary.  If  he  attempted 
to  escape,  he  would  render  himself  liable  to  be  punished  for  contempt  of 
the  law. — Dubois. 

No  such  private  arrests  are  now  permitted  by  law. — Ed. 


CALLOUSNESS   AND   APATHY  667 

troduced  by  Europeans  into  their  country  err  considerably 
on  the  side  of  leniency.  They  consider  them  quite  inade- 
quate to  protect  society  against  evil-doers.  To  keep  peace 
and  order  amongst  a  nation  constituted  like  the  Hindus, 
they  say,  much  harsher  measures  must  be  resorted  to. 

Even  capital  punishment  appears  to  produce  no  impression 
whatever  on  these  apathetic  people.  The  sight  of  an  exe- 
cution, far  from  moving  the  spectators  to  feelings  of  pity 
or  compassion,  is  only  looked  upon  as  an  amusement ;  and 
they  are  even  much  diverted  by  the  convulsive  contortions 
of  the  poor  wretch  who  is  hanging  on  the  gallows.  Perhaps 
the  utter  want  of  feeling  shown  by  the  crowd  under  these 
circumstances  was  one  of  the  reasons  why  native  princes 
so  rarely  resorted  to  capital  punishment.  Probably  they 
reflected  that  punishments  were  inflicted  quite  as  much  for 
the  sake  of  their  deterrent  effect  on  others  as  for  the  chastise- 
ment of  the  guilty.  Mutilation  appeared  to  them  to  be 
a  much  more  efficacious  way  of  repressing  vice.  Criminals 
deprived  of  nose,  ears,  or  right  hand,  dragging  out  their 
miserable  existence  before  the  eyes  of  all  men,  were  living 
and  lasting  witnesses  of  the  severity  of  the  law,  and  their 
woeful  appearance  served  as  a  daily  example  to  others. 
See,  they  seemed  to  say  to  every  passer-by,  what  a  sad  fate 
awaits  those  who  break  the  laws  ! 

The  death  penalty,  on  the  other  hand,  barely  excites  a 
passing  terror,  and  I  very  much  doubt  whether  the  fear  of 
it  ever  restrained  any  Hindu  who  was  bent  on  committing 
a  crime. 

CHAPTER   IX 

The  Military  System  of  the  Hindus. — Ancient  and  Modern  Methods  of 
Warfare. — The  Material  formerly  composing  their  Armies. — The 
Military  Game  of  Chess  invented  by  the  Hindus. — Poligars. — 
Different  Weapons  that  have  been  in  Use  at  various  Times  in 
India. 

Here  my  self-imposed  task  should  have  been  brought  to 
a  close,  for  it  is  hardly  to  be  expected  that  I  can  treat  the 
subject-matter  of  this  chapter  satisfactorily,  seeing  how 
foreign  it  is  to  my  profession.  However,  as  nearly  all  the 
public  monuments  of  India,  both  civil  and  religious,  com- 
memorate some  war,  and  as  all  the  Hindu  books  are  rilled 


668      CHANGES   IN   MILITARY   PROFESSION 

with  descriptions  of  feats  of  arms  and  accounts  of  battles, 
I  thought  that  a  few  details  on  this  subject  would  not  be 
entirely  out  of  place  in  such  a  work  as  the  present. 

The  Kshatriyas,  or  kings,  and  their  descendants  the 
Rajputs  formerly  held  undisputed  sway  in  India,  and  they 
alone  had  a  right  to  follow  the  military  profession.  All 
this,  however,  has  nowadays  undergone  a  complete  change, 
ambition  having  found  a  way  through  this  hard  and  fast 
rule.  At  the  present  time  there  are  very  few  native  rulers 
who  belong  to  the  old  warrior  caste.  In  this  case,  as  in 
many  others,  the  strongest  have  seized  the  reins  of  govern- 
ment. Indeed,  in  many  provinces  one  may  find  princes  of 
very  low  origin,  who  by  their  courage,  their  talents,  or  their 
intrigues  have  raised  themselves  to  their  high  position.  In 
the  same  way  the  profession  of  arms  has  now  been  thrown 
open  to  men  of  all  castes,  from  the  Brahmin  to  the  Pariah. 
On  the  one  hand  one  may  see  a  Brahmin  who  has  attained 
the  rank  of  commander-in-chief  of  an  army,  while  on  the 
other  hand,  especially  in  the  Mahratta  armies,  you  may 
see  them  serving  as  common  troopers. 

Though  the  habits  of  the  Hindus  appear  more  likely  to 
impair  their  courage  than  to  make  them  good  soldiers,  the 
art  of  war  nevertheless  seems  to  have  been  as  well  understood 
by  them  from  very  early  times  as  any  other,,  and  those  who 
followed  the  military  profession  have  always  been  held  in 
high  esteem.  In  fact,  military  officers  took  rank  in  the 
social  scale  immediately  after  the  priesthood.  The  Brahmins 
themselves,  actuated  by  motives  either  of  gratitude  or  of 
self-interest,  allowed  them  to  participate  in  some  of  their 
own  high  prerogatives,  such  as  the  valued  privileges  of  being 
allowed  to  hear  the  Vedas  read  and  of  wearing  the  triple 
cord.  But  however  much  the  Hindus  may  have  honoured 
the  profession  of  arms,  and  however  full  their  national 
histories  may  be  of  wars,  conquests,  sieges,  battles,  victories, 
and  defeats,  it  is  nevertheless  remarkable  that  no  nation 
has  shown  at  every  epoch  in  its  history  so  little  skill  in 
military  science.  When  pitiless  conquerors,  at  the  head  of 
savage  and  warlike  hordes,  forced  their  way  over  the  northern 
mountains  and  spread  themselves  like  a  devastating  torrent 
over  the  fertile  provinces  of  India,  the  peaceable  and  docile 
inhabitants  were  unable  to  offer  any  effectual  resistance. 


THE   MYTHICAL  WARS   OF  INDIA  669 

They  saw  their  towns  and  villages  ravaged  by  fire  and  sword, 
while  rivers  of  blood,  ingloriously  and  fruitlessly  spilt, 
deluged  their  fields.  The  readiness  with  which  they  bent 
their  necks  beneath  their  oppressors'  yoke,  and  the  feeble- 
ness of  the  efforts  which  they  put  forth  to  recover  their 
independence,  proved  how  inferior  they  were  in  courage 
and  discipline  to  the  proud  Tartars  who  invaded  and  con- 
quered them. 

The  wars  of  India  may  be  classified  under  three  heads  : 
those  of  the  mythical  ages,  those  of  the  ancient  kings,  and 
those  of  modern  times.  By  the  last  I  mean  only  the  inter- 
necine wars  between  native  princes  before  the  time  when 
these  princes,  convinced  of  the  superiority  of  European 
military  science,  determined  to  introduce  foreigners  amongst 
their  troops,  and  to  this  end  enlisted  in  their  service  those 
European  adventurers  who  offered  to  help  them  in  their 
undertakings.  It  was  an  imprudent  policy,  and  the  native 
princes  did  not  see  until  too  late  the  danger  of  surrounding 
themselves  with  such  intriguing  and  ambitious  auxiliaries. 

I  will  say  nothing  about  the  wars  of  the  gods  and  the 
giants,  which  the  majority  of  Hindu  books  describe  with 
equal  bombast  and  prolixity.  Such  exaggerated  flights  of 
imagination  can  hardly  be  considered  worthy  of  a  place  in 
serious  history.  It  is  always  the  same  story  of  armies  of 
giants  whose  heads  touched  the  stars,  and  who  were  mounted 
on  elephants  of  proportionate  size.  One  of  these  giants, 
for  example,  is  depicted  as  upheaving  the  very  firmament 
with  his  shoulders,  giving  it  such  a  violent  shock  as  to  over- 
throw all  the  gods  who  dwelt  therein,  and  thereby  warning 
them  of  what  they  might  expect  from  an  adversary  of  such 
prowess.  On  the  other  hand,  a  god  who  is  about  to  engage 
these  formidable  enemies  takes  the  earth  for  his  chariot, 
a  rainbow  for  his  bow,  and  Vishnu  for  an  arrow.  He  shoots 
this  extraordinary  missile,  and  with  one  shot  overthrows  an 
immense  city,  in  which  all  the  villains  that  he  is  pursuing 
are  entrenched,  burying  them  all  in  the  fallen  ruins  of  the 
city. 

Ab  uno  disce  omnes.  I  do  not  think  that  the  history  of 
the  wars  of  the  ancient  kings  of  India  is  one  whit  less  absurd. 
It  is  only  the  poets  who  have  undertaken  the  task  of  trans- 
mitting details  to  posterity,  and  as  Hindu  poets  are  not 


670         EXAGGERATION   IN   HINDU   EPICS 

wont  to  do  things  by  halves,  they  have  freely  availed  them- 
selves of  the  privilege  of  exaggeration  and  embellishment. 
Facts  are  so  interwoven  with  foolish  and  senseless  efforts  of 
the  imagination  that  it  is  impossible  to  disentangle  the  truth. 
Why  should  one  feel  astonished  at  Xerxes  being  able  to 
gather  together  and  maintain  a  million  soldiers  when  he  set. 
forth  to  conquer  Greece  ?  Such  an  army  would  have  formed 
only  a  small  detachment  of  one  of  the  armies  of  the  kings  of 
India.  These  latter  never  took  the  field  at  the  head  of  less 
than  several  hundreds  of  millions  of  righting  men  !  If  t lie 
reader  will  recollect  what  I  have  remarked  several  times, 
namely,  that  only  that  which  is  extraordinary  and  extrava- 
gant has  the  power  of  pleasing  the  Hindu,  he  will  hardly  be 
astonished  at  the  strange  mania  which  has  induced  Hindu 
authors  to  carry  exaggeration  even  to  puerility.  In  every 
country  writers  adapt  their  work  to  the  taste  of  the  public, 
being  anxious  to  gain  from  them  the  greatest  possible 
approbation.     The  maxim 

Rien  n'est  beau  que  le  vrai,  le  vrai  seul  est  aimable, 
would  be  rank  heresy  in  good  Hindu  literature. 

The  one  fact  that  I  have  been  able  to  glean  for  certain  is 
that  the  armies  of  the  ancient  Hindu  kings  were  divided  into 
four  arms  or  sections,  of  which  the  whole  formed  a  chatur- 
angam.  These  four  corps  were  the  elephants,  the  chariots, 
the  cavalry,  and  the  infantry.  Such,  indeed,  were  the  com- 
ponent parts  of  the  army  of  Porus,  who  was  vanquished  and 
taken  prisoner  on  the  banks  of  the  Hydaspes  by  Alexander. 

No  one  at  the  present  day  denies  the  fact  that  the  Hindus 
invented  the  military  game  of  chess  x. 

1  The  following  is  the  story,  according  to  Oriental  writers,  of  how 
this  game  was  invented.  At  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  of  the 
Christian  era  a  very  powerful  young  monarch  was  reigning  in  India,  who 
was  of  excellent  character,  but  who  allowed  himself  to  be  corrupted  by 
flatterers.  This  prince  soon  forgot  that  the  love  of  the  people  is  the 
only  sure  support  of  a  throne.  The  Brahmins  and  Rajahs  uttered  many 
remonstrances,  but  in  vain.  Intoxicated  by  his  greatness,  which  he 
fancied  was  unassailable,  he  despised  their  counsels.  Accordingly  a 
Brahmin  named  Sissa  undertook  to  open  the  young  monarch's  eyes  by 
strategy.  To  this  end  he  invented  the  game  of  chess,  in  which  the  king, 
though  the  most  important  of  all  the  pieces,  can  nevertheless  neither 
attack  nor  defend  himself  without  the  assistance  of  his  subjects.  This 
game  speedily  became  famous,  and  the  king  expressed  his  anxiety  to 


THE   GAME   OF  CHESS  671 

It  is  very  evident  that  it  was  the  composition  and  tactics 
of  the  ancient  Hindu  armies  that  originally  suggested  the 
game.  The  Hindus,  in  fact,  called  it  chatur-angam.  Though 
with  some  few  small  variations  we  have  adopted  their 
method  of  playing,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  innovations 
which  we  have  introduced  in  the  shapes  and  names  of  the 
pieces  are  certainly  not  happy.  What  can  be  more  ridicu- 
lous than  the  castles  which  move  about  from  place  to  place, 
the  queen  who  rushes  about  righting  with  the  king's  people, 
or  the  bishops  who  occupy  such  an  exalted  position  ? 

As  with  us,  the  most  important  piece  on  the  Hindu  chess- 
board is  the  king  K  The  second  piece,  which  we  call  the 
queen 2,  they  term  the  mantri,  a  title  which  signifies  a 
minister  of  state,  who  is  also  commander-in-chief  of  the 
army.  Chariots3  occupy  the  place  of  our  bishops.  Like  us, 
the  Hindus  have  knights,  but  instead  of  our  battlemented 
castles  they  have  elephants  4.  The  pawns  or  foot-soldiers 
are,  as  with  us,  the  simple  rank  and  file  of  which  the  army  is 
composed.  The  chess-board  is  called  by  the  Hindus  the 
por-sthalam,  or  field  of  battle. 

But  to  return  to  the  ancient  Hindu  armies.  In  the  first 
line  came  the  elephants.  It  is  certain  that  these  animals 
carried  castles  or  howdahs  on  their  backs,  containing  several 
men  armed  with  javelins.  But  I  think  it  would  be  wrong- 
learn  it.  Sissa  while  teaching  him  the  rules,  made  him  realize  some 
important  truths  which  up  to  that  time  he  had  failed  to  grasp,  and  the 
monarch  wishing  to  show  his  gratitude  to  the  Brahmin  asked  him  what 
he  would  like  as  a  reward.  Sissa  replied  that  he  would  be  satisfied 
with  as  much  rice  as  could  be  placed  on  the  sixty-four  squares  of  the 
chess-board  by  putting  one  grain  on  the  first,  two  on  the  second,  four 
on  the  third,  and  so  on,  the  number  on  each  square  always  doubling. 
The  king  cheerfully  agreed  to  such  an  apparently  modest  demand.  But 
the  treasurers  soon  convinced  their  master  that  he  had  pledged  himself 
to  an  act  of  munificence  which,  in  spite  of  all  his  treasure  and  vast 
estates,  he  would  be  quite  unable  to  fulfil.  Sissa  at  once  seized  the 
opportunity  of  pointing  out  to  the  monarch  how  easy  it  was  to  abuse 
the  best  intentions  of  a  sovereign  if  he  were  not  perpetually  on  his  guard 
against  those  who  surrounded  him. — Dubois. 

1  The  Arab  and  Persian  name  for  chess  is  '  the  king's  game.' — Dubois. 

2  In  Low  Latin  this  piece  was  called  fercia,  from  the  Persian  fers, 
which  means  minister  of  state,  vizir. — Dubois. 

3  In  many  Eastern  countries  these  are  elephants. — Dubois. 

4  Amongst  other  Asiatic  nations  these  are  camels  ridden  by  a  man 
with  a  bow  and  arrow  in  his  hand. — Dubois. 


672  ELEPHANTS   IN   BATTLE 

to  suppose  that  these  castles  or  howdahs  were  of  any  great 
size,  as  might  be  imagined  from  certain  illustrations.  Like 
those  which  may  still  be  found  in  the  present  day  amongst 
the  armies  of  some  Eastern  princes,  these  towers  or  howdahs 
resembled  large  boxes  without  lids,  as  long  and  as  broad  as 
a  large  bed,  placed  crosswise  on  the  back  of  the  elephant, 
and  capable  of  holding  six  or  seven  archers  when  sitting  in 
Oriental  fashion.  Though  an  elephant  is  very  strong,  so  as 
to  be  able  to  carry  two  small  cannons  and  their  carriages, 
there  is  nevertheless  a  limit  to  its  powers  ;  and  naturally 
a  much  larger  erection,  with  a  still  larger  number  of  men  in 
it,  would  be  a  burden,  under  which  even  an  elephant  would 
succumb.  And  there  is  yet  another  point,  namely,  the 
difficulty  of  fixing  a  lofty  structure  with  any  degree  of  secu- 
rity on  an  elephant's  back,  a  difficulty  which  would  be  ren- 
dered practically  insurmountable  by  the  brusque  movements 
and  rolling  gait  of  the  animal.  Be  this  as  it  may,  elephants 
in  days  gone  by  were  formidable  adversaries  amongst  these 
half -disciplined  nations.  They  broke  the  ranks,  frightened 
the  horses,  trampled  the  soldiers  underfoot ;  and  at  the  same 
time  it  was  very  difficult  to  wound  them,  on  account  of  their 
hard  and  horny  epidermis.  These  powerful  creatures  are 
still  employed  in  the  armies  of  native  princes,  but  rather 
from  ostentation  than  from  any  warlike  purpose  that  they 
serve.  A  native  general  or  senior  officer  considers  an  ele- 
phant to  be  the  only  mount  befitting  his  dignity  ;  the  animal 
being  usually  covered  with  magnificent  trappings.  It  is 
only  with  great  difficulty  that  elephants  can  be  made  to 
stand  fire,  though  every  method  is  employed  to  familiarize 
them  with  it.  Without  these  precautions  the  rattle  of  fire- 
arms and  the  squibs  that  are  hurled  at  them  would  excite 
them  to  frenzy,  and  would  consequently  cause  the  death  of 
their  riders. 

They  were  also  used  for  battering  the  gates  of  besieged 
towns  ;  and  it  was  with  a  view  to  counteracting  this  that 
most  of  the  gates  were  thickly  studded  on  the  outside  with 
long  and  stout  iron  spikes. 

In  the  Mogul  armies,  before  the  introduction  of  European 
tactics,  an  elephant  always  marched  in  the  van,  bearing  on 
its  head  a  long  pole,  from  which  floated  a  large  flag.  Some- 
times this  was  followed  by  another  elephant  carrying  a  rich 


HINDU   WAR-CHARIOTS  673 

howdah,  on  which  was  placed  a  box  containing  a  priceless 
relic,  which  usually  was,  if  one  may  believe  it,  an  actual  hair 
from  Mahomet's  beard. 

The  chief  service  which  these  animals  render  nowadays  is 
in  the  transport  of  artillery  and  equipage.  When  a  swamp, 
a  ditch,  a  canal,  or  any  other  obstacle  arrests  the  progress  of 
the  bullocks  that  drag  the  cannon,  one  or  more  elephants  are 
brought  up  to  push  the  gun-carriage  with  their  heads  and 
trunks  and  thus  help  them  over  the  difficulty.  When  rivers 
which  are  not  fordable  have  to  be  crossed,  elephants  are 
often  used  to  carry  men  and  heavy  baggage  over  on  their 
backs.  But  the  services  of  these  animals  are  dearly  bought, 
considering  the  vast  expense  which  their  food  and  keep  entail. 
Thus  they  are  falling  more  and  more  into  disuse.  Every 
day  the  camel  is  growing  in  favour  as  being  more  patient 
and  tractable. 

Chariots  formed  the  second  division  of  the  ancient  Hindu 
armies.  If  one  may  believe  what  early  Hindu  writers  say, 
these  chariots  were  used  in  considerable  numbers  and  were 
of  considerable  size.  That  of  the  king  was  the  most  magni- 
ficent. The  rest  belonged  to  his  subordinate  chiefs.  When 
two  hostile  armies  met,  the  leaders  on  each  side  were  in  the 
habit  of  interchanging  compliments  with  each  other  before 
joining  battle.  One,  for  instance,  would  drop  an  arrow  just 
short  of  his  adversary's  chariot,  and  the  other  would  return 
the  salute.  Splendid  horses  were  harnessed  to  these  war- 
chariots.  One  reads  in  the  Bhagavata  that  one  of  the  old 
kings  of  India,  when  setting  out  on  a  campaign,  harnessed 
a  troop  of  demons  to  his  chariot,  to  ensure  the  pace  being- 
good.  The  chariots  were  usually  ornamented  all  round  with 
large  bells,  which  made  a  great  noise,  and  this  custom  is 
still  occasionally  observed  at  the  present  time  in  the  case  of 
private  carriages.  The  latter,  however,  in  no  way  resemble 
the  ancient  war-chariots,  about  which  I  have  not  been  able 
to  collect  any  trustworthy  information. 

The  cavalry  formed  the  third  division.  Indian  generals 
in  ancient  times,  however,  did  not  rely  much  on  this  arm. 
The  infantry  played  the  principal  part  in  their  wars,  which 
is  contrary  to  the  practice  of  more  modern  times,  for  until 
quite  recently  no  use  whatever  was  made  of  infantry,  only 
a  few  undisciplined  regiments  of  followers  being  maintained 


674     UNSCIENTIFIC  TACTICS   IN  WARFARE 

to  pillage,  ravage,  and  destroy  all  the  villages  in  their  way. 
and  to  devastate  the  enemy's  country.  This  idea  they  had 
evidently  borrowed  from  the  Tartars,  who  had  invaded  their 
country,  and  whose  superiority  in  arms  they  had  been  forced 
to  acknowledge  to  their  cost . 

The  Moguls  and  Mahrattas,  the  two  rival  powers  who 
for  a  long  while  disputed  the  supremacy  of  India,  placed  on 
some  occasions  as  many  as  100.000  horse  in  the  field.  The 
Mahratta  princes  combined  could  have  commanded  as  many 
as  300,000  horse.  But  they  never  knew  how  to  utilize  this 
unwieldy  multitude  to  its  full  advantage,  because  they  did 
not  understand  how  to  manoeuvre  it  in  a  scientific  manner. 
The  lessons  which  the  European  invaders  gave  them  time 
after  time,  for  more  than  300  years,  seem  hardly  to  have 
taught  them  to  appreciate  their  mistakes.  Even  at  the  end 
of  this  long  period,  and  when  it  was  too  late  to  mend  matters, 
there  was  a  vast  inferiority  in  their  tactics  compared  with 
those  of  their  dreaded  opponents.  They  never  could  be 
brought  to  understand  the  value  of  strict  discipline,  good 
tactical  handling,  orderly  arrangements  in  marching  and 
camping,  and,  in  short,  all  the  skilled  dispositions  by  which 
it  is  possible  to  manoeuvre  large  bodies  of  troops  without 
confusion.  They  thought  their  work  was  done  when  they 
had  collected  a  miscellaneous  horde  of  men,  who  marched  to 
battle  in  a  disorderly  mass  and  fell  upon  the  enemy  without 
any  method  or  concerted  plan. 

Indian  armies  always  contain  a  large  number  of  chiefs 
who  command  as  many  troopers  as  they  are  able  to  raise 
at  their  own  expense.  Each  recruit  brings  his  own  horse, 
which  remains  his  private  property.  He  receives  a  fixed 
sum  for  himself  and  for  the  keep  of  his  horse.  If  he  happens 
to  lose  his  horse,  he  is  dismissed  as  useless.  This  plan 
certainly  puts  the  State  to  little  expense,  but  it  renders  the 
cavalry  as  a  body  less  effective,  for  at  close  quarters  the 
rider's  first  care  is  for  his  horse,  which  belongs  to  himself  ; 
nay,  often,  when  he  sees  that  there  is  much  danger,  he  will 
take  to  flight  at  the  first  order  to  charge.  Desertion  indeed 
is  very  common  in  the  armies  of  Indian  princes.  As  a  rule, 
little  trouble  is  taken  to  catch  deserters ;  nor  are  they  severely 
punished  when  caught.  In  order  to  ensure  fidelity  amongst 
their  troops  the  chiefs  are  in  the  habit  of  keeping  their  pay 


MUTINY   BY   MERCENARIES  675 

in  arrear  ;  and  this  prevents  a  large  number  of  mercenaries 
from  deserting,  as  they  fear  to  lose  what  is  due  to  them. 
Nevertheless,  whole  armies  have  been  known  to  throw  down 
their  arms  in  face  of  the  enemy  and  refuse  to  take  them  up 
again  until  they  had  received  their  pay.  It  is  by  no  means 
a  rare  occurrence  for  large  bodies  of  troops  to  refuse  to  set 
out  on  a  march  for  a  similar  reason.  Mutinous  soldiers, 
too,  frequently  put  their  generals  under  arrest,  send  them 
to  prison,  menace  them  sword  in  hand,  or  try  to  intimidate 
them  by  loud  threats  and  insults.  The  generals,  strange  to 
say,  will  calmly  and  patiently  put  up  with  these  mutinous 
outbursts.  Usually  they  will  pay  the  mutineers  a  part  of 
their  arrears  and  promise  the  rest  in  a  short  time.  Quiet  is 
then  restored,  and  the  men  return  to  duty  until  another  such 
occasion  presents  itself. 

Although  these  undisciplined  mercenaries  make  very 
inferior  troops,  still  there  are  instances  on  record  of  honour- 
able and  brave  conduct  among  their  chiefs,  especially  among 
Mahomedan  chiefs  of  high  rank.  The  latter  never  cry  for 
quarter  ;  and,  even  when  the  day  is  going  against  them, 
they  will  not  retreat  a  step  as  long  as  they  have  the  support 
of  a  few  of  their  followers.  Flight  or  retreat  under  such 
circumstances  is  considered  by  them  even  more  ignominious 
than  it  is  by  their  European  opponents. 

The  ordinary  cavalry  troopers,  be  they  Mahomedan  or 
Mahratta,  are  usually  very  badly  mounted,  and  their  equip- 
ments are  still  worse.  Nevertheless,  their  weedy-looking 
chargers  are  so  inured  to  fatigue  and  so  accustomed  to 
privation  that  they  will  make,  with  only  a  little  coarse  hay 
for  food,  a  succession  of  forced  marches  which  would  be 
quite  beyond  the  capabilities  of  our  best  European  cavalry, 
covering  as  they  sometimes  do  as  much  as  sixty  miles  a  day. 
Mounted  on  these  wretched  animals,  detachments  of  troops 
are  able  to  cover  great  distances,  and  to  sweep  down  sud- 
denly on  districts  from  which  they  were  supposed  to  be  far 
away.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  there  are  not  very  good 
horses  to  be  found,  especially  in  the  Southern  provinces  of 
India  ;  but  they  are  only  to  be  bought  for  very  high  prices 
that  are  quite  beyond  the  means  of  ordinary  persons.  Only 
the  chiefs  possess  really  fine  horses.  They  take  remarkably 
good  care  of  them.     They  usually  decorate  them  in  various 


tl7<)       TROOPERS    AND   THEIR    EQUIPMENT 

ways,  and  often  paint  their  bodies  in  different  colours. 
They  train  them  in  an  extremely  clever  manner,  and  ride 
them  most  gracefully.  Many  indeed  would  be  able  to  carry 
off  prizes  in  our  European  riding-schools.  The  Mahrattas, 
for  instance,  accustom  their  horses  to  stop  at  a  given  signal. 
The  rider  dismounts  and  goes  away,  leaving  his  steed  loose. 
Sometimes  for  hours  together  the  animal  will  remain  as  still 
as  a  milestone  until  his  master  returns.  A  horse-stealer 
who  one  day  came  across  a  solitary  steed,  which  had  thus 
been  left  without  any  one  to  look  after  it,  mounted  it  and 
galloped  off.  The  owner  of  the  horse,  seeing  from  a  distance 
what  had  happened,  thereupon  gave  the  call  by  which  he 
always  stopped  the  animal.  At  the  sound  of  its  master's 
voice  the  horse  perceived  its  mistake  and  stood  stock  still. 
In  spite  of  every  effort  on  the  part  of  the  thief  it  refused  to 
budge  ;  whereupon  the  latter  thought  it  more  prudent  to 
take  to  flight  on  his  own  two  legs. 

The  troopers,  Mahomedan  and  Mahratta,  are  armed  with 
lances,  javelins,  and  katharis,  or  daggers.  Some  few  have 
blunderbusses  in  addition,  while  others  have  indifferent 
sabres.  A  few  may  be  seen  armed  with  nothing  but  the 
whip  or  switch  which  they  use  in  urging  on  their  horses. 
Each  man,  in  short,  is  expected  to  arm  himself  at  his  own 
expense,  and  consequently  a  remarkable  variety  may  be 
noticed  in  the  equipments  of  a  troop  of  native  cavalry. 

They  march  in  the  most  irregular  fashion,  and  have  no 
idea  of  regular  military  movements.  Indeed,  any  such 
knowledge  would  be  of  little  or  no  use  to  them,  for  they  very 
rarely  take  part  in  a  pitched  battle.  All  their  campaigns 
are  reduced  to  mere  skirmishes  and  constant  surprises  on 
one  side  or  the  other,  in  which  very  little  blood  is  shed.  The 
chief  operations  of  native  armies  are  confined  to  ravaging  the 
country  that  they  happen  to  be  passing  through,  without 
distinction  of  friend  or  foe,  and  pillaging  without  mercy 
all  the  defenceless  inhabitants,  who  are  put  to  inconceivable 
tortures  in  the  attempt  to  force  them  to  disgorge  imaginary 
treasure  that  they  never  possess. 

The  infantry  is,  if  possible,  in  even  a  worse  plight  ;  or  at 
any  rate  it  was  up  to  the  time  when  native  princes  were 
induced  to  admit  European  adventurers  into  their  service, 
to  reorganize  and  drill  their  armies. 


THE   POLIGARS  677 

The  ancient  kings  of  India  placed  most  reliance  on  their 
infantry.  It  formed  the  fourth  division  of  their  armies,  and 
was  numerically  larger  than  the  other  three.  It  formed,  in 
fact,  the  main  strength  of  the  combined  forces.  At  the 
present  day,  too,  it  constitutes  the  principal,  and  indeed 
almost  the  only,  force  of  the  smaller  native  princes  who  are 
known  by  the  name  of  Poligars  l.  These  Poligars  rarely 
have  any  cavalry,  the  smallness  of  their  revenues  and  the 
character  of  the  country  they  inhabit  rendering  it  almost 
impossible  to  maintain  them. 

The  Poligars  in  many  respects  resemble  the  European 
barons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  who  from  their  strongholds  ven- 
tured boldly  to  defy  the  royal  authority.  They  are  fairly 
numerous  in  the  various  districts  of  the  Peninsula,  and  they 
were  much  more  numerous  before  the  great  European  Power 
extended  its  dominion  over  the  territories  in  which  they 
were  established  and  subdued  the  greater  number  of  them. 
These  petty  despots  waged  almost  incessant  war  against  each 
other.  Safely  ensconced  in  deep  jungles  or  on  inaccessible 
mountain-tops,  they  were  able  to  defy  the  princes  whose 
territories  surrounded  them  ;  and  the  latter,  unable  to 
suppress  these  turbulent  vassals  for  fear  that  they  would 
pillage  and  devastate  their  own  states,  tried  to  live  amicably 
with  them. 

These  Poligars  or  self-styled  princes  made  war  according 
to  methods  of  their  own.  The  use  of  cannon  was  unknown 
to  them  ;  their  only  arms  being  arrows,  pikes,  and  flint- 
locks. They  never  risked  a  pitched  battle.  When  attacked 
by  a  superior  force  they  took  refuge  in  their  jungles  or  on 
their  mountains.  Their  object  would  be  to  surprise  the 
advancing  enemy  in  some  defile.  Lying  in  ambush  behind 
trees  or  thick  brushwood,  they  would  pour  well-directed 
volleys  upon  their  opponents,  forcing  them  to  retire  in 
disorder  with  considerable  loss.  It  was  in  the  midst  of 
their  jungles  or  on  the  tops  of  their  mountains  that  the 
English,  after  much  labour  and  the  loss  of  many  men, 
managed  to  lay  hands  upon  these  brigand  chiefs  and  their 
lawless  followers.  Only  by  these  means  were  the  newcomers 
able  to  restore  peace  and  tranquillity  in  provinces  which 
had  previously  been  the  scene  of  perpetual  outrages. 
1  These  inhabit  the  southern  districts  of  the  Peninsula. — Ed. 


678  THE   CAMP   COMMISSARIAT 

The  art  of  laying  out  camps  is  as  little  known  to  Indian 
generals  as  that  of  marching  an  army.  The  greatest  con- 
fusion always  reigns  both  in  their  encampments  and  on  the 
march.  When  an  army  makes  a  halt,  the  most  important 
point,  of  course,  is  to  see  that  there  is  a  good  supply  of  water 
close  at  hand.  This  is  not  always  to  be  found  where  it  is 
wanted,  especially  at  certain  times  of  the  year,  and  whole 
armies  have  been  reduced  to  the  direst  straits  by  being 
temporarily  deprived  of  this  indispensable  element,  the  want 
of  which  is  much  more  keenly  felt  in  a  tropical  climate  than 
elsewhere. 

An  officer  usually  goes  on  ahead,  selects  a  suitable  site  for 
the  camp,  and  there  sets  up  a  large  flag,  which  is  visible  from 
a  long  distance.  Each  division  then  encamps  in  any  sort  of 
order  beyond  this  landmark.  Each  chief  pitches  his  tent  in 
the  midst  of  his  own  followers,  and  hoists  his  distinctive 
banner.  Confusion  and  disorder  prevail  everywhere. 
Things  are,  however,  a  little  more  orderly  around  the  com- 
mander-in-chief's tent.  Fairly  good  discipline  is  also  main- 
tained in  the  spot  set  apart  as  a  market-place.  Here  pro- 
visions and  commodities  of  various  kinds,  pillaged  from  the 
country  through  which  the  army  has  passed,  are  exposed  for 
sale  ;  for  the  progress  of  an  Indian  army  is  always  attended 
by  fire,  sword,  and  robbery.  In  fact,  it  is  considered  un- 
necessary and  troublesome  to  establish  regular  depots  for 
provisions,  or  in  fact  to  make  commissariat  arrangements  of 
any  kind.  It  was  only  when  an  army  was  obliged  to  pass 
through  a  country  which  had  already  been  devastated  that 
these  precautions  were  considered  necessary.  Strings  of 
bullocks  were  then  employed  with  the  army  to  carry  its 
provisions.  At  all  other  times  the  chiefs  relied  for  their 
commissariat  on  a  crowd  of  purveyors  attracted  by  the  hope 
of  gain,  and  especially  on  the  Lambadis,  or  Sukcders,  profes- 
sional pillagers,  whom  I  have  already  described,  and  who 
kept  the  camp  market  well  supplied  by  their  continual  raids 
on  the  unfortunate  inhabitants  of  the  surrounding  country. 

The  most  abominable  debauchery  is  openly  authorized 
among  the  soldiery,  especially  in  Mahomedan  armies.  A 
special  quarter  in  the  camp  is  set  apart  for  the  vile  and 
depraved  wretches  who  give  themselves  up  to  this  hideous 
form  of  prostitution. 


CAMP   FOLLOWERS  679 

Charlatans  of  all  kinds  swarm  in  these  disorderly  camps. 
There  are  conjurers,  soothsayers,  astrologers,  tight-rope 
dancers,  acrobats,  quacks,  pickpockets,  fakirs,  religious 
mendicants,  blind  men  ;  and  furthermore,  each  soldier  is 
generally  followed  by  his  whole  family.  Thus  you  may  often 
see  an  army  of  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  thousand  soldiers 
with  three  hundred  thousand  followers  of  all  sorts  and  con- 
ditions in  its  train,  who,  profiting  by  the  confusion  which 
reigns  in  the  camp,  devote  their  whole  time  to  robbery  with 
impunity.  The  Mahratta  armies  are  less  troubled  with  these 
encumbrances,  for  they  often  make  forced  marches,  and  it 
would  be  impossible  for  the  followers  to  keep  up  with  them. 

The  generals'  tents,  especially  in  the  case  of  Mahomedans, 
are  very  large  and  commodious.  Oriental  taste  and  luxury 
are  conspicuous  in  them.  They  are  richly  adorned,  and 
provided  with  every  kind  of  comfort.  They  are  divided 
into  several  compartments,  some  of  which  are  destined  for 
the  wives  or  concubines  of  these  pleasure-loving  commanders, 
who  are  almost  invariably  accompanied  by  their  women. 
Even  in  the  midst  of  a  tumultuous  camp,  Indian  princes 
and  generals  never  neglect  anything  that  can  pander  to  their 
sensuality. 

One  may  well  believe  that  it  is  easy  to  surprise  a  camp 
composed  of  such  a  rabble.  There  are  rarely  any  outposts. 
The  spies  who  are  maintained  in  the  hostile  camp  partly 
supply  this  deficiency  ;  for,  as  soon  as  they  perceive  anything 
unusual  going  on,  they  hurry  off  to  warn  their  employers, 
who  are  thus  prepared  to  receive  the  enemy.  The  latter 
usually  retire  as  soon  as  they  perceive  that  their  opponents 
are  on  the  alert.  Moreover,  surprises  and  night  marches  are 
not  at  all  to  the  taste  of  Indian  warriors,  who  do  not  like  to 
be  deprived  of  their  sleep.  Thus  it  has  sometimes  happened 
that  a  mere  handful  of  Europeans  has  thrown  into  disorder 
and  routed  a  whole  army  by  unexpected  attacks  of  this 
nature. 

Nevertheless,  however  inferior  the  people  of  India  may  be 
in  discipline  and  courage,  they  have  one  great  advantage 
over  Europeans,  which,  had  they  only  known  how  to  make 
use  of  it,  would  certainly  have  rendered  the  struggle  between 
them  and  their  formidable  adversaries  much  less  unequal. 
I  mean  their  extreme  temperance  in  eating  and  drinking. 


680  BESIEGED  AND  BESIEGERS 

Give  an  Indian  soldier  three  or  four  pounds  of  rice  per  week 
with  a  little  salt,  and  on  that,  with  the  addition  of  a  little 
water,  he  will  keep  himself  in  good  health,  be  active,  cheer- 
ful, and  in  condition  to  undertake  forced  marches  for  several 
days  consecutively,  without  suffering  any  inconvenience. 
What  a  fund  of  latent  force  the  Indian  armies  possessed  in 
this  useful  faculty  for  the  purpose  of  harassing  and  annoying 
an  enemy  whom  they  were  afraid  to  meet  in  pitched  battles, 
but  who,  infinitely  less  abstemious,  would  soon  have  become 
disheartened  without  a  plentiful  supply  of  substantial  food  ! 

The  art  of  fortifying,  besieging,  and  defending  strong- 
holds was  equally  neglected  in  India.  The  method  generally 
followed  was  to  invest  a  town  and  trust  to  famine  to  force 
the  besieged  to  capitulate.  To  take  a  place  by  assault 
appeared  far  too  dangerous  a  proceeding  tolndian  tacticians; 
consequently  it  frequently  happened  that  a  wretched  little 
fortified  town,  surrounded  by  nothing  but  mud  wralls  and 
defended  by  a  few  hundred  peasants  armed  with  a  few  worn- 
out  matchlocks,  was  able  to  hold  out  for  months  against  the 
attacks  of  a  host  of  assailants,  who,  tired  out  at  last  by  the 
perseverance  of  their  adversaries,  were  obliged  to  ignomi- 
niously  raise  the  siege.  Even  in  recent  times,  though  they 
might  have  learnt  by  sad  experience  to  what  horrors  a  town 
taken  by  assault  is  exposed,  several  Indian  generals  have 
been  known  to  shut  themselves  up  behind  walls  of  mere  mud 
or  earth,  and  obstinately  refuse  to  listen  to  any  suggestion 
of  capitulation,  treating  the  European  besiegers  with  insolent 
bravado,  and  fearlessly  awaiting  the  chances  of  an  assault. 

It  is  true,  however,  that  the  honour  of  the  commandant  of 
any  fortress  is  at  stake  on  such  occasions.  However  advan- 
tageous the  conditions  offered  to  him  might  be,  he  would 
never  willingly  capitulate  ;  for  should  he  be  weak  enough  to 
do  so,  he  would  find  it  difficult  to  escape  the  suspicion,  on 
the  part  of  his  king  and  of  the  people,  that  he  had  acted  with 
treachery  or  cowardice,  and  consequently  his  good  name 
would  be  for  ever  tarnished. 

Nevertheless,  the  art  of  approaching  a  fortified  position 
by  mines  and  entrenchments  has  long  been  known  to  Indian 
generals.  When  such  works  have  been  carried  as  close  to 
the  main  fortress  as  possible,  the  besieged  and  the  besiegers 
delight  in  insulting  and  challenging  each  other  by  word  of 


FORTIFICATIONS  681 

mouth.  For  instance,  the  Hindus  will  say  to  the  Mahome- 
dans  :  '  If  you  do  not  now  take  the  place,  it  will  be  as  great 
a  slur  on  your  good  name  as  if  you  had  eaten  pork.'  And 
the  besiegers  will  answer  :  '  If  we  take  the  place,  it  will  be 
as  great  a  disgrace  to  you  as  if  you  had  eaten  cow's  flesh.' 
Another  proof  that  bluster  is  no  indication  of  courage. 

A  device  upon  which  Indians  place  great  reliance  under 
such  circumstances  is  enchantment.  The  magicians  of 
either  party  are  called  upon  to  exercise  all  the  resources  of 
their  black  art.  But  unfortunately  the  sorcerers  of  the 
besiegers  are  nearly  always  as  clever  as  the  sorcerers  of  the 
besieged.  One  charm  is  consequently  nullified  by  a  counter- 
charm,  and  it  comes  to  the  same  thing  in  the  end,  namely, 
which  side  is  able  to  display  the  greater  amount  of  courage 
and  skill.  Whatever  the  result  may  be,  however,  the 
magicians  always  enjoy  a  large  share  of  the  glory  of  success 
or  bear  the  greater  part  of  the  shame  of  defeat.  These  absurd 
illusions  were  still  in  vogue  when  I  left  India. 

The  fortifications  of  the  most  important  strongholds,  even 
up  to  recent  times,  consisted  of  one  or  two  very  thick  walls 
with  round  or  triangular  towers  at  the  angles,  on  which  were 
placed  a  few  guns  very  badly  served.  The  fort  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  broad  and  deep  moat,  but  as  the  natives  of 
India  did  not  understand  the  use  of  the  drawbridge,  the 
ditch  was  spanned  by  a  road  leading  to  the  main  entrance, 
which  was  hidden  by  a  curtain  wall  to  prevent  its  being 
visible  from  a  distance. 

In  several  places  in  the  Peninsula  strongholds  may  be 
seen  which  owe  little  of  their  strength  to  the  skill  of  the 
engineer,  being  situated  on  the  top  of  steep  and  almost  inac- 
cessible hills.  These  fortresses  are  called  durgams.  Alex- 
ander besieged  a  fortress  of  this  kind  on  the  banks  of  the 
Indus,  and  found  great  difficulty  in  capturing  it  *  But 
there  is  one  great  drawback  to  these  durgams.  The  air  is 
always  cold  and  damp,  even  when  extreme  heat  prevails  in 
the  plains  below,  and  this  renders  them  most  unhealthy  to 
live  in,  the  men  who  garrison  them  being  subject  to  long 
spells  of  fever  which  are  difficult  to  cure. 

The  people  of  India  have  lately  learnt  from  Europeans 
the  warlike  art  of  exterminating  the  human  species  in  a  more 
1  Sec  Quintus  Curtius,  viii.  11.— Dubois, 
z3 


682  HINDU   WEAPONS 

scientific  and  practical  manner.  They  have  introduced 
great  changes  in  their  methods  of  attack  and  defence,  and, 
in  fact,  in  the  whole  of  their  military  system.  A  sad  and 
fatal  gift,  which  they  may  perhaps  one  day  use  against  those 
who  brought  it  to  them  ! 

Before  finishing  this  subject  I  will  add  a  few  words  on  the 
different  kinds  of  weapons  that  have  been  used  in  India  at 
different  times.  I  have  already  mentioned  that  there  are 
thirty-two  different  kinds  of  old-fashioned  weapons,  each  of 
which  has  a  name  and  shape  peculiar  to  itself.  Models  of 
these  are  to  be  found  in  the  hands  of  the  principal  idols. 
Each  deity  is  provided  with  the  one  that  he  most  affected. 
As  my  readers  would  find  no  counterpart  to  them  in  a 
European  armoury,  it  would  be  difficult  to  describe  them 
without  illustrations.  All  that  I  can  say  about  them  is  that 
besides  many  instruments  for  cutting,  there  were  others  for 
hacking,  stabbing,  and  felling. 

Among  Indian  arms  of  more  modern  times  the  most 
important  defensive  ones  are  the  helmet  and  the  shield. 
The  latter  is  made  of  leather,  and  ornamented  in  the  centre 
with  large  bosses.  Most  Indian  soldiers  can  use  it  very 
skilfully.  Some  wear  a  thick-quilted  corselet  as  a  cuirass 
or  breast-plate,  which,  it  is  said,  is  impervious  both  to  sword 
and  arrow  \  But  as  this  breast-plate  affords  no  protection 
against  a  bullet  and  is  undeniably  most  uncomfortable  to 
wear  in  a  hot  climate,  its  use  has  been  almost  entirely  aban- 
doned. Among  the  offensive  weapons  of  India  are  bows 
and  arrows.  The  bow  measures  only  about  two  feet  and 
a  half  when  strung,  and  each  arrow  is  nearly  two  feet  long. 
These  are  but  poor  specimens  of  the  weapons  which  history 
credits  the  Hindu  gods  with  using.  The  bow  used  by  Rama, 
for  instance,  was  so  enormous  that  the  fifty  thousand  men 
who  were  employed  to  bring  it  to  him  succumbed  beneath 
the  burden.  Vishnu's  favourite  weapon  was  the  chakram, 
and  many  of  his  devotees  have  it  branded  on  their  shoulders 
with  a  red-hot  iron.  It  is  still  used  in  some  parts,  and  con- 
sists of  a  metal  disk  about  nine  or  ten  inches  in  diameter,  with 
well-sharpened  edges.     There  is  a  hole  in  the  centre,  and 

1  The  Creeks,  and  Romans,  and  many  other  nations  of  old  used  this 
sort  of  cuirass,  but  they  also  wore  metal  ones  of  different  shapes. — 
Dubois. 


GRENADES,  GUNS,  AND  CANNON    683 

through  this  is  passed  a  stick  by  means  of  which  a  rapid 
rotatory  motion  is  given  to  the  disk,  which  flies  off  and 
inflicts  a  severe  cut  on  any  one  that  it  strikes. 

Large  grenades  or  squibs  are  also  frequently  used,  eight 
or  ten  inches  long,  and  armed  at  one  end  with  a  keen- edged 
crescent -shaped  blade.  These  are  fired  off  horizontally,  and 
are  used  to  produce  confusion  amongst  bodies  of  cavalry. 
They  are  less  effective  than  our  hand  grenades,  but  carry 
very  much  further.  According  to  Hindu  authors,  these 
grenades,  called  vanams,  were  used  in  very  early  times. 
The  Bamayana  speaks  of  Rama's  vanam  as  one  of  his  most 
important  weapons.  It  is  therefore  to  be  inferred  that  gun- 
powder was  known  in  India  in  very  early  times.  It  is  quite 
certain  that  the  Hindus  possessed  the  secret  of  compounding 
explosive  substances  long  before  the  invasions  of  Tartars  or 
Europeans.  Still  they  can  hardly  have  been  aware  of  the 
terrible  effect  which  these  inflammable  materials  can  pro- 
duce when  enclosed  in  a  metal  tube  :  it  was  reserved  for 
those  who  conquered  this  peaceable  nation  to  teach  them 
the  power  of  this  agent  of  destruction. 

The  Hindus  still  use  the  pike,  the  dagger,  and  the  sword. 
The  last  is  at  present  their  favourite  weapon,  and  they  have 
fencing-masters  who  can  teach  them  to  use  it  with  great 
skill. 

The  gun  is  also  much  used  by  them,  although  in  their 
hands  it  is  not  a  very  deadly  weapon.  Until  quite  recently 
they  only  used  matchlocks,  and  their  gunpowder  was  ex- 
tremely bad,  as  indeed  it  is  even  at  the  present  time. 
Amongst  Hindu  soldiers  musketry  practice  is  unknown.,  as 
their  princes  consider  that  it  is  a  useless  expense  to  employ 
powder  for  this  purpose. 

Europeans  have  recently  introduced  bronze  and  cast-iron 
cannon.  In  former  times  Indian  cannon  were  made  of  iron, 
and  were  of  enormous  calibre.  From  these  wretched  guns 
they  fired  stone  balls  more  than  a  foot  in  diameter.  They 
took  no  trouble  whatever  to  learn  how  to  aim.  I  have  read 
in  a  manuscript  written  nearly  eighty  years  ago  that  the 
Rajah  of  Tanjore,  having  declared  war  against  the  Dutch, 
sent  an  army  to  besiege  their  fortress  at  Negapatam.  When 
it  drew  near,  the  Dutch  tired  an  ill-directed  salvo  from  the 
top  of  the  ramparts.     The  Rajah's  troops,  observing  that 


684  A   RUDK   AWAKENING 

the  balls  passed  well  over  their  heads,  thought  that  they 
had  nothing  more  to  fear  from  the  enemy's  artillery,  and 
labouring  under  this  delusion,  they  boldly  approached  the 
glacis.  Just  at  that  moment  the  garrison  fired  a  few  well- 
aimed  volleys  of  grape-shot  which  annihilated  the  rash 
assailants,  who  learnt  to  their  cost  that  a  cannon  can  be 
aimed  both  above  and  below  its  true  level.  The  author 
adds  that  the  palanquin  of  a  Brahmin  who  held  a  high  com- 
mand in  the  Rajah's  army,  and  who  had  approached  a  little 
too  close  to  the  fortress,  was  struck  by  a  cannon  ball  and 
shattered  to  pieces.  The  Brahmin  got  off  scot-free  with 
only  a  fright  ;  but  his  alarm  was  so  great  that  he  ran  off  as 
fast  as  he  could,  and,  when  he  found  himself  in  a  place  of 
safety,  swore  by  his  three  hundred  and  thirty  million  gods 
that  never  again  would  he  venture  within  ten  miles  of  any 
place  inhabited  by  those  dogs  of  Feringhis. 


APPENDIX   I 

The  Jains. — Differences  between  them  and  the  Brahmins  \ 

The  word  Jain,  or  Jaina,  is  a  compound  word  denoting 
a  person  who  has  given  up  living  or  thinking  like  other  men*. 
A  true  Jain  should  entirely  renounce  all  thoughts  of  self. 
He  should  rise  superior  to  the  scorn  or  opposition  to  which 

1  Jainism  is  a  heretical  offshoot  of  Buddhism,  and  presents  resembl- 
ances to  both  Bralmiinism  and  Buddhism,  which  have  been  summarized 
as  follows  in  Elphinstone's  History  of  India  :  '  They  agree  with  the 
Buddhas  in  denying  the  existence,  or  at  least  the  activity  and  providence, 
of  God  ;  in  believing  in  the  eternity  of  matter  ;  in  the  worship  of  deified 
saints  ;  in  their  scrupulous  care  of  animal  life  and  all  the  precautions 
which  it  leads  to  ;  in  disclaiming  the  divine  authority  of  the  Vedas  ;  and 
in  having  no  sacrifices  and  no  respect  for  fire.  They  agree  with  the 
Buddhists  also  in  considering  a  state  of  impassive  abstraction  as  supreme 
felicity,  and  in  all  the  doctrines  which  they  hold  in  common  with  the 
Hindus.  They  agree  with  the  Hindus  in  other  points,  such  as  division 
of  caste.  This  exists  in  full  force  in  the  south  and  west  of  India,  and  can 
only  be  said  to  be  dormant  in  the  north-east,  for,  though  the  Jains  there 
do  not  acknowledge  the  four  classes  of  the  Hindus,  yet  a  Jain  converted 
to  the  Hindu  religion  takes  his  place  in  one  of  the  castes  from  which 
he  must  all  along  have  retained  the  proofs  of  his  descent,  and  the  Jains 
themselves  have  numerous  divisions  of  their  own,  the  members  of  which 
are  as  strict  in  avoiding  intermarriages  and  other  intercourse  as  the  four 
classes  of  the  Hindus.  Though  they  reject  the  scriptural  character  of 
the  Vedas,  they  allow  them  great  authority  in  all  matters  not  at  variance 
with  their  religion.  The  principal  objections  to  them  are  drawn  from 
the  bloody  sacrifices  which  they  enjoin,  and  the  loss  of  animal  life  which 
burnt-offerings  are  liable  (though  undesignedly)  to  occasion.  They 
admit  the  whole  of  the  Hindu  gods,  and  worship  some  of  them,  though 
they  consider  them  as  entirely  subordinate  to  their  own  saints,  who  are, 
therefore,  the  proper  objects  of  adoration.' 

The  following  is  from  Mr.  J.  A.  Baines's  Census  Report  for  1891  :  — 
'  A  second  offshoot  from  the  earlier  Brahminism  is  found  in  the  Jain, 
a  form  of  belief  that  still  subsists  and  flourishes  in  India  to  this  day.  Its 
origin  is  veiled  from  us,  but  it  bears  a  strong  family  likeness  to  the  earlier 
form  of  Buddhism,  and  it  is  a  question  amongst  scholars  whether  it  rose 
about  the  same  time  or  a  little  earlier.  At  all  events  it  seems  to  have 
been  unpopular  with  the  Buddhists,  and  to  have  diverged  less  from 


*  This  is  not  the  true  etymology.  Jina  is  '  one  who  has  overcome 
human  infirmities  and  passions ' ;  and  Jaina.  appertaining  to  Jina.— 
Pope. 


686        PRIMITIVE   RELIGION  CORRUPTED 

lie  may  be  subjected  on  account  of  his  religion,  the  principles 
of  which  he  must  preserve  and  guard  unaltered  even  to  death, 
being  fully  persuaded  that  it  is  the  one  and  only  true  religion 
on  earth,  that  is,  the  true  primitive  religion  which  was  given 
to  all  mankind. 

In  the  course  of  time,  the  Jains  say,  the  primitive  religion 
gradually  became  considerably  corrupted  in  several  essential 
points,  and  wras  superseded  by  the  superstitious  and  detes- 
table sophistries  of  Brahminism.  The  ancient  dogmas  were 
forgotten  or  put  aside  by  the  Brahmins,  who  invented  an 
entirely  new  system  of  religion,  in  which  only  a  shadowy 
resemblance  can  be  traced  to  the  old  Hindu  faith. 

It  is  the  Brahmins  who  invented  the  four  Vedas  and  the 
eighteen  Puranas,  the  Trimurti,  and  the  monstrous  fables 
connected  with  it,  such  as  the  Avatars  of  Vishnu,  the  abomin- 
able lingam,  the  worship  of  the  cow  and  other  animals,  the 
sacrifice  of  the  yagnam,  &c.  &c.  The  Jains  not  only  reject 
all  these  spurious  additions,  but  look  upon  them  with  abso- 
lute horror. 

The  Brahmins  introduced  all  these  sacrilegious  innova- 

Brahmanic  orthodoxy.  The  monastic  system  was  not  countenanced, 
but  ritual  was  simplified  and  women  were  allowed  to  share  in  it.  As  in 
Buddhism,  however,  the  larger  section  of  the  Jains  decline  to  allow  that 
women  can  attain  Nirvana,  The  latter,  however,  is  with  them  perpetual 
bliss,  instead  of  complete  annihilation.  Caste  amongst  the  Jains  is 
maintained,  and  though  they  have  no  special  reservation  of  the  priest- 
hood to  a  class,  there  is  a  general  tendency  in  that  direction,  and  in  some 
cases  Brahmins  even  are  employed.  In  later  years  the  Jains  seem  to 
have  competed  with  the  Brahmins  in  literature  and  science,  so  that  they 
fell  into  disfavour,  and  would  very  probably  have  succumbed  but  for 
the  advent  of  the  Mussulman  power.  In  the  north  and  west  of  India 
they  are  still  a  cultivated  class,  most  engaged  in  commerce,  whilst  in 
the  south,  where  they  share  with  the  Buddhists,  who  preceded  them, 
the  credit  of  forming  the  Canarese  and  Tamil  literature,  they  are  as 
a  rule  agriculturists.  Except  in  a  few  of  the  larger  cities  of  the  north 
there  seems  to  be  little  sectarian  hostility  between  them  and  the  ortho- 
dox ;  and  in  the  west,  where  they  are  still  closer  in  customs  and  observ- 
ances, the  line  of  division  is  scarcely  traceable.  In  parts  of  both  tracts 
there  is,  in  the  present  day,  a  tendency  for  Jainism  to  regard  itself  as 
a  sect  of  Brahminism,  in  spite  of  the  non-recognition  of  the  divine 
authority  of  the  Veda.  It  is  probable  that  in  compliance  with  this 
tendency  many  have  returned  their  religion  as  Hindu  of  the  Jain  sect, 
so  that  where  sect  is  not  separately  compiled,  as  in  the  imperial  series  of 
returns,  the  total  of  the  Jain  religion  is  reduced  by  that  number.  As  it 
is,  the  number  of  Jains  is  given  as  about  1,417,000/ 


SPLIT   BETWEEN    BRAHMINS    AND   JAINS    687 

tions  very  gradually.  The  Jains  were  formerly  in  close 
communion  with  the  Brahmins  both  in  faith  and  doctrine, 
but  they  opposed  these  changes  from  the  very  first  with 
all  their  power.  Then,  seeing  that  their  remonstrances 
produced  no  effect  and  that  these  religious  innovations  were 
daily  making  progress  among  the  people,  they  found  them- 
selves reduced  at  last  to  the  sad  necessity  of  an  open  rupture 
with  the  Brahmins.  The  immediate  cause  of  this  rupture 
was  the  introduction  of  the  yagnam  sacrifice,  at  which  some 
living  creature  must  be  immolated  1.  This,  they  contend, 
is  directly  opposed  to  the  most  sacred  and  inviolable  princi- 
ples of  the  Hindu  religion,  which  forbids  the  destruction  of 
any  living  thing,  for  any  reason  or  on  any  pretext  whatever. 

From  that  moment  things  came  rapidly  to  a  climax  ;  and 
it  was  then  that  the  defenders  of  the  pure  primitive  religion 
took  the  name  of  Jains,  and  formed  themselves  into  a 
distinct  sect,  composed  of  Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  Vaisyas. 
and  Sudras.  They  were  the  descendants  of  the  Hindus  of 
all  castes  who  originally  banded  themselves  together  to 
oppose  the  innovations  of  the  Brahmins,  and  they  alone 
have  preserved  the  religion  of  their  forefathers  intact  to  the 
present  day. 

After  the  schism  the  Jains,  or  true  believers,  perpetually 
taunted  the  Brahmins  with  their  debased  religion,  and  what 
at  first  merely  furnished  subject-matter  for  scholastic  dis- 
putes finally  became  the  cause  of  long  and  bloody  hostilities. 
For  a  long  time  success  was  on  the  side  of  the  Jains,  but  in 
the  end,  the  majority  of  the  Kshatriyas  and  other  castes 
having  seceded  and  adopted  the  innovations  of  the  Brahmins, 
the  latter  gained  the  ascendant  and  reduced  their  adver- 
saries to  the  lowest  depths  of  subjection.  They  overthrew 
all  the  temples  of  the  Jains,  destroyed  the  objects  of  their 
cult,  deprived  them  of  all  freedom,  both  religious  and  civil, 
and  banished  them  from  public  employment  and  all  positions 
of  trust  ;  in  fact,  they  persecuted  them  to  such  an  extent 
that  they  succeeded  in  removing  nearly  all  traces  of  these 
formidable  antagonists  in  several  provinces  where  formerly 
they  had  been  most  flourishing. 

When  these  persecutions  and  wars  began  is  a  question 
that  I  am  unable  to  answer  with  any  degree  of  accuracy  ; 
1  It  is  generally  a  ram. — Dubois. 


r>88  VARIOUS   JAIN   SECTS 

bul  it  appears  that  they  lasted  a  long  time  and  only  came  to 
an  end  in  comparatively  recent  times.  Not  more  than  four 
or  five  centuries  ago  the  Jains  exercised  sovereign  power  in 
several  provinces  of  the  Peninsula.  Nowadays  the  Brah- 
mins are  the  masters  everywhere ;  the  Jains,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  absolutely  powerless,  and  it  would  be  impossible 
to  find  one  occupying  a  position  of  any  importance.  They 
have  become  merged  in  the  lower  middle  classes.  They 
devote  themselves  to  agriculture,  and  even  more  to  trade, 
which  is  the  special  profession  of  the  Vaisyas,  among  which 
caste  the  greater  number  of  these  sectarians  are  now  to  be 
found.  Their  principal  trade  is  in  kitchen  and  household 
utensils  of  copper  and  other  metals. 

There  are  very  few  of  the  Brahmin  caste  who  hold  the 
opinions  of  the  Jains.  There  is  a  village,  however,  called 
Maleyur,  in  South  Mysore,  which  contains  between  fifty  and 
sixty  families  of  them.  They  have  a  famous  temple  there, 
of  which  the  guru  is  a  Brahmin  Jain.  In  the  other  more 
important  temples  of  the  Jains,  such  as  those  at  Belgola, 
Madighery,  and  others,  the  gurus  or  priests  are  recruited 
from  the  Vaisyas,  or  merchants.  The  Vaisya  Jains  are 
regarded  by  the  Brahmins  of  the  same  sect  as  patitas,  or 
heretics,  because  they  have  thus  usurped  the  priestly  office, 
and  also  because  they  have  altered  the  religion  of  the  true 
Jains  by  introducing  some  of  the  innovations  of  their  Brah- 
min adversaries 1.  This  divergence  of  opinion,  however,  has 
not  led  to  any  serious  differences  between  them. 

The  Jains  are  divided  into  several  sects  or  schools,  which 
differ  on  the  subject  of  perfect  happiness,  and  on  the  means 
of  attaining  it.  One  of  these  sects,  known  by  the  name  of 
Kashtachenda  Swetambara  2,  teaches  that  there  is  no  other 
moksha,  that  is  to  say,  no  other  supreme  blessedness,  than 
that  which  is  to  be  obtained  from  sensual  pleasures,  par- 
ticularly that  which  is  derived  from  sexual  intercourse  with 
women.     This  sect  is,  it  is  true,  not  numerous. 

The  school  of  the  Jaina-bassaru  is  the  most  numerous,  and 
it  is  subdivided  into  several  others.  Its  tenets  differ  very 
little  from  those  of  the  Vedanta  school  of  Brahminism.  It 
recognizes  the  different  stages  of  meditation  as  taught  by 

1  Patitas  literally  means  '  the  fallen.' — Ed. 

-  Swetambara  literally  means  '  clad  in  white.' — En. 


THE   SUPREME    BEING  689 

the  latter,  and  enjoins  very  much  the  same  means  of  attain- 
ing everlasting  felicity,  by  which  they  understand  reunion 
with  the  Godhead. 

The  Religious  System  of  the  Jains. 

The  Jains  acknowledge  one  Supreme  Being,  to  whom 
they  give  the  names  of  Jaineswara,  Paramatma,  Parapara- 
vastu,  and  several  others  expressing  the  infinity  of  his 
nature. 

It  is  to  this  Supreme  Being  alone  that  all  the  prayers  and 
sacrifices  of  the  true  Jains  are  offered  ;  and  it  is  to  him 
that  all  the  marks  of  respect  which  they  pay  to  their  holy 
personages,  known  as  Saloka-purushas,  and  to  other  sacred 
objects  represented  under  a  human  form,  are  really  ad- 
dressed ;  for  these,  on  attaining  moksha  (supreme  blessed- 
ness) after  death,  have  become  united  with  and  incorporated 
into  the  Supreme  Being. 

The  Supreme  Being  is,  they  say,  one  and  indivisible, 
a  spirit  without  corporal  parts  or  limitations.  His  four 
principal  attributes  are  : — 

1.  Ananta-gnanam,  infinite  wisdom. 

2.  Ananta-darsanam,  infinite  intuition,  omniscience,  and 
omnipresence. 

3.  Ananta-viryam,  omnipotence. 

4.  Ananta-sukham,  infinite  blessedness. 

This  noble  being  is  entirely  absorbed  in  the  contemplation 
of  his  infinite  perfections,  and  in  the  uninterrupted  enjoy- 
ment of  the  happiness  which  he  finds  in  his  own  essence. 
He  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  things  of  this  world, 
and  does  not  interfere  at  all  in  the  government  of  this  vast 
universe.  Virtue  and  vice,  good  and  evil,  are  indifferent 
to  him. 

Virtue  being  essentially  right,  those  who  practise  it  in 
this  world  will  find  their  reward  in  another  life,  either  by 
a  blessed  reincarnation,  or  by  immediate  admittance  to  the 
delights  of  Swarga.  Vice  being  essentially  bad  and  wrong, 
those  who  give  way  to  it  will  be  punished  in  another  world 
by  an  unhappy  reincarnation.  The  worst  offenders  will  go 
straight  to  Naraka  after  death,  there  to  expiate  their  crimes. 
But  in  no  case  does  God  intervene  in  the  distribution  of 


690  METEMPSYCHOSIS 

punishments  or  rewards,  or  pay  any  attention  to  the  good 
or  evil  done  by  men  here  below. 

Matter  is  eternal  and  independent  of  the  Godhead.  That 
which  exists  now  has  always  existed  and  will  always  exist. 

And  not  only  is  matter  eternal,  but  also  the  order  and 
harmony  which  reign  throughout  the  universe — the  fixed 
and  unchanging  movements  of  the  stars,  the  division  of 
light  from  darkness,  the  succession  and  constant  renewal  of 
the  seasons,  the  production  and  reproduction  of  animal  and 
vegetable  life,  the  nature  and  properties  of  the  elements  ; 
in  fact,  all  things  visible  are  eternal,  and  will  continue  to 
exist  just  as  they  have  existed  from  all  time. 

Metempsychosis  . 

The  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  Jains  is  metempsychosis. 
Their  belief  in  this  differs  in  no  way  from  that  of  the  Brah- 
mins. But  they  do  not  agree  with  the  latter  with  regard  to 
the  four  lokas  or  worlds.  These  they  refuse  to  recognize. 
They  also  reject  the  three  principal  Abodes  of  Bliss — Sattya- 
loka,  Vaikuntha,  and  Kailasa,  that  is  to  say,  the  paradises 
of  Brahma,  of  Vishnu,  and  of  Siva.  They  recognize  three 
worlds  only,  which  they  describe  by  the  generic  name  of 
Jagat-triya,  and  which  are  the  Urddhwa-loka  or  superior 
world,  the  Adha-loka  or  inferior  world,  which  they  also  call 
Patala,  and  the  Madhya-loka  or  middle  world,  that  is  to  say, 
the  earth  where  mortals  dwell. 

Urddhwa-loka. 

This  world,  which  is  also  called  Swarga,  is  the  first  of  the 
Jagat-triya,  and  Devendra  is  lord  of  it.  There  are  sixteen 
distinct  abodes  in  it,  in  each  of  which  a  different  degree  of 
happiness  is  enjoyed  in  proportion  to  the  merits  of  the 
righteous  souls  who  are  admitted.  The  first  and  highest  of 
these  habitations  is  the  Sadhu-dharma .  Only  the  very  purest 
souls  have  access  to  this,  and  they  there  enjoy  unbroken 
happiness  for  thirty-three  thousand  years.  The  Achuda- 
karpa,  which  is  the  last  and  lowest  of  the  sixteen  habitations, 
is  destined  for  the  souls  of  those  who  possess  exactly  the 
requisite  amount  of  merit,  neither  more  nor  less,  necessary 
to  procure  their  admittance  into  the  Urddhwa-loka.     They 


ABODES   OF  SAINTS   AND  SINNERS        691 

there  enjoy  for  one  thousand  years  the  amount  of  happiness 
which  is  their  portion.  In  the  other  intermediate  habita- 
tions the  degree  and  duration  of  happiness  are  fixed  in  rela- 
tive proportion  to  the  merits  of  those  who  are  admitted. 

Women  of  the  rarest  beauty  adorn  these  Abodes  of  Bliss. 
The  blessed,  however,  have  no  intercourse  with  them.  The 
sight  alone  of  these  enchanting  beauties  is  sufficient  to 
intoxicate  their  senses  and  plunge  them  into  a  perpetual 
ecstasy  that  is  far  superior  to  all  mere  earthly  pleasures. 
In  this  respect  the  Swarga  of  the  Jains  differs  little  from  that 
of  the  Brahmins. 

On  leaving  the  Urddhwa-loka  at  the  expiration  of  the 
period  assigned  to  them,  the  souls  of  the  blessed  are  born 
again  upon  earth  and  recommence  the  process  of  trans- 
migration. 

The  Adha-Loka. 

The  second  world  of  the  Jagat-triya  is  the  Adha-Ioka,  also 
called  Naraka,  and  sometimes  Patala.  It  is  the  lower  or 
inferior  regions,  the  abode  of  great  sinners  :  that  is,  of  those 
whose  crimes  are  so  heinous  and  so  manifold  that  they  can- 
not be  expiated  by  even  the  lowest  forms  of  reincarnation. 

The  Adha-loka  is  divided  into  seven  dwelling-places, 
in  each  of  which  the  severity  of  the  punishments  is 
proportionate  to  the  gravity  of  the  offences.  The  least 
terrible  is  the  Betna-pravai,  where  erring  souls  are  tormented 
for  a  thousand  consecutive  years.  The  torture  gradually 
increases  in  intensity  and  duration  in  the  other  abodes,  until 
in  the  Maha-damai-pravai ,  the  seventh,  the  punishments 
reach  a  point  of  awfulness  which  is  beyond  all  description. 
It  is  there  that  the  most  villainous  sinners  are  sent,  and  their 
horrible  sufferings  only  terminate  at  the  end  of  thirty-three 
thousand  years.  Women,  who  from  their  constitutional 
weakness  are  not  able  to  endure  such  extremes  of  suffering, 
are  never  sent  to  this  awful  Maha-damai-pravai,  no  matter 
how  wicked  they  may  have  been. 

The  Madhya-loka. 

The  middle  world,  the  Madhya-loka,  is  the  third  of  the 
Jagat-triya.  It  is  there  that  mortals  live,  and  that  both 
virtue  and  vice  are  to  be  found. 


692  THE   MADHYA-LOKA 

This  world  is  one  reju  in  extent,  a  reju  being  equal  to  the 
distance  over  which  the  sun  travels  in  six  months.  Jambu- 
Dwipa,  which  is  the  earth  on  which  we  live,  occupies  only 
a  small  part  of  the  Madhya-loka.  It  is  surrounded  on  all 
sides  by  a  vast  ocean,  and  in  the  centre  of  it  is  an  immense 
lake  extending  for  a  hundred  thousand  yojanas,  or  about 
four  hundred  thousand  leagues.  In  the  middle  of  this  lake 
rises  the  famous  mountain  Mahameru.  Jambu-Dwipa  is 
divided  into  four  equal  parts,  which  are  placed  at  the  four 
cardinal  points  of  Mahameru.  India  is  in  the  part  called 
Bharata-Kshetra. 

These  four  divisions  of  Jambu-Dwipa  are  separated  from 
each  other  by  six  lofty  mountains,  which  are  called  Himavata, 
Maha-Himavata,  Nishada,  Nila,  Arumani,  Sikari,  all  running 
in  the  same  direction  from  east  to  west,  stretching  across 
Jambu-Dwipa  from  one  sea  to  the  other. 

These  mountains  are  intersected  by  vast  valleys,  where 
the  trees,  shrubs,  and  fruits,  which  all  grow  wild,  are  of  a 
beautiful  pink  colour.  These  delicious  retreats  are  inhabited 
by  good  and  virtuous  people.  Children  of  either  sex  living- 
there  arrive  at  maturity  forty-eight  hours  after  their  birth. 
The  inhabitants  are  not  subject  to  pain  or  sickness.  Always 
happy  and  contented,  they  live  on  the  succulent  vegetables 
and  delicious  fruits  which  nature  produces  for  them  without 
any  cultivation.  After  death  they  go  straight  to  the  delights 
of  Swarga. 

A  spring  rises  on  the  top  of  Mahameru  which  feeds  four- 
teen large  rivers,  of  which  the  principal  are  the  Ganges  and 
the  Indus.  All  these  rivers  pursue  a  regular  and  even  course, 
which  never  varies.  Unlike  the  false  Ganges  and  the  false 
Indus  of  the  Brahmins,  the  waters  of  which  rise  and  fall,  the 
Ganges  and  Indus  of  the  Jains  can  never  be  forded,  and  their 
waters  always  maintain  the  same  level. 

The  names  of  the  fourteen  rivers  of  the  Jains  are  the 
Ganges,  the  Indus,  the  Rohita-Toya,  the  Rohita,  the  Hari- 
Toya,  the  Harikanta,  the  Sitta,  the  Sitoda,  the  Nari,  the 
Xarikanta,  the  Swarna-kula,  the  Rupaya-kula.  the  Rikta, 
and  the  Riktoda. 

The  sea  which  surrounds  Jambu-Dwipa  is  two  hundred 
thousand  yojanas,  or  eight  hundred  thousand  miles  long. 

Beyond   this   ocean   there   are   three  other    continents, 


COMPUTATION   OF  TIME  693 

separated  from  each  other  by  an  immense  sea.  They 
closely  resemble  Jambu-Dwipa.  and  are  also  inhabited  by 
human  beings. 

At  the  far  end  of  the  fourth  continent,  called  Puskara- 
varta-Dwipa,  is  situated  Manushy-otraparvata,  a  very  lofty 
mountain  which  is  the  extreme  limit  of  the  habitable  world. 
No  living  being  has  ever  gone  beyond  this  mountain.  Its 
base  is  washed  by  an  immense  ocean,  in  which  are  to  be 
found  an  infinite  number  of  islands  which  are  inaccessible 
to  the  human  race. 

The  Succession  and  Division  of  Time. 

Time  is  divided  into  six  periods,  which  succeed  each  other 
without  interruption  throughout  eternity.  At  the  termina- 
tion of  each  period  there  is  an  entire  revolution  in  nature, 
and  the  world  is  renewed.  The  first,  called  Prathama-kala, 
lasted  for  four  kotis  of  kotis,  or  forty  million  millions  of  years  ; 
the  second,  Divitiya-kala,  thirty  million  millions  ;  the  third, 
Tretiya-kala,  twenty  million  millions  ;  the  fourth,  Chaturtha- 
kala,  ten  million  millions,  minus  forty-two  thousand  years. 
The  fifth  period,  called  Pa?ickama-kala,  the  period  of  incon- 
stancy and  change,  is  the  age  in  which  we  are  now  living. 
It  will  last  twenty-one  thousand  years.  The  present  year 
(1824)  of  the  Christian  era  is  the  year  2469  of  the  Panchama- 
kala  of  the  Jains. 

The  comparatively  recent  date  of  the  commencement  of 
this  period  seems  to  me  to  be  worthy  of  note.  I  am  inclined 
to  think  that  it  is  the  date  of  the  schism  between  the  Brah- 
mins and  the  Jains.  Such  a  memorable  event  may  well 
have  been  considered  as  giving  birth  to  a  new  era.  If  this 
conjecture  were  confirmed  it  would  be  easier  to  fix  the  time 
when  the  principal  myths  of  Hindu  theology  originated. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  new  ideas  introduced  by  the 
Brahmins  into  their  religion  occasioned  the  schism  which 
exists  to  this  day. 

The  sixth  and  last  of  these  periods,  the  Sashta-kala,  will 
also  last  twenty-one  thousand  years.  The  element  of  fire 
will  then  disappear  from  off  the  earth,  and  mankind  will 
subsist  entirely  on  reptiles,  roots,  and  tasteless  herbage,  which 
will  only  grow  sparsely  here  and  there.  There  will  then  be 
no  caste  distinction  or  subordination,  no  public  or  private 


694  THE   JAIN   PHILOSOPHY 

property,  no  form  of  government,  no  kings,  no  laws  ;    men 
will  lead  the  lives  of  perfect  savages. 

This  period  will  terminate  with  a  jala-pralaya,  or  flood, 
which  will  deluge  the  whole  earth,  except  the  mountain  of 
silver,  called  Vidi-parta.  This  flood  will  be  caused  by  con- 
tinuous rain  for  forty-seven  days,  which  will  result  in  a  com- 
plete upsetting  of  the  elements.  A  few  people  living  near 
the  silver  mountain  will  take  refuge  in  the  caves  which  are 
hidden  in  its  sides,  and  they  will  be  saved  amidst  the 
universal  destruction.  After  the  catastrophe  the  elect  will 
come  forth  from  the  mountain  and  will  repeople  the  earth. 
Then  the  six  periods  will  begin  over  again,  and  follow  each 
other  as  they  did  before. 

The  Learning  of  the  Jains. 

The  philosophy  of  the  Jains  is  contained  in  four  Vedas  \ 
twenty-four  Puranas,  and  sixty-four  Sastras.  The  Puranas 
take  the  names  of  the  twenty-four  Tirthankaras  2,  or  saints. 
APurana  is  assigned  to  each  of  them,  and  contains  his  history. 

The  names  of  the  four  Vedas  are  Prathamam-yoga , 
Charanam-yoga,  Karanani-yoga,  and  Draviani-yoga.  These 
four  books  were  written  by  Adiswara,  the  most  ancient  and 
most  celebrated  of  all  the  holy  personages  recognized  by 
the  Jains.  He  came  down  from  Swarga,  took  a  human  form, 
and  lived  on  earth  for  a  purva-koti,  or  a  hundred  million 
million  years.  Not  only  did  he  compose  the  Vedas,  but  it 
was  he  who  divided  men  into  castes,  gave  them  laws  and 
a  form  of  government,  and  laid  down  the  lines  of  social  order. 
In  short,  Adiswara  is  to  the  Jains  what  Brahma  is  to  the 
Brahmins  ;  one  of  them  having  most  probably  been  model- 
led from  the  other. 

The  Sixty-three  Saloka-purushas. 

Besides  Adiswara,  who  is  the  holiest  and  most  perfect  of 

all  beings  who  have  appeared  on  the  earth  in  human  form, 

the  Jains  recognize  sixty-three  others,  whom  they  describe 

by  the  generic  name  of  Saloka-purushas,  and  whom  they 

1  These  are  not  called  Vedas,  but  Agamas. — Ed. 
-  Tirthankaras  means  those  who  have  '  passed  over  '  the  gulf  which 
separates  human  being)?  from  the  Godheftd, — Ed. 


VARIOUS   HOLY  PATRIARCHS  695 

also  worship.     Their  history  is  contained  in  the  Prathaman  i- 
yoga. 

These  venerable  personages  are  subdivided  into  rive 
classes :  twenty-four  Tirthankaras,  twelve  Chakravartis,  nine 
Vasu-devatas,  nine  Bala-vasu-devatas,  and  nine  Bala-ramas. 

The  twenty-four  Tirthankaras  are  the  holiest,  and  to 
them  most  honour  is  paid.  Their  position  is  the  most 
sublime  that  a  mortal  can  aspire  to.  They  all  lived  in  the 
most  perfect  state  of  Nirvana.  They  were  subject  to  no 
infirmity  or  sickness  ;  they  felt  no  want,  no  weakness,  and 
were  not  even  subject  to  death.  After  having  lived  for  a 
long  time  on  earth  they  voluntarily  quitted  their  bodies  and 
went  straight  to  moksha,  where  they  were  united  with,  and 
incorporated  into,  the  Godhead. 

All  the  Tirthankaras  came  down  from  Swarga  and  took 
human  forms  among  the  Kshatriya  caste  ;  but  they  were 
subsequently  incorporated  into  that  of  the  Brahmins  by  the 
ceremony  of  the  diksha  1.  During  their  lives  they  were 
examples  of  all  the  virtues  to  other  men,  whom  they  ex- 
horted by  their  precepts  and  their  actions  to  conform  strictly 
to  the  rules  of  conduct  laid  down  by  Adiswara,  and  to  give 
themselves  up  entirely  to  meditation  and  penitence. 

Some  of  them  lived  for  millions  of  years  ;  the  last  of  them, 
however,  only  attained  the  age  of  eighty-four. 

They  were  in  existence  during  the  period  of  Chaturtha- 
kala.  Some  were  married,  but  the  greater  number  remained 
celibate,  being  professed  sannyasis. 

The  twelve  Chakravartis,  or  emperors,  recognized  by  the 
Jains  were  contemporaries  of  the  twenty-four  Tirthankaras. 
They  shared  amongst  them  the  temporal  government  of 
Jambu-Dwipa.  They  came  straight  from  Swarga.  and  when 
on  earth  belonged  to  the  noble  caste  of  Kshatriyas.  Some 
were  initiated  into  the  Brahmin  caste  by  the  ceremony  of 
the  diksha,  completed  their  lives  as  Sannyasi  Nirvanis,  and 
after  death  obtained  moksha,  or  supreme  happiness.  Others 
returned  to  Swarga.  But  three  of  them,  having  lived  ex- 
tremely wicked  lives  on  earth,  were  condemned  to  the  tor- 
tures of  Naraka. 

The  twelve  Chakravartis  were  often  at  war  with  one 
another,  but  they  had  more  especially  to  tight  against  the 
1  This  word  literally  translated  means  '  initiation.' — Dubois. 


696  NIRVANI,    OK    BLESSEDNESS 

nine  Vasu-devalas,  the  nine  Bala-vasu-devatas,  and  the  nine 
Bala-ramas,  who  all  governed  different  provinces  in  India  \ 

The  second  Veda,  or  Charanani-yoga,  contains  the  civil 
laws,  also  regulations  relating  to  social  status,  caste,  &c. 

The  third  Veda,  or  Karanani-yoga,  is  a  dissertation  on 
the  nature,  order,  and  component  parts  of  the  Jagat-triya. 

The  fourth,  or  Draviani-yoga,  contains  the  metaphysical 
theories  of  the  Jains  and  several  controversial  subjects. 

The  State  of  Sannyasi  Nirvani. 

The  most  holy  and  sublime  state  to  which  man  can  possibly 
attain  is  that  of  Sannyasi  Nirvani,  which  means  'naked 
penitent.'  In  embracing  this  state  a  man  ceases  to  be  a 
man  ;  he  begins  to  be  a  part  of  the  Godhead.  As  soon  as 
he  has  attained  the  highest  degree  of  perfection  in  this 
state,  he  frees  himself  voluntarily,  without  any  trouble  or 
pain,  from  his  own  self,  and  obtains  moksha,  thus  becoming 
incorporated  for  ever  into  the  Divine  Self.  There  is  no  real 
Nirvani  existing  in  this  yuga .  Those  who  aspire  to  this  state 
mast  pass  through  twelve  successive  degrees  of  meditation 
and  corporal  penance,  each  one  more  perfect  than  the  last. 
These  degrees  are  a  kind  of  novitiate,  and  each  of  them  has 
a  special  appellation.  Having  at  last  become  a  Nirvani,  the 
penitent  no  longer  belongs  to  this  world.  Terrestrial  objects 
make  no  impression  on  his  senses.  He  regards  the  good 
and  evil,  virtue  and  vice,  to  be  found  on  this  earth  with 
equal  indifference.  He  is  freed  from  all  passion.  He  scarcely 
feels  the  wants  of  nature.  He  is  able  to  patiently  endure 
hunger,  thirst,  and  privations  of  all  kinds.  He  can  live 
without  food  of  any  sort  for  weeks  and  months  together. 
When  he  is  obliged  to  eat  he  partakes  indifferently  of  the 
first  animal  or  vegetable  substance  that  comes  to  hand, 
however  filthy  or  disgusting  it  may  seem  to  ordinary  people. 
He  has  neither  fire  nor  sleeping  place.     He  always  lives  in 

1  Rama  of  the  Brahmins  is  one  of  the  nine  Bala-ramas  of  the  Jains, 
and  their  Krishna  is  one  of  the  Yasu-devatas.  The  Jains  say  that  the 
Brahmins  borrowed  these  two  names  to  make  up  the  Avatars  of  their 
god  Vishnu.  They  assert  generally  that  the  Brahmins  have  stolen  from 
them  all  the  knowledge  concerning  which  they  so  particularly  pride 
t  hcmscl  v  es.  — D  u  bois. 


DIRECTIONS    FOR  CONDUCT  697 

the  open  on  the  bare  ground.  Though  absolutely  naked 
from  head  to  foot,  he  is  insensible  to  cold  and  heat,  wind  and 
rain.  Neither  is  he  subject  to  sickness  or  any  bodily  infir- 
mities. He  feels  the  most  profound  contempt  for  all  other 
men,  no  matter  how  exalted  their  rank  may  be.  and  he  takes 
no  account  of  their  doings,  good  or  bad.  He  speaks  to  no 
one,  looks  at  no  one,  and  is  visited  by  no  one.  His  feelings, 
his  affections,  and  his  thoughts  are  immutably  fixed  on  the 
Godhead,  of  whom  he  considers  himself  as  already  a  part. 
He  remains  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  God's  perfec- 
tions, all  earthly  objects  being  to  him  as  though  they  did  not 
exist. 

By  a  long  course  of  penance  and  meditation  the  material 
part  of  the  Nirvani  gradually  dissolves,  like  camphor  when 
it  is  put  in  the  fire.  At  last  all  that  remains  of  the  penitent 
is  the  semblance  or  shadow  of  a  body,  an  immaterial  phan- 
tom, so  to  say.  Having  arrived  at  this  pitch  of  perfection, 
the  Nirvani  quits  this  lower  world  and  proceeds  to  unite 
himself  inseparably  with  the  Godhead,  where  he  enjoys 
eternal  and  ineffable  happiness. 

Jain  Rules  of  Conduct. 

In  many  respects  Jain  rules  of  conduct  are  similar  to 
those  followed  by  other  Hindus,  and  particularly  the 
Brahmins.  The  Jains  recognize  the  same  observances  with 
regard  to  defilement  and  purity.  They  perform  the  same 
ablutions  and  recite  the  same  prescribed  mantrams.  Most 
of  their  ceremonies  relating  to  marriage,  funerals,  &c,  are 
the  same.  In  fact,  all  the  rules  of  social  etiquette  and  the 
general  customs  in  use  in  ordinary  life  form  part  of  their 
education. 

The  Jains  differ  from  their  comj3atriots  in  several  par- 
ticulars, of  which  the  following  are  the  most  remarkable  : — 

Under  no  circumstances  do  they  take  any  solid  food 
between  sunset  and  sunrise.  They  always  take  their  meals 
while  the  sun  is  above  the  horizon. 

They  have  no  litis  or  anniversaries  in  honour  of  the  dead. 
As  soon  as  one  of  them  is  dead  and  his  funeral  is  over,  they 
put  him  out  of  their  memories  and  speak  of  him  no  more. 

They  never  put  ashes  on  their  foreheads,  as  do  most  Hindus; 


698  REGARD    FOR    ANIMAL   LIFE 

they  are  satisfied  with"~making  with  sandal  wood-paste  the 
little  round  mark  called  bottu,  or  else  a  horizontal  line. 
Some  devotees  put  these  marks  on  their  forehead,  neck, 
stomach,  and  both  shoulders  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  in 
honour  of  their  five  principal  Tirthav karri*. 

The  Jains  are  even  stricter  than  the  Brahmins  in  regard 
to  their  food.  Not  only  do  they  abstain  from  all  animal 
food,  and  from  vegetables  the  stalks  or  roots  of  which  grow 
in  a  bulbous  shape,  such  as  onions,  mushrooms,  &c,  but 
they  also  refrain  from  eating  manjr  of  the  fruits  which  the 
Brahmins  allow  on  their  tables,  such  as  the  katri-kai.  or 
brinjal,  called  beringela  in  Portuguese,  the  pudalcm-kai,  &c. 
Their  motive  is  the  fear  of  taking  the  life  of  some  of  the 
insects  which  are  generally  to  be  found  in  these  vegetables 
and  fruits.  The  principal,  and  indeed  almost  the  only, 
articles  of  food  used  by  the  Jains  are  rice,  milk,  things  made 
with  milk,  and  j)eas  of  various  kinds.  They  particularly 
dislike  asafoetida,  to  which  Brahmins  are  so  partial1,  and 
honey  is  absolutely  forbidden. 

Whilst  they  are  eating  their  food  some  person  sits  beside 
them  and  rings  a  bell,  or  strikes  a  gong.  The  object  of  this 
is  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  their  hearing  the  impure 
conversation  of  their  neighbours,  or  of  the  passers-by  in  the 
street.  Both  they  and  their  food  would  be  defiled  if  any 
impure  words  reached  their  ears  while  they  wrere  eating. 

Their  fear  of  destroying  life  is  carried  to  such  a  length  that 
the  women,  before  smearing  the  floor  with  cow-dung,  are 
in  the  habit  of  sweeping  it  very  gently  first,  so  as  to  remove, 
without  hurting  them,  any  insects  that  may  be  there.  If 
they  neglected  this  precaution  they  would  run  the  risk  of 
crushing  one  of  these  little  creatures  whilst  rubbing  the  floor, 
which  would  be  the  source  of  the  keenest  regret  to  them. 

Another  of  their  customs,  and  one  which,  though  for  a 
very  different  motive,  might  be  advantageously  introduced 

1  This  resinous  gum,  the  smell  of  which  appears  to  us  so  abominable 
that  we  have  called  it  stercus  diaboli,  strikes  the  smell  and  taste  of  the 
Hindus  and  almost  all  Asiatics  very  differently.  They  consider  it  to 
be  possessed  of  an  agreeable  perfume  and  an  exquisite  flavour.  The 
ancient  Greeks  and  Romans  shared  their  partiality  for  this  substance; 
for  it  seems  certain  that  the  oiKtyiov  of  the  former  and  the  laser  of  the 
latter  were  nothing  more  or  less  than  asafoetida. — Dubois. 


JAIN   TEMPLES  699 

into  Europe,  is  to  wipe  most  carefully  anything  that  is  to  be 
used  for  food,  so  as  to  exclude  as  tenderly  as  possible  any  of 
t  he  tiny  living  creatures  which  might  be  found  in  or  on  it. 

The  mouth  of  the  vessel  in  which  water  for  household 
purposes  is  drawn  is  always  covered  with  a  piece  of  linen, 
through  which  the  water  filters.  This  prevents  the  animal- 
culae,  which  float  or  swim  on  the  surface  of  the  well,  from 
getting  into  the  vessel  and  being  afterwards  swallowed. 
When  a  Jain  traveller  wishes  to  quench  his  thirst  at  a  tank 
or  stream,  he  covers  his  mouth  with  a  cloth,  stoops  down, 
and  thus  drinks  by  suction.  This  cleanly  custom  is  highly 
to  be  recommended  everywhere,  apart  from  the  superstition 
which  prompts  the  Jains  to  practise  it. 

The  Jains  form  a  perfectly  distinct  class.  Brahmins 
never  attend  any  of  their  religious  or  civil  ceremonies,  while 
they,  on  their  part,  never  attend  those  of  the  Brahmins. 
They  have  their  own  temples,  and  the  priestly  office  is  filled 
by  men  professing  the  same  tenets  as  themselves. 

Amongst  these  temples  there  are  some  which  are  richly 
endowed  and  very  famous.  The  Jains  make  pilgrimages 
to  them,  sometimes  from  great  distances.  There  is  a  very 
remarkable  one  in  Mysore,  at  Sravana  Belgola,  a  village  near 
Seringapatam.  It  is  between  three  mountains,  on  one  of 
which  is  an  enormous  statue,  about  seventy  feet  high, 
sculptured  out  of  one  solid  piece  of  rock.  It  must  have 
been  a  tremendous  piece  of  work  ;  for  to  execute  it,  it  was 
necessary  to  level  the  ground  from  the  top  of  the  mountain 
to  below  the  base  of  the  statue,  and  there  form  a  sort  of 
terrace,  leaving  in  the  centre  this  mass  of  rock  which  was 
to  be  carved  into  the  shape  of  the  idol.  It  is  a  very  fine 
piece  of  Hindu  sculpture.  Many  Europeans  who  have  seen 
it  have  greatly  admired  the  correctness  of  its  proportions. 
It  represents  a  celebrated  Nirvani  called  Gumatta,  a  son  of 
Adiswara  The  figure  is  absolutely  nude,  as  are  most  of  the 
idols  to  which  the  Jains  offer  adoration,  and  which  are 
always  likenesses  of  ancient  penitents  belonging  to  this 
sect.  In  those  days  it  would  have  shocked  them  to  repre- 
sent these  penitents  as  wearing  garments,  since  they  made 
it  a  point  of  duty  to  go  absolutely  naked.  Childless  women 
may  often  be  seen  praying  to  these  indecent  idols,  in  order 
that  the}'  may  become  mothers. 


700    A   CELEBRATED   TEMPLE   DESECRATED 

This  temple  of  Belgola,  being  only  a  day's  journey  from 
Seringapatam,  has  been  frequently  visited  by  Europeans. 
It  was  a  great  source  of  grief  to  the  devotees  of  the  sect  to 
see  this  punyasthala  (holy  place)  denied  by  a  crowd  of  un- 
believing visitors.  And  what  was  still  worse,  these  inquisi- 
tive foreigners  were  often  accompanied  by  their  dogs  and 
their  Pariah  servants.  In  one  resting-place  they  would 
cook  a  stew,  in  another  they  would  roast  a  piece  of  beef 
under  the  very  nose,  as  it  were,  of  the  idol,  whose  sense  of 
smell,  the  Jains  thought,  was  infinitely  disgusted  by  the 
smoke  of  this  abominable  style  of  cooking.  At  last  the  guru 
attached  to  the  temple,  shocked  at  all  this  desecration,  fled 
from  the  unhallowed  spot,  and  retired  to  some  solitary  place 
on  the  Malabar  coast.  After  three  years  of  this  voluntary 
exile,  he  returned  to  his  former  abode  on  the  assurance  that 
Europeans  had  ceased  to  visit  the  place,  and  that  the  temple 
had  been  thoroughly  purified.  Now,  I  ask  you  whethei  it 
is  not  the  duty  of  any  well-conducted  man,  even  if  he  does 
not  respect  them,  at  least  not  to  openly  outrage  the  preju- 
dices, feelings,  and  customs  of  any  people  amongst  whom 
he  may  happen  to  be  thrown,  no  matter  how  peculiar  or 
ridiculous  they  may  appear  to  him.  What  pleasure  could 
be  derived,  or  what  good  could  be  gained,  by  exciting  the 
anger  and  contempt  of  those  from  whom  one  has  nothing 
to  fear,  and  who  cannot  retaliate  l. 

An  invalid  European  officer,  who  was  going  to  the  Malabar 
coast  for  change  of  air,  on  passing  near  Belgola,  was  seized 
with  the  idea  of  spending  a  night  in  the  temple,  which  he  did, 
in  spite  of  much  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants. 
Two  days  afterwards  the  officer  died  on  the  road,  to  the 
great  delight  of  all  the  natives,  who,  of  course,  attributed 
his  death  to  a  miracle,  and  looked  upon  it  as  a  direct  retri- 
bution from  their  outraged  deity.  This  just  and  condign 
punishment,  said  they,  would  inspire  with  wholesome  fear 
others  who  might  be  tempted  to  try  a  similar  experiment. 

The  idols  of  the  Jains  differ  in  many  respects  from  those 
of  the  Brahmins.  Almost  all  have  curly  hair  like  Negroes. 
They  wear  neither  ear-rings,  necklaces,  bracelets,  nor 
bangles  on  their  ankles,  whilst  the  Brahmins,  on  the  other 
hand,  overload  the  objects  of  their  devotion  with  such 
ornaments. 


701 


APPENDIX  II 

The  Eka-dasi,  or  Eleventh  Day  of  the  Moon. 

The  eleventh  day  of  the  moon  is  religiously  observed,  not 
only  by  Brahmins,  but  by  all  those  castes  which  have  the 
right  to  wear  the  triple  cord.  They  keep  a  strict  fast  on 
this  day,  abstain  entirely  from  rice,  do  no  servile  work,  and 
give  themselves  up  wholly  to  devotional  exercises.  The 
following  is  what  the  Vishnu- par  ana  says  on  the  subject  : — 

The  Eka-dasi  is  a  day  specially  set  apart  for  the  worship 
of  Vishnu  ;  those  who  offer  him  puja  on  this  day  ensure  for 
themselves  immortality.  Even  before  the  creation  of  the 
world  the  '  Man  of  Sin  '  was  created  by  Vishnu  to  punish 
mankind  \  He  is  of  enormous  stature,  with  a  terrific  coun- 
tenance and  a  body  absolutely  black  ;  his  eyes  are  wild  and 
glaring  with  rage  ;  he  is  the  executioner  of  mankind  l. 
Krishna,  having  seen  this  '  Man  of  Sin,'  became  thoughtful 
and  pensive.  Touched  by  the  woes  with  which  mankind 
was  overwhelmed,  Krishna  resolved  to  remedy  the  evil. 
With  this  end  in  view  he  mounted  the  bird  Garuda,  son  of 
Binota,  and  went  in  search  of  Yama,  the  King  of  Hell.  The 
Child  of  the  Sun,  delighted  at  this  visit  of  Narayana,  who 
was  master  and  guru  of  the  world,  hastened  to  offer  him 
puja,  and  placed  him  on  a  massive  throne  of  gold.  No  sooner 
had  Krishna  seated  himself  thereon  than  he  heard  the  most 
piteous  and  plaintive  cries.  Moved  with  compassion,  he 
asked  the  King  of  Naraka  whence  these  lamentations  pro- 
ceeded, and  what  caused  them. 

'  The  lamentations  that  you  hear,  0  Lord  of  the  World,' 
replied  Yama,  '  are  the  tears  and  groans  of  the  unfortunate 
beings  who,  having  spent  their  whole  lives  in  sin,  are  now 
suffering  the  tortures  of  Hell,  where  they  are  treated 
according  to  their  deserts.' 

'  Then/  said  Krishna,  '  let  us  go  to  this  place  of  torment, 
that  I  may  see  for  myself  what  these  sinners  are  enduring.' 

And  he  did  see,  and  his  heart  was  softened. 

'  What  !  '  cried  he,  overcome  with  grief,  '  is  it  possible 
that  men,  who  are  creatures  and  children  of  mine,  are  en- 
during such  cruel  agony  !    Shall  I  be  a  witness  of  their 

1  .See  the  description  in  the  chapter  on  the  Sandhya. 


702     VISHNU'S   SCHEME    FOR    REDEMPTION 

sufferings  and  do  nothing  to  help  them  I  Cannot  I  give  them 
some  means  of  avoiding  them  in  the  future  ?  ' 

Thereupon  he  considered  how  he  might  bring  the  reign 
of  the  '  Man  of  Sin  '  to  an  end,  he  being  the  sole  cause  of  all 
mankind's  misfortune.  Accordingly,  to  preserve  henceforth 
the  human  race  from  the  torments  of  Naraka,  he  transformed 
himself  into  the  Eka-dasi,  or  eleventh  day  of  the  moon.  This 
is,  therefore,  the  blessed  day  that  Vishnu  has  selected  in 
his  mercy  to  redeem  and  save  mankind.  It  is  the  happy 
day  that  procures  the  pardon  of  one's  sins  ;  it  is  the  day  of 
days,  since  one  must  look  upon  it  as  being  Krishna  himself. 

The  inhabitants  of  Hell,  full  of  gratitude  for  the  kindness 
that  Vishnu  had  showed  towards  them,  worshipped  him 
and  chanted  his  praises  loudly.  Thereupon  Vishnu,  being 
much  pleased  by  their  prayers  and  praises,  wished  to  give 
them  an  immediate  proof  of  his  goodness.  Turning  to  the 
'  Man  of  Sin,'  he  addressed  him  in  the  following  words  : — 

'  Begone,  wretched  being,  begone  !  Thy  reign  is  over. 
Till  now  thou  hast  been  the  tormentor  of  mankind  ;  I  com- 
mand thee  to  let  them  live  in  peace  for  the  future.  They 
are  my  children,  and  I  desire  them  to  be  happy.  I  wish, 
nevertheless,  to  assign  to  thee  a  place  where  thou  mayest 
live,  but  thy  place  shall  be  unique  ;  it  shall  be  here.  The 
Eka-dasi,  or  eleventh  day  of  the  moon,  is  myself  in  another 
form.  It  is  the  day  that  I  have  chosen,  in  my  mercy,  to 
save  men  and  deliver  them  from  their  sins.  Nevertheless, 
in  order  that  they  may  be  worthy  of  so  great  a  favour,  I  ex- 
pressly forbid  them  to  eat  rice  on  this  day.  I  ordain  that 
thou  shalt  dwell  in  this  rice.  This  is  the  abode  that  I  assign 
to  thee.  Whoever  shall  have  the  temerity  to  eat  this  food, 
thus  defiled  by  thy  presence,  will  incorporate  thee  with 
himself,  and  will  forfeit  all  hope  of  pardon.' 

Thus  spake  Vishnu  ;  and  the  following  is  the  sentence  of 
life  and  death  which  he  pronounced,  and  which  cannot  be 
too  strongly  impressed  on  the  attention  of  mankind  : — 

'  I  repeat,  therefore,  again,  because  I  cannot  say  it  too 
often  :  Do  not  eat  rice  on  that  day  ;  whoever  you  are,  be 
your  position  and  condition  what  they  may,  do  not  eat  rice. 
Once  more  I  say,  do  not  eat  rice.' 

To  fast  on  this  holy  day  and  to  offer  puja  to  Vishnu  is  to 
ensure  the  forgiveness  of  sins  and  the  gratification  of  all  one's 


THE   EKA-DASI  CEREMONY  703 

wishes.  Moreover  these  farther  observances  must  be  fol- 
lowed. On  the  tenth  day  the  sandhya  must  be  performed, 
and  only  one  meal  must  be  eaten,  and  that  without  salt  or 
any  kind  of  peas  or  vegetables.  It  must  only  be  seasoned 
with  a  small  quantity  of  melted  butter,  and  it  must  be  eaten 
quickly.  In  the  evening  one  must  visit  a  temple  dedicated 
to  Vishnu,  and,  holding  some  darbha  grass  in  one's  hands, 
must  meditate  for  some  time  on  the  greatness  of  the  deity, 
addressing  to  him  the  following  prayer  :- — 

'  Behold  me  in  thy  presence,  great  god  !  I  prostrate  my- 
self at  thy  feet.  Hold  out  a  helping  hand  to  me  and  remove 
the  obstacles  which  I  encounter  at  each  step.  My  feeble 
will  is  often  led  astray  by  the  passions  that  influence  me. 
Thou  alone  canst  give  it  strength  to  resist  such  weaknesses, 
and  keep  it  straight  in  the  path  of  virtue.' 

This  prayer  being  ended,  some  darbha  grass  must  be  offered 
to  Xarayana,  and  the  worshipper  must  prostrate  himself 
before  him  with  his  face  to  the  ground. 

Making  a  bed  of  this  same  grass  at  the  feet  of  Vishnu, 
he  must  pass  the  night  upon  it.  On  rising  in  the  morning 
he  must  wash  his  mouth  out  twelve  times  and  perform  the 
usual  ablutions.  During  the  day  he  must  fulfil  his  ordinary 
religious  duties,  the  chief  of  which  is  the  sacrifice  to  Vishnu. 
He  must  fast  for  the  whole  of  the  day,  eating  and  drinking 
nothing.  The  night  of  the  eleventh  day  must  also  be  spent 
in  a  temple  dedicated  to  Vishnu.  The  whole  family — father, 
mother,  wife,  brothers,  and  children — must  remain  together 
in  the  presence  of  Vishnu,  and  remain  awake. 

The  wife  who  performs  this  act  of  devotion  along  with  her 
husband  will,  on  her  reincarnation,  have  a  husband  who  will 
make  her  very  happy,  and  by  whom  she  will  have  a  numerous 
family.  After  her  death  she  will  be  conveyed  to  Vaikuntha, 
and  be  reunited  to  her  first  husband. 

Whoever  during  this  night  shall  occupy  himself  in  drawing 
the  emblems  of  the  chakra  and  sankha,  which  Vishnu  carries 
in  his  hand,  will  obtain  the  remission  of  his  sins  committed 
in  former  generations.  Whoever  shall  make  a  model  of 
these  two  weapons  with  dough  of  rice  flour,  in  several  colours, 
shall  receive  a  much  greater  reward,  for  his  sons  and  his 
grandsons  shall  enjoy  prosperity  on  earth,  and  occupy  after 
their  death  a  high  place  in  Vaikuntha. 


704  MEDITATING   ON   VISHNU 

If  any  one  places  little  flags  of  various  colours  in  Vishnu's 
temple  he  will  eventually  be  born  again  king  of  a  fine  country. 
And  if  any  one  allows  the  cloths  and  flags  that  have  been 
offered  to  Vishnu  to  flutter  freely  in  the  wind,  he  will  receive 
pardon  for  all  his  sins,  however  heinous  they  may  have  been. 
Any  one  who  places  an  umbrella  over  Vishnu's  head  will  be 
reborn  rich  and  powerful,  and  will  himself  have  the  right  to 
use  one. 

To  employ  oneself  during  this  same  night  in  making  a 
little  house  of  flowers  for  Vishnu  is  as  meritorious  a  work  as 
if  one  had  sacrificed  a  horse  a  hundred  times  over.  And  if 
any  one  should  make  this  house  in  cloth,  he  will  himself  have 
a  house  of  bricks  in  Vaikuntha. 

On  the  salagrama  stone  or  on  the  image  of  Vishnu  must 
then  be  poured  some  pancha-amrita,  that  is  to  say  milk, 
melted  butter,  curds,  honey,  and  sugar  mixed  together. 
The  image  must  then  be  adorned  with  rich  stuffs  and  precious 
jewels,  and  a  fan  must  be  placed  before  it.  Having  per- 
formed the  sam-kalpa,  and  purified  by  the  santi-yoga  '  the 
five  elements  of  which  man  is  composed,  the  worshippers 
must  fix  their  thoughts  on  Vishnu,  and,  holding  flowers  in 
their  hands,  must  meditate  for  some  time  on  the  perfections 
of  the  deity.  They  must  picture  him  to  themselves  in  their 
mind's  eye  as  seated  on  a  golden  throne  with  his  daughter 
by  his  side,  casting  around  the  effulgent  light  that  encircles 
him,  having  sometimes  two  and  sometimes  four  arms.  To 
this  Supreme  Lord  of  the  Universe  must  their  homage  be 
addressed. 

This  act  of  meditation  ended,  the  worshippers  must  offer 
him  puja.  beginning  with  the  Swagata  ;  that  is  to  say,  they 
must  ask  the  god  whether  he  is  in  good  health,  and  has  ac- 
complished his  journey  safely. 

They  will  then  present  to  him  water  to  wash  his  feet,  and 
to  refresh  him  after  the  fatigues  of  his  journey.  They  must 
say :  '  God  of  Gods,  receive  this  water  to  wash  your  feet  ; 
it  is  pure  and  sweet,  and  will  refresh  you,  and  it  will  remove 
the  dust  which  has  covered  you  on  your  way.' 

They  will  then  give  him  water  for  rinsing  out  his  mouth, 
and  more  water  and  flowers  to  put  on  his  head  ;  some  milk, 
honey,  and  sugar,  mixed  together,  to  quench  his  thirst  ; 
1  See  the  description  in  the  chapter  on  the  Sandhya. 


.MUSICAL   ACCOMPANIMENTS  705 

and  various  kinds  of  food  to  satisfy  his  appetite.  It  is  thus. 
at  intervals  of  three  hours,  that  they  must  offer  puja  to 
Vishnu.  Everything  that  is  offered  to  him  must  be  the 
very  best  that  can  be  procured. 

I  have  already  said  that  they  must  pass  the  night  without 
closing  an  eye  for  a  moment  ;  they  must  spend  it  in  dancing 
and  singing  to  the  sound  of  musical  instruments.  It  is 
sufficient  to  repeat  Vishnu's  names,  or  even  to  hear  them 
repeated,  to  obtain  the  remission  of  all  one's  sins  and  the 
accomplishment  of  all  one's  desires.  It  is  considered  a 
meritorious  action  even  to  go  and  look  at  persons  who  are 
spending  the  night  in  the  performance  of  these  pious  exer- 
cises. 

Great  care  must  be  taken  on  this  holy  day  not  to  speak  to 
any  one  who  is  not  a  true  worshipper  of  Vishnu.  To  address 
even  one  word  to  unbelievers  would  cause  Vishnu's  wor- 
shippers to  lose  all  the  benefit  of  their  devotion. 

He  who  on  this  day  hears  the  sound  of  musical  instruments 
played  in  honour  of  Vishnu  and  is  not  enchanted,  is  like  a 
dog  when  it  hears  the  vina.  The  pious  man  should  delight  in 
listening  to  a  symphony  which  is  in  itself  capable  of  remitting 
sins,  because  it  adds  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord  of  the  World. 
He  should  join  in  the  saintly  throng  of  worshippers,  when 
they  with  one  accord  hasten  to  show  their  devotion  and  their 
zeal  by  their  dances,  songs,  and  hymns  in  honour  of  the 
great  deity. 

He  who  objects  to  such  acts  of  worship  is  the  greatest  of 
sinners.  He  who,  while  not  actually  disapproving,  refrains 
from  taking  part  in  them,  and  occupies  himself  instead  with 
other  matters,  will  be  punished  for  his  indifference  by  being 
reborn  as  a  cock  in  another  life.  He  will  be  reborn  dumb  if 
he  does  not  contribute  as  much  as  ever  he  can  towards  the 
pomp  and  ceremony  of  the  Eka-dasi. 

Every  kind  of  musical  instrument  must  be  played  on  that 
night,  and  in  fact  everything  that  is  possible  must  be  done 
to  contribute  to  Vishnu's  pleasure.  The  worshippers  must 
walk  round  the  image  of  the  god  several  times  in  procession  ; 
they  must  prostrate  themselves  before  it,  and  from  time  to 
time  they  must  pour  milk  upon  its  head.  Each  worshipper, 
at  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremony,  must  give  a  present  to 
the  Brahmins  in  proportion  to  his  means. 

DUBOIS  A  a 


700  ADVANTAGES   TO   BE   GAINED 

Ordinary  food  may  be  taken  on  the  twelfth  day  in  the 
afternoon,  but  not  before,  on  pain  of  forfeiting  for  a  hundred 
generations  all  the  blessings  which  should  flow  from  these 
ceremonies  l. 

Those  who  faithfully  observe  the  fast  of  the  Eka-dasi  in 
the  manner  described  will  make  sure  of  salvation.  If  any 
one  has  killed  a  Brahmin  or  a  cow,  taken  away  the  wife  or 
property  of  another,  committed  fornication  with  the  wife  of 
his  guru,  drunk  intoxicating  liquors,  caused  abortion  in  a 
pregnant  woman  ;  all  these  and  other  similar  sins,  no  matter 
how  numerous  or  heinous  they  may  be,  will  be  entirely  ab- 
solved by  the  fast  of  the  Eka-dasi,  and  by  sacrifices  offered 
to  Vishnu  on  that  day. 

Such,  in  brief,  is  what  Markandeya  teaches  us. 

Before  leaving  this  subject  I  ought  to  mention  that  the 
precepts  contained  in  these  instructions  are  not  strictly  kept, 
except  by  a  very  small  number  of  devotees.  The  Eka-dasi, 
it  is  true,  is  kept  as  a  holy  day  by  Brahmins,  and  by  all 
persons  who  have  the  right  to  wear  the  triple  cord,  and  even 
by  a  few  Sudras  of  good  position,  but  they  content  themselves 
with  spending  the  day  in  performing  a  few  religious  rites  and 
in  amusements.  Nevertheless  they  all  abstain  from  eating 
rice.  Towards  evening,  however,  they  have  a  meal  com- 
posed of  cakes  and  fruit,  which  greatly  modifies  and  simplifies 
the  severity  and  length  of  the  fast  prescribed  by  the  Vishnu- 
pur  ana. 

APPENDIX   III 

Siva-Batri,  or  Siva's  Night. 

The  feast  of  Siva-Ratri  is  celebrated  with  great  ceremony, 
especially  by  the  Sivaites.  This  is  what  we  read  in  the 
Skanda-purana  on  the  subject  : — 

There  is  in  Jambu-Dwipa  a  large  town  known  by  the  name 
of  Varanasi,  where  dwelt  a  man  belonging  to  the  boya  or 
huntsman  caste,  who  was  short  of  stature,  very  dark  in  com- 
plexion, and  of  a  most  violent  and  passionate  temper.  One 
day  when  out  hunting  in  the  woods,  as  was  his  wont,  he  killed 

1  This  is  incorrect.  Those  who  fast  on  the  eleventh  day  break  their 
fast  before  sunrise  on  the  twelfth  day. — Ed. 


SIVA-RATRI,    OR   SIVA'S    NIGHT  707 

such  an  enormous  quantity  of  birds  of  all  kinds  that  he  was 
hardly  able  to  carry  them,  and  was  obliged  to  sit  down  and 
rest  at  almost  every  step.  Dusk  was  coming  on  while  he 
was  still  in  the  middle  of  a  thick  forest,  and  anxious  not  to 
lose  the  spoil  of  his  day's  hunting  or  to  become  a  prey  to  the 
wild  beasts  that  infested  the  place,  he  went  up  to  a  vepu  l  or 
margosa-tree,  hung  his  game  upon  one  of  the  branches,  and 
climbed  up  into  the  tree,  intending  to  spend  the  night  there. 
Now  that  night  happened  to  be  the  night  of  the  new  moon 
of  the  month  of  Phalguna  (March),  a  time  of  year  when  dew 
falls  heavily  and  the  nights  are  chilly.  The  hunter,  benumbed 
with  cold,  tormented  by  hunger  (for  he  had  eaten  nothing 
duringtheday),andhalf  dead  with  terror,  passed  a  very  miser- 
able night.  At  the  foot  of  the  tree  was  a  lingam,  and  this 
circumstance  proved  to  be  the  salvation  of  the  hunter.  The 
discomforts  that  he  was  enduring  obliged  him  to  change  his 
position  frequently,  and  the  shaking  of  the  branches  of  the 
vepu  1  caused  some  drops  of  dew,  together  with  some  leaves, 
flowers,  and  fruit,  to  fall  on  the  lingam.  This  fortunate 
accident  was  sufficient  to  win  Siva's  favour  and  to  obtain 
for  the  hunter  absolution  for  all  his  sins.  For  Siva,  to  whose 
worship  this  night  was  specially  consecrated,  was  much 
gratified  at  the  offering  thus  made  to  his  adored  symbol  ; 
and  he  ordained  that  he  who  had  made  it,  involuntary 
though  his  offering  was,  should  be  rewarded,  and  that  his 
long  fast  and  attendant  anxieties  should  be  reckoned  in 
his  favour.  The  hunter  regained  his  house  the  following 
morning,  and  died  a  few  days  afterwards.  Yama,  King  of 
Hell,  on  hearing  of  his  death,  immediately  sent  his  emissaries 
to  secure  him  and  bring  him  away.  But  Siva,  on  hearing 
of  this,  also  sent  his  own  emissaries  to  oppose  those  of  Yama 
and  to  claim  the  dead  man.  Yama's  messengers  declined 
to  yield,  and  a  violent  quarrel  ensued  between  them  and  the 
emissaries  of  Siva.  From  insults  they  quickly  proceeded  to 
violence.  Siva's  party,  being  the  stronger,  put  the  agents  of 
Naraka  to  flight,  after  severely  punishing  them.  The  latter, 
in  shame  and  bitterness,  went  and  told  their  story  to  their 
master,  and  to  excite  his  wrath  showed  him  the  wounds 
that  they  had  received  in  the  combat.  Yama,  beside  him- 
self with  indignation,  went  at  once  to  Kailaso  to  make  com- 
1  It  should  be  the  bilva,  not  the  vepu. — Ed. 


708  A    SAVING   ACT 

plaint  to  Siva  in  person.  At  the  gate  of  the  deity's  palace 
lie  found  Nandi,  the  prime  minister,  to  whom  he  explained 
the  object  of  his  visit,  at  the  same  time  expressing  his  sur- 
prise that  Siva  should  thus  declare  himself  the  protector  of 
a  common  boya,  a  hardened  sinner,  whose  trade  necessitated 
the  slaughter  of  many  living  creatures. 

1  King  of  Hell,'  replied  Nandi,  '  it  is  true  that  this  man  has 
been  a  great  sinner  and  that  he  has  not  scrupled  to  shed 
blood  ;  but  before  he  died  he,  fortunately  for  himself,  fasted, 
watched,  and  offered  a  sacrifice  to  the lingam during  the  night 
consecrated  to  Siva.  This  meritorious  action  has  obtained 
for  him  the  remission  of  all  his  sins,  the  protection  of  Siva, 
and  an  honourable  place  in  Kailasa.' 

When  Yama  heard  Nandi's  words,  he  became  thoughtful, 
and  withdrew  without  uttering  another  word. 

This  is  the  origin  of  the  feast  of  Siva-Ratri,  or  Night  of 
Siva.  In  commemoration  of  the  fortunate  boya  the  devotees 
of  Siva  spend  the  night  and  the  preceding  day  in  fasting  and 
without  sleep,  entirely  absorbed  in  worshipping  the  god,  in 
offering  him  sacrifices,  and  presenting  him  with  the  bitter 
leaves  of  the  vepu  1  or  margosa-tree  as  neiveddya,  which  they 
afterwards  eat. 

APPENDIX   IV 

Rules  of  Conduct  for  Women  during  their  Periodical  Uncleanness. 

When  a  woman  is  in  a  state  of  periodical  uncleanness,  she 
is  isolated  in  some  place  apart,  and  may  have  no  communi- 
cation with  any  one  during  the  three  days  that  her  defile- 
ment is  supposed  to  last.  The  first  day  she  must  look  upon 
herself  as  a  Pariah.  The  second  day  she  must  consider 
herself  as  unclean  as  if  she  had  killed  a  Brahmin.  The  third 
day  she  is  supposed  to  be  in  an  intermediate  state  between 
the  two  preceding  ones.  The  fourth  day  she  purifies  herself 
by  ablutions,  observing  all  the  ceremonies  required  on  these 
occasions.  Until  then  she  must  neither  bathe  nor  wash  any 
part  of  her  body,  nor  shed  tears.  She  must  be  very  careful 
not  to  kill  any  insect,  or  any  other  living  creature.  She 
must  not  ride  on  a  horse,  an  elephant,  or  a  bullock,  nor 
travel  in  a  palanquin,  a  dooly,  or  a  carriage.      She  must 

J  It  should  be  the  bilva,  not  the  vepv. — Ed. 


RULES   OBSERVABLE    BY  WOMEN  709 

not  anoint  her  head  with  oil,  or  play  at  dice  and  other  games, 
or  use  sandalwood,  musk,  or  perfumes  of  any  kind.  She 
must  not  lie  on  a  bed  or  sleep  during  the  day.  She  must  not 
brush  her  teeth  or  rinse  out  her  mouth.  The  mere  wish  to 
cohabit  with  her  husband  would  be  a  serious  sin.  She 
must  not  think  of  the  gods  or  of  the  sun,  or  of  the  sacrifices 
and  worship  due  to  them.  She  is  forbidden  to  salute  persons 
of  high  rank.  If  several  women  in  this  unclean  state  should 
find  themselves  together  in  one  place,  they  must  not  speak 
to  or  touch  each  other.  A  woman  in  this  condition  must 
not  go  near  her  children,  touch  them,  or  play  with  them. 
After  living  thus  in  retirement  for  three  days,  on  the  fourth 
she  must  take  off  the  garments  that  she  has  been  wearing, 
and  these  must  be  immediately  given  to  the  washerman. 
She  must  then  put  on  a  clean  cloth  and  another  over  it,  and 
go  to  the  river  to  purify  herself  by  bathing.  On  her  way 
there  she  must  walk  with  her  head  bent,  and  must  take  the 
greatest  care  to  glance  at  nobody,  for  her  looks  would  defile 
any  person  on  whom  they  rested.  When  she  has  reached 
the  river  she  must  first  enter  the  water  and  fill  the  copper 
vessel,  or  chembu,  which  she  has  brought  with  her  from  the 
house.  Then,  returning  to  the  bank,  she  must  thoroughly 
cleanse  her  teeth,  rinse  out  her  mouth  twelve  times,  and 
wash  her  hands  and  feet.  She  must  then  enter  the  water 
and  plunge  twelve  times  into  it,  immersing  the  whole  of  her 
body.  She  must  take  the  greatest  care  while  doing  this 
not  to  look  at  any  living  soul,  and  to  this  end  each  time  her 
head  rises  above  the  water  she  must  turn  her  eyes  towards 
the  sun.  On  coming  out  of  the  water  she  must  take  a  little 
fresh  cow-dung,  some  tulasi,  and  some  earth.  These  she 
must  mix  together  in  a  little  water,  until  they  make  a  thin 
paste,  and  with  this  she  must  thoroughly  rub  her  hands  and 
feet  and  then  her  whole  body.  After  this  she  must  re-enter 
the  water,  and  completely  immerse  herself  twenty-four 
times.  When  she  again  leaves  the  water  she  must  rub 
herself  over  with  saffron,  and  again  dip  three  times  in  the 
water.  Then  mixing  saffron  in  a  little  water,  she  must 
drink  some  and  pour  the  rest  on  her  head,  after  which  she 
must  put  on  a  pure  cloth  freshly  washed  and  the  little 
bodice  called  ravikai.  She  may  then  paint  the  little  round 
red  mark  on  her  forehead  called  kunkuma  and  return  home. 


710         COMPLETING   THE   PURIFICATION 

On  entering  the  house  she  must  take  special  care  that  her  eyes 
do  not  rest  on  her  children,  for  they  would  thereby  be  ex- 
posed to  the  greatest  danger.  She  must  immediately  send 
for  a  Brahmin  pztrohita  so  that  he  may  complete  her  puri- 
fication. On  his  arrival  this  venerable  person  first  plaits 
together  thirty-two  stalks  of  darbha  grass,  to  make  the  ring 
called  pavitram,  which  he  dips  in  consecrated  water  that 
he  has  brought  with  him.  The  woman  then  takes  another 
bath,  drinks  a  little  of  the  consecrated  water,  places  the 
ixiuitraju  on  the  ring  finger  of  the  right  hand,  and  drinks 
some  pancha-gavia  or  some  cow's  milk.  After  these  cere- 
monies her  purification  is  complete. 

APPENDIX  V 

Remarks  on  the  Origin  of  the  Famous  Temple  of  Jagannath. 

The  Province  of  Orissa,  in  which  the  temple  of  Jagannath 
is  situated,  is  called  in  Hindu  books  Utkala-desa.  Indra- 
mena,  say  these  books,  reigned  over  the  country.  Inflamed 
with  desire  to  save  his  soul,  the  prince  saw  with  dismay  that 
he  had  as  yet  done  nothing  which  would  ensure  his  happiness 
after  death.  This  thought  troubled  him  exceedingly,  and 
he  confided  his  anxiety  to  Brahma  with  the  Four  Faces,  who 
was  his  favourite  divinity.  Brahma,  being  greatly  touched 
by  the  sincere  regrets  and  fervent  piety  of  the  prince, 
addressed  him  one  day  in  the  following  consolatory  terms  : — 

'  Cease,  great  king,  from  troubling  thyself  about  thy 
future  state  ;  I  will  point  out  to  thee  a  way  of  assuring  thy 
salvation.  On  the  sea-coast  is  a  country  called  Utkala-desa, 
and  therein  rises  the  mountain  sometimes  called  Nila  and 
sometimes  Purushottama,  which  is  a  yojana  or  three  leagues 
in  length.  It  is  called  by  the  latter  name  after  the  god  who 
formerly  took  up  his  abode  there.  This  mountain  is  a  holy 
place,  and  the  sight  of  it  has  the  virtue  of  taking  away  sins. 
In  former  yugas  there  was  a  temple  of  solid  gold  upon  it, 
dedicated  to^Vishnu.  This  temple  is  still  in  existence,  but 
has  been  buried  in  the  sand  cast  up  by  the  sea,  which  renders 
it  invisible  at  the  present  time.  Restore  this  temple,  cause 
its  ancient  glory  to  be  revived,  renew  the  sacrifices  which 
were  formerly  offered  there,  and  thou  shalt  thus  ensure  thy- 
self a  place  of  felicity  after  death.' 


SEEKING   A   BURIED   TEMPLE  711 

The  king,  Indra-mena,  delighted  with  what  he  had  heard, 
asked  Brahma  who  was  the  founder  of  this  magnificent 
temple,  and  where  the  exact  spot  was  on  which  it  had  been 
built.     Brahma  responded  : — 

'  It  was  thy  ancestors,  great  king,  who  erected  it  in  the 
preceding  yuga,  and  who  by  this  means  procured  for  mankind 
the  ineffable  happiness  of  seeing  the  Supreme  Being  on  this 
earth.  Go,  then,  and  reclaim  this  venerable  spot  from 
oblivion  ;  cause  the  deity  to  descend  there  anew,  and  thou 
shalt  procure  a  similar  happiness  for  the  human  race.' 

'  But  how,'  again  asked  the  prince,  '  can  I  discover  a 
temple  which  is  completely  buried  in  the  sand,  unless  you 
yourself  help  me  to  find  it  ?  ' 

Thereupon  Brahma  gave  him  a  few  directions,  and  added 
that  he  would  find,  not  far  from  the  mountain  of  Nila,  a 
tank  wherein  lived  a  turtle  as  old  as  the  world,  who  would 
give  him  more  definite  particulars. 

Indra-mena  thanked  Brahma  and  at  once  set  forth  to 
find  the  tank.  Hardly  had  he  arrived  on  its  banks  when 
a  turtle  of  enormous  size  approached  him,  and  asked  who 
he  was  and  what  he  wanted  in  that  desert  place. 

'  I  am,'  replied  the  prince,  '  by  birth  a  Kshatriya  and 
sovereign  of  a  great  kingdom,  but  the  enormity  of  my  sins 
and  the  remorse  that  I  feel  oppress  me  and  make  me  the 
most  miserable  of  men.  Brahma  with  the  Four  Faces  has 
given  me  some  vague  information  respecting  a  holy  place 
near  the  mountain  of  Nila,  assuring  me  that  I  shall  be 
able  to  obtain  from  you  all  the  necessary  directions  to 
guide  me  in  my  search.' 

1 1  am  delighted,  0  prince,'  replied  the  turtle,  '  to  have 
an  opportunity  of  contributing  to  your  happiness.  Un- 
fortunately, however,  I  am  unable  to  satisfy  you  upon  all 
the  points  about  which  you  seek  information,  for  my  great 
age  has  caused  a  partial  loss  of  memory  ;  yet  the  indica- 
tions that  I  can  give  may,  perhaps,  be  useful  to  you.  It  is 
quite  true  that  in  former  days  there  existed  a  temple  near 
the  mountain  of  Nila,  which  was  famous  for  its  wealth. 
The  God  with  Four  Arms,  the  God  of  Gods,  the  Great 
Vishnu,  had  taken  up  his  abode  there.  All  the  other  gods 
resorted  to  it  regularly  to  do  him  honour,  and  it  was  also 
a  spot  which  they  greatly  affected  for  indulging  in  their 


712  AN   IMMORTAL   CROW 

amours.  But  for  a  long  time  past  the  sand  thrown  up  by 
the  sea  has  covered  this  sacred  pile,  and  the  god,  finding 
that  he  no  longer  received  the  accustomed  marks  of  respect, 
left  it  and  returned  to  VaikuntJia.  All  that  I  know  is  that 
this  edifice  is  buried  a  yojana  (three  leagues)  deep  in  this 
sandy  soil.  I  have  lost  all  trace  of  the  site  that  it  formerly 
occupied.  Nevertheless  there  is  another  and  a  certain  way 
by  which  you  can  discover  it.  Go  to  the  tank  called 
Markandeya  ;  on  its  banks  you  will  find  a  crow  which  has 
been  gifted  with  immortality,  and  which  can  recall  every- 
thing that  happened  in  the  most  distant  times.  Go  and 
inquire  of  it  and  you  will  obtain  all  the  information  you 
want.' 

The  king  hastened  to  the  tank  Markandeya  and  there 
found  the  crow,  which  from  its  extreme  age  had  become 
quite  white.  Prostrating  himself  before  it,  he  joined  his 
hands  in  a  supplicating  manner  and  said  : — 

'  0  crow,  who  enjoyest  the  gift  of  immortality  !  you  see 
before  you  a  king  who  is  a  prey  to  the  deepest  despair  ; 
and  only  you  can  comfort  him  !  ' 

'  What,5  said  the  crow,  '  is  the  cause  of  your  sorrow  ? 
What  can  I  do  for  you  ?  ' 

1 1  will  tell  you,'  replied  Indra-mena  ;  '  but  do  not  hide 
from  me,  I  implore  you,  anything  that  I  want  to  know. 
Tell  me  first  of  all,  who  was  the  first  king  who  ever  reigned 
over  this  country,  and  what  he  did  that  was  remarkable  1  ' 

The  crow,  well  versed  in  ancient  history,  had  no  difficulty 
in  satisfying  the  monarch,  and  answered  in  the  following 
terms  : — 

'  The  first  king  of  this  country  was  called  Chaturanana. 
He  had  a  son  called  Visva-Bahu,  who  in  turn  had  a  son 
called  Indra-mena,  a  prince  who,  having  always  shown 
great  devotion  to  Brahma  with  the  Four  Faces,  was  thought 
worthy  after  death  to  be  admitted  to  the  presence  of  the 
deity.  The  reign  of  Chaturanana  was  a  period  of  great 
happiness.  He  dealt  with  his  subjects  as  a  tender  father 
deals  with  his  children.  Amongst  the  many  praiseworthy 
acts  which  made  his  reign  remarkable  was  one  by  which 
his  name  will  be  for  ever  remembered.  It  was  he  who  had 
the  honour  and  glory  of  inducing  the  God  of  Gods  to  come 
down  to  earth  from  Vaikuntha.     He  built  for  him  a  dwelling- 


THE   TEMPLE   UNEARTHED  713 

place  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  of  Nila,  a  magnificent 
temple,  the  walls  of  which  were  of  massive  gold,  while  the 
interior  was  embellished  with  most  precious  stones.  Time, 
that  universal  destroyer,  has  respected  this  edifice,  and  it 
is  still  in  existence  perfectly  uninjured.  But  for  a  long 
time  past  it  has  been  swallowed  up  by  the  sands  of  the  sea. 
It  is  true  that  the  god  who  inhabited  the  sacred  spot  has 
ceased  to  dwell  there  ;  nevertheless,  he  could  not  entirely 
forsake  a  mountain  that  had  once  been  consecrated  by  his 
presence,  and  he  has  taken  up  his  abode  there  in  the  shape 
of  a  vepu  or  margosa-tree.  One  day  the  famous  penitent 
Markandeya,  who  for  many  centuries  did  penance  on  this 
mountain,  perceiving  that  this  tree  gave  no  shade,  was 
roused  to  indignation,  and  breathing  upon  it  he  partially 
reduced  it  to  ashes.  This  tree,  however,  was  Vishnu,  the 
Supreme  Being,  and  consequently  immortal.  The  penitent 
could  not,  therefore,  entirely  destroy  it,  and  the  trunk  still 
remains.  The  only  thing  that  I  do  not  know  is  the  exact 
spot  where  this  tree  grew.' 

Here  Indra-mena  interrupted  the  crow,  and  asked  if  it 
could  recognize  the  spot  where  the  temple  stood.  The 
crow  replied  in  the  affirmative.  So  they  both  set  out 
together  to  find  the  site.  At  the  place  where  they  stopped 
the  crow  set  to  work  to  dig  into  the  sand  with  his  beak  to 
the  depth  of  a  yojana,  and  at  last  succeeded  in  disclosing 
in  its  entirety  the  magnificent  temple  which  had  formerly 
been  the  abode  of  Narayana,  the  God  of  Gods.  Having 
shown  it  to  the  king,  the  crow  covered  it  up  again  as  before. 

The  king,  convinced  of  the  truth  of  all  that  the  crow 
had  told  him,  and  enraptured  at  having  found  that  for 
which  he  had  been  seeking  so  earnestly,  questioned  his 
guide  as  to  what  steps  he  should  take  to  restore  to  its 
former  state  of  splendour  and  fame  a  place  which  had 
been  so  venerated. 

'  What  you  now  ask  of  me,'  the  crow  replied,  '  is  beyond 
my  province.  Go  and  find  Brahma  with  the  Four  Faces, 
and  he  will  tell  you  how  to  accomplish  your  desire.' 

Indra-mena  followed  this  advice.  He  again  sought 
Brahma,  and  having  offered  him  worship  several  times, 
he  said  : — 

4 1  have  now  seen  with  my  own  eyes  near  the  mountain 
a  a  3 


714  A  NEW  TEMPLE  PLANNED 

Nila  that  su])erb  temple  which  was  formerly  the  abode  of 
the  great  Vishnu,  and  am  come  to  consult  you,  great  god, 
on  tlie  course  that  I  should  pursue  in  order  to  rekindle  in 
the  heart  of  the  people  the  holy  fervour  which  this  sacred 
place  inspired  in  former  times.  If  I  build  a  town,  what 
name  shall  I  give  to  it  ?  Vishnu,  I  know,  will  return  and 
honour  the  place  with  his  presence  under  the  form  of  the 
trunk  of  a  tree,  but  how  will  he  come,  and  what  sacrifices 
and  offerings  must  be  made  to  him  ?  Deign  to  enlighten 
me,  great  god,  and  help  me  in  this  difficulty.' 

1  To  accomplish  the  praiseworthy  object  that  is  in  thy 
mind,'  said  Brahma,  '  thou  must  erect  a  new  temple  on 
the  very  spot  where  the  old  one  is  now  buried.  Thou 
shalt  give  it  the  name  of  Sridehul.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
make  it  as  costly  as  the  former  one,  because  the  present 
inhabitants  of  the  country,  being  reduced  to  great  poverty, 
would  remove  it  piecemeal,  and  thy  labour  would  be  lost. 
It  need  only  be  built  of  stone.  In  order  to  provide  the 
necessary  accommodation  for  the  crowd  of  devotees  who 
will  visit  it,  thou  must  build  near  the  temple  a  town  which 
will  receive  the  name  of  Purushottama.  The  moment  the 
work  is  finished  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  that  is  to  say  Krishna 
himself,  will  appear  on  the  sea-shore.  This  thou  must 
remove  with  much  pomp  and  ceremony  into  the  new 
temple.  The  carpenter  Visvakarma  will  come  and  work 
at  it,  and  will  fashion  it  into  the  face  and  form  of  the  god. 
Thou  shalt  place  beside  this  god  his  sister  Subadra  and  his 
brother  Balarama.  Thou  must  offer  sacrifices  to  the  god 
day  and  night,  but  especially  in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and 
in  the  evening.  This  will  be  a  sure  and  certain  means  of 
securing  for  thyself,  and  for  all  those  who  follow  thy 
example,  a  place  in  Vaikuntha,  the  Abode  of  Bliss.  As 
Vishnu  will  not  be  able  to  consume  the  enormous  quantity 
of  food  that  will  be  offered  to  him  as  neiveddya  by  the 
multitude  of  his  devotees,  men  may  therein  find  a  means 
of  purifying  themselves  and  obtaining  the  remission  of  their 
sins  by  eating  the  remnants.  Happy  is  he  who  shall 
secure  for  himself  the  smallest  particle,  for  he  will  cer- 
tainly go  to  Vaikuntha  after  death.  To  give  thee  some 
idea  of  the  inestimable  value  of  the  remnants  of  Krishna's 
food,  let  me  tell  thee  that  if  by  accident  or  inadvertence 


BLESSINGS  PROMISED  BY  BRAHMA        715 

some  fragments  should  fall  to  the  ground,  the  very  gods 
themselves  would  strive  for  them,  even  if  the  dogs  had 
already  devoured  a  portion.  In  short,  if  a  Pariah  were  to 
take  some  rice  destined  for  Krishna  from  the  mouth  of 
a  dog  and  put  it  into  that  of  a  Brahmin,  this  rice  would  be 
so  pure,  and  would  possess  so  many  virtues,  that  it  would 
immediately  purify  that  Brahmin.  The  goddess  Lakshmi 
cooks  and  prepares  the  food  destined  for  Krishna,  and  the 
goddess  Annapurni  waits  upon  him.  A  portion  of  the  tree 
Jcalpa  will  come  down  from  Swarga  and  take  root  in  the 
centre  of  thy  new  city.  Thou  knowest  that  this  tree  is 
immortal,  and  that  thou  hast  only  to  ask  it  for  what  thou 
desirest  to  be  sure  of  obtaining  it.  The  mere  sight  of  the 
temple  that  thou  art  about  to  erect  will  be  sufficient  to 
procure  inestimable  blessings.  Even  to  be  beaten  with 
sticks  there  by  the  priests  who  serve  the  temple  will  be 
reckoned  of  peculiar  merit.  Indra,  and  the  gods  who 
follow  in  his  train,  will  come  and  live  in  thy  new  city,  and 
will  be  company  for  the  god  Krishna.  The  side  of  the  city 
which  faces  the  sea  will  be  much  more  sacred  than  the 
other  parts.  Those  who  live  on  this  side  of  it  will  daily 
increase  in  virtue.  The  sand  which  the  sea  deposits  there 
thou  shalt  call  kanaka,  or  gold  dust.  Any  one  who  shall 
die  on  this  sand  will  assuredly  go  to  Vaikuntha.  This, 
prince,  is  my  answer  to  thy  requests.  Go  at  once  and 
execute  all  my  commands.  In  the  meantime  Vishnu,  under 
the  guise  of  the  tree  which  is  to  form  the  trunk  of  which 
I  have  spoken,  will  grow  and  become  fitted  for  the  purpose 
for  which  it  is  destined.' 

Indra-mena,  having  offered  thanks  to  Brahma,  set  about 
to  obey  him.  The  temple  and  the  new  city  were  built 
with  the  utmost  celerity.  Yet  when  the  work  was  com- 
pleted the  god  did  not  appear.  This  delay  began  to  cause 
the  prince  some  uneasiness,  when  one  day,  having  risen 
very  early,  he  perceived  on  the  sea-shore  the  trunk  of 
the  tree  for  which  he  was  watching  so  impatiently.  He 
prostrated  himself  several  times  before  it  with  his  face 
to  the  ground,  and  in  the  fullness  of  his  joy  cried  :  '  O 
happiest  day  of  my  life  !  I  now  have  certain  proofs  that 
I  was  born  under  a  lucky  star,  and  that  my  sacrifices  have 
been  pleasing  to  the  gods.     Nothing  can  equal  the  happi- 


716  A  BREACH  OF  FAITH 

aess  that  I  derive  from  this  ;  for  with  my  own  eyes  I  see 

the  Supreme  Being,  him  whom  the  most  favoured  and  the 
most  virtuous  among  men  are  not  permitted  to  see.' 

Having  thus  rendered  to  the  trunk  of  the  tree  these 
preliminary  acts  of  worship,  the  king  put  himself  at  the 
head  of  a  hundred  thousand  men,  who  marched  to  the  new 
deity  and  placed  him  on  their  shoulders.  He  was  thus 
removed  to  the  temple  with  the  greatest  pomp. 

The  famous  carpenter,  Visvakarma,  speedily  arrived  and 
undertook  to  carve  the  face  and  figure  of  the  god  Krishna 
on  the  tree  which  had  just  been  deposited  in  the  temple. 
He  promised  to  finish  the  work  in  one  night  ;  but  only  on 
condition  that  no  one  looked  on  while  he  performed  his 
task.  A  single  inquisitive  glance,  he  said,  would  be  suffi- 
cient to  make  him  abandon  it,  never  to  return. 

This  was  agreed  upon,  and  Visvakarma  at  once  set  to 
work.  As  he  made  no  noise  about  it,  the  king,  who  was 
in  a  constant  state  of  anxiety,  imagined  that  he  had  run 
away  and  was  not  going  to  fulfil  his  promise  ;  so  to  make 
sure,  he  crept  softly  up  to  the  temple  and  peeped  through 
the  cracks  in  the  door.  To  his  great  delight  he  saw  the 
carpenter  quietly  at  work,  so  he  retired  at  once.  But 
Visvakarma  had  caught  sight  of  him  ;  and,  angered  at  this 
breach  of  confidence,  he  left  the  work  as  it  was,  roughly 
hewn  out,  with  only  an  indistinct  indication  of  a  human 
form.  And  so  the  trunk  of  the  tree  remained  much  as  it 
was  in  its  original  state,  and  just  as  it  may  be  seen  at  the 
present  day. 

Indra-mena  was  vexed  at  this  untoward  occurrence,  but 
in  spite  of  it  the  tree-trunk  became  his  god,  and  he  gave  it 
his  daughter  in  marriage  ;  the  wedding  being  celebrated 
with  the  utmost  magnificence. 

This,  then,  is  the  history  of  the  foundation  of  the  city  of 
Purushottama,  now  called  Jagannath,  and  of  the  tree- 
trunk  which  is  worshipped  under  the  name  of  Jagannatha, 
or  Lord  of  the  Universe. 


717 


APPENDIX  VI 

Trial  by  Ordeal. — Its  Different  Forms. 

When  the  evidence  against  a  man  accused  of  either 
a  civil  or  criminal  offence  is  not  sufficiently  strong  to 
convict  him,  the  Hindus  often  have  recourse  to  trial  by 
ordeal,  this  method  of  settling  doubtful  cases  being  a 
regular  part  of  their  judicial  system.  The  principal  ordeals 
are  those  by  scales  and  weights,  by  fire,  by  water,  and  by 
poison  *.  The  following  are  the  rules  to  be  observed.  The 
months  of  Cheitra,  Vaisaka,  and  Margasira  (April,  May, 
and  December)  are  the  most  favourable  for  ordeals,  though 
that  of  the  scales  can  take  place  at  any  time  when  there  is 
not  too  much  wind.  The  ordeal  by  fire  should  be  practised 
during  the  rainy  season,  that  by  water  in  the  hot  weather 
and  in  autumn,  that  by  poison  in  winter  and  in  foggy 
weather.  If  careful  attention  is  not  paid  to  these  points 
grave  errors  are  liable  to  occur.  An  ordeal  which  took 
place  at  an  unfavourable  moment  would  be  of  no  assistance 
in  ascertaining  the  truth.  The  accused  who  is  to  be  tried 
by  ordeal  prepares  himself  by  fasting  and  ablutions.  He 
then  goes  to  a  Brahmin  purohita,  explains  the  circumstances 
of  the  case,  and  receives  his  advice  and  instruction.  After 
this  he  offers  a  sacrifice  to  all  the  Brahmins  present,  asks 
for  their  asirvadam  (blessing),  and  then  speaks  as  follows  : — ■ 
'  Say  that  this  day  shall  be  a  fortunate  one  for  me,  a  day 
of  virtue,  a  day  on  which  it  will  be  recognized  that  I  am 
innocent  of  the  crime  of  which  I  am  accused,  a  day  on 
which  I  shall  receive  many  blessings.' 

To  this  the  Brahmins  reply  three  times  : — 
'  May  this  day  be  a  fortunate  one  for  thee,  a  day  of 
virtue,  a  day  on  which  thy  innocence  will  be  proved,  a  day 
on  which  thou  shalt  receive  many  blessings.' 

1  There  are  ten  forms  of  trial  by  ordeal : — Tula,  '  the  balance  '  ; 
Agni,  '  fire  '  ;  Jala,  '  water  '  ;  Visha,  '  poison  ' ;  Kosa,  '  drinking  water 
in  which  an  idol  has  been  washed  '  ;  Tandula,  '  ejecting  chewed  rice 
grains  '  ;  Tapta  rnasha,  '  taking  a  masha  weight  of  gold  out  of  heated 
oil '  ;  Phala,  '  holding  a  hot  ploughshare  '  ;  Dharma  dharvm,  '  drawing 
concealed  images  of  Virtue  and  Vice  out  of  a  vessel  filled  with  earth  '  ; 
Tulasi,  '  holding  the  leaves  of  holy  basil.'  This  holy  basil  is  sacred  to 
Vishnu.— Ed. 


718  PRELIMINARY  SACRIFICES 

This  preliminary  ceremony,  which  is  called  the  sasti- 
vassa,  being  ended,  they  offer  homam  in  honour  of  the 
nine  planets.  The  scales  are  then  brought  in.  Over  them 
is  a  little  white  flag,  and  a  stake  is  driven  into  the  ground 
to  support  them.  The  purohita  presiding  over  the  cere- 
mony takes  a  vessel  containing  water,  rice,  and  flowers, 
and  turning  towards  the  east,  says  : — 

'  Glory  to  the  three  worlds  l  ! 

'  Goddess  of  Virtue,  approach  this  place,  come  near, 
accompanied  by  the  eight  divine  guardians  of  the  eight 
corners  of  the  world,  and  by  the  gods  of  wealth  and  of 
winds.' 

He  offers  puja  to  the  goddess  of  Virtue  ;  then  turning 
successively  to  the  eight  principal  points  of  the  globe,  he 
says  : — 

To  the  east,  '  Glory  to  Indra  !  '  (the  king  of  the  gods). 

To  the  south,  '  Glory  to  Yama  !  '  (the  Hindu  Pluto). 

To  the  west,  '  Glory  to  Varuna  !  '  (the  Hindu  Neptune). 

To  the  north,  '  Glory  to  Kubera  !  '  (the  Hindu  Plutus). 

To  the  south-east,  '  Glory  to  Agni  !  '  (fire). 

To  the  south-west,  '  Glorv  to  Nairuta  !  '  (the  Chief  of  the 
Devils). 

To  the  north-west,  '  Glory  to  Vayu  !  '  (the  wind). 

To  the  north-east,  '  Glory  to  Isana  !  '  (the  Destroyer). 

He  then  offers  puja  to  these  eight  deities.  He  also  offers 
it  to  the  eight  gods  of  wealth,  to  the  twelve  suns  2,  to  the 
twelve  Rudras,  to  the  sixteen  mothers,  to  Ganesha,  and 
finally  to  the  eight  winds  3.  He  offers  to  Virtue  the  lesser 
puja,  that  is  to  say,  sandalwood,  flowers,  incense,  a  lamp, 
and  neiveddya, 

Then  follows  the  homam.  The  fire  having  been  con- 
secrated and  purified  by  the  purohita  according  to  Vedic 
rites,  and  the  gayatri  mantram  having  been  recited,  they 
throw  into  the  fire  a  hundred  and  eight,  or  twenty- eight, 
or  at  least  eight  pieces  of  the  villi  tree,  dipped  in  a  mixture 

1  The  three  worlds,  called  the  triloba  when  spoken  of  collectively,  are 
Sivarga,  Bhu  loka,  and  Patala — heaven,  earth,  and  hell. — Dubois. 

2  Mitra  is  one  of  the  most  common  names  for  the  sun.  It  is  also  the 
Persian  name  for  this  luminary,  which  peculiarity  strikes  me  as  note- 
worthy.— Dubois. 

3  Amongst  these  winds  there  is  one  called  anima,  which,  I  think,  is 
also  worth  noticing. — Dubois. 


ORDEAL  BY  WEIGHING  710 

of  butter  and  rice.  At  this  juncture  presents  must  be 
given  to  the  Brahmins. 

Then  the  accused,  who  must  be  fasting  and  be  wearing 
very  damp  clothes,  is  placed  on  that  side  of  the  scale  which 
is  towards  the  west.  They  then  put  bricks  and  darbhu 
grass  on  the  other  side  until  a  perfectly  just  balance  has 
been  obtained.  The  accused  then  leaves  his  scale  and  is 
sent  to  perform  his  ablutions  without  taking  off  his  gar- 
ments. During  this  interval  the  purohita  writes  in  two 
lines  of  equal  length,  and  each  containing  an  equal  number 
of  letters,  the  mantram  of  which  the  following  is  a  transla- 
tion : — 

'  Sun,  moon,  wind,  fire,  Swarga,  earth,  water,  virtue, 
Yama,  day,  night,  dusk,  and  dawn,  you  know  this  man's 
deeds,  and  whether  the  accusation  is  true  or  false.' 

He  then  specifies  below  the  offence  which  the  accused 
is  supposed  to  have  committed.  This  writing  must  not  be 
in  black  ink  ;  ink  of  some  different  colour  must  be  used. 

The  purohita  places  the  writing  on  the  head  of  the 
accused,  and  addresses  the  scales  in  these  words  : — '  Scales, 
you  know  everything  that  is  in  the  hearts  of  men  ;  you 
know  their  vices  and  their  virtues.  What  escapes  man's 
perspicacity  is  not  hidden  from  you.  Behold  a  person  who 
is  accused  of  a  crime  of  which  he  declares  himself  to  be 
innocent,  and  who  desires  to  prove  his  innocence  to  the 
public.  If  he  is  not  guilty,  justice  demands  that  you 
should  pronounce  in  his  favour.' 

The  duty  of  watching  the  movements  of  the  scales  must 
be  left  neither  to  a  religious  recluse,  nor  yet  to  a  person  of 
doubtful  honesty.  The  former  would  be  too  likely  to  be 
influenced  by  compassion  ;  the  latter  would  not  scruple 
to  trifle  with  his  conscience.  A  Brahmin  of  tried  wisdom 
and  virtue  is  therefore  chosen  to  fill  the  office,  and  he  in 
his  turn  makes  this  speech  to  the  scales  : — 

'  Scales,  the  gods  have  appointed  you  to  dispense  justice 
to  mankind  and  to  reveal  the  truth.  Show  it,  therefore, 
on  this  occasion  ;  and  if  the  man  you  are  about  to  try  is 
really  guilty,  do  not  allow  him  to  preserve  his  equilibrium, 
but  make  the  weight  of  his  sin  turn  the  scale  against  him. 

The  purohita  then  puts  the  accused  again  in  the  scales. 
He  chants  five  times  a  stanza  suitable  to  the  occasion.     If 


720  ORDEAL  BY  FIRE 

the  scale  on  which  the  accused  is  standing  forthwith  drops, 
he  is  declared  guilty  ;  if  the  contrary  is  the  case,  he  is 
declared  innocent.  If  the  scales  remain  equal,  he  is  con- 
sidered to  be  partially  guilty  ;  and  if  the  rope  breaks,  he 
is  reckoned  altogether  guilty. 

The  ceremony,  as  usual,  terminates  with  a  distribution 
of  presents  to  the  assembled  Brahmins. 

In  the  ordeal  by  fire  they  first  of  all  draw  eight  circles 
on  the  ground,  each  sixteen  fingers  in  diameter,  leaving  the 
same  amount  of  space  between  each.  Fire  is  the  presiding 
genius  of  the  first  circle.  Varuna,  the  wind,  Yama,  Indra, 
Kubera,  the  moon,  and  Savitru  preside  over  the  seven 
others. 

These  eight  circles  are  arranged  in  two  parallel  lines. 
A  ninth,  placed  by  itself,  is  dedicated  to  all  the  gods.  All 
the  circles  are  purified  by  being  smeared  over  with  cow- 
dung,  on  the  top  of  which  they  scatter  darbha  grass.  They 
then  offer  qmja  in  turn  to  the  deity  presiding  over  each 
circle. 

Meanwhile  the  person  about  to  undergo  the  ordeal  bathes 
without  removing  his  clothing,  and  while  still  quite  wet 
places  himself  in  the  first  circle  of  the  line  on  the  west  side, 
his  face  towards  the  east.  They  then  dip  his  hands  into 
wheat  flour  mixed  with  curdled  milk,  and  cover  them  over 
with  seven  leaves  of  the  aswatta  tree,  seven  leaves  of  choni, 
and  seven  stalks  of  darbha  grass. 

A  blacksmith  then  heats  a  small  iron  rod  in  the  fire  to 
a  red  heat.  The  rod  should  be  about  eight  inches  long, 
and  the  weight  of  fifty  rupees.  Then  the  purohita  places 
some  fire  purified  according  to  the  rites  of  his  Veda  to  the 
south  of  the  ninth  circle  and  performs  the  homam.  He 
invokes  the  goddess  of  Virtue  in  the  same  words  as  those 
used  in  the  ordeal  by  scales.  He  throws  the  red-hot  iron 
into  water  ;  and  after  it  has  been  re-heated  to  the  same 
degree,  he  speaks  as  follows  : — 

'  Fire,  you  are  the  Four  Vedas,  and  as  such  I  offer  you 
homam.  You  are  the  countenance  of  all  the  gods,  and  you 
are  also  the  countenance  of  all  learned  men.  You  take 
away  all  our  sins,  and  that  is  why  you  are  called  pure  and 
purifying.  I  am  the  greatest  of  sinners,  but  I  have  the 
happiness  to  see  you.     Purify  me  from  all  my  sins,  and  if 


ORDEAL  BY  WATER  721 

this  man  who  is  about  to  undergo  this  ordeal  is  really 
innocent,  refrain  for  his  sake  from  making  use  of  your 
natural  power  of  burning,  and  do  him  no  harm.' 

He  finishes  his  discourse  by  doing  homage  to  the  power 
which  this  element  possesses  of  penetrating  into  the  inmost 
recesses  of  the  human  heart  and  discovering  the  truth. 
Then  he  says  : — 

'  Glory  to  the  three  worlds  !  '  and  finally  pronounces 
this  evocation  :  '  0  fire,  come  near  !  come  near  and  stay 
here  !  stay  here  !  '  and  he  offers  puja.  The  accused  places 
himself  in  the  first  circle,  and  the  purohita,  taking  up  the 
bar  of  hot  iron  with  some  tongs,  says  again  :  '  0  fire,  you 
know  the  secrets  of  men  !  reveal  the  truth  to  us  on  this 
occasion  !  '  At  the  same  moment  he  puts  the  red-hot  iron 
on  the  hands  of  the  accused,  who  then,  still  keeping  hold 
of  the  iron,  runs  over  all  the  circles,  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  place  his  feet  alternately  on  all.  Arrived  at  the  eighth 
circle  he  throws  the  iron  into  the  ninth  on  to  some  straw, 
which  should  be  set  on  fire  by  the  contact. 

In  the  case  of  the  accused  dropping  the  iron  before  he 
has  covered  the  whole  distance,  the  trial  would  have  to 
begin  over  again.  If,  on  an  inspection  of  his  hands,  it  is 
seen  that  the  iron  has  not  injured  the  skin,  he  is  considered 
innocent.  An  accidental  burn  on  any  other  part  of  his 
body  would  not  count.  To  make  quite  sure  that  contact 
with  the  red-hot  iron  has  produced  no  sensible  effect  on 
the  skin,  the  accused  is  given  some  unhusked  rice,  which 
he  has  to  rub  vigorously  between  his  hands  to  separate  the 
grains  from  the  husk. 

The  preparatory  formalities  for  the  ordeal  by  water  are 
much  the  same  as  the  preceding  ones.  For  this  they  draw 
a  single  circle  in  which  they  place  flowers  and  incense. 
A  stake  is  also  driven  into  a  tank  or  a  river  where  the  current 
is  not  too  strong.  Near  this  stake  the  accused  must  place 
himself,  the  water  being  up  to  his  waist.  The  purohita, 
with  his  face  to  the  east,  then  speaks  these  words  : — 

1  Water,  you  are  the  life  of  all  that  has  life  ;  you  create 
and  destroy  at  will  ;  you  purify  everything,  and  we  may 
always  be  sure  to  learn  the  truth  when  we  take  you  for 
judge.  Settle  the  doubtful  question  which  now  concerns 
us  and  tell  us  whether  this  man  is  guilty  or  not.' 


722  ORDEAL  BY  POISON 

Some  one  is  then  told  to  go  a  certain  distance  and  to 
return.  During  the  time  so  occupied  the  accused  must 
immerse  himself  completely,  holding  on  to  the  bottom  of 
the  stake  fixed  close  to  him.  If  he  raises  his  head  above 
the  water  before  the  person  returns,  he  is  accounted  guilty  ; 
if  he  comes  up  afterwards,  he  is  declared  innocent. 

If  both  accuser  and  accused  are  condemned  to  undergo 
the  ordeal,  they  must  both  go  under  the  water  at  the  same 
time,  and  he  who  first  comes  to  the  surface  to  breathe  is 
considered  guilty. 

The  ordeal  by  poison  is  preceded  by  all  the  usual  cere- 
monies. A  little  powdered  arsenic  is  mixed  in  some  melted 
butter.     The  purohita  then  says  : — 

'  Poison,  you  are  a  harmful  substance,  created  to  destroy 
the  guilty  and  impure.  You  were  vomited  by  the  great 
snake  Vasuki  to  cause  the  death  of  guilty  giants.  Behold 
a  person  who  is  accused  of  a  crime  of  which  he  declares 
himself  to  be  innocent.  If  in  reality  he  is  not  guilty, 
divest  yourself  of  your  injurious  qualities  and  become  to 
him  as  amrita  (nectar).' 

The  accused  then  swallows  the  poison  ;  and  if,  though 
he  may  feel  unwell,  he  survives  for  three  days,  he  is  pro- 
claimed innocent. 

There  are  also  several  other  kinds  of  trial  by  ordeal. 
Amongst  the  number  is  that  of  boiling  oil,  which  is  mixed 
with  cow-dung,  and  into  which  the  accused  must  plunge 
his  arm  up  to  the  elbow  ;  that  of  the  snake,  which  consists 
in  shutting  up  some  very  poisonous  snake  in  a  basket,  in 
which  has  been  placed  a  ring  or  a  piece  of  money  which  the 
accused  must  find  and  bring  out  with  his  eyes  bandaged  ; 
if,  in  the  former  case,  he  is  not  scalded,  and  in  the  latter 
is  not  bitten,  his  innocence  is  completely  proved. 


INDEX 


Aaron,  524  n. 

Ablutions,  ceremonious,  185-6, 194- 

5,  487,  498,  520,  524,  525,  527, 

529,  550,  709. 
Abodes  of  Bliss,  483,  487,  493,  494, 

566,  593,  611,  613,  633,  634,  636, 

690,  691,  714. 
Abraham,  208,  536. 
Abyssinia,  208. 
Achamania  ceremony,  258-9. 
Actors,  travelling,  74. 
Adha-loka,  or  inferior  world,  690, 

691. 
Adi-Sakti,  543. 
Adiswara,  694,  695,  699. 
Aditi,  634. 
Adoption,  rules  regarding,  368  et 

seq. 
Adultery,  32-3,  211,  308  et  seq., 

657. 
Adventures  of  the  Brahman  Kala- 

Sarma,  441  et  seq. 
Adwaita  sect,  402,  403  n.,  407. 
Aesop,  435  n.,  449. 
Agastya,  248,  274,  275  n.,  426. 
Agni,  242,  633. 
Agni-diku,  146. 
Agni-Iswara,  146. 
Agraharas,    or    Brahmin    villages, 

174,  176. 
Agriculturists,  83  et  seq. 
Agrushada  Parikshai,  the,  385. 
Airavata,  617. 
Akshatas,    or   coloured   rice,    150, 

152,  225,  226. 
Alambadi,  596. 
Albinoes,  317-18. 
Alexander  the  Great,  430,  501,  518, 

522,  670,  681. 
Almanac,  the  Hindu,  135  et  seq., 

294. 
Almshouses,  235. 
Alphabets,  Indian,  427  et  seq. 
Amber,  King  of,  513. 
Ananta,  617. 


Anantaveda,  299. 
Andis,  the,  112,  120. 
Angirasi,  173,  384  n. 
Animal-worship,  636  et  seq. 
Animals,  unclean,  185. 
Aniruddha,  626,  636. 
Anna-prasana    ceremony,    156   et 

seq. 
Anusooya,  543-4. 
Aphorisms,  popular,  480  et  seq. 
Aphrodite,  596. 
Appaji,  story  of,  465  et  seq. 
Appu  (Vishnu),  553. 
Arabs,  the,  32,  101,  208,  311,  428. 
Ara-sani,  the,  232. 
Aratti  ceremonv,  the,  148  et  seq., 

167,  169,  228,*  230. 
Aristotle,  401,  435  n.,  559. 
Arjuna,  616. 

Armies,  Hindu,  668  et  seq. 
Artisans,  five  castes  of,  16,  23,  63. 
Arts  and  industries,  Hindu,  34  et 

seq.,  63,  94-5. 
Arundhati,  224,  228. 
Ascetics,  500  et  seq.,  529,  537,  576. 
Ashta-Dik-Palakas,  632-4. 
Ashta-yoga,  the  penances  of,  534-5. 
Asiatic  Researches,  377. 
Asirvadam,  the,  132. 
Asramas,  or  penances,  124. 
Assyrians,  596. 

Astrology,  Hindu,  379  et  seq.,  500. 
Astronomv,  Hindu,  99,  135  et  seq., 

378-9. 
Asvamedha  sacrifice,  271,  514  et 

seq. 
Aswatta,   or  sacred  fig-tree,   617, 

652-3. 
Atharvan,  384  n. 
Atharva-Yeda,  108,  173,  384,  649. 
Athens,  32,  547,  638. 
Athletic  contests,  570. 
Atman,  613  n. 
Atri,  98. 
Augustine,  St.,  554. 


724 


INDEX 


1  Aum,'  the  mysterious  word,  141, 

533,  G17. 
Avatars,  or  incarnations,  74,  113, 

121,  144,  145,  271,  420,  515,  010, 

018,  080. 
Ayodhya,  021. 
Ayuda-puja  sacrifice,  570. 

Baal-peor,  031. 

Babylonians,  590. 

Badari-aranya,  124. 

Badra-kali,  020,  032. 

Bahirava,  047. 

Baiders,  the,  501. 

Baines,  J.  A.,  xxvii,  085  n. 

Bairagis,  the,  112,   120,  334,  519- 

20,  002. 
Bala-Badra,  271. 

Bala-rama,  010,  020,  095,  090,  714. 
Bala-vasu-devatas,  095,  090. 
Bali,  510,  007. 
Bana,  030. 

Banasura,  King,  020. 
Bangaru-nadi,  145. 
Baramahl,  93. 
Barbers,  02. 

Bartolommeo,  Paolino  de  S.,  vi. 
Basava,  or  bull,  worship  of  the,  20, 

120,  038-9. 
Basil  plant,  worship  of  the,  049-51. 
Bassinam  ceremony,  228. 
Bathing,    rules   as   to,    185,    195, 

241-2. 
Battus,  caste  of,  278. 
Beef,  Hindu  repugnance  for,  190-1. 
Beggars,  religious,  113-14,  117. 
Belgola,  temple  at,  099,  700. 
Bellapuram,  531. 
Bellarmin,  Cardinal,  300. 
Benares,  101,   124,  222,  310,  300, 

599. 
Benevento,  Council  of,  525  n. 
Bengal,  xxvii,  280  n.,  357  n. 
Bentinck,  Lord  William,  vii,  xiv, 

xv,  357  n. 
Bhagavata,  2,   109,   121,  401,  410, 

550,  010,  024,  073. 
Bhagavat-gita,  053  n. 
Bhairava,'  250,  035. 
Bhali  bhakravarti,  271. 
Bharadwaja,  98. 


Bharata  Varsha,  223,  024. 

Bhasmasura,  517. 

Bhavani,  410  n. 

Bhima,  035. 

Bhootams,  or  evil  spirits,  044-5. 

Bhoota-sastram,  124. 

Bhrigu,  017. 

Bhuta-karma,  250. 

Bhuta-Karta,  250. 

Bikshukas,  527. 

Binota,  701. 

Birth  ceremonies,  157  et  seq. 

Birth  divination,  382. 

Birth-rate,  increasing,  94. 

Bishana,  250. 

Bodily  cleanliness,  200. 

Bolu-Jangama«,  the,  122. 

Bombay,  xiv. 

Bookbinding,  Hindu,  431. 

Bossuet,  31  n.,  298. 

Bouddha-avatar,  GIG. 

Bouddha  sect,  405,  410. 

Boy  as,  the,  501. 

Brachmanes,  501. 

Brahma,  history  and  attributes  of, 
013-5;  47,  98, 103,  144,  108, 172, 
198,  207,  219,  221,  224,  230, 
241-3,  248,  251-3,  256-7,  259, 
264-7,  270,  387,  425-6,  478,  481, 
503,  518,  525  n.,  533,  540,  542-3, 
545-6, 549, 552, 554,566,612,  616, 
624-5,  627-9,  633,  636,  690,  694, 
710-15. 

Brahmachari,  151,  179,  236  ;  rules 
followed  by  the,  160  et  seq.,  170 
et  seq. 

Brahman,  613  n. 

Brahmana,  384  n. 

Brahmanas,  687. 

Brahmins,  abstinence  from  in- 
toxicating liquors,  282  ;  begging 
by,  176;  ceremonies  of,  23,  143 
et  seq.,  151,  160  et  seq.,  701  ; 
characteristics  of,  12,  304,  316 
et  seq.,  322  ;  chief  caste,  14,  15, 
22,  24,  88,  90;  chronology  of, 
415  etseq.  ;  clothing,  their,  323  ; 
customs,  275  et  seq.,  302  et  seq.  ; 
degeneration  of,  104  ;  different 
kinds  of,  108  et  seq.  ;  doctrinal 
disputes,    121,    122;     domestic 


INDEX 


725 


festivities,  229  ;  epistolary  style 
of,  420  et  seq.  ;  etiquette,  rules 
of,  326  et  seq.  ;  fasts,  269  et  seq.; 
feasts,  276  et  seq.  ;  four  states 
of,  160  et  seq.,  500  et  seq.,  522  et 
seq.  ;  functions  proper  to,  14, 
15  ;  funeral  ceremonies  of,  482 
et  seq.,  538  et  seq.  ;  gifts  to, 
175;  gluttony  of,  272-3;  in- 
fluence on  Hinduism,  their,  4-5, 
606,  643-4  ;  irreverence  for  the 
gods,  296  et  seq.  ;  learning,  376 
et  seq.  ;  mantrams,  use  of,  138 
et  seq.  ;  marriage  among,  205  et 
seq.  ;  meals,  rules  as  to,  270 ; 
mental  superiority  of,  290 ; 
miracles,  590 ;  morality  of,  306 
et  seq.  ;  mythical  origin,  47,  97 
et  seq.  ;  occupations  of,  244  et 
seq.,  288  et  seq.  ;  opium,  use  of, 
19  ;  philosophy,  401  et  seq.  ; 
primitive,  104;  privileges  of,  172 
et  seq.  ;  proud  and  arrogant,  91, 
131  ;  punishment  of,  178  ;  re- 
ligious system,  105 ;  religious 
tolerance,  their,  295  et  seq.;  rules 
observed  by,  237  et  seq.,  270  ; 
rupture  with  the  Jains,  685  et 
seq.  ;  sacrifices,  509  et  seq.  ; 
sects,  111,  402  et  seq.  ;  social 
rank  of,  23  ;  wives  of,  336  et  seq. 

Brahmottara-Kanda,  139. 

Briareus,  546. 

Brihaspati,  252. 

Brinda- Varna,  or  paradise  of 
Krishna,  624. 

Bringi,  635. 

Brinjals,  158. 

Brinjaris,  the,  68. 

British  dominion  in  India,  xxii  et 
seq.,  4  et  seq.,  93,  290-1,  356, 
654  n.,  663  et  seq.,  677. 

Brito,  the  Jesuit,  300. 

Bruce's  Travels,  208-9. 

Bruhaspati,  617,  634. 

Buddha,  106,  118,  412,  618. 

Buddhism,  106-8,  412-14,  685  n. 

Bull-worship,  493-4,  638-9. 

Bunumi,  613. 

Burial,  superstitions  about,  319. 

Burke,  Edmund,  211. 


Burma,  L06. 
Burnouf,  Eugene,  v. 

Cadmus,  425. 

Caesar,  559. 

Calanus,  522. 

Calmet,  Dom,  vi,  102. 

Cambodia,  106. 

Cambyses,  193. 

Campbell,  A.  D.,  xvi,  xviii. 

Camps,  Hindu  military,  678-9. 

Canaan,  578. 

Canara,  268. 

Canarese  language,  392,  396,  428, 
429  ;  poetry,  393. 

Cangoondy,  358. 

Canidia,  389. 

Cape  Comorin,  60,  101,  106,  121, 
603. 

Capella,  580. 

Capital  punishment,  667. 

Carnatic,  the,  32,  71,  77,  109,  128, 
195,  196,  284,  358,  377,  593,  601, 
645. 

Caspian  Sea,  106. 

Caste,  advantages  of,  28  et  seq.  ; 
antiquity  and  origin  of,  15,  31, 
44  et  seq.  ;  attachment  to,  41  ; 
customs,  special,  16  et  seq.  ; 
distinguishing  marks  of,  24 ; 
division  and  subdivision  of,  14 
et  seq.,  48  ;  expulsion  from,  38 
et  seq.  ;  marks  of,  18,  24,  112, 
117-18;  penalties,  32-3,  37,  284; 
restoration  to,  41  ;  system,  12, 
15  et  seq.  ;  unpardonable  sins, 
43  ;  violation  of,  283  et  seq. 

Cattle-killing,  prejudice  against, 
87  n.,  193,  638. 

Caucasus,  the,  101,  102,  103. 

Cauvery,  the,  124,  195,  242,  550-1, 
596. 

Cauvery  Falls,  196. 

Cecrops,  32. 

Celibacy,  distaste  for,  205-6. 

Ceremonies,  allegorical  meaning  of, 
226. 

Ceremonious  visits,  331. 

Ceres,  546. 

Ceylon,  108,  430,  516,  607.  619. 

Chakravartis,  or  emperors,  695-6. 


726 


INDEX 


Chaldeans,  the,  42,  4(5. 
Champenois,  Mgr.,  xi. 
Chandas,  399. 

Chandra-pushkarani,  the,  124. 
Charanani-yoga,  694,  696. 
Charvaka  sect,  405. 
Chaturanana,  King,  712. 
Chaula,  or  tonsure  ceremony,  158- 

Cherumars,  the,  58  n. 

Chess,  the  origin  of,  670-1. 

Chhaya,  224. 

Chidi-mari,  torture  of,  597-8. 

Child-marriages,  212. 

Children,  a  Hindu's  desire  for,  592 

et  seq.  ;   ceremonies  concerning, 

155  et  seq.,  161. 
Child-widows,  354. 
China,  28,  106,  311,  424,  435  n. 
Chinneryapatam,  132. 
Chitrarata,  617. 
Cholia  Brahmins,  110. 
Chonata,  634. 

Christian  era,  418,  419,  420. 
Christianity  in  India,  xxv  et  seq., 

10,  311-13,  536,  606,  609,  610; 

Brahmin  attitude  towards,  294, 

299  et  seq.  ;    effect  on  marriage 
of,  211  ;    former  ascendency  of, 

300  ;   Hindu  objections  to,  209  ; 
its  retarded  progress,  301. 

Chronology,  Hindu,  415  et  seq. 
Chucklers,  or  leather-workers,  25, 

27,  49,  61,  118,  121. 
Chutrams,  or  almshouses,  235. 
Clement,  St.,  554. 
Climate,  influence  of,  321. 
Clothing,  Hindu,  323. 
Clouds,  four  principal,  380. 
Cochin  China,  106. 
Cceurdoux,  Pere,  v. 
Coimbatore,  93,  196. 
Colchis,  200. 

Cole,  Hon.  Arthur  Henry,  6. 
Colebrooke,  H.  T.,  v,  410  n. 
Coleridge,  S.  T.,  xix. 
Columella,  638  n. 
Combaconum,  195. 

Dndc 

331. 
Conjeeveram,  32,  124. 


Coorg,  317. 

Corea,  106. 

Cotton  industry,  80-1,  95. 

Cow-killing,  Hindu  horror  of,  191- 

2,  706. 
Cow-worship,  573-4,  686. 
Criminal  jurisprudence,  657  et  seq.; 

tribes,  66  et  seq. 
Crows,  superstition  as  to,  487. 
Curtius,  Quintus,  430,  681  n. 
Curzon,  Lord,  iv. 
Cycles,  Hindu  and  Chinese,  419. 

Dakshina  (fee),  130. 

Dalai-Lama,  594. 

Dancing-girls,  see  Temple. 

Dandaka-aranya,  124. 

Dandamis,  518. 

Darbha  grass,  in  ceremonial  use, 
167,  217,  218,  225,  256,  259,  482, 
484,  487,  492-4,  511-12,  651-2, 
703,  710,  720. 

Darshana,  635. 

Dasa-avatara,  400. 

Dasa-dana,  488,  492,  493,  495, 
497. 

Dasara,  feast  of,  569-70,  622  n. 

Dasaradha,  King  of  Ayodhya,  619. 

Dasarha,  King  of  Madura,  139. 

Dasaris,  120. 

Dasarus,  602. 

David,  536. 

Dead,  bath  of  the,  487,  489  ;  de- 
filement by  the,  179  ;  food  for 
the,  490-1  ;  mourning  for  the, 
350  et  seq. 

Death, ceremonies  after, 482  et  seq., 
489  et  seq.  ;  unlucky  days  for, 
499-500. 

Debt,  83  et  seq.,  656-7  ;  imprison- 
ment for,  665. 

Deccan,  the,  15. 

Deepavali  feast,  571. 

Defilements  and  purifications,  178 
et  seq.,  186  et  seq.,  194  et  seq. 

Deities,  principal,  545  et  seq. 

Delrio,  Disquisitional  Magicae,  386. 

Demons  and  devil-worship,  644-5. 

Deucalion,  420. 

Deussen,  Professor,  403  n. 

Devaki,  271,  625. 


INDEX 


727 


Devendra,  168,  219,  503,  547,  632, 
690. 

Dhanur-Vedu,  235. 

Dharmapuri,  284. 

Dharma-Sastras,  124,  235,  655. 

Diksha,  or  initiation,  104,  118,  695. 

Dilipa,  King  of,  502. 

Dindime,  518. 

Diodorus,  193. 

Diogenes,  519. 

Divination.  381-2. 

Divorce,  211. 

Divuligai,  feast  of,  85. 

Dombers  or  Dombarus,  74. 

Domestic  animals,  privations  of, 
86-7. 

Domestic  quarrels,  338. 

Domestic  service,  52  et  seq. 

Dravidian  country,  15,  146. 

Draviani-yoga,  694,  696. 

Drinking,  rules  as  to,  183,  187-8. 

Drishti-dosha,  or  evil  eye,  228. 

Druids,  the,  505,  588. 

Dubois,  Abbe  J.  A.,  life  of,  v-vii, 
viii-xii ;  as  a  Guru,  202  ;  his 
chief  work,  Hindu  Manners,  &c, 
iii,  v,  vi,  xii-xxviii ;  translation 
of  the  Pancha-tantra,  vi,  xxviii  ; 
Letters  on  the  State  of  Christian  ity 
in  India,  xxv  et  seq.,  302  n. 

Du  Halde,  418. 

Durga,  629,  632. 

Durgams,  or  fortresses,  681. 

Dvija,  'twice-born,'  98,  169. 

D  wait  a  (twofold)  sect,  402  et  seq., 
408. 

Dwaraka,  627. 

Earth,  the,  deification  of,  549  et 
seq. 

Earthenware  vessels,  184. 

East  Indian  Company,  xi,  xiv  et 
seq.,  xxviii. 

Eating,  care  in,  183  et  seq.  ;  glut- 
tony in,  272-3 ;  rules  about,  183- 
4,  188  et  seq.,  245  et  seq.,  559- 
61. 

Educational  systems,  Hindu,  376- 
8. 

Egypt  and  the  Egyptians.  31.  34, 
42,  47,  101,  193,  200,  424,  505, 


rm,  579,  581,  589,  613  n.,  631, 
640,  643  n.,  648. 

Eka-dasi  ceremony,  701  et  seq. 

Elements,  worship  of  the,  549  et 
seq. 

Elephants  in  war,  671  et  seq. 

Elijah,  537,  538. 

Elisha,  525  n. 

Elphinstone,  M.,  685  n. 

Enceladus,  546. 

Enchantments,  386. 

Epics,  Hindu,  401,  669-70. 

Epistolary  style  of  the  Hindus,  420 
et  seq. 

Erskine,  Mr.  W.,  xiv. 

Essenes,  the,  505. 

Etiquette,  Hindu  rules  of,  326  et 
seq. 

Europeans,  as  administrators  in 
India,  3,  96-7,  291,  647  ;  Hindu 
contempt  for,  xxii,  41,  192,  194, 
201,  239  n.,  273,  275,  300  et  seq., 
610,  700 ;  judicial  system  of, 
662-3,  667  ;  military  science  of, 
669,  676,  679  et  seq.  ;  superior 
physique  of,  320. 

Evil  eye,  influence  of  the,  149-50, 
228. 

Evil  spirits,  worship  of,  644-5. 

Fables,  Hindu,  433  et  seq. 

Factions,  Right-hand  and  Left- 
hand,  24  et  seq.,  60,  154  n. 

Fakirs,  118,  176. 

Family  councils,  373-4. 

Fasting  and  fast-days,  269  et  seq., 
525-6,  706. 

Fate,  Hindu  conception  of,  614-5. 

Feasts,  religious,  276  et  seq.,  567 
et  seq. 

Females,  excess  of,  208  et  seq. 

Fig-tree,  the  sacred,  243,  652-3. 

Fire,  deification  of,  549  et  seq.  ; 
ordeal  by,  717,  720. 

Fire-bath,  the,  598. 

Fish-worship,  642. 

Flattery,  Hindu  love  of,  168,  423-4. 

Flood,  "the,  allusions  to,  100,  102, 
103,  189,  199,  200-1,  531.  536; 
Hindu  traditions  as  to,  47,  98, 
251-2,  416  et  seq.,  426,503. 


728 


INDEX 


Food,  forbidden  articles  of,  282-3, 
559  ;  jungle  products  as,  82-3  ; 
moderation  in  eating,  679-80 ; 
over-eating,  272-3 ;  prejudice 
against  animal,  190  et  seq., 
560-1  ;  rules  about  eating,  183- 
4,  188  et  seq.,  245  et  seq. 

Fortifications,  Hindu,  681. 

Fort  St.  George,  x,  xiv,  xvi,  xix. 

Four  Deaf  Men,  story  of,  450  et  seq. 

Four  Foolish  Brahmins,  story  of, 
453  et  seq. 

Funeral  ceremonies,  482  et  seq., 
489  et  seq.,  538  et  seq. 

Gandharvas,  634. 

Ganesa,  the  god  of  obstacles,  162, 
631,  632,  635,  718. 

Ganges,  the,  106,  108,  118,  124, 
139,  195,  200,  241,  242,  355, 
356-7  n.,  371,  406,  487,  499, 
500  n..  502,  520,  546  n.,  550,  606, 
617,  624,  636,  692. 

Garga,  139. 

Garuda,  or  kite,  worship  of  the, 
133,  250,  546,  617,  639-41,  701. 

Garuda-basavis,  133. 

Gauri,  feast  of,  568. 

Gautama,  98,  102,  406,  619. 

Gautama-asrama,  124. 

Gayatri  prayer,  the,  140-1,  255  et 
seq.,  266-8,  617. 

Gerbillon,  Father,  594. 

Gentlefolk,  Hindu,  90-1. 

Ghauts,  Western,  76. 

Ghebres,  the,  504. 

Giants,  Hindu,  516-17. 

Gluttony,  Brahmin,  272-3. 

Goch-aranya,  124. 

God,  Christian  idea  of,  608-9 ; 
Hindu  ideas  of,  297  et  seq.,  401, 
537,  609,  689-90  ;  native  Chris- 
tian name  for,  202. 

Godavarl,  the,  124,  195,  200,  242. 

Goddesses,  principal  Hindu,  207. 

Gods,  irreverence  for  the,  296  et 
seq.  ;  principal  Hindu,  545  et 
seq.,  612  et  seq. 

Gokarnam,  124. 

Gollavarus,  or  shepherds,  22,  39, 
48,  71. 


Goshais,  120,  602. 

Govinda,  237  n.,  277. 

Grahastha,  the,  151,  160,  236  et 
seq.,  270,  523. 

Grand  Lama,  the,  106. 

Greece,  ancient,  579,  670,  682  n., 
698  n. ;  deities  of,  546,  547,  633 
fables  of,  435  n.  ;  its  indebted- 
ness to  the  Hindus,  503-4 
mythology  of,  547  ;  oracles  of. 
590;  philosophy  of,  504,  508, 
524  n.,  554,  555,  561,  615. 

Greeting,  modes  of,  326  et  seq. 

Gujerat,  292. 

Gumatta,  699. 

Gundick,  the,  648  n. 

Guru-dakshina,  the,  130. 

Gurus,  or  priests,  117,  118,  123  et 
seq.  ;  blessings  and  curses  of, 
125-6  ;  illicit  connexions,  131  ; 
magnificence  of,  129  ;  pastoral 
visits,  130  ;  temporal  and  spiri- 
tual powers,  125  et  seq. 

Guy  of  Arezzo,  589. 

Gymnosophists,  410  n.,  426,  501, 
504,  518,  558-9. 

Gypsies,  66. 

Hanuman,  or  Hanumanta  (mon- 
key), reverence  paid  to,  113,  120, 
271,  580,  617,  620,  623,  637-8. 

Hara  (Siva),  277. 

Hari  (Vishnu),  237  n. 

Hari-smarana  ceremony,  237,  248, 
615. 

Havelock,  Sir  Arthur,  375  n. 

Heavens,  the  Hindu,  566,  633  et 
seq. 

Hercules,  100,  103. 

Hermitages,  or  mutts,  132. 

Herodotus,  435  n.,  596. 

Hill  tribes,  75  et  seq. 

Hindus,  the,  ancient  history  of,  3  ; 
caste  system,  14-48  ;  conserva- 
tism of,  96  ;  customs,  origin  of, 
199,  201  ;  fables,  433-50 ; 
feasts,  567-77 ;  funeral  cus- 
toms, 482-500,  538-41  ;  gods, 
612-36;  learning  of,  376-92; 
marriage  customs,  16,  17,  20  et 
seq.,  34,  40,  46,  205-35  ;  mental 


INDEX 


729 


characteristics,  321  ;  moral 
characteristics,  306 ;  outward 
appearance,  316 ;  philosophy, 
401-15  ;  poetry  of,  392-401  ; 
poverty,  80-97  ;  privileges,  26  ; 
religion,  11,  23,  105,  542-653; 
sects,  24,  111-23,  405;  vices, 
306-15  ;  wealthy  classes,  90-1. 
See  also  India. 

Hirannia-kashiapa,  121. 

Hirannya,  614. 

Hirannyaksha,  145. 

Hist oi re  Generate  de  Tous  les 
Peuples,  377. 

Hitopadesa,  435  n. 

Hobbala,  109. 

Homam,  or  sacrifice  to  fire,  156, 
167,  169,  171,  175,  221,  225-8, 
248,  484,  495,  509,  511,  520,  524, 
538,  550,  718,  720. 

Hook-swinging,  598. 

Horace,  389,  399. 

Horoscopes,  157,  379. 

Horse,  sacrifice  of  the,  514  et  seq. 

Horses,  Indian,  673. 

Houses,  Hindu  style  of,  324. 

Human  sacrifices,  645-8. 

Husbands,  deference  towards,  339, 
347  et  seq. 

Hygiene,  Brahmin  rules  of,  237  et 
seq. 

Idols  and  idol-worship,  544-5,  548, 
568,  573-5,  578  et  seq.,  590  et 
seq.,  699,  700. 

Immortality,  Hindu  belief  in, 
488-9. 

Implements  and  tools,  worship  of, 
568. 

Inanimate  objects,  worship  of,  648 
et  seq. 

Incantations,  386. 

India,  arts  and  manufactures  of,  34 
et  seq.,  80-1  ;  government  of, 
see  British  dominion  ;  houses, 
style  of,  324 ;  justice,  administra- 
tion of,  654-67  ;  languages  of, 
424,  427  et  seq.  ;  military  sys- 
tem, former,  667-84;  poverty  of. 
7  ;  wealth,  false  ideas  of  its,  80 
et  seq.     See  also  Hindus. 


Indian  Mirror,  The,  510  n. 

Indian  Penal  Code,  659  n. 

Indra,  or  Devendra,  221,  224,  242, 
267,  362,  481,  514,  535,  555,  617, 
632-4,  718,  720. 

Indra-mena,  710  et  seq. 

Indra-purana,  555. 

Indra-pushkarani,  the,  124. 

Indus,  the,  124,  195,  200,  242,  500, 
681,  692. 

Infanticide,  500,  605. 

Inheritance,  rules  of,  368  et  seq. 

Inscriptions,  ancient,  432. 

Intermarriage,  20  et  seq. 

Intoxicants,  use  of,  19,  187-8, 
280-2,  287,  519,  635,  645,  679- 
80. 

Irulers,  the,  77,  645. 

Isaac,  536. 

Isana,  242,  633,  718. 

Ishta  devata  (tutelary  deity),  in- 
auguration of  the,  164. 

Ishwara,  627. 

Israelites,     the,     193,     198,     312, 


Jacob,  198,  213. 

Jagannath,  546  ;  temple  of,  295, 
521,  600,  602-3,  710  et  seq. 

Jagat-triya,  690,  691. 

Jaimini,  173. 

Jaina,  685. 

Jaina-bassaru  sect,  688. 

Jains,  the,  differences  with  the 
Brahmins,  13,  23,  106  et  seq.. 
414,  685  et  seq.  ;  food  of,  698  ; 
idols  of,  700  ;  learning  of,  694  et 
seq.  ;  mark  worn  by,  24,  169  ; 
religious  svstem  and  observ- 
ances of,  269,  542,  689  et  seq.  ; 
rules  of  conduct,  697  et  set).  ; 
sects  of,  688  ;  temples  of,  699- 
700. 

Jamadagni,  98. 

Jambu-Bwipa,  145,  624,  692,  693, 
695,  706. 

Jambu-vruksha.  14"). 

Janaka,  King,  619,  622. 

Jangamas,  the,  117,  120,  122,  129. 
132,  133,  602. 

Japan,  106.  311. 


730 


INDEX 


Japheth,  supposed  Hindu  descent 
from,  101,  102,  103,  503. 

Jata-karma  ceremony,  155-6. 

Jetti  caste.  570. 

Jewellery  and  ornaments,  332  et 
seq. 

Jews,  the,  212  n.,  214  n.,  225n., 
277  n.,  319  n.,  419,  524  n. 

Jina,  085  n. 

Jivatma,  273,  407. 

Joel,  Rabbi,  435  n. 

Jogis,  the,  122. 

John  de  Meurs,  589. 

John  of  Capua,  435  n. 

John  the  Baptist,  537-8. 

Johnson,  Professor  F.,  435  n. 

Jones,    Sir  William,  v,  vi,  435  n. 

Joshua,  516,  607. 

Jugglers  and  epiacks,  73  et  seq. 

Jumna,  the,  124,  242,  606. 

Junginagatta,  596. 

Jungle  dwellers,  76  et  seq.,  160, 
500  et  seq. 

Juno,  546,  547. 

Jupiter,  545,  546,  547. 

Jupiter,  the  planet,  236,  379,  381. 

Justice,  British  administration  of, 
663  et  seq.  ;  Hindu  administra- 
tion of,  654  et  seq. 

Justin,  St.,  554. 

Jwala  (Siva),  553. 

Jyotisha-sastram,  124. 

Kadrupala,  250. 

Kadu-Kurumbars,  the,  76-7,  645. 

Kadurgita,  635. 

Kaempfer,  311. 

Kaikeya,  619. 

Kailasa    (Saiva's    paradise),    197, 

534,  566,  629,  630,  633,  635,  690, 

707,  708. 
Kalahasti,  124. 
Kalavati,  Princess,  139. 
Kali,  388,  647. 
Kali-purana,  647. 
Kaliya,  the  serpent,  627. 
Kali-yuga  era,  140,  145,  347,  415 

et  seq.,  565,  617,  618. 
Kalki  avatar,  or  horse  incarnation, 

616,617. 
Kalla  bantrus,  or  thieves,  67-8 


Kal pa-tree,  634. 

Kamadhenu,  the  cow,  634. 

Kamsa,  King,  625-6. 

Kamtchatka,  106. 

Kanaras,  the,  11. 

Kandalas,  the,  122. 

Kania-dana  ceremony,  223,  226. 

Kankana  ceremony,  222,  229. 

Kanojis,  the,  68. 

Kapalika  sect,  405. 

Kapalini,  250. 

Kapila,  the  teaching  of,  408  et  seq. 

Ka  pi  la-Muni,  617. 

Kara-madai,  596. 

Karanani-yoga,  694,  696. 

Karelaks,  318. 

Karma-Veda,  174. 

Karona,  the,  636. 

Kartika,  617,  635. 

Kashmir,  192  n. 

Kashtachenda    Swetambara    sect, 

688. 
Kasi,  222,  366. 
Kasyapa,  98,  250,  257,  633. 
Kaviana-takam,  124. 
Kedaram,  124. 
Kesava,  237  n. 
Ketrika,  250. 
Ketu,  236. 
Khumbakarna,  248. 
'  Kinnahra,'  the,  65. 
Kircher,  A.,  v. 

Kistna,  the,  10,  121,  122,  124. 
Kitoki,  618. 

Komatty  (Vaisya)  caste,  361. 
Konkanis,  the,  11,  110. 
Kousalya,  619. 
Krishna,   224,  258,  271,  401,  616, 

624-7,  696  n.,  701,  714,715. 
Krishna-paksha,  146. 
Krishna  Roya,  King,  465  et  seq. 
Krupacharia,  271. 
Kshatriyas,  or  Rajahs,  one  of  the 

four  main  castes,  14-15,  22,  687, 

695  ;  funeral  ceremonies  of,  496  ; 

mark   worn   by,   24,    169,    170 ; 

marriage  among,  233-4  ;  military 

duties    prescribed    for,    14,    47, 

234-5,  (>()8  ;    origin  of,  47,  614  ; 

religious  obligations,   170,  269; 

sacrifices  of,  646,  647. 


INDEX 


731 


Kshetraja,  250. 

Kubera,  242,  481, 617, 033,718, 720. 

Kudimis,  the,  75  n. 

Kudlugondur,  132. 

Kullars  (robber-caste),  17. 

Kumara,  634. 

Kumbokanam,  603. 

Kuravers  or  Kurumarus,  the,  65 

et  seq. 
Kurgas  or  Kudagas,  11. 
Kurma-avatar,  616. 
Kurubas,  the,  48. 

La  Fontaine,  449. 
Lakshmana,  619,  621-2. 
Lakshmi,  207,  224,  346,  388,  546-7, 

636,  715. 
Lakshminarayana,  410  n. 
La  Loubere,  106. 
Lambadis,  or  pillagers,  68  et  seq., 

678. 
Lamps,  feast  of,  571. 
Languages,  Hindu,  427  et  seq. 
Lankah  (Ceylon),  619  et  seq. 
Laos,  106. 
Launay,  M.,  xii. 

Law,  administration  of,  654  et  seq. 
Lazarus,  607. 

Learning,  Hindu,  376  et  seq. 
Leather,    Hindu     repugnance    to, 

182. 
Lethe,  563. 

Letter- writing,  Hindu,  420  et  seq. 
Linga-basavis,  133. 
Lingadaris,  sect  of,  111. 
Lingam,  the,  112,  117-19,  121,  538, 

540,  568,  580,  628-31,  686,  707, 

708. 
Linga-purana,  629. 
Lingayats,   the,  religious  customs 

and  tenets  of,  20,  114,  116-18, 

181,  190,  193,  560,  568,  639. 
Lingis,  410  n. 
Litigation,  Hindu  propensity  for, 

664. 
Lizard  omen,  216. 
Logan,  W.,   Manual  of  Malabar, 

17  n.,  58  n. 
Logic,  study  of,  406,  408. 
Lokayatha  Sastra  sect   and  doc- 
trine, 414. 


Longinus,  399. 

Louis  XI,  608  n. 

Low  castes,  contempt  for,  48  et 

seq. 
Lycurgus,  103,  377,  426,  504. 

Mackintosh,  Sir  James,  xiv. 

Madhya-loka,  or  middle  world, 
690-2. 

Madhya-Yandana,  the,  258. 

Madras,  xi,  375  n.,  598  n. 

Madras  Government,  xiv  et  seq. 

Madura,  17,  60,  300,  598  n.,  603. 

Magic,  Hindu,  382  et  seq. 

Magic  syllables,  143,  388. 

Magicians,  powers  attributed  to. 
382,  385,  681  ;  rivalry  amongst, 
391  ;  stock-in-trade  of,  389,  646. 

Magog,  102,  103. 

Mahabharata,  2,  360. 

Maha-damai-pravai,  691. 

Maha-deva,  627. 

Maha-gurus,  125. 

Maha-loka,  258. 

Maha-makham  festival,  196. 

Mahameru,  Mount,  145,  633,  692. 

Maha-navami  festival,  569-70. 

Mahanuvu,  47,  48  n. 

Maha-sankranti  feast,  571  et  seq. 

Mahomedans,  conduct  in  public, 
78 ;  dress,  mode  of,  323,  341  ; 
Hindu  attitude  towards,  304 ; 
military  service  of,  675-6,  678-9, 
681  ;  proselytizing  efforts  of,  xi, 
610 ;  rule,  effects  of  their,  187, 
194,  355,  647,  657  ;  salutations 
of,  326  ;  superstitious  practices 
of,  385,  570;  tyrannical  methods 
of,  178,  290,  299,  303,  590,  659, 
660;   vices  of,  311,  312,  678. 

Mahrattas,  the,  evil  propensities 
of,  69  ;  military  prowess  of,  (M8, 
674-6,  679. 

Malabar,  13,  17  n.,  56  et  seq.,  76, 
78,  317,  323,  341,  645,  700. 

Malacca  Straits,  106. 

Malai-Kondigarus,  the.  78. 

Malcolm,  Sir  John,  663  n. 

Malcyur,  688. 

Mandakini,  the.  (134. 

Mandara,  Mount,  101,  651. 


732 


INDEX 


.Maiulra,  540. 

Mangalashta  ceremony,  223-4,226. 

Mantapam,  the,  229. 

Mantradaris,  142. 

Mantrams,  or  prayers,  committed 
to  memory,  170  ;  efficacy  of,  138 
et  seq.,  197,  250,  563;  funeral, 
483,  485-7,  490-1,  494-5,  497  ; 
initiatory,  118,524-5;  magical, 
333,  386,  388-9  ;  of  midwives, 
142 ;  of  physicians,  141  ;  of 
sorcerers,  142  ;  peculiar  to  each 
sect,  122 ;  propitiatory,  134 ; 
sacrificial,  512  ;  to  various  dei- 
ties, 250  et  seq. 

Manu,  145,  176  n.,  416,  486  n. 

Manu,  Laws  of,  501  n.,  522  n. 

Manufactures,  34  et  seq.,  63 ; 
effects  of  machinery  on,  94-5. 

Manu-Sastras,  655. 

Manuscripts,  Hindu,  432. 

Marana  Devi,  388. 

Marava  country,  17. 

Margasirsha,  617. 

Mari-amma,  582,  597-9. 

Markandeya,  712,  713. 

Markan deya-pura na,  416. 

Marriage  ceremonies,  217  et  seq.  ; 
child,   212 ;     consummation   of 
231,  337  ;   dancing-girls  at,  585 
expenses,     213-4,     217,     230 
feasts,  226  et  seq.  ;   games,  229 
importance  of,  205  ;    indissolu- 
bility of,  211  ;   intermarriage,  20 
et  seq.,  34,  46  ;    months  chosen 
for,  213-4  ;    of  trees,  653  ;    pre- 
liminaries of,  213  et  seq.  ;    pro- 
cession, 230 ;  revolting  customs, 
16,  17  ;   rites,  217  et  seq.  ;  vow 
(the    Arundhati),    230;     widow 
remarriage,  24,  40  ;    within  the 
gotram,  22. 

Mars,  the  planet,  236,  380,  381. 

Materialistic  philosophy,  410-11. 

Mathura  (Muttra),  624. 

Matsya-avatar,  426,  616. 

Mattas  or  Mattancharas,  the,  122. 

Maya,  or  illusion,  402  et  seq.,  407 
et  seq.,  113,  517. 

Meditation,  the  practice  of,  144  et 
seq.,  520,  529  et  seq.,  536  et  seq. 


Melkota,  temple  of,  583. 

Me moires  de  V  Academie  des  Sciences, 

377. 
Mercury,  the  planet,  236,  379,  381. 
Meru,  Mount  (Great  Meru),   101, 

617. 
Metempsychosis,  556  et  seq.,  561- 

3,  690. 
Midwives,  142. 
Military  system  of  the  Hindus,  667 

et  seq. 
Milk  as  a  beverage,  187. 
Mill,  James,  xix. 
Mimamsa  philosophy,  406,  410. 
Mimamsa-sastram,  124. 
Miracles,  592. 
Missionary  labours  in  India,  xxv 

et  seq.,   300  et  seq.     See  also 

Christianity. 
Mitra,  259,  718. 
Moabites,  631. 
Moguls,  429,  672,  674. 
Mogur,  temple  at,  595. 
Mohini,  651. 
Moksha,   or  supreme   blessedness, 

688,  695. 
Moksha-sadhaka,  519-20,  538. 
Money-lenders,  656-7,  665-6. 
Monier- Williams,    Sir   M.,    191  n., 

486  n.,  542  n.,  613  n. 
Monkey  worship,    113,    120,   271, 

580,  617,  620,  623,  637-8. 
Montesquieu,  191  n.,    206  n.,  576, 

610,  612. 
Moochis,  or  tanners,  63. 
Moral  stanzas,  474-82. 
Morning   ablutions,   238   et  seq.  ; 

prayers,  236,  251  et  seq. 
Morsa-Okkala-Makkalu,  the,  17. 
Moses,  31,  46,  47,  180  n.,  198,  199, 

384  n.,  417,  420,  525  n.,  536. 
Mottet,  M.,  xii. 
Mourners,  hired,  352. 
Mourning  for  the  dead,  484  et  seq., 

489  et  seq. 
Mudu-dorai,  596. 
Muhurta  ceremony,  221-2. 
Muir,  Dr.,  Old  Sanskrit  Texts,  44  n. 
Midler,      Professor     Max,      12  n., 

102  n.,  403  n.,  663  n. 
Munisawmy  Iyer,  C.  V.,  xxviii. 


INDEX 


733 


Music,  Hindu,  64,  587  et  seq.,  595 

et  seq.,  705. 
Musical    instruments,    64-5,    497, 

587,  589,  705. 
Mutiny,  the,  xxiv. 
Muttadars,  the,  89. 
Mutts,  or  hermitages,  131. 
Mylitta,  596. 
Mysore,  x,  xxvii,  6,  15,  17,  18,  20, 

43,  51,  68,  71,  93,  109,  202,  385, 

583,  594,  596,  642,  645,  647,  688, 

699. 
Mythology,  Hindu,  516-17,  545  et 

seq. 

Xagara-panchami  feast,  571. 
Xairs  or  Xaimars,  11,  16. 
Nairuta,  718. 

Nalangu  ceremony,  218,  229. 
Xallaris,  the,  122. 
Namadaris,  sect  of,  111,  117. 
Xamakal,  532. 

Xama-karma  ceremony,  or  name- 
giving,  156. 
Xamam,the,  109, 112, 119,334,631. 
Xaniaskara,  performance  of,  326, 

650. 
Xambudiri,  the,  16,  17  n. 
Xanda,  258,  271,  624,  626. 
Xandi,  635,  647,  708. 
Xandikeswara,  249. 
Xanjangud,  temple  at,  594,  59". 
Xarada,  the  Penitent,  245,  537. 
Xaraka,  or  hell,  197,  547,  556,  557, 

563  et  seq.,  689,  691,  695,  701, 

702,  707. 
Xara-medha  sacrifice,  646. 
Xarasimha,  121. 
Xarasimha-avatar,  616. 
Xarasimmiyengar,  V.  X.,  xxvii. 
Xarayana,    197,   237  n.,  545,   553, 

615,  649,  701,  703,  713. 
Xarayana-asrama,  124. 
Xastika  sect  and  doctrine,  414. 
Xatural  objects,  worship  of,  648  et 

seq. 
Xegapatam,  683. 
Xeimisha-aranya,  124. 
Xeiruta,  242,  633. 
Xeiveddya,  or  Divine  offering,  148, 

490,  512,  539,  568,  708,  714. 


Xepal,  648  n. 

Xeptune,  545,  547,  718. 

Xerbudda,  the,  124,  242. 

Xereids,  547. 

Xew  Year's  day,  the  Hindu,  137, 

567. 
Xila,  Mount,  710  et  seq. 
Xilagiri-malai,  196. 
Xile,  the,  200,  613  n. 
Xilgiris,  or  Blue  Mountains,  196  n. 
Xirvani,  or  blessedness,  state  of, 

695,  696-7,  699. 
Niti-Sastras,  655. 
Xiti  Slokas,  or  moral  stanzas,  474 

et  seq. 
Xitya-Karma,  161,  235,  268. 
Xoah,  100,  103,  199,  416-18. 
Xobili,  Roberto  de',  v,  300. 
Xomad  tribes,  65  et  seq.  ;    camps 

of,  72  ;   self-government,  73. 
Xurjehan,  Emperor,  449. 
Xyaya  philosophy,  406. 

Oath,  statements  on,  662. 

Obscene  rites,  286  et  seq. 

Ogyges,  420. 

Oil,  hygienic  use  of,  27 1 . 

Opium,  use  of,  19,  287. 

Ordeal,  trial  by,  661-2,  717  et  seq. 

Orgies,  religious,  283  et  seq.,  596. 

Origen,  559  n. 

Orissa,  710. 

Ornamental  marks,  333. 

Ornaments,  323,  332  et  seq.,  342-3. 

Osiris,  100. 

Outcastes,  see  Pariahs. 

Ovid,  390  n.,  563  n.,  (i37  n. 

Padakanikai,  130. 

Padma-purana,  344,  502,  537.  564. 

Pailada,  173. 

Pakanittis,  the,  71. 

Pali  language,  108. 

Pallers,  the,  60. 

Palni,  603. 

Pancha-amrita  offering,  153. 

Pancha-gavia  offering,   42,  152-3, 

194,  195,  486,  489,  490,  524,  529, 

538. 
Panchalas,  or  five  artisan  classes, 

16,23,24,  169,  170. 


734 


INDEX 


Panchangam,  or  Hindu  calendar, 
13G-7. 

Pancha-tattfra  (fables),  vi,  xxviii, 
434  et  seq. 

Panchayat,  or  arbitration  tribunal, 
655. 

Pandals,  or  pavilions,  154,  162, 
232,  233,  338. 

Pandarams,  or  beggars,  117,  120, 
129,  132. 

Panda,  King,  360. 

Panjab,  xxvii. 

Paper,  manufacture  of,  429. 

Parabrahma,  or  Supreme  Being, 
140,  297,  406,  506,  509,  518,  562, 
566. 

Paramannam,  the,  540. 

Paramatma,  or  Supreme  Spirit, 
297,  402  n.,  406,  407. 

Parameswara,  627. 

Parasu-rama,  234  n.,  271. 

Parasu-rama-avatar,  616. 

Paravati,  568. 

Parents  and  their  children,  307-8. 

Pariahs,  or  outcastes,  15,  32,  393  ; 
abject  condition  of,  29,  49  et 
seq.,  187,  558 ;  domestic  ser- 
vants, 52-3i  feasts  of,  280; 
flesh-eaters,  60,  192  ;  food  eaten 
by,  56  ;  gurus  of,  61-2  ;  Hindu 
contempt  for,  305,  476  ;  huts  of, 
59  ;  improvidence  of,  59  ;  in- 
toxicants used  by,  188 ;  mark 
worn  by,  121 ;  marriage  amongst, 

24,  62,  338  ;  menial  occupations, 
54  ;  origin  of,  52  ;  privileges  of, 
32,  118,  583;  servitude  of,  56 
et  seq.  ;  soldiers,  54 ;  sup- 
porters  of   Right-hand   faction, 

25,  60 ;  vice  and  uncleanliness 
of,  55. 

Parvata,  628,  635. 

Par  vat  i,  207,  224,  546,  613,  628, 

635. 
Patala  (hell),  256,  259,  515,  564, 

691. 
Patanjala  philosophy,  406. 
Patitas,  or  heretics,  688. 
Patna,  406. 

Pattanattu-pillai,  274,  275  n. 
Paul,  St.,  298. 


Pavadam  sacrifice,  114et  seq.,  608. 

Pavitram  amulet,  150-1. 

Penances,  517  et  seq.,  529  et  seq., 
535,  597  et  seq. 

Penitents,  religious,  332,  519,  522 
et  seq. 

Penitents,  the  seven,  98-9,  102, 
107,  108,  219,  416,  417,  426,  502, 
503,  635. 

Perjury,  prevalence  of,  662. 

Persia,  435  n.,  504,  505. 

Persian  language,  449. 

Perumal  (Vishnu),  615. 

Phallus  worship,  631. 

Pharaoh,  193. 

Pharisees,  the,  269  n. 

Phasis,  the,  200. 

Philosophy,  Hindu  systems  of,  274, 
297  et  seq.,  401  et  seq.,  500  et 
seq. 

Pi  Hay,  the,  22. 

Pillayar,  162,  249,  631. 

Pitri-loka,  the,  495. 

Plato,  298, 435  n.,  554,  559,  562,563. 

Plotinus,  554,  561. 

Plutarch,  435  n. 

Pluto,  546,  547,  718. 

Plutus,  718. 

Poet  historians  of  India,  2. 

Poetry,  Hindu,  392  et  seq.  ;  dif- 
ferent kinds  of,  393  ;  epics,  2, 
401  ;  feet  in  verse,  396 ;  long 
and  short  quantities,  394 ; 
metres,  397  ;  richness  of  meta- 
phors, 399 ;  superstition  in, 
395-6;  taste  and  style,  399, 
400 ;  verses,  398-9. 

Poison,  ordeal  by,  717,  722. 

Poligars,  or  chiefs,  677. 

Polygamy,  207,  210,  368. 

Pompilius,  Numa,  32. 

Pondicherry,  301. 

Pondicherry  Mission,  xi. 

Pongul  feast,  the,  57 1  et  seq. 

Pons,  Father,  268,  377. 

Poothana,  627. 

Population,  increase  of,  93. 

Porphyry,  554,  561. 

Potters,  63. 

Poverty,    Hindu,    7,    80   et   seq. 
causes  of,  93  et  seq. 


[XDEX 


735 


Pradyumna,  636. 
Prahlada,  121,  617. 
Pranava,  the,  533,  538. 
Prasadam,  the,  125,  128,  132. 
Prathamani-yoga,  694,  695. 
Prayers,  see  Mantrams. 
Predestination,  481,  614-15. 
Predictions,  381-2. 
Pregnancy,  behaviour  during,  338, 

347. 
Preta-Vahana,  250. 
Pride,  spiritual,  304,  518. 
Priests,  583.     See  also  Gurus. 
Priestesses,  133. 

Processions,  religious,  597,  604-5. 
Prometheus,  102-3. 
Property,  division  of,  372  et  seq.  ; 

legal  possession  of,  656  ;  succes- 
sion to,  369,  372  et  seq. 
Propriety,  outward,  313. 
Proserpine,  546. 
Prostitution,  305,   310,  312,    331, 

585  et  seq. 
Public  buildings,  325  ;    feasts,  276 

et  seq. 
Pudupettah,  361. 
Puja,  or  sacrifice,  147  et  seq.,  163, 

167,  168,  217,  218,  222,  227,  232, 

244,  245,  249,  265,  271,  490,  493, 

524,  568,  584,  630,  649,  704,  718, 

720. 
Puliahs,  the,  60-1. 
Puloma,  604. 
Puniaha-vachana   ceremony,  151- 

2,  492. 
Punishment  for  crimes,  284,  657  et 

seq. 
Puranas,  the,  44  n.,  109,  125,  196, 

392,  543,  544,  624,  629,  686,  694. 
Puri,  the  Jagannath  temple  at,  521, 

600,  710  et  seq. 
Purification,  external,  178  et  seq.  ; 

internal,  186  et  seq.  ;    of  places, 

153-4  ;   of  the  soul,  194  et  seq., 

520. 
Purohita-Asrama-Karma,  268. 
Purohitas,    or    officiating    priests, 

134  et  seq. 
Purushottama    (Jagannath),  "714, 

716. 
Pushkala,  the  cloud,  380. 


Put  (hell),  205  n.,  486  n. 
Putra,  meaning  of,  205  n. 
Pythagoras,  377,  504, 524  n.,  556  n., 
558  et  seq. 

Racine,  653  n. 

Raghavaiengar,  Hon.  Dewan  Baha- 
dur S.  Srinivasa,  xxi,  84  n. 
Rahu,  236. 
Raivata,  145. 
Rajahs,  see  Kshatriyas. 
Rajputana,  606. 
Rajputs,  668. 
Ram,  sacrifice  of  the,  510  et  seq., 

569,  687. 
Ram  Mohun  Roy,  vii,  357  n. 
Rama,  224,  270,  388,  401,  516,  607, 

616,     618-24,     637,     682,     683, 

696  n. 
Rama-avatar,  616. 
Ramanjogis,  the,  112. 
Ramayana,  2,  401,  618,  622  n.,  637, 

683. 
Rameswaram,  124;  temple  of,  295, 

603. 
Ramojus,  the,  122. 
Ranade,  Mr.  Justice,  iv. 
Ravana,  516,  607,  614,  619,  621. 
Rechabites,  the,  505. 
Recluse,  the  Vanaprastha,  500  et 

seq. 
Reincarnation,  198. 
Religion  and  polity,  Hindu,  574  et 

seq.,  607. 
Religious  beliefs,  incoherent,  608  ; 

tolerance,  295  et  seq. 
Retna-pravai,  the,  691. 
Rice,  L.,  Mysore  and  Coorg,  20  n. 
Big -Veda,  108,  173,534. 
Rishis,   the  seven,   98,   416,   548. 

See  also  Penitents. 
Robber  castes,  17,  66  et  seq. 
Rogers,  Abraham,  551. 
Rohini,  224,  271. 
Roman  Catholicism  in  India,  xxv 

Romans',  the,  570,  638,  682  n., 
698  n.  ;  caste  divisions  of,  32  ; 
deities  of,  546,  547,  57 1  ;  philo- 
sophy of,  615. 

Roth,  H.,  v. 


736 


INDEX 


Kucha,  168,  219,  221,242,  257,  266, 

546,  627. 
Rudrakshas,  118. 
Rudras,  the  twelve,  718. 
Rukmani,  224,  271,  0>2<i. 

Sabines,  the,  32. 

Sacred  animals,  191,  193  ;  objects 
in  nature,  196  ;  rivers  and  tanks, 
195. 

Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  655  n. 

Sacrifices,  Brahmin,  509  et  seq. ; 
human,  645  et  seq. 

Sadasiva,  627. 

Sagam,  418. 

Sagana,  389. 

Saiva  sect,  405,  410  n.  ;  doctrines 
held  by,  406-7. 

Sakha- Veda,  174. 

Sakta  sect,  405,  410. 

Sakti,  114  n.,  287. 

Sakti-puja,  rite  of,  114,  286  et  seq., 
410. 

Saktis,  the  four,  411  et  seq. 

Salaam,  the,  326. 

Salagrama  stone,  worship  of  the. 
648-9. 

Saliva,  the  defilement  of,  184. 

Salivahana,  223,  418. 

Saloka-purushas,  or  holy  men,  689, 
694-6. 

Salvation  Army,  xi. 

Samaradhanas,  or  public  feasts, 
276  et  seq. 

Sama-Veda,  108,  173,  265,  617. 

Sam-kalpa  ceremony,  the,  144  et 
seq.,  162,  164,  166,  218,  220,  222, 
223,  241,  484,  490,  492,  704. 

Samson,  607. 

Sandhya  ceremony,  108,  270,  550, 
551,  576,  653,  703;  evening, 
263-6  ;  morning,  251-7  ;  noon- 
day, 258-63  ;  rules  to  be  ob- 
served, 241-50  ;  what  the  cere- 
mony is,  266 ;  who  may  per- 
form it,  269. 

Sankara  Acharya,  407,  617. 

Sankhya  philosophy,  406,  408. 

Sannyasi,  or  state  of  penitence, 
151,  160,  522  et  seq. 

Sannyasi  Nirvani,  state  of,  696-7. 


Sannyasi  Nirvanis,  695. 

Sannyasis,  or  penitents,  160,  522 
et  seq.  ;  celibacy  of,  206,  505, 
523,  526,  695;  duties,  528  et 
seq.  ;  funeral  ceremonies,  538 
et  seq.  ;  initiation  ceremonies, 
524 ;  marks  worn  by,  332 ; 
penances,  531  et  seq.  ;  rules  to 
be  observed,  525-7  ;  vices  of, 
205. 

Sanskrit  epics,  2 ;  language,  v, 
108,  174,  392,  429;  poetry,  2, 
393,  449,  474  ;  study  of,  vi,  vii, 
174. 

Santa,  250. 

Santi-yoga  ceremony,  245,  535, 
538,  704. 

Sapta-kula-parvata,  225. 

Sarasvati,  the  goddess,  207,  224, 
545,  613,  636. 

Sarasvati,  the  sacred  river,  124, 
242. 

Sarovignaimurti,  275  n. 

Sarveswara,  202. 

Sashtanga  salutation,  41-2,  327, 
573. 

Sasti-vassa  ceremony,  718. 

Sastras,  694. 

Satanis,  the,  122. 

Sathalli,  xi,  xxvii. 

Sathi,  224. 

Sattya-loka.or  paradise  of  Brahma. 
198,  248,  258,  566,  633,  636,  690. 

Saturn,  236,  380,  381,  546. 

Satya  Bhama,  271. 

Savitru,  the  Sun,  141,  720. 

Sectarian  squabbles,  120;  sub- 
division, 122;  toleration,  119. 

Seeta,  516. 

Self-torture,  597  et  seq. 

Senaar,  plains  of,  201. 

Seringapatam,  xi,  594,  647,  699, 
700. 

Sesha  ceremony,  the,  225-6. 

Sesostris,  100. 

Seven,  the  mystic  number,  223, 
380-1,  524-5  n. 

Sexes,  proportion  of  the,  208  et  seq. 

Shat  Mata,  or  six  sects,  111,  405. 

Shem,  103. 

Sholigars,  645. 


INDEX 


737 


Siaui,  100. 

Siamese  language,  432-3. 

Siberia,  106. 

Siculus,  Diodorus,  522. 

Siddha  Vatu,  250. 

Simhasanas,  109,  127. 

Sin,  Hindu  theory  as  to,  194  et 
seq.  ;  the  man  of,  265,  534-5, 
701,  702 ;  purification  from, 
194-6,  520. 

Singeri,  109. 

Sins,  of  former  existences,  198 ; 
remission  of,  195 ;  unpardon- 
able, 197. 

Sissa,  670-1  n. 

Sita,  224,  619  et  seq. 

Siva,  history  and  attributes  of, 
627-31 ;  111,  118-21,  124,  127-8, 
133,  139,  143,  190,  197,  202  n., 
207,  224,  236,  241-3,  249-50, 
253,  257-8,  264-7,  270,  334,  387, 
410  n.,  412,  478,  493,  499,  503, 
517,  525  n.,  533-5,  540,  542-3, 
545-6,  549,  551-4,  560,  564,  566, 
568, 572,  580,  601-2,  612-13,  616, 
619,  625,  632-3,  635,  638-9, 
653  n.,  690,  706-8. 

Siva-bhaktas,  or  Sivaites,  111-12. 

Sivaites,  division  into  sects,  24, 
117,  122;  feast-days,  270,  278, 
568,  706-8  ;  food  and  drink,  116, 
118  ;  funeral  custom,  361  ;  her- 
mits, 541  ;  origin  of,  121  ; 
priests,  117,  123  et  seq.  ; 
priestesses,  133 ;  religious  ob- 
servances, 20,  116,  132,  638-9  ; 
rules  and  regulations,  116  ;  sec- 
tarian squabbles,  119-20;  signs 
worn  by,  118-19,  121-2;  wor- 
shippers of  the  bull,  20,  638-9. 

Siva-ratri,  or  Siva's  night,  270, 
568,  706-8. 

Skanda-purana,  648  n.,  706. 

Skins  of  antelope  and  tiger,  purity 
of,  162  n. 

Slavery  amongst  low  castes,  56  et 
seq. 

Sleeping,  faculty  of,  88  ;  rules  as 
to,  249. 

Slokas,   or  moral  stanzas,  474  et 


Smartha  Brahmins,  109,  127. 

Snake-charmers,  74-5. 

Snake-worship,  571,  641-2. 

Socrates,  298,  435  n.,  554,  559. 

Soligurus,  the,  77. 

Solomon,  536. 

Solon,  32. 

Sorcerers,  142,  383-4,  681. 

Soul,  Hindu  ideas  as  to  the,  404  et 
seq. ;  purification  of  the,  194  et 
seq.,  520,  528  et  seq.  ;  trans- 
migration of  the,  556  et  seq., 
561-3,  690. 

Spinoza,  409. 

Sraddha  sacrifice,  289,  486  n. 

Sravana  Belgola,  temple  at,  699, 
700. 

Sravenur,  109. 

Sringeri,  124. 

Srirangam,  124. 

Sri-Vaishnavas,  the,  127. 

Starvation,  borderland  of,  86. 

Sterculius,  571. 

Stilus,  use  of  the,  430. 

Stoics,  the,  505. 

Strabo,  596. 

Subadra,  714. 

Subramaniah,  temple  at,  642. 

Succession,  rules  regarding,  369, 
372  et  seq. 

Suddhodana,  412. 

Sudras,  one  of  the  four  main 
castes,  14,  22,  32,  82,  267,  322, 
687;  ablutions  of,  269;  ab- 
stinence from  meat,  189,  190  ; 
adoption,  ceremony  of,  371  ; 
artisans,  15,  16,  32;  Brahmin 
contempt  for,  135,  187,  558, 
618  ;  credulity  of,  297  ;  culti- 
vators, 14,  16,  22,  84  ;  domestic 
regulations,  19  ;  etiquette,  rules 
of,  188,  330;  feasts  and  fasts, 
274,  278  et  seq.,  706;  funeral 
ceremonies,  361,  497  et  seq.  ; 
headmen  of  villages,  88,  89 ; 
lower  classes  of,  24,  25,  48  et  seq., 
190;  marriage  customs,  213, 
230  et  seq.,  280,  338  ;  menials, 
14,  52-3,  62;  nomads,  62; 
origin  of,  47,  614 ;  penitents. 
541  ;    poetrv  of,  393  ;    sectarian 


Bb 


'38 


INDEX 


divisions,  111  ;  self-torture  by, 
600  ;  sub-castes,  15,  23,  25,  48  ; 
temple  officers,  583  ;  violation 
of  caste,  283,  561  ;  wealthy 
classes,  00-2,  118,  121  ;  widows, 
3.12. 

Sugriva,  620. 

Suicides,  religious,  521,  606. 

Sukalers,  or  pillagers,  68,  678. 

Sukla-paksha,  146. 

Sumantu,  172. 

Superstition,  effects  of,  522,  575-6, 
643-4. 

Surabhi,  617. 

Surakara,  250. 

Sura-pana,  282. 

Surpanakha,  619. 

Surya-pushkarani,  the,  124. 

Suttee,  or  widow-burning,  vii,  355 
et  seq.,  605. 

Svarochisha,  145. 

Svayambhuva,  145. 

Swagata,  704. 

Swarga,  or  paradise  of  Indra,  234, 
256,  258,  259,  263,  535,  547,  556, 
557,  566,  624,  633-5,  649,  650, 
689-92,  695,  715. 

Tales,  Hindu,  450  et  seq. 

Tali,   or  marriage-cord,  224,  226, 

353,  492. 
Tamasa,  145. 
Tamil  country,  15  ;  language,  392, 

472  et  seq.,  497  ;   poetry,  393. 
Tanjore,  195,  282,  361,  603,  683. 
Tapasas,  or  penances,  535. 
Tapo-loka,  258. 
Tarka-sastram,  124. 
Tarpana  ceremony,  266. 
Tartars,  the,  32,  683. 
Tartarus,  547. 
Tartary,  102,  103,  106,  503. 
Tattooing,  333  et  seq.,  342. 
Tatuvadi  Brahmins,  109,  122,  127. 
Ta vernier,  594. 

Teeth,  rules  for  cleansing,  240-1. 
Telugu  language,  392,  396,  427  et 

seq.  ;  poetry,  393. 
Telugus,  the,  11-12. 
Temple  car  festivals,  602,  604,  606  : 

carvings,     582 ;      dancing-girls, 


14!),  337,  574,  584  et  beq.  : 
feasts,  567,  575-6 ;  idols,  57$, 
580  et  seq.  ;  musicians,  584,  587, 
705;  offerings,  600,  603;  offi- 
cials, 583  ;  orgies,  596  ;  proces- 
sions, 601,  604-5  ;  revenues,  589 
et  seq.  ;  women,  133,  584  et 
seq.  ;    worshippers,  590  et  seq. 

Temples,  architectural  appearance 
of,  579 ;  built  on  mountains,  578 ; 
ceremonies  performed  in,  584  et 
seq. ;  dedicated  to  the  elements, 
551 ;  famous,  583,  591,  594,  595, 
601-3 ;  interior  of,  580  et  seq.  ; 
numerous,  577 ;  strangers  ex- 
cluded from,  302  ;  structure  of, 
570. 

Theodoret,  St.,  554. 

Therapeutics,  the,  505. 

Thyestes,  559. 

Tibet,  106,  435  n.,  594. 

Time,  Jain  succession  and  division 
of,  693-4. 

Tipamma,  595-6. 

Tippu  Sultan,  xi,  78,  385. 

Tirat,  406. 

Tirthankaras,  or  saints,  694,  695, 
698. 

Tirupati,  residence  of  the  high 
priest,  128  ;  temple  at,  295,  591, 
593,  601-2. 

Tiruvalluvar,  274,  275  n. 

Titans,  546. 

Tonsure  ceremony,  the,  158-9. 

Toranams,  or  wreaths,  157. 

Torture,  of  prisoners,  659-60 ; 
religious,  597  et  seq. 

Totiyars,  the,  17. 

Tournemine,  420. 

Transmigration  of  the  soul,  o'^  et 
seq.,  561-3,  690. 

Trial  by  ordeal,  661-2,  717  et  seq. 

Trimurti.  or  Hindu  Trinity,  106, 
107,  243,  525  n.,  542  et  seq..  549. 
611,  612. 

Trinity,  the,  Hindu  knowledge  of, 
554. 

Triple  cord,  the,  24,  170,  274,  701  ; 
investiture  of,  160  et  seq.,  369. 
370  n. 

Tritons,  545,  547. 


INDEX 


■39 


Tulasi  plant,  worship  of  the,  649- 

51. 
Tulus,  the,  11. 
Tungabudra,  the,  522. 
Tutelary    deities,    invocation    of, 

164. 
Twice-born,  the,  98,  169. 

Ugadi,  or  New  Year's  day,  137, 
567. 

Ugrasena,  King,  624,  626. 

Unclean  objects,  181  et  seq. 

Upanayana,  or  triple  cord  cere- 
mony, 160  et  seq.,  170,  369, 
370  n. 

Vpanishads,  or  Vedic  commen- 
taries, 174. 

U  pa- Veda,  174. 

Uppareru,  the,  22. 

Urddhwa-loka,  the,  690-1. 

Usha,  636. 

Usury,  83,  85,  656-7,  665-6. 

Utkala-desa,  710. 

Utrassa  Brahmins,  109. 

Vacharada,  626. 

Vaikuntha,  or  paradise  of  Vishnu, 
197,  257,  566,  633,  635-6,  690, 
703,  704,  712,  714,  715. 

Vaiseshika  philosophy,  406. 

Vaishnavas,  sect  of,  122,  129,  133, 
405,  410  n.,  510. 

Vaishnava-triamalas,  sub-sect  of, 
122. 

Vaisva-Bahu,  712. 

Vaisyas  (landholders  and  mer- 
chants), one  of  the  four  main 
castes,  14,  22;  feast  of,  170; 
funeral  ceremony,  496 ;  origin 
of,  47,  614 ;  religious  observ- 
ances, 269  ;  sectarian  disputes, 
687-8;  subdivision  of,  15;  triple 
cord  worn  by,  24,  169,  170; 
wealthy  classes  of,  90,  91  ; 
women,  their  lack  of  beauty,  22. 

Valangai-Mougattar,  25. 

Valluvas,  '  the  Brahmins  of  the 
Pariahs,'  61-2. 

Valmiki,  622  n. 

Vamacharis,  286  n. 

Vamana,  616. 


Vamana-asrama,  124. 

Vamana-avatar,  616. 

Vanaprasthas,  or  jungle-dwellers, 
151,  160,  500  et  seq.,  523; 
origin  of,  503-4  ;  penances,  517 
et  seq.  ;  religious  observances, 
509  et  seq.  ;  rules,  505-6 ; 
sacrifices,  509  et  seq.  ;  studies, 
506  ;  virtues,  508-9. 

Varaha-avatar,  616. 

Varuna,  168,  242,  257,  259,  266, 
514,  547,  633,  718,  720. 

Vasishta,  98,  224,  228,  344,  347  n., 
537,  622,  623. 

Vasishta-asrama,  124. 

Vasu-Deva,  271,  496,  625. 

Vasu-devatas,  the  nine,  695,  696. 

Vasuki,  the  snake,  722. 

Vatu,  250. 

Vayu,  242,  633,  718. 

Vedangas,  the  six,  124. 

Vedanta  philosophy,  406  et  seq., 
688. 

Vedanta-Sara,  123. 

Veda-Vyasa,  140,  271. 

Vedas,  or  Sacred  Books,  124,  170, 
257,  265,  384  n.,  413,  510  n., 
511,  618,  628,  634,  685  n.,  686, 
694,  720  ;  antiquity  of,  140,  173, 
425  ;  attributed  to  Brahma,  103, 
172,  266,  425-6  ;  Brahmin  pri- 
vilege of  reading,  1 72,  668 ; 
commentaries  on,  109,  174; 
contents  of,  173  ;  division  into 
four  books,  108-9,  172-3;  in- 
fallibility of,  406  ;  obscurity  of, 
109  ;  study  of,  173-4,  289,  636  ; 
teaching  of,  173,  267-8,  384,  409, 
533. 

Vegetarian  diet,  188-9  ;  forbidden 
articles,  189. 

Veidikas,  or  learned  men,  173. 

Velayuda,  603. 

Vemana,  194,  274. 

Venkateswara,  593-4,  601-2. 

Venus,  the  planet,  236,  257,  2*>6, 
379. 

Versifying,  Hindu,  392  et  seq. 

Vibhishana,  271,  621. 

Vice,  unnatural,  312. 

Vidatta,  250. 


'40 


INDEX 


Vigneshwara,  151,  155,  162,  163, 
216,  217,  221,  249,  369,  572,  580, 
631-2. 

Village  headmen,  88-9  ;  menials, 
62. 

Villages,  plan  of,  325. 

Vina,  the,  65. 

Vinata,  250. 

Vinayaka,  631. 

Viraja,  the,  636. 

Viraktas,  the,  122. 

Vira-seivas,  the,  117,  122. 

Virgil.  430,  525  n. 

'  Virgin,  gift  of  the,'  223. 

Virgin  widows,  354,  355  n. 

Virtue,  goddess  of,  718,  720. 

Vishnavites,  the,  24,  111  et  seq., 
541,  553;  ceremonies  of,  132. 
650  n.  ;  costume,  112:  festivals 
of,  270  n.,  278  ;  initiatory  rites, 
118;  intemperance  of,  114; 
'  namam,'  wearers  of  the,  109, 
1 12, 119,  334  ;  objects  of  venera- 
tion to,  114,  640-1  ;  peculiar 
custom  of,  349 ;  priests,  127, 
128,  132  ;  priestesses,  133  ;  re- 
ligious beggars,  113;  religious 
squabbles,"  120  ;  sacrifice  ('  pa- 
vadam')  by.  114-6,  608;  sec- 
tarian toleration  of,  119  ;  stigma 
attached  to,  121,  122  ;  sub-sects 
of,  122. 

Vishnu.  '  avatars  '  or  incarnations 
of,  74,  113,  121,  144,  145,  271, 
426,  515,  616-8,  686;  history 
and  attributes  of,  615-8;  98, 
103,  111-4,  116,  119-22,  127-8, 
133,  147,  168,  173,  197,  207, 
219,  221,  223,  232,  234  n.,  236-7. 
240-3,  245,  248-50,  252-3,  256- 
8,  263-4,  266,  270-1,  286,  329, 
387-8,  400-1,  412,  416,  478, 
517,  525  n.,  533-6,  539,  542-3, 
545-7,  549,  551-4,  556,  564,  566, 
581,  601-2,  612,  619,  624-5,  627, 
629,  633,  636-7,  641,  648-53, 
669,  682,  690,  701-6,  710, 
713-5. 
Vishnu-bhaktas,  sect  of,  111  et  seq. 
Yishnii-purana,  537,  701,  706. 
Vishnu-Sarma,  436,  449. 


Visishtadwaita,  doctrine  of,  402  u. 
Visits,  ceremonious,  331. 
Visvakarma,  714,  716. 
Viswamitra,  98,  619. 
Voderus,  the,  117,  122. 
Voltaire,  193  n.,  597,  612,  648. 
Vossius,  589. 
Vyasa,  109,  174. 

Wandering  tribes,  65  et  seq. 

Warfare,  ancient  and  modern,  667 
et  seq. 

Washermen,  63. 

Washing,  rules  for,  241  et  seq. 

Water,  deification  of,  549  et  seq.  ; 
ordeal  by,  717,  721. 

Water-drinking,  187. 

Wealth,  owners  of,  91  ;  reckles.- 
squandering  of,  92. 

Weaning  ceremony,  156-8. 

Weapons,  enchanted,  386-7,  389  ; 
modern,  682-4  ;  old-fashioned, 
682. 

Weavers,  81. 

Weighing,  ordeal  by,  718-9. 

Wellesley,  Lord,  500  n. 

Wellington,  Duke  of,  xi. 

Widowhood,  condition  and  tokens 
of,  350  et  seq. 

Widows,  burning  of,  vii,  355  et 
seq.,  605 ;  children  of,  361  ; 
contempt  for,  352  et  seq.  ;  de- 
barred from  domestic  ceremo- 
nies, 148  ;  funeral  ceremonies, 
their  part  in,  496  ;  morality  of. 
309  ;  mourning  ceremonies  of, 
350  et  seq.,  491  et  seq.  ;  re- 
marriage prohibited,  24,  40,  210. 
212,  359  ;  sad  fate  of,  354-5  ; 
virgin,  354,  355  n. 

Wilkins,  Sir  Charles,  v,  435  n. 

Wilks,  Colonel,  x,  xiv,  xvi,  201  n. 

Wilson,  Professor,  xix. 

Wives,  Hindu,  231,  338  et  seq., 
343  et  seq.  ;   of  the  gods,  133. 

Women,  and  children,  94,  592  et 
seq.,  699  ;  ceremonies  after  con- 
finement, 155  et  seq.  ;  chastity 
of,  313-4,  354;  cosmetic  used 
by,  335  ;  dress  and  ornaments 
of,  340  et  seq.  ;    education  of, 


INDEX 


II 


:;.'{»i-7  ;  funeral  ceremonies  of, 
496;  Hindu  ideas  as  to,  207, 
231-2,  336  et  seq.  ;  mourners, 
352,  485,  491  et  seq.  ;  occupa- 
tions of,  337  ;  outward  decorum 
of,  587  ;  respect  shown  to,  340  ; 
rules  of  conduct  for,  180,  708  et 
seq.  ;  sayings  about,  479. 

Writing,  invention  of,  424  et  seq.  ; 
materials  for,  429  ;  method  of, 
428  et  seq. 

Wuddars,  the.  70. 

Wynaad,  596. 

Xerxes,  669. 

Yagnam  sacrifice.  108,  175,  510  et 
seq..  550.  623,  646,  686,  687. 


Yajur-Veda,   the,    108,    L72,   256, 

550. 
Yama,  242,  250,  267,  479,  481,  483, 

496,  514,  547.  556,  565,  633,  <i  +  7. 

701,  707,  708,  718,  720. 
Yama-loka  (hell),  258,  483,  487. 
Yasoda,  625-6. 
Yedeyers,  the,  22. 
Yeruvaru  tribe,  the,  78-9. 
Yogam,  doctrine  of.  529  et  seq. 
Yogis,  529. 
Yojana,  the,  145  n. 
'  Young  men's  feast.'  166. 

Zeno,  505,  519. 
Zodiac,  the,  381,  499. 
Zoroaster,  504. 


OXFORD 

PRINTED    AT   THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 

BY   HORACE    HART,    M.A. 

PRINTER    TO    THE    UNIVERSITY 


SOME 
OPINIONS  OP  THE  PRESS 

•  By  rescuing  from  obscurity  the  final  results  of  Abbe  Dubois's 
thirty  years  of  observation  and  research,  Mr.  Beauchamp  will  place 
the  life-work  of  that  great  missionary  in  its  true  form  before  the  world. 
He  also  makes  a  considerable  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  Southern 
India  on  the  eve  of  British  rule.' — The  Times. 

'Mr.  Beauchamp  has  not  only  rescued  from  oblivion  the  finished 
Madras  MS.,  but  he  has  performed  the  task  of  translator  and  editor 
with  fidelity  and  skill.  His  footnotes  are  exactly  what  they  should  be, 
neither  adding  to  nor  taking  from  the  text,  but  explaining  terms  which 
might  otherwise  puzzle  the  English  reader,  and  stating  the  subsequent 
legislative  action  of  the  British  Government  in  regard  to  the  customs 
or  practices  described  by  Dubois.' — The  Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

'  While  in  some  degrees  this  is  a  new  work,  it  may  be  best  regarded 
as  an  authoritative  edition  of  a  book  that  has  become  almost  a  standard 
authority  on  Deccan  manners  and  customs  at  the  beginning  of  this 
[the  nineteenth]  century.' — The  Athenaeum. 

'Mr.  Beauchamp's  work  is  admirably  done.' — The  Spectator. 

•  Mr.  Beauchamp  has  earned  the  gratitude  of  all  for  his  research  and 
the  eminently  able  manner  in  which  he  has  translated  and  edited  this 
work,  so  as  to  make  it  at  last  worthy  of  its  truly  remarkable  author.' — 
The  English  Historical  Review. 

r"  '  With  all  its  extraordinary  fullness  of  detail  his  book  is  as  interesting 
as  it  is  instructive,  and  few  who  have  once  taken  it  up  will  fail  to  read 
to  the  conclusion.' — The  Imperial  Institute  Journal. 

'  A  work  of  unusual  importance  and  standard  value.  It  is  cheap  at 
any  price. ' — The  Asiatic  Quarterly  Review. 

'Mr.  Beauchamp  has  done  good  service  to  the  reading  public  and  to 
the  reputation  of  the  author  by  now  publishing  ...  a  verbatim  transla- 
tion of  Dubois's  great  work  in  its  revised  form,  elucidated  by  many 
excellent  notes  suggested  by  the  events  of  the  last  seventy  years,  and 
by  the  researches  of  later  writers,  who  have  devoted  their  attention  to 
the  study  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  inhabitants  of  India." — 
The  Times  of  India. 

•This  admirable  translation  of  the  Abbe  Dubois's  remarkable  work 
reflects  the  highest  credit  on  the  sympathetic  editor  and  annotator.' — 
The  Bombay  Gazette. 


SOME   OPINIONS   OF  THE  PRESS 

'  Mr.  Beauchamp,  by  his  translation  of  this  invaluable  work,  has  not 
only  rendered  a  great  service  to  Indian  literature,  but  has  repaired 
a  serious  injustice  to  a  very  remarkable  man,  who,  by  the  failure  of  the 
authorities  to  publish  his  amended  MS.,  was  left  for  many  years  open 
to  the  undeserved  charge  of  having  written  with  inadequate  knowledge 
of  his  subject.' — The  Englishman  (Calcutta). 

4  It  is  a  grand  book,  the  most  real  book,  perhaps,  in  which  a  student 
of  India  can  find  out  what  the  life  of  India  means.  It  is  a  book  of  long 
ago,  but  it  is  a  book  of  which  every  page  might  have  been  written 
yesterday.' — The  Madras  Times. 

*  Every  one  who  wants  to  know  the  Hindus  as  they  really  are — the 
civilian,  soldier,  merchant,  scholar — ought  to  know  herein  something 
of  the  people  with  whom  they  must  come  in  contact.  The  young 
civilian  ought  specially  to  be  made  to  master  the  Abbe's  book,  as  it  will 
help  him  considerably  in  his  public  career.  The  crowning  merit  of  his 
work  consists  in  this,  that  it  is  a  first  handbook  written  straight  out  of 
personal  experience.  The  Abbe  Dubois . .  .  studied  the  political  con- 
dition of  the  country  in  which  he  lived,  and  wrote  most  wisely  about 
it.  ...  If  the  Abbe°s  fifth  paragraph  had  been  duly  pondered  on,  it 
would  have  prevented  the  Mutiny  of  1857.' — The  late  Right  Hon.  M.  E. 
Grant  Duff,  in  Presidential  Address  to  the  Royal  Historical  Society. 

'A  work  for  which  every Indologist and  Ethnologist  will  be  grateful.' 
— Prof.  M.  Winterxitz  in  Nature. 


Hi 


•:■:■:■ 


