===== Internet Archive OCR: hindufastsfeasts00muke_djvu.txt =====

BL  2003  . M896  1918 
Mukerji,  A.  C. 

Hindu  fasts  and  feasts 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Princeton  Theological  Seminary  Library 


https://archive.org/details/hindufastsfeastsOOmuke 


HINDU  1 
TS  AND  FEAST 


MUKERJi  M.A 


1 ■ 

■I 

1 ■ 

\m 

HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


* 


3 


o 


BY 

ABHAY  CHARAN  MUKERJI,  M.A., 

;> 

-)  PROFESSOR,  MUIR  CENTRA!,  COLLEGE, 

» 

ALLAH  A BAD, 


3 


Old  sisters  of  a day  gone  by, 

Gray  nurses,  loving  nothing  new ; 

Why  should  they  miss  their  yearly  due 
Before  their  time?  They  too  will  die.’ 

— Tennyson. 


0F  pri/£tB> 

I AY  25  1998 


SECOND  EDITION .] 

ALLAHABAD 


THE  INDIAN  PRESS 


1918 


All  rights  reserved.] 


[Price  Re+  1. 


<* 


<» 


Printed  and  published  by  Apurva  Krishna  Bose,  at  the  Indian  Press, 
Allahabad. 


PREFACE 


In  introducing  my  little  book  to  the  public,  I feel 
that  my  first  word  should  be  a word  of  sincere 
gratitude  to  the  Hon’ble  Mr.  J.  G.  Jennings,  M.A., 
Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bihar  and  Orissa,  to 
whom  I owe  not  only  the  idea  of  writing  on  such  a 
subject,  but  also  his  kind  collaboration  in  the  actual 
production  of  no  fewer  than  seven  of  these  essays. 
The  kindness  with  which  he  gave  me  his  valued 
assistance  and  encouragement  in  the  midst  of  his 
heavy  official  duties  as  Principal,  Muir  Central 
College,  is  certainly  worthy  of  a higher  acknowledg- 
ment than  the  mere  formality  of  a word  of  thanks  in 
the  Preface. 

In  their  first  form,  these  essays  appeared  as 
articles  in  The  Leader  or  The  Pioneer , from  time  to 
time,  during  the  years  1913  and  1914.  I have  now 
re-written  them,  with  large  additions,  and  arranged 
them  in  chronological  order,  with  a view  to  giving 
them,  if  possible,  a more  permanent  form.  Two  of 
them— Sitala  Saptami  and  Dasahra  or  Ganga  Puja — 
are  appearing  here  for  the  first  time. 

No  one  can  be  more  sensible  of  the  shortcomings 
of  this  little  book  than  myself.  My  difficulties  were 
serious,  and  in  many  cases  almost  insurmountable. 
In  the  first  place,  it  is  impossible  to  write  on  a social 


ii 


PREFACE 


or  religious  subject  with  absolute  “ fairness  ; ” and  in 
the  case  of  the  Hindu  society  and  religion  this 
“ fairness”  is  impossible  in  another  sense, — the  subject 
itself  is  one  which  is  utterly  incapable  of  any  exhaust- 
ive or  even  adequate  treatment.  For,  as  Sir  Monier 
Williams  says  in  his  Religious  Life  and  Thought  in 
India , “ Religion  is  ever  present  to  a Hindu’s  mind.  It 
colours  all  his  ideas.  It  runs  through  every  fibre  of  his 
being.  It  is  the  very  Alpha  and  Omega  of  his  whole 
earthly  career.  He  is  born  religious,  and  dies  religious. 
He  is  religious  in  his  eating  and  drinking,  in  his 
sleeping  and  waking,  in  his  dressing  and  undressing,  in 
his  rising  up  and  sitting  down,  in  his  wor«k  and  amuse- 
ment. Nay,  religion  attends  him  in  antenatal  ceremo- 
nies long  before  his  birth,  and  follows  him  in  endless 
offerings  for  the  good  of  his  soui  long  after  death.” 
Every  word  of  this  statement  is  as  true  to-day  as  it 
was  in  Sir  Monier  Williams’  time ; and  the  result  is 
that  to  write  an  exhaustive  account  of  the  Hindu 
fasts  and  feasts  is  really  equivalent  to  writing  a com- 
plete history  of  the  Hindu  people  from  the  Aryan 
immigration  into  India  down  to  the  present  day ; and 
such  a task  would  be  as  stupendous  as  the  famous 
Hindu  legend  about  the  “ Churning  of  the  Ocean  ” by 
the  gods  and  giants  in  the  earliest  infancy  of  the 
World,— a task,  therefore,  that  can  fitly  be  undertaken 
by  one  who  is  either  a god  or  a giant. 

In  the  second  place,  I had  to  contend  against  the 
difficulty  caused  by  the  absence  of  written  authorities 
on  a vast  number  of  points  touched  in  these  pages. 
Where  written  authorities  exist,  they  were  some- 
times inaccessible,  sonfetines  conflicting,  sometimes 


PREFACE 


iii 


unauthentic.  I have,  therefore,  been  obliged  to  rely 
chiefly  on  tradition  and  personal  experience,  and 
where  even  these  have  failed,  I have  had  to  fall  back 
upon  that  last  resort  of  all  writers  on  Folklore  — con- 
jecture. 

My  last  word  in  the  Preface  must;  like  my  first, 
be  a word  of  gratitude— of  respectful  gratitude  to  the 
Honorable  Sir  James  Scorgie  Meston,  K.O.S.X.,  Lieu- 
tenant-Governor of  the  United  Provinces,  and  to 
the  Honorable  Mr.  CUF.  de  la  Fosse,  M.A.,  Director 
of  Public  Instruction,  whose  kind  appreciation  of 
some  of  these  e,ssays  in  the  Press  has  greatly  en- 
couraged me’  in  my  task  of  republishing  them  in 
book  form. 

Muir  College,  Allahabad  : A.  O.  M. 

April  10th , 1916. 


o 


I 


c 


t. 


) 

CONTENTS 

1 > 

Page. 

I.— Makara  Sankranti 

... 

... 

1 

II.— Ganesha  Chaturthi 

... 

8 

III,— Basanta  Panchami 

... 

24 

IV.— Shivaratri  ... 

85 

V.— HOLI  0 ... 

45 

VI.— SlTALA  SAPTAMI 

... 

57 

VII.— Rama  Navami 

... 

65 

VIII.— Dasahra  or  Ganga  Puja 

73 

IX.— Nag  Panchami 

81 

X.— Raksha  Bandhan 

... 

... 

91 

XI.— Krishnashtami 

... 

100 

XII.— Ananta  Chaturdashi  ... 

... 

... 

112 

XIII.— Mahal aya  Amayasya  ... 

123 

XIV.— Durga  Puja  ... 

133 

XV.— Kojagara  Lakshmi  Puja 

146 

XVI.— Diwali  or  Dip  Malika 

... 

153 

XVII.- Jamghat  or  Bhratri  Dwitiya 

173 

XVIII.— Akshaya  Navami 

... 

183 

XIX.— Devotthan  Bkadashi  ... 

191 

XX.—Kartiki  Purnamashi  ... 

i ■ 

j 

200 

c 


c 


« 


c 


o 


G 


c 


c 


<t 


I 


I 

Makara  Sankranti 


Makara  Sankranti*  popularly  called  “ Khichri,” 
is  a festival  held  in  celebration  of  the  sun’s  northern 
course  in  the  heavens.  This  bending  of  the  solar 
course  takes  piace  exactly  at  that  point  of  time  when 
the  sun  enters  the  sign  of  ‘Makara  ’ or  Capricorn. 
The  precise  momenrt  varies  from  year  to  year.  In 
the  year  1914,  for  instance,  the  exact  time  of  the 
sun’s  change  of  course  was  12  hours,  8 minutes,  18 
seconds,  Calcutta  time.  The  Sanskrit  term 
‘ Makara,’  however,  does  not  signify  what  the  Latin 
‘ Capricorn  ’ does  : it  means  an  ‘ alligator.’  But 
this  is  only  a difference  in  nomenclature  which  is 
immaterial,  for  both  names  stand  for  the  same 
section  of  the  astronomical  heavens.  ‘ Makara  ’ 
is  also  the  Sanskrit  name  of  the  month  which 
commences  with  the  sun’s  entrance  into  the  sign 
of  the  zodiac  called  by  that  name, — a month  which 
is  commonly  called  * Magh  ’ in  these  provinces. 
Makara  Sankranti  is  thus  a kind  of  New  Year’s 
festival,  marking  the  sun’s  attainment  of  the  most  * 


southern  point  in  the  eclipticj  and  the  commencement 


j 


2 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


of  the  northerly  course,  or  what  in  religious  phraseo- 
logy is  called  “ Uttaravana.”  Astronomically,  it  is  a 
new  year’s  day  indeed,  and  it  occurs  within  two 
weeks  of  the  conventional  New  Year’s  Day  of  the 
civilised  world ; for  Makara  Sankranti  invariably 
falls  between  the  12th  and  the  14th  of  January  each 
year.  A new  year’s  day  is  a day  of  rejoicing  every- 
where in  the  world,  and  the<  Hindus  have  always 
observed  their  own  in  their  own  customary  style, — 
by  a bath  in  the  Ganges,  followed  by  sober  feasting. 

Makara  Sankranti  originally  became  a day  of 
rejoicing  as  marking  the  termination  of  the  inauspi- 
cious month  of  Pans  (or  Poos)  which,  in  India,  or  at 
least  in  certain  parts  of  it,  is  regarded  as  a pecu- 
liarly ill-omened  month.  For  this  reason,  sacred 
ceremonies  of  all  kinds,  and  even  the  undertaking 
of  journeys  or  shifting  abode  from  one  house  to 
another,  are  forbidden  in  this  month.  Hence  the 
last  day  of  this  month,  or  more  precisely  the  first 
day  of  the  next,  is  celebrated  as  a 4 festival  of  good 
cheer,’  notably  in  Bengal  and  in  Southern  India,  in 
both  of  which  places  the  day  is  observed  by  free 
indulgence  in  the  eating  of  cakes,  sweets,  puddings, 
and  other  vegetarian  delicacies,  in  the  preparation 
of  which  the  Hindu  matron  is  a renowned  specialist. 
These  excellent  dishes  are  known  by  a multiplicity 
. of  culinary  names,  but  many  of  them  have  now  be- 
come as  mythical  a3  thpir  origin,  and  survive  only 


MAKARA  SANKARANTI 


3 


9 in  their  names.  In  the  United  Provinces,  the  fes- 
tival is  popularly  called  * Khichri,’  after  a well-known 
Indian  dish  consisting  of  ’a  mixture  of  rice  and 
some  kind  of  dal,  and  this  article  of  food  forms  the 
customary  dish  of  the  day.  The  Indian  ‘ Khichri  ’ 
has  many  grades  of  quality,  from  the  humblest  to 
the  highest,  to  suit  all  ranks.  The  Emperor  Aurang- 
zeb  is  said  to  have,  been  particularly  fond  of  one 
variety,  called  4 Biryani  Khichri.’  Uncooked  ‘ khi- 
chri ’ is  also  given  away  to  the  poor,  and  offered  to 
priests  and,  Brahmans,  accompanied  by  presents  of 
cash  and  sweets.  These  sweets,  too,  are  of  a pres- 
cribed order  : they  must  contain  an  ingredient  of 
sesamum,  the  eating  of  which  in  some  form  is  espe- 
cially recommended  in  the  month  of  Magh,  probably 
as  a preventive  against  chills. 

Makara  Sankranti  is  one  of  the  great  bathing 
days  in  the  Hindu  calendar.  A bath  at  the  conflu- 
ence in  Prayaga  (Allahabad)  on  this  day  is  believed 
to  be  fraught  with  incalculable  spiritual  merit,  and 
this  belief  is  perpetuated  in  an  old  saying — “ On  the 
day  of  an  eclipse,  bathe  at  Kashi  (Benares) ; on  the 
day  of  Makara,  at  Prayaga ; and  on  the  day  of 
Ram  Navami,  at  Ayodhya  these  three  baths  being 
pre-eminently  the  holiest  in  the  whole  year.  Makara 
Sankranti  is  the  opening  day  of  the  annual  religious 
fair  at  Allahabad,  officiall  11  ^d  the  Magh  Mela,’ 


which  lasts  for  a whole 


during  which  the 


4 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FBASTS 


orthodox  bathe  in  the  Tribeni  every  morning  before 
sunrise,  abstain  from  grain  food  during  the  day- 
time, and  reside  in  the  dlose  vicinity  of  the  Ganges 
in  thatch-built  hufs  erected  especially  for  this 
purpose.  These  huts  are  built  as  near  the  water’s 
edge  as  possible,  and  the  whole  month  of  Magh  is 
often  spent  in  camp  life  on  the  river’s  bank,  which 
is  piously  known  as  “ Kalpa  Bas.”  The  length  of 
residence  is  reduced  in  special  cases,  such  as  that  of 
people  who  cannot  afford,  owing  to  pressing  duties, 
to  spend  a longer  time  out  of  hottfe  ; and  three 
days  are  in  such  exceptional  eases  held  to  be  as 
good  as  thirty.  The  whole  month  of  Magh  is  a 
bathing  season,  but  particular  days  are  marked  out 
above  the  rest  as  especially  important.  These  are, 
besides  the  Sankranti,  (1)  the  Amavasya  or  new 
moon  of  Magh,  (2)  Basanta  Punch  ami,  or  the  fifth 
day  of  the  light  half  of  the  same  month,  (3 ) Achala 
Saptami,  or  the  seventh  day  of  the  same  fortnight, 
(4)  the  Ekadashi , or  eleventh  day,  which  is  always  a 
sacred  day,  and  (5)  the  Maghi  Purnamashi , or  full 
moon,  after  which  the  assemblage  of  bathers  begins 
to  break  up. 

The  religious  observances  connected  with  this 
great  bathing  festival  at  Prayaga  are  laid  down  in 
an  ancient  work,  called  the  Prayaga  Mahatmya , 
<which  is  supposed  to  be  a part  of  the  Matsya  Pa- 
rana, a work  dealing  wip  the  life  and  adventures 


MAKARA  SANKRANTI 


5 


) of  the  Fish  Incarnation  of  Vishnu.  The  bath  must 
be  preceded  by  an  equally  obligatory  rite,  the 
shaving  of  the  head  and  face, — hair  being  consi- 
dered an  unclean  excrescence  of  the  body  which 
must  be  shaved  off  before  a purificatory  bath  can  be 
of  complete  efficacy.  Men  who  have  their  father 
alive  are  exempted  from  the  necessity  of  shaving 
off  the  moustaches,  and  women  who  have  husbands, 
or  maidens  who  are  still  unmarried,  are  not  required 
to  have  their  heads  shaved.  The  same  exemption 
appears  ty  liave  been  granted  to  persons  who  are 
permanent  residents  of  Allahabad,  presumably  be- 
cause their  hair,  whether  cut  at  home  or  on 
the  banks  of  the  holy  stream,  is  sure  to  find 
its  way  into  the  waters  of  the  Ganges  sometime 
or  other  during  the  rainy  season.  The  Prayaga 
Mahatmya  promises  release  from  ten  thousand  re- 
births for  every  single  hair  above  the  chin  which 
finds  its  rest  in  the  Ganges.  But  the  thousands  and 
tens  of  thousands  who  annualty  assemble  at  Allaha- 
bad to  bathe  in  the  Ganges  in  Magh,  hardly  ever 
bear  the  idea  of  spiritual  merit  as  a distinctly  consci- 
ous end  in  their  minds  ; they  traverse  miles  and  miles 
of  rough  country,  cheerfully  enduring  hunger, 
fatigue,  and  cold,  plodding  on  their  path  from 
sunrise  to  sunset,  for  weeks  together,  lying  down  by 
the  roadside  on  the  bare  ground  to  pass  the  chilly 
night  under  a tree,  with  no  61othing  but  a coarse 


6 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


country  blanket  or  a tattered  rezai  (quilt),  not 
because  they  can  accurately  measure  the  quantity  or 
value  of  the  spiritual  good  they  are  to  reap  from 
these  toilsome  marches, „ or  from  the  bath  which  is 
to  come  at  the ‘'end  of  them,  but  only  because  they 
regard  the  whole  as  a simple  duty — a duty  that 
they  owe  to  their  neighbours  and  to  their  religion, 
and  from  the  performance  of  which,  therefore,  they 
expect  no  remuneration  or  reward,  here  or  here- 
after. Ask  any  individual  among  the  surging 
multitude  as  to  why  he  has  to  come cto  bathe,  and 
he  will  tell  you  “ because  he  ought  to  bathe.”  This 
word  ‘ ought  ’ possesses  a solemn  meaning  in  the 
mind  of  a devout  Hindu,  to  whom  a duty  is  a duty, 
the  why  and  the  wherefore  of  which  it  is  not  his 
business  to  inquire  into  or  discuss.  His  whole  duty, 
in  the  case  of  a duty,  is  to  do  it,  without  looking 
within  for  the  motive,  or  without  for  the  consequen- 
ces, or  even  around  for  the  approval  or  disapproval 
of  the  world.  Let  a Hindu  be  told  by  proper 
authority  that  such  and  such  a thing  is  his  duty 
(i dharma ),  and  nothing  will  shake  his  resolution  or 
daunt  his  spirit.  Difficulty,  hardship,  self-mortifi- 
cation— these  act  as  allurements  on  the  pious  Hindu 
heart  ; and  to  be  convinced  of  this  paradox  one  has 
only  to  witness  a Magh  Mela  and  study  the  attitude 
of  the  myriads  that  fio^ck  to  Prayaga  by  every 
available  route,  defying  hunger  and  cold,  disease 


MAKARA  SANKRANTI 


7 


i and  accident,  for  no  other  business  than  to  bathe  at 
the  confluence  and  to  visit  the  shrine  of  Bhara- 
dwaja.  For  the  one  is  held,to  be  incomplete  without 
the  other,  and  hence  throughout  the  bathing  season 
one  can  see  an  unceasing  * stream  of  pilgrims 
passing  between  the  Tribeni  and  the  temple  of 
Prayaga’s  presiding  sage,  Bharadwaja. 

Uttarayana  is  also  commemorated  as  the  day  on 

which  Bhishma,  the  octogenarian  leader  of  the 

Kuru  forces  in  the  Mahabharata,  after  discoursing 

for  many  days  on  the  duties  and  mysteries  of  Life 

and  Death  as  he  lay  wounded  on  the  battle-field, 

) 

pierced  by  innumerable  arrows,  emancipated  his 
soul  from  the  thraldom  of  flesh  by  an  act  of  will. 
This  does  not  mean  that  he  committed  what  in  law 
is  called  suicide.  The  Hindus  believe  that,  while 
the  hour  of  death  is  unalterably  fixed  by  Fate  in 
the  case  of  the  majority  of  men,  the  pious  soul 
that  has  all  through  life  been  in  communion  with  its 
God,  acquires  the  power  of  releasing  itself  from  the 
bondage  of  the  body  at  will , — that  is,  of  prolonging 
life  up  to  any  limit  it  chooses,  and  also  of  terminat- 
ing it  at  any  point ; and  cases  of  voluntary  surrender 
of  life  ( deha-tyaga ) have  been  witnessed  even  in  this 
sceptic  age,  among  men  who  were  neither  4 saints  ’ » 
nor  ‘sages,’  but  humble  householders  who  did  their 
life’s  duties  like  other  men,  and,  while  living  in  the 
world,  lived  always  above  it.* 


c c ’ll 

Ganesha  Chaturthi. 

Ganesha  Chaturthi  is  one  of  those  Hindu  festivals 

< 

that  are  not  honoured  by  a public  holiday.  Ganesha 
is  one  of  the  most  popular  deities  of  the  Hindus,  so 
much  so  that  he  is  worshipped  before  <every  import- 
ant domestic  occurrence  and  before  every  important 
public  or  private  worship.  His  name  is  also  invoked 
at  the  beginning  of  every  book  in  the  simple  stereo- 
typed formula  “ Sri  Ganeshai  Namah  ” (‘  I bow  to 
Ganesha  ’),  with  which  every  Sanskrit  book  opens. 
The  name  of  Ganesha  is  also  uttered  in  pious 

veneration  at  the  time  of  starting  on  a journey,  or 

* 

launching  a new  venture,  or  building  a new  house, 
or  even  drawing  up  a list  of  articles  to  be  purchased 
for  a happy  ceremony  that  may  be  in  prospect.  The 
character  in  which  Ganesha  figures  most  con- 
spicuously in  Indian  legend  is  that  of  V ighna-nashak 
(or  remover  of  untoward  impediments);  and  he  is  just 
- as  often  invoked  by  another  title,  which  only  avoids 
the  negative  form, — namely,  that  of  Siddhidata 
or  ‘ bestower  of  success.’  These  two  epithets  have 
been  so  frequently  associated  with  the  character 


GANESHA  CHATURTHI 


9 


* of  this  deity  that  they  have  become  actual  sur- 
names of  Ganesha,  and  have  materially  contri- 
buted to  add  to  his  popularity  not  only  among  the 
educated  classes  of  Hindps,  but  also  among  the 
illiterate  masses,  who  reverence  him 'just  as  deeply, 
in  order  that  they  might  not  have  to  suffer  dis- 
appointment in  their  humble  undertakings. 

Apart  from  these  somewhat  utilitarian  consider- 
ations, Ganesha  is,  in  himself,  one  of  the  most 
interesting  gods  of  the  Hindu  pantheon.  He  is  the 
son  of  Shiva  and  Parvati,  and  this  high  descent  is 
enough  to  entitle  ^im  to  high  veneration  from 

Hindus  of  all  classes.  But  he  is  also  the  god  of 
> 

wisdom  and  the  patron  of  learning,  and  as  such 
wins  the  homage  of  the  highest  of  sages.  Yudhish- 
tira,  King  of  the  Pandavas,  Damayanti,  queen  of 
the  Nishadas,  and  even  Indra,  Lord  of  the  Heavens, 
are  said  to  have  worshipped  Ganesha  and  obtained 
their  desired  ends  at  his  hands.  The  images  of 
Ganesha  that  we  come  across  in  Hindu  temples — 
and  wherever  there  is  a symbol  of  Shiva,  there, 
too,  we  find  an  image  of  Ganesha — represent 
him  as  a short  fat  figure,  of  a somewhat  pale  colour, 
with  a protuberant  belly,  four  arms,  and  the  head 
of  an  elephant  (including  the  trunk)  resting  on  his 
shoulders.  In  one  hand  he  holds  a conch  shell,  in 
another  a revolving  disc,  in  a third  a club  or  mace;> 
and  in  the  fourth  a water-lily.  > His  vahan  or  vehicle 


10 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FBASTS 


is  the  rat.  His  elephant’s  head  has  a full  trunk  ^ 
coiled  artistically  about  the  throat  and  shoulder,  but 
only  one  tusk,  the  otherhaving  been  lost  in  a scuffle 
that  he  had  had  with  Pa*"asurama.  This  Parasura- 
ma  was  a fanatic  Brahman  who  became  the  deadly 
enemy  of  all  Kshattriyas,  and  who  in  his  racial 
wrath  made  no  less  than  three  wholesale  massacres 
of  the  Kshattriya  race  in  India. 

Every  little  detail  in  the  figure  of  Ganesha,  such 
as  we  find  placed  in  the  niche  of  a temple  of  Shiva, 
has  an  emblematic  meaning  and  a storied  origin  that 
can  be  traced  in  one  or  other  of(the  Puranas.  The 
legends  that  cluster  round  the  personage  of  Ganesha 
are  many  and  varied,  and  the  most  important  of 
them  are  recorded  in  the  Ganesha  Khanda  (the 
chapter  on  Ganesha)  of  the  Brahma  Vaivarta 
Parana.  The  same  events  are  often  differently 
described  in  different  legends.  Even  the  account 
of  his  birth  varies  in  essential  particulars  in  various 
authorities.  One  legend  represents  that  he  sprang 
from  the  scurf  of  Parvati’s  body.  Parvati  was 
married  some  years  to  Shiva,  but  had  no  issue,  and 
her  heart  began  to  yearn  for  a child.  One  day,  as 
Shiva  had  gone  out  to  gather  flowers  on  Mount 
Kailasa,  and  Parvati  was  left  at  home,  she  wished 
to  have  a bath.  Before  plunging  into  water,  she 
rubbed  her  body  with  oil,  and  from  the  scurf  that 
dropped  off  her  skin,  &he  made  a little  human  figure 


GANESHA  CHATURTHI 


II 


% into  which  she  breathed  life.  The  doll,  thus 
animated,  became  a handsome  boy,  and  she  named 
him  Ganesha.  She  then  *asked  this  creation  of 
hers  to  guard  the  door  of  the  house  until  she 
finished  her  bath.  It  so  happened  that  Shiva  him- 
self turned  up  at  the  door  the  very  next  moment. 
Ganesha’s  orders  were  to  guard  the  entrance,  and 
he  took  this  to  mean  that  he  was  not  to  allow 

i 

anybody  to  enter,  whoever  it  might  be,  without  any 
further  reference  to  his  mother.  He  knew  not 
Shiva  ; he^  n&ver  suspected  that  it  was  his  own 
father  seeking  to  ^nter  his  own  house ; nor  did 
Shiva  either  suspect  who  this  strange  boy  might 
be.  Shiva  at  first  tried  to  coax  the  little  door- 
keeper, and  then  mingled  threats  with  cajolery  ; but 
Ganesha  was  quite  clear  about  his  orders.  Shiva 
was  filled  with  wrath  at  this  boyish  obstinacy  ; and 
in  his  rage  he  cut  off  Ganesha’s  head  and  made  a 
forcible  entry.  When  Parvati,  coming  out  of  her 
bath,  saw  Ganesha  lying  murdered,  she  was  filled 
with  grief  and  dismay,  and  in  her  sorrow  she 
refused  to  speak  to  her  husband,  insisting  that  the 
boy  should  be  restored  to  life.  Shiva  promised  to 
bring  her  son  back  to  life,  and  with  that  end  he 
despatched  his  spirit-messengers  to  all  parts  of  the 
earth  with  orders  to  bring  the  head  of  the  first 
living  creature  (no  matter  of  what  species)  that 
should  be  found  sleeping  with  his  head  turned 


12 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


towards  the  north.  Shiva’s  aerial  messengers 
roamed  about  hither  and  thither  for  a long  time, 
but  were  unable  to  find  any  human  creature 
sleeping  with  head  turned  northwards.  They  at  last 
found  an  elephant  lying  in  that  position,  and  they 
instantly  cut  off  his  head  and  brought  it  to  Shiva 
who,  fain  to  find  a head  for  a head,  fixed  it  to 
Ganesha’s  body,  and  Ganeshp  sprang  forth  to  life 
again,  half  man,  half  elephant.  The  above  legend 
accounts  for  the  superstition  that  forbids  Hindus  to 
sleep  with  their  head  towards  the  north— a prohibi- 
tion that  is  binding  to  this  day.  r There  is,  however, 
a second  reason  for  this  avoidance  of  the  northern 
aspect  in  sleep — namely,  that  in  this  position  the 
feet  of  the  sleeping  person  would  be  pointed  towards 
the  regions  of  the  dead,  and  this  would  be  an  act 
of  irreverence  to  departed  ancestors. 

The  name  ‘Ganesha’  is  sometimes  etymologically 
split  up  into  two  words,  gana  and  eesha  (‘  lord  of  the 
spirits  ’),  and  this  derivation  has  led  some  European 
scholars  to  think  that  Ganesha  is  only  a tutelary 
deity,  a vulgar  intermixture  of  the  divine  and 
the  demoniac.  This  notion  has  become  corroborated 
in  some  minds  by  a strange  verse  from  an  ancient 
version  of  Manu,  which  purports  to  lay  down  that 
“ Shiva  is  the  god  of  the  Brahmans,  Vishnu  of  the 
Kshattriyas,  Brahma  of  the  Vaishyas,  and  Ganesha 
of  the  Sudras.”  Theife  can  be  no  doubt  that  this 


GANESHA  CHATURTHI 


13 


* division  and  distribution  is  absolutely  fanciful  ; there 
is  nothing  in  present-day  religious  practice  to  show 
that  any  such  allotment  of  gc/ds,  based  on  the  fourfold 
division  of  the  Hindu  people,  t was  ever  made  or 
followed.  Brahmans  and  all  other  ‘castes  are  as 
much  worshippers  ofGanesha  as  the  Sudras,  whose 
special  deity  he  is  supposed  to  be.  Ganesha  derives 
his  popularity  from  the  fact  of  his  being  the  son  of 
the  4 great  god  ’ Shiva ; and  his  mother,  Parvati,  is 
no  other  than  Durga,  the  goddess  of  victory,  the 
mighty  Mother  of  the  Universe,  the  grand  personi- 
fication of  the  .principle  of  Power  or  Fecundity  in 
Nature.  Hence  Ganesha  is  an  object  of  devout 
adoration  for  Shaivas  and  Shaktas  alike — all  those, 
in  fact,  who  care  for  the  acquisition  of  wisdom  and 
learning,  or  who,  wanting  in  these  themselves,  ad- 
mire the  same  in  others.  The  character  in  which 
Ganesha  appears  most  frequently  in  Hindu  mytho- 
logy  is  as  the  god  of  wisdom,  the  patron  of  letters, 
and  the  bestower  of  success  in  difficult  and  hazard- 
ous undertakings.  His  elephant’s  head  is  an  em- 
blem of  all-comprehensive  wisdom,  and  even  his 
vahan,  the  rat,  is  well-known  for  its  sagacity.  There 
is  a beautiful  myth  illustrating  Ganesha’s  precocious 
wisdom.  Ganesha  and  his  brother,  Kartik,  had  once 
a boyish  dispute  as  to  which  of  them  was  the  elder 
of  the  two,  and  the  dispute  was  referred  to  Shiva, 
for  decision.  Shiva  did  not  know  what  to  say  ; for, 


14 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


in  truth,  the  question  was  hard  to  decide,  Ganesha 
being  a boy  not  ‘ born  ’ in  the  ordinary  way  at  all. 
He  gave  his  decision  most  impartially  by  ruling  that 
whichever  of  the  two  boys  would  make  a tour  round 
the  world  in  the  shorter  time,  would  thereby  prove 
himself  the  elder.  Now,  Kartik’s  vahan  is  the  pea- 
cock, and  this  gave  him  a decided  superiority  over 
the  rat-mounted  Ganesha.  Sitting  on  the  back  of 
his  winged  carrier,  Kartik  flew  off  immediately  to 
make  a circuit  of  the  world,  and  in  a short  time  dis- 
appeared from  view.  But  Ganesha,  instead  of 
setting  out  on  the  tour,  quietly  tpade  a circuit  round 
his  parents,  and  bowing  before  them  claimed  the 
prize  of  victory.  “ But  you  never  went  round  the 
globe,”  said  Shiva.  “ No,”  replied  Ganesha,  “ but 
I went  round  my  parents  who  represent  to  me  all 
that  is  comprehended  in  the  term  4 world.’  ” This 
bit  of  well-timed  philosophy  clinched  the  question 
in  dispute,  and  Ganesha  was  thereafter  acknow- 
ledged as  the  eldest  son  of  Shiva. 

Ganesha  Chaturthi  is  the  day  sacred  to  Ganesha. 
It  is  observed  on  the  fourth  day  of  the  waning  moon 
of  Magh.  By  the  common  people  the  day  is  known 
as  ‘ Sakat,’  which  is  a corruption  of  the  Sanskrit 
word  Sankat,  meaning  ‘ difficulty.’  Ganesha  Cha- 
turthi is  also  called  Sankat  Chaturthi,  in  allusion 
to  one  of  the  chief  attributes  of  Ganesha,  that  of 
remover  of  difficulties.0  The  festival  is,  at  least  in  the 


GANBSHA  CHATURTHI 


15 


United  Provinces,  observed  almost  exclusively  by 
the  women-folk,  chiefly  those  who  have  sons,  as  the 
observance  of  it  by  a mother  is  believed  to  bring  long 
life  and  prosperity  to  the  sop*.  AsDurgais  the  ideal 
of  mothers,  so  is  Ganesha  the  ideal  of  sons,  and  by 
worshipping  him,  therefore,  mothers  hope  to  earn  for 
their  own  sons  a fair  measure  of  the  sterling  virtues 
which  distinguish  Ganesha  among  the  gods.  The 
way  in  which  women  observe  this  festival  is  by 
keeping  an  absolute  fast  for  the  whole  day,  and  wor- 
shipping Garfesha  at  night,  just  at  the  moment 
when  the  moon  is  seen  rising  above  the  eastern 
horizon.  This  takes  place  between  9 and  10  o’clock 
at  night.  The  worship  consists  in  offering  to  the 
god  a kind  of  dry  pudding  made  of  sesamum  and 
unrefined  sugar,  loosely  piled  upon  a brass  tray  so 
as  to  be  of  the  shape  of  a miniature  mountain,  while 
on  a wooden  board  or  low  stool,  placed  alongside  of 
this  tray,  are  ranged  together  a number  of  conical 
figures  made  ofcowdung.  The  pile  of  sweetened 
sesamum  in  the  tray  is  supposed  to  be  a ram  or 
wolf  represented  with  a big  head,  which  is  then 
severed  from  the  trunk  with  a blade  of  durva  grass. 
This  is  usually  done  by  a priest,  who  gets  as  his  fee 
the  sesamum  head  of  this  emblematic  ram  or  wolf, 
together  with  a small  cash  present.  The  puja  being 
over,  the  women  and  children  of  the  house  sit  tOi 
gether,  and  the  oldest  matron  of  the  family  then 


16 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


recites  the  “ Katha,”  or  the  legend  appropriate  to 
the  day,  and  the  others  listen.  The  tale  of  Ganesha 
Chaturthi  has  varying  ‘versions  like  every  other 
traditional  story  handedrdown  from  mouth  to  mouth 
for  countless  generations.  One  version,  which  the 
present  writer  has  listened  to  year  after  year  in  his 
own  family  runs  as  follows  : — 

There  was  once  a poor  Brahman  householder 
who  made  a precarious  living  on  the  charity  of  his 
neighbours,  without  making  any  attempt  at  earning 
a surer  livelihood  by  other  means.  When  the 
festival  of  Ganesha  Chaturthi  game  near,  his  wife 
scolded  him  for  leading  an  indolent  life  at  home, 
and  not  making  any  effort  to  seek  a living  by  going 
abroad.  “ We  have  not  enough  even  for  daily 
bread,”  said  she,  “ how  is  it  possible  for  me  to  keep 
the  observance  of  our  sacred  festivals  ? I cannot 
become  so  irreligious  as  to  dispense  with  the  cus- 
tomary pujas  enjoined  by  our  Shastras  : I would 
much  sooner  dispense  with  a meal  occasionally  than 
abandon  our  family  gods.  I must  celebrate  the 
worship  of  Ganesha  on  the  appointed  day,  but  have 
not  the  wherewithal  to  perform  the  ceremony — not 
even  a handful  of  sesamum  or  a pinch  of  sugar. 

* You  must  therefore  leave  home  instantly,  and  get 
me  the  requisite  articles  of  worship  anyhow  you  can.” 
The  Brahman  calculated  that  the  handiest  way  of 
procuring  these  would  be  by  breaking  into  a Bania’s 


GANESHA  CHATURTHI 


17 


xshop  by  night  and  committing  a little  harmless  theft 
in  the  name  of  Ganesha.  Shortly  after  nightfall, 
the  Brahman  crept  into  a.  grocer’s  stall,  but  be- 
ing in,  his  conscience  began  to  smite  him  for 
the  contemplated  sin.  Standing  in  the  middle  of 
the  shop  the  Brahman  felt  his  movements  paralysed, 
and  he  reasoned  aloud  : “ If  I steal  any  sesamum, 
it  would  be  a sin  ; if  I steal  any  sugar,  it  would 
again  be  a sin.  There  is  no  escape  from  sin.”  The 
owner  of  the  shop,  who  was  somewhere  within  ear- 
shot, started  up  at  this  strange  soliloquy,  and,  fearing 

•J 

it  was  some  ghost  or  spirit  that  had  entered  the  shop, 
exclaimed  in  a voice  quaking  with  fear  : “I  beseech 
you,  tell  me  who  you  are,  and  I am  ready  to  do 
your  bidding  like  a slave.  Are  you  the  Lord  Chauth 
himself  ? I will  give  you  as  much  sesamum  and 
sugar  as  you  can  carry,  if  only  you  will  mercifully 
make  your  exit.”  The  Brahman  replied  that  he 
was  not  the  Lord  Ganesha  at  all,  but  only  an 
indigent  Brahman  who  had  been  driven  by  the 
scolding  of  his  wife  to  stoop  to  an  act  of  shame  from 
which  his  heart  was  rebelling.  But  this  truthful 
confession  was  more  than  the  Bania  could  believe, 
and  he  still  took  the  honest  Brahman  to  be  some 
evil  spirit,  to  appease  whom  he  asked  the  intruding 
voice  to  carry  off  as  much  sesamun  and  sugar  as 
it  pleased.  The  Brahman  cheerfully  accepted  the 
generous  gift,  and  taking  a fair  quantity  of  either 
2 


18 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


stuff,  came  home  to  his  wife  with  joy.  And  his 
wife  worshipped  Ganesha  therewith,  and  through 
the  blessing  of  the  god,  the  Brahman  was  made 
a happy  and  prosperous  man. 

There  is  another  popular  story  connected  with 
the  festival  of  Ganesha  Chaturthi,  which,  though 
somewhat  vulgar  in  colouring,  seems,  in  the  lessons 
that  it  teaches,  to  have  hada  cultured  origin.  It 
tells  us  that  there  were  once  two  neighbours,  one 
well-to-do  and  the  other  poor.  One  day  the  poor 
man  was  discovered  to  have  suddenly  become  rich, 
and  his  rich  neighbour  came  to  him  and  asked  him 
how  he  had  grown  so  wealthy  all  at  once.  He 
replied  that  his  wife  had  worshipped  Ganesha  on 
the  night  of  the  Ganesha  Chaturthi  by  offering  to 
the  god  just  a handful  of  sesamum  and  gur,  and 
that  the  god  had  become  so  pleased  with  the 
offering  as  to  visit  his  hut  personally.  He  and  his 
wife  were  sleeping  in  a room,  when  they  were 
awakened  by  a voice  speaking  in  the  little  closet 
where  the  puja  had  been  held  but  an  hour  or  so 
ago : “ I am  very  pleased  with  you.”  “ Who  is  that  ?” 
cried  out  the  wife  in  alarm.  “ It  is  I,  Chauth 
Gosain,”  replied  the  voice.  “ Well,”  said  the  wo- 
man, “ what  do  you  want  ?”  She  suspected  it  was 
some  thief  or  rogue  that  had  broken  into  the 
c house,  and  she  therefore  wakened  her  husband,  and 
the  two  stood  on  their  guard,  keeping,  however, 


\ 


GANESHA  CHATURTHI 


19 


inside  their  room.  The  voice  spoke  again,  “ I want 
to  ease  myself.”  There  could  be  no  mistake  now  : 
it  must  be  a lunatic  that  had  entered  their  house  ; 
and  the  poor  couple  thought  it*best  to  humour  the 
fellow.  So  the  woman  replied,  “ Well, — there  are 
four  corners  in  the  room  where  you  are,  and  you 
may  ease  yourself  in  one  of  those.”  A few  minutes 
later,  the  same  voice  spoke  again,  “ I want  to  make 
water;”  and  the  woman  gave  the  same  reply.  It 
was  now  past  t midnight.  All  possibility  of  sleep 
was  gone,  avid  man  and  wife  kept  broad  awake, 
expecting  to  see  worste  and  worse  forms  of  the  same 
madness.  In  the  third  quarter  of  the  night,  the 
voice  cried  again,  “ I want  to  weep.”  The  same 
reply  was  of  course  again  given,  as  it  had  at  least 
satisfied  the  supposed  lunatic  so  far  as  to  prevent 
him  from  showing  his  madness  in  a more  aggres- 
sive form.  In  the  last  quarter  of  the  night,  the 
voice  spoke  for  the  last  time,  “ I want  to  laugh.” 
But  the  same  reply  was  again  given,  although  a 
different  one  could  have  been  tried,  considering  that 
the  dawmwas  already  breaking  in  the  east,  and  help 
could  be  more  readily  procured  in  case  the  madman 
attempted  violence.  But  before  it  was  quite  dawn, 
the  madman  had  taken  his  exit,  and  daylight  reveal- 
ed a miracle  in  each  of  the  four  corners  of  the  closet 
where  the  supposed  madman  hadjplayed  his  supposed 
pranks.  The  little  room  was.  heaped  with  gold  and 


20 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


gems,  and  at  the  sight  of  these  the  poor  man  and 
his  wife  burst  into  tears  of  repentance.  The  god 
Ganesha  himself  had  visited  their  humble  dwelling, 
and  how  discourteously  they  had  treated  Him  who 
had  in  one  night  converted  their  little  hut  into  a 
treasure-house.  Now,  the  rich  neighbour  listened 
to  this  tale  with  eager  interest,  gaping  with  pro- 
found wonder  at  the  thought  of  a poor  man’s  rising 
to  such  a fortune  in  the  course  of  a single  night. 
He  questioned  him  in  detail  as  to  the  exact  procedure 
he  had  adopted  in  the  worship  of  Ganesha  on  that 
blissful  night,  the  exact  kind  of  offering  he  had 
made,  the  exact  quantity  of  each  article,  and  so 
on,  determining  in  his  mind  to  do  the  same  on 
the  next  occasion  of  the  puja.  He  told  all  this 
to  his  wife,  and  the  wife,  too,  visited  her  neighbour’s 
wife,  and  personally  verified  all  the  details  of  the 
ceremony  that  .her  husband  had  reported  to  her. 
And  then  she  impatiently  awaited  the  arrival  of 
the  sacred  day.  The  days  seemed  in  her  impa- 
tience to  pass  most  languidly.  Of  course,  she  was 
in  no  needy  circumstances,  but  rather  sufficiently 
rich  to  have  no  hankering  for  more.  But  still  the 
sight  of  her  upstart  neighbour  gave  rise  in  her 
heart  to  the  ambition  of  outshining  him  in  wealth 
and  splendour ; hence  the  keen  longing,  the  restless 
impatience  with  which  both  she  and  her  husband 
looked  forward  to  the  auspicious  day.  And  now 


GANBSHA  CHATURTHI 


21 


^ the  auspicious  day  had  come,  and  preparations  for 
the  puja  were  made  in  rigid  conformity  with  the  de- 
tails that  had  been  followed  by  their  neighbour.  Just 
a handful  of  sesamum,  only  a little  grain  of  gur 
were  offered  in  the  worship  ; the  smallest  room  in 
the  house  was  chosen  for  the  ceremony  ; and,  after 
the  carefully-studied  rites  were  over,  man  and  wife 
betook  themselves  to  sleep  in  the  next  room,  choos- 
ing to  lie  down  on  the  bare  ground,  because  their 
neighbour  had  done  so.  But  neither  of  them  could 
summon  a wink  of  sleep  in  expectation  of  the 
blessed  visitation.  They  had  not  to  wait  long. 
The  expected  voice  was  heard  at  the  expected  hour  ; 
and,  truly  enough,  it  spoke  the  same  words. 
Naturally,  the  same  reply  was  given  which  the 
woman  had  so  carefully  conned.  Everything  hap- 
pened exactly  as  had  happened  to  her  neighbour, — 
the  same  voice  speaking  the  same  words,  at  the 
same  hours,  and  receiving  the  same  replies  in  the 
same  semi-sarcastic  tone.  For  even  the  tone  of 
the  reply  had  been  studiously  copied  by  a year’s 
rehearsal.  The  last  reply  was  given  just  as  the 
dawn  was  breaking  in  the  eastern  sky.  Every- 
thing was  now  indeed  complete  : no  detail  was 
wanting,  and  the  woman’s  heart  was  leaping  with 
joy  as  at  daylight  she  opened  the  door  of  the 
little  room  to  gather  the  heaps  of  gold  and  gems. 
But  there  was  another  kind  of  miracle  awaiting 


22 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


her  eyes.  Instead  of  the  gold  and  gems  she 
had  expected  to  find,  the  whole  room  was  filled 
with  human  excrement,  flooded  with  urine,  and 
giving  forth  a horrible  stench ! The  woman  was 
horrified,  a ndr  fell  Back  in  her  terror.  Loudly  she 
denounced  her  innocent  neighbour  for  having,  as  she 
thought,  deluded  her  with  a concocted  lie.  The  next 
moment  she  blamed  herself  for  putting  faith  in  an 
upstart’s  words  ; and  the  next  moment  stormed  at  her 
neighbour  for  practising  such  a villainous  trick  upon 
her.  The  news  soon  leaked  out,  and  her  neighbours 
came,  some  to  sympathise  with  her"  others  to 
laugh  at  her  folly.  But  there  was  one  among  them 
who  saw  through  the  meaning  of  the  whole  comic 
tragedy.  She  explained  that  the  fault  was  neither  in 
the  god,  nor  in  the  neighbour  who  had  told  the  truth, 
but  in  the  silly  woman’s  own  heart  that  had  yielded 
to  temptation  when  it  should  have  resisted  it,  that 
had  fallen  a prey  to  avarice  when  it  should  have 
rested  in  contentment,  that  had  entertained  the  vile 
ambition  of  outshining  a neighbour  in  wealth  instead 
of  trying  to  excel  him  in  piety.  She  was  already  rich 
and  well-to-do,  and  the  proper  way  for  her  to  wor- 
ship the  god  would  have  been  in  a style  befitting  her 
wealth  and  position.  Instead  of  doing  that,  she  had 
blindly  followed  the  humble  style  of  her  humble 
neighbour  ; she  had  even  had  the  audacity  to  speak 
to  the  god,  knowing  that  it  was  a god  she  was 


GANESHA  CHATURTHI 


23 


addressing,  in  the  same  semi-sarcastic  tone  that 
had  been  used  by  her  neighbour  in  ignorance  ; and 
she  had  therefore  well  merited  the  punishment 
which  had  visited  her.  , 


<r 


c c 

III 

Basanta  Panchami 

Basanta  Panchami  is  the  fifth  day  of  the  light-half 
of  Magh,  and  is  so  called  because  it  is  regarded  as 
the  first  day  of  the  Indian  spring — ‘ Basanta  ’ being 
the  Sanskrit  name  of  the  spring  season.  The  great 
spring  festival  of  India  is,  however,  not  the  one  that 
bears  the  name  of  spring,  but  another  which  comes 
off  some  six  weeks  later, — namely,  the  Holi.  But 
the  Holi  is  a spring  festival  in  the  sense  that  it  is  a 
day  of  popular  rejoicing,  following  closely  upon  or 
immediately  preceding  the  harvesting  of  the  spring 
crops  ; whereas  Basanta  Panchami  marks  the  com- 
mencement of  the  spring  season  from  the  astrono- 
mical point  of  view. 

Why  the  advent  of  jthe  spring  season  should  be 
a festive  occasion  in  a tropical  country,  is  not  quite 
obvious,  for  in  no  part  of  the  plain  regions  of  India, 
where  this  festival  is  honoured  by  some  kind  of 
observance,  are  the  rigours  of  the  winter  season  at 
any  time  so  severe  as  to  make  the  approach  of 
npring  a looked-for  event.  The  mild  Indian  winter 
has  no  terrors  for  even  the  poorest  Indian  peasant, 


BASANTA  PANCHAMI 


25 


as  long  as  he  can  enjoy  the  warm  sunshine  by  day, 
and  can  gather  a heap  of  dry  leaves  to  provide  him 
with  a flicker  of  fire  at  nightfall,  just  before  he  lays 
himself  down  on  his  pallet  and  covers  himself  up 
with  his  rude  blanket  in  his  low-rodfed,  mud-built, 
air-tight  hut,  from  which  he  can  defy  the  winter’s 
wind  and  frost.  Nor  does  the  Indian  winter  cause 
any  perceptible  decay  of  vegetation  to  make  it  any- 
thing like  the  dreary  season  it  is  in  colder  climates. 
Nevertheless,  the  arrival  of  the  spring  season, 
heralded  by  the  melodious  notes  of  the  cuckoo  and 
by  the  sweet  breath  of  mango  blooms  wafted  upon 
the  breeze,  has  even  in  India  been  the  constant 
theme  of  delight  to  Indian  poets,  who  revel  no  less 
in  the  joys  and  beauties  of  the  vernal  season  than 
the  greatest  Nature  poets  of  English  literature. 
It  is  probably  these  Indian  poets  that  have  elevated 
Basanta  Panchami  to  the  dignity  of  a festival,  for 
there  was  originally  nothing  religious  about  the  day, 
and  it  is  still,  in  many  parts  of  India,  observed  as 
a mere  secular  festival,  with  no  celebration  con- 
nected with  it,  except  that  young  men  wear  a turban 
or  scarf  dyed  in  yellow,  in  allusion  to  the  popular 
meaning  of  the  term  4 Basanta  ’ which  signifies 
‘yellow.’  But  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  word 
Basanta  originally  meant  what  it  does  now,  or 
whether  this  meaning  is  derived  from  the  custom  o,f 
wearing  yellow  on  the  day  of  Basanta  Panchami. 


26 


HINDU  PASTS  AND  FEASTS 


The  presumption  that  it  is  the  ancient  Sanskrit 
poets  who  have  actually  founded  the  Basanta  festival, 
is  corroborated  by  another  custom  which  prevails  in 
those  parts  of  the  Province  where  families  of  ‘Bhats’ 
are  still  found.  The  Bhats  are  a class  of  indigen- 
ous bards,  who  at  one  time  possessed  such  poetic 
skill  that  they  could  sing  extempore  songs  on  any 
subject  given  to  them,  and  could  also  carry  on  a 
long  dialogue  in  verse  with  a member  of  their  own 
fraternity.  The  custom  among  them  is  to  present 
sprays  of  mango  bloom  to  one  another  and  to  their 
friends,  on  the  morning  of  Basanta  Panchami. 

This  friendly  present  is  sometimes  accompanied 
by  short  poetical  recitations  in  praise  of  spring,  or 
as  a compliment  paid  to  the  friend  himself.  The 
Bhats  are  by  caste  Brahmans  whose  ancestral 
occupation  was  in  ancient  times  to  compose  songs 
and  odes,  and  recite  them  on  ceremonious  occasions 
before  public  and  private  gatherings.  Some  of 
them  still  uphold  their  ancient  calling,  but  have 
adopted  other  pursuits  in  addition,  to  serve  as  a 
means  of  livelihood.  For  the  poet’s  office,  which 
was  in  ancient  India  a highly  lucrative  one,  in 
consequence  of  the  patronage  of  princes  and  nobles, 
c has  now  ceased  to  be  an  avenue  to  wealth  or 
fortune. 

It  is  probably  our  Indian  poets,  again,  who 
have  connected  Basanta  Panchami  with  the  worship 


BASANTA  PANCHAMI 


27 


of  Saraswati,  the  goddess  of  speech  and  learn- 
ing, the  goddess  most  invoked,  most  adored,  by 
ancient  writers.  Saraswafci  is  often  styled  the 
Minerva  of  Hindu  mythology;  but  this  designation 
is  really  too  narrow  ; she  combines  'in  herself  the 
functions  of  all  the  nine  Muses  of  Greek  mythology, 
presiding  over  the  whole  domain  of  letters,  arts, 
and  sciences,  which  Hindu  philosophers  have  divid- 
ed into  sixty-four  branches. 

Some  European  scholars  have  been  led  into  an- 
other error  in  trying  to  understand  the  true  cha- 
racter of  Saraswati  : they  have  confounded  the  river 
* 

Saraswati  of  Vedic  literature  with  the  goddess 
Saraswati  of  Brahmanical  writings.  They  speak  as 
though  the  latter  had  evolved  out  of  the  former, 
and  their  only  reason,  besides  the  identity  of  the 
two  names,  seems  to  be  the  fact  that  the  goddess  is 
a latter  conception  than  the  river-deity.  Dr.  Muir 
has  even  endeavoured  to  furnish  an  explanation  of 
how  the  river  Saraswati  became  gradually  trans- 
figured into  the  goddess  of  speech  and  learning. 
He  says  : “ When  once  the  river  had  acquired  a 
divine  character,  it  was  quite  natural  that  she  should 
be  regarded  as  the  patroness  of  the  ceremonies 
which  were  celebrated  on  the  margin  of  her  holy 
waves,  and  that  her  direction  and  blessing  should 
be  invoked  as  essential  to  their  proper  performance 
and  success.  The  connection,  into  which  she  was 


28 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


thus  brought  with  sacred  rites  may  have  led  to  the 
further  step  of  imagining  her  to  have  an  influence 
on  the  composition  of  the  hymns  which  formed  so 
important  a part  of  the  proceedings,  and  of  indenti- 
fying  her  with  Vach,  the  goddess  of  speech.” 

The  above  is  no  doubt  a very  ingenious  exposi- 
tion of  the  origin  of  the  goddess  Saraswati  ; but  the 
Hindu  people  still  regard  the  two  Saraswatis  as 
absolutely  distinct.  The  river  Saraswati  of  the 
Vedas  and  the  goddess  Saraswati  of  the  Puranas 
have  nothing  in  common  save  the  name,  nor  did 
the  latter  * evolve  ’ out  of  the  former,  except  in  so 
far  as  we  may  say  that  the  Puranas  were  * evolved  ’ 
out  of  the  Vedas.  That  the  river  is  frequently 
spoken  of  as  a goddess,  is  no  proof  that  the  river- 
deity  was  beginning  to  undergo  transformation  into 
the  goddess  of  learning.  Even  if  the  river-deity  is 
invoked  by  the  authors  of  Vedic  hymns,  this  is  little 
evidence  to  show  that  she  is  being  metamorphosed 
into  another  goddess.  The  river  Saraswati  is  still 
revered  as  a goddess,  only  she  has  been  relegated 
to  the  same  rank  to  which  the  Godavari  or  the 
Narbada,  or  the  Krishna  belong.  Almost  every 
Indian  river  is  regarded  as  a sacred  stream,  and 
personified  as  a god  or  goddess.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  to  the  early  Aryans  the  river  Saraswati  was 
what  the  Ganges  is  to  their  descendants  ; her 
waters  were  instinct  with  divinity  in  every  inch  of 


BASANTA  PANCHAMI 


29 


her  coarse  ; and  her  influence  must  have  inspired 
the  composers  of  the  Vedic  hymns.  There  is  also 
no  doubt  that  she  is  often  invoked  as  the  goddess  of 
speech  and  the  patroness  of  science  ; but  this  may 
be  only  the  language  of  poetic  personification.  The 
Saraswati  of  the  Puranas  is  a distinct  personage 
from  the  Saraswati  of  the  Vedas,  and  the  con- 
founding of  the  qpe  with  the  other  only  reminds 
one  of  the  historic  confusion  made  by  Burke,  in 
one  of  his  speeches  on  the  impeachment  of  Warren 
Hastings^  between  Hafiz  Rahmat  Khan,  chief  of  the 
Rohillas,  and  the  ^Persian  poet  Hafiz.  The  river- 
deity  is  now  no  longer  recognised  as  a goddess 
entitled  to  practical  adoration,  among  other  reasons 
because  the  stream  itself  has  practically  dried  up. 
Like  other  Vedic  deities,  such  as  Indra,  or  Agni,  or 
Vayu,  she  has  long  become  too  classical  to  satisfy 
the  modern  demand  for  more  and  more  personality 
and  less  and  less  abstraction  in  the  gods  and 
goddesses  of  the  Hindu  religion. 

Thus  arose  the  conception  of  Saraswati  as  a 
personal  goddess,  a goddess  presiding  over  speech 
and  letters,  and  patronising  every  branch  of  litera- 
ture, science,  and  art.  She  is  represented  as  a 
maiden  of  snowy  white  complexion,  arrayed  in  a cloth  » 
of  spotless  white,  and  sitting  on  a white  full-blown 
lotus.  Everything  about  her  is  white.  Even  her 
vahan,  the  swan,  is  famous, for  the  white  purity  of 


30 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


its  feathers.  She  has  no  superfluity  of  limbs,  such 
as,  for  instance,  the  ten  arms  of  her  mother  Durga, 
but  is  pictured  in  every  vay  like  a human  maiden 
of  peerless  beauty.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Shiva 
and  Durga,  and  the  wife  of  Brahma,  the  Creator. 
In  one  hand  she  holds  a book,  in  the  other  a vina  or 
harp,  for  she  is  also  the  goddess  of  music.  Every- 
thing white  is  pleasing  to  her  ;c  hence  the  flowers 
used  in  worshipping  her  must  be  white,  as  also  the 
sandal  paste.  In  the  puja,  she  is  sometimes  repre- 
sented by  a clay  image,  and  sometimes  only  by  a 
diagrammatic  figure  depicted  on  the  side  of  a brass 
or  copper  jug  filled  with  water?  in  front  of  which 
are  arranged  in  neat  order,  books,  pen,  ink-stand, 
and  other  writing  materials,  except  ink ; one  or  two 
musical  instruments  like  the  guitar  or  tambourine  ; 
a lighted  chirag , burning  ghee,  not  oil,  etc.  Ink  is 
not  placed  among  the  writing  materials  offered  to 
the  goddess,  because  ink  is  generally  of  a black 
colour,  and  black  is  repulsive  to  the  goddess.  The 
pen  offered  in  the  worship  of  Saraswati  is  the  old 
Indian  pen,  cut  from  a reed,  and  not  the  imported 
steel  pen  of  our  own  day.  The  offerings  are  made 
to  this  emblematic  jug,  and  the  prayers  of  the  war- 
s' shippers  are  likewise  addressed  to  it.  In  some 
houses,  Of  course,  a clay  image  is  set  up,  and  the 
worship  is  consequently  on  a much  grander  scale. 

The  offerings  special  to  Saraswati  are  unripe  ears 


BASANTA  PANCHAMI 


31 


of  barley  and  grains  of  gram,  and  sprays  of  mango 
bloom,  plums,  sweets  prepared  from  white  sesamum, 
and  other  edibles.  After,  the  puja  proper,  comes 
what  is  called  the  Pushpanjali,  a ceremony  which 
consists  in  the  offering  of  flowers  to  the  goddess  by 
a group  of  worshippers,  who  stand  in  a semicircle 
in  front  of  the  image  or  the  consecrated  jug,  and 
recite  a prescribed  prayer  in  chorus  to  the  leading 
voice  of  the  priest  or  the  head  of  the  family  who 
may  be  conducting  the  worship.  For  the  head  of 

the  family  himself  sometimes  performs  the  puja , 

» 

if  he  is  a Brahman  ; but  if  he  is  not  a Brahman,  he 
has  to  call  in  a priest  to  officiate  at  the  ceremony. 
The  worship  of  Saraswati  is  not  confined  to  any 
particular  caste,  though  originally  the  Brahmans 
alone  had  this  privilege  : for,  as  is  well  known, 
all  learning  was  in  former  times  confined  to  the 
priestly  caste,  perhaps  more  strictly  in  India  than  in 
Europe  in  the  dark  ages.  No  reading  or  writing  is 
permissible  on  this  day,  and  athletic  sports,  gym- 
nastic exercises,  concerts,  theatrical  entertainments, 
&c.,  are  considered  in  order.  Strict  fasting  is  ob- 
served by  every  one  in  the  family,  until  the  worship 
is  completely  over,  and  this  is  generally  about  mid- 
day. Even  little  boys  of  seven  or  eight  join  in 
the  fasting,  and  do  so  most  cheerfully,  hoping  in 
this  way  to  propitiate  the  goddess,  and  to  reap, 
as  their  reward,  a successful  career  at  school. 


32 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


Sarasvvati  is  now  the  favourite  goddess  of  the  Hindu 
student  community,  and  of  all  others  who  are 
engaged  in  the  pursuit,  of  knowledge.  She  is  like- 
wise the  chief  goddess  of  schoolmasters,  and  in 
Bengal  it  is  the  practice  of  every  Pandit  who  keeps 
a school  to  set  up  an  image  of  Saraswati  and  invite 
his  patrons  and  friends  to  witness  the  worship  and 
do  honour  to  the  goddess.  The  attendance  at  these 
ceremonies  is  large  or  small,  according  to  the 
Pandit’s  circle  of  patrons  and  friends,  each  of  whom 
makes  a cash  offering  to  the  goddess  at  the  time  of 
bowing  to  her ; and  the  money  thus  collected  forms 
an  important  part  of  the  Pandit’s  annual  revenue. 

A very  curious  superstition  connected  with  this 
puja  prevails  among  Hindu  boys,  who  regard  plums 
as  absolutely  forbidden  fruit  until  after  the  Saraswati 
puja  is  over, — that  is,  until  some  time  after  plums 
have  begun  to  ripen  on  the  tree  and  to  be  sold  in 
the  bazaar.  The  belief  is  that  if  any  boy  eats  a plum, 
or  even  bites  one,  earlier  than  the  Saraswati  puja, 
he  incurs  the  severe  displeasure  of  the  goddess  ; and 
this  displeasure,  in  the  case  of  a schoolboy,  is  inter- 
preted to  imply  failure  in  examinations  and  all  the 
nameless  evils  that  follow  in  its  train.  When  one 
has  passed  the  school  stage  and  has  boys  of  one’s 
own,  one  comes  to  know  better  what  this  prohibition 
means ; but  alas  ! by  that  time  the  temptation  for 
plums  has  ceased  to  ^ct.  Plums  are  a kind  of  fruit 


BASANTA  PANCHAMI 


33 


never  very  wholesome  even  when  perfectly  ripe,  but 
if  eaten  too  early  in  the  season  they  are  actually 
poisonous,  especially  in  thfe  case  of  the  younger 
folk;  hence  the  solemn  injunction  that  no  boy  shall 
taste  plums  before  the  day  of  Saraswati  puja,  which 
really  seems  to  have  been  issued  by  some  wise 
father  in  days  long  past  and  cleverly  foisted  upon 
the  goddess  Saraswati,  to  serve  as  an  effective  check 
upon  one  very  common  class  of  mischief  that  Indian 
urchins  are  addicted  to  ; and  by  making  the  right 
kind  of  appeal  to  their  childish  temperament,  this 
innocent  delusion  Jhas  worked  successfully  for 
generations,  and  ha.s  now  passed  into  an  incontest- 
able article  of  faith  among  the  juvenile  community. 

Just  as  Akshaya  Navami  is  a festival  which  is 
utilised  for  the  purpose  of  sanctifying  the  field 
produce  of  late  autumn,  by  offering  the  first  fruits 
to  the  goddess  Jagaddhatri,  in  the  same  way, 
Basanta  Panchami  serves  the  incidental  purpose  of 
offering  the  first  fruits  of  the  early  spring  crops, 
such  as  gram,  barley,  and  peas,  to  the  goddess 
Saraswati.  The  goddess  Saraswati  has  of  course 
nothing  to  do  with  agricultural  operations,  and  yet 
the  first  fruits  of  the  season  are  offered  to  her,  as 
being  the  goddess  nearest  at  hand,  because  the 
Hindu  belief  is  that  nothing  ought  to  be  used  for 
human  consumption  which  has  not  been  previously  » 
sanctified  by  being  offered  to  a’  god  or  goddess  — 


34 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


any  one  whose  festival  happens  to  synchronise  with 
the  season  for  any  particular  crop  of  fruit  or  vege- 
table or  grain. 

Saraswati  puja  is  also  the  day  on  which  Hindu 
boys  begin  their  alphabet,  and  quite  a little  cere- 
mony is  made  of  the  matter,  the  ceremony  being 
known  as  ‘ Vidyarambha.’  The  boy  is  made  to 
repeat  the  letters  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet,  as 
correctly  as  he  can  imitate  the  sounds,  and  to  trace 
one  or  two  of  them  on  the  ground,  with  a piece  of 
chalk,  his  hand  being  guided  by  the  priest,  or  by 
the  father  or  guardian  of  the  boy.  This  is  done 
in  front  of  the  image  of  the  goddess,  just  before  or 
just  after  or  during  the  intervals  of  the  worship. 
The  Vidyarambha  ceremony  is  usually  performed 
in  the  fifth  year  of  the  boy’s  age,  or,  in  case 
that  is,  for  any  reason,  rendered  impracticable, 
then,  in  the  seventh  year,  the  even  number  six, 
as,  in  fact,  all  even  numbers,  being  considered 
unlucky  in  all  auspicious  ceremonies,  marriage, 
Upanayana , tonsure  included.  With  the  revival  of 
education  and  learning  and  the  growth  of  knowledge 
that  is  taking  place  in  India  under  British  rule,  the 
worship  of  the  goddess  Saraswati  is  becoming  more 
and  more  universal,  and  in  Bengal,  at  any  rate,  she 
is  worshipped  in  every  Hindu  household,  of  which 
1 even  a single  member  has  received  a smattering  of 
some  kind  of  education. 


9 


IV 

Shivaratri 

Shivaratri  is  a religious  fast  kept  on  the  four- 
teenth day  of  the  dark  fortnight  of  the  lunar  month 
of  Phalgun.  Literally,  the  name  means  * the  night 
consecrated  to  Shiva.’  Shiva  is  one  of  the  highest 
gods  of  the  Hindu  pantheon,  and  he  is  distinguished 
from  the  lesser  #gods  by  the  title  of  Mahadeva,  or 
‘ the  Great  God.’>  He  has  countless  other  names 
corresponding  to  his  countless  attributes,  or  derived 
from  his  equally  numerous  exploits.  Outside  India 
he  is  known  as  one  of  the  three  gods  composing 
what  has  been  erroneously  called  the  Hindu  Trinity, 
in  which  Shiva  figures  as  the  “ destroyer.”  But  this 
conception  of  Shiva  has  now  become  pale  and 
faded  in  the  light  of  brighter  conceptions  that  arose 
later,  these  representing  him  as  a beneficent  deity, 

‘ the  eternally  blessed  one,’  and  ‘ the  causer  of 
blessings.’  His  personality  is  also  made  more 
interesting  by  his  being  represented  as  a human  * 
householder,  dwelling  with  his  wife  Parvati,  and 
rearing  a family  of  four  children — two  sons  and  two 
daughters,  the  sons  being  Ganesha  and  Kartik,  and 
the  daughters,  Lakshmi  ^nd  Saraswati. 


36 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


Shiva  is  a god  transcending  all  the  other  gods  in 
the  multiplex  character  of  his  personality.  Some- 
times he  is  regarded  as  the  divine  impersonation  of 
the  disintegrating  powers  of  nature,  the  forces  that 
make  for  disruption,  decay,  and  death, — in  short, 
as  the  dread  Destroyer,  who  takes  pleasure  in 
destruction  for  its  own  sake.  In  this  character,  he 
is  believed  to  be  fond  of  haunting  burning-grounds, 
of  playing  with  the  skulls  and  bones  of  the  dead, 
and  of  affecting  the  society  of  ghosts  and  goblins^ 
In  this  character,  too,  he  is  represented  as  extremely 
irascible  in  temper,  prone  to  killing  and  slaughter 
on  the  slightest  provocation,  and  having  a wildness 
and  fierceness  about  his  manners  that  inspires  his 
worshippers  with  more  awe  than  reverence.  On  one 
occasion,  the  sage  Daksha  held  a great  sacrifice  to 
which  he  invited  all  the  gods,  but  omitted  to  ask 
Shiva  and  his  wife,  and  the  god  became  so  enraged 
at  this  that  he  cut  off  the  head  of  the  sage  and 
replaced  it  by  that  of  a ram.  On  another  occasion, 
he  burnt  up  a number  of  gods  by  a flash  of  lightning 
darted  from  his  third  eye,  and  afterwards  smeared 
his  body  with  their  ashes,  whence  probably  the 
rubbing  of  ashes  on  the  body  has  become  the 
distinctive  mark  of  a devotee  of  Shiva. 

Sometimes  Shiva  is  pictured  in  a different 
character, — as  the  divine  agent  of  the  reproductive 
power  of  nature,  whence  he  derives  his  names  of 


SHIVARATRI 


37 


Sada-Shiva,  Shankara,  and  Shambhu.  It  is  in  this 
character  that  he  is  represented  by  the  familiar, 
but  often  misunderstood,  symbol  of  the  ‘ Linga.’ 
Sometimes,  again,  he  is  regarded  as^  the  grand  type 
of  an  ascetic  who  has  attained  the  highest  perfec- 
tion by  prayer,  penance,  and  privation.  In  this 
character  he  is  pictured  as  an  ordinary  human 
being  in  the  garb  *of  a holy  anchorite,  with  ash- 
besmeared  body  and  matted  locks  gathered  into  a 
knot  about  the  forehead,  wearing  a strip  of  bark  or 
Ieopard-5kin  about  the  loins,  and  sitting  in  rapt 
meditation  in  the  shades  of  a tree.  It  is  in  this 
character  of  an  invincible  ascetic  that  Shiva 
scorched  to  ashes  the  wayward  god  of  love,  Kama- 
deva,  who  once  endeavoured  to  seduce  him  away 
from  his  course  of  self-mortification.  Thencefor- 
ward Shiva  gained  complete  emancipation  from  the 
bondage  of  passion,  and  by  his  example  taught 
mankind  the  way  to  gain  the  height  of  bliss  by 
voluntary  torture  of  the  flesh,  by  the  subjection  of 
turbulent  passions,  and  by  undisturbed  meditation. 

Shiva  is  sometimes  represented  with  five  faces, 
and  then  he  is  known  by  the  name  of  ‘ Panchanana 
and  he  has  always  three  eyes,  the  third  being  * 
located  in  the  centre  of  the  forehead.  These  three 
eyes  are  supposed  to  typify  the  god’s  omniscience — 
his  knowledge  of  the  past,  present  and  future.  He 
is  said  to  have  a blue-ooloured  throat,  whence  his 


38 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


name  of  ‘ Nil-Kantha and  he  is  said  to  have 
derived  the  hue  from  his  having  drunk  up  the  poison 
which  foamed  forth  from  the  sea-surface,  at  the 
churning  of  the  ocean — a primordial  occurrence, 
very  frequently  mentioned  in  Hindu  mythology  as 
the  originating  cause  of  a number  of  objects  that 
figure  in  subsequent  myths.  His  valian  is  the  bull, 
and  hence  an  image  of  this  creature  is  to  be  seen 
in  every  temple  dedicated  to  Shiva. 

The  month  specially  sacred  to  Shiva  is  Sravan 
(J  uly-August)  ; the  tithi  (phase  of  the  moon)  favour- 
able to  his  worship  is  the  Trayodashi,  or  the  thir- 
teenth day  of  the  dark  fortnight ; and  the  day  of  the 
week  that  is  picked  out  for  the  keeping  of  vows  made 
to  him,  is  Monday.  Shivaratri  is  a sort  of  extra- 
ordinary occasion  for  the  worship  of  Shiva,  who  is 
commonly  worshipped  every  day  in  a very  simple 
form — namely,  by  the  pouring  of  a jug  of  water 
over  the  Lingum  set  up  in  the  nearest  temple,  or, 
simpler  still,  by  bathing  in  water  any  smooth  stone 
boulder  that  might  have  been  placed  by  any  pious- 
minded  rustic  at  the  foot  of  a peepul  tree  anywhere 
on  the  roadside  or  in  the  middle  of  a village  grove. 

The  exact  origin  of  the  Shivaratri  fast  is  lost  in 
the  dimness  of  the  past,  but  the  festival  happens  to 
be  mentioned  in  the  Mahabharata.  This  of  course 
by  no  means  furnishes  any  clue  as  to  the  date  of  its 
origin,  for,  apart  from  the  fact  that  the  chronological 


SH1VARATRI 


39 


value  of  the  epic  is  greatly  lost  by  a multiplicity 
of  later  interpolations,  the  festival  is  described  in 
one  of  the  concluding  books*of  the  poem — the  Shanti 
Parva,  which  some  authorities  believe  to  be  wholly 
apocryphal.  As  it  is,  a pretty  detailed  exposition  of 
the  Mahatmya  (or  religious  efficacy)  of  the  Shivara- 
tri  vow  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  Bhishma,  the 
octogenarian  leader„of  the  Kuru  forces  in  the  great 
battle  of  Kurukshetra.  Bhishma  is  lying  wounded 
on  the  battle-field,  his  body  resting  on  a bed  of 
arrows,  and  in  this  posture  he  discourses  to  a circle 
of  mourning  kinsmen  on  the  principles  of  duty,  the 
truths  of  philosophy  and  the  eternal  mysteries  of  life 
and  death.  According  to  the  legend  thus  put  into 
the  mouth  of  the  dying  hero,  the  fast  of  Shivaratri 
was  first  publicly  observed  by  King  Chitra  Bhanu, 
of  the  Ikshvaku  dynasty,  who  is  said  to  have  been  a 
king  ruling  over  the  whole  of  Jambu-Dwipa,  the 
most  ancient  name  of  India — a name  even  older 
than  Bharata-Varsha,  which  is  derived  from  King 
Bharata.  Chitra  Bhanu  was  a king  as  renowned 
for  his  piety  as  for  his  power,  helping  the  poor, 
protecting  the  weak,  and  honouring  Brahmans. 
Now,  once  upon  a time  it  so  happened  that  on  the 
day  of  Shivaratri,  as  the  king  and  queen  were 
keeping  this  holy  fast,  the  sage  Ashta-Bakra,  accom- 
panied by  some  of  his  disciples,  came  on  a visit  to 
the  court.  The  king  gave*  them  food  and  gifts 


40 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


befitting  their  position.  When  the  sage  was  pre- 
paring to  depart,  he  discovered  that  the  king  was 
abstaining  from  food  and  drink  that  day,  and  so  he 
asked,  “ What  sorrow  has  come  upon  thee  that  thou 
hast  not  taken  thy  meal  to-day  ? Why  art  thou 
putting  thy  soul  to  further  torture  by  thus  abstain- 
ing from  food  and  drink  ? Know  that  the  human 
soul  is  one  with  God,  and  it  is  by  giving  pleasure  to 
oneself,  and  not  by  inflicting  pain,  that  one  can  best 
please  God.”  The  sage,  who  by  the  way,  was  as 
famous  for  his  learning  as  for  his  deformity  of 
body,  being  “ crooked  ” in  eight  different  places 
(whence  his  name  of  Ashta-Bakra),  was  an 
Epicurean  in  faith,  and  held  pleasure  to  be  the  path 
to  piety.  For,  as  in  Greek  philosophy,  there  are 
two  distinct  schools  of  thought  in  Hindu  philo- 
sophy, corresponding  broadly  to  the  Stoic  and  the 
Epicurean,  the  one  advocating  self-indulgence,  the 
other  self-denial.  Chitra  Bhanu,  thereupon,  pro- 
ceeded to  explain  why  he  was  keeping  a fast  that  day, 
and  to  do  so,  he  had  to  recount  some  of  the  events  of 
his  former  birth.  He  told  the  sage  that  in  his  pre- 
vious life  he  was  a hunter,  by  name  Suswar,  who 
made  his  living  by  killing  game  birds  and  animals, 
c and  selling  them  in  the  bazaar.  One  day,  as  he  was 
wandering  through  the  forest  in  search  of  game, 
he  was  overtaken  by  the  darkness  of  night,  and 
being  unable  to  go  back  home,  climbed  up  a bilva 


SHIVARATRI 


41 


(wood-apple)  tree  for  shelter.  He  had  shot  a deer 
that  day,  but  had  had  no  time  to  take  it  home,  or  sell 
it  in  the  market  to  buy  food  for  himself  and  his  family. 
Distressed  with  hunger  and  thirst,  he  thought  of  his 
poor  wife  and  children  who  were  anxiously  expecting 
his  return.  He  wept,  and  his  tears  accompanied 
by  the  withered  leaves  of  the  bilva  tree,  dropped  in 
showers  upon  the  ground.  Now,  the  god  Shiva, 
who  is  fond  of  haunting  the  shades  of  bilva  trees, 
receiving  the  shower  of  tears  and  the  dry  leaves  of 
his  favourite  tree  upon  his  head,  thought  that  some 
pious  votary  of  his  was  worshipping  him  with  offer- 
ings of  water  and  belpatra, — bilva  leaves  being  an 
indispensable  offering  in  the  worship  of  Shiva  on  all 
occasions.  Next  morning,  the  hunter  returned  home, 
and  his  wife  and  children  seeing  him  safe  again  in 
their  midst,  forgot  their  hunger  and  their  grief.  He 
sold  the  deer  that  he  had  shot  on  the  preceding 
day,  and  with  the  proceeds  bought  food  for  himself 
and  his  family.  It  happened  that  just  before  he 
was  going  to  break  his  fast,  a stranger  appeared  at 
the  door  and  begged  for  food.  According  to  Hindu 
custom,  a stranger  or  guest  must  be  entertained 
with  food  before  a householder  can  take  his  meals ; 
and  so  this  unknown  man  was  served  with  a share 
of  the  meal,  before  the  hunter  and  his  family  could 
break  their  prolonged  fast.  Now,  the  proper  obser- 
vance of  a religious  fast  requires  that  not  only  is 


42 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


the  man  to  abstain  from  meals  on.  that  particular 
day,  but  that  he  shall  not  take  any  food  even  on 
the  next,  until  he  has  fir.st  fed  a Brahman ; and  then 
only  is  the  fast  considered  complete.  This  sequel 
to  a fast  is  called  its  Varan , as  its  preparatory  rites 
are  called  the  Sanjut.  The  hunter,  of  course,  knew 
nothing  of  the  fast  or  of  the  Paran  beyond  the  fact 
that  it  was  a day  of  painful  starvation  to  him  and 
to  his  family,  brought  on  by  one  of  the  inevitable 
accidents  of  his  calling.  But  through  this  unfore- 
seen mischance,  as  he  certainly  took  it  to  be  at  the 
time,  he  had  unconsciously  earned  not  only  the 
merits  of  the  fast  itself,  but  those  of  the  Paran  as 
well.  The  hunter  lived  for  many  years  after,  with- 
out any  idea  of  his  spiritual  gains,  until,  when  the 
hour  of  death  came,  he  beheld  two  spirit-messen- 
gers from  the  god  Shiva,  sent  down  for  the  express 
purpose  of  conducting  the  soul  of  the  pious  hunter 
to  the  abodes  of  the  blessed  on  mount  Kailasa. 
And  there  it  was  that  he  learned  for  the  first  time 
that  he  had  been  so  richly  rewarded  for  his  obser- 
vance of  a fast  on  the  day  of  Shivaratri,  and  that, 
too,  by  an  accident,  as  much  beyond  his  control  as 
that  swift  sunset  which  had  overtaken  him  in  the 
depths  of  that  dark  forest,  where  on  that  distant  day 
he  had  been  obliged  to  spend  a night  of  hunger  and 
tears  among  the  dry-dropping  leaves  of  the  bilva 
tree. 


9 


SHIVARATRI 


43 


The  Mahabharata  legend  adds  that  the  hunter 
lived  in  the  abode  of  Shiva  for  thousands  of  years, 
at  the  end  of  which  he  was  translated  to  a higher 
heaven,  called  Indra  Loka , the  home  of  Indra,  ruler 
of  the  skies,  where,  too,  he  spent  ah  enormous 
length  of  time  in  the  enjoyment  of  ineffable  bliss. 
He  was  then  promoted  to  a higher  heaven  still, 
called  the  Brahma  Laka , the  abode  of  Brahma,  the 
Creator  ; and  finally  he  was  elevated  to  Vaikuntha , 
the  highest  heaven,  the  celestial  mansion  of  Vishnu 
himself.  After  living  in  these  other  blissful  regions 
for  other  long  ages  of  time,  the  hunter  was  born 
again  on  earth,  as  heir  to  the  kings  of  the  Ikshvaku 
dynasty,  and  then  he  came  to  bear  his  present  name 
of  Chitra  Bhanu.  By  special  favour  of  the  god 
Shiva,  Chitra  Bhanu  retained  the  memory  of  his 
past  life  and,  in  his  new  kingly  guise,  the  hunter  had 
made  it  his  rule  to  observe  this  annual  fast,  by  the 
unconscious  observance  of  which  he  had  reaped 
such  a rich  harvest  of  both  earthly  and  spiritual 
felicity. 

The  Shivaratri  fast  is  observed  to  this  day  in 
the  form  in  which  king  Chitra  Bhanu  is  believed  to 
have  kept  it.  Those  who  undertake  it  abstain  from 
food  and  drink  during  the  day,  and  at  night  they 
worship  the  god  Shiva,  either  in  their  own  house 
or  in  some  neighbouring  temple  of  the  god,  them-, 
selves  or  through  the  medidm  of  a priest.  The 


44 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


poor  content  themselves  with  pouring  water  on  the 
head  of  an  image  of  Shiva;  the  rich  accompany 
their  elaborate  rites  with  costly  offerings  to  the  god 
and  substantial  gifts  to  Brahmans.  The  offerings 
that  are  deefried  essential  are  bilva  leaves,  dhatura, 
rice  and  water,  preferably  Ganges  water,  or,  failing 
that,  water  from  any  other  running  stream.  At  the 
conclusion  of  the  worship,  wherever  it  is  conducted 
with  some  ceremony,  the  priest  or  the  head  of  the 
family  recites  to  the  assembled  company  of  wor- 
shippers the  above  legend  of  the  hunter  who  became 
a king,  and  the  hearing  of  this  tale  is  believed  to 
be  fraught  with  blessing. 


V 

Holi 


Holi  is  the  gayest  pf  Hindu  festivals.  It  is  cele- 
brated on  the  day  of  the  full  moon  concluding  the 
lunar  month  of  Phalgun , which  roughly  synchro- 
nises with  March.  It  is  a festival  of  unmixed 

» 

rejoicing,  and  commemorates,  in  its  mirth  and 
gaiety,  the  innocent  frolics  of  the  youthful  Krishna 
with  the  merry  milkmaids  of  Brindaban.  Krishna 
is  believed  by  Hindus  of  all  castes  and  creeds  to 
have  been  a divine  incarnation,  who  appeared  on 
earth  in  the  Dwapara  age — the  third  of  those  grand 
cycles  or  aeons  into  which  Hindu  thinkers  have 
divided  Time  in  its  relation  to  the  mundane  drama. 
Some  followers  of  Krishna,  who  are  generally  known 
as  Vaishnavas,  do  not  reckon  him  as  one  of  the 
Avatars  or  manifestations  of  the  Supreme  Being, 
but  as  the  Supreme  Being  Himself  in  human  form. 
Intense  faith  in  a personal  god  is  the  distinguishing 
feature  of  the  Vaishnava  creed,  which  is  broadly 
contrasted  with  its  rival  creed,  Shaktism,  or  the 
worship  of  Power  personified  in  a goddess,  or 
the  conception  of  the  Divine  Being  in  a female  form. 


46 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


The  Vaishnavas  and  Shaktas  represent  two  sects 
between  whom  there  is  still  a great  deal  of  antago- 
nism, not  in  matters  &f  faith  only,  but  extending 
into  the  practical  affairs  of  life  as  well.  The  Vaish- 
navas, for  example,  are  vegetarians  and  teetotallers  ; 
the  Shakta  creed  does  not  forbid  the  use  of  meat 
and  wine.  Holi  is  the  most  important  Vaishnava 
festival,  and  ranks  equal  to  the  greatest  of  Shakta 
festivals — the  Durga  Puja,  which,  like  the  Holi,  is  a 
time  of  universal  rejoicing.  But  these  two  rival 
festivals  have  now  forgotten  their  old,rivalry,  and 
Vaishnavas  and  Shaktas  join  each  other  in  celebrat- 
ing both  with  the  greatest  friendship  and  amity,  so 
far  at  least  as  the  exterior  forms  of  the  worship 
and  the  social  aspects  of  each  festival  are  con- 
cerned. 

Holi  is  the  great  spring  festival  of  India,  the 
celebration  of  it  not  being  confined  to  any  particular 
parts  of  the  country,  but  extending  all  over  the  land. 
In  this  respect,  it  even  excels  the  Durga  Puja, 
which  is  the  great  autumn  festival  of  the  Hindus. 
And  spring  and  autumn  are  the  two  great  harvest 
seasons  in  India,  the  time  when  the  barns  and 
granaries  are  full,  and  when  the  hearts  of  the 
agricultural  population  of  India  are  for  a time 
sufficiently  relieved  from  the  pressure  of  anxiety 
for  bread  to  permit  them  to  give  themselves  over 
to  feasting  and  merriment.  The  harvest  season 


HOLI 


47 


is  a festive  season  not  only  among  the  rural  popula- 
tion of  India,  but  presumably  among  farmers  of 
every  country,  and,  figuratively,  among  other 
communities  as  well,  and  even  among  the  profes- 
sional classes. 

The  only  religious  element  in  the  Holi  festival  is 
the  worship  of  Krishna.  An  image  of  Krishna  as  a 
babe  is  placed  in  a little  swing  cradle,  and  decorated 
with  garlands  of  flowers  and  painted  with  gulal — a 
kind  of  crimson  powder,  also  called  abeer,  the  use  of 
which  by  open,  women  and  children  is  a marked 
feature  of  the  Holi, celebrations  even  in  their  social 
aspect.  The  swing  cradle  accounts  for  the  other 
name  by  which  the  Holi  is  sometimes  known — Dol 
jatra,  the  word  Dol  literally  meaning  ‘ a swing.’ 
But  the  religious  element  in  this  festival  has,  at 
least  in  these  provinces,  disappeared  altogether 
from  the  external  observance,  and  Holi  has  now 
become  a purely  secular  festival  characterised  by 
mere  rout  and  revel,  with  not  even  the  mention  of 
Krishna’s  name,  except  in  “ amorous  ditties  ” also 
called  Holi,  relating  to  the  gallantries  of  that  god 
with  the  gopis  of  Brindaban. 

Probably  the  most  ancient  custom  connected 
with  the  Holi  celebration  is  the  lighting  of  a bonfire 
early  in  the  morning,  an  hour  or  so  before  sunrise. 
Bonfires  are  in  every  country  associated  in  the 
minds  of  men  with  primitive  ’times,  and  the  Holi 


48 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


has  the  distinction  of  being  the  only  Indian  festival 
honoured  by  a bonfire.  These  bonfires  are  lighted 
in  every  village  and  at  street-crossings  in  towns. 
The  exact  origin  of  this  custom  of  lighting  bonfires 
cannot  now  be  traced  with  any  degree  of  certainty. 
There  are  two  or  three  old  legends  purporting  to 
indicate  the  origin,  but  they  only  help  to  lead  the 
inquirer  deeper  and  deeper  ijnto  a maze  ; for  not 
only  are  these  legends  humanly  incredible,  but  they 
have  different  versions  in  different  localities. 
According  to  one  legend,  the  bonfire  represents  the 
immolation  of  a ruthless  Rakshasi  (or  female 
fiend),  named  Holika,  from  whose  name  the  festival 
derived  its  name  of  Holi.  This  Rakshasi  used  to 
carry  off  and  devour  the  children  of  the  surround- 
ing country,  and  so  great  was  the  havoc  she  caused 
among  the  juvenile  population  of  the  neighbourhood 
of  her  home  that  the  people  formed  a plot  against 
her,  and  caught  her  and  burnt  her  to  death.  The 
legend,  however,  does  not  tell  us  either  the  name  or 
the  geographical  situation  of  this  ill-fated  district. 
Now,  since  the  burning  of  this  Rakshasi  afforded 
immunity  especially  to  children,  it  is  the  younger 
folk  who  are  especially  enjoined  in  the  Shastras  to 
make  merry  during  the  Holi  season. 

Another  legend  says  that  this  female  fiend  that 
i(s  burnt  in  emblem  on  the  morning  of  the  Holi 
festival,  was  the  sister rof  king  Hirannya  Kashyapu, 


HOLI 


49 


father  of  Prahlad.  This  prince  was  a fervent  adorer 

of  Krishna  from  his  very  boyhood.  His  father  was 

a disbeliever,  and  he  urged  fhe  boy  to  renounce  his 

faith  in  Krishna,  using  threats  when  persuasion 

seemed  to  fail.  But  the  boy  refused  to  yield.  The 

enraged  father  thereupon  ordered  Prahlad  to  be 

trampled  to  death  by  an  elephant,  but  the  infuriated 

tusker  knelt  down  before  the  brave  child  as  he 
* 

advanced  fearlessly  towards  the  beast,  chanting  the 
name  of  Krishna.  The  boy  was  then  hurled  down 
from  the  summit  of  a steep  rock  to  be  dashed  to 
death  ; he  was  flung  into  a swollen  river  to  be  drown- 
ed, but  he  escaped  from  both  as  triumphantly  as 
before. 

He  was  then  thrown  into  a blazing  fire  to  be 
burnt,  but  the  fire  did  not  even  scathe  his  skin.  At 
last,  Prahlad’s  aunt  seized  the  boy  and  flung  her- 
self into  the  flames  with  him.  For  a while  both 
aunt  and  nephew  vanished  from  sight,  and  King 
Hirannya  rejoiced  that  he  had  at  last  made  an  end 
of  the  wicked  boy  by  sacrificing  the  life  of  his  own 
sister.  The  flames  soon  died  down,  and  in  the  midst 
of  the  encircling  smoke  the  peering  eyes  of  specta- 
tors discerned  a little  boy  squatting  on  the  glowing 
embers,  as  happily  as  though  they  were  a heap  of 
flowers.  But  the  aunt  had  perished  in  the  fire. 
The  Holi  bonfire  is  supposed  to  commemorate  the 
fate  of  Prahlad’s  wicked  aunt.  > This  may  be  true  ,* 

4 


50 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


but  it  may  also  be  true  that  some  Vaishnava  com- 
mentator of  our  religious  books  may  have  found  an 
excellent  origin  for  the  Holi  bonfire  in  this  story  of 
Prahlad,  which  is  to  this  day  a household  tale  in 
India. 

Some  authorities  give  a third  explanation  of  the 
bonfire,  which  in  their  opinion  represents  the  death 
of  the  old  year  and  the  commencement  of  the  new. 
For,  according  to  an  ancient  legend,  the  world  was 
created  by  Brahma  on  the  first  day  of  Chaitra,  that 
is,  the  day  following  the  Holi.  It  does  not  appear 
probable  that  the  custom  of  burning  a bonfire  on  the 
last  day  of  the  year  has  been  in  existence  since  the 
day  when  Brahma,  the  Creator,  gave  birth  to  the 
world  : more  probably  the  custom  originated  in  the 
time  of  Vikramadittya,  Raja  of  Ujjain,  the  reputed 
founder  of  the  Samvat  era,  for  the  Samvat  year 
terminates  with  the  Holi.  The  Samvat  era,  which 
is  57  years  in  advance  of  the  Christian  era,  has  still 
a very  wide  currency  among  the  Hindus  of  the 
United  Provinces,  and  the  Benares  publication  of 
astrological  almanacs  is  still  based  on  the  Samvat 
era.  This  hypothesis  that  the  Holi  bonfire  repre- 
sents the  passing  away  of  the  old  Samvat  year, 
gains  some  weight  from  the  fact  that  the  bonfire  is 
as  often  called  the  “ burning  of  Holi  ” as  the  “ burn- 
ing of  Samvat If  this  conjecture  be  true,  we 
may  extend  our  guess  a little  further  and  say  that 


HOLI 


51 


it  was  probably  Vikramadittya  himself  who  first 
instituted  the  bonfire,  either  as  a mere  token  of 
popular  rejoicing,  or  as  a state  measure  designed 
in  the  interests  of  public  health;  for  the  fire  provided 
a ready  receptacle  for  consuming  the  year’s  accu- 
mulated rubbish  in  every  populated  area,  large  or 
small.  For,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  ancient 
Hindus  well  understood  the  hygienic  and  sanitary 
virtues  of  a blazing  fire,  as  in  all  important  ceremo- 
nies, domestic  or  otherwise,  in  which  there  is 
likelihood  of  any  overcrowding,  they  have  invariably 
prescribed  a sacrificial  fire,  into  which  are  thrown 
various  kinds  of  offerings,  the  resulting  smoke  being 
held  to  be  extremely  efficacious  in  purifying  the  at- 
mosphere and  thus  ensuring  a measure  of  protec- 
tion to  public  health. 

There  is  no  end  of  course  to  conjecture,  and 
where  the  field  of  inquiry  happens  to  be  a depart- 
ment of  Folklore,  and  the  folk  concerned,  a people 
of  such  ancient  origin  as  the  Hindus,  it  easily  affords 
scope  to  the  wildest  play  of  fancy.  No  doubt,  fancy 
is  the  only  resort  where  fact  is  hard  to  get  at ; but 
fancy,  once  let  loose,  is  very  unwilling  to  furl  her 
wings.  One  learned  writer  on  the  Folklore  of 
Northern  India  feels  inclined,  after  comparing  the 
Holi  bonfires  with  similar  observances  in  Europe, 
to  think  that  they  are  “ Sun  charms  or  magical 
ceremonies  intended  to  ensure  proper  supply  of 


52 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


sunshine  for  men,  animals  and  plants.”  He  admits 
that  the  climatic  conditions  of  Northern  India  do 
not,  as  a rule,  necessitate  the  use  of  incantations  to 
produce  sunshine  ; but  he  cautions  us  to  remember 
“ that  the  native  of  the  country  does  not  look  on 
the  fierceness  of  the  summer  sun  with  the  same 
dread  as  is  felt  by  Europeans  ; ” and  he  also  gives 
to  the  common  Indian  villager  the  credit  of  knowing 
that  “ seasonable  and  sufficient  rainfall  depends  on 
a due  supply  of  sunshine.”  It  is  not  quite  obvious, 
however,  why  the  Hindu  originators  of  the  Holi 
bonfire  should  have  been  so  anxious  to  ensure  a 
“ due  supply  of  sunshine  ” in  that  particular  part  of 
the  year,  or  in  this  particular  part  of  the  country, 
to  which  the  custom  is  almost  exclusively  confined, 
seeing  that,  of  all  other  provinces  of  India,  these 
have  always  been  most  favoured  by  a plentiful  sup- 
ply of  the  brightest  kind  of  sunshine. 

The  Holi  bonfire  is  regarded  as  a sacred  object. 
Every  family,  residing  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
site  of  a bonfire,  considers  it  its  duty  to  contribute 
something  either  in  cash  or  in  kind — that  is,  by  pre- 
senting logs  of  wood  or  basketfuls  of  cowdung  cakes 
for  fuel.  By  prescriptive  right,  based  on  immemo- 
rial usage,  boys  are  allowed  to  seize  or  pilfer  fuel  of 
any  kind  for  the  sacred  fire,  such  as  the  wood- 
work of  deserted  dwellings,  old  stakes  and  posts, 
broken  furniture,  and  the  like  ; and  the  owner  of 


HOLI 


53 


these,  when  cognisant  of  such  thefts,  feels  it  his 
duty  to  keep  quiet.  When  the  fire  is  blazing,  those 
present  walk  round  it  in  token  of  reverence  ; and 
when  it  has  died  down,  they  pour  water  over  the 
embers,  and,  before  leaving  the  place,  streak  their 
foreheads  with  the  ashes,  to  bring  them  luck  during 
the  coming  year. 

The  most  important  function  of  the  day  is  the 
“ playing  with  coloured  wafer  ” (rung  khelna) . Quan- 
tities of  red-coloured  liquid,  made  by  mixing  some 
sort  of  red  ,pigment  in  water,  are  poured  by  friends 
upon  friends,  in  friendly  merriment ; and  there  are 
visits  from  house  to  house,  at  each  of  which  this 
mutual  exchange  of  the  sportive  liquid  takes  place. 
Sometimes,  the  jovial  fluid  is  dispensed  with,  and  a 
dry  red  powder,  called  gulql  or  abeer , often  mixed 
with  talc,  is  smeared  on  the  face  as  a more  refined 
substitute  for  the  coloured  water.  But  the  smearing 
of  the  face  is  permissible  only  among  equals,  juniors 
in  age  or  inferiors  in  rank  being  only  allowed  to 
place  a little  of  this  dry  stuff  on  the  foot  of  the 
elder  or  superior,  as  a mark  of  respect.  The  elder 
or  superior,  in  return,  streaks  the  forehead  of  the 
other  with  a pinch  of  the  same  stuff,  as  a symbol  of 
his  blessing.  Among  the  vulgar,  however,  such 
niceties  of  etiquette  are  quickly  forgotten  in  the 
excitement  of  the  hour.  No  one  is  spared,  not  * 
even  women  and  children  ; even  domestic  animals 


54 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


are  not  exempted.  As  the  morning  advances  the 
merriment  increases,  and  the  companies  of  merry- 
makers swell  into  crowds.  In  the  face  of  one  of 
these  riotous  crowds,  it  is  as  hard  to  escape  a drench- 
ing as  to  save  one’s  life  before  a pack  of  hungry 
wolves.  It  is  no  use  praying  for  exemption,  or 
rendering  tender  apologies,  or  making  angry  pro- 
tests : such  attempts  only  help  to  bring  on  the 
drenching  all  the  more  quickly,  and  with  a venge- 
ance. Among  the  vulgar,  too,  muddy  water  freely 
takes  the  place  of  the  coloured  liquid,  and  is  squirted 
through  bamboo  syringes,  right  and  left,  in  merciless 
fashion.  Coloured  water  of  some  sort  is  deemed  abso- 
lutely essential  by  the  illiterate  masses,  and  since  pig- 
ments  and  dye-stuffs  are  rather  expensive  luxuries,  a 
solution  of  street  dust  is  held  to  be  a lawful  substi- 
tute. People  of  varied  taste  prepare  rung  in  all 
the  colours  of  the  rainbow,  though,  strictly,  only 
red  or  pink  is  orthodox.  The  only  people  who 
abstain  from  playing  with  “ rung  ” are  widows  and 
those  who  are  in  mourning  for  the  death  of  a rela- 
tive within  the  year.  Hindu  widows  are  prohibited 
for  the  rest  of  their  lives  from  wearing  any  colour, 
either  in  their  garments,  or  on  their  skin ; and 
mourners  must,  similarly,  dress  in  spotless  white 
from  head  to  foot,  during  the  period  of  mourning. 
The  merriment  reaches  its  climax  at  mid-day,  when 

a 

the  folks  go  home  and  , bathe,  have  their  breakfast 


HOLI 


55 


and  take  some  rest  before  beginning  the  functions 
of  the  afternoon.  These  consist  in  visits  to  relatives 
and  friends,  and  during  these  visits  it  is  customary 
for  parties  to  embrace  one  another.  Old  quarrels 
are  forgotten,  old  friendships  are  revived,  new 
acquaintances  are  created.  Hindus  do  not  object 
to  embracing  even  Mohamedan  friends,  just  as, 
during  the  Mohamedan  festival  of  IJd,  Mohamedans 
do  not  scruple  to  embracing  their  friends  among 
the  Hindus.  The  ignorant  consider  it  a sin  toN^ 
change  their  red-stained  Holi  garments  for  a week 
after  the  festival,  at,  the  end  of  which  another  little 
festival  is  held  in  some  parts  of  the  province  as  a 
sort  of  sequel  or  epilogue. 

A curious  custom  has  come  to  be  associated 
with  the  Holi  festival,  the  custom  of  singing  obscene 
songs  in  public  places — a custom  that  would  certainly 
be  more  honoured  in  the  breach  than  in  the  obser-  * 
vance.  These  obscene  songs  are  supposed  to  be 
addressed  to  the  same  female  fiend  that  is  burnt  in 
emblem  in  the  bonfire  ; but,  unfortunately,  they  have 
been  diverted  from  their  original  aim  and  are  now 
flung  at  any  young  woman  that  might  be  passing  by 
the  spot  where  a rude  fellow  happens  to  be  in  a musi- 
cal mood.  These  songs  are  known  as  kabeer , probably 
after  the  name  of  their  author ; but  this  discreditable 
composer  could  not  have  been  the  famous  reformer  of 
the  same  name,  the  religious  f611ower  of  Ramananda, 


56 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


who  conceived  the  bold  idea  of  uniting  Hindus  and 
Musalmans  in  the  worship  of  one  common  God. 
Whoever  this  debauched»bard  may  have  been,  he  well 
deserved  to  have  been  a kinsman  of  Dame  Holika, 
in  whose  honour  he  first  employed  his  metrical 
skill. 

Holi  is  not  only  a day  of  sportive  merriment  and 
of  ribald  song,  but  also  a day  of  good  cheer,  the 
choicest  dishes  of  Hindu  cuisine  being  prepared  and 
partaken  on  this  day.  Even  the  poorest  must  have  a 
tasteful  meal  on  the  day  of  Holi ; and  those  who  can- 
not afford  to  cook  one  for  themselves,  will  go  and 
beg  it  at  the  houses  of  the  rich  rather  than  go 
without  it  on  such  a sacred  day.  For  the  meal 
taken  on  the  day  of  the  Holi  festival  is  really  a 
new  year’s  banquet,  and  the  belief  is  that,  if  they 
have  a hearty  meal  on  the  first  day  of  the  year, 
they  will  have  a continuity  of  such  meals  through 
the  rest  of  the  year.  Meat  food  is,  however,  abso- 
lutely forbidden,  even  among  those  who  are  not 
vegetarians,  and  sweets  prepared  from  milk  and 
curd  are  held  to  be  in  keeping  with  the  dignity  of 
the  day. 


VI 

Sitala  Saptami 


Sitala  Saptami  .is  a purely  female  festival — if, 
indeed,  it  may  be  called  a festival  at  all,  consisting 
as  it  does  in  the  offering  of  propitiatory  * pujas  ’ to 
the  female  goddess,  Sitala,  by  her  female  worship- 
pers. It  occurs  just  one  week  after  the  Holi 
festival — that  is,  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  waning 
moon  in  the  dark  fortnight  of  Chaitra.  In  some 
parts  it  is  held  in  the  bright  half  of  Sravan,  two 
days  after  the  Nag  Panchami.  By  many,  every 
moonless  Saptami  (seventh  day  of  the  moon),  from 
the  dark  fortnight  of  Chaitra  to  the  corresponding 
fortnight  of  Sravan , is  observed  as  a day  sacred  to 
Sitala  and  celebrated  by  proper  fasts  and  forms  of 
worship.  This  shows  that  there  is  a whole  season 
of  five  months  which  is  sacred  to  Sitala ; and 
devout  worshippers  of  this  goddess,  who  are  exclu- 
sively females,  keep  a fast  and  make  offerings  to  her 
in  each  of  these  months,  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  * 
waning  moon.  Others,  who  are  not  so  devout,  or 
who  are  not  bound  by  any  vows,  worship  her  on  the 
first  or  last  day  of  the  seasoft. 


58 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


Sitala  is  popularly  the  goddess  of  the  small-pox, 
and  the  season  in  which  her  worship  begins  synchro- 
nises therefore  with  the  "beginning  of  the  small-pox 
season.  It  is  well  known  that  this  dreadful  epidemic 
visits  India  just  at  the  commencement  of  the  hot 
weather,  and  carries  on  its  ravages  all  through  the 
summer  season,  subsiding  finally  when  the  rains  have 
well  set  in.  It  is  therefore  that, the  summer  months 
from  Chaitra  to  Sravan  (March  to  July)  have  been 
made  sacred  to  Sitala.  Her  worshippers  believe 
that  if  the  goddess  is  properly  propitiated  by  prayer 
and  offerings,  she  will  avert  sm, all-pox  ; whereas  if 
she  is  offended,  she  will  cause  it.  The  goddess  is 
sometimes  identified  with  the  disease  itself ; hence 
the  particular  solicitude  with  which  a patient  suffer- 
ing from  small-pox  is  humoured.  Any  food  that  the 
patient  may  call  for  is  readily  given,  regardless 
whether  it  is  likely  to  do  him  harm  or  good  ; anything 
that  the  patient  may  sajr  in  his  delirious  raving  is 
reverently  attended  to,  as  an  utterance  inspired  by 
the  goddess ; any  particular  kind  of  service  or  nurs- 
ing which  the  sufferer  may  demand  is  unhesitatingly 
offered,  as  betokening  a command  of  the  goddess. 
No  medicine  is  allowed  to  be  administered  to  the 
patient,  who  is  left  completely  to  the  mercy  of  the 
goddess.  Medicines  are  believed  to  be  offensive  to 
the  goddess,  as  implying  an  agency  claiming  to 
counteract  the  divine  Agency  of  the  goddess.  The 


SITLA  SAPTAMI 


59 


utmost  cleanliness  is  observed  not  only  in  the  sick- 
room, but  everywhere  else  in  the  house,  as  filth 
and  dirt  are  likely  to  an^er  the  goddess.  Leaves 
of  the  Neem  tree  are  spread  in  abundance  all  over 
and  under  the  sick  bed,  and  all  about  the  floor  of 
the  sick-room,  not  in  reference  to  any  medicinal 
properties  of  the  Neem  tree,  but  because  the 
Neem  tree  is  especially  sacred  to  Sitala.  Every 
village  boasts  of  traditions  relating  how  individuals 
afflicted  with  small-pox  were  cured  by  the  special 
intervention  of  the  goddess,  who  dictated  through 
the  lips  of  the  patients  themselves  the  special  forms 
of  propitiation  that  were  necessary  in  those  special 
cases ; and  hence,  whenever  a case  of  small-pox 
occurs  in  a family,  the  female  relations  of  the  pa- 
tient at  once  make  a vow  to  Sitala  to  offer  such  and 
such  forms  of  worship  to  her  when  the  sufferer 
should  recover  ; and  these  vows  are  audibly  repeated 
before  the  patient  constantly  during  his  illness. 
Sometimes  the  goddess  is  believed  to  communicate 
her  wishes  to  some  near  kinsman  of  the  sufferer  in 
a dream  ; and  strange  as  it  may  seem,  such  dreams 
are  often  mandatory,  and  in  such  cases  they  are 
literally  fulfilled.  Some  cases  of  cure  are,  indeed, 
so  wonderful  as  to  seem  miraculous,  and  these  are 
invariably  taken  to  be  the  result  of  sudden  and  direct 
intervention  on  the  part  of  the  goddess,  who  is 
believed  to  effect  an  instantaneous  cure  whenever 


60 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


she  pleases  to  do  so,  simply  “ by  passing  her  hand 
over  the  body  of  the  sufferer.”  Hence  a deeply 
emotional  woman  sometimes  professes  to  see  an 
airy  hand  moving  to  and  fro  over  the  bed  of  an 
unconscious  victim  and  bringing  him  back  to  life 
and  health. 

It  is  this  popular  belief  identifying  the  goddess 
Sitala  with  small-pox,  that  is  responsible  for  the 
practice,  prevailing  in  some  parts,  of  not  burning 
the  bodies  of  those  who  die  of  this  disease.  It  is 
also  an  expansion  or  corollary  of  this  same  belief 
that  the  goddess  Sitala  has  been  rmade  the  presiding 
deity  of  cholera,  and,  since  1897,  of  the  Plague  as 
well.  There  are  very  few  brick-built  temples  raised 
to  this  goddess,  and  those  that  do  exist  are  unim- 
posing  structures,  low,  narrow,  and  with  no  archi- 
tectural pretensions  of  any  kind.  Her  shrines  are 
generally  found  outside  the  bounds  of  a village, 
mostly  under  Neem  trees,  or  in  shady  groves  where 
a mud  platform  and  a tall  bamboo,  bearing  a blood- 
red  banner  fluttering  forlornly  in  the  wind,  mark 
the  sacred  spot  where  the  village  women  gather 
together  during  seasons  of  sickness  to  offer  flower 
and  grain  to  appease  the  wrath  of  the  angry  god- 
dess. 

The  name  ‘ Sitala  ’ literally  means  ‘ cool,’  al- 
though in  her  character  she  is  anything  but  cool. 
She  is  believed  to  delight  in  blood  ; and  hence  a 


SITALA  SAPTAMI 


61 


goat-sacrifice  is  often  vowed  to  her  by  her  worship- 
pers. Hence,  too,  she  is  represented  as  wearing 
blood-red  garments,  althoqgh  the  complexion  of  her 
face  is  a pale  yellow.  She  carries  a bundle  of  reeds 
in  her  hand  and  she  is  mounted  on  an  ass.  The  ass 
is  the  vahan  of  Sitala,  but  strangely  enough,  this 
animal  is  despised  as  an  unclean  beast,  and  the 
higher  castes  of  Hindus  disdain  even  to  touch  it, 
and  feel  it  necessary  to  purify  themselves  by  a bath 
if  accidentally  they  come  in  contact  with  an  ass. 
Probably  the  reason  why  the  donkey  is  called  the 
vahan  of  the  goddess  of  small-pox,  is  that  the  milk 
of  a she-ass  is,  by  Hindu  physicians,  declared  to  be 
a specific  remedy  in  cases  of  small-pox. 

Sitala  is  known  by  other  names  as  well,  such  as 
Devi,  Bhawani,  and  Mata.  The  last  name  means 
simply  a 4 mother/-— an  affectionate  name  given  pro- 
bably to  win  her  favour,  or  alluding  to  her  being  a 
manifestation  of  Shakti,  the  divine  mother  of  the 
universe.  Every  town  and  village  of  Northern 
India  has  its  local  4 Mother,’  who  is  worshipped 
regularly  twice  every  week,  generally  on  Mondays 
and  Fridays  ; and  on  these  days  there  is  always  a 
little  local  mela  or  fair  at  every  local  shrine.  The 
local  Mother  of  Allahabad  is  the  goddess  Alopi,  a 
name  literally  meaning  4 the  one  that  never  disap- 
pears.’ She  is  not  represented  by  an  image,  but 
only  by  a stone  slab  on  which  the  offerings  of 


62 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


worshippers  are  made.  One  remarkable  feature  of 
the  worship  of  Alopi — and  this  is  perhaps  true  of 
other  local  Mothers — is  that  Mohamedan  bhistis  or 
water-carriers  are  employed  by  Hindu  worshippers 
to  pour  down  a mashak  of  water  in  front  of  the 
shrine,  when  the  puja  is  over.  This  pouring  of 
water  on  the  ground  signifies  the  “ cooling  of  the 
earth,”  the  “ cooling  ” being  probably  an  emblema- 
tic reference  to  the  name  of  the  goddess  Sitala,  and 
also  a token  of  her  vouchsafing  domestic  peace  and 
quiet. 

The  offerings  special  to  Sitala  are  betel  leaves, 

o 

flowers,  preferably  of  a red  colour,  and  some  varie- 
ties of  cooked  food,  such  as  poori  and  gulgula , or 
only  parched  grain.  It  is  another  distinctive  pecu- 
liarity of  the  worship  of  Sitala,  that  cooked  food 
forms  part  of  the  offerings  at  a temple.  The  rule 
is  that  cooked  food,  carried  out  of  the  bounds  of  the 
chowka  or  cooking  place,  becomes  ipso  facto  un- 
clean, and  unfit  even  for  respectable  mortal  taste  ; 
hence  no  cooked  food  is  ever  offered  in  worship  at 
any  public  temple,  the  priests  alone  having  the 
privilege  of  supplying  the  deity  with  his  usual  meals 
at  the  usual  hours,  during  which  the  public  are  shut 
out  from  the  temple  and  visits  are  disallowed.  But 
in  the  case  of  the  goddess  Sitala  this  rule,  which  is 
Rigidly  enforced  in  all  othe£  cases,  is  relaxed,  and 
cooked  food  from  the  hands  of  all  castes  is  freely 


SITALA  SAPTAMI 


63 


allowed  to  come  within  the  very  sanctum  of  the 
temple.  Sometimes  the  food  is  cooked  at  home  and 
brought  to  the  temple  and  offered  ; sometimes  it  is 
cooked  on  the  grounds  adjoining  the  temple  and 
offered  to  the  goddess  and  then  partaken  by  her 
worshippers  ; but  this  latter  course  is  adopted  only 
in  cases  of  a special  vow  to  that  effect. 

It  must  be  pointed  out  that  Mother- worship  in 
these  rather  gross  forms  is  confined  exclusively  to 
the  female  folk  of  the  lower  castes.  These  Mother- 
goddesses  are  the  most  popular  local  deities  of 
Northern  India,  in  the  sense  that  they  are  publicly 
worshipped  oftener  than  any  other  gods  or  goddes- 
ses. The  only  other  deity  that  approaches  them  in 
popularity  is  the  goddess  Shashthi,  the  goddess  of 
maternity  and  offspring,  whose  sacred  day  is  the 
sixth  day  of  the  bright  half  of  practically  every 
month.  Their  immense  popularity  is  probably  due 
to  the  fact  that  they  are  goddesses,  manifestations 
of  the  divine  mother.  When  the  human  mother  is 
venerated  as  a kind  of  divine  personage,  the  rever- 
ence due  to  the  divine  mother  must  be  proportion- 
ately greater.  Another  reason  probably  is  that 
they  are  believed  to  be  easily  propitiated  by  prayers, 
vows,  and  offerings.  But  the  real  reason  is  that 
they  are  believed  to  b Qjaggrata,  ‘ wide-awake,’  ready 
at  all  times  to  listen  to  human  prayer,  and  not  like  . 
the  Epicurean  gods  lying  beside  their  nectar, 


64 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


“ careless  of  mankind,”  or  smiling  in  secret,  look- 
ing over  wasted  lands  — 

“ Blight  and  famine,  plague  and  earthquake,  roaring  deeps, 
and  fiery  sands, 

Clanging  fights,  and  flaming  towns,  and  sinking  ships,  and 
praying  hands.” 


VII 

Rama  Navami 


Rama  Navami  is  the  birthday  of  Rama,  who  is 
accepted  by  Hindus  of  all  classes,  castes,  and  creeds 
as  a divine  incarnation  who  appeared  on  earth  in 
the  Treta  age,  the  second  of  the  four  aeons  into 
which  human  Time  is  divided.  According  to  Hindu 
belief,  an  incarnation  arises  whenever  the  world 
begins  to  groan  under  the  weight  of  an  accumulated 
load  of  sin,  and  then  the  All-preserver  Vishnu  feels 
constrained  by  a self-made  law  to  put  some  part  of 
his  divine  essence  into  human  form,  to  save  the 
human  species  from  annihilation.  Now,  we  learn 
from  the  Ramayana  that  just  before  the  advent  of 
Rama,  a race  of  Rakshasas  had  overrun  the  land  and 
were  committing  unbearable  outrages  in  every 
populated  tract  of  the  country.  They  even  carried 
death  and  dismay  into  the  forest  tracts  of  India,  and 
molested  poor  anchorites,  disturbing  them  in  their 
devotions,  pelting  them  with  abuse,  and  making 
their  lives,  wherever  spared,  intolerable.  The  age, 
too,  had  become  thoroughly  corrupt ; distinctions 
of  right  and  wrong  were  but  'faintly  recognised ; 


66 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


the  wicked  throve  and  prospered ; those  who 
honoured  neither  their  parents  nor  their  gods  lived 
in  the  enjoyment  of  fortune.  The  Earth  was 
dismayed  at  this  piteous  persecution  of  everything 
high  and  holy ; and  the  mythological  account  of 
the  birth  of  Rama  says  that  the  Earth-mother, 
feeling  helpless,  assumed  the  shape  of  a cow,  and 
with  tears  made  her  plaint  to  the  gods.  The  gods 
sympathised  with  her  distress,  and  asked  her  to  go 
to  Brahma,  the  Creator,  for  redress.  But  Brahma 
sent  her  on  to  Vishnu,  and  the  lesser  gods  joined 
their  own  entreaties  praying  for  speedy  relief. 
Vishnu  heard  their  prayer,  and  acknowledged  it  by 
means  of  a divine  voice  announcing  his  will  thus : — 
“ I will  myself  descend  from  heaven,  with  my 
eternal  spouse,  and  lift  the  whole  of  earth’s 
burden.”  At  this  assurance,  the  Earth  forgot  her 
woes,  and  the  gods  danced  for  very  joy.  They  too 
hastened  down  to  the  world  and  took  shape  as  mon- 
keys, awaiting  the  divine  advent  with  bounding  joy. 

Meanwhile,  Dasaratha  had  succeeded  to  the 
throne  of  Kosala,  a powerful  ancient  kingdom  of 
Northern  India,  situated  in  what  is  now  called 
Oudh.  He  was  a scion  of  the  illustrious  solar  race 
who  claim  descent  from  the  Sungod.  The  poet  of 
the  Ramayana  has  eulogised  the  virtues  of  this 
monarch  in  a style  heavily  laden  with  oriental  orna- 
ment; but  even  aftei*  making  due  allowance  for  poetic 


RAMA  NAVAMI 


67 


exaggeration,  we  must  admit  that,  historically,  he 
was  a most  benevolent  ruler,  a father  to  his  people 
a sage  and  saint  in  private  life,  a defender  of  the 
faith.  He  had  three  queens,  Kausalya  being  the 
eldest ; and  the  queens  too  were  as  pious  and  godly 
as  the  king.  But  at  heart  this  great  king  was  an 
unhappy  man,  because  he  had  no  issue  by  any  of 
the  three  queens.  One  day  the  king  repaired  to 
Saint  Vasishtha,  his  guru  or  religious  preceptor, 
and  spoke  of  the  sorrow  he  felt  at  his  continued 
childlessness.  The  saint  advised  him  to  perform 
a sacrifice,  such  as  was  prescribed  in  the  holy 
books  for  the  birth  of  a son.  In  the  midst  of  the 
sacrifice  the  Fire-god  appeared  in  person,  with  an 
offering  in  his  hand,  saying  to  Dasaratha,  “ Take 
this  oblation,  O king,  and  divide  it  among  thy 
queens,  in  such  proportions  as  thou  pleasest.” 
When  the  Fire-god  vanished,  the  king  sent  for  his 
wives,  and  distributed  the  sacred  oblation  among 
them,  giving  a half-share  to  Kausalya,  the  senior 
queen,  and  dividing  the  other  half  equally  between 
the  other  two.  Thereafter  were  born  the  four 
brothers,  Rama,  Lakshmana,  Bharata,  and  Satru- 
ghna,  of  whom  the  first,  Rama,  was  the  son  of  the 
eldest  queen,  and  so  was  recognised  as  the  eldest  of 
!the  princes. 

“ Full  of  delight  was  all  creation,  animate  and 
inanimate,  when  Rama  was  born.  On  the  ninth 


68 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


day  of  the  holy  month  of  Chaitra,  in  the  bright 
lunar  fortnight,  under  Abhijit,  his  favourite  constella- 
tion, on  a seasonable  day,  neither  hot  nor  cold,  a 
holy  time  of  rest  for  all,  with  fragrant  breezes 
blowing,  amidst  the  delight  of  gods  and  rapture  of 
the  saints,  while  the  woods  were  full  of  blossoms 
and  every  river  flowed  with  nectar,  God  took  birth 
as  a man,  in  a body  formed  at' his  own  will — he  who 
is  beyond  all  form,  or  quality,  or  perception  of  the 
senses.”  It  is  in  these  words  that  the  Ramayana 
(Book  I,  Bal-Kanda ) describes  the  birth  of  Rama, 
and  it  is  the  birth  of  Rama  that  is  commemorated 
in  all  parts  of  India  by  this  annual  festival,  called 
the  Rama  Navami. 

The  subsequent  history  of  Rama  is  recorded  in 
the  same  work  which  furnishes  us  with  an  account 
of  his  divine  birth.  The  Ramayana  is,  as  its  name 
fitly  denotes,  a metrical  biography  of  Rama,  and  not 
merely  an  immortal  epic  ; it  records  every  event  of 
his  life,  down  to  the  minutest  detail  ; it  reports 
every  utterance  of  his  lips  with  the  strictest 
faithfulness ; it  celebrates  every  exploit  of  his 
arms  in  strains  of  poetry  that  frequently  soar 
above  the  sublimest  heights  ever  attained  by 
uninspired  human  composition.  The  seven  Books, 
the  five  hundred  cantos,  the  twenty-four  thou- 
sand couplets  that  belong  to  this  monumental 
piece  of  writing,  have  but  a single  theme — Rama  ; 


RAMA  NAVAMI 


69 


the  three  thousand  years  during  which  this  colossal 
literary  fabric  has  stood,  have  not  touched  a single 
leaf  of  it  with  the  fading  hue  of  decay.  The 
Ramayana  still  forms  the  basis  of  a living  faith — 
a faith  deep-drawn  from  the  storied  past,  infused 
with  fresh  vigour  at  many  an  intermediate  stage, 
and  palpitating  with  the^  breath  of  life  as  warmly 
to-day  as  it  did  through  the  centuries  left  behind. 
This  is  because  the  ideals  of  character  depicted  in 
the  story  are  the  ideals  that  have  ever  appealed 
most  forcibly  to  the  mind  of  the  Hindu  people,  who 
prize  the  quiet  domestic  virtues  far  more  deeply 
than  those  uproarious  qualities  that  are  often  so 
proudly  paraded  before  the  public.  The  filial 
obedience  of  Rama,  the  brotherly  faith  of  Laksh- 
mana,  the  sincere  self-sacrifice  of  Bharata,  the 
wifely  devotion  of  Sita,  the  unswerving  loyalty  and 
allegiance  of  Hanumana, — these  are  ideals  of 
imperishable  worth  penetrating  deeply  into  the 
minds  of  a people  that  have  retained  the  primitive 
purity  of  human  virtues,  unalloyed  by  the  later 
virtues  of  a later  civilisation. 

Every  event  of  Rama’s  life  is  fraught  with  an 
undying  lesson  for  the  pious  Hindu.  Rama  is  a 
born  prince,  and  then  a king  ; but  in  their  adoration 
for  his  character  his  worshippers  forget  his  kingly 
position  ; they  take  every  deed.of  his  as  done  with 
the  express  object  of  holding  up  a model  before 


70 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


their  eyes  ; they  interpret  every  word  of  his  in  the 
light  of  a gospel ; and  in  their  eagerness  to  do 
honour  to  the  hero  they  have  accorded  a due 
measure  of  honour  to  the  hero-worshipper  as  well 
— the  “ saint”  Valmiki,  the  original  author  of  the 
Ramayana , and  even  to  his  worshippers,  those  who 
have  translated  the  Sanskrit  epic  into  the  different 
vernaculars  of  India.  Men  like  Tulsi  Das,  whose 
translation  is  the  great  classic  of  Hindi  literature, 
are  not  believed  to  have  been  ordinary  mortals, 
but  men  divinely  favoured,  the  elect  of  God.  For 
the  popular  belief  with  regard  to  such  religious 
writings  is  akin  to  the  Miltonic  conception  of  the 
vocation  of  a poet, — that  no  one  can  dare  to  write 
on  such  sacred  themes  unless  he  is  especially 
inspired  by  “ that  Eternal  Spirit  who  can  enrich 
with  all  utterance  and  knowledge,  and  sends  out 
his  seraphim  with  the  hallowed  fire  of  his  altar  to 
touch  and  purify  the  life  of  whom  he  pleases.” 

The  importance  of  the  Rama  Navami  festival 
cannot  be  properly  gauged  unless  we  take  account 
of  the  veneration  with  which  the  Hindus  regard  the 
Ramayana — a veneration  which  is  only  a reflection 
of  that  devouter  sentiment  with  which  they  regard 
the  very  name  of  Rama.  One  curious  practice, 
common  among  ignorant  Hindus,  will  illustrate 
the  blind  fervour  of  faith  which  they  repose  even 
in  the  bare  name  of  Rama.  They  write  the  simple 


RAMA  NAVAMI 


71 


name  of  Rama,  or  get  it  written  by  a priest,  a 
thousand  or  a hundred  thousand  times  on  a sheet 
of  paper,  which  they  afterwards  cut  up  into  as  many 
bits,  and  insert  each  bit  into  a little  ball  or  globule 
of  kneaded  flour,  and  then  cast  these  stuffed 
globules  into  the  waters  of  the  Ganges  or  some 
other  holy  stream,  to  feed  fish.  This  is  sometimes 
done  only  as  an  act’of  piety,  but  more  often  it  is 
done  in  fulfilment  of  a vow  made  in  some  season  of 
difficulty  or  distress.  A sort  of  magic  virtue  is 
also  sometimes  attached  to  the  name  of  Rama,  which 
is  believed  to  scare  away  evil  spirits,  more  effective- 
ly than  any  exorcism.  There  is  no  name  more 
constantly  on  Hindu  lips  ; even  the  common  form 
of  salutation  among  the  uneducated  consists  in 
repeating  the  name  of  Rama  twice  in  succession, 
and  the  salutation  is  returned  by  a fresh  repetition 
of  the  same  name.  The  same  name  serves  as  a 
pious  invocation  at  the  commencement  of  every 
work,  and  at  its  close  the  name  is  again  uttered  in 
token  of  pious  thanksgiving.  An  instinct  of  rever- 
ence for  this  name  is  inherited  at  the  very  birth  of 
a Hindu  infant,  and  the  instinct  grows  stronger  at 
each  step  of  its  life  onward.  The  story  of  Rama  is 
one  of  the  earliest  tales  that  the  Hindu  child  hears 
in  the  nursery ; when  he  goes  to  school  he  reads 
the  same  story  for  himself  in  some  popular  version' 
of  the  great  epic  ; in  youth,  the  narrative  of  Rama’s 


72 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


exploits  stimulates  his  imagination  and  elicits  his 
admiration  ; in  manhood,  he  ponders  reflectively 
over  the  great  truths  that  he  draws  from  that 
Scripture ; in  age,  he  derives  spiritual  consolation 
from  telling  the  name  of  Rama  on  his  beads  ; and 
last,  when  his  lips  are  sealed  by  the  hand  of  death, 
it  is  the  same  holy  name  again  that  is  whispered 
into  his  ears  and  chanted  in  a chorus  as  his  body  is 
carried  to  the  river-bank  for  cremation. 


VIII 

Dasahara,  or  Ganga  Puja 

Dasahara  or  Ganga  Puja  must  be  at  once  distin- 
guished from  Dasahara  or  Durga  Puja.  The  name 
Dasahara,  as  given  to  the  last  day  of  the  Durga  Puja 
festival,  is  a misnomer,  arising  probably  from  the 
fact  that  both  festivals  occur  on  the  tenth  day  of  the 
moon,  the  prefix  dasa  meaning  ‘ ten.’  But  the  two 
festivals  whose  names  have  become  erroneously 
identical,  have  nothing  in  common,  except  this 
accidental  resemblance  of  names.  They  occur  in 
different  seasons  of  the  year,  they  commemorate 
different  myths,  they  are  held  in  honour  of  different 
deities. 

The  word  ‘ Dasahara  ’ is  an  abbreviation  of  the 
Sanskrit  phrase  Dasa-bidha  pap  hara , which  means, 
‘the  destroyer  of  ten  kinds  of  sin.’  It  is  a name 
given  to  the  birth-day  of  the  goddess  Ganga,  because 
this  sacred  stream  is  believed  to  be  a destroyer  of 
human  sins.  The  “ birth-day  ” of  the  goddess  Ganga 
means  the  day  on  which  the  river,  which  was  origi- 
nally a celestial  stream,  descended  from  her  heaven- 
ly channel  to  flow  on  th^  face  of  the  earth.  This 


74 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


sacred  day  is  the  tenth  day  of  the  moonlit  half  of 
Jaistha  (May-June),  which  is,  accordingly,  one  of  the 
greatest  bathing-days  of  the  Hindu  calendar. 

There  are  several  legends  describing  how  the 
river  Ganga  first  came  down  to  earth.  There  was 
once  a king  of  Ayodhya,  named  Sagara,  who  had 
two  wives  but  no  issue.  Childlessness  being  one 
of  the  greatest  curses  that  can  ever  fall  to  the  lot 
of  a Hindu,  Sagara  performed  many  a penance  and 
offered  many  a sacrifice  with  the  desire  of  begetting 
offspring.  Thereafter,  one  of  the  queens  became 
the  mother  of  a single  son,  named  Ashwamanjan, 
and  the  other  bore  so  many  as  sixty  thousand.  In 
his  joy  the  king  proceeded  to  celebrate  the  Ashwa- 
tnedha  ceremony,  or  the  Horse-sacrifice,  in  order  to 
declare  his  suzerainty  over  the  neighbouring  king- 
doms and  principalities.  But  Indra,  king  of  Heaven, 
stole  the  sacred  steed  out  of  jealousy,  and  caused  a 
most  inauspicious  interruption  to  the  holy  ceremony. 
The  sixty  thousand  princes  proceeded  in  all  direc- 
tions to  search  the  stolen  steed,  but  found  no  trace 
of  it  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  They  therefore  pro- 
ceeded to  dig  down  below  the  surface,  each  prince 
digging  for  the  depth  of  a league,  until  they  should 
reach  the  centre  of  the  globe.  But  before  they 
could  accomplish  their  task,  they  were  consumed 
by  a fire  by  the  sage  Kapila,  whom  they  found  sit- 
ting in  a deep  underground  cell,  with  his  eyes  closed 


DASAHARA,  OR  GANGA  PUJA 


75 


in  meditation,  and  with  the  stolen  steed  standing 
behind  him.  Without  making  any  inquiries  as  to 
how  the  steed  had  come^to  be  there,  the  princes 
accused  Kapila  of  theft.  The  sage,  who  did  not 
know  anything  of  the  theft,  fell  into  a rage  at  this 
unjust  accusation,  and  burnt  the  entire  company  of 
princes  to  ashes  with  the  fire  of  his  wrath.  King 
Sagara  was  overwhelmed  with  grief  at  the  loss  of  his 
sixty  thousand  sons,  and  in  his  distress  he  went 
about  from  one  sage  to  another,  seeking  advice  and 
consolation.  He  was  told  that  his  sixty  thousand 
sons  would  come  to  life  again  and  ascend  to  heaven, 
provided  the  river  Ganga  could  be  brought  down  to 
flow  on  earth.  Bhagiratha,  his  grandson — the  son 
of  his  surviving  heir,  Ashwamanjan — thereupon 
undertook  a course  of  prayer  and  penance  with 
the  object  of  bringing  down  the  goddess  Ganga  ; and 
his  prayers  were  at  last  granted  by  Brahma,  who 
directed  the  celestial  stream  to  descend  from  the 
Himalayas.  The  descent  of  the  river  was  so  tre- 
mendous in  force  that  the  earth  would  have  been 
swept  away  had  not  the  god  Shiva  broken  the  fall  of 
the  waters  by  allowing  them  to  flow  through  his 
matted  locks,  which  caused  the  river  to  split  into 
seven  streams.  For  this  service,  Shiva  has  received 
the  title  of  ‘ Gangadhar,’  or  * Upholder  of  the  Gan- 
ges.’ When  the  waters  of  the  Ganges  reached  the 
ashes  of  the  sixty  thousand  slain  princes,  their 


76 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


spirits  rose  to  heaven  and  were  admitted  to  eternal 
bliss.  But  there  was  still  one  rude  interruption  to 
the  peaceful  course  of  the  Ganges  on  earth.  The 
sudden  onrush  of  waters  disturbed  the  sage  Jahnu 
as  he  was  performing  a holy  sacrifice,  flooding 
the  sacrificial  site,  wetting  or  drowning  many  of 
the  sacrificial  offerings,  putting  out  the  sacrificial 
fire.  Jahnu  thereupon  drank  up  the  whole  stream 
by  making  an  achrnan  of  her — achman  being  the 
sipping  of  holy  water  just  before  a religious  rite. 
But  the  sage  afterwards  relented,  and  allowed  the 
river  to  flow  out  of  one  of  his  ears  ; hence  the  Gan- 
ges is  also  known  by  the  name  of  Jahnavi,  ‘ the 
daughter  of  Jahnu.’ 

Just  as  the  name  Dasahara,  which  properly 
applies  to  the  birthday  of  the  goddess  Ganga,  is 
given  to  the  Vijaya  Dasami  by  a popular  confusion, 
in  the  same  way,  a similar  chance  resemblance  of 
names  has  connected  the  little  island  (or  rather 
eyot)  of  Sagara,  situated  at  the  mouth  of  the  Gan- 
ges, and  called  * Sagara  ’ no  doubt  on  account  of  its 
proximity  to  the  sea,  with  King  Sagara,  this  legend- 
ary king  of  Ayodhya.  This  island  is  invested  with 
great  sanctity  and  is  the  seat  of  an  annual  pilgri- 
mage on  the  day  of  Dasahara. 

The  legends  that  cluster  round  the  person  of  the 
gpddess  Ganga  are  mostly  illustrative  of  her  wonder- 
ful power  of  cleansing  a rnanpfrom  sin.  The  extreme 


DASAHARA,  OR  OANGA  PUJA 


77 


case  of  her  exercising  such  power  was  that  of  Raja 
Trisanku,  who  had  committed  the  three  deadly  sins 
of  killing  a cow,  disobeying  his  father,  and  eating 
unhallowed  meat.  But  even  he  was  absolved  from 
his  sins  by  a bath  in  the  Ganges.  There  was 
another  sinful  king,  who  might  be  Trisanku  or  some 
other,  who  had  committed  the  inexpiable  sins  of 
murdering  a Brahman,  and  marrying  his  own  step- 
mother ; and  he,  too,  was  similarly  saved  from  the 
effects  of  his  sins.  A bath  in  the  Ganges  is  effica- 
cious not  only  as  a propitiation  for  past  sin,  but  also 
for  the  purpose  of  gaining  a store  of  spiritual  merit 
that  remains  to  one’s  credit  through  many  births 
and  serves  to  counteract  the  evil  effect  of  other  sins 
incurred  in  the  same  or  other  lives. 

Some  legends  represent  the  goddess  Ganga  as 
the  daughter  of  Himavat  and  Mena,  and  as  the  wife 
of  King  Santanu,  a descendant  of  the  illustrious 
King  Bharata,  son  of  the  immortal  Sakuntala.  San- 
tanu was,  according  to  some  legends,  the  father  of 
Bhishma,  the  aged  chief  who  fought  as  leader  of  the 
Kuru  armies  in  the  Mahabharata  war.  He  was  a 
king  regarding  whom  it  is  said  that  “ every  decrepit 
man  whom  he  touched  with  his  hands  became  young 
again.”  He  was  also  famed  as  satya-badi,  * the 
truth-teller,’  and  was  remarkable  for  his  devotion, 
charity,  modesty,  constancy,  and  resolution. 

Every  spot  washed  bft  the  waters  of  the  Ganges 


78 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


is  believed  to  be  holy  ground,  and  some  of  the 
holiest  places  of  pilgrimage  are  situated  on  the 
banks  of  this  river.  Ejvery  inch  of  the  fifteen 
hundred  miles  of  her  length  is  believed  to  be  instinct 
with  divinity ; her  waters  are  credited  not  only  with 
spiritual  absolution  from  sin,  but  also  with  medicinal 
and  hygienic  properties,  and  modern  chemistry  has 
added  to  her  ancient  glories  by  declaring  that  her 
waters  are  an  effective  germicide.  The  temples 
that  line  her  banks  are  countless  in  number, 
and  fresh  additions  are  made  year  after  year. 
These  temples  are  not  raised  in  honour  of  the 
goddess  herself,  but  belong  to  different  deities ; 
the  goddess  Ganga  is  not  worshipped  in  any  temple 
reared  by  the  hand  of  man,  nor  is  she  represented 
by  any  image  of  brass  or  stone  ; her  temple  is  her 
majestic  home  of  waters,  and  her  best  image  is  the 
image  of  heaven  she  reflects  on  her  broad  bosom. 

Like  other  gods  and  goddesses,  Ganga  has  her 
own  special  priests,  who  are  known  as  Ganga-putras , 
‘ sons  of  the  Ganges,’  and  these  priests  form  a very 
exclusive  fraternity,  who  are  found  in  numbers 
wherever  a place  of  pilgrimage  is  situated  on  the 
banks  of  this  river.  Many  of  them  earn  large  in- 
comes at  each  bathing  season,  and,  season  or  no 
season,  they  always  manage  to  make  a living  out 
of  the  daily  gifts  they  receive  from  customary 
bathers.  c <e 


DASAHARA,  OR  GANGA  PUJA 


79 


Ganges  water  is  needed  daily  for  the  everyday 
duties  of  a Hindu’s  life.  It  is  required  for  the 
morning  and  evening  worship ; it  is  needed  at  the 
celebration  of  every  domestic  ceremony  ; it  is  indis- 
pensable for  every  purificatory  rite ; it  is  equally 
essential  at  the  moment  of  death,  when  it  is  dropped 
on  the  lips  of  a dying  person  as  a sort  of  viaticum. 
Even  those  who  do  not  live  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  Ganges  take  care  to  keep  a bottle  of  its  water 
for  use  on  occasions  of  emergency.  They  either 
obtain  a supply  from  a trader — for  there  is  a regu- 
lar trade  carried  on  in  despatching  Ganges  water 
in  small  bottles  to  all  parts  of  India  ; or  they  care- 
fully preserve  the  remnant  of  a supply  they  them- 
selves or  their  friends  had  brought  from  some 
pilgrimage.  When,  however,  Ganges  water  is  not 
procurable  by  any  means,  any  water,  such  as  that 
from  an  ordinary  well,  can  be  sanctiiied  by  means 
of  appropriate  mantras  ; and  this  is  actually  done 
by  most  people  living  far  from  the  Ganges,  in  the 
case  of  the  water  they  use  in  their  daily  worship. 

Many  other  Indian  rivers  are  regarded  as  holy 
streams,  the  chief  of  these  being  the  Jamuna,  the 
Godavari,  the  Saraswati,  the  Narmada,  the  Indus, 
and  the  Kaveri.  Of  these,  the  Narmada  is  by  some 
people  regarded  as  equal  in  sanctity  to  the  Ganges, 
if  not  superior.  These  people  say  that  according  to 
the  Bhavishya  Purana  (a^sacyred  book  containing  a 


80 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


record  of  sibylline  prophecies),  the  sanctity  of  the 
Ganges  will  cease,  by  flux  of  time,  on  a certain  date 
during  the  Kali  Yuga  (the  present  age),  whereas  the 
sanctity  of  the  Narmada  is  everlasting.  This  cer- 
tain date  is  said  to  be  “ five  thousand  years  from 
the  commencement  of  the  Kali  Yuga”  According 
to  certain  occult  calculations,  this  date  was  put  down 
as  the  year  1895  of  the  Christian  era.  About  that 
time  there  was  some  commotion  in  religious  circles 
over  what  they  feared  to  be  a national  disaster. 
But  twenty  years  have  elapsed  since  that  dreaded 
date,  and  the  Ganges  still  retains  her  ancient  sanc- 
tity without  the  slightest  abatement. 

One  curious  fact  about  the  goddess  Ganges  is 
that  the  best  of  all  the  hymns  ever  composed  in  her 
honour,  is  said  to  have  been  written  by  a Mohamedan 
worshipper,  named  Darab  Khan — a Bengali  Moha- 
medan in  all  probability,  for  the  above  tradition  is 
current  only  in  Bengal. 


IX 

Nag  Panchami 


Nag  Panchami,  pppularly  called  4 Guriya,’  is  the 
fifth  day  of  the  light  half  of  Sravana,  and  occurs 
just  about  the  middle  of  the  rainy  season,  in  July 
or  August.  It  is  a festival  held  in  honour  of  the 
Nags  or  serpent-deities  of  Hindu  mythology,  who 
are  fabled  to  have  sprung  from  Kadru,  one  of  the 
wives  of  the  sage  Kashyapa.  It  is  very  unlikely 
that  this  sage  wras  the  same  who  is  well-known  to 
have  been  the  founder  of  a numerous  sub-division 
of  Brahmans  ; but  the  ancient  sages  are  sometimes 
credited  with  the  strangest  things.  Be  that  as  it 
may,  this  extraordinary  lady  is  reputed  to  have 
become  the  mother  of  a thousand  Nags,  who  after- 
wards became  the  progenitors  of  the  whole  serpent 
species.  The  Nags  were  not  serpents  themselves, 
but  a race  of  beings  partaking  of  both  human  and 
serpentine  qualities,  and  yet  in  some  respects  super- 
human. They  were  often  very  friendly  to  man,  and 
sometimes  they  even  condescended  to  choose  hu- 
man consorts,  and  to  dwell  with  them  under  the 
same  roof.  These  Nag  de^iigods  are  believed  to  be 
6 


82 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


still  in  existence,  living  deep  down  below  the  earth’s 
surface,  in  a region  called  ‘ Patala,’  one  tract  of 
which  is  for  that  reason  called  ‘ Nag  Loka  ’ (the 
world  of  Nags).  They  evidently  lead  a civilised 
life,  for  they  are  represented  as  ruled  by  kings, 
the  most  renowned  and  supreme  of  whom  is  Sesha 
Nag,  a thousand-crested  monster  who  supports 
the  “ flat  disc  of  the  earth  ” upon  his  thousand 
heads,  and  whose  coiled-up  body  forms  the  couch 
of  Vishnu  during  his  four  months’  spell  of  sleep 
within  the  bowels  of  the  earth.  The  waking  up  of 
the  god  from  sleep  forms  the  occasion  of  a Hindu 
festival,  called  Devotthan  Ekadashi. 

Serpent  worship,  as  the  practical  part  of  a 
human  creed,  is  as  old  as  the  human  race  itself, 
and  much  research  has  been  made  into  the  subject 
of  ophiolatry  with  a view  to  determining  its  exact 
origin.  The  only  certain  conclusion  which  scholars 
have  arrived  at  seems  to  be  that  the  real  origin  of 
this  practice  must  ever  remain  uncertain.  Some 
authorities  are  inclined  to  think  that  Snake-worship 
was  the  earliest  form  of  religion  prevalent  among 
men,  not  only  in  India,  but  in  every  country  in 
which  snakes  at  all  inspire  the  human  heart  with 
dread.  The  reason  they  give  for  this  opinion  is 
that  primitive  man,  unarmed  as  he  was  with  any 
efficient  knowledge  of  medicine  and  surgery,  natur- 
ally felt  the  greatest  horror  for  “ a mysterious 


NAG  PANCHAMI 


83 


creeping  creature,  silent  and  stealthy  in  its  move- 
ments, apparently  quite  unprovided  with  the  most 
ordinary  means  of  offence  and  defence,  yet  found 
to  have  at  its  command  the  most  deadly  of  all 
known  destructive  weapons,  and  able  to  cause 
almost  instantaneous  death  by  merely  pricking  the 
skin  of  its  adversary.”  Such  seems  at  least  to  be 
the  opinion  of  Sir  Monier  Williams.  But,  so  far  as 
his  statement  may  be  taken  to  apply  to  India,  it  is 
inapplicable  in  the  case  of  the  primitive  Aryans  of 
the  Vedic  period.  For  there  is  no  mention,  not 
even  a significant  hint,  of  serpent-worship  any- 
where in  the  Vedas.  The  Vedic  deities  are  the 
powers  of  Nature,  the  four  Elemental  Beings,  earth, 
water,  fire  and  air,  personified  under  various  names 
and  represented  with  various  attributes.  Serpent- 
worship  must  be  taken  to  mark  a stage  later  than 
the  Vedic  form  of  faith.  Whether  this  later  stage 
represents  an  advance  or  a decline  in  the  life  of  the 
Hindu  religion,  is  a point  upon  which  it  is  impos- 
sible to  arbitrate  ; but  it  seems  that  veneration  for 
snakes  (not  of  course  pushed  to  practical  adoration) 
marks  that  stage  in  the  development  of  the  Hindu 
religion  when  it  first  became  fully  ‘ catholic,’ 
tolerating  all  creeds,  admitting  all  manner  of 
doctrines,  acknowledging  all  sorts  of  deities, — that 
form  of  Hinduism  which  still  subsists,  and  which  . 
shelters  under  its  protecting  wings  all  shades  of 


84 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


human  belief,  rational  and  irrational,  from  the 
grossest  form  of  fetishism  to  the  sublimest  mono- 
theism. 

Serpents  are  inseparably  associated  in  all  minds 
with  fear ; but  there  is  some  ground  for  believing 
that  the  worship  of  serpents  did  not  wholly  arise 
from  fear.  Serpent-worship,  so  far  as  it  is  not 
merely  a popular  superstition,  enjoys  some  measure 
of  scriptural  sanction  in  addition  to  what  impetus 
it  derives  from  the  instinct  of  fear.  The  common 
people  of  course  are  in  their  worship  actuated  by 
fear  alone ; but  this  is  so  not  only  in  the  case  of 
serpent-deities,  who  are  legitimate  objects  of  fear 
to  believers,  non-believers  and  disbelievers  alike, 
but  even  in  the  case  of  the  most  benignant  gods. 
Others  regard  serpents  as  worthy  of  veneration, 
because  the  “ great  god  ” Shiva,  who  heads  one 
of  the  most  numerous  cults  among  the  Hindus,  is 
represented  as  wearing  a serpent  round  his  neck, 
with  many  others  dangling  along  his  breast  and 
back,  or  coiling  gracefully  around  his  waist,  these 
serpents  symbolising  tc  the  eye  of  faith  the  endless 
cycle  of  recurring  years,  the  eternal  revolution 
of  ages,  the  never-ceasing  whirl  of  atoms  bringing 
on  the  perpetual  dissolution  and  regeneration  of 
the  races  of  mankind  and  all  else  of  life  or  matter 
that  dwells  on  this  planetary  system.  This  is  how 
serpent-worship  has  inte'rtwined  itself  with  Shaivism 


NAG  PANCHAMI 


85 


and  thus  found  favour  among  a numerous  class  of 
Hindus,  literate  as  well  as  illiterate.  It  has  also 
penetrated  its  way  into  Vai^hnavism  through  a very 
dark  channel,  for  Vaishnavites  say  that  their  chief 
god  is  in  the  habit  of  enjoying  a four  months’  spell 
of  sleep  on  the  coiled-up  body  of  Sesha  Nag,  deep 
down  in  the  centre  of  the  earth  ; and  blessed  must 
this  proud  creature  \)e  to  render  this  service  to  the 
great  Preserver  of  the  universe.  At  the  same  time, 
we  cannot  help  believing  that  the  worship  of  Nags 
is  not  absolutely  unmixed  with  fear,  even  in  the 
case  of  staunch  Shaivas  and  enthusiastic  Vaish- 
navas,  if  they  have  any  idea  of  the  formidable 
statistics  of  mortality  by  snakebite  published  in 
India  every  year. 

It  would  be  unnecessary  to  refer  here  in  any 
detail  to  the  part  played  by  snakes  in  Indian 
folklore.  There  are  well-known  myths  relating  to 
snakes  current  in  every  village  of  India,  and  these 
stories  are  as  popular  among  the  younger  folk  as 
ghost  stories.  There  was  in  one  village  a snake 
who  used  to  present  a Brahman  with  two  gold  pieces 
every  night.  There  was  another  in  another  that 
kept  guard  over  a buried  treasure  lying  underneath 
such  and  such  tree.  There  was  a third  that  had  a 
tongue  of  flame  with  which  he  set  fire  to  whole 
fields,  and  sometimes  his  flaming  tongue  was  seen 
shining  through  the  darkness  away  on  some  lonely 


86 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


heath  scattered  over  with  the  bones  of  dead  cattle. 
A fourth  would  bite  a man  to  death  one  night  and 
lick  the  poison  back  the  next  morning,  on  discover- 
ing that  the  man  was  innocent.  A fifth  had  the 
power  of  changing  his  form  mysteriously  and  of 
flying  through  the  air  with  the  same  ease  with  which 
fishes  swim  in  water.  These  wonderful  stories  are 
obviously  fairy  tales  invented  by  some  village  genius 
to  amuse  village  urchins,  and  also  probably  to  set 
limits  to  their  endless  peregrinations  through  the 
village  fields  and  groves,  which  are  just  the  places 
most  haunted  by  snakes  on  summer  nights  and 
throughout  the  rainy  season.  Not  the  least  wonder- 
ful of  these  snake  stories,  but  having  a more 
realistic  basis,  are  stories  of  snake-charmers  or 
‘ Ojhas,’  as  they  are  sometimes  called,  who  effect 
miraculous  cures  of  patients  dying  from  the  poison 
of  snake-bite.  These  cures  are  effected  sometimes 
merely  by  means  of  magic  incantations,  but  some- 
times by  the  magician’s  summoning  to  his  pre- 
sence the  very  snake  that  caused  the  bite,  and 
compelling  it,  by  appropriate  spells,  to  suck  back 
the  poison  from  its  victim’s  body  through  the 
puncture  caused  by  the  bite.  Even  at  this  day 
there  are  people  in  all  parts  of  India  who  can  cure 
cases  of  snake-bite  without  the  use  of  a single 
^rug,  and  without  even  making  an  incision  into  any 
part  of  the  patient’s  skin.  They  do  this  only  with 


NAG  PANCHAMI 


87 


the  aid  of  mantras , and  as  a labour  of  love  ; they 
charge  no  fee,  they  accept  no  remuneration,  they 
expect  no  recompense.  For  these  mantras  are 
generally  learned  from  the  lips  of  holy  devotees 
who  enjoin  the  practice  of  this  healing  art  as  a 
religious  duty  upon  their  disciples,  so  that  if  the 
latter  should  accept  any  repayment  for  such  services, 
they  fear  to  incur  the  displeasure  of  their  preceptor, 
and  lose  the  efficacy  of  those  mantras  into  the 
bargain.  Some  cures  are  obtained  by  the  use  of 
herbs  and  roots,  and  every  Hindu  physician  of  the 
6ld  school  possesses  a knowledge  of  these,  and  in 
simple  cases  effects  successful  cures  without  the 
assistance  of  any  surgical  appliances.  There  are 
others  in  which  accessory  aids  supplement  the  magic 
of  mantras.  I remember  to  have  witnessed  a holy 
sage  performing  such  cures  long  ago.  A turban 
cloth  was  wetted  and  then  twisted  twofold  or  fourfold 
so  as  to  make  a sort  of  thick  lash,  and  with  this 
lash  the  palms  of  the  patient’s  hands,  the  soles  of 
his  feet,  and  the  crown  of  his  head  were  struck,  at 
first  gently,  and  then  more  and  more  briskly,  until, 
in  severe  cases,  consciousness  returned  ; and  then 
the  man  was  lifted  up  to  a sitting  posture,  and  his 
back,  too,  was  similarly  treated  with  the  lash,  the 
strokes  continuing  in  the  case  of  all  these  parts  of 
the  body  until  the  man  began  almost  to  cry  for  pain  ; 
and  then  he  was  made  to  stand  up  and  to  suffer 


88 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


another  round  of  lashing ; and  finally,  he  was  made 
to  walk  up  and  down,  under  support,  for  about  half 
an  hour,  receiving  at  intervals  a few  strokes  of  the 
lash  still.  The  whole  cure,  in  bad  cases,  occupied  a 
couple  of  hours.  The  only  directions  that  were 
given  to  the  patient’s  attendants,  when  the  whole 
was  finished,  were  that  the  man  must  not  be  allow- 
ed to  eat  or  drink  anything  for  at  least  twelve  hours, 
and  that  he  must  on  no  account  fall  into  sleep  for 
the  same  length  of  time.  Incantations  were  used 
at  infrequent  intervals  during  the  lashing,  but  they 
were  pronounced  inaudibly,  and  all  that  the  spectator 
saw  or  heard  was  the  almost  ceaseless  lashing  and 
an  occasional  breath  forcibly  blown  out  through  the 
lips  of  the  sage  towards  the  patient,  but  not  neces- 
sarily touching  the  patient’s  body. 

Serpent-worship  has  not  yet  died  out  from  India, 
and  though  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  at  one 
time  it  was  pretty  common,  the  strange  thing  about 
it  is  that  there  are  few  or  no  temples  dedicated  to 
serpents  anywhere  in  Northern  India,  except  at 
Allahabad,  where,  in  Daraganj,  not  far  from  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges,  there  is  a temple  containing 
an  actual  stone  image  of  a snake-god.  This  snake- 
god  is  Vasuki,  a king  of  the  Nags,  whose  sister, 
Manasa,  is  the  only  Nag  deity  worshipped  in  Bengal, 
— but  not  on  the  day  of  Nag  Panchami,  which  is  a 
festival  unknown  in  that  presidency.  There  is 


NAG  PANCHAMI 


89 


another  Nag  temple  in  Allahabad,  near  the  famous 
hermitage  of  Bharadwaja,  in  Colonelganj,  but  this 
temple  is  not  so  important,  as  the  Daraganj  one, 
and  is  probably  only  a spurious  imitation  of  the 

latter. 

Nag  Panchami  is  a festival  confined  only  to  the 
United  Provinces.  The  religious  element  in  the 
festival  has  been  crushed  almost  out  of  existence 
under  a weight  of  secular  forms  and  observances  ; 
and  Nag  Panchami  is  now  chiefly  celebrated  by 
young  men  and  women  enjoying  the  pleasure  of  a 
swing  or  jhoola,  the  craze  for  which  is  so  strong  in 
places  like  Ayodhya  and  Mirzapur,  that  there  is  in 
those  towns  a regular  “ jhoola  season,”  commencing 
on  the  day  of  Nag  Panchami  and  continuing  up  to 
the  day  of  the  next  full  moon, — that  is,  lasting  for 
eleven  days.  In  some  districts,  the  customary 
practice  on  the  day  of  this  festival  is  for  the  head 
of  the  family  to  take  an  early  bath  in  the  morning, 
and  to  paint  on  the  wall  of  his  bedroom  a couple  of 
rude  pictures  representing  the  Nag  deities,  and 
then  make  offerings  to  Brahmans.  This  is  supposed 
to  guard  the  whole  house  from  the  danger  of  snake 
bite  during  the  year.  The  women-folk  of  some 
villages  sometimes  make  a snake-like  line,  by 
scattering  flour  all  round  the  house,  drawing  a sort 
of  magic  circle  within  which  no  snake  is  believed  . 
to  have  power  to  enter.  The  characteristic  food  of 


90 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


the  day  is  gram  soaked  in  water,  which  is  called 
ghughri,  and  is  eaten  sometimes  raw  and  sometimes 
fried  in  mustard  oil  or  ghee.  ‘Ghughri  ’ is  also  pre- 
sented to  Brahmans  and  given  to  menials. 

The  popular  name  of  the  festival,  ‘ Guriya,’  alludes 
to  one  of  the  ceremonies  performed  on  this  day,  just 
at  about  sunset.  A number  of  rude  dolls,  made  of 
rag  and  dyed  in  a solution  of  iurmeric,  are  thrown 
down  into  a pit,  and  the  village  lads  beat  these  with 
sticks  amid  much  boyish  merriment.  This  cere- 
mony is  probably  emblematic  of  the  destruction  of 
the  whole  brood  of  serpents.  The  term  ‘Guriya, ’ 
however,  only  means  a ‘ doll,’  and  it  is  this  custom 
of  ‘beating  ’ dolls  with  sticks  on  the  evening  of  Nag 
Panchami  that  has  given  its  popular  name  to  the 
festival,  Guriyon  ka  mela. 


X 

Raksha  Bandhan 

Raksha  Bandhan?  popularly  called  4 Salono,’  is 
the  full  moon  of  Sravana,  and  thus  occurs  exactly 
ten  days  after  Nag  Panchami.  4 Salono  ’ is  a cor- 
ruption of  the  Persian  term  Sal-i-Nau , 4 the  new 
year  ; ’ and  it  is  a name  given  to  the  full  moon  of 
Sravana , because  it  marks  the  point  of  transition  be- 
tween the  old  and  the  new  Fasli  or  agricultural  year. 
The  classic  name,  Raksha  Bandhan,  is  derived  from 
the  principal  ceremony  of  the  day — the  tying  of  an 
ornamental  silk  cord  or  cotton  string  round  the 
wrist.  This  silk  or  cotton  cord  is  called  the  4 Raksha,’ 
because  it  is  intended  to  serve  as  an  amulet  guarding 
the  wearer  from  all  kinds  of  evil.  These  sacred 
strings  are  usually  dyed  in  yellow,  the  most  auspi- 
cious colour  among  the  Hindus  ; but  sometimes  they 
are  blazoned  with  a variety  of  gaudy  colours  and 
ornamented  with  tassels,  to  suit  individual  tastes. 
Usually,  it  is  the  family  priest  who,  after  consecrat- 
ing a bundle  of  Rakshas  by  offering  them  in  wor- 
ship to  Vishnu,  ties  one  round  the  wrist  of  every  , 
member  of  his  client’s  family,  tflore  particularly  the 


92 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


children  and  the  principal  earning  members.  But 
in  Brahman  households  the  priest’s  function  is  often 
performed  by  the  head-  of  the  family  who  ties  the 
Raksha  round  the  wrists  of  his  dependants  with  ap- 
propriate blessings.  Among  some  Brahman  com- 
munities, notably  those  of  Gujarat,  Raksha  Bandhan 
is  a festival  in  which  the  active  part  of  the  celebra- 
tion is  performed  by  females,  who  tie  the  sacred 
amulet  round  the  wrists  of  their  brothers  and  give 
them  or  receive  from  them  presents  of  cash  and  of 
clothing,  according  as  the  brothers  are  younger  or 
older  than  themselves, — a ceremony  analogous  to 
Bhratri  Dwitiya. 

According  to  a popular  notion,  Raksha  Bandhan 
is  a distinctively  Brahman  festival,  the  privilege  of 
observing  it  being  confined  to  Brahmans  alone.  This 
notion  is  based  on  an  ancient  saying,  which  enu- 
merates four  chief  denominational  festivals,  corres- 
ponding to  the  four  chief  divisions  of  the  Hindu 
race.  Thus  Raksha  Bandhan  is  the  festival  for 
Brahmans,  Durga  Puja  for  Kshattriyas,  Diwali  for 
Vaishyas,  and  Holi  for  Sudras.  The  above  classifi- 
cation is  no  doubt  a very  ingenious  one,  founded  as 
it  is  on  a superficial  similarity  between  the  essential 
nature  of  a festival  and  the  distinctive  character  of 
the  caste  whose  special  privilege  it  is  declared  to  be. 
Thus,  Raksha  Bandhan  is  unquestionably  a Brah- 
man festival,  inasmuch  as  Brahmans  alone  have 


RAKSHA  BANDHAN 


93 


the  privilege  and  the  power  of  conferring  the  pro- 
tection of  the  ‘ Raksha  ’ upon  such  members  of  the 
other  castes  as  they  might  choose  to  pick  out  for 
this  special  favour.  Raksha  Bandhan  also  imposes 
some  obligations  on  Brahmans,  in  that  it  enjoins 
upon  them  to  change  their  sacred  thread  on  this 
sacred  day.  The  Durga  Puja  is,  similarly,  a pre- 
eminently Kshattriya  festival,  because  the  goddess 
Durga  is  the  goddess  of  Victory,  and  also  because 
the  martial  pageantry  of  the  Ram  Lila  is  fitted 
to  appeal  to  the  martial  spirit  of  the  warrior  caste. 
In  the  same  way  Diwali  has  special  claims  on 
the  reverence  of  the  Vaishyas,  because  they 
constitute  the  mercantile  community  among  the 
Hindus,  and  therefore,  represent  the  wealthy 
classes  who  would  naturally  be  interested  in  the 
worship  of  Lakshmi,  the  goddess  of  wealth  and 
prosperity.  Lastly,  Holi  may  be  fitly  relegated  to 
the  last  rank  of  a Sudra  festival,  in  consequence  of 
the  vulgar  practice  of  singing  obscene  songs  in 
public  streets.  So  far  the  classification  of  the 
festivals  according  to  castes  may  be  justified  by 
some  kind  of  principle.  But  in  practice  no  such 
classification  is  acknowledged,  except  in  the  case  of 
Raksha  Bandhan  alone,  the  exclusively  Brahman 
character  of  which  has  not  been  infringed  by 
trespassers  from  the  lower  castes. 

Whatever  authority  there  might  be  for  the 


94 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


notion  that  Raksha  Bandhan  was  originally  a dis- 
tinctively Brahman  festival,  and  whatever  the  ori- 
ginal mode  of  celebrating  it  might  have  been,  there 
is  no  doubt  that  the  present  fashion  of  observ- 
ing it  is  little  short  of  a regular  system  of  levying 
blackmail.  It  is  treated  as  a great  harvest-day  by 
Brahmans  of  the  priestly  order,  and  the  mendicant 
class,  who  wander  about  the  town  all  day,  from 
sunrise  to  sunset,  carrying  a bundle  of  ‘ Rakshas,’ 
visiting  the  houses  of  the  rich  and  well-to-do, 
tying  a ‘ Raksha  ’ round  their  wrist,  wherever  they 
can,  hanging  on  until  they  have  received  a cash 
present,  and  then  departing  to  repeat  the  same 
performance  in  as  many  more  places  as  they 
can  go  to.  If  they  happen  to  meet  any  of  their 
clientele  on  the  road,  they  waylay  him  there,  and 
insist  on  tying  a ‘ Raksha  ’ round  his  wrist,  however 
unwilling  he  may  be  to  be  manacled  in  this  manner 
in  the  public  streets.  The  merest  chance  of  an 
acquaintance,  the  most  casual  contact,  the 
remotest  connection  is  enough  to  establish  a bond 
of  relationship  between  you  and  a Brahman  of  this 
class,  entitling  him  to  the  privilege  of  tying  a 
‘ Raksha’  round  your  arm,  wherever  he  may  happen 
to  catch  you  on  this  day.  Discharged  cooks,  whe- 
ther of  your  own  house  or  of  that  of  a friend  at 
< whose  place  you  have  once  dined ; post  and  tele- 
graph peons,  who  happen  to  be  Brahmans  by  caste  ; 


RAKSHA  BANDHAN 


95 


Brahman  constables  attached  to  the  Police  station 
under  whose  jurisdiction  you  live  now  or  ever  lived 
in  the  past ; nephews  of  a former  Chaukidar  or 
Chaprasi  of  your  office ; not  to  speak  of  all 
Brahman  members  of  your  present  domestic  and 
office  establishment, — all  these  have  a strong  claim 
upon  your  wrist  and  your  purse,  a claim  that  they 
exercise  not  only  by  right  of  their  Brahmanical  blood, 
but  also  on  the  strength  of  their  or  their  ancestors’ 
present  or  past  connection  with  you,  in  your  private 
or  public  capacity,  or  with  one  of  your  own  ances- 
tors, in  his  private  or  public  capacity.  I once  order- 
ed a pair  of  boots  from  a well-known  local  firm  of 
shoemakers.  This  was  in  the  month  of  September, 
some  six  weeks  after  the  Raksha  Bandhan  festival. 
The  boots  were  delivered  at  my  house  by  a Chaprasi 
of  the  firm.  Next  year,  eleven  months  after  the 
boots  were  made,  and  when  I had  half  worn  them 
out,  the  same  Chaprasi — or  at  any  rate,  he  claimed 
to  be  the  same,  and  I think  truly,  else  he  would 
never  have  known  that  I once  committed  the  indis- 
cretion of  ordering  a pair  of  boots  to  be  delivered 
at  my  house  by  a Chaprasi — well,  the  same  Chap- 
rasi presented  himself  before  me,  with  a most 
amiable  smile  on  his  lips,  and  offered  to  tie  a 
4 Raksha  ’ round  my  wrist.  He  felt  a little  surprised 
at  my  bad  memory  when  I stared  blankly  at  his 
face  ; and  then  he  proceeded  to  remind  me  of  the 


96 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


happy  circumstances  under  which  I first  made  his 
acquaintance.  Neither  ot  us  had  time  that  day  to 
make  our  acquaintance,  any  deeper,  and  so  I bade 
good-bye  to  my  friend  with  a small  cash  present, 
which,  whatever  pocket  it  might  go  into,  was,  in  so 
far  as  it  went  out  of  mine,  so  much  added  to  the 
original  cost  of  my  boots. 

The  fees  which  form  the  customary  receipts  of 
Brahmans  on  this  day  are  always  paid  in  cash, 
ranging  from  a pie  to  a rupee,  according  to  the 
means  of  the  giver  or  the  rank  of  the  receiver.  The 
act  of  tying  the  ‘ Raksha  ’ is  always  accompanied  by 
a classical  benediction,  which,  in  the  mouth  of 
illiterate  Brahmans,  is  often  unintelligibly  mispro- 
nounced, and  which  in  its  correct  form  runs  as 
follows  : — 

^ U31T  ^TJf^TT  1 

srfris&nftr  nvm:  ii  5 ii 

The  meaning  of  this  stereotyped  blessing  is — 
“ Thus  I tie  the  4 Raksha  ’ round  your  wrist, — the 
same  which  bound  the  arms  of  the  mighty  Bali, 
king  of  the  Danavas.  May  the  protection  afforded 
by  it  be  eternal ! ” 

The  reference  in  the  foregoing  formula  to  Raja 
Bali  would  appear  to  give  to  Raksha  Bandhan  a 
most  ancient  origin,  the  exact  date  of  which  cannot 
now  be  determined ; but  probably  the  name  of 
this  legendary  king  is  intended  to  serve  no  other 


RAKSHA  BANDHAN 


97 


purpose  than  that  of  poetic  similitude.  The  story 
of  Bali  is  one  of  the  most  popular  tales  of  Indian 
mythology,  and  it  is  adverted  to  or  quoted  in  full 
by  writers  of  Puranas  to  explain  or  illustrate  many 
a point  of  social  usage  or  religious  observance. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  oid  books  to  show  that  the 
practice  of  tying  a sacred  thread  round  the  wrist 
on  this  particular  day  of  the  year  originated  in  the 
time  of  Raja  Bali,  unless  it  is  assumed  that  every 
form  of  charity  to  Brahmans  first  arose  in  the 
reign  of  that  super-charitable  monarch.  For  Hindu 
poets  have  represented  Bali  as  a king  of  boundless 
benevolence,  who  by  his  lavish  gifts,  bestowed  with 
a heedless  profusion  without  a parallel  even  in 
India,  has  left  behind  him  a name  which  Brahmans 
at  least,  who  benefited  most  largely  from  his  chari- 
ties, will  not  willingly  let  die.  Bali  was  not  an 
Aryan  king,  but  belonged  to  the  inferior  race  of 
* Danavas,’  who  were  sometimes  regarded  as  lower 
even  than  human  beings,  as  when  the  ‘ Danava  5 
race  was  contrasted  with  the  ‘ Manava  * or  the 
human  race.  But  owing  to  his  generosity  his 
name  is  gratefully  cherished  as  one  of  the  greatest 
benefactors  of  ancient  times.  Bali  was  a man  of 
great  piety  and  devotion,  and  with  the  aid  of  these 
he  asserted  his  superiority  over  Indra  himself,  King 
of  the  heavens,  and  extended  his  sway  over  the 
whole  of  infinite  space,  over  each  of  the  “ three 
7 


98 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


worlds/’ — “ the  upper,  nether,  and  surrounding  air.” 
Thereupon  the  gods,  who  were  thus  dispossessed 
of  their  realms,  appealed  to  Vishnu  for  redress. 
Vishnu  listened  to  their  appeal,  and  infused  a 
portion  of  his  essence  into  the  body  of  a dwarf,  and 
appeared  on  earth  as  the  Vamana  Avatara,  or  the 
Dwarf  Incarnation.  Now  Raja  Bali  was  in  the 
habit  of  giving  away  anything  to  any  one  who  came 
to  ask  for  it, — a form  of  charity  which  is  still  consi- 
dered the  highest ; and  Vishnu,  knowing  that  the 
Raja  had  bound  himself  by  such  a vow,  appeared 
before  the  king  in  the  shape  of  a dwarf,  and  begged 
as  much  land  as  he  could  step  in  three  paces. 
The  king  thought  it  was  quite  a trifling  gift  that 
the  dwarf  had  solicited — three  steps  of  ground, 
measured  out  by  the  tallest  man,  was  not  at  all  a 
considerable  gift  for  any  king,  much  less,  when 
measured  out  by  a little  dwarf,  Bali  of  course 
granted  the  gift,  but  felt  rather  amused  at  this 
insignificant  petition  which  came  with  such  a con- 
trast after  the  munificent  gifts  to  which  he  had 
become  accustomed.  Just  as  his  boon  was  granted, 
the  dwarf  swelled  himself  into  a giant’s  bulk  and 
stature,  and  in  two  mighty  strides  stepped  across 
the  whole  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  then  asked 
Bali  in  what  region  he  was  to  find  the  third  step  of 
ground  that  he  had  been  promised.  Bali  replied, 
“ I have  no  more  land  to  give  than  you  have  legs 


RAKSHA  BANDHAN 


99 


to  measure  it  with.”  At  this,  Vishnu  miraculously 
shot  forth  a third  leg  from  his  navel,  and  showing 
it  to  Bali  demanded  the  unpaid  balance.  Finding 
himself  quite  vanquished,  Bali  placed  the  third  foot 
upon  his  head,  and  Vishnu  pinned  him  down  into 
the  interior  of  the  earth.  The  gods  were  now  free 
to  re-enter  their  realms ; but  Bali’s  last  act  of 
charity,  although  it  ( brought  about  his  disappear- 
ance from  the  world,  did  not  go  absolutely  unre- 
warded ; for  Vishnu  made  him  King  of  Patala,  or 
the  nether  world,  where  he  is  believed  to  be  exer- 
cising his  sovereignty  to  this  day. 


XI 

Krishnashtami 


Krishnashtami  or  ‘ Krishna  Janma  Ashtami  ’ is 
the  birthday  of  Krishna,  and  is  hence  regarded  as 
one  of  the  holiest  days  in  the  Hindu  calendar,  for 
Krishna  is  worshipped  not  as  a mere  Avatara,  or 
personification  of  a single  divine  attribute,  but  as 
God  Himself  who  appeared  on  earth  in  human  shape 
in  the  Dwapara  Yuga.  His  4 birth  * in  mortal  form 
took  place  on  the  eighth  day  of  the  waning  moon  in 
the  dark  fortnight  of  Bhadrcij  just  at  the  hour  of 
midnight,  and  at  the  precise  moment  of  the  moon’s 
entrance  into  the  asterism  Rohini.  The  event  is 
celebrated  as  a religious  festival  by  Hindus  of  all 
sects  and  creeds,  though  only  one  of  them,  the 
Vaishnavas,  regard  the  identity  of  Krishna  with  the 
Supreme  Being  as  part  of  their  formal  articles  of 
faith, — formal,  because  in  practice  every  Hindu  re- 
cognises and  worships  every  god  and  goddess,  be 
he  a Shaiva  or  a Vaishnava,  or  a Shakta,  or  one 
uninitiated  into  any  special  sect.  The  customary 
mode  of  observing  this  sacred  birthday  is  a fast, 
partial  or  total.  A ‘ partial  ’ fast  consists  in  a 


KRISHNASHTAMI 


101 


person’s  taking  only  fruit  and  milk,  usually  at  a single 
meal  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  and  abstaining  from 
all  grain  food.  A total  fast*  means  one’s  abstaining 
from  food  and  drink  of  every  kind,  including  even 
water.  The  Vaishnavas  regulate  their  fast  accord- 
ing to  the  time  of  the  moon’s  passage  through  the 
asterism  of  Rohini  ; others,  according  to  sunrise. 
Hence  it  is  that  Janmashtami  is  in  some  years  ob- 
served on  two  different  days  by  different  sects  of 
Hindus,  one  observing  it  on  the  day  preceding  the 
midnight,  others  on  the  day  succeeding  it. 

The  principal  written  authority  on  Krishna  is  the 
Bhagvata  Purana,  though  there  are  equally  authori- 
tative accounts  in  the  Brahma  Vaivarta  Purana 
and  the  Hari  Vansa  also.  The  story  of  Krishna’s 
birth,  as  recorded  in  these  sacred  hooks,  is  as  fol- 
lows : — 

About  the  close  of  the  Dwapara  age,  there 
reigned  in  Mathura  a dynasty  of  kings,  called  the  Sur 
dynasty.  Ugrasen  was  the  reigning  monarch  just 
before  the  birth  of  Krishna.  But  Ugrasen  had  a 
son  named  Kansa,  who  usurped  the  throne  in  his 
father’s  lifetime.  Kansa  had  a sister  named  Devaki, 
who  was  married  to  Vasudeva,  a prince  of  the  lunar 
race.  The  marriage  ceremony  was  attended  with 
great  eclat,  and  Kansa  himself  drove  the  chariot  in 
which  the  newly-married  couple  were  borne  in  pro-* 
cession  through  the  streets  oi*  the  capital.  As  the 


102 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


gay  procession  was  passing  through  the  city,  a voice 
from  heaven  smote  Kansa’s  ears,  saying,  “ Beware, 
for  the  eighth  child  born  to  the  princess  in  the  car 
that  thou  art  driving  now,  shall  be  thy  slayer  ! ” 
Kansa  started  to  hear  this  ill-omened  prophecy,  and 
his  first  impulse  was  to  put  his  sister  Devaki  to  ins- 
tant death,  and  thereby  preclude  all  possibility  of 
danger  from  that  quarter.  But  Vasudeva  pacified 
his  impulsive  rage  by  a solemn  promise  to  deliver 
into  his  hands  all  the  children  that  might  be  born  to 
Devaki.  Years  elapsed,  and  when  Devaki  was  ex- 
pected to  be  confined  of  her  eighth  child,  Kansa 
removed  the  mother  to  his  own  palace,  and  placed 
the  strictest  guard  over  her  person,  lest  an  attempt 
should  be  made  to  save  the  child  by  stealth.  Now 
Vasudeva  had  been  forewarned  by  a divine  message 
that  the  eighth  child  would  be  an  incarnation  of  God, 
and  that  he  would  be  divinely  favoured  in  every 
attempt  that  he  might  make  to  have  the  child  secret- 
ly transferred  to  a neighbour’s  house  to  spare  it  from 
the  wrath  of  Kansa.  The  pains  of  Devaki  commenc- 
ed just  before  midnight.  The  utmost  precaution 
was  taken  to  keep  the  news  from  spreading  beyond 
the  walls  of  her  chamber.  Happily,  the  sentinels 
placed  to  guard  Devaki’s  door  were  plunged  in  sleep, 
— yoga-nidra,  as  the  sacred  historian  puts  it,  that 
is,  a kind  of  enchanted  or  hypnotic  sleep  induced 
by  supernatural  agency.  Rain  was  pouring  in 


KRISHNASHTAMI 


103 


torrents,  and  lurid  flashes  of  lightning  were  cleaving 
the  sky,  when  at  the  hour  of  midnight  Krishna  came 
into  the  world,  in  the  shape  of  a human  infant  of  dark 
complexion  and  of  uncommon  beauty  of  form.  It 
was  in  allusion  to  his  dark  complexion  that  the  child 
received  the  name  of  Krishna,  the  word  literally 
meaning  ‘ black.’  Now  Vasudeva  had  come  to  learn 
that  a female  child  had  just  about  that  hour  been 
born  to  his  neighbour,  Nanda,  the  cowherd  king  of 
Gokul,  whose  palace  was  situated  at  a short  distance 
from  Mathura  on  the  other  side  of  the  Jamuna. 
With  the  infant  Krishna  in  his  arms,  Vasudeva 
boldly  stepped  forth  into  the  midnight,  and  wading 
through  the  flooded  streets  came  to  the  bank  of  the 
river  Jamuna.  The  river  was  in  flood  ; the  heavy 
monsoon  rain  had  made  the  ford  impassable  ; no 
boat  could  be  thought  of  on  such  a stormy  night  ; 
and  for  one  moment  Vasudeva  stood  in  silence  on 
the  river-bank,  plunged  in  thought.  Suddenly  he 
noticed  a jackal  wading  through  the  river  to  the 
other  side,  and  Vasudeva,  encouraged  by  this  unex- 
pected discovery  of  a ford,  stepped  into  the  water, 
guiding  his  way  by  the  gleams  of  lightning  which 
still  flashed  across  the  scowling  sky.  Just  as  he  was 
in  mid-stream,  says  the  story,  the  Jamuna  felt  a 
maternal  longing  to  clasp  the  infant  god  once  in 
her  arms,  so  that  the  little  child  accidentally  slipped, 
into  the  water,  but  was  immediately  picked  up  again, 


104 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


and  taken  safely  to  the  house  of  Nanda.  When 
Vasudeva  reached  the  place  he  found  the  whole  house 
hushed  in  sleep.  Nanda’s  wife,  Jasoda,  who  had  just 
before  been  delivered  of  a daughter,  was  lying  in  a 
semi-unconscious  state,  and  Vasudeva  had  there- 
fore no  difficulty  in  gaining  entrance  into  her  room 
and  in  effecting  a secret  exchange  of  the  two  babes, 
placing  the  infant  Krishna  beside  the  breast  of 
Jasoda,  and  carrying  Jasoda’s  daughter  in  his  arms 
all  the  way  back  to  Mathura  ; and  during  the  whole 
of  this  time  not  a living  creature  knew  anything  of 
what  was  happening.  It  was  not  until  the  “ change- 
ling ” baby  began  to  cry  in  Devaki’s  room  that  the 
royal  guards  came  to  know  that  a babe  had  been 
born,  and  they  lost  no  time  in  sending  a report  to 
their  master  to  that  effect.  That  very  night  Kansa 
repaired  to  Devaki’s  room  and  seized  the  infant, 
without  suspecting  anything  amiss.  Coming  out 
of  the  room  into  the  courtyard,  he  dashed  the 
babe  against  a stone  slab,  and  thought  himself 
now  safe.  But  just  then  a bodiless  voice  cried 
out  from  above,  “ What  boots  it,  cruel  Kansa, 
thus  to  slay  a helpless  babe  on  the  belief  that 
thou  hast  destroyed  thy  enemy  ? Thy  enemy 
still  lives, — a mighty  one  among  the  gods.”  Now 
Jasoda’s  daughter,  she  that  was  born  synchronously 
with  Krishna,  was  no  human  creature  at  all,  but 
Jogamaya,  the  goddess  of  illusion,  who  had  taken 


KRISHNASHTAMI 


105 


birth  in  Nanda’s  family  to  be  the  instrument  of 
saving  the  life  of  Krishna ; and  it  did  not  matter  at 
all  to  her  that  her  illusory  body  was  dashed  to  death 
by  Kansa  as  long  as  her  mission  was  fulfilled. 
Kansa  was  greatly  alarmed  by  this  second  voice 
from  heaven.  Like  another  famous  ruler,  he 
gathered  together  his  officers  of  state,  and  ordered 
a house-to-house  search  for  whatever  young  children 
there  might  be  living  within  his  territories,  and 
commanded  them  all  to  be  brought  before  him  and 
put  to  death  without  delay.  No  quarter  was  shown 
to  children  possessing  handsome  looks  or  promising 
uncommon  vigourv  Those  of  a dark  complexion,  or 
those  who  had  nothing  conspicuous  about  their 
features,  were  spared,  as  not  likely  to  be  a danger 
to  him  at  any  time.  In  this  way  it  was  that  Krishna 
escaped  the  malice  of  his  maternal  uncle,  and  lived 
in  peace  and  safety  at  the  house  of  his  foster-father, 
Nanda,  where  he  grew  up  to  boyhood  as  a cowherd 
among  cowherds.  While  still  a boy,  Krishna  gave 
proof  of  many  of  his  divine  powers.  He  affected  to 
be  a naughty  child,  and  he  used  to  steal  whatever 
butter  and  curd  he  could  lay  his  hands  on, 
either  in  Nanda’s  house  or  in  those  of  his  neigh- 
bours. Noticing  the  boy’s  predeliction  for  dairy 
produce,  his  foster-mother  Jasoda  took  more  and 
more  care  to  keep  such  articles  as  much  out  of  his , 
reach  as  possible  ; but  no  ciare,  no  secrecy  could 


106 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


frustrate  the  boy’s  ingenious  devices  to  get  at  these 
tempting  viands,  whenever  he  was  minded  to  do  so. 
One  day  Jasoda  was  churning  milk,  and  the  boy 
repeatedly  toddled  up  to  her,  attempting  to  seize 
the  butter,  and  the  mother  as  repeatedly  caught 
hold  of  the  boy  and  seated  him  away  in  another 
room,  until  she  felt  obliged  to  resort  to  stronger 
measures.  So  she  bound  the  child’s  hands  and  feet 
with  a piece  of  cloth,  and  tethered  him  to  a 
pillar.  But  lo  ! the  very  next  moment  the  child  had 
freed  himself  from  his  fetters  and  was  toddling  up 
to  the  churn  with  a triumphant  chuckle. 

This  was,  however,  one  of  the  pettiest  of  his 
miracles.  There  was  a monstrous  serpent  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Gokul,  known  by  the  name  of 
Kaliya,  and  the  youthful  Krishna,  then  only  a boy 
of  six  or  seven,  boldly  seized  its  crest,  and  mounting 
its  head  danced  upon  it  with  the  gleeful  air  of  a 
child.  On  another  occasion,  when  Krishna  was 
about  ten  years  old,  the  people  of  Mathura  and 
Brindaban  were  visited  by  a “ plague  ” of  rain,  sent 
down  by  the  god  Indra,  out  of  spite  for  the  growing 
homage  which  Krishna  was  receiving  at  the  hands 
of  those  people,  who  were  gradually  renouncing 
their  worship  of  the  older  gods.  The  rain  poured 
for  seven  days  and  seven  nights  in  succession,  until 
'the  whole  locality  was  threatened  with  a serious 
deluge.  Krishna  lifted  up  mount  Gobardhan,  a 


KRISHNASHTAMI 


107 


small  hill  which  still  stands  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Mathura,  and  held  it  aloft  on  the  tip  of  his  little 
finger  to  protect  the  affected  area  from  inundation. 
An  earlier  miracle  relates  to  a fearful  Rakshasi  of 
the  time,  named  Putana.  This  sorceress  crept  into 
Krishna’s  room  one  day,  when  the  child  was  asleep 
in  his  cradle,  and  with  the  intention  of  killing  the 
child,  she  proceeded  to  suckle  it  with  her  poisoned 
milk,  which  was  so  deadly  that  a single  drop  was 
enough  to  kill  the  healthiest  babe.  But  Krishna 
drew  her  breast  with  such  force  that  he  drained  off 
her  very  lifeblood,  and  the  wicked  woman  died  on 
the  spot  amid  shrieks  of  agony. 

But  his  most  important  miracle  was  the  one  he 
performed  shortly  before  leaving  Mathura, —namely, 
the  slaying  of  Kansa  in  a personal  combat  within 
the  precincts  of  the  royal  palace  itself — the  lion  in 
his  own  den.  Kansa  was  holding  a reception  of 
princes  and  chiefs  in  his  great  audience  hall,  and 
he  had  deliberately  excluded  Krishna  from  invita- 
tion. Krishna  felt  this  as  a grave  insult,  and  to 
clear  his  honour,  he  marched  up  to  the  palace,  but 
could  not  enter,  because  the  gates  were  guarded 
by  a lordly  tusker,  who  swung  his  head  and  trunk 
backwards  and  forwards,  barring  all  ingress. 
Krishna  had  therefore  to  knock  off  the  head  of  this 
huge  sentinel,  and  then  entering  the  king’s  recep- 
tion room,  challenged  him  to  5 a private  encounter 


308 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


then  and  there.  It  was  not  long  before  he  over- 
powered his  adversary,  and  with  one  sweep  of  his 
hand  cut  off  the  head  of  the  hateful  tyrant,  whose 
death  had  been  the  purpose  for  which  he  had 
assumed  mortal  form.  Krishna’s  mission  was  now 
accomplished,  and  shortly  after  that  he  left  Mathura 
and  migrated  to  Gujarat,  of  which  place  he  became 
king.  There  he  fixed  his  capital  at  Dwarika,  on  the 
seacoast,  and  converted  it  into  a flourishing  port. 
Dwarika  is  now  a famous  place  of  pilgrimage  on 
the  west  coast. 

The  subsequent  history  of  Krishna  is  interwoven 
with  the  story  of  the  Mahabharata.  Worshippers 
of  Krishna  draw  a distinction  (without  a difference) 
between  Krishna,  the  cowherd  boy  of  Brindaban, 
and  Krishna,  the  king  of  Gujarat,  the  friend  and 
kinsman  of  the  Pandavas,  the  counsellor  and 
charioteer  of  Arjuna,  in  the  battle  of  Kurukshetra, 
the  preacher  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita.  According 
to  particular  sects,  it  is  the  boyhood  of  Krishna, 
extending  up  to  the  age  of  twelve,  that  constitutes 
a fit  object  of  contemplation  and  worship  for  the 
devout  soul ; the  latter  part  of  Krishna’s  career  is, 
they  say,  intended  to  present  an  ideal  of  manhood 
to  those  who  set  action  above  contemplation,  who 
regard  character  as  a more  needful  asset  than 
spirituality,  in  a word,  those  who  seek  God  along 
the  broad  highways  Gf  life,  and  not  through  the 


KRISHNASHTAMI 


109 


narrow  path  of  devotional  love.  Hence  the  image 
of  Krishna  found  in  many  Vaishnava  temples,  repre- 
sents him  as  a boy,  and  not  as  a full  grown  man, — 
that  is,  what  they  call  Bala-Krishna. 

The  orthodox  mode  of  celebrating  the  Krishn- 
ashtami  festival  consists,  in  addition  to  fasting,  in 
worshipping  an  image  of  Krishna  as  a baby,  placed 
in  a swinging  cradle — such  as  is  sometimes  done  at 
the  Holi — and  heaped  up  with  garlands  of  sweet- 
smelling flowers.  In  some  temples  as  well  as  private 
households  the  whole  round  of  ceremonies  custom- 
ary at  the  birth  of  a Hindu  infant,  are  gone  through 
in  emblem  ; and  there  is  music  and  singing  of  the 
same  style  as  is  customary  at  the  actual  birth  of  a 
son  in  a respectable  Hindu  house.  The  orthodox 
hour  of  these  celebrations  is  midnight,  the  hour  of 
birth  being  as  carefully  followed  as  the  day.  In 
some  houses,  especially  those  of  the  nobility, 
Nautch  parties  form  part  of  the  celebration.  Every 
detail  is  followed, — nothing  that  would  be  appro- 
priate to  the  occasion  being  left  out.  The  custom- 
ary offerings  are  sweets  prepared  from  milk  in  as 
much  variety  as  possible, — because  Krishna  as  a 
boy  was  particularly  fond  of  milk  and  other  dairy 
produce.  Custom  likewise  bids  that,  on  this  day,  the 
children  of  the  house  should  receive  a rich  profu- 
sion of  sweets, — no  doubt  in  token  of  reverence  for 
the  god’s  own  boyish  love  for  this  class  of  edibles; 


110  HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 

There  is  a curious  superstition  that  the  Hindus 
have  derived  from  the  birthday  of  Krishna, — namely, 
that  as  Krishna,  who  was  born  in  the  asterism  of 
Rohini,  proved  to  be  the  slayer  of  his  maternal 
uncle,  Kansa,  so  the  birth  of  any  male  child  in  that 
conjunction  of  planets  forebodes  evil  to  the  maternal 
uncle  of  that  child  ; and  tradition  says  that  there 
were  instances  in  the  old  days  where  such  ill-fated 
children  were  secretly  put  to  death. 

As  Rama  Navami  is  the  chief  festival  of  the 
votaries  of  Rama,  and  as  Shivaratri  is  the  most 
sacred  day  among  the  followers  of  Shiva,  so  is 
Krishnashtami  the  principal  celebration  (c  utsava  ’) 
among  the  Vaishnavas,  though,  in  these  days,  since 
the  revival  of  the  Hindu  religion  after  the  decay  of 
Buddhism,  the  festival  is  observed  as  solemnly  by 
other  sects  as  by  the  most  zealous  members  of  the 
Krishna  cult.  It  is  one  of  those  few  festivals  that 
are  observed  all  over  India,  because  it  is  associated 
with  a name  that  is  revered  in  every  district  and 
every  province  of  this  large  continent.  If  we  were 
asked  to  pick  out  two  names  that  are  most  revered, 
from  among  the  three-and-thirty  crores  of  names 
held  in  reverence  by  Hindus  all  over  the  world, 
those  two  names  would  be  Krishna  and  Rama, — 
Krishna  first,  and  Rama  second ; the  priority  of 
Krishna  in  popular  estimation  being  due  to  the 
-posteriority  of  his  date  of  appearance  among,  men, 


KRISHNASHTAMI 


ill 


for  the  rule  in  religion,  as  the  Hindu  understands 
it,  is  the  same  law  of  nature  which  makes  the 
fresher  seed  produce  the  healthier  crop. 


XII 

Ananta  Chaturdashi 

Ananta  Chaturdashi,  popularly  called  Ananta, 
is  a festival  of  the  second  order, — if  one  may  fitly 
call  it  a festival,  and  if  it  be  not  heresy  to  arrange 
the  Hindu  festivals  in  a hierarchical  series.  It  is 
held  every  year  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  moon 
in  the  light  half  of  Bhadra , that  is,  three  weeks 
after  the  Janmashtami.  It  is  more  of  a puja  (a 
form  of  worship)  than  a parva  (a  festival)  ; that  is 
to  say,  there  is  nothing  social  or  corporate  about  the 
observance  of  it ; it  is  only  a day  set  apart  for  the 
worship  of  Vishnu,  Ananta  (or  the  Eternal)  being 
one  of  the  numerous  names  of  the  Preserver.  The 
true  origin  of  the  observance  cannot  be  stated  with 
certainty,  any  more  than  we  could  in  the  case  of 
the  Shivaratri.  Like  the  Shivaratri,  the  present 
festival  finds  a mention  in  the  Mahabharata,  and  in 
the  same  apocryphal  book — the  Shanti  Parva . 
Like  the  Shivaratri,  it  was  first  publicly  inaugurated 
by  a king  of  the  lunar  race.  There  is  a resemblance 
even  in  the  names  of  the  two  kings  who  first 
instituted  the  Shivaratri  and  the  Ananta  festival, — 


ANANTA  CHATURDASHI 


113 


Chitra  Bhanu,  Chitrangada.  Lastly,  there  is  a 
similarity  in  the  dates  of  the  two  festivals  ; it  is  a 
fourteenth  day  of  the  moon  in  each  case,  only  that 
the  Shivaratri  falls  in  the  dark  fortnight,  the 
Ananta  in  the  moonlit  half ; one  other  minor  differ- 
ence is,  that  the  former  occurs  in  spring,  the  latter 
in  autumn.  Such  a mass  of  resemblance  must  be 
more  than  mere  coincidence ; one  appears  to  be 
a mere  imitation  of  the  other.  Probably  what 
happened  is  this.  A certain  bard  in  a certain  age 
took  it  into  his  head  to  smuggle  into  the  Mahabharata 
a legend  relating  to  the  Shivaratri  vow.  The 
author  of  this  interpolation  was  probably  a follower 
of  Shiva,  and  to  popularize  his  favourite  god  he 
inserted  an  account  of  him  into  the  great  epic,  just 
when  the  latter  had  begun  to  win  universal  popula- 
rity. Such  a place  of  honour  accorded  to  Shiva 
was  probably  galling  to  some  equally  zealous 
Vaishnava  bard,  who,  in  his  anxiety  not  to  be 
beaten  in  piety  by  a Shaiva,  concocted  a festival  of 
his  own  creed  similar  to  the  Shivaratri,  and  called 
it  by  a similar  name  (for  another  name  of  Shivaratri 
is  ‘ Shiva  Chaturdashi  ’),  fixed  it  on  a similar  date, 
gave  it  a similar  origin,  and  found  for  it  a similar 
place  of  honour  in  the  pages  of  the  same  immortal 
epic,  putting  it  into  the  mouth  of  the  same  aged 
chieftain  (Bhishma)  through  whose  lips  the  rival 

festival  of  Shiva  had  first  b^gn  published  to  the 
8 


114 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


Hindu  world.  One  can  easily  fancy  this  clever 
Vaishnava  bard  saying  to  himself — “ Is  Vishnu  the 
Preserver  to  be  beaten  by  Shiva  the  Destroyer  ? No  ; 
if  Shiva  has  his  Shiva  Chaturdashi,  Vishnu  shall 
have  his  Ananta  Chaturdashi ; if  Shiva  receives  his 
yearly  homage  in  spring,  Vishnu  shall  have  it  in 
autumn  ; if  Shiva’s  vrata  was  first  promulgated  by 
king  Chitra  Bhanu  of  the  lunar  race,  Vishnu’s  worship 
shall  also  have  royal  sanction  from  a king  of  the 
same  dynasty,  and  a queen  too,  and  the  king  shall 
be  one  bearing  nearly  the  same  name — we  shall  call 
him  Chitrangada,  and  give  to  his  queen  the  name  of 
Chitra  Rekha  ; and  if  Shiva’s  holy  fast  is  worthy  of 
commemoration  in  scripture,  I will  not  be  back- 
ward in  finding  for  Vishnu’s  holier  fast  a place  in 
the  very  same  chapter  and  verse.” 

This  is  probably  the  correct  origin  of  the  Ananta 
fast.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  we  believe  one 
to  be  modelled  after  the  other,  we  must  take  Shi- 
varatri  to  be  the  original  and  Ananta  the  copy, 
because,  historically,  Vaishnavism  is  a later  phase 
of  the  Hindu  religion  than  Shaivism.  There  is  one 
other  possibility — that  both  accounts  may  have  been 
evolved  out  of  the  same  head  and  inserted  by  the 
same  hand  in  their  present  place.  For  the  Maha- 
bharata,  in  its  present  form,  is  not  the  work  of  a 
single  author,  but  a work  that  “ went  on  growing 

c 

with  the  growth  of  centuries  ; ” and  as  the  late  Mr. 


ANANTA  CHATURDASHI 


115 


R.  C.  Dutt  says,  “ every  generation  of  poets  had 
something  to  add  ; every  distant  nation  in  Northern 
India  was  anxious  to  interpolate  some  account  of  its 
deeds  in  the  old  record  of  the  international  war  ; 
every  preacher  of  a new  creed  desired  to  have  in 
the  old  Epic  some  sanction  for  the  new  truths  he 
inculcated.” 

The  customary  observances  connected  with  the 
Ananta  festival  are  of  the  simplest  kind,  consisting 
chiefly  in  wearing  on  the  arm,  just  above  the  elbow 
joint,  a holy  thread,  usually  dyed  in  yellow,  and 
made  of  cotton  or  silk  yarn  twisted  ornamentally 
into  fourteen  knots— the  fourteen  being  emblematic 
of  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  moon  on  which  the  festi- 
val is  held.  This  holy  thread,  which  is  also  called 
Ananta,  is,  previous  to  wearing,  duly  consecrated 
by  offerings  of  tulasi  leaves  ( tulasi  or  holy  Basil 
being  a plant  sacred  to  Vishnu,  and  being  itself 
worshipped  as  a deity),  offerings  of  flowers  and 
libations  of  Ganges  water,  made  to  the  accompani- 
ment of  proper  mantras . In  the  case  of  females 
(for  females  are  not  excluded  from  this  holy  fast,  or 
from  the  Shivaratri  either),  the  holy  thread  is  tied 
round  the  left  arm,  whereas  in  the  case  of  males  it 
is  fastened  round  the  right  arm.  The  fast  observed 
on  this  day  is  not  a total  fast  ; the  only  restriction 
that  is  made  in  the  matter  of  food  is  that  salt 
is  absolutely  forbidden,  but  grain  food  is  not 


116 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


disallowed.  In  this  respect  the  Ananta  fast  is  far 
less  rigid  than  its  rival  Shivaratri,  and  this  is  be- 
cause it  is  a Vaishnava  fast.  For  the  Vaishnavas 
discountenance  the  practice  of  those  hard  austerities 
that  the  Shaivas  regard  as  the  only  path  to  salva- 
tion. Vermicelli  boiled  in  milk  and  sugar  is  held  to 
be  the  special  dish  on  the  day  of  the  Ananta  festival. 
Of  course,  only  one  meal  is  taken  during  the  day, 
shortly  after  noon,  and  this  is  first  offered  to  the 
god  of  the  day  and  then  partaken  by  the  members 
of  the  family  as  prasad  (or  sacred  remnant  of  any 
food  which  is  believed  to  have  been  first  tasted  by 
a god), — by  those  members  who  are  keeping  the  fast 
as  well  as  by  those  who  are  not.  Orthodox  Vaish- 
navas keep  the  Ananta  thread  on  for  a whole  year, 
that  is,  till  the  next  season,  when  they  discard  the 
old  one  and  put  on  a new. 

The  Mahabharata  legend  giving  the  origin  of 
the  Ananta  festival  runs  as  follows  : — There  was, 
in  the  Dwapara  age,  a king  named  Chitrangada,  of 
the  lunar  race,  who  was  unequalled  in  piety,  save 
by  his  wife,  Chitra  Rekha.  The  king  and  queen 
once  received  a direct  commandment  from  Vishnu 
to  observe  the  Ananta  mat  a.  Straight  the  king 
ordered  a magnificent  temple  to  be  raised  to  Vishnu, 
and  when  the  building  was  completed,  he  cleared  it 
with  his  own  hands,  and  placed  an  image  of  the  god 
therein,  and  had  the  shrine  and  idol  both  duly 


ANANTA  CHATURDASHI 


117 


consecrated.  He  bestowed  large  sums  in  charity 
upon  the  poor,  fed  Brahmans,  and  gave  a banquet 
to  his  friends,  in  honour  of  the  happy  ceremony. 
When  the  day  of  Ananta  Chaturdashi  came  round, 
he  had  it  proclaimed  by  beat  of  drum  throughout  his 
territories  that  all  his  subjects,  of  whatsoever  caste 
or  creed  they  might  be,  should  observe  the  Ananta 
vrata  on  pain  of  severe  punishment.  The  effect  of 
this  peremptory  edict  was  that  all  his  subjects  were 
in  a mass  freed  from  the  fetters  of  sin  and  admitted 
to  the  abodes  of  the  blessed  after  their  death,  turn  by 
turn  ; so  that  these  people  became  as  sinless  in  the 
Dwapara  age  as  the  people  of  the  Satya  yuga , the 
golden  age,  had  been.  Such  sinlessness  was  consi- 
dered by  Dwapara — the  Spirit  of  the  Age — to  be 
contrary  to  the  laws  laid  down  by  Brahma  the 
Creator,  who  had  willed  that  not  more  than  one  in  a 
thousand  should,  in  the  Dwapara  age,  attain  the 
sanctity  of  a saint ; whereas  the  actual  proportion 
of  saintliness  in  the  population  was,  in  Chitrangada’s 
time,  cent  per  cent, — an  extraordinary  figure  indeed, 
thought  Dwapara;  and  on  inquiry  into  the  cause 
of  this  unnatural  phenomenon,  he  found  out  that  it 
was  due  to  the  endeavours  of  king  Chitrangada  in 
enforcing  observance  of  the  Ananta  vow  by  a com- 
pulsory edict.  So  Dwapara  revolved  in  his  mind  a 
scheme  whereby  he  thought  of  frustrating  the  pious 
efforts  of  the  king,  and  of  restoring  the  laws  of  the 


118 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


Creator  to  operation.  He  summoned  Vishwakarma, 
the  sculptor  of  the  gods,  and  said  unto  him  : “ Make 
me  the  image  of  a maiden  of  such  beauty  that  she 
may  indeed  be  peerless  among  earthly  creatures.” 
Vishwakarma  at  once  complied  with  the  wishes  of 
Dwapara,  and  made  a maiden  of  peerless  beauty, 
whom  he  named  Mohini  (‘  the  captivating  one  and 
when  Mohini,  after  being  endowed  with  life  by  the 
Creator,  presented  herself  before  Dwapara,  the  latter 
asked  her  to  go  down  to  the  world  of  mortals,  take 
her  stand  on  Mount  Dibya,  and  there  hold  Raja 
Chitrangada  in  remembrance,  and,  when  she  saw 
him,  dissuade  him  from  observing  the  Ananta  vrata, 
not  by  threat  or  persuasion,  but  by  cunning  stratagem. 
The  maiden  did  as  she  had  been  commanded.  As  the 
fates  had  pre-ordained,  Chitrangada  happened  just 
then  to  be  on  a visit  to  the  same  mountain,  in 
the  course  of  a hunting  expedition.  Seeing  a lovely 
maiden  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  the  Raja  was  captivated 
by  her  beauty,  and  he  stepped  up  to  her  and  said, 
“ Who  are  you,  fair  maiden,  and  of  what  high  line- 
age ? Where  is  your  home  ? Tell  me  truly,  O 
chaste  one.  Your  beauty  is  simply  ravishing ; it  is 
fit  to  win  the  heart  of  Indra  and  the  other  gods. 
But  let  me  first  introduce  myself. — My  name  is 
Chitrangada,  and  I am  a king  of  the  lunar  dynasty. 
My  heart  has  been  filled  with  love  for  you.  I pray 
you,  do  consent  to  be  my  beloved  queen.” 


ANANTA  CHATURDASHI 


119 


The  maiden  replied,  “ I have  no  father,  no 
mother,  being  self-created,  and  this  same  mountain 
is  my  lonely  home.  My  name  is  Mohini,  and  I 
am  willing  to  offer  my  hand  to  you, — but  on  one 
condition,  namely,  that  you  make  a solemn  promise 
always  to  do  whatever  I tell  you,  and  never  to  say 
me  nay,  even  if  the  three  worlds  were  in  jeopardy.” 

The  Raja  made  a solemn  promise  to  that  effect 
without  a moment’s  delay,  and  the  maiden  then 
gladly  consented  to  be  his  queen.  The  same  night 
the  Raja  was  wedded  to  this  maiden  on  the  hill-top 
by  the  ancient  priest  of  the  lunar  kings,  named 
Kankayan.  Next  day  the  king  brought  his  newly- 
wedded  wife  to  his  palace,  and  made  her  his  chief 
or  senior  queen.  Days  passed  on  in  happiness,  and 
when  the  Ananta  season  came  round  in  due  course, 
the  king  and  his  old  queen,  Chitra  Rekha,  kept  their 
usual  fast,  and  observed  the  yearly  rite  in  the 
customary  style,  by  making  gifts  of  land  and  kine 
to  Brahmans,  and  doles  of  grain  and  cash  to  the 
poor.  Suddenly  it  flashed  upon  the  mind  of  Mohini 
that  she  had  been  specially  commissioned — created , 
in  fact — to  cause  a violation  of  the  king’s  obser- 
vance of  the  Ananta  fast,  and  she  at  once  ap- 
proached the  Raja  and  said  to  him,  “Why  are  you 
keeping  a fast  to-day  ? What  is  the  good  of  per- 
forming such  an  austere  form  of  penance  ? Let 
me  ask  you  to  renounce  it,  and  to  take  your  meal’ 


120 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


in  the  usual  way,  for,  I tell  you,  the  greatest  sin  is 
to  perpetuate  a sin.” 

These  words  fell  upon  the  Raja  like  a bolt  from 
the  blue  ; he  was  first  struck  aghast  at  the  blasphemy, 
and  then  fell  into  a rage,  his  eyes  flaming  with 
wrath  and  his  lips  quivering  with  emotion.  But  he 
exercised  his  wonted  self-control,  and  regaining 
his  coolness  he  replied,  “ You  women  are  a simple- 
minded  race,  not  gifted  with  any  capacity  to  under- 
stand these  occult  truths.  This  is  the  Ananta 
Vrata,  famous  all  over  the  world,  observed  by  high 
and  low  alike, — and  do  you  ask  me  to  violate  it  ? 
Well,  women  are  an  ignorant  herd,  rarely  possessed 
of  reason,  and  I do  not  know  how  to  convince  you 
of  the  rightness  and  wrongness  of  things.  By 
observing  this  holy  fast,  all  trace  of  sorrow  and  sin 
vanishes  for  ever,  and  the  bliss  of  heaven  becomes 
assured.  Now  listen  to  the  story  of  my  life  in  my 
previous  birth,  so  that  you  might  know  why  I have 
undertaken  a vow  to  keep  this  fast  every  year.  In 
my  former  birth  I was  a Sudra,  addicted  to  vice, 
hardened  in  sin,  a shameless  villain,  a confirmed 
drunkard,  a habitual  slayer  of  beasts  and  birds. 
My  evil  life  led  my  brethren  to  turn  me  out  of  their 
fold.  In  a fit  of  rage  I betook  myself  to  a dark 
forest  where  I soon  began  to  die  of  hunger  and 
thirst.  Suddenly  I came  upon  a temple  dedicated 
to  Vishnu,  within  which  I sought  shelter  for  the 


ANANTA  CHATURDASHI 


121 


night  and  lay  down  on  the  floor  fatigued  and 
famished.  It  so  happened  that  the  day  was  the 
day  of  Ananta  Chaturdashi,  which  I spent  in  volun- 
tary abstinence  from  food  and  drink.  Next  morning 
a much  more  cruel  fate  awaited  me  : a serpent  bit 
me  in  the  leg  and  I died.  Immediately  after,  two 
dark-robed  demons  came  from  Yama,  king  of  the 
dead,  and  caught  my  soul  in  a tight  noose  ; but 
just  then  two  beaming  angels,  sent  down  by  Vishnu, 
appeared  on  the  spot,  and  seated  me  in  an  aerial 
car  and  bore  me  to  heaven.  There  in  the  celestial 
region  of  Vishnu  did  I dwell  for  two  hundred 
thousand  years,  at  the  end  of  which  I was  translated 
to  the  higher  heaven  of  Brahma,  where  I resided 
for  another  long  term,  after  which  I took  human 
shape  again  and  was  born  a king,  the  king  that  I 
now  am.  All  this  reward  I gained  in  return  for 
my  having  observed  the  Ananta  Vrata,  casually, 
once.  Now  tell  me  if  I can  ever  give  it  up,  and 
whether  I should.  Never  utter  such  an  impious 
wish  again.” 

Mohini  rejoined,  “ O Raja,  you  made  a solemn 
promise  to  me  that  you  would  always  do  as  I bade 
you.  I shall  henceforth  know  you  to  be  a liar. 
You  know  there  is  nothing  more  sinful  than  false- 
hood.” 

The  Raja  felt  very  much  ashamed  and  found 
himself  fixed  on  the  horns  of  a dilemma.  At  last  he 


122 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FBASTS 


replied,  “ Lady,  it  shall  never  be  my  lot  to  break  an 
ancient  vow,  or  to  prove  false  to  my  own  word.  I 
shall  much  rather  give  up  my  life.” 

So  saying  the  Raja  summoned  his  eldest  son, 
and  making  over  the  sceptre  of  sovereignty  to 
him,  said,  “ I am  going  to  sacrifice  my  life  at  the 
altar  of  Truth.  The  palace,  the  throne,  the  kingdom 
are  all  yours  now.  Rule  justly,  reverence  the  gods, 
and  pay  due  honour  to  Brahmans.” 

With  these  words  the  king  placed  himself  in  a 
posture  of  deep  meditation  (yoga)  and  passed  away 
into  eternal  bliss.  After  his  death,  a proclamation 
was  made  throughout  his  territories  to  the  effect 
that  “ no  man  should  make  a promise  to  his  wife.” 


xiii 

Mahalaya  Amavasya 

Amavasya  is  the  last  day  of  the  dark  fortnight 
of  a lunar  month,  and  is  in  every  season  considered 
by  the  Hindus  to  be  a day  especially  set  apart  for 
the  performance  of  religious  ceremonies  in  honour 
of  the  spirits  of  departed  ancestors.  Of  all 
Amavasyas,  the  one  that  is  universally  observed  as 
the  chief  day  for  the  worship  of  the  dead,  is 
Mahalaya,  the  fifteenth  or  last  day  of  the  moonless 
fortnight  of  the  month  of  Kuar  or  Aswin  (Septem- 
ber-October).  The  whole  of  the  fortnight  preceding 
Mahalaya  is  collectively  called  the  Pitri  Paksha, 
or  the  fortnight  sacred  to  the  memory  of  departed 
ancestors.  Every  day  of  this  fortnight  is  sacred, 
and  witnesses  the  observance  of  various  ceremonies 
in  honour  of  the  dead  by  thousands  of  Hindus  in 
every  part  of  India.  A well-known  Sanskrit  text 
says,  “ Each  day  of  this  holy  fortnight  is  equal  in 
point  of  sanctity  to  a day  spent  at  Gaya,”-— Gaya 
being  the  place  regarded  as  holiest  for  all  kinds  of 
religious  rites  in  memory  of  the  dead.  Whatever 
the  actual  date  of  a man’s  death  may  be,  his 


124 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


Sraddha  (or  annual  worship  of  his  departed  spirit) 
must  be  performed  on  one  of  the  days  of  this  parti- 
cular fortnight.  If  a man’s  father  died,  say,  on  an 
Ekadashi  (the  eleventh  day  of  the  moon,  waxing  or 
waning),  the  Ekadashi  or  eleventh  day  of  this  holy 
fortnight  is  observed  as  a day  of  special  religious 
rites  in  his  memory,  the  general  worship  of  his  spirit 
being,  however,  continued  throughout  the  fortnight. 
And  since  there  are  only  fifteen  days  of  the  moon, 
every  day  of  this  fortnight  is  a day  of  Sraddha  for 
some  individual  or  other.  Sometimes  the  day  of  the 
full  moon  ( Purnamashi ) immediately  preceding  the 
commencement  of  the  dark  fortnight  is  included  in  the 
Pitri  Paksha,  which  is  thus  extended  to  sixteen  days 
in  order  to  give  a chance  of  performing  Sraddha  to 
those  who  may  have  lost  one  of  their  ancestors  on 
the  day  of  a full  moon. 

One  day  of  this  ancestral  fortnight,  namely,  the 
ninth,  is  set  apart  for  the  worship  of  dead  female 
ancestors,  especially  the  mother ; and  hence  this  day 
is  called  ‘Matri  Navami.’  The  annual  oblations  to  all 
female  ancestors  must  be  offered  on  this  ninth  day  of 
the  moon,  irrespective  of  the  tithi  of  their  death. 

The  first  half  of  the  month  of  Kuar — the  Pitri 
Paksha — is  considered  sacred  to  the  memory  of 
deceased  ancestors  in  accordance  with  a belief,  which 
finds  mention  in  the  Hindu  scriptures,  that  as  soon  as 
the  sun  enters  the  sign  of  Kanya  or  Virgo,  the  spirits 


MAHALAYA 


125 


of  departed  ancestors  leave  their  abode  in  the 
regions  of  the  dead,  and,  coming  back  to  the  world 
of  living  mortals,  occupy  the  homes  of  their  descend- 
ants to  receive  their  homage  and  worship.  And 
this  homage  and  worship  is  not  only  ungrudgingly 
given,  but  is  regarded  as  the  highest  of  all  earthly 
duties,  by  high  and  low  alike.  Even  Protestant 
Hinduism  has  not  shaken  off  its  faith  in  the  efficacy 
of  ancestor-worship,  which  lies  at  the  very  root  of 
the  Hindu  religion.  No  important  religious  ritual 
or  domestic  ceremony  is  complete  without  it.  It 
has  to  be  done  before  each  of  the  principal  Sans- 
karas  or  purificatory  rites  that  a high-born  Hindu 
has  to  perform  through  life.  Before  Annciprasana 
(the  ceremony  of  feeding  a child  for  the  first  time 
with  rice  or  grain  food — which  takes  place  about 
the  seventh  month) ; before  tonsure  ; before  Upana- 
yana,  or  the  ceremony  of  investing  a boy  with 
the  sacred  thread,  the  mystical  cord  symbolical  of 
regeneration  ; before  marriage  ; in  fact,  before  every 
event  in  the  household  or  religious  life  of  every 
Hindu,  the  deceased  ancestors  must  be  worshipped 
in  a prescribed  form.  The  Pitri  Paksha  is  the 
fortnight  immediately  preceding  the  great  Nava - 
ratra , the  4 nine  days  ’ during  which  the  goddess 
Durga,  the  Universal  Mother,  is  worshipped  through- 
out India,  and  this  order  of  time  is  a proof  that 
the  worship  of  ancestors  is  regarded  by  the 


126 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


Hindus  as  a preliminary  even  to  the  worship  of  the 
gods. 

The  principles  of  ancestor-worship  are  perfectly 
intelligible.  The  dead  ancestor  is  deified  into  a 
household  god,  and  is  believed  to  be  still  protecting 
his  own  family  and  receiving  worship  and  reverence 
from  his  descendants  as  of  old;  indeed,  from  his 
present  position  among  the  blessed  spirits,  he  is 
regarded  as  wielding  greater  authority  and  entitled 
to  greater  veneration  that  when  he  dwelt  on  earth. 
Ancestor-worship  is  one  of  the  earliest  attempts 
made  by  the  Hindu  mind  to  solve  the  problems  of 
life,  death,  and  eternity,  and  the  old  solution  is 
none  the  worse  for  being  so  old ; for  ancestor- 
worship  still  forms  a living  part  of  the  daily  faith 
of  the  whole  Hindu  world,  the  only  exceptions  being 
those  few  who  in  their  headlong  zeal  for  reform 
have  not  scrupled  to  transgress  the  barriers  of 
society  and  religion  alike. 

Ancestor-worship,  such  as  it  prevails  in  India, 
does  not,  however,  mean  that  all  the  ancestors  of  a 
Hindu  are  worshipped  by  him  during  the  ancestral 
fortnight.  It  is  only  those  who  have  lost  their 
father  that  owe  this  sacred  duty  ; those  who  have 
their  father  still  alive  are  exempt  from  this 
obligation.  This  shows  that  the  so-called  “ an- 
cestor-worship ” is  really  the  worship  of  the  spirit 
of  the  deceased  father  alone,  though  as  a matter 


MAHALAYA 


127 


of  fact  the  grandfather  and  the  next  ancestor  also 
come  in  for  their  share  of  the  offerings  and 
oblations.  But  these  latter  ,only  derive  their  right 
from  the  father,  and  are  worshipped  after  the 
father.  The  father  is  in  Hindu  households  regard- 
ed as  the  earthly  representative  of  God ; he  is  the 
present  God — the  visible,  living  incarnation  of  the 
Supreme  Being,  and  is  therefore  an  object  of  daily 
worship  ; and  the  same  father,  when  departed  from 
the  world,  continues  to  be  the  prime  object  of 
worship  as  long  as  the  son  lives,  even  after  the  son 
himself  has  become  a father  or  grandfather. 

The  ceremonies  customary  in  this  season  are  of 
two  kinds  : (1)  the  Sraddha,  which  is  performed  on 
one  day  of  this  fortnight,  the  day  corresponding  to 
the  tithi  of  the  death  ; (2)  the  Tarpana,  or  offering 
of  water,  which  is  continued  every  day  throughout 
the  fortnight.  The  term  4 Sraddha  ’ literally  signi- 
fies a 4 gift  offered  with  faith  ’ or  simply  a 4 pious 
offering  ’ — not  necessarily  to  an  ancestor,  but  to 
any  dead  relation  to  whom  this  honour  is  due. 
There  are  twelve  kinds  of  Sraddha  enumerated  in 
the  Shastras,  in  addition  to  the  annual  Sraddha 
performed  during  the  Pitri  Paksha,  which,  though 
of  yearly  recurrence,  is  in  no  way  less  elaborate  in 
ceremonial  than  the  obsequies  performed  on  the 
eleventh  day  after  the  actual  death  of  an  ancestor, 
the  only  difference  being  that  the  latter  function  is 


128 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


accompanied  by  multifarious  gifts  of  food,  clothing 
and  utensils,  which  are  dispensed  with  in  the  case 
of  this  annual  Sraddjia.  In  all  forms  of  Sraddha 
the  chief  act  is  the  offering  of  pinda  or  balls  of 
cooked  rice  and  libations  of  water  to  the  accompani- 
ment of  proper  prayers. 

The  term  ‘ Tarpana  ’ literally  means  ‘ refresh- 
ment,’ or  more  precisely  ‘ a refreshing  drink  of 
water.’  It  is  divided  into  three  parts,  as  the 
libations  are  offered  first  to  the  gods,  next  to  the 
rishis  or  sages,  and  lastly  to  the  ancestors.  The 
gods  specially  named  are  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra, 
and  Prajapati ; the  sages  too  are  mentioned  by 
name,  and  they  are  the  principal  sages  honoured 
by  the  whole  Hindu  world, — Bhrigu,  Narad,  Atri, 
Vasishtha,  Angiras,  Maricha,  &c.  The  ancestors 
too  must  be  mentioned  by  name,  the  father  being 
the  first  to  receive  his  share  ; next  comes  the 
grandfather,  and  then  the  great-grandfather  ; then 
come  the  mother,  the  grandmother,  and  the  great- 
grandmother,— making  up  six  in  all  in  the  paternal 
line.  Then  come  the  maternal  ancestors,  three 
male  and  three  female, — the  females  of  the  latter 
group  receiving  only  a single  libation,  whereas 
all  others  receive  three  each.  After  these  come  the 
collateral  ancestors,  and  all  others  (not  specified  by 
name)  who  have  died  childless,  and  who  have  there- 
fore no  direct  representative  to  offer  oblations  to 


MAHALAYA 


129 


their  spirits.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  cere- 
mony, the  votary  bows  down  his  head  to  the  ground 
and  repeats  a short  text,  the  literal  meaning  of  which 
is: — ‘The  Father  is  Heaven,  the  Father  is  religion 
(or  duty),  the  Father  is  the  highest  form  of  penance, 
prayer,  or  meditation  ; it  is  by  pleasing  the  Father 
that  all  the  gods  are  propitiated.”  This  text  forms 
as  it  were  the  cardinal  doctrine  of  the  Hindu  faith 
in  “ancestor- worship,”  and  it  also  serves  to  illustrate 
the  restricted  sense  in  which  the  custom  of  ancestor- 
worship  is  to  be  understood,  as  signifying  principally 
the  worship  of  the  father,  and  not  the  whole  series 
of  one’s  ancestors. 

Rules  of  the  most  minute  detail  are  laid  down  in 
the  Hindu  Shastras  for  regulating  the  procedure  at 
these  customary  annual  oblations,  and  these  rules 
form  the  basis  of  the  Hindu  law  of  inheritance.  The 
spot  where  the  ceremony  is  to  be  performed  must  be 
sequestered  and  scrupulously  clean.  It  should  face 
south,  the  direction  in  which  the  Hindu  abodes  of 
the  dead  are  supposed  to  lie.  The  ceremony  is  to  be 
performed  by  the  eldest  son,  or  in  cases  of  his  un- 
avoidable inability,  by  the  youngest,  to  whom  how- 
ever the  right  must  be  expressly  delegated.  Even 
a minor  son  has  preference  over  an  elderly  brother 
or  even  an  uncle.  Female  relations  have  no  right 
to  perform  Sraddha,  though  childless  widows  are 
sometimes  given  this  privilege  as  a concession. 

9 


130 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


These  strict  rules  furnish  the  Hindu  with  the  well- 
known  argument  for  the  necessity  of  marriage  and 
the  procreation  of  male  issue.  The  annual  cere- 
monies of  Sraddha  and  Tarpana  are  to  be  continued 
until  the  departed  spirit,  in  whose  honor  these  are 
performed,  attains  beatification,  which  usually  takes 
place  after  three  generations,  and  then  the  soul 
passes  into  a state  of  blessedness  and  ceases  to 
influence  the  descendants  for  good  or  evil.  The 
sacred  grains  used  in  the  Sraddha  and  the  Tarpana 
are  barley  and  sesamum  seed.  Shaving  or  cutting 
the  hair,  or  even  paring  the  nails,  is  forbidden  on  the 
day  of  Sraddha , but  some  people  abstain  from  these 
during  the  whole  of  the  Pitri  Paksha,  deriving  this 
practice  from  one  popularly  attributed  to  a legend- 
ary king,  named  Kama.  The  story  goes  that  Raja 
Kama  made  a vow  that  he  would  not  break  his  fast 
daily  until  he  had  given  a maund  and  a quarter  of 
gold  to  Brahmans.  After  his  death  he  went  to  hea- 
ven, where  he  was  lodged  in  a palace  of  gold,  and 
was  given  nothing  but  gold  for  his  food  and  drink, — 
for  in  his  life  his  only  gift  in  charity  had  been 
gold.  In  his  distress  he  asked  as  a boon  to  be 
allowed  to  go  back  to  earth  for  fifteen  days.  The 
boon  was  granted,  and  he  occupied  himself  during  his 
time  of  grace  in  giving  away  large  quantities  of  food 
to  the  hungry,  and  was  so  busy  all  this  time  that 
he  neglected  to  bathe*  shave  or  wash  his  clothes. 


MAHALAYA 


131 


The  place  which  is  held  to  be  specially  sacred 
for  purposes  of  Sraddha  is  Gaya,  a town  about  sixty 
miles  south-west  of  Patna.  The  object  of  the  annual 
Sraddha  is  to  hasten  the  progress  of  the  soul 
through  the  various  stages  of  spiritual  existence  ; 
and  if  the  ceremony  is  performed  at  Gaya  it  is  be- 
lieved that  the  length  of  these  “ intervital  ” periods 
is  cut  short  considerably,  and  the  soul  passes  at  a 
bound  into  Vaikuntha,  or  the  paradise  of  Vishnu. 
The  Phalgu  river  at  Gaya  is  a stream  sacred  to  the 
spirits  of  departed  ancestors.  It  is  on  the  banks  of 
this  river,  or  at  the  Vishnupada  Temple,  that  the 
Sraddha  at  Gaya  must  be  performed,  and  it  is  said 
that  at  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremony,  when  the 
cakes  are  reverently  deposited  in  the  river,  the 
spirits  of  the  ancestors  are  actually  beheld  in  bodily 
form,  receiving  the  pious  offering  with  a smile  of 
satisfaction.  The  sacred  portion  of  the  same  river 
is  said  occasionally  to  flow  with  milk,  but  the  milk 
never  appears  to  the  eye  of  unbelievers  or  those 
who  are  wanting  in  the  necessary  degree  of  rever- 
ence. Even  when  the  Sraddha  is  performed  else- 
where, the  offered  cakes  are,  at  the  end  of  the  cere- 
mony, “directed  towards  Gaya”  by  appropriate 
holy  texts. 

Illusions  like  the  above  may  not  be  mere  illusions 
after  all  : it  depends  upon  the  spirit  of  the  age  and 
upon  the  faith  of  the  individual  how  these  state- 


132 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


ments  are  interpreted.  If  all  the  visible  and  invi- 
sible phenomena  of  the  universe  be  reduced  to  mere 
manifestations  of  Matter  and  Motion,  ancestor- 
worship  is  indeed  futile  ; but  if  Mind  be  an  agent 
working  unseen  behind  the  scenes,  then  probably 
ancestor-worship^may  be  taken  as  a powerful  source 
of  divine  inspiration  in  moments  of  difficulty,  dark- 
ness, and  doubt,  and  as  one  of  the  most  potent 
factors  in  bringing  about  peace,  and  purity,  and 
holiness  in  human  life 

“ How  pure  at  heart  and  sound  in  head, 

With  what  divine  affections  bold 
Should  be  the  man  whose  thought  would  hold 
An  hour’s  communion  with  the  dead. 

In  vain  shalt  thou,  or  any,  call 

The  spirits  from  their  golden  day, 

Except,  like  them,  thou  too  canst  say, 

My  spirit  is  at  peace  with  all. 

They  haunt  the  silence  of  the  breast, 

Imaginations  calm  and  fair, 

The  memory  like  a cloudless  air, 

The  conscience  as  a sea  at  rest : 

But  when  the  heart  is  full  of  din, 

And  doubt  beside  the  portal  waits, 

They  can  but  listen  at  the  gates, 

And  hear  the  household  jar  within.” 


— Tennyson  : Memoriam. 


XIV 

Durga  Puja 

Durga  Puja,  popularly  miscalled  Dasehra,  is  one 
of  the  greatest  of  Hindu  festivals.  It  is,  as  its  name 
suggests,  a festival  of  the  Shaktas,  or  worshippers 
of  Shakti,  the  conception  of  the  divine  attribute  of 
Power  represented  in  female  form,  and  regarded,  in 
her  most  comprehensive  character,  as  the  living 
Energy  or  Force  of  Nature — the  mighty  Mother  of 
the  Universe.  The  Shakti  is  adored  in  various  forms, 
all  female,  and  under  various  names,  all  signifying 
special  attributes, — Uma,  Gauri,  Parvati,  Mahadevi, 
Kali,  Tara,  Lakshmi,  Bimala,  being  only  a few  of  her 
thousand  appellations.  Some  of  these  are  benignant 
deities,  calculated  to  inspire  love  and  reverence; 
others  are  only  what  we  must  call  malignant  spirits, 
fit  to  inspire  awe  and  strike  terror  into  the  heart. 

The  Shakta  creed  was  until  recently — when  it 
received  a check  in  the  revival  of  Vaishnavism 
through  the  preaching  of  Chaitanya — the  latest 
development  of  Hinduism,  the  creeds  that  preceded 
it  in  popularity  having  been  Shaivism  and  Vaishnav- 
ism. According  to  Shaivism,  Shiva  is  the  Supreme 


134 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


Being,  and  not  merely,  as  he  is  dimly  represented  in 
the  Vedas,  one  of  the  trinity  of  Brahma  the  Creator, 
Vishnu  the  Preserver  and  Shiva  the  Destroyer.  He 
is  also  regarded  as  identified  with  every  form  and 
force  in  nature,  and  yet  thought  of  as  a personal  God, 
who  possesses  a bodily  form,  and  can  think,  and 
feel,  and  act.  Vaishnavism  is  akin  to  Shaivism  in 
its  being  a monotheistic  faith  and  in  setting  aside 
the  triune  equality  of  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Shiva. 
The  Vaishnavas  regard  Vishnu  alone  as  the  one  true 
God,  especially  as  manifested  in  the  incarnation  of 
Krishna.  These  two  creeds  agree  in  dissenting 
from  the  impersonal  pantheism  of  earlier  sects, 
whose  one  God  is  the  immaterial  substratum  of 
every  thing,  animate  and  inanimate.  They  also 
agree  in  holding  that  this  personal  God— Shiva  or 
Vishnu — is  a male  being,  but  that,  whenever  he  wills 
to  put  forth  energy  for  the  creation  of  a world 
external  to  himself,  his  nature  becomes  duplex.  The 
idea  of  this  duality  of  the  divine  nature  gave  birth 
to  the  conception  of  Shakti,  the  female  counterpart 
of  the  Omnipotent, — and  this  conception  came  in 
time  to  be  more  honoured  and  propitiated  than  the 
male  conception.  Hence  it  is  that  the  worshippers 
of  Shakti  became  more  fervent  in  their  faith  and 
more  zealous  in  their  devotion  than  the  worshippers 
of  either  Shiva  or  Vishnu.  Shaktism,  however, 
underwent  a series  of  modifications,  both  in  doctrine 


DURGA  PUJA 


135 


and  in  ritual,  until  it  reached  its  lowest  phase  in 
the  horrid  rites  of  the  Tantras.  The  objectionable 
elements  of  Tantric  ritual  caused  a violent  reaction 
an  favour  of  the  rival  creed  which  Shaktism  had 
supplanted,  and  the  result  was  a revival  of  Vaish- 
navism.  The  details  of  the  Durga  Puja  are  governed 
by  Tantric  texts,  but  the  Puja  is  one  of  the  purest 
forms  of  the  worship  of  Shakti.  The  prayers  and 
mantras  repeated  on  the  occasion  are  taken  from 
the  Tantras,  but  the  Tantric  forms  of  drunkenness, 
debauchery  and  witchcraft  were  at  no  time  asso- 
ciated with  the  festival. 

Originally  the  Durga  Puja  was  held  for  nine  days 
in  succession,  commencing  with  the  bright  fortnight 
of  the  month  of  Chaitra  (March-April),  the  whole 
Puja  seasor.  being  collectively  called  the  Navaratra, 
or  ‘the  nine  nights,’ — night , because  being  essentially 
a Tantric  form  of  worship  it  used  to  be  conducted 
in  the  secrecy  of  the  night.  But  later  on  the  date  of 
the  Puja  was  shifted  forward  so  as  to  take  place  in 
the  m)onlit  half  of  Kuar  or  Aswin  (September- 
Octobe’),  and  this  is  the  time  the  festival  is  held  still. 
There  :an  be  no  doubt  that  both  these  dates  were 
conneced  with  the  cutting  of  the  harvest,  as  Kuar 
and  Chaitra  have  always  been  the  two  principal 
harvestseasons  in  India.  But  the  worship,  as  a wor- 
ship, h;s  nothing  to  do  with  any  agricultural  oper- 
ations. It  is  believed  that  this  change  pf  dates  was 


136 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


made  by  Rama,  King  of  Ayodhya,  the  hero  of  the 
Ramayana,  who  invoked  the  goddess  Durga  for 
supernatural  aid  in  his  campaign  against  Ravana, 
the  demon-king  of  Lanka.  The  earlier  Navaratra — 
that  of  the  month  of  Chaitra — still  continues  in 
vogue  under  a different  name,  Vasanti  Puja;  but  its 
importance  as  a form  of  worship  has  now  greatly 
declined,  and  the  festive  character  of  the  season 
is  entirely  lost. 

But  while  the  old  spring  festival  has  lost  its 
festive  accompaniments,  the  new  autumn  festival 
has  gained,  at  least  in  Upper  India,  elements  of 
festivity  that  never  belonged  to  the  old  Pu;a.  These 
elements  of  festivity  are  due  to  the  association  of 
this  Puja  with  the  victories  of  Rama,  and  it  has, 
since  the  age  of  Rama,  been  the  practice  of  the 
people  to  celebrate  these  victories  annually  in  the 
form  of  spectacular  displays  called  the  Ran  Lila. 
The  Ram  Lila  is  an  open-air  dramatic  represeitation 
of  the  principal  incidents  of  the  Ramayana , designed 
to  instruct  ignorant  audiences  in  the  moral  teachings 
of  the  great  Hindu  epic.  Every  city  and  town, 
every  populous  village  and  mart  holds  ife  own 
annual  Ram  Lila,  and  there  is  much  friendly  rivalry 
between  neighbouring  parties  in  the  ponp  and 
splendour  with  which  they  can  accompan;  their 
celebrations.  The  Ram  Lila  is  usually  heldfor  ten 
days,  commencing  with  the  Navaratra,  aid  the 


BURGA  PUJA 


137 


incidents  selected  for  special  representation  are 
chiefly  the  incidents  of  the  war  in  Lanka  between 
Rama’s  forces  led  by  Hanumana,  the  monkey  chief, 
and  the  Rakshasa  forces  commanded  by  Ravana  and 
his  Rakshasa  relations.  No  character  in  the  Ram  Lila 
is  more  popular  with  the  rustic  audience  than  Hanu- 
mana, who  with  his  long  tail  standing  erect  behind 
his  head,  marches  to  and  fro  on  the  battle-field  at 
the  head  of  his  army  of  bears  and  monkeys.  Hanu- 
mana, or  Mahavira  as  he  is  otherwise  named  on 
account  of  his  invincible  prowess,  is  to  the  millions 
of  Hindustan  the  living  embodiment  of  loyalty  or 
personal  devotion,  and  the  faithful  Hindu  heart 
has  long  elevated  him  into  a deity  and  worships  his 
deified  spirit  in  every  town  and  village  of  Northern 
India  on  every  Tuesday  in  the  year, — Tuesday 
being  the  day  sacred  to  Mangal  (Mars),  the  planet  of 
war.  The  Ram  Lila  performances  are  held  in  the 
afternoon  for  a couple  of  hours  every  day.  In  be- 
tween the  rude  acting,  a group  of  singers  standing 
or  sitting  in  one  corner  of  the  “ stage,”  chant  verses 
from  the  Ramayana  in  chorus,  attracting  a little 
audience  of  their  own,  while  the  larger  audience  out- 
side the  fencing  raise  shouts  of  “Ramchandra 
ki  jai ! Ravana  ki  chhai !”  (Victory  to  Rama  I 
Destruction  to  Ravana !)  at  short  intervals 
throughout  the  play.  The  Ram  Lila  ends 
with  the  defeat  and  death  - of  Ravana,  whose 


138 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


immense  effigy,  made  of  bamboo  lattice-work  pasted 
over  with  paper,  is  set  fire  to  and  blown  up  with 
fireworks  at  the  conclusion  of  the  performance. 
This  takes  place  on  the  tenth  day,  which  is  called 
Vijaya  Dashami  (‘  the  victorious  tenth  ’),  in  allusion 
to  Rama’s  final  victory  over  Ravana,  which  was 
achieved  on  this  tenth  day  of  the  moon  of  Kuar. 
The  Ram  Lila,  however,  is  connected  with  the 
Durga  Puja  only  by  the  bonds  of  association  ; it 
does  not  form  a factor  of  the  religious  ceremony, 
for  the  two  celebrations  are  held  independently  of 
each  other,  and  in  some  parts  of  India  one  or  the 
other  only  holds  the  field. 

The  Durga  Puja  lasts  nominally  for  nine  days 
and  nine  nights,  as  the  term  ‘ Navaratra  ’ denotes  ; 
but  the  last  three  days  alone  are  considered  import- 
ant, every  hour  of  these  being  filled  with  elaborate 
ceremonies  and  with  a continuous  round  of  feasting 
and  merry-making,  especially  among  the  younger 
folk.  Of  these  three  days  again,  the  middle  one  is 
regarded  as  the  most  sacred,  and  hence  it  is  known 
as  Maha  Ashtami  (‘  the  great  eighth  ’)  because  it  is 
on  this  day  that  the  holiest  puja , called  the  Sandhi 
Puja , takes  place. 

Durga  Puja  is  the  stateliest  of  Hindu  pujas,  and 
is  one  of  the  few  in  which  the  religious  duties  dis- 
charged by  the  worshippers  are  of  a corporate  or 
congregational  nature.  Not  only  are  the  expenses  of 


DURGA  PUJA 


139 


the  Puja  defrayed  by  voluntary  subscription  raised 
from  among  the  well-to-do  people  of  the  town  or 
village,  but  there  is  even,  the  offering  up  of  a 
common  prayer  to  a common  deity  by  a company  of 
worshippers  standing  together  at  one  spot  in  front 
of  the  image.  The  image  itself  is  placed  in  the 
centre  of  a lofty  structure  of  wicker-work,  with  a 
semi-circular  top  containing  little  spaces  in  which 
are  arranged,  according  to  a prescribed  order,  a 
series  of  diminutive  images  representing  a variety 
of  minor  deities.  Durga  herself  is  represented  as 
a tall  woman  with  a fair  yellowish  complexion, 
yellow  being  the  most  sacred  of  all  colours.  She 
has  ten  arms,  each  holding  either  a weapon,  such 
as  a scimitar,  a club,  a bow  and  arrow,  a battle-axe, 
or  else  some  other  suitable  symbol,  such  as  a 
conch  shell,  a revolving  discus,  a lotus  flower.  In 
one  of  her  lower  arms  she  holds  a tuft  of  hair 
belonging  to  the  head  of  an  Asur,  or  demon, 
upon  whom  she  tramples  with  one  foot,  the 
other  foot  resting  on  the  back  of  a lion.  The 
Asur  or  demon  below  her  foot  is  Mahishasur,  a 
demon  who  terrorised  the  earth  in  the  form  of  a 
ferocious  buffalo,  and  to  crush  whom  was  one  of  the 
special  missions  that  Durga  undertook  to  execute 
in  the  world  of  mortals.  For  this  reason  the 
goddess  bears  also  the  name  of  ‘ Mahish-mardini  ’ 
(‘  destroyer  of  the  buffalo-demon  ’).  The  lion  is  the 


140 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


vahan  of  Durga,  and  this  fact  accounts  for  another 
of  her  thousand  names — ‘ Singha  Vahini  ’ or  4 rider 
of  the  lion.’  The  image  is  clothed  in  a silk  saree , 
and  each  limb  is  adorned  with  tinsel  ornaments  of 
gold  and  silver  tinge.  On  the  head  is  placed  a 
mukut  or  crown,  surmounted  with  an  aigrette  set 
with  sparkling  beads  of  varied  colours.  On  the 
right  side  of  Durga,  stand  Saraswati,  the  goddess 
of  learning,  and  a step  lower,  Ganesha,  the  elephant- 
headed god  of  wisdom.  On  the  left  side,  stand 
Lakshmi,  the  goddess  of  wealth  and  beauty,  and  a 
step  lower  down,  Kartik,  the  commander-in-chief  of 
the  army  of  the  gods.  Saraswati  and  Lakshmi  are 
the  daughters  of  Durga  ; Ganesha  and  Kartik  are 
her  sons, — all  sprung  from  her  marriage  with  Shiva. 
The  images  of  these  four  are  slightly  smaller  than 
the  central  image,  and  each  is  supplied  with  his  or 
her  distinctive  symbol  of  divinity — the  lotus  flower 
and  conch  shell  of  Lakshmi,  the  vina  or  harp  of 
Saraswati  ; while  Kartik  sits  astride  on  a peacock, 
and  Ganesha  is  mounted  on  his  vahan  of  a mouse. 
Each  of  these  seeming  trifles  has  a spiritual 
significance  attached  to  it  in  the  Devi  Parana , 
which  is  one  of  the  4 authorized  ’ treatises  on  the 
subject  of  Shakti  worship. 

The  offerings  made  in  the  Durga  Puja  include 
specimens  of  almost  every  product  of  the  earth 
belonging  to  the  animal,  vegetable  and  mineral 


DURGA  PUJA 


141 


kingdoms.  Every  object  which  possesses  value  in 
the  eyes  of  man  is  deemed  fit  as  an  offering  to 
the  goddess.  Some  of  these  offerings  are  made 
only  in  emblem, — for  example,  land,  which  is 
offered  in  the  shape  of  an  earthen  basin  filled  with 
loose  earth  ; but  other  offerings,  such  as  Nava-ratna 
(‘  the  nine  gems  ’)  are  made  in  actuality,  and  some 
of  these  are  considered  indispensable.  Animal 
sacrifices  too  are  offered  up  before  the  goddess, 
but  these  are  restricted  to  goats  and  buffaloes, 
both  of  which  must  be  of  male  sex  and  of  black 
colour.  The  slaughter  of  buffaloes  has  long  become 
obsolete,  but  goat  sacrifices  are  still  a common 
feature.  Particular  care  is  taken  that  the  head 
of  the  victim  should  be  struck  off  at  a single  blow, 
and  the  sharpest  swords  and  the  strongest  arms  are 
therefore  used  for  this  purpose.  If  a second  blow 
should  by  accident  become  necessary,  it  is  consider- 
ed to  be  a grave  ill-omen.  The  men  engaged  for 
decapitating  the  victims  constitute  a special 
caste  akin  to  blacksmiths.  In  many  places  black- 
smiths are  actually  employed  for  this  purpose.  In 
numerous  households,  however,  animal  sacrifices 
have  been  completely  done  away  with,  but  to  keep 
up  the  form,  and  in  order  that  nothing  might  be 
wanting  to  complete  the  worship,  some  vegetable, 
such  as  a gray  gourd,  is  cut  up  with  a sword  in  the 
presence  of  the  goddess.  The  use  of  a sword  is 


142 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


indispensable, — if  only  in  the  offering  of  a mock 
sacrifice  ; and  some  Hindu  sects  in  Rajputana  and 
Nepal  observe  the  custom  of  worshipping  the 
ancient  implements  of  war  at  this  time.  The 
sword  is  also  one  of  the  symbols  of  Durga,  and  is 
worshipped  along  with  her. 

There  is  a special  hour  for  the  offering  of  sacri- 
fices, and  this  hour  may  vary  from  year  to  year,  as 
it  has  to  be  determined  by  astronomical  calculations. 
Such  is  the  case  also  with  the  hours  of  the  morning 
and  evening  worship.  For  example,  in  the  year  1913 
the  exact  time  for  the  commencement  of  the  morning 
worship  was  fifty-one  minutes,  forty-three  seconds 
past  nine,  on  the  day  of  Mahashtami,  while  the  time 
for  beginning  the  evening  worship  was  37  minutes,  13 
seconds  past  eleven.  At  these  precise  moments  it  is 
believed  that  the  spirit  of  the  goddess  lights  upon 
the  image  for  a very  brief  space  of  time — “ as  long 
as  a mustard  seed  can  stand  on  the  pointed  edge  of 
a cow’s  horn.”  This  phrase,  stripped  of  ornament, 
amounts  really  to  a nonentity,  but  to  the  mind  of 
believers  it  does  signify  a little  fraction  of  a moment, 
which  the  pious  Hindu  tries  spasmodically  to  seize 
in  order  to  offer  in  it  his  devoutest  prayers  to  the 
goddess.  The  hours  of  worship  are  given  in  every 
reliable  Panjika  or  almanac,  and  are  calculated  and 
published  several  months  in  advance.  Due  allowance 
is  made  for  the  different  hours  of  meridian  at 


DURGA  PUJA 


143 


different  places  in  India,  and  the  utmost  punctual- 
ity is  observed  in  the  commencement  of  the  holy 
service,  morning  and  evening,  on  each  of  the  three 
successive  days  of  the  Puja.  Similarly  the  strictest 
accuracy  is  observed  in  the  repetition  of  the  holy 
texts  by  the  priests,  two  or  more  of  whom  associate 
together  in  conducting  the  worship,  each  having  a 
copy  of  the  sacred  book  open  before  him,  in  order 
that  each  may  supply  an  omission  or  correct  a mis- 
pronunciation made  by  the  reciting  priest.  For  the 
belief  is  that  if  in  the  repetition  of  a text  or  prayer 
the  slightest  error  should  take  place,  though  it  be 
in  the  accidental  omission  or  mispronunciation  of  a 
single  syllable,  a dire  calamity  is  sure  to  befall  the 
worshipper  or  his  household.  After  each  puja  pre- 
scribed for  the  day,  the  inmates  of  the  house  and 
their  friends  and  guests  sit  together  and  partake  of 
the  prasad , the  gentlemen  dining  separately  from  the 
ladies,  and  generally  at  an  earlier  hour.  In  the 
houses  of  the  rich  the  prasad  consists  of  the  choicest 
delicacies,  and  the  company  sitting  together  at  a 
meal  numbers  hundreds.  In  fact  the  feasting  is 
continuous  from  midday  to  midnight  on  each  of  the 
three  days  of  the  puja  season,  a fresh  batch  taking 
the  place  of  one  rising  from  a meal.  The  guests 
invited  to  a Puja  have  not  only  the  privilege  of 
enjoying  their  host’s  dinner,  but  have  also  the 
corresponding  obligation  of  majking  an  offering  to 


144 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


the  goddess,  and  this  offering  is  usually  a cash 
present,  which  is  very  convenient  to  both  parties. 
For  the  cash  thus  collected  is  the  property  of  the 
house  owner,  not  of  the  priest,  who  only  receives 
his  stipulated  fee,  with  perhaps  a share  of  the  offer- 
ings in  kind. 

The  Durga  Puja,  as  a puja,  concludes  at  a fixed 
hour  of  the  night  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  season. 
On  the  tenth  day,  which  is  called  Vijaya  Dashami 
or  Dasehra,  the  assemblage  of  images  is  ceremoni- 
ously dipped  into  a river,  this  ceremony  being 
known  as  Bisarjan.  At  sunset,  the  images  are 
borne  to  the  river  bank  on  the  shoulder  of  the 
youths  of  the  household  or  of  the  neighbourhood, 
with  a long  train  of  followers  and  bands  of  musi- 
cians, till  the  river  bank  is  reached  and  a halt  is 
made.  The  images  are  then  placed  on  board  a 
boat  and  rowed  to  a spot  a few  yards  away  from  the 
bank  where  the  water  is  deep  enough  for  them  to  be 
completely  immersed.  The  images  are  then  strip- 
ped of  the  valuable  part  of  their  dress  and  orna- 
ments, and  plunged  into  the  water  to  the  accompa- 
niment of  enthusiastic  shouts  of  ‘ Victory  to  the 
Mother  !’  Thereafter  friends  visit  friends  to  wish 
one  another  good  luck  and  happiness,  and  at  each 
house  thus  visited  they  are  requested  to  partake  of 
some  sweets  that  are  offered  to  them.  The  ex- 
change of  compliments  with  friends  abroad  is  effect- 


i 


DURGA  PUJA 


145 


ed  through  that  modern  institution,  the  post,  and 
wherever  one  may  happen  to  be,  or  however  long 
the  correspondence  may  have  been  interrupted,  the 
day  of  Vijaya  Dashami  is  the  day  of  all  days  on 
which  a Hindu  most  expects  to  hear  from  absent 
friends. 


XV 


Kojagara  Lakshmi  Puja 

Lakshmi  is  now  the  popular  Hindu  goddess  of 
wealth  and  its  attendant  blessings,  and  the  worship 
of  her,  in  conjunction  with  her  spouse  Narayan, 
sometimes  forms  a preliminary  to  certain  religious 
ceremonies  or  to  certain  social  functions,  such  as 
the  feeding  of  Brahmans.  Originally,  however, 
Lakshmi  was  a mere  abstract  conception,  devoid  of 
form  and  figure,  and  denoting  simply  ‘ good  fortune 
and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  the  name  is  used  in  the 
Rigveda,  the  oldest  religious  book  of  the  Hindus. 
Later  writers  represent  her  as  having  sprung  from 
the  froth  of  the  sea  at  the  time  of  the  “ churning  of 
the  ocean  ” by  the  gods  and  giants, — an  event 
which  forms  the  subject  of  a famous  Hindu  legend 
adumbrating  the  manner  in  which  were  created 
some  of  the  objects  that  subsequently  find  a cons- 
picuous place  in  Puranic  mythology.  This  Hindu 
legend  of  the  Samudra  manthan,  as  it  is  called,  is 
mentioned  in  the  opening  chapters  of  the  Ramayana 
and  the  Mahabharata,  and  in  dim  outline  it  is  similar 
to  the  classical  legend  of  the  war  between  the  gods 


KOJAGARA  LAKSHMI  PUJA 


147 


and  the  giants.  When  Lakshmi  first  “ arose  from 
out  the  azure  main  ” in  all  the  bloom  of  ethereal 
beauty,  Vishnu  took  her  as  his  bride,  and  it  is  as  the 
consort  of  Vishnu  that  Lakshmi  is  still  conceived 
by  the  bulk  of  the  Hindu  people.  The  Vaishnavas 
are  the  only  sect  that  disclaim  this  relationship,  for 
they  admit  no  females  in  their  pantheon,  and  repu- 
diate and  even  ridicule  the  idea  that  Vishnu  was 
ever  “ married.”  Some  Vaishnavas,  however,  hold 
that  Lakshmi  is  an  ideal  personification  of  the  deity’s 
more  feminine  attributes— the  softer  emotions  of 
sympathy,  love,  and  compassion  ; while  the  more 
philosophical  of  them  contend  that  the  Hindu  gods 
are  represented  with  consorts  only  to  typify  the 
mystical  union  of  the  two  eternal  principles  of 
generation— Spirit  and  Matter,  Purnsha  and  Pra- 
kriti , which  are  involved  in  the  very  conception  of  a 
created  universe.  These  theological  controversies 
have  long  become  echoes  of  the  past,  and  Lakshmi 
is  now  worshipped  as  the  goddess  of  wealth  and 
good  fortune  by  sectarians  and  non-sectarians  alike. 
Doctrine  and  dogma  have  lost  their  significance  in 
the  face  of  rite  and  ritual.  Differences  between  sect 
and  sect  are  becoming  more  and  more  merged  in 
common  forms  of  worship.  Ever  since  wealth  be- 
came an  object  of  value  in  the  eyes  of  man  in  society, 
Lakshmi  has  been  an  object  of  pious  worship  by 
Hindus  of  every  caste  and  creed,  and  especially  by 


148 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


the  Vaishyas  or  trading  clssses  of  the  community. 
For,  as  has  already  been  pointed  out  in  an  earlier 
section,  different  Hindu  festivals  are  especially 
favoured  by  different  Hindu  castes,  though  all  are 
allowed  to  join  in  the  common  worship  and  make 
offerings  to  the  god  or  goddess  of  the  day. 

Kojagara  Lakshmi  Puja  is  held  on  the  night  of 
the  full  moon  following  the  Durga  Puja,  that  is,  five 
days  after  the  Vijaya  Dashami,  and  it  may  hence 
be  regarded  as  a sort  of  sequel  to  the  Durga  Puja. 
It  marks  the  close  of  a succession  of  religious  forms 
and  ceremonies  that  are  held  from  day  to  day  prac- 
tically through  the  entire  light  half  of  Kuar  or 
Aswin — the  whole  fortnight  being  therefore  called 
the  Devi-Paksha,  or  the  fortnight  devoted  to  the 
worship  of  Devi  or  Shakti.  The  Devi  Paksha  in- 
variably commences  just  after  the  close  of  the  Pitri 
Paksha,  and  this  is  one  proof  that  among  the  Hindus 
the  worship  of  ancestors  precedes  the  worship  of  the 
gods.  Lakshmi  is  worshipped  again  in  a more  ela- 
borate form  a fortnight  later, — on  the  night  of  the 
Diwali  ; and  hence  the  present  puja  is  called  Koja- 
gara Lakshmi  Puja,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  latter 
worship,  which  is  called  the  Dwipannit  Lakshmi 
Puja,  or  one  accompanied  by  an  illumination.  The 
term  “ Kojagara  ” is  an  abbreviation  of  a short 
Sanskrit  sentence — 


KOJAGARA  LAKSHMI  PUJA 


149 


which  means,  “ Who,  after  drinking  cocoanut  juice, 
is  awake  in  this  lower  world?” 

This  is  a question  which  Lakshmi  is  believed  to 
put  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  this  globe,  as  she  makes 
her  annual  circuit  round  the  earth  on  this  holy 
night  ; and  she  is  believed  to  bestow  her  favours  on 
any  one  whom  she  finds  awake  : hence  the  drinking 
of  cocoanut  juice  and  the  keeping  of  a vigil  are 
customary  on  this  day.  But  the  vigil  is  not  all  : it 
is  invariably  preceded  by  a simple  form  of  devotion, 
intended  probably  to  solicit  the  blessed  visitation. 
A figure  of  the  goddess  is  painted  in  red  ochre  or 
sandal  paste  on  the  side  of  a small  brass  or  copper 
jug,  which  is  placed  in  a room  or  courtyard  under 
a small  leafy  canopy,  and  while  the  priest  repeats 
the  holy  texts,  the  oldest  married  lady  of  the  house, 
who  has  been  keeping  a fast  on  behalf  of  the  whole 
household,  makes  offerings  of  flowers,  fruits,  and 
sweets  to  the  goddess.  The  offerings  special  to 
Lakshmi  on  this  occasion  are  the  cocoanut  and 
chiura  ( or  rice  flattened  by  crushing ) which  are 
afterwards  distributed  among  the  worshippers  as 
prasad . The  bird  sacred  to  Lakshmi  is  the  owl — 
the  screech-owl,  not  the  hoot-owl,  the  latter  being 
regarded  as  a bird  of  ill-omen  by  the  Hindus  as 
by  other  people.  The  owl  is  also  the  vahan  of 
Lakshmi.  The  grain  sacred  to  Lakshmi  is  the 
paddy,  and  cowrie  shells  are  her  favourite  play- 


150 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


things,  probably  in  reminiscence  of  her  original  home 
amid  the  waters  of  the  ocean.  But  more  probably 
the  association  of  the  cowrie  shell  with  the  god- 
dess Lakshmi  has  an  economic  origin.  In  the 
earliest  times  the  cowrie  shell  was  probably  the 
only  currency  in  India,  and  in  the  sacred  books 
of  the  Hindus  the  values  of  things  are  frequently 
given  in  cowries.  Gifts  in  cowrie  shells  are  also 
permitted  in  cases  where  gifts  in  kind  are  not 
easily  procurable  or  are  prohibitive  according 
to  the  donor’s  means.  For  these  reasons  a Hindu 
regards  the  cowrie  as  sacred,  and  would  never 
defile  it  in  any  way,  such  as  by  touching  it  with  his 
foot,  as  this  is  supposed  to  offend  Lakshmi.  There 
are  various  things  which  Lakshmi  favours,  and 
various  others  which  she  strongly  disapproves,  and 
Hindu  girls  in  educated  families  are  taught  to  learn 
these  with  particular  care,  in  order  that  when  they 
grow  up  to  be  mistresses  of  households  they  might 
be  assured  of  unbroken  happiness  and  prosperity 
by  virtue  of  their  habitual  observance  of  these 
supposed  commandments  of  Lakshmi.  Among  other 
things,  talking  in  a loud  voice,  swallowing  food  in 
large  mouthfuls  or  with  strong  avidity,  walking  with 
a hasty  gait,  sitting  across  the  threshold  of  a door 
or  at  the  entrance  to  a passage,  talking  or  listening 
to  scandal,  want  of  personal  cleanliness,  picking 
quarrels,  laziness,  prodigality,  are  vices  which  Laksh- 


KOJAGARA  LAKSHMI  PUJA 


151 


mi  looks  on  with  special  abhorrence  in  a female. 
On  the  other  hand,  she  promises  never  to  desert  a 
woman  who  always  keeps  herself  and  her  house 
scrupulously  clean  ; who  is  well-versed  in,  and  who 
can  perform  with  her  own  hands,  all  the  domestic 
duties  pertaining  to  a Hindu  household  ; who  speaks 
in  a sweet  and  low  voice,  walks  with  slow  and 
noiseless  steps,  and  laughs  an  inaudible  laugh  ; who 
reverences  her  elders  and  her  gods,  paying  honour 
wherever  honour  is  due  ; who  never  sits  idle  for 
one  moment,  finding  an  hour  for  every  work  and  a 
work  for  every  hour ; who  daily  lays  by  a little 
store  for  the  morrow’s  use,  spending  what  she  can 
for  the  present  day ; who  rises  from  sleep  with  the 
dawn  and  lights  the  lamp  just  at  nightfall.  These 
wise  precepts  are  strung  together  in  the  form  of  a 
metrical  hymn  to  Lakshmi,  and  this  hymn  is  recited 
or  chanted  on  the  evening  of  the  Puja  in  the 
presence  of  the  female  members  of  the  household 
seated  together.  The  conch  shell  is  the  favourite 
instrument  of  Lakshmi, — probably  another  remi- 
niscence of  her  ocean  home  ; and  it  is  one  of  the 
daily  duties  of  a Hindu  matron  to  sound  the  conch 
shell  in  honour  of  Lakshmi  just  after  lighting  the 
house  lamp  at  dusk.  The  first  place  where  the 
evening  lamp  is  lighted  in  a Hindu  house,  is  the 
store-room,  where  also  the  conch  shell  is  sounded, 
and  the  reason  of  this  obviously  is  that  all  the  store 


152 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


is  taken  to  be  the  gift  of  Lakshmi,  and  that  by 
doing  her  honour  amid  these  surroundings  she  is 
likely  to  grant  continuance  to  her  gifts  and  also  to 
bestow  her  blessings  in  greater  abundance. 

Lakshmi  is  also  called  by  the  name  of  Vara- 
Lakshmi,  in  allusion  to  the  power,  credited  by  her 
votaries,  of  granting  boons  solicited  by  her  wor- 
shippers. Hindu  artists  represent  Lakshmi  as  a 
maiden  of  peerless  beauty,  seated  on  a full-blown 
lotus  floating  in  water,  with  an  elephant  on  each 
side  of  her,  pouring  water  over  her  head  from 
golden  goblets  held  aloft  in  their  trunks.  Her  head 
is  adorned  with  a crown,  her  neck  hung  routad  with  a 
wreath  of  never-fading  flowers — the  gift  of  the  Ocean 
— and  her  smooth  round  arms  decked  with  heavenly 
gems  of  surpassing  brilliance  which  she  has  taken 
out  of  her  “ treasures  of  the  deep.”  She  is  some- 
times represented  with  four  arms,  but  since  she  is 
also  the  goddess  of  beauty  she  is  generally  depicted 
with  only  two.  In  one  hand  she  holds  a lotus  bloom, 
the  flower  she  holds  dear  above  all  others  ; in  the 
other,  either  a conch  shell  or  a sheaf  of  paddy, 
Lakshmi  is,  and  has  ever  been,  a household  deity, 
and  she  has  therefore  no  temples  raised  to  her  in 
any  part  of  India;  but  being  the  goddess  of  abund- 
ance and  prosperity,  she  continues  to  be  the  object 
of  fervent  adoration  by  the  female  folk  of  the  entire 
Hindu  community. 


XVI 


Diwali  op  Dip  Malika 

Diwali,  like  its  predecessor  Durga  Puja  or 
Dasehra,  is  not  really  a single  festival,  but  consists 
of  a succession  of  celebrations  extending  over  a 
number  of  days  ; but,  unlike  Dasehra,  the  Diwali 
celebrations  are  different  in  form  and  bear  different 
names  from  day  to  day.  The  order  of  the  Diwali 
series  is  as  follows  : — Narak  Chaturdashi,  Diwali 
proper,  Jamghat  and  Bhratri  Dwitiya.  The  Dasehra 
observances  are  all  grouped  round  a common  centre, 
whereas  those  of  the  Diwali  shift  their  point  of 
convergence  from  one  to  another  object  of  worship 
or  veneration,  and  are  members  of  one  series  only 
in  so  far  as  they  follow  one  another  in  quick  suc- 
cession in  the  same  week.  The  Dasehra  is  properly 
a festival  of  the  Kshattriyas  or  the  warrior  caste ; 
the  Diwali  is  strictly  a festival  of  the  Vaishyas 
or  the  trading  classes.  The  Dasehra  is,  or  at  least 
was  originally,  a rural  festival,  connected  with  the 
cutting  of  the  harvest ; the  Diwali  was  primarily 
an  urban  festival,  for  the  obvious  reason  that  the 
mercantile  classes  have  always  constituted  the  bulk 


154 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


of  city  populations.  But  there  are  a few  marked 
points  of  resemblance  between  these  two  festivals, 
due  probably  to  their  intrinsic  importance.  As 
in  the  Dasehra  so  in  the  Diwali,  a mixed  variety 
of  social  customs  and  observances  have  clustered 
round  the  chief  religious  ceremony  of  the  season, 
and  in  both  cases  the  religious  growths  have 
been  overborne  by  a weight  of  parasitical  forms, 
entirely  unconnected  with  religion.  The  Diwali 
has  again,  like  the  Dasehra,  assumed  a dual  aspect ; 
for  as  in  the  Dasehra  we  have  the  worship  of  Durga 
and  the  Ram  Lila  taking  place  side  by  side,  so  in 
the  Diwali,  the  worship  of  Kali  and  the  worship  of 
Lakshmi  are  held  simultaneously  on  the  same  night, 
though  not  perhaps  under  the  same  roof. 

The  Diwali  season  commences  on  the  fourteenth 
day  of  the  dark  fortnight  of  Kartik  (October- 
November),  this  fourteenth  day  being  called  Narak 
Chaturdashi,  because  it  commemorates  the  victory 
of  Krishna  over  the  demon  Narakasura.  The  legend 
of  Narakasura  is  contained  in  the  Bhagvata , the 
Kalika  Pur  ana , and  other  mythologies  of  the  same 
period.  According  to  these,  Narakasura  was  a fear- 
ful demon  dwelling  in  the  country  called  Prag- 
jyotisha,  which  some  authorities  identify  with  the 
western  portion  of  modern  Assam.  This  demon 
carried  off  the  ear-rings  of  Aditi,  the  mother  of  the 
gods.  The  gods  thereupon  declared  war  against 


DIWALI  OR  DIP  MALIKA 


155 


the  demon,  but  were  unable  to  make  a stand  against 
him,  and  so  they  appealed  to  Krishna  for  help. 
Krishna  fought  with  the  demon,  slew  him,  and 
brought  back  the  stolen  jewels  in  triumph.  According 
to  another  version,  which  is  more  popular,  Naraka- 
sura  carried  off  the  daughter  of  Vishwakarma,  the 
architect  of  the  gods,  and  insulted  her.  The  demon 
had  been  a notorious  kidnapper  of  girls,  and  he 
had  been  in  the  habit  of  seizing  and  carrying  off 
any  beautiful  damsel  that  caught  his  fancy.  In  this 
way  he  had  made  for  himself  a prodigious  harem  of 
sixteen  thousand  mistresses.  And  now  he  began  to 
cast  profligate  eyes  on  the  daughters  of  the  gods 
themselves.  Nothing  daunted  the  intrepid  volup- 
tuary ; maidens,  princesses,  nymphs,  goddesses  were 
alike  in  dread  of  him.  The  women  of  both  the 
upper  and  nether  worlds,  therefore,  joined  together 
in  supplicating  Vishnu  to  destroy  the  demon  and 
restore  the  sanctity  of  female  honour.  But  Nara- 
kasura,  with  all  his  weakness  for  the  fair  sex,  was  a 
demon  of  great  piety,  and  had,  by  penance  and 
meditation,  accumulated  such  a rich  store  of  spiritual 
merit  that  Vishnu  was  for  a time  not  only  unwilling 
but  actually  powerless  to  do  him  harm.  But  when 
the  load  of  daily  sins  outweighed  his  previous  store 
of  virtue,  Vishnu  gave  leave  to  Krishna  to  march 
upon  his  stronghold  and  put  him  to  death.  But 
since  spiritual  merit,  once  earned,  can  never  be 


156 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


totally  blotted  out  by  any  subsequent  acts  of  sin, 
Narakasura  was  allowed  to  crave  a boon  at  the 
moment  of  death,  and  the  boon  he  asked  for  was 
that  the  day  of  his  death  might  ever  be  commemo- 
rated as  a day  of  feasting  in  the  world.  “ Be  it  so,” 
said  Krishna,  and  then  with  one  blow  of  his  sword 
he  made  an  end  of  Narakasura  and  liberated  his 
sixteen  thousand  imprisoned  mistresses  in  one 
moment.  Such  is  the  legend  of  Narak  Chaturdashi, 
which  is  also  called  Bhoot  Chaturdashi,  probably 
through  a confused  association  of  the  popular 
meanings  of  ‘ Narak  ’ (‘  hell  ’)  and  ‘ Bhoot  ’ (‘  devil  ’). 
Another  explanation  is  that  the  name  Bhoot  Cha- 
turdashi alludes  to  the  darkness  of  the  night,  a 
bhoot  or  devil  being  popularly  believed  to  have  a 
pitch-black  complexion.  The  ignorant  people  call 
it  Choti  Diwali,  or  the  Little  Diwali. 

Various  little  observances  are  customary  on  the 
day  of  Little  Diwali,  and  though  these  observances 
vary  in  detail  from  province  to  province,  they  are 
in  the  main  uniform  throughout  India.  For  ex- 
ample, it  is  usual  on  this  day  for  people  to  get  up 
from  bed  as  early  as  possible,  and  to  have  their 
head  and  body  rubbed  with  perfumed  oil  before 
taking  a bath.  Every  member  of  the  household, 
from  the  baby  upwards,  must  have  this  perfumed 
bath,  which  is  believed  to  cleanse  all  sins  as  effect- 
ively as  a bath  in  the  Ganges.  Even  in  places 


DIWALI  OR  DIP  MALIKA 


157 


situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  this  oil  bath  is 
indispensable,  but  it  may  of  course  be  followed  by  a 
water  bath  in  the  Ganges,  or  other  river,  or  even  at 
home,  according  to  convenience  ; for  the  Diwali  is 
not  a “ bathing  day  ” in  the  same  sense  as  a day 
on  which  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon  takes  place. 
After  the  oil  bath,  the  putting  on  of  new  clothes, 
or  at  least  clean  clothes,  is  equally  obligatory. 
This  is  followed  by  a light  repast  consisting  of  fruit 
and  sweets.  For  the  Diwali  is  not  a fasting-day 
either,  in  the  same  sense  as,  for  example,  the 
Shivaratri.  A sumptuous  breakfast  comes  on  in 
the  course  of  the  day,  the  orthodox  hour  for  the 
day  meal  in  Hindu  households  being  the  hour  of 
noon.  A special  dish  made  of  fourteen  different 
kinds  of  sag  (or  vegetable  leaves)  is  also  customary 
at  breakfast,  the  fourteen  being,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  knots  of  the  Ananta  thread,  symbolical  of  the 
day  of  the  moon.  In  the  evening,  shortly  after 
dusk,  fourteen  lamps  are  lighted  in  and  about  the 
house,  the  fourteen  being  again  emblematical  of 
the  day  being  a Chaturdashi. 

The  most  important  day  of  the  season  is,  how- 
ever, not  Chaturdashi,  but  the  next  day,  the 
Amavasya,  the  darkest  day  of  the  dark  fortnight  of 
Kartik.  It  is  this  Amavasya,  which  falls  exactly 
one  month  after  the  Mahalaya,  that  is  called  by  the 
name  of  the  Diwali.  The  term  ‘ Diwali  ’ is  a 


158 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


popular  abbreviation  of  ‘ Dipavali  ’ (‘  a row  of 
lamps’),  and  the  festival  is  so-called  because  at 
night  there  is  an  illumination  in  every  Hindu 
house.  According  to  some  authorities  the  festival 
was  originally  held  in  commemoration  of  the 
liberation  of  Raja  Bali  from  the  bondage  of  hell 
through  the  intervention  of  the  goddess  Lakshmi. 
The  legend  of  King  Bali  has  already  been  described 
in  the  section  on  ‘ Raksha  Bandhan,’  and  need  not 
be  repeated  here.  The  favour  shown  to  him  by 
Vishnu  who  left  him  his  kingdom  of  Patala,  instead 
of  seizing  his  entire  dominions,  was  done  at  the 
intercession  of  his  spouse  Lakshmi,  whose  goodwill 
the  deposed  monarch  had  previously  won  by 
appropriate  prayers  and  penances,  Diwali  was 
thus  originally  the  worship  of  Lakshmi,  but  later 
on  it  came  to  be  associated  with  the  worship  of 
another  goddess,  Kali,  but  how  exactly  the  change 
came  about  is  now  a matter  of  pure  conjecture. 
It  seems  that  as  Vaishnavism  began  to  give  way 
before  the  advance  of  Shaktism,  not  only  Vishnu, 
but  his  consort  Lakshmi  as  well,  began  to  lose 
popular  favour,  with  the  result  that  forms  of  the 
Shakti  began  to  take  the  place  originally  occupied 
by  the  various  manifestations  of  Vishnu,  the 
Preserver.  Such  changes  in  the  origin  and  signi- 
ficance of  the  Hindu  festivals  are  pretty  common. 
The  Holi,  for  example,  was  originally  held  in 


DIWALI  OR  DIP  MALIKA 


159 


honour  of  Madan,  the  god  of  love,  but  it  came 
subsequently  to  be  associated  with  the  gay  sporting 
of  Krishna. 

The  most  characteristic  feature  of  the  Diwali, 
that  which  gives  its  name  to  the  festival,  is  the 
illuminations  that  take  place  at  night.  Every 
Hindu  house,  from  the  palace  to  the  hut,  is  cleaned 
and  swept  and  whitewashed  or  mudwashed  a few 
days  before  the  Diwali,  and  at  night  the  house- 
tops are  lighted  up  with  rows  of  chirags  or  earthen 
lamps,  the  number  of  which  of  course  varies  with 
the  means  of  the  house-holder.  The  origin  of  the 
Diwali  illuminations  is  contained  in  a popular 
legend  which  seems  now  to  be  losing  ground  in 
popular  memory.  The  legend  tells  us  how  an 
astrologer  once  foretold  to  a Raja  that  on  the  new 
moon  of  Fartik  (that  is,  the  Diwali  Amavasya),  his 
fate  or  end  (kal)  would  come  at  midnight  in  the 
shape  of  a snake ; that  the  way  to  escape  from 
death  was  that  he  should  order  all  his  subjects  to 
clean  their  houses  and  to  illuminate  the  city  at 
night;  and  that  the  king  too  should  place  a lamp 
at  his  door  and  at  the  four  corners  of  his  bed, 
and  sprinkle  rice  and  sweets  everywhere  about  the 
palace.  If  the  door-lamp  should  go  out,  that  was 
a sign,  said  the  astrologer,  that  the  king  was  about 
to  become  unconscious,  and  in  that  event  he  should 
take  care  previously  to  tell  his  queen  to  sing  the 


160 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


praises  of  the  fatal  snake  when  he  arrived.  These 
directions  were  carefully  followed,  and  the  snake 
was  so  pleased  with  his  reception  that  he  told  the 
Rani  to  ask  any  boon  she  chose.  Of  course  the  boon 
she  asked  was  that  her  husband  should  be  spared. 
The  snake  replied  that  it  was  not  in  his  power  to 
grant  such  a boon,  but  promised  to  intercede 
with  Yama,  god  of  death,  to  grant  a fresh  lease  of 
life  to  her  doomed  husband.  The  snake  further 

asked  the  queen  to  continue  her  watch  over  the 
Raja’s  body,  while  he  himself  hurried  away  with  the 
disengaged  soul  to  the  palace  of  Yama.  When  the 
papers  relating  to  the  Raja’s  destiny  were  put  up 
before  Yama,  his  age  was  denoted  by  a zero, 
meaning  that  the  Raja’s  life  had  come  to  an  end 
in  the  natural  course ; but  the  kindly  snake,  who 
had  been  won  over  by  the  flattery  of  the  queen, 
managed  to  insert  a seven  before  the  nought  and 
made  it  seventy.  Yama  looking  at  the  papers 
exclaimed,  “ This  mortal,  I find,  has  still  seventy 
years  to  live : take  him  back  at  once.  ” So 
the  snake  brought  back  the  soul  of  the  departed 
king,  who  instantly  came  to  life,  and  lived  seventy 
years  more,  and  instituted  this  “ festival  of  lamps  ” 
(Diwali)  in  honour  of  his  resuscitation. 

The  above  legend  is,  according  to  some  author- 
ities, of  much  later  origin  than  the  Diwali  festival, 
which,  in  their  opinion,  was  originally  instituted  in 


DIWALI  OR  DIP  MALIKA 


161 


honour  of  the  spirits  of  dead  ancestors.  This 
opinion  gains  weight  from  the  fact  that  all 
Amavasyas  are  days  held  to  be  specially  sacred 
to  the  memory  of  dead  ancestors,  and  it  is  natural 
that  the  Diwali  Amavasya  should  come  to  be 
regarded  as  doubly  special  for  this  purpose,  as 
it  is  the  next  Amavasya  after  Mahalaya,  the  great- 
est day  in  the  year  for  the  worship  of  deceased 
ancestors.  It  is  just  possible  that  the  Diwali 
Amavasya  may  have  been  accorded  as  a * day  of 
grace  * for  the  performance  of  Sraddha  by  those 
who  for  unavoidable  reasons  could  not  render  that 
duty  on  the  day  of  Mahalaya.  Whatever  the 
original  character  of  the  Diwali  Amavasya  might 
have  been,  whether  it  was  a day  of  rejoicing  for 
the  resurrection  of  a Raja,  or  a day  of  ceremonious 
mourning  for  departed  ancestors,  certain  it  is  that 
at  the  present  day  the  festival  is  neither  the  one 
nor  the  other,  but  a day  of  feasting  and  sporting, 
with  just  a touch  of  religious  worship — the  worship 
of  Lakshmi  or  Kali.  This  worship  is  neither  very 
common  nor  well-known  ; in  these  provinces  it  is 
practically  unknown  ; but  where  the  worship  does 
prevail  it  is  rarely  that  the  two  goddesses  are 
worshipped  together. 

The  worship  of  Kali  is  nowhere  more  popular 
than  in  Bengal.  It  is  perhaps  the  commonest  form 
of  the  worship  of  Shakti,  and  has  therefore  under- 
ll 


162 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


gone  changes  of  form  and  ceremony,  growing  more 
and  more  degenerate  at  every  step, — if  one  may  say 
so  without  sacrilege — until  it  assumed  its  worst 
form  in  the  drunken  revelry  of  the  Kapaliks.  The 
goddess  Kali  is  known  by  a multiplicity  of  names, 
each  signifying  a separate  attribute,  but  all  pre- 
senting her  to  the  imagination  of  her  votaries  as  an 
object  of  awe  and  dread.  The  appearance  of  Kali, 
as  she  is  ordinarily  represented  in  Hindu  temples, 
and  as  she  is  described  in  the  Tantric  books,  is  as 
follows  : — She  has  a jet  black  complexion,  and  a 
terrible  gaping  mouth,  through  which  her  red 
tongue  hangs  out,  dripping  with  the  blood  of  the 
giants  she  has  slain  or  devoured,  whose  heads  she 
has  strung  together  in  the  form  of  a garland  that 
she  wears  around  her  neck.  She  has  four  arms, 
in  three  of  which  she  holds  weapons  of  war,  and 
in  the  fourth,  a human  head.  She  tramples  in 
ecstasy  upon  the  breast  of  her  husband  Mahadeva 
or  Shiva,  who  lies  prostrate  on  the  ground,  and  she 
loves  to  haunt  burning-grounds,  roaming  over  them 
with  her  long  and  uncombed  hair  trailing  behind 
her  back.  The  customary  mode  of  worshipping 
her  is  by  offering  animal  sacrifices,  but  goats  alone 
are  now  deemed  enough  to  appease  her  thirst  for 
blood.  Among  some  Shakta  sects,  the  offering  of 
spirituous  liquors  is  also  considered  an  essential 
part  of  the  worship  of  Kali,  who  is  regarded  by  her 


DIWALI  OR  DIP  MALIKA 


163 


votaries  as  the  Universal  Mother,  and  is  invoked 
in  the  tenderest  manner  by  the  name  of  ‘ mother/ 
The  worship  of  Lakshmi,  the  other  goddess  of 
the  day,  is  not  confined  to  Bengal,  but  is  common 
in  every  part  of  India  on  the  night  of  the  Diwali. 
The  form  in  which  the  worship  is  conducted  fixes 
unmistakably  its  character  as  a Vaishya  festival. 
Lakshmi  is  represented,  not  by  an  image,  such  as 
Kali  and  Durga  are,  but  by  a gold  coin,  and  it  is 
to  this  gold  coin  that  the  devotional  offerings  are 
made.  The  coin  is  bathed  in  the  holy  water  of  a 
sacred  stream,  or  in  milk,  and  adorned  with  flowers 
and  sandal-paste  to  the  accompaniment  of  suitable 
forms  of  invocation  and  propitiation.  In  poorer 
households,  a silver  coin,  such  as  a common  rupee, 
does  duty  for  the  gold  piece  ; but  the  worship  of 
the  precious  metals  in  some  form  is  indispensable, 
as  this  is  believed  to  be  productive  of  wealth 
and  prosperity  through  the  coming  year.  The 
account-books  of  the  family  or  the  firm  are  also 
brought  out  and  worshipped,  and  many  people  open 
new  account-books  from  this  date.  A row  of  lights 
is  placed  in  front  of  the  consecrated  coin  or  the 
account-book,  and  lamps  are  also  lighted  in  every 
part  of  the  house,  chiefly  at  the  door  or  entrance  ; 
for  it  is  believed  that  Lakshmi  rides  about  the  world 
on  her  vahan,  the  owl,  on  the  Diwali  night,  and  that 
she  is  naturally  inclined  to  enter  a house  which  is 


164 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


brightly  illuminated,  in  preference  to  one  which  is 
dimly  lighted  or  enveloped  in  darkness.  It  is  pro- 
bably this  belief  that  Lakshmi  makes  a tour  of  in- 
spection round  the  world  on  the  night  of  the  Diwali 
that  accounts  for  the  custom  of  illuminating  houses 
on  this  particular  night  of  the  year.  There  is  a 
beautiful  legend  connected  with  this  nocturnal  tour 
of  Lakshmi.  There  was  once  a Raja  who  had  four 
daughters.  He  called  them  together  one  day  and 
asked  them  who  gave  them  their  daily  bread.  The 
first  three  replied,  “ Your  majesty,  of  course.’* 
But  the  youngest  proudly  declared  that  her  own  fate 
supplied  to  her  not  only  her  daily  bread  but  every- 
thing else  that  she  daily  enjoyed  or  suffered.  The 
king  was  very  much  in  wrath  to  hear  this  undutiful 
disavowal  of  the  royal  bounty,  and  in  his  rage  he 
banished  his  ungrateful  daughter  to  the  woods  after 
marrying  her  to  a beggarly  Brahman  who  made  a 
precarious  living  on  the  charity  of  his  neighbours. 
And  the  princess  and  the  poor  Brahman  began  to 
live  in  the  woods,  subsisting  on  whatever  food  or 
money  the  latter  got  in  alms  from  day  to  day. 
The  Brahman  had  been  strictly  enjoined  by  his  wife 
never  to  return  empty-handed,  but  even  to  pick  up 
any  rubbish  lying  on  the  street,  rather  than  return 
home  absolutely  without  anything.  It  so  happened 
that  one  day  the  Brahman  got  no  alms  at  all,  and 
was  returning  home  in  great  dejection  when 


DIWALI  OR  DIP  MALIKA 


165 


suddenly  he  remembered  his  wife’s  instruction,  and 
looking  about  himself,  he  saw  a dead  snake  lying 
on  the  road,  and  finding  nothing  better,  picked  it  up 
and  brought  it  home,  more  in  jest  than  in  earnest. 
His  wife,  seeing  a dead  snake  dangling  from  the 
Brahman’s  arms,  was  at  first  alarmed,  but  on  being 
told  that  that  was  all  he  had  got  that  day,  she 
was  greatly  reassured,  and  was  also  rather  pleased 
that  her  husband  had  taken  care  to  remember  her 
request  never  to  return  home  empty-handed.  The 
dead  snake  was  simply  flung  on  the  thatched  roof 
of  the  hut,  and  there  it  lay  for  many  days,  and 
nobody  thought  anything  of  it.  Now  shortly  after 
this,  as  one  day  the  king,  the  father  of  this  banish- 
ed princess,  was  bathing  in  a tank  situated  within 
the  bounds  of  the  royal  palace,  he  took  off  his 
pearl  necklace  and  laid  it  on  one  of  the  steps  of  the 
bathing  ghat.  Just  then  a kite  suddenly  pounced 
upon  it  and  flew  away  with  it,  and  in  a moment 
disappeared  in  the  sky.  Flying  into  the  woods,  the 
kite  noticed  the  dead  serpent  lying  on  the  thatch 
of  the  princess’  hut,  and  dropping  the  necklace, 
it  seized  the  serpent  and  flew  away  with  it.  The 
princess  saw  all  this,  and  she  took  the  necklace 
and  kept  it  with  herself,  not  mentioning  the  fact 
even  to  her  husband.  She  could  certainly  recognise 
the  ornament,  and  she  probably  rejoiced  in  the 
thought  that  she  could  now  repay  her  father’s 


166 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


cruelty  with  kindness.  The  very  next  day  it  was 
proclaimed  by  beat  of  drum  throughout  the  king- 
dom that  whoever  could  furnish  a clue  leading  to 
the  recovery  of  the  lost  jewel,  should  be  hand- 
somely rewarded  by  the  king.  Hearing  this  procla- 
mation, the  princess  asked  her  husband  to  respond 
to  the  offer  and  stand  forth  as  a candidate  for  the 
promised  reward.  The  Brahman  naturally  hesitated, 
not  knowing  anything  of  the  missing  necklace,  and 
it  was  only  on  his  wife’s  persistent  urging  that  he 
consented  to  go.  He  was,  however,  advised  not  to 
accept  the  offered  reward,  but  to  demand  the  fulfil- 
ment of  a certain  condition  which  he  was  to  name 
after  reference  to  his  wife.  The  Brahman  did  as 
he  was  advised.  He  undertook  to  restore  the  lost 
necklace  on  condition  that  the  king  promised  to 
grant  a boon  which  he  would  name  after  consultation 
with  his  wife.  The  king  agreed  and  the  Brahman 
came  home  to  receive  further  instructions  from 
his  wife,  who  advised  him  to  say  that  the  only 
reward  he  would  accept  was  that  the  king  should  by 
a royal  mandate  forbid  the  lighting  of  lamps 
absolutely,  even  in  the  royal  palace,  on  the  night  of 
the  approaching  Diwali,  for  that  one  year,  but  that 
the  Brahman  alone  should  be  permitted  to  hold  the 
customary  illuminations  in  his  own  house  in  the 
woods.  The  king  was  rather  surprised  to  hear  this 
boon,  but  he  granted  it  most  readily,  and  the 


DIWALI  OR  DIP  MALIKA 


167 


Brahman  came  home  once  more  and  taking  the 
necklace  from  the  princess,  gave  it  to  the  king,  who 
forthwith  issued  a royal  proclamation  forbidding  all 
illuminations  on  the  night  of  the  Diwali  for  that  one 
year,  throughout  his  kingdom,  in  every  house  and 
hut,  except  the  Brahman’s.  Diwali  came,  and  not 
a lamp  was  lighted  anywhere  throughout  the  king- 
dom, except  in  that  lonely  hut  in  the  woods  occupied 
by  the  Brahman  and  the  banished  princess.  At 
about  midnight  Lakshmi  commenced  her  annual 
progress  with  a view  to  visiting  the  houses  of  those 
who  were  her  favourites ; but  the  whole  world  was 
steeped  in  darkness  that  night.  Riding  on  her  owl, 
Lakshmi  thought  of  entering  the  royal  palace,  but 
the  palace  was  not  discernible  in  the  darkness. 
Both  she  and  her  vahan  were  in  great  perplexity, 
not  knowing  where  to  go  or  how  to  find  their  path 
in  that  dismal  darkness.  Repeatedly  did  she  ask 
her  vahan  to  take  her  to  the  royal  palace  as  the 
one  spot  where  she  thought  there  was  sure  to  be 
light.  But  even  the  king’s  residence  was  buried 
in  darkness.  Lakshmi  therefore  bent  her  way 
towards  the  forest  where  she  discerned,  or  thought 
she  discerned,  a thin  stream  of  light  issuing  from 
a cottage  door,  far  in  the  thickness  of  the  leafy 
woods.  Towards  this  cottage  door  she  hastened, 
and  into  it  she  stepped,  finding  some  relief  at 
last  after  her  darksome  journey  through  the 


168 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


benighted  country.  Now  this  cottage  was  the  very 
same  in  which  the  banished  princess  lived.  She 
had  lighted  a few  lamps  in  her  house  in  the  evening, 
and  had  duly  worshipped  Lakshmi,  and  she  knew 
nothing  of  Lakshmi’s  arrival.  She  went  to  bed  at 
her  usual  hour,  and  rose  next  morning  at  her  usual 
hour,  and  perceived  no  change  anywhere  in  her 
surroundings.  But  as  the  days  passed  on,  the 
king  declined  in  wealth  and  power  and  the  banished 
princess  rose  in  the  favour  of  Lakshmi,  until  the 
splendour  of  her  position  eclipsed  the  king’s  fortune 
completely.  For  Lakshmi’s  blessed  visit  to  the 
lowly  hut  had  the  effect  of  transforming  it  into  a 
lordly  palace ; and  what  was  before  the  lordly  palace 
dwindled  down  into  a lowly  hut,  and  the  haughty  king 
who  had  banished  his  pious  daughter  for  believing 
in  fate  was,  by  the  working  of  the  same  fate, 
reduced  to  the  position  of  the  beggarly  Brahman 
such  as  the  one  to  whom  he  had  given  the  hand  of 
his  daughter  as  a punishment.  This  story,  which 
is  intended  to  illustrate  the  meritoriousness  of  wor- 
shipping Lakshmi  and  of  illuminating  the  house  on 
the  night  of  the  Diwali,  is  recited  as  a katha  or 
parable  in  the  presence  of  the  younger  members  of 
the  household  at  the  conclusion  of  the  puja.  It  is 
a very  old  story,  derived  purely  from  tradition 
perhaps,  and  unrecorded  in  any  of  the  holy  books, 
so  far  as  the  present  writer  is  aware  ; but  modern 


DIWALI  OR  DIP  MALIKA 


169 


readers  of  the  tale  will  not  fail  to  observe  the  strik- 
ing similarity  it  bears  to  the  story  of  King  Lear, 
and  to  recognise  the  strong  impetus  it  gives  to  the 
naturally  fatalistic  tendency  of  the  Hindu  mind. 

The  Diwali,  like  the  Holi,  is  a festival  of  rejoic- 
ing. All  forms  of  innocent  mirth  are  deemed  fit 
and  proper  in  this  season,  and  the  illuminations  too 
have  long  been  looked  upon  as  nothing  more  than 
a form  of  rejoicing.  The  Diwali  is  also,  like  the 
Holi,  a season  for  eating  sweetmeats.  Sweetmeats 
are  not,  in  the  estimation  of  the  common  people 
of  India,  articles  of  everyday  food,  but  are  meant 
to  be  eaten  on  “state  occasions’’  only.  A popular 
6aying  well  expresses  this  popular  deference  for 
sweetmeats, — “ Everyday  is  not  Holi  or  Diwali 
that  one  should  eat  sweetmeats.”  Hence  probably 
on  these  two  days  of  the  year,  the  production, 
consumption,  distribution  and  exchange  of  sweet- 
meats are  each  carried  on  with  a vengeance. 
Piles  of  sweetmeats  are  displayed  in  the  confection- 
ers’ shops  in  the  bazaar ; the  children  keep  devour- 
ing sweetmeats  practically  all  day,  rejecting  their 
daily  dal-roti  with  disdain  ; all  grades  of  people,  high 
and  low,  rich  and  poor,  get  sweetmeats  to  eat ; and 
hampers  of  sweetmeats,  tastefully  arranged,  are  ex- 
changed among  friends  and  relations.  There  is  one 
particular  kind  of  sweetmeat  which  is  not  sold  in 
the  bazaar  in  any  other  season — sweetmeat  toys. 


170 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


The  Diwali  resembles  the  Holi  in  yet  another 
respect.  Just  as  the  immoral  custom  of  singing 
obscene  songs  has  become  associated  with  the  Holi,. 
in  the  same  way  the  pernicious  practice  of  gambling 
has  somehow  received  a semi-religious  sanction  in 
the  Diwali  season.  Not  merely  is  it  not  considered 
wrong  to  gamble,  but  gambling  is  positively  enjoined 
on  one  and  all,  as  a holy  rite  that  pleases  the  god- 
dess Lakshmi,  and  under  this  excuse  it  is  indulged 
in  by  all  classes.  All  monetary  transactions  are 
suspended  in  the  Diwali  season  on  the  plea  that 
they  are  forbidden  by  Lakshmi ; but  probably  the  real 
reason  of  this  prohibition  is  that  all  the  available 
cash  belonging  to  a household  is  invested  in  playing 
gambling  matches,  so  that  none  is  left  for  carrying 
on  business.  Hence  the  taking  of  loans,  the  re- 
payment  of  loans,  the  negotiation  of  loans  are  all  for- 
bidden, and  in  some  households  people  are  so 
rigorous  that  they  abstain  from  cash  payments  of 
all  kinds,  even  for  purchased  goods.  Gambling  is 
further  encouraged  by  a superstitious  belief  that  he 
who  does  not  practise  it  on  the  night  of  the  Diwali 
becomes  a loathsome  mole  in  his  next  birth,  losing 
all  the  store  of  religious  merit  he  might  have  accumu- 
lated in  the  past.  The  low  classes  play  gambling 
matches  in  public  places,  and  on  the  Diwali  night,  as 
one  walks  through  the  brightly  lighted  streets  of  any 
Indian  town  or  village,  one  may  see  shops  and  booths 


DIWALI  OR  DIP  MALIKA 


171 


thronged  with  groups  of  gamblers  seated  at  tiny 
gaming-tables,  the  stake-holder  shouting  at  frequent 
intervals  Ek  lagawe  char  pawai  (‘  stake  one,  win 
four  ’),  to  attract  players  from  among  the  passers- 
by.  Sometimes  people  make  pretty  little  fortunes 
in  this  detestable  game.  Even  educated  Indians 
are  known  to  indulge  in  this  pastime,  and  one  always 
hears  stories  of  fortunes  made  and  fortunes  marred 
during  the  Diwali  season  every  year.  So  binding 
is  this  ancient  custom  believed  to  be  that  even  the 
legal  enactment  against  gambling  is  relaxed  for  three 
days,  as  a special  concession  to  the  superstition  of 
the  Hindus. 

The  Diwali  is  also  the  day  for  women  to  prepare 
what  is  called  Atnawas  ka  Kajal , or  * lampblack 
deposited  on  the  new  moon.’  Lampblack — of  course, 
that  which  is  deposited  by  an  open  chirag  burning 
vegetable  oil — is  believed  to  be  a specific  remedy 
against  various  eye-diseases,  and  Hindu  infants  have 
their  eyelids  painted  with  this  lampblack  as  part  of 
their  daily  toilet.  But  the  lampblack  deposited  on 
the  new  moon  of  Diwali  is  believed  to  possess  magic 
efficacy  against  all  disorders  brought  about  by  the 
“ evil  eye  ” (which  is  technically  called  “ nazar 
lagna  ” ) ; and  since  not  only  little  children  but  adults 
also  may  prove  victims  to  the  “ evil  eye,”  everyone, 
young  and  old,  applies  the  Diwali  lampblack  to  his 
eyelids  as  a protection  against  such  afflictions.  The 


172 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


Diwali  lampblack  is  produced  by  a large  earthen 
chiragy  burning  mustard  oil,  and  the  soot  is  allowed 
to  settle  on  an  earthen  vessel  shaped  like  a bell, 
placed  just  over  the  top  of  the  flame,  the  light  being 
kept  burning  all  night  by  an  extra  feed  of  oil,  not 
only  to  produce  an  extra  quantity  of  black,  but  also 
to  have  at  least  one  lamp  burning  all  through  the 
sacred  night,  which  is  believed  to  be  productive  of 
good  fortune.  The  Diwali  Kajal  is  carefully  preserv- 
ed throughout  the  year  to  be  used  on  occasions  of 
need,  such  as  during  the  sickness  of  a child. 

On  the  Diwali  day,  too,  it  is  customary  for  friends 
and  neighbours  to  exchange  presents  of  sweetmeats 
and  parched  rice  (‘  Khilen  ’),  the  latter  being  a spe- 
ciality of  the  day,  same  as  the  ghughri  is  of  Nag 
Panchami.  Diwali  is  also  the  day  on  which  children 
must  fire  crackers,  and  every  pice  they  can  save 
from  sweetmeats  is  carefully  invested  in  the  purchase 
of  fire-works.  In  the  illumination  of  the  house  it 
is  the  children  again  that  take  a prominent  part, 
and  there  is  much  good-natured  rivalry  among 
neighbours  in  the  matter  of  this  form  of  display. 
The  Diwali  illuminations  are  seen  at  their  best  in 
Benares,  where  the  beauty  of  the  spectacle  is  height- 
ened by  the  situation  of  the  city  on  the  bank  of  the 
Canges,  and  the  unique  contour  of  the  temples  and 
other  buildings  lining  the  river’s  edge  for  miles  and 
miles. 


XVII 

Jamghat  and  Bhratri  Dwitiya 

The  Diwali  celebrations  do  not  terminate  on  the 
day  so  named,  but  continue  for  two  days  longer — 
the  first  two  days  of  the  next  fortnight,  and  these 
two  days  are  commonly  named  Jamghat  and  Bhratri 
Dwitiya.  ‘ Jamghat  ’ is  a rather  unrefined  word 
with  low  associations,  meaning  a £ big  assemblage 
of  men,’  and  the  name  seems  to  have  been  given  to 
the  day  following  the  Diwali,  probably  by  some 
enthusiastic  gambler,  in  allusion  to  the  multitudes 
of  their  own  fraternity  who  gather  round  the  gamb- 
ling-table in  hourly-increasing  numbers  until  the 
maximum  figure  is  reached  on  the  day  thus  fitly 
called  Jamghat.  For  on  the  Diwali  day  itself  the 
throngs  of  gamblers  do  not  attain  their  highest 
figure,  because  various  other  duties  clash  with  the 
uninterrupted  pursuit  of  gambling,  whereas  on  the 
following  day  there  is  absolute  freedom  not  only 
from  festive  observances  but  also  from  the  avoca- 
tions of  business.  The  Jamghat  is  a day  on  which 
all  respectable  Hindu  shops  are  closed,  and  business 
is  completely  suspended.  This  is  really  due  to  the 


174 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


fact  that  the  old  account-books  are  closed,  and  the 
new  ones  not  yet  opened,  and  the  holiday  observed 
on  the  Jamghat  is  intended  to  give  time  to  business 
men  to  check  their  cash  balances  before  beginning 
the  new  year’s  entries.  But  in  gambling  circles  the 
holiday  is  supposed  to  be  given  in  order  to  afford 
time  for  gambling,  and  gambling  is  accordingly  kept 
up  in  full  swing  at  every  hour  of  the  day  and  night. 

The  vulgar  name  * Jamghat  ’ has  a classic  equi- 
valent, * Gobardhan,’  a name  now  falling  into  disuse 
and  passing  gradually  into  oblivion,  as  the  festival 
"which  it  denoted  is  losing  popular  favour  year  by 
year.  Gobardhan  was  at  one  time  a most  important 
rural  festival  celebrated  by  the  cow-herd  caste 
( Ahirs ),  who  occupied  a position  of  consideration 
in  the  village  community  of  ancient  India,  and  some 
of  whom,  such  as  Nanda,  king  of  Gokul,  were  crown- 
ed monarchs  ruling  petty  realms  and  principalities. 
Except  in  such  parts  of  the  United  Provinces  as  are 
not  yet  traversed  by  a railway  line,  this  old  festival 
may  be  said  to  have  become  altogether  defunct.  In 
these  rural  tracts,  however,  far  from  the  influences 
of  modern  civilization,  the  festival  is  still  celebrated 
in  all  its  rural  simplicity,  with  no  admixture  of  ele- 
ments drawn  from  the  polished  life  of  cities  or 
courts.  The  women  construct  a small  mud  plat- 
form in  an  open  place  outside  the  house,  and  on  it 
<they  erect  a tiny  clay  hut,  in  which  they  place 


JAMGHAT  AND  BHRATRI  DWITIYA 


175 


images  of  Gauri  and  Ganesh.  They  also  place  there 
some  of  the  parched  grain  made  for  the  Diwali,  and 
stick  a few  tufts  of  grass  here  and  there  into  the 
mud  platform,  and  then  wave  a rice-pounder  (or 
musal)  round  the  whole,  invoking  blessings  on  their 
relations  and  friends  in  the  following  terms  : — “May 
this  house  grow  like  the  sugarcane  and  expand  like 
the  Ganges  and  the  Jumna.”  The  waving  of  the 
rice-pounder  is  a ceremony  emblematic  of  the  ex- 
pulsion of  poverty  from  their  doors. 

Gobardhan  is  therefore  a purely  cattle  feast,  ob- 
served almost  exclusively  by  the  Ahir  caste  The 
name  Gobardhan  suggests  a point  of  association 
between  this  festival  and  the  early  cowherd  life  of 
Krishna  passed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mount 
Gobardhan,  a little  hillock  or  stone  mound  near 
Muttra,  where  the  god  spent  his  boyhood  in  tending 
his  foster-father’s  cattle.  The  ceremonies  connect- 
ed with  the  festival  are  performed  chiefly  by  the 
womenfolk  of  the  community,  the  male  members 
honouring  the  day  mainly  by  large  potations  of 
country  wine.  There  is  a current  saying  among  the 
poor  that  “ liquor  a hundred  years  old  will  be  drain- 
ed on  the  day  of  Diwali,”  and  experience  has  proved 
that  the  saying  is  founded  on  fact. 

In  other  parts  of  Northern  India,  the  Gobar- 
dhan festival  is  celebrated  somewhat  differently. 
The  women  make  a cowdung  figure  of  Mount  Gobar- 


176 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


dhan,  on  which  they  place  a little  clay  image  of  Krish- 
na lying  on  his  back,  surrounded  by  cowdung  cakes, 
in  which  are  stuck  tufts  of  green  grass, — the  cakes 
representing  cattle,  and  the  tufts  of  grass  standing 
for  trees,  and  the  whole  presenting  a graphic  model 
of  Krishna’s  early  life  when,  as  a cowherd  boy,  he 
used  often  to  lie  down  on  a bank  of  grass  while  his 
cattle  grazed  around  him  on  the  green  pastures  at 
the  foot  of  Mount  Gobardhan.  On  this  miniature 
cosvdung  hill  the  women  place  the  churn-staff,  a 
bunch  of  crested  sugarcanes,  a handful  of  parched 
rice,  and  a lighted  chirag  in  the  centre.  The  male 
members  of  the  village  household  are  then  called 
in,  and  they  bow  their  heads  before  this  Gobardhan, 
and  are  then  feasted  on  rice  and  sweets.  A priest 
then  picks  up  one  of  the  sugarcanes,  crunches  a 
bit  of  it  at  one  end,  and  declares  the  sugarcane 
crop  ripe  for  cutting.  How  confusedly  things  mix 
up  in  the  hands  of  the  Indian  peasant  is  best 
instanced  in  the  case  of  the  Gobardhan  festival, 
which,  beginning  as  a celebration  in  honour  of 
Krishna’s  cowherd  life,  ends  as  a ceremony  prelimi- 
nary to  the  cutting  of  the  sugarcane  crop.  It  is  alsa 
the  practice  for  all  owners  of  cattle,  residing  in  the 
village  or  in  the  city,  to  dye  the  horns  of  all  their 
cattle  on  the  day  of  the  Gobardhan  festival,  and  this 
is  believed  to  act  as  a protection  against  disease  and 
accident. 


JAMGHAT  AND  BHRATRI  DWITIYA 


177 


In  some  Brahman  households  the  only  mode  of 
observing  the  day  following  the  Diwali  is  for  the 
ladies  of  the  house  to  paint  all  door  frames  belong- 
ing to  the  house  with  vermilion  spots,  chiefly  the 
two  upper  corners  of  the  chowkhat  ; but  this  custom 
has  obviously  nothing  to  do  with  the  cattle  feast, 
but  seems  rather  to  form  part  of  the  worship  of 
Lakshmi  conducted  the  previous  night,  for  vermilion 
is  an  object  sacred  to  Lakshmi.  Vermilion  is  not 
only  a symbol  of  matrimony  among  Hindu  females, 
but  one  kind  of  it  is  called  Sri,  which  is  also  one 
of  the  names  of  Lakshmi  herself.  The  door  frames 
are  marked  with  these  spots  of  red,  probably  as  a 
token  of  welcome  or  thanksgiving  to  the  benignant 
goddess  of  wealth.  This  explanation  of  the  custom 
is,  however,  an  inference  or  conjecture,  not  corro- 
borated by  any  scriptural  testimony. 

Bhratri  Dwitiya  is  the  second  day  after  the  new 
moon  of  Diwali.  It  is  a day  specially  observed  by 
women  who  have  brothers, — hence  the  name 
‘ Bhratri  Dwitiya  ’ or  its  popular  form  ‘ Bhaiya 
Dwij,’  which  means  ‘ the  second  day  of  the  moon 
sacred  to  brothers.’  The  brothers  receive  an  affec- 
tionate invitation  from  each  of  their  sisters  to  be 
present  at  their  house  on  this  festive  day,  and 
wherever  the  visit  is  practicable  or  convenient,  the 
invitation  is  as  a rule  gladly  accepted.  If  any 
brother  and  sister  happen  to  be  living  with  their 
12 


178 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


parents,  the  ceremony  of  the  day  becomes  much 
simpler,  as  the  formalities  of  issuing  and  accepting 
invitations  are  necessarily  dispensed  with.  The 
ceremonies  of  the  day  commence,  as  is  usual  with 
all  Hindu  ceremonies,  with  a holy  bath, — the  bath 
specially  ordained  on  the  day  of  * Bhratri  Dwitiya  * 
being  a bath  in  the  Jumna;  but  if  that  be  not 
possible,  any  other  river  is  held  to  be  as  good  a 
substitute,  or  if  no  river  is  at  hand,  a bath  at  home 
is  the  last  resort.  ‘ Bhratri  Dwitiya  ’ is  a great  day 
for  bathing  in  the  Jumna,  and  in  places  situated  on 
the  banks  of  this  river  there  is  always  a mela  on 
this  day.  Both  brother  and  sister  take  their  bath 
and  keep  a fast  until  the  ceremony  of  the  day  is 
over.  This  consists  in  the  sister’s  presenting  to 
her  brother  a new  dhoti  and  dupatta  (wearing-cloth 
and  scarf),  which  he  has  to  put  on  then  and  there, 
and  thus  attired  he  takes  his  seat  on  a carpet 
spread  on  the  ground.  The  sister  then  comes  for- 
ward to  do  him  honour  by  bowing  down  to  him,  if 
the  brother  happens  to  be  elder  in  age  ; but  if  he  is 
younger,  it  is  he  that  bows  down  to  her  and  receives 
her  blessings.  The  sister  then  places  in  the  hand 
of  the  brother  a quantity  of  the  best  sweetmeats, 
and  in  addition  makes  a cash  present,  which  is, 
however,  invariably  returned  with  suitable  additions 
from  the  brother’s  own  pocket.  But  the  most 
important  part  of  the  ceremony  is  the  tilak,  or 


JAMGHAT  AND  BHRATRI  DWITIYA 


179 


streaking  the  brother’s  forehead  with  holy  paint. 
This  is  always  the  sister's  part,  which  is  not 
reciprocated  by  the  brother.  Every  sister  has  to 
give  the  tilak  to  every  brother,  without  distinction 
of  age.  The  holy  mark  is  made  with  the  little 
finger  of  the  left  hand, — for  in  the  case  of  women 
the  left  portion  of  the  body  is  used  for  a variety  of 
religious  functions,  as  we  saw  in  the  case  of  the 
wearing  of  the  Ananta  thread  ; the  sister  must  also 
bend  herself  on  the  left  knee  while  giving  the  tilak  : 
and  the  brother  must  sit  with  his  face  to  the  east. 
There  is  a prescribed  formula  which  has  to  be 
repeated  by  the  sister  during  the  performance  of 
each  tilak,  and  a suitable  form  of  blessing  accom- 
panying the  offering  of  a holy  draught  of  milk  and 
honey,  which  the  brother  sips  three  times  after  it  is 
poured  into  the  hollow  of  his  hand.  The  formula 
of  the  tilak  ceremony,  literally  translated  into 
English,  means  : — “ Thus  do  I streak  my  brother’s 
forehead,  and  thereby  plant  a thorn  at  the  door  of 
Yama  ( i.e .,  make  his  entrance  into  the  abode  of  the 
dead  impossible).  As  Jumna  streaked  the  fore- 
head of  her  brother  Yama,  so  do  I in  the  case  of 
my  own  brother.  As  Yama  is  immortal,  so  may 
my  brother  be  immortal  likewise !” 

. In  Hindu  mythology,  the  river  Jumna  is  indeed 
called  the  sister  of  Yama,  king  of  the  dead;  but  no 
record  is  found  of  her  having  ever  streaked  his  fore- 


180 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


head,  except  in  this  formula,  which  is  of  precarious 
origin  and  unknown  authorship.  Yama  is  undeni- 
ably one  of  the  immortals,  and  Jumna  is  as 
certainly  his  sister;  and  this  imaginary  relationship 
of  the  two  has  given  birth  to  a festival  which  serves 
to  strengthen  and  perpetuate  among  the  Hindus  the 
bonds  of  affection  between  brother  and  sister, 
which,  but  for  this  periodic  renewal,  would  tend  to 
weaken  and  decay,  after  the  sister  has  left  the 
paternal  home  and  made  for  herself  a new  one  in 
perhaps  a stranger  land,  where  other  and  later  and 
^stronger  ties  soon  fasten  her  heart  and  fetter  her 
limbs  too  heavily  to  give  the  housewife  and  the 
matron  many  chances  of  visiting  the  ancestral 
roof  and  reviving  the  dear  old  associations  of  her 
girlish  days.  In  the  tilak  ceremony,  each  sister 
takes  a part  turn  by  turn,  and  where  the  number 
of  brothers  and  sisters  happens  to  be  a pretty  large 
one,  the  ceremony  becomes  an  imposing  spectacle 
and  occupies  several  hours  of  the  morning.  Cousins, 
both  male  and  female,  are  also  allowed  to  take  part 
in  the  ceremony,  and  this  is  really  the  rule  in  all 
joint  Hindu  families,  for  the  Hindu  makes  little 
distinction  between  a brother  and  a cousin  or  bet- 
ween a sister  and  a cousin  in  domestic  or  social 
matters.  Even  brothers  “ by  courtesy,”  such  as  the 
sons  of  one’s  father’s  friends,  are  recognised  as  bro- 
thers on  this  day,  and  are  given  presents  of  sweet- 


JAMGHAT  AND  BHRATRI  DWITIYA 


181 


meat  or  invited  to  the  common  banquet,  or  honour- 
ed in  a higher  degree  according  to  the  degree  of 
intimacy  subsisting  between  the  friendly  families. 

The  tilak  ceremony  is  followed  by  that  of  cere- 
monious blessing,  which  consists  not  only  in  the 
expression  of  all  kinds  of  good  wishes  for  the  bro- 
ther’s long  life,  health  and  happiness,  but  also  in 
the  sister’s  placing  a few  grains  of  unhusked  paddy 
and  a few  blades  of  green  durva  grass  (popularly 
called  Panic  grass  in  English)  on  the  brother’s 
head,  as  an  accompaniment  to  the  blessing.  The 
paddy  and  the  durva  grass  are  the  invariable 
accompaniments  of  a ceremonious  benediction, 
because  the  paddy  is  the  Hindu  emblem  of  prosperi- 
ty, and  the  durva  grass  is  a type  of  immortality — of 
imperishable,  ineradicable  life.  This  form  of  cere- 
monious blessing  is,  however,  only  observed  in  the 
case  of  a brother  who  is  younger  than  the  sister ; if 
the  brother  is  older,  he  does  bless  his  sister  in  return 
for  her  bow,  but  not  with  any  such  ceremony.  The 
hour  for  tilak  is  usually  the  morning,  but  the  exact 
time  of  the  ceremony  depends  upon  the  duration  of 
the  Dwitiya  tit  hi.  There  are  certain  days  of  the 
week,  such  as  Tuesdays  and  Saturdays,  which  are 
considered  inauspicious  for  the  giving  of  tilak  ; and 
hence  whenever  ‘ Bhratri  Dwitiya  ’ happens  to  fall 
on  one  of  these  days,  the  tilak  is  dispensed  with, 
but  the  other  details  are  gone  through  in  due  order. 


182 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


The  most  interesting  part  of  the  programme  is  that 
which  comes  last,  usually  about  midday,  and  this 
is  the  banquet.  Rows  of  cups  and  dishes  filled 
with  the  most  tempting  delicacies  are  placed  before 
the  brother,  who  is  expected  to  do  justice  to  a meal 
that  would  ordinarily  suffice  for  a dozen  ; for  the 
banquet  is  not  only  an  outcome  of  the  sister’s  affec- 
tion, but  also  a token  of  her  husband’s  status  in 
society, — with  perhaps  an  added  element  of  display 
running  through  the  whole.  In  many  cases  the 
sister  cooks  the  day’s  meal  with  her  own  hand,  as 
far  as  she  can  ; but  in  no  case  do  the  brother  and 
sister  dine  together  — no  grown-up  males  and 
females  ever  can  do  so  in  any  Hindu  household. 

The  formula  repeated  by  the  sister  during  the 
tilak  ceremony  is,  strangely  enough,  worded  in  the 
vernacular,  not  in  Sanskrit.  This  shows  that  it  is 
not  of  very  ancient  origin,  or  at  least  that  it  is  not 
taken  from  any  of  the  recognised  sacred  books  of  the 
Hindus.  But  it  is  the  vernacular  garb  that  makes 
the  formula  repeated  with  such  manifest  emotion, 
and  not  in  the  dry  mechanical  manner  in  which 
mantras  in  Sanskrit  are  pronounced  or  mispro- 
nounced by  people  ignorant  of  their  meaning. 


XVIII 

Akshaya  Navami 


Akshaya  Navami  is  the  ninth  day  of  the  light  half 
of  Kartik , and  occurs  exactly  one  month  after  the 
ninth  day  of  the  Navaratra.  Like  the  earlier  Nava- 
mi, it  is  a day  set  apart  for  the  worship  of  the 
Shakti ; but  on  the  present  occasion  the  worship 
does  not  extend  over  nine  days  and  nine  nights, 
but  begins  and  ends  on  the  same  day.  Nor  is  the 
Shakti  worshipped  on  this  day  under  the  name  of 
Durga,  the  goddess  of  victory,  but  under  the  more 
dignified  appellation  of  Jagaddhatri,  * the  sustainer 
of  the  world.’  It  seems  rather  a redundancy  for 
the  same  Shakti  to  be  worshipped  twice  more  after 
the  prolonged  ceremonies  of  the  Navaratra, — once 
on  the  day  of  the  Diwali,  and  again  nine  days  after 
the  Diwali.  But  the  great  difference  between  the 
Durga  Puja  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Kali  Puja  and 
the  Jagaddhatri  Puja  on  the  other,  is  that  the 
former  is  a communal — one  might  almost  say  na- 
tional— celebration,  whereas  both  the  latter,  as  far 
as  the  element  of  worship  goes,  are  more  or  less 
individual,  confined  only  to  particular  households, 


184 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


and  not  joined  in  by  the  whole  community  as  a 
community.  Indeed,  as  in  the  case  of  Kali  Puja  dur- 
ing the  Diwali  season,  the  worship  of  Jagaddhatri 
on  the  day  of  Akshaya  Navami  is  now  practically 
unknown  in  places  outside  Bengal.  But  the  original 
object  of  instituting  a second  festival,  the  Jagaddhatri 
Puja,  and  fixing  the  date  of  it  only  a month  after 
the  first,  the  Durga  Puja,  was  probably  to  give  to 
pious  people  the  chance  of  offering  to  the  Universal 
Mother  the  first  fruits  of  the  late  autumn  crops, 
those,  namely,  that  are  not  ripe  for  harvesting  at  the 
date  of  the  earlier  Puja.  For,  according  to  the 
principles  of  the  Hindu  religion,  no  article  of  food 
is  fit  for  human  consumption  until  it  has  been 
sanctified  by  being  offered  to  a god  or  goddess. 
Even  in  the  case  of  the  individual’s  daily  meal,  it 
must  be  offered  to  the  gods  before  he  can  take  it. 

Akshaya  Navami  is  strictly  not  a festival,  but  a 
mere  domestic  ritual ; it  is  therefore  unattended  by 
any  of  that  pomp  and  circumstance  of  worship 
which  accompanies  the  Durga  Puja;  there  is  no 
interchange  of  friendly  greetings,  no  social  reunion, 
no  gay  or  gaudy  rites,  no  popular  festivities,  no 
public  rejoicing.  It  is  celebrated  in  a quiet,  unos- 
tentatious manner  in  the  privacy  of  the  home,  and 
sometimes  the  simplicity  of  form  is  carried  to  such 
a point  that  the  goddess  Jagaddhatri  is  not  even 
represented  by  an  image,  but  only  by  a brass  or 


AKSHAYA  NAVAMI 


185 


copper  jag  duly  consecrated  by  holy  texts.  Accord- 
ing to  some  authorities,  Akshaya  Navami  owes  its 
origin  to  the  fact  (although  the  fact  in  this  case 
amounts  only  to  a fiction)  that  it  was  on  this  day 
that  the  Sun-god,  Surya  Deva,  worshipped  Durga, 
and  was  in  return  rewarded  with  many  a bless- 
ing,— such  as  offspring  in  the  shape  of  the  fruits  of 
the  earth ; health,  as  evidenced  in  the  fact  of  the 
sun’s  daily  unfailing  course  through  the  heavens ; 
riches,  that  is,  those  gems  that  derive  all  their 
lustre  from  the  sun’s  rays ; and,  above  all,  the 
priceless  gift  of  seeing  all  things  and  making  all 
things  visible.  The  Sun  was  one  of  the  earliest 
Vedic  deities  of  the  Aryans,  and  he  is  still  an  object 
of  daily  worship  to  thousands  of  their  descendants  ; 
and  the  myth  telling  of  the  Sun-god’s  having  wor- 
shipped Durga  is  manifestly  a clever  device  invent- 
ed by  some  zealous  Shakta  to  elevate  the  position 
of  his  favourite  goddess  in  the  eyes  of  rival  creeds. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  the  tradition  that  Akshaya 
Navami  marks  the  day  on  which  the  Sun-god  wor- 
shipped Durga,  remains  a tradition  to  this  day, 
though  as  a matter  of  fact  it  is  not  universally  be- 
lieved in. 

Akshaya  Navami  has,  however,  a sanctity  other 
than  that  it  derives  from  the  Sun-god’s  supposed 
worship  of  Durga  ; the  day  constitutes  an  import- 
ant chronological  landmark,  for,  if  we  may  rely  on 


186 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


tradition  again,  it  was  on  this  day  that  the  Treta 
Yuga  commenced.  The  Treta  is  the  second  of  the 
four  great  ages  into  which  ancient  Hindu  writers 
have  divided  the  entire  duration  of  Time  in  its  re- 
lation to  the  world— -the  first  being  the  Satya  Yuga, 
the  popular  conception  of  which  is  very  similar  to 
that  of  the  * Golden  Age.’  These  ages  or  yugas 
are,  of  course,  as  vaguely  defined  as  it  is  natural 
for  such  immense  tracts  of  time  to  be,  and  to  most 
Hindus,  therefore,  the  Treta  Yuga  is  best  known  as 
the  age  of  Rama,  and  the  Dwapara  as  the  age  of 
Krishna. 

The  special  merit  resulting  from  the  worship  of 
the  Shakti  on  the  day  of  Akshaya  Navami,  is  that 
the  worshipper  is  rewarded  with  the  “ attainment  of 
the  kingdom  of  peace  which  is  free  from  all  toil  and 
trouble.”  There  is  a special  reward  to  be  gained 
also  by  those  who  take  part  in  the  Bisarjan  cere- 
mony, the  ceremony  of  plunging  or  immersing  the 
holy  image  in  water  at  the  conclusion  of  the  wor- 
ship ; and  this  reward  consists  in  the  “ attainment 
of  unrivalled  sovereignty,  the  begetting  of  sons  and 
heirs,  the  possession  of  wealth,  power,  slaves,  and 
the  gaining  of  complete  emancipation  from  the 
bondage  of  sin.”  So  speaks  the  Devi  Purana  to 
the  faith  of  the  devout  Shakta.  The  same  sacred 
book  also  lays  down  that  the  merit  obtained  by 
worshipping  the  Devi  on  this  one  day  is  equal  to 


AKSHAYA  NAVAMI 


187 


the  cumulative  merit  obtained  by  worshipping  her 
for  four  months  continually. 

The  greatest  characteristic  of  this  holy  day — 
that  which  gives  it  its  distinctive  epithet  of  4 Aksha- 
ya’ — is  that  gifts  bestowed  on  this  particular  day 
of  the  year  continue  to  bear  blessings  for  ever. 
Similarly  any  wrong  or  act  of  sin  committed  on 
this  holy  day  never  ceases  to  bear  evil  fruit  at  any 
time.  This  is  why  this  Navami  is  called  Akshaya , 
which  literally  means  4 indestructible.’  A similar 
4 indestructibility  ’ belongs  to  four  other  days  under 
special  conjunctions,  — (1)  to  an  Amavasya,  if  it  hap- 
pens to  fall  on  a Monday, — hence  the  sanctity  of 
what  is  called  a 4<  Somavati  Amavasya;”  (2)  to  a 
Saptami,  if  it  falls  on  a Sunday ; (3)  to  a Chaturthi, 
if  it  falls  on  a Tuesday;  and  to  an  Ashtami,  if  it 
falls  on  a Thursday.  In  each  of  these  cases  the 
day  becomes  4 Akshaya,’  which  is  defined  in  astro- 
logical almanacs  as  meaning  4 a day  on  which  a 
good  or  bad  deed  done  by  a person  does  not  lose 
its  effect  for  sixty  thousand  lives.’ 

The  usual  mode  of  celebrating  the  Akshaya 
Navami  festival  in  Upper  India  is  by  making  gifts  to 
Brahmans.  The  gift  especially  appropriate  to  this 
day  is  the  gray  gourd  (or  what  in  Hindustani  is 
called  petha).  This  vegetable  is  seldom  eaten  as 
a vegetable ; its  only  use  is  in  the  preparation  of  a 
kind  of  sweetmeat  or  jam  which  possesses  nutritive 


188 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


and  medicinal  properties  of  high  value  according 
to  the  Ayurvedic  pharmacopcea.  Sometimes  a gift 
of  pancha-ratna  (‘  five  gems  ’)  accompanies  the  gift 
of  a gourd,  by  being  inserted  inside  the  centre  of 
the  vegetable  in  such  a way  as  to  conceal  it  from 
the  eyes  of  the  recipient.  The  ‘ five  gems  ’ are  gold, 
silver,  copper,  coral,  and  pearl ; and  the  secret 
insertion  of  these  within  a big  vegetable  before 
being  given  away  to  a Brahman  constitutes  a most 
meritorious  form  of  charity,  known  as  Gupta  Dan 
(‘secret  charity’).  But  it  is  not  within  the  means 
of  ordinary  folk  to  earn  this  merit  by  this  rather 
expensive  form  of  charity;  hence  the  common  peo- 
ple observe  this  festival  by  simply  taking  a bath  in 
the  Ganges  and  giving  away  a few  pice  in  charity 
to  Brahmans  on  the  river  bank. 

Akshaya  Navami  is  also  associated  with  a 
touching  episode  of  the  Ramayana,  in  connection 
with  which  there  is  a special  celebration  held  at 
Allahabad.  It  was  on  this  day  that  Bharata  met 
his  brother  Rama,  when  the  latter  was  returning 
home  at  the  expiration  of  his  fourteen  years’  banish- 
ment, the  concluding  portion  of  which  was  occupied 
by  the  conquest  of  Lanka  and  the  slaying  of  its 
demon-king,  Ravana.  Rama,  Sita,  and  Lakshmana 
were  travelling  in  an  aerial  car  ( Pushpaka  ratha), 
which  belonged  to  Ravana,  and  which  had  been 
presented  to  Rama  by  Bibhishana  in  gratitude  for 


AKSHAYA  NAVAMI 


189 


his  having  been  installed  on  the  throne  of  Lanka. 
As  the  flying  car  was  passing  over  Prayag,  Rama 
made  up  his  mind  to  pay  a visit  to  the  holy  sage 
Bharadwaja,  at  whose  hermitage  he  had  put  up  for 
a day  on  his  way  to  the  forest  fourteen  years  before. 
The  aerial  car  alighted  on  the  ground,  and  Rama 
and  his  party  entered  the  hermitage  of  Bharadwaja, 
from  whose  lips  they  learned  glad  tidings  of  home 
for  the  first  time  since  they  had  left  the  wooded 
hill  of  Chitrakuta  and  proceeded  into  the  deeper 
forest  regions  of  Southern  India. 

Word  was  immediately  sent  to  Bharata  of 
Rama’s  arrival  at  Prayag,  and  Bharata  hastened 
from  Nandigram,  a village,  not  far  from  Ayodhya, 
from  where  he  was  ruling  the  realm  as  Regent, 
during  Rama’s  absence.  Bharata  came  to  the  holy 
asram  with  all  the  speed  he  could,  and  it  was  at 
the  hermitage  of  Bharadwaja  that  the  “ meeting 
with  Bharata  ” ( Bharta-Milap ) took  place.  This 

happy  meeting  of  the  two  brothers  after  a painful 
separation  of  fourteen  years,  is  an  event  which  is 
annually  celebrated  with  much  rejoicing  all  over 
India,  and  nowhere  with  more  rejoicing  than  in  and 
about  the  actual  site  of  the  ancient  hermitage, 
where  a group  of  little  unimposing  temples,  standing 
amidst  rather  squalid  surroundings,  marks  the 
place  where  India’s  greatest  rishi  had  his  residence, 
and  where  he  devoted  his  life  to  the  peaceful  work 


190 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


of  teaching  the  holy  scriptures  to  a band  of  adoring 
disciples,  who  at  one  time  numbered  thousands  and 
constituted  a university  of  their  own,  long  before 
Sir  Alfred  Lyall  conceived  the  happy  idea  of  restor- 
ing to  Prayag  its  ancient  seat  of  learning. 


XIX 

Devotthan  Ekadashi 

Devotthan  Ekadashi  is  not  a feast,  but  a fast.  It 
occurs  on  the  eleventh  day  of  the  brightening  moon 
in  the  latter  half  of  Kartik,  just  two  days  after  the 
Akshaya  Navami.  The  epithet  ‘ Devotthan  5 signifies 
that  on  this  day  the  god  Vishnu  is  believed  to  wake 
up  from  sleep,  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word  being 
‘ the  rising  up  of  the  god.’  According  to  the  Puranas, 
Vishnu  sleeps  for  four  months  in  the  year,  from  the 
eleventh  of  the  light  half  of  Asarh  (hence  popu- 
larly called  the  ‘ Sayana  Ekadashi  ’)  to  the  corres- 
ponding day  of  the  month  of  Kartik , on  which  he 
wakes  up  from  his  sleep — the  whole  period  of  the  god’s 
rest  being  called  the  * Sayana.’  The  first  of  these 
Ekadashis  is  not  marked  by  any  particular  celebra- 
tions, except  that  in  some  villages  the  women  mark 
their  houses  with  lines  of  cowdung,  and  observe  a 
partial  fast,  eating  only  fruit  and  sweetmeats  in  the 
evening.  During  the  four  months  of  the  god’s 
slumber  it  is  considered  unlucky  to  hold  any  auspi- 
cious ceremonies,  such  as  marriage, regeneration, ” 
tonsure,  and  the  like.  Even  repairing  the  old  thatch 


192 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


of  the  house  or  re-stringing  the  household  cots  or 
charpoys  is  deemed  improper.  These  four  months, 
it  will  be  observed,  cover  the  whole  of  the  rainy 
season,  which,  in  a tropical  country  like  India,  is  the 
most  unhealthy  season  and  is  popularly  called  the 
Chau-masa,  ‘ the  four  (evil)  months.’  By  a natural 
association  the  most  unhealthy  season  has  come  to 
be  believed  as  the  most  unlucky  season  of  the  year, 
in  which  all  domestic  rites  and  duties  are  forbidden 
or  at  least  deemed  inauspicious. 

Vishnu  enjoys  his  long  sleep,  not  in  heaven  his 
usual  abode,  nor  on  earth,  the  scene  of  his  succes- 
sive incarnations,  but  deep  down  in  the  interior  of 
the  earth,  where  the  Nag-king  Sesha  rules  his 
subterranean  realm.  Sesha  is  an  enormous  serpent 
or  python  having  a thousand  heads,  representing 
infinity,  for  which  reason  he  is  also  called  Ananta 
the  endless  which  name  is  again,  by  a hypallage, 
transferred  to  Vishnu  himself.  This  serpent-king 
forms  both  the  couch  and  the  canopy  of  Vishnu 
during  his  four  months’  sleep.  The  Sesha  Nag  is 
also  represented  in  Hindu  cosmography  as  bearing 
or  supporting  the  globe  on  his  thousand  heads. 
Sometimes  he  is  spoken  of  as  the  ruler  of  Patala , 
the  nether  world,  and  sometimes  he  is  believed  to 
have  impersonated  himself  as  Balarama,  brother  of 
Krishna.  According  to  popular  belief,  all  earth- 
quakes are  caused  by  this  Snake’s  occasionally 


DBVOTTHAN  EKADASHI 


193 


shaking  one  of  his  thousand  heads,  in  the  process 
of  transferring  the  globe  from  one  to  another. 

The  belief  regarding  Vishnu’s  sleep  has  been 
expanded  into  a wider  belief  representing  all  the 
other  gods  as  sleeping  during  the  same  interval, 
and  waking  up  from  sleep  one  after  another  during 
the  whole  of  the  bright  fortnight  of  Kartik , one  or 
more  on  each  day,  until  on  the  day  of  Purnamashi 
(or  full  moon)  all  the  gods  are  supposed  to  be  awake 
again  to  preside  over  human  affairs.  This  wider 
belief  is  no  doubt  the  outcome  of  a popular  gloss  on 
the  legend  relating  to  Vishnu’s  sleep,  and  was 
probably  set  afoot  by  a favourite  Vaishnava  saying, 
* Sarva  deva  maya  Hari ,’  meaning  ‘ Hari  or 
Vishnu  represents  in  himself  all  the  gods it  follows 
therefore  that  when  Vishnu  is  asleep  all  the  other 
gods  are  plunged  in  slumber  likewise.  Whatever  the 
origin  of  this  belief  might  be,  it  has  got  such  a hold 
of  the  theological  mind  that  some  Hindu  almanacs 
contain  a full  list  of  the  names  of  the  sleeping  gods, 
together  with  each  one’s  date  of  awakening  noted 
against  each.  But  of  all  ‘ awakening  ’ days  the 
only  one  that  is  honoured  with  some  kind  of  solem- 
nity is  the  Ekadashi.  The  Ekadashi,  or  eleventh 
day  of  a fortnight,  is  a day  of  fasting  and  prayer 
occurring  twice  in  every  month,  and  is  regarded  as 
a day  sacred  to  Vishnu  ; and  there  are  in  all  twenty- 
four  such  fasts  observed  every  year.  So  meritorious 
13 


194 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


is  the  Ekadashi  fast  believed  to  be,  that  there  is  no 
difference  between  an  Ekadashi  of  the  bright  fort- 
night and  one  of  the  dark  fortnight,  both  being 
meritorious  in  an  equal  degree.  The  merits  ascribed 
to  the  Ekadashi  fast  are  of  the  highest  order  ; many 
of  them  are  stated  in  an  obviously  exaggerated 
form,  but  the  object  of  the  exaggeration  is  only  to 
emphasize  the  value  of  the  merits.  For  example, 
an  Ekadashi  fast  is  held  tantamount  to  performing 
penance  for  60,000  years ; it  is  also  equivalent  to 
making  a gift  of  a thousand  kine  to  Brahmans  or 
feeding  millions  of  starving  beggars,  and  so  on.  It 
is  also  equal  in  efficacy  to  undertaking  a number  of 
holy  pilgrimages,  or  wearing  the  body  out  by  rigid 
austerities.  It  gives  one  eternal  felicity  in  the 
highest  heavens,  and  enables  the  pious  soul  to  attain 
all  its  ends  both  in  this  life  and  in  the  next. 

The  above  beliefs  with  respect  to  the  incalculable 
spiritual  merit  arising  from  observance  of  the 
Ekadashi  fast,  are  based  on  two  legends  contained 
in  the  Mahabharata.  One  of  these  relates  to  a sage 
named  Bhadrashila,  son  of  Galab  Muni,  who  became 
a devout  votary  of  Vishnu  from  early  boyhood,  and 
gave  up  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and  the  practice  of 
the  customary  religious  rites  in  order  to  devote 
himself  whole-heartedly  to  the  worship  of  Hari. 
From  the  same  early  age  he  solemnly  undertook  to 
observe  the  Ekadashi  fast  twice  every  month.  His 


DEVOTTHAN  EKADASHI 


195 


father  once  asked  him  why  he  preferred  this 
rigorous  form  of  devotion  to  the  many  easier  ones 
laid  down  in  the  holy  books  and  declared  to  be 
equally  efficacious.  The  son  replied  that  the  merit 
accruing  from  the  observance  of  the  Ekadashi  fast 
was  literally  infinite  —as  infinite  as  the  star-lit  sky 
or  the  boundless  ocean.  He  had  had  the  good 
fortune  of  receiving  a direct  revelation  from  God  on 
this  subject,  and  he  had,  in  the  same  manner,  been 
let  into  the  secret  of  his  former  birth,  an  account  of 
which  he  then  proceeded  to  give  to  his  father : — “In 
my  former  life,”  said  Bhadrashila,  “ I was  a power- 
ful king  oft  he  lunar  race,  and  bore  the  name  of 
Dharmakirti.  As  a man  I was  a wicked  sinner;  as 
a king,  a hated  tyrant  ? and  in  both  capacities  I 
continued  for  many  years  to  heap  a growing  load  of 
sin  upon  my  head.  One  day  I went  out  on  a hunting 
expedition,  escorted  by  a regiment  of  soldiers.  Soon 
I spied  a lovely  deer  in  one  of  the  forest  brakes, 
and  I ordered  my  attendants  to  make  a cordon 
round  the  animal,  and  never  to  let  the  game  escape, 
on  pain  of  death.  It  so  happened  that  the  deer 
made  its  escape  at  a point  where  I was  myself  stan- 
ding on  guard.  I could  not  blame  my  soldiers;  it 
was  my  own  negligence  that  had  allowed  the  beast 
to  break  loose,  and  in  very  shame  I shot  an  arrow 
after  the  flying  deer  ; but  to  my  further  shame,  I 
missed  the  mark,  andin  a moment  the  fleet  runner 


196 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


had  bounded  away  out  of  sight.  Stung  by  shame, 
I galloped  my  horse  and  pursued  the  fugitive 
game  right  into  the  thick  of  the  forest ; but  the 
sly  beast  was  nowhere  in  sight.  In  the  course 
of  my  hot  search,  my  poor  steed  stumbled  and 
rolled  down  on  the  ground  a lifeless  carcass. 
The  shades  of  evening  were  closing  around  me  and 
enveloping  the  dark  forest  in  a darker  fold ; hunger 
and  thirst  were  gnawing  at  my  bowels.  Benighted, 
bewildered,  bereft  almost  of  sense  and  motion,  I 
laid  myself  down  at  the  foot  of  a tree,  and  when  the 
night  advanced,  and  the  forest  beasts  began  to  prowl 
around,  the  powers  of  Nature  refused  to  sustain  my 
life  any  longer,  and  I expired.  As  soon  as  the 
breath  forsook  my  body,  I beheld  two  emissaries 
from  Yama  standing  beside  me,  and  shortly  they 
bound  my  soul  and  carried  it  to  the  abodes  of  the 
dead.  On  seeing  my  spirit,  Yama  was  very  angry 
with  his  servants  for  taking  my  soul  to  his  region, 
for  he  said  that  I was  absolved  from  all  sin,  in  that 
I had  breathed  my  last  in  a state  of  fasting  on  an 
Ekadashi  day, — a fact  of  which  I myself  had  not 
the  faintest  idea.  So,  instead  of  subjecting  my  soul 
to  torture,  Yama  made  obeisance  to  me,  and  my 
soul  was  forthwith  uplifted  from  the  nether  regions 
to  the  highest  heaven  of  Vishnu,  borne  all  the  way 
up  in  an  ethereal  chariot  specially  sent  down  for 
that  purpose.  And  in  this  celestial  abode  I dwelt 


DEVOTTHAN  EKADASHI 


197 


for  millions  of  years  in  the  uninterrupted  enjoy- 
ment of  felicity  such  as  man  cannot  picture  even 
in  his  dreams.”  Bhadrashila’s  story  made  such 
a profound  impression  on  the  mind  of  his  father 
that  the  old  man  immediately  became  a convert 
to  Vaishnavism,  and  he  too  undertook  the  Eka- 
dashi  observances  as  strictly  and  regularly  as  his 
son. 

The  Mahabharata  supplies  us  also  with  a detail- 
ed account  of  the  mode  in  which  the  Ekadashi  fast 
is  to  be  observed — an  account  which  is  obviously 
one  of  the  many  interpolations  that  mar  the  purity 
of  the  great  epic.  According  to  this  account,  the 
man  who  wishes  to  observe  this  fast  in  the  proper 
fashion,  should  first  take  a bath  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, without  the  customary  application  of  oil  on  the 
head  and  body.  He  should  then  proceed  to  worship 
Vishnu  in  the  following  style  : — Let  him  take  his 
seat  on  a clean  carpet  ( asana ),  after  sanctifying  it 
with  the  prescribed  texts  and  signs.  Let  him  next 
go  through  a series  of  gestures,  and  recite  a number 
of  holy  hymns  in  honour  of  Vishnu.  After  this  he 
should  repeat  the  name  of  the  god  twelve  times 
on  his  fingers,  preferably  1008  times,  and  let  him 
at  each  repetition  visualize  the  divine  image  with 
the  fullest  concentration,  so  as  distinctly  to  behold 
a picture  of  him  “ in  his  heart.”  Thereafter  he 
should  offer  flowers,  fruits,  sweets  and  tulasi  leaves 


198 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


to  the  image  of  the  god,  and  then  bow  his  head 
down  to  the  ground  and  finish  his  devotions.  The 
next  thing  is  the  fast,  which  must  as  far  as  possible 
consist  in  total  abstinence  from  both  food  and  drink 
for  the  whole  day  and  night.  On  the  following 
day  he  should  repeat  the  early  bath  and  the  morn- 
ing devotions,  and  then  feed  some  Brahmans, 
together  with  his  friends,  relations  and  guests, 
before  he  breaks  his  own  fast.  The  usual  number 
of  Brahmans  fed  on  such  occasions  is  twelve,  and 
the  breaking  of  a fast,  called  the  paran,  in  proper 
form  is  only  one  degree  lower  in  importance  than 
the  proper  observance  of  the  fast  itself.  And  if 
both  the  fast  and  the  breaking  of  it  have  been 
observed  in  the  manner  specified  above,  the  reward 
is  “ freedom  from  all  sorrow.”  This  is  a high  reward 
indeed,  but  what  makes  it  higher  still  in  value  is 
that  it  is  both  divisible  and  transferable  at  the 
recepient’s  option.  The  second  legend  in  the 
Mahabharata  illustrates  this  last  point  about  the 
Ekadashi  fast.  There  was  once  in  Shantipur  a 
learned  Brahman,  named  Devamali,  who  was  the 
owner  of  a large  fortune  which  he  had  amassed  by 
various  lawful  means,  such  as  farming,  trading  and 
banking.  But  with  all  his  power  and  pelf,  the  Brah- 
man was  an  unhappy  man  for  want  of  a son.  The 
Vedas  say  that  the  man  who  has  no  son,  lives  his  life 
in  vain,  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  next ; and  the 


DEVOTTHAN  EKADASHI 


199 


feeling  that  the  current  of  his  life  was  about  to  lose 
itself  in  a sandy  desert,  rankled  constantly  in  the 
Brahman’s  heart,  and  made  him  and  his  wife  ex- 
ceedingly miserable.  One  day,  as  the  Brahman  was 
sitting  in  a sorrowful  mood,  the  saint  Narada 
happened  to  come  on  a visit  to  him,  and  on  being 
asked  why  he  looked  so  melancholy,  the  Brahman 
replied  that  being  a childless  man  he  felt  his  life  to 
be  a burden.  Narada  advised  him  to  hold  a Yajna 
or  sacrifice,  assuring  him  that  by  this  means  he  was 
sure  to  be  blessed  with  offspring  even  yet.  The 
Brahman  accordingly  held  a great  sacrifice,  and  lo  I 
out  of  the  smouldering  embers  of  the  sacrificial  fire 
arose  a pair  of  boys,  lovely  as  cherubs,  and  to  all 
appearance  of  happy  fortune.  One  of  them  was 
named  Yajnamali,  ‘ the  child  of  sacrifice  ; ’ the  other 
was  named  Sumali,  ‘ the  child  of  beauty.’  When 
the  boys  grew  of  age,  their  father  Devamali  settled 
his  wealth  and  property  on  his  two  sons  in  equal 
shares,  and  renouncing  the  householder’s  life,  went 
into  a forest  on  the  banks  of  the  Narbada,  to  spend 
the  remainder  of  his  days  in  prayer  and  meditation  ; 
and  his  faithful  wife  followed  him  to  his  retirement. 
In  the  woods,  the  recluses  betook  themselves  to  the 
hermitage  of  Jananti,  a sage  who  was  renowned  for 
his  knowledge  of  the  scriptures,  and  whom  they 
found  at  that  moment  surrounded  by  a circle  of 
admiring  disciples.  Noticing  a stranger,  the  sage 


200 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


asked  him  who  he  was  and  what  his  object  was  in 
coming  there.  The  Brahman  replied  that  his  name 
was  Devamali,  that  he  was  sprang  from  the  line  of 
Bhrigu,  and  that  he  had  come  to  learn  the  practice 
of  religious  austerities  with  a view  to  obtaining 
salvation.  Jananti  made  answer : “ Seek  refuge 
from  thy  sins,  not  in  a forest,  but  in  Vishnu,  the 
lord  of  the  universe,  under  whose  protection  all 
trace  of  sin  vanishes.  No  earthly  creature  can  do 
without  his  protection,  since  he  is  the  fountain  of 
life,  and  the  quintessence  of  all  forms  of  being.  Re- 
peat his  name,  worship  his  spirit,  obey  his  com- 
mandments ; reverence  him  in  thy  heart,  serve  him 
with  thy  hands,  name  him  with  thy  lips, — and  thou 
shalt  steer  safely  across  the  troubled  waves  of 
mortality.” 

The  Brahman  was  very  happy  to  receive  his 
spiritual  guidance,  and  leaving  the  holy  presence  of 
the  sage,  he  repaired  to  the  banks  of  the  Jumna, 
where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  devotion 
to  Vishnu.  And  when  he  died  in  the  fulness  of  time, 
his  faithful  wife  immolated  herself  on  the  same  pyre 
with  him,  and  both  were  admitted  into  the  paradise 
of  Vishnu.  Now,  of  his  two  sons,  born  of  the  holy 
sacrifice,  Yajnamali  grew  up  to  be  a man  of  great 
righteousness  and  piety,  spending  large  sums  of 
money  in  private  charity  as  well  as  on  works  of 
public  utility.  In  course  of  time  he  was  blessed 


DEVOTTHAN  EKADASHI 


201 


with  sons  and  grandsons,  and  lived  a life  of  unal- 
loyed happiness  through  the  favour  of  Vishnu,  in 
whose  honour  he  kept  the  Ekadashi  fast  and  obser- 
ved various  other  forms  and  ceremonies.  His 
brother,  Sumali,  on  the  contrary,  turned  out  a 
knave  and  scoundrel,  and  falling  into  evil  com- 
pany, he  squandered  all  his  money  upon  unworthy 
objects,  and  ultimately  became  a sinful  wretch  of 
the  blackest  type.  One  day  Yajnamali  admonished 
him  in  the  presence  of  the  leading  men  of  the 
village,  exhorting  him  to  abandon  his  wicked  ways, 
but  instead  of  feeling  ashamed  or  repentant,  Sumali 
was  stung  into  a sudden  wrath,  and  in  his  fit  of 
rage  he  slapped  his  brother  rudely  on  the  face,  and 
publicly  insulted  him.  Thereupon  the  village 
headmen  caught  him,  and  bound  him  up  with  chains, 
and  laid  him  on  the  ground,  pinioned  hand  and  foot, 
and  pressed  under  the  weight  of  an  enormous  boul- 
der. But  his  brother,  pitying  his  distress,  released 
him  from  that  torture,  and  forgave  him  the  insult  he 
had  offered.  The  village  community  then  declared 
him  an  outcaste,  and  turned  him  out  of  the  village 
bounds.  Shortly  afterwards,  Yajnamali  died,  and 
as  he  was  being  carried  to  heaven  in  an  aerial  car, 
he  met  a man  on  the  way  who  was  being  ruthlessly 
dragged  by  two  dark-looking  hangmen.  Not  know- 
ing who  the  wretched  fellow  was,  he  asked  the  con- 
ductor of  the  car  if  they  knew  the  man,  and  they  said 


202 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


it  was  Sumali,  his  own  brother.  Sumali’s  unhappy 
fate  deeply  touched  his  brother’s  heart  with  pity, 
and  he  generously  gave  away  a portion  of  his  own 
spiritual  merit  to  his  unfortunate  brother,  whom 
he  thus  released  from  the  cruel  grasp  of  Yama’s 
emissaries,  and  the  two  brothers  then  entered  heaven 
where  they  dwelt  in  felicity  for  interminable  ages. 

These  legends  go  to  prove  the  sanctity  of 
Ekadashis  in  general ; special  Ekadashis  have,  over 
and  above  these  general  rewards,  rewards  of  a spe- 
cial nature  assigned  to  them.  Such  special  Eka- 
dashis are  the  Nirjala  Ekadashi  of  the  month  of 
Jaishtha  or  June,  the  Vaikuntha  Ekadashi  of  Magh , 
and  the  Devotthan  Ekadashi  of  Kartik.  Of  these 
again  the  best  known  is  the  last.  The  first  is  so- 
called  because  it  is  customary  for  those  who  observe 
it  4 not  to  taste  even  a drop  of  water  ’ that  day.  The 
second  is  called  Vaikuntha  Ekadashi  because  it 
assures  the  blessings  of  heaven  to  those  who  keep 
a fast  on  that  day.  The  origin  of  the  name 
Devotthan  has  already  been  explained. 

Devotthan  Ekadashi,  popularly  called  Deothan  or 
Dithwan,  is  now  a purely  rural  festival,  if  the  name 
festival  may  properly  be  given  to  ceremonies 
devoid  of  all  elements  of  festivity  or  mirth.  Like 
the  Gobardhan,  it  has  degenerated  into  a bucolic 
ceremony  inaugurating  the  cutting  of  the  sugarcane 
crop.  In  villages  the  people  paint  the  cane-press 


DEVOTTHAN  EKADASHI 


203 


with  a kind  of  red  paint,  and  light  a row  of  lamps 
upon  it  even  in  the  day  time.  The  owner  of  the 
crop  then  worships  his  household  gods  in  the 
middle  of  the  field,  and  breaks  off  some  stalks  of 
sugarcane  which  he  places  across  the  eastern 
boundary  of  the  field.  He  then  presents  five  canes 
each  to  the  village  priest,  the  blacksmith,  the 
carpenter,  the  washerman  and  the  barber — the  five 
most  important  members  of  the  village  community ; 
and  he  also  takes  five  canes  home.  There,  on  a 
wooden  board  or  low  stool,  two  images,  one  of 
Vishnu,  and  the  other  of  Lakshmi,  are  drawn  with 
ghee  and  cowdung.  On  the  same  board  are  placed 
a little  cotton  wool,  some  fruit  and  sweet ; a fire 
sacrifice  ( agiyar ) is  then  performed,  and  the  five 
canes  are  placed  round  the  sacred  board  a few 
inches  apart,  while  their  bushy  tops  are  tied 
together  into  a tangled  knot.  When  these  pre- 
parations are  complete,  the  priest  is  called  in, 
and  he  brings  the  “ Saligrama.”  The  “ Saligrama  ” 
is  a smooth  spherical  pebble,  of  jet  black  colour, 
of  the  size  of  an  egg,  which  is  kept  in  a large 
percentage  of  Brahman  households  as  a handy 
emblem  of  Vishnu  or  Narayan,  which  can  be  moved 
about  from  place  to  place,  unlike  the  other  images 
or  idols  which  cannot  be  removed  from  the  shrines 
in  which  they  have  been  installed  with  due  cere- 
mony. The  t Saligrama  ’ is  worshipped  by  the 


204 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FBASTS 


priest  with  offerings  of  flowers,  etc.  ; and  then  the 
women  sing  songs  of  praise  to  Vishnu  to  wake  him 
up  from  sleep  and  to  induce  him  to  accept  their 
offerings.  The  knotted  tops  of  the  sugarcane 
are  then  broken  off,  and  while  the  main  stalks  keep 
standing  round  the  sacrificial  board,  their  bundled- 
up  crests  are  flung  on  the  roof  of  the  house,  and 
there  they  remain  at  the  mercy  of  the  weather 
until  the  Holi  season,  when  they  are  thrown  into 
the  bonfire  and  burnt.  When  the  whole  ceremony 
is  over,  the  priest  consults  his  almanac,  and  de- 
clares the  auspicious  hour  for  commencing  reaping 
operations,  which  begin  some  time  the  same  day 
amidst  much  enthusiasm, — enthusiasm  due  not  only 
to  the  prospect  of  a handsome  return  for  the  crop, 
but  to  the  more  immediate  prospect  of  getting 
jugfuls  of  the  fresh  sweet  juice  to  drink.  At  night 
it  is  customary  in  some  places,  such  as  Benares, 
to  have  temples  and  places  of  worship  ( Thakur - 
Dwaras)  illuminated,  much  in  the  same  style  as  on 
the  Diwali  night. 

The  Devotthan  Ekadashi  is  generally  observed  as 
a close  fast  by  all  Hindus,  and  not  only  by 
Vaishnavas.  Some  abstain  from  food  and  drink 
through  the  whole  day  and  night ; others  observe 
only  a partial  fast,  and  take  a light  meal  usually 
consisting  of  milk,  sugarcane  juice,  and  boiled 
shakar  kand,  a kind  of  sweet  potato  which  the 


DEVOTTHAN  EKADASHI 


205 


rustics  call  Ganji, — the  last  two  being  the  speciality 
of  the  day.  The  rules  of  fasting  at  the  present 
day  are  by  no  means  so  stringent  as  they  were  in 
ancient  times.  Several  severe  forms  of  abstinence 
specified  by  Manu  have  become  quite  obsolete  now, 
such  as  the  fast  called  “ Atkrichchra,”  which 
consisted  in  eating  only  a single  mouthful  of  food 
every  day  for  nine  successive  days,  and  then 
abstaining  from  all  food  for  the  next  three  days. 
Another  austere  fast,  called  the  “ Chandrayana 
Vrata,”  consisted  in  diminishing  the  consumption 
of  food  every  day  by  one  mouthful  for  the  waning 
half  of  the  lunar  month,  beginning  with  fifteen 
morsels  at  the  full  moon,  and  ending  with  a total 
fast  at  the  new  moon,  and  then  increasing  it  in 
like  manner  during  the  next  fortnight.  Neverthe- 
less the  custom  of  fasting  is  so  prevalent  in  India 
that,  as  Sir  Monier  Williams  remarks,  “ no  Christ- 
ian man— be  he  Roman  Catholic  or  Anglican — 
not  even  the  most  austere  stickler  for  the  most 
strict  observance  of  every  appointed  period  of 
humiliation  and  abstinence,  can  for  a moment  hope 
to  compete  with  any  religious  native  of  India — 
Hindu  or  Mohamedan — -who  may  have  entered  on 
a course  of  fasting,  abstinence,  and  bodily  macera- 
tion.” 


XX 

Kartiki  Purnamashi 


Of  all  the  six  seasons  that  make  up  the  Indian 
year,  spring  and  autumn  stand  out  conspicuously  as 
the  chief  festive  seasons  of  the  Hindus.  And  the 
explanation  of  this  is  not  far  to  seek ; spring  and 
autumn  are  the  two  harvest  seasons  in  India,  and 
the  population  of  the  country  having  ever  been 
mainly  agricultural,  it  is  natural  that  the  harvest 
seasons  should  also  be  the  festive  seasons  of  the 
people.  Changes  in  form  and  fashion  have  taken 
place  in  the  festivals  from  age  to  age  ; festivals 
have  in  some  cases  lost  their  original  significance 
and  acquired  fresh  ones  in  the  course  of  their 
immemorial  history  ; new  festivals  have  occasionally 
been  added  on  to  the  calendar ; but  the  dates 
of  the  ceremonies  have  in  all  cases  remained 
unchanged  through  these  hundreds  and  thousands 
of  years.  This  is  doubtless  due  to  the  fact  that 
the  ancestral  occupations  of  the  people,  their 
characteristic  modes  of  thought  and  feeling,  and 
the  essentially  religious  bend  of  their  minds  are 
to  this  day  just  what  they  were  when  these  festivals. 


KARTIKI  PURNAMASHI 


207 


were  first  instituted  in  the  misty  past.  For  such 
a people  the  harvest  season  is  the  only  time  when 
it  is  possible  for  them  to  hold  celebrations  of  any 
kind,  public  or  private,  religious  or  secular,  that 
involve  any  outlay  of  money,  as  in  bestowing  gifts 
on  Brahmans,  or  making  offerings  to  the  gods,  or 
giving  banquets  to  the  village  brotherhood.  From 
the  Ananta  Chaturdashi  starts  a succession  of 
festivals,  of  one  kind  or  another,  commencing  with 
the  fortnight  dedicated  to  the  worship  of  ancestors,, 
followed  immediately  by  the  nine  days  of  the 
Navaratra,  and,  five  days  later,  by  the  vigil  of  the 
Lakshmi  Puja,  and  a fortnight  later  again,  by  the 
illuminations  of  the  Diwali,  and  terminating  with 
the  trio,  Akshaya  Navami,  Devotthan  Ekadashir 
and  Kartiki  Purnamashi.  A Hindu  proverb  says, 
“ there  are  twelve  months  in  the  year,  but  thirteen 
festivals,”  and  the  saying  will  appear  by  no  means 
exaggerated  if  we  but  look  at  the  above  list,  and 
reckon  the  number  of  ceremonies  it  implies,  all 
crammed  within  the  short  space  of  two  lunar 
months.  Kartiki  Purnamashi  brings  up  the  rear 
of  this  glittering  array  of  festivals,  and  then  there 
is  a halt  in  the  march.  For  the  next  month, 
Agrahayana , is  considered  very  inauspicious,  at 
least  in  these  provinces,  because  it  was  in  this 
month  that  Rama’s  fourteen  years’  banishment 
took  place.  The  whole  month  is  consequently  still 


208 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


regarded  as  a period  of  mourning  by  the  Hindus 
of  the  United  Provinces,  who  loyally  abstain  from 
all  kinds  of  domestic  rejoicing  in  this  unlucky 
month.  Marriages  are  absolutely  forbidden  in  this 
month,  among  all  castes,  for  the  belief  is  that 
a marriage  held  in  this  month  is  sure  to  prove 
unfortunate,  for  Rama’s  own  marriage  took  place 
in  Agrahayana , and  no  marriage  ever  proved  more 
unhappy.  For  only  a few  days  later,  came  the 
sentence  of  banishment  upon  Rama,  followed  not 
long  afterwards  by  his  wife’s  captivity,  her  second 
banishment  to  the  hermitage  of  Valmiki,  and  her 
final  disappearance  from  the  scene  of  her  woes. 

Kartiki  Purnamashi  is  one  of  those  festivals 
which  have  now  deviated  from  their  original  form 
and  character.  In  the  earliest  ages,  when  the  cult 
of  Shiva  was  the  prevalent  form  of  faith,  it  was  a 
festival  held  in  honour  of  Shiva’s  victory  over  the 
demon  Tripurasura.  According  to  an  old  legend, 
there  was  once  a war  between  the  gods  and  the 
demons,  who  on  being  defeated  appealed  for  help 
to  Mai,  a great  magician,  who  gave  them  three 
towers  of  gold,  silver,  and  iron,  within  which  the 
demons  concealed  themselves,  and  from  these  safe 
coverts  they  carried  on  an  irregular  warfare  against 
the  celestials.  The  gods  feeling  powerless  appealed 
for  help  to  Shiva,  ‘ the  great  god,’  who  personally 
came  to  their  succour,  and  discharged  such  a 


KARTIKI  PURNAMASHI 


209 


destructive  shower  of  arrows  upon  the  enemy’s 
strongholds  that  there  was  not  a foe  left  alive 
among  the  Asurs  or  demons.  The  cunning  magi- 
cian then  gave  them  further  aid  by  throwing  their 
bodies  into  a well,  which  was  situated  within  the 
triple  line  of  fortifications,  and  lo!  the  demons 
sprang  forth  to  life  again  and  resumed  their  con- 
test with  the  gods,  for  the  well  had  been  filled  with 
nectar,  and  the  mere  contact  of  this  miraculous 
fluid  with  the  bodies  of  the  slain  demons  was  enough 
to  restore  them  to  life.  To  outwit  the  magician, 
Vishnu  assumed  the  shape  of  a cow,  and  drained 
the  nectared  well  completely  dry.  Shiva  then 
attacked  the  demons  again  with  formidable  pre- 
parations—-making  the  earth  his  war-chariot, 
with  the  sun  and  moon  as  chariot-wheels,  and  the 
Himalaya  mountains  as  his  bow,  and  with  these  he 
made  an  end  ofthe  4 Triple-towered  demon  ’ (Tripura- 
sura).  This  victory,  according  to  traditional  belief, 
was  won  by  Shiva  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon  of 
Kartik,  and  it  is  in  allusion  to  this  conquest  of  Tri- 
purasura  that  Shiva  is  often  represented  in  Hindu 
mythology  as  a warlike  deity  constantly  engaged  in 
battle  with  mighty  demons.  For  the  same  reason 
Shiva  is  depicted  as  armed  with  a Trisula,  or  trident, 
having  three  prongs,  symbolizing  his  three  attributes 
of  Creator,  Destroyer  and  Regenerator.  A bronze 
image  in  the  Madras  Museum  represents  Shiva  in 


14 


210 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


the  posture  of  dancing  triumphantly  on  the  body 
of  the  slain  Tripurasura.  For  Shiva  is  also  regard- 
ed as  the  4 lord  of  dancing  ’ (hence  his  name  of 
‘Natteshwara  ’)  — dancing  by  male  dancers,  who 
were  at  one  time  almost  as  numerous  in  India  as 
Nautch  girls. 

The  Kartiki  Purnamashi  has  long  ceased  to  be  a 
Shaiva  festival,  and  Shiva’s  victory  over  Tripurasura 
has  become  a forgotten  legend,  rarely  known  even 
to  Hindu  divines,  except  in  so  far  as  it  accounts  for 
one  of  Shiva’s  well-known  names — Tripurari.  As 
has  happened  to  many  another  Hindu  festival,  the 
original  facial  stamp  of  Shaivism,  which  Kartiki 
Purnamashi  bore  in  ancient  times,  was  worn  off  in 
course  of  time,  and  a new  impress  put  upon  it  by 
the  Vaishnavas,  who  appropriated  the  festival  to 
themselves  as  commemorating  the  day  of  Krishna’s 
Ras  Lila, — a festival  celebrating  the  mystical  amor- 
ous 4 dance  ’ of  Krishna  in  the  company  of  the  4 pas- 
toral maids’ of  Brindaban.  Later  on,  during  the 
ascendancy  of  Shaktism,  the  festival  had  a third 
stamp  affixed  to  it,  the  Shaktas  claiming  it  as  a day 
sacred  to  the  goddess  of  the  Ganges,  and  declaring 
it  as  one  of  the  most  important  bathing-days  of  the 
year. 

The  Ras  Lila  is  a subject  which  has  suffered 
much  from  the  criticism  of  learned  commentators 
who  have  been  unable  to  perceive  the  allegory 


KARTIKI  PURNAMASHI 


211 


running  underneath.  The  description  of  this  ‘ Lila  ’ 
is  given  in  the  minutest  detail  in  Chapters  29-33 
of  the  Sritnad  Bhagavata , a religious  treatise  of  the 
highest  authority,  written  by  the  sage  Vyasa,  and 
recited  by  Sukadeva  before  king  Parikshit,  grandson 
of  Raja  Judhishtira  of  Hastinapur,  who  was  one  of 
the  heroes  of  the  Mahabharata  war.  The  descrip- 
tion is  heavily  overlaid  with  sensuous  imagery  of 
the  most  inflaming  Oriental  type,  and  it  is  probably 
natural  that  to  the  mind  of  an  unsympathetic  or 
hypercritical  reader  the  pictures  should  suggest 
voluptuous  thoughts,  and  the  whole  of  the  sacred 
narrative  turned  into  a vivid  sensual  representation 
of  what  such  a reader  would  be  inclined  to  call  the 
heedless  dissipation  of  a reckless  rake.  But  before 
passing  any  judgment  on  the  ethical  character  of 
the  Ras  Lila,  every  reader  should  remember  one 
simple  fact,  which  is  undeniable,  that  while  at  Brin- 
daban,  that  is,  at  the  date  of  the  Ras  Lila,  Krishna 
was  only  a boy  of  twelve,  and  physically  too  imma- 
ture to  commit  those  excesses  which  have  been 
Icharged  against  him  by  hasty  critics.  Even  suppos- 
ing he  were  older,  the  number  of  4 Gopikas  ’ (or 
milkmaids)  he  is  supposed  to  have  dallied  with — 
sixteen  thousand!  — is  itself  too  appalling  a figure 
to  warrant  a literal  interpretation  of  these  so-called 
amours.  The  simplest  meaning  of  the  Ras  Lila  is 
that  it  is  a plain  spiritual  allegory,  signifying  the 


212 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


happiness  enjoyed  by  Krishna’s  followers  in  holding 
loving  intercourse  with  their  divine  master.  The 
sixteen  thousand  Gopikas  represent  the  approximate 
number  of  his  adherents  at  that  date  ; and  as  for 
the  loving  intercourse,  it  scarcely  needs  mention 
that  the  religion  of  Krishna  is  wholly  and  solely  a 
religion  of  love,  and,  as  everybody  knows,  love  is  a 
feeling  the  true  essence  of  which  cannot  be  defined 
except  by  pointing  to  concrete  instances  of  the  re- 
lation subsisting  between  master  and  servant,  or 
father  and  son,  or  friend  and  friend,  or  husband 
and  wife.  And  these  are  just  the  four  types  of  Love 
subsisting  between  Krishna  and  his  votaries — the 
last  being  the  highest  form  of  love.  Again,  the 
happiness  of  love,  according  to  all  philosophies, 
consists  in  its  gratification,  and  the  gratification 
consists  in  union  with  the  beloved  ; and  how  can 
the  happiness  of  such  a union  be  described  or  com- 
municated in  “ matter-moulded  forms  of  speech  ” j 
except  by  borrowing  illustrations  from  the  physical 
world  ? Every  student  of  Psychology  knows  that 
in  describing  mental  processes  it  is  not  only  usual, 
but  absolutely  indispensable,  to  make  use  of  words 
and  expressions  properly  applicable  to  facts  of  the 
material  world.  When  this  is  so  in  the  case  of  such 
simple  mental  processes  as  apprehension,  perception 
or  attention,  how  much  more  so  it  must  be  in  the 
case  of  the  highest  and  most  complex  of  human 


KARTIKI  PURNAMASHI 


213 


feelings,  namely,  love,  by  virtue  of  which  man  rises 
nearer  to  divinity  than  by  any  other  mental  or  bodi- 
ly process.  And  when  to  these  considerations  we 
add  others,  due  to  the  exigencies  of  language,  and 
the  impulses  of  poetry,  and  of  Oriental  poetry,  we 
should  have  no  further  difficulty  in  understanding 
the  true  import  of  what  was  perhaps  only  a sacred 
ceremonial,  but  subsequently  subjected  to  unmerit- 
ed and  rather  irresponsible  criticism  at  the  hands 
of  both  eastern  and  western  critics,  and  of  deplor- 
able misunderstanding  at  the  hands  of  many  Vaish- 
navas  themselves. 

The  description  of  the  Ras  Lila,  from  the  phy- 
sical plane,  has  been  well  summarised  by  Coleman 
in  his  Mythology  of  the  Hindus  (pp.  42-43),  from 
which  the  following  is  an  extract,  with  the  comment- 
ary omitted,  and  with  a few  immaterial  verbal 
alterations  — 

“ On  the  night  of  the  Kartik  Purnima,  when  the 
moon  was  shining  in  her  meridian*lustre,  and  a cool 
and  sweet  air  breathed  around,  Krishna  began  to 
play  a ravishing  note  on  his  flute.  On  hearing  it, 
the  Gopikas  immediately  left  their  several  occupa- 
tions unfinished,  and  ran  out  to  listen.  Krishna 
asked  them  if  all  was  well  at  home,  and  then  pro- 
ceeded to  give  them  some  good  advice  upon  their 
duties  to  the  family.  One  of  the  Gopikas  replied, 
“ When  frenzy  seizes  the  heart,  all  duties,  all  earthly 


214 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


motives  are  overturned  and  forgotten.  If  you 
order  us  to  go  back,  we  are  lame  ; if  you  call  us 
unto  you,  w e fly.”  Krishna  finding  that  their  pas- 
sion for  him  was  sincere,  took  each  of  them  in  his 
arms  and  treated  them  with  equal  tenderness,  so 
that  all  the  happiness  and  transport  which  are  to 
be  found  in  the  world  were  collected  in  one  place 
— in  the  hearts  of  the  Gopikas.  Wherever  they 
turned,  each  found  Krishna  close  to  her,  and  the 
happiness  of  their  love  for  Krishna  was  enhanced 
by  the  feeling  that  Krishna  loved  them  equally  in 
return.  All  of  a sudden — just  as  their  love  was 
tinged  with  this  touch  of  vanity — Krishna  played 
them  a trick  : he  vanished  from  their  company, 
leaving  them  staring  around  in  astonishment  and 
despair,  and  interrogating  every  tree,  flower,  and 
blade  of  grass,  to  obtain  information  of  their  run- 
away swain.  After  a tiresome  search,  they  found 
that  another  damsel,  named  Radha,  was  engaging 
his  attentions,  and  they  became  frantic  with  grief 
till  Krishna,  taking  pity  upon  them,  again  made  his 
appearance,  when  they  worshipped  him  with  flowers, 
and  expressed  their  love  to  him  in  different  actions 
and  attitudes.  All  this  exceesive  joy  terminated  in 
a gay  dance,  in  which  Krishna  multiplied  his  form 
in  proportion  to  the  number  of  the  Gopikas,  and 
giving  each  of  them  a hand,  caused  each  to  believe 
that  he  was  close  to  her  side.  The  exertion  of  the 


KARTIKI  PURNAMASHI 


215 


dance  caused  the  moisture  of  perspiration  to  appear 
on  the  cheeks  of  the  Gopikas, "whose  jet-black  tres- 
ses trembled  over  their  shoulders  as  their  hair  lay 
in  dishevelled  curls  behind  their  heads.” 

The  above  is  a summarised  translation  of  the  five 
chapters  of  the  Bhagavata  treating  of  the  Ras  Lila. 
Even  in  this  brief  summary,  the  language  is  sensu- 
ous enough.  But  the  spiritual  significance  of  the 
whole,  and  of  every  detail  of  the  narrative,  is  not 
very  deep  down,  and  does  not  require  much  effort 
to  grasp.  The  beautiful  full  moon  of  an  Indian 
autumn  s selected  by  the  poet  as  the  time  when 
Krishna  plays  a rapturous  note  on  his  flute,  to  re- 
present the  fact  that  scenes  of  natural  beauty  and 
calmness  are  the  fittest  places  for  the  love-worship 
of  Krishna,  so  much  so  that  Krishna,  as  it  were, 
invites  his  votaries  thither,  and  the  votaries  (the 
4 Gopikas  ’)  respond  to  the  invitation  so  eagerly 
that  they  forget  everything  of  the  world.  The 
4 Gopikas,’  in  the  allegory,  stand  for  the  votaries 
of  Krishna,  who  may  be  of  the  male  or  female  sex 
according  to  recognised  earthly  distinctions,  but 
who,  in  their  relation  to  Krishna,  must  be  represent- 
ed as  all  female,  for,  according  to  the  ancient 
Hindu  belief,  the  one  male,  the  only  Purusha  in  the 
universe,  is  Krishna,  the  Lord  of  Creation,  to  whom 
the  infinitude  of  created  worlds,  especially  his  be- 
loved followers,  stand  in  the  dearest  of  all  human 


216 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


relations,  that  of  husband  and  wife,  such  a relation- 
ship being  in  Vaishnava  phraseology  called  Madhu - 
riya,  which  properly  means  ‘ the  tender  feelings  of 
a passionate  maiden  for  her  love.’ 

The  impassioned  exclamation  of  the  Gopika  who 
replies  to  Krishna’s  advice  by  saying  ‘ when  frenzy 
seizes  the  heart,  all  duties,  all  earthly  motives,  are 
overturned  and  forgotten,  ’ — will  need  no  explana- 
tion if  only  the  word  4 frenzy  ’ is  correctly  interpret- 
ed to  mean  what  it  does — 4 religious  fervour.’ 

The  next  sentence  of  Coleman,  after  this  expla- 
nation, will  come  easier.  It  says,  “ Krishna  find- 
ing that  their  passion  for  him  was  sincere,  took  each 
of  them  in  his  arms,  & c.”  All  that  it  means — and 
it  can  mean  nothing  else  for  a boy  of  twelve — for  we 
should  also  remember  that  the  number  of  Gopikas  is 
put  down  at  16,000 — all  that  it  means  is  that  Krishna 
after  satisfying  himself  that  the  devotion  of  these 
16,000  followers  was  genuine  and  sincere,  accepted 
them  for  his  followers.  The  phrase  “ took  them  in 
his  arms  ” is  only  a graphic  phrase  meaning  ‘ad- 
mitted them  to  fellowship.’  In  Hindi  the  common 
phrase  used  to  denote  an  act  of  legally  adopting  a 
boy  as  heir,  is  ‘ taking  into  one’s  arms’ — “ god  lena .” 

“ Wherever  they  turned,  each  found  Krishna 
close  to  her,  etc.”  How  can  each  member  of  a 
huge  assembly  of  16,000  find  one  and  the  same 
individual  near  to  herself  ? That  is  a physical 


KARTIKI  PURNAMASHI 


217 


impossibility,  even  though  that  one  individual  were 
to  borrow  “ the  heels  of  Atalanta.”  But  interpreted 
in  the  light  of  love,  the  difficulty  quickly  vanishes* 
A person  is  naturally  apt  to  see  as  distinct  an 
image  of  his  beloved  in  every  object  he  looks  upon^ 
as,  for  instance,  Tennyson  saw  of  his  deceased 
friend  Hallam  when  he  said  — 

“ Thy  voice  is  on  the  rolling  air, 

I hear  thee  where  the  waters  run  ; 

Thou  standest  in  the  rising  sun, 

And  in  the  setting  thou  art  fair. 

As  to  Krishna’s  “ trick  ” of  slipping  away  mysteri- 
ously from  the  company , the  explanation  is  that 
true  Hove  must  be  disinterested,  devoid  of  self  or 
vanity,  so  that  as  soon  as  a tinge  of  these  baser 
elements  discolours  its  white  purity,  ‘ Krishna  vani- 
shes,’ i.e.t  the  divine  element  in  the  love  instantly 
disappears.  But  if  sorrow  and  penitence  chasten  it 
back  again  into  an  unalloyed  passion,  Krishna  is 
successfully  found  again,  as  he  is  represented  to 
have  been  by  the  grieving  Gopikas.  But,  says  the 
narrative,  Krishna  was  discovered  to  have  been 
“ enjoying  the  company  of  another  damsel,  Radha.” 
But  what  does  Radha  stand  for  in  the  allegory  ? 
She  represents  a votary  of  Krishna  so  devoted 
as  to  have  become  part  and  parcel  of  his  very 
being,  one  without  whom  he  could  not  rest  at 
ease ; and  naturally  therefore  he  should  prefer 
such  a one  to  the  Gopikas,  who,  in  the  picture^ 


218 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


are  only  her  handmaids.  But  still  they  repre- 
sent the  highest  form  of  devotional  love,  cultivated 
at  the  sacrifice  of  earthly  good,  and  they  are  there- 
fore in  their  turn  preferred  over  other  devotees 
who  seek  to  attain  Krishna  by  other  paths,  such  as 
those  of  abstract  contemplation  or  reverence  and 
awe. 

Lastly,  the  ‘ dance  ’ in  which  Krishna  is  said  to 
have  multiplied  his  form,  giving  a hand  to  each 
of  the  16,000  Gopikas,  is  obviously  not  an  earthly 
dance  of  the  same  type  as  an  Indian  nautch : it  is 
only  a physical  metaphor  intended  to  illustrate  the 
boundless  rapture  felt  by  a truly  devoted  soul  in  a 
state  of  ecstatic  union  with  its  god.  Those  who  have 
ever  witnessed  such  a rare  soul  in  such  rare  circum- 
stances, will  have  no  difficulty  in  understanding 
the  meaning  of  the  ‘ dance,’  and  the  correct  signi- 
ficance of  the  last  sentence  of  the  passage  quoted 
from  Coleman — that  about  the  moisture  of  perspira- 
tion coming  on  the  cheeks  of  the  Gopikas,  and  their 
dishevelled  hair — for  they  will  remember  that 
ecstasies,  caused  either  by  bodily  transports  or 
spiritual  raptures,  always  leave  a temporary  after- 
effect of  nervous  exhaustion. 

The  above  is  the  plain  meaning  of  Ras  Lila  as 
understood  by  an  ordinary  educated  Hindu,  be  he 
a Vaishnava  or  not.  It  is  possible  for  a Hindu  to 
dismiss  all  adverse  criticism  of  Krishna’s  so-called 


KARTIKI  PURNAMASHI 


219 


gallantries,  by  replying  simply  that  Krishna  is  God, 
the  Supreme  Being  Himself,  and  that  canons  of 
morality  which  selfish  man  has  invented  to  safe- 
guard his  poor  worldly  interests,  are  clearly  not 
applicable  to  the  case  of  God,  who  is  above  all  law, 
above  all  morality,  and  not  subject  to  any  kind  of 
judgment.  But  such  a ‘defence5  is  hardly  neces- 
sary in  the  case : that  the  whole  is  an  allegory  is 
enough  to  silence  all  criticisms  of  Krishna’s  so- 
called  ‘ conduct 5 in  the  Ras  Lila,  which  Hindus 
themselves  regard  as  more  or  less  mystical. 

The  Ras  Lila  is  annually  celebrated  in  some 
Hindu  households  in  the  form  of  an  ordinary  nautch 
party,  in  which  little  boys  are  decked  as  Gopikas, 
and  one  of  them  assumes  the  role  of  Krishna,  and 
there  is  music  and  dancing  of  a rude  or  refined 
style,  according  to  the  taste  of  the  actors  and  the 
householder.  This  is  followed  or  preceded  by  the 
worship  of  Krishna,  much  in  the  same  style  as  on 
the  day  of  Janamashtami.  It  is  noteworthy  that  in 
a Ras  Lila  performance  it  is  customary  to  erect  a 
sort  of  canopy  or  awning  over  the  spot  where  the 
‘dance’  takes  place,  even  though  this  may  be  inside 
a roofed  hall,  the  canopy  being  meant  to  signify 
that  the  gods  above  are  not  allowed  even  to  witness 
the  performance,  much  less  to  take  part  in  it ; for 
the  Vaishnava  belief  is  that  no  one  is  permitted 
to  join  in  the  Lila  who  does  not  stand  “ in  the 


220 


HINDU  FASTS  AND  FEASTS 


relation  of  a Gopika  ” to  Krishna, — that  is,  who  is 
not  an  ardent,  disinterested  worshipper  of  him,  who 
does  not  love  him  for  his  own  sake,  in  utter  obli- 
viousness of  his  own  self.  The  Ras  Lila  is  cele- 
brated as  a ‘ festival  ’ only  by  ignorant  Hindus,  who 
do  not  know  that  it  does  not  mean  a dance  in  any 
sense  of  the  word.  The  educated  classes  celebrate 
it  by  worshipping  the  image  or  spirit  of  Krishna 
on  this  hallowed  night  when  he  loved  to  play  a 
thrilling  note  on  his  pipe  in  the  moonlit  bowers  of 
Brindaban. 

Kartiki  Purnamashi  is  also  a great  bathing-day. 
At  every  place  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges 
there  is  a mela  on  this  day ; but  the  chief  centre  of 
bathing  is  Bithur,  a village  in  the  district  of  Cawn- 
pore,  which  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  holiest  spots 
in  all  Hindustan,  having  been  the  residence  of 
Valmiki  and  the  scene  of  the  fight  between  Rama 
and  his  unknown  sons,  Lava  and  Kusa.  In  an 
earlier  age  it  was  the  spot  where  Brahma,  the 
Creator,  completed  the  work  of  creation  by  hold- 
ing an  Aswamedha  or  horse-sacrifice,  and  the  mark 
of  a horse’s  hoof  on  one  of  the  stone  steps  leading 
to  what  is  called  the  Brahmavarta  Ghat,  is  still 
shown  to  the  pious  pilgrim  as  an  object  of  devout 
worship.  The  residence  of  Valmiki  too  is  still 
shown  on  the  river  bank,  and  a temple  was  built  in 
his  honour  by  the  Mahrattas  on  a mound  to  the 


KARTIKI  PURNAMASHI 


221 


south  of  the  town.  The  annual  gathering  of  pilgrims 
at  Bithur  on  this  day  is  nearly  one  lac,  and  of  this 
number  a large  proportion  consists  of  Sadhus  or 
religious  mendicants. 


THE  END 


' 


\ 


) 


Princeton  Theological  Semina 


II 1 

1012 

31  ‘ 

58 

| Libraries 

D182 


