===== Internet Archive OCR: hindufeastsfasts00sastuoft_djvu.txt =====

FRQM  THE  LIBRARY  OF 

TKIHITY  COLLEGE 


FROM-THE-  LIBRARY-OF 
TWNITYCOLLEGETORONTO 


HINDU   FEASTS 

FASTS  AND  CEREMONIES 


BY 

PANDIT  S.  M.  NATBSA  SASTRI,  B.A. 

Member  of  the  Folklore  Society,   London 
WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION    BY 

HENRY  K.  BEAUCHAMP,  C.I.E. 

Editor  of  the  "Madras  Mail,'"  Fellow  of  the  University  of  Madras,  etc. 


MADRAS 

PRINTED    AT   THE    M.    E.    PUBLISHING    HOUSE,    MOUNT    ROAD 


1903 

All  Rig  Jits  Reserved 


03 


121096 

MAR      3  1986 


s 


INTRODUCTION 


(JT'HE  work  which  Pandit  Natesa  Sastri  has 
(*J  been  engaged  in  for  so  many  years,  and 
of  which  this  volume  is  only  one  small  exem 
plar,  deserves  every  welcome  and  support,  as 
much  from  his  own  countrymen  as  from  foreign 
dwellers  in  the  land.  The  folklore  of  a  country 
is  never  so  well  known  even  by  the  folk  of  the 
country  itself,  that  popular  literature  concern 
ing  it  is  not  to  be  heartily  welcomed.  More 
over  there  is  always  a  young  generation  grow 
ing  up  which  is  waiting  to  be  instructed  in  it 
by  the  easiest  and  widest  possible  means. 

The  simpler  tenets  of  religion  and  the  more 
popular  tales  and  legends  are  learned  from  the 
lips  of  parents  and  teachers  :  but  there  is  much 
that  can  only  be  learned  from  books.  Further, 
in  these  days  of  hurry  and  stress,  by  which 
even  India  is  being  more  or  less  affected,  the 
old  leisurely,  yet  possibly  more  thorough, 
methods  of  oral  tradition  and  teaching  are  no 
longer  possible,  and  we  must  trust  more  and 
more  to  written  and  printed  records.  Pandit 
Natesa  Sastri  is  doing  most  excellent  work  in 
collecting,  arranging  and  recording  in  concise 
and  easily  assimilable  form  some  of  the  more 


IV  INTRODUCTION 


noticeable  tales,  traditions,  customs,  beliefs, 
and  ceremonies  of  the  Hindus.  And  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  many  others  of  his  educated  fellow- 
countrymen  will  follow  his  good  example.  For 
there  are  mines  of  wealth  to  be  exploited  in 
this  manner,  and  there  is  work  for  many  scores 
of  writers,  compilers  and  translators. 

There  is  no  country  in  the  world,  moreover, 
where  such  studies  are  of  more  importance  than 
in  India,  for  with  the  Hindu,  customs  and 
traditions  explain  almost  every  act  of  his  every 
day  life.  As  a  learned  writer  on  the  Hindus 
has  well  said: — u  With  the  Hindu,  religion  is 
not  a  thing  for  times  and  seasons  only,  but 
professes  to  regulate  his  life  in  its  many  rela 
tions.  It  orders  ceremonies  to  be  performed  on 
his  behalf  before  he  is  born,  and  others  after 
his  death.  It  ordains  those  attendant  on  his 
birth,  his  early  training,  his  food,  his  style  of 
dress  and  its  manufacture,  his  employment, 
marriage,  amusements.  It  seeks  to  regulate 
not  only  his  private  life,  but  also  his  domestic 
and  national.  To  treat  of  the  ordinary  life  of 
the  Hindu  is  to  describe  his  religion." 

It  follows  from  this  that  for  Hindus  to  know 
themselves,  or  for  others  to  know  them,  a  study 
of  such  matters  as  Pandit  Natesa  Sastri  sets 


INTRODUCTION 


forth  in  this  little  book,  as  in  others  of  his 
writings,  is  essential. 

At  the  same  time  there  is  one  point  that 
must  ever  be  kept  in  mind,  namely  the  danger 
of  generalising  with  regard  to  Hindu  manners, 
customs,  ceremonies  and  traditions.  As  the 
writer  above  quoted  remarks  : — "  It  should  be 
remembered  that  descriptions  true  of  certain 
classes  or  of  certain  districts  may  riot  be  correct 
of  other  classes  or  other  districts ;  and  that  fre 
quently  the  residents  of  one  district  are  totally 
ignorant  of  what  prevails  in  others.  This  can 
scarcely  be  wondered  at  when  we  consider  the 
number  of  books  which  are  accepted  by  the 
people  as  divinely  given  for  authorities  concern 
ing  the  gods  and  the  religious  life.  The  people 
of  one  district  are  familiar  with  only  a  small 
part  of  one  book,  whilst  those  of  other  districts 
found  their  faiths  on  other  books  or  different 
parts  of  the  same.  In  addition  to  this  it  must 
not  be  forgotten  that  a  century  ago  there  was 
no  prose  literature,  no  newspapers,  magazines, 
or  novels  ;  whilst  the  theatrical  representations 
were  almost  entirely  confined  to  mythological 
subjects.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  find  a 
custom  in  the  home,  or  a  ceremony  in  worship, 
supported  by  quite  different  authorities  by 
different  people." 


VI  INTRODUCTION 


It  is  one  of  the  excellent  characteristics  of 
Pandit  Natesa  Sastri  that  he  particularises 
where  necessary  and  generalises  only  where  it 
is  safe  to  do  so. 

It  seems  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  or 
emphasise  how  specially  valuable  to  foreign 
students  are  Pandit  Natesa  Sastri's  works,  and 
others  similar  to  them.  The  bounden  duty  laid 
upon  all  Europeans  living  in  this  country  and 
earning  their  livelihood  in  it,  of  striving  to 
understand  and  appreciate  the  people  among 
whom  they  dwell,  needs  no  argument  or  demon 
stration.  Such  knowledge  and  appreciation 
cannot  be  acquired  without  careful  study  and 
observation.  But  now-a-days,  at  any  rate,  he 
who  runs  may  read  many  excellent  treatises 
both  by  natives  of  India  and  by  Europeans  on 
various  aspects  and  characteristics  of  Hinduism 
and  the  Hindus  ;  and  for  a  general  work-a-day 
knowledge  of  the  Hindus  there  is  no  more  use 
ful,  and  at  the  same  time  more  interesting, 
study  than  that  of  current  beliefs  and  practices 
such  as  are  described  by  Pandit  Natesa  Sastri 
in  this  little  volume. 

HENRY  BEAUCHAMP. 
MADRAS, 
9th  December,  J902. 


CONTENTS 

Chapter  Page 

I.  THE  AKDBA        .  1 

11.  AVANI    AVITTAM 

III.  THE  MAHALAYA  AMAVASA  .  .15 

IV.  THE  BHOGI  AND  THE  PONGAL  .     18 
V.  THE  DIPAVALI  r  .            23 

VI.  THE  HINDUS  AND  THE  ECLIPSE     .  .     31 

VII.  HINDU  FUNERAL  KITES-  .       .     34 

VIII.  HOLI  AND  KAMANDI             .  .     42 

IX.  KALAKSHEPAS,  OLD  AND  NEW  .       .     50 

X.  THE  MUKKOTI  OR  VAIKUNTA  EKADASI  .     56 

XI.  THE  KRITTIKA  .  .       .     62 

XII.  THE  MAHAMAKHA    .  .68 

XIII.  THE  ABDDHODAYA  AND  THE  MAHODAYA     .     78 

XIV.  THE  SARASVATI  PUJA  >-.  .  .     84 
XV.  THE  MAHASIVARATRI           .  .     89 

XVI.  THE  SRIJAYANTI  OR  KRISHNASHTAMI  .     97 

XVII.  THE  VARALAKSHMI  WORSHIP     .  .       .  103 

XVIII.  THE  VINAYAKA  CHATURTHI              .  .  107 

XIX.  THE  HINDU  NEW  YEAR'S  DAY  .       .115 

XX.  THE  ON  AM  FEAST  IN  MALABAR    "  .  .118 

APPENDIX  A.— THE  KALIYUGA            .  .  127 

APPENDIX  B.— GLOSSARY  .  .  148 


Hindu  Feasts,  Fasts  and  Ceremonies 

I.    Cbe  Hrbra 


HE  followers  of  the  Saiva  religion 
deem  five  places  in  Southern 
India  most  holy,  and  they 
are: — Conjeeveram,  where  Siva 
is  worshipped  in  the  shape  of 
Prithvi-lijiga  or  as  the  repre 
sentative  of  the  element  earth  ; 
Tiruvanaikovil,  near  Trichiriopoly,  where  he 
is  worshipped  in  the  shape  of  vf&ier-linga  ; 
Sri  Kalahasti,  the  shrine  containing  the  air- 
linga ;  Tiruvannamalai,  the  seat  of  the  fire- 
lincja ;  and  Chidambaram,  the  abode  of  the 
ether-lingo,.  The  several  forms  of  the  god 
Siva  in  these  sacred  shrines  are  considered  to 
be  the  bodies  or  casements  of  the  soul  whose 
natural  bases  are  the  five  elements — earth, 
water,  fire,  air  and  ether.  The  apprehension 


HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

of  God  In  the  last  of  these  five  as  ether  is, 
according  to  the  Saiva  school  of  philosophy, 
the  highest  form  of  worship,  for,  it  is  not  the 
worship  of  God  in  a  tangible  form,  but  the 
worship  of  what,  to  ordinary  minds,  is  vacuum, 
which  nevertheless  leads  to  the  attainment 
of  a  knowledge  of  the  all-pervading  without 
physical  accessories  in  the  shape  of  any  ling  a, 
which  is,  after  all,  an  emblem.  That  this  is 
the  case  at  Chidambaram  is  known  to  every 
Hindu,  for  if  he  ever  asks  the  priests  to  show 
him  the  God  in  the  temple  he  is  pointed  to  an 
empty  space  in  the  most  holy  of  the  holies, 
which  has  been  termed  the  Akasa,  or  ether- 
linga.  In  this  lies  the  so-called  Chidambara- 
raliasya — the  secret  of  worship  in  the  sacred 
city  of  Chidambaram.  When  any  devotee  has 
reached  the  stage  of  worshipping  God  in  this 
manner,  he  is,  according  to  the  Saiva  doctrine, 
deemed  to  be  exempt  from  all  future  births 
and  is  supposed  to  secure  absorption  in  the 
supreme  essence  of  God.  It  is  on  account  of 
this  high  nature  of  worship  that  the  main  hall 
of  the  Siva  temple  in  this  town  is  termed  the 
cJvit-sablia — the  hall  in  which  the  true  devotee 
acquires  illimitable  and  supernatural  powers 


THE   ARDRA 


which  could  be  obtained  only  by  concentrated 
devotion  to  God  and  which  when  once  acquired 
could  be  exercised  at  pleasure.     Including  the 
•chit-sabha — the   hall    of    supreme   vision  and 
wisdom,  there  are  five  chief  halls  in  the  Chidam 
baram   shrine,   which  are  called  the  kanaka- 
sabha — the    golden   hall ;  the    cliitra-sablia— 
ornamental  hall ;  the  deva-sabha — the  divine 
hall ;  and  the  nritta-sablia — the  hall  of  dancing. 
The  special  deity  worshipped  in  the  temple  is 
called    Natesa — the    lord    of    dancers.      His 
other  names  are  Nataraja — the  king  of  dan 
cers  ;  Sabhesa — the  lord  of  the  several  sacred 
halls  ;  and  Sabhapati — the  president  of  these 
sacred  halls.     The  prominent  idea  underlying 
the  Stliala  Pur  ana  of  Chidambaram  is  that  the 
great  God  having  perceived  his  own  Self   in 
Himself  is  illuminated  with  wisdom  and  dances 
with   very   joy  on  account  thereof;  and  that 
the   devotee  who  visits  the  temple  and  wit 
nesses  this  dance  becomes  himself  absorbed  in 
God.     The  Chidambaram  shrine  has  thus  from 
time  immemorial  been  a  visible  symbol  of  a 
philosophic  phase  of  the  Hindu  religion.     It  is 
the  place  where,  according  to  Hindu  beliefs, 
persons  even  of  the  lowest  caste  have  attained 


4  HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

oneness  with  God  by  sincere  devotion  and  faith. 
Nanda — a  Paraiya  saint — attained  eternal  feli 
city  by  his  devotions  at  Chidambaram.  The 
most  orthodox  of  the  orthodox  Brahmans  will 
never  stint  the  reputation  of  this  greatest  of 
Saiva  saints,  wrho  after  all  was  only  a  Paraiya 
by  birth.  It  is  the  only  place  in  the  whole  of 
India  where  no  attempt  has  been  made  to 
import  conventional  ideas  of  Godhead  into 
the  purely  philosophic  basis  of  the  Hindu  reli 
gion.  In  keeping  with  this  fame,  Chidambaram 
is  now  the  seat  of  several  Sudra  monasteries, 
where  several  hundreds  of  Sudra  mendicants 
are  taught  Sanskrit.  A  Brahman  visitor  to 
this  sacred  town  will  be  surprised  to  see  the 
number  of  Sudras  repeating  the  Upanishads  in 
the  early  morning  in  these  monasteries.  To 
add  to  his  wonder  he  will  find  that  they  have 
not  only  got  by  heart  these  sacred  writings  but 
that  they  understand  their  meaning  and  possess 
a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  subject-matter  which 
is  a  rare  thing  even  with  Brahmans. 

Such  is  the  merit  of  Chidambaram.  Special 
meritoriousness  is  attached  by  the  Saivites 
to  the  Ardra  festival  which  takes  place  in  this 
town  on  the  full-moon  day  of  the  month  of 


THE    ARDRA 


Margasira,  according  to  the  Hindu  year,— 
corresponding  to  the  latter  half  of  December 
and  the  first  half  of  January.  As  the  Hindu 
deity  Rama  is  supposed  to  have  been  born  on  a 
Nauami  day  and  Krishna  on  an  Aslitami  day,  so 
Siva  in  his  incarnation  of  Natesa  is  considered 
by  the  Saivites  to  have  been  born  on  the  full- 
moon  day  of  the  month  of  Margasira  and  in 
the  constellation  of  Ardra — the  sixth  lunar 
mansion.  On  the  night  previous  to  the  feast 
the  bathing  of  the  image  of  the  god  Natesa 
takes  place  on  a  grand  scale.  Of  the  Hindu 
trinity  Siva  is  supposed  to  be  fond  of  baths 
and  Vishnu  of  ornaments.  The  Siva  god  of 
Chidambaram — lord  Natesa — is  bathed  only 
six  times  in  a  year,  and  the  bath  on  the  night 
previous  to  the  Ardra  feast  is  conducted  on 
the  grandest  scale.  Pilgrims  and  devotees 
flock  to  the  hall  where  this  bathing  is  per 
formed.  Pots  full  of  milk,  honey,  lemon- 
juice,  pomegranate  juice,  cocoanut  water, 
ghee,  oil,  sandal  paste,  curds,  holy  ashes,  and 
other  liquids  and  solids,  considered  as  sacred 
offerings  to  the  deity,  pour  in  from  all  parts  to 
be  used  on  the  occasion.  This  ceremony  com 
mences  at  about  midnight  and  lasts  till  late 


6  HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

in  the  morning.  When  the  bathing  is  over 
the  image  is  choicely  decorated ;  and  the 
Brahman  priests  of  Chidambaram  are  con 
sidered  to  be  adepts  at  showing  off  the  image 
to  its  best  advantage.  The  decoration  is  done 
behind  screens  and  when  the  screens  are  raised 
the  whole  hall  rings  with  the  hymns  of  praise 
chanted  by  the  thousands  of  pilgrims  and 
devotees  who  have  assembled  there  to  worship 
God.  The  choicest  temple  jewels  in  southern 
India,  made  of  the  finest  of  precious  stones, 
are  to  be  seen  only  in  two  shrines — Srirangam 
and  Chidambaram.  Natesa  on  the  Ardra  fes 
tival  day  is  most  superbly  decorated  and  at 
about  evening  time  is  taken  round  on  a  grand 
procession.  This  is  the  most  impressive  scene 
of  the  Ardra  festival  and  the  Anandatandavam 
— the  dance  in  ecstatic  joy — takes  place  on 
this  occasion.  The  bearers  of  the  image  have 
a  mode  of  marching  slowly,  so  as  to  give  the 
image  the  appearance  of  dancing.  The  most 
holy  of  holies — the  Garbhagriha  of  the  temple- 
is  reached  after  a  slow  march  of  three  or  four 
hours  ;  and  this  completes  the  Ardra  feast. 

There  is  a  queer  story  in  connection  with 
this  feast   which   obtains   credence   with   the 


THE    ARDRA 


mass  of  the  worshippers,  but  which  is  not  to 
be  found  in  any  of  the  Hindu  Puranas.  It  is 
that  the  god  Siva  left  his  inner  apartments 
one  night  and  returned  home  early  next  morn 
ing.  The  goddess  Parvati  grew  jealous  on 
this  account  and  denied  him  admission.  Hot 
words  were  exchanged  and  soon  after  recon 
ciliation  followed.  In  keeping  with  this  legend 
the  temple  doors  are  shut  just  as  the  god 
enters  at  the  close  of  the  procession  on  the 
Ardra  day,  and  questions  and  replies  take 
place  between  two  priests  who  represent  the 
god  and  goddess.  After  the  supposed  recon 
ciliation  the  doors  are  opened.  This,  as  has 
been  said  already,  is  entirely  a  popular  belief, 
having  no  Puranic  foundation. 

The  places  in  Southern  India  most  sacred 
to  this  feast  are  Chidambaram  in  the  South 
Arcot  District,  Tiruvalur  in  the  Tanjore  Dis 
trict,  Lalgudi  in  the  Trichinopoly  District, 
and  Perur  in  the  Coimbatore  District.  The 
great  Saiva  philosopher — Manikkavasakar— 
passed  his  latter  days  in  Chidambaram  and 
worshipped  Natesa.  A  small  festival  in  honour 
of  the  memory  of  this  philosopher  takes  place 
on  this  occasion  in  the  temple. 


2,    H\>ani  Hvittam 

r/     ~~~ 

PAKAKMA,  or  Avani  Avittam, 
as  it  is  called  in  Tamil,  is  a 
holy  day  with  the  twice-born 
castes,  especially  the  Brah- 
mans.  It  always  falls  on  the 
day  when  the  moon  is  in  the 
asterism  of  Sravishtha  in  the 
fifth  lunar  month  of  Avani — July  and  August. 
It  is  the  day  of  the  annual  renewal  of  the 
sacred  thread  of  the  twice-born  castes, — Brah- 
mans,  Kshatriyas  and  Yaisyas.  The  daily  rites 
of  a  Brahman  are  several  and  every  Brahman 
must,  properly  speaking,  go  through  every  one 
of  these  rites,  though  the  rule  now  is  more 
honoured  in  the  breach  than  in  the  observance. 
The  rites  are  as  follows  :— 

A  Brahman,  as  soon  as  he  rises  from  his 
bed,  must  clean  his  teeth  with  the  twig  of 
the  Ficus  Kacemosa  (fig  tree)  or  mango  leaf. 
He  must  then  rinse  his  mouth  twelve  times 
with  water.  He  must  then  proceed  to  bathe 
in  a  river  or  in  other  water  and  pray  before 


AVANI   AVITTAM  9 


bathing.  After  bathing  the  Brahman  has  to 
put  on  his  clean  apparel.  He  must  then  wash 
his  hands  and  feet  and  sip  water  thrice  in  the 
name  of  Maha  Vishnu.  He  must  perform 
his  morning  worship — pratali  sandliya — with 
argliya — oblations  of  water — and  gayatri— 
meditation  on  the  Sun-god.  After  this  the 
Brahman  must  proceed  to  study  the  Vedas 
under  his  preceptor — guru.  A  portion  of  this 
sacred  lore  is  got  up  by  heart  every  day.  The 
guru — teacher — sits  facing  the  east  and  recites 
the  text  and  the  student  sits  facing  the  west  and 
repeats  the  same.  This  practice  must  be  gone 
through  daily '  till  the  whole  of  the  Vedas  is 
learnt  by  heart.  This  continues  till  midday. 
The  Vedas,  Upanisliads,  codes  of  law  and  other 
branches  of  sacred  literature  must  be  gone 
through  thus  and  acquired  by  the  Brahman. 

Then  the  midday  bathing  and  prayers  suc 
ceed,  followed  by  the  worship  of  the  Manes. 
AYater  with  sesamum  seeds  is  offered  as  an 
oblation  to  the  Manes,  from  the  hollow  of  both 
hands  joined.  After  the  propitiation  of  the 
Manes,  the  propitiation  of  the  deities  com 
mences,  which  consists  of  oblations  of  fire 
with  prayers  addressed  to  several  gods.  After 


10         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 


finishing  this  the  Brahman  goes  to  his  midday 
meal.  Before,  however,  sitting  down  for  his 
dinner  he  is  ordained  to  see  whether  any  guests 
are  waiting  at  his  door ;  and  if  so,  he  must 
receive  them,  present  them  with  planks  to  sit 
on,  give  them  wrater  for  ablution,  and  offer 
them  honey  mixed  with  other  food  for  refresh 
ment.  He  must  then  take  them  into  his  house 
and  feed  them  sumptuously.  The  evening 
closes  with  bath  and  prayers  as  in  the  morning. 
These,  then,  form  the  daily  routine  of  a 
Brahman.  But  few  observe  them  regularly,, 
and  those  too  are  to  be  found  in  remote 
villages.  Even  they  become  liable  to  lapses 
from  the  daily  routine. 

UpaJcarma  or  Avani  Avittam  wras  instituted 
at  a  very  distant  epoch  of  time  for  those  that 
had  not  attended  regularly  to  the  performance 
of  these  rites  and  for  those  who,  though  regular, 
had  deviated  on  certain  occasions  during  the 
year.  Thus  the  day  of  UpaJcarma  is  the  annual 
renewal  day  of  the  sacred  thread — the  symbol 
of  the  obligations  of  the  twice-born — of  the 
Brahmans  and  other  twice-born  castes.  Early 
in  the  morning  of  this  day  every  Brahman  who 
is  invested  with  the  holy  thread  bathes  and 


AVANI   AVITTAM  II 


offers  his  usual  morning  prayers.  After  these 
are  over,  and  as  a  preparatory  rite  to  the 
Avani  Avittam  or  Sravani  ceremony,  he  repeats 
the  Kamokarshit  prayer.  This  prayer  affirms 
that  for  each  individual  who  recites  it,  all 
his  sins  of  omission,  commission  and  deviation 
originated  from  anger  or  passion,  and  that  his 
soul  which  is  by  nature  pure  is  not  responsible 
for  them.  This  prayer  he  repeats  a  hundred 
and  eight  times.  This  is  the  morning  ceremony 
on  the  Sravani  day.  The  ceremony  proper 
commences  at  about  midday.  At  that  time  all 
the  Brahmans  assemble  and  go  in  a  body  to  the 
river  or  sacred  tank  of  the  village  or  town  in 
which  they  live.  The  priest  dictates  to  them  a 
Sankalpa  praying  that  the  effect  of  all  the  sins 
that  they  have  committed  either  consciously 
or  unconsciously  may  perish  with  their  plunge 
in  the  holy  water ;  and  consecrating  the  water 
each  performs  his  bathing.  This  ceremony 
takes  from  an  hour  to  an  hour  and  a  half. 
After  bath  the  new  sacred  thread  is  worn  and 
the  old  one  is  removed  and  cast  away.  This 
means  that  the  Brahman  commences  his  reli 
gious  life  anew  from  the  Sravani  day.  All  the 
ceremonies  connected  with  the  investiture  of 


12          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

the  sacred  thread — upanayana — are  performed 
on  a  small  scale  on  this  day.  A  commence 
ment  is  made  of  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  Upa- 
nisliads,  codes  of  law  and  other  departments  of 
knowledge.  Each  lore  is  in  turn  taken  up 
and  finished.  The  first  sentence  and  the  last 
sentence  of  an  Upanishad  are  repeated,  and 
this  act  performed  on  the  Sravani  day  means 
that  the  subject  to  which  the  sentences  refer 
has  been  commenced  and  finished.  The  propi 
tiation  of  the  Manes  by  the  offerings  of  water 
and  sesamum  and  of  the  gods  by  oblations  of 
ghee  in  the  fire  finish  the  Sravani  ceremony. 
A  good  and  sumptuous  afternoon  dinner  fol 
lows  and  closes  the  ceremonies  of  the  day. 

Thus  with  the  renewal  of  his  sacred  thread, 
the  Brahman  renews  his  sacred  studies  also.  All 
his  deviations  from  established  rules  having 
been  rightly  traced  to  either  passion  or  anger, 
lie  confesses  in  a  general  way  his  sins,  promises 
to  cast  them  off  from  the  Sravani  day,  re 
commences  all  the  various  departments  of  the 
study  of  Sanskrit  lore,  commences  and  finishes 
the  Vedas  themselves  and  becomes  in  every 
sense,  as  the  ceremony  at  least  declares  him 
to  be,  a  pure  Brahman  again.  On  this  special 


AVANI   AVITTAM 


account  the  Sravani  is  also  termed  the  Upa- 
Jcarma—fhe  commencement  of  the  study  of 
the  Vedas.  This  Sravani  ceremony  is  a  most 
ancient  one  and  is  coeval  with  the  civilisation 
of  the  Brahmans.  The  Kigveda  Brahmans 
perhaps  instituted  it  and  the  Yajurveda  Brah 
mans  followed  it.  It  is  not  a  Puranic  rite  but 
a  rite  sanctioned  by  the  Vedas  themselves. 
It  is  therefore  one  of  the  oldest  rites  of  the 
Brahmans. 

The  gayatri  day  is  a  day  of  prayer  performed 
on  the  day  next  to  the  Sravani  day.  The  Ga 
yatri  is  a  sacred  verse  repeated  by  every  Brah 
man  at  his  morning,  midday  and  evening  de 
votions  and  on  other  occasions  also.  Great 
sins  are  believed  to  be  expiated  by  a  pious 
repetition  of  this  verse.  The  general  meaning 
of  the  verse  is  as  follows  : — "  Let  us  contem 
plate  the  divine  splendour  of  the  Sun- God,  the 
donor  of  bliss  to  all,  that  he  may  give  us  all 
kinds  of  happiness  in  all  the  worlds." 

Every  Brahman   is  required  to   repeat   the 
gayatri  at  least  thirty-two  times  each  time- 
morning,  midday  arid  evening.     This  makes  it 
obligatory  on  every  religious  Brahman  to  med 
itate  on  the  gayatri  at  least  ninety-six  times 


14          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

•every  day.  But  there  might  have  been  days 
in  the  year  on  which  a  Brahman  was  not  able 
to  observe  this.  To  make  amends  for  all  the 
shortcomings,  the  gayatri  is  repeated  1,008 
times  on  the  day  succeeding  the  Sravani  day, 
and  hence  the  day  next  to  the  Sravani  is  called 
the  day  of  the  gayatri  japa.  It  takes  gener 
ally  four  to  five  hours  to  pronounce  the  incan 
tation  1,008  times  and  this  number  must  be 
reached  before  midday. 

The  Brahmans,  as  a  class,  attach  the  great 
est  importance  to  these  two — the  Sravani  and 
the  Gayatri — days. 


3.    £be  flfcabala^a  Hmavasa 

MAVASA,  or  the  day  of  the  con 
junction  of  the  sun  and  the 
moon,  occurs  once  every  month 
and  it  is  a  day  considered  by 
the  Hindus  to  be  specially  set 
apart  for  the  offering  of  obla 
tions  and  the  performance  of 
religious  ceremonies  to  the 
Pitris  or  the  spirits  of  departed  ancestors. 
Such  being  the  general  belief,  what  is  the  rea 
son  for  the  Hindus  paying  greater  attention  to 
the  Mahalaya  Amavasa,  or  the  new  moon  day  of 
the  month  of  Kanya  (Tamil  Purattasi)  when  the 
sun  is  in  the  sign  Virgo  ?  The  Itihasa,  a  great 
authority  on  the  religious  rites  of  the  Hindus, 
says  that  the  moment  the  sun  enters  the  sign 
Virgo  (Kanya)  the  departed  Manes,  leaving  their 
abode  in  the  world  of  Yama,  the  Destroyer,  come 
down  to  the  world  of  man  and  occupy  the  houses 
of  their  descendants  in  this  world  or  as  it  is  said 
in  Sanskrit,  Kanya  yate  yatlia  surye  yitaras 
tisJitanti  sve  grille.  Therefore  the  fortnight  pre 
ceding  the  new  moon  of  the  month  of  Kanya 


16         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

is  considered  as  the  fortnight  which  is  specially 
sacred  to  the  propitiation  of  the  Manes  or 
departed  spirits.  Dine  dine  gay  a  tulyam — The 
ceremonies  in  honour  of  the  Manes  performed 
during  each  day  of  this  fortnight  are  considered 
to  be  equal  to  the  ceremonies  performed 
in  the  sacred  city  of  Gaya.  But  instead  of 
performing  these  rites  on  each  of  the  days  or 
the  fortnight,  most  Hindus  do  so  only  on  one 
of  the  days.  Orthodox  Hindus,  however,  per 
form  ceremonies  on  every  one  of  the  days  of 
this  fortnight.  These  ceremonies  terminate 
on  the  Mahalaya  Amavasa  day,  which  is  there 
fore  observed  with  greater  sanctity  than  other 
new  moon  days.  If,  through  unavoidable 
causes,  any  Hindu  is  not  able  to  perform  his 
Mahalaya  rites  during  the  course  of  the  fort 
night  preceding  the  Mahalaya  Amavasa,  he  is 
allowed  as  a  concession  to  perform  the  same 
in  the  fortnight  succeeding  this  new  moon, 
because  it  is  said  that  the  Manes  continue  to 
linger  in  his  house,  expecting  him  to  perform 
the  ceremonies,  till  the  sun  enters  the  sign 
Scorpio  (Viclicliliika),  i.e.,  till  about  the  next 
full  moon  day.  If  even  by  that  time  a  Hindu 
has  not  performed  these  ceremonies  to  the 


THE    MAHALAYA   AMAVASA  17 


Manes  they  are  said  to  become  disgusted  with 
him  and  return  to  the  world  of  Yaina  after 
cursing  their  descendants  in  this  world..  ;#??Hf- 
clihika  darsauat  yanti  nirasa  pitaro  gatali.  \\ 

Such  is  the  helief  about  the  Mahalaya 
Ainavasa  and  the  two  lunar  fortnights  which 
precede  and  succeed  it.  The  month  of  Rani/a 
is  thus  reserved  for  the  worship  of  departed 
spirits  and  the  most  propitious  portion  pf  th£ 
month  for  such  worship  is  the  fortnight  pre 
ceding  the  Mahalaya  Ainavasa.  Generally 
speaking,  every  Hindu  strictly  observes  his 
Mahalaya.  If  he  is  careless  about  it,  he  will 
find  it  difficult  to  have  a  peaceful  time  with 
the  old  ladies  in  his  house. 


i  an&  tbc  ponoal 


HE  Tamil  month  of  Margali 
(Sans.  Mrigasira  )  ,  correspon  d  - 
ing  mostly  with  December  and 
running  on  to  the  llth  January, 
is  considered  by  the  Hindus  to 
be  a  most  unhealthy  month.  It 
is  the  month  in  which  all  kinds 
of  epidemics  —  cholera,  fever  and  small-pox  are 
supposed  to  occur.  Accordingly,  the  last  day 
of  this  Tamil  month  is  observed  as  a  festive 
day  by  the  Hindus  in  Southern  India  in  thank 
fulness  to  the  .higher  powers  that  the  worst 
month  has  ended.  The  feast  is  called  the 
BJiogi-Pandigai  or  feast  in  honour  of  Indra, 
the  king  of  heavens,  the  lord  of  the  clouds, 
rain,  seasons  and  everything  that  is  the  source 
of  happiness  and  plenty.  The  word  Bhoga 
comes  from  the  Sanskrit  root  Bhuj,to  enjoy. 
So  Bhogi-Pandigai  is  a  feast  of  enjoyment  on 
account  of  deliverance  from  the  calamitous 
month  of  Mrigasira. 

Pongal  or  Sankramana  or  Sankranti  is  a 
festival    which  is   observed  on    the   first  day 


THE  BHOGI  AND  THE  PON  GAL        19 


of  the  Tamil  month  of  Tai  (Sans.  Makara). 
It  is  a  New  Year's  day  astronomically,  and 
commences  approximately  on  the  12th  Janu 
ary  every  year.  It  is  observed  by  the  Hindus 
by  offering  boiled  rice  in  milk  to  propitiate  the 
Sun-god.  Hence  the  feast  is  called  the  Pongal, 
which  in  Tamil  means  boiled  rice.  This  feast 
is  also  called  the  Uttarayana  feast,  as  the 
sun  commences  his  journey  towards  the  North 
on  this  day.  Sankranti  or  Sankramana,  which 
is  the  Aryan  name  for  the  Pongal,  means  the 
entrance  of  the  sun  into  the  sign  Capricorn. 

The  Ponged  is  observed  as  a  day  for  the 
special  worship  of  the  sun  throughout  India 
by  the  Hindus.  Everything  sweet  is  supposed 
to  please  the  sun -god.  So  rice  with  sugar 
and  milk  is  cooked  on  this  day  in  every  Hindu 
household.  The  sun-god  is  worshipped  in  the 
courtyard  of  the  house  with  diagrams  in  red 
mud  describing  the  sun  and  the  rnoon,  and  pitja 
is  performed  on  a  large  scale.  The  Pongal  food, 
which  consists  of  sugar-cane  and  sugar-candy 
forms  the  chief  offering  to  the  god.  This  also 
constitutes  the  first  course  in  a  Hindu  dinner. 
Kich  men  regard  this  day  as  a  meritorious  one 
for  making  charitable  donations,  and  every 


20         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS  AND   CEREMONIES 


Hindu  Raja  gives  away  large  sums  in  charity. 
An  assembly  of  Pandits  sits  on  this  day  in 
Baroda,  and  grants  rewards  to  the  Hindu 
scholars  who  have  passed  examinations  in  the 
several  departments  of  the  Vedas,  TarJca, 
Vyakaranaj  etc.,  of  the  Sanskrit  language. 
Other  Native  Courts  also  observe  the  same 
custom.  The  season  for  marriages  in  Hindu 
households  also  commences  on  this  day  and 
lasts  for  six  months  up  to  the  end  of  the 
Uttarayana — the  whole  of  the  summer  solstice. 
The  brides  for  the  year  get  their  presents 
on  the  Sankranti  day  and  these  are  called 
the  Sankranti  Sim.  They  consist  gener 
ally  of  new  cloths,  one  or  two  ornaments 
and  vessels  and  also  sugar-canes,  molasses,  oil, 
ghee,  etc.  The  Sankranti  is  also  the  day  of 
the  year  in  which  all  the  old  earthen  utensils  of 
a  Hindu  household  are  replaced  by  new  ones. 
The  pong al — boiled  rice — itself  must  be  cooked 
in  a  new  pot. 

,  The  day  after  the  Pongal  is  called  the 
Mattupongal  feast,  or  the  feast  in  honour  of  the 
cattle.  On  this  day  all  the  cows,  bullocks, 
buffaloes  and  horses  in  a  Hindu  household  are 
well  washed  and  decorated.  They  are  also 


THE  BHOGI  AND  THE  PON  GAL         21 


worshipped,  and  cooked  rice  is  given  to  them. 
Cows  generally  eat  cooked  rice  freely  but 
bullocks  and  horses  will  not  as  a  rule.  Towards 
evening  festoons  of  aloe  fibre  and  cloths  con 
taining  coins  are  tied  to  the  horns  of  bullocks 
and  cows  and  the  animals  are  driven  through 
the  streets  with  tom-tom  and  music.  This 
ceremony  is  not  much  observed  in  populous 
towns  or  by  the  Brahrnans.  They  merely  wor 
ship  the  cow  during  the  day  time.  But  in  the 
villages,  especially  in  villages  inhabited  by 
the  Kalla  or  robber  tribes,  the  maiden  chooses 
as  her  husband  him  who  has  safely  untied  and 
brought  to  her  the  cloth  tied  to  the  horn  of  the 
fiercest  bull.  The  bullocks  are  let  loose  with 
their  horns  carrying  valuables  amidst  the  din 
of  tom-tom  and  harsh  music  which  terrify  and 
bewilder  them.  They  run  madly  about  and 
are  purposely  excited  by  the  crowd.  A  young 
Kalla  will  declare  that  he  will  run  after  such 
and  such  a  bullock — and  this  is  sometimes-  a 
risky  pursuit — and  recover  the  valuables  tied  to 
its  horn,  and  he  does  so  often  in  a  dexterous 
manner.  These  tamashas  take  place  on  a 
grand  scale  in  villages  round  about  Madura  and 
Tinnevelly  where  Kallas  live  in  large  numbers. 


22          HINDU   FEASTS,   FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 


Accidents  are  very  common  but  they,  are  not 
allowed  to  interfere  with  the  festivities.  Be 
sides,  the  Kalla  considers  it  a  great  disgrace 
to  be  injured  while  chasing  a  bull. 


5.    £be  SMpavali 


^N  the  day  of  the  Dipavali  feast 
every  Hindu  gets  up  at  about 
4  o'clock  in  the  morning  and 
bathes  in  oil  before  sunrise.  From 
the  baby  to  the  oldest  member  in 
every  Hindu  household — every 
male  and  female — has  to  go  through  this  oil 
bath  before  sunrise — for  the  meritoriousness 
(puny a}  of  the  bath  is  supposed  to  be  lost 
if  it  is  riot  undergone  before  the  appearance 
of  the  Lord  of  the  day.  What  is  the  origin 
of  this  bath  and  why  is  so  much  sanctity 
attached  to  it  ?  The  Dipavali  too  is  only  of 
pitramc  sanction.  The  legend  or  legends 
which  are  quoted  for  the  observance  of  this 
feast  are  to  be  found  in  the  P>liagavata?±  At 
the  time  of  Sri  Krishna  there  was  a  mighty 
demon,  named  Narakasura,  reigning  over  the 
country,  called  Pragjyotisha — the  district  lying 
to  the  east  of  Bengal,  probably  the  western  por 
tion  of  Assam.  According  to  a  certain  story 
Narakasura  carried  off  the  earnings  of  Aditi, 
the  mother  of  the  gods.  The  gods  were  power- 


•24  HINDU    FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 


less  to  recover  the  jewels  and  applied  to  Sri 
Krishna  for  help.  Krishna  fought  with  the 
demon,  slew  him  and  hrought  back  the 
jewels.  Another  story  says  that  Narakasura 
assumed  the  shape  of  an  elephant  and 
carried  of!  the  daughter  of  Visvakarma— the 
architect  of  the  gods — and  outraged  her.  He 
also  seized  the  best  daughters  of  the  Gan- 
dharva  (demi-gods)  gods,  and  men  and 
the  divine  nymphs  themselves  and  made  for 
himself  a  harem  of  16,000  beautiful  damsels. 
During  his  reign  no  woman  considered  herself 
secure,  and  so  all  joined  together  and  petitioned 
Vishnu  to  destroy  the  demon  and  thus  put  an 
end  to  his  atrocities.  But  with  all  his  vices 
Narakasura  had  accumulated  such  a  vast  fund 
of  meritoriousness  by  his  penances  and  con 
templation  at  the  commencement  of  his  career 
that  Vishnu  for  a  longtime  condones  his  crimes, 
till  at  last,  unable  any  more  to  bear  his  havocs, 
allowed  Sri  Krishna  to  march  to  Pragjyotisha 
and  slay  him.  In  his  last  moments  Naraka 
sura  came  to  his  senses,  praised  the  deity  for 
his  having  come  down  in  the  incarnation  of 
Sri  Krishna  to  give  him  eternal  felicity  (moksha) 
and  began  to  repent  of  his  immoral  life.  As 


THE    DIPAVAL1  25 


he  was  always  a  gay  person  revelling  in  worldly 
pleasures,  feasts,  baths,  women,  display  of  fire 
works,  etc.,  he  requested  the  great  god  that 
the  day  of  his  death  (moJcsha)  should  be 
honoured  by  the  Hindus  in  revels  and  festivi 
ties.  "Let  it  be  so"  said  Sri  Krishna  and 
transferred  the  1(3,000  damsels  collected  by 
Narakasura  from  Pragjyotisha  to  his  own 
harem  at  Dvaraka,  where  they,  after  a  certain 
time,  became  Risk-is  or  sages. 
I  So,  the  Dipavali  goes  by  another  name  of 
tne  Narakackaturda&i,  i.e.,  the  fourteenth  day 
of  the  dark  fortnight  of  the  month  of  Tula 
(October — November)  on  which  the  demon 
Narakasura  was  put  to  death  by  Sri  Krishna. 
QAnd  the  Hindus  consider  the  oil  bath  in  the 
morning  of  that  day  before  sunrise  equal  to  a 
bath  in  the  sacred  waters  of  the  holy  Ganges. 
After  the  bath  in  the  early  morning  every 
Hindu  takes  a  small  quantity  of  a  special 
medicine  which  is  prepared  for  the  occasion, 
and  which  is  mostly  composed  of  ginger 
powder.  Then  every  male  who  can  afford  the 
cost  wears  a  pair  of  new  dkoties.  The  females 
and  children  have  also  their  saris  and  back- 
kana  cloths.  A  light  refreshment  of  sweet- 


26          HINDU    FEASTS,    FASTS    AND   CEREMONIES 


meats  and  fruits  is  then  taken  by  every  one 
and  the  children  and  youngsters  go  to  fire 
crackers  on  a  large  scale.  The  elder  members 
again  bathe  after  6  A.M.  and  proceed  to  the 
temple  (if  there  is  one  near)  to  worship  the 
God.  Then  relatives  and  friends  living  near 
are  visited.  Every  Hindu  who  meets  another 
asks  him  "  Have  you  had  the  holy  Ganges 
bath?"  "Yes,  Sir,  by  the  favour  of  your 
blessing"  is  the  reply.  At  the  end  of  every 
visit  to  a  house  pan  mpari  is  distributed.  At 
midday  a  sumptuous  dinner  closes  the  Dipa 
vali  festivities.  The  Dipavali  is  observed,  in 
the  Tamil,  Telugu  and  Kanarese  Districts  of 
the  Madras  Presidency  as  a  feast  set  apart  for 
wearing  new  cloths.  Men,  women  and  chil 
dren  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  wear  new 
cloths  on  this  da^y.  But  if  any  calamity,  such  as 
the  death  of  a  near  or  dear  relative,  has  visited 
any  family  within  a  year,  the  observance  of  the 
Dipavali  is  given  up  that  year  in  that  family. 
Mourning  in  Hindu  societies  is  observed  for 
one  year,  arid  a  house  which  is  in  mourning 
does  not  keep  up  festivities  for  that  period. 
This  is  the  universal  rule.  In  such  houses 
there  would  not  be  oil  baths  or  wearing  new 


THE   DIPAVALI 


apparel  or  exchange  of  visits,  or  congratula 
tions  for  the  holy  Ganges  baths.  But  even 
such  houses  freely  give  permission  to  their 
youngsters  to  indulge  in  crackers,  for  the  mirth 
of  children  should  not  be  curtailed  J  In  Madras 
the  wearing  of  the  new  apparel  is  done  during 
the  Krittika  feast  by  the  non-Brahman  popu 
lation. 

There  is  a  certain  Hindu  saying  to  the  effect 
that  "  toddy  a  thousand  years  old  will  be 
drained  on  the  Dipavali"  This  is  too  true 
with  the  low  and  poorer  class  of  the  Hindus, 
and  especially  the  labourers.  They  make  this 
the  greatest  drinking  day  of  the  year.  fChil- 
dren  enjoy  the  Dipavali  feast  the  most. 
With  them  this  feast  is  only  for  spending  as 
much  money  as  possible  in  harmless  fireworks. 
The  genius  of  European  merchants  has  in 
vented  so  many  varieties  of  crackers  and  gay 
lights  of  fancy  colours  and  these  with  the 
Chinese  crackers  are  bought  to  a  very  large 
extent  and  lighted  up  or  fired  as  the  case  may  be. 
Even  the  poorest  household  spends  a  couple  of 
rupees  at  least  in  providing  these  enjoyments 
to  its  youngsters.  Eich  men,  not  to  speak  of 
Zarnindars,  buy  for  hundreds  and  thousands 


28          HINDU    FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 


and  a  very  large  amount  of  money  which  could 
be  better  utilised  is  wasted  on  this  day; — in  smoke, 
as  an  ironical  Tamil  proverb  very  well  puts  it, 
Kasai  Kariyakkade  banam  vanyi  sudu — '"Do 
not  waste  your  money,  buy  crackers  and  lire 
them."  [Pipers  and  drummers  visit  every  house 
which  celebrates  this  feast  at  about  3  in  the 
morning  and  play  upon  their  instruments  for 
a  few  minutes  and  go  away.  This  is  of 
course  a  convenient  arrangement  to  awake  the 
inmates  in  time.  But  they  turn  up  again  in 
the  morning  to  demand  presents;] the  peons, 
the  house  servants,  the  sweeper  and  the  scav 
enger,  where  these  exist,  must  have  their 
bakshis  on  this  day.  ^These  are  minor  in 
dents  on  one's  purse  which  is,  however,  easily 
and  gladly  managed.  But  the  major  indents 
are  the  costly  presents  to  the  bride  or  bride 
groom  as  the  case  may  be.  The  bride's  parents 
invite  the  bridegroom  or  vice  versa  and  in 
addition  to  presenting  him  with  costly  cloths 
according  to  the  position  and  wealth  of  the 
party,  they  have  also  to  give  costly  presents  in 
the  shape  of  jewels  and  vessels  to  which  a 
large  quantity  of  gingelly  oil,  fruits  and  Other 
sundries  are  also  added.  This  is  generally 


THE    DIPAVALL 

done  on  the  first  Dipavali  after  the  marriage, 
once  by  the  bride's  family  and  a  second  time 
by  that  of  the  bridegroom,  but  the  presentation 
of  cloth  or  cloths  continues  as  long  as  the 
relationship  continues.  1  In  Northern  India 
and  among  the  Gujaratis  of  Madras,  the  Di 
pavali  is  the  day  of  the  closing  of  the  annual 
accounts.  From  this  day  new  accounts  are 
opened  in  newly-bound  account  books,  and 
this  continues  till  the  Dipavali  of  the  next 
year,  when  fresh  accounts  are  again  opened. 
/J^he  word  Dipavali  is  a  Sanskrit  com 
pound,  made  up  of  two  simple  words,  Dipa, 
meaning  lights,  and  avali,  a  row,  thus  a  row 
of  lights.  The  feast  is  purely  an  Aryan  one. 
In  Madras  we  do  not  notice  any  row  of  lights 
on  the  night  of  the  Dipavali  or  on  the 
preceding  night  in  front  of  houses  ;  to  a  small 
extent  we  observe  this  display  on  the  Krit- 
tika  day.  But  in  Northern  India,  Bombay 
and  Bengal  the  literal  meaning  of  the  word 
Dipavali  is  well  carried  out  in  the  ob 
servance  of  this  feast,  and  one's  eyes  are 
almost  dazzled  by  the  rows  of  lights  displayed 
'in  the  fronts  of  houses  in  exceedingly  fanciful 
arrangements!  Thanks  also  to  the  invention 


30          HINDU   FEASTS,   FASTS   AND   CE11EMONIES 


of  gas  lights,  every  Hindu  or  Parsee  merchant 
in 'Bombay  spends  hundreds  of  rupees  in  con 
ducting  gas  to  the  front  of  his  house  and  laying 
thousands  and  ten  thousands  of  lights  there. 
L  If  any  one  cares  to  enjoy  the  Dipavali  he 
should  be  in  Bombay  to  witness  this  feastA 


*   Gbe  Ibinfcus  an&  ttoc  Eclipse 


HE  Hindus  were  the  first  to 
have  correct  and  scientific 
ideas  about  eclipses.  Varaha- 
niihira,  the  greatest  Hindu 
astronomer,  who  flourished  in 
the  sixth  century  A. I).,  has  described  the 
phenomena  of  eclipses  in  the  same  way  as 
any  astronomer  of  the  twentieth  century 
wrould  do.  But  with  the  generality  of.  the 
Hindus  the  eclipse  is  the  swallowing  of  the 
sun  and  the  inoon  for  a  time  by  a  demon  called 
Hahu.  liahu  is  also  one  of  the  nine  planets  in 
the  astronomy  of  the  Hindus,  the  ascending 
node.  If  any  Hindu  calendar  is  consulted  for 
the  figure  of  an  eclipse,  Kahu,  in  the  form  of  a 
monstrous  serpent  or  dragon,  will  be  seen  to 
grasp  the  sun.  Thus  the  common  Hindu  be 
lieves  the  eclipse  to  be  a  great  calamity  that 
has  come  over  the  luminaries.  He  has  to  fast 
for  six  hours  before  the  commencement  of  the 
eclipse,  and  prepares  his  food  and  eats  only  after 
the  eclipse  is  over.  During  the  course  of  .the 
eclipse  he  has  to  perform  certain  ceremonies. 
As  soon  as  the  first  contact  takes  place  he 


32        HINDU    FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

bathes  and  offers  prayers  to  the  Manes.  After 
the  last  phase  of  the  eclipse  he  bathes  again, 
offers  certain  prayers  and  returns  home.  Dur 
ing  the  course  of  the  eclipse  he,  stays  by  the 
side  of  a  river  or  on  the  sea-shore.  Biver-baths 
and  sea-baths  are  performed  on  this  occasion 
to  propitiate  the  Manes.  Some  devout  Hindus 
go  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Rameswaram  or  Benares 
to  plunge  themselves  in  the  waters  of  the  ocean 
or  the  Ganges  during  the  eclipse. 

The  eclipse  must  take  place  on  some  asterisni 
or  other,  and  if  that  asterisni  happens  to  be 
that  in  which  any  Hindu  was  born,  he  has  to 
perform  some  special  ceremonies  to  absolve 
himself  from  impending  evil.  Every  Hindu 
who  was  born  in  the  asterism  in  which  the 
eclipse  takes  place  considers  it  as  foreboding 
some  calamity  for  him  in  that  year.  He 
makes  a  plate  of  gold  or  silver  or  of  palm-leaf, 
according  to  his  means,  and  ties  it  on  his  fore 
head,  with  Sanskrit  verses  inscribed  over  it. 
He  sits  with  this  plate  for  some  time,  performs 
certain  ceremonies,  bathes  with  the  plate  untied 
and  presents  it  to  a  Brahman  with  some  fee, 
ranging  from  four  annas  to  several  thousands 
of  rupees,  according  to  his  means.  Maha- 


THE    HINDUS  AND   THE    ECLIPSE  33 

rajahs  give  large  donations  to  Brahmans  on 
this  occasion.  Nearly  90  per  cent,  of  the 
copper-plate  grants  of  the  Vi  jay  anagar  period 
of  the  15th  and  16th  centuries  A.  D.  are  dona 
tions  of  villages  and  of  property  to  Brahmans 
by  the  Hindu  kings  of  Vij  ay  anagar  on  the 
occasions  of  either  a  solar  or  a  lunar  eclipse. 
Even  now  in  Travancore,  Mysore,  Baroda  and 
other  Native  States,  the  Brahmans  are  most 
munificently  remunerated  on  eclipse  occasions. 
The  belief  that  an  eclipse  is  a  calamity  to 
the  sun  or  the  moon  is  such  a  strong  Hindu  be 
lief  that  no  marriages  take  place  in  the.  months 
in  which  an  eclipse  falls.  Even  the  most  edu 
cated  Hindu  who  has  taken  his  degree,  with 
special  distinction  in  astronomy  probably, 
undergoes  all  the  Hindu  rites  on  the  occasion. 
The  eclipse  time  is  considered  a  most  auspi 
cious  time  for  mastering  the  incantations  for 
exorcising  the  evil  effects  of  serpent  bite,  or 
scorpion-sting,  and  of  devils,  and  many  special 
ists  in  these  directions  would  be  seen  standing 
in  water  and  muttering  these  incantations. 


7,   Ibinbu  funeral  IRites 


Hindu  funeral,  as  it  is  now  per 
formed,  has  undergone  many 
changes  from  what  it  was 
originally  meant  by  the  an 
cient  sages  of  India  to  be,  and 
as  such  deserves  handling  in 
a  critical  way.  Every  religion 
has  its  own  mode  of  conducting  its  funeral 
rites.  The  Hindu  mode  is  that  the  son  or  the 
sons  or  the  nearest  agnatic  kindred  must  per 
form  these  parting  ceremonies.  As  soon  as 
all  hope  of  life  is  given  up,  the  family  priest 
summons  all  the  sons  to  sit  by  the  side  of  the 
dying  father.  To  avoid  confusion,  let  us 
suppose  the  dying  party  to  be  the  father,  and 
that  his  sons  perform  the  rites.  Certain  do 
nations  are  first  given  to  the  Brahmans.  A 
lighted  lamp,  a  vessel  full  of  sesamum  seed,  a 
vessel  filled  with  oil,  a  milch  cow  with  its  calf 
— these  four  must  be  given,  or  if  a  person  is 
too  poor  to  buy  a  cow,  he  must  at  least  give 


HINDU   FUNERAL   RITES  35 


a  couple  of  rupees.  These  donations  are  con 
sidered  to  be  most  effective  in  washing  away 
the  sins  of  the  dying  in  an  ;  and,  as  a  corollary, 
he  who  receives  the  gifts  is  supposed  to  inherit 
the  sins  of  the  dying  person.  Hence  it  is  very 
difficult  to  find  persons  to  receive  the  donations 
voluntarily ;  and  to  induce  the  acceptance  of 
them,  large  fees  have  sometimes  to  be  offered. 
The  men  who  accept  the  bribes  are  Brahmans 
of  very  inferior  social  scale,  who  appear  with 
hideous  faces,  which  proclaim  that  the  average 
lustre  of  their  caste  has  left  them  long  ago. 
Then  succeeds  the  sacred  bath  to  purify  the 
soul  and  atone  for  the  sins  of  the  dying  person 
-it  is  called  the  Kaveri  or  samudra  snana,  as 
the  person  dying  happens  to  be  near  a  river  or 
the  sea — and  fees  are  paid  to  Brahmans,  who 
are  supposed  to  perform  the  ablutions.  The 
fee  for  each  bath  is  generally  six  annas  and  a 
quarter.  In  rich  families  fees  are  given  for  a 
thousand  such  baths.  As  it  is  considered  very 
respectable  to  receive  this  kind  of  fee,  a  good 
number  of  high  class  Brahmans  is  always 
available  for  this  purpose. 

After  giving  the  gifts  enumerated  above,  the 
son  or  sons  of  the  dying  man  sit  near  his  head 


36         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

and  chant  hymns  from  the  Vedas  to  the  dicta 
tion  of  the  family  priest.    This  is  a  most  solemn 
occasion.     The  weeping  and  crying  and  other 
outward    manifestations   of   mourning   cease. 
The  purport  of  the  prayer  is  that  all  the  sins 
of  the  dying  man  may  be  absolved  and  that  he 
may  find  a  happy  abode  in  Heaven.     When 
the  dying  man    actually  expires,   the    prayer 
ceases  and  all  the  relations  go  into   the  street 
mourning  and  wailing,  facing  the  south — this 
amounts  to  an  appeal  to  the  God  of  Death— 
whose  quarters  are  supposed  to  be  in  that  direc 
tion — to  show   mercy  to   their  dead   relation. 
Then  the  whole  household  assembles  round  the 
dead  person,  and  incessant  weeping  and  wail 
ing  proceed  for  three  or  four  hours.     The  males, 
however,   do  not  give  vent  to  their  sorrow  in 
this  way,  and  generally  keep  themselves  aloof. 
Some  of  the  old-school  women  also  come,  having 
learned  by  heart  several  mourning  ditties  which 
they  repeat,  and  make  a  pretence  of  weeping. 
If  any  of  these  old  women  have  any  insinua 
tions  to  make,   they  take  this  opportunity  of 
making     them,    and    quarrels    spring    up — of 
course,    after   the    mourning   days    are    over. 
When  the  time  for  the  removal  of  the  corpse 


HINDU   FUNEKAL   KITES  37 

to  the  burning  ground  has  arrived,  the  body 
has  to  be  washed  and  decorated.  The  religious 
rites  for  the  preparation  of  the  sacred  fire  to 
ignite  the  funeral  pyre  have  to  be  performed 
near  the  corpse.  The  daughters  and  other 
close  female  relatives  of  the  dead  man  bring 
water  in  pots  and  wash  and  decorate  the 
body,  while  the  sons  perform  the  religious 
ceremony  and  prepare  the  sacred  fire.  In 
the  meantime  the  construction  of  the  bier 
goes  on  outside  the  house.  When  every 
thing  is  ready,  the  leave-taking  ceremony 
takes  place.  This  consists  in  the  dead  man's 
palm  being  rubbed  with  as  many  two-anna 
pieces  as  there  are  close  relatives,  and  these 
pieces  being  then  presented  to  those  relatives, 
who  keep  them  as  long  as  they  live.  When 
this  is  concluded,  the  corpse  is  placed  on  a 
bier  of  green  palm  leaves,  the  grandsons  stand 
ing  ready  with  lighted  torches  to  accompany 
the  bier  to  the  burning  ground.  Young  women 
stay  at  home  but  elderly  ones  always  accom 
pany  the  corpse.  Arrived  at  the  burning 
ground,  elaborate  religious  ceremonies  are 
gone  through,  at  the  end  of  each  of  which 
a  large  fee  is  paid  to  religious  Brahmans, 


38          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

rich  people  sometimes  spending  a  large  sum 
of  rupees  on  these  funeral  obsequies  in 
the  belief  that  any  amount  so  expended 
always  adds  to  the  meritoriousness  of  the 
spender.  After  these  rites  the  body  is  placed  on 
the  pyre  and  the  fire  lighted.  The  sons  of  the 
deceased  sit  down  and  are  clean  shaved,  and 
after  that  bathe  and  return  home  with  the 
other  mourners.  The  sons  and  the  wife  of  the 
dead  man  are  the  chief  mourners!  This  almost 
ends  the  first  day's  rites. 

On  the  second  day,  the  rites  commence  very 
early  in  the  morning.  The  funeral  pyre  is  ex 
amined  and  the  remains  of  the  deceased  are  col 
lected,  while  prayers  are  said  and  rites  perform 
ed,  milk  and  cocoanut  water  being  sprinkled 
over  the  ashes  to  appease  the  thirst  of  the  dead 
man's  soul ;  and  other  oblations  in  the  form 
of  fried  rice,  pulses  and  dry  cakes  are  offered. 
The  funeral  party  then  returns  home.  There 
a  room  is  set  apart,  and  in  a  corner  of  it  a  stone 
to  represent  the  dead  man's  body  is  set  up, 
and  before  noon  every  day  certain  rites  are 
performed,  which  end  in  the  offering  of  rice- 
balls  to  the  soul  of  the  dead  man.  These  rice- 
balls  are  then  carried  out  and  thrown  away  in 


HINDU   FUNERAL   BITES  39 

a,  pond  or  river.  This  mode  of  offering  con 
tinues  till  the  twelfth  day,  when  the  dead  man 
is  considered  to  have  taken  his  place  in  Heaven 
along  with  the  other  departed  relatives.  This 
twelfth-day  ceremony  is  called  the  Sapindi- 
Jcarana,  meaning,  adding  the  newly  dead  to 
those  who  have  already  departed,  and  not  less 
than  thirty-two  donations,  varying  in  value 
according  to  the  pecuniary  position  of  the 
parties,  are  offered.  The  first,  second,  tenth, 
eleventh  and  twelfth  day  ceremonies  are  the 
most  sacred  and  tedious  ones,  but  they  are  all 
gone  through  by  the  Hindus.  The  thirteenth 
day  concludes  the  funeral  rites,  and  is  therefore 
called  Subhasvikarana,  meaning,  resuming  the 
usual  mode  of  happy  life  after  the  mourning 
days  are  over.  On  this  day  the  house  is  blessed 
by  the  priest,  presents  are  given  by  the  fathers- 
in-law  to  the  sons  who  were  engaged  in  these 
rites,  and  betel-leaf  chewing,  which  was  discon 
tinued  for  the  thirteen  days,  is  resumed  at  night. 
Let  us  now  turn  to  the  festive  portion — if 
that  term  can  be  aptly  applied  to  such  a  sorrow 
ful  occasion — of  the  funeral  rites.  The  ancient 
Hindu  sages  have  wisely  ruled  that  certain 
close  relatives  should  supply  the  mourning 


40          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

house  with  food  on  the  mourning  days.  These 
relatives  are  the  fathers  or  fathers-in-law  (or 
the  nearest  male  relatives  in  that  direction) 
of  the  sons  who  perform  the  funeral  rites.  If 
the  person  who  died  has  seven  sons,  the  duty 
of  supplying  the  mourning  house  with  food 
falls  on  the  fathers-in-law  of  all  the  seven  sons, 
if  they  are  all  married,  or,  if  not,  on  those  of 
the  sons  who  are  married.  The  outside  supply 
of  food  is  necessary  for  the  first,  second,  tenth, 
eleventh,  twelfth  and  thirteenth  days.  If 
there  are  six  different  parties  to  undertake 
this  kind  of  supply,  they  do  it  in  turns. 
If  their  number  is  insufficient,  some  of  these 
days  are  left  out  and  only  important  days,  as 
the  first,  tenth  and  the  thirteenth,  are  chosen, 
or  any  one  or  two  of  these  days.  So  far  as  the 
rule  goes,  it  is  a  wise  provision,  for  when  the 
house  goes  into  mourning,  its  comforts  in  the 
direction  of  feeding  will  be  neglected  unless 
some  outside  relation  is  chosen  for  the  occa 
sion.  This  duty  of  supply  is  called  sar  va.ikki- 
radu,  which  means  the  supplying  of  food  with 
pepper  water  ;  only  simple  food  is  meant,  and 
that  was  the  rule  in  ancient  days.  But  the 
modem  Hindu  custom  is  to  supply  a  grand 


HINDU   FUNERAL   RITES  41 

feast  with  all  the  modern  art  of  which  Hindu 
cookery  is  capable.  All  kinds  of  fruits,  sweets 
and  varieties  of  rice-preparations  are  offered  to- 
the  mourners.  One  father-in-law  vies  with 
another  in  his  competition  to  give  grander  and 
grander  dinners  on  the  successive  days,  and  to- 
crown  the  horror,  quarrels  sometimes  spring 
up  among  some  of  these  idiotic  relations  that- 
due  and  proper  invitation  was  not  sent  to  such 
and  such  a  party  to  be  present  at  the  dinner. 
Did  the  sages  ever  mean  that  their  simple 
ruling  should  be  thus  abused  by  modern  civili 
sation  ?  The  sooner  the  old  and  orthodox  cus 
tom  is  resumed  the  better.  On  the  night  of 
the  thirteenth  day  presents  in  the  shape  of 
new  cloths,  rings  and  money  are  given  to  the 
boys  and  girls  of  the  deceased  by  their  rela 
tives.  A  new  cloth  is  worn  by  almost  all  and 
the  mourning  proper  becomes  a  thing  of  the 
past.  The  monthly  ceremonies  are  kept  up 
and  the  annual  ceremony  closes  the  career  of 
the  dead  man  in  his  relationship  with  the  world 
of  the  dead,  and  he  becomes  a  mane  or  pitri. 


*   Iboli  anJ)  IkamanM 

tne  olcl  days  when  demons 
were  very  powerful  in  India 
there  was  a  she-demon  named 
Holika.  She  was  the  most 
wicked  of  her  race.  Every  day 
she  would  visit  some  town  or 
village  and  carry  away  some  of  its  children  to 
feast  upon  them.  These  cruelties  increased 
so  much  that  the  whole  world  complained  to 
the  king  of  the  Eakshasas.  Even  that 
monarch  who  belonged  to  a  proverbially  cruel 
race  was  moved  when  he  heard  that  all  the 
children  were  being  thus  eaten  up  by  Holika. 
He  did  not  like  to  displease  a  female  member 
of  his  own  class.  So  he  ordered  that,  as  Holika 
had  cultivated  a  special  taste  for  children's 
flesh,  the  people  should  give  her  one  child  for 
her  food  every  day,  making  their  own  arrange 
ments  to  do  so.  Even  this  they  considered 
a  great  favour  and  each  house  resolved  to  send 
by  turn  one  child  a  day.  When  one  village 
had  thus  had  its  turn,  the  next  village  or 


HOLI   AND   KAMANDI  43 

•city,  as  the  case  may  be,  took  up  the  arrange 
ment.  Thus  several  years  passed.  One  day 
the  lot  fell  upon  a  poor  old  woman  and  her 
grandson  had  to  be  sent  up  to  Holika  the  next 
morning.  That  was  her  only  child  then — her 
son  and  her  daughter-in-law  having  gone  away 
long  ago  to  the  land  from  the  borders  of  which 
no  traveller  returns.  Her  sorrow  knew  no 
bounds.  She  was  soon  to  lose  the  last  male 
member  of  her  family.  Her  extreme  sorrow 
moved  the  heart  of  every  one,  and  Providence 
too  seemed  to  pity  her.  It  so  happened  that  a 
holy  mendicant  chanced  to  pass  by  that  village 
accidentally  that  day.  He  heard  moanings 
in  that  old  woman's  house.  He  went  to  her 
and  on  making  sympathetic  enquiries  learnt 
the  cause.  He  was  a  holy  person  and  after 
some  contemplation  found  out  the  way  by 
which  he  could  save  not  only  that  old  woman 
but  the  whole  world  from  Holika's  havocs. 
Said  he : — "  My  good  old  woman !  do  not  fear. 
Holika  will  die  to-morrow  if  you  only  follow 
my  advice.  If  she  hears  vile  and  indecent 
abuses  and  obscene  expressions,  she  will  fall 
down  and  die.  It  is  so  decreed.  You  should 
therefore  collect  all  the  children  of  the  village 


44          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

and  when  Holika  turns  up  to-morrow  to  de 
mand  your  grandson,  these  children  must 
severely  rebuke  her,  using  obscene  and  inde 
cent  expressions  and  making  similar  signs  and 
symbols.  She  will  pursue  the  children.  They 
must  not  at  all  be  afraid  of  her,  but  must  con- 
tinue  to  pour  out  vile  abuses.  And  as  it  is  so 
decreed,  she  must  fall  down  dead."  Having 
said  this,  the  mendicant  went  away. 

The  old  woman  circulated  the  news  in  the 
village.  As  those  days  were  days  of  strong 
beliefs,  the  villagers  collected  together  all  the 
boys  and  girls  and  backed  them  up  secretly 
to  attack  Holika  when  pointed  out.  The  plan 
worked  excellently  well  and  Holika  died.  The 
children  joined  together  and  cremated  her 
body.  This  event  is  supposed  to  have  hap 
pened  on  the  full-moon  day  of  the  white-half 
of  Phalguna,  corresponding  to  the  latter  half 
of  the  month  of  March.  And  the  Holi  feast 
of  the  Hindus  originates  from  this  legend. 

In  Madras  the  Mahrattas  and  Lalas — mostly 
non-Brahmans — observe  this  feast  with  all 
sorts  of  hideousness.  The  Brahmans — Mah 
rattas — celebrate  it  by  a  feast.  In  other 
parts  of  India  all  castes  more  or  less  observe 


HOLI   AND   KAMANDI  45 

the  Holi.  There  is  no  religious  ceremony 
of  any  kind  connected  with  this,  but  there 
is  more  than  any  reasonable  amount  of  foolish 
practices  associated  with  it.  During  the  ob 
servance  of  this  feast  the  youngsters  of  the 
Lala  sect  in  Madras  make,  in  each  house  or  in 
common  for  a  whole  street,  an  image  of  Holika, 
sing  obscene  songs  before  it,  offer  sweetmeats, 
fruits  and  other  things  in  mock-worship  of  the 
image,  exchange  horse-play  compliments  by 
syringing  coloured- water  on  each  other's  clothes 
and  spend  the  whole  period  of  the  feast  like 
merry  butterflies  singing  and  chatting  and 
abusing.  Indecent  language  is  allowed  to 
be  indulged  in  during  the  continuance  of  this 
jolly  occasion.  At  about  1  A.M.,  on  the  full- 
moon  day,  the  image  of  Holika  is  burnt,  and 
children  sit  round  the  embers  and  beat  their 
mouths  making  a  mock-mourning  sound.  Ten 
der  children  are  shown  over  the  fire  for  a 
second  by  the  fond  mothers  and  this  process  is 
believed  to  remove  all  kinds  of  danger  from 
the  babies. 

Such  is  the  origin  of  this  feast,  which,  how 
ever,  very  few  happen  to  know.  Most  of  the 
observers  of  this  feast  imagine  that  the  object 


46          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

they  worship  is  Cupid  and  that  the  mock-funs 
they  observe  are  on  account  of  Kama,  the  God 
of  Love.  And  this  feast  which  is  observed  as 
the  Holi  in  Madras  and  Northern  India  is 
known  as  Kaman-pandikai  in  the  South.  And 
the  images  of  Cupid  and  his  wife  Kati  are 
painted,  worshipped  and  burnt  on  the  same 
day  and  hour  as  the  image  of  Holika.  And  it< 
is  also  most  curious  to  see  that  this  Kaman- 
pandikai  in  the  South  is  observed  more  by  the 
adults  than  by  the  children  who  also  take  part 
in  it.  The  burning  of  Cupid  by  Siva  has  been 
sung  by  more  than  one  Hindu  poet ;  but  none 
has  done  it  so  beautifully  as  Kalidasa  in  his 
Kumar usambliava,  or  the  "  Birth  of  the  War- 
god."  The  story  briefly  runs  thus  :  There 
was  a  mighty  Titan  in  times  of  yore  named 
Tarakasura.  He  was  such  a  great  terror  to  the 
celestials  and  a  fortiori  to  the  mortals.  One 
day  he  is  said  to  have  invaded  the  Divine 
world  and  carried  away  all  the  damsels  from 
Indra's  harem.  The  sun-god  by  his  order 
shone  like  the  moon.  The  wind-god  was  by  a 
similar  command  wafting  soft  and  sweet  breeze 
ever  by  the  side  of  this  Titan.  The  celestials 
were  terrified  at  his  havocs.  The  Divine 


HOLI   AND   KAMANDI  47 

assembly  met  to  concert  measures  to  put  down 
Taraka.  Brihaspati,  Indra's  minister,  rose 
up  and  said  that  the  offspring  of  Siva  and 
Parvati — Kumara — can  destroy  that  powerful 
Titan.  But  Siva  was  a  sage  who  was  per 
forming  penance.  How  to  make  him  court 
Parvati  ?  The  council  sent  for  Cupid  and  he 
boastingly  appeared  before  the  lord  of  the 
celestials  and  said  that  he  would  bind  any 
being,  whether  God  or  man,  by  the  chain  of 
woman's  love.  Indra  was  greatly  pleased.  It 
was  just  what  he  wanted.  So  he  sent  Cupid 
to  Siva,  requesting  him  to  dart  his  arrows 
rather  cautiously,  as  Siva  was  no  ordinary 
God.  And  Cupid  too,  when  he  was  told  the 
name  of  the  deity  that  he  had  to  conquer  by 
his  arrows,  became  terrified.  He  was  unable 
to  withdraw.  So  he  went  to  the  hermitage  of 
Siva.  At  Cupid's  approach,  the  birds  and  beasts 
of  the  forest  danced  with  joy  at  the  sudden 
setting-in  of  the  Spring  season.  The  drone 
drank  the  honey  which  remained  after  the  bee 
had  first  drunk  to  her  fill.  Parvati  was  help 
ing  Siva  with  flowers,  fruits  and  other  things 
which  were  required  for  that  god's  penance. 
Cupid  considered  that  everything  was  ex- 


48         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

tremely  favourable  to  him.  He  fixed  the 
arrow  of  love  to  his  bow  and  was  taking  his 
aim  at  Siva.  The  ever-holy  mind  of  Siva 
wavered  a  bit  and  he  cast  his  looks  on  Parvati, 
who  appeared  all  the  more  beautiful  that  day 
decorated  from  top  to  toe  with  all  the  flowers 
that  Spring  had  brought  into  existence  in 
that  hermitage.  Then  Siva  suddenly  regain 
ing  his  balance  of  mind,  laughed  at  his  o\vn 
weakness  and  looked  round  to  see  the  cause  of 
it.  He  saw  Cupid  at  a  distance.  The  celes 
tials  who  were  watching  from  above  noticed  the 
rage  of  Siva.  "  Please  subdue  your  anger  and 
save  poor  Cupid,"  begged  they.  But  before 
that  noise  reached  the  ears  of  Siva,  a  small 
spark  of  fire  got  unloosened  from  the  third  eye 
in  his  forehead  and  left  Cupid  an  image 
of  ashes.  This  event  is  believed  to  have 
occurred  on  the  full-moon  day  of  Phalguna. 
It  is  the  death  of  Cupid  in  this  unhappy 
manner  that  is  celebrated  as  Kaman-pandikai 
in  South  India.  A  flag  called  the  flag  of  Cupid 
is  left  planted  for  four  or  five  days  before  the 
full-moon  day,  in  a  prominent  place  in  every 
street,  is  worshipped  with  love  songs  and  other 
frolics  and  is  burnt  on  the  full-moon  day. 


HOLI  AND   KAMANDI  49 

As  both  these  events,  the  death  of  Holika  and 
the  death  of  Cupid,  occurred  on  the  same  day, 
this  feast  is  called  the  Holi  feast  by  some  and 
as  Kaman-pandikai  by  others,  the  first  five 
days'  feast  before  the  full-moon  being  called 
the  Holi-pandikai  and  the  next  three  days 
as  the  Kaman-pandikai.  As  the  Holi  feast 
is  celebrated  to  remove  the  evils  of  youngsters 
and  children,  Kaman-pandikai  is  supposed  to 
be  observed  to  remove  the  evils  that  may 
accrue  to  adults  and  grown-up  men  by  the 
setting-in  of  the  Spring.  If  they  go  wrong 
their  body  will  be  reduced  to  ash  as  was  Cupid's, 
is  the  moral. 


9.    IRalafcsbepae— < 
an&  IHew 


NE  of  the  striking  ways  in 
which  Hindu  Eevivalism  has 
made  itself  particularly  visi 
ble,  specially  among  the 
Hindu  community  in  Madras, 
in  recent  years,  is  the  weekly 
gatherings  in  different  parts  of  the  city  to 
hear  religious  discourses  by  professional 
preachers.  These  discourses  are  known  as 
KalaJcshepas  in  the  sacred  language  of  the 
East.  What  is  a  KalaJcshepa  ?  The  word  is 
a  Sanskrit  compound  formed  of  two  simple 
words  meaning  "  the  whiling  away  of  time," 
The  history  of  the  word  can  be  traced  to  the 
early  day^  of  the  earliest  of  the  Pur  anas. 

In  the  good  old  times  of  Ancient  India, 
whenever  a  king  or  any  great  personage  cele 
brated  a  religious  sacrifice,  several  learned 
persons  from  remote  parts  of  the  country  came, 
on  invitation,  to  take  part  in  the  celebration, 
their  primary  duty  being  to  assist  in  the  re 
ligious  rites.  And  these  rites  extended  over 


KALAKSHEPAS — OLD   AND   NEW  51 

a  large  space  of  time,  in  some  instances  to  as 
many  as  twelve  years  and  in  some  to  as  few  as 
twelve  days.  But  the  generality  of  sacred  rites 
lasted  for  a  period  of  twelve  months  ;  and  the 
spots  chosen  for  such  celebrations  were  the 
banks  of  a  stream  or  river  with  beautiful 
groves  or  other  natural  scenery.  The  cere 
monies  connected  with  the  performance  of  the 
rites  were  invariably  gone  through  in  the  first 
half  of  the  day,  and  the  royal  host  had  to  pro 
vide  some  sort  of  diversion  for  the  guests  for  the 
other  half.  And  this  diversion  had,  from  early 
times,  been  called  KalaJcshepa.  The  guests, 
among  whom  were  hundreds  of  men  learned 
in  various  branches  of  study,  often  had  new 
and  old  ideas  to  communicate  to  and  exchange 
with  each  other.  The  sages  of  old  utilised  the 
occasion  of  such  unique  gatherings  not  merely 
for  the  pleasant  whiling  away  of  their  time  but 
more  particularly  for  the  instruction  and 
mutual  enlightenment  of  the  guests.  After  the 
midday  meal,  these  learned  men  assembled  under 
the  cool  and  refreshing  shades  of  the  spacious 
trees  of  the  hermitage  and  spent  their  time  in 
the  most  pleasant  and  useful  manner  possible. 
A  few  who  were  learned  in  philosophy  would 


52         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 


form  themselves  into  a  group  under  a  stately 
banyan  and  discuss  the  several  systems  of  their 
special  branch  of  study.  Another  group  under 
the  sacred  pipal,  probably  codifiers  like  Manu, 
would  discuss  the  revisions  and  emendations  of 
moral  and  ethical  codes.  A  third  batch  would 
be  clearing  their  doubts  regarding  their  intona 
tion  in  the  chanting  of  Vedic  hymns.  Thus 
according  to  their  tastes  and  inclinations  the 
learned  sages  grouped  themselves  into  batches 
and  carried  on  discussions  in  their  lines  of 
thought ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  period  of  the 
sacrifice  they  left  the  hermitage  not  only  en 
riched  by  the  liberal  gifts  of  the  host  but  with 
increased  knowledge  acquired  from  exchange 
of  thoughts  with  their  fellow  professors,  which 
knowledge  they  diffused  among  the  people  at 
large  during  their  travels  from  place  to  place. 
Such  gatherings,  which  in  the  old  days  may 
be  said  to  have  somewhat  corresponded  to  the 
present  day  British  Association  stripped  of  all 
its  modern  environments,  were  the  result  of 
the  ancient  form  of  Kalakshepa.  And  students 
of  oriental  literature  will  find  descriptions  of 
such  gatherings  in  the  pages  of  the  ancient 
epics  of  India,  such  as  the  Mahabharata  and 


KALAKSHEPAS — OLD   AND    NEW  53 


the  Eamayana.  Nay,  the  whole  of  the  Maha- 
bharata  is  said  to  have  been  related  during  one 
of  these  long  sacrifices.  In  ancient  times 
Kalakshepas  were  few  and  far  between.  But 
wherever  arid  whenever  such  took  place  they 
always  resulted  in  a  substantial  addition  to 
the  literature  of  the  country  and  the  enlighten 
ment  of  the  people  at  large. 

But  now  these  Kalakshepas  have  multiplied 
like  mushrooms  and  in  many  cases  persons 
with  no  pretensions  to  learning  stand  up  as 
preachers.  The  original  object  of  instruction  is 
lost  sight  of,  and  Mammon  is  the  God  pre 
siding  over  most  of  these  exhibitions.  Most  of 
the  Bliagavatas  are  self-styled ;  and  having 
managed  to  get  a  smattering  knowledge  of  a  few 
puranic  tales,  they  make  Kalakshepa  of  these 
tales,  not  on  religious  occasions  but  invariably 
during  the  Eahukala  time  of  a  Sunday  evening, 
nor  before  learned  assemblies  always,  as  in  days 
of  old,  but  often  before  unlearned  and  un 
critical  audiences.  In  the  majority  of  instances 
at  the  present  day  it  is  the  inspiring  nature  of 
the  themes  chosen  for  KalaJcshepa  and  the  ac 
companiment  of  music  that  attract  large  crowds 
to  such  discourses  more  than  the  learning  or 


54         HINDU    FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 


powers  of  exposition  of  the  preacher.  Whether 
the  audiences  return  home  the  wiser  for  having 
attended  such  lectures  or  not,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  Bhagavatas  return  the  richer  ; 
for,  their  fees,  in  most  cases,  for  a  lecture  range 
from  Us.  10  to  100  according  to  their  power 
to  amuse,  instruct  or  divert  the  audience. 
One  with  a  decidedly  musical  talent  is  more 
popular  among  the  people  than  one  with  mere 
learning.  Sometimes  these  modern  Bhagavatas 
drive  in  coaches  to  their  places  of  preaching 
while  the  sages  of  the  old  had  perhaps  to 
perform  their  long  and  tedious  journeys  on 
foot.  Some  of  them  robe  themselves  in  silks 
and  shawls  and  glitter  in  diamonds,  while  the 
Bhagavatas  of  old  were  content  perhaps  with 
the  bark  of  trees.  Many  of  the  popular 
Bhagavatas  often  earn  Es.  200  to  500  and 
sometimes  more  a  month.  For  all  that  what 
is  an  average  Bhagavata  ?  When  compared 
with  the  sages  of  old  most  of  the  modern 
Bhagavatas  have  only  a  show  of  knowledge 
and  are  yet  admired  by  an  audience  who 
wonder  "how  such  a  small  head  could  carry 
so  much  wonderful  knowledge"  in  Tamil, 
Telugu,  Kanarese,  Sanskrit,  Mahratti,  Hin- 


KALAKSHEPAS — OLD   AND   NEW  55 


dustani,  and  sometimes  English  also.     As  is 
the  Bhagavata,  so  is  the  audience. 

But  in  these  days  of  widespread  irreverence 
and  irreligion,  preachers,  however  poor  in 
attainments  and  however  low  they  have  fallen 
from  the  standard  of  the  ideal  preachers  of  old, 
still  have  some  power  of  God  in  their  hands, 
provided  the  Hindu  public  who  are  catered  for 
by  these  professionals  learn  to  be  discriminat 
ing  in  the  bestowal  of  their  patronage  and 
exacting  in  their  judgment  of  the  qualifications 
and  capabilities  of  the  preachers.  There  are 
many  religious  organizations  in  Madras,  which 
ought  to  combine  for  their  common  good  and 
resolve  to  encourage  only  the  really  learned 
among  these  professionals.  A  great  responsi 
bility  therefore  lies  on  the  leaders  of  the  Hindu 
community  in  this  matter,  and,  if  only  they 
introduce  wholesome  reforms  in  their  field  of 
popular  education  a  great  deal  of  good  might 
in  time  be  expected  by  the  people. 


10.  Gbe  flDufcfcoti  or  \Daihuntba  j£fca&a0i 

i 

BE  word  Ekadasi  means  the 
eleventh  day  of  a  fortnight,  and 
there  are  thus  two  Ekadasis 
every  month.  All  the  twenty- 
four  Ekadasis  throughout  the 
year  are  sacred  to  a  Hindu. 
Strict  fasting  and  prayer  have 
to  be  observed  throughout  the  Ekadasi  day. 
The  orthodox  Hindu  bathes  early  in  the  morn 
ing  in  a  running  stream,  tank,  or  well,  and 
goes  through  a  series  of  prayers.  '  He  must 
not  hold  any  conversation  with  persons  of  low 
caste,  with  those  who  have  renounced  the 
Hindu  religion,  with  liars,  with  thieves  and 
others  of  abandoned  character.  The  company 
of  those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  plundering 
the  property  of  others  or  temple  property  must 
be  strictly  avoided  on  the  EJcadasi  day.  The 
orthodox  Hindu  observing  this  fast  must  raise 
his  eyes  towards  the  sun  to  expiate  the  sin  of 
having  seen  these  bad  people,  if  ever  he  hap 
pens  to  meet  them  on  this  day.  He  should 
spend  his  whole  time  in  worshipping  Govinda 
by  flowers,  fruits,  incense  and  Vedic  hymns. 


THE    MUKKOTI    OR   VAIKUNTHA   EKADASI  57 


He  must  avoid  bad  or  cruel  words  in  talking 
to  people.  He  must  fast  day  and  night  and 
devote  his  whole  time  to  pure  religious 
thoughts  and  prayers — all  of  which  must  relate 
only  to  the  god  Krishna.  Ekadasi  of  the 
dark  half  of  the  month  is  as  pure  as  that  of 
the  light  half  of  the  month.  He  who  observes 
the  Ekadasi  strictly  gets  all  the  meritorious- 
ness  that  is  ascribed  to  the  performance  of 
charitable  acts  during  the  solar  or  lunar 
eclipses  or  to  the  performance  of  the  Asva- 
medha  or  horse-sacrifice.  The  meritoriousness 
which  is  attained  by  an  anchorite  after  per 
forming  penance  for  full  sixty  thousand  years 
is  acquired  by  him  who  observes  but  one 
EJcadasi-fasi  rigidly.  The  fame  which  is 
attained  by  a  donation  of  1,000  cows  to  Brah- 
mans  is  acquired  by  him  who  observes  a  single 
EJcadasi  correctly.  The  keeping  of  this  fast  is 
more  meritorious  than  the  giving  of  acres 
as  gifts  to  Brahmans,  and  more  holy  than  im 
parting  the  sacred  knowledge  of  the  Vedas 
to  students.  It  is  several  times  superior  to 
feeding  starving  men,  for  it  is  the  day  most 
sacred  to  Yishnu.  The  observance  of  this  fast 
on  this  day  gives  one  eternal  felicity  in  the 


58          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

heavens.  The  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  waters 
and  sacred  places  is  recommended  only  to 
those  who  have  not  understood  the  sanctity  of 
the  Ekadasi.  All  the  hard  penances  of  a  rigid 
anchorite  are  prompted  by  utter  stupidity 
inasmuch  as  he  could  easily  avoid  them  if  he 
would  observe  but  one  Ekadasi  strictly.  He 
who  observes  the  Ekadasi  attains  all  his  ends 
and  he  who  does  not  observe  it  is  the  worst  of 
sinners.' 

This  is  the  description  given  in  the  Bhavi- 
shyottara-purana  of  the  sanctity  of  the  Eka 
dasi.  Every  orthodox  Hindu,  be  he  Smarta, 
Vaishnava  or  Madhva,  has  to  observe  this  fast 
rigidly.  Some  of  the  Yaishnavas  and  the 
Madhvas  have  such  a  great  regard  for  the  Eka 
dasi  fasting  that  they  give  up  on  this  day  the 
performance  of  the  annual  ceremonies  to 
satisfy  the  manes  of  their  departed  forefathers, 
if  the  ceremonies  happen  to  fall  on  this  day. 
The  Smartas  and  some  of  the  Yaishnavas 
will  consider  this  as  amounting  to  giving  up 
the  ceremonies,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  per 
formed  on  the  day  on  which  they  fall.  But 
those  Vaishnavas  and  the  Madhvas  who  give 
up  the  ceremonies  have  their  own  arguments 


THE    MUKKOTI    OK   VAIKUNTHA   EKADASI  59 

for  doing  so.  When  they  do  not  themselves 
eat  on  the  Ekadasi  day,  the  manes  of  their 
forefathers  have  no  claim  to  be  fed  by  cere 
monies  and  so  the  right  to  perform  these 
ceremonies  rises  only  on  the  day  succeeding 
the  fasting  day.  The  observance  of  the 
Ekadasi  day  is  not  solely  based  upon  puranic 
belief.  There  are  several  Upanishads,  which 
are  regarded  to  be  equal  in  sacredness  to  the 
Vedas  and  which  also  attribute  the  greatest 
sanctity  to  the  observance  of  the  Ekadasi  fast. 
All  this  is  about  Ekadasi  in  general.  And 
it  must  once  for  all  be  said  that  an  orthodox 
Hindu  looks  upon  all  the  Ekadasis  at  all  times 
of  the  year  as  the  same,  as  far  as  their  sanctity 
is  concerned.  He  does  not  attribute  more 
sacredness  to  one  and  less  to  another.  But  by 
the  Vaishnavas,  the  Mukkoti  or  Vaikuntlia 
Ekadasi  is  considered  the  most  holy  of  all  the 
Ekadasis.  No  direct  authority  for  this  belief 
so  far  as  we  know  exists  anywhere  in 
the  sacred  writings  of  the  Hindus.  The 
Puranas  and  the  Upanishads  speak  of  the 
sacredness  of  Ekadasi  in  general  and  on 
this  head  all  are  agreed.  But  what  is  the 
reason  for  attributing  special  sanctity  to  the 


60          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEEEMONIES 


Mukkoti  Ekadasi  which  occurs  in  December- 
January  ?  The  following  seems  to  be  the 
explanation  : — Krishna  in  the  Bhagavadgita 
says  to  Arjuna  that  if  he — the  deity — is  looked 
at  in  the  light  of  months,  he  is  the  month  of 
Margasira  (12th  December — llth  January). 
The  idea  is  that  this  month  is  more  to  the 
liking  of  the  God.  As  the  Mukkoti  Ekadasi 
falls  in  the  light  half  of  this  month  it  must 
have  been  held  specially  sacred  by  the  Brah- 
mans.  This  sacred  day  of  the  light  fortnight 
of  Margasira,  this  Mukkoti  Ekadasi,  is  repre 
sented  as  a  female  deity  in  the  Brahmanda- 
purana  (the  gender  of  Ekadasi  is  feminine) 
and  to  have  originated  from  the  body  of  Krishna 
himself.  The  statement  of  Krishna  in  the 
Gita  that  he  is  the  month  of  Margasira  among 
months  and  the  story  in  the  BraJimandapurana 
that  the  goddess  presiding  over  this  Ekadasi 
sprung  from  the  body  of  Krishna  himself  must 
be  the  main  reasons  for  the  Mukkoti  Ekadasi 
being  held  highly  sacred  by  the  Hindus.  Apart 
from  both  these,  there  is  another  cause  why  the 
Yaishnavas  deem  this  day  most  sacred.  One 
of  their  great  sages,  Namrnalwar  attained  his 
felicity — Vaikuntlia — on  this  day,  according  to 


THE   MUKKOTI   OR   VAIKUNTHA  EKADASI  61 

Vaishnava  legends.  The  thirty-three  crores  of 
gods  are  said  to  have  come  down  to  witness  it. 
Hence  this  Ekadasi  is  called  VaiJcuntha  Eka- 
dasi  or  Mukkoti  Ekadasi,  which  latter  is  a 
shortened  form  of  Muppattu  Mukkoti  Ekadasi. 

In  Vishnu  temples  a  special  gateway  leading 
to  the  shrine  is  opened  on  this  day  and  he  who 
passes  through  this  doorway  is  considered  to 
have  passed  through  the  gates  of  Vaikuntha 
or  the  abode  of  felicity  in  the  heavens,  like 
Nammalwar,  a  famous  Yaishnava  saint.  The 
Madhvas  and  the  Smartas  who  observe  the 
Ekadasi  equally  well  with  the  Yaishnavas  do 
not  appear  to  attach  any  special  merit  for  the 
passage  through  this  special  gateway,  which  is 
called  the  Vaikuntha  gateway. 

The  Mukkoti  Ekadasi  is  observed  in  all  Yaish 
nava  temples.  Ten  days  before  and  ten  days 
after  it  are  also  held  sacred  by  the  Yaishnava 
sect  of  the  Tenkalai  class,  as  the  recitation  of 
Tiruvaymoli — the  Tamil  Vaishnava  Veda — is 
supposed  to  have  taken  place  before  the  god 
Ranganatha  in  Srirangarn  on  these  days.  In 
this  sacred  island-shrine  of  the  Vaishnavas  this 
feast  is  celebrated  in  grand  style  and  pilgrims 
flock  to  it  from  all  parts  of  India. 


U.  Gbe  Ikrittifca 


HE  Krittika  is  a  feast  in  honour 
of  the  glory  of  Siva.  The 
legend  regarding  this  feast  is 
as  follows :  Brahma  and  Vishnu 
had  a  dispute  among  them 
selves  as  to  who  was  the 
superior  of  the  two,  and  ap 
pealed  to  Siva.  To  decide  the  superiority, 
Siva  devised  a  means.  He  said  that  he 
would  stand  up  as  an  all-pervading  pillar  of 
fire,  that  Brahma  should  traverse  the  sky  and 
discover  the  top  of  the  pillar,  and  that  Vishnu 
should  find  his  way  to  the  nether  world  and 
discover  the  foot  of  it.  Brahma  called  at  once 
his  swan  vehicle  and  started,  and  Vishnu 
assumed  the  form  of  a  boar  and  went  on  boring 
and  boring  to  the  nether  world  and  down  and 
down  to  discover  the  foot.  He,  who  returned 
first  and  reported  what  he  was  asked  to  see, 
was  to  be  pronounced  the  superior  of  the  two. 
That  was  the  test  of  superiority.  So  Brahma 
and  Vishnu  were  very  busy  travel  ling  one  to 


THE    KRITTIKA  63 


the  upper  and  the  other  to  the  nether  world. 
They  are  said  to  have  gone  on  and  on  and  on 
for  several  Yugas  (eras)  with  no  avail.  While 
Brahma  was  travelling  up  he  observed  a  KetaJci 
(Tamil :  Talambu)  flower,  the  sweet  scented 
flower  of  the  sere wpine,  travelling  down  towards 
the  earth.  It  is  stated  that  Brahma  stopped 
the  flower  and  asked  him  to  relate  his  his 
tory.  u  0,  I  was  on  the  head  of  Siva 
several  centuries  ago.  I  left  it  and  am  going 
down  to  the  earth.  0,  what  a  long  travel 
I  have  had !  How  far  is  the  earth  yet  from 
this  place  ?  And  who  are  you,  please,  and 
what  is  your  object  in  travelling  up,"  said  the 
flower.  Brahma: — "I  am  Brahma,  and  was 
asked  by  Siva  to  discover  the  top  of  his  head. 
I  left  the  earth  several  Yugas  ago.  If  what 
you  say  is  true,  I  have  not  done  half  the  way 
yet.  But  will  you  mind  doing  me  a  small 
favour  ?  Vishnu  and  I  were  asked  by  Siva  to 
discover  his  head  and  foot,  respectively.  I 
shall  say  that  I  saw  the  head,  and  cite  you  as 
my  witness.  You  must  confirm  me  as  you  say 
that  you  occupied  once  that  part  of  Siva's  body." 
"Agreed,"  said  the  sere  wpine  flower,  for,  as 
he  had  a  long  journey  to  perform  to  reach 


64         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS  AND   CEKEMONIES 


the  earth,  he  liked  the  idea  of  securing  a  com 
panion  in  Brahma  for  his  travels  and  this  he 
could  gain  by  uttering  a  petty  lie.  So  Brahma 
and  the  Ketaki  flower  started  together  on 
their  downward  journey  and  came  to  Siva 
after  several  Tug  as.  Brahma,  of  course,  had 
carefully  got  by  heart  what  he  had  heard 
from  the  Ketaki  about  the  head  of  Siva. 
As  soon  as  they  reached  the  earth,  Brahma 
said  to  Siva  : — "  Holy  Sir  !  I  have  seen  your 
head."  Siva  understood  in  himself  by  his 
superior  powers  that  it  was  impossible.  Still, 
to  prove  that  Brahma  was  uttering  a  lie,  he 
asked  him  to  describe  it.  Brahma  repeated 
the  story  that  he  had  heard  from  the  flower 
and  cited  the  Ketak-i  as  his  witness.  "  Vile 
wretch,"  said  Siva  to  the  screwpine,  "as  you 
have  uttered  a  falsehood  before  me,  may  you 
never  be  used  in  my  worship."  And  even  to 
this  day  the  sweet  scented  screwpine  flower, 
on  account  of  this  curse  of  Siva,  is  never  used 
in  Siva  temples  for  the  worship  of  Siva.  And 
as  Brahma  lied  before  Siva  he  was  cursed  to 
go  without  temples  in  this  earth.  So  even  now 
Brahma  has  no  temple  in  the  whole  of  India. 
Thus  in  short  runs  the  legend. 


THE    KEITTIKA  65 


The  Krittika  feast  is  celebrated  to  com 
memorate  the  occasion  of  Siva's  having  stood 
up  as  a  fire-pillar  on  this  day.  What  the  Dipa- 
vali  is  to  the  Gujaratis  in  the  Gujaratipet  of 
Madras,  so  is  Krittika  to  the  other  Hindus.  A 
row  of  lights  will  be  observed  in  front  of 
every  house  on  this  night  in  the  whole  of 
Southern  India.  Children  take  to  firing- 
crackers.  The  non-Brahman  population  of 
Madras  wear  new  cloths  on  this  day.  As 
Siva  is  supposed  to  have  appeared  in  the 
form  of  a  pillar  of  radiance  on  this  day, 
in  every  place  where  there  is  a  Siva  temple 
a  big  rod  some  25  or  30  feet  high  is  planted 
opposite  to  the  temple  in  an  open  space 
and  left  covered  up  with  a  thick  coating 
of  dried  palm  leaves  from  top  to  bottom.  The 
whole  work  assumes  the  form  of  a  leafy 
cylinder  of  about  five  feet  in  diameter.  In  the 
evening,  after  sun-set,  the  Siva  god  of  the 
village  or  town  is  taken  out  of  the  temple  in 
procession.  The  procession  stops  before  the 
cylinder.  A  brief  ceremonial  worship  is  per 
formed  and  then  lighted  camphor  is  thrown 
at  the  foot  of  the  cylinder.  The  whole  work 
now  blazes  up  and  a  great  conflagration 

5 


66          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

ensues  which,  of  course,  is  so  well  arranged 
as  not  to  injure  any  house  or  property.  While 
this  cylinder  continues  to  burn,  the  worship 
pers  assembled  there  throw  pulverised  resin 
over  it.  This  is  the  closing  of  the  feast  in 
temples  situated  in  the  plains.  As  soon  as 
the  leafy  pillar  is  reduced  to  ashes,  the  vil 
lagers  assembled  collect  the  embers  which  are 
considered  to  be  the  body  of  Siva,  and  mirac 
ulous  powers  are  attributed  to  them.  Some 
times  they  are  used  for  manuring  the  fields 
in  the  expectation  of  a  good  harvest.  In  the 
places  sacred  to  Siva,  where  temples  are  situ 
ated  on  the  tops  of  mountains,  the  burning 
of  the  leafy  pillar  takes  place  a  day  after 
that  observed  in  the  plains.  Sometimes  a  big 
caldron  containing  ghee,  camphor  and  other 
combustibles  is  lighted  on  the  mountain  top 
and  this  continues  to  bum  for  a  whole  month. 
At  Tiruvannamalai,  Trichinopoly,  Tiruttani, 
Mayilam,  and  other  places  where  the  temples 
are  situated  on  hills,  the  whole  rock  on  which 
the  pagoda  stands  is  illuminated  and  the  sight 
is  rendered  as  grand  as  temple  funds  will 
admit.  The  view  at  Tiruvannamalai  on  the 
Krittika  feast  night  is  supposed  to  be  the 


THE    KRITTIKA  67 


grandest  in  Southern  India.  This  feast  takes 
place  in  the  month  of  Krittika  (November — 
December)  when  the  constellation  of  that 
name  is  in  conjunction  with  the  moon,  which 
occurs  on  the  full-moon  day  of  this  month. 
What  Shah-e-berat  is  to  Muhammadans  so  is 
Krittika  to  the  Hindus — a  night  of  illumi 
nations  and  lights.  This  feast  is  generally 
supposed  to  conclude  a  course  of  heavy  rains 
that  follow  the  North-East  Monsoon.  "  After 
Krittika  there  is  no  rain"  is  the  Tamil  proverb 
—"KarttikaikJcappuram  rnalai  illai."  As  in 
the  Dipavali,  there  are  special  presents  in  the 
Krittika  feast  also  to  the  newly  married  bride 
in  the  shape  of  cloths,  vessels,  brass  or  bronze 
lamps,  and  others. 


12, 


flfcabamafcfca 


HE  full-moon  day  of  the  month 
of  Kumbha  (corresponding  to 
12th  February  to  12th  March) 
is   held  sacred  by  the  Hindus 
throughout  India  for  bathing  in 
the    sacred   tank    called     the 
Mahamakha-saras   in  Kumba- 
konam.     This  occasion,    which   occurs 
annually,  is  called  the  MaJcham,  i.e.,  the 
occasion  when  the  moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism  oiMaJcham  in  the  month  of  Kumbha. 
But  the  Maliamakliam  or  the  great  Makham  is 
an  event  which  occurs  only  once  in  twelve  years. 
The   planet     Jupiter   takes    twelve   years   to 
complete   one   revolution   round  the   sun  and 
during   this  course   when  it  is  in   conjunction 
with    the   moon   in   the   MaWia    asterism    of 
the   constellation  of  Leo — Simha — the  Malia- 
makham  occurs.     This  is  an  astronomical  inci 
dent  which  takes  place  only  once  in  twelve 
years,   and  when  it  takes  place  the  event  is 
celebrated  as  above  mentioned.     All  the  holy 


THE  MAHAMAKHA  69 


rivers  and  bathing  places  on  the  seashore  are 
resorted  to  on  this  occasion ;  but  the  Hindu 
who  takes  his  bath  in  the  holy  waters  of  the 
MahamaJcham  tank  at  Kumbakonam  is  con 
sidered  to  have  reaped  the  beneficial  effects  of 
several  baths  in  all  the  holy  waters  of  India. 
Such  being  the  belief  of  the  Hindus  an 
account  of  the  origin  of  the  Mahamakham  fes 
tival  may  be  interesting.  The  MahamaJcham 
tank,  which  is  the  biggest  one  in  Kumba 
konam,  is  situated  in  the  south-eastern  portion 
of  the  town  and  is  about  a  mile  to  the  west 
of  the  South  Indian  Kailway  Station  there. 
In  shape  it  is  a  nine-sided  polygon  with  five 
re-entrant  angles.  Two  very  old  Siva  temples 
dedicated  to  Abhimukteswara  and  Visvanatha 
are  situated  respectively  on  its  eastern  and 
northern  sides,  and  streets  run  on  the  other 
two  sides.  The  legend  of  the  tank,  as  disclosed 
by  the  Sthalapurana  of  Kumbakonam,  runs  as 
follows  : — Under  the  orders  of  Siva,  Brahma 
collected  the  essence  of  all  the  sacred  waters 
in  the  wTorld  in  a  pot  and  mixed  with  it  the 
nectar  (devamrita)  also.  He  most  carefully 
secured  this  pot  on  the  top  of  the  mountain 
Meru.  But  during  the  great  deluge,  when  the 


70         HINDU    FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEEEMONIES 


world  was  destroyed  by  an  overflowing  inunda 
tion,  the  pot  somehow  lost  its  position  and 
was  observed  floating  on  the  water.  At  the 
end  of  the  deluge,  when  the  waters  subsided, 
the  pot  rested  in  a  place  now  called  Kumba- 
konarn  and  at  the  spot  where  the  temple  of 
Kumbheswara — from  whom  the  town  derives 
its  name — is  situated.  The  compound  word 
"  Kumbakonam,"  which  is  the  name  of  the 
city,  comes  from  two  simple  Sanskrit  words 
kuniblia  meaning  an  earthen  pot  and  gliona 
the  nostril  or  neck  of  it.  Thus  the  name  of 
the  city  is  connected  with  the  pot  of  Brahma. 
But  to  continue  the  legend  : — When  at  the 
beginning  of  the  creation  of  the  world  after  the 
deluge,  the  god  Siva  was  wandering  over  the 
earth  in  the  disguise  of  a  hunter,  he  saw  this 
earthen  pot,  and  as  he  then  held  a  bow  in  his 
hand,  he  aimed,  in  sportive  mood,  at  the  neck 
of  the  pot.  The  pot  broke  and  the  holy  water 
in  it  began  to  flow  out.  It  found  its  level  in 
a  hollow  pit.  This  is  the  very  same  pit  that 
has  become  now,  according  to  the  legend,  the 
sacred  tank  of  Mahamakhasaras  at  Kumba 
konam.  When  Siva  saw  the  pot  break,  he 
made  a  lingam  out  of  sand  and  placed  it  over 


THE    MAHAMAKHA  71 

the  pot  and  infused  his  own  fiery  energy  into 
it.  When  this  was  done,  Brahma  came  down 
from  the  upper  regions  with  thirty-three  crores 
of  devas  and  worshipped  the  ling  am  in  be 
fitting  style.  He  was  engaged  in  his  prayers 
for  a  very  long  time,  and  came  to  the  close  on 
a  MahamaJiham  day.  He  got  up  from  his 
contemplative  position  and  proceeded  to  bathe 
in  the  tank  before  him.  But  lo  !  a  most  holy 
congregation  was  before  him.  The  great  gods 
Nageswara,  Mukteswara  and  others,  the  god 
desses  of  all  the  holy  waters  of  the  world — 
Ganga,  Yamuna,  Setu,  etc.,  were  already 
waiting  there  to  bathe  in  the  tank  along  with 
the  lord  of  creation — Brahma.  Even  the  deity 
of  Benares — Visveswara — had  come  there  not 
to  lose  the  rare  opportunity.  They  all  greeted 
Brahma  and  praised  him  for  his  faith  in  Siva. 
Brahma  proceeded  to  bathe  in  the  tank  by  way 
of  bringing  the  period  of  his  contemplation  to 
a  close,  and  all  the  gods  followed  suit  and  took 
their  baths.  These  events  occurred  on  a  Malta- 
maJcham  day,  and  from  that  time  forward 
bathing  in  this  tank  on  the  MahamaJcham 
occasion  has  come  to  be  considered  as  equal 
to  bathing  in  all  the  sacred  rivers  and  before 


72         HINDU  FEASTS,   FASTS  AND   CEREMONIES 

all  the  gods.  Such  then  is,  according  to  the 
legend,  the  origin  of  this  tank  and  of  this 
festival. 

Every  orthodox  Hindu  believes  that  the 
holy  waters  of  the  Ganges  come  down  to  thi& 
tank  on  this  occasion.  Most  of  the  old  Brah- 
mans  will  say  that  they  observed  the  goddess 
Ganga  raise  one  of  her  hands  from  underneath 
the  surface  of  the  water  of  this  sacred  tank  to 
announce  to  the  anxious  pilgrims  her  arrival  in 
the  tank,  and  that  soon  after,  a  lime  fruit,  a 
garland  of  flowers  and  a  roll  of  palm  leaf  were 
seen  floating  on  the  water.  The  latter  are 
considered  to  be  the  signs  of  the  visit  of  a 
deity,  especially  of  a  female  deity.  The  pre 
liminaries  to  this  festival  commence  ten  days 
before  the  MahamaJcham  day.  From  distant 
quarters  of  India  pilgrims  flock  to  Kumbako- 
nam  in  very  large  numbers.  On  the  Maha 
maJcham  day  all  the  principal  idols  of  Siva  in 
the  town  march  in  procession  to  this  tank. 
Thousands  of  pilgrims  and  devotees  follow 
these  idols  chanting  hymns  in  praise  of  the  holy 
rivers.  When  the  procession  reaches  the  pillar 
post  near  the  Nageswara  temple  one  great 
mass  of  moving  heads  is  observed  from  that 


THE   MAHAMAKHA  73 


elevated  position  as  far  as  the  eyes  can  reach 
to  the  East,  South,  North  and  West.  For, 
Mahamakham  is  considered  the  greatest  occa 
sion  in  India,  and  large  crowds  flock  to  wit 
ness  it.  The  municipal  authorities  take  the  pre 
caution  of  reducing  the  depth  of  the  water  in  the 
tank  and  leave  only  water  just  sufficient  to 
enable  the  pilgrims  to  bathe  without  danger  of 
being  drowned.  This  wise  precaution  has  been 
taken  from  time  immemorial ;  but  instead  of 
the  steam  engines  now  used,  piccotahs  or 
country  water-lifts  were  used  in  those  old  days. 
The  idols  of  gods  that  march  in  procession 
are  temporarily  accommodated  in  the  manda- 
pams  on  the  banks  of  the  tank.  The  trident 
which  is  the  emblem  of  Siva  is  taken  out  by 
the  priest  of  each  god  and  immersed  in  water. 
This  is  the  signal  that  that  particular  god 
to  whom  the  trident  belongs  has  himself  per 
formed  the  bathing  ceremony  in  the  tank.. 
This  is  also  the  signal  that  the  holy  occasion 
for  the  bathing  of  the  people  has  set  in.  The 
twelve  tridents  are  immersed  simultaneously 
in  twelve  different  spots  of  the  tank,  and  along 
with  these,  thousands  of  devotees  plunge  their 
heads  into  the  waters  with  the  firm  belief 


"74          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

that  they  are  bathing  in   the  quintessence  of 
all  the  sacred  rivers,  and  in  the  presence  of  all 
the  gods.     Every   one  gets    up  from   the  bath 
with  his  whole  body  besmeared  with  mud,  but 
for  all  that,  he  goes  home  with  the  consolation 
that  the  holy  occasion  has  been  availed  of  and 
that  the  holy  bathing  in  all  the    sacred  rivers 
has  been  taken  in  one  plunge.     Such  is   faith, 
simple  faith,  more  consoling   than  all  philo 
sophy.     What  Jerusalem  is  to  the  Christians, 
what  Buddha-Gaya  is  to  the  Buddhists,  what 
Mecca  is  to  the  Muhammadans,  what  Benares 
is  to  the  Indian — so  is  the  MahamaJcham  bath 
to  all  the   Hindus   on  the  Mahamakham  day. 
As  the  water  in   this  tank  is  supposed  to  have 
originated  first  from   the  earthen  pot   so  care 
fully  guarded  by  Brahma,  this  tank  goes  also 
by  the  name  of  Brahma-tirtham.     Owing  to  the 
special  sanctity  attached   to  it  on  this    occa 
sion,  the  tank  is  also  called  the  MahamaJcha- 
saras.    It  is  also  called.  Kanyatirtham  after  the 
goddesses  Kanyas  on  the  tank.     These  kanyas 
or  virgins  are  supposed  to  be  the  representa 
tions  of  nine  holy  waters  : — Gang  a,    Yamuna, 
N armada,     Saras  vati,     Godavari,     Krishna , 
Kaveri,  Tambraparni,  and  Kanyakumari. 


THE    MAHAMAKHA  75 

The  bath  in  the  Mahamakham  tank  on  this 
sacred  occasion  is  considered  to  wipe  off  all 
sins.  The  river  Ganges  is  supposed  to  run 
into  the  Mahamakham  tank  by  a  subterranean 
current,  Antarvahini,  on  this  day  and  the 
Hindu  devotee  will  assert  that  if  on  this 
sacred  occasion  the  water  in  the  Ganges  is 
examined  it  will  be  noticed  to  have  gone  down 
by  one  foot.  Where  did  the  waters  go  !  Of 
course  to  the  Mahamakham  tank !  How  did 
they  go  ?  By  the — Antarvahini — under  current. 
In  connection  with  this  strong  belief  the  fol 
lowing  story  is  related  :— 

In  the  good  old  days,  before  the  Kaliyuga 
had  set  in,  there  \vas  a  very  pious  king  reign 
ing  over  the  country  of  Mithila,  north  of 
Benares.  He  was  happy  in  every  way  except 
that  he  had  not  a  son  to  succeed  to  his  throne. 
Once  upon  a  time  a  holy  sage,  a  rishi, 
visited  the  king  and  told  him  that  if  he 
bathed  in  the  waters  of  the  sacred  Ganges  on 
the  Mahamakham  day  he  would  soon  obtain  a 
son.  The  king  had  the  greatest  respect  for 
the  sage  and  desired  to  follow  his  advice.  He 
proclaimed  his  intention  among  his  subjects, 
and  several  of  these,  who  were  unhappy  like 


76         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

the  king  in  not  having  sons,  followed  their 
sovereign.  Each  started  with  his  wife  also  ; 
for  the  Hindu  belief  is  that  bathing  in  holy 
waters  is  not  complete  unless  both  the  husband 
and  the  wife  hold  each  the  other's  hand  and 
bathe  together  in  the  waters  facing  the  current. 
So  on  that  MahamaJcJiam  day  before  the  Kali- 
yuga  several  thousands  of  families  bathed  thus 
in  the  Ganges  with  the  king  of  Mithila.  All 
got  out  of  the  water  safe,  except  the  king  and 
his  queen.  What  became  of  the  royal  pair, 
no  one  knew.  A  very  careful  search  was  made. 
The  river  was  dragged  with  nets.  Not  the 
slightest  clue  could  be  had.  It  was  a  perfect 
mystery  to  every  one.  The  loyal  subjects 
returned  to  their  homes  with  dismal  faces  and 
regarded  the  event  as  a  great  calamity. 

But  the  fact  was  that  the  king  with  his 
queen  got  out  safe  from  his  bathing.  But  in 
stead  of  meeting  with  their  own  people,  he  and 
his  wife  found  themselves  in  the  middle  of  a 
strange  tank,  and  in  the  middle  of  people  speak 
ing  strange  tongues.  For  the  royal  pair  got 
out  of  their  bathing  at  Kumbakonam  and  not 
at  Benares  where  they  plunged  themselves  in 
the  Ganges,  because  the  subterranean  current 


THE    MAHA.MAKHA  77 

•of  the  Ganges  had  carried  the  pair  to  the 
Mahamakh&m  tank  at  Kumbakonam.  The 
royal  pair  had  travelled  the  Jong  distance  in 
the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  With  difficulty  they 
explained  themselves  to  the. people  at  Kumba 
konam  and  found  out  the  real  state  of  affairs. 
The  king's  desire  has  already  been  fulfilled ; 
for  he  had  a  boy.  Such  is  the  story  and  it  is 
very  interesting  as  it  is  proof  positive  to  the 
pious  devotee  that  subterranean  communication 
between  the  Ganges  and  the  Mahamakliam 
tank  exists  even  to-day. 

The  sacredness  of  grand  rivers  generally  is 
a  strong  Hindu  belief  and  the  special  sanctity 
attributed  to  certain  waters  on  an  occasion 
occurring  only  once  in  twelve  years  is  equally 
a  strong  Hindu  belief.  PushJcaram  is  the 
Mahamakham  of  the  Telugus,  and  occurs  only 
once  in  twelve  years,  when  the  freshes  of  the 
Godavari  rise  to  a  very  high  level.  Bathing 
on  the  PushJcaram  day  at  certain  chosen  spots 
on  the  banks  of  the  Godavari  is  considered  as 
sacred  by  the  Telugus  as  the  Mahamakham 
bath  is  by  all  Hindus. 


13,    Gbe  Hrbbboba^a  anfc  tbe 


HE  Hindus  regard  the  two  occa 
sions  of  Arddhodaya&ud  Maho- 
daya  as  very  sacred  occasions 
for  taking  baths  in  holy  rivers 
and  in  sacred  spots  on  the  sea 
shore.  The  Arddliodaya  is  con 
sidered  to  be  the  more  sacred 
of  the  two.     It  is  the  rising  of  the  sun  and 
the  moon  in  conjunction  at  the  beginning  of 
which  the  sun  is  in  Capricorn — Makara — on  a 
Sunday  in  the  month  of  Pusliya  (January-Feb 
ruary)  and  the  moon  in  the  22nd  asterism— 
Sravana  and  the   seventh  Yoga.     These  five 
events  do  not  occur  in  conjunction  oftener  than 
once    in    sixty   years.      The   most   important 
circumstance  in  the  Arddlwdaya  is  the  half- 
rising  of  the  sun  with  which  are  connected  the 
four  events  above  mentioned.     Owing  to  this 
half-rising  of  the  sun  this  occasion  is  called 
the  Arddliodaya,  which  is  a  Sanskrit  compound 
meaning  the  half -rising.     Thus  the  Arddlio 
daya   is  a  very  rare   opportunity    for    sacred 


THE  ARDDHODAYA  AND  THE  MAHODAYA     7 

baths   and    we    have    no   recollection    of    its 
occurrence  in  the  immediate  past. 

But  the  Malwdaya  occurs  oftener.  It  is 
considered  a  little  less  meritorious  as  compared 
with  the  Arddliodaya,  but  for  all  that  it  is  also 
considered  a  very  sacred  opportunity  for  baths. 
The  Malwdaya  is  the  rising  of  the  sun  and 
the  moon  in  conjunction  on  a  Monday,  the  sun 
being  in  Capricorn,  in  the  month  of  Pushy  a 
(January-February)  and  the  moon  in  the 
asterism  of  Sravana  when  it  is  in  conjunction 
with  Vyatipata  yoga.  The  last  Mahodayas 
occurred  on  Monday,  the  5th  February, 
1894,  and  on  the  1st  February,  1895.  Both  the 
Arddliodaya  and  the  Mahodaya  are  deemed  to  be 
very  sacred  occasions  for  religious  bathing,  alms 
giving,  propitiating  the  spirits  of  the  departed 
forefathers,  and  performing  other  religious 
duties.  Wealthy  Hindus  generally  go  on  pil 
grimages  to  Benares  and  Rameswaram  to 
bathe  in  the  sacred  waters  in  these  places. 
The  sacred  water  of  Dhamishkoti  near  Rames 
waram  is  considered  to  be  most  holy  on  this 
occasion  as  it  is  said  to  have  been  opened  by 
Rama  with  his  bow.  The  Hindus  of  Madras 
generally  proceed  to  Mahabalipuram — the 


SO         HINDU   FEASTS,    FAS^S   AND   CEREMONIES 

Seven  Pagodas — to  bathe  in  the  sea  on  this 
occasion. 

MAHODAYAM  AT  MAHABALIPUR 

The  small  village  of  Mahabalipuram  assumes 
an  unusually  busy  appearance  at  the  Maho- 
dayam,  a  special  New  Moon  day  occurring  on 
a  Monday  in  the  month  of  Pushy  a.  This 
special  New  Moon  day  occurs  once  in  30  years 
and  as  such  is  considered  extremely  sacred  by 
the  Hindus.  Pilgrimages  are  undertaken  to 
Benares  and  Eameswaram  for  baths  in  the  holy 
Ganges  or  in  the  DhanushJcoti.  Orthodox 
Hindus  who  have  not  the  time  and  convenience 
for  such  undertakings,  go  to  some  sacred  place 
situated  on  the  sea :  and  Mahabalipuram  on  the 
Madras  Coast  is  a  specially  sacred  place  for 
occasions  like  this.  From  the  Sunday  previous 
country  carts  begin  to  pour  in  from  all  direc 
tions  notwithstanding  the  difficulties  of  the 
marshes  on  all  the  sides  of  this  little  village. 
More  than  a  thousand  carts  could  be  seen 
in  this  place,  and  boats  from  the  Adyar 
would  be  emptying  pilgrim-passengers  here  in 
several  hundreds  every  hour.  The  petty  traders 
of  Madras  make  a  good  profit  in  selling  fruits 
and  other  petty  things.  On  the  morning  of 


THE  ABDDHODAYA  AND  THE  MAHODAYA    81 

the  Monday,  more  than  fifteen  thousand  heads 
are    seen    bathing    in    the    sea.     The   whole 
shore  would  be  one  mass  of  Hindus  and  most 
fortunately  there  are  generally  no    accidents 
of  any  kind.     Mahabalipuram  is  known  to  the 
European  world  by  the  antiquarian  remains  in 
which  this  village  is  rich  and  which  have  been 
well  described  to  the  public  by  many  eminent 
writers  on   antiquities.     All  the    pilgrim    so- 
journers  visit  these  remains  after  the  bath  and 
the  ideas  they  express  of  what  they  see  are 
very  amusing  and  give  us  an'  insight  into  their 
knowledge  of  their  own  history.    ' '  These  are  the 
caves  where  the  Pandavas  lived,"  say  some. 
"  No,"  denies  another  with  all  the  authority  of  a 
historian  and  states  that  these  caves  were  con 
structed   by   Eishis.     A   third  greyhead,  with 
anger  in  his  face,  states  that   Mahabali  was  a 
very  powerful  sovereign,  that  even  gods  from 
the  heavens  were  visiting  him  every  day,  and 
it  was  to    accommodate   them   that  Mahabali 
built  these  caves.     These  and  such  like  are  the 
theories.     But  not  one  is  to  be  seen  expressing 
a  wish  to   know   anything  historically   about 
these  relics.     No  one   studies  or  attempts  to 
study  them,  though  several  works  exist  already 


82          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

giving  as  much  as  inquiry  has  hitherto  been 
able  to  ascertain  of  information  on  this  subject. 
Whether  these  caves  accommodated  the  gods 
at  the  time  of  Mahabali  or  not,  it  cannot  be 
denied  that  they  now  accommodate  the  pilgrim- 
sojourners  of  Mahabalipuram.  Thousands  and 
thousands  of  people  find  their  home  now  in 
these  Pallava  caves.  This  village  is  very 
small  and  house  accommodation  is  very  scanty, 
the  number  of  ruined  houses  and  those  now  in 
occupation  being  not  more  than  eighty.  And 
where  could  the  fifteen  thousand  pilgrims  find 
their  home  for  a  day  now  but  in  these  caves  ? 
The  whole  place  is  full  of  people,  the  major  por 
tion  being  Vaishnavas,  by  which  sect  this  place 
is  held  specially  sacred.  The  bath  and  sight 
seeing  of  the  relics  are  generally  over  by  about 
10  in  the  morning  and  the  pilgrims  return 
home  for  breakfast.  Fortunately  a  good  supply 
of  provisions  is  kept  ready  by  the  merchants. 
But  the  supply  of  pure  water  is  not  sufficient, 
and  this  difficulty  is  not  felt  as  the  sojourners 
are  all  to  return  to  their  respective  homes  by 
the  evening.  Visitors  from  Madras  generally 
go  down  to  Mahabalipuram  by  the  Canal  and 
return  by  the  land  route  via  Tirukkalukkunram 


THE  ARDDHODAYA  AND  THE  MAHODAYA    83 

and  Chingleput.  There  is  no  road  between 
Mahabalipuram  and  Tirukkalukkunram.  There 
is  a  rough  path  by  the  thick  copse  of  shrub 
wood  in  which  the  whole  plain  round  about 
Mahabalipuram  abounds,  and  a  walk  through 
it  by  the  setting  sun  repays  all  the  pain  and 
trouble  of  a  day's  sojourn  at  Mahabalipuram. 
The  fine  breeze,  the  rosy  rays  of  the  setting 
sun,  the  scenery  of  the  blue  flowers  of  the 
Kasan  shrub,  the  fluttering  peacock  which 
happens  to  be  peculiar  to  this  copse,  and  the 
sweet  scent  of  a  thousand  wild  flowers  cheer 
the  exhausted  pilgrim  and  when  the  sun  sets, 
the  heart  of  the  pilgrim  droops  down  with  the 
approaching  night.  To  add  to  his  gloom  the 
copse  changes  into  marsh  and  broken  country 
tracks  with  ruts  and  muddy  pools — till  Tiruk 
kalukkunram  is  reached.  Thence  it  is  all  a 
nice  road  to  Chingleput,  which  is  performed 
in  two  hours  by  a  jutka. 


Sarasvati  puja 


AEASVATI  in  Hindu  Mytho 
logy  is  the  goddess  of  speech 
and  learning  and  represented 
as  the  wife  of  Brahma,  the 
creator  or  the  supreme  spirit. 
The  ninth  day  of  the  month 
of  Avani,  corresponding  to 
October,  is  considered  most  sacred  in  the 
year  to  this  goddess.  Generally  the  first  nine 
days — Navqratri — of  the  bright  half  of  this 
month  is  considered  sacred  either  to  Durga, 
Lakshmi,  or  Sarasvati,  and  throughout  India 
worship  on  a  grand  scale  is  performed  to  these 
goddesses.  Though  these  days  are  thus  sacred 
to  one  goddess  or  other,  the, last  3  days,  from 
the  7th  to  the  9th  of  the  Navaratri,  are  specially 
sacred  to  the  goddess  of  learning,  and  the 
last  of  these  festive  days,  the  Navami,  closes 
the  ceremony  by,  the  worship  of  Sarasvati. 
During  the  Navaratri  days  all  the  toys 
available  in  a  Hindu  household  are  dis 
played  in  fanciful  arrangements  in  a  large 


THE    SABASVATI   PUJA  85 

hall  with  the  goddess  Durga,  Lakshmi,  or 
Sarasvati  in  the  middle,  and  this  display  is 
supposed  to  represent  the  penance  of  these 
goddesses.  The  Madhvas  and  the  Yaishnavas 
would  call  this  the  penance  of  Lakshmi,  and 
would  point  out  to  the  grand  feast  at  Tirupati 
during  this  period  as  their  authority.  In  the 
Tirupati  hills  there  is  a  Brahmotsavam  held 
during  this  period  representing  the  penance  of 
Lakshmi  and  the  festival  closes  on  this  day 
with  Lakshmi's  wedding  to  Yishnu.  The 
Sivites  term  this  Durgapuja,  and  this  name 
appears  to  be  more  correct,  as  the  greatest  por 
tion  of  India  regards  the  Navaratri  as  sacred  to 
Durga.  Durga's  hard  penance  to  secure  Siva, 
as  her  lord  is  known  to  every  Hindu  and  is 
sung  by  the  best  of  their  poets,  so  that  it  does 
not  require  any  special  mention  here.  The 
Advaitis,  in  keeping  with  their  school,  worship 
all  the  three  goddesses,  on  this  occasion  and 
commence  their puja  with  salutation  to  Durga, 
Lakshmi  and  Sarasvati. 

We  have  already  alluded  to  the  display  of  toys 
in  every  Hindu  household.  Women  and 
children  take  great  pleasure  in  collecting  dur 
ing  this  occasion  as  many  toys  as  possible. 


86         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS  AND   CEREMONIES 

Every  evening,  during  these  nine  days,  they 
spend  an  hour  or  two  in  singing  the  praises  of 
these  goddesses,  and  after  this  is  over,  distri 
bute  pan  supari  and  sweets.  This  ceremony 
is  confined  only  to  women  and  children  ;  male 
members  do  not  take  part  in  it.  It  is  near 
this  display  of  toys — the  Jcolu,  as  it  is  called  in 
the  south  of  India — that  all  the  available 
books  of  a  Hindu  household  are  arranged  for 
the  day  and  there  the  goddess  Sarasvati  is 
worshipped.  A  silver,  copper  or  brass  chombu 
filled  with  rice  to  the  brim,  with  a  cocoanut 
over  it,  serves  to  represent  any  goddess. 
Sometimes  a  gold  jewel  serves  as  an  ornament 
to  this  vessel.  Just  at  midday  the  head  of  the 
family  takes  his  seat  in  the  middle  of  the  hall  to 
perform  the  puja  and  all  the  children  assemble 
round  him.  Strict  fasting  is  observed  till  the 
worship  is  over.  Young  boys,  though  their 
mothers  may  permit  them  to  eat  their  food, 
will  not  touch  anything  lest  the  goddess  Saras 
vati  be  displeased.  When  the  head  of  the 
house  finishes  his  puja  all  the  others  assembled 
there  stand  up  with  flowers  in  their  hands 
reciting  the  praises  of  Sarasvati  to  the  dicta 
tion  of  the  master  and  offer  the  same  to  the 


THE   SARASVATI   PUJA  87 

goddess.  Thus  concludes  the  Sarasvati  puja 
and  a  sumptuous  feast  in  honour  of  the  god 
dess  follows.  People  who  are  rich  present 
clothes  on  this  occasion  to  married  women. 
The  origin  of  this  ceremony  is  to  be  found 
in  the  SJcanda  Purana.  It  runs  briefly  as 
follows : — 

In  the  Kritayuga  there  lived  a  famous 
King  named  Suketu.  He  was  well  versed  in 
politics  and  his  only  pleasure  was  to  attend  to 
the  welfare  and  comfort  of  his  subjects.  The 
name  of  his  queen  was  Suvedi.  She  was 
young,  beautiful  and  much  attached  to  her 
lord.  It  so  happened  that  Suketu  was  defeat 
ed  by  his  enemies  and  compelled  to  fly  for  his 
life  with  his  queen.  The  royal  pair  wandered 
in  a  forest  for  several  days  without  food  and, 
unable  to  bear  the  exhaustion,  fell  ill.  Suvedi 
carried  her  weak  lord  on  her  shoulders  and 
was  trying  to  find  her  way  out  of  the  woods 
when  she  was  met  by  the  sage  Angiras  who  said : 
"  Who  are  you  that  have  ventured  alone  into 
this  deep  forest  ?  You  seem  to  be  much  afflict 
ed.  Eelate  your  history  and  I  shall  try  my 
best  to  relieve  you."  Suvedi  related  her 
history  and  Angiras  was  extremely  moved  on 


88         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

hearing  it.  The  sage  at  once  recommended  to 
Suvedi,  a  pilgrimage  to  Panchavati  and  the 
worship  of  Durga  there,  during  the  Navaratri 
days.  The  queen  with  Suketu  reached  Pan 
chavati  and  worshipped  the  goddess  Durga 
very  devoutly.  First  Suketu  was  restored 
to  perfect  health  ;  then  she  gave  birth  to  a  son 
whom  Angiras  named  Suryapratapa.  This 
prince  in  due  course  became  very  powerful. 
He  defeated  his  enemies  and  got  back  his 
kingdom  and  reinstated  his  father  in  it.  The 
current  belief  is  that  every  one  will  attain  his 
object  by  the  Sarasvati  puja,  as  Suvedi  did  by 
the  observance  of  tins  puja. 

By  the  non-Brahmans,  this  puja  is  called 
the  Ayudlia  puja — the  worship  of  the  imple 
ments  by  the  artisans — or  the  tool-feast. 
Thus  the  Brahman  worships  his  books  and 
the  artisan  his  tools. 


flDabasivaratrt 


T  is  the  name  of  a  Hindu  festival 
observed  in  honour  of  Siva, 
one  of  the  gods  of  the  Hindu 
Trinity.  This  falls  generally 
in  the  month  of  Magha  and 
the  festival  is  called  the 
Makasivaratri  as  it  is  observed  on  the 
night  preceding  the  new  moon.  Not  only 
the  night  but  the  day  also  preceding  the  new 
moon  in  that  month  is  devoted  by  the  Smarta 
sect  of  the  Hindus  to  Siva's  worship.  On  this 
day  the  orthodox  Hindu  rises  early  in  the 
morning,  bathes  and  attends  most  devoutly  to 
his  prayers.  He  attends  a  temple  if  there  is 
one  near.  Fasting,  as  a  general  rule,  is  observ 
ed  throughout  the  day  and  the  night.  Sitting 
up  in  wakefulness  throughout  the  night  entirely 
absorbed  in  worshipping  Siva  is  considered 
most  meritorious.  There  are  special  prayers 
for  each  of  the  four  watches  (Jamas — three 
hours'  duration)  of  the  night,  and  the  devotee 
who  goes  through  these  prayers  on  the  night 


90          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

sacred  to  Siva  is  considered  to  be  working  his 
way  up  to  oneness  with  Siva  after  his  death. 

The  Sivaratri  is  also  held  sacred  for  the 
making  of  holy  ashes  by  the  Smartas.  Holy 
ashes  are  a  daily  necessity  to  this  class  of 
Hindus,  and  those  prepared  on  the  day  sacred 
to  Siva  are  considered  to  be  very  pure.  The 
process  is  extremely  simple.  There  are  cer 
tain  days  in  the  year  which  are  held  sacred 
for  drying  up  cow-dung  balls,  from  which  holy 
ashes  are  made.  The  balls  thus  prepared  are 
taken  to  an  open  yard  of  the  house  on  the 
Sivaratri  night  and  placed  in  the  midst  of  a 
large  heap  of  husk  or  chaff.  The  master  of 
the  house  or  the  household  priest,  who  had  been 
observing  a  fast  and  repeating  prayers  the  whole 
day,  sets  fire  to  this  heap  in  the  early  part  of 
the  Sivaratri  night.  The  heap  continues  in 
flames  throughout  the  night  and  is  reduced  to 
ashes  the  next  morning.  The  latter  is  then 
collected  and  preserved  as  holy  ashes  for  use  till 
the  next  Sivaratri. 

The  origin  of  the  sacredness  of  the  Sivaratri 
is  related  in  the  following  Puranic  legend : — In  a 
forest,  unknown  to  the  public,  on  the  Himalaya 
mountains  there  once  lived  a  hunter  with  his 


THE   MAHASIVAEATBI  91 

wife  and  an  only  child  in  a  humble  cottage. 
He  was  in  the  habit  of  going  out  daily  in  the 
morning  with  his  bow  and  arrows  and  return 
ing  home  in  the  evening  with  some  game  or 
other  which  furnished  the  food  for  the  whole 
family.  As  usual  he  went  out  in  search  of 
game  on  a  certain  morning.  It  was  an  un 
usually  hot  day  and  he  wandered  throughout 
the  forest,  but  was  not  able  to  secure  any  game. 
The  evening  was  fast  approaching.  Darkness 
had  almost  set  in.  Thinking  it  was  no  use 
lingering  longer  in  the  dense  forest  he  turned 
his  course  towards  his  cottage  with  a  melan 
choly  countenance,  for,  what  could  his  wife  and 
child  do  for  their  supper  that  night  ?  This 
was  his  sole  thought.  Sometimes  he  would  stop 
on  his  way  and  say  to  himself  that  there  was 
no  use  in  going  home  without  any  flesh  to 
cook.  He  saw  a  big  tank  on  his  way,  "  Ah  ! 
to  be  sure  some  animal  or  other  must  come  to 
this  tank  to  drink  water.  I  shall  hide  myself 
behind  some  thick  bush  and  wait  for  the 
occasion."  On  second  thoughts,  he  consider 
ed  it  safer  to  climb  a  tree  to  be  beyond  the  reach 
of  any  beast  of  prey.  To  attract  beasts  to  the 
side  of  the  tree  on  which  he  was  resting  he 


92         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

kept  dropping  tender  leaves  from  the  tree.  He 
was  not  disappointed  in  his  manoeuvres.  Dur 
ing  the  first  watch  of  the  night  a  doe  ante 
lope,  after  drinking  water  in  the  tank,  approach 
ed  the  tree  to  feed  at  the  tempting  leaves 
without  any  idea  of  the  danger  that  hung 
over-head.  The  hunter  glad  at  heart  hastily 
prepared  himself  to  take  aim  at  the  poor  beast. 
The  antelope  perceived  the  danger  and  instead 
of  running  away,  most  piteously  addressed  the 
hunter  in  human  voice,  "  0  !  Hunter  dear  ! 
Do  not  kill  me  now."  The  hunter,  though 
startled  to  hear  the  animal  speak  in  human 
voice,  said,  mustering  up  his  courage  :  "  My 
charming  antelope  !  I  cannot  but  kill  you  at 
once.  My  wife  and  child  are  dying  at  home 
from  hunger.  You  must  be  their  food  to 
night."  "Even  so,  hunter,  I  have  a  dear 
husband  and  an  affectionate  child  at  home. 
I  must  take  leave  of  them  before  I  fall  down 
dead  by  your  shaft.  For  their  sake  save  me 
for  only  a  few  hours.  You  are  not  a  hard 
hearted  bachelor.  As  you  feel  for  your  wife 
and  child,  surely  you  must  realise  what  my  mis 
ery  will  be  if  I  do  not  take  leave  of  my  lord  and 
child  before  I  lay  down  my  life."  The  hunter, 


THE    MAHASIVARATRI  93 

moved  at  the  piteous  words  of  the  beast,  thought 
within  himself  how  hard-hearted  he  was  to  re 
solve  to  kill  a  beast  so  that  he  may  feed  on  its 
carcase.  But  kill  he  must  if  he  should  eke 
out  his  livelihood  in  that  forest.  The  antelope 
promised  to  return  after  taking  leave  of  her 
husband  and  her  child.  He  permitted  her  to 
do  so  and  she  promised  to  be  back  in  the  fourth 
watch  of  the  night. 

The  first  watch  of  the  night  was  almost  over. 
Our  hero  was  wide  awake.  Having  lost  his  first 
opportunity  that  night,  he  waited  for  another 
beast  to  approach  his  tree.  And  his  heart  leapt 
with  joy  at  the  sight  of  another  beast  approach 
ing  the  tree  during  the  second  watch.  He 
again  prepared  himself  to  aim  his  shaft  at 
it.  He  was  again  astonished  when  he  heard 
that  antelope  also  begging  him  in  human 
voice.  Again  there  was  a  conversation,  in  the 
course  of  which  the  hunter  learnt  that  the 
second  antelope  was  the  husband  of  the  first 
one.  It  also  requested  the  hunter  to  spare  it 
till  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night,  as  it  wanted 
to  see  its  wife  and  child.  The  hunter  gladly 
granted  the  request ;  for,  he  was  sure  of  carry 
ing  away  both  these  beasts  at  the  fourth 


94          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

watch.  He  thought  that  beasts  which  argued 
in  such  an  honest  fashion  would  never  prove 
untrue.  During  the  third  watch  our  hero  met 
a  third  antelope,  which  happened  to  be  the 
child  of  the  first  two  antelopes.  This  beast 
also  astonished  the  hunter  by  a  similar  request, 
which  of  course  was  readily  granted,  to  be 
spared  till  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night. 

Thus  the  three  watches  of  the  night  were 
spent  by  the  hunter  in  strict  wakefulness.  He 
had  not  had  even  a  wink  of  sleep.  The  tree  on 
which  he  lodged  for  the  night  happened  to  be 
the  Bilva  tree  (cratceva  religiosa)  the  leaves  of 
which  are  held  to  be  sacred  to  Siva ;  and  in  drop 
ping  the  leaves  he  was  unwittingly  offering 
worship  to  Siva  throughout  the  night,  for  the 
leaves  happened  to  fall  on  a  ruined  image  of 
Siva  which  lay  under  the  branches  of  that 
tree.  To  add  to  the  hunter's  fortune,  the  night 
on  which  all  these  things  took  place  happened 
to  be  a  Sivaratri  night,  though  the  hunter  was 
ignorant  of  it.  The  three  watches  were  over. 
The  hunter  was  anxiously  waiting  for  the  return 
of  the  three  antelopes  as  they  promised  to  do. 
The  fourth  watch  also  was  running  out  fast. 
Still  the  beasts  never  came  back.  The  hunter 


THE    MAHASIVARATRI  95 

had  almost  set  himself  down  for  a  fool  for 
having  let  the  animals  go  in  the  first  instance. 
The  morning  twilight  had  almost  appeared. 
He  turned  his  face  towards  the  east  and  a  most 
heart-rending  sight  met  his  eyes.  There  he 
saw  in  the  dusk  of  the  early  morning  the  three 
honest  animals  each  weeping  at  the  fate  of  the 
other  two,  unmindful  of  its  own.  Even  the 
hunter's  hard  heart  melted  away  at  what  he 
saw.  He  turned  to  the  other  side  to  hide  his 
tears ;  but  he  saw  there  his  wife  and  child,  who 
after  spending  the  whole  night  in  the  forest  in 
his  search  came  running  towards  him  in  joy 
when  they  saw  him.  He  turned  again  his  eyes 
towards  the  east  with  something  in  his  mind 
more  noble  and  elevated  than  hitherto.  He 
had  almost  resolved  to  excuse  the  beasts  and 
give  back  their  lives  though  they  had  not  re 
turned  to  him  yet.  But  just  as  the  lord  of  the 
day  was  making  his  appearance  on  the  horizon, 
there  stood  before  the  hunter  a  divine  vimana 
which  carried  away  all  the  six — the  three  ante 
lopes,  the  hunter,  his  wife  and  child — to  the 
heavens — to  the  realm  of  Siva.  In  connection 
with  this  marvellous  passing  away  to  heaven 
of  the  beasts,  the  hunter  and  his  family  is  held 


96          HINDU   FEASTS,   FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

the  popular  belief  that  Mrigasira — the  fifth 
lunar  mansion  containing  three  stars  in  Orion 
and  figured  by  an  antelope's  head,  which 
appear  in  the  heavens  is  a  symbolic  repre 
sentation  of  this  Puranic  story. 


16,    Gbe  Srija^anti  or  IRrtebnasbtami 


OKD  KKISHNA'S  birthday, 
Srijayanti  or  Krishnashtami,  is 
the  most  popular  festival  in 
the  whole  of  India.  These  two 
are  the  names  by  which  this 
festival  is  called  by  the  Vaish- 
navas,  while  among  the 
Smartas  it  is  known  as  Gokulaslitami,  and  in 
Northern  India  as  Janmashtami.  By  whatever 
name  it  may  be  known,  this  festive  celebra 
tion  of  the  birth  of  Lord  Krishna  is  kept  as  a 
holy  day  by  all  Hindus  throughout  India. 
According  to  the  Pur  anas,  Krishna  was  born 
on  the  8th  lunar  day  (Ashtami)  of  the  waning 
moon  of  the  month  of  Sravana  at  midnight, 
upon  the  moon's  entrance  mioRokini  asterism. 
On  account  of  this  sacred  occasion  a  fast  is  held 
on  the  day  preceding  the  date  of  his  birth,  the 
fast  being  broken  as  usual  by  a  feast  on  the 
following  day.  The  observance  of  the  fast 
varies  with  different  sects.  The  followers  of 
the  Smriti — Smartas — commence  their  fast 

7 


98          HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 


with  the  commencement  of  the  lunation  when 
ever  that  takes  place ;  the  Vaishnavas  and  the 
Madhvas  regulate  their  fast  by  the  moon's 
passage  through  the  asterism  of  Rohini. 

Krishna  is  the  most  popular  deity  through 
out  the  whole  of  India  and  is  considered  as  the 
eighth  Avatar  or  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  one  of 
the  Hindu  Trinity,  and  the  following  is  a  brief 
account  of  Krishna's  history  as  collected  from 
the  several  Puranas. 

In  days  gone  by  there  reigned  in  Mathura, 
the  modern  Muttra,  a  most  wicked  and  unpopu 
lar  king,  named  Kamsa,  who  had  a  cousin 
named  Devaki  married  to  Yasudeva,  of  the 
lunar  race .  On  the  date  of  the  latter ' s  marriage , 
Kamsa,  the  tyrant,  drove  the  car  in  which  Deva 
ki  and  Vasudeva  were  conducted  in  procession. 
As  the  procession  was  passing  along  the  streets 
an  unknown  voice  deep  as  thunder  came  from 
above.  u  Oh  you  fool,  Kamsa!  The  eighth 
child  of  the  lady  in  the  car  that  you  are  now 
driving  will  put  an  end  to  your  atrocious  life.'7 
As  soon  as  Kamsa  heard  this  ominous  voice,  he 
became  greatly  enraged  and  attempted  to  put 
Devaki  to  death  thereby  preventing  the  possi 
bility  of  the  birth  of  his  future  enemy.  But 


THE    SRIJAYANTI    OR   KRISHNASHTAMI 


Vasudeva  argued  with  the  tyrant  and  pacified 
him  by  promising  to  deliver  into  his  hands  all 
the  children  that  Devaki  may  bring  forth. 
Kamsa  satisfied  with  this  assurance  desisted 
from  putting  his  threat  into  execution,  and 
true  to  his  promise  Yasudeva  handed  over 
to  Kamsa's  custody  the  first  six  children. that 
were  born  to  Devaki.  Balarama,  the  seventh 
child  of  Devaki,  was  saved  by  divine  interfer 
ence  and  Krishna  was  the  eighth  son.  Of 
course  Kamsa  had  placed  strict  guard  throughout 
the  palace  to  prevent  the  eighth  son  from  being 
in  any  way  saved.  How  then  was  Krishna 
saved  ?  Vasudeva,  as  soon  as  the  eighth  child 
was  born,  took  it  and  went  out.  The  guards 
placed  over  the  place  were  all  charmed  by 
Yoganidra — a  kind  of  hypnotic  sleep.  Eain 
was  pouring  down  in  torrents  that  night,  and 
to  protect  the  baby  from  the  heavy  rain,  Sesha, 
the  many-headed  serpent,  followed  Yasudeva 
and  spread  his  hood  over  the  child's  head. 
The  Jumna  was  flowing  full  and  it  had  to  be 
crossed.  Though  the  river  was  usually  deep 
and  dangerous  with  whirlpools  the  wraters  at 
that  time  went  down,  running  only  knee  deep. 
Thus  by  divine  favour  the  several  obstacles 


100       HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

were  overcome  and  the  other  side  of  the  river 
was  reached.  There  was  a  cowherd  there 
named  Nanda,  whose  wife  Yasoda  had  brought 
to  bed  a  female  child.  Yasudeva  placed  his 
son  in  the  daughter's  place,  while  Yasoda  was 
also  under  the  spell  of  magic  sleep,  and  quickly 
returned  home  carrying  away  the  female  child. 
When  Yasoda  awoke  she  found  that  she  had 
been  delivered  of  a  son  and  she  rejoiced  at  it. 

Yasoda' s  female  child  was  now  placed  by 
Vasudeva  in  the  bed  of  Devaki,  no  suspicions 
being  aroused  in  anybody's  mind.  The  guards 
who  were  set  to  watch  by  Kamsa  were  awaken 
ed  by  the  cry  of  the  new-born  babe  and  starting 
up  they  sent  word  at  once  to  their  master. 
Kamsa  immediately  repaired  to  the  mansion 
of  Yasudeva  and  seized  hold  of  the  infant.  In 
vain  did  Devaki  entreat  him  to  spare  her  child  ; 
but  the  tyrant  ruthlessly  dashed  it  against  a 
stone,  when  lo  !  it  rose  into  the  sky  and  ex 
panded  into  a  gigantic  form  and  laughed  aloud, 
striking  terror  into  the  on-lookers,  and  address 
ed  Kamsa  in  a  thundering  voice — "What  avails 
it  thee,  Kamsa,  to  have  thus  dashed  me  down 
with  the  belief  that  thy  enemy  is  destroyed  ? 
He  is  born  that  shall  kill  thee,  the  mighty  one 


THE    SKIJAYANTI   OR   KRISHNASHTAMI  101 

amongst  the  gods."  Thus  saying  the  being 
vanished. 

Kamsa  was  greatly  alarmed.  He  called  a  big 
council  and  ordered  active  search  to  be  made 
for  whatever  young  children  there  may  be  on 
earth  and  ordered  that  every  boy  in  whom  they 
observed  signs  of  unusual  vigour  be  put  to 
death  without  any  remorse.  Notwithstanding 
all  these  precautions,  Balarama  and  Krishna 
were  growing  up  at  the  abode  of  Nanda,  where 
they  were  roaming  in  the  woods  and  joining  in 
the  sports  of  herdsmen's  sons  and  daughters. 
When  he  attained  to  Man's  estate  Krishna  pro 
ceeded  to  Gujarat,  built  Dvaraka  and  trans 
ferred  to  that  place  all  the  inhabitants  of 
Muttra,  after  killing  Kamsa  in  a  combat. 

Krislmaslitami  is  the  festival  which  is  cele 
brated  in  honour  of  the  birthday  of  Krishna. 
At  about  midnight,  on  the  Ashtami  night 
(September  8th),  a  clay  image  of  Krishna  in 
the  form  of  a  baby  is  made  in  every  Hindu 
house  and  worshipped.  Several  dishes  of 
sweets  are  offered  to  the  god,  to  be  consumed 
afterwards  by  the  inmates  of  the  house.  Apart 
from  its  importance  from  a  religious  point 
of  view  the  feast  is  very  popular  with  Hindu 


102       HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

children  on  account  of  the  sweets  that  are 
distributed  to  them  on  the  occasion.  A 
superstitious  belief  is  current  amongst  the 
Hindus  that  as  Krishna,  who  was  born  in  the 
asterism  of  Rohini,  was  the  cause  of  the  death 
of  his  maternal  uncle  Kamsa,  the  birth  of  a 
male  child  in  that  asterism  forbodes  evil  to 
the  maternal  uncle  of  that  child  ;  and  there 
were  instances  in  old  days  in  which  such 
children  were  put  to  death.  But  this  supersti 
tious  belief  is  fast  dying  out. 


17.   £be  IDaralafcsbmi  Worabfp 


AKSHMI,  the  bride  of  Vishnu, 
is  represented  as  the  goddess 
of  Prosperity  and  abundance 
as  also  of  Love  and  Beauty, 
in  the  Hindu  Mythology :  the 
designation  of  vara  indicates 


the  power,  generally  credited  to  her,  of 
granting  boons  to  her  devotees.  A  day  is 
specially  set  apart  for  her  special  worship. 
The  evening  is  both  a  religious  and  festive 
occasion  to  the  Hindu  ladies  and  children, 
and  soon  after  sunset  the  Varalakshmi  is  wor 
shipped  in  every  Hindu  household  on  a  large 
scale  with  flowers,  food,  puddings  and  sweets 
of  several  kinds.  A  figure  of  the  Goddess 
of  Prosperity  is  painted  on  a  brass  or  copper 
vessel  and  placed  in  the  hall  or  court  of  the 
house  under  a  small  leafy  canopy  erected  for 
the  occasionr.  The  Brahman  priest  is  invited 
to  repeat  the  form  of  the  worship  and  the 
oldest  married  lady  of  the  house  who  has  ob 
served  a  fast  during  the  whole  day  performs 
the  puja  of  Varalakshmi,  soon  after  sunset, 


104        HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

with  sincere  devotion.  The  priest  receives  his 
fees  and  then  the  eager  children  partake  of 
the  puddings  and  sweetmeats  first  offered  to 
the  goddess  during  the  course  of  the  worship. 
The  several  Puranas  speak  highly  of  the  powers 
of  Lakshmi,  who  is  represented  as  the  essence 
of  wealth  and  prosperity  and  the  mother  of  the 
universe,  eternal  and  imperishable.  As  Vishnu 
is  supposed  to  be  all-pervading,  so  also  is 
Lakshmi  considered  to  be  omnipresent.  Yishnu 
is  understanding,  Lakshmi  is  intellect ;  Yishnu 
is  desire,  and  Lakshmi  is  wish.  He  is  mean 
ing;  she  is  speech.  She  is  the  moon,  the  un 
fading  light,  the  moving  principle  of  the  whole 
world.  She  is  represented  to  have  sprung 
from  the  waves  of  the  milk  ocean,  when  it  was 
churned  by  the  demons  and  the  gods  seated  on  a 
full-blown  lotus  and  holding  a  water-lily 
(nilotpala)  in  her  hand  and  radiant  with 
beauty.  As  soon  as  she  was  observed  to  rise 
up,  heavenly  musicians  sang  sweet  songs  and 
celestial  nymphs  danced.  The  holy  Ganges 
and  other  sacred  river  goddesses  attended  for 
her  ablutions.  The  elephants  of  the  skies, 
taking  up  their  pure  waters  in  gold  vases, 
poured  them  over  her — the  queen  of  the  world. 


THE   VARALAKSHMI    WORSHIP  105 

The  ocean  of  milk  presented  her  with  a  wreath 
of  never-fading  flowers  and  the  artist  of  the 
gods  decorated  her  with  heavenly  jewels  and 
gems.  The  picture  of  Lakshmi  is  generally 
drawn  thus  in  this  night's  worship — with  the 
goddess  seated  on  a  full-blown  lotus,  elephants 
on  both  sides  pouring  water  over  her  from  gold 
vases  lifted  up  in  their  trunks,  &c.  After 
Lakshmi  was  thus  bathed,  attired  and  adorned, 
she  cast  herself  on  the  breast  of  Hari — Vishnu— 
and  became  his  bride  ever  since  that  time. 
Eudra,  the  chief  of  the  gods,  extolled  her  powers 
as  soon  as  she  sprang  out  of  the  ocean  and 
called  her  the  mother  of  all  beings,  the  super 
human  power  incarnate,  and  the  purifier  of  the 
universe.  Lakshmi  to  a  Hindu  is  the  presid 
ing  deity  of  Prosperity,  and  her  worship  is 
deemed  to  bring  good  fortune  in  every  house 
hold. 

The  following  account  of  Lakshmi  is  from  the 
Hamayana  translated  by  K.  T.  H.  Griffiths  :— 

"  When  many  a  year  had  fled 
Up  floated,  on  her  lotus  bed, 
A  maiden  fair,  and  tender-eyed, 
In  the  young  flush  of  beauty's  pride. 
She  shone  with  pearl  and  golden  sheen, 
And  seals  of  glory  stamped  her  queen. 


106      HINDU    FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 


On  each  round  arm  glowed  many  a  gem, 
On  her  smooth  brows  a  diadem. 
Rolling  in  waves  beneath  her  crown, 
The  glory  of  her  hair  rolled  down. 
Pearls  on  her  neck  of  price  untold, 
The  lady  shone  like  burnished  gold. 
Queen  of  the  gods,  she  leapt  to  land, 
A  lotus  in  her  perfect  hand, 
And  fondly,  of  the  lotus  sprung, 
To  lotus-bearing  Vishnu  clung. 
Her,  gods  above  and  men  below 
As  Beauty's  Queen  and  Fortune  know." 


.   £be  IDina^afca  Cbaturtbi 


INAYAKA  CHATUKTHI  day 

is  set  apart  for  the  sole  worship 
of  Ganesa,  the  common  deity 
of  all  Hindus.  As  he  is  sup 
posed  to  be  very  fond  of  rice 
puddings,  these  dishes  are 
cooked  on  a  very  large  scale 
in  every  Hindu  house  and  offered  to  the  god, 
to  be  consumed,  by  the  members  of  the  family, 
after  the  worship  is  over.  A  fresh  image  of 
Ganesa  in  clay  is  made  and  worshipped  on 
this  day.  One  hundred  and  eight  different 
names  of  this  god  are  repeated  after  the  pre 
liminary  ceremonies  and  108  different  flowers 
are  thrown  in  worship  over  him.  The  origin 
of  this  worship  is  prehistoric.  Yudhisthira, 
the  hero  of  the  Mahabharata,  Damayanti, 
the  queen  of  the  Nishada  King  Nala,  Indra, 
the  Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  even  Krishna, 
the  expounder  of  the  Bhagavatgita  are  said 
to  have  devoutly  worshipped  Ganesa  and 
to  have  obtained  their  desired  ends.  Vina- 


108       HINDU   FEASTS,   FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

yaka  or  Ganesa  is  the  eldest  son  of  Siva  and 
Parvati,  or  of  Parvati  only,  according  to  the 
following  legend,  as  he  sprang  from  the  scarf 
of  her  body.  Siva  had  gone  from  home  and 
Parvati  was  left  alone  on  the  Kailasa ;  she 
wished  to  have  a  bath  and  not  liking  the 
idea  of  any  person  entering  the  house  then, 
she  rubbed  her  body  with  her  hands  and  from 
the  dirt  that  rolled  off  produced  a  figure  to  which 
she  gave  life  and  named  Ganesa.  She  then  ask 
ed  Ganesa  to  sit  at  the  door  and  allow  no  one, 
whoever  he  might  be,  to  come  in  till  she  had 
finished  her  bath.  Ganesa  sat  at  his  duty 
and  while  Parvati  wras  bathing  inside,  Siva 
returned  home.  He  wanted  to  enter  his 
house,  but  Ganesa  would  not  allow  him.  After 
trying  in  vain  to  persuade  him  with  gentle 
words,  the  great  god  used  threats  which, 
however,  had  no  effect.  He  was  at  last 
compelled  to  cut  off  Ganesa 's  head  and  force 
his  way  in.  When  the  goddess  who  was  within 
perceived  her  lord  entering  and  when  she  came 
to  know  that  Ganesa  had  been  murdered, 
she  would  not  speak  to  Siva  until  her  attend 
ant  was  restored  to  life.  In  order  to  do  this, 
Siva  gave  orders  to  his  army  of  the  Bhuta- 


THE    VINAYAKA   CHATURTHI  109 

ganas  to  find  the  first  living  creature  that  slept 
with  its  head  turned  towards  the  north,  to  cut 
of!  its  head  and  to  fit  it  into  Ganesa's  body.  The 
Bhutas  searched  and  searched  for  a  very  long 
time  and  at  last  found  an  elephant  asleep  with 
its  head  to  the  north  and  cutting  off  its  head 
they  brought  it  and  fixed  it  to  Ganesa's  body, 
•and  lo  !  he  rose  up  a  man  in  body  and  elephant 
in  face.  This  story  also  accounts  for  the 
belief  of  the  Hindus  to  avoid  the  northern 
•aspect  in  sleep. 

Yinayaka  is  the  eldest  son  of  Siva  and  Par- 
vati  and  one  of  the  most  popular  of  the  deities 
of  India.  He  is  the  male  Minerva  and  the 
Janus  of  public  ways.  His  shrine  is  in  every 
Hindu  village.  He  is  worshipped  in  every 
Hindu  house.  Every  school  boy  commences 
his  lessons  after  giving  his  usual  prayers  to 
Yinayaka.  Every  merchant  commences  his 
operations  after  first  propitiating  this  deity. 
In  marriages  and  in  every  kind  of  religious 
ceremony,  Yinayaka  is  the  first  god  whose  help 
is  invoked.  Almost  all  the  standard  works  in 
Sanskrit  and  the  Yernacular  languages  begin 
with  an  invocation  of  the  help  of  Ganesa. 
Yinayaka' s  figure  is  represented  as  elephant 


110       HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 


in  face  and  man  in  body.  The  elephant's  head 
is  regarded  as  the  emblem  of  sagacity.  In  his 
image  he  is  always  seated  at  his  ease,  with  his 
legs  folded  under  him  on  a  lotus  throne.  He 
has  four  arms  and  they  hold  an  elephant's 
trunk,  a  noose,  a  mace,  and  a  modaka  (rice 
pudding).  He  wears  a  crown.  His  ears  are 
adorned  with  jewels  and  his  forehead  wears  the 
vibhuti — the  sacred  ashes.  He  wears  a  garland 
of  pearls  and  precious  stones  round  his  neck. 
He  is  worshipped  under  the  different  names 
of  Vinayaka,  Ganesa,  Ganapati,  Pillaiyar,  etc. 
As  this  most  popular  deity  is  worshipped  in 
almost  every  village,  there  is  a  belief  among 
certain  people  that  he  is  the  god  of  the  Sudras 
and  lower  orders,  who  are  generally  uneducat 
ed.  As  an  authority  for  this  belief,  the  follow 
ing  couplet  is  sometimes  quoted  :— 

Vipranam  daivatam  Sarnbhuh 

Kshatriyanam  tu  Madhavah  | 
Vaisyanam  tu  bhaved  Brahma 

Sudranam  Gananayakah  (| 

The  above  verse  means  that  Siva  is  the  god 
of  the  Brahmans,  Vishnu  of  the  Kshatriyas, 
Brahma  of  the  Vaisyas,  and  Ganesa  of  the 
Sudras.  This  is  a  most  fanciful  verse,  which 


THE    VINAYAKA   CHATURTHI  111 


is  not  at  all  corroborated  by  any  other  author 
ity.  If  any  regard  is  to  be  paid  to  this  coup 
let,  then  no  Brahman  can  worship  Vishnu 
and  no  Yaisya  can  worship  Siva,  facts  which 
are  absurd  on  their  very  face,  as  tested  by  both 
the  ancient  and  modern  ways  of  Hindu  faith. 

Ganesa  worship  is  a  prehistoric  one  and 
it  goes  without  saying  that  the  couplet  some 
times  quoted  as  an  authority  that  Ganesa  is 
the  god  of  the  Sudras  is  most  unfounded.  On 
the  other  hand,  he  is  worshipped  by  the  high 
est  class  of  Brahmans.  There  are  also  special 
sects  who  are  called  Ganapatiyas,  whose  sole 
devotion  is  to  this  deity.  Vinayaka  is  the 
deity  that  rules  over  good  and  bad  alike- 
controlling  the  evil  in  every  case  and  prevent 
ing  hindrances  and  difficulties.  As  such,  he 
is  the  embodiment  of  success  and  of  all  those 
qualities  in  short  which  overcome  hindrances 
in  every  undertaking  and  of  their  usual  accom 
paniments — good  living,  plenty,  prosperity, 
and  peace.  This  is  the  one  great  and  real  reason 
for  the  popularity  of  the  worship  of  this  deity. 

There  is  always  a  small  shrine  of  Vignesvara, 
attached  to  all  Siva  temples.  In  the  Vishnu 
temples  too  he  is  worshipped  as  Tumbikkai- 


112        HINDU   FEASTS,   FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

.alvar — the  sage  of  the  elephant's  trunk — and 
as  Vishvaksena.  Sometimes  he  has  his  own 
temples  too.  As  he  is  the  favourite  son  of 
Siva,  he  receives  honours  equal  to  Siva.  His 
image  is  with  sincere  devotion  adored  by  men 
and  women  alike.  He  is  supposed  to  represent 
the  several  personifications  of  sagacity,  shrewd 
ness,  patience,  and  learning.  Asa  test  of  his 
wisdom,  it  is  related  that  when  he  was  a  child 
and  playing  in  company  with  his  brother  Sub- 
rahmanya,  Siva  promised  to  present  a  mango- 
fruit  to  him  who  made  a  circuit  round  the 
world  and  returned  first.  Subrahmanya 
summoned  his  peacock,  mounted  it  and  was 
ready  for  the  journey.  But  Ganesa  calmly 
went  round  Siva,  his  father,  and  demanded  the 
fruit.  "  But  you  never  went  round  the  world," 
said  Siva.  "  What  is  the  world,  but  your  own 
holy  self  ?  I  went  round  you.  Ergo,  I  went 
round  the  world,"  was  Ganesa's  wise  reply. 
Siva  was  of  course  convinced,  praised  Ganesa 
for  his  shrewdness,  and  gave  him  the  promised 
fruit,  which  however,  he  shared  with  Subrah 
manya.  The  peculiarity  of  this  deity  is  that 
his  worship  is  combined  as  it  were  with  that 
of  every  other  god.  All  sects  unite  in  claiming 


THE   VINAYAKA   CHATURTHI  113 


him  as  their  own.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
his  shrines  are  found  generally  associated  with 
those  of  other  deities — Siva  and  Vishnu.  The 
largest  temple  built  solely  in  honour  of  Ganesa 
in  India  is  the  Uchchippillaiyar  temple  on  the 
top  of  the  famous  and  beautiful  rock  at 
Trichinopoly. 

Though  this  god  is  invoked  on  several  occa 
sions  during,  the  year,  there  is  a  special  day  in 
every  year  which  is  set  apart  particularly  for 
his  worship,  and  this  day  is  called  the  Vina- 
yalid  Chaturthi  day,  which  falls  on  the  fourth 
lunar  day  of  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of 
Simha.  The  Tamils  term  this  day  Pillaiyar 
Chavutti  day. 

Of  all  the  figures  in  the  Hindu  Mythology, 
that  of  Ganesa  or  Pillaiyar  must  be  most 
familiar  to  every  European.  In  the  bathing 
ghat  of  every  river  and  underneath  the  pipal 
tree  will  be  seen  a  figure  in  a  sitting  posture, 
short  and  stout,  with  a  protuberant  stomach  and 
four  hands,  riding  a  mouse  and  with  the  body 
of  a  man  and  the  head  of  an  elephant.  This 
is  the  image  Ganesa  or  Pillaiyar,  and  there  is  not 
a  single  village  in  the  whole  of  India  which  does 
not  possess  at  least  half  a  dozen  of  these  familiar 


114       HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

images.  The  elephant  head  has  only  one  tusk 
in  full  and  the  other  appears  cut  off  in  the  middle, 
which  is  supposed  to  have  resulted  in  a  scuffle, 
between  Ganesa  and  Parasurama.  The  "  belly- 
god  "  is  on  this  account  called  Ekadanta,  or 
the  single-tusked.  Ganesa  is  said  to  have 
written  the  Mahabharata  at  the  dictation  of 
Vyasa — for  it  is  said  that  the  latter  was  so 
quick  in  repeating  the  epic  that  no  mortal  could 
have  managed  to  follow  him. 


ibittim  IRew  gear's  2)a\> 


YEKY  nation  in  the  world  has  its 
New  Year's  Day.  A  year  is  the 
time  of  the  apparent  revolution  of 
the  sun  through  the  ecliptic  ;  and 
a  sidereal  year  is  the  time  in 
which  the  sun  departing  from  any  fixed 
star  returns  to  the  same.  The  Hindu's 
astronomical  year  is  sidereal.  He  calls  it 
Samvatsaradi,  the  first  day  of  the  year  or  the 
Vishu-chaitravishu,  the  equinoctical  point  of 
Aries,  into  which  the  sun  enters  at  the  vernal 
equinox.  This  event  generally  falls  on  the 
12th  April  and  is  considered  by  the  Hindu  a 
punaykala — a  holy  occasion.  So  on  the  New 
Year's  Day  the  Manes  and  Gods  are  propitiated 
by  offerings  of  tarpana — oblations  of  water— 
and  other  allied  ceremonies.  In  other  res 
pects,  the  New  Year's  Day  is  a  day  of  feasting. 
Though  thus  the  astronomical  Hindu  year 
falls  on  the  12th  April,  the  New  Year's  Day  is 
observed  on  different  days  by  different  sects 
of  the  Hindus,  according  as  they  happen  to 
follow  the  lunar,  the  luni- solar  or  the  solar 
calendar.  The  Tamils  follow  the  solar,  and 


116       HINDU    FEASTS,    PASTS   AND    CEEEMONIES 

their  year  is  thus  the  sidereal  year.  The 
Telugus  and  the  Canarese  follow  the  Chandra- 
mana  reckoning,  and  their  year  is  the  luni- 
solar,  which  begins  earlier  than  the  l^th  April. 
The  Malayalis  follow  the  Tamils,  though  their 
Kollamandu — which  is  more  an  agricultural 
year — begins  about  the  middle  of  September, 
when  the  sun  enters  the  autumnal  equinox. 

On  the  New  Year  Day  the  elderly  people- 
males  and  females — take  a  sacred  bath  in  the 
holy  rivers  or  the  sea,  whichever  happens  to  be 
nearest.     The  males  propitiate  the  Manes  and 
the  deities  ;  children    appear  in    their  holiday 
dress  and  jewels.  The  nearest  temple  is  attend 
ed  and  the  god  in  it  is  worshipped.     In   some 
families    children  and  other  members  receive 
new  cloths.     A  sumptuous   meal  is  cooked  in 
every  house  and  poor  relations  are  always  cor 
dially  invited  to  the   feast.     At  evening  time 
the   Panclianga   or  the  Calendar   of  the  New 
Year  is   read  out  and   expounded   by  a   holy 
Brahman.     Several  people   assemble  to  listen 
to  this   exposition.     At  the    end  of   this  cere 
mony,  attar,  pan  supari,  and  dessert  are  dis 
tributed.     Sometimes   a  short   entertainment 
of  music  is  also  added  to  this  ceremony.     The 


THE   HINDU   NEW  YEAR'S   DAY  11T 

whole  day  is  spent  more  or  less  in  mirth  and 
festivity  and  a  light  supper  closes  the  day's 
proceedings. 

In  Malabar,  the  New  Year's  Day  festivities 
are  observed  on  a  very  grand  scale.  On  New 
Year's  eve  all  the  gold  coins  available  in  the 
house,  all  gold  jewels,  all  kinds  of  auspicious 
fruits  and  flowers  and  everything  consider 
ed  to  be  good  to  look  at  are  placed  in  the  room 
set  apart  for  the  worship  of  the  family  god. 
The  Karnavan  who  is  the  head  of  the  family 
first  opens  this  room  between  4  and  5  on  New 
Year's  morn  and  worships  with  a  lighted  lamp 
in  his  hand  all  these  articles.  Then  every 
member  of  the  house  one  after  the  other  goes  to 
the  front  of  the  room  with  his  or  her  eyes  shut 
and  opens  them  when  arrived  at  the  proper 
spot  to  take  a  sight  of  the  auspicious  articles 
collected.  The  Karnavan — head  of  the  family 
—presents  each  with  something  or  other, — • 
coins,  jewels,  flowers,  fruits,  etc.  This  is  the 
chief  difference  between  the  Malayalis  and  other 
Hindus  as  regards  the  observance  of  the  New 
Year's  festivities.  And  every  Hindu  takes  care 
to  see  an  auspicious  sight  on  the  New  Year's 
morn  whether  he  is  a  Malayali  or  other  Hindu. 


20.   ftbe  ©nam  feast  in  flDalabar 

» 

HE  Onam  is  the  oldest  of  the  na 
tional  feasts  of  Malabar.  This 
feast  commences  nine  days  pre 
vious  to  Onam  day  from  the 
Hast  a  asterism  and  lasts  three 
days  after  it.  The  commence 
ment  of  the  festivities  is  an 
nounced  by  the  youngsters  twanging  a  bow 
string  which  is  called  VilluJcJcottal.  This  Vil- 
lukkottal  is  very  harsh  but  is  carried  on  through 
out  the  continuance  of  the  feast  for  ten  days. 
It  corresponds  to  the  sounding  of  harsh  drums 
by  the  low-caste  people  of  the  Madras  Coast 
during  the  Sanhramana  festivities — the  en 
trance  of  the  sun  into  the  sign  Capricorn. 
The  Onam  is  celebrated  to  commemorate  the 
reign  of  Mahabali,  the  mythological  king  who 
is  said  to  have  ruled  over  Malabar.  He  is  re 
ported  to  have  been  humbled  by  Vishnu  in  Ti- 
rukkakarai,  a  sacred  town  in  Travancore,  where 
Vishnu  appeared  as  a  fair  young  boy  weeping. 
The  Hindu  legends  put  this  appearance  down 
as  the  Vamanavatara  or  the  dwarf  incarnation 


THE  ONAM  FEAST  IN  MALABAR         119 

of  Vishnu  ;  but  the  homely  Malayali  prefers  to 
describe  him  as  a  fair  boy.  Mahabali  asked 
the  boy  what  he  wanted  and  gave  him  fruits 
and  sweetmeats,  but  the  cunning  young  rogue 
would  accept  nothing.  "What  do  you  want, 
then  ?"  asked  the  king  who  used  to  give  all 
those  who  came  to  him  whatever  they  asked  for. 
The  boy  said  that  he  required  only  three  feet 
of  ground  and  this  was  readily  granted  by  the 
unsuspecting  king.  Suddenly  the  boy  assumed 
a  huge  shape  (generally  called  Visvarupa  or 
world-pervading  shape)  and  with  one  foot  cover 
ed  all  Mahabali's  dominions.  The  second  foot 
took  in  all  the  sky  covering  the  king's  domin 
ions,  but  where  was  the  third  foot  of  ground  ? 
The  king  was  amazed  and  thought  that  Vishnu 
himself  wras  before  him.  "  Where  am  I  to 
measure  the  third  foot  ?"  cried  the  deity.  "  On 
my  head,  my  lord  !"  was  the  calm  reply  of 
the  monarch.  And  so  it  came  to  pass,  and 
Mahabali  was  humbled  to  dust.  This  event 
took  place  on  the  Onam  day,  in  the  asterism  of 
Tiru-Ona  (whence  the  name  Ona,  devoid  of, 
Tiru  which  means  holy)  in  the  month  of  Simlia 
answering  to  the  latter  half  of  August  and  the 
former  half  of  September. 


120       HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

But  a  question  may  arise  here  as  to  why  this 
day  which  is  a  sorrowful  day  on  which  a  good 
sovereign  died  should  be  observed  with  festiv 
ities.  It  is  stated  that  Mahabali  requested 
Yishnu  that  the  day  of  his  departure  to  the 
other  world  should  be  observed  with  festivities 
and  the  boon,  it  is  said,  was  granted  by  the 
deity.  There  is  also  another  belief.  On  the 
Onam  day,  king  Mahabali  is  supposed  to 
again  pay  a  visit  to  his  country,  his  object 
being  to  see  whether  his  subjects  still  enjoy 
the  same  amount  of  happiness  and  prosper 
ity,  as  they  did  under  him.  So,  to  give- 
a  right  impression  to  their  whilom  sover 
eign,  the  Malayalis  keep  up  the  festivities  on 
this  day,  for,  if  they  should  mourn,  Maha 
bali  would  return  to  his  abode  in  the  other 
world  with  a  grieved  heart  and  a  vexed  mind. 

At  the  approach  of  Onam,  the  houses  in  Mala 
bar  are  decorated  with  flowers  and  festoons. 
A  clay  image  of  Yishnu  is  made  in  every  home 
and  worshipped  during  these  ten  days.  The 
god  is  inaugurated  with  a  special  feast  called 
Puadai  feast  in  which  rice  and  nendra  plantain 
are  cooked  and  offered  to  the  god.  The  duty 
of  bringing  flowers  and  boughs  to  decorate  the 


THE    ON  AM   FEAST   IN   MALABAR  121 


houses  is  left  to  the  younger  boys.  Each 
youngster  takes  a  small  basket  and  proceeds 
to  the  gardens  and  fields  with  his  companions 
merrily  singing  a  shrill  hymn  called  the  Onam 
hymn.  The  following  is  the  translation  of  one 
of  the  verses  : — "  Oh  !  the  moon-disc-decorated 
(Siva)  protect  me.  Oh  !  the  husband  of  Parvati 
(Siva)  protect  me.  Oh!  the  moon-faced  deity 
protect  me.  Oh!  the  god  worshipped  by  Indra 
and  other  gods  protect  me."  It  does  not  matter 
if  Siva  is  extolled  while  Ho wers  are  being  gather 
ed  for  the  worship  of  Vishnu,  the  rule  among  the 
youngsters  being  that  some  deity  or  other  must 
be  praised.  The  image  is  called  Mahadeva. 
The  women  and  girls  at  home  amuse  them 
selves  with  a  dance  in  a  circle  called  the 
Tappattikkali ;  all  stand  up  and  circle  round 
and  round  clapping  their  hands  and  sing 
ing  sweet  songs  in  praise  of  Vishnu  or  some 
other  deity.  One  of  the  elders  of  the  party 
starts  the  song  and  leads  the  dancers,  and 
the  others  accompany  her  by  repeating 
what  she  says  and  following  her  move 
ments.  These  amusements  continue  until  the 
Onam  when  presents  of  new  cloths  are  made. 
All  the  male  and  female  members  of  every 


122         HINDU   FEASTS,    FASTS   AND    CEREMONIES 

family,  including  the  children,  receive  their 
new  cloths  from  the  Karnavan,  or  family 
head.  The  women  also  receive  any  other  new 
cloths  meant  for  some  future  occasion,  as  Onam 
day  is  considered  an  auspicious  one  for  receiving 
such  presents.  Early  in  the  morning  the  labour 
ers  and  cultivators  visit  their  masters  with  a 
number  of  nendram  ~kay,  a  species  of  plantain 
peculiar  to  Malabar,  and  receive  in  return  a 
new  cloth,  oil,  rice,  ghi,  etc.,  as  becoming 
their  position.  There  is  nothing  unusual  in 
the  food  partaken  during  the  Onam  festivities 
except  that  the  nendram  fruit  must  form 
one  of  the  dishes.  The  house  of  every  Nam- 
budri  Brahman  is  thrown  open  to  as  many 
Brahmans  as  may  care  to  visit  it.  The  Pandi 
Brahmans,  or  the  Brahman  cloth  merchants 
from  Tinnevelly  who  visit  Malabar  with  the 
mundtU  cloth  specially  made  for  the  feast  in 
Ambasamudram  and  Yiravanallur  in  the  Tin 
nevelly  District,  are  well  fed  and  their  cloths 
are  largely  in  demand.  On  Onam  day  a  special 
dish  of  nendram  is  partaken  by  every  Mala 
yan* — this  is  called  pululikiya  pala  noruJcJca. 

After  the  presents  have  been  distributed,  the 
worship  of  Vishnu  succeeds  and  the  feast  over, 


THE    ONAM   FEAST   IN   MALABAR  123 

the  Malayali  men  assemble  to  witness  a  grand 
sham  fight  (PadaJcJcali  or  Kayyankali).  Each 
of  the  opposing  sides  must  be  under  the  patron 
age  of  some  influential  Malayalis  who,  a 
month  or  two  before  the  Onam  feast  agree 
to  conclude  it  in  this,  the  usual  way. 
This  entertainment  is  a  very  costly  one. 
The  men  engaged  to  fight  are  generally  well- 
known  wrestlers  and  acrobats  ;  they  live  at  the 
expense  of  the  person  who  engages  them,  and 
are  specially  trained  in  order  to  display  their 
full  skill  on  the  Onam  day.  All  the  people  assem 
ble  to  witness  the  sports — men,  boys  and  little 
girls,  the  women  stopping  at  home  to  dance 
and  sing  the  Tappattikali.  The  men  divide 
themselves  into  two  parties,  or  cileries,  and  sit 
on  the  ground  in  rows,  15  to  20  yards  being 
left  between  them  and  here  it  is  that  the  com 
batants  display  their  skill.  Two  men  are  chosen 
as  umpires  on  each  side.  The  game  com 
mences  at  1  o'clock  every  day  and  continues 
until  6  P.M.  on  Onam  day  and  the  two  succeed 
ing  days,  and  at  6  P.M.  on  the  10th  day  of  the 
feast — i.e.,  the  third  day  from  Onam  proper 
wrhich  is  also  the  third  day  after  the  com 
mencement  of  the  sports — the  decision  of  the 


124        HINDU   FEASTS,   FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 


umpires  is  declared.  A  commencement  is 
made  by  one  party  sending  out  ten  boys  to  chal 
lenge  ten  boys  from  the  other  side.  These  display 
their  strength  and  agility  of  limb  by  acrobatic 
feats,  and  then  challenge  the  boys  from  the 
other  party.  The  latter  accepts  the  challenge 
by  sending  out  ten  boys  to  meet  them.  Both 
the  sides  return  to  their  respective  seats.  The 
umpires  then  call  out  by  name  one  boy  from 
one  party  and  ask  him  whether  he  would  fight 
so  and  so,  on  the  other  side.  Sometimes 
the  boy  accepts,  sometimes  he  sneeringiy  says 
that  it  would  be  a  disgrace  on  his  part  to  be 
matched  against  such  a  poor  and  weak  opponent. 
rlhe  doubts  are  decided  by  the  umpires  and 
the  fight  takes  place.  Certain  conditions  are 
agreed  upon  and  woe  betide  him  who  disre 
gards  them.  The  conditions  are  whether  the 
blows  to  be  struck  shall  be  all  on  the  back  (odar- 
am),  on  the  sides  (kadakam),  on  the  back  of  the 
neck  (pedant),  on  the  cheek  (cheJcadatta) ,  etc. 
The  youngsters  then  set  to,  two  at  a  time,  and 
an  account  is  carefully  kept  by  the  umpires  of 
successes  and  defeats.  Then  in  gradation  of 
age,  dexterity  and  skill,  others,  still  two  and 
two  at  a  time,  one  from  each  party,  appear 


THE    ONAM   FEAST    IN    MALABAR  125 

and  light.  This  goes  on  for  three  days.  On 
the  last  day  the  decision  of  the  umpires  is  given. 
Every  one,  specially  engaged  for  the  entertain 
ment,  is  rewarded  on  the  night  of  the  third 
day,  in  accordance  with  his  powers  and 
prowess.  This  closes  the  padakkali  which 
takes  place  before  a  Eajah  or  local  chieftain, 
now  a  rich  tarawad,  who  witnesses  the  whole 
scene  and  distributes  the  prizes.  It  is  con 
sidered  a  high  honour  to  win  a  prize  in  the 
padakkali.  Generally  no  harm  is  done  in  the 
sham  fight,  but  sometimes,  under  excitement, 
and  when  the  parties  attacking  each  other  are 
professional  wrestlers  or  bear  a  grudge  towards 
one  another  accidents  do  occur.  This  whole 
sham  fight  is  called  onitalla.  But  these 
are  rare  and  never  come  into  Court,  for 
king  Mahabali  cannot  thus  be  insulted.  On 
the  evening  of  the  last  day  the  clay  image  of 
Yishnu  is  placed  on  an  ornamental  plank 
made  of  jack-wood  and  with  much  tamasha, 
in  which  the  young  and  the  old  freely  join,  is 
taken  to  a  river,  tank  or  some  unfrequented 
place,  and  thrown  away.  From  time  im 
memorial  the  Onam  seems  to  have  been 
celebrated  in  the  same  festive  way  in  Malabar. 


126       HINDU   FEASTS,   FASTS   AND   CEREMONIES 

Several  treaties,  engagements  and  papers  of 
importance  edited  by  Mr.  Logan,  late  of  the 
Madras  Civil  Service— the  greatest  authority 
in  Malabar  matters — contain  allusions  to  this 
Onam,  so  remote  as  in  A.D.  1784. 


APPENDIX  A. 


[We  are  enabled  to  place  before  our  readers  to-day* 
an  admirable  article  on  the  Kaliyuga  from  the  pen 
of  a  learned  Hindu  gentleman.  The  word  "  Kali 
yuga"  is  constantly  cropping  up  in  native  writings 
and  speeches,  and  is  likely  to  do  so  still  more  in 
the  future,  but  a  perusal  of  this  article  will  explain 
the  belief,  for  a  superstition  it  cannot  fairly  be  called, 
based  as  it  is  on  writings  held  sacred  by  the  people. 
That  extraordinary  divine,  Dr.  Gumming,  used  to 
startle  periodically  worthy  British  matrons  and 
susceptible  young  men  and  maidens  by  proving  to 
his  and  their  complete  satisfaction  that  the  end  of 
the  world  was  near  at  hand.  His  prophecies  were 
the  result  of  abstruse  mathematical  calculations 
Lased  on  his  interpretation  of  certain  scriptural 
texts  ;  but,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  he  never  brought 
forward  such  strong  evidence  as  is  furnished  in  the 
Puranic  writings  which  fixes  the  exact  hour  of  the 
dawn  of  the  Last  Day  at  2  A.M.  on  the  25th 
November,  1899.  The  point,  however,  on  which 
particular  stress  is  to  be  laid  is  the  difficulty  that 
must  naturally  exist  in  dealing  with  people  who 


*•  The  Madras  Mail,  19th  November,  1896. 


128       HINDU    FEASTS,    FASTS    AND    CEREMONIES 

honestly  believe  in  this  Kaliyuga  story  during  such 
a  crisis  as  the  present.  Even  the  most  sceptical 
will  read  with  some  surprise  of  the  evils  accompany 
ing  the  close  of  this  age,  as  described  in  the  Vishnu 
Pin  ana.  They  tally  so  closely  with  recent  changes 
in  the  social  order  of  Hindu  life. — EDITOR,  TJic 
Madras  Mail."] 

A  Y-uga  in  Sanskrit  (in  Heb.  OUm,  in  Gr. 
Aion,  and  in  Lat.  JEvuni)  means  an  age  of 
the  world.  Four  Yugas  are  recognised  by  the 
Hindu  mythology,  the  Krita,  the  Treta,  the 
Dvapara  and  the  Kali.  All  these  four  Yugas 
joined  together  constitute  a  great  age,  or  an  ag 
gregate  of  four  ages  (Mahay uga).  A  thousand 
such  aggregates  are  a  day  of  Brahma.  Let  us 
give  the  number  of  years  allotted  to  each  Yuga 
in  the  years  of  the  gods  and  in  the  years  of 
men.  The  first  rule  is  that  a  year  of  men  is 
equal  to  a  day  of  the  gods.  The  following 
table  gives  the  years  of  the  four  Yugas  accord 
ing  to  both  these  calculations  :— 

Yugas.  Divine    years.  Years  of  Mortals. 

Krita  ...         4,800  4,800x360=1,728,000 

Treta  ...         3,600  3,600x360=1,296,000 

Dvapara  ...         2,400  2,400x360=    864,000 

Kali  ...         1,200  1,200x360-    432,000 


Total  (a  Mahayuga)  4,320,000 


THE    KALIYUGA  129 


So  the  notion  of  these  four  ages  may  be  best 
remembered  by  a  deteriorating  series  expressed 
by  a  descending  arithmetical  progression  as 
4,  3,  2,  1,  by  the  conversion  of  units  into  thou 
sands  and  by  the  legend  that  these  are  divine 
years  each  composed  of  360  years  of  men.  A 
period  of  4,320,000  years  constitutes  a  great 
age,  or  a  Mahayuga,  and  this  number  multiplied 
by  1,000  i.e.,  4,320,000,000  years  becomes  a 
day  of  Brahma:— 

Daivikanam  Yuyanam  tit  sahasram  pari- 
samkhyaya  \  Bralimam-ekamaharjneyam  tava- 
ti  ratrir-eva  clia.  At  the  end  of  this  day 
a  dissolution  of  the  universe  will  occur,  when 
all  the  three  worlds,  earth  and  the  regions 
of  space  will  all  be  consumed  by  fire.  The 
three  worlds  then  become  but  one  mighty 
ocean.  Brahma  will  sleep  for  a  night,  of  equal 
duration  with  his  day,  on  this  ocean  and  at  its 
close  will  create  the  world  anew.  A  year  of 
Brahma  is  composed  of  360  such  days  and 
nights  and  a  hundred  such  years  constitute  his 
whole  life,  which  is  called  a  Kalpa.  Brahma- 
nascliayuslia  Kalpa  kalpavidbhih  nirupitah. 
Such,  in  brief,  is  the  belief  of  the  Hindus 
regarding  the  ages  and  the  duration  of  the 


130  APPENDIX   A. 


world  and  full  details  of  this  belief  will  be  found 
in  Books  I,  IV,  V  and  VI  of  the  Vishnu  Purana. 
What  is  the  object  of  Brahma  in  thus  de 
stroying  the  whole  universe  and  recreating  it  ? 
The  Hindu  philosophy  most  beautifully  ex 
plains  it : — 

Sarva-bhutani  Kaunteya 

Prakritam  yanti  mamikam  | 

Kalpa-kshaye  punas-tani 

Kalpadau  visrijamy-aham  j 

' '  I  absorb  the  whole  universe  in  myself  at 
the  end  of  the  Kalpa  and  at  its  commencement 
I  create  it  again,"  says  Brahma.  Volumes  are 
written  in  the  several  Puranas  about  the 
merits  and  demerits  of  each  Yuga,  or  age. 
The  brief  way  to  remember  the  wiiole  subject 
would  be  to  imagine  Virtue  to  have  four  legs. 
In  iheKrita,  or  the  first  Yuga,  Virtue  walks  on 
all  her  four  legs.  In  the  Treta,  or  the  second 
Yuga,  she  walks  only  on  three  of  her  legs  ;  in  the 
Dvapara  on  two,  and  in  the  last  age,  the  Kali- 
yuga,  on  only  one  leg.  After  this  brief  remark 
about  the  Hindu  notions  of  the  age  of  the  uni 
verse,  its  destruction  and  recreation,  let  us  con 
fine  ourselves  on  the  present  occasion  to  the  full 
description  of  the  Kaliyuga,  the  fourth  Hindu 


THE    KALIYUGA  131 


age  which  is  current  now,  and  in  which  Virtue 
is  said  to  walk  only  on  one  of  her  four  legs.  The 
Kaliyuga  era  commenced  in  3102  B.  C.  and 
we  are  now  in  the  year  4998  of  the  Kaliyuga  ; 
i.e.,  4,997  years  of  the  Kaliyuga  have  already 
passed  away  and  the  year  current  4998  com 
menced  on  the  12th  April,  1896.  The  year 
5000  of  the  Kaliyuga  will  commence  on  the 
12th  April  1899,  A.D.  and  end  on  the  llth 
April  1900.  The  belief  of  the  orthodox  Hindus 
from  the  Himalayas  to  Cape  Comorin  that  this, 
their  fourth,  era  is  one  of  vice,  wickedness  and 
misery  is  universal,  and  is  recorded  in  almost 
each  and  every  one  of  their  Puranas.  It  is 
also  strongly  believed  that  the  year  5000  of 
the  Kaliyuga  will  be  a  year  of  doom  and 
ruin.  Let  us  dwell  at  length  on  both  these 
beliefs. 

In  Book  IV  of  the  Vishnu  Purana  it  is 
stated  that  Kali  feared  to  set  his  feet  on  this 
world  as  long  as  it  was  purified  by  the  touch  of 
the  sacred  feet  of  Krishna. 

Yavat  sapada  padmabhyam 
Sprisan-aste  Kamapatih  [ 
Tavat  Kalir  vai  prithivim 
Parakrantum  na  ch-asakat  II 


APPENDIX    A. 


The  usual  notion  of  the  Hindus  is  that    the 
age  of  Kali  set  in  from  the  death  of  Krishna ; 
but  it  is  also  a  common  supposition  that  it 
commenced  a  little    later,  with  the  reign  of 
Parikshit.     It  is    said    in    Book    II.    of  the 
Bliacjavata  that  after  Krishna  died  or  ascended 
to  his  abode  in  Heaven,  the  Pandavas  also 
followed  him  after  installing  their  grandson 
and  heir,  Parikshit,  astheErnperorof  iheBhara- 
ta.     The  new  monarch,  according  to  the  usual 
custom,  set  out  on  a  tour  round  his  empire  to 
establish  order,  to  make  friends  with  friendly 
kings  and  to  subdue  vassals.     He  finished  his 
tour  and  was  returning  to  his  capital,  when,  on 
his  way  back  and  near  the  river   Sarasvati  he 
noticed  that  a  cow  and  an  ox  were  being  tortur 
ed  to  death  by  a  person  who  appeared  to  be  a 
Sudra,  and  who  had  put  on  royal   robes.     The 
cruel  Sudra  had  cut  off  three  of  the  four  legs 
of  the  ox  and  was  proceeding  to  cut  off  the  fourth 
leg  also.    The  cow  appeared  to  be  only  a  bag  of 
bones ;  she  was  so  lean  and  dried  up  by  starva 
tion.     Even  a  heart  of  adamant  would  have 
melted  away  at   the  sight.     But   the    Sudra 
went  on  kicking  and  lashing  her  incessantly. 
Parikshit  was  horrified  at  what  he  saw  and  in 


THE    KALIYUGA 


great  wrath  addressed  the  person  as  follows  :— 
''Who  are  you,  vile  wretch,  that  have  put  on 
royal  garments?  Are  you  not  ashamed  of 
your  conduct  towards  these  poor  creatures,  one 
of  which  you  have  already  deprived  of  its  three 
legs  and  the  other  3-011  have  starved  to  death  ? 
I  must  put  you  at  once  to  death."  The  Emper 
or  then  asked  the  ox  and  the  cow  to  relate  their 
history.  After  some  reluctance  the  ox  said 
that  he  was  Justice  (or  Virtue,  Dliannci)  who 
walked  on  his  four  legs  of  (1)  contemplation 
upon  God,  (2)  purity  of  life,  (3)  mercy  towards 
living  beings,  and  (4)  truth  in  the  Krita  ynga 
or  first  Hindu  age ;  that  he  had  lost  his  three  legs 
at  the  rate  of  one  at  the  end  of  every  Yuc/a  and 
that  he  had  his  only  leg,  truth,  left  remaining  at 
the  commencement  of  the  Kali  era  and  that 
lord  of  the  Kaliyuga  was  already  aiming  at  his 
fourth  leg.  The  Emperor  learnt  the  cow  to  be 
the  goddess  Earth  who  was  reduced  to  that 
condition  by  the  departure  of  Krishna  from 
this  world  of  men.  Parikshit  was  horrified  at 
what  he  saw  and  heard,  and  aimed  his  death- 
dealing  sword  at  the  Sudra,  when,  wonder  of 
wonders !  he  threw  away  his  royal  garments, 
assumed  his  true  form  and  falling  down  before 


134  APPENDIX  A. 


the  Emperor,  begged  for  his  life.  This  Sudra 
was  Kali  himself.  Parikshit  was  a  true  hero 
and  a  genuine  sprout  of  the  Pandava  family. 
His  motto  was,  never  kill  a  fallen  enemy.  So 
he  spared  Kali's  life  on  condition  that  he  left 
his  dominions  at  once.  But  Kali  begged  for 
some  place  to  live  in.  He  was  asked  by  the 
Emperor  to  find  his  abode  in  gambling  houses, 
in  taverns,  in  women  of  unchaste  lives,  in 
slaughtering  places  and  in  gold.  And  Kali 
agreed  to  do  so.  So,  as  long  as  Parikshit  reign 
ed  over  the  Bharata  (India)  Kali  confined  him 
self  only  to  these  five  places ;  but  after  the 
reign  of  that  just  Emperor,  Kali  made  his  way 
to  other  places  like  wild  fire  and  established 
his  power  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of 
the  whole  world.  This,  in  short,  is  the  legend 
of  the  setting  in  of  the  Kaliyuga. 

In  India  when  a  young  boy  or  girl  happens 
to  break,  in  eating  or  dress,  the  orthodox  rules 
of  caste,  his  or  her  parents  will  say :  "  0  !  It  is 
all  the  result  of  the  Kaliyuga.'''  If  a  Hindu 
becomes  a  convert  to  any  other  religion,  or  if 
any  atrocious  act  is  committed  the  Hindu  will 
observe:  "0!  It  is  the  ripening  of  Kali." 
Every  deviation  from  the  established  custom, 


THE    KALIYUGA  135 

every  vice,  every  crime,  in  fact  everything 
wicked,  is  set  down  by  the  ordinary  Hindu  to 
the  ascending  power  of  the  Lord  of  the  Kali  age. 
These  notions  entertained  by  the  people  must 
not  be  entirely  set  down  to  be  wholly  super 
stitious.  In  every  one  of  the  Hindu  Puranas 
the  Kaliyuya  (or  the  dark  age)  is  described  as 
the  worst  period  of  everything  wrong,  unhappy 
or  miserable.  The  Vishnu  Purana,  Bhagavata, 
Devibhagavata,  and  a  number  of  religious  works 
give  a  glowing  description  of  the  numerous 
miseries  reserved  for  mankind  in  the  Kaliyuga^ 
and  the  ordinary  Hindu  bred  up  from  his  in 
fancy  in  the  Puranic  lore  has  accepted  these 
beliefs  as  part  and  parcel  of  his  existence,  and 
anything  going  wrong  in  his  own  household  or 
round  about  him  is  set  down  to  the  influence  of 
the  Kali  age.  Parasara  describes  the  evils  of 
Kaliyuga  in  detail  in  the  Vishnu  Purana.  We 
will  give  some  of  the  most  prominent  ones 
here: — The  strict  rules  of  caste,  order  and  obser 
vances  will  never  exist.  The  rights  enjoined  by 
the  four  Vedas  will  perish.  The  rules  of  conduct 
between  the  husband  and  wife  between  the 
preceptor  and  his  disciple  will  be  disregarded. 
Marriage  rules  will  be  set  at  naught.  Every 


APPENDIX    A. 


book  will  be  a  sacred  book.  All  gods  will  be 
gods.  People  will  turn  proud  at  small  posses 
sions.  Wives  will  desert  their  husbands  when 
the  latter  become  poor  and  take  up  to  persons 
who  are  rich.  A  person  possessing  money  will 
be  the  lord  of  everything,  irrespective  of  his 
birth  or  position  in  life.  All  money  will  be 
spent  on  mere  show.  The  world  will  become 
avaricious.  Men  will  desire  to  acquire  wealth 
by  dishonest  means.  Cows  will  be  fed  only  as 
long  as  they  supply  milk.  The  people  will  ever 
remain  in  fear  of  famine  and  scarcity.  They 
will  ever  be  watching  the  sky  for  a  drop  of  rain. 
Severe  famines  will  rage  and  people  will  be 
driven  to  the  necessity  of  living  upon  leaves  of 
trees.  There  will  never  be  abundance  or  plea 
sure  in  the  Kali  age.  Kings,  instead  of  protect 
ing  their  subjects,  will  plunder  them  under  the 
pretence  of  levying  taxes.  Men  of  all  degrees 
will  believe  themselves  to  be  equal  to  the  Brah- 
mans.  Everyone  who  happens  to  have  cars,' 
elephants  or  steeds  will  fancy  himself  to  be  a 
Rajah.  There  will  be  no  warriors  or  Princes  who 
could  be  called  by  such  names  on  account  of 
their  birth.  People  will  desert  their  houses. 
Children  will  die  in  great  numbers.  Women 


THE    KALIYUGA  187 


will  bear  children  at  the  age  of  5,  6  or  7  and 
men  beget  them  when  they  are  8,  9  or  10.  Grey 
hair  will  appear  when  a  person  is  only  12  years 
of  age  and  the  duration  of  life  for  men  will 
only  be  20  years.  The  Vedas,  the  gods,  the 
Brahmans,  the  sacred  waters,  will  all  be  dis 
regarded.  The  parents-in-law  will  be  respected 
in  the  place  of  parents  and  brothers-in-law 
(brothers  of  wives)  will  be  one's  bosom  friends. 
Sins  will  be  committed  daily  and  everything 
which  brings  down  misery  on  human  beings 
will  be  found  to  be  prevailing  to  the  greatest 
extent  in  the  Kali  age. 

This  is  but  a  part  of  the  description  given 
in  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  Hindu  Puranas  on 
the  evils  of  the  Kali  age.  The  railway  carriage 
where  a  Brahman  and  a  non-Brahman  sit 
side  by  side  in  the  same  compartment  and  the 
schools  where  English  is  taught  in  the  same 
way  to  a  Brahman  as  to  a  non-Brahman,  instead 
of  exciting  the  admiration  of  the  orthodox 
Hindu  for  the  benefits  they  have  conferred  upon 
the  public,  are  looked  upon  as  the  platforms 
where  Kali  plays  most  for  levelling  caste  dis 
tinctions.  Female  education,  though  authori 
ties  exist  in  the  Puranas  themselves  for  such 


138  APPENDIX   A. 


a  course,  is  viewed  as  another  turn  which  Kali 
has  taken  to  corrupt  womankind.  The  several 
Government  and  Municipal  taxes  are  consider 
ed  to  be  the  miseries  of  the  mighty  reign  of 
Kali  without  the  least  consideration  that  the 
subject  is  bound  to  pay  to  the  State  for  his 
own  protection.  The  Hindu  mind  is  ever  inge 
nious  in  looking  upon  everything  from  a  Kali 
point  of  view.  But  we  must,  at  the  same  time, 
mention  here  that  it  is  only  the  Hindu  who  lives 
in  remote  villages  and  who  has  not  had  the 
advantage  of  a  free  education  who  thinks  thus. 
Every  educated  Hindu,  of  course,  takes  the 
right  view  of  the  case.  Thus  ends  our  descrip 
tion  of  the  Kaliyucja  in  general  and  of  the 
evils  thereof  as  found  in  the  Pur  anas  and  as 
prevailing  among  the  people. 

In  addition  to  this  belief  there  is  yet  an 
other,  and  a  strong  one,  that  the  year  5000  of 
the  Kaliyucja  (April  1899— April  1900)  will  be 
a  year  of  doom  and  ruin.  The  famine  that  is 
threatening  now  a  great  portion  of  India,  the 
grain  riots  everywhere,  the  failure  of  monsoons, 
the  bubonic  plague  in  Bombay,  the  several 
fires  and  floods  in  almost  all  the  great  rivers 
(Mahanadis)  this  year,  such  as  the  Krishna, 


THE    KALIYUGA  139 


Godavari,  Kaveri,  Narmada  and  Tapti,  which 
have  caused  immense  loss  of  lives  and  pro 
perty,  are  believed  by  the  uneducated  classes 
to  be  ushering  us  into  a  period  of  general 
cataclysms  which  is  expected  to  take  place  in 
the  last  days  of  1899  A.  D.  We  will  examine  now 
the  sources  of  the  belief.  Although  all  the 
Puranas  are  unanimous  in  describing  the 
miseries  of  the  Kali  age  there  is  fortun 
ately  only  one  Parana  which  speaks  of  the 
ruin  of  the  world  in  the  year  5000  of  the  Kali 
age.  But  this  one  Purana  is  the  greatest 
authority  to  the  whole  of  India.  Its  name  is  the 
Devibliayavata  and  it  is  regarded  as  a  most 
sacred  book.  In  the  6th  chapter  of  Book  IX 
it  is  related  that  the  three  goddesses  Sarasvati, 
Ganga,  and  Lakshmi  had  a  quarrel  among 
themselves  in  heaven  and  each  cursed  the  o^her. 
By  the  power  of  the  curses  they  were  converted 
into  the  rivers  of  Sarasvati,  Ganga(  Ganges)  and 
Padmavati  in  this  world  and  are  expiating  their 
sins  here.  Lakshmi  in  addition  to  her  form  as 
the  river  Padmavati  has  assumed  also  the  shape 
of  the  shrub  Tulasi  (Oscymnin  sanctum).  In 
the  8th  chapter  it  is  stated  that  these  goddess 
es  will  abandon  this  world  in  the  year  5000  of 


140  APPENDIX   A. 


the  Kaliyuga  and  with  the  disappearance  of 
these  noble  rivers  everything  will  disappear 
from  the  world  with  the  exception  of  two  places 
— Benares  and  Brindavan  (Muttra) .  The  origi 
nal  in  Sanskrit  stands  thus  :— 

Kalau  pancha-sahasram  cha 

Varsham  sthitva  cha  Bharate 

Jagmus-tas-cha  sarit  rupam 

Vihaya  Sri-Hareh  padam  ||  (1) 

Yani  sarvani  tirthani 

Kasi  Brindavanam  vina  | 

Yasyanti  sarvam  tabhih  cha. 

Vaikuntham  ajnaya  Hareh  |j  (2) 

(1)  They — the  goddesses  Sarasvati,  Gariga 
and  Lakshmi,  after  having  stayed  in  this  world 
for  5,000  years  of  the  Kaliyuga  in  the  shape  of 
rivers,  gave  up  their  transformed  shapes  and 
went  to  the  abode  of  Vishnu  (heaven). 

(2)  All  other  holy  things,  too,   with  the  ex 
ception    of    Kasi    (Benares)    and    Brindavan 
(Muttra)  accompanied  them  to  the  abode   of 
Bari  by  the  order  of  Hari. 

The  statement  contained  in  the  above  two 
verses  is  believed  to  be  the  highest  authority 
for  the  impending  doom  in  the  year  named. 
Except  Benares  and  Brindavan,  everything 
holy  will  disappear  from  the  world.  The  year 


THE    KAL1YUGA  141 


5000  of  the  Kaliyuga  occurs  in  two  other  places 
also  in  the  DeviWiagavata^  once  in  the  middle 
of  Chapter  7  of  Book  IX  when  Narayana  pro 
nounces  the  liberation  of  the  curse  to  the  god 
desses  : — 

Kalau  pan cha  sahasre  cha 
Gate  varshe  cha  mokshanam  | 

1  When  5,000  years  of  the  Kali  age  have  ex 
pired  you  will  be  liberated  from  the  curse.' 
Again  in  Chapter  13  (1st  verse)  where  Narada 
asks  Narayana  to  relate  to  him  what  happened 
to  the  goddesses  after  the  year  5000,  he  says  :— 

Kalau  pancha- Sahasrabde 
Samatite  Suresvara  | 
Kva  gata  sa  Mahabhaga 
Tanme  vyakhyatum  arhasi  || 

Thus  from  a  minute  examination  of  the  Devi- 
hhagavata,  the  year  5000  is  alluded  to  in  only 
three  places  in  Chapter  8,  9  and  13  of  the 
ninth  book  of  that  work.  And  it  is  only  in 
Chapter  8  that  the  disappearance  of  everything 
from  the  world  in  the  year  5000  Kaliyuga  is 
alluded  to.  And  the  Hindu  belief  in  the  Pura- 
nas  is  that  everything  happens  as  predicted 
therein  and  even  so  the  doom  and  ruin  of  the 


142  APPENDIX   A. 


year  5000  will  come  to  pass  as  foretold  by   the 
Devibhagavata, 

In  addition  to  the  Puranic  belief  there  are 
a  few  verses  current  among  the  astrologers  of 
India  which  imply  that  the  Hindu  religion  will 
perish  in  the  year  5000  of  the  Kali  age.  They 
are  as  follows  : — 

Kalau  pancha-sahasrante 

Vishnuh  tyakshyati  medinim  |  (1) 

Yada  Vishnur-divam  gachchhet 

Tada  Veda-viparyasah  jj  (2) 

Yada  Veda-viparyasah 

Tada  jyotir-divam  vrajet  j  (3) 

Tasmat-tu  pancha-sahasram 

Phala-sastram  Kalau  yuge  ||  (4) 

They  mean  (1)  Vishnu  abandons  this  world 
at  the  close  of  the  year  5000  of  the  Kaliyuga. 
(2)  When  Vishnu  goes  away,  the  Vedas  will  be 
turned  upside  down.  (3)  When  the  Vedas  have 
suffered  thus,  the  splendour  of  the  planets  will 
vanish.  (4)  So,  the  truths  of  astrology  will  be 
current  in  this  world  only  up  to  the  year  5000 
of  the  Kaliyuga.  These  verses,  which  allude 
to  the  ruin  of  India  three  years  hence,  are  said 
to  have  been  uttered  by  Krishnamisra,  a  poet 
who  flourished  in  the  Court  of  Vikramaditya  at 
Ujjain  in  the  llth  Century  A.D.  These  are 


THE    KALIYUGA  143 

the  only  sources  for  the  strong  Hindu  belief 
that  the  year  5000  will  bring  general  ruin  to 
the  whole  world.  Some  are  charitable  in  stating 
that  if  the  whole  world  is  not  ruined,  there  will 
be  wonderful  changes  and  utter  misery  and 
famine  at  least  in  that  year.  At  what  time  of 
the  year  5000  will  this  ruin  overcome  India 
will  be  the  next  question. 

In  the  Hindu  calendar  every  month  has  a 
Zodiac  called  Easi  with  the  position  of  the 
planets  for  the  month  indicated  in  it  by  astro 
nomical  calculations.  Generally  not  more  than 
a  single  planet  will  be  found  in  each  of  the  12 
houses,  or  mansions,  of  the  Zodiac.  Karely 
two  or  three  or  even  four  will  be  found  once  in 
several  years  in  one  and  the  same  mansion. 
But  if  more  than  four  of  the  planets  are  found 
combined  in  the  same  house  a  great  calamity 
is  foreseen.  The  following  verses  of  the 
Jyotislia  Sastra  may  be  read  with  interest:— 

Pancha  griha  hanti  samasta  desan 
Shashta  griha  hanti  samasta  bhupan  | 
Sapta  griha  hanti  samasta  lokan 
Nirmartyam  ashta  griha  samyutena  || 

They  mean  that  the  combination  of  five 
planets  in  one  of  the  mansions  of  the  Zodiac  in 


144  APPENDIX   A. 


any  month  will  lead  to  the  destruction  of  all 
countries ;  the  combination  of  six  planets,  to 
the  destruction  of  all  Kings ;  that  of  seven,  to 
the  destruction  of  all  worlds,  and  if  eight 
planets  combine  the  universe  will  be  rendered 
destitute  of  men.  Bhishma  the  just  and  the 
greatest  warrior  of  the  world  fell  in  the  wars 
of  the  Mahabharata  in  the  month  of  Magrasira 
(December)  on  the  new  moon  day — Amavasa 
—when  seven  planets  combined  in  a  single 
mansion  of  the  Zodiac  of  that  month.  But 
for  that  combination  such  a  mighty  warrior 
would  never  have  fallen.  This  is  the  belief  of 
the  Hindus.  The  year  1896  A.D.,  is,  as  we 
have  stated  already,  4998  of  the  Kaliyuga 
corresponding  to  the  year  Durmuklii  of  the 
Brihaspati  cycle  of  60  years.  Five  thousand 
Kaliyuga  will  be  1899  A.D.  and  the  year 
Vikari  of  the  Brihaspati  cycle.  According  to 
the  astronomical  calculations  of  the  Hindus, 
eight  planets  meet  in  the  mansion  of  Scorpio 
(Vrichchhika)  of  the  Zodiac  of  the  month  of 
Krittika,  corresponding  to  the  last  week  of 
November,  1899,  at  the  23rd  GhatiJca  i.e.  2-6 
A.M.  on  the  13th  lunar  day  (trayodasi)  of  the 
dark  half  of  that  month.  Between  that  time 


THE   KALIYUGA  145 


and  the  succeeding  new  moon  day,  i.e.,  two 
days  after  that  combination  a  great  ruin  will 
come  over  India.  India  may  not  be  entirely 
depopulated  or  devoured  by  floods,  but  famine, 
pestilence,  war  and  other  miseries  will  reign 
over  the  whole  country.  This  is  the  strong 
belief  and  November  1899  is  the  expected 
time. 

What  a  firm  hold  this  belief  has  taken  pos 
session  of  the  Hindu  mind  will  become  plain  to 
our  readers  if  they  refer  to  the  Madras  Mail 
of  the  24th  October  last.  It  will  be  found 
there  that  an  astrologer  addressed  the  Dewan 
in  the  Mysore  Eepresentative  Assembly  held  in 
October  last  to  make  provision  for  performing 
pujas  (worship)  to  the  planets  and  to  propitiate 
them  to  avert  the  impending  catastrophe  of 
the  year  Vikari  (1899  A.  D.),  Kaliyuga  5000. 
Some  of  the  members  appeared  to  have  been 
seriously  occupied  with  that  matter.  The 
Dewan  promised  to  place  the  subject  before 
the  Maharajah.  Eight  planets,  it  is  said, 
according  to  the  astronomical  calculations  in 
this  country,  meet  together  in  November  1899, 
in  the  mansion  of  Scorpio,  and  not  six  as  the 
Mysore  astrologer  stated.  Some  astrologers 

10 


146  APPENDIX   A. 


say  that  the  meeting  of  the  eight  planets  is 
impossible  and  that  only  seven  meet  in  one 
mansion.  A  Tamil  Pandit  and  astrologer 
named  Mr.  Kandaswami  Filial,  of  Dindigul,  in 
the  Madura  District,  predicted  some  time  ago 
that  the  year  1899— Kali  5000— will  be  one  of 
terrible  famine  far  exceeding  that  of  1877  in 
its  horrors  by  reason  of  the  conjunction  of  the 
Sun,  Mars,  Mercury,  Venus,  Jupiter,  Saturn 
and  also  the  Solar  node  (Ealm)  at  one  and 
the  same  sign  of  the  Zodiac  Scorpio  in 
November,  1899. 

But  let  us  all  be  more  hopeful.  The  annals 
of  India  show  a  regular  series  of  famines 
separated  by  intervals  of  not  more  than  3  to  8 
years,  sometimes  10,  and  lasting  frequently 
over  a  year,  even  as  long  as  three  years.  The 
most  prolonged  famine  that  India  ever 
experienced  was  that  of  1876-78.  The  S.  W. 
Monsoon  failed  in  1875  and  1876.  The  N.  E. 
Monsoon  did  not  bring  in  sufficient  amount  of 
rain  in  these  years.  Between  1876-78  people 
died  in  thousands.  Whatever  the  uneducated 
Hindu  may  say  about  the  horrors  of  Kali, 
these  famines  must  be  attributed  more  to  the 
peculiar  position  of  the  mountains  in  India, 


THE    KALIYUGA  147 


especially  in  the  Deccan  and  Southern  India. 
This  interferes  with  the  even  distribution  of 
rain.  We  are  fortunately  at  the  end  of  1896 
A.D.  Whatever  may  be  the  popular  belief 
about  the  end  of  the  world  in  November,  1899, 
let  us  only  suppose  that  if  any  calamity  at  all 
is  ever  to  happen  as  predicted  by  the  Puranas, 
that  the  years  1897-99  will  be  a  period  of  pro 
longed  famine  as  that  of  1876-78.  Fearing 
that  such  may  be  the  case,  apart  from  the 
puranic  ideas,  the  Government  and  the  charit 
able  public,  as  would  now  and  then  be  seen 
from  the  columns  of  the  Madras  Mail,  are 
already  adopting  measures  to  avert  its  evils. 

The  year  5000  of  Kali  is  the  turning  point 
of  a  minor  cycle  of  5000  years  commencing 
from  Krishna.  It  is  believed  by  the  Occultists 
that  spirituality  gains  ascendancy  after  5000 
Kaliyuga.  It  is  quite  natural  to  expect  such 
extraordinary  events  to  take  place  during  the 
time  of  the  change  of  either  major  or  minor 
cycle. 


APPENDIX   B. 


Ashtami. — The  eighth  day  of  a  fortnight. 

Bhagavad  Gita  or  the  Song-Celestial  is  a  dialogue 
between  the  hero  Arjuna  and  Krishna  who  had  in 
carnated  upon  earth  to  restore  righteousness.  It 
forms  Chaps.  25 — 42  of  the  Bhishmaparva  of  the 
Mahabharata  and  therein  are  set  forth  the  path  of 
action,  the  path  of  devotion,  and  the  path  of  know 
ledge,  all  leading  towards  one  goal,  in  a  manner 
which  is  pre-eminently  useful  to  the  man  of  the 
world  engaged  in  the  busiest  affairs  of  life,  as  to  the 
recluse  in  the  forest. 

Bachkanas. — Cloths  worn  by  young  children. 

Bhavishyottara=purana. — The  title  of  a  book — 
the  sacred  book  which  describes  the  events  which 
are  to  occur  in  the  future. 

Dhoties. — Cloths  worn  by  males. 

Dvaraka. — A  sacred  place  in  the  extreme  western 
projection  of  the  peninsula  of  Kathiawar,  about  seven 
hundred  miles  to  the  south-west  of  Mathura  (Muttra) 
Krishna  is  Dvarakavasin,  one  who  resides  in  Dvaraka. 
It  is  said  that  Krishna  got  the  god  Visvakarman  to 
build  Dvaraka  for  him  on  land  which  the  sea  bared 


GLOSSARY  149 

by  receding  at  his  request  and  the  reason  assigned 
for  his  seeking  Dvaraka  is  that  Jarasandha,  a  king 
of  the  Magadhas  drove  away  Krishna  and  the  Yadavas 
from  Mathura. 

Ganges. — The  river  Ganges  or  Ganga  is  the 
mother  of  Kumara  and  represents  the  goddess  Vak 
or  Vidya. 

Garbagriha. — The  Garbagriha  is  the  innermost 
part  of  a  Hindu  Temple,  called  the  holy  of  the  holies. 
In  the  Garbagriha  the  image  of  the  temple  god  is 
placed  and  worshipped. 

Gayatri. — The  sacred  Gayatri  verse,  to  which 
great  religious  importance  is  attached,  freely  trans 
lated  means  :  "  Let  us  meditate  as  on  ourselves,  on 
the  shining  Creator  and  All-pervader,  that  divine 
light  which  destroys  avidya  or  ignorance  and  its 
effects.  May  that  Sun  enlighten  our  intelligence." 

This  is  also  the  prayer  taught  to  the  initiate  when 
he  becomes  a  Brahmana  in  the  Upanayana  ceremony, 
and  is  used  in  several  rites  connected  with  sacri 
fices.  The  verse  is  repeated  many  times  in  the  daily 
Sandhya  worships.  The  sage  Visvamitra  is  suppos 
ed  to  be  the  author  of  the  Gayatri  verse. 

Kalian. — A  criminal  tribe  found  chiefly  in  the 
districts  of  Madura,  Trichinopoly  and  Tanjore. 

Kasan. — A  shrub  bearing  purple  flowers,  Memye- 
cylon  tinctorium.  Vishnu's  colour  is  said  to  re 
semble  the  colour  of  Kasan. 


150  APPENDIX   B. 


Kaveri-snana. — A  snana  or  bath  in  the  river 
Kaveri.  The  term  Kaveri-snana  is  applied  to  fees 
paid  to  Brahmans  for  performing  baths  in  the 
sacred  river  Kaveri.  The  fee  thus  paid  is  supposed 
to  wash  away  the  sin  of  the  donor. 

Ketaki. — The  sweet-scented  screwpine  flower, 
Pandanax  oderatissima. 

Navami. — The  ninth  day  of  a  fortnight. 

Philosophy  of  the  Hindus.  —  There  are  six 
schools  of  Indian  philosophy  and  they  are  the 
Nyaya,  the  Vaisheshika,  the  Sankhya,  the  Yoga,  the 
Purva  Mimamsa  and  the  Uttara  Mimamsa  schools. 
For  a  good  idea  of  these  our  readers  are  referred  to 
Professor  Max  Miiller's  excellent  treatise  on  the  Six 
Systems  of  Indian  Philosophy. 

Rahukala. — An  inauspicious  portion  of  the  day  of 
the  duration  of  an  hour  and  a  half,  being  that  part 
which  is  considered  to  be  under  the  influence  of  Rahu, 
the  ascending  node  regarded  as  one  of  the  nine 
planets. 

Sandhya. — The  Sandhya  worship  in  which  the 
Gayatri  is  used  seems  to  be  of  very  ancient  date.  The 
following  account  is  found  in  the  Taittiriya  Aran- 
yaka : — 

In  the  old  days,  the  Rakshasas  performed  hard 
penances  when  the  god  Prajapati  asked  them  as  to 
whatboon  they  wished  for.  They  said  in  reply :  'Grant 
that  we  should  fight  with  the  sun'  which  request  the 
god  granted.  From  that  day  these  Rakshasas  are  said 


GLOSSARY  151 


to  be  fighting  with  the  rising  sun  till  he  sets.  But 
they  are  put  down  by  means  of  the  water  conse 
crated  by  uttering  the  Gayatri.  Therefore,  these 
Brahmavadins,  facing  the  east  at  the  morning 
Sandhya,  throw  up  water  consecrated  by  uttering 
the  Gayatri.  The  particles  of  that  water  become 
Vajra  weapons  and  throw  the  Kakshasas  down 
into  the  island  called  Mandeharuna.  By  turning 
round  to  the  right  after  throwing  up  the  water,  they 
blow  away  sin.  The  Brahman  who  contemplates 
the  sun  at  sunrise  and  sunset  and  performs  Sandhya 
gets  all  happiness. 

Samudra-snana. — A  snana  or  bath  in  the  sea. 
This  term  also  like  the  Kaveri-snana  is  applied  to 
fees  paid  to  the  Brahmans. 

Sankalpa. — A  solemn  vow. 

Sari. — A  dress  consisting  of  an  entire  piece  of 
cloth  wrapped  several  times  round  the  loins  ;  and 
falling  down  over  the  legs  to  the  ankle  serves  as  a 
petticoat.  The  other  end  is  passed  round  the  neck 
and  hangs  on  one  side. 

Sthala-purna. — A  purana  or  legend  describing 
the  history  of  a  certain  sacred  place  or  temple.  It 
is  more  mythological  than  historical. 

Sravishta. — The  twenty-third  lunar  mansion  con 
sisting  of  four  stars. 

Tarka. — Logic. 

The  Upanishads. — The  word  Upanishad  signifies 
according  to  Sri  Sankara  "  that  knowledge  which 


152  APPENDIX  B. 


tears  asunder  the  veil  of  ignorance  and  makes  one 
realise  and  approach  Brahman."  It  also  means 
"  esoteric  knowledge  or  esoteric  doctrine "  as  we  find 
in  the  Taittiriya  Upanishad,  Chapter  I,  3,  "  We 
shall  now  explain  the  Upanishad  of  the  Samhita" 
meaning  its  esoteric  meaning.  In  the  Mahabharata, 
the  word  Upanishad  is  used  for  secret  or  essence, 
for  when  Vyasa  speaks  of  "  truth  being  the  Upanishad 
of  the  Veda,  subjugation  of  sense,  the  Upanishad  of 
truth,  and  charity  the  Upanishad  of  the  control  of 
the  senses,"  he  means  that  the  essence  of  the 
Vedas  lies  in  the  practice  of  the  influences  and  that 
without  the  latter  a  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  is  of 
no  use.  Primarily,  the  word  Upanishad  therefore 
means  secret  knowledge  and  secondly  the  books 
containing  that  knowledge. 

The  Upanishads  are  many  in  number  but  the 
authoritative  Upanishads  are  the  Isa,  Kena,  Katha, 
Prasna,  Munda,  Mandukya,  Aitreya,  Taittireya, 
Chandogya,  Brihadaranyaka  and  Swetaswatara.  The 
Upanishads  are  mainly  dialogues  between  teachers 
and  pupils  or  discussions  between  sages  at  king's 
courts  or  in  the  forest.  In  some  cases  the  gods  are 
declared  as  imparting  knowledge  of  Brahman  to 
men. 

Upanayana. — The  performance  of  Upanayana 
entitles  the  Brahmans,  the  Kshatriyas  and  Vaisyas 
to  the  application  of  dvija  twice-born.  The  ceremony 
is  known  as  the  Upanayana  because  of  the  child 


; 

&LOSSABY  153 


3eing  carried  to  or  brought  near  his  preceptor  for 
initiation  into  the  Veda.  He  has  his  first  birth  from 
his  natural  father  and  mother  but  his  second  birth 
'is  from  Savitri,  the  Gayatri  as  mother,  and  the  pre 
ceptor,  Acharya,  as  father.  The  earliest  period 
for  the  Upanayana  is  the  seventh  or  the  eighth  year 
for  a  Brahman,  the  eleventh  for  a  Kshatriya,  and 
the  twelfth  for  a  Vaisya,  the  latest  periods  being 
respectively  the  16th,  22nd,  and  the  24th  years  after 
which  a  prayaschita  is  necessary.  The  Yagyopavita 
or  sacred  thread  which  the  child  wears  on  the  day 
of  the  Upanayana  ceremony  consists  of  three  threads 
and  is  so  called  because  the  person  wearing  it  is  in 
vested  with  the  sign  of  Yagya,  another  name  for 
Vishnu.  The  three  threads  are  supposed  to  repre 
sent  the  three  attributes  of  Satwa,  Rajas,  and  Tamas 
of  which  the  universe  is  composed  or  the  three  gods 
Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Siva  in  one.  Its  knots  repre 
sent  the  pranava  with  the  ardhmatra  and  it  is  worn 
with  the  formula  :  "  The  Yagyopavita  is  most  sacred  ; 
it  is  the  ornament  and  sign  of  Brahmanhood.  It 
was  produced  by  Brahma  sitting  on  his  seat  of  lotus 
and  from  the  threads  of  the  stalk  of  lotus." 

The  Vedas. — The  Vedas  are  four  in  number,  viz., 
the  Rig  Veda,  the  Sanaa  Veda,  the  Yajur  Veda  and 
the  Atharva  Veda.  The  Rig  Veda  consists  entirely 
of  hymns  classified  and  arranged  for  worshipping 
with  gratitude  and  wonder  the  great  and  beneficent 
manifestations  and  powers  of  nature.  By  an  ancient 


154  APPENDIX   B. 


custom  some  of  these  hymns  were  chanted  in  some 
forms  of  sacrifice,  and  a  collection  of  these  select 
hymns,  set  to  music,  was  called  the  Sama  Veda. 
Again,  special  sacrificial  formulas  were  required  for 
the  use  of  the  officiating  priests,  and  these  formulas 
were  separately  collected  and  known  as  the  Yajur 
Veda.  The  Atharva  Veda  was  the  last  one.  The 
study  of  the  Vedas  which  were  supposed  to  embody 
all  the  learning  which  it  was  given  to  man  to 
acquire,  was  considered  the  most  important  duty  and 
the  most  cherished  heritage  of  all  Hindus. 
Vyakarana . — Grammar. 


FEINTED   AT   THE   >L    E.    PUBLISHING    HOUSE,    M4DRAS,    1903. 


DATE  DUE 


e 

l^j 

TRINJ 

-1SGE  LI 

5RARY 

!APR      , 

5  W7 

NOV  f 

'  19?^ 

'  i  n 

.    '•• 

^TA^J5-, 

}°I4% 

FEB09 

m 

