===== Internet Archive OCR: E01624_The_Hindu_of_Self_culture_djvu.txt =====

THE HINDU. SYSTEM 


SELF-CULTURE 


PATANJALA YOGA SHASTRA. 


KISHORI LAL SARKAR, M.A. B.L. 


(Author of. the Hindu System of Moral Science 
and of the Hindu System of Religious 
Scisnce and Art.) 


PUBLISHED BY 
SARASI LAL SARKAR, m.a. 
Assistant Surgeon, Chemical Department, 
Medical Colleges. 


jax CORNWALLIS STREET. 


12902. 


CALCUTTA: 
Puintry sy H.C, Das, ‘ Evysrom Pexss,” 
ao, Noyen Chand Dutt's Street. 


PREFACE, 


The principles of yoga apply alike to the 
highest spheres of contemplative and reli- 
gious life and to the humblest objects of 
worldly pursuit. It is like the fundamental 
processes of algebra which enter into the solu- 
tion of the highest problems of Differential 
Calculus no less than into the solution of 
ordinary questions of calculation, The com- 
mentators of the Yoga Shastra however view 
it only in connection with the bigh meta- 
physical and spiritual questions relating to 
humanity. This is no wonder, as the yoga 
Shastra itself deals with too many questions of 
this class. But the need of the modern day is 
to know the Yoga Shastra as a general and 
abstract system, irrespective of the objects 
to which it may"be applied. In the following 
pages I have tried to present it in this shape. 
The appendix is’ intended by the publisher 
to explain how far the discoveries and the 
researches of modern Europe comport with 
the facts and theories of Yoga Shastra. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER L- 


Tae ouritxg or THE SuRJECT. 





Supzecr. Page. 
Section 1.—Introduction on oo «(ot 
Section 2.—The process of Nirodha ... ow 5 
Section 3.—~The Samddhi process which comes 
after Nirodha os 10 
Section 4.--The peaceful harmonious state alter 
Samédhi on oe WS 
Section §.~The three states considered tegether 2. 
CHAPTER II. 
FURTHER EXPOSITION ON THE LINES 
INDICATED, 
Section 1<—The meatal functions on which 
Nirodha bears 28 
Section 2.—The steps leading to Samadhi 4 or 
Ekdrthaia we Hw 
Section 3--The state of Ekdgraté or success 
alter Samadhi - 38 
Scctiow 4,—The three stages of Yora i in n relation 
to the Sankhya Philosophy at 
Section §.—What to be shunned and what to be 
gained by Yoga 46 


Seetiva 6.—The same subject continued 


CHAPTER IIl. 
‘Tur ticat racrors or YocA. 


Section t.—General enumeration of the factors 53 
Section 2.—The first Yoginga—Yam: 58 
Section 3.—The Second Yoginga—Niyama .., 6 
Section 4.—The third Yogdnga—Asana (Posture) 65 
Section 5,—The fourth Yogdénga—Pranayama ... 67 
Section 6.—The filth Yogdnga—Pratyahdra (Res+ 
traint) aie we 71 
Section 7.—The sixth Yogdnga—Dhieand we 93 
Section 8.—The seventh yoginga—Dhyina .. 75 
Section 9.—The eighth Yoganga—(Samidhi) ... 79 









CHAPTER Iv. 
Tas Divisions snp vxcRrezs or Yoca, 
Section 1.—The four-fold mn by Bhdgabat 
Geeta “ BZ 
Section 2.—The great division into the Sabeez 
(with Seed) and the Nirbeez 
(without seed) ws 87 
Section 3.—The great division into the Sabeez 
and Nirbeez (continued) os 92 





[ ii J 


CHAPTER V. 
Yoga IN RELATION TO VARIOUS CONCERNS 





or Lire, 
Section 1.—How Yoga influences religion, and 
vice versa we . o 98 
Section 2.—Voga as it concerns morality rae 103 
Section 3.—Yoga as it concerns intellect oe TEE 
—:— 
APPENDIX. 
Yooa axp Mxsarenism, 
(Written By the Publisher). 
Section 3,—What is mesmerism, and how it is 
induced? “ oe WL 
Section 2.—The physiological explanation of 
Mesmerism .., one ae 125 


Sa.tion 3.~Mesmerism is something more than 
@ mere physiological Oral 


menon os we ae 130 
Section 4—The spiritual explanation of mes- 
merism o ” on 134 





Section 5.—The phenomena of clairvoyance ... 138 
Section 7.—Clairvoyance regarding space as dealt 
with by Patanjala 1 wo 145 
Seetion 8.—Spiriwalism and Yoga ae 9 
Section 9,—Yoga and Mysticism ow ae ESS 





CHAPTER 1. 


THE OUTLINE OF THE SUBJECT. 


SECTION 1.—THE INTRODUCTION 


“Yoca is the nirodha of the mental opera- 
tions.” 1—1.* 

Now the first question is what is niredha? 
Tt will be observed that it does not 
mean absolute obstruction of mental opera- 
tions, for then the word would have been 
waary (abarodha). Neither does it mean 
absolute opposition, for then the word would 
have been faite (biredha). Nirodha in th 
wide sense in which it is used here, in tact, 
means, confinement leading to concentra- 
tiua, and the: to adjustment. Hence it 
involves three ideas more or less. Stoppage. 





» dafeuatafaae: 12°¢ 1 


(2) 


concentration and harmonization, in other 
words, “yoga includes (1) nirodha with that 
limited meaning given to it in the definition 
of nirodha parinima, (2) samadhi with that 
limited meaning similarly given to it, in the 
definition of samadhi parindma and (3) 
ekagrata as indicated by the definition of 
ekagratf parindma. 3 

Culture of soil involves three things (1) 

preparing the yround ; ‘2) growing the plant 

(3) reaping the fruits. The yoga system of 

the culture of mind similarly lays down three 
fundamental processes. 

(1) The process of nirodha (stoppage) 
or the process of nivritti. 

» (4) The process of samadhi (conventra- 
tion) or the process of purilied 
pravritti. 

(3) The process of ek8grata siddhi (suc- 
cess as to singleness of purpos} 
or the process of harmonizing 
pravritti with nis ritti, 

The frst process secures swarupata or the 

state of being self-vollected and tranquil. 


(3) 


‘The secend secures ekarthat4 or identifi- 
vation with one thing, so as to exclude all 
other things, in other words, concentration 
with more or less tension. 

The third secures what is called ekagrat 
or harmonization unto one thing, free of all 
tension. 

The difference between ekarthati and 
wkAgratd, is this :-— 

In ekarthat4 there is a total exclusion of all 
things other than one and in ck&grata@ there 
is no such exclusion, but harmonization— the 
one thing being at the top (TW). 

in short, nirodha, samadhi and siddhi are, 
as if, they were—the preparation, the ine 
ation and the fruition of the object. 





It will be secn hereafter, that attention, 
application, and concentration correspond te 
dharan3, dhyana and samadhi. Thus they 
are included in the second process, r/z., that 
of samadhi mentioned above. European 
writers on self-culture principally give stress 
to attention, application and concentration. 
But these may either be of the pure stuif, of 


{ 4) 


duty, and righteousness, or they may be rank 
passion and infatuation. Devotion may be 
angelic or perverse. Therefore it is not 
enough to teach devotion to one's object of 
pursuit, but first of all to see that the right 
thing is selected and the right course followed. 
Hence the Hindu yoga shastra enjoins 
is preliminary purifying condition, nirodha 
(or stoppage of excitement, passion and im- 
pulse). Thus nirodha must precede dhyana 
and samadhi (application and concentration) 
Concentration being preceded by absolute 
equanimity, the result is an harmonious state 
uf peaceful action and a state of harmony 
between the object and its surroundings. 
These three steps are thus desvribed 
by PRtanjala onder the names (1) nirodhi 
inima, (2) samadhi parinAma, and (3) 













Agrata parinama.* 
"The impression of excitement and the 


© qanafacrdenrcdiefrreargaia 


fatrentfaariy fartrrafcen: 121R 1 


(s) 


{spontaneous} counter-impression to stop it, 
the one falling and the other rising—if the 
mind sides with the stopping tendency,—this 
is tendency to stoppage (or nirodha pari- 
nama)” g—Ill. 

“When of auultifariousness and singlen: »5 
of purpose, the one abates and the other 
grows, that is the tendency to concentration 
(or sam&dhi parindma,)” 11—II.* 

“ When tranquility and activity are re: 
ciled to each other,(that is, when ats 
active and activity is tranquil, under the influ- 
ence of a single purpose, that is the tendency 
to harmonize unto one thing (or ekagrata 
parinima,) 12—IL-t 





© ualddatard: waited frre 
warfrafoura: 1 egal 


+ arenfem qe ran Foret 
waraet after: 121 ¢2 1 


(6) 


SECTION 2.—THE PROCESS oF NiropHa. 


It is to be observed that it is yoga 
which developes the spiritual sphere of 
man. Yoga also expands the worldly 
business capacities of man. In the former 
sphere it is gnana yoga or buddhi yoga 
or raja yoga or bhakti yoga. In the 
Jatter sphere it is mano yoga. But in both 
the principle is the same. It is the _ principle 
of application and concentration, But as 
already said, concentration upon a particular 
thing may be in the shape of an infatuation. 
and this is the case when the mind pursues 
an object under excitement and passion. 
‘Therefore the mind should be cleared off all 
excitement before it moves. In fact, to cause 
the mind to be practically vacant, is the best 
preparation for receiving a thing in its true 
light. Hence the yoga shistra attaches a 
primary importance to the process of 
vacating or tranquilizing the mind. It is the 
initial process which by clearing the ground, 
enables the mind, easily to soar high and to 
alight upon any of the highest peaks of 


(7) 


spiritual, scientific or other researches. Hence 
the yoga shastra, though it begins with the 
definition of yoga 


( frafarrafe freee: ) 


using the word nirodha in a wide sense, 
limits and points the sense of the term 
nirodha in the following sutra.* 

. “In two conflicting impulses, one tending 
to excite and the other to stop excitement, 
when the former is subdued, and the latter 
prevails, and the mind falls in with the latter, 
that is a state called the state of tendency to 
nirodha (stoppage). 3—III. 

External objects constantly — impress 
themselves upon the mind and tend to excite 
it in one way or other, at the same time, 
there arises a counter tendency not to yield 
to the excitement. The former tendency ix 
culed dyuthdn and the latter mirodha. A 
man is incessantly subject to such a conflict. 





o a ainfnchrdenrcatcfaae migatat 
fartaaafanraat father ofeern i 19 t 


(8) 


A’ tempting dish of food tends to excite the 
desirc to cat, while considerations of health 
come in to suggest not to eat. A charming 
object tends you to run towards it, while 
prudential thoughts occur to make you not so 
to run. Some words or acts on the part of 
a man tend to excite anger in you while you 
feel the desirability of not being angry. In 
short, to do or not to do, to feel or not to feel, 
to think or not to think, is the constant 
alruggle to which man is subject. The yoga 
system says that the first thing to go right, is 
to pause by stopping the excitement, and to 
make yourself calm by becoming absolutely 
indifferent to all impulses. 

The homely adage, “look before you leap,” 
imay well be referred to, to explain the first 
step of the lofty structure built in the shape 
uf yoga philosophy or the Hindu system of 
self-culture. But the yoga shastra does not 
inculcate everlasting stoppage of feeling and 
thought. It teaches only to stop them till 
you can fully become master of your position, 
and till you can take a calm and dispassionate 
view of the whole thing. 


{ 9) 


“Then the superintending will is in its 
true position”, 3—I.* 

When nirodha parinima ¢. e. the state of 
tendency to stoppage, takes place as defined 
in sutra g of book IIY quoted above, and 
when the superintending will power is in its 
true position, what follows? 10—III-t 

“Then the mind takes a calm and quiet 
course from the impressions.” 

Thus yoga is not for securing an everlast- 
ing cessation of activity. It only chastens the 
mind and frees it from impurity. It prevents 
distraction and guards agdinst falling into the 
pitfals of wrong and error. It puts the will- 
power in its proper condition of guidance 
and superintendence, a condition which ix 
not secured, when it yields to excitement» 
and distractions. For when it so yields 
itself, it becomes identified with the impulses 
for the time being.t 


© “aal Ee: TRA STATITA 0” ge h 
+ ree uarerarfeat Pearcy! go'k tl 
& wfrareafraca i wt 


{ 1 ) 


“The man becomes identified with im- 
pulses under other circumstances (than those 
of nirodha.)’ 4—1. 

When English writers inculcate the neces. 
sity of getting tid of prejudice and passion, 
they, in effect, inculvate to a certain degree, 
the principle of nirodha. As regards the 
high problems of man's destiny and existence, 
the necessity of nirodha, in order to ap- 
proach them, is no less insisted on by western 
writers than by the Hindus. Says the Eng- 
Kish philosophical poet -— 

“Retire, the world shut out, 

Then in the dead of night 

In the depth of heart thus inquire, 
*What am I and whence &c.'" 








SECTION 3.—THE SAMADHI PROCESS WHICH 
COMES AFTER NiropHa, 

Ir has been seen that the object of nirodha 
(stoppage) is to vacate the mind of its exist- 
ing prejudices and passions, and thus prepare 
it for the influx of pure truths and healthy 


Com) 


sentiments. In fact, junction and disjunc- 
lion—yoga and biyoga—go together. The 
positive and the negative are counterparts 
of each other. In yoga shastra the negative 
phase is called ‘nirodha'—the positive phase 
is called ‘samadhi.’ 

Nirodha parinama hax been explained by 
sutra g of book Hl. It is the state in which, 
between the tendency to get excited and 
that to get quicted, the latter prevails. 
‘This has been dealt with in the preceding 
section. It has also been shown in that secs 
tion that the mind in that state takes a calm 
and quiet course from the impressions pro- 
duced as stated in sutra to of the same book, 
Samadhi parinama is defined in sutra 11 as 
follows :—* 

“Between the tendency to be distracted 
by a multitude of objects and that to single 
out one,—when the former tendency disap- 
pears and the latter prevails in the mind— 





* wshaterumat: witeatfrra 
wanfa afew 1 eet 


{ 12 } 


that state is called samdhi parinama or the 
state tending to samadhi.” 

The process is this, When by nirodha 
or stoppage of excitement you rise over all 
pre-existing impressions,—that is, over all 
prejudices, a calm and easy flow of ideas 
takes place. Then you are enabled to take 
a position which is dispassionate, open, and 
free. Thus of all things, the fittest or the 
worthiest naturally becomes the most promi- 
nent and spontancously engages your atten- 
tion, throwing the crowd of other objects in 
the back ground. Thus ckarthata or single. 
mindedness begins to assert itself tending to 
absorb the mind in it. This is samfdhi 
parinama. 

Alter that, when the mind awakens from 
samadhi, it finds itself in complete posxses- 
sion of its object and equally earnest and 
tranquil—that is the state called ckagrata 
parinima. It comes after samadhi parinima 
But of this state in the next section. 


The state after nirodha is the samadhi 
parinama state. The cultivation of this state 


(1307 


mvans the cultivation of singlencss of purpose 
or singleness of object. 

To cullivate devotion to one thing ata 
lime, is the means of preventing distractions.* 

“For the prevention thercof (i. ¢., of dis- 
tractions) let one truth be dwelt upon.” 32—I. 

The first step towards it is “the cultivation 

of moral virtues such as benevolence, tender 
sympathy, complacency, and rising superior to 
pleasure and pain, and to merit and demerit. 
whereby the minJ acquires healthy ease.’ 
Sve sutra 33—L.+ 

The second step is the regulation of the 
breath. Sve sutra 34—L.} 

“The mind may also be fixed even by de- 
volion to worldly objects.” See sutra 35—1.$ 





oc Uf aa ART aTE: WRT 

+ dfeaqagemterat qeeeyengea 

faxaret araarafarr ware 1 Rae 

4 weg aferarcaredt at mre agit tl 

§ faraettar wafer were: 
feafarfrafaratt eye i 


{ 4) 


“Or the fixation may arise from illumina- 
tion devoid of anxiety.” (36—1).* 

“Or it may arise from a state of dis- 
passionateness. 38—I.+ 

“Or it may arise frem pondering on an 
object of one’s own liking.” (39—I).t 

These are some of the ways in which one 
may begin the cultivation of the habit of 
Single minded devotion. The acquisition of 
such a habit is the means of removing 
obstacles to progress and improvement. 
These obstacles are enumerated in sutra 30 
of Book I, as follows :-—§ 

“Sickness, Ianguer, doubt, carelessness, 
laziness, passionate attachment, wrong per- 


* fantran ar witferaat 1 Rae 
<b atererafaerd ar fare a Reig 
 qerrfireret WEUTTRT I Ree 
§ wnrfirearrchrerrarereranfacfreanrferesiar- 
emafrnerrafeents § feafssare sa 


Tar aie ll 


Cor) 


ception, purposeless occupation, instability of 
purpose”. 30——I. 

‘These stand in the way of realizing the 
direct presence of the Supreme Intelligence 
which however is realized by means of 
incessantly meditating on that Supreme One, 
a process before which all obstacles vanish. 
Sutras 28 and 29—{.* 

‘Thus incessant remembrance of the name 
of the Deily, with intent meditation of its 
meaning, is the paramount cultivation ot 
singlemindedness. 

Wt will be clear now that although the 
first step of yoga is nirodha or the tranqui- 
lization of the mind—the next step is 
samidhi or the identification with one object. 
This step begins with a tension. But greater 
the identification, the less the tension, till 
one is reduced to a state of inaction in the 
completion of samadhi or to a state of 
absorption. But inaction can not be 





* paUeeaaA bee 
HHA: RT STAT LTT STAT TATA NRE 


{ 16) 


lasting. The yogi can not be satisfied with 
it. Hence the next state called that of 
ekigraté parinima is one of harmony bet- 
ween inaction and action, between blankness 
and excitement. In short, it is a state of 
peaceful activity in connection with the 
object which engrossed it in samadhi. 





SECTION 4.—THE PEACEFUL HARMONIOUS 
STATE AFTER SAMADHL. 

There is ckarthatha before samadhi as 
indicated by sutra 11, book HI. But ekar- 
thath is not the same as the ckigrata which 
comes alter samadhi. This is shown by 
sutra 12. This is the last phase of yoga. 
In samadhi the will power is engrossed in its 
object, it is as if it were lost in it. But alter 
samadhi, it is in possession of its object with 
equanimity between the opposing tendencies 
to blankness and to excitement, and between 
unity and multiplicity.* 


“* arerifedl qemenht fraleawar 
fee 1 2 all 





(17) 


“When peacefulness and activity are re- 
conciled to cach other (with regard to the 
object of application which stands at the top 
of all others), that is the state tending to 
ekagrat4 (harmonization unto one).”  12—HI. 

This sutra describes a very important 
state of the mind, a state which is often lost 
sight of. It is by missing this state that 
people say that the yoga shastra is nihilistic. 
and that the Hindu system of culture leads 
to nirvan, ‘The ckagrat& parinama as defined 
above is the state of peacefulness free from 
apathy, and of earnestness free from excite- 
ment, In nirodha parinama the mind is 
tranquilised, but in its tranquility a variety 
of ideas calmly flows in (sutra 10, book HI). 
In samadhi parinama this variety of ideas 
or purposes gathers to a head, and the mind 
becomes engrossed in a single object, in which 
it tends to be fost. Both these states arr 
defective. In the first there is negative tran- 
quility, but no positive object. In the second 
there is a positive object, but in this stage, 
first there is great tension, and then a state 
of relaxation or inaction. This inaction of 

2 





(38) 


samadhi, in fact, is the necessary result of 
that absolute isolation of the object from all 
its surroundings, which is a condition of the 
state of samadhi. But in the ek&grata pari- 
nama state, the will power is self-possessed 
and not lost. The object appears with its 
surroundings, and these surroundings are 
vlothed with a harmonious relation with the 
object, which prevents excitement and blank- 
ness, but which brings about earnestness and 
peacefulness. With all great men, scientists, 
artists or prophets, there must be the state 
of incubation, éc., the state of meditation and 
absorption. ‘This ix nirodha and samadhi pari- 
mima. Then comes the state of action, /e., 
the state of peaceful and masterly realization, 
This last state ix ckayrata parinama, in fact, 
the state towards siddhi (success). Sir Isaac 
Newton, before he enunciated the great 
truths which revolutionized the mathematical 
knowledge of the world, used to remain for 
hours and days absorbed in contemplation, 
‘That was the state of sam&dhi parinama. 
And then after that he made his own, what 
had been pressing upon his mind and was 








( 19 ) 


able quietly to deliver to the world the funda. 
mental propositions of higher mathematics. 
This was the state of ekagrati parindma as 
defined above. The great prophets of religion 
exhibited similar respective states of absorp- 
tion and of masterly action. 

“The three states of santa (tranquility) 
udita (excitement) and abyapadesha (the in- 
expressible harmonization of the two) are 
things the presence of which is to be found 
in every dharmi.” See sutra 14—L11* 

“A dharmi is he who follows the qualitirs ot 
tranquility, excitement and the inexpressible 
harmonization of tranquility and excitedness." 

‘The abyapadesha condition, which charav- 
terises true ekgrata is realized in one who 
chastises without anger, who eats without 
sl 
who, in fact, cam even fight as Arjuna was 
directed to fight by the Lord without any per- 
sonal feclings of amhition or vanity. This is 
the state of pure dutifulness—the state of want 





iness, who earns money without avarice, 





* quenferreaeet whrgaal wait 1¢8-at 


(2) 


of selfish attachment. It can only be consum- 
niated by complete faith and reliance on the 
Loving God. Such faith and reliance is the 
perfect and transcendental ek&grata in which 
the ‘one aim’ is not any limited object—but 
faithfulness to the Supreme Will. When the 
‘one aim’ is limited to any particular object, 
say lo a scientific or any other worldly object, 
the ekfgraté is inferior aod partial. But 
when the ‘one aim’ is to conform to the moral 
and spiritual order of the universe—that is to 
the Supreme Will governing it—the ekigrati 
is the highest and perfect. When this aim is 
vstablished, all minor aims come in as acces- 
sorics or as things subservient. 


SECTION 5.—THE THREE STATES 
CONSIDERED TOGETHER. 


“THE tranquilizing, the concentrating, and the 
harmonizing are the short names by which the 
ihree parinimas, nirodha parindma, samadhi 
parinaina and ekagrat4 parinadma may be called. 
Now it will be seen that they successively lead 


(ar) 


to each other and that there is 2 common cle- 
ment pervading them all, viz., an element of 
antagonism to distraction and passion. There- 
fore the three are called different phases of 
the same thing. The tranquilizing tendency 
is called the property (dharma). The con- 
centrating tendency is called the function 
(lakshmana) and the harmonizing is called the 
condition ({avasth3). That is they are res- 
pectively, the essential property, the denoting 
function and the resulting state of the subject 
as regards the object. This is clear from the 
following sutra :—* 

“By explaining the three parinimas the 
exsential property, the denoting function and 
the final condition as regards the senses and 
the objects of the senses are explained.” 
13—Ill. 

It means that onc finds in the senses and 
the objects of the senses, changes which cor- 
respond to the tranquilizing, the concentrat- 
ing and the harmonizing conditions. 


* uta qafeay wirewerret 
UFC ATRTAT: te RBH 





( 22 ) 


The tranquilizing tendency is the charac- 
terstic condition called santa (peaceful), the 
concentrating tendency is the symplomatic 
condition called udita (stimulated) and the 
harmonizing tendency is the final condition 
called—abySpadesha (inexpressible). Accord- 
ingly these three states are said to be found 
in every dharmi or phenomenal being or thing 
in sutra 14 book IH, which has already been 
quoted. 

What differentiates the parindmas is the 
order of succession {krama). 

“ Difference in the order is the occasion 
of the diflerence of parin3mas.”"* —15—III. 

Now what is krama (order) ? It is detined 
as follows :—t 

“Order of succession is the relation of 
moments cognised in the last modification." 

It is conceivable that ekagrath may come 
first, instead of coming last, or the samadhi 


* warerel ofcerarera Sq: 1241R0 
+ wanfrteht ufeararacrafraren 
WT 1RRSH 





( 23°) 


may come first instcad of coming in the 
second place, in some exceptional cases. 
This may be owing to the direction that 
the consciousness of onc moment may take 
with reference to that of the next. But this 
discussion as introduced by the sutras above 
quoted is metaphysical and may well be kept 
apart. The practical importance of combin- 
ing together the three parindovas is shown by 
more than one sutra.* 

“By practising samyama (defined a» 
practising together dharana, dhyan and 
samadhi) with reference to vach of the three 
parinimas one gets a knowledge of the past 
and the future." 16—II1. 

By ptactising samyama with regard to 
nirodha parinama, one becomes immoveable 
by external influences. He is not driven to 
do what he ought not to du and becomes 
xwastha or truly posted. 

By practising sanyama with reference to 
samadhi parin’ma, one is freed from the 
distractions of his own consciousness. He 





* gftqrasadaareatararra Wg 't4'el 


{ 24 )} 


is put upon the way of concentration and 
becomes identified with one object. By 
practising sanyama with regard to ekigrat’ 
parindma, one rises over all struggle and with 
the singleness of purpose acquired by sam&dhi 
he realizes his object in all its shapes and 
form and to its very essence easily and spon- 
taneously. 

Such a three fotd discipline must vastly 
widen the field of one's mind and must 
immensely deepen one's grasping power. 
So with such power and insight one may 
well pry into the future and get a retrospect 
of the past—to both of which the present is 
always a key. 

The power of one, who has qualified 
himself as above extends to the minutest and 
1o the most extensive. His vision is both 
microscopic as well as macroscopic. He is 
at home in dealing with the particular as well 
as the general. So we have sutra 40 book I.* 

“ His mastery extends to the most minute 
and to the most extensive”. 


* TOTRAT TT THTSTT. wei 


(25 ) 


Again in sutra 41 book 1.* 

“ The mind in which transformations have 
lost ground becomes unto the perceiver, the 
perception and the perceivable as a trans- 
parent crystal on which they are reflected as 
one and the same with it.” 

This means that one, who has mastered 
external influences and has become self. 
collected, has no burden to bear either in 
tegard ta his own act or with regard to the 
objects before him. The external influences 
and impressions set tightly on him like a 
reflected light and he is free to attain to the 
highest position, pressed upon by nothing in 
this world. 

Such is the state of consummation of yoga. 
Yoga thus comprehends the three changes of 
tranquilization, concentration and harmoniza- 
tion. The word yoga is sometimes used as 
limited to nirodha and sometimes as limited 
to samadhi. But its meaning is not com. 





* ahentcfirarreta atufranweaTyy 
BR 


( 26) 


pleted without ckAgrat4 either in its highest 
state as implying approach to the Supreme 
One or as implying only a harmonious 
Tealization of any limited pure object of 
pursuit. 

The means, by which nirodha, samadhi 
and ckagrat are secured, are treated in detail 
under the head of yoga-angas or the practical 
limbs of yoga. ‘They are however genera- 
lized under the two heads of abhyas and 
bairagya, the physico-psychic discipline and 
the ethico-spiritual disciptine.* 

“The brittis are stopped by abhyas 
{physical and psychic exercises) and by 
pairlgya (freeing oneself from attachments by 
moral and religious exercises). 12—I. 

What is abhyas? “It is the effort to re- 
main in the state of nirodha.” Sutra 13—1.+ 

it will be seen hereafter that this effort 
consists of regulation of posture, and of 
breath, of withdrawing the senses from thvic 








* peararcranat afeene: ¢ziqu 
t wren femett wattsvare: inate 


(27) 


objects and gathering them to a point, and 
fixation of attention &c. Then “this effort 
in order to be well grounded must be observed 
for a long time uninterruptedly and with 
devotion.” Sutra 14—-1.* 

In the next place, bairdgya is defined as 
follows :-—t 

“It is the mastery of him who has risen 
above and become indifferent to the (attrac- 
tions of) objects seen and heard.” Such 
mastery requires yama (control of desires.) 
niyama (regulation of them) and samyama 
(three-fold practice) &e. 

“When bairigya is carried to perfection 
the real purusha—the soul, is known and an 
indifference to phenomenal changes arises” 
Sutra 16—I.f 





* 3 q Shiaretced wencafaat eg: 
afer garg 

+ cerpafrafrrafraerea sites vet 
Saran ita 

treme gementjutareny cain 


CHAPTER 11. 


FURTHER EXPOSITION ON THE 
LINES INDICATED. 


SeEcTION ].—THE MENTAL FUNCTIONS 
ON WHICH NIRODHA BEARS. 


The functions of the mind are either 
sound or morbid accordingly as they are 
aktishta or klishta. If one learns to check 
them, he can employ them discriminately. 
But if he be unable to check them he is often 
a prey to them in evil directions. Hence 
the necessity of acquiring the power to stop 
them. Accordingly the author enumerates 
them at the outsct.* 


* awa: were: farer aferer: ixien 


( 29) 


“Brittis (functions) are of five classes 
whether healthy or morbid {i.¢. whether 
affected or unaffected by klesha).” 5—I!. 

“Klesh consists of ignorance, egotism, 
attachment, hatred, and tenacity to worldly 
life."* 6—IL 

The five classes of mental functions have 
been said to be (klishta and aklishta) morbid 
and healthy.t 

“ Evidencing, misevidencing, idealizing 
nidra (vacating) and remembering are the 
five functions."6—I. 

Manifestly, misapprehension or miseviden- 
cing is of an unhealthy class. Apprehension 
ar evidencing is of a healthy class and the 
others apparently may be either healthy or 
unhealthy according to circumstances. And 
even apprehension may be forbidden by the 
requirements of the situation, and may be 
regarded as unhealthy. 

“ Pramina or evidencing is of three kinds 





* wfranferrraeeanfafrom: @ar 4 
t wavefardraferenfner arr 1a! 


( 30 ) 


«~direct perception, inference and inspira- 
tion.”* i 

Thus by pram4na is meant the work of 
the perceptive faculty, of the reasoning 
faculty and of the ‘spiritual faculty—called 
inspiration, by the higher influences operating 
in higher minds. 

“ Misevidencing means false apprehen- 
sion such as does not conform to that (real 
object)."t 4—I. 

To recognize mistaking as a function ix 
peculiar to the Hindu system. That man 
mistakes, is a fact. It is better for many 
purposes to recognize this fact than not. 
It is an incident of the chaotic tendency 
which is admitted to exist in nature. Its 
use is to emphasize and call into play the 
evidencing faculty which without this opposite 
could not appear io relief. In short, to err 
being human—erring should have a place in 
considering the operations of the mind. 





* WareTqareritea Rarerit beige 


+ facade fererrerrerrganfaey icier 


{ 31 ) 


“Vikalpa or the idealizing consists in 
following the sense conveyed by words in the 
absence of the thing.’* g—I. 

Broadly speaking, this is imagination. 

“Nidré or the vacating is the function 
resting upon consciousness of blankness.”> 

In the Hindu system, securing the state of 
blankness is a thing of great importance. 
It is the means of securing fulness of 
healthy activity. It is an act conducive to 
nirodha or tranquilization. 

“ Smriti or remembering is not the tetting 
xo of that of which one has become aware." 

To sum up the brittis, a thing is evidenced 
hy the senses or the senses conjointly with 
reasoning. ‘This is pramana. Then it is 





possible that owing to the wrong action 
of the senses, the evidence ix false. This 
is biparyaya or mistake. But leaving aside 
this possibility and taking the evidence to 








* sqegarargarelt sequal frarer: eign 
+ warrant Ufetfirer tole 


t wepgefrrareenatie aftr ie te 


( 32) 


be correct when the thing evidenced is 
removed, a substitute of it in the shape of 
a word with a representing sense remains. 
This is bikalpa (imagination). But when the 
mind is driven to get rid of this substituted 
representation and feels consciousness of 
blankness, this is nidré (or vacation). But 
if instead of getting rid of the representa- 
tion which one was aware of, does not let 
it go, this is smriti (memory). These are the 
five classes of brittis or functions. But the 
force of the word britti is a little more than 
mere functions. It is derived from the root 
bri (@) meaning to fall upon. The term britti 
conveys the idea of agitation and excitement. 

It is therefore that the brittis are to be 
stopped in order to enable the will power to 
act freely and properly. This stoppage or 
nirodha is for securing tranquilization. It is 
not for stopping action. In fact for the matter 
of action it is not stopped by nirodha. A 
gentle action within, ever remains even after 
stopping the excitement of the function men- 
tioned above. Sutra 10 book iii expressly 
Bays SO. 


{ 33 ) 


Each of the hrittis might, in fact, press upon 
the mind in relation to more than one objret 
atatime. This would be confounding. Then 
several britlis might tend to work at the same 
time. This also would be confounding. In 
fact the brittis tend to lead the mind each 
in its own way. But the mind should be able 
to dismiss or entertain them. Says an english 
essayist. “ Dost thou xo young know when to 
xpeak and when to hold thy tongue." Similar- 
ly it may be said “ Dost thou so young know 
when to remember and when to forget" and 
soon, But onc, in order to know when to do 
a thing or not to do it—must first of all know 
to be calin and self-collected by shutting out 
the invasions of all aggressive influences. 
This shutting out is niredha. This state 
of nirodha is thus described by Bhagabat 
Geeta* 

“As a lamp sheltered from” the wind 
flickereth not, such is the traditional simili 





* ae Sat fare ee Taar |ar: | 
aifien aaferea geet aaa: veil 
3 


( 34) 


of the yogi of subdued thought, absorbed in 
the yoga of the self.” 


SEction 2-—TIE STEPS LEADING fU 
SAMAvHt OR EKARTHATA. 

It has been already seen that samadhi 

parinima is the state in which the tendency tu 

multifariousness yields to the tendency (oat 

single purpose: (sutra 2 book IE.) Samfdhi 

itself is defined as fotlows :—* 

“When that (contemplation) is (so in 
tensilicd) a» to lose, as if it were, conscious- 
self in tne consciousness af the 
object that is samadhi." 3—I1L. 

T definition and the defmitions of 
dbarand and dhyana will he 








Hens of one’ 













after in full. Burt it is neee 





Ty te toucl 
them here.+ 


> izartarefratay eeapafas garhae' ay 
+ Sqergirae areca gigi 





{ 35 ) 


“To fix the mind on a limited space 
(object) is dharana." 1—III. 

“There to concentrate attention i. 
dhySna”"* 2—II1. 

So samadhi is the highest degree of 
concentrating altention when it rea 
point at which the idea of the obje 
and the man lo: 











even consciousness 
This is the highest ckarthata (singleness of 
purpose), 

How is this to be practised? It can be 
practixed in two ways—in a theoreti 
studently way -or in a practical way, 
course of the aflairs of active life. The first 
method is practised in groves and caves under 
the instructions of qualified gurus, the second 
method, in striving after suce 









ins honest 
avocations of life and above all in performing 
religious devotion. 

When the object of the sadhan (effort) 
is limited, dharana and dhyana may not ev- 
tend to samadhi, In such cases, even if they 
extend to samadhi, that samadhiis not nirbevz 











* A HERAT WTAE R18 


( 36 ) 


(thorough) samadhi but only sampragnata 
(partial) as it will be explained hereafter. 

But where the object of sidhan is the 
Divine Being and when it is properly conducted 
with that end, getting all obstacles removed, 
the man falls into nirbecz samadhi, or consum- 
mate self-obliviousness and such samfdhi is 
followed by realizing divine life. This subject 
will he fully treated later on. Ordinarily the 
yoga shstra speaks of removal of pain as 
the object of yoxa. But what is meant by 
this pain? Jt means living the low life, of 
one who cannot realize the moral and 
spiritual order of the universe. In short, it is 
that which accompanies ignorance, in the sense 
of incapacity to realize all that is high and 
noble. But the effect of the highest samadhi 
is what the Bhagabat Geeta deseribes as the 
states of sthifapragaa (fixed in wisdom) and 
of sthitadhi (fixed in-contemplation).* 








* acerfet wer arena aml oe eT | 
WareaTAAT Qe: feaaMesyas cyl 


(37) 


“When a man abandoncth, © Partha! all the 
desires of the heart, and is satisfied in the self 
by the sell, then is he called stable in mind (55). 

He whose manas is free from anxiety amid 
pains, indifferent amid pleasures, loosed from 
passion, fear and anger, he is called a muni 
of stable mind. (56). 

He who on every side is without attach- 
iments, whatever hap of fair and foul, who 
neither likes nor dislikes, of such a one the 
understanding is wellepoised. (57). 

When, again, as a tortoise draws in on 
all sides its limbs, he withdraws hi» senses 
from the objects of sense thea is his under- 
standing well-poixed. (58). 


Benger: gay fare: | 

Dacmraihs; ferrite free’ wigs 

a adarafire Seay MT MITTAL | 

anfierefa 4 tf ae osm ufafea: mel 

aar dwet aad Qaioerats aa | 

sfraralfntererer rer neff: acu 
aarngdtar t 30 





( 3% ) 


SECTION 3.—THE STATE OF EKAGRATA 
OR SUCCESS AFTER SAMADHI. 

Tt hax been explained that while samadhi 
is the state of incubation, the state of 
ekAgratA is the state of fruition. low it has 
heen defined by Patanjala has been shown 
before. It ix the condition of subjective and 
objective harmony as has been already 
explained. It includes subjective harmony, 
as by definition it includes a reconcilement 
of tranquility with carnestness. It ha» 
objective harmony because the definition 
implies that one thing is to be the lading 
thing of all others. 








As in the case of samadhi, so in the case 
of ckagraté, the consummation is only realized 
when the object is the Divine Being. In all 
other cases the object consists of something 
connected with some duty, limited by time 
and space. The ekagrata arising in relation 
to such objects is a harmonious peaceful ex- 
perience limited by time and space. 

But when the object is the All Goad Divine 
Being the ckagrata is unrestricted. 


(39 ) 


Then again in the case of samadhi—when 
the object is more or less of a negative charac- 
ter, some sort of samadhi may be attained, 
In the case of ekagrata however when the 
object is of a negative character—the condi- 
tion of true ekagrat& is not at all attainable. 

‘The author speaks of two sorts of samadhi 
as follows :—* 5 

(“The samadhi) of those who seek to be 
merged in the bodiless or in nature, is of a 
worldly purpose.” —1g—I. 

The author means that such sam&dhi has 
no higher fruition in their case, they being 
subject to the laws of this phenomenal world 
as for example birth and rebirth. 

But he says that :—t 

“That of others is preceded by, reverence, 
vigor memory, samAdhi proper (in the sense 
of ekfrthata) and supersensuous perception.” 
20—I. 

Reading this sutra with sutra 12 of book iii 





* qacaral fatenafeeaen! pee! 
aruratdcarfraarferengaan sartera 1°10 


( 40) 


defining ckAgrat® parindma it is evident, that 
it is the samadhi of those who have faith and 
hope that terminates in the harmonizing con- 
dition of unrestricted ekigrata parinaima, but 
not of those who want to be merged in nature. 
Sri Bhagavat Geeta calls it bhakti yoga. 

In fact ckAgrata, in the sense of religious 
devotion, isha less the end than the beginning 





of yoga. 
practical yoga as the preliminary preparation 
for the regular course of yoga cultivation. 
And this practical yoga consists among other 
things, of resignation to God.* 

The highest ckigrata is described by Bha- 
gabat Geeta by the following among other 
sutrast 


* aa: enaratacnfearnia fanaa: 1218 
+ sfacarfa ware fer wefeer cent art: | 
aufa qaifie dasage arate werTng tH 
atfaarafa etarg ays | 


maTaTy WH A At GA ela: 1 Hel 
ameter 1 


anjala puts what he calls the 








(41) 


 J[aving restrained them all, he should sit 
harmonized, devoted wholly to me ; for whose 
senses are mastered, of him the understanding 
is well-poised.” (61). 

“And among all yogis, he who with the 
innerself abideth in me, he is considered by me 
to be the most completely harmonized.” (47). 


——:0;—— 


SECTION 4 --—THE THREE 
IN RELATION TO TH 
PHILOSOPHY. 






In the higher spheres of speculation 
nirodha, samadhi and ckAigratt may be illus- 
trated by the truths of the Sankhya philosophy. 
The Sankhya treats of three stages of human 
progress, 

First is the defacto state of ordinary hu. 
manity. In this state—the purusha or the 
experiencer, is in the state of bondage and the 
prakriti or the object of his experience is a 
combination, pulling purusha on three sides 
and continually agitating and bewildering him. 
In this state the experiencer is hardly able to 











(42) 


elaim experience to be his property. On the 
vontrary—it is the experienced prakriti which 
claims him to be its—property. The experience 
of this stage is lower experience and is called 
aviveka or (ignorance) and is associated with 
misery. 

The second stage of progress according to 
the Sankbya, is realized when on the one 
hand, the experiencer or the purusha isolates 
himself from the objects of his experience 4¢., 
from the mixed action of the three-faced 
prakriti, and can take a stand unaffected by 
itas a passive onlooker; and then on the 
other hand, prakriti ceases to pull him on three 
sides, and appears in that balanced state which 
is asserted by the definition of prakriti to be 
iis proper condition. 

In the third stage the experiencer or the 
purusha is absolutely free and his experience 
ka, 
but that higher experience called viveka, 
where he realizes the dependence of prakriti 
on the spiritual order of things. In this stage 
the purusha is the master of prakriti and has 
the leading string of it in his bands. 


is no mare the lower experience called av 





( 43) 


It is clear that nirodha is directed against 
the first stage, that samadhi marks the second 
stage and ekagrata also called kaibalya 
characterzes the third stage of the Sinkhya 
system. 

The state of bondage from which a man 
is to work his way out by yoga is thus 
described by Patanjala :-—* 

“The store of the influences of past 
works, which has its root in the cause» 
producing afflictions (ignorance passions &) 
has fruition in the present as well as in’ the 
future.” 12—II. 

“This root extisting, it fructifies into 
varieties of birth and of age and the burden 
(thereof)"+ 13—Il. 

“These have joy or suffering as their 
fruits, according as the cause is virtue or 
view.”"$ 14—I. 








* AUS: Wa SUSE MASALA Va! 
t “afereza afearat sranguta: 0"¢ 2121 
$28 wreaftereer: pergetaarg regigi 


( 44) 


“What is to be averted is pain not yet 
come."* 16—II, 

“The cause of the thing to he shunned (ie. 
of pain) is the attachment of the experiencer 
to the object of experience (i. e. the bondage 
of the experiencer)"t —17-—IL. 

It will be observed that sanyoga is com- 
pulsory or ignorant junction as opposed to 
yoga which is discriminating junction. 

“The entity of the experienced is, as if it 
were, for the experiencer."~ —21~—II 

“Attachment is for a right rea 
the relation between the Jording power of the 
experiencer and the power of the experienc- 
ed itself, Such a realization arises from 
detachment."§ 23—I1. 

“Of that (attachment) ignorance is the 
| 24-1. 


zation of 





cau 





* oa Sewer bare os 
+ Cert apn Faq neon 
t Wee Wa ERAT RE 
§ wera wedtrafarta: date, 12 gia! 
| orem Valeri as 1 Wi 





(45) 


“Ignorance being removed, the attach. 
ment is removed, such removal produces 
kaibalya, in the experienccr.”* 

Thus nirodha is against sanyoga (ignorant 
vonjunction). 

Samadhi and ekAgrat& are for securing 
yoga (the disciminating junction). 

For, on examining the Patanjal system as 
a whole, it becomes evident that what is called 
viveka or gnana is the realization of the 
spiritual and moral order of things, with a 
power of unattached junction with nature in 
a disinterested manner; and aviveka or the 
agnana is the reverse of such realization. 

Attachment to prakriti is to be shunned. 
because it obscures a disinterested sense of 
duty and produces distractions and confusion, 
but a junction free from these needs not br 
shunned. So in the case of spiritual ckagrata 
there is junction but it is not that conjunc. 
tion (attachment which is to he shunned.) 

In short the object of nirodha parinama is 
to suspend the conjunction (attachment) 








“AAT SAIATTA Ett AE STATA Y 2 


t 4) 


between the experiencet and the object of 
experience, that of samadhi parinama is to 
cultivate that sort of simple junction which 
is free from ignorance and selfish attachment, 
and that of ekigrata parinama is to confirm 
the state of disinterested sense of duty ari- 
sing from it on a positive basis of peace and 
harmony. It has already been said that these 
are teapectively called the—pro- 





parinaimas 
perty, function and the condition of yoga 
(dharma, lakhan and avastha), The yoga thus 
consists of this triple pariniimas—and not of 
nirodha only, And it ix by practice of this 
triple parintimas upon a given object that one 
san achieve siddhi or success with regard to 
that object. 








SECTION 5.—WHAL TO BE SHUNNED AND 
WH: TU BE GAINED RY YOGA. 

Both the Sankhya and Patanjala state, in 

effect that man has two levels of experience 








—one is the level of agnana or aviveka 
(ignorance) and the other is that of gnfina 
or viveka (wisdom). The one is the lower 
experience and the other higher experience. 


( 47) 


Salvation means the higher experience 
and bondage the lower.* (Sankhya 23 and 
24 book III). 

Now the fower experience avidya ir 
defined by Patanjala to be“ That perversion 
by which the ephimeral, the impure, the evil 
and the nonspiritual are taken to be the 
eternal, the pure, the good and the spiritual.” 
See sutra 5 book Ut 

This lower es ce further includes — 
aomila raga, dwesha and abhinivesha (egro- 
lism, attachinent, hatred, tenacity to worldly 
lite.) 

* Asmita (egotism) is identiting the power 
of experiencer with the power of experien- 
cing.t 6—I1. 






“ Raga (attachment) is pleasurable attrac- 
$ 7-ll. 

* guarq gfe u xafaadery 
+ wiramfecrarmfaanfagermenta- 


ferent it 4 20 
t eqedancerecarfern uel 


§ qeraadt TT 191k 











C a) 


“Dwesha (hatred) is painful attrac- 
tion.”* 8—Il, 

Abhinivesha (tenacity to worldly life) is 
that self sustaining current of attachment te 
ence which exists even in the case 
ise."t  g—ll. 
se are the factors of that ower expe- 
tience called agnana—which binds man to 
affliction. They thus constitute what is called 
klesha or (pain). See sutra 3—II. 

Now on the other hand what is the higher 
experiene called viveka or gnina? The 
Sankhya defines his purusha and prakriti but 
has not strictly defined this higher experience, 
It evidently leaves it to be understood as 
explained by the upanishads, one sutra of 
which he reproduces in explanation of the 









term viveka as fallow: 








* garam i Fer 1 az 
+ eraretfagatsta cereaant afriaaer: 1 
ERR 


 wenararsie atts arenfeattafatecioys Ri 
wteres | 


(49) 


“Viveka is established by studying the 
reality by the ‘not this and not this,’ procuss 
of relinguishment. : 

Patanjala says “the realization of viveka 
without a break, is the means of removing 
hondage.”* 26—II. 

In fact viveka or gnina is the reverse of 
avidyi. or agnina. Positively stated, it is 
the realization of the moral and the spiritual 
order of the universe, as opposed to looking 
upon it as a conglomeration of matter with- 
out any guiding spirit. It will now be seen 
that the object of yoga, is to rise above the 
level of the lower or sensual experience and 
10 acquire a firm position on the level of the 
higher or supensensual experience—nay to 
teach to the highest experience of all--the 
kaibalya in which matter and mind are 
pereeived as merely the emanations of cne 
and the same Spiritual Sua. 





* fawarenfaclagar ertiona: 1 ke 3H 
mo 


( 50) 


Section 6.—THE SAME SUBJECT 
CONTINUED. 

The higher experience (vivcka) which is 
to be secured by yoga is explained by Patan- 
jala systematically. This higher experience 
begins with the subjugation of the senses. 

“The subjugation of the senses takes 
place by mastering the mode of perception, 
the nature of it, the egotism it tends to, the 
concommitance, and the purpose it serves.’* 
48—III. 

“From that the senses acquire the quick 
ness as of mind, the cessation of the 
character of instrument and the conquest of 
the muainspring of external force." 4g—III. 

“He who fixes the mind on purusha and 
sattwa (the spiritual element of nature) so 
as to realize the distinction between them, 


* qwaaerfaareaawdaarfefae: 4 
Pit 


+ went watateer fierce: maT I 
weaQ 


C5) 


gets knowledge of and supremacy over all 
things."* 50—III. 

“Then when one rises superior even to 
the attachment of that (supremacy and full 
knowledge), the seed of evil being destroyed, 
kaibalya (the state of realzing the only one) 
follows."t | 51~—IIl. 

See also sutras 24 and 25—V. 

“The realization of the only one arises 
from the purity and harmony of purusha and 
satwa (the spiritual element of nature)."f 
56—III, 

Thus higher experience begins fron 
acquiring a control over the senses and ends 
with absolute purity and harmony. 

The conjunction of purusha with nature 
which is to be shunned is a conjunction 
consisting of agnana or aviveka. It ix 





* qaquaren enfrarre 

welarnfaeras’ Gar wae | olgt 
+ avararefa derdterad Serer aay 
F eeagendh: wfrered Saw 1 1Ea 


( 52) 


attachment. Such a conjunction forms 
experience of a lower order which ought to 
give way to the higher experience called 
viveka which consists of purusha being 
purely joined with the purest and highest 
phase of nature. 

The following two sutras also throw light 
upon the above observations.* 47—I. 

“In that clear state which follows un- 
questioning concentration is to be found 
spiritual serinity.” 48—I. 

“Then arises the (ruth bearing wisdom.” 





* fafieraarcicaremare 1 geiyy 
ETAT AH AT Ele 


CHAPTER III. 
THE EIGHT FACTORS OF YOGA. 


SECTION 1.—GENERAL ENNUMERATION 
OF THE FACTORS. 
The cight factors of yoga called the 
yogingas are the following :— 

1, Yama—control or adhering to the five 

primary duties. 

2. Niyama—regulation or adhering to the 

five known means of progress. 

3- Asana—position or the easy attitude of 

the body. 

4. Préndyama—control and regulation ot 
prana (vital energy in con- 
nection with the breath) 

5. Pratyékara—withdrawing the senses from 
external objects and turn- 
ing them inward, 


(4) 


6. Dkérané—fixation of attention. 
7. Dhyéna—concentration. 
8. Samédhi—identification.* 

All these factors more or less enter the 
phase of ’nirodha and the phase of sam4dhi in 
its extended sense. Ekagraté however being 
the limiting condition, may be said to trans- 
vend the angas (members or factors). The 
functions and utility of the angas of yoga are 
thus described.t 

“From the practice of the yogingas arises 
the light of inspiration up to the limit of 
saving knowledge by destroying impurity.” 

The yoga angas enter more or less in 
yogas of all kinds, however called, mano- 
yoga, buddhi-yoga gnana-yoga or rAja-yoxa. 
In bhakti-yoga however their presence is not 
directly felt. In what is culled hata-yoga the 
physical factors, Asana and prandyama are 


* ‘at rear remTeeTER RRR ATONTE TORT. 
waredicerngtf | ge) 2 
+ Aenprqurneafeaa wrereifirafate 


TH RVR 





{ 55 ) 


mostly used and almost carried to a fault. A 
distinguished writer says regarding the hata 
yoga :— . 

“This system (hata yoga) deals principal- 
ly, with with the physical part of man with 
view the to train his will. The processes 
prescribed to arrive at this end, are so hard 
and, difficult that only very few of the resolute 
souls go through all the stages of its practice. 
but many have failed and some died in the 
attempt of its acquirement. It is therefore 
strongly denounced by all the wisest 
philosophers.” 

According to Bhoja Raja's commentary 
the yoga-angas, as ennumerated in the sutras 
of P&tanjala, are placed in the order of their 
importance. 

Accordingly dharan4, dhyana and samadhi 
are higher than dsana and praniyama. There- 
fore those who accord a predominance to the 
litter two angas over the forner three, arc not 
right. The Hindu literature, in general, and 
even the Buddhistic attach a greater import- 
ance to the mental and moral angas (factors) 
of the yoga than to the physical angus. 


{ 36) 


The Vishnu Purana says :-— 

11. Whatever he meditates upon, that is 
obtained by a man (in future existence): 
such is the mysterious power of meditation. 

12, Therefore must he dismiss everything 
perishable from his thoughts, and meditate 
upon what is imperishable only. 

13. There is nothing imperishable, except 
Purusha. 

14. Having become united with Him 
(through constant meditation), he obtains 
final liberation. 

15. Because the great Lord pervades the 
whole universe (pura), therefore is he deno- 
minated Purusha by those who reflect upon 
the real nature (of the Supreme Spirit). 

Then the Buddhistie school of ‘Tian Tai 
is based upon ‘Chi Kwan’ which is a corrup- 
tion of ‘sthira-gnana’ ‘ fixed wisdom'—thus 
acknowledging, the paramount importance of 
meditation and devotion. 

Thos what is called hata-yoga as contra- 
distinguished from yoga in its moral and 
mental aspect, may well be left apart. But 
the distinction that deserves of considera- 


( 57) 


tion, is that between abhyas-yoga’ and 
‘bairigya-yoga’. P&tanjala says yoga is 
attained by abhy4s and bairigya—practice 
and freedom from passions. The question 
presents itself ‘what is the relation of the 
cight yogangas with either of the two, abhyas 
and ‘bairigya’? The relation of the angas 
to the two is this. ‘The angas are consciously 
cultivated in the abhy&s, while they are un- 
consciously cultivated in the bairigya. One 
may study the principles of syllogism as a dis- 
tinct object of pursuit. But when he reasons 
about things in his worldly dealings, he is never 
conscious of those principles. Nevertheless 
those principles are unconsciously followed 
if he follows common sense. 

Similarly when one acts disinterestedly 
and does duty for the sake of duty, he 
unconsciously performs the angas—dharan’, 
dhyin and samfdhi and also the other angas. 
I say the other angas because when one is 
earnestly bent upon the discharge of a duty, 
even his pulses become quiet and his breath 
steady. 

This is one distinction between abhvds 


( 58 ) 


and bairigya. The other is that abhyas is 
psychic while bairagya is ethical. 





SECTION 2.—THE FIRST YOGANGA—YAMA, 

“ Yama} (self control) consists of avoiding 
(1) injury to life, (2} falsehood (3) misappro- 
piation (4) incontinence (5) avarice."* 30—II 

It may be expressed in the shape of thr 
following commandments :— 

(1) Thou shalt not hurt. 

(2) Thou shalt not lie. 

(3) Thou shalt not misappropiate. 

(4) Thou shalt not indulge in excess. 

(5) Thou sholt not covet. 

“ These are the five great universal duties 
without reference to rank, time, place and 





circumstances.""t —31—II. 
Of the ten Christian Commandments, the 
first four relate to doctrinal matters. The 


* ‘whterear Tea aairafcee n mer mere 
+ Ctanfagweneenarreaerer ae die 
AWA LIRA 





( 59 } 


remaining six bearing on conduct are as, 
follows :— 

(1) Thou shalt do no murder. 

(2) Thou shalt not commit adultery. 

(3) Thou shalt not steal. 

(4) Thou shalt not bear false witness. 

(5) Honour thy father and thy mother. 

{6} Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 

thyself. 

The Bhudhistic scriptures are prolific of 
commandments. But the principal command- 
ments are the ten precepts. The precepts 
with regard to those, who having sinned seck 
for recovery by repentance, are the following. 

(a1 They must revive their faith in 
rewards and punishments. 

(b) They must encourage in themselves a 
feeling of deep shame for their sin. 

(c) They must be filled with a sense of 
reverence and fear. 

(d) ‘They must desire to destroy occasions 
of sins or as the law says, “shape their 
conduct according to religion.” 

(e) They must confess their sins without 

reserve. 


[ 6 } 


(f) They must cut off all sinful inclinations 
(or heart-leanings to sin). 

(g) They must excite in themselves a 
jealousy for religion (the law, or 
desire to protect the law). 

{h) They must promote in themselves a 
desire to sec all men arrive at 
salvation. 

(i) They must constantly invoke “ all the 
Buddhas.” 

{j) They must consider the “ deadness” 
(unproductiveness) of the nature of 
sin. 

These precepts are of a general nature. 
But the five commandments involved in yama 
are practical. They are only the first steps 
in the course of improvement and self-culture. 
But they are indispensible. Without them 
any attempt to nirodha or samadhi would be 
simply abortive. The Christian command- 
ments may well compare with them. 


( 6 } 


SECTION 3.~—-THE SECOND YOGANGA 
—Nivama. 

“Niyama (regulation) consists of ob- 
setvance of (rt) purity (both bodily and 
mental (2) contentment, (3) austerity, (4) 
study of scriptures, (5) persevering devotion 
to God.”* = 32—II. 

In effect niyama is to make it a point 
to observe the following rules. 

(1) Keep your mind and body clean. 

(2) Be not impatient and too much 

ambitious. 

(3) Learn to bear hardship. 

(4) Learn truths taught by holy men. 

(5) Love God above all. 

The true principle of niyama or observance: 
of sound rules is laid down in the following 
sutra.t 

“To shut out the wrong side and to con- 
template on the opposite (the right) side.” 





* drreataaa: eraaarciearantt 
fram RT 


+ fansara® uffrowrarg: 22130 


( 62) 


This is also said in sutra* 10—II. 

“These subtle evils (avidya, dwesha) are 
to be evaded by calling up their opposites.” 

This principle is further explained as 
follows :—t 

“The distracting things—injury to 
others, and the like—no matter whether done, 
caused to be done or approved of, whether 
preceded by covetousness, passion or con- 
fusion, whether slight, tolerable or excessive 
are productive of depravity and suffering, thus 
to call to mind their opposites.’ 34—II4 

In other words to ponder on the negative 
state of a bad decd, is a means of preventing 
them, as this necessarily brings to mind the 
the good effects of abstaining from them. 

One who has attained to that stage of 
moral perfection at which he is free from all 


* 8 ufemertar. Qe: |) ee 1 80 
+ faraif¥erea: weenferreenfeareiane- 
aheqet en weeanfeerran ger wreTTe 
fa nferrarerrary | ge 1 80 


( 63 ) 


selfishness, and his whole life is resigned to 
God, does not require particular rules and 
regulations to protect him. But to those who 
are not so advanced, these are of great use. 
Hence the numerous érafrs (vows) and the 
various yogas and yagnas—devotional cere- 
monies as well as what is called prayaschitta 
the purifying ceremonies). 

In fact niyama is in furtherance of yama. 
The five evils against which onc is to fight in 
way of self-control (yama) can only be suc- 
cessfully combated by realizing the benefit 
which arises from their opposites. 

“ When enmity is removed from one’s mind, 
all enimity to him ceases* 35—I1. 

“When truthfulness is established in one's 
heart, he never misses the fruits of works 
desired."t 36—II. 

“When one is above temptation to mis- 
appropriate others’ properties, one finds 





* aftamftrerat wefedt aca 0 avian 
+ wenfrerat firarrersaery 1 Rainy 


( 64 ) 


himself in possession of all valuable things."* 
37—II. 

© When abstinence from sensuality is esta- 
blished, one gets vigour."+ 38-~-Il. 

“When one is entirely self-reliant and 
disdains charity, he gets a glimpse of his 
former tife."{ 39—II. 

The author goes on, in a similar strain to 
ennumerate the blessings arising from the five 
niyamas. These blessings are the rewards of 
virtues inculcated by them and do not arise 
from the opposite of any vice as is the case 
with yama to which the above sutras, regarding. 
opposites refer. 

In the plane of rules and regulations (bidhi 
mArga) men are good from motives of bene- 
fit. It is therefore that the author dwells on 
the benefits from the five niyamas. But it is 
not necessary to discuss this subject further. 





* wet anfrerai BTA Tey NRO 
+ ayrranfaerat tare, i acige 
t wafewesta erererererreatia: t gecan 


U 6 ) 


SECTION 4. THE THIRD YOGANGA-ASANA 
(Posture). 

Asana is one of the angas primarily re- 
quired in effecting nirodha parinima (the 
tendency to stoppage). 

“The (desirable) posture is thal posture in 
which one may remain steadily and at case.""* 

There are many such postures—such ay 
padmdsana, danddsana, swastikdsana. It is 
the steadiness and pleasantness of, a posture 
that make it serviceable to concentration. 

“ Postures become steady and pleaxant hy 
giving up struggling efforts and by resigna- 
tion to the transcendental."t 47-—II. 

Asana or suitable posture ix a necessary 
condition of the next anga pranayama (balan- 
cing of the breath and the vital energy). 

“ When 4sana is secured, then there is no - 





* fercgwareny! vane 
+ mae fererereraraferearg weet 
5 


( 66 ) . 


disturbance by any couple of opposite thoughts 
and feelings.”* 48—II. 

What is called mudra (gesture) may be 
mentioned in connection with Asana. It con- 
sists in particular movements of the limbs, so 
thythmically or harmoniously ordered as to 
secure a healthy action of the nerves and of 
the mind. These mudris are mostly resorted, 
to in what is called hata-yoga. Rut many of 
them are acceptable also for purposes of higher 
yoga. In fact in bhakti-yoga the mudras invol- 
ved in singing and dancing are highly valuable. 
The principle which governs the mudris 
isthe same as that governing Asana. That 
principle is, so to dispose the body as to bring 
pleasure and steadiness. Men whose duties 
require travelling or going from one place to 
another are in need of following some such 
system and method in effecting locomotion 
as secures ease and steadiness. The soldier 
marches rhythmically and the porter also walks 
according to some measured steps. 





* aett wrarrfereren: es an 


( 67 ) 


‘Thus the importance given to Gsana in the 
yoga shAstra is not something singular. 

The posture in which man should sit 
while engaged in doing the duties of the busi- 
ness world is a question of importance. Proba- 
bly the European posture of sitting upon armed 
chairs is a suitable business posture. But the 
Hindu padmasana is certainly not inferior 
even for business purposes. 





SFCTION § THR FOURTH YOGANGA 
PRANAYAMA. 

‘Regulation of the breath aud the vital 

energy.) 

Asana and pranayama are connected with 
each other—the former leading to the latter 
Hence the follewing sutra :— 

“When this (a pleasant.and easy posture} 
has been established—the motion of inspira. 
tion and expiration becomen divided—and this 
is prandyama.”"* 49—II. 





* afer afr BEHRENS at ie: 
AIATaTE: W BetRR 











‘( 68 ) 


Pranayama is variously defined. The 
above definition is very simple and the 
prindyma according to it, does not involve 
-any effort to be made. By this definition, it 
is the sequence of an easy and pleasant 
posture. But this matter so simply put is 
far reaching in its effect. The term prina 
is ordinarily understood to mean breath. But 
its higher meaning is vital energy, and even 
psychic energy. So the word priniyfima 
may mean both regulation of the breath as 
well as regulation of the vital and psychic 
energy. 

The human organization is a silent musi- 
cal box. It is full of rhyme and rhythm. 
Anspiration, and expiration—inhalation and 
exhalation of breath—take place naturally by 
way of rhythm. The breath in and the breath 
out rhyme to each other—with a short stop 
or pause, This rhythmical process is related 
to the beats of the pulse—and is connected 
with the healthy action of the lungs and of 
heart. But there are many causes which pro- 
duce discordance between the two vibrations 
inhalation and exhalation and which change 


6 


the true position of the pause. These causes 
are disease, excitement, peculiar conditions 
of time and place. But if the harmony be 
restored these causes disease, excitement &c 
disappear. Besides—inhalation and exhalation 
may both become too long or too short—or too 
forcible or too mild by time, place and number. 
So the author says :— 

“ But this (breath) which is outer, inner 
and pausing—is long or short according to 
time, place and number.”* 50—II. 

The breath when the pausing stage is 
developed, is said to exert a double influence 
called external and internal. One explana- 
tion of this double influence may be, that it 
sends one current of influence towards the res- 
piratory and circulating organs or the involun- 
tary nervous system, and another current 
of influence upon the cerebro-spinal or the 
voluntary nervous system. Accordingly the 
author says: 


* 2g enunaercarusfitereradentiz: 
afcedt She: ener: 1 weit 


(7) 


" ©The fourth state is that in which it throws 
itself upon both the external and the internal 
spheres."* —51—II. 

By stimulating the nerves—praniyama 
(breath) strengthens the nerve centres and 
produces that psychic exhilaration called the 
arousing of Kundalini power. In this way 
the obstructions to the spiritual power are 
removed. Hence the author says: 

“‘ Thereby the obscurations of the spiritual 
display are removed."t 52—II. 

And then :— 

“The mind becomes fitted for dbhfiran& 
(fixation).’t 53—IE. 

Thus to regulate the breath quietly and 
harmoniously so as to strengthen and stimu- 
late the nerve centres is the real priniyima. 
Hypnotism and mesmerism are processes 
which impart similar stimuli to the nervous 
system. The Hindu writers recognize six 


* anurewarcfirrareat tape: ny eit 
+ er Wra TeTTCT a ARE 
FE WUCNTS STAT HTS: ARIE 


(Cm) 


centres—producing the nerve current which 
they locate in the spinal column—each of 
which according to them embraces a greater 
or less variety of influence. 

To be able to manage these centres is 
said to constitute the going through the six 


circles. (WEWMRE-) 


SECTION 6.—THE FIFTH YOGANGA.—PRATYA- 
HARA.—(Restraint). 

Pratyahfra is for effecting nirodha or stop- 
page of mental wanderings. It means calling 
back the senses from their external objects. 
‘The Bhagabat Geeta says~a man may course 
over objects of sense—provided he be not 
attached to them. That is the higher state. 
In the lower state, running over the objects of 
the senses means attachment, distraction and 
passion. 

When by dsana, and prandy4ma the mind 
is regulated and the nerve power is quick- 
ened—you are enabled to exercise contro! 
over the senses. Thus enabled you may with- 
draw the senses from one or other of their 


€ 7) 


objects. Then the senses become subject to 
the will-power and obey it. This is called 
pratyahara. The senses are said to be the 
subjects. The mind is to he the minister 
and the buddhi the ruler. The buddhi is the 
righteous will power. 

The mind constitutes the self-centering 
tendency of the Will-Power. The senses 
distract the mind. When they cease to distract 
it and detaching themselves from their external 
objects accommodate themselves to the will 
power—that is pratyShara, 

“Restraint” is as it were the mentaliza- 
tion of the senses in the absence of concern- 
ment with each one's own object."* 54—II. 

“Then the senses are thoroughly 
subjugated.” 55—II. 

Praty&hira is understood rather theoreti- 
cally and its position as one of the yogingas ix 
somewhat theoretical. Practically it is atmost 


* eaftrrenahmn’ fore weareyat 
w@fexaret warrere b agie 
T are: Teer fare FA LIR 


(723) 


synonymous with nirodha. At any rate 
practically—pratyahara can only be secured 
by dharani, dhy3n and samadhi. To show 
this the following sutra may be reproduced 
here :— 

“The subjugation of the senses ‘takes 
place by mastering the act of perception, the 
nature of it, the egotism it envolves, its se- 
quence and the purpose it serves.”* 48—II1, 


SECTION 7.—THE SIXTH YOGANGA— 
DHARANA, 

The preceding yoginga pratyA&hira 
naturally leads to dharan4 or (fixed attention.) 
It is defined as follows -— 

“Dharan& is the fixing of attention upon 
a circumscribed object.” 1—III. 

After the ethical and the physico-psychlic 
processes described before, this is the first of 
the steps of a purely psychic character. It has 


” ayewentferreaninwd arenfe- 
fire: 1 Sty tb 





{m) 


been already seen that the stage of samAdhi 
parinima, begins with practising the focussing 
of the mental operations. And the author 
having described the obstacles to yoga as con- 
sisting of disease, dulness, doubt, carelessness, 
sloth, worldly mindedness, false notion, missing 
the point and instability (sutra 30 book !) 
and having also mentioned what are con- 
sidered to be concomitants of those 
obstacles, viz grief, feeling of distress, 
trembling and unregulated breath (sutra 31 
book 1) speaks of the necessity of single- 
minded application, to one object, as the 
preventive remedy of those obstacles and 
their concomitants. In sutra 32, book! is 
the following :— 

* For the prevention thereof let one truth 
be dwelt upon.”* 

Now dhSran4 is the factor by which one 
begins to dwell upon one truth. It appears 
that the difference between dhSran& and 
dhyan is this. By dhirana one object is 
singled out and realized as distinct from 


* mofatardtarrenare: b git i 





(75 ) 


others. Its effect is to realize the distinctnes 
of that object, while the effect of dhyan is 
to realize it clearly as regards its parts. By 
dhyan you get a full view of all that is con- 
tained in the thing—visibly or in an occult 
way. What Bhagabat Geeta puts as dhriti 
in suttras 33, 34, 35 chapter xviii may be read 
here in this connexion. From these sutras it 
would appear that Bhagabat Geeta takes « 
wider view of dharani. 


SECTION 8.—THE SEVENTH YOGANGA— 
DHYAN. 

Dhy&n is a yoganga of great importance. 
Its importance being only next to samAdhi. 
It is defined'as follows :— 

“ When the mental strain is attuned with 
that (object of dhtrand) this is called dhy&a."* 
Thus dhyin is more than contemplation or 
imagination. It is the active application of 
the mind in earnest union with an object. 


* aay UAMMTTOTETTNAT OTA URL 


( 6) 


Bhagabat Geeta treats of the subject of 
dhySn very fully. 

It may be either tamasic, rijasic or sitwic. 
Tamasic dhySn consists of contemplating of 
object of sense with attachment or passion 
(see sutras 62—ii. ch.). 

The highest state of dhyin is the state 
described by Bhagabat Geeta as the state 
of sthitadhi (figren@h:) see sutra 56 chapter ii. 

The Geeta also compares between dhyfn- 
yoga with abhy&s-yoga and gnana-yoga. See 
sutra 12, chapter 12. 

It will be hereafter seen that samadhi is 
only the ultimate state of dhyan in which 
the mind loses self-consciousness. The Yoga 
Vasishta Ramayana, which may be regarded 
as an authority treating gnina-yoga does not 
categorize the yogingas as above. But it 
enumerates seven states of gnina which are 
evidently those referred to in the following 
sutra of Patanjala 

“ Of that (enlightenment) there are seven 
sues up to the limiting ground.”* 


# ree wee mente WT Reig a 


Cor} 


’ The seven states of gnina are thus des- 
cribed by Yoga Vasista Rimiyana :— 

“The seven Gnana states. Now to the 
seven Gnana-Bhumikas. Disputants hold to 
infinite divisions of these Gnina states. [n 
my opinion I prefer to classify them thus 
under a septenary head. The cognition of the 
real nature of these Gnana states is Atma- 
Gnina. The goal of all these is the imperish- 
able Nirvana. The seven stages are—Subech- 
cha, (spiritual longing after the bliss given 
out in the Vedas), Vicharan (enquiry therein), 
Thanumanasi, (the melting of the mind in 
enquiry), Satwapathi, (the passage of the mind 
in truth) Asamsakti, (being without Sankalpa), 
Pathirtha Bhavana (knowledge of truth), and 
‘Turya. Persons who have known these states 
will never welter in the mud of delusions, 
As Moksha arises therefrom, there will be 
an end of all pains. Of what avail to us is 
the wretched Moha? That desire which ever 
arises in one to enjoy directly the Gnana- 
essence through the path of indifference to 
objects after a study of Atma-Gnina Sastras 
and association with the knowers of Brahman 


( 8) 


is Subechcha. The second or Vichirana is 
the mastery of the good qualities of the wise 
and of Atmik contemplation with the rise 
of spiritual desires in one, When after these 
two states are fully developed in him, he 
abandons the natural desires and his mind is 
concentred in one object at its will, then it (the 
mind) is rendered lean like Thanu (fine-thread) 
and the third stage -is reached. Al! desires 
being eliminated from the mind through the 
above three processes, Tatwa Gnana is deve- 
loped and this is the fourth state of Truth. 
Beyond these is the fifth state when he dis- 
connects himself from all Sankalpas by merg- 
ing into the blissful enjoyment of true Gnana 
without association with objects. When these 
fi fates are fully developed in an indivi- 
dual, he is drowned in the Elysian bliss of 
Atma Cinana and then he loses all affinities 
for objects. After the ripening of these five 
states and the development of quiescence 
through merging into one’s own Self of Atma 
Gnana, all perception of objects, external 
and internal, is lost and the person, if at all 
he has any perception of objects, has it only 





{ 79) 


through sheer external compulsion. This is 
the state called Pathartha Bhavana. Then 
the Turya, the seventh state is reached, when, 
having rendered objective the hitherto latent 
.Atma Gnana, he firmly stays in his own Self, 
having completely divested himself of all con- 
ceptions of heterogeneity which arise through 
his experiences on earth. This is the Spiri- 
iual path of the stainless Jivan Muktas. Above 
this Turya state of Jivan Muktas is Turya~ 
theetha state of Videha Muktas. This state 
in one that can be attained only by those 
Mahatmas (great souls) who have known 
their own self through Atma Gnana.” 


SECTION g. THE FIGHTH ANGA—(SAMADHI), 


The term samadhi is used in two senses 
alarger anda smaller sense. In the larger 
sense it is used co-extensively with yoga as 
including all the parts of it. In the smaller 
sense it is only that step of yoga which 
characterizes the samadhi parinima being the 
step of engrossing concentration only. 


( 8 ) 


‘The three concluding angax dhSran4, 
dhy&n and sam&dhi are the crowning angas 
and are called “ inner angas as compared with 
the others which are called the outer”; of 
these three dh&rand and dhyina have been 
described in detail. Shortly—~ 

1. Dharand is fixing the mind upon a 
particular object. 

2. Dhy4an is earnestly keeping the mind 
upon it. 

3. Samidhi ix identifying the mind 
with it. 

It is defined as follows :— 

“That (dhyan) when conscious only of 
the essence of the object, as if unconscious 
of self is samadhi strance).”* 3.—I11. 

Thus dhSran& is the initial point, dhyan 
is the middle point and samadhi the conclud- 
ing point of the same thing. 

“Three together (made to bear on a thing) 
constitute sanyama.”¢ 4.—III. 


* aerdareenitqerennafon werfiseeie 


T qaharedaes 2 gt 


( ar) 


“From the mastery of that, springs th 
world of higher understanding* _5.—III. 

“That (sanyama) is to be applied (first) to 
the basical ground (sampragn4ta).t 6.—J1L. 
"The three are called the external angas a~ 
compared with the preceding (five)."f 7H 

“But they are external to what is known 
as the seedless."§° 8—IIL, 

‘The seedless state is that ia which ther: 
is no trace of egoism—the: seed of all evil. 

Samadhi as defined above is not scedless, 
in this sense. For, in it, the form of self is 
lost sight of; but not the reality of it 
myama is an important subject of the yor: 
sastra. It is the means of success (siddhi) 
‘Yama’ is control, ‘Niyama’ is regulation, 
anyama is the triple exercise in the form o1 
dhirani, dhyfina and samadhi. You must fis 
yeue object, you must know how to be at that 


* pemarey marae: Valen 
+ we afag fafa: 2 giau 
2 waaay Year: 1 ean 
§ aeftafecs fretfarer ici eu 


6 


























( 8 ) 


object, and then you must know how to 
indentify yourself with that object. In one 
sense, the last (sam&dhi) implics the other two 
but not necessarily. You may get identified 
with a thing, without a distinct and clear con- 
sciousness of what it is, and without a proper 
realization of it. So all the three steps must 
he, separately gone through. By dharana 
one gets a distinct idea. By dhyana one 
gets a clear idea. By samadhi one get» 
into the soul of the thing. A thing is dis- 
tinetly perceived when it is distinguished 
from other things. ‘This is done by dharana. 
A thing is clearly perceived when all its parts 
are vividly perceived. This is done hy 
dhyana, And the thing is completely realized 
when its very essence is siezed. This is done 
by samadhi. ‘ When all these are done on 
one object, then sanyama is done tsutra 4 
—~book HL"”)* Sanyama again may be per- 
formed in connexion with cach of the three 
parinamas, nirodha, samadhi and ekAgrata. 
See sutra 16 book III. 


o aaa wa AT Bk 7 


CHAPTER IV. 
THE DIVISIONS AND DEGREES 
OF YOGA. 


SECTION 1.—THE Four-Fo.p Division 
BY BHAGAVAT GeErra, 


RuHAGAVAT GEETA divides Yoga into four 
classes, (1) Abhyas, (2) Gntna, (3) Dhyana 
(4) Karma. 

(3) Abhyas yoga begins with the quiet 
posture of the body—Asan, passes through: 
the discipline called prindyama, and ther 
through pratyahar (withdrawal of the senses 
from the external objects), ends in psychic 
absorption. 

(2) Gnana yoga begins with tarka, and 
then passing through bichara ends in tattwa 
gnana (spiritual illumination). 

(3) Dhyana yoga begins with reverence 
and then passing through earnest applicatien 
and faith ends in absolute bhakti. 


( & ) 


(4) Karma yoga begins with the obser. 
vance of the rules of conduct and then 
passing through acts of worship and prayer 
ends in disinterested work. 

(1) Abhyds yoga is indicated by th: 
following among other sutras :--— 

“ Body, head and neck balamed, immov- 
ably steady, looking fixedly at the point of 
the nose, with unwandering yoxa."* 13.—VI1 

“The self serene, fearless, firm in’ the 
vow of the brahmachari: manas controlled 
thinking on the harmonized, fet him In 
concentrated on Me."f 1g—-V 1. 





(2) Gnana yoga is referred to among other 
hy the following sutras :-- 

“The determinate reason is but one in 
this mortal life, O joy of the Kurus; many 


* aa arafircatd areared ft 
aternfeard a fererrretaay een 
T marermarfarentte wratfrt fea: | 
Buetereaafeer gM WAIT RTT eB! 


1 8&5 ) 


hranched and endless are the thoughts of the 
uresolute.* 41.—IT. 

“ Better than the sacrifice of wealth, is the 
sacrifice by gnina, QO Parantapa. All efforl< 
in their entirety O Partha, culminate in 
xnina.”t 33-—IV. 





(3) Dhyfna yoga is spoken of as bhakt: 
voga in Chapter XI of which the following 
sutras may he quoted :— 

“Those verily are devoted to Me whu 
having presented all actions to Me and who 
giving up other vogas, worshipping, meditat 
on Me."$ 6—XIL 


“Of these 1 speedily become the uplifter 





“wEUTaT wWarenre qeatserrarfy ne el?! 
+ TarrgenTare Aare: ae | 
wa winfed at sia ofcanaa ieeisl 
12 q calfe ainfe afa dare aqua: | 
waraha Ata at aaa SaTST vega 


( 86 ) 


from the occean of death, their minds medita- 
ting on Me”* = 7—II. 

{4) Karma yoga is explained among 
others by the following sutras :—~ 

“Therefore, without attachment, con- 
stantly perform action which is duty, for 
performing action without attachment man 
verily reacheth the Supreme." —19.—III. 

" Surrendcring all actions to Me, with thy 
thoughts on the Supreme Self, from hope and 
egotism freed, and of mental fever cured 
engage in battle." 30-—HL. 

Each of these divisions no doubt overlaps 
the others, more or less, But yet the classi- 
fication has good grounds, The Geeta makes 


* Saray aqwal Tadarcenny | 

wanfar Frere, ore wea SfirrSerarq tei ¢2 
+ rece: erred are arr | 
wat wreey whaceratfr TaT were 

t afe enife winfe darararertaer | 
facut eben eer qare ferrrerere wy etaa 


{ 87 ) 


this classification, at the same time it says 
that the so called one form of yoga is not 
substantially different from the others. 





SECTION 2, THE GREAT DiviSION INTU 
THE SABEREZ (WITH SEED) AND THE 
NirBEEZ (WITHOUT SEED). 


A PROPER understanding of this division 
into the sabeez and the nirbeez samidhi or 
yoga, is essential to the understanding of the 
PAtanjala, in fact, of the Sankhya philosophy. 
Whiat is the becz, the presence or the absence 
of which marks the imperfection and the 
perfection of yoga? It is the seed of karma 
(karma beez) as contradistinguished from the 
seed of gnana (gnina beez). It is not the 
~eed of perfect knowledge which is tu be 
found in the Supreme Being (Iswara) as 
mentioned below :— 

“In Him is the unsurpassable seed of 
perfect knowledge.”* 25.—I. 


* arn freind eae dtery rR 





( 88 ) 


It is the-seed of raga, dwesha, &c., which 
producing the storc house of karma (karma- 
saya) faints even exhaustive power and 
exhaustive knowledge regarding external 
objects. It is the presence of this seed in 
what is called the sampragnita samadhi—that 
mikes it sabeez. 

“It is the stock of karma as originating 
in the kleshas (attachment, hatred &c.), that 
leads to consequences in the seen or in the 
gnseen births.”"—12—IT. 

“When the klesha is at the root, then it 
tructifies into different kinds of suflermg in 
the shape of birth, length or shortness af Tik 
and the like." —13—II. 

The karma beez, or the seed of attach. 
iment lingers up to the state of exhaustive 
power and knowledge acquired by. siddhi 
With the vestige of attachment left, even in # 
state of such supremacy and knowledg 
falls short of nirbeez samadhi or kaib 
which is another word for nirbecz samadhi. 
Accordingly the author sz 

“ All sorts of supremacy and all kinds of 
knowledge arise as soan as the purusha ix 











&9 


realized to be over above the sattwa (buddhi— 
the will organ.)” —50--IIE. 

“But it is by ge rid of even that 
atlachment, thereby wearing out the seed of 
«vil—that kaibalya is obtained.” 51—IIT. 

Thus the seed to be destroyed consists of 





the tendency of attachment. It underlies 
what is called the kleshas, 77s., passion, hatred 
te, (soe sutra 6—I[L, page 29). “Ht has 
already been shown how Patanjala analyses 
this objectionable tendency to be the con- 
tinction or the identitication of the experien- 
cor and the experienced (see sutra 17—H1. 
Tage 44) as opposed to the purity and har- 
mony between them, This purity and har. 
mony is tantamount to kaibalya. 





“Tn the purity and harmony between the 
purnsha and sattwa consists onliness {kai- 
55111. 

Tt has alse been already pointed ont, how 





bal 





Vitanjala explains that the final end of even 
conjunction or attachment is good, as it 
serves to develope the power of the purusha 
to effect detachment. (Secu sutra 23—II, 
page 44.) 


( 90 ) 


But here it may be noticed, how Patanjala 
lays down that, the play between the conjunc- 
tion (which causes bhoga) and purity and 
harmony which amount to salvation, is 
merely owing to the experienceable nature a> 
consisting of the three gunas :—He says :-— 

“The experienceable nature having thr 
character of illumination, action and rest (the 
sattwa, rajas and tamas) which enter into the 
elements and the senses, has for its (legiti- 
mate) object the experience and emancipatiun 
of man”* = 18—III. 

Nature or the experienceable becomes 
functus officio when man has got experience 
and is free. 

“But it cannot be absolutely functus 
officio, for it may be so with one, who has 
had his fill of experience and has become 
free, but it will contiue tu work as regards 
others."¢ 22—II. 


* qarofieatferferite aafen: — — 
wate Grr WUE 
mere efeerearenre AeMTSTET TRAE 1A 


(9: ) 


“Tt is blindness, or ignorance that tends 
to continue the conjuction.” 24~—I. 

“Let ignorance (of man’s truc position) 
cease and the attachment will cease, and the 
attachment ceasing kaibalya (the sense of 
being in the One alone) dawns.” 25H. 

So this state is the state of nirbeez sama- 
dhi, when attachment vanishes, and the man 
tests in the One Supreme Will alone, the 
One without a second. In it there is no seed 
of pain. There is no seed of that selfish 
attachment which arises from man’s slavery 
tu nature. In short, when a man is absolutely 
freed from all sankalpas (aims of his own), 
but throws himself entirely into the current 
of Brahma sankalpa, (Divine design), to be 
drifted by that alone, this is nirbeez samadhi 
or nirbikalpa or nishkima or the transcen- 
dental state. + 

What then is sampragnata or sabeez 
samadhi. It fg a state of partial self oblivion 
not entirely free from attachment to objects 
of nature and not wholly devoid of selfish aim 
and purpose, but nevertheless moving towards 
the Supreme Chit. 


{ 92 ) 


SECTION 3—THE GREAT DIVISION INTO 
THE SANEEZ AND Nirerz 
(ContINUED).* 


Tur sabcez yoga consists of various grades 
but generally it is called the sampragnfta. 
Sampragnata is defined as follows. 

“The sampragnata (samadhi of a mixed 
character) is that which follows argumenta- 
tion, deliberation, sense of pleasure and sense 
af egotism.”* —17.—1. 

Then by a proc: 





vos of gradual climination 
step by step. the sabecz terminates in the 
nitbeer. 

First stage—the argumentative is defined 
as follows : 
¢ argumentative stage is that which is 








mixed of words, their import, and related 
sf 42-—T. 
* In the next s 


ide: 








—the non-argumentative. 
the argumentation is 











* faaafaarcrenfarrgreny earn: | 
ole 
tagnirafanern qetat aferat ez 01 qn 


( 93 ) 


{t is defined as follows — 

“The non-argumentative stage is that in 
which, the memory being purified, the sense 
{of the thing: alone transpires, one’s own 
self being as if non-existent.”* 43—I. 

The author says that what has been said 
teyarding the argumentative and non-argu- 
mentative similarly holds good with regard to 
passing from the deliberative to the non. 
deliberative, so with regard to subtle object~ 
alsa, 

’ The explanation of these (the argumen- 
tative and the non-argumentative), explain- 
the deliberative, the non-deliberative and »0 
those with subtle objects."+ 44—1. 

“Phe stage of the subtleness of objects 
ends with the undefinable.f 45—1. 








X fafer cat ¢ vei el 

+ wade afeerc fate ere ¢ errr 
STS B81 el) 

t aenfaererarfene warren a vale t 


( 96 ) 


ahout, is repressed and thus all are repressed, 
then comes the samadhi without seed.” 51-- 1 
The two means of effecting yoga are ox- 
etvise (abhyasa) and dispassiun (bairSyya). 
These two means resolve inte eight factors 
call -d the yog”ingas discussed in the foregoing 
chapter. 





The two means go band in hand and all 
the gradations of yaga from the gross sampray- 
nila up to the nirbeez, show pradations both 
uf abhyds and bairigya. In other words they 
show a simultaneous gradual development oi 
psychological and ethical culture. 


Let us examine the lowest the sabitarka 
Mage. The sabitarka samadhj defined in 
sutra 42-1, is no doubt of an intellectual 
cha 
as well. As in the intellectual phase of sabi- 
tarka samadhi, there must be efforts to get rid 
of verbal processes and associated pre 
of ideation from which it is not free, so. the 
ethical phase of the sabitarka, as indicated hy 
sutra 33—-II, consists of an effort te countervail 
the bitarka as meaning the perverse indica- 





er, But it has an ethical counterpart 








( 97 ) 


inclinations which are to be subdued by 
yama. 

The sabichar and nirbichir also has each 
a double phase—intellectual and ethical. The 
similarity of which two with sabitarka and 
nirbitarka, is stated by the author himself, in 
the sutra 44, chapter 1, and the moral aspect 
of them consists mainly of niyama. 

In fact, the gradual progress of yoga is 
the gradual purification of samskdra. And 
what is samaskara? It is only the impinge 
of previous acts of klesha, /.¢., passion, hatred, 
&c., which constitute kama-beez. Thus, 
clearly, the serial development as shown in the 
preceding sections, is not only @ serial deve- 
Jopment of psychological quietude (faxtat), 
but also ethical tranquility (qreTEre . 


CHAPTER V. 


YOGA IN RELATION TO VARIOUS 
CONCERNS OF LIFE. 


Section 1.—How YOGA INFLUENCES 
RELIGION, AND VICE VERSA. 


Or the two branches of the question, to 
take up the first branch, in the first place. 
But before discussing these questions, it is 
desirable to sce how religion is commonly 
described, and what it generally imports, with- 
out entering into the subject of philosophy 
of religion, which has been discussed more or 
less in a separate treatise, named the Hindu 
System of Religious Science and Art. It has 
been shown in that book, that religion consists 
of realizing the Supreme Will in a personal 
aspect as well as in an impersonal aspect, by 
devotion and love in the former case, and by 
rational elaboration, in the latter case. 


{ 99 ) 


The word dharma is, in modern times, 
ased to mean religion among other things. 
There should not be any objection to using 
it in this sense. For dharma, in its leading 
sense, means that property which distin. 
quishes a class of things from another class. 
Now it is the religious and the moral sense 
which distinguishes man from other animals. 
Many animals have not only the power to 
feel, but power to think as well. What they 
have not, is the religious and mora] sensc. 
The term dhasma is aptly used to denote 
hoth these. For these are the distinguishing 
characte: ‘tics of man. 

Every system of religious faith recognizes 
that, mar Ze facto is not the man de jure; in 
other words, that man is not what he ought 
to be. The Christians call the de facto man 
the fallen man. The Hindus regard man, as 
he is, to be tied or bound, whereas he should 
be free and unattached. The Hindu philoso- 
phers prove the tied state to be only an ap- 
parent, and his expected free state to be the 

* real state. 


They say bondage is apparent, man is 


( 10 ) 


really ever free. He has only to know him- 
self in order to realize his freedom. Thus 
according to Hindu philosophy, the idea of 
fallenness is not real, as also the idea of bond- 
age. Probe yourself to the quick and you 
find voursclf free and unfallen. 

But be that as it may, ordinarily the aim 
of all religions, is to cure man of his fatlen- 
ness or bondage. This cure is effected by 
vealizing the spiritual nature of man, and the 
spiritual order of the universe as manifesting 
One Supreme Loving Wille governing and 
pervading all. Yoga leads to this realization 
fully. 

It has already been seen how beginning 
from the sampragnata samadhi, in which the 
karma beez and asmita and their concom- 
tmitants are present, man may reach the state 
of nirbeez sam&dhi in which all seeds of 
karma vanish, the seeds which fructifying 
into impressions and desires put him in 
bondage. 

Removal of seeds of karma reduces the 
man apparently to a vacant state of Q€U 
wafer {as if losing one’s consciousness of 


( 10r ) 


one’s self.) But then a simultaneous develop- 
ment takes place of the highest consciousness, 
consisting of realization of the true position 
of self, as resting in the Supreme Will. 

“In the case of those devoid of personal 
motives, the cure of the gunas of their bind- 
ing effects, constitute kaibalya. In other words, 
it is the realization of the power of true posi- 
tion as in the Chit (Supreme Will).”*(33—IV). 

Now let us see how religion promotes 
yoga. It accelerates yoga even in the ordinary 
form of devotion to the Supreme Lord, and 
coupled with the simple expedient of nima 
yapa (remembering by name) as enjoined, it 
promotes an approach to even the nirbeez 
samidhi. As already stated, yoga begins with 
religion as it ends with religion. 

“To him it (sam&dhi) is at hand who'is 
ardently earnest.t (2:—I.) 





* geet ger afirres: aret 
weunferer wifafss wfiefefr 1 eaiat 
+ Phrdarrrarew: 101 


( 102 ) 


© But ardour may vary, being of 2 mild, 
moderate or excessive degree."* (22—I). 

“Or (it may be accelerated) by devotion 
to God."t (23—~I). 

Thus religion promotes yoga even in the 
initial sampragn4ta state. This is also stated 
in 1—II. Devotion to God is stated to be a 
necessary condition of yoga in sutra 32 of 
the same chapter, and in sutra 45 of the same 
chapter itis stated that “samadhi results from 
devotion to God.” t 

Then devotion itself is but a form of 
yoga. Take for instance the nama yapa 
(mre aa) ‘reciting the name given to God 
with intense meditation of its meaning.” 

“This kind of meditation leads even to 
the realizition of Impenetrating Intelligence 
as also the removal of all obstacles.§ (29—I). 


* ecgerenrfirerrererregy aretisfr fardier: Riel 
t domeafeqarerrgy ar ggg 
+ wanfifefirchereafemrrey is yet 
Serer, rreraySererefivarett scrererearearey a2! 


( 103 } 


“In realizing the spiritual presence (as 
explained in sutra 24—I} one approaches the 
unsurpassable seed of Omniscience that is in 
Him"* 35—I. 

P&tanjala takes the pranava (meaning 
glory) to be the name of God. 

But in this Kaliyuga the name Hari is 
enjoined as the fit name of God, by reciting 
which men are to be saved. 

In fact in respect of yoga as in all other 
things God is man's guide and teacher. 

“He being the guide even of all of anti- 
quity not being conditioned by time." 26—I. 


Section Il. YOGA AS It CONCERNS 
MORALITY. 
The modern term afffer means guiding, 
right conduct or morality. This depends 
upon the distinction between -right and 


* Ay Wee: TET: RIE! 
t qaierrerfa qpe: arterial 


( 104 ) 


wrong (nyfya and anySya). These two last 
terms ny&ya and anyaya have a double mean- 
ing, viz. logical and iogical as well as right 
and wrong. The two meanings are con- 
nected with each other. For it is supposed 
that what is logical rationally, is morally 
sound, In fact, the Hindu system of logic 
taught by Rishi Gautama is called nySya- 
darsana, because it leads to salvation 
(firslterq) Underlying all these terms there is 
the idea of natural selection of what is 
proper. 

The question to be now discussed is how 
yoga influences morality and how morality 
influences yoga. 

To take up the former part of the 
question in the first place. That yoga leads 
to right conduct or morality has been general- 
ly shown. A few words specifically demons- 
trating this, are only neeessary. 

Now yoga consists of securing a state of 
being self-collected, of self-commanding and 
of self-commanded. in fact the state of being 
relf-collected by yoga, results in being 
self-commanding and _ self-commanded. 


(105 ) 


Section 4 of this book beginning at page 41 
may be read here in this connexion. So 
we may look to self-collectedness alone. It 
ensures right conduct in the following way. 

The whole of the bnman economy may 
be regarded as consisting of pairs of superior 
and inferior organism or faculties in @ rising 
series, the one commanding and the other 
to be commanded. For example the bones 
of our body are governed by the muscles. 
The muscles are governed by the peripheral 
nerve centres. Then these peripheral nerve 
centres are governed by the nerve centres in 
the spinal cord. Then again the centres in 
the spinal cord, are governed by the higher 
motor and sensory centres in the brain. These 
are again governed by the psychical faculties, 
which again are subordinate to the will-° 
power to which all these are instruments, 
and which would move in the right direction 
when every organism or faculty is in their 
true position with respect to each other. 

But it is often not so owing to what is 
called klesha or pain-bearing obstructions, 
which primarily consist of lower experience 


(| 106 ) 


or avidy& (explained in section 5 chap. Ii. of 
this book) and obstacles—disease, indolence 
&c. (mentioned at page 14). These upset 
the equilibrium. The question is, How may 
that equilibrium be restored? It is by being 
self-collected. Then these distractions being 
temoved the commanding organisms and 
faculties, take by nature their commanding 
position just as water flows into a field when 
obstructions are removed. 

"The efforts are but occasions to remove 
obstacles of nature, the real cause being the 
cause of nature, as in the case of water flow- 
ing in, when the farmer removes the embank- 
ment.”* (3—IV.) 

This sutra shows how yoga leads to right 
conduct. The klesha as consisting of igno- 

‘rance, which is the seed of karma, constitutes 
a factor of the human economy destined to 
be countermanded. 

The countermanding agencies evidently 





* fafrrmatrre weratet seweey 
wren, @ferererzy vais 


(107 ) 


are of the nature of illuminating knowledge, 
deference &c. described in 20—I. (vide 
page 29). 

“ Then again the confusion between purusha 
{spirit) and sattwa (the objective mechanism) 
is the cause of all distressing worldly experi- 
ence. But the true position of purusha (the 
spirit) is realized by controlling the lower 
(mechanical) self which is to work for thes 
higher.”* (36—IIL) 

“As the result of this, full superintendence, 
and knowledge follows.” (49—III). 

In fact when sattwa is differentiated from 
the purusha, then the purusha occupies its 
true position with respect to sattwa and thus 
sattwa becomes purified and reconcilable 
with purusha and eventually merges into 
purusha in the state of kaibalya. 

“By the similarity of purity between 
sattwa ‘and the purusha, comes kaibalya.” 
(56—iII). 


* qeguenicaresteat: merarfaitery, 
aii; rerteng endeaary Ferwrryana a 


{ 108 } 


The highest devolopment of moral con- 
sciousness takes place when full superintend- 
ence and knowledge resulting from the reali- 
zation of the purusha, as superior to sattwa, 
bring in @ sense of disinterestedness and 
thus produce overwhelming righteousness. 

“ After illumination, he who can use his 
powers in a disinterested manner, unto him 
comes as the result of perfect discrimination, 
sambdhi called that of overwhelming righte- 
ousness.* (28—IV.) 

One word of further explanation of the 
word sattwa may be necessary here. It is 
the highest and the finest phase of prakriti 
or nature; that which consists apparently of 
the physiological man as guided by impulses 
originating in the brain. This brain power is 
sometimes denoted by the word buddhi used 
in a material sense. This may well be called 
the lower mechanical self. Purusha (the 
spiritual man) is to be discriminated from 





* adenttsengatew water fatwent 
white, earfir 1 acigi 


(| 109 ) 


this brain function, and then the result is 
that the brain function comes to be realized 
as only reflection or projection of purusha, 
and then the purusha is realized as having 
full superintendence and knowledge of ail 
things. Want of this discrimination is the 
stumbling block of the modern materialists. 
They, failing to make this discrimination, fall 
into that state of confusion in which every 
thing seems to proceed from sattwa (brain 
function) intead of purusha. 

Thus yoga leads not only to right con- 
duct as it does in the sampragnita stage by 
subordinating the kleshas (passion, hatred, 
&c.) to higher feelings and cognitions, but it 
leads to that culmination of morality in which 
all tinge of selfishness disappears, 

The full philosophy of the distinction 
between the right and the wrong involves 
the discussion of the three gunas. This dis- 
cussion has been gone into at length ina 
separate treatise (the Hindu System of Moral 
Science) to which the reader may be referred. 

But shortly it may be said here that when- 
ever a man is called upon to decide between- 


( 110 ) 


what to do and not to do, there are three 
possibilities which underlie the question. 

{1) the possibility of a confused view of 
the thing owing to what is known as 
tama-guna. 

(2) the possibility of yielding to what is 
evil or painful in the long run owing 
to what is known as raja-guna. 

(3) the possibility of electing that which 
is good or happy in the long run. 
This can be done by the prevalence 
of sattwa-guna. 

Now by the state of self-collectedness 

the first possibility is obviated at the outset. 

Then as regards the struggle between the 

second and the third, it may be regarded as 
the struggle of conscience or the struggle of 
subordinating the lower feelings to higher 
feelings. This struggle is removed by the self- 
collected state of yoga which is practically 
synonymous with sattwa-guna. 

In the next place the question of the in- 

fluence of morality upon yoga, should be con- 
sidered, Practical morality in the shape 


( 11 ) 


yama and niyama are the two of the factors 
of yoga. And the author has shown how by 
the process of calling up the opposite, the 
great rules of moral conduct composing yama 
and niyama are firmly established. 


SkCTION III—YOGA a5 IT CONCERNS 
INTELLECT. 


THE limited space of this book does not 
allow the subject to be dealt with from 
metaphysical or philosophical points of view. 
So we shall confine our attention only to the 
practical aspect of the subject. Says an 
eminent psychologist, ‘To understand intel- 
lection we must look at its actual develop- 
ment under the impetus of practical needs, 
rather than to logical ideals of what it 
ought to be, Like other forms of purposive 
activity, thinking is primarily undertaken .as 
a means to an end and especially the end of 
economy. It is often easier and always 


(112) 


quicket te manipulate ideas than to manipu- 
late real things; to the common mind the 
thoughtful man is one who uses his head to 
save his heels” Now let us see how yoga 
shSstra economizes thinking and shows the 
proper way of manipulating ideas so as to 
produce useful results. 

Let us take the first step of sampragnita 
samadhi, the step from the sabitarka samadhi 
to the nirbitarka samadhi. In the sabitarka 
sam{dhi the attention is divided among words, 
concept of the object and the cognate ideas 
which they give rise to (vide sutra 42—I 
quoted at page 92.) 

The result of this is that the amount of 
attention given to the concept of the object 
is small, and the concept or thought image is 
vague and indistinct. 

But, when one passes from this to the 
nirbitarka stage of samadhi, “the memory of 
the concept of the thing is purged (of 
associated ideas and the thought of word) 
the concept of the thing only floats as if the 
mind of the man js lost init.” (Vide sutra 


43—I page 93.) 


( 13°) 


The word is an artificial symbol, but from 
association and habit, one is apt to loose 
sight of its symbolic import, and allow his 
mind to be occupied vaguely with the word, 
lending to displace the real import of it. 
This dissipation of attention upon the word 
impedes the full realization of the concept 
expressed by the word. Again a full reali- 
zation of the concept (ay) only takes place 
when the mind addresses itself clearly to 
the form, shape and qualities of an individual 
object and gets a full picture of it, presented 
before the mind's eye with vividness. But 
such a realization is interfered with, if the 
mind is led simultancously, to collateral and 
related ideas, 

In nirbitarka samadhi, the idea of the 
images is freed from all thoughts of the word, 
on the one hand, and of all digressions in the, 
shape of collateral and similar thoughts on 
the other; the result is a perfect realization 
of the picture of the object, and then the 
man can manipulate it to get useful and 
practical results. : 
The practical results of yoga in pro- 

8 


(1g) 


Gucing strange developments of mental 
powers would not be easily recognized by 
ihe men of the West. But thére are facts 
found even by them which at least are similar 
to the results of yoga. For instance we will 
sketch here from the book named ‘Science 
Byways’ by R. A. Proctot, where he deals 
with the subject of calculating boys together 
with the author’s explanation on the matter. 
Zerab Colburn was the son of an American 
peasant. He was not yet six years of age 
when he surprised his father by readiness in 
multiplying numbers and solving other simple * 
arithmetical problems. He was brought to 
London in 1812, when only eight years old, 
and his powers tested by Francis Baily and 
other skilful mathematicians. From Carpen- 
ter's synopsis of the experiments thus made 
a few extracts are given below. 

He extracted the squere root of 106,929 
-and the cube root of 268,336,125 before the 
original numbers can be written down. 
He would multiply any number consisting 
of two figures into itself successively eight 
or nine times, giving the results faster 


C15) 


than the person appointed to record them 
could set them down. 

The following results appear much more 
surprising to mathematicians than aay of the 
‘above, because they relate to questions, for 
which mathematicians have not been able ta 
provide any systematic method of pracedure 
whatever. He was asked te name two num- 
ers which, when mukiplied together, would 
give the number 247,483 and he immediately 
tamed g4i and 263, which are the only two 
numbers satisfying the condition. He was 
asked te mame a number which will divide 
36,083 exactly, and he immediately replied 
that there is no such number. 

The following is the extract frem R. A. 
Proctor's suggested explanation of the matter : 

“}t happens that I am able, fram my 
sown experience, ta advance an explanation 
which accords well with facts, and especially 
with the ciccumstance that calculating boys 
usually lose their exceptional power of rapid 
reckoning when they are instructed in and 
aught to practise the ordinary methods; for 
Lused formerly to possess, though in a slight 


(16 3) 


degree only, a power of finding divisors pro- 
ducts, and so on, which—unlike ordinary skill 
in calculation—required only to be expanded 
lo effect what Colburn effected. It was, in 
puint of fact, simply the power of picturing 
a number (not the written number, but so 
many * things’), and changes in the number, 
corresponding to division or multiplication 
as the case might be. Thus the number 24 
would be presented as two columns of dots 
cachicontaining ten and one column contains 
«ing four on the right of the columns of ten. 
If this number were to be multiplied by three, 
all that was necessary was to picture three 
sels of dots like that just described ; then to 
conceive the imperfect columns brought to- 
gether on the right, giving six columns of 
ivn and three columns each of four dots; 
and these three gave at once (by heaping 
them up properly) another column of ten 
with two over: in all seven columns of ten 
and one column of two,—that is, seventy-two. 
‘This takes long in writing, but, as pictured 
in the mind's eye the three sets representing 
a4 formed themselves into the single set 


Con) 


representing 72 in the twinkling of an eye 
(if the minds eye can be imagined twinkling). 
als is easy, with practice, for any one of 
average powers to conceive in this way 
fAumbers up to several hundreds, and to 
imagine such processes of change as | have 
described in a simple case. Of course this 
fact does not in one sense explain Col. 
burn’s feats with much larger numbers. 
Rut the power required for this method 
needs only to be possessed to an enhanced 
degree to enable the calculator to accomplish 
feats of the kind. It will be observed that 
when a number has been mentally pictured 
asa set of columns—so many units, tens, 
thousands and so on—the mind can proceed 
to picture this array of dots forming them. 
selves into rank and file, so many wide and 
so many deep, with so many over when a 
complete rectangular phalanx is not formed. 
“Uf in any such pictured arrangement there 
ace none thus left over, then the number in 
each rank is one divisor, and that in each 
file is another. Ifthe mental sergeant after 
conceiving the army set two deep, three deep, 


( m8 3 


four deep and so on, until rank is exceeded 
by file, finds no single case where there arc 
none left over, then the number thus dealt 
with has no divisors.” Similarly’ Mr. Proctor 
explains how other mathematical processes 
as of extracting square, cube roots etc, can 
be performed without the help of usual 
processes. 

Independent evidence exists to show 
that the mind can form perfect pictures of 
4 great number of objects, and conceive 
processes of change to take place, following 
these processes as confidently as though thry 
took place under the eyes or were affected 
by the hands of the person conceiving them, 
It appears that there are few apter illustra- 
tions of this faculty than that which we find in 
the power which some chess-players possess 
w#f conducting several games simultaneously 
without seeing the board. The same faculty 
is exercised by the artist who draws either 
from memory or by a sort of creative talent 
which enables him to conceive suitable forms 
or attitudes and copy them as though the 
conceptions were realitics, 


(ng ) 


It is evident that the faculty about which 
Mr. Proctor talks of picturing an object un- 
hampered by what he calls the usual processes, 
consists in the practice of nirbitarka samidhi 
as is explained by Patanjala, in which the 
picture of the object is directly realized. The 
long extracts made above may be justified 
as showing the wonderful results of such 
@ process, 

Sabirtarka and nirtbirtarka samfidhi deal 
with objects perceived by external senses. 
But there is another class of things which 
forms the object of consciousness consisting 
of abstract and ethical conceptions. The 
consciousness of this class of things is.also of 
a double character desigpated by Patanjala 
as sabichdr and nirbichir samadhi. (Vide 
sutras .—44.) In the eabich’r stage, the 
consciousness is distracted by bich&r, or the 
process of comparison and abstraction. But 
in nirbichir stage these processes are got rid 
of, and the essential element of the concep- 
tion is directly and fully realized. It is such 
a realization that goes to make a man a‘ 
genius in particular departments of thought. 


APPENDIX. 
YOGA AND MESMERISM. 
(written by the publisher). 


Secrion [.—WHAT IS MESMERISM, AND 
HOW IT Is INDUCED? 


THE cases of phenomena which would 
be classed under the heading of mesmerism 
at the present day, seem to have been known 
in many countries as in India, at a very early 
period. Stories are probably to be found in 
other countries as in this country, describing 
persons curing diseases of others, by doing 
something with their hands by way of stroking 
or the like; stories of a priest or a spiritual 
teacher, doing something by way of incan- 
tation or religious ceremony, and thereby 
throwing his follower or any other man into a 
trance are reported by traditions of countries 


(122) 


widely separated from one another. These 
classes of facts were brought, for the first 
time, into the notice of the western scientific 
men by F.A. Mesmer who recognized the truth 
of some of thesé stories and especially those 
relating to curing diseases. In 1776 he had 
opportunities of personally investigafing how 
a Swedish priest cured diseases by manipula- 
tions, similar to what is now known as mes- 
meric passes. Two years later he came to 
Paris which was thrown into a state of great 
commotion by the marvellous effects of Mr, 
Mesmer’s doings, The class of phenomena 
which Mesmer produced in his patients, was 
christened in his honour with the name 
of meamerism. This subject however, is 
yet in its infancy and a good deal yet 
remains to be done to arrive at definite 
conclusions regarding it; still we may com- 
pare some of the facts and theories thus ob- 
tained with the principles of yog philosophy. 
The higher phenomena however of the 
Class, such as clairvoyance, though they 
have been obtained by a few scientific 
investigators of undoubted ability and 


(123-7 


veracity, do not appear in the results obtained 
by the most modern investigators. So the 
tendency at present is to discredit these 
phenomena altogether and to try to explain 
the phenomena of mesmerism obtained by 
them, by some of the known physiological 
facts regarding the nervous system of the 
the body. Those obscure phenomena of 
mesmerism which cannot be so explained at 
present, these investigators hope, will be 
cleared up, with the progress of the know- 
ledge regarding the physiology of the 
nervous system. 

The usual method of inducing the 
mesmetic or hypnotic state is to cause the 
pérson operated on to stare fixedly at a 
faceted or glittering piece of glass held at 
from 8 to 15 inches from the eyes in such a 
position above the forehead as will strain the 
eyes and .eyelids. The eyelids then close ; 
or the operator may gently close them with 
the tips of the fingers. The patient is now 
in a sleep-like condition and the limbs often 
remain in almost any position in which the 
operator may place them as in a cataleptic 


( 124) 


condition. At the same time the patient 
may be caused to make movements in 
obedience to the commands of the operator, 
and to act according to the ideas suggested 
to him. In short, all kinds of actions, even of 
a ridiculous and degrading nature may be 
done by the patient at the command of the 
operator. Many other peculiar phenomena 
are also noticed Which need not be detailed 
here, Usually the patient has a vague re- 
collection like that of a disturbed dream, but 
sometimes there is an acute remembrance of 
all that has happened and even a feeling of 
pain at having been compelted to do ridi- 
culuus actions. 

We may. remark here, by the way, that 
the Hindus knew the various modes of proce- 
dure employed by the western mesmerists 
ta induce mesmerism. For example, the 
method described above, vis., gazing fixedly 
at an object, in a manner, so that the 
eyes may be strained at the same time, is 
variously employed by the Hindus, ¢.g., look- 
ing fixedly at a bright object. concentrating 
one’s gaze on the tip of one’s own nose or 


{ 225 } ’ 


the point between the two eye-brows. These 
two last methods are commonly employed by 
the Hindu devotees at the time of fixing 
their mind upon God. In Mah&bbarata there 
is a story how a lady named Sulabhd, who 
was a yogince, mesmerized and controlled 
king Janak by gazing stcadfastly into his 
eyes. In Tanteas are described methods of 
inducing mesmerism by methods similar to 
Mesmeric passes. 


SECTION 1].—THE PHYSIOLOGICAL EX- 
PLANATION OF MESMERISM. 





In order to understand properly the res 
cent physivlogical explanation regarding these 
phenomena, as given by modern investigators, 
it is necessary to know a few elementary 
fact» of physiology. 

It is the nervous tissue of the body that 
carries out the functions of the conscious and 
vegetative life of 2 man. If we trace the 
cause of any of the bedily phenomena as 


(136) 


tovement, sensation, secretion, circulation, 
respiration, &c., we find that the ultimate 
vause of all of these phenomena is due to 
activity of certain groups of nerve cells. 

But the stimulation of certain groups of 
nerve cells exerts a peculiar kind of action 
which is known as inhibition. This can be 
best explained by an example. 

The heart is supplied by two separate 
couples of nerves, one of which is called 
sympathetic and the other, pneurto-gastric. 
Uf the sympathetic nerve is stimulated or its 
activity is increased, the movement of the 
heart is increased i.¢., the beats of the heart 
become more frequent and more vigorous. 
After the stimulation is removed, the heart 
shows signs of exhaustion and fatigue, by 
heating less vigorously than what it did 
before the stimulation was applied to the 
sympathetic nerve, 

If, on the other hand, pneumo-gastric nerve 
is stimulated, we notice that, as its activity 
becomes more and more increased, the force 
and frequency of heartbeats are gradually 
diminished, ultimately beats of the heart 


( 127) 


cease altogether. But when this nerve is 
freed from stimulation, heart resumes beating 
again'and its beats are found more vigorous 
than those before applying the stimulation. 

It bas been again established by physiolo- 
gists that neither the sympathetic nor the 
pneumogastric nerves act directly on the 
muscles of the heart, but they act through the 
intervention of another group of nerve cells 
known as ganglion cells. 

The ‘stimulation of the pneumogastric 
nerve inhibits or restrains the action of the 
ganglion cells. When the activity of one 
group of nerve cells, say A, diminishes the 
activity of another group of nerve cells B, A 
is said to exercise inhibitory or restraining 
action regarding B. 

But it will be seen from the illustration of 
the nervous mechanism of the heart, that A 
does not’ weaken or destroy the energy of B, 
but inhibits the action of B by preventing the 
manifestation of its energy £.¢., its functional 
activity. This energy accumulates or remains 
in a potential state ready to be manifested 
after the cessation of the inhibitory action. - 


( 128 ) 


Physiology has also proved that the psy- 
chical phenomena of the mind are connected 
with the activity of a certain group of nerve- 
cells in the brain; so that if the functional 
activity of these cells be diminished, suxpend- 
ed or perverted from any cause, the develop- 
ment of the psychical phenomena of the mind 
appears, to a corresponding extent dimi- 
nished, suspended or perverted. The phy- 
sological counterpart of yoga can be under. 
stood in the light of the inhibitory action 
on the nerve-cells of the brain connected 
with the psychical phenomena z¢., percep. 
tion, ideation and volition. Physival pro- 
cesses of yoga excite some part of the 
nervous mechanism of the body, other than 
the nerve centres connected with psychical 
part of the brain. The cfiect of the ex- 
citement of the former is to inhibit or to 
restrain the latter. The inhibition or res- 
traint of the nerve centres of the brain is 
followed by an increased store of potential 
energy of the psychical centres; thus the 
restraint of the activity of the nerve centres 
of the brain corresponds to nirodha parinama, 





t 129 ) 


their total inhibition corresponds to sam&dhi 
parinima and when the store of energy 
produced by such inhibition comes into active 
play this would correspond to ekagrati 
paringma. As may be expected, there are 
many different theories of mesmerism pro- 
pounded by different observers. But the one 
based upon the inhibitory action explained 
above is generally accepted at present. The 
theory of mesmerism is that the activity of 
the cells of the volitional part of the brain is 
diminished or suspended, and the person iy 
reduced more or less to the position of 
an automaton played upon by the operator 
through the medium of the patient's sensory 
organs. 

According to the experiments of western 
mesmerists, it has been proved that the inhi. 
bition of the activity of the ceils of the brain 
connected with conscious perception and 
volition is brought on by a gentle prolonged 
stimulation of the sensory nerves of the face or 
of the auditory or optic nerves. The Hindus, 
who have carried the system of mesmerism 
to its perfection in the system of yoga philo. 

9 


( 130 ) 


tophy, have proved that the prolonged and 
gentle stimulation of other cranial nerves 
besides the sensory nerves of the face, and 
the auditory and optic nerves, can give rise 
to the phenomena of this class. 

In pranfyama, which may be regarded as 
a very powerful accessory of yoga, the yogees 
subject the pneumogastric rerve to prolonged 
and gentle stimulation. The Hindu yogee's 
preference of this nerve to any other nerve 
may be due to the fact that this may be re- 
garded physiologically as the most powerful 
and most important of the cranial nerves. 
Amongst its other functions it controls the 
organs of vegetative life, viz., the organs 
of circulation, respiration and digestion. It 
fn quite probable that, physiologically, by 
influencing the action of this nerve, yogees 
can suspend the phenomena of vegetative 
life and thus completely store up the nervous 
energy which is wasted io carrying out the 
vegetative and the psychical life of a man. 

‘That phenomena of this sort are possible 
will be seen from the authenticated cases 
tecorded in the western medical books—vide 


(131) 


Guy's Forensic Medicine p. 214; Ogstan, 
Medical Jurisprudence Lecture p. 364. 

The latest researches in physiology prove 
that-for the stimulation of the paeumogas- 
tric nerve neither inspiration nor exp ration 
alone, is sufficient, for this contains two sets 
of fibres, some of which are stimulated by 
inspiration while the others are stimulated by 
expiration. So for the complete stimulation 
of the nerve both inspiration aud expirat on 
should be rhythmically combined. Jt is « 
very noteworthy fact that the Hindus bave 
recommended this very form of stimulation 
for praniyama, 


SEcrion (1{.—MESMERISM 1S SOME 
‘TIMING MORE THAN A MERE 
PHYSIOLOGICAL PHENOMENON, 


The theory of mesmerism based upon the 
inhibitory action of the aerve cells, though 
it explains some of the phenomena of mes- 

ig not sufficient to explain all. la 


( 1 ) 


fact, one of the investigators divided the 
phenomena of mesmerism into two classes. 
In one of these we notice nothing but pure 
inhibition. of consciousnese which" he called 
lypnotism; im the other class, this ‘inhibition 
is accompanied by more complex phenomena, 
which he called animal magnetism. Undoub- 
tedly many of thes- obscure phenomena will 
be cleared up with the progress of knowledge, 
regarding the physiology of the nervous 
sysiem. Even then there will be left a class 
of residual phenomena which it would be 
extremely difficult to «xplain satisfactorily by 
materialistic theories, 

Let us take the following example : 

A person was mesmerized and a cold body 
was placed in contact with his skin «nd it 
was suggested by the operator, that the body 
in contact with the skin was # hot body. This 
suggestion produced, at least, in some authen- 
tic cases, not only the movements and gestures 
of a person placed in contact with a hot body, 
but an actual blister was visible which must 
have been caused by some mental impression. 

This, in other words, is an instance of thé 


(133-3 


mind governing the bedy and not vice versa. 
It is rather difficult to explain phenomena of 
these sorts solely on the physiological basis of 
the inhibitory theory. The instances of the 
above class of +henomena can be mutltiptied 
almost indefinitely. In fact upon the exis- 
tence of this class of phenomena, chiefly 
depends the therapeutic.1 value of m ame- 
tism. P&tanjala, in enumerating the siddhis 
or effects of yoga, mentions some such effects 
as appear to he physiological, among many 
which are psychical. For instance he gives 
as the effect of the higher stages of yog:, the 
development of the excellences of the body, 
such as beauty, gracefulness, st-ength, ada- 
mantine hardness. Vide Sutra 47—II1.* . 

By sanyama on strength one acquires the 
strength of an elephant, (15~—IV).t 

From sanyama on the pit of the throat, 
results thé cessation of hunger and thirst." 





*qrarreerndyrrentit WITS BOT 
to wéty witgwerfirs aye 
t weet eftrrrar frefer reyes 


( ing J 

By sanyama on the éwrera-nadi, one gains 
steadiness.’ 

These ‘profound physiological effects of 
yoga, correspond to similar physiological 
effects of mesmerism, with this difference 
thar in the latter-case they are produced in 
one’s own self, which may be regarded as 
sell-mesmerism. 


Section IV.—Fue Spiarruat Ex- 
PLANATION OF MESMERISM. 


. According to the mate: ialistic theory man 
is a machine, no doubt the most complex and 
wonderfully adapted of all known machines, 
but still neither more nor leva than an instru- 
ment, whone energy is provided by forces 
from without and which, when set in acticn, 
performs the various operations for which its 
structure fits it. As already stated, by the 
utmost stretch of the physiological explanation 


* qereren Bara get 


{ 135 ) 


or by any theory that does not take a higher 
i view of life than is suggested by the material- 
istic theory, the phenomena known as clair- 
voyance &c. cannot be satisfactorily solved. 
The Hindus, on the other hand, hold a view 
which is spiritualistic or what Is more correct 
to say, a doctrine, which combines spiritualism 
and materialism, materia! as to the body and 
in some measure as regards the mind, and 
spiritual as regards the soul. The principles of 
the Sankhya Philosophy bearing upon yoga, 
have been referred to, in section 4 beginning 
at page 41 of this book. 

“In the ordinary phenomena of life, the 
spiritual part of man is identified as it 
were with the mechanical part of him and he 
does not know that the spiritual part is really 
the master who is moving the mechanical 
part.” (Sutra 4 book 1.) 

“But by yoga the spiritual part of man 
acquires its true position” (Sutra 3 book I) 

‘The view of man taken by Sankhya and 
Patanjela is apparently reproduced in the 
following lines of Emerson : 

‘* All goes to show that the soul in man 


{ 336 ) 


is not an organ, but animates and exercises 
all the organs, is not a function, like the 
power of memory, of calculation, of comyari- 
son, but uses these as hands and feet ; is not 
a faculty, but a light; is not the intellect or 
the will, but is the back ground of our being, 
in which they lie,—an immensity not pos- 
sessed and that cannot be possessed.” 

Hence for the phenomena of Yoga three 
things are necessary. 

(x). The material part of man should 
be brought into a passive condition. This 
happens in yoga as in mesmerism, as the 
reault of certain physiological processes and 
of fixing one’s attention. 

The spiritual part of man should be 
educated so as to assume a commanding 
position with respect to the mechanical part. 
This is done in the case of yoga by the 
moral training and -by the training of the 
will power, 

(3Y The spirituat part of man should 
actually learn more and more to command: 
the mechanical part, 


(137 } 


This is secured by practising the suc- 
cesnive stages of yoga. In mesmerism, in all 
cases, the mechanical part of the person 
operated upon is brought more or less into a 
passive condition. But regarding the spiri- 
tual part of the mesmerized person, three 
things may happen. 

{1) It may remain in the passive state, 
teceiving directions from the will of the 
operator. 

(2) It may remain neutral i. ¢., neither 
controlling the mechanical part of the man 
nor being controlled by the will of the 
operator in the passive state and it actually 
assumes this commanding position when the 
mechanical part is reduced to the passive 
condition by mesmerism. 

(3) It may be previously educated to a 
certain extent to control the mechanical 
part. 

In the phenomena of mesmerism classed’ 
under (1) we would expect phenomena 
characterized by peculiar physiological and’ 
psychical changes which are really worked 
through the spiritual part of the mesmerized, : 





(138 ) 


which governs his physiolog’cal actions and 
psychical faculties. 

The class of phenomena described under 
(2) does not go beyond the stage of certain 
hypnotic conditions. 

The class of phenomena described under 
(3) is that whi h resembles yoga. Like yoga 
it is characterized by the presence of the 
higher powers of the spiritual part of man 
as clairvoyance, and by the enjoyment of 
Spiritual bliss, ecstasy or samAdhi. 


SECTION V.—THE PHENONOMENA OF 
CLAIKVOYARCE. 


The subject of clairvoyance requires more 
than a passing notice in a treatise on yoga 
shistra, because the majority of siddis (extrae 
ordinary powers originating in the practice 
of yoga , enumerated by P&tanjala relates to 
this acquirement. 

‘As the phenomena of clairvoyance have 
not been experienced in the course of ine. 


€ 3139 } 


vestigations into mesmerism cafried on by 
many eminent scientific men of modern, 
limes, the tendency of modern . times is 
to discredit the phenomena of clairvoyance 
altogether. But we should take into account 
the fact, that the phenomena of clairvoyance 
have been observed in many cases of mev- 
merism by very competent and trustworthy 
observers. For example, William Gregory’ 
M. D. F. RS. E., Professor of Chemistry in the 
University of Edinburgh, writes in his book 
on Animal Magnetism :— 

“Mr, Braid, not having produced or seen 
clairvoyance, has gone so far as to deny its 
existence. I entertain the highest: respect 
for Mr. Braid; but I cannot help thinking 
he has here been too hasty in his conclusion. 
It was long béfore I myself saw the higher 
phenomena, and, on more than one occasion, 
I have mentioned this, when writing on 
the subject. * * More recently, how- 
ever I have not only been enabled to see 
and study these phenomena, as produced by 
others, but also to produce them myself; 
and I can only urge once more, on all en-. 


{ 140 } 


quirers, the importance of time, patience and- 
perseverance in these researches.” 

Authenticated cases of clairvoyance have 
been reported by men like Schopenhauer, 
Duke of Argyll and others. The phenomena 
of clairvoyance have occurred in the experi- 
ence of many distinguished men of modern 
times. Our readers may find many historical 
instances of clairvoyance collected in the 
volume of ‘The Indian Medical Gazette for 
the year 1878, the volumes of the Theoso- 
phist for the year 1894 and 1895, the Black 
wood’s Magazines for the year 1850, Prof 
Gregory's book on Animal Magnetism Part 
II. and the book on clairvoyance by C. W. 
Leadbeater and numerous other books. 

Out of many historical instances of 
clairvoyance, I shall content myself* with 
quoting only one. Swedenborg was in 
England and thence landing at Gothen. 
berg saw, a few hours later, the fire at, 
Stockholm, related it to a large company 
and again after a few hours announced that 
the fire had been got under and described 
ita extent and other details. Naturally this, 


( mgt) 


created a great stir at Gothenberg and thé 
matter was investigated within the shortest 
possible time and it was found that the 
fire, as described by Swedenborg at Gothen- 
berg, had really occurred at Stockholm at 
that very time. Kant, who was a contem- 
porary of Swedenborg was struck by this 
and similar events in the life of Swedenborg. 
The fact was so well-attested that a German 
Professor, with whose ideas it did not agree, 
while afraid to deny the truth of the story, 
passed it over with the words, “Any 
one who knows men, knows that Sweden- 
borg had either fimself arranged for the fire 
which he saw while at a distance from 
Stockholm in order to gain the reputation of 
@ supernaturally gifted person or else his 
announ ement was a chance coincidence.” 
Thanks to the efforts of the Psychi-al 
Research Society, -a form of clairvoyance, 
known as telepathy or thought-read ng has 
obtained scientific rec-gnition. Professor 
Crookes has, in his presidential addreas to 
the British Associatin of Science, not «nly 
asserted the existence of the phenomena of 





( naa) 


telepathy but has als» arged that it ought to 
be made the basis of the explanation of the 
more obscure phenomena of spiritualism. 
-With regard to this belief of s:ientific men as 
to thought reading Professor Gregory in hia 
‘book on Animal Magnetism (already quoted 
before) very pertinently and trenchantly 
remarks :—"I would remark that many 
persons, who are extremely averse to admit 
the existence of clairvoyance at all, are apt 
to suppose that they get eid of it, when the 
facts ae forced on their attention so that 
they can no longer be denied, by ascribing 
them to thought-reading, as if ¢hought-read- 
ing—the power of secing iato another man's 
soul (and through his body too)—were at all 
less wonderful than the power of seeing 
through a stone wall or a floor.” 








( 143) 


SECTION VI. CLAIRVOYANCE REGARDING 
SPACE AS DEALT WITH BY PATANJALA. 


Thought-reading as an elementary form 
of clairvoyance is stated by Patanjala to be 
nothing more than “deciphering the 
thoughts of another man, by following up 
suggestions tending thereto.” He however 
adds that ‘ths docs not iuclude matters which 
have given cise to these thoughts as these ara 
not brought under sanyama.’ It would appear 
however that ‘when sanyama is directed 
additionally to these maiters they also are 
known.’ * 

Leaving out of account the forms of 
clairvoyaace, which can be explained by the 
theory of thought-reading, clairvoyance proper 
can be sub-divided under two heads: 

(t) Clairvoyance regarding s,ace. In 
this form of clairvoyance persons can see or 
describe objects or eveats which are beyond 
the Peach of theie physical views, 

(2) Clairvoyance regarding time. In 


* marae Tefewrng net Ra 





( 44) 


this form of clairvoyance persons can see in 
their mental visions the past events of which 
they are totally unaware or can predict future 
events. 

As regards claitvoyance regarding space, 
one may be very well prepated for jt by 
the new physical dscovery in th- shape of 
Rontgen rays. Patanjala expounds clairvoys 
ance regarding space in general, with refers 
ence to its acton upon the luminous subtle 
medium perceptible during yoga. 

“ By concentration on the effulgent per- 
ception, comes the knowledge of the fine, 
the obstructed and the remote.” ‘26—III)* 
The subject of luminous perception during 
mesmerism: was brought for the first time 
to public notice by an eminent Austrian 
chemist named Baron Karl Von Reichenbach 
and was carefully investigated by him. 

His investigations prove thal many 
persons, when mesmerized, nolice a kipd of 


‘aren erarery qeraafeafrmewren | 
Raia 





( 45) 


light emitted more or less by all bodies, 
‘This light is visible in the dark and with 
closed eyes. The opaque bodies (which 
consisted of a thick bar of iron in some 
experiments conducted by Reichenbach ) 
when shining in this light appear trans- 
parént like gi When distant objects 
are seen, the clairvoyant, if asked how he 
sees them, oflen speaks of a luminous cloud 
or fog in which he sees the object at first dim 
and gray, afterwards plain and in its natural 
colours. Tis, the explanation of clairvoy- 
ance regarding space, described by modern 
writers becomes more or less identical with 
that given by Patanjala. 





SECTION VII-—CLAIRVOYANCE REGARDING 
‘TIME AS DEALT WITH BY PATANJALA. 


I shall next take up clairvoyance regard- 
ing*time or, in other words, regarding know- 
ledge of the past and the future. 


Nothing has been ma-le clearer with the 
10 


( 146 ) 


progress of scientific knowledge than the fact 
that the present is always the key to the 
past and the future. 


For example, Babbage has pointed out 
that if we had the power to follow and detect 
the minutest effects of any disturbance, ,each 
particle of existing matter would furnish a 
register of all that has happened. “ The 
track of every vessel that has yet disturbed 
the surface of the ocean, remains for ever 
registered in the future movement of all 
succeeding particles which may occupy its 
place. The furrow, which it left, is, indeed 
instantly filled up by the closing waters, but 
they draw after them other and larger portions 
of the surrounding element, and these again, 
once moved, communicate motion to others 
in endless succession.” “The air itself is 
one vast library on whose pages are for 
ever written all that man has ever said or 
whispered,” &c. 3 

Similarly, Laplace asserted that a perfect 
knowledge regarding a thing, as it existed at 
any given moment, would give a perfect 


{ 147) 


knasledge of what was to happen thence 
forth and for ever afte, as to that thing. 


The astronomer can calculate the 
position of the heavenly bodies when thon- 
sonds of generations of men shall have 
passed away, and in this fact we have sume 
illustration, as Laplace remarks, of the power 
which +ctentific prescience may attain. 

This great truth, is emphatically stated 
by P&tanjala in the following sutra: 

“ Both the past and the future (of a thing) 
really exist as such, in consequence of the 
difference in the conditions of the properties 
by time."* = r2—IV. 

He says :— 

“Krama (the law of sequence) is the 
cause of changes (parinama)” i. ¢., the law of 
sequence working under different conditions 
gives rise to different sets of changes. 


Patanjala explains that a knowledge of the 
past and the future is obtained by exercising 
sanyama (by concentrating the mind to the 


© witarnet weaitrenaterediny « 








( 148 ) 


extent of ecstasy) upon the present condi- 
tion of a thing, in the triple aspect of dharma, 
Jakshana and avasth§, i.¢., (properties, signs 
and conditions.) 


Mesmer also tries to explain clairvoyance 
from the same point of view. He says:when 
we reflect that man, is, through’ his inner 
sense in contact with nature, always in con- 
dition to perceive the concatenation of cause 
and activity, we can understand that the back- 
wird glance 1s only a perception of causes 
through their working, the forward glance 
a perception of working from the causes.” 

Patanjala_ gives particular cases of 
this form of clairvoyance in the following 
sutras :— 

By perceiving (by sanyama) the. impres- 
sions of previous acts), knowledge of the past 
life is obtained.”* 18—3. 


" Karma is of two kinds, soon to be fruc- 
tified and late to be fructified. By making 
sanyama on them, or by the signs called 





© dearcarerencerg gat onfawng, 1yc 188 


( u9 } 


aristka (portents), the yogis know the con- 
ditions of their death.”* 


SecTION VIII.—SpiriTuALisM AND YOGA. 


THE term spiritualism, in a general sense, 
includes the truths of religion, but in modern 
times it is used in a special sense as em- 
bracing those phenomena which are popu- 
larly explained as being the work of departed 
spirits. The phenomena of this latter class 
resemble mesmerism in one important as- 
pect. It has been explained before, that some- 
times the mesmeric conditions are capable 
of being explained on the theory that they 
are solely due to influences within the man 
mesmerized, but in other cases,—and such 
cases are many—they cannot be entirely su 
explained, but are partly to be ascribed to the 
influence of the operator. 





© Stam frum wicreiam- ~ 
eacrerara afceeay AT wala tl 


(150 ) 


Similarly as regards what are called spiri- 
tual phenomena, in some cases they can be 
explained as being purely the workings of 
the powers of the medium, but in other cases 
they are unintelligible without referring them 
to sume extrinsic intelligent force. 

It has been seen however that jn either 
case of the mesmeric phenomena, the under- 
lying principle is that of yoga. Simi. 
larly when one examines the phenomena 
experienced in what is called spiritualism, 
one finds that they are man‘festations of the 
same kind as found in the siddhis of yoga. 
‘Thus these spiritual manifestations throw 
light on the siddhis or the powers acquired 
by yoga and vrce versa. The difference be- 
tween the two is, that th- powers acquired by 
yoya are powers resulting from the develop- 
ment of the powers of the yogee consciously 
exercised, while in the case of the spiritual 
manifestations they are to be conceived either 
a» proceeding from the powers of the medium 
unconsciously exercised or from those of such 
extrinsic intelligent forces as those of disem- 
bodied spirits. 








(151) 


The phenomena of spirituatism may be 
classed under two heads. Under the first head 
come, the physical phenomena and physical 
forces such as are described in the following 
extract from the Encyclopeedia Britannica, 
on the subject of spiritualism : 

“ The physical phenomena of spiritualism 
are those which * * * exhibit a force 
hitherto unknown to science, acting on the 
physical world otherwise than through the 
brain or muscles of the medium. These 
vhenomena were raps and other sounds 
occurring without apparent pbysical cause 
and the similarly mysterious movements of 
furniture and other objects, the appearance 
of light, quasi-human voices, materialization 
* * * handling of r-d hot coals and the 
apparent passage of solids through solids 
without disintegration.” 

To the second head, belong facts con. 
sisting of mental operations and mental 
changes. To quote from the book named 
“The wonderful Century, by A. R. Wallace 
D.C.L, LL. 0, F. R. S. 

“Automatic writing, trance speaking, 


( 352) 


clairvoyance have been all demonstrated in 
the presence of living observers of undoubted 
ability and knowledge as they were demons-, 
trated to the observers of the early part of 
the century and carefully recorded by them. 
The still more extraordinary phenomena— 
vericidal hallucination, warnings, detailed pre- 
dictions of future events, * * *—still occur 
among us as they have occurred in all ages.” 
It is evident that it is possible to attribute 
both these classes of facts either to the 
agenry conscious or unconscious, of the 
medium himself or to the agency of dis- 
embodied spirits. If in all cases, they can be 
explained by attributing them to the agency 
of the mediums then the theory of spirit- 
communication fails. But the  spiritualists 
demonstrate, at feast in many cases, that the 
phenomena produced cannot be explained, 
by the theory of the action of the medium. 
Be that as it may, in any events these 
phenomena show the action of a force which 
is not ordinary, and which is not explainable 
by the known laws of the physical world. 
Now, examining the phenomena called 


{ 153) 


the siddhis, which are produced by yoga, one 
sees the resemblance between them and the 
phenomena described as spiritualistic pheno- 
mena. Therefore if one be disposed to 
doubt the truth of the siddhis of yoga, such 
doubts should be removed by a reference to 
the facts which are proved by the phenomena 
of spiritualism. 

For establishing the truth of spirit-com- 
munication the second classof facts, those of 
a mental character, are more valuable than 
those of a physival character. For, in those 
cases in which a medium speaks of secrets 
regarding a dead pe-son which the medium 
could not possibly know, the conclusion 
becomes inevitable that it is a spirit who is 
in some way influencing him. 

The mode in which a deceased person 
can give rise to the phenomena of spiritualism 
is evidently of the same kind as that in 
which the yogee acquires the powers of 
siddhis, that mode in either case being 
something supersensuous. Assuming the 
existence of the force manifested in the 
phenomena of spiritualism which, to quote 


( 154) 


the words of Prof Crookes from his presi- 
dential address of the British Association of 
Science, “ exists outside our scientific know, 
ledge and is exercised by intelligence differ- 
ing from the ordinary intelligence common 
to mortals” we can explain the physical 
phenomena produced by the siddhis or the 
powers acquired by yoga. For example, the 
experiments of Professor Crookes prove that 
this force among other things, can act upon 
the weight of material bodies making them 
lighter or heavier than their real weight. 
The sutras ‘of Patanjala show that a yogee 
can make his body as light or heavy as he 
likes. 

By the light of such aforce we can explain 
such terms of Patanjali as WHA (conquering 
the elements) am ares {superinten- 
ence over all things). Ry the following sutra 
(38—IL.) Patanjali shows a striking analogy 
betw en disembodied spirits and the minds 
of yogees in as much as both can possess the 
budies of other persons: 

“When the cause of the bondage has 
become loosened, the mind of the-yogee can 








‘ { 155 ) 


possess another body by the knowledge of 
the method of passing-* 38—iii. . 


Section IX.—YoGA ANb Mysticism. 


In the preceding pages, of this appendix 
the siddhis have been the object of atten- 
tion in some form or other, But the 
position Patanjala accords to the siddhis, in 
relation to the highest object of his treatise 
on yoga, remains to be considered. The 
siddhis he regards, as something very 
inferior to the ultimate goal of human efforts. 
Nay, he says that “they serve as obstacles in 
the attainment of that goal but they are 
powers in the worldly state."+ 

‘The goal of human existence according 
to the yoga shastra is what Patanjali cally 


6 wranifrer weredtene fara 
acacherta 19s gu 
+ & wareqqent qana fer: cigs 


( 156 ) . 


(G1) Zaitalya which is the altimate stage 
of nirbees samédhi. The attempt to reach 
the stage of kaibalya has not only been made 
by the Indian yogees, but also by other reli- 
gious sects in the various parts of the world. 
These attempts at actual realization of the 
communion with the Highest, are described 
by the western philosophic writers under the 
name of mysticism. It is true, they apply to 
this state a designation, implying some sort 
of disparagement, but later on we will show 
that the ground of their disparaging nomen- 
clature is in no way justifiable. 


But first of all Jet us make an extract 
from the article on mysticism in Encyclo- 
peedia Britannica to see what is meant by 
mysticism. 


“Mysticism maintains the possibility of 
direct'intercourse with the Being of Beings— 
intercourse, not through any external media 
such as an historical revealation, oracles, 
answers to prayer and the like, but bya 
species of ecstatic transfu-ion or identifica- 
tion, in which the individual becomes in very 


( 157 ) 


truth “ partaker of the divine nature.” The 
realization is so vivid, that though the theory 
takes its rise in the needs of the individual, 
the individual tends in the sequel to be lost 
altogether in the excess of divine light. All 
relations tend to become unreal for the mys- 
tic except that between himself and God. 
And as this goal is unattainable while reagon 
and the consciousness of self remain, the 
mystic begins to consider these as impedi- 
ments to be cast aside. Our consciousness of 
self is the condition under which we possess 
a world to know and to enjoy; but it like- 
wise isolates us from all the world beside. 
Reason is the revealer of nature and of God; 
but, by its very act, reason seems to separate 
the things reasoned about. Hence mysticism 
demands a faculty above reason, by which the 
subject shall be placed in immediate and 
complete union with the object of his desire, 
a union in which the cons: iousness of self 
has disappeared and in which, therefore, 
subject and object are one.” 

This is verily kaibatya or nirbeej samadhi of 
Patanjala, no matter by what name it is called. 


( 138 ) 


Now as for the name mysticism which 
the western writers generally employ, to 
this highest goal of human life according 
to the Hindu philosophy, it» justification 
is sought in two ideas, both of which are 
mistaken, One idea is, that it leads to a 
state of torpor, physical and moral. This 
is‘ owing simply to an ignorance of the 
marvellous powers both physical and moral 
in the shape of siddh s which are acquired by 
a man who even approaches this state. No 
doubt apparently such a man is often found 
in a torpid state, but all the same he is armed 
with these vast powers always. He is warned 
by Patanjali not to use these powers for 
selfish vanity (vide sutra (53-11[). Thus what 
is called torpor may have underlying it, the 
highest moral state with the greatest ethical 
and psychical powers. 

In this connexion we may quote from 
the presidential address of Professor Crookes 
of the British Association of Science “ Whilst 
it is clear that our knowledge of sub-conscious 
mentation is stillto be developed, we must 
beware of rashly assuming that all variations 


( 159 ) 


from the normal ‘waking condition are 
necessarily morbid.” 

‘the second objection raised against the 
doctrine of mysticism is that the idea of 
transfusion of the individual into the divine 
essence or the bringing together, of the finite 
and the infinite is an absurd idea. To quote 
the words of Professor Andrew Seth “it is 
characteristic of mysticism that it does not 
distinguish between what is metaphorical and 
what is susc=ptible of a literal interpretation. 
Hence it is prone to treat a relation of 
ethical harmony as if it were one of 
substantial identity or chemical fusion; and, 
taking the sensuous language of religious 
feelings literally, it bidssthe individual aim at 
nothing less than an interpenetration of 
essence.” 

But the difficulty, touched by Professor 
Andrew Seth arises from the misconception 
of certain facts. Man can neither conceive 
the finite without the infinite nor the infinite 
without the finite. He cannot long enough 
rest within limits, he cannot at the same 
time rest without limits. Therefore it is his 


160 


.very nature, to transfuse the finite into the 
infinite. as 

To extend this process is progress and the 
ideal of this process in the limit, to use a 
mathematical’ expression, is the highest ideal 
such as is egplained by the Vedantic philo~ 
sophy of the Hindus. This philosophy 
demonstrates that the relation between the 
“individual and the Infinite God is a relation 
intellectually incomprehensible and is ful! of 
wonder, and to enjoy the emotion of that 
wonder is the highest privilege of man. 

As Emerson says, 

“ The impossible shall yet be done, 

And, being two, shall still be one. 

As the wave bre&ks to foam on shelves, 

Then runs into a wave again, 

So lovers melt their sundered selves, 

Yet melted would be twain.” 


